A 


t PROSE  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION 

OF 


AGNI  PURiNAM 


EDITED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY 


HAMATH  A NATH  DUTT  {Shastri)  M.A-,  M.RA.S. 

Author  of  an  English  Translation  of  the  Ramayana,  Mahabharata, 
Vishnupuranam,  Srimadhhagavatam,  Bhagavad  Gita, 
and  other  works. 


@alf  aHa: 

Printed  by  H.  C.  Das,  Elysium 
40,  Nay  an  Chand  Ddot’s  Stri 


181 


JENTBA 


Call  No.j 


Calcutta : 

M.  N.  DUTT, 

40,  Noyan  Chand  Dcjtt's  Street, 


OEHTUA  • AKW-- 

If  FT.  v;  RY  B 


»( *{  PTEft  ! .'—Customary  Salutation.  Conference  between  Suta  and 
fi  lUn,iic  u Suta  volunteers  a narration  of  the  Agnipuranam,  as  disclosed 
}[  tt  hr  it;  by  flhe  holy  Vyasa,  who  in  his  turn  learned  it  from  Vashista* 

| £' numeration  of  the  different  branches  of  learning  dealt  with  in  the 

l :*rvsvMt  Puranam  , ...  ...  ...  , , 1—9 

? ‘ CmPTER  IL — The  Fire-God  narrates  to  the  holy  Vashistha,  all 
ibout  the  Fish-manifestation  of  the  Supreme  Vishnu  • ....  9—13 

ff  Chapter  IS I. — The  God  of  Fire  describes  the  Tortoise  incarnation 
'$f  W.mu,  and  the  incidents  of  his  life  on  earth  ...  ...  13—20 

f!  Cu  aptbr  IV.— The  same  continued  " 20—25 

Chapter  V*— The  Fire-God  gives  a summary  of  the  Ramay&nam* 
jfjTK'  preparation  of  the  sacrificial  Payasha— The  birth  of  Ram  and 
'hh  h,*ur  brothers— The  sending  out  of  Ram  and  Lakshmana  by  their 
Itiliw  to  defend  the  sacrifice  of  the  holy  Vishvamitra  against  depre- 
Maritnii  * by  Rakshases — Rama  destroys  the  monstress  Tadaka—* 
Kama „ and  Lakshmana  accompany  the  holy  sage  Vishvamitra  to  the  j 
how-sacrifice  of  Janaka,  the  king  of  Mithila, — Rama  breaks  in  twain  I 
the  redoubtable  bow— Marriage  of  Rama  and  his  brothers  with  the1 
princesses  of  that  principality. — Their  return  to  Ayodhya  with  their 
parried  brides  ...  ...  - ...  ...  25—34 

| C&avtk&  VL— -Narada  takes  up  the  thread  of  the  narrative*— Pro-  j 
jjposad’ installation  of  Rama  on  the  throne  of  Ayodhya. — The  necessary’#- 

ilon  for  the  iri&ugaration  ceremony — Conference  between  the  I 
Latkeyt  and  her  hand-maid  Manthara—The  evil  counsels '■  of  . 
*— Kaikeyi  asks  Dasaratha  to  proclaim  her  son  Bharata  as  the  , 
•ince  of  the  realm — Dasaratha  is  forced  to  comply  wtth'/fiec^ 
.$  bound  by  a previous  oath— Rama,  ■ Lakshmana  and  Sita 
in  exile— Dasaratha  relates  to  Koushafya  the  incident . of  his 
Muni'S  son  in  the  forest,  and  of  his  curse. — The  death  of  Dasp- 
harat  returns  to  Ayodhya— His  expostulations  with  Rama  in 
: to.  resume  his  birth -right— Ramans  refusal — Bharata’s  stay1  at 
I'm  as  the  proconsul  of  Ra'm^  ..*/  -34**-3$ 

vm.  VIL—Narada  proceeds^with  the  story— Rama  receive®  . 
peapOAs  from  the:  holy  sage  Agastya — He  leaves  the  hermit- 
5 latter,  and  repairs. to  the  forest  of  T>andaka— The  mdnstressr 
;ha  meets  .Ra:ma in  the  forest  a;nd',cour£s.  his  love — Her  desire 
r Lakshmana  and  the  beautiful  Sita— Disfigurement-  of  her 
’ Lakshmana— Surpanakh A sees  her  brother  Khara  m her 
-Khara  attacks'  Rama'  with  'his' Rakshases,  and  is  ‘ktffed— 
life  .plans  revenge  with,  her  brother  Havana,  who  sends.  Maricba 
away  Rama  from  the  cottage,  in  the  form  of  a golden  dejr-— 
IgVAoa  ’carries  awaya  Sita  in  his  island  home  in  the  interim — The  bM-  ; 
Ipg'ijatayu  fights  Havana'  on.  the  way,  and  is  killed— Rama, ■toffs  • 
Istf Andba,  who  freed  of  curse,  advises  him  to.  make  a common  cause 


CONTENTS. 


('niPTPR  VIII. — Rama’s  lamentation  on  thi*  Unnhs  <A  t!.i»  f’nmr || 
li,  "L  ing  with  Sngriva-Rama  pierces  the  ^ev.  «»  m«  u«-s  ’ 

Lie  shaft,  and  kills  Dundhovi-Bam*  Ml*  \ati  and  r«mf,  :x4\m  w|  1 
Cara  and  the  kingdom  of  Kiskmdaon  Sugnva—1  he  I«.hm  wM*  r; 
oldiers  in  all  directions  in  quest  of  Sita—  l he  monkey  s«l diets  re 
md  disclose  to  Rama  and  Sugriva  all  they  have  gatin’  red  fumi  Jatt  ^ 
tbout  the  whereabouts  of  the  beautiful  Sita  ...  1 4t-  < l 

Chapter  IX.— llanumana  leaps  over  to  Lanka,  and  finds  her  o ' | 
in  the  forest  of  Ashoka-Conference  between  Hamim.nm  and  StM,  wtt  ; j| 
wives  him  a Jewel  as  a memento— Hanum&na  sees  Havana  atm  f»HT| 
petrates  heavy  damages  to  the  city  and  her 

crosses  over  to  India  and  communicates  the  news  la  Kama*  yiir  , 
Angada  and  others— Hama  repairs  to  the  ocean- shot r,  #*1*  a t»«  . ; 

constructed  with  the  advice  of  the  Ocean ‘God,  m&Mtneml  with  H»bhj  5 
sharia,  and  enters  Lanka  with  his  troops  ...  * 42-« 

Chapter  X —Rama  sends  Angada  to  Havana  demand*.  p t» , -a 
render  of  Sita— Havana  declares  war— The  war  described— RavanijH 
in  his  disaster  arouses  his  brother  Kumbhukarna  out  of  sleep  ■-  I he  in 
nt  the  Hakshasa-generals  in  succession— Havana  meets1  Kama  in  a j 

combat.  The  fall  of  Havana  and  the  meeting  of  Rama  and  Sitft—'lhflj 
installation  of  Bibbishana  on  the  throw  of  Lanka— Hama's  re!u<- 
to  Ayodhya  with  Sita  and  Lakshmana  in  the  aerial  car,  Pushpi.k.  . 

Chapter  XL — Agastya  sees  Rama  and  narrates  to  him  a fctfttoifij 
of  the  birth*  of  Havana  and  his  brothers,  LaksHmaiia  slays  the  monsteffi 
Havana— Bharata  slays  the  Gandharbha  Shailashu— The  exile  of  Sita  - 
The  birth  of  the  uvo  sons  of  Rama— His  accession  to  heaven  ...  5*— St \ 

' Chapter  XI L — The  God  of  Fire  describes  the  birth  of  Krishna  i 1 
the  womb  of  Devakh— Krishna  exchanged  with  the  daughter  ofl 
Yoshada  for  fear  of  Kansa— -The  prophecy  relates  to  Kansa  about  the 
growth  of  his  future  destroyer— Kansa  sends  Putana,  a she-demon  t* 
Hill  children  all  round— The  childish  freaks  of  Krishna  and  Valaram# 
in  Gokul — Incidents  illustrating  the  early  prowess  of  Krishna— lirbtwwt  ■ 
destroys  Puttha,  the  serpent  Kaliya,  the  demons  Dhenuka,  Gardhava* 
etc.  /fertshaa  revives  the  Vedic  sacrifices— goes  over  to  Mathura  M; 
the  cfiUpany  of  Valarama  at  the  instance  of  the  pious  A%ura— Kfisshfilk 
‘ '*  single  combat,  defeats  Jarasandha,  and  annexes  hi* 

I he  domain  of  Vasudeva— Krishn  a founds  the  ckydf 
carries  sixteen 'thousand  wives— Krishna  forcibly  car*' 
heaven  the  mountain  of  gents,  and  the  Parijata  &f«s% 
n in  the  garden  of  Satyabhama.— Receives  lessoatfirbiii1 
andipani,  and  brings  back  to  life  the  son  of  lit©  {After-?*, 
ot  ten  by  Krishna  and  Valadeva— The  marriage' Utbfti 
a — The  battle  between  Hart  and  Shiva — Bafabhadr* 
e river  Yamuna  by  force— The  happy  lift  if 
Innumerable  progeny  of  Krishna  ...  / w*  $«N*S| 

prhe  God  of  Fire  gives  a geneotogy  of  the  savqfc 
i&e.)  of  The  Moon — The  birth  of '(na'KufOK  and  Pandalk ; 
nd  wicked  stratagems  of  Dpryodhaok—  The  marriiJr 
Arjuria  ' receives  a car  anti  celestial  weapons  from  mm 
? burning  down  of  the  fores  jc  of  Khandava—Th*  ttm^mm 
Of  .new  Kingdoms  by  the  Panda vas— Yadhisthira  performs  a R*ja  i 
1 saerthee—  The  jealousy  of  Durjodhana**ftic  playing  of  a'  fjwjHL™ 


was  &&  „,oses  .*  ^ 

e of  Virata — Bhirm  kills  Riches  fA.  • 1 ilves  Ln^^gmto 
Ji,  — Arjuna  de  eats  the  Kuri  -.*/  'nsuIt,"«  ,*»»  modesty, 
Abhimanyu,  a sol  of  AHuna  ‘ «*6 

...  5;— 6o 

KunlkThetr/— KrH,nUS  a|ld  t,le,Pa,:dus  meet  in 

J’ting  out  his  conssnSou,  S«5ie*  - &{ff  l°  d"  h’s 

i.lv,l,o„_Vudhi«l,i„  confers  hi,  „om,  on'  .‘.C 

fHar-  ,sxrw^ssn  5^  g? 

nescience  The  mission  of h s HfeS  o weaHSe*  1" 
5SSi“J?  « T-  ^ true  fakh°  as'revealed 


•tier  principles  of  Mahat,  Ahankara,  et1.er  W°'l  °-  ‘['fi 

tjmat*ria|  element  created,  in  which  the  Fee  of  Brahma  the 

alien  of  created  t im»»  * "'isk  * * *-»ranma  was  afloat'-- 

nter^arts — Creation  of  the  physical*  forces*  Saddh  sioils^vith  tl,eir 
•he  5avmt  immortal  # Thl  ,»  .ce^  ^addhyas,  Devas,  and 

mated  cosmic  matter)  4o  two~OriginIse°x  ^ ^ °,f 
Wf  f>Dhruwi^^nir”  **,e  God  of  Fire  describes  the  ancestry  # 

w o)  Star-T1'e  JS  iJ 

•atriyas-Milching  oMhe  gaulfb'f  Prithn-rh^son^  “a 

rind U to  ^Oharmi*  Daksha'  ti>e  mind- born -Daksha"sdaS1>  ' 

• begets  sons  on  Sati  P 8 . ' °_“*e  R^as-Maha- 

XlX.—The  sons , of  liashyapa— The  birth  of  the  twelve 
«hYnM  E.  I ljp  **,s  ?f  H'fanyaitsha— The  birth  p# 

01  d‘*“«  WhWpr-i*.^  : 


TENTS 


,w«>  of  creation , s 

° of  the  sensible  a 

„..a  Creations- tbi 

i'heltnarriage  <*  ^ 

•worship 
ablution  I 


vv  —The  successive 

Ithf *"4  v,“ 

incarnation  # procedure  of  Vishnu 

Chapter  XX  . Ae  o{  ceremonial 

Wfi^j&^tPssr  ~zs 

Chapter  XfU-  purification  oit't  b<j  m 

Sjp'£*‘3eCVh"%°™^.°1  k'“ 

Vvuha  Archanam  - f Dimensions  snd  j 

•Nava-Vjun  y _The  rite  of  h'e  ,addIe— Their  dime' 

Chapter  XXlV.r.fic.aV  gpoon  and  taMj  the  sacred  *i« 

the  fi'ePlt7V  the  vessels  and  utensils  a ^ done  unto  the  i 

adjustment  os  t ^ Qarbadhanam  r«lles  to|the  * 

purification— 1 *'®  The  subsequent  P0S‘  the  fire—  t he  sac 
k'"dofd)Ubaam's  of, clarified  ^Qfih]p  of  VishvaUsena 
sacrificial  ar>iro^  ‘“JJarada  enumerates  *^a^eva,  ’ 

N^'"”  “ 

tarshanaetc.r-  {Vishvaksena  ...  , ty 

tras— lhe  x vi. -The  Madras  (the V Worship-T 

fjnqers)  enjoined  to  o _ - . 

and  merit  x‘xVli._Tbe  rite  of  ,’1'u”,1'"n'  pecb,t  pr< 
CHAPTER  f*YVellsacrifiCial  groum ^ p and  spi 
f purification  °.,  d__The  prayer  tor  ^"e.  les— The  tniivd 

§ i >>“ 

%r”  %'  srsi“  & 

SS'”  »7»7  sys».  # - 

dUck>le—T'ie  rit*  °{  Saka|p.0‘jilea  of  Abhisheha,  pr. 

CHAPTER  ^^rU‘7he  merit  of  erecting 

of  the  Boar  m j chamber* 

“SS  & ,hf  s— » 

» . t^-vssr-“t^‘ 


„la„  of  (he  mystic  diagram-The  rite  of  Rajapata-uoimiring 
(Jic  oi  Mic  petals  and  causeways  of  the  mystic  lotus-shaped  d‘i aKr*m^~  . 

Mantras  oi  purification,  etc.,  and  the  number  of  times  tt»ey  are 
o repeated  oPn  the  occasion-The  rite  of  Purvas.va-The  nte  of 

VI antra- Puraschara  and  the  monthly ■ 

rf  CS^-rhe  forms  ofi^Sod  Hari,  the  gross,  the  Param  (subtle) 
of  S Vir  t ( universal) — The  Vija  sacred  to  the  god,  supposed  to  be 
IU  Wlanted  in  the  heart  in  the  form  of  a Kadamva  tree-Dhy.nam 
mww  Vn  unison  of  the  thinking  sou!  with  the  absolute  sp.r.t  (Han)  --- 
..  ‘ Attainment  of  Siddhis,  such  as  Amma,  etc.  ...  - 120  ‘*3 

j , ("hu>t*r  XXX!.— The  rite  of  Marjana  (purification),— its  pro- 
Z lh«  prayer  » ‘b.  **** 

naiii  connection  with  the  rite  ...  ...  * 

lion-  Ciiaptkr  XXXII.— The  forty-eight  Sanaskaras  such  as  Garbha-  f 
•frit  ; f the  seven  Vratas,  the  eight  Parvana-Shraddhas,  the  seven 
race  HarUvatanas — the  seven  Somasanstha,  such  as  Ago.sthoma,  Hma-  j 
lead  ” ' I an  etc,.-  l’he  practice  of  eightc^m^vu^es^N  umber  of  times  i 
Pari  The  principal  Mantras,  suctfhs  the  SSutar  efcTt31^eated...I27-i28  t 
~ r,,,„T.B  v XXII l.—The  right  of  Pavitrarohana (investing  the  image 

,,  C „f  Sfi-d  Hari  with  the  holy  thread)-Us  season  and  the  characteristic 
t \ r.  ‘ the  ho"  thread-  rhe  prayer  to  be  repeated  on  the  occasion 

Wat  The  fiVyair.  sacred  to  the  god-The  mode  o offering  the  articles  of 
hrlkl  wn  shin  to  the  deity,  and  the  Mantras  specifically  enjoined  to  be  re- 
Zd  riled  on  the  occasion  of  restraining,  by  the  votary,  each  of  Ins  twenty- 
rimil  ^‘  s.ihtle  principles  of  taste,  sound,  etc— l he  rite  of  subsequent 
Ch  Nya«!  and  ihe  purification  of  the  body. -Prayer  the  worship  and  t the 
tU«>  final  investure.  the  rite  of  noma,  and  the  completion  ot 


MW 


CONTENTS-. 


and , exhorts  men  to  faithfully  carry  out  his  injunctions.  The  nyrit 
of  building  golden  temples  - *•«  . .,,,  . '142'  146  ; 

Chapter  XXXIX.— Consecration  of  divine  images— The  Fun- 
charatra  school  of  philosophy— Qualifications  of  a priest  officiating 
at  such  a consecration,  ceremony — The  position  of  the  divine  images 
at  the  time— Location  of  temples,  dedicated  to  the  different  gods 
in  the  different  quarters  of  the  town — The  rules  to  be  observed  in  build- 
ing temples  on  grounds  contiguous  to  each  other — The  rite  of  Bliupari- 
graha  (taking  possession  of  a plot  for  the  purposes  of  a divine  •dificj?)--* 
Purification  of  the  site  selected,  and  the  rite  of  the  B halavah— The 
standard  of  linear  measurement  ...  ...  - ...146—149 

Chapter  XL. — The  procedure  to  be  adopted  in  making  Argha 
offerings  to  the  God — The  history  of  Vastu  Purusha — The  construction 
of  the  mystic  diagram  (Mandala)— Hie  process  of  worshipping  the 
gods  and  the  principles  within  its  chambers — Description  of  offerings 
to  be  made  to  each  of  them — The  location  of  Vardhint  at  the  centre  of 
the  diagram — The  offering  of  the  f:  1 Argha — The  excavation  of  the 
foundation  of  the  would-be  constructs  temples— The  rite  of  removing 
the  Shalya  (charmed  bone  or  metal)  from  underneath  its  site  ...  150—1;;! 

I 1 Chapter  XLL— Rules  to  be  observed  in  Saying  down  the  found  a - 
ft  ion  of  a divine  edifice— Religious  ceremonies  attending  on  the  act, 
fare  described- — The  dimensions  of  the  bricks  or  stone  slabs  to  bo  used  in 
the  construction — Hymns  to  the  bricks — Hymn  to  the  Earth  Goddess— 
Excavations  and  their  measurements — The  accompanying  rite  of  Vasin- 
yaga— The  merit  of  building  a temple — Doors  and  windows  of  temples 
are  to  open  on  different  quarters  of  the  sky  according  to  I heir 
varied  sites  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  r.0 

Chapter  XL1L — The  structure  of  a divine  temple  or  edifice.  , Tins 
plan  of  the  ground- floor,  the  dimensions  of  the  plinth,  wall  and  the 
cornices — The  rules  to  be  observed  in  constructing  entrance  halls 
(Mukha  Mandapas)  and  posterior  chambers  (Pasehat  Mandapas.)— 
Dimensions  of  a temple,  built  according  to  the  shse  of  an  idol  lo  bj 
installed  therein — The  construction  of  the  vault,  dome,  top  platform^*’ 
and  the  ornamental  appendages  of  a temple — Construction  of  QnpmmM 
-^Proportionate  measures  of  an  idol  and  its  pedestal— -The 
Mandap  with  its  eight  pinnacles  ...  ...  ...  *57 — 

Charter  XLllL — The  rite  of  installing  an  idol  in  a temple — lies*' 
cription  of  temples  of  different  structures  in  which  the  images  #f: 
I different  deities  are  to  be  installed— Construction  of  a stone-image  ## 
I V.i$h»ui~--The  rite  of  Sinha-Homa — 'Hie  size  of  a stone-slab—  Relighufr 
ceremonies  to  be  performed  in  the  wood  before  sculpturing  the  image* 

a . ||  v - 159-^'- 

Chaptkr  XLJ  V.— -The  essential  points  in  an  image  of  the  god  Vatu* 

, deva  or  pf  <pdty — Rules  to  be  observed  in  sculpturing  such  'Skt| 

image.  The  measures  of  its  different  limbs  and  parts  ...  - 

hapter  X.LV.  The  essentia!  points  of  a divine  pedestal  (Pinditof' 

, . . ■ • j,j  j, I , " ; 1 ...  «*?—«« 


CONTENTS 


Chapter  LXV. — The  mode  of  building  Goparas,  etc. — The  selec- 
tion of  site  and  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Homstead,  inci- 
dental thereto — The  models  after  which  the  Halls  are  to  be  built — 
'The  objectionable  sites — The  merit  of  such  an  endowment — The  way 
of  constructing  a.  Saptavoum  Hall  sacred  to  the  god  Hari  (which  is 
similar  to  that  of  constructing  a royal  palace) — The  dimensions  and 
characteristics  of  such  edifices — The  religious  rites  attending  on  the 
first  entrance  into  such  a mansion — Invocation  to  the  earth  goddess 
to  bless  the  mansion  ...  ...  ...  ...  237 — 239 

Chapter  iLXVI. — Consecration  of  the  images  of  gods  and  spiritual . 
beings,  such  as  the  sun,  etc. — The  construction  of  the  principal  Mantras, \ 
sacred  to  each  of  them — The  vow  of  thirty  days,  fast — The  rite  of  \ 
accompanying  Homa — The  subsequent  rite  of  worshipping  the  gods  \ 
Bramha,  Vishnu,  and  Isa — Libations  to  be  offered  to  the  souls  of  ' 
mountains,  rivers,  and  oceans — -Gifts  at  the  close  of  the  ceremony — 
Another  sort  of  penance,  described— lin clowme'nt  and  consecration  of 
cattle  paths,  pasturages  and  fruit  gardens — Their  merit — The  merit 
of  constructing  monasteries  and  buildings  for  the  use  of  public  in 
general  ...  ...  ...  ...  .*•  239 — 243 

CHAPTER  LX VI I. — The  rite  of  Girnoddharam  (repairing  an  old 
image  or  replacing  a disfigured  idol  by  a new  one) — 1 he  merit  of  per- 
forming such  a ceremony,  as  well  as  those  of  dredging  or  re-excavating 
old  wells,  tanks,  and  reservoirs  of  water  in  general  ...  ...  244 

Chapter  LX VIII.— Description  of  the  feasts  and  the  parradingj 
of  an  idol,  etc.,  that  are  to  be  celebrated  and  made  at  the  close  of  a | 
consecration  ceremony — The  time  of  their  celebration— -Religious  rites  | 
preceding  such  a Yatrctasavam  (parrading)— l he  parrade  and  its 
goal  described -The  merit  of  attending  and  getting  up  such  a pageant 
—The  immersion  of  the  idol  in  a river  and  taking  it  back  to  the  temple. 

. ■ • ' ' ~ 1 245 -“247 

Chapter  LXIX.— The  rile  of  Avabrhha  Suanam  and  its  rules— 
Filling  up  of  the  sacrificial  pitchers  with  different  substances  and  wheel- 
ing them  into  their  proper  positions  in  the  shed  of  ablution-— I he* 
Home,  in  connection  with  the  ceremony,  after  the  anointment  ot  thert 
pitchers  with  clarified  butter— The  bathing  of  the  god—  1 he  feast  follow- 
ing dose  upon  the  ceremony,  and  the  merit  of  its  performance— i he  j 
worshio  of  the  goddess  of  Gouri  ...  •••  247  249 


CONTENTS. 


xil 


Chapter  CXXXV.— The  Astrological "DiagramTor  determining  the 
success  or  failure  of  a journey  ...  ...  ...  ...  540 

Chapter  CXXXVL — The  death  or  pestilence-bringing  charm  545 
Chapter  CXXXVH. — The  six  sorts  of  charms  ...  ...  544 

1 Chapter  CXXXVH  I. — 'The  sixty  different  Samvatswras  and  the 
good  or  evil  results  thereof  ...  ...  ...  ...  547 

Chapter  CXXXiX. — The  drugs  and  article*;  of  mysterious  virtues 


549 


Chapter  CXL. — The  names  of  the  thirty-six]  polyglot  medicinal 
drugs  ..  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  551 

Chapter  CXLI. — The  medicinal  or  curative  incantations  ...  553 

Chapters  CXLIf  and  'CXLI1I.— ' The  process  of  worshipping  the 

•••"  55<> 
...  563 


goddess  Kuvjika 

Chapter  CXLI  V. — The  rites  of  Shodanyasa 
Chapter  CLXV, — Trikhandi  Mantras 
Chapter  CXLVII. — The  rite  of  Shadanga  Nyasa 
|Ch  after  CXLVII  I. — The^penance  which  grants  victory  in  war 
Chapter  CXLIX. — The  different  Manus  and  their  periods  ... 

Chapter  CL — The  tenets  of  faith  and  the  laws  of  conduct 
different  Manwantaras  ...  ...  ... 

Chapter  CLL — The  conduct  of  a Brahmana 
[Chapter  CLIL — ' The  rites  and  ceremonies  of  a house-holder 
(Chapter  CLIIL — The  various  forms  of  marriage...  ... 

| Chapter  CLI V.- — The  various  daily  rites 
Chapter  CLV. — The  substances  for  purifying  ho  use -hold  goods  59$ 
Chapters  CL VI  and  CL VI I. — The  nature  and  period  of  impurity. 

600 

Chapter  CLV  III. — The  period  of  impurity  upon  a miscarriage  of 
a foetus  ; ...  ...  ...  ...  ■ 60S 

Chapter  CLIX. — The  condition  of  a person  after  death 
Chapter  CLX. — The  duties  of  a Yati  ... 

Chapter  CLXI. — The  characteristic  features  fof  the  life 


57 1 
57$ 
5S0 
..  582 
during 
..  5S6 
- 589 
590 
**  592 
« 595 


...  615 
...  617 
a YatL 
617 

...y  .6i$s' 
;.y.:4;:624. 


Chapter  CLXIL — The  various  Codes  of  Dharmasastras 
Chapter  CLXI II. — Sraddha  Kalpa 

Chapters  CLXI  V and  CLXV. — Sacrifice  in  honor  of  the  guardian 
deities  of  the  planets  ... 

Chapter  CLX VI. — The  five  virtues  of  men  ... 

Chapter  CLXVIL — The  process  of  performing  Graha-Yajna 

Chapter  CLX VI 1 1 . — Interdicted  rites  and  foods  ... 

Chapter  clxix.— The  atonement  for  sins 

Chapter  clxx.— * l he  penances  for  deadly  sinners; 

. Chapters  clxxi  and  CLXxn.~— The  most  mysterious  of  the  sin  ex* 
plating  rites  { < ^ 5^ 


6.34 
636 
64  s 
645 
649 


III 


*Ll_i  II  . 1 


f M 1 1 h 1 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  CLXXiii.—  The  different  acts  of  atonement  ... 

Chapter  clxxiv. — The  atonement  for  a sin  due  to  an  omission  of 
worshipping  an  idol  ...  ....  ■ . .....  ...  .....  '665 

v/^hapter  CLXXV. — The  fasts,  ceremonies  and  penances  ...  668 

Chapter  clxxvi.— The  Vratas  which  should  be  performed  during 
the  first  phase  of  the  Moon’s  wane  or  increase  ...  ...  675 

v-^Chapter  clxxvii. — The  Vratas  to  be  performed  on  the  day  of  the 
second  phase  of  the  Moon’s  wane  or  increase  ...  ...  677 

^Chapter  clxxviii. — The  Vratas  which  should  be  performed  on  days 
of  the  third  phase  of  the  Moon’s  wane  or  increase  ...  ...  679 

v/6hapter  clxxix  — The  Vratas  of  the  fourth  phase  ...  684 

(Chapter  clxxx.« — The  Panchami-Vrata  ...  ...  685 

I Chapter  clxxxi, — The  Shasthi- Vrata  ....  ...  686 

I Chapter  clxxxii. — The  Saptami- Vrata  ...  687 

) Chapter  cxxxxni. — The  Asthami  Vrata  ...  ...  687 

f Chapter  clxxxiv. — The  worship  of  the  Eight  Matris  on  the  eighth 
day  ...  ...  ....  ...  ...  ...689 

I Chapter  clxxxy. — *The  Vratas  to  be  performed  on  the  ninth  phase 

692 

| Chapter  clxxxyi.— The  Dashami  Vratas  ...  ...  694 

1 Chapter  clxxxvii.— The  Vratas  to  be  performed  in  days  of  the 
eleventh  phase  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  695 

1 Chapter  glxxxviii. — The  Vratas  to  be  performed  on  days  of  the 
twelfth  phase  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  696 

J Chapter  CLXXXIX.— The  Shravana  Ovadashi  Vrata  ...  699 

1 Chapter  CXC. — The  Vrata  which  is  complementary  to  all  other 
Vratas  ...  ...  ...  .. ...  701 

| Chapter  CXCL — Trayodashi  Vratas  ...  ...  ...  702 

1 Chapter  CXC II. — The  Vratas  to  be  performed  on  days  of  the 
fourteenth  phase  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  704 

\ Chapter  CXC  III. — The  Shivaratri  Vrata  ...  ...  705 

| Chapter  CXCI V. — The  Ashoka  Purnima  Vrata  ...  ...  706 

IChapter  CXCV. — Vratas  under  various  asterisms  ...  707 

! Chapter  CXC VI. — The  Nakshatra  Vratas  ...  ...  709 

IChapter  CXC VI f .—The  Divasa  Vratas  (during  day)  ...  713 

[Chapter  CXCV  III. — Monthly  vows  ...  ...  ...  7l4 

IChapter  CXCIX. — Ritu  Vratas  or  Season  vows  ...  ...  716 

j Chapter  CC. — The  vow  for  illuminating  a divine  edifice  ...  718 

(Chapter  CCL — The  nine-fold  Propitiation  ...  ...  721  — 

Chapter  CCU. — The  worship  of  Hari...  ...  ...  724 

Chapter  CCU!.— -The  fruits  acquired  by  a man  for  worshipping 
Had  ...  ...  . ...  m 

| Chapter  CCIV. — The  vow  of  monthly  fasting  ...  ...  73° 

j Chapter  CCV.-The  king  of  all  the  vows  ...  . — .173^. 


xtv 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  CCVI. — The  worship  of  the  holy  sage  Agastya 
v^Chapter  CCVII. — The  practice  of  the  Koumuda  Vrata  ,.o  736 
em  Chapter  CCVIII. — The  process  of  making  gifts  on  tl 


5.  ^(chapter  CCVIII. 
of  Vratas 

jEhapter  COX.— 
Vratas 


— The  process  of  making  gifts  on  the  occasion 

...  737 

The  piety  accruing  from  making  various 


«*^-pliAPTKR  CCX.— The  sixteen  great  gifts  ...  ...  746 

^JEhapter  CCXL — The  gift  of  cows  and  buffaloes, ..  ...  751 

^.J^HAPTER  CCXII. — The  gifts  made  in  different  months  ...  758 

_^J2kAPTER  CCXIII. — 'The  gift  of  the  whole  earth  ...  763 

Chapter  CCXl  V, — Nadichakra  or  the  system  of  veins,  nerves, 

and  arteries  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  765 

Chapter  CCX  V.— The  Omkar  Mantra  ...  ...  769 

Chapter  OCX VI. — The  Gayatri  Mantra  ...  ...  775 

Chapter  CCXVII. — The  use  of  the  Gayatri  Mantra  for  worship’* 
ping  the  phalic  emblem  ...  ...  ...  ...  777 

Chapter  CCXVIII. — The  duties  incidental  to  a sovereignty...  779 

Chapter  CCXiX. — The  Mantras  to  be  used  on  the  occasion  of  the 
installation  of  a king  ...  ...  ...  ...  783 

Chapter  CCXX. — The  duties  of  a king  ...  ...  788 

Chapter  CCXXI. — The  duties  of  the  servants  of  a king  ...  792 

Chapter  CCXXII. — The  sites  and  constructions  of  forts  ...  794 

Chapter  CCXX  Hi. — The  system  of  administration  ...  796 

Chapter  CCXXIV. — The  duties  of  a king  in  the  female  apart- 
ment ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  80a 

Chapter  CCXXV. — The  duties  of  a king  towards  the  royal  princes 

804 

Chapter  CCXXV  I. — The  acts  of  a man  through  the  innate  forces 
of  his  nature  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  807 

Chapter  CCXX VII. — The  Code  of  Criminal  L aws  ...  Bio 

Chapter  CCXXV1H. — The  occasion  for  an  expedition  ...  SiS 

Chapter  CCXXIX. — The  nature  and  significance  of  dreams  820 
Chapter  CCXXX. — The  auspicious  signs  for  an  expedition  ...  823 
Chapter  CCXXX  I. —Birds  unfolding  the  good  or  the  evil  fate  825 

Chapter  CCXXX II. — Portends  presaging  danger  to  a besieging 
army  ...  ...  ...  ...  ’ ...  ...  829 

Chapter  CCXXX  III. — The  conditions  of  journey  ...  833 

Chapter  CCXXXIV, — The  nature  of  penalties  ...  ...  836 

Chapter  CCXXX V. — The  daily  duties  of  a king  ...  839 

. Chapter  CCXXX VI. — The  weekly  dudes  preceding  the  day  of 
march  ' ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  & _ g4, 

CCXXX VIL — The  prayer  to  Imfot  ».,/  ,848: 

1 Chapter  CCXXXV III. — The  Royal  ditties  as’ disclosed  by  Rama 
to  Lakshmana  ...  ...  . ...  851 


CCLXVL — The  ablution  for  exercising  the  malignant 
ka  ].,  ’ ...  ' ...  ...  ...  982 

CCLXvIl.— Maheswara  Ablution  ...  ...  984 

CCLXfUL— The  celebration  of  the  king’s  birth-day  987 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  CCXXXIX. — The  seven  factors  of  government  ...  853 

Chapter  CCXL. — '1’he  balance  of  power.  How  £0  treat  with  the 
..neighbouring;  kings  ...  . .1.  ■ ....  ,,,  * ...  858 

Chapter  CCXLL— The  utility  of  diplomacy  ...  ...  863 

Chapter  CCXL! I.— The  arrangement  of  the  various  divisions  of 
the  army  ...  ...  ...  ...  ' ...  S71 

Chapter  CCXLHL— *The  art  of  divining  the  character  and  the 
good  ot  the  evil  fate  ...  ...  ...  ...  880 

Chapter  CCXL1V, — The  characteristics  of  women  ...  883 

Chapter  CCXL V, — The  formation  of  various  royal  implements 

884 

Chapter  CCXLVI. — ‘ The  characteristics  of  the  different  classes  of 
Seills  ...  ...  ...  ...  ' ...  ...  887 

Chapter  CCXLVKL — I'he  characteristics  of  a homestead  ...  889 

Chapter  CCXLVI  11. — I'he  realization  of  heart-felt  desires  ...  893 

Chapter  CCXLIX. — 'Hie  science  of  archery  ...  ...  894 

".^CflAPTER  CCL. — The  worship  of  arms  ...  ...  897 

^ Chapter  CCL!.— The  use  of  arms  on  horse-back  and  riding 

899 ; 


animate 

Chapter  CCLIL— -The  thirty-two  sorts  of  military  art 
Chapter  CCLIII.— ' The  institution  of  law-suits  ... 

Chapter  CCLI V .—Debts  and  their  repayment  ... 

Chapter  CCi  'L — The  citing  of  witnesses  in  a legal  matter 
Chapter  CCLV*.  The  partition  of  properties  ... 

Chapter  CCL  VII.-  -The  settlement  of  boundary  disputes 

Chapter  CCLV11L — Hie  punishment  for  abusing  the  deformed 
nn&  tdft  singing  lampoons  ...  ...  ....  932 

after  CCL IX. — The  rites  and  ceremonies  described  in  the 

: Vedas.  : Lv-;: w ^ ...  943 

Chapter  CCLX. — The  verses  of  the  Yajurveda  and  the  rites  where 
they  axe  to  be  used  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  954 

l/C H after  CCLXl. — The  rites  and  Mantras  of  the  Sama  Veda  966 

" '^Chapter  CCLX  1 1. —The  tiles  and  Manilas  of  the.  Atharvan 
Veda  ./.  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  968 

Chapter  CCLXl II. — The  Suktas  as  contained  in  each  of  the 
Vedas  ...  ...  ...  ...  972 

-How  to  ward  off  the  dreadful  visitations  of 

...  976 

vXfttAPTER  CCLXV. — i’he  ceremonial  ablutions  in  general 

\Si2uAZ 
spirit  Vinayaka 

Chapter  CCLX^Tl. — Maheswara  Ablution 

ycu. 


Chapter  CCLXl V. 
Nature 


pter  CCLXVL- 
inayaka 


:XVt 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter  CCLXIX. — The  Mantras  for  consecrating  the  royal 
•umbrella  ...  ...  ...  ...  ,.r  991 

Chapter  CCLXX. — The  incantation  of  Vishnu  Panjaram  ...  995 

Chapter  CCLXX  I. — The  two  divisions  of  the  Vedic  Mantras  997 
Chapter  CCLXXIi.~-~An  account  of  Brahma,  Padma,  and  Vara  ha 
Furanams  ...  ...  ....  ■ ...  ...  999 

Chapter  CCLXXIII. — The  dynasties  of  the  solar  and  lunar  races 

1003 

Chapter  CCLXXI V. — The  names  of  kings  who  belonged  to  the 
lunar  race  ' ...  ...  ...  ...  ' ...  too 6 

Chapter  CCLXX V. — An  account  of  Yadu’s  family  ...  1009 

Chapter  CCLXXVI. — An  account  of  Krishna’s  family  and  deeds, 

1013 

Chapters  CCLXXVfl  and  CCLXXVilL— The  lunar  race  con- 
tinued ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1016 

Chapter  CCLXX IX. — The  system  of  medicine  propounded  by  the 
holy  Dhamvantari  ...  ...  ...  ...  1021 

Chapter  CCLXXX. —-Organic,  Mental,  Extraneous  and  Func- 
tional diseases  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1028 


Chapter  CCLXXXI. — Indian  Pharmacopeia  ...  ...  1033 

Chapter  CCLXXXU. — Hy genic  effects  of  different  trees  and 
shrubs  planted  around  the  dwelling  of  a man  ...  1037 

Chapter  CCLXXXI!  L — Medicines  for  infantile  dv  sen  try  or  for  all 
diseases  brought  about  by  the  vitiated  state  of  mother’s  milk  ...  1038 

Chapter  CCLXXXI  V. —The  Omhar  Mantra  giving  longevity  1044 

Chapter  CCLXXXV. — Infallible  celestial  medicines  as  disclosed 
by  the  His  hi  A trey  a ...  . ...  ...  ...  ...  1046 

Chapter  CCLXXXV I. — Medicines  which  can  avert  death,  or  in- 
crease the  duration  of  life  ...  ...  ...  ...  1054 

Chapter  CCLXXXV!!. — The  excellence  of  elephants  and,  the 
diseases  to  which  they  are  subject  ...  ...  ...  1057 

Chapter  CCLXXXVIIL — Diseases  of  horses  and  rules  for  manag- 
ing . them  ...  . . . ...  ...  ««.  1 060 

Chapter  CCLXXX  IX.— The  ominous  marks  in  the  body  of  a 
horse  ...  ...  ...  ...  , ...  . ...  1.065." 

-w^5hapter  CCXC. — The  religious  rites  which  should  be  performed 
for  th£  good  of  the  stud  ...  ...  ...  ...  1071 

1 .^Chapter  CCXCI.— The  rite  for  bringing  peace  on  elephants.,.  1072 
; Chapter  CCXC  1 1. — The  rite  which  is  beneficial  to  the  cows  ...  1075 


Chapter  CGXCIIL 
comforts 


-The  Mantras  which  1 grant 


all  croat  ore 
...  loSi 


Chapter  CCXC!  V.— The  different  species  of  shakes ; the  time  when 
poison  increases  in  them  ...  ,,,  10B7 

Chapter  CCXC' mode  of  treatment  I by  incantations  in  a 
case  of  snake- bite  ...  ,,,  , ,,,  1092 





contents; 


ytii AFTER  CCXCVI, — The  rite  of  five  groups  of  ceremonies  called 
Rudrd  Vidhanam  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1098 

Chapter  CCXCVH, — The  worship  of  Rudra  ...  ...  1100 

Chapter  CCXCVIII. — The  treatment  of  Gonasa  snake-bite...  1 102 

^Chapter  CCXCIX. — -The  mystic  rites  which  prevent  the  diseases 
imperilling  the  life  of  a child  in  the  lying-in -Chamber  ...  1105 

^Chapter  CCC, — The  Mantras  destroying  the  baneful  influences 
of  malignant  stars  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1114 

Chapter  CCCL — The  worship  of  the  various  Ganas  ...  it 2 £ 

Chapter  CCC II. — The  principal  Mantras  sacred  to  the  lord  of 
heaven  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1123 

Chapter  CCCIIL — The  hour  when  the  vital  spark  of  a man  would 
be  extinguished  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1127 

Chapter  ccciv.— The  Mantras  sacred  to  the  God  Shiva  ...  1130 
Chapter  cccv. — The  recitation  of  the  fifty  names  of  Vishnu...  1134 
Chapter  cccvi. — The  incantations  for  stupefying  the  faculties  of 
adversaries  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1137 

Chapter  cccvii.-— ' The  Mantras  by  which  the  three  worlds  can  be 
enchanted  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1140 

Chapter  cccviii. — The  Man  tram  sacred  to  the  goddess  of  fortune 

1 145- 

Chapter  CCCix. — The  Mantra  for  worshipping  the  goddess  Tvarita 
who  grants  enjoyment  of  earthly  comforts  and  salvation  after  death. 


Chapter  cccx. — The  worship  of  the  goddess  Tvarita  by  which  one 
can  enjoy  all  comforts  in  this  life  ...  ...  ...  H53' 

^HIAPTER  cccxi. — The  rite  of  initiation  with  a mystic  diagram  1159 
Chapter  CCCXII.— The  incantations  by  which  one  can  acquire* 
learning'  ...  ■ ...  v.>  " • **  • ll&$ 

Chapter  cccxxn.- — The  process  of  worshipping  the  god  Vinayaka. 

V . 1168- 

Chapter  cccxiv.-— The  Mantras  for  the  goddess  Tvarita  ...  1173* 
Chapter  cccxv. — The  spells  which  stupefy  the  intellectual  facul- 
ties of  a man  ...  ...  ...  ...  •**  11 7^’ 

Chapter  cccxvi. — The  Mantra  for  realizing  one’s  all  desires  ...  1179 
' Chapter  cccxvn.— The  Prasada-Manfcra  of  Shiva...  ...  n8b 

Chapter  cccxvm. — The  same  Mantra  continued  ...  ...  1184 

Chapter  cccxvix. — The  worship  of  the  Goddess  of  Learning  ...  1 186 
Chapter  cccxx. — The  mystic  diagram  of  Sharvato-Bhadra  Man- 

dalam/  ...  ...  • 

tjghapter  cccxxi, — The  ceremony  of  Astra-Yajnam  ...  i*94 

Chapter  cccxxn. — The  bliss  of  the  same  Mantra  ....  ...  1196 

Chapter  cccxxn  1. —The  Mantra  for  curing  diseases  and  warding  off 
death  ...  ...  ...  ...  **•  11 99 

V - Chapter1 ' cccxxi?,*— The  peace-giving  rite  of  Shiva-Shfanti  ; 


XV  ill  CONTENTS. 


Chapter  cccxxv  — The  Rudraksha  seeds  ...  ,a<>  I2og 

Chapter  cccxxvi. — The  worship  of  the  goddess  lima  ...  1212 

wXfhapter  cccxxv n, — Tlie  worship  of  the  regents  of  the  religious 

VOWS  ; ...  :V.."  .....  ...  1217 

Chapter  cccxxvm. — The  Rules  of  Prosody  ...  ...  1219 

Chapter  cccxxix. — The  metre  of  the  Divine  Gayatri  ...  1220 

Chapter  CCCXXX. — The  metre  Jagati  ...  ...  ...  1:221 

Chapter  cccxxx  1.— The  metre  Utkriti  ...  ...  ^ ...  1223 

Chapter  cccxxx  n, — Vrittas  or  metres  regulated  by  the  number  and 
position  of  syllables  in  each  quarter  ...  ...  ...  1226 

Chapter  cccxxxnr. — Ardha-Sama  Vrittam  or  half-equal  metres. 

122S 

Chapter  cccxxxiv. — Yati  or  the  pause  in  reciting  a verse  ...  1229 

Chapter  cccxxxv.— Miscellaneous  metres  ...  ...  1233 

Chapter  cccxxxvi . — ‘ The  science  of  pronounciation  and  laws  of 
euphony  ...  ...  ...  ...  1234 

Chapters  cccxxxvn.  to  cccxxxix— Rhetoric,  or  figure  of  speech 

1236 

Chapter  cccxl.-— The  four  different  styles  ...  ...  1249 

Chapter  cccxll — The  different  parts  and  members  of  the  body. 

1250 

Chapter  cccxui. — The  characters  and  lessons  of  the  drama  ...  1251 

Chapter  CCCXLin.-— Armprasa  or  a alliteration  ...  ...  1257 

Chapter  cccxliv. — The  figure  of  speech  which  is  related  to  ,the 
sense  ...  * ...  ....  ...  ...  12  60 

Chapter  CCCXLV. — The  artistic  arrangement  of  words  in  a sen- 
tence ...  ...  ...  ....  ...  1270 

Chapter  cccxlvi, — The  point  of  excellence  in  a Poem  ...  1272 


Chapter  cccxlvxx. — The  defects  of  a literary  composition  ...  1275 
Chapter  cccxlvi n. — Lexicon  of  mono-syllabic  words  ...  1.279 

Chapter  cccxlix. — Different  kinds  of  dissolution  ...  ...  1283 

Chapter  cccl. — Spiritual  dissolution  ...  ...  ...  1287 

Chapter  CCCLI. — Physiology  ......  *..1291 

Chapter  ccclil — Hells  and  the  passage  of  the  soul  described  1294 
Chapter  cccliil — The  eight  auxiliary  factors  of  Yoga  ...  1299 
Chapter  cccuv.— -The  process  of  Pranayama,  &c,,  ...  1304 

Chapter  ccclv.— Dhyanatn  or  meditation  ...  ...  1306 

Chapter  ccclvi . — D hara na  or  the  faculty  of  retaining  in  the  mind. 

1310 

Chapter  ccctvn. — Samadhi  ...  «.*  , ...  13*3 

Chapter  ccclvi  1 1. —The  knowledge  of  Brahma  ...  ...  1317 

■' Chapters; 'ccptix&'cccLX.---' The  atiributes  of  Brahma  ...  132a 
Chapter  CCCXI.—- Non- Dualism  »3;2i\ 

Chapter  ccclxii  ,~~The  Synopsis  of  the  Geeta  ...  ...  1333 

Chapter  ccCLxm.*~The  summary  of  Yarn®  Geeta  ...  1339 

Chapter  .toccutiy*— An  account  of  Agni  Parana  Mv  ' '.••:134a 


sadly  signify  that  the  Puranas  exclusively  deal  with  these 
topics  only.  On  the  contrary,  every  Parana  dwells  at  length 
on  one  or  more  particular  subjects  and  in  some,  these  five 
primary  topics  occupy  a very  subordinate  position.  Our  re- 
mark is  particularly  applicable  to  Agni  Puiana  more  than 
three-fourths  of  which  have ' no  connection  however  with 
the  five  principal  topics,  in  the  introduction  Suta  describes 
the  subjects  of  knowledge,  and  therefore,  the  subject  matter 
of  this  Purana,  is  two-fold— namely  Pardvufya,  sacred 
knowledge  or  theology  and  Apara  Vedya,  profane  know- 
ledge or  the  arts  and  sciences  known  to  the  people.  The 
subject  matter  of  the  Agni  Purana  is  thus  described  in  the 
Introduction 

AGNI  said  :— Vishnu  is  the  fire  of  universal  dissr.lmi'-n 
and  I am  Rudra.  I will  communicate  unto  thee  the  essence  of 
learnings,  the  Purana, 1 that  is  the  cream  of  all  sci.-rws  mui 
the  cause  of  all ; (13)  [Containing  an  account  of]  ^.-nation 
and  dissolution,  of  various  families,  periods  of  M«nts  and 
genealogies.  The  Lord  Vishnu  assumes  the  forms  of  fish, 
tortoise  &.  There  are  two  sciences,  superior  and  inferior, 
n twice-born  one,  the  Vedrs,  Rik,  Yayusb,  Saman  and 


Atharvan,  the  six  auxiliiaries  of  the  Vedas,  namely  (SikshS), 
the  science  of  proper  articulation  and  pronounciation, 
(Kalpa)  ritual  or  ceremonial,  (Vyakarana)  grammar, 
(Nirukta)  etymological  explanation  of  difficult  Vedic  words 
(Jyotisb)  astronomy,  (Chhandas)  science  of  prosody, 
(Abbidh§na)  lexicon,  MimSnsS,  Dharma  Sastras.  Pura- 
nakas,  Nyaya,  medical  science,  musical  science,  the  science 
of  archery  and  Political  economy — these  all  are  the  inferior 
sciences.  The  superior  science  is  that  by  which  Brahma  is 
comprehended  (14 — 17).  I will  describe  unto  thee  the  great 
Purana,  Agni,  containing  the  great  and  eternal  science  of 
Brahma,  that  which  is  invisible,  incomprehensible,  stable  and 
eternal;  and  is  theicause  of  fish  and  other  forms,  recounted 
unto  me  by  Vishnu  and  unto  the  celestials  in  the  days  of  yore 
by  Brahma  (18 — 19). 

In  the  general  treatment  of  the  subjects  the  author,  how- 
ever, does  not  stick  to  the  five  principal 
The  general  character.  top;cs  wfoich  should  constitute  a Purana. 

He  even  loses  sight  of  the  two-fold  knowledge,  divine  and 
secular  set  forth  by  him  originally  in  the  introduction.  He 
has  introduced  a number  of  topics,  useful  to  men,  without 
any  system  or  method.  His  work  is  more  like  an  Encyclo- 
paedia, containing  a variety  of  useful  topics  bearing  on  later 
Sanskrit  learning  for  Vedic  rituals  are  seen  no  where  in  the 
book.  ' . - ; 

The  contents  of  this  Purana  clearly  show  that  it  has  no 
seetarial  leaning.  It  impartially  treats  of  Vaishnava,  Saiva, 
and  Sakta  forms  of  worship.  It  is  more  a compendium  of 
Sanskrit  learning  than  the  advocacy  of  any  particular  form 
of  religion.  It  is  classed  among  the  Tamasa  or  the  delusive 
division  of  the  Puranas.  Professor  Wilson  thus  remarks  on 
the  general  character  of  this  Purana. 

" From  this  general  sketch  of  the  Agni  Purana  it  is  evi- 
dent that  it  is  a compilation  from  various  works ; that  conse- 
quently it  has  no  claim  in  itself  to  any  great  antiquity, 


although  from  thft  absence  any  exotic  materials,  it  might  be 
pronounced  earlier,  with  perhaps  a few  exceptions,  than  the 
Mahomedan  invasion.  From  the  absence  also  of  a contro- 
versial or  sectarial  spirit,  it  is  probably  anterior  to  the 
straggles  that  took  place  in  8th  and  9th  centuries  of  our  era 
between  the  followers  of  Siva  and  Vishnu.  As  a mere  com- 
pilation hpwever,  its  date  is  of  little  importance,  except  as 
furnishing  a testimony  to  that  of  the  materials  of  which  it  is 
composed.  Many  of  these  may  pretend  no  doubt  to  con- 
siderable antiquity,  particularly  the  legendary  accounts  of 
the  Avataras,  the  section  on  regal  policy  and  judicature  and 
genealogical  chapters,  how  far  the  rest  may  be  ancient  is 
perhaps  questionable,  for  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
Parana,  and  comprehending  such  incongruous  admixtures, 
is  not  the  entire  work  as  it  at  first  stood.  It  is  not  unlikely 
that  many  chapters  were  arbitarily  supplied  about  8 or  9 
centuries  ago,  and  a few  perhaps  even  later,  to  fill  up  the 
chasms  which  time  and  accident  had  made  in  the  original 
Agneya  Parana/1  ':  >:: 

He  again  remarks  in  his  introduction  to  the  Vishnu 
Parana:*— 

The  cyclopsedical  character  of  the  Agni  Purana,  as  it  is 
now  described,  excludes  it  from  any  legitimate  claims  to  be 
regarded  as  a Purana,  and  proves  that  its  origin  cannot  be 
very  remote.  It  is  subsequent  to  the  Itihasas,  to  the  chief 
work  on  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  medicine,  and  to  the  intro- 
duction of  the  Tantrik  worship  of  Devi.  When  this  latter 
took  place,  is  yet  far  from  determined ; but  there  is  every 
probability  that  it  dates  long  after  the  beginning  of  our  era. 

The  materials  of  the  Agni  Purana  are,  however,  no  doubt, 
of  some  antiquity.  The  medicine  of  Susruta  is  considerably 
older  than  the  ninth  century;  and  the  grammar  of  Panini 
probably  precedes  Christianity.  The  chapters  on  archery 
and  arms,  and  on  regal  administration,  are  also  distinguished 
by  an  entirely  Hindu  character,  and  must  have  been  written 


Song  anterior  to  the  Mahomedan  invasion,  So  far  the  Agni 
Purana  is  valuable,  as  embodying  and  preserving  relics"'  of 
antiquity,  although  compiled  at  a more  recent  date. 

Professor  Wilson  gives  the  following  summary  of  the 

contents  of  this  Purana  which  will  give 
S \i  m tr*  r y r „ 

our  readers  some  idea  of  the  numerous 

subjects  treated  of  in  this  work. 

The  early  chapters  of  ;this  Purana  describe  the  Avataras, 
and  in  those  of  Rama  and  Krishna,,  avowedly  follow  the 
Rani  ay  an  a and  Mahabharata,  A considerable  portion  is 
appropriated  to  instructions  for  the  performance  of  religious 
cere  monies '5  many  of  which  belong  to  the  Tantrik  rituals 
and  are  apparently  transcribed  from  the  principal  authorities 
of  that  system.  Some  belong  to  mystical  forms  of  Saiva 
worship,  little  known  in  Hihdust.han,  though  perhaps,  still 
practised  in  the  south.  One  of  these  is  the  Diksha  or  inita- 
tkm  of  a novice;  by  which  with  numerous  ceremonies  and 
invocation,  in  which  the  mysterious  monosyllables  of  Tantras 
are  constantly  repeated/  the  disciple  is  transformed  into  a 
living  personation  of  Siva,  and  receives,  in  that  capacity, 
the  homage  of  his  Guru.  Interspersed  with  these  are  chapters 
descriptive?,  of  The  earth  and  of  the  universe,  which  are 
same  as  those  of  the  Vishnu  Purana ; and  Mahalmyas  or 
legends  of  the  holy  places,  particularly  of  Gaya.  Chapters 
on  the  duties  of  kings  and  on  the  art  of  war  then  occur, 
which  have  the  appearance  of  being  extracted  from  some 
older  work,  as  is,  undobtedly,  Urn  chapter  on  judicature, 
which  follows  them,  and  which  is  the  same  as  the  text  of  the 
Mitakshara,  Subsequent  to  these  we  have  an  account  of  the 
distribution  and  arrangement  of  the  Vedas  and  Puranas  and, 
in  a chapter  on  gifts,  we  have  a description  of  the  Puranas, 

■ which,  is  precisely  the  same  and  in  the  same  situation,  as  the 
similar  subject  m the  Matsya  Purana.  The  genealogical 
chapters  arc  meagre  lists,  differing,  in  a few  respects,  from 

■ those  commonly  received,  as  hereafter  noticed,  but  mi- 


[ V ] 


It  is  extremely  difficult  to  find  out  exactly  the  period 

when  this  cyclopaedic  work  was  written. 
Date  . 

It  was  undoubtedly  written  long  before 

the  Mahomedan  invasion.  “The  chapters,  twelfth  to  fifteenth, 
in  which  a synopsis  of  the  Ramayana  and  Mahabharata  is 
given,  conclusively  prove  that  the  work  was  written  long  after 
Ramayana  and  the  Mahabharata  and  at  a time  when  those 
works  had  become  very  old  and  abstracts  of  them,  were, 
likely  to  be  prized  by  the  general  readers/'  This  is  the  view 
of  Dr.  Rajendra  Lala  Mitra.  Besides  many  mystic  rites,, 
mantras  and  ceremonies,  with  which  this  Parana  teems  and 
many  of  which , are  entirely  obsolete  now  and  thoroughly 
inexplicable  clearly  prove  its  antiquity.  The  mantras  are 
generally  of  the  Taniric  type.  It  may  be  that  this  work 
might  have  been  written  after  Tan  trie  form  of  worship  had 
been  introduced  in  this  country.  The  likely  inference  is  that 
this  work  was  written  after  the  Tantric  period  and  as  the 
author  wanted  to  make  a compilation  of  the  history,  mytho- 
logy, rites,  ceremonials,  &c.,  of  the  Hindus  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  general  readers  he  gave  an  account  of  many 
obsolete  rites  and  mantrams  that  were  in  vogue  in  very 
ancient  time. 

The  numberless  obsolete  rites,  ceremonials  and  mantrams, 

described  in  this  Parana,  are  of  no  in- 
Important  topics.  ^ & general  reader.  But  the 

chapters  on  medicine,  materia  medica  and  pharmacy  as  well 
as  those  on  the  treatment  of  elephants  and  horse  diseases 
are  highly  interesting*  Besides  an  exhaustive  account  of 


[ Vi  ] 


Para-  Vidya  and  the  science  of  Brahma  occurs  in  this 
Parana,  It  is  a very  interesting  account  and  will  proves 
without  doubt,  highly  useful. to  the  readers*  The  chapters  on 
Law-Courts,  Judicial  Officers,  evidences,  inheritance,  boun- 
dary and  other  disputes,  &c.,  may  not  be  very  useful  to  those 
who  are  familiar  with  the  law  literature  of  the  Hindus  codi- 
fied by  Manu,  Mitakarshara  &c.,  but  they  will  afford  a very 
profitable  and  interesting  study  to. the  general  readers  who 
have  not  the  time  and  patience  to  go  through  those  volumi- 
nous treatises.  The  subject  of  training  in  the  use  of  arms  and 
armour  is  treated  in  four  chapters ; of  these  archery  is  prin- 
cipally dealt  with.  These  chapters  are  highly  interesting 
and  their  abstracts  will  be  found  in  Dr.  Wilson's  <f  essay  on 
the  Art  of  War  as  known  to  the  Hindus."  Dr.  Rajendra 
Lala  Mitra  thus  writes  on  the  subject  of  Gaja  Ayurveda 
and  the  veterinary  art  treated  of  in  this  Purana. 

‘The  subject  is  named  Gaja  Ayurveda  and  is  explained 
by  one  called  P&lakapya  and  the  latter,  instead  of  addressing 
Susrufca,  makes  Lomapada,  king  of  Anga,  the  receiver  of 
his  instructions.  At  the  close  of  chapter  291  Agni  dis- 
tinctly says  that  the  instructions  regarding  horses  had  been 
imparted  by  Salihotra  to  Susruta  and  those  regarding  ele- 
phants had  been  communicated  by  Palakapya  to  the  king  of 
Aoga;  ?the  obvious  inference  is  that  the  two  [names  indicate 
not  the  same  but  two  different  persons. 

In  the  next  chapters  Dhanwantari  again  takes  up  the 
thread  of  the  discourse  and  dwells  at  some  length  on  the 
value  of  the  horse  as  a vehicle,  and  proper  times  and  modes 
fj|  of  using  the  animal,  He  concludes  by  saying  that  he  would 

it  quote  the  words  of  Salihotra  on  the  good  and  bad  points  of 

horses  and  on  the  veterinary  art.  Accordingly  chapter  288th 
is  devoted  to  the  quotation  in  question.  S&Iihotra  is  said 
to  have  been  a Rishi  of  great  renown  who  had  acquired 
the  veterinary  art  from  the  celestial  horse  doctors  the  two 
Aswins  and  had  written  the  first  book  on  the  subject  for 


human  use.  His  work  has  not  yet  been  met  with,  but  an 
abridgment  of  it  by  Nakula,  the  fourth  of  the  Pandu  brothers, 
is  still  current  and  veterinary  art  is  in  India  indicated  by 
the  name  of  the  Risfai.  The  vernacular  form  in  northern  India 
and  also  in  Bengal  is  Saluteri  and  the  practitioner  of  the  art 
Saluter.  In  the  reign  of  Ghiasuddin  Muhammad  Shah  Ghil- 
zai,  A.  H.  783-A.B.  1381,  a Sanskrit  work,  styled  Salotar 
appeared  in  a Persian  dress  under  the  name  of  Kurrat-ul - 
mulk  and  extended  to  41  pages.  Even  before  that,  an  Aarabic 
version  had  appeared  under  the  name  of  Kitabul  Baitarat, 
and  subsequently  in  the  reign  of  Shah  Jahan  a Persian  trans- 
lation was  prepared  of  a Sanskrit  work  named  Salotorai 
which  extended  to  16, OOO  slokas.  There  is  nothing  however 
to  show  whether  the  original  of  any  of  these  three  versions 
was  the  work  of  Salihotra  or  a later  compilation  on  farriery* 
Seeing  that  the  word  Saloteri  is  now  become  a common 
noun  for  farriery,  I am  of  opinion,  that  the  Persian  versions 
were  not  taken  from  the  original  work  of  Salihotra,  but  from 
a later  compilation,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of  the 


CHAPTER  I 


:vi  |*  Salutation  unto  the 
Having  saluted  Narayana 
male  beings  as  Well  as  Saras \ 
let  us  cry  success. t 


* It  is  a mystic  name  of  the  deity  used  at  the  commencement  of  all 
prayers  and  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus,  who  believe  that  the  word 
was  in  existence  even  at  the  beginning  of  the  world.  It  was  first  re- 
vealed to  mankind  by  Brahma.  His  son  again  communicated  it  to 
Pippalada,  Sanatkumar  and  Angiras, 

The  Upanishadas , the  gnostic  portion  of  the  Vedas,  understand  the 
word  (Jm  as  being  synonymous  with  one  and  expressive  of  the  unity 
of  the  God*  head. 

The  Theological  meaning  of  the  word  Om  is: — The  three  Vedas, 
the  Rik,  Yayus  and  Sam  an  ; the  three  gitnas  namely  the  qualities  of 
goodness,  darkness  and  ignorance;  the  three  worlds,  heaven,  the  earth 
and  the  infernal  regions  ; the  three  states  of  things— the  creation  ; 
preservation  and  destruction,  the  three  agencies  of  these  personified 
as  Brahma  the  Creator,  Vishnu  the  preserver  and  Shiva,  the  destroyer  ; 
the  three  elemental  forms,  fire,  wind  and  sun  ; the  three  sacrificial  fires 
called  the  Dakshinas,  Garhapatya  and  Ahavanya  ; three-fold  learning 


2 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


I bow  again  and  again  unto  Sree ,* * * §  Saraswati,  Gourif 
GaneshaJ  the  lord  Skandha,§  Brahma,  VanhiJ  Indra''  and 
other  celestials  and  Vasudeva  (i). 

Performing  a sacrifice  in  honor  of  Hari,  in  (the  forest  of) 
Naimisha  the  Rishis  Shounaka  and  others  in  the  way  of  a 
conversation  relating  to  a pilgrimage,  welcomed  Sutaf  and 
said  to  him  (2). 

The  Rishi  said 

O Suta,  thou  art  adored  by  us.  Do  thou  communicate 
unto  us  (an  account)  of  the  Truest  of  the  True,**  by  knowing 
which  one  acquires  omniscience  (3). 

SUTA  said  : — -The  lord  Vishnu,  endued  with  all  spiritual 
powers, ft  the  Creator  of  the  celestial  region  and  others  is 
the  Truest  of  the  True.  By  knowing  that  / am  Brahma XX 
one  acquires  omniscience  (4).  Two  Brahmas  are  to  be 


* The  goddess  of  riches. 

4 Gouri  the  consort  of  Siva, 

$ The  son  of  Siva.  He  is  considered  as  the  most  auspicious  deity 
to  whom  adoration  is  offered  at  the  beginning  of  every  religious  rite. 

§ Name  of  Kartikeya  the  generalissimo  of  the  celestial  host,  it  is 
also  a name  of  Siva. 

||  The  Regent  of  Fire. 

H The  word  signifies  the  offsring  of  a Kshatriya  by  a Brahmin, 
woman.  This  mixed  caste  used  to  keep  horses  and  drive  cars  in  the 
days  of  yore.  A particular  family  of  this  caste  however  became  famous 
for  its  knowledge  of  Puranas  and  other  sacred  writings. 

m This  refers  to  the  true  knowledge  of  Brahma.  According  to  the 
Aryan  Rishis  this  is  the  knowledge  which  one  aspires  to  acquire, 

. Tt  The  word  in  the  text  is  Bkagavan  which  means  one  who  is  pos- 
sessed of  Bhaga  or  spiritual  power  which  is  of  six  sorts  namely,  domi- 
nion, might,  glory  splendour  wisdom  and  dispassion, 

J|,lt  is  a transcendental  Vedic  phrase  meaning  I am  Brahma;  this 
is  the. highest  aspiration  of  a Veda  ruin.  By  continued  spiritual  exercises 
a man; -arrives^  at  a stage  of  culture  when  it  becomes  psychologically 
impossible  for  him  to  think  himself  separate  from  Brahma,  This  phrase 
is  thus  explained  in  Panchadasi,  Chapter  V, 


A GOT.  PURANAM. 


known  namely  Sarnia  Brahma * and  Para  Brahma f and 
two  branches  of  learning  are  to  be  mastered  namely  rites  and 
ceremonials'!  and  Sruti§  (5).  Headed  by  Suka  and  Paila 
I repaired  to  the  hermitage  of  Badarika.  Bowing  there 
unto  Vyasa  we  accosted  him  and  he  communicated  unto  us 
the  true  Essence  (of  things)  (6). 

Vyasa  said 

Do  thou,  O Suta,  headed  by  Suka  and  others,  hear  of  the 
True  Brahma,  the  greatest  of  the  great,  communicated 
unto  me  by  Vashistha  when  he  was  accosted  by  the  sages  (7). 

VASHISTHA  said  : — Hear,  O Vyasa  followed  by  the  entire 
world,  I will  describe  to  you  two  sciences  (Vidya)  which 
Agni,  accompanied  by  the  sages  and  celestials,  communicated 
unto  me  in  the  days  of  yore  (8).  [I  will  describe  unto  thee] 
the  Rik  and  the  other  Vedas  in  which  is  contained  the 
knowledge  of  Para  Brahma  and  which  gives  satisfaction  to 
all  the  celestials,  as  well  as  the  Parana  communicated  by 
Agni  and  which  is  designated  by  Brahma  as  Agneya . It 

u The  phrase  (Aha?n  Brahmasmi)  I am  Brahma  cited  in  the  Brihad 
Aranyaka  Upanishad  of  Yayur  Veda  is  thus  explained  : — The  Infinite 
Intelligence,  the  Supreme  Self,  residing  in  the  body,  composed  of  the 
five  elements,  by  the  inherent  force  of  Maya,  but  discovered  as  a 
witness  by  passivity,  self-control  and  other  means  for  attaining  self- 
knowledge  is  the  signification  of  ( Aham .) 

Brahma  refers  to  the  self-existent,  all  pervading  Supreme  Self.  And' 
(am)  establishes  the  non -difference  of  the  two  intelligences  expressed 
by  I am  (Brahma).  If  therefore  the  identity  of  the  individual  and 
universal  intelligence  be  established,  then  the  use  of  (1  am-  Brahma) 
by  one  liberated  in  life  necessarily  implies  no  contradiction,  but  an 
established  truth. 

* The  Vedas  which  is  held  in  equal  reverence  with  Brahma  by  the 
Hindus  for  its  spiritual  knowledge  consisting  in  words, 

f The  Supreme  Being  to  whose  eternal  existence  the  Vedas  testify. 

t Srimitis  or  the  rules  of  rites  and  ceremonials.  The  word  literally 
means  that  which  is  remembered . 

§ The  word  literally  means  that  which  is  heard , St  is  the  know- 
ledge revealed  i-n  the  Vedas,  ■ 


II 


lit 


#;v 


f! 

. 


Ai- 


4 


AGNI  FUR  A NAM. 


grants  heavenly  enjoyments  and  salvation  unto  men  who 
read  or  hear  it  (9 — 10).  And  accosted  by  sages  [if  will 
describe]  Vishnu,  in  the  form  of  the  fire  of  dissolution,  the 
Brahma  of  light,  the  greatest  of  the  great  adored  through 
[nan a (knowledge)  and  Karma  (religious  rites)  (11). 

V A SHI  STB  * said: — Do  thou  communicate  unto  me  Brahma, 
Is  war  a,  the  boat  for  crossing  the  ocean  of  the  world — the 
cream  of  sciences  by  learning  which  a man  become- s 
omniscient  (l 2). 

AGNI  said Vishnu  is  the  fire  of  universal  dissolution 
and  1 am  Rudra.  I will  communicate  unto  thee  the  essence  of 
learnings,  the  Parana,  that  is  the  cream  of  all  sciences  and 
the  cause  of  all ; (13)  [Containing  an  account  of]  creation 
and  dissolution,  of  various  families,  periods  of  Mann  and 
genealogies.  The  Lord  Vishnu  assumes  the  forms  of  fi-b, 
tortoise  &.  There  are  two  sciences,  superior  and  inferior. 
O twice-born  one,  the  Vedas,  Rik,  Yayush,  Saman  and 
Atharvan,  the  six  auxiliaries  of  the  Vedas,  namely  (Siksha), 
the  science  of  proper  articulation  and  pronounciation. 
(Katpa)  ritual  or  ceremonial,  (Vyakarana)  grammar, 
(Nirukta)  etymological  explanation  of  difficult  Vedic  words, 
{Jvotish)  astronomy,  (Chhandas)  science  of  prosody, 
(Abhidhana)  lexicon,  Miroansa,*  Dharnia  Sastras,f  Pura- 

* One  of  the  six  Darshanas  or  systems,  of  Indian  philosophy,  ft 
was  originally  divided  into  two  systems.  Purva-Mimansa  or  Karma 
Mimansa  founded  by  jaimini  and  lit  Lara  Mimarna  or  Brahma 
Mimnnsa  founded  by  Bad  ray  ana  ; but  the  two  systems  have  very  little 
in  common  with  them,  the  first  concerning  itself  chiefly  with  the  secret 
interpretation  of  the  ritual  of  the  Veda  and  the  settlement  of  the  dubious 
points  in  regard  to  Vedic  texts  ; and  the  latter  dealing  with  the  nature? 
of  Brahman  or  the  Supreme  Spirit.  The  first  part  is  popularly  known 
as  Mimansa  and  the  latter  as  Vedanta. 

t The  General  ho  i y of  law  comprehending  a char  a (ritual)  I *ymvaham 
{civil  - acts  and  - rules)  and  Prayaschilia  (expiation)  is  denominated  the 
Pharma  Sasira,  v 11  ' 

The  Pharma  Shasira  is  to  he  sought  primarily  in  the  Sanhihiy 
' {collections  or  institutes)  of  the  holy  sages,  whose  number  'according  to 


AGNl  PUR  AN  AM.  J 

the  list  given  by  Jagnyavalkya  is  twenty:  namely,  Mann,  Atri, 
Vishna,  Marita,  Jagnyavalkya  or  Yajnyavalkya,  Ushana,  Angira, 
jama  or  Yama,  Apastamba,  Samvarta,  Katyayana,  Vrihaspati, 
Pat  asara,  V 3rasa,  Sankha,  and  Likhita,  Daksha,  Goutama,  Satataoa 
and  Vashishtha  Parasara,  whose  name  appears  in  the  above  list* 
enumerates  also  twenty  select  authors  ,*  but  instead  of  Jama,  and  Vyasa, 
he  gives  Kashyapa,  Gargya,  and  Pracheta,— The  Padma-purana 
omitting  the  name  of  Atri  which  is  found  in  JagnyavalkyaV  list* 
completes  tKb  number  of  thirty-six  by  adding  Marichi,  Pulastya* 
Pracheta,  Bhrigu,  Narada,  Kashyapa,  Vishwamitra,  Devala,  Rishya- 
sringa,  Gargya,  Boudhayana,  Poithnashi,  Jabali,  Sumantu,  Paraskara* 
Lokakshi,  and  Kuthumi. — Ram-krishna  in  his  gloss  to  the  Grijhya  or 
Gvijhy a- sutras  of  Paraskara,  mentions  thirty-nine,  of  whom  nine  are 
not  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  above  lists.  These  (nine)  are  Agni, 
Chyavana,  Chhagaleya,  Jatukarana,  Pitamaha,  Prajapati,  Buddha* 
Satayana,  and  Soma. 

Several  Sanhitas  are  sometimes  ascribed  to  one  author  : his  greater 
or  less  institutes,  (* vrihat  or  laghu ,)  or  a latter  work  of  the  author,  when 
old  ( Driddha .) 

There  appear  to  have  been  some  more  legislators,  namely* 
Dhoumya,  the  priest  of  the  Pandavas  and  author  of  a commentary  on 
the  Jajur-veda,  Ashwalayana,  who  wrote  on  the  details  of  religious 
acts  and  ceremonies,  Bhaguri,  who  is  quoted  as  the  author  of  a gloss 
on  the  institutes  of  Mann,  and  Datta,  the  son  of  Atri. 

By  Parasara,  author  of  one  of  the  Sa n h ttas,  (referring  to  the  Hindoo 
division  of  the  world  into  four  ages,)  are  assigned,  as  appropriate  to  the 
lirita-yuga,  or  first  age,  the  institutes  of  Manu,  to  t ho  Tret  a or  second, 
the  ordinances  of  Goutama,  to  the  or  third,  those  of  Sankha 

and  Likhita,  and  to  the  Kali,  or  fourth,  (the  present  sinful  age  as  it  is 
deemed,)  his  (Parasara’s)  own  ordinances.  The  distinction,  however, 
does  not  seem  ever  to  have  been  actually  observed,  the  institutes  of  al! 
and  every  one  of  the  sages  being  respected  as  of  equal  authority  next 
to  those  of  Manu. 

The  Manava  Dharma  Sastm,  or  the  Sanhiia  of  Manu,  is  above  all 
of  them  : it  is  regarded  by  us  Hindoos  as  next  in  sancitity  to  our  scrip- 
tures, the  Vedas,  and  is  the  oldest  of  the  memorial  laws.  The  author  of 
the  Afanu-sanhita  is  that  Munu,  who  is  Swayambhuva  (sprung  from  the 
Self-Existent.)  He  is  the  grandson  of  Brahma  and  the  first  of  the 
seven  Manus  who  governed  the  world.  It  was  he  who  produced  the 
holy  sages  and  the  rest*  and  was  not  only  the  oldest  but  also  the  greatest 
of  the  legislators* 


L | 


6 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


nakas*  * Myaya,f  medical  science,  musical  science,  the  science 


Besides  the  usual  matters  treated  of  in  *a  code  of  laws,  the  Laghu 
San  hit  a of  Manu,  which  comprises  in  all  2,  685  shlokas  or  couplets,  and 
is  divided  into  twelve  chapters,  comprehends  a system  of  cosmogony, 
the  doctrines  of  metaphysics,  precepts  regulating  the  conduct,  rules  for 
religious  and  ceremonial  duties,  pious  observances,  and  expiation,  and 
abstinence,  moral  maxims,  .regulations  concerning  things  political, 
military,  and  commercial,  the  doctrine  of  rewards  and  punishments 


after  death,  and  the  transmigration  of  souls  together  with  the  means  oi: 
attaining  eternal  beatitude. 

The  other  sages  wrote  Sanhitas  on  the  same  model,  and  they  all 
cited  Manu  for  authority,  whose  Sanhita  must  therefore  be  fairly 
considered  to  be  the  basis  of  all  text-books  on  the  system  of  Hindu 
jurisprudence.  The  law  of  Manu  was  so  much  revered  even  by  the 
sages  that  no  part  of  their  codes  was  respected  if  it  contradicted  Menu. 
The  sage  Vrihaspati,  now  supposed  to  preside  over  the  planet  Jupiter, 
says  in  the  law  tract,  that  “ Manu  held  the  first  rank  among  legislators, 
because  he  had  expressed  in  his  code  the  whole  sense  of  the  Veda  ; that 
no  code  was  approved,  which  contradicted  Manu  j that  other  Skastms 
and  treatises  on  grammar  or  logic  retained  splendour  so  long  only  as 
Manu,  who  taught  the  way  to  just  wealth,  to  virtue,  and  to  final  happi- 
ness, was  not  seen  in  competition  with  them.5  Vyasa  too,  the  son  of 
Farasara  before  mentioned,  has  decided,  that  the  Veda  with  its  Angas 
or  the  six  compositions  deduced  from  it,  the  revealed  system  of  medicine, 
the  Puranas  or  sacred  histories,  and  the  code  of  Manu  were  four  works 
of  supreme  authority,  which  ought  never  to  be  shaken  by  arguments 
merely  human.  Above  all  he  is  highly  honored  by  name  in  the  Veda 
itself  where  it  is  declared  that  what  Manu  pronounced  was  a medicine 
for  the  soul 

* Puranas. 

f It  is  the  dialectic  philosophy  of  Gautama  dealing  with  the  meta- 
physics  of  Logic,  The  text  of  Goutama's  Nyaya  Sutras  is  a collection 
of  Sutras  in  five  books  or  lectures  each  divided  into  two  daily  lessons 
and  these  again  are  sub-divided  into  sections, 
jy : Besides  there  are  other  important  treatises  namely  {1 ) Nytlya 

of  Ballabha-acharya  (2)  Tarkabkasa  of  Kesava  Misra  (3) 

• Tarkabhasaprakasa  of  Govardhana  Misra  (4)  Bhamrtha *dwipika  of 
If  .Gourtkanta-  {5)  Tarkabkasa  sara  Manjari  of  Mahadeva  (6)  Nyaya 
Sangraha  of  Ramalingakriti. 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


of  archery  and  Political  economy — these  all  are  the  inferior 
sciences.  The  superior  science  is  that  by  which  Brahma  is 

There  is  another  compendious  work  on  Indian  Logic  Padarthadipika 
by  Konda-bhatta  a noted  grammarian.  There  are  some  metrical 
treatises  the  most  important  of  which  are  Kusamanjali  and  My  ay  a 
Sankshepa . 

Doctrine-^ The  order  observed  both  by  Gotama  and  Kanada,  in 
delivering  the  precepts  of  the  science  which  they  engage  to  unfold  is 
enunciation,  definition  and  investigation.  Enunciation  ( Uddesa ) is  the 
mention  of  a thing  by  its  name.  Definition  ( Lakshana ) sets  forth  a 
peculiar  property,  constituting  the  essential  character  of  a thing.  In- 
vestigation (Pariksha)  consists  in  disquisition  upon  the  pertinence  and 
sufficiency  of  the  definition.  Consonantly  to  this  the  teachers  of  philo- 
sophy premise  the  terms  of  the  science,  proceed  to  the  definition  and 
then  pass  on  to  the  examination  of  subjects  so  premised. 

In  a logical  arrangement  the  **  predicaments’ ’ padavtha  or  object 
of  proof  are  six  as  they  are  enumerated  by  Kanada  ,*  viz  substance, 
quality,  action,  community,  particularity,  and  aggregate  or  intimate 
relation,  to  which  a seventh  is  added  by  other  authors  ; privation  or 
negation.  These  again  compose  a twofold  arrangement  ,*  positive  and 
negative,  Bhava  and  ahhava , the  first  comprising  six  and  the  latter  one. 

According  to  the  Buddhists  this  padartha  or  predicament  is  know- 
ledge ( Jnana ) and  according  to  the  Vedantists  the  predicament  or 
object  is  Brahma  the  universal  being  in  whom  all  exists. 

Gotama  enumerates  sixteen  heads  or  topics  : among  which,  proof 
or  evidence  and  that  which  is  to  be  proven  are  chief;  the  rest  are 
subsidiary  or  accessory  as  contributing  to  knowledge  and  ascertainment 
of  truth.  They  are  (i)  proof  (2)  that  which  is  to  be  known  and  proven 
{3)  doubt  (4)  motive  ^5)  instance  (6)  demonstrated  truth  (7)  member 
of  a regular  argument  or  Syllogism  ( 8 ) reasoning  by  reduction  to 
absurdity  (9)  determination  or  ascertainment  (10)  determination  or 
disquisition  (ri)  controversy  (12)  ohjecion  (13)  fallacious  reason 
(14)  perversion  (15)  futility  (16)  confutation. 

There  is  no  discrepancy  between  these  two  arrangements.  They 
are  held  to  be  reconciliable  ; the  one  more  ample,  the  other  more  suc- 
■cint;  but  both  leading  to  like  results. 

My  ay  a as  well  as  the  Sankhya  concur  with  other  schools  of  psycho- 
logy in  promising  beatitude  and  mo  ska , deliverance  from  the  evil  for 
the  reward  of  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  principles- which  they  teach. 


1 

$j  ■ • • 


V»*V  .v;  ; 

. 

; ■ 

? 


8 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


comprehen  led  (14 — 17).  I will  describe  unto  thee  great 
Purana,  Agni,  containing  the  great  and  eternal  scierlee  of 


Soul  then  is  that  which  is  to  be  known  and  proven.  Go  tarn  a,  how- 
ever, enumerates  under  this  .head,  besides  soul,  it  associate  body,  the 
external  sense,  intellect  or  understanding,  mind  of  the.  internal  organ, 
activity,  fault,  transmigration,  fruit  or  consequence  of  deeds,  pain  or 
physical  evil  and  lastly  liberation,  making  together  with  soul  twelve 
objects  of  proof,  r 

I.  Evidence  or  proof  by  which  these  objects  are  known  and  demon- 


strated is  of  four  kinds: — (i)  perception  (2)  inference  of  three  sorts 
(consequent,  antecedent  and  analogous)  (3)  comparison  ; and  (4)  affir- 
mation ('comprising  tradition  and  as  well  as  revelation}, 

II, — (a)  The  first  and  most  important,  of  twelve  objects  of  evidence 
or  : matters  to  be  proven  enumerated  by  Gotama,  is  soul.  It  is 'the  site:: 
of  knowledge  or  sentiment  ; distinct  from  body  and  from  the  senses  ; 
different  for  each  individual  co-existent  person,  infinite  eternal, 
perceived  by  the  mental  organ.  This  is  the  living  so  til  ffiwafma  '■of 
animating  spirit  of  an  individual  person.  But  the  Supreme  Soul  or 
Paramatvia  is  one,  the  seat  of  eternal  knowledge  ; demonstrated  as  the 
maker  of  all  things.  The  individual  soul  is  infinite  for  wherever  the 
body  goes  there  the  soul  too  is  present.  It  experiences  the  fruits  of  its 
deeds  ; pain  or  pleasure. 

(b)  The  second  object  of  evidence  is  body.  It  is  the  site  of  effort, 
of  organs  of  sensation,  and  of  sentiment  of  pain  nr  pleasure.  It  is  an 
ultimate  compound  ; the  seat  of  soul’s  enjoyment.  It  is  earthly  for  the 
qualities  of  the  earth  are  perceived  in  it. 

(c)  Next  among  objects  of  proof  are  the  organs  of  sensation.  An 
organ  of  sense  is  defined  as  an  instrument  of  knowledge,  conjoined  to 
the  body  and  imperceptible  to  the  senses. 

There  are  five  external  organs  ; smell,  taste,  sight,  touch  and  hear- 
ing; they  are  not  modifications  of  consciousness  (as  the  Sankliyas 
maintain)  but  material,  constituted  of  the  elements,  earth,  water,  light, 
air  and  ether  respectively. 

The  pupil  of  the  eye  is  not  the  organ  of  sight,  nor  is  the  outer  ear 
the  organ  of  hearing.  But  a ray  of  light  proceeding  from  the  pupil  of 
the  eye  towards  the  objects  viewed  is  the  visual  organ.  Tims  the  ether 
contained  in  the  cavity  of  the  ear  and  communicating  by  the  inter'* 


Thus  the 


m is  lucid,  the  organ  of  hearing  is  etherial, 
of  feeling;  serial  and  that  of  smelling 


that  of 


AttNl  PURANAMb 


9 


fi  rail  toft,  that  which  is  invisible,  incomprehensible,  stable  and 
eternal  ; and  is  the  cause  of  fi-h  and  other  forms,  recounted 
unto  me  by  Vishnu  and  unto  the  celestials  in  the  days  of  yore 


CHAPTER  11 


V aSHISThA  said  : — Do  thou  describe  unto  me  the  fish  and 
other  incarnations  of  Vishnu  the  cause  of  creation  & as  well 
as  the  Agni  Puranam  as  heard  by  thee  from  Vishnu  in 
the; days  of  yore  (s).  r^AC;:;'' 

Agni  said  : — Hear,  0 Vashistha,  f will  describe  the  fish 
incarnation  of  Hari.  The'  work  of  going  through  incarna- 


fions  h intended  for  the  protection  of  tiin 
lion  of  the  wicked*  (a)* 


pious  and  destruc 


AGNl  PUR  AN  AM* 


Brafiml.  There,  O Muni,  the  earth  and  men  were  submerged 
tinder  the, rising  ocean  (3).  At  that  time  Manirf  Vaivaswata 

person  in  the  female  incarnation.  Assuming  His  fourteenth  form  as 
Narasingh,  He  tore  with  His  nails  the  inflated  lord  of  Demons,  resting 
Him  on  his  own  hips,  even  as  a maker  of  grass-screens  tears  grass 
devoid  of  knots.  In  His  fifteenth  incarnation,  desirous  of  recovering 
the  three  worlds,  He  went  to  the  ceremony  inaugurated  by  Bali, 
disguised  as  a Dwarf,  praying  for  three  paces  of  earth.  In  the  sixteenth 
incarnation,  enraged  at  the  sight  of  the  kingly  caste  warring  upon  the 
priestly,  He  purged  the  world  of  Kshatriyas,  as  many  times  as  three 
times  seven.  In  the  seventeenth,  beholding  the  degeneracy  of  men’s 
intellects,  he  was  born  of  Satyabati  by  Paracara,  and  divided  into 
branches  the  tree  of  the  Vedas.  Next,  to  achieve  the  end  of  the  gods, 
He  assumed  the  form  of  Naradeva,  and  performed  a great  many  feats 
of  valour,  such  as  the  taming  of  the  Sea.  In  the  ninteenth  and 
twentieth  incarnations,  having  birth  among  the  Vrishnis  as  Rama  and 
Krishna,  the  Lord  lightened  the  load  of  the  Earth.  Next,  when  Kali 
sets  in,  He  will  he  born  among  the  Kikatas  as  Buddha,  son  of  Anjana, 
in  order  to-  delude  the  foes  of  the  gods.  Afterwards,  in  the  twilight  of 
Kali , when  kings  shall  have  mostly  become  robbers,  the  Lord  will  be 
born  of  Vishnuyasas,  under  the- name  of  Kalki. 

* A day  and  night  of  Brahma,  a period  of  4,320,000,000,  Solar- 
sydereal  years  or  years  of  mortals  measuring  the  duration  of  the  world 
and  as  many,  the  intervals  of  its  annihilation. 

-j*  The  name  Manu  is  specially  applied  to  fourteen  successive  mythical 
progenitors  and  sovereigns  of  the  earth  described  in  the  Code  of  Manu* 
and  in  the  later  mythology  as  creating  and  supporting  this  world  of 
moving  and  stationery  beings  through  successive  Antaras  or  long  periods 
of  time.  Svvayambhuva,  who  sprang  from  Swayambhu,  the  self-born 


12 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


practised  hard  penances  for;  attaining  objects  of  enjoyment 
and  salvation.  Once  while  he  was  pouring  libations  under  a 
cassia  fistula  tree  there  arose  from  the  water  in  his  palms  a 
small  fish  and  said  to  him  who  was  about  to  throw  it,  “ Pray, 
do  not  throw  me  away,  O best  of  men,  I fear  very  much  the 
acquatic  animals.”  Hearing  it  (Manu}  threw  it  into  a vessel 

Increasing  there  in  size;  the  fish  again  told  him.  “ Give  me 
a bigger  accomodation/7  Hearing  its  words  the  king  threw’ 
It  into  a water-jar.  Increasing  there  again  in  size  it  said 
to  the  King  “ O Manu,  give  me  a bigger  accomoda- 
tion” (4 — 7). 

Then  thrown  again  into  a tank  it  assumed  proportions 
according  to  its  size  and  said  “ Give  me  a larger  room”  and 
the  Manu  accordingly  threw  it  into  the  ocean  (8).  In  no 
time  it  assumed  a size  extending  over  a hundred  thousand 
Yojanas.  Beholding  such  a wondrous  fish  Manu,  filled  with 
surprise,  said  ; — (9). 

« '.'Who  art  thou  but  Vishnu?  0 NSrayana,  why  dost 
thou,  0 Janarddana,  overcome  me  with  thy  Illusory 
power”?  (lO). 

Thus  accosted  by  Manu  the  Fish  said  to  him  engaged  in 
the  work  of  protection  ; — “ I have  Incarnated  myself  for  the 
protection  of  the  universe  and  destruction  of  the  wicked 
(xi).  In  the  seventh  day  the  ocean  will,  submerge  the 
earth.  When  a boat  will  approach  thee  do  thou  take  all 
the  seeds  of  creation  and  encircled  by  the  seven  Rishis, 
spend  on  it  Brahmas  night,  and  bind  tins  boat,  with  the 
huge  serpent,  to  my  born”  (12 — 13b  Having  said  this  the 
Fish  disappeared.  The  Manu  awaited  the  appointed  hour  on 
the  bark  of  the  surging  deep.  He  then  got  upon  the  boat. 
That  fish  had  one  horn  of  gold  ten  thousand  Yojanas  in 
length,  He  tied  the  ancient  boat  described  by  the  fish  to  its 
horn  (14—- 15).  Keshava  killed  the  Dftnava  Ilayagriva* 

* The  following  account  about  the  Matjm  or  the  Fish  Incarnation 
of  Vishnu. occurs  In  the  $yimadifk4gm&iam«/':, 


who  destroyed  the  Vedas  of  Brahma.  And  chanting  with 
hymns  his  glories  he  heard  from  the  fish  the  Vedic  man  trams 
and  preserved  them.  And  when  Var&ha  Kalpa  set  in  Han 
assumed  the  form  of  a tortoise  (l 6 — 17). 


CHAPTER  III 


A GNI  said: — I will  now  describe  the  tortoise  Incarnation 
(of  Vishnu)  destructive  of  sins  as  heard  by  me.  Formerly  in 
the  war  between  the  gods  and  demons*  the  former,  in  con- 


A powerful  demon,  by  name  Hayagriva,  pilfered  the  Vedas  from 
Brahma.  Vishnu  saw  this  sinful  act  of  the  demon  and  wanted  to  kill 
h'im.  Satyavrata,  a royal  sage,  attained  the  rank  of  Manu.  While 
he  was  performing  ablution,  Vishnu  assumed  the  form  of  a small  Fish 
and  passed  into  his  hands.  The  account  then  is  the  same  as  described 
in  this  chapter.  The  demon  was  killed  after  the  deluge  and  the  Vedas 
were  restored  to  Brahma. 

A fuller  account  of  this  Incarnation  occurs  in  the  Matsya  Parana,* 
There  is  however  a divergent  account  to  be  met  with  in  the  Mahabharata. 
It  has  no  reference  to  Hayagriva  as  in  the  Bhagavat  and  other  Puranas. 
In  the  Satpatha  Brahmana  of  the  Yayur  Veda  a legend  about  fish 
occurs  but  there  it  has  no  reference  to  any  special  deity. 

* I’he  mythological  account  of  this  war  between  the  gods  and 
the  demons  or  the  Suras  and  Asuras  is  as  follows  : — 

Vishnu,  the  lord  of  the  creation,  wanted  to  make  his  favourites  the 
gods,  immortal  and  powerful.  He  asked  them  to  churn  the  ocean  of 
milk  so  that  ambrosia  might  be  provided.  The  demons  offered  their 
services  to  the  gods  which  they  did  not  decline.  When  ambrosia 
was  produced  Vishnu,  assuming  the  form  of  a beautiful  damsel, 
distributed  the  whole  amongst  the  Suras.  Hence  the  quarrel  arose.  It 
continued  for  thousands  of  years.  The  demons  were  very  powerful 
and  some  of  them  became  invincible  and  unconquerable  by  the  grace 
of  their  god  Siva.  Though  they  could  not  exterminate  the  gods,  yet 
they  defeated  them  often,  drove  them  from  the  celestial  region  and  took 
possession  of  it.  * * 


agni  PURANAM, 


14 

sequence  of  an  imprecation  from  Ditrv&sS,#  wore  defeated 
by  the  latter  and  humiliated.  Then  chanting  the  glories  of 
Vishnu  who  was  lying  in  the  ocean  of  milk  they  said  “ Save 
us  from  the  Asuras”  (1—2).  Hari  then  said  to  Brahma  and 
other  gods  “ Do  ye  make  treaty  with  the  A suras  for  churning 
the  ocean  of  milk  and  securing  ambrosia  for  the  well-being 
of  the  celestials.  In  the  interest  of  an  important  work  even 
the. enemies  should  be  overturned  for  peace.  I will  make  yon 
partake  of  the  ambrosia  and  not  the  Danavas  (3 — 4), 


There  were  supposed  to  be  thirty  three  millions  of  gods  and 
goddesses — but  India  was  their  king  and  Lord.  After  the  defeat  of 
the  Danavas  on  the  shore  of  the  churned  ocean  the  gods  lived  in 
happiness  for  several  years  till  a great  Danava  was  born,  who  was 
known  by  the  name  of  Viirasitra . He  collected  all  the  demons  under 
his  banner  and  declared  war  against  the  Devas,  ft  went  on  for  years 
and  the  gods  were  greatly  assailed.  Indra  then  went  to  Brahma  for 
help  who  advised  him  to  go  to  Dadichi  for  his  bones  to  make  an  weapon 
with  them.  Dadichi  agreed  and  Indra  drove  the  demons  away  with  that 
dreadful  weapon. 

Many  years  passed  in  peace  when  the  demons  again  gathered  round  a 
leader  named  Taraka.  Shiva  helped  them  and  the  gods  grew 
weakened  gradually.  The  celestials,  after  holding  a council,  thought 
of  arousing  Shiva  from  his  Yoga-Sleep  through  the  help  of  Mariana* 
the  god  of  love.  Mahadeva  awoke  and  begat  Karri  key  a or  lima,  He 
became  the  commander-  in  ' Chief  of  the  celestial  army  ami  defeated  the 
demons. 

Again  the  demons,  grew  powerful  under  two  D.irtava’ chiefs  named 
Shumbha  and  Nishumbha,  At  this  time  Durga  went  to  the  battle- 
field and  destroyed  the  Danavas. 

There  is  however  a spiritual  significance  about  (In*  dory.  The 
war  between  the  gods  and  demons  going  on  eternally  means  the  struggle 
between  good  and  evil  that  we  find  in  this  world.  The  gods  are  the 
representatives  of  good  spirit  and  the  demons  those  of  the  evil  The 
final  triumph  of  the  gods  means  the  ultimate  victory  of  good  mm  evil 
In  this  world.  -L 

* A dreadful  Rishi,  who  was  of  a highly  wrathful  temperament* 
Every  one  stood  in  dread  of  his  imprecation. 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM 


Making  the  mount  Mandara* * * §  the  churning  rod  and  VUsukif 
the  rope  do  ye  vigilantly  churn  the  ocean  of  milk  with  my 
help"  (5). 

Then  making  the  covenant  as  suggested  by  Vishnu  the 
Daityas  came  to  the  ocean  of  milk.  Then  the  celestials 
began  to  churn  it  where  the  tail  (of  the  serpent)  was  (6). 
When  the  celestials  were  distressed  with  the  sighs  of  the 
serpent  they  were  consoled  by  Hari;  and  when  the  ocean  was 
thus  churned  the  mountain  could  not  support  itself  and 
entered  into  the  water  (7).  Then  assuming  the  form  of  a 
tortoisej  Vishnu  supported  the  mount  Mandara.  From  the 
churning  of  the  ocean  of  milk  (first)  came  out  a dreadful 
venom  (8).  Hara  kept  it  in  his  throat  and  was  (accordingly) 
called  blue-throated.  Then  arose  the  goddess  Varuni§ 
next  Parijata ||  and  then  Koustavalf  (jem)  (9).  Then  came 
out  celestial  kine  and  nymphs  and  then  Lakshmi**  who  went 
to  the  side  of  Hari.  Beholding  her  and  chanting  her  glories 
all  the  deities  regained  their  (former)  beauty  (10).  Then 
came  out  Dhanyantari  the  founder  of  Ayurvedaff  holding  an 


* The  first  mountain  of  the  world. 

f A serpent,  the  sovereign  of  snakes.  In  Mahabharata  Vasuki  is  the 
king  of  a clan  of  barbarians  called  Nagas, 

J This  is  the  Ktirma  or  Tortoise  incarnation  of  Vishnu. 

§ A kind  of  wine  which  was  a favourite  drik  of  the  celestials. 

||  A kind  of  celestial  flower  a favourite  of  Sachi,  the  queen  of  Indra. 

5j  A jewel  worn  by  Vishnu  on  his  breast. 

**  Goddess  of  prosperity  the  consort  of  Vishnu. 

ff  The  Hindu  system  of  medical  science  the  promulgator  of  which 
was  Dhanwantari. 

The  mythological  account  of  the  Hindus  traces  the  origin  of 
Ayurveda,  their  medical  science,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Kali  yuga> 
when  Brahma , taking  compassion  on  man's  weak,  degenerate  and 
suffering  state,  produced  the  Upaveda  or  commentary  on  the  sacred' 
Vedas,  which  consists  of  four  treatises  (l)  the  Dfiarmashastra,  the 
science  of  law  (2)  Dhanurveda,  the  science  of  the  bow,  (3)  Gandharva 
Veda , the  science-^  music,  (4)  Ayurveda,  the  science  of  life.  Thus  pi V 
systematic  treatise  on’TrtedicaJ  science  is  given  by  Brahma  to 


AGN1  PUR  AN  AM. 


1 6 

earthen  pot  full  of  ambrosia  (it).  Taking  ambrosia  from 
his  hands  the  Daityas  gave  half  of  it  to  the  gods  and  went 


to  teach  them  properly  the  manner  of  living  in  the  world  by  preventing 
and  curing-  diseases.  This  sacred  medical  work  of  the  Hindus 
resembles  in  form  and  style  the  fourth  sacred  Veda  namely  the  Atkntrvan. 
It  describes  the  means  of  keeping  health,  the  causes  of  diseases  and 
the  ways  of  curing  them.  The  original  work  was  divicjed  into  eight 
sections. 

They  are  : — 

(t),  Salya  or  surgery  ; it  deals  with  the  method  of  removing 
external  substances  such  as  grass,  w»bd»  stones  &c.  accidently  getting 
into  the  body  : explains  the  method  of  removing  dead  child  from  the 
mother's  womb,  of  healing  wounds  and  using  various  surgical  instru- 
ments in  operations. 

(2) .  Salakya  ; it  deals  with  the  description  and  treatment  of  the 
external  and  organic  diseases  of  the  eyes,  ears,  mouth  and  nose 

(3)  Kay  a Chikitsa  or  an  account  of  the  diseases  affecting  the  whole 
body  as  fevers,  consumption,  mania,  epilepsy,  leprosy,  diabetes  and 
other  diseases. 

(4) ,  Shut  a Vidya  or  the  means  of  restoring  the  deranged  faculties 
of  the  mind  on  account  of  a man’s  being  possessed  by  devils. 

(5) .  Kamnarabhvitya  or  the  treatment  of  infantile  diseases. 

(6) .  Agada  or  the  administration  of  poisons  and  their  antedates* 

(7) .  R a say  an  a or  an  account  of  the  medicines  which  cure  all 
diseases,  restore  general  health  and  youth. 

(8) .  Bajikarna  or  the  means  of  restoring  the  manhood  and  in- 
creasing the  human  race. 

Thus  we  see  that  Ayitrdenm  is  the  first  'systematic;  work  cm  Hindu 
medicine  which  was  revealed  by  Brahma  who  first  in*ti  noted  the 
patriarch  Daksha.  He  wrote  a b >ok  named  Chikii$a-darsluma»nd 
communicated  the  medical  science  to  the  two  Ashwinis  or  offspring  of 
the  sun.  Others  say  that  Brahma  communicated  the  Ayurveda  to 
Surya.  The  Ashwinis  were  the  medical  attendants  of  the  gods  and 
authors  of  several  treatises  on  medicine  out*  of  winch  was  named 
Chikit$a~ratnaiantra,  As  the  gods  were  ever  youthful  and  healthy 
suffering  from,  no  diseases  they  stood  in  no  need  of  a physician.  The 
Ashwinis  however  performed  many  surgical  operations  for  the  gods. 
Being  cured  of  his  paralytic  arm  by  the  Ashwinis  Incfc*  WriU  Ayurveda 
from  them, 


AGNI  PURANAM-. 


away  with  the  other  half.  Vishnu,  the  root  of  creation,  then 
assumed  the  form  of  a (beautiful)  damsel  (12).  Beholding 


Thus  it  is  evident  that  for  a considerable  time  the  knowledge  of 
Ayurveda  was;  confined  amongst  the  gods.  Sometime  after  this,  how-*' 
ever,  with  the  prevalence  of  wickedness  and  iniquity,  mankind  began  to 
suffer  from  various  diseases.  Grieved  at  this,  the  sages  Varadwaja  and 
A trey  a convened  a meeting  of  the  Munis  in  the  Himalaya  mountains. 
According  to  the  account  in  Charaka  there  were  present  the  sages 
Angira,  Jamadagni,  Vasistha,  Kasyapa,  Bhrigu,  Atreya,  Gautama, 
Sankhya,  Pulastya,  Narada,  Asita,  Bamdeva,  Markandeya,  Aswanayana, 
Parikshita,  Bhikshuratreya,  Bharadwaja,  Kapinjala,  Vishwamitra, 
Aswaranya,  Bhargava,  Chayabana,  Abhijit,  Gargya,  Sandiiya,  Abar- 
kshi,  Devala,  Galava,  Saukritya,  Vaijavapaya,  Kusika,  Vadarayna, 
Kaikasaey,  Dhauma,  Marichi,  Kasyapa,  Sarakshya,  Hiranakshya, 
Lokakshya,  Paingi,  Saunaka,  Sakuneya,  Gautamayani  and  others. 

After  some  deliberations  they  all  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the 
only  means  of  saving  humanity  from  such  a disaster  was  to  send  one 
of  their  number  to  the  thousand-eyed  deity  Indra  and  to  obtain  from 
him  the  knowledge  of  medicine.  Varadwaja  was  selected.  The  sage 
went  to  the  king  of  gods  and  returned  with  the  knowledge  of  Ayur- 
veda. He  related  to  the  Rishis  the  precepts  that  he  had  learnt  from 
Indra.  They  consisted  of  (1)  Samana  or  the  general  character  of 
everything,  (2)  Visesa  or  classification,  (3)  Dravya  or  elements,  (4)  Guna 
or  qualities,  (5)  Karma  or  actions,  (6)  Sanyoga  or  combination.  Of 
those  Rishis  Atreya  communicated  his  knowledge  of  medicine  to  his 
numerous  pupils. 

Then  again  after  the  deluge  when  the  Vedas  were  lost  the  gods  and 
demons  churned  the  ocean  for  finding  out  the  water  of  immortality. 
When  the  ocean  was  churned  many  precious  gifts  or  ratnas  came  out. 
Among  them  was  Dhanwantari  the  physician  or  holy  sage  who  came 
out  with  water  of  life  or  Amrita . He  was  a pupil  of  Indra  in  Ayurveda 
and  practised  medicine  in  heaven.  Seeing  the  miseries  and  diseases  of 
mankind  he  came  down  on  earth  to  instruct  them  in  the  science  of  Life, 
He  afterwards  became  the  king  of  Kasi  and  performed  many  celebrated 
cures.  Witnessing  the  miserable  condition  of  mankind  the  Rishis  sent 
a deputation  to  Divadasa  or  Dhanwantari  requesting  him  to  teach  them 
the  science  of  life.  This  deputation  consisted  of  Oupadbnuba* 
Baiturana,  Aurabhra,  Karabirja,  Goupura,  Rukeeta  and  Susruta  who 
followed  the  king  to  retirement.  Of  them  Susruta  was  selected  top 
abridge  the  Ayurveda.  ;; 


A€NI  PURANAM. 


«8 

her  endued  with  beauty,  the  Daityas,  overcome  with  facina- 
lion,  said  “ Be  our  wife,  take  this  ambrosia,  0 fair  one  and 
snake  us  partake  of  it”  (13). 

Saying  “ So  be  it”  Hari  took  it  from  them  and  made  the 
celestials  drink  of  it.  Assuming  the  form  of  the  moon 
Rahu*  drank  up  the  portion  offered  to  the  sun  and  moon 
and  therefore  his  head  was  severed  off  his  head  by  his  enemy 
Hari.  He  then  said  to  Hari,  the  giver  of  boon  ts  By  thy 
mercy  I have  attained  immortality  14 — 1 5)*”  u Rahu  is 
mortal  still  he  will  possess  the  sun  and  the  moon  during  the 
ecclipse  as  well  as  the  other  planets.  Charities  made  at 
that  time  will  be  imperishable  (16).  To  it  Vishnu  replied 
“ So  be  it”  along  with  all  the  immortals,  casting  off  his 
female  form,  He  was  then  requested  by  Hara  to  show  (this 
form)  unto  him  (17),  The  Divine  Hari  then  dis- 
played his  female  form  unto  Rudra.  Overpowered  by  his 
(Vishnu’s)  illusory  power,  Shambhu,  renouncing  Gouri, 
longed  for  that  damsel  (iS).  He  became  naked  and  looked 
like  a maniac.  He  held  the  woman  by  the  hair  and  she, 
releasing  her  hairs,  ran  away.  He  too  followed  tier  (19), 
Wherever  dropped  Harass  seminal  fluid  there  sprang  up 
fields  of  his  phallic  emblem  and  gold  (20).  Then  knowing, 
that  this  was  her  illusory  form  Hara  assumed  his  own  real 
form.  Hari  then  said  to  Shiva  0 Rudra,  my  illusory 
power  has  been  overpowered  hv  thee  (21).  There  Is  no 
other  male  being  on  earth  who  is  capable  of  d'isco'm filling 
my  Maya” f 

# The  ascending  node;  in  mythology  the  son  of  Sivhihu,  a DaWym 
with  the  tail  of  a dragon  whose  head  was  severed  from  Ins  body  by 
Vishnu,  but  being  immortal  the  head  and  tail  retained  their  separate 
existence  and  being  transferred  to  the  stellar  sphere,  became  authors  of 

ecclipse  the  first  specially,  by  en devouring  at  various  times  to  swallow 
the  sun  and  ]he  moon. 

f For  a right  interpretation  of  broad  outlines  of  the  Vedanta  Philo- 
sophy  one  must  begin  with  Maya,  It  is  a term  pretty  commonly  used, 
but  with  wide  distinctions.  It  has  a scientific  and  a popular  signification 
both  of  which  it  will  be  our  purpose  to  show  in  the  present  notice* 


m 


AGNI  PUR  ANA  M 


Thereupon  not  obtaining  the  ambrosia  the  Daityas  were 
defeated  by  the  Devas  in  battle.  The  gods  then  repaired 


Maya  has  been  defined  as  the  inherent  force  residing  in  the  Supreme 
Brahma — which  is  essentially  existent  and  which  cannot  be  differentiated. 
As  the  consuming  flame  of  fire  imparts  an  idea  of  its  force,  so  the 
potentiality  of  force  present  in  Self  is  plainly  seen  in  the  objective  world. 
But  this  Maya  cannot  be  said  to  be  one  with  Parabrabma,  nor  as  some- 
thing distinct,  in  the  same  way  as  the  consuming  force  of  a fire  cannot 
be  said  to  be  the  fire  itself.  Then  again  if  you  admit  it  as  a separate 
entity  you  cannot  by  any  means  describe  its  separate  existence. 
(. Panchadasi , Book  II.  V.  & 43.) 

It  will  thus  be  evident  that  Maya  and  Parabrabma  are  but  another 
name  for  Matter  and  Force.  We  all  know  force  cannot  exist  without 
matter  as  a separate  entity,  yet  to  say  that  it  is  the  same  as  matter,  is 
absurd.  Hence  in  the  text  quoted  we  find  the  non -dualist  asking  his 
opponent  a Madhyamika  Buddhist  to  describe  force  as  a separate  entity. 
But  it  may  be  urged  that  Parabrabma  is  force,  and  we  have  seen  Maya 
to  be  also  a force — therefore  we  have  force  x force— or  force  within  force 
something  equally  absurd.  A condition  Which  the  mind  fails  to  com- 
prehend. But  such  apparent  ambiguity  is  far  from  real.  For  Maya  is 
matter  in  its  undifferentiated  condition  in  which  the  difference  between 
matter  and  its  indwelling  potentially  is  minimised  to  the  lowest  numeri- 
cal figure;  it  is  the  boundary  line  of  matter  and  force,  where  matter 
losing  its  grossness  assumes  the  subtlety  of  super  ethereal  finis,  where 
no  matter  is  distinguishable  as  such,  but  all  is  spirit  or  force.  And  such 
inference  is  derived  from  Nature.  To  quote  a familiar  illustration,  the 
transition  from  a mineral  to  a vegetable  and  from  vegetable  to  animal 
is  so  gradual  that  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  die  one  from  the  other. 
Even  at  the  present  moment  science  is  undecided  as  to  whether  certain 


20 


agni  puranam. 


t0  lheir  celestial  home.  He  who  reads  this  account  goes  to 
the  celestial  region  (22). 


to  his  opponent  whic 
bis  own  position  invi 
Now  Maya  is  < 
something  indescrib 
existence  (asat) — in 

the  chief  factor  of  the  grand  cosmos  ii 

is  nothing  less  than  matter. 
Parabrahma,  and  if  we  say 
world  from  the  very 
the  Hebrew  accounn 


force  and  it  is  ^elsewhere  defined  as 
neither  existence  (sat)  nor  non- 
e with  Ignorance,  which  again  being 
the  same  as  Prakrit!  of  Kapiia, 
Now  this  Maya  existed 
that  by  an  act  of  volition 
same  Maya,  we  imply  no 
of  God’s  creating  the  world 
be  asked  Parabrahma  is  an  imper- 
due  to  consciousness  which  it  can  lay  no  claims 
— reply  that  matter  per  $e  is  un- 
bring  forth  nothing  'until  acted  upon  fey 
of  a force  and  that  the  Parabrahma  is 
impress  of  change  which  it 
to  make  it  evolve  things  varied  and 


Therefore  Maya 
potentially  in  the 
created  he  the  objective 
such  contradiction  as 
out  of  nothing.  But  then  we  may 
sonality,  and  volition  is 
to.  To  such  of  our  task  masters  we 
conscious  and  inert,  and  can  1 
an  intelligent  co-operation 
Consciousnes  itself,  consequently  the 
produces  in  the  mass  of  inertia 
innumerable  is  tantamout  to  the  volitional  agency  of  a personal  creator. 
Then  again  if  it  be  asked  that  since  Parabrahma  is  a pure  spirit,  ' 
how  can  it  have  any  connection  with  matter  which  is  its  antagonist?  We 
have  seen  that  spirit  and  force  are  convertible  terms,  and  we  have  like-  , 
wise  seen  that  force  cannot  exist  without  matter,  hence  where  ever  there 
is  force  there  matter  must  always  be  ; — to  sum  up  then  we  find,  Maya 

existed  in  the  Parabrahma,  and  it  is  the  same  Maya  which  brough  forth 

the  universe  in  a natural  order  of  sequence  by  undergoing  mutations 
impressed  upon  it  through  its  force  or  Parabrahma.  It  is  unnecessary  | 
here  to  dwell  upon  the  consecutive  series  of  changes,  suffice  it  to  say  fi 
that  from  its  undifferentiated  condition, -a  state  in  which  it  had  no  !, 

properties  to  distinguish  it,  for  properties  are  due  to  the  elements,  ether  i!jj 

and  the  rest,  its  pre-elementary  condition  if  we  may  be  allowed  such  an 
expression— it  became  subtle,  and  then  gross,  and  ultimately  quintuph- 
cated.  Change,  then,  is  the  law  of  the  universe,  without  it  the  earth 
would  lose  its  freshness  and  beauty  ; change  every  where  and  at  every 
moment  is  the  grand  centric  law  round  which  are  deposited  the  ni  us,  ; 

and  the  nucleoli  of  future  planets,  their  satellities  «cc.,  as  surely  as  it  i 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ac 


lgni  said : — I will  now  describe  the  tortoise  incarna“» 
lion  (of  Vishnu)  destructive  of  sins. 

Having  vanquished  the  celestials  Hirauyaksha*  became 
their  lord  and  settled  in  their  region  (i).  The  celestials 
then  repaired  to  Vishnu  and  chanted  his  glories,  who  assum- 
ing the  form  of  a sacrificial  boar  and  killing  their  thorn  the 
Danava  together  with  all  (other  Daityas)  protected  virtue 
and  the  gods.  Afterwards  Hari  disappeared. 


(Kapil a) ; though  in  truth  it  may  be  laid  down  that  the  earth  we  inhabit 
is  not  the  first  of  the  series  and  that  our  human  race  is  not  the  first  that 
has  been  called  into  existence.  From  close  reasoning  this  must  naturally 
establish  itself.  For  if  the  Parabrahma  is  eternal  and  essentially 
existent,  and  if  such  Parabrahma  must  have  its  Maya  wherein  to  reside, 
if  the  contact  of  the  two  induce  changes  which  end  in  words  usually 
called  creative,  but  strictly  speaking  evolutional,  then  where  is  the 
beginning  and  the  end  in  such  a plan  ? 

Another  signification  of  Maya  is  illusion . This  consists  in  believing 
the  world  and  all  its  goods  to  be  real,  and  thus  entranced  to  hunger 
after  material  comforts.  As  an  apt  illustration  we  may  refer  to  the 
story  of  Narada.  Narada  was  enquiring  of  Krishna  one  day  what 
Maya  was.  They  were  travelling  together  in  a sandy  waste  ; Narada 
feels  thirsty,  and  wants  some  water  to  drink,  a shed  was  pointed  out, 
where  he  repairs  leaving  his  companion  to  wait  for  him.  The  proprietress 
of  the  shed  happened  to  be  a young  damsel  whom  Narada  had  no 
sooner  seen,  than  he  fell  head  and  ears,  over,  in  love.  His  thirst  for 
drink  was  gone,  but  he  was  now  possessed  with  a thirst  lor  obtaining 
the  fair  creature’s  hands.  He  marries  her,  he  gets  several  children  and 
removes  with  his  family  from  place  to  place  to  avoid  disaster  till 
ultimately  his  wife  and  family  are  drowned  while  crossing  the  bed  of  a 
river ; and  he  is  found  bewailling  the  loss  of  his  dearly  beloved  wife. 
In  such  a juncture  Hari  puts  in  appearance ; to  his  queries  Narada 
gives  no  reply  but  intent  on  grief  he  weeps  as  loudly  as  ever.  He  is  full 
entranced  in  the  meshes  of  Maya.  Bhagavan  deprives  him  of  the 
charm;  when  lo  1 Narada  is  again  restored  to  Juana*  He  has  now 
seen  Maya,  . . 

* A demon  chief. 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM. 


Hiranytksha  had  a brother  by  name  Hiranyakashlpu 
(2—3).  Having  vanquished  the  celestials  he  occupied  al| 
their  possessions  and  monopolised  their  share  in  the 
sacrificial  offerings.  Having  assumed  the  form  of  a man- 
lion  he  killed  him  together  with  all  the  Asuras  and  re- 
established the  Suras  (celestials)  in  their  own  stations. 
Narasinha*  (man-lion  incarnation  of  Vishnu)  was  then 
worshipped  by  the  celestials.  - 

Formerly  in  the  war  between  Devas  and  Asuras  the 
Suras  were  defeated  and  driven  out  of  heaven  by  Bali  and 
his  followers  and  sought  the  protection  of  Hari.  Having 
promised  safety  unto  the  celestials,  been  prayed  for  by 
AdityS  and  Kashyapaf  and  been  born  as  a dwarf  from 
Aditya  he  went  to  the  sacrifice  of  Bali  j who  promised  to 

is  tiie  mytholo- 


The  tollowins 


* Man-lion  incarnation  of  Vishnu, 
gica!  aecount  of  this  incarnarnation. 

In  ancient  time  there  were  two  demon  kings  named  1 1 iranjaksha 
and  HiranyaKashipu.  They  were  deadly  enemies  of  Vishnu  and  tried 
their  best  to  put  down  his  worship.  Their  attempt-,  u -r  ■ however 
baffled  by  the  birth  of  a pious  son  of  Hiranya  Kashipu,  by  name 
Pralhada,  who  was  a devout  follower  of  Vishnu.  Hiranya  Kashipu 
tried  every  possible  means  to  induce  his  son  not  to  worship  Vishnu  hut 
he  was  unsuccessful.  He  then  tried  to  kill  him,  by  throwing  him  down 
from  a mountain  summit,  by  placing  him  umi  1 tlm  „f  a mad 

elephant  and  by  various  other  means,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  One 
day  growing  exasperated  he  asked  his  son  “Where  is  your  I lari'"’ 
Pralhada  said  "My  Hari  is  everywhere— He  is  , lV.v  n . .'ii.u 
before  you."  The  Danava  king,  in  anger,  -muck  ti„.  with  his 

foo  and  anon  Vishnu  came  out  inhis  man-lion  form  and  kill  ,d  him. 

t He  was  the  son  of  Marichi,  the  son  of  Brahma  and  one  of  the 
progenitors  of  created  beings.  In  Pur, -mas  ho  is  d.,„viVd  as  the 
usband  of  Adm  and  twelve  other  dauglm-ts  of  Dak  ha,  .md  Mthcr  nt 
gods,  demons,  men  and  of  the  entire  animal  creation,  lie  i*  one  of 
the  seven  sages  and  father  of  Vivaswat  ami  VKhm.  and  grmut-Mthor 
ofManu  Adm  had  twelve  sons  of  whom  Shukra  was  the  eld<  t and 
Vishnu  the  youngest,  . 

? Bali  was  a powerful  and  pious  king.  Even  now  people  point  out 

that  eLTri n T*  k!ng  so  very  powerful  by  his  virtues 
Indra  the  king  of  celestials  had  to  give  his  sovereignty  Wtc 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


him.  Therefore  to  kill  him  Vishnu  incarnated  himself  as  a dwarfish 
B rah  m ana. 

^ All  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus  are  divided  into  two  classes 
namely  Sruti  or  what  is  heard  or  revealed  and  Smriti  or  what  is 
remembered.  The  Vedas  constitute  the  Sruti  for  they  are  regarded  by 
them  as  revealed  and  the  sacred  Laws  &c  now  pass  under  the  name  of 


f He  was  the  priest  of  the  Daityas  and  the  presiding  priest  of  the 
Sacrifice  undertaken  by  Bali. 

if.  The  practice  amongst  the  pious  Hindus  is  that  whenever  one 
wants  to  make  any  gift  in  a sacrifice  or  a religious  rite  he  takes  up 
water  in  his  hand  and  with  a promise  pours  it  into  the  hand  of  the 
recipient. 

§ v.  He  assumed  a huge  size  which  startled  the  on-lookers  and 
proved  what  Sukra  had  said, 

|]  Nether  region.  Another  mythological  account  is  that  Vishnu 
placed  one  foot  on  earth,  one  in  the  sky  and  wanted  room  for  the  third. 
Bali  then  offered  his  head,  Vishnu  placed  his  third  foot  on  it  and  sent 
him  down  to  the  nether  region,  where  even  now  Bali  is  reigning. 

Another  appellation  of  Indra,  the  king  of  gods. 

m Brahmana : his  second  birth  is  said  to  take  place  when  he  puts  on 
his  sacrificial  thread.  , 


24 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM. 


and  establishing  peace  Hari  incarnated  himself ; and  having 
smothered  the  proud  Kshatryas*  he  protected  the  gods 
and  Vipras.  From  Jamadagni  and  Renuka  he  was  born  as 
Bhargava,  proficient  in  the  use  of  arms  {12  — 13). 

By  the  grace  of  Dattatreyaf  the  thousand-armed 
Kartavirya  became  the  Lord  Paramount  of  the  world.  Once 

* The  military  caste.  The  following  is  the  text  of  Manu  on  the 
origin  of  castes. 

“For  the  sake  of  preserving  this  universe  Brahma  allotted  several 
duties  to  those  who  sprang  respectively  from  his' ' mouth,  .anrj}  -.■his 
thigh  and  feet. 

To  Brahimanas  he  assigned  the  duties  of  reading  the  Veda  and 
teaching  it,  of  sacrifing,  of  assisting  others  to  sacrifice,  of  giving  alms 
and  of  receiving  gifts. 

To  defend  the  people,  to  give  alms,  to  sacrifice,  to  read  the  Veda,  to 
shun  the  temptations  of  sexual  enjoyment  constitute  in  short  the  duties 
of  the  Kshatryas. 

To  tend  cattle,  to  bestow  properties,  to  sacrifice,  to  read  scriptures, 
to  carry  on  trade,  to  lend  money  on  interest  and  to  cultivate  land  are  the 
duties  of  the  Vaisyas. 

To  serve  the  three  other  castes  is  the  duty  of  the  Sudras. 

Mr.  Muir  has  collected  many  passages  relating  to  the  origin  of 
castes  and  finds  it  “abundantly  evident  that  the  sacred  books  of  the 
Hindus  contain  no  uniform  or  consistent  account  of  the  origin  of  castes, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  present  the  greatest  varieties  of  speculation. ,J 

The  earliest  reference  is  to  be  seen  in  Purusha»Sukta  of  Rigvedt* 
which  is  considered  by  many  as  an  interpellation. 

In  this  hymn  it  is  stated  that  Purusha  being  divided  **  The  Brahman 
"was  his  mouth  ; the  Rajanya  was  made  his  arms,  the  Vaisya  was  his 
thighs;  the  Sudra  sprang  from  his  feet  On  this  point  Mr,  Muir  thus 
remarks 

“In  a hymn  of  this  allegorical  and  mystical  character  it  cannot  be 
assumed  that  the  writer  intended  to  represent  it  as  a historical  fact  that 
four  different  classes  sprang  from  different  parts  of  Purusha**  body; 
any  more  than  he  desired  to  assert  as  literally  true,  what  he  has  stated 
in  verses  • 13  and  14  that  “ the  moon  was  produced  from  his  mind,  the 
the  sun  from  his  05 e &c. 

t 'The  name  of  a great  Rishi.  An  account  of  this  Rishi  occurs  in 
Markandeya  Puranam* 


A'GNl  PURANAM. 


25 


while  a-hunting  lie  was  tired  in  the  forest  and  invited  by 
the  Muni  Jamadagni.  The  king  with  his  retinue  was  fed  by 
him  by  the  favour  of  Kamadhenu*  (14—15).  (The  king) 
then  prayed  for  the  cow  and  (the  sage)  not  agreeing  he 
pilfered  it.  Thereupon  Rama,  with  his  axe,  cut  off  the 
head  of  the  king  in  battle  and  brought  back  the  cow  to  his 
hermitage.  One  day  while  Rama  was  out  into  the  forest 
Kartavirya*s  sons,  out  of  enmity,  killed  Jamadagni.  On  his 
return  Rama  saw  his  sire  slain  and  was  stricken  with 
grief  in  consequence  thereof  (17—18).  Having  divested  the 
earth  of  the  Kshafcryas  for  twenty  one  times, .made  five  wells 
in  Kurukshetraf  offered  oblations  to  the  departed  manes 
and  conferred  the  earth *011  Kashyapa  the  Lord  settled  himself 
on  the  mount  Mahendra.  Hearing  of  the  incarnations  of 
tortoise,  boar,  man-lion,  dwarf  and  Rama  a man  repairs  to 
the  cesiestial  region  (19 — 20). 


CHAPTER  V, 


Agni  said  •: — I will  now  describe  RamayanaJ  which 
gives  enjoyment  and  emancipation  as  described  formerly 
by  Narada§  unto  Valmikt  (1), 

* A fabulous  cow  that  gives  whatever  is  prayed  for. 

f The  field  where  the  great  battle  was  fought.  Modern  Panipat  is 
now  pointed  out  as  the  proper  place. 

^ Literally  it  means  history  of  Raw  a the  great  epic  of  the  Hindus 
written  by  the  sage  Valmikt, 

I He  is  one  of  the  well-known  celestial  sages.  In  the  Vedas  he 
is  described  as  one  of  the  descendants  of  Kan  wa  and  author  of  several 
hymns  of  the  Rig-veda.  In  mythology  he  is  often  associated  with 
Parvata  and  acts  like  a messenger  of  gods  to  men,  and  is  known  as  the 
son  of  Brahma.  He  is  the  friend  of  Krishna  and  is  the  inventor  of  Vina 
or  lute.  In  the  Mahabharata  he  is  described  as  the  king  of  the  celestial 
musicians.  ■ ■ 


26 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


Narada  said  : — Brahma  sprang  from  the  lotus  navel  of 
Vishnu  ; his  son  was  Marichi ; his  son  was  Kashyapa ; liis  son 
was  Surya  whose  soa  again  was  Vaivaswata  Manu  (2).  From 
him  sprang  Ikshwaku  in  whose  family  was  born  Kakuthstha. 
His  son  was  Raghu ; his  son  was  Aja  whose  son  was 
Dasharatha  (3).  For  the  destruction  of  Havana  Hari  incar- 
nated himself  in  four  parts.  King  Dasharatha  begat  RSma 
on  Koushlya  (4).  He  begat  his  son  Bharata  on  iCaikeyi  and 
Lakshmana  and  Satrughna  on  Sumitra.  Rishyashringa* 

The  following  account  of  Narada's  telling  Valmiki  about  Rama 
occurs  in  the  first  chapter  of  Ram  ay  an  a : 

The  ascetic  Valmiki  asked  that  best  of*  sages  and  foremost  of  those 
conversant  with  words,  ever  engaged  in  austerities  and  Vaidika  studies, 
Narada  saying, — “ Who  at  present  in  this  world  is  alike  crowned  with 
qualities,  and  endued  with  prowess,  knowing  duty,  and  grateful,  and 
truthful,  and  firm  in  vow, — who  is  qualified  by  virtue  of  his  character, 
and  who  is  ever  studious  of  the  welfare  of  all  creatures?  Who  is 
learned,  hath  studied  society,  and  knowetb  the  art  of  pleasing  his 
subjects?  And  who  alone  is  ever  lovely  to  behold?  Who  hath 
subdued  his  heart,  and  controlled  his  anger,  is  endowed  with  personal 
grace  and  devoid  of  malice ; and  whom,  enraged  in  battle,  do  even 
the  gods,  fear?  Great  is  my  curiosity  to  hear  of  such  a person*  Thou 
eanst,  O Maharshi,  tell  me  of  a man  of  this  description.”  Hearing 
Valmiki’s  words,  Narada,  cognizant  of  the  three  worlds,  said  with 
alacrity, — “ Do  thou  listen!  Rare  as  .are  the  qualities  mentioned  by 
thee,  I will,  O sage,  having  duly  considered,  describe  unto  thee  a 
person  .endued  with  them*  There  is  one  sprung  from  the  line  of 
Ikshwaku,  known  by  the  name  of  Rama. 

* In  one  of  the  deepest  and  most  romantic  glens  of  the  Maisur 
Malnad,  .formed  by  the  Western  Ghats,  is  nestled  the  shrine  of 
Sringesva  of  Kigga,  The  locality  is  extremely  picturesque,  and  the 
habits  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  are  very  primitive.  The  soil  is 
rich,  and,  though  thinly  scattered,  the  peasants  are  by  no  means  over- 
industrious.  The  productions  are  among  the  most  valuable,  consisting 
of  supari,  cardamoms,  rice,  &c.  Territorially,  the  village  of  Kigga  is 
in  the  Koppa  Taluka  of  the  Nagar  Division.  There  is  a tradition 
attaching  to  this  shrine  to  the  effect  that  no  drought  will  ever  approach 
within  t2  gavadas  of  the  god.  In  seeking  the  origin  of  this  tradition, 
the  following  legend  has  been  gathered  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to 


AGN1  PURANA^ 


gave  Payasha  unto  them  (the  queens)  after  completing 
a sacrifice  and  they  partook  of  it  and  from  them  were 


remark  that  the  people  of  the  country  accept  its  truth.  But  a simpler 
explanation  may  easily  be  arrived  at.  The  temple  is  built  close  to  the 
eastern  base  of  the  Western  Ghats,  and  as  their  gigantic  peaks  intercept 
and  appropriate  the  precious  burden  of.  the  clouds  during  the  S.  W. 
monsoon,  the  locality  happens  by  a simple  natural  law  to  be  highly 
favoured  with  rain.  The  local  priest-hood,  with  a view  to  enhance  their 
own  importance  and  gains,  have  turned  the  naturnal  phenomenon 
to  their  own  advantage,  clothing  it  with  a religious  and  supernatural 
garb. 

4 Vibhandaka  Muni,  son  of  Kasyapa,  who-  was  the  son  of 
Marichi  Brahma,  consulted  his  father  as  to  the  choice  of  the 
best  place  for  tapas,  and  *was  directed  to  the  spot  in  which  the 
river  Tungabhadra  runs  in  three  different  directions.  Vibhandaka 
thereupon  went  in  search  of  such  a place,  commencing  from  the 
source  of  the  river,  and  after  passing  various  tirthas  and  holy  spots, 
at  Sringapura  (modern  Sringeri),  and  identified  it  with  the  locality 
ordained  by  his  holy  father,  from  the  Tungabhadra  three  making 
different  sweeps  in  its  course.  The  Rishi  here  performed  the  rite  of 
tapas  rigorously  for  three  thousand  years,  and  its  severity  (lit.  jvala 


AGNi  PUR  A NAM, 


When  tfe  boy  was  about  twleve  years  old,  the  Paramesvara  and1 
parvati  were  one  day  taking  an  airing  in  the  celestial  regions,  attended 
by  their  retinue  of  evil  spirits,  ghosts,  and  devils,  and  were  much- 
surprised  to  find  a child  in  such  company.  They  alighted  on  the  spot 
and  blessed  the  boy,  investing  him1  with  the  varam,  or  power  of  destroy™ 
ing  famine  and  drought  within  twelve  yojanas  of  his  abode* 

was  ruling  the  king™ 
unusual  drought  of  twelve  years5"' 
were  in  great  suffering,  no  food  or  drink 
At  this  juncture  the  divine  Rishi 


‘Once  upon  a time,  when  Romapada  Maharaja 
dom  of  Anga,  it  was  overtaken  by  an 
duration,  and  the  people 
being  procurable  for  men  or  cattle, 

SanatKumara,  who  has  the  privilege  of  visiting  the  earth  whenever  the 
fancy '.seizes  him,  went  to  see  the  afflicted  country  and  its  unfortunate- 
ruler.  He  was  duly  received  by  the  Raja,  and  informed  him  that  if 
the  young  Rishya  Sringa,  son  of  Vibhandaka  Muni,  could  be  induced 
to  visit  the  country  of  Anga,  it  would  get  rain  in  abundance,  and  regain 
its  usual  prosperity.  Romapada  (bare-footed)  could  make  nothing  of 
this  information  and  consulted  all  the  wise  men  in  his  dominions  on  the 
subject.  They  referred  to  their  sacred  books,  and  told  him  that  the 
Asrama  of  Vibhandaka  was  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Tungabhadra 
river,  which  was  in  the  southern  direction.  The  advisers  moreover 
expressed  their  own  inability  to  bring  Rishya  Sringa  to  Anga,  but  sug- 
gested that  the  Raja  should  employ  dancing  girls  of  surpassing  beauty 
to  allure  the  young  Rishi  to  the  desired  place.  Acting  upon  this  prac* 
tical  suggestion,  Romapada  sent  several  lovely  women  of  equivocal 
character,  with  large  supplies  of  scents,  cloths,  jewels,  and  wealth,  and 
directed  them  to  conduct  Rishya  Sringa  to  his  capital,  by  every  means 
in  their  power,  whether  fair  or  foul.  They  at  first  established  a depot 
at  a place  called  Narve,  and  taking  advantage  of  Vibhandaka 's  absence 
from  the  hermitage,  gradually  initiated  the  unsophisticated  young  Rishi 
in  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  escaping  from  the  certain  malediction  of 
the  father  to  their  own  retreat  at  Narve.  The  enchanted  young  man 
one  day  asked  his  enchanters  the  object  which  prompted  their  unusual 
attentions.  They  gave  highly  beguiling  pictures  of  ;the  wealth  and 
beauty  of  their  own  country,  and  invited  him  to  go  with  them  to  enjoy 
the  same.  The  young  Rishi  was  completely  overcome  by  the  artifices 
of  these  deluders,  and  consented.  Taking  advantage  of  \hc  father’s 


•AGN!  PUKANAM 


and  worship  was  paid  to  him*  Sometime  after,  the  Maharaja  praising* 
the  Rishi  very  much,  offered  to  give  his  daughter,  Santadevi  in  mar- 
riage, and  the  offer  was  accepted.  The  wedding  came  off  with  due 
pomp  and  eclat,  and  the  happy  bridegroom  dwelt  for  some  time  in  the 
country  of  his  adoption. 

'About  this  period,  Dasaratha  king  of  Ayodhya,  was  in  deep  distress 
from  the  absence  of  an  heir  to  his  throne.  Narada  paid  him  a visit  and 
divining  cause  of  his  host’s  dejection,  advised  him1  to  invite  to  his  court 
the  Muni  Rishya  Sringa,  who  would  bring  about  realization  of  his  wishes* 
Dasaratha  did  accordingly,  and  Rishya  Sringa  conducted  a yajna 
(sacrifice)  called  Puira  Kameshti  in  which  the  god  Agni  came  out  of 
the  cacrificia!  fire,  and  handing  a cup  of  Paramanna  ( Payasa ),  told  the 
Raja  to  distnoute  its  contents  among  his  wives,  whereby  he  would  get 
four  sons,  named  Rama,  Lakshmana,  Bharata,  and  Satrughna.  The 
god  thereupon  vanished  out  of  sight.  Dasaratha  followed  the  directions 
of  Agni,  whose  prophecy  was  duly  fulfilled.  Rishya  Sringa  soon  after 
returned  to  his  father’s  old  Asrama,  but  did  not  find  him  there.  His 
father’s  disappearance  afflicted  him  very  much,  whereupon  Vibhandaka 
emerged  from  the  Linga  of  Malahanisvara.  The  son  was  overjoyed', 
paid  him  due  reverence,  and  asked  him  where  he  could  best  conduct 
tapas . Vibhandaka  referred  him,  however,  to  Maha  Vishnu,  who  was 
living  in  the  Sahyadri  hills.  Rishya  Sringa  was  accordingly  proceeding 
in  that  direction,  when  he  was  benighted  on  the  bank  of  a stream  near 
Nirmalapura  (modern  Nemmar).  He  stopped  there  to  perform  his 
evening  religious  rites,  when  a Rakshasa  named  Vyagbra  (tiger)  rushed 
upon  him  with  the  object  of  swallowing  him  up.  The  holy  man  there- 
upon threw  a drop  of  water  upon  the  Rakshasa  from  the  nail  of  his 
little  finger,  and  instantly  the  demon  quitted  the  body  of  the  tiger,  and 
begged  the  Rishi  to  tell  him  what  he  should  do.  Rishya  Sringa  directed 
him  to  go  to  Sarvesvara  (a  Lingafe  so  called),  and  by  doing  so  the 
quondam  tiger  attained  moksha  (salvation). 

* Next  day  Rishya  Sringa  proceeded  to  the  Sahyadri,  and  performed 
tapas  there  seven  years  in  honour  of  Maha  Vishnu.  That  god  told 
him  to  go  to  an  incarnation  of  Siva  called  Chandra  Sekhara,  at  the  foot 
of  the  Sahyadra  mountain.  The  Risk  went  to  the  spot  indicated,  and 
peeped  at  it  through  the  darkness  with  half-dosed  eyes.  Hence  the 
place  is  called  Kigg,  from  Kiggannu,  the  half-open  eye.  The  Rishi 
again  performed  tapas , and  Chandra  Sekhara  appeared  before  him  and 
asked  what  he  wanted.  Rishya  Sringa  begged  that  Paramesvara  would 
absorb  himself  within  his  (Rishya  Sringa’s)  soul.  According  Parames- 
vara became  one  with  Rishya  Sringa,  whose  name  also  became 
celebrated  in  the  world.’1 


3& 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


born  (the  princes)  beginning  with  Rim  a all  like  unto* 
their  sire.'^  f 


Although  this  spot  is  not  exactly  on  the  bank  of  the  Tungabhadra,, 
still  the  Puranas  say  so,  as  the  rivers  N and  ini  and  Nalini  how  respec- 
tively from  the  left  and  right  of  it,  and  join  the  Tungabhadra  at 
Nemmar. 

It  will  be  perceived  from  the  foregoing  that  the  interested  Brahmans 
have  woven  a marvellous  story,  however  preposterous,  round  a plain 
natural  fact.  This  legend  has  been  extracted  from  the  Skanda  Purana „ 
A portion  of  the  same  is  related,  in  somewhat  different  language,  in  the 
Mahabharata  Aranyaparva  (Adbyayas  no  to  1x3).  Also  in  the 
Ramayana  Baldkanda  (chapters  9 to  17). 

On  the  back  part  of  many  temples  of  note  there  are  at  present  well 
cut  representations  in  relief  of  the  manner  in  which  the  privileged  Rishya 
Sringa  was  conveyed  from  the  quiet  of  his  father's  hermitage  by  the 
creatures  who  were  present  on  the  mission  by  Romapada.  There  is  a 
marvellous  and  beautiful  cut  in  the  temple  of  Gopalasvarni  in  Devandahalli, 
and  fairly  represents  all  similar  sculptured  figures.  The  Rishi  is 
represented  with  a deer's  head. 

Narve  is  still  a village,  and  goes  by  that  name.  It  is  about  12? 
miles  from  the  shrine  at  Kigga,  which  is  itself  about  6 miles  from 
Sringeri,  the  seat  of  the  great  Sankaracharya. 

It  only  remains  to  say  that  the  Linga  in  the  temple  is  a long-cylinder, 
ever  three  feet  above  ground,  and  some  part  of  it  must  besides  be 
buried  under  the  Pitham.  Its  surface  is  rough,  and  the  credulous  are 
asked  to  believe,  with  the  aid  of  the  light  reflected  from  a large  mirror, 
that  the  ineqalities  on  the  Linga  are  nothing  less  than  the  actual  avatars 
of  Siva,  his  consort,  and  his  bull  1 

There  are  some  fine  carvings  and  inscriptions  in  the  vicinity.  The 
shrine  Is.  largely  endowed  with  Lands,  partially  free  from  government 
revenue,  ■ It  would  be  difficult  to  find  lovelier  and  more  enchanting 
scenery  than  that  which  the  traveller  suddenly  comes  upon  in  these 
regions. 

■ The  Tungabhadra  above  referred  to  is  only  the  Tunga— far  above 
its  confluence  with  the  Bhadra.— F.  N,  Indian  Antiquary* 

* Dacaratha  had  no  issue.  The  sages  advised  him  to  bring  down  a 
sage  Rishya-sringa  to  celebrate  a sacrifice.  The  king  sent  some  nymphs 
to  the  forest  and  brought  down  the  sage  through  their  temptation, 
Rishwasringa  came  to  Ayodhya  and  performed  a sacrifice  and  then 


llliiiiSI 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


Requested  by  the  Sage.  Vishwamitra  for  removing 
obstacles  of  sacrifice  the  king  dispatched  Rama  and 
Lakshmana  with  him,  Rama,  well  trained  and  proficient 
in  the  use  of  all  sorts  of  arms,  killed  Taraka  (5 — 7),  He 
stupified  Mancha  with  a human  weapon  and  sent  him  away 
to  a long  distance.  The  powerful  (hero)  then  killed  Savahu* 
the  obstructer  of  sacrifices,  together  with  his  followers  (8). 

offered  Payasha  or  pudding  to  the  king.  The  following  account  about 
it  occurs  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Ramayana. 

Do  thou,  foremost  of  kings,  accept  this  excellent  and  divinely 
prepared  Payasa , conferring  sons,  health,  and  affluence, — which  thou 
art  to  give  unto  thy  worthy  consorts,  saying, — Partake  it.  Through 
them  thou  wilt,  O monarch,  obtain  sons, — for  obtaining  whom  thou 
hast  performed  this  sacrifice.”  Thereupon,  saying, — “ So  be  it,”  the 
lord  of  men  delightedly  placed  that  divinely-bestowed  golden  vessel 
filled  with  the  celestial  Payasa  upon  his  head.  And  having  saluted 
that  wonderful  being  of  gracious  presence,  he  in  excess  of  joy  began  to 
go  round  him  again  and  again.  Then  Dacaratha,  having  received  that 
divinely- prepared  Payasa  waxed  exceeding  glad;  like  unto  a pauper 
attaining  plenty.  Then  that  highly  effulgent  being  of  wonderful  form, 
having  performed  that  mission  of  his,  vanished  even  there.  And 
Dacaratha’s  inner  apartment,  being  graced  with  the  rays  of  joy,  looked 
like  unto  the  welkin  flooded  with  the  lovely  beams  of  the  autumnal 
moon.  Then  entering  the  inner  apartment,  he  spake  unto  Kaucafya, 
saying, — “ Take  thou  Payasa  ; for  this  will  make  thee  bear  a son.” 
Having  said  this,  the  king  offered  unto  her  a portion  of  this  Payasa . 
Then  he  conferred  upon  Sumitra  a fourth  of  it.  Then  inorder  that  she 
might  have  a son,  king  Dacaratha  made  over  unto  Kaikeyi  an  equal 
portion  of  what  remained.  And  then  having  reflected,  the  mighty-* 
minded  one  gave  unto  Sumitra  the  remaining  portion  of  the  Payasa 
resembling  ambrosia.  Thus  the  king  dispensed  the  Payasa  unto  each 
and  all  of  his  wives.  And  those  foremost  wives  of  the  king,  having 
received  that  Payasa , became  exceedingly  delighted,  and  considered 
themselves  as  highly  honored.  Then  those  excellent  consorts  of  the 
lord  of  earth,  having  separately  partaken  of  that  choice  Payasa , shortly, 
bore  offsping,  resembling  fire  or  the  Sun.  And  the  king,  beholding 
those  wives  of  his  bearing  children,  obtained  his  desire  and  became 
delighted;  even  as  that  foremost  of  the  celestials,  Indra,  while  being 
worshipped  by  the  Siddhas  and  the  ascetics. 


AGNJ  PURANAM. 


While  living  in  the  hermitage  of  Siddhas*  he  along  with 
his  yonnger  brother,  Vishwamitia  and  other  sages,  went  to 
witness  the  bow  sacrifice  of  Maithilaf  undertaken  through 


* A Siddha  is  a Semi-divine  being  supposed  to  be  of  great  purity 
and  holiness  and  characterised  by  eight  supernatural  faculties  namely. 

(l)  Animan  or  the  power  of  becoming  as  small  as  an  atom  ; (3) 
Mahiman  or  the  power  of  increasing  size  to  any  shape;  '3)  La&hma* 
or  the  power  of  assuming  extreme  lightness  at  will  ; (4)  Ganmtn  or 
the  power  of  making  one’s  self  heavy  (5)  Prapti  or  the  power  ot  obtain- 
ing everything  at  will  (6)  Prahamya  or  irresistible  will  ; (7)  hint™  or 
supremacy  (S)  Vashitwa  or  the  power  of  subjugating  all.  _ 

f The  king  of  Mithila  v.,  Janaka.  Mithila  is  the  modern  district  of 
Durbhanga  in  Behar  where  still  the  ruins  of  Janakapuram  are  to  be 
seen.  The  following  account  occurs  in  the  sixty  sixth  chapter  of  the 
first  book  of  Ramayana  which  will  fill  up  the  missing  parts. 

The  next  morning,  which  happened  to  be  bright  the  lord  of  men, 
having  performed  his  daily  devotions,  welcomed  Vicwamitra  and 
Raghava.  And  having,  in  accordance  with  the  scriptures,  paid  hemage 
unto  the  former  as  well  as  the  two  high-souled  Raghavas,  that  virtuous 
one  said, -Hail,  O woishipful  sir!  What  shall  1 do  unto  thee,  O sinless 
one?  Do  thou  command.  Surely,  I deserve  to  be  commanded  by 
thee.  Thus  addressed  by  the  high-souled  Jannka,  that  first  of  ascetics 
endowed  with  a righteous  soul,  well  versed  in  speech,  answered,— 
“ These  sons  of  Dacaratha— Kshatriyas-famed  among  men,  are  eager 
to  behold  that  best  of  bows,  that  lies  with  thee.  Do  thou  show  it  unto 
hem,  may  it  be  well  with  thee  ! Having  obtained  a sight  of  that  bow, 

the  king’s  sons,  their  desires  crowned  with  success,  will  return  as  they 

list.”  Thus  accosted,  Janaka  replied  unto  the  mighty  Mum,  saying, ~ 
“ Listen  to  why  the  bow  lieth  here.  There  was  a king  known  by  the 
name  of  Devarata.  He  was  the  elder  brother  of  Nimi.  And,  O 
worshipful  one,  this  bow  was  consigned  unto  the  hands  of  that  high- 
soulded  one  as  a trust.  Formerly  with  the  view  of  destroying  Daksha’s 
sacrifice,  the  puissant  (Siva),  drawing  this  bow,  sportively  spoke  unto 
the  celestials  in  ire,  saying,—'  Since,  ye  gods,  ye  deny  me  the  shares  (of 
this  sacrifice),  which  I lay  claim  to,  I will  with  my  bow  even  sever  those 
heads  of  yours.’  Thereat,  O powerful  ascetic,  with  hgitated  hearts,  the 
deities  fell  to  propitiating  that  lord  of  the  celestials, —and  Bhnva  was 
pleased  with  them.  And  well-pleased  with  them,  he  conferred  this 
upon  those  high-soulded  ones.  And  even  this  is  that  jewel  of  a bow 
belonging  to  the  high-souled  god  of  gods,  and  which  was  ultimately,  O 


lord,  consigned  as  a trust  unto  our  ancestor.  And  as  I was  ploughing 
the  mead,  arose  a damsel,-— and  as  I obtained  her  while  hallowing  the 
field  (for  sacrifice),  she  hath  come  to  be  known  by  the  name  of  Sita. 
And  arising  from  the  earth,  she  grew  as  my  daughter.  And  un- 
sprung from  the  usual  source,  she  was  then  established  here  as  my 
daughter,  whose  hand  must  be  obtained  by  bending  the  bow.  And  O 
foremost  of  ascetics,  many  a king,  coming  here,  had  sought  to  obtain 
my  growing  daughter  arisen  from  the  earth.  But,  O worshipful  one, 
in  consideration  of  her  being  one  whose  dower  must  be  prowess  in 
bending  the  bow,  i would  not  bestow  my  daughter  upon  those  lords  of 
earth  seeking  for  the  damsel.  Thereupon  O puissant  anchoret,  all  the 
kings  in  a body  began  to  Hock  to  Mithila,  desirous  of  being  acquainted 
with  the  strength  of  the  bow.  And  on  their  being  curious  (as  to  the  bow), 
1 showed  it  unto  them  ; but  they  could  neither  hold  nor  wield  it.  And, 
O mighty  Muni,  finding  those  powerful  kings]  to  be  but  endowed  with 
small  prowess,  I passed  them  by.  Hear  what  then  befell,  O thou  of 
ascetic  wealth.  Then,  O powerful  anchoret,  in  high  ire,  the  kings, 
doubtful  as  to  their  strength  in  stringing  the  bow,  laid  seige  to  Mithila. 
And  those  potent  princes,  conceiving  themselves  as  frustrated  by  me, 
began  to  harass  the  city  of  Mithila,  waxing  wondrous  wroth.  And  when 
a year  had  been  completed,  my  defensive  resources  were  entirely 
exhausted, — and  at  this,  I was  exceedingly  aggrieved.  Then  I sought 
to  propitiate  the  deities  ; and  well -pleased,  the  celestials  granted  me  a 
Chaturanga  army.  At  length  those  wicked  kings,  meeting  with 
slaughter,  broke  and  fled  in  all  directions,  together  with  their  adherents, 
bereft  of  vigor,  and  confidence  in  their  strength.  And*  O puissant 
ascetic,  this  highly  effulgent  bow  will  I show  unto  Rama  and  Lakshmana, 
O thou  of  excellent  vows.  And,  if,  O ascetic,  Rama  succeeds  in  fixing 
string  to  it,  l will  confer  up  n Oacaratha’s  son  my  daughter  Sita, 
unsprung  from  the  usual  source.” 

* The  eldest  son  of  Goutama  and  the  family  priest  of  Jan 
king  of  Mithila. 


AGN1  RtfRANAM. 


the  instrumentality  of  Shatananda*  and  under  the  in- 
fluence of  Vishwamitra.  [The  object  of  the  sacrifice]  was 
communicated  by.  the  king  unto  Rlma  and  the  Muni  was 
worshipped  in  that  sacrifice  (9-—10).  He  then  drew  the  bow 
and  snapped  it  easily.  Janaka  then  conferred  on  Rlma  Sill, 
her  daughter  born  of  no  woman,  the  dowry  from  the  bride- 
groom in  whose  wedding  was  prowess.  And  after  the  arrival 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


of  liis  father  and  other  relatives  Rama  espoused  Sita  and 
Lakshmana  Urmila  (r i — 12).  Satrughna  and  Bharata 
married  Shrutakirti  aud  MSndavi  the  two  daughters  of 
Kucadhwaja,  Janaka’s  younger  brother  (13)-  After  the 
wedding  of  his  two  daughters  Rama,  honoured  by 
Janaka,  went  away  accompanied  by  Vashistha  and  others 
after  having  vanquished  Jamadagnya.  Bjiarata  and 
victorious  Satrughna  also  returned  to  AyodhyS  (14). 


CHATER  VI 


IN  arada  said  : — After  the  departure  of  Bharata*  Rama 
adored  his  father  and  other  elders.  King  Dacaratha  then 
said  to  Rama  54  Hear,  0 Raghava,f  you  have  been  installed 
by  the  subjects  out  of  their  appreciation  for  your  accomplish- 
ments. 1 have  therefore  thought  of  declaring  you  as  my 
heir-apparent  next  morning  (i— 2).  Therefore  practise  self- 
control'^  and  observe  vows  along  with  SitH  in  the  night/' 
The  king  also  communicated  this  unto  Vashistha  and  his 
eight  ministers  who  were  Sristhi,  jayanta,  Vijaya,  Sidrfhartha, 
Raslra  Vardhana,  Ashoka,  Dharmapala,  Sumantra  and  as 
well  as  unto  Vashishtak  (3 — 4b 

Hearing  the  words  of  his  sire,  saying  1 So  be  it',  adoring 
the  deities  and  communicating  this  intelligence  unto 


* It  is  mentioned  in  the  original  Rarnayana  of  Valenki  that  Bharata, 
at  that  time,  was  at  his  maternal  .uncle's  residence. 

f An  appellation  of  Rama.  Literally  it  means  a descendant  of 
Raghu * 

{ The  practice  amongst  the  Hindus  is  that  on  tire  day  previous  to 
any  religious  or  -religio-social  ceremony  they  abstain  from  eating  and 
keep  themselves  perfectly  pure. 


AGNI  PURANAM'. 


* The  name  of  a demon-chief.  _ , 

| On  one  occasion  Dasharatha  was  wounded.  Kaikeyi  cured  hu» 
with- care  and  skill  for  which  he  promised  her  two  boons. 


Koushalya  Rama  waited  (in  the  night)  (5).  The  king  then 
addressed  Vashistha  and  others  regarding  Rama's  installation, 
asked  them  to  collect  necessary  materials  and  repaired  to 
Kaikeyi’s  (mansion)  (6). 

Seeing  the  decoration  of  Ayodhya  and  informed  of 
RSma’s  installation,  Kaikeyi’s  companion  Manthara  said  to- 
iler “ Rlma’s  installation  comes  off”  (7).  Once  she  was 
dragged  by  ’Rama  holding  her  feet  and  for  this  offence  she 
wished  for  Rama’s  exile  into  the  forest  (8). 

SHE  said  : — “ Rise  up,  O Kaikeyi,  in  the  installation  of 
Rama,  lies  your  death,  mine  and  that  of  your  son.  Verily 
there  is  no  doubt  about  it”  (9). 

Hearing  the  words  given  vent  to  by  the  haunch-backed 
woman  Kaikeyi  gave  her  an  ornament  and  said  “ As  Bharata 
is  like  a son  unto  you,  so  is  Rama  to  me”  (10).  Worked 
up  with  anger  Manthara  cast  off  the  necklace  and  said  to 
Kaikeyi  “ I do  not  see  any  means  by  which  Bharata  may 
inherit  the  kingdom  (n).  Q foolish  girl  5 save  me,  Bharata 
and  yourself  from  Raghava.  If  Raghava  becomes  the  king 
his  son  will  succeed  him.  The  Royal  line  will  then  forsake 
Bharata  as  formerly  in  the  war  between  gods  and  demons 
the  celestials  were  slain  by  Shamvara*  (12— *13).  While  one 
night  your  husband  went  to  you  (wounded)  you  cured  him 
with  your  learning. f He  granted  you  (at  that  time)  two 
boons.  Pray  to  the  king  for  them  now,  so  that  he  may  exile 
Rama  into  the  forest  for  fourteen  years  and  confer  on  Bharata 
the  heir-apparent  ship”  (15 — 15). 

Urged  on  by  the  haunch-backed  woman,  she,  seeking  her 
interest  in  another’s  misfortune,  said  :— ■“  find  out  some  good 
expedient  for  me”  (16). 

Then  entering  into  the  mansion  of  anger  she  lay  sense- 
less on  the  ground.  Thereupon  having  worshipped  the  twice- 


3® 


AGM  FUR  AN  AM. 


born-  and  others  king  Dacaratha  came  there.  Seeing 
Kaikeyi  thus  angry  he  said  What  is  this?  Are  you 
ailing?  Are  you  assailed  with  fear?  Tell  me  what  you  wish 
and  I will  satisfy  it.  I swear  by  Rama  in  whose  absence  I 
cannot  live  for  a moment,  that  I will  satisfy  your  desire,  G 
fair  one  (17 — 19).” 

“ Tell  me  the  truth,  O king’7  she  said  u you  granted  me 
two  boons  formerly  $ satisfy  your  promise  now,  CP  king.  Let 
Rama,  self-controlled,  live  for  fourteen  years  in  the  forest 
and  install  Bharata  to-day  with  all  the  ingredients.  1 will 
drink  poison  and  die  if  you  do  not  grant  me  this  prayer,  O 
king/1’  Hearing  it  the  king  dropped  down  senseless  on 
earth  like  one  clapped  down  by  a thunder-bolt  (20—22). 

Having  regained  consciousness  for  a moment  he  said 
to  Kaikeyi  tf  0 thou  bent  on  doing  misdeeds,  what  has 
Rama  done  unto  thee  or  what  have  f done  that  thou  speakest 
thus  unto  me,  O thou  doing  mischief  unto  all  ? I shall  be 
censured  by  all  if  I carry  out  thy  pleasure  23 — 24}.  Thou 
art  not  my  wife  hut  the  night  of  death.  Bharata  is  not  such 
a son.  After  my  death  and  the  departure  of  my  son  thou 
wilt  govern  this  kingdom  as  a widow”  (25). 

Fettered  by  the  bonds  of  truth  he  sent  for  R&roa  and 
said “ I have  been  duped  by  Kaikeyi,  O Rama;  defeat 
me  and  govern  this  kingdom  (26).  Kaikeyi  wants  you  to 
live  in  the  forest  and  make  Bharata  the  king.”  Having 
bowed  unto  his  father  and  Kaikeyi  and  circumambulated 
them,  and  having  saluted  Koushafya  and  consoled  her,  he, 
along  with  Lakshmana  and  his  wife  SitS,  got  upon  a car  with 
Sumantra,  Having  made  gifts  unto  the  Brahmanas  and  the 
poor,  he,  followed  by  bewailing  mothers  and  Vipras,  issued 
out  of  the  city  <27 — 29).  Having  spent  the  night  on  the 
bank  of  the  TamasS.  [he  went  away]  leaving  behind  the 
citizens.  And  having  not  seen  him  in  the  morning  they  all 
returned  to  the  city  (30). 

Filled  with  grief  and  weeping  the  king  came  to  Kaucalyt'i 
palace.  All  the  citizens,  women  and  wives  of  the  king  also 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


37 


wept  (31),  Seated  on  his  car  and  clad  in  bark  Rama  went 
to  the'city  of  Shringavera  * And  he  was  worshipped  by  Guha 
there  under  an  Ingudi  tree  (32).  With  Lakshmana  and  Guha 
they  kept  up  the  whole  night.  And  leaving  his  car  there 
Sumantraf  crossed  the  river  Janhavif  in  a boat  (33). 
Having  crossed  the  river  Rama,  Lakshmana  and  Siti  arrived 
at  Prayaga.§  And  having  bowed  unto  Rharadwaja  they 
repaired  to\he  mount  Chitrakuta||  (34).  Having  worshipped 
there  the  Vastu  deity  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Mandakini 
Raghava  showed  Chitrakuta  unto  SitS  (35)‘  fhat  time 
a crow  wounded  (Sita)  with  its  talons  and  Rama  uprooted 
its  eyes  with  an  Aishika  weapon,  it  then,  renouncing  all  the 
celestials,  sought  refuge  with  Rama  (36). 


* In  this  city  a king  of  a barbarian  clan  by  name  Guha  was  reigning. 
He  was  a follower  of  Rama, 
f Dasharatha’s  charioteer. 

j A name  of  the  river  Ganges-said  to  have  been  derived  from  Janhu, 
§ A sacred  shrine  of  the  Hindus-the  junction  of  the  rivers  Ganges 
and  Yamuna.  Its  modern  name  is  Allahabad,  the  seat  of  the  N.  W.  P 

Government.  . 

||  A sacred  mountain  of  the  Hindus  situate  in  the  ft.  W.  r.  o 

€ This  refers  to  the  killing  of  Sindu,  the  son  of  a blind  Muni,  bj 
Dasharatha  [See  Chapter  LXIH  of  Valmiki’s  Ramayana.  " Anc 
coming  to  the  bank  of  the  Sarayu  while  it  was  so  dark  that  nothm§ 
could  be  discovered,  I heard  sounds  of  a filling  pitcher  proceeding  froir 
the  waters  resembling  the  roars  of  an  elephant.  Thereupon  raising 
up  my  shaft  flaming  and  like  unto  a serpent  of  virulent  poison,  I,  desirou. 
of  hunting  the  imaginary  elephant,  let  fly  my  shaft  in  the  direction  0 
the  sound”.— M.  N.  Dutt’s  Translation.  ,•  , 


38 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM. 


sorrow*.  Remembering  that  grief,  O Koushalyl  f fcnow,  f 
will  die  for  the  separation  of  my  son.”  Saying  this  and 

exclaiming  “ Oh  ? Rama  i”  the  king  went  to  heaven  (37 40). 

Thinking  that,  he  filled  with  grief  was  asleep,  Kaushalya 
also  slept.  But  in  the  auspicious  morning,  bards  and 
panegyrists  whose  duty  was  to  arouse  the  king  by  singing, 
could  not  break  his  sleep.  The  king  did  not  awake.  The'n 
taking  him  for  dead  Kaushalya  cried  aloud  '•  Alas  ! I am 
undone”  41  42).  Men  and  women  began  to  weep  and 

Bharata  with  Satruglma  was  brought  to  the  city  from 
Rajagriba*  by  Vashistha  and  others  (43).  Beholding 
bewailing  Kaikeyi  he,  filled  with  sorrow,  censured  her,  saying 
“a  calumny  thou  hast  put  on  thy  head”.  Then  speaking 
highly  of  Kousbalya  he  put  the  (dead  body  of  his)  sire  in  a 
jar  of  oil  and  performed  the  funeral  obsequies  on  the  bank  of 
the  river  Sarayu.  Then  requested  by  Vashistha  and  others  to 
govern  the  kingdom  he  said  “ I will  go  to  fetch  Rama.  The 
powerful  Rama  is  the  recognised  king.”  He  then  went  to  the 
city  of  Shringavera  and  was  entertained  by  Bharadwaja  there 
{44—46).  Saluting  Bharadwaja  he  then  approached  Rama 
and  Lakshmana  and  said  “ 0 Rama,  father  has  gone  to 
heaven  ; do  thou  become  king  of  Ayodhya”  (47).  Abiding 
by  thy  mandate  I will  repair  into  the  forest/* 

Hearing  the  news  and  offering  water  Rama  said  “ Take 
this  my  shoe  and  go ; for  observing  my  vow  1 will  not 
return  to  my  kingdom  and  wear  bark  and  matted  locks  ” 

Thus  addressed  by  Rama  the  powerful  hero  went  to 
Nandigram  and  settled  there.  And  worshipping  t!ie  pair  of 
Ins  shoes  in  Ayodhya  he  governed  the  kingdom  (48—49). 


* The  city  of  Bharata’s  maternal  uncle. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


n.  ARADA  said  Having  bowed  there  unto  his  mothers, 
Vashistha,  his  wife  Anasuya,  Sharabhanga,  Sutiknaka, 
Agastya’s  brother,  Agastya  and  having  received  by  the 
latter's  favbur  a bow  and  a dagger  he  came  to  the  forest  of 
Dandaka  (i — -2).  They  settled  on  the  bank  of  Godavati*  in 
[the  forest  of]  Panchavati  in  Janasthana.f  There  the  dread- 
ful ShurpanakhaJ  went  to  devour  them  (3).  Beholding 
Rama  of  great  beauty  that  damsel  said 

“ Who  art  thou  ? Whence  have  you  come  ? I pray  that 
you  may  be  my  husband  (4).  I will  eat  up  the  other  two/' 
Saying  it  she  approached  him.  And  addressed  by  Rama 
Lakshmana  cut  off  her  nose  and  ears  (5).  Bathed  in  blood 
she  went  away  and  spoke  to  her  brother  Khara. 

u Shorn  of  my  nose,  I will  give  up  my  life.  Rama  has  a 
wife  by  name  Sita,  and  a younger  brother,  by  name 
Lakshmana.  If  you  can  make  me  drink  their  hot  blood, 
I will  live,  O Khara”  (6 — 7). 

Having  said  “ So  be  it”  to  her  Khara,  accompanied  by 
fourteen  thousand  Rakshasas,  Dushana,  as  well  as  Trishiras, 
went  out  to  fight.  Shurpanakhi.  then  went  to  Lanka  and  laid 
herself  prostrate  on  earth  before  Ravana  — 10).  Worked 
up  with  anger  she  said  to  RSLvana 

u You  are  not  our  king  and  protector.  Steal  SitS  the 
wife  of  R§ma,  the  destroyer  of  Khara  and  others.  I will 


* Nasik,  a district  in  the  Bombay  Presidency,  is  now  pointed  out  as 
corresponding  with  the  Panchavati  forest  of  Ra  may  an  a.  The  river 
Godavari  still  flows  there. 

f The  name  of  a civil  division  of  that  time. 

{ She  was  the  sister  of  Ravana,  the  king  of  Lanka  and  of  Khara, 
the  king  of  Janasthana.  These  Rakshasas  were  probably  barbarian 
kings  reigning  in  the  Southern  India  whom  Rama  killed  and  extended 

. . ,j  ? if  i§j 

ms  conquests. 


40 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


Hive  by  drinking  Rama’s  and  Lakshmana’s  blood  and  not 
otherwise.” 

Hearing  it  and  saying  “ so  so  be  it”  Ravana  said  to 
MSricha  “ Proceed.  Assuming  the  form  of  a beautiful  gold 
deer,  that  can  attract  Rama  and  Lakshmana  do  thou  sport 
before  Sita  and  I will  then  steal  her  away  or  else  thou  shaft 
meet  with  death”  (I  I — 13). 

Maricha  said  to  Ravana Rama  holds  a death-giving 
bow.  I am  to  meet  with  death  either  from  Ravana  or 
RSghava.  If  death  is  certain  it  is  better,  to  receive  it  at  the 
hands  of  R&ma  than  at  those  of  Ravana”. 

Determining  thus  and  assuming  the  form  of  a deer  he 
began  to  range  before  Sita  (14—15).  Rama  was  despatched 
by  Sita  (to  catch  it)  and  he  killed  it  with  a shaft.  While 
dying  the  deer  exclaimed  “ Oh  Sita  l 0 Lakshmana  j”  * 
Addressed  by  Sita  Sumitra’s  son  reluctantly  approached 
RSma.  Ravana  carried  away  Sita  having  slain  the  vulture 
Jatayusha.f  Having  his  limbs  wounded  by  Jatayu  and  taking 
up  Jfanaka's  daughter  on  his  lap  he  went  to  Lanka,  kept  her 
in  the  Ashoka  forest  guarded  % and  said  (16—18).  “ Do  thou 

become  my  foremost  queen.  Guard  her,  0 Rakshasees” 

Having  slain  Maricha  and  seen  Lakshmana  Rama  said 
“ ft  is  an  illusory  deer,  0 Sumitra's  son.  Forsooth  after 
your  departure  for  here  Sita  has  been  stolen  away/1  He 
then  went  (to  the  cottage)  and  did  not  find  her  ( tg — 20). 
Stricken  with  fear  he  then  bewailed  exclaiming  #s  Where  hast 
thou  gone  leaving  me  behind  ?”  Consoled  by  Lakshmana 
Rama  began  to  search  the  road  by  which  Janaka’s  daughter 
had  been  taken  away  (21).  Seeing  him  JatSyu  said  H Ravana 


* He  immitated  the  voice  of  Rama  which  filled  Sita  with  fear  about 
Rama’s  personal  safety. 

f He  was  a great  friend  of  Rama’s  father. 

| Even  now  a forest  is  pointed  out  in  Ceylon  where  a lake  is  to  be 
seen,  which  people  ascribe  to  Sita’s  tears* 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


41 


%as  stolen  her  away”  and  expired.  Having  performed  his 
last  rites  Rama  killed  Kavandha,  who,  freed  of  curse,  said 
u Do  thou  go  to  Sugriva*  ,(22.) 


CHAPTER  VIII 


> ^ l.  , , , 


IMS 


42 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


foot  steps.”  Whereto  Sugriva  replied  u Immersed  in- enjoy- 
ments I could  not  perceive  that  the  proper  time  had  gone 
by”  (7). 

Saying  it  the  king  of  Vanaras  went  to  Rama  and  saluting 
him  said  ; — <c  I have  brought  all  the  Vanaras  for  searching 
out  Sita’s  whereabouts.  By  thy  mandate  I will  despatch 
them  to  find  out  Jan  aka’s  daughter.  ’ They  wijl  come  back 
in  the  first  half  of  the  month.  If  they  spend  more  than  a 
month  I will  kill  them  (8 — 9).” 

Thus  addressed  the  Vanaras  repaired  to  the  east,  west 
and  north.  And  not  finding  Janaka’s  daughter  they  returned 
to  Rama  and  Sugriva  (10).  Then  taking  Rama’s  ring 
Hanuman  with  other  Vanaras  repaired  to  the  south  near 
S^iprabha’s  cave  (it).  They  spent:  more  than  a month  but 
could  not  find  out  Janaki.  They  said  : — f{  Uselessly  shall  we 
die.  Blessed  is  Jatayu,  who  slain  by  Ravana  in  battle,  gave 
up  his  life  for  Sita.” 

Hearing  it  and  casting  off  the  food  offered  by  Kapis 
Sampati  said: — “ This  Jatayu  is  my  brother.  Once  I (and 
he)  soared  high  in  the  sky  near  the  flaming  sun,  while  protect- 
ing him  from  the  rays  of  the  sun  my  pinnions  had  been 
scathed.  Hearing  Rama’s  news  my  wings  have  again  grown. 
Ska  has  been  taken  to  Lanka  and  kept  in  Ashoka  garden 
(situate  on  the  mount)  TrikutS  in  the  ocean  of  salt  water 
extending  over  a hundred  Yojanas.  Learning  it  the  V&haras 
communicated  the  intelligence  to  Rama  and  Sugriva  (t2 — 16), 

CRATER  IX.  . j' 


NarADA  said  : — Hearing  the  words  of  Sampati*  and 
beholding  the  ocean,  Hanuman,  Angaelaf  and  others  said 

* Brother  of  Jatayu, 

t Son  of  Vali,  the  king  of  Kishkinda  whom  Rama  killed  for  giving 
throne  to  Sugriva. 


mm  PURANAIVL 


u who  lives  there  who  can  cross  this  ocean”  ? (i).  For 
saving  ’the  lives  of  Kapis*  and  giving  celebrity  to  Rama's 
work,  Marutif  should  overleap  the  ocean  extending  over  a 
hundred  Yojanas  (2).  Beholding  the  rising  mount  Mainaka, J 
and  slaying  Sinhika§  he  espied  Lanka  and  saw  Rakshasa 


* A name  of  Vanaras. 

f Son  of  Maruta,  wind-god;  an  appellation  of  Hanuman. 

J The  account  in  the  Ramayana  is  that  while  Hanuman  was  crossing 
the  ocean  he  felt  exhausted  on  the  middle  of  the  deep.  At  that  time 
the  mount  Mainaka  came  out  of  the  sea  and  Hanuman  a rested  on  its 
summit.  This  mountain  is  no  longer  to  be  seen.  Perhaps  it  is  under 
the  ocean  now.  in  the  First  Chapter  of  Sundara  Kan  dam  the  following 
occurs. 

And  Hanuman,  that  lord  of  monkeys,  being  engaged  in  the  act  of 
hounding,  the  Ocean,  wishing  glory  unto  the  race  of  the  Ikshwakus. 
thought  within  himself,  u Truly  shall  I be  blamed  of  all  persons  if  I 
do  not  assist  this  lord  of  monkeys — Hanuman.  Reared  I have  been  by 
Sagara,  the  foremost  of  the  race  of  the  ikshwakus — and  this  monkey 
is  their  counsellor.  It  therefore  doth  not  behove  me  to  tire  him  out. 
It  becometh  me  to  do  that  by  which  the  monkey  may  take  in  me  and, 
relieved,  may  happily  traverse  the  remaining  way.”  Having  arrived 
at  this  wholesome  resolution,  the  Ocean  spake  unto  that  best  of  moun- 
tains, Mainaka  hued  in  gold  and  situate  in  the  waters,  saying,  “ O 
lord,  thou  hast  been  placed  here  by  the  king  of  celestials  as  an  outer 
gate  against  the  Asuras  inhabiting  the  region  under  the  earth.  Thou 
too,  from  then,  hast  been  waiting  at  this  gate,  unapproachable  by  the 
Asuras,  rising  up  again  and  again  and  whose  prowess  is  well-known 
unto  the  Lord  of  celestials.  O mountain,  thou  art  capable  of  expanding 
thyself  upwards  and  on  thy  sides.  I do  command  thee  therefore,  O best 
of  mountains,  to-  rise  up.  That  best  of  monkeys,  the  energetic  Hanu- 
man, the  performer  of  mighty  deeds,  engaged  in  Rama*  service,  worn 
out  with  fatigue,  waiteth  above  thee.  Beholding  the  exhaustion  of  that 
leader  of  monkeys,  it  behoveth  thee  to  rise  up/*  Hearing  the  speech 
of  the  Ocean,  the  golden  mountain  Mainaka,  covered  with  tall  trees  and 
creepers,  rose  up  instantly  from  his  watery  bed.  Like  unto  the  Sun  of 
bright  rays  rising  out  of  the  watery  expanse,  he  uplifted  himself  from 
the  Ocean,  Bieing  thus  commanded  by  the  Ocean,  the  great  mountain 
covered  on  all  sides  with  water,  immediately  brought  forth  his  peaks. 

§ The  following  account  of  Hanuman’s  wonderful  feat  occurs  in  the 
the  First  Chapter  of  Sundarkandam, 


44 


AGNl  PUR  A NAM. 


women  in  their  houses  (3).  Fie  did  not  see  Sita  in  the 
palaces  of  Dashagriva/*  Kumbha,  the  Kakshasa  Kumbhalcarna, 
Bibhishana,  Indrajit  as  well  as  in  the  houses  of  other 
Rlkshasas,  Nor  did  he  see  her  in  the  drinking  ground  and 
other  places  and  he  was  (accodingly)  filled  with  anxiety 
Then  repairing  to  the  Ashoka  forest  he  espied  Sita  under  a 
Singshapa  (Dalbergia  Sisu  tree)  guarded  by  the  Rakshasis 
and  repeatedly  asked  by  them  to  become  Ravan’srwife.  And 


And  it  came  to  pass  that  beholding  him  in  the  act  of  bounding,  a 
Rakshasi  named  Sinhika,  of  great  age,  and  capable  of  wearing  forms 
at  will,  thought  within  herself,-— “ To-day  after  a long  lapse  of  time  I 
shall  have  my  fare.  This  mighty  creature  hath  after  a time  come 
within  my  power.”"  Having  thought  thus  in  her  mind,  she  seized 
(Hanuman's)  shadow.  On  his  shadow  being  secured,  the  monkey 
reflected, — ft  As  a mighty  bark  is  retarded  in  its  course  in  the  sea  by 
adverse  wind,  have  I,  my  prowess  paralysed,  been  suddenly  obstructed 
In  my  career.”  Then  looking  above  and  below  and  sideways,  the 
monkey  saw  a mighty  creature  arisen  from  the  salt  waters.  And  seeing 
that  one  of  a distorted  countenance,  the  wind-god’s  son  thought, — **  This 
one  is  without  doubt,  the  creature  of  wonderful  form,  possessed  of 
exceeding  prowess, — given  to  securing  its  prey  by  means  of  its  shadow, — 
which  had  been  described  by  the  monkey-king.  And  concluding  her  to 
beSinhika  from  her  act,  the  intelligent  monkey  attaining  a gigantic  body, 
increased  himself,  like  a mass  of  clouds  during  the  rains.  And  seeing  the 
enlarged  body  of  the  mighty  monkey,  she  extended  her  mouth  measur- 
ing the  sky  and  the  nether  regions*  And  roaring  like  unto  a mass  of 
clouds,  she  rushed  against  the  monkey.  Thereat,  that  Intelligent  and 
mighty  monkey  marked  her  deformed  and  huge  mouth,  her  body  and 
its  astieulated  members.  And  the  redoubtable  monkey  hard  as  the 
thunderbolt,  contracting  himself  in  a moment,  threw  himself  into  her 
mouth.  And  the  Siddhas  and  Charanas  saw  him  sink  in  her  mouth,  as 
the  full  Moon  is  taken  by  Rahu  during  a Parva.— Then  tearing  her 
limits  by  means  of  his  sharp  daws,  the  monkey,  endowed  with  the 
celerity  of  thought,  vehemently  sprang  forward.  Then  slaying  her  by 
bis  acuteness  of  sight,  endurance  and  skill,  that  heroic,  Self -controlled 
monkey  again  began  to  swell  .himself  amain.  He  bearf  having  been 
crushed  out  by  Hanuman,  she,  rendered  lifeless,  fell  into  the  water* 

* laterally  it  means  H having  ten  necks”.  It  is  an  appellation  of 
','Kavana. 


JtGNI  PURANAM. 


45 


Siia  was  repeatedly  saying  * No1  unto  Havana  who  also  was 
standing  under  the  tree  and  the  Rakshasees  were  again  and 
again  urging  her  to  become  his  wife.  After  the  departure  of 
Ravana  the  Kapi  said; — “ There  flourished  a king  by  name 
Dagaratha.  He  had  two  excellent  sons,  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
who  had  been  exiled  into  the  forest.  You  Janaki,  Rama’s 
wife,  have  been  carried  away  by  Ravana  by  force.  Rama 
has  made  friends  with  Surgiva  and  has  sent  me  here  to  find 
out  your  whereabouts.  This  ring  is  the  insignia  given  by 
Rama,  take  it,  (4—9).”  Sita  took  the  ring  and  saw  Maruti 
before  her  seated  on  a tree.  She  then  said  : — u If  Rama  is 
alive  why  doesjhe  not  rescue  roe”  ? 

The  Kapi  said  to  her  who  was  filled  with  fear  “ O Siti, 
Raima  did  not  know  your  whereabouts.  Knowing  them  now 
and  slaying  the  Rakshasa  Ravana  with  his  followers  he  will 
release  you.  Do  not  grieve,  O worshipful  dame.  Give  me 
your  insignia”. 

Sita  handed  over  to  the  Kapi  a jewel  \io — 12)  and 
said  “ Do  thou  do  that  by  which  Rama  may  take  me  away 
soon.  And  remind  him,  O remover  of  sorrow,  of  his  taking 
out  the  eyes  of  the  crow”  (13), 

Accepting  the  jewel  and  message  Hanuman  said  “ I will 
take  thee  to  thy  husband.  O fair  one,  do  thou  speedily 
get  on  my  back  and  I will  even  to-day  show  thee  Rama  and 
Sugriva.”  Sita  said  to  Hanuman May  Raghava  take 
me”  (14—15). 

Hanum&n  then  made  arrangements  for  seeingDashagriva. 
He  devastated  the  forest,  killed  the  gardeners  and  servants 
with  nails  and  teeth,  the  sons  of  the  seven  ministers  as  well 
as  Havana’s  son,  the  prince  Aksha.  Shakraj it  bound  him 
having  coppery  eyes  with  the  nooses  of  serpents  and  showed 
him  unto  Ravana. 

Ravana  said  : — “Who  art  thou?”  '■& 

MAKtrrTsaid  : — “ I am  Rama’s  messenger.  Return  Sita 
unto  Raghava,  or  else  surely,  assailed  with  Rama’s  shafts 
you  will  die  along  with  all  the  inhabitants  of  Lanka”  (16—19)* 


46' 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


Ravana  was  about  to  kill  him  but  was  prevented  by 
Bibhishana.  Maruti  then  set  fire  to  his  tail.  And  tfith  his* 
flaming  tail  he  set  fire  to  Lanka,  Then  eying  the  Rakshasas,- 
bowing  unto  Sita,  coming  to  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  he 
said  “ I have  seen  Sita”  (20—21).  Having  drunk  honey  in 
mangoe  groves  and  vanquished  Dadhimukha  and.  others 
Angada  and  other  Vanaras  returned  and  said  to  Rama;— 
“We  have  seen”  (22).  r 

Hearing  that  Sita  has  been  seen,  Rama,  filled  with  delight, 
said  to  Maruti f‘  How  have  you  seen  Sita  ? What  has  she 
communicated  unto  me?  With  the  nectarine  message  of 
Sita  do  you  cool  down  me  who  am  being  consumed  will? 
the  fire  of  desire”. 

Hanum&n  said  to  Rama “ Having  seen  Sita,  burnt 
down  the  city  (of  Lanka)  and  crossed  the  ocean  I have 
returned  here.  Accept  this  jewel  from  Sita.  Having  slain 
Ravana  regain  Sita.  Do  not  grieve,  0 Rama.  (23—25)” 

Taking  that  jewel,  Rama,  stricken  with  the  pain  of 
separation,  began  to  weep  ; (saying)  ; — “Having  seen  the 
jewel  I have  seen  Janaki.  Take  me  to  Sita.  f cannot  live 
without  you.”  He  was  then  consoled  by  Sugriva  and 
others. 

Rama  then  went  to  the  bank  of  the  ocean  where 
Bibhishana  met  him.  Having  said  u Return  Sit!  unto  R&tnaP 
Bibhishana  was  censured  by  his  brother,  the  vicious-souled 
Ravana  and  made  helpless.  Rama  installed  his  friend 
Bibhishana  on  the  rich  throne  of  Lanki.  When  (Rama) 
prayed  to  the  ocean-god  for  giving  him  way  he  did  not  come. 
And  Rlma  then  sundered  him  with  his  shafts.  The  ocean- 
god  then  approached  Rama  and  said ; — “ Having  built  a 
bridge*  over  the  ocean  through  [the  help  of}  Mala  do  thou 
go  to  Lanka.  Formerly  I had  been  rendered  deep  by  thee 
Then  by  the  bridge  constructed  by  Nala  with  trees  mi 


m This  is  what  is  now  called  Adam’s  Peak,  Between  Ceylon  and 
India  there  is  a range  of  hillocks  submerged  under  water* 


AGNI  PURANAM 


rocks  RSma  went  to  the  other  side  of  the  great  ocean.  And 
stationed  on  the  beautiful  bank  of  the  ocean  Rama,  together 
with  the  Vanaras,  espied  Lanka  (26—31), 


CHAPTER  X 


II  ARADA  said  Instructed  by  Rama  Angada  went  to 
Ravana  and  said  " Return  immediately  Jan  aka’s  daughter 
to  Raghava  or  else  you  will  meet  with  death.”  (x).  The 
Rakshasa  Ravana,  elated  with  the  pride  of  fighting,  was 
about  to  kill  him,  Dashagriva  then  communicated  unto 
Rama,  u I think  there  must  be  a war”  (2).  Hearing  of  the 
offer  of  battle  Rama,  with  all  the  Kapis,  arrived  at  Lanka. 
The  Vanaras  Hanuman,  Mainda,  Dwivida,  Jamvavan,  Nala, 
Neela,  Tara,  Angada,  Dumra,  Sushena,  Keshari,  Gaya, 
Panasa,  Vinata,  Rambha,  Sharabha,  Krathana,  Vali,  Gavaksha, 
Dadhivakra,  Gavaya,  Gandhamadana,  these  and  innumerable; 
others  followed  Sugriva  (3 — 5).  There  took  place  a close 
fighting  between  the  Vanaras  and  R&kshasas.  With  shafts, 
clubs  and  saktis  the  Rakshasas  slew  the  Vanaras  (6).  With 
nails,  teeth  and  rocks  the  Vanaras  killed  the  Rakshasas. 
The  Rakshasa  army  consisting  of  elephants,  horses,  cars, 
and  the  infantry  was  killed  (7).  With  a mountain  peak  Hanu- 
man slew  his  enemy  Dumraksha.  Neela  killed  the  fighting 
Akampana  and  Prahasta  (8).  Released  from  the  (serpentine) 
fetters  of  Indrajit’s  shafts  at  the  view  of  TSrksha  (Garuda) 
Rama  and  Lakshmana  killed  the  Rakshasa  army  with  their 
arrows  (9).  Rama  assailed  Ravana  with  arrows  in  battle. 
And  filled  with  sorrow  Ravana  aroused  (his  brother)  Kum- 
bhakarna  (to).  Aroused  Kumbhakarna*  drank  a hundred 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


mm 


jarfuls  of  wine  and  feasted  upon  buffaloe  and  other  animals 
and  then  said  to  Ravana  :-(«)•  « Thou  hast  committed  a 

great  iniquity  by  stealing  Sit£.  However  I go  to  the  battle- 
field and  will  slay  Rama  with  all  the  Vanaras”  (12). 

Saying  it  Kumbhakarna  assailed  all  the  Vanaras.  He 
then  overtook  Sugriva  who  chopped  off  his  ears  and  nose. 
(13)  Deprived  of  ears  and  nose  he  devoured  the  Vanaras. 
Rama  then  cut  off  Kumbhakarna’s  arms  with  his  shafts. 
(H)  Then  cutting  off  his  legs  he  struck  down  his  head  on 
earth.  Thereupon  Kumbha,  Nikumbba,  the  Rakshasa  M3ha- 
r&ksha,  Mahodara,  Mahapiirshwa,  Malta,  Unmatta,  Pradhasa, 
Bhasakarna,  Virupaksha,  Devantaka,  Narantaka,  Trishira, 
Atikaya,  encountered  Rama,  Lakshmana,  Vibhishana  and 
Vanaras  in  battle.  All  those  Rakshasas  were  slain  and 
struck  down  on  earth.  Then  fighting  with  his  illusory  power 
Indrajit  fettered  Rama  and  others  (t  5-1®)  w,lh  l,is  serPen‘ 
tine  shafts  given  him  as  boons.  They  were  to  be  healed 
up  with  the  herbs  Vishalyaka*  Maruti  then  brought  the 


* There  is  a divergence  between  the  story  here  and  that  in  the 
original  Ramayana.  There  Lakshmana  was  killed  by  Ravana  and  the 
the  former  was  restored  to  life  by  a medicinal  plant.  The  following 
extract  Is  taken  from  my  Translation  : 

Having  spoken  thus  unto  Raghava,  the  highly  wise  Sushena  thus 
addressed  the  mighty  monkey,  Hanuman,  saying,— “ O placid  one, 
going  hence  to  the  mountain,  Mahodaya,  which,  O hero,  had  formerly 
been  mentioned  unto  thee  by  Jambavan,  bring  hither  the  mighty  drug 
sprung  at  its  right  summit- Vicalyakarani  byname  andSavarnyakarani, 
and  Sanjivakarani,  O hero,  and  the  potent  medicine— Sandhani.  Do 
thou  bring  (these)  in  order  that  the  hero-Lakshmana-may  be  revived." 
Having  been  thus  instructed,  Hanuman,  repairing  to  the  Medicinal 
mountain,  was  wrought  up  with  anxiety,  not  knowing  the  drugs.  . And 
then  the  thought  sprang  up  in  the  mind  of  the  Wind-god’s  offspring  of 
immeasurale  prowess,— ' I shall  go,  even  taking  this  (entire)  summit  of 
the  mountain.  In  this  very  summit  must  that  delightful  drug  hava 
sprung.  This  1 inter,  in  asmuch  as  Sushena  had  forsooth  said  so.  If  l 
spend  much  time  (in  thought),  that  would  be  fraught  with  evil.1 
Having  reflected  thus,  the  exceedingly  powerful  Hanuman,  foremost 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


1 3SB 


mountain  ; and  having  healed  up  their  wounds  with  Vishalya 
Hanuman  re-established  the  mountain  where  it  was  originally 
situated.  While  (In  d raj  it)  was  offering  oblations  to  fire  in 
the  sacrificial  house  of  Nikumbhila  Lakshamana  killed  that 
•heroe  in  battle  with  arrows.  Stricken  with  grief  Havana  was 
about  to  kill  Sita  (19 — 21). 

Prevented  by  Avindhya,  the  king  seated  on  his  car  went 
out  with  his  army.  At  fndra’s  command  Matali*  placed 
Rima  on  his  car  (22).  The  encounter  between  Rama  and 
R&vana  was  becoming  of  Rama  and  Ravana.  Havana  slew 
Vanaras.  Miruti  and  others  assailed  him  also  (23),  Like 
unto  a cloud  Rama  showered  arrows  and  weapons  on  him. 
Rima  cut  off  his  standard,  cars,  horses,  charioteer,  bow, 
arms  and  heads.  But  his  heads  again  and  again  cropped 
up.  Then  piercing  his  heart  with  a weapon  granted  by  the 
Grand-Father  (Brahma)  Rama  struck  down  Ravana  on  the 
ground.  All  the  Raksbasas  and  women  wept.  At  RamaV 
command  Bibhishana  consoled  them  and  performed  his 
obsequiel  ceremonies  (24—26). 


monkeys, — swiftly  drawing  up  to  that  best  of  mountains,  and  giving 
three  shakes  to  the  mountain  filled  with  various  flowering  trees,-— raised 
it  up  with  his  hands.  And  taking  that  summit  of  the  mountain  resem- 
bling dark-blue  clouds  charged  with  rain,  Hanuman  from  the  earth 
bounded  up  into  the  sky.  And  arriving  (at  his  quarters),  that  wondrous 
vehement  one,  putting  down  the  mountain-peak,  and  reposing  for  a 
while,  spoke  unto  Sushena,— “ I did  notj  find  the  drug,  O best  of 
monkeys;  and  therefore  have  I brought  this  entire  summit  of  the 
mountain.”  When  the  Wind-god’s  offspring  had  spoken  thus, 
that  foremost  of  monkeys — Sushena — praising  him,  uprooted  the 
herb  and  secured  it,  Seeing  Hanuman’s  feat,  incapable  of  being  done 
by  even  the  celestials,  the  choicest  of  the  monkeys  were  amazed.  Then 
crushing  the  healing  herb,  that  ‘best  of  monkeys — the  exceedingly 
effulgent  Sushena,  made  Lakshmana  "smell  the  same.  And  thereupon 
the  wounded  Lakshmana, — slayer  of  hostile  heroes — smelling  it,  cured 
of  his  wound  and  ailments,  speedily  rose  up  from  the  ground, 

* Indra’s  charioteer. 


50 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


Hanumlna  then  brought  Sita  unto  Rlma,  who  after  test- 
ing her  purity,  took  her  back.  She  proved  her  purity  by 
entering  into  fire.  Indra  and  other  celestials  then  chanted 
Ram’s  glories  as  well  as  Brahma,  and  Dasharatha,  saying 
“ Thou  art  Vishnu,  the  suppressor  of  the  Rakshasas.”  Then 
adored  Indra  revived  all  the  Vanaras  with  a shower  of  am- 
brosia (27 — 28). 

Having  seen  the  war,  the  celestials,  worshipped  by  Rlma, 
returned  to  their  region.  Rama  then  conferred  Lank!  on 
Bibbishana.  And  having  honored  the  Vanaras  he  took  his 
seat  with  Sill  in  the  Pushpaka  car  and  returned  by  the  way 
in  which  he  had  gone,  showing  delightedly  unto  her  many  fast- 
nesses of  the  forest  (29—30).  Having  saluted  Bharadwaja 
they  arrived  at  Nandigram.  Then  bowed  unto  by  Bharata 
they  returned  to  Ayodhya  (3  x ).  Having  saluted  Vashistha 
and  others,  Koushalya,  Kaikeyi  and  Sumitra  and  regained 
his  kingdom  he  worshipped  the  twice-born  ^32).  With  horse- 
sacrifices  he  adored  his  own  self  Vasudeva.  He  made  various 
gifts  and  governed  his  subjects  {33).  Offspring,  virtue  and 
enjoyment  multipled.  The  wicked  were  suppressed.  People 
followed  their  duties  and  earth  was  filled  with  all  sorts  of 
corns.  While  Rama  governed  his  kingdom  there  was  no 
premature  death  (34). 

CHAPTER  XI. 


I^arara  said  When  Rlghava  was  settled  in  his  king- 
dom Agastya  and  others  went  to  him  and  well  adored  by 
him  said  : — “ Blessed  and  victorious  are  you,  since  you  have 
killed  Indrajit  (1).”  Brahma’s  son  was  Pulastya  ; his  son  was 
Vishravain.  His  wife  was  Naikeshi.  On  his  first  wife  Push- 
potkata  he  begat  a son,  the  lord  of  riches.  From  Naikeislii 


AGNI  PDRANAM. 


m 


— 

: 


5* 


was  bo^n  RSvana  of  twenty  arms  and  ten  faces.  By  his 
penances  and  on  account  of  a boon  granted  by  BrahmS  he 
defeated  all  the  celestials  (2 — 3).  Kumbhakarna  was  fond 
of  sleeping  and  Bibhishana  grew  virtuous.  Surpanakha  was 
their  sister.  RSvana’s  son  was  MeghanSda  (4).  Having 
defeated  Indra  he  obtained  the  name  Indrajit  (the  victor  of 
Indra)  and  he  was  more  powerful  than  Ravana.  He  was 
slain  by  thee  and  Lakshmana,  wishing  the  well-being  of  the 
celestials  (5). 

Having  said  so  the  Vipras,  headed  by  Agastya  and  saluted 
by  Rama,  went  away.  Requested  by  the  celestials  and 
ordered  by  Rama  Lakshmana  slew  Lavana  (6).  There  was  a 
city  by  name  Mathura.  Ordered  by  Rama  Bharata  killed  the 
wicked  Gandharva  Shailusha  who  was  living  on  the  bank  of 
the  ocean  and  with  sharpened  arrows  his  three  koti  sons. 
Having  placed  his  son  Pushkara  and  Taksha  in  charge  of 
the  country  Bharata  returned  with  Satrughana  and  saluted 
Rama’s  feet.  Rama  there  governed  his  men  suppressing 
the  wicked  and  encouraging  the  gentle  (7 — 9).  From  Sit5 
whose  pure  character  he  knew,  but  whom  he  renounced  on 
account  of  the  vilification  of  his  subjects  were  born  two 
most  excellent  sons,  Kusha  and  Lava  in  the  hermitage  of 
VSlmiki  (10).  Installed  on  the  throne  and  engaged  in  the 
meditation  “ I am  Brahma”  he,  governing  the  kingdom  con- 
sisting of  many  cities  with  citizens,  younger  brothers  and 
Sita's  sons  for  ten  thousand  and  ten  hundred  years  and 
performing  sacrifices,  went  to  the  celestial  region  adored  of 
the  deities  (11 — 12). 

AGNI  said Hearing  this  story  from  NSrada  VSlmiki 
composed  the  RSmayana.  He,  who  listens  to  this  theme,  at 
length  repairs  to  the  celestial  region. 


I? 


'-3 


-:0;- 


• 1 «■; 1 


8358 


1 


. : . , : . 1 1 ; ' MSS  ■ ■ ' : . V' 


I WM 


CHAPTER  XII. 


.A.GNI  said  : — I will  now  describe  Harivamsha* * * §  (the 
family  of  Hari).  The  un-born  (Brahma)  was  born  from  the 
lotus  nave!  of  Vishnu.  From  Brahma  was  born  Atri  and 
from  him  Soma.  From  Soma  was  born  Pururava  (i).  Of 
him  was  born  Agni  ; from  him  was  horn  Nahushn  and  from 
him  Yayati.  He  begat  on  Devayani  Yadu  and  Turva.su  (2). 
Sarmistha,  the  daughter  of  Vrishaparvan,  gave  birth  (for 
him)  to  Duhyu,  Anu  and  Puru.f  In  Yadu’s  family  were  born 
the  Yadavas  the  foremost  of  whom  was  Vasudeva.  For 
relieving  the  earth  of  her  burden  Hiranyakasbipu’s  sons  were 
begotten  by  Vasudeva  on  Devaki.  They  were  the  first  six 
offspring  taken  previously  into  Devaki’s  womb  by  Yoga- 
nidra  (sleep  of  devotion)  despatched  by  Vishnu.  Bala  was 
the  seventh  embryo  of  Devaki.  He  was  transferred  from 
her  womb  to  that  of  Rohini  and  therefore  Hari  was  called 
Robin eya.J  Krishna  was  the  issue  of  the  eighth  conception. 
He  appeared  in  the  sky  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with  four 
arms.  Hymned  by  Vasudeva  and  Devaki  he  was  born  as  a 
boy  with  two  arms.  From  fear  of  Kansa  Vasudeva  placed 
him  on  Yashoda’s  bed  and  taking  her  girl  placed  her  on 
Devaki’s  bed. § Hearing  the  cries  of  the  baby  Kansa  threw 
her  on  a rock  {4—8).  Saying  f*  the  child  of  thy  eigtb  con- 
ception is  my  death"  although  he  was  prevented  by  Devaki. 

* It  is  a most  important  work,  regarded  as  the  sequel  of  the  Maha- 
bharata,  held  in  great  reverence  by  the  Hindus. 

t An  account  of  this  family  is  to  be  found  in  Vishnu  and  Bhagvat 
Puranas.  ' 

4!  Vasudeva  had  two  wives  Devaki  and  Rohini*  Baladeva  was- 
transferred  from  the  womb  of  the  former  to  that  of  the  latter  and  there- 
fore he  was  called  Sangkarsana. 

§ Vasudeva  exchanged  the  children.  , ; 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


53 


Hearing  a disembodied  speech,  he,  under  infatuation,  killed 
all  her  embroys  (9).  It  was  settled  at  the  time  of  Devalues 
marriage  that  she  would  consign  all  her  children  to  him. 
Dashed  there  the  girl  went,  up  into  the  sky  and  spoke  to 
Kansa  (10) 

“What  is  the  use  of  throwing  me,  O Kansa?  He,  the 
all-in-all  of  gods,  is  born  who  will  kill  you  for  relieving 
the  earth  of  "her  burden”  (xx). 

Having  said  this  and  killed  Shumbha  and  others  she  was 
hymned  by  Indra,  saying  “ O worshipful  Durga,*  O Veda- 
garbha,  Amvika,  Bhadrakali,  Bhadra,  Kshemya,  Kshemakari,. 
O thou  having  more  than  one  arms,  I bow  unto  thee.  He 
who  reads  thy  names  at  three  periods  of  junction  obtains  all 
desired-for  objects”  (12 — -13), 

kansa  then  despatched  Putan&  and  other  she-demons  for 
killing  all  the  children.  In  fear  of  Kansa  and  others 
Vasudeva  consigned  Rama  and  Krishna  to  Yashoda’s  husband 
Nanda  in  Gokula.f  And  they  sported  there  with  kine  and 
cowherd  boys  (14-1 5).  The  two  protectors  of  the  entire  uni- 
verse became  there  two  cow-herd  boys.  The  naughty  Krishna 
was  once  tied  by  Yashoda  with  a rope  to  a mortar J (16). 
And  he,  going  between  two  trees,  Yamala  and  Arjuna, 
uprooted  them  both.  And  anxious  to  suck  Yashoda's  breast-, 
milk  fie  overturned  a cart  (17).  Putana,  about  to  kill  him* 
was  destroyed  by  him  by  sucking  up  her  breast  milk.. 
Going  to  Vrindavana  Krishna  vanquished  Kalya  in  the  lake 
of  Yamuna§  and  drove  him  from  there  out  into  the  sea. 
Requested  by  Bala  he  made  the  Tala  groves  secure  by 
killing  Dhenuka,  Gardhava  and  other  demon  (18—19).  He 


* These  are  the  various  names  of  Durga.  The  girl  was  the  incar 
nation  of  DurgA.  . 

f A village  on  the  other  side  of  Mathura  in  N.-W.  P.  of  India. 


+ These  are  the  various  miracles  worked  by  Krishna  a profuse  ac- 
count of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  Tenth  Book  of  Bhagavaipurantzm . 

5 A portion  of  the  river  Yamuna  is  still  pointed  as  this  lals 


. : . 


I 


54 


A€Nt  PURANAM. 


slew  the  demon  Aristha  in  the  form  of  a bull  and  I^eshini 
in  the  form  of  a horse.  Having1  suppressed  festivities  in 
honor  of  Sakra  he  revived  Vedic  sacrifices  (20).  Having 
held  up  the  mount  (Govardhana)  he  saved  the  country  from 
the  rain  (showered)  by  Sakra,  And  saluted  by  Mahendra 
Govinda  took  charge  of  Arjuna  (21 ).  Pleased  Krishna 
again  introduced  the  festivity  (in  honor)  of  Indra.  Eulogised 
by  Akura  who  had  been  despatched  by  Kansa  he  came  to 
Mathura  on  a car  (22).  He  was  looked  at  by  the  sportive 
and  attached  milk-women.  Having  slain  a washerman, 
who  was  unwilling  to  part  with  clothes  he  took  them  (23). 
With  Rama  he  was  engarlanded  by  a flower-vendor  and 
he  conferred  on  him  a boon.  And  having  been  offered 
unguents  by  a haunch-backed  woman  he  made  her  straight. 
Having  entered  the  arena  of  sport  he  killed  the  mad  ele- 
phant Kuvalayapida  at  the  gate.  In  the  presence  of  Kansa 
and  others  he  encountered  the  wrestler  Chanura,  set  against 
them  by  all  present  on  the  platform  and  Bala  met  with 
Mushthika.  The  wrestlers  Chanura,  Mushtika  and  others 
were  killed  by  them  (24 — 26).  Afterwards  having  slain 
Kansa,  the  king  of  Mathura,  Hari,  appointed  his  father  the 
king  of  Yadavas.  The  two  wives  of  Kansa,  Asti  and  Pripti 
were  Jar&sandha*s  daughters.  Excited  by  their  words  he 
laid  seige  to  Mathura  and  Yadavas  fought  with  him  with 
arrows  (27—28). 

Having  left  MathurS.  R&ma  and  Krishna  went  to  Gomanta 
and  having  vanquished  Jar&sandha  made  the  city  of 
Poundraka  Vasudeva's  property  (29).  Having  built  the 
city  of  DwarkS  he  lived  there  encircled  by  the  YUdavas. 
And  having  slain  the  dreadful  (demon)  Naraka  he  brought 
there  all  the  daughters  of  Devas,  Gandharvas  and  Yakshas* 
Janarddana  married  those  sixteen  thousand  damsels  of  whom 
Rukshmini  and  seven  others  were  the  foremost  30 — 3 i). 

. Seated  on  Garuda  with  SatyabhSmS.  (his  wife)  Hari, 
vanquishing  Indra  in  the  celestial  rtegion,  ■ brought  the 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


55 


mountain  of  jems  with  all  the  jewels  and  the  Plrijata  tree 
and  planted  the  latter  in  SatyabhamSi's  palace.  Having 
received  lessons  in  military  science  from  (the  Rishi)  Sandi- 
pana,  he  having  defeated  the  Daitya  Panchajana  and  been 
worshipped  by  Yama  (the  Regent  of  the  dead)  returned  (the 
Rishi)  his  son.  Worshipped  by  Muchukanda*  he  killed 
KaJavavana  (32—34).  (After  his  return)  he  saluted  Vasu- 
deva,  Deva&i  and  the  devoted  Brahmanas. 

Balabhadra  begat  on  Revati  Nishatha  and  Ulmukha  (35). 
Krishna  begat  Shatnva  on  Jamvavati.  He  had  besides  many 
other  sons.  He  begat  Pradyumna  on  Rukshmini.  On  the 
sixth  day  he  was  stolen  away  by  force  by  (the  demon) 
Shamvara  who  threw  him  into  ocean  where  a fish  devoured 
him.  A washerman  caught  the  fish  and  Shamvara  taking 
it  gave  it  to  (his  wife)  MUyavad  (36^-37).  Seeing  her  own 
husband  in  the  fish  M&y&vati  brought  him  up  and  said 
“ I am  your  wife  Rati ; you  are  my  husband  Kama  ; you  were 
made  limbless  (z.e.,  reduced  to  ashes)  by  Shambhu  (Siva).  I 
was  captured  by  Shamvara  and  am  not  his  wife.  You,  cogni- 
sant of  illusory  power,  kill  Shamvara  (38 — 39)  ” 

Hearing  it  and  slaying  Shamvara  Pradyumna,  with  his 
wife  Mayavati,  went  where  Krishna  was.  And  Krishna  and 
Rukshmini  were  pleased  [to  see  him]  (40). 

Pradyumna’s  son  was  the  highly  intelligent  Aniruddha, 
the  husband  of  Ush§.  Bali's  son  was  Vana.  He  had  a delight- 
ful city  (by  name)  Shonitapuram  (41).  By  practising  hard 
penances  he  became  Siva's  son.  Pleased  Siva  approached 
Vana  and  said  “ O Vana,  you  will  obtain  a fight  when  this 
peacock  standard  will  be  struck  down"  (42),  Beholding  Uma 
sport  with  Siva  Ushaf  felt  a desire  for  having  a husband. 


* A royal  saint.  His  cave  where  Krishna  killed  Kalayavana  is  to  be 
seen  on  a mountain  near  tDhoIepur  in  Rajputana  where  a fair  is  held 
annually 

. f The  story  ef  Usha's  love  is  described  at  length  in  If 

> i , 1 1 ....  .. : i ifi  I 


56 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM. 


To  her  Gouri  said  : — ((  The  person  wliom  you  will  see  in 
a dream  in  the  night  of  the  twelfth  day  of  the  month  of 
Vaishaka  while  sleeping  will  be  your  husband.”  Thus  ad- 
dressed by  Gouri  and  pleased  Usha,  while  sleeping  in  her 
house,  saw  him  (43  —44).  Considering  herself  united  with 
her  consort,  she,  by  means  of  a portrait  drawn  by  her,  brought 
Aniruddha  through  her  friend  Chitralakha  (45). 

The  daughter  of  Kuinbhanda,  Vana's  minister,  brought 
Krishna’s  grand-son  from  Dwarka  and  Aniruddha  lived  there 
happily  with  Usha  (46).  He  was  then  reported  unto  Van  a 
by  guards  who  were  in  charge  of  the  standard.  Then  there 
took  place  a highly  terrific  encounter  between  Aniruddha 
and  Vina  (47). 

Hearing  the  news  from  Narad  a Krishna,  seated  on 
Garuda’s  back,  went  there  with  Pradyurnna,  Balabhadra 
and  others  and  defeated  there  the  fire-gods  and  fevers 
produced  there  by  Maheswara  (48).  There  took  place  a 
gre'at  encounter  between  Hari  and  Shankara.  Nandi, 
Vinayaka,  Skanda  and  others  were  defeated  by  Garuda  and 
other  (followers  of  Krishna)  (49).  While  Shankara  yawned 
It  was  destroyed  by  Vishnu  with  an  yawning  weapon. 
Having  his  thousand  arms  lopped  off  (Vana)  prayed  unto 
Rudra  for  protection  (50).  Vishnu  however  kept  Vana  alive 
with  two  arms  and  said  to  Shiva:— Thou  hast  promised 
protection  unto  Vana  and  (necessarily)  I have  done  so  (51), 
There  is  no  difference  between  us,  He  who  sees  this 
difference  goes  to  hell.” 

Then  worshipped  by  Shiva  and  others  accompanied  by 
Aniruddha  and  UshS  Vishnu  returned  to  Dwarka  and  lived 
happily  with  Ugrasena  and  other  Yadavas.  Aniruddha's  son 
Vajia  learnt  every  thing  from  Markandeya  (52—53). 
Balabhadra,  the  slayer  of  Pralamba,  the  master  of  monkey 
Dwivida  and  the  destroyer  of  the  pride  of  the  Kouravas, 
drew  the  river  Yamuna  (54b  The  Lord  Hari,  having  many 
forms,  lived  happily  with  Rukshmini  and  others  and  begat 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM, 


57 


numberless  sons  amongst  Yadavas.  He  who  reads  it  with 
his  desired-for  objects  gained  repairs  to  the  region  of 
Had  (55). 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


J^LGNI  said:— I will  now  describe  Rharata,*  and  the  cha- 
racteristics of  Krishna’s  greatness.  Making  the  Pandavas 
the  instrument  Vishnu  relieved  the  earth  of  her  burden  (1). 
Brahma  sprang  from  Vishnu’s  lotus  navel.  His  son  was  Atri 
whose  son  again  was  Soma.  His  son  was  Buddha.  His  son 
was  Aila  and  his  son  was  Pururava  (2).  From  him  was 
born  Ayu  whose  son  was  king  Nahusha.  His  son  was 
Yayati.  From  him  was  born  Pur u in  whose  family  was  born 
Rharata.  Then  was  born  king  Kuru  (3).  In  his  family  was 
born  Shantanu  whose  son  was  Bhishma  given  birth  to  by 
Gangs.  His  younger  brother  Chitrangada  and  Vichitra  were 
begotten  by  Shantanu  on  Satyavatif  (4).  After  Shantanu’s 
death,  Bhishma,  who  led  a life  of  celebacy,  governed  his 
brother’s  kingdom.  Chitrangada  was  killed  when  he  was  a 
boy  by  Chitrangada. % The  two  daughters  of  the  king  of 
K§shi,  Amvika  and  Amvftlika  were  brought  by  Bhishma 
after  having  vanquished  his  enemy  and  given  as  wives  to 
Vichitravirya  who,  sometime  after,  died  of  consumption. 
With  Satyavati’s  permission  Vyasa  begat  Dhritarastra  on 


* The  Mahabharata,  one  of  the  two  great  Indian  epics, 
f She  was  the  daughter  of  a fisherman.  Shantanu  fell  in  love  with 
her  and  espoused  her  on  condition  that  her  son  would  succeed  to  , the 


throne.  Bhishma,  the  eldest  son  of  Shantanu,  led  a life  of  celebacy  to 


make  good  his  father's  promise. 
X A Gandharva  king. 


■ 

. , •A't 


HKi 


I 


1 


AGN1  PUR  A NAM. 


Amvika  and  Panda  on  Amvalika  ,*  who  became^  king.f 
Dhritarastra  begat  on  Gandhari  hundred  sons  headed  by 
Duryodhana  (5 — 8).  In  the  hermitage  of  Shatashringaf 
Pandu  was  cursed  by  a Rishi  that  he  would  die  of  his 
intercourse  with  his  wife.f  Dharma  begat  on  Kunti  for 
Paodu,  Yudhishtira,  the  Wind-god  Bhima  and  Shakra  Indra. 
The  two  Ashwinis  begat  on  Madri  Nakula  and  Sahadeva.jf 
Afterwards  Pandu  died  by  knowing  Madri  (9—10).  Kunti 
.gave  birth  to  Kama  in  her  maiden-hood  who  was  under  the 
protection  of  Duryodhana.  By  an  accident  enmity  took  place 
between  the  Kurus  and  Pandavas  (11).  T fie  wicked-minded 
Duryodhana  put  the  Pandavas  into  a house  of  wax  and  put 

#■  Tins  practice  of  inviting  learned  and  pious  men  for  begetting 
offspring  on  widows  was  then  sanctioned  by  the  Sacred  writ.  The 
following  six  kinds  of  sons  are  mentioned  in  the  Adi  Parva  of  the 
Mahabharata ; — 

(1)  Aurasha  or  the  son  begotten  by  one’s  own  self  on  his  wife;  (2) 
Pranita  or  the  son  begotten  on  one’s  own  wife  by  an  accomplished 
person  ; Parikriti  or  the  son  begotten  on  one’s  own  wife  by  a man  for 
pecuniary  consideration;  (4)  Paunarbhava  or  the  son  begotten  on  a 
wife  after  her  husband’s  death  ; (5)  Kanina  or  the  son  born  in  maiden™ 
hood  ; (6)  Kami  a or  tho  son  born  of  a woman  who  had  intercourse  with 
four  persons  ; (7)  Datta  or  given  by  another ; (S)  Krita  or  bought  from 
another;  (9)  Upakrita  or  son  coming  to  another  out  of  gratitude;  {10} 
Sayamupagata  or  the  son  coming  himself  to  give  him  away  ; {n)Sada  or 
the  son  born  of  a pregnant  bride ; (12}  Hinajonidhriia  or  the  son  born 
of  a woman  of  lower  caste  (See  Adi  Parva  Chapter  CXIX  Verses(33 — 34), 

f Dhritarastra,  though  eldest,  did  not  get  the  throne  on  account  of 
his  blindness. 

I A mountain  having  a hundred  peaks. 

5 The  story  is  to  be  found  in  the  Adi  Parva  of  the  Mahabharata, 
Once  on  a time  Pandu  retired  into  a forest  with  his  two  wives  Kunti 
and  Madri  for  a pleasure  trip.  There  he  shot  down  a deer  while  she  was 
holding  intercourse  with  his  mate.  She  cursed  Pandu  saying  that  he 
would'  die  of  her  intercourse  with  his  wife*  Tins  was  eventually  brought 
about  by  his  knowing  his  wife  Madri. 

II  Pandu  had  no  issue  and  he  therefore  requested  his  wives  to*  invit 
various  gods  for  begetting  powerful  sons  on  them. 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


59 


Sire  to  it.  The  Pandavas  however  with  their  mother  managed 
to  come  but  of  the  burning  house  (12).  Then  they  all,  under 
the  guise  of  ascetics,  lived  in  Ekachakra  in  the  house  of  a 
Brahmana  after  having  slain  the  Rakshasa  Vaka  (12).  They 
then  went  to  Panchala  country  on  the  occasion  of  Draupadi's 
Swayamvara.*  And  by  shooting  the  mark  the  five  Pandavas 
obtained  Draupadi  (14).  They  obtained  half  of  the  kingdom 
when  Duryodhana  and  others  came  to  know  (of  their  where- 
abouts). Arjuna  (obtained)  from  Fire-God  the  most  excellent 
car  as  well  as  the  celestial  bow  Gan  diva  as  also  Krishna  as 
his  charioteer  in  battle.  And  they  all,  proficient  in  the  use 
of  arms,  obtained  'from  Drona  un-ending  shafts  and  Brahma 
weapons  (j 5 — 16).  Through  Krishna's  (help)  Arjuna  set 
fire  to  Khandava  forest. f And  that  Pandava  with  a down- 
pour of  arrows  put  a stop  to  Indra’s  showers  (17).  All  the 
quarters  were  conquered  by  the  Pandavas.  And  Yudhishthira 
ruled  his  kingdom  celebrating  a Rajasuya  sacrifice}  with 
profuse  gold.  This  Suyodhana  could  not  bear  (18).  He  was 


* This  was  a ceremony  prevalent  in  ancient  India.  A royal  maiden 
used  to  invite  all  the  eligible  bride-grooms  and  select  one  after  her 
heart.  The  following  account  of  the  condition  of  her  Swuyamvava 
•occurs  in  the  Adi  Parva,  CLXXXVII  of  Mahabharata. 

“ Causing  a machinary  to  be  erected  in  the  sky  the  king  Drupada 
set  up  a mark  to  be  shot  through  that  machinery.  He  said  : — He  who 
will  string  this  bow,  and  he  who  will  be  able  to  shoot  the  mark  above 
the  machinery  with  these  ornamented  arrows,  will  obtain  my  daughter. 

f The  account  occurs  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  Adi  Parvan  of 
Mahabharata.  The  allusion  is  as  follows  : — Agni  fed  on  clarified  butter 
for  years  and  grew  pale.  He  went  to  Brahma  for  a cure  who  told  him  to 
go  and  devour  the  forest  of  Khandava  the  abode  of  the  enemies  of  gods. 
He  went  there  and  put  fire  to  it  which  was  extinquished.  He  came 
back  to  Brahma  who  asked  him  to  secure  the  help  of  Krishna  and 
Arjuna  who  succeeded  in  the  work  though  even  Indra  poured  down 
rain  to  put  out  the  fire. 

% A sacrifice  in  which  one  becomes  Lord  Paramount  after  exacting 
allegiance  from  minor  chiefs. 


■ ■ ■■,- Ov  R 
; ... 


6o 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


then  urged  on  by  his  brother  Dushashana,  Kama,  who  had 
been  enriched  by  him  and  as  well  as  by  Shakuni  fto  play  a 
game  of  dice,  and  by  a dishonest  trick  defeated  Yudhisthira 
and  won  his  kingdom  from  him.  The  audience  then  laughed 
at  him.  Thus  vanquished  Yudhishthira  with  all  his  brothers 
retired  into  woods  (19—20).  He  spent  twelve  years  of  the 
promised  period  in  the  forest  and  fed  eighty  eight  thousand 
Brahmanas  there  (21).  Then  with  Dhoumya  “and  Draupadi 
making  up  the  sixth  they  went  to  Virata’s  house.  The  king 
passed  there  incognito  as  the  twice-born  Kanka  and  Bhima 
as  the  cook.  Arjuna  [lived  in  the  guise  of]  Vrihannala* * * §  his 
wife  as  Sairindrif  and  the  twins  (as  keepers  of  horses  and  kine). 
Under  another  name  Bhimasena  killed  KichakaJ  in  the  night 
who  was  about  to  ravish  Draupadi.  Arjuna  defeated  Kurus 
who  had  taken  away  kine  from  (Virata’s)  cow-shed  and 
Pandavas  were  afterwards  found  out  (22—24).  Krishna’s 
sister  Subhadra  gave  birth  from  Arjuna  to  her  son  Abld- 
manyu.  Virata  conferred  his  daughter  Uttara  on  him  (25), 
Dharmaraja  then  collected  seven  Akshouhinis  of  soldiers. 
He  then  despatched  Krishna  as  an  emissary  for  battle  who 
said  to  the  invincible  king  Duryodhana  who  was  master  of 
eleven  Akshouhinis§  of  soldiers : — “ Give  half  of  your 
kingdom  to  Yudhisthira,  or  at  least  give  him  five  villages  or 
give  him  battle.”  A.  ;Y: . 

Hearing  his  words  Suyodhana  said  to  Krishna  : — “ I will 
not  even  give  him  land  measuring  the  point  of  a needle.  I 
will  fight  with  him.”  Then  showing  him  his  invincible 
universal  form  and  adored  by  Vidura  (Krishna)  approached 
Yudhisthira  and  said  “ Fight  with  Suyodhana”  (26—29). 

* An  eunuch  who  was  the  tutor  of  Uttara. 

-f  Maid-servant  of  the  queen  of  Virata. 

$ Commander-in-chief  of  Virata’s  army  who  grew  enamoured  of 
Draupadi’s  beauty. 

§ A large  army  consisting  of  21870  chariots,  as  many  elephants, 
65610  horse  and  109350  foot. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


XIlGni  said: — The  armies  of  Yudhisthira  and  Duryodhana 
assembled  on  the  field  of  Kurukshetra.  Beholding  Bhishma, 
Drona  and  others  and  considering  them  as  his  elders 
(Arjuna)  did  not  like  to  fight  (i).  The  lord  then  said  to 
Partha  : — - 

“ You  should  not  grieve  for  Bhishma  and  others.  The 
bodies  are  destructible,  but  the  one,  who  has  the  body,  does 
not  perish  (2).  Know  this  soul  as  Para  Brahma  and  that 
I am  Brahma . Whether  (a  work)  is  successful  or  not  a Yogin 
is  always  the  same.  Therefore  observe  your  royal  duties^.1*6. 

Thus  addressed  by  Krishna  Arjuna  got  on  his  car,  struck 
the  musical  instruments  and  fought,  In  the  beginning  Bhishma 
was  the  commander-in-cheif  of  DuryodhanaV  army  and 
Shikhadin  was  that  of  the  Pandava  army.  Then  there  took 
place  encounter  between  both  (the  parties).  Dhritarashtra's 
sons  assisted  by  Bhishma  killed  Pandavas  in  battle  (4—5). 
And  the  Pandavas  headed  by  Shikhandin  killed  Dhritarastra's 
sons  in  battle.  There  took  place  an  encounter  between 
Kuru  and  Pundava  soldiers  like  that  between  gods  and 


* This  refers  to  the  celebrated  episode  of  the  Mahabharata  the 
Bhagaeuad-Gita%  the  greatest  book  ever  written  in  any  language  of  the 
world.  These  two  verses  constitute,  as  if,  the  key-note  of  the  entire 
teachings  of  Krishna  to  Arjuna”. 

On  some  points  the  several  philosophic  systems  vary  ; but  all  insist 
that  knowledge  is  the  essential  means  for  the  attainment  of  liberation  ; 
more  or  less  all  are  indifferent  to  action  as  a complement  of  knowledge. 
Consequently  the  philosophic  systems  might  become  open  to  the  charge 
that  “ the  ascetic  who  never  stirred  from  his  seat  was  superior  to  the 
active,  brave  soldier  or  merchant  who  defended  his  neighbours  in  war  or 
fed  them  in  famine”.  The*  Bhagavad-Gita  guards  the  devotee  against 
this  erroneous  idea,  by  pointing  out  the  duty  of  action  as  involved  in 
“knowledge,”  and  the  danger  of  pure  asceticism,  ^ 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


62 

demons,  enhancing  the  delight  of  and  before  the  very 
eyes  of  gods  stationed  in  heaven.  For  the  (first)  ten  days 
Bhishma  struck  down  the  Pandava  warriors  with  his 
weapons  (6—7). 

On  the  tenth  day  Arjuna  showered  arrows  on  the  heroic 
Bhishma.  And  urged  on  by  Drupada  Shikhandin  made  a 
downpour  of  arrows  like  unto  a cloud  (8).  The  elephant 
warriors  and  the  infantry  struck  each  other  with  their  respec- 
tive weapons.  Pointing  out  the  road  of  battle,  beholding 
the  sun  during  its  progress  to  the  north  of  the  equator, 
meditating  on  Vishnu  and  hymning  his  glories  Bhishma, 
having  death  at  his  call,  lay  on  a bed  of  arrows  requested  by 
Vasu  to  repair  to  his  region  (9 — 10). 

On  Duryodhana  lamenting  Drona  assumed  the  office  of 
the  commander-in-chief.  The  Pandava  soldiers  were  filled 
with  delight  as  well  as  their  chief  Dhristadyumna  (n). 

There  took  place  a dreadful  encounter  (between  both 
the  parties)  increasing  the  dominion  of  Yam  a * Virata, 
Drupada  and  others  were  sunk  in  the  ocean  of  Dronaf  (12), 
The  huge  army  of  Duryodhana,  consisting  of  elephants, 
horses,  cars  and  infantry,  was  struck  down  by  Dhristadyumna 
and  Drona  looked  like  death  there  {13).  Afterwards,  on 
(Yudhisthira's)  exclaiming  u AshwathamaJ  is  slain”  Drona 
threw  off  his  arms.  And  then  assailed  with  Dhristadyumna’s 
arrows  he  fell  down  on  earth  (14). 

On  the  fifth  day  on  Duryodhana  being  stricken  with  grief 
the  irrepressible  Kama,  having  assailed  all  the  Ksltairyas, 
became  his  commander-in-chief  (15).  Arjuna  assumed  the 
command  of  the  Pandava  army.  Then  there  took  place  a 
highly  dreadful  encounter  with  various  weapons  between 
them  both  like  that  between  the  gods  and  demons  (16). 

* Stripped  off  metaphor  it  means  11  in  which  many  persons  were 
skilled”. 

, f v harassed  by  Drona  or  covered  by  him  with  arrows. 
t He  was  son  of  Drona.  This  was  a false  report  for  killing  Drona* 


AG  MI  PUR  AM  AM, 


In  the  .battle  between  Kama  and  Arjuna  Kama  killed  his 
enemies  with  arrows.  And  on  the  second  day  Kama  was 
struck  down  by  Arjuna  (17).  Shalya  fought  for  half  a day 
and  \ udhishthira  killed  him.  Having  his  army  slain 
Suyodhana  fought  with  Bhimasena  (18).  Having  slain  many 
men  he  addressed  Bhimsena.  And  while  he  was  about  to 
strike  him  with  a club  Bhima  struck  him  down  as  well  as 
his  younger  brother  with  his  club.  In  the  night  of  the 
eighteenth  day  while  asleep  the  highly  powerful  Ashwathama 
assailed  one  Akshouhini  of  Pandava  army.  He  killed  the 
sons  of  Draupadi,  the  Panchala  princes  and  Dhristadyumna 
(19—21).  While  Draupadi  was  bewailing  for  the  death 
of  her  sons  Arjuna  with  an  Aishika  weapon  took  off  the 
jewel  of  his  head  (22).  Hari  then  revived  ["the  warriors J 
scorched  with  Ashwathama/ s weapons.  LJttara  at  that  time 
was  enciente  and  the  offspring  of  that  conception  was  the 
king  Parikshit  (23). 

Kritavarma,  Kripa  and  Drona’s  son  then  retired  from  the 
battle-field  as  well  as  the  five  Pandavas,  Satyaki  and  Krishna 
and  not  others  (24).  Having  consoled  his  aggreved  wives 
Yudhishthira,  with  Bhima  and  others,  cremated  all  the  slain 
heroes  and  distributed  water  and  riches  (15).  Having 
heard  from  Sh&ntanu’s  son  Bhishma  various  duties  conferring 
tranquility  viz  the  duties  of  a king,  those  leading  to  eman* 
cipation  and  those  about  making  gifts  he  became  the  king* 
(17).  And  that  represser  of  enemies  made  gifts  unto  Brahma- 
nas  in  his  Ashwamedha  (horse)  sacrifice.  And  hearing  from 
Arjuna  of  the  destruction  of  the  Yidawas  from  a pestle  and 
settling  the  kingdom  00  Parikshit  he,  with  his  younger 
brothers,  repaired  to  heaven  (18—19). 


* These  accounts  occur  in  the  Shanti  Parvan  of  the  Mahabharata, 


. li  ix&i*  sikS  i » i ... 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Agni  said  : — When  Yudhisthira  was  'established  on  the 
throne  Dhritarastra  retired  into  woods  with  Gandhari  and 
(travelled)  from  one  hermitage  into  another  as  well,  as  Prhha, 
O twice-born  one  (i).  Burnt  by  a forest-lire  Vidura  went 
into  heaven.  Thus  did  Vishnu  slay  the  D&navas  the  load  of 
the  earth,  for  the  protection  of  virtue  and  destruction  of 
iniquity  making  the  Pandavas  the  instrumental  thereof. 
Then  with  a pestle,  under  the  pretext  of  a Brahmanic 
imprecation  he  destroyed  the  Yadava  race  constituting  a 
heavy  load  and  installed  Bajra  on  the  kingdom.*  Then 

* The  following  account  in  Vishnupuranam  fills  up  the  gap. 

Maitreya  said  : — Tell  me  how  Janarddana  brought  about  the 
extermination  of  his  own  family  under  the  pretext  of  a Brahmin ica! 
curse  and  In  what  manner  did  he  renounce  his  human  body. 

Parasara  said  : — At  the  holy  place  of  Pindarika,  Viswamitra, 
Kanwa  and  the  great  sage,  -Narada,  were  seen  by  some  boys  of  the 
-Yadu  family.  Inflated  with  their  youth  and  influenced  by  predestined 
results,  they  dressed  and  adorned  Samba,  the  son  of  Jambavati,  as  a 
female  and  taking  her  to  the  sages,  they  addressed  them  with  usual 
reverence,  saying  “What  child  will  this  female,  the  wife  of  Bahru, 
who  is  anxious  to  have  a son,  give  birth  to?'1  The  sages,  who  were 
gifted  with  divine  wisdom,  enraged  at  this  insult,  said  : — “She  will  give 
birth  to  a club  that  will  exterminate  the  entire  Yadava  race.” 

Thus  addressed  by  the  sages,  the  boys  went  to  Ugrasena  and  related, 
to  him  what  had  happened  ; and  after  sometime,  as  foretold,  a.  club 
was  produced  from  the  belly  of  Samba.  Ugrasena  had  the  club,  which 
was  made  of  iron,  ground  to  dust  and  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  particles 
of  the  dust  there  became  rushes.  There  was  one  part  of  the  iron  club 
which  was  like  the  blade  of  a lance  and  which  the  Andhakas  could  not 
break  ; this  when  thrown  into  the  sea  was  swallowed  by  a fish  ; the  fish 
was  caught,  the  iron  spike  was  extracted  from  its  belly,  and  was  taken 
by  a hunter  named  Jara.  The  all-wise  and  illustrious  slayer  of  Madfeu 
did  not  think  it  proper  to  counteract  the  predestination  of  fate. 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


In  the  interval  an  "emissarry  despatched  by  the  celestials  came  to 
Krishna1  and  said  to  him  in  private  : — “I  am  sent  to  thee,  O lord,  by 
the  celestials  ; and  do  thou  hear  what  Indra  together  with  the  Viswas 
Maruts,  Adityas,  Sadhyas  and  Rudras  respectfully  represent.  More 
than  a century  has  gone  by  since  thou  in  compliance  with  the  request  of 
the  celestials,  descended  upon  earth  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  it  of  its 
load.  The  demons  have  been  destroyed  and  the  burden  of  earth  has 
been  removed  ; now  let  the  immortals  once  again  see  their  king  in 
heaven.  Mor'S  than  a hundred  years  have  passed,  and  if  thou  dost  wish 
do  thou  return  to  heaven.  This  is  the  prayer  of  the  celestials.  And 
if  this  be  not  thy  will,  do  thou  remain  here  as  long  as  it  may  be  desirable 
to  thy  dependants.”  Whereto  Krishna  replied,  “I  am  well  aware  of  all 
thou  hast  said.  The  earth  is  not  relieved  of  her  load  until  the  Yadavas 
are  extirpated.  I shall  also  speedily  bring  it  about  in  my  descent,  and 
it  shall  take  place  in  seven  nights.  Having  restored  the  land  of 
Dwaraka  to  the  ocean  and  destroyed  the  race  of  Yadu,  I shall  proceed  to 
the  region  of  the  celestials.  Inform  the  celestials  that  having  renounced 
my  mortal  frame  and  been  accompanied  by  Sankarshana,  I will  then 
return  to  them.  The  tyrants  that  oppressed  the  earth,  Jarasandha  and 
the  rest,  have  been  slain  and  a youth  even  of  the  race  of  Yadu  is  so 
less  than  they  an  incumbrance.  Having  removed  this  huge  weight  of 
the  earth,  I will  proceed  to  the  mansions  of  the  celestials,,  Say  this  to 
them.” 

Parasara  said : — O Maitreya,  being  thus  addressed  by  Vasudeva, 
the  messenger  of  the  celestials  bowed  and  took  his  heavenly  course  to 
the  king  of  the  deities.  The  illustrious  Krishna  too  now  espied  signs 
and  portents  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven  prognosticating  day  and  night 
the  destruction  of  Dwaraka.  Beholding  those  evil  omens,  he  said  to  the 
Yadavas ; “Behold  these  [dreadful  portents;  let  us  hasten  to  Prabhasa 
“ to  avert  them.”  When  he  had  thus  said  to  the  eminent  Yadavas,  the 
illustrious  Uddhaba  saluted  and  said  to  him  : “Tell  me,  O lord,  whafc 
is  proper  that  I should  do,  for  it  seems  to  me  that  thou  wilt  destroy 
all  this  race.  The  signs  that  are  manifest  declare  nothing  less  than 
the  annihilation  of  the  race.  “Thereupon  Krishna  replied:  “Do  thou 
by  my  favour  proceed,  by  this  celestial  course,  to  the  holy  place 
Badrikasrama  in  the  Gandhamadana  mountain,  the  shrine  of  Nara 
Narayana ; and  on  that  spot  sanctified  by  them,  thou,  meditating  upon 
me,  shalt  obtain  perfection  through  my  favour.  Having  extirpated  this 
Yadu  race,  I shall  proceed  to  Vaikuntha ; and  after  I have  quitted 
Dwaraka,  the  ocean  shall  inundate  it.” 

Parasara  said  Being  thus  addressed  by  him  and  commanded  by 


; 


! ■ 
.-Ti » 


66 


AON!  PUR  AN  AM, 


Kesava,  Uddhaba  proceeded  to  the  holy  shrine  of  Nara  Narayanst 
And  the  Yadavas,  with  Krishna,  Balararna  and  others,  having  ascended 
swift-coursing  cars,  proceeded  to  Prabhasa.  Having  reached  Prabhasa, 
the  Kukkuras  and  Andhakas  bathed  there  and,  being  excited  by 
Krishna,  indulged  in  liquor.  ■ As  they  drank,  the  destructive  fire  of 
dissension  was  engendered  amongst  them  by  mutual  collision  and  fed 
with  the  fuel  of  abuse.  Worked  up  .with  ire  by  the  divine ■ infi tience, 
they  attacked  one  another  with  missle  weapons,  and  when  these  were 
finished,  they  had  recourse -to  the  rushes  growing  nigh.  * The  rushes  in 
their  hands  became  like  thunder-bolts,  and  they  assailed  one  another 
with  them.  Pradyumna,  Syamba,  Kritavarman,  Satvaki  Aniruddha, 
"Prithu,  Vipathu,  Charuvarman,  Charuka,  Akrura,  and  many  others, 
struck  one  another  with  the  rushes,  which  became  hard  like  thunder- 
bolts. Thereupon  Krishna  arriving  there  prevented  them  : but  they 
thought  that  he  was  taking  part  with  each  severally  and  continued  the 
conflict. 

Thereupon,  enraged,  Krishna  took  up  a handful  of  rushes  to  destroy 
them,  which  became  a club  of  iron  ; and  with  this  he  killed  many  of  the 
murderous  Yadavas,  whilst  others  fighting  fiercely  destroyed  one 
another.  At  this  time  in  the  very  presence  of  Krishna’s  charioteer,  his 
swift  steeds  carried  off  his  Jaitra  car  and  entered  into  the  sea.  The  dis- 
cus, the  dub,  the  bow,  the  quiver,  the  shell  and  the  sword  of  Kesava, 
having  circumambulated  their  master,  flew  along  the  path  of  the  sun. 
In  a short  time  there  was  not  a single  Yadava  left  alive  save  the  mighty 
Krishna  and  Daruka.  Going  towards  Rama,  who  was  sitting  at  the 
root  of  a tree,  they  saw  a huge  serpent  coming  out  of  his  mouth. 
Having  issued  out  of  his  mouth,  the  mighty  snake  proceeded  towards 
the  ocean  hymned  by  saints  and  other  great  snakes.  Bringing  an 
offering  of  respect,  the  ocean  came  to  him  and  then  the  majestic  being 
worshipped  of  all  the  attendant  snakes,  entered  into  the  waters  of  "the, 
deep.  Beholding  the  departure  of  the  spirit  of  Baladeva,  Kesava  said 
to  Daruka— “Do  thou  go  to  Vasudeva  and  Ugrascna  and  communicate 
unto  him  this.  Go  and  inform  them  of  the  departure  of  Balabhadra, 
and  the  destruction  of  the  Yadava  race,  and  also  that  I shall  engage 
in  religious  meditation.  Do  thou  also  inform  Almka  and  the  in- 
habitants of  Dwaraka  that  their  city  shall  be  inundated  by  the  ocean., 
And  do  ye  await  the  arrival  of  Arjuna  at  Dwaraka.  When  Arjuna,  the 
descendant  of  Pandu,  shall  issue  out  of  the  city,  none  of  you  should  wait 
there  but  go  whither  the  descendant  of  Kuru  shall  repair.  Do  thou  also 
go  to  the  son  of  Kunti  and  tell  him  that  he  may  at  my  request  protect 
my  family  according  to  his  might  Then  go  to  Hastmapur  with  Arjuna 


agni  fuhanam. 


67 


l 

% 


* This  sacred  shrine  is  near  Ajmere  in  Rajputana. 


Siaving^  renounced  his  own  body  in  Prabhasa*  at  the  command 
of  the  Daily.  Hari  was  adored  by  the  denizens  of  Brahma 
and  Indra  lokas.  Balabhadra,  the  incarnation  of  An  ant  a, 
went  to  the  heavenly  region  of  Paiala  (2 — 5). 

The  Lord  Hari  is  indestructible  and  is  worthy  of  being 
meditated  on  by  sages.  In  his  absence  the  ocean  submerged 
the  city  of  Dwaraka  (6).  Having  performed  the  cremation 
ceremony  tff  the  Yadavas  he  offered  them  water  and  gave 
away  their  riches.  The  cow-herds,  with  the  weapons  of 
rods,  carried  away,  after  defeating  Partha,  ail  the  wives  of 


and  all  the  inhabitants  of  Dwaraka  and,  let  Vajra  be  installed  king  over 
the  race  of  Yadu.” 

Parasara  said  : — Thus  instructed  and  having  bowed  unto  and  cir- 
cumambulated Krishna  again  and  again,  Daruka  departed  as  he  had 
been  desired ; and  having  conducted  Arjuna  to  Dwaravati,  the  intelli- 
gent servant  of  Krishna  established  Vajra  as  king.  Thereupon  having 
concentrated  In  himself  that  supreme  spirit  which  is  identical  with 
Vasudeva,  the  divine  Govinda  was  inentified  with  all  beings.  Recollect 
ing  the  worlds  of  the  Brahmana,  the  curse  of  Durvasas,  the  illustrious 
Krishna  sat  engaged  in  meditation,  placing  his  foot  upon  his  knee. 
Then  there  came  a hunter  named  Jara,  whose  arrow  was  tipped  with  a 
blade  made  of  the  iron  club,  which  had  not  been  reduced  to  powder ; 
and  espying  from  a distance  the  foot  of  Krishna  he  mistook  it  for  a part 
of  a deer,  and  shooting  his  arrow,  lodged  it  in  the  sole.  Approaching 
his  mark,  he  saw  the  four-armed  king  and  falling  at  his  feet,  repeatedly 
besought  his  forgiveness,  exclaiming,  “I  have  done  this  deed  unknow- 
ingly, thinking  I was  aiming  at  a deer.  Have  pity  on  me  who  am  con- 
sumed by  my  crime;  for  thou  art  able  to  consume  me."  Thereupon 
Bhagavan  said:  "Thou  needst  not  have  the  least  fear,  hunter  ,*  by  my 
favour,  thou  shalt  repair  to  the  region  of  the  celestials."  As  soon  as 
Krishna  had  said  this,  the  celestial  car  arrived  there,  ascending  which 
the  hunter  repaired  to  the  regions  of  the  celestials. 

Thereupon  the  divine  Krishna  having  united  himself  with  his  own 


pure,  spiritual,  inexhaustible,  inconceivable,  unborn,  undecaying,  im-  I 

perishable,  and  universal  spirit,  which  is  one,  Vasudeva,  renounced  ■ I , 

mortal  frame  and  his  connection  with  the  three  qualities.  * ai 


68 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


Vishnu*  at  the  imprecation  of  Aslhavakra.t  And  Partita 
mourned  for  the  loss  (7—8).  Consoled  by  Vyasa  he  thought 
ul  had  strength  as  long  as  I was  by  Krishna.”  And  then 
returning  to  the  city  of  Hastina  he  communicated  every. 

* O foremost  of  ascetics,  one  day  while  proceeding,  Arjuna,  the  son  of 
Pritha,  halted  the  people  he  had  brought  from  Dwaraka  in  the  Pancha- 
nada  country  in  a rich  and  fertile  spot ; the  desires  of  the  r neighbouring 
robbers  were  excited  when  they  saw  a number  of  widowed  females  and 
immense  riches  in  the  possession  of  Arjuna  alone.  Worked  up  with 
their  cupidity  they  assembled  their  villainous  herds  and  said  to  them 
This  Arjuna,  alone  with  his  bow,  is  passing  amongst  us  having  immense 
riches  and  numbeless  women  with  him,  whose  husbands  had  been  slain  ; 
cursed  is  thy  strength  therefore.  His  pride  hath  been  increased  by  the 
death  of  Bhishma,  Drona,  Jayadratha,  Kama  and  others  ; he  is  not 
cognisant  of  the  prowess  of  the  simple  villagers.  Up,  up,  take  your 
long  thick  staves  ; this  stupid  fellow  hates  us.  Why  should  we  not  lift 
up  our  arms  ?”  Saying  this  they  rushed  armed  with  cudgles  and  clods 
of  earth,  upon  the  people  who  were  without  their  lord.  Arjuna  met 
them  and  said  to  them  in  contempt ; “Go  away,  O ye  wretches,  ignorant 
of  what  is  right,  if  you  do  not  wish  to  die.”  But  they  neglected  his 
threats  and  seized  his  treasures  and  women,  the  wives  of  Viswaksena. 

f In  ancient  time,  a Brahman,  named  Ashtavakra,  was  pursuing  his 
religious  penances,  standing  in  water  and  meditating  on  the  eternal 
spirit  for  many  years.  On  account  of  the  overthrow  of  the  A suras  there 
was  a great  festival  on  the  summit  of  Meru;  on  their  way  to  which 
Eambha,  Tilottama  and  hundreds  of  other  beautiful  nymphs  praised 
and  hymned  him  for  his  devotions.  They  bowed  unto  him  and  eulogised 
him  when  he  was  immersed  in  water  up  to  his  throat,  his  hair  twisted  in 
a braid.  They  sang  in  honour  of  him  whatever  they  thought  would  be  . 
agreeable  to  that  most  eminent  of  Brahmanas.  Ashtavakra  at  last 
said  to  them  : — “I  am  well  pleased  with  you,  illustrious  damsels;  ask 
of  me,  whatever  you  wish  and  I will  give  it  however  difficult  it 
may  be  of  attainment.”  Thereupon  all  these  nymphs,  Rambha 
Tillottama and  others  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  replied;— “It  is  enough 
for  us  that  thou  art  pleased,  what  else  need  we  say,  O Brahman  ?” 
But  some  amongst  them  said  “If  you  are  indeed  pleased  with  us, 
O illustrious,  sire,  thou  grant  us  a husband,  the  best  of  men  and  sove- 
reign of  Brahmanas.”  Thereupon  saying  "so  be  it,”  Ashtavakra 
came  up  from  the  waters*  When  the  nymphs  observed  him  coming 


AGNI  PURANAM 


thing  unto  Yudhisthira  and  his  other  brothers,  who  were  the 
protecters  of  men  at  that  time,  saying  “ I have  the  same  bow, 
the  same  weapons,  the  same  car  and  the  same  horses.  But 
they,  are  all  useless  in  the  absence  of  Krishna  as  is  a gift 
given  to  one. born  in  an  inferior  family.” 

Hearing  it  and  placing  Parikshit  on  the  throne  the 
intelligent  Dharmaraja  with  Draupadi  and  his  brothers  set 
out  for  final  pface,  perceiving  the  instability  of  the  world  and 
reciting  the  (name  of)  Hari  eight  hundred  times  (9 — 12). 
On  the  great  road  dropped  down  Draupadi  with  Sahadeva 
and  Nnkula,  Phalguna,  Bhima  and  the  king  were  filled  with 
grief  (13).  Then  seated  on  a car  brought  by  Indra,  he  with 
his  younger  brothers,  reached  the  celestial  region.  And 
beholding  Duryodhana  and  others  as  well  as  Vasudeva  he 
was  filled  with  delight,  f have  thus  described  Bharata  unto 
thee.  He  who  reads  it  repairs  to  heaven  (14). 


out  of  the  water  and  saw  that  he  was  very  ugly  and  crooked  in  eight 
places  they  could  not  restrain  their  merriment  and  laughed  aloud.  The 
Muni  was  very  angry  and  imprecated  them  with  a curse,  saying  : — 
“Since  you  have  been  so  impertinent  as  to  laugh  at  my  deformity,  I 
denounce  upon  you  this  curse  ; through  the  favour  I have  shown  unto 
you,  you  shall  obtain  the  first  of  males  for  your  husband ; and  on 
account  of  my  curse,  you  shall  afterwards  fall  into  the  hands  of 
thieves. ; ' ' , 'Q.. :•  ■ ; 


CHAPTER  XVL 


■ jAlgni  said  I will  now  describe  the  Buddha*  incar- 
nation, by  reading  and  hearing  of  which  one  acquires  great 
profit.  Formerly  in  the  war  between  gods  aiyi  demons  the 

* A general  name  for  the  deified  teachers  of  the  Buddha  sect 
amongst  whom  numerous  Buddhas  are  reckoned.  The  name  is  here 
especially  applied  to  the  ninth  incarnation  of  Vishnu.  He  was  bom  at 
Kavilavastu  at  the  foot  of  >the  Nepal  a mountain.  His  father  was 
Suddhodana  who  was  a king  and  his  mother  was  Mayadevi.  The 
following  sunmary  of  his  life  and  work  taken  from  a well-known  work 
from  the  4th  to  the  20th  year. 

4th year,  Goutama  admitted  a rope-dancer  to  the  Order  and  lived 
in  Mahabana. 

$th year.  He  went  to  Kapilavastu  to  see  his  father  who  was  dying. 
After  the  cremation  he  returned  to  Mahabana  followed  by  his  step- 
mother and  his  wife,  who  were  accompanied  by  many  ladies.  They 
all  earnestly  asked  him  to  be  admitted  to  the  Order,  but  the  Buddha 
was  not  willing  to  admit  them  to  the  Order,  but  at  last  yielded  to  the 
earnest  advocacy  of  Anaqjda.  He  then  retired  to  a hill  near  Allahabad. 

6th year,  Goutam  returned  to  Rajgriha  and  admitted  Kshama,  the 
queen  of  Bimhasura  to  the  Order.  One  of  his  disciples  displayed 
miracles,  but  the  Buddha  strictly  ordered  that  no  miracles  should  be 
displayed  and  he  particularly  enjoined  that  miracles  had  nothing  to  do 
with  religion. 

jth year.  His  opponets  induced  a woman,  named  Chincha,  to 
accuse  him  of  a breach  of  chastity,  but  her  deceipt  was  exposed. 

8th  year.  He  passed  on  a bilinear  Kapilavastu,  made  some  new 
converts  and  returned  to  KosumBi* 

gth  year.  A great  dissension  broke  out  in  the  Order.  The  Buddha 
tried  in  vain  to  establish,  peace  and  amity.  At  last  being  disgusted,  he 
left  his  disciples  and  went  alone  to  the  forest  of  Pa  Uyaka . 

10  year . The  neighbouring  villagers  built  him  a hut,  where  he 
spent  the  rainy  season.  Here  the  refractory  Buddhist  monks  found 
him  out  and  asked  his  pardon*,'  They  were  forgiven  and  well  received. 
With  his  repentant  disciples  he  went  to  Sramsti  and  thence  to  Rajgriha. 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


former  were  defeated  by  the  latter.  S. 
os  l1*  they  sought  refuge  with  Isvvara 


1 1 year*  He  made  some  more  important  converts  and  passed  his 
time  in  Magadha  and  Rosa  la* 

1 2th year.  He  made  his  longest  journey,  going  as  far  as  Mantala 
and  returning  via  Benares,  preaching  in  all  the  places  he  visited. 

13th  year,  ye  spent  the  year  in  Chaliya  and  Sravasti  in  delivering 
discourses* 

14th year.  He  remained  in  Sravasti , where  he  delivered  a discourse 
to  his  son  Rahula . He  then  travelled  to  Kapil  avast  it, 

15th  year.  The  whole  of  the  year  he  remained  in  the  wood  outside 
Kapilavastu , where  he  addressed  a discourse  to  his  cousin  Mohanama , 
who  had  succeeded  his  father  on  the  throne  of  Kapilavastu . He 
delivered  also  a discourse  on  the  superiority  of  righteousness  to  alms- 
giving. 

1 6th  year.  This  year  was  spent  at  a place  called  Alawi. 

ryth year.  He  went  to  Rajgriha  and  passed  the  rainy  season  there. 
He  preached  a sermon  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  Srimati}  a 
courtezan.  He  refused  to  preach  to  a hungry  man  until  he  had  been 
well-fed. 

iS  year.  He  went  to  Chaliya , where  he  instructed  a weaver  who 
accidentally  killed  his  daughter.  After  passing  $the  rainy  season  there 
he  returned  to  Rajgriha. 

igth  year,  Goutam  travelled  through  Magadha  preaching  in  all 
the  villages.  On  one  occasion  finding  a deer  caught  in  a snare,  he 
released  it  and  fed  it.  The  angry  hunter  tried  to  kill  him,  but  he 
preached  to  him,  who  with  all  his  family  became  his  disciples. 

20 year.  He  spent  the  year  in  pYeaching  in  villages  and  towns.  In 
the  forest  of  Chaliya  he  succeeded  in  overcoming  by  kindness  a notorious 
robber  named  Angbjimala,  whom  he  persuaded  to  become  a Buddhist 
Monk. 

From  the  21st  year  to  the  45th  year  of  his  Buddha-hood  we  know 
almost  nothing  of  his  mission  works.  Perhaps  one  year  was  so  much 
alike  of  the  other,  that  ijds  chroniclers  did  find  nothing  to  narrate. 

The  Summum  bomirk » according  to  Buddha  of  a mart’s  life,  is  to 
attain  Nirvana , and  tHds  every  man  can  acquire  by  spiritual  exercises. 
He  laid  down  the  folio wiifeTaws  for  his  monks. 

What  is  that  Law  ^ 'lit  is  (1)  the  four  Earnest  Meditations  (2)  the 
four  Great  Efforts  (3)  tin  _ our  Roads  to  Saint  ship  (4)  the  five  Moral 


agni  puranam. 


Infatuation  he  was  born  as  fch$  son  of 
He  infatuated  the  Daily  as  and  made  them 


powers  (5)  the  seven  kinds  of  Wisdom , and  (6)  the 
Path”  (Rh.  D.  Buddhist  Suttas,  pp.  61-63.) 

This  is  the  sun  and  substance-— a short  summary, 

of  the  Buddha.  We  shall  now  try  to  explain  ea 
docrines. 

i*  The  four  Earnest  Meditations  are  meditation, 

(a)  On  the  impurity  of  the  body. 

(h)  On  the  evils  which  arise  from  sensation. 

(c)  On  the  impermanence  of  ideas. 

(dj  On  the  conditions  of  existence. 

The  four  Great  Efforts  are  the  efforts. 

(a)  To  prevent  bad  qualities  from  arising. 

(b)  To  put  away  bad  qualities  which  have  arisen, 

(c)  To  produce  goodness  not  previously  existing. 
/>n.  To  increase  srondness  when  it  does  exist. 


four  means  by  which  it  is 


AGW1  PURANAM. 


73 


the  religion  of  the  Veda,  They  then  became 
of  Buddha  and  induced  others  to  forsake  Vedic 


(b)  Right  Alms. 

( cj  Right  Speech. 

(d)  Right  Actions.  . 

((?)■  Right  Means  of  livelihood. 

(f)  Right  Endeavour. 

(g)  Right  Mindfulness. 

( h)  Right  Meditation. 

The  following  general  rules  of  a householder’s  duties  are  most 
beautiful. 

General  Duties. 


Parents  and  Children. 

Parents  should  — 

1.  Restrain  their  children  from  vice. 

2.  Train  them  in  virtue. 

3.  Have  them  taught  arts  and  science. 

4.  Provide  them  with  suitable  husbands,  or  wives. 

5.  Give  them  their  inheritance. 

The  child  should  say  : — 

1.  I will  support  them  who  supported  me. 

2.  I will  perform  family  duties  incumbent  on  them. 

3.  I will  guard  their  property. 

4.  I will  make  myself  worthy  to  be  their  heir. 

5.  When  they  are  gone,  I will  honour  their  memory. 

Pupils  and  Teachers, 

The  pupils  should  honour  their  teachers * 

I.  By  rising  in  their  presence, 

,2,  By  ministering  to  them. 

3,  By  obeying  them, 

4,  By  supplying  their -wants.  ■ 

5,  ■ By  attention  to  instruction. 

The  teacher  shuold  show  his  affection  to  his  pupils—* 

1.  By  training  them  in  all  that  is  good.  v j T 7. 

2.  By  teaching  them  to  hold  knowledge  fast. 

3.  By  instruction  in  science  and  lore. 

4.  By  speaking  well  to  them,  to  their  friends  and  co  mpanions, 

5.  By  guarding  them  from  danger. 


74  AGNI  PURANAM. 

religion  (3>  He  became  Arhata*  and  afterwards  made 
others  Arhatas.  Divorced  from  Vedic  religion  they  became 
all  Pashandinast  (4)-  They  committed  (sinful)  deeds  capable 
of  taking  one  to  bell  and  received  (gifts)  from  degraded 
persons.0  At  the  end  of  Kali  yuga  there  will  be  mixed  castes 
(e)  And  there  will  flourish  robbers  having  no  character.  The 
Veda  of  Vajasaneya,  proved  by  its  fifteen  benches,  will  be 
in  existence  (6).  Under  the  cover  of  religion  they  w.ll 
preach  irreligion.  And  the  Mlechhas  in  the  guise  of  kings 
will  devour  men  (7).  Armed  with  a coat  of  mail  and 
weapons,  Vishnuyasha's  son  Kalld,  with  Jajnavalka  as  his 
priest,  will  extirpate  the  Mlechhas,  establish  the  order  and 
respective  dignity  of  the  four  Varnas  and  various  AshramasJ 
and  lead  people  to  the  path  of  pure  religion  (8—9).  Then 
having  renounced  the  form  of  Kalki  Hari  will  return  to 


Husband  and  Wife. 

dThe  husband  should  cherish  his  wife. 

1.  By  treating  her  with  respect. 

2.  By  treating  her  with  kindness. 

3.  By  being  faithful  to  her. 

4.  By  causing  her  to  be  honored  by  others. 

5.  By  giving  her  suitable  ornaments  and  clothes. 

The  wife  should  show  her  affection  for  her  husband 

1 . By  doing  her  household  works  aright. 

2.  By  being  hospitable  to  kinsmen  and  friends. 

3.  By  being  a chaste  and  faithful  wife. 

4.  By  being  a thrifty  housekeeper. 

5.  By  showing  skill  and  diligence  in  all  she  has  to  do. 

* Enlightened.  A general  term  applied  to' the  chief  saints  of  the 
Buddha  sect.  They  are  ranked  by  them  as  superior  to  the  gods  of 
other  sects. , 

f Irreligious  people.  : 

% A religious  order  of  which  there  are  four  kinds  referable  to  the 
different  periods  of  life;  ist  that  of  the  student  or  Brahmacharin.  2 
that  of  the  house-holder  or  Grihasta  j $ that  of  the  anchorite  or 
Vanabrastha ; 4th  that  of  the  beggar  or  Vikshu. 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


75 


heaven.  ^ Thereupon  Kritayuga  will  come  into  existence  as 
before  (to).  Thus  in  all  the  Kalpas  and  Manwantaras  the 
various  Varnas  and  Asramas  are? established  in  their  duties 
(if).  There  are  numerous  incarnations  past  and  future. 
The  pure  man,  born  in  a good  family,  who  hears  of  or  reads 
the  ten  incarnations  of  Vishnu,  having  acquired  all  desired 
for  objects,  attains  to  heaven.  It  is  Hari  who  makes  all 
arrangements  bf  virtue  and  vice,  and  it  is  Hari,  the  cause  of 
creation  &c,  who  incarnates  himself  (12 — 13). 


CHAPTER,  XVII 


JrLCNI  said  : — Hear,  I will  now,  describe  Vishnu’s  sport 
of  the  creation*  of  the  universe  and  others.  He  is  the  author 
of  the  creation  and  the  beginning  of  the  universe  and 
creation  and  is  with  and  without  Gunasf  (l).  Brahma  is  un- 


a The  Hindu  philosophers  consider  the  work  of  creation  and  disso- 
lution as  merely  a sport  of  the  Lord. 

b The  three  gunas  or  the  universal  tendencies  of  Nature  farm  a 
most  important  factor  in  the  metaphysical  system  of  the  Hindus.  The 
great  first  cause  is  the  Infinite,  Incomprehensibly  Self-existing  Being 
from  whom  all  spiritual  and  material  matter  is  derived  and  from  whom 
proceeds  the  universe ; being  immaterial  he  is  above  corruption  ; being 
invisible  he  can  have  no  form  or  quality  ; but  what  we  behold  is  his 
works.  The  entire  universe,  consisting  of  animate  and  inanimate 
creations,  has  emerged  out  of  God  and  into  Him,  it  will,  in  course  of 
time,  subside.  He  is  the  Absolute  Reality  and  all  things,  present  to 
our  consciousness,  are  its  phenomena  or  shows.  The  God  is  the 
neumenon  and  the  universe  before  us  is  the  phenomenon.  The  Abso- 
lute Real  God  manifests  Himself  as  related  for  creating  the  universe 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


manifest,  and  existent.  In  the  beginning  there  was  no^sky,  no 
day  or  night.  Entering  into  Prakriti  (nature)  and  Purusha 


which  is  called  His  Maya.  As  the  beautiful  luminary  the  sun  casts  its 
rays  of  light  upon  millions  of  pools  of  water  and  represents  himself  at 
the  same  moment  on  each  of  them,  so  are  our  souls  the  manifestations  of 
the  Divine  Being,  The  creating  power  or  energy  of  God  is  Prakriti 
or  Nature — the  material  cause  of  the  universe.  It  is  blipd  and  purpose- 
less, without  form  or  parts,  is  eternal,  material,  universal,  forming  for 
itself  yet  undeveloped  being  from  which  proceeds  the  visible  world. 

In  this  creative  energy  of  God,  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  we 
find,  on  an  analysis,  three  universal  tendencies  which  are  named  by  the 
Rishis  the  three  Ganas . The  action  of  these  universal  tendencies  is  not 
only  visible  in  the  nature  of  men,  but  it  is  equally  so  in  the  lower  order 
of  animate  beings  as  well  as  in  the  inanimate  creation.  We  find  three 
universal  tendencies  or  forces  acting  on  the  face  of  the  creation.  There 
is  the  chaotic  or  disorganising  tendency  which  leads  everything  into 
confusion,  there  is  the  isolating  tendency,  by  which  every  object  tries 
to  secure  an  individual  position  of  its  own  and  there  is  the  harmonizing 
tendency  by  which  every  object  gravitates  to  a centre  in  creation  and 
which  tries  to  bring  all  objects  of  creation  into  one  universal  order. 
Thus  in  the  creation  there  is  one  disorganising  tendency,  one  isolating 
tendency  and  one  organizing  tendency.  These  three  universal  tenden- 
cies are  inherent  in  creation,  both  animate  and  inanimate  and  every 
form  of  growth  is  dependent  upon  the  working  of  these  tendencies. 
They  are  not  the  materials  or  ingredients  which  form  all  the  objects  of 
Nature  but  the  laws  that  regulate  their  creation — the  inherent  energies 
or  tendencies.  The  first  is  called  the  Tama  gnna  or  the  disorganizing 
tendency  or  the  energy  that  brings  on  confusion  in  the  work  of  creation 
and  puts  obstacles  in  the  way  of  order  or  harmony.  The  second  is 
called  Raja-gima  or  isolating  tendency — or  the  inherent  energy  by  | 
which  every  object,  in  nature,  struggles  to  secure  its  own  independence 
and  to  isolate  itself  from  the  rest.  The  third  is  the  Sathva-gnna  or  the 
tendency  that  tries  to  establish  universal  order,  —the  energy  that  tries 
to  evercome  confusion  and  isolating  tendencies  and  bring  every  thing 
into  the  centre  of  a universal  order.  Because  the  creative  energy  of  the 
God  is  invested  with  these  three  qualities  or  universal  tendencies  there-  Si 
fore  every  object  In  the  creation  partakes  of  its  nature.  Thus  the  ' 
harmonizing  or  organizing  tendency  is  called  the  Safhva-guna  \ the  ‘i 
isolating  tendency  is  called  the  Raja-gtma , and  the  disorganizing 


A-GN1  PURANAM. 


tendency  is  called  the  Tama-guna.  These  three  universal  tendencies, 
energies  or  qualities  regulate  the  entire  creation, 

■ ■■  The' Hindu ''■■Rish'is  "have  always  meditated  on  their  Brahnyp  or 
Supreme  Deity  in  His  two  aspects,  namely  Saguna  or  immanent  and 
Nirguna  or  transcendent.  The  entire  universe  is  resolvable  into  two 
factors,  Nature  and  God  ; by  the  former  may  be  understood  the 
“totality  of  perceptible  phenomena,  and  by  the  latter  the  eternal  ground 
or  cause  whose  essence  they  express.”  God  is  Himself  the  Real 
Absolute,  and  Nature  is  His  objective  manifestation.  He  is  the  eternal 
abiding  ground,  and  Nature  is  the  transient  phenomenon,  God  is 
what  is  and  Nature  is  what  appears.  Thus  in  His  true,  real  nature  God 
is  transcendent  : He  is  immanent  when  He  manifests  himself  in  Nature 
The  relation  of  God  with  the  objective  worl  is  governed  by  three  Gunas 
or  qualities.  These  Gunas  are  the  qualities  for  primary  elements 
which  constitute  the  entire  objective  world.  These  three  principles 
are  essential  ingredients  of  which  every  object  of  Nature,  from  a man  to 
an  insect,  from  a mountain  to  a grass,  is  formed.  These  are  the  three 
universal  tendencies,  which  govern  the  relation  of  the  universe  with  the 
God,  the  relation  of  the  object  with  the  subject.  These  are  the  forms 
in  which  the  Absolute  Reality  manifests  itself*  These  three  Gunas  are 
Sattwa  or  the  principle  of  organisation,  Rajas  or  the  principles  of  self- 
attraction and  Tamas  or  the  principle  of  disorganisation.  When  God 
manifests  Himself  in  Nature  He  appears  in  these  forms  as  such  as 
such  He  is  called  immanent  or  Saguna . When  God  is  in  Nature,  when 
the  objective  world  is  viewed  in  its  relation  to,  and  dependence  on  its 
author  He  is  Saguna . Immanency  is  attributable  to  God  only  when 
He  manifests  Himself  In  Nature,  only  when  the  relation  of  the  object 
with  the  subject  is  taken  into  consideration.  The  phenomena  of  Nature 
are  objects  which  are  not  eternal.  They  are  not  permanent  entities, 
but  undergo  changes.  And  so  they  must  be  related  to  an  Eternal 
Subject,  an  abiding  ground  that  remains  unchanged  in  the  midst  of 
changes.  No  one  can  help  thinking  of  something  behind  what  he  sees 
or  feels.  The  colour,  the  form,  the  sound  are  not  floating  attributes, — 
they  are  attached  undoubtedly  to  a permanent  ground.  This  Eternal 
Essence  from  which  all  objects  of  Nature  proceed,  this  permanent 
abiding  ground  which  sends  out  all  phenomena  of  Nature,  this  Abso- 
lute Reality  which  suffers  no  changes,  is  the  Nirguna  Brahma  of  the 
Hindu  Rishis.  God  is  transcendent  as  the  absolute  Reality — the  Abso- 
lute Truth,  Intelligence  and  Bliss — sat,  chit,  an andam*  This  is  the 
true  Nature  of  God  that  has  been  so  often  described  in  glowing  terms 
by  the  Rishis  of  the  Upanishads. 


AGNI  PURANAM 


The  Sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Hindus  speak  of  God  as  both  Saguna 
and  Nirguna  as  manifesting  in  Nature  and  tagain  transcending  the 
object-]  of  Nature — as  partaking  of  qualities  or  Gunas  of  Nature  and 
again  transcending  them.  Isa-Upanishad  it  is  said  : — 


“It  (Brahman)  moves  but  (truly)  does  not  move  : it  is  neap,  it  is  also 
distant.  It  is  inside  all  this,  and  outside  all  this.” 

Similarly  many  other  Sruti  texts  clearly  prove  that  the  Rishis  of  the 
Upanishadas  contemplated  upon  the  Divine  Being  both  as  Sagiina  and 
Nirguna.  The  former  aspect  of  the  Divine  Nature  is  transitory,  subject 
to  change,  relative  and  dependent,  and  while  the  latter  is  essential, 
* absolute  and  eternal.  The  Saguna  aspect  is  limited  in  time  and  space 
and  Nirguna  transcends  all  such  limitations.  The  Saguna  is  ever 
changing  and  whirling,  the  Nirguna  is  enduring,  central,  regulative 
and  reposing  eternally  in  the  midst  'of  changes.  The  Saguna  is  acci- 
dental, and  Nirguna  'is  essential.  The  Saguna  aspect  is  finite,  and 
Nirguna  is  infinite.  The  Saguna  excludes  Nirguna , but  Nirguna  com- 
prehends Saguna . The  finite  can  not  contain  the  infinite,  but  infinite 
' can  comprehend  the  finite. 

It  is  for  this  reason  the  Rishis  of  the  Upanishada  hold  that  the  Nir 
guna  describes  the  nature  of  God  in  its  absolute  truth.  Thus  the  con  - 
ception  of  Nirguna  is  the  conception  of  the  True  and  Absolute  Divine 
Being.  The  true  nature  of  God;  according  to  the  Rishis,  is  Nirguna , it 
is  only  when  His  powers  are  alluded  to  in  His  manifestation  in  the  object 
of  Nature  that  He  is  called  Saguna.  They  have  therefore  given  a de- 
cided preference  to  the  worship  of  Nirguna , though  often  times  their 
disciples  are  exhorted  to  contemplate  on  the  Saguna  aspect  of  the  Divine 
Being.  It  is  indeed,  very  difficult  to  conceive  One,  Absolute,  Infinite 
Being — but  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  conceive  Him  in  Nature,  to  con- 
template Him  as  the  author  of  the  objective  world  and  exercising  His 
power  in  Its  preservation  and  destruction.  The  latter,  though  practically 
infinite  is  really  speaking  relative  and  finite.  The  Nirguna  Indicates  the 
the  tr«e  nature  of  the  Divine  Being  while  Saguna  describes  His  power 
which  though  infinite  in  nature  depends  upon  time  and  space  for  Its 
manifestation.  From  the  contemplation  of  the  Saguna  aspect  of 
•God -one ' can,;  arrive  at  that  of  the  Nirguna - — which  is  the  ultimate 
goal  of  the  spiritual  exercises  of  a worshipper.  Nirguna  or  absolute 
attributes  of  God  include  the  Saguna  or  relative  attributes*  The  only 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


(soul)  Vishnu  agitated  them  (2),*  In  the  beginning t>f  the 
creation  first  came  out  the  principle  of  Mahat  (greatness) 
and  then  that  of  Ahakaraf  (egoism)  and  then  the  Vaikarika, 


dfference  between  them  is  that  the  former  describes  the  true  Nature 
of  the  Divine  Being,  and  the  latter  how  He  manifests  Himself  in 
Nature  and  governs  the  creation.  Though  the  first  stage  in  a man’s 
religious  cukure  is  the  contemplation  of  the  Saguna  aspects,  the 
ultimate,  goal  howeve,  is  that  oiNirguna. 

Kena  Sruti  thus  describes  Him  : — 

“ He  is  the  ear  of  ears,  mind  of  minds,  words,  prana  of  pranas,  and 
eye  of  eyes, 

*'  People  cannot  conceive  Him  in  their  mind,  but  He  knows  it. 
Know  Him  as  Brahma. 

“ Know  him  as  Brahma  whom  people  cannot  see  with  their  eyes,  but 
through  whose  power  they  see  all  objects  of  vision/’ 

“ He  is  not  to  be  seen  by  eyes,  not  to  be  described  by  words,  not  to 
be  conceived  in  mind.  We  do  not  know  Him.  Know  Him  as  Brahma 
who  is  indescribable  in  words,  but  who  whose  power)  gives  utter- 
ance to  words. 

* According  to  Sankhya  the  creation  is  effected  by  the  involuntary 
union  of  soul  and  nature.  Others  hold  that  Brahma  brings  about  this 
union  for  a mere  sport. 

f The  twenty-five  principles  of  Sankhya’s  system  are  (first)  Prakriti 
or  Pradhana : the  universal  and  material  cause ; the  root  or  the  other 
plastic  origin  of  all.  It  is  eternal  productive  but  not  produced. 

2.  Intelligence  otherwise  called  Mahat  or  Buddhi.  This  is  the  first 
production  of  nature  and  the  intellectual  .principle. 

5.  Ahankara  or  the  consciousness  of  ego  or  I am.  This  is  produced 
by  intellectual  principle, 

4 — 8.  Five  Tanamatras  or. subtile  particles  or  atoms  perceptible  to 
beings  of  a superior  order,  but  unapprehended  by  the  grosser  senses  of 
mankind.  These  are  the  production  of  the  consciousness  of  ego. 

9 — 13.  Five  instruments  of  sensation,  namely*  the  eye,  the  ear,  the 
nose,  the  tongue  the  skin. 

14 — The  five  instruments  of  acti#n,  namely,  the  organ  of  speech, 
the  hands,  the  feet,  the  organ  of  excretion  and  the  organ  of  generation. 

19.  Mind,  serving  both  for  sense  and  action. 

20—24,  Five  elements  produced  from  |the  five  elemental  particles, 
namely,  (1)  ether,  or  the  vehicle  of  sound ; it  has  the  property  of 


So 


AGNI.  PUR  AM  AM* 


Taijasa  and  Tamasa  creations  (3).*  From  Ahahkara 
emanated  Akasha  (ether)  the  vehicle  of  sound,  air  sensible  to 
hearing1  and  fire  sensible  to  sight*  Taste  is  the  elementary 
particle  of  water  and  smell  is  that  of  earth.  From  Ahankara 
and  the  quality  of  Tamas  emanate  luminous  bodies  and  organs 
[of  sense  and  action]  (4 — 5).  The  ten-fold  d evas  (celes- 
tials are  the  (first)  transition  from  the  natural  or  the  quiescent 
condition  of  the  soul.  Manas  or  mind  is  the  eleventh  organ. 
Then  came  into  existence  the  self-sprung  Lord  desirous  of 
creating  various  creatures  (6).  He  first  created  water  and  in 
it  seeds.  Waters  are  called  Nara  for  they  are  the  creation  of 
Nara  (the  spirit  of  God)*  and  since  they  were  his  first  Ayana 
or  place  of  motion,  he  hence  is  named  Narayana  or  moving 
on  the  waters.  The  egg  engendered  in  the  water  was  gold- 
hued.  In  it  Brahma  himself  was  horn  and  therefore  the 
Sruti  reveals  him  to  us  Swayamhhu  or  self-horn.  Having 
lived  there  for  one  full  year  the  Lord  Hiranyagarbha 
sundered  that  egg  into  twain,  one  forming  heaven  and 
another  earth.  And  between  these  two  fragments  the  Lord 
created  the  sky  (7  — 10).  The  ten  quarters  upheld  the  earth 
when  it  was  submerged  under  water.  There  Prajapati, 
desirous  of  creating  created  time,  mind,  speech,  desire,  anger 
and  attachment  and  their  counterparts.  He  created  thunder 

audible  ness  ; (2)  air,  sensible  to  hearing  and  touch  ; (3)  fire,  sensible  to 
hearing,  touch  and  sight ; (4)  water,  sensible  to  hearing,  touch,  sight, 
taste  ; (5)  earth  sensible  to  hearing,  touch,  sight,  test  and  smell. 

25.  Soul  termed  Purusa  or  Atman  which  is  neither  produced  nor 
productive.  It  is  multitudinous,  individual,  sensitive,  eternal,  un- 
alterable, and  immaterial.  These  twenty-five  principles  are  thus 
contrasted  in  Karika  u Nature,  root  of  all,  is  no  production,  Seven 
principles,  the  great  or  intellectual  one  etc,,  are  productions  and 
productive;  sixteen  are  productions  (unproductive).  Soul  is  neither  a 
production  nor  productive.1’ 

* Vaikavika  is  the  first  creation  which  is  the  outcome  of  the  first 
transition  from  the  natural  or  the  queiscent  condition  of  soul.  Taijasa 
or  luminous  bodies  Tamasa  ; is  the  creation  of  the  quality  of  ignorance  1 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


and  cltjud  from  lightning,  rain-bow  and  birds  from  red 
colour.  First  of  all  he  created  Parjanya  (Indra)  and  then 
from  his  mouth  the  Rile,  Saman  and  Yayush.  For  complet- 
ing sacrifice  [he  created]  Saddhyas*  who  propitiated  the 
Devas,  the  most  exalted  order  of  creation  with  sacrifices. 
[He  then  created]  Sanatkumar  from  his  arm  and  Rudra  from 
his  anger.  [He  then  created]  Marichi,  Atri,  Anginas, 
Pulastya,  PuTalia,  Kratu  and  Vashistha.  They  were  regarded 
as  the  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma.  0 foremost  [of  sages] 
these  seven  procreated  many  dreadful  offspring.  Having 
divided  his  own  body  he  became  male  with  one  half  and 
female  with  another.  Brahma  then  procreated  progeny  on 
her  (the  female  half)  (n — 16). 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


-TxGNt  said  -Priyavrata  and  Uttanaplda  were  the  two 
sons  of  Manu  Sw&yambimva  who  begat  them  on  the  maiden 
Shatarapaf  endued  with  asceticism.  The  Lord  Paramount 
[UuSnapada]  begat  on  Kardama’s  wife  KamyaJ  [two 
daughters]  Samrat  and  Kukshi.  Utt&napada  begat  on 
Suruchi§  a son  [by  name]  Uttama  (1—2).  He  begat 'on 
Suniti  a son  [by  name]  Dhruva.  O Muni,  for  establishing 
bis  fame  Dhruva  carried  on  austerities  for  three  thousand 
celestial  years  (3).  Propitiated  with  him  Hari  conferred 


.82 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


on  him  a fixed  station  above  all  constellations.* * * §  Beholding 
his  advancement  Ushanaf  recited  the  [following]  verses:— 
“ Oh  ! I have  heard  of  the  wonderful  ascetic  powers  of  this 
Dhruva,  placing  whom  before  the  seven  RishisJ  are  now 
situate  (5). 

Dhruva  begaP’on  his  wife  Shambhu  two  sons  Shisthi  and 
Bhavva,  And  Shisthi  begat  on  Suchaya  five  sinless  sons  (6), 
(viz)  Ripu,  Ripunjaya,  Vipra,  Vrikala  and  Vrikatejasam. 
Ripu  begat  upon  Vrihatee  the  highly  effulgent  Chakshusa 
who  again  begat  Maun  Chakshusa  on  Pushkarini  of  the  face 
of  Varuna.  Manu  begat  on  Nadvala  ten  most  excellent  sons 
(7— -8)— Uru,  Puru,  Satadumaya,  Tapaswi,  Satyavak,  Knvi, 
Agnistoma,  Atiratra,  Sudum nya,  and  Abhimanyu  (9).  Urn 
begat  on  his  wife  Agneyi  six  highly  effulgent  sons,  Anga, 
Sumanas,  Svati,  Kratu,  Angiras  and  Gaya§  (9 — 10).  And 
Anga  begat  on  Suneethi  one  son  [named]  Vena.  Given  to 
sinning  and  negligent  to  protect  [his  subjects]  he  was  slain 
by  the  Rishis  with  Kuga  reeds  (it).  But  with  a view  to 
multiply  his  progeny  the  Rishis  rubbed  his  right  hand. ]j 
And  from  the  rubbing  of  Vena’s  hand  sprang  the  king 


* An  exhaustive  account  of  Dhruva 's  translation  to  stellar  regions 
occurs  in  Vishnupuranam.  i(  1 do  confer  upon  thee,  O Dhruva  a 
station  which  is  above  those  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  stars,  Mercury,  Venus, 
Saturn  and  all  other  constellations  ; above  the  regions  of  seven  Rishis 
and  the  deties  who  traverse  the  universe’*.  . ' 

f The  preceptor  of  Daityas, 

J The  seven  sages,  Marichi,  Atri,  Angiras,  Puiastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu 
and  Vasishtha  ; here  the  constellation  called  Ursa  Major,  the  seven  stars 
of  which  are  said  to  be  the  seven  sages  mentioned  above. 

§ In  Vishnupuranam  the  name  Sim  occurs  for  Gaya, 

|j  A complete  account  of  Vena’s  oppressions  and  haughtiness  occurs 
in  Vishnupuran.  He  oppressed  his  subjects  and  grew  so  haughty  that  he 
did  not  allow  the  sages  even  to  perform  a sacrifice  in  honor  of  Hark 
For  this  insolence  the  Rishis  killed  him.  So  that  be  might  not  die  son* 
less  and  the  kingdom  might  not  suffer  from  the  absence  of  a king  they 
rubbed  Vena’s  right  hand'1  from  which  sprang  the  popular  king  Prtehtb 


A.GNf  PURANAM. 


%$ 


Pritliu  £12).  Seeing  him  the  Rishis  said  1 <f  This  highly 
effulgent  king  will  satisfy  his  subjects  and  acquire  great 
fame  (13).  Armed  with  a bow  and  coat  of  mail  Vena's  son 
Prithu,  the  predecessor  of  the  Kshatryas,  protected  his 
subjects  as  if  consuming  all  with  his  innate  lustre  (14).  He 
was  the  first  of  the  lords  of  the  earth  who  were  sprinkled 
with  water  on  the  occasion  of  RSjasuya  sacrificed  From 
that  ceremony  were  born  the  clever  Sutaf  and  MagadhaJ 
(15).  The  two  heroes  composed  verses  in  his  praise.  He 
obtained  the  appellation  of  Raja  by  pleasing  his  subjects. 
With  celestials,  Munis,  Gandharvas  (celestial  musicians), 
Apsaras,  (Nymphs)  Pitris,§  Danavas,  serpents,  reptiles  and 
mountainous  subjects  he  milched  the  earth  for  corns  and  for 
preserving  the  lives  of  his  subjects.  Milched  Vasundhara]] 
poured  desired-for  milk  into  every  vessel  with  which  they 
sustained  themselves  (16— -1 8). 

Prithu  had  two  pious  sons  Antardhana  and  Pali.  And 
Antardhana  begat  on  Shikhandini  a son  named  Havirdhana 
(19).  And  Havirdhana  again  begat  on  Dhishana  six  sons, 


* v.  He  was  the  first  of  all  the  Lords  Paramount  of  the  world, 

f The  founder  of  the  race  of  bards  whose  duty  was  to  compose 
verses  about  the  families  of  great  kings  and  sing  their  praises. 

$ The  first  born  of  the  panegyrists — a class  of  men  who  flourished  in 
every  royal  court  of  ancient  India. 

§ Departed  manes  : they  are  a class  of  inferior  deities. 

|1  The  goddess  Earth.  A beautiful  story  about  Prithu’s  attack  of 
Earth  on  behalf  of  his  subjects  occurs  in  Vishnu  Puranam.  Once  the 
country  suffered  from  famine  and  draught.  Petitioned  by  the  Rishis 
Prithu  got  enraged  and  pursued  the  Earth  with  uplifted  arrows.  She 
fled  from  one  place  to  another  and  at  last  helplessly  agreed  to  give  what 
Prithu  wanted.  She  asked  him  to  give  her  a calf  and  level  the  surface 
of  the  earth.  She  then  gave  milk  which  is  the  root  of  all  vegetation. 
This  story  has  a great  moral  value.  It  shows  that  Prithu  was  the  first- 
king  who  levelled  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  introduced  cultivation. 
From  him  the  Earth  received  the  name  of  Prithim  i* * * §st  the  daughter  of 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


84 

PrSchinavarhis,  Shukra,  Gaya,  Krishna,  Vreya  and  Ajina  (20). 
[He  was  named  Prlchinavarhis]  on  account  of  his  placing 
upon  the  earth  at  the  time  of  his  prayer  the  sacred  grass 
pointing  to  the  east.  The  Lord  Prachinavarhis  was  a mighty 
king  and  Patriarch  (21),  Prachinavarhis  begat  on  Savarna, 
the  daughter  of  Samudra  (the  ocean-god)  ten  sons  who  were 
all  named  Prachetas  and  well  skilled  in  archery  (22),  They 
all  practised  the  same  religious  austerities  and  remained 
immersed  in  the  bed  of  the  deep  for  ten  thousand  years  (23), 

Having  obtaianed  the  dignity  of  patriarchs  and  pleased 
Vishnu  they  came  out,  [found]  the  sky  overspread  with  trees 
and  burnt  them  down  (24).  Beholding  the  trees  destroyed 
by  the  fire  and  wind  produced  from  their  mouths  Soma,  the 
kins;  [of  plants]  approached  those  patriarchs  and  said  125), 

“ Renounce  your  grief,  I will  confer  on  you  this  most 
excellent  maiden  M&risha*  begotten  by  the  ascetic  sage 
Kan du  on  (the  nymph)  Plamocha  and  [nourished)  by  me. 
Cognizant  of  the  future  I created  this  wife  for  you  capable 
of  multiplying  your  family.  She  will  give  birth  to  Daksha 
who  will  multiply  progeny”  (26—27). 

Pracheta  accepted  her ; and  from  her  was  born  Daksha 
and  the  mobile  and  immobile  creation,  the  two-legged 
creatures  and  quadrupeds  (2S). 

The  mind-born  Daksha  afterwards  procreated  daughters. 
He  conferred  ten  of  them  on  Dharma,  thirteen  on  Kashyapa, 
twenty  six  on  Soma,  four  on  Aristhanemi,  two  on  Vah'uputra. 

* The  great  Rishi  Kandu  engaged  in  great  penances.  This  filled 
the  king  of  gods  with  fear  who  despatched  nymph  Plamocha  to  obstruct 
Ins  devotion.  The  sage  fell  in  love  with  her  and  lived  in  her  company 
for  many  years*  Afterwards  perceiving  his  mistake  he  renounced  her. 
Being  remonstrated  with  by  that  sage  she  issued  out  of  the  hermitage 
and  began  to  wend  her  way  by  the  welkin  rubbing  the  perspiration  of 
her  body  with  the  leaves  of  the  trees.  The  child,  she  had  conceived 
from  the  sage,  came  out  from  the  pore  of  her  skin  in  drops  of  perspira- 
tion. The  trees  received  those  drops  and  the  wind  collected  them*  Soma 
protected  It  with  fei*  rays  till  it  increased  in  size.  ■ * : 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


85 


and  two#on  Angiras  (29 — 30).  By  mental  intercourse  they 
gave  birth  to  Devas,  Nagas  and  others,  I will  now  describe 
the  progeny  of  Dharma  begotten  by  him  on  his  ten  wives 
(31).  Vishwa  gave  birth  to  Vishwadevatas* * * §  Sadhya  to 
Sadhyas,  Marut  to  Marutsf  and  Vasu  to  VasusJ.  The 
Bhanus  (suns)  were  the  sons  of  Bhanu  and  the  deities 
governing  the  moments  of  Muhurtha.  Ghosa  was  begotten 
by  Dharma  ®oo  Lamva  and  N5gavithi§  was  born  of  Yami 
(32 — 33).  And  ail  the  objects  of  the  world  were  born  of 
Arundhati.  SankalpH  (pious  determination)  was  born  of 
Sankalpa.  The  stars  were  the  sons  of  the  moon  (34). 

Apa,  Dhruva,  Soma,  Dhara,  Anila,  Pratysusha  and 
Pravasa  were  the  names  of  the  eight  Vasus  (35). 

The  sons  of  Apa  were  Vaitanda,  Sbrama,  Shanta  and 
Muni.  Dhruva ;s  son  was  Kala,  the  destroyer  of  the  world 
and  Soma’s  son  was  Varchas  (light)  (36).  Dhara’s  sons  by 
Manohara  were  Dravina,  Hutahavyavaha,  Shishira,  PrUna  and 
Ramana  (37).  Anila’ s sons  were  Manojava  (swift  as 
thought)  and  Avijnatagati  (unknowable  motion).  And 
Agni’s  son  Kumara  was  born  in  a clump  of  Sara  reeds  (38). 
His  sons  were  Sakha,  Visakha,  Naijameya  and  Pristhaja. 
Kirtika’s  son  was  Kartikeya  and  the  ascetic  Sanatkumar  (39). 
Pratyasa’s  son  was  Devala.  Prbhasa’s  son  was  Vishwakarma. 
He  was  the  maker  of  thousand  arts  for  the  celestials  (40). 
And  men  are  now  making  their  liveli-hood  out  of  the  arts 
invented  (by  him).  Kashyapa  begat  on  learned  Surabbi 
eleven  Rudras  (41). 

By  the  favour  of  Mahadeva  whom  she  thought  of  in  her 
ascetic  observances  Sati  gava  birth  to  Ajaikada,  Hirbradhna, 

* A class  of  deities  to  whom  daily  offerings  are  to  be  made. 

f Wind-gods.  . ■; ■"  ^ 

| A kind  of  demi-god  of  whom  eight  are  enumerated  viz  Dhava, 
Druva,  Soma  (moon),  Vishnu,  Anila  (wind),  Anala  (fire)  Prabhusa  and 
Prabhava. 

§ The  milky  way. 


■86 


A C N 1 PUR  A N A M . 


Twasta  and  Rudra.  Twasta’s  son  was  the  beautiful  gnd  the 
highly  illustrious  Vishwarupa.  Bara  had  various  forms.  Try- 
amvaka,  AparSjita,  Vrishakapi,  Shambhu,  Kapardi,  Revata, 
MrigavySdha,  Sarpa,  Kapali  and  Ekaka-were  the  forms  by 
which  the  entire  world,  mobile  and  immobile,  was  overspread 
with  hundreds  and  millions  of  Rudras  (43  44)  • 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Agni  said  : — I will  now  describe  progeny  of  Kshyapa. 
O Muni,  from  Aditi  and  others  the  deities  I ushitas 
of  Chakshusa  (Manwantara)  were  again  begotten  by 
Kashyapa  on  Aditi  (t).  They  were  born  as  the  twelve 
Adityas  in  Vaiviswata  Manwantara  viz  Vishnu,  Shakra 
Twasta,  Dhata,  Aryama,  Push!,  Vivaswan,  Savita,  Mitra, 
Varuna,  Bhaga  and  Ansu.  The  wives  of  Aristbanemi  bore 
him  sixteen  children  (2—3).  The  daughters  of  the  learned 
Vahuputra  were  the  four  lightnings.  The  excellent  Richas 
were  the  children  of  Angiras  and  the  celestial  weapons  were 
the  offspring  of  the  Risfii  Krishaswa  (4).  These  appear 
and  disappear  age  after  age  as  the  sun  rises  and  sets, 

Kashyapa  begat  on  Dili  (two  sons)  Hiranyakmd.ipu  and 
MiranySksha,  She  had  also  a daughter  named  Smhik&  who 
was  married  to  Viprachitti.  Rihu  and  others  were  the  children 
of  Sinhika  (5 — 6). 

Hiranyakashipu  had  four  highly  effulgent  sons  namely, 
Anuhi&da,  Hilda,  Prabrtda,  greatly  devoted  to  Vishnu  and 
Sanhrada,  the  fourth.  Hr&dS’s  son  was  Hrada, 
sons  were  Ayushman,  Sivi  and  Vashkata  {7—8)*  - ' 


iiapina 


ittsiiifs 


i ' l 
: ....  .'. 

■ ' .'1:  ■:  . ; (RhillJ 

£.3.^ «„ 


AGM  PUKANAM. 


The  rson  of  Prahrada  was  Virochana  whose  son  was  Bali, 
who  had  a hundred  sons  amongst  whom  Vana  was  the  eldest, 
O great  Muni  (9).  Having  propitiated  Uma's  Lord  in  the 
previous  Kalpa  Vina  obtained  a boon  from  the  Iswara  that 
he  would  always  roam  by  his  side  (10). 

Hiranyaksba  had  five  sons  namely  .Sham vara,  Shale  uni, 
Twsiti,  Durmtirdha  and  Shankara.  Danu  had  a hundred 
sons  (r  1).  Swarbhanu  had  a daughter  named  Prabha. 
Pulomana\s  daughter  was  known  as  Snchi.  Vrishaparvan’s 
daughter  Sarmistha  had  two  daughters  vis  Upadanavi  and 
Havashira  (12).  Pulorna  and  Kalaka  were  the  two  daughters 
of  Vaishwanara.  They  were  married  to  Kashyapa  and  gave 
birth  to  ten  millions  of  sons  (13'.  In  PrahrUda's  family 
were  born  four  Kotis  of  Nivatakavachas.  Tamra  bad  six 
| sons  named  Suki,  Sweni,  Bhasi,  Sugrivi,  Suchi  and 
; Gridhrika.  They  gave  birth  to  crows  and  other  birds. 
|:'  Horses,  camels  &c.,  were  also  the  offspring  of  Tamra.  Aruna 
11?  and  Garuda  were  the  sons  of  Vinata. 

& , The  thousand  serpents  were  the  offspring  of  Surasa. 
Kadru  also  had  a thousand  children  namely  Sesha,  Vasukir 
Takshaka  and  others.  Animals  having  tusks  were  the 
■ offspring  of  Krodhas  and  acquatic  fowls  were  the  children  of 
Dhara.  Surahhi  gave  birth  to  cows  and  buffaloes  and  Ira: 
was  the  mother  of  all  sorts  of  grass  (14—17).  S wad  ha  gave 
birth  to  Yakshas  and  RakshUs,  Muni  to  Apsaras  and  Aristha 
to  Gandharvas.  These  were  the  offspring  of  Kashyapa 
> whether  moveable  or  stationery  ( 18). 

!?,  Their  children  and  grand  children  were  innumerable.  The 
Danavas  were  defeated  by  Devas.  Having  her  children 
£ . destroyed  Dili  propitiated  Kashyapa1,  and  prayed  from  him  a 
son  capable  of  destroying  Indra  and  achieved  her  object. 
Indra  seeking  out  her  fault,  [found  out  that  one  day]  without 
|4p“Washing  her  feet  she  fell  asleep  and  (Indra)  cut  off  the 
$r  embryo.  They  became  the  deities  Maruts  and  these  forty- 


88 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


nine  highly  effulgent  celestials  became  the  assistants  of 
Shakra.* 

Having  installed  the  king  Prithu  over  all  these  Hari  and 
Brahma  parcelled  out  soverignty  unto  others.  The  Lord 
Hari  conferred  the  soverignty  of  Brahmanas  and  plants  on 
the  moon,  that  of  water  on  Varuna.  Vaishravana  was  the 
king  riches,  Vishnu  the  lord  of  Sun,  Fire-god  the  king  of 
Vasus,  Vasava,  the  king  of  Maruts.  Daksha*  became  the 
king  of  Patriarchs  and  Prahrada  of  Danavas  (19—24). 
Yama  became  the  king  of  Pitris  and  Hara  the  Lord  of 
goblins.  Himavana  became  the  king  of  mountains  and 
Samudra  (ocean)  the  lord  of  rivers  (25).  Chitraratha 
became  the  king  of  Gandharvas,  Vasuki  the  king  of  Nagas, 

* The  following  account  occurs  in  Vishnupuranam. 

O best  of  ascetics,  when  there  was  a quarrel  amongst  the  Gandharvas, 
serpents  Danavas  and  gods,  Diti,  having  lost  all  her  children,  propitiated 
Kasyapa.  Being  perfectly  adored  by  her,  Kasyapa,  the  foremost  of  the 
ascetics,  promised  her  a boon  and  Diti  prayed  for  it  in  the  shape  of  a 
valiant  son  capable  of  destroying  Indra.  O excellent  Muni,  he  granted 
his  spouse  that  boon.  And  having  granted  her  that  boon  Kasyapa 
said  ; — “ You  shall  give  birth  to  a son  who  shall  destroy  Sakra,  if  with 
pious  thoughts  and  a pure  body,  you  carry  the  babe  in  your  womb  for  a 
hundred  years.”  Having  said  this  the  ascetic  Kasyapa  remained  with 
her  and  she  conceived  being  perfectly  pure.  Knowing  that  this  concep- 
tion was  for  its  own  destruction,  Indra  the  lord  of  immortals,  came  to 
her  and  attended  upon,  her  with  humility.  And  the  slayer  of  Paka 
wanted  there  to  thwart  her  intention.  At  last  in  the  last  year  of  the 
century  he  found  out  an  opportunity.  Diti,  without  washing  her  feet, 
went  to  bed.  And  when  she  was  asleep  the  wielder  of  the  thunder-bolt 
entered  into  her  womb  and  severed  the  embryo  into  seven  pieces. 

The  child,  thus  severed,  cried  out  bitterly  in  the  womb  but  Sakra 
again  and  again  said  u Do  not  cry.”  The  embryo  was  thus  cut  into 
seven  portions,  and  Indra,  wroth  again,  cut  each  portion  into  seven 
pieces  with  his  thunder-bolt.  From  these  originated  the  swift-coursing 
deities  called  Maruts  (wind.)  They  got  this  name  from  the  words  with 
which  Indra  had  addressed  the  embryo  (Ma — rooda—do  not  cry)  and 
became  forty-nine  divinities,  the  assistant*  of  the  wielder  of  the  thunder 
bolt. 


AGNl  PtJRANAM, 


Takshaka  the  king  of  serpents  and  Garuda  the  king  of  birds 
(26)*  Airavata  became  the  king  of  elephants,  bull  the  king  of 
kine,  tiger  the  king  of  animals,  and  Plaksha  the  king  of 
trees  (27).  Uchaishrava  became  the  king  of  horses. 
Sudhanwa  became  the  regent  of  the  east,  Shankapada  that 
of  the  south,  Ketuman  of  the  north  and  Hiranyaromaka  of 
the  west.  I have  thus  described  the  secondary  ^creation  (28)* 


CHAPTER  XX, 


AgnI  said  The  first  creation  of  Brahman  was  Mahat 
(intellectual  principle).  The  second  was  that  of  Taumdtras 
(subtile  particles)  which  is  known  as  Bhuta*  (1).  The 
third  was  the  czzhctvikci  creation  known  as  A iizdviyct ‘j*  or 
that  of  the  instruments  of  sensation  and  action.  This  is 
Pr&kritaX  creation  originating  from  the  intellectual  principle 
(2).  And  the  main  creation  counts  as  the  fourth  and  includes 
the  immobile  objects.  By  the  name  of  Tiryyaksrotas  is 
meant  birds,  beasts  &c  (3}.  The  sixth  creation  is 
Urddkas rotas  which  is  known  as  Devasarga . And  the 
seventh  is  Arovakasrotas  which  is  man  (4),  The  eigth  is 
the  creation  of  Anugrahas%  composed  of  Sattwas  (goodness) 
and  Tamas  (passion).  hive  are  the  Vaikrita ||  acis  of 
creation  and  three  are  Prdkrita  (5).  And  they  together 

* Creation  of  elements. 

f Relating  to  Indriya  or  organ  of  sense. 

$ From  Prakriti  or  Nature. 

§ An  order  of  deities. 

. • ••  • . ; .. 

j|  Relating  to  the  excited  condit  ion  of  any  thing, 


n 


1 


I 


I ■ 


11 1 : 


5f;  li 


Ilf 


: 

- ' ■.  ■■  , 


^Jjl8 


go 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


constitute  Vaikrita  and  Prakrita.  And  the  ninth  M 
Koumara.  These  are  the  nine  creations  of  Brahma,  the 
radical  causes  of  the  universe  (6). 

Bhrigu  and  other  sages  married  Kshyati  and  other 
daughters  of  Daksha.  People  designate  creation  as  three- 
fold, Nitya%  Naimittika  and  Dainandina.  That  which  takes 
place  at  the  end  of  a minor  dissolution  is  called  Dainandina . 
The  constant  daily  creation  of  beings  is  called  Nitya  (g). 

Bhrigu  begat  Dhata  and  Vidhata  on  Kshyiti.  Vishnu's 
wife  was  Shree  who  was  requested  by  Sakra  for  multiplying 
progeny  (9).  Dhata's  and  Vidhata’s  sons  were  Pr&na  and 
Mrikanduka.  Vedashira  bore  Mrikanduka  [a  son  named] 
Markandeya  (10).  Marichi  begat  on  Samhhuti  a son 
Pournamasa,  Angiras  begat  on  Srmiti  his  sons  Sinivafi, 
Kuhu,  Raka  and  Anumati.  And  by  Atri  Anasuya 
gave  birth  to  Soma,  Durvasa  and  the  Yogin  Dattatreya. 
Pulastya's  wife  Freed  gave  birth  to  a child  named  Dattoli. 
Pul  ah  a begat  on  Kshama  Sahishnu  and  Karmapadika 
(II — 13).  The  wife  of  Kratu  Sannati  brought  forth  the 
highly  effulgent  Balakhilyas,  sixty  thousand  in  number,  no 
bigger  than  a joint  of  the  thumb  in  size  (14}*  Vasishtha 
begat  on  Urja  the  seven  sages,  Raja,  Gotra,  Urdhav&huka, 
Savana,  Alaghu,  Sukra  and  Sutapa.  Agni  begat  on  Sw&hS, 
P&vaka,  Pavamana  and  Suchi.  Agnishwattas  and  Varhi- 
shads  the  former  being  devoid  and  the  latter  possessed  of 
fires*  were  the  Pitris  {departed  manes).  SwadhH  had  two 
daughters  Mena  and  Vaidh&rini. 

Hinsa  (envy)  was  the  wife  of  Adharrna  (unrighteousness) ; 
her  offspring  was  Anrita  (untrulhfulness)  and  a daughter 
Nikriti.  From  these  cama  forth  Bhaya  (fear)  and  Naraka 
(hell)  and  two  daughters  (Maya)  (illusion)  and  Vedaol  (pain) 

* According  to  the  commentator  this  distinction  is  derived  from  the 
Vedas.  The  first  class  or  Agnishwattas  consists  of  those  householders 
who  when  alive,  did  not  offer  burnt  sacrifices  1 the  second  of  those  who 
presenfed’oblations  with  fire. 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


(16—18).  Mayans  ’son  was  Mrityu  the  allayer  of  the 
sufferings  of  creatures.  And  Vedana  bore  for  Rourava  a 
son  named  Duksha  (misery)  (19).-  And  from  Mrityu  (death) 
sprang  Vyadhi  (disease),  Jvara  (decrepitude),  Soka  (sorrow), 
Trishna  (thirst),  and  Krodhanger.  While  Brahma  wept 
from  his  weeping  sprang  Rudra.  The  Grand-father  called 
him  Bhava,#  Sharva,  Ishana,  Pashupati,  Bhima,  Ugra  and 
Mahadeva  (20—21).  From  Daksha's  anger  his  wife  Sati 
renounced  her  body ; and  born  again  as  Himavan’s  daughter 
she  became  the  spouse  of  Shambhu  (22).  I will  now 
describe,  as  I have  heard  from  Narada,  the  method  of 
worshipping,  preceded  by  bathing  and  other  rites,  Vishnu 
and  other  gods  that  gives  enjoyment  and  emancipation  (23). 


CHAPTER  XXI 


II  ARADA  said  : — I wiil  now  describe  the  ordinary  form 
of  Vishnu's  worship  as  well  as  the  Mantras  (mystic  for- 
mulae) which  grant  all.  [One  should]  worship  [him  by 
saying]  salutation  unto  Achyuta*  and  his  entire  family  (1). 
Salutation  unto  Dh&ta  (preserver),  Vidhata  (creator),  Ganga 
Yamuna,  ocean,  the  prosperity  of  Dwara  (DwarakSi), 
V&stu-deity,  Sakti,  Kurma  (tortoise),  Antaka,  earth,  religious 
knowledge,  disassociation  from  the  world,  lordly  powers,  the 
Rik  and  other  Vedas,  Krita  and  other  Yogas,  Sattwa  and 
other  Gunas,  the  solar  disc,  the  purifying  and  most  excellent 


* A name  o£  Rrishoa^Literary^tmdecaying, 


AGM  PURANAM. 


92 

Jnana  and  Karma  Yoga**  (2—4).  Salutation  unto  joy,  truth, 
fulness,  the  various  forms  of  Ishana’s  favoured  seats,  Durgi,, 
speech,  Ganas  (goblins),  Kshetra  (field),  Vasudeva  and  others 
(5).  Salutation  unto  heart,  head,:  mace,  coat  of  mail,  eye, 
weapons,  conch-shell,.,  . discus,  club,  lotus,  Srivatsa  (mystic 
mark  on  Krishna's  breast)  and  Kaustava  jem  (6).  He 
should  then  adore  the  garland  of  wild  fkwers,  Sree 
(goddess  of  prosperity),  Pushti,  (nourishment),  Garuda, 
preceptor,  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Raksha,  water,  air,  and  the 
lord  of  riches  (7).  [He  should  next  adore]  Ishana,  his 
weapons,  and  his  carriers  bull  and  others.  By  worshipping 
Vishwaksenaf  first  in  the  circular  figure  one  acquires 
Siddhi  (8). 

This  is  the  ordinary  mode  of  worshipping  Siva.  One 
should  first  adore  Nandi  and  then  Mahakala,|  Ganga, 
Yamuna,  the  Ganas,  the  goddess  of  speech,  the  goddess  of 
prosperity,  the  spiritual  guide,  the  Vasludevata,  the  various 
Saktis,§  Dharma  and  other  gods.  Varna,  Jyestha,  Roudri, 
Kala-vikarini,  Valavikarini,  Valapramathini,  Sarvabhutadamani 
Madanodmadini  and  Siva  [should  then  be  worshipped  in 
due  order]  (9 — x 1).  [Saying]  Ham,  Hum  Ham  salutation 
unto  Siva  form,  he  should  adore  Siva,  his  limbs  and  mouth. 
Houm  salutation  unto  Siva,  Ishana  and  Ids  other  forms  (12). 

■ Hrim  Salutation  unto  Gouri ; Gam,  salutation  unto  Gana, 
Shakra,  Chanda,  heart  &c.  These  are  the  mantrams  in  order 


* Yoga  or  union  with  the  Supreme  Being,  The,  union  can  be  effec- 
ted by  two-fold  means* * * §— first  by  a true  knowledge  of  the  nature  and 
being  of  Brahma  or  impersonal  Self,  which  is  called  Jnana-Yoga* 
and  Second  by  doings  one's  own  duty  and  religious  acts  without  any 
selfish-  motive  which  is  called  Karma-Yoga.  This  has  been  explained 
at  length  an  the  celebrated  work  Bhagavat-Gita. 

f An  epithet  of  Vishnu, 

% Attendants  of  Siva. 

§ Attending  deities  of  the  goddess  Durga*  These  are  enumerated 
as  8,  9 or  even  50*  £ i| 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


in  the  adoration  of  the  sun.  Then  the  twany  coloured 
Dandin  should  be  adored  (13).  [He  should  then]  adore 
Ucchaisrava  and  the  greatly  pure  Arena,  the  charioteer  [of 
the  sun]  and  then  the  highly  blissful  Skandha  and  others  (14). 
Then  Dipta,  Sukshana,  Jaya,  Bhadra,  Bibhuti,  Vimala  these 
dreadful  forms  of  lightning,  which  have  their  faces  directed 
towards  all,  'should  be  adored  (15).  Then  with  the  man  tram 
Ham,  Khan,  he  should  adore  the  seat  of  the  sun,  having  the 
shape  of  the  sky  and  fire-brands.  [He  should  then  say] 
Ham,  Hrim,  salutation  unto  the  sun,  salutation  unto  the 
heart  (16).  Salutation  unto  Arka  (the  rays  of  the  sun)  the 
lord  of  fires  proceeding  to  the  region  of  Asuras  and  air 
and  having  flames  lighting  up,  earth,  nether  region  and  the 
sky,  Ham.  This  is  the  amulet*  (17).  * Salutation  unto  the 
lustre,  the  eye  and  the  weapons,  Raj ni,  Shakti  and  Nishkaleha 
of  the  Sun,  I will  now  describe  in  order  and  in  brief  the 
adoration  of  Soma,  Angaraka,  Budha,  Jiva,  Shukra,  Shani, 
Rahu,  Ketu  and  the  effulgent  Chanda.  The  worshipper 
should  then  adore  the  principal  seat  of  the  image,  heart  &c. 
(18—19).  The  man  tram  of  the  Vishnu  seat  of  Vishnu 
form  is  u Hrim,  Shrim,  Shridhara,  Hari”,  Hrim  is  the 
mantram  for  all  the  forms  capable  of  enchanting  the  three 
worlds  (20).  Him,  Hrishikesha,f  Klim  Vishnu.  With  long 
vowels  [one  should  adore]  heart  &e.  With  these  mantfams 
should  be  performed  Panchami  PujaJ  which  gives  victory 
in  battle  &c.  (21).  One  should  then  adore  in  order  his 
discus,  club,  conch-shell,  mace,  dagger,  Srlnga  bow,  noose, 
goad,  (mystic  mark)  Srivatsa,  (the  jem),  Koustava  and  garland 
of  wild  flowers  (22).  With  the  mantram  Srirn  one  should 


* Some  mystic  words  are  Written  on  a paper  hr  bark  and  it  is  then 
put  into  an  amulet.  If  it  is  carried  by  a person  he  or  she  always  be** 
comes  successful.  ^ .1  ■; 

f Literally  one  who  has  controlled  his  senses.  An  Epithet  of  Vishnu. 


$ An  adoration  offered  on  the  fifth  day  after  the  full -moon. 


s 


V' 


i , 


94 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


adore  the  great  gooddess  of  prosperity  Sree,  Garuda,  the 
spiritual  guide,  Indra  and  other  deities.  With  the  mantram 
Aum  and  Hrim  one  should  adore  the  form  and  seat  of 
Saraswati  (23),  Then  Hrit,  Lakshmi,  Medha,  Kali,  Tusti, 
Pushfci,  Gouri,  Prabhavati,  Durga,  Gana,  Guru  and  Kshetrapa 
should  be  worshipped  (24).  Then  he  should  say,  “ Gam, 
salutation  unto  the  Lord  of  Ganas,  Brim  unto/Jouri,  Shrim 
unto  Sri,  Shrim  unto  Twarita,  Sou  unto  Tripura”  (25),  All 
the  mantrams  should  be  preceded  by  Pranava  (Om)  added 
Vindu  to  it,  either  while  offering  adorations  or  performing 
Japa  (26).  Celebrating  a Hama  with  sessamum  seed  and 
clarified  butter  he  who  reads  these  mantrams  of  adoration, 
yeilding  religious  profit,  desire,  worldly  profit  and  salvation, 
repairs  to  heaven  after  having  enjoyed  all  the  objects  of 
desire  (27). 


CHAPTER  XXII, 


Narada  said  : — I will  now  describe  the  mode  of  bathing 
[necessary  before  the  performance  of]  any  religious  rite, 
Meditating  on  the  man-lion  form  one  should  take  up  a clod 
of  earth.  And  dividing  it  into  two  pieces  he  should  with 
one  bathe  his  mind  (i).  Immersing  himself  in  water,  rinsing 
his  mouth,  and  arranging  his  hairs,  he  should,  protected  by 
the  1 lion,  perform  the  due  rite  of  bathing  preceeded  by 
Pranayama*  {2),  Meditating  on  Hari  in  his  heart  with  the 
mantram  consisting  of  eight  letters  he  should  divide  the 


* 'A  Yogic  process  of  the  suppression  of  vital  breath* 


AGN!,  ruranam. 


9 5 


clod  of  earth  into  three  parts  on  his  palm  and  then  protect 
the  quarters*  reciting  the  name  of  the  lion  (3).  Reciting 
the  name  of  Vasudeva,  determining  within  himself  about 
sacred  water,  rubbing  his  body  with  Vedic  mantrams, 
adoring  the  image  of  the  deity  and  putting  on  a pure  doth 
he  should  perform  the  rite.  Putting  water  into  hands  with 
mantrams,  dividing  it  into  two  parts,  drawing  air  and 
controlling  it  with  the  name  of  Narayana  he  should  pour  the 
water.  Afterwards  meditating  on  Hari,  offering  Arghya*f 
he  should  recite  the  mantram  of  twelve  letters  a hundred 
times  beginning  in  order  with  the  seat  of  yoga,  for  all  the 
Regents  of  the  quarters,  Rishis,  Pitris,  men  and  all  creatures 
and  ending  with  the  mobile  and  immobile  creation.  Then 
having  assigned  his  limbs  [to  the  various  deities]  and  putting 
a stop  to  the  recitation  of  the  mantrams  he  should  enter 
into  the  sacrificial  room.  In  this  way  in  the  adoration  of 
the  other  deities  one  should  perform  the  bathing  with  the 
principal  and  other  mantrams  (4 — 8). 


* This  ceremony  is  necessary  so  that  no  impediment  may  approach 
the  worshipper  from  any  quarter. 

f A respectful  offering  or  oblation  to  a god  or  a venerable  person* 


chapter  xxiii. 


Narada  said I will  now  describe  the  mode  of 
[offering]  Puja  (adoration)  by  performing  which  Vipras  attain 
all  objects  of  life.  Washing  his  head,  rinsing  his  mouth 
and  controlling  his  speech  one  should  well  protected  sit  in 
a Swastika,  Padma*  or  any  other  posture,  with  his  face 
directed  towards  the  east.  He  should  thee  meditate  in  the 
middle  of  his  navel  on  the  mantram  Yarn  smoke  coloured 
and  identical  with  the  terrific  wind  and  purify  all  the 
impurities  of  the  body.  Then  meditating  on  the  mantram 
Kshoum , the  ocean  of  light,  situate  in  the  lotus  heart,  he 
should,  with  flames  going  up,  down  and  in  contrary  directions, 
burn  down  all  impurities.  He  should  then  meditate  on  the 
mantram  Van  of  the  shape  of  the  moonf  situate  in  the  sky, 
And  then  the  intelligent  worshipper  should  sprinkle  his  own 
body  extending  from  the  lotus  heart  with  nectarine  drops, 
through  the  tubulour  organ  Susumna  passing  through  the 
generative  organ  and  other  tubes  (1—5), 

Having  purified  the  Tattwas  (ingredients  of  worship)  he 
should  assign  them.  He  should  then  purify  his  hand  and 
the  implements.  First  he  should  assign,  beginning  with  the 
thumb  of  the  right  hand,  the  fingers  of  the  two  hands  to  the 
principal  limbs.  Then  with  sixty  two  mantrams  he  should 
assign  the  twelve  limbs  to  the  body  namely  heart,  head, 
tuft  of  hair  on  head,  skin,  two  eyes,  belly,  back,  arms,  thighs, 
.knee-joints  and  feet.  Then  having  offered  Mudra  and 

"*  These  are  the  various  Asasnas  or  postures  in  which  a Yogin  sits  to 
practise  his  devotion,  Asana  is  that  in  which  he  crosses  his  legs  under- 
neath  him  and  lays  hold  of  his  feet  on  each  side  with  his  hands* 

f The  word  in  the  text  is  Shashanka  literally  meaning  having  a hare 
on  the  lap , It  is  an  epithet  of  the  moon. 


A'GNl  PUR  ANA  M. 


97 


* A mixture  of  money,  a respectful  offering  made  to  a deity,  a guest 
or  the  bride-groom  on  his  arrival  at  the  door  of  the  father  of  the  bride ; 
its  usual  ingredients  are  five  : — 

whr: 

*3 


recited 1 his  name  one  hundred  and  eight  times  he  should 
meditate  on  and  adore  Vishnu  (6—8).  Having  placed  a 
water ^ar  on  his  left  and  articles  of  worship  on  his  right  he 
should  wash  them  with  implements  and  then  place  flowers 
and  scents  (9).  Having  recited  eight  times  the  adorable 
light  of  Omnipresence  and  consciousness  he  should  take  up 
water  in  his  palm  with  the  ma n tram  phut  and  then  meditate 
on  Hari  (10).  With  his  face  directed  towards  the  south-east 
direction  presided  over  by  Agni  (Fire-God)  he  should  pray 
for  virtue,  knowledge,  disassociation  from  worldly  objects 
and  lordly  powers ; lie  should  cast  off  his  sins  and  physical 
impurities  on  the  Yoga  postures  beginning  with  the  East 
(li),  In  Kurma  (tortoise)  posture  he  should  adore  Ananfca, 
Yama,  the  sun  and  other  luminous  bodies.  Having  first 
meditated  on  them  in  his  heart,  invoked  them  and  adored 
•them  in  the  circle  he  should  again  place  offerings,  water  for 
washing  feet,  water  for  rinsing  mouth,  and  Madhuparka' * 
(12—13).  Then  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the  art  of 
worshipping  the  lotus-eyed  deity  (Vishnu)  he  should  place 
water  for  bathing,  cloth,  sacred  thread,  ornaments,  scents, 
flowers,  incense,  lamps  and  edibles  (14), 

He  should  first  adore  the  limbs  at  the  gate  in  the  east 
and  then  Brahma.  He  should  then  assign  the  discus  and 
dub  to  the  southern  quarter  and  the  conch-shell  and  bow 
to  the  corner  presided  over  by  the  moon  (15).  He  should 
then  assign  arrows  and  the  quiver  to  the  left  and  right  side 
of  the  deity.  He  should  assign  leathern  fence  and  prosperity 
to  the  left  and  nourishment  to  the  right  (16).  With  man  trams 
he  should  worship  the  garland  of  wild-flowers,  the  mystic 
mark  Srivatsa  and  the  Koustava  jem  and  all  the  deities  of 


gg  AGNI  PURANAMT 


the  quarters  in  the  outside— all  these  parapharnalia  "and  at- 
tendants of  Vishnu  (i 7).  Either  Ipartially  or  wholly  he 
should  recite  the  mantrams  for  adoring  limbs,  and  adore 
them,  circumambulate  them  and  then  offer  offerings  (18). 
He  should  meditate  in  his  mind  “ I am  Brahma*  Hari”  and 
should  utter  the  word  “come”  in  the  ceremony  of  Avahana * 
(invocation)  and  the  words  forgive  me  in  the  rite  of  Visar* 
Jana + (19).  Those  who  seek  salvation  should  thus  perform 
Pujd  (worship)  with  the  man  tram  of  eight  letters,  I have 
described  the  worship  of  one  form.  Hear,  I will  now  des- 


cribe that  of  nine  Vyuhas  (20). 

He  should  assign  Vasudeva,  Bala  and  others,  first  to  his 
two  thumbs  and  then  severally  to  his  head,  fore-head,  mouth, 
heart,  navel,  buttock,  knees,  head  and  afterwards  worship 
them.  He  should  then  worship  one  Pit  ha  (the  seat  of  a 
deity)  and  nine  Vyuhas  or  parts  of  the  body.  He  should 
as  before  worship  in  nine  lotuses  the  nine  forms  and  the 
nine  parts  of  the  body.  In  the  midst  thereof  he  should 
adore  Vasudeva  (21-— 23). 


CHAPTER  XXIV, 


11  arada  said : — I will  now  describe  the  Agni  or  fire 
rites,  by  which  one  attains  to  all  desired-for  objects. 

Measuring  a piece  of  land,  four  times,  twenty-four  thumbs 
in  length,  with  a thread,  one  should  make  a'square  pit  On  all 


* It  is  a religious  rite  of  the  Hindus  by  which  they  install  life  in 
the  idol  made  for  worship. 

t A rite  in  which  the  life  given  is  sent  away  and  the  idol  is  thrown 
away.;  These  two  peculiar  religious  rites  distinctly  show  that  the  Hindus 
do  not  worship  the  idol  but  the  spirit  which  they  temporarily  Invoke 
in  that  idol 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


99 


sides  ofi  the  pit,  there  should  be  left  a space'of  two  thumbs 
breadth  as  if  making  its  girdle  (1—2),  One  seat  of  twelve 
thumbs  in  length,  and  eight,  two  and  four  thumbs  severally 
in  extent  should  be  made  in  the  East  (3).  One  beautiful 
seat  of  ten,  six  and  four  thumbs  in  extent  and  with  a mouth, 
two  thumbs  in  width  and  lowering  gradually  should  be  made 
in  the  west  {4),  It  should  be  of  the  form  of  a leaf  of  the 
holy  fig-tree  2nd  should  enter  a little  into  the  pit.  A drain, 
quarter  of  a thumb  in  breadth  and  fifteen  thumbs  in  length, 
should  then  be  dug.  The  base  of  the  drain  at  the  seat  will 
foe  three  thumbs  and  the  fore  part  six. 

I have  thus  described  to  you  the  pit  of  three  mekhalas 
(altars).  I will  now  describe  the  circular  pit.  A thread 
should  be  fixed  in  the  pit  and  its  remaining  portion  should  be 
fixed  on  its  side  (5 — 7).  Placing  half  of  the  rope  in  the  pit 
and  the  other  half  on  the  side  makes  a whirling  circle.  One 
fares  well  by  making  this  whirling  crescent-shaped  pit.  After 
placing  lotus  petals  and  mekhalas  in  this  circular  pit  one 
should  make  a sacrificial  laddie  of  the  size  of  an  arm  for 
performing  Homa  (8 — 10). 

Then  he  should  make  a site,  thirteen  thumbs  in  length, 
and  four  in  breadth.  He  should  dig  a pit  on  the  space 
covering  three  fourths  of  this  area  and  a make  a beautiful 
circle  in  the  middle  (1 1).  He  should  purify  the  space  outside 
the  pit  to  the  extent  of  half  a thumb  and  one  fourth  of  a 
thumb,  and  with  the  remaining  portion  should  reserve  a 
boundary  line  all  around.  A space  measuring  half  a thumb 
should  be  kept  at  the  mouth.  A beautiful  space  covering 
five  thumbs  should  be  kept  in  the  middle.  The  ground  on 
all  sides  should  be  level,  and  that  in  the  middle  should  be  a 
little  lowered.  The  last  pit  should  be  beautifully  made 
according  to  one’s  own  desire  (12 — 16). 

The  sacrificial  ladle  should  have  a handle,  one  band  in 
length.  The  circumference  of  the  spoon  attached  to  it 
should  be  two  thumbs.  Diving  it  a little  into  the  mud  0**$ 

IMP 

1 

. ; 3 


v I l t ‘ 


l!S§! 

Illll 


A sacrificial  food  by  partaking  of  which  dac  gains  his  object. 


should  draw  with  it  a line  on  the  fire  named  Vajra  (i7~lS)a. 
He  should  first  draw  a line  beginning  with  the  corner  presided1 
over  by  the  moon,  then  two  lines  between  it  and  the  east  and 
then  three  lines  in  the  middle  towards  the  South.  Having 
thus  drawn  lines  with  the  recitation  of  the  mystic  syllable. 
Om,  one,,  versed  in  mantras,  should  make  the  seat  in  which 
the  power  of  Vishnu-'  lies  (19 — 20). 

Having  adorned  the  incarnate  form  of  rdie  fire  and' 
remembered  Hari  he  should  throw  it.  Then  taking  up- 
sacrificial  twigs  measuring  the  span  between  the  thumb  and 
the  fore-finger  he  should  offer  them  (21).  He  should  then 
spread  three-fold  Ku§a  grass  in  the  east.  He  should  then 
place  Shruk  (sacrificial  ladle  for  pouring  clarified  bull)  and 
Snm  (ladle)  on  the  ground.  He  should  then  place  vessels  for 
keeping  clarified  butter,  ckaru*  and  the  sacrificial  grass  Kuga.. 
And  then  taking  up  water  with  the  vessel,  he  should  fill  up 
other  vessels  with  it  (22 — 23.).  Then  sprinkling  all  the  vessels 
with  sacred  water  thrice  he  should  place  before  the  sacrificial 
fuel..  Then  filling  up  the  vessel  with  clarified  butter  he 
should  keep  it  there.  Then  shaking  it  with  the  wind  of  the 
breath  he  should  perform  the  purificatory  rite  (24 — 26).  He 
should  take  up  two  Kugas  whose  tips  had  not  been  cut  off,, 
each  measuring  the  span  between  the  thumb  and  the  fore- 
finger, with  the  thumb  and  the  nameless  finger  of  the  right 
handy  He  should  take  up  with  it  clarified  butter  twice  and 
cast  it  thrice.  And  again  taking  up  with  them  the  sacrificial 
ladles  he  should  sprinkle  them  with  water  (27—28}.. 
Having  rubbed  them  with  the  Kuga  reeds  and  washing  them 
again  the  worshipper  should  place  them  reciting  the  mystic 
syllable  Om  (29).  He  should  afterwards  perform  the  Horna 
ceremony  with  mantrams  each  ending  with  Om*  He  should 
'perform  the  prescribed  portions  of  Garbh&dh^na  and  other  ‘ 
rites  (30).  He  should  perform  duly  all  the  Vratas  (vows) 


AGNI  PUR  AN  Am, 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


and  Adkikctras . A worshipper  should  consecrate  all  the 
ingredients  by  reciting  the  mystic  syllable  Om\  A Horn  a 
ceremony  should  be  performed  proportionate  to  the  means  of 
an  individual  (31).  First  should  be  performed  Garbhadhana,#- 
then  Punsavana,<5  then  Shimantonnayana,£  then  Jatakarma,*/ 
then  Namae  and  then  Annaprasatia/*,  then  ChudSkarana,^ 
then  Vratavandha/i*  and  then  numberless  other  Vedic  Vratas 
(vows),  A qualified  person  should  perform  all  these  rites  in* 
in  the  company  of  his  wife  (32 — 34).  Meditating  on  the  dei 
in  the  heart  and  other  parts,  worshipping  him  he  should 
offer  sixty  four  oblations  (35).  The  worshipper  should  the 
offer  the  full  oblation  with  the  sacrificial  ladle,  filling  it  u 
(with  clarified  butter)  and  reciting  sweetly  along  with  it  th 
man  tram  with  the  word  Bhoushaf  (36).  Having  purified  the 
lire  of  Vishnu  he  should  boil  the  Charu  (food)  belonging* 
to  Vishnu.  Having  worshipped  Vishnu  in  the  altar  and' 
remembering  the  manfcrams  he  should  boil  it  ($7).  Having 
worshipped  in  order  with  sweet-scented  flowers  his  seat,, 
bed  etc,  as  well  as  the  ornaments  for  the  various  limbs- 
lie  should  meditate  on  that  most  excellent  of  all  the  deities 
(38).  Then  oblations  of  clarified  butter  should  be  poured 
in  order  to  fires  placed  in  the  north-east  and  north-west 
ners  (39).  Then  having  poured  portions  of  clarified  butter 


a One  of  the  Samskaras  or  purificatory  ceremonies  performed  after 
menstruration  to  ensure  or  facilitate  conception.  This  ceremony 
legalizes  in  a religious  sense  the  consummation  of  marriage. 

b It  is  a ceremony  performed  on  a woman’s  perceiving  the  first  srgns^ 
of  a living  conception  with  a view  to 
c ‘Parting  of  the  hair' one 
rites  observed  by  women  in  the  fourth, 

' pregnancy.  ' ; ■ -:v 5.--  : . 

d Ceremony  performed  on  the  birth  of  a son* 
e Ceremony  of  giving  name  to  the  child, 
f A ceremony  performed  when  the  child  first  tastes  rice- 
g The  ceremony  of  tonsure, 
h Investiture  with  sacred  thread. 


102 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


in  the  south  and  the  north  he  should  perform  the  Cftremony 
of  Homa  in  the  middle  reciting  in  order  all  the  mantrams  (40). 
In  the  Homa  of  endless  limbs  (parts)  he  should  offer  obla- 
tions  of  clarified  butter  to  the  ten  forms  of  the  deity  with 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  sacrificial  grass,  sacrificial  fuel 
and  sessamum  seeds  (41).  Having  thus  performed  the 
Homa  ceremony  he  should  invite  his  disciples  to  place  be- 
fore the  beasts  of  sacrifice  fed  by  them  and  sacrifice  them 
with  weapons  (42). 

Having  united  the  disciples  with  his  own  self  with  the 
fetters  of  Avidya  (ignorance)  and  Karma  he  should  adore 
the  | Lingam  to  which  is  bound  consciousness  (43).  Per- 
ceiving its  true  essence  by  dhydna  (meditation)  he  should 
purify  it  with  Vayu  mantrams.  He  should  then  adore  the 
creation  of  Brahmanda  (universe)  with  Agni  mantrams  (44). 
He  should  then  meditate  on  all  articles  reduced  into  ashes 
on  the  pit.  He  should  then  sprinkle  the  ashes  with  water 
and  meditate  on  Samsara  (world)  (45).  He  should  then 
assign  creative  power  to  the  seed  of  the  earth  enveloped 
with  Tanmatras  or  subtle  elementary  particles  (46).  He 
should  then  meditate  on  the  egg  arising  therefrom,  its 
container  and  identical  with  itself.  He  should  then  meditate 
within  the  egg  on  the  form  of  the  Purusha  identical  with 
Pranava  (Om)  (47).  He  should  then  attach  the  creative 
organ,  situate  within  self,  purified  before.  He  should  then 

meditate  on  the  various  senses  (48).  He  should  then  divide 

the  egg  into  two  parts  and  place  them  in  the  slcy  and  earth. 
And  between  them  he  should  meditate  on  Prajapati  (The 
Creator)  (49).  Meditating  on  his  being  born  and  supported 
by  Pranava  and  making  his  form  identical  with  mantras 
he  should  perform  the  Nyasa  rite  (assignment  of  limbs  to 
various  deities)  as  described  before  (50).  Meditating  on 
the  hands  and  head  of  Vishnu  he  should  realize  by  Dhyana 
(spiritual  meditation)  that  one  is  multiplied  into  many  (ki). 
Taking  their  fingers  and  tying  them  to  their  eyes  with  a 


agni  puranam 


piece  of 'cloth  a mantrin  should 
water  (52).  After  havi 
fectly  knowing  the  true  nature 
make  his  disciples  sit  with  tl 
west  and  their  palms  fofde 
Instructed  by  their  | 
offering  there  handfuls  of  flo 
adorations  without  recit 
the  feet  of  their 
him  the  Dakshina  or 
possessions  (55), 
and  they  should  worship  H 
Vishwaksena,  the  lord  of 
discus  and  club  (56), 
with  their  fore-fingers 
Vishwaksena  the  enti 
Vishnu.  Then  bowing  1 
their  own  persons.  And  p! 
pit  they  should  dedicate  it  to  Vishwaksen 
hungry  attain  all  and  disappear  in 


sprinkle  them  with  sacred 
ing  made  the  P ujd  the  preceptor,  per- 
1 of  gods,  should 
5cted  towards  the 
with  flowers  (53). 
preceptor  they  should  adore  Hari  after 
--  "JWers  (54).  Having  thus  offered 
mg  any  mantrams  they  should  salute 
preceptor;  and  afterwards  they  should  offer 
fee,  if  possible  the  half  of  their  worldly 
The  preceptor  should  instruct  the  disciples 
lari  by  reciting  his  names,  namely 
sacrifices  and  the  holder  of  conch, 
They  should  then  place  offerings 
to  the  circular  altar,  and  dedicate  to 
re  remnant  of  the  offerings  made  unto 
low  they  should  sprinkle  with  water 
acing  on  their  body  the  fire  of  the 
a,  saying  "May  the 
Hari  (57—59).” 


CHAPTER  XXV 


104 


AGN1  PURANAM, 


•salutation  unto  the  Lord  Narasimha*  (3).  Orn  bhur  saluta- 
tion unto  the  Lord  Baraha.f  He  should  then  form  the  limbs 
of  the  man  tram  Swar,  each  duly  ending  in  order  with  the 
sy  all  able  swar,  the  nine  Nayakas,  the  kings,  red  like  Java 
flowers,  green-hued,  red-blue,  crimson  coloured,  bright  like 
lightning  and  twany  like  honey  (4 — 5).  He  should  imagine 
heart  and  other  parts  divided  according  to  the  Tanfcras.  The 
characteristics  of  Vyanjana  and  other  mantrams  are  different 
(4).  They  are  divided  by  long  vowels  ending  with  and  inter- 
perse  d with  Namas.  The  principal  and  minor  parts  are 
composed  of  short  vowels  (7).  Letters  are  divided  in  this 
most  excellen  t man  tram  and  the  principal  and  minor  limbs 
are  composed  gradually  of  long  and  short  bowels  (8),  The 
consonants  are  used  in  order  each  ending  with  the  mantram 
Swa  in  various  divisions  (9).  Having  made  proper  assign- 
ment a Siddha  should  recite  these  mantrams  (10).  With  the 
twelve  ramfiications  of  the  principal  mantram  he  should  adore 
the  heart,  the  head-gear,  coat  of  mail,  eyes,  weapons  and 
six  limbs  of  Vishnu  (u).  He  should  then  make,  in  order, 
assignment  to  the  heart,  head,  tuft  of  hair,  weapon,  {eye, 
belly,  back,  arm,  thigh,  knee-joint,  cheeks,  and  feet  of  the 
deity  (13). 

Kam,  tam,  pam#  Sham,  salutation  to  VinataJs  son 
(Garuda) ; Kham,  tham,  pham,  Sham,  salutation  to  the  club. 
Gam,  dam,  Vam,  Sam  is  the  mantram  for  securing  health ; 
Gham,  dham,  bham  and  Ham,  salutation  to  Sbree. 

Vam,  Sham,  Man,  Kham  [is  the  mantram  for  adoring  his 
conch-shell]  Panchajanya.J  Chham,  tam,  pam  is  the 


* The  man -Sion  form  of  Vishnu,  one  of  his  incarnations  in  which 
he  killed  the  giant  Hiranya-Kasipu. 

t The  boar-form  of  Vishnu  in  which  he  raised  up  the  earth  from 
water  after  deluge. 

J Krishna  obtained  this  conchshell  after  destroying  a demon  who 
had  assumed  this  form,  for  regaining  the  son  o,f  a Etrahma,na  from  bis 
clutches*  '/ 


AGNI  PURANAM.  io? 

mantram  for  the  kaustava  jem.  Jam,  Kham,  Vam  for  Sudar- 
s ha ii a (discus).  Sam,  Vam,  Dasn,  Cham,  Lam  for  his  mystic 
mark  Srivatsa,  (14). 

Om,  Dh am,  Van  for  his  garland  of  wild  flowers.  And  Oin 
is  for  the  great  Atlanta.  With  these  various  letters  various 
forms  of  the  mantra  should  be  made  (15).  The  caste  and 
name  of  the  person  should  be  added  in  the  mantram  for 
adoring  the  heart.  And  Pranava  should  be  added  to  each 
mantram  which  should  be  recited  five  times  (16).  With  Om 
one  should  adore  the  heart,  head  and  the  tuft  of  hair  of  the 
great  Purusha,  and  adding  his  own  name  should  adore  the 
coat  of  mail  and  the  weapon  (17).  He  should  say  “Om  salu- 
tation unto  An  taka.”  This  mantram  consists  of  one  to  twenty 
six  parts  (iS).  Then  with  the  tips  of  the  little  and  other 
fingers  he  should  adore  Prakriti  on  his  body  saying  “Prakriti 
is  the  second  form  of  the  great  Purusha”  (19).  Om  salutation 
unto  the  great  Purusha.  The  air  and  the  sun  are  his  two 
forms.  Fire  is  the  third  form.  He  should  assign  those  with 
his  fingers  to  his  body  (20).  He  should  assign  the  air  and 
the  sun  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  He  should  assign 
the  various  forms  and  limbs  of  the  deity  in  the  head  (21). 
He  should  assign  the  extensive  Rik  Veda  to  his  hand  and  the 
Yayus  to  his  fingers  and  the  two  Atharvans  to  his  two  lotus 
palms  (22).  As  before  he  should  assign  the  extensive  sky 
to  his  finger  and  body  and  the  air  and  others  to  his  fingers, 
head,  heart,  organ  of  excretion  and  feet.  (23).  Air,  fire, 
water,  earth  [with  sky  or  ether]  are  called  five  elements. 
Mind,  ears,  skin,  tongue  and  nose  are  the  five  organs  of 
sense.  (24).  One  should  assign  the  endless  mind  beginning 
with  the  thumb  in  order  to  head,  mouth,  heart,  organ  of  ex- 
cretion and  organ  of  generation  (23).  The  prime  form  in  the 
shape  of  Jiva  (sentiency)  permeates  all  and  everywhere. 
Earth,  sky,  heaven,  the  principle  of  greatness,  asceticism, 
truth  should  be  assigned  duly  in  the  body  and  fingers  begirt-, 
ning  with  the  thumb.  The  lord  of  the  world,  first  assigned 


io6 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


to  the  palm,  should  be  gradually  taken  to  the  body,  head, 
forehead,  face,  heart,  organ  of  excretion  and  crown  of  the 
head.  This  is  Agnisthoma  rite.  Next  follows  the  sacrifice 
Yajapeyaka  of  sixteen  limbs  (26-—  28).  in  this  Atiratra  and 
Aptoyama  are  the  two  optional  parts.  The  soul  of  the  sacri- 
fice has  seven  forms.  Intellect,  egoism,  mind,  sound,  touch, 
form,  taste,  smell,  understanding  should  be  4^7  assigned 
to  the  fingers  and  the  body.  He  should  assign  teeth,  and 
palms,  to  head,  forehead,  mouth,  heart  navel,  organ  of  ex- 
cretion and  two  feet.  These  are  called  eight  vyuhas  or 
limbs.  A person  should  assign  sentiency,  identical  with  in- 
dividual soul,  intellect,  egoism,  mouth,  sound,  quality,  air, 
form  and  taste  to  the  two  thumbs.  He  should  gradually  trans- 
fer them  to  the  left  hand  through  the  fore  and  other  fingers 
(29-32).  Indra  exists  covering  the  ten  parts  of  the  body, 
head,  forehead,  mouth,  heart,  navel,  organ  of  excretion,  two 
knee-joints  and  two  feet  (33).  He  should  assign  fire  between 
the  two  thumbs.  Assignment  should  also  be  made  with  the 
fore  and  other  fingers.  Mind,  identical  with  eleven  organs, 
ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  smell,  speech,  hand,  crown  of  the 
head,  anus,  should  be  assigned  to  head,  forehead,  mouth, 
heart,  navel,  buttock  and  the  two  knees  (34—35).  Male 
organ,  mind  and  ears  should  be  assigned  to  the  two  thumbs. 
Additional  assignment  should  be  made  to  the  two  thumbs 
by  eight  fingers  (36),  Head,  forehead,  mouth,  heart,  navel 
should  be  assigned  to  anus,  two  thighs,  shanks,  ankles  and 
feet  (37). 

Vishnu,  Madhuhara,  Vamana  (dwarf)  of  three  footsteps, 
Sridhara,  Hrishikesha,  Padmanabha,  Damodara,  Keshava, 
Narayana,  Madhava  and  Govinda  are  the  names  of  Vishnu. 
He  should  be  invoked  everywhere.  The  thumb*  and  other 
fingers,  two  palms,  two  feet,  two  knees,  waist,  head  should  be 
assigned  to  head,  crown  of  the  head,  waist  and  knees  and  feet 
(38—40).  'There  are  severally  twelve,  twenty-five  and  twenty- 
six  parts— *Purusha,  intellect,  egoism,  mind,  heart,  touch/  taste. 


AON!  PURANAM* 


107 


form,  smell,  ears,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  nose,  speech,  hand,  head, 
anus,  male  organ,  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  sky.  The  Purusha 
has  all  these  in  hairs— he  should  be  invoked  in  the  ten 
fingers,  thumb  and  others  (41—43).  Having  assigned  the 
remnant,  in  the  palm,  head  or  forehead  he  should  assign 
mouth,  heart,  navel,  buttock,  thighs,  knee-joints  in  order  to 
feet,  knees,  male  organ,  heart  and  head.  Meditating  on  the 
great  Purusffa  in  all  these  twenty-six  a wise  man  should 
adore  Prakriti  in  the  circular  altar. 

In  the  first  part  of  the  day  he  should  worship  heart  &c. 
in  the  corner  presided  over  by  the  moon.  As  before  he 
should  adore  (Vishnu's)  weapons  and  (his  carrier)  Vinata's 
son  in  the  quarter  presided  over  by  fire  (N.  B.)  He  should 
adore  the  guardian  deities  of  the  quarters  in  the  middle  of 
the  fire  (44—47).  A man,  having  kingdom  &c.,  should 
adore  them  by  placing  his  middle  fingers  to  the  navel  and 
having  his  mind  fixed  on  the  lotus  (48).  For  conquering 
kingdoms,  and  for  the  preservation  of  all  he  should  adore 
the  universal  form  of  Vishnu  with  all  the  parts  and  five  limbs. 
(49).  One  should  celebrate  the  sacrifice  of  Vishwaksena, 
having  adored  first  Garuda  and  Indra.  He  will  obtain  all 
desired-for  objects.  The  mantram  is  that  of  the  ether  i.e. 
Byoma  mantram.  (50). 


CHAPTER  XXVI 


m arada  said:— I will  now  describe  Mudra*  which 
brings  the  worshipper  nearer  to  the  object  of  his  worship. 
The  first  is  called  Anjali  or  the  folding  of  palms.  The 


ACm  PURANAM, 


second  Is  called  Vandani  (fingers  interleaved)  to  be'  placed 
on  the  heart  (2).  Fold  the  left  palm  keeping  the  thumb 
erect  Then  interweave  it  with  the  thumb  of  the  right  palm. 
These  are  the  three  ordinary  Mudras. 

Besides  these  there  are  some  other  extraordinarily  Madras. 
By  the  interweaving  of  the  smallest  and  other  fingers  eight 
more  positions  are  formed  in  order  (2—3).  The  first  eight 
man  trams  should  be  recked.  With  the  thumb  he  should 
bend  low  the  youngest  finger,  the  ring  finger  and  the 
middle  finger.  Raising  up  the  hand  before  his  eyes  the 
worshipper  should  recite  the  nine  man  trams.  Having  thus 
raised  up  the  left  hand  he  should  slowly  lower  it  down 
(4 — g).  These  are  the  Madras  of  the  various  limbs  of 
Varaha  (Boar).  Having  folded  the  left  hand  into  a fist  he 
should  gradually  release  the  fingers.  He  should  lower  a 
little  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Then  the  left  hand 
should  be  folded  into  a fist  with  the  thumb  up.  This  brings 
on  the  success  of  Mudra  (6—7). 


CHAPTER  XXVII, 


n AHA  DA  said  : — I will  now  describe  Dikshd  (initiation 
ceremony)  that  grants  all  objects  of  desire.  The  worshipper 
should  adore  Hari  in  the  circle  of  a lotus.  Having  collected 
all  the  articles  of  sacrifice  011  the  tenth  day  Of  a lunar 
fort-night,  assigned  and  consecrated  them  with  mantrams, 
reciting  them  a hundred  times,  designed  for  worshipping  the 
man-lion  form  of  Vishnu,  he  should  scatter  on  all  sides 
sessamum  .seeds*  'destructive  of. demons,  reciting  the  mintrkm 
ending  .with  the  syllable  Phat.  (1—2),  He 'should 


f 


AGN1  PURANAM.  jop 

there  Sdkti*  identical  with  all,  in  the  form  of  grace.  He 
should  next  collect  all  the  herbs  and  spread  them  with 
mantrams  (3).  A worshipper  should  consecrate  a hundred 
times  in  pure  vessels  the  Panchagavyaf  by  the  mantrams 
which  are  used  in  worshipping  the  five  principal  forms  of 
Vasudeva  (4).  With  the  man  train  ending  with  the  word 
Narayana  he  ^should  scatter  them  on  earth  thrice  with  the 
tips  of  a Kuga  grass  held  by  his  right  hand.  Then  seated 
with  his  face  directed  towards  the  east  he  should  meditate  on 
Vishnu  in  his  heart.  He  should  adore  Vishnu  with  all  his 
parapharnalia  in  the  jar  and  Vardhani  (a  water  jar)  (5—6). 
He  should  consecrate  the  Vardhani  by  reciting  the  astra 
mantram  for  a hundred  times.  And  sprinkling  it  with  a 
continous  downpour  of  water  he  should  take  it  to  the  north- 
east quarter  (7).  Taking  the  jar  on  his  back  he  should  place 
it  on  the  scattered  sessamum  seeds.  Then  collecting  them 
with  Kuca  reeds  he  should  adore  the  presiding  god  of  the 
jar  and  Karkari  (a  water-jar  with  small  holes  at  the  bottom) 
(3).  He  should  then  adore  Hari,  clad  in  a raiment  and 
adorned  with  five  jewels,  in  the  sacrificial  altar,  offering 
oblations  to  fire  in  his  honor  and  reciting  [proper]  mantrams 
for  his  adoration,  as  before  (9).  Touching  him  with  a lotus 
and  anriointing  his  person  with  fragrant  unguents  the  wor- 
shipper should  fill  up  the  boiling  vessel  with  clarified  butter 
and  cow’s  milk  (10).  Then  seen  by  Vasudeva  and  Sang- 
karshana  lie  should  throw  rice  mixed  with  clarified  butter 

* The  actwe  power  of  a deity  regarded  as  his  wife.  In  the  Hindu 
system  of  worship  every  deity  is  worshipped  along  with  his  consort* 
No  worship  is  complete  unless  this  active  energy  in  the  shape  of  a 
female  deity  is  adored.  But  Sakfci,  in  Hindu  mythology,  popularly  and 
generally  refers  to  Durga  the  consort  of  Siva, 

f The  five  products  of  the  cow  taken  "collectively  i,  e*  milk,  curd, 
clarified  butter  or  ghee,  urine  and  cow  dung.  AH  these  are  regarded 
as  sacred  articles  of  paramount  *and  essential  importance  for  worship- 
ing a.  deity.  ■ ' . 


essential  importance  for  worship- 

..  . . ;■  ...  ■ ;/  a d\  . ri.-  ; ria  A 


li! 


ft  l 


i f i 

li 

M l 


no 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


into  the  well-purified  milk  (n),  Meditating  on  Pr&dyumna 
the  worshipper  should  stir  it  slowly  with  a Kuga  reed  and 
thinking  of  Aniruddha  he  should  put  down  the  boiled  food 
(12).  T ben  washing  his  face  and  hands,  besmearing  it  (with 
sandal)  he  should  put  the  sectarial  mark  with  ashes  on  his 
forehead  and  then  place  the  beautifully  prepared  and 
purified  chant  by  the  side  of  Naravana  (13)*  He  should 
-dedicate  one  portion  of  it  to  the  deties,  the  second  to  the 
jar  and  with  the  third  portion  he  should  offer  three  oblations 
(14).  He  should  offer  the  fourth  part  to  his  pure-souled 
preceptor  along  with  all  his  disciples.  Having  consecrated 
the  tree  of  milk  seven  times  with  Narayana  mantrams,  used 
a peice  of  wood  thereof  for  cleaning  the  teeth,  been  coos- 
cious  of  his  sins,  offered  oblations  to  the  hundred  auspicious 
and  most  excellent  lions,  lying  in  the  north  and  north  east 
quarters  belonging  to  Indra  and  Agni,  rinsed  his  mouth  and 
entered  the  temple  of  worship  the  raarifcrin  should  circum- 
ambulate Vishnu  with  the  recitation  of  mantrams  (15—17). 

Thou  art,  0 lord,  alone  the  refuge  of  the  beasts,  sunk  in 
the  ocean  of  the  world,  for  being  released  of  the  fetters. 
Thou  art  • always  fond  of  thy  votaries.  Thou  dost  always 
forgive  the  celestials  fettered  by  Prakriti  with  her  noose. 
By  thy  grace  I shall  release  these  beasts  bound  with  a 
noose  (18—19). 

Having  made  this  declaration  to  the  Lord  of  the  celestials 
■ he  should  allow  the  beasts  to  enter  (that  temple).  Having 
purified  them  according  to  the  rules  mentioned  before  and 
consecrated  them  with  fire  he  should  close  their  eyes,; 
Mentioning  the  name  of  the  deity  he  should  pour  handfuls  of 
flowers  there  (20—21).  He  should  then  duly  perform  the 
rite  of  recitation  and  worship.  He  should  mention  the 
name  of  the  idol  on  which  flowers  fall  (22).  He  should 
then  take  up  a Ted  thread  spun  well  by  a maiden  • and 
. measure  it  six;  times  from  the  tuft  of  the  hair /to  the  toe 
and  again  multiply  it  three  times  (23),  He  should  then 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


meditate  on  Prakriti  as  being  present  there}  in  whom  the 
universe  lies,  and  from  whom  the  universe  is  born  and  who 
appears  as  manifold  by  her  various  actions  (24).  Having 
thus  made  nooses  of  Prakriti  proportionate  to  the  number, of 
beasts  he  should  place  that  thread  cm  an  earthen  tray  by 
the  side  of  the  pit  (25).  Thereupon  having  meditated  on 
all  the  Tattwas*  beginning  in  order  of  creation  from 
Prakriti  to  the  earth  the  worshipper  should  assign  them  to  the 
body  of  his  disciple  (26).  All  these  are  known  by  persons, 
devoting  their  thought  to  the  ascertainment  of  the  nature  of 
principles,  and  are  severally  divided  as  one,  five  fold,  ten- 
fold and  twelve-foldf  (27).  With  five  organs  of  action  the 
entire  {universe  is  created.  Having  drawn  all  the  Tanmatras 
(subtile  particles)  with  self  he  should  place  the  Maya 
(illusion)  rope  on  the  body  of  the  beast  (28).  Prakriti  is  the 
creative  power— the  agent  is  Buddlii  (intellect)  or  Manas 
. •(mind).  The  five  Tanmatras  originate  from  Buddhi  and  the 
five  elements  from  the  organ  of  action  (29).  He  should 
meditate  on  these  twelve  principles  in  the  rope  and  body 
according  to  his  desire.  With  the  residue  of  offerings  he 
should  offer  oblations  to  the  work  of  Creation  carried  on  in 
grades  (30).  Celebrating  one  by  one  a hundred  Hamas  he 
should  offer  the  most  perfect  oblation.  Then  covering  the 
earthen  tray  he  should  dedicate  it  to  the  presiding  god  of  the 
jar  (31). 

Having  duly  performed  the  adhivasa%  ceremony  he  should 
initiate  his  devoted  disciply'  Having  placed  in  an  [open] 


* See  note  on  p 79. 

f The  first  one  division  is  Prakriti.  The  five  divisions  are  Tanmatras 


or  five  subtle  particles;  the  ten  divisions  are  the  five  instruments  of 
sensation  and  the  five  instruments  of  action  ; with  Prakriti  and  mind 
added  to  these  ten  the  twelve  parts  are  made  up.  ;■■■:■ 

t iPreiiminary  rite  of  consecrating  an  idol  before  it  is  placed  or  a 
pupil  before  he  is  initiated® 


ilM  ISKff# 


iiai 


1 


r 


jgg§ 


AGNl  PURANAM, 


112 


place  where  the  wind  blows  Karani*  and  a Kariari 'f 
made  either  of  silver  or  iron  as  well  as  other  necessary 
ingredients  and  touched  them  with  the  principal  mantram  he 
should  perform  the  Adhivdsa  ceremony  (32—33),  [He  should 
then  recite]  “salutation  I offer  this  food  to  the  goblins.” 
Then  he  should  meditate  00  Hari  as  lying  on  the  sacrificial 
grass.  He  should  next  adorn  the  sacrificial  yard  by  spread- 
ing  over  it  jars  of  sweet  meats  (34).  He  should  perform  a 
sacrifice  in  honor  of  Vishnu  in  that  circular  altar  • and 
then  pouring  oblations  to  the  fire  he  should  initiate  his 
disciples  seated  in  Padma  postures  (55).  Sprinkling  water 
on  Vishnu  with  his  hand  and  touching  gradually  his  head 
he  should  meditate  on  Prakriti  and  all  her  transforma- 
tions as  well  as  on  all  the  presiding  deities  present  there 
(36).  Bringing  the  creation  in  his  mind  he  should  gradually 
transfer  it  to  his  heart.  He  should  then  meditate  on  all 
transformed  into  Tanmatras  and  on  all  identical  with  Jiva 
(or  sentiencyt  (37)»  Thereupon  having  offered  prayers  to 
the  presiding  deity  of  the  jar  and  drawing  the  thread  the 
worshipper  should  approach  the  fire  and  place  it  on  its  side 
(38),  He  should  offer  a hundred  oblations  with  the  principal 
mantram  to  the  presiding  god  of  the  creation  present  there 
.and  then  offer  the  most  perfect  oblation  (39).  He  should 
■ then  collect -white  dust  and  . consecrate  it  a hundred  • tidies  ■ 
with  the  principal  man  tram.  He  should  then  throw  it  on  his 
'heart  reciting  the  man  tram  terminated  by  Hunt  and  fihat 
(40).  Then  gradually  with  man  trams  formed  by  subtracting 
syllables  he  should  offer  oblations  to  earth  and  other 
Tattwas  (41).  He  should  gradually  transfer  all  the  Tattwas, 
fire  &c  to  their  abode  Hari ; and  the  learned  worshipper 
should  then  think  of  the  sacrifice  (42),  He  should  subtract 
the  Tattwas  and  then  attain  *quietitude.  He  should  then 

* An  arrow  of  a particular  shape, 

f A knife. 


A-GN1  PURANAM-. 


'offer  oblation  to  the  fire.  Offering  eight  oblations  each  in 
favour  of  Garbh&dliana,  J&takarma,  Bhoga  (enjoyment)  and 
dissolution,  he  should  offer  one  to  Suddhi  or  purification. 
Taking  up  pure  ingredients  he  shouuld  offer  the  most  perfect 
oblation.  And  gradually  he  should  offer  oblations  to  other 
Tattwas,  Afterwards  by  Jnana  Yoga  he  should  immerse 
Jiva,  freed  of  worldly  fetters,  in  the  Eternal  Paramatman 
(43—46).  learned  man  should  think  of  the  spirit  of 

disassociation  in  the  Ever  blissful  pure  and  intelligent 
(Atman),  Afterwards  he  should  offer  the  Purna  (or  most 
perfect)  oblation  in  honor  of  the  deity  and  finish  the  rite  of 
Diksha  or  initiation  (47).  ':.v;-7.y;- 

I will  now  describe  the  Prayoga  (working)  mantrams 
associating  the  rite  of  Diksha  with  Homa. 

Om,  yam,  goblins,  the  pure  Hum,  phat.  By  this  one 
should  strike  and  separate  the  two. 

Om,  yam,  I destroy  the  goblins.  Hear  how  this  should  be 
united  with  Prakriti  after  having  accepted  it. 

Om,  Yam,  Bhutani  Punscha:  I will  now  relate  the 
mantrams  of  Homa*  and  those  of  Purnahutif  (48 — 49). 

Om  Swaha  destroy  these  goblins. 

Om,  am,  om,  Namas  (salutation)  unto  the  Lord  VSsiideva 
Boushat. 

After  offering  the  Purnahti  he  should  make  his  disciples 
do  the  same.  Then  the  learned  worshipper  should  purify 
all  the  Tattwas  in  due  order  with  the  mantram  Swa  preceded 
by  Tavana  and  ended  by  Namas, 

Om  Vain  the  organs  of  action.  Om  dem  the  organs  of 
intellect  &c. 

Om  sum  Tanmatra  of  smell.  Otn  sum  sum  Prakriti.  Om 
sum  sum  destroy  all  Swaha.  , 


* The  ceremony  of  offering  oblations  to  the  fire, 
f The  final  and  most  consummate  offering  to  the  fire, 
15 


n 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


114 

Then  Purnahuti  should  ' be  offered  in  the  northern 

direction. 

Om  Ram,  the  Tanmatra,  the  subtle  element  of  taste. 

Om  Bhen  the  Tanmatra  of  form.  Om  Ram  the  Tanmatra 
of  touch.  Om  am  the  Tanmatra  of  sound.  Om  bham 
Nam  as.  Onci  som  egoism.  Om  nam  intellect.  Om  om 
Prakriti. 

I have  thus  described  the  Diksha  ceremony  of  the  deity 
of  one  form  aod  also  described  the  dedication  to  nine 
Vyuhas. 

Having  consumed  all  a man  should  consign  Prakrit!  to 
Nirvana,  and  he  should  then  consign  Prakriti  to  the  Ishwara 
shorn  of  changes  (50 — 53). 

Having  purified  the  elements  he  should  purify  the  instru- 
ments of  action,  intellect,  Tanmatras,  mind,  knowledge  and 
egoism  (54).  Having  next  purified  the  gross  body  and  the 
soul  he  should  again  purify  Prakriti.  The  pure  Prakriti  and 
Purusha  are  stationed  in  Iswara  (55).  A person,  qualified  to 
understand  the  principles,  should  meditate  on  the  deity, 
after  Purnahuti  and  initiate  his  disciples  whom  he  had  known 
well  and  who  had  been  freed  from  the  bonds  of  Bhoga 
(endless  law  of  retribution)  (56k  Having  meditated  on  the 
deity  with  his  limbs  and  mantrams  he  should  gradually 
purify  equally  all  the  Tattwas.  Having  thus  meditated  on 
the  deity  endued  with  all  lordly  powers  he  should  offer  the 
Purnahuti . This  is  the  initiation  ceremony  of  the 
worshipper.  In  this  there  is  no  necessity  of  any  article  or 
property  which  Is  not  within  his  means  (57—58), 

Having  worshipped  the  deity  as  before  with  all  ; tj*e 
ingredients  the  foremost  of  votaries  should  initiate  the 
disciple  on  the  twelfth  day  from  that  of  the  adhivasa  cere- 
mony (59).  The  disciple  must  be  devoted,  humble,  endued 
with  all  the  physical  accomplishments  and  not  very  rich. 
Having  worshipped  the  deity  in  the  altar  he  should  initiate 
such  a disciple  (60).  The  spiritual  guide  should  meditate 


A.GNI  PURANAM6, 


In  the  person  of  the  disciple  on  the  entire  host  of  gods  and 
:atl  the  elements  spiritualized  in  order  of  the  creation  (6i). 
He,  desirous'  of  creation,  should  offer,  in  honor  of  Vasudeva 
and  other  agents  of  procreation,  each  sixteen  oblations 
accompanied  with  mantrans  beginning  in  due  order  from  the 
commencement  (62).  Having  released  all  the  fetters  of 
Karma  which  bind  one  to  births  the  spiritual  guide  should 
purify  them!  with  Homa  by  the  destructive  Yoga  (63)* 
Having  withdrawn  them  gradually  from  the  body  of  his 
disciple  the  spiritual  guide  should  purify  all  the  Tatfcwas 
Immersing  them  In  Agni,  Prakriti,  Vishnu  and  other  deities 

(64) .  With  Purnahuti  he  should  purify  the  impure 
principles.  After  the  disciple  had  attained  his  natural 
state  of  mind  he  should  consume  all  the  qualities  of  Prakriti 

(65) .  As  necessary  or  qualified  to  do  he  should  either 

free  or  bind  the  beasts.  Or  in  their  absence  the  preceptor 
should  perform  the  Sakti  diksha  \ 66).  Having  worshipped 
with  reverence  all  the  ascetics  endued  with  spiritual  powers 
lie  should  place  his  son  by  Vishnu  in  the  altar  (67).  The 
disciple  should  sit  with  his  face  towards  the  deity.  And 
the  spiritual  guide  should  sit  with  face  directed  askance.  He 
should  then  meditate  on  all  the  sacrifices,  instituted  along 
with  those  performed  on  the  changes  of  the  moon  (68).  He 
should  by  Dhyana  meditate  on  the  deity  in  the  person  of  his 
disciple  and  touch  it  as  before  (69).  He  should  then  gradti- 
ally  purify  all  the  Tattwas  on  the  altar  of  Hari.  And  he, 
engaged  in  the  enquiry  into  self,  should  touch  it,  take  it  and 
set  it  aside  (70).  He  should  gradually,  according  to  their 
nature,  purify  them  and  unite  them  with  the  deity*  And  then 
he  should  collect  them  with  a purified  mind  (71).  He  should 
by  Jn&na  mudra  and  dhyana  yoga  purify  them*  When  all 
the  Tattwas  are  thus  purified  he  should  place  them  in  the 
Great  Iswara  (72).  Having  burnt  them  he  should  extinguish 
the  fire  and  engage  his  disciples  In  ths  service  of  the  Lord, 
Then  the  foremost  of  spiritual  guides  should  conduct  the 


AGUt  PUR  AN  AM* 


worshipper  in  the  road  of  Siddhi  (73)*  Having  thus  per* 
formed  vigilantly  all  the  rites  a house-holder  becomes  a 
qualified  person.  He  should  so  long  purify  his  own  self 
as  long  as  his  anger  is  not  dissipated  (74),  Knowing  himself 
shorn  of  anger  and  freed  from  sins  a self-controlled  person? 
should  confer  the  previiege  of  a qualified  person  either  on 
his  own  son  or  his  disciple  (75).  Having  burnt  the  noose 
of  cosmic  illusion,  and  stationed  himself  in  self  he  should^ 
in  his  unmanifest  form,,  wait  for  the  destruction  of  his 
body  (76). 


CHAPTER  XXVfll, 


11  arADA  said I will  now  describe  the  Abhisheka  cere-! 
many  of  the  preceptor  and  his  son  by  which  a worshipper 
attains  siddhi  and  a diseased  man  becomes  freed  from  di- 
seases (1).  A king  obtains  kingdom  and  a woman  acquires 
a son  freed  from  sins.  He  should  assign  jars  containing 
jems  in  the  middle  and  east.  He  should  place  in  rows  a 
thousand  or  a hundred  of  them  in  the  circular  altar  under 
the  canopy  in  the  east,  of  Vishnu  (2— 3).  Having  placed  them 
sill  he  should  assign  his  son  in. parts  to  all.  He  should  then 
perform  the  Abhisheka  ceremony.  Men  should  there  offer 
Yoga  and  other  Pitakas  (altars)  for  receiving  favours.  -The 
preceptor  should  announce  the  conditions  and  a disciple, 
initiated  into  secrets;  he  acquires  all  that  he  wants  (4—5). 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


NaraDA  said :-— Having  worshipped  the  Lord  Hari  ora 
a circular  altar, erected  on  a purified  ground  in  the  room  a 
worshipper  should  practise  mantrams  in  the  temple  (i).  On 
a square  piece  of  ground  he  should  draw  a circle  and  should 
write  the  word  bhadra  (auspiciousness)  in  all  the  minor 
Compartments  (2).  Thirty  six  compartments  should  be  made 
outside.  Two  rows  should  be  made  and  two  doors  on  two 
sides  (3),  He  should  make  a lotus-like  circle  in  the  exterior, 
and  should  make  twelve  parts  in  the  half  of  the  lotus  (4). 
Having  thus  divided  it  he  should  make  four  circles,  one 
around  the  other.  The  first  is  the  ground  of  pericarp,  the 
second  is  that  of  filaments,  the  third  is  that  of  petals  and  the 
fourth  is  that  of  the  tips  of  petals.  He  should  join  the  points 
of  the  triangle  with  a thread  (5—6).  Having  connected 
with  it  the  filaments  and  the  petals  he  should  draw  eight 
petals  (7).  Then  the  interstices  between  the  petals  should 
be  drawn  inside  the  figure.  Then  the  tops  of  the  petals 
should  be  drawn  one  after  another.  They  should  be  again 
drawn  on  sides  and  on  the  exterior.  Then  filaments  should 
be  drawn  between  two  petals  (8—9).  This  is  the  ordinary- 
lotus  circle  of  sixty  two  petals.  Then  in  proper  measure 
the  pericarps,  in  halves,  should  be  drawn  in  the  east  in  due 
order  (10).  By  its  side  six  Kundalis  should  be  drawn  in 
circles.  Thus  twelve  fishes  should  be  drawn  in  the  lotus 
of  sixty  two  petals  (1 1).  For  attaining  success  in  the  rite 
One  should  draw  the  figure  of  an  unbroken  fish  with  five 
petals.  The  line  of  sky  (Vyomarekha)  should  be  drawn  out- 
side the  Pitha  (altar)  ; and  then  he  should  sweep  clean  the 
compartments  (12).  Two  and  two  other  figures,  for  the 
fe$f,  should  be  drawn  in  the  three  corners,  The  bodies 


: M 


■ ' 


■•"rW 


' if !'j||: 

fjfilB- 
:SMl 


mmimsmrnm 


Slilfifl 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


IlS 

should  extend  on  all  the  four  sides  (13).  Then  the  fins 
should  be  drawn  in  the  directions  for  forming  the  row.  Doors 
should  be  made  in  all  the  four  directions  (14).  One  the  sides 
of  the  doors  an  expert  man  should  draw  eight  graceful  ex- 
pressions; and  by  them  graceful  expressions  should  be  drawn 
(15).  Then  corners  of  minor  ornaments  should  be  made. 
In  the  middle  compartment  two  figures  each  should  be  drawn 
in  four  directions  (16).  On  the  four  external  sides  figures 
should  be  made  with  clay.  For  beautifying  it  three  figures 
should  be  drawn  on  each  side  of  the  petal  (17).  Similarly 
in  the  contrary  direction  minor  ornaments  should  be  drawn, 
three  in  number,  without  any  gap  in  and  outside  the  cone 

(18) .  Thus  the  sixteen  compartments  are  formed  and  thus 
the  other  circle  is  formed.  In  the  sixty-second  division 
a row  of  thirty-six  petals  should  be  drawn  in  the  lotus 

(19) .  One  fin  should  be  drawn  at  each  door  for  beautify, 
ing  it.  In  the  circular  altar  of  one  cubit  a lotus  should  be 
drawn  with  twelve  fingers  (20).  With  the  thumb  the  door 
should  be  drawn  one  cubit  in  area.  Then  four  altars  should 
be  made ; the  circular  lotus  should  be  two  fingers  in  cir- 
cumference (21).  The  half  of  the  lotus  should  be  drawn 
with  nine  fingers,  the  navel  with  three,  the  doors  with  eight 
and  the  circumference  with  four  (22).  Having  divided  the 
ground  into  three  parts  he  should  draw  the  inside  with  two 
fingers.  Then  for  accomplishing  his  object  he  should  write 
the  five  short  vowels  and  draw  the  radii  (23).  Then  accord- 
ing to  his  own  desire  he  should  either  draw  lotus  petals,  or 
citron  leaves  or  the  leaves  of  the  lotus  (24),  The  outer  cir- 
cumference should  be  drawn  from  the  root  of  the  radius  (25). 
He  should  roll  the  middle  Aram  (fire-producing  stick)  in 
the  interstice  between  the  radii  and  at  all  the  interven- 
ing spaces  citron  leaves  of  equal  dimensions  should  he. 
drawn  (26). 

Then  the  ground  should  he  divided  into  seven  parts,, 
each  of  them  measuring  equally  fourteen  fingers.  Then  two 


AGNI  PURANVIW, 


m 


hundred  and  ninety  six  apartments  should  be  drawn.  The 
word  bhadra  (auspiciousness)  should  be  written  there-  They 
should  be  encircled  with  rows  on  which  the  names  of  the 
quarters  should  be  written  (27—28).  Again  on  all  these 
rows  figures  of  lotuses  should  be  drawn.  Then  in  the  middle 
compartment  necks  should  be  drawn  in  all  the  quarters  (29). 
Four  figures  shpuld  be  drawn  outside,  and  after  it  three  in 
each  row,  one  after  the  other.  Then  an  ornament  should  be 
drawn  by  the  side  of  each  neck  (30).  He  should  sprinkle 
thrice  with  water  the  seven  extremities  of  the  external  cone. 
Thus  is  formed  the  circular  altar  of  seven  divisions  where 
Hari  should  be  worshipped  (31).  This  is  the  circular  altar 
of  twenty  five  vhyuhas  where  the  universal  form  of  Vishnu 
is  worshipped.  Thirty  two  cubits  of  ground  should  be  equally 
measured  by  a votary  with  his  hand  (32).  Thus  within  six- 
teen (principal)  compartments  one  thousand  and  twenty  four 
minor  ones  are  formed  (33).  Having  written  bhadra  and 
sprinkling  water  to  the  fire  he  should  write  eight  bkadrakas 
with  six  compartments  in  all  the  quarters.  Then  sprinkling 
the  fins  and  the  sixteen  bkadrakas ) with  water  he  should  , 
draw  other  fins  on  all  sides  34 — *35).  He  should  then  draw 
the  twelve  doors,  three  in  each  quarter,  six  at  the  outside, 
and  four  severally  in  the  end,  middle  and  all  sides  (36).  He 
should  draw,  for  beautifying  the  figure,  four  doors,  two  outside 
and  two  inside.  And  three  minor  doors  should  be  drawn 
in  the  extremeties  and  five  outside  (37)*  Then  he  should 
as  before  make  ornamental  drawings,  seven  in  the  external 
cones  and  three  in  the  end  (38). 

He  should  worship  Para  Brahma  in  the  auspicious  twenty- 
five  Vyhuas.  Then  gradually  in  the  lotus  drawn  in  the  mid- 
dle beginning  with  the  east  he  should  worship  V&stideva  and 
other  deities  (39).  Having  worshipped  the  Boar  form  of 
Vishnu  in  the  first  lotus  he  should  adore  the  Vyuahas  till  the 
worship  of  the  twenty-six  is  finished  (40).  In  the  lotus  he  should 
adore  all  the  Vyuhas  with  great  care,  He  should  then 


mimm. 


agni  puranam, 


PrachetS  in  the  shape  of  the  sacrifice  (41).  He  should  regar  d 
Achyuta  as  divided  into  many  forms  such  as  truth  etc.  He 
should  then  portion  out  the  ground  of  forty  fingers  (42).  He 
should  first  divide  it  into  seven,  then  again  into  two,  then 
into  four,  six,  seven,  hundred  and  thousand  (43).  The 
bhadra  of  the  compartments  should  be  encircled  with  sixteen 
of  them.  Then  rows  should  be  drawn  on  the  sides  along 
with  the  bhadras  (44)-  Sixteen  figures  of  lotuses  should  be 
drawn,  then  twenty  four  lotuses  for  rows  and  thirty  two 
lotuses  for  fins  (45).  Then  with  forty  rows  and  three  fins 
the  principal  and  minor  ornaments  of  the  doors  should  be 
drawn  in  all  the  directions  (46).  Two,  four  or  six  doors 
should  be  drawn  in  all  the  directions;  either  five  or  three 


CHAPTER  XXX, 


n ARADA  said One  should  adore  the  iotus-naveiled 
Brahma,  with  all  his  limbs,  in  the  middle  lotus*  In  the  lotus 
in  the  north-east  comer  he  should  adore  Prakrit!  and  Purusha 
in  the  lotus  in  the  north  (i).  In  the  south  of  the  Purusha 
Sre-gad  should  be  worshipped  and  the  wind-god  in  the  south- 
east  quarter  presided  over  by  Varuna.  The  sun  should  be 


AGNI  PUTNAM, 


122 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


colours,  the  two  corners  with  blue  and  yellow  and  the  centre 
with  dark  (17).  The  radii  should  be  painted  with  yellow 
and  blue  colours  and  the  circumference  with  blue  and  dark- 
blue.  The  outer  part  should  be  drawn  with  white,  dark- 
blue,  dark  and  yellow  lines  (18).  The  powder  of  Shali-rice 
is  white ; it  becomes  blue  on  being  mixed  with  safflower, 
yellow  on  being  mixed  with  turmeric  and  black  on  the  rice 
being  burnt  (19).  It  becomes  dark-blue  with  Shami  leaves. 
One  lakh  of  Veeja  mantrams  should  be  recited  ; four  lakhs  of 
mantrams  should  be  recited;  one  hundred  and  thousand 
means  of  acquiring  learning  should  be  mentioned ; ten 
thousand  means  of  the  science  of  enlightenment  should 
be  mentioned;  and  a thousand  verses  should  be  recited. 
First  of  all  reciting  one  hundred  thousand  of  mantrams  the 
ceremony  of  the  purification  of  self  should  be  performed 
(20—21).  Then  with  another  Lakh  the  mantra  should  be 
dedicated  to  the  earth.  Thus  the  Homa-like  Purvasevd  of 
Vyas  is  described  (22).  The  Purvasevd  rite  should  be 
performed  with  ten  parts  of  the  Mantras . With  the  Pur  as- 
chara  ceremony  of  the  mantrams  the  monthly  Vraia  should 
be  performed  (23).  One  should  place  the  left  foot  on  the 
ground  without  accepting  the  donation  due  to  him.  By 
doing  so  twice,  or  thrice,  the  middle  class  and  the  most 
excellent  Siddhis  are  acquired  (24).  I shall  now  describe 
the  Dhyana  (meditation)  of  mantrams  by  which  the  fruits 
thereof  are  acquired.  One  should  receive  outside  the  gross 
body  of  the  deity  which  can  be  described  in  words  (25). 
The  luminous  subtle  form  exists  in  the  heart  and  is  within 
the  reach  of  thought.  Param  or  the  great  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  thought  (26).  The  boar,  lion  etc,  are  principally 
the  gross  forms.  The  form  of  Vasudeva  is  beyond  the  range 
of  thought  (27),  The  other  minor  forms  exist  in  the  heart 
and  are  within  the  range  of  thought.  The  Virai  or  the 
universal  form  is  the  gross  body  and  the  subtle  form  is  design- 
ated by  a symbol  (38).  The  form  that  is  beyond  the  reach 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


123 


of  thought  is  described  as  Ishwara • One  should  meditate 
on  the  Veeja  (the  essence  of  mystic  syllables)  of  the  shape  of  a 
Kadamva  flower,  which  is  consciousness,  the  eternal  light 
residing  in  the  lotus  of  ;the  heart.  As  a lamp  lies  obstructed 
inside  a pitcher  so  the  lord  of  mantrams  lies  restrained  in 
the  heart.  As  the  beams  of  light  come  out  through  a per- 
forated pitcher  so  the  rays  of  the  Veeja  come  through  the 
organs  of  the*  body.  Then  uniting  themselves  with  the 
power  of  the  deity  they  exist  in  the  body  (29—32).  Coming 
out  of  the  heart  the  tubular  organs  come  within  the  ken 
of  the  instrument  of  vision.  Then  the  two  organs  come 
to  the  top  of  the  nose.  Then  having  conquered  the  airs  of 
the  body  by  means  of  the  tube  passing  through  the  organ 
of  excretion,  a mantrin , ever  engaged  inc.meditation  and  the 
recitation  of  the  names  of  the  deity,  enjoys  the  fruits  of  the 
mantram  (33—34).  With  the  gross  elements  and  Tanmatras 
(subtle  particles)  purified,  practising  Yoga  with  some  object 
in  view,  disassociating  himself  from  the  world  he  acquires 
AnimH  and  other  siddkis  and  leaves  the  elements  in  the 
All-intelligent  (35). 


CHAPTER  XXXh 


: 


■ 


1 


Agni  said  I will  now  describe  the  Marjana  (cleansing 
rite)  of  one’s  own  self  as  well  as  of  others  by  which  a man  is 
freed  from  miseries  and  attains  to  felicity  (i). 

Om  salutation  unto  the  greatest  object,  Purusha,  the 
great  ascetic,  to  Him  of  one  and  many  forms,  present  all 
over  the  universe,  the  Great  Soul,  him  freed  from  sins,  pure  ■» 
and  ever  engaged  in  meditative  .contemplation.  May  what  ^ 


» 


*L 

fp^ 

Wife 

Hi msM 


124 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM,, 


I say  prove  true  (2—3).  Salutation  unto  the  Boar,  Man-lion 
and  Dwarf  form  (of  Vishnu)  the  great  Muni.  May  what  I 
say  prove  true  (4).  Salutation  unto  Him  of  three  foot-steps, 
Rama,  Vaikuntha  and  Nara.  May  what  I say  prove  true, 
0 Boar,  O Lord,  O Man-lion,  0 Lord  Dwarf  of  three  foot- 
steps, 0 Lord  of  Hayagriva,  0 Lord  of  all,  O Hrishikesh,  do 
thou  destroy  all  evils  (5—6),  With  these  four  most ’excellent 
weapons,  discus  and  others,  ever  victorious  and*'  of  unbroken 
power  do  thou  destroy  ail  wicked  beings  (7).  Remove  such 
a person's  calamity  and  do  him  all  good.  Destroy  the  fear 
of  the  fetters  of  death  which  is  the  result  of  calamity.  Des- 
troy the  magical  incantations  set  with  meditation  for  working 
evils,  creating  diseases  and  decrepitude  (8—9).  : 

Om  salutation  unto  Vasudeva,  Krishna,  unto  him  having 
lotus  eyes  and  Keshava,  the  first  holder  of  the  discus  (ro). 
Salutation  unto  his  clean  raiment  rendered  yellow  with  the 
filaments  of  lotuses,  unto  the  discus  hurled  on  the  shoulders 
of  the  great  enemy  of  Harass  as  well  as  unto  the  holder  of 
the  same  (11).  Salutation  unto  the  holder  of  the  earth  up- 
raised by  his  tusks  (Boar-form),  unto  him  having  three  forms, 
unto  the  great  sacrificial  horn,  unto  him  lying  on  the  hood 
of  the  serpent  Sesha  (12).  Salutation  unto  thee,  the  celes- 
tial lion  (man-lion  form),  having  manes  of  the  hue  of  molten 
gold,  eves  bright  like  the  burning  fire,  and  claws  hard  as 
adamant  (13).  I bow  again  and  again  unto  thee  adorned 
with  the  Vedas,  Rik,  Yayush  and  Saman,  who  hadst  cover 
the  earth  with  thy  one  foot  in  thy  Dwarf  form  (14).  Q Boar, 

O thou  of  huge  tusks,  do  thou  grind  all  the  evils  and  the 
effects  of  all  the  sins  (15).  0 dreadful  man-lion,  O thou 

having  fire  burning  within  thy  teeth,  O destroyer  of  dangers, 
do  thou  break  down  all  his  enemies  (16).  O thou  the  origi- 
nator of  Rik,  Yayush  and  Sama  Vedas,  O thou  the  holder 
of  Dwarf-form,  0 Janarddana,  do  thow  allay  all  his  miseries 
(17).  0 Govinda,  do  thou  cure  all  forms  of  fear,— -coming  • 

every  day,  every  alternate  day,  every  third  and  fourth  day. 


AGNI  PURANAM.  125 

the  higli  fever,  the  Satata  fever,*  one  attended  with  com- 
plications, mixed  remittent  fever  and  accidental  fever.  Do 
thou  cut  off  the  sufferings  (18 — 19).  The  diseases  of  the 
eye,  the  complaints  of  the  head,  diseases  of  the  belly  and 
stomach,  difficulty  of  breathing,  excessive  breathing,  burning 
of  the  body,  trembling,  diseases  of  the  organ  of  smelling 
and  feet,  leprosy,  consumption,  fistula,  all  the  forms  of 
dysentry,  diseases  of  the  mouth,  chest  diseases,  stone  in  the 
bladder,  strangury  (difficulty  in  passing  urine),  diseases  of 
the  generative  organ,  gonorrhoea  and  other  dreadful  diseases* 
those  originating  from  the  wind,  bile  and  phlegm  respec- 
tively and  those  caused  by  the  derangement  of  all  these  three, 
accidental  diseases,  boils,  pustules,  Erysepelas— may  all  these 
disappear  on  being  cleansed  by  V&sudeva  (20*— 24).  May 
all  these  be  destroyed  by  the  recitation  of  Vishnu’s  name  ; 
may  all  these  innumerable  ailments  be  completely  done  away 
with  on  being  struck  by  Hari’s  discus  (25).  The  recitation 
of  the  names  of  Achyuta,  Ananta  and  Govinda  destroys  all 
the  diseases.  Verily,  verily  do  I say  so  (26). 

The  poison  of  animate  beings  and  inanimate  objects,  the 

artificial  poison,  that  of  the  teeth  and  nails,  that  of  the 

sky,  that  of  the  spider  and  various  other  insects — may 
all  these  and  various  other  dreadful  poisons  be  destroyed 
by  JanSrddana  on  the  recitation  of  his  name  (27—28).  The 
planets,  evil  stars,  the  female  goblins,  Vetalas,  Pishacas, 
Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  R&kshasas,  Shakuni,  Pufcani  and  other 
she-devils,  Vainayakas,  Mukhamandins,  the  wily  Revati,  the 
old  Revati,  the  evil  planets  called  Vriddhakas,  the  Matri- 
Grahas— may  the  recitation  of  the  early  life  of  Vishnu 
destroy  all  these  evil  agencies  which  try  to  destroy  the 
children  (29—31).  May  the  looks  of  the  Man-lion  con- 
sume all  these  evil  agents  which  infest  old  age,  boy- 
hood and  youth  (32).  May  the  grim-visaged  and  highly 

* One  of  the  varieties  of  intermittent  fever  which  has  two  paroxysms 

daily,  i 


126 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


powerful  Man-lion  destroy  all  these  innumerable  agents  of 
evil  and  do  good  to  the  world  (32).  O man-lion,  O great 
lion,  O thou  having  a garland  of  fire,  O thou  of  fiery 
mouth,  O lord  of  all,  0 thou  having  fiery  eyes,  destroy 
all  these  innumerable  agents  of  evil  (33).  May  the  Great 
Atman  JanSrddana,  identical  with  all,  destroy  all  the 
diseases,  the  great  portents,  all  the  poisons,  all  the  evil 
stars,  the  obnoxious  creatures,  the  bad  influence  of  the 
stars,  all  the  dangers  of  corn-fields,  such  as  fire,  ashes  &c. 
(34—36).  Assuming  one  of  thy  forms,  do  thou  destroy  all 
these,  O Vasudeva.  Hurling  thy  discus  Sudarshana  engar- 
landed  with  a dreadful  fire,  do  thou  destroy  all  evils,  O 
Achyuta,  O foremost  of  gods  (37—38).  O Sudharshana  of 
fiery  effulgence  and  great  sound,  destroy  all  these  evil  agents. 
May  the  demon?  meet  with  destruction,  O Vibhishana  (39). 
May  the  deity  Man-lion  of  terrific  roars,  identical  with  all 
the  quarters,  east,  west,  north  and  south  (40),  may  the  Lord 
Janarddana  of  many  forms  protect  all  the  quarters,  heaven, 
earth,  sky,  the  rear,  sides  and  the  front  (41).  Vishnu  protects 
the.  entire  universe  consisting  of  Devas,  Asuras  and  men. 
May  by  this  fact  all  the  evil  agents  be  put  down  (42).  The 
very  remembrance  of  Vishnu  immediately  dissipates  all  sins. 
May  all  the  evil  agents  be  similarly  suppressed  (43).  Vishnu 
is.  the  great  soul  sung  in  the  Vedanta  or  the  gnostic  portion 
of  the  Vedas ; may  by  his  power  all  the  evil  agents  be  sup- 
pressed. Vishnu  is  lauded  by  the  celestials  as  the  lord  of 
sacrifices  ; may  by  his  power  all  that  I say  may  prove  true 
(4.5).  May  peace  and  auspiciousness  prevail  and  evils  meet 
wltl>  suppression.  I press  the  Kuca  reeds  originating  from 
the  person  of  VSsudeva  (46).  May  Govinda,  Nara  and 
Narayana  cleanse  them.  The  recitation  of  Hari’s  name 
removes  all  miseries  (47).  The  instrument  of  cleansing 
wards  off  all  diseases.  1 am  Hari ; Vishnu  is  thq  Kug&  teed 
—your  disease  is  destroyed  by  me  (48). 


CHAPTER  XXXiL 


Agni  said  : — In  the  initiatory  rites  for  attaining 
emancipation  an  intelligent  man  should  perform  forty  eight 
Samskaras’  (purificatory  rites).  Hear  them  by  practising 
which  one  becomes  a god  (i).  The  ceremony  of  GarbhS- 
dh&na  is  performed  as  soon  as  the  conception  takes  place, 
then  Punsavana,  then  Seemantonnayana,  then  Jitakarma, 
then  Naming  ceremony,  then  Ann&shana,  then  Chudakarana 
and  then  Brahmacbarya.  There  are  (seven)  Vratas  (vowed 
observance) the  four  are  Vaisbnavi,  Parthi,  Bhoutiki,  and 
Shroutiki.  Then  the  giving  of  kine,  Snatakatwa*  and  Paka- 
yajnaf  these  three  make  up  the  seven. 

There  are  eight  Parvana  Sraddhas  performed  in  the 
months  of  Srlvaoa,  Agrahayana,  Chaitra  and  Ashwin.  There 
are  seven  Hariyajnas;J  hear  their:names ; they  are  Adhana, 
Agnihotra,  Dash,  Pournamasaka,  Chaturmasya,  Pashuvandha 
and  Soutramani.  Hear  of  the  seven  Somasanstha,  viz  the 
foremost  of  sacrifices  Agnisthoma,  Atyagnisthoma,  Ukta> 
Sodasha,  Vajapeyaka,  Atiratra  and  Aptayama.  There  are 
thousand  others.  They  are  Hiranyananghri,  Hiranyaksha* 
Hiranyamitra,  Hiranyapani,  Hemaksha,  Hemasutraka,  Hirar 
nyashwa,  Hiranyanga,  Hemajihva,  Hiranyavan  and  so  forth, 
Ashwamedha  is  the  king  of  them  all.  Hear  now  of  the  eight 
virtues  (8—9).  They  are  compassion  unto  all  creatures,  forgive.- 
I ness,  simplicity,  purity,  industry,  seeking  the  welfare  of  all, 
liberality,  and  want  of  avarice.  A hundred  oblations  should 
be  offered  with  the  principal  mantram.  These  are  the  Soura* 

* Entering  upon  the  duties  of  a householder  after  finishing  the  Vec 
studies  within  the  prescribed  time. 

. f A simple  domestic  sacrifice. 

$ Sacrifices  in  which  oblations  of  clarified  butter  are  offer 


fillips 


ft  t 


11 


% 


128 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


Sakteya  and  Vishmvisha  Dikshas.  Being  purified  by  these 
purificatory  rites  a man  obtains  emancipation,  enjoyment  and 
freedom  from  all  diseases  and  lives  like  a god.  By  reciting 
the  name  of,  adoring  and  mediating  on  the  deity  one  meets 
with  well-being  (10—12). 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 


JHlGNI  said  : — I will  now  describe  the  Pavitra-arohana 
(sacred  installing)  of  Hari  as  well  as  the  fruits  of  his  worship 
all  through  the  year.  The  first  day  of  a lunar  fortnight 
either  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  Ash&da  or  the  end  of 
Kartika  gives  riches  (1).  Beginning  with  the  second  day  of 
the  lunar  fort-night  the  Adhana  ceremony  of  Shri,  Gouri, 
Ganesha,  Saraswati,  Guha,  Martanda,  the  Matri-Durgas, 
Siva  and  Brahma  should  be  performed.  That  day  is  sacred 
for  a particular  deity  of  which  he  is  fond.  The  regu- 
lations are  the  same  in  the  Adhana  ceremony  but  the 
mantras  are  different.  Making  nine  folds  of  a thread  made 
of  gold,  silver,  copper,  silk  or  cotton  or  any  other  thread 
spun  by  a Br&hmana,  well  purified,  one  should  perform  the 
rite  of  Pavitraka  (consecration).  It  must  be  highest  one 
hundred  and  eight  (fingers)  in  length  or  its  half.  He  should 
then  fexclaim  " O lord  ! ? Whatever  thou  hast  said  to  me  lest 
the  rite  may  not  be  stopped  I . have  done  it  for  the  conse- 
cration ceremony.  May  there  be  no  impediment  here.  O 
eternal,  0 lord,  grant  me  success  (2 — 7).”  He  should  then 
fix  it  in  the  first  part  of  the  circular  altar  after  reciting  the 
following  Gayatri  (slffered  verse.) 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


Om  Narayana  Vidmahe;  V3sudeva  Dhimahi,  Tanna  Vishnu 
Prachodayat.  He  should  consecrate  the  knees,  thighs,  and 
navel  of  the  idol  and  adorn  the  feet  with  a garland  of  one 
thousand  and  eight  flowers.  The  garland  should  be  made 
duly  thirty  two  fingers  long  (8—10).  In  the  circular  lotus  of 
one  finger  the  pericarp,  filament,  leaf,  the  first  mantram  and 
the  outer  circumference  of  the  circle  should  be  consecrated 
(11).  In  the  ‘altar  with  fingers,  the  threads  for  the  self,  the 
preceptors  and  the  parents  should  be  consecrated.  Twelve 
strings  should  be  consecrated  to  the  end  of  the  navel  and  a 
similar  .number  of  purified  scents.  Then  two  garlands  should 
be  tied  with  two  fingers  with  the  recitation  of  one  hundred 
and  eight  mantrams  (12—13).  Then  with  the  ring  and 
middle  fingers  twenty  four  and  thirty  six  garlands  should  be 
severally  consecrated  for  the  sun.  Then  with  fingers  begin- 
ning with  the  youngest  twelve  strings  should  be  placed  at  the 
purified  origin  of  the  sun,  fire  &c  as  in  the  case  of  Vishnu. 
Then  the  sacrificial  thread  should  be,  according  to  one’s 
might,  placed  in  the  articles  of  the  worship  of  Vishnu  on  the 
altar  in  the  pit  encircled  by  a girdle  (i4~~t6).  A person, 
who  performs  ablution  and  Sandhya,  should  dye  the  seven- 


agni  puranam. 


130 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  I restrain  the  subtle  particle 
of  taste.  Salutation. 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat*  Hum,  I restrain  the  subtle  particle 
of  colour.  Salutation. 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  I restrain  the  subtle  particle 
of  touch.  Salutation. 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  I restrain  the. subtle  particle 
of  sound.  Salutation. 

Drawing  up  the  five  vital  breaths  one  should  meditate  on 
the  subtle  particle  of  smell,  colour  and  earth  and  on  the 
presiding  god  Indra,  yellow-hued,  holding  a strong  thunder- 
bolt within  his  two  feet.  He  should  then  restrain  the  pure 
subtle  particle  of  taste  in  that  of  colour  and  similarly  the 
remaining  others. 

Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  taste. 

Ora,  Hrim,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the  subtle 
particle  of  colour. 

■ Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  touch. 

Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 

subtle  particle  of  sound. 

In  the  interstice  between  his  two  thighs  he  should  meditate 
on  the  presiding  deity  Varuna,  holding  a white  lotus  as  his 
emblem,  whiie-hued  and  crescent-shaped.  Drawing  up  the 
four  vital  breaths  he  should  ^restrain  the  pure  subtle  particle 
of  taste  in  that  of  colour  (21— -24). 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 

subtle  particle  of  colour. 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation,  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  touch. 

Om,  Hum,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 

subtle  particle  of  sound. 

Having  drawn  up  the  three  vital  breaths  he  should 

meditate  on  the  Vanhi  mandate  having; 


agni  puranam. 


well  as  on  the  presiding  god  of  fire,  crimson-colourd,  holding 
an  emblem  of  Swasthika,  in  his  navel.  He  should  then 
immerse  the  pure  colour  in  the  subtle  particle  of  touch. 

Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  touch. 

Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  sound.  The  circle  between  throat  and 
nostril  is  the  seat  of  Vayu.  Having  drawn  up  the  two  vital 
breaths  he  should  meditate  on  the  smoky-coloured  wind-god 
having  the  moon  for  his  emblem.  Then  by  means  of 
meditation  he  should  restrain  the  subtle  particle  of  touch  by 
that  of  sound  (25 — 27). 

Om,  Hrim,  Has,  Phat,  Hum,  salutation,  I restrain  the 
subtle  particle  of  sound. 

Having  drawn  up  one  vital  breath  he  should  restrain  the 
ether,  clear  and  transparent  like  glass,  on  the  tip  of  his 

nose  (28). 

In  this  way  a worshipper  should  gradually  purify  his 
various  limbs.  He  should  meditate  on  his  dry  body  from  the 
tip  of  the  foot  to  the  end  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown 
(29).  With  the  mantram  Yam  and  Vam  he  should  adore  the 
essence,  covered  with  flames,  coming  out  of  the  cavity  of  the 
brain  (30^.  Having  meditated  on  Vindu  he  should  besmear 
the  body  with  ashes;  and  then  with  the  mantram  lam 
he  should  convert  it  into  a celestial  body  (31).  Having 
made  Ny§sa  or  assignment  of  the  various  fingers  and  parts 
of  the  body  he  should  practise  mental  yoga  and  adore 
Vishnu  with  all  his  limbs  in  the  lotus  of  the]  heart  with 
mental  flowers  (32).  Then  with  principal  mantram  be  should 
adore  the  lord  of  the  deities  who  gives  enjoyment  and  eman- 
cipation praying  •' O lord  of  gods,  welcome  unto  thee.  O 
Keshava,  come  near  me.  Accept  my  mental  adoration,  the 
true  spirit  of  which  has  been  thought  over  by  me,”  Then 
the  tortoise,  the  power  of  support,  then  Ananta  and  then 
earth  should  be  adored  (33—34).  In  the  fire  &c  Dharma 


13* 


AGNI  PURAN'AM* 


and  others,  in  the  senses  other  impure  beings,  in  Satfcwa  and 
other  qualities  the  lotus,  in  maya  or  avidya  (illusion)  the 
principle  of  |time,  the  sun  and  other  luminous  bodies  and 
the  king  of  birds  should  be  adored.  Then  Vayu  and  other 
deities  of  the  quarters*  the  preceptor,  Gana,  Saras wati, 
Narada,  Nalakuvara,  the  great  preceptor  and  his  sandal 
should  be  adored  in  the  middle.  In  the  filaments  the  pre- 
vious Siddhis,  the  after  Siddhis,  the  Sakcis,  Lakshmi, 
Saraswati,  Priti,  Kirti,  Shanti,  Kanti  Pushti,  Stuti,  Mahendra 
and  others  should  be  adored.  In  the  middle  Hari,  Shriti, 
Shri,  Rati  and  Kanti  should  be  adored,  Achyuta  should 
be  placed  with  the  principal  mantram,  saying  iC  Ora,  have  thy 
faces  towards  me, be  thou, near  me”  Having  placed  Arghya 
and  other  articles  and  offered  them  he  should  adore  him  with 
scents,  garlands  and  the  principal  mantram  (35—40). 

“ Ora  strike  terror*  strike  terror  to  the  heart  and  head  * 
terrorise  it  again.  Grind  the  flames  of  the  fires,  weapons 
and  armours  (41). 

Protect,  protect,  destroy,  destroy,  salutation  to  the  amulet 
Om,  Hum,  phafc,  salutation  to  the  weapon/1 

Then  with  the  principal  mantram  he  should  adore  the 
limbs.  He  should  first  worship  the  form  of  Daksha  and  the 
moon.  Vasudeva,  Sangkarshana,  Pradyumna,  Aniruddfaa, 
Agni  &c,  Shri,  Dhrifci,  Rati  are  the  forms  of  Hari.  In  the 
east  and  eastern  corners  should  be  adored  the  conch,  discus, 
club  and  lotus ; beyond  it  the  Shranga  bow,  mace,  sword  and 
the  garland  of  wild  flowers.  Indra  and  others,  as  well  as 
Ananfca  and  Varuna  should  be  adored  in  the  south  west 
quarter;  Brahma  and  Indra  in  the  north-east  and,  their 
weapons  in  the  outside.  Airavata,  the  goat,  the  buffaJoe, 
the  monkey, ithe  deer,  the  hair,  the  bull,  the  tortoise  and  the 
swan  should  be  adored  outside.  The  gate-keepers,  K^ujpuda 
and  others  of  Krishna,  should  be  adored  in  pairs  at  the  gates 
from  the  east  to  the  north.  Then, saluting  Hari  one  should 
bring  edibles.  Saying  “Salutation,  unto,  the  attendants /oi 


v~';!  v. 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


Vishnu”  he  should  place  the  edibles  on  the  sanctified  altar* 
He  should  offer  adoration  to  Vishwa,  Vishwaksena  and  Ishana. 
He  should  then  tie  the  thread  of  protection  in  the  right  hand 
of  the  deity,  saying,  “ I have  worshipped  him  for  full  one 
year*  Now  salutation  unto  the  sacred  rite  of  installation  which 
yeilds  consummate  fruit 5(42—50).  He  should  observe  the 
vow  of  fasting  before  the  deity  saying,  11  Being  engaged  in 
fasting  I do  propitiate  the  deity.”  May  lust,  anger  and 
other  passions  not  reside  in  me,  O lord  of  gods,  from  to- 
day it  is  the  last  of  them.  The  observer  of  vow  should 
adore  the  deity  according  to  his  might  and  perform  religious 
rites  day  and  night.  Having  lauded  Vishnu  and  offered  obla- 
tion to  fire  in  his  honor  he  should  perform  Visarjana  (life- 
destroying  rite.)  This  is  the  every  day  mode  of  worship. 
(The  mantram  is)  Om,  Hrim,  Srim,  salutation  unto  Shri- 
dhara,  unto  him  who  enchants  the  three  worlds  (52—53).” 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


■AlGNI  said  -.—With  the  following  special  mantram  the 
sacrificial  ground  should, be*  adorned. 

“ Salutation  unto  the  deity  Brahmanyaj  Shridhara  o£ 
undecaying  self,  unto  Vishnu  whose  forms]  are  the  Rikf 
Yayush  and  Samar*  and  whose  body  is. the  sound.” 

Having  drawn  the  figure  of  Mandala  or.  circular  altar  he 
should  collect  all  the  articles  of  sacrifice  (1—2).  Having, 
washed  the  head  and  fingers  a man  should  take  up  Arghya 
with  his  fingers.  He  should  then  sprinkle  the  head  and 
gate-wavs  with  Arghya.  He  should  then  begin  the  sacrifice, 
of  the  gate  (Dwarayaga)  and  adore  all  the  presiding  deities  | 


in  * mil  ’ 


)• 


■I 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


of  the  doors.  Ashwatha  (fig-tree),  Udumvara,  Vata  and 
Plaksha  are  the  trees  of  the  east  The  Rik  is  the  ornament 
of  lodra  in  the  west ; the  Yayush  is  the  highly  auspicious 
one  of  Yama ; the  Saman  is  of  the  water-god  and 
Atharvanlis  of  Soma  (3 — 5).  The  end  of  the  gate,  the  flags, 
the  lotuses  and  the  two  pitchers  should  be  adored  in  every 
door  by  their  respective  names ; and  in  the  east  a pitcher 
full  of  water.  He  should  then  adore  the  guardians  of  the 
door— the  two  sons  of  Ananda,  Virasena  and  Sushenaka  in 
Daksha  and  Sambhava  and  Prabhava  in  Soumya.  Having 
recited  the  names  of  the  weapons  and  scattered  flowers  he 
should  remove  all  the  obstacles.  Having  performed  the 
purificatory  rite  of  the  elements  as  also  Nylsa  one  should 
perform  Mudra  (6—8).  Having  recited  the  fire  mantram 
. terminating  with  the  word  Pkat  he  should  throw  mustard 
seeds  on  all  sides.  The  urine  of  the  cow  should  be  sanctified 
by  Vasudeva,  the  cow  dung  by  Sangkarshana,  the  milk  by 
Pradyumna,  and  the  curd  produced  therefrom  should  be 
dedicated  to  Narlyana.  One,  two,  three  or  more  divisions 
should  be  made  with  clarified  butter  (9— 10).  When  these 
articles  are  mixed  in  a vessel  of  clarified  butter  it  is  called 
Pancha-gavya  (or  five  products  of  a cow).  Some  of  them 
are  used  for  sprinkling  the  sacred  temples  and  others 
B for  food  (il).  indra  and  other  guardian  deities  of  the 
ft  quarters  should  be  adored  in  ten  pitchers.  And  they  should 
If  be  made  to  hear  the  command  of  adoration.  And  they 
ip'/  should  be  installed  by  the  command  of  Harr  (12).  Having 
If;  kept  safely  all  the  articles  of  sacrifice  he  should  scatter 
If/'  articles  which  are  intended  for  scattering.  Then  reciting 
the  principal'  mantram  for  eight  hundred  times  he  should 
m take  up  handfuls  of  Kuga  grass.  Having  placed  a pitcher 
f ■ and  Vardhani*  \in  the  north-east  quarter  he  should  adore 
I1  Hari  and  all  his  limbs  in  the  pitcher  and  'the  weapon  in 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


135 


Vardhani.  Having  gone  round  the  temple  of  sacrifice  and 
sprinkled  water  in  broken  drops  by  the  Vardhani  he  should 
take  the  pitcher  and  adore  it  on  a fixed  seat  (13—15).  He 
should  adore  Hari  with  scents  and  other  articles  in  the 
pitcher  adorned  with  five  jems  and  cloth,  and  on  the  left 
hand  side,  his  weapon  in  the  Vardhani  having  gold  inside  it 
(16).  Near  hhn  he  should  adore  the  presiding  goddess  of  the 
earth  and  the  god  of  the  ground.  In  the  same  way  on  the 
last  day  of  the  month  he  should  arrange  for  the  bathing 
ceremony  of  Vishnu,  Having  placed  in  the  nine  corners 
nine  jars  full  of  water  he  should  throw  into  them  water 
for  washing  feet,  Arghya,  water  for  rinsing  mouth  and  five 
gavyas  (18).  In  the  jars  placed  in  east,  north-east  &c 
the  five  sweet  articles  should  be  placed.  Curd,  milk,  honey 
and  hot  water  are  the  four  ingredients  for  worshipping 
feet  (19).  Lotus  and  dark-blue  grass  are  the  ingredients 
for  worshipping  the  feet  of  Vishnu’s  consort.  Barley-seed, 
scents,  flowers  and  Akshata  being  united  with  the  above 
four  make  up  the  eight  articles  (20).  Kuga  grass,  flowers  and 
sessamum  seeds  are  the  articles  of  adoration.  He  should 
offer  water  for  rinsing  mouth  together  with  cloves  and  berries 

(21) .  He  should  sprinkle  the  deity  with  five  sweet  articles 
reciting  the  principal  mantram.  He  should  sprinkle  purified 
water,  from  the  middle  pitcher,  on  the  head  of  the  deity 

(22) ,  With  the  tip  of  the  Kuga  grass,  a man  should  touch 
the  water  poured  from  the  pitcher.  He  should  offer  Padya 
arghya  and  Achmanas  with  purified  water.  Having  covered 
his  limbs  with  a silk  raiment  he  should  take  him  to  the  altar. 
There  he  should  adore  the  sky  after  restraining  all  the  vital 
airs  (23— 24).  Having  washed  thrice  the  hands  and  the 
marks  on  the  palms  going  towards  the  east,  those  running 
between  north  and  south  and  those  running  towards  the 
north,  and  sprinkled  them  with  the  arghya  water  he  should 
display  Yentmudra.  Having  meditated  on  the  form  of  Agni 
a mao  should  throw  fir$  into  the  Yoni  Kunda  (well)  (25—26), ' 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


F:i36 

He  should  afterwards  bring  vessels  with  Kusa,  Shruk  and 
Shruvas  (sacrificial  ladles) ; and  then  fuels  should  be  placed 
at  an  annJs  distance  (27),  Then  the  vessel  for, pouring  clari- 
fied butter  as-  well  as  that  for  holding  It  should  be  brought 
Then  two  rows  of  rice  with  faces  bent  downwards  should  be 
made  (28),  Then  a Kusa,  with  its  face  towards  the  west, 
should  he  bent  In  this  vessel  for  pouring  clarified  butter. 
Then  having  .meditated  on  fires  consecrated  with  prayers  he 
should  adore  the  deity.  Then  having  filled  the  quarter  of 
the  pouring  vessel  and  adored  it  he  should  consign  It  to  the 
south.  He  should  consign  charu  (food)  to  the  fires;  he 
should  assign  Brahma  to  the  south.  Having  spread  Kusa  In 
the  east  he  should  place  the  line  of  circumference  (29— >31). 
According  to  the  rites  of  Vishnu  a man  should  perform 
Garbhadhlna  and  other  rites  namely  GarbhadhUna,  Punsa- 
vana,  Simmantannyona,  Naming  ceremony;  and  in  every 
case  he  should  offer  eight  oblations.  Then  with  the  Suk  and 
Shruva  (sacrificial  ladles)  he  should  offer  Purnahuti  (the  last 
and  consummate  oblation).  Having  meditated  on  Lakshmi, 
in  her  menses,  in  the  midst  of  the  Kunda  (well)  he  should 
offer  an  oblation.  Prakriti  of  three  gunas  or  qualities  is 
called  the  presiding  goddess  of  the  Kunda  (sacrificial  well) 
(32 — 34).  Vishnu  is  the  source  of  all  creatures,  all  forms  of 
learning,  mantrams  and  Ganas.  Fire  is  the  instrument  of 
emancipation,  the  great  soul  and  the  giver  of  liberation  (35). 
His  head  is  described  to  be  in  the  east,  his  arms  are  placed 
in  north-east  and  south-east  corners  and  his  two  thighs  in 
the  north-west  and  south-west.  His  belly  is  the  Kundala ; 
the  organ  of  generation  is  made  by  the  same.  The  three 
gunas  are  the  Mekhalas  (girdles).  Having  thus  meditated 
on  the  fire  he  should  offer  fifteen  pieces  of  sacred  fuels  with 
musti-mudra*  after  reciting  Pranava  (Om).  Again  in  th6 
vessels  of  the  north-west  and  south-east  corners  oblations 


* The  formation  of  a fist. 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


*37 


should  be  offered.  And  In  the  north-east  corner  an  obla- 
tion of  a portion  of  clarified  butter  should  he  offered  accom- 
panied with  the  recitation  of  the  principal, mantram.  lit  the 
north  and  south  he  should  meditate  on  the  consecrated  fire 
stationed  in  the  middle  of  a lotus  with  Vyahritis . Wife 
one  hundred  and  eight  oblations  this  form  of  Vishnu,  having 
seven  tongues,  effulgent  like  a Kofi  of . suns,  having  the 
moon  for  his  face  and  the  sun  for  his  eye,  should  he  adored. 
Then  with  fifty  eight  oblations  and  the  principal  mantram 
his  thousand  limbs  should  be  adored. 


CHAPTER  XXXV* 


Ac 


LGNI  said  :“Having  offered  the  residue  of  offerings  one 
should  perform  the  sacred  rite  of  Adkivdsa .*  The  secret 
man-lion  manfcrams  should  be  recited  with  the  weapon  (i). 
The  clothes  covering  the  vessels  as  well  as  articles  contained 
in  them,  should  be  consecrated  with  mantrams.  The  vessels, 
for  pouring  clarified  butter,  should  be  consecrated  once  or 
twice  with  hel  leaves  and  mantrams  (2).  Having  placed  by 
the  pitcher  a piece  of  wood  for  cleansing  the  teeth  and 
emblic  myrobalan  and  having  communicated  the  news 
thereof  a worshipper  should  have  them  consecrated  through 
Sangkarshana  in  the  east.  In  the  south  ashes,  sessamum 
seeds,  cow-dung  and  earth  should  be  consecrated  through 
Pradyumna.  The  western  quarter  should  be  assigned  to 
Aniruddha ; the  same  corner  should  be  assigned  to  Narayana. 
The  sacrificial  grass  and  water  should  be  assigned  to  the 

* Consecration  of  an  Image  especially  before  the  commencement  of 
a' sacrificial  rite. 


AGNf  PURANAM. 


heart.  Kumkuma  and  Rochana  should  be  assigned  to  the 
fire.  In  the  north-east  corner  the  incense  should  be  assigned 
to  the  head ; and  tuft  of  hair  should  be  assigned  to  the  south- 
west. The  principal  celestial  flowers  should  be  assigned 
through  an  amulet  to  the  north-west  corner.  Sandal,  water, 
Akshata,  curd  and  Durva-grass,  should  be  placed  in  cups 
made  of  leaves  (3 — 6). 

Having  surrounded  the  house  with  three  threads  he  should 
again  throw  articles  conferring  Siddhi . Then  in  the  order 
of  adoration  he  should  offer  scents  and  other  sanctifying 
articles  accompanied  with  mantrams  at  the  foot  of  the  gate 
or  in  the  pitcher  of  Vishnu. 

He  should  then  adore  the  beautiful  spirit  of  Vishnu's 
energy  destructive  of  all  sins,  saying  “ I hold  on  thy  limbs,, 
the  deity  who  grants  all  desired-for  objects.”  Then  worship- 
ping him  with  incense,  lamps,  &c.,  he  should  approach  the 
gate-way  (7 — 9).  He  should  then  offer  holy  scents,  flowers, 
and|fried  grain,  saying— <f  For  achieving  virtue,  desire  and 
worldly  profit,  I do  hold  on  my  limbs  the  sacred  energy  of 
Vishnu  destructive  of  all  sins.”  He  should  then  offer  sancti- 
fied articles  to  the  other  members  of  the  family  and  the 
preceptor.  Having  worshipped  him  with  scents  and  flowers 
saying— (<  May  these  scents,  flowers  and  fried  grain  be 
converted  into  the  energy  of  Vishnu”  he  should  dedicate 
them  to  Hari  (10 — 12).  Having  offered  those  articles  to 
him  stationed  in  the  fire  the  worshipper  should  pray  to 
the  deity,  [Saying} 

H Thy  body  lies  in  a bed  upheld  by  a huge  serpent  in 
the’ ocean  of  milk.  I worship  thee  in  the  morning,  come 
near  me,  O Keshava.”  Then  having  offered  offerings  lo- 
in dra  and  other  gods  he  should  dedicate  them  to  the 
attendants  of  Vishnu  (13—14).  Then  he  should  place  a 
pitcher  in  front  of  the  deity  covered  with  two  pieces  of  cloth# 
It  should  be  filled  with  water  mixed  with  Rocbana  (a  kind 
of  yellow  figment)  camphor  and  saffron.  Having,  gone  to  the 


AON!  PURANAM 


door  of  the  Mandala  he  should  place  in  due  order  in  the  three 
the  five  gavyas,  chant  and  wood  for  cleansing 
teeth.  By  listening  to  the  recitation  of  the  Puranas,  recit- 
ing the  hymns,  keeping  up  nights,  by  maidens,  women,  and 
objects  of  enjoyments,  one,  without  holy  scents,  performs  the 
rite  of  Adhivasa  (13—18). 


CHAPTER  XXXVI, 


JhLgni  said  Having  bathed  in  the  morning  and  wor- 
shipped the  gate-keepers  the  worshipper  should  enter  the 
secret  room  and  collect  and  place  all  the  articles,  raiments, 
ornaments  and  scents  offered  previously  in  the  Adhivasa 
ceremony.  And  having  removed  the  remains  of  the  offerings 
he  should  place  the  [image  of  the]  deity  and  worship  it  with 
five  sweet  articles,  silk  raiments,  purified  scents  and  water. 
He  should  next  offer  cloth,  scents  and  flowers  as  offered  pre- 
viously in  the  Adhivasa  rite.  Then  having  offered  oblations 
to  the  fire,  he  should  offer  the  daily  prayers  to  the  deity  and 
bow  unto  him.  Having  performed  [these  preliminary  rites] 
he  should  offer  to  the  deity  Naimittika*  adorations  (l— 4). 

He  should  thus  pray  "to  Hari  for  consecrating  the  gate- 
keepers, Vishnu  pitchers  and  Vardhanis.  With  the  principal 
mantram  and  the  following  he  should  consecrate  the  pitcher. 

<(0  Krishna,  O Krishna,  salutation  unto  thee.  For  puri- 
fying all  accept  this  purified  article  capable  of  yielding  the 
fruits  of  the  year  and  adoration.  Do  thou  purify  all  the  sins 
that  had  been  committed  by  me.  0 God,  O lord  of  the 
celestials,  by  thy  favour  I will  be  purified.**  Then  sprinkling 


* An  occasional  rite,  a periodical  ceremony# 


240 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


his  ownself  with  the  purified  water  as  well  as  the  pitcher  of 
Vishnu  he  should  go  near  the  deity  (5 — 8). 

He  should  then  offer  to  his  purified  self  the  tie  of  safety* 
praying  0 lord,  take  this  Brahma  thread  that  had  been 
made  by  me,  so  that  the  accomplishment  of  my  religious 
rite  may  not  be  vitiated  by  any  imperfection/' 

He  should  next  offer  purified  water  to  the  gate-keepers 
and  the  leading  preceptors  (9—10).  Garlands  of  forest 
flowers  should  be  next  offered  to  the  younger  deities.  Then 
all  the  purified  articles  should  be  offered  to  the  heart, 
Vishwaksena  and  others  (ix).  Having  offered  oblations  to 
the  fire  he  should  offer  the  purified  presents  to  Vishnu  and  j 
others  stationed  near  the  fire.  Afterwards  lie  should  offer 
Purnahuti  which  is  the  root  of  the  expiation  of  sins  (12). 
[The  prayer  is  :— ] 

“0  thou  having  Garuda  for  thy  emblem,  with  one  hundred 
and  eight  or  five  Upanishadas,  with  garlands  of  pearls  and 
sapphires  and  Mandara  flowers  this  thy  annual  adoration 
is  made.  As,  O god,  thou  dost  carry  always  on  thy  breast 
the  Kaustava  jem  and  the  garland  of  forest  flowers  so  do 
thou  carry  this  sacred  thread  and  adoration  on  thy  breast. 
Willfully  or  unwilfully  whatever  regulation  I have  practised 
in  thy  adoration  it  has  been  perfected  by  the  rite  shorn  of 
impediments/5 

Having  offered  this  prayer,  bowed  unto  him  and  secured 
forgiveness  he  should  put  the  purified  article  on  his  head 
(15-—16).  Having  offered  edibles  dedicated  to  Vishnu  in  the 
south  he  should  please  his  preceptor  and  the  Vipras  by  offer- 
ing  them  food  and  clothes  either  for  a day  or  for  a fortnight 
(17).  Having  gone  into  the  water  at  the  time  of  bathing  he 
should  offer  the  purified  article  there.  He  should  then  him- 
self continually  ; .distribute-  food  amongst  the  hungry  (18). 
Having  worshipped  fire  in  the  Visarjana  ceremony  he  should 
dedicate  purified  articles  and  say  (i  Having  thus  duly  per- 
formed my  annual  adoration,  do  thou,  well  adorned,  re- 


> 


accept  this  purified  article,  conferring  the  fruits  of  the  yean? 
and  adoration!  for  purifying  all  (9).  For  purifying  all  1 


AGNl  PUEANAM* 


pair  to  the  holy  region  of  Vishnu.”  In  the  middle  lie  should 
adore  Soinesha  and  Vishwaksena.  Having  adored  the  puri- 
fied articles  he  should  dedicate  them  to  the  Brahmanas. 
According  to  the  number  of  purified  articles  offered  he  should 
live  gloriously  for  thousands  of  Yugas  in  the  region  of 
Vishnu.  ■ Having  placed  his  family,  ten  generations  before 
and  a hundred  after,  in  the  region  of  Vishnu  he  should  him- 
self acquire  Reverential  faith  (19 — 22). 


CHAPTER  XXXVIL 


JljlGNI  said  Hear  in  brief  the  holy  Arohana  rite  of  all 
the  deities.  He  should  first  of  all  purify  all  the  necessary 
articles  (1).  Then  approaching  the  Creator  of  universe  with 
all  the  members  of  his  family  he  should  say  “ I invite  thee— 
I dedicate  these  pure  articles  unto  thee.  Salutation  unto 
thee,  0 creator  of  the  universe.  Do  thou  accept  these 
purified  articles.  0 thou  the  master  of  those  conversant  in 
the  Vedas — I make  this  thy  annual  adoration  with  garlands 
of  pearls  and  sapphires  and  Mandara  flowers  {2—5}.  Having 
duly  performed  this  my  annual  adoration,  go,  O purified 
article,  well  adorned,  to  heaven.  Salutation  unto  thee,; 
O Sun,  accept  this  purified  article  (6).  O Shiva,  salutation 
. unto  thee,  accept  this  purified  article,  conferring  the  fruits 
of  the  year  and  adoration,  for  purifying  all  (7).  0 Ganesh- 

wara,  salutation  unto  thee,  accept  this  purified  article  con- 
ferring the  fruits  of  the  year  and  adoration,  for  purifying 
all  (8).  Salutation  unto  thee,  0 goddess  Sakti,  do  thou 


I?:;:  i; 


fct 


AGNi  FURANAM. 

dedicate  unto  thee  this  most  excellent  thread,  identical  with 
Ntrayana  and  Aniruddba,  which  gives  the  fruits  of  the 
season  and  adoration,  wealth,  crop,  longevity  and.  freedom 
diseases.  1 dedicate  unto  thee  this  most  excellent  thread 
identical  with  Kimadeva  and  Shangkarshana  which  gives 
learning,  offspring  and  good  luck.  I offer  unto  thee,  this 
thread  identical  with  Visudeva  which  gives  religious  profit 
and  emancipation  and  which  is  the  instrument  in  crossing  the 
deep  of  the  world.  I confer  on  thee  this  thread  identical  with 
the  universal  form,  which  gives  all,  destroys  sins  and  saves 
the  past  and  future  generations.  With  mantrams  he  should 
gradually  dedicate  it  to  four  younger  deities  (10—14). 


•:o:« 


II 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII* 


jnLGNl  said : — I will  now  describe  the  fruits  of  making 
temples  for  the  residence  of  VUsudeva  and  other  deities. 
He  who  attempts  to  erect  temples  for  gods  is  freed  from 
sins  of  a thousand  births  (1).  Those  who  think  of  building 
a temple  in  their  minds  are  freed  from  the  sins  of  a hundred 
births.  Those,  who  approve  of  a man’s  building  a temple 
for  Krishna,  freed  from  sins,  repair  to  the  region  of  Achyuta. 
Having  desired  to  build  a temple  for  Hari  a man  immediately 
takes  a million  of  his  generations,  past  and  future,  to  the 
region  of  Vishnu,  The  departed  manes,  of  the  person  who 
builds  a temple  for  Krishna,  freed  from  the  sufferings  of  hell 
and  well  adorned,  live  in  the  region  of  Vishnu.  The  cons- 
truction of  a temple  for  a deity  dissipates  even  the  sin  of 
Brahmanicide  (3 — 5).  By  building  a temple  one  reaps  the 
fruit  which  he  does  not  even  by  celebrating  a sacrifice.  By 
building  a temple  one  acquires  the  fruits  of  bathing  at  all 


llal 


m 


] 


agni  puranam 


the  sacred  shrines  (6).  The  construction  of  a temple,  which 
gives  heaven,  by  a religious  or  an  irreligious  mao,  yeilds  the 
fruit  reaped  by  persons  slain  in  a battle  undertaken  on  behalf 
of  the  celestials  (7).  By  making  one  temple  one  goes  to 
heaven  ; by  making  three  one  goes  to  the  region  of  Brahma ; 
by  making  five  one  goes  to  the  region  of  Shambhu ; by 
making  eight  one  goes  to  the  region  of  Hari  (8).  By 
making  sixteen  one  attains  all  objects  of  enjoyment  and 
emancipation.  By  making  the  biggest,  middling  and  smallest 
temples  of  Had  one  in  order  acquires  heaven,  the  region  of 
Vishnu  and  emancipation.  A poor  man,  by  building  a 
smallest  temple,  reaps  the  same  benefit  which  a rich  man  does 
by  building  a biggest  temple  for  Vishnu.  Having  acquired 
riches  and  built  a temple  with  a small  portion  of  it  a person 
acquires  piety  and  gets  boons  from  Hari,  By  making  a 
temple  with  a lakh  of  Rupees,  or  a thousand,  or  a hundred 
or  fifty  a man  goes  where  the  Garuda-emblemed  deity 
resides.  He  who,  in  his  child-hood,  even  sportively  makes  a 
temple  of  V&sudeva  with  sand,  repairs  to  his  region.  He 
who  builds  temples  of  Vishnu  at  sacred  places,  shrines  and 
hermitages,  reaps  three-fold  fruits.  Those,  who  decorate  the 
temple  of  Vishnu  with  scents,  flowers  and  sacred  mud,  repair 
to  the  city  of  the  Lord.  Having  erected  a temple  for  Hari,  a 
man,  .either  fallen,  about  to  fail  or  half-fallen,  reaps  two  fold 
fruits.  He  who  brings  about  the  fall  of  a man  is  the  protector 
of  one  fallen.  By  making  a temple  for  Vishnu  one  attains  to 
his  region.  As  long  as  the  collection  of  bricks  of  Hari* s 
temple  exists  the  founder  of  his  family  lives  gloriously  in  the 
region  ’’’of  Vishnu.  He  becomes  pious  and  adorable  both  in 
this  world  and  in  the  next  (2-— 19). 

He  who  builds  a temple  for  Krishna,  the  son  of  Vasudeva, 
is  born  as  a man  of  good  deeds  and  his  family  is  purified 
(20).  He  who  builds  temples  for  Vishnu,  Rudra,' the  sun-god 
and  other  deities,  acquires  fame.  What  is  the  use  of  wealth 
unto  him  which  is  hoarded  up  by  ignorant  men  ? (21).  Use* 


1 1 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


less  is  the  acquisition  of  his  riches,  who,  with  hard  earned 
money,  does  not  have  a temple  built  for  Krishna,  whose 
wealth  is  not  enjoyed  by  the  Pitris,  Brahmanas,  the  celestials 
and  friends.  As  death  is  certain  unto  men  so  is  his  destruc- 
tion (21—23).  The  man,  who  does  not  spend  his  money  for 
his  enjoyments  or  in  charities  and  keeps  it  hoarded  up,  is 
stupid  and  is  fettered  even  when  alive  (24) v What  is  his 
merit  who,  obtaining  riches  either  by  an  accident  or  by 
manliness,  does  not  spend  it  for  a glorious  work  or  for  religion 
(25)*  [What  is  his  merit]  who  having  given  away  his 
wealth  unto  the  leading  twice-born,  makes  his  gift  circulated 
or  who  speaks  more  than  he  gives  away  in  chanties  (26)  ? 
Therefore,  a wise  man  should  have  temples  built  for  Vishnu 
and  other  deities.  Having  entered  the  region  of  Han  he 
acquires  reverential  faith  in  Narottama  (27).  . He  pervades 
all  the  three  worlds  containing  the  mobile  and  immobile,  the 
past,  future  and  present,  gross,  subtle  and  all  the  inferior  ob- 
jects. From  Brahma  to  a pillar  every  thing  has  originated 
from  Vishnu.  Having  obtained  entrance  into  the  region  of 
the  Great  Soul,  Vishnu,  the  omnipresent  God  of  gods  a man 
Is  not  born  again  on  earth* 

By  building  temples  for  other  gods  a man  reaps  the  same 
fruit  which  he  does  by  building  one  for  Vishnu  (28—30). 
By  building  temples  for  Shiva,  BrahmS,  the  sun,  Chandi  and 
Lakshrai  one  acquires  religious  merit.  Greater  merit  is 
acquired  by  installing  images  (31).  In  the  sacrifice  atten- 
dant upon  the  setting  up  of  an  idol  there  is  no  end  of  fruits. 
One  made  of  wood  gives  greater  merit  than  what  is  made  of 
clay ; one  made  of  bricks  yields  greater  than  a wooden  one. 

’ One  made  of  stoneiyields  greater  than  what  is  made  of  bricks. 
Images  made  of  gold  and  other  metals  yield  the  greatest 
religious  merit.  Sins  accumulated  in  seven  births  are  dis- 
sipated even  at  the  very  commencement.  (32 — 33).  One 
building  a temple  goes  to  heaven ; he  never  goes  to  hell. 
Having  saved  one  hundreds  of  his  family  he  takes  them  to 


m 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


the  region  of  Vishnu  (34)*  Yama  said  to  his  emissaries:— 
“ Do  not  bring  to  hell  persons  who  have  built  temples  and 
adored  idols  (35).  Bring  those  to  my  view  who  have  not 
built  temples.  Range  thus  rightly  and  follow  my  com- 
mands (36). 

“Persons  can  never  disregard  your  commands  except 
those  who  are  under  the  protection  of  the  endless  Father  of 
the  universe  (*37).  You  should  always  pass  over  those  persons 
who  have  their  minds  fixed  on  the  Lord.  They  are  not  to 
live  here  (38).  You  should  avoid  them  from  a distance  who 
adore  Vishnu  (39).  These,  who  sing  the  glories  of  Govinda, 
those,  who  worship  Janarddana  with  daily  and  occasional 
rites,  should  be  shunned  by  you  from  a distance  (40).  They, 
who  attain  to  that  station,  should  not  be  even  looked  at  by 
you.  The  persons,  who  adore  Him  with  flowers,  incense, 
raiments  and  favourite  ornaments,  should  not  be  marked  by 
you.  They  go  to  the  region  of  Krishna.  Those,  who  besmear 
the  body  (of  Vishnu)  with  unguents,  who  sprinkle  his  body, 
should  be  left  in  the  abode  of  Krishna.  Even  a son  or  any 
other  member,  born  in  the  family  of  one  who  has  built  a 
temple  of  Vishnu,  should  not  be  touched  by  , you  (41-43). 
Hundreds  of  persons,  who  have  built  temples  of  Vishnu  with 
wood  or  stone,  should  not  be  looked  at  by  you  with  an  evil 
mind  (44).35 

By  building  a golden  temple  one  is  freed  from  all  sins. 
He,  who  has  got  a temple  built  for  Vishnu,  reaps  the  great 
fruit  which  one  does  by  celebrating  sacrifices  even  day.  By 
building  a temple  for  the  Lord . he  takes  his  family,  a 
hundred  generations  past  and  a hundred  to  come,  to  the 
region  of  Achyuta.  Vishnu  is  identical  with  the  seven 
worlds.  He,  who  builds  a temple  for  him,  saves  the 
endless  worlds  and  himself  attains  to  immortality.  As  long 
as  the  bricks  will  last,  the  maker  (of  the  temple)  will 
live  for  so  many  thousand  years  in  heaven.  The  make! 
of  the  idol  attains  to  the  region  of  Vishnu,  and  he  who  con<- 


I4g  AGNI  PURANAM. 

serates  the  installation  of  the  same  is  immersed  in  Harh 
The  person  who  builds  a temple  and  an  image  as  well  as  he 
who  consecrates  them  come  before  him  (45— 49)* 

This  rite  of  Pratistha  (installation)  of  Had  was  related 
by  Yama.  For  creating  temples  and  images  of  the  deities 
Hayasirsha  described  it  to  Brahma  (go). 


CHAPTER  XXXIX, 


IIAYAGRIVA  said  :~0  Brahman,  hear  me  speak  about 
the  consecration  of  the  images  of  Vishnu  and  other  gods  (i). 
I have  already  dealt  with  the  principles  of  Pancharatra*  and 


* The  word  Ratra  signifies  knowledge,  and  the  Narada  Panchar air  a t 
which  is  one  of  the  standard  religious  works  upholding  the  principles 
of  the  Pancharatra  School  of  philosophy, ^defines  the  term  as  meaning 
the  sum  total  of  the  five  distinct  sorts  of  knowledge  we  have,  of  the 
external  world  through  our  senses— 


It  may  be  safely  asserted  here  that  Vaisnavism  owes  its  origin  to  [this 
school  of  philosophy,  which  with  the  aid  of  several  subsequent  accretions 
of  an  article  of  faith  or  practice  from  the  sister  schools,  has  determined 
the  nature  and  formation  of  its  namesake  in  modern  times*  Sankara- 
charya  once  questioned  the  soundness  and  orthodoxy  of  the  tenets  of 
Pancharatra  school,  and  even  attempted  to  prove  their  incompatibility 
with  the  principles  of  the  Vedas. 

■ ' ; (Vide  Sarirak  Sutra. — 2-2-43/  2-2-44!  05*) 


AGNI  FUKANAM 


SaptarStra  schools  of  philosophies  which  are  classed  by  the 
Munis  under  twenty-five  different  heads  as  discussed  in  the 
following  books  or  Tantras,  viz.,  i the  Hayapirsa  Tantram, 
which  is  the  first  and  original  book  of  the  Pancharatra  school, 
2 the  Trailokya  Mohun  Tantram,  3 the  Baibhabum 
Tantram,  4 the  Pouskaram  Tantram,  5 the  Prahlad  Tan- 
tram,  6 the  parga,  7 the  Galabum,  8 the  Naradya  Tantram, 
9 the  Sampracnum  Tantram,  10  the  Sandilya  Tantram, 
11  the  Vaishvakam,  12  the  Svatatum,  13  the  Shounakum 
Tantram,  14  the  Vashistam,  15  the  Gayansagar  Tantram, 
16  the  Shaimbhubam  17  the  Kapil  Tantram  18  the  Tarksa 
tantram,  19  the  Narayanikum,  20  the  Atrayaum,  21  the 
Narasinha  Tantram,  22  the  Anandaksa,  23  the  Arun 
Tantram,  24  the  Boudhyan  Tantram,  25  the  Arsam  or 
the  Bicvoktam  tamtram  which  is  a synopsis  of  the 
preceding  one  (2).  Only  a Brahmin  of  the  Madhya  Dega 
and  such  like  places  shall  officiate  in  and  perform  the  conse- 
cration ceremony,  and  the  Brahmins  of  Cutch,  Kavari,  Kan- 
kao,  Kamrup,  Kalinga  Cachi,  Cashmere  and  Kosala  shall 
not  take  any  part  therein.  The  earth,  wind,  fire,  water  and 
the  sky  (ether)  are  known  as  Pancharatras  or  the  objects  of 


Ramanuja  however,  held  a contrary  view,  and  quoted  slokas  from  the 
Mahabharata  and  other  tantras  to  show  that  not  only  the  Pancharatra 
school  embodies  within  itself  the  highest  principles  of  Indian  Spiritua- 
lism, but  that  it  is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  revelations  of  the  Vedas 
like  the  Sankhya  philosophy  which  too  was  denounced  by  Sankara  on 
account  of  its  heterodoxy— 

srfar.  mwf  mt  1 

trWil#[«ddrfd  il 


AGNI  PyRANAM. 


knowledge  acquired  through  the  five  senses  of  man  (2—7). 
A Brahmin  of  that  country  (Madhya  Dega),  with  his  spiritual 
consciousness  darkened  by  illusion,  and  though  otherwise 
deficient  in  his  knowledge  of  the  Pancharatra  or  the 
five  proper  sensibles  of  man,  shall  deem  himself  Bramka 
or  the  resplendent  Vishnu  (8).  And  he  is  to  be  looked 
upon  as  the  Guru  (preceptor)  and  the  mastej;  of  all  the 
Tantras  though  otherwise  bereft  of  the  necessary  virtues  and 
attributes.  The  image  of  a god  shall  be  consecrated  with 
its  face  towards  the  city  and  never  with  its  back  turned  upon 
the  same  (9).  In  Kurukestra,  Gaya  or  in  places  adjoining 
the  banks  of  rivers  the  image  of  Bramha  should  be  in  the 
centre -of  the  town,  the  beautiful  representation  of  Indra 
being  to  the  east  thereof  (10).  The  images  of  Agni,  Matris, 
Shuts  and  Jama  shall  be  placed  in  the  south-easterly  quar- 
ter of  a town,  and  those  consecrated  to  the  Pitris,  Daityas 
and  Chandika  shall  be  in  the  south.  The  temples  of  Varuna, 
and  Varuni  shall  be  located  in  the  south-westerly  direction, 
while  those  dedicated  to  V5yu  or  (wind)  and  the  Naga 
shall  be  in  the  north-westerly  quarter.  The  temples  of 
Yaksha  and  Guha  are  to  be  erected  in  the  north,  while  those 
of  Chandisha  and  Mahesh  shall  have  their  locations  towards 
the  north-east,  the  temples  of  Vishnu  occupying  sites  in 
any  direction  whatever  ( 1 1— 13).  A temple  of  a god  should 
not  be  knowingly  so  curtailed,  increased  or  be  made  equal 
in  size  or  so  built  as  to  encroarch  upon  the  grounds  pre- 
viously consecrated  to  anothar.  Under  the  circumstances  a 
learned  man  shall  leave  a space  intervening,  measuring  twice 
the  elevated  area  of  the  said  two  temples  and  shall  cause  a 
new  temple  to  be  erected  instead  of  curtailing  the  areas  of  the 
two  (14).  After  having  purified  the  earth,  the  consecrator  of 
the  temple  shall  take  possession  of  the  ground  (15).  And  shall 
cause  the  offering  known  as  Bhutabali  to  be  made  all  along 
the  area  up  to  the  surrounding  wall,  the  component  parts  of 
the  offering  being,  curd,  powder,  barley,  fried  paddy,  Mas 


' % V * * I ' - ' r j1  1 ‘ ' 1 : 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


(a  sort  of  kidney  beam)  and  powdered  roots  of  turmeric  (16). 
Then  barley  powders  shall  be  cast  in  all  the  eight  directions 
accompanied  by  the  man  tram,  known  as  Astaksari \ and 
then  the  following  prayer  is  to  be  read  aloud.  (t  Let  all 
those  Rakshasas  and  Pichasas  who  dwell  in  the  earth,  depart* 
that  I may  prepare  this  place  for  the  God  Hari.  Then  the 
oxes  shall  be  yoked  to  the  plough  and  the  land  will  be 
ploughed  (17 — 18).  Eight  Paramanus  make  one  Ratharanu, 
Eight  Ratharanus  make  one  Tasraranu.  Eight  Tasraranus 
make  one  Balagra?n.  Eight  Balagrams  make  one  Likhya. 
Eight  Likhyas  make  one  yuka.  Eight  yukas  make  one  Java 
Madhyama.  Eight  Javas  make  one  Anguli.  Twenty-four 
Angulis  make  one  kara ; one  kara  and  four  Angulis  make 
one  Padma  Hast  aka  (19). 


1 he  God  said : — In  the  former  times  there  was  that 
material  principle  dangerous  to  behold.  The  gods  cast  him 
down  into  the  terrestrial  globe  and  be  is  known  as  the  Vdstu 
Purusha  (i).  In  the  mystic  diagram  known  as  Mandal,  and 
which  is  divided  into  sixty -four  small  squares,  worship  and 
propitiate  the  God  Isha  on  the  head  of  the  Vdstu  Purusha,  in 
the  first  half  of  the  corner  of  the  first  rectangular  division,  with 
clarified  butter  and  sun-burnt  rice  and  after  him  propitiate 
and  worship  the  god  Parjanya  (the  god  of  rain}  who  occu- 
pies one  such  whole  rectangular  division  (2).  Propitiate  and 
worship  the  god  Jayanta,  who  occupies  two  such  rectan- 
gular chambers  with  water  and  lotus  flowers,  the  go,<i 


150 


AGNI  PUEANAM. 


Mahendra  who  occupies  one  such  whole  little  square,  with 
banner,  and  worship  and  propitiate  the  sun  god  in  the  cham- 
ber of  the  diagram  known  as  Sarvarakta  from  its  being 
coloured  all  red  (3).  Worship  and  propitiate  the  god  of 
Truth,  who  occupies  only  the  half  of  such  a chamber,  with 
sacrificial  offering,  and  with  a copious  quantity  of  clarified 
butter  in  the  next  room,  reckoned  in  due  succession,  and  the 
sky-god  (byoma)  in  the  half  of  the  corner  chamber,  with  bird's 
flesh  (4}.  Worship  and  propiteate  the  god  Vanhi  (Fire)  in  the 
half  chamber,  with  a sacrificial  laddie,  and  the  god  Pusa 
with  fried  paddy,  the  god  Vitatha  (Untruth)  in  the  next  two 
adjacent  chambers,  with  gold  and  a churn  and  home  grown 
sun-dried  rice  (5).  Worship  and  propiteate  the  god  Dharmesh 
in  the  two  chambers  with  meat  and  rice  from  boiled  paddy, 
and  the  Gandharva  occupying  two  such  rectangular  divisions, 
with  perfume  and  bird's  tongue  (6).  Propitiate  and  wor- 
ship (Jagna),  occupying  both  the  upper  and  lower  halves 
of  a similar  rectangular  division,  with  a piece  of  blue  cloth, 
the  Pitris,  who  firstly  occupy  the  half  of  a mandaU 
chamber,  with  a dish  composed  of  milk,  sessamum  and  rice, 
and  then  in  the  next  entire  room,  with  the  small  branches 
of  a tree  used  as  tooth  brushes  (7).  Worship  and  propitiate 
the  two  door  keepers  or  porters  Sugriva  and  Puspadanta, 
and  to  whom  the  next  two  chambers  of  the  diagram  are 
held  sacred,  with  Javak  and  a bundle  of  barley;  and  the 
god  Varuna  '(Neptune)  in  the  next  entire  and  adjoining 
room  with  lotus  flowers  (8).  Worship  and  propitiate  the 
Asura  with  wine  in  the  next  two  chambers,  the  serpent  god 
Shesa  with  water  and  clarified  butter  in  the  next  adjoining 
one,  the  spirit  of  sin  with  barley  in  the  one-half  of  the  next 
room,  and  the  Disease  in  the  other  half  with  munda  (a  kind 
of  liquid  preparation)  (9).  Worship  and  propitiate  Naga  in 
the  next  chamber,  with  flowers  known  by  the  name  of  Naga* 
puspa  and  the  chief  of  the  Nagas  whose  place  is  in  the 
next  two  chambers  with  edibles,  the  Vallata  with  kidney 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


* s 5 1 


bean  and  rice  (from  boiled  paddy)  in  the  next  room,  and 
the  moon  with  the  same  sacrificial  substance  in  the  one 
adjacent  thereto  (10).  Worship  and  propitiate  the  two 
Rishis  with  honey  and  1 'Pay  as  ha”  (a  sort  of  porridge  com- 
posed of  rice  sugar  and  milk  boiled  together),  Diti  with 
annointing  in  the  whole  of  the  next  chamber,  A diti  in 
the  half  of  the  next  and  in  the  entire  whole  of  the  adjoin- 
ing one  (i i).  '‘Propitiate  Apa  with  milk  and  cake,  in  the 
chamber  below  one  situate  at  the  north  east  corner,  and 
Apavatsa  with  curd,  in  the  room  below  that  of  Apa  (12). 
Propitiate  Marichi  in  the  four  eastern  chambers  with  balls 
of  sweet-meat,  and  the  god  Savitri  with  red  flowers  in  the 
corner  chamber  below  one  situate  at  the  Brahma  corner  (13). 
In  the  half  chamber  below  offer  water  and  Kusha  grass 
to  Savitri  and  red  sandal  paste  to  Vivasvan,  in  the  next 
four  chambers  of  the  diagram  (14).  Offer  rice  with  turmeric 
to  Indra  in  the  chamber  below  one  situate  at  the  south- 
west corner  of  the  Mandal  and  rice  and  clarified  butter 
to  Indrajay  in  the  corner  room  below  that  (15).  Treacle 
and  Payasha  (a  composition  of  rice  sugar  and  milk  boiled 
together)  should  be  offered  to  Indra  in  the  four  chambers 
and  boiled  meat  to  Rudra  in  the  chamber,  below  one  situate 
at  the  north  west  corner  (16).  In  the  corner  chamber  below 
that,  offer  wet  fruits  to  Yaksha,  and  rice,  meat  and  Mas  (a  sort 
of  kidney  bean)  to  Mahidhar  (17).  Offer  Tit  (sessamum  orien- 
tate) and  rice  to  Bramha  in  the  chamber  at  the  centre 
of  the  diagram,  Mas  and  clarified  butter  to  ,Charuki  and 
garland  and  Krisara  (a  dish  composed  of  rice  “til”  and  milk) 
to  Skanda  (18).  Red  lotuses,  gourd,  fruits  and  rice  (from 
boiled  paddy)  should  be  offered  to  Kandarpa  ; Putana  should 
be  propitiated  with  fruits  and  biles,  while  the  offering  made 
to  Jam vaka  should  consist  of  meat  and  blood  (19).  Appease 
Papa  with  blood,  biles  and  bones.  Offer  blood,  and  garland  to 
Pilipanja,  meat  and  blood  to  Isha  and  other  gods  of  his  class 
in  absence  whereof  the  sacrifice  should  consist  of  sun-dried 
' 


AGNI  PURANAM 


rice  only  (20).  Offer  sacrifices  in  due  order  to  the  Matris 
Pishachas,  Pitris  and  Ksetrapalas ; edifices  of  gods  should 
not  be  consecrated  without  first  propitiating  and  offering 
sacrifices  to  the  afore  mentioned  spirits  and  demi-gods,  after 
which  Hari,  Laksmi  and  Ganas  should  be  worshipped  at  the 
spot  consecrated  to  and  set  apart  for  Bratnha  in  the  mystic 
diagram  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Bramhasthan 
(21).  Offer  in  the  central  pitcher  the  final  rand  crowning 
oblation  to  Brahma  and  other  deities  presiding  over  the 
different  quarters  of  the  firmament,  ami  a pitcher  together 
with  a small  jar  filled  with  water  to  the  god  M a lies  war  who  is 
the  guardian  deity  of  all  homesteads.  After  having  performed 
all  these,  make  obeisance  and  utter  the  mantras  of  benedic- 
tion. Pass  the  small  water  jar  round  the  mandal , let  drop 
jets  of  water  along  the  border  lines  of  the  diagram  and  sow 
along  them  the  seven  sorts  of  seeds  used  in  the  sacrificial 
ceremonies  as  before  (22 — 25).  Begin  that  way  the  com- 
mencement of  that  excavation  and  make  a hole  in  the  centre 
one  cubit  deep  (26).  Make  hole  smooth  the  to  the  width  of 
four  fingers,  contemplate  and  worship  the  four-handed  Vishnu 
and  offer  Argha  (oblation)  to  him  from  the  pitcher  (27). 
Fill  in  the  majestic  conch  shell  called  Daksinavarta  with 
water  out  of  the  small  jar,  put  white  flowers  into  the  same 
and  fill  in  the  same  with  earth  and  seeds  (28),  After  having 
performed  the  above  Arghadan  ceremony,  make  presents 
to  the  Guru  (the  priest  performing  and  officiating  at  the  cere- 
mony etc.,)  of  cows  and  clothes  and  worship  the  Vaisnavas  and 
the  sculptors  who  are  well-versed  in  astronomy  {29).  After 
that  carefully  make  excavations  until  the  water  is  reached. 
A Shalya  lying  underneath  the  god  Vishnu  ceases  to  exert 
any  baneful  influence  (30),  A skeleton  Shalya  rends  asunder 


* Shalya  (Skleton  of  a badman  or  a pernicious  being  or  any  other 
charmed  metalic  substance  lying  underneath  the  soil  and  supposed  to 
extert  baneful  influence* 


ACM!  PUHANAM, 


the  walls  of  a house,  and  the  happiness  of  the  Inmates  there- 
of; and  the  Shalya  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  being  whose 
name  is  heard. 


CHAPTER  XLl 


A HE  God  said  : — I shall  speak  to  you  about  the  conse- 
cration of  the  foundation  of  a divine  edifice,  and  also  about 
the  ceremonies  attendant  upon  the  lying  down  of  the  foun- 
dation stone.  The  temporary  sacrificial  shed  shall  be  raised 
at  first,  and  four  receptacles  shall  be  excavated  therein  for 
holding  the  sacrificial  fire  (i).  The  placing  of  bricks,  and 
pitchers  full  of  water,  shall  be  carefully  attended  to,  and  the 
doors  and  pillars  of  the  blessed  sacrificial  shed  shall  be  erect- 
ed and  finished.  The  excavation  between  the  padas  and  the 
centra!  circle  of  the  mandal,  shall  be  tilled  up  to  the  limit  of 
the  former,  and  the  Bastupurusha  shall  be  worshipped  at 
the  same  time.  The  Bricks  shall  measure  twelve  fingers  in 
length,  with  a breadth  and  width  of  four  fingers  respectively, 
and  shall  be  well  burnt  (2 — 3).  Bricks,  measuring  a cubit  in 
length,  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  best;  and  they  can  be 
cut  out  of  stone,  where  stone  slabs  are  used  in  stead.  Nine 
Ghatas  or  copperpitchers  and  bricks  shall  be  placed,  and  the 
bricks  shall  be  laid  upon  the  earth,  being  poured  over  with 
pure  water,  water  saturated  with  a composition  known  as 
Pancka-Kasaya , and  water  containing  solution  of  Sarbou- 
sadhi  and  saadalpaste.  You  shall  besmear  the  bricks  with 
sandalpaste,  and  shall  skatter  over  the  same  the  seeds  of  the 
golden  Brihigrass,  and  shall  thrice  utter  the  purifying 
mantras  begining  with  Apohzsta^  Shanno  Devi,  Taratsaman- 
diri  Pabamani,  Udatamam  Varunam,  Kayanash  Varunasyat* 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


mantram,  Hansa  and  tne  mantra  Known  as  cmsuma,  .finer 
having  placed  the  bricks  and  the  pitchers  with  these  mantras, 
worship  the  God  Hari  in  a bed,  in  the  Eastern  part  of  the 
mystic  diagram  (mandal),  and  light  up  the  the  sacrificial  fire 
and  offer  oblation  to  the  god  Agni  with  twelve  pieces  of 
samid  (branches  of  sacrificial  trees)  (4—9).  The  Aghdrajya 
{the  quarter  residue  of  the  sacrificial  clarified  butter  after 
dividing  the  same  into  four  parts  in  the  sacrificial  pot,  three 
quarter  of  which  can  be  offered  as  oblations  without  purifica- 
tion) shall  be  purified  with  the  pranab  mantra  (Ora),  and  the 
eight  oblations,  and  subsequent  to  that,  eight  oblations  of 
clarified  butter  will  be  given  with  the  mantras  known  as 
Byaritis  <!0).  After  that,  offer  oblation  in  fire  to  the  gods 
Lokesha,  Agni,  Soma,  Abgraha  and  Purusottama  with  the 
Byariti  mantras  (11).  After  that  the  guru  or  the  Bramhin 
performing  and  officiating  at  the  sacrificical  ceremony,  shall 
perform  the  Pryaschitta,  (ceremony  for  the  expiation  of  sins) 
facing  the  Eastern  quarter  of  the  firmament,  in  the  eight 
pitchers,  and  shall  separately  spatter  black  Tils  (sesamura 
orientale)  in  all  the  eight  directions,  soaked  in  clarified 
butter,  and  shall  place  pitcher  and  a brick  in  the  centre,  and 
invoke  therein  the  following  celestial  emblems  and  animals 
viz.,  the  Padma,  Mahapadma,  Makar , (a  kind  of  sea  animal) 
Kacchap  (tortoise),  Kumadam,  Nanda,  Padma,  Sankhya  and 
Padmini  (14—15).  The  pitchers  must  not  be  removed,  and 
a brick  is  to  be  immersed  into  each  of  those  eight  pitchers, 
starting  with  the  pitcher  to  the  east  of  the  Mandal,  and 
ending  with  one  situate  at  the  north  east  corner  thereof. 
The  [Sakti  (personifications  of  divine  energy)  Bimala  and  her 
companions  are  the  presiding  deities  of  the  aforesaid  bricks, 


Amt  FUSUNAftt 


" Oh  thou  Brick— the  beautiful,  full-bodied  and  youthful 
daughter  of  the  Muni  Angira  1 — I establish  thee,— grant  me 
my  desired  object;  and  with  this  he  shall  carefully  excavate  a 
hole  in  the  centre,  twelve  fingers  wide  and 'four  fingers  deep, 
and  place  the  pitcher  in  the  midst  thereof,  the  hole  with  the 
pitcher  in  it,  standing  as  it  were  for  the  impregnated  womb 
of  the  whole  project.  Invoke  the  goddess  Padmini  over  the 
pitcher,  and  in  the  said  womb  or  (hole),  place  loose  earth, 
flowers,  gems  and  iron,  and  invoke  the  arms  of  Dikpati 
therein  (17—20).  Worship  the  earth-goddess  in  a lotus- 
shaped copper  receptacle  as  following— 

Oh  thou  the  absolute  mistress  of  all  animal  beings  ! — god- 
dess for  whose  thrones,  the  mountains  hold  up  their  decorated 
summits,  be  thou  impregnated  mother  whose  dominions  are 
guarded  by  the  seas ! Be  thou  glad  with  all  the  Vasus 
(a  class  of  demi-gods)  and  all  the  people  inhabiting  thee. 
All  glory  to  thee  goddess,  who  once  knew  the  Rishi  Vasishta 
as  her  lord,  and  who  once  formed  the  property  of  Bhargaba, 
and  who  givest  all  glory  to  men  her  offsprings ! Goddess 
perfect  in  thyself,  and  who  once  was  in  the  possession  of 
Angira,  dost  thou  grant  me  my  heart's  desire  (21 — 22) ! Fill 
my  mind  with  bliss,  mother  blissful— Thou  who  possessed 
all  seeds,  all  gems,  and  all  cereals  within  thyself  (24).  Glory 
to  thee  thou  gladsome  goddess  of  colour  and  beauty  ! thou 
who  art  the  daughter  of  the  God  of  creation,  and  whose 
bosom  appears  so  very  smooth  and  flat  to  the  onlookers!  stay- 
est  thou  here  in  bliss — thou  goddess,  of  majesty  (25) ! Sfcayest 
thou  in  this  house  thou  blissful  beautiful,  goddess  of  wonder 
and  mystery,  bedecked  with  scented  garlands— Thou  who  art 
ever  resplendent  and  everywhere  worshipped  { Stay  in  bliss 
in  this  room,  and  give  us  plenty  and  progress  more  and  more, 
—thou  whom  the  gods,  the  kings  and  the  patriarchs  of  families 
simultaneously  possess.  Increase  the  progeny  of  Jbrutes  for 
the  comforts  of  man  | Saying  this  he  must  pour  into  the 
hole  the  urine  of  cowl  (26—28).  After  that  put  down  the 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


bricks  jems  etc,  which  (form  the  contents  of  the  womb  as  it 
were)  into  the  hole  (which  stands  for  the  ’ womb)  and  the 
impregnation  will  take  place  in  the  night.  Give  cows  and 
clothes  to  the  Guru{ the  officiating  priest)  and  feasts  to  the 
other  people  (29).  After  the  throwing  down  of  the  bricks 
efcc/anfco  the  hole,  the  same  is  to  be  filled  up.  Make  excava- 
tions commensurate  with  the  length  of  the  divine  edifice  (30). 
A Pithabandha  (excavation)  which  is  more  than  half  the 
breadth  of  the  edifice,  is  to  be  deemed  as  the  best,  a quarter 
less  than  that  measure  is  middling,  while  that  which  is  half  of 
the  first  kind,  occupies  the  lowest  place  in  tbs  scale  of  merit 
(31).  After  making  excavation;  perform  the  Vastujag  once 
more.  The  person  who  performs  the  consecration  ceremony  of 
the  foundation  stone,  is  purged  off  of  all  sins  and  resides  in 
Heaven  in  perfect  felicity  (32).  The  bodily  sin  of  the  man  is 
destroyed,  the  very  day  he  forms  the  resolution  of  a building 
an  edifice  for  the  Gods,  it  being  superfluous  to  describe  the 
virtues  of  those  who  have  duly  built  and  consecrated  such 
structures.  It  is  beyond  the  power  of  man,  to  enumerate  all 
the  merits  which  a person  acquires  in  the  eyes  of  Heaven,  by 
raising  a divine  building,  though  not  composed  of  more  than 
eight  bricks,  and  the  proportionate  merit  of  building  a divine 
palace  may  be  accordingly  inferred  from  the  above  fact  (33—* 
35).  A divine  edifice,  built  in  the  central  or  eastern  part  of 
a village,  shall  have  doors  opening  on  the  west,  and  in  all 
other  angular  quarters  of  the  heaven,  such  houses  shall  face 
the  west,  while  those  erected  in  its  northern,  southern  nr 
western  parts  shall  face  the  east. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 


HayagRIBA  said  : — Hear  me  speak  about  the  construc- 
tion of  a divine  palace.  A plot  of  square  ground  is  to  be 
divided  into,  sixteen  equal  rectangular  divisions  (i).  The 
four  central  squares  of  which  are  to  be  filled  up  with 
iron,  the  remaining  twelve  being  left  for  the  walls  to  be 
raised  upon.  The  plinth  shall  extent  over  four  such  quadri- 
lateral spaces,  and  the  height  of  the  wall  shall  be  twice  that 
of  its  length.  The  cornice  shall  begin  at  this  point  and 
an  open  platform  having  the  quarter  breadth  of  the  space 
enclosed  between  the  plinth  and  the  cornice  shall  be  raised  all 
round  the  edifice.  Two  equal  openings  having  the  same  width 
as  the  latter,  shall  be  left  on  the  two  sides  for  exits  (2 — 4). 
The  ground  elevation,  is  to  be  made  at  first,  equal  to  the  length 
of  the  roof,  or  twice  that  length,  as  the  law  of  beauty  may 
require  (5).  In  front  of  the  palace,  and  on  the  lines 
running  parallel  through  the  sides  of  its  inner  chamber, 
construct  the  structure  known  as  Mukha  Mandap,  or  the 
Entrance  hall,  adorned  with  pillars  and  being  of  the  same 
length  with,  or  longer  than  the  principal  palace  by  the  length 
of  a pada\  and  build  the  anti-chamber  known  as  Paschta- 
mandap  some  81  padas  or  steps  from  the  site  of  the  prinJ 
cipal  habitation.  Worship  the  parrots  at  the  front-door, 
the  gods  at  the  back  exit,  and  the  thirty-two  Antagas  in  the 
surrounding  wall.  This  is  the  general  rule  which  prevails 
in  most  places  about  the  rearing  up  of  the  divine  edifices. 
Now  I shall  speak  to  you,  about  another  sort  of  palace, 
built  according  to  the  measure  of  the  image  installed 
therein  (6— 9).  The  blessed  stool  or  Pindika  is  to  be  con- 
structed of  the  proportionate  measure  with  the  image,  the 
adytum  of  the  temple  will  be  half  of  the  Pindika,  the  walls 
shall  have  the  width  equal  to  the  length  of  the  adytum,  the 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM. 


li eight  will  be  equal  to  the  length  of  the  wall,  and  the 
top  or  the  pinnacle  shall  have  double  the  height  of  the 
wall  (10 — 1 1).  The  walk  around  the  temple  shall  measure 
quarter  of  the  height  of  the  pinnacle,  and  the  entrance 
chamber  or  the  Muka  Mandapa  shall  be  comprised  of 
the  same  measure  and  shall  be  in  the  front  (12).  The 
eighth  part  of  the  Adytam  shall  be  set  apart,  for  opening 
exits  for  litters  etc.,  which  shall  be  three  in  number, 
and  are  to  be  placed  under  the  three  arches,  on  the 
left  side  of  the  temple  (l  3).  Four  lines  are  to  be  flung 
upward  from  the  spring  lines  for  the  construction  of  the 
vault.  The  keystone  is  to  be  ascertained,  and  a lion  is 
to  be  built  over  the  middle  part  of  the  vault,  in  the  same  line 
with  the  keystone.  The  lion  is  not  to  be  represented  in  a 
drooping  posture,  nor  is  he  to  be  made  very  fierce  looking. 
Lay  down  two  such  strings  or  lines  at  the  sides.  On  the 
top  of  the  vault  construct  a little  platform  or  top  chamber 
known  as  Badi,  which  shall  have  a length  equal  to  twice 
its  breadth,  and  put  upon  the  same  the  conical  ornament 
generally  placed  over  the  pinnacles,  of  temples  and  known  as 
Kalasha  (14 — 18).  Put  the  two  globes  over  the  Kalasa,  to- 
gether with  the  auspicious  branches  and  circles  of  metal  19). 
The  images  of  Chanda  and  Prachanda  are  to  be  carved 
into  the  door-frame,  and  they  shall  occupy  the  quarter  part 
thereof  (20).  In  the  globe  over  the  Kalasha,  carve  the  image 
of  the  goddesses  Lakshmi  as  an  extremely  beautiful  maiden 
sitting  upon  a lotus-flower,  and  the  Dik-gajas  (celestial  ele- 
phants who  reside  in  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven) 
pouring  water  over  her,  out  of  the  pitchers  raised  with  their 
trunks  (11).  The  height  of  the  walls  surrounding  the  palace 
will  be  equal  to  the  quarter  part  of  the  latter,  while  the 
Gofur  or  the  principal  gate  will  be  less  than  the  same  in 
in  height  by  a pada*  A divine  image  measuring  five  cubits 
shall  have  a pedestal  measuring  a cubit  only.  A mandap. 
or  shed  known  as  Canada  mairdaa  shall  be  raised  in  the 


AGNI  PURANAM 


front,  and  eight  turrets  or  pinnacles  shall  be  raised  over  the 
vault  on  the  head  of  the  image  one  in  each  quarter  of  the 
heaven  (22 — 23).  Invoke  the  B.araha  manifestation  of  Vishnu 
in  the  east,  Nrisinha  in  the  south,  Sridhara  'in  the  west 
Havagriba  in  the  north,  Jamadagna  in  the  south-east,  Rama 
in  the  South-west,  Bamana  in  the  north-west,  and  Vasudeva 
in  the  north-east  turret*  The  palace  is  to  be  decorated  with 
garlands  all  round,  which  may  be  hung  so  low  as  to  reach 
the  seven-eighth  part  of  the  door,  the  first  one-eighth  portion 
being  forbidden  as  inauspicious  (24 — 25). 


CHAPTER  XLIII 


1 HE  God  said  : — 0 Bramhan  ! Now  I shall  speak  to 
you,  about  the  installation  or  establishment  of  the  image  of  a 
God  in  the  palace.  The  image  of  the  god  Vasudeva,  shall 
be  placed  in  the  centre  of  a chamber  of  that  peculiar  struc- 
ture, which  is  known  as  Panchayatan,  while  those  of  Baman, 
Nrisinha,  Hayacirsa,  and  the  image  of  the  Boer  incarnation 
of  Vishnu  shall  be  respectively  located  in  the  south-eastern, 
south-western,  north-western,  and  the  north-eastern,  corners 
of-the  same  (1—2).  After  that  invoke  Narayan  in  the  centre, 
Ambica  in  the  south-east,  the  sun  in  the  south-west,  Brahma 
in  the  north-west,  and  the  Linga  or  Rudra  in  the  north-east. 
Or  in  a Nabadhama  chamber,  locate  Vasudeva  in  the  centre, 
and  Indra  other  deities,  who  preside  over  the  different 
quarters  of  the  heaven,  in  the  eastern  portion  thereof,  each 
to  the  left  of  the  other.  Or  in  a Nabadhama  make  a 
Panchayatan,  and  locate  the  god  Vishnu  in  the  centre,  Laksmi 
and  Vaisrabana  in  the  east,  Matris  in  the  south,  and  Skanda, 


l6o  AGNI  PURANAM.  . ? 

Ganesha,  Ishan,  the  Sun  and  other  planets  in  the  west.  Place 
the  ten  incarnations  of  Vishnu,  such  as  Matsa  etc,  in  the  north 
the  goddess  Chandika  in  the  south-east,  the  goddess  Ambica 
in  the  south-west,  and  the  goddess  Sarasvati  in  the  north- 
west corner  of  the  said  chamber  (3—7)*  Or  in  a Trayaoda- 
shalaya,  locate  the  goddess  Padma  in  the  north-east,  the  god 
Narayana  at  the  centre,  Kesava  and  other  manifestations  of 
the  god  Vishnu,  in  the  four  quarters  begining  with  the  east, 
and  the  god  Hari  himself  in  all  the  other  corners  of  the  room 
(8 — 9).  The  images  are  generally  made  up  of  seven  different 
substances,  such  as  clay,  wool,  iron  jems,  stone,  sandal,  and 
and  flowers,  which  being  worshipped  at  the  time  grants 
and  fulfills  all  desires.  I shall  now  speak  about  the  stone 
image  of  Vishnu,  where  the  custom  of  making  a stone  image 
obtains  (10 — 1 1).  In  the  absence  of  hills,  the  stone  is  to  be 
dug  out  of  the  Earth,  those  of  red,  brown,  black  or  yellow 
colours  being  regarded  as  the  most  auspicious.  In  case  a 
stone  of  one  of  the  afore  mentioned  colours  is  not  obtain- 
ed, its  loss  or  absence  is  to  be  atomed  for,  by  means  of  the 
sacrificial  mantras  and  ceremonies  known  as  Sinha  Vidya. 
A piece  of  stone,  which  after  the  performance  of  the  Homo, 
ceremony  known  as  Sinhahoma , becomes  trimmed  with, 
white,  or  assumes  a black  colour  and  emits  sparks  of  fire,  or 
produces  sound  like  Indian  bell  or  bell  metal  is  to  be  deemed 
as  belonging  to  the  male  sex  (12 — 14).  The  stones,  in  which 
the  above  signs  appear  but  in  a less  marked  degree,  are  to 
be  suposed  as  of  the  female  sex,  while  those  that  exhibit 
signs,  peculiar  to  both  the  classes,  are  to  be  considered 
as  neuter.  A stone  which  bears  the  sign  of  a mandal 
or  ring  in  its  middle,  is  to  be  held  as  an  impregnated  one, 
and  is  to  be  rejected  accordingly  (15).  A man  must  go  to 
the  wood  for  an  image,  and  there  he  shall  excavate  and 
raise  the  sacrificial  shed  Mandapx  which  being  made  smooth 
and  plastered  over,  shall  be  the  place  where  the  God  Hari 
is  to  be  worshipped  on  the  occasion  of  the  Banajag  (sacrifice 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM* 


in  the  wood)  ceremony,  to  be  performed  in  connection 
therewith  (16).  The  Tankas  (sculptors*  chisels)  being  the 
instruments  to  work  with,  are  to  be  worshipped,  and  the 
scarfice  shall  be  offered  to  them,  and  the  Homa  ceremony 
(the  offering  of  clarified  butter  in  the  fire  accompanied 
by  mantras)  is  to  performed  unto  them,  and  after  that  the 
stone  is  to  be^  bathed  with  rice  water  (16—17).  Protect  it 
with  the  mantra  of  Nrisinha,  and  worship  it  with  the  princi- 
pal or  original  mantra.  Perform  the  Homa  ceremony,  and 
offer  the  final  oblation,  and  after  that  let  the  Guru  or  the 
priest  officiating'at  the  ceremony,  offer  the  Bhutabali  (sac- 
rifices to  the  Ghosts,  and  other  evil  spirits),  and  propotiate 
the  ghosts,  demons,  Gujhyakas,  and  Siddhyas  and  other 
spirits,  who  may  be  risiding  in  the  place  as  follows  (18 — 20). 
“We  have  come  here  for  the  purpose  of  making  an  image 
of  the  god  Vishnu,  and  we  have  undertaken  the  journey  at 
the  instance  of  the  god  Keshava.  Any  thing  done  to  please 
the  god  Vishnu,  is  also  pleasant  to  you.  Therefore  quietly  and 
quickly  depart  ye  spirits,  quitting  this  place,  being  pleased 
with  the  sacrifice,  we  have  offered  (2 1),”  Thus  pacified,  the 
spirits  will  go  away  wherever  they  please,  and  he  and  the 
sculptors  shall  live  upon  the  sacrificial  porridge  (charu)  that 
day,  and  shall  tell  the  following  dream  mantras  in  the  night 
(22).  “Om  Obeisance  to  the  omniscient  and  almighty  Vishnu! 

I bow  unto  thee  thou  universal  being,  manifest  in  the  universe, 
who  art  the  presiding  deity  of  all  dreams  (23).  O thou 
Lord  of  all  the  Gods,  instruct  me  in  dreams  how  to  execute 
all  the  works  I have  in  my  mind  (24).  I shall  sleep  by  the 
side.  u Om.  Om,  Hum,  Fut  Visnafoa  svaha”  is  the  mantra 
to  be  told  for  having  dreams.  A good  dream  augurs 
every  thing  well,  while  a bad  one  requires  the  ceremony 
known  as  Sinha  Homa  to  be  performed.  Offer  oblation  to 
the  stone  in  the  morning,  and  worship  the  implements  with 
the  astraka  mantras  (25).  The  spades  and  chisels  shall  be 
edged  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  the  priest  shall  deem 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 


The  God  said  Now.  I shall  speak  to  you  about  the 
essential  points  of  an  image  of  Vasudeva  and  other  gods 
in  detail.  After  having  placed  the  aforementioned  block  of 
stone,  facing  the  north  or  the  east,  in  the  northern  part  of  a 
divine  edifice,  and  after  having  worshipped  the  same  with 
offerings,  the  sculptor  shall  divide  the  block  into  nine  parts/ 
along  a line  drawn  through  its  centre  (1—2).  The  stone  is  to 
divided  by  lines  each  a finger  apart,  and  such  a division  is 
to  be  called  a Svangul  according  to  the  surpa  measurement* 
A part  or  division  of  the  stone  enclosing  a space  measering 
two  such  fingers,  is  known  by  the  name  of  Golaka  or  Kala« 
natra  (3).  Divide  one  of  the  aforesaid  nine  divisions  into 
three  parts,  and  make  with  one  such  the  part  of  the  body  from 
below  the  calves  or  the  insteps;  and  with  such  an  one  both 
neck  and  knee  joints  respectively  '(4)*  The  Cfowft.or:-1:* 
i-dress  shall  measure  the  length  of  a thumb  and  a middle, 


mself  the  god  Vishnu,  and  shall  look  upon  the  sculptor: 
as  Vigvakarnia  (26).  An  implement,  (such  as  chisel  etc.),' 
ich  has  been  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  Vishnu;  shall  be 
ven  after  its  back  and  edge  having  been  tasted.  Now  the 
sculptor,  who  has  put  all  his  passions  under  curb  and  rein, 
take  the  chisel  in  his  hand,  and  cut  out  the  stone  into 
a square  block,  a smaller  one  fort  the  purpose  of  making  the 
Pindika  or  Pedestal,  which  must  be  made  a little  less  in 
size.  The  said  blocks  shall  fee  brought  in  a car  to  the 
house  of  the  sculptor,  covered  over  with  a piece  of  cloth, 
he  shall  make  the  image  out  of  the  same  after  having 
worshipped  it  in  due  form  (27-— 28). 


AGNf  PURANAM. 


A GNt  POfAHAM. 


finger,  and  the'  face,  throat  and  the  depression  ^Hrrdaya)  at 
the  chest  shall  be  of  the  same  length  (5}.  The  space  be- 
tween the  naval  and  the  genital  shall  measure  the  lengths 
of  a thumb  and  a middle  finger,  the  thighs  shall  be  of  twice 
that  length,  while  the  parts  between  the  calves  and  knee 
joints  shall  be  commensurate  with  the  lengths  of  the  thighs 
(6).  Now  hear  me  speak  about  the  laying  down  of  the  ’curve- 
lines  on  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  Two  such  lines  are  to 
be  laid  down  on  the  legs,  two  about  the  part  between  the  calves 
and  the  knee-joints,  two  about  the  knee-j#oinis  and  two 
about  the  thighs  (7).  One  such  line  is  to  be  laid  down 
over  the  region  of  the  genital,  another  about  the  waist, 
while  the  other  is  to  be  carved  along  the  upper  portion' 
of  the  umbilical  region,  for  the  purpose  of  fastening  the 
girdle  (8).  The  region  of  the  epigastrium,  or  the  depression- 
between  the  two  muscles  of  the  breast,  is  to  be  made  out  by 
such  a line,  while  two  such  are  to  be  placed  about  thb 
throat,  to  bring  out  its  rotundity.  One  such  line  is  to-be  laid7 
down  across  the  forehead,  while  another  is  to  be  used  in  order 
to  exhibit  the  roundness  of  the  head.  (9).  O Bramhan  j 
one  such  line  is  to  be  placed  over  the  crown  or  the  head- 
gear,  and  seven  vertical  lines  are  to  be  carved  in  the  same  to 
show  its  erect  position  (10).  Lay  down  six  such  lines  over 
the  space,  comprised  between  the  lower  part  of  the  spine, 
and  the  end  of  the  lower  garment,  which  after  the  cloth  is 
carried  round  the  body,  is  brought  up  behind,  and  tucked 
into  the  waist  band.  These  lines  are  to  be  understood,  asr* 
exclusive  of  the  middle  or  the  central  one  (il).  The  nose,  the* 
forehead,  and  the  mouth,  shall  respectively  measure  four 
fingers  in  length,  and  so  also  the  neck  and  the  ears  (ia).; 
The  cheek  bones  shall  be  made  two  fingers  in  breadth,  being1 
equal  to  the  breadth  of  the  chin,  arid  the  forehead  shall  bef 
made  eight  fingers  broad  {13).  Over  and  above  that,  theh 
shall  measure  two  fingers  each,  over  which  the 


agni  puranam. 


between  tlie  eyes  and  ears  shall  respectively  measure  four 
fingers  (14).  The  ears  shall  be  two  fingers  in  thickness 
and  the  cavity  of  the  ears  shall  be  placed  in  the  extension 
of  the  line  joining  the  tips  of  the  eye-brows  (15).  An  ear, 
not  pierced  through  by  any  ornament,  shall  measure  six 
fingers,  while  one  not  similarly  treated,  shall  measure  four 
fingers  like  the  chin,  for  which  the  same  rule  is  to  be 
observed  (16) ; and  after  that,  finish  the  outer  ear  or  the  open- 
ing of  the  external  auditory  passage,  together  with  its  mem- 
branes and  appendages.  The  whole  lower  lip  shall  not 
take  mote  space  than  two  fingers,  and  half  asmuch  shall 
be  left  for  the  upper  one  (17).  The  breadth  of  the  eye 
shall  be  half  a finger,  while  that  of  the  opening  of  the 
face  may  extend  up  to  the  four,  the  thickness  in  relief 
being  one  finger  and  a half  in  both  the  cases,  provided  that 
the  mouth  is  curved  shut,  which  in  the  opposite  case  must 
be  made  three  fingers  wide  (18).  The  height  of  the  nose  will 
be  one  finger  at  its  root,  and  shall  terminate  at  the  tip,  in  the 
form  of  a Karavir  flower,  its  sanctioned  height  at  the  part 
being  two  fingers  only  (19).  The  space  intervening  between 
the  two  eyes  will  be  four  fingers,  while  the  corners  of  the 
eyes  shall  be  two  fingers,  and  the  space  between  them  shall 
measure  two  (20).  The  corner  shall  be  one-third  of  the 
eye,  and  the  iris  will  have  a length  of  the  fifth  part  thereof 
(21).  The  expanse  or  space,  taken  by  the  whole  organ,  shall 
be  three  fingers  in  length,  and  the  whole  cavity  of  the  eye 
shall  measure  half  a finger  in  width,  over  which  the  two  eye- 
brows shall  be  placed  equal  to  each  other  and  commensurate 
with  the  length  of  the  aforesaid  cavity  (22).  A '.space,  two 
fingers  wide,  shall  be  left  between  the  starting  points  of  the 
two  eye-brows,  which  will  be  four  fingers  in  length,  and  the 
measure  round  the  head  will  be  thirty  six  fingers  (23).  The 
head  measure  of  an  image  of  Kesava,  or  other  manifestations 
of  the  God  Vishnu  shall  be  thirty-two  fingers,  and  the  head 
measure  of  all  those  who  are  short  peeked,  shall  increase 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


by  ten  fingers.  The  intervening  space  between  the  neck 
and  the.  breast  shall  be  thrice  the  length  of  the  neck,  and 
shall  be  thrice  as  much  broad  plus  eight  fingers  (25).  The 
shoulders  shall  measure  eight  fingers,  and  the  two  blessed 
shoulder  regions  s&teen  fingers. 

The  arm  shall  measure  seven  nairas  in  length,  and 
the  Prabahu  sixteen  fingers  only  (26).  The  extended  arms 
shall  be  three  Kalas  in  length,  and  the  Prabahu  will  be  of 
equal  measure  with  the  same.  O Bramhan,  the  arm  shall 
have  a breadth  of  nine  Kalas  at  the  upper  part  (27),  seven- 
teen aogulis  at  the  middle  and  sixteen  angulis  above  the 
elbow-joint,  its  circumference  being  thrice  as  much  (28). 
The  measure  round  the  Prabahu  shall  be  sixteen  angulis, 
while  that  of  the  forearm  twelve  (29).  The  palm  of  the 
hand  shall  be  six  angulis  in  breadth,  and  seven  angulis 
in  length  (30).  The  middle  finger  shall  measure  five  fingers 
in  length,  the  fore  and  the  ring  fingers  being  respectively 
less  than  that  by  the  width  of  half  a finger,  and  the  thumb 
and  the  little  fingers  shall  measure  four  fingers  each  (31). 
The  thumb  shall  have  only  two  marks  of  joint  or  phalanges  on 
its  back,  and  the  remaining  fingers  shall  have  three,  and  the 
nail  is  to  be  placed  at  the  top  of  each  finger  (32).  The  stomach 
shall  be  of  the  same  dimension  with  the  chest ; and  the 
naval  shall  be  a finger  broad,  and  deep  according  to  propor- 
tion (33).  The  intervening  space,  between  the  navel  and 
the  region  of  the  genital,  shall  a tal  broad,  and  the  girth 
about  the  umbilicus  shall  be  forty  two  fingers  (34)* 
breasts  shall  be  placed  a tal  apart,  and  the  chins  shall  mea- 
sure a jaba  each,  and  their  roundness  will  occupy  two  pa4it 
measures  of  spaces  (35)*  The  measure  round  the  breast 
will  be  sixty  four  fingers,  while  the  girth  round  its  lower 
extremity  shall  be  of  four  mukkas  (36)*  The  circumfer- 
ence round  the  waist  shall  be  fifty-four  fingers,  and  the 


s66 


AGNI  PU  RAN  A Mi' 


shall  be  narrower  as  it  reaches  downwards,  The’knee-joinfc 
shall  be  eight  fingers  in  breadth,  and  shall  measure  thrice 
as  much  ;in  girth  (38).  The  middle  of  the  knee-joint  shall 
be  seven  fingers  In  breadth,  and  its  girth  will  be  three  times 
its  breadth.  The  front  or  lower  part  of  the  knee  joint  shall 
measure  five  fingers,  with  a girth  of  thrice  the  measure  of 
its  width.  The  feet  shall  be  of  a tal  measure,  and  shall 
be  raised  by  four  fingers  (39~~“4G)*  The  parts  in  front  of  the 
calves  shall  be  made  four  fingers.  The  legs,  when  extended, 
shall  measure  three  padas  and  the  female  organ  of  genera- 
tion shall  be  three  fingers  in  length  with  a girth  of  five 
fingers.  The  fore-finger  of  the  feet  shall  also  measure  five 
fingers  in  length,  and  the  rest  of  the  fingers  shall  proportion- 
ately go  on  decreasing  in  size,  each  next  being  less  than  the 
preceding  one,  by  the  one  sixteenth  part  of  the  former 
(41—42).  The  height  of  the  toe  will  be  a pada  and  a finger 
and  its  nail  shall  measure  a little  less  than  a jaba,  and  the 
remaining  fingers  shall  be  less  than  one  other  by  the 
breadth  of  half  a finger.  The  scrotum  shall  the  three  fingers, 
in  length,  and  the  male  organ  of  generation  shall  be  four 
fingers  long  (44).  The  girth  about  the  upper  part  of  the 
scrotal  sac  shall  measure  five  fingers,  while  that  about  its  end 
or  lower  part  shall  be  six  fingers  (45).  The  image  shall  be 
decked  with  a large  number  of  ornaments,  and  the  emblems 
shall  be  placed  in  its  hands  in  the  following  order,  in  which 
they  are  usually  met  with  (46).  The  weapon  iC  Chakra”  is 
to  be  placed  in  the  upper  right  hand,  the  lotus  in  the  one 
below  that  on  the  right,  the  Sankbya  (conch)  in  the  upper 
left  hand,  and  the  cudgel  in  the.  one  below  that  on  the  left, 
as  one  usually  comes  across  in  an  image  of  the  Vasudeva 
(47).  The  images  of  Sri  and  Pusti,  one  carrying  a lotus 
and  the  other  a harp  are  to  be  made,  these  images  reaching* 
up  to  the  thighs  of  that  of  Vasudeva.  The  Images  of" 
two  Vidyadhars,  holding  celestial  garlands  in  their  hands, 
are  to  be  carved  into  the  space  occupied  'by  ihe  Hato  of  bfee";* 


ACNI  PUR  A NA  M* 


i6f 


head  of  the  principal  image,  and  the  images  of  celestial 
elephants  are  to  be  carved  in  the  region,  of  the  halo.  The 
pedestal  shall  be  of  a whitish  red  colour,  on  which  the  image 
is  to  be  worshipped  as  follows. 


CHAPTER  XLV 


A HE  God  said.-— Now  I shall  describe  the  essential 
points  of  a Pindika  or  a divine  stool,,  which  shall  have  a 
length,  equal  to  the  breadth  of  the  pedestal  of  an  image, 
half  of  its  height,  and  shall  have  four  times  its  thickness ;(i). 
Leave  aside  the  two  lower  steps,  and  polish  on  all  sides 
the  rectangular  space,  on  the  top  of  the  third  from  the 
bottom,  and  similarly  the  space  at  the  foot  of  the  third 
step  counted  downwards,  and  lastly  the  quadrilateral  space 
intervening  between  the  above  two,  (thereby  meaning  the 
space  at  the  top  of  the  third  step  from  the  bottom)  together 
with  its  two  sides.  Divide  the  first  two  steps  from  the  top  into 
four  parts,  |and  polish  the  two  rectangular  chambers  at  the 
foot  of  the  second  step  from  the  top,  made  thereby  (2—4), 
The  height  of  the  steps  shall  be  equal  to  one  such  part,  and 
their  beadth  will  be  half  as  much,  leaving  an  indent  to  the 
width  of  such  a part  on  each  side  (5),  and  leaving  a pada 
breadth  of  space  on  the  exterior  side.  The  exits  for  water, 
shall  be  made  over  the  indentures  of  the  first  three  steps 
from  the  top,  one  at  the  end  of  each  (6).  This  auspicious 
and  blessed  divine  pedestal,  'is  usually  constructed  in  a 
large  number  of  different  shapes  (7).  The  images  of  Laksmi 
and  other  goddesses  shall  measure  eight  talas  in  length. 
In  all  such . Images,  the  eye-brows  shall  be  to  the  length 
of  a java,  and  the  nose  a bit  smaller  than  them*  The  face, 


X68 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


shall  be  straight,  elongated  and  raised,  and  shall  measure 
more  than  a golaka  (8).  The  eyes  shall  be  large,  measur- 
ing iess  than  three  jahas  by  the  third  part  of  a jab  a,  and 
their  breadth  shall  be  half  of  the  aforesaid  measure  (9). 
The  ears  shall  be  made  beautiful  in  shape,  and  shall  extend 
to  a line  passing  through  the  tips  of  the  lips.  The  shoulders 
shall  be  made  sloping,  and  to  measure  a kala  jess  than  the 
dimensions  of  the  ears  (10).  The  neck  shall  be  made  to  mea- 
sure a kald  and  a half,  with  a breadth  not  affecting  the  beauty 
of  the  same.  The  thighs,  knee-joints,  and  the  pedestal  shall 
measure  a natra  less,  and  the  waist,  buttocks  and  the  upper 
part  of  the  feet  shall  be  made  proportionately  (11).  The 
fingers  shall  measure  less  than  the  seventh  part  of  the  above, 
and  shall  be  made  straight  and  tapering,  so  as  not  to  look 
knotty  or  crooked  (12).  The  thighs,  waist  and  the  knee-joints 
shall  be  greater  than  the  above  in  breadth  by  a naira,  and  the 
sides  and  the]middle  part,  together  with  the  two  compact  and 

elevated  breasts,  closely  pressing  each  other,  shall  be  of  the 

same  measure  in  roundness  (13)-  The  two  breasts  shall  mea- 
sure a tala,  and  the  waist  a kala  and  a half.  The  ornaments 
and  appendages  will  consist  of  a lotus  flowar  in  the  right  hand, 
and  a Bal  fruit  in  the  left.  The  two  maidens,  represented 
in  the  attitude  of  wafting  chowries,  shall  be  placed,  one  on 
each  side  of  4the  image,  and  the  image  of  the  long  nosed 
Garuda  shall  also  have  a place  therein.  Now  I shall  speak 
about  the  Salagram  stones  decked  with  chakras  and  of  other 
gods  as  well.  ' . 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 


m 

i.  he  God  said Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
worshipping  the  image  of  a Shalagrama  etc.,  which 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


169 ' 

Imparts  both  enjoyment  in  this  world,  and  salvation  in  the 
next.  A Shalagram  stone,  known  as  Basudeva)  is  marked 
by  a black  colour  around  Its  mouth  or  lateral  aperture,  and 
possessing  the  ■ Impressions  of  two  chakras^  or  ring  like 
marks  inside  the  same  (1).  The  Safagram  stone,  belong- 
ing to  the  class  Sankarsan}  is  of  a red  colour,  possesses  two 
such  chakras  or  circular  impressions  within  Its  cavity,  and  is 
lobe  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  very  good  classes  of  the  stone  ; 
while  one  of  the  class,  known  as  Pradumnya^  bears  upon  its 
surface  a large  number  of  impressions  like  pin  holes,  is  of  an 
elongated  shape  with  a blue  colour,  and  Is  marked  with  a very 
faint  impression  of  a chakra  within  (2).  The  Anirudhya  stone 
is  circular  and  yellow,  marked  with  two  or  three  lines  around 
Its.  outer  surface,  and  bears  the  impression  of  a lotus  flower 
within  its  cavity;  while  the  particular  class  of  Shalagram 
stone,  known  as  Narayana , Is  of  a black  colour,  with  its 
cavity  comparatively  raised  up,  and  smaller  in  length.  The 
Para  masti  stone  is  perforated  at  the  back,  and  have  dot 
like  spots  over  the  surface,  the  internal  cavity  being  im- 
pressed with  the  mark  of  a lotus  flower;  and  the  class  of 
stone  known  as  Vishnu  resembles  the  weapon  gad  a in  shape, 
and  carries  a line  about  the  middle  part,  the  circular  impres- 
sion within,  being  comparatively  thicker  (3).  The  Nrzsinha 
stone  is  of  a brown  colour,  has  the  same  sort  of  chakra 
mark  as  the  above,  and  is  dotted  with  five  spots  ; while  a 
Baraka  resembles  a Saktiin  shape,  and  its  two  chakras  are 
rugged  and  unequal  (4).  A Salagrarti  of  the  Krisna  class  is 
black,  round  and  elevated  at  the  back,  the  chakra  in  the 
inside  bearing  the  mark  of  an  Avarta  (spiral),  while  a sthala 
stone  which  is  very  auspicious,  assumes  the  colour  of  a Jem 
called  Indra  Nil  (sapphire),  and  is  girdled  by  three  lines  (5). 
The  stone  belonging  to  the  class  Hayagriha  is  blue,  dotted  with 
spots,  and  resembles  an  Ankush  in  shape  ; while  one  of  tile 
Baikunta  class,  is  known  by  its  jemlike  colour,  the  lotus  like 
mark  in  its  chakra  which  is  single,  and  by  the  appearance 
22  : -v" 


. ftp slffi  f 


AGNI  PUEANAM 


ance  of  tail  like  marks  on  its  surface  (6).  The  characteristic 
features  of  a Salagram:  stone  of  the  Matsa  class,  are  its 
elongated  shape,  the  three  dot  like  spots  on  the  surface, 
its  glassy  colour,  and  the  absence  of  any  cavity  or  chakra. 
A stone  of  the  Sridkar  class,  is  differentiated  by  the 
mark  of  a garland  of  wild  flowers  in  its  internal  cavity,  its 
roundness,  and  by  the  five  line  marks  around  its  body  (7),  The 
Bamana  is  a stone  of  a puny  size,  round  and  dotted  with 
a spot,  and  is  of  a round  shape  ; while  the  Tribikramct  class 
bears  the  line  mark  at  the  right  side,  and  the  dot  spot  or  the 
left  (8).  A Salagrara  stone,  appertaining  to  the  class  Ananta , 
bears  an  impression  like  the  hood  of  a serpant,  while  one 
of  the  Naikava  class,  assumes  a variety  of  shape  and  colour, 
and  is  varied  in  attributes  also  ; the  Damodar  class  being 
recognised  by  the  attributes  of  thickness,  the  possession  of 
two  slender  points  on  the  exterior,  and  by  the  existence  of  the 
characterestic  circular  mark  or  chakra  in  the  central  part  of 
cavity  (9 — 10).  The  Sudarshan  class  has  got  only  a single 
chakra,  the  existence  of  double  or  two  fold  chakra,  characteri- 
ses  the  class  Lzksml Narayan,  the  essential  features  of  the 
Achyuta  or  Tribikrama  class,  being  the  existence  of  three 
chakras  or  internal  circular  marks  as  spoken  of  above  (11). 
Four  chakras  mark  the  Janardan  class,  and  five  such  are  the 
essentials  of  a Vasudeva,  and  the  existence  of  six  or 
seven  such  chakras  is  to  be  met  with  in  the  Pradumna  and 
the  Sankarsan  class  of  Salagram  (12).  A Purushotama 
stone  possesses  eight,  a Nababuyaku  nine,  a Dushdvatar 
ten,  an  Anirudka  eleven,  and  a Dvadashatma  class  of 
Salagram  twelve  circles;  a Salagram,  bearing  circular  im- 
pressions in  its  inside  more  than  twelve,  is  designated  as  an 
■Ananta.  K.,:  1 


CHAPTER  XL VII 


1 HE  GOO  said  : — Hear  me  describe  the  process  of 
worshipping  the  god  Simla  gram,  whoses  image  is  decked 
with  the  circular  marks  known  as  chakras , and  the  rites  and 
ceremonies,  essential  to  the  worship  of  other  manifestations  of 
Vishnu,  which  admits  of  three  distinct  divisions,  according  as 
the  worshipper  performs  the  same  I with  a view  to  obtain 
any  special  or  particular  boon,  2 or  with  the  disinterested 
object  of  assigning  all  the  merit  acquired  by  the  performance 
thereof,  to  the  deity  himself,  or  as  a matter  oft  daily 
practice,  by  which,  he  does  not  gain  any  special  merit, and 
the  nonperformance  whereof,  takes  away  something  from  his 
former  virtues,  as  a positive  failing,  and  3 lastly  that  which 
partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  both  (1).  The  worship  of  the 
five  manifestations  of  the  god  Vishnu,  beginning  with  incar- 
nation of  the  divine  Matsa,  may  be  classed  either  under 
the  first  or  the  last  grap ; while  the  worship  of  the 
incarnations  such  as  Baraha  (the  incarnations  In  thq-sfs.ap^ 
of  a Boar),  Nrisinha  (incarnation  in  the  shape  of  a pentaur 
like  being,  upper  half  lion,  lower  half  man)  and  Baman  (the 
Dwarf  Incarnation)  leads  to  salvation  (2).  In  order  that  you 
may  attain  salvation  by  the  performance  thereof,  now  I shall 

take  up  the  subject  of  the  three  fold  worship  of  the  god 

Shalagram,  marked  with  the  mystic  circle  called  chakra  etc . 
of  which  the  ' best  form  Is  the  disinterested  worship,  or 
the  worship  without  any  desire  or  supplication  on  the  part 
of  the  devotee.  The  form  which  centres  round  an  image, 
and  enjoins  the  worship  to  be  performed  in  a rectangular 
diagram,  described  round  the  figure  of  the  spherical  mystic 
lotus  flower,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  as 

the  next;  while  that,  which  is  done  with  an 
pies  the  lowest  place  In  the  scale  of^ jaifl^rig1  >a 


1 72 


AGNI  FURANAM. 


devotee  shall  locate  the  mystic  symbol  Odd  in  the  solar 
plexus  at  his  breast,  practise  the  Sadangnyasa , or  the 
rite  of  locating  in  the  six  different  parts  of  his  body  such  as 
hands  and  the  body  etc,,  the  mantras  peculiar  to  each,  fold  up 
the  fingers  into  different  postures  known  as  Madras , outside 
the  mystic  rectangular  diagram,  and  shall  first  worship  his 
spiritual  preceptor  or  the  guru  in  the  east,  Gana  in  the  west,. 
Dhata  (the  god  of  fate)  in  the  north-west,  Bedhata,  in  the 
south-west  and  Karta  and  Harta  in  the  north,  and  the 
south  respectively,  Vishvakseo  in  the  north-east,  and’ 
Ksetrapala  in  the  south-east.  At  the  outset  the  Vedas 
such  as  Ric  etc,  are  to  be  worshipped,  thee  the  cushion 
on  which  the  devotee  will  sit  during  the  worship,  then 
the  serpent  Ananta  who  is  supposed  to  bear  the  Earth 
on  his  hoods,  and  then  the  Earth,  and  then  the  Feetha  and 
lastly  the  three  mystic  diagrams,  Arka,  Chandra  and  Banhi 
respectively  (4 — 7).  The  padmasan  shall  consist  of  the  twelve 
letters  forming  the  God’s  own  mantra,  and  the  God  Is  to  be 
placed  therein,  and  to  be  worshipped  with  all  the  Bija  or 
the  principal  mantras  appertaining  to  his  worship,  uttered 
jointly  and  severally  in  turn  (8).  Commence  the  worship 
with  Om  and  the  mantras  of  Gaitri \ Jitadi  etc.  and  after  that 
show  the  three  mudras,  (combination  of  the  hands  in  different 
postures)  of  Visvaksen  Chakra  and  Ksetrapala  respectively, 
as  the  worship  of  the  god  Shalagram  which  falls  under  the  first 
. group  is  absolutely  disinterested  and  claims  no  merit  (9—10). 
Draw  a man  dal  or  mystic  circle  consisting  of  sixteen 
radii  and  containing  the  Image  of  a lotus  flowers  at  its  ■ 
centre,  as  stated  above;  and  worship  the  spiritual  preceptor 
and  others  with  Shankha  (conch  shell)  Chakra  (the  circular 
weapon  of  Vishnu)  Gada  (a  cudgel)  and  a sword  as  pre- 
viously mentioned  (n).  Locate  the  Bow  the  arrows  in  the 
east  and  Xortb,  with  the  Pranaba  mantras  and  establish  the 
with  the  twelve  letters  which  enter 
^Uon  of  the  mantra  Om  Namo  Bhagabata 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


Vasudavya  (12),  Now  I shall  describe  another  form  of 
worshipping  Shalagram.  A lotos  flower  consisting’©!  eight 
petals  is  to  be  drawn,  and  worship  the  guns  and  other 
gods  upon  the  ground  as  above.  The  Asan  or  seat  shall  be 
offered  with  the  eight  letters  farming  a portion  the  god's 
said  principal  mantra,  and  establish  the  shila  with  the  same, 
and  worship  it  by  uttering  the  same  eight  letters  ten  times 
and  Vishnu  with  the  gaiatri  (13). 


CHAPTER  XLVIII 


I HE  God  said:*— -Now  i shall  reproduce  to  you,  the 
psalm  in  honour  of  the  twenty-four  incarnations  of  the  God 
Vishnu,  which  forms  an  arostic  in  relation  to  the  principal 
mantra  of  the  God,  designated  as  the  Dvadashakasri  (Om, 
Namo  Bhagabata  Basudevaya)  mantra,  from  the  number  of 
Sanskrit  letters  entering  into  its  composition.  The  hymn  is 
as  follows : ' ■ 

I bow  down  to  thee  O Kshava  ! whose  image  is  the  one 
universal  principle  manifesting  itself  in  the  three-fold  form 
of  creation  (literally  emanation,  the  doctrine  of  creation 
having  no  place  in  the  Sanskrit  theology,  the  universe  being 
supposed  to  have  been  evolved  out  of  the  universal  self 
through  the  medium  of  Maya,  or  only  apparent  as  the 
reflective  effect  of  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  universal 
principles  known  as  Prakriti  and  Purusha,  which  will  be 
dealt  with  later  on  ; — the  loose  and  promiscuous  use  of  these 
terms  and  their  equivalents,  having  much  to  be  blamed  for 
their  popular  acceptance  in  the  modern  times,)  continuance 
and  final  merging  back  of  the  universe  into  the  original  self, 
through  the  process  of  evolution,  and  of  which  principle  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


it  Qm”  is  the  Vedic  symbol ; and  who  holdest  the  divine  lotas 
flower,  conch  shell,  the  circular  weapon  Chakra  and  the  Gada 
or  Cudgel,  in  thy  four  hands  (the  lotus  flower  with  its  petals 
symbolising  the  different  stages  of  the  universal  emanation 
or  evolution,  the  conch  shell  standing  for  the  voice  or  sound 
as  the  embodiment  of  thought  which  is  the  test  of  conscious- 
ness, the  circular  weapon  representing  the  cycles  of  exist- 
ence to  be  gone  through  before  the  final  stage  of  evolution  can 
be  reached,  and  the  Gada  standing  for  the  principle,  enfor- 
cing the  confirm  ability  to  the  universal  Law,  whether  phy- 
sical, moral  of  spiritual.  Salutation  unto  thee,  O Narayana, 
in  which  shape  thou  holdest  the  divine  conch  shell,  the  lotus 
the  Cudgel  and  the  Chakra  in  thy  four  hands  (standing  for  the 
rotatory  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies)  in  the  order  (a  little 
different  from  that  in  which  they  are  placed  in  thy  manifestation 
as  Keshava)  (i).  After  that  I make  obesiance  to  Madhava,  in 
whose  hands  are  the  divine  Cudgel  (Gada),  Chakra,  shankhya 
(conch  shell)  and  the  lotus  flower,  and  also  to  the  mighty 
Govinda  (the  preserving  principle  of  the  universe)  who  doth 
weild  in  his  arms  the  weapons  Chakra,  the  Gada  or  the  Cudgel 
named  Koumadaki,  the  lotus,  and  the  conch  shell  (2).  I lay 
myself  prostrate  before  thee  O Vishnu,  who  givest  salvation 
to  man,  and  holdest  in  thy  hands,  the  celestial  Gada  (Cudgel), 

lotus  flower,  Shankhya  (conch  shell)  and  the  Chakra , I bow 

to  thee  0 Madhusudana  who  art  armed  with  the  divine 
Shankhya,  Chakra,  lotus  flower  and  the  Chakra  (the  first-two 

weapons  being  in  all  cases  in  the  two  right  hands,  and  the 

rest  two  being  in  the  left  both  upper  and  lower)  (3).  With 
the  most  heart  felt  reverence,  I fall  at  the  feet  of  the  Iribi- 
krama  manifestation  of  Visnu,  who  is  represented  as  carry- 
ing in  his  hands,  the  divine  lotus  flower,  Cudgel,  Chakra 
and  Shankhya  (conch) ; and  may  the  Baman  (dwarf  incarna- 
tion of  the  God  Vishnu),  who  wields  in  his  four  arms,  the 
Shankhya,  Chakra,  Gada,  and  the  lotus  flower  in  the  order,  to 
be  interpreted  according  to  the  direction  given  above,  preserve 


agni  puranam. 


•me  at  all  times  from  harms  (4).  Sridhar  is  the  opener  and 
exposer  to  men  of  all  ways  leading  to  salvation,  and  is  re- 
presented as  carrying  a lotus  flower,  a Chakra  or  a circular 
sharp  edged  weapon  flung  from  a distance,  the  Shankhya  (a 
conch  shell)  and  may  he  the  divine  manifestation  who  is  known 
as  Hrishikesha  and  whose  four  arms  are  armed  with  Gada, 
Chakra,  lotus  flower  and  conch  shell  guard  us  from  all  evils 

(5) .  I make  obesiance  to  Padmanava,  who  is  the  grantor  of 
all  boons,  and  carries  in  his  hands,  the  divine  conch-shell, 
lotus  flower,  Chakra  or  the  ring  weapon,  and  the  Cudgel  ; 
and  also  to  Damodar,  who  holds  in  his  four  arms,  the 
heavenly  lotus  flower,  conch-shell 'cudgel  and  the  ring  weapon 

(6) .  May  Vasudeva,  who  carries  a cudgel,  conch-shell,  a 
ring  weapon,  and  a lotus  flower,  purify  the  universe;  and  may 
Sankarskana  in  whose  hands  are  the  divine  Cudgel,  conch- 
shell,  lotus  flower,  and  the  ring  weapon,  preserve  us  from  all 
evils  (7).  Preserve  us  OPradyuninaj  Thou  art  the  lord  of 
the  universe  and  wieldst  in  thy  hands  the  Cudgel  Chakra, 
conch-shell,  and  the  lotus  flower ; or  the  Cudgel  and  the  conch- 
shell  in  thy  right  hands  in  stead.  Preserve  us  O Anirudha! 
Thou  who  art  every  where  irresistible  and  invincible  in  the 
universe,  and  who  dost  carry  in  thy  arms,  the  Chakra,  Cudgel 
conch-shell,  and  the  lotus  flower  (8).  May  Purushottam,  who 


176 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


And  likewise  the  incarnation  known  as  Upendra,  who  is 
manifest  in  the  form  of  a child,  and  carries  the  divine  conch 
shell,  Cudgel,  Chakra,  and  the  lotus  flower  both  in  the  right 
and  in  the  left  hand,  in  the  order  they  are  described.  And 
similarly,  may  the  manifestation  of  Vishnu,  revealed  to  man 
as  Janarddana,  and  who  takes  away  all  sin  and  misery  from  the 
hearts  of  his  worshipers,  and  who  carries  in  his  four  hands  the 
divine  emblems  and  weapons  of  a conch  shell,  a lotus  flower 
Chakra,  and  the  Gada,  or  Cudgal  named  Koumadaki,  bless  me 
with  the  enjoyment  of  good  cheers  in  this  world,  and  grant 
me  salvation  in  the  next;  and  for  which  I also  beseech  thee 
O krisluia,  to  the  portions  of  whose  votaries,  fall  enjoyment  in 
this  life  and  salvatioa  hereafter,  and  who  wieldest  in  thy  arms 
the  celestial  conch  shell,  club,  lotus  flower  and  the  Chakra 
(n — 12).  The  first  and  original  manifestation  of  Vishnu 
was  in  the  form  of  Vasudeva,  out  of  that  issued  the  image 
of  Sankarsbana,  out  of  which  the  manifestation  of  Pradyumna 
was  evolved  and  revealed,  and  which  finally  blossomed 
into  the  image  of  Anirudha  (13).  Eeach  of  the  above- 
mentioned  manifestations,  was  split  up  and  resolved  into 
three  different  images  such  as  Keshava,  etc.,  thus  making  up 
in  all  the  twenty-four  images,  which  form  the  subject  of  the 
present  hymn  composed  of  twelve  letters,  by  reading  or 
bearing  which,  a man  is  purified,  and  becomes  purged  off  of 
all  sin  and  attains  every  desire  of  the  heart  (14). 


CHAPTER  XL1X. 


The  God  said  : — Now  I shall  describe  the  characteristics 
of  the  ten  incarnations  of  Vishnu,  such  as  Matsa  (the  fish 
manifestation)  etc.  The  manifestation  should  be  made  to 


AGNI  PUR  ANA  M. 


resemble  a fish  in  shape,  while  that  of  the  divine  tortoise, 
■should  be  so  made  as  to  look  like  the  prototype  of  the  animal, 
from  which  it  has  received  its  nomenclature  (i).  The  incar- 
nation of  the  terrestrial  Boar,  should  be  endowed  with  a 
human  body,  and  as  carrying  a gada  (club)  and  other  weapons 
in  his  right  arm,  and  the  divine  conch  shell,  the  goddess 
Laksmi,  or  a lotus  flower  in  the  left  (2).  The  goddess  Laksmi 
should  be  represented  as  resting  on  his  elbow,  and  the  Earth 
and  the  serpant  Ananta  of  the  nether  regions,  (the  mythecal 
support  of  the  Earth  in  space)  following  his  lead.  O Brah- 
man, the  installation  of  such  an  image  by  any  person, 
ensures  his  acquisition  of  a kingdom,  and  helps  him  to 
cross  this  ocean  of  mundane  existence  (3).  Narasinha 
should  be  represented  as  having  a lion’s  head  on  a human 
body,  possessing  four  arms,  in  the  two  of  which  he  should 
hold  the  effulgent  gada,  and  the  celestial  ringweapon,  and 
the  other  two  should  be  made  to  appear  as  tearing  open 
the  entrails  of  the  Danava  (Hiranyakashipu),  and  putting 
them  round  his  shoulders,  and  the  Danava  should  be  re- 
presented as  lying  dead  on  the  thighs  of  the  God  (4).  The 
Bamana  incarnation  of  Vishnu  should  be  represented  as  a 
dwarf;  carrying  a stick  and  an  umbrella,  or  .hn.,id  h- 


l ?8 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


longer,  and  the  calmness  of  the  heart  within  should  be  made 
to  reflect  in  his  countenance,  as  he  is  the  bestower  of  all 
blessings,  and  the  protector  of  all  beings  from  evils  and  harms 
(gy  divine  incarnation  of  Kulhi,  is  to  be  represented  as 
a Brahmin,  carrying  a bow  and  a quiver,  and  engaged  in  the 
act  of  exterminating  the  Mlechhya  race,  or  is  to  be  depicted 
as  a Brahmin  bestriding  a horse,  and  fully  equipped  with  a 
sword,  a chakra,  a Javlin,  an  arrow  and  a conch  shell  to  blow 
upon  the  warcall  (9-10).  Now  I shall  speak  to  you  about  the 
essential  points  of  the  nine;  manifestations  of  the  god  Visnu, 
such  as  Vasudeva  etc.  The  gada  is  to  be  placed  in  the  upper 
right  hand,  and  the  excellent  celestial  ring  weapon  (chakra)  in 
the  upper  left,  or  in  the  alternative  the  image  may  be  made  as 
having  four  hands,  the  conch  being  placed  in  the  lower  right 
hand,  while  the  lower  left  is  to  be  depicted  in  the  attitude 
of  confering  blessings  ; and  the  images  of  Bramha  and  Ishl 
are  to  be  located  on  both  sides,  as  the  two  constant  compa- 
nions of  the  god  (1 1).  Rama  is  usually  represented  as  carrying 
a plough,  a Muskala  (mace)a  ^(club)  and  a lotus  flower ; and 
Pradumnya  as  wielding  a thunderbolt  and  the  divine  conch 
shell  in  his  right  hand,  and  albow  and  an  arrow  in  the  left  two, 
or  as  carrying,  out  of  love,  gadas  in  all  the  four.  Anirudha  as 
well  as  Naray\n  should  be  represented  with  four  hands  (12— 
,3).  Bramha  (the  creator)  is  to  be  represented  as  possessing 
four  hands  and  foqr  faces,  looking  towards  the  four  quarters 
of  the  firmament,  and  riding  on  the  celestial  swan,  and  his 
long  breast  and  clotted  hairs  reaching  down  his  prodigious 
belly,  in  his  right  hands"  are  the  rosary  and  the  sacrificial 
laddie,  in  his  left  a water-pot  and  a vessel  to  hold  the  sacrir 
ficial  clarified  butter,  and  the  goddesses  Saraswati  and  Savitri 
should  be  made  as  respectively  waking  on  the  right  and 
the  left  (15).  Vishau  is  to  be  represented  as  possessing  eight 
hands,  and  riding  on  the  celestial  t^rd  Garuda,  and  as  hold- 
ing in  bis  right  hands  a sword,  a gada  and  an  arrow,  and  a 
bow  and  a Khanka  in  |he  left,  while  the  remaining  two 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


m 


hands  are  to  be  represented  in  the  attitude  of  imparting 
benediction  (16).  The  image  of  Narasingfta  is  to  be  furnished 
with  four  hands,  the  two  holding  the  celestial  ring  weapon  and 
the  conch  shell,  and  the  other  two  engaged  in  tearing 
the  entrails  of  the  great  demon  (17),  The  Baraha  or 
Boar  incarnation  of  Vishnu  shall  be  possessed  of  four  hand! 
in  one  of  wfjich  he  shall  hold  the  serpent  Vasuki \ th 
left  one  holding  the  earth.  The  goddess  Lakshmi  should  be 
represented  as  sitting  at  his  feet,  and  the  earth  also  as 
falling  prostrate  thereat.  The  celestial  bird  Garuda,  who 
holds  the  whole  universe  bound  up  in  charm,  should  be 
located  00  the  right  side  of  the  god's  statue,  and  should 
provided  with  four  couples  of  arms,  the  right  hands  ho 
ing  the  weapons  known  as  Chakra , sword,  mace  and 
Ankusha , and  the  left  arms  carrying  the  weapons  and  the 
divine  emblems  of  conch  chell,  lotus  flower,  Gada  and 
(noose).  The  images  of  Lakshmi  and  Saraswati,  the  former 
carrying  her  own  emblem  of  a lotus  flower,  and  the  latter 
holding  the  divine  harp  in  her  hands,  are  to  be  installed 
on  the  left  hand  side.  And  on  the  right  hand  side 
the  statue,  the  image  of  Bishvarupa  is  to  be  installed, 
Bishvarupa  who  has  got  four  faces  and  twenty  hands,  those 
to  the  right  wielding  the  celestial  arms  known  as  Mudgar 
(club),  Pasha  (noose),  Shahti  (spear)  Shula  (pointed  iron 
rod)  arrow,  thunderbolt,  sword,  bell,  Darnuru  (small  drum), 
and  the  snake,  and  those  on  the  left  carrying  the  divine 
conch  shell,  lotus  flower,  Gada  (club),  Pasha  (noose),  Tamara 
plough,  axe,  stick,  knife  and  the  shield.  On  the  left-han 
side  install  the  image  of  the  Shankaraka  manifestation  of 
Hari,  who  is  the  destroyer  of  all  sin  and  its  progeny  of 
misery.  The  God  is  to  be  represented  as  endowed  with 
three  eyes,  being  symbolical  of  the  knowledge  of  the  past 
present  and  the  future,  and  as  lying  afloat  on  his  left 
the  water  of  the  primordial  ocean,  and  whose  umbilical 
like  the  stem  of  a lotus  flower,  has  blossomed  i 


A'GN!  PUR  A. NAM. 


l80 


faced  creator  of  the  universe.  Exhibit  therein  the  goddess 
Lakshmi  as  champooing  a leg  of  the  God,  and  the  female 
personifications  of  the  divine  energy  known  as  Bimala, 
etc.,  as  blowing  chowries  unto  him  (20—24).  The  manifes- 
tation of  Vishnu,  designated  as  Rudra  Kesava,  is  to 
be  represented  as  carrying  a trident  and  an  Asti  in  his 
two  right  hands,  and  a gad  a and  a Chakra  in  the  two  left ; 
The  right  half  part  of  the  body  shall  have  all  the  features  of 
the  image  of  Mahadeva,  and  the  left  half  shall  have  those  of  a 
statue  of  Vishnu,  and  the  images  of  Lakshmi  and  Gouri  are  to 
be  located  on  each  side  (25).  The  image  known  as  that  of 
Hayacirsa  shall  hold  the  divine  conch  shell,  gad  a (club),  lotus 
flower  and  the  Vedas  in  his  four  hands.  Its  left  leg  should  be 
placed  on  an  image  of  the  serpant  Ananta , and  his  right  on 
the  back  of  a carved  tortoise  (26).  Datvatraya  shall  be 
represented  as  having  two  arms,  with  the  goddess  Lakshmi 
seated  on  hi^  left  lap,  while  an  image  of  Bishvaksen  which 
closes  the  list  of  the  divine  figures  of  Vishnu,  be  made  to 
wield  the  celestial  ring  weapon,  gada  ( glub ) a plough  and  a 
conch  shell  in  his  four  arms.  The  whole  picture  (as 
delineated  in  stanzas  23 — 24)  is  to  be  construed  as  a mystic 
’ representation  of  the  first  coming  of  the  universe  into  being. 
There  lay  expanded  the  infinity  of  the  primordial  naraf 
(water  of  the  devine  energy)  coeternal  with  the  immutable 
self  of  Narayan  (the  receptacle  of  nara  or  the  forces  of 
the  universe),  and  from  his  umbilicus,  round  which  in  a man, 
according  to  the  spiritual  psychology  of  the  Brahmans,  the 
firy  plexus  known  as  Dushadal  chakra  is  placed,  and  which, 
by  analogy  in  this  case,  represents  the  centre  of  the 
Kinitic  and  necessarily  that  of  the  Caloric  energy  of  the 
universe  as  well,  springs  up  the'  lotus  stem,  the  material 
essence  terminating  in  a full  blown  lotus  flower,— the 
evolving,  external ; or  material  aspect  of  ■ Nature,  its-  petals: 
standing  for  the  order  of  evolution,  which  it  shall  have  to, 
go  through  subject  to  the  control  of  the  Cpd  of  fate; 


Amt  PURANAM. 


(Brahma),  who  sits  upon  it.  Lakshmi  (light),  the  in- 
seprable  companion  of  all  manifestations,  is  represented 
as  waiting  at  the  foot  end  of  the  divine  bed,  perhaps 
brooding  upon  her  sojourn  through  the  infinite  space, 
then  about  to  begin  ; and  Bimala  (pure  energy)  and  her  sister 
forces  have  been  represented  as  blowing  chowries,  a fact  which 
is  emblematic  of  the  advent  of  the  ether  and  the  wind 
as  the  resultant  of  the  birth  throes  of  the  universe.  Thus  at 
a very  early  age,  the  Sanskrit  Philosophy  recognised  the 
absolutely  free  and  unlimited  condition  of  the  Being,  and  re- 
cognised also  the  limited,  qualified  nature  of  the  Becoming, ~~~ 
the  Real,  which  is  absolute  and  unequalified,  underlying  and 
freely  evolving  itself  out  in  to  the  Phenomenal , the  process 
of  evolution  being  subject  to  conditions  which  are  at  once 
the  strength  and  laws  of  the  absolute  Ego, 


CHAPTER  L, 


" The  God  said  The  Goddess  Chandika 
seated  as  having  twenty  hands,  out  of  which, 
on  the  right,  holding  and  being  armed  v 
trident,  sword  spear,  ckakray  Pasha  (noose) 
Abhaya,  Damaru  (drum)  and  Saktika,  and 
weapons  are  to  be  placed  in  the  remaining 
the  left  side,  viz the  Nagpasha  (snake  us 
Khafcaka,  axe,  Ankusha,  bow,  bell,  banner 
mirror  and  the  Mudgar,  The  buffalo  should 
ed  below,  with  its  head  entirely  severed, 
(demon)  should  be  sculptured  as  rushing  out 
foaming  with  rage,  and  brandishing 


the  Asi 


sword 


! !'  ■' ,!  ; 


iBz 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


the  air,  and  vomiting  blood : — his  hairs  clotted  with  blood, 
and  blood  streaming  forth  from  his  two  eyes,  and  drippling 
down  round  his  breast  like  a garland.  The  goddess  is  to 
be  represented  in  a standing  posture,  with  her  right  foot 
resting  on  the  back  of  the  lion,  and  her  left  on  the  shoulder 
of  the  demon,  round  whose  neck  is  twisted  the  serpent 
noose  of  the  goddess,  and  who  is  pounced  upon  by  her  celes- 
tial lion  biting  at  his  arm  (1—5).  This  image  of  Chandika 
Is  to  be  made  as  possessing  three  eyes,  fully  armed  and 
crushing  the  enemy  of  the  God,  and  is  to  be  worshipped  in 
the  mystic  diagram  containing  the  images  of  nine  lotus 
flowers  and  known  as  Nabapadma  (6),  and  at  the  commence- 
ment, centre  and  the  Eastern  and  other  quarters  of  the  same 
from  the  representation  of  the  goddess,  with  the  nine  tatvas 
in  turn.  The  image  should  be  made  as  possessing  eighteen 
anus,  those  on  the  right  carrying  a human  head,  a Khetaka, 
a mirror,  a Tar} an i,  a bow,  a banner,  a Damaru,  and  a noose, 
and  the  left  arms  being  equipped  with  the  following  weapons, 
such  as  spear,  club,  trident,  thunderbolt,  sword,  pike,  arrow, 

1 chakra  and  shalaka , in  the  order  in  which  they  are  enumerated. 
The  images  of  the  remaining  nine  manifestations  of  the 
goddess,  such  as  I Rudra  Chanda,  2 Prachanda,  3 Chandogra* 
4 Chandanaika  5 Chanda,  6 Chandabati,  7 Chandarupa, 
8 Atichandika  and  9 Ugrachanda  shall  be  made  as 
possessing  sixteen  arms,  by  omitting  in  each  image,  the 
arms  holding  the  Damaru  (a  little  drum)  and  the  Tarjani \ 
and  as  having  a white  red  or  \ yellow  complexion  like  the 
substance  named  Gorochana  {7— ®n).  Or  they  shall  be  made 
of  a blue  white,  yellow  or  dusky  complexion  respectively, 
riding  on  a lion,  and  clenching  in  their  fists  the  tuft  of  the 
demon's  hair,  who  is  to  be  represented  as  rushing  out  of  the 
severed  body  of  a buffolo/t^).  The  images  df  the  nine 
different  manifestatiorf§*l5fDurgd.,  should  be  made  as  standing 
in  that  particular  attitude  which  goes  by  the  name  of 
A Hr  ha  (the  attitude  in  shooting,  In  which  the  right  knee  m 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


advanced  and  the  left  leg  is  retracted).  The  Installation  of 
the  above  images  together  with  those  of  Gouri,  Chandika 
etc.,  and  of  Kundi,  Aksarradi.  and  Agoidhrijc  is  conducive 
to  the  increase  of  progeny  etc.  (13).  She  is  identical  with 
Ramvi  or  Lalita,  who  being  worshipped  in  the  wood,  gives 
salvation  or  spiritual  success  to  men,  and  is  to  be  represented 
as  holding  in  her  left  hand,  a severed  human  head  with  the 
neck  attached,  and  a mirror  in  the  right  (14).  The  images  of 
Souvagya,  Urdhik&,  holding  in  their  palms  the  offerings  of 
fruits,  are  to  be  installed  in  the  right  hand  side  of  the 
goddess,  and  that  of  Lakshmi,  holding  a full  blown  lotus 
flower  and  a BaS  fruit  in  her  right  and  left  hands,  is  to 
be  located  in  the  left  (15).  The  images  of  the  goddess 
Saraswati  carrying  in  her  hands  a book,  a rosery  and  a lyre, 
and  of  the  white-coraplexioned  river  goddess  Janhavi,  as  hold® 
ing  a pitcher  and  and  a lotus  flower  in  her  hands,  and  be- 
striding a sea  monster  (Makar),  together  with  the  image  of 
the  river  goddess  Jarauna,  represented  as  a damsel  of  a dusky 
hue,  and  carrying  a pitcher,  and  seated  on  a tortoise,  and 
that  of  Tamvuru,  set  forth  as  a white  coloured  man,  carrying  a 
harp  and  a trident  and  riding  on  a bull,  are  to  be  worshipped 
in  the  front  of  the  image  of  the  goddess  (17)*  The  four- 
faced Bramfai  is  to  be  represented  as  of  a fair  complexion 
and  riding  on  a swan,  and  carrying  in  her  hands  Kunda, 
Aksapatra)  a rosary  and  a sacrificial  laddie,  while  Sankari 
is  to  be  represented  as  seated  on  a bull,  carrying  a bow  and 
an  arrow  in  her  right  hands,  and  a Chakra  in  her  left  (l8)v 
Koumari  should  be  represented  as  of  a red  colour  and  riding 
on  a peacock,  possessed  of  two  arms,  and  wielding  a spear 
(19).  Barahi  should  be  made  as  a maiden,  equipped  with  a 
danda  (stick),  sword,  mace  and  a conch  shell,  and  holding 
In  her  two  right  hands  the  clestial  conch  and  the  ring 
weapon,  and  the  earth,  mace  and  the  lotus  flower  in  her  left- 
hands,  and  as  sitting  on  a buffalo  (20).  Aindri  who  bestows 
succession  on  her  votaries,  should  be  represented,  as  having 


5 84 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


y 

U 


lilv 


a thousand  eyes,  and  holding  the  thunder-bolt  in  her  left 
hand,  while  Chamunda  should  be  sculptured  as  having 
made  a foot  stool  of  the  dead  body  of  a man,  and  as  possess- 
ed of  three  eyes  sunk  in  their  respective  sockets,  and  as  a 
woman  who  has  lost  all  flesh,  and  has  been  reduced  to 
skeleton,  with  hairs  angrily  standing  up  erect  on  her  head 
and  wearing  a tiger’s  skin  round  her  extremely  emaciated 
belly,— her  left  arms  being  equipped  with  a Pattisha  (spear) 
and  a human  skull,  a strident  and  a small  sword  (karti) 
being  in  the  other  two  (21—22).  Beniak  should  be  made 
as  having  the  body  of  a man,  and  the  head  of  an  elephant 
and  possessing  a huge  trunk  and  a belly.  He  should  be 
endowed  with  the  sacrificial  thread  peculiar  to  a Brahmin, 
and  known  as  Upabita . His  face  or  mouth  should  measure 
seven  kalas  in  breadth,  while  the  trunk  should  be  made 
to  measure  thirty-six  fingers  in  length.  The  neck  should 
have,  a length  of  a kala  and  a half,  with  a girth  of  about 
twelve  kalas . The  region  of  the  throat  should  be  made  thirty- 
six  fingers  in  length  and  the  space  about  the  region  of  the 
anus  should  have  a breadh  of  half  a finger  (23 — 25).  The 
space  about  the  region  of  the  Umbilicus  shall  measure 
twelve  fingers;  and  similarly  the  feet,  and  the  space  between 
the  calves  and  the  knee-joints,  shall  respectively  commen- 
surate with  the  naval  region.  He  should  be  represented 
as  having  made  an  axe  of  one  of  his  own  tusks,  and  holding 
the  same  in  his  right  hand,  while  a luddock  (a  ball  of  sweet 
meat)  and  a lotus  flower  should  be  placed  in  his  two  left 
hands  (26),  The  image  of  Skanda,  the  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  celestial  forces,  and  who  is  also  known  as  Shakha  and 
Bishaka,  and  is  the  lord  of  the  universe,  should  be  represented 
as  a boy  possessing  two  arms  and  riding  on  a peacock,  with 
the. images  of  Sumukhi  and  Bidalaksi  installed  on  his  two 
sides.  The  god  may  be  represented  as  endowed  with  one  m 
six  faces,  or  possessing  six  or  twelve  hapds.  But  in  a wood 


or  a village,  his  image  should  be  made  to  appear;  with  tw® 


111 


mm  wranam. 


hmAs  only,  carrying  the  celestial  weapon  Sakti  in  his  right 
•and  a Cookuta  in  his  left  hand,  or  in  the  case  of  his  having 
twelve  arms,  the  six  on  the  right  should  . be  equipped  with 
the  divine  weapons  respectively  known  as,  Sakti \ arrow, 
Pasha  (noose),  sword,  totrada,  iarjani  and  the  Sakti 
the  left  six  being  armed  with  the  Saktis  only  (27 — 29).  The 
feminine  manifestation  of  the  divine  energy,  revealed  as 
Uudra  Chandika,  should  have  an  image  possessing  eight 
hands,  weilding  in  them  a bow  decked  with  peacock’s- 
feathers,  a kheta,  a banner  together  with  the  weapon  called 
<coocuta , a human  skull,  a Kartari,  (a  kind  of  small  two 
handed  sword  beaked  like  a Tomahawk),  a trident  and  a 
moose  respectively  both  on  the  right  and  the  left,  owe  hand 
being  represented  in  the  attitude  confering  blessing.  The 
■goddess  should  be  represented  as  wearing  the  skin  of  an 
elephant,  and  her  legs  should  be  made  to  appear  as  raised  up 
■in  the  attitude  of  dancing,  the  trappings  of  the  little  drums 
and  human  skulls  girdled  round  her  waist  measuring  time 
with  her  dance  9 and  hence  she  is  called  the  queen  or  th 
goddess  of  dancing,  and  is  also  known  by  the  epithet  of 
Rudra  Cham un da  (30—31).  The  aforesaid  goddess  sculptured 
in  a sitting  posture,  and  as  having  four  faces,  is  known  as 
Mahalakshmi  The  same  figure  represented  with  three  eyes 
and  ten  hands,  of  which  the  five  on  the  right  hold  the  shastrU 
sword  and  the  Damarus  (drums),  and  the  five  on  the  left* 
wield  the  bell,  Khaiakay  Khattanga  and  the  trident,  and 
also  represented  as  eating,  men,  horses  and  buffalos  held 
secure  in  her  gripe,  goes  by  the  name  of  Siddha  Chamunda* 
and  grants  all  success  and  specially  that  in  practising  the 
Yoga  to  her  votaries.  The  goddess  admits  of  being  repre- 
sented in  another  form,  in  which  she  should  be  made  of  a 
redish  complexion  and  armed  with  a noose  and  an  A nkusha 
The  goddess  Bhairabi,  who  is  the  embodiment  of  the  uni- 
versal Beautiful,  is  to  be  imaged  as  possessed  of  twelve 
bands*  The  Bidya  (the  manifestations  of  the  divine  energy 


agni  puranam. 


in  female  shapes)  spoken  of  above  are  to  be  looked  upon 
as  appertaining  to,  and  emanating  from  the  sterner  or  awe 
inspiring  aspect  of  the  divine  nature,  and  are  connected 
with  the  cremation  ground  (of  the  universe,  when  the  flames 
of  the  millineum-fire  shall  consume  and  reduce  it  to  its 
original  nothingness,  together  with  the  space  and  time  its 
habitation  and  life) ; and  the  above  portion  of  .the  Chapter 
dealing  with  the  aforesaid  manifestations  is  called  Amdas- 
takam  (36). 

The  goddess  Ksama  should  be  represented  as  a woman  old 
and  possessing  two  arms,  with  her  mouth  widely  opened, 
and  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  jackals ; and  the  manifesta- 
tion 0f  the  goddess  known  as  KsamakSri  should  be  imaged 
as  having  very  large  teeth,  and  in  a kneeling  posture  (37). 
The  Jaksinis  (wives  of  a class  of  demi-gods,  and  female  atten- 
dants of  the  goddess  Durga  and  her  different  manifestations) 
should  be  made  as  maidens  with  large,  motionless  eyes  ; the 
Sh&kini’s  should  be  made  with  eyes  looking  askance.  The 
Maharamyas  should  be  endowed  with  yellow  eyes,  and  the 
Apsaras  should  be  always  represented  as  extremely  handsome 
damsels  (38). 

Nandisha,  the  porter  of  the  goddess  should  be  represented 
as  carrying  a rosary  in  one  hand,  and  a trident  in  the  other  \ 
and  Mahakal  should  be  imaged  as  equipped  with  a sword, 
a human  head,  a mace,  and  a Khataka  weapon  (39).  Bhringy 
should  be  made  to  appear  as  an  extremely  emaciated  person 
Kusmanda  should  be  sculptured  as  a man  of  small  stature  in 
a dancing  attitude;  while  the  attendants  known  as  Birvadras 
etc.  should  he  endowed  with  the  heads  and  ears  of  elephants 
and  cows  (40).  Ghantakuma  should  be  represented  as 
possessing  eighteen  hands,  eight  on  each  side,  and  carrying 
a tbunder-bolt,  a sword,  a club,  a chakra  an  arrpw,  a mace,  a 
pike  and  a club  on  the  right ; and  a targani,  Kheta  Shakti,  a 
human  head,  a noose,  a bow,  a bell,,  an  axe  on  the  left, 
and  a trident,  remainin  g with  the  two  hands  situate  on 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


both  the  sides,  and  as  crushing  the  sin  begotten  and 
erysipilatous  diseases,  girdled  by  a row  of  bells  round  his 
waist  (41—42), 


CHAPTER  LI 


1 HE  sun  rides  in  a chariot  provided  with  a single  wheel, 
and  drawn  by  seven  horses,  carrying  in  his  two  hands  the 
two  celestial  lotus  flowers,  the  emblems  of  light  and  anima- 
tion ; and  on  his  right  hand  side  stands  his  attendant  Rundi, 
bolding  in  his  hands  a pen  and  an  inkstand,  symbolizing 
the  computation  of  the  age  of  the  universe  by  the  process 
of  the  suns,  and  the  recording  of  the  merits  and  demerits 
of  the  beings  dwelling  there  in,  in  the  register  of  the  heaven 
(l).  On  his  left,  stands  his  porter  Ptngala,  mace  in  hand,' 
the  insignia  of  his  master’s  divine  sovereignity ; and  on  his 
two  sides  are  stationed  the  two  celestial  damsels  wafting 
chowries  unto  him,  ever  proceeding  on  his  luminous,  infinite 
and  ethereal  journey,  with  his  shadow  queen  (NispravH)  by  his 
side  (2).  In  the  alternative  the  sun  god  Bkaskara  should 
be  represented  as  alone,  and  riding  on  a horse  back ; and 
the  Dikpalas  or  the  presiding  deities  of  the  different 
quarters  of  the  firmament  should  be  imaged  as  each  carry- 
ing two  lotus  flowers  and  weapons  in  their  hands,  and  also 
as  conferring  blessings,  each  in  his  respective  order  (3). 
Agnis  and  such  like  gods,  carrying  clubs,  trident,  chakras, 
and  lotus  flowers  are  to  be  located  in  the  angular  quarters 
of  the  heaven;  and  the  different  manifestations  of  the 
sun  god  beginning  with  Arjamat  and  finishing  with  Aksa, 
should  be  each  represented  with  four  arms,  and  located  in 
, the  diagram  of  twelve  petals  (4)1  and  is  to  be  call©#^y' 


illlillfl 


AGNI  PURAKAM. 


the  following  names,  as  he  successively  passes  into  each  o® 
the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  and  travels  over  the  tropics 
of  cancer  and  the  capricorn,  between  the  months  of  Marga- 
eirsa  and  Kartika  each  year,  the  names  being,  Varuna,  Surya, 

a,  Sabita,  Gavastika,  Rabis,. 
and  Visnuka  (5 — 6).  The 
to  be  located  in  the  ends, 
of  the  petals  of  the  aforesaid  mystic  diagram,  are  to 
be  of  black,  red,  reddish,  yellow,  pale  yellow,  white,, 
amber,  yellow,  greenish,,  greyish,  smoke  and  blue  colours 
respectively,  and  they  respectively  pass  under  the  deno- 
minations of  Ida,  Susamna,  Bisvacehi,  fndu,  Pramardiuy, 
Praharsiny,  Mahakali,  Kapila,  Prabodhiny,  Nilambara, 
and  Amrita  (7— a).  Similar  colours  are  to  be 


Sahasrangshu,  Dhata,  Tapan 
Parjanya,  Tasta,  Mitra, 
saktis,  or  the  solar  energies 


UGH  I PURANA&I. 


Mahabjai  Shunku,  Kulika  and  Sustrina  are  to  be  understood 
as  all  resplendent  creatures  with  hooded  heads  (13.)  Indra  is 
to  imagined  as  riding  on  an  elephant*  and  wielding  a thunder- 
bolt'; and  Agni  as  seated  on  a goat,  and  holding  a spear  in 
his  hand,  Yama  (the  god  of  death)  is  to  be  depicted, as  riding 
on  a buffalo,  and  carrying  a dub,  and  Nairita  is  to  be  pic- 
tured as  brandishing  a sword  (14).  Varuna  the  god  of  the 
ocean)  is  to’  be  delineated  as  riding)  on  a sea-monster 
(Makara)  and  carrying  a trident  in  his  hand,  while  Bayu  (the 
wind)  is  to  be  depicted  as  driving  an  antilope,  with  a full 
furled  streamer  gaily  flying  by  his  side.  Kuvera  should  be 
pictured  as  carrying  a mace  and  riding  on  a sheep,  and  Ishan 
with  his*clofefced  hair  as  sitting  on  a ;buHock4(*5)*  Lokopalas 
should  be  represented  as  having  two  hands  only,  Visvakarma 
as  telling  a rosery,  Hanuman  as  wielding  a thuder-bolt  and 
oppressing  the  earth  with  his  feet  (16).  The  Kinnaras  should 
be  imagined  as  inhabiting  the  skies,  and  playing  on  harps 
in  the  air,  and  likewise  the  Bidhyadharas  as  bedecked  with 
garlands*  The  Pisacbes  should  be  represented  as  extremly 
emaciated  in  their  bodies,  and  tbfe  Vetalas  as  having  distorted 
faces.  The  Ksefcrapalas  should  be  depicted  as  equipped 
with  tridents,  and  the  Pretas  as  having  big  bellies  (17). 


CHAPTER  LII 


A he  God  said;~Mow  I shall  describe  to  you,  m tfcfr, . 
following  eight  couplets,  the  Yoginis  who  dwell  in  the  differ- 
ent quarters  of  the  heaven.  I shall  start  with  the  East  an,#,, 
finish  with  the  north-east  quarter  of  the  firmament  Tfaeljf  ' 
names  are  as  follows  ;*** 


igo 


AGNI  PUR  a NAM. 


The  Yoginis  named  Aksovya,  Raksakarni,  Rakhsi,  KripanI 
and  Aksaya  inhabit  the  eastern  quarters  of  the  sky  (i). 
The  Yoginis  known  as  Pishangi,  Ksay3,  Ksema,  Ila,  LilS, 
Lola,  Lakta,  Balakeshi,  Lalas5,  and  Bitnali  dwell  in  the  south- 
eastern quarter  of  the  firmament  (2).  The  Yoginis  who  are 
named  HutashS,  Bishalaksi,  Hunkari,  Barabamukhi,  Maha- 
krurS,  Krodhana,  Vayankari,  and  Muhanana,  reside  in  the 
south  (3).  The  Yoginis  who  are  styled  Sarbagni,  Sarala, 
Tara,  RigvedS,  HayananS,  SaraksyS,  Rudrasangrahi,  SambarS 
and  Taljhangika,  are  the  inmates  of  the  south-western 
heaven  (4).  The  Yoginis  denominated  as  Raktaksi,  Supra- 
sidha,  Bidutjivha,  [Karankini,  Maghanada,  Prachandogora, 
Kalakarni  and  Baraprada  are  the  residents  of  the  western 
firmament  (5).  The  Yoginis  known  by  the  epithets  of 
Chandra,  Chandrabali  Prapancha,  PralayantikS,  Sishubaktri, 
Pisbachi,  Pishitasha  Lolupa  occupy  the  north  western  direc- 
tion of  the  heaven  (6).  The  Joginis  called  Dhamani,  Tapani, 
Ragini,  BikritSnana,  Bayubega,  Brihatkuksi,  Bikrita  and 
Bisharupika,  hold  sway  in  the  north  (7).  While  the  Joginis 
described  as  Jamajevha  Jayanti  Durjaya,  Jayantika  Bidali, 
Rabati,  Putana  and  Bijuyantika  hold  sovereignty  over  the 
north-east  (8).  These  Joginis  should  be  represented  as 
having  eight  or  four  hands  as  the  case  may  be,  and  wielding 
arms  according  to  their  own  choice,  and  who  impart  alii 
success  to  their  votaries,  on  being  duly  worshipped  and 
propitiated.  Vairaba  should  be  depicted  as  carrying  the 
sun  in  his  hand,  Kurpurasya  being  represented  as  wearing 
large,  clotted  hairs.'and  bedecked  with  the  moon  in  the  fore- 
head (9).  Kritibasa  is  to  be  delineated  as  wielding  on  the 
one  side,  the  weapons  sword,  pike,  axe,  and  an  arrow,  and  as 
folding  a palm  in  the  attitude  of  imparting  benediction  to  the 
universe,  together  with  a bow,  a trident,  a Khatvanga,  and  A 
half  noose  on  the  other.  His  garment  shall  be  of  the  skin 
of  an  elephant,  held  in  its  place  by  his  two  hands;  and 
venomous  snakes  shall  be  represented  as  resting  on  his  body, 


AGft!  PUEAMAM* 


'serving  the  purposes  of  ornaments;  or  in  the  alternative  the 
god  Panchanan,  who  is  another  manifestation  of  the  same 
god,  is  !to  be  worshipped  amidst  the  Matrikas  sitting  on  the 
deadbody  of  a man,  and  with  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  up 
to  thelefcter  Ra  and  with  his  mantra  Om  Shrni,  Houm  namas 
Shiv&ya  and  the  eight  long  voweled  mantras  such  as  Eem, 
Woom,  Aim,  Ayin,  Om,  Oun  and  As  (10—13).  Biravadra  should 
be  represented  as  having  four  faces  and  riding  on  a bullock  5 
while  Court  is  to  be  depicted  as  possessing  two  arms  and 
three  eyes,  and  carrying  a mace  and  a mirror  (14).  Lalita 
should  be  depicted  as  carrying  a trident,  pitcher  and  a galan- 
tika,  (a  pitcher  with  a whole  at  the  bottom)  and  with  one  hand 
folded  in  the  attitude  of  imparting  blessing,  or  as  a com- 
panion of  the  god  Skanda,  carrying  a brush  and  a mirror  (t$). 
Chandika  should  be  represented  with  10  hands  and  as 
carrying  a sword,  a trident  a chakra  a spear  in  the  right* 
and  a snake  noose,  shield,  pike,  axe  and  a bow  in  the 
left  aad  as  riding  on  a lion  with  her  trident  firmly  fixed  into 
the  breast  of  the  buffalo  demon  (16). 


CHAPTER  Lilt. 

U.iiMH«tfniiriirif~-i 

* 

HP 

1 HE  God  said Hear  me  describe  the  essential  points 
of  a falic  emblem.  A rectangular  block  of  stone  is  to  be 
marked  as  divided  length  wise  into  two  equal  divisions  ; the 
lower  half  of  which  is  to  be  divided  in  its  turn,  into  eight 
equal  parts.  Five  such  parts  are  to  be  left  out,  and  the  re-  | 
maining  block  formed  of  the  remaining  five,  should  be 
divided,  breadth  wise  into  three  parts,  the  first  of  which  is  . j 
to  be  called  the  Bramhabhagdi  the  second  Vishnu  part^he,  _ t.| 

jeI 

& ,7-!?  * ' 


192 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


last  or  the  lowest  part  being  known  as  the  Chivavagas  which 
•shall  be  larger  than  the  other  two  parts,  and  over  whose 
•four  angles  of  division  at  the  upper  extremity,  a squre  is  to 
be  drawn,  thus  dividing  the  part  known  as  Visnubhaga  into 
-an  octagonal  block*  Divide  the  same  again  into  a block 
containing  thirty  two  sides,  and  then  the  same  again  into 
•one  of  sixty-four  and  then  turn  it  into  a roundfshaped  block 
<1— 4).  The  Brahmin  (sculptor)  who  must  be  an  inhabitant  of 
the  country  known  as  Madhyadeshay  shall  then  cut  out  the 
head  of  the  falic  emblem  in  the  shape  of  an  umbrella,  with 
a breadth  equal  to  the  half  of  the  linga  divided  into  eight 
equal  parts  (5 — 6).  A linga  which  has  a breadth  equal  to 
three-fourth  of  its  length,  is  to  be  deemed  as  the  grantor  of 
all  human  desires  (7).  The  pillar  or  prop  part  of  such  a falic 
emblem  shall  be  a quater  of  the  entire  length  of  the  latter, 
which  is  the  measure  usually  adopted  by  the  gods  in  their 
worship  (8). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  general  features  and  attributes 
of  all  sorts  of  falic  emblems.  The  learned  should  divide  a 
linga  measuring  sixteen  fingers,  into  six  parts  through  the 
central  line  passing  through  the  Brahma  and  Rudra  Vagas 
The  spaces  comprised  within  two  such  lines  of  division  shall 
measure  eight  Javas  each  in  the  first  two  cases,  each  latter 
measuring  a Java  less  than  the  preceding  one  (10).  The 
lower  part  should  be  divided  into  three  parts,  the  upper  one 
should  be  left  aside,  and  the  remaining  two  parts  should 
be  divided  into  eight  divisions,  the  three  upper  ones  of 
which  are  to  be  left  aside  (n).  The  upper  three  divisions 
those  above  the  five  sections  spoken  of  above,  should  be 
projected  to  form  the  circuitous  belt,  and  their  blending 
should  be  brought  about  after  leaving  such  apart  inter- 
vening (12).  These  are  the  characteristics  of  the  falic  em- 
blems in  general,  and  now  I shall  speak  to  you  about  the 
essential  features  of  their  pedestals  (13).  O thou  well-versed 
In  knowledge,  the  commencement  or  starting  section  of  the 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


193 


emblem,  together  with  its  height,  and  the  part  known  as 
Brahma-Vaga  (part  sacred  to  Brahma)  should  be  ascertained 
at  the  outset,  and  then  the  latter  should  be  placed  over  the 
slab  designated  as  the  Karmashila  (14). 

The  different  dimensions  of  the  pedestal  should  be  made 
according  to  its  elevation.  The  Peetha  or > the  part  actually 
occupied  by  the  emblem  should  be  of  two  such  parts 
in  height,  with  a length  commensurable  with  that  of  the 
linga  (15).  The  internal  space  or  cavity  of  the  Peetha 
(stool  proper)  should  be  divided  into  three  parts,  its  breadth 
being  equal  to  one  sixth  part  of  its  length  (16).  The  belt 
or  the  girth  round  it  should  measure  one  third  part  of  its 
breadth,  and  the  depth  of  its  cavity  will  be  equal  to  or  shall 
be  one-sixteenth  part  of  its  belt  with  a gradual  slope,  the 
height  of  the  stool  being  decorated  with  ornamental 
works  (16—18.) 

A part  of  it  will  remain  imbeded  in  the  ground,  a part  o£ 
it  will  be  the  height  of  the  stool  proper,  three  such  parts  will 
be  the  height  up  to  the  topmost  brim  or  border 'of  the  pedestal. 
The  second  or  upper  step  shall  be  of  two  such  parts  in  height, 
while  the  last  or  the  lowest  step  shall  have  the  height 
of  such  a single  part  which  is  to  be  taken  up  by  each  flight 
of  steps  leading  upwards,  until  the  topmost  border  is  reached 
(19—20).  Indents  to  the  breadth  of  such  a part  are  to  be 
set  apart  on  each  flight  of  steps  until  the  lowest  one  is 
reached,  and  they  shall  be  cut  into  to  three  by  the  three  exists 
for  water,  which  shall  measure  a fore-falanx  of  a finger  in 
breadth  at  their  base,  and  one-sixth  of  a finger  at  their  ends, 
and  whose  beds  shall  slope  a little  towards  the  postern  side. 
These  are  the  general  characteristics  of  the  falic  emblems 
and  their  pedestals  (21—22). 


tlllli 

|n| 


CHAPTER  LIV. 


The  GOD  said  Oh  Brahman  hear  me  describe  in  the 
following  manner,  the  respective  measures  of  the  different 
classes  of  the  falic  emblem.  I shall  presently  speak  about 
those  made  of  common  salt  and  clarified  butter,  which  if 
worshipped  increase  the  intellect  of  their  worshippers  (i). 
A linga  made  of  a piece  of  cloth,  together  with  one 
made  of  clay,  whether  soft  or  burnt,  being  worshipped 
* for  the  time  being,  gives  wealth,  a burnt  one  in  the  latter 
case  being  held  better  than  an  unburnfc  one  (2).  There  Is 
more  merit  in  worshiping  a wooden  linga  than  an  earthen 
one,  and  so  on  a falic  emblem  of  stone  is  better  than  a 
wooden  one,  one  made  of  pearl  is  better  than  one  of  stone, 
and  lastly  the  worship  of  a linga  of  gold  or  iron  ensures 
greater  merit  to  the  worshipper  than  the  worship  of  all  the 
preceding  ones  respectively  (3).  The  falic  emblems  made  of 
silver,  copper  or  brass,  impart  enjoyment  and  salvation  to  men, 
while  those  of  zinc  and  mercury  are;said  to  be  very  auspicious 
and  confer  similar  boons  as  above  (4).  The  installation  of  a 
falic  emblem  made  of  mercury  or  iron,  or  of  mercury  iron  and 
other  petals  combined,  and  with  gems  laid  up  in  their  insides, 
increase  the  glory  of  their  worshippers,  and  grant  them 
success  and  all  the  blessings  "their  hearts  can  wish  for  (5). 
Edifices  or  temple  may  be  raised  to  these  emblems,  some 
what  to  their  west,  in  the  event  of  any  body  wishing  to  do 
the  same.  Even  the  circular  luminous  spot  which  the  sup 
casts  on  a mirror,  and  which,  for  its  resemblance  to  the  shape 
of  a lingam,  is  called  the  falic  emblem  of  the  solar  rays,  is 
to  be  worshipped.  In  fact  the  god  Hara  can  be  worshipped 
every  where,  his  full  and  complete  worship  or  his  worship  in 
its  entirety  being  possible  in  a lingam  only,  which  in  the 
case  of  being  a stone  or  a wooden  one  shall  measure  ^ 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


195 


cubit  in  length  (7).  A faiic  emblem  of  the  chala  class  shall 
measure  up  to  fifteen  fingers  according  to  the  finger  measure 
(see  Couplets  19-21.  Chapter  39th),  those  usually  wor- 
shipped in  a household  measuring  from  one  to  fifteen  fingers 
each  (8).  These  emblems  are  divided  into  three  classes 
such  as  the  Kanyasa  (small)  the  Madhyama  (middle)  and  the 
Yasta  (large)  according  to  their  respective  dimensions,  those 
of  the  first  class  consisting  of  thirty  six  emblems  (four 
sets  of  nine)  those  of  the  middle  being  comprised  of  four 
sets  of  nine  (thirty  six)  and  those  of  the  third  or  the  Yasta 
class  containing  equal  sets  of  nine  with  the  middle.  The 
Lingams  of  the  Kanyasa  class  shall  measure  one  to  five 
fingers  each,  the  chala  emblems  of  the  second  class  shall  be 
of  six  to  ten  fingers  each,  and  those  of  the  Yasta  or  the  third 
class  of  the  chala  (removable)  faiic  emblems  shall  measure  from 
eleven  to  fifteen  fingers  respectively  (8—12).  The  faiic  em- 
blems made  of  the  precious  stones  known  as  the  Mahar atria 
shall  measure  six  fingers  each,  those  made  of  the  other  gems 
shall  have  a length  or  height  of  nine  fingers  each,  those  of 
gold  shall  measure  twelve  fingers,  and  the  rest  fifteen  fingers 
respectively  (13).  The  couple  of  the  two  sets  of  corners  from 
the  top  shall  be  successively  cut  into  four  or  sixteen  equal 
sides,  and  those  again  into  thirtytwo  and  sixty  four  in 
turn  so  as  to  make  it  a polygon  of  sixty  four  equal  sides 
(14).  The  two  sides  being  thus  lopped  off,  the  neck  of  a 
faiic  emblem  of  the  chala  class  shall  rather  measure  twenty 
six  parts  from  the  rectangular  space  at  its  foot  (15),  The 
face  of  the  lingam  shall  gradually  go  on  decreasing  by  four, 
six  and  eight  parts  from  its  base,  and  similarly  the  middle 
part  of  the  emblem  shall  be  gradually  less  than  the  height  at 
its  commencement  by  a pada  (16). 


CHAPTER  LV, 


X HE  God  said  :--Now  1 shall  speak  to  you  aoout  me 
pedestals  of  the  divine  images,  which  shall  equal  the  image 
in  length  and  shall  be  half  as  much  broad  (i).  In  the  alter- 
native the  breadth  shall  be  equal  to  the  half  or  one-third  of 
the  measure  of  the  height,  and  its  belt  shall  be  equal  to  the 
one-third  of  its  breadth  (2).  The  hollow  or  cavity  in  the 
inside  shall  be  of  that  measure,  and  shall  be  sloping  towards 
its  posterior  part,  and  a space  measuring  a quarter  part  of  the 
pedestal  shall  be  set  apart  for  the  exits  or  passages  of 
water  (3).  The  Samamulas  (water  passages  of  equal  base) 
shall  have  a breadth  equal  to  the  half  measure  of  the  space 
set  apart  for  water  passages,  and  their  beds  shall  be  equal  to 
the  third  thereof  (4).  The  water  passages  of  equal  base,  shall 
have  a breadth  at  the  extremity  equal  to  the  half  thereof ; and 
the  channel  will  have  a breadth  equal  to  the  one-third  part  of  the 
breadth  of  the  pedestal  (5).  The  image  of  the  god  Mahadeva 
may  be  as  long  as  the  pedestal,  or  may  be  half  as  much  in 
length,  in  the  former  case  the  height  of  the  pedestal  is  to  be 
divided  into  sixteen  parts  as  before;  and  the  six  divisions  be- 
low should  be  made,  as  occupying  the  two  parts  of  its  entire 
height,  and  its  neck  or  the  extreme  upper  border  should  be 
laid  about  with  the  three  parts  thereof,  and  the  foundation, 
indents,  steps  and  the  platforms  shall  comprise  such  a part 
or  a bhctgct  respectively.  The  measures  of  the  different  parts 
stated  above,  shall  hold  good  in  the  cases  of  all  ordinary 
images  (6—7).  The  front  of  the  image  shall  be  propor- 
tionate to  the  door  of  the  temple,  and  the  elephants,  tigers, 
and  other  beasts  of  prey  shall  be  carved  into  the  region 
occupied  by  the  halo  of  the  image  (8).  The  pedestal  of  an 
image  of  the  god  Hari  should  be  made  in  a way  as  to  show  it 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


to  the  best  advantage  possible.  The  measures  laid  down  con- 
cerning the  images  of  Vishnu  shall  apply  to  the  images  of  all 
the  other  gods,  while  those  set  forth  in  connection  with  the 
images  of  the  goddess  Lakshmi,  should  be  observed  and 
adapted  in  the  images  of  all  the  other  goddesses  (9). 


CHAPTER  LVI, 


1 HE  God  said  Now  I shall  deal  with  the  five  differ- 
ent divisions  of  an  installation  ceremony.  The  image  is 
to  be  looked  upon  as  the  embodiment  of  the  Purusha  or  the 
Supreme  Being,  the  real  and  subjective  principle  of  the 
universe,  who  is  known  by  the  denomination  of  Narayana 
and  the  Pindika  or  the  pedestal  is  to  be  considered  as  a 
symbol  of  Nature  or  the  goddess  Lakshmi;  and  the  cere- 
mony of  installation  consists  in  bringing  about  the  union 
of  the  two,  which  has  the  universe  for  its  offspring  (1),  Men 
generally  perform  these  ceremonies  with  a view  to  have 
a fulfilment  of  their  heartfelt  desires.  The  guru  or' the  priest 
officiating  at  the  ceremony  shall  cause  the  sacrificial  sheds  to 
be  raised  in  the  front  of  the  temple  or  the  divine  edifice, 
on  the  extension  of  the  two  parallel  side  lines  of  its 
adytum.  These  sheds  may  be  made  to  measure  eight, 
sixteen,  or  twenty  cubits  and  the  sheds,  shall  occupy 
half  the  space  included  between  them,  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  the  sacrificial  bathing  seats,  pitchers,  and  sub- 
stances deemed  essential  and  necessary  to  the  sacrifice  (2— *3)* 
The  auspicious  sacrificial  platforms  shall  be  made  as  to  occupy 
an  entire  one-third  part  of  the  above  space,  and  shall  be  hung 
over  with  a canopy,  and  bedecked  with  pitchers  large  and 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


washed  with  the  composition  known  as  the  Panchayabya , (the 
dung  and  urine  of  a cow  together  with  its  milk  and  curd)  and 
the  priest  officiating  at  the  ceremony,  shall  wear  ornaments, 
and  deem  himself  identical  with  the  god  Vishnu,  and  shall 
commence  the  worship  subsequent  to  that  (5).  The  wor- 
shippers of  the  idols  who' are  efficient  in  their  worship  shall  be 
propitiated  with  rings  and  bracelets,  and  shall  be  established  at 
the  front  of  each  sacrificial  Kunda  (cavity  for  sacrificial  fire) 
(6).  The  branches  of  the  PippaSa,  Oudumbara,  Bata,  and 
other  sacrificial  trees  should  be  posted  at  the  different  doors 
of  the  shed,  which  may  be  rectangular,  semi-circular,  lotus- 
shaped, or  circular  in  construction.  A branch  of  the  Plakhya 
(Indian  sacrificial  fig)  should  adore  the  east  gate  of  the 
Mandapa%  a Subhadra  branch  should  decorate  the  south,  and 
the  northern  and  western  doors  of  the  Mandap  should  be 
decorated  with  the  branches  of  the  Sukarma  and  Subatra 
■ trees  respectively  (7—8).  The  pitchers  should  be  placed 
five  cubits  apart  at  the  foot  of  the  each  column  of  the 
sacrificial  gates,  and  should  be  worshipped  with  the  mantra 
beginning  with  the  terms  <£  Syonna  Prithvy/1  their  mouths 
having  been  previously  filled  up  with  the  new  born  shoots 
of  mango  trees  (9).  The  Chakra  or  the  ring  shaped  metal 
blade  should  be  placed  at  the  top  of  the  sacrificial  shed, 
together  with  a banner  five  cubits  long,  and  sixteen  finger’s 
broad.  Or  in  the  alternative  a streamer  may  measure  seven 
cubits  in  height  which  shall  be  made  of  a reddish,  flame- 
like,  black,  white,  yellow,  blood-red,  or  of  a white  colour 
in  turn  (10—12).  O thou  best  of  the  gods,  the  presiding 
deities  of  the  flags  hoisted  in  different  quarters  of  the  heaven, 
beginning  with  the  east,  and  who  are  known  as  Kumada, 
Kumudaksa,  Pundarika,  Bamana,  Shankhukarna,  Sarvanatra, 
add  Sumukha,  and  who  are  possessed  of  innumerable  divine 
virtues,  should  be  worshipped,  together  with  the  hundred  and 
eight  red  spotless  and  well-burnt  pitchers  placed  outside 
the  sacrificial  shed,  full  of  water  and  with  pieces  of 


ft- 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


199 


doth  girdled  round  their  necks  to  which  pieces  of  gold  have 
been  attached  (13—15).  O Bramha,  four  pitchers  should 
be  placed  at  the  corners  of  the  sacrificial  elevation  with  the 
mantras,  “Ajighra”  etc,  and  after  having  placed  separate 
pitchers  at  the  east  and  other  sides  thereof  (16),  invoke 
the  gods  Indra  and  his  companions  in  the  sacrificial  pitchers 
placed  at  th£  east  and  other  sides  of  the  shed  respectively, 
worship  the  god  Indra  with  the  mantra  beginning  as 
Trataram  Indra  etc,  and  invoke  him  as  follows— Come 
Indra  thou  lord  of  the  gods  and  the  wielder  of  the  thunder- 
bolt and  who  ridest  on  the  celestial  elephant,  defend  the 
eastern  gate  of  our  sacrificial  shed  in  the  company  of  other 
gods  (17 — 18).  Agni  (the  god  of  fire)  is  to  be  propitiated  with 
the  mantra  beginning  with  the  terms  i(  Agni  murdha”  etc. 
or  obesience  to  the  god  Agni,  and  invoke  him  with  the  other 
presiding  gods  of  the  firmament  respectively  as  following. 
Come  Oh  Agni,  thou  who  weildst  a trident  and  ridest  on  a 
goat,  accept  my  worship  and  defend  the  south  eastern  gate 
of  my  sacrificial  mandap.  Come  Oh  thou  mighty  sun 
begotten  god  of  death,  who  ridest  on  a buffalo  and  weildest  a 
trident,  defend  the  southern  gate  of  my  sacrificial  shed.  Be 
thou  propitiated  with  the  mantra  Baibasvata  sangamanamt  I 
Come  Oh  Nairita  who  dost  carry  in  thy  hand  a sword  and  who 
art  accompanied  by  armies  and  riding  animals,  defend  the 
south-western  gate  of  our  mandap.  Here  is  water  for 
absolving  thy  feet,  and  here  is  offering  to  thee.  Be  thou 
propitiated  with  our  mantras  beginning  as  Esha  ta  Nairit 
etc.  (19—22).  Come  Oh  thou  mighty  Varuna  who  dost 
carry  a trident  and  ridest  on  the  sea  monster  known  as  the 
Makara . I make  obesiance  to  thee,  defend  the  western  gate 
Let  the  priest  officiating  at  the  ceremony  propitiate  the 
god  with  his  own  mantra  beginning  with  i(  Urum  hi  Raja 
Varunam  (23 — 24).  Come  Oh  Biyu  (wind)  with  the  antilope 
thou  ridest  upon  and  thy  companions  Maruts  and  thy  own 
barker,  defend  the  north  western  gate  of  our  sacr||^' ' 

- V "f'i?  • : 

" : - : 

'1 ' 


, 


2QO  AGNI  PURANAM. 

shed  thou  mighty  god!  being  propitiated  by 
such  as  “ Obesiance  to  ! 
the  Bataityadi  mantra 
mantra1'  I make  obesiance  to  Som 
terms  Somam  Rajctnam 
mighty  Soma  who  weildest  in 
Come  with  the  animal  thou  ri 
the  northern  gate  of  our 
to  thee  who  art ; 

(25—27).  Propitiate 
as  obesiance  to  the  1 
terms  Ishanamasya, 

O Ishana,  who  ridest  on  a 
comest  thou  with  thy  mighty  army 
eastern  gate.  Worship  the  god  Bramha 
«q  bow  unto  thee  0 Bramhan  or  that  beginning  as  Hirnya- 
garva,  etc.,  and  invoke  him  as  come  O ye  Bramha  who 

ridest  on  a swan  and  dost  carry  in  thy  hands  the  sacrificial 

vessel  and  a laddie,  etc.,  defend  the  upward  direction  of  the 
sacrificial  shed.  Propitiate  the  serpent-god  Ananta  with  the 
mantra  of  obesiance  to  Ananta  or  with'the  one  running  as 
Namastu  Sarpaoto  and  invoke  him  as  come  O thou  Ananta 
Who  dost  sit  upon  the  back  of  the  primordial  tortoise  and  who 
art  the  king  of  snakes,  defend  the  under  the  ground  portion 
of  our  sacrificial  mandap  (28—31). 


' our  mantra 
the  god  of  wind,  etc,  which  is  known  as 
Propitiate  the  God  Soma  with  the 
a and  which  begins  with  the 
and  invoke  him  as  come  O thou 
thy  hand  the  celestial  mace 
dest  upon,  and  thy  army,  defend 
sacrificial  shed.  I make  obesiance 
accompanied  by  Kuvera  the  God  of  wealth 
' . the  God  Ishana  with  the  mantra  such 
God  Ishana  and  which  begins  with  the 
t,  etc.,  and  invoke  the  god  as  come 
bull  and  wieldst  a trident ! 
and  defend  the  north- 
with  the  mantra  of 


CHAPTER  LVII 


J.HE  GOD  said:— After  that,  perform  the  ceremony 
known  as  that  of  taking  possession  of  the  sacrificial  ground 
(Vu  Pan'graka ),  by  scattering  over  the>ame  the  mustard  seeds 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


201- 


Hrishikesha,  Padmanava  and  Damoodar  in  the  north-east 
and  other  corners  of  the  same  (6).  After  having  performed 
the  worship  in  the  four  pitchers  situate  in  the  bathing  shed 
at  the  north,  deposit  all  the  sacrificial  substances  in  the 
same  (7).  Out  of  the  pitchers  containing  water  for  the 
sacrificial  bath,  consecrete  the  aforesaid  pitchers  in  all  the 
quarters  of  the  globe,  and  lovingly  stow  the  pitchers  for  the 
purpose  of  bathing  (8).  Put  the  young  shoots  of  Bata  (fig), 
Oudumber,  Ashvatha,  Ashoka,  Bal,  Palasha,  Arjuna,  Plakha, 
Kadamva,  Bakul,  and  mango  trees  in  the  mouth  of  the  afore- 
said pitchers,  together  with  the  lotus  flowers,  grass,  the 
substance  known  as  Rochona,  Darva  and  Pinjalam  (10)* 
Pat  down,  into  the  pitchers  on  the  right  hand  side,  the 
lowers.,  called  Jats,  and  Kunda,  and  pieces  of  sandal  wood 


202 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


both  red  and  white,  together  with  rice,  tagara  and  Sidhartha 
(white  mustard)  (n).  Place  in  the  other  pitcher  the  silt  ob- 
tained from  the  two  opposite  banks  of  the  rivers  flowing  into  the 
sea,  especially  that  obtained  from  each  of  the  banks  of  the 
river  Ganges,  together  with  pieces  of  gold  and  silver,  cow- 
dung,  barley  shall  paddy,  seasmum,  the  shyama  creeper, 
Vishnupurni,  Vringaraj,  and  Shatabari  (Asparagus  recemosus) 
(12—13).  Place  in  the  other  pitcher  at  the  north-east  corner 

the  Sahadeva,  Mahadevi,  Bala,  and  castor  plants  together  with 
the  branches  of  the  Ashvatha,  Bilva  and  cocoanut  trees  (14). 
Place  in  the  other  pitcher,  the  loose  earth  obtained  from 
anthills  situate  at  the  seven  different  places  enjoined  in  the 
Shastras,  and  put  down  in  the  other  the  water  of  the 
river  Ganges  together  with  the  loose  sand  obtained  from 
its  banks  (15).  Place  in  the  other  pitcher  the  earth 
loosened  by  boars,  elephants  and  bulls  driving  their  tusks, 
and  horns  into  the  ground,  together  with  the  clay  lying 
at  the  roots  of  Kusha  grass  and  lily  stems  respectively 
(16).  Put  into  the  other  pitcher  the  clay  obtained  from 
the  holy  mountains,  while  saffrom  and  flowers  of  the 
Nctga  Keshara  tree  should  be  placed  in  the  other  (17). 
Flowers  together  with  the  sandal  wood ,*Agaru  (Agallochum) 
and  camphor  should  be  placed  in  the  one  next  follow- 
ing, Baidurjya  ( Lapis  lazuli)  coral,  pearl,  crystal  and 
diamond  being  previously  immersed  in  the  same  (tS). 
The  priest  who  is  the  inhabitant  of  that  excellent  country 
called  the  Madhyadeca  shall  fill  the  next  pitcher  with 
waters  obtained  from  the  rivers  bearing  both  mascular  and 
feminine  names,  together  with  the  water  carried  from  the  lakes 
or  tanks  (19) ; and  shall  duly  instal  and  consecrate  in  the 
sacrificial  shed,  another  set  of  eighty  one  pitchers  filled  with 
perfumed  waters,  the  consecration  being  performed  with  the 
mantra  commonly  known  as  the  Srisukta  (20).  Barley,  ^fhite 
mustard,  perfumes  and  the  extremities  of  the  Kusha  grass, 
sundried  rice,  sesamuna  orientale,  a fruit  and  a flower  should 


, , If 


L S 


liiStSfll 


rr%  a 


Ami  puranam. 


be  first  placed  for  the  purpose  of  presenting  the  preliminary 
offering ; while  lotus  flowers,  branches  of  green  grass,  a 
climbing  plant  called  shyamalata  (Ichonocarpus  frutiscens> 
together  with  a leaf  of  the  holy  basil,  and  the  bunches,  of 
Kuska  grass  should  be  offered  on  the  right  hand  side,  as  the 
foot  offering  of  the  deity,  the  small  metal  cups  containing 
the  offering  of  honey  ect.  being  placed  on  the  same  side 
with  the  foregoing  articles  (22).  The  berry  of  the  coccola 
plant  (probably  cocculus  Indicus)  clove  and  the  fruit  of  the 
auspicious  Jati-tree  (nutmeg)  together  with  sun  dried  rice 
and  the  bunches  of  green  grass  should  be  offered  into  the 
fire  on  the  north  for  the  purpose  of  rinsing  the  mouth  of 
the  deity  (23).  Offer  on  the  north  east  a vessel  containing 
flower  and  perfume  for  performing  Nirajan  ceremony  (waiving 
of  flower  light  or  cloth  before  an  image)  to  the  deity, 
a similar  vessel  being  placed  on  the  north  west  side  of  the 
mandap  as  containing  odoriferous  ungent  of  the  god  (24)* 
Sixty  lighted  lamps  together  with  muramansi \ amalak  and 
nishadikam  should  be  offered,  eight  lamps  having  been  lighted 
up  for  the  purpose  of  waving  lights  before  the  deity  (25).  The 
celestial  emblems  and  weapons  of  the  god  such  as  the  conch, 
the  ring  weapon,  the  Sribatsa  (curl  of  hair  on  the  breast 
of  Vishnu),  the  thunder-bolt  and  the  divine  lotus  should  be 
presented  as  made  of  [flowers  of  various  colours  and  placed 
in  a golden  receptacle  (26)*  ' 


CHAPTER  LVIIL 


A ME  said  :~Excavate  the  hole  for  the  sacrificial 
fire  on  the  north  west  side  of  the  mandap , and  after  haying 
performed  the  homa  to  the  number  of  hundred  and  eight 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


unto  ’the  god  Agni  and  the  Vaisnaba,  “and  after  having 
duly: washed  and  established  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  the 
priest  accompanied  by  the  sculptors  and  the  worshippers 
of  the  idol,  should  go  to  the  shed  where  the  image  had 
been 'carved  out  with  the  flourishes  of  fcoumpefc : and  music, 
A ring  composed  of  mustard  seeds  and  the  messes  of  a 
cowbeb  should  be  put  around  the  left  wrist  of  the  image 
with  the  mantra  runnig  as  Visnaba  etc,  and  a similar  one 
of  a piece  of  silk  cloth  should  be  wound  up  around  the  same 
part  of  the  priest  (i — 3).  The  image  should  be  established 
in  the  mandap,  attired  in  a garment,  and  should  be  wor- 
shipped and  propitiated  in  the  following  manner  u I bow 
down  to  thee  thou  sovereign  mistress  of  the  gods,  who  hast 
been  made  by  Visvakarma,  I make  obesiance  to  thee  thou 
resplendent  nurse  of  the  universe.  In  thee  I intend  wor- 
shipping Narayan  who  knows  no  change  or  modification, 
and  whom  no  evil  can  reach.  Be  thou  prosperous  goddess 
devoid  of  all  short  comings  on  the  part  of  the  sculptor  and 
which  being  thus  advised  should  be  carried  to  the  bathing 
shed  (4-— 6).  The  sculptor  should  be  entertained  with  the  arti- 
cles of  present,  and  the  priest  with  the  gift  of  a cow,  and  the 
eyes  of  the  image  should  be  opened  up  with  the  mantra  run- 
ning as  Chitram  dehati,  while  the  sight  is  to  be  endowed 
with  the  mantra  begining  with  the  terms  <f  Agnir  Joti”  etc, 
while: flowers  and  white  mustard  seeds  immersed  in  clarified 
butter  should  be  offered  on  the  pedestal  (7— 8).  The  priest 
shouldplace  on  the  head  of  the  image  bunches  of  Kusha  grass 
and  put  collyrium  along  its  eyes  with  the  mantra  running  as 
Madkubata  (9),  At  the  same  time  .he  should  utter  the 
mantras  beginning  with  Hiranyagarva  etc,  and  again  put  the 
pigment  along  the  eyes  accompanied  by  the  mantra  ghritabati 
(10).  The  cake  of  the  Masur puls  should  be  waved  before  the 
I; : imagetbe  mantra  of  A to  Deva  being  simultaneously  read  there. 

withyand  the  priest  should  perform  the  washing  ceremony 
t with  hot  water  nod  the  mantra  running  wMptti  teAgm  (iih 


AGNI  PURANAM.  20$ 

The  Image  should  be  anointed  by  reading  the  mantra  the 
Drupudadiba  and  washed  over  by  the  priest  with  the  waters 
bfrivers  and  sacred  pools  by  uttering  the  mantras  apohista, 
and  with  the  Jem  waters  consecrated  by  the  mantra 
Pabamani  (12).  Bathe  the  image  with  hot  water  conse- 
crated by  the  Gayitri  mantra , and  with  water  out  of  the 
pitchers  made#  of  earth  from  the  sacred  places  and  conse- 
crated by  the  mantra  sanno  Devi  and  with  sandal  paste 
accompanied  by  the  mantra  samudram  gaccha  (13).  Bathe 
the  supreme  god  with  the  five  different  sorts  of  earth  and 
sand,  and  water  consecrated  by  the  mantra  Hiranyati,  and 
with  water  out  of  the  pitchers  made  of  the  anthill  earth  con- 
secrated by  the  mantra  Imam  mati  (14).  Pour  out  the  wash- 
ings of  cereal  over  the  image  accompanied  by  the  mantrams 
Tadvishnu  and  Ja  Oushaditiy  and  with  bitter  drugs  dissolved 
in  water  consecrated  by  the  mantra  Jajna  Jajuayati  and 
after  that  with  the  composition  known  as  the  Panchagabya 
by  uttering  the  identical  mantra  (1 5).  The  image  should  be 
bathed  with  waters  containing  fruits,  out  of  the  pitchers 
respectively  situate  on  the  north  and  the  east,  with  the 
mantras  Pay  as  Prithibyam  and  Ya  Falini  Bisvata  Chaksu 
(16),  Perform  the  Udvartan  (consists  in  waving  lights, 
flower,  or  a pice  of  cloth  before  the  image)  ceremony  by 
ultering  the  Somam  Rajanam  mantra  from  the  right  of  the 
image  and  by  reading  out  the  mantra  Hansasuchi  on  his 
west  ’(17).  Place  the  Indian  spikenard  and  fruit  of  the 
emblick  myrobolan  on  the  head  of  the  image  conse  crated 
by  the  mantra  of  Murdhanandiva  and  pour  over  its  * head 
the  contents  of  the  eighty  one  pitchers,  accompanied  by 
the  mantra  running  as  Idam  Apaii  and  anoint  the  same 
with  sandal  paste  consecrated  by  the  mantra  gandha  dvarati 
(18—19),  The  god  should  be  ^invoked  with  the  following 
mantra.  Come  O God  Vishnu  the  benefactor  of  the  whole 
Universe.  I make  obesiance  to  thee  O Vasudeva  ! dost  thou 
accept  |the  portion  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  thread  ring  : 


! 


I 


so6 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


wound  up  round  the  left  wrist  of  the  image  should  be  un- 
loosened (20).  The  similar  thread  ring7 round  thej  left  wrest 
of  the  priest  should  be  untied  with  the  sukta  mantram 
running  as  Munchmil  etc.  The  Padya  (water  for  washing 
the  feet)  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra  Hirnmayati 
and  the  Argha  (preliminary  offering  of  flowers  and  perfumes) 
with  the  mantra  beginning  with  A to  Deva  etc  (21).  The 
email  metal  cups  containing  honey  and  known  as  Madhu- 
parkas  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra  beginning  as 
Madhubata,  and  the  achaman  (the  ceremony  of  sipping 
water  and  of  washing  lips  etc.  at  the  commencement  of  the 
worship)  should  be  performed  with  the  mantra  begin- 
ning as  Maiyee  grinhami , and  the  learned  priest  should 
scatter  bunches  of  green  grass  and  pinches  of  sun  dried 
rice  with  the  mantra  running  as  Aksunqmi modanta  etc  (22); 
The  body  of  the  image  should  be  rubbed  over  so  as  to  look 
all  aglow,  and  perfumes  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra 
beginning  as  Gundhabati.  The  garland  should  be  offered 
with  the  mantra  of  Unnayami,  etc.,  and  the  sacred-thread 
should  be  presented  with  the  mantra  running  as  Idam  Visou 
(23).  The  two  pieces  of  wearing  cloth  should  be  given  with 
the  mantra  beginning  as  Brihaspata  Bustrajugmam  and  the 
cloth  covering  the  upper  part  of  the  body  should  be  pre- 
sented with  the  mantra  having  the  terms  Vidaham  at  its 
commencement,  and  the  cereals  and  white  flowers  should  be 
scattered  with  the  mantra  running  as  Mahabrata  etc.  (24). 
The  incense  sticks  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra 
commencing  as  Dhurasi  etc.,  and  the  collyrium  should,  be 
applied  to  along  the  eye-lids  of  the  image,  with  the 
Sukta  known  as  the  Brivata  Sukta . The  ornamental  tilab 
(tatoo)  mark  should  be  impressed  on  the  back  of  the  nose 
with  the  mantra  beginning  as  Jtynajajnati  etc.,  and  the 
garland  should  be  presented  with  the  mantra  running  as 
Dirghausta  etc  (25).  The  umbrella  should  be  opened  up 
over  the  head  of  the  image  with  the  mantra  of  Indra  ahatra 


AGNI  PURANA&i 


etc,  the  mirror  should  be  presented  by  reading  out  the 
mantra  of  Biraja  etc,  the  chowries  with  the  mantra  o£ 
Bikarna  and  the  ornaments  should  be  presented  by  uttering 
the  mantra  running  as  Rathantara  (26).  The  fans  of 
Palmyra  leaves  should  be  offered  with  the  Bayudaivatya 
mantras  and  Jems  should  be  offered  by  uttering  the  mantra 
beginning  a$  Munchami  to  etc,  and  hymns  should  be  sung 
unto  the  God  Hari  as  laid  down  in  the  vedic  Poorusa  Sukta 
(27).  The  ceremonies  mentioned  above  should  be  performed 
in  the  case  of  the  installation  of  this  god  and  of  other  gods  as 
well  and'their  hallowed  pedestals,  and  the  mantra  known  as 
the  Souparna  sukta  should  be  read  aloud  in  the  time  of  rais- 
ing the  image,  which  should  be  raised  by  uttering  the  mantra 
running  as  (fttista'e tc,  and  carried  to  the  shed  of  the  divine 
bedstead  accompanied  by  the  sukta  mantra  known  as  sakun 
sukta  and  the mantra  beginning  as  Bramha  rathadi  (28— » 
29).  The  priest  should  lay  down  in  the  bed  the  divine  image 
and  the  pedestal  of  the  god  Visnit  by  uttering  the  sukta  called 
the  srisukta , and  one  beginning  with  A to  Deva  etc.  ($o)< 
A lion,  a bull,  a fan,  a pitcher,  a banner,  a trumpet,  and  a 
lamp  constitute  what  is  known  as  the  Astamangala  or  the 
eight  auspicious  combination  (31).  The  priest  should  make 
an  exhibition  of  these  auspicious  combination  at  the  foot 
of  the  divine  image,  accompanied  by  the  repitition  of  the 
mantra  known  as  the  Gayatri,  and  the  Sukta  known  as  the 
Ashavasukta.  A hearth,  a covering  pan  a dadbika  (laddie),  a 
mushal  (a  rod  for  thrashing  grains)  a stone  slab  (for  grinding 
spices)  a broomstick,  and  other  household  furniture  and  utera 
sils  of  *diet,  should  be  presented  to  the  god.  A pitcher  filled 
up  with  edibles  and  with  gems  and  ajpiece  of  cloth  over  it 
should  be  kept  at  the  head  of  the  bedstead  (32^34), 


CHAPTER  LIX* 


m 

1 HE  God  said The  Adhibasana  ceremony  of  [the  God 
Hari  consists  in  the  act  of  approaching  that  god,  and  I shall 
presently  describe  the  process  by  which  that  is  to  be  brought 
about.  The  priest  should  consider  himself  as  the  omniscient, 
all  pervading  being,  and  the  purest  of  all  conscious  subjects 
(l).  He  should  rouse  up  within  himself,  the  egoistic  conscious 
energy  of  his  ownself,  or  in  other  words,  his  consiciousness 
perse t (which  being  possessed  of  an  epithet,  or  upadhi  and 
being  apparently  qualified  by  his  senses,  has  determined  his 
individuality  in  this  world),  with  his  intercorporal  wind  burst- 
ing forth  in  the  sound  of  an  omkar ; and  commune  the 
same  with  the  divine  energy  dawning  upon  his  innerself  (2), 
The  learned  priest  should  realise  in  imagination  that  his 
gross,  material  body,  together  with  the  earth  his  abode, 
had  been  converted  into  vapour  or  air,  and  that  too  in  its 
turn  he  should  light  up  in  mind  with  the  resplendent  Banhi 
Bif.  This  terrestrial  globe  mentally  converted  into  an 
immense  mass  of  glowing  fire,  should  be  visioned  in  mind 
as  transformed  into  an  infinite  expanse  of  ethar,  the  whole 
external  world,  together  with  all  the  objects  of  sense  per- 
ception, whether  earthly  or  etherial,  having  been  imagined  as 
bereft  of  their  external  existence,  and  existing  in  the  senses 
only  as  the  five  proper  sensibles  (Panchatanmatra)  which 
should  be  mentally  transformed  in  their  turn,  each  into  its 
immediate  anticedent  (4). 

The  expanse  of  ether  spoken  of  above,  should  be  thought 
as  merged  into  the  substance  of  the  mind,  the  mind  in  Its 
turn  as  converted  into  the  Ego  or  the  conscious  personal 
Individualism,  and  the  personality  as  transformed  into  the 
Involving  intelligent  principle  or  the  spirit  of  the  universal  * 
^nature  (Mahat),  and  the  nature  in  her  turn  should  be  merged 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


209 


iti  that  disemdodied  indiscredible  absolute  real  in  man,  which 
knows  no  change  or  modification  (5).  This  real,  whose  self 
is  the  perfect  and  absolute  knowledge,  is  called  Vasudeva, 
who  by  means  of  that  indiscrebable  energy  known  as  Maya, 
and  with  the  object  of  evolving  out  into  this  universe,  first 
brought  to  being  the  god  Sankarsan  (literally  universal 
attraction).  JThis  Sankarsan  emanated  from  the  Absolute 
Real,  who  was  then  a voice  or  a sound  only.  The  god  San- 
karsan the  universal  attraction)  in  his  turn,  begat  Pradumna 
(literally  light)  in  the  womb  of  Maya  (literally  the  evolving 
principle  propelling  the  essence  or  embryo  of  the  universe) 
(6—7),  Pradumna  (light)  who  was  tangible  or  was  possessed 
of  the  attribute  of  touch,  begat  Anirudha  Brahma  (literally 
unobstructed  space  and  receptacle  of  light).  Anirudha  pos- 
sessed the  attribute  of  taste  only  and  Brahma  those  of  smell 
and  light.  Brahma  and  Anirudha  first  created  water ; and 
Brahma  laid  down  the  golden  eggs  (the  primordial  molecules 
of  matter)  in  that  water,  which  were  constituted  of  the  five 
material  elements,  such  as  the  earth,  water,  light,  (heat)  air 
and  ether.  Imbued  or  impregnated  with  the  spirit  or  cons- 
ciousness,  these  eggs  or  molecules  generated  a peculiar  knd 
of  force  or  energy  within  themselves,  which  is  called  life  (8— 
9).  And  life  in  the  company  of  consciousness  gave  rise  to  the 
faculties,  the  whole  combination  being  known  as  a living  being 
(Prani).  But  the  Jib  (the  real  or  the  inner  being),  though 
somewhat  dependent  upon  and  determined  by  its  material 
constituents,  partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  soul  or  spirit,  and 
is  a spiritual  entity  amidst  the  five  different  pranas  or  life 
winds  (10).  Intellect  came  out  as  a resultant  of  the  combina- 
tion of  the  life  and  the  soul  with  its  eightfold  modifications  ; 
and  out  of  that  proceeded  egoism  or  individuality  which 
in  its  turn  gave  birth  to  mind  (11).  The  mind  with  its  sensa- 
tions (Sankalpa)  brought  on  the  five  corresponding  sensibles 
of  sound,  touch,  sight,  taste,  and  smell,  which  in  their  turn 
being  joined  with  the  perceptions  (Jaan)  produced  the  five 

27 


210 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM. 


sense  organs  of  skin,  ears,  nose,  eyes  tongue  and  which 
are  called  the  intellectual  sense  organs  and  the  five  operative 
ones  ; which  'are  the  legs,  the  arms,  the  speech  and  the  geni- 
tals (12—14.) 

Now  I shall  enumerate  the  five  material  elements  which 
include  the  earth,  water,  light,  air  and  ether,  which  enter  into 
the  composition  of  the  materia!  body  of  a man  which  is  a 
microcosm  of  the  whole  universe  (15).  And  I shall  give 
you  the  names  of  all  the  mantras  which  signify  and  symbolise 
the  principles  dealt  with  above,  for  their  being  located 
(imaginarily)  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body  (16). 

These  letters  should  be  imagined  as  written  in  fire,  and 
resplendent  wills  a sort  of  hallowed  light,  casting  no  shaddow 
at  the  time  of  locating  them  in  the  different  parts  of  the 
body.  The  letter  Ma  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  soul  or  the 
innerself,  should  be  located  as  co-extensive  with  the  body  of 
the  deity  (16).  The  letter  Bha>  which  is  emblematic  of  life, 
should  be  imagined  as  lodged  in  the  epithet,  which  marks 
and  differentiates  the  individuality  of  the  god;  and  the 
Ba}  which  is  a symbol  for  intellection,  should  be  located  in 
the  region  of  his  heart,  together  with  the  letter  Pha  which  is 
a phonetic  sign  for  the  egoistic  consciousness,  and  the  letter 
Pa  which  stands  for  the  mind  as  the  some  total  or  the  aggre** 
gate  of  sensations  (17—18).  The  letter  Na  which  is  a symbol 
for  the  proper  sensible  of  sound  should  Jbe  located  in  the 
heart,  while  the  letter  Dha , which  represents  the  proper 
sensible  of  touch,  should  be  imagined  as  lodged  in  the  face 
of  the  image  (19). 

The  letter  Da}  which  signifies  the  proper  sensible  of 
sight  should  be  located  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  the  letters 
Jha  the  indicator  of  the  proper  sensible  of  taste  being 
located  in  the  pelvic  cavity  (20),  The  letter  Ta}  which  is 
symbolical  of  the  proper  sensible  of  smell,  should  be  located 
inside  the  regions  of  the  Knee-joints,  while  the  letters  Na 
{Murdhanya)  and  Dha,  • should  \ be  • imagined  as  "impressed': 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM 


Inside  the  ears  and  the  skin  respectively  (21).  The  letter 
Da  should  be  imagined  as  burning  in  the  eyes,  and  the  letter 
Tha  in  the  tongue,  the  letters  Ta  and  Inga  being  respectively 
located  in  the  nose  and  the  speech  (22),  The  adept  and  the 
initiated  Brahmin  should  locate  in  the  arms,  the  letters  /ha 
which  is  an  emblem  of  the  organ  of  hands,  the  letter  ja  in 
the  feet,  the  letter  ccha  inside  the  anus,  and  the  letter  cha 
in  tbe  genitals  (23).  The  letter  unga , which  Is  symbolical 
of  the  earthly  essence,  should  be  imagined  as  shining  brilliant 
inside  the  muscles  of  the  legs,  fthe  letter  gha  in  the  pelvic 
cavity,  and  theFletter  ga  which  Is  symbolical  of  the  light, 
should  be  imagined  as  illumining  the  region  of  the  cardaic 
recesses  of  the  god  (24).  The  letter  Kha  which  represents 
the  serial  essence  ( Bayutatva ) should  be  fancied  as  placed 
In  the  nostrils,  and  the  letter  ka  which  symbolise*  the 
Infinite  ethar  should  be  located  in  the  cavity  of  the  skull  (25). 
The  letter  ya  which  ows  its  origin  to  the  spirit  of  the  sun, 
should  be  mentally  ensconced  In  the  plexus,  situate  over  the 
aforesaid  organ,  and  which  is  named  after  that  deity— hundred 
and  forty  thousand  rays  of  light  being  imagined  as  shooting 
forth  from  the  centre  thereof  (26)-  The  .letter  Ma  burning 
as  a star  of  sixteen  points,  should  be  placed  in  the  midst 
of  the  circle  from  which  radiate  the  aforesaid  rays  of  light, 
and  within  that,  the  priest  fully  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of 
the  mantra,  should  imagine  the  letter  chandrabindu  (sign  for 
the  nasal  sound);  and  the  letter  Ha,  preceded  by  the  pranaba 
mantra  Om,  should  be  placed  at  the  centre  of  the  plexus,  and 
the  sign  of  the  vowel  U,  should  be  coupled  with  the  aforesaid 
Ha,  So  that  the  whole  mantra  at  the  centre  would  read  Om 
Hnu . The  mantras  which  form  the  energies  as  it  were  of 
the  principal  one,  are,  “ Om  Am  Paramestyatmana  2,  Am 
namas  Purusatmana  3.  Om,  bam  Manonibntyatmana , 4 
Nam  Bishvatmana  5 Om  bam  namas  Sarvatmana  (27 — 29). 
The  first  of  the  aforesaid  mantras  should  be  applied  to  the 
•seat5  the  second  to  the  cushion,  the  third  to  the  bed  of,  the 


21% 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


god,  the  fourth  to  his  drink,  and  the  fifth  at  the  time  of  fits 
second  or  final  worship.  These  five  mantras  are  also  named 
as  the  five  Upanishads  or  five  different  branches  of  knowledge 
The  mantra  Hun  should  be  located  in  the  centre,  after  having 
contemplated  the  god  Bari  who  is  embodied  by  the  mantras 
(31).  The  principal  mantra  of  any  particular  manifestation 
of  Vishnu  should  be  located  at  the  time  of consecrating 
that  image,  and  after  that  the  general  principal  mantra  of 
the  god  Vasudeva  which  runs  as  Om  namas  Bhagabata  Vasu- 
devaya  (32).  Mental  images  of  the  different  manifestations 
of  the  pgod  .Vishnu  should  be  projected  by  imagination  into 
different  parts  of  the  body  of  the  image,  such  as  the  head,  nose, 
forehead  face,  throat,  heart,  hands,  knee-joints  and  the  feet,  and 
each  part  should  have  a particular  manifestation  as  its-presid- 
ing  deity  as  follows  (33).  The  manifestation  known  as  Keshava 
should  be  located  in  the  head  of  the  image,  Narayana  in  the 
face,  Madhava  about  the  neck,  Govinda  in  the  hand,  Vishnu 
at  the  heart,  Madusudana  at  the  belly,  Tribikrama  about  the 
waist,  Sridhar  about  the  knee-joints,  Hrishikesha  in  the 
rightside,  Padmanava  about  the  calves  and  Damodar  in  the 
feet.  Oh  thou  Best  of  the  honestmen  ! the  location  of  the 
different  deities  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body  as  enu- 
merated above  shall  apply  to  all  the  images  of  Vishnu 
in  any  form  of  manifestation  whatsover  (34—37)*  In  the 
alternative  the  ceremony  of  infusing  life  into  the 
Image  of  any  particular  god  or  manifestation  about  to  be 
Installed,  should  be  performed  with  the  principal  mantra  of 
that  particular  god  head.  The  first  letter  of  the  name  of 
any  particular  manifestation  of  a god,  should  he  coupled 
with  the  twelve  vowel  letters  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  and 
located  in  the  different  parts  of  the  image  such  as  the  heart 
etc,  at  the  time  of  the  life  infusing  ceremony  and  only  the 
principal  mantra  should  consist  of  ten  letters.  The  faculties 
and  principles  are  to  be  located  in  the  body  In  the  same  order 
as  they  are  found  In  the  god;  and  the  god  Vishuu  should-  be 


worslipped  In  the  mystic  diagram  resembling  the  shape  of  a 
circle  described  around  a lotus  flower,  with  perfumes  and  other 
articles  of  worship  (38—40).  The  seat  together  with  its 
body  and  cover,  should  ’ be  contemplated  as  previously 
directed,  and  over  that  the  auspicious  Chakra  or  a circle  of 
twelve  radii  should  be  imagined  (41).  The  circle  should  be 
imagined  as  % having  three  concentric  naves  and  two  circum- 
ferences, and  Nature  etc  should  be  contemplated  at  the  back 
thereof  (42).  The  sun  god  should  be  again  worshipped  at 
the  ends  of  the  spokes  in  a twelve  fold  way,  and  the  moon, 
with  his  three  fold  armies  and  sixteen  phases,  should  be 
contemplated  therein  (43).  The  priest,  who  is  the  inhabitant 
of  that»excellent  country  called  the  Madhyadeca)  should  con- 
template a lotus  flower  of  twelve  petals  about  the  nave  of 
the  wheel,  and  in  the  centre  thereof  the  effulgent  energy  of 
the  supreme  being,  (Pourusha  Shakti)  should  be  worship- 
ped and  propitiated.  The*  god  Hari  should  he  now  located 
in  the  image  where  lie  should  be  worshipped  with  the  other 
gods  (44—45).  The  manifestations  of  Keshava,  etc.  should 
be  worshipped  with  their  attendants  and  abarum  in  due  order, 
with  the  flowers,  perfumes  and  other  articles  of  worship, 
and  with  the  mantra  known  as  the  Dvadasha  ks ari  fr om  the 
number  of  letters  of  whictwit  is  composed  (46).  The  priest 
should  worship  the  lokepalas  in  due  order  in  that  circular 
diagram  of  twelve  radii,  and  after  that  the  image  with 
flowers,  perfumes,  and  other  articles  of  worship,  and  the 
mantra  known  as  the  Purusha  sukta.  Similarly  the  divine 
pedestal  should  be  worshipped  with  the  mantra  known  as  the 
Srikukta , after  which  the  sacrificial  fire  called  Vcnsnabanala 
should  be  lighted  up  (47—48).  The  wise  priest  after  having 
performed  the  homa  ceremony  in  the  fire  with  the  mantras 
peculiar  to  the  god  Vishnu,  should  consecrate  the  water 
known  as  the  water  of  peace  ( Shantyudak ) and  sprinkle  the 
same  over  the  head  of  the  image,  after  which  he  should 
perform  the  ceremony  of  ( Banin  pranayam)  kindling 


AGNS  PURANAM 


AGNI  PURANAM 


kindle  up  the  sacrificial  tire  in  tne  nre  receptacle 
on  the  south  with  the  mantra  running  as  Agnim 

Hutam  etc.  and  in  the  fire  receptacle  to  the  east 
with  the  mantra  beginning  as  Agni  Agneeti  (50).  In  the 
fire  Receptacle  on  the  north  the  sacrificial  fire  should  be 
kindled  up  with  the  mantra  Agni  Agni  Habamaha , the 
mantra  to  be  used  on  such  occasions  at  large  being  as  Tam 
Agni  hyagniruchyata  (51).  In  all  the  Knndas  orthe  recep- 
tacles  for  sacrificial  fire,  the  fire  is  to  be  worshipped  with  the 
branches  of  Palasha  trees  to  the  number  of  hundred 
and  eight,  and  with  the  seeds  of  Brihi  grass  accompanied  by 
the  (pranaba  mantra  Om  (52).  Clarified  butter  with 
sesamum  orientale  should  be  offered  unto  the  sarificial  fire 
with  the  mantra  running  as  Om  Bku,  Om  Bhuba.  etc;  and 
after  that  only  clarified  butter  should  be  offered  by  uttering 
the  principal  mantra  ; and  after  that  the  homa  ceremony  of 
peace  called  the  Shanti  Homa  should  be  performed  with  the 
composition  known  as  the  three  Honeys  (S3).  The  priest 
should  touch  the  feet,  naval,  ears  and  the  head  of  the  god  by 
uttering  the  twelve  letters  forming  his  principal  mantra , 
and  after  having  again  performed  the  homa  ceremony  with 
curd,  clarified  butter,  and  water,  should  touch  the  head  of  the 
god  for  the  second  time  (54).  After  having  touched  the 
head,  naval  and  the  feet,  the  priest  should  establish  the 
four  rivers,  viz.,  the  Ganges  Jarnuua  Godavari,  and  sarasvati 
by  calling  the  name  of  each,  in  due  order  (55).  The 
rivers  should  be  dried  up  with  the  gayitri  mantra  sacred  to 
the  god  Vishnu , and  the  ckaru  or  the  sacrificial  porridge 
should  be  cooked  by  uttering  the  gayitri  mantra . After 
that,  offerings  should  be  made,  and  homa  ceremonies  performed 
and  repast  should  be  given  to  the  Brahmans  (56).  Gold  and 
cows  should  given  to  the  spiritual  preceptor  for  the  satisfac- 
tion of  the  Samaga  (those  who  sing  hymns  of  the  Sama 
Veda)  Brahmans.  The  Dikpatis  (the  guardian  deities  of 


AGNI  PURANAM.  : . 

rters  of  the  firmament)  should  be  propitiated 
d the  night  of  the  Adhibasa  ceremony  should 
oil  and  songs  in  honour  of  the  supreme 


CHAPTER  LX. 


the  installation  of  the 
um  should  be  divided 
the  Brahmabhaga 
to  be  fixed,  and  should 
on  the  parts  which  are 
!S,  and  which  respec- 
age  should  be  so 
or  division  of  the 
i.  The  pedestal 
called  Deva  Mounsk- 
should  be 
the  event  of  its  being 
which  place  it  under 
dealt  with  (l — 3>- 
with  the  mantra 
t)  and  the  inser- 
ittering  the  same 


jL  HE  GOD  said  As  regards 
divine  pedastal,  the  length  of  the  adyt 
into  seven  parts,  and  on  the  part  known  as 
(part  sacred  to  Bramha ) the  image  is 
not  under  any  circumstances  be  placed 
named  after  the  gods,  man  and  Pichas< 
tively  belong  to  them.  Rather  the 
posted  as  not  to  encroach  upon  the  part 
adytum  called  the  part  of  the  winged  beings 
should  be  carefully  fixed  off  the  parts  < _ 

bkags  (Divine  and  Human  divisions),  and  jems 
inserted  or  driven  into  the  same,  in 
built  of  stone  possessing  marks; 
the  category  of  the  neuter  stone  previously 
The  Hama  ceremony  should  be  performe 
sacred  to  Narsinha  manifestation  of  Vishnt 
tion  of  the  gems  should  be  made  by  i 
mantra.  The  seeds  of  Bnhigrass,  gems,  the 
metal  known  as  Tridkatu , iron  and  other  metahc 
and  sandal  wood,  etc,  should  be  inserted  into  the 
starting  from  the  east.  The  holes  should  be  fil 

the  substance  known  as  the  u , . v 

...  eKniild  be  read  at  the  same  time  (4— 5-J 


Zl6 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


r 


After  having  performed  the  ceremony  attendant  upon  the 
aforesaid  insertion  of  gems,  the  images  should  be  rubbed 
over  with  the  bunches  of  pointed  Kusha  grass,  and 
Sahadeva  (6)«  Both  the  inside  and  the  exterior  surface 
of  the  image  [should  be  cleansed  and  purified  with  the 
composition  known  as  the  Panchagabya  (cows-milk,  and  its 
curd;  cow  butter  in  a clarified  slate,  and  the  urine  and  dung 
of  a cow),  and  thoroughly  washed  over  with  river  water 
and  the  washings  of  the  Kusha  grass  17).  The  Sthandila 
(sand  pavement  for  lighting  the  sacrificial  fire  upon^  should 
be  beautifully  made  of  sand,  of  a rectangular  shape, 
each  side  measuring  a cubit  and  a half  (8).  The  pitchers 
should  be  duly  placed  in  the  eight  directions  beginning 
with  the  east,  and  the  consecrated  fire  should  be  brought 
in  by  uttering  the  eight  letters  spoken  of  above  (9).  The 
Homo,  ceremony  should  be  performed  into  the  fire  by  throw- 
ing— the  branches  of  the  sacrificial  trees,  with  the  Gayatri,  and 
the  Tamagna  Dyuvi  mantra,  and  clarified  butter  should  be 
offered  into  the  same  hundred  times  with  each  of  the  eight 
letters  of  the  alphabet  thus  making  in  all  eight  hundred  obla- 
tions of  clarified  butter,  after  which  the  final  oblation  should 
‘be  offered  (10).  The  water  of  peace  ( Shanti  Udak)  should  be 
subsequently  sprinkled  over  the  head  of  the  image  with  the 
bunches  of  mango  leaves,  and  by  uttering  hundred  times  the 
principal  mantra  of  the  god ; accompanied  by  the  Rik 
mantra  running  as  Sreesha  Ta  jhanayaya  (a).  The  image 
should  be  lifted  up  with  the  mantra  beginning  as  “ Bramhajan 
and  should  carried  to  the  front  of  the  divine  edifice  with  the 
mantra  which  runs  as  “ Rise  Oh  lord  of  Brahma”  (Uttista 
Bramhanaspata)  (12).  The  god  Hari  should  be  carried  in 
a litter  towards  his  divine  edifice,  accompanied  by  songs 
andVedic  hymns  sung  in  a chorus,  and  should  be  dropped 
down  at  the  gate  of  his  palace  (13).  Women  and  Brahmins 
should  pour  water  ever  the  image  of  Had,  out  of  the  eight 
auspicious  pitchers,  and  the  priest  should  plaster  sandal 


ml 


AGNl  PURANAM 


paste  and  other  perfumes  over  his  body,  by  uttering  his 
principal  mantra  {i  Obeisance  to  the  god  Vasudeva”  (14), 
Subsequent  to  that,  a cloth  and  the  preliminary  offering 
(Argha)  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra  of  “A'to  Deva  etc/9 
and  in  the  auspicious  moment  fixed  for  the  occasion  by  the 
astrologers,  the  image  should  be  placed  upon  the  pedestal 
simultaneously,  there  with,  and  the  priest  should  utter  the 
mantra  which  runs  as  u Devasya  to  etc.”  (15)*  The  intelligent 
priest  should  place  the  image  on  the  pedestal  by  uttering  the 
following  mantra.  “ Obeisance  to  the  supreme  being,  who 
though  one,  admits  of  a threefold  division  as  the  Creator 
(Evolver),  the  Preserver  and  the  destroyer,  and  who  fills  the 
three  divisions  of  the  universe  known  as  the  Heaven,  the 
region  of  the  mortals,  and  the  nether  regions,  and  who  is 
almighty  in  these  three  domains and  make  it  steady  on  the 
same  (16).  The  image  should  be  washed  with  the  composition 
called  the  Panchagabya  (five  substances  obtained  from  the 
cow),  in  the  accompaniment  of  the  mantra  which  runs  as 
“ Dhruba  Dyou”  etc,  and  the  a Bishvataschaksu  etc,”  respec- 
tively ; and  should  be  bathed  with  perfumed  water  subsequent 
to  that  (17).  The  god  Hari  should  be  worshipped  with  all  his 
appertenances  as  forming  one  whole.  The  universal  sky 
should  be  considered  as  his  embodiment,  or  in  other  words  his 
image  should  be  deemed  as  reflected  in  the  infinite  expanse  of 
the  heaven,  while  tthe  Earth  should  be  reckoned  as  his  foot- 
stool (18).  His  body  should  be  imagined  as  composed  of 
firy  particles  (paramanu,  or  t he  divisible  parts  of  an  atom 
recently  recognised  by  the  chemistry  of  the  west),  and  His 
universal  spirit,  which  pervades  through  the  twenty  five 
Mzhatanmatra  Shuts  (the  fundamental  components  of  the 
universe  and  of  which  the  universe  itself  is  but  the  exterior 
aspect)  should  be  invoked  in  the  image  in  the  following 
way  (19)*  1 invoke  the  universal  soul,  who  is  all  knowledge, 

all  consciousness,  and  all  gladness.  I invoke  thee  Infinite 
consciousness  unaffected  by  the  states  of  waking,  aad 


mm  PURANAM, 


dream,  and  who  art  devoid  and  independent  of  body,  senses* 
mind,  inteilection,  life,  and  egoism  ; and  who  dost  reside  m 
the  heart  of  every  entity  from  the  lowest  stratum  of  Nature 
to  the  resplendent  Brahma } the  top  of  the  creating  or  the 
evolving  principle,  Comest  thou  out  from  the  heart  of  the 
universal  nature,  and  takesfc  thy  abode  in  the  midst  of  thy 
created  image,  thou  supreme  deity  j Dost  Ibou  make  this* 
image  imbued  with  thy  perfect  absolute  soul,  both  its  inside 
and  out.  Takest  thy  abode  in  this  image,  assuming  the  body 
of  material  essence  to  the  length  of  eight  fingers,  endow- 
ed with  an  epithet*  (20 — 22).  Having  thus  invoked  in  the 
image,  the  supreme  Brahma,  the  culminating  stage  of  all  light 
and  knowledge,  and  who  is  one  and  absolute  in  the  uni- 
verse, and  having  thus  made  the  same  imbued  with  the 
universal  soul  by  uttering  the  pranava  mantra  (0m),  (23), 
the  priest  should  arouse  him  up  and  make  him  hear.  The 
ceremony  of  Sannidkya  Karana  (act  of  bringing  the  god 
near)  consists  in  the  act  of  telling  the  mantra  by  touching 
I the  heart  of  the  image.  The  priest  should  read  out  the 
Vedic  mantra  known  as  the  Parasha  Sbukta,  and  tell  in 
secret  the  following  mantra  (24).  I make  obeisance  to* 
thee,  0 Vishnu,,  thou  lord  of  the  gods,  whose  soul  is  perpe- 
tual felicity  arisen  out  of  its  own  perpect  nature,  and  whom 
the  universe  acknowledges  as  its  supreme  lord.  Knowledge 
and  science  are  thy  two  embodiments,  0 Lord,  who  dost 
follow  the  energies  of  the  Supreme  Brahma,  I bow  unto 
thee,  O Vishnu,  who  art  the  original  and  disembodied  spiri- 
tual being  without  any  change  or  modification,  and  whom  the 
three  virtues  such  as  Sattwa,  Raja  and  Tama  can  never  affect.' 
Dost  thou  'approach  this  image  who  art  the  most  magnani- 
mous spirit.  Wake  up  in  this  image  with  thy  embodiment  of 
knowledge  and  all  thy  fot us  flowers  or  divine  energies,  con- 
gregated in  this  one  receptacle  of  the  image  {25— *27).  After 


'*  See  note. 


mm 


AGNt  PURANAM 


Slaving  performed  the  above  Sannidhya  Karana  ceremony, 
the  priest  should  ! worship  Brahma  and  the  family  of  other 
gods,  by  mentioning  the  name  of  each,  and  the  divine  em- 
blems and  weapons  with  the  respective  Mudras  hearing  their 
names  (28).  The  presence  of  the  god  should  be  inferred 
from  the  Jatra  and  B arsa,  and  the  priest  should  make  obei- 
sance to  him,  and  propitiate  him  by  telling  the  mantra  sacred 
to  him,  and  which  is  composed  of  the  eight  letters  stated 
above.  Subsequent  to  that  he  should  go  out  of  the  temple 
and  worship  the  images  of  Chanda  and  Prachanda  posted 
at  the  door,  and  worship  the  image  of  the  celestial  bird 
(Garuda),  sacred  to  the  God  Vishnu,  after  having  duly  in- 
stalled him  at  the  shed  of  the  sacrificial  fire  (Agni  mandap) 
{29—30). 

The  presiding  deities  of  the  different  quarters  of  the 
heaven  should  be  duly  invoked  and  worshipped  in  their  re- 
spective quarters,  and  the  priest  should  instal  and  worship 
the  other  gods  together  with  the  image  of  Bishvaksena  and 
those  of  the  divine  conch-shell  and  ring  weapon,  etc.  (31). 
Offerings  should  be  made  to  all  the  pernicious  ghosts,  and  to 
the  other  attendant  gods  of  Vishnu ; and  remuneration  for 
performing  the  ceremony  should  be  given  to  the  priest  by 
making  over  to  him  the  proprietory  right  of  a village,  to- 
gether with  a cow  and  bits  of  gold  (32).  Articles  such  as 
are  necessary  for  the  performance  of  a sacrificial  ceremony 
should  be  given  to  the  principal  priest  (Acharjya),  while  the 
remuneration  to  be  paid  to  the  Rittwiks  (assistant  priests) 
should  be  half  of  that  of  the  former  in  value  (33).  Remunera- 
tions should  be  paid  to  the  other  priests,  and  the  Brahmins 
should  be  sumptuously  fed,  without  any  regard  to  their 
number,  and  the  Guru  or  the  principal  priest  should  offer  the 
benefit  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  jajaman  or  the  person  at  whose 
instance  the  same  had  been  performed  (34)* 

The  consecrator  of  an  image  of  Vishnu  leads  his  fathers 

ar*d  progenies  t*  '•  "■  ■"  /'  •'  "T-)' 


220 


AGN1  puranam. 


cedure,  set  forth  above,  should  be  adopted  in  the  installation 
of  all  other  images,  except  that  the  principal  mantra  should 
vary  in  each  case,  the  mantra  of  that  particular  god  having 
had  to  be  worshipped  (3$). 


CHAPTER  XLL 


The  God  said  Now  I shall  speak  all  about  the  bath- 
tng  ceremony  {Abavritha  snanam)  to  be  performed  after 
the  completion  of  the  sacrifice.  The  Homo,  (offering  of 
clarified  butter  into  the  fire)  should  be  finished  with  the  mantra 
which  runs  as  Visnoma  tu  etc.,  and  the  eighty  one  pitchers 
should  be  duly  placed  in  their  proper  places,  and  the  god 
Hari  should  be  invoked,  and  installed  (l),  and  worshipped 
with  flowers  and  perfumes.  Offerings  should  be  made  to  the 
guru  or  the  principal  priest,  and  the  doors  should  be  duly 

consecrated  according  to  the  rite  described  below.  A piece 

cf  gold  should  be  placed  beneath  the  door  (2).  And  the 
guru  or  the  priest  after  having  placed  the  tender  shoots  of 
Oudumbar  etc.  into  the  mouths  of  the  eight  pitchers,  and 
after  having  performed  the  worship  with  flowers  and  per- 
fumes,  and  with  the  mantra  of  Om  (3),  should  perform  the 
homa  ceremony  with  the  branches  of  the  sacrificial  trees  and 
fried  paddy  and  the  sessamum  orientate,  and  offer  the  bed 
and  the  Adhar  shakteka  below  (4).  The  Gods  named 
Chandra  and  Prachanda  should  be  located  at  the  bottom  of 
the  branches,  while  the  goddess  Laksmi  who  is  adored  by  the 
whole  hierarchy  of  the  gods,  should  be  located  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  Oudum-bar  branch  (5).  The  four  faced  Bramha 
should  be  duly  and  revetrenteally  accosted  apd  worshipped 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


by  reading  aloud  the  vedic  mantra  known  as  the  srisukta . 
The  fruits  of  Bet  tree  should  be  offered  to  him  and  the  remun- 
eration for  performing  the  sacrifice  should  be  given  to  the 
principal  and  other  priests  (6). 

Now  I shall  speak  about  the  consecration  of  the  divine 
temple  whose  doors  have  been  consecrated  at  the  outset, 
and  wherin  the  image  of  the  god  Bari  has  been  duly  ins- 
talled (y).  The  consecration  of  such  a temple  consists  in 
the  act  of  consecrating  its  heart  or  adytum.  Pitchers 
made  of  gold  and  silver,  and  a pitcher  made  of  silver  only, 
together  with  one  made  of  the  Indian  bell  metal  should 
be  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  vault  of  the  badi,  filled 
with  the  eight  kinds  of  auspicious  Jems,  cereals,  seeds, 
iron,  and  water— with  pieces  of  cloth  tied  round  their  necks 
(8—9).  The  Homa  ceremony  should  be  performed  with 
the  mantra  peculiar  to  Nrisinha,  and  the  life  should  be 
invoked  into  the  temple  with  the  tattva  known  as  the 
Narayantatva  (10).  Oh  lord  of  the  gods,  the  life  of  the 
temple  is  to  be  imagined  as  partaking  of  the  nature,  and  the' 
temple  itself  is  to  be  imagined  as  possessing  the  attributes 
of  the  god  himself  (11).  The  piece  of  gold  should  be  placed 
below  with  the  golden  pitcher,  and  remuneration  should 
be  given  to  the  principal  priest,  and  the  Bramhins  should 
be  fed  (12).  Subsequent  to  that  the  ceremonies  of  twisting 
thread  or  hanging  garlands  round  the  platform,  neck,  top, 
and  globe  of  the  temple  should  be  performed,  and  over  the 
globe  the  metal  ring  known  as  the  Sudarshan  Chakra  should 
be  placed,  as  being  emblematic  of  the  knowledge-embo- 
died image  of  the  god  Vastideva  (13 — 14).  Or  in  the  alter- 
native a kalasha  (a  conical  ornament)  should  be  placed  in 
the  place  of  the  globe  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  couplet, 
on  its  head  the  chakra^  and  the  eight  Bighneshvaras  (gods  of ' 
harm)  should  be  located  and  worshipped  all  round  the  platform 
of  the  temple  (15).  Or  in  the  alternative,  O Birthless  ! the  four 
images  of  Garuda  may  be  placed  in  the  four  quarters  of  the 


titute  the  temple  (17).  Oh  sinless  1 A man  derives  tens  ot 
millions  of  times  more  merit  by  hoisting  the  flag,  since  it 
wafts  winds  unto  the  different  parts  of  a diviner  temple  such 
as  platform  etc,  and  hangs  round  its  neck  (18).  The  streamer 
should  be  held  as  the  Prakriti  (the  nature,  the  wife  of  God) 
and  the  rod  itself  as  emblematic  of  the  Purusha  or  the  sub- 
jective principle  of  the  universe.  Hear  me  Oh  Bramhan  1 
a temple  is  nothing  but  another  form  of  the  divine  image 
of  Vishnu  (19).  And  now  I shall  describe  to  you  the 
different  parts  of  the  latter.  A body  is  composed  of  the 
five  elements  such  as  the  earth,  water,  light,  aii  and  the 
sky,  and  so  in  the  case  of  the  temple,  its  capacity  (Dharana) 
stands  for  the  earth  (Dharani)  which  is  so  called  from  its 
capabality  of  holding  its  internal  cavity  stands  for  the  sky, 
the  fire,  everyday  lit  up  in  its  inside,  represents  the  fire,  and 
its  touch  represents  the  wind,  which  possesses  that  attribute 
(20).  The  five  proper  sensibles  of  a man  are  also  represented 
in  the  case  of  a divine  temple  which  bring  on  a close  analogy 
between  itself  and  its  inmate  divinity  which  is  represented 
as  endowed  with  the  attributes  of  a corporate  human  being. 
Thus  the  earthly  waters  contained  in  the  stone  slabs  of  the 
temple  represent  the  earthly  attributes,  its  echo  stands  for  the 
proper  sensible  of  sound,  its  touch  which  is  rough  or  other 
wise  answers  for  the  proper  sensible  of  that  denomination 
in  a human  being,  its  colour  which  may  be  white  or  other- 
wise, stands  for  the  rupatanmatra  (proper  sensible  of  sight), 
while  the  perfumed  insence  sticks,  every  day  burnt  under- 
neath its  vault,  answers  for  the  gandha  tanmatra  or  the 
proper  sensible  of  smell  in  the  case  of  a human  subject,  while 
the  rice  and  other  dishes  exhibited  before  the  god  in  the  temple, 


mm  FUR  A NAM. 


furnishes  it  as  it  were  with  the  proper  sensible  of  taste  (22)- 
The  ridge  of  the  vault  is  the  nose  of  the  temple,  the  two  a per* 
tures  in  its  two  sides,  tinder  which  lie  the  exits  for  men  and 
litters,  are  to  be  deemed  as  its  two  hands,  the  arched  terrace 
on  its  top  is  to  be  considered  as  its  head,  the  conical  orna- 
ment as  its  hairs,  the  neck,  as  its  neck,  and  the  platform 
over  the  vault  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  its  shoulder,  the  water 
passages  standing  as  it  were,  for  its  anus  and  the  genitals, 
and  the  lime  plaster  for  its  skin.  The  door  is  to  be  consider- 
ed as  its  aperture  of  the  mouth,  the  image  installed  in  its 
inside  as  its  life,  the  pedestal  as  its  vital  energy,  whose 
shape  should  be  imagined  as  its  animation,  and  whose  cavity 
as  its  inertia,  while  the  image  of  the  god  Keshava  is  to  be 
deemed  as  its  soul,  seated  on  the  throne  of  its  heart  and 
viewing  the  incidents  happening  within  its  inside-— only  as 
an  onlooker  like  the  human  soul,  and  taking  no  part  therein* 
Thus  the  analogy  between  the  god  and  his  temple  is  complete, 
the  latter  being  held  as  identical  with  and  only  a different 
manifestation  of  the  former  (23 — 26;.  The  god  Siva  is  to  be 
consideredas  forming  the  plinth  or  knee-joints  of  the  god  thus 
revealed  in  the  shape  of  a temple,  the  god  Bramha  as  located 
on  its  shoulder,  and  the  god  Vishnu  at  its  top  (27), 

Hear  me,  O Brahman  ! describe  the  consecrating  cere- 
mony of  a divine  edifice  by  means  of  a banner.  The  gods, 
by  hoisting  banners  impressed  with  the  signs  of  the  divine 
weapons,  conquered  the  demons  (28).  The  pitcher  shaped 
ornament  of  the  temple  should  be  placed  over  its  oval  top 
part,  and  the  flag  should  be  planted  over  the  same*  The 
rod  should  measure  the  half  or  a third  part  of  the  temple  or 
the  structure  in  length*  The  flag  should  be  impressed  in  the 
middle  with  the  mark  of  a circle  of  eight  or  ten  radii,  the 
figure  of  the  celestial  bird  (Garuda)  or  that  of  the  Narasinha 
manifestation  of  Vishnu  being  worked  on  the  space  within 
the  aforesaid  circle,— the  rod  being  left  always  unpainted 
(29—30).  J M 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


The  length  of  the  flag-rod  may  be  made  equal  to  the 
breadth  of  the  edifice,  or  equal  to  the  half  or  the  third  part 
of  the  terrace  1(31).  Or  the  same  may  be  made  to  the 
length  of  double  the  height  of  the  door,  being  planted  at 
the'north,  east  or  the  north-west  corner  of  the  divine  edifice 
(32).  The  flag  should  be  made  of  a piece  of  silk  cloth,  of 
a single  or  variegated  colour,  with  chowries,  bell?,  and  small 
bells  attached  to  it,  and  which,  thus  decorated,  is  said  to  be 
the  destroyer  of  all  sins  (33>.  A flag  which  touches  the 

ground  and  measures  a cubit  .11  breadth  at  its  extremity  or 

has  a breadth  equal  to  the  quarter  of  its  length  at  its  base, 
Is  called  a Mahadhaja,  and  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the 
grantor  of  ail  human  desires  (34).  A pataka  (streamer) 
should  have  half  the  demension  of  a Mahadhaja,  except 
that  the  breadth  at  its  extremity  should  measure  twenty 
fingers  only  (35)'  The  Chakra,  and  the  flag  with  its  rod, 
should  have  all  the  above  ceremonies,  like  the  image. 
They  should  be  bathed  iu  the  sacrificial  shed.  The  priest 
should  duly  perform  unto  them  all  the  rites  set  forth  above 
except,  that  of  opening  up  of  the  eyes  36—37).  Then 
the  learned  priest  should  mentally  locate  in  the  Chakra 
the  sukta  mantras  beginning  as  sahasra  shirsha  etc. 
together  with  the  mantra  known  as  the  sudarskan  mantra 
and  the  tattv a (or  the  primordial  principle  known  as  the 
rnanstattva  or  the  pane, pie  of  mind  (38).  The  different 
manifestations  of  Vishnu,  such  as  Kesava  etc.  should  be 
imagined  as  installed  along  the  spokes  of  the  Chakra , which, 
O thou  best  of  the  gods!  should  be  made  inbued  with  life  with 
,,  mantra  of  the  "manarup‘\{ 39).  The  priest  should  locate 
the  twenty  five  fundamental  principles  of  the  universe,  at 
the  nave  and  each  of  the  orbits  of  the  wheel  {Chakra),  and 
at  the  petals  of  the  lotus  flower  round  which  the  same  is 
described,  and  the  god  Nrisinha,  and  Bisvarupa  at  the  ceutre 
of  the  lotus  (40).  Locate  in  the  rod  of  the  banner  the  supreme 
being  after  contemplating  therein  the  living,  indivisible,  and 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


225 


the  universal  soul,  whose  self  is  composed  of  the  suiras* 
and  locate  the  god  Harl  in  the  doth  of  the  banner  (41).  The 
'energies  of  the  god  Hari  which  are  earned  Bala  and  A bait 
and  which  have  become  jointly  manifest  in  the  form  of  a 
banner,  should  be  contemplated,  and  invoked  and  worshipped 
in  the  sacrificial  shed,  and  the  Homa  ceremony  should  be 
•subsequently  performed  uuto  them  in  the  sacrificial  fire 
receptacle  (4.2). 

A golden  cone  (Kalasha)  together  with  the  fine  jems  en- 
joined to  be  buried  on  such  occasions  in  the  Shastras, 
should  be  placed  over  the  conical  ornament  at  the  top  of 
the  temple  and  a Chakra  of  gold  should  be  placed  underneath 
the  same  accompanied  by  the  mantra  known  as  the  Chakra 
mantra  (43).  The  Chakra  should  be  washed  with  mercury 
and  covered  over  with  the  Natrapatta  (eye-cover)  and  should 
be  thereafter  fixed  to  its  place,  the  divine  manifestation 
of  Nrisinha  having  been  mentally  located  at  its  centre  (44). 
Then  the  Jajaman  (person  at  whose  instance  the  temple  or 
the  image  is  consecrated)  accompanied  by  his  friends  and 
relations,  should  invoke  and  worship  the  God  Hari,  by  uttering 
the  mantra  Om,  Ksoum,  Nrisinhaya  namas,  and  hold  the  ban- 
ner in  his  hand  (45).  He  should  dip  the  tip  of  the  banner  into 
a vessel  full  of  curdf  and  worship  it  with  the  mantra  which 
begins  with  the  word  Dhru  and  ends  with  the  term  Fut  (46), 
After  that  the  Jajaman  should  reverentially  walk  round 
the  temple  or  the  edifice  contemplating  the  god  Narayana, 
and  carrying  on  his  head  the  curd-pot  stated  above,  in  the 
midst  of  the  peals  of  trumpet  and  the  auspicious  notes  of 
the  sacred  music  (47),  Then  the  banner  with  the  rod  should 
be  planted  and  hoisted  up  unfurled,  and  the  priest  who  is  well 


* The  aphorsims  of  the  different  schools  of  Sanskrit  Philosophy,’ 
and  a particular  class  of  mantras  are  called  “ sutras”. 


29 


♦ 


experienced  in  the  religious  ceremony  - 

Sukta  which  runs  as  Munchamitu  (I  let  thee  loose)  etc.,  and 
the  Astaksari  (composed  of  eight  letters)  mantra  should 
be  read  at  the  time  of  planting  the  rod  (48).  1 he  Brahmin 

Taj am an  should  then  make  presents  of  utensils,  banners 
and  elephants  to  the  Acharjya  or  the  principal  priest  and 
the  procedure  described  above  should  be  adopted  m plant, 
ing  banners  over  the  divine  temples  in  general  (49)-  fh.e 
emblem  which  is  sacred  to  any  particnlar  god,  should  be 
planted  with  his  own  peculiar  mantra.  The  man  who  plants 
1.  « i.A.ncr  horamss  mighty  in  this  world,  and  a monarch 


CHAPTER  LXII 


I HE  GOD  said  : — Now  I shall  describe  to  you  roe 

monies  attendant  upon  the  consecration  of  all  the  divine 

images,  and  shall  at  first  deal  with  those  which  precede  the 
installation  of  Lakshmi  and  the  other  goddesses  (1).  A.l 

the  rites  described  above  should  be  performed.  The  sheds 

for  the  purpose  of  sacrificial  bathing  and  other  rites  should 
be  raised,  the  image  of  the  goddess  Lakshmi  should  be  fixed 
on  its  pedestal,  and  the  eight  pitchers  full  of  water  should 
be  duly  placed  as  in  the  previous  instances  (2).  The  image 
should  be  anointed  with  clarified  butter  and  washed  with  the 
composition  known  as  the  Panchagabya , by  uttering  the  prin- 
cipal mantra  of  the  goddess.  After  that  the  eyes  of  the  image 
should  be  made  as  endowed  with  sight  by  reading  out  the 
mantra  which  runs  as  Hiranyabarna  Harini  (the  golden 
coloured  fawn  etc.,)  (3)-  The  composition  known  as  the  three 
honevs  fsuear.  honey  and  clarified  butter)  should  be  offered 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


227 


hi 


Abaha  etc.,  and  bathe  her  image  with  water  out  of  the 
pitcher  at  the  East  of  the  sacrificial  shed  by  reading  aloud 
the  mantra  commencing  as  Ashva  purva  etc  (4).'  The  image 
of  the  goddess  should  be  washed  with  water  out  of  pitchers 
situate  at  the  south  and  the  west  respectively  by  uttering  the 
mantra  running  as  kamosmi  etc.,  and  Chandra  Prava  etc.,  and 
the  contents  0$  the  pitcher  at  the  north  side  of  the  sacrificial 
shed  should  be  poured  over  its  head  accompanied  by  the 
mantra  Aditya  Varna  etc  (5).  The  pitchers  situate  at  the 
angular  corners  of  the  shed,  such  .as  the  south  east,  south 
west,  north  west,  and  the  north  east,  should  he  emptied 
over  the  head  of  the  image,  by  uttering  the  respective 
mantras  which  runs  as  Upaituma x kutpipasa,  gandharva , 
manasa  kamamakritim , and  soubarna  kardama ; and  the 
image  should  be  subsequently  bathed  with  waters  out  of  the 
eighty  one  pitchers  dealt  with  before,  by  uttering  the  mantra 
which  begins  as  Apas  srijan  ksitin  (6 — 7).  The  priest 
should  worship  the  image  with  sandalpaste,  by  uttering  the 
mantra  begining  as  Adra  Puskarini,  and  with  flowers  by 
reading  out  the  mantras  which  run  as  Tanma  Abaha  and  ya 
ananda,  Rich  a khilam  (8).  The  goddess  should  be  invoked 
and  worshipped  in  the  bed  with  the  mantra  known  as  the 
shayantea,  and  her  presence  should  be  worshipped  with  the 
mantra  known  as  the  Srisukta,  and  consciousness  is  to  be 
invoked  and  worshipped  in  the  heart  of  the  image  by  tell- 
ing' the  principal  mantra  of  the  goddess  (9).  The  homa 
ceremony  should  be  performed  in  the  fire-receptacle  at  the 
sacrificial  shed  with  a hundred  or  thousand  lotus  flowers, 
and  by  uttering  the  mantra  known  as  the  srisukta  or  with 
the  same  number  of  karabi  flowers  as,  the  priest  might 
choose  (10).  Household  furniture  should  be  offered  by 
uttering  the  mantra  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  couplet,  and 
the  consecration  of  the  temple  or  the  edifice  should  be  per-; 
formed  as  previously  directed  (11).  The  pedestal  should  be 
' flowed  by  reading  the  mantras,  and  the  image  should 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


consecrated  subsequent  to  that.  At  the  ceremony  of  sanm- 
dhya  karan  or  Adhibasa  (making  the  spirit  approach  the 
image)  the  mantra  known  as  the  srisukta  should  be  told  in  the 
front  of  the  image,  and  the  ceremony  itself  should  be  per- 
formed by  telling  the  principal  mantra  sacred  to  the  goddess 
Laksmi,  after  having  invoked  the  spirit  or  consciousness 
in  the  image.  The  priest  and  the  Bramhins  should  be  pre- 
sented with  land,  gold,  cows  and  rice.  The  processes  of 
consecrating  the  images  of  other  goddesses,  are  identical 
with  what  has  been  laid  down  in  the  present  chapter,— such 
a consecration  being  always  held  as  leading  to  heaven  and 
other  blessful  regions  (12). 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 


The  God  said  -.—The  consecration  of  the  images  of 
Garuda  (bird  sacred  to  Vishnu),  Brahma,  Narasinha  and  of 
0ie  divine  emblems  such  as  the  Chakra  etc.  should  be  made 
•with  mantras  sacred  to  each  of  them,  and  the  procedure 
to  be  adopted  is  identical  with  what  has  been  laid  down  in 
the  case  of  Vishnu.  0 Brahman,  I shall  disclose  to  you 
the  mantras  referred  to  above,  in  their  due  order  (i).  Fol- 
lowing is  the  mantra  sacred  to  the  celestial  Chakra  (ring 
weapon)  of  Vishnu  which  is  called  the  Sudarshana  and  which 
being  duly  worshipped  with  it  imparts  victories  in  war. 
“Obesiance  to  the  great  Chakra  weapon  Sudarshana  which  is 
dreadful  to  the  evildoers.  Kill  and  kill,  pierce  and  pierce,  cut 
through  and  cut  through,  0 Sudarshana.  Devour  and  devour 
all  the  other  mantras  (incantations,) — eat  up  and  eat  up  all  the 
evil  spirits,  threaten  and 

Narasinha  whose  mantras  ate  as  follows.  “ Obesiance  to  Nara- 


AGNI  PUR- A NAM, 


sioha  Om,  Ksoum  Narasinha  the  fierce  looking  burn  and  burn, 
be  resplendent  and  resplendent.  Following  is  another  form 
of  the  same  mantra  which  is  known  as  the  Patabaksm  (be- 
longing to  the  nither  regions)  mantra  of  that  manifestation  of 
Vishnu,  “ Om  ksoum  obesiance  to  Narasinha,  who  is  efful- 
gent with  the  light  of  ten  thousand  million  suns,  who  is 
provided  with  teeth  and  claws  hard  and  strong  as  the 
bolts  of  heaven,  and  who  with  his  dreadful  and  dishevelled 
manes  wildly  dancing  in  storm,  is  manifest  as  blowing  on 
a trumpet,  whose  unearthly  peals  have  heaved  up  the 
one  universal  ocean  of  the  millinim,  the  ocean  madly,, 
mightily,  dashing  rolling,  dancing,  with  its  sable  energy  of 
destruction  over  the  space  where  the  suns  and  constellations 
had  been,  in  a weird  dance  of  the  ecstasy  of  death. 

Come  O Lord.  I make  obesiance  to  thee  who  safely  takesfc 
men  across  all  incantations.  Be  manifest  and  resplendent 
with  the  divine  truth  O Narasinha  who  is  both  the  universal 
subjective  and  the  objective.  Open  thy  mouth,  and  let  the 
infinite  vacuum  within  thyself  yawn,— attack  and  fall  upon  the 
universe,  roar  and  roar,  and  let  thy  lion-like  voice  be  heard,. 
Cut  through  and  cut  through,  and  drive  and  drive  before 
thee,  and  pierce  and  pierce  into,  and  overwhelm  and  over- 
whelm all  sorts  of  incantations  (mantras).  Dost  thou 
kill,  cut  and  clip,  dislodge  from  its  place,  cut  open  and 
cause  to  be  burst,  with  thy  Chakra  weapon  showering  fire 
and  thunder-bolt  in  all  directions,  all  the  nether  regions,  the 
abodes  of  the  demons.  Dost  thou  who  art  clad  in  sheets 
of  living  flame — Dost  thou  besiege  the  nether  regions  from  all 
the  quarters  of  the  heaven  with  thy  arrows  of  thunder- 
bolts vomitting  fatal  fire.  Draw  out  the  hearts  of  the 
inmates  of  those  regions,  and  forthwith  burn  and  burn,  cook 
and  cook,  trample  and  trample,  dry  up  and  dry  up,  and  hack 
and  hack  the  same  to  pieces,  till  they  are  quite  subjugated 
to  me.  Preserve  me  O Lord,  manifest  in  the  shape  of 
Narasinga  (a  man  and  a lion).  Preserve  me  O Vishnu,  frptn* 


AGN1  FURANAM 


all  dangers  and  incantations.  Hung  Fut,  Gbesiance  to  thee 
Fut  to  the  nether  regions,  Fut  to  the  Asuras,  Fut  to  the 
forms  of  incantations,  Fut  to  the  incantations  themselves. 
This  is  the  mantra  of  the  Narasinha  manifestation  of  Vishnu, 
which  imparts  success  and  grants  fulfilment  of  all  desires' 
(3).  The  image  of  the  celestial  Garuda,  who  has  bound  up  in 
spell  the  whole  universe,  should  be  established  hf  uttering  the 
mantra  stated  above, 'and  which  is  called  the  Tralokyarnohan, 
mantra  the  charmer  of  the  three  regions  (of  the  universe).  The 
image  should  be  made  as  possessing  two  or  four  arms,  and  in 
the  former  case  as  carrying  a mace  in  the  right  hand,  the  left 
being  folded  up  in  the  attitude  of  giving  benediction  (4). 
The  upper  left  arms  should  be  equipped  with  a Chakra  and 
the  conch-shell  which  should  represent  the  celestial  Pancha- 
janya,  should  be  placed  in  the  hand  below  the  same,  the 
two  right  hands  being  provided  with  Sri  and  Pu'shti  together 
with  Bala  and  Rhadra  (5).  The  images  of  Vishnu,  Bainana, 
Baikunta  and  Hayagriba  should  be  installed  either  in  a mandap 
or  an  edifice  (6).  And  similarly  the  different  incarnations 
of  Vishnu  such  as  the  Fish,  etc.,  who  are  to  be  installed  in 
water.  The  images  of  Sankarshana,  Bishwarupa,  and  the 
falic  emblem  or  the  image  of  Rudra,  together  with  those  of 
Ardhanarisha  the  god  with  a body  (half  woman,  half  man), 
Hari,  Shunkar,  Matrikas,  Bharaha,  the  sun,  Planets,  Binayaka 
Gouri,  Dikpalas,  Bala,  and  Abala  should  be  similarly  estab- 
lished in  a temple  or  an  edifice  (6 — 9), 

Now  I shall  describe  the  consecration  ceremonies  of 
books  and  the  mode  of  writing  them.  Having  worshipped 
the  book,  with  its  letters  and  pages  on  a cushion  made  of 
Shara  leaves,  placed  on  a mystic  diagram  known  as  the  Svas- 
tik,  the  spiritual  preceptor,  the  goddess  of  learning  and  the 
god  should  be  worshipped  In  their  turn  (10).  The  jajaman  (the 
person  at  whose  instance  any  ceremony  is  performed)  should 
contemplate  the  spiritual  guide,  the  tearing  and  the  writer  of 
the  manuscript,  and  the  goddess  Padmni  after  having*  written 


AGNfl  PURANAM, 


231 


the  five  stanzes,  on  a silver  plate  facing  the  east.  The  pen 
should  be  of  gold,  and  the  letters  written  with  it  on  the 
occasion  should  be  of  the  Devanagara  character.  The 
Brahmans  should  be  sumptuously  fed,  and  money  remunera- 
tions should  be  given  to  them  as  much  as  the  jajaman  could 
afford  ( 1 1— 12).  Men  should  write  the  Pur  anas  or  books  of 
of  the  sacred  literature  after  having  first  worshipped  the 
spiritual  guide,  the  learning  and  the  god  Hari,  and  in  the 
mystic  diagram  (mandaf)  at  the  north  east  as  previously 
directed  (13}.  The  book  should  be  seen  reflected  in  water 
in  the  pitchers  as  here  before  described  and  should  be  placed 
in  the  bed,  the  ceremoney  of  endowing  it  with  eyesight 
having  been  performed  (14).  The  Vedic  Purusha  Sukta  and 
the  pranaba  mantra  (Orn)  should  be  mentally  located  in  the 
book,  and  with  which  it  would  become  sentient  as  it  were. 
The  sacrificial  porridge  should  be  cooked  subsequent  to  that, 
wherewith  the  priest  and  the  brahmins  should  be  fed,  and 
money  remunerations  should  also  be  given  to  them.  The 
book  is  to  be  carried  in  a litter,  or  on  an  elephant  round  the 
city,  and  should  be  established  and  worshipped  on  its  return, 
in  a temple  or  an  edifice,  wrapped  up  in  a piece  of  cloth, 
it  being  compulsory  to  worship  the  book  both  before  and 
after  reading  (15 — 17).  At  an  auspicious  moment  the  book 
should  be  read  out  for  the  peace  of  the  world,  and  the 
jajaman  and  such  like  persons  should  sprinkle  water  over  a 
chapter  of  the  book  (18).  The  merit,  O Brahman,  of  present- 
ing a book  to  a brahmin  is  interminable,  like  the  giving  away 
of  a cow  or  of  a plot  of  land,  as  the  gift  of  knowledge  is  held 
to  be  the  gift  her  excellence  (19).  Oh  sinless  son  of  Brahma , 
the  merit  of  giving  a book  to  a Brahmin  ensures  to  the 
donor  a residence  in  the  region  of  Vishnu  for  as  many  thou- 
sand years  as  there  are  letters  in  the  collection  of  palmyra 
leaves  which  form  the  same.  The  man  who  makes  a present 
of  a book  on  the  Pancharatra  philosophy  or  of  one  belonging 
to  the  group  of  Pur  anas,  carries  up  with  him,  his  twenty  one 


: : 


■■  " " ' : ' 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


different  families  of  relations  into  the  region  above,  and 
subsequently  becomes  merged  in  the  supreme  Brahma,  the 
supreme  principle  of  the  universe  (20 — 21). 


CHAPTER  LX1V 


A HE  God  said:— Now  I shall  speak  to  you  about  the 
consecration  of  tanks  and  ponds,  wherein  the  good  god 
Varuna,  who  is  indentical  with  the  god  Soma,  and  who  is 
but  another  manifestation  of  Vishnu,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as 
revealed  in  the  form  of  water  (x)„  The  universe  is  permeated 
with  the  energy  of  the  god  Agni  which  is  called  the  fire,  and 
the  water  which  is  Vishnu  himself  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the 
cause  which  brought  the  universe  into  being.  The  image  of 
the  god  Varuna  (water-god)  should  be  made  of  gold,  silver, 
or  of  jems,  and  he  is  to  be  represented  as  possessing  two 
arms  and  seated  on  a swan,  carrying  a snake-noose  in  his 
left  hand,  and  folding  the  right  in  the  attitude  of  giving 
encouragement  (Abhaya),  with  the  hosts  of  rivers  and 
serpants  following  in  his  heels  (2 — 3).  The  platform  or  the 
earthen  elevation  within  the  sacrificial  shed  should  contain 
the  receptacles  for  the  hallowed  fire,  excavated  in  its  middle, 
and  a pilcher  with  a Karaka  (stone)  in  its  inside  should  be 
placed  in  honor  of  the  sea-god  Varuna,  at  the  gate  of  the 
sacrificial  shed  (4).  At  the  door  of  the  fire  receptacle, 
which  may  be  of  a semicircular  shape,  or  of  the  classes 
which  pass  under  the  denominations  of  sastik  or  Bhadrak 
respectively,  pitchers  full  of  water  should  be  placed  for 
welcoming  as  it  were  the  hallowed,  sacrificial  fire  (5).  The 
priest  should  touch  the  image  of  the  sea  god  Varuna  by 
uttering  the  mantra  which  runs  as  Yaya  skata  etc,  and 


AON!  PURANAM 


subsequently  anoint  the  same  with  clarified  butter  by  reading 
the  principal  mantra  exclusively  belonging  to  the  same  god 
(6).  Subsequent  to  that  he  should  wash  the  eight  pitchers 
with  the  hallowed  consecrated  water  by  uttering  the  ‘mantra 
beginning  as  Skano  Dev£t  and  pour  sea  water  into  the  one 
situate  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  sacrificial  structure  (7). 
The  water  of^the  river  Ganges  should  be  kept  in  the  pitcher 
at  the  south  east,  rain  water  in  the  one  at  the  south,  fountain 
water  in  that  at  the  south  west,  river  water  in  the  pitcher  at 
the  west,  water  obtained  from  a river  with  a masculine  name 
at  the  north  west,  water  containing  solution  of  vegetable 
matters  in  the  one  at  the  north,  while  the  waters  obtained 
from  the  sacred  pools  should  be  kept  in  the  pitcher  placed 
at  the  north  east  corner  of  the  sacrificial  platform.  In 
the  event  of  all  the  above  being  not  available,  river  water 
should  be  poured  into  all  the  pitchers  consecutively  with 
the  mantra  beginning  as  cultively  ect,  and  the  priest  should 
mentally  endow  the  same  with  eye  sight  by  reading  out 
the  mantra  which  commences  with  the  terms  Durmitriya 
etc.,  and  by  anointing  the  eyes  with  a composition  of  honey 
sugar  and  clarified  butter  (8 — 10).  After  having  evoked  the 
sight  by  imagination  into  the  eyes  of  the  image,  the  priest 
should  receive  from  the  / ajaman  (celebrator  of  the  solemnity) 
the  present  of  a golden  cow,  and  pour  water  over  the  head 
of  the  imaged  Vishnu  out  of  the  pitcher  at  the  east  by  utter- 
ing the  mantra  which  has  in  its  beginning  the  terms  Samudra 
Yastd  etc.  (u).  Then  the  contents  of  the  remaining  pitchers 
should  be  emptied  over  head  of  the  image  in  the  following 
way  and  order,  viz  the  Ganges  water  should  be  poured  out 
by  uttering  the  mantra  commencing  with  Samudram 
Gaccha  etc.,  the  rain  water  with  the  mantra  running  as 
Soma  Dhanu  etc,s  the  stream  water  by  reading  out  the  * 
mantra  starting  as  Davirapo  etc.,  and  the  nada  water  by 
repeating  the  mantra  commencing  as  Pancha  nadyata  (12). 
The  water  containing  the  solution  of  vegetable  matters 


234 


AGNJ  PURANAM. 


i 


should  poured  out  on  the  head  of  Varuna,  accompanied  hf 
the  mantra  having  at  its  begining  the  terms  Udvita 
(vegetable)  ect,  the  waters  obtained  from  the  sacred  pools 
should  be  let  fall  by  uttering  the  mantra  known  as  the 
Pabamani,  and  u Apohista”  etc,,  is  the  mantra  which  should 
be  repeated  at  the  time  of  bathing  the  image  with  the  ■ com- 
position called  the  Panchagabya,  " Heranyavarna91  (golden 
colour)  ect.,  being  uttered  while  washing  it  with  the  wash- 
ings of  gold  (13).  The  mantra  H Apo  Agni”  (fire  is  water) 
etc.  should  be  used  while  the  divine  image  would  be  bathed 
with  the  rain  water.  The  Byahriti  mantrans  such  as  Om 
Bhu,  Om  Bhuba,  ect.  should  be  repeated  on  the  occasion  of 
washing  the  same  with  the  well  water.  The  tank  water 
should  be  consecrated  with  the  mantra  of  Varunadvi  etc. 
before  it  could  be  poured  out  the  image  (14),-  while  the 
contents  of  the  eighty  one  stone  jars  should  : be  emptied  on 
its  head,  accompanied  by  the  mantra  running  as  Apodevi 
etc.  and  the  priest  should  subsequently  offer  him  the  first 
oblation  (Argha)  by  uttering  the  mantra  beginning  as 
Varunsya  etc.  (15).  The  cups  containing  honey  should  be 
offered  with  the  Byahriti  mantras%  the  cloth  with  the  one 
beginning  as  Brihaspati,  the  sacred  thread  with  the  mantra 
of  the  “ Varuna19  etc ; and  the  doth  for  the  upper  body 
with  the  pranaba  mantra  (Om)  having  been  repeated  (16). 

The  priest  should  offer  flowers,  chowrie,  a mirror,  an 
umbrella,  a fan,  and  a banner  by  uttering  the  mantra  of 
“ Yadvarunya,”  etc,,  at  each  instance  (17).  The  image  should 
be  raised  up,  and  the  principal  mantra  of  the  god  should  be 
repeated  at  the  time  ; the  image  should  be  besought  to  get 
up  by  uttering  “ Rise  up.  Oh  God  etc.”  and  the  priest 
should  perform  at  night  the  Adhibasa  ceremosiey  unto  the 
god  as  previously  stated  and  invoke  his  presence  by  uttering 
the  mantra  which  commences  with  the  terms  “ Varuoam  etc. . 
and  worship  him  after  all  with  the  mantra  beginning  as 
Yadvaruny am  (i8)«  Fancy  the  image  as  endowed  with 


AGftI  PURANAM. 


235 


ife  by  uttering  the  principal  mantra  of  the  god,  and  again 
worship  him  with  sandalpaste,  etc.  After  that  worship  the 
fuels  of  the  hallowed  sacrificial  fire  in  the  fire  receptacle  6n 
the  platform,  with  the  sandalpaste  etc.,  as  before  and  by 
repeating  the  “ firanab a Om”  which  is  the  first  mantra  of  the 
Vedas.  Milch  the  four  cows,  prepare  the  sacrificial  porridge 
of  barley  and  perform  therewith  the  Homa  ceremoney  in  the 
sacrificial  fire  just  then  lighted  up  (rg— 20). 

The  invocation  is  to  be  performed  |by  uttering  the 
Gayatri  mantra,  or  the  mantra  beginning  as  Ora  Vu,  Ora  Vuba. 
Ora  Sva  etc.  (Byahriti).  The  Homa  ceremony  is  to  be  per- 
formed unto  the  Antariksakas  by  uttering  the  mantra  Suryaya , 
Prajapataya , Dow  svaka3  and  similarly  unto  the  Earth  god- 
dess, Dehadhriti,  Svadhriti,  and  Rati,  the  gods  Ugra , Vimas 
and  Roudraka  being  propitiated  with  the  homa  cere- 
mony performed  with  the  mantra  Ya  Ramatyai,  etc., 
(21—22)*  The  gods  Vishnu,  Varuna,  Dhata  Rayasposa 
Mahendra,  Agni,  Yama>  N air  it  a Varuna  > Vayu , Kuvera% 
1 skana , Brahma  and  Jaleskvar  should  be  propitiated  with 
oblations  of  the  homa  by  mentioning  the  word  svaha  after  the 
name  of  each  of  the  above  gods,  the  words  tadbiprasdtt 
being  appended  to  the  name  of  the  god  Vishnu  at  the  time 
offering  oblation  to  him  (23— 24).  The  homa  ceremony 
unto  the  god  Soma  should  be  performed  six  times  by  uttering 
the  mantra  Soma  Dhano  etc,  and  also  the  mantra  running  as 
Imam  mSti,  Thrice  the  homa  ceremony  is  to  be  performed 
by  uttering  the  mantra  Apohista  etc.  and  once  with  the 
mantra  beginning  as  Ima  Rudra  etc  (25).  The  learned 
priest  should  offer  oblations  in  all  the  quarters  of  the  heaven, 
and  worship  the  image  with  flowers  and  perfumes,  and 
subsequently  place  the  same  in  the  midst  of  the  mystic 
diagram  (26)*  The  image  should  be  worshipped  in  turn  with 
perfumes  flowers  and  golden  flowers  etc,  and  the  prist  should 
lay  out  eight  such  raised  squares  of  sand,  measuring  a cubit 
each  (which  are  generally  used  for  the  location  of  ;iM 


AGN1  PURANAM, 


sacrificial  fire)  facing  the  direction  in  which  lay  the  tank,  then 
to  be  , consecrated.  The  sacrificial  fire  should  be  lighted  up 
on  the  squares  above  described  and  the  oblations  of  clarified 
butter  should  be  offered  in  them  hundred  and  eight  times. 
Subsequent  to  that  the  priest  should  cook  the  sacrificial 
porridge  made  of  barley,  and  perform  the  Homa  ceremony 
■with  the  same,  sprinkle  water  over  the  head  of  the  image,  and 
perform  the  ceremony  of  evoking  life  into  its  interior  (29). 
The  god  should  be  contemplated  as  accompanied  by  the 
goddess  Gouri  and  attended  upon  by  the  spirits  of  rivers, 
bearing  both  masculine  and  feminine  names,  and  the  cere- 
mony known  as  the  sannidhyakarana  (act  of  bringing  near) 
should  be  performed  after  having  worshipped  him  with  the 
mantra  begining  as  “ Om  obesiance  to  the  god  Vanina”  (3a). 
.The  image  should  be  carried  round  the  village  or  the 
town  on  the  back  of  an  elephant,  the  eight  auspicious  things 
described  before  forming  part  of  the  procession,  and 
should  be  subsequently  Immersed  in  the  water  of  the 
.pitcher,  containing  a solution  of  honey,  sugar  and  clarified 
butter,  the  mantra  running  as  “ Apohista"  etc.,  having  been 
simultaneously  read  therewith  (31).  After  that  the  image 
should  be  buried  unseen  in  the  midst  of  the  tank,  and  the 
priest  after  bathing  should  contemplate  the  god  of  water 
as  standing  on  an  universal  sea,  on  which  the  ashes  of  crea- 
tion consumed  by  the  essence  of  fire  are  moving  about 
(32—33).  Then  the  sacrificial  post  (yupa j which  might  be  of 
a rectangular,  octagonal  or  rounded  shape,  and  which 
should  be  made  of  wood  held  sacred  to  the  sacrifice,  should 
be  driven  into  the  centre  of  the  bed  of  the  tank  (bapn) pushes- 
rini  (pond)  er  taragh,  its  lower  end  being  plated  with  gold, 
the  part  driven  into  the  ground  being  fifteen  cubits,  in  the 
case  pf  a tank  and  twenty  and  twenty  five  cubits  respectively 
in  the  two  tatter  cases  (34—36).  In  the  alternative  the  post 
could  be  driven  into  the  centre  of  the  sacrificial  shed,  covered 
over  with  a cloth,  and  furnished  with  a banner,  at  the  top 


AGNI  PVR  A NAM. 


the  mantra  to  be  red  out  on  the  occasion  being  ” Yupctbraska" 
etc,  (37*.  After  having  worshipped  the  same  with  flowers 
and  perfumes,  the.:  priest  should  perform  the  ceremony 
known  as  the  Jagacchanti  (conveying  peace  to  the  universe,} 
and  the  consecrator  should  make  a gift  of  cows,  golden 
utensils,  and  proprietory  rights  in  grounds  to  the  priest,  give 
money  to  the  Bramhins,  and  sumptuously  feed  all  the  other 
persons  present,  and  should  pour  out  the  composition  known 
as  the  P anchagabya  into  the  water  of  the  tank  by  reading 
out  the  mantra.  “ Be  gratified  with  the  water  of  this  tank 
all  ye  created  beings  {—ranging  from  the  lowest  animal  to 
the  god  Beam  ha— the  highest  in  the  heirarchy  of  the  spiritual 
beings,  who  may  be  in  need  of  water  (38—40).  Sprinkle 
the  water  of  peace  ( skantitoas ) consecrated  by  the  Bramhins, 
together  with  the  hallowed  waters  of  the  sacred  pools,  make 
gifts  of  cows  to  the  bramhins,  feed  with  rice  all  the  comers  ir- 
respective of  cast,  creed  or  nationality.  A man  who  consec- 
rates a reservoir  of  water  acquires  in  a si nele  dav  a merit 


CHAPTER  LXV. 


A he  God  said Now  I shall  discuss  the  way  of 
building  the  blessed  halls  in  front  of  the  divine  temples  and 


agni  puranam 


cf  other  things  connected  with  tne  same.  «uer  nav.ug 
tested  the  ground  on  which  the  hall  is  to  be  built,  the  priest 

shall  perform  the  ceremony  known  as  the  Vastujagailit  the 

sacrifice  in  connection  with  the  consecrations  of  households) 
(i)  The  halls  may  be  built  after  the  model  the  consecrator 
likes,  and  the  images  of  gods  he  likes  to  instal  therein.,  may  be 
installed  within  them,  without  any  reservation  whatever,  except 
that  such  buildings  must  not  be  constructed  on  the  crossings  of 
roads,  nor  in  the  interior  of  a villages,  nor  on  props  or  pillars 
so  as  to  have  a hanging  or  aerial  aspect  (2).  The  endower  of 
such  a building  becomes  free  of  all  sins,  and  resides  in  bliss 
in  the  region  of  heaven  by  raising  up  his  progenies  and 
departed  manes  to  the  level  of  his  own  spiritual  perfection. 
A saptavoum  hall  sacred  to  the  god  Harr  should  be  built  in 
the  following  way.  The  same  rule  holds  good  in  building 
temples  of  the  gods,  as  in  the  case  of  erecting  mansions  of 
the  kings.  The  banners  etc.  should  be  planted  in  the  differ- 
ent  quarters  of  the  heaven  starting  with  east  as  previously 
directed.  The  edifice  should  be  built  of  a quadrilateral 
eiiano  not  having  had  sides  or  walls  built  at  tangents  to 


IS  1 SI  I ISSSlit  ■'  iS;la 


AGNI  PUR ANA  M. 


239 


haHj  where  the  following  mantra  of  prosperity  should  be 
read  out.  iS  Be  thou  glad  O mother  Earth,  with  all  the  Vasus 
(a  class  of  demigods)  and  all  the  people  inhabiting  thee. 
All  glory  to  thee  Goddess,  who  once  knew  the  Rjshi  Vasista 
as  her  lord,  and  who  once  formed  the  property  of  Vargaba, 
and  who  givest  all  success  to  men  her  offsprings  ! Goddess 
.perfect  in  tfiyself,  and  who  once  was  in  the  possession  of 
Angira,  dost  thou  grant  me  my  hearts  desire.  Fill  my  mind 
with  bliss  mother  blissful— -Thou  who  possesses!  all  seeds,  all 
gems,  and  all  cereals  within  thyself.  Glory  to  thee  thou 
gladsome  goddess  of  colour  and  beauty  thou  who  art  the 
daughter  of  the  God  of  creation,  and  whose  bosom  appears 
so  very  smooth  and  flat  to  the  onlookers  ! stayest  thou  here 
io  bliss  in  this  room,  thou  goddess  of  fortune  and  good 
deeds,  stayest  thou  in  this  room  thou  goddess  of  majesty— 
Thou  blissful,  beautiful  daughter  of  Bhargaba— the  goddess  of 
wonder  and  mystery,  bedecked  with  the  scented  garlands— 
Thou  who  art  ever  resplendent  and  everywhere  worshipped, 
grantest  thou  prosperity  to  this  world.  Increase  the 
progeny  of  brutes  for  the  comforts  of  man— Goddess  t thou 
whom  the  holy  mendicants  (lifc-masters  of  monasteries) 
Kings  and  the  patriarchs  possess.  I establish  thee  Oh  thou 
goddess  of  bricks,  who  though  incomprehensible,  shapeless 
and  perfect  in  thyself  dost  yet  assume  a distinct  shape, 
dost  thou  grant  me  prosperity  (6—23), 


% 


CHAPTER  LXVI. 


* 


The  God  said:— Now  I shall  describe  to  yoa  the  v 
process  of  consecrating  the  images  of  all  the  gods  and 
spiritual  beings  such  as  the  sun,  the  Vasus,  the  Rudras  0he 


f’ . 


240 


A€NI  PORANAM. 


sadhyas,  the  Ashvinas  and  the  Rishis  (sages)  etc.,  with  the 
special  features  of  the  ceremonies  to  be  performed,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  installation  of  each  of  the  above,  images 
(1—2).  The  first  letter  of  the  name  of  any  particular  god 
should  be  coupled  with  the  long  vowels  and  consonant  letters 
of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  which  blended  with  the  sign  of  the 
nasal  sound  would  give  the  principal  mantra  ,of  that  parti- 
cular god,  and  which  preceded  by  a pranaba  mantra  would 
be  the  mantra  of  his  obesiance  (3).  The  image  of  each 
god  should  be  installed  and  worshipped  with  his  own 
principal  mantra,  especially  the  image  of  the  holy  saints  who 
had  lived  a life  of  austere  penance  in  hermitages  and 
monasteries  (4).  Now  I shall  speak  about  the  penance  of 
fasting  for  a month  and  of  the  one  which  ends  on  the 
thirteenth  day  from  its  commencement.  A stone  slab  together 
pitchers  made  of  Indian  bell  metal,  and  carrying  in  their 
mouths  the  articles  previously  described,  should  be  placed  in 
their  proper  positions  according  to  the  rule  as  enjoined  in 
that  behalf  in  the  books  of  sacrificial  rites  (5).  The 
worshipper  should  prepare  the  sacrificial  porridge  with 
barley,  Bramhakurcha  and  the  condensed  milk  of  a parti- 
cular class  of  cows  known  as  the  i{  Kapila”  and  by  uttering 
the  mantra  which  runs  “ YadVisnu u etc,  (6).  The  porridge 
should  be  stirred  up  with  the  sacrificial  laddie,  and  the 
pranaba  (Om)  should  be  simultaneously  read  therewith 
which  should  be  thought  as  holding  the  vessel  of  the 
porridge  firm  in  its  place.  The  god  Vishnu  should  be 
invoked  and  worshipped  and  the  Hama  ceremony  should  be 
performed  unto  him  with  the  mantras  respectively  commen- 
cing with  the  terms  u Om  Vu,”  u Om  Bhuba”  i(  Om  Sva” 
etc,  and  " Tad  Bipra$aiit  Biskvata  Ckaksn,  Vur  agnaya  and 
also  with  the  pranaba  (Om)  and  the  Gayatri  mantra  {7—8). 
The  priest  should  also  separately  perform  the  Hama 
ceremony  with  the  mantras  running  asr  Suryaya  Svaku, 
(oblation  to  the  sun  with  obesiance)  Prajapataya  Svaka 


(oblation  to  the  god  Prajapati  or  the  lord  of  creation 
with  obesiance),  Antariksyaya  svaha  (oblation  to  the  god  of 
the  intervening  region  between  the  heaven  and  the  Earth  with 
obesiance),  Dyousvaha  (oblation  to  the  Heaven  with 
obesiance),  Bramhana  Svaha  (oblation  to  the  god  B ram  ha 
with  obesiance)  and  also  with  the  mantras  running  as 
Prithibi  Makar ajaka , and  Somam  Rajanam  unto  the  god 
Indr  a and  his  companion  deities  of  the  different  quarters  of 
the  • firmament,  after  which  the  offerings  known  as  the 
Digbalis  should  be  offered  with  the  remaining  portion  of 
the  sacrificial  porridge  (9—10).  Eight  Hundred  sticks  of 
the  sacrificial  Palusha  tree,  dipped  in  clarified  butter  should 
be  offered  in  the  fire,  and  the  eight  oblations  of  sessamum 
orientate  known  as  the  Irabati  (watery)  Tilastakam  should  be 
thrown  into  the  same,  accompanied  by  the  mantra  called  the 
Purusha  Sakta  (11).  Subsequent  to  that  the  attendants  of 
the  gods,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Isha  should  be  propitiated 
with  horn  a offerings,  and  similarly  the  deities  of  the  planets 
and  the  presiding  spirits  of  the  different  quarters  of  the 
firmament  (12), 

Horn  a oblations  should  be  offered  to  the  (souls)  of  the) 
mountains,  rivers,  and  oceans,  and  three  oblations,  each  of 
a sacrificial  spoonfull  of  clarified  butter  should  be  offered 
into  the  fire  accompanied  by  the  Byahriti  mantra  of  Om 
Vu,  Om  Bkuba , Om  Sva  (13).  The  god  Bryma  should 
have  a homa  offering  made  with  the  mantra  i|gt^wn  as  the 
Vaisnava  mantra  and  ending  with  the  word'  Bousat,  the 
oblation  being  composed  of  a spoonful  of  the  sacrificial 
porridge  mixed  with  the  composition  known  as  the  five 
substances  from  the  cow  (Panchagabya) ; and  the  DdksinM 
(remuneration  for  performing  the  sacrifice)  should  be  given 
to  the  Acharjya  or  the  principal  priest  (14).  The  learned 
should  conclude  or  terminate  the  penance  of  a month’s  fast 


Ami  PUKANAMi 


with  broamental  trappings,  and  by  uttering  the  mantra  which 
runs  as  " Be  pleased  with  these  presents  Oh  Vishnu  (15), 
Now  I shall,  fully  speak  about  the  performance  of 
another  set  of  religious  rites  or  ceremonies  than  the  one  of  a 
month’s  fasting,  described  above.  The  God  Vishnu  should 
be  worshipped  and  the  particular  kind  of  sacrificial  porridge 
known  as  the  Vaisnaba  Charu  should  be  prepared,  with  rice, 
sessatnum,  Nibar  seeds,  and  clarified  butter,  or  with  barley 
or  the  seeds  of  Shyama  grass  and  clarified  butter,  and  the 
homa  ceremony  should  be  performed  by  uttering  the 
mantras  known  as  the  Matri  mantras , and  after  that  similar 
Homa-oblations  should  be  offered  to  Vishnu  and  the  other 
masapas  by  offering  twelve  shoots  of  the  Ashvattha  tree 
dipped  in  the  sacrificial  clarified  butter  accompanied  by  the 
twelve  mantras  such  as,  Om  Visnaba  Svaha  (oblation  to  the 
god  Vishnu  with  obesiance),  “ Om  Visnaba  Nivuayapaya ” 
Svaha,”  “ Om  Visna  Cipivistayaya  Svaha ” u Am  Narsin 
hay  a Svahas  Om  Purusottamaya  Svaha  (18).  Subsequent 
to  that  the  twelve  Homaic  oblations  are  to  be  offered  with 
the  rarata  mantra  of  the  god  Vishnu,  and  twelve  more  such 
Irabati  offerings  with  the  sacrificial  porridge  prepared  in 
honour  of  that  god  (tg).  Similarly  the  Homa  ceremony 
should  be  performed  with  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter, 
and  also  wfith  the  mantra  which  runs  as  tad  biprasati  after 
which,  the  1/t  offering  should  be  offered  and  the  ceremony 
should  be  with  the  three  final  oblations  (20).  The 

Anubak  (compilation  from  the  Rich  and  Yajur  Vedas) 
mantras  should  be  repeated  and  the  sacrificial  porridge 
should  be  prepared  in  a copper  vessel  by  uttering  the 
pranava  mantra  “Om”,  Then  the  twelve  Brahmins  whose 
respective  duties  were  to  gaze  at  each  of  the  nine 
planets*  which  herald  the  months  and  the  different  seasons 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


243 


of  the  year  should  be  feasted  with  the  priest  who  would  from 
the  thirteenth  Brahmin  in  the  assembly.  Thirteen  pitchers 
containing  sweet  water  together  with  thirteen  umbrellas, 

, garments,  gold  chains  and  thirteen  pairs  of  shoes  should  be 
given  to  them  (21—23).  A path  should  be  laid  out  for  the 
cattle  so  that  they  might  freely  move  about  aud  stroll  in 
comfort,  and  the  sacrificial  post  should  be  driven  into  the 
same  after  the  consecration  thereof  (24).  The  house 
holder  should  consecrate  a yard  where  water  would  be 
distributed,  such  a yard  should  measure  ten  cubits  at  the 
least  and  he  should  enter  the  same  after  celebrating  therein 
the  Homo,  ceremony  according  to  the  directions  previously 
given  (23 — 26).  All  the  creatures  should,  be  continuously 
feasted  with  boiled  rice,  etc,  and  money  remunerations  should 
be  given  wise  to  the  Brahmins  as  far  as  the  means  of  the 
consecrator  would  admit  of.  A consecrator  of  such  a garden 
perpetually  resides  in  heaven  and  comfortably  strolls  in  the 
fields  of  the  elysium  (27).  A man  who  builds  a monastery  goes 
to  the  blessed  region  of  Sva  and  afterwards  lives  in  the  same 
sphere  with  the  king  of  the  gods  (Indr a),  and  similary  the 
man  who  makes  an  endowment  of  a place  where  water  is 
distributed,  lives  in  the  same  region  with  the  water-god 
Varuna  (28).  The  man  who  builds  a bridge  of  bricks 
for  the  use  of  the  public,  lives  in  the  highest  heaven 
(Gel aka)  and  the  man  who  lays  out  a cattlepath  lives  in 
heaven  also,  and  lastly  a man  who  practises  austere  penances 
^ in  the  honour  of  the  god  Vishnu,  becomes  absolved  of  all 

sins  (29).  A man  who  consecrated  an  edifice  to  a god, 
lives  in  heaven  as  long  as  the  universe  exists  (30). 


CHAPTER  LXVIL 


1 BE  God  said  : — Now  I shall  describe  to  you  the 
process  of  replacing  an  old  image.  The  priest  should  bathe 
the  image  with  all  the  ornaments  on,  A divine  representa- 
tion which  belongs  to  the  Achala  or  the  fixed  class,  and 
which  has  become  old,  should  be  unearthed  and,  stowed  in 
a room,  while  the  one,  which  has  become  extremely  time- 
worn, should  be  rejected,  A stone  image  which  has  become 
broken  or  disfigured,  should  be  cast  aside,  a new  one  possess- 
ing ail  the  attributes  and  bearing  all  the  characteristic 
marks  of  its  predecessor,  should  be  installed  in  its  place,  all 
the  tattvas  having  been  consecutively  merged  into  the  fun- 
damental principle  of  the  universe  by  the  priest  according 
to  the  process  of  merging  fully  dealt  with  in  the  Chapter  59, 
(3E— *2).  The  priest  should  unearth  the  image  after  having;, 
performed  the  Horn  a ceremony  by  uttering  thousand  times 
the  mantra  sacred  to  the  Narsinha  manifestation  of  Vishnu, 
An  old  image  made  of  wood  should  be  reduced  to  ashes 
by  fire,  while  one  of  stone  should  be  cast  into  the 
water  (3).  An  old  image  made  of  metal  or  gems  should  be 
carried  in  a vehicle  wrapped  in  a piece  of  cloth  and  drowned 
in  deep  water  or  in  the  sea,  accompanied  by  the  notes  of 
the  sacred  music  (Indian)  and  money  remunerations  should 
be  given  to  the  priest  who  would  officiate  at  the  ceremony. 
Anew  image  should  be  consecrated  and  installed  in  the 
place  of  the  old  one,  made  of  the  same  substance  and  having 
the  same  dimensions  as  the  latter,  great  merit  being  attached 
to  the  dredging  and  reexcavation  of  old  wells,  tanks  and 
the  large  and  artificial  reservoirs  of  water  (4—5). 


CHAPTER  LX VIII 


246 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


& ! 


I 1 5 
* 


1 


I 


sion  of  the  imaged  god  in  the  temple  and  the  divine  plat- 
form should  be  decorated  with  beads  and  the  new-born 
shoots  of  trees  (9).  The  four  pillars  should  be  erected  and 
in  the  midst  of  that  the  image  should  be  placed  over  the 
mystic  diagram  known  as  the  svastic,  or  on  the  painted  repre- 
sentations in  the  case  where  the  celebration  would  be  for  the 
fulfilment  of  any  desire  on  the  part  of  the  celebrator ; and 
the  Adhibasa  (the  act  of  making  the  spirit  or  the  god  ap- 
proach the  image)  ceremony  should  be  performed  therein  with 
the  mantras  sacred  to  the  God  Vishnu  (10).  The  image 
should  be  anointed  with  clarified  butter  by  reading  aloud  the 
principal  mantra  of  that  god,  and  should  be  placed  under  an 
unbroken  jet  of  that  substance  all  through  the  night  (11), 
A mirror  should  be  presented  before  the  image  and  the  rite 
of  waiving  light  before  it  should  be  performed  accompanied 
by  holy  songs  and  the  notes  of  the  sacred  music,  and  the 
image  should  be  worshipped  with  flowers,  and  perfumes,  and 
by  waiving  chowries  and  lighted  lamps  before  the  same  (12). 
Turmeric,  Mudga,  Saffron  and  powdered  Shukla  should  be 
placed  on  the  head  of  the  image,  but  a man  acquires  all  the 
merit  by  putting  clarified  butter  on  its  head  as  one  derives  by 
puttting  all  the  above  substances  (13). 

After  having  bathed  the  image  and  having  installed  the 
same  in  a carriage,  the  officers  of  the  king  should  take  it 
to  the  riverside  with  the  priest  after  having  opened  an  um- 
brella of  state  on  its  head,  amidst  loud  shouts  and  acclama- 
tions (16).  Eight  miles  down  the  river,  a platform  should 
be  raised  on  the  bank,  and  the  image  should  be  taken  down 
from  the  carriage  and  deposited  thereon  (15).  The  sacri- 
ficial porridge  should  be  prepared,  and  the  homa  ceremony 
should  be  performed  with  that  sweetened  sacrificial  rice 
gruel,  and  the  sacred  pools  should  be  invoked  therein 
by  repeating  the  Vedic  mantras  which  are  known  as  the 
Ablinga  mantras  (16).  The  image  should  fee  again  wor- 
shipped with  the  principal  oblations  by  uttering  the  Apohista 


AGNI  PUHANAM, 


and  the  Upanisad  mantras  after  having  performed  the  rite 
of  purification  (Aghamarshan)  in  water  (17).  The  precep- 
tor should  bathe  with  the  elites  and  the  Bramhins  and 
place  the  image  on  the  platform  after  having  taken  it 
out  of  water,  which  should  be  again  worshipped  and  brought 
back  to  the  temple  the  same  day.  The  priest  should  worship 
the  god  as  revealed  in  the  fire,  which  imparts  both  enjoy- 
ment in  this  world,  and  salvation  in  the  next. 


CHAPTER  LXIX- 


1 HE  Goo  said  : — Oh  Bramhan  hear  me  describe  in  de* 
tail  the  festival  of  bathing.  The  pitchers  should  be  placed 
over  the  mystic  diagram  inside  the  bathing  shed,  and  first 
of  all  the  God  Hari  should  be  contemplated  and  propitiated 
with  the  Homa  ceremony,  which  may  consist  of  a hundred 
or  thousand  oblations  including  the  final  or  completing  offer- 
ing (1— -2).  Then  the  articles  essential  to  the  bathing  cere- 
mony should  be  collected  and  the  pitchers  wheeled  into 
their  proper  places  along  the  paystic  diagram  and  the  rite  of 
Adhibasa  should  be  performed  in  the  strings  tied  round  their 
necks  (3).  The  mandal  or  the  mystic  diagram  spoken  of 
in  the  preceding  couplet  should  be  a square  divided  into 
eleven  chambers  or  compartments,  and  the  sacrificial  porridge 
should  be  placed  in  the  #entre  thereof,  the  sides  having 
been  made  clean  and  smooth  (4).  The  nine  angular  divi- 
sions of  the  diagram  commencing  with  the  east  etc,  should 
be  filled  in  with  powdered  Shall  rice  and  a pitcher  should 
be  brought  to  that  place  fay  exhibiting  the  mudra  (folding  of 
the  fingers  in  a particular  attitude)  known  as  the  Kumva 


AGN1  PUR  A NAM 


Mudra  (5).  Bunches  of  (Darva)  grass  should  be  immersed 
in  the  same  by  - uttering  the  Pundarikashi  mantra,  and'  a 
pitcher  containing  water  together  with  all  sorts  of  precious 
stone  should  be  placed  in  the  central  chamber.  Barley,  seeds 
of  Brihi 'grass,  sesamum,  Nibar  seeds,  seeds  of  Shyama  grass 
Kulathapulse,  Mudga  pulse,  and  white  mustard  seeds  should 
be  cast  in  all  the  eight  directions.  Out  of  the,  nine  pitchers 
placed  in  the  eastern  chamber  of  the  mystic  square,  the 
central  one  should  be  filled  with  clarified  butter,  the  re- 
maining eight  having  been  filled  up  with  the  decoction  of 
Palasha,  Acvatha,  Nyagrodha,  Bilva,  Odumbara,  Shirisha, 
Jambu,  Shami,  and  Kapithva  trees.  Similarly  the  middle 
one  of  the  nine  pitchers  placed  in  the  south  east  chamber 
of  the  square  should  be  made  full  of  honey,  the  remaining 
eight  having  been  filled  up  with  the  earth  dug  by  horses 
or  loosened  with  the  horns  of  cows,  and  the  tusks  of  elephants 
out  of  the  bows  of  mountains  and  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  or 
of  the  other  rivers  and  sacred  pools  (10).  In  the  chamber  at 
the  southern  corner  of  the  square,  the  pitcher  at  the  middle 
should  be  filled  up  with  the  oil  of  the  sesamum  Orientate 
while  the  remaining  eight  pitchers  should  respectively  con- 
tain, a naranga , a Jambir,  a date  fruit,  a mridvik%  a coconut, 
an  areca  nut  a pomegranate,  and  a fianas  (1 1).  Similarly 
in  the  south  western  chamber  of  the  square,  the  pitcher  at 
the  middle  should  be  filled  up  with  thickened  milk,  while 
the  remaining  eight  should  respectively  contain  saffron. 
Nagflower,  Champ  aka , Mala  ti  Mullika , P unnag  y Karaber 
and  the  flower  known  as  the  Mahatpal  (12 — -13).  In  the  wes* 
tern  chamber  of  the  square  the  middle  pitcher  should  contain 
a cocoanut  at  its  mouth  while  the  rest  of  the  eight  pitchers 
should  be  filled  up  with  waters  obtained  from  rivers  bearing 
both  masculine  and  feminine  nances,  and  also  from  tanks, 
wells,  seas,  streams,  and  with  water  | obtained  from  the  river 
Ganges  together  with  rain  water  and  j water  stored  up  by  accu- 
mulating dews  of  the  heaven  (14—13).  Similarly  in  the  north- 


AGNS  PURANAMi 


western  chamber  of  the  mystic  square,  the  central  pitcher 
should  contain  a bunch  of  plaintain,  while  the  remaining 
eight  should  contain  Sahadevi  Koutnarit  Sinhy>  Byaghri \ 
Amritam  (Aconitum  Nap)  Visnuparni , Shataskibay  and 
Batka,  which  jointly  fall  under  the  category  of  the  divine 
medicinal  plants  (x6),  In  the  east  and  the  north  chamber,  the 
middle  pitchers  should  be  filled  up  with  curd,  while  the  rest 
should  contain  the  drugs  which  are  called  the  Sidhadrabyas, 
and  which  are  Pafcra,  Cardemon,  I!a,  Kustha.  Balak,  Sandal, 
Lata,  Kasturi  and  black  Agollochum  (17—18).  In  the  north 
east  chamber,  the  middle  pitcher  should  contain,  the  conse- 
crated water  for  the  absolution  of  sin,  while  the  rest  should 
contain,  Chandra,  tara,  Shukla,  Girishar,  Camphor,  Sherln 
and  jems  etc.  (19),  They  should  be  raised  up,  and  anointed 
with  clarified  butter  and  perfumes,  the  homa  oblations 
having  been  offered  in  the  sacrificial  fire  (20).  Sacrifices 
should  be  made  in  honour  of  all  the  Vutas,  and  the  celebrator 
after  having  given  remunerations  to  the  priest  and  the 
Brahmins,  should  spread  out  a sumptuous  feast  for  all 
comers,  after  having  installed  the  god  with  the  Munis  and 
the  other  divinities.  Having  thus  bathed  the  god,  the  feast 
of  bathing  should  be  celebrated.  A man  who  bathes  the 
god  with  eight  pitchers  of  water,  attains  all  fortune.  By  per- 
forming the  Abavritha  bathing  ceremony,  the  feast  is  made 
complete.  After  the  completion  of  such  a ceremony  the 
marriage  festivals  of  the  goddess  Lakshmi  or  Gouri  should 
be  celebrated  (21—23). 


CHAPTER  LXX. 


rp 

1 HE  god  said  ;~Now  I shall  speak  about  the  consecra- 
tion of  trees.,  which  imparts  enjoyment  in  this  World  and 
salvation  in  the  next  Water  containing  solution  of  the 
drugs  known  as  the  Sarvousadhi  should  be  poured  over  the 
heads  of  trees  from  whose  boughs  garlands  should  be  hung 
down,  and  which  should  be  plastered  over  with  rice  paste 
and  covered  over  with  pieces  of  cloth,,  The  ceremony  of 
Karnabedha  (perforation  of  the  balls  of  the  ears)  should  be 
performed  unto  them,  with  needles  made  of  gold  (1—2) ; 
and  on  the  masonry  platform  around  them,  the  Adhibasa  rite 
of  the  pitchers  should  be  celebrated.  Offerings  should  be 
made  in  honour  of  the  god  Indra  and  his  companion  deities, 
and  the  Homa  ceremony  should  be  performed  unto  Vanaspati 
The  Earth  goddess  should  be  invoked  out  of  the  hearts  of 
trees  by  uttering  the  Ahhiseka  mantras.  The  ^renowned 
Brahmins  should  pour  water  over  the  head  of  the  consecrator 
by  uttering  the  Rich  and  Yajur  Veda  mantras,  and  the 
mantras  which  are  sacred  to  the  sun  and  the  seagod  Vanina, 
together  with  those  which  are  called  the  Mangal  mantras* 
The  consecrator  wearing  all  the  ornaments  should  make 
gifts  to  the  Brahmins  of  cows,*  clothes,  ornaments  and 
proprietory  rights  in  land.  For  four  consecutive  days 
the  Brahmins  : should  be  feasted  with  the  thickened  milk 
among  other  things.  The  Homa  ceremony  should  be  per- 
formed with  the  ^branches  of  Palasha  tree,  and  handfuls 
of  sessamum  orientate.  The  sacrificial  priest  should  have 
remunerations  double  in  value  to  what  should  be  given  to 
the  other  Brahmins  and  the  mystic  sacrificial  diagram  should 
be  drawn  according  to  the  directions  priviously  laid  down. 
The  consecration  of  trees  and  gardens  imparts  the  highest 


AGNS  PURANAM, 


merit  to  the  consecrator  and  absolves  him  of  all  sins  and 
demerits.  Now  I shall  describe  to  you  the  process  of  wor- 
shipping the  sun,  Ganesha,  Gouri  and  other  divinities  belong- 
ing to  the  family  of  Hara  as  told  by  the  latter  to  the  god 
Skanda  (3 — 9). 


CHAPTER  LXXI 


1 HE  GOD  said  First  I shall  speak  about  the  worship 
of  Ganesha.  The  nyasa  (act  of  mentally  locating  a mantra 
or  an  image  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body)  is  to 
be  performed  as  follows.  Gan  ay  a svaha  (obesiance  to 
Ganesha)  in  the  heart,  'Akdanstraya  Svaha  in  the  head, 
Gajakarnina  svaha  in  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head,  Gaya* 
vaktraya  svaha  as  armour,  Mohadaraya  svaha  in  the  eyes, 
and  Sadantahastaya  svaha  as  the  weapon.  The  god  gana, 
the  preceptor,  Paduka,  Sakti  and  Ananta  are  to  be  located 
below  the  principal  joint  and  Sudan  in  the  part  above 
that : The  Pitha  Saktis  such  as  Jvalini,  Nanda,  Sura  ska, 
Kamrupa,  Uadaya,  Kamvartiny,  Satya,  Vignanasha  etc., 
are  to  be  located  in  the  petals  of  the  lotus  shaped  mystic 
diagram,  together  with  the  mantras,  Yam,  Ram,  Lam,  Bam. 
The  Gayatri  of  .the  god  is  as  follows.  Let  us  know  the  god. 
Lambodar  (the  bigbellied  god),  meditate  upon  the  god  Moha- 
dara  (the  great  bellied  one)  and  let  our  mind  be  goaded  to 
think  of  the  god  with  the  elephant’s  head.  The  gods  Gana- 
pati,  Ganadhipa,  Ganesha,  Gananayaka,  Ganakrida,  Bakra- 
tundu,  Ahadanstra,  Mahodaras  Gajavaktra,  Lamhahuhsi, 
Vikala  Vignanasha,  Dhumraharna , Mahendra  and  others 
are  to  be  worshipped  in  the  petals  of  the  painted  lotus 
shaped  diagram  (1—7).  : 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 


The  God  said: — Oh  Skanda  now  I should  describe  to 
you  the  ablution  and  worship  to  be  performed  every  day  at 
the  outset.  A piece  of  clay  to  the  length  of  eight  fingers  is 
to  be  dug  out  and  raised  with  the  pointed  end  of  the  sword 
of  the  bather  (i).  The  sword  should  be  again  used  in  filling 
in  the  hole  thus  dug  out,  and  the  bather  should  place  the  piece 
of  clay  on  his  head,  and  purify  the  same  with  the  weapon 
mantra.  The  person  performing  the  ceremony  of  ablution, 
should  carry  a weed  or  the  stem  of  a grass  on  his  head  and 
divide  the  piece  of  clay  into  three  parts  by  uttering  the  Kaba- 
cha  mantra.  One  part  of  the  clay  should  be  used  in  washing 
the  part  of  the  body  from  the  naval  downwards,  while  the 
second  portion,  should  be  pasted  all  over  the  body,  purified 
with  the  astra  mantra.  He  should  now  firmly  press  his  eyes 
with  his  two  hands  and  dip  in  the  water  with  his  breath  entirely 
suppressed  (2~4>.  For  sometimes  he  should  remain  under 
water,  contemplating  in  his  heart  the  sword  as  dazzling  with 
the  glare  of  the  fire  of  death.  After  having  thus  finished  his 
ablution  with  the  clay,  he  should  come  above  water  (5). 
And  after  having  performed  the  Sandhya  worship  known  as 
the  Astra  (weapon)  sandhya,  he  should  perform  the  Bidhi 
Snan  or  the  rite  of  bathing  according  to  the  regulations  of 
the  Sastras.  Subsequent  to  that  he  should  draw  forth  into 
bis  heart  one  of  the  sacred  rivers  such  as  the  Sarasvati, 
etc.,  by  exhibiting  the  mudra  (the  particular  attitude  of  the 
fingers)  called  the  Ankusha  (mace)  mudra,  and  after  having 
mentally  located  the  same  therein  with  the  mudra  known 
as  the  Sanharmudra,  knee  deep  enter  into  the  water 
and  after  having  placed  the  last  residuary  portion  of  the 
clay  under  his  left  foot,  again  divide  the  same  into  three 


AGN!  PURANAM* 


253 


parts,  facing  the  north.  The  right  portion  of  the  body  should 
be  consecrated  by  once  telling  the  mantra  stated  above,  and 
seven  and  ten  times  the  mantras  of  Siva  and  Soumya  res- 
pectively, and  the  particles  of  the  mud  should  be  cast  in  all 
the  directions  starting  with  the  East,  accompanied  by  the  shara 
mantra  ending  with  Hun  flit.  The  Shiva  and  somya  mantras 
should  be  told  or  repeated  all  over  the  body  from  the  head  to 
the  foot  beginning  with  the  arms,  so  as  to  make  them  permeated 
with  the  essence  of  or  an  organism  sacred  to  the  God  Shiva. 
Again  the  mud  or  clay  is  to  be  taken  into  the  right  hand  and 
the  four  limbs  should  be  consecrated,  and  the  nine  apertures 
of  the  body  be  Swashed,  with  the  same,  after,  which  the 
bather  should  plunge  himself  into  the  water,  contemplating 
the  God  Rari,  Shiva  or  Gauge  in  his  mind,  and  finish  the 


bathing  rite  by  uttering  the  names  of  the  six  different  parts 
of  the  body  coupled  with  the  term  Vousat  (12).  He  should 
throw  water  with  a pitcher  into  all  the  different  angular 
points  of  the  heaven,  inorder  that  no  harm  might  reach 
him  while  making  ablution.  Such  a person  after  the  bath 
should  bathe  with  perfumes  and  the  paste  of  Embric 
myrobolan  fruit  (13),  and  make  that  tirtha  cease  to  exist 
by  exhibiting  the  Sanhar  raudra.  Subsequent  to  that  he 
should  perform  the  rite  of  bathing  with  the  ashes 
which  have  been  duly  consecrated  before,  specially 
with  the  Sanhita  mantras,  by  rubbing  the  same,  over  his 
entire  body  from  head  to  foot  accompanied  by  the  Shara 
mantra  ending  with  Hum  Fufc  (15).  Having  thus  performed 
the  malasnnan  (bathing  with  clay  or  ashes),  he  should 
perform  the  ablution  ceremony  known  as  the  Vtdi  Snant* 
The  Gods,  fsha,  Tatpurusa,  Agfaora,  Gughyaka,  Ajata,  and 
Sankara,  should  be  propitiated  with  worshipping  them  in 
the  head,  heart,  mouth,  and  the  body,  in  the  three  divisions  of 
the  day  or  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  before  and  after  the 
setting  in  of  the  rainy  season  (1 7)*  If  a person  chances  to 
touch  a woman,  a eunuch)  a sudra,  or  a cat,  hare,  or  a mouse* 


III 


IlillSia 


254 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


just  rising  after  sleep,  or  after  he  has  drunk  water  or  finished 
his  meals,  should  undertake  the  particular  kind  of  ablution 
called  the  Agnayaka  snana  for  his  purification,  which  consists 
in  standing  op  with  uplifted  arms  and  with  the  face  turned 
towards  the  East,  the  purification  being  brought  about  by 
means  of  the  sun's  rays  and  the  rain  water  (19).  The  ablution 
known  as  the  Mahendra  Snanam  should  be  performed  by 
walking  seven  steps  in  the  midst  of  the  cows,  besmeared  with 
the  particles  of  dust  raised  by  their  hoops.  The  purification 
would  be  done  by  the  nine  mantras  and  the  ablution  by  utter- 
ing the  Kabacha  mantra , and  he  should  pour  water  over  the 
head  by  uttering  the  mantra  which  runs  as  Sadyajata  etc . 
(21).  Thus  the  mantra  snanam  or  ablution  by  means  of 
the  mantras  should  be  made  in  honour  of  the  god  Varuna 
or  Agni  by  telling  in  mind  the  principal  mantra  of  each 
and  by  regulating  the  breath  according  to  the  rules  of  the 
Pranayama  (22).  The  mental  ablution  should,  be  made 
whenever  necessary  in  honour  of  the  god  Vishnu,  by  uttering 
the  mantra  sacred  to  him  (23). 

Now  I shall  speak  about  the  different  forms  of  the 
Sandkya)  worship  to  be  performed  with  the  different 
j;  mantras,  and  after  making  which  the  worshipper  should  three 
times  drink  water  with  the  Sankara  and  Brahma  tirthas 
(roots  of  the  different  fingers)  (24).  He  should  utter  the  names 
of  the  different  principles  constituing  his  self  or  being  each 
coupled  with  the  term  Swadha  and  complacently  touch  the 
nine  apertures  of  his  body,  after  having  performed  the  rite 
of  Sakalikaran  with  respiration  regulated  according  to  the 
rules  of  the  Pranayma  (25).  He  should  thrice  recapitulate 
In  mind  the  Shtba  Sanhita  and  after  having  rinsed  his  mouth 
with  water  and  performed  the  nyasa  ceremony  (rite  of 
locating  the  images  of  gods  or  mantras  in  the  different  parts 
of  the  body)  as  laid  down  in  the  Sandhya  worship  should 
meditate  upon  the  Brahmic  or  the  morning  Sandhya t as  fol- 
lows*  The  goddess  who  is  of  a red  complexion;  Is  seated  on  a ; 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


255 


swan  ana  possesses  tour  races  ana  equal  numuci  ui  ua»ua, 
carrying  garlands  in  his  right  arms  and  an  anchorite's  stick  and 
a Kamandalu  (pitcher)  in  the  left.  The  Midday  Sandhya  is  to 
be  contemplated  as  a white  woman  mounted  on  the  celestial 
bird  Garuda  and  possessing  four  arms,  carrying  a conch 
and  a chakra  in  her  two  left  arms,  and  a mace  in  one  of  the 
right  bands,  The  remaining  hand  being  folded  up  in  the 
attitude  of  giving  encouragement  (28).  The  image  of  the 
Sandhya  to  be  worshipped  in  the  evening  (Roudri  sandhya) 
is  that  of  a woman  seated  on  a lotus  flower  placed  on  a bull, 
carrying  in  her  two  right  hands  a trident  and  a rosery  and  a 
spear  in  her  upper  left,  the  lower  left  arm  being  folded  in 
the  attitude  of  giving  encouragement  She  is  to  be  re- 
presented as  having  three  eyes  and  bedecked  with  the  moon 
in  her  forehead  (28).  Oh  Brahman  ! Sandhya  is  the  witness 
of  all  the  acts  of  men  and  the  soul  follows  in  her  wake.  The 
fourth  form  of  Sandhya  is  that  which  is  contemplated  fay  the 
wise,  and  should  be  thought  of  in  the  night  (30).  The 
Parama  Sandhya  is  that  which  flows  invisible  through  the 
ganglias  respectively  situate  at  the  heart,  the  upper  end  o£ 
the  nose,  and  the  fourth  ventricle  of  the  brain  (31).  The 
foot  of  the  fore-finger  is  to  be  considered  as  the  Pitri  tirtha 
or  the  part  sacred  to  the  Pitris,  the  foot  of  the  little  finger  is 
sacred  to  Prajapati,  the  part  at  the  foot  of  the  thumb  is 
sacred  to  Brahma,  the  fore  part  of  the  hand  being  held  as 
containing  spots  sacred  to  the  different  gods.  (Deve-tirtha) 
(32).  The  palm  of  the  left-hand  is  to  be  held  as  sacred  to 
fire,  while  that  of  the  right  as  the  spot  sacred  to  Soma t 
all  the  finger-joints  being  held  sacred  to  the  Rishis  (33)* 
Now  the  sacred  pool  is  to  be  made  permeated  with  the 
energy  of  God  Shiva  by  uttering  the  mantras  sacred  to 
him  and  the  Marjan  ceremony  is  to  be  performed  by 
uttering  the  Sanhita  mantras  of  that  god  (34).  The  rite  o£ 
maryana  consists  in  the  act  of  sprikling  with  the  right  hand 
water  which  drops  down  from  the  left  hand,  over  the  head 


256 


A€Nf  PURANAM. 


(35).  The  water  carried  in  the  palm  of  the  right  hand  is  to 
be  brought  near  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and.Is  to  be  contemplated 
as  of  a white  colour  and  as  the  embodiment  of  knowledge,  and 
Is  to  be  drawn  forth  into  the  cavity  of  the  left  nose,  and  there 
to  be  retained.  Subsequent  to  that  the  water  is  to  be  ejected 
through  the  right  nostril,  and  Is  to  be  again  cast  down  into  the 
right  palm,  contemplated  as  having  assumed^  black  colour 
by  washing  off  the  sins  of  the  practiser  and  is  to  be  thrown 
on  a stone  slab.  This  is  what  is  called  the  Aghamarsctna  rite 

(37) .  Then  a bunch  composed  of  Kusha  grass,  flower,  and 
the  pinches  of  sundried  rice,  should  be  offered  to  Shiva  as 
the  Arghya  or  the  preliminary  offering,  accompanied  by  the 
mantras  sacred  to  that  divinity,  after  which  the  Gyatri  should 
be  repeated  as  many  times  as  the  worshipper  could  afford 

(38) .  Now  I shall  speak  about  the  Tarpana  or  the  rite  of 
offering  watery  oblations  to  the  god  which  should  be  done  by 
uttering  the  principal  mantra  Houn  Shibaya  Svaha,  and  by 
means  of  the  Devatertha . The  word  Svaha  is  to  be  repeated 
io  all  the  other  cases  as  well  (39). 

The  Nyasa  is  to  be  performed  as  follows.  Hrang  Hrida* 
ya  (to  the  heart),  Hring  Shirasa,  (to  the  head),  Hrung  Shikai 
(to  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown),  Hraing  Kabachaya  Astra- 
ya  or  in  the  alternative  the  eight-gods  can  be  located  in  the 
different  parts  of  the  body  above  enumerated  in  the  place 
of  the  aforementioned  mantras.  The  tarpana  or  the  offer- 
ing of  water-oblatious  should  be  performed  unto  the  follow- 
ing gods  as  follows Hang  Vasuvyas  Svaha,  Rudravyas 
Svaha,  Visvavyo  Svaha,  Marudvyo  Svaha,  and  unto  the 
following  Risis  such  as  Kanthopabeti  as  follows.  Hang 
Vriguvyo  Svaha,  Hang  Angiravyo  Svaha,  Hang  Atraya 
Svaha,  Hang  Vasistaya  namas,  Pulastaya  namas,  Hang 
Kratava  namas,  Hang  Varadvajaya  namas,  Hang  Visva- 
mitraya  namas,  Hang  Prachatasa  Vasafc,  and  unto  the 
following  holy  sages  as  follows  Hang  Sanakaya  Vasat, 
Hang  Sanandaya  Vasat,  Hang  Sanatanaya  Vasat,  Hang 


AGNl  PURANAMh 


257 


Sanatlcumaraya  Vasat,  Hang  Kapilaya  Vasat3  Hang  Pancha 
Shikhaya  Vasat,  the  ceremony  having  been  performed  with 
the  combined  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  touched  at  the 
elbowjoint  by  the  left  (40—44).  Then  the  tarpana  ceremony 
should  be  performed  unto  all  the  spirits,  and  Petris  and  to 
Daksa,  Skandaf  and  Upabiti  by  appending  the  word  Vousat 
to  the  names  of  each  with  the  ends  of  Rushagrass  and 
Sessamum  Orientate  (45).  Similarly  the  tarpana  ceremony 
is  to  be  performed  unto  Ravya  Vala,  Anal  a , $oma}  Varna, 
Arjama}  Agni  and  to  Barhis  by  appending  the  term  Svadha 
to  the  name  of  each  of  the  above  gods  (46).  In  the  same 
manner  watery  oblations  should  be  offered  to  Ajyapa  and 
Soma  and  to  the  souls  of  the  ancestors  and  departed  manes 
of  the  celebrator  of  the  cecremony  as  special  gods  as  fol- 
lows, Om,  Hang,  Ishanaya  Pitra  Svadha,  Hang,  Pitamahay 
(to  the  grand-father)  Svadha  (obesiance),  Hang  Prapita- 
mahaya  (to  the  great  grandfather)  Svadha,  and  similarly  as 
follows— Hang  Pitrivyas  (to  the  ancestors)  Svadha,  Hang 
Pitamahaya  (to  the  grandfathers)  Svadha,  Hang  Prapita- 
mahaya  (0  the  great  grandfathers)  Svadha  (47 — 48).  Simi- 
lar oblations  should  be  offered  to  the  souls  of  the  departed 
manes  in  the  mother’s  line  as  follows,  u Hang  Pramata- 
mahavyas  (great-grandfather  in  the  mother’s  line  with  his 
brothers  and  cousins)  Svadha  and  lastly  Hang  Svadha  to 
the  souls  of  the  great  great-grandfather  in  the  mother’s 
line  and  of  his  brothers  and  cousins.  Hang  Svadha  to  the 
souls  of  all  the  ancestors.  Similarly  Svadha  (obesiance)  to 
the  souls  of  all  the  dead  cognates  and  to  those  of  the  departed 
priests  and  preceptors,  and  to  all  the  demons,  Matris,  and 
to  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven,  with  their  presiding 
deities  (50).  ’ : .V-; 


■ / 


CHAPTER  LXXHL 


1 he  God  said  :~Oh  Skanda,  now  I shall  describe  to 
you  the  mode  of  worshipping  the  Sun-god  together  with 
the  rites  known  as  the  Karanganyasa  (location  of  the  different 
firy  letters  of  the  alphabet  or  of  the  images  of  a particular  set 
of  gods  inside  the  hands  and  such  other  parts  of  the  body,  by 
imagination)*  The  worshipper  should  contemplate'himself  as 
Identical  and  fully  permeated  with  the  essence  or  the  energy 
of  that  divinity,  and  worship  the  preliminary  oblation  accord- 
ingly (i),  which  should  be  imagined  as  coloured  red  with  the 
drop  of  water  sprinkled  over  his  forehead.  After  having  wor- 
shipped the  same  and  other  things  appertaining  to  the  worship 
of  the  sun-god,  and  performed  the  particular  rites  called  the 
rites  of  protection  and  covering,  with  their  respective  mantras, 
the  votary  should  wash  the  thing  with  that  water  and  com- 
mence worshipping  the  Sun-god  facing  the  East.  The 
Karanganyasa  rite — should  be  performed  as  Om  Am  Hrid- 
yaya  etc.  and  the  two  attendants  of  the  god  who  are  named 
Dandi  and  Pingala  should  be  respectively  worshipped  at  the 
right  and  the  left  side  of  the  door  (2 — 3}.  The  god  Gana 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  north-east  quarter  of  the  heaven, 
as  Am  obesiance  to  Gana,  the  preceptor  should  be  worshipped 
in  the  south-east  angle  of  the  sky,  and  the  Peetha  or  the 
magnificently  splendid  cushion  of  the  god  in  the  middle  part 
of  the  stool  (4),  The  components  of  the  solar  rays  such  as 
Bimala,  Sara,  Parama  and  Sukha  should  be  worshipped  in 
the  angular  quarters  of  the  heaven,  starting  with  the  south- 
east etc,  imaged  as  mighty  lions  of  a white  blood  yellow  or 
of  a blue  colour  respectively  (5).  Inside  the  lotus  shaped 
mystic  diagram,  the  essences  or  the  energies  of  the  God 
should  be  worshipped  as  follows.  u Rdng  Dipatayi \ Rum 
Suksmaai)  Rang  Jay  ay  ai,  Rum  Vadrayais  Raing  Bihhuiyai? 


AGNI  PUHANAMi 


Rayim  Himalaya i,  Rang  A moghayai}  Raung  Vidyutayi,  in 
the  different  angular  points  of  the  diagram.  The  seat  or 
the  cushion  should  be  presented  to  the  god  at  the  centre  of 
the  lotus  by  uttering  the  mantra  Rang,  and  the  six  letters, 
(Hoang,  Hring  Sa,  Surylya)  which  compose  the  principal 
mantra  in  the  worship  under  discussion,  should  also  he 
written  thereof  (6—7).  The  sungod  should  be  invoked  with 
the  mantra  which  runs  as  Om,  Ham,  Khang  obesiance  to 
Rhakolkaya,  and  should  be  mentally  located  in  the  handful 
of  water  oblation  touched  with  the  head,  as  a resplendent 
spirit  of  a deep  red  colour  (8).  The  invocation  should  be 
performed  with  the  mantra  which  runs  as.  Hrang,  Hring, 
Sa,  obesiance  to  the  sun-god  (Suryaya)  by  exhibiting  the 
mudra,  and  flowers  and  perfumes  should  be  presented  to  him 
for  his  satisfaction,  and  also  the  mudra  known  as  the  Bimala 
mudra  should  be  exhibited  in  connection  therewith  (9). 
The  mudras  such  as  Padma  mudra.  and  Vilvamudra,  should 
be  exhibited  to  the  god  in  turn,  and  then  the  rite  known 
as  the  Sadanganyasa  should  be  performed  in  the  different 
directions  of  the  heaven,  starting  with  the  south-eastern 
angle  of  the  latter  as  follows — Om  Ang  Hridayaya  namas 
(obesiance  to  the  sun  god)  in  the  heart,  Vu,  Vuba  Sva  obe* 
siance  to  Suresha  (the  lord  of  the  gods)  in  the  tuft  of 
hair  on  the  crown  in  the  south  west.  Hung  kabackaya 
namas  (obesiance  to  the  armour  mantra)  in  the  north  west, 
Hang  Natraya  namas  Hang  (obesiance  to  the  eyes)  in  the 
centre  and  Va  Astraya  namas  obesiance  to  the  weapon 
mantra)  in  the  East  and  so  on  (io-~ -ll),  Then  the  mudras 
(the  folding  of  the  palms  and  fingers  in  a particular  attitude) 
should  be  exhibited  as  follows  viz,  the  Dhanumudra  (fingers 
folded  in  the  shape  of  a cow)  to  the  heart  and  such  like 
organs  spoken  of  before,  Govisana  mudra  to  the  eyes  (12). 
The  iryastnz  (that  part  of  the  Astra  mantra  which  serves 
as  it  were  the  purpose  of  making  it  sharp  and  bright 
•by  a fiction  and  makes  its  dreadful  accordingly)*  Obesi- 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


CHAPTER  LXXIV, 


A 'HE  God  said  Now  f shall  speak  about  - i.lkc- ■ •■■  ■ worship* 
.of:  the  God  Siva  which  is  to  be  performed  as  laid  down 


*P§t^fW  I ; t , , ; : 


ance  should  be  made  to  the  planets  in  the  following: 
way,  viz.,  Sam  obesiance  to  the  Moon,  Bam  obesiance  to  the 
Mercury,  Vrim  obesiance  to  the  Jupiter,  Vam  obesiance  to 
the  Venus,  Mang  obesiance  to  the  Mars,  Cam  obesiance  to 
the  Saturn  and  Rang  and  Kang  obesiance  to  the  Rahu  and 
the  Katu  (nodes)  respectively,  the  ceremony  having  even  per- 
formed in  the  different  petals  of  the  lotus  shaped  diagram 
commencing  from  the  East.  The  Khakolka*  should  be  wor- 
shipped jointly  with  the  above,  by  offering  flowers  and 
perfumes  (13 — >14).  The  Argha  or  water  oblations  should  be 
offered  to  the  sun-god  out  of  the  vessels  containing  water 
for  the  same  and  by  uttering  the  principal  mantra  appertain- 
ing to  that  particular  divinity.  The  worshipper  should  then 
make  obesiance  to  him,  with  his  face  turned  back  from  his 
disk  after  having  performed  the  Bis  ary  an  ceremony 
with  the  mantra  running  as  Ksamasva,  etc.,  (Pardon  me 
O God  in  taking  leave  of  thee).  Having  performed  the  rite 
of  mentally  merging  the  component  principles  of  the  universe 
in  the  fundamental  one,  the  votary  of  the  sun-god,  should 
contemplate  in  his  heart  the  god  as  identical  with  the  god 
Sankara  and  offer  the  light  or  the  effulgence  to  the  latter  as  a 
garland  made  of  the  solar  rays.  A man  receives  every  thing 
lie  has  a mind  to,  by  thus  worshipping  and  contemplating 
the  sun-god  or  by  performing  a Horaa  ceremony  ii>  his  honot 

(1—517)- 


A.GN1  PURANAM 


before.  The  worshipper  should  repeat  m his  mmd  the 
Pranava  mantra  Ora,  and  wash  the  threshold  of  the  temple 
with  water  consecrated  by  the  Ashtra  mantra  or  the  mantra 
of  weapon,  after  having  worshipped  Homa  and  the  other 
warders  of  the  god  (X).  He  should  deem  himself  as  endowed 
with  the  divine  eye-sight,  and  worship  the  goddess  Lakshmi 
and  Sarasvati.  together  with  the  sod  Gana  in  the  Globe  or 


Jamuna  at  the  left  hand  side  thereof,  the  pernicious  spirits 
and  the  demons  having  been  previously  driven  away  by 
throwing  a consecrated  flower  (2— 3).  The  spirits  of  mis- 
chief residing  in  the  bowels  or  the  upper  crust  of  the  earth 
should  be  removed  by  beating  the  two  fingers  of  the  left 
hand  against  the  palm  of  the  right,  and  the  worshiper  should 
then  cross  the  threshold  of  the  temple  leaping  over  the 
same  by  holding  the  upper  cross  bar  of  the  door  frame. 
Having  thus  entered  the  temple  by  first  lifting  his  right  foot 
be  should  project  the  mental  image  of  the  Astra  or  the 
mantra  of  weapon,  into  the  body  of  the  ornamental  globe 
on  the  top  of  the  same,  and  worship  at  its  centre  as  follows 
“ Om  Hang,  obesiance  to  Bramba,  who  presides  over  all  the 
house-steads  (5)*  Then  the  worshipper  should  go  the  hanks 
of  the  river  Ganges  without  conversing  with  any  one  in 
the  way,  and  carrying  a pitcher  and  balls  of  sun  dried  rice, 
after  having  obtained  permission  in  that  behalf  from  the 
god  himself  (6).  Having  bathed  in  the  river  he  should 
wash  the  above  balls  thus  purified  and  repeat  over  the  same 
the  Gyatri  mantra  or  the  mantra  known  as  the  Hridbeej  (j). 
All  articles  found  necessary  in  the  course  of  the 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


to  be  performed  both  in  the  right  and  the  left  side  of  the 
image,  and  in  the  head  with  the  mantras,  and  also  by 
exhibiting  the  mudra  known  *as  the  Sanhar  mudra  (9), 
In  the  case  where  the  worship  would  be  undertaken  for  the 
fulfilment  of  any  definite  object,  the  votary  should  meditate 
upon  his  own  soul,  situate  at  the  lotus  of  the  twelve  petals 
in  the  heart  or  the  nerve  ganglia  called  fcha  Solar  Plexus  in 
man,  by  holding  his  hand  at  his  breast,  folded  in  that  parti- 
cular attitude  known  as  the  tortoise  or  the  Kucchapika;  or 
in  the  alternative  he  should  purify  the  five  material  princi- 
ples of  his  body,  by  contemplating  an  aperture  or  passage 
all  through  the  body  from  the  toes  upwards  open 
at  both  ends  and  by  leading  the  stream  of  his  consci- 
ousness up  through  the  opening  as  laid  down  below 
(10 — u).  The  worshipper  should  contemplate  in  sup- 
pressed respiration  the  energy  of  consciousness  which 
pervades  the  region  of  his  heart,  in  the  firy  mental  image  of 
the  letter  Hnu  which  should  be  located  in  the  inside  of  the 
passage  or  the  apperture  which  runs  through  the  system  be* 
low  the  spinal  chord,  and  opens  at  its  upper  extremity 
into  the  Brahmarandha  or  the  aperture  the  brain  (12). 
The  breath  should  then  be  let  out  according  to  the  rules 
of  the  Rachaka  or  the  letting  out  of  the  breath  wind  in 
practising  the  Pranayama. 

Then  the  contemplator  should  carry  the  firy  Image  of  the 
term  Hnu  with  the  effulgent  image  of  the  term  Fut  appen- 
ded thereto  with  the  string  or  the  column  of  his  con^ciousr 
ness  perse,  rising  upward  from  the  lower  part  of  his  organ- 
ism, and  rending  through  the  nerve  ganglia  respectively 
situate  at  the  heart,  the  palate,  the  intervening  space  be- 
tween the  two  eye  brows,  and  the  Bramharandra  or  the 
cavity  of  the  soul  in  the  brain,  upto  the  middle  point  in  the 
roof  of  the  latter  cavity,  and  should  there  locate  the  image 
of  the  above  letters  which  should  be  deemed  as  self 
conscious,  together  with  the  life  located  in  and  con- 


AGNI  PURANAM 


centered  to  that  single  point,  consciousness  having  been  re- 
flected back  in  the  heart  simultaneously  therewith,  by  means 
of  the  Samputa  or  the  entire  stoppage  of  respiration  by 
pressing  the  two  nostrils.  After  having  psychically  located  the 
image  of  the  term  Htrn  in  the  way  and  the  spot  directed 
above,  the  worshipper  should  meditate  upon  the  absolute  or 
the  unaffected  soul  manifest  in  the  point  above  described,  and 
should  unite  the  stream  of  his  consciousness  with  Civ  a or 
the  infinitely  blissful  one  revealed  in  the  above  point,  by  one 
stroke  of  Kumbhuka  or  Udghata  (by  holding  the  breath 
in  check  at  a single  stretch  for  a time  as  enjoined  in 
that  behalf  in  practicing  the  Kumvuka  Yoga)  and  merge 
the  former  in  the  latter  (13—15).  After  having  merged 
himself  in  Shiva,  by  carrying  up  the  stream  of  his  conscious- 
ness by  means  of  the  Beej  mantras,  the  worshipper  should 
purify  his  inner  self  by  carrying  in  an  inverse  order  or 
downwards  the  luminous  point  located  in  his  brain  up  to 
the  point  at  the  centre  of  the  nerve  ganglion  (Dvidul) — situ« 
ate  at  the  part  intervening  the  two  eye-brows,  by  merging, 
in  imagination  the  earth,  wind,  water,  fire,  and  the  sky,  one, 
into  the  other  immediately  following  it  in  the  order  of  enumer- 
ation, until  the  same  is  realized  in  the  mind  {16 — 17). 

Hear  me  Oh  Bramhan  describe  the  process  by  which  the 
same  is  to  be  brought  about.  The  earth  principle  which  is 
hard  and  of  a yellowish  colour  and  bedecked  with  electric  efful- 
gence, is  to  be  destroyed  by  means  of  the  Atma  Beeja  (Beej a 
mantra  appertaining  to  the  soul)  Honm  {18).  '*  Oh  Bramhan 
the  entire  body  from  foot  to  head  should  be  contemplated 
as  a foursided  figure,  and  therein  the  principle  of  wind 
should  be  meditated  upon  by  practising  the  five  strokes 
of  Kumvaka*  according  to  the  rule  to  be  observed  i§ 


* It  is  a truth  as  old  as  the  world  itself,  that  when  the  mind  sleeps  the 
spirit  wakes.  To  induce  such  a sleep  in  which  the  universe  hides  its 
face,  and  the  inner  springs  of  thought  are  brought  to  a stand  still 
was  the  only  object  aimed  at,  by  the  yoga  philosophy  of  ancient  Indiai 

. ..................  'A. Vi ; 


AGN1  PURANAM 


the  same  (19),  and  which  principle 
on  the  Beejamantra  firing,  is  to  be 


founded  in  the  body 
contemplated  as  in  a 


vwt*j  w ui  cas.  uuuugu  uic  trammels  or  tne  body  was 

to  concentrate  the  whole  soul,  the  entire  energy  of  the  mind  on  a defi- 
nite point,  till  the  both  the  thought  and  its  object  were  gone  and  the 
soul  fonnd  its  rest  in  the  bosom  of  its  universal  progenitor  in  blissful 
communion.  Thus  the  Rishes  found  out  at  a very  early  age,  that  to 
make  mind  absolutely  bereft  of  all  sensations  and  perceptions,  is  the  only 
means  of  creating  that  mental  vacuum  in  whichjand  through  which  only 
the  electric  soul  sparks  shoot  through  and  become  visible.  But  abso- 
lute concentration  is  impossible  until  the  respiration  is  checked,  even  if 
all  connection  is  artificially  cut  off  between  the  senses  and  their  objects 


1 rrfwsr 

ww.  t f?r  iW3fr:  1 1 

?rfw5T  ^rf?r 

irrsrraw:  1 «<l  b 

WW-  t 

15^  srat:  to*  irf^  „ 

mi  tmi'.  1 

mror?*  %f^r: » 


Ami  PURANAM 


{quid  state,  and  possessing  the  brilliancy  of  a lotus  flower 
■{20).  The  worshipful  principle  of  fire  should  be  purified  by 
practising  four  strokes  of  the  Kumvaka,  and  by  uttering 
the  mantra  known  as  the  Batna  mantra  (21).  The  mantra 
Hum  is  to  be  contemplated  as  of  red  colour,  and  impressed 
with  the  sign  of  the  Svastik,  carrying  three  Astras,  and  as 
the  representative  of  the  knowledge  or  the  principle  of  know- 
ing (22). 

The  latter  principle  in  the  body  should  be  purified  by  practi- 
sing there  strokes  of  the  Kumvuka  Yoga,  and  by  contem- 
plating the  mantra  Hrin,  which  should  be  thought  as  full 
of  air,  bedecked  with  six  points,  and  meditated  upon 
as  conferring  peace  and  possessing  a black  colour  (23—24). 
The  earth  principle  is  to  be  purified  by  contemplating  a 
circle  of  heaven,  filled  in  with  ether  and  shining  with  the  lustre 
of  a pure  and  effulgent  crystal  (25).  The  rite  of  final  puri- 
fication should  be  performed  by  contemplating  the  image  of 
of  the  mantra  Hung  fut,  at  one  stroke  of  th z Kumvaka  (26). 
Then  the  Adkar,  Anemia,  Dharma,  Gnyan,  (knowledge)  and 
such  like  circles  or  lotuses  should  be  permeated  with  the 
nectar  shed  down  by  the  principal  mantra  of  the  God  (27),  and 
the  heart  should  be  contemplated  as  a throne  spread  out  to 
him,  after  having  invoked  the  image  therein  which  should  be 
made  permeated  with  the  essence  or  soul  of  Shiva,  placed 
inside  the  solar  plexus  or  the  lotus  at  the  heart  containing 
twelve  petals.  Then  the  ceremony  known  as  the  Sakali- 
karan  should  be  performed  in  connection  with  the  image 
by  uttering  the  word  Vousat  appended  to  the  Sakti  mantra, 
after  having  made  the  same  saturated  with  the  divine 
ambrosia,  shed  by  the  Hindu  or  the  nerve  ganglion  between 
the  two  eyebrows,  in  the  course  of  practising  the  Kumvaka; 
and  which  ceremony  consists  in  locating  the  mantras  such 
as  Hridmantras  etc.,  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body 
as  the  heart,  the  arms  and  the  little  fingers  of  the  hand 
(28—30).  The  worshipper  should  defend  or  protect  his 


266 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


surroundings  with  the  mantra  of  the  weapon  and  the 
divine  essences  beyond  that  with  the  same,  and  exhibit: 
the  mudra  known  as  the  Mahamudra  both  'upwards  and 
downwards  (31).  He  should  worship  the  god  Shiva  in  his 
heart  with  the  flowers  of  sentiment,  by  practising  the  Purak 
form  of  the  kumvaka,  (taking  in  of  the  air),  and  perform 
the  homa  ceremony  in  the  fire  situate  at,  his  umbilical 
region  and  known  as  the  Shivanala,  with  the  clari- 
fied butter  of  ambrosia  dropped  down  in  the  course  of 
practising  the  Kumvuka,  and  meditate  upon  the  god  as 
revealed  in  the  form  of  a point  at  the  centre  of  the  nerve 
ganglion  at  the  forehead  (33).  Similarly  the  vessels  or  the 
' capacities  of  the  utensils  of  gold  etc,  to  be  used  in  the  course 
of  the  worship,  should  be  purified  with  the  water  of  nectar 
obtained  from  the  above  source  and  with  sundried  rice 
and  the  water  consecrated  with  the  weapon  mantra  (Fut) 
(34),  and  worshipped  after  having  invoked  them  by  per- 
forming in  their  honour  the  nyasa  ceremony  known  as 
the  Sadanganyasa.  . They  should  be  covered  over  with  the 
mantra  which  serves  the  purpose  of  an  armour 
mantra)  after  having  protected  them  with  the  Bati  mantra 
which  is  the  mantra  of  protection  (35). 

Subsequent  to  that  the  Argha  or  the  preliminary  offering 
should  be  dressed  up,  composed  of  the  eight  substances, 
which  should  be  sprinkled  over  with  water  by  means  of  the 
Dhanumudra,  and  after  which  the  worshipper  should  sprinkle 
the  same  over  his  head  (36).  The  articles  to  be  used  in 
the  worship  should  be  consecrated  with  mantras,  and  threads 
should  be  girdled  round  them  (37).  The  Mudra  known  as 
the  Amrita  mudra  should  be  exhibited,  and  flower  should 
be  cast  on  the  cushion  of  worship,  while  the  worshipper 
should  deck  his  face  with  the  tilak  mark,  and  put  another 
flower  on  his  own  head  consecrated  by  the  principal  mantra 
of  the  god  (38).  A man  of  gentle  temperament  should' 
remain  silent  at  the  time  of  eating,  bathing,  and  worshipping 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


and  while  engaged  in  practising  Yoga  or  performing  the 
Homa  and  other  sacrifices  or  at  the  time  of  repeating  any 
mantras  for  the  fulfilment  of  any  particular  desire  (39). 
The  mantra  should  be  purified  by  prefixing  to  it  the  {nada- 
’ mantra ) “Om,”  and  should  be  then  used  in  the  worship, 
the  Samanya  Argha,  or  the  general  preliminary  offering 
having  been,  offered  by  uttering  the  Gayatri  mantra  (40). 
After  having  moved  round  the  Brakmapanchaka,  the  wor- 
shipper should  take  a garland  from  the  body  of  the  falic 
emblem,  and  offer  the  same  to  the  Chanda  manifestation 
of  that  divinity  situate  in  the  north  east  quarter  of  the 
heaven  (41).  The  purification  of  the  falic  emblem  consists 
in  the  act  of  washing  the  pedestal  with  the  water  consecrated 
by  the  mantra  of  weapon,  and  also  with  the  Hridmantra,  and 
in  sprinkling  the  water  of  the  Arghapatra  (offering  plate)  over 
the  same  (42).  All  the  other  gods  should  be  worshipped 
as  well  for  the  purification  of  the  mantra  and  the  falic  emblem, 
together  with  all  the  other  articles  to  be  used  in  the  worship, 
and  of  the  innerself  of  the  worshipper  as  follows,  “ Hangobe- 
siance  to  the  God  Ganapati  presiding  over  the  north  western 
quarter  of  the  globe,  in  that  direction,  “Hang  obesiance 
to  the  preceptor”  (the  obesiance  should  be  made  in  the 
north  east  angle  of  the  sky).  The  Adhar  Sakti,  (the  god- 
dess or  the  energy  residing  in  the  cushion  of  the  God) 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  Kurmashila , and  meditated 
upon  as  a goddess  possessing  complexion  like  the  new 
born  shoots  of  corn,  and  the  Asan  of  Shiva  known  as 
the  Ananta  (infinity)  should  be  worshipped  in  the  Brahma- 
shila  together  with  the  attendants  of  the  God  such  as 
Vichitrakesha , and  Krita , and  Trita  who  form  the  cushion 
and  the  shoes  as  it  were  of  that  divinity  (45),  Dharma,  Guyana, 
Vairagya,  and  Aishvaraya,  should  be  worshipped  in  turn, 
as  possesing  complexions  like  camphor,  saffron,  gold  and 
collyrium  respectively  (46). 

■v  . At  the  centre  of  the  lotus  shaped  diagram  and  in  ||r 


268 


Amt  PURANAM. 


petals  thereof,  the  energies  or  the  goddesses  who  reside 
in  the  cushion  or  the  peetha  of  the  God  should  be  worship* 
ped  in  turn,  their  names  being  Vala,  Yasta,  Roudri,  Kali, 
Kalabikarini,  Valabikarini,  Balapramathini,  etc, .and  who  are 
represented  as  carrying  chowries  in  their  right  hands,  the 
fingers  of  their  other  hands  being  folded  up  in  the  attitude  of 
giving  encouragement.  At  the  ends  or  the  extremities  of  the. 
petals  of  the  mystic  diagram  the  goddesses  such  as  Sarva- 
vutadammi  etc,  should  be  worshipped  as  Hung  Sarvavuta* 
damanyai,  Hung  Munomanyai  namas,  Huag  Ksityai  namas 
and  so  on  the  Suddhavidyas , together  with  the  cushion  of  the 
god  which  is  spread  over  and  coeternal  with  all  the  component 
principles  of  the  universe  (47 — 49).  The  God  should  bejocated 
in  the  cushion  as  possessed  of  five  faces  and  ten  arms,  with 
complexion  white  and  pleasing,  and  decked  with  the  crescent 
moon  in  his  forehead,  and  carrying  in  his  five  right  arms, 
a spear,  a stick,  a benediction,  a mace,  and  a Khattanga  res- 
pectively, and  a Damaru  (small  drum),  a Vijapura , a blue 
lotus,  a Sutraka , and  a lotus  flower  in  the  five  left  (50}.  The 
image  of  Shiva  as  possessed  of  the  thirty  two  attributes 
should  be  installed  at  the  centre  by  uttering  the  mantra 
which  runs  as  i(  Hang , Hang ; Hang  obesianee  to  the 
image  of  Shiva,  and  after  having  meditated  upon  his  divine 
self  which  is  self-revealed  to  his  votaries  (51 — 52*),  the 
mantra  should  be  carried  with  the  occult  stream  or 
column  of  consciousness  up  to  the  spot  sacred  to  Siva, 
by  leaving  below  the  nerveganglion  sacred  to  Bramha^  and 
the  worshipper  should  meditate  upon  the  former  god  re* 
vealed  as  a luminous  point  in  the  midst  of  the  nerve  ganglion 
at  the  forehead,  and  effulgent  with  the  shining  splendour  of 
the  full  moon;  and. also  contemplate  him'  in  the  different  parts 
of  his  body  at  the  time  of  practising  the  sadanganyasa  rite, 
and  also  in  the  handful  offering  of  flowers,  after  which  be 
should  deposit  the  same  in  the  image  of  Lakshmi  (ope  ;pf  the 
goddesses  residing  in  the  cushion  of  the  god  Siva)  (53-^54), 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


The  worshipper  should  approach  the  image  and  invoke 
the  presence  of  the  God,  by  uttering  the  mantra  which  runs 
as  Ora,  Hang,  Houng,  obesiance,  to.  Shiva,  and  also  by  ex- 
hibiting the  mudra  known  as  the  Abahani,  and  guard  against 
the  going  away  of  the  God,  as  it  were,  by  putting  the  god- 
esses  Nisthura,  and  Kalakanta  in  his  way,  and  by  uttering 
the  mantra,—// isth  u ray  a i fut,  (obesiance  to  Nisthura ), 
Kalakantayai  fut  (obesiance  to  the  wife  of  Shiva  revealed 
as  the  eternal  time).  After  having  removed  the  spirits 
who  are  harmful  to  the  practices  of  Yoga  or  worship,  and 
made  the  obesiance  and  exhibited  the  Lin ga  mudra,  the 
worshipper  with  the  Hrin  mantra  should  perform  the  rite  of 
Abgunthan,  and  afterwards  that  of  invocation  as  follows  by 
standing  in  the  front  of  the  image.  “ Let  thy  stay  and  ins- 
tallation here  be  agreeable  to  thee,  I sit  beside  thee  Oh, 
God  (55  57).  The  rite  of  abgunthan  signifies  the  presence, 
and  supervision  of  the  God,  and  the  giving  of  devotion  towards 
himself  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  worship  (58).. 
After  having  performed  the  ceremony  of  sakalikaran  or 
the  mentioning  of  the  different  parts  of  the  body  together 
with  the  mantras  sacred  or  peculiar  to  each,  the  ceremony 
known  as  the  Amriti  karan-  should  be  performed  as  fol- 
lowsThe  worshipper  should  permeate  his  heart  with  the 
energy  of  consciousness  sacred  to  Shiva,  by  appending  the 
word  namas  (obesiance)  to  the  mantra  to  be  repeated  on 
the  occasion.  Similarly  he  should  contemplate  the  tuft  of? 
hair  on  his  crown  as  formed  of  the  eightfold  glories 
{Atcvarya)  of  the  God  such  as  lordliness  etc.,  the  word 
svadha  being  affixed  to  the  mantras  for  the  occasions.  The 
worshipper  should  contemplate  the  invincible  energy  of  the 
God  as  forming  his  armour,  the  unbearable  prowess  of  the  God 
which  carries  before  it  all  impediments  and  obstructions,  as  his 
weapon,  and  the  words  svaha  and  vonsat  should  be  respec- 
tively appended  to  the  mantras  which  would  be  repeated  on  the 
two  latter  occasions  (59—61).  The  padya  (water  for  washing 


isiim 


270 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


the  feetof  a God)  should  be  offered  by  first  uttering  the  mantra 
known  as  the  Hridmantra.  The  padya  should  be  presented 
on  the  feet  of  the  image,  and  the  Achamanyam  (water  for 
rinsing  the  month)  in  its  face  ( 62 )•  The  Arghya  or  the 
preliminary  offering  composed  of  flowers  and  bunches  of 
green  grass  and  grains  of  the  sundried  rice,  should  be 
placed  on  the  head  of  the  image  ; and  thus  havingfpurified  the 
image  of  the  lord  by  means  of  the  ten  sorts  of  purifications 
laid  down  in  the  books  of  religious  ceremonies,  the  wor- 
shipper should  worship  the  same  with  the  five  essential 
articles  of  worship  such  as  the  flowers,  perfumes,  etc., 
Subsequent  to  that  he  should  rub  the  image  with  salt  and 
mustard  seeds,  and  wash  the  same  in  turn  with  milk,  curd, 
clarified  butter  and  honey,  and  sweet  scented  flowers.  The 
defects  in  the  above  substances  should  be  atoned  for  by 
reading  over  them  the  mantras,  such  as  the  Isha  mantra  etc.^ 
and  the  image  should  be  bathed  with  waters  dyed  white  with 
barley  paste  dissolved  in  water,  and  afterwards  should  be 
bathed  with  a copious  quantity  of  cold  water,  perfumed  water 
having  been  added  to  it  to  the  extent  which  the  means  of  the 
worshipper  would  admit  of.  After  that  the  image  should  be 
rubbed  dry  with  a piece  of  clean  linen,  and  the  Arga  or  the 
preliminary  offering  should  be  offered,  care  being  taken  as  not 
to  move  the  hand  over  its  head,  which  should  not  be  under 
any  circumstance  be  left  devoid  of  flowers  (63 — 68).  The 
image  should  be  plastered  over  with  the  paste  of  white 
sandal  by  repeating  the  mantra  sacred  to  Shiva,  and  wor- 
shipped with  flowers  by  uttering  the  same  niantra.  The 
vessel  for  containing  the  perfumed  incense  stick  should 
be  consecrated  with  the  Astra  and  the  Shiva  mantra, 
and  the  bell  with  the  Astra  mantra  only.  The  wor- 
shipper should  now  burn  guggul  before  the  image,  by 
ringing  with  his  other  hand  the  bell  previously  conse- 
crated, and  the  Achamanyakam  (water  for  rinsing  the 
mouth)  should  be  subsequently  offered  again  by  repeating 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


the  Hridmantra  followed  by  the  word  svadha  (69 — 70). 
After  having  finished  the  rite  of  waiving  light  before  the 
image,  the  achamanyakam  should  be  again  offered,  and 
the  worshipper  on  having  made  obesiance  to  the  God  and 
taken  his  permission,  should  offer  him  the  eatables  and 
other  articles  of  enjoyment  (71). 

The  Hri<J  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  south  east,  Chandra 
in  the  north  east,  and  the  golden-coloured  Shiva  together 
with  Shikha  and  Rakta  in  the  south  west,  and  Krisna  and 
Vaman  in  the  north  western  corners  of  the  lotus  shaped 
diagram.  Similarly  the  Gods,  Chaturvaktra , and  Chaturvahu 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  petals  of  the  diagram  together 
with  the  divine  weapon  in  the  east  which  is  to  be  meditated 
upon  as  a thunder,  looking  fierce  with  its  rugged  teeth 
(72 — 73).  The  nyasa  is  to  be  performed  as  follows  Houng 
obesiance  to  Shiva  in  the  naval,  Om,  Hang,  Han,  Heen, 
Boon  in  the  head,  Hring  in  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown,  Haiu 
in  the  armour,  Has  to  the  weapon  and  to  the  other  atten- 
dants of  the  God  (74).  The  padya  (water  for  washing 
the  feet),  together  with  the  water  for  rinsing  the  mouth 
and  the  preliminary  offering,  perfumes,  flowers,  incense 
sticks,  lamps,  and  dishes  of  rice  etc,  should  be  offered  to 
the  God.  Bunches  of  green  grass  and  kusha  grass  together 
with  the  grains  of  sundried  rice  should  be  placed  on  the 
head  of  the  image,,  and  betel  leaves,  mirror,  and  a piece  of 
cloth  for  wiping  the  lips  should  be  presented  to  its  inmate 
divinity  (75 — 76).  Then  the  principal  mantra  of  the  God 
should  be  told  eight  hundred  times,  and  the  sword  of  the 
God  sheathed  in  its  scabbard  should  be  contemplated  in,  and 
represented  by  the  bunches  of  the  white  kusha  flowers 
previously  subjected  to  the  influence  of  the  Hridmantra  (77). 
Subsequent  to  the  telling  of  the  above  mantra,  the  wor- 
shipper should  read  aloud  the  following  couplet”  Dost 
thou  accept*Oh  Lord  who  art  the  myeterious  of  all  mysteri* 
ous  beings,  the  repitition  of  the  sacred  mantras  done  by  me, 


AGNI  PUHAMAM, 


CHAPTER  LXXV, 


X HE  God  said:— -The  worshipper  should  enter  another 
room  unseen  with  the  vessel  of  offering  in  his  hand,  and 
look  to  the  arrangements  of  the  articles  essential  to  the 
performance  of  a sacrifice,  endowed  as  it  were,  with  the  divine 
eyesight.  He  should  see  the  receptacle  for  the  sacrificial  fire 
with  his  face  turned  towards  the  north.  The  ceremony  of 
sprinkling  and  stirring  water  with  the  epds  of grass, 


for  custody.  May  I attain  salvation,  through  thy  kindness, 
with  the  merit  thereof,  for  thou  shall  abide  Oh  Lord  ! (78). 
The  worshipper,  if  a man  of  the  world,  should  take  into  the 
palm  of  his  right  hand,  the  washings  of  the  Argba  or  the 
preliminary  offering  consecrated  by  the  mulct  or  the  princi- 
pal mantra  of  the  God,  and  with  his  left  hand  offer  the 
same  to  the  God  Camvit , after  reading  the  above  verse. 
Subsequent  to  that  he  should  read  the  following  verses 
and  make  over  the  merit  of  the  Yafia  (telling  of  any  parti- 
cular mantra)  to  the  God.  I have  devoted  my  whole  self 
to  you  0 Shankar!  whatever  Ido, — right  or  wrong,  be 
pleased  to  cast  them  away.  Hnnksa!  (79 — 81).  Shiva  is 
the  giver,  Shiva  is  the  protector,  and  Shiva  is  the  universe 
itself,  all  through  which  he  reigns  supreme  and  victorious. 
I am  identical  with  Shiva.  After  having  offered  the  Argha, 
the  worshipper  should  tell  the  mantras  ten  thousand  times, 
and  sing  psalms  in  honour  of  the  God  subsequent  to  that 
(82).  After  having  performed  the  ceremony  of  circutn- 
bulation,  he  should  make  obesiance  to  the  eight  manifesta- 
tions of  the  God,  with  the  eight  parts  of  his  body,  and 
meditate  upon  his  divinity  either  in  a picture  or  in 
fire  (83). 


mm  furamam, 


273 


should  be  done  by  repeating  the  Astra  mantra , and  that  of 
Consecration  should  be  performed  by  sprinkling  over  water 
with  the  mantra  which  by  a religious  or  ceremonial  fiction, 
serves  the  purpose  of  an  armour  ( Kavacha  mantra  p.  2,\  The 
ceremonies  of  digging  out  a piece  of  clay,  together  with  those 
of  filling  in  and  levelling  the  hole,  should  be  completed  with 
the  repetition  of  the  Varma  or  the  Kavacha  mantra , and  those 
©f  bathing  and  division  into  parts,  with  the  astra  and  the 
sara  mantra  respectively.  Similarly  the  rites  of  sanmarjan , 
samalapan , Kalarup  and  Trisutra  Paridhana  should  be 
performed  by  reading  the  Varma  mantra  (3—4).  Three  lines 
are  to  he  laid  down  in  the  north,  and  one  below  them  should 
be  drawn  so  as  to  face  the  east,  and  any  defect  or  shortcoming 
lying  inherent  in  them,  should  be  made  good  by  touching 
them  with  the  stems  of  Kushagrass  consecrated  by  the  Astra 
mantra  of  the  god  Shiva  (5).  The  mystic  quadrilateral  diagram 
should  be  laid  down  by  uttering  the  Bajrikaran  and  the  Hrid - 
mantra , the  aksapatra  with  the  ma7itra  of  armour,  and  the 
sand  cushion  or  the  quadrilateral  seat  for  the  sacrificial  fire 
shouldbe  spread  out  with  the  repitition  of  the  Hridmantra  (6). 
The  goddess  of  speech  together  with  the  god  Isha  should  be 
worshipped  therein  with  the  Hridmantra.  The  consecrated 
fire  should  be  brought  from  a holy  place,  placed  in  a pure 
receptacle  by  leaving  aside  its  parts  over  which  the  demons 
preside.  The  different  and  component  parts  of  the  sacrificial 
fire  which  are  called  Oudarjya , Aindaba  and  Vita,  should  be 
made  one,  and  established  with  the  mantra  known  as  the 
Vanhi  Bija  (the  principal  and  monosyllablic  mantra  sacred  to 
the  god  of  fire)  and  by  also  reading  the  mantra  which  runs  as 
Om  Hrim  obesiance  to  thegod  of  fire.  The  fire  god  should  be 
invoked  with  the  Sankita  mantra , and  the  ceremony  of 
Amritikaran  (making  immortal)  shouldbe  perfarmed  unto  him 
by  exhibiting  the  mudra  known  as  the  Dhanumudra  (folding 
of  the  fingers  in  the  shape  of  a cow).  The  fire  should  be,: 
lorried,  by  uttering  the  Hati  mantra , the  ceremoney 


AGN!  PURANAMi 


Abgunthan  (lit  covering  over)  having  been  performed  by 
repeating  the  mantra  of  the  armour  (Kavacha);  and  the 
worshipper  should  thrice  circumbulate  round  the  hallowed 
receptacle  of  fire,  subsequent  to  his  worshipping  the  presiding 
deity  of  that  element  The  fire  should  be  looked 

upon  as  the  seminal  fluid  of  the  god  of  speech  ( r Bagiev  ar % 
cast  by  him  into  the  wnmb  of  his  goddess  (. Bagicmri ).  Then 
the  worshipper  should  sit  down  with  his  knee  joints  rested 
on  the  ground,  and  throw  down  the  fire  in  his  front,  by 
uttering  the  Hridmantra.  Then  the  spontaneous  gathering* 
as  it  were  of  the  above  seeds  of  fire,  their  development, 
purification,  etc.  should  be  performed  with  the  repetition  of 
the  above  mantra  at  the  respective  instances  mentioned 
before,  and  the  Garvagni  or  the  fire  in  the  womb,  which 
should  be  protected  by  means  of  the  Cara  mantra , should 
be  propitiated  with  a worship  (11—13).  The  garvaja 
or  the  embryo  fire  should  be  contemplated  as  placed 
like  a bracelet  round  the  wrist  of  the  goddess^  and 
the  fire  is  to  be  worshipped  with  the  mantra  sacred  to  the 
sadyajata  manifestation  of  Cankar , by  way  of  performing  the 
garvadhan  ceremony  (the  ceremony  undertaken  with  a 
view  to  ensure  a safe  and  perfect  development  of  the 
fetus  of  fire)  (14).  Subsequent  to  that,  three  oblations 
should  be  offered  into  the  fire,  by  uttering  the  Hrid» 
mantras,  and  the  fire  is  to  be  worshipped  at  the  left  by 
way  of  performing  the  Punsaban  ceremony,  (sacrifice  sup- 
posed to  have  a determining  effect  upon  the  sex  of  the 
fetus,  and  which  is  made  inorder  to  bring  out  the  embryo  as  a 
male-child  into  the  world)  generally  performed  in  the  third 
month  of  conception  (15).  Similarly  three  such  oblations 
containing  drops  of  water  should  be  offered  with  the  headl 
into  the  fire,  and  which  would  stand  as  it  were*  for  the 
performance  of  simantonyan  of  fire,  which  in  the  case  of  a 
human  fetus,  is  performed  in  the  sixth  month  of  gestation 
fi6).  Three  oblations  should  be  offered  into  the  fire,  by  way 


mm  PURANAM* 


275 


©f  determining  the  formation  of  its  face  and  body  and  as 
before,  the  Jatakarma  (ceremonies  of  post  natal  purification 
etc,  which  are  generally  done  in  the  tenth  month  in 
the  case  of  a human  child.)  should  be  performed  by  kindling 
up-  the  sacrificial  fire,  and  by  throwing  the  stems  of  Kusha 
grass  into  the  same,  for  removing  as  it  were,  the  impurities 
of  womb  from  the  body  of  the  fire  (18).  The  godess  (the 
mother  of  the  newborn  sacrificial  fire)  should  be  meditated 
upon  by  mentally  telling  the  Hridmantra,  after  having 
performed  unto  her  as  a human  • mother,  the  purifying 
ceremony  of  binding  a piece  of  gold  round  her  wrist,  and 
should  be  sprinkled  over  with  water  consecrated  by  the 
astro  mantra , for  purifying  the  impurities  of  child-birth  (19), 
The  pitchers  outside  the  receptacle  for  the  sacrificial  fire, 
should  be  gently  touched  with  the  ends  of  the  Kusha' grass  by 
uttering  the  Astra  mantra , and  sprinkled  over  with'  drops 
©f  water  by  reading  aloud  the  Kavacha  mantra,  while  the 
ends  of  the  Kusha  grass  composing  the  sacrificial  girdle 
and  situate  at  the  north  and  the  East,  should  be  washed  with 
water,  accompanied  by  a trepitition  of  the  above  said  astro- 
mantra.  The  Paridki  or  the  periphery  of  a circle  laid 
round  the  sacrificial  fire,  should  be  determined  with  the 
stems  of  the  Kusha  grass,  previously  consecrated  with  the 
astro  and  the  Hrid  mantra,  and  the  cushions  inscribed  within 
it,  should  be  spread  out  by  reading  the  astra  mantra  (m). 
Then  for  the  removal  of  garland,  five  sticks  of  the  sacrificial 
tree,  should  be  thrown  into  the  fire,  dipped  in  clarified 
butter,  by  uttering;  the  principal  or  the  Bzeja  mantra  of  the 
god,  and  the  gods  Brahma^  Cankar^  Vishnu,  and  Ananta 
are  to  be  propitiated  with  the  offerings  of  the  Hama, 
performed  by  reading  aloud  the  mantra  known  as  the 
Hrid-  mantra  (22).  The  god  Paryatiya  together  with  the 
other  gods  located  in  the  periphery  of  the  above  circle 
should  be  worshipped  in  turn  with  pinches  of  sun  dried 
;,«pe©  and  bunches  of  green  grass,  and  the  godsf  such  as 


AGNI  FURANAM, 


Indra>  Isha-  Paryanya  etc.,  having  places  in  the  inscribed 
cushion,  should  be  worshipped  in  the  different  quarters  o£ 
the  heaven  over  which  they  hold  their  respective  sway,  by 
uttering  the  Hridmanlra.  The  command  or  the  mandate’  o-f 
of  the  supreme  god  Siva  to  the  effect.  “ Come  Ob  gods, 
and  preserve  this  child  fire,  by  removing  all  harm  that  might 
befal  him,1'  should  be  read  out  to  them  (23—24,%  Subsequent 
to  that,  the  worshipper  should  take  in  his  hand  the  sacrificial! 
spoon  and  the  laddie,  and  touch  the  lighted  sacrificial  fire 
with  the  root,  middle  and  the  extremities  of  the  Kusha  grass 
with  their  faces  turned  downward.  The  three  tattvas  or  the 
three  principles  of  soul,  knowledge  and  Siva,  should  be 
located  in  the  parts  of  the  fire,  respectively  touched  with  the 
above  portions  of  the  Kusha  grass,  the  mantras  Han,  Hun, 
Hum,  San,  Ra  and  Ba  having  been  located  therein  conjointly 
with  the  above  principles.  The  goddess  Sakti  should  be 
located  in  the  sacrificial  spoon,  and  Camvu  in  the  sacrificial  lad- 
die, by  uttering  the  Hridmantra;  and  the  god  and  the  goddess 
should  now  be  contemplated  as  seated  on  the  bunches  of  the 
Kusha  grass  about  to  be  used  in  the  Homa  ceremnny,  which 
should  be  stowed  on  the  right  side  of  the  worshipper, 
girdled  with  the  three  strings  of  thread,  and  worshipped  with 
flowers  etc.  (25  28).  The  worshipper  should  now  meditate 
upon  the  god’s  own  image  as  sentient  and  all  aglow  with 
the  divine  essence  or  effulgence,  and  carry  the  clarified 
cow  butter  uncontaminated  by  the  sight  of  any  other 
worshipper,  over  the  south  east  corner  of  the  fire-recep- 
tacle, and  move  the  same  round  and  round  by  uttering 
the  Hridmantra.  He  should  again  move  round  the  vessel 
of  the  sacrificial  butter  over  the  fire  in  the  north  east  corner 
ef  the  receptacle,  after  having  meditated  upon  the  image 
of  the  god  Vishnu  (29-30).  Then  the  Homa  ceremony 
should  be  performed  first  in  honour  of  the  god  Vishnu,  with 
the  clarified  butter  held  with  the  ends  of  a Kusha  grass  and 
by  repeating,  the  mantra  above  directed  to  be  located  in 


AGNJ  PURANAM, 


bead  in  practising  the  nyasya3  the  word  svaha  having  been 
affixed  to  the  same.  Similarly  a homa  oblation  should  be 
offered  with  the  same  mantra  to  the  god  Shiva,  revealed  in 
the  form  of  a luminous  point  at  the  centre  of  the  nervegan* 
lion  at  the  forehead  (30 — 31).  The  worshipper  should  medi- 
tate upon  his  own  soul  by  locating  the  same  at  the  region  of 
his  umbilicus,  and  sprinkle  water  over  that  with  the  two  stems 
of  Kusha  grass,  each  to  the  length  of  a span,  and  held  with 
his  ring  and  the  small  finger  respectively  (32).  Similarly 
water  should  be  sprinkled  over  the  fire  in  front  of  the 
worshipper  with  the  stems  of  the  above  two  Kusha  grass* 
accompanied  by  the  astra  mantra.  The  fire  in  front  of  the 
pf  the  worshipper  should  be  again  sprinkled  over  with  water 
consecrated  by  the  Hridmantra.  The  burnt  Kusha  grass- 
should  then  be  taken  out,  and  purified  with  the  astra 
mantra  and  by  means  of  the  other  lighted  Kusha  grass, 
which  should  be  put  out,  and  the  former  one  lighted 
and  moved  round  the  fire.  The  Kusha  grass  previ- 
ously burnt,  asit  were,  with  the  astra  mantra,  should  be 
thrown  into  the  fire.  After  having  thrown  into  the 
sacrificial  clarified  butter,  the  Kusha  grass  bound  up  in  a 
knot,  and  contemplated  the  two  fortnights  and  Ida  therein* 
the  homa  ceremonies  should  be  performed  in  succession 
by  taking  three  laddlefuls  of  the  same  substance.  A 
portion  of  the  latter  should  be  thrown  into  the  fire  by  uttering 
the  Sva  mantra,  the  other  part  into  the  clarified  butter 
held  In  the  vessel  and  the  residue  into  the  fire  successively 
(33—36)4  Om  Ham  Agnaya  Svaha  (oblation,  to  the  god 
Agni  with  obesiance).  Om  Han  somaya  svaha  (oblation 
to  the  god  Soma  with  obesiance).  Om  Han  Agni  somavyam. 
svaha  (obesiance  to  the  gods  Agni  and  Soma  with  obesiance). 
The  above  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  for  the  pur- 
pose of  opening  as  it  were  the  three  eyes  and  the  mouth  of 
the  fire  god  (39).  The  fourth  oblation  should  be  offered  with  a 
laddieful  of  clarified  butter  as  follows.  “ Om  Ha  n Agnaya 


2jB 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


Svestikreia  Svaha v (obesiance  to- the  god  Agni  who-  is  the 
creator  of  sacrifice).  The  nyasa  in  honour  of  the  fire  god 
should  be  performed  in  the  six  different  parts  of  the  body, 
and  who  is  to  be  invoked  by  exhibiting  the  cowshaped  mudrU 
(38).  The  rite  of  Abaganthan  (a  religious  fiction  of  covering  a 
sacrificial  article  over  with  the  energy  of  a mantra,  spoken  of 
before)  should  be  done  over  the  clarified  butter, *by  uttering 
the  mantra,  while  the  same  was  to  be  protected  with  the 
Sara  mantra . A drop  of  clarified  butter  should  be  cast 
into  the  fire  with  the  Hridmantra , which  should  be  purified 
by  sprinkling  drops  of  water  over  the  same,  and  the  ceremony 
of  ascertaining  and  locating  the  different  mouths  of  fire 
together  with  that  of  making  them  one  or  holding  them 
together  is  to  be  performed  as  follows  Om  Am  Sadyajataya 
svaha  (oblation  to  the  god  Sadyajata  with  obesiance).  Om 
Am  oblation  to  Bamadeva  with  obesiance,  Om  Am  Aghoraya 
Svaha  (oblation  to  the  god  Aghora  with  obesiance).  Ora 
Am  Tatpurusaya  svaha  (oblation  to  the  god  Tatpurusa  with 
obesiance).  Om  Ham  Ishanaya  svaha  (oblation  to  the  god 
Ishana  with  obesiance)  (40).  Om  Ham,  oblation  with 
obesiance  to  the  gods  Sadyajata  and  Bamadeva,  Om  Ham 
oblation  with  obesiance  to  the  gods  Bamadeva  and  Aghora 
Om  Ham  oblation  with  obesiance  to  the  gods  Aghora  and 
Tatpurusa  and  Ishan « Thus  the  rite  of  making  one  the 
different  mouths  of  the  sacrificial  fire  should  be  performed 
with  the  mantras  stated  above,  and  also  by  offering  laddfe 
fuls  of  clarified  butter  running  from  the  fire  into  the 
angular  points  of  heaven,  from  the  North  west  by  the  south 
west  to  the  north  Bast.,  Om  Ham  oblation  with  obesiance  to 
Sadyajata*  Bamadeva,  Aghora,  Tatpurusa  and  leanat  With 
these  eight  mantras  the  inner  nature  and  shape  of  the  eight 
mouths  of  the  fire  are  to  be  determined  (42).  The  ire  shout# 
be  worshiped  in  the  north  east  quarter,,  and  three  oblations 
should  be  offered  unto  the  same.,  by  uttering  the  Astra 
mantra;  and  tire  worshipper  with  his  whole  soul  should 


AGN1  PURANAM 


contemplate  the  sacrificial  fire  as  converted  into  or  per- 
meated with  the  fire  of  the  divine  essence  of  Siva  (43). 
Having  worshipped  both  the  father  and  the  mother 
(the  god  and  the  goddess)  with  the  Hridmantra,  the  final 
oblation  should  be  offered  unto  them  with  the  principal 
mantra  coupled  with  the  term  Vousat  in  the  end  (44)* 
Subsequent  *0  that  the  worshipper  should  meditate  upon 
the  resplendent  image  of  the  god  Shiva  attended  upon  by 
his  attendants  and  soldiers,  after  having  invoked  him  in 
the  lotus  of  his  heart;  and  perform  the  tarpana  (offering 
of  the  watery  oblations)  ceremony  in  his  honour  after 
having  previously  taken  his  permission  in  that  behalf  (45). 
Then  having  established  a communion  between  the  god  of 
the  sacrificial  fire,  the  god  Shiva  and  his  own  soul 
situate  within  his  veins  and  arteries,  the  worshipper  should 
offer  the  Hama  oblations  to  the  latter  god,  numbering  a 
tenth  part  of  the  number,  of  mantras  to  be  repeated  on  the 
occasion  (46).  The  Homa  should  be  made  with  clarified 
butter,  thickened  milk,  honey,  and  fried  barley  mixed  with 
cord,  and  a handful  of  the  sacrificial  porridge  (, Payasa ) (47)* 
Moreover  it  would  be  proper  for  the  worshipper  to  perforpi 
the  Homa  ceremony  by  throwing  into  the  fire,  eatables  of 
all  sorts  and  denominations,  as  well  as  with  a handful  of 
fried  paddy,  three  pieces  of  the  edible  roots,  and  with  an 
equal  number  of  fruits  (48),  Five  times  the  BLoma  oblations 
should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  composed  of  the  five  half-mouth- 
fuls of  boiled  rice,  bits  of  sugar  cane  each  to  the  length  of  a 
span,  a&d  the  stems  of  sacrificial  creepers  measuring  two 
fingers  in  length  (49).  Similarly,  oblations  of  flowers  and 
leaves  having  their  natural  measures,  should  be  offered  into 
the  .sacrificial  fire,  together  with  the  sticks  of  sacrificial  trees 
each  measuring  ten  fingers  in  length,  together  with  similar 
oblations  of  camphor,  sandal,  saffron,  musk,  and  an  ointment 
consising  of  camphor,  agallochum  and  kakola,  mixed  in  equal 
proportions  (50).  Then  the  worshipper  should  perform  the 


AGNS  PURANAM, 


Homa  ceremony  again  with  the  puls  and  the  scented  gum® 
tesin  know  as  the  Gug^cilct^  which  should  resemble  the  stone 
of  a Jujube  in  size,  together  with  the  eight  parts  of  bulbous 
roots  as  laid  down  in  the  books  of  sacrificial  rites  (51).  The 
Homa  ceremony  should  be  thus  completed  by  uttering  the 
Brahmabeejct  mantra  (Ora),  with  a spoonful  of  clarified  butter 
the  other  sacrificial  spoon  having  been  held  with  its  cavity 
turned  downwards  (52).  The  worshipper  should  place  a 
flower  at  the  head  of  the  spoon  and  hold  the  same  with  his 
left  hand.  He  should  stand  up  half  erect  from  his  seat  and 
fix  his  eyes  upon  the  end  of  the  laddie,  after  having  held 
the  handle  of  the  latter,  closely  pressed  against  his  naval. 
Subsequent  to  that  he  should  rouse  up  the  stream  of  his 
pure  consciousness  through  the  occult  nerve  aperature 
lying  below  the  spinal  chord,  and  known  as  the  Susanina 
and  carry  the  same  up  to  the  root  of  his  left  breast,  and 
tell  the  principal  mantra  in  a low  tone  with  the  word  Vousat 
appended  thereto,  and  offer  the  offering  Into  the  sacrificial 
fire  composed  of  barley,  etc.,  (53—56).  Sandal  paste  to- 
gether with  betel  leaves  and  water  for  rinsing  the  mouth, 
should  be  then  offered  to  the  god.  The  worshipper  should 
then  meditate  upon  his  glory  and  make  obesiance  to  him, 
which  should  be  done  after  having  worshipped  and  covered 
over  the  sacrificial  fire  as  it  were  with  the  weapon  {mantra 
coupled  with  the  word  Fut,  and  by  exhibiting  the  sankar 
tnudra , and  by  uttering  the  mantra  which  runs  as  Pardon 
me,  O god,  in  taking  leave  of  you,  etc.,  (57 — 58).  Then  the 
gods  who  reside  in  the  periphery  of  the  mystic  circular 
diagram,  should  be  meditated  upon,  and  located  in  the 
nerve  plexus  (solar  plexus)  at  the  heart  which  forms  the 
Inmost  being  as  it  were  of  a man,  with  the  greatest  devo- 
tion the  worshipper  having  repeated  the  Hrid  mantra  at  the 
time  by  taking  in  his  breath  (59).  Morsels  of  all  the  edibles 
dressed  up  for  the  worship  should  be  taken  and  stowed  in 
two  circles,  and  near  the  receptacle  of  the  sacrificial  offering 


A'GNI  PUR  A NAM, 


both  internal  and  externa!  should  be  made  to  the  above  gods, 
in  the  angular  quarters  of  the  heaven  from  the  south-east 
as  follows,  0m,  Ham,  offering  with  obesiance  to  the  Rudras 
in  the  east,  0m,  Ham,  offering  with  obesiance  to  the 
Matris  in  the  south,  Ham  oblation  with  obesiance  to  the 
Gan&s  in  the  west,  Ham  oblation  with  obesiance  to  the 
Yakhas  in  the  north,  Ham,  offering  with  obesiance  to  the 
planets  in  the  north-east,  Ham  offering  with  obesiance  to 
the  Asuras  in  the  south-east,  Ham  offering  with  obesiance 
to  the  Rakshasas,  Ham,  offering  with  obesiance  to  the 
Nagas,  in  the  north-west,  Ham,  oblation  with  obesiance  to 
the  stars  at  the  centre,  Ham,  oblation  with  obesiance  to  the 
different  constellations  of  stars  in  the  south-east  and  Ham 
offering  with  obesiance  to  the  Vicvas  in  the  south-western 
•quarter  of  the  globe,  the  term  Ham,  being  the  mantra* 
which  should  be  uttered  before  offering  the  oblations  in 
each  of  the  above  instances  (60 — 63).  An  offering  should 
be  made  to  the  god  Kshetra  in  the  inner  circle  or  the 
m and  a I in  the  west,  while  in  the  exterior  or  the  second 
circle  spoken  of  above,  offerings  should  be  made  to  the  gods 
Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Nairita  Varuna,  Wind,  Kuvera  arid 
Ishana  as  follows,  oblation  and  obesiance  to  Ishana  in  the 
east,  oblation  and  obesiance  to  Brahma  in  the  north-east 
and  oblation  and  obesiance  to  Vishnu  in  the  south-west,  etc. 
Then  the  offerings  should  be  made  to  the  crows,  out  of  the 
morsels  of  eatables  placed  on  the  periphery  of  the  cutter 
circle  (64—66),  ; ; r ^ '-y 


CHAPTER  LXXVL 


The  God  said  Then  the  worshipper  should  approach 
and  address  the  image  of  the  god  Shiva-  as  follows~KindIy 


tit ! j».  A llMHHBf  § 111 1 1 * 


f 


i L ; 

m 

-- 


1 


AGNf  P-UR  A MAM. 


accept  0 lord,  the  merits  of  the  worship  and  the  Ham® 
ceremony  done  and  performed  by  me.  In  a calm  and  Iran* 
quil  state  of  mind,  he  should  offer  the  merit  of  his  above- 
said  pious  acts  to  the  god,  with  the  water  of  the  Argha 
offering  and  by  uttering  the  Uridheej  mantra  and  by  exhibit- 
ing to  him  the  mudra  known  as  the  Udvaba  rmidra  (I — 2), 
Subsequent  to  that  the  god  should  be  again  worshipped  as 
before,  and  hymns  should  be  sung  in  his  praise,  and  the 
worshipper  should  offer  the  final  offering  with  his  face  turned 
off  from  the  image,  by  repeating  the  mantra  which  runs  as 
“Pardon  me,  O lord  in  taking  leave  of  you  (3).  The  falic 
emblem  should  be  bid  adieu  to  by  exhibiting  the  Naraca 
mudra  and  by  uttering  the  weapon  mantra  coupled  with  the 
word  Fut,  after  which  the  falic  emblem  should  be  considered 
as  merged  in  the  mantra,  known  as  the  mantra  of  the  image 
(Murti)  (4).  After  having  worshipped  the  god  in  the  sacri- 
ficial sand-cushion  as  directed  above  and  having  merged  in 
himself  the  hosts  of  mantras  used  in  the  course  of  the  worship, 
the  worshipper  should  propitiate  the  god  Chanda  the  atten- 
dant of  Shiva,  according  to  the  rules  laid  down  below.  The 
god  should  be  invoked  as  Om,  obesiance  to  Chanda  Ishan, 
Ora,  obesiance  to  Chanda  Murti  at  the  centre,  Ora,  Fut 
Svaha  (obesiance)  to  Dhu.li  Chandesbvaraya  (5 — 6).  Then 
the  rite  of  Sadanganyasa  (explained  before)  should  be  per- 
formed In  the  present  case  as  follows — Gm,  Bnu  Fut, 
obesiance  to  Chanda  situated  at  my  heart,  Om,  obesiance 
to  Chanda  situated  at  the  crown  of  ray  head,  Ora,  Hnu,  Fuf, 
obesiance  to  Chanda  situated  at  the  tuft  of  hair  on  my 
crown,  Hnu,  Fut,  obesiance  to  Chanda,  who  protects  me, 
as  my  armour,  Ora,  Hnu  Fut,  obesiance  to  Chanda,  who  is 
ray  weapon*  Then  he  should  meditate  upon  the  image  of 
the  god  Chanda,  as  possessing  four  hands  and  a black  com- 
plexion and  as  carrying  in  them  a mace,  a tanka,  a rosery, 
and  an  anchorite's  pitcher  respectively,  (7 — 8). 

In  the  alternative  the  god  Bramha  should  be  worshipped  ' 


mm  PUHAMAM.  %o% 

5b  the  semilunarshaped  tanka  weapon  of  Chanda , and  the 
worshipper  should  tell  in  his  mind  the  mantra  sacred  to  him, 
as  much  as  he  could,  not  exceeding  a tenth  part  of  the  number 
of  mantras  to  be  repeated  in  the  principal  worship  of  the  god, 
of  which  the  present  worship  would  form  a part  (9).  Gold  and 
gem  ornaments  together  with  clothes,  cows  and  proprietory 
rights  in  iand<should  be  made  over  to  the  image,  after  which 
the  garland  of  flowers  closing  the  list  of  offerings  and 
worship  should  be  presented  to  him  as  follows  (iO).—-“  Com- 
manded by  Civa  I offer  to  thee  O God,  all  these  articles  of 
food  and  drink  together  with  betel  leaves,  garlands,  and 
scented  pastes.  Oh  Chanda  may  all  these  pious  acts 
be  agreeable  to  thee,  which  have  been  undertaken 
by  me  agreeably  to  your  wishes ! Dost  thou  pardon 
me  Oh  God  for  any  short  coming  on  my  part  in  performing 
the  above  deeds,  whether  due  to  folly  or  ignorance. 
Make  them  whole  and  complete  Oh  God  at  all  times’* 
{11—12).  Having  thus  addressed  the  god,  the  worshipper 
should  offer  the  Argka  and  meditate  upon  the  glory 
of  'that  divine  manifestation,  and  merge  in  himself  the 
mantras  used  by  him  in  the  course  of  the  worship,  by 
exhibiting  the  Sanharmudra  and  by  repeating,  while  taking 
in  the  breath,  the  mantra  known  as  the  Sanharmurti  mantra 
coupled  with  the  principal  one.  The  flowers  etc.  should  be 
then  removed  from  their  places,  and  the  ground  shSuld  be 
washed  over  with  water  containing  a solution  of  cow  dung, 
and  the  worshipper  after  having  rinsed  his  mouth,  should 
cast  away  the  offerings  etc.,  and  commence  the  worship  of 
another  god  or  otherwise. 


■na 


isiisi 


HBlEI 


■ 


CHAPTER  LXXVIt 


YbE.  God  said Now  i shall  .describe  to  you  the 
process  of  worshipping  the  cow  Kapila  which  as  follows-— ^ 
Om  obesiance  to  Kapila  who  imparteth  joy,  Om 
obesiance  ..to  Kapalia  who  is  the  abode  of  all  bliss,  Om 
obesiance  to  Kapila  who  is  of  a gentle  character.  Om 
obesiance  to  Kapila  who  is  effulgent  as  the  celestial  Suravi \ 
Om:  obesiance  to  Kapila  who  is  of  a good  temperament,,  and* 
Om  obesiance  to  Kapila  who  imparts  enjoyment  in  this 
world  and  salvation  in  the  next  (i — 2).  Acceptest  thou  this 
morsel  of  food  Oh  Kapila,  who  art  the  daughter  of  Suravi, 
the  mother  of  the  universe  and  who  grantest  all  boons  and 
gives!  ambrosia  to  the  gods.  Dost  thou  grant  me  my 
hearts  desire.  Take  away  all  my  sins  and  inequities  Ob 
Kapila  who  werfc  worshipped  by  Vacista  and  the  intelligent 
Vicvamitra  (3—4).  May  the  cow  rest  before  me  and  at  my 
back  every  day,  and  so  may  I rest  amidst  cows  at  all  times 
and,  often  mediate  upon  a cow  in  my  heart  (5),  Take 
these  morsels  of  food  given  by  me  O Kapila.  After  having 
thus  addressed  the  cow,  the  worshipper  should  deem  himself 
as  identical  with  Civa  or  the  supreme  blissful  one,  who  is 
pure,  and  whose  ethereal  self  is  incapable  of  sin,,  and 
subsequently  worship  the  book  of  learning  and  make 
obesiance  to  his  preceptors  and  superiors  (6).  At  noon  be 
should  bathe  and  worship  the  god  Civa  with  the  eight 
.scented  flowers,  the  worship  of  the  above  god  together  with 
those  of  his  divine  cushion  and  attendants  being  enjoined 
.to  be  made  with  an  equal  number  of  flowers  (6—7).  At  that 
time  of  the  day  the  food  should  be  brought  into  the  well 
cleansed  Kitchen,  while  the  worshipper  with. 
the  Kasha  grass 'Should  sprinkle  over  it  the  water  held  in  the 


AGNI  PURAMAM, 


conch  shell,  and  firstly  ^ dedicate  the  same ' to  the  god  Giva 
■ ■■(g).  after  having  told  in  mind  the  Mritunjaya  mantra, 
coupled  with  the  term  Vousat . Then  the  half  of  the  above 
morsels  should  be  set  apart  for  performing  therewith  the 
Homa  ceremony  unto  the  oven,  after  having  duly  purified 
the  same,  together  with  the  fire  kept  therein,  and  the  obla- 
tions should  be  olfered  to  them  in  turn*(io).  The  worshipper 
should  perform  the  Homa  in  the  fire  about  his  umbilicus  by 
once  taking  in  the  breath  wind,  then  carry  the  Banhibeej  (lit 
the  seed  of  fire)  therefrom  and  through  the  Sadtsthan  by 
letting  out  the  breath  wind,  and  merge  the  same  in  the 
oven  fire  after  having  contemplated  that  as  Civagni,  or 
the  fire  of  the  divine  essence  of  Shiva.  Then  the 
oblations  composed  of  the  above  morsels  of  food  should  be 
dedicated  to  the  following  gods  and  cast  into  the  oven  fire 
in  the  order  as  follows.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  fire  god 
with  Obesiance,  Ham  oblation  to  the  god  Soma  with 
obesiance,  oblation  to  the  sungod%  to  Vrihaspati \ to  Prajapati \ 
to  all  the  gods,  total!  the  Vicvas  and  Ham  oblation  to  the  fire 
god  who  is  the  creator  of  the  sacrifice ; and  the  offerings 
should  be  cast  into  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven, 
starting  with  the  East.  After  that  he  should  bid  adieu  to 
the  oven  fire  by  reading  out  the  mantra  which  runs  as 
H Pardon  me  Oh  God  in  bidding  you  farewell  (i  i~— 14). 
in  the  right  hand  portion  of  the  oven,  the  god  of  virtue 
or  piety  is  to  worshiped  as  “obesiance  to  the  god  of  piety, 
and  -Cj  the  left  band  part  thereof  the  spirit  of  impiety  ; as 
obesiance  to  the  spirit  of  impiety  in  the  vessel  containing 
the  firmented  decoctions  of  boiled  rice  {15).  The  god 
Varuna  or  the  fire  god  of  the  sea  should  be  worshipped  for 
having  transformed  the  sap  into  the  serum,  together  with  the 
god  Ganesb,  the  destroyer  of  all  harms,  at  the  door  of  the 
kitchen.  The  goddess  Sovaga  should  be  worshipped  In  the 
stone  slab  for  grinding  spices  as  “Obesiance  to  Sovag^u 
In  the  mortar  the  worship  is  to  be  performed  as  Om 

■ > . ■ . . • - ; ■ 

v . : : ■:  : t ‘ ; 


286 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


obesiance  to  Roudrika,  and  Om  obesiance  Sto  Girika5  and 
in  the  pestle  as  Om  obesiance  to  Balapryi,  and  Om  obesi- 
ance to  Ayuadha  (16—17).  Similarly  in  the  broomstick 
the  two  latter  gods,  should  be  worshipped,  and  the  god  of 
love  in  the  bed  (iS).  Then  having  offered  the  oblation  to 
the  god  of  the  house-hold,  the  worshipper  who  had  taken 
the  vow,  together  with  his  son  and  the  preceptor  should 
take  their  meals  served  in  golden  plates,  or  in  vessels  made 
of  lotus  leaves,  without  speaking  a word  (19).  The  leaves 
of  Bata,  Acvatha,  Arka,  Batabi,  Sal,  and  Vallatak  trees 
should  not  be  used  in  making  such  vessels.  Then  he  should 
rinse  his  mouth  with  water,  offering  watery  oblations  to 
his  five  Pran  winds  as  follows— Om  Pran  Svaha  (oblation 
to  the  wind  at  the  heart)  Om  Apana  Svaha  (oblation  to 
the  wind  about  the  anus).  Om  Samana  Svaha  (oblation 
to  the  wind  about  the  naval).  Om  (Jdan  Svaha  oblatitfn  to 
the  wind  at  the  head).  Om  By  ana  Svaha  (oblation  to  the 
wind  which  flows  through  the  whole  body.  And  again  after 
having  kindled  up  ^his  fire  of  hunger,  he  should  offer  similar 
oblations  to  the  five  supplementary  winds  of  his  body  such 
as  Naga>  Kurma,  Krikara , Devadatta  and  Dhananjaya . 
Then  after  having  finished  his  meals,  he  should  drink  the 
finishing  draught  of  water,  and  again  offer  watery  oblations 
to  his  five  principal  vital  winds  as  before  by  reading  aloud 
the  mantra  which  runs  as  Amrit  Vpasiaranamasi *,  and 
perform  the  chullaka  rite  by  uttering  the  mantra  which 
runs  as  A mritapida  namasi  (20—24). 


CHAPTER  LXXVIil 


. > rp  . . 

1 HE  God  said  Now  I shall  describe  to  you  the  process 
of  investing  a divine  image  with  the  holy  thread  which 


i V a ,j 


AGN1  PURANAM, 


crowns  the  performance  of  all  other  religious  ceremonies  in 
respect  of  merit,  and  which  is  usually  grouped  under  the 
two  catigories  of  Nitya  and  Naiinittik  according  as  the  same 
is  undertaken  out  of  a disinterested  motive  or  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  any  definite  object  (i).  The  investure  is  to  be 
performed  either  in  the  month  of  Asar,  Sraban  or  Vadra, 
on  the  eighth  or  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  fortnight,  both 
light  and  dark,  or  on  the  first  day  of  one  of  the  above- 
mentioned  fortnights  during  the  five  months  from  Asara 
to  Karticka,  the  images  which  are  usually  invested 
with  such  threads,  being  those  of  the  fire  god,  Brahma, 
Ambica,  Ganesha,  Naga,  Skanda,  the  sun-god,  Shuli,  Durga 
Yama,  Indra,  Govinda,  the  god  of  love,  Camvu  and  other 
eaters  of  the  celestial  ambrosia.  Gold,  silver,  and  copper 
were  the  metals  used  in  making  those  threads  in  the  Golden 
(Satya)  and  the  successive  ages,  cotton  and  silk  threads  and 
fibres  of  the  lotus  stem  are  what  they  should  be  made  of 
in  the  present  Kali  Yuga  (2— -4).  The  deities  who  reside  in 
and  preside  over  the  nine  component  strings  of  the  holy 
thread  are,  the  pranava  mantra  Ora,  the  moon,  the  fire-god, 
Brahma,  Naga,  Guha,  Hari,  Survesha  and  another.  A holy 
thread  of  the  uttama  class  should  be  composed  of  fifty- 
nine  strings  of  thread,  while  those  of  the  Madhyama  and 
the  Kainsa  class  should  be  made  of  half  or  a quarter  num- 
ber of  strings  of  the  former,  or  a holy  thread  of  the  uttama 
class  might  be  made  of  eighty-one  strings  of  thread,  one 
of  the  Madhyama  class  of  fifty  strings,  and  one  of  the 
Kanyasta  class  of  thirty-eight  strings  of  thread  only.  The 
Granthi  or  the  binding  knots  should  be  tied  at  equal 
interstices  (5 —7).  The  breadth  of  the  entire  holy  thread 
being  twelve,  eight  or  four  fingers  according  to  the  class  the 
same  would  belong  to,  or  would  be  made  equal  to  the  breadth 
of  the  falic  emblem  (8).  In  length  the  holy  thread  should 
be  made  to  reach  down  to  the  pedestal  of  the  image,  or 
a equal  to  . quarter  of  its  entire  length  and  the  pedestal 


Amt  PURANAM. 


combined,  washed  with  the  Sujata  (9).  The  knots  should 
be  tied  up  from  the  left  and  consecrated  with  the 
mantra  sacred  to  the  Agkora  manifestation  of  the  god 
Shiva,  and  dyed  with  the  paste  of  saffron  and  sandal  by 
reading  aloud  the  mantra  known  as  the  Purus  ha  Sukta 
(jo).  In  the  alternative  the  thread  might  be  coloured 
with  a composition,  of  musk,  Rochana,  camphor,  turmeric 
and  Gairlc  (yellow  clay)  pasted  together  and  the  knots 
should  be  made  to  number  ten  or  as  many  as  there 
would  be  the  number  of  strings  in  it  (l  1).  The  in- 
terstices between  the  knots  should  measure  one,  two  or 
four  fingers  respectively  or  as  much  as  would  be  compa- 
tible with  a decent  aspect  of  the  entire  combination,  the 
knots  being  named  as  Prakrit!  (nature).  Pourasi  (appertain* 
ing  to  the  subjective  principle  of  the  universe),  Beera 
(Heroine,  or  the  principle  of  valour).  Aparajita  (invincible* 
ness),  Bijaya  (victory)  Jaya  (gladness  of  conquest),  Ajita, 
{unconquerableness),  Sadashiva  (everblissfulness),  Manomani 
(the  opening  up  of  mind,  or  the  expansion  of  the  intellect), 
ahd  Sarvamuki  (facing  all,  or  omniscience),  after  the  attri- 
butes they  represent,  the  eleventh  and  the  succeeding  knots 
being  known  as  the  Suva  or  the  Blissful  (12 — 13). 

In  the  alternative  the  knots  of  the  sacred  thread  should 
be  made  to  number  fifteen,  or  one^^f^  each  of  the  manifes- 
tations  of  the  god  or  in  other  words  the  knots  of  the  holy 
thread  should  number  as  many  as  there  are  known  revealed 
forms  of  any  particular  god,  whose  image  would  be  invested 
with  the  same,  the  number  of  knots  in  the  case  of  the 
image  of  Guru  or  Gana  being  seven  only  (14).  Or 
knot  should  febe  tied  for  each  of  the  warders  or  the  presiding 
deities  of  the  angular  quarters  of  the  heaven,  and  a holy 
thread  in  the  case  of  a falic  emblem  should  measure  from  one 
to  nine  cubits  in  length  (15).  The  number  of  knots  in  & ' 

holy  thread  of  the  Bridha  class  should  number  twenty 
eight  in  all,  the  number  prescribed  for  the  other  two  classes 


*GNI  PURAHA8S, 


II 


feeing  eighteen  and  eight  respectively  and  the  breadth  of 
the  knots  or  of  the  entire  holy  thread  would,  in  all  instances^ 
commensurate  with  the  breadth  of  the  phalic  emblem.  On  the 
seventh  of  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  fortnight,  the  preceptor, 
pure  in  body  and  mind,  and  having  performed  his  daily 
devotional  rites,  should  decorate  the  temple  with  flowers 
and  pieces  of^ay  coloured  cloth  in  the  evening,  (17);  and 
worship  the  sun  god  on  the  hallowed  ground  after  having 
duly  taken  possession  of  the  same  according  to  the  rites 
of  Vuparigraha  dealt  with  before,  and  after  having  duly 
performed  the  special  form  of  Sandhya  worship  prescribed 
for  the  occasion  and  especially  the  rite  of  offering  watery 
oblations  (Tarpana)  (18).  The  preceptor  should  then  recite 
the  pranava  mantra,  rinse  his  mouth,  and  perform  the 
rite  of  Sakalikaran  spoken  of  before  (mentioning  the 
names  of  the  different  parts  of  the  body  coupled  with  the 
mantra  particularly  sacred  to  each),  wash  the  threshold  of 
the  temple  with  water  consecrated  with  the  mantra  Of 
weapon,  and  start  the  worship  in  the  eastern  side  of  this 
adytum,  proceeding  to  its  other  parts  as  follows “Han* 
obeisance  to  the  door  known  as  the  Cantikala  (phase  of 
peace),  Ham  obeisance  to  the  phase  of  knowledge,  Ham 
obeisance  to  the  phase  of  non-action,  and  Ham  obesiance 
to  the  door  known  as  the  phase  of  existence  or  being. 
The  warders  of  the  god  should  be  worshipped  at  the  top- 
sides  of  those  doors,  two  at  each  as  follows -Obeisance  to 
Nandi,  obeisance  to  Mahakala.  I bow  down  unto  the  warder 
Vringi.  f make  obeisance  to  Gana.  Obeisance  to  the  warder 
Vrisava.  I fall  at  the  feet  of  the  warder  Skanda,  and  lastly 
as  “ I make  obeisance  to  Chanda  (19— 22).  In  the  event 
of  the  ceremony  having  been  undertaken  out  of  a disin- 
terested motive,  the  preceptor  after  having  worshipped  the 
warder  gods  at  the  sides  of  the  temple  door,  and  after  having 
purified  the  material  principles  of  his  body  and  perfor 
the  rite  known  as  the  Vastujag,  should  place  in  the 
37 


Sit 


1 > ■ ' . -* 


MNP 

w 


Iff : it 


111::: 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


of  the  god  the  special  Argha  or  the  offering  (23).  After 
having  washed  the  phalic  emblem,  he  should  purify  his  hand 
with  flowers  and  bunches  of  Kusha  grass  consecrated 'with 
the  Hridmantra,  and  make  the  same  permeated  with  the, 
essence  of  Shiva,  place  it  on  his  head,  and  contemplate  him- 
self as  identical' with  him,  the  first  cause  and  who  is  the 
omniscient  one,  and  accordingly  whose  effulgent  self  is  the 
chief  factor  in  the  sacrifice.  The  preceptor,  holding  the 
sword  of  true  knowledge  in  his  hand,  should  meditate  upon 
the  god.  Subsequent  to  that  he  should  go  to  the  south  west 
corner  of  the  sacrificial  shed  fully  purified  with  all  the 
necessary  rites  of  purification,  and  lay  down  therein  the 
washings  of  the  Argha,  the  composition  known  as  the 
Panchagavya  and  all  other  articles  essential  to  the  sacrifice. 
After  having  laid  them  down  with  his  face  turned  towards 
the  north,  the  preceptor  should  collect  together  the  stems 
of  Kusha  grass  lying  scattered  on  the  sacrificial  platform,  and 
spread  them  out  in  the  small  jar  in  the  south  eastern  corner 
thereof  (24 — 28).  The  gods  presiding  over  the  human  house- 
holds should  be  worshipped  in  the  south  western  corner  of  the 
sacrificial  shed,  the  goddess  Laksmi  at  its  door,  and  after 
that  the  pitcher  placed  on  all  sorts  of  sacrificial  seeds  facing 
the  west  (29).  Then  the  bull  riding  god,  together  with  the 
goddess  bestriding  a lion  and  the  Vardhini  (sacrificial  jar) 
should  be  worshipped  with  the  Pranava  mantra,  and 
in  the  pitcher  the  god  Shiva  should  be  worshipped  with 
his  attendants,  and  the  divine  weapon  in  the  Vardini 
(30).  In  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven,  the  presi- 
ding deities  such  as  Indra,  etc.,  together  with  the  gods 
Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Shiva,  should  be  worshipped,  and 
the  preceptor  having  taken  in  his  hand  the  Vardini,t  which 
should  be  carried  behind  the  pitchers,  should  read  out  the 
mandate  of  the  god  Shiva ; and  the  ground  should  be  im- 
pressed with  the  mark  of  an  unbroken  jet  of  water  by  utter- 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


water-girdle  should  be  considered  as  a weapon' guarding 
against  the  advent  of  all  dangers  that  might  befala  the 
worshipper  (33).  Thus;the  god  should  be  worshipped  in  the 
firmly  placed  cushion,  imaginarily  spraed  over  the  pitcher 
placed  there,  and  after  that  the  weapons  of  the  god  in  the 
Vardini  located  with  the  Pranava  [Mantra  (Om)  (34).  The 
union  of  the  two  emblems  of  creation  should  be  brought 
about  by  showing  the  Mudra  known  as  the  Linga  Mudra. 
Then  the  sword  of  [knowledge  should  be  dedicated  to  the 
consecreated  pitcher  and  the  merit  of  rehearsing  the  princi- 
pal Mantra  to  the  god,  with  a tenth  part  of  which  the  protec- 
tion should  be  read  out  in  the  Vardini,  the  god  Hara  having 
been  worshipped  previous  thereto  with  the  composition 
known  as  the  Panchagavya  and  the  god  Ganesha  in  the 
north  western  angle  of  the  heaven  (35~36)*  Subsequent 
to  that  the  fire  sacred  to  Shiva  and  made  permeated 
with  his  essence  should  be  bathed  and  worshipped 
in  the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle  and  the  sacrificial  por- 
ridge duly  purified  by  offering  the  oblation  known  as  the 
Sampata  oblation,  should  be  divided  with  a Kusha  grass 
into  three  parts,  respectively  ’consecrated  to  the  god,  the 
fire  god,  and  the  soul,  out  of  which  the  two  former  should 
be  offered  to  the  god  Shiva  and  the  fire  god,  the  portion 
consecrated  to  the  soul  having  been  kept  apart  {37 — 38). 
The  stick  for  cleansing  the  teeth  should  be  offered  in 
the  east  to  the  god  by  repeating  the  Mantras  of  arrow  and 
armour  respectively,  together  with  a piece  of  clay  either  on 
the  south  or  on  the  west  by  reading  aloud  the  Mantras  such  as 
the  Aghora  and  the  Shika  Mantra  (39).  In  the  north,  the  water 
consecrated  to  Bamana  should  be  offered  from  the  left  side 
by  repeating  either  the  Hnd  or  the  Sadyajata  Mantra,  and 
likewise  the  scented  water  in  the  north  east  with  the  head 
(40).  The  composition  known  as  the  Panchagavya  together 
with  Palasha  and  lotus  flowers  should  be  cast  all  round  ' and 
flowers  should  be  offered  in  the  north  'eastern  quarter  of 


AGttt  PURANAM. 


292 

the  globe,  and  the  substance  known  as  the  Rockam  (yellow 
dye)  in  the  south  east  (41).  Similarly  the  substance  known 
as  the  Agaru  should  be  offered  in  the  south  corner  of  the 
mystic  diagram  and  all  the  essential  articles  of  the 
homa  ceremony  should  be  offered  in  four  equal  divisions 
in  the  north  west  with  the  stems  of  Kusha  grass  and  by 
uttering  the  Sadyajata  mantra  (42).  Then  afi  anchorite’s 
stick,  a rosary,  a waist  cloth,  and  an  alms  bowl  together  with 
collyrium,  and  a stick  for  applying  the  same,  saffron,  oil,  a 
comb,  a prepared  betel  leaf  and  a mirror  should  be  presented 
to  the  imaged  god  in  the  front  of  the  worshipper.  The 
substance  known  as  the  Rochana  (yellow  dye)  should  be 
offered  to  the  god  and  presented  on  the  north  side  of  the 
image,  a cushion,  a pair  of  shoe3,  a bowl,  a pair  of  cloth  and 
an  umbrella  having  been  previously  dedicated  for  the  satis* 
faction  of  the  image  god  icana  in  the  north  east  by  uttering 
the  mantra  held  sacred  to  that  particular  manifestation  of 
Mahadeva  (43—44).  The  sacrificial  porridge  containing 
a quantity  of  clarified  butter  should  be  offered  to  the  god 
in  the  east,  with  perfumes,  etc. 

Then  the  holy  threads  purified  by  having  been  immersed 
in  the  washings  of  the  Arghct  offering  should  be  brought 
near  the  sacrificial  fire  hy  repeating  the  Sanbita  mantras 
(45— 46).  Then  the  worshipper  having  covered  the  same 
with  a piece  of  hyde  of  the  black  antelope,  should  medi* 
late  upon  the  eternal  blissful  one  who  without  knowing 
any  change  or  modification  in  himself,  divided  the  eternal 
timte  into  months  and  years  and  witnesseth  all  that  takes 
place  in  the  universe,  and  is  the  protector  of  all  created  things. 
Then  the  holy  thread  should  be  purified  by  uttering  twenty- 
one  times  the  Sanhita  mantra  coupled  with  the  Sati  and 
Hati  ones  (47— -48).  Subsequent  to  that,  the  room  of  wor- 
ship  should  be  girdled  with  threads ; and  perfumes,  etb., 
should  be  given  to  the  sun-god , after  having  previously 
worshipped  him  therein.  Then  the  w^rshfpp^ 


AGNI  PURANAM,  ?93 

rinse  his  mouth  and  perform  the  Nywsct  ceremony  and  , 
worship  in  succession  in  the  pitcher  of  water  consecrated 
to  Shiva  the  gods  Vastu  with  his  weapon,  the  goddesses  such  , 
as  Nanda,  etc.,  the  Lokapalas,  the  god  Ganesha,  the  goddess 
Vardani  the  preceptor  and  the  sou!,  by  mentioning  the  name 
of  each  (49—50).  Subsequent  to  that  be  should  hold  the 
holy  thread  smeared  with  the  paste  of  the  drugs  known  as 
the  Sarvousadi,  and  perfumed  with  the  fumes  of  burnt 
flowers  and  green  grass  in  the  cavity  of  his  two  blended  palms, 
and  read  aloud  the  prayer  as  follows-— "Qm  salutation  to  ,, 

thee.  Oh  for  removing  all  short  comings  00  my  part  in  per- 
forming this  ceremony,  I invoke  the  boon  of  compensating 
regulation,  born  of  thee.  I have  worshipped  thee,  O thou  God, 
who  art  the  abode  of  all  soul  and  non-soul.  Dost  thou  crown  ; 
my  undertakings  with  success.  I bow  unto  thee.  Oh  Shamvu 
at  all  times,  and  with  my  whole  soul.  Be  pleased  with  me.  I 

invite  thee,  O god,  with  thy  goddess  and  attendants  and  the 
god  Ganesha  and  the  Lokapalas  accompanied  by  the  gods  of 
the  mantras,  with  a view  to  invest  thee  with  the  holy  thread 
to-morrow  morning,  and  I shall  fulfill  the  vow  f have  taken, 
O lord,  at  thy  command”  (51— 55).  Having  thus  invited  the 
god  the  worshipper  should  perform  the  rite  of  AmTttikarut$ 
by  taking  in  the  breath  wind,  and  repeat  the  principal  mantra 
of  the  god  near  the  phalic  emblem  and  dedicate  the  merit 

thereof  to  the  same,  after  which  he  should  bid  adieu  to  the.. 

god  after  having  made  the  final  obeisance  to  him,  repeated; 
the : principal  mantra,  and  sung  the  hymn  in  bis  praise 
(56^57),  Then  having  performed  the  homa  ceremony  in 
the  Shivanal  (fire  permeated  with  the  essence  of  Shiva) 
with  a third  part  of  the  sacrificial  porridge,  thrice  the  obla- 
tions should  be  given  to  the  inmates  of,  the  different  quarters 
of  the  heaven,  together  with  the  Matris,  the  Vutas,  the  presid- 
ing deities  of  the  firmaments,  the  Rudras,  andthe  Kshetrapajas^ 
and  to  the  celestial  elephants  also  guarding  the  different  angles^ 
^bf  The  sky,  as  oblation  and  obeisance  (naraas)  to  the  Rud^ 


oblation,  and  obeisance  (Svaha)  to  the  Kshetrapalas  and  so  on  ' 
(58—59).  After  having  performed  the  rite  of  Achaman  (rite 
of  rinsing  the  mouth  with  water)  the  investor  of  the  thread, 
should  proceed  on  with  the  Homa  ceremony  supposed  to 
remedy  all  defects  that  might  have  lurked  in  the  perform- 
ance of  the  same;  and  the  final  oblations  should  be  cast 
into  the  sacrificial  fire,  as  Om  Bhu  Svaha,  cOm  Bhuba, 
Svaha,  etc.,  after  which  the  fire  should  be  made  secure  as 
it  were  in  the  receptacle,  and  the  four  oblations  should  be 
cast  into  the  same  as  follows — Om,  oblation  to  the  fire-god 
with  obeisance,  Om  oblation  to  Soma  with  obeisance, 
Om  oblation  to  Soma  and  the  fire  god  with  obeisance,  and 
lastly  as  Om  oblation  with  obeisance  to  the  fire  god,  who  is 
the  creator  of  the  sacrifice  (60 — 61).  Then  the  union 
should  be  brought  about  of  the  gods  respectively  located 
in  the  mystic  diagram  and  the  sacrificial  fire  receptacle. 
Then  the  holy  thread  should  be  kept  in  a vessel  made  of 
bamboo  and  consecrated  with  the  Astra,  Hridaya,  and  the 
Kala  mantras ; and  the  Hrid,  armour  and  weapon  mantras 
should  be  located  therein  together  with  the  mantra  of 
armour,  and  worshipped  with  the  six  esfentiai  articles 
cff  worship  by  repeating  the  Pranava  mantra  Om*  Then  the 
vessel  containing  the  holy  thread  should  be  girdled  with 
strings  of  thread,  and  the  worshipper  in  a spirit  of  humble 
devotion  should  dedicate  the  same  to  the  lord  of  the 
universe  for  safe  custody  (62— 65).  Subsequent  to  that  he 
should  make  gifts  of  two  theological  works,  and  place  the 
holy  thread  at  the  feet  of  the  preceptor,  in  a spirit  of  contrite 
supplication  (66).  After  that  he  should  come  out  of  the 
room  and  perform  the  rite  of  Achaman  and  worship  in  the 
three  mystic  diagrams  cleansed  with  a solution  of  cow-dung, 
the  composition  known  as  the  Panchagavya,  the  sacrificial 
porridge,  and  the  sticks  for  cleansing  the  teeth.  Theii 
having  again  rinsed  the  mouth  with  water  and  kept  up  a 
vigil  with  songs  and  h£mns  hp  to  a very 


AGNI  PUHANAM, 


&GNI  FURANAM. 


295 


the  night,  "his  inner  self  being  stuffed  as  it  w6re  with  the 
mantras.  The  worshipper  should  lie  down  fasting  near 
the  image,  contemplating  the  god,  and  sleep  on  a mattress 
made  of  Kusha  grass.  In  this  way  a man  should  undertake 
the  ceremony,  lying  fasting  and  self-controlled  on  a bed  of 
ashes,  even  if  his  prayer  were  for  the  cessation  of  a recur- 
rence of  births  (67—69)* 


CHAPTER  LXXIX, 


1 HE  Goo  said  Early  in  the  morning,  the  worshipper 
having  bathed  and  performed  his  daily  sandhya  worship, 
should  enter  the  sacrificial  ‘shed  with  all  his  passions  add 
lower  propensities  entirely  subdued.  Then  having  decked 
the  pbalic  emblem;  he  should  take  hold  of  the  holy  thread 
and  place  the  same  in  a hallowed  vessel  situate  at  the*  north 
east  corner  of  the  mystic  diagram  previously  laid  out 
Subsequent  to  that  he  should  bid  farewell  to  the  god  Shiva, 
and  having  removed  the  flowers,  etc.,  from  the  body  of  the 
phalic  emblem,  should  again  perform  the  two  rites  of  Arikik 
(daily  prayer)  on  the  hallowed  ground  as  before  (3)*  Then 
the  gods,  Aditya,  Dikpalas,  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  Ishana, 
Shiva  and  the  fire  god  should  be  fully  Worshipped  according 
to  the  practices  usually  observed  in  the  course  of  Naimittik 
worships;  and  the  tarpan  rite  with  the  mantras  together 
with  the  rite  of  expiation  of  sin  < should  be  performed 
hundred  and  eight  times  with  the  Shiva  mantras, 'after  which 
the  final  oblations  should  be  gradually  cast  into  the- fire 
(4—5).  Then  the  holy  thread  should  be  offered  to  the  sun 
; god,  and  then  after,  the  ackaman,  to  the  warder  gods,  the 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


Dikpalas,  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  and  to  the  Vardini  (6U 
The  worshipper  having  seated  near  the  phalic  emblem  should 
present  the  holy  thread  to  the  soul,  the  God  Gana,  the 
preceptor,  and  to  the  fire  god  (9).  Subsequent  to  that  he 
should  worship  the  god  Shiva  in  the  principle  of  soul  or 
knowledge  which  is  anterior  ,to  and  underlies  the  principle 
of  nature,  protected  and  domineered  over  by  ^Brahma  the 
god  of  creation,  by  reading  out  the  following  prayer.  “ I 
have  performed,  O God,  this  sacrifice  as  commanded  by  thee, 
who  art  the  soul  of  the  eternal  time,  according  to  the  best 
of  my  light  and  knowledge,  and  according  to  the  rules  as 
seemed  best  to  my  understanding.  Dost  thou  accept  this 
holy  thread  permeated  with  thy  essence  O Shamvu  t and 
make  whole  and  complete  whatever  has  been  impurely, 
improperly  and  incompletely  done  by  me  in  the  course  of 
the  sacrifice.  Om  fulfil  and  make  complete  this  my  vow  of 
sacrifice,.  Om  obeisance  to  the  lord  of  vows  (8— *10).  Then 
the  god  should  be  again  worshipped  with  the  holy  thread 
in  the  principle  of  knowledge  which  is  precedent  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  universal  destruction,  and  over  which  the  essence  of 
the  god  Vishnu  presides,  by  .repeating  the  principal  mantra 
of  the  god.  Similarly  the  god  should  be  again  worshipped  in 
the  principle  of  Shiva  which  is  lorded  over  by  the  principle 
•of  destruction,  by  uttering  the  Shivanta  mantra ; and  the 
holy  thread  should  be  deposited  therewith  on  the  pbalic 
emblem  or  the  image  of  Shiva  who  controls  all  the  forces  or 
principles  moving  the  universe.  The  holy  thread  should  be 
invested  with  the  principal  mantra  ending  with  the  layanta 
mantra  of  the  god,  where  theunvestor  performs  the  cere- 
mony with  a view  to  attain  salvation,  the  mantras  which 
should  be  used  on  the  occasion  where  the  investor  under- 
takes the  vow  for  the  fulfilment  of  any  definite  object,  are 
as  follows  Om  Ham  obeisance  to  Shiva  who  presides  over 
the  principle  of  soul,  Om  Ham  obeisance  to  Shiva  who  is 
the  lord  of  the  principle  of  knowledge.  Om  Ham  oho.-oam-* 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


as  follows: — “Thou  art  the  only  means  of  salvation,  Uh  uod, 
to  all  the  created  beings  (16).  Thou  art  the  only  abiding 
principle  in  ,jvhom  the  universe  resides.  Thou  art  the  god 
of  gods,  Oh  lord,  who  by  pervading  all  hearts  dost  witness 
the  acts  of  all  the  created  nature.  By  deed  or  thought  or 
speech  I have  no  other  being  to  resort  to  save  thy  eternal 
self.  Make  whole  and  complete,  Oh  lord,  whatever  has  been 
done  defective  and  incomplete  by  me  every  day  whether 
i n regard  to  the  mantra,  practice,  article  or  prayer  in  connec- 
tion with  this  sacrificial  ceremony.  Pardon  all  my  omissions, 
Oh  God,  and  make  me  pure  and  free  of  sin.  Thou,  who  art  the 
absolutely  pure,  lord  of  the  gods — thou  who  hast  purified  the 
universe  with  all  its  fixed  and  moving  inmates,  pardon  all  my 
short-comings  and  defective  acts.— Thou  who  art  now  reveal- 
ed as  the  holy  thread.  Make  one,  Oh  God,  whatever  in  the 
course  of  the  sacrifice,  be  scattered  and  separate  through 
my  folly,  or  whatever  has  been  made  defective  through  my 
ignorance  or  folly,  and  make  them  stiched  together  as  if  with 
a single  thread  by  your  gracious  will.”  Thus  having  read 
the  prayer  and  dedicated  the  merit  of  reciting  the  mantra 
to  the  god  and  made  obeisance  to  him,  he  should  take  the 
vow  of  . a three  or  four  month’s  penance  as  directed  by  his 
spiritual  guide  (17 — 22).  Then  having  made  obeisance  to 
the  preceptor,  the  votary  should  approach  the  receptacle  of 
the  sacrificial  fire,  and  cast  into  the  same  the  four  skeins  of 
the  holy  thread  for  the  purpose  of  investing  therewith,  as 
it  were,  the  god  Shiva  located  in  the  sacrificial  fire.  The 
god  in  the  fire  should  be  worshipped  with  flowers,  burning 
incense  sticks,  and  pinches  of  sun-dried  rice,  after  vyhich 
fioly  threads  with  oblations  should  be  presented  to  the 
gudras.  The  god  Shiva  should  be  bid  adieu  with  » 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


obeisance,  the  Homa  for  the  expiation  of  sin  ( Prayaschifta 
koma)  should  be  performed,  the  final  oblations  should  be 
gradually  cast  into  the  fire,  the  sacrificial  fire  should  be 
propitiated  with  oblations  of  sacrificial  porridge,  and  the 
god  (Shiva)  located  therein  should  be  bid  farewell 
(23 — 25).  The  Homa  ceremony  should  be  perfomed  with 
the  Vyahriii  mantras  as  follows—- Om  B6u  svaha,  Om 
Bhuba  svaha , etc.,  and  the  going  away  of  the  god  of  fire 
should  be  obstructed,  as  it  were,  by  putting  in  his  way  the 
goddess  Nisthura.  Then  the  four  oblations  should  be  offered 
to  the  fire  and  the  other  gods,  and  the  four  oblations  with 
the  four  holy  threads  should  be  given  to  the  presiding 
deities  of  the  different  quarters  of  the  firmament ; and  an 
other  holy  thread  to  the  books  of  Siddhanta  to  commensurate 
with  the  entire  length  of  the  latter  (25—27).  Om.  Hum 
oblation  to  the  region  known  as  the  Bhu,  Om  Ham  oblation 
to  the  region  known  as  the  Bhuba.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the 
region  known  as  the  Sva.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  regions 
of  Bhu;  Bhuba  and  Sva.  Having  performed  the  Vyakriti 
homa  with  the  above  mantras,  the  four  oblations  should  be 
offered  as  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  fire  god.  Om  Ham 
oblation  to  the  god  Soma.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  Soma  and 
Agni  combined.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  fire  god-who  is 
the  creator  of  the  sacrifice.  The  preceptor  should  be 
worshipped  as  the  god  Shiva,  without  any  distinction  what- 
ever, with  clothes  and  ornaments,  etc.,  and  all  tire  merits  of 
the  other  annual  sacrifices  performed  at  the  instance  of 
the  investor  of  the  holy  thread,  should  be  made  over  to 
him  (28—29),  w^o  should  be  invested  with  the  holy  threat 
by  uttering  the  mantra  which  runs  as  “the  god  said  With 
whom  the  preceptor  is  pleased,  etc."  Then  the  BramMfe* 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


399 


investor  should  bathe  early  in  the  morning  and  perform  his 
daily  rites  of  prayer  and  worship,  and  take  leave  of  the  god 
Shiva  after  having  worshipped  him  and  the  holy  thread  with 
the  eight  scented  flowers  as  previously  described  (30—32). 
Then  having  performed  the  rites  of  the  Nitya  and  the 
Naimittik  worship  in  full,  the  god  Shiva  should  be  con- 
templated as  located  in  the  flame  of  fire  and  accordingly 
worshipped  therein.  Subsequent  to  that  the  homa  for  the 
expiation  of  sin  should  be  performed.  After  that  oblations 
of  clarified  butter  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  by  reading 
the  mantras  of  weapon,  and  lastly  the  final  oblation  should 
also  be  offered  in  the  same.  A man  who  would  ask  for  enjoy- 
ment and  pleasures,  should  make  over  the  merit  of  perform- 
ing the  sacrifice  to  Shiva,  saying  “ Let  this  my  act  take  fruit, 
Oh  lord,  while  those  who  would  want  salvation,  should 
dedicate  the  merit  thereof  to  the  god  by  saying  “ Let  not  the 
performance  of  the  present  sacrifice,  Oh  God,  bind  me  as  a 
chain  to  the  cycle  of  recurring  existences  (33 — 35).  The 
union  of  the  god  Shiva  located  in  the  sacrificial  fire  with  the 
blissful  one  ensconsed  in  the  solar  plexus  of  the  investor  of 
the  thread,  should  be  brought  about;  and  the  essence  of  fire 
should  be  attracted  therein,  after  which  the  physical  embodi- 
ment of  the  latter  should  be  taken  leave  of  and  put  out  (36}. 
Then  having  rinsed  his  mouth,  the  votary  should  enter  the 
sacrificial  shed  and  make  the  water  of  the  pitcher  permeated 
with  the  essence  of  Shiva  who  should  be  bid  farewell 
simultaneously  therewith  (37).  Similarly  the  Lokapalas 
should  be  taken  leave  of,  and  the  holy  thread  having  been 
removed  from  the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem,  should  be 
put  upon  the  image  of  the  Chanda  manifestation  of  that 
deity  together  with  flowers*  etc,  who  should  be  duly 
worshipped  subsequent  thereto.  In  the  alternative  the 
god  Chanda  might  be  duly  worshipped  on  the  sacrificial 
sand-cushion  as  directed  before  by  reading  aloud  the 
following  prayer.  “May  any  defect  in  my^petforming  this 


mm 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


annual  sacrifice  be  remedied  by  thy  gracious  will,  ■ ©I* 
Chanda  f Having  thus  spoken  to  the  god,  the  votary  should 
bid  him  farewell  with  an  obeisance,  and  again  worship  the 
god  Shiva  after  having  removed  the  flowers  and  other  articles 
of  worship  from'  the  body  of  the  imaged  Chanda,  A man 
living  within  a radius  of  forty  miles  of  his  spiritual  guide, 
should  be  deemed  as  free  of  all  sins  and  impurities,  and  un- 
dertake the  rite  of  investing  the  holy  thread  in  his  company,, 
though  he  might  live  as  remote  as  stated  above  (3.8—41), 


CHAPTER  LXXX, 


AGN1  PUR  AN  AMT. 


$ot 


evening*  After  having  duly  worshipped  t'he  sun-godP  Sankar 
and  the  god  of  fire,  the  root  of  the  tree  planted  in  a lump 
of  day  should  he  put  on  the  west  side  of  the  phalic  emblem, 
the  stem  on  the  left  or  on  the  head  of  the  linga,  Dhatri  on 
its  north,  the  torn  leaves  on  the  south,  and  its  flower  on  the 
east.  The  flowers  and  roots  should  he  stowed  in  a box 
and  the  got?  Shiva  should  be  worshipped  on  the  north- 
east The  five  artides  of  worship  held  in  the  cavity  of 
the  blended  palms,  should  he  placed  on  the  head,  and  the 
god  should  be  invoked  as  follows  (5 — 8).  (i  I have  invited 
thee,  O thou  god  of  gods,  in  the  early  morning.  May  I attain 
the  fruit  of  practising  this  penance  and  may  all  my  acts  in 
connection  with  the  same,  be  whole  and  complete  by  thy 
gracious  will  (9)*^  Then  the  holy  thread  kept  in  the  vessel 
should  be  covered  over  with  the  principal  mantra  of  the 
god.  The  votary  should  bathe  early  in  the  morning  and 
worship  the  lord  of  the  universe  with  perfumes  and 
flowers,  etc.  Then  having  performed  the  rites  of  his 
daily  and  incidental  worship  and  ceremonies,  he  should 
worship  the  Damanak  tree.  Then  he  should  hold  in  the  cup 
of  his  united  palms  the  three  oblations  in  succession 
which  should  be  offered  as  Om  Ham  oblation  to  Ishana  who 
is  the  lord  of  the  principle  of  knowledge,  Om  Ham  oblation 
t6  Ishana  who  domineers  over  the  principle  of  bliss,  the  fourth 
oblation  having  been  offered  with  the  mantra  which  runs  as- 
H Om  Houm  obeisance  to  the  supreme  god  (Maheshvara)  who 
wields  a trident  in  his  hand.  Make  whole  and  complete*. 
Oh  lord,  this  sacrifice  and  fulfil  the  object  for  which  the 
same  has  been  undertaken.”  Then  having  worshipped  the 
fire  god,  Shiva  and  the  preceptor,  the  god  should  be  invoked* 
as  follows:-— 44  Make  complete,  Oh  lord,  by  curtailing  or  by 
making  good  as  the  case  may  be,  whatever  has  been  done 
by  me  in  excess  of  or  whatever  falls  short  of  the  proper 
standard  of  ceremonies  in  connection  with  the  sacrifice. 
Make  whole  this  my  ceremony  of  investing  your  image 


MMMi 


AGNI  PURANAM 


with  the  fibres  of  the  Damanaka  tree,  A man  who  performs 
this  ceremony  goes  to  heaven  by  the  merit  which  he  acquires 
when  the  Damanak  tree  begins  to  bloom  in  the  month 
of  Chaitra  (10—13). 


CHAPTER  LXXXt 


J.  HE  God  said Now  I shall  describe  to  you,  O 
Brahman  \ the  rite  of  spiritual  initiation  which  destroys 
all  sin  and  enables  the  soul  to  break  through  the  bonds  of 
illusion  and  inequities  (x).  That  sort  of  initiation  should  be 
only  deemed  as  deserving  the  epithet  which  begets  true  know- 
ledge in  the  initiated  who  are  divided  according  to  their 
respective  capacities  into  three  different  classes  such  as  the 
(r).  Bignatakala  (those  who  are  cognisant  of  the  beati- 
tudes and  the  Pralayakala  (those  who  have  reached  a 
psychic  altitude  from  which  those  attributes  can  be  made 
cognisant  of)  and  the  Samala  (those  whose  psychic  percep- 
tion is  clouded  with  mala  or  mental  dirt),  only  these  three 
classes  being  enjoined  to  be  favoured  with  an  initiation  in 
the  Shastras  (2).  The  disciples  who  belong  to  the  first  of 
the  above  three  classes  are  bereft  of  all  mental  impurities,  the 
second  class  is  marked  by  an  immunity  from  all  sinful  acts, 
and  the  third  class  of  disciples  can  hold  communion  by 
prayer  with  the  region  from  which  the  divine  attributes 
become  perceptible.  The  initiation  in  its  turn  admits  of 
two  distinct  divisions  as  well,  the  Niradhara  (devoid  of  a 
bold  or  receptacle)  and  the  Sadhara  (possession  a mantra 


AGNI  PURANAM.  303 

the  disciples  of  the  first  two  classes  should  be  favoured 
with,  while  the  Sadhara  form  of  initiation  is  meant  for  ail. 
fn  the  former  sort,  the  worship  of  Shamvu  alone  brings 
about  the  wakening  of  the  soul  by  striking  the  inner  man, 
as  it  were,  with  a sort  of  irresistible  psychic  velocity,  and 
accordingly  the  mind  does  not  stand  in  need  of  working 
up  its  own  ‘elevation,  by  meditating  upon  any  particular 
mantra,  or  an  attribute  of  the  godhead,  the  recepients  of 
such  an  initiation  being  presumed  to  be  considerably  ad- 
vanced in  the  spiritual  plane.  In  the  contrary  in  the 
Sadikarana  sort  of  initiation,  the  god  Shamvu  becomes 
merged  as  it  were  in  the  shape  of  the  preceptor,  and  a 
piercing  soul-energy  is  evoked  and  becomes  operative  in 
the  disciple  by  rending  asunder  the  veil  of  illusion.  Thus 
the  spiritual  initiation  admits  of  being  divided  into  four 
distinct  classes  such  as  the  Niradhara,  Sadhara,  Sabeeja 
(initiation  by  imparting  a particular  mantra  to  meditate 


304 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


takes  away  from  his  virtues  as  a positive  moral  delin* 
quency.  Tims  the  forms  of  spiritual  initiation  may  be 
grouped  under  two  distinct  categories,  each  marked  by  its 
own  characteristic  features.  One  is  full  of  penances  and 
ceremonials  and  is  ushered  in  by  its  indispensible  adjuncts 
of  mystic  diagram  and  the  sacrificial  fire  receptacle,  the 
other  holds  sway  only  over  the  region  of  mind  5nd  is  based 
upon  the  knowledge  of  truth  (ri-*i2).  The  preceptor 
who  has  got  the  right  to  administer  any  form  of  spiritual 
initiation  should  administer  the  same  in  the  following 
manner. 

In  the  beginning  I shall  speak  about  the  form  of 
initiation  which  is  known  as  the  Skanda  Diksa  (13).  The 
preceptor  seated  on  his  cushion  and  holding  the  Argha 
offering  in  his  palm,  should  worship,  the  warder  gods  at 
the  threshold  of  the  sacrificial  shed  after  having  performed 
the  rite  of  his  daily  prayer  and  worship,  and  on  having 
removed  the  pernicious  spirits  who  usually  dis- 
turb the  performance  of  a sacrifice.  Subsequent  to 
that  he  should  perform  the  rite  of  nyasa  by  uttering  the 
mantra  of  weapon,  and  purify  the  material  principles  of 
his  body  by  uttering  the  mantras  enjoined  to  be  repeated  on 
the  occasion.  Then  the  special  Argha  offering  should  be 
dressed  up  composed  of  sessamum  orientale,  rice,  sun-dried 
rice,  Kuska  grass,  green  grass,  white  mustard  seeds  and 
thickened  milk  with  barley,  all  sprinkled  over  with  water. 
The  articles  easential  to  the  ceremony  should  be  purified 
by  washing  them  with  the  washings  of  the  above  special 
Argha  offering,  and  the  preceptor  should  impress  the  ridge 
of  his  nose  with  the  characteristic  tilak  mark.  The  purifica- 
tion and  worship  of  his  seif  and  his  own  cushion  should  be 
made  as  laid  down  before.  Then  the  composition  known 
as  the  Panchagavya>  fried  paddy,  sandal,  seeds  of  white 
mustard,  the,  sacred  ashes,  bunches  of  green  grass,  sun-dried 
rice,  and  the  §te 


l Kuska  grass,  etc.,  to  be 


AGNl  PURANAM, 


made  use  of  in  the  course  of  the  ceremony,  should  be 
purified  by  repeating  the  mantras  peculiar  to  the  occasion 
(13—I7).  Then  the  grains  of  fried  paddy  which  had  been 
scattered  and  purified  as  before,  should  be  consecrated  with 
the  mantra  of  weapon  and  sticks  of  incense  should  be 
lighted  up  and  waived  before  them.  Subsequent  to  that 
they  should  .be  sprinkled  over  with  water  consecrated  by 
the  mantra  of  weapon  and  covered  over,  as  it  were,  with 
the  mantra  of  armour  previously  explained.  Then  the 
stems  of  green  grass  which  should  be  knotted  up  in  the 
forms  of  various  weapons,  and  which  are  potent  enough  in 
warding  off  all  evils,  should  be  stowed  in  thirty-six 
different  bunches,  each  measuring  a tala  in  length.  Then 
the  Astra  mantra  of  the  god  Shiva  should  be  repeated 
over  the  sword  of  knowledge,  and  the 


306 


AGNI  PUKANAM. 


(24 — 25).  Then  the  mao,  holding  the  sword  of  knowledge 
in  his  head  and  facing  the  south  west  angle  of  the  heaven, 
cleanse  the  ground  of  the  sacrificial  shed  with  the  composi- 
tion known  as  the  Panchagavya  together  with  the  washings 
of  the  Argha  offering  (26).  The  stems  of  Kusha  grass  should 
be  carefully  examined  and  tied  up  in  separate  knots,  which 
should  be  subsequently  scattered  around  and  then  gathered 
up  (27).  The  cushion  should  be  spread  out  with  them  in  the 
north-east  angle  of  the  heaven,  the  gods  presiding  over 
households  and  the  goddess  Lakshmi  having  been  worship- 
ped in  the  south-weastern  angle  of  the  heaven  and  at  the 
door  of  the  sacrificial  shed  respectively  (28). 

In  the  west,  Purayanti,  who  is  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
sacrificial  shed,  should  be  worshipped  with  gems  by  uttering 
the  Hrid  mantra  (29).  The  worshipper  with  his  face  turn- 
ed towards  the  west,  should  worship  the  god  Samvti  in  the 
pitcher  situate  at  the  north-east  corner  of  the  sacrificial  shed 
over  a cushion  of  paddy,  and  containing  water,  gems  and  a 
piece  of  doth  over  its  mouth.  Similarly  the  goddess  Sakti 
should  be  worshipped  to  the  south  thereof,  the  goddess 
Vardhini  who  strides  a lion  and  who  is  revealed  in  the 


form  of  sword  in  the  west;  the  gods  who  are  the  guardian 
deities  of  the  different  angles  of  the  firmament  of  whom  Indra 
is  the  first  and  Vishnu  is  the  last,  in  their  respective  regions, 
and  the  cushion  as  well  as  the  weapons,  of  the  gods  together 
with  the  animals  they  ride  upon,  should  be  worshipped  with 
the  Hrid  mantra  by  mentioning  the  name  of  each.  Then 
the  sacrificial  Jar  should  be  carried  round  behind  the  pitchers, 


and  an  unbroken  jet  of  water  should  be  sprinkled  over  the 
hallowed  ground  by  way  of  circumbulation.  The  mandate 
of  the  god  Shiva  should  be  read  out  to  the  guardian  deities 
of  the  heaven  followed  by  a repetition  of  the  principal  Mantra 
sacred  to  that  divinity,  and  the  Jar  together  with  the  sacri- 
ficial pitcher  should  be  duly  consecrated  and  held  in  their 
place.  Subsequent  to  that  the  god  Shankar  should  be 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


worshipped  with  his  attributes  and  attendants  on  the  steady 
cushion,  as  it  were,  placed  over  the  afore  said  sacrificial 
pitcher,  and  his  weapon  in  the  Vardhini  as  follows  ; — i(Om 
Has  obeisance  to  the  cushion  of  the  weapon,  Hum  Fut 
Om  Om  obeisance  to  the  image  of  the  weapon.  Om  Hum 
Fut  obeisance  to  the  weapon  known  as  the  Pashupata. 
Om  Om  obeisance  with  Fut  to  the  heart.  Om  Srim  obeisance 
with  Hum  to  the  head.  Om  Yam  obeisance  with  the  Hum 
Fut  mantra  to  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown.  Om  Gum 


oucisance  witn  toe  tium  Put  mantra  to  the  weapon. 
The  weapon  should  be  meditated  upon  as  a god  possessing 
four  faces  and  looking  fierce  with  his  jaw  of  ragged  teeth 
effulgent  as  a million  of  suns,  and  weilding  a mace,  a club 
a spear  and  a sword  in  his  four  hands  (30 — 35).  The 
union  of  the  two  opposite  emblems  of  creation  should  be 
brought  about  by  exhibiting  the  ling  mudra , and  the  pitcher 
should  be  touched  with  the  small  finger  and  the  Vardhini 
with  the  clenched  fist,  and  the  sword  of  knowledge  should 
be  presented  for  protecting- the  mouth  of  the  pitcher.  The 
mantra,  which  serves  the  purpose  of  the  principal  mantra 
sacred  to  Shiva  should  be  repeated  hundred  times  in  the 
sacrificial  pitcher,  and  with  a tenth  part  thereof  the  pro- 
tection is  to  be  given  to  the  Vardhini  as  follows  .-“Cautiously 
guard,  Oh  thou  god,  who  art  the  lord  of  the  universe  and 
the  protector  of  all  sacrificial  ceremonies,  this  my  sacrificial 
shed.  The  god  Chaturbahu  (the  four  handed  one)  who  is  the 
inmate  deity  of  the  Pranava  mantra  should  then  be  worship- 
ped, together  with  the  god  Gan  a in  the  north-western  corner 
of  the  shed,  and  the  god  Shiva  over  the  sand  cushion;  and 
then  the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle  should  be  worshipped  with 
the  Argha  offering  (36 — 40).  fn  an  abstracted  state  of  mind 
the  worshipper  should  stow  on  his  right  and  left  hand  sides  the 
articles  essential  to  the  sacrifice  such  as  the  sticks  of  sacrificial 
trees,  Kusha  grass  and  sessamum  orientate,  {41),  which  should 


3°& 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


be  purified  as  before,  together  with  the  fire-receptacle*  fire* 
ladle,  and  the  clarified  butter  and  contemplate  the  god 
Shiva  in  the  sacrificial  fire  and  then  meditate  upon  the.  great- 
ness of  the  god  Urdhavaktra  (42),  Then  he  should  perform 
the  Sritinyasa  rite  in  the  image  of  the  god  in  the  sacrificial 
pitcher  and  in  the  body  of  the  disciple  and  also  in  the  sacrificial 
fire  cushion*  according  to  the  rules  of  practising  the  nyas® . 
Then  repeating  the  Banhibeej,  the  Homa  oblations  should  be 
offered  to  the  phases  of  beatific  knowledge  which  are  known 
as  Hiranya,  Kanaka,  Rakta,  Krishna,  Suprava,  Atirikta,  and 
Bahurupa,  occupying  the  different  angles  of  the  body  of  the 
fire  (44 — 45),  In  the  sacrifice  undertaken  with  a view  to  ap- 
pease the  anger  of  a particular  god,  or  to  confer  any  special 
boon  on  the  person  at  whose  instance  the  same  would  be 
performed,  ttye  Homa  oblations  should  be  composed  of  thick- 
ened milk,  sugar,  and  honey  etc.,  while  they  should  be  made 
of  Pinyaka,  powdered  barley,  and  decoctions  of  rice,  in  the 
sacrifice  performed  with  the  object  of  harming  an  enemy  of 
the  performer  (46™47).  An  angry  and  insulted  person 
offer  oblations  of  salt,  Rajika,  whey,  mustard  oil  and  thorn  by 
uttering  the  vasya  mantra  for  wreaking  vengence  upon  the 
insulfcor,  while  a person  bent  on  attracting  or  securing  the 
affections  of  a woman  or  on  gaining  mastery  over  the  mind 
of  another  person  should  perfom  the  Homa  with  the  obla- 
tions of  Bandhuk  and  Kinsuk  flowers  (48-— 49).  In  lust 
for  gain  cr  empire,  the  offerings  should  consist  of  Fatal  and 
Champaka  flowers  or  of  Bal  fruits,  and  with  lotus  flowers 
and  eatables  respectively  where  the  sacrifice  is  made  with 
a view  to  attain  a paramount  sovereignity  or  wealth  (go). 
Bunches  of  green  grass  should  be  cast  into  the.  sacrificial 
fire  where  the  object  of  the  performer  is  the  cure  of  any 
obstinate  disease,  the  offerings  of  Pryangu,  Malatiand  Mango 
flowers  and  Jvarantak  being  held  as  imparting  sw&y  over 
all  the  created  nature  (51),  A homa  ceremony  performed 
with  the  Mritunjaya  mantra  grants  immunity  from? death*  while 


AGN1  PURAHAM. 


309 


the  one  performed  with  the  offerings  of  sessamum  orientale 
confers  prosperity.  The  ceremony  of  propitiation  known  as 
the  Rudra  Shanti  should  be  undertaken  for  general  benedic- 
tion or  for  the  propitiation  of  angry  gods  and  astral  influences 
in  general  (52). 

Oh  Brahman  [ now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
performing  the  Kama  which  should  be  performed  in  connec- 
tion with  the  rite  under  discussion.  Eight  hundred  oblations 
should  be  cast  into  the  sacrificial  fire  by  uttering  the 
principal  mantra  sacred  to  the  god  and  offerings  to  the 
number  of  a tenth  part  thereof  to  the  divine  adjuncts.  The 
Tarpana  ceremony  should  be  performed  by  repeating  the 
abovesaid  principal  mantra  after  which  the  final  oblation 
should  be  cast  into  the  fire  as  laid  down  before  (53).  Then 
for  the  purpose  of  ushering  in  the  disciple,  as  it  were,  and  for 
bringing  in  auspicious  omens  by  removing  the  evil  ones* 
the  preceptor  should  rehearse  himself  the  mantra  known  as 
the  Pratishisya  mantra.  Two  hundred  oblations  should  be 
cast  into  the  fire  with  the  principal  mantra  as  previously 
directed.  The  rite  of  tarpana  should  be  performed  once 
with  the  eight  astra  or  weapon  mantras  preceded  by  the 
principal  one  and  followed  by  the  term  Svaha.  The  Dipana 
or  the  rite  of  luminafcion  should  be  performed  by  uttering  the 
mantra  which  runs  as  Om  Hrum  Hroun  firing  Shivaya  svaha, 
and  the  rite  *of  tarpana  with  the  mantra  Om  Houm  Shivaya 
Svaha  (54—56).  Then  having  washed  the  pot  or  the 
vessel  for  cooking  the  sacrificial  porridge  with  waters 
permeated  with  the  essence  of  Shiva,  and  plastered  the  same 
over  with  the  paste  of  sandal,  a girdle  of  consecrated  Kusha 
grass  (both  stem  and  leaf)  with  the  astra  and  the  armour 
mantra  should  be  tied  round  the  neck  of  the  same  for  the 
proper  preparation  of  the  porridge  (57-— 5$)*  Then  in  the 
cushion  placed  with  the  armour  mantra  over  the  semi-lunar- 
shaped mystic  sacrificial  diagram,  the  god  Shiva  should  b& 
^worshipped  with  the  flowers  of  sentiment  or  with  flowers  | 


1 


3io 


AGN!  PUHANAM. 


simply  in  the  vessel  of  porridge  girdled  round  the  neck  with 
a piece  of  cloth.  Subsequent  to  that  the  vessel  should  be 
placed  over  the  oven  situated  at  the  right  side  of  the  precep- 
tor and  which  would  have  its  aperture  facing  the  west,  and 
which  should  be  previously  consecrated,  the  mantra  of 
egoism  mentally  projected  into  the  same*  The  two  sides 
of  the  oven  should  be  contemplated  as  made  up  of  piety 
and  impiety  and  over  which  the  Afcma  mantra  had  been 
repeated.  The  vessel  should  be  cleaned  with  the  washings 
of  clarified  butter  and  the  mantra  of  weapon  should  be 
repeated  over  the  same.  By  repeating  hundred  times  the 
Prasad  mantra,  the  grains  of  shyama  grass,  etc.,  should  be 
cast  into  the,  clarified  butter  previously  purified  with  the 
mantra  of  weapon  (59—62),  Five  handfuls  of  the  above 
seeds  should  , be  thrown  into  the  clarified  butter  in  the 
case,  where  the  initiation  would  be  given  to  a single  disciple 
only.  In  caste  where  there  would  be  more  than  a single 
disciple,  a half/  handful  of  Shyama  seed  should  be  taken  for 
each  additional  one.  The  above  seeds  should  be  protected  or 
covered  over,  either  with  the  mantra  sacred  to  the  fire  god, 
or  with  the  mantra  of  armour,  and  the  porridge  should  be 
cooked  in  the  flame  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  by  uttering  the  chief 
of  the  mantras  which  are  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva.  Subse- 
quent to  that,  a ladleful  of  clarified,  butter  should  be 
melted  in  the  low  fire  of  the  oven  by  uttering  the  Sanhita 
mantras  followed  by  the  term  Svaha,  and  cast  into  the  vessel 
of  the  sacrificial  porridge.  Then  the  vessel  should  be  put 
over  the  stems  of  consecrated  Kusha  grass  by  repeating 
the  weapon  mantra,  and  the  plaster  of  clay  would  be  put  over 
its  body  by  uttering  the  ptaoava  mantra  Om,  and  by  once 
reading  aloud  the  Sanhita  mantras,  the  disciple  having 
cast  oblations  on  the  cushions  of  piety,  etc.,  situated  at  the 
east  of  the  mystic  diagram  around  the  receptacle  for  the 
sacrificial  fire  by  uttering  the  Hrid  mantra.  The  vessel 
would  thus  be  cool  on  having  received  a cool  plaster  upon 


AGNI  PURAN'AM. 


311 

its  body.  The  Sampata  offering  should  be  given  with  a 
ladleful  of  ^clarified  butter,  and  the  purification  is  to  be 
brought  about  by  reading  the  Sanhita  mantras  followed  by 
the  word  Vousat ; and  the  porridge  should  be  taken  out  of  the 
vessel.  The  ceremony  of  Amritikaran  (act  of  transforming 
the  porridge  into  ambrosia)  should  be  performed  by  exhibit- 
log  the  Dhanta  mudra)  and  the  porridge  should  be  made  cool 
by  placing  the  vessel  on  the  sacrificial  sand  cushion  (63 — 70). 
The  porridge  should  be  divided  into  three  parts,  one  for  the 
disciples,  one  for  the  fire  god,  and  one  for  the  Lokapalas 
and  which  should  be  dedicated  to  them  by  uttering  the  Hrid 
mantra  followed  by  the  word  namas  (obeisance).  The  water 
for  rinsing  the  mouth  should  be  offered  by  repeating  the 
same  mantra,  and  the  final  oblation  should  be  cast  into  the 
sacrificial  fire  on  having  made  hundred  offerings  of  clarified 
butter  unto  the  same,  by  uttering  the  mantra  enjoined  to  be 
repeated  on  the  occasion.  Mystic  diagrams,  sacred  to  the 
Rudras  and  the  Matrikas,  should  be  laid  down  to  the  east  of 
or  amidst  the  sacrificial  pitchers  sacred  to  the  god  Shamvu, 
and  offerings  should  be  mentally  made  unto  them.  The 
worshipper  should  make  himself  one  with  the  god  Shiva  in  the 
pitcher  sacred  to  that  divinity,  and  consider  himself  as  the 
omniscient  being  who  is  the  top  and  crown  of  things 
and  the  presiding  deity  of  the  sacrifice  then  closed  and 
performed.  He  should  deem  himself  identical  with  the  god 
Shankar,  and  walk  out  of  the  sacrificial  shed,  full  of  that 
divine  egoistic  notion.  Then  he  should  cause  the  disciples  to 
be  seated  on  the  cushion  spread  out  over  the  stems  of  Kasha 
grass  previously  consecreated  with  the . prana va  mantra,  and 
placed  over  the  mystic  diagram  by  uttering  the  weapon  mantra. 
The  disciple  should  put  on  a pair  of  clean  white  clothes. 
His  holy  thread  should  be  clean  and  white,  and  he  should 
face  the  north,  if  the  initiation  were  for  the  purpose  of 
attaining  salvation;  while  he  should  turn  his  face  towards 
the  east,  if  his  object  were  to  obtain  pleasure  and  enjoy- 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


312 

ment  only.  The  preceptor  should  make  the  disciple  sit 
erect  on  the  cushion,  and  vein  him  affectionately  from  foot  to 
the  tuft  of  hair  on  his  crown,  while  the  latter  should  turn  his 
face  towards  the  east,  in  the  case  where  the  initation  would  be 
for  the  attainment  of  any  earthly  good,  the  order  of  looking 
at  the  different  parts  of  the  body  of  the  disciple  being  in  the 
inverse  order,  that  is  from  tuft  of  hair  on  the?  crown  down* 
wards,  in  the  event  of  the  initiation  being  made  for  sal- 
vation of  the  disciple.  The  eyes  of  the  preceptor  would 
look  entranced  and  widened  with  the  teaming  beams  of 
affection  and  the  divine  essence  of  Shiva  while  looking  at 
the  disciple,  who  should  be  bathed  in  water  consecrated 
with  the  weapon  mantra,  the  rite  of  his  ablution  in  water 
consecrated  with  the  mantras  peculiar  to  the  mantrasnan 
described  before,  having  been  duly  performed  before  that. 
Then  the  disciple  should  perform  the  rite  of  ablution  with 
the  consecrated  ashes,  for  warding  off  all  sorts  of  evils  that 
might  befal  /him  in  the  course  of  the  sacrifice,  and  for 
destroying  all  sorts  of  impieties  and  imperfections  by 
practising  the  yoga  known  as  the  yoga  of  annihilating  the 
illusion  and  apparently  created  universe,  and  the  duly  con* 
secrated  ashes  should  be  gently  rubbed  over  his  body 
{71—79}.  Subsequent  to  that  the  disciple  should  be  again 
sprinkled  over  with  water  consecrated  with  the  weapon 
mantra,  and  for  the  perpose  of  Sakalikaran,  should  be  touched 
with  the  end  of  a Kasha  grass  in  the  part  of  his  body  above 
the  umbilicus  by  repeating  the  weapon  mantra,  the  rite  being 
Jkown  as  the  rite  of  Mar j an  or  cleansing  (80).  Similarly 
the  part  of  his  body  below  the  navel  should  be  thrice 
touched  with  the  end  of  the  consecrated  Kusha  grass  for  the 
purpose  of  performing  the  rite  of  Agbamarsana  (expiation  of 
sin),  the  bonds  of  his  physical  body  should  thus  be  broken 
through  by  means  of  the  above  two  ceremonies  performed 
by  uttering  the  mantra  of  the  arrow  (81).  The  preceptor 
should  then  locate  in  the  body  of  his  disciple , previously 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


3^3 


Worshipped  with  flowers,  the  god  Shiva  together  with  his 
divine  cushion  and  attendants,  by  fixing  his  eyes  upon  those 
of  his  disciple,  and  by  driving  through  the  above  organs 
| ’ t*ie  soul  °f  the  latter  the  divine  essence  with  which 

his  own  self  had  been  made  permeated  with.  The  preceptor 
should  utter  the  Netra  (eyes)  and  the  Hrid  mantra  while 
| thus  projecting  the  god  light  of  his  own  sou!  into  the  inner- 
being  of  his  disciple,  and  make  him  seated  on  a cushion 
on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  phalic  emblem,  clad  in  a white 
garment  duly  consecrated  with  the  mantra,  after  having 
made  him  reverentially  walk  round  the  image  of  the  above- 
said  emblem  of  creation.  The  cushion  should  be  covered 
I-  over  with  a piece  of  white  cloth  and  the  preceptor  should 
drive  his  own  soul  into  the  lotus  of  the  disciple’s  heart  with 
all  the  energy  of  his  own  psychic  nature,  and  by  exhibiting  the 
mudra  of  destruction  (Sanhar  mudra)  and  by  repeating  the 
mantra  of  the  image.  Having  prevented  the  possibility  of 
its  escaping  from  the  purified  body  of  the  disciple  facing 
the  east,  the  preceptor  should  perform  the  nyasa,  and  worship 
the  god  Shiva  in  his  head  by  repeating  over  the  same  the 
principal  mantra  of  the  god  (82—85).  The  hand  of  the 
disciple  should  be  converted  into  a hand  sacred  to,  and 
permeated  with,  the  essence  of  Shiva  by  telling  the  Shiva 


mantra,  such  a hand  being  known  to  translate  a votary  to  the 
region  hallowed  by  the  feet  of  the  god,  and  to  supply  him 
with  the  only  means  of  worshipping  him  in  this  existence. 
Then  the  worshipper  or  the  disciple  should  cast  flowers  upon 
the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem,,  sing  hymns  while  thus  offer- 
ing flowers  and  invoking  his  divine  presence  with  the 
mantras,  after  having  removed  all  the  impediments  which 
stand  in  the  way  of  worship.  The  preceptor  should  make 
obeisance  to  the  Brahmins  present  on  the  spot  and  to  the 
sacrificial  jar  (Bardhini)  and  the  pitcher,  and  cause  the 
disciple  to  be  seated  near  the  sacrificial  fire  facing  the  north, 
and  on  his  own  righthand  side,  and  meditate  upon  the 

^iii 


:.yji 


Hi 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


CHAPTER  LXXXII, 


1 he  God  said : — 0 thou  six-faced  one  hear  roe 
describe  the  process  of  performing  the  rite  of  spiritual 
initiation  known  as  the  Sanskardiksha  (the  rite  of  purifying 
initiation)  The  god  Shiva  situated  both  in  the  heart  and  in 
the  sacrificial  fire  should  be  invoked,  and  the  union  of  the 
two  divine  manifestations  respectively  located  in  the  two 
abovesaid  different  places  should  be  brought  about,  and  the 
gods  thus  united  should  be  propitiated  with  tarpana 
performed  by  uttering  the  Hrid  and  the  Atma  mantra.  Five 


occult  nerve  Susumna  emerging  out  of  the  body  of  the 
disciple  and  entering  into  that  of  his  own.  The  preceptor 
should  place  the  consecrated  Kusha  grass  into  the  right- 
hand  of  his  disciple,  the  one  end  of  which  should  touch  his 
own  knee-joint,  the  other  end  resting  on  the  body  of  the 
phalic  emblem.  Then  he  should  enter  into  the  heart  of  the 
disciple  by  letting  out  the  breath  wind  while  repeating  the 
mantra  sacred  to  Shiva,  and  come  back  into  his  own  heart 
by  practising  the  Puraka  (taking  in  of  the  breath  wind) 
form  of  Kumbhaka.  Having  thus  established  a commu- 
nion between  the  god,  the  disciple  and  himself,  the  preceptor 
with  the  Hrid  mantra  should  cast  three  oblations  into  the 
fire  permeated  with  the  essence  of  Shiva,  for  ensuring  the 
presence  of  the  god,  and  make  another  hundred  offerings 
unto  the  same  for  making  the  hand  of  the  disciple  perma- 
nently permeated  with  the  essence  of  Shiva.  The  disciple 
thus  Initiated  becomes  competent  to  worsip  the  god 
Shiva  (86—93). 


k I 


AGN!  PUR  A NAM.  3*5 

oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  for  invoking  the 
presence  of  the  god,  and  the  new-born  babe  of  fire  should 
be  touched  with  a flower  consecrated  with  the  mantra  of 
weapon,  the  stary  effulgent  point  of  consciousness  having 
been  mentally  located  therein  (1—3).  Having  located  the 
mantra  Hum  in  the  fire  by  practising  the  Rechaka  form  of 
Kumbhaka,  tbe  preceptor  should  draw  it  forth  by  means  of 
the  Sanharini  mudra  and  merge  the  same  in  his  own  heart 
by  taking  in  the  breath  wind  with  a Puraka  form  of 
Kumbhaka.  Then  the  abovesaid  essence  of  fire  should  be 
cast  into  the  organ  of  generation,  as  it  were,  of  the  goddess 
Bagishvari  by  letting  out  the  breath  wind  full  of  the  energy  of 
the  Hrid  mantra  and  by  exhibiting  the  mudra  known  as  the 
Bdbhaba  mudra  (4—5).  In  the  smokeless  sacrificial  fire 
fully  ablaze,  the  oblation  should  be  offered  with  the  mantra 
which  runs  as  u Om  Hum  Hum  obeisance  to  the  soul,”  for  the 
fulfilment  of  ithe  object  for  which  the  Homa  ceremony  had 
been  undertaken.  A Homa  ceremony  performed  in  a dull 
fire  emitting  smoke,  fails  to  bring  in  any  success  (6).  A 
pleasing  fire  that  rises  circling  upwards  and  emits  a sweet 
smell,  is  to'be  preferred  in  performing  the  Home  ceremony, 
as  well  as  the  fire  which  touches  the  grouud  and  sends 
out  sparks  in  contrary  directions.  The  sacrificial  fire 
should  be  so  lighted  as  to  possess  the  above  characteristics, 
and  the  iniquities  of  the  disciple  should  be  destroyed 
by  performing  the  Homa  therein,  which  is  known  as  the 
sin-eating  Homa;  or  in  the  alternative  the  failings  of  the 
disciples  might  be  burnt  with  the  energy  of  the  mantra 
sacred  to  the  god  Shiva  Hundred  oblations  by 

uttering  the  five  principal  mantra  of  the  god,  and  an  oblation 
with  the  same  mantra  followed  by  the  term  Vousat,  should 
be  cast  into  the  fire  for  depriving  the  disciple  of  the 
attributes  of  the  twice-born  caste,  and  for  purifying  and 
making  him  permeated,  as  it  were,  with  the  divine  essence  of  ; 

. . Shiva,  and  by  the  way  of  performing  unto  him  the  rites  of  „ i 


mms 

* 


I 

8 
■ al 

1 

I 

m 


:f? 

11 

f 


iri  ■ 


Then  the  preceptor,  well-versed  in  the  procedure  of,  sacri- 
ficial ceremonies,  should  carry  the  said  principal  mantra 
with  the  occult  stream  of  his  pure  consciousness  through  the 

: ' ■ ' -J  • f.-  ’y4  r’’  t *,  rt  ’ i i ' ■ , ■'  , 


AGNi  PUB  ANA 


Garbhadhan,  Simaftfonuyan  and  Namakaran,  etc.)  described' 
before  (See  Anti  Verse  13-17.  Chapter  75.)  in  his  spiritual 
re-birth. 


The  rite  of  Garbhadhao  in  the  present  case*  signifies  the 
elevation  and  conversion  of  the  soul  of  the  disciple,  by 
breaking  through  the  bonds  of  the  flesh  through  his  own 
exertion,  towards  and  into  the  sonship  of  the"  god  Rudra; 
while  the  rite  of  Punsavana  should  be  interpreted  as  a mani- 
festation of  the  soul — attributes  in  the  initiated,  unaffected 
by  the  workings  of  Maya  or  illusion.  The  spontaneous 
dawning  of  the  true  knowledge  on  the  mind  of  the  disciple, 
clouded  by  the  darkness  of  illusion  until  such  spontaneous 
lamination,  should  be  known  as  the  rite  of  Simantabandhan 
in  the  instance  under  discussion  ; while  the  development  and 
evolving  out  of  the  principle  of  absolute  bliss  (Shiva)  within 
the  disciple  should  be  designated  as  the  act  of  taking  birth 
in  this  form  of  spiritual  initiation-— the  wakening  of  conscious- 
ness in  a human  child,  like  the  other  acts  described  above, 
having  had  its  prototype  in  the  wakening  of  the  notion  of 
personal  identity  with  the  supreme  blissful  one,  in  the  soul 
of  the  initiated,  which  has  become  equal  to  the  Supreme  Being 
in  spiritual  perfection.  Then  the  preceptor  should  ‘carry 
into  the  lotus  of  his  heart  his  own  soul,  manifest  as  an 
effulgent  spark  of  Are,  by  exhibiting  the  mudra  known  as 
the  Sanhar  mudra ; and  utter  the  mantra,  principally  sacred 
to  the  god,  by  practising  the  Kumbhaka  Yoga,  (restraining 
the  breath  wind  while  engaged  in  meditation)  and  by  bring- 
ing about  an  union  of  the  god  Shiva  and  his  own  soul  in 
his  heart,  and  them  he  should  retain  therein  the  two  abovesaid 
entities,  made  one.  as  it  were,  by  a process  of  mental 
fusion  (9 — 15). 


AGrNI  PURANAM.  31  f. 

nerve  ganglia,  respectively  sacred  to  the  god  Brahma,  etc.,  up 
to  the  region  sacred  to  Shiva,  by  practising  the  Rechak  form 
of  Kumbhaka,  performed  by  covering- over  or  permeating  the 
breath  wind  with  the  essence  of  the  Hrid  mantra  and  by  psy- 
chically projecting  the  same  into  the  petals  of  the  lotus  of  the 
disciple's  heart  (16—17).  Then  he  should  duly  propitiate 
Shiva  and  the  fire-god;  and  cause  the  disciple  to  reveren- 
tially bow  down  unto  them,  and  advise  him  as  follows “You 
shall  not  blaspheme  nor  speak  ill  of  the  Shastras,  nor  skip 
over,  while  walking,  the  flowers  and  perfumed  leaves  with 
which  any  worship  had  been  performed.  You  shall  worship 
Shiva,  the  preceptor,  and  the  fire  god  as  long  as  you  shall  live’* 
(18—19).  The  above  vows  should  be  given  unto  those  who 
are  by  self  discipline,  quite  capable  of  keeping  them  $ while 
portions  only  of  the  above  vows  should  be  given  to  women, 
boys  and  old  men,  or  to  persons  who  are  invalid  or  addicted 
to  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  according  to  their  respective 
capacities.  The  preceptor  should  then  consecrate  in  a vessel 
the  alms  bowl,  waist  cloth  and  other  articles  essential  to 
the  due  fulfilment  of  the  vow,  with  the  Sanhita  mantras 
coupled  with  the  term  Svaha  in  the  end  and  preceded 
by  the  Ishana  or  the  Hrid  mantra.  Subsequently  the  pre- 
ceptor should  exhibit  them  to  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
sacrificial  sand  cushion,  after  having  quickly  cast  into  the 
fire  the  oblations  kqown  as  the  Sampata  offerings.  Then 
for  protection,  the  above  articles  should  be  kept  for  a 
time  beneath  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  and  then  made  over  to 
the  person  who  had  taken  the  vow,  with  the  leave  and 
permission  of  the  god  Shiva,  first  obtained.  Thus  by 
means  of  the  spiritual  initiation  made  with  the  above 
vows,  the  due  fulfilment  whereof  is  its  essential  condition, 
and  which  as  forming  the  theme  of  discussion  in  the 
present  chapter,  is  known  as  the  Samaya  Diksha  (vow 
initiation^,  the  inner  man  of  the  disciple  takes  a new  spiri- 
tual birth  and  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  a spiritual  infant 


1 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM 


though  competent  and  entitled  to  perforin  the  Homa  cere, 
mony  unto  the  fire  god  and  to  receive  the  knowledge  in 
culcated  by  the  Agamas.* 


CHAPTER  LXXXIII 


Jl  HE  God  said  .‘-—Now  I shall  describe  to  you  the  process 
of  illumining,  as  it  were,  the  principal  mantra  to  be  used  in 
the  course  of  the  spiritual  initiation,  which  has  for  its  object 
the  entire  cessation  of  the  recurring  cycles  of  future  exist- 
ence, and  the  unfettering  of  the  shackles  of  the  flesh.  The 

above  ceremony  of  lumination  should  be  performed  with  the 
rites  of  Tadan,  etc.  The  rite  of  lumination  should  be  per- 
formed unto  each  of  the  above  principal  mantras  by  offering 
one  or  three  oblations  in  the  fire  for  each  of  them,  the  mantra 
being  “Gm,  Hrun,  Houm,  Hrum  Fut.”  The  Nyasa  rite  should 
be  performed  as  follows  “Om,  Hroun,  Houm,  Hrun  Fut,J  at 
the  heart,  and  so  on  at  the  head,  and  the  mouth  respectively. 
In  all  sacrificial  ceremonies  undertaken  with  a view  to  injure 
the  enemies  of  the  performer,  the  rite  of  lumination  should 
be  done  unto  each  of  the  component  parts  of  the  abovesaid 
principal  mantra,  while  in  the  ceremonies  intended  to  bring 
peace  and  prosperity,  the  above  rite  should  be  performed 
by  appending  the  mantra  Vasat  to  the  principal  one.  The 


* The  Agamas  commonly  known  as  the  Tantras  are  so-called 
because  they  came  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  god  Shiva,  heard  by  his 
goddess  Girija  (the  daughter  of  the  mountain),  and  were  approved  of 
by  the  god  Vasudeva. 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


319 


preceptor  should  offer  oblations,  in  all  the  instances  to  all 
the  roads  leading  to  salvation  or  the  desired  end;  and  wor- 
ship the  disciple  seated  on  the  mystic  cushion  on  his  left. 

Then  he  should  contemplate  a string  of  thread  as  the 
occult  soul-nerve  Susumna,  and  tie  up  the  tuft  of  hair 
on  the  crown  of  the  disciple  with  the  one  end  thereof,  the 
other  end  being  let  fall  so  as  to  reach  down  to  his  toe.  In 
the  case  where  the  disciple  asks  for  salvation,  the  thread 
should  be  tied  round  a part  of  his  body  by  exhibiting  the 
Sanhar  mudra  (l — 7).  The  thread  should  be  tied  round  a part 
of  the  right  side  of  the  disciple,  if  male,  and  round  a part  on 
the  left,  if  female  ; the  goddess  Shakti  having  been  previously 
worshipped  on  his, or  her  head,  as  the  case  may  be  (8).  Then 
having  taken  hold  of  the  thread  by  exhibiting  the  Mudra 
known  as  the  Sanhar  Mudra,  the  same  should  be  placed  on 
the  head  of  the  disciple.  The  Nadi  or  the  occult  nerve  of  pure 
consciousness  should  be  taken  out  by  uttering  the  principal 
Mantra,  and  projected  into  the  thread  by  repeating  the  mantra 
known  as  the  Hrid  (9).  The  same  should  be  covered  over 
with  the  energy  of  the  Rudra  Mantra,  and  thrice  the  ob- 
lations should  be  offered  for  invoking  the  presence  of  the 
soul-god  by  repeating  the  Hrid  Mantra,  and  thrice  unto  the 
goddess  Shakti  (10).  Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the  road  of 
sound,  Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the  road  of  Vavana,  Om  Ham 
obeisance  to  the  road  of  Kala,  and  Om  Ham  obeisance  to 
the  road  of  Sodhya.  The  above  ways  to  the  desired  end 
should  be  located  in  the  thread  above  described  with  water 
consecrated  with  the  Mantra  of  weapon ; and  the  disciple 
should  be  bathed  in  the  same.  The  preceptor  should 
gently  beat  against  the  heart  of  the  disciple  with  a flower, 
and  enter  into  the  body  of  the  latter  by  means  of  his 
psychic  force,  while  practising  the  Rechaka  form  of  the 
Kumbhaka  by  letting  out  the  breath  wind  ; and  cut  in  two 
with  the  Mantra  of  weapon  the  string  of  psychic  energy  g§|M 
flowing  from  his  own  soul  into  that  of  his  disciple,  and  1 


iiiipii 

llilll 


II-  ,-Vv|: 


ACN1  PURANAM, 


he  should  pour  out  the  Hansa  bija  or  the  occult  energy* 
which  moving  the  heart  of  the  latter  with  the  rythmic 
movements  of  respiration,  gives  rise  to  the  sound  Han-sa 
(il— -13).  Houm  Hum  Fufc”  is  the  mantra  which  should 

be  used  at  the  time  of  performing,  as  it  were,  the  post  natal 
rite,  of  cleaving  asunder  the  umbilical  chord  of-  the  new- 
born 'soul  in  the  heart  ofSthe  disciple.  Then  having  covered 
the  same  over  with  the  Shakti  sutra  or  the  thread  of  psychic 
energy}  by  uttering  the  mantra  which  runs  as  “Ham  Ham 
Svaha”;  the  mantra  “ Om  Ham  Ham  Ham  Ham,  obeisance 
to  the  soul”  should  be  projected  psychically  into  the  above 
thread,  so  as  to  pervade  its  entire  length,  the  thread  having 
been  meditated  upon  as  the  umbilical  chord  of  the  new-born 
soul-life.  The  psychic  thread  should  be  covered  over  with 
the  mantra  of  armour.  Thrice  the  oblation  should  be 
offered  with  the  Hrid  mantra  for  invoking  the  presence  of 
the  soul-god.  The  thread  should  be  embodied  with  the 
principle  of  knowledge  and  the  phase  or  the  attribute  of  the 
soul-energy  known  as  the  Shantyateeta  Kala,  or  the  beatitude 
beyond  the  state  of  absolute  bliss,  should  be  looked  at  by 
repeating  the  mantra  which  runs  as  “ Om  Ham  Houm 
obeisance  to  the  phase  of  soul-energy  beyond  the  state  of 
pure  bliss  ; the  other  psychic  principles  having  been  located 
therein,  and  meditated  upon,  as  having  been  converted  into 
the  essence  of  the  mantras  (14—1.6}* 

Two  out  of  the  twenty-five  fundamental  principles  of  the 
universe  together  with  the  mantra,  the  sixteen  Varnas,  the 
eight  worlds,  the  Beejnadis,*  the  letters  ka  and  tha  together 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


§2 1 


three  qualities,  the  object  born  of  the  cause  of  Rudra,  should 
be  psychically  ensconced.  The  preceptor  should  meditate 


with  one  out  of  the  three  fundamental  attributes  (gtma),  the  one 
object  of  sense-perception,  and  the  primordial  cause  revealed 
in  the  form  of  the  eternal  blissful  one  (Sadashiva),  should  be 
contemplated  as  having  been  located  in  the  phase  of  beatitude 
beyond  the  region  of  absolute  bliss  (Shantyatita  Kala) ; and  the 
latter  in  its  turn  should  be  projected  into  the  thread  described 
above  (Pasha ’‘Sutra)  resplendent  with  its  white  effulgence,* 
by  repeating  the  mantra  which  runs  as  <(Om  Houm  Hum  FutM 
to  the  Shantyatita  Kalapasha.  Thus  having  taken  that  out, 
the  preceptor  should  place  the  same  on  the  head  of  the  thread 
abovedescribed,  and  cast  three  oblations  of  clarified  butter 
into  the  fire  for  ensuring  the  stay  of  the  Shantyatita  Kalaun 
the  thread  (17 — 19).  Two  out  of  the  twenty-five  fundamental 
principles  of  the  universe,  the  two  letters  Ka  and  Tha,  and  the 
two  Bijnadis,  together  with  the  two  out  of  the  three  funda- 
mental qualities,  the  two  mantras,  the  one  absolute  cause 
situated  at  the  occult  nerve-ganglion  of  that  name  and  called 
the  Ishvara,  the  twelve  terms  signifying  the  different 
attributes  of  the  god  (padas),  the  seventeen  worlds,  and 
one  out  of  the  five  Visayas  (objects*' of  sense-per- 
ception) should  be  considered  as  merged  in  the  Shanta 
Kala,  which  should  be  mentally  projected  into  the  principle 
of  beatitude  known  as  the  Krishna,  the  god  Achyuata  having 
been  meditated  upon  therein.  The  phase  or  the  beatitude 
of  bliss  should  be  taken  out  of  the  latter  principle  by  per- 
forming the  rite  of  Tadana  and  placed  at  the  mouth  of  his 
occult  psychic  nerve.  Then  the  preceptor  should  cast  three 
oblations  into  the  fire  with  the  Atma  mantras,  for  invoking 
the  presence  of  the  above  beatitude  in  that  part  of  the  thread. 
Then  in  the  phase  or  the  principle  of  knowledge  located  in 
the  beatitude  called  the  Atirikta,  the  seven  tattvas  or 
the  fundamental  principles  of  the  universe  together  with  the 
twenty-one  beatitudes,  six  letters,  and  twenty-five  worlds,  the 


322 


agni  puhanam. 


upon  the  Pratistha  Kala  (the  lordly  attribute  of  the  godhead), 
filled  in  with  the  sis  worlds,  the  six  attributes  of  the  god,  the 
twenty  beatifie  glories,  the  four  qualities,  the  three  mantras 
and  the  only  object  born  of  the  essence  of  the  god  Hari,  after 
having  performed  the  rite  of  Tadana  in  the  phase  of  beatitude 
designated  as  the  Sukla.  Then  having  placed  the  same  at  the 
navi  sutra  (the  occult  nerve  ganglion  about  the  umbilicus) 
the  preceptor  should  offer  three  oblations  for  ensuring 
the  location  of  the  same  therein.  Subsequent  to  that,  he 
should  locate  in  the  Kala  or  the  principle  of  non-action,  the 
mantra  Hrim,  together  with  the  winds  pervading  the  occult 
nerves,  and  the  sense-organs  (both  intellectual  and  operative) 
and  the  principles  presiding  over  the  workings  of  each  of 
them,  conjointly  with  each  of  the  five  objects  of  sense-per- 
ception, and  the  first  cause  contained  in  the  Bramhanda- 
m antra,  together  with  the  Samvaras.  The  rite  of  Tadana 
(beating  out)  should  be  performed  at  the  outset,  in  the  remain- 
ing principles  of  beatitude  other  than  those  above  enumerated, 
which  should  be  located  and  worshipped  in  the  thread,  the 
usual  oblations  for  ensuring  their  countinuance  therein, 
having*  been  duly  offered  in  the  sacrificial  fire  (2Q-— 30)* 
Thus  having  abstracted  the  Kalas  or  the  principles  of 
beatitude,  the  preceptor  should  lay  them  down  in  the  thread 
above  described.  The  act  of  locating  them  should  be  accom- 
panied  by  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice,  called  the  sacrifice 
with  vows  and  penances,  where  the  form  of  initation  falls 
under  the  category  called  the  Sabija,  Other  rites,  over:: 
and  above  those  already  described,  should  be  undertaken 
with  a view  to  keep  intact  the  corporeal  body  of  the  dis- 
ciple, .until  the  mantra  would  take  fruit  and  produce  the 
wished  for  beatitudes,  (31 — 32).  The  mantra  which  is  the 
epithet  of  the  occult  soul-light,  should  be  meditated  upon 
in  the  principles  of  beatific  knowledge  (Kalas)  described 
above,  the  rites  of  tarpana  (Zz/., —propitiation)  and  lamination: 
ving  been  performed  with  the  same,'  and  the  oblations 


ACfNi  PURANAM, 


having  been  offered  with  the  Atma-mantra,  S three  times 
three. 

“ Om  Ham  oblation  with  obeisance  to  the  noose  of 
the  phase  of  % beatitude  beyond  that  of  absolute  bliss/1 
The  rite,  of  Tarpana  (propitiation)  should  be  performed 
with  the  preceding  mantra,  “ Om,  Ham,  Ham,  Ham,  , Fut, 
Oblation  with  obeisance  to  the  noose  (meaning  the  above 
said  thread ) of  beatitude  beyond  that  of  pure  bliss, ” the 
rite  of  lumination  (Deepana)  having  been  performed  with  the 
above  mantra,  for  considering  the  beatitudes  as  pervading 
the  five  occult  nerve  ganglia,  through  which  they  become 
respectively  patent  and  perceptible  (33 — 34).  To  that 
end,  the  thread  should  be  smeared  with  clarified  butter 
coloured  with  saffron,  and  the  god  Shiva  with  his  attendants  1 
should  be  worshipped  therein,  with  the  “Vala”  mantra  fol- 
lowed by  the  mantra  “Hun  Fut,”  by  piercing  through  the 
occult  nerve  ganglia  in  due  succession.  The  preceptor  should 
concentrate  his  vital  energy  on  his  own  heart,  and  only 
confine  his  life-energy  to  that  part  of  his  body  while  taking 
hold  of,  and  tying  the  thread  by,  uttering  the  following  mantra. 

“ Hpum,  Ham,  Hun,  Fut,"  I take  hold  of  the  Shyantatitakala 
'(phase  of  beatific  knowledge  beyond  that  of  pure  bliss) 

; and  tie  up  the  same  round  my  body.  The  above  mantra 
should  be  repeated  while  accepting,  taking  hold  of,  and 
tying  the  above  thread,  which  stands,  as  it  were,  for 
the  bonds  of  the  world  (36).  The  seated  preceptor  should 
place  the  above  thread  on  the  shoulder  of  the  disciple  (if 
* male)  for  completing  the  rite,  and  hundred  times  offer  the 
“Homa”  oblation  with  the  principal  mantra  for  expiating 
all  sins  of  the  disciple.  The  Homa  ceremony  should  be 
performed  in  a covered  saucer,  in  the  case  where  the  disciple 
is  of  the  male-sex,  and  on  an  overturned  saucer  in  the  case 
of  a female  disciple  (37 — 38).  The  thread  should  be  covered 
over  with  the  essence  of  the  Hrid  mantra,  and  worshipped  with 
the  same,  on  having  been  made  pure  by  worshipping  the 


god  Shiva  and  his  attendants,  and  by  offering  the  Sampata 
oblations  spoken  of  before.  Then  the  thread  should  be 
placed  beneath  the  sacrificial  pitcher;  and  the  mantra  of 
protection  from  harms  should  be  read  out  to  the  same. 
Flowers  should  be  given  in  the  hands  of  the  disc,  vie,  and  the 
sacrificial  pitchers  should  be  worshipped,  after  which  the 
preceptor  would  walk  out  of  the  sacrificial  tempi*?,  after  having 
caused  the  disciples  to  be  seated  on  the  three  mystic  diagrams, 
previously  described  on  the  hallowed  ground.  The  disciple 
should  sit  facing  the  northern  quarter  of  the  firmament,  if 
the  initiation  were  for  the  object  of  enjoying  an  immunity 
from  the  recurring  cycles  of  existence ; while  they  should 
turn  their  faces  towards  the  east,  if  the  initiation  were 
made  for  enjoyment  of  comforts  only,  both  in  this  life  and 
hereafter  (39—42).  At  the  outset,  the  preceptor  should 
perform  the  ceremony  of  the  Chullak  Horaa  with  three  obla- 
tions of  the  composition,  known  as  the  Panchagavya,  and 
after  that  with  three  or  eight  mouthfuls  of  the  sacrificial 
porridge,  uncontaminated  by  the  touch  of  the  teeth,  the  same 
having  been  made  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  Atma 
mantra  repeated  over  them.  Such  oblations  should  be  covered 
over  with  Palasha  and  Pippal  leaves  respectively,  according  as 
the  ceremony  would  be  performed  for  attaining  salvation  or  for 
obtaining  comforts.  The  Samvojan  oblations,  (oblations  of 
should  be  offered,  by  repeating  the  Hrid  mantra;  and 
preceptor  should  rinse  his  mouth  with  water  conse- 
crated with  the  same  mantra.  The  sticks  or  stems  of  sacri- 
ficial trees  should  be  given  with'ifche  Hrid  mantras,  for  serving 
the  purpose,  as  it  were,  of  tooth-brushes,  and  hundred  and 
eight  times  the  principal  mantra  should  be  told,  for  making  up 
and  atonibg  for  any  defect  or  deficiency  of  procedure  in 
performing  the  sacrifice.  Then  the  merit  of  performing 
the  above  rites  should  be  assigned  to  the  presiding  deity  of 
the  sacrificial  sand-cushion,  whom  the  preceptor  should  sub- 
sequently bid  adieu,,  and  go  on  with  the  worship  of  the  god 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM. 


AGN1  FURANAM. 


3^5 


Chandeshvar,  and  worship  the  sacrificial  porridge  over  the 
consecrated  fire,  after  having  removed  the  flowers,  etc,,  with 
which  the  god  Chanda  had  been  worshipped  (43 — 47),  After 
that,  the  preceptor  should  worship  the  Lokapalas  and  the 
sacrificial  pitchers,  and  only  take  leave  of  them,  and  then 
bid  adieu  to  the  god  Gana  and  the  fire-god,  in  the  event 
of  their  having  been  retained  on  the  periphery  of  the  outer 
mystic  circle  of  the  sacrifice.  Then  oblations  in  small  quanti- 
ties should  be  given  to  the  Lokapalas,  on  the  periphery  of  the 
above  circle;  and  the,  preceptor  bathed  in  the  consecrated 
water  or  with  hallowed  ashes,  should  then  enter  the  temple  of 
sacrifice,  and  cause  the  disciples,  if  house-holders,  to  be  laid 
down  on  a mattress  of  Kusa  grass,  with  their  heads  turned  to- 
wards the  north;  while  those  who  would  be  monks,  should  lie 
down  on  a bed  of  ashes,  with  their  heads  turned  towards  the 
south.  Then  the  preceptor  should  bathe  the  disciples,  who 
had  tied  up  the  tufts  of  hair  on  their  crowus  in  knots,  with 
the  astra  and  the  seven  Manavak  mantras,  and  walk  out 
of  the  temple  subsequent  thereto. 

u0m  Hili,  Hili,  Swaha  (oblation  with  obeisance^  to  the 
mace-wielding-god.”  The  preceptor  should  eat  the  sacri- 
ficial porridge,  containing  the  composition  known  as  the 
Panchagavya,  and  then  having  cleansed  his  teeth  and  rinsed 
his  mouth  with  water,  lie  down  on  the  bed  over  which 
the  Pavaman-mantra  had  been  previously  repeated,  and 
meditate  upon  the  rites  performed  in  connection  with  the 
sacrifice.  This  is  the  rule  which  should  be  adapted  in  the 
Adhivasa,  preliminary  to  the  ceremony  of  spiritual  initia* 
lion  (48—53),  , -V' ' ' 


»:o> 


■ 1 1 gf  if  g ... .. 


CHAPTER  LX XX I V ; 


The  GOD  said  -Then  early  in  the.  mornings  the 
preceptor  should  bathe  and  perform  his  daily  rit^s  of  prayer 
and  worship.  Dreams  of  curd,  ginger,  meat,  and  wine,  in  the 
night  preceding  the  day  of  ceremony,  should  be  held  as  the 
most  auspicious  ones,  while  dreams  of  riding  on  elephants  or 
horses,  or  the  dream  of  a piece  of  white  cloth  by  the  preceptor, 
should  also  be  looked  upon  as  harbingers  of  good.  The 
preceptor  dreaming  in  sleep  by  as  if  he  is  bathing  or  anointing 
his  body  with  oil,  should  be  regarded  as  auguring  evil,  which 
should  be  remedied  with  a Horna  ceremony,  performed  with  the 
Aghora-mantra  (i — 2).  The  preceptor  should  enter  the  sacri- 
ficial shed,  after  having  finished  his  two  daily  rites  of  sandhya 
worship,  which  he  should  perform  according  to  the  rules  of 
incidental  (Naimittika)  sacrificial  ceremonies.  He  should 
rinse  his  mouth  with  water,  purify  his  own  soul  and  the  part  of 
his  forearm,  known  as  the  Shivahasta,  locate  in  his  inner 
being  the  presiding  deities  of  the  different  angular  points  of 
the  sky,  such  as  Indra  etc.,  and  worship  them  in  the  sacrificial 
pitcher  turn  and  turn  about.  The  God  Shiva  should  be  wor- 
shipped both  on  the  mystic  diagram,  and  on  the  sacrificial  sand- 
cushion,  and  the  fire-god  should  be  worshipped  with  oblations ; 
and  the  rite  of  mantra  tarpana  should  be  performed  until  the 
final  oblation  would  be  offered.  The  inauspiciousness  of 
the  two  latter  sorts  of  dreams,  should  be  removed  and  atoned 
for  by  casting  hundred  and  eight  oblations  of  clarified  butter 
into  the  fire,  accompanied  by  the  mantra  of  weapon  pre- 
ceded by  the  mantra  Hum.  The  preceptor  should  then 
perform  the  rite  of  luminating  the  mantra,  and  offer  oblations 
(Antarvali  or  oblations  presented  on  the  interveining  space) 
on  the  sacrificial  ground,  comprised  between  the  sacrificial 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


pitchers  and  the  sand-cushion,  for  lighting  the  hallowed  fire 
upon.  Subsequent  to  that  he  should  ask  the  permission  of 
the  god  to  usher  in  the  disciple,  and  then  walk  out  of  the 
temple.  All  the  rites  and  ceremonies  described  under  the 
Samaya  Diksha,  should  be  performed  ; the  mystic  diagram 
should  be  laid  down  on  the  ground  as  thereunder  averred. 
The  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  known  as  the  Sampata 
(oblations  which  are  supposed  to  lay  down  the  foundation 
of  the  Homa),  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  with  the  end 
of  the*consecrated  Kusha  grass  which  should  be  looked  upon 
as  the  umbilical  chord  of  the  latter.  The  preceptor  should 
thrice  offer  oblations  fin  to  the  fire,  by  uttering  the  principal 
mantra  for  ensuring  the  safe  location  of  the  above  ; prototype 
of  the  umbilicus  during  the  continuance  of  the  sacrifice, 
and  take  in  hand,  the  thread  known  as  the  Fasha-sutra, 
after  having  worshipped  the  god  Shiva,  invoked  and 
located  in  the  sacrificial  pitcher  (3 — 9).  Then  the  above 
Pasha-sutra  should  be  tied  round  and  hung  down  from  the 
tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  disciple,  who  would  remain 
standing  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  preceptor,  so  as  to 
reach  down  to  the  toe  of  the  former.  In  the  case  where  the 
disciple  would  be  initiated  with  the  sole  object  of  working 
out  his  own  salvation,  the  thread  should  be  tied,  by  viewing 
it  whilejrehearsing  mentally  the  Chidmantra;  its  entire  length 
having  been  contemplated  as  full  of  the  essence  of  all  the 
knowabie  Bhuvanas  or  the  worlds  of  perception,  the  principle 
of  non-action  (Nibriti)  having  been  located  therein.  The 
preceptor  should  mentally  recite  hundred  and  eight  times,, 
the  names  of  the  gods  -Kapala,  Aja,  Buddha,  Bajradeha 
Pramardan,  Bivuti,  Abyaya,  Shasta,  Pinaki,  the  lord  of  heaven 
Agni,  Rudra,  Hutashi,  PingaJa,  Khadaka,  Hara,  Jvalana  Da- 
hyana,  Babhru,  Bh  asm  an  taka,  Kshapantaka,  Yamya,  Mrityu- 
hara,  Dhata,  Vidhata,  Karjaranjaka,  Kala/Dharma,  Adharma* 
Sanyukta,  Viyogaka,  Nairita,  Marana,  Hanta,  KruradristiV 
; Bhayanaka,  Urdhanshakha,  Birupaksa,  Dhumra,  Lohita- 


Hn  ill  111 


3^8 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


Danstra,  Va!a,  Ativala,  Pashahasfca,  Mahavala,  Shveta, 
Jayabhadra,  Dirghavahu,  Jalantaka,  Badabasya,  and  Vinsa 
(the  ten  latter  gods  being  the  ten  different  manifesta- 
tions of  the  sea  god  Varuna)  together  with  those  of 
Shighra,  Laghu,  Vayuvega,  Sukshma,  Tikshna,  Kshpa  itaka, 
Panchantaka,  Panchashikha,  Kapardi,  Meghavahana,  Jata- 
Makutadhari,  Nanaratnadhara,  Nidhisha,  Rupavkna,  Dhanya, 
Soumyadeba,  Prasadakrit,  Prakasha,  Laksmivan,  Kamarupa, 
Vidyadhara,  Gnanadhara,  Sarvagna,  Vedaparaga,  Matrivrittu, 
Pingaksha,  Vutapala,  Valipriya,  ^Sarvavidyavidhata,  Suka- 
Dukshahara,  Ananta,  Palaka,  Dhira,  Pataladhipati,  Vrisha, 
Vrisadhara,  Virja,  Grasana,  Sarvatomukha,  Lohita  (the  ten 
latter  being  the  ten  manifestations  of  Rudra  seated  on  the 
hoods  of  snakes),  Shamvu,  Vivo,  Gana,  Adhyaksa,  Traksa, 
Tridashavandita,  Sanhar,  Bihara,  Lava,  Lipsu,  Vichakshana, 
Atta,  Kuhuka,  Kalagni,  Rudra,  Hataka,  Kusmanda,  Satya, 
Vishnu,  Bramha,  (these  eight  being  the  manifestations  of 
Rudra  occupying  the  interior  of  the  caldron  of  the  universe). 
The  preceptor  should  also  contemplate  the  names  of  the 
Bhubanas  together  with  those  of  the  gods  Bhahodvaba 
Sarvavuta,  Sarvavutasukhaprada  (Grantor  of  fielicity  to  all 
beings)  Sarvasannidhyakr  it  (the  all-pervading  one),  and 
Bramha,  Vishnu,  Rudrakar  (creator  of  ^ the  Indian  trinity  of 
godhead)  as  follows.  Oh  Thou  worshipped  one  existing 
before  all  ! Om  Oh  Thou  who  dost  witness  the  evolution  of 
the  universe,  and  all  incidents  happening  therein  f Om  Thou 
who  art  the  destroyer. of  Rudra  or  the  principle  of  universal 
dissolution.  Om  Thou  who  art  revealed  in  the  sun 
(Patanga).  0ns  Thou  who  art  the  sound,  the  essence  of 
all  things  and  beings,  and  the  eternal  blissful  one,  and  the  all 
pervading  life-pulse  of  the  universe,  who  dost  grant  all  boon 
to  all  beings,  and  who  art  the  creator  of  Bramha,  Vishnu,  and 
Rudra.  I make  obeisance  to  thee,  0 Shiva  (the  blissful  one). 
Om  obeisance  and  obeisance  to  thee  (xg — 26). 

Then,  0 Skanda,  in  the  thread  or  the  Pashatsutra  above 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


described,  the  principle  of  non-action  (Nivrltti)  should  be 
contemplated,  as  impregnated  with  the  twenty-eight  beatific 
states,  together  with  the  mind  which  fills  the  universal  expanse 
of  ether,  and  also  with  the  eight  letters  of  which  the  Sadya, 
Hrid,  Astra  and  Netra,  Mantras  are  composed.  The  letter 
‘Ma’  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet,  which  is  the.  emblem  of  the 
mystic  seed  the  universe,  together  with  the  occult  nerves 
Ida  and  Pingala,  and  the  vital  winds  known  as  the  Pran  and 
the  Apan,  the  two  organs  of  smell  and  generation,  together 
with  the  principle  of  earth  matter,  which  is  characterised  by 
the  proper  sensible  of  smell,  and  the  five  proper  sensibles  of 
smell,  touch,  etc.,  should  also  be  contemplated  as  merged  in 
the  above  principle  of  non-action  located  in  the  thread, 
which  is  emblematic  of  the  bond  of  this  life  (Pasha-Sutra) 
should  be  filled  in,  by  an  act  of  psychic  abstraction,  with 
the  principle  of  essential  matter  ( Prithvi-Maudal ),  which 
is  of  an  amber  hue,  and  a square  shape,  chequered  with  elec- 
tric flashings  and  extending  over  eighty  millions  of  miles  of 
space.  In  this  zone  of  essential  matter  should  be  considered 
as  lying  concealed,  die  wombs  of  the  different  forms  of 
existences,  the  first  being  the  source  from  which  flows  out 
ihe  existence  of  the  celestial  beings,  then  the  four  fold 
arrangements,  from  which  emanate  the  creeping  crawling 
things  of  the  carLh  (sarishripa),  then  the  womb  of  bird  life 
and  that  of  bovine  species,  and  then  the  womb  through  which 
the  mammals  are  brought  to  being,  each  succeeding  one 
evolving  out  of  its  anterior  species  in  due  order  of  evolution. 
The  fifth  form  of  womb  is  that  to  which  the  immoveables 
of  nature  owe  their  origin,  the  sixth  form  being  that  in 
which  the  non-humans,  such  as  the  Rakshas,  the  Pishaches, 
the  Yakshas,  and  the  Gandharvas,  etc.,  take  their  birth.  The 
seyenth  form  of  womD,  is  that  in  which  the  Yamas  take  their 
birth ; the  eighth  form  being  known  as  the  Bramhayoui.  The 
eight  essential  principles  relating  to  the  earth  matter,  together 
with  their  respective  receptacles,  should  be  contemplated  ■ 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


as  having  been  located  in  the  above  principle  of  non- 
action. The  absolute  dissolution  of  the  universe,  which 
means  the  disintegration  of  the  universal  nature,  together 
with  the  sensations  of  pleasure  and  pain,  which  are  the  out- 
come of  intellection,  and  the  god  Bramha  who  is  the  first 
cause,  and  to  whose  waking  state  is  due  the  continuance 
of  the  universe,  should  also  be  located  in  tfee  principle  of 
non-action  mentioned  above,  which  should  be  coupled  with  the 
Mantra  particularly  sacred  to  it,  and  running  as  “ Om  Harrs 
Hum  Ham  Hum  Fut  to  the  thread  which  stands  for  the  beati- 
tude of  non-action.”  Then  the  preceptor  should  draw  it  forth 
by  practising  the  Puraka  form  of  Kumbhaka,  and  by  exhibit- 
ing the  Ankushamudra,  the  mantra  which  would  be  repeated 
on  the  occasion  being  “ Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the  Nivritti 
Kala  Pasha.”  Then  he  should  carry  up  the  same  through 
the  occult  nerve-ganglia  situate  at  the  lower  part  of 
his  body,  by  exhibiting  the  Sambarmudra  and 'repeating 


the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Om  Hum  Ham  Hrum  Hum 


Fut  to  the  Nivrittikalapasha”  (thread  of  the  beatitude  of 
non-action).  Then  the  same  should  be  projected  into 
the  receptacle  for  the  sacrificial  fire,  by  exhibiting  the 
Mudra  known  as  the  Udbhavamudra,  and  also  by  repeating 
the  abovesaid  Mantra.  The  Nivrittikala  thus  located  in 
the  fire-hole,  should  be  worshipped  with  the  above  Mantra, 
and  therein  the  oblation  should  be  cast  unto  the  same,  with  a 
view  to  ensure  its  continuance.  The  Tarpana  should  be 
performed  by  offering  three  oblations.  The  god  Brahma 
should  be  invoked  with  the  Mantra  “ Om  Ham  obeisance  to 
the  god  Brahma;”  and  the  following  prayer  should  be  read 
aloud  “Oh  Brahman!  I initiate  this  disciple  in  this  world 
over  which  you  hold  sway.  May  he  attain  salvation.  Dost 
thou  be  propitious,  Oh  lord  j”  The  god  of  fate  should  be  thus 
spoken  to,  after  which  the  preceptor  should  invoke  the 
goddess  Vagishvari  with  the  Hrid-Mantra,  who  is  the  deity  of 
protection  and  makes  herself  manifest  in.  the  forms  of 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


33  e 


knowledge,  volition  and  action,  and  who  possesses  the  six 
divine  attributes,  and  is  the  sole  cause  of  the  universe.  The 
goddess  should  be  worshipped  in  the  following  way.  The 
principal  Mantras  wh,ich  are  preceded  'by  the  Hrid-Mantras 
and  coupled  with  the  Hum  Fut  Mantra  in  the  end,  and  which 
had  been  previously  stirred  up  in  the  womb  of  the  goddess 
Vagishvari,  sliould  be  psychically  projected  into  the  heart  of 
the  disciple.  The  preceptor,  well-versed  in  the  procedure  of 
these  sacrifices,  should  then  penetrate  into  his  innerself  by 
one  stroke  of  his  soul-energy,  unite  the  effulgent  point  of 
consciousness  of  the  latter  located  in  the  beatitude  of 
non-action,  with  the  other  beatific  principles  (Kalas),  and 
divide  the  same  with  the  principal  Mantra  “ Om  Ham  Hum 
Has  Hum  Fut,”  and  also  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which 
runs  as  “ Om  Ham  Svaha,  and  by  exhibiting  the  Samharmudra 
after  having  practised  a Purak  form  of  the  Kumbhaka. 
(27 — 40).  Then  he  should  draw  it  out  by  repeating  the  Atma- 
Mantra  (“  Om  Hum  Hum  Hum  obeisance  to  the  soul)  and 
merge  the  same  in  his  own  pure  consciousness.  Then  he 
should  bring  about  an  union  of  his  own  soul  and  the  god 
and  the  goddess.  Then  he  should  rouse  up  the  same, 
practise  the  Rechaka  form  of  Kumbhaka,  and  carry  up  the 
stream  of  his  pure  consciousness,  through  the  occult  nerve- 
ganglia  respectively  sacred  to  the  god  Bramha,  etc.,  up  to 
the  cavity  of  the  brain  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva.  He  should 
locate  the  same,  in  its  upward  course,  in  all  the  principles 
which  give  rise  to  the  different  existences,  such  as  the  serpent, 
the  Aves,  the  mammal  etc.,  contained  in  his  inner-being 
which  is  the  Microcosm  of  the  Universe,  and  finally  merge 
the  same  in  the  womb  of  the  fire  goddess  Vagishvari,  by 
exhibiting  the  Udbhavamudra  from  the  left.  The  location 
of  the  soul  in  the  principles,  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
line,  should  be  made  by  the  preceptor,  with  a view  to 
perform  the  rite  of  Giarbhadhau  to  the  newly-born  soul-child 


•h  f‘he  disciple,  so  as  to  forestall  the  process  of  evolution,  or 


Hi 


a***»«i 


33^ 


AGNS  PURAN4M. 


go  that  he  might  not  be  under  the  need  of  going  through 
the  necessary  cycles  of  existence,  before  he  could  enter  the 
door  of  salvation.  The  stream  of  soul-energy  thus  evoked, 
should  be  worshipped  with  the  Mantra  u Om  Ham  Ham  Ham 
obeisance  to  the  soul;  and  five  times  the  rite  of  Tarpana 
should  be  performed  unto  it  with  the  same  Mantra.  In  all 
other  principles  of  birth,  the  psychic  body  o£  the  disciple 
should  foe  purified.  The  rite  of  Punsavan  should  not  be 
performed  in  the  present  instance,  as  the  psychic  body  is 
not  characterised  by  any  distinctive  mark  of  sex.  The 
rite  pi  purification  of  the  body  of  the  soul-child  in  its 
successive  births  in  the  different  wombs  of  existences,  such 
as  the  non-human  and  the  divine,  etc.,  in  its  gradual 
progress  towards  salvation,  should  be  made  with  the  Siras- 
Mantra ; and  likewise  the  preceptor  should  perform  unto 
him,  the  rite  of  postnatal  ceremony  in  those  of  its  psychical 
re-births,  with  the  same  Mantra  as  the  above.  The  preceptor 
should  contemplate  the  mantra  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva,  and 
also  5th e respective  regions  occupied  by  the  material  garbs 
of  the  soul-child,  in  its  successive  re-births  described  above. 
Its  objects  of  sense  perception  should  be  meditated  upon  by 
repeating  the  Mantra  of  armour,  and  its  senses  by  repeating 
the  Mantra  of  weapon  ; while  its  appearances,  false  know- 
ledge, sins,  and  cessations  of  beings,  should  be  contemplated 
by  uttering  the  Mantra  which  is  sacred  to  the  soul  and  known 
as  the  Afcma-Mantra  (41 — 47)*  The  ears  should  be  made 
pure  with  the  essence  of  the  Shiva  Mantra,  and  the  purifica- 
tion of  the  component  principles  should  be  made  by  repeat- 
ing the  Hrid-Mantra.  hive  oblations  should  be  offered  five 
times  in  succession,  in  the  course  of  Garbhadhan  and  other 
rites  described  above ; and  the  extinction  of  the  sinful  acts 
of  the  disciple  should  be  made  with  the  essence  of  the  Mantra 
of  Maya  (illusion).  Similarly  the  chain  of  hankerings  and 
propensities,  which  binds  him  to  his  successive  mundane 
existences,  should  be  broken  with  the  essence  of  a similarly 


AGNI  PURANAM 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


cravings  and  desires  in  common  with  all  other  animals,  have 
burnt  down  all  his  sins  and  impieties.  Bind  him  not  again  with 
the  cycles  of  necessary  existence,  though  he  still  lives  in  a 
region  of  which  you  are  the  supreme  God.  Then  the  preceptor 
should  bid  farewell  to  the  above  god,  gradually  fill  in  the 
right  occult  nerve  below  his  spinal  chord,  by  restraining  his 
breath*wind  in  Kumbhaka,  exhibit  the  Samhar  Mudra,  and 
unite  his  own  soul  with  the  Universal  One  which  would 
thereby  look  like  the  disk  of  the  full  moon  in  the  beginning  of 
an  eclipse* 

The  preceptor  should  locate  the  same  in  the  thread  by 
practising  the  Rechaka  form  of  Kumbhaka,  and  worship  the 
drops  of  ambrosial  water  contained  in  the  vessel  of  offering, 
and  place  the  same  on  the  head  of  the  disciple.  Then  the 
god  and  the  goddess  should  be  bid  adieu,  and  the  final  obla- 
tion should  be  offered,  by  uttering  the  Shara  Mantra  with  the 
term  Vousat  appended  thereto.  Thus  the  beatific  principle 
of  non-action,  (Nivritti  Kala)  should  be  purified  in  the  form  of 
spiritual  initiation,  made  with  the  object  of  merging  the 
disciple  in  the  Supreme  being.  (54  —58) 


CHAPTER  LXXXV. 


X HE  union  of  the  two  classes  of  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  the  universe,  both  pure  and  impure  (limited  and  ab- 
solute), should  be  brought  about  by  repeating  the  Mantra  “Om 
H«tm  Hrum  Ham.  In  the  beatific  quality  or  state  known  as 
the  Pratistha,  the  preceptor  should  contemplate  as  merged 
the  following  principles  and  divinities,  viz,,  the  essential 
virtues  of  water,  light,  and  sky,  the  five  proper  sensible's  of 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


touch,  taste,  etc.,  the  senses,  the  principle  of  cognition,  the 
essentia!  virtues  (such  as  the  Satva,  Raja  and  Tama),  and  the 
egoistic  knowledge  (which  make  up  the  twenty-four  out  of 
the  twenty-five  fundamental  principles  of  the  universe, 
known  as  the  twenty-five  Mahatanmatrabhutas)  together  with 
the  Purusha  or  the  subjective  reality.  The  preceptor  should 
imagine  as  merged  in  the  above  said  Kala,  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  beginning  with  ‘ Kha’  and  ending  with  ‘Ya,’  the 
fifty  six  Bhuvanas,  and  the  equal  number  of  Rudras  who 
domineer  over  the  same  (x — 4).  The  names  of  the  fifty- 
six  Rudras  are  as  follows  (t)  Amaresh,  (2)  Prabhaba,  (3) 
Naimisha,  (4)  Puskara,  (5)  Padi,  (6)  Dandi,  (7)  Bhavabhuti, 
(8)  Nakulesha,  (9)  Harish,  Chandra,  (10)  Srishaila,  (11) 
Anvisha,  (12)  Asratikesha,  (13)  Mahakala,  (14)  Madhyama, 
(15)  Kedara,  (16)  Bhairava,  (these  forming  the  second 
group  of  the  eight  Rudras),  (17)  Gaya,  (18)  Kurukshetra, 


t.'x- 


AGNI  PURANAM 


burning  one,  without  ever  being  reduced  to  ashes  or  without 
losing  anything  by  combustion  ! Om,  Oh  thou  who  knowest 
no  beginning  ! Om,  Oh  thou  One  amongst  multiplicity  l Om, 
Oh  thou  Dhu  Dhu  t Om,  Oh  thou  who  dost  underlie  this 
terrestrial  globe  l Om,  Oh  thou  on  whom  rests  the  heavenly 
region  of  Bhuba  ! Om,  Oh  thou  in  whom  the  region  of  Sva  has 
its  abode  t Oh  thou  who  art  the  deathless  ohe ! Oh  thou 
who  dost  come  out  of  the  universal  dissolution ! Oh  thou 
the  blissful  one  ! Oh  thou  all  I Oh  thou  the  absolute  soul  t Oh 
thou  .the  god  of  gods  J Oh  thou  the  Supreme  deity  t Oh  thou 
lord  of  good  will  l Oh  thou  the  supreme  heat  and  light,  the 
presiding  deity  of  Yoga ! Oh  Muncha,  who  art  the  first  cause, 
the  all,  and  the  alt-pervading  one  ! These  are  the  thirty  two 
attributes  of  godhead.  The  essence  of  the  three  Mantras  of 
Vamadeva,  Sniva,  and  Shikha,  should  be  meditated  upon 
as  permeating  the  abovesaid  Pratistha  Kala,  together  with 
the  two  occult  psychic  uerves  respectively  known  as  the  Gan- 
dhari  and  the  Susumna,  aud  the  vital  winds  called  the  Samana 
and  the  Udana.  Walt  his  psychic  energy,  the  preceptor 
should  make  the  auovesaid  phase  of  beatitude,  endowed  with 
the  seuse-orgaus  of  taste  aud  reproduction  of  the  species. 
The  fundamental  substance,  loaning  the  real  and  underlying 
substratum  of  the  phase,  would  be  tne  sentiments  only,  while 
the  attributes  which  would  form  therein  the  proper  objects  of 
sense-perception,  would  be  the  proper  seusibles  of  sight, 
hearing,  touch,  and  taste.  The  white  sphere-shaped  man  dal 
would  be  the  shape  of  the  region  of  the  beatific  phase  under 
discussion  ; and  the  lotus  flower,  with  the  attributes  it  signi- 
fies, would  be  its  distinctive  emblem  (1—15).  Dream  should 
be  known  as  the  only  state  of  consciousness  in  that 


AGN1  PURANAM 


with  all  the  Bhuvanas  before  described,  and  carry  that  into 
bis  own  body  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  the  soul,  and  retain 
the  same  within  himself,  blended,  [as  it  were,  with  the  stream 
of  psychic  energy  flowing  in  his  occult  soul-nerve. 

Subsequent  to  that,  he  should  draw  it  forth  from  the 
occult  nerve-ganglia,  situate  within  the  lower  part  of  his  body, 
by  practising*  the  Purak  form  of  Kumbhaka,  and  by  exhibiting 
the  Mudra  known  as  the  Ankusha  (mace)  mudra,  while  men- 
tally repeating  the  Mantra  “ Om  Ham  Khim  Ham  to  the 
noose  ol  the  Pratistha  Kala  Om  Fut  Svaha.”  Then  he  should 
take  the  latter  out  of  the  occult  soul-nerve,  by  exhibiting  the 
Samhar  Mudra  ; and  retain  the  same  in  the  lower  part  of  his 
heart,  by  practising  the  Kumbhaka  and  by  simultaneously 
repeating  therewith,  the  Mantra  Om  Ham  Hrun  Hram  Hrun 
to  the  Pratistha  Kalapasha  Hnu  Fut.  Then  he  should 
project  the  same  into  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  by  practising 
the  Rechaka  form  of  Kumbhaka,  and  by  repeating  the 
same  Mantra.  Thus  having  worshipped  the  same  with  the 
above  Mantra,  three  oblations  should  be  cast  into  'the  fire 
with  the  Mantra  coupled  with  the'.term  Svaha  in  the  end,  for 
ensuring  the  continuance  of  the  Kala  in  the  sacrificial 
pitcher.  The  god  Vishnu  should  be  subsequently  invoked 
and  worshipped;  and  the  rite  of  Tarpana  should  be  per- 
formed in  his  honour.  The  god  should  be  prayed  as 
follows " Oh  Vishnu,  who  dost  preside  (over  the  phase  of 
beatitude  about  to  be  purified  and  made  patent  in  the 
disciple,  I shall  initiate  him  in  this  thy  kingdom.  Be  gra- 
cious, 1 Oh  lord  1 so  that  . he  may  enter  the  door  of  salva- 
tion. Then  as  before,  the  god  Vagishvar  and  the  goddess 
Vagishvari  should  be  invoked,  worshipped,  and  propitiated 
with  the  rites  of  Tarpana;  after  which  the  preceptor  should 
gently  touch  the  heart  of  the  disciple  by  repeating  the 
Mantras  “Om,  Ham,  Ham,  Ham,  Fut;”  and  enter  into 
the  same  by  repeating  the  abovesaid  Mantra.  The  pre- 
ceptor should  sever  the  string  of  pure  consciousness,  .locate 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


338 


in  the  abovesaid  thread  with  the  Mantra  of  weapon. 
Then  he  should  draw  it  into  his  own  heart,  by  repeating 
the  Hrid-Mantra  coupled  with  the  term  Svaha  in  the  end ; 
and  lodge  the  same  in  his  own  soul,  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
of  the  soul,  preceded  by  the  Astra  Mantra,  and  followed  by 
the  term  namas";  the  Mantra  thus  formed,  would  read  as 
“Om,  Ham,  Ham,  Ham,  obeisance  to  the  soul  (Atmana 
namas).  Then  5 the  union  of  the  god  and  the  goddess 
should  be  brought  about;  and  the  seed  of  soul  should  be 
cast  into  the  womb  of  the  goddess  Vagishvari,  by  exhibiting 
the  Udbhavamudra  from  the  left;  the  Mantra  being  “Om, 
Ham,  Ham,  Ham,  obeisance  to  the  soul.”  The  Hrid-Mantra 
should  be  repeated  for  endowing  the  soul-child,  as  it  were, 
with  a distinct  form  and  shape.  The  postnatal  ceremony 
of  the  above  child,  should  be  performed  by  uttering  the 
Siras-Mantra.  Its  possession  should  be  determined  by 
repeating  the  Shikha-Mantra,  its  objects  of  enjoyment 
being  offered  with  the  essence  of  the  Mantra  of  armour. 
The  component  principles  of  the  new-born  soul-child,  should 
be  purified  by  uttering  the  Hrid-Mantra ; and  the  rite  of 
Garbhadhana  should  be  done  unto  him  as  before.  Hundred 
oblations  {should  be  offered  with  the  Mantra  of  Release, 
for  unloosening,  as  it  were,  the  bonds  of  the  world.  Thus 
having  unfettered  the  disciple,  the  preceptor  should  cut  the 
thread  with  a knife,  over  which  the  Kala-Mantras  had  been  re- 
peated ; the  Mantra  of  weapon  having  been  repeated  hundred 
times  before  that.  The  Kala-Mantra  which  should  be  repeated 
on  the  occasion,  being  " Om,  Hrim ;”  the  noose  having  been 
made  permeated  with  the  beatitude  of  Pratistha.  Hun  Fut. 
Then  the  noose  or  the  thread,  described  above,  should  be 
gathered  up  in  a knot,  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  weapon  as 
described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  then  placed  in  the  cavity 
of  the  sacrificial  laddie,  full  of  clarified  butter,  and  cast  into 
the  fire  with  an  oblation.  The  Kalastra  Mantra-sboold'be 
read  on  the  latter  occasion,  and  five,  oblations  should  be 
v, ■; v ;v:. : ■ f!  II 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


339 


cast  into  the  fire,  for  guarding  against  the  fresh  cropping 
up  of  the  shoots  of  illusion.  Then  the  ceremony  of  ex- 
piation of  sin,  should  be  performed  with  oblations  cast 
eight  times  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  with  the  Astra-Mantra 
as  “Ora  Has  Hun  Fut  to  the  weapon.”  The  God  Hrishi- 
kesha  should  be  invoked  with  the  Hrid-Mantra.  The  god 
should  be  worshipped,  and  the  rite  of  Tarpana  should  be 
done  unto  him.  The  sovereignty  of  the  god  Vishnu  over 
the  region  in  which  the  beatitude  under  discussion  is  located, 
and  which  had  been  borrowed  by  the  preceptor  at  the  outset 
of  the  sacrifice,  'should  be  returned  to  him.  The  Mantra 
which  should  be  repeated  on  the  occasion,  being  u Ora  Ham 
accept  this  dowry  of  sentiment,  Oh  lord.”  Then  the  Mandate 
of  the  god  Shiva  should  be  read  over  to  the  god  which  is 
to  the  following  effect.  <f  Oh  lord,  the  initiated  disciple* 
though  possessed  of  a material  body,  and  formerly  subject 
to  the  ills  of  life,  in  common  with  the  lower  animals  have 
reduced  his  former  iniquities  to  ashes.  Bind  him  not  to  the 
chain  of  re-birth.  Then  the  preceptor  should  bid  farewell  to 
the  god  Vishnu  by  exhibiting  the  samharmudra,  and  unite  his 
own  soul  with  the  universal  One,  which  would  look  like  the 
disk  of  the  moon  in  the  middle  part  of  a lunar  eclipse,  and 
merge  the  same  in  the  thread,  representing  the  bond  of  the 
world.  Then  the  god  and  the  goddess  should  be  taken 
leave  ofr  and  the  sacrificial  fire-god  should  be  worshipped 
Wttb flowers*  etc.)  and  the  final  oblation  should  be  cast  into 
the  fitec  Thus  the  beatific  phase  known  as  the  Pratistha 
should  be  purified  ( 1 6— -3  r)> 


CHAPTER  LXXXV1 


JL  HE  God  said  The  union  of  the  Vidya  Kala  and' 
the  Prachina  Kala  should  be  made,  as  before  described,  by 
uttering  the  Mantra  “ Om  Houm  Kshim.  I shall  now  enu- 
merate, Oh  Bramhan,  the  tattvas  or  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples which  should  be  located  in  the  beatitude  of  know- 
ledge (Vidyakala).  They  are  the  principles  of  Raga  (attach- 
ment), *Suddha  Vidya  (pure  knowledge),  Nyati  (fate),  and 
Maya  (illusion),  which  together  with  the  two : mentioned 
above  are  seven  in  number.  The  letters  ‘Ra/  ‘La/  ‘Va/  and 
the  three  Ssn  which  are  known  as  the  emblems  of  the  six 
different  branches  of  learning  (Sat  Vidya),  should  also  be 
projected  into  the  abovesaid  phase  of  beatitude,  I shall 
now  describe  the  twenty  one  padas  (terms)  which  should 
also  be  located  in  the  same  (i — 3). 

Om  obeisance  to  the  god 'Shiva,  who  is  the  lord  of  all 
created  things*  Ham  to  the  god  fshana  at  my  head to  the 
Tat-purusha  at  my  face -Agfa ora  at  my  heart,  to  Bamadeva 
at  my  anus,  and  to  the  god  who  is  revealed  in  the  form  of 
Sadjeyata,  who  pervades  my  entire  body.  Om  obeisance  to 
the  mysterious  of  the  mysterious*  Om  obeisance  to  the  pro- 
tector of  the  universe.  Om  obeisance  to  the  deathless  one. 
Om  obeisance  to  the  lord  of  all.  Om  obeisance  to  the  god 
who  is  resplendent  as  the  light  Om  obeisance  to  the  god 
Of  gods.  Om  obeisance  to  the  source  of  all  thoughts  and 
sentiments.  Om  obeisance  to  the  god  who  pervades  this 
universal  expanse  of  ether. 

Now  I shall  enumerate  the  names  of  the  Bhuvanas  and 
the  Rodras  who  preside  over  the  same,  and  describe  their 
mature.  The'  names  of  the  Rudras,  Oh  Brahman,  are  as 
follows  ;«Bamadeva  (the  god  of  irascible  nature).  Sartrabha- 


I 


agni  puranari.  34 g 

vodbbava.  (The  god  from  whom  all  get  their  birth),  Bajra- 
deha  (the  thunder-bodied  One).  Prabhu  (lord),  Dhata  (the 
weilder  of  fate)  Krama  ‘(order),  Vikrama  (power),  Suprabha 
(the  resplendent  One),  Vatu  (the  agile  One),  Prashanta  (the 
supreme  pacified  One)  Paramaksara  (tbe  Supreme  know- 
ledge). Shiva  (the  blissful  One),  Sashiva  (the  One  possessed 
of  the  Supreme  benediction),  Babbru  (the  yellow  light), 
Aksaya  (the  being  who  knows  no  loss  or  waste).  Shambhu 
(the  begetterjof  peace),  Adristurupa  (the  eternal  being,  the  Uke 
of  whom  has  not  been  found),  Adrista-nama  (the  invisible 
One).  Rupabardhana  (the  promoter  of  beauty),  Manonraona 
(expander  of  mind),  Mahavirja  (the  mighty  One),  Chitrangada 
(the  variegated  one)  Kalyana  (the  blissful  One),  Mantra 
(the  controller  of  mind),  Ghora  (the  dreadful  One).  Amara 
(the  immortal  One).  In  the  abovesaid  phase  of  beatitude, 
the  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  two  occult  psychic 
nerves  known  as  the  Pusha  and  the  Hastijihva,  and  the 
vital  winds  called  the  Vyana,  Naga  and  the  Pravanjana 
described  before.  The  only  object  of  sense-perception 
which  should  be  contemplated  in  the  abovesaid  principle 
of  beatitude,  is  what  is  perceived  through  the  sense  of  sight. 
The  principle  of  beatitude  under  discussion,  should  be 
regarded  as  the  region  where  tbe  sense  of  sight,  and  the 
sense-organ  of  locomotion,  are  only  operative,  the  attributes, 
which  act  upon  the  organism,  being  the  proper  sensibles  o 
sound,  touch  and  sight  only.  The'  state  of  consciousness, 
which  prevails  in  this  particular  region  of  beatific  bliss,  is  the 
-t  «a„rhic  sleeo  which  is  bereft  of  all  dreams 


laiai 


the  same  as  before  described ; a 

the  heart  of  the  disciple,  by  bri 
energy  of  his  own  being.  The 
the  same  in  his  own  soul,  and  su 
into  the  receptacle  for  the  , 
addressed  the  new-born  soul-life, 
should  be  invoked  and  worshipped,  and  the 
wake  up  the  new-born  soul  i 
the  Mantra  spoken  of  above, 
same  in  his  own  soul,  and  s 
the  womb  of  the  goddess  Vagish 
by  repeating  the  Dvadashanta 
Udbhavamudra  from  the  left  ( 
dban  and  the  postnatal  purific 
the  new-born  soul  child.  The 
should  be  determined.  The 
principles  of  the  disciple’s 
hundred  oblations  should  be  offered 
of  release)  according  ( 
ceremony  of  Mala-karma 
Maya  Mantra,  inorder  that  t 
to  the  recurring  series  of 
thread  tied  round  th»  hn 


pmjecc  tne  same 
:rificial  fire,  after  having 
The  god  and  the  goodess 
preceptor  would 
in  the  heart  of  the  disciple,  with 
, take  hold  of  and  merge  the 
subsequently  cast  the  same  into 
vari  (the  goddess  of  speech) 
Mantra,  and  by  exhibiting  the 
The  rite  of  Garbha- 
ition  should  be  performed  unto 
regmn  of  its  stay  add  Uperation 
ears  aud  the  boibponent 
body  should  be  purified,  and 
10  Niscriti  the  goddess 
to  rules  laid  down  before;  and  the 
--4  sho«u!d  be  performed  with 


Amt  PLJRANAM* 


343 


bid  them  adieu  after  worship.  The-  preceptor  should  take 
the  principle  of  knowledge  out  of  his  own  soul,  and  locate 
the  same  in  the  thread  or  noose  standing  for  the  bond  of 
existence.  Then  he  should  concentrate  his  whole  self  on  the 
soul-point  in  the  head  of  the  disciple,  and  bid  farewell  to  the 
god  and  his  goddess.  The  final  or  the  oblation  closing  the 
sacrifice,  should  be  cast  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  and  the  rite 
of  making  up  any  deficiency  in  performing  the  same,  should 
be  undertaken  as  directed  before.  Thus  the  phase  or  the 
principle  of  beatific  knowledge  (Vidya  Kala)  should  be 
purified.  (15—21.), 


CHAPTER  LXXXVII 


A BE  God  said Now  the  principle  of  beatific  know- 
ledge should  be  duly  united  with  the  beatific  principle  of 
absolute  peace.  The  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the 
two  fundamental  principles  of  the  universe,  together  with  the 
gods  Bhaveshvar  and  Sadashiva  as  located  therein.  He 
should  contemplate  the  two  letters  ‘Ha*  and  ‘Ksha/  and  the 
Rudras  known  as  the  Samana  Rudras,  together  with  the 
regions  (Bhuvanas)  they  preside  over,  as  merged  in  the 
abovesaid  beatitude  of  absolute  peace.  Oh  Brahman,  I 
shall  enumerate  the  names  of  the  abavementioried  Rudraa 
which  are  as  foJlows  s-^Pravhaba,  Samaya,  Kshndra,  Vimala, 
Shiva,  Ghana,  Ghana,  Niranjanakar,  Sashiva,  the  two 
Diptikaris,  TridesheshW,  Tridesha,  Kala,  Sukshma,  and 
Amvujashva#.  The  twelve  padas,  or  the  terms  of  epithet  with 
which  thfr]  Rudras  are  to  be  invoked,  and  which  the  above- 
said  beatific  principle  should  be  contemplated  as  stuff# 


Amt  PUR  A MAM, 


are  as,  -follows Obeisance  to  the  (eternal  one) 
pervading  the  infinite  expanse  of  ether.  Obeisance  to 
(the  supreme  being),  who  is  manifest  in  the  shape  of  the 
heaven.  Obeisance  to  the  all-pervading  Shiva  (the  blissful- 
one).  Obeisance  to  the  infinite  one  who  knows  no  lord  or 
master,  and  who  is  independent  of  any  hold  or  receptacle,, 
Obeisance  to  the  one,  who  is  changeless  "eternal  truth. 
Obeisance  to  the  infinite,  changeless  being,  who  is  the 
theme  of  contemplation  in  all  forms  of  yoga  meditation. 
Obeisance  to  the  eternal  Yogi,  who  lives  on  contemplation 
of  his  votaries.  These  are  the  twelve  phrases  of  invocation. 
Similarly  the  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  absolute 
subjective  personality  of  the  universe  in  the  abovesaid 
phase,  together  with  the  two  Upukar-Mantras  and  the  two 
occult  nerves  known  as  the  Alamvusha  and  Ayusha,  and  the 
two  supplementary  vital  winds,  known  as  the  Krikara  and  the 
Kurma.  The  sense  of  touch,  and  the  sense  organ  of  hand 
should  be  looked  upon  as  the  only  two  sorts  of  sense- 
perception,  which  characterise  the  beatific  principle  under 
discussion.  The  attributes  of  touch  and  sound  are  the  only 
attributes  which  mark  the  contents  of  the  beatitude  of 
absolute  peace;  and  the  only  cause  to  which  it  owes  its  origin, 
and  from  which  it  has  emanated,  should  be  held  as  coming 
out  direct  of  the  god  Shiva,  who  is  the  lord  of  the  universe. 
The  fourth  state  of  consciousness,  or  the  purely  psychic  state 
which  lies  beyond  the  states  of  waking,  dreaming,  and  sleep- 
ing, which  the  human  consciousness  is  made  of,  should  be 
regarded  as  the  state  of  consciousness  which  prevails  in, 
and  characterises  the  inmates  of,  the  beatific  principle  of 
pure  and  absolute  peace.  The  preceptor  jshould  psychically 
project  into  the  same  all  the  different  Bhuvanas.,  (I— 7,)  The 
preceptor  should  enter  into  the  beatitude  of  peace  and  stir 
up  therein  the  new-born  soul-life  and  take  that  out  through 
the  psychic  string  merged  in  the  abovesaid  Shanfci  Kafa  and 
carry  the  same  into  his  own  soul.  After  that  he  should 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM, 


project  the  same  into  the  receptacle  for  sacrificial  fire  (r~8). 
The  god  Isha  should  be  prayed  as  follows  :~<‘0h  Isha,  thou 
art  the  presiding  deity  of  the  beatitude,  about  to  be  evoked 
in  disciple  to  be  initiated.  In  him  I evoke  the  above- 
said  beatitude  with  a view  to  open  the  path  of  his  salvation. 
Dost  thou  take  mercy  on  him,  Oh  God  j”  The  god  and  the 
goddess  shouM  be  invoked,  and  the  new-born  soul-life 
should  be  stirred  up  in  the  heart  of  the  disciple,  and  the 
preceptor  should  draw  out  and  merge  the  same  in  his  own 
soul,  by  contemplating  it  as  permeated  with  the  essence  of 
the  universal  father  and  imaginarily  cast  the  same  into 
the  womb  of  the  goddess,  by  exhibiting  * the  Udbhavamudra 
and  by  repeating  the  principal  Mantra  of  the  god  preceded 
by  the  Hrid-Mantra. 

The  Hrid-Maotra  should  be  repeated  for  endowing  the 
beatitude  under  discussion  with  a corporeal  frame  as  it  were. 
The  Mantra,  known  as  the  Panchashira-Mantra  should  be 
read  for  bringing  the  same  into  being.  Its  safe  continuance 
should  be  ensured  by  uttering  the  , Shikha- Mantra.  The 
Mantra  of  Armour  should  be  read  aloud  for  providing  it 
with  enjoyments,  and  for  its  final  rest  the  Mantra  of  Weapon 
should  be  read  aloud.  The  streams  of  vital  currents  in  its 
body,  should  be  purified  with  the  essence  of  the  Hrid-Mantra, 
and  the  rites  of  Garbhadhana,  etc.,  should  be  done  unto  it, 
as  previously  described.  The  noose  of  thread  round  the 
body  of  the  disciple,  should  be  untied  by  repeating  the 
Mantra  of  Armour,  and  five  times  the  oblation  should  be  cast 
into  the  fire  with  the  Astra-Mantra,  for  annihilating  the 
seed  of  impiety.  The  noose  thus  untied,  should  be  severed 
with  a knife,  over  which  the  Astra-Mantra  had  been  seven 
times  repeated.  The  Astra-Mantra  being  u Om  Houm  to 
the  beatitude  of  absolute  peace.”  The  chord  should  be 
gathered  up  in  a.  knot,  put  into  the  sacrificial  ladle  with 
' ; clarified  butter,  and  cast  as  an  oblation  into  the  sacrificial  fire 
: with  the  Kalastra-Mantra.  Five  times  the  Homa  ceremony 


346 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


should  be  performed  with  the  Astra-Mantra  for  the  purpose  of 
preventing  the  fresh  cropping  up  of  the  seed  of  sin,  and 
the  Prayaschitta  Homa  should  be  performed  with  eight 
oblations,  offered  with  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Om 
Has  to  the  weapon  (Ashtraya)  Hun  Fut.”  The  preceptor 
should  invoke  and  worship  the  god  in  his  heart,  and  per- 
form the  rite  of  Tarpana  in  his  honour.  " The  dowry 
( Sulka ) should  be  presented  to  the  god  as  follows:-— 
<(  Om  Ham  , 0 god,  accept  this  dowry  of  intellect  and 
egoistic  knowledge,  Om  obeisance  to  thee.  The  mandate 
of  the  god  Shiva  should  be  read  out  to  him  to  the  following 
effect  *“Be  gracious,  O Lord,  to  the  disciple,  who  though 
subject  to  cravings  and  desires  which  the  beasts  of  the  field 
are  heir  to,  has  burnt  down  his  lower  nature.  Dost  thou  not 
stand  in  the  way  of  working  out  his  own  salvation.  The 
preceptor  should  bid  the  god  adieu,  and  bring  about  an 
union  of  the  crescent  of  his  soul,  and  its  universal  progenitor 
known  as  the  Rudra ; and  project  the  same  into  the  head  of 
the  .disciple,  by  exhibiting  the  Udbhavamudra,  and  by  utter- 
ing the  principal  Mantra  sacred  to  the  god.  The  preceptor 
should  take  leave  of  the  god  and  the  goddess  who  are  the 
parents  of  the  universe,  after  having  worshipped  them  with 
flowers  and  perfumes,  etc.,  and  cast  the  final  oblation  into 
the  fire  thus  closing  5 the  sacrifice.  The  rite  of  making  up 
the  deficiency  in  the  procedure  of  the  sacrifice,  together  with 
the  rites  of  Tadana,  etc.,  should  be  duly  performed  with  the 
Vija-Mantra  in  the  course  thereof,  which  is  its  only  distinctive 
feature.  Thus  the  beatific  principle  of  peace  should  be 
purified  (19—25}. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVIII. 


HE  God  said  In  his  own  soul  the  preceptor  should 
blend  the  beatific  principle  called  the  Shantyatita  Kala,  with 
its  sister  principle  known  as  the  beatitude  of  absolute 
peace,  the  tattvas  or  the  fundamental  principles  should 
be  duly  merged  in  the  united  beatitude  as  laid  down  before. 
The  union  should  be  brought  about  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
which  runs  as  “Ora  Hnu,  Kshouro,  Houns,  Ham.”  In  the 
said  principle,  should  be  merged  the  energies  of  the  god 
Shiva  and  his  goddess,  the  two  fundamental  principles  of 
the  universe,  and  the  eight  Siddhis  which  are  known  as  the 
Dipaka,  Ruchika,  Mochaka,  Urdhagami,  Vyomarupa,  Anatba, 
Anashrita  and  Omkararupada.  The  Mantra  sacred  to  the 
Ishana  manifestation  of  Rudra,  the  sixteen  letters  be- 
ginning with  the  vowel  ‘A’  and  ending  with  the  ‘Visarga,’ 
and  the  two  occult  nerves,  Kuha  and  Shankbini,  to- 
gether with  the  two  supplementary  vital  winds,  known  as 
Devadatta  and  Dhananjaya,  should  likewise  be  looked  upon 
as  pervading  the  same.  The  proper  sensibles  of  touch  and 
hearing  are  the  only  proper  sensibles,  which  obtain  in  the 

region  of  beatitude  named  above.  The  universal  ether 
with  its  attribute  of  sound,  is  the  predominating  element  of 
the  beatific  phase  under  discussion,  and  the  state  of  consci- 
ousness which  distinguishes  the  same  should  be  known  as 
the  state  which  is  beyond  the  Turya  state  (the  state  of  cons- 
ciousness unaffected,  by  waking,  sleeping  or  dreaming) ; and 
the  god  Sadashiva  should  be  known  as  the  sole  cause 
working  in  the  abovesaid  phase.  Thus  the  collection  of 
the  beatific  principles  should  be  meditated  upon,  and 
the  rite  of  Tadana,  etc.,  should  be  performed.  The  precep- 
tor should  perform  a similar  rite  unto  the  noose  of  thread, 


34§ 


AGNI . PUlANAMi 


after  having  imaginarily  divided  the  same  into  parts,  with 
the  principal  Mantra  followed  by  the  Fut  Mantra.  He 
should  penetrate  into  the  inside  of  the  noose,  by  repeating 
the  above  Mantra  coupled  with  the  term  Namas  (obeisance) 
in  the  end,  and  therein  unloose  the  beatific  principle  under 
discussion,  by  repeating  the  same  Mantra  with  the  term  Fut 
thereto  appended  (i — 7).  Then  the  beatitude,  which 
should  be  made  covered  over  with  the  essence  of  the  Shikha, 
and  the  Hrid-Mantra  followed  by  the  term  Svaha,  should  be 
psychically  drawn  out  of  the  head  of  the  above  noose  of 
thread,  by  exhibiting  the  Srinimudra ; and  the  preceptor 
should  project  the  same  into  the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle,  by 
uttering  the  principal  Mantra  preceded  by  the  Hrid-Mantra 
and  coupled  with  the  term  Namas  (obeisance)  in  the  end, 
and  by  practising  the  Rechaka  form  of  Kumbhaka.  The 
Mudra  known  as  the  Udbhavamudra  should  be  exhibited  at 
the  time  of  such  projection;  and  the  abovesaid  beatific 
principle  should  be  worshipped  therein  like  the  beatitude 
of  non-action,  the  god  Sadashiva  having  been  previously 
worshipped  and  propitiated  (8—10).  The  above  godf 
should  be  reverentially  addressed  as  follows  :« — H I initiate 
this  disciple,  Oh  lord,  in  the  region  of  eternal  time  of  which 
thou  art  the  supreme  lord.  Be  gracious,  Oh  lord,  on  the 
disciple  who  is  a seeker  of  salvation."  The  god  and  the 
goddess  should  be  invoked  and  worshipped  as  before.  The 
rites  of  Tarpana  and  Sanniddhikaran  should  be  done  unto 
them  ; and  the  preceptor  should  stir  up  the  psychic  energy 
in  the  heart  of  the  disciple,  by  gently  beating  against  his 
breast,  while  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Ora  Ham 
Houm,  Ham,  Fut."  Then  he  should  penetrate  into  the 
heart  of  the  disciple,  and  divide  his  psychic  energy  drawn 
forth  into  the  noose  of  thread  impregnated  with  the 
beatific  principles,  with  the  essence  of  the  Mantra  of 
weapon  (Om  Ham,  Has,  Hrun,  Fut),  and  by  exhibiting  the 
greater  Ankusha  (Mace)  Mudra.  Subsequent  to  that,  he 


AtiN!  PURANAM. 


349 


should  attract  and  merge  the  same  In  his  own  soul ; the 
Mantras  which  should  be  repeated  both  at  the  time  of 
attraction  and  merging,  being  the  Mantras  “Om  Ham,  Ham' 

Him  Svaha  to  the  soul,”  and  “Om  Ham,  Ham,  Him,  obei- 
sance to  the  soul”  respectively  (it — 14).  The  union  of  the 
god  (Vagishvaca)  and  the  goddess  (Vagishvari)  should  be 
meditated  upon ; and  the  preceptor  should  project  the  above 
psychic  principle  in  the  womb  of  the  goddess,  as  laid  down 
before.  The  rites  of  Garbhadhana,  etc.,  should  be  performed 
as  before,  and  hundred  times  the  principal  Mantra,  coupled 
with  the  Mantra  of  release,  should  be  repeated,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  the  wordly  bonds  of  the  disciple  to  fall 
off.  Five  times  five,  the  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the 
fire  with  the  Mantra  of  Armour,  with  a view  to  break  through 
the  bonds  of  life,  and  to  annihilate  the  the  latent  energy  of 
evil  in  the  disciple.  Seven  times  the  Kala-Mantra  5 
preceded  by  the  Mantra  of  Weapon,  should  be  repeated  over 
the  knife  ; and  the  noose  of  thread  should  be  severed  there- 
with. The  Mantra  which  should  be  repeated  on  the  occasion 
being  “ Om  Ham  to  the  noose  of  beatitude  beyond  that  of 
the  absolute  peace  (Shantyatlta  Kala)  Has  Hum  Fut  ” 

(15 — 18).  Then  the  preceptor  should  bid  farewell  to  the 
severed  noose,  as  before  described,  gather  up  the  same  in  a 
knot,  place  it  in  the  sacrificial  ladle,  full  of  clarified  butter, 
and  cast  the  same  therewith  into  the  fire  by  repeating  the 
Kala  and  the  Astra  Mantra.  Five  oblations  should  be  cast 
into  the  sacrificial  fire,  for  arresting  the  recrudescence  of 
the  evils  of  life,  that  bind  a soul  to  this  miserable  terrestrial 
existence;  and  eight  oblations  should  be  offered  by  way 
of  making  up  and  atoning  for  any  defect  or  diffieiency,  that 
might  have  lurked  in  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice  (19—20). 

The  god  Sadashiva  should  be  invoked  and  worshipped, 
as  before  directed.  The  rite  of  Tarpana  should  be  done 
unto  him,  and  his  sovereignty  over  the  region  of  beatitude 
into  which  the  disciple  had  been  initiated,  should  be  returned 

' i ■'  ,§].  0 

i . ..  \ : 


iilil 


- v -ii 


35<* 


AGNJ  PUHANAM*, 


to  that  deity  as  follows  Oip,  Ham  Sadashiva  take  this 
dowry  of  the  principle  of  mind,  symbolised  in  the  mystic 
' zero*.  Swaha !”  The  mandate  of  the  god  Shiva  should,  be 
read  out  to  him  as  follows  :~uBind  not  this  disciple,  O lord, 
again  to  the  cycle  of  life,  who  being  an  animal  in  body, 
has  yet  consumed  his  animal  propensities.  Take  mercy  on 
him,  0 lord”  The  final  oblation  should  be  cash  into  the  fire, 
by  repeating  the  principal  Mantra  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva, 
and  the  preceptor  should  bid  farewell  to  the  same  deity. 
After  that  the  Guru  or  the  preceptor  should  merge  in  his 
pwn  spul,  the  pure  and  absolute  soul,  shining  majestic  like 
the  aqtumn  full  moon  just  appeared  on  the  border  of  horizon, 
and  effulgent  with  the  essence  of  Rudra,  by  exhibiting 
the  S^mharmudra;  and  subsequently  project  the  same  into 
the  inner  self  of  the  disciple,  by  exhibiting  the  Mudra  known 
a£  the  Udbhava-Mudra.  The  preceptor  should  p lape  the 
washings  of  the  Argha  offering  op  the  head  of  the  disciple, 
Ond  devoutly  pray  for  their  pardon,  and  bid  them  adieu  after 
addressing  them  as  follows “ Pardon  me,  0 universal 
parents!  for  the  trouble  I have  given  yon  for  the  purpose 
of  initiating  this  disciple.  Depart  in  pleasure,  O thou  uni- 
versal father,  and  O thou  universal  mother,  to  your  own 
place”  (21 — 2d).  The  precetor  should  repeat  the  Shikha- 
Mantra  over  a steel  hnife,  and  cut  therewith,,  to  the  ie  ngth 
Qf  four  fingers,  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  disciple 
which  is  emblematic  of  knowledge.  The  Mantra  which 
should  be  repeated  on  the,  occasion,  is  “Qm  Klin  to  the  tuft 
pf  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  head  (Shikayai)  Hnu  Fut,  Qm 
Has  to  the  weapon  (Astraya)  Hun  Fut.”  Then  the  cleft 
hairs  abovedescribed,  should  be  put  into  a crucible  of  cow- 
dung,  which  should  be  covered  over  with  the  sarpe  subs* 
s^ahqe.  The  crucible  should  be  put  into,  the  sacrificial  la,dle, 
full  of  clarified  butter,  and  cast  into  the  fire,  as  ah  pblation, 
accompanied  by  the  Mantra  of  Vtfeappn  followed  by  the  Hnu 
Fut  Mantra.  Then  the  preceptor  should  wash  the  two  sorts 


agm  puranam.  35* 

of  sacrificial  ladle,  known  as  the  Sruk  and  the  Sruva,  rinse 
his  mouth  with  water,  and  cause  the  disciple  to  be  bathed^ 
Subsequently,  the  Guru  should  stir  up  the  soul,  thu&W*tt^g|;, 
or  united,  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  weapon,  disjoin  and 
worship  the  same  as  previously  laid  down,  and  merge  it  in  the 
petals  of  the  lotus  (solar  plexus)  of  his  own  heart  (27 — 30). 
The  preceptor’should  remove  the  attributes  of  material  exist- 
ence in  the  disciple  enveloping  his  soul-light,  and  by  offering 
the  final  oblation  in  the  following  way  The  sacrificial  ladle 
should  be  filled  up  with  clarified  butter,  and  the  preceptor  should 
hold  the  other  sacrificial  ladle  known  as  the  Sruk,  with  its 
cavity  turned  downward  according  to  the  rites  of  Nityakarma 
(daily  rites  of  worship!,  and  by  exhibiting  the  Sankhasannibha- 
Mudra;  He  should  expand  his  chest  and  hold  up  his  head 
erect,  as  should  be  done  at  the  time  of  uttering  the  Nada* 
Mantra,— Om,-— with  his  sight  immoveably  fixed,  his  heart 
filled  with  the  contemplation  of  the  Supreme  Being  and 
hallowed  by  the  presence  of  the  eternal  blissful  one.  Then 
he  should  draw  out  of  his  own  heart,  and  that  of  the  disciple 
and  the  tongues  of  the  burning  sacrificial  fire,  the  occult 
soul-nerve-ganglia,  and  locate  the  same  at  the  head  of 
the  sacrificial  ladle.  The  soul-energy,  manifest  as  a lumi- 
nous point,  should  be  meditated  upon  at  that  part  of  the  ladle, 
and  the  seven  following  principles  of  sound  should  be  united 
with  the  same  in  turn.  The  preceptor  with  his  mouth  a 
little  open  and  his  breath-wind  restrained  in  the  Puraka 
form  of  Kumbhaka,  should  first  unite  with  the  soul-point,  the 
principle  of  life,  and  then  the  principle  of  absolute  truth,  after 
having  repeated  in  succession  the  Mantras  known  as  the  Hrid, 
etc.  The  real  nature  or  essence  of  the  “ Offi,”  permeating 
the  occult  soul-nerve  known  as  the  Sushumna,  is  the  third 
principle  which  should*  bo  whited  with  the  soul-point,  situate 
at  the  head  of  the  sacrificial  ladle,  Whose  reverberations 
would  faintly  and  faintly  die  away  in  the  seventh  cause. 
The  sound  emitted*  by  the  psychic  energy  in  its  passage 


352 


AGNI  PUaANAM. 


I«W» 


AGM  PUR  A NAM. 


?53 


of  the  soul,  and  whom  the  thoughts  cannot  conceive  and 
the  mind  is  incapable  of  comprehending,  and  who  is  the 
abode  of  all  eternal,  universal  truths.  Then  the  preceptor 
should  cast  the  oblation  unto  the  god  Shiva,  located  in  the 
sacrificial  fire,  by  repeating  the  Shiva  Mantra  coupled  with 
the  term  Vousat  in  the  end,  with  a view  to  make  the  Yoyanika 
steady  as  it  ••were  ; and  then  cast  into  the  fire,  a ladleful  of 
clarified  butter  described  above,  as  the  final  oblation  com- 
pleting the  sacrifice  (44 — 46).  Then  the  soul  possessing 
the  six  godly  attributes,  should  be  taken  out  of  the  supreme 
being,  duly  meditated  upon,  and  projected  into  the  body  of 
the  disciple  by  repeating  the  following  Mantra  l(  Om  Ham 
oblation  to  the  soul  for  making  it  omniscient,  Om  Ham 
oblation  to  the  soul  for  the  purpose  of  making  it  all  con- 
tentment. Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  sou!  for  making  it 
cognisant  of  its  originless  existence.  Om  Ham  oblation 
to  the  soul  for  the  purpose  of  making  it  aware  of  its 
eternal  aloofness.  Om  Ham  oblation  to  the  sou!,  so  that  it 
may  not  lose  its  power  anywhere,  and  Om  Ham  oblation 
to  the  soul  for  making  it  irresistible  everywhere  ” (46 — 48). 
The  preceptor  should  sprinkle  the  drops  of  ambrosia  from 
the  Argil  a- offering,  on  the  head  of  the  disciple,  with  a view 
to  alleviate  and  relieve  the  pain,  caused  by  projecting  such  a 
violent  and  piercing  soul-force  into  the  disciple.  He 
should  make  obeisance  to  the  sacrificial  pitcher,  sacred  to 
the  god  Shiva,  and  situate  in  the  sacrificial  shed  on  the 
righthand  side  of  that  deity;  and  ptac?  oh  bis  righthand 
side  the  disciple,  with  the  peace  of  soul  beaming  in  his  face. 
The  preceptor  should  address  the  deity  named  above  as 
follows “ You  have  favoured  this  disciple,  Oh  lord  ! by 
taking  seat  in  this  corporeal  frame  of  mine.  Increase,  Oh 
God,  the  devotion  of  the  disciple  towards  yourself,  the  fire- 
god,  and  the  preceptor/'  Then  he  should  make  obeisance 
to  him,  and  bless  the  disciple,  and  offer  the  eight  scented 
flowers  enjoined  to  be  offered  on  the  occasion,  to  the  god 


354 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


Shiva.  The  disciple  should  bathe  with  waters,  out  of  the 
sacrificial  pitchers  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva,  after  which  the 
sacrifice  should  be  closed  (47—52). 


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. 


The  God  said: — I shall  shortly  describe  the  form  of 
spiritual  initiation  known  as  the  Tattviki  initiation.  The 
noose  of  thread  should  be  hung  down  from  the  head  of  the 
disciple ; and  the  union  of  the  tattvas  or  the  fundamental 
principles,  and  the  soul  of  the  preceptor  should  be  brought 
about  as  previously  described  (1).  The  preceptor  should 
contemplate  in  the  noose  or  the  thread,  the  fundamental 
principles  beginning  with  those  of  time  and  heat,  and  end- 
ing with  that  of  pure  bliss,  like  the  beads  in  a rosary  (2). 
The  principle  of  bliss  (Shivatattva)  should  be  invoked ; and 
the  rite  of  Garbhadhana  should  be  done  unto  the  same,  as 
laid  down  before.  The  soverignity  of  the  god  should  he 
returned  to  him,  and  the  preceptor  should  give  him  a dowry 
of  all  things,  by  repeating  the  principal  Mantra.  The  final 
oblation  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  j permeated  with  the 
sound-essence  of  411  the  fundamental  principles,  with  each 
one  of  which  the  disciple  would  attain  salvation.  Another 
such  full-ablation  should  be  offered  to  the  god  Shiva,  with 
a view  to  make  the  union  of  the  souls  firm  and  inseverable, 
after  which  the  disciple  should  be  bathed  with  waters  out  of 

the  sacrificial  pitcher,  sacred  to  the  abovenamed  deity  (3—5). 


1 HE  God  said  -The  preceptor  should  perform  unto 
the  disciple,  the  rite  of  Abhiseka  as  follows,  for  the  purpose 
of  conferring  prosperity  on  him.  The  disciple  should  be 
worshipped  at  the  outset,  and  the  eight  pitchers  should 
be  duly  stowed,  on  the  eight  angular  points  of  the  sacrificial 
shed,  starting  with  the  south-east,  one  being  placed  in  the 
middle.  In  the  eight  pitchers  described  in  the  preceding 
line,  the  preceptor  should  invoke  the  eight  oceans  respec- 
tively known  as  the  oceans  of  alkali,  curd,  wine  etc.,  and 
locate  therein  the  eight  Rudras  respectively  known  as  (r) 
Sikhandi,  (2)  Srikantha,  (3)  Tfimurfca,  (4)  Ekarudraksa,  (6) 
Ekanatra  (7)  Sukshma,  and  (8)  Ananta  Rudra.  In  the  pitcher 
at  the  middle  of  the  sacrificial  shed,  the  preceptor  should 
locate  the  god  Shiva  together  with  the  Mantra  held  sacred 
to  him,  and  tfye  presiding  deities  of  the  different  quarters 
of  the  heaven,  in  the  different  corners  and  angular  points 
of  the  sacrificial  shed.  In  the  shed  erected  for  the 
purposes  of  sacrificial  bathing,  an  earthen  platform  should 
be  raised,  measuring  two  cubits  in  length  and  eight  fingers 
in  height,  wherein  the  cushion  'of  eternity  (Ananta)  of  the 
god  Shiva,  should  be  imagined  as  spread  over  a mattress  of 
Baet  leaves  (r— 6).  The  preceptor  should  cause  the  disciple 
to  be  seated  on  the  same,  with  his  face  turned  towards  the 
East,  and  perform  the  rite  of  Sakalikaran  (the  act  of  assigning 
the  different  parts  of  the  body  to  the  different  deities  with  the 
different  Mantras)  unto  him,  and  worship  him  as  before.  The 
body  of  the  disciple  should  be  rubbed  over  with  Kanjika,  (decoc- 
tion of  rice),  ashes  of  burnt  clay,  grass,  cow-dung,  Golaka,  white 
mustard,  and  washings  of  curd.  Waters  of  the  sacrificial 
pitchers  in  which  the  oceans  of  alkali,  curd,  wine,  etc,  have 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


been  respectively  invoked,  should  be  poured  out  over  the  head 
of  the  disciple,  by  repeating,  the  Hrid,  Vidyesha  and  the 
Shamvara-Mantras  coupled  with  term  Svadha.  Then  the 
disciple  should  be  clad  in  a pair -of,.- white  clothes,  and  seated 
on  the  righthand  side  of  the  preceptor,  who  should  again 
Worship  him  on  the  cushion  mentioned  before,  and  worship 
him  as  above  described.  The  preceptor  should  address  him 
as  follows: — “ From  this  day  you  shall  well  test  the  rece- 
pient  of  the  garments  and  pharphernelia  of  a Yogin,  such  as 
the  anchorite's  turban,  garments,  crown,  knife,  small  jar  or 
the  alms-bowl,  the  rosary,  the  book  with  its  gloss,  the  initiation 
and  the  rite  of  installation,  etc,  before  you  favour  him  With 
these  things.  The  preceptor  should  graciously  accost  the 
disciple  and  make. obeisance  to  the  god  Maheshvara  (the  god 
of  the  gods),  and  the  goddesses  as  follows,  for  removing  all 
impediments  that  might  obstruct  the  fruition  of  the  object, 
with  which  the  ceremony  had  been  undertaken.  “I  have 
been  commanded  by  thee,  0 lord,  who  are  revealed  in  the 
shape  of  preceptor,  to  undertake  this  Abhiseka  ceremony. 
O Shiva,  I have  performed  the  same  rite  unto  the  disciple 
who  is  well-versed  in  the  Sanhita  [ Scriptural  Books"]  (7—14). 
Five  oblations  should  be  five  times  cast  into  the  fire  with 
the  object  of  t propitiating  the  Mantras.  Then  the  oblation 
should  be  offered,  and  the  preceptor  should  cause  the 
disciple  to  be  seated  on  his  righthand  side,  and  stir  up  the 
soul-life  in  the  latter,  by  gently  beating  against  the  fingers 
of  his  righthand,  first  the  thumb,  then  the  forefinger  and 
so  on,  with  the  end  of  a burnt  Kusha  grass.  Then  he 
should  make  him  bow  down  unto  himself,  and  the  disciple 
should  hold  flowers  in  the  cavity  of  his  blended  palms,  at  the  • 
time  of  making  the  obeisance.  ■ Then  the  merit'  of  perform-  J 
ing  the  ceremony  should  be  assigned  to  the  god  Shitfa,  - 
located  both  in  the  sacrificial  pitcher  and  the  fire,  and  the 
preceptor  should  address  him  as  follows  : — “ Be  always  pro- 
pitious O god,  on  the  disciples,  who  are  well-versed  Jo  the 


AGN!  PURANAM.  357 

A wan  like  a monarch  attains  all  wished  for 
after  the  Abhisheka  (installation)  ceremony  (15—18). 


Shastras 
objects,  s 


CHAPTER  XCI 


1 HE  God  Said  The  initiated  disciple  duly  installed 
in  the  soul  region,  should  worship  the  god  Vishnu,  the 
Sun  and  the  other  gods,  with  the  peals  of  trumpets  and 
conch-shells.  A man  who  bathes  the  gods,  with  the  composi- 
tion known  as  the  Panchagavya,  carries  with  him  into  the 
region  of  bliss,  the  souls  of  all  his  departed  manes  and 
progenies.  Sins  committed  in  the  course  of  millions  of 
years,  are  reduced  to  ashes  by  bathing  and  anointing  the 
gods  with  clarified  butter.  A person,  who  bathes  the  gods 
with  an  adaka  (two  maunds),  of  clarified  butter,  is  trans- 
formed into  a god.  Then  he  should  worship  them  after 
plastering  them  over  with  sandal-.paste.  The  gods  should 
be  always  worshipped  without  any  effort,  and  with  short 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


as  the  Tripura-Mantra  would  be  composed  of  the  letter  'Ka’ 
preceded  by  the  sixteen  vowel  letters.  The  Mantras  having 
for  its  principal  part  the  Mantra  Hrim,  and  preceded  by  the 
Pranava-Mantra  “Om,”  are  twenty  thousand  in  number,  or  ac- 
cording to  the  computation  of  other  authorities,  their  number 
is  sixty  thousand  in  all.  The  Mantras  which  are  particularly 
sacred  to  the  goddess  Sarasvati,  (the  goddess  pf  learning) 
are  “Am  Hrun,”  which  are  likewise  sacred  to  the  goddesses 
Chandika,  Gouri  and  Durga  respectively;  while  the  Mantras 
with  which  the  goddess  Lakshmi  should  be  worshipped,  are 
“Am  Shring.”  The  Mantras  which  are  respectively  sacred  to 
the  sun  god,  Shiva,  Ganesha,  and  the  god  Hari,  are  known 
as  “Kshoum,  Krim,  Am,  Houm,  Am,  Gam  and  Am.”  The 
preceptor  after  having  initiated  the  disciple,  should  contem- 
plate and  repeat  three  ^hundred  and  six  times  each  of  the 
above  said  Mantras,  respectively  sacred  to  the  sun-god,  the 
moon,  the  goddess,  and  the  god  Vishnu,  and  which  Mantras 
are  composed  of  the  different  combinations  of  ‘Ka’  with- 
the  sixteen  vowel  sounds,  and  end  with  the  same  letter 
‘Ka’  (8—17). 


CHAPTER  XCII 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


ilfillli 


XGN1  PURANAM. 


360 

having  levelled  the  ground,  the  precepter  should  purify 
the  same,  and  lay  down  lines  circumbulating  the  latter,  with 
gold  dust,  curd  and  sun-burnt  rice.  He  should  worship  the 
god  Shiva  in  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  situate  at  the  middle  and 
the  south  east  corner  of  the  sacrificial  shed,  and  sprinkle 
waters  out  of  them  over  the  spade,  after  having  duly  wor- 
shipped the  presiding  deity  of  the  household  (the  Vastu- 
devata).  Oblations  should  be  cast  outside  the  mystic  dia- 
gram, for  warding  off  the  Rakshashas  (demons),  and  other 
pernicious  spirits,  that  are  harmful  to  the  due  performance 
of  a sacrifice.  The  oblations  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
line,  should  be  scattered  to  all  the  quarters  of  the  heaven, 
and  offered  to  the  guardian  deities  of  the  same.  The  pre- 
ceptor should  sprinkle  water  over  the  ground,  and  worship 
the  spade,  etc.  Then  having  placed  a waterful  pitcher, 
covered  over  with  a pair  of  clothes,  on  the  shoulder 
of  a Brahman,  and  after  having  duly  placed  the  same 
with  the  peals  of  divine  music  and  the  chantings  of  the 
Bramha  Vidya  *Vedic  hymns),  the  preceptor  should  lay 
down  the  same  on  the  south-east  corner  of  the  sacrificial 
shed,  and  worship  it,  on  the  setting  in  of  the  auspici- 
ous moment  of  worship.  The  ground  should  be  excavated 
with  a spade  duly  consecrated  and  sprinkled  over  with 
honey.  The  earth  .dug  out  of  the  excavation,  should 
be  deposited  on  the  south-west  corner  of  the  ground,  which 
should  be  filled  in  with  water  out  of  the  sacrificial  pitcher, 
and  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  edifice  should  be  carried 
as  far  as  desired.  Then  having  rested  a little,  the  preceptor 
should  cause  the  border  of  excavation  to  be  carried  round ; 
and  sprinkle  water  over  the  same  until  the  south-eastern 
corner  of  the  ground  is  reached.  The  water-mark  should  be 
laid  down  all  along  the  outskrit  of  the  boundary  line.  The 
Argha  or  the  preliminary  offering  should  be  offered,  and  the 
pitcher  should  be  carried  round,  and  the  ground  should  be 
thus  taken  possession  of,  according  to  the  rites  of  Bhupa- 


I iiiiiiii  ii®  I'  1 1 11111  iifii .. 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


exercising  evil  influence,  had  been  buried  underneath  the 
ground  in  the  west.  Similarly  the  group  of  letters  beginning 
with  “Pa”  if  touched  by  the  counting  disc,  would  indicate  the 
existence  of  a human  skull  beneath  the  ground.  Likewise  the 
groups  of  Setters  beginning  with  *Ta/  ‘Sha/  and  ‘Ha7  respec- 
lively,  would  point  out  the  existence  of  a corpse,  a charmed 
iron-bolt  and  a bit  of  enchanted  silver  underneath  the  ground. 
The  preceptor  should  cause  the  ground  to  be  levelled  and 
made  smooth,  by  breaking  down  the  clods  with  a club.  The 
ground  should  be  plastered  over  with  a coating  of  clay  to  the 
depth  of  eight  fingers,  and  well-cleansed  with  water.  Then 
the  preceptor,  with  the  general  Argha  offering  in  bis  hand, 
should  enter  the  sacrificial  shed,  and  locate  the  warder-gods, 
two  at  each  door  of  the  temple.  Then  he  should  purify  the 
component  principles  of  his  own  self,  and  the  rite  of  purifi- 
cation of  the  sacrificial  shed  and  the  fire-receptacle  should 
he  duly  performed.  The  sacrificial  small  jar  should  he 
installed  by  the  side  of  the  sacrificial  pitcher  and  the  god 
Shiva  together  with  the  Lokapalas  should  be  duly  worshipped 
(1 6— --29).  The  lighting  up  and  the  worship  of  the  sacrificial 
fire,  should  be  done  as  before,  and  the  preceptor  should 
again  enter  the  sacrificial  shed,  accompanied  by  the  Yayamam 
(the  person  at  whose  instance  the  sacrifice  is  performed). 
The  stone  slabs  with  which  the  temple  should  be  built, 
should  he  of  a square  shape,  measuring  a cubit  both  in 
length  and  breadth,  and  eight  fingers  in  height.  The  bricks 
in  the  case  where  the  temple  would  be  made  of  them, 
should  measure  half  of  the  stone  slabs.  The  images  of  lotus 
flowers,  etc.,  should  be  carved  into  the  above  bricks,  which 
are  respectively  known  as  the  Nanda,  Bhadra,  Jaya,  Rikta, 
and  Purna,  of  which  the  presiding  deities  respectively 
known  as  Padma,  Mahapadtna,  Shankha,  Makara,  and, ' - 
Samudra  should  be  respectively  located  in  the  five  sacrificial 
pitchers  containing  gems,  and  which  are  respectively-'  named  1 


- »1..  „ Ti 

L i„; 


AGNI  PURANAM 


Nanda,  Bhadra,  Jaya,  Purna,  Ajita,  Aparajita,  Vijaya,  Mangafa* 
and  Dharani,  and  the  nine  sacrificial  pitchers  are  named  as 
Subhadra,  Vibhadra,  Sunanda,.Pushpanandaka,  Jaya,  Vijaya, 
Kumbha,  Purna  and  Uttara  (30— *36).  The  cushion  should  be 
offered  £0  them  at  the  beginning,  and  the  rites  of  Tadana 
should  be  performed  unto  them  with  the  Shara-Mantra* 

All  the  stpne  slabs  should  be  covered  over  with  the 
essence  of  the  Armour-Mantra,  without  any  distinction 
whatever,  and  bathed  with  scented  water  containing  a solu- 
tion of  clay,  cow-dung,  bitter  drugs,  and, the  urine  of  the 
cow*  The  preceptor  should  thus  perform  the  rite  of  ablution 
with  cleansing  dirt  (Malasnan)  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
line,  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  Weapon  coupled  with  the 
®Hun  Fut  Mantra*  in  the  end  ; after  which  they  should  be 
duly  bathed  with  the  compositions,  known  as  the  Pancha- 
gabya  and  the  Panchamrita.  Subsequent  to  that,  the  preceptor 
should  immerse  them  in  perfumed  water,  by  repeating 
the  Mantra  coupled  with  their  own  names,  and  afterwards 
bathe  them  with  water,  containing  fruits  and  washings  of 
gold,  gems  and  the  horns  of  the  cow  (37— 40).  Then  the 
stone  slab  should  be  plastered  over  with  sandal-paste,  and 
wrapped  up  in  clothes.  The  preceptor  should  offer  a 
seat  of  gold  unto  the  vsame,  carry  it  on  his  shoulders,  and 
circumbulate  round  the  sacrificial  shed,  after  which  it  should 
be  laid  down  in  a bed,  or  on  a mattress  of  kusha  grass,  by 
repeating  the  Hrid-Mantra.  The  preceptor  should  worship 
the  stone  slab  mentioned  before,  and  psychically  evoke  and 
retain  in  the  same,  the  fundamental  principles  beginning  with 
the  principle  of  cognition  and  ending  with  that  of  the  essential 
earth-matter.  The  slab  should  be  made  permeated  with  the 
essence  of  the  three  sets  or  groups  of  fundamental  principle, 
the  first  group  beginning  with  the  principle  of  cognition 
and  ending  with  the  principle  of  consciousness,  perse  the 
second  group  being  formed  of  the  principle  of  thought 
in  the  beginning,  and  ending  with  the  principles  of  five 


364  AGNI  FURANAM. 

proper  sensibles,  "such  as  the  proper  sensibles  of  touch* 
taste,  etc.,  the  third  group  consisting  of  the  principles 
of  the  proper  sensibles  in  one  end,  and  the  principle  of 
essential  matter  in  the  other.  The  concourse  of  principles 
spoken  of  above,  should  be  considered  as  capacitated  in 
the  principles  of  pure  bliss  (Shiva-tatlva),  pure  knowledge 
and  absolute  soul.  The  principles  with  their  respective 
presiding  deities,  should  be  worshipped  with  the  Atma-, 
and  the  Hrid-mantras,  in  the  places  assigned  to  them  in  the 
sacrificial  shed,  and  marked  with  flowers  and  garlands,  as 
follows  “Om,  Hnu,  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  absolute 
bliss  (Shiva-tattva),  Ora  Hnu,  obeisance  to  the  Rudra  who 
is  the  presiding  deity  of  the  (abovesaid  principle  of  abso- 
lute bliss.  Ora,  Ham,  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  pure 
knowledge  (Vidya-tattva).  Ora,  Ham,  obeisance  to  Vishnu, 
who  is  the  presiding  deity  of  the  principle  of  pure  knowledge. 
Ora,  Ham  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  absolute  soul. 
Ora  Ham  obeisance  to  Brahma  who  is  the  presiding  deity 
of  the  principle  of  the  pure  and  absolute  soul”  (41—45)* 
The  principles  which  are  embodied  or  made  concrete  in  the 
different  manifestations  of  the  god  Shiva,  such  as  the  Kshama, 
Fire,  Yayaman,  the  sun,  water,  air,  the  moon  and  the  uni- 
versal ether,  should  be  psychically  projected  into  each  of 
the  above  stone  slabs,  together  with  the  inmate  deities  of 
the  above  eight  manifestations  or  embodiments  in  turn,  who 
are  named  as,  Sarva  (the  albpervading  one)  Pashupati 
(the  lord  of  animal  beings),  Ugra  (the  fierce  or  the  burning 
one),  Rudra  (the  heat-giving  one),  Bhava  (the  one  who 
controls  all  “Being”),  Maheshvar  (the  god  of  gods),  Maha- 
deva  (the  Supreme  god),  and  Bhouma  (the  god  of  earth). 
The  Lokapalas  should  be  located  in  the  sacrificial  pitchers* 
by J* repeating  the  Mantras  respectively  sacred to : each' >&£■: 
them,  as  follows  : — “Ora  obeisance  to  the  image  of  the  earth  ; 
Om  obeisance  to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Earth,  and  so 
on,”  The  pitchers  should.be  worshipped  with  the  same 


AGNi  p uranari 


Mantra,  or  with  the  Vi j a or  the  principal  Mantra  sacred  to 
each  of  the  Lokapalas  such  as  Indra,  etc.,  which  ate  Li*m, 
Rum,  Shum,  Pum,  Vrum,  Yum,  Mum,  Hnm  and  Kshoum. 

The  procedure  described  above,  should  be  adapted  in 
cases  where  the  sacrificial  pitchers  number  nine  in  all; 
whereas  the  rule  that  would  obtain  in  the  case  where  they 
number  five,  only  is  as  follows The  five  fundamental 
principles  should  be  located  in  each  of  the  above  slabs, 
together  with  the  images  of  earth,  etc.,  and  the  five  pre- 
siding deities  such  as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  Ishvara  and 
Sadashiva,  as  follows “Om  obeisance  to  the  image  of  the 
earth,  Otn  obeisance  to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  earth-image 
(46—50).  The  pitchers  should  be  worshipped  by  mention- 
ing the  name  of  each.  The  rite  of  Nyasa  should  be  per- 
formed unto  them,  commencing  with  the  one  situate  at  the 
middle  part  of  the  sacrificial  shed.  The  virtue  known  as 
the  Oharika  (capacity  of  holding)  should  be  evoked  in  the 
receptacle  for  sacrificial  fire,  and  rite  of  Tarpana  should  be 
done  unto  the  same,  by  offering  stems  of  kusha  grass  and 
sessamum  orientate.  Then  a similar  rite  should  be  done 
unto  the  fundamental  principles  described  above,  and  to 
their  presiding  deities,  and  likewise  to  the  images  and  their 
inmate  divinities,  by  offering  oblations  of  clarified  butter. 
Then  for  the  purification  of  the  part,  known  as  the  Brahma- 
vaga,  hundred  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  after 
which  the  final  one  should  be  offered.  The  slabs  should  be 
sprinkled  over  with  the  water  of  peace,  consecrated  after 
offering  the  abovesaid  final  oblation.  The  preceptor  should 
worship  each  of  the  abovenamed  fundamental  principles, 
located  in  the  stone  slabs,  by  touching  them  with  the  ends  of 
kusha  grass.  The  rites  of  Sannidhya  (invoking  the  presence) 
and  Sandhana  (unison)  should  be  done  unto  the  above 
principles,  which  should  be  again  located  in  the  slabs,  after 
having  been  made  pure.  The  rite  should  be  similarly  extend- 
ed to  the  three  groups  or  sets  of  principles  described  before* 


mm  PURANAM. 


as  follows c,0m  Am,  Rim  obeisance  to  the  principles  of 
absolute  soul  and  pure  knowledge  combined,  The  preceptor 
should  touch  the  three  parts  of  the  stone,  respectively  sacred 
to  Brahma  with  the  ends  of  the  kasha  grass,  and  bring  about 
an  union  of  the  fundamental  principles  as  follows: — “ Om 
Ham  Um  obeisance  to  the  principles  of  knowledge  and  bliss” 
(51 — 56).  The  final  oblation,  composed  of  honey  and  clari- 
fied butter,  should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  and  the  sacrificial 
pitchers,  over  which  the  Lokapalas  preside,  and  containing 
gems,  etc.,  and  sprinkling  them  over  with  the  composition 
known  as  the  Panchagavya,  should  be  worshipped  by 
repeating  the  Mantras  sacred  to  each  of  the  above 
deities  (Lokapalas).  The  preceptor  should  perform  the 
Homa  ceremony,  for  ensuring  the  continuance  of  the 
divinities,  and  meditate  upon  the  image  of  the  presiding 
deity  of  the  stone  slabs,  as  a golden  coloured  goddess,  clad 
in  a garment  of  stone,  who  has  just  finished  her  ablution-  and 
shining  in  the  form  of  pure  knowledge.  Hundred  oblations 
should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  for  making  up  any  deficiency  in 
performing  the  sacrifice,  and  for  the  purification  of  the  home 
stead;  the  Mantra  with  which  the  oblations  should  be  cast,, 
being  the  Mantra  of  Weapon  with  the  Shiras- Mantra  append 
ded  thereto  (56— 59). 


CHAPTER  XCIfl 


1 HE  God  said  Then  the  strings  should'  be  '.laid  ■ daw# 
i#  the  same  line  with  the  sacrificial  shed,  so  as  to  enclose  the 
ground,  on  which  the  divine  edifice  would  be  raised.  The 
ground  so  enclosed,  would  be  a square  shaped  and  divided1 
into  sixty-four  equal  rectangular  chambers,  Poles  of  bamboo' 


AGN1  PURANAft*. 


367 


should  be  driven  into  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  ground, 
and  string  should  be  Said  down  across  the  eight  angular 
points  thereof.  The  gods  respectively  occupying  the  two, 
and  six  chambers  of  the  ground,  divided  into  compartments 
described  above,  should  be  worshipped  jointly  with  the 
Vastudev.ua  (trie  god  of  the  homestead).  At  the  time  of  wor- 
ship, the  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  latter  god  in 
the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle,  as  a fierce-Iooking  demon  with 
curled  locks  dancing  about  his  shoulders,  and  lifting  up  his 
diabolical  head  from  underneath  the  ground,  with  his  face 
turned  towards  the  north  (1—3).  The  thighs,  knee-joints,  etc., 
of  the  god,  should  be  considered  as  lying  towards  the  north-* 
west  and  the  southern  corner  of  the  chequered  ground,  the 
two  soles  of  his  feet  as  turned  towards  the  south,  and  his 
head  towards  the  north-west,  with  his  two  palms  lying  blended 
in  the  attitude  of  prayer  on  his  heart  (4).  All  the  gods  should 
be  worshipped  as  located  in  the  Vastu  (the  diagram),  by 
which  the  consecrator  would  attain  bliss.  The  eight  guardian 
deities  of  the  eight  angular  points  of  the  ground,  should  be 
worshipped  in  the  eight-half  chambers  of  the  diagram,  situate 
at  those  points.  The  Rishis  such  as  Marichi,  etc.,  should 
occupy  six  such  chambers  of  the  diagram,  counted  from  the 
east,  and  four  such  chambers  at  the  middle  of  the  ground, 
should  be  assigned  to,  and  set  apart  for,  the  god  Brahma,  while 
the  rest  of  the  gods  should  respectively  occupyja  single  cham- 
ber. The  body  of  the  god  of  the  household,  should  be  made 
endowed  with  all  the  nerves  and  the  nerve-ganglias.  The 
twelve  joints  known  as  the  trishula,  Mainvandha,  Svashfctka, 
etc.,  of  the  above  god,  should  be  imagined  as  lying  under- 
neath the  walls  of  the  edifice,  about  to  be  reared  up  and 
consecrated  (5 — 8).  An  oblation  of  a handful  sun-dried  rice, 
cast  in  clarified  butter,  should  be  offered  to  the  god 
Isha,  and  an  offering  of  water  with  lotus  flowers  should  be 
given  to  Parjanya  (the  god  of  the  rains).  A bright  saffron- 
coloured  banner  should  be  presented  to  Jayanta  (the 


liiisii 


iilii® 

liliiSiSite 


SifSBasi 

Mil 


368 


AGWf  PCJHANAM. 


heir-apparent  to  the  throne  of  heaven).  Washings  of  gems 
would  be  the  offering,  with  which  the  king  of  the  gods 
(Mahendra)  should  be  worshipped  ; and  a smoke  coloured 
canopy  should  be  offered  to  the  sun-god.  The  oblation 
offered  to  the  god  of  truth  (Satya),  should  be  composed  of 
barley  and  clarified  butter,  while  that  offered  to  Vrislia, 
should  be  consisted  of  clarified  butter  only.  The  sky  should 
be  propitiated  with  an  offering  of  bird's  flesh,  and  powdered 
barley  should  be  given  to  the  above  gods,  commencing  from 
the  east.  A ladleful  of  honey,  thickened  milk,  and  clarified 
butter  should  be  given  to  the  fire-god,  while  a full-oblation 
of  fried  paddy,  soaked  in  the  washings  of  gold,  would  be  the 
offering  with  which  the  god  of  untruth  should  be  worshipped. 
The  oblation  offered  to  the  god  of  death  and  unalterable  laws 
of  the  universe  (Yama),  should  be  composed  of  water,  dried 
grapes,  and  home-grown  sun-burnt  rice,  while  perfumes 
should  be  offered  to  the  lord  of  the  Gandharvas,  and  a bird's 
tongue  to  the  warder-god  Vringa.  Lotus  leaves  should  be 
offered  to  the  god  of  sacrifice,  and  the  eight  gods  spoken  of 
in  the  preceding  lines,  should  be  considered  as  occupying 
the  northern  quarter  of  the  diagram.  An  oblation  of  water, 
and  thickened  milk,  containing  seeds  of  sessarnum  orientale, 
should  be  given  to  the  Pifcris ; and  sticks  of  sacrificial  trees 
should  be  presented  to  the  warder-god,  for  serving  the  purpose, 
as  it  were,  of  tooth-brushes,  which  the  preceptor  should  offer 
by  exhibiting  the  Dhenu  (cow-shaped)  Mudra.  Cakes  should 
be  given  to  Sugriva,  Darvaka  (sacrificial-grass)  to  Puspadanta, 
red  lotus  flowers  to  the  sea-god  Prachetas,  while  wine  should 
be  offered  for  propitiating  the  demon  (Asura).  Molasses  and 
clarified  butter  should  be  offered  to  the  serpent-god  Shesha, 
while  a preparation  of  Sugar  and  clarified  butter  or  fried 
paddy  should  be  offered  to  the  spirit  of  diseases.  The  gods 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  lines,  should  fye  considered  as 
occupying  the  western  side  of  the  diagram  laid-  down  #1* 
the  side  of  the  divine  edifice,  A yellow  banner  should  be 


A ON  I PURANAM. 


369 


given  to  the  god  of  storm  (Manila),  and  the  flowers  of  Naga- 
dceshara  to  the  serpent-god  (Naga).  The  edibles  should  be 
given  to  Mukshya,  and  the  purified  soup  of  Mudga  (. Phaseolus 
Mungo)  to  Bhallata.  To  Soma  should  be  given  the  sacrificial 
porridge  soaked  in  clarified  butter,  and  the  lily  flowers  to  the 
goddess  of  Dawn.  Oblation  should  be  given  to  Adit i,  and  a 
bouse  sboultkbe  consecrated  to  the  goddess  Dili.  The  gods, 
described  in  the  preceding  lines,  should  be  known  as  occupy- 
ing the  northern  side  of  the  diagram  abovedescribed.  In  the 
west,  the  Modakas  should  be  offered  to  the  god  Brahma  and 
the  Rishi  Marichi,  occupying  the  six  chambers  of  the  ground 
laid  out  in  squares.  Red  flowers  should  be  presented  to 
the  god  Savita,  situate  in  the  chamber  below  what  had  been 
assigned  to  the  fire-god,  and  in  the  chamber  below  that, 
water  with  the  stems  of  kusha  grass  should  be  given  to  the 
goddess  Savitri.  In  the  south,  red  sandal-paste  should  be 
presented  to  the  god  Vivasvana,  occupying  six  chambers 
of  the  diagram,  and  in  the  chamber  below  the  one  at  the 
corner  dedicated  to  Raksha,  turmeric  with  eatables  should 
be  presented  to  the  god  Indra.  Mixed  rice  should  be 
offered  to  the  god  Indra-Jaya,  in  the  chamber  below  that  of 
the  god  spoken  of.in  the  preceding  line,  and  molasses  with 
eatables  should  be  given  to  Mitra,  occuping  six  chambers 
in  the  west  side  of  the  diagram  (9 — 21). 

An  oblation  composed  of  clarified  butter  and  the  rice  of 
boiled  paddy,  should  be  offered  to  the  god  Rudra,  occupying 
the  chamber  at  the  north-west  corner  of  the  diagram.  In  the 
•chamber  below  that,  offerings  of  Mas  (Phaseolus  Radiatus) 
should  be  given  to  the  servant  of  the  god  Rudra  at  the  north. 
A plateful  of  meat-offering  should  be  given  to  the  god  of 
mountains  (Dharadhara),  who  would  be  considered  as  oc- 
cupying six  chambers  of  the  diagram.  Apa  and  Vatsa  should 
fee  duly  worshipped  in  the  chamber  below  what  had  been 
dedicated  to  the  god  Shiva,  and  offering  of  curd  and  thicken- 
ed milk  should  be  respectively  given  to  them.  In  the  four 


370 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


chambers  at  the  middle  of  the  diagram,  oblations  of  sacri- 
ficial porridge,  containing  clarified  butter  and  soaked  in  the 
•composition  known  as  the  Panchagavya,  should  be  offered  to 
•the  god  Brahma,  outside  the  boundary  Sine  of  the  mystic 
•diagram  (Vastu-Mandal)  extending  from  thefnorth-easfc  by  the 
south-west  to  the  north-west.  The  four  demonesses  such  as 
Charaki,  etc.,  should  be  respectively  worshipped  with  the 
following  offerings meat  with  clarified  butter  should  be 
offered  to  Charaki,  while  curd  with  lotus  flowers  should  be 
the  portion  of  Vidari  in  the  sacrifice.  The  demoness  Putana 
should  be  propitiated  with  an  offering  of  flowers,  blood  and 
bile.  Bones  together  with  flowers,  blood,  and  bile,  should 
fall  to  the  lot  of  the  monstress  of  sin,  while  meat  and  edibles 
should  be  offered  to  the  god  Skanda  in  the  east.  Popas  (a 
sort  of  sweet  cake  fried  in  ghee)  with  krisara  (Rice  and  peas 
boiled  together)  should  be  given  to  Aryama  in  the  south,  and 
meat  with  blood  to  the  monster  Jambhaka  in  the  west.  In  the 
north,  offerings  of  flowers  and  bloody  rice,  should  be  made 
unto  the  monster-maiden  Pilipinya,  or  in  the  alternative,  all 
the  gods,  forming  or  occupying  the  different  parts  of  the 
body  of  the  Vastu-Devata,  should  be  worshipped  with  oblations 
composed  of  curd,  water,  sun-dried  rice,  and  the  stems  of 
kusha  grass.  In  the  case  of  a town  or  a mansion,  the  mystic 
diagram  should  be  divided  into  eighty-one  chambers.  The 
strings  or  lines,  laid  across  the  cardinal  points  of  the 
diagram,  should  occupy  the  breadth  of  three  such  squares, 
and  comprise  the  breadth  of  six  such  at  the  other  angular 
points.  The  gods  such  as  Isha,  etc.,  should  respectively  occupy 
one  such  entire  chamber,  the  Nagas  should  have  two  such 
respectively  consecrated  to  them,  the  Rishis  such  as  Marichi 
etc.,  should  occupy  six  such,  while  in  the  present  case  nine 
chambers  at  the  middle,  should  be  dedicated  to  the  god 
Brahma  (22 — 32).  1 

In  the  case  of  constructing  a city,  or  in  establishing  a smalf 
hamlet  (Gramksheta— lit,  a miserable  town  or,  hamlet},  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


37* 


m , . , 

f' 


mystic  diagram  spoken  of  above,  and  known  as  the  Vasin- 
Mandat  should  be  divided  into  hundred  Interlinear  chambers 
or  sub-divisions.  The  two  bamboo  poles-  respectively  called 
the  ‘invincible**  (Durjaya)  and  the  “unliftable  one**  (Durdhara) 
sho-uld  be  driven  into  the  two  corners  thereof.  The  Nayasa 
should  be  performed  therein  as  In  a divine  temple,  and  the 
planets  and  the  gods,  such  as  Skanda,  etc.,  who  should_.be 
located  in  the  same,  should  occupy  six  such  chambers  as 
described  above.  Five  chambers  should  be  dedicated  to 
the  monstress  Charaki  and  others,  and  the  lines  and  bamboos 
should  occupy  spaces,,  as  laid  down  in  the  case  Just  above 
mentioned.  In  the  case,  where  the  sacrifice  in  question' 
would  be  undertaken,  with  the  object  of  constructing  a 
divine  temple,  the  diagram  should  be  divided  into  hundred 
and  thirty-four  square-shaped  chambers  or  divisions,  sixty- 
four  out  of  which,  should  be  dedicated  to  the  god  Bramha 
and  the  Rishis  such  as  Marichi,  etc.  The  gods  such'  as 
Ishna,  etc.j  should  have  nine  chambers  assigned  to'  each 
of  them,  the  gods,  such  as  Skanda,  should  have  eight, 
the  demonesses  such  as  Charaki,  etc.,  should  occupy  an 
equal  number  of  chambers  with  the  latter  gods,  the 
poles  and  the  lines  should  occupy  the  same  space  as  in  the 
preceding  Instance,  and  the  rite  of  Nayasa  should  be  per- 
formed nine  times  more,  than  what  had  been  enjoined  to  be 
performed  in  the  ease  of  constructing  a city  (33^ — 3*8)*  The 
diagram,  which  is  divided  into  twenty-five  chambers,  is 
called  the  Vaitala.  The  other  forms  of  the  man  dal  or 
diagram  are  marked  by  nine  and  sixteen  sub-divisions 
respectively.  The  rectangular  diagram  may  be  inscribed 
within  a triangle,  a hexagon  or  a circle,  and  the  Nayasa  should 
be  performed  in  the  excavation  encircling  the  same,  as  on 
the  stone  slab  known  as  the  Bramba-shila.  The  rite  of 
Nayasa  should  be  performed  as  in  the  above  instance,  as  it 
should  be  done  in  the  case  of  installing  the  image  of  Shiva* 
■or  rin:  consecrating  a temple  to  him.  The  offerings  of*  ; 


p 
11! 

! 


; V 

111 


■ I 
| I 

■1 

11 


111 


372 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


sacrificial  porridge  should  be  made  unto  all  the  gods 
worshipped  in  the  course  of  the  sacrifice*  The  Vastu  or 
the  diagram  should  measure  live  cubits,  in  the  absence  of  any 
measure  being  specified,  the  one  commensurable  with  the 
entire  site  of  the  divine  mansion,  being  held  as  the  best  or 
the  most  auspicious  (38—42). 

CHAPTER  XC1V. 


rp 

1 HE  god  said  : — The  preceptor  should  worship  Charakr 
and  her  companions,  in  the  south-east  and  other  angular 
points  of  the  sky,  and  outside  the  border  line  of  the 
mystic  diagram  as  before  ; and  offer  three  oblations  to  each 
of  the  above  gods  in  succession  (i).  In  the  auspicious 
moment,  the  oblation  known  as  the  Vutabali  should  be 
offered,  and  the  goddess  of  energy  should  be  invoked  in  the 
middle  line  with  the  cushion  of  eternity  of  the  god  Shiva, 
and  the  pitcher  (Uttama)  should  be  placed  thereon. 
The  stone  slab,  should  be  put  into  the  abovesaid  pitcher 
by  repeating  the  principal  Mantra  coupled  with  the  letter 
‘ N,’  and  the  eight  pitchers  respectively  named  as  Subhadra, 
etc.,  should  be  placed  in  their  respective  holes  or  cavities, 
dug  out  in  the  different  angular  points  of  the  sacrificial 
shed,  -such  as  the  east,  etc.,  by  repeating  the  Mantras  sacred 
to  the  gods  Lokapalas.  The  goddess  of  energy  (Shakti) 
should  be  contemplated  as  located  in  each  of  the  above- 
said  holes,  and  the  stone  slabs  such  as  Nanda,  etc.,  should 
be  immersed  in  water  contained  in  each  of  them,  by  repeat- 
ing the  Mantras,  sacred  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the 
different  images  or  manifestations  of  the  gpd.  The  pitchers; 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


373 


F 


spoken  of  in  the  preceding  line,  should  be  placed  in  due 
order  from  the  middle  of  the  plinth  or  the  ground  elevation* 
and  the  gods  such  as  the  guardian  deities  of  virtue,  etc.,  should 
be  located  in  them,  which  should  be  stowed  in  the  different 
corners  and  angular  points  of  the  sacrificial  shed  (2 — -$)• 
The  set  of  pitchers  commencing  with  those  named  as 
^Nanda/  etc.^oufc  of  the  class  beginning  with  1 Sabhadra’, 
should  be  stowed  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  shed, 
the  set  consisting  of  the. pitchers  named  as  “ Ajita,”  etc.,  out 
of  the  class,  of  which  the  pitcher  “Jaya”  forms  the  first, 
having  placed  in  the  east.  The  god  Brahma  should  be 
invoked  over  all  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  and  the  essence  of 
the  god  Maheshvara  should  be  contemplated  as  pervading 
the  internal  space  (sky)  of  the  shed,  which  would  serve  as 
the  receptacle  of  the  former  divinity*  The  offerings  should 
be  made  unto  him,  and  the  preceptor  should  repeat  the 
Mantra  of  Weapon,  for  warding  off  the  harms  that  might 
have  otherwise  befallen  the  due  performance  of  the  sacri- 
fice. (6 — 8.) 

I shall  now  describe  the  procedure  which  should  be 
adapted  in  the  case,  where  the  stone  slabs  would  number 
five  in  all.  In  the  full  pitcher  at  the  middle  of  the  sacrifi- 
cial shed,  the  preceptor  should  put  down  the  stone  slab* 
known  as  the  Purna,  half  of  which  should  be  immersed  in 
water  contained  in  the  sacrificial  pitcher  known  as  the 
Subhadra;  and  the  stone  slabs  respectively  known  as 
Nanda,  etc,,  should  be  placed  in  the  pitchers  Padma,  etc., 
situate  at  the  different  quarters  of  the  sacrificial  shed, 
started  from  the  south-east.  The  remaining  four  slabs 
should  be  contemplated  as  located  in  the  middle,  their 
hearts  filled  with  the  exuberance  of  a mother's  affection, 
and  the  preceptor  should  address  them  as  follows : — 
41  Om,  Oh  Purna  1 who  art  the  daughter  of  Angirasa  and 
possessed  of  the  entire  concourse  of  divine  attributes,  dost 
Chou  make  this  undertaking  of  mine,  entire  and  complete, 


3 n 


AGNS  PU  R A NAM. 


Oh  Goddess ! I make  obeisance  to  thee.-  ©m,  obeisance 
to  thee  Nanda!  who  Impartest  joy  to  men.  I establish 
thee  goddess,  in  this  temple.  Graciously  continue  here  In. 
bliss,,  as  long  as  the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  the  myriads  of 
constellations*  would  shine  and  burn.  Impart,  Oh  Nanda  !' 
who  dost  own  the  Rishi  (Vashishta)  as  thy  father,  long  life, 
prosperity,  and  the  gratification  of  heart-felt  desires  to  men,, 
and  cautiously  guard  this  temple..  I make  obeisance  to  thee,. 
Oh  Bhadra!  who  dost  owe  thy  origin  to  the  Rishi  Kashyapa. 
Always  do  good  to  men,  Oh  goddess.  Always  grant  long- 
life, wealth,  and  fulfilment  of  the  most  wished-for  objects 
to  men.  I make  obeisance  to  thee.  Oh  Jaya,  who  art  the 
daughter  of  Bhrigu,  I establish  thee  in  this  temple, ..dost 
thou  condescend  to  continue  here,  Oh  Goddess!  and  impart 
success  and  prosperity  every  day.  Be  thou  the  mistress 
of  the  world,  Oh  Goddess,  I make  obeisance  to  thee,  Oh* 
Atirikta ! who  mendest  the  defect  of  gap  or  vacuum,  and 
givest  success  and  salvation  to  men.  Continue  here  in 
bliss,  Oh  Mother  | the  mark  of  whose  image  the  creation- 
bears  in  its  face,  and  who  dost  underlie  all  regions.”  The 
preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  three  fundamental 
principles  of  the  universe,  and  merge  them  in  the  universal 
expanse  of  ether,  a portion  of  which  fills  in  the  conclave  of 
the  temple.  The  Homa  known  as  the  expiatory  one 
(Prayaschitfca)  should  be  duly  performed,  and  the  preceptor 
should  close  the  sacrifice  thereafter  (9-— 17). 


CHAPTER  XCV. 


i HE  Gob  said  Now  I shall  dilate  upon  the  process 
installing  a phalic  emblem  in  the  temple,  shortly  dealt 
with  before.  The  installation  of  such  an  emblem,  grants 
enjoyment  in  this  life  and  salvation  hereafter,  and  which 
should  be  performed  for  those  ends  on  the  day,  held  sacred 
to  the  god  of  whom  it  is  the  emblem  (i)«  The  installation 
ceremony  should  be  performed  in  the  course  of  the  five 
months  commencing  from  Chaitra,  or  in  the  first  three  Karanas 
(Vava,  Valava,  Koulava)  on  the  rising  of  the  Venus  and 
the  Jupiter.  The  ceremony  should  be  undertaken  in  the 
light  fortnight,  specially  exempting  the  fifth  day  of  the  dark 
fortnight,  and  the  days  when  the  moon  enters  on  her  fourth, 
ninth,  sixth,  or  fourteenth,  phase.  The  auspicious  phases 
of  the  Moon  (tit his)  should  be 'fixed  for  the  performance  of 
the  above  ceremony,  and  days  of  inauspicious  planets  (the 
Mars  and  the  Saturn)  should  be  carefully  avoided.  The 
auspicious  asterisms,  under  which  the  ceremony  should  be 
performed,  are  the  Satabhisha,  the  Dhanistha,  the  Ardra,  the 
Anuradha,  and  the  succeeding  ones,  together  with  those  of 
Rohirri,  and  the  Shravana,  and  the  days  fixed  for  the  celebra- 
tion of  the  rite  should  be  respectively  possessed  of  Lagnas, 
wherein  the  Sun  would  enter  the  zodiacal  signs  of  Kumbha 
(Aquaris),  Sinha  (Leo),  Mifchuna  (Gemini),  Tula  (Libra),  Stri 
(Virgo),* Vrisa  (Taurus),  and  Dhanu  (Sagittarius).  The  auspici- 
ous Lagnas  or  moments  of  the  sun's  entrance  into  a parti- 
cular sign,  which  should  be  'known  as  the  sthira  or  the  firm, 
are  the  moments  when  the  sun  respectively  passes  under  the 
signs  known  as  the  Keshan  (Leo),  the  Vrishava  (Taurus), 
and  Kumbha  (Acquaris),  and  are  looked  upon  as  the  most 
auspicious  of  all  such  moments  and  as  imparting  success, 


AGNI  FURANAM. 


376 

the  chara  or  the  unsteady  moments  being  held  as  those, 
when  the  sun  enters  into  the  zodicai  signs  of  Meshal(Aries), 
Dhanu,  (Sagittarius),  and  Tula  (Libra).  The  Sthira  Lagnas, 
propitiously  looked  at  by  the  auspicious  planets  should.be 
regarded  as  the  most  blissful,  while  that  in  which  the  Jupiter, 
the  Venus,  and  the  Mercury  are  in  conjunction,  should  be  held 
as  giving  strength  and  longevity  to  the  performer  of  the  sacri- 
fice, and  also  as  bringing  strength,  progeny,  valour  and 
sovereignty  in  its  train.  The  planets  such  as  the  Jupiter,  the 
Venus  and  the  Mercury,  existing  in  the  fourth  house  from  the 
Lagoa  are  known  as  the  T urya,  and  are  in  their  ascen- 
deucy  when  they  stay  in  their  tenth  house.  Even  the  in- 
auspicious planets,  while  staying  in  the  third,  eleventh,  and 
the  fourth  house  from  the  Lagna  (the  moment  fixed  for 
the  performance  of  the  ceremony),  should  be  deemed  as 
exerting  blissful  influences  ; and  the  learned  should  couple 
therewith  the  auspicious  phases  of  the  moon  (tithis).  The 
preceptor  should  cause  the  sacrificial  shed  to  be  constructed 
in  front  of  the  site  of  the  temple,  leaving  an  intervening  space 
equal  to,  or  five  times,  the  measure  of  the  latter,  counted  from 
the  foot  of  its  twelve  flights  of  steps.  The  shed  should 
be  made  of  a square  shape,  and  possessing  four  doors 
or  entrances,  while  those  raised  for  the  purposes  of 
sacrificial  bathing  should  be  made  to  possess  half  as  many 
doors,  etc.,  (12— *17).  The  sheds  should  be  constructed  in 
the  north,  north-east,  or  in  the  eastern  quarter  of  the  ground, 
measuring  one,  ten,  or  twelve,  cubits  respectively  as  the  case 
might  be,  and  possessing  only  a single  or  four  entrances.  The 
remaining  sacrificial  sheds,  should  be  made  to  measure  two 
cubits  more,  than  the  last  class  of  sheds  abovedescribed,  and 
the  vedis  or  the  earthen  platforms  should  be  raised  therein, 
decorated  with  pillars  at  the  comers.  Fourteen  holes  or  re- 
ceptacles for  the  sacrificial  fire,  should  be  excavated,  by  leaving 
apart  a quarter  portion  of  the  earthen  platform,  one  out  of 
which  should  be  dug  out  in  the  north  eastern  comer  thereof, 


mm  pur  ana  m 


'another  sac'red  to  the  Guru  or  the  precepfcer  having  been 
excavated  in  the  east.  The  lire  receptacles  should  measure 
a span,  an  aratui,*  a cubit*,  a yard,  and  four  and  eight  cubits 
respectively,  according  as  fifty,  hundred,  thousand,  ten 
thousand,  hundred  thousand,  and  tens  of  millions  of  Homa 
oblations  would  be  cast  into  the  same  (18—21),  The 
'sacrificial  fire;receptacle  dug  out  in  the  south-east,  should 
be  made  to  resemble  the  female  organ  of  generation  in 
shape,  the  one  in  the  south,  should  be  made  to  resemble  the 
orescent  moon,  the  one  in  the  south-east  should  be  of  a 
triangular  shape,  the  one  in  the  north-west,  should  be  hexa- 
gonal, one  -in  the  north  should  have  the  shape  of  a lotus 
flower,  while  the  one  in  the  north-east,  would  be  a regular 
octagon.  The  hole  or  the  cavity  proper  should  be  made 
at  an  inclined  angle,  with  a gradual  slope  downwards  from  the 
brim  or  the  border  (Makhala)  round  its  surface,.;  and  should 
be  looked  upon  as  the  most  auspicious  short  of  cavity.  The 
three  borders  should  be  laid  down,  outside  the  one  above- 
mentioned,  respectively  measuring  four,  three  and  two,  fingers 
in  breadth;  or  a single  border  measuring  six  fingers  in  breadth-, 
should  be  laid  down  round  the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle, 
and  having  the  same  shape  as  the  latter.  The  Youi  or  the 
aperture  should  be  placed  over  the  same,  and  at  the  middle 
part  thereof,  resembling  the  shape  of  an  Ashvatha  treev 
The  aperture  or  the  out-lefc  (for  the  sacrificial  clarified 
butter.)  should  be  made  to  measure  a finger  in  height,  eight 
fingers  in  breadth,  half  of  the  entice  length  of  the  cavity  in 
length,  and  in  the  same  level  with  the  neck  of  the  hole. 
The  apertures  oE  the  sacrificial  fire*receptacies,  respectively 
situate  in  the  east,  south-east,  and  the  north,  should  be 
toward  the  latter  point  of  the  sky;  and  towards  the  east, 
where  the  fire-holes  had  been  excavated  in  the  other  corners 


* A cubit  of  the  middle  length,  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the 
little  finger. 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


378 

of  the  ground,  while  those  situate  at  the  points  of  compass 
other  than  the  angles  abovementioned,  should  have  their 
passages  or  outlets  turned  towards  the  noth-east  (22—27). 
The  twenty-fourth  part  of  a Kunda  or  a fire-receptacle  is 
called  an  Anguli  or  finger,  The  four  entrances  to  the  sacri- 
ficial shed,  should  be  decorated  with  the  branches  of  Piaksha, 
Oudumvara,  Ashavatha  and  Vata  trees,  and  which  counted 
from  the  east,  should  be  respectively  named  as  the  door  of 
peace,  the  door  of  prosperity,  the  door  of  strength,  and  the 
door  of  good  health.  The  sheds  should  measure  eighteen 
cubits  in  length,  half  as  much  in  breadth,  and  the  elevation 
would  measure  a cubit  in  height,  and  should  be  hung  round 
with  the  festoons  of  mangoe  leaves.  The  banners  should  be  of 
the  colours  of  a rain-bow,  or  of  a blood  red,  black  (deep-blue) 
smoke,  moon-like,  whitish,  gold  or  crystal  colour  respectively. 
The  banner  sacred  to  Brahma,  and  planted  at  the  east,  should 
be  of  a blood-red  colour,  while  the  one  at  the  south-west  and 
sacred  to  the  god  Ananta,  should  be  of  a blue  colour.  The 
banners  should  measure  five  cubits  in  length  and  half  as 
much  in  breadth,  and  the  rod  should  be  made  commensurable 
therewith  in  length,  which  should  be  a cubit  for  each  cubit 
length  of  the  former  (25—28). 

Twelve  sorts  of  earth  should  be  collected  from  different 
places  such  as  from  anthills  and  from  the  tusks  of  elephants* 
and  horns  of  the  bull,  together  with  those  found  at  the 
bottom  of  the  lotus  roots,  and  those  respectively  obtained 
from  the  pasturage  and  crossways,  which  are  essential 
to  the  installation  ceremony  of  an  image  of  Vishnu;  eight 
sorts  of  earth  being  required  for  the  installation  of  a 
phalic  emblem.  The  barks  of  the  five  bitter  trees  such 
as  the  Vata,  Oudumvara  Ashvafctha,  Mangoe  and  Jamboline 
should  be  likewise  collected,  together  with  the  fruits  of  the 
season,  and  the  waters  obtained  from  the  sacred  pools  and 
■ livers,,.; and  >>the  scented  water,  and  the  water  eontainroj*.,a 
solution  of  the  drugs  knows  as  the  Sarvousadbi.  ;"The;  ftYfc 


A.GN!  PURANAM. 


379 


hallowed  fruits  and  auspicious  flowers,  should  be  similarly 
collected,  together  with  the  washings  of  a cow’s  horn,  for 
the  purposes  of  performing  the  rite  of  ablution,  and  a piece 
cloth  prepared  with  the  paste  of  flour,  etc.,  should  be  used 
in  rubbing  the  body  with.  A pitcher,  with  thousand  holes 
pricked  into  its  body,  should  be  used  in  pouring  out  water 
over  the  head  of  the  bather,  and  the  substance  known  as  the 
Rochana  (yellow  pigment)  should  be  used  in  decorating  his 
body.  The  oblation  should  be  separately  performed  with  the 
substances,  known  as  the  Vijaya  (cannabis  sativa),  and 
Lakshmana,  Vala  (small  cardamoms),  Gaduchi,  Ativala  (Sida 
Cordifolia),  Patha,  Sahadeva  (Echites  Frutescens),  Shatavari 
(Asparagns  Recemosus),  Ridhi  (a  sort  of  medicinal  plant), 
Subarcha  (Alkali),  Vridhi  (a  sort  of  medicinal  plant)  and  the 
hundred  roots  of  the  cereals  (32— 38).  The  rite  of  protection 
should  be  done,  by  pouring  out  the  consecrated  water  contain- 
ing grains  of  sessatnum  orientale,  over  the  head  of  the  bather 
and  the  rite  known  as  the  Bhasmasnan  (ablution  with  conse- 
crated ashes)  should  be  done  unto  the  bather,  without  any 
Mantra  or  sacrificial  drug  whatever.  Paste  of  powdered 
barley,  wheat,  Bael  fruit,  and  camphor,  should  be  plastered 
over  the  concave  surfaces  of  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  for  sub- 
sequently bathing  them  with  water.  The  bedstead  together 
with  its  sheets  and  pillows,  and  the  sticks  for  applying  jcolly- 
rium  along  the  eyes,  should  be  offered  as  the  means  of  the 
consecrator  would  admit  of.  The  vessel  should  be  filled 
up  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  and  the  pitcher  sacred  to 
the  God  Shiva  together  with  the  sacrificial  small  jar  and 
the  pitchers  respectively  sacred  to  the  Lokapalas,  should 
be  duly  stowed.  One  pitcher,  for  each  of  the  sacrificial  fire- 
receptacles,  should  be  set  apart  for  the  purpose  of  inducing 
sleep  in  the  same.  The  preceptor  should  cover  with  a 
piece  of  cloth,  the  pitchers  held  sacred  to  the  warder-gods 
and  the  gods  of  virtue,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  set  of  pitchers 
ginning  with  the  one  named  Prashanta,  and  the  other 


m 


: V 


AG  N't  PUR  ANA  M. 


3$0 

pitchers  respectively  held  sacred  to  the  god  of  the  home- 
stead, the  goddess  Lakshmi,  and  the  god  Ganesha,  and  those 
containing  grains  of  paddy  and  decorated  with  garlands, 
and  tied  round  the  neck  with  pieces  of  cloth,  and  those 
containing  scented  waters  in  which  bits  of  gold  had  been 
immersed,  together  with  the  pitchers,  over  whose  mouths  the 
plates  of  rice,  known  as  the  Purnapafcra,  had  been  placed,  and 
which  had  been  bedecked  with  the  new-born  shoots  of  auspi- 
cious evergreen  trees.  The  preceptor  should  scatter  the 
seeds  of  white  mustard,  and  grains  of  fried  paddy,  all  round 
the  abovesaid  sacrificial  pitchers.  He  should  take  hold  of 
the  sword  of  knowledge  with  its  scabbard  as  before.  The 
presents  of  a vessel  for  cooking  the  sacrificial  porridge,  and 
a copper  Darvi  (large  spoon),  a vessel  full  of  honey  and 
clarified  butter  for  absolving  the  feet  of  the  preceptor,  a 
cushion  or  a mattress  of  kusha  grass,  measuring  two  cubits 
in  length,  and  composed  of  at  least  three  hundred  stems 
of  the  above  grass,  together  with  a vessel  for  holding  sessa- 
mum  orientate,  a bowl  of  clarified  butter-oblation,  a 
vessel  for  containing  the  Argha  offerings,  a prepared  holy 
thread,  twenty  kinds  of  fruits,  a pitcher,  an  incense-burner, 
the  two  sacrificial  ladles,  known  as  the  Sruk  and  the  Sruva, 
a box,  a cushion,  a chowrie,  a bundle  of  sacrificial  faggots, 
flowers,  leaves,  Guggul  (scented  gum  resin),  lamps  of 
clarified  butter,  incense  sticks,  grains  of  sun-dried  rice, 
clarified  butter  made  of  cow-milk,  barley,  sessamum 
orientale*  stems  of  kasha  grass,  the  composition  known  as 
the  the  three  honeys  (honey,  sugar  and  clarified  butter),  and 
sticks  of  sacrificial  trees  should  be  made  to  the  Acharya. 
The  sticks,  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  line,  should  measure 
ten  phalanges  respectively,  if  the  object  with  which  the 
sacrifice  had  been  ' undertaken,  was  to 'bring  peace  to  the 
consecrator.  In  an  act  of  propitiating  -and  appeasing  the 
wrath  of  the  sun  and  other  planets,  the  Sruva  or  the 
laddie  . with  which  the  oblations  should  ■ be  ' cast " into  ' the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


fire,  should  measure  a cubit  in  length.  The  sacrificial 
faggots  should  be  composed  of  hundred  and  eight  sticks 
of  the  branches  of  Arka,  Palasha,  Khadira,  Amarga,  Pippala 
Oudumvara,  and  Shami  trees,  and  also  of  an  equal  number  of 
the  stems  of  the  green  and  kasha  grass,  in  absence  whereof 
they  should  be  composed  of  barley  and  sessamum  orientate. 
A similar  present  of  household  furniture,  a large  Saucer,,  a 
Darvi  (ladle),  two  pieces  of  cloth  for  the  gods,  coins,  crown 
and  wearing  apparels,  together  with  a golden  necklace  (Hara) 
earrings,  and  bracelets  should  be  made  over  to  the  precept- 
tor  (Acharya)  as  before ; and  the  presents  enumerated 
above,  should,  under  no  circumstance,  be  very  costly  or  too 
much  expensive  (39—54)*  The  Brahmins  who  are  the 
custodians  of  the  images,  together  with  the  Astrajapis, 
(Repeaters  of  the  Mantra  of  Weapon,)  astrologers,  and 
sculptors  should  be  duly  worshipped,  and  their  worship 
should  be  made  with  the  three  quarter  parts  of  the  number  of 
articles,  with  which  the  Acharya  had  been  worshipped. 
The  eight  gems  known  as  Sapphire,  Atinila,  and  pearls, 
flowers,  ruby,  and  Vaidurya,  together  with  the  cereals  vcalled 
the  Ushira  and  Madhavakranta,  red  sandal-wood,  A g al- 
lodium, Srikhanda,  Sariba,  Kustha  and  Shankhini,  and  the 
eight  kinds  of  metal  and  mineral  such  as  the  gold,  copper,  rakta, 
silver  bell,  metal,  lead,  iron,  Orpiment,  Red  Arsenic,  Gairika, 
Svarnamakshika,  (common  pyritic  iron  ore).  Mercury,  fire 
Gairika,  Sulphur,  Mica,  and  the  eight  sorts  of  brihi  grain* 
such  as  wheat,  sessamum  orientale,  Masa,  Mudga,  barleys, 
Nivara,  and  Shyamaka,  should  be  given  away. 


I ill 


|H 


iiftiliilBi 


.'.Si  H M 

.*  >v- |||  *^:.  | 


CHAPTER  XCVI. 


The  God  said: — The  preceptor  having  performed  his 
two  daily  rites  of  worship,  should  enter  the  sacrificial  shed 
with  the  Argha  offering  in  his  hand,  accompanied  by  the 
Brahmins  with  idols  in  their  hands.  The  doors  of  the 
sacrificial  shed  known  as  the  door  of  peace,  etc.,  should 
be  worshipped  in  turn,  as  laid  down  before.  The  preceptor 
should  worship  the  warder-gods  located  in  the  branches  of 
the  sacrificial  trees,  with  which  the  said  doors  had  been 
decorated,  and  reverentially  walk  round  the  shed  by  way 
of  performing  the  rite  of  circumbulation  unto  them.  The 
warder-gods  Nandi  and  Mahakala  should  be  worshipped  at 
the  east  door,  the  warder-gods  Vringi  and  Vrinyaka 
(Ganesha)  at  the  south,  the  warder-gods  Vrisava  and  Skanda 
at  the  west,  while  the  warder-god  Chanda,  together  with  the 
goddess,  should  be  worshipped  at  the  northern  door  of  the 
sacrificial  shed.  Beneath  the  branches  of  the  sacrificial  trees 
described  above,  the  pitchers  respectively  situated  at  the 
doors  abovementioned,  one  on  each  side  thereof,  should 
be  worshipped  by  repeating  the  name  of  each  in  its  dative 
case-ending,  preceded  by  the  Pranava  Mantra  " 0m,0 
and  coupled  with  the  term  Namas  (Obeisance)  in  the  end, 
successively  as  follows  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher 
Prashanta,  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher  Shishira,  Om  obei- 
sance to  the  pitcher  Parjanya,  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher 
Ashoka,  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher  Sanjivana,  Om  obeisance 
to  the  pitcher  Arnrita,  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher 
Dhanada,  and  Om  obeisance  to  the  pitcher  Shriprada.”  The 
Lokas,  the  planets,  the  Vasus,  and  the  Sravantis, 
should, be  contemplated  as  guarding  in  couples,  the  doom 
of  the  sacrificial  shed.  The^  gods  such  as  the  suds* 


AGISU  PUHANAM 


the  yogas  (the  ages  such  as  the  golden,  etc.),  the  Vedas  'and 
the  goddess  Lakshmi  and  the  god  Ganapati  are  the  gods 
who  always  stay  therein,  with  a view  to  ward  off  and 
guard  the  sacrifice  against  ail  harms  and  evils,  which  usually 
befai  and  beset  the  performance  of  the  same.  The  divine 
weapons  such  as  the  thunder,  shakfci  (spear),  club,  sword, 
noose,  banner,  mace,  trident,  the  ring-weapon  and  the 
banner  should  be  worshipped  in  turn  as  follows: — “Om 
Hnu,  Fufc,  obeisance  to  the  shakti  or  the  spear  located  at 
the  door  of  the  sacrificial  shed.  The  eight  presiding 
deities  of  the  banner  such  as  Kumuda,  Kumadaksa,  Pundarika, 
Vamana,  Shankhukarna,  Sumukha,  and  Supratistha  should 
be  worshipped  in  the  different  quarters  of  the  heaven,  such 
as  the  east,  by  offering  the  oblations  known  as  the  Vutabali. 
The  Mantra  with  which  they  should  be  worshipped  are  as 
.-follows “Om  Hum  obeisance  to  Kumuda,  Om  Houm 
obeisance  to  Kumadaksa,  Om  Houm  obeisance  to  Vamana/ 
Om  Houm  obeisance  to  Pundarika,  Om  Houm  obeisance  to 
Shankhukarna,  Om  Houm  obeisance  to  Sumukha,  Om 
Houm  obeisance  to  Supratistha  (9—10).  The  eight 
Kshetrapalas  such  as  Hatiika,  Jamjihva,  Kala,  Karalf, 
Akanghri,  and  Bhima,  should  be  similarly  worshipped  with 
flowers,  offerings,  and  incense  sticks;  and  the  preceptor 
should  contemplate  them  as  satisfied  with  the  worship  en- 
joined to  be  made  before.  The  fundamental  principles* 
such  as  the  principles  of  essential  earthmatter,  etc., 
should  be  located  and  worshipped  in  the  ktfsha  grass? 
bamboo  poles,  and  the  Sthuna  (pillar),  by  repeating  the 
Mantra  known  as  the  Sadyajata  (9—13).  The  preceptor 
should  consider  the  sacrificial  shed  (Mandapa)  as  per* 
raeated  with  the  essence  of  the  god  Sadashiva,  hoi* 
lowed  by  his  divine  presence,  and  bung  over  by  banners, 
in  each  of  which,  the  goddess  of  energy  had  taken  her  abode* 
The  harms,  and  pernicious  spirits  which  float  about  in  the 
air,  or  drop  down  from  the  e the  rial  region,  or  crop  up  from 


3^4 


A'GNI  puranam. 


underneath  the  soil,  should  be  warded  of!  as  laid  down 
before ; and  the  preceptor  should  enter  the  sacrificial  shed 
by  the  western  door,  after  having  reverentially  walked  round 
•and  round  the  former.  After  that,  he  should  take  his  seat  by 
the  earthen?  platform,  absorbed  in  deep  meditation,  and  purify 
the  component  materials  of  his  body,  perform  the  rite  known 
as  the  internal  or  the  mental  sacrifice  (Anterjag^),  and  purify 
the  Mantras  and  articles  to  be  used  in  the  course  of  the  wor- 
ship. Subsequent  to  that,  the  preceptor  should  worship  his 
own  soul.  The  composition  known  as  the  Panchagavya  should 
be  applied  as  before,  and  the  sacrificial  pitchers  should  be 
wheeled  into  their  due  receptacles,  as  in  the  former  instance. 
Therein  should  be  located  the  principle  of  absolute  bliss 
(Shiva-tattva),  and  subsequently  the  fundamental  principles  of 
knowledge  and  soul  (thus  numbering  three  in  all)  should  be 
psychically  merged  in  the  former.  The  preceptor  should 
locate,  by  means  of  his  psychic  force,  the  principles  thus 
united  and  made  one,  together  with  their  presiding  deities, 
Rudra,  Narayana,  and  Bramha,  in  the  inside  of  his  body 
from  the  forehead  downwards,  by  repeating  the  Nija- 
Mantra  (On?  Ham  Ham)  (14 — 19).  He  should  locate  the 
different  images  of  the  god,  together  with  their  inmate 
divinities,  in  his  own  body,  as  enjoined  to  be  done  oil  the 
former  occasion,  contemplate  himself  as  covered  over  with 
the  essence  of  the  god  Shiva,  and  put  the  part  of  his 
forearm  known  as  the  Shiva-hasta  on  his  head,  The  pre~ 
cep  tor  should  contemplate  the  effulgence  of  the  deity 
with  which  his  whole  inuerself  had  been  permeated,  as 
darting  forth  from  the  cavity  of  his  brain  and  flashing 
through  the  heaven,  dispelling  gloom  and  lighting  up  the 
horizon*  He  should  bedeck  himself  with  flowers,  garlands 
and  ornaments,  etc*,  and  the  Bramhan  custodians  of 
the  idols  was  well,  deem  himself  identical  with  the  god 
Shiva,  and  draw  out  the  sword  of  knowledge.  The  sacrik 
facial  shed  should  be  purified  with  the  rite  known  as  the 


Mm  wnmm* 


rite  of  four-fold  purification,  the  stems  of  'kasha  grass 
•should  be  scattered  all  round,  after  which  they  should  be 
gathered'  up  again.  The  cushion  fox  the  gods,  such  as  the 
god  of  the  homestead,  etc.,  should  be  spread  over  the'sacri- 
ficlal  small  jar  [and]  they  [the  god]  should  be  invoked  there- 
upon. The  .pitcher  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva,  together  with  the 
'sacrificial  small  jar  which  is  supposed  to  protect  the  former 
as  a weapon,  should  be  worshipped  in  the  Steady  Cushion. 
The  Lokapalas  should  be  duly  worshipped  in  the  sacrificial 
pitchers,  situate  at  the  corners  of  the  shed  over  which 
they  respectively  preside,  together  with  their  weapons, 
insignias  of  divinity,  and  the  animals  they  respectively  ride 
upon.  The  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  god  Indra, 
as  possessing  a golden  complexion  and  a thousand  eyes, 
decked  with  a crown,  wielding  the  thunder-bolt  in  his 
hand  and  riding  on  the  celestial  elephant  Airavata-.  Similarly 
the  god  of  fire  should  be  contemplated  as  of  a blood-red 
complexion,  holding  a rosary,  an  alms-bowl,  and  a spear 
in  his  hands,  riding  on  a goat,  and  carrying  a garland  of 
flames  on  his  breast*  Likewise  the  preceptor  should  medi- 
tate upon  the  god  of  death  (Yama),  as  riding  on  a buffalo, 
carrying  a club  in  his  hand,  and  burning  with  the  blaze  of 
fatal  fire.  The  god  Nairita  should  be  meditated  as  riding  on 
an  ass,  and  with  blood  shot  eyes.  The  god  Varuna  (sea-god) 
should  be  contemplated  as  possessing  a white  complexion* 
riding  on  a sea  monster,  and  holding  a noose  of  serpent  in 
his  hand.  The  god  of  wind  (Vayu)  should  be  contemplated 
as  riding  on  an  antelope,  and  the  god  of  wealth  (Kuvera) 
on  a sheep.  The  trideni-weilding  god  should  be  contem- 
plated as  riding  on  a bull,  the  god  of  eternity  (Ananta)  on  a 
tortoise  and  holding  a ring  weapon,  the  god  Bramha,  on  a 
swan,  and  as  possessing  four  arms  and  four  faces  (20 — 30). 
According  to  some  authorities,  the  gods  of  virtue,  etc.,  should 
be  worshipped  in  the  earthen  platform,  and  the  sacrificial 
: pitchers  ••situate -.at  the  feet  of  the  pillars  at  the  corner  thereof*; 

49  . ' 


386 


AGNJ  PURANAM. 


The  mandate  "of  the  god  Shiva  should  be  read  aloud  to 
the  sacrificial  pitcher,  which  should  be  carried  round  behind 
the  preceptor, 'the  small  jar  (Vardhini)  following  in  its  train* 
The  god  Shiva  should  be  worshipped  in  the  cushion  (known 
as  the  Sthirashana),  who  should  be  worshipped  as  laid  down 
before,  by  exhibiting  the  Mudra  known  as  the  Udbhava- 
Mudra  (31 — 33).  The  sword  should  be  addressed  as  fol- 
lows : — “ Oh  thou  lord  of  the  universe,  this  sacrifice  has  been 
undertaken  in  thy  honour,”  which  should  be  then  immersed 
in  the  water  of  the  pitcher.  The  rite  of  initiation  should  be 
psychically  projected  either  in  the  sacrificial  pitcher  or  in  the 
sand  cushion  or  in  the  mystic  diagram.  Then  the  preceptor 
should  approach  the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle,  after  having 
worshipped  the  lord  of  the  gods  in  the  mystic  diagram.  The 
Bramhin  custodians  of  the  divine  images,  should  cleanse  their 
respective  fire-receptacles,  according  to  the  direction  of  the 
preceptor,  who  would  sit  facing  the  central  part  of  the 
cavities  of  the  fireholes.  The  Japins  or  the  meditators  of 
Mantras  should  repeat  the  Mantra  as  many  times,  as  laid 
down  in  the  Shastras ; while  others  should  repeat  the 
Sanhita  Mantras,  and  the  Bramhins  should  read  out  the 
Hymns  of  peace  from  the  different  branches  of  the  Vedas,  to 
which  they  respectively  belong.  The  Bramhins  who  are  the 
Chaunters  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda,  should  read  aloud 
in  the  east,  the  Hymns  known  as  the  Shrisukta,  Pavamani, 
Maitraka,  and  the  Vrisakapi.  In  ihe  south,  the  Bramhins, 
who  are  the  Chaunters  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Samaveda, 
should  recite  the  hymns  known  as  the  Devavrata,  Bharuoda, 
Jesthasama,  Rathantara,  and  the  Purusha.  The  Brahmins, 
who  are  the  reciters  of  the  Yayurveda  Hymns,  should  read 
aloud,  in  the  west,  the  Mantras  known  as  the  Rudra,  Purusha 
Sukta,  Slokadhyaya  and  the  Brahmanas,  while  the  Brahmins 
who  are  the  custodians  of  the  Atharva  Veda  Mantras, 
should  repeat,  in  the  north,  the  Mantras  known  as  the 
Nilrudra,  Sukshmasukshma,  Atharvashira  and  the  Tatpurusha 


AGN1  PURANAM* 


SS? 


(34—41).  The  preceptor  should  then  light  up  the  sacri- 
ficial fire  in  each  of  the  above  fire-receptacles,  and 
the  different  portions  thereof  such  as  those  forming  of 
the  eastern  and  other  parts  of  the  body  of  the  flame, 
should  be  respectively  put  into  the  fire-receptacles,  situate  at  ■ 
the  corresponding  parts  of  the  sacrificial  sheds,  and  offerings 
of  burning  incense-sticks,  lighted  lamps,  and  sacrificial 
porridge,  should  be  made  unto  them.  The  fire  should  be 
consecrated,  and  the  preceptor  should  perform  therein  the 
rite  of  Mantra  Tarpana,  after  having  worshipped  the  god. 
Shiva,  as  before.  The  priest  well-versed  in  the  Mantras, 
should  cast  the  Homa  oblations  into  the  fire,  for  making 
auspicious  the  time  and  the  place  of  the  sacrifice,  or  for 
removing  the  harms  of  omens  that  portend  evil,  after 
which  the  bliss  giving  final  oblation  should  be  offered.  The 
sacrificial  porridge  should  be  prepared  as  before,  and  the 
preceptor  should  offer  the  same  into  all  the  fire-holes,  as 
before.  Then  the  Yajamanas  (persons  at  whose  instance 
a ceremony  is  performed)  fully  attired  and  bedecked  with 
ornaments,  should  enter  the  sacrificial  bathing  shed,  place 
the  image  of  the  god  on  the  divine  cushion,  perform 
the  rites  of  Tadana  and  Abagunthana  (covering  over  with 
the  essence  of  a Mantra)  unto  him,  and  bathe  him  with  the 
water  containing  a solution  of  clay  and  bitter  drugs,  after 
having  worshipped  him  as  before.  The  image  or  the  phalic 
emblem  should  be  subsequently  bathed  in  turn  with  the;  urine 
of  cow,  cowdung,  ashes,  and  the  water  consecrated  with  the 
Mantra  of  Weapon  followed  by  the  term  “Fat”  Then 
the  preceptor  who  should  be  an  inhabitant  of  that  excellent 
country  (Madhyadesha — Central  India),  and  the  Brahmin 
custodians  of  idols,  should  purify  the  causal  principles  of 
their  respective  bodies,  worship  the  phalic  emblem  with 
white  flowers,  cover  that  over  with  a piece  of  yellow 
coloured  cloth,,  over  which  the  Dharma  Mantra  had  been 
repeated,  and  carry  the  same  to  the  earthen  platform  at  the  , 


AGNI  PUR-ANAMN 


3«» 

north.  Ttienf  the  cushion  should  be  spread  aver  the  bed 
prepared' for  the  god,  and  the  emblem  should  be  laid  thereon*. 
The  preceptor  should  mark  the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem 
with  the  fines  of  saffron-tinted  strings,  and  mark,  with  a thin 
rod  of  gold  dipped  in  collyrium,  the  spot  where  its  eyes  would 
be.  The  collyrium  should  be  put  along  the  eyes,  and1  the  sculp-, 
tor  should  carve  out  the  same,  as  laid  down  in  cihe  Shastras 
(42 — 51).  The  eyes  should  be  carved  into  a spot ; just  at  the 
top  line  of  the  three  quarter  part  of  the  entire  length  of  the 
emblem,  or  at  a spot  about  half  a pada  above  the  half  length 
from  the  bottom  $ the  carving  out  of  the  eyes  at  such  a part 
being  held  as  the  most  auspicious,  and  also  as  granting  the 
fulfilment  of  all  desires.  In  all  sorts  of  phalic  emblem, 
the  eyes  should  be  carved  into  a spot  above  the  three  quarter 
length'  of  the  same,  divided  into  Bhaga  measures,  as  previ- 
ously dealt  with.  (See  Chapt.  5-4.)  In  .a  phalic  emblem?,, 
measuring  a cubit  in  length,  the  cavity  of  the  eyes  should 
be  of  the  eight  parts  of  Yava  divided  into  nine  parts,  both  in 
depth  and  breadth.  So  in  a phalic  emblem  measuring  a 
cubit  and  a half,  the  sockets  of  the  eyes  would  measure,  in 
all  dimensions,  a eighth  part  more  than  what  has  been 
specified  in  the  preceding  case.  In  a phalic  emblem  measu- 
ing  nine  cubits,  the  cavity  of  the  eyes  would  respectively 
measure  eight  Yavas  in  length,  depth  and  breadth.  In  all  in- 
stances where  the,  length  of  the  phalic  emblem  would  increase 
by  a Pada  measure,  the  measures  of  the  occular  cavities 
would,  also,  correspondingly  increase  by  a Yava  measure. 
The  lines  laid  down  around  the  top  line  of  the  emblem, 
would  also  increase  by  three  parts,  both  in  breadth  and 
depth,  and  in  all  cases,  the  crown  of  the  emblem  would  be 
narrow  and  tapering  (52—59.)  „ 

: 'The  region  of  the  eyes  should  be  divided  into  eight  parts,; 
and  the  lower  part  of  the  crown  of  the  emb!em:  Tnto two*1 
The  two  lower  parts  of  the  region  of  the1  eyes,  divided  as 
■ftbwe*  should,  be,  left  out ; mi  the  remaining  s ix  pants  should 


ftGNP  PURANAM, 


be  carved  into  three  lines  or  borders,  carried  round  and 
united  ■ at  the  back  of  the  emblem's  head.  The  border- 
lines at  the  top,  forming,  as  it  were,  the  gland-border  of  the 
emblem  of  universal  progenation,  should  be  made  of  a Yava 
measure,  where  the  phatic  emblems  would  be  made  of  gems 
or  gold ; and  the  emblem  should  be  made  endowed  with  the 
eye-sight  by  ^carving  the  above  mark  into  the  part  indicated 
before.  The  lines  bringing  out  the  characteristic  features 
of  the  emblem,  should  be  worshipped  with  honey  and  clarified 
butter,  by  repeating  the  Mritunjaya-Mantra,  with  a view  to 
remove  the  impurities  incidental  to  sculpturing.  The  phalic 
emblem  should  be  worshipped,  after  having  bathed  the  same 
with  clay,  etc.  The  sculptor  should  be  rewarded,  and  gifts 
of  cow  should  be  made  to  the  preceptor.  The  phalic 
emblem  should  be  worshipped  with  lamps  lighted  both 
on  the  right  and  the  left;,  and  married  ladies  should  sing 
hymns  in  praise  of  the  deity.  The  body  of  the  emblem; 
should  be  rubbed  over  with  the  substance  known  as  the 
Rochona.  The  married  women  should  be  dismissed  with 
gifts  of  molassses  salt  and  paddy.  The  preceptor,  jointly  with 
the  Brahmin  custodians  of  idols,  should  bathe  the  phalic  em^ 
blem  with  clay,  cowdung,  cow's  urine,  ashes  and  water.  Subset 
quently  the  preceptor  should  bathe  the  abovesaid  emblem 
with  the  compositions  known  as  the  Panchagavya  and 
Panchamrita,  and  with  astringent  and  bitter  drugs,  together 
with  the  water  containing  a solution  of  the  drugs  known  as 
the  Sarvoushadhi.  After  that,  the  phalic  emblem  should  be 
bathed  with  water  containing  white  flowers,  fruits  and  the 
washings  of  gems,  gold,  horns  and  barley,  and  a thousanct 
jets  of  rain  water  should  be  let  loose  on  the  head  of  the  same. 
Subsequent  to  that,  the  emblem  should  be  again  bathed  with 
the  waters  obtained  from  the  sacred  pools,  and  the  river 
Ganges,  and  waters  out  of  the  pitcher  sacred  to  the  god 
Shiva, .or  in  which  the  ocean  known  as  the  ocean  oi 
ihickened-milk  had  been  invoked  (60—69.) 


390 


AGN!  PUHANAM, 


The  phalic  emblem  should  be  worshipped  with  the  paste 
of  astringent  drugs  and  that  of  sandal,  and  flowers  should  be 
offered  to  the  deity  of  the  same  by  repeating  the  Brahma- 
Mantras,  and  a piece  of  red  cloth  with  the  Mantra  of  Armour. 
The  flowers  of  Nerium  Odorum  should  be  waived  before  the 
emblem.  The  Argha  offering  should  be  composed  of  articles 
such  as  the  stems  of  kusha  grass,  etc.,  soaked  in  milk 
and  the  washings  of  clarified  butter,  and  the  preceptor 
should  offer  the  same  to  the  god  in  the  emblem,  who  should 
be  propitiated  with  hymns  and  a repetition  of  the  Purusha 
Mantra.  The  rite  of  Achaman  or  of  rinsing  the  mouth  with 
water,  should  be  be  performed  by  repeating  the  Hrid-Mantra 
and  the  preceptor  should  address  the  deity  as  “Rise  O lord/1 
Then  the  phalic  emblem  should  be  carried  to  the  sacrificial 
shed  in  a divine  chariot,  and  the  articles  essential  to  his  wor- 
ship should  be  put  into  the  same.  The  emblem  should  be 
laid  down  in  the  bed  prepared  at  the  western  door  of  the 
shed.  At  the  same  door,  a cushion  made  permeated  with  the 
essence  of  the  goddess  of  energy,  should  be  spread  out 
for  receiving  the  emblem  and  its  pedestal.  The  part  of  the 
emblem  known  as  the  Brahmashiia  should  be  stowed  to  the 
west  thereof.  The  sacrificial  pitcher  in  which  the  psychic 
sleep  had  been  induced,  should  be  converted  into  the  Sthira 
(immoveable  seat)  of  the  god  as  described  before,  and  stowed 
in  the  noth-east  corner  of  the  shed  ; which  is  held  sacred  to 
him.  The  Argha-offeringf  should  be  presented  to  him  by 
repeating  the  Mantra,  and  the  phalic  emblem  should  be 
raised  out  of  the  bed,  by  uttering  the  Shiva-Mantra,  and 
deposited  on  the  cushion,  with  its  head  turned  towards  the 
east  The  phalic  emblem  should  be  again  worshipped  with 
Incence-sticks,  and  garments,  and  household  furniture  should 
be  offered  to  it,  according  as  the  means  of  the'  consecrator 
would  admit  of,  by  repeating  the  Mantra  of  Armour  and  the 
Hrid*Mantra  respectively.  The  gods  of  virtue  should : be 
worshipped  with  the  Sristi  and  other  Mantras  in  turn*  and 


AGNJ  PURANAM. 


3§i 


' a vessel  full  of  honey  and  clarified  butter  should  be  placed 

i ; at  the  foot  of  the  emblem,  as  an  unguent  of  the  god.  The 

priest  officiating  at  the  ceremony,  and  who  should  be  an 
inhabitant  of  that  excellent  country,  known  as  the  Madhya- 
desha,  should  merge  in  the  body  of  the  emblem  all  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  the  universe,  together  with  their  res- 
pective presiding  deities,  and  divide  the  abovesaid  body 
into  three  parts,  with  a garland  of  flowers,  sacred  to  the  god 
Shiva*(70 — 79). 

j*  In  the  three  divisions  of  the  entire  body  of  the  phalic 

emblem  made  as  above,  the  preceptor  should  locate 
; the  fundamental  principles,  beginning  -with  the  principle 

of  M^ya  (illusion)  and  ending  with  that  of  absolute 
energy  (Shakti),  together  with  'the  {principles  of  soul, 
knowledge,  and  pure  bliss,  in  the  order  in  which  they 
j stand  in  the  universal  creation,  in  the  different  parts  of  the 
emblem  such  as  the  square,  the  octagonal,  and  the  round 
part.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  above  three  prin- 
| ciples,  such  as  the  gods,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Rudra,  should 

be  psychically  projected  into  each  of  the  abovesaid  divisions, 
and  likewise  the  different  embodiments  of  the  god, -—such  as 
■ the  earth,  the  fire,  sacrifice,  the  water,  the  air,  the  moon, 

I the  sun,  and  the  sky,  together  with  their  respectives  deities 

I such  as  Sarva,  Pashupati,  Ugra,  Rudra,  Bhava,  Mahesha, 

Mahadeva  and  Bhima,  and  the  Mantras  respectively  sacred 
to  them  (La,  Va,  Sha,  Sa,  Cha,  Ya,  Sa  and  Ha)— should  be 
located  therein.  The  preceptor  well-versed  in  the  Mantras, 
should  merge  in  the  spirit  of  the  sacrifice  of  which  the  five 
I fire-receptacles  are  the  indispensible  adjuncts,  the  five 

I material  embodiments  of  the  god,  such  as  the  earth,  water, 

I;  fire,  air  and  the  sky,  by  repeating  the  Pranava  (Om)  or 

I the  Hrid-Mantras  sacred  to  the  god,  together  with  their 

| -respective  inmate  divinities,  such  as  Brahma,  Dharanidhara, 

f Rudra,  Isa,  and  Sadaksha.  The  essential  matters  spoken 

I of  above,  together  with  their  respective  deities,’ -^should  be 


392 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


located  in  the  order  which  they  occupy  in  the  created 
universe.  The  consecrator  who  is  a seeker  of  salvation, 
should  locate  the  principles  of  non-action,  etc.,  with  their 
respective  presiding  deities,  such  as  the  gods,  Ajata,  etc., 
instead  of  the  thirty-six  principles,  spoken  of  above,  and 
contemplate  the  principle  of  the  soul  as  pervading  them  all. 
(50—87.)  The  Brahmin  custodians  of  the  "divine  image 
should  see  in  their  soul,  if  absolutely  pure,  the  gods  known 
as  the  Vidyashas,  while  they  should  meditate  upon  the 
images  of  the  gods  Lokapalas,  in  the  event  of  their  souls 
not  having  been  made  absolutely  pure.  The  groups  of  the 
different  fundamental  principles,  respectively  numbering 
twenty-five,  eight,  five  and  three,  together  with  their  presi- 
ding deities  such  as  Indra  etc.,  should  be  worshipped  as 
follows: — “Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the  principle  of  pure 
energy.  Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the  presidiug  diety  of  the 
same.  Om  Ham  obiesance  to  the  image.  Om  Ham  obeisance 
to  Shiva,  who  is  the  presiding  diety  of  the  same.  Om  Ham 
obeisance  to  the  earth-image.  Om  Ham  obeisance  to 
Brahma,  who  is  the  presiding  deity  of  the  images  at  large, 
and  Om,  Ham,  obeisance  to  Rudra,  who  is  the  presiding  deity 
of  principle  of  bliss”  (88— -89.) 

The  preceptor  should  recite  the  above  Mantras  from  the 
region  of  his  umbilicus,  the  sound  of  which  would  spread 
all  round  mingled  with  the  tolls  of  bell.  The  Mantras 
should  be  taken  into  the  region  of  the  heart  and  merged  in 
the  effulgent  image  of  Shiva,  situate  in  the  lotus  of  the  twelve 
petals'. (the  occult  nerve  ganglion  known  as  the  solar  plexus) 
and  therein,  the  god  should  be  meditated  upon  as  shining  res* 
plendent  with  the  beams  of  thirty  eight  Kalas,  effulgent  as  the 
sun,  and  the  only  omnipotent  being  in  the  universe.  The  pre- 
ceptor, should  project  the  same  [into  the  phalie  emblem, 
whereby  the  rite  of  Jivanayasa  (projection  of  vital  energy) 
should  be  performed  (90 — 92). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of  performing  the  rite 


AGNI  PURANAM 


$>f  Nayasa  in  the  divine  pedestal.  The  pedestal  should  be 
washed  with  water,  plastered  over  with  the  paste  of  sandal, 
and  covered  over  with  a piece  of  cloth  containing  an 
aperture  like  .the  female  organ  of  generation.  The  five 
sorts  of  gems  should  be  driven  into  the  pedestal,  situate 
at  the  north  of  the  phalic  emblem,  which  should  be  stowed 
and  worshipped  in  the  same  manner  as  the  phalic  emblem. 
After  that,  the  pedestal  should  be  again  washed  with  water, 
and  deposited  at  the  foot  of  the  phalic  emblem.  The  rites  of 
ablution  etc.,  should  be  performed  unto  all  the  goddesses  of 
energy  and  the  divine  bull,  who  should  be  united  with  the 
stone  pedestal,  the  emblem  of  the  universal  receptivity,  by 
repeating  the  Mantras,  begining  with  “ and  ending  with 
Hrim  (Pam  ?)  as  follows  - • 

“Om  Hum  Hrum  Obeisance  to  the  energy  of  action,  Om 
Hum  Hram  Svaba  (obeisance)  to  Mahagouri,  the  beloved 
wife  of  Rudra  (this  is  to  be  performed  on  the  pedestal). 
Ore  Ham  obeisance  to  the  universal  capacity  of  holding. 
Om  Ham  Obeisance  to  the  Vrisbha  (bull).”  Before  worship- 
ping as  above  indicated,  the  preceptor  should  lay  down 
round  the  pedestal,  three  circles  of  consecrated  ashes,  the 
stems  of  Kusha  grass,  and  the  seeds  of  sessamum  orientale, 
for  serving  the  purposes  of  rnoats  as  it  were,  and  wor- 
ship the  Lokapalas  with  their  weapons  for  guarding  the 
same.  The  five  Nayikas  (the  companions  of  the  wife  of 
Shiva)  such  as  Dharika,  Dipti,  Utyugra,  Jyotsna,  Valotkata, 
Dhatri,  Vidatri,  should  also  be  located  in  the  divine  images 
of  peace.  In  the  alternative,  the  Nayikas  such  as  Varna, 
Yasta,  Kryaguna,  should  be  located  therein,  or  the  principles 
of  knowledge,  action  and  volition  should  be  located  in  their 
stead  (93—100).  The  five  principles  of  Tama  (Vanity),  Moha 
(ignorance),  Ksama,  (kindness),  Nistha  (devotion),  Death,  illu- 
sion, Bhabajvara,  or  the  three  principles  of  Mahamoha,  Ghora, 
and  Jvara,  or  the  three  principles  of  action,  knowledge  and 
volition,  together  with  the  three  Nayikas  such  as  Vadha, 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


etc,  should  be  located  In  the  three  indomitable  principles  of’ 
soul  etc,  (xoo — 102).  Even  in  the  present  case,  the  god  Sarva 
should  be  worshipped  with  the  goddesses  Gouri  etc.  both  on 
the  pedestal  and  the  part  ©f  the  ptsalic  emblem,  known 
as  the  Brahmashila.  Having  located  the  deities  and  prin- 
ciples  as  above  described,  the  preceptor  should  approach, 
the  sacrificial  fire-receptacle,  and  invoke  thefein  the  god, 
Mahasvara,  on  the  border  thereof;  the  principle  of  action 
having  been  located  in  the  other  border. 

The  preceptor  should  locate  the  phonetic  symbol  of  the 
Nada  mantra  “ Om”  in  his  lower  lip.  Then  the  union  of 
the  occult  psychic  beam  with  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  sand- 
cushion,  the  fire  lighted  thereon,  and  the  god  Isha, 
located  therein,  should  be  brought  about  in  the  following 
way.  The  preceptor  should  rouse  up  the  stream  of  his 
psychic  energy  resembling  the  fibre  of  a lotus  stem,  with  one 
stroke  of  the  Kumbhaka.  The  force  or  light  thus  evoked  would 
again  at  once  rise  upwards,  enter  into  the  disc  of  the  sun, 
which  emerging  thereout,  would  descend  into  the  sacrificial 
pitchers  and  the  sand  cushion,  etc.,  above  enumerated.  All 
the  Brahmin-repeaters  of  the  Mantras,  respectively  seated 
before  the  hallowed  fire-receptacles,  would  do  the  same;  and 
the  goddess  of  energy  known  as  Dharika  (lit-capacity  of 
holding)  together  with  the  fundamental  principles  and  their 
presiding  deities,  the  images  and  their  inmate  divinities, 
should  be  psychically  located  in  the  fire-hojes ; and  the  rite  of 
Tarpana  should  be  done  unto  them,  by  casting  oblations  of 
clarified  butter  into  the  same  (103—108). 

Having  thus  performed  the  rite  of  Tarpana,  hundred  or 
five  hundred  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  by  repeat- 
ing the  Sanhita  Mantras,  with  a view  to  invoke  the  presence 
of  the  deities  and  the  principles  above  enumerated,  after  which 
the  final  oblation  should  be  offered.  The  Brahmin-custodians 
of  idols  should  likewise  perform  the  above  : rites.'  .Then, the 
rite  of  Tarpana  should  be  again  performed  unto  the  goddess  * 


©f  mercy,  by  repeating  the  Brahma  and  the  Ang&mantras. 
The  preceptor  should  touch  the  foot  of  the  phalic  emblem 
washed  with  the  waters  of  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  with  the 
ends  of  the  Kusha  grass,  and  repeat  in  mind  the  Mantras 
as  many  times,  as  the  oblations  had  been  cast  into  the  fire. 
The  presence  of  the  god  should  be  invoked  by  repeating 
the  Hrid-Mantra,  and  the  rite  of  Avagonthana  should  be 
performed  by  rehearsing  the  Mantra  of  armour.  Thus  for 
the  purification  of  the  -parts  of  the  phalic  emblem,  res- 
pectively presided  over  hy  the  gods  Brahma  and  Vishnu, 
the  preceptor  should  perform  the  Homa  and  the  Japa  (re- 
petition of  Mantras)  as  many  times,  as  above  enumerated, 
and  touch  the  middle  part  thereof,  with  the  end  and  the 
middle  part  of  a consecrated  Kusha  grass.  The  contact 
should  be  made  as  follows ((Om,  Ham,  Ham,  Om,  Om,  Om,  j 
Em,  Om,  Bhum,  Bhura,  obeisance  to  the  Vajhyamurti.  Om, 
Ham,  Vam,  Am,  Om,  Om,  Am,  Sham,  Om,  Bhum,  Bhum, 
Yarn,  obeisance  to  the  fire-imaged  god.”  Similarly  the  other 
manifestations  of  the  god  such  as  Yayamana,  etc.,  should  be 
contemplated  and  touched  in  the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem, 
with  the  ends  of  the  Kusha  grass,  as  laid  down  before. 
Likewise  the  five  different  manifestations  of  the  god  should 
be  located  and  communed  with,  where  the  five  images  only 
would  obtain.  The  three  fundamental  principles,  known 
as  the  principles  of  soul,  knowledge  and  bliss,  should  be 
united  with  the  pedestal  and  the  imaged  bull  beside  the 
emblem,  by  repeating  either  the  principal  or  the  Atmamantras. 
Hundred  oblations  of  clarified  butter  should  be  cast  into 
the  sacrificial  fire,  for  the  purification  of  the  different  parts 
the  phalic  emblem,  and  hundred  and  eight  with  the  Mantra, 
held  sacred  to  Shiva,  with  a view  to  make  up  any  defi- 
ciency in  performing  the  sacrifice  (log— *i  17).  Then  the 
preceptor  should  whisper  into  the  ears  of  the  god  Shiva,  (the 
phalic  emblem)  the  following  prayer.  “Om  obeisance  to  the 
■god--'  Kudra, 1 O Rudra,  I make  obeisance  to  thee.  Make 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


396 

whole  and  complete,  O lord,  whatever  has  been  don© 
defective  and  informal  by  me,  permeated  with  thy  essence, 
in  connection  with  this  sacrifice,  and  kindly  accept  the  same.’' 
Over  the  pedestal,  the  preceptor  should  read  aloud  as  fol- 
lowsOui,  Hrim,  obeisance  to  Shankari.  Make  whole 
and  complete  this  undertaking,  O goddess  l”  In  the  body 
of  the  phalic  emblem,  the  preceptor  should  'perform  the 
rite  of  Nyasa,  and  psychically  project  the  force  or  the 
energy  of  action,  into  the  stoneslab  known  as  the  Brahma- 
shila,  placed  upon  the  pedestal.  The  energy  known  as  the 
capacity  of  holding,  should  likewise  be  located  therein.  The 
Adhivasa  ceremony  should  extend  over  seven,  five,  or  three 
consecutive  nights,  or  occupy  a single  night  only,  without 
which  a ceremony  of  consecration  is  held  as  barren  of  fruits. 
The  precepor  should  offer  hundred  oblations  of  clarified 
butter,  and  make  offerings  known  as  the  Bhutavali,  after 
having  worshipped  the  sacrificial  pitchers,  every  day  in  the 
course  of  Adhivasa  ceremoy,  which  is  so  called  from  the  stay 
or  the  continuance  (Vasa)  of  the  disciple  in  sack  cloth  and 
ashes,  by  the  side  of  the  preceptor  (118 — 124). 

CHAPTER  XCVIL 


rrt 

1 HE  God  said  The  preceptor  having  performed  the 
rites  of  his  daily  and  morning  worship,  should  worship  the 
warder  gods,  and  subsequently  enter  the  temple  and  purify 
the  component  principles  of  his  body  (1).  Then  he  should 
worship  the  presiding  deities  of  the  different  quarters  of  the 
heaven,  together  with  the  sacrificial  pitcher  and  the  smalt 
jar ; and  cast  eight  handfuls  of  oblation  into  the  fire,  in  honor 
of  the  god  Shiva  and  the  fire-god.  Subsequent  to  that,  he 
should  enter  the  temple,  after  having  first  obtained  permis- 
sion of  the  god  in  that  behalf,  and  remove  the  harms  and 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


397 


evils  lodged  thereto,  by  repeating  the  Shara  (arrow)  mantras 
followed  by  the  terms  “Hnu,  Fut.”  The  phalic  emblem  should 
not  be  established  just  at  the  middle  of  the  temple,  so  that 
It  might  be  free  of  the  defect  of  bedha  (piercing),  and  which 
should  be  accordingly  placed  a Java  or  half  a Java  apart  from 
the  exact  centre,  to  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  temple. 
The  slab  kno*wn  as  the  Ananta,  and  which  Is  the  symbol  of 
universal  receptivity,  should  be  first  established  by  uttering 
the  principal  Mantra,  sacred  to  the  god.  Over  the  same  the 
stone  slab  Achala  which  is  emblematic  of  the  cushion  of 
Shiva,  which  as  such  has  access  every  where  In  the  universe, 
should  be  placed  by  uttering  the  above-said  Mantra,  or  by 
repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  follows  “Om  obeisance 
to  the  all  pervading,  unchangeable,  immoveable  goddess 
Achala.  Hum,  Lum,  Hriun  Swaha  ? continue  here,  O goddess, 
according  to  the  direction  of  the  god  Shiva”  (2—7).  Having 
thus  addressed  the  deity,  the  preceptor  should  guard  against 
his  going  away,  by  exhibiting  the  mudra  known  as  the  Rudra 
mudra. 

After  that,  the  preceptor  having  mentally  repeated  the 
Mantras  sacred  to  the  Lokopalas,  should  meditate  with  his 
whole  soul,  upon  the  different  sorts  of  metal,  and  mineral,  such 
as  the  diamond,  jems,  iron,  gold,  orpiment,  and  the  drugs  and 
cereals  enumerated  in  the  preceding  chapter.  The  above 
substances  should  be  contemplated  as  possessed  of  the  attri- 
butes of  imparting  strength,  beauty,  energy  and  a good 
complexion.  The  sacrificial  pitchers  respectively  made  of 
gold,  silver,  etc.,  should  be  stowed  in  holes  dug  out  in  the 
different  directions  of  the  temple,  such  as  the  east,  etc.,  and 
the  image  of  the  bull  should  be  established  facing  the  door 
of  the  temple.  In  the  hole  or  the  cavity  at  the  centre, 
should  be  placed  the  golden  pitcher,  plastered  with  the  eatth 
obtained  from  the  banks  of  the  rivers,  or  the  peaks  of 
mountains.  In  the  next  hole,  should  be  placed  the 
pitch  er  painted  with  lamp  black  and  containing  honey  and 


1 


Bfi  i 


111 


398  ' AGNI  PUB ANA  M* 

sundried  rice#  and  In  which  the  ashes  of  gold  or  silver 
mixed  with  all  sorts  of  seeds,  had  been  stowed.  In  the 
same  pitcher  a stem  of  lotus  flower  made  of  gold,  silver 
or  iron  and  perforated  with  holes,  should  be  im- 
mersed, together  with  the  essence  of  the  supreme 
deity  and  the  goddess,  and  "the  eternal  cushion  of  the  former* 
The  hole  or  the  cavity  should  be  washed  with  a quan- 
tity of  sacrificial  porridge,  or  plastered  over  with  a 
solution  of  scented  gum  resin  (Guggtila),  after  which  the 
preceptor  should  cover  the  same  with  a piece  of  cloth,  and 
repeat  thereover  the  Mantras  of  weapon  and  armour,  by 
way  of  doing  unto  it  the  rite  of  protection  (8~i6)»  Offer- 
ings should  be  made  to  the  preseding  deities  of  the  differnfc 
quarters  of  the  heaven,  and  the  preceptor  should  rinse  his 
mouth  with  water,  and  cast  hundred  oblations  with  the  final 
one  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  by  repeating  either  the  Mantra 
of  weapon  or  the  Mautra  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva,  with  a 
view  to  remove  any  defect  that  might  have  lurked  in  the 
stoneslab  and  the  cavities  for  sacrifical  pitchers,  or  Inci- 
dental to  polluted  contact  or  contamination.  The  gods 
occupying  the  different  parts  of  the  diagram  known  as  the 
Vastumandala,  should  be  respectively  propitiated  with  an 
oblation  ; and  the  preceptor  should  raise  the  god  and  his 
cushion  with  the  chauntings  of  the  Hrid  mantra,  and 
approach  the  phalic  emblem  subsequent  thereto  j the  Brahmin 
custodians  of  idols,  having  been  posted  in  the  different 
corners  of  the  temple.  The  preceptor  after  having  per- 
formed the  sacrifice  in  honour  of  the  god,  should  eireumbu- 
kfce  the  temple,  accompanied  by  the  four  Brahmin  custodians 
of  idols,  and  deposit  the  phalic  emblem  in  front  of  the  door, 
known  as  the  door  of  bliss  (Bhadraksha).  The  . Argha 
offering  should  be  presented  on  the  head  of  the  phalic 
emblem,  which  should  be  deposited  at  the  door  or  the 
threshold,  care  having  been  taken  to  avoid  its  contact  with 
. the  dim  or  »thq  doorframe*  Even  in  an  unfinished  temple,  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


3 99 


phalic  emblem  should  be  made  to  enter,  orit  should  be  swung 
through  the  principal  entrance  of  the  temple^  and  should 
not  be  entered  through  any  other  opening  under  any  circum- 
stance. - Then  the  phalic  emblem  should  be  placed  on  its  seat 
in  front  of  the  temple  door,  with  the  flourishes  of  trumpet, 
and  offerings  of  green  grass  and  sundried  rice  should  be 
made  unto  it*  Tho  preceptor  should  adress  the  emblem  as 
*£  Rise  Oh  lord,”  and  subsequently  read  aloud  the  Mantra 
known  as  the  u Great  Pushupata,”  after  having  removed  the 
sacrificial  pitchers  from  their  cavities  with  the  help  of  the 
Murtipas  (Brahmin-custodians  of  idols)  (17—18).  Then 
the  phalic  emplem  should  be  raised  up  and  smeared  with 
the  paste  of  sffron ; and  the  preceptor  should  meditate  upon 
the  god  as  united  with  his  goddess,  by  whom  the  emblem 
should  be  considered  as  protected.  The  preceptor  should 
repeat  the  principal  Mantra  sacred  to  the  god,  and  afterwards 
place  the  same  in  the  cavity.  The  two  parts  of  the  phalic 
emblem  known  as  the  Brahmashila,  should  be  buried  under- 
neath the  soil,  or  an  eiglh  part  of  the  entire  length  of  the  Linga 
should  be  underneath  the  earth.  The  phalic  emblem  should  be 
soldered  to  a plate  of  lead,  buried  waistdeep  under  the 
ground,  and  the  outlying  parts  of  the  cavity  should  be  filled 
up  with  sand.  The  preceptor  should  address  the  emblem 
as  u Be  steady  Oh  lord  !n  Then  having  invoked  and  located 
the  god,  from  whom  all  things  take  their  shape,  In  the 
phalic  emblem  made  steady  as  above  described,  the  preceptor 
should  also  locate  therein  the  goddess  of  energy,  by 
repeating  the  principal  Mantra,  and  the  principle  of 
Niscala  by  uttering  the  Sruti  Mantra.  If  the  head  of  the 
phalic  emblem  leans  towards  the  south,  at  the  time  of  fitting 
the  same  in  its  cavity,  the  preceptor  should  offer  oblations 
with  the  Mantras  sacred  to  the  presiding  deity  of  that  quarter 
of  the  heaven,  and  the  final  oblation  should  fee  offered  with 
the  same -Mantra,  and  renumerations  should  be  given  to  the 
preceptor*  The  preceptor  should  cast  a hundred  oblations 


* 


400 


AGHl  PURAMAM, 


into  the  fire,  by  repeating  either  the  principal  • or  the 
Vaharupa  Mantra,  in  the  event  of  the  phalic  emblem  having 
leaned  towards  the  left  hand  side,  or  dropped  down  slatingly 
or  having  been  splifcted  or  cracked,  and  in  all  other  defects 
the  preceptor  should  perform  the  Bliss-confering  rite  known 
as  the  Shiva-Sbanti.  A phalic  emblem*  looked  at  by 
the  preceptor  doing  the  rite  of  Nyasa  unto  the  same, 
becomes  devoid  of  ait  defects.  The  Mantra  sacred 
to  the  goddess  Gouri,  should  be  psychically  projected 
into  the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem,  and  the  pedestal 
should  be  consecrated  by  repeating  the  Sristi  Mantra.  The 
sides  of  the  emblem  should  be  made  smooth,  by  rubbing 
them  with  sand  and  particles  of  diamond.  Then  the 
preceptor  and  the  custodians  of  idols  should  pour  out  water 
of  peace,  out  of  a pitcher  raised  above  the  head  of  the  phalic 
emblem,  and  similarly  bathe  the  same  in  the  compositions 
known  as  the  Panchamrita  (milk,  curd,  clarified  butter 
and  honey),  etc.  The  emblem  of  the  supreme  god  should 
be  smeared  with  the  scented  paste  of  sandal,  and  worshipped 
with  the  Mantras  respectively  sacred  to  Uma  (the  wife  of 
Shiva)  and  Maheshwara  (Shiva — the  supreme  deity),  and  the 
preceptor  should  touch  the  parts  occupied  by  them  in  the 
body  of  the  phalic  emblem,  with  the  ends  of  his  fingers 
entwined  in  the  posture  of  the  mudra  (manual  sign)  known 
as  the  Linga  mudra  (the  sign  of  the  organ  of  generation.) 

Then  the  learned  preceptor  should  worship  the  phalic  em- 
blem with  the  six  articles  of  worship  (Sadanga),  psychically 
merge  in  the  same  the  three  fundamental  principles  of  soul, 
knowledge,  and  bliss,  and  locate  in  its  part  known  as  the 
Kriapitha  (seat  of  action),  the  different  images  of  the  god, 
together  with  their  presiding  inmate  divinities,  and  subse- 
quently bathe  the  same,  after  having  smeared  it  with  sandal 
paste,  and  located  therein  the  essence  of  the  god  (Shiva)  as 
its  sole  pervading  principle.  Fruits,  incensesticks,  lighted 
lamps  of  clarified  butter,  plates  of  edible  offerings  and 


mm  puranam. 


40 1 


garlands  of  flowers  should  be  presented  to  the  deity  (the 
phatic  emblem)  by  repeating  the  Hrid-Mantra*  the  articles 
’enumerated  in  the  preceding  line  should  be  such,  as  tire 
means  of  the  consecrator  would  admit  of.  The  Argha  offering 
■should  be  made  unto  the  emblem  subsequent  thereto,  and 
the  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  god  by  mentally  re- 
peating the  "‘Mantra  sacred  to  him,  and  assign  the  merit 
thereof  to  the  god,  after  having  jointly  addressed  him  with 
the  custodians  of  idols  (Murtipas)  as  follows  “ Be  pleased 
to  stay-in  this  temple,  Oh  lord,- as  long  as  the  sun,  moon,  and 
the  myriads  of  constellations  would  shine  and  blaze.  Having 
thus  made  obeisance  to  the  deity,  the  preceptor  should  walk 
out  of  the  temple  by  repeating  either  the  Hrid  or  the 
Pranava-Mantra,  and  thereafter  consecrate  the  image  of 
the  divine  bull  in  front  of  the  temple  door.  Offerings 
should  be  made  a hundred  times  as  before,  by  repeating  the 
Mntunjaya-Mantra,  with  a view  to  make  up  any  omission 
or  deficiency  unwittingly  made  in  performing  the  sacrifice; 
and  hundred  oblations  should  be  offered  to  the  god  Sasfaiva* 
by  repeating  the  Shiva-Mantra,  the  oblations  being  •com- 
posed of  sacrificial  porridge,  where  earthly  peace  is  the  only 
object  wished  for  by  the  performer  (27—44).  The  preceptor 
should  address  the  god  as,  “Make  good,  Oh  thou  Supreme 
lord,  whatever  has  been  omitted  by  me,  either  through  ig- 
norance or  inadvettance.  The  merit  of  performing  the 
sacrifice  should  be  ‘made  over  to  the  husband-god  of  the 
universal  mother  (Amivikesha),  who  is  the  primal  origin  of 
all  the  worlds,  animals  and  gold,  and  from  whom  all  songs 
music,  and  harmony  have  emanated.  For  four  consecutive 
days,  gifts  and  festivities  should  be  made  and  held  around 
the  temple,  and  the  preceptor  with  the  custodians  of  images 
should  continuously  cast  oblations  into  the  sacrificial  fire, 
during  the  three  days  and  nights  following  the  day  of  con* 
secration.  On  the  fourth  day,  the  final  oblation,  composed  of 
the  sacrificial  porridge,  should  be  cast  into  all  the  fire-recep* 


402 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


fades,  purified  with  the  oblation  known  as  the  Sampata  offer- 
ing (lit., — Oblation  ushering  in  the  sacrifice),  the  Mantra 
which  should  be  repeated  on  the  occasion,  being  called  the 
Vahurupi- Mantra.  For  four  days  after  that,  the  flowers  used 
in  the  sacrifice  should  be  kept  in  the  temple,  after  which  they 
should  be  removed,  and  the  phalic  emblem  should  be  again 
bathed  and  worshipped  as  an  ordinary  phalic  emblem.  The 
worship  should  be  made  by  repeating  the  general  Mantras 
sacred  to  Shiva,  after  which  its  consciousness  should  be 
taken  back,  and  the  god  Shiva  should  be  bid  adieu.  lo 
the  case  of  a phalic  emblem  not  falling  funder  the  above 
category,  the  rites  of  invocation,  manifestation  and  bidding 
farewell  should  be  performed  according  to  the  capacity  of 
the  worshipper,  the  rite  of  bidding'  adieu  consisting  of 
taking  leave  of  the  god  till  next  day  (45—50). 

According  to  several  authorities  seven  oblations,  after 
the  close  of  the  sacrifice,  should  be  cast  into  the  lire, 
dedicated  to  the  seven  divine  attributes  of  the  god  Shiva, 
such  as  the  attributes  of  steadiness,  immeasurableness, 
cognisance  of  his  own  originless  existence,  eternity,  universal 
locomotion,  and  deathlessness.  The  oblations  should  be 
cast  as  follows {<0m  obeisance  to  Shiva  (phalic  emblem) 
Be  thou  steady,  Oh  God.  Om  obeisance  to  Shiva  (phalic 
emblem).  Be  thou  immeasurable,  Oh  God.  Om  obeisance 
to  Shiva  (phalic  emblem).  Be  thou  cognisant,  Oh  lord,  of  thy 
own  originless  existence.  Om  obeisance  to  the  phalic 
emblem.  Be  thou  eternal,  Oh  lord.  Om  obeisance  to  the 
phalic  emblem,  dost  jtbou  have  access  every  where  in  the 
universe,  Oh  lord,  and  Om  obeisance  to  the  phalic  emblem* 
Be  immortal,  Oh  lord,”  Then  two  pitchers,  full  of  water, 
should  be  made  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  god 
Shiva,  and  the  phalic  emblem  should  be  bathed  in  the  water 
out  of  one  of  the  aforesaid  pitchers,  the  contents  of  the  other 
pitcher  being  reserved  for  performing  therewith  the  rite  of 
ablution  known  as  the  Kartrisnana3  The  preceptor  should 


AGN!  PURANAMa 


403 


walk  outside  on  having  taken  permission  of  the  god,  and 
locate  in  the  north-east  corner  of  the  temple,  and  beyond 
the  sacrificial  enclosure,  the  god  Chanda,  contemplated  as 
seated  on  a cushion  measuring  a Dhamagra.  The  rites  of 
Nayasa  should  be  done  unto  him,  and  oblation  should  be 
offered  in  his  honour  as  laid  down  before,  and  the  preceptor 
should  meditate  upon  his  divine  essence  and  worship  him 
conformably  to  the  class  of  worship  known  as  the  Brahmani- 
Archana,  with  its  essential  rites  and  features  as  follows 
“ Obeisance  to  Sadyajata,  “ Om,  Hum,  Fut,  Om,  Vim, 
obeisance  to  Vamadeva,  Hrum,  Fut,  Am,  Vum,  obeisance 
to  Aghora,  Hrum-,  Fut,  Om,  obeisance  to  Tatpurasha  and 
Voumishana,  Hruo  Fut.  The  merit  of  repeating  the  Mantras 
should  be  made  over  to  the  god,  and  the  preceptor  should 
address  him  as  follows  Stay  in  this  temple,  O Chanda, 
as  long  as  the  god  Shiva  shall  continue  therein.  Make  whole 
j and  complete,  O lord,  whatever  has  been  omitted  by  me 
through  ignorance  or  Inadverfcance.” 

0 Brahman,  the  god  Chanda  should  not  be  invoked  in 
the  temple,  where  phalic  emblems  known  as  the  Vana  or  the 
Shayambhu  Lin  gas,  or  an  image  of  the  god  should  be  instal- 
led. The  preceptor  should  worship  the  god  Chanda,  and 
the  consecrator  of  the  temple  with  his  son  and  wife,  accord- 
ing to  the  rites  enumerated  in  the  worship  of  the  presiding 
deity  of  the  sacrificial  sand  cushion,  with  his  mind  intently 
fixed  upon  the  one  supreme  cause,  which  is  the  real  under- 
lying substratum  of  [the  universe,  and  which  evolves  itself 
out  into  multitudinous  forms  of  beings  and  existences.  The 
preceptor  should  bathe  the  Yayaman  (the  consecrator)  and 
his  wife  and  children  with  the  waters  out  of  the  sacrificial 
pitchers,  situate  at  the  east  and  other  sides  of  the  temple, 
and  the  Yayaman  should  worship  the  preceptor  as  the  god 
Maheshvar,  without  any  distinction  whatever ; and  make  gifts' 
of  gold,  cow,  and  land  to  him  and  the  repeaters  of  Mantras 
\ and  the  custodians  of  images*  The  sculptors  and^astvologers 


m 


AGNJ  PUR  A NAM. 


should  be  satisfied  with  presents,  and  the  indigent  and  the 
miserable  should  be  feasted  with  sumptuous  repasts.  The 
gifts  made  aver  to  the  preceptor,  etc.,  should  not  be  too  much- 
costly  and  expensive,  and  the  Yayaman  should  address  the 
former  as  follows  “Pardon  me,  O thou  ocean  of  mercy,  for 
the  trouble,  I have  directly  put  you  to,  in  connection  with 
this  sacrifice.  The  preceptor  should  place  in  tffe  hands  of' 
the  Yayaman,  sun-burnt  i rice  and  the  stems  of  busha  grass,, 
which  should  be  looked  upon  as  permeated  with  the  merit  of 
consecrating  the  divine  temple,  and  glowing  resplendent 
as  a star.  Subsequent  to  that,  he  should  make  obeisance 
to  the  supreme  lord,  covered  over  with  the  essence  of  the 
Pashupata-Mantra  (sacred  to  the  manifestation  of  Shiva* 
known  as  Pashupati  or  the  lord  of  animal  beings.)  Then 
the  Bhutas  or  the  attendant  goblins  of  the  god*  should  be 
propitiated  with  offerings,  and  the  preceptor  should  address 
them  as  follows  .“Stay  here  in  bliss,  each  of  you,  as  long 
as  the  god  Shiva  shall 'graciously  continue  herein/1  The 
sacrificial  shed  covered  with  pieces  of  -cloth,  and  containing 
all  the  articles  used  in  the  course  of  the  sacrifice,  should  be 
given  to  the  preceptor  and  the  sculptor  should  take  the  sacri- 
ficial bathing  shed  and  all  other  articles  found  therein. 

O Brahman,  other  gods  headed  by  the  god  Sadhya,  etc.* 
should  be  installed  in  the  temple,  by  repeating  the  Mantras* 
recorded  in  the  Agamas,  together  with  the  different  funda- 
mental principles,  such  as  the  principle  of  good  (Sutaitva) 
etc.,  forming  the  veils  of  the  abovesaid  godheads,  and  which 
should  vary  as  the  beginning  letters  of  the  names  of  the 
gods  would  differ.  The  different  holy  pools  and  sacrificial 
cereals  should  likewise  be  located  therein,  together  with  the 
Kinnaras,  and  the  gods  known  as  the  ‘Kshetrapalas,  whose 
abode  is  the  essential  principle  of  the  earth  matter.  The 
sacred  pools  and  the  goddesses  Saraswati  and  Lakshmi  should 
also  be  located  in  the  temple  for  the  purpose  of  performing  at 
times  the  rite  of  oblation  therein  (5^-71),  The  presiding 


AGN1  PURAMAM* 


405 


deities  of  the  different  Bhuvanas,  dealt  with  before, "should  also, 
be  invoked  in  the  temple*  and  the  preceptor  should  ensure 
their  continuance  therein.  Similarly  should  be  located  therein 
the  attributes  of  Brahma,  the  god  of  creation,  such  as  those 
of  creating  and  giving  mobility  at  the  outset,  to  the  innumer- 
able myriads  of  firy  atoms  which  freely  moved  about 
In  the  bosoncTof  the  universal  space,  and  which  under  the 
influence  of  a mysterious  affinity  and  cohesion*  formed 
themselves  into  that  primordial  firy  globe,  known  as  the 
Brahmanda  or  the  primordial  egg,  and  which  moving  In  the 
wake  of  two  different  aspects  of  one  and  the  same 
principle  of  disintegration,  viz.  the  centrifugal  and  the 
centripetal  force,  subsequently  fathered  these  Infinite  hosts 
of  suns  and  their  satellites.  The  attributes  of  the  creator 
god  (Brahma)  such  as  those  of  absolute  and  paramount 
sovereignty  over  the  created  universe,  together  with  the 
threefold  god-head  of  Bari,  and  the  principles  of  proper 
sensibles,  etc.,  respectively  domineered  over  hyphens,  should  . 
be  psychically  ensconced  in  the  earthly  abode  of  the  deity. 
Likewise  the  divine  attributes  of  the  gods,  Natyesha  (the 
presiding  deity  of  the  histrionic  art),  Gana,  Matrisha, 
Yaksesha,  Sharajanma,  and  Shiva,  together  with  the  five 
auspicious  Gems,  should  be  ensconsced  in  the  hole  or  cavity 
of  the  adytum,  the  sixth  part  at  its  back  having  been  left 
apart,  where  the  same  would  be  divided  into  six  equal  parts 
or  divisions,  The  image  of  the  deity  should  be  placed  on  the 
fifth  part  of  its  seat,  where  the  latter  would  be  divided  into 
eight  equal  divisions,  the  installation  of  an  image  on  the 
seventh  part,  being  always  held  as  auspicious  (72—77). 

In  the  case  where  an  image  or  pictured  the  god  should 
be  consecrated  in  the  stead  of  a phaiic  emblem,  the  rite  of 
purification  should  be  made  by  simply  meditating  upon  the 
same,  and  the  rites  of  ablution  and  driving  in  of  gems,  etc*, 
spoken  of  before,  should  be  mentally  performed.  The 
rites  of  opening  up  of  the  eyes,  and  the  spreading  out  of  the 


AGN1  PUR  AN  AM* 


406 

cushion,  should  be  made  by  offering  flowers  containing  no 
humidity  in  them,  so  that  the  colouring  of  the  picture  might 
not  be  affected  ia  the  least  (77—79). 

Oh  .Brahman  J now  I shall  deal  with  the  procedure,  which 
should  be  adopted  in  installing,  a phalic  emblem  of  the 
Chala  class.  The  Pitha,  or  the  seat  proper  of  the  emblem* 
should  be  [divided  into  five,  or  three  separate  parts:  and  the 
fundamental  principles  enumerated  before,  should  be  divided 
into  as  many  sets  or  groups,  and  psychically  projected  into 
the  body  of  the  phalic  emblem.  The  body  of  a phalic  emblem 
made  of  crystal,  should  be  duly  purified  by  uttering  the 
Sristi-Mantra,  but  the  slab  known  as  the  Brahma-Shila,  the 
auspicious  Gems,  and  the  Pravuti  should  not  be  consecrated* 
in  the  instance  under  discussion.  The  preceptor  should 
perform  in  mind,  the  rite  of  placing  the  emblem  on  its 
pedestal  The  phalic  emblem,  known  as  the  Vana  or  the 
Shyambhu  Lingas  require  no  purification.  The  rites  of 
ablution  in  the  case  of  a Chala  or  movable  phalic  emblem* 
should  be  made  by  repeating  the  Sanhita-Mantras,  and 
likewise  the  rite  of  Nyasa  and  the  casting  of  oblations  into 
the  fire,  should  be  done  with  the  same  Mantra,  The  sacred 
rivers,  oceans,  and  mountains  should  be  invoked  as  laid  down 
before.  The  hallowed  earthly  phalic  emblem  together  with 
its  pedestal  made  of  clay,  should  be  worshipped  according 
to  the  rite  of  Diksana*  which  should  be  thereafter  cast 
into  the  water,*  and  the  preceptor  should  take  back  and 
merge  in  himself  the  Mantras  with  which  the  worship  had 
been  performed.  The  worship  of  such  an  emblem,  grants 
the  wished  for  object  after  the  lapse  of  a year.  The  instal- 
lation of  images  of  Vishnu  or  of  other  gods  should  be  made* 
Oh  Brahman,  by  repeating  separate  Mantras  which  "should 
! be  discussed  in  its  proper  place  (8o~86), 


CHAPTER  XCVtH. 


1 HE  God  said  :~Hear  me,  Oh  Skanda,  describe  thg 
process  of  installing  'an  image  of  Gouri,  together  with  the 
mode  of  worshipping  the  said  goddess.  The  sacrificial  shed 
should  be  raised  as  before,  and  the  image  of  the  goddess  should 
be  placed  in  front  thereof.  Subsequent  to  that,  Oh  Guha,  the 
goddess  should  be  Said  down  in  bed,  into  which  the  essence 
of  the  Mantras  of  images  had  been  projected  by  means  of 
soul-force,  and  fundamental  principles  of  sou!,  knowledge 
and  bliss,  together  with  the  god  Shiva  had  been  located. 
The  preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  goddess  of  absolute 
energy,  as  occupying  the  different  parts  of  his  own  body, 
and  cast  oblations  into  the  fire,  as  laid  down  before,  by  way 
of  performing  the  Homa  ceremony  unto  her.  Then  the 
pedestal  should  be  united  with  the  principle  of  universal 
action,  which  should  be  contemplated  as  pervading  the 
region  of  the  pedestal,  filled  in  with  auspicious  Gems  des- 
cribed before.  After  that,  the  image  of  the  goddess  which 
is  the  symbol  of  universal  force,  should  be  placed  on  its 
pedestal  by  repeating  the  two  Mantras  specially  sacred  to 
her.  The  principle  of  universal  action  (Kriashakti)  should  be 
projected  into  the  body  of  the  pedestal,  and  the  principle 
of  wisdom  into  that  of  the  goddess  with  whom  the  all-per- 
vading energy  ( Vyapinishakti ) should  be  united.  The 
goddesses  Amvica  and  Shivanamni  should  be  invoked  and 
worshipped  as  follows  “Om  obeisance  to  the  capacitating 
virtue  of  the  universe,  Om  obeisance  to  the  primordial 
tortoise  bearing  the  same  on  its  back.  Om  a similar  obiesance 
to  the  god  Skanda*  Om  Bourn,  obeisance  to  the  god 
Narayana,  Om  obeisance  to  the  sovereign  attributes  of  the 
supreme  diety,  Om,  Am  obeisance  to  the  Adhachhadana 
under-lining  of  the  divine  cushion),  Om  obeisance 


408 


AGN1  PUftAtUMi 


to  the  lotus-shaped  cushion  of  the  goddess.  Dm  obeisafceS 
to  the  upper-lining  of  the  same.  'Om  Ham  obeisance  to  the 
lotus-shaped  cushion/”  Then  the  gods  such  as  Keshava,  etc.* 

. should  be  worshipped. 

Om  Hrim  obeisance  to  the  petals  of  the  lotus-seat,  where 
in  the  gods  Puskar&ksha,  etc.,  should  be  worshipped,  as  “Om 
Ksham  obeisance  to  the  gods  Pukkaraksa,  etc.  [Om  Ham  obei- 
sance to  Pusti  (the  goddess  or  the  principle  of  growth.)  Hrim 
obeisance  to  the  goddess  of  knowledge  (Gnana),  Hrun  obei- 
sance to  the  goddess  or  the  energy  of  action.  Om  obeisance 
to  Nala.  Rum,  obeisance  to  the  god  of  virtue.  Rum  obeisance 
to  the  god  of  wisdom.  Om  obeisance  to  the  god  of  apathy 
towards  the  world  and  its  concerns  (Vairagya).  Om  SVaimh 
obeisance  to  the  god  of  impiety,  fim  Rum,  obeisance  to  the 
god  of  ignorance,  Om  obeisance  to  the  spirit  of  worldlioess 
(Avairagya),  Om  obeisance  to  the  presiding  deity  of  indi- 
gence (Anishvarjya).  Hum  obeisance  to  the  speech.  Hum* 
obeisance  to  Ragani.  Kraim,  obeisance  to  JvalnL  Om,  Hruni 
obeisance  to  Shama,  Hrum  obeisance  to  Yasfca.  Om,  Hroun, 
Roum,  Kroum,  obeisance  to  the  nine  goddesses  of  energy. 
Goum,  obeisance  to  the  cushion  of  the  goddess  Gourh 
Goum  obeisance  to  the  image  of  Gouri.’* 

O Skanda,-— Now  I shall  enumerate  the  Mantras  sacred 
to  the  goddess  Gouri,  which  are  as  follows *“Om,  Hrun* 
Sa,  obeisance  (Shwaha)  to  Mahagouri,  who  is  the  beloved 
wife  of  the  god  Rudra,  Obeisance  to  Gouri,  Gam,  Hrum^ 
Hrnu,  Gum,  Shiva  to  both  the  armour  and  the  tuft  of  hair 
on  the  crown  (of  the  worshipper).  Gom  to  the  eyes,  Gom 
to  the  (Mantra)  protecting  the  worshipper  as  an  weapon! 
(Astraya).  Om,  Goum,  to  the  goddess  or  the  principle  of 
true  or  scientific  knowledge.  Om,  Gam,  obeisance  to  the 
goddess  or  the  principle  of  action.’*  Thereafter  the  gods 
such  as  Indra,  etc.,  should  be  Worshipped  in  the  eastern  and 
other  quarters  of  the  heaven,  over  which  they  respectively 
preside.  Then  “Om,  Sum,  obeisance  to  Subhaiga,  Hrnu, 


AGNI  PURANAM.  409 

obeisance  to  Lalita,  Om,  Hrim,  obeisance  to  Kamini,  Om, 
Hrum,  obeisance  to  Kamashalini.” 

An  image  of  the  goddess  Gouri  should  be  installed  by 
reading  out  the  above  Mantras  which  are  held  sacred  to  her. 
The  preceptor  should  worship  the  goddess  in  the  image, 
with  the  abovesaid  Mantras,  and  mentally  repeat  the  same. 
A person  wh<»  installs  an  image  of  the  goddess  in  the  manner 
indicated  above,  attains  all  merit  (1—8.) 

CHAPTER  XCIX. 

The  God  said : — Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
installing  an  image  of  the  sun-god.  The  sacrificial  sheds 
should  be  raised  as  before,  and  the  rites  of  ablution,  etc., 
should  be  performed  according  to  the  rules  laid  down  in  the 
preceding  chapter.  The  sun-god  should  be  located  in  the 
cushion  spread  out,  as  before,  in  front  of  the  temple-door, 
together  with  his  attendants  and  attributes,  and  the  goddess, 
Vidya  (learning).  The  preceptor  should  likewise  project 
into  the  same,  with  his  soul  force,  the  three  fundamental 
principles  of  soul,  knowledge  and  bliss,  as  in  the  previous 
instance,  • and  the  five  material  principles  of  sky,  light, 
water,  etc.  The  rite  of  purification  should  be  done,  and  the 
pedestal  should  he  purified  as  before  and  the  preceptor 
should  project  into  the  same  the  divine  attributes  ending 
with  that  presided  over  by  the  god  Sadashiva.  The  pedestal 
should  be  established  and  made  permeated  with  the  goddess 
of  energy  called  Sarvotomukhi,  and  the  preceptor  should  place 
thereon  the  image  of  the  sun-god  by  uttering  the  Mantras 
sacred  to  him,  and  which  have  been  enumerated  before  (1—5). 


52 


CHAPTER  C. 


: pw 

I he  God  said  : — Now  I shall  describe  the  rite  of  con* 
secration  which  should  be  made  in  connection  with  the 
doors  of  a divine  temple*  The  door-frames  * should  be 
washed  with  water  saturated  with  a solution  of  bitter  drugs, 
and  laid  down  in  the  bed,  as  directed  in  the  case  of  a phalic 
emblem.  The  three  fundamental  principles  (Tattvas)  of  soul, 
knowledge,  and  bliss,  should  be  respectively  projected  into 
their  lower,  middle,  and  upper  parts,  and  oblations  of  clarified 
butter  should  be  cast  into  the  fire,  accompanied  at  each 
instance  by  a chanting  $of  the  Rupa-Mantras.  The  god  of 
homestead  (Vastu)  should  be  worshipped  at  a little  distance 
from  the  temple-door,  by  repeating  the.  Mantra  of  eternity 
(Ananfca),  the  five  auspicious  gems  should  be  buried  underneath 
the  same,  and  the  ceremony  of  peace-giving  Homa  should  be 
performed  as  previously  described.  A bundle  containing 
barley,  sun-dried  rice,  and  the  medicinal  plants  respectively 
known  as  the  Ridhi,  Vridhi,  Mahati!a,i  Go,  earth,  mustard, 
Raj  e 2)  dr  a,  Mohini,  and  s Laksana,  should  be  buried  under-, 
neath  the  temple,  ■ for  protection  thereof.  . The  goddess  of 
universal  nature  (Prakriti)  should  be  located  in  the  orna- 
mental globe  over  its  pinnacle,  'by  repeating  the  Pranava- 
Mantra.  The  fundamental  principle  of  soul  should  be  psychi7 
calfy  projected  into  its  foundation,  a little  to  the  north  of 
the  door,  the  principle  of  knowledge  at  its  two  sides, 
and  the  sky  within,  should  be  made  permeated  with,  the 
essence  of  the  fundamental  principle  of  bliss.  Then  the  god 
Maheshanatha  should  be  installed  by  repeating,  the  principal 
Mantra,  and  the  Homa  oblations  should  be  cast  , into  the 
fire,  in  honor  of  the  warder-gods,  Nandi,  etc.,  by  repeating 
the  name  of  each.  The  oblations  spoken  of  in  the  preceding 
line,  should  number  either  fifty  or  a hundred  jn  all,  and  the 


mm  puranam. 


^ I 


41 1 


preceptor  having  made  offerings  unto  the  presiding  deities 
of  the  different  quarters  of  the  firmament,  should  cast  a 
hundred  oblations  into  the  lire,  with  the  Hati-Mantra,  for 
. making  up*any  defect  or  omission  made  in  performing  the 
, ceremony,  after  which,  remuneration^for  finishing  the  same, 

: should  be  given  to  him  (1—9). 


CHAPTER  CL 


1 HE  God  said  :~Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
.consecrating  a divine  edifice.  The  vault  having  been 
arched  and  completed,  the  preceptor  should  place  one  of 
■the  sacrificial  pitchers  containing  a solution  of  the  composi- 
tion known  as  "the  Panchagavya,  honey  and  thickened 
milk/and  m which  the  five  auspicious  Gems  had  been  im- 
mersed, on  the  lotus-shaped  mystic  diagram,  over  which 
the  virtue  of  holding  (Adharshakti)  had  been  located.  The 
pitcher  should  be  smeared  over  with  a paste  of  scented  sandal, 
and  a piece  of  cloth  should  be  tied  round  its  neck,  and 
garlands  of  sweet-odoured  flowers  should  be  hung  round 
the  same.  The  preceptor  should  decorate  the  temple  with 
festoons  of  mangoe  leaves,  perform  the  rite  of  Sakalikaran 
in  his  body,  and  carry,  up  by  restraining  his  internal  vital  winds, 
in  a Puruka  form  of  Kumbhaka,  the  occult  stream  of  his 
soul  energy,  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  universal 
soul,  into  his  occult  psychic  nerve-ganglion  over  which  the 
god  Shambhu  presides.  Then  he  should  take  the  same  into 
the  occult  nerve-ganglion,  known  as  that  of  the  twelve  petals, 

. and  subsequently  cast  the  same,  resplendent  as  a spark  of 
fire,  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  by  practising  a Rechaka  form  of 


«r 

1 ■ || | ||i 


• 


II 


ti 

if  I.  K 


II  Ihl 

m ft  Hi 
H 


k fl* 
mm 


412 


AGNf  PURANAM, 


Kumbhaka,  The  Ativahikas  of  tantras  (beatific  states)  should 
be  located  in  the  pitcher  into  which  the  above  soul-spark  had 
been  projected*  together  with  the  image  of  the  god  Vagishvara 
and  the  ten  vita!  winds*  and  the  thirteen  sense-organs 
and  their  presiding  deities*  by  repeating  the  name  of  each* 
preceded  by  the  Pranava-Mantra.  The  two  fundamental 
principles  of  illusion  (Maya)  and  the  universal  space,  stand- 
ing in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  towards  each  other,  and 
the  gods  known  as  the  Vidyesha  (gods  of  learning)  toge- 
ther with  the  essence  of  the  god  Shambhu,  which  should  be 
regarded  as  the  propelling  principle  of  the  abovesaid  gods 
and  attributes,  should  also  be  located  in  the  same,  by  re- 
peating the  Mantras  held  sacred  to  him  ; and  the  pitcher 
should  be  looked  upon  as  fully  saturated  with  the  essence 
of  the  above  divinity.  The  preceptor  should  exhibit  'the 
Rodha-Mudra,  by  way  of  guarding  against  the  outgoing  ol 
the  deity.  The  act  of  location  mentioned  above,  should  be 
made  in  the  golden  pitcher  sacred  to,  and  permeated'with  the 
essence  of,  the  supreme  absolute  (Purusha).  The  pitcher 
should  be  purified  by  smearing  it  over  with  a paste  of  the 
composition  known  as  the  Panchagavya,  and  subsequently 
laid  down  in  the  bed  prepared  as  previously  directed.  The 
preceptor  should  meditate  upon  the  goddess  Uma  and  the 
gods  Rudra  and  Umapati  at  the  time  of  depositing  the 
above  pitcher,  wherein  the  Mantra  sacred  to  the  god  Shiva 
should  be  located  as  its  all-pervading  principle.  The  rites  of 
Hama,  ablution,  and  the  repetition  of  the  Mantras  should  be 
made  for  invoking  the  presence  of  the  deity,  and  with  a view 
to  pray  for  his  continuance.  The  rites  of  invocation,  and 
waking  up,  etc.,  of  the  supreme  being,  should  be  divided  into 
three  parts,  which  should  be  subsequently  thought  as  merged 
in  the  pitcher  in  which  the  universal  Nature  had  been  res- 
pectively invoked  and  located  (1—16), 


CHAPTER  C1L 


'The  God  said  O Skanda!  I shall  now  describe  the 
portions  of  the  consecration  ceremony  which  appertain  to  the 
pinnacle  and  the  banner  of  a divine  temple  or  edifice,  or  to  the 
other  gods  dwelling  therein.  In  the  case  of  a brickbuilt  divine 
edifice  lying  half  underneath  the  water  of  a tank,  or  half  of 
which  only  is  visible  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  flag.posfc 
should  be  made  of  wood,  while  it  should  be'of  stone  where  the 
edifice  would  be  built  of  the  same  materia!.  The  ornamental 
top-pitcher  over  the  pinnacle  of  a temple,  in  which  an  image 
of  the  god  Vishnu  had  been  installed,  should  be  furnished  with 
a quoit  or  disc  which  is  the  divine  insignia  of  the  same  god. 
The  flag-post  at  the  top  of  a temple,  in  which  a phalic  emblem 
had  been  installed,  should  be  provided  with  a trident  (the 
god's  own  weapon)  at  its  top,  mounted  over  by  another  such 
small  phalic  emblem.  The  banner  should  be  made  to  reach 
down  to  the  half  of  the  plinth  of  the  temple,  or  to  commensur- 
ate with  Its  entire  length,  or  of  the  same  length  with  its  rod, 
according  to  the  option  of  the  consecrator.  The  banner 
known  as  the  Mahadhvaja  should  be  made  to  flap  around  the 
platform  of  the  edifice,  and  should  be  tied  to  or  hung  down 
from  a rod  respectively  measuring  fourteen,  nine,  or  six  cubits 
in  length.  A banner  of  the  above  class  is  held  as  imparting 
all  sorts  of  boon  to  the  consecrator  (i~7)/A  flagstaff  breaking 
down  in  the  middle,  at  the  time  of  planting  the  same,  augurs 
evil  to  the  consecrator,  or  to  the  sovereign  of  the  country, 
and  which  should  be  accordingly  remedied  by  performing  the 
bliss-giving  rite  with  the  Vahurapa-Mantra  as  laid  down  before, 
or  by  worshipping  the  wader-gods,  or  with  the  rite  of  propi- 
tiation known  as  the  Mantra-Tarpana.  Subsequent  to  that, 
the  flagstaff  should  be  bathed  in  water  consecrated  with  the 
Mantra  of  Weapon,  and  the  preceptor  having  sprinkled 


414  AGNI  PURANAM. 

water  over  the  same  with  the  same  Mantra,  should  wash  the 
divine  edifice  with  water  containing  a solution  of  bitter 
drugs.  The  rod  should  be  laid  down  in  the  bed,  smeared 
over  with  sandal  paste.  In  the  pinnacle,  the  Mantras,  sacred  to 
the  phalic  emblem,  should  not  be  psychically  located,  nor  the 
goddesses  of  energy  respectively  known  r’as  JTnan-Shakti  and 
the  Kriya-shakfci  should  be  invoked  therein. , The  principles 
of  sense  (Artha)  and  knowledge  (Vidyatattva),  together  with 
the  essence  of  the  Sadyajata-,  and  Vakra-,  Mantras,  should 
be  psychically  projectedpnto  the  body  of  the  flagstaff,  while, 
the  fundamental  principle  of  bliss  should  be  contemplated 
as  merged  in  the  streamer  itself.  The  preceptor  fully 
initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  Mantras  should  locate  in  the 
pinnacle  of  the  temple  the  indivisible  godhead  of  Shiva,  and 
worship  the  attendants  and  attributes  of  the  same  divinity. 
Homa  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  by  uttering  the 
Mantras,  which  should  be  coupled  with  the  term  Fufc  in  the 
end,  when  the  abovesaid  oblations  would  be  offered  to  each 
part  of  the  hallowed  banner. 

Oh  Brahman!  the  banner,  according  to  other  authorities 
should  be  purified  by  undertaking  the  sacrifice  known  as  the 
Astra-jag,  which  has  been  described  before.  The  preceptor 
should  enclose  a little  space  or  aperture  on  the  platform  at 
the  top  of  the  plinth,  and  decorate  the . same  with  festoons 
and  gay  coloured  hangings.  The  three  fundamental  princi- 
ples of  soul,  knowledge  and  bliss,  should  be  psychically 
projected  into  the  part  of  the  temple  above  the  enclosure 
mentioned  above.  Homa  oblations  should  the  cast  into  the 
sacrificial  fire,  and  the  god  Shiva  should  be  worshipped  as 
before.  The  temple  should  be  contemplated  as  pervaded  all 
through  by  the  essence  of  the  latter  god,  in  whom  all  the 
fundamental  principles  have  found  their  abode.  The  god 
Ananta  should  be  considered  as  lying  at  its  foot  or  foundation, 
the  gods  respectively  known  as  Kushmanda  and  Hataka  as 
guarding  the  platform  at  the  -top.  of  the  plinth,  and  the 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


4X5 


Lokapalas  accompanied  by  the  hundred  Rudras,  together 
with  the  Bhuvanas  (knowable  worlds),  hell  and  the  nether 
regions,  should  be  located  in  the  plinth,  which  should  be 
looked  upon  as  the  microcosm  of  the  universe  (8 — 20). 
The  preceptor  should  contemplate  in  the  imaged  Lion  afc 
the  left  side  of  the  temple,  the  concourse  of  the  principles  of 
water,  light,  vfrind  and  the  sky,  and  the  principle  [of  intellec- 
tion and  the  source  of  life  known  as  the  Ananta,  together 
with  the  eight  forms  of  yogas  and  the  three  virtues  ending 
with  the  virtue  of  disintegration. 

The  four  principles  of  learning,  etc.,  should  be’considered 
as  occupying  the  cornice  of  the  temple,  the  principle  of 
illusion  with  the  god  Rudra,  as  located  at  its  neck,  and  the 
goddess  of  knowledge  (Vidya)  in  the  part  above  that.  In  the 
ornamental  globe  over  the  pinnacle,  the  preceptor  should  locate 
the  Vindu  (the  mystic  zero)  which  is  the  symbol  of  universal 
evolution  together  with  the  gods  Isha  and  Ishvara.  The  pre- 
ceptor should  look  upon  the  globe  as  the  clotted  hairs  of  the 
god  (Isha),  and  the  crescent  at  the  top  of  the  rod  over  the 
pinnacle  as  forming  his  trident.  The  three  forces  should  be 
located  in  the  flagstaff,  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  Nada 
Mantra,  and  the  occult  soul-energy  known  as  the  Kundalt 
Shakti  should  likewise  be  located  in  the  cloth  of  the  banner. 
The  different  parts  of  a temple  or  a divine  edifice  should  be 
thus  contemplated  as  occupied  and  presided  over  by  the  gods 
mentioned  above.  The  phalic  emblem  should  be  raised  up 
with  the  earth  lying  at  its  bottom,  or  with  the  pedestal  on 
which  the  same  had  been  placed.  The  Mantras  known 
as  the  Sumantras  should  be  read,  as  the  emblem  of 
universal  progenation,  would  be  placed  at  its  seat, 
(Shakti  .pan kaj a),  into  which  auspicious  gems  had  been 
previously  driven.  At  the  auspicious  moment  known  as  the 
Diiavajalagna.  the  Yayamana  (consecrator  of  the  temple), 
accompanied  by  his  friends  and  relations,  should  reverentially 
w$lk  round  the  temple,  whereby  he  would  attain  his  most. 


4*6 


AGN!  FURANAM, 


wished-for  objects*  The  preceptor  should  repeat  the  Mantra 
known  as  the  Pashupata,  and  meditate  upon  the  presiding 
deities  of  the  Mantras,  fully  equipped  with  their  respective 
weapons,  which  should  be  invoked  for  guarding  the  different 
parts  of  the  temple,  and  oblations  should  be  cast  into  the  fire 
for  making  up  any  deficiency  in  performing  the  sacrifice* 
Offerings  should  be  made  to  the  presiding  deities'll  the  differ* 
enfc  quarters lof  heaven,  and  remuneration  for  performing  the 
sacrifice  should  be  given  to  the  preceptor,  whereby  the 
Yayamana  (the  consecrator)  would  enter  the  region  of  bliss* 
A consecrator  of  a divine  edifice  would  enjoy  celestial 
comforts  for  as  many  thousand  yugas,  as  there  are  number 
of  atoms  in  the  structure  (21—30). 


CHAPTER  CHI. 


The  God  said : — Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
repairing  or  replacing  a phalic  emblem  which  has  become  old,- 
or  broken,  or  has  been  struck  with  lightning,  or  has  become 
devoid  of  its  characteristic  mark  (Lakshma)  spoken  of  before, 
or  whose  outlines  have  become  blunt  or  obliterated.  The  de- 
fective phalic  emblems  which  have  been  cracked,  broken,  or 
damaged  in  any  other  way,  should  be  installed  on  their 
pedestals,  and  likewise  the  images  of  their  bulls  should 
be  cemented  to  their  place.  The  phalic  emblems  which 
have  been  unearthed,  or  have  become  unsteady,  together 
with  those  that  have  been  slantingly  soldered  to  their  seats, 
or  lean  towards  any  particular  point  of  the  compass,  as 
well  as  those  that  have  been  fixed  at  the  exact  centre  of  the 
temple,  should  be  only  re-installed  on  their  pedestals,  if 


ham  Puii&tiAM. 


devoid  of  any,  cracks,  fissures,  or  defective  marks,  or  if  the 
same  be  removed  by  cleansing  the  emblem  with 'stream- 
Water,  "such  as  of  rivers,  etc.  A phalic  emblem,  once  un- 
earthed and  duly  installed  at  a different  place  according 
to  the  rites  laid  down  in  the  Shastras,  should  not  be  removed 
'under  any  circumstance’,  even  though  the  same  had  been 
improperly  placed  (f— 5). 

A phalic  emblem  should  be  established  by  casting  a hun- 
dred oblations  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  while  a thousand 
oblations  should  be  offered,  before  the . same  could  be  un- 
earthed and  removed  (6). 

An  old  phalic  emblem,  though  otherwise  duly  installed, 
should  be  removed  after  having  been  worshipped  according 
to  the  rites  enumerated  before,,  In  the  sacrificial  shed  raised 
in  the  north  or  in  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  ground,  the 
preceptor  should  worship  the  warder-gods  at  each  door  under 
the  decorative  arch,  and  perform  the  rite  of  Mantra-puja 
(worshipping  with  the  Mantras)  on  the  sacrificial  sand-cushion. 
The  rite  of  Tarpana  (propitiation)  by  'uttering  the  Mantras, 
should  be  likewise  gone  through,  the  offerings  known  as  the 
Digvalis  should  be  made  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the 
different  quarters  of  the  heaven,  and  the  Brahmins  should  be 
treated  to  a sumptuous  repast.  The  the  preceptor  should 
rinse  his  mouth  with  watery  and  address  the  god  as 
follows  $-**»  (7 — 9). 

H Leave  this  phalic  emblem,  O lord,  which  has  become  old 
and  defective,  and  which  is  about  to  be  unearthed  and  re- 
moved, Graciously  take  thy  seat,  god,  for  awhile 
within  my  iimerself,  if  it  so  please  thee.*’  Having  thus 
addressed  the  god,  the  preceptor  should  perform  the  rite 
of  Shantihoma,  by  offering  into  the  fire  a hundred  and 
eight  oblations  composed  of  honey,  clarified  butter,  thick- 
ened milk,  and  grass ; the  Mantra  with  which  the  oblations 
should  be  offered,  being  the  Mantra  principally,  held  sacred  : 
%$■  the,  god  Shiva.  1 Then  the  phalic  emblem  should  be  ins - 


mm  FURANAM. 


•4  i-S- 

talled  in  its  former  place,  the  preceptor  should  worship  the 
same  on  the  sacrificial  sand-cushion,  the  Mantra  which  should 
be  used,  on  the  different  occasions  in  the  course  of  the  worship, 
being  the  Shiva-Mantra  running  as  ^“Om,  obeisance  to  the 
all-pervading  god  (Shiva).”  The  Mantras,  0 Brahman,  with 
which  the  different  parts  of  the  body  of  the  preceptor  should 
be  purified  and  made  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  god, 
are  known  as  the  Anga-Mantras.  The  rite  of  purification 
should  be  performed  as  follows  nOm  obeisance  to  the  all* 
pervading  Shiva,  situate  at  the  region  of  theiheart.  Om, 
obeisance  (Swaha)  to  the  all-pervading  Shiva,  located  in  the 
cavity  of  the  brain.”  Then  the  preceptor  should  address  the 
beings  who  might  have  found  lodgment  in  the  body  of  the 
phalic  emblem,  as  follows  “Leave  this  phalic  emblem,  all 
ye  beings,  that  may  be  resting  therein,  and  peacefully 
depart  from  this  place,  to  any  other  region  you  please, 
by  order  of  Shiva,  who  would  remain  here,  attended  upon  by 
the  principles  of  knowledge,  etc.,  and  the  gods  who  preside 
over  the  same.”  Then  the  three  sets  of  oblations,  spoken 
of  before  and  numbering  a thousand  each,  should  be  cast 
into  the  sacrificial  fire,  by  repeating  the  Pashupata-Mantra. 
Then  the  fundamental  principles,  enumerated  before,  to- 
gether with  [their  respective  presiding  deities,  located  in  the 
body  of  the  phalic  emblem,  should  be  touched  with  the  ends 
of  the  kasha  grass  washed  with  the  consecrated  water  of 
peace  (Shantodaka).  The  Argha  offerings  should  be  made 
to  the  abovesaid  gods  of  the  fundamental  principles  in  an 
inverse  order.  Subsequent  to  that,  the  preceptor  should  hid 
farewell  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the  eight  different  mani* 
festatipns  of  the  god  Shiva,  located  in  the  hallowed  pedestal 
of  the  emblem,  and  cast  them  into  the  water  of  peace,  by 
binding  them  with  a noose  of  gold,  placed  on  the  back  of 
the  bull  sculptured  by  the  side  of  the  phalic  emblem.  The 
preceptor  should  repeat  at  the  time  the  Mantra,  held  sacred 
to  the  god  Shiva*  and  cast  a hundred  oblations  in  succession! 


AGNI  PURANAftt* 


into  the  sacrificial  fire,  with  a view  to  confer  prosperity  on 
the  consecrator.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  . different 
quarters  of  the  firmament,  should  be  propitiated  with  a 
hundred  such  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  the  sacrificial 
ground  should  be  purified  by  another  such  hundred,  and  the 
rite  of  granting  protection  should  be  performed  on  the  left 
hand,  side  thereof,  by  repeating  the  great  Pash  upata-M  antra 
[Maha  Pashupata]  (9—15).  A phalic  emblem  installed  by 
the  demons  (Asuras),  Munis  (sages),  or  by  Brahmins  belong* 
ing  to  the  clan  of  any  renowned  Rishi,  or  well-versed  in  the 
Tantras,  should  not  be  removed  at  all,  though  broken  or 
timeworn,  or  otherwise  fit  to  be  removed  and  replaced. 
The  process  . described  above  should  be  adopted  in  the 
case  of  replacing,  an  old  dilapidated  phalic  emblem.  The 
interior  of  the  temple  should  be  made  permeated  with  the 
essence  of  the  .Mantras  of  Sword,  and  the  inside  of  a divine 
edifice  should  not  be  made  too  spacious  or  too  narrow,  as  in 
the  former  case,  the  consecrator  would  suffer  pecuniary  loss, 
and  meet  his  doom  in  the  latter.  The  decorations  and 
ornamental  bangings  00  the  body  of  the  interior,  should  be 
decently  made  and  as  running  along  its  entire  length  and 
breadth  (16—21),  , . 


CHAPTER  CIV 


Jt  HE  God  said Hear  ire,  Oh  God,  whose  banner  is 

mounted  over  by  a peacock,  describe  the  general  character- 
istics of  a divine  edifice,  A square  plot  of  ground  should 
be  divided  into’  four  equal  rectangular  divisions.  The 
breadth  of  the  walls  should  occupy  a quarter  part'  of  the 
entire  area  of  such  a square,  while  the  Garbha  or  the 


420 


AGNI  PUB  AN  AM* 


Adytum  should  comprise  a eighth  part  thereof,  the  pedestal 
measuring  a pada  only,  In  the  alternative  the  pedestal 
should  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Adytum,  where  the  ground 
or  the  site  on  which  the  same  would  be  built,  would  be 
divided  into  five  such  chambers  or  divisions  as  described 
above.  In  breadth,  the  wall  should  occupy  one  suth  division 
with  holes  or  cavities  let  into  its  body.  The  Wo  parts  of 
the  entire  rectangular  plot  should  be  within  the  Adytum,, 
The  vault  of  the  Adytum  should  be  so  arched  as  to  cover 
three  such  parts,  the  walls  proper  occupying  the  rest,  or  the 
remaining  parts.  In  the  case,  where  the  site  of  the  temple 
would  be  divided  into  six  equal  rectangular  chambers,  the 
walls  should  be  built  to  extend  over  one  such  entire 
division  in  breadth,  the  Adytum  should  be  made  as  much 
broad,  and  the  breadth  of  the  pedestal  should  be  made 
commensurable  with  that  of  two  such  chambers.  The  height 
of  the  temple  would  be  double  or  greater  than  twice  the 
breadth  by  a pada,  or  triple  the  breadth  of  the  same,  the 
entire  altitude  in  certain  instances  being  made  greater  than 
twice  the  breadth  of  the  temple  by  half  a pada  measure,  or 
equal  to  the  half  or  a third  part  of  the  entire  area  of  the 
ground  on  which  the  same  would  be  constructed  (i— 6)«  The 
inner  circumference  of  the  vault  would  measure  a pada  less 
than  the  measure  of  the  ground,  the  external  circumference 
Paridhi  would  measure  a third  part  thereof,  in  which  the  doors 
or  exits  would  be  opened  up.  The  images  of  the  gods 
Bhairava,  Chamunda,  Natyesha,  arid  the  eight  or  the  four 
images  of  the  gods  should  be  placed  at  the  middle  part  of  the 
body  of  the  temple  or  the  divine  edifice.  The  open  platform 
all  round  may  be  omitted  in  the  case  of  a divine  edifice.  The 
'images  of  Adityas  should  be  placed  in  the  exterior  of  the 
eastern  wall  of  the  edifice,  the  images  of  Skanda  and  Agni  in 
the  north-west,  while  those  of  the  god  of  death  and  other 
gods  should  tje  placed  in  t^ie  different  angles  and  comers 
thereof  over  which  they  respectively  preside. 


I gj  I 


AG  Ml  PURANAM. 


The  terrace  or  the  pinnacle,  as  the  case  might  be,  should 
be  divided  into  four  equal  parts,  the  region  of  the  vault  into 
two,  and  the  images  of  the  above-mentioned  gods,  should  be 
placed  within  them,  over  the  third  part.  The  Vadi  or  the  top. 
platform  should  be  held  sacred  to  the  god  of  fire,  and  over 
which  should  be  placed,  the  Malasarak  furnished  with  a cornice 
or  border.  The  five  classes  of  temple  or  divine  edifice  are  res- 
pectively known  as  the  Vairaja,  Puspaka,  Kailasa,  Manika, 
and  Tripistapa.  The  'first  of  the  above  classes  of  the  divine 
edifice  is  characterised  by  a rectangular  shape,  the  second 
resembling  the  first  in  structure ; while  the  third  and  the 
fifth  classes  are  respectively  built  circular  andfoctagonal,  the 
fourth  class  being  constructed  in  a way  so  as  to  resemble  the 
segments  of  a circle.  Each  of  the  above  classes  of  temples 
is  divided  into  nine  sub-divisions,  thus  giving  rise  to  forty-five 
different  structures  of  temple  (7 — 13),  The  nine  forms  of 
divine  edifice  belonging  to  the  genus  Vairaja  are  respectively- 
known  as  Mara,  Mandara,  Vimana,  Bhadra,  Saravatobhadra, 
Charuka,  Nandika,  Nandi,  Vardhamana,  and  Shrivatsa.  The 
nine  temples  that  owe  their  origin  to  the  genus  Puspaka,  are 
named  as  Valabhi,  Griharaja,  Shalagriha,  Mandira,  Vishala, 
Brahmamandira,  Bhuvana,  Prabhava,  Shibikaveshma.  The 
nine  temples,  that  have  sprung  out  of  the  class  Kailasa,  are 
respectively  called  Valaya,  Dhundhuvi,  Padma,  Mahapadma, 
Vardhiny,  Ushnisha,  Shankha,  Kalasa,  and  JShavriksha,  and 
are  of  a circular  shape.  The  names  of  the  nine  temples  which 
belong  to  the  genus  Manika  are  named  as  Gaja,  Bhrisava, 
Hansa,  Garufeman,  Rikshanayaka,  Bhusana,  Bhudhara,  Srijaya 
Prithividhara,  and  are  spheriodical  in  shape.  The  nine 
temples  which  are  the  modified  forms  of  the  genus  Tripusta, 
are  respectively  known  as  Vajra,  Chakra,  Svastika,  Vajra- 
Svastika,  Chitra,  Svasfcika-khadga,  Gada,  Shrikantha  and 
Vijaya.  The  villages  and  Lathas  consecrated  to  .the  god 
should  be  similarly  named  as  above.  The  pinnacles  or  terraces 
should  be  constructed  of  a height  equal  to  ball  of  that  of  the 


422  . AGNI  PURANAM. 

neck  of  the  temple  or  the  edifice,  and  proportionately  broad. 
The  top  platform  should  be  divided  into  ten  equal  parts,  and 
the  breadth  of  the  shoulder  of  the  temple  would  be 
five  such  parts  thereof.  The  neck  should 
parts  of  the  top-platform  divided  as  above,  while  the 
of  Prachanda  carved  therein  should  be  made 
such  divisions.  The  doors  should  be 
cardinal  points  of  the  compass,  and 
angular  points  of  the  heaven.  The 
constructed  so  as  to 
temple  and  to  extend 
There  is  another  class  of  pedestals 
extend  up  to  the  fifth  part  of  the  Adytum  from  the 
edge  thereof,  their  height  being  double 
Oh  Brahmin  J Now  I shall  deal  with  a 
of  a structure  other  than  that  described 
The  pedestal  should  measure  hundred  and 
apertures  for  the  doors  r 
etc.,  and  measuring  ten  fingers  each 
four  sides.  The  doors  of  the 
number  three  in  all,  and  likewise  the  doors 
class  should  be  of  the  same  number. 


equal  to 
measure  three 
image 
equal  to  four 
lade  so  afto  face  the 
ot  as  to  open  on  the 
pedestal  should  be 
occupy  the  two  posterior  corners  of  the 
up  to  the  middle  part  of  the  Adytum. 

which  are  built  as  to 
posterior 
of  their  length, 
pedestal  usually  built 
in  the  preceding  line, 
six  fingers.  Four 
respectively  known'as  the  Uttama, 
>j  should  be  left  on  its 
Madhyama  class  should 
of  the  Kanyasa 
The  breadth  of  the 
qual  to  half  of  the  height  of  the  same, 
by  a third  part  of  its  height.  The 

lt  the  t0P  °f  the  door  should  measure 
tour,  eight  or  twelve  fingers  each  or  which  should  comprise  a 
space  measuring  a pada  measure  of  the  entire  height  of  the 
latter,  their  breadth  being  equal  to  half  of  the  breadth  of 
the  same  (door).  The  doors  should  be  decorated  with  two, 
five,  seven,  or  nine  such  ornamental  indents  or  branches, 
and  the  warders  should  be  carved  into  the  doorframe  so  as 
to  occupy  a quarter  part  of  the  latter  below  the  lower 
ornamental  branch.  The  ends  of  the  ornamental  branches 
overhanging  the  doors,  should  be  made  to  culminate  in  the 
‘raages  of  fairy  twins  (14^30.) 


mm  PUHANAM,  423 

'Oh  Brahman ! A temple  in  which  a pillar  has  been  en« 
croched  upon,  makes  the  consecrator  doomed  to  eternal 
slavery,  while  one  which  impedes  or  any  way  interferes 
with  the  growth  of  a tree  in  its  grounds,  brings  poverty. 
A divine  .edifice,  in  any  way  encroaching  upon  a well  at  its 
gate,  portends  danger-;  while  the  one  that  hangs  or  protrudes 
over  its  grounds  angurs  pecuniary  loss  to  the  consecrator. 
The  consecrator  would  suffer  incarceration  when  a temple 
or  a divine  edifice  consecrated  by  him  would  in  any  way 
obstruct  a public  thoroughfare.  The  endower  of  a temple 
would,  be  cursed  with  poverty  in  the  event  of  the  latter* 
having  been  constructed  so  as  to  encroach  upon  or  to  make 
narrow  the  hall  in  its  front.  A temple  or  a divine  edifice 
run  into  by  a rock,  Ulakhal,  or  so  built  as  to  be  struck  with 
the  shadow  of  another  temple,  should  b e deemed  as  the 
harbinger  of  fued,  poverty,  and  indigence.  The  defect  of 
encroachment  is  irremediable,  an  act  of  felling  a tree  or  up- 
rooting of  stone  can  never  set  it  right,  nor  can  the  same  be 
remedied  by  leaving  intervening  a space  equal  to  twice  the 
•area  of  the  original  compound  (31—34). 


CHAPTER  CV* 


rrt 

X HE • God  said !— The  God  of  the  homestead  should' 
be  worshipped  in  the  mystic  diagram  of  eighty-one  chambers, 
for  the  prosperity  of  a city,  village,  fortress,  temple  or  a 
mansion  consecrated  to  a god  (1). 

Oh  Brahman ! now  I shall  enumerate  the  names  of  the 
ten  occult  nerves  which  run  all  through  the  body  of  the 
latter  god,  They  are  as  fellows  s— Shanta,  Jashovati,  Kanta, 


|fl| 

HI 

Wfl-fli; 


ill 

fill  ■ 


' 1 mKlf 

/!  * |J|i® 

I 1 

mm  Swiilll 


if  hum, 
||  I li’ 

S li  : 

Hi 

: fe- 
ll i|H| 

' 

il  l® 

I™ 


ill 

I IB 


4*4 


agki  puranam. 


Vishala,  Pranavahifci,  Sati,  Vasumafci,  Nanda,  Subhadra* 
and  Manorama.  There  are  other  twelve  nerves  which 
spread  all  over  the  eighty-one  chambers  forming  the  body  of 
the  homestead  god,  and  which  are  respectively  named  as, 
Harini,  Suprabha,  Lakshmi,  Vibhuti,  Vimala,  Priya,  jaya* 
Jvala  Vishoka,  etc.,  funning  upwards  from  the  foot  of  the 
mystic  diagram  (2—4). 

' The  god  such  as  Isha,  Dhananjaya,  etc.,  should  be 
worshipped,  Oh  Brahman,  in  the  eight  angular  chambers  of 
the  diagram,  starting  with  the  one  situate  at  the  north- 
east corner  thereof.  The  gods  such  as  Indra ' (the  king  of 
the  gods),  Satya  (the  god  of  truth),  Vrisha,  and  Vyoma  (the 
god  of  the  sky)  should  be  worshipped  in  the  eastern  chambers 
of  the  diagram,  the  gods  known  as  Havyavaha  (fire— the 
conveyer  of  sacrificial  oblations  to  the  gods),  Pasha,  Vitatba 
(the  god  of  untruth),  Bhima,  Kritanfca  (the  god  of  death)* 
Gandharva,  Bhringa,  and  Mriga  having  been  worshipped  in 
those  at  the  south  (5 — 6). 

The  Pitris,  the  warder-gods,  Sugriva,  Puspadanta,  Varuna 
(the  sea-gods),  Daitya  (demon),  Shesha  (the  divine  serpent 
bearing  the  earth  on  its  hood),  and  Yakshma  (Fthysis) 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  western  chambers  of  the 
diagram.  In  the  six  half-chambers  the  diseases,  the 
primordial  serpent,  Bhallata,  the  god  of  fortune,  together 
with  Dili  (the  mother  of  the  gods)  and  Aditi  (the  mother 
of  the  demons)  should  be  worshipped,  the  god  Brahma 
having  been  worshipped  in  the  nine  chambers  at  the 
middle  (7 — 8).  In  the  chamber  below  that,  the  god  Apavatsa 
should  be  worshipped.  In  the  six  chambers  at  the  south-east 
corner  of  the  sacrificial  shed,  the  fire  god  should  be  worship- 
ped, the  sun-god  having  been  worshipped  in  the  two  chambers' 
at  the  centre.  The  god  Savitri  should  be  worshipped  in  the 
two  chambers  below,  and  the  god  Vivasvan  in  the  six  chambers 
situated  faelow.  those  assigned  to  that  great  luminary  (the 
god  pf  day),  ■ In  the  chambers  immediately  beyond  those 


AGNJ  FURANAM. 


425 


dedicated  to  the  Pritis  and  the  god  of  creation,  the  preceptor 
should  worship  the  gods  Vishnu,  Indra  and  the  moon,  and 
the  god  jay  a ■ in  the  chamber  below  that.  The  god  Mitra 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  six  chambers  comprised  between 
those  respectively  set  apart  for  Brahma  and  the  sea  god* 
The  servant  god  of  Rudra  should  be  worshipped  in  the 
chamber  included  between  the  rectangular  subdivisions  of 
the  mystic  diagram,  which  are  respectively 'held  sacred  to  the 
spirit  of  diseases  and  the  god  Brahma.  The  spirit  of  Pthysis 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  two  chambers  situate  below 
the  above  said  subdivisions,  and  the  god  known  as  the 
Dharadhar  in  the  six  chambers  below  the  same.  The 
demonesses,  O Skanda,  known  as  Cbaraki,  Vidari,  Putana 
together  with  the  monsters  named  Vikala,  Jamva,  Pilipinja, 
and  the  demon  of  sin  should  be  worsipped  outside  the 
chambers  dedicated  to  the  gods  Isha  etc.,  (9— 13). 

In  the  case  of  a simple  house,  the  diagramshould.  be 
divided  into  eighty  one  subdivisions,  whereas  the  same 
would  be  divided  into  a hundred  chambers,  where  the 
sacrifice  known  as  the  Vastujaga  would  be  performed  in 
connection  with  a Mandapa.  The  gods  enumerated  above 
should  be  worshipped  as  before.  The  god  Brahma  should 
be  worshipped  in  the  sixteen  chambers  at  the  middle*  The 
gods  Marichi,  Vivashvana,  Mitra,  and  Pi ithvidhara,  etc., 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  ten  chambers  occupying  the  four 
corners  of  the  mystic  diagram  {such  as  the  northern,  etc.), 
and  the  gods  and  spirits  named  as  Isha,  Agni,  the  mother  of 
the  demons,  the  two  Pitris,  Mriga,  the  spirit  of  sin,  the  spirit 
Pthysis,  the  [god  of  wind,  etc.,  should  be  respectively  wor- 
shipped in  the  half  chambers  situate  at  the  angular  points 
of  the  diagram,  such  as  the  north-east,  etc. 
r O Guha,  now  I shall  briefly  describe  the  measures  of  the 

different  forms  of  a divine  edifice.  The  house  should  measure 
twenty  cubits  in  length  and  twenty-eight  cubits  in  breadth. 
The  entire  circumference  would  measure  twenty-two  cubits^ 


426 


agni  pur  ana  m. 


and  the  width  of  the  wall  would  measure  nine.  The  mea- 
cures  specified  above,  would  hold  good  in  the  case  of  the 
Mandapas  known*  as  the  ShUhirashraya,  the  Sluvakhya,  the 
Rudrahina  and  the  S.dabhaya.  The  Mandapas  belonging  to 
the  Savitra  class,  would  measure  eighteen  cubits  in  length 
and  fifteen  in  breadth,  and  the  width  of  the  walls  would  be 
made  equal  to  a thirty eth  part  of  the  above  area  (*.*.,  eight 
cubits)  The  height  of  the  walls  above  the  plinth,  would 
measure  thrice  the  width  thereof.  The  ground  elevation 
Which  would  vary  both  in  shape  and  size,  according  to  the 
number  of  passages  intersecting  the  same,  should  be  xn  the 

same  line  with  the  foot  of  the  wall. 

In  a divine  edifice  of  the  Bhadra  class,  the  passages 
should  be  left  along  its  three  sides,  except  in  the  front.  The 
passage  on  the  posterior  part  of  the  edifice,  should  be  omit- 
ted in  one  of  the  Shrijaya  class,  while  in  one  of  the  Bhadra 
class,  the  passages  would  be  left  on  the  two  sides  (14—  20). 
The  passage  should  be  made  as  wide  as  the  interior  of  the 
Adytum,  or  would  measure  half  of  the  width  of  the  latter. 
The  feeder  or  the  supplementary  passages  leading  to  the 
main  one,  should  measure  half  of  the  latter,  and  would 
pass  through  one,  two  or  three  rooms  as  the  case  might 

be  (2X—22). 

O Brahman,  presently  I shall  dwell  upon  the  features 
possessed  ’in  common  by  the  divine  edifices  in  general, 
possessing  which,  a temple  or  a mansion  is  regarded  as  im- 
parting all  sorts  of  boon  to  the  consecrator.  The  bouse 
should  have  two,  three,  four,  or  eight  rows  of  rooms  or  wings, 

or  on  the  contrary  it  should  consist  of  a single  row  of  rooms 

only.  i«  a divine  edifice  consisting  of  four  sets  of  rooms, 
the  first  set  should  be  constructed  on  the  north,  the  second 

on  the  south;  the  remaining  two  as  facing  the  front  of 
the  edifice,  whose  eastern  frontage,  for  the  same  reason, 
would  be  unobstructed.  An  edifice  consecrated  to  the  god 
•f  water,  should  face  the  north-east,  while  those  respectively 


AGN1  FUR  ANAM. 


dedicated  to  the  gods  of  day  and  death,  should  have  a front- 
age looking  on  the  east,  A divine  mansion  occupying  the 
northern  and  eastern  parts  of  the  ground,  is  known  as  the 
Danda,  while  the  one  built  on  the  eastern  and  the  western 
parts  thereof  is  named  as  the  Vata  (the  airy  one).  A divine 
mansion  occupying  the  western  and  the  noth-western 
parts  of  the  ground  is  called  the  Grihavaii,  while  the  one 
without  the  wing  on  the  west,  is  called  the  Trishala,  and 
is  supposed  to  make  its  consecrator  rich  and  prosperous. 
A house  devoid  of  its  eastern  wing  spoken  of  above,  is  styled 
as  the  Sukshetra,  and  brings  plenty  in  its  train ; while  a 
three-winged  building  constructed  without  the  rows  of 
rooms  on  the  north,  is  called  the  Shuli.  A Trishala  (three 
winged  divine  mansion)  built  without  its  wing  on  the  west, 
is  considered  fatal  to  the  sons  and  progenies  of  the  conse- 
cretor,  and  also  as  creating  a large  number  of  his  enemies. 

I shall  now  describe  the  eight  chambers  of  divine  edifice 
reckoned  from  the  east,  and  which  are  known  as  the  Dhvaja, 
etc.,  and  which  are  used  as  a laundry,  scent-room,  etc.  The 
kitchen  should  be  on  the  south-east  corner  of  the  house*  the 
bed-rooms  and  parlours  should  be  on  the  south;  and  bows 
and  weapons  should  be  stowed  in  a room  situate  at  the  south- 
west corner  of  the  building.  Rich  articles  of  enjoyment 
should  be  kept  in  the  room  commonly  held  sacred  to  the  god 
Amvupesha,  while  perfumes  and  garlands,  O god,  should  be 
kept  in  a room  occupying  the  north-western  corner  of  the 
house.  Cattles  should  be  penned  in  a room  on  the  north, 
while  the  room  for  spiritual  initiation,  etc.,  should  be  made 
in  the  north-east.  The  house  should  be  made  according  to 
a standard  measured  with  the  consecrator’s  own  hand. 
The  cubit  measures  spoken  of  above  should  be  tripled, 
and  then  divided  by  eight ; and  the  residue  should  be  the 
measure  of  the  chambers  known  as  the  Dhvaja  etc.,  which 
may  be  even  extended  upto  fourteen  cubits.  A building 
raised  on  the  second,  third,  fourth,  sixth,  and  the  eighth 


428 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


part  of  the  ground,  or  the  one  raised  at  the  either  erid 
thereof,  should  be  deemed  as  ruinous;  and  therefore  a divine 
edifice  should  be  built  on  the  ninth  part  of  the  same®. 
The  Mandapa  should  be  raised  at  the  middle  part  thereof 
which  should  have  a breadth  equal  to  or  double  the . breadth 
of  the  edifice.  Rows  of  rooms,  like  those  usually  found  in 
a Bazar,  should  be  raised  along  its  eastern,  southern,  and  the 
western  boundary.  The  different  Bhubanas  beginning  with 
that  presided  over  by  the  god  Isha,  and  terminating  with  that 
of  Ad  it  t,  should  be  looked  upon  as  located  in  the  eight 
doors  of  the  edifice. 

■ I shall  now  describe  the  evils  and  goods  which  are  res- 
pectively  attendant  upon  the  same,  in  the  eight  doors  at 
the  east,  Vishnu,  and  the  gods  of  evil,  and  devotion  should  be 
considered  as  posted  as  guards  ; fear,  loss  of  a wife,  victory  * 
prosperity,  and  accession  of  strength,  being  considered  as 
the  natural  outcome  of  their  being  stationed  as  above 
described.  The  evils  and  the  compensating  good  which 
are  consequent  upon  the  opening  up  of  doors  in  the 
south,  are  the  loss  by  'comfiagration,  misery,  the  death  or 
falling  off  of  friends,  pecuniary  loss,  death,  prosperity,  profi- 
ciency in  fine  arts,  and  the  birth  of  sons.  Similarly  a door  on 
the  west,  grants  longevity,  a good  harvest,  wealth,  peace, 
accumulation  of  wealth,  enjoyment,  and  progeny  to  the 
consecrator  of  the  edifice,  the  counterbalancing  evils  in  the 
case,  being  draught,  and  the  final  renouncement  by  the  build- 
er  (yayaman),  of  the  world  and  its  concerns.  Oh  Skanda^ 
vanity,  pain,  chiefness,  wealth,  longevity,  loss  of  fleshy  intelli- 
gence, and  glory  are  the  inseparable  adjuncts  which  accom- 
pany the  opening  up  of  doors  of  a divine  edifice,,  reckoned 
ftom  the  east  by  the  south  to  the  north  (23—38). 


CHAPTER  CVS* 


1 HE  Goo  said  : — Now  I shall  speak  all  about  the  found- 
ation of  a city  and  the  rite'  of  worshipping  the  Vasto  (the 
mystic  diagram)  in  connection  therewith.  A plot  of  land  or 
ground  measuring  eight  or  four  miles,  should  be  enclosed  with 
walls ; the  presiding  deity  of  the  mystic  diagram  having  been 
previously  worshipped.  The  ground  should  be  divided  into 
interlinear  chambers  as  laid  down  in  the  case  of  a Vastu- 
mandah  The  eastern  gate  should  be  over  the  chamber  of 
the  diagram  dedicated  to  the  god  of  day,  and  included  within 
the  thirty  chambers  occupied  by  the  gods  Isha,  etc,  in  the 
present  instance  (Comp.  Chapt,  93).  The  southern  gate  should 
be  raised  over  the  chambers  of  the  Vastu  mandal,  held 
sacred  to  the  Gandharvas,  while  the  western  gate  of  the 
city  should  be  constructed  over  the  chamber  assigned  to  the 
god  of  oceans,  the  northern  gate  having  been  reared  on  the 
chambers  dedicated  to  Soma.  The  lowlroofed  rooms,  on  each 
side  of  the  gate,  should  made  to  extend  over  a considerably 
large  area,  and  the  gates  should  be  six  cubits  wide,  so  as  to 
admit  elephants  and  other  large  animals  passing  under  their 
arch-ways.  A city  should  not  be  founded  on  plots  of  ground 
lying  remote  from  one  another,  nor  it  should  be  so  built  as 
to  have  an  angular  or  a semilunar  aspect  (1—4).  A city 
resembling  a Vajrasuchi  in  shape  or  which  can  be  reached  by 
two  or  three  ways,  should  be  held  as  inauspicious.  The 
forepart  of  a city  laid  out  or  built  in  the  shape  of  a bow  or 
Vajranaga  should  be  reckoned  as  the  most  auspicious.  The 
gods  such  as  Vishnu,  Hara,  the  sungod  etc.,  should  be  wor^ 
shipped  before  founding  a city,  and  offerings  should  be  made 
at  the  instance  of  the  founder.  The  goldsmiths  and  smithy 
shops  should  be  established  in  the  south  eastern  quarter 
of  a city.  In  the  south  thereof,  should  be  the  habiliments  ©f 


430 


AGNI  PUKANAM. 


those  who  live  by  giving  lessons  in  dancing,  together  with 
the  houses  of  courtesans  ; while  actors,  potters  and  fishermen 
should  occupy  the  southwestern  quarters  of  the  same  (5—7), 
War-chariots,  swords  and  weapons  in  general  should  be 
stowed  in  the  western  part  of  a city,  while  brewers  and 
public  officials  should  occupy  the  north  western  quarter  of 
the  latter.  The  houses  of  Brahmans,  monks,  and  other  holy 
personages  should  be  in  the  northern  quarter  of  the  town, 
while  merchants  and  dealers  in  fruits  should  reside  in  the 
south  eastern  division  of  the  latter.  The  generals  and  com- 
manders of  forces  should  be  quartered  in  the  east,  while  tire 
different  regiments  forming  the  military  force  of  the  state 
should  be  stationed  in  the  south  east.  The  officers  'who 
attend  upon  the  ladies  of  the  court,  should  have  their  resi- 
dence in  the  southern  quarter  of  a city,  the  royal  camps 
(Kandara)  having  been  pitched  in  the  south  western  part  of 
the  same.  The  prime  ministers,  together  with  the  weavers 
and  the  principal  treasurer  of  the  state  should  be  lodged  in  the 
western  part  of  a cily,  while  the  judicial  and  the  magisterial 
officers  of  the  crown,  who  should  be  respectively  recruited 
from  among  the  Brahmans  and  the  Nayakas  (chiefs),  should 
have  their  dwellings  in  the  northern  part  of  the  same.  The 
Kshatryas  should  dwell  in  the  eastern  part  of  a city,  and  the 
Vaishyas  should  occupy  the  southern  part  thereof,  while  the 
Shudras  should  make  the  western  quarter,  their  own  locality. 
The  physicians  should  have  their  respective  dwellings  all 
round  the  city,  and  like wise„the  elephants  and  the  forces  should 
be  quartered  in  a way  so  as  to  defend  it  in  ail  directions. 
The  phalic  emblems  belonging  to  the  Chala  or  the  remova- 
ble class,  should  be  installed  in  temples  situate  at  the 
eastern  quarter  of  the  city,  while  its  cremation  ground  should 
be  in  the  southern  part.  Cattlesheds  should  be  raised  in  its 
western  part,  while  the  farmers,  or  the  actual  tillers  of  the 
soil,  should  ;be  lodged  in  the  north.  The  Mlecchas  and 
other  low  castes  of  people  should  have  their  dwellings  in 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


quarters  situate  at  the  angular  quarters  of  a city;  and  this 
rule  should  be  observed  even  in  small  villages.  The  images 
oi  Lakshmi,  and  Vaisravan  should  be  established  at  each 
side  of  the  eastern  gate;  and  the  temples  of  gods  should  be 
established  on  the  western  side  of  a city*  facing  the  east* 
and  looking  on  the  two  abovesaid  images.  In  the  east  and 
the  south,  the^divine  edifices  should  face  towards  the  west 
and  the  north  respectively.  The  images  of  Brahma,  Visnu, 
Isha  and  other  gods  should  be  installed  in  a city,  for  the 
protection  of  and  as  the  guardian  deities  of  the  latter.  A 
city,  village,  fortress,  or  a house  not  having  any  titular 
deity  of  its  own,  is  devoured  by  the  Picbases,  and  becomes 
infested  with  a fell  disease  or  pestilence.  A city  or  a vil- 
lage etc,,  protected  by  a deity, ""'becomes  thriving  and  pros- 
perous ; and  imparts  victory,  enjoyment  of  earthly  goods* 
and  finally  salvation  to  its  inhabitants. 

The  chamber  known  as  the  Shrigriha  in  a royal  house- 
hold should  be  in  the  east,  while  the  kitchen  should  occupy 
a site  in  the  southeast  corner.  The  bed-room  should  be  in 
the  south,  while  the  arsenal  should  be  on  the  south  west. 
The  dining  room  should  be  in  the  western  wing  of  the 
palace*  and  the  granary  should  be  in  the  north  west.  The 
store-room  should  be  on  the  north,  while  the  room  for  an 
idol  should  be  on  the  southeast. 

The  palaces,  Oh  Brahman,  should  be  constructed  as 
forming  the  one,  two,  three*  or  four  sides  of  a square  $ the 
latter  admitting  of  a subdivision  into  two  hundred  different 
classes,  and  which  in  its  turn  may  be  extended  so  as  to 
cover  a fivehundred  arid  five  different  styles  of  architecture, 
according  as  their  wings  and  varandahs  would  vary  in 
structure  and  number.  The  house  known  as  the  Trishala, 
and  which  occupies  the  three  sides  of  the  plot  of  the  ground 
on  which  the  same  has  been  built,  is  divided  into  four 
different  classes,  while  the  houses  belonging  to  the  style 
of  architecture  known  as  the  Dvishala  and  Ekashala*  may 


I s if 

t i"’  fijs?' 

it:  » 


r f1'  l|0 

v*  • H A ' 

1 ; * , ¥ * 


' \ 1 
i 

5 , p|t 


III 

till 


f | 

gM 


43* 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


the  master  of  nemkuta,  the  country  of  Waishadha,  Was 
transferred  to  Harivarsa,  Ilavrita  became  possessed  of 
the  middle  part  of  the  Maru  country,  the  country  of 
Nilaehala  was  settled  upon  Ramya,  Hiranya  inherited  the 
country  of  Shvetavarsa,  Kuru  succeeded  to  the  throne  of 
the  Kourava  country,  Bhadrashva  ascended  the  throne  of 
: ^ ’ : :■ ■ * ■ ■;  : ■ v“ . ■ ■ ; 


be  divided  into  five  or  four  sub-classes  respectively,  ac- 
cording to  the  difference  of  their  structure  and  size. 

The  varan  dabs  or  the  intervening  apertures  between  rows 
of  rooms,  as  the  case  might  be,  should  number  twenty-eight 
both  in  a house  and  a city,  or  they  should  be  made  to  number 
four,  seven,  fifty-five,  six,  twenty,  twenty-eight  or  eight 
only  (8—23).  r 


CHAPTER  CVII. 


Oaid  the  God  of  Fire  Now  I shall  speak  about 
the  Bhubankoshas  and  the  different  continents  of  the  terres- 
trial globe  (1).  The  king  Priyavrata  had  ten  mighty  sonss 
named  Agnidhra,  Agnivahu,  Vapushmana,  Dyutimana,  Medha, 
Medhatithi,  Bhabya,  Savana,  Jyotishmana,  and  Satya.  The 
father  made  a gift  of  seven  continents  as  follows: — Jamvu- 
dwipa  was  given  to  Agnidhra,  and  Plakha  to  Medhatithi. 

The  continent  of  Shaimali  was  given  to  Vapushmana, 
and  the  continent  of  Kushahava  was  given  to  Jyotishmana. 
The  continent  of  Krouncha  was  given  to  Dyutimana,  while 
those  of  Shaka  and  Push kara  were  respectively  made  over 
to  Bhabya  and  Savana.  Agnidhra  in  his  turn  divided 
the  undermentioned  countries  among  his  own  sons  as  their 
heritage,  viz.,  Jamvudvipa  was  given  to  Laksa,  the  country 


AGNt  PURANAM 


above,  renounced  the  world  and  went  to  the  wilderness. 

In  the  forest  of  Shalagram,  the  King  practised  austere 
penances,  and  subsequently  attained  the  god  Hari. 

O thou  best  of  beings,  the  above-said  eight  countries  be- 
ginning with  that  of  Kimpurusha,  abound  in  joy  and  felicity. 

In  them  the  meritorious  acts  of  pious  men,  soon  take  fruit. 
No  such  fear  of  death  or  old  age,  no  compunctious  scruple 
about  the  oughtness  or  propriety  of  an  action  which  torment 
the  poor  mortals  always  groping  about  in  the  dark,  nor  any 
change  or  viscissitude  which  the  whirligig  of  time  engenders 
and  brings  to  being,  ever  torment  or  visit  the  inmates  of 
the  above-said  regions  of  perpetual  bliss.  No  such  distinc- 
tion between  the  rich,  the  poor,  and  the  middle  class, 
is  to  be  found  there,  O lord,  which  makes  life  doubly  miser- 
able in  this  terrestrial  globe,  and  which  sets  up  an  artificial 
barrier  between  man  and  man,  and  often  adds  Insult  to  noble 
though  hiding  indigence. 

Navi  begat  Rishava  by  Merudevi,  Rishava  begat  Bharata. 
Hence  his  country  is  called  Bharatvarsa.  Rishava  made  over 
the  sovereignty  of  his  country  to  his  son,  and  lived  the  life 
of  an  ascetic.  He  practised  penances  in  the  forest  of  Shala- 
gram and  attained  salvation.  I shall  have  occasion  to  speak 
of  him  again  under  the  chapter  on  the  Yoga  philosophy,  V 
Bharata  begat  Sumati,  Sumati  begat  Tejas,  whose  son  was 
Indradumnya.  Indradumnya  begat  Paramasthi;  Paramasthi, 
begat  Pratihara,  Pratihara  begat  Pratiharta,  Pratiharta  begat 
Bhuba,  Lfdgita,  and  Prastara.  Prastara  begat  Vibhu,  and 
Prithu.  Prithu  begat  Nakta,  Nakta  begat*  Gayn,  Gaya  begat 
Kara,  Nara  begat  Virata,  Virata  begat i Mahavirja,  Mabavirj^ 
begat  Dhimana,  Dhimana  begat  Mahanta,  whose  sons  were 
Manasyu,  Tvasta,  Viraja,  and  Rajas.  Rajas  begat  hundred, 
sans,  0 sage,  who  were  the  lights  of  ithe  universe  and-  whpsf$f,4 


AGNI  PURANAM 


progenies  filled  lire  country  called  Bharatavarsa  during  the 
cycles  of  time  known  as  the  Satya  and  the  Treta,  and 
afterwards  ascended  the  heaven  which  is  known  as  the 
Shyambhuva  (2 — 18)» 


CHAPTER  CVIl! 


by  seven  seas  known  as  the  sea  or  salt,  the  sea  ofc  cane- 
sugar,  the  sea  of  wine,  the  sea  of  clarified  butter,  the  sea 
of  curd,  the  sea  of  milk,  and  the  sea  of  water.  The  island 
known  as  the  Jainvudvipa  is  situated  in  the  middle  of  these 
islands,  and  the  mount  Meru,  the  king  of  sixteen  mountains 
towfers  majestic  from  its  centre  and  extends  over  a space  of 
eighty-four  thousand  yojanas.  The  breadth  of  the  mountain 
measures  thirty-two  thousand  yojanas  at  its  summit  and 
sixteen  yojanas  at  its  base.  The  peaks  which  rise  up  in 
the  shape  of  a pericarp  of  a lotus,  are  known  as  the  Hima- 
van,  the  Hemakuta,  and  the  Nishadba.  The  hills  which  lie 
farther  south,  are  the  Nila  (blue),  the  Shvefca  (white)  and  the 
Shringi  (the  peaked  hill),  the  mountains  known  as  the 
Varsaparvata  lying  to  the  north  of  the  former.  Two  of  the 
above  measure  a laksha  (hundred  thousand)  yojanas  at  their 
middle,  while  the  others  measure  ten  thousand  yojanas  less  at 
the  same  part,  their  altitude  being  two  thousand  yojanas, 
which  is  their  breadth  at  the  base. 

O thou  twice-born  one,  the  countries  which  lie  south  of 
the  above  mountains  are  , Bharatvarsam,  . the  tompef  >*■. of 

...  ■ ..  1 ,>  ....  tit.  . - ■lsul..,,'  ‘ A.*.. 


AGN1  PURANAM* 


ike  north  of  the  mount  Mem,  are  Ramya,  Hiranmyam,  and 
the  Uttar  Kurus.  O fcfiou  best  of  the  sages,  each  of  the  above** 
said  countries  extend  over  a space  of  nine  thousand  miles. 
The  country  known  as  Ilavrita  lies  at  the  middle  of  them, 
and  the  Mount  Meru  heaves  up  its  golden  head  from  the 
centre  thereof.  All  round  the  Mem  mountain,  lies  extended 
the  country  <Jf  Ilavrita  comprising  a space  of  nine  thousand 
miles  and  four  mountains  heave  up  their  summits  from  its 
midst.  The  mountains  such  as  the  Mandara  and  the  Gandha- 
madhana  form  the  pedestals,  as  it  were,  of  the  Meru  on  the 
east  and  the  south  respectively.  The  mount  Vipula  lies  on 
its  western  side,  and  the  mount  Suparshva  on  its  north. 

The  trees  which  grow  on  the  abovesaid  mountains  are 
Kadamva,  Jamvu,  and  Pippala,  and  they  extend  over  a region 
of  eleven  hundred  miles,  their  natural  abode  being  those 
mountain  sides.  The  continent  known  as  Jamvudvipa  is  so 
called  from  the  trees  of  Jamvu  abounding  therein,  and  is 
washed  by  the  waters  of  the  river  Jamvunadi  which  deposits; 
golden  ores  on  its  soil.  The  mount  Suparshva  lies  to  the 
east  of  the  Meru  chain,  while  the  mount  Ketumala  lies  to 
the  west  thereof  (i — 14). 

The  forest  of  Chaitraratha  lies  to  its  east  and  the  mount 
Gandhamadana  to  its  south,  the  Vaibhraja  to  its  west,  and 
the  Nandana  to  its  north. 

I shall  now  deal  with  the  lakes  which  are  situate  in  the 
region  of  Meru,  and  which  are  named  as  the  Arunoda,  the 
Mahabhadra,  the  Sanshitoda,  the  Samanas^  the  Shitabha, 
the  Chakra,  and  the  Munja,  and  to  the  east  of  which  lies 
the  chain  of  mountains  known  as  the  Kesharachala.  The 
mountains  Trikuta,  etc.,  are  on  the  south  of  the  above  lakes, 
the  hills  named  as  the  Shishimukha  lie  to  the  west  thereof, 
and  the  hills  known' as  the  Shankhakuta,  etc.,  lie  to  the  north 
; .of.  ihe  Meru.  ' 

The  abode  of  the  god  Bnahma  is  in  the  Meru  mountain. 


j 


m 


I 

I 

m 


1 


■ 


/ I 


I 1 


TheLokapalas  such  as  the  gods  Indra,  etc.,  also  reside  therein, 


/■'.  h ti 


occupying  a space  I measuring  {fourteen  thousand  miles  in 
length.  The  rivers  Shita  and  the  Alakananda  washing  the 
feet  of  the  god  Vishnu,  and  flooding  the  interlunar  spaces, 
descend  on  the  hill  known  as  the  Bhadrashva,  leaping  down 
from  hill  to  hill,  and  finally  entering  the  sea.  The  river 
Alakannada  empties  itself  into  thesea  by  seven  channels  from 
the  west,  draining  the  countries  of  Avdhi,  Chaksif,  Somyavdhi, 
the  north  Kurus,  Anila,  and  Nishadha,  and  the  hills  Malyavat 
and  Gandhamadan  traverse  the  two  latter  countries.  The 
Mount  Meru  is  situated  like  a lotus  between  them,  of  which 
the  countries  of  [Bharatvarsa,  Ketumala,  Bhadrashva  and  the 
north  Kurus  form  the  different  petals,  and  whose  outskirts  are 
flanked  by  the  boundary  hills  of  Jathara  and  Devakuta  and 
which  run  from  north  to  south  across  the  countries  of  Anila 
and  Nishadha.  The  mounts  Kailasa  and  Gandhamadana  run 
across  the  same  countries.  The  hills  of  , Nishadha  and 
Paripatra  traverse  a space  of  eighty  yojanas  from  sea  to  sea. 
The  hills  known  as  the  Trishringa  (the  three  peaked  hill)  and 
the  Rudhera  are  respectively  situate  on  the  east  and  the 
west  side  of  the  Meru  mountain,  to  the  north  whereof  lies 
the  Varsaparvata  (mountain).  The  abodes  of  the  gods  such  as 
Lakshmi,  Vishnu,  Agni  and  the  sun  stretch  along  the  peaks  and 
valleys  of  the  above-said  hills  and  mountains,  and  the  souls 
of  mortals  who  have  done  works  which  merit  heaven  find 
lodgment  along  the  brim  of  the  same,  for,  oh  thou  best  of 
the  sages,  no  impious  person  can  visit  the  place.  The 
Hayagriva  manifestation  of  Vishnu  is  worshipped  in  the 
country  of*’ Bhadrashva,  the  Varaha  (primordial  Boar)  manifes- 
tation iniKetumala,  the  tortoise  manifestation  in  Bharatvarsa, 
and  the  fish  manifestation  in  the  Kurus,  the  universal  image 
of  Vishnu  being  worshipped  every  where.  The  inhabitants* 
whose  number  is,  twenty  four  thousand  in  alb  are  above  all 
which  the  human  flesh  is  hereto,  and  meverlfeel* 
ite- nor -know  any  fear.  The  measure 


AGNI  PUEANAM. 


AGNl  FUR  A NAM, 


43? 


the  Satya  yaga,  etc,  and  days  follow  one  another  unnoticed 
in  Jihe  exuberance  of  joy  which  is  the  element  of  the  inmates 
of  those  blissful  abodes.  They  do  not  depend  upon  line 
clouds  for  the  supply  of  water  which  spring  up  there,  from 
underneath  the  surface  of  the  earth.  There  are  seven 
Kulahills  (Kulachafas)  in  each  of  the  above  countries  and 
hundred  rivers  flow  through  them,  giving  rise  to  hundreds 
of  sacred  pools.  Oh  Brahman,  I shall  now  speak  about  all 
the  sacred  pools  and  places  that  are  in  the  country  of 
Bharatavarsa  (25 — 33). 


-:o:- 


CHAPTER  CIX. 


Jl  HE  Fire  God  said  Now  I shall  describe  the  great- 
ness of  all  the  sacred  pools  and  places,  which  people  resort 
to  in  India.  A man  who  has  perfect  control  over  the  doings 
of  his  thands  and  feet,  and  who  has  got  ample  education, 
practised  penances,  secured  a good  name  in  the  world,  and 
has  mastered  his  own  mind,  is  fit  to  start  on  a pilgrimage  to 
the  sanctuaries  mentioned  above.  A pilgrim  who  has  re- 
frained from  taking  alms,  fives  on  a spare  diet,  who  has 
put  his  passions  and  propensities  under  a healthy  cjurb,  and 
become8  absolved  of  all  sins,  attains  the  merit  of  performing 
all  sacrifice  by  resorting  to  a sacred  place  or  attains  the 
same  merit  without  pilgrimage  if  he  observes  a fast  for  three 
consecutive  days  (1-—3). 

A person  who  does  not  make  a gift  of  gold,  cows,  etc,, 
at  a sacred  place,  takes  birth  as  an  indigent  pauper  in  his 
next  existence.  A man  attains  the  same  merit  by  visiting 
a sacred  place,  as  bv  performing  a sacrifice. 


s 


§1 

I 


I': 


11 


mm 


reside 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


© Brahman,  Pushkara  is  the  greatest  of  all  sacred  places 
in  respect  of  sanctity  and  merit.  A man  should  dwell,  at 
least,  three  nights  within  its  holy  precints,  O thou,  twice* 
born  one,  ten  millions  of  sacred  places,  are  in  Pushkara.  The 
god  Brahma  accompanied  by  all  the  gods  live  in  that  great 
sanctum.  The  sages  (Munis)  resort  to  the  'place  with  the 
most  willing  heart,  and  the  Devas  (gods)  attained  the  ends  of 
their  beings  on  the  banks  of  that  sacred  pool,  A bather 
in  the  waters  of  Pushkara,  attains  the  merit  of  a hundred 
horse-sacrifice,  by  worshipping  the  Pitris  and  the  gods  on 
Its  banks.  A man  who  doles  out  rice  on  its  banks  on  the 
moon-light  night  of  the  month  of  Kartick,  becomes  absolved 
of  all  sins,  and  goes  to  the  region  of  Brahma.  O Brahman, 
Pushkara  is  difficult  to  get  at  and  very  austere  is  the  penance 
which  is  practised  in  Pushkara.  Hard  it  is  to  dole  out  alms 
and  charities  in  Pushkara,  and  the  articles  are  exceptionally 
hard  to  procure.  A man  who  lives  for  a year  in  Pushkara  and 
repeats  his  prayer  and  performs  the  Sraddha  ceremony  of  his 
fathers,  succours  the  souls  of  his  hundred  departed  manes 
from  the  nether  regions.  Therein  lies  the  sacred  place  known 
as  the  Jamvumarga,  as  well  as  the  sanctum  named  the 
Tandulikashraya.  Kanyashram  is  a sacred  place, "and  a resort 
thereto  equals  the  merit  of  visiting  a million  of  sanctuaries. 
Such  is  the  river  Narmada,  the  great  Arvudahill,  the  river 
Charmanvati,  the  Indus,  the  temple  at  Somnath,  Pravasha, 
the  union  of  the  Saras wati  and  the  sea,  and  the  estuary  of 
the  latter  river.  A pilgrimage  to  Dwaraka,  Gomati,  and 
Pindarak  grants  all  desires.  The  places  and  hills  such  as 
Bhumitirtha,  Brahmatunga,  the  five  rivers,  Vimatirtha,  the 
Himalaya,  the  sin  destroying  Dvarika  should  be  held  as  equally 
sacred.  Likewise  the  cape  Comorin,  Binashan,  Nagodbhed, 
Aghardana,  are  holy  sanctuaries.  A man,  who  always  repeats 
that  he  will  go  to  Kurukshetra  and  live  therein,  becomes  free 
>es  to  heaven.  The  gods  such  as  Vishnu,  etc.,  all 


AG  Ml  PORANAM. 


439 


that  place.  A man  who  visits  and  bathes  in  the  river  Sara- 
swati  goes  to  the  region  of  Brahma,  even  the  particles  of  dust 
In  Rurukshatra,  impart  salvation.  The  other  holy  places.  O 
Brahman,  are  Dharmatirtha,  Suvarnakhya,  the  source  of  the 
Ganges,  Kankhal,  the  lake  Bhadrakarna,  the  confluence  of 
the  Ganges  and  the  Saraswati,  Brahmavarta,  Aghardana 
(the  place  where  the  demon  Agha  was  killed),  the  hill  of 
Bhrigutunga,  Kujabhra,  the  fountain^  and  glaciers  which 
give  rise  to  the  river  Ganges  and  Aghantaka,  while  the  holy 
*cky  of  Benares  is  the  sancto  sanctum  of  all  sacred  places, 
and  likewise  the  sanctuaries  of  the  towns  of  Avimukta  and 
Anufctama. 

O Brahma,  the  holy  places  which  close  the  list  of  the 
places  of  pilgrimages,  are  Kapalamochana,  the  city  of 
Prayaga  which  is  the  crown  of  sacred  places,  the  confluence 
of  the  rivers  Gomati  and  the  Ganges,  and  the  latter  river  itself 
which  brings  down  heaven  into  the  countries  it  flows  through. 
The  city  of  Raj  agriha  is  a holy  city  and  likewise  the  villages 
of  Shalagrama  and  Aghantaka  are  sacred  places,  the  remain- 
ing sacred  (places  of)  pilgrimages  being  Vatesha,  Varnana* 
tirtha,  the  temple  of  Kali  (modern  Kalighat),  Louhifcya,  the 
rivers,  Karatoa,  Shona,  the  hills  known  as  the  Shri  Parvata, 
Koivagiri,  the  Sajhyadri,  the  Malaya  hills,  the  rivers  such  as 
the  Godavari,  Tungabhadra,  Kaveri,  Barada,  Tapi,  Paya* 
shvini,  Reva,  and  the  forests  of  Dandaka.  O Brahman,  I 
shall  close  this  list  of  the  sacred  places  with  the  names  of 
the  following  cities,  principalities,  etc.,  vw.,  Kalanjai^t 
Munjavata,  Supararka,  Mandakini,  Chitrakuta,  the  city  of 
Shringavira,  Avanti,  Ajodhya  and  the  forests  of  Naimisha 
which  grant  to  its  pilgrims  both  enjoyments  of  earthly  cheers 
and  salvation  hereafter  .(4— 24). 


CHAPTER  CX. 


1 HUS  SAID  THE  Goo  OF  Fire  Now  I shall  describe 

^ . . <r 

the  sanctity  of  the  river  Ganges,  which  imparts  to  men 
enjoyment  of  earthly  cheers  in  this  life  and  salvation 
in  the  next*  The  countries  which  the  Ganges  meanders 
through  should  be  deemed  as  hallowed  grounds.  The  river 
Ganges  is  the  earthly  door  to  salvation  to  men  who  long  for 
emancipation  from  this  prison  house  of  life.  The  river  Ganges 
duly  worshipped  succours,  from  the  nether  regions,  the  two 
branches  of  the  family  of  a bather  therein*  The  man  who  drinks 
the  water  of  the  holy  Ganges  attains  the  merit  of  a thousand 
sin-expiating  rites  of  Chandrayana  (a  penance  practised  in 


Chapter  cxi. 


& 


)aid  THE  God  of  Fire  :~Now  I shall  describe  the 
greatness  of  the  sanctity  of  the  confluence  of  the  rivers 
Jamuna  an$  the  Ganges  at  Prayag  (Allahabad).  Oh  thou 
twice-born  one,  a man  attains  every  thing  worth  having  in 
this  life,  and  attains  salvation  after  death,  by  resorting  to  the 
abovesaid  place.  The  gods  such  as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  etc., 
the  Gandharvas,  the  saints  and  sages  together  with  the 
&eas  and  sacred  streams  always  congregate  at  Prayag.  The 
three  cavities  for  the  fire  god  (Agnikunda)  are  to  be  found  in 
the  abovesaid  place,  in  the  middle  of  which  the  Ganges  flows. 
The  river  Jumna,  who  knows  the  sun  god  as  her  father  and 
is  renowned  in  the  three  worlds,  rushes  into  the  river  Ganges 
at  Prayag,  Carrying  before  her  all  the  sacred  pools  and  their 
sanctity.  The  thighs  of  the  earth  goddess  are  between  the 
rivers  Jamuna  and  the  Ganges,  Prayag  is  her  public  region,  and 
the  Rishis  residing  therein  serve,  as  it  were,  the  purpose  of 
the  male  organ  of  generation.  The  holy  Tirthas,  known  as 
the  Kamvala  and  and  the  Ashvatara,  are  at  Prayag,  and  the 
Tittha  of  Bhogavati,  which  is  also  at  the  latter  place,  is  deemed 
as  the  Vedi  or  the  platform  seat  of  the  god  of  creation. 
There  the  Vedas  and  sacrifices  are  incarnate  in  living  forms, 
and  the  man  who  sings  the  praise  or  recites  the  name  of 
this  hallowed  confluence,  or  carries  the  clay  thereof,  is  sure 
to  be  purged  off  of  all  sin.  A Sraddha  ceremony,  (funeral 
obsequies  or  acts  in  honor  of  a departed  soul)  or  the  rite  of 
repeating  the  Mantras,  or  an  act  of  charity  done  and  perform- 
ed, at  Prayag,  puts  forth  immortal  fruit  (i — y)< 

O thou  twice-born  one,  a man  once  resolved  to  make  his 
end  at  Prayag  at  the  expiry  of  his  natural  term  of  life, 
should  not  change  his  mind  through  the  persuasions  of  his 
relations,  nor  even  if  a precept  is  quoted  from  the  Vedas  to 

; : 56  ^ 


442  AGN!  PUHANAM, 

invalidate  the  notion  that  he  would  make  a laudable  end 
otherwise.  Ten  thousand,  nay  six  million  sacred  pools  and 
sanctuaries  lie  hidden  in  the  confluence  of  the  two  hallowed 
rivers  below  Prayag.  The  sacred  pool  known  as  the 
Bhogabati  and  which  is  sacred  to  the  mythical  serpent  Vasuki 
(on  whose  hoods  this  terrestrial  globe  is  supposed  to  be 
poised  up),  together  with  the  sacred  Himalayan  cascade 
known  as  the  Hansaprapatana  {lit.  the  Alight  of  swans)  jointly 
flow  as  an  undercurrent  in  the  purifying  waters  of  the  hal- 
lowed junction  of  Prayag,  and  a man  attains  the  same 
merit  by  an  ablution  therein  for  three  consecutive  days,  as 
be  would  have  otherwise  got  by  making  a gift  of  a million 
of  cows. 

According  to  the  dictum  of  the  holy  sages,  the  river 
■ Ganges,  though  easily  available  elsewhere  along  the  channel 
of  its  mighty  stream,  is  exceptionally  bard  to  get  at  in  the 
three  following  places,  namely  at  its  source,  Prayag,  and 
at  the  place  where  it  empties  Itself  into  the  sea-  A man 
who  doles  out  charities  at  either  of  the  three  abovesaid 
places  goes  to  heaven  after  death,  and  becomes  a monarch 
in  his  next  existence  (8—12).  The  man  who  departs  this 
life  either  at  the  foot  of  the  memorable  Vat  a tree  or  at 
the  confluence  of  the  rivers  at  Prayag  goes  to  the  region  of 
Vishnu. 

The  other  Tirtbas,  0 Brahman,  which  are  to  be  found  at 
Prayaga,  are  Urvashi-pulin  (the  banks  sacred  to  the  nymph 
Urvashi),  the  Sandhyavata,  the  rivers  Jumuna  and  the  Ganges 
containing  a million  of  sacred  pools  and  which  are  more  sanc- 
tified than  a Ashwamedha  sacrifice  together  the  Manasa  which 
destroys  all  egoistic  notions  and  the  Vasaraka  (13-^14)* 


CHAPTER  CXI1 


kJaid  THE  God  OF  Fire:— The  god  Maheshwara  said 
to  the  goddess  Gouri  that  Baranashi  (Benares)  excels  all 
other  sacred  pools  and  places  in  respect  of  sanctity,  and  im- 
parts to  its  inmates  who  recites  the  name  of  the  god  Hari, 
both  enjoyment  of  the  sweets  of  this  life  and  salvationfin  the 
next  (i), 

Rudra  said  Benares  which  is  the  sacred  abode  of  the 
goddess  Gouri,  is  never  forsaken  (Amukta)  by  the  god  Hara 
and  the  latter  goddess  and  those  who  are  bent  on  working 
out  their  own  salvation.  Any  Mantra  repeated,  any  penance 
practised,  any  oblation  cast  into  the  sacrificial  fire  in  Benares 
bears  immortal  fruit.  A man  should  take  up  his  lodging 
for  good  in  Benares,  after  having  rubbed  off  the  dust  from 
his  feet  with  a stone  slab. 

The  places  of  pilgrimage  which  should  be  resorted  in  the 
holy  city  of  Benares,  and  which  are  not  known  to  every 
body,  are  the  Harish  Chandra,  the  Amritakeshwara,  the 
Japyesehvara,  the  Shriparvata,  Mahalaya,  Vrigu,  Cbande- 
shvara,  Kedara,  and  Bhairava,  0 god,  the  city  of  Benares  is 
the  most  mysterious  of  all  sacred  places  under  my  protec- 
tion. The  city  extends  over  a space  of  two  yoj  an  as  in  the 
east,  and  half  a yoyaoas  (four  miles)  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion. The  holy  city  is  washed  on  its  two  sides  by  the  rivers 
Asi  and  Varuna,  and  the  offering  of  an  oblation,  resignation 
at  life,  worshipping  a god,  performing  a Shraddha  ceremony, 
and  making  gifts  at  this  place,  lead  to  salvation  and  earthly 
prosperity  (2—7). 


CHAPTER  CXHI. 


jJ>aid  the  God  of  .Fire: — Now  I shall  describe  the 
glory  of  the  sacred  stream  of  Narmada,  (pleasure-giving  river) 
which  imparts  great  pleasure  to  its  votaries.  The  water  of 
the  river  Ganges  purifies  the  bather  in  the  course  of  a day, 
while  the  mere  sight  of  the  hallowed  waters  of  the  Narmada, 
absolves  a mao  of  all  sin.  Along  the  hills  on  the  banks  of 
this  sacred  stream,  the  places  of  pilgrimage  respectively 
number  in  six  thousand  and  six  millions  in  two  groups,  extend 
over  a region  measuring  a hundred  yojanas  in  length  and 
two  yojanas  in  breadth.  The  sacred  confluence  of  Kaveri  is 
below  Amarakantaka. 

Now  I shall  narrate  the  history  of  the  hill  known  as  the 
Shriparvata.  Here  the  beautiful  Gouri,  guised  as  the  goddess 
Shri,  practised  austere  penances,  whereupon  the  god  Harl 
told  her  that  she  would  attain  salvation,  and  that  the  bill 
would  be  named  after  her.  Hence  the  epithet  of  the  peak* 
The  hundred  miles  along  the  hill  would  be  a place  of  great 
sanctity,  and  any  gift,  penance,  Shraddha,  or  the  rite  of 
repetition  of  a Mantra,  made  or  performed  there  would 
bear  immortal  fruits.  Death  at  such  a place  would  lead  the 
departed  soul  to  the  region  of  the  god  Shiva.  Here  the  god 
Hara  dallied  with  his  goddess  Gouri,  and  here  flourished  the 
mighty  demon-king  known  as  Hiranyakashipu.  Here  Vaii 
the  king  of  the  demons  and  the  holy  sages  practised  austere 
penances  and  attained  salvation  (i«—6). 


CHAPTER  CXIV. 


Oaid  THE  Fire  God  : — Now  I shall  narrate  the  glory 
of  the  sacre'd  pilgrimage  of  Gaya.  Gaya  is  the  foremost. 
Oh  Brahman,  of  ail  holy  places.  A demon  named  Gayasura 
practised  austere  penances.  The  gods  became  afraid  of 
his  austerities,  visited  the  god  Vishnu  leisurely  rolling  on 
the  waves  of  the  ocean  of  Kshira  (curdled  milk)  and  asked 
him  to  protect  them  from  the  hands  of  Gayasura.  Agreeably 
to  their  request,  the  god  visited  the  demon,  told  him  to 
ask  for  a boon,  as  his  time  had  come.  The  demon  replied 
that  he  would  be  the  holiest  of  all  sacred  places.  The  god 
Hari  complied  with  his  request,  granted  him  the  boon,  and 
went  away.  The  gods  went  to  their  respective  places  in 
heaven,  air  and  earth,  terrified  by  the  presence  of  the  demon, 
and  even  without  waiting  to  see  the  god  Hari  exerting 
himself  to  their  benefit.  The  gods  headed  by  Brahma  told 
Hari,  that  the  heaven,  earth  and  air  had  been  made  desolate 
through  the  tyranny  of  the  demon  ; whereupon  the  god  Hari 
asked  Brahma  to  go  and  pray  for  the  body  of  the  demon  for  a 
sacrifice.  Having  heard  this  the  god  Brahma  and  his  com- 
panions  visited  the  demon  Gayasura.  Thus  said  the  god  of 
creation  : “lam  a guest  at  thy  house,  I want  your  sinless 
body  for  an  offering  in  the  sacrifice.”  Gayasura  delivered 
himself  up  to  the  god  Brahma,  and  fell  down  at  his  feet. 
The  latter  god  performed  the  sacrifice  in  the  skull  of  the 
demon,  and  was  about  to  depart,  when  the  god  Vishnu 
desisted  him  from  going,  and  asked  him  to  offer  the  final 
oblation  in  connection  with  the  sacrifice. 

And  the  demon  began  to  move  at  the  time  of  offering 
the  final  oblation.  Then  the  god  Vishnu  addressed  the  god 
of  Virtue  as  follows “ Let  all  the  gods  take  hold  of  t|i$ 
stone  slab  permeated  with  divine  essence.  The  club- 


446 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


wielding  manifestation  of  mine  together  with  the  gods  will 
be  on  this  slab.”  Then  the  god  of  Virtue  took  hold  of  the 
said  stone  slab,  (whose  history,  Oh  God,  I shall  presently 
narrate). 

A daughter  named  Dharmavrata  was  born  unto  the  god  of 
Virtue  (Dharma)  by  his  wife  Dh.arroaV.ati,  Marichi  the  son 
of  Brahma  was  united  with  her  in  lawful  wedlock.  Days 
passed  in  loving  dalliance,  and  the  newly  wedded  pair  was  as 
fondly  attached  to  each  other  as  the  God  Hari  was  to 
Laksbmi,  or  the  god  Shambhu  unto  the  goddess  Gouri.  One 
day  Marichi  returned  fatigued  from  the  wood  with  his 
burden  of  flowers  and  Kusha  grass.  Having  finished  his  meal, 
the  Rishi  said  to  his  wife  Dharmavrata,  “Knead  my  feet 
"Oh  darling.”  The  beloved  wife  did  as  she  was  directed, 
while  the  sage  was  enjoying  an  after-dinner  nap.  In  the 
meantime  the  god  Brahma  presented  himself,  whereupon 
thought  the  damsel  “So  Brahma  has  honoured  me  with  a 
visit,  whether  I shall  cease  to  knead  the  feet  of  my  husband, 
or  shall]  first  worship  the  god,  who  is  worshipful  even  to 
my  worshipped  spouse.”  Thus  Dharmavrata  thought  and 
thought,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  latter  was  the 
best  course  for  her  [to  adopt.]  So  she  worshipped  the  god 
with  the  essential  articles  of  worship.  Marichi  saw  all  this, 
resented  the  conduct  of  his  wife  and  cursed  her  as  follows 
m Be  thou  transformed  into  a stone  slab”  ( i 15! 

Dharmavrata  pacified  the  anger  of  her  lord  as  best  as  she 
could,  and  said:  “I  am  innocent,  Oh  lord,  since  it  is  for  wor- 
shipping thy  father,  that  I have  ceased  to  knead  thy  feet  as 
directed.  As  you  have  cursed  me  blameless,  you  shall  be 
cursed  by  the  god  Shankar  in  return. 

The  cursed  wife,  Oh  Brahman,  forsaken  and  forlorn, 
prayed  the  god  of  fire  for  shelter,  and  practised  the  most 
austere  penances  for  thousands  and  thousands  of  years.  Then 
the  A?.jebnu,  etc.,  appeared  before  .the  forsakeo  wife  and 
asked  her  to  name  what  she  would  like  to  have.  Dharmavrata 


AON  I PURANARI, 


447 


I 


in 


*ald  “ Oh  Gods  lei  my  curse  be  removed.11  The  gods  said, 
The  curse  of  Marichi  is  sure  to  take  effect  and  can  never 
be  otherwise.  You  shall  he  transformed  into  a stone  slab 
impressed  with  the  foot  prints  of  Vishnu.  You  shall  be 
permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  gods,  Oh  Devavrata,  in 
thy  stone  life  and  shall  keep  the  demon  Gayasura  bound 
to  his  place!™  Devavrata  said  “ Grant  me  the  boon,  Oh  gods, 
if  you  are  pleased  with  me,  that  the  gods  and  goddesses 
such  as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  Gouri  and  Lakshmi  shall 
always  rest  on  me  when  converted  into  a stone  slab.™ 

The  gods  granted  her  the  boon  asked  for  and  returned 
to  their  celestial  abodes.  That  stone  slab  of  the  demon,  Oh 
lord,  was  taken  hold  of  by  the  god  of  virtue  as  described 
above.  The  demon  began  to  move  with  the  stone  slab 
rldee  upon  by  the  gods  Rudra,  etc. 

Then  the  gods  prayed  the  god  Hari  resting  @n  the  bosom 
of  the  occean  of  curdled  milk  for  succour.  The  god  said 
“Depart  all  ye  Gods.  1 shall  go  myself,  manifest  in  my  shape 
of  Gadadhara  (dub  wielder)  and  make  the  demon  steady.™ 
The  god  Gadadhara  who  is  the  source  of  all  things  and 
beings  both  latent  and  patent,  came  to  the  spot,  and  arrested 
the  further  progress  of  the  demon. 

I shall  narrate  the  history  of  the  Gadadhara-epithet  of 
the  god  Vishnu.  Once  on  a time  the  god  killed  a demon 
named  Gada.  The  god  Vishvakarma  (the  celestial  engineer) 
made  a gada  (club)  out  of  the  skeleton  of  the  latter, 
lin’d  presented  it  to  the  god  Vishnu.  The  god  killed 
many  other  demons  such  as  Heti,  etc.,  with  that  primordial 
mace  or  club  (gada).  Hence  the  epithet  Gadadhara. 

The  primordial  club-wielder  (Adigadadhara)  took  his  seat 
on  the  stone  slab  described  before,  the  progress  of  the  latter 
was  brought  to  a stop,  the  demon  (Gayasura)  was  tlfus 
made  steady,  and  the  the  god  Brahma  offered  the  final 
oblation.  ’ V. 


111 


Then  Gayasura  said,  “ why  have  I been  deceived,  Uh  uod 
I would  have  stopped  at  the  command  of  the  god  Vishnib 
And  since  you  have  tormented  me  for  nothing  you  must 
grant  me  a boon.”  The  gods  said—"  Since  you  have  been 
stopped  by  us  for  the  purpose  of  creating  a sanctuary  on 
earth,  the  gods  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Shambhii  etc.,  will  dwell 
in  thy  precincts.  You  shall  be  the  most  hallowed  of  all  places 
of  pilgrimage,  leading  to  the  region  of  Brahma  the  departed 
souls  of  the  ancestors  of  those  who  shall  visit  thee  on 
pilgrimage/’  Having  said  this  the  gods  and  the  goodesses 
continued  there  and  the  god  Brahma  performed  the 
sacrifice  (17 — 32V 

The  god  of  creation  (Brafima)  gave  ample  remunerations 
to  the  Brahmans  who  recited  the  Mantras  in  the  course  of 
his  sacrifice  (Ritvigs).  The  holy  Tirtha  of  Gaya  extends 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


449 


aft  un-Brahmioical  way  /you  shall  be  cursed  with  ignorance, 
and  yon  and  your  progenies  shall  roam  about# like  wild  colts 
Oil  the  , down,  tormented  with  the  cravings  of  flesh.  Milk 
and  honey  shall  no  more  flow  in  your  rivers,  and  the  hills 
With  which  your  are  hemmed  in  will  be  shorn  of  all  verdure 
ftnd  converted  into  bare  rocks  cursing  you  perpetually  with 
their  ragged  rocky  teeth,  for  your  lust  for  gold  and  the 
vanities  of  the  world. 

Then  the  Brahmanas,  with  ignominy  stuck  up  in  their 
throats,  replied u By  your  curse  everything  has  been  des- 
troyed, Oh  Lord.  Graciously  tell  us  how  shall  we  be  able  to 
tarn  our  livelihood.”  The  god  said,  “ Oh  Brahmans,  as  long 
as  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  will  exist,  you  and  your  sons  shall 
have  to  depend  upon  the  bounties  of  the  pilgrims  resorting 
to  this  place.  By  feeding  or  satisfying  you  all  with  presents 
in  reforming  the  ceremony  of  obsequies,  a man  would  trans^ 
pftft  the  souls  of  his  hundred  departed  relations  to  heaven 
from  hell.”  The  place  had  been  named  after  the  demon 
Gaya,  who  there  performed  a similar  sacrifice  (33— 41)* 


CHAPTER  CXV 


1 HE  souls  of  the  dead  relations  of  a man  begin  to  as- 
cend the  steps  of  heaven,  the  moment  he  leaves  his  house 
and  starts  on  a pilgrimage  to  the  holy  city  of  Gaya.  Before 
setting  out,  he  should  duly  perform  the  Sraddha  ceremony 
of  his  fathers,  and  circumbulate  in  sack  cloth  his  native 
village.  Every  day  as  he  would  travel  on  towards  the 
l»o!y  city,  be  would  take  due  care  to  subdue  his  mind 
and  never  to  seek  alms  of  any  body.  - What  is  the  .know-- 
ledge  of  God  worth  for? — What'  is  the  good  of  dying  ir 


sown 


450  AGN1  PURANAM. 

j!  ■ ^ 

the  sanctuary  of  a cattleshed  ? — WSiat  does  it  avail  a ' man1 
to  dwell  in  the  holy  plains  of  Kurukshetra,  if  his  son  goes 
to  the  sanctuary  at  Gaya,  The  souls  of  one’s  forefathers 
leap  with  joy,  in  finding  a scion  of  their  race  at  Gaya, 
thinking  that  ^ will  not  our  son  cast  an*  oblation  of  water 
to  us,  even  with  that  inadvertently  touched  by  his  feet,’7 
A man  attains  salvation  in  a fourfold  way,  i.e.,  by  acquiring  a 
knowledge  of  the  true  god,  by  performing  a Sraddha  cere- 
mony of  his  dead  fathers  at  Gaya,  by  departing  this  life  in 
a cattleshed,  and  by  residing  in  the  sacred  -fields  of  Kuru- 
kshetra, The  souls  of  a man’s  forefathers,  afraid  of  being 
led  to  the  nether  regions,  pray  for  the  birth' of  a son  in 
the  family,  so  that  he  may  visit  the  sacred  Gaya,  perform 
their  obsequies  therein,  and  may  thus  lift  them  up  front 
the  palpable  and  impenetrable  darkness  of  the  lower  worlds* 
A man  should  shave  his  head  and  fast  for  a day  while  stay- 
ing  as  a pilgrim,  at  any  sacred  place,  and  this  rule  should 
be  strictly  followed  and  adhered  to  when  visiting  any  of  the 
sacred  places  enumerated  above.  There  is  no  such  restric- 
tion, of  time  etc.,  as  to  the  giving  of  funeral  oblations  at 
Gaya,  which  may  be  offered  at  any  time  and  every  day.  The 
man  who  resides  for  three  consecutive  fortnights  within  the 
hallowed  precincts  of  Gaya,  purifies  his  fathers  and  progenies 
up  to  the  seventh  remove.  The  Sraddbas  known  as  the 
Astaka  and  the  Vridhi  of  one’s  mother  should  be  separately 
performed  at  Gaya  on  the  day  of  the  death  of  the  latter.  At 
any  other  sacred  place  the  Sraddha  ceremony  of  one’s  mother 
should  be  performed  simultaneously  with  that  of  her  consort 
(r — 9)  as  well  as  with  those  for  the  salvation  of  the  nine  rela- 
tions such  as  the  father,  etc.,  and  the  one  commonly  known  as 
the  Sraddha  ceremony  of  the  twelve  relations.  On  the  first 
day  of  his  arrival  at  Gaya,  the  pilgim  should  bathe  in  the 
sacred  pool  known  as  the  north  Manasa  (U tiara  Manasa)  for 

of  life  and  for  the,  enjoyment  of 


AGN1  PURANAM 


452  AGNI  FURANAM, 

follows “ Om  obeisance  to  the  sun  god  who  is  the  lord  of 
the  universe.  Help  me,  Oh  god,  in  carrying  out  my  desired 
end.  1 meditate  upon  thee,  Oh  lord.  Graciously  grant 
salvation  to  the  souls  of  my  departed  forefathers,  or  place 
them  amidst  the  comforts  of  a celestial  existence.  Comej  Oh 
Kavyavaha,  and  Oh  thou  fire  god,  Moon,  Yama  (the  goc|  of 
death)  Arjama,  Agnishvatta,  Vahirshada,  and  Aj/apa.  Came 
all  .ye  mighty  and  magnanimous  gods  who  preside  over  the 
regions  wherein  dwell  the  souls  of  one’s  forefathers  and 
defend  the  souls  of  my  fathers,  and  grandfathers  both  iq  the 
paternal  and  the  maternal  line,  so  that  I may  offer  the 
cakes  of  obsequies  unto  them.  I have  come  to  Gayq  for 
that  very  reason,  and  I have  offered  oblations  unto  their 
souls.1’ 

To  the  north  of  Mundaprishtha  (the  place  where  the 
heads  of  pilgrims  are  shaved)  lies  the  sanctuary  of  Kaokfial, 
renowned  in  the  three  world  for  its  holiness,  and  continuous- 
ly guarded  by  sleepless  primodiai  serpents  whose  mischievous 
tongues  always  protrude  out  of  their  mouths,  and  which 
is  pleasant  to  the  pious  and  dreadful  to  the  men  of  s|f|* 
Persons  who  bathe  in  the  holy  waters  of  Kankhala,  become 
entitled  to  sport  on  the  fields  of  Elysium  after  death. 

Then  having  visited  the  Uttar  Manasha  and  the  hallowed 
well  of  Nagarjunardana,  the  pilgrim  should  resort  to  the 
sacred  spot  known  as  the  Falgu  tirtha  which  lies  on  the  bed- 
of  the  river  of  that  denomination.  The  sacred  spot  spokeq 
of  in  the  preceding  line  should  be  considered  as  the  head  of 
Gaya.  The  tirtha  is  called  Fulgu  from  the  fact  of  prosperity, 
and  heaven  being  the  products  iFalam)  thereof,  and  it$ 
wafers  are  as  bountiful  of  good  things  of  life  as  the 
Kamdhenu  herself.  Oh  lord,  no  sacred  place  in  the  world 
can  vie  with  Falgu  in  point  of  sanctity.  The  mao*  who 
bathes  in  the  holy  waters  of  Falgu  and  sees  the  image  of  the 


AQm  PURANAM. 


4S3 


are  in  the  world,  and  all  the  sacred  pools  and  rivers  that 
flow  into  the  seas  resort  to  the  Falgu  {river)  once  every  da y. 
A man  who  reverentially  bathes  in  the  water  of  Falgu,  out 
of  a willing  heart,  brings  about  the  salvation  of  his  own 
forefathers  and  that  of  himself  and  enjoys  the  good  things  of 
life  in  addition  thereto.  Then  having  performed  the  Sraddha 
ceremony  oi  his  ancestors  and  offered  the  funeral  cake  unto 
them,  the  pilgrim  should  make  obeisance  to  the  god  Brahma, 
and  recite  the  following  verse “ In  this  Kali  Yuga,  all  the 
L'»kas  (regions  of  beings)  are  presided  over  by  the  god 
Maheshvara,  but  Gaya  is  in  the  possession  of  the  god  Gada- 
dhara.  I make  obeisance  to  the  god  of  creation  who  stays  at 
G^ya  in  the  shape  of  a phalic  emblem,  I make  obeisance  to 
Gadhadhara,  Vala,  the  god  of  love,  Aniruddha,  and  N a ray  ana. 
I make  obeisance  to  Brahma,  Vishnu,  the  Nrisinha  and  Baraha 
manifestations  of  the  latter  god.”  Then  he  should  visit  the 
image  of  the  god  Gadadhara,  whereby  he  would  deliver  a 
hundred  generation  of  his  line  from  the  darkness  of  the 
petber  regions . (17—33).  . / ■ ■ . , : 

01}  Brahman,  then  he  should  slowly  wend  bis  way  to 
the  holy  forests  lying  about  the  hermitage  of  the  Murd 
(sage)  Matanga-  Then  having  bathed  in  the  tank  held 
sacred  to  the  latter  saint,  the  pilgrim  should  perform  the 
Shraddha  ceremony  of  his  ancestors  and  offer  the  obse- 
quious cakes  by  reading  aloud  a prayer,  after  having 
made  obeisance  to  the  latter  holy  personage.  The  pray* 
er#  Oh  Brahman,  is  as  follows Let  the  gods  and 
Lohapalas  be  my  witnesses  that  I have  come  to  Gaya  and 
dope  every  thing  enjoined  to  be  performed  for  the  salvation 
of  my  forefathers,51  Then  he  should  bathe  in  the  sacred  well 
known  , as  the  Brahtna-kupa.  A ceremony  of  Shraddha  or 
Tarpaiia  performed  on  the  ground  included  between  the 
latter  well  and  the  Matanga  tank  redeems  a hundred  genera- 
tions , of  one's  relation?.  A pious  man  having  made  obei- 
sance to  the  Bodhis  tree,  become-eutitled  to  enter  paradise. 


AGMI  PURANAM. 


On  the  third  day  of  his  stay  at  Gaya  the  pilgrim  taking 
a vow  of  self-control  should  bathe  in  the  sacred  pool 
of  Brahma  (Brahma-saras).  The  Mantra  which  should  be 
repeated  on  the  occasion  is  as  follows  : — H I make  ablution  in 
this  pool  of  Brahma,  for  the  glorification  of  the  latter  god 
and  in  order  that  the  departed  souls  of  my  ancestors,  enter 
the  region  dwelt  in  by  that  divinity/*  Then  file  Sraddha 
ceremony  and  the  rite  of  Tarpana  should  be  performed,  and 
the  pilgrim  if  willing  to  undertake  the  Vajapaya  sacrifice 
should  walk  round  the  sacrificial  stake  known  as  the  Brahma- 
yupa,  or  otherwise  should  sprinkle  over  his  body  the  waters 
of  the  siacred  pool  by  reciting  the  following  verse  : — u Once 
on  a time  a holy  sage  holding  a pitcher  in  his  one  hand, 
and  a stem  of  the  Kusha-grass  in  the  other,  used  to  sprinkle 
water  over  the  roots  of  a mangoe  tree  which  grew  on  the  bank 
the  sacred  pool  (Brahma-tirtha).  Thereby  he  propitiated  the 
spirits  of  his  deceased  ancestors  and  watered  the  roots  of 
the  mangoe  tree.  Thus  a single  act  proved  efficacious  in  a 
two-fold  way.**  A man  who  makes  obeisance  to  the  image 
of  the  god  Brahma  carries  up  a hundred  generations  of  his 
progenies  to  the  celestial  regions  (34 — 40). 

On  the  fourth  day  of  his  arrival  at  Gaya,  the  pilgrim 
should  bathe  in  the  river  Falgu,  and  perform  the  rite  of  Tarpana 
unto  the  gods.  Having  performed  the  Sradha  ceremony  of 
his  ancestors,  he  should  offer  the  funeral  cake  in  the  part  of. 
the  city  known  as  the  head  of  Gaya.  The  latter  city  comprises 
an  area  of  ten  miles,  two  miles  whereof  should  be  deemed 
as  forming  its  head.  Funeral  oblations  offered  to  the  soulsk 
of  one*s  departed  ancestors,  liberate  a hundred  generations  v 
of  one's  family  from  the  shades  of  Haydes.  The  god  Maha-'  * 
deva*  the  god  of  intellection  has  cast  his  feet  on  the  locality 
of  Gaya  known  as  the  Mundapristha.  The  head  of  Gaya  \ 
is  at  the  sanctuary  of  Mundapristha.  < j,\' 

O Brahman,  the  stream  of  nectar  flows  in  the  current  of 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


455 


to  one’s  ancestors  bear  immortal  fruits.  A man  by  bathing 
at  the  Dashashmedha  and  visiting  the  image  of  the  celestial 
grandfather,  after  having  touched  the  footprint  of  Rudra, 
gets  rid  of  the  recurring  cycles  of  necessary  birth  and  does 
not  come  to  this  world  again.  The  Pindas  or  funeral  cakes 
which  should  be  offered  at  the  sanctuary  known  as  the 
Gayashira,  should  be  of  the  measure  of  a Shami-leaf,  which 
lead  one’s  ancestors  to  the  celestial  regions  and  impart 
salvation  to  those  who  have  already  been  there  by  dint  of 
their  own  pious  and  meritorious  acts.  The  oblations  offered 
On  the  footprints  of  Rudra,  should  be  composed  of  porridge, 
cakes,  barley-powder,  rice,  wheat  and  sessamum  orientale, 
which  are  supposed  to  impart  salvation  to  a hundred  genera- 
tions Of  one’s  progeny  (41 — 48.) 

A person  by  performing  the  Sraddha  ceremony  of  his 
ancestors  at  the  feet  of  Brahma,  leads  them  to  the  region  of 
the  latter.  A Sraddha  ceremony  performed  in  the  tongues 
of  fire  respectively  known  as  the  Dakshinagni,  Garhapatya 
Ahavanika  grants  the  merit  of  the  sacrifice  to  its  performer. 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


456 

behold  white  and  red  phantoms  of  departed  souls  appeared 
before  him.  Vishala  asked  them  who  they  were,  where- 
upon the  white  phantom  replied  “ I am  the  soul  of  your 
deceased  father  and  about  to  enter  the  region  of  Indra. 
Oson,  the  red  and  black  phantoms  which  you  see  before 
you  are  the  souls  of  my  father  and  grand-father  respectively, 
and  they  have  been  just  liberated  through  your  meritorious 
act  from  the  shades  of  Haydes.  Offer  cakes  for  the  salvation 
of  our  souls,  Oh  Child,  and  we  Shall  ascend  the  region  of 
Brahma.'’  Having  said  this  the  phantoms  of  Vishala'* 
ancestors  vanished  in  the  air.  Vishala  became  the  father  of 
a large  family,  ruled  his  country  well  and  subsequently 
attained  salvation  (54—59)- 

A man,  who  wishes  to  be  the  deliverer  of  bis  family 
Should  offer  oblations  at  Gaya  in  honor  of  all  the  gods,  and 
cast  funeral  cake  in  honour  of  his  disembodied  soul  in 

anticipation,  whereby  he  attains  endless  merit* 

An  intelligent  man  on  the  fifth  day  of  his  Stay  at  Gaya* 
should  duly  bathe  in  the  sacred  pool  by  reciting  the  follow- 
ing Mantra:— "O  Janarddana,  I make  this  oblation  for  the 
cessation  of  all  temporal  evils.  I make  obeisance  to  the 
immortal  Vata  tree  which  makes  a man  free  of  all  sin.  The 
Sraddha  ceremony  should  be  performed  underneath  the  afore- 
said tree,  with  a view  to  ensure  perpetual  stay  of  one's 
ancestor  at  heaven,  and  for  the  purging  off  of  all  iniquities  and 
impious  actions.  By  feeding  a single  Brahman  a underneath 
the  abovesaid  tree,  the  feeder  gets  the  merit  of  giving  a 
sumptuous  repast  to  a million  of  them.  The  man,  Who  dis* 
tributes  boiled  rice  at  Gaya,  enables  his  ancestors  to  enjoy 
celestial  comforts  for  good. 

Thus  said  the  king  of  the  disembodied  spirits  for  his 
OWn  salvation  to  a merchant,  "I  have  been  suffering  With  the 
hosts  of  spirits,  the  torments  of  the  nether  tegions  for  otrt 
misdeeds  in  human  life.  Once  on  the  Shravana  DvadaShi 

yogi! 


AGN1  PURANAM 


upon  that  ever  since.  Now,  Oh  you  merchant,  go  to  Gaya 
and  offer  oblations  to  us.”  The  merchant  accordingly  went  to 
Gaya,  [and  did  as  he  was]  directed  by  the  King  of  spirits. 
And  the  spirit-king  was  liberated  with  all  his  companions  and 
attained  salvation.  The  Verse  which  should  be  read  out  on  a 
similar  occasion  of  casting  oblations  at  Gaya  to  one’s  ances- 
tors, runs  as  tollows  “Be  propitiated  the  souls  of  all  those 
who  once  were  my  preceptors  and  of  those  who  have  died  in 
the  womb  in  my  family,  whether  I am  aware  of  such  a fact 
or  not,  and  of  those  who  belonged  to  my  family,  whether  in 
the  paternal  or  the  maternal  line,  and  of  those  who  when 
alive  were  related  to  me  through  my  wife.  Be  propitiated 
with  the  oblation  I offer  at  Gaya ; and  finally  let  all  those 
ancestors  of  mine,  who  are  now  imprisoned  in  the  con- 
fines of  the  nether  regions,  be  propitiated  with  this  my 
offering  if  they  have  not  been  already  liberated  from 
the  latter  place.  Take  these  oblations,  Oh  ye  departed 
spirits  who,  though  related  to  me  in  life,  died  without  sons 
or  issues,  and  hence  have  had  no  chance  of  getting  obla- 
tion from  any  one.  May  the  spirits  of  those  who  died 
blind,  maimed,  or  void  of  action,  be  propitiated  with  these 
offerings  of  mine."  After  having  made  obeisance  to  the  Vata 
tree  and  the  god  Vateshvara,  the  pilgrim  should  worship  his 
great  grandfather  whereby  he  would  attain  the  immortal 
region  and  redeem  a hundred  generations  of  his  family. 

Oh  Brahman,  repeated  visits  to  Gaya,  are  supposed  to 
be  impregnated  with  larger  destinies  of  the  pilgrim  after 
death  and  imparts  him  great  merit  and  sanctity  (60—74). 


IS 


CHAPTER  CXVI. 


Said  the  God  of  Fire  : — A pilgrim  should  bathe  in 
the  river  Mahanadi  by  reciting  the  Gayatrir (the  holiest 
Rik-Mantra)  and  perform  his  daily  rite  of  Sandhya  (prayer), 
thereafter.  In  the  morning  the  Sraddha  ceremony  should 
be  performed  and  the  cakes  of  obsequies  offered  before 
the  goddess  Gayatri  which  are  thereby  supposed  to  bear 
immortal  fruits.  In  the  noon  the  pilgrim  should  come 
out  of  the  river,  and  worship  the  goddess  Sandhya 
(goddess  of  prayer)  in  front  of  the  goddess  Gayatri  with 
hymns  and  music,  and  offer  oblations  ( Pinda ) at  her 
feet.  Similar  oblations  should  be  cast  at  the  feet  of 
Augusta,  and  the  pilgrim  should  pass  through  the  fissure  in 
the  hill  known  as  the  Yonidvara  (orfice  of  the  vagina)  by 
which  he  would  be  exempted  from  entering  a human  womb 
again.  He  should  make  obeisance  to  Vali,  the  rock  known 
as  Kakashila  (hill  of  crows)  and  the  god  Kumara,  and 
afterwards  offer  oblations  at  the  place  known  as  the 
Svargadvara  (the  gate  of  heaven),  Somakunda,  and  the 
Vayutirtha  (sanctuary  of  the  god  of  wind).  Subsequent  to  that 
he  should  visit  the  image  of  the  god  Kapilesha,  bow  down 
to  him  and  offer  oblations  at  the  Rukmikunda  in  honour  of 
the  souls  of  his  departed  ancestors.  Similar  oblations 
should  be  offered  on  the  banks  of  the  Akashaganga  and 
Kapila  and  the  pilgrim  should  visit  and  make  obeisance  to 
the  god  Kotisha  at  the  Kotitirtha.  Oblation  should  be  cast 
at  the  sacred  localities  respectively  known  as  the  Gadalola, 
Vanaraka,  and  Goprachara.  A man  who  bathes  in  the 
river  Vaitarini  and  performs  the  Sraddha  ceremony  of  his 
its  banks,  redeems  twentyone  generations  of 
enting  after-existences.  A 
make  obeisance  to  a cow* 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


459 


and  would  attain  equal  merit  by  offering  oblations  at  the 
sanctuary  of  Krounchapada.  The  pilgrim  should  bathe  .in 
Rinamoksa,  Papamoksa  and  the  Bhasmakunda,  the  ablution 
having  been  made  with  the  sacred  ashes  at  the  latter  place. 
Oblations  should  be  offered  at  Vishala  and  Nishchira.  A 
man  after  bathing  in  the  aforesaid  places  should  make 
obeisance  to  \he  god  Janardana,  and  recite  the  following] 
verse.  u I have  put  this  funeral  cake  In  thy  hands  Janardana, 
and  may  it  serve  me  for  ever  when  my  soul  quits  this  mortal 
frame  and  ascends  the  region  above. 

The  god  Janardana  reigns  in  person  at  Gaya  in  the 
shape  of  the  Pitris,  and  k man  who  visits  that  lotus-eyed  deity 
Is  exonerated  from  three  classes  of  debt  which  he  respec- 
tively owes  to  the  gods,  the  Rishis  and  the  PItrls  (ancestors). 
The  pilgrim  having  made  obeisance  to  Markandeshvara 
should  bow  down  to  Gridhreshvara,  and  cast  oblations 
on  the  banks  of  the  stream  sacred  to  the  god  Mahesha  at 
the  sanctuary  of  Mulakshetra.  Similar  oblations  should  be 
offered  to  the  souls  of  one’s  ancestors  at  the  Gridhakuta, 
Gridhravata,  Dhoutapada,  on  the  banks  of  the  tank  at 
Kandamala,  Ramatirtha,  and  the  Pretashila.  Obeisance 
should  be  made  unto  the  god  Prabhasesha  at  the  latter  place. 
The  verse  which  should  be  recited  on  the  occasions  is  as 
follows: — <f  May  the  souls  of  may  departed  ancestors  who 
may  be  now  living  in  heaven  or  on  earth  be  liberated.  1 
have  offered  oblations  for  their  salvation  and  may  these 
cakes  serve  them  for  eternal  time.” 

O Brahman,  the  pilgrim  who  offers  oblations  to  his 
ancestors  on  the  banks  of  the  three  aforesaid  sacred 
pools,  and  at  the  sanctuaries  of  Gavashiras,  Prabhasa, 
and  the  Pretakunda,  redeems  the  souls  of  his  relations 
from  the  shades  of  the  nether  regions.  The  pilgrim 
should  make  obeisance  to  the  image  of  the  god  Vasistesha 
and  cast  oblations  in  his  front  in  honour  of  the  souls  of 
his  departed  ancestors  which  should  be  likewise  offered 


mil 


AGN!  puranam* 


at  Gayanabhl,  Sushumna,  Mahakoti,  and  before  the  goddess 
at  the  Mundapristha,  the  latter  sanctuary  having  been  previ- 
ously worshipped  with  the  gods  Kshetrapalas  residing 
therein,  whereby  a man  is  supposed  to  enjoy  immunity 
from  the  effects  of  poison.  A man  who  bows  down  to  the 
god  Brahma,  carries  up  the  souis  of  his  deceased  ancestors 
into  the  region  of  the  latter  divinity.  A man  who  makes 
obeisance  to  the  gods  Jagannatha  and  Valabhadra,  together 
with  the  goddess  Subhadra,  becomes  possessed  of  all  he 
wishes  for,  succours  the  souls  of  the  members  of  his  family, 
and  finally  enters  the  region  of  paradise.  Similarly  the 
pilgrim  should  make  obeisance  to  the  god  Hrishikesha,  and 
worship  the  god  Madhava,  whereby  he  would  attain  divinity. 
A man  by  worshipping  the  goddess  Mahalaksmi,  Gouri, 
Mangala,  and  Sarasvati  would  be  an  immate  of  the  celestial 
abodes  and  become  a learned  man  in  his  next  birth.  A man 
who  worships  the  firegod,  Indra,  Revana,  Kapardi,  Vinayaka, 
and  the  twelve  Adityas  gets  rid  of  all  diseases  and 
ascends  heaven  after  death.  By  worshipping  the  gods 
Kartikeya,  Somanatha,  Kalesha,  Kedara,  and  Brahma,  a 
man  becomes  free  from  all  danger  and  fulfils  the  mission  of 
his  life.  The  man  who  propitiates  with  worship  the  eight 
hidden  and  mysterious  plialic  emblems  named  as  Siddhe- 
shvara,  Rudresha,  Ramesha,  Brahmakeshvara,  etc.,  becomes 
possessed  of  all  articles  of  enjoyment.  Similaly  by  wor- 
shipping and  making  obeisance  to  the  gods  and  goddesses 
such  as  Narayana,  Varaha,  Narasinha,  Shri,  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
Mahesha,  Tripuraghna  (Shiva  the  destroyer  of  the  demon 
Tripura),  Sita,  Rama,  Garuda,  and  Vamana,  becomes  the 
possessor  of  all  wished  for  objects  in  this  life  and  carries  up 
the  souls  of  his  ancestor  to  the  region  of  the  god  Brahma 
(I — 26).  A man  who  worships  the  god  Gadadhara  together 
with  all  his  celestial  companions  at  Gaya,  discharges  the 
three  sorts  of  debt  (the  spiritual,  the  social,  and  the  debt 
one  owe  to  one’s  ancestors  for  the  multiplication  of  bis 


, ■ :■  i . v1"  V : ■■  :;V.  ■ . . 


&QM  PURANAM. 


species)  and  redeems  the  souls  of  his  departed  relations 
belonging  to  all  branches  of  his  family. 

The  stone  slab  described  before  (see  Chapter  114)  should 
be  looked  upon  as  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  gods 
and  as  a deity  incarnate  on  earth.  There  is  not  a single  spot 
in  Gaya  which  is  not  sanctified  by  the  presence  of  any 
particular  god  and  which  is  not  a sanctuary  in  itself.  The 
soul  of  a person  in  whose  name  any  oblation  is  offered  at 
Gaya  after  the  worship  of  the  gods  Falguvisha,  Falgu- 
Chandisha,  and  Angarakeshvara,  is  sure  to  ascend  the 
region  of  Brahma.  The  Sraddha  ceremonies  should  be 
performed  at  the  feet  of  the  sage  Matanga  as  well  as  in 
the  hermitage  of  Bharata  and  the  sacred  places  known 
as  the  Hansahtirtha,  Kotitirtha.  Pandushila,  and  the 
fountains  respectively  known  as  the  fountains  of  fire  and 
honey  which  well  up  at  those  places.  The  pilgrim  should 
make  obeisance  to  the  gods  Rudresha,  Kilkilesha  and 
Vinayaka  who  are  the  presiding  deities  of  the  abovesaid 
sanctuaries.  The  man  who  offers  oblations  to  the  souls  of 
his  ancestors  in  the  forest  of  Dhanuka,  and  makes  obeisance 
to  a cow  at  that  place,  as  well  as  the  person  who  casts 
oblations  in  honour  of  his  departed  progenitors  on  the  banks 
of  the  Sarvasvad  is  the  deliverer  of  their  souls.  In  the 
evening  he  should  worship  the  goddess  Sarsvati  and  make 
obeisance  to  her  thrice  a day,  whereby  he  would  be  well 
versed  in  the  Vedas  and  the  supplementary  branches  of 
knowledge  as  well  (27 — 33). 

By  circumbulating  the  holy  city  of  Gya,  and  distributing 
boiled  rice,  etc.,  among  the  indigent  population,  and  by 
worshipping  resident  Brahmanas  a man  is  supposed  to  attain 
everlasting  merit.  Then  having  propitiated  the  god  Gada- 
dhara  (the  club  or  the  mace  wielding  deity)  with  a hymn 
and  prayed  for  his  good  graces,  he  should  implore  him  as 
follows: — “ O god,  who  permanently  residest  in  the  holy 
city  of  Gaya,  and  impartest  salvation  to  the  souls  of  one's- 


■ 


AGNS  PUKANAM 


ancestors,  I make  obeisance  to  thee,  O god,  who  teaches!: 
the  mystery  of  divine  communion  to  men,  for  the  increase 
of  piety,  and  the  enjoyment  of  good  things  in  this  life  and 
salvation  in  the  next, 
art  devoid  of  body,  senses, 

I make  obeisance 

reality,  absolute  purity,  and  perfect  intelligence 
obeisance  to  thee,  O god, 
shipped 
O god,  1 


I make  obeisance  to  thee  O god,  who 
mind,  intellect,  life,  and  egoism, 
to  thee,  0 god,  who  art  the  everlasting 

I make 

who  art  the  infinite  joy  and  wor- 
i even  by  the  Danavas  (Demons.)  I bow  down  to  thee 
whose  hallowed  presence  destroys  the  sinful  propen- 
sities, which  this  iron  age  of  philistinism  invariably  gives 
rise  to  in  man,  and  who  art  bedecked  with  the  garlands 
of  wild  flowers  (emblematic  of  the  myriads  of  suns  and 
their  satellites).  In  the  soul  of  my  soul,  I meditate  upon 
the  god  who  is  the  protector  and  paramount  lord  of  the 
created  nature,  and  imparts  salvation  to  one’s  departed  manes 
and  who  is  the  universal  life  pulse  carrying  vitality  and 
beating  through  all  forms  of  existence  whether  visible  or  in- 
visible, and  who  though  one  sees  his  essence  reflected  in 
innumerable  souls  singing  his  hymn  in  one  grand  chorus 
of  universal  joy.  I am  a suppliant  at  the  feet  of  that  god, 
who  is  the  only  changeless  and  unchangeable  entity  amidst 
the  evershifting,  everchanging  scenes  through  which  the 
universal  nature  spins  out  her  life-thread  and  who  succours 
the  failing  humanity  from  the  fata!  fire  of  iniquities  in  a world 


AGNI  PURANAM* 


goes  to  the  region  of  Brahma  after  death  carrying  with  him 
the'  souls  of  his  deceased  fore-fathers  to  stay  there  for 
good  (34 — 42), 


CHAPTER  CXVIL 


Said  the  God  of  Fire  Now  I shall  discuss  the 
process  of  performing  the  Sraddha  ceremony  at  Gaya  as 
described  by  the  sage  Katyana.  The  Sraddha  ceremony 
should  be  preferentially  performed  at  Gaya  and  other  sacred 
places  on  the  day  when  the  sun  enters  a new  sign  of 
the  zodiac,  or  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon  or  on  days 
after  the  fourth  day  of  that  fortnight.  On  the  previous 
day  the  pious  householder  Brahmans,  holy  sages,  mendicants, 
and  Brahmanas  who  have  taken  the  vow  of  ablution, 
together  with  those  who  were  conversant  with  the  Vedic 
lore,  or  those  who  strictly  observe  the  propriety  of  conduct, 
or  those  who  never  do  any  act  which  casts  a slur  .on  their 
names,  should  be  invited  for  the  celebration  of  the  rite. 

Lepers  and  Brahmanas  afflicted  with  psoriasis  should  not  be 
invited  at  all,  and  likewise  the  persons  who  have  come  with- 
out an  invitation  and  who  are  but  intruders  at  the  best, 
should  not  be  taken  notice  of  even  if  present  on  the  occasion 
of  a Sraddha  ceremony,  , ' 

The  direct  ancestors  of  a man  such  as  the  father,  grand-  j 

father,  and  the  great  grand-father  should*  be  invoked,  as  j 

well  as  the  maternal  grand-fathers  and  such  persons  on  his  J 

mother's  line  unto  whom  he  is  entitled  to  offer  funeral  1 

cakes.  The  performer  of  such  a Sraddha  ceremony  should  fj 

be  meek  gentle  and  holy  on  the  day  of  its  celebration*  ob- 


be  meek  gentle  and  holy  on  the  day  of  its  celebration,  .pb~ 
.jServe  a vow  of  silence  and  self-control,  and  should  not 


AGNl  PURANAM 


stir  out  of  his  home,  nor  read  the  sacred  verses  or  rnc 
Vedas,  nor  do  any  act  which  would  not  stand  the  crucial 
test  of  perfect  truth.  Then  the  souls  of  all  the  ancestors 
enumerated  above,  whose  presence  on  the  occasion  had 
been  invoked  as  previously  described,  should  be  consi- 
dered as  present.  Affectionate  enquiries  should^  be  made 
of  their  comforts,  and  cushions  should  be  spread  out  for 
their  reception  by  laying  down  a separate  row  of  the  stems 
of  Kushagrass.  Subsequent  to  that  the  gods  whose  presence 
is  deemed  essential  to  the  performance  c.  — - 

ceremony  l 

fathers  imagined  as 
visits  should  be  first  consulted  with  a 
permission  in 

Then  the  performer  of  the  Sraddha  ceremony 
address  them  as  “ 
not?”  Then  the 

their  permission,  and  barley  corn 
round.  Then  he  should  address  the 
Vishvadevas  shall  li  invoke  the  Pitris?”  and  with  their 
permission  should  ask  them  to  be  seated  on  the  cushion. 

Then  grains  of  sessamum  orientale  should  be  scattered, 
and  the  Mantras  such  as  “ come,  Oh  ye  Pitris”  should  be 
repeated  over  the  vessels  placed  upon  the  stems  of  conse- 
Kushagrass.  Subsequent  to  that  the  performer  of 


of  such  an  ancestral 
should  be  invoked  and  the  spirits  of  the  performer’s 
having  graced  the  occasion  with  their 
view  to  obtain  their 

that  behalf. 

“ ‘ “ r should 

I shall  invoke  the  Visvadevas,  Shall  I or 
gods  Visvadevas  should  be  invoked  with 
should  be  scattered  all 
latter  gods  as  <fOli 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


466 


agni  pubanam. 


in  the  hands  of  his  forefathers,  supposed  to  be  spread  out 
on  the  stem  of  the  consecrated  kusha  grass.  Then  the  first 
oblation  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  by  repeating  the  following 
Mantra;— "Om  obeisance  to  the  fi regod  who  conveys  the 
oblations  to  the  Pitris.”  Similar  oblations  should  likewise  be 
offered  to  the  gods  and  sages  such  as  the  Moon-god,  the 
Pitris,  Yama  (the  god  of  death)  and  Angira  in  th£  following 
manner: — "Om  obeisance  (svaha)  to  Soma,  Om  obeisance  to 
Pitriman,  and  Om  obeisance  to  Yams.” 

Then  the  residue  of  the  oblations  should  be  gathered  in 
a rice-pot,  which  should  be  taken  hold  of  by  the  performer  of 
the  Shraddha  ceremony.  The  contents  of  the  abovesaid  pot 
should  be  poured  out  over  the  floor  of  the  sacrificial  room, 
and  the  following  Mantra  should  be  simultaneously  read 
therewith.  “Oh  Nectar \ this  earth  is  thy  receptacle,  the 
infinite  expanse  of  ether  abovehead  is  thy  covering.  I cast 
thee  as  an  oblation  unto  the  mouth  of  the  Brahrnana  which 
is  permeated  with  thy  own  essence’’.  Having  repeated  tlie 
above  Mantra,  the  preceptor  should  dip  his  thumb  into  the 
contents  of  the  pot  emptied  on  the  floor  as  before,  and  utter 
the  name  of  the  god  Vishnu.  Then  the  seeds  of  sessamuoj 
orientals  should  be  scattered  by  repeatingjthe  Mantra  which 
runs  as  “ApahatS  etc.,’’  after  which  they  should  be  removed, 
The  performer  should  repeat  in  his  mind  the  sacred  Gayatri 
Mantra  and  pray  as  follows  :— “I  make  obeisance  to  the  gods, 
the  Pitris,  the  great  Yoginis,  and  the  goddesses  Svadha  an,d, 
Svaha.”  Then  he  should  cast  oblations  composed  of  boiled  rice 
untp  tbe  abovesaid  deities  and  holy  personages  and  sprinkle 
water  over  the  same,  one  for  each  of  them,  after  having 
considered  them  as  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  meals  offered 
ta  them.  The  sacred  Mantra  of  Gayatri  should  be  once 


more  repeated  as  before,  after  which  the  Mantra  beginning 
with  “Madhu,”  etc.,  should  be  recited.  Then  he  shoqld  4^ 
they  had  been  pleased,  in  reply  whereto  he  should 


w 


•'  W 1 " 1 

=11*11  ||!  ; ' :^||||ll|il|  | ; ffffi 

■■  ; , * y lyyl.  ^ '■■■/:■*.  : ; 1 , 

Hill  1 ' ' :,*/  : ; : '■  . y ' l*-  ; y y; 


AGNt  PURANAM. 


The  residuary  portion  of  the  boiled  rice  should  be  then 
gathered  up  and  the  place  oh  which  the  oblations  had  been 
deposited  should  be  cleansed  with  water  for  laying  down 
thereon  the  stems  of  kusha  grass.  Three  oblations  (Pindas) 
should  be  cast  on  the  stems  of  kusha  grass  laid  down  as 
above.  Then  the  souls  of  the  fore-fathers  invoked  on  the 
occasion  should  be  imagined  as  having  rinsed  their  mouth 
With  water.  Flowers,  with  sun-dried  rice  and  washings  of 
honey  and  clarified  butter  should  be  offered  to  them,  and 
the  performer  of  the  ceremony  should  pray  as  follows  • 
“May  the  souls  Of  my  forefathers  see  light  and  may  our 
progeny  increase  and  prosper.  May  those  persons  who 
give  us  alms  enjoy  prosperity,  and  may  our  knowledge 
(Vedas)  and  progeny  grow  from  more  to  more.  May  our 
devotion  never  fail,  and  may  we  have  many  things  to  give 
to  the  poor.  May  we  have  plenty  of  rice  and  food  grains 
to  eat,  and  enough  number  of  guests  to  partake  of  our  daily 
meals.  May  we  never  stand  as  applicants  for  anything  to 
any  body,  and  may  those  who  are  in  need  come  to  us  for 
help.” 

Then  the  performer  of  the  Shraddha  ceremony  should 
gather  up  the  stems  of  kusha  grass  together  With  the  knots  of 
grass  known  as  the  Brahmanas  over  which  the  terms  Svadha 
(obeisance)  had  been  repeated  and  ask  permission  to  say 
obeisance  (Svadha)  to  his  forefathers.  Having  Obtained 
that  he  should  recite  the  following  Mantras  “Obeisance 
(Svadha)  to  the  fathers  (including  father’s  brothers  and 
cousins),  obeisance  (Svadha)  to  the  grandfathers,  obeisance 
to  the  great  grandfathers.”  Then  he  should  sprinkle  water 
by  raising  up  the  water  pot  and  pay,  as  his  means 'Would 
admit  of,  remuneration  to  the  Brahmana  who  had  officiated 
at  the  ceremony  (14—29).  In  the  Sraddha  ceremonies  per- 
formed in  honour  of  the  gods  or  One’s  forefathers  the 


performer  should  recite  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Be 


pleased,  Oh  ye  Vishvdevas !”  The  latter  gods  should  be 


. I 

' .'A. 


AGNI  PCJRANAM. 


adieu  on  each  occasion  of  ancestral  sacrifice.  Then  he 
should  reverentially  walk  round  the  Brahmanas  congregated 
on  the  occasions  and  enter  his  own  room  hy  reading  aloud 
the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Amabajasya.”  The  ceremony 
should  be  repeated  in  each  succeeding  month. 

Now  I shall  describe  tbe  process  of  performing  an 
Ekoddista  Sraddha  ceremony.  The  consecrated'"  knot  made 
of  kusha  grass  should  be  laid  down  for  each  soul  in- 
vokcd  on  the  occasion  and  cake  should  be  offered  to 
each.  The  form  of  the  Sraddha  ceremony  under  dis- 
cussion, is  characterised  by  the  absence  of  any  rite  of 
invocation,  and  any  casting  of  offering  in  the  sacrificial  fire, 
the  gods  known  as  the  Vishvdevas  taking  no  part  herein. 
The  Brahmana  while  enquiring  about  the  satisfaction  of  the 
invoked  souls  should  utter  “ Susvad.”  On  the  washings  of 
honey  and  clarified  butter,  the  souls  should  be  asked  to  be 
seated,  while  they  should  be  requested  to  be  pleased  with 
the  offerings  made  on  the  occasion.  The  performer  of  the 
ceremony  should  speak  on  behalf  of  the  invoked  souls  as 
we  are  well  pleased,  the  remaining  portion  of  the  rite  being 
identical  with  what  has  been  laid  down  above.  (30— 34.) 

Now  I shall  dwell  upon  the  procedure  to  be  adopted  in 
performing  the  Sraddha  ceremony  known  as  the  Sapinda- 
karana,  which  should  be  performed  either  at  the  middle  or 
at  the  expiry  of  the  year  of  the  death  of  tbe  relation  for 
whose  salvation  the  ceremony  would  be  undertaken.  Three 
vessels,  full  of  oblations,  should  be  laid  down  for  the  Pitris 
(ancestors),  while  one  should  be  kept  reserved  for  the 
departed  souls.  The  four  vessels  should  be  furnished  with 


AGNJ  PU8ANAM. 


469 


Accordingly  it  is  equally  obligatory  on  a man  to  discharge 
the  debt  he  owes  to  them  as  well  as  the  one  he  owes  to  his 
owe  forefathers  (35-— 37.) 

Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of  performing  the 
Sraddha  ceremony  called  the  Abhyudayika.  All  other  rites 
should  be  done  as  in  the  preceding  forms.  The  Mantras 
sacred  to  the  Pitris  should  be  repeated  in  the  forepart 
of  the  ceremony  and  the  rite  of  circumbulation  should 
be  performed  , in  the  first  part  of  the  day  on  which  the 
celebration  of  the  same  would  come  about,  The  articles 
which  are  essential  to  this  particular  form  of  Shraddha 
are  the  straight  blades  of  kusha  grass*  and  barley, 
instead  of  seeds  of  sessamum  orientale  in  the  other 
forms.  The  Brahmana  officiating  at  the  ceremony  should 
speak3  u well  done”  after  the  enquiry  regarding  the  satis- 
faction of  the  Invoked  souls*  and  the  cakes  in  the  present 
instance  should  be  composed  of  curd,  sun-dried  rice  and 
plums.  The  performer  should  ask  whether  he  would  invoke 
the  souls  of  his  ancestors  forming  his  Nandimukhas,  and 
implore  them  to  be  satisfied  with  the  Shraddha  offerings. 

The  forefathers  of  a person,  who  are  called  his  Nandimukhas, 
consist  of  his  father,  grandfather,  great  grandfather,  together 
with  his  maternal  grandfather,  maternal  great  grand  father, 
and  maternal  great  great  grandfather.  In  the  form  of  the 
Shraddha  ceremony  under  disseussion  the  performer  should 
not  couple  the  term  Svadha  with  the  names  of  his  forefathers 
on  occasions  on  which  the  same  should  be  repeated  in  the 
preceding  instances ; and  an  even  number  of  Srahmanas 
should  be  feasted  in  connection  therewith  (38 — 43). 

Now  I shall  discuss  the  nature  of  satisfaction  which 
the  different  sorts  of  cakes  or  oblations  respectively  impart 
to  the  souls  of  one's  ancestors.  Oblations  composed  o£ 
cereals  grown  in  villages  as  well  as  forest  fruits,  bulbs  V | 

and  roots  last  one's  forefathers  for  a month,  while  those  -i! 

rnnckfino  a?  and  v^nicnn  would  sp.rve  them  well  for. 


consisting  of  fishes  and  venison  would  serve  them  well  f 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


double  or  triple  that  division  of  time.  The  peculiar  kind 
of  venison  known  as  the  Rouravas  would  gratify  them 
for  five  months,  whereas  games  and  wild  fowls  would  last 
them  for  four  months.  The  departed  souls  are  supposed  to 
live  satisfactorily  upon  goat’s  meat  for  six  months,  meat  of 
tortoise,  pork,  mutton,  and  buffalo  flesh  lasting  them  for 
seven,  eight,  nine  and  ten  months  respectively.  "Sweetened 
porridge  and  butter  of  cowmiik  offered  in  a clarified  state 
would  gratify  them  for  a whole  year,  while  the  meat  of  a full 
grown  sacrificial  goat  (Vardrinasa)*  as  well  as  the  sword  of 
a rhinoceros,  flesh  of  an  antelope  or  that  of  a red  goat  and 
honey  should  be  considered  as  their  full  and  proper  ration 
for  a period  of  three  consecutive  months.  Offerings  made 
during  the  rainy  season  shonld  consist  of  fishes  having 
large  scales,  while  a Shraddha  ceremony  performed  on  the 
day  on  Which  the  moon  enters  the  asterism  Magha  should 
be  supposed  as  bearing  immortal  fruits  (44-— 48). 

The  Brahmanas  who  read  the  Mantras  or  the  portions 
of  any  particular  Veda,  or  those*  Who  are  the  custodians 
of,  and  offer  sacrificial  oblations  till  death  in,  the  same 
consecrated  fire,  lit  up  in  their  lying  in  chambers,  or  those 
who  chaunt  any  particular  branch  (Shakha)  of  one  of  the 
four  Vedas,  as  well  as  those  who  are  well  versed  in  the  six 
supplementary  branches  of  the  Vedic  lore,  and  the  readers 
of  Dharma  Drona  Or  the  chapters  of  the  Yestha  Sama 
should  be  deemed  as  the  purifying  element  of  the  above- 
said  Brahmanic  Congregation  assembled  on  the  occasion 
of  a Shraddha  ceremony  (49.) 

Now  I shall  describe  the  merit  of  performing  the 
Shraddha  Ceremony  of  one’s  ancestors  on  the  different 
days  of  the  lunar  months  of  the  year,  the  ceremony-  being 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


All 


I llllllll 


that  of  his  great  grandfather  in  the  event  of  his  son  being 
alive  at  the  time.  This  rule  should  be  followed  in  perform- 
ing the  Shraddha  ceremonies  of  his  own  mother  and  mater- 
nal grandfathers.  The  man  who  recites  the  Sraddha  Kalpa 
attains  the  merit  of  performing  the  Shraddha  itself.  A 
Shraddha  ceremony  performed  at  a sacred  glace  or  on 
days  from  which  any  of  the  four  cycles  (Yogas)  of  time 
begins  to  run  bears  immortal  fruit.  Similarly  Sraddha  cere- 
monies performed  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  light  fortnight  in 
the  month  of  Ashvina,  or  on  the  twelvth  day  of  the 
fortnight  in  the  month  of  Kartika,  or  on  the  third  day 
of  the  months  of  Magha  and  Bhadra,  or  on  the  new 
moon  day  in  Falguna,  or  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the 
fortnight  in  the  month  of  Pousa,  or  on  the  tenth  day 
of  the  lunar  month  in  the  month  of  Ashada,  or  on  the 
seventh  day  of  the  fortnight  in  the  month  of  Magha!  or 
on  the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  in  the  month  of 
Shravana,  or  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon  in  Ash&da,  KSrtikeya, 
Falguna,  and  Jaistha,  are  supposed  to  grant  perpetual  bene- 
diction to  the  souls  of  the  forefathers  of  the  performer 
like  the  Sraddha  ceremonies  performed  on  the  days  when 
the  different  Manus  such  as  Sayambhuva,  etc.,  and  who  were 
the  governing  bodies  of  the  different  cycles  of  ages  such 
as  the  Satyayuga,  etc.,  first  came  into  being.  A man  should 
offer  cakes  in  honour  of  the  departed  souls  of  his  forefathers 
at  Gaya,  Prayaga  (Allahabad).  Kurukshetra,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Narmada  and  the  Godavari  and  at  Prabhasa,  Shala- 
grama,  Benares,  Purushottama  (Puri)  and  on  the  mount  of 
Shriparvata  (57—63.) 


AGNI  PUHANAM. 


CHAPTER  CXVIII. 


laya  is  caned  isharatvarsa  and  measure  nine  thousand 
Yojanas  in  breadth.  The  country  named  above  is  the 
working  place  of  those  who  ascend  heaven  or  enjoy  other 
celestial  comforts  by  dint  of  their  own  piety  and  through 
the  merit  of  good  deeds  done  therein.  The  seven  principal 
mountain  chains  (Kulaparvata)  which  traverse  the  continent 
of  Bharatavarsa,  are  Mahindra,  Malaya,  Saghya,  Shuktimana, 
Hemaparvata  (the  Golden  Mountain),  the  Vindbya,  and  the 
Paripatra.  The  nine  islands  (territories!  in  which  the  above 
said  country  is  divided  are,  Indradvipa,  Kasara,  Tamraparni, 
Gabhastimana,  Nagadvipa,  Soumya,  Gandharva,  Varuna,  and 
Ayam  which  are  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  sea.  The 
country  above  described  is  eight  thousand  miles  in  length 
from  north  to  south  and  is  divided  into  nine  principal 
divisions  named  after  the  people  residing  therein  and  which 
lie  around  the  central  part  of  the  country  reckoned  from  the 
East.  They  are  the  land  of  the  Kiratas,  the  land  of  the 
Yavanas,  the  land  of  the  Brahmanas  from  whose  lips  drop 
down  the  deep  and  profound  truths  inculcated  in  the  Vedas 
and  the  Smritis.  In  mount  Paripatra  is  the  source  of 
several  rivers,  while  the  Narmada  and  several  other  streams 
take  rise  from  the  Vindhya.  The  Tapi  and  the  Payoshnika 
the  Godavari,  the  Bhimarathi,  the  Krishna,  the  Veni  and 
several  other  rivers  take  rise  from  the  Sajbya  Mountain,  while 
the  Kritamala  and  the  Trisama  respectively  flow  from  the 
Malaya  and  the  [Mahendra  Mountains.  The  rivers  Kumara 
and  others  have  their  source  in  the  Shuktimana  Mountain, 
while  the  Chandrabhaga  takes  it  rise  from  the  Himalaya. 


474  : ' AGNI  PURANAM. 

The  countries  known  as  the  Kurupanchala  and  the  Madhya- 
desha  are  in  the  western  part  of  the  continent  of 
India  (I— 8). 


CHAPTER  CXIX. 


iQaid  THE  FIRE  God  : — The  island  known  as  Jamvu- 
dvipa  is  comprised  of  an  area  of  eight  hundred  thousand 
miles  in  breadth,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  ocean  of 
Ksbiroda  measuring  eight  hundred  thousand  miles  (i). 
The  island  of  Plakshya  is  surrounded  by  the  ocean  of 
Aalchati,  and  the  seven  sons  of  Medhatithi  named  as 
Shantabhaya,  Shishira,  Sukhadaya,  Ananda,  Shiva,  Kshema 
and  Dhruva  are  the  lords  thereof  after  whom  the  country 
has  been  named.  The  hills  which  form  the  boundaries 
of  the  latter  country  are  the  Gomedha,  Chandra,  Narada, 
Dundubhi,  Somaka,  Sumana  and  Vaibhraja.  The  people 
who  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  latter  country  drained  by 
seven  principal  rivers  are  a blessed  people,  all  living 
up  to  the  good  old  age  of  five  thousand  years,  and 
filling  the  different  grooves  of  society  according  to  the 
duties  of  the  castes  they  respectively  belong  to.  The 
Brahman  as  who  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  are  the 
Aryakas,  Kurus,  Vivinsha,  and  the  Bhavinas,  who  are  the 
worshippers  of  the  Moon. 

Next  to  that  lies  the  island  of  Shalmali  comprising  an 
ar&A  df  ten  lakhs  of  Kroshes  and  surrounded  on  all  sides 
by  the  ocean  of  Sugarcane  juice.  The  seven  sons  of  Vapu- 
shmafna  who  are  named  as  Suta,  Harita,  Jinnuta,  Lohita, 
Vaidyuta,  Manasa  and  Suprablia  are  the  mastery  $ the 


c 


AG  MI  PURANAM. 


continent  of  Shalmali  divided  into  countries  named  after 
each  of  them®  ' i 

The  hills  which  run  across  the  continent  of  Shalmali  . are 
the-  Kumuda,  Anala,  Valahaka,  Drona,  Kaokba,  Mahisha, 
and  the  Kukudman  and  the  seven  rivers  which  take  their 
rise  from  them  and  flow  into  the  ocean  of  Surada  are  the 
Kapila,  A Am  a,  Pita,  and  Krishna,  etc.  The  Brahmanas  who 
are  the  inhabitants  of  the  above  said  isle  are  the  worshippers 
of  the  god  of  wind  (3—10). 

The  island  of  Kasha  stands  in  the  ocean  of  wine 
(Surada)  and  the  sons  of  Jyotishmana  are  the  masters  there- 
of. The  main  divisions  of  the  country  are  named  after  the 
abovesaid  princes  and  which  are  accordingly  known  as 
Udviga,  Dhanumana,  Suta,  Dvairatha,  Lamvana,  Dhairjya, 
Kapila  and  Prabhakara.  The  principal  Brahmin  communities 
residing  therein  such  as  the  Dadhimukhas  worship  the 
image  of  Brahma.  The  hills,  which  run  across  the  continent 
of  Kusha,  are  the  Vidruma,  Hemashaila,  Dyutimana,  Pu spa- 
van  a,  Kushashaya,  Harishaila  and  the  Mandara.  The  latter  is 
surrounded  by  the  ocean  of  clarified  butter  (Ghritoda)  which 
in  its  turn  is  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  the  continent  (island) 
of  Krouncha.  The  sons  of  the  king  Dyutimana  are  the 
sovereigns  of  the  latter  island,  whose  principal  divisions  are 
named  after  the  abovesaid  princes,  and  the  seven  hills  which 
lie  scattered  over  the  plains  of  the  country  are  named  as  the 
Kushala,  Manas,  Anugas,  Ushna,  Pradhatas,  and  Andhakaraka, 
and  the  seven  hills  which  run  across  the  country  drained 
by  the  seven  rivers  are  the  Krouncha,  Vamana,  Andhakaraka, 
Devavrit,  Pundarika,  Dundubhi  and  Dviguna.  The  moun- 
tain which  are  in  the  other  islands  are  respectively  named 
after  each  of  them.  The  blessed  sanctuaries  which  are  to 
be  resorted  to  in  the  island  of  Krouncha  are  at  Puskara  and 
Puskala.  The  god  Hari  is  worshipped  by  the  inmate  Brah- 
gnanas  of  the  isle  which  is  girdled  by  the  ocean  of  Dadhi- 
mandaka  and  which  in  its  turn  is  encircled  by  the  island  of 


4 


AGm  puranam, 


Shaka  (dvipa).  The  sons  of  the  king  of  Shaka  are  the 
sovereigns  of  the  different  territories  into  which  the  former  is 
divided  and  which  are  respectively  named  after  each  of  them, 
such  as  Jatada,  Kumara,  Sukumara,  Manivaha,  Kushattara, 
Modaki  and  Druma.  The  seven  mountain  chains  which 
traverse  the  continent  are  named  as  the  Udaya,  Jaladhara* 
Raivata,  Shyama,  Kudruka,  Amvikaya,  and  Ramya.  The 
seven  rivers  which  rise  from  the  abovesaid  mountains  are 
the  Maga,  Mandaga,.  etc.  The  Brahmanas  of  the  country 
worship  the  god  as  revealed  in  the  resplendent  orb  of  the 
sun.  The  island  of  Shaka  is  surrounded  by  the  ocean  of 
of  Kshira,  and  across,  and  encircling,  which  lies  the  island  of 
Puskara*.  Mahavita  and  Dhatiki  the  two  sons  of  Savana 
are  the  lords  of  the  two-  divisions  of  the  island  which  are 
respectively  named  after  each  of  them..  A single  hill  called 
the  Manasa,  and  resembling  a bracelet  in  “shape,  towers  up 
from  the  centre  of  the  island,  and  extends  over  a region 
measuring  eight  thousand  miles  in  length,  its  height  being 
equal  to  its  length  (is — 23).  The  inhabitants  of  the  above- 
said  island  which  is  girdled  by  the  ocean  of  Kshiroda  live  up 
to  the  age  of  ten  thousand  years,  and  the  Brahmanas  who 
dwell  therein  worship  the  Brahma,  manifestation  of  the 
Indian  trinity.  The  ocean  in  question  knows  110  ebb  or  flood 
tide  according  to  the  gradual  changes  in  the  phases  of  the 
moon.  Oh  thou  greatest  of  the  holy  sages,  the  waters  of 
the  rivers  that  flow  into  the  latter  increase  or  decrease  by 
fifteen  fingers  according  to  the  variation  , in  rainfalls  in 
any  particular  year.  The  soH  of  the  island  consists  of  pure 
gold'  bereft  of  all  animal  life.  The  peak  known  as  the 
Lok&loka  towers  from  the  middle  of  the  island,  half  of 
which  enjoys  perpetual  sunshine,  the  other  being  enveloped 
in  perpetual4  darkness.  The  hill  runs  across  a region  measur- 
ing eighty  thousand  miles  in  length  and  whose  summit  pene- 
trates into  the  welkin  which  bounds  in  a space  of  five  hundred 
millions  of.  Yojaoas  (24—28.),  . ' 


CHAPTER  CXX, 


Oaid  the  god  OF  FIRE The  extent  of  land  on  the 
surface  of  the  globe  is  seven  thousand  Yojanas,  the  height 
or  the  dimension  whereof  between  the  poles  is  ten  thousand 
Yojanas.  In  the  interior  of  the  globe  and  beneath  the 
earth’s  surface  are  the  seven  Patalas  or  the  nether  regions 
which  are  respectively  known  as  the  Atala,  the  Vitala,  the 
Nitala,  the  Gabhastimat,  the  Mahakshya,  the  Sutala,  and  the 
Agrya.  The  soils  of  the  abovesaid  subterranean  regions 
respectively  consist  of  sand,  stone  and  gold  and  are  coloured- 
black,  brown  and  reddish,  in  which  the  demons  happily 
dwell  and  roam  about  Below  the  nvHher  regions  is  the 
primordial  serpent  Shesha,  posing  on  sits  hundred  hoods 
this  our  terrestrial  globe,  and  on  whose-  body  rests  the  god 
Vishnu  enveloped  in  the  almighty^primevial  night  which  was 
all-pervading  before  the  light  of  creation  first  dawned  upon 
the  universal  space.  Below  this  terrestrial  globe  is  the 
region  of  hell  from  which  a Vaishnava  (worshipper  of  Vishnu) 
enjoys  a sort  of  perpetual  immunity. 

Oh  Vashistha,  the  sky  is  called  Navas  (root  “Va" 
to  shine)  from  the  fact  of  its  being  illuminated  by  the  rays 
of  the  sun  which  is  situated  at  a distance  of  eight  hundred 
thousand  miles  from  the  earth.  The  Moon  is  eight  hundred 
thousand  miles  distant  from  the  Sun,  and  at  a similar  distance 
from  the  latter  lies  the  belt  of  fixed  stars.  From  the  belt  of 
fixed  stars  the  planet  Mercury  is  some  two  lakhs  of  Yojanas 
remote.  The  Venus  is  of  similar  distance  from  the  Mercury 
and  likewise  the  Mars  is  two  laks  of  Yojanas  remote  from 
the  latter.  The  Jupiter  is  similarly  distanced  from  the  Mars* 
the  Saturn  is  two  laks  of  Yojanas  distant  from  the  Jupiter* 
and  the  constellation  known  as  the  Saptarshi  Mandala  (Ursa 
major)  is  a lak  of  Yojanas  distant  from  the  latter 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


The  pole  star  (Dhruva)  is  eight  hundred  thousand  miles 
distant  from  the  Saptarshi  and  forms  the  apex  of  the  region 
known  as  the  Trailakhya.  The  region  known  as  the  Maha  is 
tens  of  millions  of  miles  distant  from  the  pole  star  wherein 
dwell  the  persons  who  have  witnessed  a full  cycle  of  time  from 
the  creation  of  the  world  to  its  dissolution  at  the  Pralaya. 
The  region  known  as  the  Jana  Loka  is  at  a' distance  of 
two  millions  of  miles  from  the  latter  wherein  dwell  the 
Rishis  such  as  Sanaka,  etc.  The  region  of  Tapa  is  eight 
millions  of  Yojanas  distant  from  that  of  Jana  whereof 
Vairajas  are  the  presiding  deities.  The  region  of  Satya  is 
ninety-six  millions  of  miles  distant  from  the  latter,  and  the 
regiou  which  is  never  visited  by  death  is  known  as  the 
Brahma  Loka  or  the  region  of  the  deathless  disembodied 
celestials  (9 — ix.)  j 

The  region  knfwn  as  the  Bhu  occupies  only  a pada 
measure  of  the  entire  sub-solar  space,  the  region  of  “Bhuba,f 
is  within  the  orb  oft  the  Sun,  while  the  region  of  Svarga  (para- 
dise) extends  from  beyond  the  Pole  Star,  the  space  beneath 
the  latter  being  fourteen  millions  of  Yojanas.  The  regions 
planetery  and  psychical  form,  as  it  were,  the  exterior  cover 
or  shell  of  this  egg  of  the  Universe,  which  in  their  turn  are 
encrusted  by  ten  fold  layers  of  water,  fire,  wind,  ether  and 
the  earth,  just  like  the  body  of  any  other  organic  being. 
The  ten  latter  regions  and  principles,  Oh  thou  greatest 
of  the  sainted  beings,  lie  enfolded  in  one  another,  and  thus 
in  the  aggregate  form  the  exterior  cover  of  the  Universal 
Nature  (Pradhana)  (12 — 14.) 

Oh  thou  holy  one,  this  Nature  is  inconceivable  and 
baffles  all  measurement  or  comprehension.  Innumerable 
are  the  eggs  of  such  worlds  and  systems  which  are  cons- 
tantly hatched  into  their  firy  existence  under  the  wings  of 
this  universal  mother.  Oh  lord,  the  Puman  or  the  subjective 
element  (the  Brahma  of  the  Vedantins)  exists  in  a potent 
!tate  m the  bosom  „(  this  Uuivcrsal  Nature,  just as  fire  %s 


AGHl  PUR  A NAM, 


479 


'.hidden  in  a stick  of  dry  wood,  or  as  the  oil  potentially 
exists  in  the  midst  of  sessamum  orienfcale.  This  Puman  or 
the  subjective  element  lies  imbeded  in  Nature  simply  as  at 
psychic  onlooker  or  a spiritual  principle,  absolutely  neutral  and 
devoid  of  all  actions.  Oh  thou  greatest  of  the  wise  men,  this 
union  of  the  Pumana  and  the  Nature  is  held  together  by 
a sort  of  force  known  as  the  Vishnu  Shakti,  which  contains 
embryos  and  essential  virtues  of  all  beings  and  matter 
subsequently  to  be  developed  out  of  this  union  of  the 
universal  nature  and  her  mate  (Puman).  The  force  under 
discussion  serves  as  an  active  agent  or  principle  in  bring- 
ing about  their  union  when  they  lie  remote  and  apart  or 
as  a disintegrating  agent  in  severing  that  contact  out 
of  which  the  universe  comes  into  being  as  a necessary 
resultant  (15—19.) 

The  gods  and  other  celestial  beings  take  birth  through 
the  concerted  action  of  the  force  of  Universal  Nature  and 
the  dynamical  effect  of  the  essence  of  Vishnu  acted  upon 
by  the  momentum  of  the  former.  Vishnu  is  identical  with 
the  absolute  Brahma,  from  whom  the  Universe  has 
emanated  (20—21). 

Oh  thou  best  of  the  sainted  beings,  the  Sun  god  rides  in 
nine  chariots  which  occupy  a space  of  thousand  Yojanas,  and 
the  axle  tree  whereof  is  of  double  that  measure.  The 
circumference  of  its  wheel  is  greater  than  15,000,000  fifteen 
millions  of  Yojanas  by  (700,000)  twenty-eight  millions  of 
miles.  This  wheel  which  is  also  known  as  the  wheel  of 
time  consists  of  three  naves,  five  spokes,  six  circumferences 
and  the  two  movements  (Ayana)  which  bring  in  the  months 
add  the  year.  The  second  orbit  ©f  the  Sun  measures  thirty- 
nine  thousand  Yojanas  in  each  of  its  two  parts  or  division, 
which  takes  the  above  luminary  half  a Yuga  to  travel  and  at 
the  end  of  which  is  the  Pole  Star.  Oh  thou  the  best  observer 
of  vows  and  penances,  the  seven  Vedic  Cbhandas  such  as 
the  Gyafcri,  etc.,  are  the  horses  which  draw  the  chariot  of  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


ouu,  wuusc  rising  ann  setting  consist  in  his  appearance  in, 
and  disappearance  from,  any  particular  region.  The  pole 
star  is ‘fixed  in  the  region  where  those  phenomena  occur, 
and  which  is  seen  at  the  same  place  i.  e .,  higher  up  to  the 
north  of  the  “ Saptarshimandala”  owing  to  the  rotundity  of 
the  Earth’s  surface  (22—28). 

Oh  Brahman,  the  region  mentioned  above  is  known  as 
the  third  resplendent  ethereal  region  (Vishnupadan)  dwelt 
in  by  the  purest  spirits,  and  the  Brahmacharins  who  have 
purged  off  all  sins  and  impurities.  From  here  flows  the 
stream  of  celestial  Ganges  by  contemplating  which  a man 
becomes  pure  and  sinless.  Here  the  god  Hari  is  revealed 
in  the  constellation  of  stars  known  as  the  “Shishumara,” 
at  the  tail  end  of  which  is  the  fixed  star  Dhruva  (Pole  Star) 
which  revolving  on  its  own  axis  caused  the  planets  and 
their  satellites  to  move  round  and  round.  The  Sun  god  duly 
installed  in  his  chariot  by  the  gods,  Rishis,  Gandharvas, 
Apsarasas,  serpents  and  demons,  is  the  cause  of  rain,  heat 
and  humidity  in  the  air.  The  Sun  god  is  only  another  mani- 
festation of  the  god  Vishnu  extolled  and  glorified  in  the 

verses  of  the  Rig-Veda  and  is  the  source  of  all  good  and 
evil  (29—33). 

The  chariot  of  the  Moon  god  runs  on  three  wheels 
drawn  by  ten  horses  of  greenish  colour  strapped  on  the 
right  and  the  left.  Thirty-six  thousand  three  hundred  and 
thirty-three  gods  drink  of  the  phases  of  the  Moon.  One 
phase  being  partaken  of  by  the  Pitris,  and  one  phase  being 
lost  sight  of  when  it  suffers  occultation  on  the  day  of  the 
new  Moon.  The  chariot  of  the  presiding  deity  of  the 
Mercury  is  composed  of  firy  and  aerial  substance  and  is 
drawn  by  eight  horses.  Similary  the  chariot  of  the  Venus 
is  drawn  by  eight  horses  like  those  respectively  ridden  by 
Ihe  Mars,  the  Jupiter  and  the  Saturn,  the  Rahu  and  the 
Kat«  (Note)  (34-5S).  9 : 


AGN!  PURANAM# 


Oh  Brahmana,  since  this  earth  has  originated  from  the 
body  of  Vishnu  It  has  assumed  the  shape  of  a closed 
lotus  flower  traversed  by  mountain-chains  and  drained  by 
mighty  rivers.  The  earth,  the  light,  the  hills,  the  streams 
and  the  forests  are  all  permeated  and  beaming  with  the 
effulgence  of  the  god  (Bari)  without  whom  nothing 
exists.  Whatever  exists  or  exists  not  is  Vishnu,  whose 
true  nature  and  self  can  not  be  known  except  through  true 
knowledge  (Science),  the  culminating  stage  of  all  true 
science  being  the  feet  of  Supreme  Vishnu.  Do  that,  Oh 
Brahman,  whereby  the  eternal  truth  and  the  infinite  know- 
ledge which  are  but  different  epithets  of  Vishnu  are  attained. 
The  man  who  reads  or  recites  this  chapter  on  Cosmogony 
and  the  kindred  and  "allied  sciences  of  Astronomy  sees  the 
light  of  his  own  soul.  The  god  Hari  is  the  dispenser  of 
all  goods  and  evils  (39—41). 


CHAPTER  CXXI 


Daid  the  Goo  of  Fire: — Now  I shall  deal  with  the 
science  of  Astrology,  as  discussed  in  the  four  hundred 
thousand  treatises  on  the  same,  a knowledge  wherein  is  a 
safe-guard  against  the  happening  of  many  untoward  events 
and  incidents  which  usually  take  place  in  the  chances  and 
changes  of  life,  and  generally  imparts  a sort  of  omniscience 
to  the  knower.  A marriage  ceremony  should  not  be  cele- 
brated where  the  astral  conditions  known  as  Shadastaka 
and  Dvidadasha  exist  among  the  natal  stars  of  the  con- 
tracting parties,  similarly  a marriage  should  be  foregone 
where  the  astral  a ad  planetary  condition  known  as  the 


482 


AGNt  PUR  A NAM# 


Triconft  exists  * A married  couple  whose  natalstars  stand 
in  the  relation  of  Samasapfcaka  becomes  fondly  enamoured 


sic  Dvidadaska~~Ex\&ex\l\y  the  hostile  (Ari) 'relation  bearing  the  above 
epithet  between  the  natal  stars  of  the  bride  and  the  bridegroomjis 
meant  here  and  which  is  as  follows  : — 

Dhanu  (Sagittarius)  is  hostile  to  Makara  (Caprfcornus.) 

Kumbha  (Aquaries  is  hostile  to  Meena  (Pisces.) 

Mesha  (Aries)  is  hostile  to  Vrisa  (Taurus.) 

Mithuna  (Gemini)  Do  Do  Karkata  (Cancer.) 

Sinha  (Leo)  Do  Do  Do  Kanya  (Virgo.) 

Tula  (Libra)  Do  Do  Do  Vrischika  (Scorpio.) 


Sadastaka — Similarly  the  hostile  (Ari)  relation  designated  as  such 
and  which  is  enjoined  to  be  avoided  hereby  the  contracting  parties  to 
a marriage  is  as  follows  » 

Makara  (Capricornus)  is  hostile  to  Sinha  (Leo) 

Kanya  (Virgo)  Do  Do  Do  Mesha  (Aries) 

Meena  (Pisces)  Do  Do  Do  Tula  (Libra) 

Karkata  (Cancer)  Do  Do  Kumbha  (Aquaris) 

Vrisha  (Taurus  Do  Do  Do  Dhanu  (Sagittarius) 

Vrischika  (Scorpio)  Do  Do  Mithuna  (Gemini) 

11 

Tricone  mansions  of  the  different  planets  are  as  follows  : — . 

Planet  Tricone  Mansion- 

Sun  Leo 

Moon  Taurus 

Mercury  , , Virgo 

Jupiter  Sagittarius 

Venus  Libra 

Saturn  Aquaris* 


111®! 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


483 


of  each  other,  but  a marriage  can  be  safely  contrac- 
ted or  celebrated  where  the  Kshetrapatis  or  the  pre- 
siding planets  at  the  nativity  of  both  the  bride  and  bride- 
groom are  friendly  towards  each  other  or  stand  in  the 
relative  pssitlons  of  Dvtdadasha  and  Tricooe  towards  each 
other.  The  effect  of  such  an  union  is  prosperity  in  the 
married  life,  even  if  the  stars  be  otherwise  hostile.  Marriage 
between  a pair  whose  stars  stand  in  the  relation  of  Shataka 
or  Astaka  towards  each  other  is  always  prohibited,  like  an 
inauspicious  marriage  celebrated  at  the  setting  of  the  Venus 
or  the  Jupiter,  as  the  effect  of  such  an  union  would  be  the 
death  of  both  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom.  A marriage 
ceremony  gone  through  when  the'sun  is  in  the  house  (Kshetra) 
of  the  Jupiter  or  in  the  event  of  the  latter  being  within  the 
mansion  of  the  former  is  attended  by  the  widowhood  of  the 
bride.  The  celebration  of  a marriage  ceremony  should  be 
postponed  for  three  weeks  or  four  months  as  the  case  might 
be  in  the  event  of  any  planet  hastily  leaving  any  particular 
sign  of  the  Zodiac : (Atichara)  or  gradually  receding  from  its 
position.  A penance  or  marriage  ceremony  is  strictly  for- 
bidden when  the  Jupiter  takes  the  above-said  movements 
(1 — 6).  Similarly  a marriage  ceremony  should  not  be 
celebrated  in  the  months  of  Poush  and  Chaitra  or  on 
the  days  of  the  lunar  month  known  as  the  Rikta^ 
(except  such  days  being  Saturdays)  nor  when  the  god 
Hari  would  be  enjoying  his  yearly  sleep,  nor  on  Tuesdays 
and  Sundays,  nor  on  the  night  of  the  new  moon.  But 
the  evening  is  always  auspicious  as  then  no  stars  exert 
their  baneful  influence.  Marriage  ceremonies  should  be 
celebrated  under  the  auspicious  influence  of  the  asterims 
such  as  the  Rohini,  the  Uttaras,  the  Mula,  the  Hasta, 


* Rikta, — The  fourth,  ninth,  and  the  fourteenth  day  (tithi)  of  a 
fortnight.  ' \ v' ■ , : ,S 

mm  mxmt  an  <m  1 


(1118 


'f'f"  hIi1 


A man  born  under  one  of  the  asterisms  shown  in  the  Erst  column 
should  not  be  wedded  to  a woman  born  under  a Vidharkshya  mentioned 
against  it. 

wwrrI  w wsrerpr:  t 

: | ^ 'tw  w 

wtrrtww,  srsft  W w^pt:  i 


-434  . ACm  PURANAM. 

the  Revati,  and  when  the  son  is  in  the  Zodiacal  signs  of 
Libra  or  the  Gemini  (f — 8). 

A Viddharkha*  should  be  carefully  avoided  in  cele- 
brating the  ceremonies  of  marriage,  as  jfwell  as  in  the'  first 
Chudakaranam  (the  binding  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown 
of  a child),  Karnavedha  (piercing  through  of  the  balls 
of  [the  ears),  Punsavanam  (described  before)  and  the 
Annaprashanam  (a  child’s  first-eating  of  a rice  meal). 
The  ceremony  of  Punsavanam  should  be  performed 

on  days  marked  by  the  asterisms  Shravana,  Mula, 
Pushya,  and  on  Sundays,  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays  and 
especially  when  the  sun  is  in  the  signs  of  Kumbha* 
Sinha,  and  the  Gemini.  A debt  should  be  discharged 

on  Wednesdays  or  Fridays  and  also  when  the  moon 


* Krittika  is  a Viddharkshya  to  Shravana. 


Rohini  „ 
Mrigashira 
Purvashada 
Mula  „ 

Yesthya  „ 
Ashlesha  „ 
Magha  „ 

Purva  Falguni  is  a 
Uttar  do.  ,, 
Hasta  ,, 

Chitra  „ 

Svati  „ 

Vishaka  , , 


Abhijit. 

Uttarashada, 

Ardra. 

Punarvasu. 

Pushya. 

Anuradha. 

Bharani. 

Ashvini. 

Revati* 

Uttar  Bhadrapada. 
Purva  do. 
Shatabhisa. 
Shatabhisa. 


A GNU  PUR  Am  M, 


enters  the  asterisms  of  Hasta,  Mula,  Mriga  and  Pushya 
while  the  ceremony  attendant  upon  one's  eating  of  a pre- 
pared Pan  leaf  should  be  gone  through  on  Sundays,  Mon- 
days, Thursdays,  and  also  when  the  moon  enters  the  asterism 
of  Mula.  The  rite  of  a child's  Annaprashanam  should  be 
undertaken  on  a Friday,  or  a Thursday,  or  when  the  moon  res- 
pectively passes  under  the  asterisms  of  Mriga,  Pushya,  and 
the  three  and  the  five  asterisms  beginning  with  the  Hasta, 
and  the  Krittika  respectively.  New  fruits  and  new  rice 
should  be  first  eaten  on  days  when  the  moon  is  either  in 
the  asterisms  of  Ashvini,  Revati,  Pushya,  Hasta,  Yasthya, 
Rohini  or  Shravana.  Medicine  should  be  first  used  or  ad- 
ministered on  Mondays  or  when  the  moon  enters  the 
asterisms  of  Svati,  especially  avoiding  the  three  Purvas 
[Purva  Fulguni,  Purva  Bhadrapada,  and  the  Purvasada,} 
Magha,  the  three  asterisms  beginning  -with  Shravana  being 
held  auspicious  to  that  end.  A man  taking  the  first  bath 
after  his  convalescence  should  do  the  same  on  -Tuesdays, 
Sundays  and  Saturdays.  On  a Tuesday  a man  should  write 
eight  " H rings”  (Mantras)  on  a Bhurja  leaf  and  the  name 
of  the  enemy  he  wishes  to  subjugate  in  the  middle  together 
with  the  names  of  the  eight  Vasus  in  the  eight  angular  points 
thereof  and  wear  the  amulet  so  made  around  his  neck  or 
on  his  arms  or  should  tie  the  same  in  his  own  cloth,  whereby 
be  would  attain  a perfect  mastery  over  his  enemies.  The 
writing  described  in  the  preceding  line  should  be  done  in  a 
composition  made  of  saffron  and  Gorochana  (yellow  pigment) 
Similarly  a stone  slab  on  which  the  mantras  **  0m  Hunt 
Sas  with  the  names  of  one's  enemies  appended  thereto  has 
been  written  in  a similar  composition  as  above,  if  burried 
underneath  the  soil  with  its  face  turned  down,  is  a potent 
charm  in  nullifying  their  hostilities.  The  above  Mantras 
written  in  the  a - composition  containing  saffron  ; and 
Gorochana  on  a piece  of  Bhurja  leaf  acts  as  a safeguard 
against  death  {9—20). 


AGNI  PURANAM 


Now  I shall  describe  the  nine  stars  which  determine  the 
health,  wealth,  work  and  different  relations  in  life  such  as 
those  of  a husband,  brother,  etc.,  of  persons 'born  under 
their  influence  and  of  the  different  Lagnas  such  as  the 
Mesha,  etc.,  and  which  are  respectively  called  [the  Janma 
the  Sampafc,  the  Vipat  Kshema,  Pratyari,  the  Sadhaka, 
Nidhana  (the  star  of  death),  the  Mitra  and  the  Paramamitra. 

The  first  shaving  of  a child’s  hair  should  be  done  in  the 
course  of  the  six  months  beginning  with  Magha  and  on 
Sundays,  Mondays,  Thursdays,  or  Fridays.  The  ceremony 
of  Karnavedha  (perforation  of  the  balls  of  the  ears)  should 
be  performed  on  Wednesdays  and  Thursdays  and  under  the 
asterisms  of  Pushya,  Shravana  or  Chitra.  The  first  lesson 
to  a child  should  be  taught  in  his  fifth  year  after  worshipping 
the  god  Hari  and  the  goddess  of  learning  except  on  the  day 
immediately  following  on  a full  or  a new  moon  or  on  the 
sixth  day  of  the  fortnight  or  on  the  days  of  the  lunar  month 
which  are  known  as  the  Rikta,  the  day  of  a full  or  a new 
moon  and  Tuesdays  being*  held  specially  inauspicious  to  that 
end.  The  rite  of  tying  up  the  girdle  (Makhalavandanam) 
should  be  performed  in  the  course  of  six  months  begin- 
ning with  Magha.  The  religious  rite  attendant  upon  the  first 
tying  up  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  a child  should  not 
be  performed  on  days  when  the  moon  enters  the  asteriam  of 
Shravana  etc.  The  rite  of  investure  of  the  holy  thread 
if  performed  at  the  setting  of  the  Venus  or  the  Jupiter  or 
when  the  moon  is  on  the  wane,  brings  death  or  laziness  to 
the  person  invested  with  the  same.  The  rite  of  Samavartana 
should  be  performed  on  auspicious  days  or  on  a Ksouraskhya. 
The  Dhanurveda  should  be  first  taught  on  days  when  the 
moon  enters  the  asterisms  of  Ashvini,  Magha,  Chitra,  Svati, 
Punarvasu,  Bharani,  Ardra,  Magha,  Ashlesha  Banhi  and  the 
Bhaga.  A man  if  he  loves  life  should  not  put  on  a new 
cloth  on  Thursdays,  Fridays  and  Wednessdays,  although  this 

ruie  does  mi  hold  good  in  marriages.  Gems  and  ornaments 

. 


AONI  PlJRANAM. 


487 


should  be  first  put  on  days  when  the  moon  enters  the 
asterisms  of  Revati,  Ashvini,  Dhanista,  and  the  five  other 
asterisms  beginning  with  the  Hasta.  Any  thing  purchased 
on  the  day  of  Jamya,  or  Dhanista,  or  on  days  when  the 
moon  enters  the  asterisms  of  Purvafalguni,  Purvahhadrapad 
the  Purvashada  and  the  Varuna  brings  profit  to  the 
purchaser,  while  anything  sold  on  those  days  brings  loss. 
A master  or  an  employer  should  not  he  first  visited  on  days 
when  the  moon  is  in  the  asterisms  of  Bharani,  or  in  the  three 
above  said  Purvas,  Ardra,  Ashlesha,  Magha,  Anila,  and  the 
Yestha  or  in  the  Bhishaka.  Money  should  be  deposited  and 
articles  should  be  given  back  or  taken  on  days  when  the  moon 
enters  the  two  Ultaras  and  Shravanas,  on  which  the  installa- 
tion ceremony  of*  a sovereign  should  be  performed.  A house 
should  be  first  entered  into  in  months  other  than  those  of 
Chaitra,  Yaistha,  Bhadra,  Ashvin,  Pousha,  and  Magha,  the 
construction  whereof  should  be  started  on  days  when  the 
moon  passes  under  the  asterisms  of  Ashvini,  Rohini,  Mula, 
the  three  abovesaid  Uttaras,  Svati,  Hasta  or  the  Anuradha. 
In  excavating  a tank  or  constructing  a palace  Sundays  and 
Tuesdays  should  be  carefully  avoided  and  also  the 
conjunction  of  the  sun  with  the  Jupiter,  and  the  transit 
ascension  or  descension  of  the  Venus,  as  loss  by  confla- 
gration, fear,  disease,  loss  of  money  and  oppression  by  a 


MSS8811 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


known  as  the  three  Purvas,  Dhanistha,  Ardra,  Vanhi,  Vishaka, 
Ashlesha  and  Ashvini  are  ascendent,  as  a journey  under- 
taken under  the  auspicies  of  the  abovesaid  asterisms 
always  becomes  prosperous  (38-— 43).  A man  should  not  go 
out  on  pasturing  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  fortnight  or 
under  the  malignant  influence  of  the  asterisms  known  as 
the  three  Uttaras.  Shravana,  Hasta,  Chitra  Anila,  Uttara 
Rohini,  Mriga,  Mula,  and  the  Punarvasu.  Agriculture  should 
be  commenced  under  the  auspicies  of  the  astrisms  Punar- 
vasu, Uttara,  Bhaga,  Mula,  and  Varuna,  which  should  be 
done  on  Thursdays,  Fridays,  Mondays  and  Sundays,  or 
when  the  sun  enters  the  sign  of  Taurus.  Virgo,  and  Gemini 
respectively.  Seeds  should  be  sown  on  the  second,  fifth, 
seventh,  tenth,  third  or  the  thirteenth  of  a fortnight  or 
on  days  marked  by  the  asterisms  of  Revati,  Rohini,  Indra, 
Agni,  Hasta,  Maitri,  Uttara,  Mula,  Shravana,  and  Bhaga. 
Harvests  of  rice  should  be  reaped  on  the  appearance  of  the 
asteriism  Mriga,  or  of  those  presided  over  by  the  Pitris,  or 
under  the  auspicious  influence  of  Hasta,  Chitra,  Aditi,  Svati, 
Revati,  or  the  three  asterisms  beginning  with  the  Shravana, 
which  should  be  gathered  in  on  Thursdays,  Fridays,  Wednes- 
days, or  in  the  Sthira  Lagnas  under  the  influence  of  the  as- 
terisms of  Magha,  Yesta,  and  the  Uttaras  (44 — 51*) 

The  following  Mantras  written  on  a leaf  and  placed 
amidst  the  heap  of  rice  under  the  influence  of  asterisms 
known  as  the  three  Purvas,  Vishakha,  Dhanistha  or  Varuna 
gives  an  increase  in  the  produce  of  the  same.  “Om  salutation 
unto  thee,  Oh  thou  god  of  all  wealth  who  grantest  opulence 
to  thy  votaries.  I make  obeisance  to  thee.  Dost  thou  give 
me  wealth.  Om  obeisance  to  thee,  Oh  goddess  Ila  (Laksrai) 
under  whose  fostering  care  population  thrives  and  who  art 
the  desire  incarnate,  dost  thou  give  me  wealth  in  the  course 
of  this  new  year.  Rice  should  be  taken  out  of  a granary 
on  day*  marked  by  the  six  abovesaid  asterisms  and  tanks, 

s should  be  consecrated  when  the 


mm  puranap 


sun  is  in  the  sign  of  cancer.  The  god  Hari  should  be  laid 
down  on  the  twelfth  day  of  a fortnight  when  the  sun  would 
be  in  the  sign  of  the  Gemini  (5 2 — 54.)  . ' 

The  god  Indra  should  be  considered  as  got  out  of  his 
bed,  and  the  god  Hari  as  gradually  waking  on  the  twelfth 
day  of  the  fortnight  after  the  new  moon  (Darsha)  when  the 
sun  enter's  the  signs  of  Sinha  and  Tauli  respectively. 
Similarly  the  goddess  Durga  should  be  invoked  on  the  eighth 
day  of  the  fortnight  when  the  sun  is  in  the  sign  of  Virgo.  The 
tithi  known  as  the  Bhadra  occurring  on  a Tuesday,  Sunday 
or  a Saturday  marked  by  the  three  feet  of  a constellation, 
gives  rise  to  the  astral  combination  known  as  the  Tripush- 
kara  Yoga.  The  combination  of  a purified  moon  with 
the  purified  stars*  is  the  fit  occasion  for  doing  all  sorts  of 
religious  ceremonies  (55 — 57.) 

The  moon  standing  in  the  first  or  occupying  the  sixth, 
seventh,  tenth,  or  the  eleventh  house  from  the  sign  of  one’s 
own  nativity  grants  prosperity,  while  in  a light  fortnight  the 
second,  fifth,  or  the  ninth  house  of  occupation  of  that  luminary 
brings  in  good  luck.  Of  the  stars  respectively  known  as  the 
Mitra,  Atimitra,  Sadhaka,  Sam  pat  and  Kshema,  etc.,  of  a 
man’s  horoscope,  the  ascendency  of  the  one  called  Mitra 
brings  about  his  death  while  the  Star  known  as  the  Vipat  is 
the  precursor  of  the  loss  of  one’s  fortune  if  ascendant.  The 
stars  called  the  Pratyari  while  ascendant  leads  a person  to 
the  'grave,  while  the  Nidhana  star  pf  his  nativity  is  an  active 
agent  in  reducing  his  essential  body  which  serves  as  the 
sheath  of  a human  soul  to  its  original  elementary  cons- 
tituents (58-^60).  The  moon  is  said  to  be  feeble  during  the 
fifteen  days  from  the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight 


* The  moon  to  be  pure  when  the  Zodical  sign  of  the  day 

of  celebration  of  any  particular  ceremony  becomes  identical  with,  or 
stands,  third,  sixth,  seventh,  tenth,  or  eleventh  from  sign  of  the  per- 
former’s nativity,  the  moon  being  also  held  as  absolutely  pure  on  the 
■second,  fifth,  and  the  ninth  day  a light  fortnight.  ~ 


490 


AGN1  PORANAM. 


to  the  corresponding  day  of  the  light  one,  and  is  supposed 
to  be  full  from  after  the  abovesaid  period.  A full  moon 
occurring  on  a Thursday,  Monday  or  on  a Friday  when  the 
5t]n  is  in  the  sign  of  Taurus,  or  in  that  of  Gemini,  is  called 
the  Jest  ha,  while  those  occurring  in  the  month  of  Jaistha  or 
when  the  sun  is  in  the  Prajapatya  are  also  designated  by  the 
same  epithet. 

The  banner  in  honour  of  the  god  Indra  and  known  as  the 
Indradhvaja  should  be  unfurled  under  the  "asterisms  begin- 
ing  with  Svati  in  the  month  of  Bhadra, ’while  the  same  should 
be  wound  up  and  lowered  down  after  a week  while  the  as- 
terism'Ashvini  enters  the  sign  of  Leo  (60—64). 

During  a solar  eclipse  any  gift  made  should  be  con- 
sidered as  worth  its  value  in  gold,  while  all  Brahmanas 
should  be  deemed  as  pure  as  the  god  Brahma  himself,  all  the 
streams  attaining  an  equal  sanctity  with  the  Ganges.  The 
moments  when  the  sun  passes  off  from  one  Zodical  sign 
to  the  other  (Sankranti)  are  respectively  known  as  the 
Dhankhi,  Mahodari,  Ghora,  Manda,  Mandakini,  Dvija  and 
Rakshashi.  A passing  off  of  the  sun  in  a standing  posture 
(Bhava)  from  one  sign  to  the  other  during  one  of  the  astral 
combinations  (Karanum)  known  as  the  Valava,  Koulava, 
Naga,  Taitila,  fills  the  world  with  joy  and  happiness, 
poverty  and  harassment  by  a sovereign  follows  in  the  wake 
of  the  sun  entering  a new  sign  of  the  Zodiac  during  one  of 
the  astral  combinations  known  as  the  Gara,  Vava,  Vanik, 
Visti,  Ktiitughna  and  the  Shakuni,  while  the  transit  made  in  a 
laid  down  position  (Bhaba)  by  the  latter  in  one  of  the  Karanas 
known  as  the  Chatuspada,  Visti,  and  the  Vanik  portends 
famine,  war  between  the  ruling  sovereigns,  and  quarrel  among 
husbands  and  wives.  The  transit  of  the  sun  and  the  moon 
under  the  influence  of  the  star  of  one’s  nativity  augurs 
disease  and  difficulty,  while  that  occurring  on  days  marked 
by  the  asterisms  of  Krittika  (Pleides)  and  the  Rohini  brings 
misery 


mine  and  three  days  respectively.  A Sankranti 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


491 


falling  on  a day  marked  by  the  asterisms  of  Mrigashira, 
Punarvasu  and  Pushya  ushers  in  five  and  seven  bad  days 
respectively,  the  one  coming  on  while  the  asterism  Ardra 
is  in  ascendency,  brings  deathlike  misery.  A passing  off 
of  the  sun  into  a new  Zodical  sign  is  followed  by  nine  bad 
days,  and  misery  lasting  for  two,  three  and  five  months 
respectively,  when  the  same  comes  about  on  days  marked 
by  the  asterisms  of  Ashlesha,  Purvafalguni  and  the  Uttaras 
respectively,  while  the  one  occurring  on  the  day  marked  by 
the  influence  of  Magha,  leads  the  man  born  under  its 
influence  to  the  cremation  ground  (64—72.) 


The  asterism  Cbifcra,  while  the  sun  is  in  that  of  Hasta 
brings  misery  for  a fortnight,  while  the  asterisms  known 
as . the  Svati  and  the  Vishaka  in  the  latter  position 
bring  So  evil  days  for  a period  of  two  months  and 
twenty  days  respectively.  Similarly  a Sankranti  falling 
00  days  marked  by  Maitra,  Jestha,  or  the  Purvashada 
portends  danger  for  ten,  twenty  and  two  hundred  and 
forty  days  respectively,  while  the  one  coming  about  on 
a day  while  the  asterism  Muia  is  in  ascendency  brings  in 
trouble  which  can  never  be  got  rid  of.  Likewise  the  sun 
changing  its  previous  sign  and  passing  off  into  the  next 
under  the  influence  of  the  asterisms  Uttara,  Shravana. 
Dhanistha  and  Varuna  brings  in  trouble  for  twenty,  sixty, 
fifteen,  and  ten  days  respectively ; while  the  one  happening  on 
days  marked  by  the  asterism  Bhadrapada,'  portends  irremedi- 
able trouble  while  those  falling  on  days  marked  by  the  aster- 
isms of  Uttaras,  Revafci,  and  the  Ashinis  portend  evil  for 
fifteen,  ten,  or  a single  day,  the  one  taking  place  under  the 
influence  of  the  asterism  Bharini,  augurs  loss  of  life  to  a 
person  whose  nativity  is  controlled  by  the  same. 


Oh  Brahman,  the  evils  enumerated  above  should  be 
remedied  by  performing  a Homa  ceremony  with  the  Gyatri 

Mantra,  or  by  making  a gift  of  a cow  with  the  five  sorts  o£ 

, V'V.Lf 


V If 


AGNi  PUR  A NAM, 


seed  garin  and  clarified  butter  or  a quantity  of  Sessamum 
Orientate  to  a Brahmin. 

The  period  of  the  influence  of  the  different  planets 
(Dasha)  varies  asiollows  : — The  period  of  solar  influence  is 
six  years,  while  those  of  the  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Saturn, 
Jupiter,  the  Node  and  the  Venus  are  ten,  fifteen,  eight, 
seventeen,  ten,  ninteen,  twelve  and  twenty  one  years 
respectively  (65 — 79.)  * 


CHAPTER  CXXI1 


Oaid  the  God  of  fire  : — Now  I shall  describe  the 
Svarodaya  Chakra  by  means  of  which  the  success  or  failure 
of  a particular  undertaking  should  be  first  determind  and 
specially  when  a soverign  would  start  on  a military  expedi- 
tion against  his  neighbour.  The  A.  E.  U.  A and  O should 
be  written  in  the  different  chambers  of  the  mystic  diagram 
(Svarodaya  Chakra)  and  below  them  the  Tithis  such  as  the 
Nanda,  etc.,  together  with  the  names  of  the  planets  such  as 
the  Mars,  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  and  the  Venus,  the  Saturn 
being  represented  in  the  righthand  side  of  the  diagram  as 
well  as  the  Mars,  and  the  Sun.  Then  the  time  between  the 
rising  of  the  sun  to  its  reappearance  on  the  morrow  should 
be  multiplied  by  thirty-nine  and  then  divided  by  the  number 
twelve,  and  the  quotient  in  its  turn  should  be  again  divided 
by  nine  and  three  respectively,  the  quotient  being  the  time  of 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


493 


predominence  of  the  vowels  or  the  principles  they  represent 
from  day  to  day.  The  Tithi,  reckoned  as  above,  and  on  which 
the  predominance  takes  place,  brings  death  to  the  organiser 
of  any  expedition  started  on  the  same,  the  vowels  being 
held  as  juvenile,  young  and  old  in  their  respective  third,  fifth 
and  the  sipcth  Mansion  or  Chamber.  The  above  is  said  to 
be  setting  when  in  its  eleventh  Chamber  (Ansha),  winch 
position  together  with  the  fifth  brings  death  and  reverses  of 
arms  in  battle  (i — 7). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  circle  of  the  Saturn*  (Shani 
Chakra)  which  consists  of  the  twenty-seven  asterisms  arranged 
in  the  shape  of  a human  figure.  One  asterism  should  form 
the  face  of  the  figure,  four  asterism  in  due  order  should  be 
in  its  right  hand,  five  occupying  the  region  of  the  heart, 
five  forming  its  left  hand,  three  forming  the  head  and  the 
two  occupying  the  region  of  the  eyes,  while  the  last  two 
asterisms  should  be  placed  on  its  buttocks.  The  different 
asterisms  grouped  as  above  signify  good  or  evil  to  the 


* tot  1%f%c5rT  ^fwri%rr:  i 

?rer  w 11 

1%  wwgit 1 

m w*r  w 

%%  iRi  gw  m 1 

3%  <?%  fmt  wf?  11 

TT&i  irw  g%  1 

^ mm:  sjf^r  1 
wfg  11 

<t?t  gw  11 

, , . I 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


persons  starting  the  expedition  under  their  respective 
Influence.  Each  of  the  planets  continues  for  half  a month 
in  the  circle  of  the  Saturn,  which  should  be  divided  into 
fifteen  parts,  the  part  assigned  to  the  latter  being  always 
held  as  bad  and  consequently  any  work  undertaken  under  its 
malignant  influence  would  end  in  failure  and  disaster  (8h 

Now  I shall  speak  about  the  Koorma  Chakra/*  which 
consists  of  a diagram  resembling  a tortoise  in  shape.  The 
twenty-seven  asterisms  beginning  with  the  Krittikas  should 
be  ranged  therein  in  groups  of  threes  at  the  centre  and  the 
eight  directions  thereof,  from  the  east  by  the  south-east,  and  so 
on.  [The  different  divisions  of  India  and  China  which  should 
be  placed  under  the  respective  influence  of  the  abovesaid 
asterisms  have  been  mentioned  in  the  Jyotistattva. 

A journey  from  a country  to  one  which  stands  in  the 
relation  of  Vedha  (hostility)  to  the  former  is  always  inauspi- 
cious and  similarly  from  a place  to  the  other  presided  over  by 
the  Saturn  in  the  same  diagram  (/.<?.,  the  countries  placed 
under  the  asterisms  beginning  with  the  Magha  and  ending 
with  the  Krittikas  (9). 

Now  I shall  describef  the  Rahu  Chakra  (the  circle  of 
the  Nodes)  and  the  astrological  calculation  to  be  conducted 


The  East  is  Veda  (hostile)  to  the  West. 

„ North  is  „ ,,  ,,  South. 

5I  North-east  is  „ „ „ South-west, 

55  South-east  is  ,,  ,,  ,,  North-west, 

r ^ , f-. ... 

TTSRJ  mWTCFT:  fl 

f vFznmmtti  tariff  1 

wf#srf?TfTTw:  11 

'if  I m ftERTt  TTfl#  rritfarfl  % 1 
* - ^ 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


493 


by  means  thereof.  The  Rahu  Chakra  consists  ©f  a square 
divided  into  thirty-six  small  square  Chambers  (Saptashalaka), 
The  Rahu  travels  contrarily  like  the  Knight  on  a chessboard. 
On  the  day  of  the  full  moon  its  travels  from  the  south-east 
by  the  north-west  to  the  south-west,  occupying  the  north- 
west quarter  of  the  sky  on  the  day  of  a new  moon.  The 
asterism  oGcupied  by  the  Rahu  on  any  particular  day  is  called 
its  mouth  while  the  fifteenth  asterism  from  the  latter  should 
be  deemed  as  its  tail.  In  a light  fortnight  the  Rahu  affects 
the  moon  while  in  the  dark  one  it  follows  the  movements 
of  the  Sun.  A journey  should  not  be  undertaken  to  the 
north-west,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  fortnight,  to  the 
west,  and  the  south  on  its  fourth  and  the  eighth  days  respec- 
tively (10—15). 

The  fifteen  Muhartas,  Oh  Brahman,  are  named  as  Roudra 
Shveta,  Maitra  Sarabhata,  Savitra,  Virochana,  Jayadeva, 
Abhijit,  Ravana,  Vijaya,  Nandi,  Varuna,  Yama,  Soumya,  and 
Bhaba.  Violent  deeds  should  be  done  in  the  Muharta  known 
as  Roudra,  while  religious  and  ceremonial  ablutions  should 
be  performed  in  the  one  named  as  Shveta.  Marriages  of 
daughters  should  be  celebrated  in  the  Muharta  called  Maitra, 
while  all  auspicious  and  blissful  ceremonies  should  be  under- 

WrTT  WIW  m SfcPE  I 


j 

^rfrosar:  ft 

1 

3tt%  w *rr?rc  f%ti^?ncrfTf5! 

mft&c.  1 


. ;/%  *•  I |§J 

,y  ■ ,, 


agni  puranam. 


taken  during  the  continuance  of  the  one  known  as  Sarabhata. 
Ceremonies  attendant  upon  a victory  in  war  should  be 
performed  under  the  auspicies  of  the  Muharta  known  as 
Jayadeva,  while  a battle  should  be  commenced  as  soon  as  the 
one  named  Ravana  sets  in.  All  acts  concerning  trade  and 
agriculture  should  be  done  under  the  auspicies  of  the  moment 
known  "as  Vijaya,  the  one  named  as  Nandi  being  most  propi- 
tious for  the  purpose  of  pitching  a royal  camp.  The  excava- 
tion of  wells  and  tanks  should  be  commenced  at  the  happy 
moment  (Muharta)  known  as  Varuna,  while  acts  of  des- 
truction should  be  done  at  the  moment  presided  over  by 
the  god  of  death  and  which  has  got  its  epithet  from  the 
latter  deity,  while  acts  of  bliss  should  be  done  in  the  moment 
known  as  Soumya. 

The  Yogas  or  astral  conditions  which  prevail  throughout 
the  day  exert  influences  as  what  their  names  signify.  Those 
having  hostile  epithets,  exercise  malignant  influences,  while 

those  not  banefully  denominated  cast  good  luck. 

The  Rahu  (Node)  travels  from  the  east  to  the  north-west, 
and  thence  to  the  south.  From  the  south  it  goes  over  to 
the  south-east,  and  from  the  north-east  to  the  west  and 
thence  to  the  south-east,  and  which  after  the  expiry  of  four 
Ghatikas  affect  the  point  of  Sankrama.  This  is  what  is 
known  as  the  Rahu  Chakra  (16  22). 

Before  setting  out  on  conquest,  a priuce  should  wear  on 

his  body  the  following  drugs  of  mysterious  potency  such  as 

the  Chandi,  Indrani,  Varahi,  Mushali,  H-ill  Karnika,  Vala, 
Ativala,  Kshiri,  Mallika,  Jati,  Yuthika,  as  well  as  the  flowers 
and  leaves  of  Arka,  Shveta-Guduchi,  Vaguri.etc.,  for  ensuring 
the  mission  of  the  expedition. 

He  should  tie  up  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  his  head 
into  a knot  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Om 
salutation  unto  the  god  Bhairava,  who  wields  a sword  and  a 
battle-axe  in  his  hands  and  who  wards  off  all  impediments 
which  stand  in  the  way  of  victory,  Om,  Hrum,  Om,  Hrum, 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


497 


Fat.,J  With  the  same  Mantra,  a sovereign  bent  on  conquest 
should  apply  collyrium  along  his  eye-lashes  and  put  the 
Tjlak  mark  on  the  ridge  of  his  nose  and  expose  his  body 
to  the  fumes  of  scented  resins  (16 — '25).i 

Now,  O Brahman,  hear  me  describe  the  different  sorts  of 
unguents,  oils  and  powdered  drugs  known  as  the  Yoga-dhuli 
which  should  be  used  for  the  attainment  of  different  ends 
and  desires.  A Tilak  mark,  composed  of  Subhana,  Manas- 
shila,  Talam,  Shellac  and  the  milk  of  Taruni  and  put  on  the 
forehead,  imparts  ascendency  over  one's  rivals,  while  the  one, 
composed  of  Vishnukranta,  Sarpaksi,  Sahadeva  and  Rochona, 
acts  as  an  hypnotic  a^ent  in  subiupratincr  the  minHs  of  all 


63 


CHAPTER  CXXIII 


sis  of  the  science  of  Astrology  whereby  a sovereign  would 
achieve  splendid  victories  in  war  without  the  help  of  any 
incantation  or  charmed  drugs.  I shall  narrate  it  presently 
and  without  any  reservation  whatever  as  it  was  disclosed  to 
me  by  the  god  himself.  “The  goddess  (Uma)  addressed  the 
god  Shiva  as  follows  “ Tell  me,  O lord,  how  the  gods  con- 
quered the  infernal  demons,  discourse  on  the  science  known 
as  the  Yuddha  Jayarnava  whereby  incidents  good  or  evil  may 
be  easily  foretold.”  The  god  said — “Out  of  the  will-power 
of  the  Supreme  Being  there  originated  a force  whose  expo- 
nents are  the  fifteen  letters  of  the  alphabet  and  from  whom 
the  universe  has  subsequently  emanated.  By  worshipping 
that  force,  O goddess,  I have  come  to  know  of  all  the  know- 
ables  and  I shall  presently  discuss  the  congety  of  Mantras 
that  have  arisen  out  of  the  five  principal  ones  composed.of  the 
abovesaid  letters.  These  Mantras,  0 goddess,  are  the  life 
and  soul  of  all  other  Mantras.  They  form  the  back  bone  as 
it  were,  of  the  Vedas,  Rik,  Sam,  Yajur,  and  the  Atharva.  The 
Mantras  known  as  the  Sadyaiatas,  etc.,  are  but  the  different 


AGN1  PURANAM 


very  existence  even.  Oh  thou  greatest  of  the  goddesses, 
divine  energy  in  question  first  revealed  itself  in  the  sound 
of  the  Pranava  Mantra  “Omkar,  *f  and  then  the  phonetic 
symbol  of  Vindu  became  associated  with  the  “E’kar”  (sic). 
Then  the  vowel  “U’kar”  became  patent  in  the  heart  of 
the  Supreme  Brahma  at  the  time  of  chaunting  the  mystic 
Om.  THe  phonetic  symbol  of  “ Pkar,  ” resembling  the 
crescent  moon,  in  shape  should  be  considered  as  the  opener 
of  the  way  to  salvation.  Then  the  vowel  sound  of  “ A’kar i9 
was  heard  as  revolving  in  eddies  through  the  vast  waste  of 
multitudinous  eddying  light  of  creation  as  emblematic  of 
the  spiritual  agency  of  imparting  enjoyment  and  salvation, 
whereas  the  sound  of  “A’kar”  should  be  known  as  the  highest 
stage  of  the  attributes  of  the  supreme  godhead  (6— 10). 

The  energy  known  as  the  Ida  Shakti  should  be  known 
as  a fixed  energy  (Sthira  Shakti)  and  is  the  receptacle  of 
vitality  characterised  by  the  proper  sensible  of  smelt 
(Gandha).  The  phonetic  sign  of  “Ikar,”  is  emblematic  of  the 
beatific  phase  of  divinity  known  as  the  Pratistha,  whereas 
the  occult  nerve  known  as  the  Pingala  is  the  receptacle  of 
the  essence  of  the  Apana  wind  and  is  permeated  with  a 
sort  of  dreadful  psychic  force  (Krura  Shakti.)  The  Vija 
Mantra  sacred  to  the  god  Hara  is  full  of  the  essence  of 
fire.  The  other  occult  energies  flowing  within  the  spiritual 
organs  of  a human  being  are  the  Samana,  Gandhari  and 
Dahani.  The  u Omkar  ” should  be  deemed  as  the  beatific 
attribute  of  the  supreme  being  known  the  beatitude  beyond 
the  state  of  absolute  bliss  (Shantyatitakshya)  which  brings 
the  very  touch,  as  it  were,  of  the  water  of  absolute  bliss,  and 
which  in  its  turn  is  the  resultant  of  the  effects  of  the  vital 
wind  of  Udana  (t  I — 13),  jj  _ ( ■ ^ / § 

The  vowels  are  divided  into  five  classes  emblematic  of  the 
planets  known  as  the  Mars,  the  Mercury,  the  Jupiter,  the  Venus, 
and  the  Saturn  respectively.  These  are  the  seeds,  0 goddess, 
of  all  things  subsequently  developed,  and  now  I shal* 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


describe  the  Vidyapitha  which  is  as  follows  : — The  Pranava  as 
told  by  Shiva,  consists  of  the  essence  of  the  gods  Brahma, 
Vishnu  and  Rudra,  and  the  essential  and  universal  virtues  of 
Svatta,  Raja  and  Tamas.*  The  regions  of  bliss  such  as  the 
Heaven,  etc,  together  with  the  beatific  attributes  they  stand 
for  are  all  embodied  in  the  phonetic  symbol  of  the  f‘Omkar,J 
and  the  divine  energies  known  as  the  Varna,  Yestha,  Roudri 
and  that  of  the  God  Soma  (the  emblem  of  life)  are  as  well  1b- 
cated  therein.  The  three  occult  nerves  known  as  Rafcna  Nadifcf 
are  named  as  the  Sthula  (material),  the  Sukhsma  (psychic) 

* three  different  aspects  of  the  one  and  the  same  universal  force 
working  in  the  planes  of  matter,  mind  and  spirit  and  known  as  the 
forces  of  adhesion,  cohesion,  and^disintegration,  which  are  converted  Into 
hate,  antipathy  or  love  in  the  second  and  the  third  plane  respectively, 
according  to  the  laws  of  the  occult  conversion  of  energy* 

i The  three  Ratna  Nadis  are  the  occult  psychic  nerves  known  as 
the  Ida,  Pingala  and  the  Sushumna.  The  first  and  the  second  are 
respectively  situated  at  the  left  and  the  right  of  the  spinal  column, 
while  the  third  enters  the  brain  through  the  latter.  The  colours  of  the 
first  and  the  second  are  like  those  of  the  moon  and  the  pomegranade 
flower,  while  the  third  is  permeated  with  the  essence  of  all  the  gods, 

WtWT:  cTTffwt  t 

* ? r WFr  fefTT  WT  1 I 

srfww  ^ ^mT^rtfwfT  11 


tourer  %?tt  m i 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


and  the  Parapara  (the  supreme  essential),  and  are  possessed 
of  a white  effulgence,  dropping  dews  of  the  most  blissful 
nectar  (14— 17).  ' ' 

Oh  Goddess,  a man  by  meditating  upon  the  system  of  the 
three  abovesaid  occult  nerves  flooding  the  soul,  day  and  night, 
with  waters  of  the  nectar,  enjoy  an  immunity  from  all  senile 
decay  and  imbecility  and  becomes  identical  with  the  Supreme 
Blissful  One  (Shiva)  (iS). 

The  rite  of  Anganyasa  should  be  performed  at  the  tips  of 
thumbs,  etc  as  laid  down  before,  and  the  inner  eye  should  be 
made  to  open  up  so  as  to  witness  the  workings  of  that 
wonderful  divine  human,  the  psychic  inner  being.  Subse- 
quent to  that  the  sovereign  thus  equipped  and  self- 
communed  and  bent  on  conquest,  should  worshin  the  (Ind 


- r , fun--,  , , 

?rff  g 1 

cranr*  1 

gsnjrf  1 

fsrt«nf*rfer  w froratlrararproR  11 

>» 


AGNI  PUR  ANA  M. 


under  discussion,  is  the  abode  of  the  proper  sensible  of 
sound.  The  proper  sensible  of  touch  lying  around  its 
petals  should  be  touched  obliquely  and  in  a slanting 
manner.  The  proper  sensible  of  Rupa  (light  or  sight) 
darts  forth  upward  from  underneath  the  mystic  essen- 
tial water  below  the  abovesaid  occult  lotus,  the  proper 
sensible  of  smell  having  had  no  other  location  in  the 
system  of  psychic  ganglia  than  the  one  now  under  dis- 
cussion. The  lotus  shines  effulgent  with  the  transcendent 
splendour  of  the  fatal  fire  of  universal  dissolution,  and  doubly 
resplendent  with  the  spiritual  essence  of  the  God  Shiva.  Oh 
Goddess,  the  latter  should  be  deemed  as  the  life-principle  of 
all  created  beings  whether  animate  or  [apparently]  in- 
animate as  the  hills  and  mountains,  eltk,  and  whose  absence 
from  the  Mantra-pitha  means  death  of  this  windy  animation 
(19—22). 


CHAPTER  CXXV, 


1 he  God  SAID: — The  Maha  Vidya  (Mantra)  sacred  to 
the  Goddess  Karnamothi  should  be  read  by  a man  burning 
with  trage  and  with  red  bloodshot  eyes,  with  a view  to 
bring  about  the  death  or  fall  of  his  enemy  or  to  enthrall 
bis  mental  capacities  or  to  drive  him  mad.  The  Vidya 
or  the  Mantra  which  is  sacred  to  the  Goddess  Karnamothi, 
the  protectress  of  all  animate  beings  is  as  follows  : — Om 
Hrim  obeisance  to  the  Goddess  Karnamothi  Who  is  manifest 
in  various  shapes  and  is  possessed  of  innumerable  horrid 
teeth.  Hrim  fut  to  the  same  Goddess.  Om  Has.  Om  devour 
and  devour,  cut  open  and  cut  open  (the  bowels  of  my 
enemies)  and  suck  and  suck  their  veins  dry.  Hrim  Fut,  I 
make  obeisence  (ik  ...  ....  , ..  . 


AGNI  PU'R  A NAM, 


Now  I shall  speak  of  the  various  incantations  (Vidyas) 
which  should  be  used  in  connection  with  the  accomplishment 
of  fell  and  diabolical  purposes.  First  I shall  describe  the 
process  of  ascertaining  the  appearance  of  the  five*  essential 
principles  (Panchatattvas)  of  earth,  sky,  etc.,  within  the 
body  of  a votary  of  any  particular  deity  and  the  process 
known  as  the  Svarodaya.  A votary  of  the  goddess  burning 
with  rage  after  having  finished  the  necessary  Japa  and  the 
a should  perform  the  rite  of  Uchchatan  before  the  com- 
mencement of  the  war,  while  his  breath-wind  would  travel 
from  the  umbilicus  to  the  heart.  He  should  let  it  pass  it 
through  his  ears  and  the  eyes  at  the  time.  A rite,  in  connection 


AGNI  PUHANAM, 


should  be  performed  while  the  wind  blows  from  the  heart  to 
the  throat  of  the  votary.  Acts,  in  connection  with  the  rites  of 
conferring  peace  and  prosperity  on  a person,  should  be  under- 
taken when  the  wind  blows  through  the  larynx  of  the  votary. 
The  proper  sensible  of  smell  (Gandha)  should  be  considered 
as  located  between  the  roots  of  the  eyebrows,  and  a votary 
while  practising  a rite  of  Stambhanam  or  of  Akarsbanam 
should  concentrate  his  mind  at  that  point.  A Stambhanam, 
practised  as  above  indicated,  is  sure  to  produce  the  desired 
effect.  Likewise  the  votary  should  practice  an  act  of  Kilakam, 
as  laid  down  above  under  the  practice  of  Stambhanam,  and 
the  two  latter  should  be  practised  by  propitiating  the  god- 
dess known  as  Chandaghanta,  Karali,  Sumukhi,  Durmukhi, 
Revati,  Prathama  )and  Ghora  in  the  circle  or  the  belt  of  the 
air  (Vayu-Chakra).\  The  Goddesses  who  preside  over  the 
practices  of  Uchchat^nam  are  situated  in  the  belt  of  the  light, 
and  are  called  Soui^ya,  Bhisani,  Devi,  Jaya,  while  Vsjaya, 
Ajita,  Aparajita,  Mahiakoti,  Roudri,  Shushkakaya,  and  Pran- 
hara  are  the  Goddesses  who  dwell  in  the  proper  sensibles  of 
smell,  and  they  are  to  be  propitiated  in  acts  of  Stambhanam 
and  Akarsbanam  as  above  indicated.  The  celestial  mothers 
are  Virupakshi,  Hara,  Divya,  Sanhari,  Jatahari,  Danstrala, 
Shushka,  Revati,  Pipilika,  Pustihari,  Mahapustipravardhana, 
Bhadrakali.  Subhadra,  Bhadrabhima,  Subhadrika,  Sthira, 


we  groups 


Ami  PURANAM. 


Ta,  Pa,  Ya  and  Sha  (2)  E,  EE,  Kfaa,  Ccha,  Tha,  Tba,  Pha,  Ra, 
and  Sha.  (3)  U,  W,  Ga,  Ja,  Da,  D,  Va,  and  La.  (4)  A,  Aai, 
Gha,  Jha,  Dha,  Dh,  Bha,  B and  Ha,  and  (5)  O,  Ous  An,  As, 
Unga,  Enga,  and  Na,  Na,  and  Ma.  During  the  ascendency 
of  the  principles  of  which  these  letters  are  the  symbols  in  a 
human  being,  a child  becomes  a young  man  and  an  old  man 
becomes  inert  as  death.  (17—19). 

The  asterism  Krittika,  as  well  as  the  first  day  of  a fortnight, 
whether  fight  or  dark,  and  the  planet  Mars  are  favourably 
disposed  towards  making  one's  profit,  while  the  sixth  day  of 
the  fortnight  'and  the  asterism  Mula  occurring  on  a Tuesday, 
and  the  eleventh  day  of  the  fortnight  coming  on  on  a Wednes- 
day,fmarked  by  the  asterism  Ardra,  are  harbingers  of  physical 
pain.  A Tuesday  (Gna)  being  the  second  day  of  the 
fortnight  and  marked  by  the  asterism  Magha  should  be  held 
as  favourable  to  gain.  A Wednesday  marked  by  the  asterism 
Bharani  brings  loss,  while  the  asterism  [Shravana  being  the 
ruling  constellation  thereof  is- vitiated  by  the  same  defect 
The  tithi  Tritya  falling  on  a Thursday  marked  by  the  aster- 
ism  Purvafalguni  is  auspicious  to  profitable  [undertakings. 
A Thursday  marked  by  the  asterisms  Dhanistha  and  Ardra, 
and  being  the  eighth  day  of  the  fortnight  (Astami  tithi),  a 
Troyodashi  falling  on  the  same  day  marked  by  the  asterism 
Ashlesha  should  be  adeemed  as  very  inauspicious,  while  the 
fourth  day  of  the  fight  fortnight  (Chaturthi)  marked  by  the 
asterism  Purvabhadrapada  should  be  deemed  as  quite  its 
reverse, 

A Friday  being  the  ninth  day  of  the  fortnight  and  marked 
by  the  asterism  Purvashada  brings  in  disease,  while  the 
asterisms  Varani,  Bhutaja  and  .Yamadanda  ascendent  on  the 
same  day  should  be  deemed  as  forerunners  of  certain  loss.  A 
Saturday  being  the  fifth  day  of  the  fortnight  and  marked  by 
the  asterism  Kirttika  is  favourable  to  gain,  while  the  same 
day  should  be  held  as  positively  inauspicious  if  marked  by 
the- asterism  Ashlesha  and  if  forming  the  tenth  day  of  the  ; 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


described  above  after 
The  Rahu  travels  fror 


BliilttSlI 


fortnight  (Dashami  tithi).  A full  moon  occurring  on 
Saturday  marked  hy  the  asterism  Magha,  should  be  held?as  a- 
fatal  day  (20—29). 

The  Tithis  known  as  the  Pratipat  and  the  Navami  marked 
by  the  signs  such  as  the  Brahma,5  etc.,  bring  in  success. 
The  four-  Zodiacal  signs  of  Aries,  Aquaries,' etc.,  appearing 
Purna  (full  Tithi)  bring  in  success,  the  reverses 


of  arms  being  the  effect  of  their  appearance  otherwise.  In 
relation  to  war  or  military  expeditions  in  general  the  sun* 
exerts  no  influence  at  all  whether  good  or  bad.  The  influence 
of  the  moon  is  to  guard  against  a regiment  from  being 
badly  repulsed,  and  consequently  movements  of  troops  should 
be  made  on  the  day  presided  over  by  that  luminary  in 
order  to  vouchsafe  that  end.  The  Mars  brings  on  division  in 
the  camp  and  internacine  dissensions,  and  a Tuesday  is  not 
auspicious  for  the  movement  of  troops  for  that  reason.  The 
influence  of  the  Mercury  is  to  realise  attainment  of  one’s  end, 
that  of  Jupiter  is  success,  while  the  Venus  aud  the  Saturn 
give  rise  to  idle  speculations  and  reverses  respectively,  and 
accordingly  the  days  respectively  named  after  them  would 
bring  on  the  same  fate  for  any  expedition  started  on 
them  (30). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  Pingala  Chakra,  which  is  as 
follows.  The  asterism  in  which  the  sun  exists  for  the  time 
being  should  be  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a human  figure.  The 
three  asterisms  at  the  face,  eyes,  forehead,  hands,  thighs,  and 
the  feet,  if  identical  with  the  natal  star  of  the  organiser 
of  the  expedition  would  signify  failure,  or  the  loss  of  fortune. 
The  asterisms  grouped  around  the  face  of  the  figure  would 
signify  disease,  while  those  forming  its  hand  would  portend 
the  failure  of  the  undertaking,  the  asterisms  occupying  the 
sides  of  the  diagram  would  predict  success.  (31 — *32). 

Again  I shall  have  to  speak  about  the  Rahu  Chakra, 
the  one  designated  as  the  Kurma. 

•the  south-west,  ■ From  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


507 


south-west  it  goes  over  to  the  north.,  and  thence  to  the 
south-east.  From  the  latter  quarter  it  travels  over  to  the 
west  and  thence  to  the  north-east.  From  the  north-east  it 
again  goes  over  to  the  south  and  thence  to  the  north-west 
and  thence  finally  to  the  quarter  presided  over  by  the 
moort  gq,d,  during  the  period  of  four  ghatikas  every  day. 
(33—34)- 

Now  I shall  speak  of  the  Tithis  (lunar  phases)  which  act 
as  the  above  said  Rahu  and  of  the  different  directions  to  which 
a journey  should  be  held  inauspicious  during  their  respective 
continuance.  An  expedition  started  on  the  day  marked  by 
what  is  technically  known  as  the  back  of  the  Rahu,  brings 
on  success,  while  the  one  undertaken  at  what  is  known  as 
its  mouth  (see  above)  is  doomed  to  end  in  a series  of  caras- 
trophies^(35— • 36). 

Oh  darling,  the  different  quarters  of  the  sky  beginning 
with  the  south-east  and  ending  with  the  one  whose  presiding 
deity  is  God  Shiva  (North-east)  should  be  held  inauspicious  as 
the  Rahu  itself  on  the  day  of  the  fool  moon,  and  acrnrHin«ltp 


agni  puranam. 


50S 

letters  headed  by  the  preceding  ones  and  which  stand  for 
the  planets  such  as  the  sun,  etc.  The  Vulture,  Hawk, 
pjn gal,  Koushika,  Crane,  Peacock,  Garubu  are  the  birds 
whose  names  occur  in  the  diagram  and  which  serve  as  so 
many  heads  of  reckoning  (39 — 40). 

The  Sadhya  Mantra  used  after  the  performance  of 
a Homa  ceremony  proves  successful  in  acts  in  connec- 
tion with  hypnotism  or  mental  subjugation,  attracting  the 
minds  of  others  towards  oneself,  and  such  like  acts,  while 
the  Pallava  Mantra  should  be  used  in  an  act  of 
Ucchtatanum  (act  of  making  another  person  restless  or  ill  at 
ease  by  means  of  incantations).  In  acts  of  bliss  or  peace- 
making the  Mantra  “ Namaskara  ” (obeisance)  should  be 
made  use  of,  the  Mantra  Vousat  in  a Pusti-karma,  Hrim  in 
acts  of  killing  or  of  breaking  amity  between  two  persons, 
while  Fut  should  be  used  in  the  attempt  at  driving  one’s 
enemies  mad  or  such  purposes.  The  Mantra  Vasat  should  be 
used  in  acts  connected  with  Shanti  and  Dipti.  The  Mantras 
are  thus  divided  into  six  classes  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
work  (Satkarma)  in  which  they  are  to  be  employed  (41 — 4a). 

Now  I shall  enumerate  the  name  of  the  charmed 
drugs  and  vegetables  which  act  as  a shield  in  defending 
the  body  of  person  wearing  them  on  his  body. 

They  areas  follows  Mahakali,  Chandi,  Varahi,  Ishvari, 
Sudarshana,  Indrani,  Vala,  Ativala,  Viru,  Mushali,  Sahadevi, 
Jati,  Mallika,  Yuthi,  Garudi,  Bhringaraja  Chandrarupa,  which 
gathered  and  collected  during  an  eclipse  and  put  on  the 
body  give  victories  in  war  (43 — 45). 

Oh  thou  greatest  of  the  goddesses.  An  elephant  should 
be  constructed  of  earth,  and  the  rite  of  benumbing  the 
faculties  of  one's  enemies  should  be  performed  under  the  left 
leig  of  the  constructed  animal.  The  earth  should  be  dug 
out  of  an  ant-hill,  and  the  mysterious  rite  should  be  prac- 
tised eSthet  oh  the  desolate  summit  of  a mountain  or  in  a 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


SO© 


lightning,  the  two  Matrikas  having  been  previously  invoked 
over  the  earth  above  described, 

“Om  obeisance  to  the  great  Bhairava  (Mali a Bhairava)—* 
the  fierce»jawed,  yellow-eyed,  diabolical-looking  one  who 
wields  a sword  and  a trident  in  his  hands,  Vousat.”  The 
earth  should  be  made  permeated  with  the  above  Mantra* 
which  would  hold  in  abeyance  the  arms  of  the  enemy’s 
forces.  Now  I shall  speak  about  the  fire  rite  (Agnikaryya) 
which  should  be  performed  at  the  commencement  of  a battle 
for  ensuring  victory.  In  the  night  the  votary  should  resort 
to  a cremation  ground,  and  light  up  a fire  with  the  logs 
of  wood  found  therein  unto  which  he  should  perform  hun- 
dred and  eight  times  the  Homa  ceremony  with  poison  and 
human  flesh  and  blood,  and  broken  bones  of  dead  bodies 
by  uttering  the  name  of  his  enemy  (46 — 50). 

“Om  obeisance  to  the  goddess  Koumari,  Oh  thou; 
Ghanta  Devi,  kill  and  kill  all  on  a sudden  such  and  such  a 
person,  I make  obeisance  to  thee.  Oh  Goddess.  I make 
obeisance  to  thee,  Oh  thou  infinite  eternal  knowledge.” 
A Homa  ceremony  performed  with  the  preceding  Mantra 
brings  about  the  blindness  of  the  enemy  of  the  votary. 

Om  obeisance  to  thee,  Oh  thou  fierce-mouthed  one,  pos- 
sessed of  a twany  brown  complexion,  who  art  made  of  the 
essence  of  thunder  and  whose  jaws  are  as  hard  as  the  bolt  of 
lightning.  I make  obeisance  to  thee,  Oh  God,  thou  red- 
faced one  and  who  art  possessed  of  supernatural  strength 
and  whose  hairs  perpetually  stand  on  their  roots.  The 
serpent  tongues  of  lightning  flicker  forth  from  thy  mouth. 
Thy  fierce  jaws  are  furnished  with  rows  of  horrid  teeth* 
Oh  thou,  the  fierce  one.  Come,  Oh  thou  diabolical 
One,  who  dealest  the  hardest  blows  in  battle  and  who  hast 
bridged  the  ocean  of  Ravana  and  carried  the  mountain 
Gandhamadana)  on  thy  head.  Come,  Come,  O Bhairava,  Oh 
thou  wanderer  of  the  skies,  manifest  thy  inconceivable 
prowess.  Come,  Come,  Oh  thou  Great  Roudra,  enfold 


CHAPTER  CXXV. 


JL  HE  God  said  : — Now  I shall  discuss  the  combinations  of 
good  and  evil  asterisms  (Nakshatra  Pinda)  whereby  the 
success  or  failure  of  any  particular  undertaking  should  be 
determined  and  which  consists  of  the  continuance  of  the 
sun  in  any  particular  constellation  (i).  The]  three  stars 
out  of  the  number  constituting  that  particular  constellation 
should  be  grouped  around  the  head  of  the  human  shaped 
diagram  to  be]]made  use  of  in  reckoning  on  the  same,  one  star 
should  be  placed  on  its  face,  and  two  should  be  placed  where  its 
eyes  would  be.  Four  stars  should  be  placed  on  its  arms  and 
feet,  five  over  the  region  of  its  heart,  arms  and  the  thighs, 
and  subsequently  the  success  and  continuance  of  a person 
or  undertaking  should  be  determined  (2).  The  natal  star 
of  an  organiser  of  an  expedition  occurring  on  the  head  or 
at  the  face  of  the  diagram  predicts  success,  while  good 
luck  and  acquisition  of  things  should  be  deemed  as  the 
result  of  his  natal  star  falling  either  on  the  region  of  its  eyes 
or  the  heart.  Similarly  one's  natal  star  falling  on  the  arms 
of  the  figure  compels  him  to  commit  theft  while  its  situation 
at  one  of  its  feet  makes  the  natal  being  a homeless  wanderer 
or  leads  him  to  the  grave  (3—4}. 

The  asterisms  should  be  similarly  placed  in  the  diagram 
known  as  the  Kumbhastaka.  : The  Kumbha  assigned  to  the 


within  thy  endless  tail  such  and  such  a person,  Pierca  and 
pierce  and  trample  and  trample,  O thou  great  Hanumana.” 
A Homa  ceremony  should  be  performed  thirty-eight  times 
with  the  abovesaid  Mantra.  The  great  Hanuman,  delineated 
on  a picture,  put  one's  enemies  to  rout  and  confusion  (51). 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


AGN!  FURANAM. 


5X$ 


sun  is  the  Rickta  and  as  such  exerts  a malignant  influence, 

the  contrary  being  the  case,  when  it  is  situated  in  the 
East  (5), 

Now  I shall  describe  the  baneful  combination  known  as 
Fani  Rahu.  A diagram  consisting  of  twenty-eight  circles 
should  be  drawn,  intersected  by  four  lines  and  the  asterisms 
should  be  arranged  therein  in  rows  of  three.  The  asterisms 
occupied  by  the  Rahu  (ascending  Node)  should  be  deemed 
as  the  head  of  the  serpent  (Fani  Rahu)  after  which  the 
twenty-seven  asterisms  should  be  arranged  in  due  succession. 
The  influence  of  the  seven  asterisms  forming  the  head  of 
the  serpent  is  to  bring  about  a total  annihilation  of  the  royal 
forces  in  war,  while  those  situated  at  its  shoulders  together 
with  those  forming  the  middle  part  of  its  body  portend  the 
utter  rout,  and  confusion  among  the  ranks  of  the  royal 
forces.  The  asterisms  forming  the  belly  of  the  serpent 
(Fani  Rahu)  foretells  success  and  glory’to  the  marching  hosts, 
while  the  asterisms  lying  about  the  waist  of  the  diagramed 
serpent  predicts  the  ascendency  of  the  beseiging  sovereign 
over  his  adversary.  The  asterisms  situated  at  the  tail-end 


512 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


known  as  the  hundred  stars  (the  twenty-fourth  lunar  man* 
sion.)  A journey  should  be  undertaken  on  days  marked 
by  the  five  moving  asterisms  or  on  those  controlled  by 
the  asterisms  named  the  Anuradha,  the  Hasta,  the 
Mula,  the  Mriga,  the  Pushya  and  the  Punurvasus.  The 
asterisms  enumerated  above  together  with  the  Jestha,  Chitra, 
and  the  Vishakha  should  be  deemed  as  propitious  for  all 
peaceful  undertakings,  while  the  asterisms  designated  as 
the  three  Purvas,  the  Agni,  and  the  Bharani  should  be  held  as 
the  stars  for  practising  all  diabolical  incantations.  All  works 
not  requiring  any  change  of  place  should  be  done  under 
the  auspicies  of  the  fixed  asterisms,  while  the  fleet  or  the 
moving  asterisms  should  be  held  auspicious  for  undertaking 
a journey.  All  the  rites  or  practices  in  connection  with 
conferring  prosperity  on  an  individual  should  be  performed 
under  the  auspicies  of  the  mild]  (Mridu)  asterisms,  while 
violent  deeds  should  be  done  under  the  influence  of  the 
malignant  ones.  A horible  rite  should  be  practised  at  a 
time  controlled  by  the  hostile  constellations  (ll-— 17). 

Now  I shall  enumerate  the  works  which  should  be  done 
by  a person  with  his  face  bent  down  and  the  names  of  the 
asterisms  under  whose  influence  they  should  be  respectively 
done.  The  excavations  of  tanks,  wells,  and  ditches,  etc., 
as  well  as  those  in  connection  with  the  preparation  and  ad- 
ministration of  medicine  and  works  of  teaching  generally  should 
be  commenced  under  the  auspicies  of  the  asterisms  known 
as  the  three  Purvas,  which  are  also  auspicious  for  the  first 
construction  or  launching  of  a boat  The  nine  asterisms  which 
look  laterally  are  the  Revati,  Ashvini,  the  Chitra,  the  Ha&ta 
the  Svati,  the  Punarvasu,  the  Anuradha,  the  Mrigies  and  the 
Jfestha.  The  installation  ceremony  of  a prince,  the  pitching 
of  a royal  camp,  the  erection  of  sheds  for  horses  and 
bants  or  the  construction  of  a garden  house,  palace, 
iog,  walls,  and  gates  to  a field  should  be  performed  and 


*GN»  PURANAM.  5IJ 

preceding  asterisms,  which  are  similarly  friendly  for  the 
purpose  of  erecting  a flag-post  or  of  unfurling  a banner 
(18 — 2i).  A Dvadashi  (day  on  which  the  Moon  is  in  her 
twelfth  phase)  falling  on  a Sunday,  an  Ekadashi(a  day  of  the 
eleventh  lunar  phase)  coming  on  a Monday,  a Dashami  (a  day 
of  the  tenth  lunar  phase)  occurring  on  a Tuesday,  as  well  as 
a Trida  (a  day  of  the  third  lunar  phase)  happening  on  a 
Wednesday  and  a Sasthi  (a  day  of  the  sixth  lunar  phase) 
falling  on  a Thursday  and  a Dvitia  (the  day  when  the 
is  in  her  second  phase,  whether 
occurring  on  a Friday  and  a 


moon 

increasing  or  waning) 
Saptami  coming  about  on  a 
Saturday  are  known  as  the  Dagdha  (lit.  burnt-days  (22—23). 

Now  1 shall  deal  with  the  astral  combination  known  as 
the  Tripuskara.  The  six  asterisms  known  as  the  Vishakha, 
Krittika,  the  two  Uttaras,  the  twin  Punarvasus,  and  the  Purva- 
Bhadrapada  pass  under  the  names  of  the  Tripuskara.  Any 
profit  made,  any  gain  derived,  any  success  achieved,  any  son 
born,  any  thing  lost,  any  thing  fallen  from  its  place, or  any  thing 
destroyed  during  the  continuance  of  a Tripuskara  brings  in 
a repetion  of  thrice  such  gain,  profit,  birth,  loss  etc.  The  seven 
asterisms  known  as  the  Ashvini,  Bharani,  Asshlesha,  Pushya, 
Svati,  Vishakha  and  the  Shravana,  look  with  a firm  gaze 
towards  the  ten  quarters  of  the  globe.  A journey  to  a distant 
country  undertaken  at  an  auspicious  moment  is  sure  to  be 
followed  by  a safe  and  pleasant  return  journey  home.  A 
journey  started  under  the  auspicies  of  the  five  ^asterisms 
such  as  the  Revati,  Chitra,  the  Kakeras  and  the  Punarvasu 
in  the  month  of  Ashada  is  sure  to  compel  the  traveller  to 
turn  back,  similarly  the  asterism  known  as  the  hundred  star# 
a?  well  as  the  asterism  Krittika,  Rohini,  Falguni,  Magha, 
Mela,  Jestha,  Anuradha  and  the  Dhanista  would  make  a 
sojourner  fall  back,  if  quitting  home  under  their  respective 
influence.  Likewise  a journey  started  under  the  malignant 
influence  of  the  Purva  Bhadrapada  and  the  Chipitas 
is  .sure  to  end  in  the  ahovesaid  way.  Any  thing  lost 


on  days  marked  by  the'  asterisms  Hasta,  Uttar  Bhadra- 
pad  a,  Ardra,  and  the  Ashada  can  never  be  recovered,  nor 
a battle  started  under  their  influence  be  maintained  (24 — 32}. 

Now  I shall  speak  about  the  Ganda  Lagnas  (inauspicious 
moments)  which  appear  between  the  periods  of  ascendency 
of  the  different  asterisms.  The  last  four  Nadis  (a  Nadi  *=24 
minutes)  of  the  Revati  and  the  four  corresponding  ones  of  the 
Ashvini  are  Gandas,  and  accordingly  a man  should  studiously 
avoid  those  three  hours  respectively  in  undertaking  a journey 
or  any  other  auspicious  rites,  as  also  the  two  Ghatikas 
out  of  the  first  four  and  the  last  four  of  the  asterisms  Magha 
and*  Asshlesha.  Hear  me,  Oh  Bhairavi,  speak  about  the 
third  Ganda  Lagna,  which  is  the  most  malignant  of  its  class 
and  which  lies  intervening'  between  the  ascendency  of 
the  asterisms  known  as  the  Jestha  and  the  Mula.  A man 
loving  life  should  not  undertake  any  work  under  its  baneful 
influence  and  any  child  whose  nativity  is  controlled  by 
this  most  malignant  of  the  Gandas  is  sure  to  lose  its  parents 
133 — 36).  ■ ■■  ' 


CHAPTER  CXXVI. 


X HE  God  said : — The  three  Ghatikas  reckoned  from  the 
setting  in  of  the  Viskumbha  Yoga  should  be  carefully  avoided 
as,  well  as  the  five  Ghatikas  from  the  beginning  of  the  Simla. 
The -first  six  Ghatikas  of  the  Gandas  and  the  Atigaoda 
Yogas  are  very  inauspicious  which  like  the  nine  Ghatikas  in 
those  named  as  Vyaghata  and  Vaidhriti  should  be  studiously 
shunned.  The  whole  day  in  which  the  combinations  known 
as,.  Parigha-  and  .Vyatipaia,  take  place,  should  be  held  unfit 


AGNl  PUR  AN  AM. 


ACM  PURANAM. 


515 


for  all  sorb  of  undertaking  while  on  the  one  marked 
by  the  Vaidhriti  yoga  all  goings  out  or  all  things  concerning 
a -war.  should  be  postponed  or  abandoned  (1—2). 

Oh  Goddess,  I shall  speak  about  the  good  or  evil  resulting 
from  the  continuance  of  planets  in  the  different  signs  of  the 
Zodiac,  The  sun  or  the  moon  occupying  the  sign  of  one's 
nativity  feasts  a prosperous  influence  at  the  time^of  quitting  it 

The  Mars,  the  Sun,  the  Saturn,  and  the  Rahu  (the  ascend- 
ing Node)  respectively  occupying  the  second  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  from  that  of  one's  nativity  engender  loss  of  things,  or 
absence  of  gain  and  reverses  of  arms  in  battle,  while  in  the 
same  position  the  Moon,  the  Mercury,  the  Jupiter  and 
the  Venus  exert  good  influences,  like  the  Sun,  the 
Saturn,  the  Mars  and  the  Venus  in  the  third  sign  from 
the  same.  The  Mercury,  the  Moon,  the  Rahu,  the 
Saturn  and  the  Mars  exercise  blissful  influence  . when 
occupying  the  third  Zodical  sign,  from  that  of  one's 
nativity,  like  the  planets  Mercury  and  the  Venus  in 
the  fourth  sign  from  the  same,  all  other  planets  in  the 
same  position  being  held  as  specially  ominous.  The 
Jupiter,  the  Venus,  the  Mercury,  and  the  Moon  grant  the 
fulfilment  of  heartful  desires  while  in  the  fifth  sign  from 
that  of  one's  nativity,  and  likewise  the  sun  occupying 
the  sixth  sign  from  the  same,  should  be  held  as  the  harbinger 
of  good  days.  O goddess,  the  planets  known  as  the  Moon 
the  Saturn,  the  Mars,  the  Mercury  occupying  the  same  posi- 
tion with  the  Sun  in  the  preceding  line  exercise  similar  in- 
fluence, the  Jupiter  staying  thereat  being  held  as  specially 
inauspicious*  The  Sun,  the  Saturn,  the  Mars,  the  Rahu, 
staying  at  the  seventh  sign  from  that  of  one's  nativity,  bring 
in  misery  and  evil  days,  while  the  Jupiter,  Venus,  and  the 
Mercury  in  the  latter  position  exercise  a contrary  in- 
fluence. The  'Mars,  (Jna)  and  the  Venus  in  the  eighth  sign 
from  that  of  one's  nativity  exercise  blissful  influence,  while 
; all  planets  other  than  the  Mars  (Jna)  and  the  Jupiter,,  occupy* 


Ami  PURANAM. 


ing  the  ninth  sign  of  the  Zodiac  from  that  of  one's  nativity 
are  harmful,  and  likewise  the  planets  other  than  the  Sun  and 
the  Venus  staying  at  the  tenth  sign  from. the  above  should 
be  deemed  as  the  precursor  of  loss,  the  two  latter  being 
of  good  days  and  gain.  The  Saturn 
remaining  planets 
specially  lucky  when  in  the  'eleventh 
and  the  Venus 
from  that 


followed  by  a run 

the  Rahu,  the  Moon,  the  Mercury  and  the 
except  the  Jupiter  are 

sign,  &nd  all  planets  other  than  the  Mercury 
are  inauspicious  while  staying  at  the  twelfth  sign 
of  one’s  nativity  (3— 11). 

The  sun  passes  under  the  twelve  sigus  in  th 
one  full  day  (twenty*four  hours).  It  takes  the  | 
four  Nadikas  to  traverse  the  space  occupied  by  the  Zodical 
signs  of  the  Meena  (Pisces),  Mesha  (Aries)  Mithuna  (Gemini) 
and  the  Vrisa  (Tarus),  six  Nadikas  to  travel  under  the  signs 
©f  Karkata,  Sinha  (Leo),  Kanya  (Virgo)  and  the  Tula  (Libra). 
The  space  occupied  by  the  signs  of  Vrisehika  (Scorpio) 
Dhanu  (Sagitarius)  Ghata  (Aquaries)  being  done  by  the 
former  luminary  within  five  Nadikas  (12— 13). 

The  Zodical  signs  of  Aries,  etc.,  respectively  character- 
ised by  the  traits  of  Sthira  (steadiness),  Chara  (subtleness) 
and  by  features  partaking  of  the  nature  of  the  both.  The 
Karkata,  the  Makara,  the  Libra,  and  the  Aries  are  all  subtle- 
natured  signs  and  all  acts  of  victory  or  profit  should  be  done 
under  the  auspicies  of  the  same.  The  Taurus,  the  Leo, 
the  Aquaries,  the  Vrisehika,  are  the  signs  of  steadiness  and 
all  acts  requiring  the  latter  virtue  and  of.permanent  good 
should  be  undertaken  under  their  influence.  A person  going 
iontabroad  under  their  influence  is  long  detained  in  aforeign 
whereas  any  one  falling  sick  under  their  malignant 
: «ffe«ft  i i$  sure  to  succumb  to  the  disease.  The  Gemini,  the 
Virgo,  the  Pisces,  and  the  Sagitarious  partake  of  the  feature? 
eldloM*.  tb*  steady  and  the  suhtle-nnturedl  ones,  and  any  of 
them  should  be  deemed  as  always  auspicious  for  the  purposes 


AGNI  PURANAM,  5 1? 

soverign,  as  they  grant  prosperity,  acquisition,  profit*  amj 
victories  in  war,  The  asterism  Asbvini,  which  consists  of  a 
cluster  of  three  small  stars  is  shaped  like  the  hoof  of  a 
horse.  The  foul  weather  lasts  for  a day  only  if  it  rains  on  a 
day  marked  by  the  latter  asterism,  while  the  one  commencing 
from  a day  marked  by  the  asterism  presided  lover  by  the 
god  of  death*  usually  lasts  for  a fortnight  (14—19). 


CHAPTER  CXXVII 


JL  he  God  said:-— Now  I,  shall  describe  the  contrivance 
of  astrological  counting  known  as  the  Kotha  Chakra,  and 
which  consists  of  two  rectangular  quadrilaterals  described 
around  a smaller  one  on  which  the  different  asterisms 
and  signs  of  the  Zodiac  should  be  represented  as  follows. 
The  signs  such  as  the  Aries,  etc.,  should  be  placed  in  due 
succession  at  the  cardinal  and  the  angular  points  of  the 
f outer  most  square  such  as  the  east,  etc.  The  asterism  known 
as  the  Krittika  should  also  be  represented  on  its  eastern' 
side,  the  asterism  Asshlesha  would  occupy  its  south-eastern 
angle,  the  asterism  of  Bharani  should  be  placed  on  its 
southern-side,  the  asterism  Vishakha,  should  be  represented 
at  its  south-western  corner,  the  Anuradha  at  the  west,  the 
Shravana  at  the  north-west,  the  Dhanistha  at  the  north,  and 
the  Revati  at  the  north-cast.  These  eight  asterisms  should 
be  represented  in  the  outermost  square  of  the  diagram 
(1—4).  Similarly  the  eight  asterisms  called  the  Rohini 
; Pushya,  Falguni,  Svati,  Jestha,  Abhijit,  and  the  hundred 

f stars  (the  twenty  fourth  lunar  mansion)  and  the  Ashvini 

should  be  delineated  in  the  middle  square  respectively 


AGNI  ■ PUHANAM. 


* The  presiding  planet  of  the  East  is  the  Sun. 

t)  „ S.  East  „ Venus* 

u n South  i,  Mars* 

ii  ii  S.  West  it  Rahu. 

it  ,i  West  ii  Saturn, 

it  M N.  West  „ Moon. 

«i  „ North  ii  Mercury* 

i» ; 5 ■ ,».  N.  East  . „ Jupiter  .. 

' #n:w.  *n§t i 


occupying  the  different  sides  and  angular  points  there- 
of in  the  order  as  above  enumerated.  The  groups  of 
asterisms  which  should  be  arranged  in  the  innermost 
square  of  the  diagram  are  as  follows,  and  they  should 
be  placed  in  a way  so  that  the  asterism  known  as  the 
Mriga  might  be  on  its  east  side,  the  asterism  Punarvasu  at 
the  south-east,  the  asterisms  Uttar  Falguni  at  the  south,  the 
Chitra  at  the  south-west,  the  Uttarashada  at  the  north- 
west, the  Purva  Bhadrapada  at  the  north,  and  the  Revati 
at  the  the  north  east.  The  sides  of  the  two  inscribed 
squares  should  be  produced  both  ways  so  as  to  form 
four  lines  intersecting  one  another  in  the  plane  of  the 
diagram,  and  the  asterisms  known  as  the  Ardra,  Hasta, 
Ashada  and  the  three  Uttaras  should  be  represented  in  the 
chambers  of  the  diagram  made  by  the  abovesaid  intersecting 
lines  (5 — 9).  Fortifications  should  be  built  on  the  line  indicated 
above,  and  around  the  chambers  of  the  two  outer  squares  of 
the  diagram.  A belligerent  coming  from  the  outside  on  a day 
named  after  the  presiding  planet  of  the  quarter*  he  comes 
from,  and  marked  by,  the  asterisms  representening  that 
quarter  of  the  diagram  along  which  the  fortifications  have 
been  built,  and  assailing  the  same  is  sure  to  return  victorious. 
The  beseiged  on  their,  turn  would  repulse  the  attack  and  win 


AGNt  PUR  AN  AM, 


5*9 


ibt  day  when  the  position  of-  the  enemies  as  well  as  the 
direction  they  came  from,  bring  about  a happy  union  of  the 
auspicious  planets  and  the  happy  asterisms  represented 
on  the  innermost  square  of  the  diagram  and  accordingly  of 
of  the  inner  line  of  defence  of  the  camp  or  the  castle.  A 
castle  or  fort  is  to  be  resorted  to  when  a planet  of  good 
omen  enters  an  asterism  held  auspicious  for  that  end  and 
sallies  to  be  made  or  the  troops  garrisoning  the  same  should 
be  withdrawn  under  the  happy  influence  of  the  asterisms  which 
are  held  most  suited  to  that  end.  An  assault  or  battle  com- 
menced when  the  planets  Venus,  the  Mercury,  and  the  Mars 
quit  their  respective  asterisms  of  occupation  is  sure  to  end  in 
a surrender  of  the  castle,  or  in  a victory  for  the  assailing, 
party,  while  a charge  made  under  the  influence  of  the  four 
asterisms  held  auspicious  for  entering  a castle  would  put 
a new  crown  of  glory  on  the  head  of  the  besieged  com» 
mander  (10—13). 


CHAPTER  CXXViU* 


II 


«■ 


* 


I 


SSI 


II 


1 


1 ' 


il 


ill 


ill 


IhE  God  said  Now  I shall  describe  the  quantity  of 
food  grains  and  articles  which  are  to  be  collected  when 
such  natural  phenomena  such  as  the  showers  of  meteors, 

| earthquakes,  falls  of  thunderbolts,  hurricanes,  eclipses,  and 
the  appearance  of  the  meteoric  light  take  place  in  the 
different  months  of  the  year.  The  phenomena  occurring  in 
the  month  of  Chaitra  Jshould  give  rise  to  an  energetic  col- 
lection of  ornaments  and  articles  of  decoration  which  would 
bring  in  four  times  their  value  in  the  course  of  six  months, 
whereas  all  sorts  of  articles  stocked  in  the  month  of  Vaisha-J 


llllillili 


CHAPTER  CXXIX, 


1 HE  God  said Oh  thou  good  natured  goddess.  I shall 
describe  the  four  Mandate  (classes  of  physical  phenomena) 
taking  place  under  the  influence  of  the  different  asterisms 
(l).  The  asterisms  known  as  the-Krittika,  Magha,  Pushya, 
Purva  Falguni,  Vishaka  Bharani  and  the  Purva  Bhadrapada 
belong  to  the  belt  of  fire,  and  storms,  halos  round  the  sun 
and  the  moon,  earthquakes,  fall  of  thunderbolts,  eclipses, 
appearances  of  nebular  spots  in  the  heaven  or  in  the  discs' 
of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  or  that  of  red  meteoric  tight  in  the 
horizon,  showers  of  blood,  passing  of  heat  waves,  showers  of 
meteoric  stone  and  such  like  phenomena,  respectively  blow-* 
in g,  appearing  or  taking  place  under  the  influence  or  during 
the'  predominance  of  the  aforesaid  asterisms  are  sate  to  be 


AQNi  PURANAIVI, 


The  fire  will  rage  violently  ©a  the  earth.  The  milch  cows 
will  yield  a lesser  quantity  of  milk  and  the  flower*  and 
fruits  of  trees  will  deteriorate  in  she  and  number.  The  food 
grains  will  stand  perched  in  the  fields  and  the  rainfall  of  the 
year  will  be  abnormally  below  the  average.  The  four  castes 
of  people  will  be  harrassed  and  die  of  hunger,  the  countries 
of  the  S&indhavas,  Jamunas,  Gurjars,  Bhojas,  Balhika  (modern 
Balkh),  Jalandhara,  and  Kashmere  which  form  the  seven 
divisions  of  India  known  as  the  Uttarapatha  (the  northern 
division)  being  the  only  territories  affected  thereby  (i — 7). 

, The  asterisms  called  the  Hasta,  Chitra,  Magha,  Svati, 
Mriga,  Punarvasu  Uttarafalguni,  and  the  Ashvini  jointly 
form  what  is  known  as  the  (Vayu  Mandala — regions  where  the 
wind  is  the  dominant  element)  and  any  phenomena  occurring 
under  the  influence  of  one  of  them  shotild  be  ascribed  to  a 
disturbance  in  the  air.  Such  unusual  incidents  and  appearances 
are  -sure  to  be  followed  on  the  - earth  by  a perceptible  fall  of 
moral;, virtues  among  men*  and  lamentations  and  cries  of 
despair  will  rise  up  from  the  houses  of  human  creatures  made 
purblind  by  their  afflictions  and  inequities;  the  countries 
affected  thereby  being  the  territories  of  Dahala,  Kamrupa, 
Kalinga,  Koshala,  Ayodhya,  Avanti,  Kankbana  and  Andkrafca 

(8 — IO).  ' 

Oh  darling,  the  asterisms  known  as  the  Asshlesha,  Mula, 
Purvasada,  Revati,  Bradhrapada  and  the'  Uttaras  form  the 
region  where  water  reigns  supreme  among  the  constituent 
elements  f^aruna  Mandala),  and  any  unusual  physical 
phenomena,  taking  place  under  their  respective  influence, 
should  be  deemed  as  owing  to  a disturbance  of  equilibrium 
in  the  distribution  of  the  latter.  Such  an  occurrence  is 
usually  succeeded  by  a series  of  happy  and  prosperous 
results  on  earth.  The  cows  begin  to  yield  greater  quantity 
..  **iilk.  The  -Ir^es.  put  forth  vigorous  flowers  and  bear 
abundant Jruits.  The  earth  is  mantled  in  a golden  cloth  pft 
ripe yellow  corn.  Rice  sells  at  a nominal  price  and; 

66 


mm 


m 


1 


1 


- 


AGN!  PURANAM, 


CHAPTER  CXXX. 


•s  1 HE  God  said;— Now  I shall  deal  with  the  Astrological 
(calculation)  wheel  by  which  victories  or  reverses  of  arms 
in  war  can:  be  foretold.  The  wheel  or  the  diagram  consists 


iEll® 


the  whole  nature  becomes  jubilant  with  one  universal  song  of 
gladness  and  animation,  the  only  discordant  element 
wherein  will  be  the  clang  of  arms  of  the  contending  mon* 
archs  (ii— 14). 

The  asterisms  which  form  the  Mahendra  Mandala  are 
the  Jestha,  Rohini,  Anuradha,  Dhanistha,  Uttarasada,  and 
the  Abhijit,  and  any  disturbance  taking  place  runder  their 
respective  influence  should  be  ascribed  to  a disturbance  in 
the  ether  which  envelopes  this  terrestrial  globe  (Mahendram 
Utpatam).  Such  phenomena,  Oh  goddess,  pleasantly  affect 
the  conditions  of  life  on  the  globe. 

Population  thrives  and  people  live  in  health  and  ease* 
The  monarchs  enter  into  compacts  of  peace  with  one  another, 
and  plenty  reigns  supreme  over  the  face  of  the  earth, 
(15—16).  * 

The  eclipse  of  the  sun  or  of  the  moon,  Oh  thou  good 
tempered  goddess,  admits  of  a two-fold  division  according 
to  the  direction  from  which  the  shadow  is  cast  over  the 
discs  of  those  luminaries,  i.e.f  eclipse  by  the  bead  or  the 
tail  of  the  Rahu.  The  former  sort  of  eclipse  takes  place 
when  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  in  the  same  sign  of  the 
Zodiac,  the  latter  happening  in  the  case  of  (a  Jamitra)  the 
sun  occupying  the  seventh  Zodiacal  sign  from  that  in  which 
the  moon  exists  for  the  time  being.  An  eclipse  of  the 
rpoon  takes  place  when  the  moon  stays  at  the  fifteenth 
astertsm  from  the  one,  occupied  by  the  sun  (17). 


AGMt  PURANAM. 


* 


524.  ■ AGNI  pua  A NAM. 

foretelling  the  success  of  any  particular  undertaking.  Thir- 
teen lines  should  be  drawn  on  a plane  surface  and  six  more 
should  be  drawn  obliquely  as  to  intersect  them  (13).  Then 
twelve  straight  lines  should  be  drawn,  six.  on  the  right  and 
six  on  the  left  and  the  as  ter  isms.  together  with  the  letters 
from  A to  Ha  should  be  placed  therein.  The  sixteen 
or  the  seventeen  Tithis  should  also  be  represented  in  the 
chambers  and  the  letters  Aa,  Ka,  Ta,  Pa.,  etc.,  should  be 
written  below  them.  The  remaining  letters  should  be 
then  arranged  in  due  order,  and  the  number  of  letters  which 
a name  would  consist  of,  should  then  be  divided  by  eight 
(14 — 15).  The  quotient  if  identical  with  the  number  re- 
presented by  a crow  (fourteen)  would  signify  the  diagram 
to  be  a strong  one,  while  the  same  being  equal  to  the  num- 
bers represented  by  in  ass,  bull,  elephant,  lion,  khoru,  and 
Dhumra  respectively  would  signify  greater  success,  each 
succeeding  one  being  more  auspicious  than  the  one  imme- 
diately preceding  it  (19 — 20). 


CHAPTER  CXXXL 


The  Goo  said  Now  I shall  describe  the  Astrological 
diagram  which  enables  a person  to  foretell  the  nature  and 
amount  of  services  he  would  get  from  his  different  relations 
^nd  the  terms  be  would  live  in,  with  his  parents,  brothers, 
wife  or  husband  (Sheva  Chakram).  Six  straight  lines  should 
be  perpendicularly  drawn  intersected  by  eight  oblique  lines 
tlhus  giving  rise  to  thirty-five  interlinear  chambers.  The 
five  vowels  together  with  the  letters  known  as  the  Sparsha. 

‘ ‘ , alphabet  (consonant  letters  from  Ka  to 


AQNt  PURANAM* 


5^5 


each  of  the  chambers  arranged  in  groups  of  Siddha,  Sadhhya, 
Susiddha,  Ari  and  Mrityu.  Names  which  begin  with  letters 
falling  under  the  last  two  categories  should  be  deemed  as 
hostilely  disposed  towards  each  other,  and  accordingly  all 
connections  between  the  possessors . of,  those  two  names 
should  be  carefully  avoided.  The  . Sattvas  which  properly 
belong  to  the  name  of  a person  should  be  deemed  as  spe-  I 

cially  auspicious,  while  those  standing  second  or  third 
therefrom  should  be  deemed  as  the  supporter  or  the  harbinger 
of  good  luck.  The  fourth  Sattva  augurs  loss  of  fortune,  the 
fifth  in  its  turn  usually  ushers  in  the  death  of  the  named,  j 

while  the  chambers  occupied  by  the  friendly,  favourable  or  | 

servile  letters  should  be  deemed  as  predicting  the  acquisi-  I 

of  wealth  ( j> — 7),  . 'I 

The  letters  respectively  occupying  the  chambers  of  || 

Siddha,  Saddhya,  Susiddha,  Ari  and  the  Mrityu  letters  would 
predict  success  or  failure  according  to  their  etymological 
acceptance.  The  vowels  A.  E.  U.  A.  and  O.  should  be  . ; 

deemed  included  in  the  term  Akarantas  whenever  occurring  I 

in  the  text  in  connection  with  matters  hereunder  dealt  with. 

Now  I shall  narrate  the  different  species  of  beings  which 
the  different  groups  (Vargas)  of  letters  stand  for  (8—9). 

*^ie  ^ett^rs  known  as  the  Akarvargas  are  emblematic  of 
the  celestial  beings,  while  those  .belonging  to  the  group  of  j 

five  letters  beginning  with  the  first  consonant  letter  of  the  1 

Sanskrit-alphabet  (Kavarga)  are  presided  over  by  the  , I 

demons  (Daityas).  The  five  letters  beginning  with  “ Cha”  | 

are  under  the  influence  of  the  Nagas,  while  the  five  letters  \ 

beginning  with  Ta  should  be  held  as  acknowledging  the 
Gandharvas  as  their  titular  gods.  The  Rishis  have  under 
their  special  protection  the  letters  beginning  with  : Ta  (Ta 
Varga)  while  the  five  letters  forming'  the  group  known  , 
as  the  Pavarga  fall  within  the  domain  of  the  suzerainty  * 
of  the  monsters  (Rakshasas).  The  Pishachas  preside  over  . 
the  five  letters  beginning  with  Ya  (Yavarga),  while 


526 


AGNI  PuKANAM. 


letters  beginning  with  “ Sha”  fall  within  the  influence  of 
the  human  beings.  The  Demons  are  more  powerful  -than  the 
gods,  and  the  Nagas  are  stronger  than  the  Daityas.  The  Gan- 
dharvas  are  more  potent  than  the  Nagas.  The  Ririiis  exert 
stronger  influence  than  the  Gandharvas.  The  Rakshasas 
are  more  forcible  than  the  Rishis.  The  Pishachas^are  more 
powerful  than  the  Rakshasas,  while  men  in  the  present 
diagram  are  supposed  to  exercise  a stronger  occult  influence 
than  the  latter.  Similarly  one  under  the  influence  of  a 
stronger  species  should  avoid  connection  with  a person 
owning  the  sovereignty  of  the  weaker  (10—13). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  Tara  Chakra  which  should  be 
calculated  upon  after  having  reckoned  the  Sphuta  of  both, 
the  star  and  the  first  letter  of  the  name  of  a person.  The 
nine  stars  which  should  be  ascertained  from  the  natal  star 
of  a person  are  the  Janma,  the  Sampat,  the  Vipat,  the 
Kshema,  the  Pratyari,  the  Dhanada,  the  Nidhana,  the  Mitra 
and  the  Paramitra.  The  star  known  as  the  Janma  Tara  of 
a person  should  be  held  inauspicious  "as  far  as  all  his 
works  and  undertakings  are  concerned.  The  star  known  as 
the  Sampatra  Tara  exerts  an  influence  quite  contrary  to 
that  of  the  former,  while  the  star  known  as  the  Vipat  makes 
alt  his  attempts  futile.  The  star  known  as  the  Kshema, 
should  be  held  as  favourable  to  all  sorts  of  undertakings, 
while  the  Pratyari  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  harbinger 
of  a pecuniary  loss.  The  effect  of  the  star  Dhanada  is  to 
install  a man  on  the  throne  of  his  country,  the  Nidhana  makes 
all  attempt  futile,  the  Mitra  Tara  binds  men  in  ties  of  indisso- 
luble friendship,  while  the  Paramitra  star  should  be  held 
as  particularly  auspicious  (14—18), 

* Oh  darling,  the  number  of  matras  which  areThe  numerical 
equivalents  of  the  vowels  composing  the  names’of  twotpersons, 
to  be  any  way  related  or  connected,  should  be  counted  and 
added  together,  and  the  totals  to  be  divided  by  the  number 

twenty,  -The. quotients  thus  obtained  should  be  made  use 

:;i!  mi  ! M It  i 1 ( , 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


Of  in  calculating  the  debt  and  credit  (Rini,  Dhat.i)  among 
the  two  names  under  calculation,  the  former  consisting 
in  the  lesser  number  of  m'atras,  and  the  latter  of  the 
greater  (19 — 20). 

Fast  friendship  and  a very  strong  attachment  will  grow 
between  prisons,  one  of  whose  names  stand  in  the  relation 
of  credit  (Dhani)  to  that  of  the  other,  while  indifference  or 
apathy  attends  upon  a combination  where  the  name  of  one 
of  the  parties  bear  a contrary  relation  to  that  of  his  mate 
or  associate.  This  is  what  is  known  as  the  Seva  Chakra 
or  the  wheel  of  services  which  the  parties  to  a compact 
would  derive  from  each  other  (21 — 22). 

A strong  attachment  grows  between  persons  respec- 
tively born  under  the  signs  of  Aries  and  the  Gemini,  while 
those  born  under  the  latter  sign  and  that  of  the  Leo  are 
bound  together  in  a bond  of  perpetual  amity  which  even  the 
rude  hands  of  death  cannot  sever.  Similarly  persons  having 
the  Libra  and  the  Leo  as  their  natal  signs  become  fondly 
enamoured  of  each  other  like  two  persons  born  under 
the  influence  of  the  signs  of  Sagitarius  and  the  Aquaries 
respectively  (23). 

'■  XL:',  ;}'/'■  Vv'.:  1 V>;.  : : >' 

A man  should  not  accept  the  service  of  a person  to 
whose  natal  sign,  the  sign  of  his  nativity,  stands  in  the  rela«* 
lion  of  friendship*  The  following  signs  should  .be  deemed* 
as  friendly  towards  each  other.  The  Pisces  is  friendly 


while  an  infant  whose  nativity  is  marked  by  the  man- 
sion of  Venus  would  be  developed  into  a successful  man 
■«f  the  world,  addicted  to  enjoyment  and  pleasures  of  life,  and 
at  the  .same  time  capable  of.  making  large  sacrifices  for- 
dthWs.  t;  A chid  born  in  the  mansion  of  the  5»t«r#  wadld> 


AGN!  PORANAM. 


like  the  Karkata  and  the  Makara,  the  Mriga  and  the  Kum- 
bhuka,  while  the  Virgo  and  the  Pisces  are  quite  friendly 
towards  each  other  (24 — -25!. 


CHAPTER  CXXXII. 


The  God  said: — Now  I shall  describe  the  differentiating, 
traits  in  the  character  of  an  infant  according'as  the  planets 
presiding  over  the  field  of  his  nativity  (Kshetrapati)  would 
vary.  An  infant  born  under  the  influence  of  the  mansion 
of  the  sun,  grows  into  a man  of  middle  stature,  neither  thin 
nor  fat,  with  a reddish-yellow  complexion,  and  reddish  eyes. 
He  is  sure  to  be  possessed  of  valour  and  many  other  virtues 
and  the  . different  parts  of  his  body  would  be  symmetrically 
developed.  A man  born  in  the  mansion  of  the  moon, 
would  be  of  a mild  disposition,  possessed  of  a body  neither 
too  strong  nor  feeble  and  his  life  would  be  an  unbroken 
series  of  success  or  good  fortune.  A man  born  in  the  man- 
sion of  the  Mars  would  be  of  a sanguine  temperament  and 
extremely  covetous,  while  an  infant  born  in  the  mansion  of 
theMercury  would  be  intelligent  and  fortunate,  and  command 
the  respect  of  the  world.  A child  whose  nativity  is  con- 
trolled by  the  mansion  of  the  Jupiter  would  be  a man  of 
extremely  irascible  nature,  not  to  speak  of  his  success  in 
life  which  is  the  inevitable  effect  of  such  a planetary  cendi* 


AGN1  PURANAM 


perament  marked  by  the  same  qualities,  while  the 
under  the  influence  of  a hostile  Lagna  would  be 
disposed  (i — 5}. 

0 Gouri,  I shall  now  describe  the  effect  of  the 
ance  of  the  planets  in  the  sign  of 
accord 


continu- 

one’s  nativity  determined 
ing  to  his  name  (Nama  Rashi).  The  Sun  conti- 
nuing at  such  a sign  makes  him  possessor  of  elephants, 
horses,  wealth  and  paddy.  Plenty  reigns  supreme  in  the 
domain  of  such  a person  if  he  happens  to  be  a king,  and 
lost  or  lapsed  dues  are  recovered  though  left  unrealised 
fora  long  time  (6),  The  influence  of  the  Moon  in  such 
a position  is  to  bring  about  an  union  of  the  natal  being 
with  a damsel  of  celestial  beauty,  while  that  of  the  Mars  is 
ushered  in  by  acquisition  of  land  and  accession  to  comforts 
generally.  The  Mercury  at  such  a place  grants- him  land, 
wealth  and  abundance  of  food,  while  the  Jupiter  at 
such  a place  puts  him  in  possession  of  a large  number  of 
horses,  elephants,  and  abundant  wealth.  The  influence  of 
the  Venus  while  occupying  the  natal  sign  of  a person  is  to 
provide  him  with  plenty  of  good  food  and  drink,  while  that 
of  the  Saturn  is  to  afflict  the  natal  being  with  diseases  and 
vicissitudes  of  fortune.  The  Rahu  occupying*the  natal  sign 
of  a person  secures  for  him  the  services  of  other  persons, 
as  well  as  unguents  and  perfumes  and  a thriving  trade,  even 
if  the  name  of  the  person  be  consisted  of  an  odd  number 
of  letters  or  if  it  be  situated  in  the  left  column  (Nadi)  of  the 
diagram.-  Similarly  the  Saturn,  the  Mars,  and  the  Rahu 
.situated  in  the  left  Nadi  predict  victories  in  war,  while  the 
Sun  situated  in  the  right  Nadi,  augurs  loss  in  trade.  A mah 
whose  name  consists  of  an  even  number  of  letters  is  sure 
to  win  victory,  while  the  same  result  is  Obtained TrOm  its 
Adha^chara,  death  in  battle  being  the  con  sentience  of  ih-e 


AGNI  PtmANAM, 


Urddlia  one  (7— if).  11  Om  Hun,  Om  Brum,  Om  Sphaio, 
break  down  the  weapons*  Om  break  to  pieces,  Om  break 
and  break  all  sorts  of  arms,  Om  Hrum,  Om  Hus,  Fufc,-5 
The  votary  should  perform  the  rite  of  Nayasa  on  his  body  by 
repeating  seven  times  the  abovesaid  Mantra  and  hink  thim- 
self  identical  with  the  God  Bhairava,  who  is  possessed  of  four* 
ten  or  twenty  hands  wielding  in  them  a mace,  a l£hattanga,  a 
sword,  and  a Khetaka  respectively  and  devouring  the  ene- 
my's soldiers,  with  his  back  turned  on  the  ranks  of  his  own 
forces*  The  above  Mantra  should  be  repeated  hundred  and 
eight  times  in  front  of  the  enemy's  forces,  which,  being  done 
in  accompaniment  of  the  beatings  of  a Damaru,  would  create 
a panic  among  the  ranks  of  the  assailing  armies  (12— *13). 

Now  I shall  describe  another  means  of  resisting  an  in- 
vading column.  An  image  should  be  made  of  the  dungs 
of  owls  and  crows  and  placed  in  a box  or  Karpata.  The 
name  of  the  enemy  together  with  the  Sadhya  letters  should 
be  written  on  its  [head,  face,  forehead,  heart,  arms,  back, 
the  part  between  the  arms  and  the  feet,  and  the  image  should 
be  broken  down  at  the  time  of  the  onset  accompanied  by 
a repetition  of  the  abovesaid  Mantra  (14-—  17). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  mystic  incantation  known  as 
the  Tarkshya  Chakra.  The  Mantra  which  should  be  repeated 
in  connection  herewith  is  as  follows  :—“Om  Tarkshya,  cast 
down  my  enemies,  trample  the  diseases  and  venom  that 
might  invade  me/-  A person  possessed  by  an  evil  spirit,  or 
afflicted  with  diseases  and  afflictions  is  sure  to  be  clean 
and  healthy  again  by  reading  the  aforesaid  Mantra.  All 
sorts  of  poison  whether  vegetable  or  born  of  venomous 
beasts  or  spiders  are  nullified  by  the  force  of  the  above 
Mantra  and  even  by  the  very  presence  of  its  votary.  “Again 
I meditate  upon  the  great  Tarkshya  (Garuda)  who  is  fur- 
nished with  two  mighty  pinnions  and  shaped  as  a human 
being  possessing  a hooked  beak  (some  editions  read  a beak 


AGNl  PURANAM, 


them  an  elephant  and  a tortoise  respectively.  I meditate 
upon  the  great  Tarkshya  shaped  as  above  and  darting  from 
the  skies  into  the  field  of  battle,  with  hundreds,  nay  thou- 
sands  of  serpents  lying  trampled  at  his  feet,  and  mercilessly 
killing  and  devouring  the  enemies  and  dealing  destruction 
on  all  sides.  I see  the  enemies  flying  in  all  directions, 
some  of  them  lying  trampled  down  by  the  great  celestial 
bird,  some  lying  stupefied  in  the  field  flapped  by  his  mighty 
wings.”  A man  who  meditates  upon  the  great  Tarkshya  is 
sure  to  return  victorious  (18—24). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  Mantra  which  should  be  read 
over  the  feather  brush  (PichchikS)  of  conjuring  and  the  rites 
to  be  performed  in  connection  therewith.  "Om  Hrum, 
dart  down,  Om,  Hum  Sas,  O thou  superbly  mighty  one, 
devour  and  devour  all  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  Om  trample 
down  and  trample  down.  Om  break  to  pieces  and  break 
to  pieces.  Om  cast  away  and  cast  away.  Om’Hun,  Kas, 
Om  it  is  by  the  command  of  Bhairava.  “The  above  Mantra 
should  be  read  over  the  conjuring  feather  brush  during  an 
eclipse,  whereby  {the  ranks  and  files  of  the  royal  troops 
should  be  made  charmed  against  the  steel  of  the  adversary. 
Then  the  troops  should  be  paraded  before  the  caged  lions 
and  tigers,  and  the  votary  should  meditate  upon  the  God 
and  mentally  recite  the  above  Mantra  whereby  the  enemy's 
forces  would  be  annihilated  as  a lion  would  destroy  a herd  of 
deer  (25 — 26). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  Mantra  of  the  mysterious  potency 
which  would  put  the  enemy’s  forces  to  rout  from  a distance 
(Bhanga  Vidya).  Porridge  should  be  offered  to  the  Matris 
and  specially  to  the  goddess  Kalaratri.  The  goddess  should 
be  invoked  from  a distance  by  reading  the  following  Mantra 
over  the  ashes  of  a cremation  ground  together  with  the 
flowers  of  Malati,  Chameli,  and  the  roots  of  Karpasa.  “ Om 
Hearest  thou  (Oha  Ha),  Oh  Mabendri,  Hearest  thou,  Oh 
Mahendri,  break  aud  conquer  the  enemy,  devour  and 


AGNl  PUR  ARAM: 


devour  them.  Lili,  Rili,  Om  Hum  Fut.”  The  above 
Mantra  recited  by  a votary  bearing  the  impression  of  a tilak 
markon  his  nose  composed  of  Aparajita  and  Dusthur  pasted 
together,  would  repulse  the  enemy  from  a distance.  “Om, 
devour,  Oh  thou  goddess,  Kili,  Vikiii,  Desha  Kili  who  des- 
troyest  all  demons.  Kill,  Oh  thou  Shankhini  Uma,  who  wi eld- 
est a club  in  thy  hand.  Kill,  Oh^thou  the  beloved  wife  of  the 
dreadful  god  Rudra,  Oh  thou  the  greatest  of*fche  goddesses 
(Maheshvari),  from  whose  mouth  the  meteors  shoot  forth  in 
showers,  and  who  vomitest  forth  fatal  fire,  Oh  thou,  Shanklm- 
karna,  with  the  emaciated  thighs,  O thou  Alumvusha,  trample 
down  the  wicked  under  thy  feet.  May  those  who  look  at 
me,  stand  spellbound  in  awe.  Thou  who  rcsidest  in  the 
heart  of  the  mighty  Rudra,  assume  a peaceful  nature,  Oh 
goddess,  and  protect  my  body.”  The  above  Mantra  should 
be  written  on  a piece  of  Naga  leaf,  and  surrounded  on  all 
sides  by  the  Matrikas  and  looked  upon  as  the  most  power- 
ful agent  in  bringing  about  the  fulfilment  of  all  heartfelt 
desires.  The  gods  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Rudra  wore  it  in  an 
amulet  on  their  arms  of  yore  and  by  this  incantation  the 
..gods  came  out  unscathed  in  the  war  with  the  demons  in 
which  they  were  protected  by  the  incantations  sacred  to  the 
goddesses  Narasinhi,  Bbairavi,  and  Gouri  as  well  as  the 
one  known  as  the  Trailokyamohini  (2 7 — 32). 

The  charmed  amulet  of-  protection  known  as  the  Raksha- 
yantra  should  consist  of  the  name  of  the  wearer  surrounded 
by  the  Beeja  or  the  principal  Mantras  written  on  the  petals  of 
the  mystic  lotus  shaped  diagram,  and  a prison  before  wear- 
ing it  should  worship  its  presiding  deity  with  all  her 
attendants  and  attributes  (33).  . , 

Now  I shall  describe  tiie  Mritunjaya  Prakaranam. 
The  name  surrounded  by  the  Kaia  Mantras,  should  be 
in  the  middle  of  the  Mantra,  preceded  by  the  letter 
■ 5a..  Then  the  letter  Ja  coupled  with  a Vindu  should 

b! & s'!  jR d . Wll  h , Pranai/a  a » v fr  r ** 


CHAPTER  CXXXIIL 


' 1 HE  GOD  said:— Now  I shall  narrate  the  Mantra  which 
is  irresistible  in  the  three  worlds  (Trailokhya  Vijaya)  and 
which  tramples  down  the  spell  of  all  other  incantations.  The 
Mantra  is  as  follows  : — Om,  Hum,  Kshoun,  Hrum,  Om,  obei- 
sance to  the  fierce-mouthed,  horrid-jawed  goddess.  Dost 
thou  sport  amorously,  0 thou  possessed  of  terrible  features. 
Let  thy  diabolical  laughter  reverberate  the  atmosphere,  O thou 
goddess  with  blood-shot  eyes,  shriek  and  sound,  O thou, 
goddess  of  infernal  sound,  and  who  art  possessed  of  lightning 
tongues.  Be  manifest,  O thou  goddess,  of  extremely  emaciated 
features.  Put  on  thy  mantle,  0 thou  clad  in  the  coils  of  the 
serpent  known  as  the  Gonasha.  Drive  every  thing  before  thee, 
oh  thou  who  wearest  a garland  of  dead  human  bodies.  Yawn 
and  open  thy  fierce  mouth,  oh  thou  goddess  who  art  clad  in 
raw  hydes.  Dance  and  dance  with  thy  sword  flashing  forth 
lightning  in  all  directions,  with  thy  face  made  doubly  fierce 
by  sullen  look  and  thy  eyebrows  arched  in  rage.  Roar  and 
roar,  oh  thou  besmeared  with  the  smelling  fetid  fat  of  dead 
bodies  thou  art  fond  of.  Laugh  and  laugh,  get  furious  and 
furious,  oh  goddess,  shine  forth  in  terrible  splendour,  oh 
thou  coloured  like  the  blue  lightning  and  decorated  with 
garlands  of  black  cloud.  Attract  and  draw  forth  the  ijiinds  of 
men,  oh  thou  dawn-complexioned  goddess  bestriding  a lion, 
and  who  art  bedecked  with  bells  and  Ravavas.  Om  Ham  Hrim 
Hrun,  thou  fierce  looking  goddess,  Hun,  Hring,  Kling,  Om 
Hrum,  Hum,  Attract.  Om  shake  and  shake,  Om  Ha,  Has 
Khas.  O thou  thunder  wielding  goddess,  Hum,  Kshum, 
Ksham,  oh  thou  who  art  manifest  as  anger.  Burn  and  burn, 
Ohs,  oh  thou  the  most  terrible  of  all  terrors,  and  break  and 
break  (the  ranks  of  my  enemy’s  forces,)  cut  and  cut  them 


AGNJ  PURANAM. 


tress  of  all  evils,  I make  salutation  unto  thee.  Oh  thou  ever 
victorious  and  ever  irresistible  in  the  three  worlds.  Hrim  Fut 
obeisance  to  thee.  The  goddess  should  be  propitiated  in 
connection  with  an  act  of  victory  or  with  any  act  undertaken 
to  ensure 'victory  in  war,  and  should  be  meditated  upon  as 
possessed  of  a blue  complexion  and  twenty  hands  and  as 
standing  on  the  dead  bodies  of  men.  The  rite  of  Nayasa 
should  be  performed  over  the  five  different  parts  of  the 
body  as  herebefore  enjoined,  and  oblations  composed  of 
red  flowers  and  clarified  butter  should  be  offered  in  the 
consecrated  fire.  A mere  repitition  of  the  ab'ovesaid 
Mantra  which  is  known  as  the  conqueror  of  the  three 
worlds  (Trailokya  Vijaya)  will  put  the  hostile  forces  to 


CHAPTER  CXXXIV, 


1 HE  GOD  said  : Now  1 shall  narrate  to  you  the  incan- 
tation which  should  be  read  for  obtaining  victories  in  war 
a itd  which  is  accordingly  named  as  the  Sangram  Vijaya 
Vidya  (victory  winning  incantation).  The  Mantra  is  as 
follows; — “ Om  Hri-m,  oh  thou  Goddess  Chamunda,  who 
dwellest  in  the  cremation  ground  (of  the  Universe)  and  who 
wkddest  a Khattanga  and  a human  skul  in  thy  two  hands  and 
standest  on  the  body  of  (the  primordial  matter  of  universal 
dissolution  represented  by  the  god  Maheshvara)  or  the 
Mahashaya  (the  supreme  dead),  surounded  by  the  extremely 
attenuated  ether  pervading  the  dying  space  in  a disintegrate 
ing  universe,  (Mahavimana).  Obstruct  the  apertures  of  the 
globe  with  thy  indomitable  prowess,  do  that,  do  that,  oh  thou 
symbol  of  the  primal  night  who  art  surrounded  by  the 
mighty  Ganas  (a  class  of  demi-gods),  manifest  thy 
all  obstructing  prowess,  O thou  immense*mouthed  goddess, 
bedecked  with  little  drums,  bells  and  kinkinis  and  whose 
laughter  shakes  the  worlds  in  their  orbits*  Om,  Hrum,  Fut, 
(salutation  with  a view  to  obtain  thy  tutelary  protection.) 
Advance  and  advance,  0 thou  goddess,  whose  jagged  teeth 
casts  down  the  gloom  of  night,  and  who  art  clad  in  an 
elephant-skin.  Advance  and  advance,  O goddess,  with  an  ex- 
tremely haggard  and  emaciated  frame,  and  whose  footsteps  are 
followed  by  a concourse  of  many  unearthly  sounds,  advance 
and  advance,  oh  thou  the  supreme  absolute  monstress  with 
a complexion  like  the  flashes  of  heaven,  advance  and  advance 
with  thy  horrid  teeth  exposed  in  a demoniac  laughter  and  thy 
bloody  tongues  protuding~out  of  thy-terrible  mouth  devouring 
fresh  victims.  Om  Chili,  Chili,  oh  thou  goddess  with  a pair 


AGNt  PURANAM. 


537 


apertures  of  the  universe  with  thy  mighty  prowess,  Oh 
thou  goddess  with  an  ever  protruding  tongue,  manifest  thy 
prowess.  Ora  Bhim,  Oh  thou  goddess  whose  sullen  look 
inspires  terror  in  the  breasts  of  all  beings  (Bhrukuti  Mukhi), 
and  whose  roar  and  battle-cry  strikes  terror  into  the 
breasts  of  all  who  hear  them.  Show  thy  mettle,  Oh 
goddess,  on  the  crest  of  whose  crown  shines  the  moon 
occassionally  obstructed  by  the  clotted  hairs  dangling 
loosely  from  its  (crown)  inside.  Make  thy  weird  laughter 
resound  the  welkin  in  one  unbroken  and  continuous  echo. 
Qtn  Hrum,  accomplish  such  and  such  an  end  of  mine 
(the  votary  should  here  state  the  particular  object  he  has 
in  view  for  repeating  this  incantation).  Accomplish 
and  accomplish  this  end  of  mine,  Oh  goddess,  whose 
mouth  vomits  forth  primal  darkness  through  the  interestices 
of  thy  horrible  teeth,  and  who  art  the  protrectress  from  all 
banes  and  evils  that  beset  our  mundane  existence.  Soon 
and  very  soon  accomplish  this  end.  Om  Fut  to  thee.  Om 
subjugate  with  thy  mace  all  the  forces  of  my  enemy,  cut 
through  and  cut  through  their  ranks,  Oh  goddess. 

Om,  dance  and  dance  and  sport  in  death,  shake  and  shake 
my  enemies  and  turn  them  topsyturvy. 

Kill  and  kill,  Oh  thou  goddess  who  dost  fondly  relish 
human  flesh  and  blood,  trample  down  and  trample  down, 
Om,  pierce  through  and  pierce  through,  Om  slay  and 
slay,  Om  chase  and  pursue,  Om  fell  to  the  ground  the 
enemy  though  bearing  a charmed  life  and  possessed  of  a 
body  hard  as  the  bolt  of  heaven.  Om,  stupefy  and  cut 
once'  and  for  all  all  the  evil  doors  dwelling  in  the  three 
worlds  whether  captured  or  at  large.  Dance  and  dance  in 
the  battle  array,  Oh  thou  goddess  with  eyes  sunk  in  their 
sockets  and  a face  resembling  that  of  an  owl,  and  a head 
rendered  doubly  ghastly  by  hairs  standing  erect  on  their 


MCm  PURANAM. 


roots*  Burn  and  burn  tlie  enemy's  forces,  Oh  thou  goddess 
wearing  a human  skull  in  t^y  hand,  and  bedecked  with  a 
similar  garland.  Om,  cook,  and  cook  the  armed  hosts  sent 
against  me,  and  enter  the  ranks  of  [my]  enemy’s  troops  ar- 
ranged in  battle  array.  Om,  why  dost  thou  tarry  goddess, 
overwhelm  them  all  with  the  might  of  the  gods  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Rudra,  and  that  born  of  the  essence  of  >he  sainted 
beings  (Ristm). 

Om,  obstruct  and  impede  the  progress  of  the  march- 
ing hosts,  and  break  and  break  their  arms  and  weapons,  Ob 
thou  terrible  looking  goddess,  with  black  serpents  coiling 
round  thy  body.  Break  and  break  their  ranks,  Oh  thou  who 
dost  confound  all  order  among  the  troops  drawn  up  in  circles 
and  square?,  and  make  all  sorts  of  manoeuveres  impossible, 
and  from  whose  nostrils  hang  down  snakes  reaching  down 
thy  protruded  lips  rendered  doubly  dreadful  by  thy  fero- 
cious mouth  scantly  hid  by  thy  dark  brown  clotted  hairs. 
Yell  and  yell,  Oh  thou  goddess,  whose  mouth  vomits  forth 
fatal  fire,  undermine,  tumble  down,  and  uplift  the  ground 
they  stand  upon. 

Om,  make  my  head  cool,; Oh  goddess,  let  my  hand  and 
feet  resume  their  former  wonted  activity  and  vigour.  Let  my 
eyes  be  opened  and  let  my  bodily  organs  work  in  their 
natural  health,  Om  Put. 

Om,  cut  and  pierce  through  with  thy  trident,  kill  with  thy 
thunder,  strike  with  thy  club,  cleave  with  thy  quoit,  Om, 
pierce  with  thy  spear,  bite  with  thy  teeth,  fell  with  thy 
Karnika,  attack  with  thy  mace  the  fever  which  follows  a 
distinct  periodicity  and  occur  on  the  every  second,  third, 
(tertian)  or  the  fourth  day  from  its  first  paroxysm.  Set  at 
naught  the  influences  of  the  malignant  spirits  such  as  the 
Dakinis  ’and  the  Skandas  and  those  of  the  baneful  planets. 
Exorcise  them  all  and  take  thy  seat  on  the  spirits,  formerly 
possessed  by  them.  Come,  Oh  thou  wife  of  Brahma  who  art 
also  revealed  as  tlve  wives  of  Kumar  and  Maheshwar.  Come, 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


539 


come,  Oh  Vaishnavi,  come,  Oh  Bhairabi,  come,  Oh  Aindri, 
come,  Oh  Chamunde.  Om,  come,  Oh  Revati,  come,  Oh  thou 
Revati  of  the  skies,  come,  Oh  thou  goddess  who  dweilest  on 
the  summits  of  the  Himalaya.  Come,  Oh  thou  goddess,  who 
hast  slain  the  demon  Ruru  and  annihilated  the  whole  race  of 
demons,  ^orae.  Oh  thou  goddess,  whose  thoroughfare  is  the 
heaven  itself,  cast  thy  noose  and  pierce  with  thy  mace.  Stop 
and  enter  (the  line  of  the  hostile  armies,)  parlyse  their  sense 
organs  such  as  the  mouths,  hands  and  feet,  cast  a stupefying 
influence  in  all  directions,  charm  the  cardinal  and  angular 
points  of  the  skies  and  all  spaces  whether  above  or  below  this 
terrestrial  globe.  Om,  stupefy  a!i,  either  through  ashes,  drink- 
ing water,  or  [through  the  subsoil.  Om,  fell  them,  Om  obei- 
sance to  Chamunda,  Kiii,  Kill  Om,  Vichale,  Hum,  Fut. 

The  incantation  laid  down  above  should  be  deemed  as 
a potent  factor  in  bringing  about  the  fulfilment  of  all  ends 
and  desires,  and  which  being  read  after  the  performance  of  the 
necessary  Homa  and  the  Japa  (repetition  of  a Mantra)  cere- 
mony enables  a man  to  win  a battle.  The  presiding  goddess 
of  the  incantation  should  be  meditated  upon  as  possessed 
of  twenty-eight  hands,  weilding  in  them,  a sword,  a khetaka, 
a club,  a mace,  a bow,  an  arrow,  a clenched  fist,  a club,  a 
conch  shell,  a sword,  a banner,  a thunder-bolt,  a quoit,  a 
battle-axe,  a hand-drum,  a mirror,  a spear,  a tuft  of  hair, 
a phoughshare,  a Mushala,  a noose,  a Tomara,  a drum,  a 
Panara,  a blessing  and  a fist  respectively.  The  goddess 
should  be  contemplated  as  standing  on  a buffalo  in  the 
attitude  of  slaying  that  enraged  animal.  The  Homa  spoken 
of  above  should  be  performed  with  a composition  consisting 
of  honey,  sugar,  and  clarified  butter.  This  incantation 
should  not  be  disclosed  to  every  body  (i— 6). 


CHAPTER  CXXXV. 


JL  HE  God  said  : — Now  1 shall  describe  the  Astrological 
diagram  whereby  the  success  or  failure  of  a journey  or  mis- 
sion can  be  foretold.  A diagram  consisting  of  three  columns 
should  be  laid  down,  wherein  the  asterisms  such  as  the 
Ashvini,  etc.,  should  be  represented  by  the  first  letters  of 
their  respective  names. 

In  the  first  column  should  be  inserted  the  names  of  the 
asterisms  known  as  the  Ash v ini,  Ardra,  Purvas,  the  Uttar 
Falguni,  Hasta,  Jestha,  the  Varuna  and  the  Ajapa.  In  the 
column  to  the  right  hand  side  thereof  should  be  written  the 
names  of  the  asterisms  known  as  the  Mrigshira,  Pushya,. 
the  Vagya,  the  Chitra,  the  Maitra,  the  Varuna  and  the 
Vasaba.  The  third  column  should  contain  the)  names  of 
Ahirbadhna,  the  Krittika,  the  Rohini,  the  Ahi,  the  Chitra* 
the  Svati,  the  Vishakha,  the  Shravana,  and  the  Revati,  The 
Chakra  or  the  diagram,  consisting  of  the  three  columns  con- 
taining the  names  of  the  different  asterisms,  is  known  as  the 
Phanishvara  Chakra,  and  a forecast  of  good  or  evil  may  be 
done  by  means  thereof.  An  evil  caused  by  the  peculiar  post- 
tion  of  the  Sun,  Mars,  Saturn  and  the  Rahu  in  the  diagram  is 
sure  to  end  in  a run  of  good  luck,  such  as  the  acquisition  of  a 
country,  village,  etc.,  or  the  winning  of  the  affection  of  a 
brother  or  a wife.  The  names  of  the  twenty-seven  asterisms 
to  be  used  in  the  diagram  have  been  symbolically  put  down 
as  Aa,  Bha,  Kri,  Ro,  Mri,  A,  Pu,  Pu,  A,  Ma,  Pu,  U,  Ha, 
Chi,  Sva,  Vi,  A,  Ja,  Mu,  Pu,  U,  Shra,  Dha,  Sha,  Pu,  U, 
and  Ra  (a— 6)."- 


CHAPTER  CXXXVI. 


T 

i.  HE  GOD  said  : Now  I shall  describe  the  incantation 
known  as  ^ the  Mahamari  (the  death  or  pestilence-bringing 
charm)  and  which  is  sure  to  bring  about  the  absolute  ruin 
and  destruction  of  one’s  enemies.  The  incantation  runs  as 
follows:  Brim,  Kill  and  kill  such  and  such  a person,  O thou 
goddess  of  Mahamari,  (the  goddess  of  death  or  pestilence! 
who  art  possessed  of  red  bloody  eyes,  and  a complexion 
black  as  the  sable  night.  Kill  and  kill,  O thou  goddess,  who 
art  the  sister  of  the  god  of  death  and  who  dost  lead  all 
creatures  to  the  grave.  Om,  burn  and  burn,  Om,  boil  and 
boil,  Om,  cut  and  clear.  Om,  destroy  and  destroy  my  enemies 
and  may  ruin  and  confusion  seize  them  all.  Bun,  Fut.  I make 
obeisance  to  thee  goddess  dreaded  by  all  sentient  creatures, 
and  who  grantest  all  boons  to  her  votaries. 

O thou  Supreme  Goddess,  the  rite  of  Nyasa  should  be 
performed  as  follows: — Om,  obeisance  (Nam  as)  to  the  goddess 
Mari,  located  in  my  heart.  Am,  salutation  (Svaha)  unto  the 
goddess  Mahamari,  psychically  invoked  in  my  head,  Om, 
obeisance  to  the  goddess  Kalaratpi  (the  presiding  deity  of 
the  night  following  upon  the  dissolution-  of  the  universe), 
situated  at  the  tuft  of  hair  on  my  crown.  Om,  Khas,  Hum, 
obeisance  to  the  sable  coloured  goddess  who  iss  my  armour. 
Om,  Hum,  obeisance  to  the  star-eyed  goddess  possessing 
lightning  tongues  and  dreaded  by  all.  Protect  and  protect 
me,  O goddess,  in  all  my  undertakings.  [The  Mantra  is 
to  be  T*ychically  located  in  the  region  of  the  eyes,  both, 
occult  and  external  by  uttering  the  Mantra  Vousat,  obei- 
sance] and,  lastly  as  Om,  Hun,  Fut,  (obeisance)  to  the  god- 
dess Mahamari,  also  revealed  as  the  Supreme  Kali  and 
who  has  lorded  it  over  all  the  goblins  and  evil  spirits 
and  who  is  my  weapon  (i).  The  votary  should. 


AGMi  FUftANAM. 


collect  a piece  of  cloth,  worn  by  a dead  man  at  the  time 
of  death,  and  which  would  be  of  an  angular  shape,  measuring 
three  cubits  in  length,  and  paint  thereon  an  image  of 
the  goddess  as  possessed  of  three  faces,  four  hands  and 
a pitch  black  complexion.  The  arms  or  weapons  of  the 
goddess,  such  as  the  arrow,  mace,  Khattanga,  etc, H should  be 
painted  in  the  picture  with  a variety  of  colours.  The  first 
or  the  middle  face  of  the  goddess  should  be  painted  light 
black,  and  which  would  devour  any  person  looking  at  it. 
The  second  face  on  the  right  hand  side  should  be  horribly 
painted.  The  hungry,  blood-smeared  bung-down  tongue 
should  be  represented  as  licking  the  tips  of  the  perched 
and  protruded  lips  through  which  a row  of  horrid  teeth 
should  be  made  visible.  A look  at  this  second  face  of  the 
goddess  is  sure  to  annihilate  the  entire  number  of  the 
enemy's  horses.  The  third  face  should  be  painted  white, 
which  would  destroy  the  troops  of  enemy's  elephants.  The 
votary  should  worship  the  goddess  with  his  face  turned 
towards  the  west,  and  with  perfumes,  scented  flowers, 
honey  and  clarified  butter. 

0 Goddess,  a mere  contemplation  of  the  abovesaid  charm 
(Vidya)  is  enough  to  cure  a man  of  the  diseases  of  the  head 
and  eyes  and  to  acquire  mysterious  power  over  the  celestial 
and  infernal  beings  such  as  the  Yakshas  and  Rakshasas. 
By  mere  thinking  of  this  Mantra,  a man  would  be  able  to 
destroy  all  his  enemies  or  persons  who  would  be  antago- 
nistic to  him.  By  a Homa  ceremony  performed  with  branches 
of  the  Nimva  tree  dipped  in  goat's  blood,  the  angry  votary 
will  undoubtedly  destroy  his  enemies,  both  root  and  branch. 
The  Homa  ceremony,  if  continuously  performed  for  seven 
days  in  the  front  of  a hostile  army,  is  sure  to  create  a panic 
among  its  ranks,  and  to  put  it  to  utter  rout  O goddess, 
epidemic  diseases  break  out  among  the  ranks  of  the  enemy's 
forces  through  the  mysterious  potency  of  the  abovesaid 


agni  PURANAM, 


oy  performing  the  Homa  ceremony  with  a hun  It ed  and 
eight  sticks  of  a sacrificial  tree,  the  votary  would  be  able 
to  destroy  his  enemy,  even  if  protected  by  the  god  Brahma 
himself.  Similarly  a Homa  ceremony  continuously  per- 
formed  for  three  consecutive  days  with  a thousand  sticks 
of  Unmukta  and  red  Visa,  should  be  looked  upon  a*  a very 
potent  agtfnt  in  annihilating  the  enemy’s  forces,  and  which 
would  be  followed  by  his  utter  ruin.  A hostile  army  would 
be  put  to  rout  and  confusion  by  performing  the  Homa  with 
oblations  of  Rajika  and  salt  for  three  days.  A Homa  cere- 
mony. performed  with  libations  of  ass’s  blood,  would  compel 
the  enemy  to  fly  from  his  country,  while  the  one  performed 
by  pouring  out  crow’s  blood  over  the  consecrated  sacrificial 
fire,  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  death  warrant  of  one's 
enemies.  All  other  acts  in  connection  with  the  destruction 
of  one’s  enemies  should  be  closed  with  a Homa  ceremony 
performed  with  the  same  libation  (10—13).  Then  the  votary 
should  ride  on  an  elephant,  accompanied  by  a couple  of 
female  votaress,  and  with  his  body  charmed  with  the  incan- 
tation, he  would  be  able  to  scare  away  his  enemies  by 
blowing  upon  a conch-shell,  or  with  the  beatings  of  bis  war- 
drums.  He  should  exhibit  a picture  of  the  goddess  Mahamaya 
(the  goddess  of  absolute  illusion)  facing  the  enemy’s  forces 
which  should  be  cleft  asunder  in  the  battle-field.  Unmarried 
girls  should  be  sumptuously  fed  and  the  Pindi  should  be  carried 
round.  The  votary  should  contemplate  the  enemy’s  forces 
as  crest-fallen,  confused,  terror-stricken  and  fixed  and 
stationary  as  a mountain.  This  stupefying  incantation  should 
not  be  disclosed  to  everybody.  The  picture  spoken  of  above, 
should  contain  the  image  of  the  goddess  Durga,  Bhairavi, 
Kubjika,  or  of  the  god  Rudra  or  Narasingha  (14— 18). 


CHAPTER  CXXXVii. 


The  God  said  Now  I shall  describe  the  six  sorts  of 
charms  which  are  usually  known  as  the  Shatkarma  (such  as 
the  acts  of  killing,  stupefying,  etc.,  by  means  of  incantations) 
The  Mantras  which  should  be  used  in  connection  herewith 
are  as  follows First  the  Sadhya  Mantras  should  be 
laid  dawn  followed  by  the  (principal)  one.  The  Mantra 
thus  combined  and  formed  is  known  as  the  I allava,  and 
should  be  used  in  connection  with  all  acts  undertaken  with  a 
view  to  distract  the  minds  of  one's  enemies.  The  Mantra* 
known  as  the  Yogakshya  consists  of  the  principal  Mantra, being 
written  or  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  followed  by  the  Sadhya 
one,  which  in  its  turn,  should  be  followed  by  the  principal 
Mantra.  The  foregoing  Mantra  should  be  used  on  occasions 
Where  the  Votary  would  wish  for  the  extirpation  of  the 
Whole  race  of  his  enemy.  The  Mantra  known  as  the  Rodhaka 
and  which  consists  of  the  Mantra  being  written  first,  succeeded 
by  the  Sadhya  Mantra,  respectively  followed  in  their  turn  by 
the  principal  and  the  Sadhya  Mantras,  should  be  made  use  of 
In  all  acts  undertaken  with  the  sole  object  of  stupefying  the 
faculties  of  one’s  enemies.  The  Mantras  which  are  denomi- 
nated as  the  Samputas,  consists  its  the  Sadhyamantras  being 
written  at  the  middle  and  above  and  below  the  principal 
one  on  its  left  hand  side  and  should  be  used  in  attracting 
and  gaining  a control  over  another’s  mind  (1—5). 

When  the  letters  composing  any  particular  Mantra  fall 
under  the  category  of  Sadhya  letters,  the  Mantra  passes  by 
the  demomination  of  the  class  first  stated  above  (Prathama), 
and  is  to  be  employed  in  acts,  undertaken  with  a view  to  gain 
an  ascendency  or  control  over  another’s  mind.  The  Vidarvha 
class  of  Mantras  consists  in  the  two  of  the  letters  constitut- 
ing the  Mantra  being  written  at  the  beginning  followed  by  a 


A&NI  PURANAM, 


* The  entire  time  between  sunrise  and  sunset  is  divided  into  six 
different  seasons  such  as  the  Uasanta  (spring,  etc.)  According  to 
certain  authorities  the  entire  morning  time  is  designated  as  the  spring, 
while  others  aver  that  the  spring  sets  in  in  the  first  half  Prahar  (a  houiV 
and  a half ) of  each  day*  • 1 . 

wrc[  * '♦  *» 

* of  ^ wre  fsrfsraaw:  i . 

wer:  i > Jsa 

#rtt%  ^ whs:  it 

snfjff%  iftirt  wrt  TO¥$f%  r 
fsjfsift  iftrt  tfcn  i 

hti|1[tw  m TOrmwiih  w” 

; : ' 


69 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


person,  and  should  be  also  used  in  the  rites  which  give  the 
votaries  success  in  enterprize  and  accession  of  wealth  in 
general  (8— -to). 

The  votary  should  dose  a deadly  incantation  by  repeat- 
ing the  following  verse.  “Thou  art,  Oh  Yama,  the  god  of 
death,  who  boldest  sway  over  the  region  of  the  departed.  This 
ceastess,  infinite  time  is  thy  embodiment,  and  tfiou  dealest 
with  the  departed  souls  according  to  their  deserts.  I offer 
this  enemy  to  thee,  as  a victim.  Kill  him  without  delay.” 
Then  the  priest  officiating  at  the  ceremony  and  who  should 
ife  looked  upon  as  the  destroyer  of  all  people  antagonistic 
to  the  votary,  should  address  him  in  a pleasant  vein  as 
follows  : “ Hold,  Hold,  Oh  votary.  Rest  assured  I shall  spare 
no  pain  to  kill  and  overwhelm  him  with  ruin."  Then  the  god 
of  death  should  be  worshipped  and  propitiated  with  white 
lotus  flowers  and  the  votary  should  deem  himself  indentical 
with  the  god  Bhairava  and  contemplate  the  goddess 
Kulesbvari  in  his  heart.  Then  a Homa  ceremony  should 
be  performed  in  honour  of  the  presiding  deity  of  death, 
whereby  the  object  of  the  undertaking  would  be  fulfilled. 
In  the  night,  the  votary  would  learn  in  sleep  the  result  of 
the  incantation  both  as  regards  himself  and  his  adversary. 
A man,  by  worshipping  the  goddess  Durga  with  the  Mantra 
running  as  “ Salutation  to  thee,  O Durga,  O Durga  who  art 
the  protectress  of  the  universe,”  would  be  able  to  destroy  his 
enemies,  whereas  a continuous  repetition  of,  "Ha,  Sa,  Ksha, 
Ma,  La,  Ya,  Ra>  and  Ya,  Mantra,”  sacred  to  the  goddess 
Bhairabi,  would  be  attended  by  the  same  result  (i  i— 14). 


K: 


CHAPTER  CXXXVIII 


1 HE  £00  said  : — Now  I shall  enumerate  the  sixty 
different  Samvatsaras  and  the  good  or  evil  which  results 
from  them  respectively.  Sacrificial  ceremonies  become  pro- 
lific in  the  year  known  as  the  Prabhava,  while  population 
thrives  in  the  one  named  as  the  Vibhava.  A good  harvest 
is  usually  reaped  and  gathered  in,  and  the  earth  abounds  in 
joy  in  the  year  known  as  the  Shukra,  while  the  Prajapati  and 
the  Angira  are  marked  by  plenty  and  increase  of  articles  of 
comforts  in  general.  Population  thrives  in  the  year  known  as 
the  Shrimukha,  while  id 
in  the  one  named  as  the  Bhava 


eas  and  sentiments  grow  rampant 
In  the  year  denominated 
as  the  Purana  the  god  Indra  the  (rain-god),  who  is  the  pre- 
siding deity  of  all  cereals,  clothes  the  earth  with  verdure, 
while  the  year  Ishvara  is  charaterised  by  peace,  plenty  and 
good  health  of  all  creatures  inhabiting  the  globe.  The  year 
Pramathi  is  characterised  by  a moderate  rainfall,  while  corn 
grows  abundant  in  the  year  called  the  Vikrama.  All  things 
thrive  in  the  year  named  as  the  Vrishi,  while  the  one  named  as 
the  Chitrabhanu  witnesseth  the  happening  of  many  wonder- 
ful events.  The  year  Sarbhana  is  a year  of  bliss  and  good 
health,  while  the  clouds  are  favourable  in  the  year  known 
as  the  Tarana. 

The  year  Parthiva  is  marked  by  the  abundance  of  grain 
and  food-stuff,  while  the  one  named  Jaya  is  characterised 
by  excessive  rainfall.  Good  showers  are  usually  expected 
in  the  year  known  as  the  Sarvajit,  white  plenty  follows  in  the 
wake  of  Sarvadhari.  The  year  Virodhi  is  characterised 
by  atmospheric  conditions  unfavourable  to  the  formation  of 
clouds,  while  the  year  Bhayankara  usually  becomes  sadly 
memorable  for  many  terrible  events.  Men  become  chival* 


H m i|  * 1 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


rout  In  the  year  known  as  the  Khara  (Ass),  while  the  people 
become  merry  ig  the  year  known  as  the  Nandana.  The 
Vishaya  witnesselh  the  extinction  of  many  animosities,  and 
during  its  continuance  diseases  and  people  who  are 
inimical  to  the  common  weal  are  put  under  a healthy 
i^heck.  People  suffer  from  fever  in  the  year  f known  as 
the  Manmatha,  while  distress  becomes  general  in  the  year 
Earned  as  the  Duskara.  People  exchange  hard  words  in 
the  year  known  as  the  Durmukha,  while  money  becomes 
scarce  in  the  one  named  as  the  Hemalamva.  O thou, 
supreme  goddess,  the  year  Vifamva  is  marked  by  plenty, 
while  quarrels  and  dissensions  rage  rampant  in  the  year 
Called  the  Vijaya,  The  Earth  is  innundated  in  the  years 
called  the  Plava,  while  men  perform  deeds  of  virtue  in 
the  year  known  as  the  Sobhana.  Men  become;  cruel  ins 
f year  of  the  Rakshasa  class,  and  various ' sorts  of  paddy 
grow  in  a year  belonging  to  the  class  of  Anana.  Rainfall 
becomes  abundant  in  a year  of  the  Pingala  class,  while  the 
qne  belonging  to  the  order  Kal  witnesselh  the  loss  of  many 
splendid  fortunes.  Every  thing  thrives  in  a year  of  the 
Siddhartha  class,  while  dreadful  events  take  place  in  the  one 
belonging  to  the  order  Roudra.  There  is  moderate  rainfall 
in  a year  of  the  Durmati  cJa*s,  while  one  of  the  Dundhuvl 
class  is  marked  by  abundance  of  paddy  and  a plethora  of 
public  welfare.  The  years  known  as  the  Raktaksha, 
Krodh.ana,  Jaya  and  Rudhirodgari  are  marked  by  a copious 
showers,  while  a general  dearth  of  wealth  prevails  in  a year  of 
the  K*haya  Class.  These  are  the  sixty  Samvatsaras  (1—-13). 


CHAPTER  CXXXIX. 


1 HEjGod  said: — The  drugs  and  articles  which  are 
possessed  of  mysterious  virtues  and  which  should  lie  used  in 
the  acts  of  charms  are  as  follows  Bhringaraja,  Sahadevi,  the 
crest  of  a peacock,  Putranjiva,  Kritanjali,  Adbaspuspa, 
Rudantika,  Kurnari,  Rudrajata,  Vishnukranta,  white  Arka, 
Lajjaluka,  Mohalata,  black  Dhustura,  Goraksha,  Karkaii, 
Meshashringi,  and  Snulii.  The  symbolical  numbers  o! 
the  abovesaid  drugs  and  vegetables  are  as  follows the 
Rittika,  the  Van  hi,  the  Naga,  the  Fortnights,  tire  Muni, 
Manu,  Shiva,  Vasu,  the  Dik,  the  Rasa,  the  Veda,  the  Grafia, 
the  Ravi,  the  Moon,  and  Tithis  (Lunarphases).  The  firsf 
four  of  the  abovesaid  drugs  should  be  used  in  fumigating 
the  body  of  a votary,  or  their  burning  sticks  should 
be  made  use  of  in  waiving  light  before  his  person. 
The  burnt  ashes  of  the  substance,  mentioned  third  in  the 
list,  should  be  used  in  preparing  coflyrium  for  the  eyes,' 
while  the  fourth  drug  should  be  used  in  bath  and  in  washing 
generally.  The  drug  Bhringaraja  in  combination  with  the 
vegetable  immediately  following  it  in  the  list  gives  rise  to 
tour  different  kinds  of  unguents. 

The  drugs  of  which  Muni  is  the  number  in  the  list  should 
be  used  in  preparing  unguent  for  the  right  side,  the  drugst 
represented  by  the  Nagas  in  lubricating  the  left,  While  those, 
which  Ishvaras  stand  for,  should  be  used  in  annotating  the 
heads.  Scented  fumes  of  the  drugs  represented  by  the  Sun, 
Moon,  etc.,  names  of  which  occur  in  the  middle  part  of  the  list,' 
should  be  looked  upon  as  specially  auspicious  for  afl  sorts 
of  charms.  The  man  whose  body  is  besmeared  with  a paste 
of  the  foregoing  drugs,  is  worshipped  even  by  the  gods: 
Incense  sticks  made  of  the  sixteenth  drug  of  the  list  should 


mm  puranam. 


be  burnt  and  carried  round  the  room.  The  drugs,  such  as 
those  which  stand  fourth  in  the  above  order  of  enumeration, 
should  be  made  use  of  in  preparing  coliyrium  for  the  eyes, 
while  the  drugs  such  as  those  standing  fifth  in  the  list  should 
be  mixed  with  drinks.  A man  bearing  a “ tilak  * mark  on 
his  nose  composed  of  the  Rittik  (fourth),  sixth,  anfd  the  third 
drugs  of  the  above  list,  will  be  able  to  charm  the  three 
worlds.  An  unguent,  composed  of  the  substances  occupying 
tht  Surjya  (twelveth)  Tridasha  (thirteenth),  the  second,  and 
the  eighth  places  in  the  list,  is  sure  to  captivate  the  mind 
of  a damsel  and  while  a plaster  composed  of  the  subs* 
tances  standing  first,  Indra  Fani  and  the  Rudra  (eleven) 
in  the  list  applied  over  the  genitals  of  a woman  will 
charm  her  for  ever.  A pill  made  of  the  drugs  occurring 
sixteenth,  tenth,  second,  and  the  fifth  in  the  list,  is  known 
to  exert  a similar  charming  influence.  The  drugs  standing 
Rittika  (fourth),  ninth,  third,  and  eighth  in  the  list,  if  kept 
in  the  mouth  by  the  charmer,  would  paralyse  the  arms  of 
an  enemy,  and  make  all  blows  ineffectual,  while  an  unguent 
made  of  the  eighth,  Indra,  the  fourth,  and  the  ninth  substances 
of  the  list,  would  enable  a man  to  sit  upon  water  (i— 13). 
By  taking  a pill  made  of  the  drugs  standing  fifth,  third, 
eighth,  and  eleventh  in  the  list,  a man  will  feel  neither 
hunger  nor  thirst.  A miserable  woman  will  be  made  happy 
and  fortunate  by  using  the  unguent  composed  of  the  third, 
sixteenth,  tenth,  and  the  fifth  drugs  of  the  list.  By  means 
of  the  substances  occupying  the  seventh,  tenth,  Akshi 
and  the  third  places  in  the  list,  a man  will  be  able  to  play 
with  the  serpents.  By  wearing  on  her  arms  or  by  apply-' 
log  a plaster  of  the  substances  forming  the  seventh,  third 
eleventh  and  the  eighth  articles  of  the  abovesaid  list 
over  the  genital,  a woman  is  sure  to  be  safely  and  speedily 
delivered  of  a child.  A man  is  sure  to  win  in  a game  of 
dice  by  putting  on  a cloth  besmeared  with  the  -sevte&fty 
tenth,  eight ti  md  the  ninth  dregs  of  the  abovesaid  .list, 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


while  a plaster  of  the  substances  forming  the  seventh, 
third,  and  the  Muni  of  the  abovesaid  list,  and  applied 
over  the  penis  before  coition,  would  give  birth  to  a male 
child,  A pill  made  of  the  ninth,  eighth,  Naga,  and  the 
seventh  drugs  of  the  list,  is  a very  powerful  agent  in 
captivating  the  minds  of  men  (14 — 17.) 


CHAPTER  CXL, 


I he  god  said  Now  I shall  enumerate  the  names  of 
the  thirty-six  polyglot  medicinal  drugs,  which  are  used  even 
by  the  gods  Brahma,  Rudra,  and  Indra,  and  which  if  judici- 
ously administered  are  sure  to  make  men  immortal.  The 
treatment  which  may  be  resored  to  even  in  perfect  health 
is  known  as  the  process  of  imparting  immortality  {Amriti- 
karanam.)  The  drugs  are  as  follows:  Haritaki,  Aksbi, 
Dhastri,  Maricha,  Pippali,  Shifa,  Vanhi,  Shunthi,  Pippali, 
Guduchi,  Vacha,  Nimva,  Vasaka,  Shatamuli,  Saindhava  (salt) 
Sindhu  varaka,  Kantakari,  Gokshur,  Vilva,  Punarnava,  Vala, 
Eranda,  Mundi,  Ruchaka,  Bhringa,  Kshara,  Parpata, 
Dhangaka,  Giraka,  Shatapuspi,  Javanika,  Vidanga,  Khadira 
Kritamala,  Haridra,  Vacha  and  sundried  rice.  Each  of  the 
above  drugs  is  efficacious  in  all  sorts  of  ailments  and  tends 
to  make  the  patient  immortal.  A pulverised  compound  of 
the  above  drugs  treated  with  purified  mercury  gently  moves 
the  bowels  and  makes  the  blood  free  from  all  impurities, 
thereby  imparting  to  the  system  a tone  and  a vigour’  which 
usually  arrest  a premature  old  age,  and  prevent  senile  decay. 
The  above  medicine  may  be  exhibited  in  honey  and  fre- 
quently, applied  on  the  tongue  (Avaleha)  or  vciky  be  used 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


through  the  medium  of  oil,  or  clarified  butter  duly 
prepared  or  may  be  taken  as  a bitter  potion.  The  medicine  is 
sure  to  suit  all  systems  and  will  prove  a veritable  elixir  of 
life  even  where  it  is  despaired  of.  The  pills  should  be  made 
to  weigh  a Pala,  Karsa  or  half  a Karsa  only  according  to  the 
requirements  of  a particular  case.  A judicious  use  of  the 
medicine  would  enable  a man,  though  not  observing  a 
strict  regimen  of  diet,  nor  overnice  as  regards  the  principle  of 
temperance,  to  live  up  to  a good  old  age  of  three  hundred 
years.  A man  is  sure  to  get  rid  of  all  diseases  by  using 
the  first  nine  drugs  from  the  beginning,  and  no  other 
medicine  can  vie  with  it  in  the  efficacy  of  imparting  a new 
life  to  shattered,  worn  out,  or  used  up  frames.  Diseases  will 
yield  to  the  second,  third  or  the  fourth  drug  of  the  list. 
Thus  all  diseases  which  are  the  outcome  of,  deranged 
wind  will  be  subdued  by  the  use  of  the  first,  second,  third 
fourth*  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  or  the  eighth  drug  in  the  list, 
which  are  to  be  successively  administered  in  the  order  of 
their  enumeration  in  the  event  of  the  preceding  one  being 
found  insufficient  to  cope  with  the  malady.  All  diseases 
which  are  due  to  disordered  bile  will  yield  to  the  third 
tweleth,  twenty-sixth  and  the  twenty  seventh  drugs  of  the 
list.  Diseases  which  owe  their  origin  to  a deranged  state 
of  phlegm  are  sure  to  prove  amenable  to  the  drugs 
forming  the  fifth,  sixth,  the  seventh,  the  eighth  and  the 
sixteenth  remedy  in  the  list  laid  down  above.  Diseases,  which 
are  caused  by  charms  and  incantations,  yield  to  the  virtue  of 
the  fourth,  third,  fifth,  and  the  sixth  drugs  of  the  list,  whereas 
maladies,  which  are  the  resultants  of  the  influences  of 
pnafignant  stars  and  baneful  ghosts  and  goblins,  are  speedily 
cured  by  the  first,  second,  third,  ninth,  seventh,  and  the 
eighth,  drugs  of  the  fist  respectively,  or  they  will  yield  to  the 
properties  of  the  the  thirty-second,  sixteenth  and  the 
The  nrooerties  of  these  thirty-six  polyglots 


CHAPTER  CXtt. 


1 HE  God  said : — Now  I shall  speak  about  the  medi- 
cinal or  curative  incantations  which  grant  all  wished  for 
objects  to  individuals  (i).  The  number  of  the  letters  com- 
posing the  name  of  a thief  should  be  doubled  and  added 
with  the  number  of  its  Matras  multiplied  by  four.  The 
total  thus  obtained  should  be  divided  by  the  number  of  letters 
constituting  the  name  of  a person  who  should  be  reckoned 
as  a thief  in  the  event  of  there  being  left  any  remainder  (2). 

Now  I shall  dwell  upon  the  process  of  reckoning  the 
birth  of  a male  or  a female  child  in  the  womb.  If  the  ques- 
tion put  to  the  soothsayer  consists  of  an  odd  number  of 
letters,  the  child  in  the  womb  should  be  feckoned  as  be- 
longing to  the  male  sex.  The  child  would  be  born  blind,  and 
the  defect  would  be  in  the  left  eye  in  the  event  of  the  com- 
ponent letters  of  the  name  (sic)  being  of  an  even  number, 
while  the  defect  would  be  in  the  right  eye  in  case  where  the 
letters  would  number  otherwise.  The  number  of  letters 
composing  the  names  of  both  the  man  and  the  wife  should 
be  multiplied  with  the  number  of  their  Matras  and  divided 
by  four.  The  quotient,  if  even,  would  indicate  the  birth  of  a 
male  child,  while  an  odd  quotient  obtained  in  the  aforesaid 
way  would  indicate  the  birth  of  a female  child.  Any  re- 
mainder being  left  in  the  latter  case  would  predict  the  death 
of  the  wife  before  that  of  her  husband,  while  the  one  remain- 
ing in  the  former  instance  would  foretell  the  survival  of  the 
wife  (3— S). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  Shani  Chakra,  or  the  diagram 
by  which  the  malignant  influence  of  the  Saturn  lying  in  the 
particular  quarters  of  the  globe  on  a particular  day  may  bo 


554 


AGNi  PURANAM. 


ascertained.  The  Saturn  occupying  the  particular  sign  ot 
a month  casts  a full  glance  at  the  second,  seventh,  eighth  and 
the  tenth  part  of  a day  marked  by  the  same  and  a half  glance 
at  its  fourth  and  the  eleventh  part.  A malignant  glance  of 
the  Saturn  should  be  carefully  avoided.  The  presiding 
planet  of  a day  (Dinadhipa)  casts  its  peculiar  influence  for 
three  hours  only  while  the  rest  of  the  planets  exert  similar 
influences  for  half  a Yama  (eighth  part  of  a day)  respec- 
tively. The  part  of  the  day  assigned  to  the  Saturn,  should 
be  avoided  in  war  (6 — 7). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  position  of  the  Rahu  as  it  varies 
from  day  to  day  in  a week.  The  Rahu  lies  at  the  east  on 
a Sunday,  at  the  north-west  on  a Saturday,  at  the  south  on 
a Thursday,  at  the  south-east  on  a Friday  and  a Tuesday,, 
and  at  the  north  on  a Wednesday,  while  at  the  same  time 
the  Phani  Rahu  lies  enclosing  the  south-west,  south-east, 
and  north-west  quarters  of  the  globe  for  three  hours  only,  A 
man  who  starts  on  a journey  to  a direction  occupied  by  the 
Rahu,  meets  his  doom,  though  powerful  as  Indra  (the  lord 
of  the  gods)  himself  (8), 

Now  I shall  describe  the  position  of  the  Rahu  on  the 
different  days  of  a lunar  month  (Tithi).  The  Rahu  lies  in 
the  south-east  and  the  north-west  on  the  days  of  a full  and 
a new  moon  respectively.  The  Rahu  is  sure  to  kill  one’s 
enemy  j’ourneying  towards  his  face.  The  Rahu  lies  in  the 
front  of  the  Tithis  of  which  the  letters  Ka  to  Ja  are  the 
symbols,  and  in  the  east  on  the  Tithis  of  which  the  letters 
Dha  to  Ma  stand  for,  and  accordingly  the  groups  of  Mars 


AGNI  PURANAM.  555 

and  thence  by  the  west  to  the  north-east.  The  mighty  Rahu 
travels  with  the  Visti  as  stated  above,  and  occupies  the  north- 
east quarter  of  the  sky  on  the  third  day  of  a lunar  month, 
and  the  southern  on  its  seventh  day.  Thus  in  the  light  and 
the  dark  fortnights  the  Rahu  kills  one’s  enemies  situate  at 
the  quarter  from  which  the  wind  blows. 

Now  I shall  describe  the  incantation  by  which  the  body, 
of  a person  may  be  made  hard  and  proof  against  all  blows 
and  weapons  (Dridhi  Karanam).  The  charm  should  be  put 
in  an  amulet  and  worn  at  the  neck  or  on  the  arm.  The 
stems  of  Kandulakshya  culled  under  the  influence  of  the 
asterism  Pushya  and  a recitation  of  the  Aparajita  Mantra 
’would  make  a sword  inert.  The  Mantra  is  as  follows:— 
“Orn  obeisance  to  the  goddess  Vajrashrinkhala,  kill  and  kill, 
Om,  eat  and  eat,  devour  and  devour.  Om,  drink  the  blood 
of  my  enemy  out  of  thy  cup  of  a human  skull.  Om  obstruct 
and  obstruct  the  eastern  quarter  of  the  sky,  0 thou  goddess 
with  bloodshot  eyes,  besmeared  with  ashes,  clad  in  bloody 
clothes,  and  equipped  with  the  bolt  of  thunder.  Om,  close 
up,  and  close  up  the  western  gate  of  the  sky.  Om,  close  up 
and  close  up  the  southern  quarter  of  the  globe.  Om, 
barricade  the  northern  entrance  of  the  sky.  Om,  hold  in 
check  the  Nagas  (the  serpent  spirits).  Om,  keep  in  custody 
their  wives.  Om,  keep  in  control  the  demon  world.  Om, 
put  under  curb  and  rein  the  fiendish  activity  of  the  infernal 
beings  such  as  the  Yakshas,  Rakshasas  and  the  Pishahhas. 
Om  bind  and  bind  in  an  unbreakable  chord.  Om,  Protect 
and  protect  me  from  all  evils  which  are  engendered  by 
the  evil  spirits,  ghosts,  and  Gandharvas.  Om,  protect 
and  keep  secure  (for  me)  the  space  upward.  Keep 
secure  and  guard  the  space  downward.  Om,  bind  the 
Kshorika.  Om,  burn  and  burn.  O thou  goddess  of 
mighty  prowess.  Om  Ghoti,  Ghoti,  Mothi,  Mothi  to  thee, 
O thou  goddess,  who  art  encircled  by  a wall  of  liquid  thunder 
dfippling  down  from  thy  dishevelled  hairs.  Hun  Fut,  Hrun, 

; V;  i::;:  ; : 


1 


AGNt  PURANAM. 


Hrun,  Shrub,  Fut  to  thee.  Hrun/Has,  Fan,  Fen  Fas,  protect 
and  protect  me'  from  ail  malignant  stars  and  planets. 
Protect  me  from  (the  influences  of)  all  diseases,  keep  me 
secure  from  the  infinite  harms  and  evils  that  beset  human  life. 
The  above  incantation  should  be  used  in  all  sorts  of  fever 
and  specially  in  cases  where  possessions  by  evil  spirits  are 
suspected,  as  well  as  in  acts  any  way  connected  with  any 
sort  of  spell  or  charm  (9—20), 


CHAPTER  CXLII 


1 HE  God  said*. — Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
worshipping  the  goddess  Kuvjika  together  with  the 
different  stages  of  the  worship,  by  means  whereof  the  gods 
conquered  the  demons  and  regained  their  lost  kingdom  of 
paradise  with  all  its  wealth  and  celestial  weapons  (1). 

The  Beeja  Mantra  known  as  the  Mayabeeja  (Bring)  should 
be  mentally  located  in  the  region  of  the  Anus,  the  fiery  images 
of  the  six  Astra  Mantra  (Fut)  over  the  arms,  the  terms  " Kali,” 
“ Kali”  contemplated  as  written  in  pure  light  in  the  region 
of  the  heart,  while  the  votary  should  imagine  the  term  “Dusta 
Chandalika,”  as  written  in  pure  fire  inside  the  substance  of 
his  brain.  He  should  locate  the  image  of  the  Mantra  running 
as  u Hroum,  Spbam,  Ha,  Sa,  Kha,  Ka,  Ceha,  Da,  Om,  Bhai- 
rava,”  about  the  region  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown  of 
his  head.  The  goddess  Bhelakhi  should  be  deemed  as  his 
armour,  while  the  images  of  the  goddess  Rakfcachandika  and 
Duti  should  be  imagined  over  the  pupils  of  his  eyes  at  the 
time  of  meditation.  Subsequently  the  Kurcha  Mantra  which 
is  known  as  the  weapon  Mantra  - in  this  particular  instance 


Agni  puranam. 


should  be  worshipped  in  the  angular  points  of  the  Mandal, 
while  the  Mantra  known  as  the  <f  Naitram  Astra”  should  be 
worshipped  in  those  points  within  the  inner  arch  of  the 
diagram  (Mandal),  the  Mantras  “ Srong,  Ha-Sa-Ksha,  Ma, 

La,  Na,  Va,  Ba,  Sha,  Dha,  and  Sa”  and  the  Afcma  Beeja  being 
worshipped  in  the  thirty-two  petals  of  the  lotus-shaped 
diagram  (2 — 5). 

Subsequent  to  that  the  goddesses  such  as  Brahmani, 
Maheshi,  Koumari,  Vaishnavi,  Barahi,  Mahendri  and  Cha- 
in un  da  should  be  worshipped  in  the  different  petals  of  the 
Mandal,  commencing  from  the  one  situate  at  its  eastern  side. 

The  Mantras  such  as  “Ra,  Va,  La,  Ka,  Sa”  and  Ha  should  be 
likewise  located  and  respectively  worshipped  in  the  petals 
forming  its  north-east,  east,  south-east,  south,  and  the  north- 
west corners,,  In  its  western  petal  the  goddess  Kusummala 
together  with  the  five  hills  named  as  the  Jhalandar, 
Purnagiri,  Kamarupa,  should  be  respectively  worshipped  in 
the  petals  situate  at  the  north-west,  north-east  and  the  south- 
west corners  of  the  lotus  (Maud ala),  the  goddess  Vajra- 
kuvjika  being  worshipped  at  its  centre. 

The  five  Vimalas  named  as  Anadi  (the  originless)  Vimala, 
Sanyoga  Vimala  (Vimala  or  the  absolutely  purified  being 
presiding  over  the  process  of  universal  adhesion)*  Sama- 
yakshya  (the  purified  being  who  is  manifest  as  the  eternal 
time),  Prasiddha  Vimala  (the  universally  known  purified 
being)  and  Sarvajna  Vimala  (the  omniscient  purity  or  the 
purified  being)  and  who  constitute  the  set  of  five  Vimalas, 
should  be  respectively  worshipped  in  the  north-west,  north- 
east, south-west,  south-east  and  the  northern  petals  of  the 
Mandal.  In  the  north-east  petal  the  goddesses  such  as  Khin- 
kini,  Sastha,  Sotpanna,  Susthira  and  Ratna  Sundari  should 
be  worshipped  together  with  the  eight  principal  Nathakas. 

The  gods  named  as  Mitra,  Oudhisha,  Sastakshya  and  Varsa, 
etc.,  constituting  the  jewels  of  the  heaven  (Gagana-Ratnam) 
should  be  worshipped  in  its  south-east,  north,  and  the  north- 

•Suss?:  ' ■ . sifiiifiis 


la 


: " : 1 WE  GOD  said  Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of 
worshipping  the  blissful  Kuvjika  who  grants  wealth  and 

victoty  to ! lier.'*  votaries.  The  worship  should  bt  conducted 

' ■ ' ■ : :■  ■■ 

' ■'  ■'  ' " ' - ' ■'  ' " . '■  . '■  ' ",  ■ ■ . ' ■ ■■  ■ . . . ■ . ■ ' 


ACINI  PUR  AN  AM. 


eastern  corners,  while  the  Kavacharatna  (Mantras  possessing 
protective  virtues  and  hence  called  the  armour  Mantras) 
should  be  located  in  the  western  corner  while  the  Matrika 
Mantras  should  be  located  in  the  north-west,  north-east 
and  the  south-east,  In  the  southern  and  the  south-eastern 
corners  the  goddesses,  such  as  Jestha,  Roudri,  Sutika,  and. 
Mahavriddha,  should  be  worshipped  with  the  five  Pranava 
Mantras  sacred  to  each  of  them  as  constituting  the  five 
auspicious  gems  enjoined  to  be  buried  underneath  the  foun- 
dation of  a building,  the  Mandala  in  the  present  instance 
being  regarded  nothing  short  of  a sacred  temple.  The  god 
Ganapati  should  be  worshipped  with  the  Pranava  Mantra 
sacred  to  him  and  which  runs  as  “Ang,  Aing,  Gungd*  Sub- 
sequent to  that,  the  god  Vatkua  should  be  worshipped,  the 
former  deity  being  worshipped  on  the  southern  side  of  the 
rectangular  mystic  diagram  (Mandala).  The  god  Vatuka 
should  be  worshipped  in  its  left  hand  side,  while  the  sixteen 
Gurus  or  sainted  beings  should  be  worshipped  at  the  corners 
of  the  diagram  like  the  eighteen  Gurus  in  its  each  sixth 
corner-chamber.  The  gods  such  as  Brahma,  etc.,  should 
be  worshipped  within  the  eight  chambers  lying  along  the 
exterior  line  of  the  diagram  and  in  the  nine  chambers  within 
it,  the  goddesses  such  as  Kuvji,  Kuiata,  etc.,  being  previous- 
ly worshipped  in  due  succession  (6—17.) 


CHAPTER  CXLI1L 


AGNi  PURANAM, 


wi!h  the  principal  Mantras  as  well  as  the  auxilliary  ones, 
which  are  as  follows Ora,  Am,  Hrum,  Shring,  Kliani, 

Hring,  Ha,  Sa,  Ksliya,  Ma,  La,  Ca,  Ba,  Ya,  0 thou  goddess, 

Amvica,  Hran,  Hreen,  Kshreen,  Kshoun,  Kreen.  0 thou 
Kuvjika,  Hran.  Om,  Unga,  Enga,  Na  (Murdhanya),  I make 
obeisance  to  the  clear-faced  goddess,  Vran,  Chchrun,  Chcbhin, 

Kili,  Kili,  Kshoun,  Vichchha,  Kshyong,  Shring,  Krong,  Om, 

Hrong,  Eng,  0 thou  Vajrakuvjiui,  Shring.  O thou  goddess, 
who  dost  attract  the  three  worlds.  Hrun.  0 thou  goddess, 
at  whose  sight  the  god  of  love  is  melted  away.  Hrung, 

Shring.  O thou  goddess  who  causest  great  disappointments 
in  the  minds  of  men.  Eng,  Hrung,  Shrung,  Kshroung,  Eng, 

Hrung,  Shreeng,  Feng,  Kshoung,  obeisance  to  thee  goddess. 
Kshroung,  obeisance  to  Kuvjika,  Hring,  Hrong,  Kraing, 

Unga,  Enga,  Na.  I make  obeisance  to  the  clear-faced  goddess 
Chchhrang,  Chchhang,  Vichchha  Om,  Kili,  Kili." 

The  rite  of  Karanganyasa  should  be  then  performed, 
and  the  votary  should  finish  Sandhya  (prayer)  addressing  I 

the  goddesses  known  as  Roudri,  Varna,  and  Jestha.  The 
Gayatri  in  connection  with  the  abovesaid  Sandhya  worship  1 

runs  as  follows  “May  we  learn  thy  true  self,  O thou  goddess 
Kulavagishi.  Let  me  contemplate  the  name  of  the  goddess ' 

Mahakali  and  may  the  goddess  KouJi  lead  us  to  do  the 
same."  The  Mantras  which  serve  as  the  Pranavas  in  the  1 

present  instance  are  five  in  number.  The  votary  should  i 

promise  at  the  outset  to  worship  the  Paduka  of  the  goddess  I 

as  well  with  the  above-said  Pranava  Mantras  and  with  the  1 

name  of  the  deity  with  the  singular  dative  case  ending  1 

placed  in  their  middle.  In  the  alternative  the  eleven  Beeja  I 

(principal)  Mantras  should  be  coupled  in  the  end  with  the  | 

term  Namaskara  (obeisance).  The  names  of  the  deity  in  the  I 

first  instance  may  have  the  possessive  ease  ending  instead 
of  being  placed  in  the  singular  dative  case  form  (l — 4). 

I shall  now  enumerate  the  names  of  all  the  Padukas 


(attributes)  and  the  order  in  which  they  are  to  be  worshipped, 


Ii®l  jj  || 

, ,,  ‘ !-i 


lllllill 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


The  god  Koulisha  Natha  should  be  regarded  as  the  Nayaka 
(subjective  principle)  where  the  creative  principle  (Nayikal 
is  manifest  in  the  shape  of  the  goddess  Sukala.  Similarly  the 
gods  Shrikanthanatha,  Koulisha,  and  Gaganananda  should  be 
respectively  looked  upon  as  the  consorts  of  the  goddesses 
Chatula,  Devi,  Maitreshi,  while  Turna  Nayaka^ahpuld-.  be 
deemed  as  the  husband  of  the  goddess  Karali.  Similarly  the 
Padukas  (manifestations)  such  as  Mala  Devi,  Schrichandra, 
Atyanta,  Bhaga,  and  Mohini  should  be  worshipped  indue  suc- 
cession, and  likewise  Use  votary  should  worship  the  attributes 
of  the  goddess  who  is  manifest  in  the  shape  of  the  celes- 
tial pair  known  as  Atitabhuvanananda  (the  joy  that  was  in 
the  bygone  worlds)  and  Ratnadhya  (the  Sight  that  shines 
in  gems).  Similarly  the  attribute  known  as  the  Brahma  Jnan 
(knowledge  of  the  supreme  being)  together  with  those 
named  as  the  Paravidya  (supreme  knowledge)  and  Kamaia 
(beauty  and  splendour)  should  be  worshipped  (5 — 7)* 

Now  I shall  discuss  the  process  of  threefold  purifica- 
tion anent  the  Vidya  (Mantra  or  knowledge)  Guru  (preceptor) 
and  the  Devi  (the  tutelary  deity  of  a person). 

By  means  of  the  rite  of  Shodanyasa,  the  votary  should 
locate  in  his  inner  being  the  deities  such  as  Gagana,  Chatuli, 
Alma,  Padmananda,  Mani,  Kala,  Kamaia,  Manikyakantha, 
Shripadma/  Bhairavananda,  Deva,  Shiva,  Bliava,  Krishna, 
the  sixteen  Siddhas,  Chandrapura,  Gulina,  Shubha,  Kama, 
Atimukta,  j Katitha,  Vira,  Proyaga,  Kushala  Devabhogaka, 
Vishvadeva,  Khadgadeva,  Rudra,  Dhata,  Asi,  Mudrasphota, 
Vanshapara,  Bhoja,  together  with  the  sixteen  Siddhas,  Samaya 
and  Deva.  The  Padukas  (attributes)  of  the  god  Shiva  such  as 
the  Ananta  (infinity)  and  the  Mahananta  should  be  worshipped 
by  throwing  a flower  on  the  mystic  diagram  (Mandaia). 
Similarly  the  attributes  (Paduka)  of  the  god  Shrikantanatha, 
such  as  the  universal  space,  the  absolute  vacuum,  and  the 
psychic  region  composed  of  the  five  primary  principles 
(Panch&tattva),  together  ; with  Shankara  and  Ananta  should 


AGN1  PORANAM. 


it 


be  worshipped  therein.  The  gods  such  as  Sadashiva,  Pingala, 
Bhrigu,  Ananda,  N-ithaka,  Langulananda  and  Samvarta 
should  be  as  well  worshipped  inside  the  Mandala  (8—14). 

In  the  south-west,  manifestations  of  Rudra  such  as 
Shrimahakala,  Pinaki,  Mahendraka,  Khadga,  Bhujanga, 
Vana,  Aghasi,  Shavdaka,  Vasha,  Ajnarupa,  Nandarupa, 
should  be  successively  worshipped  with  oblations.  “Hrung, 
Kham,  Kham,  Hung,  Soung,  obeisance  to  the  god  Vatuka 
(some  editions  read  Vatukeshvara).  Come,  come,  accept 
and  accept  these  oblations  of  flowers,  incense-sticks,  lighted 
lamps  and  perfumes.  Be  pleased  with  these  oblations 
and  this  my  worship.  I make  obeisance  to  thee.  Om, 
Han,  Hrun,  Hrun,  Kshen,  obeisance  to  Kshetrapala. 

1 Come  down  and  come  down,  0 thou  possessed  of 
a headful  of  dark  brown  clotted  hairs  and  with  thy 
three  eyes  burning  with  fire.  Come,  O thou,  from  whose 
mouth  come  out  torrents  of  living  fire,  and  accept  these  ob- 
lations of  flowers,  perfumes,  etc.,  offered  to  thee  in  the 
course  of  the  worship.  Khas,  Khas,  Om,  Ka,  Om,  Las,  Om, 
obeisance  to  the  lord  of  the  Mahadamara/V  Subsequent  to 
that  the  Mantra  Trikutaka  should  be  worshipped  which  runs 
as  Hrun,  Ham,  Shring,  and  Samayakhya  Vimala  should  be 
propitiated  as  well.  In  the  south-west,  the  four  gods  such  as 
Kandarpanathaka  (the  destroyer  of  the  god  of  love)  as  well 
as  all  the  Rudrashaktis  (goddesses)  and  the  attributes  of 
the  goddess  Kuvjika  should  be  worshipped.  The  tbousand- 
eyed  god,  as  well  as  Vishnu  and  Shiva  should  be  worshipped 
with  the  Navatmaka-Mantra. 

The  attributes  of  the-god  Nishanath  should  be  worship, 
ped  on  the  left,  right,  and  in  the  front  of  the  votary.  Like- 
wise on  his  righth  and  side,  as  well  as  in  his  front,  he 
should  worship  the  attributes  of  the  gods  Tomarinatha  and 
Kalanala.  Similarly  the  sacred  mountains,  places  and. 
their  presiding  deities  such  as  the  JhaUndhara,  Kamrupa, 
Uddyana,  Gaganananda.and  Svargananda  with  tbeir  attzi- 

n ' ' v 


■ T, 


m 


Amt  PURANAM. 


butes  should  be  worshipped  in  the  company  of  the  gods 
Paramananda,  Satyananda,  Nagananda,  and  their  attributes 
constituting  what  is  technically  known  as  the  Ratnapancha- 
kam»  In  the  north  and  the  north-east  angles  of  the  diagram* 
the  six  attributes  of  the  god  Suranatha  as  well  as  the  gods 
Shrimut  Samayakotisha  and  Vidyakotishrava  should^be  wor- 
shipped. Similarly  the  gods  such  as  Kotisha,  Vindukotisha, 
Siddhakotishvara  and  Amavishashvara,  who  are  jointly 
known  as  the  four  Siddhas  or  beings  who  have  attained 
their  salvation  should  be  worshipped  in  the  south-east. 
The  gods  such  as  Chakrishanatha,  Kurangesha,  Vrittisha 
and  Chandranathaka  should  be  worshipped  with  perfumes, 
while  the  group  of  five  Vimalas  (Beings  void  of  impurities) 
should  be  worshipped  on  the  south  or  to  lay  it  down  more 
explicitly,  the  five  Vimalas  such  as  Anadi  Vimala,  Sarvajna 
Vimala,  Jogeesha  Vimala,  and  Siddhakshya  Vimala  should 
be  propitiated  with  oblations  (15—26). 

In  the  different  quarters  of  the  mystic  diagram,  com- 
mencing from  the  east  and  ending  with  that  situate  at  the 
north-east,  the  goddesses  such  as  Brahmani  Maheshvari, 
Koumari,  Vaishnavi  Varahi,  Aindri,  Chamunda,  Mahalakshmi, 
should  be  worshipped  in  the  petals  of  the  lotus-shaped  dia- 
gram, and  the  votary  should  respectively  invoke  and  pro- 
pitiate the  companions  of  the  goddess  of  energy  (Shakti) 
revealed  in  the  abovesaid  forms,  and  who  are  known  as  the 
Dakini,  Rakini,  Lakini,  Kakini,  Shakshini,  and  Yakhini. 

The  goddess  should  be  contemplated  as  pleasantly 
ensconced  in  ia  throne  of  regal  splendour  and  seated  on  the 
body  of  the  absolute  dead  (primordial  matter),  and  shining 
with  the  splendour  of  thousands  of  millions  of  Kulas,  The 
girdle  encircling  the  loins  of  the  goddess  should  be  contem- 
plated as  composed  of  Karkatas  (scorpions).  The  primor- 
dial serpent  Vasuki,  should  be  imagined  as  hanging  round 
her  neck  as  a garland  entwined  with  the  fabulous  Takshaka; 
The  Kuiikas  should  be  imagined  as  forming  the  pendente 


Amt  PUR  A NAM.  ; 563 

of  her  ears,  while  tortoises  should  be  regarded  as  forming 
the  middle  jewels  of  her  earrings.  The  serpents  Padma  and 
M ahapadma  should  be  deemed  as  forming  the  eye-brows 
of  the  goddess,  wielding  in  her  left  hands,  a skull,  a serpent 
a rosary,  a Khattanga,  a conchshell  and  a book,  and  hold- 
ing in  her  right  hand,  a trident,  a mirror,  a sword,  a bow 
and  strings.  The  upper  front-face  of  the  goddess  should 
be  imagined  as  possessing  a white  complexion,  the  next  one 
being  white  in  its  upper  part.  The  face  looking  towards 
the  east  should  be  imagined  as  pale  with  anger,  while  the 
one  on  the  south  should  be  contemplated  as  of  a sable  colour, 
while  the  two  faces  on  the  left  should  be  contemplated  as 
possessing  colours  like  those  of  an  ice-ball  and  a full  moon 
respectively.  The  god  Brahma  should  be  imagined  as  lying 
at  the  feet  of  the  goddess,  the  god  Vishnu  as  occupying 
the  region  of  her  thighs,  the  god  Rudra  as  lying  about  her 
heart,  the  god  Ishvara  as  nestling  round  her  throat,  the  god 
Sadashiva  as  seated  on  her  fore-head,  while  the  god  Shiva 
should  be  deemed  as  holding  sway  over  the  region  of  her 
head  upwards. 

This  picture  of  the  goddess  Kuvjika  should  be  medi- 
tated upon  as  whirling,  in  all  acts  of  worship,  etc.  (27—37). 


a m 


1 


CHAPTER  CXL1V. 


ftp 

1 HE  GOD  SAID: — Now  I shall  enumerate  the  various 
sorts  of  Mantras  and  describe  the  processes  of  performing 
their  respective  rites  of  Shodanyasa,  which  admits  of  three- 
fold division  according  as  the  Mantra  belongs  to  the  Shakta, 
Shambhava,  or  the  Jainala  class  (three  of  the.  different  sects 
of  worshippers).  The  Shambhava  (sacred;  to  the  god  Shiva) 


ifll 


1 fj§|  gg 
'"K  •'  <,y  ; 


! B>  , 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


5^4: 

class  of'  Shodanyasa  is  characterised  by  six  terms  tied  to- 
gether as  it  were  with  sixteen  knots  (Granthis).  The  Nayasa 
io  question  enjoins  the  contemplation  of  the  three  sorts  of 
knowabfes  (Trividya)  and  connotes  the  full  realisation  of 
the  three  fundamental  principles  (Tritattva  or  the  three 
principles  of  “ Vidya ,J  or  knowledge,  ^ Atma  ” -or. soul,  and 
u Shiva"  or  bliss)  within  the  inner  self  of  the  votary.  The 
Nyasa  appertaining  to  the  forth  form  of  worship  consists 
of  twelve  Shlokas  or  letters,  while  its  fifth  and  sixth  forms 
are  respectively  marked  by  features  known  as  the  Ratna- 
paochatma  and  Navatma  in  the  phraseology  of  the  Tantras. 
In  the  case  of  a Shakta  or  a worshipper  of  the  goddesses 
of  energy  (Shakti),  the  rite  of  Nayasa  touches  the  principle, 
known  as  the  Trividya,  while  io  the  second  or  the  Sham- 
bhava  form  of  worship,  the  eight  different  attributes  of  the 
god  Shiva  known  as  the  Aghoryastaka  should  be  psychically 
located  [in  the  region  of  the  heart,  neck,  sides,  naval, 
armpits,  chest  and  the  back]  as  follows: — “ Om  obeisance  to 
the  Aghoras.  Om  obeisance  to  the  phase  or  the  attribute  of 
the  god  known  as  Uma  (light),  Om  obiesance  to  the  Aghoras, 
and  to  the  attribute  known  as  Mo  ha  or  the  goddess  of  illusion, 
Om  obeisance  to  Ghora.  Om  obeisance  to  the  attribute 
known  as  Kshama  (forgiveness),  obeisance  to  the  Ghorataras. 
Om  obeisance  to  the  attribute  of  sleep  (Nidra-non-knowledge), 
and  Sarvata  Sarva.  Om  obeisance  to  the  attribute  of  non- 
health, obeisance  to  the  Sarvas,  and  Om  obeisance  to  the 
attribute  of  death  and  Om  obeisance  to  the  attribute 
of  hunger,  and  obeisance  to  the  gods  manifest  as  the 
Rudras  and  Om  obeisance  to  the  attribute  of  thirst.]  The 
fourth  form  of  the  Nyasa  above  referred  to  (Vaishnava) 
should  be  practised  in  the  twelve  parts  of  the  body,  while 
in  the  fifth  form  of  worship  (Ganapatya),  it  should  extend 
over  five.  The  Beeja  and  the  Astra-Mantras  in  the  above 
cases  are  “Krung*  Hroung,  Kleeng,  Store  eng,  Krung  and  Fut.,J 
Thd-  'Manilas  to  be  used  in  cbimection  with  a Shodanyasa 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


10  ■ a Sakta  form  of  worship,  consists  of  the  letters 
from  “Na  to  Fa”  (szc).  Nadini  should  be  located  at  the  tuft 
of  hair  on  the  crown,  of  the  head,  while  the  chain  of  the 
letters  of  fire  imagined  to  be  hung  round  the  head,  should 
..end : with, the  letter  “ Sha.”  The  Nyasa  is  to  be  performed  as 
follows “May  the  letter  ‘Da’  which  is  the  emblem  of, 
peace  be  located  in  my  head,  and  may  the  goddess  0>a- 
inunda  preside  over  my  three  eyes.  May  ‘DhaJ  which 
soothes  the  eyes,  occupy  the  two  external  organs  of  my 
sight  and  may  the  goddess  Gujhya  Shaktini  (goddess  of 
occult  energy)  take  her  seat  within  my  nostrils.  May  the 
letter  i Na/  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  goddess  Narayani, 
fill  the  cavities  of  my  ears  with  her  peculiar  celestial  essence, 
and  may  the  goddess  Tamobani  (the  gloom-dispelling 
goddess)  take  her  abode  inside  my  right  ear.  May  the  letter 
1 Ja  J which  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom  occupy  my  left  ear, 
and  may  the  thunder-wielding  goddess  (Vajrini)  take  her  seat 
in  my  mouth.  May  the  letter  4 Ka’  which  stands  for  the 
goddess  Karali  (the  goddess  of  horrible  features)  be  located 
in  my  right  tooth,  and  may  the  letter  ‘Kba*  which  is 
emblematic  of  the  goddess  Kapalini  (goddess  bedecked  with 
human  skulls)  take  her  seat  on  my  left  shoulder.  May  the 


AGHl  PURANAM. 


Is  the  phonetic  symbol  of  the  divine  attributes  embodied 
by  the  peacock  riding  goddess  (Shilchivahim).  May  the 
letter  f Bha  J which  is  exponent  of  the  divine  attributes  of 
the  terror-inspiring  goddess  (Bhisani)  be  similarly  projected 
into  the  region  of  my  right  shoulder,  and  let  me  contemplate 
the  letter  'Ma}  clad  in  the  effulgence  of  its  presiding  deity 
(Vayubega  or  the  goddess  swift  as  the  wind)  as  psychically 
projected  into  the  region  of  my  left  shoulder.  Similarly  let 
me  contemplate  my  right  arm  as  permeated  with  the  psychic 
principle  represented  by  the  letter  4 Da/  and  may  my  left 
arm  be  similarly  strengthened  with  the  virtue  of  the 
divine  attributes  of  the  god  Vinayaka  (the  grantor  of 
success  in  all  sorts  of  undertakings)  and  which  are  symbo- 
lised by  the  consonant  letter  ‘Dha.*  May  my  two  hands  be 
stuffed  with  the  essence  of  the  night  of  the  full  moon  as 
represented  by  the  letter  ‘Pa/  and  may  my  fingers  be 
permeated  with  the  effulgence  of  the  vowel  letter  4 (V 
Let  me  imagine  the  fingers  of  my  left  hand  as  filled  in  with 
the  illuminating  principle  represented  by  the  conjunct 
1 Aug/  and  may  the  conjunct  4 As/  which  is  emblematic  of 
the  vitalising  principle  of  the  universe,  permeate  the  palm 
of  my  hand”  (i — 12). 

Similarly  the  votary  should  psychically  project  into  the 
region  of  his  forehead  the  letter  “Dha”  which  represents  the 
principle  embodied  by  the  goddess  (Kapalini)  wearing  a 
garland  of  human  skulls,  while  the  letter  “Ta”  with  its  illu- 
minating principle  should  be  located  in  the  region  of  the 
Shuladanda  by  an  act  of  mental  abstraction.  The  letter  44  Ja” 
which  is  emblematic  of  the  divine  attributes  of  the  goddess 
Jayanti  (presiding  deity  of  victory),  should  be  psychically 
located  in  the  region  of  the  Trishula,  while  the  letter  “Ya” 
is  the  symbol  of  the  attributes  of  the  goddess  Sadhini 
ess  of  creative  or  building  agency),  should  be  contem- 
as  presiding  over  the  process  of  growth.  The  letter 
ive  of  the  supreme  goddess 


AGN1  PURANAM 


the  hands  should  be  imagin 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


essence  of  the  goddess  Fetkari,  should  be  held  as  located  in 
the  left  (13 — 17). 

Now  I shall  describe  the  process  of  performing  the  rite  of 
Nyasa  consisting  of  the  Navtma  Malini  Mantras  and  which 
is  as  follows*  The  Mantra  running  as  “ As,  obeisance  to 
the  god  Shrikantha,”  should  be  located  at  the  tuft  of  hair  on 
the  crown  of  the  head  (Shikha).  “ A,  obeisance  to  the  god 
Ananta”  in  the  mouth,  ‘‘Obeisance  to  the  god  Sukshma”  (the 
occult  or  the  invisible  one),  in  the  region  of  the  right  eye, 
11  E,  obeisance  to  the  Trimurti,”  in  the  cavity  of  the  left  eye. 
The  (short)  “ U,  Amarisha  v should  be  located  in  the  cavity  of 
the  right  ear,  while  the  (long)  “ U ” should  be  located  in  its 
upper  part.  The  Mantra  running  as  “ Ri  (short)  Bhava- 
bhuti,”  should  be  contemplated  as  located  at  the  tip  of  the 
nose,  while  the  Mantra  “ Ri  (long)  Tithisha,”  should  be 
deemed  as  lying  inside  the  left  nostril.  The  Mantras  which 
run  as  “ Le  (short)  Sthanu”  (the  primum  immobile).  “Li 
(long)  Hara”  (the  destroyer).  “A,  Kotesha,  and  Ai,  Vutisba” 
(the  lord  of  beatitudes),  should  be  respectively  contemplated 
as  projected  over  the  right,  and  into  the  left,  cheek,  the 
lower  and  the  upper  rows  of  teeth.  Similarly  the  Mantra 
running  as  “0,  Sadyajata  and  “On  Anugrihisha”  (the 
lord  of  mercy),  should  he  imagined  as  located  in  the 
lower  and  the  upper  lips  respectively.  The  Mantras  “Am 
Krura”  (the  cruel  one),  and  “As,  Mahesvara"  should  be 
located  in  the  Ghataka,  and  the  tongue,  respectively.  “Ka, 
Krodhisha”  (the  lord  of  Anger)  Mantra  should  .be  projected 
into  the  region  of  the  right  shoulder,  while  the  one  running 

“Kha,  Chaadisha”  (the  husband  of  the  goddess  Chandi), 
should  be  deemed  as  shining  inside  the  muscles  of  the  arms 
(18—22).  Similarly  the  Mantra  running  as  “Ga,  Panchan- 
taka”  (the  destroyer  of  the  five  material  elements),  should 
be  contemplated  as  burning  about  the  left  wrist,  while  .the 
VShikhi”  should  be  contemplated  as  fixed  like  a bracelet 


AGNi  PURANAMi 


S69 

ed  as  permeated  with  the  resplendent  essence  of  the  Mantra 
running  as  “ Unga  Ekapada while  the  “Cha  Koormaka” 
Mantra  (the  god  manifest  in  the  shape  of  the  primordial  tor- 
toise) should  be  made  to  fill  in  the  region  of  the  left  shoulder 
by  means  of  an  act  of  psychic  abstraction.  The  Mantra 
“Chchha  Ekanatra,”  (the  one-eyed  god)  should  be  imagined  as 
located  inside  the  muscles  of  the  arms,  while  the  Mantra  “Ja 
Chaturvaktra”  (the  four  four-faced  god)  should  be  deemed  as 
located  about  the  wrist  The  Mantras  “ Jha  Raksha”  (the 
monostrous  one)  and  “ Enga  Sarvakamada"  (granter  of  all 
boons)  should  be  held  as  located  about  the  bracelet  and  the 
fingers  respectively.  The  region  of  the  buttocks  should  be 
imagined  as  permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  Mantra  run- 
ning as  “ Ta  Somesha,”  while  the  region  of  the  right  thigh 
should  be  imagined  as  filled  in  with  the  effulgent  essence  of 
the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Tha  Langali”  (the  god  wielding  a 
ploughshare  in  his  hand).  The  muscles  of  the  right  thigh 
should  be  imagined  as  interpersed  with  the  flaming  characters 
of  the  Mantra  running  as  “ Da  Daruka”  (the  universal  pene- 
trating one),  while  the  Mantra  “Dha  Urdhajaleshvara”  should 
be  contemplated  as  occupying  the  region  of  the  thigh.  The 
fingers  of  the  feet  should  be  deemed  as  permeated  with  the 
essence  of  the  Mantra  running  as  **  Na  (Murdhanya) 
Umakanta”  (the  husband  of  the  goddess  Uma),  while  the 
Mantra  “Ta  Anadi"  should  be  psychically  projected  into  the 
other  lumber  region.  The  Mantra  running  as  “Tha  Dandi” 
(the  god  who  has  curbed  all  passions  and  propensities) 
should  be  located  in  the  region  of  the  left  thigh,  while 
' the  -letter  “Da”  which  is  the  exponent  of  the  divine 
attribute  of  the  god  “Vita”  should  be  located  in  the  left 
knefcjoint.  The  letter  “ Dha”  which  represents  the  divine 
.attributes  of  the  god  Meena,  should  fete  located  in  the  left 
kneejoint,  while  the  letter  “Na”  which  is  emblematic  of' 
Mesha  should  be  imagined  as  occupying  the  region  of  the 
. toes.  The  letter  ”Pa”  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  divinity  ;■ 
72 


gence  of  the  conjunct  “ Ksha”  winch  r< 
Samvarta.  A Mary  having  performed 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


the  god  Lohita,  should  be  located  In  the  region  of  the 
right  groin;  while  the  letter  “ Pha”  with  its  presiding  deity 
Slu'khv,  should  be  contemplated  as  illuminating  the  region 
of  the  left*  The  backbone  should  be  contemplated  as  being 
permeated  with  the  essence  of  the  letter  “Pa”  and  that  of 
the  god ■ Galaganda  whom  it  stands  for,  while  the  letter 
«Bha”  with  the  god  Dvirandaka  as  Its  tutelar  divinity  should 
he  contemplated  as  projected  into  the  region  of  the  umbili- 
cus. The  region  of  the  heart  should  be  contemplated  as 
burning  with  the  effulgence  of  the  letter  "Ma”  which  symbo- 
lises the  attributes  of  the  god  Mahakala,  while  the  letter  “Ya” 
which  is  emblematic  of  the  attribute  of  the  god  of  speech 
should  be  contemplated  as  located  in  the  faculty  of  memory. 
The  blood  coursing  all  through  the  veins  and  arteries  should 
be  contemplated  as  being  saturated  with  the  essence  of 
the  letter  “Ra”  which  is  the  phonetic  symbol  of  the  attri- 
butes of  the  god  Bhujangesha  (the  lord  of  the  serpents), 
while  the  letter  “La”  which  stands  for  the  god-head  of  the 
deity  Pinaki  should  be  imagined  as  burning  in  the  organic 
cells  and  tissues  composing  the  flesh  of  the  body.  Ti  e 
letter  “Ba”  with  the  god  Kbadgisha  as  its  tutelar  deity  should 
he  Imagined  as  seated  on  the  soul,  while  the  letter  “Sha” 
should  be  contemplated  as  located  in  the  joint  known  as 
the  Vakasthi,  The  marrow  lying  within  the  bony  structures 
of  the  body  should  be  contemplated  as  saturated  with  the 
essence  of  the  god  Shveta,  while  the  letter  “ Sa  together 
with  the  god  Bhrigu  (the  presiding  deity  of  the  planet  Venus) 
should  be  imagined  as  having  permeated  the  principles 
of  semen  and  other  vital  principles.  The  letter  “Ha” 
which  is  emblematic  of  the  attributes  of  the  god 
Nakulesha  should  be  imagined  as  located  in  the  principle  of 
life  (Prana), | while  different  Koshas  or  sheaths  of  the  human 


organism  should  be  contemplated  as  filled  in  with  the  efful- 


AGNf  PURANAM. 


571 


and  by  worshipping  the  attributes  of  the  god 
e Hreeng  Mantra  may  hope  to  attain  every 
iving  in  this  world  (23—30). 


CHAPTER  CXLV 


I HE  GOD  said  : — Now  1 shall  enumerate  the  Trikhandi 
Mantras  which  are  as  follows  : — “ Ons,  obeisance  to  the  god 
Rudra,  obeisance  to  Cliamunda,  obeisance  to  the  Akasha- 
inatiis.  Blessed  are  the  epithets  of  the  Akasha  Matris  who 
are  immortal  and  are  free  from  all  decay  and  afflictions 
which  our  mortal  frames  are  heir  to,  and  whose  unobstructed 
way  lies  throughout  the  universe.  Yea, [blessed  are  the  Mantras 
presided  over  by  the  Akasha  Matrikas  who  incessantly 
change  their  own  shapes  and  assume  any  shape  they  please, 
and  who  can  subjugate,  charm,  banish  and  destroy  any 
creature  they  like.  The  following  is  the  most  mysterious 
and  most  secret  of  the  Mantras  sacred  to  the  Matris  whereby 
the  highest  salvation  is  attained,  other  men’s  incantations 
are  nullified,  and  the  greatest  success  is  achieved.  In  the 
Brahmakhandapada,  or  the  part  presided  over  by  the  god 
Brahma,  the  following  hundred  and  twentv-one  Dadas  or 


. and  as  such  is  oiMkcktrf*  free 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


of  Koumari,  obeisance  to  thee,  O goddess,  whose  presence 
dispells  the  gloom  of  illusion  and  who  grantest  all  boons  and 
dost  help  all  men  to  achieve  success  in  their  respective  call- 
ings. Om  obeisance  to  the  goddess  Gujhya  (hidden)  Kuvjika, 
destroy  and  destroy,  0 goddess,  all  the  spells  and  incanta- 
tions which  my  enemies  have  prepared  or  are  preparing  or 
will  prepare  in  future  against  me.  Trample  down  and 
reduce  to  ashes  all  banes  which  may  befal  me  from  the 
mystic  diagrams  which  have  been,  or  are  being  laid  down 
by  my  enemies  or  will  be  ever  laid  down  in  future.  Destroy 
and  destroy  them  all,  0 thou  goddess,  looking  doubly  terrible 
with  the  rows  of  thy  horrible  teeth.  Hrang,  Hrung,  Hung,, 
obeisance  to  the  goddess  Gujhya  Kuvjika.  Hrung,  Om, 
Khem,  Vom,  obeisance  (Namas)  to  the  goddess  Gujhya, 
Kuvjika,”  Similarly  should  be  recited  the  Mantras  running 
as  ° Hreeng  obeisance  to  the  goddess,  who  afflicts  all  created 
beings,  Hrung  obeisance  to  the  goddess  who  attracts  the 
mind  of  all  (Sarvajanakarshini),”  Likewise]  the  Mantras 
running  as  “Am,  Khem,  Khyam,  obeisance  to  the  goddess 
Sarvajanavashankari  (the  goddess  who  charms  all  beings) 
Om,  obeisance  (Svaha)  to  the  goddess  Chamunda  revealed 
as  the  wife  of  Vishnu  (Vaishnabi),  and  whom  illusion  can 
can  never  touch,  and  who  grants  all  boon  and  success  to  her 
votaries.  Om  obeisance  to  the  goddess  Chamunda,  who  is 
the  wife  of  the  boar  incarnation  of  Vishnu  (Varaha)  and 
who  is  omniscient  and  beyond  all  illusion  and  who  grants  all 
boon  and  success  to  her  votaries.  Om  obeisance  to  the 
goddess  Chamunda  who  is  also  revealed  as  the  queen  of  the 
gods(Indrani)  and  whose  very  presence  rends  asunder  the  veil 
of,  illusion  and  grants  all  boon  and  success  to  her  wor- 
shippers. Om  obeisance  to  the  omniscient  Chamunda  who 
Is  the  wife  of  the  god  Chanda  (Chundi)  and  who  is  void  of 
all  illusion  and  grants  all  success  to  her  suppliants,  and 
Om  obeisance  to  the  goddess  Chamunda  who  is  the  wife  of 


AGNI  FUR  A MAM 


AGNI  PURANAM, 


energy  as  revealed  in  the  nrej  together  wim  uie  gu  cioess 
Gandliari  of  whose  essence  the  letter  “ Na”  is  the  symbol  and 
the  goddesses  known  as  Pindakshi,  Chapala  and  Gajajihvika 
should  be  worshipped  on  the  mystic  diagram  (Mandala). 
Similarly  the  goddesses  Mrtsa,  Bhayasara  (whose  divine 
attributes  are  represented  by  the  Mantra  “Ma/’  Madhyama 
(the  emblem  of  whose  divinity  is  the  Mantra  14  Fa”)  Ajara, 
Kumari,  Kalaratri  (represented  by  the  Mantra  “NaM), 
Sankata  (whose  divine  attributes  are  symbolised  by  the 
Mantra  11  Da”),  Kalika  represented  by  the  letter  i{  Dha,n 
Shiva  (represented  by  the  letter  “Fa”)  Bhavaghora  (the  god- 
dess who  represents  the  necessary  cycles  of  existence  on 
this  miserable  terrestrial  globe  and  accordingly  strikes 
terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  inmates  of  the  three  worlds 
and  whose  divine  attributes  are  symbolised  in  Murdhanya 
" Nn  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet),  Vibhatsa  (the  terrible  god- 
dess represented  by  the  letter  “ Dha”),  Vidyuta  (the 
goddess  or  energy  revealed  in  the  flash  of  lightning  and 
represented  by  the  letter  flTa”),  Vishambhara  (the  god- 
dess or  the  energy  serving  as  the  main  stay  of;’  the  universe 
and  represented  by  the  letter  “ Dha.”)  Shanshini  (the 
goddess  who  is  revealed  in  the  energy  of  doubt  and  repre- 
sented by  the  letter  ‘Edha’).  Karali  (the  goddess  of  ugliness) 
Jvalamala  (the  goddess  or  the  energy  revealed  in  the  con- 
flagration which  will  burn  the  universe  at  the  time  of  its 
dissolution),  Durjaya  (the  invincible  energy),  Rangi  (the 
sportive  energy).  Vama,  Jestha  (representing  with  the 
farmer  goddess  the  two  opposite  polarities  of  the  divine 
energy).  Kali  (the  goddess  or  energy  regulating  the  order 
of  eternal  time  and  represented  by  the  letter  “ Kha”), 
Kulalamvi  |tUe  ’goddess  or  energy  regulating  the  due  suc- 
cession of  events  and  represented  by  the  letter  H K a”) 
Anuloma,  Pindini  (the  goddess  or  the  energy  regulating  the 
co-operation  of  the  three  primordial  forces  of  Sattva,  Rajas 


AGNI  PURANAM 


the  molecules  of  matter  and  represented  by  the  letter  “Da”), 
Vedim  (the  goddess  or  the  energy  revealed  as  pain  and  re- 
presented by  the  letter  ‘A’),  Shantimurti  (the  imaged 
Peace,  of  which  the  letter  ‘E’  is  the  symbol),  Khadgini 
(the  sword  wielding  goddess  represented  by  the  letter  “Rr’) 
and  the  goddesses  Valita  and  Kula  respectively  represented 
by  the  Tetters  “U"  and  “Lri,”  should  be  as  well  worshipped 
within  the  circumference  of  the  diagram  and  in  due  suc- 
cession with  the  goddesses  Subhaga,  Vedana,  Karali,  etc., 
who  are  known  as  the  Madhyamas  and  the  goddess’  Ape- 
taraya  respectively  symbolised  by  the  conjuncts  Am  and 
As”  (5— ii). 

‘ Spham,  Skheem,  Skhoum,  obeisance  to  the  great 
Bhairava.”  The  goddesses  named  as  Akshodya  (some  edi- 
tions read  Akshobhya),  Rikshakarni,  Rakshasi,  ICshapa- 
nakshya,  Akshaya,  Kshema,  Pingakshi  and  Brahmani, 
constitute  the  group  of  Brahmanis.  The  goddess  Ila  (god- 
dess of  fleeting  fortune),  Lilavati  (the  sportive  goddess), 
Neela,  Lanka,  Lankeshvari,  Lalasa  (desire),  Vimala  (purity), 
and  Mala  constitute  what  is  known  as  the  group  of  the 
Maheshvaris  (the  supreme  goddesses).  The  goddesses 
named  as  Hutashana  (fire  goddess),  Vishaiakshi  (goddess 
with  a pair  of  large  and  handsome  eyes,)  Hrunkari,  Vadava- 
tn.u.k In  (the  goddess  from  whose  mouth  volcanic  flames  are 
supposed  to  be  emitted  as  found  In  ocean  beds)  Ha-Ha-rava 
(the  goddess  of  wailing).  Krura  (the  goddess  of  cruelty) 
Krodlva‘(i  he  goddess’of  wrath).  Vala,  (the  goddess  of  feminine 
grace),  Kharamukha  (the  goddess  with  the  face  of  an  ass)  are 
known  to  have  emanated  from  the  body  of  the  goddess  Koumari 

(the  goddess  of  virginity)  and  who  grant  all  boons  to  their 
votaries,  if  duly  worshipped  and  propitiated.  The  goddess 
Saryajna  (the  goddess  of  omniscience),  Tara  la  (the  goddess 
of  lightning),  Tara  (the  goddess  of  emancipation),  Rig  Veda, 
(the  goddess  of  the  Rig  Veda),  Hayanana  (the  goddess  with  a 
liorse’s  head,  Sara  (the  goddess  of  strength)  Sara  Sayangralta 


agni  puranam. 


(the  goddess  who  separates  and  picks  up  the  merit  or  sub* 
stance  from  the  demerit,  or  the  unsubstantial  part),  and 
Shashvati  (the  goddess  of  eternity)  belong  to  the  group  of 
the  Vaishnavis.  The  goddesses  such  as  Talajihva,  Raktakshi, 
Vidyujjihva,  Karankini,  Meghananda,  Prachandogra,  Kala- 
karni,  Kalipriya  belong  to  the  group  of  Varahi  and  should  be 
worshipped  by  a votary  with  a view  to  achieve  success  in  a 
military  expedition.  The  godde«ses  named  as  Chanda, 
Chandavati,  Prachanda,  Jvalitanana,  Pichuvaktra  and  Lolupa 
have  emanated  from  the  body  of  the  goddess  Aindri.  The 
goddesses  such  as  Pavani,  Jachani,  Vamani,  Damani,  Vindu- 
nila,  Vrihatkushi,  Vidyuta  and  Vishvarupini  belong  to  the 
class  of  Chamunda  and  should  be  worshipped  inside  the 
periphery  of  the  mystic  diagram  with  a view  to  win  victories 
in  war.  The  goddesses  Jamajihva  (the  goddess  on  whose 
tongue  sits  the  god  of  death),  Jayanti  (the  goddess  of  victory), 
Darjaya  (the  invincible  goddess),  and  Jamantika,  Vidali, 
Re  vat  i,  Jaya,  and  Vijaya  belong  to  the  class  of  Mahalakhmis, 
in  groups  of  eight  (i 2 — 21). 

‘iObeisance  to  the  goddess  who  subjugates  the  mind  of 
all  persons.  Am  Ksboum  obeisance  to  the  goddess  who 
stupefies  the  faculties  of  all,  Em,  Khem,  Khvam,  obeisance  to 
the  goddess  Kshovani.”  The  nine  Tvarita  Mantras  (Mantras 
sacred  to  the  goddess  Tvarita)  run  as  “Fam,  Shrung,  Ksheeng, 
Sbreem,  Hreein,  Khem,  Vaccha,  Ksha,  Kshe,  Hrun  Fut,  Hreen, 
obeisance,  Om  Hrun,  Kshe,  Vacche,  Kshe,  Kshee,  Hreen, 
Fut.”  The  seat  should  be  spread  out  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
which  runs  as  “Hreem  (obeisance)  to  thejcelestial  lion  (the 
goddess  rides  upon).  The  Mantra  Hreem  Kshe  should  be 
located  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  while  the  votary  should 
locate  in  his  head  the  Mantra  running  as  “Obeisance  (Svaha) 
Vaccha.”  The  rite  of  Nyasa  in  connection  with  the  worship 
goddess  Tvarita  should  be  performed  as  follows 
Hreem,  obeisance  (Vashat),  to  the  principles  repre- 

•* XT  . * 1 %-ft  « J 


AGN1  PURANAM 


in  my  head.  Obeisance  to  the  principles  represented  by  the 
Beeja  Mantra  Kshem,  Houm  which  protects  me  as  my 
armour.  Obeisance  (Voushat)  to  the  principle  of  which  the 
Mantra  Hrum  located  in  my  three  eyes,  is  the  symbol, 
while  the  rite  should  be  closed  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
Hreeng  Fut.  The  nine  Shaktis  or  the  goddesses  of  energy 
whose  divine  virtues  are  represented  by  the  Mantra  Hum 
and  whose  respective  essences  serve  to  make  it  such  a 
potent  factor  in  the  worship  of  the  goddess  are  named  as 
Hrinkari,  Khechari,  Chanda,  Chedini,  Kshovani,  Kriya, 
Kshemakari,  Hreenkari  (sic)  and  Futkari  (i — 5). 

Now  I shall  enumerate  the  names  of  the  deities  or  the 
companions  of  the  goddess  Tvarita  who  are  to  be  worshipped 
in  the  different  angular  points  of  the  mystic  diagram  com- 
mencing with  the  one  situate  at  the  east  as  follow:— (,Hreen 
obeisance  to  the  goddess  Nala  possessed  of  extremely 
thick  lips  (Vahutunda)  and  high  cheek  bones  and  who 
travels  through  the  skies.  Hreen  to  the  goddess  whose 
thoroughfare  is  the  infinite  expanse  of  ether  itself  and  who  is 
manifest  as  an  embodied  conflagration.  Burn  and  Burn, 
Oh,  thou  goddess  Kha,  Khe,  Chachha,  Oh  thou,  whose  death- 
like ghastly  countenance  does  inspire  terror  into  the 
hearts  of  men.  Oh  thou  terrible  looking  wife  of  the  god 


AGNI  PUHANAM. 

sacred  to  the  goddess  Tvarita.  The  rite  of  secret  Nyasa 
should  be  performed  as  follows : — f Obeisance  to  the  princi- 
ples represented  by  the  Mantras  Hroun,  Houn  and  Has 
which  are  located  in  the  region  of  my  heart.  Obeisance  to 
the  principles  symbolised  by  the  Mantras  Houn  and  Has 
and  which  are  situated  in  the  substance  of  my  brain. 

ay  the  Mantra  running  as  Fe  Jvala  illuminate  the  part  of 
my  body  occupied  by  the  tuft  of  hair  on  my  crown,  and 
y the  Mantras  Hran,  Hun,  Han  Ila,  protect  me  as  my 
armour  with  the  virtue  of  the  principle  they  stand  for.  May 
the  Mantras  Kroun,  Kshoum,  Shreen  together  with  the 
principles  they  are  emblematic  of,  be  located  in  my  eyes, 
and  may  the  Mantras  running  as  Kshoun,  Houn,  Fut  serve 
me  as  a weapon.  In  the  alternative,  the  Mantra  would  run 
as  Hnu,  Kshe,  Va,  Cha,  Kshes,  Hrun,  Kshen,  Hnu,  Fut, 
wife  of  the  ever-blissfu!  deity  (Sadashiva).  The 
: should  be  uttered  in  the  beginning  and  Hrun 
the  middle.  The  letter  Va  stands  for  the  god  Isha,  the 
Mantra  Chache  is  emblematic  of  the  divinity  of  the  deity 
nown  as  Manonmani,  Ma  and  Kshe  are  the  symbols  of 
the  celestial  Garuda,  while  the  Mantra  Hrun  represents  the 
divine  attributes  of  the  god  Madhava.  The  Mantra  Ksliem 
stands  for  the  god  Brahma,  Hnu  represents  the  sun-god 
while  the  Fut  should  be  known  as  the  weapon  Mantra 


CHAPTER  CXLVII. 


1 HE  Goo  said Om,  Gna,  Kslia,  Kshyam  obeisance 
to  the  .sun-god  who  imparts  victories  in  war.  The  rite  of 
langanyasa  should  be  performed  in  honour  *f  the  vie- 


hum  puranam* 


579 


tory-giving  sun  with  the  Mantras  Bran,  Hraen,  Hrun, 
Brain,  Broun  and  Has.  Gin,  Ban,  Kham,  obeisance  to  the 
god  Khakolka  Sphrun,  Hrun,  Hun,  Krun,  Om,  Horn,  and 
Krem.  The  eight  attributes  of  the  god,  Prabhuta,  Vimala, 
Sara,  Parama,  Sukha,  Dharma  (faith),  Juan  (knowledge)  and 
Vairagya  (non-attachment ) should  be  respectively  worshipped 
with  the  aCovesaid  Mantras.  Then  the  regal  seats  of  the 
god  known  as  the  Anantasana  (seat  of  the  infinity),  Sinhasaa 
(the  regal  seat),  Padmasana  (the  lotus  seat),  etc.,  should  be 
worshipped  in  due  succession.  The  Karnikas  and  Kesharas 
of  the  mystic  diagrams  respectively  known  as  the  Mandalas 
of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  should  be  worshipped  with  the 
energies  of  the  god  named  as  Dipta  (light),  Sukshma 
(invisible  energy),  Jaya  (gladness),  Bhadra  (bliss)  Vimala 
(purity)  Amoglia  (infallibleness),  Vidyuta  (electricity)  and 
Sarvotomukhi  (all  pervadingness).  The  three  fundamental 
principles  of  Sattva  (illuminating  principle  or  the  principle 
of  pure  knowledge),  Rajas  (the  creative  principle), 
Prakriti  (undifferentiated  cosmic  matter)  and  Purusha  (the 
subjective  personality)  should  be  simultaneously  worshipped 
with  the  Atma  ( soul ) Antaratma  and  the  Paramatma 
(the  supreme  soul)  by  the  of  repeating  the  Maya  Mantra 
(Hring).  The  goddesseses  presiding  over  the  different 
parts  of  the  day  and  known  as  Sandhya  (evening),  Usha, 
(dawn),  Prava  (light),  Maya  and  Mayavala  should  be  wor- 
shipped by  repeating  the  Beeja  Mantra  sacred  to  Vishnu 
and  coupled  with  the  nasal  phonetic  symbol.  The  eight 
warder  gods  of  the  deity  (Sun)  named  as  Surya,  Chanda, 
Prachanda,  etc.,  should  be  worshipped  with  flowers  and 
perfumes.  A worship  of  the  sun-god,  closed  with  the  rites  of 
necessary  Homa  and  Japa,  grants  victory  in  war  (i— y*) 


CHAPTER  CXLVIIL 


IBS  God  said  :~—A  Homa  ceremony  performed  after 
having  practised  hundred  times  the  rite  of  Pranayama  (re- 
gulation of  the  process  of  respiration)  and  the  penance 
known  as  the  Krichachravrata,  grants  victory  in  war,  guards 
against  the  happening  of  evil  incidents  in  life,  and  puts  the 
performer  in  possession  of  a kingdom.  The  performer  stand- 
ing in  water  should  repeat  the  Gayatri  Mantra  and  practise 
sixteen  times  the  rite  of  Pranayama  and  offer  libations  of  clari- 
fied butter  into  the  fire  in  the  fore-part  of  the  day.  He  should 
live  upon  a single  meal  each  day  or  live  upon  fruits  or  roots 
of  the  forest  or  on  substances  obtained  by  begging  or  take 
a single  morsel  (Vakabhakshi)  of  thickened  milk,  powdered 
barley  or  clarified  butter.  0 thou  daughter  of  the  mountain, 
gifts  of  gold,  cloth,  and  cows  should  be  made,  to  the  Brahmanas 
after  the  performance  of  a hundred  thousand  Horn  as  for 
tranquilising  all  sorts  of  disasters.  The  fifteen  Brahmanas 
should  be  made  to  take  part  in  the  Homa  ceremony.  There 
is  no  such  disaster  in  the  world,  O goddess,  which  the 
virtue  of  the  above-said  Homa  cannot  check  or  successfully 
cope  with,  and  there  is  no  other  rite  in  the  world  which 
can  confer  greater  benediction  or  can  grant  greater  good 
than  the  one  under  discussion.  Enemies  can  never  stand  in 
the  battle-field,  and  pestilence  never  attacks  nor  epidemic 
diseases  break  out  in  the  country  of  a sovereign  who 
manages  to  get  the  above  Homa  performed  within  his 
domain.  By  its  virtue  the  rainfall  becomes  normal  in  the 
country,  corns  begin  to  flourish  in  the  fields,  free  of  plague 
and  blight  the  demons  and  monsters  are  kept  in  order  and  the 
enemies  are  controlled  by  perforaing  the  above  Homa.  In 
the  case  of  a Koti  Homa  (in  which  a million  of  libations  are 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


5Sl 

offered)  twenty  Brahmins  should  be  invited  to  officiate  as 
priests  or  hundred  or  thousands  of  them  as  described,  where- 
by the  performer  would  attain  all  ends.  By  performing  the 
abovesaid  ceremony  of  Koti  Hama,  a man,  be  he  a reigning 
monarch,  Brahmin  or  a cunnning  man  of  the  world,  becomes 
the  possessor  of  all  wished  for  objects  in  the  world  and  is 
translated  to  heaven  in  his  mortal  frame.  The  Homa  should  be 
performed  by  repeating  the  Mantras  respectively  sacred  to 
the  gods  Indra  (the  king  of  the  gods  or  the  Indian  Jupiter), 
Varuna  (the  Neptune  of  the  Hindus),  Vayu  (the  wind-god), 
Yama  (Pluto  or  the  god  of  death),  Agni  (the  fire  god), 
Vishnu,  the  Shakti  and  Shambhu.  The  Homa  performed 
with  the  ten  thousand  libations  of  clarified  butter  grants  a 
proportionately  less  amount  of  success,  while  that  performed 
with  ten  million  libations  gives  mastery  over  the  whole 
universe.  The  Koti  Homa  referred  to  above,  should  be 
performed  with  the  object  of  subduing  all  diseases,  and  the 
libations  offered  in  the  course  thereof,  should  be  composed 
of  barley,  Vrihi,  sessamum,  thickened  milk,  clarified  butter 
and  the  blades  of  consecrated  grass,  or  the  leaves  of  Viiva 
(Bela),  Mango  and  Ushira  dipped  in  clarified  butter  may  bo 
used  in  their  stead.  The  cavity  of  the  consecrated  fire-hole 
should  be  made  eight  cubits  deep  in  the  case  of  a Koti  Homa 
while  it  should  be  made  to  measure  half  as  much  in  depth 
in  the  case  of  a Laksha  (Hundred  thousand  Homa),  the 
number  of  libations  offered  in  the  latter  Case  being  only  a 
rooi-cty  of  what  should  he  offered  in  the  former  (i— *-15). 


CHAPTER  CXL1X. 


Said  the  God  Fire:— Now  I shall  enumerate  the 
names  of  the  different  Manus  and  the  periods  of  their  res- 
pective ascendency.  Sayambhuva  was  the  name  of  the 
Manu  or  the  law-giver  who  framed  the  first  Code  of  laws 
for  the  guidance  of  the  human  society.  Agnidbra  and 
others  were  his  sons,  and  the  beings  who  attained  god-head 
at  the  time  were  Yama,  etc.  The  seven  sainted  beings 
(Saptarshi),  who  hallowed  the  universe  with  their  angelic  con- 
duct were  Ourva  and  others,  while  Shatakratu  reigned  as  the 
over  lord  of  all  the  celestials.  In  the  cycle  in  which 
Svarochisa  was  the  law-giver  (Manu)  the  gods  known  as 
Paravata,  Satushita  were  the  inmates  of  the  heaven,  owning 
allegiance  to  Vipaschitat  the  then  sovereign,  of  the  skies. 
The  sainted  beings  who  flourished  in  the  age  are  named  as 
Urja,  ecfc.,  while  the  Kimpurushas  of  Chaitra  were  the  des- 
cendants of  the  second  Manu. 

The  law-giver  (Manu)  of  the  third  age  or  the  cycle  of 
time  was  Uitama.  The  gods  such  as  Sudhama  and  others 
Jived  in  heaven  at  the  time  under  the  benign  government 
of  their  sovereign  Sushanti.  The  seven  sons  of  Vasistha 
were  the  sainted  beings  of  the  age,  while  the  races  snch  as 
Aja,  etc.,  were  the  sons  of  the  third  Manu.  The  law  code  for 
the  fourth  cycle  of  time  (Manvantara)  was  framed  by  its  Manu 
named  as  Tamasa,  whose  sons  were  the  nine  races  known 
as  Khyatimukha,  etc.  The  gods  who  dwelt  in  heaven  at  the 
time  were  Svarupa  and  others,  while  Shikhi  was  their  lord  or 
Indra.  The  sainted  beings  who  flourished  in  the  age  were 
Jyotirdhama  and  others.  The  gods  such  as  Amitabha  (gods 
of  peerless  effulgence)  and  others  were  the  residents  of 
heaven  in  the  cycle  in  which  Raiveta  was  the  Manu  or  the 


A GW  PURANAM.  ' 


583 

law-giver  to  whom  the  races  of  Valabandha,  etc.,  owe  their 
origin.  The  seven  Rishis  who  flourished  at  the  time  were 
the  sainted  Hiranyaroma  and  others.  The  Manu  or  the 
lawgiver  for  the  next  cycle  of  time  was  the  blessed  Cha- 
Ushusa,  the  god  Monajava  was  the  Indra  or  the  monarch  of 
the  contemporary  celestials  such  as  Svati  and  others. 
The  seven  Rishis  such  as  Sumadha  and  others  were  the 
light  of  the  age  and  Chakshusa  was  the  founder  of  the 
lines  of  Puru  and  its  allied  branches.  Then  had  set  in 
this  age  of  the  son  of  Vivasvan,  Shradhadeva  Manu  who 
founded  the  race  of  the  Ikshakus  in  which  the  god  Hari 
was  incarnated.  (Then  the  race  of  Manasa  sprang  up  in 
the  age  of  the  Syambhavu  Manu,  successively  followed  by 
the  races  of  Ajita,  Satya,  Hari,  Devavara,  Vaikuntha  and 
Vamana).  The  seven  Rishis  or  the  sainted  beings  who 
flourished  in  the  age  were  Vasistlia,  Kashyapa,  Atri,  Jamad- 
agni,  Gotama,  Vishvamitra,  and  Bharadvaja,  and  the  gods 
who  contemporaneously  resided  in  heaven  under  their 
Indra  or  sovereign  Purander  were  such  as  the  Adityas, 
Vasus,  and  the  Rudras,  etc.  The  eighth  Manu  was  the  son 
of  the  sun-god  by  his  shadow  queen  (Chhaya)  and  as  lift 
was  a cognate  of  his  predecessor  the  Vaivasvata  Manu  he  is 
known  as  Savarni.  The  races  of  which  he  was  the  proge- 
nitor, were  the  clans  of  Viraja  and  others.  The  gods  such 
as  Sutapa,  etc.,  were  the  inmates  of  the  celestial  regions 
during  the  ascendency  of  Savarni  and  acknowledged  the 
suzerainty  of  their  Indra  Vali.  The  sainted  beings  who 
hallowed  the  age  with  their  pious  lives  were  Diptimal,  Drou- 
nika  and  others.  The  ninth  Manu  was  Daksha  Savarni, 
The  gods  such  as  Paras,  etc.,  resided  in  heaven  at  the  time 
under  the  sovereignty  of  their  lord  Adbbuta.  The  sainted 
beings  such  as  Savan,  etc.,  flourished  in  the  age,  while  the 
races  such  as  Ghritaketu,  etc.,  were  the  descendants  of 
tlaksha  Savarni.  Then  followed  the  age  of  Manu  known 
as  Brahma  Savarni.  Then  the  gods  such  as  Sukha,  otCu 


Ami  PURANAM, 


or  the  law-giver  of  the  age  in  which  'the  gods  such  as 
Vihangas,  etc.,  were  the  inmates  of  heaven,  acknowledging 
Gana  as  their  lord.  Munis  such  as  Nischara  etc.,  flour- 
ished in  the  age  and  the  races  of  Savauragas  and  others 
were  the  descendants  of  Brahma  SavarnL  Then  followed 
the  age  of  the  Manu  known  as  Rudra  Savarni.  The  gods  such 
as  Hansa  and  others  were  the  inmates  of  heaven  and  the 
god  Ritadhama  was  their  Indra  or  lord.  The  seven  Rishis 
who  flourished  in  the  age  were  Tapashya  and  others,  and 
the  races  of  Devavat  peopled  this  terrestrial  glove.  The 
thirteenth  Manu  is  named  Rouchya.  Then  the  gods  such  as 
Sutramana  etc.,  happily  dwelt  in  heaven  under  the  government 
of  their  Indra  Divaspaii  who  conquered  the  demons.  The 
Rishis  such  as  Nirmoha  (free  of  illusion)  and  others  were  the 
pious  men  of  the  age  and  the  races  of  Chitrasena  and  others 
were  the  inmates  of  the  world.  Bhoutya  was  the  fourteenth 
Manu  (according  to  other  Puranas,  Deva  Sarvani  and  Indra 
Sarvani  were  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  Manus).  In  his 
age  the  gods  such  as  Cbakshusas  and  others  were  the 
inmates  of  heaven,  and  Shuchi  was  their  lord.  The  Rishis 
such  as  Agnivahu  and  others  were  the  holy  personages  of 
the  age,  while  the  races  of  Urumukha,  etc.,  were  the  inmates 
df  the  globe. 

The  seven  Rishis  will  propagate  the  teachings  of  the 
Vedas  on  the  earth.  The  gods  slhall  live  upon  the  libations 
offered  in  the  course  of  a sacrifice  which  will  be  the  rage 
iff  the  age  and  shall  protect  and  govern  the  people  on  earth 
bf  beams  of  their  own  begotten  sons  or  men  amply  endowed 
With  godUlike  virtues.  O Brahmin,  fourteen  Manus  will 
rtfgin  th  thfe'course  of  a day  of  the  god  'Brahma  (i — zi), 

■ O Brahman,  the  Vedas  which  'had  'formerly  been  -One 


mm  hibjuum 


whole”  and  entire  work  consisting  of  the  four  Padas  and 
a hundred  thousand  slokas  or  verses  was  divided  into  four 
separate  books  or  parts  at  the  latter  end  of  the  Dvapara 
Yoga.  The  Yajur  Yeda  originally  a single  work  was  divided 
by  the  Muni  into  four  parts.  The  Adhyajavas  were  included 
within  the  Yajur,  while  the  Mantras  dealing  with  the  per- 
formance of  sacrifices  and  offerings  of  libations  form  the 
theme  of  the  Rig  Veda.  The  Sam  Veda  deals  with  the 
hymns  or  song-portions  of  the  original  work,  while  the  por- 
tions known  as  the  Brahmhatattva  (dissertations  on  the  self 
and  nature  of  the  supreme  god)  were  grouped  together  under 
the  Atharvas  (23—24). 

The  first  Rhapsodist  who  sang  the  verses  of  the  Rig 
Veda  was  Paila,  a disciple  of  Vaysa.  Indra  gave  it  to 
Pramathi,  and  its  relative  Sanhita  to  Vashkala,  while  he  gave 
his  own  four  Sanhitas  to  Rouddha  and  others.  The  mag- 
nanimous Vaishampayana,  a diseiple  of  Vysa,  caused  this 
tree  of  Yajur  Veda  to  branch  itself  into  twenty-seven 
branches  such  as  Kanva,  Vajasenaya,  etc.,  to  he  respec- 
tively sung  by  the  rhapsodists  like  Yajnavalka  and  others. 
Similarly  , another  disciple  of  Vayasa  named  Jaimini  divided 
the  Sam  Veda  into  different  branches  and  its  Sanhitas 
were  distributed  among  the  different  rhapsodists  such 
as  Sumanta  and  Sukarma.  Sukarma  in  his  turn  took  up 
the  Atharva  Veda  with  its  hundred  thousand  verses  and 
distributed  it  among  different  rhapsodists  such  as  Pailva, 
etc.,  who  were  his  disciples,  while  Suta,  by  the  grace  of  his 
preceptor  Vaysa,  created  different  Sanhitas  of  the  Puranas* 
(25—30.) 


74 


the  characteristic  functions  of  the  farmer  being  to  protect 
the  honest  md  to  meet  out  condign  punishment  to  the 


CHAPTER  CL. 


Said  the  fire  GOD : — Pushkara  narrated  Parashu- 
Rama  the  tenets  of  faith  and  the  laws  of  conduct  to  be 
observed  by  the  different  castes  of  people  as  laid  down  by 
the  different  Manus,  which  were  disclosed  to  him  by  the 
god  Varuna,  and  a knowledge  whereof  imparts  enjoyment 
of  good  things  in  this  world  and  salvation  in  the  next 
Pushkara  said™“  I shall  presently  discuss  the  articles  of 
faith  and  the  laws  of  conduct  which  should  be  adopted  and 
observed  by  the  four  castes  of  people  in  their  every  day 
life,  which  were  approved  of,  even  by  the  god  Vasudeva  and 
which  carry  the  sanction  and  authority  of  the  different  Manus. 
Cessation  of  all  killing  propensities,  truthfulness,  mercy, 
kindness  towards  all  created  beings,  serving  god,  Brahmins, 
and  oneJs  own  parents  and  respectable  relations,  worship 
of  one’s  ancestors,  veneration  towards  the  king,  perusal  of 
good  and  pious  literature,  forbearance,  fortitude  in  suffering, 
and  theism  are  the  virtues  which  should  be  cultivated  by 
members  of  the  four  castes  and  by  men  in  general  ft, — 5), 
The  duties  of  a Brahmin  consist  of  performing  the  re- 
ligious rites  and  sacrifices  and  in  officiating  as  priests  at  the 
ceremonies  undertaken  by  members  of  his  own  caste  or 
others.  Accepting  or  living  upon  the  bounties  of  others 
he  should  practise  the  same  virtue  to  the  best  of  his  means 
and  in  a no  mean  scale,  and  his  life  should  be  devoted  to 
studies,  both  secular  and  divine  (Vedas)  and  to  the  advance- 
ment of  knowledge  in  general.  The  duties  which  are  common 
to  the  members  of  the  Kshatriya,  and  the  Vaisbya  cbtsS'  'are  ^ 
• of.'  gifts,  study  and  the  performance  of  sacrifices,  '• 


A6N1  FURANAM. 


587 

wicked  and  the  evil  doers,  those  of  the  latter  caste  being 
trade,  agriculture  and  the  possession  of  cows.  The  duties 
which  appertain  to  the  Shudra  caste,  0 thou'  best  of  the 
Bhrigus,  are  to  serve  the  Brahmins  and  to  practise  the 
handicrafts  (6 — 9). 

Since  ^the  investiture  with  the  holy  thread,  a member  of 
the  twice-born  caste  is  supposed  to  take  a second  spiritual 

birth,  and  I shall  describe  the  castes  which  children  born  of 

parents  not  members  of  the  same  caste,  would  respec- 
tively belong  to.  A child  born  of  parents  belonging  to 
different  castes  would  get  the  caste  of  its  mother,  but  on 
the  contrary  a child  born  of  a Shudra  father  by  a Brahmin 
mother  would  be  a Chandala.  Similarly  a child  born  of  a 
Kshatrya  father  by  a Brahmin  mother  is  called  a Suta,  while 
the  one  born  of  a Vaishya  father  by  a Brahmin  mother 
would  belong  to  the  Devala  caste.  Similarly  a child  born 
of  ” Shudra  father  by  a Kshatrya  mother  is  known  as  the 
Pukkasa,  while  the  one  born  of  a Vaisbya  father  by  a 
Kshatrya  mother  is  known  as  a Magadha.  A son  born  of 
a Shudra  father  by  a Vaishya  mother  is  called  a Ayogava 
and  thousands  of  different  castes  have  been  known  to  have 
originated  out  of  intermarriages  between  Vaishya  girls  and 
youths  belonging  to  the  abovesaid  hybrid  castes  (10— -1 3.) 

A marriage  should  take  place  only  between  the  members 
of  the  same  class,  the  union  of  a person  belonging  to  a 
higher  class  with  one  of  the  lower  being  always  forbidden. 
The  functions  of  the  Chandal  caste  are  to  kill  or  to  decapi- 
tate criminals  condemned  to  death  by  law,  and  to  do  such 
like  loathsome  acts,  while  the  functions  of  the  Dashika  caste 
are  to  keep  and  live  by  women.  The  duties  of  the  Sutas  are 
to  serve  as  charioters  and  drivers  of  horses,  while  a mem- 
ber of  the  Pukkasa  caste  should  earn  his  livelihood  by 
hunting.  The  duties  of  the  mepbers  of  the  Magadha  and 
Ayogaba  castes  are  to  sing  the  praises  or  panegyrics  of 
’Wngs  /“and  ;crowned  heads*  A Chandala  may  support  him- 


AGHl  PURANAM. 


5SS 

self  by  acting  as  a prize  fighter  or  by  means  of  other  handi- 
crafts, He  should  live  in  the  outskirt  of  a town  or  a village 
and  wear  the  clothes  of  the  deadmen  brought  to  the 
cremation  ground  under  his  charge.  Members  of  other 
castes  should  never  touch  or  come  in  contact  with  a 
Chandala. 

Thousands  of  hybrid  castes  have  arisen  out  of  inter- 
marriages between  Vaishya  women  and  brides  of  other 
Pratiloma  castes.  A member  of  the  Dashika  community 
should  earn  his  livelihood  by  means  of  women  or  by 
serving  as  a guard  of  the  female  apartments.  The 
equities  of  the  royal  stable  should  be  recruited  from  among 
the  Suta  community,  or  its  members  may  enter  similar 
service  of  other  rich  men  as  well.  The  Puccases  should 
live  by  killing  beasts  and  fowls  of  the  jungles,  while  the 
proper  functions  of  the  Maghadhas  are  to  serve  as  criers  or 
panegyrists  in  royal  courts.  The  Ayogavas  should  earn 
their  daily  bread  by  playing  on  the  boards  of  public 
theatres  and  by  doing  other  sorts  of  handicrafts  as  well 
A member  of  the  Chandala  community  should  live  outside 
the  precincts  of  a town  or  a village,  and  all  contact  with  him 
should  be  carefully  avoided  as  being  polluting  and  harmful, 
his  proper  function  in  society  being  to  collect  the  wearing 
apparels  of  dead  men  brought  to  the  cremation  ground. 
A man  by  renouncing  this  life  for  the  welfare  of  a Brahmin 
or  for  the  furtherance  of  the  common  weal,  becomes 
exempted  from  all  subsequent  re-births.  The  hybrid  races 
should  be  looked  upon  as  the  offsprings  of  the  cravings  of 
flesh  of  their  respective  parents  (14—18).  • 


CHAPTER  CL1 


A USHKARA  said : — All  through  his  life  a Brahman 
should  try  to  follow  the  line  of  conduct  laid  down  for  him 
in  the  code  or  he  may  earn  his  livelihood  by  practising  the 
trades  and  professions  which  are  open  to  the  Kshatriyas, 
the  Vaishyas  and  Shudras  alike,  but  never  by  doing  any 
act  which  belongs  exclusively  to  the  latter  community.  A 
Brahmin  may  keep  herds  of  cattle  or  engage  in  trade, 
money-lending  or  agricultural  pursuits,  if  necessary,  but  he 
should  abstain  from  taking  mollasses,  salt,  meat,  Gorasa,  or 
from  using  such  articles  of  luxury  such  as  shellac  (unguents), 
etc.  The  sin  which  attends  on  an  act  of  killing  ants  and 
insects  or  which  is  incidental  to  the  different  processes  of 
agriculture  such  as  ploughing  or  harrowing  the  fields  or  is 
unwittingly  and  unavoidably  committed  in  cutting  the  shrubs 
and  undergrowths,  is  atoned  for  by  the  performance  of  a 
sacrifice,  while  persons  who  have  handled  the  plough,  be- 
come pure  and  clean  by  worshipping  the  gods.  A virtuous 
man  should  yoke  eight  bullocks  to  a plough,  those  who 
live  by  agriculture  should  yoke  six,  while  a cruel  or  an  im- 
pious person  would  reduce  the  number  to  four  or  two.  A 
man  should  earn  his  livelihood  by  means  of  truth  and  piety. 
Truth  Should  never  be  parted  with,  if  positive  virtues  would 
sometimes  part  us  company.  Pity  it  is  that  in  this  poor 
world  of  ours,  an  expedient  lie  becomes  an  occasional  neces- 
sity, but  cruelty  and  deceit  should  never  be  suffered  to  blot 
the  escutcheon  of  the  divine  humanity,  even  if  death  would 
enter  the  list  as  an  adversary  (1—5). 


CHAPTER  CLIL 


P USHKARA  SAID: — Now  I shall  enumerate  the  rites 
and  ceremonies  which  should  be  gone  through  or  performed 
on  behalf  of  a house-holder.  The  catamenial  period  lasts 
for  sixteen  nights  from  the  appearance  of  the  menses  and 
Is  the  most  favourable  time  for  conception.  All  contact 
should  be  avoided  on  the  first  three  nights.  A man  wishing 
to  beget  a male  child  should  go  unto  his  wife  on  even  days 
during  the  abovesaid  period  (i)  Now  I shall  describe  the 
process  of  performing  the  rites  of  Garbhadhaoa  (lit.,— the 
rites  of  making  the  womb  strong  and  steady),  etc.,  while  the 
rite  of  Punsavanam  .should  be  performed'  as  soon  as 
there  would  remain  not  a shadow  of  doubt  about  the 
conception,  and  before  the  movements  of  the  fetus 
would  be  felt  inside  the  womb.  The  rite  of  Simantonayana 
should  be  performed  either  in  the  sixth  or  the  eighth  month 
of  the  pregnancy,  while  the  rite  of  Jatakarma  (post-natal 
ceremony)  should  be  done  unto  the  child  before  the  cutting 
off  and  binding  of  the  umbilical  chord.  The  rite  of  Nam- 
karanam  should  be  performed  at  the  expiry  of  the  period 
of  impurity  incidental  to  childbirth.  The  name  of  a 
Brahmin  child  should  end  with  the  term  “ Sharma”  (the 
happy  one),  the  name  of  a child  of  the  Kshatrya  caste  should 
end  with  the  term  “Varnia”  (the  defender  or  protector)  while 
those  of  a Vaishya  or  a Shudra  child  should  respectively 
end  with  the  terms  “Gupta’’  and  “DasaJ : (slave).  The 
mother  should  present  the  child  to  its  father  addressing 
him  as  “ Behold  this  is  your  child,  my  darling.”  The  rite 
of  Chudakaranam  (binding  of  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown 
of  a child)  together  with  that  of  Upanayanam  (investiture 


AGNI  PURAMAM. 


with  the  holy  thread  in  the  case  of  a Brahmana-child)  should 
be  performed  in  its  eighth  year  or  in  the  eighth  year 
counted  from  the  period  of  jestation,  while  the  same  should 
be  performed  in  the  eleventh  and  the  twelfth  year  (counted 
from  the  periods  of  gestation)  in  the  case  of  a Kshatriya,  and 
Vaishya-child  respectively,  and  under  no  circumstance  the 
performance  of  the  ceremony  should  be  delayed  till  after 
the  sixteenth  year  of  a Vaishya  infant.  The  holy  girdles 
(Moungis)  should  be  made  in  turn  of  the  blades  of  conse- 
crated Kasha  grass,  barks  of  sacred  trees,  etc.,  while 
those  of  penitents  and  ascetics  should  be  made  of  the 
skins  of  Marga,  tiger,  and  Vasta  respectively  (2—8)* 
The  Dandas  or  holy  rods  which  the  children  should  take 
hold  of  after  the  ceremony  of  investiture  should  be  made  of 
the  woods  of  Parna,  Pippala,  and  Vela  trees,  cut  as  to  reach 
the  temple,  forehead,  and  face  of  the  child,  according  as 
lie  would  belong  to  the  Brahmana,  Kshatrya  or  the  Vaishya 
caste*  The  rods  should  be  straight,  unstripped  of  the  bark, 
and  not  dried.  The  threads  should  be  mad©  of  cotton,  silk, 
or  wool,  and  the  infant  invested  with  them  should  beg  alms 
by  repeating  the  word  “ Bhabat”  (as  Bhaban  Viksham  Dehi) 
either  at  the  beginning,  middle,  or  the  end  of  his  prayer. 
He  should  first  ask  for  alms  in  a quarter  where  the  same 
could  be  certainly  obtained.  The  women  are  not  entitled 
to  utter  the  Veda  Mantras,  and  hence  they  are  not  invested 
with  the  holy  threads,  but  their  marriage  ceremonies 
should  be  celebrated  by  repeating  the  sacred  hymns  of  the 
Vedas  (9 — 12).  . OS ; riS" 

The  preceptor  having  invested  the  disciple  with  ’"the  holy 
thread  should  teach  him  the  way  of  purifying  his  self,  the 
rules  of  conduct  (Achara),  the  process* of  performing  the 
sacrifices  (Agni  Karyya)  and  the  rites  of  daily  prayer  and 
meditation  (13).  ^ 

The  man  who  performs  a sacrifice  with  his  face  turned 
towards  the  east,  enjoys  good  health  and  lives  long,  while 


592  AGNi  PURANAM. 

one  who  does  that  with  his  face  towards  the  south,  becomes 
famous.  The  man,  who  tells  his  prayer  with  his  face  turned 
towards  the  west,  becomes  possessed  of  an  ample  fortune, 
while  one  doing  the  same,  or  eating  with  his  face  to  the  north 
becomes  extremely  truthful.  He  should  offer  libations  into 
the  consecrated  fire,  every  morning  and  evening,  and  no 
unhallowed  substance  should  be  thrown  into  it.  He  should 
abstain  from  taking  wine,  and  eating  animal  diet,  and  under 
no  circumstance  join  hands  in  a dancing  party  or  take  part  in 
a singing  assembly,  nor  should  he  ever  cherish  or  indulges 
in  envy,  calumny  and  obscene  language.  A new  holy  rod 
(Danda)  should  be  taken  hold  of  on  throwing  the  old  or  the 
broken  one  into  the  water.  Having  been  initiated  into 
the  Vedic  lore,  a disciple  should  bathe  and  pay  proper  re- 
muneration to  his  preceptor.  Self-controlled  and  strictly 
observing  the  rules  of  conduct,  a disciple  may  live  with  his 
preceptor  as  long  as  he  lives  (13—17). 


CHAPTER  CLIII. 


]P USHKARA  said : — A Brahman  may  take  four  wives, 
a Kshatriya  three,  a Vaishya  two,  while  a member  of  the 
Shudra  caste  is  not  allowed  to  have  more  than  a single  wife. 
Sacrifices  and  religious  ceremonies  should  not  be  performed 
by  a husband  in  the  company  of  a wife  not  belonging  to 
the  same  caste  as  himself,  a privilege  which  is  reserved  for 
his  wives  of  the  same  caste.  A Kshatriya  woman  having 
been  duly  wedded,  should  hold  an  arrow  in  her  hand,  a 
Vaishya  bride  should  hold  a paddy  measure  while  a Shudra 

■ : : : ; ^ 

: ; ; '■  ■ ■ : 


AGNi  PURANAM< 


593 


girl  should  hold  a cotton  string  in  her  hand  just  after  the 
wedding  ceremony  had  been  gone  through.  A girl  should 
be  given  away,  only  once  in  marriage,  and  the  man  who  robs 
or  carries  away  a 
thief.  There  is  no  salvation  fo 
sons  or  daughters.  The  four  sacrificial 


married  girl  is  liable  to  be  punished  as  a 
r the  person  who  sells  his 
ceremonies,  enjoined 
to  be  performed  by  all  house-holders,  are  the  giving  away 
of  a daughter  in  marriage,  Sachiyaga,  Marriage,  and  the 
ceremony  of  imparting  a name  to  a new  born  child  (1—4). 

The  five,  conditions  or  circumstances  under  which  a 
woman  is  permitted  to  marry  again  are,  (1)  the  moral  degra- 
dation of  her  husband,  (2)  his  death,  (3)  renunciation  by 
him  of  all  worldly  pursuits,  his  resorting  to  a monastery, 
(4)  and  his  impotency.  The  widow  of  a man  can  marry  the 
brother  of  his  husband  if  living  and  willing  to  take  her  as 
h*s  wife,  while  in  the  alternative  she  may  marry  whomsoever 
she  pleases.  The  asterisms,  under  whose  benign  influence  a 
marriage  ceremony  should  be  celebrated  and  gone  through, 
are  the  three  Purvas,  the  asterisms  presided  over  by  the 
gods  of  fire,  and  wind,  and  the  Rohini  (5 — 7). 

A man  should  not  marry  a woman  belonging  to  his  own 
Gotra  or  to  a family  acknowledging  the  spiritual  leadership 
of  the  same  Rishi  as  his  own.  Marriage  with  a woman  is 
not  forbidden  where  the  bridegroom  is  not  related  to  tier 
within  seven  degrees  in  the  father's  line  or  five  degrees 
on  the  side  of  her  mother. 

The  Brahma  form  of  marriage  is  characterised  by  the 
giving  away  of  the  bride  to  a man  of  good  and  noble  paren- 
tage and  possessed  of  excellent  virtues,  and  who  has  been 
specially  invited  and  requested  by  her  father  for  that  pur- 
pose. This  sort  of  marriage  should  be  regarded  as  the 
bgst  form  of  uniting  a man  and  a woman  in  holy  wedlock, 
as  it  is  supposed  to  carry  the  bride's  forefathers  to  heaven. 
In  the  Arsha  (lit  appertaining  to  the  Rishis)  form  of  mar- 
riage, the  bride  is  given  away  with  the  presents  of  a 


594 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


of  bullocks  to  the  bridegroom,  while  in  the  virtue-givi. 
Prajapatya  form,  the  bridegroom,  or  his  relatives]  on  his 
behalf,  ask  for  the  hands  of  the  bride.  In  the  Asura  form 
of  marriage  which  is  always  condemnable,  the  bride  is  sold 
for  value,  while  the  Gandharva  form  is  characterised  by  the 
union  of  a man  and  a woman  out  of  mutual  love.  Marriage 
by  forcibly  carrying  away  a woman  in  battle  is  called  the 
Rakshasa,  while  a marriage  by  practising  fraud  on  the 
woman  while  asleep  or  otherwise  insensible  is  known  as 
the  Paishacha  (8 — 1 1). 

On  the  day  of  the  marriage  ceremony  an  image  of  Sachi 
should  be  made  of  clay  brought  from  a potter's  house, 
which  should  be  worshipped  on  the  banks  of  a tank  on  the 
same  day.  A bride  should  be  taken  to  the  house  of  the 
bridegroom  amidst  peals  of  music  and  shouts  of  general 
joy.  A marriage  should  not  be  celebrated  when  the  god 
Keshava  would  be  enjoying  his  yearly  sleep,  nor  in  the 
months  of  Pousha  and  Chaitra,  nor  on  Tuesdays  and  lunar 
days  marked  by  the  conditions  known  as  the  Vistis.  Like- 
wise the  settings  of  Venus  and  the  Jupiter  and  the  eclipse  of 
the  moon,  asterisms  in  conjuction  with  the  sub,  the  Saturn, 
and  the  Mars,  and  the  astral  condition  known  as  the  Vyati- 
pata  are  inauspicious  for  the  celebration  of  a marriage 
ceremony. 

The  asterisms  which  should  be  deemed  favourable  to  the 
celebration  of  a marriage,  are  the  Soumya,  the  Pitrya,  the 
the  Vayavya,  the  Savitra,  the  Rohini,  the  three  Uttaras,  the 
Mul§,  the  Maitra  and  the  Pushya. 


CHAPTER  CLI V. 


JT  CJSHKARA  said  : — A man  should  leave  his  bed  before 
the  breaking  of  day  (Brahma  Muhurita)  and  contemplate  in 
his  mind  the  gods  such  as  Vishnu,  etc.  In  the  day  time  as 
Well  as  in  the  morning  and  evening  a man  should  evacuate 
the  contents  of  the  bowels  and  kidneys  with  his  face  turned 
towards  the  north,  south  being  the%irection  he  should  look 
to  while  doing  the  same  acts  in  the  night.  Bowels  should 
not  be  evacuated  on  public  roads  and  grounds  covered 
with  grass,  nor  in  water.  Having  washed  himself,  he 
should  cleanse  his  palms  with  earth,  cleanse  his  teeth,  and 
attend  to  his  rites  of  daily  prayers  and  worship,  whereby 
he  would  get  rid  of  impurities  both  internal  and  external. 
The  sixth  act  of  a man  is  the  rite  of  daily  ablution  known 
as  the  Kriya  Snanam,  which  admits  of  a six-fold  division, 
and  as  without  ablution,  the  worships  and  sacrifices  fail 
to  grant  their  desired  effect,  a man  should  daily  bathe  in 
the  early  part  qf  the  morning  (i — 4). 

Ablution  in  water  dug  out  of  earth  is  less  meritorious  than 
one  made  in  fountain  waters.  The  waters  of  lakes  and 
natural  reservoirs  are  better  than  fountain  waters,  in  respect 
of  merit.  River-water  is  better  than  the  latter ; the  water 
of  sacred  pools  is  better  than  the  preceding  sort,  while  the 
water  of  the  Ganges  is  at  all  times  the  most  put* tying  of 
them  all  (5). 

Having  entered  the  water  a man  should  brush  off  the 
Hie.  dirt  from  his  body  and  dash  the  water  briskly  over  the 
same  by  repeating  thrice  the  Mantras  respectively  running 
“Hiranyavarna,”  “ Shannodevi,”  4<  Apohista,”  and  “ Idam 
Apas.”  Then  immerged  in  water,  he  should  repeat  his. 
Mantra  and  repeat  the  sin-destroying  verses  (Aghamarshana 
Suktas)  or  the  verses  known  as  the  Drupada,  Purusha 


AGNI  PURANAM 


or  those  running  as  Junjate  Manas,  etc.,  or  the  Vedic 
verse  known  as  the  Pourasha  and  specially  the  Gayatri 
Mantra  which  occurs  in  the  sin-destroyfng  verse  of  the 
Aghamarsha.  The  Rishi  who  composed  the  above  verses  or 
the  rhapsodist  who  first  recited  them  was  Agamarshana. 
The  metre  of  the  verse  is  Anushtubha  and  the  god  Hari  is  its 
tutelar  deity.  Then  he  should  squeeze  out  his  ''cloth  dry 
and  offer  libations  of  water  to  the  gods  and  his  departed 
manes.  Handfuls  of  water  should  be  offered  by  repeating 
the  Mantra  known  as  thenPurusha  Sukta,  and  subsequent  to 
that  he  should  perform  the  rite  of  Agni-Havanam  and 
pay  remunerations  to  the  Brahmanas  as  his  means  would 
admit  of  (6—12). 

Then  for  the  welfare  of  his  soul,  a man  should  hold 
communion  with  the  universal  spirit.  The  seat,  bed,  carriage, 
wife,  son,  and  alms-bowl  of  one's  own  are  always  holy,  while 
those  belonging  to  others  should  be  deemed  as  impure.  A 
man  should  give  way  to  a venerable  person,  a pregnant  wo- 
man or  to  a person  carrying  a heavy  load,  if  come  across 
on  the  road.  A man  should  not  look  at  the  sun  just  rising, 
setting  or  reflected  in  water,  nor  should  he  Iqpk  at  a woman 
stripped  of  clothes,  nor  leap  over  a well,  a grinding  stone, 
a piece  of  bone,  a cotton  thread,  an  execution  ground,  a 
seat  for  a pitcher,  a pestle  and  a pasting  slab,  nor  touch  ashes 
or  "anything  ugly  or  filthy.  A man  should  not  enter  the 
female  apartments  or  treasure  rooms  of  another  man's 
house,  nor  go  on  another  man's  errand.  He  should  not  get 
into  a boat  of  unsteady  equilibrium,  nor  climb  a tree  or  a 
mountain,  and  should  always  cultivate  the  science  which 
deals  with  the  increase  and  accumulation  of  wealth.  A man 
who  bites  his  finger  nails,  or  is  in  the  habit  of  tearing  grass 
or  wantonly  breaks  down  pebbles,  soon  meets  his  doom. 
A man  should  never  beat  his  palm  against  his  face  by  way 
of  keeping  time  with  music  etc.,  and  should  never  stir  about 
abroad  in  the  night  without  a lamp.  A house  should  not 


ACM!  PURANAM. 


be  entered  into  by  any  other  way  than  the  proper  door,  and 
a man  must  not  make  grimaces  or  puli  a long  face  while  in  a 
company.  A speaker  must  not  be  interrupted  while  dis- 
coursing on  any  subject  and  a man  should  never  twist  or  play 
with  the  ends  of  his  cloth,  nor  wear  it  in  an  improper  fashion, 
“ Good  ” and  “ well  done  ” should  be  the  remarks  made  in 
connection  with  all  statements  averred  in  the  presence  of 
a man,  while  he  should  studiously  refrain  from  making  any 
reflections  on  another  man’s  conduct.  A seat  made  of  the 
Palasha  wood  should  never  be  sat  upon,  and  the  shadow  of 
a divine  image  should  be  followed  at  the  time  of  accompany- 
ing it  in  a procession.  A man  must  not  walk  through  the 
two  rows  of  his  elders,  but  observe  rules  of  decorum  while 
in  their  company,  nor  gaze  on  the  stars.  The  name  of  a 
sister  stream  should  not  be  mentioned  while  crossing  a 
river,  nor  a person  should  scratch  his  body  with  two  hands. 
A man  must  not  cross  a river  without  propitiating  the  gods 
and  his  departed  manes.  A river  should  not  be  polluted  by 
throwing  dirt  and  filth  into  its  water,  nor  should  a man  take 
a bath,  shorn  of  all  wearing  apparels.  Then  he  should  com-  ■ 
muue  with  his  god  for  the  expansion  of  his  inner  being, 
A man  must  not  remove  a garland  from  his  person  with 
his  own  hands,  nor  put  on  one  composed  of  flowers 
having  rough  and  excessive  granules.  A man  must  not 
enjoy  a laughter  at  the  expense  of  wicked  men,  nor  should 
he  live  with  them  in  a foreign  country.  A place  in  which 
there  is  no  physician,  river  or  a monarch,  and  which 
abounds  in  women  and  vulgar  people  (Miechchas)  should 
not  be  dwelt  in  for  any  consideration.  A man  having  in- 
advertently gone  unto  a woman  in  her  season,  must  not  unlose 
his  tongue  but  contemplate  the  god  Keshava  in  his  mind, 

A man  should  not  laugh,  sneeze,  nor  yawn  without  having 
previously  screened  his  (mouth)  nor  give  out  the  humiliation 
suffered  by  him  even  at  the  hands  of  his  own  master.  A man 
must  not  give  a loose  rein  to  his  senses  and  appetites,  nor 

■c  -Vvvv'::";  ' '■  ' ki-kkV/kkHS  Kks 


59$ 


AGNI  PUKANAM. 


unduly  deny  himself  their  legitimate  gratifications.  Oh  thou 
son  of  Bhrigu,  a disease  must  not  be  neglected  from  its  very 
beginning,  as  an  enemy,  however  small,  must  be  always 
dreaded.  A man  should  always  rinse  his  face  with  water 
after  having  returned  from  a walk  on  the  road,  and  he  should 
never  carry  fire  and  water  at  the  same  time.  A man  must 
not  talk  loudly  and  disrespectfully  in  the  presence r of  a 
Phallic  emblem  nor  cross  his  leg  while  sitting.  A man  should 
not  be  spoken  ill  of  either  in  his  presence  or  at  his  back,  and 
abstain  from  making  blasphemous  or  sacreligous  remarks 
as  regards  a god,  a Rishi,  or  a sovereign.  A man  must  not 
put  any  faith  in  women,  nor  should  he  be  inimically  disposed 
towards  them.  The  scriptures  should  be  listened  to,  and  the 
good  graces  of  the  gods  should  be  secured  every  day,  whereby 
piety  would  be  increased.  The  Moon  god  should  be  wor- 
shipped by  a man  on  the  day  of  the  asterism  of  his  birtli 
(birth  day)  and  the  gods  and  Brahmanas  should  be  as  well 
propitiated  on  the  occasion.  All  unguents  and  lubrications 
should  be  avoided  on  the  sixth  and  the  fourteenth  days  of 
the  lunar  month.  Urine  and  execreta  should  be  deposited 
at  a distance  from  one’s  dwelling  house  and  one  must  always 
take  care  not  to  make  enemies  of  good  men  (13—3 1 .) 

CHAPTER  CLV* 


JP ushkaka  said Now  I shall  enumerate  the  names  of 
the  substances,  by  which  the  household  goods  shall  be  made 
pure,  if  anywise  pollutted  by  unhallowed  contact.  Pots 
made  of  clay,  copper  or  gold  are  purified  by  baking  them 
again  in  fire,  in  the  event  of  their  being  made  impure  by 
urine  and  execreta,  otherwise  a vessel  made  of  copper  is  made 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


clean  by  rubbing  it  with  water  containing  a solution  of  the 
acid  substances.  Articles  made  of  iron  or  Indian  bell-metal 
are  purified  by  rubbing  them  with  alchaline  substances,  while 
a pearl  is  purified  by  washing  it  simply  with  water.  Similarly 
article^  made  of  conch-shell  or  stone,  and  articles  such  as 
pot-herbs,  rope,  roots,  fruits  and  pulse  are  purified  by  washing. 
In  a sacrifice,  the  vessels  essentia!  thereto,  are  purified  by 
simply  rubbing  them  with  palms;  the  oily  substances  are 
made  pure  by  pouring  warm  water  over  them,  while  a room 
is  purified  by  sweeping  it  with  broomsticks.  A cloth  washed 
and  purified  should  be  made  purer  by  sprinkling  over  it 
a solution  of  earth  and  water.  A large  number  of  clothes 
anywise  made  impure  is  purified  by  sprinkling  water  over  it, 
while  articles  made  of  wood  are  instantly  made  pure  by  wash- 
ing. A concourse  of  wooden  articles  should  be  purified  by 
floating  them  on  water.  Bed-steads,  seats,  carriages,  and 
windows  are  purified  by  sprinkling  water  over  them,  and 
likewise  hays  and  faggots  should  be  made  pure  by  the 
same  process.  Articles  made  of  bone  and  ivory  should 
be  purified  with  the  washings  of  sun-dried  rice.  Leaves  and 
fruits  should  be  cleansed  with  the  hairs  of  a cow,  while  the 
cleansing  of  the  articles  made  of  bone  should  be  made 
in  the  way  as  laid  down  in  the  case  of  ivory.  Mollasses, 
salt  and  juice  of  trees  should  be  purified  by  drying.  The 
flowers  of  Kusumbha  trees,  together  with  wool  and 
cotton  are  cleansed  by  washing  them  in  stream  water,  care 
being  taken  to  spread  them  apart  at  the  time  of  the  washing. 
The  different  parts  of  the  body  of  a cow,  except  its  face, 
are  pure.  The  face  of  a horse  or  that  of  a goat  is  always 
pure  and  likewise  the  faces  of  a woman,  calf,  bird,  and  a 
dog  are  always  pure,  specially  when  salivating  during  a 
bunting  excursion  (i—io). 

A man  should  rinse  his  mouth  with  water  after  having 
eaten,  sneezed,  drunk  water,  risen  from  sleep,  coming  home 
from  a walk  on  the  road,  and  after  having  put  on  a cloth. 


# I 

ill  1 


I . 





| 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


CHAPTER  CLVi. 


P, 


USHKara  said: — Now  I shall  discourse  on  the  nature 
of  impurity  and  the  period  of  its  continuance  which  is  sup- 
posed  to  disable  a person  from  undertaking  all  sorts  of 
religious  and  sacrificial  rites  and  which  follows  upon  the 
death  of  (Pretashoucha)  and  birth  of  his  relations  (Sutika- 
soucha),  or  on  the  death  or  the  birth  of  a Sapinda.  A Brah- 
mana  remains  unclean  for  ten  days  and  nights.  O thou 
best  of  the  sons  of  Bhrigu,  the  members  of  the  Kshatriya 
caste  get  rid  of  their  uncleanness  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the 
birth  or  of  the  death  of  a Sapinda,  the  Vaishyas  on  the 
fifteenth,  while  aShudra,  under  a similar  circumstance,  stands 
absolved  of  his  physical  impurity  at  the  expiry  of  a month* 
In  the  case  .of  slaves,  the  period  of  uncleanness  is  like  that 
of  his  master.  For  a person  born  in  the  womb  of  a Brah- 
mana,  Kshatriya,  Vaishya  or  a Shudra  mother,  the  period  of 


A woman  in  her  menses  becomes  pure  by  touching  a cat 
on  the  fourth  day  of  her  flow,  while  she  attains  the  same 
end  by  bathing  on  the  fifth  day,  when  she  becomes  fit  to 
perform  all  the  sacrifices  undertaken  in  honour  of  the  gods 
and  her  departed  manes.  Seven  pieces  of  clay  should  be 
rubbed  over  the  region  of  the  anus ; one  piece9 should  be 
rubbed  over  the  genitals,  two  or  three  pieces  over  the  palms. 
The  number  should  be  quadrupled  in  the  case  of  an  ascetic 
or  a Brahmacharin.  Cotton  clothes  and  silks  are  purified  by 
means  of  white  mustard;  clothes  or  seats  made  of  hairs  of 
a deer  are  made  pure  by  sprinkling  water  over  them,  and 
the  same  rule  holds  good  in  the  case  of  fruits,  and  flowers 
(ix — 13). 


AGNI  PUR  ANA  m; 


k 


6<3E 


<0tvcleanness  is  one,  three  and  six  days  respectively.  In  such 
a connection  a Brahmana  and  a Kshatriya  would  be  respect- 
ively clean  again  in  three  and  six  days,  while  a Vaishya  and 
a Shudra  would  be  absolved  of  their  impurities  in  six.  In  the 
■event  of  the  death  of  a child  who  has  not  cut  his  teeth,  the 
imparity  will  last  for  a single  day  only,  while  it  will  extend 
over  a period  of  a whole  day  and  night,  where  the  child 
will  die  before  the  rite  of  Chudakarauam  has  been  performed 
■unto  it.  In  the  case  where  the  death  occurs  ere  the  rite  of 
Vratadesha  (taking  of  a religious  vow  or  penance)  has  been 
performed,  the  period  of  impurity  will  cover  a period  of 
three  consecutive  days  and  nights;  whereas  the  same 
will  last  for  ten  such,  when  the  child  dies  subsequent  to 
that.  A Shudra  becomes  clean  from  after  the  fifth  day 
of  the  death  of  a child  of  less  than  three  years,  while  the 
period  of  impurity  extends  over  a period  of  twelve  days, 
when  the  child  dies  after  completing  the  third  year  of  his 
existence.  The  period  of  uncleanness  on  the  death  of  a 
(Shudra)  child  of  six  years,  covers  an  entire  month  of  thirty 
days.  In  a single  night  the  friends  of  a deceased  woman  dying 
before  the  age  of  Chud&karanam,  becomes  free  of  the  moral 
disability  consequent  thereron,  while  the  uncleanness  lasts 
for  three  days  when  the  death  takes  place  after  that  age.  The 
members  of  the  father  s family  of  a married  woman  are  not 
uncleanly  affected  by  her  death  when  it  occurs  in  the  house 
of  her  father-in-law,  while  their  impurity  lasts  for  a night 
only,  when  she  is  delivered  of  a child  in  the  house  of  her 
father-in-law ; otherwise  the  period  of  postnatal  impurity 
extends  over  a period  of  ten  days.  The  relations  on  the 
father’s  side  of  a married  woman  become  certainly  unclean 
for  three  days,  in  the  event  of  her  dying  in  her  father’s  house, 
while  in  the  case  of  two  impurities  occurring  on  the  same  day, 
(both  of  them)  should  be  supposed  to  terminate  on  the  same 


~ "-W  ' 

end  with  the  latter,  as  laid  down  by  Dhannaraja  (i— 12).  U;  j 


m 


a 


i* 'III. 


11 


i if 

m 


i! 


I lii 

ji'i 

Vi 


fit 

I 


I 


is 

I 


I 

¥ 


: w 


; 

1 

Sr 


■ ?ff 
... : ■ &*£ 


date,  while  the  two  occurring  on  two  different  dates  should  -jj| 


§ 


'ft?:*- 

I 


■ 


602 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


The  period  of  uncleanness  following  on  the  death  of 
a relation  by  consanguinity  in  a foreign  country,  and  heard 


a little  later,  would  last  for  the  unexpired  period  of  ten  days 
from  its  occurrence.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  last  fox 
three  consecutive  days,  if  heard  at  its  expiry. 

Similarly,  the  death  of  a relation  heard  after , the  lapse 
of  a year,  does  not  entail  a period  of  impurity  more  than 
what  is  absolved  by  bathing,  even  if  the  deceased  is  related 
to  the  bather  as  a grand- father  by  the  mother’s  side  or  as 
a spiritual  preceptor.  In  the  case  of  an  abortion  occurring 
in  the  family,  a man  becomes  unclean  for  as  many  days  as 
the  number  of  the  months  of  the  abortive  pregnancy.  On 
the  death  a Sapinda,  O thou  son  of  Bhrigu,  a Brahmana 
becomes  unclean  for  ten  days,  a Kshatriya  twelve,  a Vaishya 
for  fifteen,  while  the  disability  of  a Shudra  under  a similar 
circumstance  lasts  for  an  entire  month  (13 — 1 4). 

The  cakes  of  obsequies  should  be  offered  to  the  souls  of 
the  dear  departed  near  the  Uchchhistha,  by  repeating  his 
name  and  the  name  of  the  clan  (Gotra)  he  belonged  to. 
Then  having  fed  the  best  of  Brahmanas,  and  propitiated 
them  with  wealth,  and  having  offered  the  oblations  of  sun- 
dried  rice  and  libations  of  water  by  mentioning  their  names 
and  the  names  of  the  Gotras  (the  familily  or  the  spiritual 
clan  founded  by  a Rishi)  they  belonged  to,  three  Vikar- 
shunas  should  be  laid  down,  having  the  width  of  four 
fingers  and  the  length  of  a span,  each  being  four  fingers 
apart.  Three  lamps  or  cotton  sticks  should  be  lighted  and 
placed  near  the  abovesaid  Vikarshuna.  O Rama,  twelve 
oblations  should  be  offered  to  the  god  Soma  (Moon-god). 
Vanlii  (the  god  of  fire),  and  Yama  (the  god  of  death),  and 
the  lighted  lamps  on  the  cakes  of  obsequies  should  be 
separately  put  out  as  before.  The  vessels  should  be  filled 
in  with  wine,  meat  and  curd,  and  if  there  be  any  Adhimasa 
in  the  year,  a separate  vesselful  of  oblation  should  be  decked 
out  for  that.  In  the  alternative  ail  these  should  be  pec- 


ACN!  rURANAftl, 


formed  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  occurrence.  An  additional 
Shraddba  ceremony  should  be  performed  on  the  twelfth 
month  of  the  year  in  the  event  of  there  being  an  Adhimasa 
in  it.  After  the  lapse  of  one  full  year,  the  Shraddha  should 
be  -performed  as  usual.  Four  cakes  of  obsequies  should 
be  offered  to  the  soul  of  the  departed  relation  for  whose  salva- 
tion the  Shraddha  ceremony  had  been  undertaken,  and  to 
the  soul  of  his  three  forefathers  directly  in  the  ascending 
Sine.  Then  having  worshipped  them,  the  cakes  of 
obsequies  offered  in  honour  of  the  departed,  should  be  mixed 
with  the  three  other  offered  to  their  forefathers,  by  repeat- 
ing the  Mantra,  which  runs  as  u Prithivi  Samana,”  Them 
the  vessel  containing  the  cake  offered  to  the  soul  of  the 
departed  should  be  placed  over  those  containing  the  oblations 
for  his  thrge  direct  ancestors,  though  they  should  be  sepa- 
rately decked  out  at  the  outset.  The  ceremony  in  question 
should  be  performed  without  the  Mantras  in  the  case  of  a 
Sapindikarana  ceremony  performed  in  honour  of  the  soul 
of  a deceased  woman.  The  Shraddha  ceremony  should  be 
performed  every  year,  and  every  year  should  be  offered 
to  one’s  departed  manes,  a pitcher  full  of  water  and  boiled 
rice  which  would  last  them  for  a year.  As  the  white  drops, 
of  streams  of  the  Ganges  swollen  by  the  downpours  of  the 
rainy  season,  baffle  all  counting,  so  the  number  of  one's 
forefathers  whose  souls  are  doomed  to  roam  about  in  the 
confines  of  Haydes,  becomes  incredibly  swelled  in  the  march 
of  time,  and  so  the  Shraddha  ceremony  should  be  performed 
as  often  as  possible  in  order  that  they  might  not  run  short  of 
provision  in  a region  where  the  very  atmosphere  is  mad'e 
of  torments  and  anguish  of  a disembodied  existence.  A 
Shraddha  ceremony  is  the  only  means  of  reaching  them 
the  much  needed,  longed  for,  sustenance,  in  a region  where 
other  means  of  conveyance  are  of  no  avail,  and  a man 
should  never  mourn  or  show  any  grief  at  the  time  of  offering 
oblations  to  his  departed  manes,  nay  even  if  they  were 


kCHt  PUBANAR&' 


offered,  in  anticipation,  to  his  own  would-be-liberated 
spirit  {15—31). 

No  impurity  or  uncieanness  attaches  to  the  relations  of  m 
man  who  has  committed  suicide  ’either  by  falling  from  the 
brow  of  a mountain,  or  by  means  of  fire,  or  by  hanging  him- 
self by  the  neck,  or  by  drowning  himself  in  water,  even  i£  the 
death  be  due  to  a stroke  of  a sword  or  that  of  lightning  or  to 
other  untoward  accidents.  An  ascetic,  an  observer  of  a 
religious  vow  (Vrati),  a Brahmacharin,  a King,  a Karuka,  a 
person  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  spiritualism,  and  those 
who  are  in  the  king's  service,  may  bathe  before  the  cremation 
of  a dead  body,  if  they  follow  one  to  the  cremation  ground. 
A man  should  bathe  in  water  after  having  held  an  inter- 
course with  a woman,  or  after  having  exposed  himself  to 
the  fumes  of  a burning  funeral  pile.  The  dead  body  of  a 
Brahmana,  should  never  be  carried  by  a member  of  the 
Shudra  community,  nor  should  the  dead  body  of  a Shudra 
be  allowed  to  be  brought  to  the  cremation  ground  by  a 
Brahmana,  as  the  same  is  sinful  and  improper.  But  by 
carrying  the  dead  body  of  a friendless  destitute  Brahmana 
to  the  cremation  ground,  a Shudra  goes  to  heaven  at  the 
close  of  his  life. 

The  man  who  carries  logs  of  wood  for  erecting  the  fune- 
ral pile  of  the  poor  and  destitute  dead,  wins  victories  in  war. 
Having  lighted  the  pile,  the  friends  of  the  deceased  should 
circumbulate  it  from  their  left  hand  side  ; and  then  bathe 
with  all  their  clothes  on.  Each  one  of  them  present,  should 
offer  three  libations  of  water  in  honour  of  the  departed  soul 
a^d  then  enter  their  respective  homes  by  first  brushing  the 
soles  of  their  feet  against  a piece  of  wood  and  a stone.  Then 
they  should  throw  sundried  rice  into  the  fire  Sighted  before 
their  doors  and  chew  the  leaves  of  Nimva  trees  before  cross- 
ing their  threshold.  In  the  night  they  should  fie  down  sepa- 
rately on  the  floor  and  live  on  light  diet.  On  the  tenth  day> 
they  should  get  themselves, shaved,  and  thus  becoming  cleaa  * 


AON!  PURANAM. 


605 

and  pure,  they  should  then  offer  a cake  of  obsequies  to  the 
soul  of  the  departed,  and  bathe  by  placing  on  their  cloth  the 
seeds  of  sessamum  and  sundried  rice  (32 — 39). 

The  body  of  a child,  dead  before  cutting  his  teeth  or 
that  of  a human  foetus  miscarried  or  prematurely  delivered, 
should  not  be  burnt ; nor  libations  of  water  should  be  offered 
to  its  soul.  The  bones  should  be  collected  on  the  fourth  clay, 
and  thenceforward  the  relations  of  the  deceased  would 
be  clean  (40 — 41). 


CHAPTER  CLVIII. 


P ■'  . _ -al 

x UShkara  said  : — Now  I shall  deal  with  the  nature  and 
the  period  of  continuance  of  the  uncleanness  which  follows 
upon  a miscarriage  of  a foetus  in  one’s  family.  The  period  of 
uncleanness  would  be  three  days  only,  in  the  event  of  the 
miscarriage  having  taken  place  in  the  fourth  month  of 
conception,  while  it  should  be  observed  for  ten  days  in  the 
event  of  the  catastrophy  having  taken  place  later.  In  the 
case  of  a kshatriya,  the  period  of  uncleanness  incidental  to 
the  former  circumstance,  is  four  days,  while  that  of  a Vaishya 
Is  live  days  only. 

A Shudra  under  a similar  circumstance  becomes  pure 
in  eight  days.  An  impurity  of  twelve  days  should  be 
observed  by  women  in  connection  with  an  abortion  occurring 
later,  while  the  father  becomes  clean  by  simply  bathing  after 
the  incident.  The  Sapindas  of  the  father  need  not  bathe, 
while  persons  related  to  him  in  the  seventh  or  the  eighth 
degree  of  consanguinity,  should  observe  that  uncleanness  for 
three  nights  only,  the  impurity  for  the  Sapindas  in  connec- 
tion with  the  decease  of  a child,  dead  before  cutting  his 


AGNI  PURANAM. 

teeth,  not  tasting  beyond  the  dav  of  death.  The  impurity 
in  connection  with  the  death  of  a child,  dead  before  the 
rite  of  Chudakaranam  had  been  performed  unto  him,  is  one 
night  only,  while  it  would  extend  over  a period  of  three 
nights  in  the  event  of  its  dying  without  taking  any  religious 
vow  (Vratopadesha).  The  parents  of  the  child  would  remain 
unclean  for  ten  days  in  the  event  of  its  dying  at  a later  age, 
while  the  period  of  their  impurity  would  be  three  nights 
in  the  event  of  the  child  dying  before  cutting  bis  teeth,  even 
though  after  the  performance  of  the  Chudakarana  ceremony. 
The  uncleanness  following  upon  the  decease  of  a child,  dying 
before  attaining  an  age  of  three  years,  lasts  for  a night. 
Under  a similar  circumstance,  a Kshatriya  would  remain  un- 
clean for  two  days,  a Vaishya  for  three  days,  a Shudra  for 
five  days,  and  for  twelve  days  where  the  Shudra  is  an  un- 
married one.  A Shudra  would  remain  unclean  for  twelve 
days,  a Vaishya  for  nine  days,  a Kshatriya  for  six  days  under 
the  circumstance  which  enjoins  a Brahmana  to  observe  a 
period  of  impurity  for  three  nights.  The  dead  body  of  a child, 
dying  within  two  years  of  the  date  of  his  birth,  should  not 
be  burned  in  fire,  but  buried  underneath  the  ground,  nor 
libations  of  water  should  be  offered  to  its  departed  spirit, 
even  when  the  rite  of  Namakaranain  (the  name  giving  rite) 
had  been  performed  unto  it  (I— -9). 

Libations  of  water  should  be  offered  to  the  soul  of  a 
child  who  had  died  before  cutting  his  teeth,  while  the 
impurity  in  connection  with  the  death  of  a child  who 
had  been  invested  with  the  holy  thread,  should  be  supposed 
to  last  for  ten  days,  while  an  uncleanness  of  one  day 
should  be  observed  by  a Brahmana-reciter  of  the  Vedas 
and  a custodian  worshipper  of  the  consecrated  fire.  Under 
a similar  circumstance,  a Kshatriya,  a Vaishya,  and  a Shudra 
would  remain  impure  for  three,  four,  and  five,  days  respec- 
tively, while  a Brahmana  who  is  not  a custodian  of  the 
77fci3ftsecrated  fife  would  fee  supposed  to  labour  under  a similar- 

’ ' ■ 7 7 7 ; . : ;77'  . 777:  ■ 7 7. 


AGNI  PURANAM 


disability  for  ten  clear  days.  Circumstanced  as  above,  a 
viituous  Kshatriya  would  be  pure  again  in  the  course  of  nine 
days,  au  uncommonly  pious  Brahmana  in  seven,  a qualified 
Vaishya  in  ten,  days,  while  a meritorious  Shudra  would  be 
pure  again  in  twenty  days.  Under  all  other  circumstances 
a Brahmana  would  be  clean  in  ten  days,  a Kshatriya  in  the 
course  of  twelve,  a Vaishya  in  fifteen,  and  a Shudra  in  the 
course  of  a month.  The  death  of  a relation  heard  after  the 
lapse  of  ten  days  from  its  occurrence,  entails  an  impurity 
for  a period  of  three  days  as  regards  men  of  exceptional 
virtues,  one  day  of  uncleanness  being  observed  for  each 
three  days  of  the  actual  period  of  unexpired  impurity,  while 
impurities  which  are  caused  on  the  same  day  must  abate 
altogether.  Slaves  and  servants  living  under  the  same 
roof  of  their  master,  together  with  the  disciples  learning 
and  dwelling  in  the  house  of  their  common  teacher, 
should,  on  the  death  of  any  one  in  the  master’s  family, 
separately  observe  a uniform  period  of  uncleanness  with 
that  of  their  master  or  teacher.  The  period  of  unclean- 
ness  incidental  to  the  death  of  a person,  whose  dead 
body  had  not  been  committed  to  the  flames  just  after  the 
extinction  of  vitality,  should  be  counted  as  running  from 
the  day  on  which  the  body  should  be  cremated,  and  this  Is 
known  as  the  Law  of  Vaitanikas.  The  impurity  which 
attaches  to  a man  through  his  touching  or  carrying  the  dead 
body  of  a person  not  related  to  him  by  any  tie  of  con- 
sanguinity, extends  over  a third  part  of  the  original  period 
of  uncleanness  peculiar  to  the  caste  of  the  deceased,  viz., 
the  impurity  is  supposed  to  last  for  three,  four,  five,  and  ten, 

days  respectively,  in  the  case  of  a Brahmana,  a Kshatriya, 
a Vaishaya,  and  a Shudra  respectively  (io — 17). 

In  the  case  of  an  unmarried  daughter,  the  period  of  im- 
purity is  one  day  only  (inclusive  of  the  night)  while  it 
should  be  supposed  as  extending  over  a period  of  three 
days  and  nights,  if  incidental  to  the  death  of  a married 

/;v; 


AGNl  PUHANAM. 


daughter,  the  period  of  impurity  to  be  observed  by 
her  married  sisters,  lasting  for  two  days  and  two  nights 
only  (Pakshini).  An  unmarried  girl  belongs  to  the  clanship 
of  the  same  Rishi  as  her  father,  while  a married  woman 
goes  off  by  the  Gotra  of  her  husband.  A woman,  if  un- 
married, should  offer  libations  of  water  to  the  souls  o|  her 
departed  forefathers,  while  a married  woman  should  propi- 
tiate the  souls  of  her  departed  manes,  both  on  her  father's 
and  husband's  sides,  with  libations  of  water.  O thou 
twice-born  one,  the  period  of  impurity,  following  upon  the 
death  of  one's  (Brahmana*  s)  parents,  is  ten  days.  A Brah- 
mana  remains  unclean  for  three  days  on  the  death  of  his 
daughter,  while  the  death  of  a Sapinda  relation  unto  whom 
the  rite  of  Chudakarana  has  been  performed,  entails  an 
uncleanness  of  one  day  only.  A Brahmana  on  the  death 
or  the  birth  of  a son  by  his  Brahmana  wife  becomes  clean 
after  the  lapse  of  ten  days  from  the  date  of  birth,  while  the 
period  of  uncleanness  lasts  for  one,  three  six  and  days  only 
as  the  son  is  born  of  a Kshatriya,  a Vaishya,  or  a Shudra 
mother,  the  period  of  impurity  on  his  death  being  identical 
with  what  has  been  laid  down  in  connection  with  his  birth. 

The  rules  laid  down  in  the  foregoing  couplets  should 
be  supposed  to  hold  good  as  far  as  the  Sapindas  of  a 
Brahmana  are  concerned.  Now  I shall  deal  with  the  period 
of  the  disability  of  unclean  ness  under  which  a father  usually 
labours  on  the  birth  or  the  death  of  a child  of  his  wife  by 
her  former  husband,  or  begotten  by  another  person  appointed 
to  visit  his  wife,  or  of  those  who  though  children  of  his  wives 
are  not  the  offsprings  of  his  own  loins.  The  period  of  impurity 
in  such  cases  as  well  as  in  those  connected  with  hybrid- 
children,  or  those  leading  the  life  of  celibacy  and  asceticism, 
is  three  days  only.  The  rite  of  Udaka  Kriya  (rite  of  offering 
libations  of  water  to  the  departed  souls)  should  be  performed 
in  honour  of  the  souls)  of  relations  who  have  departed  this 
life,  as  well  as  those  who  have  voluntarily  renounced  the 

; ■ ' . , : ''  ' ' 


AGNI  PURANAM 


of  its  actual  happening,  a man  becomes  pure  by  simply 
touching  or  sprinkling  water  over  Ins  head.  The  impurity 
lasts  for  two  days  and  two  nights  (Pakshini)  if  the  deceased 
happens  to  be  the  maternal  uncle  of  the  hearer,  while  it 


world  and  its  concerns  (Tyagi),  viz.y  one  for  the  mother,  two 
for  the  parents,  and  two  for  the  brothers  who  have  resorted 
to  monasteries.  In  such  a case,  the  Sapindas  (persons 
related  by  consanguinity  up  to  the  seventh  degree)  will 
remain  unclean  for  one  day  on  the  birth  of  a child  spoken 
of  in  • th^  line  immediately  preceding,  and  for  two  days 
on  his  death  (17—26). 

Now  I shall  speak  about  the  period  of  impurity  which 
will  attach  to  the  Sam&uodaka  relations  of  a person  under 
the  circumstances  stated  above.  On  the  death  of  a child 
entitled  to  a separate  Pinda  (cake  of  obsequies)  and  staying 
in  a distant  country  at^the  time  of  his  demise,  a Sam  a nod  aka 
becomes  pure  by  an  ablution  with  all  his  clothes  on.  Under 
a similar  circumstance,  the  Sapindas  would  be  clean  at  the 
expiry  of  ten  days,  the  Sakulyas  after  three  nights,  and 
persons  belonging  to  the  same  Gotra  by  an  ablution  only. 
The  Sapinda  relationship  terminates  with  the  seventh  degree 
of  consanguinity  both  in  the  ascending  and  descending  lines 
of  succession,  while  the  relationship  of  Samanodaka  lasts  up 
to  the  fourteenth  remove.  The  Gotra  of  a person  signifies  the 
fact  of  his  belonging  to  the  family  or  to  the  spiritual  tutelage 
a particular  Rishi  after  whom  the  Gotra  is  named,  and  which 
occurs,  or  is  mentioned,  after  the  name  of  a person  given  at 
bis  birth.  On  the  death  of  a Rrahmana  in  a distant  country, 
bis  relations  will  remain  impure  for  as  many  days  from  the 
date  of  its  hearing,  as  will  make  up  the  unexpired  period  of 
ten  days  counted  from  the  day  of  its  actual  occurrence,  and  in 
the  event  of  being  informed  thereof  at  the  expiry  of  ten  such 
days,  will  observe  the  impurity  for  three  consecutive  days  fol- 
lowing on  the  day  of  the  heaiing.  On  being  informed  of  the 
death  of  a relation  at  the  expiry  of  a full  year  from  the  d*te 


AGNI  PUR  A NAM, 


lasts  for  a night  only,  when  the  deceased  is  related  to  the 
person  informed  as  a disciple,  a Rittik  (priest)  or  a Vandhu, 
On  the  death  of  a son-in-law,  a daughter’s  son,  a sister’s 
son,  a brother-in-law  or  of  a son  of  his,  a man  becomes 
clean  by  an  ablution  only,  the  period  of  uncleanness  entailed 
by  the  death  of  a maternal  grand  father,  a spiritual  preceptor, 
and  of  a maternal  grand  mother  lasts  for  three  days.  In 
plague,  in  pestilence,  in  conflagration  by  general  fire,  in  an 
imminent  danger,  in  a revolution  of  government,  in 
marriage,  in  a gift  and  a sacrifice,  a man  remains  unclean 
for  a single  day  only,  like  a Bramhacharin,  a Satrivrati  and  a 
knower  of  the  Supreme  Brahma,  on  being  informed  of  the 
death  of  a relation  or  of  a person  any  way  related  to  him 
in  blood  or  by  the  bond  of  spiritual  sonship,  who  had  died  an 
accidental  or  a violent  death.  No  impurity  is  attached  to 
a man  on  being  informed  of  the  death  of  a relation  who  has 
killed  a cow,  a king,  or  a Brahmana,  or  who  has  committed 
suicide  (27—37). 

The  atonement  for  a man  afflicted  with  an  incurable 
disease  or  who  has  been  incapacitated  from  reading  the 
Vedas,  is  to  burn  himself  in  flames.  A persen  (man  or 
woman)  who  commits  suicide  by  hanging  himself  or  herself 
by  the  neck,  either  from  a sense  of  humiliation,  anger,  afflic- 
tion, through  a fear  of  defeat,  lives  for  a hundred  thousand 
years  in  hell,  in  torment  and  anguish,  perpetually 
consumed  by  the  flames  of  living  fire.  The  remains  or 
charred  bones  of  an  old  man,  who,  from  his  otter  inability  to 
recollect  a single  distich  of  the  holy  Vedas  and  to  perform 
the  holy  rites  laid  down  in  the  Shrutis,  has  voluntarily  depart- 
ed this  life,  should  be  collected  on  the  second  day  of  his, 
death.  The  uncleanness  incidental  to  the  death  of  such  ^ 
person  expires  on  the  third  day  of  his  death,  on  which  liba- 
tions of  water  should  be  offered  to  his  departed  spirit;  and 
his  Shraddha  ceremony  should  be  performed  on  the  fourth 

^ ay  b.  c _ c j * _ _ 1 « * « « « * ■>- 


AGNS  Pm  AH  am; 


lightning,  remain  unclean  for  three  days;  and  no  impurity 
attaches  to  the  relations  of  women  who  have  killed  their 
husbands,  or  have  defiled  themselves  in  the  amorous  and 
clandestine  embraces  of  vile  persons,  in  life.  A son  deserted 
by  his  parents  in  infancy,  becomes  clean  by  ablution  on 
being  informed  of  their  death,  and  after  a year  may  duly 
perform  the  Shraddha  ceremony  and  other  rites  of  obse* 
quies  for  the  salvation  of  their  soul.  Persons  who  have 
happened  to  carry  the  dead  body  of  a man,  not  related 
to  them  by  bonds  of  Sapinda  relationship,  would  be 
clean  again  by  bathing  with  all  their  clothes  on  and  after 
having  touched  fire  and  eaten  a small  quantity  of  clarified 
butter.  In  the  alternative  they  would  be  clean  by  eating  the 
boiled  rice  in  the  house  of  the  deceased  on  the  tenth  day 
of  his  death,  when  the  Shraddha  ceremony  would  be  per- 
formed, if  they  had  no  objection  to  take  rice  at  such  a place, 
biit  should  not  sit  there  for  a day  before  they  had  done  as 
above  directed.  The  Brahmanas  who  carry  the  body  of  a 
poor  destitute  Brahmana  to  the  cremation  ground,  attain  the 
merit  of  performing  a sacrifice  at  each  of  their  footfall 
towards  that  spot,  and  become  simply  pure  by  ablution.  A 
Brahmana  who  has  followed  the  dead  body  of  a Shudra  to 
the  burning  ground  or  has  joined  with  the  friends  of  such  a 
deceased  in  mourning  his  death,  becomes  pure  at  the  expiry 
of  three  days.  On  a Shudra  woman  having  been  delivered 
of  a child  in  the  house  of  a Brahmana,  or  a Shudra  having 
departed  his  life  therein,  the  master  of  the  house  should 
abstain  from  making  any  gift  or  from  undertaking  any 
religious  ceremony  for  the  attainment  of  any  object, 
for  that  entire  day.  Cooking  pots  and  other  articles 
of  pottery  should'  be  thrown  away  and  the  floors 
and  walls  should  be  plastered  over  with  a fresh  coating 
oC  ciayj  "vvhereby  the  house  would  be  again  clean  and  A 
putel  The  dead  body  of  a Brahmana  should  not  be  borne  by 
Shudras,  where  persons  of  the  same  caste  with  the  deceased 

ififiialK;  + 


613 


AGN!  PURANAM. 


would  be  available.  Brahmanas  should  carry  the  remains 
of  a Brahmana  to  the  cremation  ground  and  there  having 
washed  the  body  and  decorated  it  with  flowers  and  garlands, 
should  commit  it  to  the  flames.  The  entire  body  must  not 
be  reduced  to  ashes,  but  a remnant  should  be  preserved  ; 
and  it  should  be  held  positively  sinful  to  burn  a dead  body 
entirely  naked.  The  Grotajas  or  persons  belonging  to  the 
same  family  with  the  deceased,  should  place  the  body  on  the 
funeral  pile,  which  should  be  lighted  with  the  three 
fires  known  as  the  Ahitagni,  Anahitagni  and  the  Loulikagni 
(33—5D- 

The  son  of  the  deceased,  should  three  times  touch  the 
face  of  the  deceased  on  the  pier  with  a bundle  of  burning 
fagots  and  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ you 
have  sprung  from  the  energy  which  is  also  manifest  in  the 
fire.  You  be  and  return  to  the  original  (spiritual)  fire 
which  brought  you  to  being.  May  fire  lead  you  to 
pleasure  and  paradise.’'  Then  the  friends  and  relations 
(Vandhavas)  should  sprinkle  water  over  the  deadbody  by 
mentioning  the  name  of  the  deceased  and  the  name  of  the 
family  (Gotra)  he  belonged  to.  Tiius  the  Udakakriya  (offer- 
ings or  libations  of  water)  should  be  performed  in  honour 
of  the  departed  souls  of  one’s  maternal  grandfather,  spiritual 
preceptor  and  friends,  such  as  brothers-in-law,  etc.,  by  repeat- 
ing the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ May  water  purify  this  state 
of  ours,  etc.  J am  the  son.”  Ten  Pindas  should  be  offered  to 
the  departed  soul  of  a Brahmana,  twelve  to  the  disembodied 
spirit  of  a Kshatriya,  fifteen  to  the  departed  real  self  of  a 
Vaishya,  and  thirty  in  honour  of  the  inner  man  of  a Shudra 
reposing  in  the  shades  of  the  infernal  region.  A son  or 
his  locum  tenens  such  as  grandsons,  etc.,  should  offer  the 
cakes  of, obsequies  (Pinda)  (52 — 56). 

After  having  finished  the  cremation,  the  sons,  friends 
and  relations  of  the  deceased  should  return  home,  and 
before  crossing  the  threshold  of  the  house,  should  chew  the 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


613 

leaves  of  the  Nimva  tree,  rinse  their  mouths  with  water,  touch 
the  fire,  cow-dung,  and  white  mustard  kept  before  the  door 
way,  and  then  enter  the  house  by  rubbing  the  soles  of  their 
feet  against  a piece  of  stone.  The  persons  who  had  joined 
the  cremation  party  and  were  related  to  the  deceased  such  as 
son,  etc.,  should  lie  down  on  a mattress  or  an  a blanket  on 
the  floor]  studiously  abstaining  from  all  animal  diet,  salted 
boiled  rice,  and  all  alkaline  substances.  The  seats  and 
blankets  to  be  used  during  the  continuance  of  one's  state 
of  impurity  should  be  purchased  new  for  value.  The  man 
who  first  officiated  at  the  funernal  ceremony  at  the  burning 
ground,  should  perform  the  Shraddha  ceremony  on  the  tenth 
day.  for  want  of  funds  to  purchase  all  the  abovesaid 
articles  new,  the  performer  of  the  Shraddha  should  live  the 
life  of  an  ascetic  (Brahmacharin)  and  perform  the  ceremony 

and  offer  libations  of  water  in  a spirit  of  sincerest 
contrition  (57—59). 

The  rules  regulating  the  conduct  of  a person  during 
the  state  of  his  impurity  incidental  to  the  death  of  a relation 
shall  apply  mutatis  mutandis  to  a similar  state  follow- 
ing on  the  birth  of  a child  in  his  family.  At  least  the 
learned  and  the  intelligent  should  strictly  observe  them 
with  a view  to  attain  purity.  The  uncleanness  incidental 
to  the  birth  of  a child  in  the  family  shall  affect  all  its 
members  alike  except  the  parents  of  the  newborn  babe, 
who  are  to  treat  it  (impurity  of  child-birth)  as  a glad 
and  wished  for  disability.  The  mother  will  labour  under  a 
similar  disability  as  the  cognates  of  the  infant,  but  the 
fatl,er  wil1  remain  pure  so  as  to  be  competent  to  perform 
the  Shraddha  ceremony  of  his  fore-fathers  on  the  day  of 
his  son’s  nativity  and  to  make  costly  gifts  of  cows,  gold,  and 
clothes  to  the  Brahmanas  and  to  the  poor  and  the  needy 
(60—62). 

Of  two  concurrent  states  of  impurity  incidental  to  a 
child-birth  and  a death  in  the  family,  [the  one  occurring 


Siim  §fi§  1 1 i 

, • 


at  art  earlier  date  than  the  other,  the  uncleanness  inci- 
dent al  to  the  birth  of  a child  occurring  during  the  conti- 
nuance of  one  following  on  tire  death  of  its  relation,]  the 
hitter  should  be  observed  and  the  two  states  of  impurity 
should  be  supposed  as  expiring  on  the  abatement  of  the 
latter,  the  natal  uncleanness  in  the  above  instance  beitVcr 

' ' ' ' ' r,  ' ■ ■ ■ ** 

held  as  non-existing  and  inoperative.  Two  states  of  un- 
cleanness of  the  same  nature  and  onrt  occurring  during 
tlie  continuance  of  the  other,  shall  simultaneously  abate, 
while  those  of  opposite  nature,  shall  expire  with  the  second 
as  laid  down  by  the  king  of  virtue  (Dharmaraja).  Of  several 
deaths  occurring  in  the  family,  the  period  of  uncleanness 
should  end  with  what  is  incidental  to  the  first  death,  while 
the  unclean  ness  of  a superior  nature  should  not  be 
supposed  5as  counteracted  by  a lighter  impurity,  the  latter 
being  held  as  affected  by  the  former!  An  unclean  Hess,  occur- 
ring on  the  last  night  of  two  already  existing  states  of 
inpurity,  incidental  to  a birth  and  a death  in  the  family, 
expires  after  two  days  following'  on  the  abovesaid  night ; 
while  an  uncleanness  occurring  on  the‘ morning  instead  of 
the  night  of  the  day  above  refer* ed  to,  expires  after  the 
lapse  of  three  days  therefrom.  Under  both  the  circumstances 
the  rice  boiled  by  the  members  of  the  unclean  family  should 
not  be  partaken  of,  and  such  unclean  persons  should  abstain 
from  making  any  gifts  or  from  undertaking  any  sacrificial 
ceremony  during  the  coftfcirirtance  of  their  state  of  impurity, 
Jt^being  superfluous  to  add  that  no  sin  attaches  to  a person 
who  unwillingly  partakes  of  such  rice  or  to  the  members  of  . 
the  bereaved  and  unclean  family  who  do  the  abovesaid 'for- 
bidden acts  out  of  ignorance  of  the 'existence  of  such  un- 
clean ness  (63—69). 


purana'&i; 


CHAPTER  CLIX/ 


jL  UShakara  said  : — The  person  who  departs  this  life 
his^or  her  mind  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
god  Hari,  ascends  heaven  and  attains  salvation,  no  matter 
whether  he  or  she  had  been  initiated  or  not,  and  whether 
funeral  rites  had  been  performed  unto  his  or  her  earthly 
remains.  The  soul  of  a person  begins  to  fare  better  in  the: 
regions  above,  from  the  very  moment  the  bones  of  his  or  her 
earthly  body  are  cast  into  the  Ganges.  The  soul  of  a person 
blissfully  resides  in  the  celestial  region,  as  long  as  the  bones 
pf  his  earthly  body  remain  in  the  water  of  the  Ganges.  No 
religious  or  sacrificial  ceremonies  should  be  undertaken  for 
the  salvation  of  persons  who  have  committed  suicide  or  have 
suffered  a moral  death,  as  salvation  is  denied  to  them,  still 
the  fragments  of  their  skeleton  cast  into  the  Ganges  go  much 
Way  to  alleviate  their  sufferings  in  the  nether  regions,  Obia-* 
lions  of  boiled  rice  and  libations  of  water  offered  to  these 
fallen  spirits  return  untasted  from  the  vyelkin.  The  offerings 
known  as  the  Narayana  Vali  should  be  made  for  the  provi* 
sions  of  these  afflicted  souls,  and  Narayana  (god),  out  of  his 
infinite  mercy,  may  allow  them  to  partake  thereof.  The 
lotus-eyed  god  is  infinite  and  eternal,  and  any  thing  offered 
to  him  is  never  destroyed.  The  god  Janardana  is  called  the 
Patra  (a  receptacle)  as  he  it  is  who  intervenes  to  break  the, 
fall  of  a fallen  soul  and  lifts  him  up  from  the  abyss  of  . 
spiritual  death  atjd  holds  hpn  in  his  own  bosom.  It  is  only  , 
the  god  Hari  who  grants  enjoyment  aud  salvation  to  a 
fallen  spirit.  Seeing  death  all  round,  it  is  the  bounden 
duty  of  every  one  to  cultivate  virtue  and  to  live  a life  of 
piety  (i—6). 

In  the  darkness  of  death,  the  terrestrial  friends  of  a man 
cannot  follow  his  departed  souk  Sons  and  wives  fall  off  oa 

'' -TKv 

W'v'  ; : . L ' ' : *v  : 


6 1 6 


AGNi  PUR  A N A ML 


the  road  of  Pluto  (Yam a),  ft  is  virtue  alone  that  walks  by  his 
side,  be  it  in  the  wilderness  of  death  or  on  the  ever  glad  and 
sunlit  fields  of  Elysium,  or  where  none  can  follow.  Do  that 
to-day  what  has  been  put  off  for  the  morrow,  and  in  the 
morning  what  has  been  intended  to  be  done  in  the  after- 
noon. Death  waits  for  no  body  and  never  stops  to  ponrider 
whether  a man  has  finished  his  work  or  not.  It  takes  the 
man  busy  with  trade  or  agriculture,  as  well  as  the  spend- 
thrift and  the  indolent,  those  of  the  earth  and  earthly  as 
well  as  those  whose  minds  sit  loose  upon  their  house  and 
its  concerns.  Death  knows  no  favourite  or  enemy.  He 
carries  away  a man,  as  a wolf  a deer.  At  the  end  of  the 
preordained  period  of  life,  death  shows  its  prowess  , and 
takes  away  a being;  and  before  that  time  of  ordination  is 
reached,  a creature  pierced  with  a hundred  arrows,  defies 
death.  On  the  contrary,  at  the  full  time,  the  pointed  tip  of 
a blade  of  Kasha  grass  may  put  an  end  to  his  life. 
Death  baffles  all  medicine,  healing  art  and  incanta- 
tions. It  is  paramount  and  supreme.  The  good  or 
evil  deeds  of  a man  (Karma)  are  sure  to  overtake  him  in  his 
next  existence,  as  a calf  finds  out  its  mother  from  among 
the  herds  of  cattle.  The  origin  of  this  transient  universe 
and  of  the  life  that  perceives  it,  is  buried  in  obscurity.  Only 
its  middle  portion  is  patent  and  tangible  and  so  its  transition 
to  the  unknown  is  equally  mysterious  as  its  origin.  As 
there  are  different  stages  such  as  infancy,  youth,  and  old  age, 
in  the  life  of  a man,  so  there  is  a hereafter.  The  embodied 
soul  (Dehi)  takes  a new  body,  just  as  a man  changes  an  old 
cloth  and  puts  on  a new  one.  So  mourn  ye  not  the  death 
of  a friend  or  a relation  (7—14). 


CHAPTER  CLX. 


r,  ' *"  *r  » ' 


v Vi  USHkArA  said  : Now  I shall  discuss  the  duties  of  the 
I'otis  (ascetics)  who  have  made  the  forests  their  abode 
( Vanaprastha).  Hear,  O Brahman,  they  are  the  wearing  of 
long  clotted  hairs,  sleeping  on  the  ground,  and  putting  on  of 
a garment  of  skin.  A Vanaprastha  should  reside  in  a 
forest  and  live  upon  fruits,  edible  roots  and  the  seeds 
of  Nivara  grass.  Clear  fountain  water  should  be  bis  drink. 
He  should  bathe  thrice  every  day,  beg  no  alms,  and  annihi- 
late all  Ins  passions  and  propensities.  Hospitality  to  guests 
and  worship  of  the  god  are  its  two  fundamental  features.  A 
house-holder  having  seen  the  birth  of  his  grandson  (a  son’s 
son)  should  resort  to  the  forest.  He  may  do  that  at  the 
expiry  of  the  third  stage  of  his  life,  either  alone  or  in  the  com- 
pany of  his  wife.  In  summer  he  should  practise  the  penance 
known  as  the  Panchatapas.  in  the  rainy  season  he  should 
practise  the  same  when  the  sun  would  be  seen  through  the 
interestices  of  the  clouds,  in  the  Iiemanta  (forepart  of 
the  winter)  he  should  practise  the  most  rigid  and  austere 
penance  above  referred  to  in  wet  clothes  ; and  then  start 
straight  way  on  a journey  to  the  different  quarters  of  the 
globe,^  without  ever  thinking  of  returning  to  the  place  of 
his  original  start  (i — 5). 


[CHAPTER  CLXI. 


P . ',/J 

JT  USHKARA  said  : — Now  I shall  deal  with  the  charac-  | 

teristic  features  of  the  life  of  a Yoti  which  imparts  salvation  ■ W 


I ft 


lllifi 


over  ..the  ^&ngj?ans  in  a bouse* 


AGNI  PUR  ANA  M. 


and  illumine  the  minds  of  their  observers  with  the  light  of 
true  and  perfect  knowledge.  A man,  having  arrived  at  the 
fourth  part  of  his  life,  should  renounce  the  society  of  world- 
ly men.  A Brahmana,  the  very  moment  he  becomes 
apathetic  to  the  world  and  its  concerns,  should  adopt  the 
life  of  a Parivrajaka  and  start  on  his  aimless  journey^  He 
should  perform  the  Prajapatya  sacrifice  wherein  all  the  gods 
are  worshipped,  and  pay  remuneration  to  the  Brahman  as* 
Then  the  apathetic  mendicant,  having  taken  the  consecrated 
fire  on  his  own  person,  should  leave  his  home*  Content  and' 
and  alone,  he  should  roam  about  from  place  to  place,  taking 
a single  morsel  of  food  for  sustenance.  Indifferent  alike  to 
pleasure  and  pain,  and  not  letting  the  thoughts  of  morrow 
cross  his  mind,  and  without  laying  by  anything  against  a 
rainy  day,  he  should  go  out  in  this  wide  world,  cherishing 
and  cultivating  in  his  heart  that  rare  knowledge  of  the 
Absolute  Reality  which  is  worshipped  by  the  sages  and  which 
underlies  this  phantasmagoria  of  phenomena.  The  rejected 
and  tattered  rags  of  the  social  beings,  are  the  clothes  of  an 
emancipated  man,  the  protecting  shadow  of  a hospitable 
tree  is  his  abode,  the  skull  is  his  bowl,  and  equality  to  all  and 
practised  everywhere,  forms  the  inner  spring  of  his  conduct* 
Fond  of  neither,  he  should  never  court  death  nor  life,  but 
should  bide  his  time  till  death  comes,  as  a servant  bides  the, 
time  of  his  master.  Carefully  scanning  the  ground  with 


eyes,  he  should  step  forward  and  drink  water  filtered 


through  a piece  of  cloth.  He  should  speak  truth  and  nothing 
but  truth,  and  act,  whatever  he  would  act,  with  a mind  pure 
and  serene.  The  vessels  which  an  anchorite  would  use  should 
be  made  of  wood  or  of  the  skins  of  gourds,  clay  or  of  bamboo* 
A Yoti  should  go  out  for  alms,  when  the  ovens  have  been 
cleansed  of  their  cinders,  and  have  ceased  to  emit  smoke, 
the  pestles  have  been  laid  aside,  the  scrapes  of  bread  and 
remnants  of  food  have  been  removed  and  thrown  away,  and 


AGNI  PURANAM, 

hold,  and  all  bustle  and  hurry  have  settled  down  in  the  calm 
of  a midday  repose  (i — 8). 

The  five  sorts  of  alms  which  a Yoti  or  a Brahma- 
charm  can  take,  are  (i)  collection  of  small  quantities  of  food- 
staff  from  door  to  door,  like  the  gathering  of  honey  by  bees; 
from*,  flower  to  flower,  (2)  a quantity  of  food  enough  to 
serve  for  a day  and  obtained  from  a single  household,  (3) 
alms  asked  for  before,  (4)  alms  not  begged  of,  (5)  alms 
received  just  at  the  time  of  meal.  He  may  receive  the  alms 
in  the  cup  of  his  folded  palms,  or  keep  them  in  a bowl  of 
his  own,  out  of  the  vessel  or  cup  in  which  they  have  been 
given.  . Constantly  meditating  upon  the  results  of  the  good 
and  evil  deeds  (Karma)  of  men,  and  their  progress  or  retro* 
gation  in  the  path  to  spiritual  perfection,  he  should  fulfil 
the  duties  of  his  order,  nourishing  a clean  spirit  in  a clean 
heart.  Equality  to  all  forms  the  essence  of  virtue,  and  it  is 
not  the  garb  alone  that  makes  a saint.  Practice,  rather 
than  precepts  of  piety,  is  what  is  necessary  to  evoke  the 
God  in  life,  it  is  the  actual  dipping  of  a fruit  of  the  Katak* 


The  ten  features  of  piety  are  the  comprehension  of  God, 
forbearance,  self-control,  uncovetuousness,  purity,  absti- 
nence, modesty  and  knowledge.  The  Bhikshus  admit  of 
being  divided  into  four  different  sects  such  as  (s)  The 
Kutirakas  (living  in  cottages),  Vahudakas,  Hansas,  and  the 
Paramahansas,  each  succeeding  order  being  spiritually 
superior  to  the  one  immediately  preceding  it.  The  Yogis 
such  as  Ekadandis  and  Tridandis,  should  be  supposed  as  to 
have  been  liberated  from  the  trammels  of  existence.  The 
five  virtues  (Yamas)  are  truthfulness,  forsaking  of  all  cruelty, 
uncovetuousness,  abstemiousness,  and  absence  of  any  desire 
or  taking  of  any  alms  or  gifts.  The  five  Niyamas  (rules  of 
conduct)  are  purity,  contentment,  practice  of  austerities, 
reading  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  contemplation  of  God.  A 
Yoti  should  sit  in  the  attitude  known  as  the  Padmasana, 
The  rite  of  Pranayama  (regulation  of  the  breath  wind) 
admits  of  a two-fold  division  such  as  the  simple  and 
the  impregnated.  The  former  consists  of  that  which  is 
accompanied  by  a Japa  (repetition  of  a Mantra)  and  a con- 
templation of  the  deity,  while  the  latter  is  characterised  by 
the  absence  of  both.  Each  of  the  divisions  is  divided  into 
three  sub-divisions  such  as  the  Puraka,  Kumbhaka  and  the 
Rechaka  A Puraka  consists  in  the  act  of  taking  in  of 
the  breath  wind,  a Kumbhaka  in  checking  its  out-flow, 
while  a Rechaka  consists  in  letting  out  the  breath  wind. 
The  duration  of  the  above  processes  respectively  consist 
of  twelve,  twenty-four  and  thirty-six  Matras,  a Matra 
being  equal  to  the  time  taken  in  pronouncing  a short  vowel 
(17—24). 

: The  rite  of  Pratyahara  consists  in  drawing  the  mind  off 
from  the  things  of  the  world,  such  as  is  always  done  by 
gently  pronouncing  the  Pranava  Mantra  <fOm.”  Dhyanam 
consists  in  meditating  upon  the  infinite  and  eternal  principle 
expressed  by  the  term  god,  and  this  infinite  eternal 

3 ™ , ■ -|j  • • •• 


6l£> 


AGNI  PURANAM.' 


&GNI  PUR  AN  AM". 


concentrating  the  mind  solely  on  that,  while  a Samadhi 
signifies  the  staying  of  the  human  soul,  in  this  life,  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Brahma.  The  Ananta  J nan  am  (Infinite 
knowledge)  is  an  apprehension  by  the  Ego,  that  there  is  a 
close  identity  between  his  self  and  the  self  of  the  Supreme 
Brahma*  Brahma  is  Infinite  knowledge  and  infinite  gladness 
symbolised  by  the'terms  “Tattvamasi”  (you  are  that,  or  in 
other  words  you  are  that  real  underlying  substratum  of  the 
universe,  which  our  senses  inform  us  of,  and  beyond  which  we 
have  no  real  knowledge  of  it,  as  conveyed  in  the  Mahavakya 
of  the  Upanishads  and  true  knowledge  consists  in  detecting  this; 
identity  between  the  Brahma  and  his  own  self.  Afully  awake 
and  developed  soul  finds  that  he  is  the  infinite,  emancipated 
light,  the  god  Vasudeva  symbolised  by  the  mystic  “Omkara  ; 
the  infinite  soul,  the  supreme  Brahma.  A new  Light  dawns 
upon  such  a soul,  fully  illumining  the  fact,  that  he  is  not 
the  body  he  dwells  in,  nor  the  senses,  nor  intellect,  nor  mind- 
Neither  life  nor  egoistic  sense  is  he,  and  that  the  states  of 
consciousness  known  as  the  waking,  sleeping  and  dream  da 
not  constitute  his  self.  He  is  the  state  beyond  that — the 
Turya  Brahma.  When  fully  awake  he  finds  that  he  is  eternal, 
absolutely  pure,  all  knowing,  connected  with  all  things 
infinite  gladness,  eternal  truth  ; the  all-pervading  Hari,  the 
greatest  grandest  knowledge.  Such  a soul  fully  realises 
the  truth  that  he  and  the  great  Aditya  Purusha,  out  of 
whom  have  evolved  the  myriads  of  suns  and  solar  systems 
are  indentical,  that  he  has  no  action  of  his  own,  and  is 
indifferent  alike  to  all  pleasure  and  pain,  and  is  infinite 
forbearance.  O Brahman,  a man  by  rending  through  the 
universe  becomes  merged  in  the  self  of  god,  by  practising  i- 
the  penance  on  the  full-moon  night  in  the  month  of  Ashadha, 
or  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  lunar  month  therein.  Then  ' 

a Yoti  should  forsake  his  home  and  the  world  for  good  on  ■ ■ 
the  ninth  day  of  the  lunar  month  of  Ashadha,  fasting  on  ^ 
the  changes  of  seasons.  The  rite  of  atonement  of  an 

■ •-  " - \ 

. . : v : v;.; ' ■’  ^ : v ..  ; ; /;  ■■ 

: 1 ' t'.~  ' ' '“IS. 


1 1 
I ' i 


f)2Z 


AGNI  PUR  AN  AM*; 


anchorite  consists  in  contemplating  the  gods  of  death  andl 
storm  {25-— 31.) 


CHAPTER  CLXIT 


i USHKARA  SAID  Now  I snail  deal  with  the  codes  or 
law  (Dharmashastras)  as  framed  by  such  holy  personages  as* 
Vishnu,  Yajnavalka,  Harifca,  Atri,  Yama,  An-gira,  Vashishta,. 
Daksha,  Samvarfca,  Shatatapa,  Parashara,  Apastambha, 
Ushana,  Vyasa,  Katyayana,  Vribaspati,  Gotama,  Shanku  and' 
Likhita  (1 — 2). 

Now  I shall  briefly  discourse  upon  the  acts  and  doings 
of  men,  whereby  pleasures  are  enjoyed  in  this  life  and 
salvation  is  attained  in  the  next.  The  doings  of  a man  are 
divided  into  two  classes  such  as  the  Pravritta  and  the 
Nirvitta,  according  as  they  are  performed  disinterestedly 
or  with  the  object  of  attaining  a definite  end.  A Kamya? 
Karma  (Karma  undertaken  with  an  object),  and  a N-ivritte 
(disinterested  act)  Karma  are  the  two  sorts  of  acts  recog- 
nised by  the  Vedas.  A Kamya  Karma  is  that  which  is 
undertaken  with  the  object  of  conferring  a special  boon  on  a* 
person,,  while  a Nivritta  Karma  is  that  which  is  done  for  the 
increase  of  knowledge.  Recitation  of  the  Vedas,,  practising 
penances,  cultivation  of  knowledge,  control  of  the  senses,. 


•Agni  pukanam,  623 

This  is  the  prerogative  of  the  twice-born  castes,  specifically 
belonging  to  a Brahmana  as  his  birthright,  as  he  might 
read  the  Vedas  and  realise  the  truths  inculcated  therein 
by  living  any  of  the  four  orders  of  life.  A Brahmana 
by  dwelling  in  this  world,  may  attain  the  Supreme  Brahma 
(3 — f )•  , 

In  the  month  of  Shravana,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  lunar 
month,  or  on  days  marked  by  the  asterism  of  Hasta, 
or  Shravana,  or  on  days  therein  marked  by  the  names 
of  the  cereals,  the  Upakarma  ceremony  of  the  reciters 
of  the  Vedas  should  be  performed.  In  the  alternative  the 
Upakarma  may  be  performed  on  a day  marked  by 
the  asterism  Rohini  in  the  month  of  Pousha,  or  on  an 
Ashtaka,  and  after  that  the  Chhandas  should  be  bid  adieu  in 
water.  The  disciple,  the  preceptor  and  the  Rittigs  should 
observe  a period  of  uncleanness  for  three  days  like  the  one 
incidental  to  the  death  of  a relation.  On  the  Completion  of 
an  Upakarma,^  or  on  the  roarings  of  clouds  towards  even- 
ing, on  the  falling  of  a meteor,  or  a shooting  star,  on  having 
gone  through  the  whole  of  a Veda  and  read  the  Aranyakas,. 
on  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  days  of  a fortnight* — both  light 
and  dark,  on  a Rahusutaka,  on  the  changes  of  seasons,  on 
having  received  an  invitation  to  officiate  at  a Shtaddha  cere- . 
mony,  on  having  touched  an  unclean  animal  such  as  a toad,  a 
mungoose  and  a cat,  on  having  heard  a hog,  a dog,  a jackal, 
an  ass,  an  owl,  to  grunt,  bark,  howl,  bray  and  screech  respec- 
tively, on  the  emission  of  semen  and  erection  of  the  penis, 
on  having  come  in  contact  with  an  impure  dead  body,  a 
Shudra,  or  having  trodden  upon  a cremation  ground,  a ' 
Brahmana  should  postpone  his  reading  or  recitation  of 
the  Vedas  for  thirty-seven  days.  For  a similar  period  : 
the  recitation  of  the  Vedas  should  be  deffered  on  the. 
occurrence  of  heavenly  and  atmospheric  disturbances  such' 
as  the  falling  of  meteors,  blowing  of  heavy  gales,  appear-; 
ances  of  meteoric  glow  on  the  horizon,  showers  of  dust*-4  . 


“ Yavosi. 


AGNi;  PUR  ANA  M» 


setting  in  of  fogs  in  the  evening,  and  on  the  advent  of 
respectable  men  in  the  house,  as  well  as  on  having  struck 
against  a running  animal.  For  a day  and  a night  only  a 
Brahmana  should  stop  his  perusal  of  the  Vedas,  on  emission 
of  semen  and  erection  of  the  genitals  (8— 18), 


CHAPTER  CLXIlh 


ushkara  said : — Now  I shall  deal  with  the  Shraddha 
Kalpa  which  is  as  follows,  and  which  grants  enjoyment  in 
this  life  and  salvation  in  the  next.  On  the  afternoon  of  the 
previous  day,  the  Brahmanas  should  be  invited,  and  on  the  day 
following  they  should  be  welcomed  and  caused  to  be  seated 
on  the  platform.  The  Brahmanas  are  to  be  seated  in  even 
numbers  if  the  ceremony  be  a Deva,  while  three  or  a single 
Brahmana  should  be  made  to  take  part  in  a ceremony  of  Paitra 
Shraddha.  Similarly  in  the  Shraddha  ceremonies  of  maternal 
grandfathers,  or  in  those  known  as  the  Vaishvadaivikas, 
libations  of  water  should  be  offered  to  the  invoked  souls,  for 
washing  their  hands  and  feet,  and  the  blades  of  Kusha  grass 
should  be  spread  out  for  their  cushion.  The  spirits  should 
be  invoked  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Vishve 
Devasa,u  and  grains  of  barley  should  be  scattered  over  the 
sacrificial  vessels  containing  the  blades  of  Kusha  grass,  tied 
up  in  knots  known  as  the  Pavitras,  Then  water  should  be 
sprinkled  over  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as 
€i  Shannodevi,  and  barley  corns  should  be  scattered  all  round 
’ y repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as 


agni  puranam. 


The  Argha  should  be  taken  in  hand  by  repeating  the 
Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Ya  Divya.”  Then  "having  offered 
water,  perfumes,  incense-sticks  and  lighted  lamps  to  his  Pi;  ris 
or  the  souls  of  his  forefathers,  he  should  circumbulate  them 
from  the  left  hand  sight.  Then  having  spread  out  a double 
number  gf  the  blades  of  Kusha  grass,  he  should  invoke  the 
souls  of  his  departed  ancestors  by  repeating  the  Rik  Mantra 
which  runs  as  “Be  seated,  O my  Pitris.”  Then  having  ob- 
tained their  permission,  he  should  repeat  the  Mantra  which 
runs  as  Come,  O ye,  etc.”  In  the  present  instance,  seeds 
of  sessamum  orientale  should  be  used  instead  of  barley 
corn,  and  the  Argha  offering  should  be  dressed  up  as 
before.  Then  having  offered  the  Argha,  the  remnants 
of  the  offering  should  be  duly  gathered  in  a vessel, 
and  its  contents  should  be  then  poured  out  on  the  floor, 
by  turning  it  upside  down,  and  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
which  runs  as  “ Be  thou  a seat  to  my  Pitris  (ancestors).” 
Then  having  taken  a quantity  of  boiled  rice  soaked  in 
clarified  butter,  he  should  ask  “shall  I offer  these  into 
the  fire?”  Having  obtained  the  permission,  he  should 
perform  a Homa  therewith  in  the  fire,  as  laid  down  in 
the  case  of  a Pitri  Yajna,  and  carefully  place  the  rem- 
nants of  the  oblations  in  a vessel  kept  for  that  purpose. 
The  vessel  would  be  as  available  at  the  time,  but  prefer- 
ence should  be  given  to  one  made  of  silver,  which  should  be 
consecrated  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “Earth 
is  the  receptacle.  ’ Then  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand  should 
be  dipped  into  the  cake  of  obsequies,  and  the  Vedic  verses 
such  as  “Savya-hritika,”  “ Gayatri”  and  “ Madhuvata  ” 
should  be  recited  as  well  as  the  Mantra  which  runs  as 
“Silently  eat  ye  to  your  heart's  content.”  Then  the 
boiled  rice,  and  Havishya  (sundried,  boiled  rice  contain- 
ing  no  meat)  should  be  offered  to  the  souls  of  the  departed 
manes  by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Be  ye 
satis ned  with  this  boiled  rice.”  1 hen  the  remaining  por- 


„,r  ; 


■ J-  *...*■ , 


V 


& 

'■ 

% 

: 


f * . 
111 


626 


AGNl  PURANAM. 


tion  of  the  abovesaid  boiled  rice  should  be  scattered  over 
the  ground  and  jets  of  water  should  be  separately  , poured 
over  it.  Then  all  the  boiled  rice  should  be  gathered  together 
and  deposited  near  the  Pindas  partaken  of  by  the  Pitris 
as  in  the  case  of  a Pitriyajna.  Then  water  should  be  given 
to  the  souls  of  one’s  departed  grand-fathers  in  the  ^mother’s 
line,  for  rinsing  their  mouths.  After  that  the  Mantra  of 
benediction  known  as  the  “ Svasti”  should  be  repeated  and 
honey  should  be  poured  into  the  water.  Remuneration  should 
be  given  to  the  Brahmanas  as  the  means  of  the  performer 
of  the  ceremony  would  admit  of,  when  he  would  ask  whether 
he  would  speak  “ Svadhas”  (obeisance).  Having  obtained 
the  permission  of  the  assembled  Brahmanas,  he  should  speak 
" Svadha”  (obeisance)  to  the  souls  of  his  ancestors  invoked 
on  the  occasion.  Then  water  should  be  sprinkled  on  the 
ground  of  the  sacrificial  chamber  by  repeating  the  Mantra 
which  runs  as  “ Be  pleased,  O ye  gods/’  whereas  in  the  cere- 
monies known  as  the  Deva  Shraddha  and  Vishvedevika, 
water  should  be  poured  out  on  the  floor.  Then  the  per- 
former of  the  ceremony  should  address  the  souls  of  his 
departed*  manes  supposed  to  be  present  on  the  occasion 
as  follows  : — Increase  our  progeny  and  knowledge  in  the 
sacred  Vedas,  oh  fathers.  May  we  have  many  givers  of 
alms.  May  our  faith  never  abate,  and  may  we  have  many 
things  to  give  to  the  needy.”  Having  spoken  these  pleasant 
words,  he  should  make  them  obeisance  and  bid  them  adieu 
by  repeating  the  Mantra  which  runs  as  “ Vaje,  Vaje  ” Then 
having  raised  up  in  his  hand  the  vessel  of  Argha  offering 
In  which  the  remnants  of:  boiled  rice  had  been  previously 
gathered,  he  should  dismiss  the  Brahmanas,  by  circumbula- 
ting  and  following  them  up  to  the  door.  He  should  not,  on 
that*  day,  eat  any  other  thing  but  the  cakes,  supposed  to  have 
been  tasjpd;  by  the  souls  of  his  forefathers,  and  pass  the  night 
with  them  as  an  anchorite,  with  all  his  passion  and  propen* 


sides  subdu 


ISIWBIl 


T"'i  : : 


AGN1  PURANAM. 


In  the  ceremony  known  as  the  Vriddhi  Shraddha,  he 
should  circumbulate  the  souls  of  his  ancestors  known  as 
the  Nandimukhas,  and  propitiate  them  with  cakes  mixed 
with  curd  and  Karkandu,  all  other  acts  being  performed 
with  barley  corn  (23). 

Xhe  ^Ekoddista  form  of  Shraddha  ceremony  is  charac- 
terised by  the  absence  of  Daiva,  and  the  use  of  a single  vessel 
of  Argha  offering  and  a single  Pavitra.  The  rites  of  invoca- 
tion and  Agnikaranam  (the  casting  of  the  Pindas  in  fire) 
are  absent  in  it  as  in  the  Apasavya  form.  At  the  time  of 
bidding  farewell  to  the  ancestors  over  the  jet  of  water 
saturated  with  honey,  the  Mantra  running  as  “ Upatisthatam” 
should  be  read,  and  on  the  performer  having  repeated  the 
Mantra  “ Be  you  satisfied,”  the  assembled  Brahmanas, 
would  say  "we  have  been  contented."  Four  vessels  should 
be  decked  out  with  perfumed  water  and  sessamum  orientale. 
For  the  purposes  of  the  Argha  offering,  the  vessel  known  as 
the  iPretapatra  should  be  washed  over  the  vessels  containing 
oblations  for  the  souls  of  the  departed  ancestors.  This  is 
Ekoddistam  and  the  rules  and  ceremonies  laid  down  above 
should  be  observed  even  in  the  cases  of  the  departed  souls 
of  one’s  female  relatives  (24—27). 

Subsequent  to  that,  the  Shraddha  ceremony  known  as  the 
Sapindikaranam  should  be  performed  in  honour  of  one’s 
ancestors,  within  one  year  of  the  date  of  their  death,  fn  the 
case  of  a Brahmana,  oblations  of  boiled  rice  and  pitchers 
full  of  sweet  water  should  be  dedicated  to  their  souls,  and 
every  year  the  ceremony  should  be  repeated  on  the  date  of 
the  death,  as  in  the  case  of  a monthly  Shraddha  ceremony 
with  oblations  of  boiled  rice.  A Shraddha  ceremony  per- 
formed with  oblations  of  sun-dried  rice,  meat,  porridge,  fish, 
venison,  Kourabhra,  game,  and  goat's  meat  keeps  one’s 
ancestors  pleased  and  happy  for  a year.  Similarly  The  souls 
of  one's  forefathers  should  be  propitiated  by  offering  them 
■oblations  of  the  meat  of  Ena,  Ruru,  Boar,  and  Hare  in 


62  8 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


: ; 


succession.  By  offering  at  Gaya,  to  the  souls  of  his  departed 
ancestors,  the  oblations  composed  of  the  sword  of  a rhino- 
ceras,  fish  having  large  scales,  and  the  flesh  of  an  old  goat 
and  Kalashaka,  etc.,  a man  makes  them  happy  and  careless  for 
eternal  .time.  Similarly  a Shraddha  ceremony  performed  on 
a day  marked  by  the  asterisms  Magha,  keeps  them  h^ppy  for 
thirteen  years.  The  performer  of  the  ceremony  becomes 
the  father  of  many  sons  and  daughters,  thrives  in  trade  and 
agriculture,  and  the  tenantry  prospers  in  his  estate. 


His  sons  become  mighty  as  the  resplendent  Brahma. 
Gold  and  silver  become  abundant  in  his  house.  He  becomes 
the  chief  of  his  own  people  ; sweet  and  abundant  water 
wells  up  in  his  tanks  and  reservoirs.  In  short,  he  becomes 
possessed  of  all  good  things  in  life.  A Shraddha  ceremony 
must  not  be  performed  on  the  first  and  the  fourteenth  day 
of  a fortnight,  except  of  those  who  have  fallen  under  the 
blows  of  arms.  The  man  who  performs  a Shraddha  ceremony 
on  days  beginning  with  one  marked  by  the  asterism  Krittika 
and  ending  with  the  one  marked  by  the  asterism  Bharani, 
ascends  heaven  after  the  extinction  of  life,  and  becomes 
possessed  of  broad  acres,  progeny,  valour  and  strength.  Sons 
of  such  a person  become  the  leaders  of  the  society  they  be- 
long to,  and  grief  and  disease  never  fall  to  his  lot  in  this  life, 
which  becomes  one  continuous  run  of  success  in  trade  and 
agriculture.  Horses  and  cows  crowd  his  stables  and  cow- 
sheds, while  knowledge,  wealth,  prosperity  build  for  him  a 
second  paradise  on  earth,  crowning  him  with  that  mysterious 
healing  powers,  which  lead  to  the  discoveries  of  fresh  medi- 
cinal remedies  and  the  infallibility  of  their  cure  (28 — 39). 

The  gods  who  preside  over  the  performance  of  such 
Shraddha  ceremonies  are  the  Vasus,  the  Rudras,  the  Pitris, 
and  the  ^ons  of  Diti.  Having  propitiated  his  forefathers 
(Pitamahas)  with  the  performance  of  a Shraddha  ceremony 


a man 


1 gets  m return  Irom  them,  a kingdom,  progeny,  wealth, 


hi 


Jt  n 


mh 


AC.NI  PURANAM. 


knowledge,  longevity,  pleasures,  the  power  to  reside  in 
heaven  and  nay  salvation  itself  (40—41). 


CHAPTER  CLXIV. 


lOSHKARA  said : A man  should  perform  the  sacrifice 
known  as  the  Graha  Yajna  (sacrifice  in  honour  of  the 
guardian  deities  of  the  planets)  with  a view  to  acquire  peace, 
prosperity,  wealth  or  longevity  in  this  world,  or  to  bring 
down  good  showers  in  his  country.  The  planets  are  the 
Sun,  the  Moon,  the  Mars,  the  Mercury,  the  Jupiter,  the  Venus, 
the  Saturn,  and  the  two  Nodes,  and  their  images  should 
be  respectively  made  of  copper,  crystal,  red  sandal-wood, 
gold,  silver,  iron  and  lead.  In  the  alternative  the  images 
of  all  the  planets  may  be  made  of  gold,  and  worshipped  on 
the  mystic  diagram  drawn  in  sandal  paste,  with  flowers  and 
clothes  possessing  colours  respectively  sacred  to  each  of  them. 
Perfumes  and  bracelets  should  be  offered  to  them,  and  fumes 
of  Guggulu  (scented  gum  resin)  and  burning  incense- 
sticks  should  be  waived  round  the  Mandala  for  their  gratifi- 
cation. Porridge  should  be  prepared  in  honour  of  each  of 
the  above-said  gods,  consecrated  with  the  Veda  Mantra 
(Rich)  which  runs  as  “ Rouse  up  in  heaven  the  gods  whose 
heads  are  burning  fire,  after  having  attracted  them  with  the 
(smell)  of  this  porridge”  etc.,  and  those  respectively  running 
as  “ Shanno  Devi,”  "Vrihaspati  Atiyad,”  etc.,  and  “Katum, 
Krinvante.  The  sticks  of  sacrificial  trees  which  are  res- 
pectively sacred  to  the  planets  are  the  Arka  Palasha  Khadira 
Apamarga,  Pippala,  Udumvara,  Shami  Durva  apd  Kusha. 
Sticks  of  the  above  trees,  numbering  twenty-eight  or  hundred 
and  eight,  should  be  thrown  into  the  consecrated  fire  soaked 


: ;■  ! ■ 


CHAPTER  CLXV. 


Said  the  Fire  God  : — A man  should  meditate  upon 
his  own  soul,  flickering  like  a lamp  in  his  heart  and  who  is 
the  lord  of  the  universe.  All  other  thoughts  should  be 
banished  from  the  mind  at  the  time,  and  the  senses  and  the 
memory  should  be  made  to  recoil  back  upon  themselves,  as 
it  were.  To  such  a man  should  be  given  the  articles,  of  a 
Shraddha  ceremony  such  as  milk,  curd,  and  clarified  butter, 

except  Musura  pulse,  Priyangu,  Vartaku  and  Kadrava 
(i— 2). 

When  the  Rahu  devours  the  Sun  at  the  juncture  of  the  two 
fortnights,  the  shadow  which-  eclipses  the  Sun  should  be 
supposed  as  that  cast  by  the  elephant,  and  any  gift  made, 
or  any  Shraddha  performed,  under  the  auspicies  should  be 


in  honey,  curd,  and  clarified  butter,  to  each  of  the  guardian 
deities  of  the  planets.  The  learned  should  feast  the 
Brahmanas  with  mollasses.,  boiled  rice,  porridge,  Havishya, 
thickened  milk,  Yastika,  curd,  boiled  rice,  clarified  butter, 
cakes  and  meat,  and  coloured  boiled  rice  (Chitranna).  Cows, 
conchshells,  calves,  gold,  clothes,  horse,  white  or  black  gpats, 
iron  should  be  given  to  the  Brahmanas  by  way  of  remunera- 
tion. A man  should  worship  with  care  the  planets  which  are 
hostile  to  him.  0 Brahmana,  the  planets  bless  their  wor- 
shippers when  duly  propitiated.  The  rise  and  fall  of 
monarchs  are  controlled  by  the  influences  of  the  planets, 
as  well  as  the  continuance  and  dissolution  of  the  terrestrial 
globe,  and  hence  the  planets  are  to  be  worshipped  (i — 14). 


AGni  puranam. 


030 


AGNI  PURANHM.  631 

Moon  is  in  the  Pitra,  or  in  the  Hansa,  or  in  the  Kara,  the 
shadow  of  the  elephant  is  known  as  the  Vaivasvath  Tithi 
(3—5)- 

A woman  forcibly  ravished  by  a man  or  consenting  to 
the  proposals  of  a man  under  distraint  is  not  polluted 
thereby:  Such  a woman  should  be  let  alone  until  she  resumes 
her  catamenia  when  she  should  be  deemed  as  pure.  The 
sinless  Yogi  who  finds  nothing  but  himself  in  the  universe 
and  understands  that  it  has  but  emanated  from  his  soul,  has 
attained  the  Supreme  Brahma  and  cleanness  of  spirit  by 
meditating  upon  his  own  soul.  Some  there  are  who  aver  that 
yoga  consists  in  confirming  the  senses  to  their  objects  of 
gratification.  Those  who  hold  such  opinion  deserve  epithets 
of  so  many  fools  who  have  been  duped  by  a false  standard 
of  religion.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  hold  that  yoga  is 
nothing  but  an  union  of  the  mind  and  soul.  By  bringing 
about  the  union  of  the  mind  bereft  of  all  thoughts  but  one 
and  the  soul  within  the  wider  circle  of  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
a man  may  break  through  the  trammels  of  this  existence. 
The  five  senses  form,  as  it  were,  the  sentinels  of  the  village 
or  the  citadel  of  mind,  but  the  sixth  principle  (soul)  is  greater 
and  mighter  than  all,  and  men,  demons,  or  gods  cannot 
conquer  this  sixth  principle  by  storming  the  citadel  of  mind. 
The  senses  which  always  fly  towards  the  objective  world, 
should  be  made  to  turn  back  and  recoil  upon  the  mind  by 
an  act  of  psychic  involution,  and  the  mind  thus  made 
inert  in  its  turn  should  be  merged  in  the  soul.  Contem- 
plation of  such  an  union  is  the  only  true  contemplation,  and 
the  knowledge  of  such  a merging  is  the  only  true  knowledge. 
Besides  this  all  knowledge  is  booklore,  which  has  wrong- 
fully swelled  the  bulk  of  the  world’s  literature  (1  — 13). 

Since  the  soul  is  not  perceived  by  the  senses,  any 
statement  positively  asserting  its  existence  is  likely  to 
rouse  up  many  hostile  criticisms  and  will  be  held  at  a 
discount  by  the  public  at  large.  The  logic  of  a proposition 

. .■/.#;  :/i 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


the  soul  does  not  exist,  simply  because  it  is  not 
perceived  by  men  of  latent  psychic  perception,  is  not 
worth  repudiating.  A boy  can  find  no  pleasure,  no  beauty 
in  the  company  or  in  the  face  of  a youthful  maiden,  which 
the  fond  and  loving  eyes  of  a youth  will  enjoy  and  detect 
at  every  ingenuous  turn  of  her  head  and  conversation.  -But 
does  that  conclusively  demonstrate  the  fact,  that  since  a 
boy  cannot  detect  it,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  beauty  in  a 
female  face.  Soul-perception  like  sense-perception  requires 
a certain  point  of  development  in  the  perceiving  mind  or 
the  Ego.  Accordingly  the  region  or  the  truth  which  a Yogin 
with  a mature  and  fully  developed  psychic  sense  perceives 
and  realises  within  himself,  needs  must  be  a terra  incognita 
to  the  sordid  grovelling  wise  acres  of  the  world.  Can  a man 
who  is  born  blind  ever  know  what  a " Ghata”  (pitcher)  is  ? 
Then  how  can  a man,  who  has  fixed  his  abode  on  the 
earth,  and  is  of  the  earth,  earthly,  and  the  sumumbonum  of 
whose  life  is  gold  and  nothing  but  untarnished  gold,  whose 
imagination  can  never  soar  higher  than  paradise,  nothing 
more  or  less  than  a Persian  harem  one  stuffed  with  all  the 
creative  comforts  to  serve  till  the  crack  of  doom,  or  with 
gods  more  lustful  and  vindictive  than  mortals  of  ordinary 
morality,  peep  into  the  fountain  source  of  phenomena, 
the  grand  workshop  of  mother  Nature  with  the  Soul,  the 
grand  life-pulse  of  the  universe  hid  within  her  glowing 
bosom  ? 

Seeing  a man  in  penance  and  absorbed  in  meditation  of 
the  Supreme,  the  Son  tumbles  down  from  its  place  fearing 
that  he  will  one  day  penetrate  through  his  disc  and  enter  into 
that  infinite  Soul-sun  from  which  all  life  and  light  shower 
down  upon  the  universe,  binding  the  souls  of  all  living 
beings  in  one  grand  bond  of  co-eternal  sonship  with  their 
progenitor  (14 — 16). 

Fasts,  vows,  ablutions,  pilgrimages  to  holy  shrines,  spiri- 
tual initiations  duly  observed,  kept  performed  made 


Am* 


AGNI  PtJRANHSr. 


performed,  produce  their  respective  effects.  Salvation  is  the 
Supreme  Brahma,  Pranayam  is  the  Supreme  penance  (Tapas), 
and  the  greatest  of  atonements  is  the  repetition  of  the  Savitri 
Mantra  [Gyatrij  (17 — 18). 

The  gods  first  enjoy  the  women,  then  the  Moon-god, 
after,  them  the  Gandharvas,  subsequently  the  Fire-god, 
and  last  of  all  the  mortals ; and  hence  they  can  never  be 
polluted.  A woman  who  has  conceived  in  the  bed  of  a 
man  belonging  to  her  own  caste,  remains  impure  until  she 
is  delivered  of  her  child ; and  becomes  pure  again  as  soon 
as  her  flow  is  re-established.  Nothing  tends  to  purify  the 
innerman  morethan  a meditation  of  the  Supreme  Being,  since 
even  the  man  who  has  taken  rice  cooked  by  a Chandala, 
becomes  pure  again  through  its  purifying  principle.  The 
soul  is  the  contemplator,  the  mind  is  the  contemplation,  the 
subject  contemplated  should  be  the  god  Vishnu,  its  effect 
would  be  salvation.  The  Brahman  a,  who,  having  undertaken 
to  officiate  as  a purifying  agent  of  a congregation,  would 
fail  to  carry  out  his  duty,  would  get  no  salvation,  there  being 
no  atonement  for  such  a neglect.  Men  who  would  live  as 
wandering  mendicants  (Parivrajaka)  leaving  lonely  and  help- 
less wives  and  children  at  home,  would  take  birth  as  Vidura 
Chandalas  in  their  next  existence.  After  that,  for  a hundred 
years  they  would  live  as  vultures  ; for  next  two  hundred  years 
as  dogs,  for  next  twenty  years  as  cocks,  and  for  the  last  ten 
years  as  hogs.  After  that  they  will  take  birth  as  fruitless, 
flowerless  trees,  covered  all  over  with  thorns.  Then  having 
been  consumed  by  the  wood-fire,  they  would  be  converted 
into  stone.  Then  for  a hundred  thousand  years,  they  would 
remain  lifeless  and  inert.  Then  after  the  lapse  of  a thousand 
years,  they  would  take  birth  as  Brahma  Rakshasas.  Then 
either  after  existing  as  monkeys  again,  or  at  the  extinction  of 
the  family  they  had  originally  belonged  to,  they  would  reincar- 
nate as  men.  Thus,  the  Yoga  should  be  practised  ; as  there  is 
no  other  means  of  destroying  one’s  sins  and  misery  (19—20). 


! : : 
: 


Ill 

111 


■ 

ill 


y 


1 


■■ 


111! 


CHAPTER  CLXVI. 


PuSHKARA  said  :— Now  I shall  describe  the  five, virtues 
as  laid  down  both  in  the  Vedas  and  the  Smritis,  which 
should  be  respectively  practised  by  men  belonging  to  one  of 
the  four  castes  or  social  orders.  The  investiture  with  the  holy 
thread,  in  the  three  twice-born  castes,  should  be  known  as 
the  Varna  Dharma  (ceremonies  peculiar  to  their  castes).  The 
rites  and  ceremonies  which  vary  according  to  the  different 
social  orders  (Ashramas)  are  known  as  the  Ashrama  Dharmas, 
such  as  the  different  numbers  of  the  cakes  of  obsequies 
offered  to  the  souls  of  one’s  departed  manes.  The  ceremonies 
which  are  undertaken  for  Nimittas  (different  purposes,)  or 
both  for  the  temporal  and  spiritual  (welfare  of  a man),  are 
called  Naimittika  Dharma,  such  as  the  rites  of  atonement 

for  misdeeds  (Prayaschitta).  . c r ,, 

The  abovesaid  Ashrama  Dharma  admits  of  a five  fold 
division,  as  it  appertains  to  the  order,  Brahmachari,  House- 
holder, Vanaprastha  (ascetics  dwelling  in  forests  and 
hermitages),  Yoti,  and  the  king.  As  in  the  case  of  a king, 
the  royal  duties  consist  of  the  Shadgunas  [peace,  war, 
expedition,  etc.]  (i  5)- 

The  forty-eight  Sanskaras  or  rites  of  purification  by  means 
of  which  a man  ascends  the  region  of  Brahma,  are  as  fol- 

jows. (i)  The  rite  of  Garbhadana,  Punsavanam,  Siman- 

tonnyana,  Jatakarma,  Namakaranam,  Annaprashanam,  Chuda- 
karanam,  Upanayana,  and  the  four  V eda-Vratas,  Ablution, 
and  Union  with  one’s  wife.  The  five  Yajnas  or  sacrifices 
are  the  Devayajna,  Pitriyajna,  Manushyayajna,  Bhutayajna 
and  Brahmayajna.  The  Astakas  and  the  Saptapakas  are 
known  as  the  Yajna  Sansthas.  Similarly  the  Shraddha 
ceremony  of  one’s  fore-fathers  respectively  celebrated  on  the: 


AGNI  PURANAM. 


635 


days  of  new  and  full  moons  (Parvana),  or  in  the  months 
of  Shravana,  Agrahayana,  Chaitra,  together  with  the  rites 
of  Ashvayaji  and  Saptahavi  are  called  the  Yajnasansthas. 
Likewise  the  sacrifices  known  as  the  Agnyadheyam,  Agni- 
hotram,  Darsha,  Pournamashaka,  Chaturmashya  (sacrifice 
celebrated  in  the  month  of  Agrahayana),  Nirudha  Pashu- 
vandhaka,  Soutramani,  Sapta  Soma,  and  Agnisthoma  are 
to  be  placed  under  the  foregoing  category.  The  other  sacri- 
fices such  as  Atyagnasthoma,  Ukatha,  the  sixteen  Vajapeyas, 
the  Atiratras  and  the  eight  Stomas  (6 — 8). 


The  man  who  is  kind,  forbearing,  unenvious,  contented, 
hospitable,  and  always  pure  in  contact  and  conduct,  at- 
tains the  highest  good.  A man  should  not  talk  at  the  time 
of  coition,  passing  of  the  urine,  ablution,  eating,  strolling, 
and  cleansing  the  teeth.  A gift  once  made  should  hot  be 
taken  back,  nor  milk  should  be  taken  in  the  night  mixed 
with  clarified  butter.  A man  should  give  up  the  vulgar 
habit  of  cutting  anything  with  the  teeth,  and  of  taking  the 
heat-making  food  composed  of  the  seven  sorts  of  edible  pulve- 
rised pulse  and  corn.  Having  bathed,  a man  should  not  cull 
flowers  for  the  worship  of  an  idol,  as  they  would  be  rejected 
by  the  deity.  A man  having  placed  the  lighted  faggot  on 
the  face  of  a deceased  person,  nowise  related  to  him, 
should  offer  oblations  and  libations  of  water  to  his  soul ; 
and  observe  a period  of  uncleanness  for  fifteen  days.  A 
man  is  not  affected  by  the  sin  of  eating  with  his  inferior, 
by  drawing  a line  of  water  between  himself  and  that  person  ; 
or  if  he  can  manage  to  sit  on  the  other  side  of  a door  ora 
passage.  Before  eating,  a Brahmana  should  offer  to  his 
five  vital  winds,  libations  of  water  contained  in  the  hollow 
of  his  right  palm  made  by  joining  his  thumb  and  the  fourth 
finger  (9—12).  ' 


mor< 


mar; 


CHAPTER  CLXVIL 


Said  the  God  of  Fire;— Now  I shall  dilate  up  -on 
the  process  of  performing  the  Grahayajna  which  imparts 
•wealth,  peace,  prosperity  and  victory  to  the  performer.  A 
sacrifice  performed  for  the  propitiation  of  the  planets 
(Graha  Yajna),  is  usually  divided  into  three  classes,  accord-, 
ing  as  ten  thousand,  hundred  thousand,  or  a million  of 
libations  of  clarified  butter  are  offered  into  the  fire  in  its 
course.  The  cavity  for  the  sacrificial  fire  (Homa  Kunda) 
should  be  made  to  occupy  a fourth  part  of  the  mystic  dia- 
gram* on  the  exterior  border  whereof  ithe  planets  should 
be  invoked  and  worshipped.  The  planet  Jupiter  should  be 
caused  to  be  seated  on  the  northern  part  of  the  exterior 
rim  af  the  Maxidata.  A seat  should  be  offered  to  the  Mer- 
cury on  its  north-east  part,  to  the  VeniA  jon  the  east,  to* 
the  Moon  on.  its  south-east,  to  the  Mars  on  the  south,  to 
the  Sun  at  the  centre,  to  the  Saturn  at  the  west,  to  the 
Rahu  at  the  south-west,  and  to  the  Katu  at  the  north-west., 
Then  the  gods  such  as  Isha,  Shoma,  Guha,  Vishnu,  Brahma,. 
Indra,  Yama,  Kala,  CWtragupta,  Agni,  Apa,  the  earth  god- 
dess, Hari,  Indra  (ric),  Aiudri,  Prajapati,  Ganesha,  Durga,, 
the  god  of  Storm,  the  god  of  the  skies,  and  the  twin 
Ashvinis  should  he  worshipped  with  the  Beeja  Mantras, 
as  contained  in,  the  holy  Vedas..  The  sticks  of  the  sacri- 
ficial trees  such  as  the  Arka,  Palasha,  Khadira,  Apamarga, 
Pippala,  Oudumvara,  Shami,  and  Durva,  dipped  in  honey, 
clarified  butter  and  curd,  should  be  offered  into  the  fire  in 
succession,  fox  the  propitiation  of  the  planets  they  are  held 
respectively  sacred  to.  Thirteen  pitchers,  should  be  filled 
with  water,  and  the  libation  completing  the  sacrifice  should 
be  cast  into  the  fixe..  Then,  the  jets  of  clarified  butted 


AGNI  FURANAM. 


mixed  with  turmeric,  and  vermilion,  should  be  made  to  mm 
against  the  wall  in  that  particular  form  known  as  the 
Vasudhara  (x — -8). 

Then  the  priest  officiating  at  the  ceremony  should  pour 
out  the  contents  of  the  four  consecrated  pitchers  over  the 
head  of  the  person,  on  whose  behalf  the  sacrifice  had  been  per- 
formed® by  repeating  the  following  Mantra,  u May  the  gods 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  Maheshvara,  Vasudeva,  Jagannatha,  Pra- 
dyumna,  Agni,  Aniruddha,  and  the  Lord  Sankarshana,  pour 
out  water  over  thy  head,  install  thee  in  full  glory  and  grant 
thee  success.  May  the  gods  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Nairita, 
Varuna,  Pavana,  and  Kuvera,  Shiva,  accompanied  by  Brahma 
and  the  Dikpalas  preserve  thee  at  all  times.  May  the 
Wives  of  Piety,  the  mothers  known  as  Kirti  (fame),  Lakshmi 
(wealth),  Dhriti  (comprehension),  Medha  (Memory),  Pushti 
(prosperity),  Shraddha  (faith),  Kriya  (action),  Mati  (dis- 
position), Lajja  (modesty),  Shanti  (peace),  Tushti  (content- 
ment), Vapu  (health)  and  Kanti  (beauty),  come  and  pour  out 
water  over  thy  head.  May  the  Planets  Sun,  Moon,  Mars, 
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  Saturn,  Rahu  and  Ketu,  come  and 
help  us  in  absolving  thee  of  thy  bad  luck  by  emptying  the 
contents  of  these  pitchers  on  thy  head.  May  the  gods,  the 
demons,  the  Gandharvas,  the  Yakshas,  the  Rakshasas,  the 
|Serpents,  the  Rishis,  the  Manus,  the  celestial  cows,  the 
mothers  and  the  wives  of  the  gods,  the  celestial  trees, 
the  Serpents,  the  Daityas,  the  Apsarasas,  the  heavenly 
weapons,  the  collective  scriptures  (Sarva  Shastra),  the 
{nonarchs,  the  animals  the  gods  ride  upon,  the  cereals,  the 
jems,  the  divisions  of  time,  the  rivers,  the  seas,  the  moun- 
<ains,  the  sacred  pools  and  shrines,  and  all  the  flowing 
Tadas  (rivers  with  masculine  names)  of  the  world,  come 
d take  part  in  thy  ablution  ceremony”  (9—17). 

Then  having  bedecked  himself  with  ornaments,  he 
ould  make  gifts  of  golden  cows,  boiled  rice  and  proprie- 
ry  rights  in  lands  to  the  Brahmanas*  He  should  address  the 


m 

■ ■ 

It 


V ' 


tt 


. 


i 

SB  1 


■■1 


mm 


AGHl  PUEANAM. 


celestial  cow  Kapila  as  follows : — “ Oh  thou  Kapila,  who  :j 
worshipped  by  all  the  gods,  and  in  whose  body  dwell 
the  gods  and  sacred  shrines,  dost  thou  give  me  peace 
Then  he  should  propitiate  the  celestial  conchshell 
follows : — “ Oh  thou  conchsheil,  who  art  the  holy  of  holh 
since  the  Supreme  Vishnu  wields  thee  in  his  handle 
thou  grant  me  peace,  Oh  thou  most  blissful  of  the  bfessed 
Subsequent  to  that  he  should  invoke  the  aid  of  the  ge 
of  virtue  (Dharma)  as  follows  Oh  thou  god  of  virtue- 
who  hast  assumed  the  shape  of  a bull  and  art  riden  upc 
by  the  mighty  god  of  eight  shapes  (Shiva)  and  hence  do 
fill  the  universe  with  joy  and  gladness, — dost  thou  irripa 
peace  to  thy  suppliant.”  After  that  he  should  address  tl 
gold  as  follows  : — “ Oh  gold, — who  art  the  semen  of  the  gc 
of  fire  lodged  in  the  womb  of  the  great  Hiranyagarbh? 
and  grantest  infinite  merit  and  innumerable  boon  to  met 
•’—dost  thou  give  me  peace.”  Then  he  should  offer  a pair  e 
yellowish  clothes  to  the  god  Vishnu  and  address  them  z 
follows : — “ Oh  thou  yellow  clothes,  whom  the  might 
Vishnu  is  fond  of,  I have  offered  you  at  the  feet  of  tha 
deity.  Do  you  grant  me  peace.”  Then  he  should  propitiafi 
the  god  Vishnu  himself  by  addressing  him  as  follows  :4 
t(0  thou  Vishnu, — who  in  the  shape  of  a horse  hast  emanate* 
from  the  ambrosia  of  eternal  life  and  dost  measure  the  swee| 
of  time  by  riding  on  the  sun  and  the  moon,— grant  m 
peace.”  . Subsequent  to  tha t he  should  address  the  eJ 
goddess  as  follows : — “Since  thou  art  permeated  with* 
essence  of  the  god  Keshava  and  possesses!  the  virtue* 
destroying  sin,  Oh  thou  mother  earth,  guised  as  a moil 
pow,  grant  me  peace.  Since  all  works  concerning  £xj| 
.embedded  in  thy  womb,  are  under  thy  control,  and  all  &m 
implements  as  ploughshares,  etc.,  are  in  thy  gift,  dost  tho| 
grant  me  peace.  Since  thou  formest  the  body  of  all 
sacrifices,  and  since  fire  is  originated  in  thy  womb, 


e”.  This 

: ^ r; 


AGNI  PURANAM 


follows  :~*-“Since  the  fourteen  regions  known  as  the 
jj  Bhubanas  are  cogtoAied  in  the  body  of  a cow,  may  I find 
i’bliss  ho-’h  in  m and  the  next.  Since  the  gods  Shiva 

.est  alone  in  their  beds,  but  with  their 

& ‘v>{  "i  - , 

v n ' u es,  so  may  the  same  fate  await  me,  both  now 

^ahdjbertr*  - the  merit  of  my  having  made  a gift  of 

’“bed,  Since  '.  3s  reside  in  gems,  may  the  gods,  pleased 

"with  my  gifts  oi  tile  same,  grant  me  peace.  Since  gifts  of 
"other  things  cannot  count  the  sixteenth  part  of  merit 
attained  by  making  over  the  proprietary  right  in  a plot  of  a 
aground-  to  a Brahmana,  may  the  gods  grant  me  peace  through 

the  merit  of  a such  a gift  by  me”  (18 — 31). 

it  * 

. Thus  a Graha  Yajna  should  be  performed  usually  by 
'lasting  ten  thousand  libations  of  clarified  butter  into  the 

!re  on  the  occasion  of  the  celebration  of  a marriage  cere- 
tony,  a sacrifice  or  of  a rite  of  installation  or  consecration,  of 
\ divine  image  or  edifice.  The  usual  remuneration  should 
\e  paid  to  the  priest,  and  a victory  in  war  would  be  its 
Effect. 

For  the  attainment  of  all  wished-for  objects,  a Graha 
fajna  should  be  performed  with  a couple  of  million  of- 
ibations.  The  Kunda  or  the  cavity  for  the  sacrificial  fire, 
nth  its  rim  and  outlet  (yoni),  if  dug  in  a room  or  a Mandapa, 
tamld  be  made  to  measure  a cubit  in  length  in  the  case  of 
||  thousand  libations,  while  four  Rittijas  should  be  employed 
i ttffer  them  into  the  lire.  In  the  sacrifice  where  ten  ihous- 
id  libations  would  be  offered,  the  person  on  whose  "behalf  the 
fne  would  be  performed,  might  -form  one  of  “them.  - while 
I a sacrifice  with  a million  libations,  the  number' of  p 
Irtettgth  of  the  Kunda,  and  all  other  things  should  be  ten* 
aes  increased.  The  celestial  Garuda  should  be  contem- 
ned therein  as  possessed  of  two  or  four  hands  \ar.  i should 
* addressed  as  follows  : — “The  mighty  Vishnu  rides  upon 
e and’  thou  art  the  embodied  image  of  the  psalms  of  the 
m Veda,  who  dost  divert  the  thoughts  of  men  from 


AGNI  PURANAM 


worldly  pursuits,  dost  thou  grant  me  peace.”  In  case  of  a 
million  of  libations,  the  cavity  for  the  -,r*«Scial  fire,  should 
be  consecrated  with  the. Mantras  as  inLcu  S’Mous  instance. 
Then  the  Vasudhara  should  ba-  run  • 

ornaments  and  beddings  should  be  given  to->u  'ft aV'< 

Eighteen  Rittijas  should  be  employed  to, ,</-*'  ht  1 f -iesh.  , 
•a  sacrifice  as  the  preceding  one.  The  of  a Kptk 

Homa  (million  libations)  would  be  re  ward  Ju  with  kingdom,  in- 
crease of  progeny,  abundance  of  boiled  rice,  victory^  salvation, 
and  enjoyment.  Having  paid  the  proper  remuneration  to  the 
priests,  the  performer  of  the  Koti-Homa,  would  be  able  to  des- 
troy his  enemies.  In  a Koti-Homa,  the  cavity  for  the  sacrificial 
fire,  should  be  made  to  measure  four  or  eight  cubits  in  lengthy 
and  twelve  Brahmanas  should  be  employed  to  officiate  as 
priests,  or  as  many  as  twenty-five  or  twenty-six  may  be 
employed,  four  having  been  placed  at  the  doors  -or  at  the 
Patamandapa.  A man  by  performing  a Koti-Homa  attains  all 

*4biects  and  ascends  the  region  of  Vishnu.  The  Homa 

8 if 

‘ Hotofe’  oe  performed  by  repeating;  either  the  Graha  or  the 
Gayatri,  Vaishnava,  Jataveda,  or  the  Shaiva  Mantras.  By 
offering  into  the  fire  libations  of  clarified  butter  mixed  with 
ses.  Sunum,  and  barley,  a man  attains  the  merit  of  an  Asha- 
medha.  In  a sacrifice  undertaken  with  a view  to  create  ani- 
mosities among  his  enemies,  the  cavity  should  be  made  of  a 
triangular  shape,  the  Samidas  (sticks  of  a sacrificial  tree; 
offerec-as  oblations)  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  with  the  left’ 
hand,  mixed  with  the-talons  and  bones  of  a hawk.  The  peril 
former  should  be  clad  in  red  clothes  with  his  hairs  untied  dn  |] 
^et  loose,  and  meditate  upon  his  enemies  overwhelmed  wit* 
ccuin  and  danger.  The  Mantra  which  should  be  repeated  o|- 
the  occasion  runs  as  “ Hun  Fut  to  my  enemies.”  The  picture 
of  the  enemy  should  be  cleft  with  a razor,  while  his  itnaglf 
made  of  pasted  rice  should  be  cut  in  two.  In  the  alternative  f 
a single  disease  may  be  worshipped  whereby  he  woui.:  h ; 
gathered  to  his  rest  (33— 44). 


CHAPTER  CLXVIII 


-uld  faU  to  do  pr0per  ato„Zt  TZ  "’Ti  ^ 

1 man  should  atone  for  the  evils  he  had  d 1 m,scieeds-  A 
; • not.  A man  .h^H  ^ 

r the  toh  p„", teed ;vd  "a  edfe?r'  n°r  S,,°“ld  * V*.  & 

«.  the.  lj  v:z;t  - 

I ™ which  ,T  the  property 
that  prepared  by  a public  woman,  songster  all  ' S* 
c- arsed  man,  or  by  a woman  who  I^s  wS  her  M “t 

| ^IHlrd-Cef  r^n°leat  *'  *** 

' acetic,  a thief,  a Dandika  a bas^Td^^'  3 5 false 

»f  the  Vedas,  a weaver’  an  ’ *"  “X0rious  ! man 

dancer,  a blacksmith  a h f un^ratefuI  Person,  a 

-«„sme:rur:^r^:rM’ 

!»“-«■».  * by  ■ o 

oeen  once  purified  and  recog 
again  commits  a heinous  crin 
Likewise  a Brahmana  y 
his  fellow  Brahmana,  should 
“or  eat  his  boiled  rice,  nor  he 
W of  a Shudra.  though  dul 


people, 


: ; . 


AGNI  PURANAM 


man  should  practise  the  penance  known  as  the  Chandrayamx% 
The  boiled  rice  smelled  by  a cow,  or  dedicated  to  one's 
ancestors,  as  well  as  that  partaken  of  by  a Shudra  or  a dog*, 
or  that  prepared  by  a fallen  man,  if  eaten  by  a person,  would 
entail  the  performance  of  the  penance  known  as  the  Tapta- 
krichchha ; while  for  that  partaken  of  during  a period  of  un~ 
cleanness,  the  purification  should  be  brought  about  by  per- 
forming the  penance  of  Krichchha  Vrata,  But  the  man  who 
eats  ?1°>Uring  unclean  during  the  continuance  of  a state  of 
it* .jhv;/?  due  either  to  the  birth  or  the  death  of  a relation, 
bi;c  ^impure  therefor,  over  and  above  the  state  of  impurity  ; 

j?— -hat  two  states  of  impurity  must  abate  together,-— 
l4°ing  Mid  as  not  applicable  to  such  a case.  A good  Brah- 
/rHna  ^hmld  observe  a fast  for  three  days,  in  the  event  of  his 
>f  a well  defiled  by  the  immersion  of  the  carcasses 
or  animals  having  five  nails,  or  by  any  other  impure  contact, 
while  under  all  other  circumstances,  a Kshatriya,  a Vaishya 
and  a Shudra  should  respectively  fast  for  three,  two  and  one 
Pada  portion  of  the  time  enjoined  to  be  observed  by  the 
Brahmanas  (i — 12).  ' 

A Brahmana  should  practise  the  penance  known  as 
the  Chandrayana  after  having  unconsciously  eaten  the, 
urine  or  the  execreta  of  a cat,  a boar,  an  ass,  a camel,  a i 
jackal,  a monkey  and  a crow.  Moreover  a man  should 
work  out  his  purification  by  once  practising  the  penance;; 

known  as  the  Tapta  Krichcha,  after  b/  *r  ^aten  the  flesh! 

, . rjoSzqiHt.  r ■*, 

of  a cow,  a man,  ahorse,  an  ass,  aca  Q , domesti-  l; 

. , * nqjip  4 ;?i 

cated  cock,  or  that  of  an  elephant,  of  01  0 ei  * I 

* . ^ . 'AIM  SuiACt  } IM  ' 

a mushroom.  A Brahmacharin  having  eatc^  * * , _ j 

of  an  Amashraddha,  or  after  having  , , igly  drunk  I 

wine,  or  on  having  unwittingly  ea'^  ^ beetroot  or  a 
garlic,  should  practise  the  penance  known  as  the  Prajapatyaj 
/ — *hi!e  the  penance  would  be  the  practice  of  the  Chandrayana, 
v event  0f  his  having  knowingly  taken  the  flesh  of  the 
aid  animals.  Palugabya,  Pyasa.  and  all  other  drinks- 


