AITAREYA-ARANYAKA AND AITAREYA UPANISHAD
Translated by F. Max Müller
Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 1, 1879
Source: sacred-texts.com

AITAREYA-ARANYAKA.

IN giving a translation of the Aitareya-upanishad, I found it necessary to give at the same time a translation of that portion of the Aitareya-aranyaka which precedes the Upanishad. The Aranyakas seem to have been from the beginning the proper repositories of the ancient Upanishads, though it is difficult at first sight to find out in what relation the Upanishads stood to the Aranyakas. The Aranyakas are to be read and studied, not in the village (grame), but in the forest, and so are the Upanishads. But the subjects treated in the Upanishads belong to a very different order from those treated in the other portions of the Aranyakas, the former being philosophical, the latter liturgical.

The liturgical chapters of the Aranyakas might quite as well have formed part of the Brahmanas, and but for the restriction that they are to be read in the forest, it is difficult to distinguish between them and the Brahmanas. The

[p. xcii]

first chapter of the Aitareya-aranyaka is a mere continuation of the Aitareya-brahmana, and gives the description of the Mahavrata, the last day but one of the Gavamayana, a sattra or sacrifice which is supposed to last a whole year. The duties which are to be performed by the Hotri priests are described in the Aitareya-aranyaka; not all, however, but those only which are peculiar to the Mahavrata day. The general rules for the performance of the Mahavrata are to be taken over from other sacrifices, such as the Visvagit, Katurvimsa, &c., which form the type (prakriti) of the Mahavrata. Thus the two sastras or recitations, called agya-prauga, are taken over from the Visvagit, the sastras of the Hotrakas from the Katurvimsa. The Mahavrata is treated here as belonging to the Gavamayana sattra, which is described in a different Sakha, see Taittiriya Samhita VII, 5, 8, and partly in other Vedas. It is the day preceding the udayaniya, the last day of the sattra. It can be celebrated, however, by itself also, as an ekaha or ahina sacrifice, and in the latter case it is the tenth day of the Ekadasaratra (eleven nights sacrifice) called Pundarika.

Sayana does not hesitate to speak of the Aitareya-Aranyaka as a part of the Brahmana [*1]; and a still earlier authority, Sankara, by calling the Aitareya-upanishad by the name of Bahvrika-brahmana-upanishad [*2], seems to imply that both the Upanishad and the Aranyaka may be classed as Brahmana.

The Aitareya-Aranyaka appears at first sight a miscellaneous work, consisting of liturgical treatises in the first, fourth, and fifth Aranyakas, and of three Upanishads, in the second and third Aranyakas. This, however, is not the case. The first Aranyaka is purely liturgical, giving a description of the Mahavrata, so far as it concerns the Hotri priest. It is written in the ordinary Brahmana style. Then follows the first Upanishad, Aranyaka II, 1-3, showing

[p. xciii]

how certain portions of the Mahavrata, as described in the first Aranyaka, can be made to suggest a deeper meaning, and ought to lead the mind of the sacrificer away from the purely outward ceremonial to meditation on higher subjects. Without a knowledge of the first Aranyaka therefore the first Upanishad would be almost unintelligible, and though its translation was extremely tedious, it could not well have been omitted.

The second and third Upanishads are not connected with the ceremonial of the Mahavrata, but in the fourth and fifth Aranyakas the Mahavrata forms again the principal subject, treated, however, not as before in the style of the Brahmanas, but in the style of Sutras. The fourth Aranyaka contains nothing but a list of the Mahanamni hymns [*1], but the fifth describes the Mahavrata again, so that if the first Aranyaka may be looked upon as a portion of the Aitareya-brahmanas, the fifth could best be classed with the Sutras of Asvalayana.

To a certain extent this fact, the composite character of the Aitareya-Aranyaka, is recognised even by native scholars, who generally do not trouble themselves much on such questions. They look both on the Aitareya-brahmana and on the greater portion of Aitareya-Aranyaka as the works of an inspired Rishi, Mahidasa Aitareya [*2], but they consider the fourth and fifth books of the Aranyaka as contributed by purely human authors, such as Asvalayana and Saunaka, who, like other Sutrakaras, took in verses belonging to other Sakhas, and did not confine their rules to their own Sakha only.

There are many legends about Mahidasa, the reputed author of the Aitareya-brahmana and Aranyaka. He is

[p. xciv]

quoted several times as Mahidasa Aitareya in the Aranyaka itself, though not in the Brahmana. We also meet his name in the Khandogya-upanishad (III, 16, 7), where we are told that he lived to an age of 116 years [*1]. All this, however, would only prove that, at the time of the composition or collection of these Aranyakas and Upanishads, a sage was known of the name of Mahidasa Aitareya, descended possibly from Itara or Itara. and that one text of the Brahmanas and the Aranyakas of the Bahvrikas was handed down in the family of the Aitareyins.

Not content with this apparently very obvious explanation, later theologians tried to discover their own reasons for the name of Aitareya. Thus Sayana, in his introduction to the Aitareya-brahmana [*2], tells us that there was once a Rishi who had many wives. One of them was called Itara, and she had a son called Mahidasa. His father preferred the sons of his other wives to Mahidasa, and once he insulted him in the sacrificial hall, by placing his other sons on his lap, but not Mahidasa. Mahidasa's mother, seeing her son with tears in his eyes, prayed to her tutelary goddess, the Earth (sviyakuladevata Bhumih), and the goddess in her heavenly form appeared in the midst of the assembly, placed Mahidasa on a throne, and on account of his learning, gave him the gift of knowing the Brahmana, consisting of forty adhyayas, and, as Sayana calls it, another Brahmana, 'treating of the Aranyaka duties' (aranyakavratarupam brahmanam).

Without attaching much value to the legend of Itara, we see at all events that Sayana considered what we call the Aitareyaranyaka as a kind of Brahmana, not however the whole of it, but only the first, second, and third Aranyakas (atha mahavratam ityadikam akarya akarya ityantam). How easy it was for Hindu theologians to invent such legends we see from another account of Mahidasa, given by Anandatirtha in his notes on the Aitareya-upanishad.

[p. xcv]

[paragraph continues] He, as Colebrooke was the first to point out, takes Mahidasa 'to be an incarnation of Narayana, proceeding from Visala, son of Abga,' and he adds, that on the sudden appearance of this deity at a solemn celebration, the whole assembly of gods and priests (suraviprasangha) fainted, but at the intercession of Brahma, they were revived, and after making their obeisance, they were instructed in holy science. This avatara was called Mahidasa, because those venerable personages (mahin) declared themselves to be his slaves (dasa) [*1].

In order properly to understand this legend, we must remember that Anandatirtha, or rather Visvesvaratirtha, whose commentary he explains, treated the whole of the Mahaitareya-upanishad from a Vaishnava point of view, and that his object was to identify Mahidasa with Narayana. He therefore represents Narayana or Hari as the avatara of Visala, the son of Brahman (abgasuta), who appeared at a sacrifice, as described before, who received then and there the name of Mahidasa (or Mahidasa), and who taught this Upanishad. Any other person besides Mahidasa would have been identified with the same ease by Visvesvaratirtha with Vishnu or Bhagavat.

A third legend has been made up out of these two by European scholars who represent Mahidasa as the son of Visala and Itara, two persons who probably never met before, for even the Vaishnava commentator does not attempt to take liberties with the name of Aitareya, but simply states that the Upanishad was called Aitareyi, from Aitareya.

Leaving these legends for what they are worth, we may at all events retain the fact that, whoever was the author of the Aitareya-brahmana and the first three books of the Aitareya-Aranyaka, was not the author of the two concluding Aranyakas. And this is confirmed in different ways. Sayana, when quoting in his commentary on the Rig-veda from the last books, constantly calls it a Sutra of Saunaka, while the fourth Aranyaka is specially ascribed

[p. xcvi]

to Asvalayana, the pupil and successor of Saunaka [*1]. These two names of Saunaka and Asvalayana are frequently intermixed. If, however, in certain MSS. the whole of the Aitareya-aranyaka is sometimes ascribed either to Asvalayana or Saunaka, this is more probably due to the colophon of the fourth and fifth Aranyakas having been mistaken for the title of the whole work than to the fact that such MSS. represent the text of the Aranyaka, as adopted by the school of Asvalayana.

The Aitareya-aranyaka consists of the following five Aranyakas:

The first Aranyaka has five Adhyayas:

1. First Adhyaya, Atha mahavratam, has four Khandas, 1-4.
 2. Second Adhyaya, A tva ratham, has four Khandas, 5-8.
 3. Third Adhyaya, Hinkarena, has eight [*2] Khandas, 9-16.
 4. Fourth Adhyaya, Atha sudadohah, has three Khandas, 17-19.
 5. Fifth Adhyaya, Vasam samsati, has three Khandas, 20-22.

The second Aranyaka has seven Adhyayas:

6. First Adhyaya, Esha panthah, has eight Khandas, 1-8.
 7. Second Adhyaya, Esha imam lokam, has four Khandas, 9-12.
 8. Third Adhyaya, Yo ha va atmanam, has eight (not three) Khandas, 13-20.
 9. Fourth Adhyaya, Atma va idam, has three Khandas, 21-23.
 10. Fifth Adhyaya, Purushe ha va, has one Khanda, 24
 11. Sixth Adhyaya, Ko 'yam atmeti, has one Khanda, 25.
 12. Seventh Adhyaya, Van me manasi, has one Khanda, 26.

The third Aranyaka has two Adhyayas:

13. First Adhyaya, Athatah samhitaya upanishat, has six Khandas, 1-6.
 14. Second Adhyaya, Prano vamsa iti sthavirah Sakalyah, has six Khandas, 7-12.

The fourth Aranyaka, has one Adhyaya:

15. First Adhyaya, Vida maghavan, has one Khanda (the Mahanamni's).

The fifth Aranyaka has three Adhyayas:

16. First Adhyaya, Mahavratasya pankavimsatim, has six Khandas, 1-6.
 17. Second Adhyaya, (Grivah)Yasyedam, has five Khandas, 7-11.
 18. Third Adhyaya, (Uru) Indragni, has four Khandas, 11-14

(9-11 are labelled Aitareya-upanishad and 6-14 are labelled Bahvrika-upanishad by vertical brackets in the original)

[p. xcvii]

With regard to the Upanishad, we must distinguish between the Aitareya-upanishad, properly so-called, which fills the fourth, fifth, and sixth adhyayas of the second Aranyaka, and the Mahaitareya-upanishad [*1], also called by a more general name Bahvrika-upanishad, which comprises the whole of the second and third Aranyakas.

The Persian translator seems to have confined himself to the second Aranyaka [*2], to which he gives various titles, Sarbsar, Asarbeh, Antrteheh. That Antrteheh  is a misreading of  was pointed out long ago by Burnouf, and the same explanation applies probably to , asarbeh, and if to that, then to Sarbsar also. No explanation has ever been given why the Aitareya-upanishad should have been called Sarvasara, which Professor Weber thinks was corrupted into Sarbsar. At all events the Aitareya-upanishad is not the Sarvasara-upanishad, the Oupnek'hat Sarb, more correctly called Sarvopanishatsara, and ascribed either to the Taittiriyaka or to the Atharva-veda [*3].

The Aitareya-upanishad, properly so called, has been edited and translated in the Bibliotheca Indica by Dr. Roer. The whole of the Aitareya-aranyaka with Sayana's commentary was published in the same series by Rajendralal Mitra.

Though I have had several MSS. of the text and commentary at my disposal, I have derived little aid from them, but have throughout endeavoured to restore that text which Sankara (the pupil of Govinda) and Sayana had before them. Sayana, for the Upanishad portion, follows Sankara's commentary, of which we have a gloss by Anandagnana.

Colebrooke in his Essays (vol. ii, p. 42) says that he

[p. xcviii]

possessed one gloss by Narayanendra on Sankara's commentary, and another by Anandatirtha on a different gloss for the entire Upanishad. The gloss by Narayanendra [*1], however, is, so Dr. Rost informs me, the same as that of Anandagnana, while, so far as I can see, the gloss contained in MS. E. I. H. 2386 (also MS. Wilson 401), to which Colebrooke refers, is not a gloss by Anandatirtha at all, but a gloss by Visvesvaratirtha on a commentary by Anandatirthabhagavatpadakarya, also called Purnapragnakarya, who explained the whole of the Mahaitareya-upanishad from a Vaishnava point of view.

Footnotes

^xcii:1 Aitareyabrahmane 'sti kandam aranyakabhidham (introduction), a remark which he repeats in the fifth Aranyaka. He also speaks of the Aranyaka-vratarupam brahmanam; see p. cxiv, l. 24.

^xcii:2 In the same manner the Kaushitaki-upanishad is properly called Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad, though occurring in the Aranyaka; see Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad, ed. Cowell, p. 30.

^xciii:1 See Boehtlingk and Roth, sv. 'Neun Vedische Verse die in ihrem vollstandigen Wortlaut aber noch nachtnachgewiesen sind.' Weber Indische Studien VIII, 68. How these hymns are to be employed we learn from the Asvalayana-sutras VII, 12, 10, where we are told that if the Udgatris sing the Sakvara Saman as the Prishthastotra, the nine verses beginning with Vida maghavan, and known by the name of Mahanamni, are to be joined in a peculiar manner. The only excuse given, why these Mahanamnis are mentioned here, and not in the Brahmana, is that they are to be studied in the forest.

^xciii:2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 177, 335.

^xciv:1 Not 1600 years, as I printed by mistake; for 24+44+48 make 116 years. Rajendralal Mitra should not have corrected his right rendering 116 into 1600. Ait. Ar. Introduction, p. 3.

^xciv:2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 336.

^xcv:1 Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1873, II, p. 42.

^xcvi:1 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 235.

^xcvi:2 Not six, as in Rajendralal Mitra's edition.

^xcvii:1 This may have been the origin of a Rishi Mahaitareya, by the side of the Rishi Aitareya, mentioned in the Asvalayana Grihya-sutras III, 4 (ed. Stenzler). Professor Weber takes Aitareya and Mahaitareya here as names of works, but he admits that in the Sankhayana Grihya-sutras they are clearly names of Rishis (Ind. Stud. I, p. 389).

^xcvii:2 He translates II, I-II, 3, 4, leaving out the rest of the third adhyaya afterwards II, 4-II, 7.

^xcvii:3 Bibliotheca Indica, the Atharvana-upanishads, p. 394

^xcviii:1 A MS. in the Notices of Sanskrit MSS., vol. ii, p. 133, ascribed to Abhinavanarayanendra, called Atmashatkabhashyatika, begins like the gloss edited by Dr. Roer, and ends like Sayana's commentary on the seventh adhyaya, as edited by Rajendralal Mitra. The same name is given in MS. Wilson 94, Srimatkaivalyendrasarasvatipugyapadasishya-srimadabhinavanarayanendrasarasvati.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV.

  

THE KAUSHITAKI-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD.

THE Kaushitaki-upanishad, or, as it is more properly called, the Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad, belongs, like the Aitareya-upanishad, to the followers of the Rig-veda. It was translated into Persian under the title of Kokhenk, and has been published in the Bibliotheca Indica, with Sankarananda's commentary and an excellent translation by Professor Cowell.

Though it is called the Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad, it does not form part of the Kaushitaki-brahmana in 30 adhyayas which we possess, and we must therefore account for its name by admitting that the Aranyaka, of which it formed a portion, could be reckoned as part of the Brahmana literature of the Rig-veda (see Aitareya-aranyaka, Introduction, p. xcii), and that hence the Upanishad might be called the Upanishad of the Brahmana of the Kaushitakins [*2].

From a commentary discovered by Professor Cowell it appears that the four adhyayas of this Upanishad

[p. xcix]

were followed by five other adhyayas, answering, so far as we can judge from a few extracts, to some of the adhyayas of the Aitareya-aranyaka, while an imperfect MS. of an Aranyaka in the Royal Library at Berlin (Weber, Catalogue, p.20) begins, like the Aitareya-aranyaka, with a description of the Mahavrata, followed by discussions on the uktha in the second adhyaya; and then proceeds in the third adhyaya to give the story of Kitra Gangyayani in the same words as the Kaushitaki-upanishad in the first adhyaya. Other MSS. again adopt different divisions. In one MS. of the commentary (MS. A), the four adhyayas of the Upanishad are counted as sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth (ending with ityaranyake navamo 'dhyayah); in another (MS. P) the third and fourth adhyayas of the Upanishad are quoted as the fifth and sixth of the Kaushitakyaranyaka, possibly agreeing therefore, to a certain extent, with the Berlin MS. In a MS. of the Sankhayana Aranyaka in the Royal Library at Berlin, there are 15 adhyayas, 1 and 2 corresponding to Ait. Ar. 1 and 5; 3-6 containing the Kaushitaki-upanishad; 7 and 8 corresponding to Ait. Ar. 3 [*1]. Poley seems to have known a MS. in which the four adhyayas of the Upanishad formed the first, seventh, eighth, and ninth adhyayas of a Kaushitaki-brahmana.

As there were various recensions of the Kaushitaki-brahmana (the Sankhayana, Kauthuma, &c.), the Upanishad also exists in at least two texts. The commentator, in some of its MSS., refers to the various readings of the Sakhas, explaining them, whenever there seems to be occasion for it. I have generally followed the text which is presupposed by Sankarananda's Dipika, and contained in MSS. F, G (Cowell, Preface, p. v), so far as regards the third and fourth adhyayas. According to Professor Cowell, Vidyaranya in his Sarvopanishadarthanubhutiprakasa followed the text of the commentary, while Sankarakarya, if we may trust to extracts in his commentary on the Vedanta-sutras, followed the other text, contained in MS. A (Cowell, Preface, p. v).

[p. c]

The style of the commentator differs in so marked a manner from that of Sankarakarya, that even without the fact that the author of the commentary on the Kaushitaki-upanishad is called Sankarananda, it would have been difficult to ascribe it, as has been done by some scholars, to the famous Sankarananda. Sankarananda is called the teacher of Madhavakarya (Hall, Index, p. 98), and the disciple of Anandatma Muni (Hall, Index, p. 116).

I have had the great advantage of being able to consult for the Kaushitaki-upanishad, not only the text and commentary as edited by Professor Cowell, but also his excellent translation. If I differ from him in some points, this is but natural, considering the character of the text and the many difficulties that have still to be solved, before we can hope to arrive at a full understanding of these ancient philosophical treatises.

Footnotes

^xcviii:2 A Maha-kaushitaki-brahmana is quoted, but has not yet been met with.

^xcix:1 See Weber, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 50.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

V.

  

THE VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD.

THE Vagasaneyi-samhita-upanishad, commonly called from its beginning, Isa or Isavasya, forms the fortieth and concluding chapter of the Samhita of the White Yagur-veda. If the Samhitas are presupposed by the Brahmanas, at least in that form in which we possess them, then this Upanishad, being the only one that forms part of a Samhita, might claim a very early age. The Samhita of the White Yagur-veda, however, is acknowledged to be of modern origin, as compared with the Samhita of the Black Yagur-veda, and it would not be safe therefore to ascribe to this Upanishad a much higher antiquity than to those which have found a place in the older Brahmanas and Aranyakas.

There are differences between the text, as contained in the Yagur-veda-samhita, and the text of the Upanishad by itself. Those which are of some interest have been mentioned in the notes.

In some notes appended to the translation of this Upanishad I have called attention to what seems to me

[p. ci]

its peculiar character, namely, the recognition of the necessity of works as a preparation for the reception of the highest knowledge. This agrees well with the position occupied by this Upanishad at the end of the Samhita, in which the sacrificial works and the hymns that are to accompany them are contained. The doctrine that the moment a man is enlightened, he becomes free, as taught in other Upanishads, led to a rejection of all discipline and a condemnation of all sacrifices, which could hardly have been tolerated in the last chapter of the Yagur-veda-samhita, the liturgical Veda par excellence.

Other peculiarities of this Upanishad are the name Is, lord, a far more personal name for the highest Being than Brahman; the asurya (demoniacal) or asurya (sunless) worlds to which all go who have lost their self; Matarisvan, used in the sense of prana or spirit; asnaviram, without muscles, in the sense of incorporeal; and the distinction between sambhuti and asambhuti in verses 12-14.

The editions of the text, commentaries, and glosses, and the earlier translations may be seen in the works quoted before, p. lxxxiv.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD.

  

FIRST PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA [*1].

1. LET a man meditate on the syllable [*2] Om, called the udgitha; for the udgitha (a portion of the Sama-veda) is sung, beginning with Om.

The full account, however, of Om is this:--

2. The essence [*3] of all beings is the earth, the essence of the earth is water, the essence of water

[p. 2]

the plants, the essence of plants man, the essence of man speech, the essence of speech the Rig-veda, the essence of the Rig-veda the Sama-veda [*1], the essence of the Sama-veda the udgitha (which is Om).

3. That udgitha (Om) is the best of all essences, the highest, deserving the highest place [*2], the eighth.

4. What then is the Rik? What is the Saman? What is the udgitha? 'This is the question.

5. The Rik indeed is speech, Saman is breath, the udgitha is the syllable Om. Now speech and breath, or Rik and Saman, form one couple.

6. And that couple is joined together in the syllable Om. When two people come together, they fulfil each other's desire.

7. Thus he who knowing this, meditates on the syllable (Om), the udgitha, becomes indeed a fulfiller of desires.

8. That syllable is a syllable of permission, for whenever we permit anything, we say Om, yes. Now permission is gratification. He who knowing this meditates on the syllable (Om), the udgitha, becomes indeed a gratifier of desires.

9. By that syllable does the threefold knowledge (the sacrifice, more particularly the Soma-sacrifice, as founded on the three Vedas) proceed. When the Adhvaryu priest gives an order, he says Om. When the Hotri priest recites, he says Om. When the Udgatri priest sings, he says Om,

[p. 3]

[paragraph continues] --all for the glory of that syllable. The threefold knowledge (the sacrifice) proceeds by the greatness of that syllable (the vital breaths), and by its essence (the oblations) [*1].

10. Now therefore it would seem to follow, that both he who knows this (the true meaning of the syllable Om), and he who does not, perform the same sacrifice [*2]. But this is not so, for knowledge and ignorance are different. The sacrifice which a man performs with knowledge, faith, and the Upanishad [*3] is more powerful. This is the full account of the syllable Om.

Footnotes

^1:1 The Khandogya-upanishad begins with recommending meditation on the syllable Om, a sacred syllable that had to be pronounced at the beginning of each Veda and of every recitation of Vedic hymns. As connected with the Sama-veda, that syllable Om is called udgitha. Its more usual name is pranava. The object of the Upanishad is to explain the various meanings which the syllable Om may assume in the mind of a devotee, some of them being extremely artificial and senseless, till at last the highest meaning of Om is reached, viz. Brahman, the intelligent cause of the universe.

^1:2 Akshara means both syllable and the imperishable, i.e. Brahman.

^1:3 Essence, rasa, is explained in different ways, as origin, support, end, cause, and effect. Rasa means originally the sap of trees. That sap may be conceived either as the essence extracted from the tree, or as what gives vigour and life to a tree. In the former case it might be transferred to the conception of effect, in the latter to that of cause. In our sentence it has sometimes the one, sometimes the other meaning. Earth is the support of all beings, water pervades the earth, plants arise from water, man lives by plants, speech is the best part of man, the Rig-veda the best part of speech, the Sama-veda the best extract from the Rik, udgitha, or the syllable Om, the crown of the Sama-veda.

^2:1 Because most of the hymns of the Sama-veda are taken from the Rig-veda.

^2:2 Parardhya is here derived from para, highest, and ardha, place. The eighth means the eighth or East in the series of essences.

^3:1 These are allusions to sacrificial technicalities, all intended to show the importance of the syllable Om, partly as a mere word, used at the sacrifices, partly as the mysterious name of the Highest Self. As every priest at the Soma-sacrifices, in which three classes of priests are always engaged, has to begin his part of the ceremonial with Om, therefore the whole sacrifice is said to be dependent on the syllable Om, and to be for the glory of that syllable, as an emblem of the Highest Self, a knowledge of whom is the indirect result of all sacrifices. The greatness of the syllable Om is explained by the vital breaths of the priest, the sacrificer, and his wife; its essence by rice, corn, &c., which constitute the oblations. Why breath and food are due to the syllable Om is explained by the sacrifice, which is dependent on that syllable, ascending to the sun, the sun sending rain, rain producing food, and food producing breath and life.

^3:2 He who simply pronounces the syllable Om as part of his recitation at a sacrifice, and he who knows the hidden meaning of that syllable, both may perform the same sacrifice. But that performed by the latter is more powerful, because knowledge is better than ignorance. This is, as usual, explained by some comparisons. It is true that both he who knows the quality of the haritaki and he who does not, are purged alike if they take it. But on the other hand, if a jeweller and a mere clod sell a precious stone, the knowledge of the former bears better fruit than the ignorance of the latter.

^3:3 Upanishad is here explained by yoga, and yoga by devatadivishayam upasanam, meditation directed to certain deities, More [p. 4] likely, however, it refers to this very upanishad, i.e. to the udgithavidya, the doctrine of the secret meaning of Om, as here explained.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

SECOND KHANDA [*1].

1. When the Devas and Asuras [*2] struggled together, both of the race of Pragapati, the Devas took the udgitha [*3] (Om), thinking they would vanquish the Asuras with it.

2. They meditated on the udgitha [*3] (Om) as the breath (scent) in the nose [*4], but the Asuras pierced it (the breath) with evil. Therefore we smell by the breath in the nose both what is good-smelling and what is bad-smelling. For the breath was pierced by evil.

3. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as speech, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. Therefore we speak both truth and falsehood. For speech is pierced by evil.

4. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as the eye, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. Therefore

[p. 5]

we see both what is sightly and unsightly. For the eye is pierced by evil.

5. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as the ear, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. Therefore we hear both what should be heard and what should not be heard. For the car is pierced by evil.

6. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as the mind, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. Therefore we conceive both what should be conceived and what should not be conceived. For the mind is pierced by evil.

7. Then comes this breath (of life) in the mouth [*1]. They meditated on the udgitha (Om) as that breath. When the Asuras came to it, they were scattered, as (a ball of earth) would be scattered when hitting a solid stone.

8. Thus, as a ball of earth is scattered when hitting on a solid stone, will he be scattered who wishes evil to one who knows this, or who persecutes him; for he is a solid stone.

9. By it (the breath in the mouth) he distinguishes neither what is good nor what is bad-smelling, for that breath is free from evil. What we eat and drink with it supports the other vital breaths (i. e. the senses, such as smell, &c.) When at the time of death he [*2] does not find that breath (in the

[p. 6]

mouth, through which he eats and drinks and lives), then he departs. He opens the mouth at the time of death (as if wishing to eat).

10. Angiras [*1] meditated on the udgitha (Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be Angiras, i. e. the essence of the members (anganam rasah);

11. Therefore Brihaspati meditated on udgitha (Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be Brihaspati, for speech is brihati, and he (that breath) is the lord (pati) of speech;

12. Therefore Ayasya meditated on the udgitha (Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be Ayasya, because it comes (ayati) from the mouth (asya);

13. Therefore Vaka Dalbhya knew it. He was the Udgatri (singer) of the Naimishiya-sacrificers, and by singing he obtained for them their wishes.

14. He who knows this, and meditates on the syllable Om (the imperishable udgitha) as the breath of life in the mouth, he obtains all wishes by singing. So much for the udgitha (Om) as meditated on with reference to the body [*2].

Footnotes

^4:1 A very similar story is told in the Brihad-aranyaka I, 1, 3, 1. But though the coincidences between the two are considerable, amounting sometimes to verbal identity, the purport of the two seems to be different. See Vedanta-sutra III, 3, 6.

^4:2 Devas and Asuras, gods and demons, are here explained by the commentator as the good and evil inclinations of man; Pragapati as man in general.

^4:3 Udgitha stands, according to the commentator, for the sacrificial act to be performed by the Udgatri, the Sama-veda priest, with the udgitha hymns; and as these sacrificial acts always form part of the Gyotishtoma &c., these great Soma-sacrifices are really intended. In the second place, however, the commentator takes udgitha in the sense of Udgatri, the performer of the udgitha, which is or was by the Devas thought to be the breath in the nose. I have preferred to take udgitha in the sense of Om, and all that is implied by it.

^4:4 They asked that breath should recite the udgitha. Comm.

^5:1 Mukhya prana is used in two senses, the principal or vital breath, also called sreshtha, and the breath in the mouth, also called asanya.

^5:2 According to the commentator, the assemblage of the other vital breaths or senses is here meant. They depart when the breath of the mouth, sometimes called sarvambhari, all-supporting, does no longer, by eating and drinking, support them.

^6:1 The paragraphs from 10 to 14 are differently explained by Indian commentators. By treating the nominatives angiras, brihaspatis, and ayasyas (here the printed text reads ayasyam) as accusatives, or by admitting the omission of an iti after them, they connect paragraphs 9, 10, and 11 with paragraph 12, and thus gain the meaning that Vaka Dalbhya meditated on the breath in the mouth as Angiras, Brihaspati, and Ayasya, instead of those saints having themselves thus meditated; and that he, knowing the secret names and qualities of the breath, obtained, when acting as Udgatri priest, the wishes of those for whom he sacrificed. Tena is difficult to explain, unless we take it in the sense of tenanusishtah, taught by him.

^6:2 Adhyatma means with reference to the body, not with reference to the self or the soul. Having explained the symbolical [p. 7] meaning of Om as applied to the body and its organs of sense, he now explains its symbolical meaning adhidaivatam, i.e. as applied to divine beings.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

THIRD KHANDA.

Now follows the meditation on the udgitha with reference to the gods. Let a man meditate on the udgitha (Om) as he who sends warmth (the sun in the sky). When the sun rises it sings as Udgatri for the sake of all creatures. When it rises it destroys the fear of darkness. He who knows this, is able to destroy the fear of darkness (ignorance).

2. This (the breath in the mouth) and that (the sun) are the same. This is hot and that is hot. This they call svara (sound), and that they call pratyasvara [*1] (reflected sound). Therefore let a man meditate on the udgitha (Om) as this and that (as breath and as sun).

3. Then let a man meditate on the udgitha (Om) as vyana indeed. If we breathe up, that is prana, the up-breathing. If we breathe down, that is apana, the down-breathing. The combination of prana and apana is vyana, back-breathing or holding in of the breath. This vyana is speech. Therefore when we utter speech, we neither breathe up nor down.

4. Speech is Rik, and therefore when a man utters a Rik verse he neither breathes up nor down.

[p. 8]

Rik is Saman, and therefore when a man utters a Saman verse he neither breathes up nor down.

Saman is udgitha, and therefore when a man sings (the udgitha, Om) he neither breathes up nor down.

5. And other works also which require strength, such as the production of fire by rubbing, running a race, stringing a strong bow, are performed without breathing up or down. Therefore let a man meditate on the udgitha (Om) as vyana.

6. Let a man meditate on the syllables of the udgitha, i. e. of the word udgitha. Ut is breath (prana), for by means of breath a man rises (uttishthati). Gi is speech, for speeches are called girah. Tha is food, for by means of food all subsists (sthita).

7. Ut is heaven, gi the sky, tha the earth. Ut is the sun, gi the air, tha the fire. Ut is the Sama-veda,, gi the Yagur-veda, tha the Rig-veda [*1].

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of speech itself [*1], to him who thus knowing meditates on those

[p. 10]

syllables of the name of udgitha, he becomes rich in food and able to eat food.

8. Next follows the fulfilment of prayers. Let a man thus meditate on the Upasaranas, i. e. the objects which have to be approached by meditation: Let him (the Udgatri) quickly reflect on the Saman with which he is going to praise;

9. Let him quickly reflect on the Rik in which that Saman occurs; on the Rishi (poet) by whom it was seen or composed; on the Devata (object) which he is going to praise;

10. On the metre in which he is going to praise; on the tune with which he is going to sing for himself;

11. On the quarter of the world which he is going to praise. Lastly, having approached himself (his name, family, &c.) by meditation, let him sing the hymn of praise, reflecting on his desire, and avoiding all mistakes in pronunciation, &c. Quickly [*1] will the desire be then fulfilled to him, for the sake of which he may have offered his hymn of praise, yea, for which he may have offered his hymn of praise [*2].

Footnotes

^7:1 As applied to breath, svara is explained by the commentator in the sense of moving, going out; pratyasvara, as applied to the sun, is explained as returning every day. More likely, however, svara as applied to breath means sound, Om itself being called svara (Kh. Up. I, 4, 3), and prasvara in the Rig-veda-pratisakhya, 882. As applied to the sun, svara and pratyasvara were probably taken in the sense of light and reflected light.

^8:1 The commentator supplies explanations to all these fanciful etymologies. The heaven is ut, because it is high; the sky is gi, because it gives out all the worlds (giranat); earth is tha, because it is the place (sthana) of living beings. The sun is ut, because it is high. The wind is gi, because it gives out fire, &c. (giranat); fire is tha, because it is the place (sthana) of the sacrifice. The Sama-veda is ut, because it is praised as svarga; the Yagur-veda is gi, because the gods take the oblation offered with a Yagus; the Rig-veda is tha, because the Sama verses stand in it. All this is very childish, and worse than childish, but it is interesting as a phase of human folly which is not restricted to the Brahmans of India. I take the following passage from an interesting article, 'On the Ogam Beithluisnin and on Scythian Letters,' by Dr. Charles Graves, Bishop of Limerick. 'An Irish antiquary,' he says, 'writing several hundred years ago, proposes to give an account of the origin of the names of the notes in the musical scale.

'"It is asked here, according to Saint Augustine, What is chanting, or why is it so called? Answer. From this word cantalena; [p. 9] and cantalena is the same thing as lenis cantus, i. e. a soft, sweet chant to God, and to the Virgin Mary, and to all the Saints. And the reason why the word puinec (puncta) is so called is because the points (or musical notes) ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, hurt the devil and puncture him. And it is thus that these points are to be understood: viz. When Moses the son of Amram, with his people in their Exodus was crossing the Red Sea, and Pharaoh and his host were following him, this was the chant which Moses had to protect him from Pharaoh and his host--these six points in praise of the Lord:--

'"The first point of these, i. e. ut: and ut in the Greek is the same as liberat in the Latin; and that is the same as saer in the Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from the harm of the devil.

"'The second point of them, i.e. re: and re is the same as saer; i. e. O God, deliver us from everything hurtful and malignant.

'"The third point, i.e. mi: and mi in the Greek is the same as militum in the Latin; and that is the same as ridere (a knight) in the Gaelic; i. e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those knights who are pursuing us.

'"The fourth point, i.e. fa: and fa in the Greek is the same as famulus in the Latin; and that is the same as mug (slave) in the Gaelic; i. e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those slaves who are pursuing us.

'"The fifth point, i.e. sol: and sol is the same as grian (sun); and that is the same as righteousness; because righteousness and Christ are not different; i. e. O Christ, said Moses, deliver us.

'"The sixth point, i. e. la, is the same as lav; and that is the same as indail (wash); i.e. O God, said Moses, wash away our sins from us.

'"And on the singing of that laud Pharaoh and his host were drowned.

'"Understand, O man, that in whatever place this laud, i. e. this chant, is sung, the devil is bound by it, and his power is extirpated thence, and the power of God is called in."

'We have been taught that the names of the first six notes [p. 10] in the gamut were suggested by the initial syllables of the first six hemistichs in one of the stanzas of a hymn to St. John:

Ut queant laxis
 Resonare fibris
 Mira gestorum
 Famuli tuorum,
 Solve polluti
 Labii reatum,
        Sancte Ioannes.'

^9:1 The milk of speech consists in rewards to be obtained by the Rig-veda, &c. Or we may translate, Speech yields its milk to him who is able to milk speech.

^10:1 Abhyaso ha yat, lit. depend on it that it will be fulfilled, but always explained by quickly. See Kh. Up. II, 1, 4; III, 19, 4; V, 10, 7. Frequently, but wrongly, written with a dental s.

^10:2 The repetition of the last sentence is always an indication that a chapter is finished. This old division into chapters is of great importance for a proper study of the Upanishads.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the syllable Om, for the udgitha is sung beginning with Om. And this is the full account of the syllable Om--

2. The Devas, being afraid of death, entered upon (the performance of the sacrifice prescribed in) the threefold knowledge (the three Vedas). They covered themselves with the metrical hymns. Because they covered (khad) themselves with the hymns, therefore the hymns are called khandas.

3. Then, as a fisherman might observe a fish in the water, Death observed the Devas in the Rik, Yagus, and Saman-(sacrifices). And the Devas seeing this, rose from the Rik, Yagus, and Saman-sacrifices, and entered the Svara [*1], i.e. the Om (they meditated on the Om).

4. When a man has mastered the Rig-veda, he says quite loud Om; the same, when he has mastered the Saman and the Yagus. This Svara is the imperishable (syllable), the immortal, free from fear. Because the Devas entered it, therefore they became immortal, and free from fear.

5. He who knowing this loudly pronounces (pranauti) [*2]- that syllable, enters the same (imperishable) syllable, the Svara, the immortal, free from fear, and having entered it, becomes immortal, as the Devas are immortal.

Footnotes

^11:1 Cf. I, 3, 2.

^11:2 Pranauti, he lauds, i. e. he meditates on. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. The udgitha is the pranava [*1], the pranava is the udgitha. And as the udgitha is the sun [*2], So is the pranava, for he (the sun) goes sounding Om.

2. 'Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my only one,' thus said Kaushitaki to his son. 'Do thou revolve his rays, then thou wilt have many sons.' So much in reference to the Devas.

3. Now with reference to the body. Let a man meditate on the udgitha as the breath (in the mouth), for he goes sounding Om [*3].

4. 'Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my only son,' thus said Kaushitaki to his son. 'Do thou therefore sing praises to the breath as manifold, if thou wishest to have many sons.'

5. He who knows that the udgitha is the pranava, and the pranava the udgitha, rectifies from the seat of the Hotri priest any mistake committed by the Udgatri priest in performing the udgitha, yea, in performing the udgitha.

Footnotes

^12:1 Pranava is the name used chiefly by the followers of the Rig-veda, udgitha the name used by the followers of the Sama-veda. Both words are intended for the syllable Om.

^12:2 Cf. Kh. Up. I, 3, 1.

^12:3 The breath in the mouth, or the chief breath, says Om, i. e. gives permission to the five senses to act, just as the sun, by saying Om, gives permission to all living beings to move about.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. The Rik (veda) is this earth, the Saman (veda) is fire. This Saman (fire) rests on that Rik (earth) [*4]. Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik.

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Sa is this earth, ama is fire, and that makes Sama.

2. The Rik is the sky, the Saman air. This Saman (air) rests on that Rik (sky). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the sky, ama the air, and that makes Sama.

3. Rik is heaven, Saman the sun. This Saman (sun) rests on that Rik (heaven). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is heaven, ama the sun, and that makes Sama.

4. Rik is the stars, Saman the moon. This Saman (moon) rests on that Rik (stars). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the stars, ama the moon, and that makes Sama.

5. Rik is the white light of the sun, Saman the blue exceeding darkness [*1] (in the sun). This Saman (darkness) rests on that Rik (brightness). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik.

6. Sa is the white light of the sun, ama the blue exceeding darkness, and that makes Sama.

Now that golden [*2] person, who is seen within the sun, with golden beard and golden hair, golden altogether to the very tips of his nails,

7. Whose eyes are like blue lotus's [*3], his name is ut, for he has risen (udita) above all evil. He also who knows this, rises above all evil.

8. Rik and Saman are his joints, and therefore he is udgitha. And therefore he who praises him

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] (the ut) is called the Ud-gatri [*1] (the out-singer). He (the golden person, called ut) is lord of the worlds beyond that (sun), and of all the wishes of the Devas (inhabiting those worlds). So much with reference to the Devas.

Footnotes

^12:4 The Sama verses are mostly taken from the Rig-veda.

^13:1 The darkness which is seen by those who can concentrate their sight on the sun.

^13:2 Bright as gold.

^13:3 The colour of the lotus is described by a comparison with the Kapyasa, the seat of the monkey (kapiprishthanto yena upavisati), It was probably a botanical name.

^14:1 Name of the principal priest of the Sama-veda.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. Now with reference to the body. Rik is speech, Saman breath [*2]. This Saman (breath) rests on that Rik (speech). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is speech, ama is breath, and that makes Sama.

2. Rik is the eye, Saman the self [*3]. This Saman (shadow) rests on that Rik (eye). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the eye, ama the self, and that makes Sama.

3. Rik is the ear, Saman the mind. This Saman (mind) rests on that Rik (ear). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the ear, ama the mind, and that makes Sama.

4. Rik is the white light of the eye, Saman the blue exceeding darkness. This Saman (darkness) rests on the Rik (brightness). Therefore the Saman is sung as resting on the Rik. Sa is the white light of the eye, ama the blue exceeding darkness, and that makes Sama.

5. Now the person who is seen in the eye, he is Rik, he is Saman, Uktha [*4], Yagus, Brahman. The form of that person (in the eye) is the same [*5] as the

[p. 15]

form of the other person (in the sun), the joints of the one (Rik and Saman) are the joints of the other, the name of the one (ut) is the name of the other.

6. He is lord of the worlds beneath that (the self in the eye), and of all the wishes of men. Therefore all who sing to the vina (lyre), sing him, and from him also they obtain wealth.

7. He who knowing this sings a Saman, sings to both (the adhidaivata and adhyatma self, the person in the sun and the person in the eye, as one and the same person). He obtains through the one, yea, he obtains the worlds beyond that, and the wishes of the Devas;

8. And he obtains through the other the worlds beneath that, and the wishes of men.

Therefore an Udgatri priest who knows this, may say (to the sacrificer for whom he officiates);

9. 'What wish shall I obtain for you by my songs?' For he who knowing this sings a Saman is able to obtain wishes through his song, yea, through his song.

Footnotes

^14:2 Breath in the nose, sense of smelling. Comm.

^14:3 The shadow-self, the likeness or image thrown upon the eye; see Kh. Up. VIII, 9, x.

^14:4 A set of hymns to be recited, whereas the Saman is sung, and the Yagus muttered.

^14:5 Cf. Kh. Up. I, 6, 6.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. There were once three men, well-versed in udgitha [*1], Silaka Salavatya, Kaikitayana, Dalbhya, and Pravahana Gaivali. They said: 'We are well-versed in udgitha. Let us have a discussion on udgitha.'

2. They all agreed and sat down. Then Pravahana Gaivali [*2] said: 'Sirs, do you both speak first,

[p. 16]

for I wish to hear what two Brahmanas [*1] have to say.

3. Then Silaka Salavatya said to Kaikitayana Dalbhya: 'Let me ask you.'

'Ask,' he replied.

4. 'What is the origin of the Saman?' 'Tone (svara),' he replied.

'What is the origin of tone?' 'Breath,' he replied.

'What is the origin of breath?' 'Food,' he replied.

'What is the origin of food?' 'Water,' he replied.

5. 'What is the origin of water?' 'That world (heaven),' he replied.

'And what is the origin of that world?'--

He replied: 'Let no man carry the Saman beyond the world of svarga (heaven). We place (recognise) the Saman in the world of svarga, for the Saman is extolled as svarga (heaven).'

6. Then said Silaka Salavatya to Kaikitayana Dalbhya: 'O Dalbhya, thy Saman is not firmly established. And if any one were to say, Your head shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your head would now fall.'

7. 'Well then, let me know this from you, Sir,' said Dalbhya.

'Know it,' replied Silaka Salavatya.

'What is the origin of that world (heaven)?' 'This world,' he replied.

'And what is the origin of this world?'--

He replied: 'Let no man carry the Saman beyond this world as its rest. We place the Saman

[p. 17]

in this world as its rest, for the Saman is extolled as rest.'

8. Then said Pravahana Gaivali to Silaka Salavatya: 'Your Saman (the earth), O Salavatya, has an end. And if any one were to say, Your head shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your head would now fall.'

'Well then, let me know this from you, Sir,' said Salavatya.

'Know it,' replied Gaivali.

Footnotes

^15:1 Cognisant of the deeper meanings of udgitha, i. e. Om.

^15:2 He, though not being a Brahmana, turns out to be the only one who knows the true meaning of udgitha, i. e. the Highest Brahman.

^16:1 In V, 3, 5, Pravahana Gaivali is distinctly called a raganyabandhu.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. 'What is the origin of this world?' 'Ether [*1], 'he replied. For all these beings take their rise from the ether, and return into the ether. Ether is older than these, ether is their rest.

2. He is indeed the udgitha (Om = Brahman), greater than great (parovariyas), he is without end.

He who knowing this meditates on the udgitha, the greater than great, obtains what is greater than great, he conquers the worlds which are greater than great.

3. Atidhanvan Saunaka, having taught this udgitha to Udara-sandilya, said: 'As long as they will know in your family this udgitha, their life in this world will be greater than great.

4. 'And thus also will be their state in the other world.' He who thus knows the udgitha, and meditates on it thus, his life in this world will be greater than great, and also his state in the other world, yea, in the other world.

Footnotes

^17:1 Ether, or we might translate it by space, both being intended, however, as names or symbols of the Highest Brahman. See Vedanta-sutra I, 1, 22.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

TENTH KHANDA.

1. When the Kurus had been destroyed by (hail) stones [*1], Ushasti Kakrayana lived as a beggar with his virgin [*2] wife at Ibhyagrama.

2. Seeing a chief eating beans, he begged of him. The chief said: 'I have no more, except those which are put away for me here.'

3. Ushasti said: 'Give me to eat of them.' He gave him the beans, and said: 'There is something to drink also! Then said Ushasti: 'If I drank of it, I should have drunk what was left by another, and is therefore unclean.'

4. The chief said: 'Were not those beans also left over and therefore unclean?'

'No,' he replied; 'for I should not have lived, if I had not eaten them, but the drinking of water would be mere pleasure [*3].'

5. Having eaten himself, Ushasti gave the remaining beans to his wife. But she, having eaten before, took them and put them away.

6. Rising the next morning, Ushasti said to her: 'Alas, if we could only get some food, we might gain a little wealth. The king here is going to offer a sacrifice, he should choose me for all the priestly offices.'

[p. 19]

7. His wife said to him: 'Look, here are those beans of yours.' Having eaten them, he went to the sacrifice which was being performed.

8. He went and sat down on the orchestra near the Udgatris, who were going to sing their hymns of praise. And he said to the Prastotri (the leader):

9. 'Prastotri, if you, without knowing [*1] the deity which belongs to the prastava (the hymns &c. of the Prastotri), are going to sing it, your head will fall off.'

10. In the same manner he addressed the Udgatri: 'Udgatri, if you, without knowing the deity which belongs to the udgitha (the hymns of the Udgatri), are going to sing it, your head will fall off.'

11. In the same manner he addressed the Pratihartri: 'Pratihartri, if you, without knowing the deity which belongs to the pratihara (the hymns of the Pratihartri), are going to sing it, your head will fall off.'

They stopped, and sat down in silence.

Footnotes

^18:1 When they had been killed either by stone weapons, or by a shower of stones, which produced a famine in the land. Comm.

^18:2 Atiki is not the name of the wife of Ushasti, nor does it mean strong enough to travel. Sankara explains it as anupagatapayodharidistrivyangana, and Anandagiri adds, Svairasamkare 'pi na vyabhikarasanketi darsayitum atikyeti viseshanam. She was so young that she was allowed to run about freely, without exciting any suspicion. Another commentator says, Grihad bahirgantumarha anupagatapayodhara.

^18:3 Or, according to the commentator, 'water I can get whenever I like.'

^19:1 The commentator is at great pains to show that a priest may officiate without knowing the secret meanings here assigned to certain parts of the sacrifice, and without running any risk of punishment. Only, if another priest is present, who is initiated, then the uninitiated, taking his place, is in danger of losing his head.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA.

1. Then the sacrificer said to him: 'I should like to know who you are, Sir.' He replied: 'I am Ushasti Kakrayana.'

2. He said: 'I looked for you, Sir, for all these sacrificial offices, but not finding you [*2], I chose others.'

[p. 20]

3. 'But now, Sir, take all the sacrificial offices.'

Ushasti said: 'Very well; but let those, with my permission, perform the hymns of praise. Only as much wealth as you give to them, so much give to me also.'

The sacrificer assented.

4. Then the Prastotri approached him, saying: 'Sir, you said to me, "Prastotri, if you, without knowing the deity which belongs to the prastava, are going to sing it, your head will fall off,"--which then is that deity?'

5. He said: 'Breath (prana). For all these beings merge into breath alone, and from breath they arise. This is the deity belonging to the prastava. If, without knowing that deity, you had sung forth your hymns, your head would have fallen off, after you had been warned by me.'

6. Then the Udgatri approached him, saying: 'Sir, you said to me, "Udgatri, if you, without knowing the deity which belongs to the udgitha, are going to sing it, your head will fall off,"--which then is that deity?'

7. He said: 'The sun (aditya). For all these beings praise the sun when it stands on high. This is the deity belonging to the udgitha. If, without knowing that deity, you had sung out your hymns, your head would have fallen off, after you had been warned by me.'

8. Then the Pratihartri approached him, saying: 'Sir, you said to me, "Pratihartri, if you, without knowing the deity belonging to the pratihara, are going to sing it, your head will fall off,"--Which then is that deity?'

9. He said: 'Food (anna). For all these beings

[p. 21]

live when they partake of food. This is the deity belonging to the pratihara. If, without knowing that deity, you had sung your hymns, your head would have fallen off, after you had been warned by me .'

Footnotes

^19:2 Should it be avittva, as in I, 2, 9?

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. Now follows the udgitha of the dogs. Vaka Dalbhya, or, as he was also called, Glava Maitreya, went out to repeat the Veda (in a quiet place).

2. A white (dog) appeared before him, and other dogs gathering round him, said to him: 'Sir, sing and get us food, we are hungry.'

3. The white dog said to them: 'Come to me to-morrow morning.' Vaka Dalbhya, or, as he was also called, Glava Maitreya, watched.

4. The dogs came on, holding together, each dog keeping the tail of the preceding dog in his mouth, as the priests do when they are going to sing praises with the Vahishpavamana hymn [*2]. After they had settled down, they began to say Hin.

5. 'Om, let us eat! Om, let us drink! Om, may the divine Varuna, Pragapati, Savitri [*3] bring us food! Lord of food, bring hither food, bring it, Om!'

Footnotes

^21:1 There are certain etymological fancies for assigning each deity to a certain portion of the Sama-veda ceremonial. Thus prana is assigned to the prastava, because both words begin with pra. Aditya is assigned to the udgitha, because the sun is ut. Anna, food, is assigned to the pratihara, because food is taken, pratihriyate, &c.

^21:2 This alludes to a ceremony where the priests have to walk in procession, each priest holding the gown of the preceding priest.

^21:3 The commentator explains Varuna and Pragapati as epithets of Savitri, or the sun, meaning rain-giver and man-protector.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. The syllable Hau [*2] is this world (the earth), the syllable Hai [*3] the air, the syllable Atha the moon, the syllable Iha the self, the syllable I [*4] is Agni, fire.

2. The syllable U is the sun, the syllable E is the Nihava or invocation, the syllable Auhoi [*5] is the Visve Devas, the syllable Hin is Pragapati, Svara [*6] (tone) is breath (prana), the syllable Ya is food, the syllable Vag [*7] is Virag.

3. The thirteenth stobha syllable, viz. the indistinct syllable Hun, is the Undefinable (the Highest Brahman).

4. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of speech itself to him who knows this Upanishad (secret doctrine) of the Samans in this wise. He becomes rich in food, and able to eat food [*8],--yea, able to eat food.

Footnotes

^22:1 The syllables here mentioned are the so-called stobhaksharas, sounds used in the musical recitation of the Saman hymns, probably to fill out the intervals in the music for which there were no words in the hymns. These syllables are marked in the MSS. of the Sama-veda, but their exact character and purpose are not quite clear.

^22:2 A stobha syllable used in the Rathantara Saman.

^22:3 Used in the Vamadevya Saman.

^22:4 The Saman addressed to Agni takes the syllable i as nidhana.

^22:5 The stobha syllables used in the Saman addressed to the Visve Devas.

^22:6 See Kh. Up. I, 4, 4.

^22:7 The commentator takes vag as a stobha, as a syllable occurring in hymns addressed to Virag, and as implying either the deity Virag or food.

^22:8 wealthy and healthy.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

SECOND PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Meditation on the whole [*1] of the Saman is good, and people, when anything is good, say it is Saman; when it is not good, it is not Saman.

2. Thus they also say, he approached him with Saman, i. e. becomingly; and he approached him without Saman, i. e. unbecomingly.

:3. And they also say, truly this is Saman for us, i.e. it is good for us, when it is good; and truly that is not Saman for us, i. e. it is not good for us, when it is not good.

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the Saman as good, depend upon it all good qualities will approach quickly, aye, they will become his own [*2].

Footnotes

^23:1 Hitherto meditation on certain portions only of the Sama-veda and the Sama-sacrifice had been enjoined, and their deeper meaning explained. Now the same is done for the whole of the Saman.

^23:2 Cf. Kh. Up. III, 19, 4.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman [*3] as the five worlds. The hinkara is, the earth, the prastava the fire, the udgitha the sky, the pratihara the sun, the nidhana heaven; so in an ascending line.

2. In a descending line, the hinkara is heaven,

[p. 24]

the prastava the sun, the udgitha the sky, the pratihara the fire, the nidhana the earth.

3. The worlds in an ascending and in a descending line belong to him who knowing this meditates on the fivefold Saman as the worlds [*1].

Footnotes

^23:3 The five forms in which the Saman is used for sacrificial purposes. The Saman is always to be under-stood as the Good, as Dharma, and as Brahman.

^24:1 The commentator supplies some fanciful reasons why each of the five Samans is identified with certain objects. Earth is said to be the hinkara, because both always come first. Agni is prastava, because sacrifices are praised in the fire (prastuyante). The sky is udgitha, because it is also called gagana, and both words have the letter g in common. The sun is pratihara, because everybody wishes the sun to come towards him (prati). Heaven is nidhana, because those who depart from here are placed there (nidhiyante), &c.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman as rain. The hinkara is wind (that brings the rain); the prastava is, 'the cloud is come;' the udgitha is, 'it rains;' the pratihara, 'it flashes, it thunders;'

2. The nidhana is, 'it stops.' There is rain for him, and he brings rain for others who thus knowing meditates on the fivefold Saman as rain.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman in all waters. When the clouds gather, that is the hinkara; when it rains, that is the prastava that which flows in the east [*2], that is the udgitha that which flows in the west [*3], that is the pratihara the sea is the nidhana.

2. He does not die in water [*4], nay, he is rich in

[p. 25]

water who knowing this meditates on the fivefold Saman as all waters.

Footnotes

^24:2 The Ganges, &c. Comm.

^24:3 The Narmada, &c. Comm.

^24:4 The commentator adds, 'unless he wishes to die in the Ganges.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman as the seasons. The hinkara is spring, the prastava summer (harvest of yava, &c.), the udgitha the rainy season, the pratihara autumn, the nidhana winter.

2. The seasons belong to him, nay, he is always in season (successful) who knowing this meditates on the fivefold Saman as the seasons.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman in animals. The hinkara is goats, the prastava sheep, the udgitha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana man.

2. Animals belong to him, nay, he is rich in animals who knowing this meditates on the fivefold Saman as animals.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman, which is greater than great, as the pranas (senses). The hinkara is smell [*1] (nose), the prastava speech (tongue), the udgitha sight (eye), the pratihara hearing (ear), the nidhana mind. These are one greater than the other.

2. What is greater than great belongs to him, nay, he conquers the worlds which are greater than

[p. 26]

great, who knowing this meditates on the fivefold Saman, which is greater than great, as the pranas (senses).

Footnotes

^25:1 Prana is explained by ghrana, smell; possibly ghrana may have been the original reading. Anyhow, it cannot be the mukhya prana here, because it is distinctly represented as the lowest sense.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. Next for the sevenfold Saman. Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Saman in speech. Whenever there is in speech the syllable hun [*1], that is hinkara, pra is the prastava, a is the adi, the first, i.e. Om,

2. Ud is the udgitha, pra the pratihara, upa the upadrava, ni the nidhana.

3. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of speech itself, to him who knowing this meditates on the sevenfold Saman in speech. He becomes rich in food, and able to eat food.

Footnotes

^26:1 These are again the stobhaksharas, or musical syllables used in the performance of the Saman hymns; see <page 22>.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Saman as the sun. The sun is Saman, because he is always the same (sama); he is Saman because he is the same, everybody thinking he looks towards me, he looks towards me [*2].

2. Let him know that all beings are dependent on him (the sun). What he is before his rising, that is the hinkara. On it animals are dependent. Therefore animals say hin (before sunrise), for they share the hinkara of that Saman (the sun).

3. What he is when first risen, that is the prastava. On it men are dependent. Therefore men love praise (prastuti) and celebrity, for they share the prastava of that Saman.

[p. 27]

4. What he is at the time of the sangava [*1], that is the adi, the first, the Om. On it birds are dependent. Therefore birds fly about in the sky without support, holding themselves, for they share the adi [*2] (the Om) of that Saman.

5. What he is just at noon, that is the udgitha. On it the Devas are dependent (because they are brilliant). Therefore they are the best of all the descendants of Pragapati, for they share the udgitha of that Saman.

6. What he is after midday and before afternoon, that is the pratihara. On it all germs are dependent. Therefore these, having been conceived (pratihrita), do not fall, for they share the pratihara of that Saman.

7. What he is after the afternoon and before sunset, that is the upadrava. On it the animals of the forest are dependent. Therefore, when they see a man, they run (upadravanti) to the forest as a safe hiding-place, for they share the upadrava of that Saman.

8. What he is when he first sets, that is the nidhana. On it the fathers are dependent. Therefore they put them [*3] down (nidadhati), for they share the nidhana of that Saman. Thus a man meditates on the sevenfold Saman as the sun.

Footnotes

^26:2 Cf. Kh. Up. II, 2, 2. Comm.

^27:1 When the sun puts forth his rays, and when the cows are together with their calves, i.e. as Rajendralal Mitra says, after the cows have been milked and are allowed by the cowherds to suckle their young.

^27:2 The tertium comparationis is here the a of adi and the a of adaya, i. e. holding. The d might have been added.

^27:3 The cakes for the ancestral spirits, or the spirits themselves.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

TENTH KHANDA.

1. Next let a man meditate on the sevenfold Saman which is uniform in itself [*1] and leads beyond death. The word hinkara has three syllables, the word prastava has three syllables: that is equal (sama).

2. The word adi (first, Om) has two syllables, the word pratihara has four syllables. Taking one syllable from that over, that is equal (sama).

3. The word udgitha has three syllables, the word upadrava has four syllables. With three and three syllables it should be equal. One syllable being left over, it becomes trisyllabic. Hence it is equal.

4. The word nidhana has three syllables, therefore it is equal. These make twenty-two syllables.

5. With twenty-one syllables a man reaches the sun (and death), for the sun is the twenty-first [*2] from here; with the twenty-second he conquers what is beyond the sun: that is blessedness, that is freedom from grief

6. He obtains here the victory over the sun (death), and there is a higher victory than the victory over the sun for him, who knowing this meditates on the sevenfold Saman as uniform in itself, which leads beyond death, yea, which leads beyond death.

Footnotes

^28:1 Atmasammita is explained by the commentator either as having the same number of syllables in the names of the different Samans, or as equal to the Highest Self.

^28:2 There are twelve months, five seasons, three worlds, then follows the sun as the twenty-first. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA [*3].

1. The hinkara is mind, the prastava speech, the udgitha sight, the pratihara hearing, the nidhana

[p. 29]

breath. That is the Gayatra Saman, as interwoven in the (five) pranas [*1].

2. He who thus knows this Gayatra interwoven in the pranas, keeps his senses, reaches the full life, he lives long [*2], becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. The rule of him who thus meditates on the Gayatra is, 'Be not high-minded.'

Footnotes

^28:3 After having explained the secret meaning of the whole Sama-veda [p. 29] ceremonial, as it is to be understood by meditation only (dhyana),he proceeds to explain the secret meaning of the same ceremonial, giving to each its proper name in proper succession (gayatra, rathantara, &c.), and showing the hidden purport of those names.

^29:1 Cf. Kh. Up. II, 7, 1, where prana is explained differently. The Gayatri itself is sometimes called prana.

^29:2 The commentator generally takes gyok in the sense of bright.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is, he rubs (the fire-stick); the prastava, smoke rises; the udgitha, it burns; the pratihara, there are glowing coals; the nidhana, it goes down; the nidhana, it is gone out. This is the Rathantara Saman as interwoven in fire [*3].

2. He who thus knows this Rathantara interwoven in fire, becomes radiant [*4] and strong. He reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. The rule is, 'Do not rinse the mouth or spit before the fire.'

Footnotes

^29:3 The Rathantara is used for the ceremony of producing fire.

^29:4 Brahmavarkasa is the 'glory of countenance' produced by higher knowledge, an inspired look. Annada, lit. able to eat, healthy, strong.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA.

1, 2. Next follows the Vamadevya as interwoven in generation [*5].

Footnotes

^29:5 Upamantrayate sa hinkaro, gnapayate sa prastavah, striya saha [p. 30] sete sa udgithah, pratistri saha sete sa pratiharah, kalam gakkhati tan nidhanam, param gakkhati tan nidhanam. Etad vamadevyam mithune protam. 2. Sa ya evam etad vamadevyam mithune protam veda, mithuni bhavati, mithunan mithunat pragayate, sarvam ayur eti, gyog givati, mahan pragaya pasubhir bhavati, mahan kirttya. Na kamkana pariharet tad vratam.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Rising, the sun is the hinkara, risen, he is the prastava, at noon he is the udgitha, in the afternoon he is the pratihara, setting, he is the nidhana. That is the Brihat Saman as interwoven in the sun [*1].

2. He who thus knows the Brihat as interwoven in the sun, becomes refulgent [*2] and strong, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Never complain of the heat of the sun.'

Footnotes

^30:1 The sun is brihat. The Brihat Saman is to be looked upon as the sun, or the Brihat has Aditya for its deity.

^30:2 The same as brahmavarkasin.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.

1. The mists gather, that is the hinkara; the cloud has risen, that is the prastava; it rains, that is the udgitha; it flashes and thunders, that is the pratihara; it stops, that is the nidhana. That is the Vairupa Saman, as interwoven in Parganya, the god of rain.

2. He who thus knows the Vairupa as interwoven in Parganya, obtains all kinds of cattle (virupa), he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Never complain of the rain.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is spring, the prastava summer, the udgitha the rainy season, the pratihara autumn,

[p. 31]

the nidhana winter. That is the Vairaga Saman, as interwoven in the seasons.

2. He who thus knows the Vairaga, as interwoven in the seasons, shines (viragati) through children, cattle, and glory of countenance. He reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Never complain of the seasons.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is the earth, the prastava the sky, the udgitha heaven, the pratihara the regions, the nidhana the sea. These are the Sakvari Samans, as interwoven in the worlds [*1].

2. He who thus knows the Sakvaris, as interwoven in the worlds, becomes possessed of the worlds, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Never complain of the worlds.'

Footnotes

^31:1 The Sakvaris are sung with the Mahanamnis. These are said to be water, and the worlds are said to rest on water.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is goats, the prastava sheep, the udgitha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana man. These are the Revati Samans, as interwoven in animals.

2. He who thus knows these Revatis, as interwoven in animals, becomes rich in animals [*2], he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Never complain of animals.'

Footnotes

^31:2 Revat means rich.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

NINETEENTH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is hair, the prastava skin, the udgitha flesh, the pratihara bone, the nidhana marrow. That is the Yagnayagniya Saman, as interwoven in the members of the body.

2. He who thus knows the Yagnayagniya, as interwoven in the members of the body, becomes possessed of strong limbs, he is not crippled in any limb, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Do not eat marrow for a year,' or 'Do not eat marrow at all.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTIETH KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is fire, the prastava air, the udgitha the sun, the pratihara the stars, the nidhana the moon. That is the Ragana Saman, as interwoven in the deities.

2. He who thus knows the Ragana, as interwoven in the deities, obtains the same world, the same happiness, the same company as the gods, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, 'Do not speak evil of the Brahmanas.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA.

1. The hinkara is the threefold knowledge, the prastava these three worlds, the udgitha Agni (fire), Vayu (air), and Aditya (sun), the pratihara the stars, the birds, and the rays, the nidhana the serpents, Gandharvas, and fathers. That is the Saman, as interwoven in everything.

2. He who thus knows this Saman, as interwoven in everything, he becomes everything.

[p. 33]

3. And thus it is said in the following verse: There are the fivefold three (the three kinds of sacrificial knowledge, the three worlds &c. in their fivefold form, i. e. as identified with the hinkara, the prastava, &c.), and the other forms of the Saman. Greater than these there is nothing else besides.'

4. He who knows this, knows everything. All regions offer him gifts. His rule is, 'Let him meditate (on the Saman), knowing that he is. everything, yea, that he is everything [*1].'

Footnotes

^33:1 Here ends the Samopasana.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA [*2].

1. The udgitha, of which a poet said, I choose the deep sounding note of the Saman as good for cattle, belongs to Agni; the indefinite note belongs to Pragapati, the definite note to Soma, the soft and smooth note to Vayu, the smooth and strong note to Indra, the heron-like note to Brihaspati, the dull note to Varuna. Let a man cultivate all of these, avoiding, however, that of Varuna.

2. Let a man sing [*3], wishing to obtain by his song immortality for the Devas. 'May I obtain by my song oblations (svadha) for the fathers, hope for men, fodder and water for animals, heaven for the sacrificer, food for myself,' thus reflecting on these in his mind, let a man (Udgatri priest) sing praises, without making mistakes in pronunciation, &c.

[p. 34]

3. All vowels (svara) belong to Indra, all sibilants (ushman) to Pragapati, all consonants (sparsa) to Mrityu (death). If somebody should reprove him for his vowels, let him say, 'I went to Indra as my refuge (when pronouncing my vowels): he will answer thee.'

4. And if somebody should reprove him for his sibilants, let him say, 'I went to Pragapati as my refuge: he will smash thee.' And if somebody should reprove him for his consonants, let him say, 'I went to Mrityu as my refuge: he will reduce thee to ashes.'

5. All vowels are to be pronounced with voice (ghosha) and strength (bala), so that the Udgatri may give strength to Indra. All sibilants are to be pronounced, neither as if swallowed (agrasta) [*1], nor as if thrown out (nirasta) [*2], but well opened [*3] (vivrita), so that the Udgatri may give himself to Pragapati. All consonants are to be pronounced slowly, and without crowding them together [*4], so that the Udgatri may withdraw himself from Mrityu.

Footnotes

^33:2 These are lucubrations on the different tones employed in singing the Saman hymns, and their names, such as vinardi, anirukta, nirukta, mridu slakshna, slakshna balavad, kraunka, apadhvanta.

^33:3 It would be better if the first ity agayet could be left out. The commentator ignores these words.

^34:1 Grasa, according to the Rig-veda-pratisakhya 766, is the stiffening of the root of the tongue in pronunciation.

^34:2 Nirasa, according to the Rig-veda-pratisakhya 760, is the withdrawing of the active from the passive organ in pronunciation.

^34:3 The opening, vivrita, may mean two things, either the opening of the vocal chords (kha), which imparts to the ushmans their surd character (Rig. Prat. 709), or the opening of the organs of pronunciation (karana), which for the ushmans is asprishtam sthitam (Rig. Prat. 719), or vivrita (Ath. Prat. I, 31; Taitt. Prat. 5).

^34:4 Anabhinihita, for thus the commentaries give the reading, is explained by anabhinikshipta. On the real abhinidhana, see Rig. Prat. 393. The translation does not follow the commentary. The genitive pragapateh is governed by paridadani.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA.

1. There are three branches of the law. Sacrifice, study, and charity are the first [*1],

2. Austerity the second, and to dwell as a Brahmakarin in the house of a tutor, always mortifying the body in the house of a tutor, is the third. All these obtain the worlds of the blessed; but the Brahmasamstha alone (he who is firmly grounded in Brahman) obtains immortality.

3. Pragapati brooded on the worlds. From them, thus brooded on, the threefold knowledge (sacrifice) issued forth. He brooded on it, and from it, thus brooded on, issued the three syllables, Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah.

4. He brooded on them, and from them, thus brooded on, issued the Om. As all leaves are attached to a stalk, so is all speech (all words) attached to the Om (Brahman). Om is all this, yea, Om is all this.

Footnotes

^35:1 Not the first in rank or succession, but only in enumerating the three branches of the law. This first branch corresponds to the second stage, the asrama of the householder. Austerity is meant for the Vanaprastha, the third asrama, while the third is intended for the Brahmakarin, the student, only that the naishthika or perpetual Brahmakarin here takes the place of the ordinary student. The Brahmasamstha would represent the fourth asrama, that of the Sannyasin or parivrag, who has ceased to perform any works, even the tapas or austerities of the Vanaprastha.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FOURTH KHANDA.

1. The teachers of Brahman (Veda) declare, as the Pratah-savana (morning-oblation) belongs to the Vasus, the Madhyandina-savana (noon-libation) to

[p. 36]

the Rudras, the third Savana (evening-libation) to the Adityas and the Visve Devas,

2. Where then is the world of the sacrificer? He who does not know this, how can he perform the sacrifice? He only who knows, should perform it [*1].

3. Before the beginning of the Prataranuvaka, (matin-chant), the sacrificer, sitting down behind the household altar (garhapatya), and looking towards the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the Vasus:

4. 'Open the door of the world (the earth), let us see thee, that we may rule (on earth).'

5. Then he sacrifices, saying: 'Adoration to Agni, who dwells on the earth, who dwells in the world! Obtain that world for me, the sacrificer! That is the world for the sacrificer!'

6. 'I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life is over. Take this! (he says, in offering the libation.) Cast back the bolt!' Having said this, he rises. For him the Vasus fulfil the morning-oblation.

7. Before the beginning of the Madhyandina-savana, the noon-oblation, the sacrificer, sitting down behind the Agnidhriya altar, and looking towards the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the Rudras:

8. 'Open the door of the world (the sky), let us see thee, that we may rule wide (in the sky).'

9. Then he sacrifices, saying: 'Adoration to

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Vayu (air), who dwells in the sky, who dwells in the world. Obtain that world for me, the sacrificer! That is the world for the sacrificer!'

10. 'I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life is over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!' Having said this, he rises. For him the Rudras fulfil the noon-oblation.

11. Before the beginning of the third oblation, the sacrificer, sitting down behind the Ahavaniya altar, and looking towards the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the Adityas and Visve Devas:

12. 'Open the door of the world (the heaven), let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in heaven).' This is addressed to the Adityas.

13. Next the Saman addressed to the Visve Devas: 'Open the door of the world (heaven), let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in heaven).'

14. Then he sacrifices, saying: 'Adoration to the Adityas and to the Visve Devas, who dwell in heaven, who dwell in the world. Obtain that world for me, the sacrificer!'

15. 'That is the world for the sacrificer! I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life is over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!' Having said this, he rises.

16. For him the Adityas and the Visve Devas fulfil the third oblation. He who knows this, knows the full measure of the sacrifice, yea, he knows it.

Footnotes

^36:1 The commentator is always very anxious to explain that though it is better that a priest should know the hidden meaning of the sacrificial acts which he has to perform, yet there is nothing to prevent a priest, who has not yet arrived at this stage of knowledge, from performing his duties.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

THIRD PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA [*1].

1. The sun is indeed the honey [*2] of the Devas. The heaven is the cross-beam (from which) the sky (hangs as) a hive, and the bright vapours are the eggs of the bees [*3].

2. The eastern rays of the sun are the honey-cells in front. The Rik verses are the bees, the Rig-veda (sacrifice) is the flower, the water (of the sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower).

3. Those very Rik verses then (as bees) brooded over the Rig-veda sacrifice (the flower); and from it, thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health [*4].

4. That (essence) flowed forth and went towards the sun [*5]. And that forms what we call the red (rohita) light of the rising sun.

Footnotes

^38:1 After the various meditations on the Sama-veda sacrifice, the sun is next to be meditated on, as essential to the performance of all sacrifices.

^38:2 Everybody delights in the sun, as the highest reward of all sacrifices.

^38:3 I am not certain whether this passage is rightly translated. Rajendralal Mitra speaks of an arched bamboo, whence the atmosphere hangs pendant like a hive, in which the vapours are the eggs. Apupa means a cake, and may mean a hive. In order to understand the simile, we ought to have a clearer idea of the construction of the ancient bee-hive.

^38:4 Annadya, explained as food, but more likely meaning power to eat, appetite, health. See III, 13, 1.

^38:5 The commentator explains: The Rik verses, on becoming part of the ceremonial, perform the sacrifice. The sacrifice (the flower), when surrounded by the Rik verses (bees), yields its essence, the nectar. That essence consists in all the rewards to be obtained through sacrifice, and as these rewards are to be enjoyed in the [p. 39] next world and in the sun, therefore that essence or nectar is said to ascend to the sun.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. The southern rays of the sun are the honey-cells on the right. The Yagus verses are the bees, the Yagur-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water (of the sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower).

2. Those very Yagus verses (as bees) brooded over the Yagur-veda sacrifice (the flower); and from it, thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun. And that forms what we call the white (sukla) light of the sun.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. The western rays of the sun are the honey-cells behind. The Saman verses are the bees, the Sama-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water is the nectar.

2. Those very Saman verses (as bees) brooded over the Sama-veda sacrifice; and from it, thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun. And that forms what we call the dark (krishna) light of the sun.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. The northern rays of the sun are the honey-cells on the left. The (hymns of the) Atharvangiras are the bees, the Itihasa-purana [*1] (the reading of the old stories) is the flower, the water is the nectar.

[p. 40]

2. Those very hymns of the Atharvangiras (as bees) brooded over the Itihasa-purana; and from it, thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun. And that forms what we call the extreme dark (parah krishnam) light of the sun.

Footnotes

^39:1 As there is no Atharva-veda sacrifice, properly so called, we have corresponding to the Atharva-veda hymns the so-called fifth [p. 40] Veda, the Itihasa-purana. This may mean the collection of legends and traditions, or the old book of traditions. At all events it is taken as one Purana, not as many. These ancient stories were repeated at the Asvamedha sacrifice during the so-called Pariplava nights. Many of them have been preserved in the Brahmanas; others, in a more modern form, in the Mahabharata. See Weber, Indische Studien, I, p. 258, note.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. The upward rays of the sun are the honey cells above. The secret doctrines are the bees, Brahman (the Om) is the flower, the water is the nectar.

2. Those secret doctrines (as bees) brooded over Brahman (the Om); and from it, thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of countenance, brightness, vigour, strength, and health.

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun. And that forms what seems to stir in the centre of the sun.

4. These (the different colours in the sun) are the essences of the essences. For the Vedas are essences (the best things in the world); and of them (after they have assumed the form of sacrifice) these (the colours rising to the sun) are again the essences. They are the nectar of the nectar. For the Vedas are nectar (immortal), and of them these are the nectar.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. On the first of these nectars (the red light, which represents fame, glory of countenance, vigour, strength, health) the Vasus live, with Agni at their head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that (red) colour, and they rise from that colour [*1].

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one of the Vasus, with Agni at their head, he sees the nectar and rejoices. And he, too, having entered that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west [*2], so long does he follow the sovereign supremacy of the Vasus.

Footnotes

^41:1 This is differently explained by the commentator. He takes it to mean that, when the Vasus have gone to the sun, and see that there is no opportunity for enjoying that colour, they rest; but when they see that there is an opportunity for enjoying it, they exert themselves for it. I think the colour is here taken for the colour of the morning, which the Vasus enter, and from which they go forth again.

^41:2 1. East: Vasus: red: Agni. 2. South: Rudras: white: Indra. 3. West: Aditya: dark: Varuna. 4. North: Marut: very dark: Soma. 5. Upward: Sadhya: centre: Brahman.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. On the second of these nectars the Rudras live, with Indra at their head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that white colour, and they rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one of the Rudras, with Indra at their head, he sees the

[p. 42]

nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets in the west, twice as long does it rise in the south and set in the north; and so long does he follow the sovereign supremacy of the Rudras.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. On the third of these nectars the Adityas live, with Varuna at their head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that (dark) colour, and they rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one of the Adityas, with Varuna at their head, he sees the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the south and sets in the north, twice as long does it rise in the west and set in the east; and so long does he follow the sovereign supremacy of the Adityas.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. On the fourth of these nectars the Maruts live, with Soma at their head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter in that (very dark) colour, and they rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one of the Maruts, with Soma at their head, he sees the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the west and sets

[p. 43]

in the east, twice as long does it rise in the north and set in the south; and so long does he follow the sovereign supremacy of the Maruts.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TENTH KHANDA.

1. On the fifth of these nectars the Sadhyas live, with Brahman at their head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar.

2. They enter into that colour, and they rise from that colour.

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one of the Sadhyas, with Brahman at their head; he sees the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that colour, rises again from that colour.

4. So long as the sun rises in the north and sets in the south, twice as long does it rise above, and set below; and so long does he follow the sovereign power of the Sadhyas [*1].

Footnotes

^43:1 The meaning of the five Khandas from 6 to 10 is clear, in so far as they are intended to show that he who knows or meditates on the sacrifices as described before, enjoys his reward in different worlds with the Vasus, Rudras, &c. for certain periods of time, till at last he reaches the true Brahman. Of these periods each succeeding one is supposed to be double the length of the preceding one. This is expressed by imagining a migration of the sun from east to south, west, north, and zenith. Each change of the sun marks a new world, and the duration of each successive world is computed as double the duration of the preceding world. Similar ideas have been more fully developed in the Puranas, and the commentator is at great pains to remove apparent contradictions between the Pauranik and Vaidik accounts, following, as Anandagnanagiri remarks, the Dravidakarya (p. 173, l. 13).

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA.

1. When from thence he has risen upwards, he neither rises nor sets. He is alone, standing in the centre. And on this there is this verse:

2. 'Yonder he neither rises nor sets at any time. If this is not true, ye gods, may I lose Brahman.'

3. And indeed to him who thus knows this Brahma-upanishad (the secret doctrine: of the Veda) the sun does not rise and does not set. For him there is day, once and for all [*1].

4. This doctrine (beginning with III, 1, 1) Brahman (m. Hiranyagarbha) told to Pragapati (Virag), Pragapati to Manu, Manu to his offspring (Ikshvaku, &c.) And the father told that (doctrine of) Brahman (n.) to Uddalaka Aruni.

5. A father may therefore tell that doctrine of Brahman to his eldest son [*2], or to a worthy pupil.

But no one should tell it to anybody else, even if he gave him the whole sea-girt earth, full of treasure, for this doctrine is worth more than that, yea, it is worth more.

Footnotes

^44:1 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 4, 2.

^44:2 This was the old, not the present custom, says Anandagiri. Not the father, but an akarya, has now to teach his pupils.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. The Gayatri [*3] (verse) is everything whatsoever here exists. Gayatri indeed is speech, for speech

[p. 45]

sings forth (gaya-ti) and protects (traya-te) everything that here exists.

2. That Gayatri is also the earth, for everything that here exists rests on the earth, and does not go beyond.

3. That earth again is the body in man, for in it the vital airs (pranas [*1], which are everything) rest, and do not go beyond.

4. That body again in man is the heart within man, for in it the pranas (which are everything) rest, and do not go beyond.

5. That Gayatri has four feet [*2] and is sixfold [*3]. And this is also declared by a Rik verse (Rig-Veda X, 90, 3):--

6. 'Such is the greatness of it (of Brahman, under the disguise of Gayatri [*4]); greater than it is the Person [*5] (purusha). His feet are all things. The immortal with three feet is in heaven (i. e. in himself).'

[p. 46]

7. The Brahman which has been thus described (as immortal with three feet in heaven, and as Gayatri) is the same as the ether which is around us;

8. And the ether which is around us, is the same as the ether which is within us. And the ether which is within us,

9. That is the ether within the heart. That ether in the heart (as Brahman) is omnipresent and unchanging. He who knows this obtains omnipresent and unchangeable happiness.

Footnotes

^44:3 The Gayatri is one of the sacred metres, and is here to be meditated on as Brahman. It is used in the sense of verse, and as the name of a famous hymn. The Gayatri is often praised as the most powerful metre, and whatever can be obtained by means of the recitation of Gayatri verses is described as the achievement of the Gayatri. The etymology of gayatri from gai and tra is, of course, fanciful.

^45:1 The pranas may be meant for the five senses, as explained in Kh. I, 2, 1; II, 7, 1; or for the five breathings, as explained immediately afterwards in III, 13, 1. The commentator sees in them everything that here exists (Kh. Up. III, 15, 4), and thus establishes the likeness between the body and the Gayatri. As Gayatri is the earth, and the earth the body, and the body the heart, Gayatri is in the end to be considered as the heart.

^45:2 The four feet are explained as the four quarters of the Gayatri metre, of six syllables each. The Gayatri really consists of three feet of eight syllables each.

^45:3 The Gayatri has been identified with all beings, with speech, earth, body, heart, and the vital airs, and is therefore called sixfold. This, at least, is the way in which the commentator accounts for the epithet 'sixfold.'

^45:4 Of Brahman modified as Gayatri, having four feet, and being sixfold.

^45:5 The real Brahman, unmodified by form and name.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. For that heart there are five gates belonging to the Devas (the senses). The eastern gate is the Prana (up-breathing), that is the eye, that is Aditya (the sun). Let a man meditate on that as brightness (glory of countenance) and health. He who knows this, becomes bright and healthy.

2. The southern gate is the Vyana (back-breathing), that is the ear, that is the moon. Let a man meditate on that as happiness and fame. He who knows this, becomes happy and famous.

3. The western gate is the Apana (down-breathing), that is speech, that is Agni (fire). Let a man meditate on that as glory of countenance and health. He who knows this, becomes glorious and healthy.

4. The northern gate is the Samana (on-breathing), that is mind, that is Parganya (rain). Let a man meditate on that as celebrity and beauty.

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] He who knows this, becomes celebrated and beautiful.

5. The upper gate is the Udana (out-breathing), that is air, that is ether. Let a man meditate on that as strength and greatness. He who knows this, becomes strong and great.

6. These are the five men of Brahman, the doorkeepers of the Svarga (heaven) world. He who knows these five men of Brahman, the door-keepers of the Svarga world, in his family a strong son is born. He who thus knows these five men of Brahman, as the door-keepers of the Svarga world, enters himself the Svarga world.

7. Now that light which shines above this heaven, higher than all, higher than everything, in the highest world, beyond which there are no other worlds, that is the same light which is within man. And of this we have this visible proof [*1]:

8. Namely, when we thus perceive by touch the warmth here in the body [*2]. And of it we have this audible proof: Namely, when we thus, after stopping our ears, listen to what is like the rolling of a carriage, or the bellowing of an ox, or the sound of a burning fire [*3] (within the ears). Let a man meditate on this as the (Brahman) which is seen and heard.

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] He, who knows this, becomes conspicuous and celebrated, yea, he becomes celebrated.

Footnotes

^46:1 The meditation on the five gates and the five gate-keepers of the heart is meant to be subservient to the meditation on Brahman, as the ether in the heart, which, as it is said at the end, is actually seen and heard by the senses as being within the heart.

^47:1 The presence of Brahman in the heart of man is not to rest on the testimony of revelation only, but is here to be established by the evidence of the senses. Childish as the argument may seem to us, it shows at all events how intently the old Brahmans thought on the problem of the evidence of the invisible.

^47:2 That warmth must come from something, just as smoke comes from fire, and this something is supposed to be Brahman in the heart.

^47:3 Cf. Ait. Ar. III, 2, 4, 11-13.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. All this is Brahman (n.) Let a man meditate on that (visible world) as beginning, ending, and breathing [*1] in it (the Brahman).

Now man is a creature of will. According to what his will is in this world, so will he be when he has departed this life. Let him therefore have this will and belief:

2. The intelligent, whose body is spirit, whose form is light, whose thoughts are true, whose nature is like ether (omnipresent and invisible), from whom all works, all desires, all sweet odours and tastes proceed; he who embraces all this, who never speaks, and is never surprised,

3. He is my self within the heart, smaller than a corn of rice, smaller than a corn of barley, smaller than a mustard seed, smaller than a canary seed or the kernel of a canary seed. He also is my self within the heart, greater than the earth, greater than the sky, greater than heaven, greater than all these worlds.

4. He from whom all works, all desires, all sweet odours and tastes proceed, who embraces all this, who never speaks and who is never surprised, he, my self within the heart, is that Brahman (n.) When I shall have departed from hence, I shall obtain him (that Self). He who has this faith [*2] has no doubt; thus said Sandilya [*3], yea, thus he said.

Footnotes

^48:1 Galan is explained by ga, born, la, absorbed, and an, breathing. It is an artificial term, but fully recognised by the Vedanta school, and always explained in this manner.

^48:2 Or he who has faith and no doubt, will obtain this.

^48:3 This chapter is frequently quoted as the Sandilya-vidya, Vedantasara, init; Vedanta-sutra III, 3, 31.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. The chest which has the sky for its circumference and the earth for its bottom, does not decay, for the quarters are its sides, and heaven its lid above. That chest is a treasury, and all things are within it.

2. Its eastern quarter is called Guhu, its southern Sahamana, its western Ragni, its northern Subhuta [*2]. The child of those quarters is Vayu, the air, and he who knows that the air is indeed the child of the quarters, never weeps for his sons. 'I know the wind to be the child of the quarters, may I never weep for my sons.'

3. 'I turn to the imperishable chest with such and such and such [*3].' 'I turn to the Prana (life) with such and such and such.' 'I turn to Bhuh with such and such and such.' 'I turn to Bhuvah with such and such and such.' 'I turn to Svah with such and such and such.'

4. 'When I said, I turn to Prana, then Prana means all whatever exists here--to that I turn.'

5. 'When I said, I turn to Bhuh, what I said is, I turn to the earth, the sky, and heaven.'

[p. 50]

6. 'When I said, I turn to Bhuvah, what I said is, I turn to Agni (fire), Vayu (air), Aditya (sun).'

7. 'When I said, I turn to Svah, what I said is, I turn to the Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. That is what I said, yea, that is what I said.'

Footnotes

^49:1 The object of this section, the Kosavignana, is to show how the promise made in III, 13, 6, 'that a strong son should be born in a man's family,' is to be fulfilled.

^49:2 These names are explained by the commentator as follows: Because people offer libations (guhvati), turning to the east, therefore it is called Guhu. Because evil doers suffer (sahante) in the town of Yama, which is in the south, therefore it is called Sahamana. The western quarter is called Ragni, either because it is sacred to king Varuna (ragan), or on account of the red colour (raga) of the twilight. The north is called Subhuta, because wealthy beings (bhutimat), like Kuvera &c., reside there.

^49:3 Here the names of the sons are to be pronounced.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. Man is sacrifice. His (first) twenty-four years are the morning-libation. The Gayatri has twenty-four syllables, the morning-libation is offered with Gayatri hymns. The Vasus are connected with that part of the sacrifice. The Pranas (the five senses) are the Vasus, for they make all this to abide (vasayanti).

2. If anything ails him in that (early) age, let him say: 'Ye Pranas, ye Vasus, extend this my morning-libation unto the midday-libation, that I, the sacrificer, may not perish in the midst of the Pranas or Vasus.' Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole.

3. The next forty-four years are the midday-libation. The Trishtubh has forty-four syllables, the midday-libation is offered with Trishtubh hymns. The Rudras are connected with that part of it. The Pranas are the Rudras, for they make all this to cry (rodayanti).

4. If anything ails him in that (second) age, let him say: 'Ye Pranas, ye Rudras, extend this my midday-libation unto the third libation, that I, the sacrificer, may not perish in the midst of the Pranas or Rudras.' Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole.

5. The next forty-eight years are the third

[p. 51]

libation. The Gagati has forty-eight syllables, the third libation is offered with Gagati hymns. The Adityas are connected with that part of it. The Pranas are the Adityas, for they take up all this (adadate).

6. If anything ails him in that (third) age, let him say: 'Ye Pranas, ye Adityas, extend this my third libation unto the full age, that I, the sacrificer, may not perish in the midst of the Pranas or Adityas.' Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole.

7. Mahidasa Aitareya (the son of Itara), who knew this, said (addressing a disease): 'Why dost thou afflict me, as I shall not die by it?' He lived a hundred and sixteen years (i.e. 24+44+48). He, too, who knows this lives on to a hundred and sixteen years.

Footnotes

^50:1 The object of this Khanda is to show how to obtain long life, as promised before.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. When a man (who is the sacrificer) hungers, thirsts, and abstains from pleasures, that is the Diksha (initiatory rite).

2. When a man eats, drinks, and enjoys pleasures, he does it with the Upasadas (the sacrificial days on which the sacrificer is allowed to partake of food).

3. When a man laughs, eats, and delights himself, he does it with the Stuta-sastras (hymns sung and recited at the sacrifices).

4. Penance, liberality, righteousness, kindness, truthfulness, these form his Dakshinas (gifts bestowed on priests, &c.)

5. Therefore when they say, 'There will be a

[p. 52]

birth,' and 'there has been a birth' (words used at the Soma-sacrifice, and really meaning, 'He will pour out the Soma-juice,' and 'he has poured out the Soma-juice'), that is his new birth. His death is the Avabhritha ceremony (when the sacrificial Vessels are carried away to be cleansed).

6. Ghora Angirasa, after having communicated this (view of the sacrifice) to Krishna, the son of Devaki [*1]--and he never thirsted again (after other knowledge)--said: 'Let a man, when his end approaches,

[p. 53]

take refuge with this Triad [*1]: "Thou art the imperishable," "Thou art the unchangeable," "Thou art the edge of Prana."' On this subject there are two Rik verses (Rig-veda VIII, 6, 30):--

7. 'Then they see (within themselves) the ever-present light of the old seed (of the world, the Sat), the highest, which is lighted in the brilliant (Brahman).' Rig-veda I, 50, 10:--

'Perceiving above the darkness (of ignorance) the higher light (in the sun), as the higher light within the heart, the bright source (of light and life) among the gods, we have reached the highest light, yea, the highest light [*2].'

Footnotes

^51:1 Here we have a representation of the sacrifice as performed without any ceremonial, and as it is often represented when performed in thought only by a man living in the forest.

^52:1 The curious coincidence between Krishna Devakiputra, here mentioned as a pupil of Ghora Angirasa, and the famous Krishna, the son of Devaki, was first pointed out by Colebrooke, Miscell. Essays, II, 177. Whether it is more than a coincidence, is difficult to say. Certainly we can build no other conclusions on it than those indicated by Colebrooke, that new fables may have been constructed elevating this personage to the rank of a god. We know absolutely nothing of the old Krishna Devakiputra except his having been a pupil of Ghora Angirasa, nor does there seem to have been any attempt made by later Brahmans to connect their divine Krishna, the son of Vasudeva, with the Krishna Devakiputra of our Upanishad. This is all the more remarkable because the author of the Sandilya-sutras, for instance, who is very anxious to find a srauta authority for the worship of Krishna Vasudeva as the supreme deity, had to be satisfied with quoting such modern compilations as the Narayanopanishad, Atharvasiras, VI, 9, brahmanyo devakiputro, brahmanyo madhusudanah (see Sandilya-sutras, ed. Ballantyne, p. 36, translated by Cowell, p. 51), without venturing to refer to the Krishna Devakiputra of the Khandogya-upanishad. The occurrence of such names as Krishna, Vasudeva, Madhusudanah stamps Upanishads, like the Atmabodha-upanishad, as modern (Colebrooke, Essays, 1, 101), and the same remark applies, as Weber has shown, to the Gopalatapani-upanishad (Bibliotheca Indica, No. 183), where we actually find such names as Srikrishna Govinda, Gopiganavallabha, Devakyam gatah (p. 38), &c. Professor Weber has treated these questions very fully, but it is not quite clear to me whether he wishes to go beyond Colebrooke and to admit more than a similarity of name between the pupil of Ghora Angirasa and the friend of the Gopis.

^53:1 Let him recite these three verses.

^53:2 Both these verses had to be translated here according to their scholastic interpretation, but they had originally a totally different meaning. Even the text was altered, diva being changed to divi, svah to sve. The first is taken from a hymn addressed to Indra, who after conquering the dark clouds brings back the light of the sun. When he does that, then the people see again, as the poet says, the daily light of the old seed (from which the sun rises) which is lighted in heaven. The other verse belongs to a hymn addressed to the sun. Its simple meaning. is: 'Seeing above the darkness (of the night) the rising light, the Sun, bright among the bright, we came towards the highest light.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA [*3].

1. Let a man meditate on mind as Brahman (n.), this is said with reference to the body. Let a man meditate on the ether as Brahman (n.), this is said with reference to the Devas. Thus both the meditation which has reference to the body, and the meditation which has reference to the Devas, has been taught.

2. That Brahman (mind) has four feet (quarters).

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Speech is one foot, breath is one foot, the eye is one foot, the car is one foot-so much with reference to the body. Then with reference to the gods, Agni (fire) is one foot, Vayu (air) is one foot, Aditya (sun) is one foot, the quarters are one foot. Thus both the worship which has reference to the body, and the worship which has reference to the Devas, has been taught.

3. Speech is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. That foot shines with Agni (fire) as its light, and warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

4. Breath is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. That foot shines with Vayu (air) as its light, and warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

5. The eye is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. That foot shines with Aditya (sun) as its light, and warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

6. The ear is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. That foot shines with the quarters as its light, and warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance.

Footnotes

^53:3 This is a further elucidation of Kh. Up. III, 14, 2.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINETEENTH KHANDA.

1. Aditya (the sun [*1]) is Brahman, this is the doctrine, and this is the fuller account of it:--

In the beginning this was non-existent [*2]. It became

[p. 55]

existent, it grew. It turned into an egg [*1]. The egg lay for the time of a year. The egg broke open. The two halves were one of silver, the other of gold.

2. The silver one became this earth, the golden one the sky, the thick membrane (of the white) the mountains, the thin membrane (of the yoke) the mist with the clouds, the small veins the rivers, the fluid the sea.

3. And what was born from it that was Aditya, the sun. When he was born shouts of hurrah arose, and all beings arose, and all things which they desired. Therefore whenever the sun rises and sets, shouts of hurrah arise, and all beings arise, and all things which they desire.

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the sun as Brahman, pleasant shouts will approach him and will continue, yea, they will continue.

Footnotes

^54:1 Aditya, or the sun, had before been represented as one of the four feet of Brahman. He is now represented as Brahman, or as to be meditated on as such.

^54:2 Not yet existing, not yet developed in form and name, and therefore as if not existing.

^55:1 Anda instead of anda is explained as a Vedic irregularity. A similar cosmogony is given in Manu's Law Book, I, 12 seq. See Kellgren, Mythus de ovo mundano, Helsingfors, 1849.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA [*2].

1. There lived once upon a time Ganasruti Pautrayana (the great-grandson of Ganasruta), who was a pious giver, bestowing much wealth upon the

[p. 56]

people, and always keeping open house. He built places of refuge everywhere, wishing that people should everywhere eat of his food.

2. Once in the night some Hamsas (flamingoes) flew over his house, and one flamingo said to another: 'Hey, Bhallaksha, Bhallaksha (short-sighted friend). The light (glory) of Ganasruti Pautrayana has spread like the sky. Do not go near, that it may not burn thee.'

3. The other answered him: 'How can you speak of him, being what he is (a raganya, noble), as if he were like Raikva with the car [*1]?'

4. The first replied: 'How is it with this Raikva with the car of whom thou speakest?'

The other answered: 'As (in a game of dice) all the lower casts [*2] belong to him who has conquered with the Krita cast, so whatever good deeds other people perform, belong to that Raikva. He who knows what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.'

5. Ganasruti Pautrayana overheard this conversation, and as soon as he had risen in the morning, he said to his. door-keeper (kshattri): 'Friend, dost thou speak of (me, as if I were) Raikva with the car?'

He replied: 'How is it with this Raikva, with the car?'

6. The king said: 'As (in a game of dice), all the lower casts belong to him who has conquered with the Krita cast, so whatever good deeds other people perform, belong to that Raikva. He who knows what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.'

[p. 57]

7. The door-keeper went to look for Raikva, but returned saying, 'I found him not.' Then the king said: 'Alas! where a Brahmana should be searched for (in the solitude of the forest), there go for him.'

8. The door-keeper came to a man who was lying beneath a car and scratching his sores [*1]. He addressed him, and said: 'Sir, are you Raikva with the car? '

He answered: 'Here I am.'

Then the door-keeper returned, and said: 'I have found him.'

Footnotes

^55:2 Vayu (air) and Prana (breath) had before been represented as feet of Brahman, as the second pair. Now they are represented as Brahman, and as to be meditated on as such. This is the teaching of Raikva. The language of this chapter is very obscure, and I am not satisfied with the translation.

^56:1 Sayugvan is explained as possessed of a car with yoked horses or oxen. Could it have meant originally, 'yoke-fellow, equal,' as in Rig-veda X, 130, 4? Anquetil renders it by 'semper cum se ipso camelum solutum habens.'

^56:2 Instead of adhareyah, we must read adhare 'yah.

^57:1 It is curious that in a hymn of the Atharva-veda (V, 22, 5, 8) takman, apparently a disease of the skin, is relegated to the Mahavrishas, where Raikva dwelt. Roth, Zur Literatur des Veda, p. 36.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Then Ganasruti Pautrayana took six hundred cows, a necklace, and a carriage with mules, went to Raikva and said:

2. 'Raikva, here are six hundred cows, a necklace, and a carriage with mules; teach me the deity which you worship.'

3. The other replied: 'Fie, necklace and carriage be thine, O Sudra, together with the cows.'

Then Ganasruti Pautrayana took again a thousand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, and his own daughter, and went to him.

4. He said to him: 'Raikva, there are a thousand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, this wife, and this village in which thou dwellest. Sir, teach me!'

5. He, opening her mouth [*2], said: 'You have

[p. 58]

brought these (cows and other presents), O Sudra, but only by that mouth did you make me speak.'

These are the Raikva-parna villages in the country of the Mahavrishas (mahapunyas) where Raikva dwelt under him [*1]. And he said to him:

Footnotes

^57:2 To find out her age. The commentator translates, 'Raikva, knowing her mouth to be the door of knowledge, i. e. knowing that for her he might impart his knowledge to Ganasruti, and that [p. 58] Ganasruti by bringing such rich gifts had become a proper receiver of knowledge, consented to do what he had before refused.'

^58:1 The commentator supplies adat, the king gave the villages to him.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'Air (vayu) is indeed the end of all [*2]. For when fire goes out, it goes into air. When the sun goes down, it goes into air. When the moon goes down, it goes into air.

2. 'When water dries up, it goes into air. Air indeed consumes them all. So much with reference to the Devas.

3. 'Now with reference to the body. Breath (prana) is indeed the end of all. When a man sleeps, speech goes into breath, so do sight, hearing, and mind. Breath indeed consumes them all.

4. 'These are the two ends, air among the Devas, breath among the senses (pranah).'

________________

5. Once while Saunaka Kapeya and Abhipratarin Kakshaseni were being waited on at their meal, a religious student begged of them. They gave him nothing.

6. He said: 'One god--who is he?--swallowed the four great ones [*3], he, the guardian of the world.

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] O Kapeya, mortals see him not, O Abhipratarin, though he dwells in many places. He to whom this food belongs, to him it has not been given [*1].'

7. Saunaka Kapeya, pondering on that speech, went to the student and said: 'He is the self of the Devas, the creator of all beings, with golden tusks, the eater, not without intelligence. His greatness is said to be great indeed, because, without being eaten, he eats even what is not food [*2]. Thus do we, O Brahmakarin, meditate on that Being.' Then he said: 'give him food.'

8. They gave him food. Now these five (the eater Vayu (air), and his food, Agni (fire), Aditya (sun), Kandramas (moon), Ap (water)) and the other five (the eater Prana (breath), and his food, speech, sight, hearing, mind) make ten, and that is the Krita (the highest [*3]) cast (representing the ten, the eaters and the food). Therefore in all quarters those ten are food (and) Krita (the highest cast). These are again the Virag [*4] (of ten syllables)

[p. 60]

which eats the food. Through this all this becomes seen. He who knows this sees all this and becomes an eater of food, yea, he becomes an eater of food.

Footnotes

^58:2 Samvarga, absorption, whence samvargavidya, not samsarga. It is explained by samvargana, samgrahana, and samgrasana, in the text itself by adana, eating.

^58:3 This must refer to Vayu and Prana swallowing the four, as explained in IV, 3, 2, and IV, 3, 3. The commentator explains [p. 59] it by Pragapati, who is sometimes called Ka. In one sense it would be Brahman, as represented by Vayu and Prana.

^59:1 The food which you have refused to me, you have really refused to Brahman.

^59:2 Saunaka wishes the student to understand that though I mortals see him not,' he sees and knows him, viz. the god who, as Vayu, swallows all the gods, but produces them again, and who, as prana, swallows during sleep all senses, but produces them again at the time of waking.

^59:3 The words are obscure, and the commentator does not throw much light on them. He explains, however, the four casts of the dice, the Krita = 4, the Treta = 3, the Dvapara = 2, the Kali = 1, making together 10, the Krita cast absorbing the other casts, and thus counting ten.

^59:4 Virag, name of a metre of ten syllables, and also a name of food. One expects, 'which is the food and eats the food.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA [*1].

1. Satyakama, the son of Gabala, addressed his mother and said: 'I wish to become a Brahmakarin (religious student), mother. Of what family am I?'

2. She said to him: 'I do not know, my child, of what family thou art. In my youth when I had to move about much as a servant (waiting on the guests in my father's house), I conceived thee. I do not know of what family thou art. I am Gabala by name, thou art Satyakama (Philalethes). Say that thou art Satyakama Gabala.'

3. He going to Gautama Haridrumata said to him, 'I wish to become a Brahmakarin with you, Sir. May I come to you, Sir?'

4. He said to him: 'Of what family are you, my friend?' He replied: 'I do not know, Sir, of what family I am. I asked my mother, and she answered: "In my youth when I had to move about much as a servant, I conceived thee. I do not know of what family thou art. I am Gabala by name, thou art Satyakama," I am therefore Satyakama Gabala, Sir.'

5. He said to him: 'No one but a true Brahmana would thus speak out. Go and fetch fuel, friend, I shall initiate you. You have not swerved from the truth.'

Having initiated him, he chose four hundred lean and weak cows, and said: 'Tend these, friend.'

[p. 61]

He drove them out and said to himself, 'I shall not return unless I bring back a thousand.' He dwelt a number of years (in the forest), and when the cows had become a thousand,

Footnotes

^60:1 This carries on the explanation of the four feet of Brahman, as first mentioned in III, 18, x. Each foot or quarter of Brahman is represented as fourfold, and the knowledge of these sixteen parts is called the Shodasakalavidya.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. The bull of the herd (meant for Vayu) said to him: 'Satyakama!' He replied: 'Sir!' The bull said: 'We have become a thousand, lead us to the house of the teacher;

2. 'And I will declare to you one foot of Brahman.'

'Declare it, Sir,' he replied.

He said to him: 'The eastern region is one quarter, the western region is one quarter, the southern region is one quarter, the northern region is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of the four quarters, and called Prakasavat (endowed with splendour).

3. 'He who knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Prakasavat, becomes endowed with splendour in this world. He conquers the resplendent worlds, whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of the four quarters, by the name of Prakasavat.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. 'Agni will declare to you another foot of Brahman.'

(After these words of the bull), Satyakama, on the morrow, drove the cows (toward the house of the teacher). And when they came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down behind the fire, looking to the east.

[p. 62]

2. Then Agni (the fire) said to him: 'Satyakama!' He replied: 'Sir.'

3. Agni said: 'Friend, I will declare unto you one foot of Brahman.'

'Declare it, Sir,' he replied.

He said to him: 'The earth is one quarter, the sky is one quarter, the heaven is one quarter, the ocean is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, and called Anantavat (endless).'

4. 'He who knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Anantavat, becomes endless in this world. He conquers the endless worlds, whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Anantavat.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'A Hamsa (flamingo, meant for the sun) will declare to you another foot of Brahman.'

(After these words of Agni), Satyakama, on the morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down behind the fire, looking toward the east.

2. Then a Hamsa flew near and said to him 'Satyakama.' He replied: 'Sir.'

3. The Hamsa said: 'Friend, I will declare unto you one foot of Brahman.'

'Declare it, Sir,' he replied.

He said to him: 'Fire is one quarter, the sun is one quarter, the moon is one quarter, lightning is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, and called Gyotishmat (full of light).

[p. 63]

4. 'He who knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Gyotishmat, becomes full of light in this world. He conquers the worlds which are full of light, whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Gyotishmat.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. 'A diver-bird (Madgu, meant for Prana) will declare to you another foot of Brahman.'

(After these words of the Hamsa), Satyakama, on the morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down behind the fire, looking toward the east.

2. Then a diver flew near and said to him 'Satyakama.' He replied: 'Sir.'

3. The diver said: 'Friend, I will declare unto you one foot of Brahman!

'Declare it, Sir,' he replied.

He said to him: 'Breath is one quarter, the eye is one quarter, the ear is one quarter, the mind is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, and called Ayatanavat (having a home).

'He who knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Ayatanavat, becomes possessed of a home in this world. He conquers the worlds which offer a home, whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name of Ayatanavat.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. Thus he reached the house of his teacher. The teacher said to him: 'Satyakama.' He replied: 'Sir.'

2. The teacher said: 'Friend, you shine like one who knows Brahman. Who then has taught you [*1]?' He replied: 'Not men. But you only, Sir, I wish, should teach me [*2];

3. 'For I have heard from men like you, Sir, that only knowledge which is learnt from a teacher (Akarya), leads to real good.' Then he taught him the same knowledge. Nothing was left out, Yea, nothing was left out.

Footnotes

^64:1 It would have been a great offence if Satyakama had accepted instruction from any man, except his recognised teacher.

^64:2 The text should be, bhagavams tv eva me kame bruyat (me kame = mamekkhayam).

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TENTH KHANDA [*3].

1. Upakosala Kamalayana dwelt as a Brahmakarin (religious student) in the house of Satyakama Gabala. He tended his fires for twelve years. But the teacher, though he allowed other pupils (after they had learnt the sacred books) to depart to their own homes, did not allow Upakosala to depart.

2. Then his wife said to him: 'This student, who is quite exhausted (with austerities), has carefully tended your fires. Let not the fires themselves blame you, but teach him.' The teacher, however, went away on a journey without having taught him.

The student from sorrow was not able to eat.

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Then the wife of the teacher said to him: 'Student, eat! Why do you not eat?' He said: 'There are many desires in this man here, which lose themselves in different directions. I am full of sorrows, and shall take no food.'

4. Thereupon the fires said among themselves: 'This student, who is quite exhausted, has carefully tended us. Well, let us teach him.' They said to him:

5. 'Breath is Brahman, Ka (pleasure) is Brahman, Kha (ether) is Brahman.'

He said: 'I understand that breath is Brahman, but I do not understand Ka or Kha [*1].'

They said: 'What is Ka is Kha, what is Kha is Ka [*2].' They therefore taught him Brahman as breath, and as the ether (in the heart) [*3].

Footnotes

^64:3 The Upakosala-vidya teaches first Brahman as the cause, and then in its various forms, and is therefore called atmavidya and agnividya.

^65:1 I do not understand, he means, how Ka, which means pleasure, and is non-eternal, and how Kha, which means ether, and is not intelligent, can be Brahman.

^65:2 The commentator explains as follows:--Ka is pleasure, and Kha is ether, but these two words are to determine each other mutually, and thus to form one idea. Ka therefore does not mean ordinary pleasures, but pleasures such as belong to Kha, the ether. And Kha does not signify the ordinary outward ether, but the ether in the heart, which alone is capable of pleasure. What is meant by Ka and Kha is therefore the sentient ether in the heart, and that is Brahman, while Prana, breath, is Brahman, in so far as it is united with the ether in the heart.

^65:3 And as its ether, i.e. as the ether in the heart, the Brahman, with which prana is connected. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA.

1. After that the Garhapatya fire [*4] taught him Earth, fire, food, and the sun (these are my forms, or

[p. 66]

forms of Brahman). The person that is seen in the sun, I am he, I am he indeed [*1].

2. 'He who knowing this meditates on him, destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Garhapatya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his descendants do not perish. We guard him in this world and in the other, whosoever knowing this meditates on him.'

Footnotes

^65:4 The household altar.

^66:1 Fanciful similarities and relations between the fires of the three altars and their various forms and manifestations are pointed out by the commentator. Thus earth and food are represented as warmed and boiled by the fire. The sun is said to give warmth and light like the fire of the altar. The chief point, however, is that in all of them Brahman is manifested.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. Then the Anvaharya fire [*2] taught him: Water, the quarters, the stars, the moon (these are my forms). The person that is seen in the moon, I am he, I am he indeed.

2. 'He who knowing this meditates on him, destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Anvaharya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his descendants do not perish. We guard him in this world and in the other, whosoever knowing this meditates on him.'

Footnotes

^66:2 The altar on the right. Anvaharya is a sacrificial oblation, chiefly one intended for the manes.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then the Ahavaniya [*3] fire taught him: 'Breath, ether, heaven, and lightning (these are my forms). The person that is seen in the lightning, I am he, I am he indeed.

[p. 67]

2. 'He who knowing this meditates on him, destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Ahavaniya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his descendants do not perish. We guard him in this world and in the other, whosoever knowing this meditates on him.'

Footnotes

^66:3 The Ahavaniya altar is the altar on the eastern side of the sacrificial ground.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then they all said: 'Upakosala, this is our knowledge, our friend, and the knowledge of the Self, but the teacher will tell you the way (to another life).'

2. In time his teacher came back, and said to him: 'Upakosala.' He answered: 'Sir.' The teacher said: 'Friend, your face shines like that of one who knows Brahman. Who has taught you?'

'Who should teach me, Sir?' he said. He denies, as it were. And he said (pointing) to the fires: 'Are these fires other than fires?'

The teacher said: 'What, my friend, have these fires told you?'

3. He answered: 'This' (repeating some of what they had told him).

The teacher said: 'My friend, they have taught you about the worlds, but I shall tell you this; and as water does not cling to a lotus leaf, so no evil deed clings to one who knows it.' He said: 'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.

1. He said: 'The person that is seen in the eye, that is the Self. This is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman [*1]. Even though they drop melted

[p. 68]

butter or water on him, it runs away on both sides [*1].

2. 'They call him Samyadvama, for all blessings (vama) go towards him (samyanti). All blessings go towards him who knows this.

3. 'He is also Vamani, for he leads (nayati) all blessings (vama). He leads all blessings who knows this.

4. 'He is also Bhamani, for he shines (bhati) in all worlds. He who knows this, shines in all worlds.

5. 'Now (if one who knows this, dies), whether people perform obsequies for him or no, he goes to light (arkis) [*2], from light to day, from day to the light half of the moon, from the light half of the moon to the six months during which the sun goes to the north, from the months to the year, from the year to the sun, from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning. There is a person not human,

6. 'He leads them to Brahman. This is the path of the Devas, the path that leads to Brahman. Those who proceed on that path, do not return to the life of man, yea, they do not return.'

Footnotes

^67:1 This is also the teaching of Pragapati in VIII, 7, 4.

^68:1 It does so in the eye, and likewise with the person in the eye, who is not affected by anything. Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 14, 3.

^68:2 The commentator takes light, day, &c. as persons, or devatas. Cf. Kh. Up. V, 10, 1.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA [*3].

1. Verily, he who purifies (Vayu) is the sacrifice, for he (the air) moving along purifies everything.

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Because moving along he purifies everything, therefore he is the sacrifice. Of that sacrifice there are two ways, by mind and by speech.

2. The Brahman priest performs one of them in his mind [*1], the Hotri, Adhvaryu, and Udgatri priests perform the other by words. When the Brahman priest, after the Prataranuvaka ceremony has begun, but before the recitation of the Paridhaniya hymn, has (to break his silence and) to speak,

3. He performs perfectly the one way only (that by words), but the other is injured. As a man walking on one foot, or a carriage going on one wheel, is injured, his sacrifice is injured, and with the injured sacrifice the sacrificer is injured; yes, having sacrificed, he becomes worse.

4. But when after the Prataranuvaka ceremony has begun, and before the recitation of the Paridhaniya hymn, the Brahman priest has not (to break his silence and) to speak, they perform both ways perfectly, and neither of them is injured.

5. As a man walking on two legs and a carriage going on two wheels gets on, so his sacrifice gets on, and with the successful sacrifice the sacrificer gets on; yes, having sacrificed, he becomes better.

Footnotes

^68:3 If any mistakes happen during the performance of a sacrifice, as described before, they are remedied by certain interjectional [p. 69] syllables (vyahriti), the nature of which is next described. All this is supposed to take place in the forest.

^69:1 While the other priests perform the sacrifice, the Brahman priest has to remain silent, following the whole sacrifice in his mind, and watching that no mistake be committed. If a mistake is committed, he has to correct it, and for that purpose certain corrective penances (prayaskitta) are enjoined. The performance of the Brahman priest resembles the meditations of the sages in the forest, and therefore this chapter is here inserted.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Pragapati brooded over the worlds, and from them thus brooded on he squeezed out the essences, Agni (fire) from the earth, Vayu (air) from the sky, Aditya (the sun) from heaven.

2. He brooded over these three deities, and from them thus brooded on he squeezed out the essences, the Rik verses from Agni, the Yagus verses from Vayu, the Saman verses from Aditya.

3. He brooded over the threefold knowledge (the three Vedas), and from it thus brooded on he squeezed out the essences, the sacred interjection Bhus from the Rik verses, the sacred interjection Bhuvas from the Yagus verses, the sacred interjection Svar from the Saman verses.

4. If the sacrifice is injured from the Rig-Veda side, let him offer a libation in the Garhapatya fire, saying, Bhuh, Svaha! Thus does he bind together and heal, by means of the essence and the power of the Rik verses themselves, whatever break the Rik sacrifice may have suffered.

5. If the sacrifice is injured from the Yagur-veda side, let him offer a libation in the Dakshina fire, saying, Bhuvah, Svaha! Thus does he bind together and heal, by means of the essence and the power of the Yagus verses themselves, whatever break the Yagus sacrifice may have suffered.

6. If the sacrifice is injured by the Sama-veda side, let him offer a libation in the Ahavaniya fire, saying, Svah, Svaha! Thus does he bind together and heal, by means of the essence and the power of the Saman verses themselves, whatever break the Saman sacrifice may have suffered.

[p. 71]

7. As one binds (softens) gold by means of lavana [*1] (borax), and silver by means of gold, and tin by means of silver, and lead by means of tin, and iron (loha) by means of lead, and wood by means of iron, or also by means of leather,

8. Thus does one bind together and heal any break in the sacrifice by means of (the Vyahritis or sacrificial interjections which are) the essence and strength of the three worlds, of the deities, and of the threefold knowledge. That sacrifice is healed [*2] in which there is a Brahman priest who knows this.

9. That sacrifice is inclined towards the north (in the right way) in which there is a Brahman priest who knows this. And with regard to such a Brahman priest there is the following Gatha [*3]: 'Whereever it falls back, thither the man [*4] goes,'--viz. the Brahman only, as one of the Ritvig priests. 'He saves the Kurus as a mare' (viz. a Brahman priest who

[p. 72]

knows this, saves the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and all the other priests). Therefore let a man make him who knows this his Brahman priest, not one who does not know it, who does not know it.

Footnotes

^71:1 Lavana, a kind of salt, explained by kshara and tanka or tankana. It is evidently borax, which is still imported from the East Indies under the name of tincal, and used as a flux in chemical processes.

^71:2 Bheshagakrita, explained by bheshagena 'iva kritah samskritah, and also by kikitsakena susikshitena 'esha yagno bhavati,' which looks as if the commentator had taken it as a genitive of bheshagakrit.

^71:3 This Gatha (or, according to Sankara, Anugatha) is probably a Gayatri, though Anandagiri says that it is not in the Gayatri or any other definite metre. It may have been originally 'yato yata avartate, tattad gakkhati manavah, kurun asvabhirakshati.' This might be taken from an old epic ballad, 'Wherever the army fell back, thither the man went; the mare (mares being preferred to stallions in war) saves the Kurus.' That verse was applied to the Brahman priest succouring the sacrifice, whenever it seemed to waver, and protecting the Kurus, i. e. the performers of the sacrifice.

^71:4 Manava, explained from mauna, or manana, but possibly originally, a descendant of Manu.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH PRAPATHAKA [*1].

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. He who knows the oldest and the best becomes himself the oldest and the best. Breath indeed is the oldest and the best.

2. He who knows the richest, becomes himself the richest. Speech indeed is the richest.

3. He who knows the firm rest, becomes himself firm in this world and in the next. The eye indeed is the firm rest.

4. He who knows success, his wishes succeed, both his divine and human wishes. The ear indeed is success.

5. He who knows the home, becomes a home of his people. The mind indeed is the home.

6. The five senses quarrelled together [*2], who was the best, saying, I am better, I am better.

[p. 73]

7. They went to their father Pragapati and said: 'Sir, who is the best of us?' He replied: 'He by whose departure the body seems worse than worst, he is the best of you.'

8. The tongue (speech) departed, and having been absent for a year, it came round and said: 'How have you been able to live without me?' They replied: 'Like mute people, not speaking, but breathing with the breath, seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus we lived.' Then speech went back.

9. The eye (sight) departed, and having been absent for a year, it came round and said: 'How have you been able to live without me?' They replied: 'Like blind people, not seeing, but breathing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus we lived.' Then the eye went back.

10. The ear (hearing) departed, and having been absent for a year, it came round and said: 'How have you been able to live without me?' They replied: 'Like deaf people, not hearing, but breathing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, thinking with the mind. Thus we lived.' Then the ear went back.

11. The mind departed, and having been absent for a year, it came round and said: 'How have you been able to live without me?' They replied: 'Like children whose mind is not yet formed, but breathing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear. Thus we lived.' Then the mind went back.

12. The breath, when on the point of departing, tore up the other senses, as a horse, going to start,

[p. 74]

might tear up the pegs to which he is tethered . They came to him and said: 'Sir, be thou (our lord); thou art the best among us. Do not depart from us!'

13. Then the tongue said to him: 'If I am the richest, thou art the richest.' The eye said to him: 'If I am the firm rest, thou art the firm rest .'

14. The ear said to him: 'If I am success, thou art success.' The mind said to him: 'If I am the home, thou art the home.'

15. And people do not call them, the tongues, the eyes, the ears, the minds, but the breaths (prana, the senses). For breath are all these.

Footnotes

^72:1 The chief object is to show the different ways on which people proceed after death. One of these ways, the Devapatha that leads to Brahman and from which there is no return, has been described, IV, 15. The other ways for those who on earth know the conditioned Brahman only, have to be discussed now.

^72:2 The same fable, the pranasamvada or pranavidya, is told in the Brihadaranyaka VI, 1, 1-14, the Aitareya Ar. II, 4, the Kaush. Up. III, 3, and the Prasna Up. II, 3. The last is the simplest version of all, but it does not follow therefore that it is the oldest. It would be difficult to find two fables apparently more alike, yet in reality differing from each other more characteristically than this fable and the fable told to the plebeians by Menenius Agrippa.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Breath said: 'What shall be my food?' They answered: 'Whatever there is, even unto dogs and birds.' Therefore this is food for Ana (the breather). His name is clearly Ana [*3]. To him who knows this there is nothing that is not (proper) food.

2. He said: 'What shall be my dress?' They answered: 'Water.' Therefore wise people, when they are going to eat food, surround their food before and after with water [*4].' He (prana) thus gains a dress, and is no longer naked [*5]'.

[p. 75]

3. Satyakama Gabala, after he had communicated this to Gosruti Vaiyaghrapadya, said to him: 'If you were to tell this to a dry stick, branches would grow, and leaves spring from it.'

________________

4. If [*1] a man wishes to reach greatness, let him perform the Diksha [*2] (preparatory rite) on the day of the new moon, and then, on the night of the full moon, let him stir a mash of all kinds of herbs with curds and honey, and let him pour ghee on the fire (avasathya laukika), saying; 'Svaha to the oldest and the best.' After that let him throw all that remains (of the ghee) [*3] into the mash.

5. In the same manner let him pour ghee on. the fire, saying, 'Svaha to the richest.' After that let him throw all that remains together into the mash.

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the fire, saying, 'Svaha to the firm rest.' After that let him throw all that remains together into the mash.

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the fire, saying, 'Svaha to success.' After that let him throw all that remains together into the mash.

6. Then going forward and placing the mash

[p. 76]

in his hands, he recites: 'Thou (Prana) art Ama [*1] by name, for all this together exists in thee. He is the oldest and best, the king, the sovereign May he make me the oldest, the best, the king, the sovereign. May I be all this.'

7. Then he eats with the following Rik verse at every foot: 'We choose that food'--here he swallows--'Of the divine Savitri (prana)'--here he swallows--'The best and all-supporting food'--here he swallows--'We meditate on the speed of Bhaga (Savitri, prana)'--here he drinks all.

8. Having cleansed the vessel, whether it be a kamsa or a kamasa, he sits down behind the fire on a skin or on the bare ground, without speaking or making any other effort. If in his dream he sees a woman, let him know this to be a sign that his sacrifice has succeeded.

9. On this there is a Sloka: 'If during sacrifices which are to fulfil certain wishes he sees in his dreams a woman, let him know success from this vision in a dream, yea, from this vision in a dream.'

Footnotes

^74:1 Padvisa, fetter, pede, pedica, a word now well known, but which Burnouf (Commentaire sur le Yacna, Notes, CLXXIV) tried in vain to decipher.

^74:2 Burnouf rightly preferred pratishthasi to pratishtho 'si, though the commentary on the corresponding passage of the Brihadaranyaka seems to favour tatpratishtho 'si.

^74:3 Ana, breather, more general than pra-ana = prana, forth-breather, and the other more specified names of breath.

^74:4 They rinse the mouth before and after every meal.

^74:5 We expect, 'He who knows this' instead of prana, but as [p. 75] prana may apply to every individual prana, the usual finishing sentence was possibly dropt on purpose.

^75:1 The oblation here described is called mantha, a mortar, or what is pounded in a mortar, i. e. barley stirred in some kind of gravy. See Gaim. N. M. V. P. 406.

^75:2 Not the real diksha, which is a preparatory rite for great sacrifices, but penance, truthfulness, abstinence, which take the place of diksha with those who live in the forest and devote themselves to upasana, meditative worship.

^75:3 What is here called sampatam avanayati is the same as samsravam avanayati in the Brih. Ar. VI, 3, 2. The commentator says: Sruvavalepanam agyam mantham samsravayati.

^76:1 Cf. Brih. Ar. I, 1, 3, 22.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA [*2].

1. Svetaketu Aruneya went to an assembly [*3] of the Pankalas. Pravahana Gaivali [*4] said to him: 'Boy, has your father instructed you?' 'Yes, Sir,' he replied.

2. 'Do you know to what place men go from here?' 'No, Sir,' he replied.

[p. 77]

'Do you know how they return again?' 'No Sir,' he replied.

'Do you know where the path of Devas and the path of the fathers diverge?' 'No, Sir,' he replied.

3. 'Do you know why that world [*1] never becomes full?' 'No, Sir,' he replied.

'Do you know why in the fifth libation water is called Man [*2]? No, Sir,' he replied.

4. 'Then why did you say (you had been) instructed? How could anybody who did not know these things say that he had been instructed?' Then the boy went back sorrowful to the place of his father, and said: 'Though you had not instructed me, Sir, you said you had instructed me.

5. 'That fellow of a Raganya, asked me five questions, and I could not answer one of them.' The father said: 'As you have told me these questions of his, I do not know any one of them [*3]. If I knew these questions, how should I not have told you [*4]?'

6. Then Gautama went to the king's place, and when he had come to him, the king offered him proper respect. In the morning the king went out on his way to the assembly [*5]. The king said to him:

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] 'Sir, Gautama, ask a boon of such things as men possess.' He replied: 'Such things as men possess may remain with you. Tell me the speech which you addressed to the boy.'

7. The king was perplexed, and commanded him, saying: 'Stay with me some time.' Then he said: 'As (to what) you have said to me, Gautama, this knowledge did not go to any Brahmana before you, and therefore this teaching belonged in all the worlds to the Kshatra class alone. Then he began:

Footnotes

^76:2 This story is more fully told in the Brihadaranyaka VI, 2, Satapatha-brahmana XIV, 8, 16.

^76:3 Samiti, or parishad, as in the Brih. Ar.

^76:4 He is the same Kshatriya sage who appeared in I, 8, 1, silencing the Brahmans.

^77:1 That of the fathers. Comm.

^77:2 Or, according to others, why the water has a human voice; purushavakah in Brih. Ar. XIV, 9, 3.

^77:3 I doubt whether the elliptical construction of these sentences is properly filled out by the commentator. In the Brihadaranyaka the construction is much easier. 'You know me well enough to know that whatever I know, I told you.'

^77:4 I read avedishyam, though both the text and commentary give avadishyam. Still viditavan asmi points to an original avedishyam, and a parallel passage, VI, 1, 7, confirms this emendation.

^77:5 Cf. Kh. Up. V, II, 5.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA [*1]

1. 'The altar (on which the sacrifice is supposed to be offered) is that world (heaven), O Gautama; its fuel is the sun itself, the smoke his rays, the light the day, the coals the moon, the sparks the stars.

2. 'On that altar the Devas (or pranas, represented by Agni, &c.) offer the sraddha libation (consisting of water). From that oblation rises Soma, the king [*2] (the moon).

Footnotes

^78:1 He answers the last question, why water in the fifth libation is called Man, first.

^78:2 The sacrificers themselves rise through their oblations to heaven, and attain as their reward a Soma-like nature.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. 'The altar is Parganya (the god of rain), O Gautama; its fuel is the air itself, the smoke the cloud, the light the lightning, the coals. the thunderbolt, the sparks the thunderings [*3].

[p. 79]

2. 'On that altar the Devas offer Soma, the king (the moon). From that oblation rises rain [*1].

Footnotes

^78:3 Hraduni, generally explained by hail, but here by stanayitnusabdah, rumblings.

^79:1 The water, which had assumed the nature of Soma, now becomes rain.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. 'The altar is the earth, O Gautama; its fuel is the year itself, the smoke the ether, the light the night, the coals the quarters, the sparks the intermediate quarters.

2. 'On that altar the Devas (pranas) offer rain. From that oblation rises food (corn, &c.)

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'The altar is man, O Gautama; its fuel speech itself, the smoke the breath, the light the tongue, the coals the eye, the sparks the ear.

2. 'On that altar the Devas (pranas) offer food. From that oblation rises seed.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. 'The altar is woman, O Gautama [*2].

2. 'On that altar the Devas (pranas) offer seed, From that oblation rises the germ.

Footnotes

^79:2 Tasya upastha eva samid, yad upamantrayate sa dhumo, yonir arkir, yad antah karoti te 'ngara abhinanda vishphulingah.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. 'For this reason is water in the fifth oblation called Man. This germ, covered in the womb, having dwelt there ten months, or more or less, is born.

2. 'When born, he lives whatever the length of his life may be. When he has departed, his friends carry him, as appointed, to the fire (of the funeral pile) from whence he came, from whence he sprang.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

TENTH KHANDA.

'Those who know this [*1] (even though they still be grihasthas, householders) and those who in the forest follow faith and austerities (the vanaprasthas, and of the parivragakas those who do not yet know the Highest Brahman) go [*2] to light (arkis), from light to day, from day to the light half of the moon, from the light half of the moon to the six months when the sun goes to the north, from the six months when the sun goes to the north to the year, from the year to the sun, from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning. There is a person not human [*3],--

2. 'He leads them to Brahman (the conditioned Brahman). This is the path of the Devas.

3. 'But they who living in a village practise (a life of) sacrifices, works of public utility, and alms, they go to the smoke, from smoke to night, from night to the dark half of the moon, from the dark half of the moon to the six months when the sun goes to the south. But they do not reach the year.

4. 'From the months they go to the world of the fathers, from the world of the fathers to the ether, from the ether to the moon. That is Soma, the king. Here they are loved (eaten) by the Devas, yes, the Devas love (eat) them [*4].

[p. 81]

5. 'Having dwelt there, till their (good) works are consumed, they return again that way as they came [*1], to the ether, from the ether to the air. Then the sacrificer, having become air, becomes smoke, having become smoke, he becomes mist,

6. 'Having become mist, he becomes a cloud, having become a cloud, he rains down. Then he is born as rice and corn, herbs and trees, sesamum. and beans. From thence the escape is beset with most difficulties. For whoever the persons may be that eat the food, and beget offspring, he henceforth becomes like unto them.

[p. 82]

7. 'Those whose conduct has been good, will quickly attain some good birth, the birth of a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya. But those whose conduct has been evil, will quickly attain an evil birth, the birth of a dog, or a hog, or a Kandala.

8. 'On neither of these two ways those small creatures (flies, worms, &c.) are continually returning of whom it may be said, Live and die. Theirs is a third place.

'Therefore that world never becomes full [*1] (cf. V, 3, 2).

[p. 83]

'Hence let a man take care to himself [*1]! And thus it is said in the following Sloka [*2]:--

9. 'A man who steals gold, who drinks spirits,

[p. 84]

who dishonours his Guru's bed, who kills a Brahman, these four fall, and as a fifth he who associates with them.

10. 'But he who thus knows the five fires is not defiled by sin even though he associates with them. He who knows this, is pure, clean, and obtains the world of the blessed, yea, he obtains the world of the blessed.'

Footnotes

^80:1 The doctrine of the five fires, and our being born in them, i. e. in heaven, rain, earth, man, and woman.

^80:2 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 15, 5.

^80:3 Instead of manava, human, or amanava, not human, the Brih. Ar. reads manasa, mental, or created by manas, mind.

^80:4 This passage has been translated, 'They are the food of the gods. The gods do eat it.' And this is indeed the literal meaning of the words. But bhag (to enjoy) and bhaksh (to eat) are often [p. 81] used by theosophical writers in India, in the more general sense of cherishing or loving, and anna in the sense of an object of desire, love, and protection. The commentators, however, as the use of bhaksh in this sense is exceptional, or as it has no support in the use of the ancients, warn us here against a possible misunderstanding. If those, they say, who have performed sacrifices enter at last into the essence of Soma, the moon, and are eaten by the Devas, by Indra, &c., what is the use of their good works? No, they reply, they are not really eaten. Food (anna) means only what is helpful and delightful; it is not meant that they are eaten by morsels, but that they form the delight of the Devas. Thus we hear it said that men, women, and cattle are food for kings. And if it is said that women are loved by men, they are, in being loved, themselves loving. Thus these men also, being loved by the Devas, are happy and rejoice with the Devas. Their body, in order to be able to rejoice in the moon, becomes of a watery substance, as it was said before, that the water, called the Sraddha libation, when offered in heaven, as in the fire of the altar, becomes Soma, the king (Kh. Up. V, 4, 1). That water becomes, after various changes, the body of those who have performed good works, and when a man is dead and his body burnt (Kh. Up. V, 9, 2), the water rises from the body upwards with the smoke, and carries him to the moon, where, in that body, he enjoys the fruits of his good works, as long as they last. When they are consumed, like the oil in a lamp, he has to return to a new round of existences.

^81:1 But only to a certain point.

^82:1 In this manner all the five questions have been answered. First, why in the fifth oblation water is called man; secondly, to what place men go after death, some by the path of the Devas, others by the path of the fathers, others again by neither of these paths; thirdly, how they return, some returning to Brahman, others returning to the earth; fourthly, where the paths of the Devas and the fathers diverge, viz. when from the half-year the path of the Devas goes on to the year, while that of the fathers branches off to the world of the fathers; fifthly, why that world, the other world, does never become full, viz. because men either go on to Brahman or return again to this world.

Many questions are raised among Indian philosophers on the exact meaning of certain passages occurring in the preceding paragraphs. First, as to who is admitted to the path of the Devas? Householders, who know the secret doctrine of the five fires or the five libations of the Agnihotra, as described above, while other householders, who only perform the ordinary sacrifices, without a knowledge of their secret meaning, go by the path of the fathers. Secondly, those who have retired to the forest, and whose worship there consists in faith and austerities, i. e. Vanaprasthas and Parivragakas, before they arrive at a knowledge of the true Brahman. The question then arises, whether religious students also enter the path of the Devas? This is affirmed, because Puranas and Smritis assert it, or because our text, if properly understood, does not exclude it. Those, on the contrary, who know not only a conditioned, but the highest unconditioned Brahman, do not proceed on the path of the Devas, but obtain Brahman immediately.

Again, there is much difference of opinion whether, after a man [p. 83] has been in the moon, consuming his works, he can be born again. Birth is the result of former works, and if former works are altogether consumed, there can be no new birth. This, however, is shown to be an erroneous view, because, besides the good sacrificial works, the fruits of which are consumed in the moon, there are other works which have to be enjoyed or expiated, as the case may be, in a new existence.

The great difficulty or danger in the round of transmigration arises when the rain has fructified the earth, and passes into herbs and trees, rice, corn, and beans. For, first of all, some of the rain does not fructify at once, but falls into rivers and into the sea, to be swallowed up by fishes and sea monsters. Then, only after these have been dissolved in the sea, and after the sea water has been attracted by the clouds, the rain falls down again, it may be on desert or stony land. Here it may be swallowed by snakes or deer, and these may be swallowed by other animals, so that the round of existence seems endless. Nor is this all. Some rain may dry up, or be absorbed by bodies that cannot be eaten. Then, if the rain is absorbed by rice, corn, &c., and this be eaten, it may be eaten by children or by men who have renounced marriage, and thus again lose the chance of a new birth.. Lastly, there is the danger arising from the nature of the being; in whom the food, such as rice and corn, becomes a new seed, and likewise from the nature of the mother. All these chances have to be met before a new birth as a Brahmana, Kshatriya, or Vaisya can be secured.

Another curious distinction is here made by Sankara in his commentary. There are some, he says, who assume the form of rice, corn, &c., not in their descent from a higher world, as described in the Upanishad, but as a definite punishment for certain evil deeds they have committed. These remain in that state till the results of their evil deeds are over, and assume then a new body, according to their work, like caterpillars. With them there is also a consciousness of these states, and the acts which caused them to [p. 84] assume this or that body, leave impressions behind, like dreams. This is not the case with those who in their descent from the moon, pass, as we saw, through an existence as rice, corn, &c. They have no consciousness of such existences, at least not in their descent. In their ascent to the moon, they have consciousness, as a man who climbs up a tree knows what he is about. But in their descent, that consciousness is gone, as it is when a man falls down from a tree. Otherwise a man, who by his good works had deserved rewards in the moon, would, while corn is being ground, suffer tortures, as if he were in hell, and the very object of good works, as taught by the Veda, would be defeated. As we see that a man struck by a hammer can be carried away unconscious, so it is in the descent of souls, till they are born again as men, and gain a new start for the attainment of the Highest Brahman.

^83:1 Let him despise it. Comm.

^83:2 Evidently an old Trishtubh verse, but irregular in the third line. See Manu XI, 54.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. Prakinasala Aupamanyava, Satyayagna Paulushi, Indradyumna Bhallaveya, Gana Sarkarakshya, and Budila Asvatarasvi, these five great householders and great theologians came once together and held a discussion as to What is our Self, and what is Brahman [*2].

2. They reflected and said: 'Sirs, there is that Uddalaka Aruni, who knows at present that Self,

[p. 85]

called Vaisvanara. Well, let us go to him.' They went to him.

3. But he reflected: 'Those great householders and great theologians will examine me, and I shall not be able to tell them all; therefore I shall recommend another teacher to them.'

4. He said to them: 'Sirs, Asvapati Kaikeya knows at present that Self, called Vaisvanara. Well, let us go to him.' They went to him.

5. When they arrived (the king) ordered proper presents to be made separately to each of them. And rising the next morning [*1] he said: 'In my kingdom there is no thief, no miser, no drunkard, no man without an altar in his house, no ignorant person, no adulterer, much less an adulteress. I [*2] am going to perform a sacrifice, Sirs, and as much wealth as I give to each Ritvig priest, I shall give to you, Sirs. Please to stay here.'

6. They replied: 'Every man ought to say for what purpose he comes. You know at present that Vaisvanara Self, tell us that.'

7. He said: 'To-morrow I shall give you an answer.' Therefore on the next morning they approached him, carrying fuel in their hands (like students), and he, without first demanding any preparatory rites [*3], said to them:

Footnotes

^84:1 The same story is found in the Satapatha-brahmana X, 6, 1,1.

^84:2 Atman and Brahman are to be taken as predicate and subject.

^85:1 The commentator explains that the king, seeing that they would not accept his presents, and thinking that they did not consider him worthy of bestowing presents on them, made these remarks.

^85:2 When they still refused his presents, he thought the presents he had offered were too small, and therefore invited them to a sacrifice.

^85:3 He was satisfied with the humility of the Brahmans, who, being Brahmans, came to him, who was not a Brahman, as pupils. Generally [p. 86] a pupil has first to pass through several initiatory rites before he is admitted to the benefit of his master's teaching.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. 'Aupamanyava, whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'Heaven only, venerable king.' He said: 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Sutegas (having good light). Therefore every kind of Soma libation is seen in your house [*1].

2. 'You eat food, and see your desire (a son, &c.), and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food, sees his desire, and has Vedic glory (arising from study and sacrifice) in his house. That, however, is but the head of the Self, and thus your head would have fallen (in a discussion), if you had not come to me.'

Footnotes

^86:1 Soma is said to be suta in the Ekaha, prasuta in the Ahina, asuta in the Sattra-sacrifices.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to Satyayagna Paulushi: 'O Prakinayogya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'The sun only, venerable king.' He said: 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Visvarupa (multiform). Therefore much and manifold wealth is seen in your house.

2. 'There is a car with mules, full of slaves and jewels. You eat food and see your desire, and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his house.

'That, however, is but the eye of the Self, and you would have become blind, if you had not come to me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to Indradyumna Bhallaveya: 'O Vaiyaghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'Air only, venerable king.' He said: 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Prithagvartman (having various courses). Therefore offerings come to you in various ways, and rows of cars follow you in various ways.

2. 'You eat food and see your desire, and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his house.

'That, however, is but the breath of the Self, and your breath would have left you, if you had not come to me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to Gana Sarkarakshya: 'Whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'Ether only, venerable king.' He said: 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Bahula (full). Therefore you are full of offspring and wealth.

2. 'You eat food and see your desire, and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his house.

'That, however, is but the trunk of the Self, and your trunk would have perished, if you had not come to me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to Budila Asvatarasvi, 'O Vaiyaghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'Water only, venerable king.' He said;

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Rayi (wealth). Therefore are you wealthy and flourishing.

2. 'You eat food and see your desire, and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his house.

'That, however, is but the bladder of the Self, and your bladder would have burst, if you had not come to me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to Auddalaka Aruni: 'O Gautama, whom do you meditate on as the Self?' He replied: 'The earth only, venerable king.' He said: 'The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Pratishtha (firm rest). Therefore you stand firm with offspring and cattle.

2. 'You eat food and see your desire, and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his house.

'That, however, are but the feet of the Self, and your feet would have given way, if you had not come to me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Then he said to them all: 'You eat your food, knowing that Vaisvanara Self as if it were many. But he who worships the Vaisvanara Self as a span long, and as [*1] identical with himself, he eats food in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs.

[p. 89]

2. 'Of that Vaisvanara Self the head is Sutegas (having good light), the eye Visvarupa (multiform), the breath Prithagvartman (having various courses), the trunk Bahula (full), the bladder Rayi (wealth), the feet the earth, the chest the altar, the hairs the grass on the altar, the heart the Garhapatya fire, the mind the Anvaharya fire, the mouth the Ahavaniya fire.

Footnotes

^88:1 The two words pradesamatra and abhivimana are doubtful. The commentator explains the first in different ways, which are all more or less fanciful. He is measured or known (matra) as Self, [p. 89] by means of heaven as his head and the earth as his feet, these being the pradesas; or, in the mouth and the rest, which are instruments, he is known as without action himself; or, he has the length from heaven to earth, heaven and earth being called pradesa, because they are taught. The interpretation, supported by the Gabalasruti, that pradesa is the measure from the forehead to the chin, he rejects. Abhivimana is taken in the same meaning as abhimana in the Vedanta, seeing everything in oneself. Vaisvanara is taken as the real Self of all beings, and, in the end, of all Selfs, and as thus to be known and worshipped.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINETEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Therefore [*1] the first food which a man may take, is in the place of Homa. And he who offers that first oblation, should offer it to Prana (up-breathing), saying Svaha. Then Prana (up-breathing) is satisfied,

2. 'If Prana is satisfied, the eye is satisfied, if the eye is satisfied, the sun is satisfied, if the sun is satisfied, heaven is satisfied, if heaven is satisfied, whatever is under heaven and under the sun is satisfied.. And through their satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

Footnotes

^89:1 The object now is to show that to him who knows the Vaisvanara Self, the act of feeding himself is like feeding Vaisvanara, and that feeding Vaisvanara is the true Agnihotra.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

TWENTIETH KHANDA.

1. 'And he who offers the second oblation, should offer it to Vyana (back-breathing), saying Svaha. Then Vyana is satisfied,

2. 'If Vyana is satisfied, the ear is satisfied, if the ear is satisfied, the moon is satisfied, if the moon is satisfied, the quarters are satisfied, if the quarters are satisfied, whatever is under the quarters and under the moon is satisfied. And through their satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA.

1. 'And he who offers the third oblation, should offer it to Apana (down-breathing), saying Svaha. Then Apana is satisfied. If Apana is satisfied, the tongue is satisfied, if the tongue is satisfied, Agni (fire) is satisfied, if Agni is satisfied, the earth is satisfied, if the earth is satisfied, whatever is under the earth and under fire is satisfied.

2. 'And through their satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA.

1. 'And he who offers the fourth oblation, should offer it to Samana (on-breathing), saying Svaha. Then Samana is satisfied,

2. 'If Samana is satisfied, the mind is satisfied, if the mind is satisfied, Parganya (god of rain) is satisfied, if Parganya is satisfied, lightning is satisfied, if lightning is satisfied, whatever is under Parganya and under lightning is satisfied. And through their

[p. 91]

satisfaction he (the sacrificer or cater) himself is satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'And he who offers the fifth oblation, should offer it to Udana (out-breathing), saying Svaha. Then Udana is satisfied,

2. 'If Udana is satisfied, Vayu (air) is satisfied, if Vayu is satisfied, ether is satisfied, if ether is satisfied, whatever is under Vayu, and under the ether is satisfied. And through their satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FOURTH KHANDA.

1. 'If, without knowing this, one offers an Agnihotra, it would be as if a man were to remove the live coals and pour his libation on dead ashes.

2. 'But he who offers this Agnihotra with a full knowledge of its true purport, he offers it (i.e. he eats food) [*1] in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs.

3. 'As the soft fibres of the Ishika reed, when thrown into the fire, are burnt, thus all his sins are burnt whoever offers this Agnihotra with a full knowledge of its true purport.

4. 'Even if he gives what is left of his food to a Kandala, it would be offered in his (the Kandala's) Vaisvanara Self. And so it is said in this Sloka:--

'As hungry children here on earth sit (expectantly) round their mother, so do all beings sit round the Agnihotra, yea, round the Agnihotra.'

Footnotes

^91:1 Cf. V, 18, 1.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

SIXTH PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Harih, Om. There lived once Svetaketu Aruneya (the grandson of Aruna). To him his father (Uddalaka, the son of Aruna) said: 'Svetaketu, go to school; for there is none belonging to our race, darling, who, not having studied (the Veda), is, as it were, a Brahmana by birth only.'

2. Having begun his apprenticeship (with a teacher) when he was twelve years of age [*1], Svetaketu returned to his father, when he was twenty-four, having then studied all the Vedas,--conceited, considering himself well-read, and stern.

3. His father said to him: 'Svetaketu, as you are so conceited, considering yourself so well-read, and so stern, my dear, have you ever asked for that instruction by which we hear what cannot be heard, by which we perceive what cannot be perceived, by which we know what cannot be known?'

4. 'What is that instruction, Sir?' he asked.

The father replied: 'My dear, as by one clod of clay all that is made of clay is known, the difference [*2] being only a name, arising from speech, but the truth being that all is clay;

5. 'And as, my dear, by one nugget of gold [*3]

[p. 93]

all that is made of gold is known, the difference being only a name, arising from speech, but the truth being that all is gold?

6. 'And as, my dear, by one pair of nail-scissors all that is made of iron (karshnayasam) is known, the difference being only a name, arising from speech, but the truth being that all is iron,--thus, my dear, is that instruction.'

7. The son said: 'Surely those venerable men (my teachers) did not know that. For if they had known it, why should they not have told it me? Do you, Sir, therefore tell me that.' 'Be it so,' said the father.

Footnotes

^92:1 This was rather late, for the son of a Brahman might have begun his studies when he was seven years old. Apastamba-sutras I, 1, 18. Twelve years was considered the right time for mastering one of the Vedas.

^92:2 Vikara, difference, variety, change, by form and name, development, cf. VI, 3, 3.

^92:3 The commentator takes lohamani here as suvarnapinda.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA [*1]

1. 'In the beginning,' my dear, 'there was that only which is (to on), one only, without a second. Others say, in the beginning there was that only which is not (to me on), one only, without a second; and from that which is not, that which is was born.

2. 'But how could it be thus, my dear?' the father continued. 'How could that which is, be born of that which is not? No, my dear, only that which is, was in the beginning, one only, without a second.

3. 'It thought [*2], may I be many, may I grow forth. It sent forth fire [*3].

[p. 94]

'That fire [*1] thought, may I be many, may I grow forth. It sent forth water [*2].

'And therefore whenever anybody anywhere is hot and perspires, water is produced on him from fire alone.

4. 'Water thought, may I be many, may I grow forth. It sent forth earth [*3] (food).

'Therefore whenever it rains anywhere, most food is then produced. From water alone is eatable food produced.

Footnotes

^93:1 Cf. Taitt. Up. II, 6.

^93:2 Literally, it saw. This verb is explained as showing that the Sat is conscious, not unconscious (bewusst, nicht unbewusst).

^93:3 In other Upanishads the Sat produces first akasa, ether, then vayu, air, and then only tegas, fire. Fire is a better rendering for tegas than light or heat. See Jacobi, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XXIX, p. 242. The difficulties, however, of [p. 94] accurately translating tegas are not removed by rendering if by fire, as may be seen immediately afterward in VI, 4, 1, where tegas is said to supply the red colour of agni, the burning fire, not the god of fire. See also VI, 8, 6. In later philosophical treatises the meaning of tegas is more carefully determined than in the Upanishads.

^94:1 Really the Sat, in the form of fire. Fire is whatever burns, cooks, shines, and is red.

^94:2 By water is meant all that is fluid, and bright in colour.

^94:3 By anna, food, is here meant the earth, and all that is heavy, firm, dark in colour.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'Of all living things there are indeed three origins only [*4], that which springs from an egg (oviparous), that which springs from a living being (viviparous), and that which springs from a germ.

2. 'That Being [*5] (i. e. that which had produced fire, water, and earth) thought, let me now enter those three beings [*5] (fire, water, earth) with this living

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Self (giva atma) [*1], and let me then reveal (develop) names and forms.

3. 'Then that Being having said, Let me make each of these three tripartite (so that fire, water, and earth should each have itself for its principal ingredient, besides an admixture of the other two) entered into those three beings (devata) with this living self only, and revealed names and forms.

4. 'He made each of these tripartite; and how these three beings become each of them tripartite, that learn from me now, my friend!

Footnotes

^94:4 In the Ait. Up. four are mentioned, andaga, here andaga, garuga (i.e. garayuga), here givaga, svedaga, and udbhigga, svedaga, born from heat, being additional. Cf. Atharva-veda I, 12, 1.

^94:5 The text has devata, deity; here used in a very general sense. The Sat, though it has produced fire, water, and earth, has not yet obtained its wish of becoming many.

^95:1 This living self is only a shadow, as it were, of the Highest Self; and as the sun, reflected in the water, does not suffer from the movement of the water, the real Self does not suffer pleasure or pain on earth, but the living self only.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. 'The red colour of burning fire (agni) is the colour of fire, the white colour of fire is the colour of water, the black colour of fire the colour of earth. Thus vanishes what we call fire, as a mere variety, being a name, arising from speech. What is true (satya) are the three colours (or forms).

2. 'The red colour of the sun (aditya) is the colour of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus vanishes what we call the sun, as a mere variety, being a name, arising from speech. What is true are the three colours.

3. 'The red colour of the moon is the colour of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus vanishes what we call the moon, as a mere variety, being a name, arising from speech. What is true are the three colours.

4. 'The red colour of the lightning is the colour of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus

[p. 96]

vanishes what we call the lightning, as a mere variety, being a name, arising from speech. What is true are the three colours.

5. 'Great householders and great theologians of olden times who knew this, have declared the same, saying, "No one can henceforth mention to us anything which we have not heard, perceived, or known [*1]." Out of these (three colours or forms) they knew all.

6. 'Whatever they thought looked red, they knew was the colour of fire. Whatever they thought looked white, they knew was the colour of water. Whatever they thought looked black, they knew was the colour of earth.

7. 'Whatever they thought was altogether unknown, they knew was some combination of those three beings (devata).

'Now learn from me, my friend, how those three beings, when they reach man, become each of them tripartite.

Footnotes

^96:1 This reminds one of the Aristotelian dia gar tauta kai ek toutun talla gnurizetai, all' oy tauta dia tun ypokeimenun.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. 'The earth (food) when eaten becomes threefold; its grossest portion becomes feces, its middle portion flesh, its subtilest portion mind.

2. 'Water when drunk becomes threefold; its grossest portion becomes water, its middle portion blood, its subtilest portion breath.

3. 'Fire (i. e. in oil, butter, &c.) when eaten becomes threefold; its grossest portion becomes bone, its middle portion marrow, its subtilest portion speech [*2].

[p. 97]

4. 'For truly, my child, mind comes of earth, breath of water, speech of fire.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^96:2 Food, water, and fire are each to be taken as tripartite; hence animals which live on one of the three elements only, still share in some measure the qualities of the other elements also.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. 'That which is the subtile portion of curds, when churned, rises upwards, and becomes butter.

2. 'In the same manner, my child, the subtile portion of earth (food), when eaten, rises upwards, and becomes mind.

3. 'That which is the subtile portion of water, when drunk, rises upwards, and becomes breath.

4. 'That which is the subtile portion of fire, when consumed, rises upwards, and becomes speech.

5. 'For mind, my child, comes of earth, breath of water, speech of fire.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Man (purusha), my son, consists of sixteen parts. Abstain from food for fifteen days, but drink as much water as you like, for breath comes from water, and will not be cut off, if you drink water.'

2. Svetaketu abstained from food for fifteen days. Then he came to his father and said: 'What shall I say?' The father said: 'Repeat the Rik, Yagus, and Saman verses.' He replied: 'They do not occur to me, Sir.'

3. The father said to him: 'As of a great lighted fire one coal only of the size of a firefly may be left, which would not burn much more than this (i. e. very

[p. 98]

little), thus, my dear son, one part only of the sixteen parts (of you) is left, and therefore with that one part you do not remember the Vedas. Go and eat!

4. 'Then wilt thou understand me.' Then Svetaketu. ate, and afterwards approached his father. And whatever his father asked him, he knew it all by heart. Then his father said to him:

5. 'As of a great lighted fire one coal of the size of a firefly, if left, may be made to blaze up again by putting grass upon it, and will thus burn more than this,

6. 'Thus, my dear son, there was one part of the sixteen parts left to you, and that, lighted up with food, burnt up, and by it you remember now the Vedas.' After that, he understood what his father meant when he said: 'Mind, my son, comes from food, breath from water, speech from fire.' He understood what he said, yea, he understood it [*1].

Footnotes

^98:1 The repetition shows that the teaching of the Trivrikarana, the tripartite nature of things, is ended.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. Uddalaka Aruni said to his son Svetaketu:

Learn from me the true nature of sleep (svapna). When a man sleeps here, then, my dear son, he becomes united with the True [*2], he is gone to his

[p. 99]

own (Self). Therefore they say, svapiti, he sleeps, because he is gone (apita) to his own (sva) [*1].

2. 'As a bird when tied by a string flies first in every direction, and finding no rest anywhere, settles down at last on the very place where it is fastened, exactly in the same manner, my son, that mind (the giva, or living Self in the mind, see VI, 3, 2), after flying in every direction, and finding no rest anywhere, settles down on breath [*2]; for indeed, my son, mind is fastened to breath.

3. 'Learn from me, my son, what are hunger and thirst. When a man is thus said to be hungry, water is carrying away (digests) what has been eaten by him. Therefore as they speak of a cow-leader (go-naya), a horse-leader (asva-naya), a man-leader (purusha-naya), so they call water (which digests food and causes hunger) food-leader (asa-naya). Thus (by food digested &c.), my son, know this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth, for this (body) could not be without a root (cause).

4. 'And where could its root be except in food (earth) [*3]? And in the same manner, my son, as

[p. 100]

food (earth) too is an offshoot, seek after its root, viz. water. And as water too is an offshoot, seek after its root, viz. fire. And as fire too is an offshoot, seek after its root, viz. the True. Yes, all these creatures, my son, have their root in the True, they dwell in the True, they rest in the True.

5. 'When a man is thus said to be thirsty, fire carries away what has been drunk by him. Therefore as they speak of a cow-leader (go-naya), of a horse-leader (asva-naya), of a man-leader (purusha-naya), so they call fire udanya, thirst, i. e. water-leader. Thus (by water digested &c.), my son, know this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth: this (body) could not be without a root (cause).

6. 'And where could its root be except in water? As water is an offshoot, seek after its root, viz. fire. As fire is an offshoot, seek after its root, viz. the True. Yes, all these creatures, O son, have their root in the True, they dwell in the True, they rest in the True.

'And how these three beings (devata), fire, water, earth, O son, when they reach man, become each of them tripartite, has been said before (VI, 4, 7). When a man departs from hence, his speech [*1] is merged

[p. 101]

in his mind, his mind in his breath, his breath in heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being.

7. 'Now that which is that subtile essence (the root of all), in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^98:2 The deep sushupta sleep is meant, in which personal consciousness is lost, and the self for a time absorbed in the Highest Self. Sleep is produced by fatigue. Speech, mind, and the senses rest, breath only remains awake, and the giva, the living soul, in order to recover from his fatigue, returns for a while to his true Self (atma). The Sat must be taken as a substance, nay, as the highest substance or subject, the Brahman. The whole purpose of the Upanishad is obscured if we translate sat or satyam by truth, instead of the True, the true one,to ontus on.

^99:1 This is one of the many recognised plays on words in the Upanishads and the Vedanta philosophy. Svapiti, he sleeps, stands for sva (his own), i.e. the self, and apita, gone to.

^99:2 The commentator takes prana here in the sense of Sat, which it often has elsewhere. If so, this illustration would have the same object as the preceding one. If we took prana in the sense of breath, breath being the result of water, this paragraph might be taken to explain the resignation of the living Self to its bondage to breath, while on earth.

^99:3 That food is the root of the body is shown by the commentator in the following way: Food when softened by water and digested becomes a fluid, blood (sonita). From it comes flesh, from flesh fat, from fat bones, from bones marrow, from marrow seed. Food eaten by a woman becomes equally blood (lohita), [p. 100] and from seed and blood combined the new body is produced. We must always have before us the genealogical table:--

Sat, to on.
   |
 Tegas (fire) = Vak (speech).
   |
 Ap (water) = Prana (breath).
   |
 Anna (earth)= Manas (mind).

^100:1 If a man dies, the first thing which his friends say is, He speaks no more. Then, he understands no more. Then, he moves no more. Then, he is cold.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. 'As the bees [*1], my son, make honey by collecting the juices of distant trees, and reduce the juice into one form,

2. 'And as these juices have no discrimination, so that they might say, I am the juice of this tree or that, in the same manner, my son, all these creatures, when they have become merged in the True (either in deep sleep or in death), know not that they are merged in the True.

3. 'Whatever these creatures are here, whether a lion, or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge, or a gnat, or a musquito, that they become again and again.

4. 'Now that which is that subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^101:1 At the beginning of each chapter the commentator supplies the question which the son is supposed to have asked his father. The first is: All creatures falling every day into deep sleep (sushupti) obtain thereby the Sat, the true being. How is it then that they do not know that they obtain the Sat every day?

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

TENTH KHANDA [*1]

1. 'These rivers, my son, run, the eastern (like the Ganga) toward the east, the western (like the Sindhu) toward the west. They go from sea to sea (i. e. the clouds lift up the water from the sea to the sky, and send it back as rain to the sea). They become indeed sea. And as those rivers, when they are in the sea, do not know, I am this or that river,

2. 'In the same manner, my son, all these creatures, when they have come back from the True, know not that they have come back from the True. Whatever these creatures are here, whether a lion, or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge, or a gnat, or a musquito, that they become again and again.

3. 'That which is that subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^102:1 The next question which the son is supposed to have asked is: If a man who has slept in his own house, rises and goes to another village, he. knows that he has come from his own house. Why then do people not know that they have come from the Sat?

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA [*2].

1. 'If some one were to strike at the root of this large tree here, it would bleed, but live. If he were to strike at its stem, it would bleed, but live. If he were to strike at its top, it would bleed, but live.

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] Pervaded by the living Self that tree stands firm, drinking in its nourishment and rejoicing;

2. 'But if the life (the living Self) leaves one of its branches, that branch withers; if it leaves a second, that branch withers; if it leaves a third, that branch withers. If it leaves the whole tree, the whole tree withers [*1]. In exactly the same manner, my son, know this.' Thus he spoke:

3. 'This (body) indeed withers and dies when the living Self has left it; the living Self dies not.

'That which is that subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^102:2 The next question is: Waves, foam, and bubbles arise from the water, and. when they merge again in the water, they are gone, How is it that living beings, when in sleep or death they are merged again in the Sat, are not destroyed?

^103:1 The commentator remarks that according to the Veda, trees are conscious, while Buddhists and followers of Kanada hold them to be unconscious. They live, because one sees how their sap runs and how it dries up, just as one sees the sap in a living body, which, as we saw, was produced by food and water. Therefore the simile holds good. The life, or, more correctly, the liver, the living Self, pervades the tree, as it pervades man, when it has entered the organism which produces breath, mind, and speech. If any accident happens to a branch, the living Self draws himself away from that branch, and then the branch withers. The sap which caused the living Self to remain, goes, and the living Self goes away with it. The same applies to the whole tree. The tree dies when the living Self leaves it, but the living Self does not die; it only leaves an abode which it had before occupied. Some other illustrations, to show that the living Self remains, are added by the commentator: First, with regard to the living Self being the same when it awakes from deep sleep (sushupti), he remarks that we remember quite well that we have left something unfinished before we fell asleep. And then with regard to the living Self being the same when it awakes from death to a new life, he shows that creatures, as soon as they are born take the breast, and exhibit terror, which can only be explained, as he supposes, by their possessing a recollection of a former state of existence.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 104]

  

TWELFTH KHANDA .

1. 'Fetch me from thence a fruit of the Nyagrodha tree.'

'Here is one, Sir.' Break it.'

'It is broken, Sir.'

'What do you see there?'

'These seeds, almost infinitesimal.'

'Break one of them.'

'It is broken, Sir.'

'What do you see there?'

'Not anything, Sir.'

2. The father said: 'My son, that subtile essence which you do not perceive there, of that very essence this great Nyagrodha tree exists.

3. 'Believe it, my son. That which is the subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA [*2].

1. 'Place this salt in water, and then wait on me in the morning.'

The son did as he was commanded.

The father said to him: 'Bring me the salt, which you placed in the water last night.'

[p. 105]

The son having looked for it, found it not, for, of course, it was melted.

2. The father said: 'Taste it from the surface of the water. How is it?'

The son replied: 'It is salt.'

'Taste it from the middle. How is it?'

The son replied: 'It is salt.'

'Taste it from the bottom. How is it?'

The son replied 'It is salt.'

The father said Throw it away [*1] and then wait on me.'

He did so; but salt exists for ever.

Then the father said: 'Here also, in this body, forsooth, you do not perceive the True (Sat), my son; but there indeed it is.

3. 'That which is the subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^104:1 The question which the son is supposed to have asked is How can this universe which has the form and name of earth &c. be produced from the Sat which is subtile, and has neither form nor name?

^104:2 The question here is supposed to have been: If the Sat is the root of all that exists, why is it not perceived?

^105:1 Read abhiprasya, which is evidently intended by the commentary: abhiprasya parityagya. See B. R. Sanskrit Dictionary, s. v.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA [*2].

1. 'As one might lead a person with his eyes covered away from the Gandharas [*3], and leave him

[p. 106]

then in a place where there are no human beings; and as that person would turn towards the east, or the north, or the west, and shout, "I have been brought here with my eyes covered, I have been left here with my eyes covered,"

2. 'And as thereupon some one might loose his bandage and say to him, "Go in that direction, it is Gandhara, go in that direction;" and as thereupon, having been informed and being able to judge for himself, he would by asking his way from village to village arrive at last at Gandhara,--in exactly the same manner does a man, who meets with a teacher to inform him, obtain the true knowledge [*1]. For him

[p. 107]

there is only delay so long as he is not delivered (from the body); then he will be perfect [*1].

3. 'That which is the subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^105:2 The question here asked is: The salt, though no longer perceptible by means of sight or touch, could be discovered by taste. Then how can the Sat be discovered, although it is imperceptible by all the senses?

^105:3 The Gandharas, but rarely mentioned in the Rig-veda and the Ait. Brahmana, have left their name in Kandaroi and Candahar. The fact of their name being evidently quite familiar to the author of the Upanishad might be used to prove either its antiquity or its Northern origin.

^106:1 Tedious as the commentator is in general, he is sometimes almost eloquent in bringing out all that is implied or supposed to be implied in the sacred text. He explains the last simile as follows: A man was carried away by robbers from his own country. After his eyes had been covered, he was taken to a forest full of terrors and dangers arising from tigers, robbers, &c. Not knowing where he was, and suffering from hunger and thirst, he began to cry, wishing to be delivered from his bonds. Then a man took pity on him and removed his bonds, and when he had returned to his home, he was happy. Next follows the application. Our real home is the True (Sat), the Self of the world. The forest into which we are driven is the body, made of the three elements, fire, water, earth, consisting of blood, flesh, bones, &c., and liable to cold, heat, and many other evils. The bands with which our eyes are covered are our desires for many things, real or unreal, such as wife children, cattle, &c., while the robbers by whom we are driven into the forest are our good and evil deeds. Then we cry and say: 'I am the son of so and so, these arc my relatives, I am happy, I am miserable, I am foolish, I am wise, I am just, I am born, I am dead, I am old, I am wretched, my son is dead, my fortune is gone, I am undone, how shall I live, where shall I go, who will save me?' These and hundreds and thousands of other evils are the bands which blind us. Then, owing to some supererogatory good works we may have done, we suddenly meet a man who knows the Self of Brahman, whose own bonds have been broken, who takes pity on us and shows us the way to see the evil which attaches to all [p. 107] that we love in this world. We then withdraw ourselves from all worldly pleasures. We learn that we are not mere creatures of the world, the son of so and so, &c., but that we are that which is the True (Sat). The bands of our ignorance and blindness are removed, and, like the man of Gandhara, we arrive at our own home, the Self, or the True. Then we are happy and blessed.

^107:1 The last words are really--'for him there is only delay so long as I shall not be delivered; then I shall be perfect.' This requires some explanation. First of all, the change from the third to the first person, is best explained by assuming that at the point where all individuality vanishes, the father, as teacher, identifies himself with the person of whom he is speaking.

The delay (the kira or kshepa) of which he speaks is the time which passes between the attainment of true knowledge and death, or freedom from the effects of actions performed before the attainment of knowledge. The actions which led to our present embodiment must be altogether consumed, before the body can perish, and then only are we free. As to any actions performed after the attainment of knowledge, they do not count; otherwise there would be a new embodiment, and the attainment of even true knowledge would never lead to final deliverance.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA [*2].

1. 'If a man is ill, his relatives assemble round him and ask: "Dost thou know me? Dost thou know me?" Now as long as his speech is not

[p. 108]

merged in his mind, his mind in breath, breath in heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being (devata), he knows them.

2. 'But when his speech is merged in his mind, his mind in breath, breath in heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being, then he knows them not.

'That which is the subtile essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.'

'Please, Sir, inform me still more,' said the son.'

'Be it so, my child,' the father replied.

Footnotes

^107:2 The question supposed to be asked is: By what degrees a man, who has been properly instructed in the knowledge of Brahman, obtains the Sat, or returns to the True. To judge from the text both he who knows the True and he who does not, reach, when they die, the Sat, passing from speech to mind and breath and heat (fire). But whereas he who knows, remains in the Sat, they who do not [p. 108] know, return again to a new form of existence. It is important to observe that the commentator denies that he who knows, passes at his death through the artery of the head to the sun, and then to the Sat. He holds that with him who knows there is no further cause for delay, and that as soon as he dies, he returns to the Sat.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. 'My child, they bring a man hither whom they have taken by the hand, and they say: "He has taken something, he has committed a theft." (When

[p. 109]

he denies, they say), "Heat the hatchet for him." If he committed the theft, then he makes himself to be what he is not. Then the false-minded, having covered his true Self by a falsehood, grasps the heated hatchet--he is burnt, and he is killed.

2. 'But if he did not commit the theft, then he makes himself to be what he is. Then the true-minded, having covered his true Self by truth, grasps the heated hatchet--he is not burnt, and he is delivered.

'As that (truthful) man is not burnt, thus has all that exists its self in That. It is the True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.' He understood what he said, yea, he understood it.

Footnotes

^108:1 The next question is: Why does he who knows, on obtaining the Sat, not return, while he who does not know, though obtaining the Sat in death, returns? An illustration is chosen which is intended to show how knowledge produces a material effect. The belief in the efficacy of ordeals must have existed at the time, and appealing to that belief, the teacher says that the man who knows himself guilty, is really burnt by the heated iron, while the man who knows himself innocent, is not. In the same manner the man who knows his Self to be the true Self, on approaching after death the true Self, is not repelled and sent back into a new existence, while he who does not know, is sent back into a new round of births and deaths. The man who tells a falsehood about himself, loses his true Self and is burnt; the man who has a false conception about his Self, loses likewise his true Self, and not knowing the true Self, even though approaching it in death, he has to suffer till he acquires some day the true knowledge.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Narada approached Sanatkumara and said, 'Teach me, Sir!' Sanatkumara said to him: 'Please to tell me what you know; afterward I shall tell you what is beyond.'

2. Narada said: 'I know the Rig-veda, Sir, the Yagur-veda, the Sama-veda, as the fourth the Atharvana, as the fifth the Itihasa-purana (the Bharata); the Veda of the Vedas (grammar); the Pitrya (the rules for the sacrifices for the ancestors); the Rasi (the science of numbers); the Daiva (the science of portents); the Nidhi (the science of time); the Vakovakya (logic); the Ekayana (ethics); the Deva-vidya (etymology); the Brahma-vidya (pronunciation, siksha, ceremonial, kalpa, prosody, khandas); the Bhuta-vidya (the science of demons); the Kshatra-vidya

[p. 110]

[paragraph continues] (the science of weapons); the Nakshatra-vidya (astronomy); the Sarpa and Devagana-vidya (the science of serpents or poisons, and the sciences of the genii, such as the making of perfumes, dancing, singing, playing, and other fine arts) [*1]. All this I know, Sir.

3. 'But, Sir, with all this I know the Mantras only, the sacred books, I do not know the Self. I have heard from men like you, that he who knows the Self overcomes grief. I am in grief. Do, Sir, help me over this grief of mine.'

Sanatkumara, said to him: 'Whatever you have read, is only a name.

4. 'A name is the Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, Sama-veda, and as the fourth the Atharvana, as the fifth the Itihasa-purana, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, the Rasi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidya, the Bhuta-vidya, the Kshatra-vidya, the Nakshatra-vidya, the Sarpa and Devagana-vidya. All these are a name only. Meditate on the name.

5. 'He who meditates on the name as Brahman [*2],

[p. 111]

is, as it were, lord and master as far as the name reaches-he who meditates on the name as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than a name?'

'Yes, there is something better than a name.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^110:1 This passage, exhibiting the sacred literature as known at the time, should be compared with the Brihadaranyaka, II, 4, 10. The explanation of the old titles rests on the authority of Sankara, and he is not always consistent. See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1873, 11, p. 10.

^110:2 Why a man who knows the Veda should not know the Self, while in other places it is said that the Veda teaches the Self, is well illustrated by the commentary. If a royal procession approaches, he says, then, though. we do not see the king, because he is hidden by flags, parasols, &c., yet we say, there is the king. And if we ask who is the king, then again, though we cannot see him and point him out, we can say, at least, that he is different from all that is seen. The Self is hidden in the Veda as a king is hidden in a royal procession.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. 'Speech is better than a name. Speech makes us understand the Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, Sama-veda, and as the fourth the Atharvana, as the fifth the Itihasa-purana, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, the Rasi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidya, the Kshatra-vidya, the Nakshatra-vidya, the Sarpa and Devagana-vidya; heaven, earth, air, ether, water, fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; what is right and what is wrong; what is true and what is false; what is good and what is bad; what is pleasing and what is not pleasing. For if there were no speech, neither right nor wrong would be known [*1], neither the true nor the false, neither the good nor the bad, neither the pleasant nor the unpleasant. Speech makes us understand all this. Meditate on speech.

2. 'He who meditates on speech as Brahman, is, as it were, lord and master as far as speech reaches he who meditates on speech as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than speech

'Yes, there is something better than speech.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^111:1 The commentator explains vyagnapayishyat by avignatam abhavishyat. Possibly hridayagno stands for hridayagnam.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'Mind (manas) is better than speech. For as the closed fist holds two amalaka or two kola or two aksha fruits, thus does mind hold speech and name. For if a man is minded in his mind to read the sacred hymns, he reads them; if he is minded in his mind to perform any actions, he performs them; if he is minded to wish for sons and cattle, he wishes for them; if he is minded to wish for this world and the other, he wishes for them. For mind is indeed the self [*1], mind is the world, mind is Brahman. Meditate on the mind.

2. 'He who meditates on the mind as Brahman, is, as it were, lord and master as far as the mind reaches--he who meditates on the mind as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than mind?'

'Yes, there is something better than mind.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^112:1 The commentator explains this by saying that, without the instrument of the mind, the Self cannot act or enjoy.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. 'Will [*2] (sankalpa) is better than mind. For when a man wills, then he thinks in his mind, then he sends forth speech, and he sends it forth in a name. In a name the sacred hymns are contained, in the sacred hymns all sacrifices.

2. 'All these therefore (beginning with mind and

[p. 113]

ending in sacrifice) centre in will, consist of will, abide in will. Heaven and earth willed, air and ether willed, water and fire willed. Through the will of heaven and earth &c. rain wills; through the will of rain food wills; through the will of food the vital airs will; through the will of the vital airs the sacred hymns will; through the will of the sacred hymns the sacrifices will; through the will of the sacrifices the world (as their reward) wills; through the will of the world everything wills . This is will. Meditate on will.

3. 'He who meditates on will as Brahman, he, being himself safe, firm, and undistressed, obtains the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which he has willed; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as will reaches--he who meditates on will as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than will?'

'Yes, there is something better than will.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^112:2 Sankalpa is elsewhere defined as a modification of manas. The commentator says that, like thinking, it is an activity of the inner organ. It is difficult to find any English term exactly corresponding to sankalpa. Rajendralal Mitra translates it by will, but it implies not only will, but at the same time conception, determination, and desire.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. 'Consideration (kitta) [*2] is better than will. For when a man considers, then he wills, then he thinks in his mind, then he sends forth speech, and he

[p. 114]

sends it forth in a name. In a name the sacred hymns are contained, in the sacred hymns all sacrifices.

2. 'All these (beginning with mind and ending in sacrifice) centre in consideration, consist of consideration, abide in consideration. Therefore if a man is inconsiderate, even if he possesses much learning, people say of him, he is nothing, whatever he may know; for, if he were learned, he would not be so inconsiderate. But if a man is considerate, even though he knows but little, to him indeed do people listen gladly. Consideration is the centre, consideration is the self, consideration is the support of all these. Meditate on consideration.

3. 'He who meditates on consideration as Brahman, he, being himself safe, firm, and undistressed, obtains the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which he has considered; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as consideration reaches--he who meditates on consideration as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than consideration?'

'Yes, there is something better than consideration.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^113:1 This paragraph is obscure. The text seems doubtful, for instance, in samaklipatam, samakalpetam, and samakalpatam. Then the question is the exact meaning of samkliptyai, which must be taken as an instrumental case. What is intended is that, without rain, food is impossible &c. or inconceivable; but the text says, 'By the will of rain food wills,' &c. Will seems almost to be taken here in the sense in which modern philosophers use it, as a kind of creative will. By the will of rain food wills, would mean, that first rain wills and exists, and afterwards the vital airs will and exist, &c.

^113:2 Kitta, thought, implies here consideration and reflection.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. 'Reflection (dhyana) [*1] is better than consideration. The earth reflects, as it were, and thus does the sky, the heaven, the water, the mountains, gods and men. Therefore those who among men obtain

[p. 115]

greatness here on earth, seem to have obtained a part of the object of reflection (because they show a certain repose of manner). Thus while small and vulgar people are always quarrelling, abusive, and slandering, great men seem to have obtained a part of the reward of reflection. Meditate on reflection.

2. 'He who meditates on reflection as Brahman, is lord and master, as it were, as far as reflection reaches--he who meditates on reflection as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than reflection?'

'Yes, there is something better than reflection.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^114:1 Reflection is concentration of all our thoughts on one object, ekagrata. And as a man who reflects and meditates on the highest objects acquires thereby repose, becomes firm and immovable, so the earth is supposed to be in repose and immovable, as it were, by reflection and meditation.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Understanding (vignana) is better than reflection. Through understanding we understand the Rig-veda, the Yagur-veda, the Sama-veda, and as the fourth the Atharvana, as the fifth the Itihasa-purana [*1], the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, the Rasi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidya, the Bhuta-vidya, the Kshatra-vidya, the Nakshatra-vidya, the Sarpa and Devagana-vidya, heaven, earth, air, ether, water, fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; what is right and what is wrong; what is true and what is false; what is good and what is bad; what is pleasing and what is not pleasing; food and savour, this world and that, all this we understand through understanding. Meditate on understanding.

2. 'He who meditates on understanding as Brahman, reaches the worlds where there is understanding

[p. 116]

and knowledge [*1]; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as understanding reaches--he who meditates on understanding as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than understanding?'

'Yes, there is something better than understanding.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^115:1 See before, p. 109.

^116:1 The commentator takes vignana here as understanding of sacred books, gnana as cleverness with regard to other subjects.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. 'Power (bala) is better than understanding. One powerful man shakes a hundred men of understanding. If a man is powerful, he becomes a rising man. If he rises, he becomes a man who visits wise people. If he visits, he becomes a follower of wise people. If he follows them, he becomes a seeing, a hearing, a perceiving, a knowing, a doing, an understanding man. By power the earth stands firm, and the sky, and the heaven, and the mountains, gods and men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; by power the world stands firm. Meditate on power.

2. 'He who meditates on power as Brahman, is, as it were, lord and master as far as power reaches--he who meditates on power as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than power?'

'Yes, there is something better than power.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. 'Food (anna) is better than power. Therefore if a man abstain from food for ten days, though he live, he would be unable to see, hear, perceive, think, act, and understand. But when he obtains

[p. 117]

food, he is able to see, hear, perceive, think, act, and understand. Meditate on food.

2. 'He who meditates on food as Brahman, obtains the worlds rich in food and drink; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as food reaches--he who meditates on food as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than food

'Yes, there is something better than food.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Water (ap) is better than food. Therefore if there is not sufficient rain, the vital spirits fail from fear that there will be less food. But if there is sufficient rain, the vital spirits rejoice, because there will be much food. This water, on assuming different forms, becomes this earth, this sky, this heaven, the mountains, gods and men, cattle, birds, herbs and trees, all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants. Water indeed assumes all these forms. Meditate on water.

2. 'He who meditates on water as Brahman, obtains all wishes, he becomes satisfied; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as water reaches--he who meditates on water as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than water?'

'Yes, there is something better than water.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Fire (tegas) is better than water. For fire united with air, warms the ether. Then people say, It is hot, it burns, it will rain. Thus does fire, after showing this sign (itself) first, create water. And

[p. 118]

thus again thunderclaps come with lightnings, flashing upwards and across the sky. Then people say, There is lightning and thunder, it will rain. Then also does fire, after showing this sign first, create water. Meditate on fire.

2. 'He who meditates on fire as Brahman, obtains, resplendent himself, resplendent worlds, full of light and free of darkness; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as fire reaches--he who meditates on fire as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than fire?'

'Yes, there is something better than fire.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. 'Ether (or space) is better than fire. For in the ether exist both sun and moon, the lightning, stars, and fire (agni). Through the ether we call, through the ether we hear, through the ether we answer [*1]. In the ether or space we rejoice (when we are together), and rejoice not (when we are separated). In the ether everything is born, and towards the ether everything tends when it is born [*2]. Meditate on ether.

2. 'He who meditates on ether as Brahman, obtains the worlds of ether and of light, which are free from pressure and pain, wide and spacious [*3]; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as ether reaches--he who meditates on ether as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than ether?'

[p. 119]

Yes, there Is something better than ether.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^118:1 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 5, 2

^118:2 The seed grows upwards towards the ether; not downwards.

^118:3 Cf. Kath. Up. II, 11.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Memory [*1] (smara) is better than ether. Therefore where many are assembled together, if they have no memory, they would hear no one, they would not perceive, they would not understand. Through memory we know our sons, through memory our cattle. Meditate on memory.

2. 'He who meditates on memory as Brahman, is, as it were, lord and master as far as memory reaches;--he who meditates on memory as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than memory?'

'Yes, there is something better than memory.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

Footnotes

^119:1 The apparent distance between ether and memory is bridged over by the commentator pointing out that without memory everything would be as if it were not, so far as we are concerned.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Hope (asa) is better than memory. Fired by hope does memory read the sacred hymns, perform sacrifices, desire sons and cattle, desire this world and the other. Meditate on hope.

2. 'He who meditates on hope as Brahman, all his desires are fulfilled by hope, his prayers are not in vain; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as hope reaches--he who meditates on hope as Brahman.'

'Sir, is there something better than hope?'

'Yes, there is something better than hope.'

'Sir, tell it me.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'Spirit [*1] (prana) is better than hope. As the spokes of a wheel hold to the nave [*2], so does all this (beginning with names and ending in hope) hold to spirit. That spirit moves by the spirit, it gives spirit to the spirit. Father means spirit, mother is spirit, brother is spirit, sister is spirit, tutor is spirit, Brahmana is spirit.

2. 'For if one says anything unbecoming to a father, mother, brother, sister, tutor or Brahmana, then people say, Shame on thee! thou hast offended thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor, or a Brahmana.

3. 'But, if after the spirit has departed from them, one shoves them together with a poker, and burns them to pieces, no one would say, Thou offendest thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor or a Brahmana.

4. 'Spirit then is all this. He who sees this, perceives this, and understands this, becomes an ativadin [*3]. If people say to such a man, Thou

[p. 121]

art an ativadin, he may say, I am an ativadin; he need not deny it.'

Footnotes

^120:1 Prana is used here in a technical sense. It does not mean simply breath, but the spirit, the conscious self (pragnatman) which, as we saw, enters the body in order to reveal the whole variety of forms and names. It is in one sense the mukhya prana.

^120:2 The commentary carries the simile Still further. The felloe he says, holds to the spokes, the spokes to the nave. So do the bhutamatras hold to the pragnamatras, and these to the prana.

^120:3 One who declares something that goes beyond all the declarations made before, beginning with the declaration that names are Brahman, and ending with the declaration that hope is Brahman;--one who knows that prana, spirit, the conscious self, is Brahman. This declaration represents the highest point reached by ordinary people, but Narada wishes to go beyond. In the Mundaka, III, 1, 4, an ativadin is contrasted with one who really knows the highest truth.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTEENTH KHANDA .

1. 'But in reality he is an ativadin who declares the Highest Being to be the True (Satya, to ontus on).'

'Sir, may I become an ativadin by the True?'

'But we must desire to know the True.'

'Sir, I desire to know the True.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'When one understands the True, then one declares the True. One who does not understand it, does not declare the True . Only he who understands it, declares the True. This understanding, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'When one perceives, then one understands. One who does not perceive, does not understand. Only he who perceives, understands. This perception, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

Footnotes

^121:1 As Narada asks no further, whether there is anything better, higher, truer than prana, he is supposed to be satisfied with his belief that prana is the Highest Being. Sanatkumara, however, wishes to lead him on to a still higher view; hence the paragraphs which follow from 16 to 26.

^121:2 He would, for instance, call fire real, not knowing that fire is only a mixture of the three elements (cf. VI, 4), the rupatraya, a mere variety (vikara), and name (naman).

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

  

NINETEENTH KHANDA.

1. 'When one believes, then one perceives. One who does not believe, does not perceive. Only he who believes, perceives. This belief, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTIETH KHANDA.

1. 'When one attends on a tutor (spiritual guide), then one believes. One who does not attend on a tutor, does not believe. Only he who attends, believes. This attention on a tutor, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA.

1. 'When one performs all sacred duties [*1], then one attends really on a tutor. One who does not perform his duties, does not really attend on a tutor. Only he who performs his duties, attends on his tutor. This performance of duties, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

Footnotes

^122:1 The duties of a student, such as restraint of the senses, concentration of the mind, &c.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA.

1. 'When one obtains bliss (in oneself), then one performs duties. One who does not obtain bliss, does not perform duties. Only he who obtains bliss, performs duties. This bliss, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 123]

  

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'The Infinite (bhuman)  is bliss. There is no bliss in anything finite. Infinity only is bliss. This Infinity, however, we must desire to understand.'

'Sir, I desire to understand it.'

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FOURTH KHANDA.

1. 'Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is the Infinite. Where one sees something else, hears something else, understands something else, that is the finite. The Infinite is immortal, the finite is mortal.'

'Sir, in what does the Infinite rest?'

'In its own greatness--or not even in greatness .'

2. 'In the world they call cows and horses, elephants and gold, slaves, wives, fields and houses greatness. I do not mean this,' thus he spoke; 'for in that case one being (the possessor) rests in something else, (but the Infinite cannot rest in something different from itself)

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-FIFTH KHANDA.

1. 'The Infinite indeed is below, above, behind, before, right and left--it is indeed all this.

'Now follows the explanation of the Infinite as

[p. 124]

the I: I am below, I am above, I am behind, before, right and left--I am all this.

2. 'Next follows the explanation of the Infinite as the Self: Self is below, above, behind, before, right and left--Self is all this.

'He who sees, perceives, and understands this, loves the Self, delights in the Self, revels in the Self, rejoices in the Self--he becomes a Svarag, (an autocrat or self-ruler); he is lord and master in all the worlds.

'But those who think differently from this, live in perishable worlds, and have other beings for their rulers.

Footnotes

^123:1 Bhuman is sometimes translated by grandeur, the superlative, the akme. It is the highest point that can be reached, the infinite and the true.

^123:2 This phrase reminds one of the last verse in the No sad asid hymn, where, likewise, the expression of the highest certainty is followed by a misgiving that after all it may be otherwise. The commentator takes yadi va in the sense of, if you ask in the highest sense, then I say no; for the Infinite cannot rest in anything, not even in greatness.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWENTY-SIXTH KHANDA.

1. 'To him who sees, perceives, and understands this [*1], the spirit (prana) springs from the Self, hope springs from the Self, memory springs from the Self; so do ether, fire, water, appearance and disappearance [*2], food, power, understanding, reflection, consideration, will, Mind, speech, names, sacred hymns, and sacrifices--aye, all this springs from the Self.

2. 'There is this verse, "He who sees this, does not see death, nor illness, nor pain; he who sees this, sees everything, and obtains everything everywhere.

'"He is one (before creation), he becomes three

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] (fire, water, earth), he becomes five, he becomes seven, he becomes nine; then again he is called the eleventh, and hundred and ten and one thousand and twenty [*1]."

'When the intellectual aliment has been purified, the whole nature becomes purified. When the whole nature has been purified, the memory becomes firm. And when the memory (of the Highest Self) remains firm, then all the ties (which bind us to a belief in anything but the Self) are loosened.

'The venerable Sanatkumara showed to Narada, after his faults had been rubbed out, the other side of darkness. They call Sanatkumara Skanda, yea, Skanda they call him.'

Footnotes

^124:1 Before the acquirement of true knowledge, all that has been mentioned before, spirit, hope, memory, &c., on to names, was supposed to spring from the Sat, as something different from oneself. Now he is to know that the Sat is the Self.

^124:2 In the preceding paragraphs appearance and disappearance (birth and death) are not mentioned. This shows how easy it was in these treatises either to omit or to add anything that seemed important.

^125:1 This too is meant as a verse. The commentary says that the various numbers are intended to show the endless variety of form on the Self after creation. Cf. Mait. Up. V, 2.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH PRAPATHAKA.

  

FIRST KHANDA [*2].

1. Harih, Om. There is this city of Brahman (the body), and in it the palace, the small lotus (of

[p. 126]

the heart), and in it that small ether. Now what exists within that small ether, that is to be sought for, that is to be understood.

2. And if they should say to him: 'Now with regard to that city of Brahman, and the palace in it, i. e. the small lotus of the heart, and the small ether within the heart, what is there within it that deserves to be sought for, or that is to be understood?'

3. Then he should say: 'As large as this ether (all space) is, so large is that ether within the heart. Both heaven and earth are contained within it, both fire and air, both sun and moon, both lightning and stars; and whatever there is of him (the Self) here in the world, and whatever is not (i. e. whatever has been or will be), all that is contained within it [*1].'

4. And if they should say to him: 'If everything that exists is contained in that city of Brahman, all beings and all desires (whatever can be imagined or desired), then what is left of it, when old age reaches it and scatters it, or when it falls to pieces?'

5. Then he should say: 'By the old age of the body, that (the ether, or Brahman within it) does not age; by the death of the body, that (the ether, or Brahman within it) is not killed. That (the Brahman)

[p. 127]

is the true Brahma-city (not the body [*1]). In it all desires are contained. It is the Self, free from sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to imagine. Now as here on earth people follow as they are commanded, and depend on the object which they are attached to, be it a country or a piece of land,

6. 'And as here on earth, whatever has been acquired by exertion, perishes, so perishes whatever is acquired for the next world by sacrifices and other good actions performed on earth. Those who depart from hence without having discovered the Self and those true desires, for them there is no freedom in all the worlds. But those who depart from hence, after having discovered the Self and those true desires [*2], for them there is freedom in all the worlds.

Footnotes

^125:2 The eighth Prapathaka seems to form a kind of appendix to the Upanishad. The highest point that can be reached by speculation had been reached in the seventh Prapathaka, the identity of our self and of everything else with the Highest Self. This speculative effort, however, is too much for ordinary people. They cannot conceive the Sat or Brahman as out of space and time, as free from all qualities, and in order to help them, they are taught to adore the Brahman, as it appears in space and time, an object endowed with certain qualities, living in nature and in the human heart. The Highest Brahman, besides which there is nothing, and which can neither be reached as an object, nor be considered as [p. 126] an effect, seems to ordinary minds like a thing which is not. Therefore while the true philosopher, after acquiring the knowledge of the Highest Sat, becomes identified with it suddenly, like lightning, the ordinary mortal must reach it by slow degrees, and as a preparation for that higher knowledge which is to follow, the eighth Prapathaka, particularly the first portion of it, has been added to the teaching contained in the earlier books.

^126:1 The ether in the heart is really a name of Brahman. He is there, and therefore all that comes of him when he assumes bodily shapes, both what is and what is not, i.e. what is no longer or not yet; for the absolute nothing is not intended here.

^127:1 I translate this somewhat differently from the commentator, though the argument remains the same.

^127:2 True desires are those which we ought to desire, and the fulfilment of which depends on ourselves, supposing that we have acquired the knowledge which enables us to fulfil them.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. 'Thus he who desires the world [*3] of the fathers, by his mere will the fathers come to receive him, and having obtained the world of the fathers, he is happy.

2. 'And he who desires the world of the mothers, by his mere will the mothers come to receive him,

[p. 128]

and having obtained the world of the mothers, he is happy.

3. 'And he who desires the world of the brothers, by his mere will the brothers come to receive him, and having obtained the world of the brothers, he is happy.

4. 'And he who desires the world of the sisters, by his mere will the sisters come to receive him, and having obtained the world of the sisters, he is happy.

5. 'And he who desires the world of the friends, by his mere will the friends come to receive him, and having obtained the world of the friends, he is happy.

6. 'And he who desires the world of perfumes and garlands (gandhamalya), by his mere will perfumes and garlands come to him, and having obtained the world of perfumes and garlands, he is happy.

7. 'And he who desires the world of food and drink, by his mere will food and drink come to him, and having obtained the world of food and drink, he is happy.

8. 'And he who desires the world of song and music, by his mere will song and music come to him, and having obtained the world of song and music, he is happy.

9. 'And he who desires the world of women, by his mere will women come to receive him, and having obtained the world of women, he is happy.

'Whatever object he is attached to, whatever object he desires, by his mere will it comes to him, and having obtained it, he is happy.

Footnotes

^127:3 World is the nearest approach to loka: it means life with the fathers, or enjoying the company of the fathers.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. 'These true desires, however, are hidden by what is false; though the desires be true, they have a covering which is false. Thus, whoever belonging to us has departed this life, him we cannot gain back, so that we should see him with our eyes.

2. 'Those who belong to us, whether living or departed, and whatever else there is which we wish for and do not obtain, all that we find there (if we descend into our heart, where Brahman dwells, in the ether of the heart), There are all our true desires, but hidden by what is false [*1]. As people who do not know the country, walk again and again over a gold treasure that has been hidden somewhere in the earth and do not discover it, thus do all these creatures day after day go into the Brahma-world (they are merged in Brahman, while asleep), and yet do not discover it, because they are carried away by untruth (they do not come to themselves, i. e. they do not discover the true Self in Brahman, dwelling in the heart).

3. 'That Self abides in the heart. And this is the etymological explanation. The heart is called hrid-ayam, instead of hridy-ayam, i. e. He who is in the heart. He who knows this, that He is in the heart, goes day by day (when in sushupti, deep sleep) into heaven (svarga), i.e. into the: Brahman of the heart.

4. 'Now that serene being [*2] which, after having

[p. 130]

risen from out this earthly body, and having reached the highest light (self-knowledge), appears in its true form, that is the Self,' thus he spoke (when asked by his pupils). This is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman. And of that Brahman the name is the True, Satyam,

5. This name Sattyam consists of three syllables, sat-ti-yam [*1]. Sat signifies the immortal, t, the mortal, and with yam he binds both. Because he binds both, the immortal and the mortal, therefore it is yam. He who knows this goes day by day into heaven (svarga).

Footnotes

^129:1 All the desires mentioned before are fulfilled, if we find their fulfilment in our Self, in the city of Brahman within our heart. There we always can possess those whom we have loved, only we must not wish to see them with our eyes; that would be a false covering to a true desire.

^129:2 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 12, 3.

^130:1 We ought probably to read Sattyam, and then Sat-ti-yam. The i in ti would then be the dual of an anubandha i. Instead of yaddhi, I conjecture yatti. See Ait. Aranyaka II, 5, 5.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. That Self is a bank [*2], a boundary, so that these worlds may not be confounded. Day and night do not pass that bank, nor old age, death, and grief; neither good nor evil deeds. All evil-doers turn back from it, for the world of Brahman is free from all evil.

2. Therefore he who has crossed that bank, if blind, ceases to be blind; if wounded, ceases to be wounded; if afflicted, ceases to be afflicted. Therefore when that bank has been crossed, night becomes day indeed, for the world of Brahman is lighted up once for all [*3].

3. And that world of Brahman belongs to those

[p. 131]

only who find it by abstinence--for them there is freedom in all the worlds.

Footnotes

^130:2 Setu, generally translated by bridge, was originally a bank of earth (mridadimaya), thrown up to serve as a pathway (pons) through water or a swamp. Such banks exist still in many places, and they serve at the same time as boundaries (maryada) between fields belonging to different properties. Cf. Mait. Up. VII, 7; Kath Up. III, 2; Talav. Up. comm. p. 59; Mund. Up. II, 2, 5.

^130:3 Kh. Up. III, 1, 3.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. What people call sacrifice (yagna), that is really abstinence (brahmakarya). For he who knows, obtains that (world of Brahman, which others obtain by sacrifice), by means of abstinence.

What people call sacrifice (ishta), that is really abstinence, for by abstinence, having searched (ishtva), he obtains the Self.

2. What people call sacrifice (sattrayana), that is really abstinence, for by abstinence he obtains from the Sat (the true), the safety (trana) of the Self.

What people call the vow of silence (mauna), that is really abstinence, for he who by abstinence has found out the Self, meditates (manute).

3. What people call fasting (anasakayana), that is really abstinence, for that Self does not perish (na nasyati), which we find out by abstinence.

What people call a hermit's life (aranyayana), that is really abstinence. Ara [*1] and Nya are two lakes in the world of Brahman, in the third heaven from hence; and there is the lake Airanimadiya, and the Asvattha tree, showering down Soma, and the city of Brahman (Hiranyagarbha) Aparagita [*2], and the golden Prabhuvimita (the hall built by Prabhu, Brahman).

Now that world of Brahman belongs to those who find the lakes Ara and Nya in the world of Brahman by means of abstinence; for them there is freedom in all the worlds [*3].

Footnotes

^131:1 In the Kaush. Br. Up. I, 3, the lake is called Ara, at least according to the commentator.

^131:2 In the Kaush. Br. Up. Aparagita is not puh, but ayatanam.

^131:3 The fifth khanda is chiefly meant to recommend brahmakarya [p. 132] or abstinence from all worldly enjoyments, enjoined on the brahmakarin, the student, as a means of obtaining a knowledge of Brahman. But instead of showing that such abstinence is indispensable for a proper concentration of our intellectual faculties, we are told that abstinence is the same as certain sacrifices; and this is shown, not by arguments, but by a number of very far-fetched plays on words. These it is impossible to render in any translation, nay, they hardly deserve being translated. Thus abstinence is said to be identical with sacrifice, yagna, because yo gnata, 'he who knows,' has a certain similarity with yagna. Ishta, another kind of sacrifice, is compared with eshana, search; sattrayana with Sat, the True, the Brahman, and trayana, protection; mauna, silence, with manana, meditating (which may be right); anasakayana, fasting, with nas, to perish, and aranyagana, a hermit's life, with ara, nya, and ayana, going to the two lakes Ara and Nya, which are believed to exist in the legendary world of Brahman. Nothing can be more absurd. Having once struck the note of Brahmanic legends, such as we find it, for instance, in the Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad, the author goes on. Besides the lakes Ara and Nya (in the Kaushitaki-brahmana-upanishad we have only one lake, called Ara), he mentions the Airammadiya lake, and explains it as aira (ira annam, tanmaya airo mandas, tena purnam airam) and madiya, delightful. The Asvattha tree, which pours down Soma, is not tortured into anything else, except that Soma is explained as the immortal, or nectar. Aparagita becomes the city of Brahman, because it can be conquered by no one except those who have practised abstinence. And the hall which elsewhere is called Vibhu-pramita becomes Prabhu-vimitam, or Prabhu-vinirmita, made by Prabhu, i.e. Brahman. All the fulfilled desires, as enumerated in khandas 2-5, whether the finding again of our fathers and mothers, or entering the Brahmaloka with its lakes and palaces, must be taken, not as material (sthula), but as mental only (manasa). On that account, however, they are by no means considered as false or unreal, as little as dreams are. Dreams are false and unreal, relatively only, i. e. relatively to what we see, when we awake; but not in themselves. Whatever we see in waking, also, has been shown to be [p. 133] false; because it consists of forms and names only; yet these forms and names have a true element in them, viz. the Sat. Before we know that Sat, all the objects we see in waking seem true; as dreams seem true in dreaming. But when once we awake from our waking by true knowledge, we see that nothing is true but the Sat. When we imagine we see a serpent, and then discover that it is a rope, the serpent disappears as false, but what was true in it, the rope, remains true.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. Now those arteries of the heart consist of a brown substance, of a white, blue, yellow, and red

[p. 133]

substance, and so is the sun brown, white, blue, yellow, and red.

2. As a very long highway goes to two places, to one at the beginning, and to another at the end, so do the rays of the sun go to both worlds, to this one and to the other. They start from the sun, and enter into those arteries; they start from those arteries, and enter into the sun.

3. And when a man is asleep, reposing, and at perfect rest, so that he sees no dream [*1], then he has entered into those arteries. Then no evil touches him, for he has obtained the light (of the sun).

4. And when a man falls ill, then those who sit round him, say, 'Do you know me? Do you know me?' As long as he has not departed from this body, he knows them.

5. But when he departs from this body, then he departs upwards by those very rays (towards the worlds which he has gained by merit, not by knowledge); or he goes out while meditating on Om [*2] (and thus securing an entrance into the Brahmaloka).

[p. 134]

And while his mind is failing, he is going to the sun. For the sun is the door of the world (of Brahman). Those who know, walk in; those who do not know, are shut out. There is this verse : 'There are a hundred and one arteries of the heart; one of them penetrates the crown of the head; moving upwards by it a man reaches the immortal; the others serve for departing in different directions, yea, in different directions .'

Footnotes

^133:1 Svapna in Sanskrit is both somnus and somnium. Hence one might translate also, 'so that he is not aware that he is asleep,' which in some respects would seem even more appropriate in our passage; cf. VIII, 11, 1.

^133:2 According to the explanation given of the Om in the Upanishads, and more particularly in the Dahara-vidya contained in this Prapathaka.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA [*3].

1. Pragapati said: 'The Self which is free from sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it is which we must try to understand. He who has searched out that Self and understands it, obtains all worlds and all desires.'

2. The Devas (gods) and Asuras (demons) both heard these words, and said: 'Well, let us search for that Self by which, if one has searched it out, all worlds and all desires are obtained.'

Thus saying Indra went from the Devas, Virokana from the Asuras, and both, without having communicated with each other, approached Pragapati,

[p. 135]

holding fuel in their hands, as is the custom for pupils approaching their master.

3. They dwelt there as pupils for thirty-two years. Then Pragapati asked them: 'For what purpose have you both dwelt here?'

They replied: 'A saying of yours is being repeated, viz. "the Self which is free from sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it is which we must try to understand. He who has searched out that Self and understands it, obtains all worlds and all desires." Now we both have dwelt here because we wish for that Self.'

Pragapati said to them: 'The person that is seen in the eye [*1], that is the Self. This is what I have said. This is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.'

They asked: 'Sir, he who is perceived in the water, and he who is perceived in a mirror, who is he?'

He replied: 'He himself indeed is seen in all these [*2].'

Footnotes

^134:1 Prasna Up. II, 1.

^134:2 The same verse occurs in the Katha 6, 16, and is frequently quoted elsewhere, for instance, Mait. comm. p. 164. For vishvann, the right reading would seem to be vishvak. In the Mait. Up. VI, 30, the Trishtubh are reduced to Anushtubh verses. See also Prasna Up. III, 6-7; Mund. Up. II, 2.

^134:3 Here the highest problem is treated again, the knowledge of the true Self, which leads beyond the world of Brahma (masc.), and enables the individual self to return into the Highest Self.

^135:1 The commentator explains this rightly. Pragapati means by the person that is seen in the eye, the real agent of seeing, who is seen by sages only, even with their eyes shut. His pupils, however, misunderstand him. They think of the person that is seen, not of the person that sees (Yoga-sutras II, 6). The person seen in the eye is to them the small figure imaged in the eye, and they go on therefore to ask, whether the image in the water or in a mirror is not the Self.

^135:2 The commentators are at great pains to explain that Pragapati told no falsehood. He meant by purusha the personal element in the highest sense, and it was not his fault that his pupils took purusha for man or body.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. 'Look at your Self in a pan of water, and whatever you do not understand of your Self [*1], come and tell me.'

They looked in the water-pan. Then Pragapati said to them: 'What do you see?'

They said: 'We both see the self thus altogether, a picture even to the very hairs and nails.'

2. Pragapati said to them: 'After you have adorned yourselves, have put on your best clothes and cleaned yourselves, look again into the water-pan.

They, after having adorned themselves, having put on their best clothes and cleaned themselves, looked into the water-pan.

Pragapati said: 'What do you see?'

3. They said: 'Just as we are, well adorned, with our best clothes and clean, thus we are both there, Sir, well adorned, with our best clothes and clean.'

Pragapati said: 'That is the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.'

Then both went away satisfied in their hearts.

4. And Pragapati, looking after them, said: 'They both go away without having perceived and without having known the Self, and whoever of these two [*2], whether Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine (upanishad), will perish.'

Now Virokana, satisfied in his heart, went to the Asuras and preached that doctrine to them, that the self (the body) alone is to be worshipped, that the

[p. 137]

self (the body) alone is to be served, and that he who worships the self and serves the self, gains both worlds, this and the next.

5. Therefore they call even now a man who does not give alms here, who has no faith, and offers no sacrifices, an Asura, for this is the doctrine (upanishad) of the Asuras. They deck out the body of the dead with perfumes, flowers, and fine raiment by way of ornament, and think they will thus conquer that world [*1].

Footnotes

^136:1 I take atmanah as a genitive, governed by yad, not as an accusative plural.

^136:2 The commentator reads yatare for yatah.

^137:1 This evidently refers to the customs and teaching of tribes not entirely conforming to the Brahmanic system. Whether the adorning of the dead body implies burial instead of burning, seems doubtful.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

NINTH KHANDA.

1. But Indra, before he had returned to the Devas, saw this difficulty. As this self (the shadow in the water) [*2] is well adorned, when the body is well adorned, well dressed, when the body is well dressed, well cleaned, if the body is well cleaned, that self will also be blind, if the body is blind, lame, if the body is lame [*3], crippled, if the body is crippled, and will perish in fact as soon as the body perishes. Therefore I see no good in this (doctrine).

2. Taking fuel in his hand he came again as a pupil to Pragapati. Pragapati said to him: 'Maghavat (Indra), as you went away with Virokana, satisfied in your heart, for what purpose did you come back?'

[p. 138]

He said: 'Sir, as this self (the shadow) is well adorned, when the body is well adorned, well dressed, when the body is well dressed, well cleaned, if the body is well cleaned, that self will also be blind, if the body is blind, lame, if the body is lame, crippled, if the body is crippled, and will perish in fact as soon as the body perishes. Therefore I see no good in this (doctrine).'

3. 'So it is indeed, Maghavat,' replied Pragapati; 'but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to you. Live with me another thirty-two years.'

He lived with him another thirty-two years, and then Pragapati said:

Footnotes

^137:2 The commentator remarks that though both Indra and Virokana had mistaken the true import of what Pragapati said, yet while Virokana took the body to be the Self, Indra thought that the Self was the shadow of the body.

^137:3 Srama, lame, is explained by the commentator as one-eyed, ekanetra.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TENTH KHANDA.

1. 'He who moves about happy in dreams, he is the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.'

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. But before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this difficulty. Although it is true that that self is not blind, even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the body is lame, though it is true that that self is not rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body),

2. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him [*1].

[p. 139]

[paragraph continues] He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this.

3. Taking fuel in his hands, he went again as a pupil to Pragapati. Pragapati said to him: 'Maghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart, for what purpose did you come back?'

He said: 'Sir, although it is true that that self is not blind even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the body is lame, though it is true that that self is not rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body),

4. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him. He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this.'

'So it is indeed, Maghavat,' replied Pragapati; 'but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to you. Live with me another thirty-two years.'

He lived with him another thirty-two years. Then Pragapati said:

Footnotes

^138:1 I have adopted the reading vikkhayayanti, because it is the most difficult, and therefore explains most easily the various corruptions, or it may be emendations, that have crept into the text. Sankara explains vikkhadayanti by vidravayanti, and this shows that he too must have read vikkhayayanti, for he could not have explained vikkhadayanti, which means they uncover or they deprive of their clothing, by vidravayanti, they drive away. It is true that vikkhayayanti may be explained in two ways; it may be the causative of kha, to cut, but this meaning is not very appropriate here, [p. 139] and quite inadmissible in another passage where vikkhayayanti occurs, whereas, if derived from vikh (oixomai) in a causative sense, Sankara could hardly have chosen a better explanation than vidravayanti, they make run away. The root vikh, vikkhayayati is recognised in Panini III, 1, 28, and in the Dhatupatha 28, 129, but it has hitherto been met with in this passage only, and in Brihadaranyaka, Up. IV, 3, 20. Here also the author speaks of a man who imagines that people kill him or do him violence, or that an elephant chases him or that he falls into a pit. Here we have hastiva vikkhayayati, and Sankara, at least as printed by Dr. Roer, explains this by vikkhapayati, vikkhadayati, vidravayati; dhavatity arthah. Much better is Dvivedaganga's commentary, as published by Dr. Weber, Satap. Brahm. p. 1145, Kadakid enam hasti vikkhayayativa vidravayativa; vikha gatau, gupudhupavikhipanipanibhya aya iti (Pan. III, 1, 28) svartha ayapratyayah. In the Dictionary of Boehtlingk and Roth the derivation from kha, to cut, is preferred; see Nachtrage, s. v. kha.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 140]

  

ELEVENTH KHANDA.

1. 'When a man being asleep, reposing, and at perfect rest [*1], sees no dreams, that is the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.'

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. But before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this difficulty. In truth he thus does not know himself (his self) that he is I, nor does he know anything that exists. He is gone to utter annihilation. I see no good in this.

2. Taking fuel in his hand he went again as a pupil to Pragapati. Pragapati said to him: 'Maghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart, for what purpose did you come back?'

He said: 'Sir, in that way he does not know himself (his self) that he is I, nor does he know anything that exists. He is gone to utter annihilation. I see no good in this!

3. 'So it is indeed, Maghavat,' replied Pragapati; 'but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to you, and nothing more than this [*2]. Live here other five years.'

He lived there other five years. This made in all one hundred and one years, and therefore it is said that Indra Maghavat lived one hundred and one years as a pupil with Pragapati. Pragapati said to him:

Footnotes

^140:1 See Kh. Up. VIII, 6, 3.

^140:2 Sankara explains this as meaning the real Self, not anything different from the Self.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

TWELFTH KHANDA.

1. 'Maghavat, this body is mortal and always held by death. It is the abode of that Self which is

[p. 141]

immortal and without body [*1]. When in the body (by thinking this body is I and I am this body) the Self is held by pleasure and pain. So long as he is in the body, he cannot get free from pleasure and pain. But when he is free of the body (when he knows himself different from the body), then neither pleasure nor pain touches him [*2].

2. 'The wind is without body, the cloud, lightning, and thunder are without body (without hands, feet, &c.) Now as these, arising from this heavenly ether (space), appear in their own form, as soon as they have approached the highest light,

3. 'Thus does that serene being, arising from this body, appear in its own form, as soon as it has approached the highest light (the knowledge of Self [*3]) He (in that state) is the highest person (uttama purusha). He moves about there laughing (or eating), playing, and rejoicing (in his mind), be it with women, carriages, or relatives, never minding that body into which he was born [*4].

[p. 142]

'Like as a horse attached to a cart, so is the spirit [*1] (prana, pragnatman) attached to this body.

4. 'Now where the sight has entered into the void (the open space, the black pupil of the eye), there is the person of the eye, the eye itself is the instrument of seeing. He who knows, let me smell this, he is the Self, the nose is the instrument of smelling. He who knows, let me say this, he is the Self, the tongue is the instrument of saying. He who knows, let me hear this, he is the Self, the ear is the instrument of hearing.

5. 'He who knows, let me think this, he is the Self, the mind is his divine eye [*2]. He, the Self, seeing these pleasures (which to others are hidden like a buried treasure of gold) through his divine eye, i. e. the mind, rejoices.

'The Devas who are in the world of Brahman meditate on that Self (as taught by Pragapati to Indra, and by Indra to the Devas). Therefore all worlds belong to them, and all desires. He who knows that Self and understands it, obtains all worlds and all desires.' Thus said Pragapati, yea, thus said Pragapati.

Footnotes

^141:1 According to some, the body is the result of the Self, the elements of the body, fire, water, and earth springing from the Self, and the Self afterwards entering them.

^141:2 Ordinary, worldly pleasure. Comm.

^141:3 The simile is not so striking as most of those old similes are. The wind is compared with the Self, on account of its being for a time lost in the ether (space), as the Self is in the body, and then rising again out of the ether and assuming its own form as wind. The chief stress is laid on the highest light, which in the one case is the sun of summer, in the other the light of knowledge.

^141:4 These are pleasures which seem hardly compatible with the state of perfect peace which the Self is supposed to have attained. The passage may be interpolated, or put in on purpose to show that the Self enjoys such pleasures as an inward spectator only, without identifying himself with either pleasure or pain. He sees them, as he says afterwards, with his divine eye. The Self perceives [p. 142] in all things his Self only, nothing else. In his commentary on the Taittirya Upanishad (p. 45) Sankara refers this passage to Brahman as an effect, not to Brahman as a cause.

^142:1 The spirit, the conscious self, is not identical with the body, but only joined to it, like a horse, or driving it, like a charioteer. In other passages the senses are the horses; buddhi, reason, the charioteer; manas, mind, the reins. The spirit is attached to the cart by the ketana; cf. Anandagnanagiri.

^142:2 Because it perceives not only what is present, but also what is past and future.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

THIRTEENTH KHANDA [*1].

1. From the dark (the Brahman of the heart) I come to the nebulous (the world of Brahman), from the nebulous to the dark, shaking off all evil, as a horse shakes his hairs, and as the moon frees herself from the mouth of Rahu [*2]. Having shaken off the body, I obtain, self made and satisfied, the uncreated world of Brahman, yea, I obtain it.

Footnotes

^143:1 This chapter is supposed to contain a hymn of triumph.

^143:2 Rahu, in later times a monster, supposed to swallow the sun and moon at every solar or lunar eclipse. At first we only hear of the mouth or head of Rahu. In later times a body was assigned to him, but it had to be destroyed again by Vishnu, so that nothing remained of him but his head. Rahu seems derived from rah, to separate, to remove. From it raksh, to wish or strive to remove, to keep off, to protect, and in a different application rakshas, a tearing away, violence, rakshas, a robber, an evil spirit.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTEENTH KHANDA.

1. He who is called ether [*3] (akasa) is the revealer of all forms and names. That within which these forms and names are contained is the Brahman, the Immortal, the Self.

I come to the hall of Pragapati, to the house; I am the glorious among Brahmans, glorious among princes, glorious among men [*4]. I obtained that glory, I am glorious among the glorious. May I never go to the white, toothless, yet devouring, white abode [*5]; may I never go to it.

Footnotes

^143:3 Akasa, ether or space, is a name of Brahman, because, like ether, Brahman has no body and is infinitely small.

^143:4 Here the three classes, commonly called castes, are clearly marked by the names of brahmana, ragan, and vis.

^143:5 Yonisabditam pragananendriyam.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

  

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.

1. Brahma (Hiranyagarbha or Paramesvara) told this to Pragapati (Kasyapa), Pragapati to Manu (his son), Manu to mankind. He who has learnt the Veda from a family of teachers, according to the sacred rule, in the leisure time left from the duties to be performed for the Guru, who, after receiving his discharge, has settled in his own house, keeping up the memory of what he has learnt by repeating it regularly in some sacred spot, who has begotten virtuous sons, and concentrated all his senses on the Self, never giving pain to any creature, except at the tirthas [*1] (sacrifices, &c.), he who behaves thus all his life, reaches the world of Brahman, and does not return, yea, he does not return.

Footnotes

^144:1 The commentator says that even travelling about as a mendicant causes pain, but that a mendicant is allowed to importune people for alms at tirthas, or sacred places. Others explain this differently.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145] [p. 146]

  

TALAVAKARA

  

OR

  

KENA-UPANISHAD.

[p. 147]

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. THE Pupil asks: 'At whose wish does the mind sent forth proceed on its errand? At whose command does the first breath go forth? At whose wish do we utter this speech? What god directs the eye, or the ear?'

2. The Teacher replies: 'It is the ear of the ear, the mind of the mind, the speech of speech, the breath of breath, and the eye of the eye. When freed (from the senses) the wise, on departing from this world, become immortal [*1].

3. 'The eye does not go thither, nor speech, nor mind. We do not know, we do not understand, how any one can teach it.

4. 'It is different from the known, it is also above the unknown, thus we have heard from those of old, who taught us this [*2].

5. 'That which is not expressed by speech and

[p. 148]

by which speech is expressed, that alone know as Brahman, not that which people here adore.

6. 'That which does not think by mind, and by which, they say, mind is thought [*1], that alone know as Brahman, not that which people here adore.

7. 'That which does not see by the eye, and by which one sees (the work of) the eyes, that alone know as Brahman, not that which people here adore.

8. 'That which does not hear by the ear, and by which the ear is heard, that alone know as Brahman, not that which people here adore.

9. 'That which does not breathe by breath, and by which breath is drawn, that alone know as Brahman, not that which people here adore.'

Footnotes

^147:1 This verse admits of various translations, and still more various explanations. Instead of taking vakam, like all the other words, as a nominative, we might take them all as accusatives, governed by atimukya, and sa u pranasya pranah as a parenthetical sentence. What is meant by the ear of the ear is very fully explained by the commentator, but the simplest acceptation would seem to take it as an answer to the preceding questions, so that the car of the ear should be taken for him who directs the ear, i. e. the Self, or Brahman. This will become clearer as we proceed.

^147:2 Cf. Isa Up. II; 13.

^148:1 The varia lectio manaso matam (supported also by the commentary) is metrically and grammatically easier, but it may be, for that very reason, an emendation.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. The Teacher says: 'If thou thinkest I know it well, then thou knowest surely but little, what is that form of Brahman known, it may be, to thee [*2]?'

2. The Pupil says: 'I do not think I know it well, nor do I know that I do not know it. He

[p. 149]

among us who knows this, he knows it, nor does he know that he does not know it [*1].

3. 'He by whom it (Brahman) is not thought, by him it is thought; he by whom it is thought, knows it not. It is not understood by those who understand it, it is understood by those who do not understand it.

4. 'It is thought to be known (as if) by awakening, and (then) we obtain immortality indeed. By the Self we obtain strength, by knowledge we obtain immortality.

5. 'If a man know this here, that is the true (end of life); if he does not know this here, then there is great destruction (new births). The wise who have thought on all things (and recognised the Self in them) become immortal, when they have departed from this world.'

Footnotes

^148:2 In order to obtain a verse, we must leave out the words tvam yad asya deveshv atha nu mimamsyam eva. They were probably inserted, as an excuse for the third khanda treating of the relation of Brahman to the Devas. There is considerable variety in the text, as handed down in the Sama-veda and in the Atharva-veda, which shows that it has been tampered with. Daharam for dabhram may be the older reading, as synezesis occurs again and again in the Upanishads.

^149:1 This verse has again been variously explained. I think the train of thought is this: We cannot know Brahman, as we know other objects, by referring them to a class and pointing out their differences. But, on the other hand, we do not know that we know him not, i. e. no one can assert that we know him not, for we want Brahman in order to know anything. He, therefore, who knows this double peculiarity of the knowledge of Brahman, he knows Brahman, as much as it can be known; and he does not know, nor can anybody prove it to him, that he does not know Brahman.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA [*2].

1. Brahman obtained the victory for the Devas. The Devas became elated by the victory of Brahman,

[p. 150]

and they thought, this victory is ours only, this greatness is ours only.

2. Brahman perceived this and appeared to them. But they did not know it, and said: 'What sprite (yaksha or yakshya) is this?'

3. They said to Agni (fire): 'O Gatavedas, find out what sprite this is.' 'Yes,' he said.

4. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: 'Who are you?' He replied: 'I am Agni, I am Gatavedas.'

5. Brahman said: 'What power is in you?' Agni replied: 'I could burn all whatever there is on earth.'

6. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: 'Burn this.' He went towards it with all his might, but he could not burn it. Then he returned thence and said: 'I could not find out what sprite this is.'

7. Then they said to Vayu (air): 'O Vayu, find out what sprite this is.' 'Yes,' he said.

8. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: 'Who are you?' He replied: 'I am Vayu, I am Matarisvan.'

9. Brahman said: 'What power is in you?' Vayu replied: 'I could take up all whatever there is on earth.'

10. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: 'Take it up.' He went towards it with all his might, but he could not take it up. Then he returned thence and said: 'I could not find out what sprite this is.'

11. Then they said to Indra: 'O Maghavan, find out what sprite this is.' He went towards it, but it disappeared from before him.

12. Then in the same space (ether) he came

[p. 151]

towards a woman, highly adorned: it was Uma, the daughter of Himavat [*1]. He said to her: 'Who is that sprite?'

Footnotes

^149:2 This khanda is generally represented as a later addition, but its prose style has more of a Brahmana character than the verses in the preceding khandas, although their metrical structure is irregular, and may be taken as a sign of antiquity.

^151:1 Uma may here be taken as the wife of Siva, daughter of Himavat, better known by her earlier name, Parvati, the daughter of the mountains. Originally she was, not the daughter of the mountains or of the Himalaya, but the daughter of the cloud, just as Rudra was originally, not the lord of the mountains, girisa, but the lord of the clouds. We are, however, moving here in a secondary period of Indian thought, in whi.ch we see, as among Semitic nations, the manifested powers, and particularly the knowledge and wisdom of the gods, represented by their wives. Uma means originally flax, from va, to weave, and the same word may have been an old name of wife, she who weaves (cf. duhitri; spinster, and possibly wife itself, if O. H. G. wib is connected with O. H. G. weban). It is used almost synonymously with ambika, Taitt. Ar. p. 839. If we wished to take liberties, we might translate uma haimavati by an old woman coming from the Himavat mountains; but I decline all responsibility for such an interpretation.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. She replied: 'It is Brahman. It is through the victory of Brahman that you have thus become great.' After that he knew that it was Brahman.

2. Therefore these Devas, viz. Agni, Vayu, and Indra, are, as it were, above the other gods, for they touched it (the Brahman) nearest [*2].

3. And therefore Indra is, as it were, above the other gods, for he touched it nearest, he first knew it.

4. This is the teaching of Brahman, with regard to the gods (mythological): It is that which now

[p. 152]

flashes forth in the lightning, and now vanishes again.

5. And this is the teaching of Brahman, with regard to the body (psychological): It is that which seems to move as mind, and by it imagination remembers again and again [*1].

6. That Brahman is called Tadvana [*2], by the name of Tadvana it is to be meditated on. All beings have a desire for him who knows this.

7. The Teacher: 'As you have asked me to tell you the Upanishad, the Upanishad has now

[p. 153]

been told you. We have told you the Brahmi Upanishad.

8. 'The feet on which that Upanishad stands are penance, restraint, sacrifice; the Vedas are all its limbs [*1], the True is its abode.

9. 'He who knows this Upanishad, and has shaken off all evil, stands in the endless, unconquerable [*2] world of heaven, yea, in the world of heaven.'

Footnotes

^151:2 The next phrase was borrowed from  section 3, without even changing the singular to the plural. As Indra only found out that it was Brahman, the original distinction between Indra and the other gods, who only came near to it, was quite justified. Still it might be better to adopt the var. lect. sa hy etat in  section 2.

^152:1 I have translated these paragraphs very differently from Sankara and other interpreters. The wording is extremely brief, and we can only guess the original intention of the Upanishad by a reference to other passages. Now the first teaching of Brahman, by means of a comparison with the gods or heavenly things in general, seems to be that Brahman is what shines forth suddenly like lightning. Sometimes the relation between the phenomenal world and Brahman is illustrated by the relation between bubbles and the sea, or lightning and the unseen heavenly light (Mait. Up. V 1, 35). In another passage, Kh. Up. VIII, 12, 2, lightning, when no longer seen, is to facilitate the conception of the reality of things, as distinct from their perceptibility. I think, therefore, that the first simile, taken from the phenomenal world, was meant to show that Brahman is that which appears for a moment in the lightning, and then vanishes from our sight.

The next illustration is purely psychological. Brahman is proved to exist, because our mind moves towards things, because there is something in us which moves and perceives, and because there is something in us which holds our perceptions together (sankalpa), and revives them again by memory.

I give my translation as hypothetical only, for certainty is extremely difficult to attain, when we have to deal with these enigmatical sayings which, when they were first delivered, were necessarily accompanied by oral explanations.

^152:2 Tadvana, as a name of Brahman, is explained by 'the desire of it,' and derived from van, to desire, the same as vankh.

^153:1 It is impossible to adopt Sankara's first rendering, 'the Vedas and all the Angas,' i.e. the six subsidiary doctrines. He sees himself that sarvangani stands in opposition to pratishtha and ayatana, but seeing Veda and Anga together, no Brahman could help thinking of the Vedangas.

^153:2 Might we read agyeye for gyeye? cf. Satap. Brahm. XI, 5, 7, 1.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154] [p. 155]

  

AITAREYA-ARANYAKA.

[p. 156] [p. 157]

  

FIRST ARANYAKA.

  

FIRST ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Now follows the Mahavrata ceremony.

2. After having killed Vritra, Indra became great. When he became great, then there was the Mahavrata (the great work). This is why the Mahavrata ceremony is called Mahavrata.

3. Some people say: 'Let the priest make two (recitations with the offering of the) agya (ghee) on that day,' but the right thing is one [*1].

4. He who desires prosperity should use the hymn, pra vo devayagnaye (Rv. III, 13, 1).

5. He who desires increase should use the hymn, viso viso atithim (Rv. VIII, 74, 1).

[p. 158]

6. The people (visah) indeed are increase [*1], and therefore he (the sacrificer) becomes increased.

7. But (some say), there is the word atithim (in that hymn, which means a guest or stranger, asking for food). Let him not therefore take that hymn. Verily, the atithi (stranger) is able [*2] to go begging.

8. 'No,' he said, 'let him take that hymn.

9. 'For he who follows the good road and obtains distinction, he is an atithi (guest) [*3].

10. 'They do not consider him who is not so, worthy to be (called) an atithi (guest).

11. 'Therefore let him by all means take that hymn.'

12. If he takes that hymn, let him place the (second) tristich, aganma vritrahantamam, 'we came near to the victorious,' first.

13. For people worship the whole year (performing the Gavamayana sacrifice) wishing for this day (the last but one)--they do come near.

14. The (next following) three tristichs begin with an Anushtubh [*4]. Now Brahman is Gayatri, speech is Anushtubh. He thus joins speech with Brahman.

15. He who desires glory should use the hymn, abodhy agnih samidha gananam (Rv. V, 1, 1).

[p. 159]

16. He who desires offspring and cattle should use the hymn, hotaganishta ketanah (Rv. II, 5, 1).

Footnotes

^157:1 That it should be one only is proved from the types, i. e. from other sacrifices, that have to be followed in the performance of the Mahavrata. The first type is the Agnishtoma, where one sastra is enjoined as agyasastra, viz. pra vo devayagnaye. In the Visvagit, which has to follow the Agnishtoma, another hymn is put in its place, viz. agnim naro didhitibhih. In the Mahavrata, which has to follow the Visvagit, some people recommend the use of both these hymns. But that is wrong, for there must be in the sacrifices which follow the Agnishtoma twelve sastras altogether; and if there were two here, instead of one, we should get a total of thirteen.

^158:1 The word visah, which occurs in the hymn, means people. The commentator says that because the Vaisyas or tradespeople increase their capital, therefore they are called increase.

^158:2 Able, or liable; cf. Ait. Ar. II, 3, 5, 7.

^158:3 Atithi is here explained by yo bhavati, and bhavati is explained as walking on the good road. One expects yo va atati. The obtaining of distinction is probably derived from ati, above, in atithi.

^158:4 In the first and second the Anushtubh is followed by two Gayatris.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. He who desires proper food [*1] should use the hymn, agnim naro didhitibhih (Rv. VII, 1, 1) [*2].

2. Verily, Agni (fire) is the eater of food.

In the other (recitations accompanying the) offerings of agya (where Agni is likewise mentioned) the worshippers come more slowly near to Agni (because the name of Agni does not stand at the beginning of the hymn). But here a worshipper obtains proper food at once, he strikes down evil at once.

3. Through the words (occurring in the second foot of the first verse), hastakyuti ganayanta, 'they caused the birth of Agni by moving their arms,' the hymn becomes endowed with (the word) birth. Verily, the sacrificer is born from this day of the sacrifice, and therefore the hymn is endowed with (the word) birth.

4. There are four metrical feet (in the Trishtubh verses of this hymn). Verily, cattle have four feet, therefore they serve for the gaining of cattle.

5. There are three metrical feet (in the Virag, verses of this hymn). Verily, three are these three-fold

[p. 160]

worlds. Therefore they serve for the conquest of the worlds.

6. These (the Trishtubh and Virag verses of the hymn) form two metres, which form a support (pratishtha). Verily, man is supported by two (feet), cattle by four feet. Therefore this hymn places the sacrificer who stands on two feet among cattle which stand on four.

7. By saying them straight on there are twenty-five verses in this hymn. Man also consists of twenty-five. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk (atman) the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn.

8. And then this day (of the sacrifice) consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five [*1] (verses); it becomes the same through the same. Therefore these two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five [*2].

9. These twenty-five verses, by repeating the first thrice and the last thrice, become thirty less one. This is a Virag, verse (consisting of thirty syllables), too small by one. Into the small (heart) the vital spirits are placed, into the small stomach food is placed [*3], therefore this Virag, small by one, serves for the obtainment of those desires.

10. He who knows this, obtains those desires.

11. The verses (contained in the hymn agnim naro didhitibhih) become the Brihati [*4] metre and

[p. 161]

the Virag metre, (they become) the perfection which belongs to that day (the mahavrata). Then they also become Anushtubh [*1], for the offerings of agya (ghee) dwell in Anushtubhs [*2].

Footnotes

^159:1 Annadyam is always explained as food, here as annam tad adyam ka. It must be so translated here and elsewhere (1, 2, 10), though it is often an abstract of annada, an eater of food, a healthy man.

^159:2 This hymn is prescribed in the Visvagit sacrifice, and taken over to the Mahavrata, according to rule. It is used, however, both as obligatory and as optional at the same time, i. e. it is an essential part of the sacrifice, and at the same time to be used by those who wish for proper food.

^160:1 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 1, 4, 21; II, 3, 4, 2.

^160:2 The plural after the dual is explained by the fact that the hymn means the twenty-five verses.

^160:3 Cf. I, 3, 7, 5.

^160:4 The hymn consists of eighteen Virag and seven Trishtubh [p. 161] verses. Therefore the eighteen Virag verses remain what they are, only that the first is repeated three times, so that we have twenty Virag verses. The seven Trishtubhs, by repeating the last three times, become nine. We then take eight syllables away from each verse, thus changing them into nine Brihati verses. The nine times eight syllables, which were taken off, give us seventy-two syllables, and as each Brihati consists of thirty-six syllables, two Brihatis.

^161:1 The change of the first verse, which is a Virag of thirty-three syllables, into an Anushtubh is produced by a still easier process. The first Virag consists here of thirty-three syllables, the Anushtubh should have thirty-two. But one or two syllables more or less does not destroy a metre, according to the views of native metricians. The Virag itself, for instance, should have thirty syllables, and here has thirty-three. Therefore if changed into an Anushtubh, it simply has one syllable over, which is of no consequence. Comm.

^161:2 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 1, 1, 4.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA [*3].

1. Some say: 'Let him take a Gayatri hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Gayatri is brightness and glory of countenance, and thus the sacrificer becomes bright and glorious.'

2. Others say: 'Let him take a Ushnih hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Ushnih is life, and thus the sacrificer has a long life.'

Others say: 'Let him take an Anushtubh hymn

[p. 162]

for the Pra-uga. Verily, Anushtubh is valour, and it serves for obtaining valour.'

Others say: 'Let him take a Brihati hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Brihati is fortune, and thus the sacrificer becomes fortunate.'

Others say: 'Let him take a Pankti hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Pankti is food, and thus the sacrificer becomes rich in food.'

Others say: 'Let him take a Trishtubh hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Trishtubh is strength, and thus the sacrificer becomes strong.'

Others say: 'Let him take a Gagati hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, cattle is Gagati-like, and thus the sacrificer becomes rich in cattle.'

But we say: 'Let him take a Gayatri hymn only. Verily, Gayatri is Brahman, and that day (the mahavrata) is (for the attainment of) Brahman. Thus he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman.

4. 'And it must be a Gayatri hymn by Madhukkhandas,

5. 'For Madhukkhandas is called Madhukkhandas, because he wishes (khandati) for honey (madhu) for the Rishis.

6. 'Now food verily is honey, all is honey, all desires are honey, and thus if he recites the hymn of Madhukkhandas, it serves for the attainment of all desires.

7. 'He who knows this, obtains all desires.'

This (Gayatri pra-uga), according to the one-day (ekaha) ceremonial [*1], is perfect in form [*2]. On that day (the mahavrata) much is done now and then which

[p. 163]

has to be hidden [*1], and has to be atoned for y recitation of hymns). Atonement (santi) is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year (on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year) the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.

8. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

Footnotes

^161:3 Thus far the hymn which has to be recited by the Hotri priest, after the eating of the ritugrabas, has been considered. What follows next is the so-called Pra-uga hymn, consisting of seven trikas, which the Hotri has to recite after the Visvedevagraha. Different Sakhas recommend hymns of different metres, our Sakha fixes on the Gayatri.

^162:1 It is copied from the Visvagit, and that from the Agnishtoma.

^162:2 Nothing is wanting for its performance, if one only follows the rules given in the Agnishtoma.

^163:1 Dasinritya-bahubhutamaithuna-brahmakaripumskalisamprava-dadikam. See Rajendralal Mitra, Introduction to his edition of the Aitareya-aranyaka, p. 25. It might be better to join ekahah with santyam, but even then the argumentation is not quite clear.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA [*2].

1. Rv. I, 2, 1-3. Vayav a yahi darsateme soma aram kritah, 'Approach, O Vayu, conspicuous, these Somas have been made ready.' Because the word ready occurs in these verses, therefore is this day (of the sacrifice) ready (and auspicious) for the sacrificer and for the gods.

2. Yes, this day is ready (and auspicious) to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

3. Rv. I, 2, 4-6. Indravayu ime suta, a yatam upa nishkritam, 'Indra and Vayu, these Somas are prepared, come hither towards what has been prepared.' By nishkrita, prepared, he means what has been well prepared (samskrita).

4. Indra and Vayu go to what has been prepared by him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

[p. 164]

5. Rv. I, 2, 7. Mitram huve putadaksham, dhiyam ghritakim sadhanta, 'I call Mitra of holy strength; (he and Varuna) they fulfil the prayer accompanied with clarified butter.' Verily, speech is the prayer accompanied with clarified butter.

6. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

7. Rv. I, 3, 1. Asvina yagvarir ishah, 'O Asvinau, (eat) the sacrificial offerings.' Verily, the sacrificial offerings are food, and this serves for the acquirement of food.

8. Rv. I, 3, 3. A yatam rudravartani, 'Come hither, ye Rudravartani.'

9. The Asvinau go to the sacrifice of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

10. Rv. I, 3, 4-6. Indra yahi kitrabhano, indra yahi dhiyeshitah, indra yahi tutugana, 'Come hither, Indra, of bright splendour, Come hither, Indra, called by prayer, Come hither, Indra, quickly!' Thus he recites, Come hither, come hither!

11. Indra comes to the sacrifice of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

12. Rv. I, 3, 7. Omasas karshanidhrito visve devasa a gata, 'Visve Devas, protectors, supporters of men, come hither!'

13. Verily, the Visve Devas come to the call of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

14. Rv. I, 3, 7. Dasvamso dasushah sutam, 'Come ye givers to the libation of the giver!' By dasushah he means dadushah, i. e. to the libation of every one that gives.

[p. 165]

15. The gods fulfil his wish, with whatever wish he recites this verse,

16. (The wish of him) who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

17. Rv. I, 3, 10. Pavaka nah sarasvati yagnam vashtu dhiyavasuh, 'May the holy Sarasvati accept our sacrifice, rich in prayer!' Speech is meant by 'rich in prayer.'

18. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

19. And when he says, 'May she accept our sacrifice!' what he means is, 'May she carry off our sacrifice!'

20. If these verses are recited straight on, they are twenty-one. Man also consists of twenty-one. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, and the trunk the twenty-first. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-first, by this hymn [*1].

21. By repeating the first and the last verses thrice, they become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn'.

Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same through the same. Therefore these two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five, yea, twenty-five.

[p. 166]

Footnotes

^163:2 Next follows a list of the verses which form the seven trikas (groups of three verses) of the Pra-uga hymn, with occasional remarks on certain words.

^165:1 Cf. I, 1, 2, 7; I, 3, 5, 7.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA [*1].

1. The two trikas, Rv. VIII, 68, 1-3, a tva ratham yathotaye, and Rv. VIII, 2, 1-3, idam vaso sutam andhah, form the first (pratipad) and the second (anukara) of the Marutvatiya hymn.

2. Both, as belonging to the one-day ceremonial [*2], are perfect in form. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn [*3].

3. In the second verse of (the Pragatha [*4]), indra nediya ed ihi, pra su tira sakibhir ye ta ukthinah (Rv. VIII, 53, 5, 6), there occurs the word ukthinah, reciters of hymns [*5]. Verily, this day (the mahavrata) is an uktha (hymn), and as endowed with an uktha, the form of this day is perfect.

4. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word vira, strong, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 3), and as endowed with the word vira, strong, the form of this day is perfect.

[p. 167]

5. In the second verse (of another Pragatha) the word suviryam, strength, occurs (Rv. I. 40, 1), and as endowed with the word suvirya, strength, the form of this day is perfect.

6. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word ukthyam, to be hymned, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 5). Verily, this day is an uktha, and as endowed with an uktha, the form of this day is perfect.

7. In the (Dhayya) verse agnir neta (Rv. III, 2 0, 4) the word vritraha, killer of Vritra, occurs. The killing of Vritra is a form (character) of Indra, this day (the mahavrata) belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

8. In the (Dhayya) verse tvam soma kratubhih sukratur bhuh (Rv. I, 91, 2) the word vrisha [*1], powerful, occurs. Powerful is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

9. In the (Dhayya) verse pinvanty apah (Rv. I, 64, 6) the word vaginam, endowed with food, occurs. Endowed with food is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

10. In the same verse the word stanayantam, thundering, occurs. Endowed with thundering is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

11. In (the Pragatha) pra va indraya brihate (Rv. VIII, 89, 3) (the word brihat occurs). Verily, brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, great, the form of this day (mahavrata) is perfect.

12. In (the Pragatha) brihad indraya gayata (Rv. VIII, 89, 1)

[p. 168]

[paragraph continues] (the word brihat occurs). Verily, brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, the form of this day is perfect.

13. In (the Pragatha) nakih sudaso ratham pary asa na riramad (Rv. VII, 32, 10) the words paryasa (he moved round) and na riramad (he did not enjoy) occur, and as endowed with the words paryasta and ranti the form of this day is perfect [*1].

He recites all (these) Pragathas, in order to obtain all the days (of the sacrifice), all the Ukthas [*2], all the Prishthas [*3], all the Sastras [*4], all the Pra-ugas [*5], and all the Savanas (libations).

Footnotes

^166:1 In the first adhyaya the two hymns to be recited by the Hotri priest at the morning-libation (the agya and pra-uga sastra) have been considered. Now follows the Marutvatiya hymn, to be recited by the Hotri priest at the noon-libation.

^166:2 Taken from the Agnishtoma.

^166:3 Cf. I, 1, 3, 7-8.

^166:4 All these Pragathas consist of two verses expanded into a trika.

^166:5 Hotradaya ukthinah sastrinah.

^167:1 Cf. I, 2, 2, 14.

^168:1 Because the performance of the Mahavrata sacrifice moves the worshipper round to another world and gives him enjoyment. Comm. It is difficult to surpass the absurdity of these explanations. Na riramat means no one stopped the chariot of Sudas. But even if it meant that no one rejoiced through the chariot of Sudas, it would be difficult to see how the negative of enjoyment, mentioned in the hymn, could contribute to the perfection of a sacrifice which is to confer positive enjoyment on the worshipper.

^168:2 The stotras following after the Yagnayagniya Saman, serving for the ukthya-kratus.

^168:3 The stotras of the noon-libation, to be performed with the Rathantara, Brihat, and other Samans.

^168:4 The sastras, recitations, accompanying the oblations of agya.

^168:5 The pra-ugas, a division of sastras, described above.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA [*6].

1. He recites the hymn, asat su me garitah sabhivegah (Rv. X, 27, 1), (and in. it the word) satyadhvritam, the destroyer of truth. Verily, that day

[p. 169]

is truth, and as endowed with the word satya, truth, the form of this day is perfect [*1].

2. That hymn is composed by Vasukra. Verily, Vasukra is Brahman, and that day is Brahman. Thus he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman [*2].

3. Here they say: 'Why then is that Marutvatiya, hymn completed by the hymn of Vasukra?' Surely because no other Rishi but Vasukra brought out a Marutvatiya hymn, or divided it properly [*3]. Therefore that Marutvatiya hymn is completed by the hymn of Vasukra.

4. That hymn, asat su me, is not definitely addressed to any deity, and is therefore supposed to be addressed to Pragapati. Verily, Pragapati is indefinite, and therefore the hymn serves to win Pragapati.

5. Once in the hymn (Rv. X, 27, 22) he defines Indra (indraya sunvat); therefore it does not fall off from its form, as connected with Indra.

6. He recites the hymn (Rv. VI, 17, 1) piba somam abhi yam ugra tardah.

7. In the verse urvam gavyam mahi grinana indra the word mahi, great, occurs. Endowed with the word mahat, the form of this day is perfect.

8. That hymn is composed by Bharadvaga, and Bharadvaga was he who knew most, who lived longest, and performed the greatest austerities among the Rishis, and by this hymn he drove away evil. Therefore if he recites the hymn of Bharadvaga,

[p. 170]

then, after having driven away evil, he becomes learned, long-lived, and full of austerities.

9. He recites the hymn kaya subha savayasah sanilah (Rv. I, 165, 1).

10. In the verse a sasate prati haryanty uktha (Rv. I, 165, 4) the word uktha occurs. Verily, that day (the mahavrata) is uktha (hymn). Endowed with the word uktha, the form of this day becomes perfect.

11. That hymn is called Kayasubhiya [*1]. Verily, that hymn, which is called Kayasubhiya, is mutual understanding and it is lasting. By means of it Indra, Agastya, and the Maruts came to a mutual understanding. Therefore, if he recites the Kayasubhiya hymn, it serves for mutual understanding.

12. The same hymn is also long life. Therefore, if the sacrificer is dear to the Hotri, let him recite the Kayasubhiya hymn for him.

13. He recites the hymn marutvan indra vrishabo ranaya (Rv. III, 47, 1).

14. In it the words indra vrishabha (powerful) occur. Verily, powerful is a form of Indra [*2], this day belongs to Indra, and this is the perfect form of that day.

15. That hymn is composed by Visvamitra. Verily, Visvamitra was the friend (mitra) of all (visva).

16. Everybody is the friend of him who knows this, and for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

17. The next hymn, ganishtha ugrah sahase turaya (Rv. I, 73, 1), forms a Nividdhana [*3], and,

[p. 171]

according to the one-day (ekaha) ceremonial, is perfect in form. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for (by recitation of hymns). Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year (on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year) the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.

He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn [*1].

18. These, if recited straight on, are ninety-seven verses [*2]. The ninety are three Virag, each consisting of thirty, and then the seven verses which are over. Whatever is the praise of the seven, is the praise of ninety also.

[p. 172]

19. By repeating the first and last verses three times each, they become one hundred and one verses.

20. There are five fingers, of four joints each, two pits (in the elbow and the arm), the arm, the eye, the shoulder-blade; this makes twenty-five. The other three parts have likewise twenty-five each [*1]. That makes a hundred, and the trunk is the one hundred and first.

21. Hundred is life, health, strength, brightness. The sacrificer as the one hundred and first rests in life, health, strength, and brightness.

22. These verses become Trishtubh [*2], for the noonday-libation consists of Trishtubh verses.

Footnotes

^168:6 The type after which the Marutvatiya-sastra is to be performed is the Katurvimsa day. Hitherto (from a tva ratham to nakih sudasah), all that is taken over from the type to the modification, i. e. the Marutvatiya, has been explained. Now follow the verses which are new and peculiar to the Marutvatiya of the Mahavrata.

^169:1 The commentator endeavours to make the meaning more natural by taking in the word prahanta, he who kills the destroyer of truth. But considering the general character of these remarks, this is hardly necessary.

^169:2 Cf. I, 1, 3, 3.

^169:3 By separating the first trika from the second, and so forth.

^170:1 Cf. Ait. Brahm. V, 16.

^170:2 Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2, 1, 8.

^170:3 The hymn consists of eleven verses. In the middle, after the sixth verse, nivids or invocations, such as indro marutvan, are inserted, and therefore it is called a nividdhana hymn.

^171:1 With this hymn the Marutvatiya-sastra is finished. All the hymns from a tva ratham to asat su me garitar are simply taken over from the Katurvimsa ceremonial, the rest are peculiar to the Mahavrata day, the day preceding the Udayaniya or final day of the Gavamayana sattra. All this is more fully described in the fifth Aranyaka (V, 1, 1, 8), containing the Sutras or rules of Saunaka, while the earlier Aranyakas are reckoned as Brahmanas, and are therefore mixed up with matters not actually required for the performance of the sacrifice.

^171:2

        The first Stotriya and Anurupa trikas =

       6 (I, 2, 1, 1).

     
      The six Pragathas, each of 2 verses raised to 3 (but the text gives   seven Pragathas) =

       18 (I, 2, 1, 3; 4; 5; 6; 11; 12; 13).

     
      Three Dhayyas =

       3 (I, 2, 1, 7; 8; 9).

     
      Asat su =

       24 (I, 2, 2, 1).

     
      Piba somam =

       15 (I,2,2,6).

     
      Kaya subha =

       15 (I, 2,2,9).

     
      Marutvan indra =

       5 (I, 2, 2, 13).

     
      Ganishtha ugrah =

       11 (1, 2, 2, 17).

     
      (TOTAL)

       97

     
  

^172:1 The left side as well as the right, and then the left and right side of the lower body. Thus we have twenty joints of the five toes, a thigh, a leg, and three joints, making twenty-five on each side.

^172:2 Approach the Trishtubh metre of the last hymn. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA [*3].

1. They say: 'What is the meaning of prenkha, swing?' Verily, he is the swing, who blows (the wind). He indeed goes forward (pra + inkhate) in these worlds, and that is why the swing is called prenkha.

2. Some say, that there should be one plank, because the wind blows in one way, and it should be like the wind.

3. That is not to be regarded.

4. Some say, there should be three planks, because there are these three threefold worlds, and it should be like them.

[p. 173]

5. That is not to be regarded.

6. Let there be two, for these two worlds (the earth and heaven) are seen as if most real, while the ether (space) between the two is the sky (antariksha). Therefore let there be two planks.

7. Let them be made of Udumbara wood. Verily, the Udumbara tree is sap and eatable food, and thus it serves to obtain sap and eatable food.

8. Let them be elevated in the middle (between the earth and the cross-beam). Food, if placed in the middle, delights man, and thus he places the sacrificer in the middle of eatable food.

9. There are two kinds of rope, twisted towards the right and twisted towards the left. The right ropes serve for some animals, the left ropes for others. If there are both kinds of rope, they serve for the attainment of both kinds of cattle.

10. Let them be made of Darbha (Kusa grass), for among plants Darbha is free from evil, therefore they should be made of Darbha grass.

Footnotes

^172:3 After having considered the Marutvatiya, he proceeds to consider the Nishkevalya. This has to be recited by the Hotri while sitting on a swing.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. Some say: 'Let the swing be one ell (aratni) above the ground, for by that measure verily the Svarga worlds are measured.' That is not to be regarded.

2. Others say: 'Let it be one span (pradesa), for by that measure verily the vital airs were measured.' That is not to be regarded [*1].

3. Let it be one fist (mushti), for by that measure verily all eatable food is made, and by that measure

[p. 174]

all eatable food is taken; therefore let it be one fist above the ground.

4. They say: 'Let him mount the swing from east to west, like he who shines; for the sun mounts these worlds from east to west.' That is not to be regarded.

5. Others say: 'Let him mount the swing sideways, for people mount a horse sideways [*1], thinking that thus they will obtain all desires.' That is not to be regarded.

6. They say: 'Let him mount the swing [*2] from behind, for people mount a ship from behind, and this swing is a ship in which to go to heaven.' Therefore let him mount it from behind.

7. Let him touch the swing with his chin (khubuka). The parrot (suka) thus mounts a tree, and he is of all birds the one who eats most food. Therefore let him touch it with his chin.

8. Let him mount the swing with his arms [*3]. The hawk swoops thus on birds and on trees, and he is of all birds the strongest. Therefore let him mount with his arms.

9. Let him not withdraw one foot (the right or left) from the earth, for fear that he may lose his hold.

10. The Hotri mounts the swing, the Udgatri the seat made of Udumbara wood. The swing is masculine, the seat feminine, and they form a union. Thus he makes a union at the beginning of the uktha in order to get offspring.

[p. 175]

He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

12. Next the swing is food, the seat fortune. Thus he mounts and obtains food and fortune.

13. The Hotrakas (the Prasastri, Brahmanakkhamsin, Potri, Neshtri, Agnadhra, and Akkhavaka) together with the Brahman sit down on cushions made of grass, reeds, leaves, &c.

14. Plants and trees, after they have grown up, bear fruit. Thus if the priests mount on that day altogether (on their seats), they mount on solid and fluid as their proper food. Therefore this serves for the attainment of solid as proper food [*1].

15. Some say: 'Let him descend after saying vashat [*2]. 'That is not to be regarded. For, verily, that respect is not shown which is shown to one who does not see it [*3].

16. Others say: 'Let him descend after he has taken the food in his hand.' That is not to be regarded. For, verily, that respect is not shown which is shown to one after he has approached quite close.

17. Let him descend after he has seen the food. For, verily, that is real respect which is shown to one when he sees it. Only after having actually

[p. 176]

seen the food (that is brought to the sacrifice), let him descend from the swing.

18. Let him descend turning towards the east, for in the east the seed of the gods springs up [*1]. Therefore let him rise turning towards the east, yea, turning towards the east.

Footnotes

^173:1 They rise one span above the heart, and they proceed one span from out the mouth. Comm.

^174:1 Here we have clearly riding on horseback.

^174:2 While the swing points to the east, let him stand west, and thus mount.

^174:3 The fore-arms, from the elbow to the end, the aratni. Comm.

^175:1 One expects ishah before urgah, but it is wanting in both text and commentary, and in other MSS. also.

^175:2 The word by which the Hotri invites the Adhvaryu to offer the oblation to the gods. The descending from the swing belongs, of course, to a later part of the sacrifice.

^175:3 it is supposed that the Hotri rises from the swing to show respect to the sacrificial food, when it is brought near. But as it is not brought near, immediately after the Hotri has finished his part with the word vashat, the food could not see the Hotri rise, and this mark of respect, intended for the food, would thus be lost.

^176:1 Should it be devaretah sampragayate, or devaretasam pragayate?

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Let him begin this day [*2] with singing 'Him,' thus they say.

2. Verily, the sound Him is Brahman, that day also is Brahman. He who knows this, obtains Brahman even by Brahman.

3. As he begins with the sound Him, surely that masculine sound of Him and the feminine Rik (the verse) make a couple. Thus he makes a couple at the beginning of the hymn in order to get offspring [*3]. He who knows this, gets cattle and offspring.

4. Or, as he begins with the sound Him, surely like a wooden spade, so the sound Him serves to dig up Brahman (the sap of the Veda). And as a man wishes to dig up any, even the hardest soil, with a spade, thus he digs up Brahman.

5. He who knows this digs up, by means of the sound Him, everything he may desire.

6. If he begins with the sound Him, that sound is the holding apart of divine and human speech.

[p. 177]

Therefore, he who begins, after having uttered the sound Him, holds apart divine and human speech [*1].

Footnotes

^176:2 The Nishkevalya-sastra, of the noon-libation; Cf. I, 2, 2, 1.

^176:3 Cf. I, 2, 4, 10.

^177:1 Human speech is the ordinary speech, divine speech that of the Veda. Thus between the hymns, or the divine speech, and the ordinary language of conversation the sound Him is interposed as a barrier.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. And here they ask: 'What is the beginning of this day?' Let him say: 'Mind and speech [*2].'

2. All desires dwell in the one (mind), the other yields all desires.

3. All desires dwell in the mind, for with the mind he conceives all desires.

4. All desires come to him who knows this.

5. Speech yields all desires, for with speech he declares all his desires.

6. Speech yields all desires to him who knows this.

7. Here they say: 'Let him not begin this day with a Rik, a Yagus, or a Saman verse (divine speech), for it is said, he should not start with a Rik, a Yagus, or a Saman [*3].'

8. Therefore, let him say these Vyahritis (sacred interjections) first.

9. These interjections Bhus, Bhuvas, Svar are the three Vedas, Bhus the Rig-veda, Bhuvas the Yagur-veda, Svar the Sama-veda. Therefore (by

[p. 178]

intercalating these) he does not begin simply with a Rik, Yagus, or Saman verse, he does not start with a Rik, Yagus, or Saman verse.

Footnotes

^177:2 Mind, to think about the hymns which have to be recited; speech, to recite them without a flaw.

^177:3 It is doubtful whether neyad rikah and apagakkhet can have this meaning. However, what is intended is clear, viz. that the priest, even after having uttered the sound Him, should not immediately begin with verses from the Vedas, but should intercalate the three syllables bhur bhuvah svar, or, if taken singly, bhus, bhuvas, svar.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. He begins with tad, this, (the first word of the first hymn, tad id asa). Verily 'this, this' is food, and thus he obtains food.

2. Pragapati indeed uttered this as the first word, consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat) [*1]. And thus does a child, as soon as he begins to speak, utter the word, consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat). With this very word, consisting of tat or tatta, he begins.

3. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 71, 1) [*2]:--

4. 'O Brihaspati, the first point of speech;'--for this is the first and highest point of speech.

5. 'That which you have uttered, making it a name;'--for names are made by speech.

[p. 179]

6. 'That (name) which was the best and without a flaw;'--for this is the best and without a flaw.

7. 'That which was hidden by their love, is made manifest;'--for this was hidden in the body, viz. those deities (which enter the body, Agni as voice, entering the mouth, &c.); and that was manifest among the gods in heaven. This is what was intended by the verse.

Footnotes

^178:1 Tata and tata are used both by children in addressing their parents, and by parents in addressing their children. If tat is called the very same word, eva is used in the sense of iva.

^178:2 The verse is cited to confirm the meaning of tat, the first word of the first hymn (tad id asa), as explained before. It was said that tat was the first name applied to a child. Now, according to Asvalayana Grihya-sutra I, 16, 8, a name is given to a child at the time of its birth, a name which no one knows except father and mother, till the time when he is initiated by a Guru. This is called the abhivadaniya name. In allusion to this custom it is said here that tata is the secret name of the child, which becomes publicly known at a later time only. Of course the interpretation of the verse in that sense is unnatural, but quite in keeping with the general character of the Aranyaka. I doubt whether even the commentator understood what was intended by the author, and whether the gods who enter the body are supposed to know the name, or whether the name refers to these gods, or, it may be, to tad, the Brahman.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA [*1].

1. He begins with: 'That indeed was the oldest in the worlds [*2];'--for that (the Brahman) is verily the oldest in the worlds.

2. 'Whence was born the fierce one, endowed with brilliant force;'--for from it was born the fierce one, who is endowed with brilliant force.

3. 'When born he at once destroys the enemies;'--for he at once when born struck down the evil one.

4. 'He after whom all friends rejoice;'--verily all friends are the creatures, and they rejoice after him, saying, 'He has risen, he has risen [*3].'

5. 'Growing by strength, the almighty [*4];'--for he (the sun) does grow by strength, the almighty.

6. 'He, as enemy, causes fear to the slave;'--for everything is afraid of him.

7. 'Taking the breathing and the not-breathing;'--this means the living and the lifeless.

8. 'Whatever has been offered at feasts came to thee;'--this means everything is in thy power.

9. 'All turn their thought also on thee [*5];'--this

[p. 180]

means all these beings, all minds, all thoughts also turn to thee.

10. 'When these two become three protectors;'--i. e. when these two united beget offspring.

11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

12. 'Join what is sweeter than sweet (offspring) with the sweet (the parents);'--for the couple (father and mother) is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and he thus joins the offspring with the couple.

13. 'And this (the son, when married) being very sweet, conquered through the sweet;'--i. e. the couple is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and thus through the couple he conquers offspring [*1].

14. This is declared by a Rishi [*2]: 'Because he (Pragapati) raised his body (the hymn tad id asa or the Veda in general) in the body (of the sacrificer)' (therefore that Nishkevalya hymn is praised);--i. e. this body, consisting of the Veda, in that corporeal form (of the sacrificer).

15. 'Then let this body indeed be the medicine of that body;'--i. e. this body, consisting of the Veda, of that corporeal form (of the sacrificer).

16. Of this (the first foot of Rv. X, 120, 1) the eight syllables are Gayatri, the eleven syllables are Trishtubh, the twelve syllables are Gagati, the ten syllables are Virag. The Virag, consisting of ten syllables, rests in these three metres [*3].

17. The word purusha, consisting of three syllables, that indeed goes into the Virag [*4].

[p. 181]

18. Verily, these are all metres, these (Gayatri, Trishtubh, Gagati) having the Virag as the fourth. In this manner this day is complete in all metres to him who knows this.

Footnotes

^179:1 He now explains the first hymn of the Nishkevalya, which is called the Ragana.

^179:2 Rv. X, 120, 1.

^179:3 The sun and the fire.

^179:4 Rv. X, 120, 2.

^179:5 Rv. X, 120, 3.

^180:1 All these are purely fanciful interpretations.

^180:2 Not to be found in our Sakha of the Rig-veda.

^180:3 These metres are obtained by a purely arbitrary counting of syllables in the hymn tadidasa, which really consists of Trishtubh verses.

^180:4 If we simply count syllables, the first and second feet of the [p. 181] first verse consist of ten syllables only, the fourth of nine or ten. In order to bring them to the right number, the word purusha is to be added to what is a Virag, i.e. to the first, the second, and fourth feet. We thus get:

tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham pu
 yato gagna ugras tveshanrimno ru
 sadyo gagnano ni rinati satrun
 anu yam visve madanti umah shah.

Cf. Ait. Ar. V, 1, 6.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. He extends these (verses) by (interpolating) the sound [*1]. Verily, the sound is purusha, man. Therefore every man when he speaks, sounds loud, as it were.

2. At the end of each foot of the first verse of the hymn tad id asa, he inserts one foot of the second verse of hymn Rv. VIII, 69, nadam va odatinam, &c. Thus the verse is to be recited as follows:

Tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham pu
     nadam va odatinam,
 Yato gagna ugras tveshanrimno ru
     nadam yoyuvatinam,
 Sadyo gagnano ni rinati satrun
     patim vo aghnyanam,
 Anu yam visve madanti umah sho
     dhenunam ishudhyasi.

 

[p. 182]

In nadam va odatinam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), odati [*1] are the waters in heaven, for they water all this; and they are the waters in the mouth, for they water all good food.

3. In nadam yoyuvatinam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), yoyuvati are the waters in the sky, for they seem to inundate; and they are the waters of perspiration, for they seem to run continually.

4. In patim vo aghnyanam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), aghnya are the waters which spring from the smoke of fire, and they are the waters which spring from the organ.

5. In dhenunam ishudhyasi (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), the dhenu (cows) are the waters, for they delight all this; and ishudhyasi means, thou art food.

6. He extends a Trishtubh and an Anushtubh [*2]. Trishtubh is the man, Anushtubh the wife, and they make a couple. Therefore does a man, after having found a wife, consider himself a more perfect man.

7. These verses, by repeating the first three times, become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth [*3]. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same

[p. 183]

through the same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five .

Footnotes

^181:1 The sound, nada, is really a verse beginning with nadam, and which is interpolated after the syllables pu ru shah.

^182:1 The nasal pluta on iti is explained as padapratikagrahane 'tyantamadararthah. Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 1, 4, 3.

^182:2 Tad id asa is a Trishtubh, nadam vah an Anushtubh.

^182:3 Cf. I, 1, 2, 7; I, 1, 4, 21.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

This is an exact repetition of the third khanda. According to the commentator, the third khanda was intended for the glory of the first word tad, while the sixth is intended for the glory of the whole hymn.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. He begins with the hymn, Tad id asa, bhuvaneshu gyeshtham (Rv. X, 120). Verily, gyeshtha, the oldest, is mahat, great. Endowed with mahat the form of this day is perfect.

2. Then follows the hymn, Tam su te kirtim maghavan mahitva (Rv. X, 54), with the auspicious word mahitva.

3. Then follows the hymn, Bhuya id vavridhe viryaya (Rv. VI, 30), with the auspicious word virya.

4. Then follows the hymn, Nrinam u tva nritamam gobhir ukthaih (Rv. I, 51, 4), with the auspicious word uktha.

5. He extends the first two padas, which are too small, by one syllable (Rv. X, 120, 1 a, and Rv. VIII, 69, 2 a) [*2]. Into the small heart the vital spirits are placed, into the small stomach food is placed. It

[p. 184]

serves for the attainment of these desires. He who knows this, obtains these desires.

6. The two feet, each consisting of ten syllables (Rv. X, 120, 1 a, b), serve for the gaining of both kinds of food [*1], of what has feet (animal food), and what has no feet (vegetable food).

7. They come to be of eighteen syllables each [*2]. Of those which are ten, nine are the pranas (openings of the body) [*3], the tenth is the (vital) self. This is the perfection of the (vital) self; Eight syllables remain in each. He who knows them, obtains whatever he desires.

Footnotes

^183:1 The number is obtained as follows:

        1. Tad id asa (Rv. X, 120) =

       9 verses

     
      2. Tam su te kirtim (Rv. X, 54) =

       6 "

     
      3. Bhuya id vavridhe viryaya (Rv. VI, 30) =

       5 "

     
      4. Nrinam u tva (Rv. I, 51, 4) =

       3 "

     
       

       23 + 2 = 25

     
  

^183:2 Cf. I, 1, 2, 9.

^184:1 Because Virag, a foot of ten syllables, is food.

^184:2

        Rv. X, 120, 1 a =

       10

     
      Rv. VIII, 69, 2 a=

       7

     
      Syllable pu =

       1

     
       

       18

     
  

^184:3 Seven in the head and two in the body; sapta vai sirshanyah prana dvav avankav iti.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. He extends (these verses) by (interpolating) the sound [*4]. Verily, breath (prana) is sound. Therefore every breath when it sounds, sounds loud, as it were.

2. The verse (VIII, 69, 2) nadam va odatinam, &c., is by its syllables an Ushnih [*5], by its feet an Anushtubh [*6]. Ushnih is life, Anushtubh, speech. He thus places life and speech in him (the sacrificer.)

3. By repeating the first verse three times, they

[p. 185]

become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same through the same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five. This is the twenty-fifth with regard to the body.

4. Next, with regard to the deities: The eye, the ear, the mind, speech, and breath, these five deities (powers) have entered into that person (purusha), and that person entered into the five deities. He is wholly pervaded there with his limbs to the very hairs and nails. Therefore all beings to the very insects are born as pervaded (by the deities or senses) [*1].

5. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 4, 8):--

6. 'A thousandfold are these fifteen hymns;'--for five arise from ten [*2].

7. 'As large as heaven and earth, so large is it;'--verily, the self (givatman) is as large as heaven and earth.

8. 'A thousandfold are the thousand powers [*3];'--

[p. 186]

by saying this the poet pleases the hymns (the senses), and magnifies them.

9. 'As far as Brahman reaches, so far reaches speech;'--wherever there is Brahman, there is a word; and wherever there is a word, there is Brahman, this was intended.

10. The first of the hymns among all those hymns has nine verses. Verily, there are nine pranas (openings), and it serves for their benefit.

11. Then follows a hymn of six verses. Verily, the seasons are six, and it serves to obtain them.

12. Then follows a hymn of five verses. Verily' the Pankti consists of five feet. Verily, Pankti is food, and it serves for the gaining of proper food.

13. Then follows a tristich. Three are these threefold worlds, and it serves to conquer them.

14. These verses become Brihatis [*1], that metre being immortal, leading to the world of the Devas. That body of verses is the trunk (of the bird represented by the whole sastra), and thus it is. He who knows this comes by this way (by making the verses the trunk of the bird) near to the immortal Self, yea, to the immortal Self [*2].

Footnotes

^184:4 Cf. I, 3, 5, 1.

^184:5 Each pada has seven syllables, the third only six; but a seventh syllable is gained by pronouncing the y as i. Comm.

^184:6 Because it has four padas.

^185:1 The commentator takes this in a different sense, explaining atra, there, as the body pervaded by the person, yet afterwards stating that all beings are born, pervaded by the senses.

^185:2 The commentator explains uktha, hymns, as members or organs. They are the five, and they spring from the ten, i. e. from the five elements (earth, water, fire, wind, and ether), forming part of the father and mother each, and therefore called ten, or a decade. Dasatah is explained by bhutadasakat.

^185:3 The application of the senses to a thousand different objects.

^186:1 Each foot of the Trishtubh has eleven syllables, to which seven are added from the Nada hymn. This gives eighteen syllables for each pada. Two padas therefore give thirty-six syllables, and this is a Brihati. In this manner the twenty-three verses of the hymns yield forty-six Brihatis. Comm.

^186:2 He obtains a birth among the gods by means of this Mahavrata ceremonial, if performed with meditation and a right understanding of its hidden meaning.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 187]

  

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Next comes the Sudadohas [*1] verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

2. Next follow the neck verses. They recite them as Ushnih, according to their metre [*2].

3. Next comes (again) the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

4. Next follows the head. That is in Gayatri verses. The Gayatri is the beginning of all metres [*3]; the head the first of all members. It is in Arkavat verses (Rv. I, 7, 1-9) [*4]. Arka is Agni. They are nine verses. The head consists of nine pieces. He recites the tenth verse, and that is the skin and the hairs on the head. It serves for reciting one verse more than (the nine verses contained in) the Stoma [*5].

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] These form the Trivrit Stoma and the Gayatri metre, and whatever there exists, all this is produced after the production of this Stoma and this metre. Therefore the recitation of these head-hymns serves for production.

5. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Verily, Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

7. Next follow the vertebrae [*1] (of the bird). These verses are Virag (shining). Therefore man says to man, 'Thou shinest above us;' or to a stiff and proud man, 'Thou carriest thy neck stiff.' Or because the (vertebrae of the neck) run close together, they are taken to be the best food. For Virag, is food, and food is strength.

8. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

Footnotes

^187:1 The Nishkevalya-sastra is represented in the shape of a bird, consisting of trunk, neck, head, vertebrae, wings, tail, and stomach. Before describing the hymns which form the neck, another hymn has to be mentioned, called Sudadohas, which has to be recited at the end of the hymns, described before, which form the trunk. Sudadohas is explained as 'yielding milk,' and because that word occurs in the verse, the verse is called Sudadohas. It follows on the Nada verse, Rv. VIII, 69, 3. Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 5, 1, 7.

^187:2 They occur in another sakha, and are to be recited such as they are, without any insertions. They are given by Saunaka, Ait. Ar. V, 2, 1.

^187:3 It was created from the mouth of Pragapati.

^187:4 They are called so, because the word arka occurs in them.

^187:5 The chanters of the Sama-veda make a Trivrit Stoma of this hymn, without any repetitions, leaving out the tenth verse. The reciters of the Rig-veda excel them therefore by reciting a tenth verse. This is called atisamsanam (or -na).

^188:1 Vigavas may be a singular, and the commentator seems to take it as such in his first explanation. The text, ta virago bhavanti, proves nothing, because it could not be sa virago bhavanti, nor even sa virad bhavati. Possibly the word may occur in both forms, vigu, plural vigavah, and vigavah. In a somewhat similar way we find griva and grivah, folia and la feuille. On p. 109, the commentator speaks of vigavabhaga, and again, p. 110, pakshamularupa vigava abhihitah. He, however, explains its meaning rightly, as the root of the wings, or rather the lower bones of the neck. Grivah, plural, were originally the vertebrae of the neck. The paragraph, though very empty, contains at least some interesting forms of language. First vigu, vertebrae, then the participles duta and sambalhatama, and lastly the verb pratyak, the last probably used in the sense of to bring near, to represent, with the superlative adverb annatamam (Pan. V, 4, 11), i. e. they are represented as if they brought the best food.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Next follows the right wing. It is this world (the earth), it is this Agni, it is speech, it is the Rathantara [*1], it is Vasishtha, it is a hundred [*2]. These are the six powers (of the right wing) [*3]. The Sampata hymn (Rv. IV, 20) serves indeed for obtaining desires and for firmness. The Pankti verse (Rv. I, 80, 1) serves for proper food.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, thereby he joins all joints with breath.

3. Next follows the left wing. It is that world (heaven), it is that sun, it is mind, it is the Brihat, it

[p. 190]

a, it is a hundred [*1]. These are the six powers (of the left wing). The Sampata hymn (Rv. IV, 23) serves indeed for obtaining desires and for firmness. The Pankti verse (Rv. I, 81, 1) serves for proper food.

4. These two (the right and the left wings) are deficient and excessive [*2]. The Brihat (the left wing) is man, the Rathantara (the right wing) is woman. The excess belongs to the man, the deficiency to the woman. Therefore they are deficient and excessive.

5. Now the left wing of a bird is verily by one feather better, therefore the left wing is larger by one verse.

[p. 191]

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

7. Next follows the tail. They are twenty-one Dvipada verses [*1]. For there are twenty-one backward feathers in a bird.

8. Then the Ekavimsa is the support of all Stomas, and the tail the support of all birds [*2].

9. He recites a twenty-second verse. This is made the form of two supports. Therefore all birds support themselves on their tail, and having supported themselves on their tail, they fly up. For the tail is a support.

10. He (the bird and the hymn) is supported by two decades which are Virag. The man (the sacrificer) is supported by the two Dvipadas, the twenty first and twenty-second. That which forms the bird serves for the attainment of all desires; that which forms the man, serves for his happiness, glory, proper food, and honour.

11. Next comes a Sudadohas verse, then a Dhayya, then a Sudadohas verse. The Sudadohas is a man, the Dhayya a woman, therefore he recites the Dhayya as embraced on both sides by the Sudadohas. Therefore does the seed of both, when it is effused, obtain oneness, and this with regard to the

[p. 192]

woman only. Hence birth takes place in and from the woman. Therefore he recites that Dhayya in that place .

Footnotes

^189:1 Rathantara is the name of the whole number of hymns to be recited at this part of the sacrifice. It was made by Vasishtha, and consists of one hundred verses.

^189:2

          1. Stotriya, abhi tva sura nonumah (Rv. VII, 32, 22)

       2 (3)

     
      2. Anurupa, abhi tva purvapitaye (Rv. VIII, 3, 7)

       2 (3)

     
      3. Indrasya nu (Rv. I, 32)

       15

     
      4. Tve ha (Rv. VII, 18, 1-15)

       15

     
      5. Yas tigma (Rv. VII. 19)

       11

     
      6. Ugro gagne (Rv. VII, 20)

       10

     
      7. Ud u (Rv. VII, 23)

       6

     
      8. A te mahah (Rv. VII, 25)

       6

     
      9. Na somah (Rv. VII, 26)

       5

     
      10. Indram narah (Rv. VII, 27)

       5

     
      11. Brahma nah (Rv. VII, 28)

       5

     
      12. Ayam somah (Rv. VII, 29)

       5

     
      13. A na indrah (Rv. IV, 20)

       11

     
       

       98 (100)

     
      14. Ittha hi (Rv. I, 80, 1)

       1

     
       

       99 (101)

     
    

These hymns and verses are given Ait. Ar. V, 2, 2, 1. Here we also learn that hymn Rv. IV, 20, is called Sampata, and that the last verse is a Pankti.

^189:3 The six powers are earth, Agni, speech, Rathantara, Vasishtha, and a hundred.

^190:1 The hundred verses are given Ait. Ar. V, 2, 2, 5.

          1. Stotriya, tvam id dhi (Rv. VI, 46, 1)

       2 (3)

     
      2. Anurupa, tvam hy ehi (Rv. VIII, 61, 7)

       2 (3)

     
      3. Tam u shtuhi (Rv. VI, 18)

       15

     
      4. Suta it tvam (Rv. VI, 23)

       10

     
      5. Vrisha madah (Rv. VI, 24)

       10

     
      6. Ya ta utih (Rv. VI, 25)

       9

     
      7. Abhur ekah (Rv. VI, 31)

       5

     
      8. Apurvya (Rv. VI, 32)

       5

     
      9. Ya ogishthah (Rv. VI, 33)

       5

     
      10. Sam ka tve (Rv. VI, 34)

       5

     
      11. Kada bhuvan (Rv. VI, 35)

       5

     
      12. Satra madasah (Rv. VI, 36)

       5

     
      13. Arvag ratham (Rv. VI, 37)

       5

     
      14. Apad (Rv. VI, 38)

       5

     
      15. Katha mahan (Rv. IV, 23)

       1

     
       

       99 (101)

     
      16. Indro madaya (Rv. I, 81, 1)

       1

     
       

       100 (102)

     
    

Though there are said to be 100 verses before the Pankti (No. 16), I can get only 99 or 101. See the following note.

^190:2 The right wing, is deficient by one verse, the left wing exceeds by one verse. I count 99 or 101 verses in the right, and 100 or 102 in the left wing.

^191:1 These verses are given Ait. Ar. V, 2, 2, 9.

          1. Ima nu kam (Rv. X, 157)

       5

     
      2. A yahi (Rv. X, 172)

       4

     
      3. Pra va indraya &c. (not in the Sakalya-samhita)

       9

     
      4. Esha brahma &c. (not in the Sakalya-samhita)

       3

     
       

       21

     
    

^191:2 The other Stomas of the Agnishtoma are the Trivrit, Pankadasa, Saptadasa, the Ekavimsa being the highest. Cf. I, 5, 1, 3.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. He recites the eighty tristichs of Gayatris [*2]. Verily, the eighty Gayatri tristichs are this world (earth). Whatever there is in this world of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins this world with breath.

3. He recites the eighty tristichs of Brihatis. Verily, the eighty Brihati tristichs are the world of the sky. Whatever there is in the world of the sky of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

4. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins the world of the sky with breath.

5. He recites the eighty tristichs of Ushnih. Verily, the eighty Ushnih tristichs are that world, the heaven. Whatever there is in that world of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, also the divine being of the Devas (Brahman), may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is the breath. He joins that world with breath, yea, with breath.

Footnotes

^192:1 Asmin vigavabhage. Comm.

^192:2 These and the following verses form the food of the bird. Comm. The verses themselves are given by Saunaka in the fifth Aranyaka.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

FIFTH ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. He recites the Vasa hymn [*1], wishing, May everything be in my power.

2. They (its verses) are twenty-one [*2], for twenty-one are the parts (the lungs, spleen, &c.) in the belly.

3. Then the Ekavimsa is verily the support of all Stomas, and the belly the support of all food.

4. They consist of different metres. Verily, the intestines are confused, some small, some large.

5. He recites them with the pranava [*3], according to the metre [*4], and according to rule [*5]. Verily, the intestines are according to rule, as it were; some shorter, some longer.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins the joints; with breath.

7. After having recited that verse twelve times he

[p. 194]

leaves it off there. These pranas are verily twelvefold, seven in the head, two on the breast, three below. In these twelve places the pranas are contained, there they are perfect. Therefore he leaves it off there .

8. The hymn indragni yuvam su nah (Rv. VIII, 40) forms the two thighs (of the bird) belonging to Indra and Agni, the two supports with broad bones.

9. These (verses) consist of six feet, so that they may stand firm. Man stands firm on two feet, animals on four. He thus places man (the sacrificer), standing on two feet, among four-footed cattle.

10. The second verse has seven feet, and he makes it into a Gayatri and Anushtubh. Gayatri is Brahman, Anushtubh is speech; and he thus puts together speech with Brahman.

11. He recites a Trishtubh at the end. Trishtubh is strength, and thus does he come round animals by strength. Therefore animals come near where there is strength (of command, &c.); they come to be roused and to rise up, (they obey the commands of a strong shepherd.)

Footnotes

^193:1 Having recited the verses which form the body, neck, head, wings, and tail of the bird, also the food intended for the bird, he now describes the Vasa hymn, i.e. the hymn composed by Vasa, Rv. VIII, 46. That hymn takes the place of the stomach which receives the food intended for the bird. Cf. Ait. Ar. V, 2, 5. In I, 5, 2, 4 it is called a Nivid.

^193:2 Verses 1-20 of the Vasa hymn, and one Sudadohas.

^193:3 Pranavam means 'with pranava,' i.e. inserting Om in the proper places.

^193:4 According as the metres of the different verses are fixed by Saunaka, Ait. Ar. V, 2, 5, who says that verse 15 is Dvipada, and that the last four words, nunam atha, form an Ekapada.

^193:5 According to rule, i.e. so that they should come right as Asvalayana has prescribed the recitation of Dvipada and Ekapada verses. In a Dvipada there should be a stop after the first foot, and Om at the end o f the second. Ira an Ekapada there should be Om at the beginning and at the end.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. When he recites the Nishkevalya hymn addressed to Indra (Rv. X, 50), pra vo mahe, he inserts a Nivid [*2] (between the fourth and fifth verses). Thus he clearly places strength in himself (in the sastra, in the bird, in himself).

2. They are Trishtubhs and Gagatis.

[p. 195]

3. There they say: 'Why does he insert a Nivid among mixed Trishtubhs and Gagatis [*1]?' But surely one metre would never support the Nivid of this day, nor fill it: therefore he inserts the Nivid among mixed Trishtubhs and Gagatis.

4. Let him know that this day has three Nivids: the Vasa hymn is a Nivid, the Valakhilyas [*2] are a Nivid, and the Nivid itself is a Nivid. Thus let him know that day as having three Nivids.

5. Then follow the hymns vane na va (Rv. X, 29) and yo gata eva (Rv. II, 12). In the fourth verse of the former hymn occur the words anne samasya yad asan manishah, and they serve for the winning of proper food.

6. Then comes an insertion. As many Trishtubh and Gagati verses [*3], taken from the ten Mandalas and addressed to Indra, as they insert (between the two above-mentioned hymns), after changing them into Brihatis, so many years do they live beyond the (usual) age (of one hundred years). By this insertion age is obtained.

7. After that he recites the Saganiya hymn, wishing that cattle may always come to his offspring.

8. Then he recites the Tarkshya hymn [*4]. Tarkshya is verily welfare, and the hymn leads to welfare. Thus (by reciting the hymn) he fares well [*5].

[p. 196]

9. Then he recites the Ekapada (indro visvam vi ragati), wishing, May I be everything at once, and may I thus finish the whole work of metres [*1].

10. In reciting the hymn indram visva avivridhan (Rv. I, 11) he intertwines the first seven verses by intertwining their feet [*2]. There are seven pranas (openings) in the head, and he thus places seven pranas in the head. The eighth verse (half-verse) he does not intertwine [*3]. The eighth is speech, and he thinks, May my speech never be intertwined with the other pranas. Speech therefore, though dwelling in the same abode as the other pranas, is not intertwined with them.

11. He recites the Virag verses [*4]. Verily, Virag verses are food, and they thus serve for the gaining of food.

12. He ends with the hymn of Vasishtha [*5], wishing, May I be Vasishtha!

13. But let him end with the fifth verse, esha stomo maha ugraya vahe, which, possessing the word mahat, is auspicious.

14. In the second foot of the fifth verse the word dhuri occurs. Verily, dhuh (the place where the horse is fastened to the car) is the end (of the car). This day also is the end (of the sacrifice which lasts a whole year) [*6]. Thus the verse is fit for the day.

[p. 197]

15. In the third foot the word arka is auspicious.

16. The last foot is: 'Make our glory high as heaven over heaven.' Thus wherever Brahmanic speech is uttered, there his glory will be, when he who knows this finishes with that verse. Therefore let a man who knows this, finish (the Nishkevalya) with that verse.

Footnotes

^194:1 He repeats the Sudadohas verse no more. Comm.

^194:2 Sentences like indro devah somam pibatu.

^195:1 According to the Prakriti of the Agnishtoma they ought to be all Trishtubhs. Comm.

^195:2 These hymns occur in the eighty Brihati tristichs.

^195:3 From the Samhita, which consists of ten thousand verses. Comm.

^195:4 Rv. X, 178. Tarksha Garuda being the deity of the hymn, it is called Tarkshya.

^195:5 Cf. I, 5, 3, 13

^196:1 The Ekapada forms the last metre in this ceremony.

^196:2 The first and last half-verses of the hymn are not to be intertwined. Of the remaining fourteen half-verses he joins, for instance, the fourth foot of the first verse with the second foot of the second verse, and so on. Comm.

^196:3 Because nothing more follows. Comm.

^196:4 Rv. VII, 22, 1-6.

^196:5 Rv. VII, 24.

^196:6 The last day is the udayaniyatiratra. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA [*1].

1. Tat savitur vrinimahe (Rv. V, 82, 1-3) and adya no deva savitar (Rv. V, 82, 4-6) are the beginning (pratipad) and the next step (anukara) of the Vaisvadeva hymn, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial and therefore proper [*2].

2. On that day [*3] much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers; rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

3. Then (follows) the hymn addressed to Savitri, tad devasya savitur varyam mahat (Rv. IV, 53). Verily, mahat, great, (in this foot) is the end [*4]. This day too is the end. Thus the verse is fit for the day.

[p. 198]

4. The hymn katara purva katara parayoh (Rv. I, 185), addressed to Dyavaprithivi, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive the same reward [*1]. Thus it is fit for the day.

5. The hymn anasvo gato anabhisur ukthyah (Rv. IV, 36) is addressed to the Ribhus.

6. In the first verse the word tri (kakrah) occurs, and trivat [*2] is verily the end. This day also is the end (of the sacrifice). Thus the verse is fit for the day.

7. The hymn asya vamasya palitasya hotuh (Rv. I, 164), addressed to the Visvedevas, is multiform. This day also is multiform [*3]. Thus the verse is fit for the day.

8. He recites the end of it, beginning with gaurir mimaya (Rv. I, 164, 41).

9. The hymn a no bhadrah kratavo yantu visvatah (Rv. I, 89), addressed to the Visvedevas, forms the Nividdhana, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial, and therefore proper.

10. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

11. The hymn vaisvanaraya dhishanam ritavridhe

[p. 199]

[paragraph continues] (Rv. III, 2) forms the beginning of the Agnimaruta. Dhishana, thought, is verily the end, this day also is the end. Thus it is fit for the day.

12. The hymn prayagyavo maruto bhragadrishtayah (Rv. V, 55), addressed to the Maruts, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also is one in which many receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day [*1].

13. He recites the verse gatavedase sunavama somam (Rv. I, 99, 1), addressed to Gatavedas, before the (next following) hymn. That verse addressed to Gatavedas is verily welfare, and leads to welfare. Thus (by reciting it) he fares well [*2].

14. The hymn imam stomam arhate gatavedase (Rv. I, 94), addressed to Gatavedas, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day, yea, it is fit for the day.

Footnotes

^197:1 After finishing the Nishkevalya of the noon-libation, he explains the vaisvadevasastra of the third libation.

^197:2 The norm of the Mahavrata is the Visvagit, and the norm of that, the Agnishtoma Ekaha. The verses to be used for the Vaisvadeva hymn are prescribed in those normal sacrifices, and are here adopted.

^197:3 Cf. Ait. Ar. I, 2, 1, 2.

^197:4 Nothing higher than the great can be wished for or obtained. Comm.

^198:1 All who perform the ceremony obtain Brahman. Cf.  section 12.

^198:2 The third wheel, in addition to the usual two wheels, forms the end of a carriage, as before the dhuh, Cf. I, 5, 2, 14. This day also is the end.

^198:3 Consisting of Vedic hymns and dances, &c. Comm.

^199:1 Cf.  section 4.

^199:2 Cf. I, 5, 2, 8.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 200]

  

SECOND ARANYAKA.

  

FIRST ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

WITH the second Aranyaka the Upanishad begins. It comprises the second and third Aranyakas, and may be said to consist of three divisions, or three Upanishads. Their general title is Bahvrika-upanishad, sometimes Mahaitareya-upanishad, while the Upanishad generally known as, Aitareya-upanishad comprises the 4th, 5th, and 6th adhyayas only of the second Aranyaka.

The character of the three component portions of the Upanishad can best be described in Sankara's own words (Ar. III, 1, I, Introd. p. 306): 'There are three classes of men who want to acquire knowledge. The highest consists of those who have turned away from the world, whose minds are fixed on one subject and collected, and who yearn to be free at once. For these a knowledge of Brahman is intended, as taught in the Ait. Ar. II, 4-6. The middle class are those who wish to become free gradually by attaining to the world of Hiranyagarbha. For them the knowledge and worship of Prana (breath and life) is intended, as explained in the Ait. Ar. II, 1-3. The lowest class consists of those who do not care either for immediate or gradual freedom, but who desire nothing but offspring, cattle, &c. For these the meditative worship of the Samhita is intended, as explained in the third Aranyaka. They cling too strongly to the letter of the sacred text to be able to surrender it for a knowledge either of Prana (life) or of Brahman.'

The connexion between the Upanishad or rather the three Upanishads and the first Aranyaka seems at first sight very slight. Still we soon perceive that it would be impossible to understand the first Upanishad, without a previous knowledge of the Mahavrata ceremony as described in the first Aranyaka.

On this point too there are some pertinent remarks in Sankara's commentary on the Aranyaka II, 1, 2. 'Our first duty,' he says, 'consists in performing sacrifices, such as are described in the first portion of the Veda,, the Samhitas, Brahmanas, and, to a certain extent, in the Aranyakas also. Afterwards arises a desire for knowledge, which cannot be satisfied except a man has first attained

[p. 201]

complete concentration of thought (ekagrata). In order to acquire that concentration, the performance of certain upasanas or meditations is enjoined, such as we find described in our Upanishad, viz. in Ar. II, I-V.'

This meditation or, as it is sometimes translated, worship is of two kinds, either brahmopasana or pratikopasana. Brahmopasana or meditation on Brahman consists in thinking of him as distinguished by certain qualities. Pratikopasana or meditation on symbols consists in looking upon certain worldly objects as if they were Brahman, in order thus to withdraw the mind from the too powerful influence of external objects.

These objects, thus lifted up into symbols of Brahman, are of two kinds, either connected with sacrifice or not. In our Upanishad we have to deal with the former class only, viz. with certain portions of the Mahavrata, as described in the first Aranyaka. In order that the mind may not be entirely absorbed by the sacrifice, it is lifted up during the performance from the consideration of these sacrificial objects to a meditation on higher objects, leading up at last to Brahman as prana or life.

This meditation is to be performed by the priests, and while they meditate they may meditate on a hymn or on a single word of it as meaning something else, such as the sun, the earth, or the sky, but not vice versa. And if in one Sakha, as in that of the Aitareyins, for instance, a certain hymn has been symbolically explained, the same explanation may be adopted by another Sakha also, such as that of the Kaushitakins. It is not necessary, however, that every part of the sacrifice should be accompanied by meditation, but it is left optional to the priest in what particular meditation he wishes to engage, nor is even the time of the sacrifice the only right time for him to engage in these meditations.

1. This is the path: this sacrifice, and this Brahman. This is the true [*1].

2. Let no man swerve from it, let no man transgress it.

[p. 202]

3. For the old (sages) did not transgress it, and those who did transgress, became lost.

4. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 101, 14): 'Three (classes of) people transgressed, others settled down round about the venerable (Agni, fire); the great (sun) stood in the midst of the worlds, the blowing (Vayu, air) entered the Harits (the dawns, or the ends of the earth).'

5. When he says: 'Three (classes of) people transgressed,' the three (classes of) people who transgressed are what we see here (on earth, born again) as birds, trees, herbs, and serpents [*1].

6. When he says: 'Others settled down round about the venerable,' he means those who now sit down to worship Agni (fire).

7. When he says: 'The great stood in the midst of the worlds,' the great one in the midst of the world is meant for this Aditya, the sun.

8. When he says: 'The blowing entered the Harits,' he means that Vayu, the air, the purifier, entered all the corners of the earth [*2].

Footnotes

^201:1 Comm. The path is twofold, consisting of works and knowledge. Works or sacrifices have been described in the Samhita, the Brahmana, and the first Aranyaka. Knowledge of Brahman forms the subject of the second and third Aranyakas. The true path is that of knowledge.

^202:1 Vangah is explained by vanagata vrikshah; avagadhah is explained by vrihiyavadya oshadhayah; irapadah is explained by urahpadah sarpah. Possibly they are all old ethnic names, like Vanga, Kera, &c. In Anandatirtha's commentary vayamsi are explained by Pisaka, Vanavagadhas by Rakshasa, and Irapadas by Asuras.

^202:2 Three classes of men go to Naraka (hell); the fourth class, full of faith and desirous of reaching the highest world, worships Agni, Vayu, and other gods. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. People say: 'Uktha, uktha,' hymns, hymns! (without knowing what uktha, hymn [*3], means.) The

[p. 203]

hymn is truly (to be considered as) the earth, for from it all whatsoever exists arises.

2. The object of its praise is Agni (fire), and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

3. The hymn is truly the sky, for the birds fly along the sky, and men drive following the sky. The object of its praise is Vayu (air), and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

4. The hymn is truly the heaven, for from its gift (rain) all whatsoever exists arises. The object of its praise is Aditya (the sun), and the eighty verses are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

5. So much with reference to the gods (mythological); now with reference to man (physiological).

6. The hymn is truly man. He is great, he is Pragapati. Let him think, I am the hymn.

7. The hymn is his mouth, as before in the case of the earth.

8. The object of its praise is speech, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

9. The hymn is the nostrils, as before in the case of the sky.

10. The object of its praise is breath, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

11. The slight bent (at the root) of the nose is, as it were, the place of the brilliant (Aditya, the sun).

[p. 204]

12. The hymn is the forehead, as before in the case of heaven. The object of its praise is the eye, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

13. The eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food with reference to the gods as well as with reference to man. For all these beings breathe and live by means of food indeed. By food (given in alms, &c.) he conquers this world, by food (given in sacrifice) he conquers the other. Therefore the eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food, with reference to the gods as well as with reference to man.

14. All this that is food, and all this that consumes food, is only the earth, for from the earth arises all whatever there is.

115. And all that goes hence (dies on earth), heaven consumes it all; and all that goes thence (returns from heaven to a new life) the earth consumes it all.

16. That earth is thus both food and consumer.

He also (the true worshipper who meditates on himself as being the uktha) is both consumer and consumed (subject and object [*1]). No one possesses that which he does not eat, or the things which do not eat him [*2].

Footnotes

^202:3 The Comm. explains uktha as that from whence the favour of the gods arises, uttishthaty anena devataprasada iti vyutpatteh. [p. 203] The object is now to show that the uktha or hymn used at the Mahavrata ceremony has a deeper meaning than it seems to have, and that its highest aim is Brahman; not, however, the highest Brahman, but Brahman considered as life (prana).

^204:1 As a master who lives by his servants, while his servants live by him. Comm.

^204:2 I have translated these paragraphs, as much as possible, according to the commentator. I doubt whether, either in the original or in the interpretation of the commentator, they yield any very definite sense. They are vague speculations, vague, at least, to us, though intended by the Brahmans to give a deeper meaning to certain ceremonial observances connected with the Mahavrata. The uktha, or hymn, which is to be meditated on, as connected with the sacrifice, is part of the Mahavrata, an important ceremony, to be [p. 205] performed on the last day but one (the twenty-fourth) of the Gavamayana sacrifice. That sacrifice lasts a whole year, and its performance has been fully described in the Brahmanas and Aranyakas. But while the ordinary performer of the Mahavrata has simply to recite the uktha or nishkevalya-sastra, consisting of eighty verses (trika) in the Gayatri, Brihati, and Ushnih metres, the more advanced worshipper (or priest) is to know that this uktha has a deeper meaning, and is to meditate on it as being the earth, sky, heaven, also as the human body, mouth, nostrils, and forehead. The worshipper is in fact to identify himself by meditation with the uktha in all its senses, and thus to become the universal spirit or Hiranyagarbha. By this process he becomes the consumer and consumed, the subject and object, of everything, while another sacrificer, not knowing this, remains in his limited individual sphere, or, as the text expresses it, does not possess what he cannot eat (perceive), or what cannot eat him (perceive him). The last sentence is explained differently by the commentator, but in connexion with the whole passage it seems to me to become more intelligible, if interpreted as I have proposed to interpret it.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. Next follows the origin of seed. The seed of Pragapati are the Devas (gods). The seed of the Devas is rain. The seed of rain are herbs. The seed of herbs is food. The seed of food is seed. The seed of seed are creatures. The seed of creatures is the heart. The seed of the heart is the mind. The seed of the mind is speech (Veda). The seed of speech is action (sacrifice). The action done (in a former state) is this man, the abode of Brahman.

2. He (man) consists of food (ira), and because he consists of food (iramaya), he consists of gold (hiranmaya [*1]). He who knows this becomes golden in the other world, and is seen as golden (as the sun) for the benefit of all beings.

Footnotes

^205:1 Play on words. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 206]

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. Brahman (in the shape of prana, breath) entered into that man by the tips of his feet, and because Brahman entered (prapadyata) into that man by the tips of his feet, therefore people call them the tips of the feet (prapada), but hoofs and claws in other animals.

2. Then Brahman crept up higher, and therefore they were (called) [*1] the thighs (uru).

3. Then he said: 'Grasp wide,' and that was (called) the belly (udara).

4. Then he said: 'Make room for me,' and that was (called) the chest (uras).

5. The Sarkarakshyas meditate on the belly as Brahman, the Arunis on the heart [*2]. Both (these places) are Brahman indeed [*3].

6. But Brahman crept upwards and came to the head, and because he came to the head, therefore the head is called head [*4].

7. Then these delights alighted in the head, sight, hearing, mind, speech, breath.

8. Delights alight on him who thus knows, why the head is called head.

9. These (five delights or senses) strove together, saying: 'I am the uktha (hymn), I am the uktha [*5].' 'Well,' they said, 'let us all go out from

[p. 207]

this body; then on whose departure this body shall fall, he shall be the uktha among us [*1].'

10. Speech went out, yet the body without speaking remained, eating and drinking.

Sight went out, yet the body without seeing remained, eating and drinking.

Hearing went out, yet the body without hearing remained, eating and drinking.

Mind went out, yet the body, as if blinking, remained, eating and drinking.

Breath went out, then when breath was gone out, the body fell.

11. It was decayed, and because people said, it decayed, therefore it was (called) body (sarira). That is the reason of its name.

12. If a man knows this, then the evil enemy who hates him decays, or the evil enemy who hates him is defeated.

13. They strove again, saying: 'I am the uktha, I am the uktha.' 'Well,' they said, 'let us enter that body again; then on whose entrance this body shall rise again, he shall be the uktha among us.'

14. Speech entered, but the body lay still. Sight entered, but the body lay still. Hearing entered, but the body lay still. Mind entered, but the body lay still. Breath entered, and when breath had entered, the body rose, and it became the uktha.

15. Therefore breath alone is the uktha.

16. Let people know that breath is the uktha indeed.

17. The Devas (the other senses) said to breath: 'Thou art the uktha, thou art all this, we are thine, thou art ours.'

[p. 208]

18. This has also been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 92, 32): 'Thou art ours, we are thine.'

Footnotes

^206:1 These are all plays on words. Comm.

^206:2 This does not appear to be the case either in the Kh. Up. V, 15; 17, or in the Satapatha-brahmana X, 6, 1.

^206:3 The pluti in tazi is explained as sastriyaprasiddhyartha.

^206:4 All puns, as if we were to say, because he hied up to the head, therefore the head was called head.

^206:5 Each wished to be identified with the uktha, as it was said before that the human body, mouth, nostrils, forehead were to be identified with the uktha. Cf. Kaush. Up. III, 3.

^207:1 Cf. Kh. Up. V, 1; Brih. Up. VI, 1; Kaush. Up. II, 12-14; III, 2; Prasna Up. II, 1.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

Then the Devas carried him (the breath) forth, and being carried forth, he was stretched out, and when people said, 'He was stretched out,' then it was in the morning; when they said, 'He is gone to rest,' then it was in the evening. Day, therefore, is the breathing up, night the breathing down [*1].

2. Speech is Agni, sight that Aditya (sun), mind the moon, hearing the Dis (quarters): this is the prahitam samyoga [*2], the union of the deities as sent forth. These deities (Agni, &c.) are thus in the body, but their (phenomenal) appearance yonder is among the deities--this was intended.

3. And Hiranyadat Vaida also, who knew this (and who by his knowledge had become Hiranyagarbha or the universal spirit), said: 'Whatever they do not give to me, they do not possess themselves.' I know the prahitam samyoga, the union of the deities, as entered into the body [*3]. This is it.

[p. 209]

4. To him who knows this all creatures, without being constrained, offer gifts.

5. That breath is (to be called) sattya (the true), for sat is breath, ti is food, yam is the sun [*1]. This is threefold, and threefold the eye also may be called, it being white, dark, and the pupil. He who knows why true is true (why sattya is sattya), even if he should speak falsely, yet what he says is true.

Footnotes

^208:1 All these are plays on words, pratar being derived from pratayi, sayam from samagat. The real object, however, is to show that breath, which is the uktha, which is the worshipper, is endowed with certain qualities, viz. time, speech, &c.

^208:2 The meaning is, that the four deities, Agni, Aditya, Moon, and the Dis proceed from their own places to dwell together in the body of man, and that this is called the prahitam samyogah. Prahit is explained as prahita, placed, sent. It is probably formed from hi, not from dha. Prahitoh samyoganam is the name of a Saman, Ind. Stud. III, 225. As Devas or gods they appear each in its own place. The whole passage is very obscure.

^208:3 All this is extremely obscure, possibly incorrect. For yam, unless it refers to some other word, we expect yan. For dadyuh one expects dadyat. What is intended is that Hiranyadat had [p. 209] through meditation acquired identity with the universal spirit, and that therefore he might say that whatever was not surrendered to him did not really belong to anybody. On Hiranyadat, see Ait. Brahm. III, 6.

^209:1 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 3, 5.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. Speech is his (the breath's) rope, the names the knots [*2]. Thus by his speech as by a rope, and by his names as by knots, all this is bound. For all this are names indeed, and with speech he calls everything.

2. People carry him who knows this, as if they were bound by a rope.

3. Of the body of the breath thus meditated on, the Ushnih verse forms the hairs, the Gayatri the skin, the Trishtubh the flesh, the Anushtubh the muscles, the Gagati the bone, the Pankti the marrow, the Brihati the breath [*3] (prana). He is covered with the verses (khandas, metres). Because he is thus covered with verses, therefore they call them khandas (coverings, metres).

4. If a man knows the reason why khandas are called khandas, the verses cover him in whatever place he likes against any evil deed.

[p. 210]

5. This is said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 164, 13):--

6. 'I saw (the breath) as a guardian, never tiring, coming and going on his ways (the arteries). That breath (in the body, being identified with the sun among the Devas), illuminating the principal and intermediate quarters of the sky, is returning constantly in the midst of the worlds.'

He says: 'I saw a guardian,' because he, the breath, is a guardian, for he guards everything.

7. He says: 'Never tiring,' because the breath never rests.

8. He says: 'Coming and going on his ways,' because the breath comes and goes on his ways.

9. He says: 'Illuminating the principal and intermediate,' because he illuminates these only, the principal and intermediate quarters of the sky.

10. He says. 'He is returning constantly in the midst of the worlds,' because he returns indeed constantly in the midst of the worlds.

11. And then, there is another verse (Rv. I, 55, 81): 'They are covered like caves by those who make them,'

12. For all this is covered indeed by breath.

13. This ether is supported by breath as Brihati, and as this ether is supported by breath as Brihati, so one should know that all things, not excepting ants, are supported by breath as Brihati.

Footnotes

^209:2 The rope is supposed to be the chief rope to which various smaller ropes are attached for fastening animals.

^209:3 Here conceived as the air breathed, not as the deity. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. Next follow the powers of that Person [*1].

2. By his speech earth and fire were created.

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] Herbs are produced on the earth, and Agni (fire) makes them ripe and sweet. 'Take this, take this,' thus saying do earth and fire serve their parent, speech.

3. As far as the earth reaches, as far as fire reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the earth and fire does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows this power of speech.

4. By breath (in the nose) the sky and the air were created. People follow the sky, and hear along the sky, while the air carries along pure scent. Thus do sky and air serve their parent, the breath.

As far as the sky reaches, as far as the air reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the sky and the air does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows this power of breath.

5. By his eye heaven and the sun were created. Heaven gives him rain and food, while the sun causes his light to shine. Thus do the heaven and the sun serve their parent, the eye.

As far as heaven reaches and as far as the sun reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of heaven and the sun does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the eye.

6. By his ear the quarters and the moon were created. From all the quarters they come to him, and from all the quarters he hears, while the moon produces for him the bright and the dark halves for the sake of sacrificial work. Thus do the quarters and the moon serve their parent, the ear.

As far as the quarters reach and as far as the

[p. 212]

moon reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the quarters and the moon does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the ear.

7. By his mind the water and Varuna were created. Water yields to him faith (being used for sacred acts), Varuna keeps his offspring within the law. Thus do water and Varuna serve their parent, the mind.

As far as water reaches and as far as Varuna reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of water and Varuna does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the mind.

Footnotes

^210:1 The purusha, as described before in the second chapter, is the Pragapati or universal spirit with whom the worshipper is to identify himself by meditation. The manifestations of his power consist in creating the earth, fire, the sky, the air, heaven, the sun.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA [*1]

1. Was it water really? Was it water? Yes, all this was water indeed. This (water) was the root (cause), that (the world) was the shoot (effect). He (the person) is the father, they (earth, fire, &c.) are the sons. Whatever there is belonging to the son, belongs to the father; whatever there is belonging to the father, belongs to the son. This was intended [*2].

2. Mahidasa Aitareya, who knew this, said: 'I know myself (reaching) as far as the gods, and I know the gods (reaching) as far as me. For these

[p. 213]

gods receive their gifts from hence, and are supported from hence.'

3. This is the mountain [*1], viz. eye, ear, mind, speech, and breath. They call it the mountain of Brahman.

4. He who knows this, throws down the evil enemy who hates him; the evil enemy who hates him is defeated.

5. He (the Prana, identified with Brahman) is the life, the breath; he is being (while the givatman remains), and not-being (when the givatman departs).

6. The Devas (speech, &c.) worshipped him (prana) as Bhuti or being, and thus they became great beings. And therefore even now a man who sleeps, breathes like bhurbhuh.

7. The Asuras worshipped him as Abhuti or not being, and thus they were defeated.

8. He who knows this, becomes great by himself, while the evil enemy who hates him, is defeated.

9. He (the breath) is death (when he departs), and immortality (while he abides).

10. And this has been said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 164, 38):--

11. 'Downwards and upwards he (the wind of the breath) goes, held by food;'--for this up-breathing, being held back by the down-breathing, does not move forward (and leave the body altogether).

12. 'The immortal dwells with the mortal;'--for through him (the breath) all this dwells together, the bodies being clearly mortal, but this being (the breath), being immortal.

[p. 214]

13. 'These two (body and breath) go for ever in different directions (the breath moving the senses of the body, the body supporting the senses of the breath: the former going upwards to another world, the body dying and remaining on earth). They increase the one (the body), but they do not increase the other,' i. e. they increase these bodies (by food), but this being (breath) is immortal.

14. He who knows this becomes immortal in that world (having become united with Hiranyagarbha), and is seen as immortal (in the sun) by all beings, yea, by all beings.

Footnotes

^212:1 Having described how Prana, the breath, and his companions or servants created the world, he now discusses the question of the material cause of the world out of which it was created. Water, which is said to be the material of the world, is explained by the commentator to mean here the five elements.

^212:2 Cause and effect are not entirely separated, therefore water, as the elementary cause, and earth, fire, &c., as its effect, are one; likewise the worshipper, as the father, and the earth, fire, &c. as his sons, as described above. Mula and tula, root and shoot, are evidently chosen for the sake of the rhyme, to signify cause and effect.

^213:1 Prana is called the girih, because it is swallowed or hidden by the other senses (giranat). Again a mere play of words, intended to show that Brahman under the form of Prana, or life, is to be meditated on.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND ADHYAYA [*1].

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. He (the sun), who shines, honoured this world (the body of the worshipper, by entering into it), in the form of man [*2] (the worshipper who meditates on breath). For he who shines (the sun) is (the same as) the breath. He honoured this (body of the worshipper) during a hundred years, therefore there are a hundred years in the life of a man. Because he honoured him during a hundred years, therefore there are (the poets of the first Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Satarkin, (having honour for a

[p. 215]

hundred years.) Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Satarkin poets [*1].

2. He (breath) placed himself in the midst of all whatsoever exists. Because he placed himself in the midst of all whatsoever exists, therefore there are (the poets of the second to the ninth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Madhyamas. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Madhyama poets.

3. He as up-breathing is the swallower (gritsa), as down-breathing he is delight (mada). Because as up-breathing he is swallower (gritsa) and as down-breathing delight (mada), therefore there is (the poet of the second Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Gritsamada. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Gritsamada.

4. Of him. (breath) all this whatsoever was a friend. Because of him all (visvam) this whatsoever was a friend (mitram), therefore there is (the poet of the third Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Visvamitra. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Visvamitra.

5. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him (the breath): 'He is to be loved by all of us.' Because the Devas said of him, that he was to be loved (vama) by all of them, therefore there is (the poet of the fourth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vamadeva. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Vamadeva.

6. He (breath) guarded all this whatsoever from evil. Because he guarded (atrayata) all this whatsoever

[p. 216]

from evil, therefore there are (the poets of the fifth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Atrayah. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Atrayah.

Footnotes

^214:1 In the first adhyaya various forms of meditating on Uktha, conceived as Prana (life), have been declared. In the second some other forms of meditation, all extremely fanciful, are added. They are of interest, however, as showing the existence of the hymns of the Rig-veda, divided and arranged as we now possess them, at the time when this Aranyaka was composed.

^214:2 The identity of the sun and of breath as living in man has been established before. It is the same power in both, conceived either adhidaivatam (mythological) or adhyatmam (physiological).

^215:1 The real ground for the name is that the poets of the first Mandala composed on an average each about a hundred Rik, verses.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. He (breath) is likewise a Bibhradvaga (bringer of offspring). Offspring is vaga, and he (breath) supports offspring. Because he supports it, therefore there is (the poet of the sixth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Bharadvaga. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Bharadvaga.

2. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him: 'He it is who chiefly causes us to dwell on earth.' Because the Devas said of him, that he chiefly caused them to dwell on earth, therefore there is (the poet of the seventh Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vasishtha. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Vasishtha [*1].

3. He (breath) went forth towards [*2] all this whatsoever. Because he went forth toward all this whatsoever, therefore there are (the poets of the eighth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pragathas. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Pragathas.

4. He (breath) purified all this whatsoever. Because he purified all this whatsoever, therefore there

[p. 217]

are (the hymns and also the poets [*1] of the ninth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pavamanis. Therefore people called him who is really Prana (breath), the Pavamanis.

5. He (breath) said: 'Let me be everything whatsoever, small (kshudra) and great (mahat), and this became the Kshudrasuktas and Mahasuktas.' Therefore there were (the hymns and also the poets of the tenth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Kshudrasuktas (and Mahasuktas). Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Kshudrasuktas (and Mahasuktas).

6. He (breath) said once: 'You have said what is well said (su-ukta) indeed. This became a Sukta (hymn).' Therefore there was the Sukta. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Sukta [*2].

7. He (breath) is a Rik (verse), for he did honour [*3] to all beings (by entering into them). Because he did honour to all beings, therefore there was the Rik verse. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Rik.

8. He (breath) is an Ardharka (half-verse), for he did honour to all places (ardha) [*4]. Because he did honour to all places, therefore there was the Ardharka. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Ardharka.

[p. 218]

9. He (breath) is a Pada (word) [*1], for he got into all these beings. Because he got (padi) into all these beings, therefore there was the Pada (word). Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Pada.

10. He (breath) is an Akshara (syllable), for he pours out (ksharati) gifts to all these beings, and without him no one can pour out (atiksharati) gifts. Therefore there was the Akshara (syllable). Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Akshara [*2].

11. Thus all these Rik verses, all Vedas, all sounds [*3] are one word, viz. Prana (breath). Let him know that Prana is all Rik verses.

Footnotes

^216:1 I translate in accordance with the commentator, and probably with the intention of the author. The same etymology is repeated in the commentary on II, 2, 4, 2. It would be more natural to take vasishtha in the sense of the richest.

^216:2 This is the interpretation of the commentator, and the preposition abhi seems to show that the author too took that view of the etymology of pragatha.

^217:1 It seems, indeed, as if in the technical language of the Brahmans, the poets of the ninth Mandala were sometimes called Pavamanis, and the hymns of the tenth Mandala Kshudrasuktas and Mahasuktas (masc.) Cf. Arsheya-brahmana, ed. Burnell, p. 42.

^217:2 The poet also is called Sukta, taddrashtapi suktanamako 'bhut. Comm.

^217:3 I translate according to the commentator.

^217:4 Ardha means both half and place.

^218:1 It may also be intended for pada, foot of a verse.

^218:2 The Prana (breath) is to be meditated on as all hymns, all poets, all words, &c. Comm.

^218:3 All aspirated sonant consonants. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. While Visvamitra was going to repeat the hymns of this day (the mahavrata), Indra sat down near him [*4]. Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses [*5]

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

2. Indra said to him: 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. Rishi, repeat a second hymn [*1].' Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

3. Indra said to him: 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. Rishi, repeat a third hymn.' Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

4. Indra said to him: 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. I grant thee a boon.' Visvamitra said: 'May I know thee.' Indra said: 'I am Prana (breath), O Rishi, thou art Prana, all things are Prana. For it is Prana who shines as the sun, and I here pervade all regions under that form. This food of mine (the hymn) is my friend and my support (dakshina). This is the food prepared by Visvamitra. I am verily he who shines (the sun).'

Footnotes

^218:4 Upanishasasada, instead of upanishasada. The mistake is probably due to a correction, sa for sha; the commentator, however, considers it as a Vedic license. Skaro 'dhikas khandasah.

^218:5 These are meant for the Nishkevalya hymn recited at the noon-libation of the Mahavrata. That hymn consists of ten parts, corresponding, as we saw, to ten parts of a bird, viz. its body, neck, head, root of wings, right wing, left wing, tail, belly, chest, and thighs. The verses corresponding to these ten parts, beginning with tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham, are given in the first Aranyaka, and more fully in the fifth Aranyaka by Saunaka. [p. 219] Though they consist of many metres, yet, when one counts the syllables, they give a thousand Brihati verses, each consisting of thirty-six syllables.

^219:1 Although the Nishkevalya is but one hymn, consisting of eighty trikas, yet as these eighty trikas were represented as three kinds of food (see Ait. Ar. II, 1, 2, 2-4), the hymn is represented as three hymns, first as eighty Gayatri trikas, then as eighty Brihati trikas, lastly as eighty Ushnih trikas.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 220]

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. This then becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. Its consonants [*1] form its body, its voice [*2] (vowels) the Soul [*3], its sibilants [*4] the air of the breath.

2. He who knew this became Vasishtha, he took this name from thence [*5].

3. Indra verily declared this to Visvamitra, and Indra verily declared this to Bharadvaga. Therefore Indra is invoked by him as a friend [*6].

4. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses [*7], and of that hymn perfect with a thousand Brihad verses, there are 36,000 syllables [*8]. So many are also the thousands of days of a hundred years (36,000). With the consonants they fill the nights, with the vowels the days.

5. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. He who knows this, after this thousand of Brihatis thus accomplished, becomes full of knowledge, full of the gods, full of Brahman, full of the immortal, and then goes also to the gods.

6. What I am (the worshipper), that is he (sun); what he is, that am I.

[p. 221]

7. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 115, 1): 'The sun is the self of all that moves and rests.'

8. Let him look to that, let him look to that!

Footnotes

^220:1 Vyanganani, explained by kadini.

^220:2 Ghosha, explained by aspirated sonant consonants.

^220:3 Atma, explained by madhyasariram.

^220:4 Sashasahah. Comm.

^220:5 He became Prana, and because Prana causes all to dwell, or covers all (vasayati), therefore the Rishi was called Vasishtha. Comm. Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2, 2, 2.

^220:6 At the Subrahmanya ceremony in the Soma sacrifices, the invocations are, Indra a gakkha, hariva a gakkha.

^220:7 Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 3, 8, 8.

^220:8 Each Brihati has thirty-six syllables.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD ADHYAYA [*1].

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. He who knows himself as the fivefold hymn (uktha), the emblem of Prana (breath), from whence all this springs [*2], he is clever. These five are the earth, air, ether, water, and fire (gyotis). This is the self, the fivefold uktha. For from him all this springs, and into him it enters again (at the dissolution of the world). He who knows this, becomes the refuge of his friends.

2. And to him who knows the food (object) and the feeder (subject) in that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is never wanting. Water and earth are food, for all food consists of these two. Fire and air are the feeder, for by means of them [*3] man eats all food. Ether is the bowl, for all this is poured into the ether. He who knows this, becomes the bowl or support of his friends.

3. To him who knows the food and the feeder in that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is never wanting. Herbs and trees are food, animals the feeder, for animals eat herbs and trees.

4. Of them again those who have teeth above

[p. 222]

and below, shaped after the likeness of man, are feeders, the other animals are food. Therefore these overcome the other animals, for the eater is over the food.

5. He who knows this is over his friends.

Footnotes

^221:1 In this adhyaya some more qualities are explained belonging to the Mahavrata ceremonial and the hymns employed at it, which can be meditated on as referring to Prana, life.

^221:2 Because the world is the result or reward for performing a meditation on the uktha. Comm.

^221:3 The digestive fire is lighted by the air of the breath. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA [*1].

1. He who knows the gradual development of the self in him (the man conceived as the uktha), obtains himself more development.

2. There are herbs and trees and all that is animated, and he knows the self gradually developing in them. For in herbs and trees sap only is seen [*2], but thought (kitta) in animated beings.

Among animated beings again the self develops gradually, for in some sap (blood) is seen (as well as thought), but in others thought is not seen.

4. And in man again the self develops gradually, for he is most endowed with knowledge. He says what he has known, he sees what he has known [*3]. He knows what is to happen to-morrow, he knows heaven and hell. By means of the mortal he desires the immortal--thus is he endowed.

5. With regard to the other animals hunger and thirst only are a kind of understanding. But they do not say what they have known, nor do they see

[p. 223]

what they have known. They do not know what is to happen to-morrow, nor heaven and hell. They go so far and no further, for they are born according to their knowledge (in a former life).

Footnotes

^222:1 This treats of the gradual development of life in man, particularly of the development of a thinking soul (kaitanya).

^222:2 In stones there is not even sap, but only being, satta. Comm.

^222:3 What he has known yesterday he remembers, and is able to say before men, I know this. And when he has known a thing he remembers it, and goes to the same place to see it again. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sea, rising beyond the whole world [*1]. Whatever he reaches, he wishes to go beyond [*2]. If he reaches the sky, he wishes to go beyond.

2. If he should reach that (heavenly) world, he would wish to go beyond.

3. That man is fivefold. The heat in him is fire; the apertures (of the senses) are ether; blood, mucus, and seed are water; the body is earth; breath is air.

4. That air is fivefold, viz. up-breathing, down-breathing, back-breathing, out-breathing, on-breathing. The other powers (devatas), viz. sight, hearing, mind, and speech, are comprised under up-breathing and down-breathing. For when breath departs, they also depart with it.

5. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sacrifice, which is a succession now of speech and now of thought. That sacrifice is fivefold, viz. the Agnihotra, the new and full moon sacrifices, the four-monthly sacrifices, the animal sacrifice, the Soma sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice is the most perfect of sacrifices, for in it these five kinds of ceremonies are seen: the first which precedes the libations (the Diksha, &c.), then three libations, and what follows (the Avabhritha, &c.) is the fifth.

Footnotes

^223:1 Bhuloka. Comm.

^223:2 Should it not be aty enan manyate?

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 224]

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. He who knows one sacrifice above another, one day above another, one deity above the others, he is clever. Now this great uktha (the nishkevalya-sastra) is the sacrifice above another, the day above another, the deity above others [*1].

2. This uktha is fivefold. With regard to its being performed as a Stoma (chorus), it is Trivrit, Pankadasa, Saptadasa, Ekavimsa, and Pankavimsa. With regard to its being performed as a Saman (song), it is Gayatra, Rathantara, Brihat, Bhadra, and Ragana. With regard to metre, it is Gayatri, Ushnih, Brihati, Trishtubh, and Dvipada. And the explanation (given before in the Aranyaka) is that it is the head, the right wing, the left wing, the tail, and the body of the bird [*2].

 in each hymn. This, is the first round. He then sings the three middle verses in each hymn. This is the second round. He lastly sings the last three verses in each hymn. This is the third round. This song is called Udyati.

The Pankadasa stoma is formed out of one Sukta only, consisting of three verses. In the first round he sings the first verse [p. 225] three times, the second and third once. In the second round he sings the middle verse three times, in the third round he sings the last verse three times. This song is called Vishtuti.

The Saptadasa stoma is formed in the same manner, only that in the first round he sings the first verse three times, in the second the middle verse three times, in the third round the middle and last verses three times. This song is called Dasasapta.

The Ekavimsa stoma is formed in the same manner, only that in the first round he sings the last verse once, in the second the first verse once, in the third the middle verse once, while the other verses are each repeated three times. This song is called Saptasaptini.

The Pankavimsa stoma is formed in the same manner, only that in the first round he sings the first verse three times, the second four times, the last once; in the second round the first once, the second three times, the third four times; in the third round the first five times, the second once, the last three times; or he sings in the third round the first verse four times, the second twice, the last three times.

Sayana in his commentary on the Ait. Ar. takes the Trivrit stoma to be formed out of three hymns, each consisting of three verses, while he says that the other stomas are formed out of one hymn only. B. and R., sv. trivrit, state that this stoma consists of verses 1, 4, 7; 2, 5, 8; and 3, 6, 9 of the Rig-veda hymn IX, 11, but, according to Sayana, the stoma consists (1) of the first verses of the three Suktas, upasmai gayata, davidyutatya, and pavamanasya at the beginning of the Sama-veda-Uttararkika, (2) of the second, (3) Of the third verses of the same three hymns. Mahidhara (Yv. X, 9) takes the same view, though the MSS. seem to have left out the description of the second paryaya, while Sayana in his commentary to the Tandya-brahmana seems to support the opinion of B. and R. There is an omission, however, in the printed text of the commentary, which makes it difficult to see the exact meaning of Sayana.

The Pankadasa stoma is well described by Sayana, Tandya Br. II, 4. Taking the Sukta agna a yahi (Uttararkika I, 1, 4 = Rv. VI, 16, 10-12), he shows the stoma to consist of (1) verse 1 * 3, 2, 3 (2) verse 1, 2 * 3, 3; (3) verse 1, 2, 3 * 3.

The five Samans are explained by the commentator. The [p. 226] Gayatra is formed out of the Rik (III, 62, 10) tat savitur varenyam. The Rathantara is formed out of the Rik (VII, 32, 22) abhi tva sura nonuma. The Brihat is formed out of the Rik (VI, 46, 1) tvam id dhi havamahe. The Bhadra is formed out of the Rik (X, 57, 1) ima nu kam. The Ragana is formed out of the Rik (VII, 27, 1) indram naro nemadhita.

The metres require no explanation.

In identifying certain portions of the Nishkevalya hymn with a bird, the head of the bird corresponds to the hymns indram id gathinah, &c.; the right wing to the hymns abhi tva sura, &c.; the left wing to the hymns tvam id dhi, &c.; the tail to the hymns ima nu kam, &c.; the body to the hymns tad id asa, &c. All this was explained in the first Aranyaka.

[p. 225]

3. He performs the Prastava in five ways, he performs the Udgitha in five ways, he performs the

[p. 226]

[paragraph continues] Pratihara in five ways, he performs the Upadrava in five ways, he performs the Nidhana in five ways [*1]. All this together forms one thousand Stobhas, or musical syllables [*2].

4. Thus also are the Rik verses, contained in the Nishkevalya, recited (by the Hotri) in five orders. What precedes the eighty trikas, that is one order, then follow the three sets of eighty trikas each, and what comes after is the fifth order [*3].

[p. 227]

5. This (the hymns of this Sastra) as a whole (if properly counted with the Stobha syllables) comes to one thousand (of Brihati verses). That (thousand) is the whole, and ten, ten is called the whole. For number is such (measured by ten). Ten tens are a hundred, ten hundreds are a thousand, and that is the whole. These are the three metres (the tens, pervading everything). And this food also (the three sets of hymns being represented as food) is threefold, eating, drinking, and chewing. He obtains that food by those (three numbers, ten, hundred, and thousand, or by the three sets of eighty trikas).

Footnotes

^224:1 The uktha is to be conceived as prana, breath or life, and this prana was shown to be above the other powers (devatas), speech, hearing, seeing, mind. The uktha belongs to the Mahavrata day, and that is the most important day of the Soma sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice, lastly, is above all other sacrifices.

^224:2 All these are technicalities connected with the singing and reciting of the uktha. The commentator says: The stoma is a collection of single Rik verses occurring in the trikas which have to be sung. The Trivrit stoma, as explained in the Sama-brahmana, is as follows: There are three Suktas, each consisting of three verses, the first being upasmai gayata, S. V. Uttararkika I, 1, 1 = Rv. IX, 11. The Udgatri first sings the first three verses [*a]^224:a Hinkri with dative is explained as gai with accusative.

^226:1 The Samagas sing the Ragana at the Mahavrata, and in that Saman there are, as usual, five parts, the Prastava, Udgitha, pratihara, Upadrava, and Nidhana. The Prastotri, when singing the Prastava portions, sings them five times. The Udgatri and Pratihartri sing their portions, the Udgitha and Pratihara, five times. The Udgatri again sings the Upadrava five times. And all the Udgatris together sing the Nidhana five times.

^226:2 The Stobha syllables are syllables without any meaning, added when verses have to be sung, in order to have a support for the music. See Kh. Up. I, 13. In singing the five Samans, each five times, one thousand of such Stobha syllables are required.

^226:3 There are in the Nishkevalya hymn, which the Hotri has to recite, three sets of eighty trikas each. The first, consisting of Gayatris, begins with  indro ya ogasa. The second, consisting of Brihatis, begins with ya kid anyad. The third, consisting of Ushnihs, begins with ya indra somapatama. These three sets form the food of the bird, as the emblem of the sastra. The hymns [p. 227] which precede these, form the body, head, and wings of the bird. This is one order. Then follow the three sets of eighty trikas each; and lastly, the fifth order, consisting of the hymns which form the belly and the legs of the bird.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses.

2. Some teachers (belonging to a different Sakha) recognise a thousand of different metres (not of Brihatis only). They say: 'Is another thousand (a thousand of other verses) good? Let us say it is good.'

3. Some say, a thousand of Trishtubh verses, others a thousand of Gagati verses, others a thousand of Anushtubh verses.

4. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 124, 9):--

5. 'Poets through their understanding discovered Indra dancing an Anushtubh.' This is meant to say: They discovered (and meditated) in speech (called Anushtubh)--at that time (when they worshipped

[p. 228]

the uktha)--the Prana (breath) connected with Indra.

6. He (who takes the recited verses as Anushtubhs) is able to become celebrated and of good report.

7. No! he says; rather is such a man liable to die before his time. For that self (consisting of Anushtubhs) is incomplete. For if a man confines himself to speech, not to breath, then driven by his mind, he does not succeed with speech [*1].

8. Let him work towards the Brihati, for the Brihati (breath) is the complete self.

9. That self (givatman) is surrounded on all sides by members. And as that self is on all sides surrounded by members, the Brihati also is on all sides surrounded by metres [*2].

10. For the self (in the heart) is the middle of these members, and the Brihati is the middle of the metres.

11. 'He is able to become celebrated and of good

[p. 229]

report, but (the other) able to die before his time,' thus he said. For the Brihati is the complete self, therefore let him work towards the Brihati (let him reckon the sastra recitation as a thousand Brihatis).

Footnotes

^228:1 This passage is obscure, and probably corrupt. I have followed the commentator as much as possible. He says: 'If the Hotri priest proceeds with reciting the sastra, looking to the Anushtubh, which is speech, and not to the thousand of Brihatis which are breath, then, neglecting the Brihati (breath), and driven by his mind to the Anushtubh (speech), he does not by his speech obtain that sastra. For in speech without breath the Hotri cannot, through the mere wish of the mind, say the sastra, the activity of all the senses being dependent on breath.' The commentator therefore takes vagabhi for vakam abhi, or for some old locative case formed by abhi. He also would seem to have read prane na. One might attempt another construction, though it is very doubtful. One might translate, 'For that self, which is speech, is incomplete, because he understands if driven to the mind by breath, not (if driven) by speech.'

^228:2 Either in the sastra, or in the list of metres, there being some that have more, others that have less syllables.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. In this thousand of Brihatis there are one thousand one hundred and twenty-five Anushtubhs. For the smaller is contained in the larger.

2. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 76, 12):--

3. 'A speech of eight feet;'--because there are eight feet of four syllables each in the Anushtubh.

4. 'Of nine corners;'--because the Brihati becomes nine-cornered (having nine feet of four syllables each).

5. 'Touching the truth;'--because speech (Anushtubh) is truth, touched by the verse (Brihati) [*1].

6. 'He (the Hotri) makes the body out of Indra;--'for out of this thousand of Brihati verses turned into Anushtubhs, and therefore out of Prana as connected with Indra [*2], and out of the Brihati (which is Prana), he makes speech, that is Anushtubh, as a body [*3].

7. This Mahaduktha is the highest development

[p. 230]

of speech, and it is fivefold, viz. measured, not measured, music, true, and untrue.

8. A Rik verse, a gatha [*1], a kumbya [*2] are measured (metrical). A Yagus line, an invocation, and general remarks [*3], these are not measured (they are in prose). A Saman, or any portion (parvan) of it, is music. Om is true, Na is untrue.

9. What is true (Om) is the flower and fruit of speech. He is able to become celebrated and of good report, for he speaks the true (Om), the flower and fruit of speech.

10. Now the untrue is the root [*4] of speech, and as a tree whose root is exposed dries up and perishes, thus a man who says what is untrue exposes his root, dries up and perishes. Therefore one should not say what is untrue, but guard oneself from it.

11. That syllable Om (yes) goes forward (to the first cause of the world) and is empty. Therefore if a man says Om (yes) to everything, then that (which he gives away) is wanting to him here [*5]. If he says Om (yes) to everything, then he would empty himself, and would not be capable of any enjoyments.

12. That syllable Na (no) is full for oneself [*6]. If a man says No to everything, then his reputation

[p. 231]

would become evil, and that would ruin him even here.

13. Therefore let a man give at the proper time only, not at the wrong time. Thus he unites the true and the untrue, and from the union of those two he grows, and becomes greater and greater.

14. He who knows this speech of which this (the mahaduktha) is a development, he is clever. A is the whole of speech, and manifested through different kinds of contact (mutes) and of wind (sibilants), it becomes manifold and different.

15. Speech if uttered in a whisper is breath, if spoken aloud, it is body. Therefore (if whispered) it is almost hidden, for what is incorporeal is almost hidden, and breath is incorporeal. But if spoken aloud, it is body, and therefore it is perceptible, for body is perceptible.

Footnotes

^229:1 Vak, speech, taking the form of Anushtubh, and being joined with the Rik, or the Brihati, touches the true, i. e. Prana, breath, which is to be meditated on under the form of the Brihati. Comm.

^229:2 Cf. Ait. Ar. II, 2, 3, 4.

^229:3 Because the Anushtubh is made out of the Brihati, the Brihati being breath, therefore the Anushtubh is called its body.

^230:1 A gatha is likewise in verse, for instance, pratah pratar anritam te vadanti.

^230:2 A kumbya is a metrical precept, such as, brahmakaryasyaposanam karma kuru, divi ma svapsih, &c.

^230:3 Such as arthavadas, explanatory passages, also gossip, such as is common in the king's palace, laughing at people, &c.

^230:4 As diametrically opposed to the flowers and fruits which represent the true. Comm.

^230:5 Then that man is left empty here on earth for that enjoyment. Comm.

^230:6 He who always says No, keeps everything to himself.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH KHANDA.

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihatis. It is glory (the glorious Brahman, not the absolute Brahman), it is Indra. Indra is the lord of all beings. He who thus knows Indra as the lord of all beings, departs from this world by loosening the bonds of life [*1]--so said Mahidasa Aitareya. Having departed he becomes Indra (or Hiranyagarbha) and shines in those worlds [*2].

[p. 232]

2. And with regard to this they say: 'If a man obtains the other world in this form (by meditating on the prana, breath, which is the uktha, the hymn of the mahavrata), then in what form does he obtain this world ?'

3. Here the blood of the woman is a form of Agni (fire); therefore no one should despise it. And the seed of the man is a form of Aditya (sun); therefore no one should despise it. This self (the woman) gives her self (skin, blood, and flesh) to that self (fat, bone, and marrow), and that self (man) gives his self (fat, bone, and marrow) to this self (skin, blood, and flesh). Thus  these two grow together. In this form (belonging to the woman and to fire) he goes to that world (belonging to the man and the sun), and in that form (belonging to man and the sun) he goes to this world (belonging to the woman and to fire ).

Footnotes

^231:1 The commentator explains visrasa by 'merging his manhood in the identity with all,' and doing this while still alive. Visras is the gradual loosening of the body, the decay of old age, but here it has the meaning of vairagya rather, the shaking off of all that ties the Self to this body or this life.

^231:2 The fourteen worlds in the egg of Brahman. Comm. Some hold that he who enters on this path, and becomes deity, does not [p. 232] arrive at final liberation. Others, however, show that this identification with the uktha, and through it with the prana (breath) and Hiranyagarbha, is provisional only, and intended to prepare the mind of the worshipper for the reception of the highest knowledge of Brahman.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

EIGHTH KHANDA.

1. Here (with regard to obtaining Hiranyagarbha) there are these Slokas:

[p. 233]

2. The fivefold body into which the indestructible (prana, breath) enters, that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw about, that body where the true of the true (the highest Brahman) follows after, in that body (of the worshipper) all gods [*1] become one.

3. That body into which goes the indestructible (the breath) which we have joined (in meditation), proceeding from the indestructible (the highest Brahman), that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw about, that body where the true of the true follows after, in that body all gods become one.

4. After separating themselves from the Yes and No of language, and of all that is hard and cruel, poets have discovered (what they sought for); dependent on names they rejoiced in what had been revealed [*2].

5. That in which the poets rejoiced (the revealed nature of prana, breath), in it the gods exist all joined together. Having driven away evil by means of that Brahman (which is hidden in prana), the enlightened man goes to the Svarga world (becomes one with Hiranyagarbha [*3], the universal spirit).

6. No one wishing to describe him (prana, breath) by speech, describes him by calling him 'woman,' 'neither woman nor man,' or 'man' (all such names applying only to the material body, and not to prana or breath).

[p. 234]

7. Brahman (as hidden beneath prana) is called the A; and the I (ego) is gone there (the worshipper should know that he is uktha and prana).

8. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses, and of that hymn, perfect with a thousand Brihad verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many are also the thousands of days of human life [*1]. By means of the syllable of life (the a) alone (which is contained in that thousand of hymns) does a man obtain the day of life (the mahavrata day, which completes the number of the days in the Gavamayana, sacrifice), and by means of the day of life (he obtains) the syllable of life.

9. Now there is a chariot of the god (prana) destroying all desires (for the worlds of Indra, the moon, the earth, all of which lie below the place of Hiranyagarbha). Its front part (the point of the two shafts of the carriage where the yoke is fastened) is speech, its wheels the cars, the horses the eyes, the driver the mind. Prana (breath) mounts that chariot (and on it, i. e. by means of meditating on Prana, he reaches Hiranyagarbha).

10. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 39, 12):--

11. 'Come hither on that which is quicker than mind,' and (Rv. VIII, 73, 2) 'Come hither on that which is quicker than the twinkling of an eye,' yea, the twinkling of an eye [*2].

[p. 235]

Footnotes

^232:1 The last line on page 246 should, I think, be the penultimate line of page 247.

^232:2 The body consists of six elements, and is hence called shatkausika. Of these, three having a white appearance (fat, bone, and marrow), come from the sun and from man; three having a. red appearance, come from fire and from the woman.

^232:3 It is well therefore to shake off this body, and by meditating on the uktha to obtain identity with Hiranyagarbha. Comm.

^233:1 The worshipper identifies himself by meditation with prana, breath, which comprehends all gods. These gods (Agni and the rest) appear in the forms of speech, &c. Comm.

^233:2 The prana, breath, and their identity with it through meditation or worship. Comm.

^233:3 Sarvahammani hiranyagarbha iti sruteh. Comm.

^234:1 Cf. 11, 2, 4, 4.

^234:2 The commentator remarks that the worship and meditation on the uktha as prana, as here taught, is different from the pranavidya, the knowledge of prana, taught in the Khandogya, the Brihadaranyaka, &c., where prana or life is represented as the object of meditation, without any reference to the uktha or other portions of the Mahavrata ceremony. He enjoins that the meditation on [p. 235] the uktha as prana should be continued till the desired result, the identification of the worshipper with prana, is realised, and that it should afterwards be repeated until death, because otherwise the impression might vanish, and the reward of becoming a god, and going to the gods, be lost. Nor is the worship to be confined to the time of the sacrifice, the Mahavrata, only, but it has to be repeated mentally during life. There are neither certain postures required for it, nor certain times and places. At the time of death, however, he who has become perfect in this meditation on uktha, as the emblem of prana, will have his reward. Up to a certain point his fate will be the same as that of other people. The activity of the senses will be absorbed in the mind, the activity of the mind in breath, breath in the activity of life, life with breath in the five elements, fire, &c., and these five elements will be absorbed up to their seed in the Paramatman or Highest Self. This ends the old birth. But then the subtile body, having been absorbed in the Highest Self, rises again in the lotus of the heart, and passing out by the channel of the head, reaches a ray of the sun, whether by day or by night, and goes at the northern or southern course of the sun to the road of Arkis or light. That Arkis, light, and other powers carry him on, and led by these he reaches the Brahma-loka, where he creates to himself every kind of enjoyment, according to his wish. He may create for himself a material body and enjoy all sorts of pleasures, as if in a state of waking, or he may, without such a body, enjoy all pleasures in mind only, as if in a dream. And as he creates these various bodies according to his wish, he creates also living souls in each, endowed with the internal organs of mind, and moves about in them, as he pleases. In fact this world is the same for the devotee (yogin) and for the Highest Self, except that creative power belongs truly to the latter only. At last the devotee gains the highest knowledge, that of the Highest Self in himself, and then, at the dissolution of the Brahma-loka, he obtains complete freedom with Brahman.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 236]

  

FOURTH ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

With this adhyaya begins the real Upanishad, best known under the name of the Aitareya-upanishad, and often separately edited, commented on, and translated. If treated separately, what we call the fourth adhyaya of the second Aranyaka, becomes the first adhyaya of the Upanishad, sometimes also, by counting all adhyaya from the beginning of the Aitareya-aranyaka, the ninth. The divisions adopted by Sayana, who explains the Upanishad as part of the Aranyaka, and by Sankara, who explains it independently, vary, though Sayana states that he follows in his commentary on the Upanishad the earlier commentary of Sankara. I have given the divisions adopted by Sayana, and have marked those of Sankara's by figures in parentheses, placed at the end of each paragraph. The difference between this Upanishad and the three preceding adhyayas is easily perceived. Hitherto the answer to the question, Whence this world? had been, From Prana, prana meaning breath and life, which was looked upon for a time as a sufficient explanation of all that is. From a psychological point of view this prana is the conscious self (pragnatman); in a more mythological form it appears as Hiranyagarbha, 'the golden germ,' sometimes even as Indra. It is one of the chief objects of the pranavidya, or life-knowledge, to show that the living principle in us is the same as the living principle in the sun, and that by a recognition of their identity and of the true nature of prana, the devotee, or he who has rightly meditated on prana during his life, enters after death into the world of Hiranyagarbha.

This is well expressed in the Kaushitaki-upanishad III, 2, where Indra says to Pratardana: 'I am Prana; meditate on me as the conscious self (pragnatman), as life, as immortality. Life is prana, prana is life. Immortality is prana, prana is immortality. By prana he obtains immortality in the other world, by knowledge (pragna) true conception. Prana is consciousness (pragna), consciousness is prana.'

This, however, though it may have satisfied the mind of the Brahmans for a time, was not a final solution. That final solution of the problem not simply of life, but of existence, is given in the Upanishad which teaches that Atman, the Self, and not Prana, Life, is the last and only cause of everything. In some places this

[p. 237]

doctrine is laid down in all its simplicity. Our true self, it is said, has its true being in the Highest Self only. In other passages, however, and nearly in the whole of this Upanishad, this simple doctrine is mixed up with much that is mythological, fanciful, and absurd, arthavada, as the commentators call it, but as it might often be more truly called, anarthavada, and it is only towards the end that the identity of the self-conscious self with the Highest Self or Brahman is clearly enuntiated.

 

Adoration to the Highest Self. Hari, Om!

1. Verily, in the beginning [*1] all this was Self, one only; there was nothing else blinking [*2] whatsoever.

2. He thought: 'Shall I send forth worlds?' (1) He sent forth these worlds,

3. Ambhas (water), Mariki (light), Mara (mortal), and Ap (water).

4. That Ambhas (water) is above the heaven, and it is heaven, the support. The Marikis (the lights) are the sky. The Mara (mortal) is the earth, and the waters under the earth are the Ap world [*3]. (2)

[p. 238]

5. He thought: 'There are these worlds; shall I send forth guardians of the worlds?'

He then formed the Purusha (the person) [*1], taking him forth from the water [*2]. (3)

6. He brooded on him [*3], and when that person had thus been brooded on, a mouth burst forth [*4] like an egg. From the mouth proceeded speech, from speech Agni (fire) [*5].

Nostrils burst forth. From the nostrils proceeded scent (prana) [*6], from scent Vayu (air).

Eyes burst forth. From the eyes proceeded sight, from sight Aditya (sun).

Ears burst forth. From the ears proceeded hearing, from hearing the Dis (quarters of the world),

Skin burst forth. From the skin proceeded hairs (sense of touch), from the hairs shrubs and trees.

The heart burst forth. From the heart proceeded mind, from mind Kandramas (moon).

The navel burst forth. From the navel proceeded the Apana (the down-breathing) [*7], from Apana death.

[p. 239]

The generative organ burst forth. From the organ proceeded seed, from seed water. (4)

Footnotes

^237:1 Before the creation. Comm.

^237:2 Blinking, mishat, i. e. living; cf. Rv. X, 190, 2, visvasya mishato vasi, the lord of all living. Sayana seems to take mishat as a 3rd pers. sing.

^237:3 The names of the four worlds are peculiar. Ambhas means water, and is the name given to the highest world, the waters above the heaven, and heaven itself. Marikis are rays, here used as a name of the sky, antariksha. Mara means dying, and the earth is called so, because all creatures living there must die. Ap is water, here explained as the waters under the earth. The usual division of the world is threefold, earth, sky, and heaven. Here it is fourfold, the fourth division being the water round the earth, or, as the commentator says, under the earth. Ambhas was probably intended for the highest heaven (dyaus), and was then explained both as what is above the heaven and as heaven itself, the support. If we translate, like Sankara and Colebrooke, I the water is the region above the heaven which heaven upholds,' we should lose heaven altogether, yet heaven, as the third with sky and earth, is essential in the Indian view of the world.

^238:1 Purusha; an embodied being, Colebrooke; a being of human shape, Roer; purushakaram viratpindam, Sayana.

^238:2 According to the commentator, from the five elements, beginning with water. That person is meant for the Virag.

^238:3 Tap, as the commentator observes, does not mean here and in similar passages to perform austerities (tapas), such as the Krikkhra, the Kandrayana, &c., but to conceive and to will and to create by mere will. I have translated it by brooding, though this expresses a part only of the meaning expressed by tap.

^238:4 Literally, was opened.

^238:5 Three things are always distinguished here--the place of each sense, the instrument of the sense, and the presiding deity of the sense.

^238:6 Prana, i. e. ghranendriya, must be distinguished from the prana, the up-breathing, one of the five pranas, and likewise from the prana as the principle of life.

^238:7 The Apana, down-breathing, is generally one of the five vital airs [p. 239] which are supposed to keep the body alive. in our place, however, apana is deglutition and digestion, as we shall see in II, 4, 3, 10.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Those deities (devata), Agni and the rest, after they had been sent forth, fell into this great ocean [*1].

Then he (the Self) besieged him, (the person) with hunger and thirst.

2. The deities then (tormented by hunger and thirst) spoke to him (the Self): 'Allow us a place in which we may rest and eat food [*2].' (1)

He led a cow towards them (the deities). They said: 'This is not enough.' He led a horse towards them. They said: 'This is not enough.' (2)

He led man [*3] towards them. Then they said: 'Well done [*4], indeed.' Therefore man is well done.

3. He said to them: 'Enter, each according to his place.' (3)

4. Then Agni (fire), having become speech, entered the mouth. Vayu (air), having become scent, entered the nostrils. Aditya (sun), having become sight, entered the eyes. The Dis (regions), having become hearing, entered the ears. The shrubs and trees, having become hairs, entered the skin. Kandramas (the moon), having become mind, entered

[p. 240]

the heart. Death, having become down-breathing, entered the navel. The waters, having become seed, entered the generative organ. (4)

5. Then Hunger and Thirst spoke to him (the Self): 'Allow us two (a place).' He said to them: 'I assign you to those very deities there, I make you co-partners with them.' Therefore to whatever deity an oblation is offered, hunger and thirst are co-partners in it. (5)

Footnotes

^239:1 They fell back into that universal being from whence they had sprung, the first created person, the Virag. Or they fell into the world, the last cause of which is ignorance.

^239:2 To eat food is explained to mean to perceive the objects which correspond to the senses, presided over by the various deities.

^239:3 Here purusha is different from the first purusha, the universal person. it can only be intended for intelligent man.

^239:4 Sukrita, well done, virtue; or, if taken for svakrita, self-made.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. He thought: 'There are these worlds and the guardians of the worlds. Let me send forth food for them.' (1)

He brooded over the water [*1]. From the water thus brooded on, matter [*2] (murti) was born. And that matter which was born, that verily was food [*3]. (2)

2. When this food (the object matter) had thus been sent forth, it wished to flee [*4], crying and turning away. He (the subject) tried to grasp it by speech. He could not grasp it by speech. If he had grasped it by speech, man would be satisfied by naming food. (3)

He tried to grasp it by scent (breath). He could not grasp it by scent. If he had grasped it by scent, man would be satisfied by smelling food. (4)

He tried to grasp it by the eye. He could not

[p. 241]

grasp it by the eye. If he had grasped it by the eye, man would be satisfied by seeing food. (5)

He tried to grasp it by the ear. He could not grasp it by the ear. If he had grasped it by the ear, man would be satisfied by hearing food. (6)

He tried to grasp it by the skin. He could not grasp it by the skin. If he had grasped it by the skin, man would be satisfied by touching food. (7)

He tried to grasp it by the mind. He could not grasp it by the mind. If he had grasped it by the mind, man would be satisfied by thinking food. (8)

He tried to grasp it by the generative organ. He could not grasp it by the organ. If he had grasped it by the organ, man would be satisfied by sending forth food. (9)

He tried to grasp it by the down-breathing (the breath which helps to swallow food through the mouth and to carry it off through the rectum, the payvindriya). He got it.

3. Thus it is Vayu (the getter [*1]) who lays hold of food, and the Vayu is verily Annayu (he who gives life or who lives by food). (10)

4. He thought: 'How can all this be without me?'

5. And then he thought: 'By what way shall I get there [*2]?'

6. And then he thought: 'If speech names, if scent smells, if the eye sees, if the ear hears, if the skin feels, if the mind thinks, if the off-breathing digests, if the organ sends forth, then what am I?' (11)

[p. 242]

7. Then opening the suture of the skull, he got in by that door.

8. That door is called the Vidriti (tearing asunder), the Nandana (the place of bliss).

9. There are three dwelling-places for him, three dreams; this dwelling-place (the eye), this dwelling-place (the throat), this dwelling-place (the heart) [*1]. (12)

10. When born (when the Highest Self had entered the body) he looked through all things, in order to see whether anything wished to proclaim here another (Self). He saw this person only (himself) as the widely spread Brahman. 'I saw it,' thus he said [*2]; (13)

Therefore he was Idam-dra (seeing this).

11. Being Idamdra by name, they call him Indra mysteriously. For the Devas love mystery, yea, they love mystery. (14)

Footnotes

^240:1 The water, as mentioned before, or the five elements.

^240:2 Murti, for murtti, form, Colebrooke; a being of organised form, Roer; vrihiyavadirupa mushakadirupa ka murtih, i.e. vegetable food for men, animal food for cats, &c.

^240:3 Offered food, i.e. objects for the Devatas and the senses in the body.

^240:4 Atyagighamsat, atisayena hantum gantum aikkhat. Sayana.

^241:1 An attempt to derive vayu from vi, to get.

^241:2 Or, by which of the two ways shall I get in, the one way being from the top of the foot (cf. Ait. Ar. II, 1, 4, 1), the other from the skull? Comm.

^242:1 Passages like this must always have required an oral interpretation, but it is by no means certain that the explanation given in the commentaries represents really the old traditional interpretation. Sayana explains the three dwelling-places as the right eye, in a state of waking; as the throat, in a state of dreaming; as the heart, in a state of profound sleep. Sankara explains them as the right eye, the inner mind, and the ether in the heart. Sayana allows another interpretation of the three dwelling-places being the body of the father, the body of the mother, and one's own body. The three dreams or sleeps he explains by waking, dreaming, and profound sleep, and he remarks that waking too is called a dream as compared with the true awakening, which is the knowledge of Brahman. In the last sentence the speaker, when repeating three times 'this dwelling-place,' is supposed to point to his right eye, the throat, and the heart. This interpretation is supported by a passage in the Brahma-upanishad, Netre gagaritam vidyat kanthe svapnam samadiset, sushuptam hridayasya tu.

^242:2 In this passage, which is very obscure, Sankara fails us, either because, as Anandagnana says, he thought the text was too easy to require any explanation, or because the writers of the MSS. left out [p. 243] the passage. Anandagnana explains: 'He looked through all creatures, he identified himself with them, and thought he was a man, blind, happy, &c.; or, as it is elsewhere expressed, he developed forms and names. And how did this mistake arise? Because he did not see the other, the true Self;' or literally, 'Did he see the other Self?' which is only a figure of speech to convey the meaning that he did not see it. The particle iti is then to be taken in a causal sense, (i. e. he did so, because what else could he have wished to proclaim?) But he allows another explanation, viz. 'He considered all beings, whether they existed by themselves or not, and after having considered, he arrived at the conclusion, What shall I call different from the true Self?' The real difficulties, however, are not removed by these explanations. First of all, we expect vavadisham before iti, and secondly, unless anyam refers to atmanam, we expect anyad. My own translation is literal, but I am not certain that it conveys the true meaning. One might understand it as implying that the Self looked about through all things, in order to find out, 'What does wish to proclaim here another Self?' And when he saw there was nothing which did not come from himself, then he recognised that the Purusha, the person he had sent forth, or, as we should say, the person he had created, was the developed Brahman, was the Atman, was himself. Sayana explains vavadishat by vadishyami, but before iti the third person cannot well refer to the subject of vyaikshat.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 243]

  

FIFTH ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Let the women who are with child move away [*1]!

2. Verily, from the beginning he (the self) is in man as a germ, which is called seed.

3. This (seed), which is strength gathered from all the limbs of the body, he (the man) bears as self in his self (body). When he commits the seed to the woman, then he (the father) causes it to be born. That is his first birth. (1)

4. That seed becomes the self of the woman, as

[p. 244]

if one of her own limbs. Therefore it does not injure her.

5. She nourishes his (her husband's) self (the son) within her. (2) She who nourishes, is to be nourished.

6. The woman bears the germ. He (the father) elevates the child even before the birth, and immediately after [*1].

7. When he thus elevates the child both before and after his birth, he really elevates his own self,

8. For the continuation of these worlds (men). For thus are these worlds continued.

9. This is his second birth. (3)

10. He (the son), being his self, is then placed in his stead for (the performance of) all good works.

11. But his other self (the father), having done all he has to do, and having reached the full measure of his life, departs.

12. And departing from hence he is born again. That is his third birth.

13. And this has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. IV, 27, 1): (4)

14. 'While dwelling in the womb, I discovered all the births of these Devas. A hundred iron strongholds kept me, but I escaped quickly down like a falcon.'

15. Vamadeva, lying in the womb, has thus declared this. (5)

And having this knowledge he stepped forth, after this dissolution of the body, and having obtained all his desires in that heavenly world, became immortal, yea, he became immortal. (6)

Footnotes

^243:1 Some MSS. begin this adhyaya with the sentence apakramantu garbhinyah, may the women who are with child walk away! It is counted as a paragraph.

^244:1 By nourishing the mother, and by performing certain ceremonies both before and after the birth of a child.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 245]

  

SIXTH ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Let the women go back to their place.

2. Who is he whom [*1] we meditate on as the Self? Which [*2] is the Self?

3. That by which we see (form), that by which we hear (sound), that by which we perceive smells, that by which we utter speech, that by which we distinguish sweet and not sweet, (1) and what comes from the heart and the mind, namely, perception, command, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, seeing, holding, thinking, considering, readiness (or suffering), remembering, conceiving, willing, breathing, loving, desiring?

4. No, all these are various names only of knowledge (the true Self). (2)

5. And that Self, consisting of (knowledge), is Brahman (m.) [*3], it is Indra, it is Pragapati [*4]. All these Devas, these five great elements, earth, air, ether, water, fire, these and those which are, as it were, small and mixed [*5], and seeds of this kind and that kind, born from eggs, born from the womb., born from heat, born from germs [*6], horses, cows, men, elephants, and whatsoever breathes, whether walking or flying, and what is immoveable--all that is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self).

6. It rests on knowledge (the Self). The world

[p. 246]

is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self). Knowledge is its cause [*1].

7. Knowledge is Brahman. (3)

8. He (Vamadeva), having by this conscious self stepped forth from this world, and having obtained all desires in that heavenly world, became immortal, yea, he became immortal. Thus it is, Om. (4)

Footnotes

^245:1 I read ko yam instead of ko 'yam.

^245:2 Or, Which of the two, the real or the phenomenal, the nirupadhika or sopadhika?

^245:3 Hiranyagarbha. Comm.

^245:4 Virag. Comm.

^245:5 Serpents, &c., says the commentary.

^245:6 Cf. Kh. Up. VI, 3, 1, where the svedaga, born from heat or perspiration, are not mentioned.

^246:1 We have no words to distinguish between pragna, state of knowing, and pragnana, act of knowing. Both are names of the Highest Brahman, which is the beginning and end (pratishtha) of everything that exists or seems to exist.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SEVENTH ADHYAYA [*2].

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. My speech rests in the mind, my mind rests in speech [*3]. Appear to me (thou, the Highest Self)! You (speech and mind) are the two pins [*4] (that hold the wheels) of the Veda. May what I have learnt not forsake me [*5]. I join day and night with what I have learnt [*6]. I shall speak of the real, I shall speak the true. May this protect me, may this protect the teacher! May it protect me, may it protect the teacher, yea, the teacher!

Footnotes

^246:2 This seventh adhyaya contains a propitiatory prayer (santikaro mantrah). It is frequently left out in the MSS. which contain the Aitareya-upanishad with Sankara's commentary, and Dr. Roer has omitted it in his edition. Sayana explains it in his commentary on the Aitareya-aranyaka; and in one MS. of Sankara's commentary on the Aitareya-upanishad, which is in my possession, the seventh adhyaya is added with the commentary of Madhavamatya, the Agnapalaka of Virabukka-maharaga.

^246:3 The two depend on each other.

^246:4 Ant, explained by the commentator as anayanasamartha.

^246:5 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 2, 5.

^246:6 I repeat it day and night so that I may not forget it.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 247]

  

THIRD ARANYAKA [*1].

  

FIRST ADHYAYA.

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Next follows the Upanishad of the Samhita [*2].

2. The former half is the earth, the latter half the heaven, their union the air [*3], thus says Mandukeya; their union is the ether, thus did Makshavya teach it.

3. That air is not considered [*4] independent [*5], therefore I do not agree with his (Manduka's) son.

4. Verily, the two are the same, therefore air is

[p. 248]

considered independent, thus says Agastya. For it is the same, whether they say air or ether .

5. So far with reference to deities (mythologically); now with reference to the body (physiologically):

6. The former half is speech, the latter half is mind, their union breath (prana), thus says Suravira  Mandukeya.

7. But his eldest son said: The former half is mind, the latter half speech. For we first conceive with the mind indeed , and then we utter with speech. Therefore the former half is indeed mind, the latter half speech, but their union is really breath.

8. Verily, it is the same with both, the father (Mandukeya) and the son .

9. This (meditation as here described), joined  with mind, speech, and breath, is (like) a chariot drawn by two horses and one horse between them (prashtivahana).

10. And he who thus knows this union, becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

11. Now all this comes from the Mandukeyas.

Footnotes

^247:1 This last portion of the Upanishad is found in the MS. discovered by Dr. Buhler in Kashmir, and described by him in the journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1877, p. 36. I have collated it, so far as it was possible to read it, many lines being either broken off altogether, or almost entirely obliterated.

^247:2 Samhita is the sacred text in which all letters are closely joined. The joining together of two letters is called their samhita; the first letter of a joined group the purvarupa (n.), the second the uttararupa. For instance, in agnim ile the m is purvarupa, the i uttararupa, and mi their samhita or union.

^247:3 As in worshipping the Salagrama stone, we really worship Vishnu, so we ought to perceive the earth, the heaven, and the air when we pronounce the first and the second letters of a group, and that group itself.

^247:4 Mene has here been taken as 3rd pers. sing. perf. passive. The commentator, however, explains it as an active verb, niskitavan.

^247:5 Because it is included in the ether, not the ether in the air. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Next comes the meditation as taught by Sakalya.

[p. 249]

2. The first half is the earth, the second half heaven, their uniting the rain, the uniter Parganya [*1].

3. And so it is when he (Parganya) rains thus strongly, without ceasing, day and night [*2],

4. Then they say also (in ordinary language), 'Heaven and earth have come together.'

5. So much with regard to the deities; now with regard to the body:--

6. Every man is indeed like an egg [*3]. There are two halves [*4] (of him), thus they say: 'This half is the earth, that half heaven.' And there between them is the ether (the space of the mouth), like the ether between heaven and earth. In this ether there (in the mouth) the breath is fixed, as in that other ether the air is fixed. And as there are those three luminaries (in heaven), there are these three luminaries in man.

7. As there is that sun in heaven, there is this eye in the head. As there is that lightning in the sky, there is this heart in the body; as there is that fire on earth, there is this seed in the member.

8. Having thus represented the self (body) as the whole world, Sakalya said: This half is the earth, that half heaven.

9. He who thus knows this union, becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance,

[p. 250]

and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

  

THIRD KHANDA [*1].

1. Next come the reciters of the Nirbhuga [*2].

2. Nirbhuga abides on earth, Pratrinna in heaven, the Ubhayamantarena in the sky.

3. Now, if any one should chide him who recites the Nirbhuga, let him answer: 'Thou art fallen from the two lower places [*3].' If any one should chide him who recites the Pratrinna, let him answer: 'Thou art fallen from the two higher places [*4].' But he who recites the Ubhayamantarena, there is no chiding him.

4. For when he turns out the Sandhi (the union of words), that is the form of Nirbhuga [*5]; and when be pronounces two syllables pure (without modification), that is the form of Pratrinna [*6]. This comes

[p. 251]

first [*1]. By the Ubhayamantara (what is between the two) both are fulfilled (both the sandhi and the pada).

5. Let him who wishes for proper food say the Nirbhuga; let him who wishes for Svarga, say the Pratrinna; let him who wishes for both say the Ubhayamantarena.

6. Now if another man (an enemy) should chide him who says the Nirbhuga, let him say to him: 'Thou hast offended the earth, the deity; the earth, the deity, will strike thee.'

If another man should chide him who says the Pratrinna, let him say to him: 'Thou hast offended heaven, the deity; heaven, the deity, will strike thee.'

If another man should chide him who says the Ubhayamantarena, let him say to him: 'Thou hast offended the sky, the deity; the sky, the deity, will strike thee.'

7. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend upon it, it will come to pass.

8. But to a Brahmana let him not say anything except what is auspicious.

9. Only he may curse a Brahmana in excessive wealth [*2].

10. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he curse a Brahmana, but he should say, 'I bow before Brahmanas,'--thus says Suravira Mandukeya.

Footnotes

^248:1 Both views are tenable, for it is not the actual air and ether which are meditated on, but their names, as declared and explained in this peculiar act of worship. We should read akasasketi, a reading confirmed both by the commentary and by the Kashmir MS.

^248:2 The man among heroes. Comm.

^248:3 The Kashmir MS. reads manasaivagre.

^248:4 Both views are admissible. Comm.

^248:5 Pranasamhitah, Kashmir MS.

^249:1 If i is followed by a, the i is changed to y, and both are united as ya. Here a is the cause which changes i into y. Thus Parganya, the god of rain, is the cause which unites earth and heaven into rain. Comm.

^249:2 When it rains incessantly, heaven and earth seem to be one in rain.

^249:3 Andam, andasadrisam. Comm.

^249:4 The one half from the feet to the lower jaw, the other half from the upper jaw to the skull. Comm.

^250:1 Cf. Rig-veda-pratisakhya, ed. Max Muller, p. iii, and Nachtrage, p. ii.

^250:2 Nirbhuga(n) is the recitation of the Veda without intervals, therefore the same as Samhita. Pratrinna is the recitation of each word by itself (pada-patha); Ubhayamantarena, the between the two, is the intertwining of Samhita and Pada-patha, the so-called Krama-patha. By reciting the Samhita inattentively, one may use forms which belong to the Pada-text; and by reciting the Pada inattentively, one may use forms which belong to the Samhita-text. But in reciting the Krama both the Samhita and Pada forms are used together, and therefore mistakes are less likely to happen.

^250:3 From earth and sky. Cf. Kh. Up. II, 22, 3.

^250:4 From the sky and from heaven.

^250:5 Nirbhuga may mean without arms, as if the arms of the words were taken away, or with two arms stretched out, the two words forming, as it were, two arms to one body.

^250:6 Pratrinna means cut asunder, every word being separated from the others.

^251:1 The words were first each separate, before they were united according to the laws of Sandhi.

^251:2 He may curse him, if he is exceeding rich; or he may wish him the curse of excessive wealth; or he may curse him, if something great depends on it.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. Next follow the imprecations [*1].

2. Let him know that breath [*2] is the beam (on which the whole house of the body rests).

3. If any one (a Brahmana or another man) should chide him, who by meditation has become that breath as beam [*3], then, if he thinks himself strong, he says: 'I grasped the breath, the beam, well; thou dost not prevail against me who have grasped the breath as the beam.' Let him say to him: 'Breath, the beam, will forsake thee.'

4. But if he thinks himself not strong, let him say to him: 'Thou couldst not grasp him who wishes to grasp the breath as the beam. Breath, the beam, will forsake thee.'

5. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend upon it, it will come to pass. But to a Brahmana let him not say anything except what is auspicious. Only he may curse a Brahmana in excessive wealth. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he curse a Brahmana, but he should say, 'I bow before Brahmanas,'--thus says Suravira Mandukeya.

Footnotes

^252:1 The commentator explains anuvyahara, not as imprecations, but as referring to those who leach or use the imprecations, such imprecations being necessary to guard against the loss of the benefits accruing from the meditation and worship here described; such teachers say what follows.

^252:2 Breath, the union of mind and speech, as explained before. This is the opinion of Sthavira Sakalya, cf. III, 2, 1, 1.

^252:3 If he should tell him that he did not meditate on breath properly.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 253]

  

FIFTH KHANDA.

1. Now those who repeat the Nirbhuga say:

2. 'The former half [*1] is the first syllable, the latter half the second syllable, and the space between the first and second halves is the Samhita (union).'

3. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

4. Now Hrasva Mandukeya says: 'We reciters of Nirbhuga say, "Yes, the former half is the first syllable, and the latter half the second syllable, but the Samhita is the space between the first and second halves in so far as by it one turns out the union (sandhi), and knows what is the accent and what is not [*2], and distinguishes what is the mora and what is not."'

5. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

6. Now his middle son, the child of his mother Pratibodhi [*3], says: 'One pronounces these two syllables letter by letter, without entirely separating

[p. 254]

them, and without entirely uniting them [*1]. Then that mora between the first and second halves, which indicates the union, that is the Saman (evenness, sliding). I therefore hold Saman only to be the Samhita (union).

7. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. II, 23, 16):--

8. 'O Brihaspati, they know nothing higher than Saman.'

9. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

Footnotes

^253:1 As spoken of before, III, 1, 1, 1.

^253:2 In agnim ile, ile by itself has no accent, but as joined by sandhi with agnim, its first syllable becomes svarita, its second prakita. In tava it, the vowel i is a short mora or matra; but if joined with va, it vanishes, and becomes long e, tavet. Comm.

^253:3 Pratibodhiputra, the son of Pratibodhi, she being probably one out of several wives of Hrasva. Another instance of this metronymic nomenclature occurred in Krishna Devakiputra, Kh. Up. III, 7, 6. The Kashmir MS. reads Prakibodhi, but Pratibodha is a recognised name in Gana Vidadi, and the right reading is probably Pratibodhi. The same MS. leaves out putra aha.

^254:1 So that the e in tavet should neither be one letter e, nor two letters a + i, but something between the two, enabling us to hear a + i in the pronunciation of e.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. Tarukshya [*2] said: 'The Samhita (union) is formed by means of the Brihat and Rathantara [*3] Samans.'

2. Verily, the Rathantara Saman is speech, the Brihat Saman is breath. By both, by speech and breath, the Samhita is formed [*4].

3. For this Upanishad (for acquiring from his teacher the knowledge of this Samhita of speech and breath) Tarukshya guards (his teacher's) cows a whole year.

4. For it alone Tarukshya guards the cows a whole year.

[p. 255]

5. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 181, 1; and Rv. X, 181, 2):--

6. 'Vasishtha carried hither the Rathantara; 'Bharadvaga brought hither the Brihat of Agni.'

7. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

8. Kauntharavya said: 'Speech is united with breath, breath with the blowing air, the blowing air with the Visvedevas, the Visvedevas with the heavenly world, the heavenly world with Brahman. That Samhita is called the gradual Samhita.'

9. He who knows this gradual Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga, in exactly the same manner as this Samhita, i.e. gradually.

10. If that worshipper, whether for his own sake or for that of another, recites (the Samhita), let him know when he is going to recite, that this Samhita went up to heaven, and that it will be even so with those who by knowing it become Devas. May it always be so!

11. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

12. Pankalakanda said: 'The Samhita (union, composition) is speech.'

13. Verily, by speech the Vedas, by speech the metres are composed. Friends unite through speech, all beings unite through speech; therefore speech is everything here [*1].

[p. 256]

14. With regard to this (view of speech being more than breath), it should be borne in mind that when we thus repeat (the Veda) or speak, breath is (absorbed) in speech; speech swallows breath. And when we are silent or sleep, speech is (absorbed) in breath; breath swallows speech. The two swallow each other. Verily, speech is the mother, breath the son.

15. This has been declared also by a Rishi (Rv. X, 114, 4):--

16. 'There is one bird; (as wind) he has entered the sky; (as breath or living soul) he saw this whole world. With my ripe mind I saw him close to me (in the heart); the mother (licks or) absorbs him (breath), and he absorbs the mother (speech).'

17. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

18. Next follows the Pragapati-Samhita.

19. The former half is the wife, the latter half the man; the result of their union the son; the act of their union the begetting; that Samhita is Aditi (indestructible).

20. For Aditi (indestructible) is all this whatever there is, father, mother, son, and begetting.

21. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. I, 189, 10)--

22. 'Aditi is mother, is father, is son.'

23. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

Footnotes

^254:2 The Kashmir MS. reads Tarkshya, a name used before as the title of a hymn (Ait. Ar. I, 5, 2, 8). Here Tarakshya seems preferable, see Pan. IV, 1, 105.

^254:3 See Ait. Ar. I, 4, 2, 1-4.

^254:4 These two, the Brihat and Rathantara, are required for the Prishthastotra in the Agnishtoma, and they are to remind the worshipper that speech and breath are required for all actions.

^255:1 Everything can be obtained by speech in this life and in the next. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 257]

  

SECOND ADHYAYA [*1].

  

FIRST KHANDA.

1. Sthavira Sakalya said that breath is the beam [*2], and as the other beams rest on the house-beam, thus the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the senses, the body, the whole self rests on this [*3] breath.

2. Of that self the breathing is like the sibilants, the bones like the mutes, the marrow like the vowels, and the fourth part, flesh, blood, and the rest, like the semivowels [*4],--so said Hrasva Mandukeya.

3. To us it was said to be a triad only [*5].

4. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints, there are 360 (parts) on this side (the right), and 360 on that side (the left). They make 720 together, and 720 [*6] are the days and nights of the year. Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the days.

5. He who thus knows this self, which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto the days, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with the days, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.

Footnotes

^257:1 In the first adhyaya meditations suggested by samhita, pada, and krama have been discussed. Now follow meditations suggested by certain classes of letters.

^257:2 Ait. Ar. III, 1, 4.

^257:3 The Kashmir MS. reads etasmin prane. The self here is meant for the body, and yet it seems to be different from sarira.

^257:4 The Kashmir MS. writes antastha without visarga, while it is otherwise most careful in writing all sibilants.

^257:5 Sakalya, as we saw, told his disciples that there were three classes only, not four. Comm. The Kashmir MS. reads trayam tv eva na ityetat proktam.

^257:6 The Kashmir MS, reads sapta vimsatis ka satani.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 258]

  

SECOND KHANDA.

1. Next comes Kauntharavya:

2. There are 360 syllables (vowels), 360 sibilants (consonants), 360, groups.

3. What we called syllables are the days, what we called sibilants are the nights, what we called groups are the junctions of days and nights. So far with regard to the gods (the days).

4. Now with regard to the body. The syllables which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the bones; the sibilants which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the marrow.

5. Marrow is the real breath (life), for marrow is seed, and without breath (life) seed is not sown. Or when it is sown without breath (life), it will decay, it will not grow.

6. The groups which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the joints.

7. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints, there are 540 (parts) on this side (the right), and 540 on that side (the left). They make 1080 together, and 1080 are the rays of the sun. They make the Brihati verses and the day (of the Mahavrata) [*1].

8. Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the syllables.

9. He who knows this self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto syllables, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with the syllables, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.

Footnotes

^258:1 There are in the Mahavrata eighty tristichs of Brihatis, and as each Brihati is decreed to consist of thirty-six syllables, ten would give 360 syllables, and three times ten, 1080. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 259]

  

THIRD KHANDA.

1. Badhva [*1] says, there are four persons (to be meditated on and worshipped).

2. The person of the body, the person of the metres, the person of the Veda, and the Great person.

3. What we call the person of the body is this corporeal self. Its essence is the incorporeal conscious self.

4. What we call the person of the metres is this collection of letters (the Veda). Its essence is the vowel a.

5. What we call the person of the Veda is (the mind) by which we know the Vedas, the Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. Its essence is Brahman [*2](m.)

6. Therefore let one chose a Brahman-priest who is full of Brahman (the Veda), and is able to see any flaw in the sacrifice.

7. What we call the Great person is the year, which causes some beings to fall together, and causes others to grow up. Its essence is yonder sun.

8. One should know that the incorporeal conscious self and yonder sun are both one and the same. Therefore the sun appears to every man singly (and differently).

9. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. I, 115, 1):--

10. 'The bright face of the gods arose, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, and Agni; it filled heaven and earth

[p. 260]

and the sky,--the sun is the self of all that rests and moves.'

11. 'This I think to be the regular Samhita as conceived by me,' thus said Badhva.

12. For the Bahvrikas consider him (the self) in the great hymn (mahad uktha), the Adhvaryus in the sacrificial fire, the Khandogas in the Mahavrata ceremony. Him they see in this earth, in heaven, in the air, in the ether, in the water, in herbs, in trees, in the moon, in the stars, in all beings. Him alone they call Brahman.

13. That self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the year.

14. He who recites to another that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, and is like unto the year,

Footnotes

^259:1 Instead of Badhya, the commentary and the Kashmir MS. read Badhva.

^259:2 Hiranyagarbha, with whom he who knows the Veda becomes identified. Comm.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FOURTH KHANDA.

1. To him the Vedas yield no more milk, he has no luck in what he has learnt (from his Guru); he does not know the path of virtue.

2. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 71, 6):--

3. 'He who has forsaken the friend (the Veda), that knows his friends, in his speech there is no luck. Though he hears, he hears in vain, for he does not know the path of virtue.'

4. Here it is clearly said that he has no luck in what he has learnt, and that he does not know the path of virtue.

5. Therefore let no one who knows this, lay the sacrificial fire (belonging to the Mahavrata) for another, let him not sing the Samans of the Mahavrata

[p. 261]

for another, let him not recite the Sastras of that day for another.

6. However, let him willingly do this for a father or for an Akarya; for that is done really for himself.

7. We have said that the incorporeal conscious self and the sun are one [*1]. When these two become separated [*2], the sun is seen as if it were the moon [*3]; no rays spring from it; the sky is red like madder; the patient cannot retain the wind, his head smells bad like a raven's nest:--let him know then that his self (in the body) is gone, and that he will not live very long [*4].

8. Then whatever he thinks he has to do,. let him do it, and let him recite the following hymns: Yad anti yak ka durake (Rv. IX, 67, 21-27); Ad it pratnasya retasah (Rv. VIII, 6, 30); Yatra brahma pavamana (Rv. IX, 113, 6-11); Ud vayam tamasas pari (Rv. I, 50, 10).

9. Next, when the sun is seen pierced, and seems like the nave of a cart-wheel, when he sees his own shadow pierced, let him know then that it is so (as stated before, i. e. that he is going to die soon).

10. Next, when he sees himself in a mirror or in the water with a crooked head, or without a head [*5], or when his pupils are seen inverted [*6] or not straight, let him know then that it is so.

[p. 262]

11. Next, let him cover his eyes and watch, then threads are seen as if falling together [*1]. But if he does not see them, let him know then that it is so.

12. Next, let him cover his ears and listen, and there will be a sound as if of a burning fire or of a carriage [*2]. But if he does not hear it, let him know then that it is so.

13. Next, when fire looks blue like the neck of a peacock [*3], or when he sees lightning in a cloudless sky, or no lightning in a clouded sky, or when he sees as it were bright rays in a dark cloud, let him know then that it is so.

14. Next, when he sees the ground as if it were burning, let him know that it is so.

15. These are the visible signs (from 7-14).

16. Next come the dreams [*4].

17. If he sees a black man with black teeth, and that man kills him; or a boar kills him; a monkey jumps on [*5] him; the wind carries him along quickly; having swallowed gold he spits it out [*6]; he eats honey; he chews stalks; he carries a red lotus; he drives with asses and boars; wearing a wreath of red flowers (naladas) he drives a black cow with a black calf, facing the south [*7],

18. If a man sees any one of these (dreams), let

[p. 263]

him fast, and cook a pot of milk, sacrifice it, accompanying each oblation with a verse of the Ratri hymn (Rv. X, 12 7), and then, after having fed the Brahmanas, with other food (prepared at his house) eat himself the (rest of the) oblation.

19. Let him know that the person within all beings, not heard here [*1], not reached, not thought, not subdued, not seen, not understood, not classed, but hearing, thinking, seeing, classing, sounding, understanding, knowing, is his Self.

Footnotes

^261:1 Ait. Ar. III, 2, 3, 8.

^261:2 This separation of the self of the sun and the conscious self within us is taken as a sign of approaching death, and therefore a number of premonitory symptoms are considered in this place.

^261:3 elios menoeides Xen. Hist. gr. 4, 3, 10.

^261:4 The Kashmir MS. reads givayishyati.

^261:5 The Kashmir MS. reads gihmasirasam vasariram atmanam.

^261:6 A white pupil in a black eye-ball. Comm.

^262:1 The Kashmir MS. reads batirakani sampatantiva.

^262:2 See Kh. Up. III, 13, 8. The Kashmir MS. and the commentary give the words rathasyevopabdis, which are left out in the printed text.

^262:3 The Kashmir MS. reads mayuragriva ameghe.

^262:4 The Kashmir MS. reads svapnah.

^262:5 The Kashmir MS. reads askandati.

^262:6 The Kashmir MS. reads avagirati.

^262:7 The commentator separates the last dream, so as to bring their number to ten.

^263:1 The Kashmir MS. reads sa yatas sruto.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIFTH KHANDA [*2]

1. Now next the Upanishad of the whole speech.

True all these are Upanishads of the whole speech, but this they call so (chiefly).

2. The mute consonants represent the earth, the sibilants the sky, the vowels heaven.

The mute consonants represent Agni (fire), the sibilants air, the vowels the sun.

The mute consonants represent the Rig-veda, the sibilants the Yagur-veda, the vowels the Sama-veda.

The mute consonants represent the eye, the sibilants the ear, the vowels the mind.

The mute consonants represent the up-breathing, the sibilants the down-breathing, the vowels the back-breathing.

3. Next comes this divine lute (the human body, made by the gods). The lute made by man is an imitation of it.

4. As there is a head of this, so there is a head of that (lute, made by man). As there is a stomach

[p. 264]

of this, so there is the cavity [*1] (In the board) of that. As there is a tongue of this, so there is a tongue [*2] in that. As there are fingers of this, so there are strings of that [*3]. As there are vowels of this, so there are tones of that. As there are consonants of this, so there are touches of that. As this is endowed with sound and firmly strung, so that is endowed with sound and firmly strung. As this is covered with a hairy skin, so that is covered with a hairy skin.

5. Verily, in former times they covered a lute with a hairy skin.

6. He who knows this lute made by the Devas (and meditates on it), is willingly listened to, his glory fills the earth, and wherever they speak Aryan languages, there they know him.

7. Next follows the verse, called vagrasa, the essence of speech. When a man reciting or speaking in an assembly does not please, let him say this verse:

8. 'May the queen of all speech, who is covered, as it were, by the lips, surrounded by teeth, as if by spears, who is a thunderbolt, help me to speak well.' This is the vagrasa, the essence of speech.

Footnotes

^263:2 After having inserted the preceding chapter on omina and the concluding paragraph on the highest knowledge, he now returns to the meditation on the letters.

^264:1 The Kashmir MS. reads udara evam, &c.

^264:2 Vadanam, what makes the instrument speak, hastena. Comm.

^264:3 Here the order is inverted in the text.

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIXTH KHANDA.

1. Next Krishna-Harita [*4] confided this Brahmana [*5] concerning speech to him (his pupil):

[p. 265]

2. Pragapati, the year, after having sent forth all creatures, burst. He put himself together again by means of khandas (Vedas). Because he put himself together again by means of khandas, therefore (the text of the Veda) is called Samhita (put together).

3. Of that Samhita the letter n is the strength, the letter sh the breath and self (Atman).

4. He who knows the Rik verses and the letters n and sh for every Samhita, he knows the Samhita with strength and breath. Let him know that this is the life of the Samhita.

5. If the pupil asks, 'Shall I say it with the letter n or without it? 'let the teacher say, 'With the letter n.' And if he asks, 'Shall I say it with the letter sh or without it?' let the teacher say, 'With the letter sh [*1].'

6. Hrasva Mandukeya said: 'If we here recite the verses according to the Samhita (attending to the necessary changes of n and s into n and sh [*2]), and if we say the adhyaya of Mandukeya (Ait. Ar. III, 1), then the letters n and sh (strength and breath) have by this been obtained for us.'

7. Sthavira Sakalya said: 'If we recite the verses according to the Samhita, and if we say the adhyaya of Mandukeya, then the letters n and sh have by this been obtained for us.'

8. Here the Rishis, the Kavasheyas [*3], knowing

[p. 266]

this, said: 'Why should we repeat (the Veda), why should we sacrifice? We offer as a sacrifice breath in speech, or speech in breath. What is the beginning (of one), that is the end (of the other).'

9. Let no one tell these Samhitas (Ait. Ar. III, 1-III, 2) to one who is not a resident pupil, who has not been with his teacher at least one year, and who is not himself to become an instructor [*1]. Thus say the teachers, yea, thus say the teachers.

, and then rest in another place finishing it.

11. 'And in the place where he reads this, he should not read [p. 268] anything else, though he may read this (the Mahavrata) where he has read something else.

12. 'No one should bathe and become a snataka [*1c] who does not read this. Even if he has read many other things, he should not become a snataka if he has not read this.

13. 'Nor should he forget it, and even if he should forget anything else, he should not forget this.

14. 'No, he should never forget this.

15. 'If he does not forget this, it will be enough for himself (or for acquiring a knowledge of the Self).

16. 'It is enough, let him know this to be true.

17. 'Let him who knows this not communicate, nor dine, nor amuse himself with any one who does not know it.'

Then follow some more rules as to the reading of the Veda in general:

18. 'When the old water that stood round the roots of trees is dried up (after about the month of Pausha, January to February [*2c]) he should not read; nor (at any time) in the morning or in the afternoon, when the shadows meet (he should begin at sunrise so soon as the shadows divide, and end in the evening before they fall together). Nor should he read [*3c] when a cloud has risen; and when there is an unseasonable rain (after the months of Sravana and Bhadrapada, August and September [*4c]) he should stop his Vedic reading for three nights. Nor should he at that time tell stories, not even during the night, nor should he glory in his knowledge.

19. 'This (the Veda thus learnt and studied) is the name of that Great Being; and he who thus knows the name of that Great Being, he becomes Brahman, yea, he becomes Brahman.'

[p. 267] [p. 268]

Footnotes

^264:4 One of the sons of Harita, who was dark. Comm.

^264:5 Brahmana, in the sense of Upanishad, this secret doctrine or explanation. It forms an appendix, like the svishtakrit at the end of a sacrifice. 'Iva,' which the commentator explains as restrictive or useless, may mean, something like a Brahmana.

^265:1 The letters n and sh refer most likely to the rules of natva and shatva, i. e. the changing of n and s into n and sh.

^265:2 If we know whenever n and s should be changed to n and sh in the Samhita.

^265:3 The Kavasheyas said that, after they had arrived at the highest knowledge of Brahman (through the various forms of meditation and worship that lead to it and that have been described in the Upanishad) no further meditation and no further sacrifice could be [p. 266] required. Instead of the morning and evening stoma they offer breath in speech, whenever they speak, or speech in breath, when they are silent or asleep. When speech begins, breathing ceases; when breathing begins, speech ceases.

^266:1 The strict prohibition uttered at the end of the third Aranyaka, not to divulge a knowledge of the Samhita-upanishad (Ait. Ar. III, 1-2), as here explained, is peculiar. It would have seemed self-evident that, like the rest of the sruti or sacred literature, the Aranyaka too, and every portion of it, could have been learnt from the mouth of a teacher only, and according to rule (niyamena), i. e. by a pupil performing all the duties of a student (brahmakarin [*2a]), so that no one except a regular pupil (antevasin) could possibly gain access to it. Nor can there be any doubt that we ought to take the words asamvatsaravasin and apravaktri as limitations, and to translate, 'Let no one tell these Samhitas to any pupil who has not at least been a year with his master, and who does not mean to become a teacher in turn.'

That this is the right view is confirmed by similar injunctions given at the end of the fifth Aranyaka. Here we have first some rules as to who is qualified to recite the Mahavrata. No one is permitted to do so, who has not passed through the Diksha, the initiation for the Agnishtoma. If the Mahavrata is performed as a Sattra, the sacrificer is a Hotri priest, and he naturally has passed through that ceremony. But if the Mahavrata is performed as an Ekaha or Ahina ceremony, anybody might be the sacrificer, and therefore it was necessary to say that no one who is adikshita, uninitiated, should recite it for another person; nor should he do so, [p. 267] when the Mahavrata is performed without (or with) an altar, or if it does not last one year. In saying, however, that one should not recite the Mahavrata for another person, parents and teachers are not to be understood as included, because what is done for them, is done for ourselves.

After these restrictions as to the recitation of the Mahavrata, follow other restrictions as to the teaching of it, and here we read, as at the end of the Upanishad:

4. 'Let no one teach this day, the Mahavrata, to one who is not a regular pupil (antevasin), and has been so for one year, certainly not to one who has not been so for one year; nor to one who is not a brahmakarin and does not study the same Veda [*1b], certainly not to one who does not study the same Veda; nor to one who does not come to him.

5. 'Let the teaching not be more than saying it once or twice, twice only.

6. 'One man should tell it to one man, so says Gatukarnya.

7. 'Not to a child, nor to a man in his third stage of life.

8. 'The teacher and pupil should not stand, nor walk, nor lie down, nor sit on a couch; but they should both sit on the ground.

9. 'The pupil should not lean backward while learning, nor lean forward. He should not be covered with too much clothing, nor assume the postures of a devotee, but without using any of the apparel of a devotee, simply elevate his knees. Nor should he learn, when he has eaten flesh, when he has seen blood, or a corpse, or when he has done an unlawful thing [*2b]; when he has anointed his eyes, oiled or rubbed his body, when he has been shaved or bathed, put colour on, or ornamented himself with flower-wreaths, when he has been writing or effacing his writing [*3b].

10. 'Nor should he finish the reading in one day, so says Gatukarnya, while according to Galava, he should finish it in one day. Agnivesyayana holds that he should finish all before the Trikasitis [*4b]^266:4b See Ait. Ar. I, 4, 3, 1-4.

^266:2a Apastamba-sutras, translated by Buhler, p. 18.

^266:1b See Gautama-sutras XIV, 21, and Buhler's note.

^266:2b Navratyam akramya is explained by the commentator by ukkhishtadyakramana.

^266:3b This, if rightly translated, would seem to be the earliest mention of actual writing in Sanskrit literature.

^266:1c Apastamba-sutras, translated by Buhler, p. 92 (I, 2, 30, 4).

^266:2c Apastamba-sutras, translated by Buhler, p. 33 (I, 3, 9, 2).

^266:3c Apastamba-sutras, translated by Buhler, p. 44 (I, 3, 11, 31).

^266:4c Apastamba-sutras, translated by Buhler, p. 33 (I, 3, 9, 1).

     
The Upanishads, Part 1 (SBE01), by Max Muller, [1879], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 269] [p. 270]