This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


f 


'kl- 


I 


*  '»_ 


lll^ 


I  I 


^rji.;- 


l< 


'^^W 

^^F 


t 


^ 


.# 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


"  ■    0 


TIIR 


HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA 

TRANSLATED 

WITH  A  POPULAR  COMMENTARY 


BY 


RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH 

FORMEELY  PRINCIPAL  OF   BENARES  CX^LLBGE 


VOL.  I 


•  •••••  • 

•  •  •  •  *    ■  • 


•    .v.:    ::•::•:.;:•.:■•*.•• 
3Benart0 

PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  E.  J.  LAZARUS  &  Ca 

SOLD    ALSO    BT 

LUZAC  AND  COMPANY,  LONDON. 


1895 

All  rights  reseix'ed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


•       ••••••         f, 

•    •         '     •  •   •     •         • 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CONTENTS. 


Paob. 

Prefacs                   ...            ...            ...            ...            ...  III. 

Hymns,  Translation  and  Commentary  .* — 

Book       I.                 ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  1 

„       n.                 ...             41 

in.           81 

IV.                 129 

V.                 187 

VI. 245 

VII.  '  327 

VIII.                385 

„      IX.                427 

Appendices  : — 

I.     Latin   version  of  hymns   and   stanzas   omitted 

in  the  English  translation             ...             ...  473 

I.     Index  of  Hymns .. .             ...             ...             ...  477 

III.     Index  of  Names,  Etc.         ...             ...             ...  491 

Corrigenda  et  Addenda          ...            ...            ...             ...  520 


jvi206532 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACE. 


Thc  Atharva-veda  is  a  comparatively  late  addition 
to  the  three  ancient  Vedas,  the  Kik^  Yajus^  and  S&man — 
the  Vedas  respectively  of  recited  praise,  sacrifice,  and 
song  or  chanted  hymn — which  formed  the  foundation  of 
the  early  religious  belief  and  worship  of  the  Hindus. 
Unlike  these  three  Vedas,  the  Atharva-veda  derives  the 
name  by  which  it  is  generally  known,  not  from  the 
nature  of  its  contents  but  from  a  personage  of  indefinite* 
ly  remote  antiquity  named  Atharvan,  who  is  spoken  of 
in  the  Rigveda  as  the  first  priest  who  *  rubbed  Agni 
forth ' .  or  produced  fire  by  attrition,  who  *  first  by 
sacrifices  made  the  paths '  or  established  ways  of  com* 
munication  between  men  and  Gods,  and  overcame 
hostile  demons  by  means  of  the  miraculous  powers 
which  he  had  received  from  heaven.  To  the  descend* 
ants  of  this  Atharvan,  associated  with  the  Angirasea 
and  the  Bhpgus,  members  of  other  ancient  priestly 
families  often  mentioned  in  the  l^igveda,  the  collected 
hymns— called  also  the  Atharv&ngirasas  andtheBhrig^ 
vangirasas,  that  is  the  Songs  of  the  Atharvans  and 
Angirases  and  the  Songs  of  the  Bhrigus  and  AngiraseSi 
and,  in  the  Gopatha-Br&hmapa,  the  Atharva^a-veda  and 
the  Angirasa-veda — were,  it  is  said,  originally  revealed. 

I         Yet  another  name  of  the  collection  of  hymns  is 
Brahma- veda,  whieh  is  variously  explained  as  (1)  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XV  PRBFACl. 

Veda  of  the  Brahman  or  chief  sacrificial  priest  whose 
duty  it  was  to  supervise  and  direct  the  whole  sacrifice 
and  to  remedy  all  fs^ults  of  omission  and  commission  in 
its  performance,  while  the  other  Vedas  are  respectively 
those  of  the  Hotar,  the  Adhvaryu,  and  the  UdgAtar 
.who  are  regarded  as  the  assistants  and  inferiors  of  the 
Brahman  ;  (2)  as  the  Knowledge  of  Prayers  {brahmdni)^ 
including  benediction,  imprecation,  spells  and  charms — 
the  Veda  which  teaches  to  appease  the  Gods  and  secure 
their  protecting  favour,  to  bless  friends,  and  to  curse 
and  destroy  human  and  ghostly  enemies,  and  all  noxious 
creatures  ;  (3)  as  the  Knowledge  or  Doctrine  of  Brahma, 
the  Supreme  Self,  Soul,  or  Spirit  with  which  the  soul 
of  man  is  finally  redintegrated  ;  the  followers  of  thi^ 
Veda  asserting  its  superiority  to  the  three  more  ancient 
Vedas  on  the  ground  that,  while  they  teach  men  to  ful- 
fil the  dharma  or  religious  law,  the  Brahma-veda  imparts 
the   sublime  and    mysterious    doctrine    which  enables 
those  who  study  it  to  attain  moksha^  deliverance  from 
further  transmigration,  and,  in  the  end,  complete  absorp- 
tion into  the  Absolute.     The  second  of  these  explana- 
tions seems,  from  our  point  of  view,  to  be  the  correct 
one,  and  the  Atharva  or  Brahma- veda  may  be  regarded 
as  the  Veda  of  Prayers,  Charms,  and  Spells. 

I  have  called  the  Atharva-veda  a  comparatively 
late  addition  to  the  three  ancient  Vedas,  of  which,  it 
may  be  observed,  one  only,  the  Rigveda,  is  original  and 
historical,  the  other  two  being  merely  liturgical  compi- 
lations. The  Atharva  is,  like  the  JElik,  in  the  main 
bii^torical  and  original,  but  its  contents  cannot,  as  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


whofe,  lay  claim  to  equal  antiquity.  Professor  Whitney 
Bays :  *  The  greater  portion  of  the  hymns  are  plainly 
6hown>  both  by  their  language  and  internal  character, 
to  be  of  much  later  date  than  the  general  contents  of 
the  other  historic  Veda,  and  even  than  its  tenth  book 
with  which  they  stand  nearly  connected  in  import  and 

origin This,  however,   would  not  imply  that 

the  main  body  of  the  Atharva  hymns  were  not  already 
in  existence  when  the  compilation  of  the  Bik  took  place. 
Their  character  would  be  ground  enough  for  their 
rejection  and  exclusion  from  the  canon  until  other 
hands  were  found  to  undertake  their  separate  gathering 
into  an  independent  collection/  Professor  Weber  also 
observes  :  *  The  origin  of  the  Atharva-Sarphitd  dates 
from  the  period  when  Brahmanism  had  become  domi- 
nant. It  is  in  other  respects  perfectly  analogous  to  the 
]^ik-Saiiihit4,  and  contains  the  store  of  song  of  this 
Brahmanical  epoch.  Many  of  these  songs  are  to  be 
found  also  in  the  last,  that  is  the  least  ancient  book  of 
the  ^ik-Samhit&.  In  the  latter  they  are  the  latest 
additions  made  at  the  time  of  its  compilation  ;  in  the 
Atharvan  they  are  the  proper  and  natural  utterance  of 
the  present.  The  spirit  of  the  two  collections  is  indeed 
widely  different  In  the  Rik  there  breathes  a  lively 
natural  feeling,  a  warm  love  for  nature;  while  in  the 
Atharvan  there  prevails,  on  the  contrary,  only  an 
anxious  dread  of  her  evil  spirits  and  their  magical 
powers.  In  the  Rik  we  find  the  people  in  a  state  of  free 
activity  and  independence ;  in  the  Atharvan  we  see  it 
bound  in  the  fetters  of  the  hierarchy  and  superstitiocu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Yl  PRIFACS. 

But  the  Atharva-Satphitd  likewise  contains  pieces  of 
great  antiquity,  which  may  perhaps  have  belonged  more 
to  the  people  proper,  to  its  lower  grades  ;  whereas  the 
songs  of  the  Rik  appear  rather  to  have  been  the  prop- 
erty of  the  higher  families.  It  was  not  without  a  long 
struggle  that  the  songs  of  the  Atharvan  were  permitted 
to  take  their  place  as  a  fourth  Veda.  There  is  no  men* 
tion  made  of  them  in  the  more  ancient  portions  of  the 
Br&hmaqias  of  the  ^ik,  S&man,  and  Yajus/  Still  as 
Professor  Max  MuUer  says,  *  the  songs  known  under  the 
name  of  the  Atharv&ngirasas  formed  probably  an  addii- 
tional  part  of  the  sacrifice  from  a  very  early  time.  They 
were  chiefly  intended  to  counteract  the  influence  of  any 
untoward  event  that  might  happen  during  the  sacrifice. 
They  also  contained  imprecations  and  blessings,  and 
various  formulas  such  as  popular  superstition  would  be 
sure  to  sanction  at  all  times  and  in  all  countries.  If  once 
sanctioned,  however,  these  magic  verses  would  grow  in 
importance,  nay,  the  knowledge  of  the  other  Vedas  would 
necessarily  become  useless  without  the  power  of  remedy- 
ing accidents,  such  as  could  hardly  be  avoided  in  so 
complicated  a  ceremonial  as  that  of  the  Brahmans.  As 
that  power  was  believed  to  reside  in  the  songs  of  the 
Atharv&ngirasas,  a  knowledge  of  these  songs  became 
necessarily  an  essential  part  of  the  theological  knowledge 
of  Ancient  India/* 

*  For  further  information  see  yon  Roth's  Litteratur  und  Oesohichte 
des  Weda,  pp.  12,  13,  and  his  Abhandlung  (iber  den  Atharva-yeda ; 
Weber's  Hbtory  of  Indian  Literature  (Trttbner's  Oriental  Series),  pp. 
145 — 171 ;  Whitney's  articles  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Atharva-veda  Sanbitft  or  Collection  is  divided 
into  twenty  kdndas.  Books  or  Sections,  containing  some 
seven  hundred  and  sixty  hymns  and  about  six  thousand 
verses.  In  Books  I. — VII.  the  hymns  or  pieces  are  ar- 
ranged according  to  tbe  number  of  their  verses,  without 
any  reference  to  their  subjects  or  the  nature  of  their 
contents.  The  hymns  of  Book  I.  contain  on  an  average 
four  verses  each  ;  those  of  Book  II.  five  ;  tbose  of  III. 
six ;  those  of  IV.  seven  ;  those  of  V.  from  eight  to 
eighteen ;  tbose  of  VI.  three  ;  those  of  VII.  many 
single  verses,  and  upwards  to  eleven.  Books  VIII. — 
XX.  contain  longer  pieces,  some  of  which  extend  to  fifty ^ 
sixty,  seventy,  and  even  eighty  verses.  In  Books  I. — 
XIII.  the  contents  are  of  the  most  heterogeneous  de- 
scription with  no  attempt  at  any  kind  of  systematic 
arrangement  of  subjects.  They  consist  principally  of 
prayers,  formulas,  and  charms  for  protection  against  evil 
spirits  of  all  sorts  and  kinds,  against  sorcerers  and  sor- 
ceresses, diseases,  snakes,  and  other  noxious  creatures, 
of  benedictions  and  imprecations,  invocations  of  magical 
herbs,  prayers  for  children  and  long  life,  for  general  and 
special  protection  and  prosperity,  success  in  love,  trade, 
and  gambling,  together  with  formulas  to  be  employed  in 
all  kinds  of  domestic  occurrences.  In  Books  XIV. — 
XVIII.  the  subjects  are  systematically  arranged  ;  XIV. 
treating  of  marriage  ceremonies ;  XV.  of  the  glorifica- 
tion of  the  Vrfi,tya  or  religious  wandering  mendicant ; 

Sooiety,  Vol.  IV. ;  Max  Mailer's  Ancient  SaDskrit  Literature,  pp.  445 — 
455;  Muir'a  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  II.  pp.  187—191,  and  44«— 460  ; 
and  Ludwig's  Der  Rigveda,  III.  pp.  28,  29 ;  or  Chambers's  Encyclopsedia; 
or  the  Encjclopcedia  Britannica  under  Veda. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Vni  PRSFACX. 

XVl.  and  XVII.  of  certain  conjurations  ;  XVIII.  of 
funeral  rites  and  the  offering  of  obsequial  cakes  to  the 
Manes  or  spirits  of  departed  ancestors.  Book  XIX. 
contains  a  somewhat  miscellaneous  collection  of  supple^ 
inentary  hymns.  Book  XX.  consists — with  the  exception 
of  what  is  called  the  Kunt&pa  Section,  comprising 
hymns  127 — 136 — of  pieces  addressed  to  Indra  and 
taken  entirely  from  the  Kigveda.  These  two  Books, 
which  are  not  noticed  in  the  Atharva-veda  Pr&tis&khya 
— a  grammatical  treatise  on  the  phonetic  changes  of 
words  in  the  text — are  manifestly  a  later  addition  to  the 
Collection.  Many  of  the  Atharva  hymns  reappear  in  the 
lligveda,  about  one-seventh  of  the  Collection,  sometimes 
unchanged  and  sometimes  with  important  variations, 
being  found  in  the  older  compilation.  Interspersed  in 
several  of  the  Books  are  pieces  of  varying  length  con- 
sisting of  curious  cosmogonical  and  mystico-theological 
speculations  which  are  not  without  interest  as  contain- 
ing the  germs  of  religious  and  philosophical  doctrines 
afterwards  fully  developed  in  the  Br&hmai?as  and  Upa^ 
iiishads. 

In  this  strange  collection  of  heterogeneous  material 
there  is  much  that  is  obscure,  much  that  is  unintelligi-^ 
ble,  much  that  is  intolerably  tedious,  and  not  a  little 
that  is  offensive  and  disgusting  to  European  taste.  Yet 
the  spiritual  portions  of  the  work  have  sometimes  a 
strange  beauty  and  grandeur  of  their  own  which  attracts 
and  fascinates  the  orthodox  Hindu,  while  the  occasional 
glimpses  of  light  which  it  throws  upon  the  daily  life, 
the  toils  and  pleasures,  the  hopes  and  fears,  the  joys  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


T%WA(ms  IX 

sorrows  of  the  aiverage  man  invests  y;>  I  think,  fotthe 
European  reader  with  greater  and  more  human  interest^ 
than  is  possessed  bj  the  more  ancient  Veda.  Setting 
aside  the  rivalries,  wars,  and  conquests  of  kings  and^ 
princes,  and  the  lofty  claims  and  powers  of  the  hie-, 
rarohy,  we  may  follow  the  course  of  the  middle-class 
Aryan^s  life  from  the  cradle  to  the  funeral  pile,  and 
even  accompany  him  to  his  final  home  in  the  world  of - 
the  Departed.  We  hear  the  benedictive  charm  pro-> 
nounced  over  the  expectant  mother  before  her  child  is 
born,  the  blessing  on  the  new-born  infant,  and  in  due » 
time  on  the  darling^s  first  two  teeth.  We  attend  the 
solemn  ceremony  in  which  tho  youth  is  invested  with  > 
his  toffa  virilis,  the  new  garment  whose  assumption 
^gnifies  his  recognition  as  an  adult  member  of  the  family 
with  new  responsibilities  and  new  duties  to  perform.  As 
his  fancy  turhs  to  thoughts  of  love,  we  hear  him  mur- 
muring the  charm  which  shall  win  him  the  maiden  of 
his  choice,  and  the  lullaby  which  shall  seal  every  eye 
hut  hers  in  his  beloved's  house  and  enable  him  to  visit 
her  without  detection  or  suspicion.  We  follow  him  in  his 
formal  and  son^what  unoromantic  wooing  of  a  bride 
through  a  friend  who  acts  as  match-maker ;  we  see  the 
nuptial  procession  and  the  bride's  introduction  to  her 
new  home  ;  we  hear  her  benediction  on  the  bridegroom, 
and  the  epithalamium  pronounced  over  the  wedded  pair. 
The  young  husband  is  an  agriculturist,  and  we  see  him 
in  his  field  superintending  the  ploughmen  and  praying 
to  Indra  and  Pdshan  and  the  Genii  of  agriculture  to 
bless  their  labours.  Anon,  with  propitiatory  prayer,  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


18  ouiting  a  new  ehannel  to  bring  the  water  of  the  brook 
to  the  land  which  is  ready  for  irrigation  ;  or  he  is  pray- 
ing for  rain  and  an  abundant  crop.  Again,  when,  the 
corn  is  ripe  he  is  busy  among  the  men  who  gather  in 
the  harvest,  invoking  the  aid  of  the  good-natured  gob- 
lins— the  counterparts  of  our  Bobin  Goodfellows — ,  and 
leaving  on  the  ground  some  sheayes  to  remunerate  their 
toil.  At  sunset  he  superintends  the^  return  of  the 
cows  who  have  been  grazing  under  the  protection  of  the 
Wind-God  in  the  breezy  pastures,  and  their  return  un- 
der divine  guidance,  and  the  re-union  of  all  the  members 
of  the  household,  are  celebrated  with  symbolical  mixt 
oblation,  with  milk  and  a  brew  of  grain. 

His  wealth  and  family  increase  in  answer  to  bis  repeat* 
ed  prayer  for  children  and  riches,  and  a  new  house  must 
be  built  on  a  larger  seale.  The  building  is  erected  under 
the  careful  eye  of  the  master  and  blessed  and  consecrat- 
ed with  prayers  to  the  Gods  and  to  the  Queen  of  the 
Home.  The  mistress  of  the  house  brings  forth  the  well- 
filled  pitcher,  all  present  are  regaled  with  *  the  stream  of 
molten  butter  blent  with  nectar' — which  seems  to  be  a 
euphemistic  name  for  some  sort  of  good  liquor — ,  and  the 
householder  enters  and  takes  formal  possession  of  his 
new  dwelling  with  fire  and  water,  the  two  most  import- 
ant necessaries  of  human  life.  The  house,  moreover — a 
wooden  building  with  a  thatched  roof — has  been  speci- 
ally assured  against  fire  by  a  prayer  to  Agni  the  God  of 
that  element  with  the  additional  security  offered  by  the 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  a  good  stream  or  pool  of 
water. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PRBFACK.  XI 

Such,  or  something  like  this,  was  the  ordinary  life 
of  the  average  middle-class  agriculturist.  A  devout 
believer  in  the  Gods,  he  did  not  spend  his  substance  on 
the.  performance  of  costly  sacrifices,  but  was  content 
with  simple  ceremonies  and  such  humble  offerings  as  he 
could  well  afford.  His  chief  care  was  for  the  health  and 
well-beipg  of  himself,  his  wife,  children,  and  dependents, 
for  plentiful  harvests,  and  for  thriving  and  multiplying 
cattle  ;  and  these  were  the  blessings  for  which  he  most 
frequently  prayed.  His  chief  troubles  were  an  occasional 
touch  of  malarial  fever  or  rheumatism,  a  late  or  scanty 
rain-fall,  a  storm  that  lodged  his  ripe  barley,  lightning 
that  struck  his  cattle,  and  similar  mischances  caused  by 
the  anger  of  the  Gods  or  the  malevolence  of  demons; 
and  he  was  always  armed  with  prayers  and  spells 
against  the  recurrence  of  such  disasters.  He  was  a  man 
of  importance  in  his  village,  and  when  he  attended  the 
Assembly — which  may  have  been  a  kind  of  Municipal 
Committee  or  Parish  Council — his  great  ambition  was  to 
command  respect  and  attention  as  a  speaker,  and  with 
this  view  he  fortified  himself  with  charm  and  magic  herb 
that  inspired  eloquence  and  enabled  hira  to  overpower 
his  opponents  in  debate.  His  life,  on  the  whole,  was 
somewhat  monotonous  and  dull,  but  it  seems  to  have 
suited  him  as  he  was  continually  praying  that  it  might 
be  extended  to  its  full  natural  duration  of  a  hundred 
years.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  with  his  sons  and  his 
sons'  children  around  him,  he  was  ready  to  pass  away  to 
the  felicity  that  awaited  him  in  the  world  of  the  Fathers. 

The  small  merchant  or  trader  lived  a  less  settled 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XII  HIEPACK. 

life  and  saw  more  of  the  world  than  the  agriculturist. 
We  see  hiin  on  the  point  of  starting  on  a  journey  for 
business  purposes  with  his  little  stock  of  goods.  He 
first  propitiates  Indra  who  is  a  merchant  also,  the  God 
who  trades  and  traffics  with  his  worshippers,  requiring^ 
and  receiving  prayer  and  oblations  in  exchange  for  the 
blessings  which  he  sends,  and  who  will  now  free  the 
travelling  merchant's  path  from  wild  beasts,  robbers^ 
and  enemies  of  every  kind.  He  prays  also  to  many 
other  deities  that  he  may  make  rich  profit  and  gain  a 
hundred  treasures,  and  commits  the  care  of  his  children 
and  cattle  in  his  absence  to  Agni  the  God  of  all  Aryan 
men.  His  ritual  is  an  extensive  one  as  be  msLj  be  about 
to  journey  to  all  points  of  the  compass,  and  he  must 
accordingly  conciliate  all  the  divine  Warders  of  the 
heavenly  regions.  He  has  to  recite  sooke  ten  hymns  of 
Book  VI.,  invoking  the  aid  of  all  protecting  deities,  not 
forgetting  to  consult  the  Weather-Prophet  and  to  obtain 
from  him  the  promise  of  auspicious  morning^,  noons,  and 
nights.  He  bids  an  affectionate  farewell  to  the  bousea 
of  his  village,  and  departs  on  his  way  encouraged  by  the 
hymn  which  ensures  him  a  safe  and  successful  journey^ 
In  due  time  he  returns  having  bartered  his  wares  for  the 
treasures  of  distant  places,  for  bdellium  and  other 
fragrant  gums  and  unguents,  for  Kush^ha  and  other 
foreign  plants  and  drugs  of  healing  virtue,  for  mother-of- 
pearl,  ornaments  for  the  women,  and  perhaps  cloth  of 
finer  wool. 

The  merchant's  object  in  life  is  gain,  and  be  is  not 
always  very  scrupulous  in  his  dealings.     If  he  is  in  debt 


Digitized  by 


Google 


mwkOE.  xiir 

he  would  prefer  to  be  freed  by  the  intervention  of  a  God, 
and  not  by  his  own  exertions;  and  he  is  bold  enough 
even  to  pray  for  release  Arom  debts  whioh  be  has  incurred 
without  intending  to  pay  them.  He  is  probably  the 
gambler  who  prays  for  success  in  play,  and  for  pardon 
when  he  has  been  guilty  of  cheating. 

We  naturally  see  much  less  of  the  life  of  women 
in  the  Atharva-veda,  but  a  fair  proportion  of  the  hymns 
is  devoted  to  them  and  their  interests.  We  find  inter- 
spersed among  them  the  love-charms  of  enamoured  maidr 
ens,  the  Bride  Oracle  or  ceremony  of  finding  a  husband^ 
the  nuptial  procession,  and  the  bride's  entry  into  her 
husband's  house  as  its  honoured  mistress,  the  epitha-^ 
lamian  benediction,  and  many  spells  and  charms  to  ensure 
her. safety  and  well-being.  The  mistress  of  the  household 
had  her  share  of  duties,  cares,  and  troubles  as  well  as 
her  quiet  joys  and  pleasures,  and  she  sometimes  launches 
a  furious  and  revengefhl  imprecation  against  her  un-^ 
faithful  husband,  and  with  a  solemn  incantation  invokes 
death  and  destructidn  upon  her  successful  rivals. 

The  text  of  the  Atharva-veda,  with  'some  amend- 
ment of  the  numerous  and  obvious  fklse  readings  of  the 
manuscripts,  and  some  attempts  to  bring  sense  out  of 
the  utter  nonsense  which  constitutes  part  of  the  last  two 
books,'  was  published  at  Berlin,  in  1856,  by  Professors 
Budolf  von  Both  and  W.  D.  Whitney.  The  intention 
of  these  distinguished  scholars  was  to  prepare  and  pub- 
lish a  second  volume  containing  complete  indexes^  notes, 
and  translation,      Circumstances  have,  unfortunately, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XIV  PRBFACK. 

prevented  the  full  execution  of  this  project ;  but  a  most 
valuable  portion  of  the  intended  work,  Professor 
Whitney^s  Index  Verborum  to  the  Published  Text, 
appeared  in  1881  as  Vol.  XII*  of  the  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society  *  The  Saunaklyft^^  Chaturt- 
dhy4yik&,  or  the  Atharva-veda  Pr&tis4khya^  text,  trans- 
lation, and  notes,  was  published  by  Professor  Whitney,, 
in  1862,  in  Vol.  VII.  of  the  same  Socnety.  Of  the 
two  existing  ritual  Si!ktras  of  this  Veda,  an  excellent 
edition  of  the  Kauaika,  with  extracts  from  the  com- 
mentaries of  D4rila  and  Kesava,  has  been  brought  out,. 
as  Vol.  XIV.  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  by  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfield ;  and  Dr. 
Richard  Garbe  has  published  a  careful  edition  of  the  text 
of  the  VaitAna,  with  critical  notes  and  indexes,  followed 
by  a  commented  translation  of  the  work.  An  Anukra- 
maijii  or  Index  to  the  Atharva-veda  is  extant.  I  am 
indebted  to  Mr.  W.  H.  Wright,  Principal  of  Queen's 
College,  Benares,  and  to  the  Librarian  of  the  Sanskrit 
College,  for  the  loan  of  a  copy  of  this  work  borrowed 
from  a  gentleman  of  Benares. 

Portions  of  a  Commentary  cwcribed — but  without 
sufficient  authority — to  S&yapa,  were  discovered,  some 
fourteen  years  ago,  by  EAo  Bah4dur  Shankar  Pandurang 
Pandit,  of  Bombay,  and  have  been  printed,  but  not 

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  Professor  Whitney,  to  the  great  losa 
of  Sanskrit  literature,  has  passed  away  to  the  Fathers.  I  learn  from  & 
notice  of  his  life  and  labours  reprinted  from  the  New  York  Nation  that 
he  has  left  in  manuscript  nearly  ready  for  the  press  an  annotated  tran&> 
lation  of  the  Atharva-veda,  which  will,  I  hope,  soon  be  pubUalied. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACB.  Xr 

published,  in  their  incomplete  state.  The  Pandit  is  still 
waiting — hopelessly,  I  fear — for  the  missing  portions,  of 
which  no  trace  has  as  yet  been  found.  I  have  not 
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  printed  sheets,  but  Professor 
Whitney  who  has  seen  them  says  (Festgruss  an  Rudolf 
von  Roth  zum  Doktor-Jubilaum,  1893,  p.  96):  'What 
there  is  that  is  valuable  in  the  Atharva-veda  commentary, 
apart  from  the  various  readings,  is,  on  the  whole,  only 
what  it  derives  and  reports  from  the  auxiliary  literature 
to  which  we  also  have  access.  Independently,  and  as  com- 
mentary, I  have  not  found  that  it  anywhere  makes  import- 
ant contribution  to  the  understanding  of  the  text.'  One 
Br&hmaqia,  the  Gopatha  (published  in  the  Bibliotheca 
Indica,  1870-72),  belongs  to  the  Atharva-veda,  and  its 
Upanishads,  many  of  which  are  of  comparatively  recent 
date,  are  said  to  number  one  hundred  and  forty-five. 

There  is  no  complete  or  nearly  complete  translation 
of  the  Atharva-veda  in  any  European  language.  Profes- 
sor von  Roth  has  published  versions  of  a  few  hymns  in 
his  History  and  Literature  of  the  Veda,  and  elsewhere. 
Professor  Weber  has  published  in  Indische  Studien, 
Vols.  IV.,  XIII.,  and  XVII.,  an  excellent  translation, 
with  exhaustive  notes,  of  Books  I — III.,  and  in  Vol.  V. 
the  nuptial  formulas  contained  in  Book  XIV.  with  a 
great  variety  of  love-charms  and  similar  formulas  from 
other  Books.  Mr.  Muir  has  translated  some  entire 
hymns  and  many  fragments  and  detached  verses  and 
lines  in  his  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  especially  in  the  fifth 
volume  of  that  excellent  work.  Professor  Ludwig  has 
translated — unfortunately  without  a  commentary — ^about 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Xn  PBBFAOI. 

two  hundred  and  thirty  of  the  most  importaDt  hymns* 
Dr.  Grill  in  his  Hundert  Lieder  des  Athatva-veda  has 
translated  and  annotated  one  hundred.  M.  Victor  Henry 
has  published  a  translation  and  commentary  of  Books 
VII.  and  XIII.  Herr  Florenz  has  published  a  version 
of  about  half  of  Book  VI.  Dr.  Lucian  Scherman  has 
translated  and  elucidated  thirteen  of  the  philosophical 
hymns,  chiefly  from  Books  X.,  XI.,  XIII.,  and  XIX., 
and  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfleld  has  thoroughly  dis« 
cussed  and  partly  translated  seven  hymns  of  Books 
I.,  II.,  and  VI.  in  the  American  Journal  of  Philology, 
Vol.  VII.  4. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of  Herr 
Flore  nz's  work,  but  with  this  exception  I  have  derived 
the  greatest  possible  benefit  and  assistance  from  all  the 
translations  and  commentaries  that  I  have  mentioned, 
and  I  readily  and  thankfully  acknowledge  my  general 
indebtedness  to  their  authors  independently  of,  and  in 
addition  to,  special  references  in  my  notes  and  Index  pf 
Names,  Etc.  I  need  hardly  say  that  the  great  St. 
Petersburg  Lexicon  has  been  constantly  referred  to,  as 
well  as  the  dictionaries  of  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams  and 
Professor  Macdonell,  von  Koth's  edition  of  the  Nirukta, 
Th.  Zachariae's  edition  of  the  Anek&rthasamgraha, 
Delbriick's  Das  Altindische  Verbum,  and  the  Vedische 
Studien  of  Professors  Pisohel  and  Geldner.  The  Index 
Verborum  edited  by  Professor  Whitney  I  have  found  of 
the  very  greatest  service.  Professor  Zimmer's  Altindis- 
ches  Leben  has  also  greatly  assisted  me,  and  much  light 
has  been  thrown  upon  obscure  passages  by  Professor 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Bloomfield's  edition  of  the  Kausika-SAtra  and  Dr.  Garbe'a 
VaitAna-SAtra. 

My  plan  of  translation  is  that  previously  adopted 
in  my  versions  of  the  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda  and  SAma- 
veda»  While  aiming  especially  at  close  fidelity  to  the 
letter  and  spirit  of  the  original  I  have  endeavoured  to 
make  my  translation  as  readable  and  intelligible  as  the 
nature  of  subjects  and  other  circumstances  permit.  I 
have  also  attempted  to  preserve  something  of  the  external 
form  of  the  original  hymns  by  rendering  them— in 
general,  so  far  as  I  found  it  possible  or  expedient— in 
syllabically  commensurate  hemistichs  and  verses.  The 
prevailing  metres  of  the  original  hymns  are  Gdyatr!, 
Anushtup,  Pankti,  Trishtup,  and  Jagatl,  consisting,  the 
first  three  of  three,  four,  and  five  octosyllabic  P4das  or 
divisions,  and  the  last  two  of  four  hendecasyllabic  and 
dodecasyllabic  PAdas  respectively.  In  translating  the 
first  set  I  have  employed  corresponding  numbers  of  the 
common  octosyllabic  or  dimeter  iambic  line,  and  in  the 
second  of  the  ordinary  hypercatalectic  blank  verse  line 
and  the  Alexandrine.  I  have  not  attempted  to  reproduce 
the  rhythm  or  tonic  metre  of  the  original :  such  a  task, 
supposing  its  satisfactory  execution  to  be  possible,  would 
require  more  skill  than  I  possess,  and  more  time  and 
labour  than  I  could  spare  for  the  purpose.  Moreover, 
I  have  found  it  impossible  to  carry  out  universally  my 
general  plan  of  translation.  Parts  of  the  Atharva-veda, 
for  instance  Book  XV.  and  the  greater  portion  of 
XVI.,  are  entirely  in  prose,  and  hymns,  verses,  and  parts 
of  verses  in  prose  are  found  in  other  Books  also.     '  It  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XVIII  PRBFAGB* 

not  possible/  as  Professor  Whitney  observes,  '  to  draw^ 
everywhere  a  sharp  line  between  metrical  and  non-metri- 
cal matter ;  prose  and  loose  verse  slide  into  one  another 
sometimes  in  a  perplexing  manner,  or  are  mixed  up  in 
the  same  stanza/ 

I  cannot  conclude  without  publicly  expressing  my 
deep  obligations  to  Messrs.  E.  J.  Lazarus  k  Co.  of 
Benares  for  their  spirited  liberality  in  undertaking  of 
their  own  accord  and  at  their  own  risk  the  publication 
of  a  costly  work  which  is  not  likely  to  be  pecuniarily 
remunerative. 


R  T.  H.  GRIFFITH. 


KOTAOIRI,  NlLGIRI  HlLLS  : 

1st  November,  1894* 


-^•^^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE 

HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHAEVA  VEDA. 


BOOK  THE  FIRST. 


HYMN  I. 

Now  may  V&cbaspati  assign  to  me  the  strength  and 

powers  of  Those 
Who,   wearing   every   shape   and   form,   the   triple 

seven,  are  wandering  round. 

The  hymn,  which  is  introductory  to  the  whole  Book,  is  a  prayer 
addressed  to  Vachaspati  for  divine  help,  favour,  and  illumination.  The 
metre  is  Anushtup,  consisting  of  four  equal  octosyllabic  p&dsis,  divisions, 
or  quarter-verses.  The  name  means,  perhaps,  *the  *  After-step,*  be- 
cause each  line  was  stamped  regularly  after  the  other,  possibly  by  two 
choruses,  each  side  taking  its  turn:'  see  M.  MUller,  Vedic  Hymns, 
Part  1.  p.  xcvL 

1  Vdchaspati :  or,  Lord  of  Speech  ;  the  God  or  Genius  of  human  life 
which  lasts  as  long  as  the  power  of  speech  remains  in  the  body.  The 
name  occurs  in  the  Bigveda,  X.  1 66. 3 : '  Press  down  these  men,  Vichaspati, 
(or,  0  Lord  of  Speech)  that  they  may  humbly  speak  to  me;*  and 
stanzas  17 — 19  of  Atharva-veda  XIII.  I  are  addressed  to  this  God. 
In  Bigveda  IX.  26.  4  and  101.  5  the  name  is  applied  to  Soma  as  the 
exhilarating  drink  which  makes  men  eloquent  and  inspires  the  song. 
Vachaspati  is  classed  in  the  Nirukta  among  the  deities  of  the  firma- 
ment or  middle  sphere  between  heaven  and  earth.  His  name,  being 
compounded  with  pdti^  indicates  a  more  recent  deification  than  that  of 
the  great  Powers  of  Nature  whose  presence  and  superhimian  influence 
were  immediately  seen  and  felt. 

TImu  :  the  Gods  in  general ;  or  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods. 

The  triple  seven:  trishapUth ;  a  fanciful  expression  for  an  indefinite 
number.     So  trih  saptd  vUkpulingakdy  the  three  times  seven  l)right 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

2  Come   thou   again,    Vdchaspati,   come    with   divine 

intelligence. 
Vasoshpati,  repose  thou  here.    In  me  be  Knowledge, 
yea,  in  me. 

3  Here,  even  here,  spread  sheltering  arms  like  the  two 

bow-ends  strained  with  cord. 
This  let  VAchaspati  confirm.     In  me  be  Knowledge, 
yea,  in  me. 

4  V&chaspati   hath   been   invoked :  may  he  invite  us 

in  reply. 
May  we  adhere  to  Sacred  Lore.     Never  may  I  be 
reft  thereo£ 

sparks  of  fire;  and  trih  saptd  mayHryhh,  the  peahens  three  times 
seven  (Rigveda  I.  191.  12,  14).  In  Atharva-veda  XIII.  1.  3  the  Maruts, 
who  are  said  to  form  nine  troops  of  seven  each,  are  called  the  triple 
seven,  irishapUSlso  marutahy  instead  of  the  thrice-three  seven;  and 
these  powerful  deities  may  be  intended  here  also.  Professor  Weber 
would  derive  the  word  from  the  root  sup^  a  secondary  form  of  sach,  to 
cleave  to,  to  follow,  of  which  sapta  would  be  the  past  participle  passive 
used  in  the  sense  of  combination,  and  trishupt  Vh  might  then  mean 
triply  combined,  *  Gods  of  three  spheres,'  the  three  classes  of  deities  whose 
spheres  of  activity  are  respectively  heaven,  atmosphere  or  firmament, 
and  earth.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  translates  triskaptSh  in 
this  passage  by  *  zu  Dutzendeu,'  in  dozens. 

2  Vasoshjxiti :  Lord  of  Treasure,  that  is,  of  wealth  and  food,  accord- 
ing to  Durga,  the  Commentator  of  the  Nirukta.  Vasoshpati  is  not 
mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Veda. 

Knowledge :  smtdm ;  that  which  was  heard  (from  the  beginning), 
the  Veda,  revelation,  or  sacred  knowledge.  According  to  the  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  ^  Gehor,'  hearing,  is  meant.  The  Nirukta  X.  18 
has  ni  rdvfiaya  mdyyeva  tanHam  mdmay  *  maintain  my  self  within  me/ 
keep  my  body  and  soul  together,  that  I  may  enjoy  the  possessions  of 
which  thou,  Vasoshpati,  art  the  controller. 

Book  I.  has  been  excellently  translated  and  fully  annotated  by  Weber 
in  Indische  Studien,  IV.  pp.  393 — 430.  Professor  Ludwig,  also,  has 
translated  fifteen  of  the  hymns  in  Der  Rigveda,  Vol.  III.  and  Dr.  Grill 
has  translated  and  annotated  five. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MN  2.]  THE  ATUARVjL-VEDA.  9 

HYMN  II. 

Wb  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  Parjanya,  hberal 

nourisher, 
Know  well   his   mother  Prithivl,   Earth   with   her 

manifold  designs. 

2  Do  thou,   O   Bowstring,   bend  thyself  around  us: 

make  my  body  stone. 
Firm  in  thy  strength  drive  far  away  malignities  and 
hateful  things. 

3  When,   closely  clinging  round    the  wood,  the  bow- 

string sings  triumph  to  the  swift  and  whizzing  arrow, 
Indra,  ward  off  from  us  the  shaft,  the  missile. 


This  hymn  is  a  charm  against  acute  diarrhoea  or  dysentery.  The 
metre  is  Dvipada  Tnshtup,  consisting  of  three  padas  or  divisions  of 
eleven  syllables  each,  in  stanza  3,  and  Anushtup  in  the  i*est. 

1  Parjanya :  derived  probably  from  an  original  root  parj,  to  sprinkle 
or  moisten,  is  the  rain-cloud  and  the  divine  power,  or  God,  that 
animates  it,  the  generator  and  nourisher  of  plants  and  animal  life. 
Parjanya  has  been  identified  with  the  Lituanian  Perkunas,  the  God  of 
thunder:  see  Max  MUller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?,  pp.  183  sqq. 
See  also  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index,  for  hymns  addressed 
to  this  deity.  Parjanya  is  called  the  fatJur  of  the  shaft  or  arrow,  which 
is  to  be  employed  in  the  charm,  on  account  of  the  rapid  growth,  in  the 
rainy  season,  of  the  9ard  (Saccharum  Sara),  the  reed  of  which  arrows 
were  made,  9ard  meaning,  like  the  Latin  arundo,  both  reed  and  arrow. 

Prithivi :  for  prithviy  broad  Earth  personified  as  the  mother  of  all 
beings.  With  her  manifold  designs:  with  her  countless  inventions 
and  productions.  According  to  others  bhU'rivarpasam  means  *  many- 
shaped,'  <  presenting  many  appearances.'  Of.  Spenser's  '  the  dsedale 
earth.' 

2  Bowstring:  which  is  to  be  twisted  round  the  patient's  body 
during  the  recitation  of  the  charm.     Stone :  sound  and  strong. 

3  The  wood :  literally,  the  tree,  meaning  the  bow.  Jndra :  ad- 
dressed as  being  the  God  of  battle  and  the  chief  tutelary  deity  of  the 
Aryans. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

4  As  in  its  flight   the  arrow's   point   hangs   between 
earth  and  firmament, 
So   stand   this   Munja  grass   between  ailment  and 
dysenteric  ill ! 

HYMN    IIL 

We  know  the  father  of  the   shaft,   Parjanya  strong 

with  hundred  powers  : 
By  t'.is  may  1  bring  health  unto  thy  body  :  let  the 

channels  pour  their  burthen  freely  as  of  old. 

4  Hang* :  literally,  stands. 

5  Munja  grots :  mufija  (Saccharum  Munja)  is  a  soit  of  rush  or  grass 
which  grows  to  the  height  of  about  ten  feet.  It  is  used  in  basket-work, 
and  the  mekkal^  or  girdle  worn  by  Brilhinans  is  made  from  it.  It 
appears  from  the  Kausika-Siitra,  XXV.  6,  and  D^la's  Commentary 
themon,  that  the  head  of  a  stalk  of  Munja  grass  is  to  be  tied  with  a 
cord,  then,  perhaps,  to  he  suspended  from  the  neck  of  the  patient  or 
to  be  otherwise  attached  to  his  body.  As  the  dischaiged  arrow  hangs 
between  heaven  and  earth,  so  the  grass  is  to  stand  between  the  patient's 
ailment  and  dirdndy  diarrhoea  in  an  acute  form,  or  dysentery,  that  is, 
to  prevent  the  indisposition  from  developing  into  serious  disease.  The 
word  dtrd^  from  sru,  to  flow,  +  d,  has  been  translated  difibrently  by 
Professors  Ludwig  and  Zimmer,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Darila 
has  correcUy  explained  it  by  aUsdraj  diarrhoea  or  dysentery.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Kausika-Siitra  the  patient  has  also  to  drink  a  mixture 
oontiining  earth  taken  from  a  field  and  a  lump  hiU  of  ants,  and  is  to 
be  anointed  with  sacrificial  molten  butter,  with  yet  further  treatment. 
See  remarks  on  this  hymn  by  Professor  Maurice  Bloomfield  (to  whom 
we  are  indebted  for  an  excellent  edition  of ,  the  Kausika-Siitra)  in  the 
American  Journal  of  Philology,  Vol.  VII.  pp.  466—469. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  constipation  and  suppression  of  urine. 
It  closely  resembles  Hymn  II.  in  its  adoption  of  the  formula,  We  know 
the  father  of  the  shaft ;  and  in  the  symbolical  discharge  of  the  arrow 
in  stanza  9.    The  metre  is  Pankti,  consisting  of  five  octosyllabic  padas. 

1  Parjanya  :  see  preceding  hymn,  note  on  stansa  1.  By  tkU :  with 
the  aid  of  this  arrow.  Let  the  channels  pour  :  my  translation  of  the 
latter  part  of  this  refrain  is  not  literal :  In  terram  dejecta  cadant  tua 
cum  sonitu  hdl,  would,  though  barbarous,  he  a  closer  version :  bdii  is 
an  interjection  imitative  of  the  sound  of  a  falling  substance. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMir  3.]  TEK  ATBARVATEDA,  6 

2  We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  Mitra,  the  Lord  of 

hundred  powers  : 
By  this,  etc. 

3  We  know  the  father  of  the  shaft,  Varu^a,  strong 

with  hundred  powers  : 
By  this,  etc. 

4  We  know  the  father  of  the  shafts  the  Moon  endowed 

with  hundred  powers  : 
By  this,  etc* 

5  We  know  the  &ther  of  the  shaft,  the  Sun  endowed 

with  hundred  powers  : 
By  this  may  I  bring  health  unte  thy  body  :  let  the 
channels  pour  their  burthen  freely  as  of  old. 

6  Whatever  hath  gathered,  as   it  flowed,   in  bowels,. 

bladder,  or  in  groins, — 
Thus  let  the  conduit,  free  from  ohedc,  pour  all  it& 
burthen  as  of  old. 

7  I  lay  the  passage  open  as  one  cleaves  the  dam  thai 

bars  the  lake : 
Thus  let,  etc. 

8  Now  hath  the  portal  been  unclosed  as  of  the  sea  thai 

holds  the  flood  : 
Thus  let,  etc. 

2  Mitra :  the  Friend,  the  gracious  God,  the  Zend  Mithra.  See 
Hjnms  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index.  Mitra  is,  perhaps,  oalled  the 
father  of  ikt  fiiafi  beoausa  it  grows  by  day  over  which  that  deity  as  a 
lorm  of  the  Sun  presides. 

3  Varvma:  the  Coverer  or  Eboompasser;  onginaHy  the  visihie 
starry  heaven.  Varuna's  oonnexion  with  the  shaft  or  reed  is  not  very 
obvious.  The  growth  of  the  future  arrow  by  night,  over  whieh  VarutMi 
presides,  may,  perikape,  be  tiie  ground  d  relationship. 

4  The  Moon :  the  infltKnoe  ol  die  Moon  on  the  sap  and  growth  of 
plants,  of  which  Soma  (another  name  of  the  Moon)  is  the  King,  is  fre- 
quently alluded  to. 

5  The  portal :  vaUihildm  :  literally,  the  orifice  of  the  bladder. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6  •  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

9  Even  as  the  arrow  flies  away  when  loosened  from  the 
archer's  bow, 
Thus  let  the  burthen  be  discharged  from  channels 
that  are  checked  no  more. 

HYMN  IV. 

Along  their  paths  the  Mothers  go,  sisters  of  priestly 

ministrants. 
Blending  their  water  with  the  mead. 

2  May  yonder  Waters  near  the  Sun,  or  those  where- 

with the  Sun  is  joined, 
Send  forth  this  sacrifice  of  ours. 

3  I  call  the  Waters,  Groddesses,  hitherward  where  our 

cattle  drink : 
The  streams  must  share  the  sacrifice. 

4  Amrit  is  in  the  Waters,  in  the  Waters  balm. 

Yea,  through  our  praises  of  the  Floods,  O  horses, 
be  ye  fleet  and  strong,  and,  O  ye  kine,  be  full  of 
strength. 

9  The  arrow :  here,  says  the  Kausika-Sutra,  XXV.  14,  ishum  visri- 
jatiy  *  he  (the  operator)  discharges  an  arrow/  symbolizing  thereby  the 
free  passage  of  the  loosened  contents  of  the  stomach  and  bladder  of  the 
patient.  Other  operations  are  to  be  performed,  and  a  decoction  of 
medicinal  herbs  is  to  be  administered. 

Stanzas  1 — 3  and  the  first  line  of  stanza  4  are  taken  from  Rigveda' 
I.  23.  16—19,  attributed  to  the  Rishi  Medhl^tithi. 

1  The  Mothers :  the  maternal  Waters,  the  Apah  or  waters  of  the 
firmament  regarded  as  divinities  who  give  and  cherish  life.  Sisters  : 
closely  connected  with  the  priests  who  officiate  at  sacrifices  as  water  is 
mingled  with  the  ingredients  of  the  Soma  libation.  With  the  mead  : 
mddhund  ;  mddhu  meaning  sweetness  or  any  sweet  or  pleasant  drink, 
Specially,  as  here,  the  expressed  juice  of  the  Soma  plant. 

3  The  streams  :  the  divine  Waters  of  the  ocean  of  air. 

4  Amrit :  nectar,  the  drink  of  the  Gods  that  confers  immortality ; 
or  immortality  itself. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H  7MN  6.]  THE  A  THAR  VA  •  VEDA.  7 

HYMN  y, 

Ye,  Waters,  truly  bring  us  bliss :  so  help  ye  us  to 

strength  and  power 
That  we  may  look  on  great  delight. 

2  Here  grant  to  us  a  share  of  dew^  that  nTost  auspici- 

ous dew  of  yours, 
Like  mothers  in  their  longing  love. 

3  For  you  we  fain  would  go  to  him  to  whose  abode  ye 

send  us  forth, 
And,  Waters,  give  us  procreant  strength. 

4  I  pray  the  Floods  to  send  us  balm,  those  who  bear 

rule  o'er  precious  things, 
And  have  supreme  control  of  men. 

In  the  Bigveda  the  partly-oorresponding  stanza  lain  the  Pura-ushnih 
metre,  consisting  of  three  p&das,  the  first  of  which  contains  twelve,  and 
the  second  and  third  eight  syllahles  each.  The  stanza  here  has  an  ad- 
ditional ootosyllahic  p&da.  For  the  second  line  of  the  stanza,  as  trans- 
lated above,  the  reading  of  the  Rigveda  is  i  apd[m  utd  prdsastaye  dSvd 
bhdvata  vdjinah  :  Yea,  be  ye  powerful,  ye  Gods,  to  celebrate  the 
Waters'  praise.  The  metre  iik  stanzsA  1 — 3  i&  Gayatri,  consisting  of 
three  octosyllabic  pMaa  or  divisions. 

The  hymn  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  9i.  1 — 3,  5,  ascribed  to  Sindhn- 
dvipa,  son  of  Ambarisha,  or  to  Trisiras,  son  of  Tvashtar.  The  same 
stanzas  form  a  hymn  of  the  Samaveda  (If.  ix.  ii.  10). 

1  Waters  :  see  the  preceding  hymn,  note  on  stanza  1.  OYeat  delight  : 
meaning,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  perfect  knowledge  of  Brahma. 

2  Dew  :  rdsah  ;  any  fluid,  here  meaning  water. 

3  The  purport  of  the  stanza  appears  to  be  : — If  you  direct  us  and 
strengthen  us  for  the  work,  we  are  ready  and  willing  to  visit  any  wor- 
shipper of  yours  in  whose  house  we  may  perform  sacrifice  in  your 
honour.  Give  us  procreant  strength :  ye  give  us  power  to  generate, 
that  is,  to  produce  or  perform  the  sacrifice  which  may  be  regarded  a& 
the.  offspring  of  the  officiating  priests.  Professor  Grassmann  translates, 
the  pida  by : — *  Ihr  Waaser  machet  kraltig  une.'  Ye  waters  make  us 
powerful  But  the  force  otjan — in  jandyatha^  signifying  ^^n-eration,, 
procreation,  should  be  preserved*  Professor  Weber  translates  the  first 
line  differently  ; — *  We  bear  you  thither  to  the  man  whose   habitatioa 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  l 

HYMN  VI. 

The  Waters  be  to  us  for  driak^  Goddesses,  for  our 

aid  and  bliss: 
Let  them  stream  health  and  wealth  to  us. 

2  Within  the  Waters — Soma  thus  hath  told  me— dwell 

all  balms  that  heal, 
And  Agni,  he  who  blesseth  all. 

3  O  Waters,  teem  with  medicine  to  keep  my  body  safe 

from  harm, 
So  that  I  long  may  see  the  Sun. 

4  The  Waters  bless  us,  all  that  rise  in  desert  lands  or 

marshy  pools ! 
Bless  us  the  Waters  dug  from  earth,  bless  us  the  Waters 
brought  in  jars,  bless  us  the  Waters  of  the  Rains ! 

ye  befriend/  Sijana's  authority  (Commentary  on  SJUnaveda  II.  ix.  ii. 
10.  3)  supports  this  interpretation  of  gamdtMi  as  causative » ^ma- 
ydma;  but  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  Vedic  use.  Benfey  (Die  Hymnen 
des  Sama-Veda)  says  in  note  2,  p.  223 : — *  I  now  take  oram  gam  as 
meanino^  to  go  adorning,  to  go  in  order  to  adorn,  to  glorify,  and 
accordingly  he  translates  stanza  3  of  this  Hymn  in  the  S&ma-veda : — 
*  Dieaen  euren  erheben  wir,  dessen  Herrschaft  ihr  huldreich  seid,  und 
machet  fruchtbar,  Wasser  uns :'  We  glorify  this  man  of  yoors,  the  man 
whose  lordship  ye  befriend,  and,  Waters,  make  us  rich  in  fruit.  My 
version  of  the  stanza  is  based  on  Ludwig's  translation  and  Commentaiy 
(Der  Rigveda,  I.  p.  189,  and  IV.  p.  180). 

The  first  three  stanzas  of  the  hymn  are  to  be  repeated  by  Br&hmans 
at  their  morning  ablutions :  see  Colebrooke's  Essays,  I.  On  the  Beli* 
gious  Ceremonies  of  the  Hindus. 

Stanzas  1 — 3  are  ti^en  from  Rigveda  X.  9.  4,  6,  7,  the  two  latter 
being  repeated  from  I.  23.  20,  21,  forming  a  continuatioii  of  Hyma 
IV.  of  this  Book. 

2  Sonui:  the  God;  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant  personified  and 
regarded  as  an  all-powerful  deity.  Agn^i:  the  God  of  fire.  See 
Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index,  for  both  deities.  The  meaning 
is  that  the  poet,  under  the  inspiration  produced  by  draughts  <A  Soma 
juice,  has  perceived  that  water  possesses  healing  virtue,  and  that  the 
waters  of  the  firmament — that  is,  clouds — contain  purifying  and 
heahh-giviug  fire  or  Agni  in  the  shape  of  lightning. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  7.]  THX  ATHARVAVBDA.  9 

HYMN  VII. 

Bring  the  Eimidiii  hither»  bring  the  Y4tudb&Da  self- 
declared , 

For  Agni,  God,  thou,  lauded,  hast  become  the 
Dasyu's  slaughterer. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  detection  and 
deatruotion  of  evil  spirits.  The  metre  ehanges  in  stanza  5  from  Anush- 
tup  to  Trishtup  which  consists  of  four  p4das  of  eleven  syllables  each. 
M.  Miiller  explains  '  its  name  '  Three-step '  by  the  fact  that  the  three 
last  syllables  w  —  w,  which  form  the  characteristic  feature  of  that 
metre,  and  may  be  called  its  real  vritta  or  turn,  were  audibly  stamped 
at  the  end  of  each  turn  or  strophe : '  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  p.  xcvr. 
The  hendocasyllabic  metre  in  which  I  render  the  Trishtup  stanza  here 
and  wherever  it  occurs  does  not  profess  to  be  more  than  a  substitute 
for  the  original  metre :  retaining  the  number  of  syllables,  it  does  not 
attempt  to  preserve  the  exact  rhythm  of  the  Trishtup  which,  I  think, 
is  not  satisfactorily  reproducible  in  English  verse. 

1  The  Kimtdin :  one  of  a  class  of  malignant  spirits.  According  to 
the  Nirukta  VI.  11  the  word  originally  means  one  who  goes  about 
dying  Kim  iddn%m,y  Quid  nunc  1  What  now  f  or  Kim  idam  f  What 
18  this  t  Literally,  a  quidnunc ;  a  vile  and  treacherous  spy  and  informer. 
The  Ydtudhdna :  one  of  a  class  of  evil  spirits,  demons,  or  sorcerers, 
explained  by  Sayapa  as  Rllkshasas,  but  in  the  Veda  apparently  distinct 
from  those  violent  and  voracious  ogres.  In  Bigveda  VII.  104  and  X.  87 
there  are  two  long  series  of  imprecations  directed  against  R&kshasas 
and  Yitudhanas.  The  Daityu's  slaughterer:  Dasyus  is  the  general 
name  of  a  class  of  powerful  sup^ human  beings  hostile  to  Gods  and 
men,  oompnsing  the  malignant  demons  of  the  air,  the  withholders 
of  the  seasonable  rain.  Indra  as  the  chief  tutelary  God  of  the  Aryans 
is  sometimes  called— as  Agni  is  here— the  slayer  oi  the  Dasyu:^- 
*  Thou  (Indra)  from  (A  old  wast  bom  to  strike  the  Dasyus  dead  :* 

Bigveda  I.  51.  6. '  He who  slays  the  Dasyus,  He,  O  men,  is  Indra :' 

Bigveda  II.  12.  10.  The  name  of  Dasyus  was  also  sometimes  given  to 
the  wild  indigenous  races  who  opposed  the  immigration  of  the  Aryans 
and,  later,  to  all  people  who  did  not  follow  the  Vedic  ritual  or  observe 
the  essential  Brihmauical  ceremonies. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


10  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

2  O  J4tavedas,  Lord  Supreme,  controller  of  our  bodies, 

taste 
The   butter,   Agni,   taste   the  oil :  make  thou   the 
Y^tudh&nas  mourn. 

3  Let   Ydtudhd^nas  mourn,   let  all    greedy   Kimidins 

weep  and  wail : 
And,  Agni,  Indra,  may  ye  both  accept  this  sacrifice 
of  ours. 

4  May  Agni  seize  upon  them  first,  may   strong-armed 

Indra  drive  them  forth  : 
Let  every  wicked  sorcerer  come  hither  and  say.  Here 
amL 

5  Let  us  behold  thy  strength,  O  Jdtavedas.     Viewer 

of  men,  tell  us  the  Y&tudhanas. 
Burnt  by  thy  heat  and  making  declaration  let  all 
approach  this  sacrifice  before  thee. 

6  O   J&tavedas,   seize  on  them  :  for  our  advantage  art 

thou  born : 
Agni,  be  thou  our  messenger  and  make  the  Yfttu- 
db&nas  wail. 

7  O   Agni,   bring    thou   hitherward   the   Y&tudh&nas 

bound  and  chained. 
And  afterward  let  Indra  tear  their  heads  off  with 
his  thunderbolt. 

2  Jdtavedas :  the  wise,  the  sapient ;  a  frequently  ooeurring  designa- 
tion of  Agni :  see  Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp.  94,  95.  The  butter :  djya  ; 
butter  melted  or  clarified,  used  for  oblations,  or  for  pouring  into  the 
holy  fire  at  the  sacrifice,  or  for  anointing  anything  sacrificed ;  some- 
times also  oil  and  milk  used  instead  of  clarified  butter  at  a  sacrifice. 
The  oil :  taila  ;  oil  expressed  from  the  seeds  of  the  tila  or  sesamum 
plant  (Sesamum  Indiciun).  This  oil  was  not  usually  offered  in  oblation  ; 
but,  besides  this  special  detective  sacrifice,  it  appears  to  have  been 
sometimes  used  in  sacrifices  to  the  Fathers  or  Manes :  see  Atharva- 
veda  XVIII.  4.  32. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  523. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  8.]  THE  ATHARVAVRDA,  11 

HYMN  VIII. 

This  sacrifice  shall  bring  the  Y&tudh^nas  as  the  flood 

brings  foana  : 
Here   let  the   doer  of  this   deed,  woman   or  man, 

acknowledge  it. 

2  This  one  hath  come  confessing  all :  do  ye  receive  him 

eagerly. 
Master  him  thou,  Bphaspati;  Agni  and  Soma,  pierce 
him  through. 

3  O  Soma-drinker,  strike  and  bring  the  Y&tudh&na's 

progeny : 
Make  the  confessing  sinner's  eyes  fall  from  his  head, 
both  right  and  left. 

The  hymn  is  a  continuation  of  Hymn  YII.  The  sacrifice  has  proved 
effectual  (stanza  2),  and  a  Y&tudhana  or  sorcerer  has  heen  forced  to 
come  forward  and  confess.  The  metre  changes  in  stanza  4  from 
Anushtup  to  Trishtup. 

1  This  deed :  some  act  of  sorcery.  Woman  or  man :  sorceress  or 
sorcerer ;  Y&tudh&ni  or  Y^tudh&na. 

2  Brihaspati :  or,  O  Lord  of  Prayer.  '  Bphaspati,  alternating  with 
Brahmanaspati,  is  the  name  of  a  deity  in  whom  the  action  of  the  wor- 
shipper upon  the  gods  is  personified.  He  is  the  suppliant,  the  priest 
who  intercedes  with  the  gods  for  men,  and  protects  them  against  the 
wicked.  Hence  he  appears  as  the  prototype  of  the  priests  and  the 
priestly  order,  and  is  also  designated  as  the  Puroh  ta  [High  Priest]  of 
the  divine  community.  The  essential  difference  between  the  original 
idea  represented  in  this  God  and  those  expressed  in  most  of  the  other 
and  older  deities  of  the  Veda  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  latter  are 
personifications  of  various  departments  of  nature,  or  of  physical  forces, 
while  the  former  is  the  product  of  moral  ideas,  and  an  impersonation 
of  the  power  of  devotion.' — Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  p.  272. 
For  hymns  addressed  to  Brihaspati  and  Brahmanaspati,  see  Hymns  of 
the  Bigveda,  General  Index  I. 

3  Soma-drinker :  Indra,  who  is  especially  the  Lord  of  Soma  and  the 
chief  drinker  of  libations  made  of  its  juice: — *  Known  as  the  Soma- 
drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  who  wields  the  bolt>  He,  O  ye  men, 
is  Indra :'  Rigveda  II.  12.  13.    This  appellation  of  Indra  will  be  found 


Digitized  by 


Google 


U  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

4  As  thou,  ()  Agni  J&tavedas,   knowest  the  races   of 
these  secret  greedy  beings, 
So  strengthened  by  the  power  of  prayer,  O  Agni, 
crushing  them  down  a  hundred  tinges  destroy  them. 

,  HYMN  IX. 

May  Indra,  Pftshan,  Varupa^  Mitra,  Agni,  benignant 

Gk)ds,  maintain  this  man  in  riches. 
May  the  Adityas  and  the  Visve  Devas  set  and  sup- 
port him  in  supremest  lustre. 

in  most  of  the  many  Rigreda  Hymns  addressed  to  this  deity.     Ri^^t  and 
left :  pdram  utd  dvaram  ;  literally,  upper  and  lower.     Weber  suggests 
the  possibility  of  Yatudh^as  being  credited  with  additioukl  eyes. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  DerRigveda,  III.  p.  523. 

The  oocasioD  of  the  hymn  is  an  Abhisheka  or  inaugtiratioDby  sprinkl- 
ing or  unction  of  a  Raja  or  King  who  ai^)eara  to  have  been  elected 
from  among  the  members  of  a  princely  family.    The  metre  b  Trishtup. 

1  P4$han  :  a  God  who  protects  and  multiplies  catUe  and  human 
possessions  generally.  In  character  he  is  a  solar  deity,  and  a  guide  on 
roads  and  journeys.  As  a  form  of  the  Sun  he  beholds  the  entire  uni- 
verse. The  name  is  derived  from  pmhy  to  nourish.  For  hymns  to 
P6shan  see  Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  General  Index  I.  pi.  xxvii.  The 
Adityas :  literally,  the  sons  of  Aditi,  Infinity  or  £teniity.  ^  There  (in 
the  highest  heaven)  dwell  and  reign  those  gods  who  bear  in  common 
the  name  of  Adityas.  We  must,  however,  if  we  would  discover  their 
eariiest  character,  abandon  the  conceptions  whidi  in  a  later  age,  and 
even  in  that  of  the  heroic  poems,  were  entertained  r^;arding  thes^ 
deities.  According  to  this  conception  they  were  twelve  Sun-gods» 
bearing  evident  reference  to  the  twelve  months.  But  lor  the  most 
ancient  period  we  must  hold  fast  the  primary  significatioA  of  their 
name.  They  are  the  inviolable,  imperishable,  eternal  beings.  Aditi^ 
eternity  or  the  eternal,  is  the  element  which  sostains  them  and  is  sus- 
tained by  them The  eternal  and  inviolable  element  in   which  the 

A4ityas  dwell,  and  which  forms  their  essence,  is  the  celestial  light..; 
The  Adityas,  the  gods  of  this  light,  do  not  therefore  by  any  means, 
coincide  with  any  of  the  forms  in  which  light  is  manifested  in  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  10.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  13 

2  May  light,  O  Gkxis,  be  under  his  dominion,  Agni,. 

the  Sun,  all  that  is  bright  and  golden. 
Prostrate  beneath  our  feet  his  toes  and  rivals.     Up- 
lift him  to  the  loftiest  oope  of  heaven. 

3  Through   that   most  mighty  prayer,   O   Jatavedas, 

wherewith  thou  broughtest  milk  to  strengthen  Indra, 
Even  therewith  exalt  this  man,  O  Agni,  and  give 
him  highest  rank  among  his  kinsmen. 

4  I  have  assumed  their  sacri6ce,  O  Agni,  their  hopes, 

their  glory,  and  their  riches'  fulness. 
Prostrate  beneath  our  feet  his  foes  and  rivals.     Up- 
lift him  to  the  loftiest  cope  of  heaven. 

HYMN  X. 

This  Lord  is  the  Gods'  ruler ;  for  the  wishes  of 
Varupa  the  King  must  be  accomplished. 

Therefore,  triumphant  with  the  prayer  I  utter,  I 
rescue  this  man  from  the  Fierce  One's  anger. 


universe.  They  are  neither  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  dawn,  hut 
the  eternal  sustainers  of  this  luminous  life,  which  exists,  as  it  were, 
behind  all  these  phenomena :'  Roth,  quoted  by  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit 
Texts,  V.  p.  56.  For  hymns  addressed  to  these  deities  see  Hymns  of  the 
Bigveda,  General  Index  I.  p.  xxvii.  The  Visve  Denas :  visve  devdlk^ 
visvedfvdh ;  the  All-Gods,  Universal  Crods,  Collective  Gods ;  all  the 
Oods  together.  See  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  I.  p.  xxvii. 

2  Loftiest  cope  of  heaven :  highest  pitch  of  earthly  happiness. 

3  Thou  broughtest  milk :  the  allusion  is  obscure.  Jatavedas,  the 
sapient  Agni,  appears  to  have  strengthened  Indra  at  some  critical  time 
with  milk  or  Soma  juice,  but  the  particulars  appear  to  be  undisooverable. 

There  is  a  somewhat  similar  benediction  of  a  newly  elected  king  in 
Rigveda  X.  153. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  256. 


After  intercession  with  Varuna,  a  priest  absolves  a  sinner  who  has 
offended  that  deity.  The  metre  is  Trishtup  in  1,  2,  and  Anushtup  in  3,  4. 

1  This  Lord :  Varuna  appears  as  the  Asura,  divine  Being  or  Lord 
par  excellence,  the  Ahura  Mazd&.  *This  god  is  one  of  the  most 
interesting  creations  of  the  Hindu  mind,  because  though  we  can  still 
perceive  the  physical  background  from  which  he  rises,  the  vast,  starry, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


14  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  L 

2  Homage  be  paid,  King  Varuija,  to  thine  anger ;  for 

thou,  dread  God,  detectest  every  falsehood. 
I  send  a   thousand   others   forth   together :  let   this 
thy  servant  live  a  hundred  autumns. 

3  Whatever  falsehood  thou  hast  told,  much  evil  spoken 

with  the  tongue, 
I  liberate  thee  from  the  noose  of  Varuijia  the  right- 
eous King. 

4  I  free  thee  from  VaisvAnara,  from  the  great  surging 

flood  of  sin. 
Call    thou   thy  brothers,  Awful    One !   and  pay  at- 
tention to  our  prayer. 

HYMN  XL 

Vashat  to  thee,  O  PAshan !  At  this  birth  let  Arya- 
man  the  Sage  perform  as  Hotar-priest. 

As  one  who  bears  in  season  let  this  dame  be  ready 
to  bring  forth  her  child. 

brilliant  expanse  alK)ve,  his  features,  more  than  those  of  any  of  the 
Vedic  gods,  have  become  completely  transfigured,  and  he  stands 
before  us  a  god  who  watches  over  the  world,  punishes  the  evil-doer, 
and  even  forgives  the  sins  of  those  who  implore  his  pardon  :*  M.  Miiller, 
India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  p.  195. 

2  /  %tnd  a  thousand  others  forth :  I  intercede  for  this  man  only. 
I  resign  to  thee  all  others  to  punish  as  thou  wilt. 

3  Tfu  noose :  borne  by  Varuna  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world, 
to  entangle  and  capture  the  evil-doer. 

4  Vaisvdnara :  belonging  to,  or  ruling  all  men  j  here  meaning 
Varuna.  Call  thou  thy  bi^others :  call  the  other  Adityas  that  they  may 
see  that  thou  hast  pardoned  the  penitent  and  restored  him  to  favour. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  446. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  be  used  at  child-birth.  The  details  given 
in  stanzas  3 — 6  are  strictly  obstetric  and  not  presentable  in  £nglish  : 
see  Appendix.  The  text  appears  to  be  mutilated  in  some  places,  and 
the  metre  is  irregular. 

1  Vdshat :  is  a  sacrificial  exclamation  uttered  by  the  Hotar  or  chief 
priest  at  the  end  of  the  Yajya   or  sacrificial  verse,   whereupon  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  12.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  15 

2  Four  are  the  regions  of  the  sky,  and  four  the  regions 
of  the  earth : 
The  Gods  have  brought  the  babe  ;  let  them  prepare 
the  woman  for  the  birth. 

HYMN  XIL 

Born  from  the  womb,  brought  forth  from  wind  and 
from  the  cloud,  the  first  red  bull  comes  onward 
thundering  with  the  rain. 

Our  bodies  may  he  spare  who,  cleaving,  goes  straight 
on  ;  he  who,  a  single  force,  divides  himself  in  three. 

oblation  is  cast  into  the  fire  by  the  AdhTaryu,  the  priest  who  performs 
the  practical  part  of  the  ceremony.  O  PUshan :  addressed  as  the  multi- 
plier and  nourisher  of  human  beings :  see  I.  9.  1.  Aryaman:  meaning 
the  bosom  friend,  one  of  the  Adityas  who  is  commonly  invoked  together 
with  Vanina  and  Mitra:  see  I.  9.  1.  Hotar-prUst :  or  Hotar;  meaning 
the  Sacrificer  (from  At«,  to  sacrifice,)  or  the  Invoker  (from  Ave,  to  call) ; 
the  chief  priest  who  presents  the  oblation  or  burnt-offering,  or  who 
recites  the  prayers  and  invites  the  Gods  to  attend  the  sacrifice. 

2  Have  brought  the  babe :  from  those  distant  regions.  Cf.  '  Where 
do  you  come  from,  baby,  dear?  Out  of  the  everywhere  into  here.' — 
G.  Mac  Donald  :  Baby. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  478. 

This  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  Professor  Bloomfield  (American 
Journal  of  Philology,  Vol.  VII.  pp.  469  —472),  who  entitles  it  a  Prayer 
to  Lightning,  conceived  as  the  cause  of  fever,  headache,  and  coughs. 
It  appears  to  have  been  placed  immediately  after  Hymn  XL  simply 
because  it  begins  with  the  word  jardyujdh,  and  jarS^yu  is  the  penulti- 
mate word  of  that  hymn.  The  metre  is  Jagatt,  consisting  of  four  padas 
of  twelve  syllables  each,  in  1 — 3,  and  Anushtup  in  4. 

1  Bom  from  the  womb :  literally,  from  the  placenta ;  that  is,  from 
the  womb  of  the  cloud.  Brought  forth  from  wind  and  from  the  cloud  : 
vdtabhrajds  emended  to  vdtdbhrajds  by  Bloomfield.  The  first  red  bull; 
the  lightning.  According  to  Weber,  puerperal  fever  is  meant : — *  A 
red  bull,  the  first  product  of  the  afterbirth,  comes  on  thundering  with 
rain,  with  glowing  breath  of  wind,' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


U  TBB  HYMSrS  OF  [BOOK  L 

2  Bending  to  thee  wko  clingest  to  each  limb  with  heat, 

fain  would  we  worship  thee  with  offered  sacrifice, 
Worship  with  sacrifice  the  bends  and  curves  of  thee 

who   with  a  vigorous  grasp   hast   seized  on  this 

one's  limbs. 
S  Do  thou  release  this  man  from  headache,  free  him 

from  cough  which  has  entered  into  all  his  limbs  and 

joints. 
May  he,  the  child  of  cloud,  the  offspring  of  the  wind, 

the  whizzing  lightning,  strike  the  mountains  and 

the  trees. 
4  Well  be  it  with  my  upper  frame,  well  be  it  with  my 

lower  parts. 
With  my  four  limbs  let  it  be  well.    Let  all  my  body 

be  in  health. 

HYMN  XIII. 

HoMAGB  to  thee,   the  Lightning's   flash,  homage  to 
thee,  the  Thunder's  roar  I 

Homage   to  tliee,  the    Stone   which   thou    hurlest 
against  the  undevout ! 
2  Homage  to  thee,  Child   of  the  Flood    whence   thou 
collectest  fervent  heat ! 

Be  gracious  to  our  bodies,  give   our  children  happi- 
ness and  joy. 

2  Thee:  Lightning. 

In  the  Anukramapt  the  hymn  is  designated  as  a  yahshmanAianam 
9ilktam^  a  hymn  which  cures  consumption.  In  the  Kau^ika-Sdtra  it 
is  employed  as  a  charm  against  thunderstorms,  and  in  a  performance 
which  is  described  hy  the  Commentator  D&rila  as  a  cure  for  headache. 
For  further  information  see  Professor  Bloomfield's  remarks  referred  to 
above. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  to  Lightning  personified  and  deified. 

2  Child  of  the  Flood:  spruno:  from  the  waters  or  watery  clouds  of 
the  ocean  of  air.  According  to  others,  Child  of  the  Heijrht,  that  is, 
the  firmament.  For  an  cxhuustive  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  pravdt^ 
see  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  IL  pp.  63 — 76. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Btitlf  U.]  TBS  AtaARVAVSDA,  IT 

3  Yea,  homage  be  to  thee,  O  Ofeptitig  of  the  Flood ! 

Homage  we  pay  to  thee,  the  dart  and  fiefy  flame  : 
t*or  well  we  know  thy   secret  and   sublimest  home, 
whore  thou  as  central  point  art  buried  in  the  sea. 

4  Thou,  Arrow,  which  the  host  of  Gods  created,  mak- 

ing it  strong  And  mightj^  for  the  shdating, 
Be  gracious,  lauded  thus,  to  our  assembly.     To  thee, 
that  Arrow,  be  our  homage^  Goddess! 

HYMN  XIV. 

As  from  the  tree  a  wreath,  have  I  assumed  her  for- 
tune and  her  fame : 

Among  her  kinsfolk  long  may  she  dwell,  Hke  a 
mountain  broadly-based. 

.f  ■  ■    ■       '        -  ■  ^  I  ■ ,.  ■  ■ 

i  Iti  the  sea:  in  the  dcean  of  air. 

4  7%e  host  of  Gods:  all  the  Gods  together.  Assembly:  congre- 
gatioti  for  saorificial  purposes. 

Professor  Bloomfield  hflis  sliov^n  (American  Journal  of  Philology 
Vol.  til.  pp.  473— 4?6)  by  quotations  from  the  Kausika-Sutra  that, 
When  that  ritual  Wfta(  6oiAp08ed[,  this  hymn  was  regarded  and  treated 
ftot  is  ft  m«ririftge  sottgf,  ils  Webef,  Ltldwig,  and  Zitamef  have  interpret- 
ed it,  but  as  a  n^omaa'h  iiicatitfttiotK  again^  «  rfVaf.  'But,'  m.jt 
ttoiet»ot  Bfc)Ot<tfield,  ^  it  sterns  t6  me  that  traoto  of  a  mot^  original 
i!b|f>pHeatloi$  are  not  Watirtifrg.  Th^  word  pi&suf  tr&nshtt^  above  doubt- 
itfgly  hf  '  with  her  relaittes,'  mean^  hattirally  *4mong  the  fathers  or 
manes.'  The  third  stanza  of  th^  hymn,  consider^  independently, 
wouM  btt  etuMf  ^l^la^ned  ac^  6il^  t^ter^  at  th^  funeral  of  H  maiden, 
Mud  it  AeeffiB  p<)BSible  thftt  tbe  tnti^  hymti  riepresento  sifniUn^  maft^rial 
fiOB&eWh«l  W6rk^  over  f6t  €ktei  6i66toion.' 

1  The  Wometo  Who  employs  tfae^  incdtrta^iolD  ftpilefifks  : — '  I  have  tak^ 
to  itoydeH  the  fortune  ai^  fahxe  of  my  rival  as  cftte  takes  et  Wf eath 
from  a  tree  :  loiK^  r^y  i^  remtainf  tlhmai^ried,  a  flxtui^d  in  her  relathres' 
hoilse.'  Wet>ef,  ZisMMr,  and,  appcir^ntly,  LudWig  Assign  the  dtansii  to 
the  bridegroom,  ^h«rfortun6*  ih^atting  the  fortune  of  the  brid^and 
pitrishu  meaning  '  my  parents,'  or  r^ither  '  my  kmsfolkJ 

2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


18  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /. 

2  King  Yama,  let  this  maiden  be  surrendered  as  a  wife 

to  thee  : 
Bound   let  her  be  meanwhile   within  her  mother's, 
brother's,  father's  house. 

3  Queen  of  thy  race   is   she,    O  King :  to  thee  do  we 

deliver  her. 
Long  with  her  kinsfolk  may  she  sit,  until  her  hair 
be  white  with  age. 

4  With  Asita's  and  Kasyapa's  and  Gaya's  incantation, 

thus 
As   sisters  pack   within  a   chest,  I  bind  and  tie  thy 
fortune  up. 

2  The  woman  devotes  her  rival  hereafter  to  Yama,  King  of  the 
Departed.  According  to  Weber,  Zimmer,  and  Ludwig,  the  stanza  is 
the  reply  of  the  bride's  relatives  to  the  bridegroom  who  is  addressed 
as  king  and  yama^  that  is,  controller,  the  word  being  derived  from 
yarn^  to  restrain.  According  to  this  interpretation  'her  mother's' 
would  be  *  thy  mother's.' 

3  The  incantation  is  continued.  Queen  of  thy  race :  hulapd';  *  guard- 
ian of  thy  house:'  Ludwig.  *Thy  housekeeper:'  Bloomfield.  Her 
kinsfolk:  pitrishu ;  literally,  fathers,  meaning  the  father  and  his 
brothers  or  other  near  relatives.  The  pronoim  not  expressed  in  the 
text,  would  be  *  thy '  according  to  the  interpretation  given  by  Weber, 
Ludwig,  and  Zimmer.  Until  her  hair  he  white  vnth  age :  this  is  a 
conjectural  rendering,  suggested  in  the  St  Petersburg  Dictionary  and 
adopted  doubtingly  by  Zimmer,  of  the  probably  corrupt  Bam6pydt 
of  the  text.  According  to  Weber  opydt  is  the  precative  from  the 
verb  vapj  to  sow,  ^  d,  that  is,  may  she  sow  or  scatter  blessings  from 
her  head.     Ludwig  translates  similarly. 

4  Asita,  Kasyapa,  and  Gaya  are  ancient  Rishis,  the  seers  or  authors 
of  various  hymns  of  the  Rigveda.  Incantation:  or,  prayer.  The 
woman  is  still  the  speaker.  According  to  Weber,  Ludwig,  and 
Zimmer,  the  stanza  is  the  bridegroom's  reply.  Zimmer  adds  that  the 
sisters  are  those  of  the  bride,  who  pack  her  dowry  within  the  chest. 

For  details  of  the  ceremony  which,  according  to  the  Kausika- 
Sutra,  accompanies  the  recitation  of  the  hymn,  see  Bloomfield  as 
quoted  above.  Zimmer's  translation  is  to  be  found  in  his  Altindisches 
Leben,  p.  314;  and  Ludwig's  in  his  Der  Rigvoda,  IIL  p.  459.  ^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMS  15]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  19 

HYMN  XV. 

Let  the  streams  flow  together,  let   the   winds  and 

birds  assembled  come. 
Let  this  my  sacrifice  delight  them  always.    I  offer  it 

with  duly  mixt  oblatiod. 

2  Come  to  my  call,  Blent  Offerings,  come  ye  very  nigh- 

And,  singers,  do  ye  strengthen  and  increase  this 
man. 
Hither  come  every  animal :  with  this   man   let  all 
wealth  abide. 

3  All  river  founts  that  blend  their  streams  for  ever 

inexhaustible — 
With  all  these  confluent  streams  of  mine  we  make 
abundant  riches  flow. 

4  All  streams  of  melted   butter,   and   all   streams   of 

water  and  of  milk — 
With  all  these  confluent  streams  of  mine  we  make 
abundant  riches  flow. 


A  sacrifice  is  performed,  and  prayer  is  offered  for  the  prosperity  of  a 
patron.  The  metre  is  mixed.  In  stanza  1  the  first  line  is  Anushtup 
and  the  second  Trishtup.  In  2,  line  1  is  Jagat!  and  line  2  Anushtup. 
Stanzas  3  and  4  are  Anushtup. 

1  Them:  the  Gods.  Weber  translates  pradivas,  always,  by  *the 
Eternal  Ones' : — *  May  the  Eternal  Ones  accept  my  sacrifice.'  Dultf 
mixt  oblation :  consisting  of  milk,  butter,  and  the  juice  of  com  (perhapm 
a  sort  of  beer) :  see  II.  26.  4,  5.  Stanzas  1  and  2  occur  again  with 
variations  in  XIX.  1.  1,  2. 

2  This  man :  some  wealthy  householder  who  pays  the  expenses  of 
the  sacrifice  and  rewards  the  officiating  priests.  Animal:  domestic 
animal ;  cow,  horse,  goat,  sheep. 

The  Blent  Offerings,  or  Mixt  Oblation,  are  called  samsrdvands,  from 
MMy  together,  and  arw,  to  flow,  and  every  line  but  one  of  the  stanza  cour 
tains  a  word  or  words  of  the  same  derivation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iO  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

HYMN  XVI. 

Mat  potent  Agni  who  destroys  the  demons  bless 

and  shelter  us 
From  greedy  fiends  who  rise  in  troops  at  night-time 

when  the  moon  is  dark. 

2  VaruQa's  benison  hath  blessed   the   lead,   and   Agni 

strengthens  it. 
Indra  hath  given  me  the  lead :  this  verily  repels  the 
fiends. 

3  This  overcomes  Yishkandha,  this  drives  the   voraci- 

ous fiends  away  : 
By  means  of  tbis  have  I  o'erthrown  all  the  Pis&chi's 
demon  brood. 


The  hymn  is  a  prayer  and  charm  against  demons. 

1  The  demons  :  Yatus,  evil  spirits,  fiends,  or  sorcerers  who,  like  the 
Y^tudhanas  (I.  VII.  1),  assume  a  yariety  of  shapes  and  plagne  and 
injure  men  and  cattle.  Greedy  fiends:  atrinas;  'tusky  fiends:'  M. 
Miiller.  At  night-time  when  the  moon  is  dark :  amdvdsydm  rdtrim ; 
during  the  night  of  new  moon,  the  first  night  of  the  first  quarter  when 
the  moon  is  invisible. 

2  The  lead:  a  piece  of  this  metal  employed  as  a  charm  against  demons 
and  sorcery :  see  Book  XII.  2.  1,  19,  20,  53.  So  in  England  a  horse- 
shoe was  in  former  times  generally  regarded  as  a  protection  against 
witches,  and  is  still  sometimes  nailed  on  or  (prer  the  door  of  a  house 
or  stable.  Iron  in  other  forms  also  was  used  as  a  charm  for  stables : — 
'  Hang  up  hooks  and  shears  to  scare,  Hence  ihe  bag  that  rides  tiie  mare 
Till  they  be  all  over  wet  with  the  mire  and  the  sweat.  This  observed, 
the  manes  shall  be,  Of  your  horses,  all  knot-free.' — Herriok.  Charma 
and  Ceremonies,  LXYIII. 

3  Viskhmdha :  from  vi,  apart,  and  skandka,  shoulder ;  drawing  as- 
under or  racking  the  shoulders ;  apparently  acute  rheumatism  in  the 
•houliers  and  neck.  Yishkandha  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the 
Atharva-veda,  but  nowhere  clearly  defined.  The  Commentator  attri- 
butes its  attacks  to  the  malice  of  fiends  and  evil  spirits.  The  FisdchVs 
demon  brood:  Pisachi  is  the  feminine  of  Pisllchi  (Rigveda  I.  133.  5), 
or  Pisacha,  the  name  of  a  class  of  fierce  and  malignant  imps  or  goblins. 
Piaach  in  Hindi  and  Pisachi  in  Tamil  are  still  in  common  use  as 
general  terms  for  goblins  or  fiends.     The  feminine  in  Hindi  is  Pisachni. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  17.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  21 

4  If  thou  destroy  a  cow  of  ours,  a  human  being,  or  a 
steed, 
We  pierce  tbee  with  this  piece  of  lead  so  that  thou 
mayst  not  slay  our  men. 

HYMN  XVII. 

Thosh  maidens  there,  the  veins,  who  run  their  course 

in  robes  of  ruddy  hue. 
Must  now  stand  quiet,  reft  of  power,  like  sisters  who 

are  brotherless. 

2  Stay  still,  thou  upper  vein,  stay  still,   thou  lower, 

stay,  thou  midmost  one. 
The  smallest  one  of  all  stands  still :  let  the  great 
vessel  e'en  be  still. 

3  Among  a  thousand    vessels    charged   with   blood, 

among  a  thousand  veins, 
Even  these   the   middlemost   stand   still   and  their 
extremities  have  rest. 

4  A   mighty   rampart  built  of  sand   hatb  circled  and 

encompassed  you : 
Be  still,  and  quietly  take  resi 


The  hymn  has  been  tranelated  and  annotc^ted  by  Dr.  Ji^iua  Grille 
Hundert  lieder  des  Atbarva-veda,  pp.  1,  75. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  be  employed  when  venesectiott  is  performed. 

1  Brotherless:  unsupported  and  helpless^  when  their  lather  is  dead^ 
and  they  have  no  brother  on  whom  the  duty  of  protecting  and  finding^ 
husbands  for  them  would  naturally  devolve. 

3  Vessels  charged  with  hleod :  see  Dr.  Wise,  CoaHnentary  on  the 
Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  63,  64. 

4  Rctmpart  built  of  sand :  the  bandage  was  probably  fifled  with  wet 
sand  to  compress  and  cool  the  vein. 

See  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atharva-veda,  pp.  16,  76,  and  Ludwig^ 
Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  508. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


22  TUB  UYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /. 

HYMN    XVIII. 

We  drive  away  the  Spotted  Hag,  Misfortune,  and 

Malignity : 
All  blessings  to  our  children  then  !  We  chase  Malign 

nity  away. 

2  Let  Savitar,    Mitra,   Varuna,   and    Aryaroan   drive 

away  Stinginess  from  both  the  hands  and  feet: 
May  Favour,  granting  us  her  bounties,  drive  her  off. 
The  Gods  created  Favour  for  our  happiness. 

3  Each  fearful  sign  upon  thy  body,  in  thyself,  each  in- 

auspicious mark  seen  in  thy  hair,  thy  face. 
All  this  we  drive  away  and  banish  with  our  speech. 
May  Savitar  the  God  graciously  further  thee. 

4  Antelope-foot,     and     Bullock-tooth,      Cow-terrifier, 

Vapour-form, 
The  Licker,  and  the  Spotted  Hag,  all  these  we  drive 
away  from  us. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  avert  evil  spirits  of  misfortune  and  wicked- 
ness, to  remoTe  ill-omenei  personal  marks,  and  to  secure  prosperity. 

The  metre  is  Anushtup  in  stan^is  1  (with  an  irregularity  in  line  2) 
and  4,  and  Jagat!  in  stanzas  2  and  3. 

1  Tke  Spotted  Hcuf :  or,  LaRml.  Mirforturu ;  or,  Lakshmi ;  Fortuna^ 
Fortune ;  the  Goddess  of  good  and  ill  luck,  more  usually  the  former. 
Maitfftiity :  or  Ar&ti.  To  our  children  :  Ludwig  reads  nir^  out,  instead 
of  prajdydi,  to  otu*  children,  which  mars  the  metre :  '  Then  let  all 
happy  things  be  ours/ 

2  Savitar :  the  Sun,  especially  the  morning  Sun  whose  light  drives 
away  witches  and  evil  spirits.  StingineM :  Arani.  From  the  hands 
and  feet:  on  which  Arani  may  have  impressed  her  ill-omened  signs. 
The  charm  was  probably  recited  over  a  young  child.  Favour :  Ann- 
mati ;  divine  Grace,  personified  as  a  Goddess  representing  the  Gods' 
favourable  acceptance  of  worship  and  oblations. 

3  With  our  speech:  vAch^;  with  the  voice;  with  the  spell  which 
we  utter. 

4  Antelope-foot :  Rishyapadt.  Bullock-tooth :  or.  Mighty-tooth ; 
Vfishadati.     Cow-terrifier :  Goshedhd;  probably  from  go  ^sedhdy  sidh 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  19.]  TUB  ATHARVA-VEDA.  23 

HYMN  XIX. 

Let  not  the  piercers  find  us,  nor  let  those  who  wound 

discover  us. 
O  Indra,  make  the  arrows  fall,  turned.  £ar  from  us, 

to  every  side. 

2  Turned  from  us  let  the  arrows  fall,  those  shot  and 

those  that  will  be  shot. 
Shafts  of  the  Gods  and  shafts  of  men,  strike  and  trans- 
fix mine  enemies! 

3  Whoever  treateth  us  as  foes,  be  he  our  own  or  strange 

to  us,  a  kinsman  or  a  foreigner, 
May  Rudra  with  his  arrows  pierce  and  slay  these 
enemies  of  mine. 


meaning  to  drive  away :  Cow  tailed,  according  to  Weber*  Vapour-form : 
VidhamsL;  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  here  is  uncertain.  The 
Licker:  Viledht.  All  these  are  names  or  epithets  of  sorceresses,  witches, 
or  female  fiends  'of  various  forms. 

Professor  Greldner  argues  with  great  ingenuity  that  the  subject  of 
the  hymn  is  some  semi-domesticated  animal,  in  all  probability  a  house 
cat,  and  that  the  object  of  the  charm  is  to  bani^  its  original  wild  and 
fiendish  nature,  and  to  retain  and  improve  all  its  inherent  good  qualities 
and  make  it  a  friend  and  a  blessing  to  men :  see  Vedische  Studien, 
I.  pp,  313—315, 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498. 


The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  protection  from  arrows  and  for  the  punish* 
ment  of  enemies  in  general.  The  metre  is  Anushtup,  with  an  addition- 
al p&da  in  line  1  of  stanza  3. 

1  Piercerg :  ifyddhinas ;  hostile  archers. 

3  Rudra :  usually  derived  ftrom  rud^  to  howl  or  roar,  the  Howler, 
the  Roarer ;  but  more  probably  from  a  lost  root  rud^  to  be  red  or 
ruddy,  the  Red,  the  Brilliant.  Rudra  is  a  God  of  thimder,  storm,  and 
tempest,  and  the  father  and  leader  of  the  Rudras,  Maruts  or  Storm- 
Gods.  He  is  represented  as  a  terrible  deity  whose  arrows  bring  disease 
or  destruction  on  men  and  cattle,  but  is  also  sometimes  addressed  as 
benevolent  and  auspicious,  a  healer  and  a  saviour,  inasmuch  as  hi& 


Digitized  by 


Google 


?4  THE  HTMm  OF  [BQOK  /. 

4  The  rival  and  non-riva),  be  who  in  his  hatred  curses 
us — 
May  all  the  deities  injure  him !  My  nearest,  closest 
niail  is  prayer. 

HYMN  XX. 

Mat  it  glide  harmless  by  in  this  our  sacrifice, 
O  Soma,  God !  Marruts,  be  gracious  unto  us. 

Let  not  disaster,  let  not  malison  find  us  out ;  let  not 
fibominable  guiles  discover  us. 

2  Mitra  and  Varuflia,  yq  twain,  turn  carefully  away 
from  us 
The  deadly  dart  that  flies  to-da^y,  th§  n^ismle  of  the 
wicked  ones. 

thunderstorms  after  long  drought  purify  the  air,  dispel  miasma,  and 
bring  health  and  vigour  to  everything  that  has  life.  *  Far  be  thy  dart 
that  killeth  men  or  cattle:  thy  bliss  be  with  us,  O  thou  Lord  of  heroes:' 
Rigveda  I.  114.  10.  *  Where  is  that  gracious  hand  of  thine,  0  Rudra, 
the  hand  that  giveth  health  and  bringeth  eomfort,  Remove  of  the 
woe  the  €)ods  have  sent  us  f  Look  thou  on  me,  O  mighty,  with  com- 
passion:' Rigveda  II.  34.  7.  For  hymns  to  Rudra,  see  Hymns  el  the 
Rigveda,  General  Index  I. 

4  My  nearest,  closest  mail  is  prayer  :  these  words  are  the  conclud 
ing  p4da  of  Hymn  75,  Book  YI.  of  the  Rigveda,  entitled  Weapons 
<rf  War. 

The  hymn  is  i^  pr^yeri  aeeompanying  saerifiee^  for  pioteetioai  horn 
ciiemies.  The  metre  is  Jagati  in  stania  1|  and  An^ishl^  m  ibe  feit 
of  the  hymn. 

1  /(;  that  is,  the  deadly  dart,  tadhds,  oi  vtweat^  %  S«ma:  seel.  VI.  2. 
Mctn^ts:  ^^e  sons  of  Rudra,  Gods  of  the  winds  aud  tempests^  fre- 
quently if^voked  pot  Goly  ^a  the  sei^dera  of  storpi  t^d  rain  but  aa 
all-powerf^l  protecting  deities.  *  We  invoke  with  prayer  t|ke  offspring 
of  Ru^ns  the  brisk,  the  pure^  the  worshipful,  the  apt^v^  Cling  for 
l^ppiness-sake  to  the  strong  company  of  the  Maruts,  the  cbflisers  of  th^ 
sky,  the  powerfi^l,  impetuous:'  ]|tigveda  I.  &4.  12:  9eQ  M*  MUUer'ii 
V^iQ  Hyrnftfii,  P»rt  I.  p.  ^07. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MYMN  21.1  THB  ATBABVA^YgDA.  35 

3  Ward  off  from  thia  iide  and  from  that,  O  Varni^a, 

the  deadly  dart : 
Give  U3  thy  great  protection,  turn  the  lethal  weapon 
far  away. 

4  A  mighty  Ruler  thus  art  thou,  unconquered,  van- 

quisher of  foes, 
Even  thou  whose  friend  is  nevQr  slain,  whose  friend 
is  n^ver  overcpm©, 

HYMN  XXI. 

Lord  of  the  clans,  giver  of  bliss,  fiend-slayer,  mighty 

oVr  the  foe, 
May  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  go  before  us^  Bull,  who 

brings  us  peace. 

2  Indra,  subdue   our  enemies,  lay  low  the  men  who 
fight  with  us : 
Down  into  nether  darkness  send  the  man  who  shows 
us  enmity : 


4  This  stanza  is  taken  from  Kigveda  X.  152.  1,  a  hymn  addressed 
to  Indra  and  ascribed  to  a  Rishi  S&sa  (Ruler)  of  the  family  of 
Bharadv&ja. 

Tfee  bymn  is  %  pvciyfr  to  Indw  for  protection  from  enemies.  It  is 
taken,  vitlt  slight  variations,  from  l^igveda  X,  152.  2 — 5,  the  first 
9tanM  ol  wbioh  gonQludes  the  preceding  hymn  XX. 

1  L&td  of  ^  elaiM:  tn^m  pdtU;  or  Iiord  of  (Aryan)  men  in 
geneial»  King  ^vitpdiik.  The  Rigveda  has  vifdi  pdti$j  Lord  of  the 
elan  pr  tribe.  FieiMl-Mlaper :  vriti^akd;  slayer  of  fiends  and  foes  in 
general,  or  slayer  of  Vfitm  the  fiend  and  foe  par  exctllmuty  the  Vedio 
personification  of  the  malignant  power  which  takes  possession  of  the 
douds  and  withholds  the  seasonable  raU^  Indra  batties  with  this  chief 
4emon  o(  drpught^  shatters  him  and  his  cloud-castles  with  his  thunder- 
bolt and  releases  the  imprisoned  waters.  MiUl:  vri9M;  the  original 
ipeaning  of  the  word  wim9  male,  masculine,  then  stroixg,  powerful,  then 
specially  bull,  stallion,  hero.  Saorapa  explains  vrUkA  by  *showerer 
of  benefits.'    See  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  pp.  318  sqq. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


26  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /. 

3  Strike  down  the  fiend,  strike  down  the  foes,  break 

thou  asunder  Vritra's  jaws. 
O  Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  quell  the  wrath  of  the  assail- 
ing foe. 

4  Turn  thou  the  foeman's  thought  away,  his  dart  who 

fain  would  conquer  us  : 
Grant   us   thy   great   protection  ;    keep  bis  deadly 
weapon  far  away. 

HYMN  XXII. 

As  the  Sun  rises  let  thy  sore  disease  and  yellowness 

depart. 
We  compass  and  surround  thee  with  the   colour  of 

a  ruddy  ox. 
2  With  ruddy  hues  we  compass  thee  that  thou  mayst 

live  a  lengthened  life : 
So  that  this  man  be  free  from   harm,   and   cast  his^ 

yellow  tint  away. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Jaundice. 

1  As  the  Sun  rises  :  so,  in  Rigveda  I.  50.  11,  SArya,  the  Sun,  is  en- 
treated to  remove,  as  he  rises,  the  sore  disease  and  yellow  hue  of  the 
afflictel  suppliant.  Sore  disease  :  hfiddyotds  ;  from  Aruf,  the  heart, 
and  dyat,  to  be  broken ;  any  severe  internal  malady.  Yellowness : 
yellowish  white  colour  of  the  skin,  and  yellowness  of  the  eyes,  teeth^ 
and  nails,  are  the  most  unmistakeable  visible  signs  of  pslndu  or  jaun- 
dice which  must  be  the  disease  intended  here.  Buddy  :  see  stanzas  2 
and  3. 

2  With  ruddy  hues :  the  patient  is  surrounded  with  red  or  ruddy- 
coloured  objects  in  order  to  combat  the  yellow  which  is  symptomatic 
of  the  disease :  *  should  the  patient  see  every  thing  yellow  he  will  not 
soon  get  well :'  Wise,  Hindu  Sysem  of  Medicine,  p.  248.  Cast  his  yellow 
tint  away :  dharito  bhiAvat;  Weber  divides  dhar  ito  *  his  new  life  may 
now  begin,' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  23.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  27 

3  DevatyAs  that  are  red  of  hue,   yea,   and   the  ruddy- 

coloured  kine, 
Each  several  form,  each  several  age, — with  these  we 
compass  thee  about. 

4  To  parrots  and  to  starlings    we   transfer   thy   sickfy 

yellowness : 
Now  in  the  yellow-coloured  birds  we  lay  this  yellow- 
ness of  thine. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

O  Plant,  thou  sprangest  up  at  night,  dusky,  dark- 
coloured,  black  in  hue ! 

So,  Rajan!,  re-colour  thou  these  ashy  spots,  this 
leprosy. 


3  Devatyds :  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Weber  translates,  douht- 
ingly,  by  *  Gotterkriifte,'  divine  powers.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary leaves  the  word  unexplained  with  the  remark  that  animals  of 
some  kind  must  be  intended,  if  the  reading  is  correct  The  word  does 
not  occur  elsewhere. 

4  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  50.  12,  and  is  the  second 
stanssa  of  a  tric/ia  or  triplet,  the  repetition  of  which,  with  due  formalities, 
is  considered  to  be  curative  of  disease.  7'o  parrots  and  to  starlings : 
birds  with  more  or  less  greenish  yellow  tints  or  marks.  Similarly 
among  the  Romans,  people  with  the  jaundice  were  called  *  icterici ' 
according  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  XXX.  11),  from  the  fanciful  notion  that 
the  disease  was  cured  by  looking  at  the  icterus,  one  of  the  many 
varieties  of  the  Stuniidae  or  starling  family.  The  bird  died  instead 
of  the  patient.  Iti  the  yellow^oloured  birds:  Mridraveshu;  so  explained 
in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary.  According  to  Sayana  *in  the 
Haritala-trees/  but  no  tree  of  that  name  appears  to  exist. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Leprosy.  Susruta  describes  seven 
severe  forms  of  this  terrible  disease,  and  mentions  eleven  slighter 
varieties  :  see  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  258  sqq. 

1  Rajant :  Rajan!  is  the  name  of  the  Curcuma  Longa  which  may 
have  been  one  of  the  plants  used  in  the  treatment  of  leprosy ;  but  the 
word  is  probably  used  here  on  account  of  its  derivation  from  rahjy  to 
colour :  *  So,  Colourer,  re-colour  thou/  *  O  du  Farbereiche,'  *  0  thou 
Colour-rich:'  Weber. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28  THE  HYUNS  OF  {BOOK  /. 

2  Expel  the  leprosy,  remove  from  him  the  spots  and 

ashy  hue  : 
Let  thine  own  colour  oome  to  thee ;  drive  far  away 
the  specks  of  white. 

3  Dark  is  the  place  of  thy  repose,  dark  is  the  plaee 

thou  dwellest  in : 
Dusky  and  dark,  O  Plant,  art  thou  :  remove  from 
him  each  speck  and  spot. 

4  I  with  my  spell  have  chased  away  the  pallid  sign  of 

leprosy 
Caused  by  infection,  on  the  skin,  sprung  from  the 
body,  from  the  bones. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

First,  before  all,  the  strong-winged  Bird  was  born ; 

thou  wast  the  gall  thereof. 
Conquered  in  fight,  the  Asuri  took  then  the  shape 

and  form  of  plants. 

2  L€t  thine  otm  colour  come  to  thee:  addressed  to  the  patient. 
Acoordii^  to  Dr.  Qrill,  the  address  to  the  Plant  is  continued :  *  Let 
the  peculiar  colour  of  the  disease  enter  into  thee,  that  is^  absorb  it^  so 
that  the  patient  may  recover.' 

4  Cauud  hf  infection :  two  varieties  of  the  disease  appear  to  be 
meanti  (1)  communicated  by  contact,  breathing  the  same  air,  eating 
with,  or  wearing  the  clothes  or  ornaments  of  a  leper,  and  (2)  caused 
by  the  sufferer's  own  sins,  irregularities  in  eating  and  fasting,  indi- 
gestible food,  mental  agitation,  excessive  fatigue,  etc. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rig\reda,  III.  p.  506, 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Dr.  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder  des  Atharva*veda, 
pp.  19,  77, 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Leprosy.     See  L  23. 

1  The  first  stanza  is  difficult.  Whatever  the  '  strong-winged  Bird ' 
may  be,  S&mi  the  plant  to  which  the  charm  is  addressed  is  said  to  have 
been  its  gall,  probably  because  both  the  gall  and  the  Plant  were 
regarded  as  remedies  for  leprosy.  The  Asuri,  the  female  personification 
of  the  fiendish  darkness  of  night,  being  conquered  by  the  Sim,  took 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  25.1  TBS  ATOARVAVSDA,  2» 

2  The  Asurl  made,  first  of  all,  this  medicine  for  leprosy, 

this  banisher  of  leprosy. 
She  baQished  leprosy,  and  gave  one  general  colour  to 
the  skin. 

3  One-coloured,  is  thy  mother's  name.  One-coloured  is 

thy  father  called : 
One-colour-maker,  Plant  I  art  thou:  give  thou  one 
colour  to  this  man. 

4  S&m&  who  gives  one  general  hue  was  formed  and 

fashioned  from  the  earth : 
Further  this  work  efficiently.     Restore  the  colours 
that  were  his. 

HYMN  XXV. 

Whin  Agni  blazed  when  he  had  pierced  the  Waters, 
whereat  the  Law-observers  paid  him  homage, 

There,  men  assever,  was  thy  loftiest  birthplace: 
O  Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us. 

refuge  in  the  gloom  of  the  forest,  and  assumed  the  form  of  a  plant  in 
her  eispring,  the  herb  which  is  addressed :  compare,  <  0  Plants  thou 
sprangest  up  at  night'  (I.  23.  1.).  According  to  Weber  the  < strong* 
winged  Bird '  is  the  Sun. 

2  The  banuher  of  Upro^y :  this  p&da  is  probably  an  explanatory 
gloss.  By  omitting  it  and  resolving  prathaimeddm  into  prathamd  iddm 
the  regular  Anushtup  metre  is  restored. 

3  Omercolomrtd :  contrasting  with  the  patient's  spotted  skin. 

i  Sdmd :  the  plant  to  which  this  name  or  epithet  is  given  is  not 
identifiable.  As  an  adjective  derived  from  the  verb  §am  the  word 
would  mean  'curative:'  'heilkraftig:'  Weber.  *  Instead  of  fdmdf  the 
PaippalikU  recension  reads  apdmd  (the  dusky) :  with  which  compare 
1.  23.  1 ;  so  also  Shankar  Pandit  according  to  2  MSS.  Observe  also 
fdmAka  =  ^pdmAka  in  Kausika-Sutra  VIII.  11.  9ydmA  is  the  name  of 
varioas  plants  (see  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.  v.):'  GrilL 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  lUgveda,  III.  p.  509, 
and,  with  annotations^  by  Dr.  Grill,  Hundert  lieder,  pp.  19.  20,  77,  79. 

The  hymn  is  a  chann  against  Fever.     The  metre  is  Trishtnp. 

1  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  that  fevers  begin  to  be  prevalent 


Digitized  by 


Google 


80  THE  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  T. 

2  If  thou  be  fiery  glow,  or  inflammatioti,   or  if  thy 

birthplace  call  for  chips  of  fuel, 
Rack    is    thy   name,   God   of    the    sickly    yellow ! 
O  Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us. 

3  Be  thou  distress,  or  agonizing  torment,  be  thou  the 

son  King  Varupa  hath  begotten, 
Rack    is    thy   name,   God   of    the    sickly    yellow! 
O  Fever,  yielding  to  our  prayer  avoid  us. 

at  Uie  commencement  of  the  annual  Rains,  when  Agni  the  God  of  ¥'\fe 
descends  in  his  form  of  lightning  from  the  WateiB  of  the  firmament 
and  falls  with  the  rain  into  the  waters  of  the  earth.  The  Law-obser- 
vers :  the  Gods  who  observe  and  maintain  the  everlasting  statutes  of 
moral  and  natural  order.  The  allusion  is  to  the  flight  of  Agni,  and 
his  pursuit  and  discovery  by  the  Gods : — *  Him  (Agni)  the  unerring 
ones  (the  Gods),  observant,  found  in  floods,  couched  like  a  lion  in  his 
lair:'  Rigveda  III.  9.  4:  compare  Rigveda  1.  45.  1.  0  Fever:  tdkmdn^ 
derived  from  tak,  to  fly  at,  to  pounce  upon,  meaning  that  which  sud- 
denly seizes,  is  explained  in  the  St.  Petersbui^  Dictionary  as  a  kind 
of  disease,  or  probably  a  whole  class  of  diseases,  accompanied  by  erup- 
tions on  the  skin.  But  a  comparison  of  the  passages  of  the  Atharva- 
veda  in  which  the  word  occurs  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  fever  in  ita 
many  varieties,  especially  malarial  fever,  is  the  disease  that  is  intended. 
The  word  does  not  occur  in  the  Rigveda,  nor — barring  the  Kausika- 
SAtra — is  it  found  in  works  later  than  the  Atharva-veda.  Fever,  says 
Susruta,  is  the  king  of  diseases.  With  fever  man  is  bom,  and  with 
fever  he  departs  from  this  world.  For  an  exhaustive  excursus  on 
Takman,  see  Grohmann,  Medecinisches  aus  dem  Atharva-veda,  Indische 
Studien,  IX.  pp.  3  81 — 423,  and  compare  Wise,  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  under  Fevers  (Jwara)  pp.  219 — 233. 

Takman,  or  Fever,  is  addressed  in  the  hymn  as  a  devd,  a  superna- 
tural being  or  God,  to  whose  influence  the  disease  may  be  attributed. 

2  If  thy  birthplace  call  for  chips  of  fuel :  if  thou  be  caused  by  an 
internal  fire  which  consumes  the  vital  forces,  like  flame  that  requires 
fragments  of  wood  to  feed  it.  Mack  is  thy  name:  hr44u,  from  hm^j  to 
draw  or  contract;  cramp  or  spasm  :  'Krunpf  ist  dein  name:'  Ludwig. 

Ood  of  the  sickly  yellow :  or,  of  the  yellow  colour  >  a  symptom  of 
Paittik  Jwara  or  bilious  fever :  see  Wise,  p.  225. 

3  The  son  King  Varuna  hath  begotten :  if  thou  hast  come  from  the 
God  Varuna,  sent  by  him,  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  to 
punish  sin. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  26.1  TBJS  ATHARVAVEDA.  31 

4  I  oflTer  homage  to  the  chilly  Fever,  to  his  fierce  burn- 
ing glow  I  oflfer  homage. 
Be  adoration  paid  to  Fever  coming  each  other  day, 
the  third,  or  two  days  running. 

HYMN  XXVI. 

Let  that  Destructive  Weapon  be  far  distant  from  us, 
O  ye  Gods ;  far  be  the  Stone  ye  wont  to  hurl. 

2  Our  friend  be  that  Celestial  Grace,  Indra  and  Bhaga 

be  our  friends,  and  Savitar  with  splendid  wealth. 

3  Thou,  OflFspring  of  the  Waterflood,  ye  Maruts,  with 

your  sun-bright  skins,gi ve  us  protection  reaching  far. 

4  Further  us  rightly,  favour  ye  our  bodies  with  your 

gracious  love.     Give  thou  our  children  happiness. 

4  ChUly  Fever :  coldness  of  the  body  and  shivering  fits  are  among 
the  symptoms  mentioned  in  the  Hindu  System  of  Medicine.  The  names 
of  the  three  varieties  of  intermittent  fever  mentioned  in  the  second 
line  are,  in  the  text,  anyeyiU^  trttfyakas  (tertian),  and  vhhayadyui 
recurring  on  both,  that  is,  two  successive  days. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  protection,  guidance,  and  prosperity. 

2  Bhaga :  Bagi^  in  Old  Persian,  BogtL  in  Old  Slavonic ;  Bhaga  is  the 
gracious  Lord  and  protector  and  the  bestower  of  wealth.  His  name 
is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  with  that  of  Savitar,  and  he 
is  invoked  together  with  Piishan  and  the  Adityas,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and 
Aryaman.     See  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  II. 

3  Offspring  of  the  Waterflood :  pravato  napdt.  Lightning  is  so  called 
in  I.  13.  2.  3:  *  Child  of  the  Flood.'  Here  Agni  is  intended,  sprung  in 
the  form  of  lightning  from  the  clouds  or  waters  of  the  firmament : 
pravdt  te  agne  jdnimd,  'Agni,  thy  birth  is  from  the  flood:'  Rigveda 
X.  142.  2.  With  your  sun-bright  skins:  *0  Maruts,  strong  and  wise, 
with  sun-bright  skins:'  Rigveda  VII.  59.  11. 

4  Our  bodies:  ourseUres,  as  separate  from  our  children.  Thou: 
Agni. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


32  THS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  f. 

HYMN    XXVII. 

There  on  the  bank   those  Vipers  He,   thrice-seven, 

having  oast  their  skins : 
Now  we  with  their  discarded  sloughs  bifid  close  and 

cover  up  the  eyes  of  the  malicious  highway  thief. 

2  Far  let  her  go,  cutting  her  way,  brandishing,  as  it 

were,  a  club : 
Diverted  be  the  new-born*6  tnind:   ne'er  Ate  the 
wicked  prosperous. 

3  Not  many  have  had  power  Enough ;  the  feeble  odes 

have  not  prevailed, 
Like  scattered  fragments  of  a  reed:  ne'er  are  the 
wicked  prosperous. 

4  Go  forward,  feet,  press  quickly  on,  bring  to  the  house 

of  him  who  pays. 
Unconquered  and  unplundered,  let  Indrfttrl,  foremost, 
lead  the  way. 

A  charm  in  which  snak^*  skins  a«  employed. 

1  Vipers :  the  Pf  idlLka,  a  venomotis  snake,  adder  of  lipsr,  iif  ttt* 
quently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva-veda.  Thriee-iettn :  iti^dpiSfa  ; 
indefinitely  for  a  eonsidetable  nnmber.  According  to  Weber,  '  thficc- 
coiled :'  see  I.  1.  1,  note.  Bind  clow :  the  sloughs  are  to  nrake  th^ 
travellers  invisible  to  robbers.  John  Aubrey,  the  English  antiquary, 
who  lited  in  the  seventeenth  century,  recommends  the  powder  obtain- 
ed from  a  snake  which  has  been  caught  at  midnight  of  Midmmamer 
Eve,  killed,  skinned,  and  dried  in  the  shade,  as  a  mean^  to  preccM 
invisibility. 

2  Let  her  go:  meantng  the  mother  soak^  C-iuUng  Kef  v»$:  through 
her  old  skin.  A  dab :  her  head^  raieod  for  attaek.  The  rtete-bom's  mind ; 
the  attention  ef  the  snake  who  hae  east  her  old  skin  and  got  a  new  one. 

d  Se4Ueired  fragmenU  of  a  f€ed :  vewfradgAe;  or,  'scattered  stalks 
afdvmd  a  reed/  The  wofd  4dga  m  saki  to  mean  an  oblation  of  oaelted 
bntter ;  or  a  sacriAeial  e»k«^ 

4  Oo  forward^  /ee$ :  the  Speaker  of  the  eharm  addressciB  hie  own 
feet  He  wishes  to  press  on  to  the  house  of  the  man  who  will  pay  him 
for  what  he  brings.  Indrdift:  the  Consort  of  Indra.  The  Goddess  will 
guide  him.  Unplundered:  with  reference  to  the  charm  which  the 
man  possesses. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMN  29.]  TnS  ATEARVAVEDA,  3^ 

HYMN  XXVIII. 

God  Agni  hath  come  forth  to  us,  fiend-slayer,  chaser 

of  disease, 
Burning  the  Y4tudh&na8  up,  Kimidins,  and  deceitful 

ones. 

2  Consume  the  Y&tudH&nas,  God !  meet  the  Eimidins 

with  thy  flame : 
Burn  up  the  Y&tudh&nis  as  they  face  thee,   thou 
whose  path  is  black ! 

3  She  who  hath  cursed  us  with  a  curse,  or  hath  con- 

ceived a  murderous  sin  ; 
Or  seized  our  son  to  take  his  blood,  let  her  devour 
the  child  she  bare. 

4  Let  her,  the   Y&tudh&nt  eat  son,   sister,  ahd  her 

daughter's  child. 
Now  let  the  twain  by  turns  destroy  the  wild-haired 
YAtudh&nls  and  crush  down  Ar4yls  to  the  earth ! 

HYMN  XXIX. 

With  that  victorious   Amulet   which  strengthened 
Indra*s  power  and  might 

A  prayer  for  the  destruction  of  demons. 

1  YdtudhdnoB,., Kimidins  :  see  I.  7.  L 

2  Thou  whose  path  is  black :  the  same  epithet,  kriskndvartani^  is 
given  to  Agni  in  the  Rigveda,  VIII.  23.  19. 

4  The  twain :  Agni  and  Indra,  or  Agni  and  Soma ;  both  Indra  and 
Soma  being  associated  with  Agni  as  allies  in  the  destruction  of  demons. 
ArAyts :  Ariyi  is  originally  the  personification  as  a  female  fiend  of 
the  illiberal  impiety  which  refuses  to  give  oblations  to  the  Gods  and 
guerdon  to  the  priests.  The  word  was  afterwards  used  as  the  designa^ 
tion  of  a  class  of  malevolent  spirits :  *  ArUyt,  one-eyed,  limping  hag, 
fly,  ever-screeching!  to  the  hill:'  Rigveda  X.  155.  1. 

The  hymn,  which  is  a  charm  to  secure  the  supremacy  and  success  of 
a  dethroned  King  on  his  restoration  to  power,  is  an  adaptation  of 
Hymn  X.  174  of  the  Rigveda. 

1  AmnUt :  instead  of  manind  the  Rigveda  reading  is  havishd:  'With 
that  victorious  sacrifice,*  an  oblation  which  secures  success  against 
one's  enemies.  Brahmanaspati :  Lord  of  Prayer:  another  name  of 
Brihaspati :  see  1.  8.  2,  note. 

3 


Digitized  by 


Google 


»4  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  t. 

Do  thou,  O  Brahma^aspatii  increase  our  strength  for 
kingly  sway. 

2  Subduing  those  who  rival  us,  subduing  all  malignities. 
Withstand  the  man  who  menaces,  and  him  who  seeks 

to  injure  us. 

3  Soma  and  Savitar  the  God  have  strengthened  and 

exalted  thee  : 
All  elements  have  aided  thee,  to  make  thee  general 
conqueror. 

4  Slayer  of  rivals,   vanquisher,   may  that  victorious 

Amulet 
Be  bound  on  me  for  regal  sway  and  conquest  of  mine 
enemies. 

5  Yon  Sun  hath  mounted  up  on  high,  and  this  my  word 

hath  mounted  up 
That  I  may  smite  my  foes  and  be  slayer  of  rivals, 
rivalless. 

6  Destroyer  of  my  rivals,  strong,  victorious,  with  royal 

sway, 
May  I  be  ruler  of  these  men,  and  King  and  sovran 
of  the  folk. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Guard  and  protect  this  man,  all  Gods  and  Vasus. 

Over  him  keep  ye  watch  and  ward,  Adityas. 
Let  not  death  reach  him  from  the  hands  of  brothers, 

from  hands  of  aliens,  or  of  human  beings. 


2  This  and  the  following  stanza  are  addressed  to  the  amulet,  which 
reminds  one  of  the  old  Teutonic  Siegerstein  or  Stone  of  Victoiy. 

5  The  first  line  is  taken,  with  one  variation,  from  Higveda  X.  159.  1. 
My  word :  the  Rigveda  reading  is  mdmakd  hhdgahy  my  happy  fate, 
instead  of  mdmakdm  vdchas. 

The  occasion  of  the  hymn  is  the  consecration  of  a  King.     Cf.  I.  9. 

1  Vaftis :  Gods,  frequently  mentioned  with  the  Adityas  and  the 
Kudras ;  personifications  of  the  powers  of  nature,  especially  of  those 
that  are  bright  and  celestial,  and  sometimes  almost  synonymous  with 
the  D^vas. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  31.]  TUE  ATBARTAVBDA.  36 

2  Listen,  one-minded,  to  the  word  I  utter,  the  sons, 

0  Gods,  among  you,  and  the  fathers ! 

I  trust  this  man  to  ail  of  you  :  preserve  him  happily, 
and  to  length  of  days  conduct  him. 

3  All  Gods  who  dwell  on  earth  or   in   the   heavens, 

in  air,  within  the  plants,  the  beasts,  the  waters, 
Grant  this  man  life  to   full  old  age,   and   let   him 
escape  the  hundred  other  ways  of  dying. 

4  You,  claiming  Anuy&jas  or  Pray&jas,  sharers,  or  not 

consumers,  of  oblation, 
You,  to  whom  heaven*s  five  regions  are  apportioned, 

1  make  companions  at  his  sacred  sessions. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Herk  will  we  serve  with  sacrifice  the  great  Con- 
trollers of  the  world. 

The  four  immortal  Warders  who  protect  the  regions 
of  the  sky. 

3  Full  old  age :  extending  to  at  leaslr  a  hundred  years.  Prayers 
for  life  to  last  for  a  hundred  winters  or  autumns  are  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  the  Kigveda :  see  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index 
II.,  under  Hundred  winters.  The  hundred  other  wayB :  see  II.  28.  1, 
and  VIII.  2.  27. 

4  Anuydjai  or  Praydjat :  PraylLjas  consist  of  texts  and  oblations 
forming  part  of  the  introductory  ceremony  at  a  Soma  sacrifice,  and 
Anuyajas  are  the  secondary  or  final  offerings  :  *  Voropfer  and  Nachop- 
fer :'  Weber.  Heaven^s  five  regions :  the  regions  of  the  sky  are,  in 
the  Veda,  more  usually  said  to  be  four  or  six :  see  I.  31.  1,  2.  Companiona 
at  his  sacred  sessions :  satrasddas  ;  feast-companions,  or  assistants  at  the 
aattra  or  saXra  (from  sad^  to  sit),  a  long  sacrifice,  sacrificial  session, 
or  Soma  ceremony,  lasting  more  than  twelve  days  and  conducted  by 
many  officiating  priests. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  430. 


The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  protection  and  general  prosperity. 
1   Tht  four  immortal  Warders  :  according  to  a  passage  in  the  Shad- 
viusa-Br&hmnna,  Agni  is  guardian  of  the  east,  Yama  of  the  south. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


36  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  L 

2  Ye,  Guardians  of  the  regions,  Gods  who  keep  the 

quarters  of  the  heavens, 
Bescue  and  free  us  from  the  bonds  of  Niryiti,  from 
grief  and  woe ! 

3  If  free  from   stiffness,    serve    thee    with    oblation^ 

not  lame  I  sacrifice  with  oil  and  fatness. 
Let  the  strong  Warder  God  who  keeps  the  regions 
bring  to  us  hither  safety  and  well-being. 

4  Well  be  it  with  our  mother  and  our  father,  well  be  it 

with  our  cows,  and  beasts,  and  people. 
Ours  be  all  happy  fortune,  grace,  and  favour.    Long, 
very  long  may  we  behold  the  sunlight. 

HYMN   XXXIL 

Yb  people,  hear  and  mark  this  well :  he  will  pro- 
nounce a  mighty  prayer : 

That  which  gives  breathing  to  the  Plants  is  not  on 
earth  nor  in  the  heaven. 

Yamna  of  the  west,  and  Soma  of  the  north.  According  to  Manu 
V.  96,  there  are  eight  Lokap^as  or  World-protectors  who  preside  oyer 
the  eight  points,  cardinal  and  intermediate,  of  the  compass :  these  are 
Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  SArya,  Varuna,  Pavana  or  VAyu,  the  God  of  Wind, 
Kuvera,  the  God  of  Riches,  and  Soma  or  Chandra  the  Moon-God.  The 
word  in  the  text,  dsdpdldsy  does  not  occur  again  in  the  hymns  of  the 
Veda. 

2  Nirriti :  Decay  or  Destruction  personified ;  the  Goddess  of  Mis- 
fortune, Death  and  Corruption. 

3  Free  from  stiffness not  lame:  in  full  possession  of  my  bodily 

powers  and  active  in  thy  service.  Thee  :  Agni,  the  strong  Warder  God 
of  the  next  line. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372. 

The  hymn  is  in  honour  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Universal  Father 
and  Mother.  See  Max  Miiller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  pp. 
158—162. 

1  He :  the  priest.  Will  pronounce  a  mightp  prayer :  according  to 
Weber:  *0f  mighty  Brahman  (The  Absolute)  will  he  speak.'  The 
Plants:  vtriidhah;  meaning  here  especially  medicinal  herbs. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  33.]  THE  ATHARYAYEDA.  ST 

2  Their  station,  as  of  those  who  rest  when  weary,  is 

in  midmost  air  : 
The  base  whereon  this  world  is  built,  the  sages  know 
or  know  it  not. 

3  What  the  two  trembling  hemispheres  and  ground 

produced  and  fashioned  forth, 
This  All,  is  ever  fresh  to-day,  even  as  the  currents 
of  the  sea. 

4  This  All  hath  compassed  round  the  one,  and  on  the 

other  lies  at  rest. 
To  Earth  and  all-possessing  Heaven  mine  adoration 
have  I  paid. 

HYMN  XXXIIL 

Mat  they,  the  golden-hued,  the  bright,  the  splendid^ 
they  wherein  Savitar  was  born  and  Agni, 

2  Their  gtation is  in  midmost  air:    the   Plants,   (^  medicinal 

herbs,  are  said  (Rigveda  X.  97.  1)  to  have  been  produced  '  three  ages 
eaiiier  than  the  Gods,'  devcbhyas  triyt^dm  purd^  and  in  stanza  15  of 
the  same  hymn  they  are  called  brihai^tiprasattds,  commissioned  by 
Brihaspati,  who  is  a  deity  of  the  middle  air  and  as  the  Lord  of  Prayer 
presides  also  over  mantras  or  spells  and  charms. 

3  Trembling:  not  yet  firmly  established.  Hemispheres:  rddasi; 
a  dual  meaning  heaven  and  earth,  without  the  antariksha  or  inter- 
mediate air.  Ground :  hhiUmis ;  here  the  land  as  a  portion  of  the 
whole  earth.  Weber  gives  the  word  in  this  place  the  meaning  of  air 
or  firmament.  Produced  and  fashioned  forth :  nirdtakshatam ;  the 
eonstTucUon  of  a  dual  verb  with  three  subjects  appears  to  be  somewhat 
irregular ;  but  hhUvdwiha  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  parenthetical. 
This  All:  Universal  Creation. 

4  The  one:  Earth.     The  other :  Heaven. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  533. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  to  the  divine  Waters  (cf.  I.  4.  1)  for  health 
and  happiness. 

1  Samtar,  the  Sun,  is  bom  in  the  mists  and  vapours  of  the  early 
morning ;  and  Agni  springs  in  his  form  of  lightning  from  the  clouds 
or  waters  of  the  sea  of  air.  Yaruna:  originally  the  same  as  the  Greek 
OuranoB,  the  visible  sky,  and  afterwards  the  great  God  beyond  it,  the 
moral  Governor  of  the  world.  The  waters  in  which  he  moves  are  the 
atmosphere  or  firmament. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


38  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1. 

They  who  took  Agni  as  a  germ,  fair-coloored,  the 
Waters,  bring  felicity  and  bless  us ! 

2  They  in  the  midst  whereof  King  Varuija  moveth, 
viewing  men's  righteous  and  unrighteous  dealing, 
They  who  took  Agni  as  a  jyerm,  fair-coloured,  those 
Waters  bring  felicity  and  bless  us  I 

S  Whom  the  Gods  make  their  beverage  in  heaven,  they 
who  wax  manifold  in  air's  mid-region, 
They  who  took  Agni  as  a  germ,  fair-coloured, — those 
Waters  bring  felicity  and  bless  us ! 

4  Ye  Waters,  with  auspicious  eye  behold   me :  touch 
ye  my  skin  with  your  auspicious  body. 
May  they,  the  bright  and   pure,  distilling  fatness^ 
those  Waters,  bring  felicity  and  bless  us. 

HYMN  XXXIV, 

From  honey  sprang  this  Plant  to  life :  with  honey 

now  we  dig  thee  up. 
Make  us   as  sweet  as  honey,  for  from  honey  hast 

thou  been  produced. 

2  My  tongue  hath  honey  at  the  tip,  and  sweetest  honey 
at  the  root : 
Thou  yieldest  to  my  wish  and  will,  and  shalt  be  mine 
and  only  mine. 

4  Distilling  fatness :  ghritaa^hiZtas ;  literally,  dropping  ^Aftto,  melted 
and  clarified  butter  or  oil,  used  figuratively  for  fertility  and  prosperity  : 
*  When  I  washed  my  steps  with  butter,  And  the  rock  poured  me  out 
rivers  of  oil:'  Job,  29.  6:  and  *  Thou  cro\vnest  the  year  with  thy  good* 
ness;  And  thy  paths  drop  fatness:'  Psalm  LXY.  11. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  win  and  secure  a  girl's  love. 

1  7'his  Plant :  sugar-cane ;  see  stanza  5.  With  honep :  with  the 
sweetness  which  thou  containest ;  or  perhaps,  as  Dr.  Grill  suggests, 
with  a  spade  or  mattock  smeared  with  honey,  which  would  make  the 
charm  more  effectual. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  35.]  TBS  ATHARYAYEDA.  -  39 

3  My  coming  in  is  honey-sweet,  and  honey-sweet  my 

going  forth  : 
My  voice  and  words  are  sweet :  I  fain  would  be  like 
honey  in  my  look. 

4  Sweeter  am  I  than  honey,  yet  more  full  of  sweets 

than  licorice  : 
So  mayst  thou  love  me  as  a  branch  full  of  all  sweets, 
and  only  me. 

5  Around  thee  have  I  girt  a  zone  of  sugar-cane  to 

banish  hate, 
That  thou  mayst  be  in  love   with  me,  my  darling, 
never  to  depart. 

HYMN  XXXV. 

This  Ornament  of  Gold  which  Daksha's  children 
bound,  with  benevolent  thoughts,  on  Sat^nlka, 

This  do  I  bind  on  thee  for  life,  for  glory,  for  long  life 
lasting  through  a  hundred  autumns. 

3  My  coming  in my  going  forth:  all  my  doings;  my  general 

conduct. 

4  Licorice :  madiigha  is  an  imspecified  shrub  or  plant  that  yields  a 
sweet  juice  :  see  YI.  102.  3  for  its  employment  in  combination  with 
other  sweet  plants. 

5  To  banish  hate:  and,  of  course,  to  inspire  love.  My  darling, 
never  to  depart :  more  literally :  *  that  thou  mayst  never  go  away,^ 
or  become  ulienated  from  me.  So  in  the  Eddie  Hfivarmdl,  the  Lay  of 
the  High  One,  Woden  says :  *  The  seventeenth  (song  or  charm)  I 
know  :  That  the  young  maid  shall  never  forsake  me.' 

The  second  line  of  the  stanza  recurs  in  similar  lovcHsongs;  see  II.  30. 
1,  and  VI.  8.  1—3. 
The  hymn  is  one  of  Dr.  GrilFs  Hundert  Lieder. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  accompanying  investiture  with  an  amulet  of 
gold. 

1  DakshaU  children  :  ddkshdyatUts  ;  Daksha  is  in  the  Veda  a  creative 
power  associated  with  Aditi  (Infinity  or  Eternity),  the  mother  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4a  .  THE  ATHABVA-YEDA.  [BOOK  I. 

2  This  man  no  fiends  may  conquer,  no  Pia&chas,  for 

this  is  might  of  Gods,  their  primal  offspring. 
Whoever  wears  the  Gold  of  Daksha's  children  hath 
a  long  lengthened  life  amopg  the  living. 

3  The  light,  the  power,  the  lustre  of  the  "Waters,  the 

strength  of  Trees,  and  all  their  forceful  vigour, 
We  lay  on  him  as  powers  abide  in  Indra  :  so  let  him 
wear  this  Gold  and  show  his  valour. 

4  With  monthly  and  six-monthly  times  and  seasons, 

with  the  full  year's  sweet  essence  do  we  fill  thee. 
May  Indra,  Agni,  and  all  G^xls  together,  showing  no 
anger,  grant  thee  what  thou  wishest. 

Adityas.  In  post-vedic  literature  he  is  generally  regarded  as  the  son 
of  Brahm^  and  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Praj&patis  or  Lords  of 
Created  Beings.  The  Diksh^yanas,  or  descendants  of  Daksha,  are 
mentioned  also  in  the  Satapatha-Br&hma^a.  The  investiture  of  SatA- 
ntka  must  be  an  occurrence  of  ancient  times  of  which  no  particulars 
have  been  preserved.  A  hundred  autumns :  regarded  as  the  natural 
duration  of  hiunan  life;  an  expression  frequently  occurring  in  the 
Bigveda,  alternating  \irith  <  a  himdred  winters : '  Of.  Isaiah  LXY.  20 : 
There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old  man  that 
hath  not  filled  his  days :  for  the  child  shall  die  a  hundred  years  old. 

2  Fisdchas:  imps  or  goblins :  see  I.  16.  3,  note. 

Professor  Ludwig  has  translated  this  hymn,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  457. 

4  Six-monthly  times :  Samd  meaning  a  half-year:  'originally,  pro- 
bably, summer  (cf.  Zend  Aama).' — St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  11. 


HYMN  I. 

Vbna  beholds  That  Highest  which  lies  hidden, 
wherein  this  All  resumes  one  form  and  fashion. 

Thence  Prisni  milked  all  life  that  had  existence  :  the 
hosts  that  know  the  light  with  songs  extolled  her. 

Knowing  Eternity,  may  the  Gandharva  declare  to  us 

that  highest  secret  station. 
Three  steps  thereof  lie  hidden  in  the  darkness :  he 

who  knows  these  shall  be  the  father's  father. 


The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  Prime  Cause  of  all  things. 

1  Vena:  Vena,  *the  loving  Sun'  of  Rigveda  I.  83.  5,  kdntah  or  *  the 
beloved/  is  said  by  the  Scholiast  to  be  madhyasthdno  devah,  a  God  of 
the  middle  region  of  the  air.  He  is,  apparently,  the  Sun  as  he  rises  in 
the  mists  of  the  morning :  see  Rigveda  X.  123.  1.  2.  Weber  trans- 
lates Vena  by  'der  Seher,'  the  Seer,  connecting  the  word  with  the  Zend 
root  vahi,  to  see.  That  Highest :  the  Supreme  First  Cause.  Primi : 
usually  the  Speckled  Cow,  the  variegated  cloud,  regarded  as  the 
mother  of  the  Maruts.  Here  she  appears,  like  the  cow  Audhumbla  of 
Scandinavian  mythology,  to  represent  the  creative  power  of  Nature. 
All  life  that  had  existence:  jdyamdndfy^  the  feminine  plural  stands 
without  a  substantive ;  prajd%  creatures,  may  perhaps  be  understood  ; 
or,  as  Weber  suggests,  vrdhj  hosts,  from  the  second  p&da  of  the  line. 
The  hosts :  either  the  beings  called  into  life  by  this  act  of  Ppsni,  or 
already  existing  beings  produced  by  an  earlier  act  of  creation.  So 
when  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  laid :  The  morning  stars  sang 
together.  And  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy. — Job,  38.  7, 

2  The  Gandharva :  Vena,  the  rising  Sun.  According  to  Weber, 
*  the  sage.'  Three  steps :  according  to  Mahtdhara,  the  three  paddni, 
steps,  or  conditions,  are  production,  existence,  and  disappearance ;  or 
the  Absolute  (Brahma),  the  Demiiu'gus  or  Creator,  and  the  individual 
soul.  Weber  suggests  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Purusha-SCikta 
(Rigveda  X.  90.  3,  4):  *A11  creatures  are  one-fourth  of  him,  three- 
fourths  immortal  life  in  heaven.  With  three-fourths  Piurusha  went 
up :  one-fourth  of  him  again  was  here.'  The  father's  father :  wiwr 
than,  and  able  to  instruct,   his  elders. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


42  TBB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  II. 

3  He  is  our  kinsman,  father,  and  begetter  :  he  knows 

all  beings  and  all  Ordinances. 
He  only  gave  the  Gods  their  appellations  :  all  crea- 
tures go  to  him  to  ask  direction. 

4  I  have  gone  forth  around  the  earth  and  heaven,  I 

have  approached  the  first-born  Son  of  Order. 
He,  putting  voice,   as   'twere,   within   the  speaker, 
stands  in  the  world,  he,  verily  is  Agni. 

5  I   round  the  circumjacent  worlds  have  travelled   to 

see  the  far-extended  thread  of  Order, 
Wherein  the  Gods,  obtaining  life  eternal,  have  risen 
upward  to  one  common  birthplace. 

HYMN  II. 

Lord  of  the  World,  divine  Gandharva,  only  he 
should  be  honoured  in  the  Tribes  and  worshipped. 

Fast  with  my  spell,  celestial  God,  I  hold  thee.  Hom- 
age to  thee !  Thy  home  is  in  the  heavens. 

3  He :  the  Almighty  Creator.  The  stanssa  is  taken,  with  variations, 
from  Bigveda  X.  82.  3.  2b  ask  direction :  or,  for  information ;  to  learn 
who  is  the  Supreme  Grod ;  or  what  their  several  fmictions  and  duties  are. 

4  Order  (rita)  is  the  eternal  Law  of  the  Universe,  and  the  fir gt- 
horn  Bon  thereof  is  Prajapati,  the  Creator,  who  is  in  this  stanza  identi- 
fied with  AgnL 

5  ObPiining  life  immortal :  Agni  alone,  it  is  said,  was  originally 
immortal,  and  the  other  Qoda  obtained  immortality  through  him. 
See  Rigveia  V.  3.  4;  VI.  7.  4 ;  VII.  13.  2.  According  to  other  texts 
(Bigveda  IV.  54,  2,  and  IX.  106.  8),  immortality  is  conferred  on  them 
by  Savitar  and  by  Soma.  The  whole  of  this  Book  has  been  trans- 
lated, with  copious  explanatory  notes,  by  Professor  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  XIII.  pp.  129 — 216.  Sixteen  of  the  hymns  have  been  translated 
by  Professor  Ludwig,  in  Der  Bigveda,  III.,  and  thirteen  by  Dr.  Grill 
in  his  Himdcrt  Licder  des  Atharva-veda, 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  win  success  in  gambling. 

1  Gandharva :  called  Visv&vasu  or  Lord  of  all  Wealth  in  stanza  5,  not 
identified  here  with  the  Sun  as  in  II.  1.  His  especial  duty  is  to  guard 
the  heavenly  Soma  which  the  Gods  obtain  through  his  permission. 
The  glorification  of  which  he  is  the  subject  in  this  gamblePs  hymn  is 
grossly  exaggerated.  The  Tribes:  five  in  number,  which  constitute 
the  Aryan  conmiunity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  3.]  TBE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  43 

2  Sky-reaching,    like    the    Sun   in   brightness,    holy, 

he  who  averts  from  us  the  Gods'  displeasure. 
Lord  of  the  World,   may  the  Gandharva  bless  us, 
the  friendly  God  who  only  must  be  worshipped. 

3  I   came,    I    met  these   faultless,   blameless   beings : 

among  the  Apsarases  was  the  Gandharva. 
Their  home  is  in  the  sea — so  men  have  told  me, — 
whence  they  come  quickly  hitherward  and  vanish. 

4  Thou,  Cloudy  !  ye  who  follow  the  Gandharva  VisvA- 

vasu,  ye,  Starry!  Lightning-Flasher! 
You,  O  ye  G<)ddesses,  I  truly  worship. 

5  Haunters  of   darkness,  shrill  in  voice,  dice-lovers, 

maddSeners  of  the  mind — 
To  these  have  I  paid  homage,  the  Gandharva's  wives, 
Apsarases. 

HYMN    in. 

That  little  spring  of  water  which  is  running  down- 
ward from  the  hill 

I  turn  to  healing  balm  for  thee  that  thou  mayst  be 
good  medicine. 

3  ApsarasM:  (perhaps  from  ap,  water,  aud  sri,  to  go)  celestial 
nymphs  who  dwell  among  the  clouds,  the  waters  of  the  sea  of  air,  the 
consorts  of  the  Gandharva  or  of  the  class  of  Gandharvas. 

4  ThoUy  Cloudy :  six  other  names  of  Apsarases  are  given  in  Bigveda 
X.  95.  6. 

5  Haunters  of  darhneis  :  loving  the  dark  woods  when  they  visit  the 
earth.  Dice-lovers :  This  is  the  point  of  the  hymn.  The  Gandharva  is 
unduly  glorified  because  he  is  the  consort  of  the  Apsarases ;  and  they 
are  worshipped  as  bein^  intimately  connected  with  dice  and  able  to 
influence  the  gambler^s  luck.  See  IV.  38. 1—4;  VI.  118. 1;  VII.  109.  2,  3. 
Jliaddeners  of  the  mind :  of  the  gambler. 


The  hymn  contains  a  charm  m  which  water  is  used  to  cure  disease. 

1  For  thee:  for  the  mixture  which  the  speaker  is  preparing,  and 
which  the  addition  of  fresh  water  from  the  spring  will  make  complete. 
That  thou  mayst  be  good  medicine:  that  the  whole  mixture  thus  prepar- 
ed may  be  thoroui^hly  effectual.  Ludwig  alters  subheshajam  to  sd- 
hkeshajoy  *that  thou  mayst  have  good  medicine,*  referring  thee  aud  thou 
to  the  patient  for  ^hose  benefit  the  charm  is  uttered. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


44  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Ih 

2  Hither  and  onward!  Well!  Come  on!  Among  thy 

hundred  remedies 
Most  excellent  of  all  art  thou^  curing  disease  and 
morbid  flow. 

3  The  Asuras  bury  deep  in  earth  this  mighty  thing 

that  healeth  wounds. 
This  is  the  cure  for  morbid  flow,  this  drivetb  malady 
away. 

4  The  emmets  from  the  water-flood  produce  this  heal- 

ing medicine : 
This  is  the  cure  for  morbid  flow,  this  drivetb  malady 
away. 

5  Mighty  is  this  wound-healing  balm :  firdm  out  the 

earth  was  it  produced. 
This  is  the  cure  for  morbid  flow,  this  drivetb  malady 
away. 

6  Bless  us  the  Waters !  be  the  I^ants  auspicious ! 
May  Indra's  thunderbolt  drive  off  the  demons.     Far 

from  us  fall  the  shafts  they  shoot  against  us! 

2  Hither Come  on:  the  water  is  addressed.     Thy:  the 

change  of  te  mto  mty  my,  would  make  the  meaning  clearer.     Curing 

morbid  flow :  andtrdvdm,  literallj,  without  dsrdvd  or  diarrhooa  r 

See  I.  2.  4. 

3  The  A»ura$ :  malevolent  demons ;  they  are  said  to  have  buried 
water  deep  in  the  earth,  apparently  that  men  should  not  profit  by  it. 

4  The  emmets:  *die  UpajikA:'  Grill;  *Die  Wassemixen,'  nixes,  or 
water-fairies:  Weber  and  Ludwig.  *The  ttpajtkds  or  vpadt'kds  area 
kind  of  ants  who  are  endowed  with  the  quality  of  producing  water^ 
and  that  too,  beneficent,  healing  water,  wherever  they  ai^)ear,  and 
consequently  wherever  they  are  applied :'  Bloomfield,  American  Jour- 
nal of  Philology,  VII.  p.  483.  See  also  Atharva-veda  VI.  100.  2. 
Termites  or  white  ants  appear  to  be  meant,  called  in  Hindi  dimcik  or 
ditcaky  corrupted  from  vpc^fihvikA,  an  older  form  of  upqj^ca  or  upcidtkap 
and  found  in  the  Rigveda. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  507> 
and  by  Grill  with  notes,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  17,  79. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMN  4,]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  45 

HYMN  IV. 

For  length  of  life,  for  mighty  joy,  uninjured,  ever 

showing  strength 
We  wear  Vishkandha's  antidote,    the    Amulet    of 

Jangi^a. 

2  Amulet  of   a  thousand   powers,   Jangi^a   save  us, 

all  around, 
From  Jambha,  and  from  Visara,  Vishkandha,  and 
tormenting  pain. 

3  This  overcomes  Vishkandha,  thisl  chases  the  greedy 

fiends  away : 
May  this  our  panacea,  may  Jangi^a  save  us  from 
distress. 

4  With  Jangi^a  that  brings  delight.  Amulet  given  by 

the  Gods, 
We  in  the   conflict   overcome  Vishkandha  and  all 
Rdkshasas. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  win  protection  and  general  prosperity. 

1  Vishkandka^s  antidote :  Vishkandha  was  probably  rheumatism,  and 
the  name  of  the  fiend  to  whose  malignity  the  disease  was  attributed : 
See  I.  16.  3.  Jang%4^:  a  plant  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva- 
veda  as  a  charm  against  demons  and  a  specific  for  various  diseases. 
It  appears  to  have  been  cultivated  (stanza  5),  but  no  description  of  it 
has  been  given,  and  it  cannot  now  be  identified.  For  its  divine  effects 
see  XIX.  35.  1 — 5.  The  plant  seems  to  have  resembled  *  that  moly 
That  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave,'  (see  Homer,  Odyssey,  X.  305) 
which  according  to  Dierbach  was  the  Mandrake,  and  in  Theophrastus 
is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  garlic.  See  Lang's  Custom  and  Myth  (new 
edition),  pp.  143  sqq. 

2  Jambha :  homjamhhy  to  seize  with  the  mouth;  a  disease,  and  the 
name  of  Uie  fiend  that  causes  it.  Weber,  citing  Kausika-Sutra  XXX II. 
1,  jamhhagfihitdya  stanam  prayachhati^  *he  offers  the  (mother's) 
breast  to  the  (child)  seized  by  Jambha,'  suggests  that  some  infantile 
disorder,  perhaps  teething,  is  intended.  Visara :  from  vi  and  srI, 
to  split  or  break  in  pieces ;  the  name  of  another  fieni  and  the  disease 
or  morbid  symptom  attributed  to  him,  racking  pain  or  perhaps  con- 
vulsions. Tormenting  pain  :  or  violent  inflammation,  and  its  originate 
ing  demon. 

4  Bdkshas<u :  fierce  nocturnal  fiends  or  ogres. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4G  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IL 

5  May  Cannabis  and  Jangija  preserve  me  from  Vish- 

kandha, — that 
Brought  to  us  from  tho  forest,  this  sprung  from  the 
saps  of  husbandry. 

6  This  Amulet  destroys  the  might  of  magic  and  malign- 

ity : 
So   may  victorious  Jangi^a   prolong  the  years  we 
have  to  live. 

HYMN  V. 
Ikdra,   be   gracious,   drive  thou  forth,  come,  hero, 

with  thy  two  bay  steeds. 
Taste  the  libation,  hither,  enjoying  meath  and  the 
hymn,  come,  fair,  to  the  banquet. 
2  O  Indra,  even  as  one  athirst,  fill  thee  with  meath  as 
'twere  from  heaven. 
Sweet-toned,  the  raptures  of  this  juice  have  come  to 
thee  as  to  the  lignt. 

5  Cannabis :  ^and  ;  hemp ;  Cannabis  Sativa.  The  saps  of  husbandry : 
the  moisture  of  the  cultivated  and  irrigated  soil.  The  hemp,  on  the 
other  hand,  grows  without  cultivation. 

Indra  is  invited  to  come  and  drink  a  libation  of  Soma  juice. 

1  This  stanza  and  the  two  that  immediately  follow  it  are  found, 
with  variations,  in  S&maveda  II.  iii.  i.  22.  The  metre  is  somewhat 
irregular.  The  stanzas  are  obscui*e ;  and  2  and  3  are  characterized  by 
the  repetition  of  ndj  *like,'  'as'  *as  it  were,'  which  recurs  six  times. 
7*iro  bay  steeds:  this  is  the  usual  number  assigned  to  Indra  in  the 
Bigveda ;  but  in  one  passage  (II.  18.  4 — 6)  the  worshipper  invites  the 
God  to  come  with  two,  with  four,  with  six,  and  so  on  up  to  a  hundred, 
the  progressive  multiplication  being  perhaps  intended  to  indicate  the 
ever  increasing  rapidity  with  which  the  worshipper  prays  the  God  to 
approach.  The  Scholiast  says  that  by  their  supernatural  power  the 
two  horses  of  Indra  multiply  themselves  indefinitely.  Meath:  the 
Soma  juice. 

2  As  one  athirst:  literally,  like  a  new  (drinker).  Sweet-toned: 
accompanied  with  sweet  songs. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  5.1  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  4T 

3  Swift-conquering  Indra,  Mitra-like,  smote,  as  a  Yati, 

Vritra  dead. 
Like  Bhrigu  he  cleft  Vala  through,  and  quelled  his 
foes  in  Soma's  rapturous  joy. 

4  O  Indra,  let  the  juices  enter  thee.  Fill  full  thy  belly, 

sate  thee,  mighty  one !  Let  the  hymn  bring  thee. 
Hear  thou  my  call,  accept   the   song   I  sing,   here, 
Indra,  with  thy  friends  enjoy  thyself,  to  height  of 
rapture. 

5  Now  will  I  tell  the  manly  deeds  of  Indra,  the  first 

that  he  achieved,  the  thunder-wielder. 
He  slew  the  Dragon,  then  disclosed  the  waters,  and 
cleft  the  channels  of  the  mountain  torrents. 

6  He  slew  the  Dragon  lying  on  the  mountain :  his 

heavenly  bolt  of  thunder  Tvashtar  fashioned. 
Like  lowing  kine  in  rapid  flow  descending  the  waters 
glided  downward  to  the  ocean. 


Z  As  a  Yati :  one  of  a  mythical  race  of  ascetics  connected  with  the 
Bhpgus,  and  said,  according  to  one  legend,  to  have  taken  part  in  the 
creation  of  the  world.  The  force  of  the  comparison  is  not  very  obvi- 
ous; and  perhaps  it  would  be  better,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  to  give 
yd^  here  the  meaning  of  '  wrestler.'  Weber  translates  it  by  *  Zaubrer,' 
magician,  enchanter.  Bhrigu :  a  Rishi  regarded  as  the  ancestor  of 
the  ancient  race  of  Bhrigus  who  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rig- 
veda  in  connexion  with  Agni,  and  who  are  specially  associated  with 
the  Atharva-veda  hymns.  Vala:  a  demon  of  drought  who  steals  the  cows 
of  the  Gods  and  hides  them  in  a  vald,  enclosure  or  cave,  that  is,  keeps 
the  seasonable  rains  imprisoned  in  dark  thick  clouds. 

5  Stanzas  5 — 7  are  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  32.  1 — 3.  T/te  Dragon : 
Ahi,  the  great  serpent,  another  name  of  Vfitra,  the  chief  demon  of 
drought. 

6  The  mountain:  the  great  mountain-like  cloud.  Tvashtar:  the 
Indian  Hephaestus  or  Vulcanus,  the  celestial  Artificer. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


48  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

7  Impetuous  as  a  bull  he  chose  the  Soma,  and  quaffed 
the  juices  in  three  sacred  beakers. 
Maghavan  grasped  the  thunder  for  his  weapon,  and 
smote  to  death  this  first-born  of  the  dragons. 

HYMN  VI. 

Half-tears  and  seasons  strengthen  thee,  O  Agni, 
the  years,  and  all  the  Verities,  and  Rishis ! 

Flash  forth  with  thy  celestial  effulgence:  illumine 
all  four  regions  of  the  heavens. 

2  Kindle  thee,  Agni,  and  make  this  man  prosper :  rise 

up  erect  for  high  and  happy  fortune. 
Agni,  be  those  uninjured  who  adore  thee,  and  may 
thy  priests  be  glorious  and  no  others. 

3  These  Brdhmans  have  elected  thee,  O  Agni :  be  thou 

propitious  in  our  sacred  chamber. 
Slayer  of  rivals,  Agni,  quell  our  foemen :  watch  in 
our  house  with  care  that  never  ceases. 

7  r'Jn  three  sacred  beakera :  trikculrukeshu;  according  to  S4yana,  at 
the  ihree  sacrifices  called  Jyotis,  Gauh,  and  Ayus,  the  first  three  days 
of  the  Abhiplava  festival:  'and  quaffed  in  threefold  sacrifice  the 
juices.'  Maghavan :  the  Bounteous  One  (Indra). 

Indra  with  his  thunderbolt  slays .  the  Dragon  who  obstructs  the 
rain ;  or  shatters  the  massive  clouds  that  gather  at  the  end  of  the 
season  of  drought,  and  sends  the  waters  down  upon  the  parched  earth. 
Similarly  Apollo,  the  Sun-God,  slew  the  great  serpent  Python;  and 
Odin,  as  God  of  the  Sun  or  Spring  in  Northern  mythology,  slays  tho 
serpent  who  represents  the  wet  and  misty  winter. 

The  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  von  Roth  in  his  Abhandlimg  ilber 
den  Atharva-veda,  pp.  11 — 14. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  to  Agni  for  protection. 

1  The  poet  prays  that  the  Sacrificial  Fire,  representing  Agni  on 
earth,  may  continually  increase  in  strength  and  splendour.  Half-years  : 
sdmdB ;  months,  according  to  Mahidhara :  days,  according  to  Weber. 
Rishis :  all  the  seers  or  sacred  poets  to  whom  the  hymns  of  the  Veda 
have  been  revealed. 

2  This  man :  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

3  Have  elected  thee  :  to  be  their  great  Chief  Priest.  Sacred  chamber : 
or,  sanctuary  ;  the  sacrificial  hall  or  enclosure. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  7,]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  i9 

4  Seize,  Agni,  on  thy  power  and  firmly  hold  it :  contend 

thou  with  the  Friend  by  way  of  friendship. 
Placed  in  the  centre  of  our  fellows,  Agni,  flash  forth 
to  be  invoked  by  kings  around  thee. 

5  Past  those  who  i^lay,  past  enemies,  past  thoughtless 

men,  past  those  who  hate, — 
Yea,  Agni,  hear  us  safe  past  all  distresses :  give  thou 
us  opulence  with  men  about  us. 

HYMN  VII. 

Hated  by  sinners,  sprung  from  Gods,  this  Plant  that 

turns  the  curse  away 
Hath  washed  from  me  all  curses,  ba  water  makes 

clean  from  spot  and  stain. 

2  All  curses  of  a  rival,  each  curse  of  a  female  relative, 
Curse  uttered  by  an  angry  priest,  all  these  we  tread 

beneath  our  feet. 

3  Spread  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  downward  from 

heaven  thy  root  depends  : 
With  this  that  hath  a  thousand  joints  keep  thou  us 
safe  on  every  side. 

4  Guard  on  all  sides  this  woman,  guard  my  children, 

us,  and  all  our  wealth ! 
Let  not  malignity  overcome,  nor  adversaries  conquer 
us. 


4  The  Friend :  the  God  MItra.     By  way  of  frimdship  :  mitradM. 

5  The  first  line  of  the  stanza  is  in  the  Anushtup  metre  :  the  rest  of 
the  hymn  is  Trishtup. 

The  hymn  is  a  counter-charm  against  imprecation  and  malignity. 

1  ThU  Plant :  Darbha  or  Kiita  grass  (Poa  Cynosuroides),  much  used 
in  sacrificial  ceremonies  and  endowed  with  various  sanctifying  qualities. 

3  Ihvonwnrd  from  heaven :  referring  to  its  divine  origin :  *  0  Plant 
(DarbhaX  thy  root  is  in  the  heavens.'  Atharva-veda  XIX.  32.  3. 
A  thousand  jotnU :  Darbha  is  a  grass  that  spreads  rapidly  and  con- 
tinually re-roots  itself.  The  multiplicity  of  joints  or  roots  indicates 
the  far-reaching  power  of  the  plant. 

4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


150  THE  HYMKS  OF  [BOOK  II 

I  6  Upon  the  curser  fall  his  curse  !  Dwell  we  with  him 
whose  heart  is  true  ! 
We  split  the  cruel  villain's    ribs    whose    evil    eye 
bewitches  ua 

HYMN  VIIL 

Twin  Stars  of  happy  on^en,  flamed  Heleasers^  have 

gone  up.    May  they 
Loose,  of  inherited  disease^  the  uppermost  and  lowest 

bond. 

2  Vanish  this  Night,  extinct  in  Dawn !  Let  those  who 
weave  their  spells  depart. 
So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited 
disease. 


5  Betntchei  us ;  dread  of  the  etil  eye  (cbashm-i-bad)  is  still  as 
prevalent  in  India,  especially  among  wotfien,  as  it  is,  and  has  been 
f  roih  early  times,  in  Italy — especially  in  the  southern  parts — where  the 
reputation  of  being  a  jettatore  or  jettatrice  (caster  of  the  evil  eye) 
brings  ostracism  and  social  ruin  upon  people  even  of  the  highest  rank. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  508, 
and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  34,  81 « 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  kshetriyd,  some  hereditary  diseasei 
perhaps  pulmonary  Consumption. 

1  Releasers:  viekfitau;  the  ancient  name  of  the  lunar  asterism 
called  Mdlabarhap!  or  MMa.  0/  inherited  diseasei  hshetriydsya ;  the 
word  means  originally  of,  or  belonging  to,  a  hshePra  (Hindi  khet)  a 
field ;  and,  as  a  neuter  substantive,  a  chronic,  constitutional,  or  here- 
ditary disease,  derived  from  the  mother's  body  regarded  as  a  produc- 
tive field.  Weber  takes  the  word  here  to  refer  to  injury  of  the  field  or 
farm;  and  stansas  8 — 5  seem  almost  to  justify  his  interpretation.  An 
alternative  version  might  be :  *  of  the  spell  that  binds  our  field.' 

2  Those  who  weave  their  spells:  witches  and  female  fiends.  The 
refrain  in  this  and  the  following  stanzas  might  be,  in  accordance  widi 

,  Weber^s  interpretation :    *May  the  plague-staying  Plant  remove  the 
spell  that  liesi  upon  our  field/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BY  MS  9.  J  TBE  ATUARVA'TEDJi.  «1 

3  With  straw  of  barley  tawny-brown  in  colour  with  its 
silvery  ears,  with  stalk  and  stem  of  Sesamum — 
So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited 
disease. 
4r  Let  homage  to  thy  ploughs  be  paid^  our  homage  to 
the  pole  and  yokes. 
So  let  the  plague*destroying  Plant  remove  inherited 
disease. 
'  6  Homage  to  men  with  blinking  eyes^  homage  to  those 
who  hear  and  act !  To  the  Field's  Lord  be  homage 
paid.. 
So  let  the  plague-destroying  Plant  remove  inherited 
disease. 

HYMN  IX. 

Frkb  this  man^  Dasavriksha !  from  the  demon,  from 

Gr4hi  who  hath  seized  his  joints  and  members^ 
And  raise  him  up  again^  O  Tree^  into  the  world  of 

living  men. 
2  He  hath  arisen  and  come  once  more,  rejoined  the 

band  of  those  who  live. 
May  he  become  the  sire  of  sons,  and  of  all  men  most 

fortunate. 

6  Men  with  blinking  eyest  farm-labourers  who  have  Worked  till  they 
cannot  keep  their  eyes  open.  Weber  suggests  that  good-natured 
Kobold-like  domestic  sprites  may  be  intended.  Perhaps  they  have 
worked  all  night ;  as  Milton  (L'  Allegro)  speaks  of  *the  drudging  goblin' 
who  earns  his  bowl  of  cream  by  threshing  more  com  in  one  night 
than  ten  day-labourers  could  finish.  The  FieUTs  Lord :  ksketrapati  ; 
the  Genius  Loci,  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  field,  sometimes  said  to  be 
Agni,  or  Rudra :  see  Rigveda  IV.  57.  1^  2.  The  hymn  has  been  trans- 
lated by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  513. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  cure  dangerous  diseasci 
.     1  Daiavriksha:  explained  by  the  Kausika-S^tra  and  D&rila  (XXVtl. 
5)  as  an  amulet  made  of  ten  kinds  of  holy  wood  which  is  to  be  employ- 
ed in  the  process  of  recovering  the  patient.     Grdhi:  a  female  fiend 
who  seizes  men  and  causes  death  and  disease. 

2  He  hath  arisen :  the  effect  of  the  charm  being  regarded  as  oertain, 
'^The  aorists  are  prophetic  preterits': — Grill. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


52  TEE  HTMirS  OP  [BOOK  II. 

3  He    hath    retarned  to  consciousness,    rejoined    the 

living's  firm  abodes, 
For  hundred  leeches  are  in  this,  yea,  and  a  thousand 
healing  herbs. 

4  The  Gods,  the  Brahman-priests,  and  plants  observed 

the  way  to  gather  thee  : 
All  deities  descried  the  way  men  gather  thee  upon 
the  earth. 

5  Let  him  who  made  it  also  heal :  he,  truly,  is  the 

deftest  leech. 
Pure,  with  a  leech  he  verily  shall  give  thee  medicines 

that  heaL 

HYMN  X. 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse.  Destruction, 

from  Druh,  from  Varuija's  noose  I  free  and  save  thee. 
With  spell  and  prayer  I  make  thee  pure  and  sinless : 

to  thee  be  both,  the  Earth  and  Heaven,  auspicious! 

3  Hundred  leeches  are  in  tlUs:  the  amulet  possesses  the  healing 
power  of  a  hundred  physicians  and  a  thousand  medicinal  herbs. 

4  Brahman-prieBtB :  priests  versed  in  sacred  knowledge  who  super- 
vise and  direct  the  sacritice. 

5  him  who  made  it :  probably  the  God  to  whom  the  origin  of  the 
amulet,  that  is,  the  wood  of  which  it  was  made,  is  attributed.  With  a 
leech :  the  amulet  contains  in  itself  (st.  3)  the  powers  of  a  hundred 
physicians  and  a  thousand  healing  herbs,  so  the  God  when  he  gives  it 
supplies  both  leech  and  medicine.  The  instrumental  hhishdjd,  with  a 
leech,  makes  the  line  difficult  and  obscure.  Weber  says  that  it  gives 
no  sense,  and  reads  hhishdjdtn  instead :  *  As  purest  of  physicians  it 
(the  amulet)  indeed  shall  give  thee  (the  patient)  medicines.' 

The  hymn  is  an  Absolution  and  a  Benediction,  to  be  used,  according 
to  later  authorities,  in  the  Birth-ritual  or  ceremony  after  the  birth  of  a 
child,  at  the  iirst  washing  of  the  infant.  But  this  does  not  appear  to 
be  the  original  object  of  the  hymn. 

1  Family  sickness:  kshetriyd ;  hereditary  disease:  see  II.  8.  I. 
Kinsmen's  cwrse :  rivalry  and  enmity  between  relatives  by  blood  seem 
to  have  been  the  rule:  bhrdtrivya,  father's  brother's  son,  cousin,  means 
almost  exclusively  enemy  in  the  Veda  ;  and  sajdtd  and  sdbandhu  fre- 
quently imply  rivalry  as  well  as  consanguinity.  Destruction  ;  Niqiti, 
the  Goddess  of  Death,  Destruction,  and  Misfortune  in  general.  Druh : 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  10.]  TEE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  S3 

2  Gracious  to  thee  be  Agni  with  the  Waters,  let  Soma 

with  the  Plants  be  kind  and  bless  thee. 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse,  Destruction, 
from  Druh,  from  Varu^a's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 

3  May  kind  Wind  strengthen  thee  in  air's  mid-region, 

to  thee  may  heaven's  four  quarters  be  auspicious. 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse,  Destruction, 
from  Druh,  from  Varu^ia's  curse  I  thus  release  thee. 

4  These   Goddesses,   four  regions  of  the  heavens,  on 

whom  the  Sun  looks  kindly,  wives  of  V4ta — 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse.  Destruction, 
from  Druh,  from  Varu^a's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 

5  For  long  life,  in  the  midst  of  these  I  set  thee.  Away 

pass  Nirriti,  away  Consumption ! 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse.  Destruction, 
from  Druh,  fromVaruna's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 

6  Thou  hast  been  freed  from  Phthisis  and  from  trouble, 

from  shame,  and  from  the  snare  of  Druh  and  Gr&hl. 

From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse.  Destruction, 

from  Druh,  from  Varupa's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 

7  Joy  hast  thou  found,  and  left  ill-will  behind  thee: 

thou  hast  attained  the  happy  world  of  virtue.' 


the  injurer ;  a  female  fiend  so  named  :  '  May  he  oatch  the  snares  of 
Druh.'  Bigveda  VII.  59.  8.  Varwia^B  noose :  with  which  he  entangles 
sinners  to  destroy  them.  Sinless :  meaning,  if  a  new-bom  child  is  the 
subject^  free  from  sin  committed  by  thy  parents :  *  Let  ns  not  suffer 
for  the  sin  of  others:'  Rigveda  VI.  51,  7 ;  *  Loose  us  from  sins  com- 
mitted by  our  fathers:'  Rigveda  VII.  86.  5. 

2  Plants :  of  which  the  deified  Soma  is  lord  and  king. 

3  Wind:  V&yu,  the  God  of  Wind,  a  deity  of  the  middle  region  of  air. 

4  Vdta :  another  ham^  of  V&yu ;  Latin  ventus. 

5  Consumption :  ydkshma:  very  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva- 
veda.  The  cure  of  this  disease  is  the  subject  of  Hymn  OLXI.  of  Book 
X.  of  the  Rigveda. 

6  Phthisis:  ydkshma^  again.  Grdht:  the  grasping  female  fiend  who 
seizes  men  and  kills  them :  see  II.  9.  I. 

7  Joy  hast  thou  found:  the  verbs  in  this  line  are  prophetic  preterits : 
see  II.  9.  2,  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


64  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It. 

From  family  siokness^  kinsmen's  curse,  Destructioiiy 

from  Drub,  from  Varuoa's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 
8  The  Gods  have  freed  ft*om  sinfulness,  redeeming  the 

Sun,  the  Law  fVom  darkness  and  from  Gr&hi. 
From  family  sickness,  kinsmen's  curse,  Destruction, 

from  Druh,  from  YaruQa's  noose  I  thus  release  thee. 
With  spell  and  prayer  I  make  thee  pure  and  sinless : 

to  thee  be  both,  the  Earth  and  Heaven, auspicious! 

HYMN  XI, 
Dart  against  dart,  destroyer  of  destruction,  thou  art 

the  missile  sent  to  meet  the  missile. 
Reach  thy  superior,  thou ;  surpass  thine  equal. 
2  Sraktya  art  thou,  an  Amulet  art  thou,  a  counter- 
charm  of  spells. 
Reach  thy  superior,  thou ;  surpass  thine  equal. 
S  Use  spells  against  the  man  we  hate,  against  the  man 
who  hateth  us. 
Reach  thy  superior,  thou ;  surpass  thine  equal 
4  A  prince  art  thou,   giver  of  speech,   thou   art   our 
bodies'  strong  defence. 
Reach  thy  superior,  thou ;  surpass  thine  equal. 


8  BedeenUng  the  Sun^  the  Lavf^ :  i^  the  Qods  haye  rescued  the  Sim 
from  eclipse  and  preserved  the  Order  of  the  Upiverse  from  the  fiend^s 
attack,  so  they  have  absolved  thee  from  sin.  The  Sim,  and  the  Li^Wi 
are  introduced  merely  by  way  of  illustration. 

The  hymn  has  been  thoroughly  discussed  by  Weber,  Indische  Studieo, 
XIIT.  pp.  156 — 163.  It  has  lUso  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Per 
Rigveda,  HI.  513, 

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  an  Amulet  which  is  to  act  as  a  coimter- 
^harm  against  the  spells  of  an  enemy. 

2  Sraktya :  one  of  the  ^Ania  or  holy  trees  mentioned  in  a  list  given 
iQ  the  Kausika-Siitra,  VIII.  15,  and  identified  by  Darila  with  the 
Tilaka  which  is  a  tree  hearing  beautiful  flowers.  The  Amulet  that  is 
to  ward  off  witchcraft  is  made  of  the  wood  of  this  tree:  see  Bloomfield, 
American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII,  477. 

4  A  prince :  sUri;  an  institutor  of  sacrifice ;  a  lord  or  chief.  Giver 
of  speech :  making  Uiy  wearer  eloquent. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  12.]  TBB  ATHARVAWPA.  Wr 

5  Fulgent  art  thou^  and  splendid,  thou  art  heavenly 
lustre,  thou  art  light. 
Reach  thy  supenQr,  thou ;  surpass  thine  equal, 

HYMN  XII, 
Thb  spacious  Firmament,  and   Earth  and   Heaven, 

the  Field's  Queen,  and  the  wonderful  Wide-Strider, 
Yea,  the  broad   middle   air   which  V^ta  guardeth^ 

Oiay  these  now  burn  with  heat  while  I  am  burning. 

2  Listen  to  this,  ye  Gods  who  merit  worship.    Hymns 
here  are  suDg  for  me  by  Bharadv^ja^ 
Bound  in  the  noose  may  he  be  doomed  to  trouble 
whoever  mars  this  that  our  mind  hath  purposed.^ 
S  Hear  this  my  call,  O  Indra,  Soma-drin]jier,  as  with  a 
burning  heayt  I  oft  invoke  thee. 
I  smite,  as  'twere  a  tree  felled  with  a   hatchet,   the 
man  who  marreth  this  my  plan  and  purpose,^ 

The  hynm  is  an  appeal  to  Heayen  and  l^larth  and  other  Powers  for 
sympathy  and  for  vengeanpe  on  a  malicious  adversary  who  has  reviled 
and  obstructed  the  religioiis  duties  of  the  injured  worshipper. 

1  The  FielcPi  Queen  :  the  fen^^Ie  deity  who  id  tlxe  special  guardian 
of  the  cultivated  land.  Wide-JStrider :  Vbhnu,  a  God  of  the  upper 
region  who  as  a  personification  of  the  Stm  traverses  the  world  in  three 
strides,  his  rising,  culmination,  and  setting  s  see  9^gveda  I.  154,  155,' 
156,  and  VJI.  d9,  100.  Vdta :  on-  Viyu,  thp  God  of  Wind.  Bum 
.ynth  heat ;  sympf^thizQ  with  me  in  my  fierv  in^digoj^tion.  Weber  and 
others  SjB^  here  £^  reference  to  an  ordeal  by  fire  which,  the  Bishi 
undergoes  or  offers  to  undergo,  and  to  wlycU  the  i^vo^ed,  Powers  also^ 
as  his  compurgators^  are  called  upon  to  subn^it^ 

The  tl^^ee  ¥rorlds,  Hef^vei^  EBurth«  aiud  Finnionent,  and  their  thre^ 
protecting  Powers  iwpe  invoked ;  but  in3tea4  oJt  Vftyu  himself  the  Ai^ 
or  Firmament  whiplv  he  goverqa  is  again  mentioned. 

2  BMradvdja:  the  great  Rishi  of  s^oient  tiDft0S,  celebrated  in  the- 
Bigveda,  is  supposed  to  be  present  and  assisting  the  injured  worshipper 
This  that  our  n^ind  hath  purposed :  tl^e  sacrifice  iqrbich  we  intend  to 
perform. 

3  Hatchet :  here  a^ain  Web^r  sees  an  allusioQ  to  the  heated  i^xe 
used  in  the  ordeal  by  fire :  but  qotbing  more  than  an  illustration 
se^ms  to  l^  intended. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ii6  THE  HYBiNS  OF  [BOOK  tl 

4  Together  with  thrice-eighty  S&ma-singers,  Angirases, 

and  Vasus,  and  Adityas, 
May  the  felicity  of  the  Fathers  guard  us.     I  seize 
that  man  with  fire  that  Gods  have  kindled. 

5  O  Heaven  and  Earth,  regard  me  with   your   favour, 

and,  all  ye  Gods,  stand  on  my  side  and  help  me. 
Angirases,  Fathers  worthy  of  the  Soma !  woe  fall  on 
him  who  caused  the  hateful  outrage  ! 

6  Whoever  either  scorns  us,  O  ye  Maruts,  or  blames 

devotion  which  we  now  are  paying, 
Let  his  own  wicked  deeds  be  fires  to  burn  him.  May 
Heaven  consume  the  man  who  hates  devotion. 

7  Thy   sevenfold   vital   breath,   thine  eight    marrows 

I  rend  away  with  prayer. 
With  Agni  as  thine  envoy,  go,  prepared,  to  Yama's 
dwelling-place. 

4  Tlvnee-eighty  S'tma-tfingers :  or  singere  of  hymns.  The  meaning 
is  not  clear,  and  Ludwig  reads  somapebkih,  Soma-drlnkers,  instead  of 
Bdmagebhih  which,  he  says,  gives  no  sense.  Weber  thinks  that  the 
thrice-eighty  singers  of  S^mans  are  men,  Adityas,  Vasus,  Angirases, 
and  Manes  who  appear  at  the  ordeal  as  compurgators  or  witnesses  to 
prove  the  innocence  of  the  accused,  whose  importance  necessitates  the 
presence  of  so  large  a  nimiber.  The  number  eighty,  Professor  Weber 
observes,  frequently  occurs  in  connexion  with  the  Fire-ritual.  Angi- 
rases :  regarded  as  a  higher  race  of  beings  between  Gods  and  men, 
the  typical  first  sacrificers,  whose  ritual  is  the  pattern  which  later 
priests  must  follow.  Fathers :  Manes  or  Ancestral  Spirits ;  the  deified 
spirits  of  the  ancestors  of  the  Rishis,  associated  with  the  Gods  and 
exercising  superhuman  powers :  see  Hymns  of  the  Bigveda,  Greneral 
Index  II.  The  feliciiyy  is^UdpHrtdm,  of  the  Fathers,  is  the  reward 
which  they  receive  in  heaven  for  their  sacrifices  and  pious  works  on 
earth.     That  man  :  the  adversary.     With  fire  :  with  fiery  indignation. 

6  This  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  VI.  52.  2.  It 
Was  perhaps  spoken  by  the  priest. 

7  lliis  stanza  and  the  next  are  addressed  by  the  complainant  to  his 
adversary. 

Sevenfold  vital  breath :  drawn  through  eyes,  ears,  nostrils,  and  mouth. 
Eight  marrows :  one  in  each  division  of  each  arm  and  leg. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  13.]  THt!  ATBARVAVEDA.  67 

8  In  J&tavedas'  kindled  flame  I  set  the  place  assigned 
to  thee. 
Let  fire  consume  thy  body,  and  thy  voice  go  to  the 
general  breath. 

HYMN  XIIL 

Strength-giver,  winning  lengthened  life,  O  Agni, 
with  face  and  back  shining  with  molten  butter, 

Drink  thou  the  butter  and  mir  milk  and  honey,  and, 
as  a  sire  his  sons,  keep  this  man  safely. 

2  For  us  surround  him,  cover  him  with  splendour,  give 

him  long  life,  and  death  when  age  removes  him. 
The   garment  hath  Brihaspati  presented   to   Soma, 
to  the  King,  to  wrap  about  him. 

3  Thou  for  our  weal  hast  clothed  thee  in  the  mantle : 

thou  hast  become  our  heifers*  guard  from  witchcraft. 
Live  thou  a  hundred  full  and  plenteous  autumns,  and 
wrap  thee  in  prosperity  of  riches. 

,4  Come  hither,  stand  upon  the  stone :  thy  body  shall 
become  a  stone. 
The  Universal  Gods  shall  make  thy  life  a  hundred 
autumns  long. 

8  The  general  breath :  to  the  element  to  which  it  belongs ;  like  to  like. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  445, 
and  translated  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp. 
47,  85—88,  and  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XIII.  pp.  164—171. 

The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  a  youth's  investiture  with  a  new  gar- 
ment at  a  ceremony  {goddnam)  performed  when  he  attains  the  age  of 
sixteen  or  eighteen  years,  and  shortly  before  his  marriage. 

1  Winning  lengthened  life :  for  the  youth. 

2  The  Gods  are  addressed,  as  the  imperatives  in  the  first  line  are 
plural.     The  stanza  recurs  in  XIX.  24.  4. 

3  Addressed  to  the  youth  who  has  now  become  an  adult  member  of 
the  family  with  duties  to  perform. 

4  Shall  become  a  stone:  firm  and  strong  to  endure:  of.  I.  2.  2: 
*  Make  my  body  stone.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


fi«  THB  H7MNS  OF      ^  {BOOK  II;, 

6  So  may  the  Universal  Gods  protect  thee,  whom  we 
divest  of  raiment  worn  aforetime. 
So  after  thee^   welKformed   and  growing   stroager, 
be  born  a  multitude  of  thriving  brothers, 

HYMN  XIV. 

*    Forth  from  the  ball  the  bold,  the  shai'p,  the  greedy 
one,  the  single-voiced, 
Sad&nv^,  and  all  progeny  of  Chan^a  we  exterminate. 
2  We  drive  you  forth  from  cattle-shed,  from  axle,  from 
\A  ithin  the  waiq, 

6  The  Univertml  Oods :  the  Viflive  Dev&h,  Visvedevas,  or  All-Qods. 
Thriving  brothen :  the  youth  is  apparently  an  only  son. 

The  ceremony,  .the  Retails  of  which  are  giveA  u^  the  Kivusika-Sdtr;^ 
XTII,  I4IV,  i?emin<ia  one  of  the  Roman  youth's  assi^nptioji  of  the  togk 
yirilis,  an  occasion  which  was  celebrated  with  great  rejoicings  by  his 
friends.  The  hymn  has  been  tvaqsUted  by  I^udwig,  Der  Rigveda, 
III.  p.  446. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  banish  evil  creatures  from  the  hoi^  and 
homestead. 

1  Forth  Jrom  the  hall:  nieM^m  ;  according  to  S&yani^  the  pame  of 
a  Pisacht  or  female  goblin.  This  word  and  the  two  following  are  ex- 
tremely difficult,  and,  as  they  st«^d  in  the  text,  cannot  be  satisfactorily 
explained,  The  hold :  dhrisk^tlm ;  a  masculine  form  used  apparently 
for  the  feminine.  The  sharp  :  dhxshdifam :  the  meaning  of  the  word 
ifr  not  clear,  and  the  feminine  form  is  required.  Weber  reads  dhishd- 
^m  accordingly,  deriving  it  from  dhd,  to  hold.  The  greedy  one: 
jighatsiiam ;  from  ghas,  to  eat.  The  single-toned :  ekavAdydtm ;  some 
troublesome  creature  that  utters  one  constantly  repeated  sound, 
Weber  suggests  that  the  wood-worm  or  borer,  a  most  distractingly  an- 
noying plague,  b  meant.  ScMnvds :  according  to  the  Nirukta,  always 
making  a  noise  {sadd,  always,  and  nUy  to  cry),  Qver-screeching ;  or^  as 
Weber,  Grassmann,  and  Grill  prefer,  demoniacal,  fiendish,  from  sa, 
with,  and  ddnu  or  ddtiava,  a  demon.  Chaft^ :  the  fierce  one ;  the 
name  of  a  chief  goblin  ;  perhaps  King  of  the  Rats,  as  conjectured  by 
Weber  who  thinks,  with  much  probability,  that  the  evil  creatures  that 
ave  to  be  banished  are  rats  and  mice  to  whom  the  ^thets  used  will 
well  apply.  ' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


tiTMN  \t]  rat  ATHARVAVBDA.  W 

Ye  daughters  of  Magundt,  we  frighten  and  chase 
you  from  our  homes. 
S  Yonder  let  the  Arftyis  dwell,  there  where  that  house 
is  down  below. 
Let  utter  indigence  and  all  the  Yfttudh4n)s  settle 
there, 

4  May  Bhiitapati  drive  away,  and  Indra,  the  Sadftnv^s 

hence. 
Let  Indra  with  his  bolt  quell  those  who  sit  upon  our 
dwelling's  floor, 

5  Whether  ye  be  of  farm  and  field,  or  whether  ye  lie 

sent  by  men. 
Or  be  ye  sprung  from  Dasyu  race,  vanish,  Sad&nv^, 
and  begone. 

6  I  have  gone  round  their  homes  as  runs  a  fleet^foot 

racer  round  the  post, 
And  in  all  races  conquered  you.     Vanish,  Sad&nv&s, 
and  begone. 

HYMN  XV. 

As  Heaven  and  Earth  are  not  afraid,  and  never  suffer 

loss  or  harm. 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  feax  not  thou, 

2  Magwidi :  a  female  eyil  spirit  not  mentioned  elsewhere :  perhaps 
the  wife  of  Cha^da  and  mother  of  his  progeny. 

3  ArdifU :  female  fiends  aqd  night-haga  :  see  I.  28.  4.  Doum  below  : 
in  the  darkness  of  the  nether  world :  or,  possibly,  the  house  of  aik 
enemy  lower  down  the  hill  is  intended.  YdtmthdnU :  or,  sorceresses, 
see  I.  8.  1. 

4  BMUapaH:  lord  of  creatures,  especially  of  ghosts  and  evil  spirits. 
The  name  is  applied  to  Rudra,  Agni,  Bhava,  and  Sarva. 

5  By  men :  by  human  sorcerers.  Spmngfrom  Da$yu  race :  originat- 
ing from,  and  sent  by,  fiends. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  52a» 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  1,  89 — 92. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Fear. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


60  TBE  HTMFS  OP  [BOOK  IL 

2  As  Day  and  Night  are  not  afiraid^  nor  ever  suffer  loss 

or  harm, 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  tboa. 

3  As  Sun  and  Moon  are  not  afirakt,.  nor  ever  suffer  loss 

or  barm, 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou. 

4  As  Br4bmanhood   and    Princely   Pow^  fear  not^ 

nor  suffer  loss  or  harm. 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou. 

5  As  Truth  and  Falsehood  have  no  fear,  nor  ever  suffer 

loss  or  harm. 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou. 

6  As  What  Hath  Been  and  What  Shall  Be  fear  not, 

nor  suffer  loss  or  harm. 
Even  so,  my  spirit,  fear  not  thou* 

HYMN  XVI. 

Guard  me  from  death,  Inhaling  and  Exhaling  f  All 
bliss  to  you ! 

2  Guard  me  from  overhearing.  Earth  and  Heaven !  All 

hail  to  you ! 

3  Do  thou,  O  Siirya,  with  thine  eye  protect  me  t  All 

hail  to  thee ! 

4  Br/ihmanhood  and  Princely  Power:  hrdkma  and  Jnkairdm;  priests 
and  nobles. 

5  Truih  and  FiUtehood:  Weber  reads  fitdmy  Order,  instead  of 
dnritam,  falsehood:  *  Falsehood  cannot  be  suitably  addueed  as  as 
example  in  such  a  formula.  That  would  indeed  be  a  sort  of  sacrilege/ 
I  take  the  text  as  I  find  it,  and  do  not  see  that  it  needs  alteration. 

This  non-metrical  formula  is  a  prayer  for  general  protecUon. 

1  Inhaling  and  Exhaling:  two  of  the  vital  airs,  Inspiration  and 
Expiration,  personified.  All  bliss:  or,  All  hail;  ttfdChd;  an  auspicious 
word  or  benediction  used  at  the  end  of  invocations,  like  Amen. 

3  Sdrya :  Qod  of  the  Sun. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMSr  18^]  THS  ATEARVAVEDA.  i\ 

4  Agni  Vaisv^nara,  with  all  Gods  preserve  me!  All 

hail  to  thee  I 

5  Preserve  me  with  all  care,   O  All-Sustainer !  All 

hail  to  thee ! 

HYMN  XVII. 

Power  art  thou,  give  me  power.    All  hail ! 

2  Might  art  thou,  give  me  might.     All  hail ! 

3  Strength  art  thou,  give  me  strength.     All  hail ! 

4  Life  art  thou,  give  me  life.     All  hail ! 

5  Ear  art  thou,  give  me  hearing !     Hail ! 

6  Eye  art  thou,  give  me  eyes.     All  hail ! 

7  Shield  art  thou,  shield  me  well.     All  hail  I 

HYMN  XVIII. 

Destruction  of  the  foe  art  thou,  give  me  the  scaring 
of  my  foes.  All  hail  1 

2  The  rival's  ruiner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  my 

rivals  off.     All  hail ! 

3  Arayts*  ruiner  art  thou,   give   me  to  drive  Ar&yis 

off.  All  hail ! 

4  Pisdchas*  ruiner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  Pis4chas 

off.     All  hail! 

5  Sad&nv&s'  ruiner  art  thou,  give  me  to  drive  Saddnv&s 

off.  All  hail! 

4  Vaiwdnara :  belonging  to  all  (Aryan)  men ;  universal ;  a  frequently 
occurring  epithet  or  appellation  of  Agni.  WM  all  Godi :  or,  with 
the  All-Gods, 'the  Visvedevas  or  Visve  Devas. 

5  AU'Sustainer :  vifvambkara ;  Vishnu. 

A  non-metrical  formula  addressed  to  an  Amulet. 

A  non-metrical  charm  against  enemies,  goblins,  and  other  evil 
creatures. 

3  ArdyU  :  female  fiends  or  witches :  see  I.  28.  4. 

4  Ptfdchas :  goblins :  see  I.  16.  3. 

5  Saddnvds:  imps,  or  noisy  pests :  see  II.  14.  L 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 

J 


•2  THS  BY  Mir S  OP  [MOOK  IL 

HYMN  XIX. 

Burn  thou,  O  Agni,  with  that  heat  of  thine  against 
the  man  who  hates  Us,  whom  we  hate. 

2  Flame  thou,  O  Agni,  with  that  flame  of  thine  against 

the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate. 

3  Shine  out,  O  Agni,  with  that  sheen  of  thine  against 

the  man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate. 

4  Blaze  thou,  O  Agni,  with  that  blaze  of  thine  against 

the  man  who  hates  uS)  whom  we  hate« 

5  O  Agni,  With  the  splendour  that  is  thine  darken  the 

man  who  hates  us,  whom  we  hate. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

O  Serabhaka,  Serabha,  back  fall  your  arts  of 
witchery  !  Bacl^,  Kimidins  I  let  your  weapon  ^11. 

Eat  your  possessor ;  eat  ye  him  who  sent  you  forth ; 
eiat  your  own  flesh* 

2  Sevridhaka,    O  Sevridha,    back   fall   your  arts  of 
witchery!  Back,  Kimidins!  let  your  weapon  fall,  etc. 

A  non-metrical  charm  invoking  Agni's  aid  against  an  enemy. 

Hymns  XX — XX 1 11  are  exactly  similar  except  that  other  deities, 
;  V&yu,  Sdrya,  Chandra  or  the  Moon,  and  the  Waters,  axe  addressed 
instead  of  Agni. 


A  charm  against  the  magic  arts  of  fiends. 

1  In  this  and  thd  three  following  stanzas  four  Kimtdins,  imps, 
goblins,  or  sorcerers  (see  I.  7.  1.)  and  in  5 — 8  four  KimtdinSs,  or  female 
fiends  of  the  same  class,  are  addressed.  SerahkaJca:  the  derivation 
is  unknown.  According  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  a  kind  of  snake  is 
meant.  Your  posse^or :  him  whose  servants  ye  are ;  the  superior 
fiend  who  commands  you. 

2  Sevridhaka :  $4vridha,  perhaps  a  shortened  form  of  ievavridAa^ 
means  in  the  five  passages  of  the  Rigveda  in  which  it  occurs,  auspicious, 
bliss-increasing.  It  may  perhaps  be  used  euphembtically  here,  as 
Bobin   Good-fellow  is  the  old  name  of  a  '  shrewd  and  knavish  sprite.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JTYMNZi]  TUB  ATBAR7AVEDA.  6S 

3  O    Mroka,    Anuinroka,    back    return    your  arts    of 

witchery  1  Back,  Kimldiiis !  let  your  weapon  fall,  etc. 

4  O  Sarpa,  Anusarpa,  back  return  your  arts  of  witchery  I 

Back,  Kimidins  1  let  your  weapon  fall,  etc. 

5  Back  fall  your  witcheries,  Jiiroi  I  back  your  weapon, 

ye  Kimidints,  etc. 

6  Back  fall  your  spells,   Upabdi!  back  your  weapon, 

ye  Kimidints,  etc. 

7  Back  fall  your  witchcrafts,   Arjun!!    your  weapon, 

ye  Kimldinis,  etc. 

8  Back,  O  BbarCijl!  fall  your  charms,   your  weapon, 

ye  Kimldinis, 
Eat  your  possessor ;  eat  ye  him  who  sent  you  forth ; 
eat  your  own  flesh. 


3  Mroira :  mentioned  in  V.  31.  9  as  a  destructive  Agni  or  fire ;  here, 
perhaps,  representing  the  burning  heat  of  fever.  Anamroka :  Mrot^ 
with  the  prefix  anti,  with ;  a  slight  modification  of  the  name. 

4  Sarpa^  Anu$arpa  :  serpent,  and  serpentine. 

5  Mmt :  according  to  the  St  P.  Dictionary,  a  snake  that  has  cast 
its  skin ;  according  to  Weber,  connected  with  j^r^i,  glowing  heat,  and 
meaning  fever. 

6  Upabdi :  noise,  rattle,  clatter.  Possibly  referring  to  the  chattering 
of  the  teeth  in  cold  ague  fits. 

7  Arfunt :  white ;  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  a  (silvery) 
snake.  Weber  thinks  that  the  reference  is  to  the  whiteness  of  the 
skin  in  leprosy. 

8  Bhafiyt :  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionaiy,  some  noxious  animal 
is  meant.  Weber  refers  the  word  to  the  roots  bhrijy  bhrc^\  to  fry  or 
roast,  and  thinks  that  the  burning  heat  of  fever  is  intended.  Profes- 
sor Weber  has  carefully  discussed  all  tiie  above-mentioned  names  in 
Indische  Studien,  XIII.  pp.  182 — 186.  It  is  as  difficult  to  ascertain  the 
exact  meaning  of  the  words  as  of  the  demons'  names  borrowed  by 
Shakespear  from  Harsnet,  viz.  Smulkin,  Modo,  Mahu,  Flibbertigibbet^ 
and  Pur. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


61  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IL 

HYMN  XXV. 

The  Goddess  Frisnipari^i  hath  blest  us,  aod  troubled 

Nirritl 
Fierce  crusher  of  the  Ka^vas  she :  her  have  I  gained, 

the  mighty  one. 

2  Victorious  in  the  olden   time  this  Prisnipar9l  was 
brought  forth : 
With  her  I  cleave,  as  'twere  a  bird's,  the  head  of  the 
Detestables. 

4  The  hateful  fiend  who  drinks  the   blood,  and   him 

who  take  away  the  growth, 
The  KaQva  who  devours  the  germ,  quell,  Pyisnipar^l! 
and  destroy. 

5  Drive  and  imprison  in  a  hill  these  Ka^vas  harassers 

of  life : 
Follow  them  Prisnipar^i,  thou  Groddess,  like  fire  con- 
suming them. 

6  Drive  thou  away  these  KaQvas,  drive  the  harassers 

of  life  afar. 
Whither  the  shades  of  darkness  go,  I  send  the  fiends 
who  feed  on  flesh. 


A  chann  against  the  fiends  who  cause  abortion. 

1  Priqniparni :  (having  variegated  leaves)  Hemionitis  Cordifolia,  a 
medicinal  plant,  a  decoction  of  which  is  reoonunended  by  Susnita  to 
be  taken  as  a  preventive  of  abortion.  The  word  is  given  doubtingly 
by  Wise  as  Pr%$tapumi,  Nirriti :  the  Gckldess  of  Death  and  Misforr 
tune  who  rejoices  at  the  destruction  of  an  unborn  babe.  Kanvas :  a 
class  of  evil  spirits,  mentioned  in  this  place  only.  In  the  Rigveda  the 
Kanvas,  descendants  of  the  great  Rishi  Kai^va,  are  an  illustrious 
priestly  family. 

6  Wliiiher  the  skades  of  darknes$  go :  probably,  as  Weber  suggests, 
the  gloomy  depths  of  the  forest.  Feed  on  fiefh :  devour  the  unborn 
babe. 

The  hymn  is  one  of  Griirs  Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  20,  92. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMSr  26.]  THE  ATHARrA-TBDA.  U 

HYMN  XXVI. 

Let  them  come  borne^  the  cattle  that  have  wandered, 
whom  V^yu  hath  delighted  to  attend  un, 

Whose  forms  and  figures  are  well  known  to  Tvashtar. 
These  cows  let  Savitar  drive  within  this  stable. 

2  Let  the  beasts  stream    together  to   this   cow-pen. 

Brihaspati  who  knoweth  lead  them  hither ! 
Let  Sinlv&U  guide  the  foremost  homeward.    When 
they  have  come,  Anumati !  enclose  them. 

3  Together  stream  the  cattle!  stream  together  horses 

and  the  men ! 
Hither  ward  press  all  growth  of  grain!  I  offer  sacrifice 
with  mixt  oblation. 

4  I  pour  together  milk  of  kine,  with  butter  blending 

strength  and  juice. 
Well  sprinkled  be  our  men,  as  true  to  me  as  cows  are 
to  their  herd! 

5  Hither  I  bring  the  milk  of  cows,  hither  have  brought 

the  juice  of  corn. 
Hitherward  have  our  men  been  brought,  hitherward 
to  this  house  our  wives. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  on  the  cattk  as  they  come  home  from  grazing. 

1  Vdyu:  the  God  of  the  wind  which  refreshes  the  cattle  in  Uieir 
breezy  pastures  and  driyes  off  the  flies.  Tva»hUir :  Uie  Artificer  of  the 
Gods,  regarded  as  the  giver  of  increase  in  cattle,  his  special  function 
in  the  natural  world  being  the  formation  of  the  embryo :  *  Trashtar  the 
Lord  hath  made  all  forms  and  all  the  cattle  of  the  field.' — Rigreda  I. 
188.  9.  Satniar :  here  the  setting  Sun. 

2  Brihaspati :  as  Lord  of  Prayer  including  charms.  Stntvdlt :  a  per- 
sonification of  the  Night  of  New  Moon :  see  Weber,  Indiscfae  Studien, 
y.  pp.  230 — 232.     AnumaU:  hei«  the  Night  of  Full  Moon  personified. 

3  This  stanza  and  the  two  following  form  in  reality  a  separate  hymn 
the  subject  of  which  is  the  samsrdvyAm  havis  or  Mixt  Oblation :  see 
I.  15.  1.  The  fourth  plUla  of  the  stanza  is  hendecasyllabio  or  Trishtup 
instead  of  the  octosyllabic  Anushtup  of  the  rest  of  the  three  stanzas. 

5  The  JMtce  of  com:  a  brew  of  grain,  perhaps,  as  Weber  suggests,  a  sort 
of  beer.  The  mixture  of  ingredients  is  probably  symbolical  of  the  re-union 
at  eTeningof  all  the  members  of  the  household  and  the  return  of  the  cattle. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  371,  and 
by  Grill,  pp.  64.  92. 

5 


Digitized  by 


Google 


•«  r//JP  HYJiJ^S  OH'  [BOOK  II 

HYMN  XXVII. 

Let  not  the  enemy  win  the  cause !  Strong  and  pre- 
dominant art  thou. 

Refute  mine  adversary's  speech.  Render  them  dull 
and  Bat,  O  Plant. 

2  The  strong-winged   bird  discovered  thee,  the  boar 

unearthed  thee  with  his  snout. 
Refute  mine  adversary's  speech.     Render  them  dull 
and  flat,  O  Plant. 

3  Yea,  Indra  laid  thee  on  his  arm,  to  oast  the  Asuras 

to  the  ground. 
Refute  mine  adversary's  speech.     Render  them  dull 
and  flat,  O  Pl^nt. 

4  Indra  devoured  the  PAt4  plant  that  he  might  lay  the 

Asuras  low. 
Refute  mine  adversary's  speech.     Render  them  dull 
and  flat,  O  Plant. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  an  opponent  in  deliate. 

1  T/ie  cause  :  prd'8%m^  debate,  from  the  root  prdckh,  to  question ; 
not  food,  from  prds,  to  eat,  as  Weber  and  Ludwig  have  taken  it,  re- 
garding the  hymn  as  an  incantation  against  robbers,  pronounced  in 
order  to  protect  granaries  and  store-rooms.  *  It  is  rather  a  charm  ut- 
tered by  an  intending  disputant  before  entering  upon  a  debate  in  the 
mbhd  or  pai-tshad,  the  assembly  of  the  village,  and  addressed  to  the  pdtd- 
plant :'  see  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.  pp.  479 — 
482,  who  has  discussed  the  hymn  and  convincingly  established  this 
interpretation  by  arguments  based  chiefly  on  the  Kausika-Sdtra, 
XXXVIII.  17  sqq.  Mine  adversary's  speech  :  the  speech  of  each  ad- 
veisaiy,  of  all  my  opponents. 

2  The  strong-unnged  bird :  eagle  or  falcon.  The  magic  Plant  was 
difiicult  to  discover,  requiring  the  keen  sight  of  a  falcon  and  the  saga- 
city and  strength  of  a  wild  boar  to  find  and  uproot  it  Similarly,  the 
magical  moly  and  mandragora  or  mandrake  were  '  hard  to  dig/  See 
A.  Lang's  Custom  and  My  thy  (New  Edition)  pp.  143  sqq. 

3  The  Asuras :  the  demons  who  fought  against  ihe  Gods,  like  the 
Titans  of  Grecian  mythology. 

4  The  Pdld-plant :  probably  identical  with  Fkthk  (Clypea  Hemandi- 
folia).  Like  the  Scottish  rowan,  or  like  St.  John's  wort^  it  was  potent 
against  fienis. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  28.]  THIt  ATHARVA-VEDA,  «T 

5  With  this  I  overcome  my  foes  as  Indra  overcame  the 

wolves. 
Befute  mine  adversary's  speech !  Render  them  dull 
and  flat,  O  Plant. 

6  O   Rudra,   Lord   of  Healing    Balms,   dark-crested, 

skilful  in  tliy  work ! — 
Refute  mine  adversary's  speech.     Render  them  dujl 
and  flat,  O  Plant. 

7  Indra,  defeat  the  speech  of  him  who  meets  us  with 

hostility. 
Comfort  us  with  thy  power  and  might.     Make  ma 
superior  in  debate. 

HYMN  XXVIII. 

This  Child,  Old  Age  1  shall  grow  to  meet  thee  only  : 
none  of  the  hundred  other  deaths  shall  harm  him. 

iFrom  trouble  caused  by  friends  let  Mitra  guard  him, 
as  a  kind  mother  guards  the  son  she  nurses. 

2  Mitra  or  Varupa  the  foe-destroyer,  accordant,  grant 
him  death  in  course  of  nature! 
Thus  Agni,  Hotar-priest,  skilled   in  high  statutes, 
declareth  all  the  deities'  generations. 

5  With  this  :  according  to  D jlrila,  the  speaker  chews  the  root  of  the 
plant,  and  wears  a  garland  made  of  seven  of  its  leaves.  2'he  wolves  : 
MAvriMn  ;  according  to  Saja^ia,  wild  dogs.  The  word  seems  to  mean 
any  canine  animal  of  prey.  Here  perhaps  fiends  who  had  assumed  the 
shapes  of  wolves  or  hyenas  are  meant. 

6  Lord  of  Healing  Balms:  see  I.  19.  3.  The  verb,  Refute,  in  the 
second  line  may  perhaps  refer  to  Rudra. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  461, 
and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  23,  93. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  long  and  happy  life  for  a  boy. 

1  Hundred  other  deaths :  cf  I.  30.  3.     Friends :  cf.  stanza  3. 

2  Thus  Agni :  the  benediction  seems  to  have  been  pronounced  at 
some  birth  ceremony  accompanied  with  a  sacrifice,  at  which  Agni  as 
chief  priest  is  represented  as  summoning  all  the  Gods  to  be  present. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


68  TJSB  H7MNS  OF  [BOOK  n. 

Z  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  all  terrestrial  cattle,  of  cattle 
born  and  to  be  born  hereafter. 
Let  not  breath  drawn  or  breath  emitted  fail  him. 
Let  not  his  friends,  let  not  his  foemen  slay  him. 

4  Let  Heaven  thy  father  and  let  Earth  thy  mother, 

accordant,  give  thee  death  in  course  of  nature, 
That  thou  mayst  live  on  Aditi's  bosom,    guarded, 
a  hundred  winters,  through  thy  respirations, 

5  Lead  him  to  life,  O  Agni,  and  to  splendour,  this  dear 

child,  Yaru^a!  and  thou  King  Mitra! 
Give  him  protection,  Aditil  as  a  mother;  All  Gods, 
that  his  be  life  of  long  duration ! 

HYMN  XXIX. 

Gods,  give  him  all  that  earth  hath  best  with  bodily 

strength  and  happy  fate. 
Agni  and  Silirya  grant  him  life,  Brihaspati  give  him 

eminence ! 

2  Bestow  thou  life  on  him,  O  J4tavedas.    Store  him 

with  future  progeny,  O  Tvashtar. 
Send  him,  O  Savitar,  full  growth  of  riches.     Let  this 
thy  servant  live  a  hundred  autumns. 

3  May  this  our  prayer  bring  strength  and  goodly  offspring. 

Give,  both  of  you  one-minded,  strength  and  riches. 

3  Thou:  apparently  Agni  of  the  preceding  stanza.     According  to 
Weber,  Tvashtar,  Pdshan,  or  Rudra  is  intended. 

4  A  hundred  winters :  regarded  as  the  natural  duration  of  hitman 
life :  see  I.  35.  1. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert 
Lieder,  pp.  48,  95. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  pronounced  over  a  sick  man. 

2  l^vashtar :  whose  function  is  to  provide  for  the  increase  of  the 
human  race. 

3  May  this  our  prayer  brifig :  there  is  no  verb  in  the  text,  and 
bring,  or  give,  must  be  supplied.    Both  of  you:  it  is  not  clear  which 

two  of  the  above-mentioned  Gods  are  intended.     Let  him m»;  the 

verb  is  not  in  the  text,  unless  jdyam  be  altered  to  jdyat^  which  Weber 
thinks  is  absolutely  necessary. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMS  29.1  ^B*  ATHAB7A-7MDA.  <9 

Let  him  with  might  win  fields  and  victory,  Indra ! 
setting  beneath  his  feet  the  rest,  his  rivals. 

4  As  Indra's  gift,  by  Varuna  instructed  the  fierce  one 

came  to  us  sent  by  the  Maruts. 
Let  him,  O  Heaven  and  Earth,  rest  in  your  bosom. 
Let  him  not  hunger,  let  him  not  be  thirsty. 

5  Ye  twain  endowed  with  vigour,  grant  him  vigour. 

Ye  who  are  rich  in  milk,  give  milk  to  feed  him. 
These   twain   have  given   him    vigour,   Earth   and 
Heaven,   and  all  the  Gods,  the  Maruts,  and  the 
Waters. 

6  With  health-bestowing  drops  thine  heart  I  comfort : 

all-bright  again,  and  undiseased,  enjoy  them. 
Drest  in  like  robes  let  these  two  drink  the  mixture, 
wearing  the  Asvins'  form  as  an  illusion. 

7  Erst  Indra,  wounded,  made  this  strengthening  potion, 

eternal  food  :  thine  is  it,  here  presented. 
With  this  live  full  of  vigour  through  the  autumns. 
Let  not  thy  strength  be  drained.     Leeches  have 
helped  thee. 


4  The  fierce  one :  apparently  the  strong  warrior  who  is  now  lying  sick. 

6  Drops :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text,  and  waters  or  streams 
must  be  supplied.  Let  these  two  drink  the  mixture :  this  appears  to 
refer  to  a  form  of  procedure  like  that  described  in  the  Kausika-Siitra, 
XXVII.  8 — II.  The  patient  leans  upon  some  healthy  man.  The 
mixture  {manthd^  a  sort  of  gruel  made  of  milk  and  barley-meal)  is 
poured  upon  the  sick  man's  head,  and  then  offered  to  the  healthy  man 
to  whom  the  thirst  of  fever  is  thus  transferred,  and  the  patient  is  re- 
lieved. Asvtns :  the  twin  Gods  of  the  dawn.  They  are  also  physicians 
(see  Rigveda  VIII.  18.  8 ;  22.  10 ;  75.  1 ;  X.  39.  3),  and  for  this  reason 
probably  their  characters  are  assumed  by  the  sick  man  and  hi^i  friend. 

7  Wounded :  in  some  battle  with  the  demons.  The  autumns :  the 
most  unhealthy  season  of  the  Indian  year.  Leeches :  physicians  :  per- 
haps with  reference  to  the  assumption  of  the  characters  of  the  Asvins. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  lUgveda,  p.  493^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


70  THE  EYMNi  OF  [BOOK  Ih 

HYMN  XX3; 

As  the  wind  shakes  this  Tuft  of  Grass  hither  and 

thither  on  the  ground, 
So  do  I  stir  and  shake  thy  mind,  that  thou  mayst  he 

in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  departs 

2  Ye,  Asvins,  lead  together,  ye  unite  and  bring  the 

loving  pair. 
Now  have  the  fortunes  of  you  twain,  now  have  your 
vows  and  spirits  ipet. 

3  When  eagles,  calling  out  aloud^  are  screaming  in  the 

joy  of  health. 
Then  to  my  calling  let  her  come,  as  to  the  arrow's 
neck  the  shaft. 

A  chann  ta  win  a  girl's  loTe, 

1  Tuft  of  Grass :  here  mentioned  only  by  way  of  iDnstration.  Ac- 
cording to  the  ILausika-Sdtra,  XXXV.  21,  the  procedure  to  accompany 
the  recitation  of  the  charm  is  as  follows;  Between  two  slips  or 
cuttings  taken  respectively  from  a  tree  (rejw^senting  the  lover)  and 
the  creeper  that  clings  roimd  it  (signifying  the  girl),  place  an  arrow 
(symbolical  of  Kama,  the  Indian  Cupid),  some  Sthakara  (probably  » 
fragrant  gum  or  powder),  Kushtha  (Costus  Speciosus,  or  Arabicus), 
eyesalve,  Madugha  (probably  licorice),  and  grass  batterei  by  a  storm 
(symbolical  of  the  girPs  agitated  mind),  mix  all  together  with  sacri- 
ficial butter,  and  apply :  the  mode  of  application  is  not  mentioned ; 
probably  the  two  slips  were  anointed  with  it.  The  second  line  of  the 
stanza  is  found  also  in  I.  34.  5,  and  VI.    8,  1 — 3. 

2  Fe,  Aavtns:  in  Rigveda  X.  85,  which  describes  the  wedding  of  Surya, 
the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  regarded  as  the  t}^ical  bride,  the  two  Asvins, 
Gods  of  the  dawn,  appear  as  the  groomsmen,  the  friends  of  the  bride- 
groom, who  hal  asked  and  obtained  her  hand  for  Soma  the  Moon-God. 

The  stanza  appears  to  be  spoken  by  some  friend  of  the  lover ;  the 
first  line  being  addressed  to  the  Asvins,  and  the  second  to  the  lover 
and  the  girl.  If  you  twain  refers  to  the  j^svins,  the  meaning  can  be 
only :  You  have  done  your  duty  and  gained  your  wishes  by  making 
two  lovers  happy  :  but  this  seems  forced  and  unnatural. 

3  As  to  the  arrouf*8  neck  the  shaft :  straight  to  her  destined  husband 
as  the  shaft  of  the  arrow  is  forced  into  the  neck  or  lower  part  of  the 
head  of  the  weapon,  an  J  fixed  firmly  there. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  31.]  TH^  ATHARVA'¥£DA.  71 

4  Let  what  ia  inward  turn  outside,  let  what  is  outward 

be  within  : 
Keize  and  possess,  O  Plant,  the  mind  of  Knaidens  rich 
in  every  charm. 

5  Seeking  a  husband  she  hath  come !  and  I  came  long- 

ing for  a  wife  : 
Even  as  a  loudly-neighing  steed  my  fate  and  fortune 
have  I  met. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

With  Indra's  mighty  millstone,  that  which  crushes 

worms  of  every  sort, 
I  bray  and  bruise  the  worms  to  bits  like  vetches  on 
the  grinding  stone. 
2  The  Seen  and  the  Invisible,  and  the  KurAru  have 
I  crushed : 
AlS^^dus,  and  all  Ghhalunas,  we  bruise  to  pieces  with 
our  spell. 

4  Lef  what  w  htward  turn  outside  :  let  her  mini  be  thoroughly- 
upset  by  the  tumultuous  agitation  of  love  ;  or  with  Dr.  Grill :  let  the 
love  that  she  hides  show  itself,  and  let  the  love  that  I  show  find  its 
way  into  her  heart  O  Plant :  the  Grass  mentioned  in  stanza  1.  Rick 
in  every  charm :  vtBvdrUpdndm  ;  or,  of  all  shapes  and  forms. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p. 
517  ;  and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  h%  97. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  all  sorts  of  Wormsw 

1  Indra^s  mighty  milUtone:  a  figurative  expression  meaning  (1)  th^ 
crushing  power  of  Indra  (cf.  *  Though  the  stones  of  God  grind 
slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small '),  and  (2)  the  priestly  spell  to 
which  this  power  has  been  imparted  by  the  God.  In  the  Rigveda  (I. 
8.  3,  and  40.  8)  sacrifice  employe!  against  enemies  is  spoken  of  as  a 
thunderbolt,  the  special  weapon  of  Indra  in  his  battles  with  demons, 
so,  similarly,  the  incantation  here  is  called  Indra's  millstone  which 
crushes  noxious  creatures  of  other  kinds. 

2  The  Seen  and  the  Invisible :  here  the  names  of  two  species  of 
worms.  The  Kur(iru,  AlUndu,  and  Chhaluna  arc  also  worms  of  un- 
identifiable kinds. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


72  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It 

3  I  kill  Aldndus  with  a  mighty  weapon :  burnt  or  not 

burnt  they  now  have  lost  their  vigour. 
Left  or  not  left,  I  with  the  spell  subdue  them :  let 
not  a  single  worm  remain  uninjured. 

4  The  worm  that   lives  within   the  ribs^   within   the 

bowels,  in  the  head, 
Avaskava  and  Borer,  these  we  bruise  to  pieces  with 
the  si>elL 

5  Worms  that  are  found  on  mountains,,  in  the  forests^ 

that  live  in  plants,  in  cattle,  in  the  waters. 
Those  that  have  made  their  way  within  our  bodies, — 
these  I  destroy,  the  worms'  whole  generation. 

HYMN   XXXII. 

Uprising  let  the  Sun  destroy,  and  when  he  sinketh, 

with  his  beams 
The  Worms  that  live  within  the  cow. 

3  With  a  mighty  weapon  :  with  incantation,  whicb  is  elsewhere  can- 
ed a  vajra  or  thunderbolt:  see  VI.  134.  1  sqq.  and  135.  1.  Burnt  or 
not  burnt :  fire  £^>pears  to  be  used  in  the  procedure  prescribed  in  the 
Kausika-Satia  XXVII.  14—18. 

4  Avaskava  and  Borer:  two  other  unidentified  species  of  worms 
which  attack  the  body  of  man.  Of  worms,  external  and  internal,  there 
are  said  to  be  twentj  varieties,  eadk  of  which  has  a  particular  name  : 
see  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,,  j^,  348 — 360. 

5  The  worms  that  infest  the  human  body  having  been  disposed  of^ 
the  charm  is  directed  against  those  which  attadL  trees,  {^ants,  and  cat- 
tle. So,  even  at  the  present  day,  in  the  rural  porishea  near  Quebec 
the  priests  utter  incantations  over  the  potato-buga  and  grasshoppers* 
(Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine,  June  1893,  p.  106). 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  323^ 
and,  wijth  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lied^,  pp.  6,  98, 


The  hymn  is  a  duirm  against  the  Worms  or  Bots  which  infiest  cows. 

1  According  to  the  Kausika-Sfitra,  XXVII.  21  —24,  the  ceremony 
which  accompanies  the  incantation  is  to  be  performed  at  sunrise,  noon^ 
and  sunset.  The  sun  is  considered  as  especially  instrumental  in 
destroying  noxious  reptiles  etc.,  and  in  counteracting  the  operation 
of  poison:  see  Rigreda  I.  191.  8,  9.  The  first  Kdntu  in  line  1,  which 
mars  the  Anushtup  metre,  is  merely  a  gloss  and  should  be  eliminated 
from  the  text. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  32.]  THB  ATBAHYA^YEDA.  » 

2  The  four-eyed  worm,  of  every  shape,  the  variegated, 

and  the  white — 
I  break  and  crush  the  creature's  ribs,  and  tear  away 
its  head  besides. 

3  Like  Atri   I   destroy  you,    Worms!    in    Ka^va's, 

Jamadagni's  way : 
I  bray  and  bruise  the  creeping  things  to  pieces  with 
Agastya's  spell. 

4  Slain  is  the  sovran  of  these  Worms,  yea,  their  con- 

trolling lord  is  slain  : 
Slain  is  the  Worm,  his  mother  slain,  brother  and 
sister  both  are  slain. 

5  Slain  are  his  ministers,  and  slain  his  followers  and 

retinue  : 
Yea,  those  that  seemed  the  tiniest  things,  the  Worms 
have  all  been  put  to  death. 

6  I  break  in  pieces  both  thy  horns  wherewith  thou 

pushest  here  and  there : 
I  cleave  and  rend  the  bag  which  holds  the  venom 
which  is  stored  in  thee. 


2  Fowr-eyed:  that  is,  as  Dr.  Grill  explains,  marked  with  a  spot 
above  each  eye :  cf.  IV.  20.  7. 

3  Atri,  Kanva,  Jamadagni,  and  Agastya  are  very  celebrated  Bishis 
or  Seers  of  the  ^igveda  and  regarded  as  masters  of  magic  arts.  Hymn 
CXCI.  of  Book  I.  of  the  Bigveda,  the  silent  repetition  of  which  is 
said  to  counteract  all  venom  in  reptiles,  insects,  scorpions,  roots,  and 
artificial  poisons,  is  ascribed  to  Agastya. 

4  CwUroUing  lord:  sthapdtii;  lord  of  the  district,  governor,  or  chief 
officiaL 

5  MtnisUrs :  ve§dia$  ;  vassals,  according  to  Hlllebrandt. 

€  This  stanza  appears  to  be  addressed  to  some  conspicuously  aggres- 
sive worm  or  maggot. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  500, 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  7,  100. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  II. 

HYMN  XXXIIL 

From  both  thy  nostrils,  from  both  eyes,  from  both 

thine  ears,  and  from  thy  chin, 
Forth  from  thy  brain  and  tongue  I  root  Consumption 

seated  in  thy  liead. 

2  Forth  from  the  neck  and  from  the  nape,  from  dorsal 

vertebrae  and  spine. 
From  arms  and  shoulder-blades  I  root  Consumption 
seated  in  thine  arms. 

3  Forth  from  thy  heart  and  from  thy  lungs,  from  thy 

gall-bladder  and  thy  sides, 
From  kidneys,  spleen,  and  liver  thy  Consumption  we 
eradicate. 

4  From  bowels  and  intestines,  from  the  rectum  and  the 

belly,  I 
Extirpate  thy  Consumption,  from  flanks,  ijavel,  and 
mesentery. 

5  Forth  from  thy  thighs  and  from  thy  knees,  heels  and 

the  foreparts  of  thy  feet, 
Forth  from  thy  loins  and  hips  I  draw  Consumption 
settled  in  thy  loins. 

6  Forth  from  thy  marrows  and  thy  bones,  forth  from 

thy  tendons  and  thy  veins 
I  banish  thy  Consumption,  from   thy    hands,   thy 
fingers,  and  thy  nails. 

7  In  every  member,  every  hair,  in  every  joint  wherein 

ijb  lies. 
We  with  the  exorcising  spell  of  Kasyapa  drive  far 
away  Consumption  settled  in  thy  skin. 

The  hymn,  which  is  a  charm  against  Yakshma,  Phthisis  Pulmonalis 
or  Consumption,  is  enlarged,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  163. 
For  an  account  of  the  disease  and  its  treatment  in  India  in  former 
times  see  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  321 — 324. 

7  Ka$yapa :  a  Rishi,  seer  of  some  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  and  father 
of  Vivfihi  to  whom  the  original  hymn  (Rigveda  X.  163)  i«  ascribed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  34.]  THE  ATBARVA-VSDA.  76 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

Mat  this,  of  all  the  beasts  that  Pasupati  rules,  Lord 

of  animals,  quadruped  and  biped, 
Come,   purchased,  to  the  sacrificial   portion.     May 

growth  of  wealth  attend  the  sacrificer. 

2  Loosing  the  seed  of  future-time  existence,  give  good 
success,  O  Gods,  to  him  who  worships. 
May  what  is  present,  duly  brought,  the  victim,  go  to 
the  deities'  beloved  region. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  accompanying  an  animal  sacrifice. 

1  This:  the  animal  selected  for  sacrifice.  Pofupati:  Lord  of  Beasts; 
usually  regarded  as  a  name  of  the  later  Rudra.  Quadruped  and  biped  : 
a  frequently  occurring  Vedic  expression  for  the  people  of  a  household 
and  IJie  domestic  and  sacrificial  animals  around  them :  '  To  us  and  to 
our  cattle  may  Soma  give  salutary  food,  To  biped  and  to  quadruped.' 
RV.  III.  62.  14.  According  to  the  sacrificial  ritual  there  are  five 
pasavah  or  sacrificial  animals,  man,  horse,  ox,  sheep,  and  goat.  Man 
is  only  a  paau,  though  the  highest,  primus  inter  pares.  *  To  thee  (Bhava) 
are  these  five  animals  (paadvah)  allotted,  oxen,  and  sheep,  and  goats,^ 
and  men,  and  horses.'  AV.  XI.  2.  9.  See  Zimmor,  Altindisches  Leben, 
pp.  72,  73. 

The  text  of  the  first  line  of  the  stanza  has  apparently  no  sequence  ; 
but  the  interpretation  which,  following  Weber,  1  have  given,  is  the  only 
one  that  will  suit,  ^^ccording  to  Ludwig  (Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  433) 
the  translation  would  be :  *  May  Pasupati,  who  is  Lord  and  Master  of 
homestead  animals,  quadruped  and  I  ips  1,  Purchased,  obtain  his  sacri- 
ficial portion :'  which  is  grammatical  but  unintelligible. 

Purchcued :  the  animal  selected  for  sacrifice  was  separated  from  the 
flock  or  herd  and  driven  away  to  feed  where  it  chose.  When  it  was 
to  be  sacrificed  it  was  redeemed  from  the  man  who  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  it. 

2  Loosing:  liberating ;  see  stanzas  3  and  4.  The  seed  of  futnre-tiirie 
existence :  the  victim  whose  sacrifice  is  to  secure  future  life  for  the 
sacrificer.  Xhily  brought :  updhntam ;  the  technical  term  used  on 
such  occasions,  meaning  prepared  for  the  sacred  rite  and  brought  to 
the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  victim :  Bnsamdndm ;  a  euphemistic  word 
for  the  animal  that  is  to  be  slaughtered.  The  victim  thus  offered  to 
the  Gods  goes  at  once  to  Svarga  or  heaven,  the  deities*  beloved  region. 
So,  at  the  Horje-sacrifice,  the  priest  addresses  the  slaughtered  animal : 
'  No ;  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art  not  injured  :  by  easy  paths  tmto 
the  Gods  thou  goest.'    Rifveda  I.  162.  21.       • 


Digitized  by 


Google 


715  TffE  BTMirS  or  {BOOK  IL 

3  Those  who  are  looking,  deep  in  meditation,  on  the 

bound  animal  with  eye  and  spirit — 
To  them,  the  first,  may  Agni,  God,  give  freedom, 
rejoicing  in  his  creatures,  Visyakarman. 

4  Tame    animals    of    every  shape,  though  varied  in 

colour,  manifold,  alike  in  nature — 
To  them,   the  first,  may  Viyu,  God,  give  freedom, 
Praj&pati  rejoicing  in  his  creatures. 

6  Let  those  who  know  receive  before  all  others  the 
vital  breath  proceeding  frem  the  body. 
Go  to  the  sky.     Stay  there  with  all  thy  members. 
By  paths  which  Gods  have  travelled  go  to  Svarga. 

HYMN  XXXV. 

We  who  enjoying  it  have  grown  no  richer,  for  whom 

the  sacred  altar-fires  have  sorrowed. 
We  who  compounded  with  deficient  worship, — may 

Yisvakarman  make  our  service  prosper. 


3  Tho^t  who  are  looking :  other  animals,  relatives  and  friends  of  the 
victim.  Agni,  or  the  Sacrificial  Fire,  is  asked  to  divert  and  free  them 
from  their  sad  thoughts.  Vimzkarman :  the  Onmific ;  the  Creator  of 
All ;  here  probably  an  appellative  of  Agni. 

4  Alike  in  nature:  all  being  domestic  and  sacrificial  animals* 
Prajdpati  :  Lord  of  Creatures ;  here  probably  an  appellative  of  Ykju, 

5  Those  who  know :  the  Gods  in  heaven.  Go  to  the  sky  r  to  Svarga 
or  heaven :  see  note  on  stanza  2.  According  to  the  Kauiika^dtra  XLl  V. 
15,  the  victim  is  slaughtered — it»  vital  breath  ia  stopped — as  thia 
fitanza  is  recited. 

A  hymn  of  expiation  for  an  imperfectly  performed  sacrifice. 

1  We :  priests  and  others  complain  that  through  the  fault  of  the 
institutor  of  a  Soma  sacrifice  of  which  they  have  been  partakera  they 
have  failed  to  obtain  the  benefits  which  they  expected.  Altair-fires : 
agndyo  dhishsiydh ;  fires  lighted  on  small  side  altars,  usually  eight  in 
nmnber.  Sorrowed :  as  having  been  kindled  in  vain.  Compounded 
with :  took  part  in  the  ill-managed  ceremony  and  so  shared  the  institu- 
tor's  guilt.  Viivakarman  :  the  Omnific ;  the  Creator  of  the  Universe  ; 
the  (Sod  to  whom  the  expiatory  sacrifice  is  offered.  Owr  service :  the 
sacrifice  which  we  are  now  performing. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  35.1  ^^J^  ATEAR7A'VEDA,  77 

2  Ilishis  have  called  the    sacrifice's   patron   amerced 
through  sin,  sorrowing  for  his  offspring. 
Those  drops  of  meath  whereof  he  missed  enjoyment, — 
may  Visvakarman  with  those  drops  unite  us. 

5  Regarding  niggard  churls  as  Soma-drinkers,  skilful 
in  sacrifice,  weak  at  the  meeting, 
Whatever  sin  the  captive  hath  committed,  do  tliou 
for  weal  release  him,  Visvakarman  I 

4  Awful  are  Ilishis  :  unto  them  be  homage,  and  to 

their  eye  and  truthfulness  of  spirit ! 
Loud  homage  to  Brihaspati,    O  mighty!    Homage 
to  thee,  O  Visvakarman!  Guard  us. 

5  The  eye  of  sacrifice,   source,  and   beginning — with 

voice,  ear,  spirit  unto  him  I  offer. 
To  this  our  sacrifice  wrought  by  Visvakarman  may 
the  Gods  come  gracious  and  kindly -hearted. 


2  TkeMcrijU^ipatrim:  The  householder  who  instituted  the  preyioua 
sacrifice,  and  whose  mismanagement  has  drawn  upon  him  the  censure 
of  the  Kishis  or  sages.  Sarroioing  far  his  of  spring :  who  would  suffer 
lor  the  fault  of  the  head  of  the  family.  Meatk :  Soma  juice ;  madAavj^dn 
instead  of  the  meaningless  matkav^dn  of  the  text.  Unite  u$ :  may  we 
be  benefited  by  the  Soma  libations  of  the  present  sacrifice  in  place 
of  those  that  were  wasted  in  the  former  mismanaged  ceremony. 

3  Regarding  niggard  ckurh  as  Soma-drinkers :  the  institutor  of  the 
former  sacrifice  appears  to  have  admitted  illiberal  and  ungodly  persons 
to  the  ceremony  and  allowed  them  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  which  they 
were  unworthy  to  touch.  Although  well  versed  in  the  rules  of  such 
holy  rites,  he  showed  himself  weak  and  infirm  in  the  sacrificial  assem-> 
bly.  The  captive :  the  guilty  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  who  is  brought 
in  bonds  {baddhds)^  like  a  church  delinquent  in  penitential  sheets  to 
obtain  absolution  by  the  expiatory  ceremony. 

4  Pishis:  referring  particularly  to  those  who  have  censured  the 
culprit :  see  stanza  2. 

Brihaspati:  as  Lord  of  Prayer. 

5.  Unto  him :  to  Visvakarman  who  is  the  eye  of  sacrifice,  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


78  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  If. 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

To  please  us  may  the  suitor  come,  O  Agni,  seeking 
this  maid  and  bringing  us  good  ifbrtune. 

Approved  by  wooers,  lovely  in  assemblies,  may  she 
be  soon  made  happy  with  a  husband. 

2  A  s  bliss  beloved  by  Soma,  dear  to  Prayer,  and  stored 

by  Aryaman, 
With   the   God   Dhdtar's   truthfulness   I  work  the 
bridal  oracle. 

3  0  Agni,  may  this  woman  find  a  husband.  Then  veri- 

ly King  Soma  makes  her  happy. 
May  she  bear  sons,  chief  lady  of  the  household,  bles- 
sld  and  bearing  rule  beside  her  consort. 

The  hjnm  is  a  charm  to  secure  a  husband  for  a  marriageable  girl. 

1  The  suitor :  the  interceder  or  match-maker  whose  business  is  to 
find  a  suitable  wife  for  his  friend  or  employer.  0  Agni :  addressed  as 
especially  connected  with  marriage,  regulating,  as  the  Sun,  the  proper 
season  for  its  celebration,  and,  as  the  sacrificial  fire,  the  consecrator  of 
the  rite :  see  Rigveda  L  66.  4 ;  V.  3,  2 ;  X.  85.  40. 

2  Beloved  by  Soma :  as  S&ryll,  the  typical  bride,  was  married  to 
Soma,  the  young  maid  is  regarded  as  originally  belonging  to  him :  see 
Rigveda  X.  85.  40.  Dear  to  Prayer :  or,  graced  by  Brahman,  as 
Weber  and  Grill  interpret.  Stored  by  Aryaman  :  *  Aryaman  art  thou 
(Agni)  as  regardeth  maidens  *  (Rigveda  V.  3.  2) ;  that  is,  in  connexion 
with  marriage ;  aryamdn  meaning  also  a  companion,  especially  a  friend 
who  asks  a  girl  in  marriage  for  another.  The  bliss  or  allotted  fate  is 
said  by  SHyana  to  be  the  young  maiden.  The  stanza  is  somewhat 
obscure,  and  perhaps  out  of  place.  Dr.  Grill  puts  it  next  after  stanza 
4.  DMtar's  truthfulness :  Dh&tar  is  the  fistablisher  or  Ordainer,  re- 
garded as  a  separate  God,  and  mentioned  here  as  the  Upholder  of  the 
sacrament  of  marriage.  Bridal  oracle :  patividanam  ;  the  charm  that 
finds  or  procures  a  husband :  *  Brautorakel :  *  Weber. 

3  Chief  lady  of  the  household :  mahisht ;  the  technical  term  for  the 
first  married  wife ;  the  principal  consort  of  a  king.  Cf .  Ri  gveda  X.  85. 
26,  27. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  36.]  THE  ATUARVA-VEDA.  79 

4  As  this  lair,  Maghavan !  that  is  fair  to  look  on  was 

dear  to  wild  things  as  a  pleasant  dwelling, 
So  may  this  woman  here  be  Bhaga's  darling,  loved 
by  her  lord,  and  prizing  his  affection. 

5  Mount  up,  embark  on  Bhaga's  ship,   the  full,  the 

inexhaustible, 
Thereon  bring  hitherward  to  us  the  lover  whom  thou 
fain  wouldst  wed. 

6  Call  out  to  him,  O  Lord  of  Wealth !  Make  thou  the 

lover  well-inclined. 
Set  each  on  thy  right  hand  who  is  a  lover  worthy  of 
her  choice. 

7  Here  is  the  Bdellium  and  the  gold,  the  Auksha  and 

the  bliss  are  here  : 
These  bring  tliee  to  the  husbands,  so  to  find  the  man 
whom  thou  woudst  have. 


4  This  lair :  the  hole  of  some  wild  animal  or  perhaps  a  bird's  nest 
is  indicated  by  way  of  illustration.  Maghavan :  the  Bounteous  One, 
Indra.  Bhaga :  the  Dispenser,  who  brings  wealth  and  happiness,  and 
blesses  conjugal  love.  This  God  is  frequently  associated  with  Indra  in 
prayers  for  welfare. 

5  Addressed  to  the  maiden.  Bhaga^s  ship :  or  the  ship  of  Fortune  : 
with  reference  probably  to  some  practice  by  means  of  which  girls  en- 
deavoured to  discover  who  should  marry  them.  See  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  Y.  p.  221,  for  similar  customs  among  t»he  German  peasant 
maidens. 

6  Lord  of  Wealth  :  Indra,  the  Bounteous  One,  is  probably  intended. 
On  thy  right  hand :  in  the  place  of  honour. 

7  Bdellium :  a  costly  fragrant  gum  that  exudes  from  a  plant  said  to 
be  the  vine  palm  (Borassus  FlabeUiformis).  The  Sanskrit  name  of  the 
gum  is  gtiggiUu.  It  may  have  formed  part  of  the  girFs  dowry,  or  she 
may  have  been  anointed  and  perfumed  with  it.  The  gold :  as  dowiy 
or  personal  ornaments.  The  Avksha :  probably  a  sweet-scented  unguent, 
as  S^yapa  explains  it :  see  Grill's  note.  The  bliss :  the  charms  of  the 
maiden.  To  the  husbands :  to  those  who  wish  to  marry  thee. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


80  THE  ATHARVA'VEDA.  [BOOK  If. 

S  May  Savitar  lead  and  bring  to  thee  the  husband 
whom  thy  heart  desires. 
O  Plant,  be  this  thy  gift  to  her ! 

8  Savitar:  the  Sun ;  regarded  as  the  universal  vivifieT  who' will  bless 
the  bride  :  '  Happy  is  the  bride  whom  the  Sun  shines  on.'  The  second 
mayatu  of  the  second  line  is  evidently  an  interpolation ;  and  the  last 
superfluous  pida  also  seems  to  be  a  later  addition,  as  no  Plant  has  been 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  stanzas. 

The  hynm  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  476, 
and  is  one  of  Grill's  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  55,  102. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  III 


HYMN  I. 

Let  the  wise  Agni  go  against  our  foemen,  burning 

against  ill-will  and  imprecation. 
Let  him  bewilder  our  opponents'  army.     Let  J&ta^ 

vedas  smite  and  make  them  handless. 

2  Mighty  are  ye  for  such  a  deed,  O  Maruts^     Go  for- 

ward, overcome  them  and  destroy  them. 
The  Vasus  slew,  and  these  were  left  imploring.  Wise 
Agni  as  our  messenger  assail  them  I 

3  O  Maghavan,  O  Indra,  thou  who  slayest  fiends,  and, 

Agni,  thou, 
Burn,  both  of  you,  against  these  men,  the  foemaii's 
host  that  threatens  us. 

4  Shot  down  the  slope,  with  thy  two  tawny  coursers, 

forth  go  thy  bolt,  destroying  foes,  O  Indra ! 
Slay  those  who  fly,  slay  those  who  stand  and  follow. 
On  every  side  fulfil  these  men's  intention. 

5  Indra,  bewilder  thou  the  foemen's  army. 

With  Agni's,  Vita's  furious  rush  drive  them  away 
to  every  side. 


The  hymn  is  a  prayer  or  chaiin  to  secure  the  defeat  and  destruction 
of  enemies  in  battle. 

2  Afamts:  'the  terrible  Storm-gods,  literally  the  Smashers,  in  whose 
name  the  germs  of  the  Italic  god  of  war,  Mars,  have  been  discovered. — 
M.  Mliller.  The  Vasus :  the  kind  Gods,  the  Maruts.  These :  the  men 
in  whose  behalf  the  hymn  is  recited,  and  for  whose  success  prayer  and 
sacrifice  were  oflfered  to  the  Gods. 

4  These  merCs  intention  :  the  hopes  and  wishes  of  our  own  men. 

5  The  first  pslia  is  hendecasyllabic,  and  p&das  2  and  3  are  octosyllabic. 

6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8S  TBB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

6  Let  Indra  daze  their  army.     Let  the  Maruts  slay  it 
with  their  might. 
Let  Agni  take  their  eyes  away,  and  let  the  conquered 
host  retreat. 

HYMN  II. 
Mat  Agni,  he  who  knows,  our  envoy,  meet  them» 

burning  against  ill-will  and  imprecation. 
May  he  bewilder  our  opponents'  senses.     May  j&ta- 
vedas  smite  and  make  them  handless. 

2  This  Agni  hath  bewildered  all  the  senses  that  were 

in  your  hearts  : 
Now  let  him  blast  you  from  your  home,  blast  you 
away  from  every  side. 

3  Dazing  their  senses,  Indra,  come  hither  ward  with 

the  wish  and  will. 
With   Agnis,   V&ta's   furious  rush   drive  them  to 
every  side  away. 

4  Vanish,  ye  hopes  and  plans  of  theirs,  be  ye  con- 

founded, all  their  thoughts ! 
Whatever  wish  is  in  their  heart,  do  thou  expel  it 
utterly. 

5  Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemen,  seize  on  their 

bodies  and  depart,  O  ApvA  1 

6  Let  Indra  daze  their  army:  this  and  the  following  hymn  are 
classed  in  the  Eausika-Sdtra  with  mokandni^  ma^cal  charms  for  stupe- 
fying and  bewildering  an  enemy. 

All  the  hymns  of  this  Book  have  been  translated,  with  exhaustive 
annotations,  by  Professor  Weber  in  Indische  Studien,  XVII,  pp.  179 — 
314;  eleven  (including  this  hymn)  have  been  translated  by  Professor 
Ludwig  in  Der  Rigveda,  III.,  and  seven  by  Dr.  Grill  in  Hundert  Lieder 
des  Atharva-veda.  Many  passages  have  been  translated  and  annotated 
by  Professor  H.  Zimmer  in  his  Altindisches  Leben,  and  several  by 
Dr.  John  Muir  in  Original  Sanskrit  Texts. 

The  hymn  is  a  rifaccimento  or  another  recension  of  the  preceding. 

b'Apvd:  according  to  Sslyana,  a  female  deity  who  presides  over 
sin ;  according  to  Mahidhara,  sickness  or  fear.  Apparently  Apv&  is  a 
personification  of  colic  or  dysentery,  likely  to  attack  soldiers  in  the 
Held.  And  depart :  or,  pass  us  by,  do  not  attack  us.  The  stanza  is 
taken,  with  slight  variations,  from  Kigveda  X.  103.  12. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ISYMN  5.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  83 

Go  meet  them,  flame  within  their  hearts  and  burn  them. 

Smite  thou  the  foes  with  darkness  and  amazement. 

6  That  army  of  our  enemies,  O  Maruts,  that  comes 

against  us  with  its  might,  contending — 

Meet  ye  and  strike  it  with  unwelcome  darkness  so 

that  not  one  of  them  may  know  another. 

HYMN  III. 

Loudly  he   roared.     Here   let  him   labour  deftly. 

Spread,  Agni,  over  spacious  earth  and  heaven. 
Let  Maruts  who  possess  all  treasures  yoke  thee. 

Bring  him  who  reverently  paid  oblations. 

2  Though  he  be  far  away,  let  the  red  horses  bring 

Indra,  bring  the  sage  to  us  and  friendship. 
Since   with    SautrAmaijl   Gods    for   him    o'erpower 
G&yatrl,  Brihati,  and  hymn  of  praises. 

3  King  Varuija  call  thee  hither  from  the  waters  1  Prom 

hills  and  mountains  Soma  call  thee  hither ! 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  restoration  of  an  expelled  King. 

1  He  roared :  the  crackling  and  roaring  of  Agni  the  Sacri6cial  Fire, 
r  is  a  good  omen  for  the  success  of  the  ceremony.  Bring  him:  addressed 

to  Agni :  remember  the  pious  prince  and  bring  him  back  from  exile. 

2  The  red  horses:  the  flames  of  Agni;  arushdscLS  here  being  an 
appellative.  Indra :  the  King ;  Indra  being  the  type  of  regal  power. 
Sautrdmant :  a  special  ceremony  sacred  to  Indra  as  Sutrtfman,  the 
Good  Protector.  Gods:  priests;  cf.  Rigveda  X.  122.  7.  Gdyatrt:  a 
verse  or  hynm  in  the  Giyatri  metre,  consisting  of  three  octosyllabic 
p&das.  Brihati :  a  verse  or  hymn  in  the  Brihati  metre,  consisting  of 
thirty-six  syllables  (8  +  8  +  12  +  8)  in  four  pidas.  The  priests  by 
performing  the  Sautr4mani  ceremony  for  the  restoration  of  the  banished 
King  overpower  the  hymns  and  prayers  of  those  who  favour  the 
enemy  who  expelled  him  and  would  keep  him  in  exile. 

3  From  the  waters :  Varuna,  the  Encompasser,  representing  at  first 
the'all-embracing  heaven  that  broods  over  the  celestial  ocean  of  air, 
being  especially  connected  in  later  times  with  the  terrestrial  ocean  and 
the  waters  of  the  earth  and  regarded  as  their  presiding  deity :  see 
Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  pp.  74 — 76.  From  hills  and  mount- 
ains :  on  which  the  Soma  plant,  as  yet  unidentified,  is  said  to  have 
grown :  see  Hymns  of  the  Kigveda,  I.  2.  1,  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


W  TUB  BYMNS  OP  [BOOK  til. 

Let  Indra  call  thee  hither  to  these  people.  Fly 
hither  to  these  people  as  a  falcon. 

4  May  the  hawk  bring  the  man  who  must  be  summoned, 

from  far  away,  in  alien  land,  an  exile. 
May  both  the  Asvins  make  thy  pathway  easy.  Come, 
and  unite  yourselves  with  him,  ye  kinsmen. 

5  Let  thine   opponents   call  thee  back.     Thy  friends 

have  chosen  thee  again. 
Indra  and  Agni,  all  the  Gods  have  kept  thy  home 
amid  the  tribe. 

6  He  who  disputes  our  calling  thee,  be  he  a  stranger 

or  akin, 
Drive  him,  O  Indra,  far  away,  and  do  thou  bring 
this  man  to  us. 

HYMN  IV. 

To  thee  hath  come  the  kingship  with  its  splendour : 
On !  shine  as  lord,  sole  ruler  of  the  people. 

King!  let  all  regions  of  the  heavens  invite  thee.  Here 
let  men  wait  on  thee  and  bow  before  thee. 

2  The  tribesmen  shall  elect  thee  for  the  kingship,  these 
five  celestial  regions  shall  elect  thee. 
Rest  on  the  height  and  top  of  kingly  power :  thence 
as  a  mighty  man  award  us  treasures. 

5  Thy  friends  Tiave  chosen  thee  again :  other  passages  also  in  the 
Atharva-yeda  show  that  the  kingship  was  sometimes  elective :  see  the 
following  hymn,  stama  2,  and  V.  19.  16,  and  VI.  87,  88.  Cf.  also 
Bigveda  X.  173.  1. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  441. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  at  the  election  of  a  King. 

\  On:  I  omit  udihi^  rise  up,  which  mars  the  metre. 

2  Five  celestial  regions  :  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the 
addition  of  the  zenith  or  the  nadir ;  the  more  usual  number  is  four  ot 
six. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BJMN  i.]  THB,  ATHARVA-VBBA.  85 

3  Kinsmen,  inviting  thee,  shall  go  to  meet  thee,  with 

thee  go  Agni  843  an  active  herald. 
Let  women  and  their  sons  be  friendly-minded.    Thou, 
mighty  one,  shalt  see  abundant  tribute. 

4  First  shall  the  Asvins,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  the  Uni- 

versal Gods,  and  Maruts  call  thee. 
Then  turn   thy  mind  to  giving  gifts   of   treasure, 
thence,  mighty  one,  distribute  wealth  among  us. 

5  Speed   to   us   hither    from    the    farthest    distance. 

Propitious  unto  thee  be  Earth  and  Heaven. 
Even  so  hath  VaruQa  this  King  asserted,  he  who 
himself  hath  called  thee :  come  thou  hither. 

6  Pass  to  the  tribes  of  men  O  Indra,  Indra.     Thou 

with  the  Varuqas  hast  been  found  accordant. 
To  his  own  place  this  one  hath  called  thee,  saying. 
Let  him  adore  the  Gods  and  guide  the  clansmen. 

7  The  Bounteous  Paths  in  sundry  forms  and  places, 

all  in  accord,  have  given  thee  room  and  comfort. 
Let  all  of  these  in  concert  call  thee  hither.     Live 
thy  tenth  decade  here,  a  strong  kind  ruler. 

6  Indra :  the  newly-elected  king.  T?te  Varunas :  apparently  mean- 
ing the  Goda;  according  to  Weber  'the  electors,'  from  vp,  to  choose. 
This  one :  the  old  king  whom  the  newly-elected  prince  has  succeeded ; 
or,  possibly,  as  Zimmer  suggests,  Agni,  present  as  the  Sacrificial  Fire, 
may  be  intended. 

7  77ie  Bounteous  Paths :  ways  to  riches,  personified  as  the  deities 
of  plenty  and  prosperity:  cf.  Bigveda  V.  61.  14.  Live:  vasa,  as 
suggested  in  Whitney's  Index  Yerborum,  should  be  read  instead  ai 
voBo,  Thy  tenth  decade  :  the  last  stage  of  thy  full  natural  life  which 
should  extend  to  a  hundred  years.  The  people  in  Germany  have  a 
similar  division  of  human  life  into  ten  decades,  from  childhood  up  to 
•Grace  with  God :'  see  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVIL  p.  193. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisohes  Leben, 
p.  164,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  252. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B6  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  HI. 

HYMN  V. 

This  Parna- Amulet  hath  come,  strong  and  destroy- 
ing with  its  strength  my  rivals. 

The  power  of  the  Gods,  the  plants'  sweet  essence, 
may  it  incite  me  ceaselessly  with  vigour. 

2  O  Parija- Amulet,  in  me  set  firmly  might  and  opulence. 
Witbin  the  compass  of  my  rule  may  I  be  rooted  and 

supreme. 

3  That  dear  mysterious  Amulet  which  Gods  have  set 

within  the  tree, 
May  the  Gods  grant  to  me  to  wear  together  with 
extended  life. 

4  As  Indra's  gift,  by  Varupa  instructed,  Par^a  hath 

come,  the  mighty  strength  of  Soma.* 
This  would  I,  brightly  shining,  love  and  cherish  for 
long  life  lasting  through  a  hundred  autumns. 

5  The  Par^a-Charm  hath  come  to  me  for  great  securi- 

ty from  ill, 
That  I  may  be  exalted,   yea,   above   the   wealth   of 
Aryaman. 

The  hymn  is  addressed  by  a  newly-elected  King  to  an  Amulet  which 
is  to  strengthen  his  position  and  confirm  his  authority. 

1  ThU  Parna- Amulet :  Parna  (meaning  originally  *  feather,'  *  feather- 
like leaf '),  in  later  times  generally  called  Palasa,  is  the  Butea  Frondosa, 
a  beautiful  sacred  tree  with  large  leaves  and  fine  red  flowers.  The 
great  ladle  with  which  clarified  butter  is  poured  into  the  fire,  and 
other  sacrificial  utensils,  are  made  of  its  wood  to  which,  in  the  shape  of 
amulets,  also  the  greatest  efficacy  was  ascribed.  Professor  Weber 
observes  that  parna,  feather,  is  etymologically  identical  with  the  Ger- 
man Fam,  Fnglish  fern  ;  cf.  the  Greek  irripig,  the  feathery  plant,  fern. 
Fern-seed  was  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  rendering  one  who  carried 
it  invisible,  ajid  the  plant  was  said  to  be  of  celestial  origin,  and  able 
to  secure  the  fulfilment  of  every  wish :  see  Simrock,  Handbuch  der 
Deutschen  Mythologie,  p.  498.  The  metre  of  the  first  line  is  irregular, 
the  first  pada  being  octosyllabic  and  the  second  hendecasyllahic. 

3  That  dear  mysterious  Amulet :  meaning  the  magical  virtue  posses- 
sed by  the  charm  rather  than  the  charm  itself,  the  wearing  of  which 
was  in  the  speaker's  own  power. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  6.1  THB  A  THAR  7A-7EDA,  87 

6  Sagacious  builders  of  the  car,  clever  and  skilful  arti- 

sans,— 
Make  all  the  men  on  every  side,  Parija,  obedient  to 
my  will. 

7  The  kings  and  makers  of  the  kings,  troop-leaders, 

masters  of  the  horse, — 
Make  all  the  men  on  every  side,  Panjia,   obedient  to 
my  will. 

8  Thou,  Par^a,  art  my  body's  guard,  man  kin  by  birth 

to  me  a  man. 
With  splendour  of  the  circling  year  I  bind  thee  on 
me,  Amulet! 

HYMN  VI. 

Masculine  springs  from  masculine,  Asvattha  grows 

from  Khadira. 
May  it  destroy  mine  enemies,   who  hate   me  and 

whom  I  detest. 

5  Hath  eome  to  me:  or,  literally,  bath  mounted  me,  that  is,  probably, 
been  fastened  round  my  neck. 

6  Builders  of  the  car:  the  rathakdrah,  wheelwright,  carpenter, 
chariot-maker,  was  held  in  high  honour  in  the  village  community ;  and 
as  the  builder  of  his  war-chariots  was  on  terms  of  friendly  intimacy 
with  the  king.  He  was  moreover  regarded  as  the  representative  of 
the  Ribhus,  those  ancient  artificers  whose  wondrous  skill  obtained  for 
them  a  place  among  the  Gods :  see  Rigveda  I.  20. 

7  Makers  of  the  kings :  the  influential  nobles  who  set  the  king  on  his 
throne.  Masters  of  the  horse  :  sUtdh ;  charioteers.  In  Vedic  times  these 
were  royal  officers  of  considerable  importance,  and  iu  the  Epic  period 
they  were  also  the  heralds  of  the  king. 

8  Parna :  Weber  takes  the  word  as  nomina^iive : — *  Thou  art  my 
body's  feathered  guard;'  treats  it  as  trisyllabic,  and  omits  viro^  man^ 
as  a  gloss.  Man :  manly,  heroic,  on  account  of  the  magic  power  which 
thou  possessest,  and  so  akin  to  me.  With  splendour  :■  by  binding  thee 
<m,  I  secure  to  myself  all  the  splendour  of  the  year. 

The  hymn  is  addressed  to  an  Amulet  of  Asvattha  wood  which  is  ta 
secure  the  defeat  and  destruction  of  the  wearer's  enemies. 

1  Asvattha  (asvastha,  standing-place  for  horses)  is  the  Ficus  Religiosa, 
the  Pippal,  Peepal,  or  sacred  fig-tree.  It  is  venerated  by  Hindus,  and 
according  to  Atharva-veda  V.  4.  3  the  Gods  sit  under  its  shade  in  tho 


Digitized  by 


Google 


«a  TBE  B7MNS  OP  [BOOK  Hh 

2  Crush  down  my  foes,  Asvattha!  Rend,  O  BursteiTy 
those  who  storm  and  rage, 
With  Indra,  slayer  of  the  fiends,  with  Mitra  and 
with  Varu^a. 
8  As  thou  hast  rent  and  torn  apart,  Asvattha  t  in  th,e 
mighty  sea, 
So  rend  asunder  all  those  men  who  hate  me  and 
whom  I  detest. 

4  Thou  who  like  some  yictorious  bull  displayest  thy 

surpassing  might, — 
With  thee,  with  thee,  Asvattha!  we  would  overcome 
our  enemies. 

5  Nirriti  bind  them  with  the  bonds  of  Death  which 

never  may  be  loosed, 
Mine  enemies,  Asvattha!  those  who  hate  me  and 
whom  1  detest. 

6  As  thou,  Asvattha!,  mountest  on  the  trees  and  over- 

throwest  them, 
So  do  thou  break  my  foeman's  head  asunder  and 
overpower  him. 

7  Let  them  drift  downward  like  a  boat  torn  from  the 

rope  that  fastened  it. 

third  heaven.  Its  seeds  germinate  in  the  hollows  of  other  trees,  aqd 
the  new  growth,  whidi  eventually  destroys  its  foster-mother,  is 
endowed  with  magical  powers  somewhat  similar  to  those  ascribed  to  t^e 
parasite  mistletoe  in  Europe,  ee^oiallj  when  it  grows  on  trees,  such 
as  the  oak  and  the  hazel,  which  do  not  usually  bear  it.  The  Asvattha 
^nerally  grows  on  the  Sami  (Prosopis  Spicigera) ;  in  the  present 
instance  it  springs  from  the  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu),  and,  what  is 
still  more  surprising,  maaculine  9pring$  from  matculinej  that  is,  the 
names  of  both  trees  are  words  of  that  gender. 

2  0  Burster:  vatbddha;  so  called  because  it  splits  asimder  the 
wood,  masonxy,  or  sUme  in  whose  crevices  its  seed  has  germinated  and 
grown.     With  Indra  :  in  alliance  with  him. 

3  As  thou  hast  rent :  the  Khadira  tree.  In  the  mighty  sea  :  in  the 
topmost  branches  that  waved  in  the  ocean  of  air. 

.  5  Nirfiti :  the  Qoddess  of  Misfprtune,  Deaths  and  Destruction, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HrHirf]  TBB^  ATBABVAVEDA.  89 

There  is:  bq^  torniog  back  for  those  whom  He  who 
Cleaves  hath  driven  away. 

8  With  mental  power  I  drive  them  fortti,  drive  them 
with  intellect  and  charm. 
We  banish  and  expel  tiiem  with,  the  branch  of  aa 
Asvattha  tree. 

HYMN  Vll. 

Thb  fleet-foot  Roebuck  wears  upon  his  head  a.  head- 
ing remedy. 

Innate  disease  he  drives  away  to  all  directions  with 
his  horn. 

%  With  his  four  feet  the  vigorous  Buck  hath  boumled 
in  pursuit  of  thee. 
Unbind  the  chronic  sickpess,  Horn  I  deeply  inwoven 
in  the  heart. 

8  That  which  shines  yonder^  like  a  roof  resting  on  four 
walls,  down  on  us, — 
Therewith    from    out  thy  body  we  drive  all  the 
chronic  malady. 

7  He  wKq  Cleavis  :  Aavattha,  the  Burster :  see  stanza  2. 
S  With  the  branch :  which  was  probably  wayed  during  the  reoita- 
Hon  of- the  ohann :  see  Weber. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  drive  away  hereditary  disease. 

1  A  healing  remedy:  the  horn,  to  be  used  merely  as  a  charm 
without  reference  to  the  medicinal  virtue  of  the  ammonia  which  it 
Ciontains.  Oil  of  Hartshorn,  Volatile  Salt  of  Hartshorn,  and  Spirits  of 
Hartshorn,  procured  by  distillation  from  the  antlers  of  the  stag 
(jOervus  Elaphus),  were  formerly  much  used  in  European  medicine. 
Innate  di$ea$e :  hehetriyd;  perhaps  pulm<H)ary  consumption :  see  II.  8. 1^ 

2  The  vigarovs  Buck:  the  hora  representing  the  animal  has 
attacked  thee,  that  is,  the  patient's  disease. 

3  Like  a  roof:  *  The  animal  is  compared  to  a  house,  its  legs  are  t^e 
poets,  and  its  horns  the  roof ' : — Grill.  According  to  Weber,  the  cere- 
mony  is  performed  at  night  in  the  open  air,  and  the  roof  is  one  of 
tbe  constellations. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


90  THE  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

4  May  those  twin  stars,  auspicious,  named  Releasers, 

up  in  yonder  sky, 
Loose  of  the  chronic  malady  the  uppermost    and 
lowest  bond. 

5  Water,   indeed,   hath   power  to  heal.  Water  drives 

malady  away. 
May  water — for  it  healeth  all — free  thee  from  perma- 
nent disease. 

6  Hath  some  prepared  decoction  brought  inveterate 

disease  on  thee, 
I  know  the  balm  that  healeth  it :  we  drive  the  malady 
away. 

7  What  time  the  starlight  disappears,  what  time  the 

gleams  of  Dawn  depart. 
May  evil  fortune  pass  from  us,  the  chronic  sickness 
disappear. 

HYMN  VIII. 

Let  Mitra  come,  arranging,  with  the  Seasons,  lulling 
the  Earth  to  rest  with  gleams  of  splendour. 

And  so  let  Agni,  Varu^a,  and  V&yu  make  our  domi- 
nion tranquil  and  exalted. 
2  May  Indra,  Tvashtar  hear  my  word  with  favour, 
may  Dhdtar,  R4ti,  Savitar  accept  it. 

I  call  the  Goddess  Aditi,  heroes'  mother,  that  I  may 
be  the  centre  of  my  kinsmen. 

i  The  stanza  is  almost  identical  with  II.  8.  1. 

5  It  seems  that  the  patient — probably  a  child — was  bathed  at  this 
stage  of  the  ceremony.  Dr.  Grill  refers  to  Rigveda  X.  137.  6  :  *The 
waters  have  a  balm  for  all :  let  them  make  medicine  for  thee.' 

7  The  ceremony  lasts  till  sunrise,  when  the  patient  is  supposed  to 
be  cured.     The  hymn  is  one  of  Dr.  Grill's  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  8,  105. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  secure  the  submission,  love,  and  fidelity  of. 
kinsmen. 

1  Mitra :  the  Friend,  whose  favour  is  especially  necessary  in  such  a 
case.     Lulling  the  Earth :  in  his  character  of  the  Sun  and  God  of  Day. 

2  DhAtar :  the  Ordainer :  see  II.  36.  2.  Rdti :  Favour,  divine 
Grace  personified :  see  I.  26.  2.  Heroei^  mother  :  mother  of  the  Adityas. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMN  9.]  THE  ATHARVA-VSDA.  91 

3  Soma  I  call,  and  Savitar  with  homage,  and  all  the 

Adityas  in  the  time  of  contest. 
Long  may  this  fire  send  forth  its  splendour,  lighted 
by  kinsmen  uttering  no  word  against  me. 

4  Here,  verily,  may  you  stay :  go  ye  no  farther.     The 

strong  Herd,  Lord  of  Increase,  drive  you  hither! 
To  please  this  man  may  all  the  Gods  together  come 
unto  you  and  be  as  dames  who  love  him. 

5  We  bend  together  all  your  minds,  your  vows  and 

purposes  we  bend. 
We  bend  together  you  who  stand  apart  with  hopes 
opposed  to  ours. 

6  I  with  my  spirit  seize  and  hold  your  spirits.     Follow 

with  thought  and  wish  my  thoughts  and  wishes. 
I  make  your  hearts  the  thralls  of  my  dominion:  on  me 
attendant  come  the  way  I  guide  you. 

HYMN  IX. 

Heaven  is  the  sire,  the  mother  Earth,  of  Karsapha 

and  Yisapha. 
As  ye  have  brought  them  hither,  Gods !  so  do  ye 

move  them  hence  away. 

3  7'his  fire :  the  saorifioial  fire  in  which  oblations  to  the  invoked 
deities  are  offered. 

4  May  you  $tay :  the  kinsmen  are  addressed.  The  strong  Herd :. 
P£ishan,  the  guardian  of  flocks  and  herds,  and  giver  of  general 
prosperity,  l^his  man:  the  householder  who  recites  the  preceding 
and  the  following  stanzas,  this  stanza  being  spoken  by  one  of  the 
officiating  priests. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Vishkandha  or  Rheumatism :  see  1. 1 6.  3. 

1  Earsapha  and  Yisapha,  the  latter  meaning  hoofless,  or  having 
distorted  hoofs,  are  said  in  the  S.  P.  Dictionary  to  denote  two  imps  or 
goblins.  According  to  Weber  the  words  are  appellatives,  the  former 
from  irtf  to  emaciate,  and  the  latter  from  t»tf,  to  penetrate,  with  a 
suffix  apha  =  ahka  used  in  the  formation  of  the  names  of  some  animals 
(as  vrishahhay  ualabha^  etc.).  The  translation  would  then  be:  Heaven 
is  the  sire,  the  mother  Earth,  of  that  which  thins  and  penetrates  (i.  e. 
Vishkandha  or  Rheumatism).  As  ye  have  brought  it  hither,  Gods ! 
so  do  ye  move  it  hence  away. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


92  fHS  B7MNS  OF  [BOOK  IIL 

2  The  bands  hold  fast  without  a  knot :  this  is  the  way 

that  Manu  used« 
I  make  Vishkandha  impotent  as  one  emasculateth 
bulls. 

3  Then  to  a  tawny-coloured  string  the  wise  and  skil- 

ful bind  a  brush. 
Let  bandages  make  impotent  the  strong  and  active 
K&bava. 

4  Ye  who  move  active  in  your  strength  like  Grods  with 

Asuras'  magic  powers, — 
Even  as  the  monkey  scorns  the  dogs,  Bandages !  scorn 
the  K&bava. 

5  Yea,  I  will  chide  thee  to  thy  shame,  I  will  disgrace 

the  K4bava. 
Under  our  imprecations  ye,  like  vapid  cars,  shall  pass 
away. 

6  One  and  one  hundred  over  ei^rth  are  the  Vishkandhas 

spread  abroad. 
Before  these  have  they  fetched  thee  forth,  Vish- 
kandha-quelling  Amulet. 

2  The  hatuh:  bandages  round  the  affected  parts.  Manu:  the 
tiiinker,  Man  par  excellence,  the  progenitor  of  mankind. 

3  A  brush :  with  which  to  produce  counter-irritation.  I  adopt 
Weber's  interpretation  of  khfigcUa,  which  in  Rigveda  11.  39.  4  means 
apparently  a  staff  or  crutch,  which  would  not  suit  this  passage. 
Kdbava :  one  of  the  demons,  of  the  disease. 

4  Instead  of  y^nd  a  word  of  one  syllable  is  required  by  the  metre : 
pd  should  probably  be  read.  Aturas' :  demons'.  The  monkey :  when 
he  is  safe  up  a  tree. 

6  One  and  one  hundred :  a  number  frequently  used  of  ill-omened, 
or  unpleasant  objects ;  the  hundred  and  one  ways  of  dying  have  beea 
mentioned  before :  see  I.  30.  3.  In  AV.  V.  30.  16,  Takman  or  Feveir 
is  said  to  have  a  hundred  racking  pains.  So  in  Bohemia  the  popular 
belief  reckoned  up  a  hundred  varieties  of  that  disease :  see  Grohmann, 
Ifidische  Studien,  IX.  p.  390.  Before  these :  in  front  of,  and  to  oppose, 
all  these  rheumatic  pains. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMS  10.]  TBB  ATHAHVA-rSDA.  W 

HYMN  X. 

The  First  hath  dawned.  With  Yama  may  it  be  a 

cow  to  pour  forth  milk. 
May  she  be  rich  in  milk  and  stream  for  us  through 

many  a  coming  year. 

2  May  she  whom  Gods  accept  with  joy,  Night  who 

approacheth  as  a  cow. 
She  who  is  Consort  of  the  Year,  bring  us  abundant 
happiness. 

3  Thou  whom  with  reverence  we  approach,  O  Night, 

as  model  of  the  Year, 
Vouchsafe  us  children  long  to  live,  bless  us  with 
increase  of  our  wealth. 

4  This  same  is  she  whose  light  first  dawned  upon  us : 

she  moves  established  in  the  midst  of  others. 
Great  powers  and  glories  are  contained  within  her  : 
a  first-born  bride,  she  conquers  and  bears  children. 

5  Loud  was  the  wooden  press-gear's  ring  and  rattle, 

as  it  made  annual  oblation  ready. 
First   Ashtakd!  may  we  be   lords   of  riches,  with 
goodly  children  and  good  men  about  us. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  a  happy  New  Year. 
•  1  The  First :  an  early  day  of  the  New  Year,  regarded  as  indicative 
of  the  fortune  of  the  whole  twelvemonth.  With  Yama  :  may  this  im- 
portant day  not  only  illumine  us,  but  send  its  light  even  to  the  realm 
of  Yama,  the  King  of  the  Departed.  A  cow  :  the  emblem  of  plenty ; 
^ver  of  abundant  blessings.  The  second  line  is  taken  from  Bigveda 
IV.  57.  7. 

2  Oods :  probably  meaning  priests.  Night :  preceding  the  important 
ilay.     Consort  of  the  Year  :  see  stanza  8. 

3  Model  of  the  Year  :  see  stanza  1,  note. 

5  Wooden press^ear :  literally,  wooden  press-stones;  meaning  both 
the  stones  and  the  wooden  implements,  the  pestle  and  mortar,  used 
for  extracting  the  Soma  juice  and  grinding  or  pounding  the  grain  re- 
quired for  the  sacrifice.  First  Ashtakd :  an  Ashtak^  is  the  eighth  day 
iBtfter  full  moon.  The  first  that  occurs  in  the  New  Year  is  the  occasion 
which  this  hymn  celebrates. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


94  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

6  The  shrine  of  I1&  flows  with  oil  and  fatness :  accept, 

O  J&tavedas,  our  oblations. 
Tame  animals  of  varied  form  and  colour — may  all 
the  seven  abide  with  me  contented. 

7  Come  thou  to  nourish  me  and  make  me  prosper. 

Night !  may  the  favour  of  the  Gods  attend  us. 
Filled  full,  O  Ladle,  fly  thou  forth.  Completely  filled 

fly  back  again. 
Serving  at  every  sacrifice  bring   to   us   food  and 

energy. 

8  This  Year  hath  come  to  us,  thy  lord  and  consort, 

O  Ek&shtakd. 
Vouchsafe  us  children  long  to   live^  bless  us   with 
increase  of  our  wealth. 

9  The   Seasons,  and   the  Seasons'   Lords   I  worship, 

annual  parts  and  groups, 
Half-years,  Years,  Months,  I  offer  to  the  Lord  of  all 
existing  things. 

6  The  shrine  of  lid :  the  place  of  worship  and  libation  personified 
as  a  Goddess.  Jdtavedas :  wise  Agni.  Tame  animals :  representatives 
of  these  are  brought  that  they  may  share  the  benediction.  All  th^ 
seven :  ox,  horse,  sheep,  goat,  mule,  ass,  and  man ;  five  of  which  are 
sacrificial  animals :  see  II.  34.  1. 

7  Ladle :  with  which  the  clarified  butter  is  poured  into  the  sacrifi- 
cial ^.  Completely  filled :  bringing  abundant  blessings  to  us  in  re- 
turn for  our  oblation  to  the  Gkxls. 

8  Ekdshtakd:  or  First  Ashtak&;  the  eighth  day  after  the  first  full 
moon  of  the  New  Year,  regarded,  on  account  of  its  superior  importance, 
as  the  Consort  of  the  personified  Year. 

9  The  Seasons :  the  hot  weather,  the  rains,  and  the  cold  weather. 
The  Seasons*  Lords :  the  genii  who  preside  over  those  divisions  of  the  year. 
In  Higveda  X.  2.  1  Agni  is  invoked  as  Lord  of  Seasons  par  excellence. 
The  Lord  of  all  ejoisting  things :  any  one  of  the  great  Gods  who  at  the 
time  of  worship  occupies  the  foremost  place  in  the  thoughts  of  the  wor- 
shipper. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  11.]  TBE  ATEAEVA-TEDA.  9S 

10  I   oflTer  to   the    Seasons,   to  their   several   groups, 

to  Months,  to  Years, 
Dh4tar,  VidhAtar,  Fortune,  to  the  Lord  of  all  exist- 
ing things. 

11  With  fatness  and  libation  we  sacrifice  and  adore  the 

Gods. 
Wealthy  in  kine  may  we  retire  to  rest  us  in  our 
modest  homes. 

12  Ek&shtak&,   burning   with   zealous   fervour,  brought 

forth  her  babe  the  great  and  glorious  Indra. 
With   him    the    Gods   subdued    their    adversaries : 
the  Lord  of  Might  became  the  Dasyus'  slayer. 

13  Indra's  and  Soma's  mother!    thou  art  daughter  of 

Fraj&pati. 
Satisfy  thou  our  hearts'  desires.     Gladly  accept  our 

sacrifice. 

HYMN  XL 
For  life  I  set  thee  free  by  this  oblation  both  from 

unmarked  decline  and  from  consumption : 

10  Dhdtar:  the  Ordainer.  Vtdhdtar:  the  Disposer.  Fortune:  Proa- 
perity,  personified. 

12  With  religious  fervour :  tdpasd;  according  to  Weber,  'seized  with 
the  pangs  of  childbirth.'  Their  adversaries :  the  Asuras  or  demons, 
called  also  Dasjus,  who  fought  against  them. 

13  Indra* s  and  Soma^s  mother:  the  laudation  of  the  personified 
Ekftshtaldl  or  First  Ashtaka  here  reaches  its  climax.  '  In  stanzas  3 
and  8  she  was  called  the  Consort  of  the  Year,  and  here  she  becomes 
the  mother  of  two  of  the  chief  Gods  and  daughter  of  the  Father  of  the 
Gods :' — Weber.  Prajdpati  :  Lord  of  Creatures,  Creator ;  a  Supreme 
Being  above  the  Vedic  Gods  and  sometimes  regarded  as  their  father. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  201. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  recovery  of  a  sick  person  in  extreme 
danger  of  death.  Stanzas  1 — 4  are  taken,  with  variations  in  3  and  4, 
from  Rigveda  X.  161.  1 — 4,  and  appear  again,  without  these  variations 
m  AV;  XX.  96.  6—9. 

1  Unmarked  decline :  some  insidious  disease  differing  from  Raja- 
jakshma  or  pulmonary  consumption.  Perhaps,  as  Prof.  Zimmer  sug- 
gests, hypertrophy  may  be  the  complaint  intended :  see  Altindisches 
Leben,  p.  377.  The  grasping  demon :  grdhi,  from  yraA,  to  seize,  a 
female  demon  who  seizes  men  and  kills  them. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


96  TBE  WYMJrS  QF  [BOOK  TM. 

Or  if  the  gFasping  demon  have  possessed  hiniy  free 
bim  from  her,  O  Indra,  thou  and  Agni  t 

2  Be   his   days  ended,   be   he   now   departed,   be  he 

brought  very  near  to  death  already, 
Out  of  Destt?uction's  lap  again  I  bring  him,  save  him 
for  life  to  last  a  hundred  autumns. 

3  With  sacrifice  hundred-eyed  and  hundred-powered, 

bringing  a  hundred  lives,  have  I  restored  him, 
That  Indra  through  the  autumns  may  conduct  him 
safe  to  the  farther  shore  of  all  misfortune. 

4  Live,  waxing  in  thy  strength,   a  hundred   autumns, 

live  through  a  hundred  springs,  a  hundred  winters ! 
Indra,  Agni,  Savitar,  Brihaspati  give  thee  a  hundred! 
With  hundred-lived  oblation  have  I  saved  him. 

5  Breath,  Respiration,  come  to  him,  as  two  car-oxen 

to  their  stall ! 
Let  all  the  other  deaths,  whereof  men  count  a  hun- 
dred, pass  away. 

6  Breath,  Respiration,  stay  ye  here.     Go  ye  not  hence 

away  from  him. 
Bring,  so  that  be  may  reach  old  age,  body  and  mem*- 
bers  back  again. 

7  I  give  thee  over  to  old  age,  make  thee  the  subject  of 

old  age. 
Let  kindly  old  age  lead  thee  on.     Let  all  the  other 
deaths,  whereof  men  count  a  hundred,  pass  away ! 


2  A  hundred  autumns :  autumns  representing  here,  as  Prof.  Weber 
remarks,  a  middle  stage  between  the  ancient  computation  by  winters 
(himds)  and  the  later  reckoning  by  rainy-seasons  (varskdnt),  correspond- 
ing to  the  southward  advance  of  the  Aryan  settlements. 

3  Hundred-powered :  the  Rigveda  has  *  hundred-autumned.' 

4  Give  thee  a  hundred :  autumns  or  years  being  understood.  The 
third  pllda  is  extravagantly  hypermetrical,  and  cannot  be  reduced  to 
the  Trishtup  standard. 

5  The  other  deuths  :  besides  natural  death  through  old  age. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EYMN  12.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  M 

8  Old  age  hath  girt  thee  with  its  bonds  even  as  they 

bind  a  bull  with  rope. 
The  death  that  held  thee  at  thy  birth  bound   with 

a  firmly-knotted  noose, 
Therefrom,  with  both  the  hands  of  Truth,  Brihas- 

pati  hath  loosened  thee. 

HYMN  XII. 

Here,  even  here  I  fix  my  firm-set  dwelling:  flowing 

with  fatness  may  it  stand  in  safety. 
May  we  approach  thee.  House !  with  all  our  people, 

unharmed  and  goodly  men,  and  dwell  within  thee. 

2  Even  here,  O  House,  stand  thou  on  firm  foundation, 

wealthy  in  horses,  rich  in  kine  and  gladness. 
Wealthy  in  nourishment,  in  milk  and  fatness,  rise  up 
for  great  felicity  and  fortune. 

3  A  spacious  store,  O  House,  art  thou,  full  of  clean 

corn  and  lofty-roofed. 
Let  the  young  calf  and  little  boy  approach  thee,  and 
milch-kine  streaming  homeward  in  the  evening. 

4  This  House  may  Savitar  and  Vdyu  stablish,  Brihas- 

pati  who  knows  the  way,  and  Indra. 
May  the  moist  Maruts  sprinkle  it  with  fatness,   and 
may  King  Bhaga  make  our  corn-land  fruitful. 


8  .4^  thy  birth  :  Prof.  Weber  is  of  opinion  that  the  occasion  of  the 
hymn  is  the  difficult  birth  of  a  child  who  comes  into  the  world  in  an 
apparently  dying  state. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  on  the  completion  of  a  new  house. 

1  Dioelling :  Mdm,  Fatness:  ghritdm:  clarified  butter,  the  em^ 
blem  of  abundance  and  prosperity :  see  I.  33.  4,  note. 

3  Full  of  clean  com :  pUtidhdnyd  being  apparently  a  corrupt  reading 
for  pHtadhdnyd. 

4  Sprinkle  it  with  fatness  :  that  is,  with  fertilizing  rain.  Make  our 
com^land  fruitftU :  ni  krishim  tanotu  ;  according  to  Weber  *  make  our 
ploughing  fruitful,'  that  is,  let  our  ploughing  go  deep  enough  to  pro- 
duce a  good  harvest ;  but  deep  ploughing  is  not  in  favour  with  Indian 
cultivators  even  now,  and  cannot  have  been  necessary  or  desirable 

7 


Digitized  by 


Google 


&8  THS  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

5  Queen  of  the  Home  1  thou,  sheltering,  kindly  God- 

dess, waet  stablished  by  the  Gods  in  the  beginning. 
Clad  in  thy  robe  of  grass  be  friendly-minded,  and 
give  us  wealth  with  goodly  men  about  us. 

6  Thou   Pole,   in   ordered   fashion   mount   the  pillar. 

Strong,  shining  forth  afar,  keep  off  our  foemen. 

House !  let  not  those  who  dwell  within  thee  suffer. 

Live  we,  with  all  our  men,  a  hundred  autumns. 

7  To  this  the  tender  boy  hath  come,  to  this  the  calf 

with  all  the  beasts, 
To  this  the  crock  of  foaming  drink,  hither  with  jars 
of  curdled  milk. 

8  Bring  hitherward,  O  dame,  the    well-filled    pitcher, 

the  stream  of  molten  butter  blent  with  nectar. 
Bedew   these   drinkers   with   a   draught   of  Amrit. 
May  all  our  hopes'  fulfilment  guard  this  dwelling. 

in  Vedio  times  and  comparatively  virgin  soil.  The  general  meaning  is 
clear,  but  the  exact  sense  in  which  ni  tanotu  is  used  is  not  certain. 
According  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary  the  compound  verb  means,  to  pene- 
trate, to  cause  to  take  root. 

5  Queen  of  the  Borne :  the  female  deity  who  presides  over  house- 
building, and  who  was  originally  commissioned  by  the  Gods  to  ins- 
truct men  in  this  art.  Bobe  of  grass  :  with  reference  to  the  thatch  on 
the  roof. 

6  Pole:  literally,  bamboo;  the  cross-beam.  The  pillar:  probably 
made  of  some  more  durable  wood.  Shining  forth :  perhaps,  because 
it  was  smeared  with  ointment  to  preserve  it  from  the  weather  and 
the  attacks  of  white-ants. 

7  With  all  the  beasts :  jdgatd  sahd ;  jdgat  here  being  used,  as  it 
frequently  is,  in  the  special  sense  of  domestic  animals :  see  I.  31.  4. 

Foaming  drink :  parisriitas  ;  a  beverage  prepared  from  herbs,  a  sort 
of  beer. 

8  0  dame :  the  mistress  of  the  newly  built  house.  Molten  butter 
blent  with  nectar:  probably,  as  Weber  observes,  only  euphemistic 
names  for  good  liquor  of  some  sort.  All  present  seem  to  have  been 
provided  with  refreshment  as  at  an  English  house-warming.  Amrit : 
nectar,  or  any  sweet  drink.  Hopes^  fulfilment :  ishtdpHrtdm  ;  mean- 
ing the  reward  of  our  pious  works. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  13.]  THB  ATHARTA-YMDA.  99 

9  Water  that  kills  Consumption,  free  from  all  Consump- 
tion,  here  I  bring. 
With  Agni,  the  immortal  one,  I  enter  and  possess 
the  house. 

HYMN  XIIL 

As  TE,  when  Ahi  had  been  slain,  flowed  forth  toge- 
ther with  a  roar, 

So  are  ye  called  the  Roaring  Ones:  this,  O  ye 
Rivers,  is  your  name. 

2  As  driven  forth  by  Varu^a  ye  swiftly  urged  your 

rolling  waves, 
There  Indra  reached  you  as  you  flowed:  hence  ye 
are  still  the  Water-floods. 

3  Indra  restrained  you   with  his  might.  Goddesses, 

as  ye  glided  on 
Not  in  accordance  with  his  will :  hence  have  ye  got 
the  name  of  Streams. 


9  The  householder  now  enters  and  takes  formal  possession  of  the 
house  with  water  and  fire,  the  two  most  important  necessaries  of 
human  life. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigyeda,  p.  463 ; 
by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  150,  and  by  Grill,  with  annotations, 
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  59,  108. 

A  hymn  on  the  occasion  of  cutting  a  channel  for  irrigation  or  to 
avert  a  flood. 

1  The  deified  Rivers  are  addressed.  Ahi :  the  Dragon,  Vritra,  the 
chief  demon  who  keeps  the  waters  of  heaven  imprisoned  in  the  dark 
cloud.  The  Roaring  Ones :  nadyh»  ;  a  common  name  of  rivers,  deriv- 
ed from  the  root  nad^  to  roar,  which  appears  in  dnadatd^  ye  roared, 
of  line  1. 

2  Driven  forth  hy  Varuna :  so,  •  Varuna  dug  the  channels  for  thy 
forward  course,  O  Sindhu.'  Rigveda  X.  75.  2.  Reached :  dpnot.  Water- 
floods  :  djpas  ;  a  play  upon  the  two  words  which  have  no  etymological 
connexion. 

3  Restrained :  dvtvarata^  from  vri.  Streams  :  literally,  water,  vdr  ; 
another  play  upon  two  words  of  unconnected  origin. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KO  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IJI. 

4  One   only   God  set  foot  on   you  flowing  according 

to  your  will. 
The  mighty  ones  breathed  upward  fast :  hence  Water 
is  the  name  they  bear. 

5  Water  is  good,  water  indeed  is  fatness.     Agni  and 

Soma,  truly,  both  bring  water. 
May  the  strong  rain  of  those  who  scatter   sweetness 
come  helpful  unto  me  with  breath  and  vigour. 

6  Then  verily,  I  see,  yea,  also  hear  them :  their  sound 

approaches  me,  their  voice  comes  hither. 
Even  then  I  think  I  am  enjoying  Amrit,  what  time 
I  drink  my  fill  of  you,  gold  coloured ! 

7  Here,  O  ye  Waters,  is  your  heart.     Here  is  your 

calf,  ye  holy  ones. 
Flow   here,  just   here,  O  mighty  Streams,  whither 
I  now  am  leading  you. 

4  One  only  God :  Indra.  The  mighty  ones :  the  Rivers.  Breathed 
upward ;  liddnishus  /  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  the  God.  Water  : 
udakdm  ;  a  play  on  the  M  in  this  word  and  uddnishus, 

5  Water  is  good :  like  Pindar's  "Apitrrov  filv  vSwp,  Fatness :  in 
the  shape  of  fertilizing  rain.     Those  toko  scatter  sweetness  :  the  Waters. 

6  Oold-C0loured :  gleaming  like  gold  in  the  sunshine. 

7  This  stanza  contains  the  practical  part  of  the  ceremony,  the  pre- 
ceding stanzas  being  merely  introductory.  The  canal  is  already  cut, 
and  the  water  of  the  river  is  to  be  admitted.  Here  is  your  heart : 
this  new  channel  which  the  river  is  to  fill  is  now  to  be  dear  to  you. 
Your  calf:  your  darling ;  loved  as  the  calf  is  by  its  mother ;  a  com- 
mon term  of  endearment.  According  to  the  directions  given  in  the 
Kausika-Sutra  XL.  3 — 6,  with  the  recitation  of  paLda  1  some  gold  is 
deposited;  with  pada  2  a  frog  with  rush-like  streaks,  with  a  blue  and  a 
red  thread  tied  round  it,  is  placed  upon  the  gold;  with  pada  3  the  frog 
is  covered  with  an  aquatic  plant  called  Avak^  Sevila  or  Sevala 
(Vallisneria  Octandra).  The  symbolical  meaning  of  each  act  in  this 
procedure  is.  Prof.  Weber  remarks,  sufficiently  intelligible.  All  that 
will  be  found  on  the  spot  in  future  is  figuratively  and  proleptically 
represented — the  gold-gleaming  water  with  its  rushes,  its  frogs,  and 
its  lotus-flowers  [Sevalas,  or  aquatic  plants]. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UYMN  U.]  TBB  ATHARVA^VEDA.  101 

HYMN  XIV. 

A  Pen  wherein  to  dwell  at  ease,  abundance  and  pros- 
perity, 

Whatever  is  called  the  birth  of  day,  all  this  do  we 
bestow  on  you. 

2  May  Aryaman  pour  gifts  on  you,  and  PAshan,  and 

Brihaspati, 
And  Indra,  winner  of  the  prize.    Make  ye  my  riches 
grow  with  me, 

3  Moving   together,    free   from   fear,    with  plenteous 

droppings  in  this  pen. 
Bearing  sweet  milk  like  Soma-juice,  eome  hither  free 
from  all  disease. 

4  Come  hither,  to  this  place,  O  Cows  :  here  thrive  as 

though  ye  were  manured. 
Even  here  increase  and  multiply  :  let  us  be  friendly, 
you  and  me. 

5  Auspicious  be  this  stall  to  you.    Prosper  like  culti- 

vated rice. 
Even  here   increase  and   multiply.    Myself  do  we 
bestow  on  you. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  of  the  Cattle-pen  in  which  the  cows  aire 
kept  vX  night. 

1  The  birth  of  day :  born  or  produced  on  an  auspicious  day ;  all 
good  fortune. 

2  Pour  gifts  on  you:  *keep  you  together/  according  to  Weber. 
Of  the  prize :  booty  in  battle. 

i  As  though  ye  were  manwred :  according  to  Weber,  *  wie  der  mist,' 
like  the  cow-dung,  which  increases  rapidly  if  it  be  not  regularly  re- 
moved. 

5  Like  cultivated  rice :  sdrisdkd  is  difficult  and  perhaps  corrupt. 
Sdri  may  be  another  form  of  edli,  rice,  or,  as  Weber  takes  it,  the  bird 
Sari  or  more  commonly  Sarik^,  the  Maina  (Gracula  Religiosa),  whose 
droppings  are  in  accordance  with  its  voracious  habits.  Myself  do  we 
bestow  on  you :  that  is,  I  devote  myself  to  your  service.  Or,  with 
Weber,  We  bind  you  closely  to  myself  ;  that  is,  by  a  bond  of  reciprocal 
benefits :  I  feed  you  well  and  you  are  to  enrich  my  land. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


102  THE  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

6  Follow  me,  Cows,  as  master  of  the  cattle.   Here  may 
this  Cow-pen  make  you  grow  and  prosper. 
Still  while  we  live  may  we  approach  you  living,  ever 
increasing  with  the  growth  of  riches. 

HYMN  XV. 

I  STIR  and  animate  the  merchant  Indra :  may  he 
approach  and  be  our  guide  and  leader. 

Chasing  ill-will,  wild  beast,  and  highway  robber, 
may  he  who  hath  the  power  give  me  riches. 

2  The  many  paths  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel,  the 
paths  which  go  between  the  earth  and  heaven, 
May  they  rejoice  with  me  in  milk  and  fatness  that  I 
may  make  rich  profit  by  my  purchase. 
8  With   fuel,    Agni  1  and   with   butter,  longing,  mine 
oflfering  I  present  for  strength  and  conquest ; 
With  prayer,  so  far  as  I  have  strength,  adoring— 
this  holy  hymn  to  gain  a  hundred  treasures. 


6  Approach :  the  word  lipasadema  implying  careful  attention  to  the 
wants  of  the  cows. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  4C9, 
and,  with  annotatipns,  by  Grill,  Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  64,  112. 


The  hymn  is  a  merchant's  prayer  to  Indra,  Agni,  and  other  Gods  for 
success  in  his  business. 

1  The  merchant  Indra :  who  deals  and  traffics  with  his  worshippers, 
requiring  and  receiving  prayer  and  oblation  in  exchange  for  the  bless- 
ings which  he  sends.  Guide  and  leader :  the  merchant  being  on  the 
point  of  starting  on  a  journey  for  business  purposes.  Ill-vnil :  the  ab- 
stract for  the  concrete ;  every  enemy.  Wild  beast  and  highway  robber : 
or,  according  to  Weber,  « wild  beast  that  infests  the  way.* 

2  May  they  rejoice  with  me :  I  read  me  instead  of  m^  as  Weber  sug- 
gests. The  meaning  is,  May  the  Gods  who  come  from  heaven  to  our 
sacrifices  be  pleased  with  the  oblations  which  I  offer  to  them. 

3  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  III.  18.  3.  This  holy  hymn : 
governed  by,  I  present,  in  the  first  line. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  16.]  TEE  ATHARTATBDA.  lOS 

4  Pardon  this  stubbornness  of  ours,  O  Agni,  the  dis- 

tant pathway  which  our  feet  have  trodden. 

Propitious  unto  us  be  sale  and  barter,  may  inter- 
change of  merchandise  enrich  me. 

Accept,  ye  twain,  accordant,  this  libation  1  Prosper- 
ous be  our  ventures  and  incomings. 

5  The  wealth  wherewith  I  carry  on  my  traffic,  seeking, 

ye  Gods !  wealth  with  the  wealth  I  offer. 
May  this  grow   more   for  me,   not  less :  O  Agni, 
through  sacrifice  chase  those  who  hinder  profit  1 

6  The  wealth  wherewith  I  carry  on  my  traffic,  seeking, 

ye  Gods !  wealth  with  the  wealth  I  offer, 
Herein  may  Indra,  Savitar,  and  Soma,  Praj4pati, 
and  Agni  give  me  splendour. 

7  With  reverence  we  sing  thy  praise,  O  Hotar-priest 

Vaisvanara. 
Over  our  children  keep  thou  watch,  over  our  bodies, 
kine,  and  lives. 

8  Still  to  thee  ever  will   we   bring   oblation,^  as  to  a 

stabled  horse,  O  J4tavedas. 
Joying  in  food  and  in  the  growth  of  riches  may  we 
thy  servants,  Agni,  never  suffer. 

4  The  first  line  of  this  stanza,  borrowed  from  Rigveda  I.  31.  16,  is 
superfluous  and  out  of  place  here.  Dr.  Grill  and  Prof.  Zimmer  leave 
it  untranslated.  Ye  twain:  Indra  who  is  addressed  in  stanza  1,  and 
Agni  addressed  in  3.  Incomings:  'dtthitam  ;  explained  by  the  Commen- 
tator as  vyavahdrdd  utpannam  Idhhayuktam  dhanam  :  see  GrilFs  note. 

6  Through  sacrifice :  in  return  for  the  sacrifice  which  I  offer,  l^hose : 
the  text  has  devdii,  Gods,  which  mars  the  metre  and  is  probably  a  gloss. 

6  Splendour :  rdchim ;  or,  favour ;  dignity  and  importance.  Accord- 
ing to  Weber  the  word  here  means  *  understanding.' 

7  Vai^dnara:  dear  to  all  men;  an  appellative  of  Agni.  This 
Anushtup  stanza  appears  to  be  an  interpolation. 

^  As  to  a  stabled  horse :  as  we  carry  fodder  to  a  horse  that  is  not 
turned  out  to  graze.  Jdtavedas :  wise  Agni.  Servants :  prdiivesds ; 
or,  neighbours. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


104  •'    TSE  E7MNS  OF  [BOOK  III 

HYMN  XVI. 

Agni  at  dawn,  and  Indra  we  invoke  at  dawn,  and 
Varuija  and  Mitra,  and  the  Asvins  twain  : 

Bhaga  at  dawn,  Piishan  and  BrahmaQaspati,  Soma 
at  dawn,  and  Rudra  we  invoke  at  dawn. 

2  We  call  strong  Bhaga,  conqueror  in  the  morning, 

the  son  of  Aditi,  the  great  Disposer, 
Whom  each  whodeemshimself  poor,  strongandmighty, 
a  king,  addresses  thus,  Grant  thou  my  portion ! 

3  Bhaga,  our  guide,  Bhaga  whose   gifts  are  faithful, 

favour  this  hymn  and  give  us  wealth,  O  Bhaga. 
Bhaga,   augment   our   store   of    kine    and    horses. 
Bhaga,  may  we  be  rich  in  men  and  heroes. 

According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra  this  hymn  is  the  beginning  of  *  the 
ritual  of  a  travelling  merchant  when  about  to  start  on  a  trading  expe- 
dition/ He  has  also  to  recite  the  hymns  III.  26  and  27,  VI.  1,  3,  4, 
5,  6,  7,  59,  93,  107,  128,  and  IV.  28,  with  which  certain  oblations 
are  to  be  made.  See  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  VII. 
p.  487. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  215, 
by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  69,  113,  and  by 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  258. 

The  hymn  is  the  morning  prayer  of  the  great  Rishi  Vasishtha,  taken, 
with  slight  variations,  from  Rigveda  VII.  41. 

1  Atdavm:  prayer  and  praise  in  the  early  morning  being  most 
acceptable  to  the  Gods. 

2  Bhaga  :  see  I.  26.  2.  Conqueror  in  the  morning :  in  his  character  of 
the  early  Sun  overpowering  Ushas  or  Dawn  who  in  Rigveda  I.  123.  5  is 
called  his  sister.  Disposer :  or,  Supporter.  Grant  thou  my  portion : 
or,  may  I  receive  my  share.  Weber  takes  hhahshi  as  the  first  person 
singular,  Atmanepada,  and  the  Commentaries  make  it  second  person 
singular,  Parasmaipada,  of  the  aorist  in  each  case.  The  meaning  is 
that  everyone,  poor  and  weak,  strong  and  mighty,  the  king  himself 
looks  to  Bhaga  as  the  giver  of  his  allotted  fortune. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMK  16.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  105 

4  So  may  felicity  be  ours  at  present,  and  when  the 

Sun  advances,  and  at  noontide ; 
And  may  we  still,  O  Bounteous  One,  at  sunset   be 
happy  in  the  Gods'  protecting  favour. 

5  May  Bhaga  verily   be  biiss-bestower,   and  through 

him,  Gods !  may  happiness  attend  us. 
As  such  with  all  my  might  I  call  and  call  thee :  as 
such  be  thou  our  leader  here,  O  Bhaga. 

6  To  this  our  sacrifice  may  the  Dawns  incline  them, 

and  come  to  the  pure  place  like  Dadhikr&van. 
As  strong  steeds  draw  a  chariot  may  they  bring  me 
hitherward  Bhaga  who  discovers  treasure. 

7  May  the  kind  Mornings  dawn  on  us  for  ever  with 

wealth  of  kine,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes, 
Streaming    with    all    abundance,    pouring   fatness. 
Do  ye  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings ! 

5  May  Bhaga  verily  he  bliss-bestower :  hhdgavdn  ;  originally,  possess- 
ing a  happy  lot,  fortunate,  blessed,  adorable ;  now  generally  meaning 
Almighty  Grod. 

6  The  Batons  :  the  lights  of  morning,  personified.  The  pure  place  : 
the  chamber  of  sacrifice.  Dadhikrdvan :  or  Dadhikrils,  or,  in  the 
crude  form,  Dadhikdl,  is  the  name  of  a  mythical  being  often  men- 
tioned in  the  Rigveda,  and  the  deified  subject  of  Hymns  IV.  38,  39, 
40,  and  VII.  44.  He  is  described  as  a  kind  of  divine  horse,  and 
probably,  like  T&rkshya,  is  a  personification  of  the  morning  Sun. 
Sometimes  he  is  considered  as  a  creation  of  Heaven  and  Elarth,  some- 
times of  Mitra  and  Varuna,  and  is  invoked  in  the  morning  together 
with  Agni,  Ushas,  and  the  Asvins.  According  to  Professor  Pischel 
(Vedische  Studien,  I.  124),  Dadhikrdvan  may  have  been  originally  a 
most  distinguished  race-horse,  glorified  and  deified  by  the  exaggerated 
praises  of  the  bards  of  a  people  who  were  passionately  devoted  to 
chariot-racing.  Like  Dadhikrdvan  may  mean,  with  the  swiftness 
of  the  famous  mythical  horse,  the  type  and  model  of  racers.  See 
Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  II. 

7  Do  ye  preserve  us  evermore  tvith  blessings  :  this  address  to  the  Gods 
in  general  is  the  conclusion  of  many  Rigveda  hymns  attributed  to 
the  Vasishthas. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


106  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

HYMN  XVII. 

Wise  and  devoted  to  the  Gods  the  skilful  men  bind 

plough-ropes  fast, 
And  lay  the  yokes  on  either  side. 

2  Lay  on  the  yokes  and  fasten  well  the  traces  :  formed 

is  the  furrow,  sow  the  seed  within  it. 
Vir&j  vouchsafe    us    hearing  fraught    with  plenty ! 
Let  the  ripe  grain  come  near  and  near  the  sickle. 

3  The  keen-shared  plough  that  bringeth  bliss,  furnished 

with  traces  and  with  stilts. 
Shear  out  for  me  a  cow,  a  sheep,  a  rapid  drawer  of 
the  car,  a  blooming  woman,  plump  and  strong ! 

4  May   Indra   press  the   furrow   down,   may  Piishaa 

guard  and  cherish  her. 
May  she,  well  stored  with  milk,  yield  milk  for  ue 
through  each  succeeding  year. 

The  hymn  is  a  fanner's  song  and  prayer  to  speed  the  plough. 

1  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  101.  4.  Devoted :  sumnayafi 
can  hardly  be  the  right  reading.  The  Rigveda  has  sumnat/d^  an 
instrumental  case  used  adverbially,  devoutly ;  or,  through  devotion, 
through  fixing  their  hopes  of  happiness  upon  the  Gods.  The  sktlful 
men :  the  ploughmen  who  understand  their  work. 

2  Formed  is  the  farrow :  cf.  Hynms  Ancient  and  Modern,  383:  *We 
plough  the  fields,  and  scatter  The  good  seed  on  the  land.  But  it  is  fed 
and  watered  By  God's  Almighty  Hand.' 

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  101.  3. 
VirdiQ :  meaning,  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  Vak  the  Croddesa 
of  Speech.  The  Rigveda  reads  girdcha^  *  Through  song,'  or  *  by  means 
of  our  hymn;'  and  Weber  here  also  translates  a  conjectural  reading 
^rdmcha,  *  of  our  prayers  or  songs.' 

3  Furnished  with  traces  and  unth  stilts  :  somasdtsaru  ;  resolved  into 
sa-uman  (cf.  uta^  woven  or  spun,  and  umd^  flax),  sa-tsarUf  with  traces^ 
with  a  handle. — Weber. 

4  Indra  as  the  God  who  sends  the  necessary  rain  is  prayed  to  blesa 
the  work  by  cutting  the  furrow,  and  PAshan  as  the  God  of  Increase 
is  prayed  to  protect  it.  Her  :  the  furrow  personified.  Milk :  mean- 
ing plentiful  nourishment.  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  IV.  57. 
7 :  its  second  hemistich,  which  is  a  solemn  formula,  occurs  also  in 
Atharva-veda  III.  10.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  17.)  THE  ATHAR7A-7EDA.  107 

5  Happily  let  the  shares  turn  up  the  ploughland,  the 

ploughers  happily  follow  the  oxen. 
Pleased  with  our  sacrifice,  Suna  and  Slra !  make  the 
plants  bring  this  man  abundant  produce. 

6  Happily  work  our  steers  and  men !  May  the  plough 

furrow  happily. 
Happily   be   the   traces  bound.     Happily  ply   the 
driving-goad. 

7  Suna  and  Stra,  welcome  ye  this  laud^  and  with  the 

milk  that  ye  have  made  in  heaven 
Bedew  ye  both  this  earth  of  ours. 

8  Auspicious  Slt4,  come  thou  near :  we  venerate  and 

worship  thee 
That  thou  mayst  bless  and  prosper  us  and  bring  ub 
fruits  abundantly. 

5  Taken  from  Rigveda  IV.  57.  8  with  variations.  Suna  and  Sira : 
two  deities  or  deified  objects  who  bless  or  are  closely  connected  with 
agriculture.  According  to  Y&ska,  Suna  (the  auspicious)  is  V&yu,  and 
Sira  (plough)  is  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  The  words  probably  mean,  as 
suggested  in  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  ploughshare  and  plough.  Prof. 
Grassmann  translates  them  by  *  0  Pflug  and  Lenker,'  '  O  Plough  and 
Ploughman,'  but,  •  0  Plough  aud  Ploughshare,'  would  be  a  better 
rendering.  ThU  man  :  the  owner  of  the  land.  The  second  hemistich 
of  the  Rigveda  stanza  is  :  '  With  meath  and  milk  Parjanya  make  us 
happy  1  Grant  us  prosperity,  Suna  and  Sira  (or  0  Plough  and  Plough- 
share).' 

6  Taken  from  Rigveda  IV.  67.  4. 

7  Rigveda  IV.  57.  5. 

8  Rigveda  IV.  57.  6.  Slid :  or,  Furrow,  personified  and  addressed  as 
a  deity.  An  elaborate  ceremonial,  which  the  recitation  of  this  hymn 
is  to  accompany,  is  prescribed  in  the  Kausika-Sutra :  see  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  XVII.  pp.  256  sqq.  In  England,  Plough-Monday, 
the  first  Monday  after  Twelfth-day,  when  men  returned  to  the  plough 
at  the  end  of  the  Christmas  holidays,  used  to  be  celebrated  by  the 
farm-labourers  who  drew  a  plough  from  door  to  door  of  the  village  and 
solicited  '  plough-money '  to  spend  in  honour  of  the  day. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


108  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

9  lioved  by  the  Visvedevas  and  the  Maruts,  let  Sltft 
be  bedewed  with  oil  and  honey. 
Turn  thou   to   us  with  wealth   of  milk,  O  Sita,  in 
vigorous  strength  and  pouring  streams   of  fatness. 

HYMN  XVIII. 

From  out  the  earth  I  dig  this  Plant,  an  herb  of  most 

effectual  power, 
Wherewith  one  quells  the  rival  wife  and  gains  the 

husband  for  one's  self. 

2  Auspicious,  with  expanded  leaves,  sent  by  the  Gods, 

victorious  Plant, 
Drive  thou    the    rival    wife    away,    and    make    my 
husband   only   mine. 

3  Indeed  he  hath  not  named  her  name :  thou  with  this 

husband  dalliest  not. 
Far  into  distance  most  remote  we  drive   the  rival 
wife  away. 

4  Stronger  am  I,  O  stronger  one,  yea,  mightier  than 

the  mightier ; 
Beneath  me  be  my  rival  wife,  down,  lower  than  the 
lowest  dames ! 


9  With  oil  and  honey :  some  clarified  butter  with  honey  or  meath 
was,  it  seems,  poured  into  the  first  furrow  to  secure  a  good  crop. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  145,  is 
a  spell  to  rid  a  jealous  wife  of  a  more  favoured  rival. 

1  This  Plant :  said  to  be  the  P^ta,  probably  identical  with  P&th4 
(Clypea  Hemandifolia),  f>  climbing  plant  possessing  various  medicinal 
properties,  and  employed  for  magical  purposes  :  see  Atharva-veda  II. 
27.  4. 

2  Expanded :  or  *  erected,'  as  Weber  translates  it. 

3  He  :  the  husband.  The  Rigveda  has :  *  Her  very  name  I  utter 
not :  she  takes  no  pleasure  with  this  man.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  19]  THE  ATEARVA'TEDA.  109 

5  I  am  the  conqueror,  and  thou,  thou  also  art  victori- 

ous : 
As  victory  attends  us  both  we  will  subdue  my  fellow- 
wife. 

6  I've  girt  thee  with  the  conquering  Plant,    beneath 

thee  laid  the  mightiest  one. 
As  a  cow  hastens  to  her  calf,  so  let  thy  spirit   speed 
to  me,  hasten  like  water  on  its  way. 

HYMN  XIX. 

Quickened  is   this  my  priestly  rank,   quickened  is 

manly  strength  and  force, 
Quickened  be  changeless  power,  whereof  I   am   the 

conquering  President! 

2  I  quicken  these  men's  princely  sway,  the  might,  the 

manly  strength  and  force ; 
I  rend  away  the  foemen's  arms  with  this  presented 
sacrifice. 

3  Down  fall   the   men,    low   let  them  lie,   who   fight 

against  our  mighty  prince. 
I  ruin  foemen  with  my  spell,  and  raise  my  friends  to 
high  estate. 

6  According  to  Darila,  with  the  recitation  of  the  first  hemistich 
leaves  of  the  magical  plant  are  to  be  placed  in  the  bed  of  the  rival, 
and  not  in  that  of  the  husband  as  suggested  by  Sayana  in  his  Commen- 
tary on  the  Rigveda  where  the  reading  is  somewhat  different.  The 
second  hemistich  is  addressed  to  the  husband. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  office  of  Purohita  or  Household 
Priest  and  Counsellor  of  a  King. 

1  Quickened:  or,  sharpened,  that  is,  intensified.  Manly  strength:  of 
the  people,  who  constitute  the  army.  Power :  or,  sway ;  the  rule  of  the 
second,  princely  or  military  class. 

3  Mighty  prince :  the  rich,  powerful,  and  liberal  householder  who 
institutes  and  pays  the  expenses  of  sacrifice  :  *  our  mighty  saorificer : ' 
Weber;  *  our  Sfiri,  the  Maghavan  : '  Ludwig. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


no  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IIL 

4  Keener  than  is  the  axe's  edge,  keener  than  Agni's 

self  are  they, 
Keener  than  Indra's  bolt  are  they  whose   Priest  and 
President  am  I. 

5  The  weapons  of  these  men  I  whet  and  sharpen,  with 

valiant  heroes  I  increase  their  kingdom. 
Victorious  be  their  power  and  ever  ageless!  May  all 
the  Gods  promote  their  thoughts  and  wishes. 

6  Let  their  fierce  powers,  O  Maghavan,  be  heightened, 

and  upward  go  the  shout  of  conquering  heroes. 
Apart  and  clear,  let  shout  and  roar  and  shriek  and 

lamentation  rise ! 
Let  the  Gods  led  by  Indra,.let  the  Maruts  with  our 

army  go. 

7  Advance  and  be  victorious,  men !  Exceeding  mighty 

be  your  arms ! 
Smite  with  sharp-pointed  arrows  those  whose  bows 
are  weak.     With  your  strong  arms  and  weapons 
smite  the  feeble  foe. 

8  Loosed  from   the  bowstring  fly  away,  thou  Arrow, 

sharpened  by  our  prayer. 
Assail  the  foemen,    vanquish    them,  conquer  each 
bravest  man  of  theirs,  and  let  not  one  of  them  escape. 

4  Priest  and  President :  purdhitah  ;  literally,  one  set  before  (praeses), 
appointed  to  special  functions. 

6  0  Maghavan :  mighty  or  bounteous  Indra.  Clear:  ketumdntah ; 
according  to  Weber  and  Ludwig  *  with  banners/  Shout  and  roar :  of 
the  victors.  Shriek  and  lamentation :  of  the  vanquished :  cf.  Homer, 
Iliad,  IV.  450 :  ivOa  S'fi/x'  oi^iayyri  re  Koi  €ix*»>^^  iriX^v  avSpiov 
oWvvTtjjv  T€  Koi  6\\vfjLiv(a}v  I  *  And  then  did  tumult  rise  Up  to  her 
height ;  then  conquerors'  boasts  mixed  with  the  conquered's  cries : ' — 
Chapman.  The  Purohita's  glorification  of  his  high  office  has  become 
a  war-song  with  which  he  inspirits  the  men  who  are  going  forth  to 
battle  under  his  auspicious  benediction. 

7  The  Erst  hemistich  is  composed  of  p&das  1  and  3  of  Eigveda 
X.  103.  13. 

8  Our  prayer  :  or,  spell.  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from 
Rigveda  VI.  75.  16. 

*  The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  234^ 
and  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  p.  283. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


STMN  20.]  TUB  ATHARVAVEDA.  Ill 

HYMN  XX. 

This  is  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence  sprung  to 

life  thou  shinest  forth. 
Knowing  this,  Agni,  mount  on  high  and  cause  our 

riches  to  increase. 

2  Turn  hither,  Agni,  speak  to  us,  come  to  us  with  a 

friendly  mind. 
Enrich  us,  Sovran  of  the  Tribes  1  Thou  art  the  giver 
of  our  wealth. 

3  Let  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and  Bhaga,  and 

Brihaspati, 
The  Goddesses  grant  wealth  to  us,  SAnrit&,  Goddess, 
give  me  wealth ! 

4  We  call  King  Soma  to  our  aid,  and  Agni  with  our 

songs  and  hymns. 
The  Adityas,  Vishnu,  SArya,  and  the  Brahman-priest 
Brihaspati. 

5  Do  thou,  O  Agni,   with   thy    fires   strengthen    our 

prayer  and  sacrifice. 
Incite  thou  us,  O  God,  to  give,  and  send  us  riches  to 
bestow. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  riches  and  general  prosperity. 

1  Thii :  the  centre  of  the  northern  altar  or  fire-receptacle  in  the 
sacrificial  court  or  hall.  The  first  hemistich  is  taken  from  Rigveda 
III.  29.  10,  the  second  hemistich  of  which  is :  *  Knowing  this,  Agni, 
seat  thyself,  and  prosper  thou  the  songs  we  sing.' 

2  Sovran  of  the  Tribes :  viadm  pate ;  or,  Lord  of  the  people ;  King 
of  the  Aryan  settlers.  Stanzas  2 — 7  are  taken,  with  variations,  from 
Rigveda  X.  141.  1,  2,  3,  6,  4,  5. 

3  Tke  Goddesses :  the  consorts  of  the  Gods,  Indr&ni,  Agn4yt,  Yam- 
9&nt,  and  other  Gn&s  or  celestial  Dames.  SUnritd:  Pleasantness, 
Gladness,  or  Glory,  personified  as  a  Goddess. 

4  The  Aditya :  Varuna,  the  Aditya  par  excellence,  primus  inter 
pares.  The  Brahman-priest :  Brihaspati,  Lord  of  Prayer,  is  the  Purohita 
of  the  Gods  and  the  prototype  of  the  priestly  order. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


112  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IIL 

6  Both  Indra  here  and  V4yu  we  invoke  with  an  aus- 

picious call, 
That  in  assembly  all  the  folk  may  be  benevolent  to 
us,  and  be  inclined  to  give  us  gifts. 

7  Urge  Aryaman  to  send   us  gifts,   and   Indra,   and 

Brihaspati, 
V4ta,   Vishnu,   Sarasvati,    and   the   strong  courser 
Savitar. 

8  Now  have  we  reached  the  ordering  of  power,  and  all 

these  worlds  of  life  are  held  within  it. 
Let  him  who  knows  urge  e'en  the  churl  to  bounty. 
Give  wealth  to  us  with  all  good  men  about  us. 

9  May  heaven's  five  spacious  regions  pour  their  milk 

for  me  with  all  their  might. 
May  I  obtain  each  wish  and  hope   formed  by  my 

spirit  and  my  heart. 
10  May   speech   that   winneth   cows    be   mine.      With 

splendour  mount  thou  over  me. 
May  Vdyu  hedge  me  round  about.     May  PAshan 

make  me  prosperous. 

6  In  assembly :  or,  when  they  meet  rw ;  that  is,  in  ordinary  inter- 
course. 

7  Sarasvati :  a  female  divinity  of  the  upper  region,  guardian  of  the 
waters,  and  bestower  of  fertility ;  identified  also  with  Ykk  the  God- 
dess of  Speech. 

8  The  first  hemistich  appears  to  be  entirely  out  of  place  here.  *  The 
verse  in  the  Yajus-ritual  belongs  to  the  so-named  vlljaprasaviy&ni, 
which  form  the  kernel  of  the  Vajapeya-sacrifice,  the  name  of  which, 
in  opposition  to  the  explanation  given  in  the  Brahma;ia  itself,  appeare 
to  me  to  mean  Protection  of  Power  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  ceremony  ap- 
pointed for  the  samraj  [lord  paramount,  or  sovereign].' — Weber* 

9  Five  spaciotis  regions  :  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the 
zenith  or  the  nadir.  Milk :  blessings. 

10  Cows :  usually  presented  to  priests  by  princes  and  wealthy  insti- 
tutors  of  sacrifice.  With  splendour :  or,  with  power ;  addressed  to  the 
Sun,  the  hymn  being  recited  at  simrise. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYUN  21.]  THE  ATBARYA^VBDA.  113 

HYMN  XXI. 

All  Fires  that  are  in  water  and  in  Vritra,  all  those 
that  man  and  stones  contain  within  them, 

That  which  hath  entered  herbs  and  trees  and  bushes — 
to  all  these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered. 

2  That  which  abides  in  Soma  and  in  cattle,  that  which 

lies  deep  in  birds  and  sylvan  creatures. 
That  which  hath  entered  quadrupeds  and  bipeds — to 
all  these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered. 

3  The  Fire  that  rideth  by  the  side  of  Indra,  the  God 

Vaiflv&nara,  yea,  all-consuming, 
Whom,   as  the  victor,    I  invoke  in  battles — to   all 
these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered. 

4  The    all-devouring    God    whom    men    call    K&ma, 

he  whom  they  call  the  Giver  and  Receiver, 
Invincible,  pervading,  wise,  and  mighty — to  all  these 
Fires  be  this  oblation  offered. 

The  hymn,  in  honour  of  all  varieties  of  Fire,  is  especially  a  charm  to 
appease  Agni  in  his  most  dreaded  form,  and  to  quench  the  flames  of 
the  funeral  pile. 

1  In  water  and  in  Vritra :  existing  in  the  fonn  of  lightning  in  the 
waters  of  the  air  and  in  the  Dragon  or  great  dragonish  cloud  which, 
personified  as  the  demon  of  drought,  withholds  the  seasonable  rain. 
Man :  contains  fire  in  the  shape  of  the  internal  heat  which  is  said  to 
effect  the  digestion  of  his  food,  and  as  the  natural  vital  warmth  of  the 
bodj.  Stones :  contain  fire  which  may  be  struck  out  in  sparks.  Herbe 
and  trees  and  bushes :  Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning  enters  all  plants 
with  the  descending  rain.  The  phosphorescence  of  some  species  of 
plants  may  also  be  referred  to. 

2  In  Soma  :  as  the  heating  element  of  the  exhilarating  beverage. 
In  caUU :  and  the  other  animals,  the  fire  is  the  natural  heat  of  their 
bodies  which  maintains  their  str^igth,  swiftness,  ferocity  and  other 
characteristic  qualities. 

3  That  rideth  by  the  side  of  Indra:  the  destructive  fire  of  war. 
Vaifvdnara  .*  Agni  as  God  of  all  Aryan  men,  peaceful  fire,  domestic 
and  sacrificial. 

4  Kdma :  God  gI  wish  and  desire  in  general,  including  love ;  the 
inspirer  and  fulfiller  of  the  wish.  See  III.  29.  7.  Here  he  is  identified 
with  Agni.    See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  Y.  p.  403. 

8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


114  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III. 

5  To  thee,  strength-giver^  glorious,   rich  in  pleasant 

strains,  whom  in  their  minds  the  thirteen  creatures 
of  the  world. 
And  the  five  sons  of  man  regard  as  Hotar-priest — 
to  all  these!  Fires  be  this  oblation  oflfered* 

6  To  him  who  feeds  on  ox  and  cow,  sage,  bearing 

Soma  on  his  back, 
To  all  Vaisvanara's  followers — to  these  be  this  obla- 
tion paid. 

7  All  fiery  flames  that  follow  after  lightning,  flashing 

o'er  earth,  through  firmament  and  heaven, 
All  that  are  in  the  wind  and  skyey   regions — to  all 
these  Fires  be  this  oblation  offered. 

8  The  golden-handed  Savitar  and   Indra,   Brihaspati, 

Varu^ia,  Mitra,  and  Agni, 
The  Angirases  we  call,  the  Visve  Devas :  let  them 
appease  this  Agni,  Flesh-devourer. 

5  Thirteen  creatures  of  the  world :  perhaps  all  creatures  exclusive  of 
men,  thirteen  being  used  for  a  large  indefinite  number.  Five  sons  of 
man  :  the  eponymi  of  the  five  great  Aryan  tribes  and  their  descendants; 
the  five  races,  tribes,  or  peoples  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Bigveda ; 
probably  the  confederation  of  the  Turva§as,  Yadus,  Aniis,  Druhyus, 
and  P^rus.  See  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General  Index  TI.  under  Five 
races. 

6  Who  feeds  on  ox  and  cow:  vkshdhndya  vasdnndya:  the  first 
hemistich  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Kigveda  VIII.  43.  11,  where 
I  have  translated  these  words  by  '  fed  like  ox  and  cow,'  a  possible 
rendering  which  I  do  not  now  approve.  Sacrifice  of  oxen  and  barren 
cows  was  not  xmusual  in  old  Vedic  times.  Bearing  Soma  on  his  back  : 
sprinkled  with  libations  of  Soma  juice.  Vaisvdnara^s  followers  :  varie- 
ties of  fire,  of  which  Vaisvinara  is  chief. 

8  According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra,  with  the  recitation  of  this  stanza 
the  funeral  fire  is  damped  with  holy  water  and  extinguished.  The 
preceding  stanzas  are  merely  introductoxy  to  the  practical  part 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  22.)  THE  ATHARVAVBDA.  115 

9  Flesh-eating  Agni  is  appeased,   appeased  is  he  who 
hurteth  men. 
Now  him  who  burneth  every  thing,  the  Flesh-con- 
8umer>  have  I  stilled. 
10  The  mountains  where  the  Soma  grows,  the  waters 
lying  calm  and  still, 
Vdta,  Parjanya,  Agni'fe  self  have   made  the  Flesh- 
consumer  rest. 

HYMN  XXII. 

Famed  be  the  Elephant's  strength,  the  lofty  glory, 
which  out  of  Aditi's  body  took  existence  1 

They  all  have  given  me  this  for  my  possession,  even 
all  the  Gods  and  Aditi  accordant. 

2  On  this  have  Mitra,  Varuija,  Indra,  and  Rudra  fixed 

their  thought. 
May  those  alUfostering  deities  anoint  and  balm  me 
with  his  strength. 

3  The  strength  wherewith  the  Elephant  was  dowered, 

that  decks  a  King  among  the  men,  in  waters, 
"Wherewith  the  Gods  at  first  attained  to  godhead, 
O  Agni,  even  with  that  strength  make  thou  me 
vigorous  to*day. 

10  Agn^B  ulfi  the  fire  having  done  its  work  and  almost  burnt  itself 
out,  y&ta  and  Parjanya,  or  wind  and  rain,  having  aided  its  extinction. 


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  taming  and  training  of  an  elephant 
for  the  King  to  ride. 

1  Aditi's  body :  Aditi,  who  appears  in  the  Kigveda  as  mother  of  the 
Aditjas,  is  in  later  times  called  Mother  of  the  Gods  and  Mother  of  the 
World.  All  the  Oodt :  *  Without  the  help  of  all  the  Gods  and  the  con- 
sent of  Aditi  it  would  be  impossible  to  tame  so  powerful  an  animal/ — 
Weber.     The  King  is  the  speaker. 

2  Hts  strength :  the  might  of  the  elephant,  tamed  with  the  help  of 
the  Gods. 

3  In  waters :  when  he  is  sprinkled  with  the  water  of  consecration. 
Attained  to  godhead :  Agni  alone  was  originally  immortal,  and  the 
other  Gods  obtained  immortality  through  him  or  through  Soma.  See 
RigveJa  V.  3.  4 ;  VI.  7.  4;  IX.  106.  8. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


11«  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III 

4  The  lofty  strength  which  sacrifice  brings,  J&tavedas  I 

unto  thee, 
What  strength  the  Sun  possesses,  all  strength  of  the 
royal  Elephant — such   strength  vouchsafe  to  me 
the  pair  of  Asvins  lotus-gfarlanded ! 

5  Far  as  the  heavens'  four  regions  spread,  far  as  the 

eye's  most  distant  ken. 
So  wide,  so  vast  let  power  be  mine,  this  vigour  of 
the  Elephant. 

6  Now  hath  the  Elephant  become  chief  of  all  pleasant 

beasts  to  ride. 
With  his  high  fortune  and  his  strength  I  grace  and 
consecrate  myself. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

From  thee  we  banish  and  expel  the  cause  of  thy 

sterility. 
This  in  another  place  we  lay  apart  from  thee  and 

far  removed. 

2  As  arrow  to  the  quiver,  so  let  a  male  embryo  enter 
thee. 
Then  from  thy  side   be   born  a   babe,  a  ten-month 
child,  thy  hero  son. 

5  Far  as  the  heavens*  four  regions  spread :  let  the  possession  of  so 
mighty  an  elephant  make  me  supreme  ruler  over  all  around  me  as  far 
as  the  distant  horizon. 

The  hymn  has  been  tr^islated  by  Ludwig^  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  461. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  remove  sterility,  and  to  assure  the  birth  of 
male  children. 

2  Js  arrow  to  the  quiver:  according  to  the  KausikarSdtra  an  arrow 
is  to  be  used  in  the  ceremony  which  the  hymn  is  to  accompany. 

A  ten-month  child :  bom  in  the  tenth  lunar  month ;  cf .  l^igveda  V. 

78.  8,  9.     So  also :  *  Matri  longa  decern  tulerunt  fastidia  menses.' 

Virgil,  JEclogue  IV.  61. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BrMJir^i.]  THE  ATHARVA'YBDA.  IIT 

3  Bring  forth  a  male,  bring  forth  a  son.  Another  male 

shall  follow  hinu 
The  mother  shalt  thou  be  of  sons  born  and  hereafter 
to  be  born. 

4  With  that  auspicious  genial  flow  wherewith  steers 

propagate  their  kind, 
Do  thou  obtain  thyself  a  sou :  be  thou  a  fruitful 
mother-cow, 

5  I  give  thee  power  to  bear  a  child :  within  thee  pass 

the  germ  of  life  1 
Obtain  a  son,  O  woman,  who  shall  be  a  blessing  unta 
thee.     Be  thou  a  blessing  unto  him. 

6  May  those   celestial   herbs  whose  sire  was  Heaven,. 

the  Earth  their  mother,  and  their  root  the  ocean, 
May  those  celestial  healing  Plants  assist  thee   \s> 
obtain  a  son. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

Thk  {dants  of  earth  are  rich  in  milk,  and  rich  in  milk 
is  this  my  word. 

So  from  the  rich  in  milk  I  bring  thousandfold  pro- 
fit hitberward. 
2  Him  who  is  rich  in  milk  I  know.     Abundant  hath 
be  made  our  corn. 

The  Grod  whose  name  is  Gatherer,  him  we  invoke 
who  dwelleth  in  bis  house  who  sacrifices  not 

S  Tht  ocean  :  the  sea  of  air.  CeUstial  herb$^:  See  Rigveda  X.  97.  A 
9on :  '  Nowhere  in  the  Vedic  hymns  do  we  find  a  wish  for  the  birth  of 
a  daughter.' — Zimmer. 

The  hjnm  has  been  translated  bj  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  477,  and 
by  Zimmer,  Altindischea  Leben,  p.  31dw 

The  hynm  is  a  song  d  Hanrest-Home. 

1  Milk :  here  used  in  ita  figurative  sense  of  beneficial  yirtue  or 
blessing.     Word:  or,  hymn. 

2  Bim  who  t$  rich  in  milk :  that  is,  in  beneficial  power ;  probably  a 
gbod-natured  domestic  sprite  of  the  dass  '  called  with  us  bobgoblins  or 


Digitized  by 


Google 


118  THB  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  HI. 

3  All  the  five  regions  of  the  heavens,  all  the  five  races 

of  mankind, — 
As  after  rain  the  stream  brings  drift,  let  them  bring 
increase  hitherward. 

4  Open  the  well  with  hundred  streams,  exhaustless, 

with  a  thousand  streams. 
So  cause  this  corn  of  ours  to  be  exhaustless,   with  a 
thousand  streams. 

5  O  Hundred-handed,  gather  up.     O  Thousand-hand- 

ed, pour  thou  forth. 
Bring,  hither  increase  of  the  corn  prepared   and  yet 
to  be  prepared. 

6  Three  sheaves  are  the  Gandharvas'  claim,  the  lady  of 

the  house  hath  four. 
We   touch   thee   with   the   sheaf  that   is  the  most 
abundant  of  them  all. 


Robin  Goodfellows,  that  would  in  those  superstitious  times  grind  com 
for  a  mess  of  milk,  cut  wood,  or  do  any  manner  of  drudgery  work  * 
(Burton's  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  Part  I.  Sec.  2).  Atharva-veda  II.  8, 
5.  The  God:  the  superhuman  bemg,  the  goblin.  So  Du  Cange  explains 
the  Low  Latin  gobelinus  by  a^' daemon  qui  vulgo  Faunus'  who  was  re- 
garded as  the  protecting  deity  of  agriculture.  Who  dwelleth :  who  is 
at  present  in  the  house  of  a  godless  illiberal  churl  whom  he  will  be 
glad  to  leave. 

3  Five  regiofu  :  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the  zenith  or 
the  nadir.  Five  races  of  mankind :  the  five,  that  is,  all,  the  great 
Aryan  tribes.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  120,  121.  Ac* 
cording  to  Prof.  Roth  and  Prof.  Weber,  the  expression  comprehends 
all  human  races,  the  Aryans  in  the  centre  and  around  them  all  the 
nations  imder  the  four  quarters  of  heaven. 

4  The  well :  figuratively  or  symbolically ;  the  source  of  plenty. 

5  Hundred-handed  ;  .  .  .  Thousand-handed :  two  drudging 
goblins  are  addressed. 

6  Three  sheaves  of  com  are  to  be  left  on  the  ground  to  remunerate 
the  goblins  who  are  here  euphemistically  called  Gandharvas,  a  higher 
and  more  spiritual  class  of  celestial  beings  ;  four  are  the  special  per- 
quisite of  the  mistress ;  and  the  best  sheaf  of  all  is  offered  as  a  sample 
to  the  owner  of  the  field.  I  adopt  Weber's  translation  of  rndtrd^ 
sheaves,  the  word  literally  signifying  measures.  Of  course  the  grain 
ijrould  not  be  measured  at  the  beginning  of  harvest,  * 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTJfy  25.1  TSlt  ATBARrA^VEDA.  119 

7  Adding  and   Gathering  are  thy  two    attendantsy 
O  Praj&pati. 
May  they  bring  hither  increase,  wealth  abandant, 
inexhaustible. 

HYMN  XXV. 

^     Let  the  Impeller  goad  thee  on.     Rest  not  in  peace 
upon  thy  bed. 
Terrible  is  the  shaft  of  Love:  therewith    I  pierqe 
thee  to  the  heart. 

2  That  arrow  winged  with  longing  thought,  its  stem 
Desire,  its  neck  Resolve, 
Let   K&ma,   having   truly   aimed,   shoot  forth  and 
pierce  thee  in  the  heart. 

'  3  The  shaft  of  K&ma,  pointed  well,  that  withers  and 
consumes  the  spleen. 
With  hasty  feathers,  all  aglow,  therewith   I  pierce 
thee  to  the  heart. 


7  Adding  and  Gathering:  Upoh^  and  Samiihi,  names  given  to 
the  two  industrious  goblins.  Attendant^  or  treasurers  \  keepers  an^ 
distributors  of  thy  riches  in  the  shape  of  com.  0  Prajdpati :  the 
Protector  of  Life  being  closely  connected  with  the  harvest  which  sup- 
ports it. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  p.  268. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  win  a  maiden's  love. 

1  Impeller :  or,  Disturber ;  Kama,  the  God  of  Love,  who  is  also 
called,  among  other  names,  Madana,  the  Maddener,  and  Manmatha, 
Agitator  of  the  Mind.  Weber  and  Zimmer  translate  uttuelds  by 
*Unruhe,'  'unrest,'  'agitation.' 

2  The  spleen :  regarded,  with  the  liver,  as  the  part  of  the  body  from 
which  the  blood  flows,  and  the  seat  of  the  passions  and  affections. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts, 
V.  407;  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  516;  by  Zimmer,  Altindis* 
ches  Leben,  p.  307 ;  and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  53,  115. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


120  THE  B7MNS  OF  [BOOK  ML 

4  Pierced  through  with  fiercely-burning  heat,  steal  to 

me  with  thy  parching  lips, 
Gentle   and   humble,   all   mine  own,  devoted,  with 
sweet  words  of  love. 

5  Away  from  mother  and  from  sire  I  drive  thee  hither 

with  a  whip, 
That  thou  mayst  be  at  my  command  and  yield  to 
every  wish  of  mine. 

6  Mitra  and  Varu^a,  expel  all  thought  and  purpose 

from  her  heart. 
Deprive   her   of  her  own   free-will  and   make  her 
subject  unto  me. 

HYMN  XXVL 

Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  eastward  regioq, 
entitled  Weapons,  Agni  forms  your  arrows. 

Be  kind  and  gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us.  To  you 
be  reverence,  to  you  be  welcome ! 

2  Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  southward  region, 

entitled  Eager,  K4ma  forms  your  arrows. 
Be  kind,  etc. 

3  Ye  Gods  who  dwel^  within  this  westward    region, 

whose  name  is  Hadiant,  Water  forms  your  arrows. 
Be  kind,  etc. 

4  Ye  Gods  who  dwell  within  this  northward  region, 

whose  name  is  Piercers,  V^ta  forms  your  arrows. 
Be  kind,  etc. 

5  Yc  Gods  whose  home  is  in  this  firm-set    region— 

Nilimpas  is  your  name — Plants  are  your  arrows. 
Be  kind,  etc. 

The  hymn,  which  is  closely  connected  with  hymn  XX VI I,  is  a 
charm  to  win  the  favour  of  the  Sei-pents  of  all  the  regions  under 
heaven. 

1  Gods  :  the  Serpents  are  addressed  as  powerful  superhuman  beinj^s. 
Weapons:  or,  Heti.  Agni  forms  your  arrmvs:  or,  your  arrows  are  fire. 

5  This  fii^m-set  region:  the  point  directly  under  the  feet,  opposite 
to  the  zenith.     Nilimpas :  perhaps,  smearers,  lickcrs  (of  themselves). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MTM^  Sr.]  TEE  ATHJiRVA-VEDA.  121 

6  Ye   Gods  nebose  hoDie  is   in  this   upmost  region, 
Yearn  ers  by  name,  Bfihaspati  forms  your  arrows. 
Be  kind  and  gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us.      To  you 
be  reverence,  to  you  be  welcome  1 

HYMN   XXVIL 

AoNi  is  regent  of  the  East,  its  warder  is  Asita,  the 

Adityas  are  the  arrows. 
Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warders,  and 

to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship ! 
Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and 

whom  we  hate. 

2  Indra  is  regent  of  the  South,  its  warder  Tiraschir&ji, 

and  the  shafts  the  Fathers. 
Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warders, 

and  to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship ! 
Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and 

whom  we  hate. 

3  Of  the  West  region  Varu^a  is  ruler,  PridAku  warder, 

Nourishment  the  arrows. 
Worship,  etc. 

6  UpmoH  region :  the  highest  point  of  the  heaven  overhead,  the 
senith. 

The  Serpents  of  the  six  regions  having  been  conciliated  in  the  pre- 
ceding hymn,  the  regents,  warders,  and  arrows  of  those  regions  are 
duly  reverenced,  and  the  speaker's  enemy  is  solemnly  given  over  to 
the  Serpents  for  condign  punishment. 

1  Asita :  Black  Serpent. 

^  Of  the  South :  according  to  Manu  V.  96,  Tama  is  the  regent  of 
the  South.  The  distribution  of  the  regions  is  variously  given  by 
different  authorities.  See  Atharva-veda  1.  31.  1,  note.  Tiraachir^/i  : 
the  Serpent  with  transverse  streaks.  The  Fathers:  Manes,  or 
Ancestral  Spirits. 

3  Ppddku :  Adder  or  Viper ;  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva- 
veda.    See  1. 27.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


122  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  in. 

4  Soma  is   ruler  of  the   Western  region,  Svaja  the 

warder,  lightning's  flash  the  arrows. 
Worship,  etc. 

5  Vishnu  is  ruler  of  the  firm-set  region,  Kalm&shagrlva 

warder,  Plants  the  arrow& 
Worship,  etc. 

6  Brihaspati  controls  the  topmost  region,   Svitra  is 

warder,  and  the  Rain  the  arrows. 
Worship  to  these  the  regents,  these  the  warderSi 

and  to  the  arrows,  yea,  to  these  be  worship  t 
Within  your  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hateth  us  and 

whom  we  hate. 

HYMN  XXVIIL 

This  cow  was  born  to  bring  forth  offspring  singly, 
though  they  created  kine  of  every  colour. 

When  she  produces  twins  in  spite  of  Order,  sullen, 
with  groan  and  grudge  she  harms  the  cattle. 

i  Svaja:  a  variety  of  Viper.    See  V.  14.  10,  and  VI.  66.  2. 

5  Firm-set  region :  the  nadir.  See  III.  26.  5«  KalvUUhagriva : 
Spotty-neck. 

6  Topmost  region :  the  zenith.  Svitra :  White  Serpent ;  an  un- 
identified species. 

Professor  Weber  remarks  that  mo  ritual  procedure  is  prescribed  in 
the  Kau8ika-S4tra  for  this  and  the  preceding  hymn ;  and  suggests 
that  they  may  have  found  their  way  into  the  text  after  the  oompod* 
tion  of  that  work. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  change  the  ill-omened  birth  of  twin  calves 
into  a  blessing. 

1  They :  the  text  has  bh^takritah  (Risldft  regarded  as  creators  of 
beings),  which  is  metrically  superfluous  and  almost  certainly  a  gloss. 
Cows  were  created  of  many  colours,  but  were  intended  to  produce 
only  one  calf  at  a  birth.  When  twins  are  bom,  a  charm  is  necessaiy 
to  avert  the  ill  omen;  and  the  Kauaika-Sdtra  prescribes  an  appropriate 
ceremony,  ending  with  the  bestowal  of  the  peccant  cow  on  ^e  priest. 
A  somewhat  similar  ceremony  is  prescribed  in  the  same  Ritual  when 
a  woman  presents  her  husband  with  twins.  In  this  case  also,  it  seems,, 
the  mother  becomes  the  property  of  the  priest.  The  same  supersti- 
tion is  found  at  the  present  time  in  uncivilized  parts  of  Africa. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EJUS  28.]  TEB  ATHARVA-VEDA.  123 

2  She   brings  destruction  on  the  beasts^  turned  to  a 

flesh-devouring  worm. 
Yea,  give  her  to  the  Brahman  that  she  may  bring 
luck  and  happiness. 

3  Be  thou  auspicious  to  our  folk,  bring  luck  to  horses 

and  to  kine. 
Auspicious  unto  all  this  farm,  bring  luck  and  hap- 
piness to  us. 

4  Let  there  be  rain  and  increase  here,  here  be  thou 

most  munificent. 
Mother  of  twins,  prosper  our  herd. 

5  Where,  having  left  all  sickness  of  their  bodies,  the 

pious  lead,  as  friends,  their  lives  of  gladness — 
Nigh  to  that  world    approached    the  twin  calves' 
mother.    Let  her  not  harm  our  people  and  our 
cattle. 

6  Where  lies  the  world  of  those  dear  friends,  the  pious, 

those  who  have  brought  due  sacrifice  to  Agni — 
Nigh   to   that  world   approached   the   twin  calves' 
mother.     Let  her  not  harm   our  people   and   our 
cattle. 


At  Lutsd,  in  MaBhonaland,  *  if  a  woman  gives  birth  to  twins,  they  are 
immediately  destroyed.  This  they  consider  an  unnatiu^  freak  on  the 
part  of  a  woman,  and  it  is  supposed  to  indicate  famine  or  some  other 
calamity'  (The  Ruined  Cities  of  Mashonaland,  by  T.  Bent,  p.  276). 

3  Farm :  kskdlrdya ;  literally,  field. 

5  Nigk  to  that  world:  the  home  of  the  Departed.  Weber  sees 
here  a  play  on  the  words  yamint,  the  twin  calves'  mother,  and  Yam4 
(understood)  the  King  of  the  Dead.  The  meaning  is  that  the  cow 
nearly  died  in  giving  birth  to  her  offspring.  Now,  as  she  has  been 
bestowed  upon  the  priest  she  will  be  a  blessing  to  us  instead  of  a  cauia 
of  calamity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


124  THE  HYMSS  OF  {BOOK  III. 

HYMN  XXIX. 

When  yonder  kings  who  sit  beside  Yama  divide 
among  themselves  the  sixteenth  part  of  hopes 
fulfilled, 

A  ram  bestowed  as  sacrifice,  white-footed,  frees  us 
from  the  tax. 

2  He  satisfies  each  hope  and  want,  prevailing,  present 

and  prepared. 
The  wish-fulfilling  ram,  bestowed,  white-footed,  is 
exhaustless  still. 

3  He  who  bestows  a  white-hooved  ram,  adequate  to 

the  place  he  holds. 
Ascends  to  the  celestial  height,  the  heaven  where 
tribute  is  not   paid  to  one  more  mighty  by  the 
weak. 

4  He  who  bestows  a  white-hooved   ram,  adequate  to 

the  place  he  holds. 
Offered  with  five  cakes,  lives  on  that,  unwasting,   in 
the  Fathers'  world. 

5  He  who  bestows  a  white-hooved  ram,  adequate  to 

the  place  he  holds. 
Offered  with   five  cakes,  lives  on  that,  wasteless, 
while  Sun  and  Moon  endure. 


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  immunity  from  taxation  in  the  next 
world  to  be  purchased  by  the  performance  of  a  certain  sacrifice  on 
earth. 

1  New-comers  into  the  next  world  have  to  pay  one-sixteenth  of  their 
hopes  fulfilled,  that  is,  the  reward  of  their  good  works  on  earth,  to  the 
assessors  of  Yama  the  King  of  the  Departed ;  but,  if  they  choose,  they 
can  compound  for  this  tax  before  they  go  thiUier. 

2  Prevailing :  the  ram,  like  the  bull,  is  an  emblem  of  strength. 
Indra  himself  is  frequently  called  the  Ram  in  the  Rigveda.  Adequate 
to  the  place  he  holds :  '  equivsdent  to  the  place  in  heaven  which  is  as- 
signed to  Uie  giver.' — Weber. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  80.1  THE  ATHARtA-VEDA.  125 

6  Like   a  refreshing   draught,   like   sea,   the  mighty 

flood,  he  faileth  not. 
Like  the  two  Gods  whose  home  is  one,  the  ram 
white-footed,  faileth  not. 

7  Whose   gift   was  this,  and  given  to  whom  ?     K&ma 

to  KAma  gave  the  gift. 
K&ma  is  giver,  K&ma  is  receiver.  K&raa  hath  passed 

into  the  sea. 
Through  K&raa  do  I  take  thee  to  myself.     O  KAma, 

this  is  thine« 

8  May  Earth  receive  thee  as  her  own,  and  this  great 

interspace  of  air. 
Neither  in  breath  and  body  nor  in  progeny  may  this 
acceptance  do  me  harm. 

HYMN  XXX. 
Freedom  from  hate   I   bring  to  you,    concord   and 

unanimity. 
Love  one  another  as  the  cow  loveth  the  calf  that  she 

hath  borne. 

6  Two  Gods  whose  home  is  one :  the  ABvins. 

7  Edma  to  Edma  gives  the  gift :  K&ma,  Desire,  represents  both  the 
performer  of  the  sacrifice,  who  desires  a  commensurate  return,  and  the 
God  who  desires  to  receive  it.  *  The  infinity  of  these  mutual  desires 
is  represented  by  the  immensity  of  the  sea  in  the  last  pdda/ — ^Weber. 
Through  Edma :  through,  or  in  consequence  of  the  giver's  desire  the 
priest  accepts  the  victim  for  the  God. 

8  This  staHza  is  addressed  to  the  worshipper  by  the  priest  who  hints 
at  the  risk  which  he  himself  runs  in  accepting  for  the  God  an  offering 
which  may  not  give  satisfaction,  and  at  the  gratitude  which  his  medi- 
ation deserves.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  XVII.  pp.  305,  306 ; 
and  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  p.  403. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  375. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  or  oharm  to  secure  love  and  concord  in  a  family. 

1  The  cow :  aghnyd^;  explained  by  the  Conmientators  as  •  not  to  be 
killed ;  *  by  the  St  Petersburg  Dictionary  as  *  not^  or  hardly,  to  be 
conquered  or  overcome;'  but  derived  by  Weber  from  ahan^  day> 
•  bright-coloured,'  like  usroy  vsrd^  ttsriya,  us7-iyd,  steer,  cow,  ray,  mom- 
ing-light,  bri^tness.  Both  in  the  Veda  and  in  classical  Sanskrit 
poetry  the  cow  is  the  stock  example  of  strong  natural  affection ;  vatsa^ 
calf,  meaning  also  *  darling '  in  general.  See  III.  13.  7. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


13e  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  III 

2  One-minded  with  his  mother  let  the  son  be  loyal   to 

his  sire. 
Let  the  wife,  calm  and  gentle,  speak  words  sweet  as 
honey  to  her  lord. 

3  No  brother  hate  his  brother,  no  sister  to  sister  be 

unkind 
Unanimous,  with  one  intent,  speak  ye  your  speech 
in  friendliness. 

4  That  spell  through  which  Gods  sever  not,  nor  ever 

bear  each  other  hate, 
That  spell  we  lay  upon  your  home,  a  bond  of  union 
for  the  men. 

5  Intelligent,  submissive,  rest  united,  friendly  and  kind, 

bearing  the  yoke  together. 
Come,  speaking  sweetly  each  one  to  the  other,     I 
make  you  one-intentioned  and  one-minded. 

6  Let  what  you  drink,  your  share  of  food  be  common : 

together,  with  one  common  bond  I  bind  you. 
Serve  Agni,  gathered   round   him   like   the   spokes 
about  the  chariot  nave. 

7  With  binding  charm  I  make  you  all  united,  obeying 

one  sole  leader  and  one-minded. 
Even  as  the  Gods  who  watch  and  guard  the  Amrit, 
at  morn  and  eve  may  ye  be  kindly-hearted 


6  Band :  or,  strap ;  the  thong  with  which  the  yoke  is  fastened. 

7  The  Amrit :  the  precious  nectar ;  or,  immortality.  *  Das  Got- 
tliche.* — ^Weber. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  516 ; 
and,  with  annotations  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  30,  116.  Muir 
has  translated  stanzas  1 — 4  in  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  439,  and  Zimmer  iu 
Altindisches  Leben,  p.  316. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMir  81]  TRB  ATHARTA^TEDA.  12» 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Mat  Gods  release  from  failing  strength,  thou  Agni, 

from  malignity ! 
I  free  from  every  evil,  from  decline  :    I  compass 

round  with  life. 

2  Ma^  Favam&na  free  from  harm,  and  Sakra  from  un- 

righteous deed. 
I  free  from  every  evil,  from  decline :    I   compass 
round  with  life. 

3  Tame  beasts  have  parted   from  wild  beasts,   water 

and  thirst  have  gone  apart. 
I  free,  etc. 

4  Farted  are  heaven  and  earth,  and  paths  turned  to 

each  quarter  of  the  sky. 
I  free,  etc. 

5  Tvashtar  prepares  the  bridal  of  his  daughter ;  then 

all  this  world  of  life  departs  and  leaves  him. 
I  free,  etc. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  recoyexy  of  a  person  who  is  danger- 
ouslj  ill. 

1  Decline:  ydkihrna;  emaciating  disease,  phthisis,  or  pulmonary 
consumption. 

2  Pavamdna:  the  deified  Soma,  as  it  flows  through  the  purifying  filter. 
See  Bigveda  or  S&maveda  Index.    Scikra :  the  Mighty  One ;  Indra. 

3  In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  the  speaker  gives  instances 
of  thorough  separation  illustrative  of  the  thorough  removal  of  the  sick 
man's  disease  which  the  charm  is  to  effect.  Tame  animals  have  been 
reclaimed  and  thoroughly  separated  from  their  wild  congeners;  heaven 
and  earth,  originally  in  close  juxtaposition,  have  been  separated  and 
for  ever  propped  apart  (Rigveda  VI.  8.  3;  VIII.  83.  11);  Tvashtar 
and  the  world  of  life  to  which  he  gave  form  have  been  parted  ;  and  so 
shall  it  be  with  the  sufferer  and  his  disease. 

5  The  Rigveda,  X.  17.  1,  has  the  first  hemistich  of  this  stanza  with 
an  important  variation,  sdm  eti,  *  comes  together,'  instead  of  vi  ydii^ 
'  goes  apart,'  *  departs  and  leaves  htm,'  Tvashtar,  who  is  often  regarded 
as  the  chief  agent  in  natural  phenomena  and  the  creator  of  the  first 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1J8  THE  ATBARfA'VaDA.  [BOOK  111 

6  Agni  combines  the  vital  airs.     The  Moon  is  closely 

joined  with  breathe 
I  free,  etc* 

7  The  Gk)ds  have  lifted  np  with  breath  the  Sun  whose 

might  is  everywhere* 
I  free,  etc 

8  Die  not.    Live  with  the  breath  of  those  who  make 

and  who  enjoy  long  life. 
I  free,  etc. 

9  Die  not.     Stay  here.     Breathe  with  the  breath  of 

those  who  draw  the  vital  air. 
I  free,  etc. 

10  Rise  up  with  life,  conjoined  with  life,     Up„  with  the 

sap  of  growing  plants  I 
I  free,  etc. 

11  We  as  immortal  beings  have  arisen  with  Parjanya's 

rain. 
I  free  from  every  evil,   from  decline  :    I  compass 
round  with  life. 


forms  of  life,  appears  here  to  be  identified  with  Praj&pati,  the  Lord  of 
Creation,  and  to  have  prepared  to  marry  his  own  daughter,  which  pro- 
ceeding shocked  and  alienated  the  whole  world.  '  Prajipati,  the  liord 
of  Creation,'  says  Kum&rila,  *  is  a  name  of  the  sun,  and  he  is  called 
80  because  he  protects  all  creatures  His  daughter  Ushas  is  the  dawn. 
And  when  it  is  said  that  he  was  in  love  with  her,  this  only  means  that 
at  sunrise,  the  sun  runs  after  the  dawn,  the  dawn  being  at  the  same 
time  called  the  daughter  of  the  sun,  because  she  rises  when  he  ap- 
proaches.' See  M.  Mailer's  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
pp.  529,  530.  The  legend  of  Praj&pati  and  his  daughter  is  related  in 
Rigveda  X.  61.  5 — 8.  See  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  IV.  pp. 
46,  47.  Prof.  Weber  gives,  as  usual,  ample  information,  regarding  the 
passage  in  the  text^  in  Indische  Studien  XVIL  pp.  310 — 313. 

6  *  As  stanzas  1 — 5  have  separation  from  evil  and  consumption  for 
their  subject,  so  stanzas  6 — 10  are  concerned  with  conjunction  with 
vital  power  especially  with  the  breath  of  life.' — Weber. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  IV. 


HYMN  L 

Eastward  at  first  the  prayer  was  generated :  Vena 
disclosed  bright  flashes  from  the  summit, 

Disclosed  his  deepest,  nearest  revelations,  womb  of 
the  non-existent  and  existent. 

2  Let  this  Queen  come  in  front,  her  Father's  daughter, 
found  in  the  worlds  for  earliest  generation. 
For  him  they  set  this  radiant  vault  in  motion.     Let 
them  prepare  warm  milk  for  him  who  first  would 
drink. 

This  introductory  hymn  is  a  hrahmodyam  or  enunciation  in  design- 
edly enigmatioal  language  of  oosmogonical  and  mystico-theological 
doctrine. 

1  Prayer  originated  in  the  eastern  heaven :  when  Vena  (see  II.  1.1), 
the  early  Sun,  first  rose  in  his  glory  he  poured  fortli  the  type  of  hu- 
man prayer,  his  morning  song  of  joy  and  praise.  The  Sun  is  first-bom 
of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  his  birth  is  the  type  of  all  subsequent  gene- 
ration. Non-^xUtent :  what  does  not  yet  exist,  but  possesses  the  possi- 
bility of  future  existence. 

2  TkU  Queen :  Y^k,  Speech  personified,  the  Word,  the  first  creation 
and  representative  of  Spirit,  and  the  means  of  communication  between 
men  and  Qods :  of.  '  I  am  the  Queen : '  Bigveda  X.  125.  3.  Her  Fatker^i 
daughter :  sprung  from  Spirit.  For  earliest  generation :  in  Bigveda  X. 
125,  7,  8  V&k  is  represented  as  saying  that  she  brings  forth  the  Father, 
Uiat  is.  Heaven  the  father  of  all  things,  and  that  she  holds  together  all 
existence.  Similarly,  the  Logos,  the  Word  '  was  in  the  beginning,'  and 
*  all  things  were  mad6>by  him.* — St.  John,  1. 1 .  For  him :  for  Heaven,  the 
deity  distinct  from  the  material  sky.  They :  the  hk&iahritas  or  creators 
of  beings:  see  III.  28.  1.  Warm  milk:  the  gharma  or  libation  of  heated 
milk,  especially  offered  to  the  Asvins.  Would  drink:  Prof.  Ludwig 
derives  dhdsydve  here  from  dhd:  'to  him  who  first  wished  to  create.^ 

9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


130  THE  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV. 

3  He  who  was  born  as  his  all-knowing  kinsman  de- 

clareth  all  the  deities'  generations. 
He  from  the  midst  of  prayer  his  prayer  hath  taken. 
On  high,  below,  spread  forth  his  godlike  nature. 

4  For  he,  true  to  the  law  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  esta- 

blished both  the  mighty  worlds  securely. 
Mighty  when  born,  he  propped  apart  the  mighty, 
the  sky,  our  earthly  home,  and  air's  mid-region. 

5  He  from  the  depth  hath  been  reborn  for  ever,  Bri- 

haspati  the  world's  sole  Lord  and  Ruler. 
From  light  was  born  the  Day  with  all  its  lustre: 
through  this  let  sages  live  endowed  with  splendour. 

6  The  sage  and  poet  verily  advanceth  the  statute  of 

that  mighty  God  primeval. 
He  was  born  here  with  many  more  beside  him  :  they 
slumbered  when  the  foremost  side  was  opened. 


3  H%$  all-knowing  kinsman :  Jitavedas,  the  omniscient  Agni,  sprung 
like  other  Gods  from  Heaven  and  £arth.  From  the  midst  of  prayer : 
Agni,  identified  here  with  Brihaspati,  has  learnt  prayer  or  devotion 
from  the  original  prayer  mentioned  in  stanza  1. 

4  He  propped  apart  the  mighty  :  heaven  and  earth  were  originally 
in  close  juxtaposition.  Agni  is  here  (as  in  Bigveda  I.  67.  3)  said  to 
have  separated  them  and  fixed  them  in  their  present  position.  This 
action  is  also  ascribed  to  Indra  (Rigveda  X.  89.  4 ;  113.  5)  ;  to  Yaruna 
(VII.  86.);  to  Soma  (IX.  101.  15),  and  to  other  deities  in  other  pas- 
sages of  the  Rigveda.  This  old  surviving  nature-myth  of  the  original 
union  and  subsequent  forcible  separation  of  Heaven  and  Earth  is  found 
in  Greece,  China,  and  New  Zealand,  as  well  as  in  India.  See  Custom 
and  Myth : — *  The  Myth  of  Cronus.' 

6  From  the  depth :  of  the  ocean  of  air,  from  the  womb  of  the  cloud 
in  the  shape  of  lightning.    Bfihaspati :  identified  with  Agni. 

6  They  slumbered :  all  the  rest  fell  asleep,  showed  no  energy,  aa 
soon  as  they  were  bom :  the  sage  (meaning  perhaps  the  Sun)  alone 
remained  awake  and  full  of  active  power. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  2.]  TBS  ATHARVA-VEDA.  131 

7  The  man  who  seeks  the  friend  of  Gods,  Atharvan  the 
father,  and  Brihaspati,  with  worship, 
Crying  to  him,  Be  thou  all  things'  creator  I  the  wise 
God,  self-dependent,  never  injures. 

HYMN  II. 

Giver  of  breath,   giver  of   strength    and    vigour, 

he  whose  commandment  all  the  Gods  acknowledge, 
He  who  is  Lord  of  this,  of  man   and   cattle  : — What 

God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 
2  Who  by  his  grandeur  hath  become  sole  ruler  of  all 

the  moving  world  that  breathes  and  slumbers. 
Whose  shade  is  death,  whose  lustre  makes  immortal : — 

What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 


7  Atharvan :  the  ancient  priest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first 
who  obtamed  fire,  now  associated  with  the  Gods  in  heaven.  The  wise 
Gad:  Agni.  Skilled  in  all  lore  is  Agui,  he  whom  erst  Atharvan  brought 
to  life  (9igveda  X.  21.  5). 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  393. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Bigveda  X.  121 
an  address  to  The  Unknown  God. 

1  Of  this :  worli,  or  creation.  WTiat  God :  hdsmai  dtvdya  ;  cui  deo 
Ka,  kah,  (quis)  Who  1  that  is,  the  Unknown  God,  has  been  applied  by 
Indian  Commentators  as  a  name  to  Praj^pati  and  to  other  Gods  by  a 
forced  interpretation  of  the  interrogative  pronoun  which  recurs  in  the 
refrain  of  each  verse  of  the  hymn :  Worship  we  Ka  the  God  with  our 
oblation. 

2  WhoM  Itutre  makeB  immortal:  or,  whose  shade  is  life  eternal. 
*  Whose  shadow  is  immortality,  whose  shadow  is  death.' — M.  Mailer. 
(7AA4y<f  means  both  'shadow'  and  'reflected  light,'  *  lustre.'  If  both 
senses  of  the  word  are  intended  here  the  meaning  might  be  :  Whose 
cold  shadow  (his  displeasure,  or  ignorance  of  him)  is  death,  while  the 
knowledge  of  his  bright  glory  makes  his  worshipper  immortal.  See  M. 
M.  7'hat  breathes  and  slumben :  that  is,  both  of  Gods  and  men. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


132  THE  MYMFS  OF  {BOOK  17. 

3  To  wliom  both  hosts  embattled)  look  with  longing, 

and  Heaven  and  E^rth  invoke  him  in  their  terror; 
Whose  is  this  path  that  measures  out  the  region : — 
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

4  Whose  is  the  mighty  earth  and  spacious  heaven,  and 

yonder  ample  firmament  between  them. 
Whose   is  yon   Sun    extended  in  his  grandeur: — 
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

5  Whose,  through  his  might,  are  all  the  Snowy  Moun- 

tains, and  whose,  they  say  is  £as4  in  the  ocean, 
The  arms  of  whom  are   these  celestial  quarters: — 
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

6  The  deathless  Waters,  born  in  Law,  receiving,  pro- 

tected all  the  germ  in  the  beginning, — 
Waters   divine    who  had   the   God   above  them : — 
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation ! 

7  In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  even  at  his 

birth  sole  Lord  of  all  creation. 
He  fixt  and  firmly  stablished  earth  and  heaven:-^ 
What  Gi>d  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation? 


3  The  region :  mid-air. 

5  Basd  in  ike  ocean :  a  m3^thical  river  in  the  sea  of  air  flowing  roand 
earth  and  atmosphere. 

6  Bom  in  Law :  produced  in  aooordance  with  fitd^  the  fixed  Order 
of  the  Universe.  The  reference  is,  not  to  the  waters  of  the  clouds 
released  by  Indra,  but  to  the  unfathomed  depths  of  water  that  preceded 
distinct  creation,  when  *  the  earth  was  wiUiout  form  and  void ;  and 
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved 
upon  the  face  of  the  waters.' — Genesis,  I.  2,  3. 

7  This  is  stanza  1  of  the  Rigveda  hymn.  Hircmyagetrbha :  literally 
<  the  gold-germ/  Hhe  source  of  golden  light,'  the  Sun-God  'as  the 
great  power  of  the  universe,  from  which  all  other  powers  and  exis> 
tencee,  divine  and  earthly,  are  derived,  a  conception  which  is  the 
nearest  approach  to  the  later  mystical  conception  of  Brahmft,  th« 
creator  of  the  world.'-^Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Veda,  p.  50. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BrAtir^.y  tbb  atharvaveda.  153 

8  In  the  beginning,  generating  offspring,  the  Waters 
brought  an  embryo  into  being  ; 
And  even  as  it  siNrang  to  life  it  bad  a  covering  of  gold. 

HYMN  IIL 

Three  have  gone  hence  and  passed  away,  the  man, 
the  tiger,  and  the  wolf. 

Down,  verily,  the  rivers  flow,  down  goeth  the  celes- 
tial Tree,  down  let  our  foea>en  bend  and  bow. 

2  On  distant  pathway  go  the  wolf,  on  pathway  most 
remote  the  thief  I 
On   a   far   road   speed   forth  the  rope   with  teeth, 
and  the  malicious  man ! 

8  This  ttausa  »  not  in  the  Rigveda.  Tk$  embryo  which  had  a  covers 
ing  of  gold  is  the  Sun. 

The  whole  hymn  should  be  compared  with  the  Rigveda  hymn  as 
translated  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Prof.  Max  Milller  in  his  His- 
tory of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  {>.  569,  and,  later,  in  Vedic  Hymns, 
Part  I.  pp.  1 — 13.  The  Bigveda  hymn  has  also  been  translated  and 
discussed  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  pp.  16—18;  by  Mr.  Wallis,  Cos- 
mology of  the  Rigveda,  p.  50  sqq.,  Kod  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from 
the  Rigveda.  It  is,  of  course,  also  to  be  found  in  all  complete  trans- 
lations of  the  Rigveda. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  tigers,  wolves,  thieves,  and  other 
noxious  creatures. 

1  Have  gone  hence:  proleptically ;  the  anticipated  result  of  the 
charm  being  regarded  as  actually  obtained.  The  mam:  my  human 
enemy ;  the  thief.  Tke  tiger  :  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Atharva- 
veda,  but  apparently  unknown  to  the  seers  of  the  Rigveda.  Doton  goeth 
the  ceUitial  Tree :  the  meaning  is  not  clear,  and  the  p^a,  which  is 
metrically  superfluous,  may  be  an  interpolation.  Perhiips,  as  Prof. 
Ludwig  suggests,  the  reference  may  be  to  the  Tree  which  Varuna 
'  sustains  erect  in  the  baseless  region '  (Rigveda  I.  24.  7),  the  World- 
Tree  or  Tree  of  Life  of  the  ancient  myth,  whose  roots  grow  downward 
from  heaven. 

2  Tke  rope  ttnth  teeth :  the  serpent.  An  Arabic  proverb  says  :  He 
who  has  been  bitten  by  a  serpent  dreads  a  bit  of  rope. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


134  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV.  i 


I 


3  We  crush  and  rend  to  pieces  both  thine  eyes,  O  Tiger, 

and  thy  jaws,  and  all  thy  twenty  claws  we  break. 

4  We  break  and  rend  the  tiger  first  of  creatures  that 

are  armed  with  teeth  ; 
The  robber  then,  and  then  the  snake,  the  sorcerer, 
and  then  the  wolf. 

5  The  thief  who  cometh  near  to-day  departeth  bruised 

and  crushed  to  bits. 
By  nearest  way  let  him  be  gone.     Let  Indra  slay 
him  with  his  bolt. 

6  Let  the  beast's  teeth   be   broken  off,  shivered  and 

shattered  be  his  ribs  1 
Slack  be  thy  bowstring :  downward  go  the  wild  beast 
that  pursues  the  hare  1 

7  Open  not  what  thou  hast  compressed,  close  not  what 

thou  hast  not  compressed. 
Indra  s  and  Soma's  child,  thou  art  Atharvan's  tiger- 
crushing  charm. 

HYMN  IV. 

We  dig  thee  from  the  earth,  the  Plant  which  streng* 

thens  and  exalts  the  nerves, 
The  Plant  which   the   Gandharva   dug  for  Varuqa 

whose  power  was  lost. 

6  Slack  he  thy  bowstring :  a  figurative  expression  for :  may  thy 
power  of  striking  thy  prey  be  enfeebled.  Tkt  wild  beast :  not  the  tiger, 
but  some  smaller  rapacious  animal. 

7  The  first  hemistich  is  addressed  to  the  animal :  If  thy  mouth  is 
shut,  open  it  not ;  if  it  is  open  to  attack  thy  prey  do  not  (bite  and) 
dose  it.  Cf.  VI.  56.  1.;  X.  4.  8.  The  second  hemistich  is  addressed  to 
the  amulet  or  charm  which  is  to  crush  the  tiger.  Indra'a  and  Soma*$ 
child :  probably  some  poisonous  herb,  deriving  its  growth  from  Soma 
the  King  of  Plants  and  its  destructive  power  from  the  mightiest  God 
Indra.  The  tiger-crushing  charm  owes  its  origin  to  the  ancient  fire- 
priest  Atharvan,  as  other  charms  are  ascribed  to  the  Risbis  Agastya, 
Asita,  Gaya,  and  Jamadagni.     See  I.  14.  4 ;  II.  32.  3, 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  restore  virile  power. 

1    Whose  power  vhxs  lost :  the  legend  referred  to  is  not  traceable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  6.]  TBR  ATBARVA-VEDA.  135 

2  Let  Ushas  and  let  Sdrya  rise^  let  this  the  speech 
I  utter  rise. 
Let  the  strong  male  Fraj&pati  arise  with  manly 
energy. 

HYMN  V. 

Thb  Bull  who  hath  a  thousand  horns,  who  rises  up 

from  out  the  sea, — 
By  bira  the  strong  and  mighty  onie  we  lull  the  folk 

to  rest  and  sleep. 

2  Over  the  surface  of  the  earth  there  breathes  no  wind^ 
there  looks  no  eye. 
Lull  all  the  wt>men,  lull  the  dogs  ta  sleep,,  with 
Indra  as  tby  friend! 

&  The   women  sleeping  in  the  eourt,^  lying  without^ 
or  stretched  on  beds, 
The    matrons   with    their    odorous    sweets — these,, 
one  and  aK,.  we  lull  to  sleepv 

4  Eiach  nK>ving' thing  hare  I  secured,  have  held  and 
hold  the  eye  and  breath. 
Each  limb  and  member   have  I  seized  ia  the   deep, 
darkness  of  the  night. 

2  Prajdpati:  Lord  of  Life ;  the  Qod  who  presides. o^er  procreatioiiL 
For  the  six  remaining  stanzas  see  Appendix* 

The  hymn  is  the  lullaby  oi*  sleep-charm:  of  a  Ibver  who  fs  secretlj 
visiting  his  love^ 

1  This  stanza,  and  stanzas  3^,  5,  6  are  taften*  fi:om  Bigreda  YII.  5.  T, 
8,  6,  5.  The  Bull  who  hath  a  thousand  horns :  the  sun  with  his  count- 
less racys  of  lights  whose  setting  brings  the  time  of  rest  an^slieep ;  or 
perhaps  the  starry  heaven,  as-  Grassmann  translates,  is  intended  ;  or, 
according  to  Aufrecht,  the  moon,  fn  Bigveda  I.  154.  6,  the  'many^ 
homed  and  restless  oxen  **  appear  to^  be-  the  stars  with  their  ever 
twinkling  rays,  which  supports  Grassmann's  interpretation. 

2  With  Indra  as  thy  frimd:  the  speaker  addt^sses  the  soporific  plant 
•r  other  chann,  strengthened  by  Indra,  which  he  carries  with  him. 

2t  With  iksir  odorous  sweets :  wearing  garlands  ol  fragrant  flowers.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IM  THE  BYMFS  OF  {BOOK  IK 

5  The  man  who  sits,  the  man  who  walks,  whoever  etaacls 

and  clearly  sees — 
Of  these  we  closely  shut  the  eyes,  even  as  we  closely 
shut  this  house. 

6  Sleep    mother,    let  the    father    sleep,    sleep    dog, 

and  master  of  the  home. 
Let  all  her  kinsmen  sleep,  sleep  all  the  people  who 
are  round  about. 

7  With  soporific  charm,  O  Sleep,  lull  thou  to  slumber 

all  the  folk. 
Let  the  rest  sleep  till   break  of  day,  I  will  remain 
awake  till  dawn,  like  Indra  free  from  scath  and 
harm. 

HYMN  VL 

The  Br&hman  first  was  brought  to  life  ten-headed 

and  with  faces  ten. 
First  drinker  of  the  Soma,  he  made  poison  ineffectual. 
2  Far  as  the  heavens  and  earth  are  spread  in  compass, 

far  as  the  Seven  Rivers  are  extended, 
So  far  my  spell,  the  antidote  of  poison,  have  I  spoken 

hence. 

6  Her :  asyai  here  =  atyds.     This  pronoun  which  is  the  clue  to  the' 
purpose  of  the  charm  is  not  found  in  the  corresponding  stansa  of  the 
Bigveda  hymn,  the  last  four  verses  (5,  6,  7,  8)  of  whidi  are^  according 
to  Sajana,  to  be  recited  by  thieves  and  house-breakers  in  pursuit  of 
plunder. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Aufrecht  in  Indischd^ 
Studien  IV.  pp.  340  sqq.,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  51,  118. 

The  hymn  is  a  (diarm  to  make  a  poisoned  arrow  harmless. 

1  Br&hmans  are  from  their  birth  endowed  with  extraordinary  and 
superhuman  powers  and  privileges. 

2  Sevm  Biver$ :  according  to  Prof.  Max  MiUler,  the  Indus,  the  five 
rivers  of  the  Panj&b  (Vitastil,  Asikn!,  Parusb^i,  Vip&i,  ^utudri)  and 
the  Sarasvatt.  Lassen  and  Ludwig  put  the  Kubh&  in  the  place  of  the 
last-named.  See  Zimmer,  Altindiscbes  Leben,  pp.  3  sqq.  Sofwr: 
reaching  so  far. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMJr  6.]  THn  ATHARVA'VEDA.  187 

.3  The  Btrong-winged   Bird   QarutmAn  first  of  all,  O 
Poison,  fed  on  thee  : 
Thou  didat  not  grip^  or  make  him  drunk  :  aye,  thou 
becamest  food  for  him. 

4  Whoever  with  five  fingers  hath  discharged  thee  from 

the  crooked  bow, 
I  from  the  shaft  have  charmed  away  the  poison  of 
the  fastening  band. 

5  The  poison  have  I  charmed  away  from  shaft,  cement, 

and  feathered  end ; 
Yea,  from  the  barb,  the  neok,  the  horn,  the  poison 
have  I  charmed  away. 

6  Feeble,  O  Arrow,  is  thy  shaft,  thy  poison,  too,  hath 

lost  its  strength. 
Made  of  a  worthless  tree,  thy  bow,  O  feeble  one, 
is  impotent. 

7  The  men  who  brayed  it,  smeared  it  on,  they   who 

discharged  it,  sent  it  forth. 
All  these  are  made  emasculate,  emasculate  the  poison- 
hill. 


3  &€N^9iutt»  .*  the  celestial  Bird ;  the  Sun,  who  is  considered  as  es- 
pecially instrumental  in  counteracting  the  effects  of  poison.  See  Big- 
Teda  I.  191.  10.  There  is  probablj  a  play  on  the  ifox^B  garutmdn  and 
gj^  to  swallow, 

4  The  fastening  band:  which  keeps  the  arrow-head  in  position. 

5  Cemmi :  or,  perhaps,  paint  The  kom :  arrows  appear  to  have 
been  <^  two  kinds,  one,  the  older  and  less  efieotive,  tipped  with  deer's 
horn,  and  the  other  pointed  with  ajtaB^  bronse  or  iron.  Poiscmed  arrows, 
mentioned  with  approbation  in  the  Rigveda  (VL  75, 15),  were  forbidden 
to  Kshatriyas  by  the  Lftws  of  Manu,  that  is,  the  ideal  Code  of  the 
Minavas. 

7  Who  brayed  it:  pounded  the  leaves  and  stem  of  the  plant  and  pro- 
pared  the  poison.  The  poiion^iU :  the  mountain  where  the  plant  gxew. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


138  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

8  Thy  diggers  are  emasculate,   emasculate^  O  Plant, 
art  thou. 
The  rugged  mountain  that  produced  this  poison  ia 
emasculate. 

HYMN  VII. 

So  may  this  water  guard  us  on  the  bank  of  VarapdvatL 
Therein  hath  Amrit  been  infused  :  with  that  I  ward 
thy  poison  off. 

2  Weak  is  the  poison  of  the  East,  weak  is  the  poisoa 

of  the  North, 
So  too  this  poison  of  the  South  counts  as  a  cake  of 
curds  and  meal. 

3  When  he  hath  made  of  thee  a  cake^  broad,  steaming,. 

swelling  up  with  fat, 
And  even  in  hunger  eaten  thee,  then  gripe  him  not,, 
thou  hideous  one ! 

4  Intoxicaterl  like  a  shaft  we  make  thy  spirit  fly  away,. 
Like  a  pot  boiling  on  the  fire,  we  with  our  word 

remove  thee  hence. 

8  0  Plant :  the  name  of  the  plant  from  which  the  poison  was  ex- 
tracted is  not  given.  Many  of  the  wild  races  who  inhabit  the  hill» 
and  forests  of  India  poison  the  arrows  with  which  they  kill  tigers  and 
other  beasts  of  prey,  and  they  appear  to  be  acquainted  with  many 
jungle  plants  which  serve  their  purpose. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Dor  Rigveda,  III.  p.  51  !L 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  make  a  poisonous  plant  innocuous. 

1  In  the  first  hemistich  there  is  a  play  on  the  words  v6tr^  water, 
vdraydtadf  ward  off,  or  guard,  and  varandvatydm,  the  locative  case  ot 
varandvatt,  which  appears  to  be  the  name  of  some  river  or  lake  on- 
whose  banks  the  Varana  (Crataeva  Roxburghii),  a  plant  used  in  medi- 
cine and  supposed  to  possess  magical  virtues,  grows  abundantly.  The 
poisonous  plant  was,  it  seems,  washed  in  the  water  of  the  river  and. 
then  boiled. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7M!^  8.]  THE  ATHARVA-7EDA.  139 

5  We  set  arouDd  thee  with  the  spell  as  'twere  a  gather- 

ed armament. 
Stay  quiet  like  a  rooted  tree.  Dug  up  with  mattocks, 
gripe  not  thou. 

6  For  coverings  men  have  bartered  thee,  for  skins  of 

deer  and  woven  cloths. 
Thou  art  a  thing  of  sale,  O  Plant.     Dug  up  with 
mattocks,  gripe  not  thou ! 

7  None  have   attained   to   those   of  old,   those   who 

wrought  holy  acts  for  you. 
Let   them   not   harm    our   heroes  here.     Therefore 
I  set  before  you  this. 

HYMN  VIII. 

The  Being  lays  the  sap  of  life  in  beings :  he  hatl^ 
become  the  sovran  Lord  of  creatures. 

Death  comes  to  this  man's  royal  consecration: 
let  him  as  King  own  and  allow  this  kingdom. 

2  Come    forward,    turn    not   back   in   scorn,    strong 
guardian,  slayer  of  thy  foes. 
Approach,  O  gladdeuer  of  thy  friends.     The  Gods 
have  blessed  and  strengthened  thee. 

5  A  gathered  armament :  the  spell  aots  like  a  body  of  soldiers  encom- 
passing the  plant  and  preventing  it  from  doing  harm. 

6  For  coverings :  pavdstats  ;  in  Bigveda  X.  27.  7,  the  word  in  the 
dual  means  the  *  two  eanopies,'  heaven  and  earth. 

7  This  stanza,  recurring  in  V.   6.  2,  has  no  meaning  here,  and  ia 
evidently  an  interpolation* 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  201; 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Himdert  Lieder,  pp.  28,  121. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  pronounced  at  the  consecration  of  a  King. 

1  The  Being  :  the  Divine  Being,  meaning  here  the  Creator. '  Royal 
consecration :  the  Rlijas^a  was  a  great  sacrifice  or  religious  ceremony 
performed  at  the  coronation  of  a  supreme  sovereign  by  the  King  him-, 
self  and  his  tributary  princes.  Mrityu  or  the  God  of  Death  shows  bis 
approval  by  attending  the  inauguration  of  the  new  King. 

2  The  King  is  addressed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


140  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It. 

3  All  waited  on  him  as  he  came  to  meet  them.     He 

self-respIeDdent  moves  endued  with  glory. 
That  is  the  royal  hero's  lofty  nature :  be,  manifold, 
bath  gained  immortal  powers. 

4  Stride  forth  to  heaven's  broad  regions,  thou,  a  tiger 

on  a  tiger's  skin. 
Let  all  the  people  long  for  thee.      Let  heavenly 
floods  be  rich  in  milk. 

5  Heaven's  waters  joyous  in  their  milk,  the  waters  of 

middle  air,  and  those  that  earth  containeth — 
I  with  the  gathered  power  and  might  of  dX\  these 
waters  sprinkle  thee. 

6  The  heavenly  waters  rich  in  milk  have  sprinkled  thee 

yrxih  power  and  might 
To  be  the  gladdener  of  thy  friends.  May  Savitar  so 
fashion  thee. 

7  These,  compassing  the  tiger,  rouse  the  lion  to  great 

joy  and  bliss. 
As  strong  floods  purify  the  standing  ocean,  so  men 
adorn  the  leopard  in  the  waters. 


4  A  tiger :  the  type,  in  the  Atiianra^veda,  of  haraio  strength  and 
courage.  A  tiger^$  $kin:  stepping  on  a  tiger's  skin,  symbolical  of 
assuming  regal  powers,  was  an  important  part  of  the  ceremony. 

5  Jiilk :  the  blessings  which  they  pour  down, 

6  Savitar :  the  Sun  as  the  great  vivifier  and  promoter  of  all  growth. 

7  Theu:  the  priests  who  conduct  the  ceremony.  The  tiger  .  ,  .  the 
lion  .  .  ,  the  Uopard:  the  strong  and  valiant  King.  In  the  waier$ : 
with  which  he  is  sprinkled  in  the  Abhisheka  or  Sprinkling  Ceremony 
wherewith  the  King  is  consecrated. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  458; 
and  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  213. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BY  UN  «.]  THB  A  THAR  VA-  7EDA.  141 

HYMN  IX. 

Approach  !  thou  art  the  mountain's  eye,  the  living 

thing  that  saveth  us ; 
A  gift  bestowed  by  all  the  Gods,  yea,  the  defence 

that  guardeth  life. 

2  Thou  art  the  safeguard  of  the  men,  thou  art  the  safe- 

guard of  the  kine, 
Thou  standest  ready  to  protect  the  horses  that  are 
fleet  of  foot. 

3  Thou,  also.  Salve !    art    a    defence  that  rends  and 

crushes  sorcerers. 
Thou  knowest,  too,  of  Amrit,  thou  art  the  delight  of 
all  who  live,  a  jaundice-curing  balm  art  thou. 

4  Whomso   thou   creepest   over,   Salve !    member  by 

member,  joint  by  joint, 
From  him,  like  some  strong  arbiter  of  strife,  thou 
banishest  decline. 

5  No  imprecation  reaches  him,  no  magic,  no  torment- 

ing fiend, 
0  Salve,  Vishkandha  seizes  not  the  man  who  carries 
thee  about. 

6  From  lying  speech,  from  evil  dream,  from  wicked  act 

and  sinfulness. 
From     hostile    and    malignant     eye, --from    these, 
0  Salve,  protect  us  well. 

The  hymn  is  a  ohann,  addressed  to  a  precious  Ointment,  for  pro- 
tection from  all  sorts  of  evil  and  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth. 

1  Sy€ :  the  precious  treasure.  Instead  of  dksham  of  the  text,  which 
mars  the  metre,  several  MSS.  have  ak$hyam  »  akthiam,  *  belonging  to 
the  eye,'  'the  hilFs  eye-salve;'  but,  as  Dr.  Grill  observes,  such  a 
limitation  is  inconsistent  with  the  powers  attributed  to  the  ointment, 
and  it  would  be  better  to  read  akahaydm  or  alcakardn^  '  the  imperishable 
treasure.' 

3  Jaundiee-euring  halm :  haritahhe^hajdm  ;  see  I.  22. 

4  Decline :  the  emaciating  disease  called  Yakshma :  see  II.  10.  5 ;  33. 

5  Viikkandha:  rheumatism;  see  I.  16.  3. 

6  Malignant  tye :  see  II.  7.  5. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


142  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

7  I,  knowing  this,  O  Salve,  will  speak  the  very  truth 

and  not  a  He  : 
May  I  obtain  both  horse  and  ox,  may  I  obtain  thy 
life,  O  man. 

8  Three  are  the  slaves  that  serve  the  Salve,  Fever, 

Consumption,  and  the  Snake. 
Thy  father  is  the  loftiest  of  mountains,  named  the 
Triple -peaked. 

9  Sprung  from  the  Snowy  Mountain's  side,  this  Oint- 

ment of  the  Three-peaked  hill 

Crushes  and  rends  all  sorcerers  and  every  witch  and 
sorceress. 
10  If  thou  art  from  the  Three-peaked  hill  or  hast  thy 
name  from  Yamun^ 

These  names  are  both  auspicious  :  by  these  two  pro- 
tect thou  us,  O  Salve  ! 

HYMN  X. 

Child  of  the  wind  and  firmament,  sprung  from  the 

lightning  and  the  light, 
May  this  the  gold-born  Shell  that  bears  the  pearl 

preserve  us  from  distress. 

7  The  second  hemistich,  which  seems  out  of  place  here,  is  taken, 
with  a  variation,  from  Rigveda  X.  97.  4  :  *  Steed,  cow,  and  garment 
may  I  gain,  win  back  thy  vital  breath,  0  man : '  that  is,  May  1  restore 
thee  to  life,  and  receive  a  horse,  etc.,  as  my  fee  for  curing  yon. 

8  Fever :  see  I.  25.  2.  Consumption  :  btildsah  :  apparently  a  kind  of 
pakshma  ;  a  wasting  disease  ;  consumptive  expectoration  :  see  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  p.  385.  Triple-peaked :  trikakUd  ;  a  high  mountain 
in  the  Himsilaya ;  the  modem  Trikiita :  see  Zimmer  A.  I.  L.  p.  30. 

-  10  Yamund :  the  river  Jamuna,  commonly  called  Jnmna,  regarded 
in  mythology  as  the  twin  sister  of  Yama.  Both  ati8piciou$:  both 
mountain  and  river  beinjj  endowed  with  special  sanctity. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  507  ; 
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Uundert  Lieder,  pp.  35,  123. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  accompanying  investiture  with  a  protective 
amulet  of  shell. 

1  As  is  usual  in  addresses  to  amulets,  the  origin  of  the  shell  is  glori- 
fied.    It  was  produced  from  the  rain  that  fell  into  the  sea  from  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  10.1  THE  ATHARV4VEDA.  143 

2  Shell  that  wast  born  from  out  the  sea,   set  at  the 

head  of  things  that  shine  ! 
With   thee  we   slay  the   R&kshasas  and  overcome 
voracious  fiends. 

3  We  stay  disease  and  indigence,  and  chase  Saddnvds 

with  the  Shell 
May  the  a!l-healing  Shell  that  bears  the  pearl  pre- 
serve us  from  distress. 

4  Bom  in  the  heaven,  sprung  from  the  sea,  brought  to 

us  hither  from  the  flood, 
This  gold-born  Shell  shall   be   to   us  an  amulet  to 
lengthen  life. 

5  From  ocean  sprang  the  Amulet,  from  Vritra  sprang 

the  Lord  of  Day  : 
May  this  protect  us  round  about  from  shaft  of  God 

and  Asura. 
€  Peerless  'mid  golden  ornaments  art  thou  :  from  Soma 

wast  thou  born.  . 
Thou  gleamest  on  the  quiver,  thou  art  beautiful  upon 

the  car :  may  it  prolong  our  days  of  life ! 


windy  sky,  and  the  iridescent  hues  of  its  lining  came  from  the  bright 
flashes  of  the  lightning.  Gold-bom :  golden,  or  excellent  by  nature. 
Somewhat  similar  is  the  belief  mentioned  by  Dioscorides  and  Pliny 
that  pearls  are  formed  by  drops  of  rain  falling  into  the  oyster-shells 
when  open.  The  Persians  also  say  that  drops  of  spring  rain  falling 
into  the  pearl-oyster  turn  into  precious  pearls. 

3  Saddnvda:  troublesome  noisy  pests:  see  II.  14.  1. 

4  From  the  flood:  tindhutds  ;  or,  from  Sindhu,  the  Indus. 

5  From  Vfitra  sprang  the  Lord  of  Day :  as  the  Sun  shone  out  when 
Vritra,  the  huge  cloud,  was  shattered,  so  the  shell  with  its  bright  trea- 
sure sprang  from  the  dark  depths  of  the  sea.     Asvira  :  hostile  demon. 

6  From  Soma  wait  thou  bom  :  indirectly ;  libations  of  Soma  juice 
cause  the  rain  to  fall,  and  the  rain  produces  the  shell.  On  the  car : 
in  the  Bigveda  the  chariot  of  the  Sun  is  decked  with  pearl  (I.  35.  4) ; 
and  horses'  trappings  are  sometimes  adorned  with  it  (VII.  18.  23,  and 
X.  68.  11).  May  it  prolong :  this  abrupt  change  of  the  personal  pro- 
noun is  not  uncommon  in  the  Veda. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


U*  THE  BtitSS  6P'  [BOOK  if. 

7  Bone  of  the  Gods  became  the  pearl's  shell-mother : 
endowed  with  soul  it  moveth  in  the  waters. 
I  bind  this  on  thee  for  life,   strength,  and  vigour, 
for  long  life  lasting  through  a  hundred  autumns. 
May  the  pearl's  mot  her  keep  and  guard  thee  safely ! 

HYMN  XL 

The  Bull  supports  the  wide-spread  earth  and  heaven. 

The  Bull  supports  the  spacious  air  between  them. 
The  Bull  suppoi*ts  the  sky  s  six  spacious  regions  :  the 

universal  world  hath  he  pervaaed. 

2  The  Bull  is  Indra:  o'er  the  beasts  he  watches.     He, 

Sakra,  measures  out  three  several  pathw^ays. 
He,  milking  out  the  worlds,  the  past,   the   future, 
discharges  all  the  Goods'  eternal  duties. 

3  Being  produced  among  mankind  as  Indra,  the  Caldron 

works  heated  and  brightly  glowing. 
[  Let  him  not,  with  good  sons,  pass  off  in  vapour  who 
hath  not  eaten  of  the  Ox  with  knowledge. 

7  Bone  of  the  Gods :  another  fanciful  origin  of  the  shell  containing 
the  pearl  or,  rather,  the  mother^f-pearl  or  nacre. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Lodwig,  Der  Rigreda,  III.  p.  463 , 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  36,  124. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  Qharma  or  Caldron  in  which  the 
libation  of  hot  milk,  offered  especially  to  the  Asrins,  is  prepared. 

1  Six  spacioue  rtgtotu  :  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the 
lenith  and  the  nadir. 

2  ffer  the  beaste :  in  the  most  extended  sense  of  the  word,  meaning 
perhaps  all  animals.  Sakra :  or  mighty ;  a  common  epithet  or  i^pel- 
lation  of  Indra.  Three  several  pathways :  to  earth,  firmament,  and 
h^^hest  heaven. 

Z  As  Indra :  the  Caldron  is  symbolically  called  Indra  on  account  of 
the  extraordinary  efficacy  of  the  libation  which  is  prepared  in  it.  With 
good  sons :  supr<{fds  ;  Ludwig  reads  stqnxi^,  *  an  able  goer.'  The  Ox : 
or  Bull ;  here  meaning  the  Caldron  or  its  contents.  The  hemistich  it 
unintelligible  to  me. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UXMJff  n.]  THE  ATHARYA'VEDA,  U6 

4  The  Ox  pours  milk  out  in  the  world  of  virtue  :  in 

earliest  time,  he,  Pavamdna,  swells  it. 
Parjanya  is  the  stream,  Maruts  his  udder,  sacrifice 
is  the  milk,  the  meed  his  milking. 

5  That  which  not  sacrifice  nor  sacrificer,  not  giver  nor 

receiver  rules  and  governs, 
All-winning,  all-supporting,   all-effecting, — which  of 
all  quadrupeds,  tell  us  !  is  the  Caldron  ? 

6  May  we,  fame  seekers,  reach  the  world  of  virtue  by 

service  of  the  Gharma  and  through  fervour. 
Whereby  the  Gods  went  up  to  heaven,  the  centre  of 
life  eternal,  having  left  the  body. 

7  Praj&pati,  supreme  and  sovran  ruler,  Indra  by  form 

and  by  his  shoulder  Agni, 
Came   to   Visv&nara,   came    to   all   men's   Bullock  : 
he  firmly  fortified  and  held  securely. 

8  The  middle  of  the  Bullock's  neck,  there  where  the 

shoulder-bar  is  placed. 
Extends  as  far  to  east  of  him  as  that  is  settled  to  the 
west. 


4  TJie  Ox :  the  Caldron.  Pavamdna :  the  deified  Soma  juice  as  it 
passes  through  the  purifying  filter.  Parjanya :  the  deity  of  the  rain- 
cloud.  See  I.  2.  1.  The  meed :  the  honorarium  given  to  the  oflficiating 
priests,  by  the  institutor  of  a  sacrifice.  The  word  (ddkshind)  means 
primarily  a  good  cow,  the  original  sacrificial  fee. 

5  Of  all  quadrupeds :  the  Caldron  had,  perhaps,  four  short  legs  to 
support  it  when  placed  on  the  ground.  The  answer  to  the  question 
is,  the  ox. 

6  Service  of  the  Gharma  :  the  Pravai^a  ceremony,  in  which  the 
Gharma  or  heated  libation  was  oiFered  to  the  Gods.  Through  fervour  : 
tdpaad  ;  through  ardent  religious  devotion.  The  Gods  are  said  in  other 
passages  to  have  obtained  their  immortality  through  Agni  or  Soma. 
See  Rigveda  V.  3.  4;  VI.  7.  4 ;  VII.  13.  2 ;  IX.  106.  8. 

7  Shoulder :  his  power  of  bearing  ;  Agni  being  the  general  bearer  of 
oblations  to  the  Gods.     Visvdnara  :  the  benefactor  of  all  men.    * 

10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


146  TBE  ETMm  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

'9  He  whosoever  knows  the  seven  exhaustless  pourings 
of  the  Ox, 
Wins  himself  offspring  and   the  world:    the  great 
Seven  Rishis  know  this  well. 

10  With  feet  subduing  weariness,  with  legs  extracting 

freshening  drau^ts, 
Through  toil  the  plougher  and  the  Ox  approach  the 
honeyed  beverage. 

11  Assigned  are  these  twelve  nights,  they  say,  as  holy 

to  Prajftpati  : 
Whoever  knows  their  proper  prayer  performs  the 
service  of  the  Ox. 

12  At  evening  he  is  milked,  is  milked  at  early  morn, 

is  milked  at  noon. 
We  know  that  streams  of  milk  that  flow  from  him  are 
inexhaustible. 

HYMN  XIL 

Thou  art  the  healer,  making  whole,  the  healer  of  the 

broken  bone  : 
Make  thou  this  whole,  Arundhati ! 

9  Pourings  of  the  Ox :  meaning,  apparently,  the  libations  poured 
from  the  Caldron,  and  the  consequent  blessings.  Seven  RUkU  :  Qotama, 
Bharadvllja,  Viavamitra,  Jamadagni,  Vasishtha,  Kasyapa,  and  Atri, 
^tecording  to  the  Satapatha-Br&hma^.  Other  names  are  given  by 
•other  authorities. 

10  The  plougher  and  the  Ox :  the  priest  and  the  caldron.     Honeyed 
leverage :  the  sweet  libation. 

12  Is  milked :  the  reference  is  to  the  three  daily  sacrifices. 

Stanzas  7 — 12  are  purposely  obscure,  and  cannot  be  intelligibly 
translated. 

The  first  six  stanzas  have  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V. 
pp.  399  and  361,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  534. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm,  addressed  to  a  Plant,  to  mend  a  broken  bone. 

1  The  healer :  rdhant;  literally,  causing  to  grow  (again).  Arundha- 
ti :  a  climbing  plant,  not  identified  ;  probably  a  variety  of  Convolvu- 
lus or  bindweed  which  is  to  bind  fast  the  injured  limb  as  it  binds  the 
tree  round  which  it  grows. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMJf  13.]  THE  ATHASVA-rMDA.  U7 

2  Whatever  bone  of  thine  within  thy  body  hath  been 

wrenched  or  cracked, 

May  Dhatar  set  it  properly,  and  join  together  limb 
by  limb. 

3  With  marrow  be  thy  marrow  joined,  thy  limb  united 

with  the  limb. 

Let  what  hath  fallen  of  thy  flesh,  and  the  bone  also, 
grow  again. 

4  Let  marrow  close  with  marrow,  let  skin  grow  united 

with  the  skin. 

Let  blood  and  bone  grow  strong  in  thee,  flesh  grow 
together  with  the  flesh. 

5  Join  thou  together  hair  with  hair,  join  thou  together 

skin  with  skin. 
Let  blood  and  bone  grow  strong  in  thee.     Unite  the 
broken  part,  O  Plant. 

6  Arise,  advance,  speed  forth:  the  car  hath  goodly 

fellies,  naves,  and  wheels. 
Stand  up  erect  upon  thy  feet. 

7  If  he  be  torn  and  shattered,  having  fallen  into  a  pit, 

or  a  cast  stone  have  struck  him. 
Let  the  skilled  leech  join  limb  with  limb,  as  'twere 
the  portions  of  a  car. 

HYMN  XIII. 

Gods,  raise  again  the  man  whom  ye,  0  Gods,  have 
humbled  and  brought  low. 

2  DhAtar :  the  God  who  ordains,  establishes,  fixes,  and  preserves. 

6  This  and  the  following  stanza  seem  to  be  out  of  place  here.  The 
tkUled  leech :  ribh^  ;  clever,  expert,  a  skilful  workman,  meaning  here 
a  surgeon.  Or  the  meaning  may  be :  Let  him  (the  God)  join  limb 
with  limb  as  joins  a  smith  the  portions  of  a  car. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  508  \ 
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  18,  125. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


148  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV, 

Ye  Gods,  restore  to  life  again,  him,  Gods !  who  hath 
committed  sin. 

2  Here  these  two  winds   are   blowing   far  as  Sindhu 

from  a  distant  land. 
May  one  breathe  energy  to  thee,  the  other  blow  thy 
fault  away. 

3  Hither,  O  Wind,   blow   healing   balm,   blow   every 

fault  away,  thou  Wind  ! 
For  thou  who  hast  all  medicine  comest  as  envoy  of 
the  Gods, 

4  May  the  Gods  keep  and  save  this  man,  the  Maruts' 

host  deliver  him. 
All  things  that  be  deliver  him  that  he  be  freed  from 
his  oflFence. 

5  I  am  come  nigh  to  thee  with  balms  to  give  thee  rest 

and  keep  thee  safe. 
I  bring  thee  mighty  strength,  I  drive  thy  wasting 
malady  away. 

6  Felicitous  is  this  my  hand,  yet  more  felicitous  is  this. 
This  hand  contains  all  healing  balms,  and  this  makes 

whole  with  gentle  touch. 

7  The  tongue  that  leads  the  voice  precedes.  Then  with 

our  tenfold-branching  hands. 
With  these  two  healers  of  disease,  we  stroke  thee 
with  a  soft  caress. 

The  hymn,  taken,  with  the  exception  of  stanzi^  6,  from  Rigveda  X. 
137,  is  a  charm  to  restore  a  sick  man  to  health. 

1  Who  hath  committed  $in :  sickness  being  regarded  as  the  conse- 
quence and  punishment  of  sin. 

2  Sindhu  :  the  Indus. 

4  Offence  :  and  consequent  disease. 

6   Wasting  malady  :  yakshma,  pulmonary  consumption. 

6  Taken  from  Eigveda  X.  60.  12.  More  felicitous  is  this:  my  other 
hand,  probably  the  ri2fht.  With  gentle  touch :  with  light  friction,  lay- 
ing-on  of  hands,  or  hypnotizing  passes. 

7  The  tongue :  the  charm  is  uttered  first,  and  then  the  hands  are 
used  to  relieve  the  sufibrer  and  to  restore  him  to  health. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1 


HYMN  14.]  THB  ATHARYA-YEDA.  149 

HYMN  XIV. 

The  Goat  was  verily  produced  from  Agni.    Through 

sorrow  he  beheld,  at  first,  his  father. 
Through  him  at  first  the  Gods  attained  to  godhead, 

and,  meet  for  sacrifices,  were  exalted. 

2  Bearing  in  hands  seethed  viands,  go  with  Agni  to 

the  cope  of  heaven. 
Reaching  the  sky  that  touches  heaven,  mix  with  the 
company  of  Gods. 

3  From  earth's  high  ridge  to  middle  air  I  mounted, 

and  from  mid-air  ascended  up  to  heaven. 
From  the  high  pitch  of  heaven's  cope  I  came  into  the 
world  of  light. 

4  Mounting  the  sky  they  look  not  round  ;  they  rise  to 

heaven  through  both  the  worlds. 
Sages  who  paid  the  sacrifice  that  pours  its  streams 
on  every  side. 

5  First  among  all  the  deities,  come  forward,  thou  who 

art  eye  of  Gods  and  men,  O  Agni. 
Imploring,  and  accordant  with  the  Bhrigus,  to  heaven 
in  safety  go  the  sacrificers ! 

The  hymn  is  an  accompaniment  to  a  sacrifice  of  a  he-goat. 

1  The  goat  as  a  favourite  sacrificial  victim  is  regarded  as  the  off- 
spring of  the  fire  that  consumes  him  and  which  therefore  he  looks  up- 
on with  sorrow.  In  Rigveda  I.  162.  4  the  goat  is  called  *  the  share  of 
Pdshan,'  that  is,  according  to  Siyana,  of  Agni ;  and  in  Rigveda  X. 
16.  4  Agni  is  addressed  with  the  words  *  Thy  portion  is  the  goat '  (dif- 
ferently rendered,  however,  by  Muir  and  other  scholars).  Through  him  : 
through  Agni. 

2  The  institutors  of  sacrifice  are  exhorted  to  win  their  Way  to  hea- 
ven by  the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies  on  earth. 

3  Middle  air :  antdriksham  ;  or,  sky.  Heaven :  divam  ;  above  the 
sky.  Heaven* s  cope :  divd  nakas  ;  a  region  still  higher  than  the  heaven. 
The  world  of  light :  warjydtis  ;  the  highest  realm  of  all ;  the  abode 
of  the  Sun ;  the  empyrean.  See  M.  Miiller,  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  1.  p.  9; 
and  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  358. 

5  The  Bhrigtis  :  the  descendants  of  the  Kishi  Bhrigu,  the  seer  of 
many  of  the  hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


150  THB  HYMirS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

6  With  milk  and  butter  I  anoint  the  mighty,  celestial 

Goat,  strong-winged,  and  full  of  juices. 
Through    him  will  we  attain  the   world  of  virtue, 
ascending  to  the  loftiest  cope,  to  heaven. 

7  Set  the  Goat's  head  toward  the  eastern  region,  and 

turn  his  right  side  to  the  southern  quarter. 
His  hinder  part  turn  to  the  western  quarter,  and  set 
his  left  side  to  the  northern  region. 

8  Set  the  Goat's  backbone  upmost  in  the  zenith,  and 

lay  his  belly  downward  in  the  nadir ;  set  his  mid- 
portion  in  mid-air  between  them. 

9  O'er  the  dressed  Goat  lay  a  dressed  skin  to  robe  him 

prepared,  in  perfect  form,  with  all  his  members. 
Kise  upward  to  the  loftiest  vault  of  heaven :  with 
thy  four  feet  stand  firmly  in  the  regions. 

HYMN  XV. 

Let  all  the  misty  regions  fly  together,  let  all  the 

rain-clouds,  sped  by  wind,  assemble. 
Let  waters  satisfy  the  earth,  the  voices  of  the  great 

mist-enveloped  Bull  who  roareth. 

2  Let   them   show  forth,   the  strong,  the   bounteous 

Maruts :  let  plants  and  shrubs  be  hung  with  drops 

of  moisture. 

Let  floods  of  rain  refresh  the  ground  with  gladness, 

and  herbs  spring  various  with  each  form  and  colour. 

6  Celestial :  regarded  as  divine  as  soon  as  he  is  selected  for  sacrifice. 
Strong-winged  :  prepared  to  pass  rapidly  to  heaven. 

9  In  the  second  hemistich  the  victim  is  addressed.  The  sacrificed 
animal  is  immediately  transported  to  heaven.  Similarly  the  Horse  is 
addressed  (Rigveda  I.  162.  21) :  '  No,  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art 
not  injured :  by  easy  paths  unto  the  Gods  thou  goest.'  A  detailed 
account  of  Uie  Sacrifice  of  the  Goat  is  given  in  Atharva-veda  IX.  5. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  or  charm  to  hasten  the  coming  of  the 
periodical  Rains. 

1  BiUl :  Parjanya :  the  God  of  the  thunderous  raio^loud.  See  1. 2. 1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMlSr  15.1  ^BJt.  ATHARVAYBDA.  151 

3  Cause  us  who  sing  to  see  the  gathering  vapours :  out 

burst  in  many  a  place  the  rush  of  waters ! 
Let.  floods  of  rain  refresh  the  ground  with  gladness ; 
and  herbs  spring  various  with  each  form  and  colour. 

4  Apart,  ParJAnyal.  let  the  treops  of  Maruts,  roarings 

swell  the  song. 
Let  pouring  torrents  of  the  rain  that  rainetL  rain 
upon  the  earth* 

5  Up  from  the  sea  lift  your  dread  might,  ye  Maruts.r 

as  light  and  splendour,  send  the  vapour  upward ! 
Let  waters  satisfy  the  earth,  the  voices  of  the  great 
mist-enveloped  Bull  who  roaretb. 

8  Roar,  thunder,  set  the  sea  in  agitation^  bedew  the 
ground  with  thy  sweet  rain,  Parj^nya  I 
Send  plenteous  showers  on  him.  who  seeketh  shelter, 
and  let  the  owner  of  lean.kine  gp  homeward. 

Z  Let  the  boon  Maruts,  let  the  springs  and   coiling^ 
serpents  tend  you  well. 
Urged  by  the  Maruts  let  the  clouds  pour  down  their 
rain  upon  the  earths 

8  Let  lightning  flash    on    every  side :    from  all   the- 

regions  blow  the  winds  L 
Urged  by  the  Maruts  fet  the  clouds  pour  down,  their 
rain  upon  the  earth. 

9  May  waters,  lightning,. cloud,  and  rain,  boon  springs 

and  serpents  tend  you  well. 
Urged  by  the  Maruts  let  the  clouds  pour  down  their 
rain  upoa  the  earths 

i.  Of  the  rain,  that  raineth  rain :  varshdaya  vdrshato  vdrihantu, 

6  The  oumer  of  lean  kine :  who,  as  grass  will  immediately  spring  up, 
need  no  longer  search  for  pasture  for  his  cattle. 

7  The  springs  :  the  fountains  of  heaven.  Coiling  serpents :  ajagards  : 
literally,   * goat-swallowers ; '  pythons;   long  fantastic-shaped 
of  cloud. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


152  TUE  UYMirS  OF  [BOOK  17. 

10  May  be  who  hath  become  the  plants'  high  regent, 

suiting  our  bodies,  Agni  of  the  Waters, 
May  Jdtavedas  send  us  rain  from  heaven,  Amrit  and 
vital  breath  to  earthly  creatures. 

11  Sending  up  waters  from  the  flood  and  ocean  Prajft- 

pati  move  the  sea  to  agitation! 
Forth  flow  the  moisture  of  the  vigorous  stallion! 
With  this  thy  roar  of  thunder  come  thou  hither, 

12  Our  Father,  Lord  divine  pouring  the  torrents.     Let 

the  streams  breathe,  O  Varupa,  of  the  waters. 
Pour  the  floods  down  :  along  the  brooks  and  channels 
let  frogs  with  speckled  arms  send  out  their  voices. 

13  They  who  lay  quiet  for  a  year,  the  Br&hmans  who 

fulfil  their  vows, 
The  frogs,  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  the  voice  Par- 
janya  hath  inspired. 

14  Speak   forth    a    welcome,  female  frog!      Do  thou, 

O  frog,  accost  the  rain. 
Stretch  thy  four  feet  apart,  and  swim,  swim  in  the 
middle  of  the  lake. 


10  The  plants^  high  regent :  *  He  (Agni)  ripens  plants  of  every  form 
and  nature '  (Rigveda  X.  88.  10).  Of  the  Waters :  Agni  is  called  apdm- 
napdt,  Ofispring  of  the  Waters,  as  being  bom  in  the  shape  of  lightning 
from  the  watery  clouds. 

1 1  The  vigorous  stallion  :  the  fertilizing  rain-cloud.  Similarly : 
« Send  down  for  us  the  rain  of  heaven,  ye  Maruts,  and  let  the  stallion's 
streams  descend  in  torrents*  (Rigveda  V.  83.  6).  The  last  p&da  of 
thie  stanza  1 1  and  the  first  pada  of  that  which  follows  make  up  the 
second  hemistich  of  the  Rigveda  stanza  referred  to,  Parjanya  being 
the  God  addressed. 

13  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  VII.  103.  1.  In  that  hyma 
the  frogs  rejoicing  in  the  fall  of  the  periodical  Rains  after  the  long 
drought  are  represented  as  Br&hmans  busily  employed  in  the  per-* 
formance  of  religious   ceremonies. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMirie.]  THE  ATHARVA'VEDA.  163 

15  Khapvakhft,   hoi     Khaimakhft,   hoi     Thou   in    the 

middle,  Tadurl! 
Fathers,  enjoy  the  rain  from  one  who  strives  to  win 
the  Maruts'  heart. 

16  Lift  up  the  mighty  cask  and  pour  down  water :  let 

the  wind  blow,  and  lightnings  flash  around  us. 
-    Let  sacrifice  be  paid,  and,  widely  scattered,  let  herbs 
and  plants  be  full  of  joy  and  gladness. 

HYMN  XVL 

The  mighty  Kuler  of  these  worlds  beholds  as  though 

from  close  at  hand 
The  man  who  thinks  he  acts  by  stealth :  all  this  the 

Gods  perceive  and  know. 

2  If  a  man  stands  or  walks  or  moves  in  secret,  goes  to 

his  lying-down  or  his  uprising, 
What  two  men  whisper  as  they  sit  together,  King 
Varu^a  knows  :  he  as  the  third  is  present. 

3  This  earth,  too,  is  King  Varupa's  possession,  and  the 

high  heaven  whose  ends  are  far  asunder. 
The  loins  of  Varu^a  are  both  the  oceans,  and  this 
small  drop  of  water,  too,  contains  him. 

15  Khanvakkdj  KhaimvkhA  (onomatopoetic  words),  and  Taduri  are 
names  of  frogs. 

16  The  first  pUda  is  taken  from  Rigveda  V.  83.  8.  Cask  :  or,  pail ; 
meaning  the  watery  cloud. 

The  hymn  celebrates  the  omnipresence  and  omniscience  of  Varuna, 
the  moral  Gk)yemor  of  the  world ;  and  concludes  with  an  imprecation 
on  an  enemy. 

2  His  lying-down  or  Mb  uprising :  cf.  *  Thou  knowest  my  downsit- 
ting  And  mine  uprising  .  .  .  Thou  compassest  my  path  And  my  lying 
down.'— Psalm  139.  2,  3. 

3  Both  the  oceans :  the  sea  of  air  and  the  terrestrial  ocean ;  the 
waters  above  the  firmament  and  the  waters  under  the  firmament. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


15*  TEB  HTMirS  OF  [WOE  IF. 

4  If  one  should  flee   afar  beyond   the   heaven.   King 

Varui]ia  would  still  be  round  about  him. 
Proceeding  hither  from  the  sky   his   envoys  look^ 
thousand-eyed,  over  the  earth  beneath  them. 

5  All   this  the  royal  Varuija  beholdeth,  all  between 

heaven  and  earth  and  all  beyond  them. 
The  twinklings  ofmea's  eyelids  hath  he  counted.  As- 
one  who  plays  throws  dice  he  settles  all  things. 

6  Those  fatal  snares  of  thine  which  stand  extended,. 

threefold,  O  Varuflia,  seven  by  seven, 
May  they  all  catch  the  man  who  tells  a  falsehood,  and 
pass  unharmed  the  man  whose  words  are  truthful. 

7  Varu^a,  snare  him  with  a  hundred  nooses !  Man's 

watcher !  let  not  him  who  lies  escape  thee. 
There  let  the  villain  sit  with  hanging  belly  and  bandr 
aged  like  a  cask  whose  hoops  are  broken. 


4  His  envoys :  Vanina's  spies,  messengers,  os  angels  are  perhaps  the 
other  Adityas.  See  Kigveda  I.  25.  13,  and  VII.  87.  3. 

7  Snare  him :  mine  enemy.  Like  a  cash :  swoHen  with  dropsy  and* 
bandaged  round  as  a  cask  or  chest  is  boimd  with  hoops  or  bands. 
Dropay,  or  some  similar  disease  seems  to  have  been  especially  regarded 
as  a  punishment  sent  by  Varu^.  So  a  sufferer  addresses  Varuna  (Big* 
Teda  VIL  89.  2)  : — *  When  ...  I  move  along,  tremulous  like  a  wind- 
blown skin,  Have  mercy,  spare  me,  mighty  Lord  ! '  See  Zimmer,  A.  I.. 
Leben,  p.  392. 

I  borrow  Dr.  Muir's  translation  of  Professor  Roth's  remarks  on  thiB* 
hymn : — 

*  There  is  no  hymn  in  the  whole  Vedic  literature  which  expresses 
the  divine  omniscience  in  such  forcible  terms  as  this ;  and  yet  this 
beautiful  description  has  been  degraded  into  an  introduction  to  an  im- 
precation. But  in  this,  as  in  many  other  passages  of  this  Veda,  it  is 
natural  to  conjecture  that  existing  fragments  of  older  hymns  have' 
been  used  to  deck  out  magical  formulas.  The  first  five  or  even  six. 
verses  of  this  hymn  might  be  regarded  as  a  fragment  of  this  sort.' 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  wholly  or  in  part — stanzaa  1 — 6—,. 
by  von  Roth,  Abhandlung  iiber  den  Alharvarveda,  p.  29 ;  by  Muir,  0.  S. 
Texts,  V.  63  ;  by  Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda,  89 ;  by  Max  MttUer,  Chips  from 
a  German  Workshop,  I.  41 ;  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  388 ; 
and  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  32.  126. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  17.]  THE  ATHARVA-TEDA.  155 

8  Varu^a  sends,  and  drives  away,  diseases :  Varu^a  is 

both  native  and  a  stranger, 
Varupa  is  celestial  and  is  human. 

9  I  bind  and  hold  thee  fast  with  all  these  nooses,  thou 

son  of  such  a  man  and  such  a  mother. 
AH  these  do  I  assign  tbee  as  thy  portion. 

HYMN  XVII. 

Wb  seize  and  hold  tbee,  Conquering  One  !  the  queen 
of  medicines  that  heal. 

0  Plant,  I  have  endowed  thee  with  a  hundred  powers 
for  every  man. 

2  Still  conquering,  banishing  the  curse,  mighty,  with 

thy  reverted  bloom. 
Thee  and  all  Plants  have  I  invoked  :   Hence  let  it 
save  us !  was  my  prayer. 

3  She  who  hath  cursed  us  with  a  curse,   or  hath  con- 

ceived a  murderous  sin. 
Or  seized  our  son  to  take  his  blood,  may  she  devour 
the  child  she  bare. 

4  What  magic  they  have  wrought  for  thee  in  dish  un- 

baked or  burnt  dark-red, 
What  they  have  wrought  in  flesh  undressed,-— con- 
quer the  sorcerers  therewith. 

5  111  dream  and  wretchedness  of  life,  Rdkshasa,  monster, 

stingy  hags, 
All  the  she-fiends  of  evil  name  and  voice,  we  drive 
away  from  us. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm,  addressed  to  a  plant  endowed  with  magical 
virtues,  to  secure  immunity  from  various  kinds  of  evil,  and  restoration 
of  health. 

1  Canqueritig  One :  the  magical  plant  is  addressed. 

2  With  thy  reverted  bloom :  see  stanza  6,  note. 

3  The  stanza  is  repeated  from  I.  28.  3. 

5  Stins^  hags :  Arllyls ;  see  I.  28. 4,  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ne  TEE  HTMm  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

6  Death  caused  by  famine,  caused  by  thirst,  failure  of 

children,  loss  of  kine, 
With  thee,  O  Apdrnftrga^  all  this  ill  we   cleanse   and 
wipe  away. 

7  Death  caused  by  thirst,  death  caused  by  stress  of 

hunger,  loss  at  play  with  dice, 
All  this,  O  ApftmSirga,  with  thine  aid  we  cleanse  and 
wipe  away. 

8  The  Ap^mSrga  is  alone  the  sovran  of  all  Plants  that 

grow. 
With  this  we   wipe  away   whatever  hath   fallen  oa 
thee  :  go  in  health  ! 

HYMN  XVIII. 

The  nK)on]igbt  equalleth  the  sun,  night  is  the  rival 

of  the  day. 
I  make  eflfectual  power  my  help :  let  magic  arts  be 

impotent. 
2  Gods !  if  one  make  and  bring  a  spell  on  some  man's^ 

house  who  knows  it  not, 
Close  as  the  calf  that  sucks  the  cow  may  it  revert 

and  cling  to  him. 

6  ApAmdrga :  (from  mrij\  to  cleanse  or  wipe,  with  apa  +  d)  Achy- 
ranthes  Aspera,  a  biennial  plant  frequently  used  in  incantations,  im 
medicine,  in  washing  linen,  and  in  sacrifices,  and  still  believed  to  have 
the  power  of  making  men  proof  against  the  stings  of  scorpions.  It  is. 
called  also  par&kpushpiy  pralpakpuskpt,  and  pratyahparnt  from  the 
reverted  direction  of  the  growth  of  its  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruit.  See 
IV.  19.  4,  7;  VI.  129.  3;  and  VII.  65.  1. 

7  We  cleanse  and  wipe  away :  apa  mrijmdhe  ;  see  note  on  stanza  6» 

8  On  thee  ;  some  sick  man  is  addressed. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  66 ;  and,, 
with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  37,  130. 

Thehymnis  a  counter-charm  against  the  magical  incantations  of  others. 

1  The  meaning  is  :  lighted  by  this  full  moon  which  makes  the  night 
as  bright  as  day,  I  gather  a  plait  whose  efl&cacy  is  undoubted,  which 
shall  counteract  the  magical  practices  of  malignant  fiends  and  sorcerers.. 

2  May  it  revert :  an  allusion  to  the  reverted  leaves  of  the  plant  used 
in  the  incantation :  see  IV.  17.  6,  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  19.]  TEE  ATHARVA-TEDA,  157 

3  When  one  puts  poison  in  a  dish  of  unbaked  clay  to 

kill  a  man, 
It  cracks  when  set  upon  the    fire  with   the   sharp 
sound  of  many  stones. 

4  Endowed  with   thousand  powers  1  adjure   the   bald 

and  those  with  necks  awry. 
Back  to  its  author  turn  the  spell  like  a  dear  damsel 
to  her  friend! 

:5  I  with  this  Plant  have  ruined  all  malignant  powers 
of  witchery, 
The  spell  which  they  have  laid  upon  thy  field,  thy 
cattle,  or  thy  men. 

»6  No  power  had  he  who  wrought  the  spell :  he  hurt 
his  foot,  he  broke  his  toe. 
His  act  hath  brought  us  happiness  and  pain  and  sor- 
row to  himself 

7  Let  ApslmArga  sweep  away  chronic  disease  and  every 

curse, 
Sweep  sorceresses   clean   away^   and   all  malignant 
stingy  hags. 

8  Sweep  thou  away  the  sorcerers,   all  stingy  fiendish 

hags  away. 
All  this,  O  Apdmdrga,  with  thine  aid  we  wipe  away 
from  us. 

HYMN  XIX. 

Thou  breakest  ties  of  kith  and  kin,  thou  causest,  too, 
relationship : 

4  Endowed  xvith  iheusand  powers  1 :  the  plant  is  addressed.  The  bald 
<ind  those  with  necks  awry:  hairless  goblins  whose  heads  are  twisted  round. 

7  Apdmdrga:  the  magical  plant  (Achyranthes  Aspera)  :  see  IV.  17.  6. 
Chronic  disease  ;  kshetriyd  ;  see  II.  8.  1. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hnndert 
Lieder,  pp.  25,  131. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm,  like  the  preceding  hymn,  to  counteract  the 
incantations  of  enemies,  and  to  secure  general  protection  for  the  speaker. 
1   Thou  :  the  plant  Ap&m&rga  (see  IV.  17.  6)  is  addressed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


158  TEB  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV. 

So  bruise  the  sorcerer's  oflfepring,  like  a  reed  that 
groweth  in  the  Rains. 

2  Thou  hast  been  blessed  with  blessing  by  the  Brah- 

man, Kai^va  N&rshada. 
Thou  fliest  like  a  flashing  dart :  there  is  no  fear  or 
danger,  Plant!  within  the  limit  of  thy  range. 

3  Illumining,  as  'twere,  with  light,  thou  mo  vest  at  the 

head  of  plants. 
The  saviour  of  the  simple  man  art  thou,  and  slayer 
of  the  fiends. 

4  As  once  when  time  began  the  Gods  with  thee  ex- 

pelled the  Asuras, 
Even  thence,  O  Plant,  wast  thou  produced  as  one 
who  wipes  and  sweeps  away. 

5  Thy  father's  name  was  Cleaver.  Thou  with  thousand 

branches  cleavest  all. 
Do  thou,  turned  backward,  cleave  and  rend  the  man 
who  treateth  us  as  foes. 

6  The  evil  sprang  from  earth  ;  it  mounts  to  heaven  and 

spreads  to  vast  extent. 
Reverted,  shaking  him  with  might,   thence  on   its 
maker  let  it  fall. 


2  Kanva  N'drshada:  a  Bishi,  son  of  Nrishad.  The  celebrated  Kanva 
of  the  Bigveda  was  the  son  of  Ghora.  The  two  name-words,  which 
mar  the  metre  of  the  hemistich,  appear,  as  Grill  observes,  to  be  an  in- 
terpolated gloss. 

4  Expelled  the  Asuras :  Indra's  victory  over  the  Asuras  or  hostile 
demons  is  attributed  to  the  strengthening  power  of  another  plant, 
P&tH,  in  II.  27.  4.  One  who  toipes  and  swe^i  away :  apdmdrgds  ;  used 
here  as  an  appellative. 

5  With  thousand  branches  :  the  virtues  and  powers  ascribed  to  a  plant 
are  usually  in  proportion  to  the  abundance  of  its  roots  or  branches. 

Turned  backward:  having  reverted  or  retrofracted  leaves  and 
flowers:  see  IV.  17.  6,  note. 

6  The  evil :  the  spell  which  the  charm  is  to  counteract. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYMir  20.]  THB  ATEARVA-TEDA.  159 

7  For  thou  hast  grown  reverted,  and  turned  backward 

also  is  thy  fruit. 
Bemove  all  curses  far  from  me,  keep  most  remote 
the  stroke  of  death, 

8  Preserve  me  with  a  hundred,  yea,  protect  me  with  a 

thousand  aids. 
May  mighty  Indra,  Lord  of  Plants!  give  store  of 
stren^h  and  power  to  thee. 

HYMN  XX. 

It  sees  in  front,  it  sees  behind,  it  sees  afar  away, - 
it  sees 

The  sky,  the  firmament,  and  earth :  all  this,  0  God- 
dess, it  beholds. 

2  Through  thee,  0  godlike  Plant,  may   I  behold  all 
creatures  that  exist, 
Three  several   heavens,   three   several  earths,  and 
l^ese  six  regions  one  by  one. 


8  Thousand  aids :  with  reference  to  the  thousand  branches  of  the 
plant  (stanza  5). 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert 
Lieder,  pp.  34,  132. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm,  addressed  to  a  magical  plant,  for  the  acquisi- 
tion of  superhuman  powers  of  sight. 

1  It :  the  magical  plant.  0  Goddess :  the  divine  plant  is  directly 
addressed,  and  also  spoken  of  in  the  third  person.  The  plant  is  said  by 
D&rila  to  be  the  sadampushpd  (Semperflorens,  Ever-blooming)  not  yet 
identified.  Its  virtues  resemble  those  attributed  in  England  to 
Euphrasy  or  Eyebright,  the  plant  with  which,  together  with  Rue  and 
three  drops  from  the  well  of  Life  ,  the  Archangel  Michael  '  purged  the 
visual  nerve'  of  Adam  (Paradise  Lost,  XL  414),  and  enabled  him  to 
look  into  the  distant  future. 

2  Three  several  heavens :  the  world  is  divided  into  earth,  sky,  and 
heaven ;  and  each  of  these,  again,  is  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  Rig- 
veda  as  threefold.  See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  114.  Six 
regions :  the  four  quarters  of  the  heavens  with  the  zenith  and  the  nadir. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


160  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

3  The  pupil,  verily,  art  thou  of  that  celestial  Eagle's  eye. 
On  earth  hast  thou  alighted  as  a  weary  woman  seeks 

her  couch. 

4  The  God  who  hath  a  thousand   eyes   give   me   this 

Plant  in  my  right  hand  ! 
I  look  on  every  one  therewith,  each  Sfldra  and  each 
Aryan  man. 

5  Make  manifest  the   forms  of  things;  hide  not  their 

essences  from  sight. 
And,  thou  who  hast  a  thousand  eyes,  look  the  Kiml- 
dins  in  the  face. 

6  Make  me  see   Y&tudhd^nas,   make   thou   Ydtudb&nis 

visible. 
Make  me  see  all  Pisdchas.  With  this  prayer,  O  Plant, 
I  hold  thee  fast. 

7  Thou  art  the  sight  of  Kasyapa  and  of  the  hound  who 

hath  four  eyes. 
Make  the  PisScha  manifest  as  SArya  when  he  rides 
at  noon. 

3  The  celestial  Eagle  is  Garutman,  the  Sun.  Couch :  vahydm  (from 
voA,  to  carry) ;  originally,  a  portable  bed  or  litter. 

4  The  Ood  who  hath  a  thousand  eyes :  Indra ;  as  he  is  chief  Regent 
of  the  atmosphere,  his  countless  eyes  may  be  the  stars.  SMra  and 
Aryan:  men  of  the  labouring  class,  and  men  of  the  three  higher 
classes,  that  is  Br&hmans  (the  priestly  caste),  lUjanyas  or  Kshatriyas 
(the  regal  and  military  caste),  and  Vaisyas  (husbandmen  and  trades- 
men). The  four  castes  are  mentioned  only  once  in  the  Eigveda 
(X.  90.  12).  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  11.  368  ;  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda, 
III.  212;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  117  sqq.,  204,  216,  435. 

5  Kimidins :  see  I.  7.  1. 

6  YdtudhAnas.,.YAtudh&nis :  see  I.  7. 1 ;  8.  1.  Pisdchas:  see  I.  16.  3. 

7  Kasyapa :  one  of  a  class  of  semi-divine  spirits  or  genii  connected 
with  or  regulating  the  course  of  the  Sim.  Four  eyes:  that  is,  probably, 
two  eyes  with  a  large  spot  above  each.  Of.  '  And  those  two  dogs  of 
thine,  Yama !  the  watchers,  four-eyed,  who  look  on  men  and  guard 

•  the  pathway' (Rigveda  X.   14.  11).     The  substantive  in  the  text  is 
feminine,  hunyd^s^  bitch. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BY:^N  n,]  TBE  ATBAR7A'7M1>JL  Ml 

8  Kimldin,  YMudh&oa  from  their  hidrng-plaoes  ba^^e 

I  dragged. 
I  look  on  every  one  with;  this,  SMra  and  Aryan  man 
atiker 

9  Make  that  Pis0,eha  visible,  the  fiend  who  flies  ki 

middle  air, 
The  fiend  wh-o  glides-  across  the  sky,  and  him  who 
deems  the  earth  his  help. 

HYMN  XXL 

The  kine  have  come  and  brought  good  fortune  :  let 

them  rest  in  the  cow-pen  and  be  ha^ppy  near  us. 
Here  let  them  stay  prolific,  many-coloured^  and  yield 

through  many  morns  their  milk  for  Indra. 
2  Indra  aids  him  who  ofiTers  sacrifice  and  praise  :  he 

takes  not  what  is  his,  and  gives  him  more  thereto. 
Increasing  ever  .more  and    ever   more   his   wealth, 

ha  makes  the  pious  dwell  within  unbroken  bounds. 
8  These  are  ne'er  lost,  no  robber  ever  injures  them : 

no  evil-minded  foe  attempts  to  harass  them. 
The  master  of  the  kine  lives  a  long  life  with  these,  the 

Cows  whereby  he  pours  his  gifts  and  serves  the  Gods. 

8  With  this :  t^nOj  masculine,  meaning)  not  directly,  the  plant,^but  the 
Qod  or  divine  power  within  it. 

9  Who  Jlies  in  middle  air :  as  witches  in  Europe  were  popularljK 
believed  to  do.  Deems  the  earth  his  help  :  and  is  satisfied  with  holes 
and  caverns  as  hiding-places. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  525, 
and,,  with  annotations,,  by  Gtdll,.  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  2,  133. 


The  hymn,  taken  with  slight  variations  from  Rigveda  VI.  28.  1 — 7, 
is  a  glorification  and  benediction  addressed  to  Cows. 

3  Tliese  are  ne'er  lost :  according  to  Sayana,  t^e  indicative  mood 
here  has  an  imperative  force  :  let  them  not  be  lost)  let  not  the  robber 
assail  them. 

11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


162  TEE  ATBABYA-7EDA.  [BOOK  IT. 

4  The  charger  with  his  dusty  brow  overtakes  them  not, 

and  never  to  the  shambles  do  they  take  their  way. 
These  Cows,  the  cattle  of  the  pious  worshipper,  roam 
over  wide-spread  pasture  where  no  danger  is. 

5  To  me  the  Cows   seem    Bhaga,  they    seem  Indra, 

they  seem  a  portion  of  the  first-poured  Soma. 
These  present  Cows,  they,  O  ye  men,   are   Indra. 
I  long  for  Indra  with  my  heart  and  spirit. 

6  O  Cows,  ye  fatten  e'en  the  worn  and  wasted,  and 

make  the  unlovely  beautiful  to  look  on. 
Prosper  my  home,  ye  with  auspicious  voices !  Your 
power  is  magnified  in  our  assemblies. 

7  In  goodly  pasturage,  bright-hued,  prolific,  drinking 

pure  water  at  fair  drinking-places, 
Never  be  thief  or  sinful  man  your  master,  and  may 
the  dart  of  Kudra  still  avoid  you  ! 

HYMN  XXII. 

Exalt  and  strengthen   this   my  Prince,    O   Indra. 

Make  him  sole  lord  and  leader  of  the  people. 
Scatter  his  foes,  deliver  all  his  rivals  into  his  hand  in 

struggles  for  precedence. 

2  Give  him  a  share  in  village,  kine,   and  horses,  and 
leave  his  enemy  without  a  portion. 

4  Tht  charger o^ertakei  them  not :  they  are  not,  or,  according  to 

Sayana,  let  them  not  be,  carried  off  in  predatory  incursions. 

5  The  owner  of  the  cows  regards  them  as  the  deities  Bhaga  and 
Indra,  the  representatives  of  prosperity  and  power.  They  seem  a  por- 
tion :  their  milk  is  as  pleasant  and  efficacious  as  Soma  juice.  They, 
0  ye  men,  are  Indra :  an  imitation  of  the  refrain,  *  He,  0  ye  men, 
is  Indra'  (Rigveda  II.  12). 

7  Budra:  see  note  on  I.  19.  3. 

The  hymn  is  a  benediction  on  a  newly-consecrated  King. 
1  Prince:  kshatriyam;  ruler,  applied  in  the  Rigveda  to  Varuna, 
Mitra,  and  other  Grods ;  here  meaning  a  Prince  or  King. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  23.]  THE  ATHARTA^TEDA,  163 

Let  him  as  King  be  head  and  chief  of  Princes.  Give 
up  to  him,  O  Indra,  every  foeman. 

3  Let  him  be  treasure-lord  of  goodly  treasures,  let  him 

as  King  be  master  of  the  people. 
Grant  unto  him  great  power  and  might,  O  Indra, 
and  strip  his  enemy  of  strength  and  vigour. 

4  Like  milcb-kine  yielding  milk  for  warm  libations,  pour, 

Heaven  and  Earth !  on  him  full  many  a  blessing. 
May  he  as  King  be  Indra's  well-belovfed,  the  darling 
of  the  kine,  the  plants,  the  cattle. 

5  I  join  in  league  with  thee  victorious  Indra,   with 

whom  men  conquer  and  are  ne'er  defeated. 
He  shall  make  thee  the  folk's  sole  lord  and  leader, 
shall  make  thee  highest  of  all  human  rulers. 

6  Supreme    art    thou,   beneath   thee   are  thy  rivals, 

and  all,  O  King,  who  were  thine  adversaries. 
Sole  lord  and  leader  and  allied  with  Indra,  bring, 
conqueror,  thy  foemen's  goods  and  treasures. 

7  Consume,  with  lion  aspect,  all  their  hamlets,  with 

tiger  aspect,  drive  away  thy  foemen. 
Sole  lord  and  leader  and  allied  with  Indra,  seize,  con- 
queror, thine  enemies'  possessions. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

I  FIX  my  heart  on  wise  and  ancient  Agni,  the  Five 
Tribes'  Lord,  in  many  a  place  enkindled. 

2  Of  Princes :  members  of  the  same  regal  family.  Cf.  *  Give  him 
highest  rank  among  his  kinsmen'  (I.  9.  3). 

5  In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  the  King  is  addressed. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  457  ; 
by  Zimmcr,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  165;  and,  with  annotations,  by 
Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  67,  135. 

The  hymn  is  a  magnification  of  Agni  and  a  prayer  for  his  protection. 

1  The  Five  Tribes*  Lord :  the  special  tutelary  deity  of  the  Five 
ArysLn  Tribes.   See  II.  2.  1,  note. 

Biit^  for  other  opinions  regarding  the  five  peoples,  races,  or  tribes, 
see  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  II.  pp.  176  sqq. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


164  TEE  HYMirS  OF  [BOOK  IF. 

We  seek  him  who  hath  entered  all  our  houses.     May 
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  As  thou  conveyest  oflferings,  J^tavedas!  and  fashion^ 

est  the  sacrifice  with  knowledge, 
So  bear  thou  to  the  Gods  the  prayer  we  utter.    May 
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  I  pray   to  Agni   in    each  act  successful,  employed 

in  every  sacrifice,  the  strongest. 
Fiend-slayer,    served    with    fatness,     strengthening 
worship.  May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  We   invoke   the    oblation-bearer,     well-born    Agni 

Jfttavedas, 
Him,  Vaisvanara,  almighty.  May  he  set  us  free  from 
trouble. 

5  With  whom  as  friend  the  !p,ishis  gave  their  power 

new  splendour,   with  whom  they  kept  aloof  the 
A  suras'  devices, 
Agni,  with,  whom  Indra  subdued  the  Papis.  May  hp 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Through   whom   the    Gods   discovered  life   eternal, 

through  whom  they  stored  the  plants  with  pleasant 
juices. 
Through  whom  they  brought  to  men  the  light  of 
heaven.     May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

7  I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Agni,  sole  Lord 

of  all  this  world,  of  all  that  shineth. 
Of  what  exists  and  shall  exist  hereafter.     May  he 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  The  RisJUi :  ancient  saints  and  sages,  bards  and  seers  of  the  sacred 
hymns  of  the  Rigveda.     Pants  :    a  class  of  demons  of  darkness  who 
steal  the  cows  of  the  Gods  and  shut  them  up  in  caverns,  that  is,  con-  "^ 
ceal  the  rays  of  daylight  in  dark  clouds.  See  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda, 
General  Index  II. 

6  Discovered  life  eternal :  were  made  immortal.  See  II.  1.  5.   Staged 
the  plants :  Agni  is  said  to  bring  all  plants  to  maturity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  24.J  THT!  ATHARVAVEDA.  165 

HYMN  XXIV. 

I   THINK  of  Indra,   only  him  for  ever,  fiend-slayer. 

May  these  lauds  of  mine  come  near  him. 
He  Cometh  to  the  pious  offerer's  calling.    May  he 

deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Who  with  strong  arms  overcame  his  strong  oppo- 

nents, who  broke  and  crushed  the  power  of  the 
demons, 
Who  won  the  rivers  and  the  kine  in  battle.    May  he 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  Ruler  of  men,  finder  of  light,  the  hero :  the  pressing- 

stones  declare  his  valour,  master 
Of  sweetest  sacrifice  with  seven  Hotars.     May  he 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  The  lord  of  barren  cows  and  bulls  and  oxen,  finder 

of  light  for  whom  the  posts  are  planted. 
For  whom  the  bright  juice  flows  cleansed  by  devo- 
tion.   May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  Whose  favour  those  desire  who  offer  Soma,  whom, 

arrow-bearer,  men  invoke  in  battle. 
On   whom  the   hymn  depends,  in  whom  is  power. 
May  he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Who  was   born,   first,   for  active  operation,  whose 

valour  as  the  first  hath  been  awakened, 
Who  raised  his  bolt  when  he  encountered  Ahi.  May 
he  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

A  hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Indra. 

2  The  rivers  and  the  coios  .*  the  imprisoned  waters  of  the  air  and  the 
rays  of  daylight  for  which  Indra  fought  with  the  fiend  Vritra  or  Ahi^ 
that  is,  the  huge  mass  of  cloud  that  obstructed  them. 

3  Presnng-stones :  which  extract  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant,  Indra's. 
favourite  drink.  With  seven  Hotars :  pwformed  by  the  Hotar  (see  I. 
11)  and  six  assistant  priests. 

4  The  lord  of:  to  whom  are  offered.  The  posts :  to  which  sacrificial 
victims  are  tied. 

6  Ahi  :  the  Dragon  or  Serpent,  Vyitra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


166  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  17. 

7  Strong  Lord,  who  leadeth  hosts  to  meet  for  battle, 
who  sendeth  riches  both  of  earth  and  heaven, — 
I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Indra.     May  he 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

HYMN  XXV. 

I  THINK  on  VAyu's  and  Savitar's  holy  rites,  ye  twain 
who  penetrate  and  guard  the  living  world  : 

Ye  who  have  come  to  be  this  All's  pervaders,  deliver 
us,  ye  two,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Ye  who  have  counted  up  the  earth's  expanses,  and 

in  the  sky  smoothed  out  the  air's  mid-region, 
Whose  going-forth  hath  ne'er  been  reached  by  any, 
deliver  us,  ye  two,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  Beauteously  bright !  men  rest  in  thy  dominion  when 

thou  hast  risen  up  and  hastened  onward. 
Ye,  V4yu,  Savitar,  preserve  all  creatures.  Deliver  us, 
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  Hence,  Vdyu,  Savitar,  drive  evil  action,  chase  SimidS, 

away,  drive  off  the  demons. 
Ye  give  us  store  of  energy  and  power.     Deliver  us, 
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  Of  their   own   selves   let   Savitar   and   V&yu   send 

favourable  strength  and  wealth  and  plenty. 
Here  give   us  perfect   freedom    from   consumption. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Ye,  Savitar  and  VAyu,  to  assist  us,  enjoy  the  hymn 

and  the  delightful  cheerer. 
Come  hither  downward  from  the  stream  of  blessing. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

A  hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  V&yu  God  of  Wind  and  Savitar  the 
Sun-God. 

4  Simidd :  apparently  a  female  demon,  or  a  disease  attributed  to  her 
malevolence.  *  May  all  the  rivers  keep  us  free  from  Simida '  (Rigveda 
VII.  50.  4).  .  X . 

6  Cheerer:  the  exhilarating  Soma  juice.  The  stream  of  blessing: 
the  firmament  and  heaven  whence  rain  and  other  blessings  flow. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BY^N  26.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  167 

7  Like  noblest  benisons  they  have  stayed  in  the  God- 
loving  man's  abode. 
I  glorify   bright   Savitar   and   V4yu.      Deliver  us, 
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

HYMN  XXVI. 
O  Heaven  and  Earth,  I  think  on  you,  wise,  givers  of 

abundant    gifts,    ye    who     through     measureless 

expanses  have  spread  forth. 
For  ye  are  seats   and   homes  of  goodly   treasures. 

Deliver  us,  ye  twain  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Yea,  seats  and  homes  are  ye   of  goodly   treasures, 

grown  strong,  divine,  blessed,  and  far-extending. 
To  me,  O  Heaven  and  Earth,   be   ye   auspicious. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  I  call  on  you  who  warm  and  cause  no  sorrow,  deep, 

spacious,  meet  to  be  adored  by  poets. 
To   me,    O    Heaven   and   Earth,   be  ye  auspicious. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  Ye  who  maintain  Amrit  and  sacrifices,  ye  who  sup- 

port rivers  and  human  beings, 
To  me,  O   Heaven   and   Earth,   be   ye   auspicious. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  Ye  by  whom  cows  and  forest  trees  are  cherished, 

within  whose  range  all  creatures  are  included. 
To  me,    O   Heaven  and   Earth,    be   ye   auspicious. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Ye  who  delight  in  nectar  and  in  fatness,  ye  without 

whom  men  have  no  strength  or  power. 
To   me,    O   Heaven   and   Earth,   be   ye  auspicious. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

7  The  grief    that  pains  me  here,  whoever  caused  it, 

not  sent  by  fate,  hath  sprung  from  human  action. 

I,  suppliant,  praise  Heaven,  Earth,   and  oft   invoke 

them.  Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

A  hymii  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Parents  of  all. 
4  Amrit:  here  meaning  the  life-giving  rain  on   which  the  perfor- 
mance of  sacrifices  depends. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


108  TBB  BTMirS  OF  {BOOK  17. 

HYMN  XXVII. 

I  THINK  upon  the  Maruts :  may  they  bless  me,  may 
they  assist  me  to  this  wealth  in  battle. 

I  call  them  like  swift  well-trained  steeds  to  help  us. 
May  they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Those  who  surrouad  the  never-failing  fountain  for 

ever,  and  bedew  the  plants  with  moisture, 
The  Maruts,  Prisni's  eons,  I  ehiefly  honour.     May 
they  deliver  ua  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  Bards,  who  invigorate  the  milk  of  miloh-kine,  the 

sap  of  growing  plants,  the  speed  of  coursers — 
To  us  may  the  strong  Maruts  be  auspicious.     May 
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  They  who  raised  water  from  the  sea  to  heaven  and 

send  it  from  the  sky  to  earth  in  showers. 
The  Maruts  who  move  mighty  with  their  wat^rs^ 
may  they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  They  who  delight  in   nectar  and  in  fatness,  they 

who  bestow  upon  us  health  and  vigour. 
The  Maruts  who  rain  mighty  with  their  waters,  njay 
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Whether  with  stormy  might  the  Maruts  stablished 

this  All,  or  Gods  with  their  celestial  power, 
Ye,  kindly  Gods,  are  able  to  restore  it.     May  they 
deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

7  Potent  in   battles  is  the  Maruts'  army^  impetuous 

train,  well-known,  exceeding  mighty. 
I,  suppliant,  praise  and  oft  invoke  the  Maruts.  May 
they  deliver  us  from  grief  and  trouble. 

A  hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  the  Manits,  the  terrible  Gods  of  battle^' 
storm,  and  tempest,  and  the  gracious  senders  of  the  refreshing  rain. 

2  Pri8n€$  sons :  the  Maruts  are  the  sons  of  Rudra  and  Prisni,  tho 
speckled  cloud.  See  II.  1. 1.  The  never-failing  fountain :  the  rain-cloud. 

3  Bards:  chanters  of  their  tliunder-psalm  with  the  musicof  the  winds. 

6  To  restore  it :  with  seasonable  rain. 

7  Fotmt  in  battles:  see  III.  1.  2, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  28.]  THV  ATHARVA-VEDA,  169 

HYMN  XXVIIL 

I  RBVBRENCB  you — mark  this — Bhava  and  Sarva, 
ye  under  whose  control  is  this  that  shineth, 

Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped. 
Deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Lords  of  all  near  and  even  of  what  is  distant,  famed 

as  the  best  and  skilfullest  of  archers, 
Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

3  Thousand-eyed   foe-destroyers,   I   invoke   you,   still 

praising  you  the  strong,  of  wide  dominion  : 
Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  Yer  who  of  old  wrought  many  a  deed  in  concert,  and 

showed  among  mankind  unhappy  omens ; 
Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

$  Ye  from  the  stroke  of  whose  destroying  weapon  not 
one  among  the  Grods  or  men  escapeth. 
Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Hurl  your  bolt,  strong  Gods,  at  the  Y&tudh4na,  him 
who  makes  ready  roots  and  deals  in  magic : 
Lords  of  this  world  both  quadruped  and  biped,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain  from  grief  and  trouble. 

A  hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Bhava  and  Sarva,  two  deities  gene- 
rally mentioned  together  and  more  or  less  oonneoted  with  Rudra. 

1  ThU  that  shineth :  all  the  radiant  world.  Bhava  and  Sarva :  Bhava 
is  sometimes  explained  as  *  the  existent,'  *  the  eternal,'  sometimes  as  *  the 
producer  of  everything,'  so  that  according  to  the  latter  explanation  he 
is  the  exact  opposite  of  Sarva  '  the  destroyer : '  and  possibly  the  term 
(Bhava)  has  been  formed  with  the  view  of  propitiating  the  terrible 
god  by  a  favourable  name.  (Abridged  from  Muir's  translation  of  a 
note  by  Weber :  see  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  428). 

The  hynm  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  332. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


170  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  17. 

7  Comfort  and  aid  us,  ye   strong    Gods,   in   battles, 
at  each  Kimidin  send  your  bolt  of  thunder. 
I,  suppliant,  praise  and  ever  call  on  Bhava  and  Sarva. 
Set  us  free  from  grief  and  trouble. 

HYMN  XXIX. 

You  twain,  O  Mitra,  Varu^a,  I  honour,  Law- 
strengtheners,  wise,  who  drive  away  oppressors. 

Ye  who  protect  the  truthful  in  his  battles,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

2  Ye  the    wise    Gods    who    drive  away    oppressors, 
ye  who  protect  the  truthful  in  his  battles, 
Who  come,  men's  guards,  to  juice  pressed  forth  by 

Babhru,  deliver  us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

. ft 

A  hymn  of  praise  and  prayer  to  Mitra- Varuna,  or  Mitra  and  Varuna 
as  a  dual  deity  {Mitravdrunau), 

1  2'he  truthful :  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  Satyllvan  is  a 
man's  name. 

2  Babhru:  a  king  whom  the  Asvins  assisted  in  his  trouble  (Rigveda 
VIII.  22.  10).  Agasti:  more  commonly  called  Agastya,  a  very  cele- 
brated Kishi  and  seer  of  twenty-five  hymns  of  Book  I.  of  the  Rigveda. 
He  is  one  of  those  indcftnable  mythic  personages  who  are  found  in  the 
ancient  traditions  of  many  nations,  and  in  whom  cosmogonical  or  astro- 
nomical notions  are  generally  figured.  Thus  it  is  related  of  Agastya  that 
the  Vindhyan  Mountains  prostrated  themselves  before  him ;  and  yet 
the  same  Agastya  is  believed  to  be  the  regent  of  the  star  Canopus.  In 
the  Ramayana  he  appears  as  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Rama.  Atri : 
one  of  the  great  Seven  Rishis,  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda 
and  said  to  have  been  delivered  from  distress  by  Indra  and  by  the 
Asvins  (Rigveda  I.  51.  3,  and  112.  7).  Angiras:  one  of  the  Seven 
Rishis  and  the  seer  of  a  number  of  the  Rigveda  hymns.  Jamadagni : 
a  celebrated  ancient  Rishi.  See  II.  32.  3.  Kasyapa  also  is  a  well-known 
Vedic  sage,  and  Vasishtha  is  especially  famous  as  the  great  adversary 
of  Visv&mitra.  Of  the  names  which  follow,  Saptavadhri  is  said  (Rig- 
veda V.  78.  6)  to  have  been  delivered  from  trouble  by  the  Asvins  ; 
Vadhryasva  is  mentioned  (Rigveda  VI.  61.  1)  as  a  worshipper  of  Sara- 
Bvati,  and  (X.  69.)  as  a  special  worshipper  and  favourite  of  Agni.  The 
rest  are  Rishis  and  seers  of  hymns,  of  more  or  less  celebrity,  and  all 
are  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,  none  being,  however,  represented  as , 
having  been  especially  favoured  by  Mitra  and  Varuna  who  in  this 
hymn  are  glorified  as  their  protectors. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  137. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  30.]  THE  ATHABVA-VEDA,  171 

3  Mitra  and  Varuna  who  help  Agastl,  Atri,  and  Angi- 

ras,  and  Jamadagni, 
Ye  who  help  Kasyapa,  who  help  Vasishtba,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

4  Mitra  and  Varuna,  who  help  Sy4v4sva,  Atri,  and 

Pururaljha,  and  Vadhryasva, 
Ye  who  help  Vimada  and  Saptavadhri,  deliver  us, 
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

5  Ye,  Varuna,  Mitra,  who  give  aid  to  Kutsa,  Gavish- 

thira,  Bharadvdja,  Visvlmitra, 
Who  help  Kakshlvan  and  give  aid  to  Kanva,  deliver 
us,  ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

6  Ye,  Mitra,  Varupa,  who  help  Trisoka,  Medh4tithi, 

and  Usand  son  of  Kavi, 
Ye,  Gotama's  and  Mudgala's  protectors,  deliver  us, 
ye  twain,  from  grief  and  trouble. 

7  Whose  straight-reined  car  that  keeps  the  track  of  good- 

ness assails  and  ruins  him  who  walks  perversely — 
I,  suppliant,  praise  with  constant  invocation  Mitra 
and  Varuija.     Save  us  from  affliction. 

HYMN  XXX. 

I  TRAVEL  with  the  Rudras  and  the  Vasus,  with  the 

Adityas  and  All-Gods  I  wander. 
I  hold  aloft  both  Varuna  and  Mitra,  I  hold  aloft 

Indra  and  both  the  Asvins. 
2  I  am  the  Queen,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasures,  most 

thoughtful,  first  of  those  who  merit  worship. 
The  Gods,  making  me  enter  many  places,  in  divers 

spots  have  set  mine  habitation. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  125,  is  a  glorification 
of  Vak,  Speech  personified  and  deified,  the  Word,  the  first  creation 
and  representation  of  Spirit,  and  the  means  of  communication  between 
men  and  Gods. 

1  V&k  speaks.  Eudras  :  the  Sons  of  Rudra,  the  Manits  or  Storm- 
Gods.  The  Vastis:  considered  as  a  separate  class,  eight  deities  fre- 
quently mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Adityas  and  the  Rudras. 
All-Gods:  the  Visvedevas,  hero  regarded  as  a  separate  class. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


172  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  IV 

3  I,  verily,  myself  antiounce  and  utter  the  word  that 

Gods  and  men  alike  shall  welcome. 
I  make  the  man  I  love  exceeding  mighty,  niake  him 
a  sage,  a  Rishi,  and  a  Brahman. 

4  Through  me  alone  all  eat  the  food  that  feeds  them,  each 

man  who  sees,  breathes,  hears  the  word  out-spoken. 
Tliey  know  it  not,   but  yet  they  dwell  beside  me. 
Hear,  one  and  all,  the  truth  as  I  declare  it. 

5  I  bend  the  bow  for  Rudra  that  his  arrow  may  strike 

and  slay  the  hater  of  devotion. 
I  rouse  and  order  battle  for  the  people,  and  I  have 
penetrated  Earth  and  Heaven. 

6  I  cherish  and  sustain    high-swelling    Soma,    and 

Tvashtar  I  support,  P^han,  and  Bhaga. 
I  load  with  wealth  the  zealous  sacrificer  who  pours 
the  juice  and  offers  his  oblation. 

7  On   the   world's   summit  I  bring  forth  the  Father : 

my  home  is  in  the  waters,  in  the  ocean. 
Thence   I   extend   o'er  all   existing   creatures,  and 
touch  even  yonder  heaven  with  my  forehead* 

8  I  breathe  a  strong  breath  like  the  wind  and  tempest^ 

the  while  I  hold  together  all  existence. 
Beyond   this   wide  earth  and  beyond  the  heavens 
I  have  become  so  mighty  in  my  grandeur. 

7  The  Father:  Dyu  or  Dyaus  =  Zeus,  Heaven  or  Sky,  produced  from 
Vak  identified  with  Paramatm^,  the  Supreme  and  Universal  Soul. 

Mr.  Wallis  observes :  *  Vac,  *  Speech '  is  celebrated  alone  in  two 
whole  hymns  [of  the  Rigveda],  X.  71  and  X.  125,  of  which  the  former 
shows  that  the  primary  application  of  the  name  was  to  the  voice  of 
the  hymn,  the  means  of  communication  between  heaven  and  earth  at 
the  sacrifice.  The  other  hymn  illustrates  the  constant  assimilation  of  ' 
the  varied  phenomena  of  nature  to  the  sacrifice ;  all  that  has  a  voice 
in  nature,  the  thunder  of  the  storm,  the  re-awaking  of  life  at  dawn, 
with  songs  of  rejoicing  over  the  new  birth  of  the  world,  are  embodied 
in  this  Vac  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  said  of  B{ihaspati  that  he  em< 
braces  all  things  that  are.  It  is  thus  another  expression  for  that  idea 
of  the  unity  of  the  world,  which  we  have  seen  crowning  the  mystical 
speculations  of  all  the  more  abstract  hymns  of  the  collection '  (CosmoK 
logy  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  85). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MYM:]Sr  St]  TBS  ATBARVA-rRDA.  173 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Borne   on    with   thee,   O   Manyn  girt  by  Maputs, 

let  our  brave  men,  impetuous,  bursting  forward, 
March   on,    like   flames   of  fire   in    form,   exulting, 

with  pointed  arrows,  sharpening  their  weapons, 
a  Flashing  like  fire,  be  thou,    O  conquering  Manyu, 

invoked,  O  victor,  as  our  army's  leader. 
Slay  thou  our  foes,  distribute  their  possessions  :  show 

forth  thy  vigour,  scatter  those  who  hate  us. 

3  O    Manyu,    overcome    those   who   assail    us.     On 

breaking,  slaying,  crushing  down  the  foemen. 
They  have  not  hindered   thine   impetuous    vigour : 
mighty- !  sole-born !  reduce  them*ta  subjecrion. 

4  Alone  of  many  thou  art  worshipped,  Manyu  :  sharpen 

the  spirit  of  each  clan  for  combat. 
With   thee    to    aid,    O  thou  of  perfect  splendour, 
we  raise  the  glorious  battle-shout  for  conquest. 

5  Unyielding,  bringing  victory  like  Indra,  O  Manyu, 

be  thou  here  our  sovran  ruler. 
To   thy  dear  name,  O  victor,  we  sing  praises  :  we 
know  the  spring  from  which  thou  art  come  hither. 

6  Twin-born  with  power,  destructive  bolt  of  thunder! 

the  highest  conquering  might  is  thine,  subduer ! 
Be  friendly  to  us  in  thy  spirit,  Manyu!  O  much- 
invoked,  in  shock  of  mighty  battle  ! 

7  For  spoil  let  Varu^a  and  Mariyu  give  us  the  wealth 

of  both  sides  gathered  and  collected  ; 
And   let   our    enemies   with   stricken   spirits,    o'er- 
whelmed  with  terror,  slink  away  defeated. 


The  hymn,  which  is  taken  from  the  Rigveda  (X.  84),  is  a  hat  tie-song 
addressed  to  Manyu,  Wrath  or  Warlike  Ardour  personified  and  deified. 

1  Like  flames  of  fire  in  form:  a^nirUpdh;  Homer's  Sifiag  nvpog 
alOofjievoio  {Il»  11.  596). 

3  Sole-horn :  having  none  to  rival  thee  in  thine  own  province. 

5  The  spring:  the  divine  transcendental  source. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


174  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV. 

HYMN  XXXII. 

He  who  hath  reverenced  thee,  Manyu,  destructive  bolt ! 

breeds  for  himself  forthwith  all  conquering  energy. 
Arya  and  D4sa  will  we  conquer  with  thine  aid,  with 

thee  the  conqueror,  with  conquest  conquest-sped. 

2  Manyu  was  Indra,  yea,  the  God  was  Manyu  ;  Manyu 

was  Hotar,  Varuna,  JAtavedas. 
The  tribes  of  human  lineage  worship  Manyu.  Accord- 
ant, with  thy  fervour,  Manyu !  guard  us. 

3  Come  hither,  Manyu,  mightier  than   the   mighty  : 

smite,  with  thy  fervour  for  ally,  our  foemen. 
Slayer  of  foes,  of  Vritra,  and  of  Dasyu,  bring  thou 
to  us  all  kinds  of  wealth  and  treasure. 

4  For  thou  art,  Manyu,  of  surpassing  vigour,  fierce, 

queller  of  the  foe,  and  self-existent, 
Shared  by  all  men,  victorious,   subduer  :  vouchsafe 
to  us  superior  strength  in  battles. 

5  I  have  departed  still  without  a  portion,   wise  God ! 

according  to  thy  will,  the  mighty. 
I,  feeble  man,  was  wroth  with  thee,  0  Manyu.  Come 
in  thy  proper  form  and  give  us  vigour. 

6  Come  hither,  I  am  all  thine  own :   advancing,  turn 

thou  to  me,  victorious,  all-bestowing. 
Come  to  me,  Manyu,  wielder  of  the  thunder  :  bethink 
thee  of  thy  friend,  and  slay  the  Dasyus. 

The  hymn,  which  is  almost  identical  with  Rigveda  X.  83,  is  a  battle-song 
addressed  to  Manyu,  personified  Wrath,  the  deity  of  the  preceding  hymn. 

1  Ddsa :  a  general  name  applied  in  the  Veda  to  certain  evil  beings 
or  demons  hostile  to  Indra  and  to  men.  It  means  also,  a  savage, 
a  barbarian,  as  here,  one  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  country 
opposed  to  an  Aryan  immigrant.  \  In  the  second  hemistich  I  read 
mant/dniy  as  in  the  Rigveda,  instead  of  manyur  of  the  text. 

2  Fervour :  tdpas ;  originally 'heat,'  'burning,*  and  secondly  'reli- 
gious austerity,*   *  fervid  abstraction.' 

3  Dasyu :  fiend,  or  barbarian. 

5  Without  a  portion :  without  a  share  in  thy  favours. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  33.]  THE  ATHAR7A-7EDA.  175 

7  Approach,  and  on  our  right  hand  hold  thy  station, 
then  let  us  slay  a  multitude  of  foemen. 
The  best  of  meath  I  offer  to  support  thee :  may  we 
be  first  to  drink  thereof  in  quiet. 

HYMN  XXXIIL 

Chasing  our  pain  with  splendid  light,  0  Agni,  shine 

thou  wealth  on  us. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  ! 

2  For  goodly  fields,  for  pleasant  homes,  for  wealth  we 

sacrifice  to  thee. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away ! 

3  Best  praiser  of  all  these  be  he,  and  foremost  be  our 

noble  chiefs. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  I 

4  So  that  thy  worshippers  and  we,  thine,  Agni !  in  our 

sons  may  live. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away ! 

5  As  ever-conquering  Agni's  beams  of  splendour  go  to 

every  side, 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  ! 

6  To  every  side  thy  face  is  turned,  thou  art  triumphant 

everywhere. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  ! 

7  O  thou  whose  face  looks  every  way,  bear  off  our  foes 

as  in  a  ship. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  ! 

8  As  in  a  ship  across  the  flood,  transport  us  to  felicity. 
His  lustre  flash  our  pain  away  ! 

The  hymn,  which  is  almost  identical  with  Rigveda  T.  97,  is  a  prayer 
to  Agni  for  protection  and  general  prosperity. 

1  Pain :  suffering  inflicted  on  us  by  our  enemies. 

3  He :  in  the  original  hymn,  meaning  Kutsa  the  Rishi  or  seer  to 
whom  the  hymn  is  attributed.  May  he  be  preeminent  among  those 
who  celebrate  thy  praises,  and  may  the  chiefs  or  wealthy  householders 
who  have  instituted  the  sacrifice  be  distinguished  among  thy  worshippers. 

8  Acro$$  thejlood:  or,  over  Sindhu,  or  Indus :  As  over  Sindhu  in  a  ship. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


17e  THE  BTMirS  OF  \SOOK  IT. 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

The   head   of  this   is   prayer,   its   back  the  Brihati 

Odana's  belly  is  the  Vdmadevya ; 
Its  face  reality,  its  sides  the  metre,  Visht&r}  sacrifice 

produced  from  fervour. 

2  Boneless,  deansed,  purified  by  him  who  cleansethi 

they  go  resplendent  to  the  world  of  splendour. 
Fire  burneth  not  their   organ  of  enjoyment :  much 
pleasure-  have  they  in  the  world  of  Svarga. 

3  Never  doth  want  or  evil  fortune  visit  those  who  pre- 

pare oblation  called  Visht4rt. 
He  goes  unto  the  Gods,  he  dwells  with  Yama,.he  joys 
among  Gandharvas  meet  for  Soma. 

4  Yama  robs  not  of  generative  vigour  the   men  who 

dress  oblation  called  Visht4ri. 
Borne  on  his  car,  a  charioteer,  he  travels  :  endowed 
with  wings  he  soars  beyond  the  heavens. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  a  certain  sacrifice  called  VishUrt, 
\vho8e  chief  element  is  Odana,  a  mess  or  broth  of  mashed  rice  or  other 
grain  cooked  with  milk. 

1  Of  this :  of  the  Odana.  7%e  Brihat :  the  name  of  various  S4mana 
or  songs  of  praise  composed  in  the  Brihati  metre  which  consists  of 
two  padas  of  eight  syllables  each  followed  by  one  p&da  of  twelve  and 
one  of  eight  syllables.  Vdmadtvya:  (eoming  from  Y^madeva  the 
Rishi  or  inspired  seer  of  Book  IV.  of  the  Kigveda)  the  name  given  to 
various  S&mans.  Vishtdri  r  (meaning  *  extensive')  the  name  of  the  ob- 
latioa  which  is  the  subject  of  the  hymn.  In  non-sacerdotal  language 
the  meaning  of  the  stanza  is :  Devotion,  various  songs  of  praise  and 
the  metre  in  which  they  are  composed,  results,  and  efifectiveness  are  the 
essential  accompaniments  of  the  brew  of  rice  and  milk  offered  in  the. 
YishtUri  sacrifice  which  is  originated  by  a  fervid  religious  spirit. 

2  By  htm  who  cleanseth :  by  the  purifying  Wind.  Tht^  :  who  offer 
the  VishUri  oblation.  Fire :  the  flames-  of  the  funeral  pile.  Muir 
(0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  307)  cites  from  the  Satapatha-Brahmana,  X.  4.  4.  4  : 

•  When  a  man,  knowing  this,  practises  austere  fervour,  he  retains  in 
heaven  all  his  functions,  even  to  that  of  sexual  intercourse.' 

3  He :  the  offerer  of  the  oblation.  Gandharvas :  genii  who  inhabit 
Svarga  or  heaven. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HXMjS^  35.]  THB  ATHARVA-VEDA.  177 

5  Strongest  is  this,  performed,  of  sacrifices  :  he  hath 

reached  heaven  who  hath  prepared  Visht^l. 
The  oval-fruited  lotus  spreads  his  fibre  :  there  bloom 

the  nenuphar  and  water-lilies. 
Abundant  with  their  overflow   of  sweetness,  these 

streams  shall  reach  thee  in  the   world   of  Svarga, 

whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee. 

6  Pull  lakes  of  butter  with  their  banks  of  honey,  flow- 

ing with  wine,  and  milk  and  curds  and  water — 
Abundant  with  their   overflow   of  sweetness,   these 
streams  shall  reach  thee  in  the  world  of  Svarga, 
whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee. 

7  I  give  four  pitchers,  in   four  several  places,  filled  to 

the  brim  with  milk  and  curds  and  water. 
Abundant  with   their   overflow  of  sweetness,  these 
streams  shall  reach  thee  in   the   world  of  Svarga, 
whole  lakes  with  lotus-blossom  shall  approach  thee. 

8  I  part  this  Odana  among  the   Br&hmans,   Vishtdrl, 

conquering  worlds  and  reaching  heaven. 
Let  me  not  lose  it :  swelling  by  its  nature,  be  it  my 
perfect  Cow  to  grant  all  wishes  1 

HYMN  XXXV. 

Odana  which  Praj4pati,  the  firstborn  of  Order,  dress- 
ed with  fervour  for  the  Brahman, 

5  The  oval-fruited :  or  dndtkam  may  be  a  separate  plant  with  egg- 
shaped  fruit  or  bulbs.  Cf.  V.  17.  16.  Lotus:  Mmudam;  either  the 
white  esculent  water-lily  or  the  red  lotus  whose  fruit  is  also  edible. 
Nenuphar  and  water-lilies  :  a  substitution  for  the  S&liika,  Saphaka,  and 
Mulftlin  of  the  text  which  seem  to  be  unidentifiable  aquatio  plants. 
Thee :  the  offerer  of  the  oblation. 

As  regards  Svarga  or  heaven  and  the  joys  of  the  departed,  see  a  ful- 
ler and  more  attractive  account  in  Rigveda  IX.  113.  7 — 11. 

8  Cow  to  grant  all  wishes :  dhenilh  kdmad'dghd ;  the  mythical  Cow 
of  Plenty,  fiUfiller  of  all  desires. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  437. 

The  hymn  is  a  further  magnification  of  the  Odana,  or  oblation  of 
mashed  rice  and  milk  (see  IV.  34). 

1  Prajdpati :  the  Lord  of  Life ;  the  Creator.  Mfityu :  the  God  of  Death. 

12 


Digitized  by 


Google 


178  TOS  ttTMlfS  OP  [JBOOlt  tV. 

Which  guards  the  worlds  from  breaking  at  the  cen- 
tre,— I  with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu. 

2  Whereby  the    World-Creators    vanquished   Mtityu, 
that  which  they  found  by  fervour,  toil  and  trouble. 
That  which  prayer  first  made  ready  for  the  Brah- 
man,— I  with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu. 

8  That  which  upholds  the  Earth,  the  all-sustainer,  that 
which  hath  filled  air's  middle  realm  with  moisture, 
Which,    raised    on    hiifh    in    grandeur,    stabli&hed 
heaven, — ►!  with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu. 

4  Prom  which  the   months    with   thirty   spokes   were 

moulded,  from  which  the  twelve-spoked  year  was 
formed  and  fashioned, 
Which  circling  day  and  night  have  ne'er  overtaken, — 
I  with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mtityu. 

5  Which  hath  become   breath-giver,    life-bestower,   to 

which  the  worlds  flow  full  of  oil  and  fatness. 
To  whom  belong  all  the  refulgent   regions, — I    with 
this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu. 

6  From  which,  matured,    sprang   Amrit   into   being, 

which  bath  become  G^yatri's  lord  and  ruler, 
In  which  the  perfect  Vedas  have  been  treasured, — 
I  with  this  Odana  will  conquer  Mrityu. 

7  I  drive  away   the  hostile   God-despiser :  far   oflF  be 

those  who  are  mine  adversaries. 
I  dress  Brahmaudana  that  winneth  all  things.     May 
the  Gods  hear  me  who  believe  and  trust  them. 


2  Tht  World'Creatorg :  see  III.  28.  1. 

4  Twelve-spoked  year :  cf.  Rigveda  I.  164.  11. 

6  QdyatrV$  lord:  master  of  the  Gllyatrl  metre.  Perfect:  or>  omniform. 

7  Brahmaudana :  the  Odana  or  mess  of  rice  and  milk  distributed 
to  Brihmans,  and  especially  to  priests  at  a  sacrifice. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  438. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  36.]  THB  ATffARVA^VEDA.  179 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

Endowed  with  true  strength,  let  the  Bull,  Agni  Vais- 

v4nara,  burn  them  up, 
Him  who  would  pain  and  injure  us,  him  who  would 

treat  us  as  a  foe. 

2  Him  who,  unharmed,  would  injure  us,  and  him  who, 

harmed,  would  do  us  harm 
I  lay   between  the  doubled  fangs  of  Agni,  of  Vais- 
vinara. 

3  Those  who,  what  time  the  moon  is  dark,  hunt  with 

loud  cry  and  answering  shout, 
Flesh-eaters,  others  who  Would  harm, — all   these    I 
overcome  with  might. 

4  I  conquer  the  Pisdchas  with   my   power,  and  take 

their  wealth  away. 
All  who  would  injure  us  I  slay.     Let  mine  inten- 
tion have  success. 

5  With  Gods  who  flee  with  him,  and  match  their  rapid 

motion  with  the  Sun, 
I  with  those  animals  who  dwell  in  rivers  and  on  hills 
am  found. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  fiends,  human  enemies,  and  trouble- 
some pests. 

3  With  loud  cry :  dgare^  which  does  not  occur  elsewhere,  is  a  word 
of  uncertain  signification.  In  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  it  is  sug- 
gested that  it  may  stand  for  dgdre^  *  in  the  chamber,*  and  so  Ludwig 
translates  it.  Sayana  explains  it  as  meaning  *  on  the  field  of  battle.' 
See  Grill's  note.     Flesh^aters :  eaters  of  raw  flesh  ;  demons. 

4  PiBdchas:  goblins,  fiends.    See  I.  16.  3,  note. 

5  With  Gods :  as  Agni ;  *  Vajsvanara  hath  rivalry  with  Sdrya'  (Rig- 
veda  I.  98.  1.);  Soma:  *This  Pavam&na  ....  mounts  upwithSArya 
to  the  sky'  (Rigveda  IX.  27.  5).  With  those  animals :  sdm  taih  pasii- 
hhih  ;  this  is  obscure,  and  the  metre  suffers.  Grill  suggests  that  in- 
stead of  pavdhhih  some  such  word  £t8  pisdchahd^  *  destroyer  of  PisaLchas,' 
should  be  read  :  *With  those  who  dwell  in  streams  and  hills  I,  slayer  of 
the  fiends,  am  found.'    Ludwig,    retaining  pastibhth,   translates    *  mit 

diesen  [wie  mit]  vieh  mog  ich  befuuden  werden ; '  *  may  I   be   found 
with  these  (as  with)  cattle,' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


180  TH£  HYMirS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

6  I  trouble  the  Pis&chas  as  tlie  tiger  plagues  men  rich 

in  kine. 
They,  even  as  dogs  when  they  have  seen  a  lion,  find 
no  hiding-place. 

7  Naught  with  Pis^has  can   I  do,  with  thieves,  with 

roamers  of  the  wood. 
Pis4chas  flee  and  vanish  from  each  village  as  I  enter  it. 

8  Into  whatever  village  this  mine  awful  power  pene- 

trates, 
Thence  the  Pis4chas  flee  away,  and  plot  no  further 
mischief  there. 

9  Those  who  enrage  me  with  their  prate,  as  flies  tor- 

ment an  elephant, 

I  deem  unhappy  creatures,  like  small  insects  trouble- 
some to  man. 
10  Destruction  seize  upon  the  man,  as  with  a  cord  they 
hold  a  horse. 

The  fool  who  is  enraged  with  me !  He  is  not  rescued 
from  the  noose. 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

With  thee,  O  Plant,  in  olden  time  Atharvans   smote 

and  slew  the  fiends. 
Kasyapa  smote  with  thee,  with  thee  did  Ka^va  and 

Agastya  smite. 

7  Thieves  .  .  .  roamers  of  the  wood :  the  mischievous  Pis^chas  are 
probably  meant. 

8  This  mine  awful  power :  which  frightens  the  goblins  away. 

9  With  their  prate :  I  adopt  the  reading  lapitvd',  suggested  by  Prof. 
Whitney  in  his  Index  Verborum,  instead  of  lapit<ty  *  chatterings/ 

\0  He  is  not  rescued  from  the  noose :  he  shall  be  caught  in  the  snare 
of  Nirriti  the  Goddess  of  Misfortune  and  Destruction. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigreda,  III.  p.  526, 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  3,  136. 


The  hymn  is  a  spell  to  drive  away  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases. 
1   A  tharvans  :  the  descendants  of  the  great  Atharvan,  the  first  Fire- 
priest.  Kasyapa  . . .  Kanva  . . .  Agastya  :  see  Index. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN^  a?.]  THE  ATBASYA'TBDA.  181 

2  With  tbee  we  scare  and  drive  away  Grandharvas  and 

Apsarases. 
O  Ajasringi^  chase  the  fiends.     Cause  all  te  vanish 
with  thy  smell. 

3  Let   the  Apsarases,   puffed  away,  go  to  the  river, 

to  the  ford, — 
GuggulA,  PIU,  Naladl,  Aukshagandhi,  Pramandint. 
Ye  have  become  attentive  since  the  Apsarases  have 

past  away. 

4  Where  great  trees  are,  A$vatthas  and  Nyagrodhas 

with  their  leafy  crests. 
There  where  your  swings  are  green  and  bright,  and 

lutes  and  cymbals  sound  in  tune. 
Ye  have  become  attentive  since  the  Apsarases  have 

past  away. 

5  Hither  bath  come  this  one,  the  most  effqctual  of  herba 

and  plants. 

6  Let  Ajasringt  penetrate,  Ar&takl  with  sharpened  bori|* 

7  From  the  Gandharva,  dancing  near,  the  lord  of  the 

Apsarases, 
Wearing  the  tuft  of  hair,  I  take  all  manhood  and 
viriUty. 

2  Gandharvas :  see  Index.  Apsarases:  see  Index.  Ajasringt:  the 
name  of  the  plant  used  in  the  inoantatioa ;  literally  Goat's  Horn,  Odina 
Pinnata. 

3  These  names  are  derived  from  fragrant  plants  or  aweet  scents, 
GuggnlA  meaning  *  Bdellium-scented ;  *  Naladi  *  Smelling  of  Spikenard;' 
the  plants  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  names  have  not  been  indenti- 
fied.  The  names  of  the  six  Apsarases  mentioned  in  Bigveda  X.  95,  6 
refer  to  their  looks  and  habits.  Ye :  the  Gandharvas.  The  charm 
has  now  driven  the  nymphs  away. 

4  The  Asvattha  (see  III.  6.  1)  is  the  Holy  Fig-tree,  Ficus  Religiosa  ; 
the  Nyagrodha  is  the  Indian  Fig-tree,  Ficus  Indica. 

6  ArdtaM :  a  name  or  epithet  of  Ajasringi  or  Goat's  Horn. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


182  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  lY. 

8  With  those  dread  hundred  iron  spears,  the  darts  of 

Indra,  let  it  pierce 

The  Blyxa-fed  Gandharvas,  those  who  bring  no  sacri- 
ficial gift, 

9  With  those  dread  hundred  golden  spears,  the  darts 

of  Indra,  let  it  pierce 
The  Blyxa-fed  Gandharvas^  those  who  bring  no  sacri- 
ficial gift. 

10  0   Plant,   be   thou  victorious,   crush   the   PisAchas, 

one  and  all^ 
Blyxa-fed,  shining     in   the  floods,    illumining  the 
selfish  ones. 

11  Youthful,  completely  decked  with  hair,  one  monkey- 
.    like,  one  like  a  dog, — 

So  the  Gandharva,  putting  on  a  lovely  look,  pursues 

a  dame. 
Him  with  an  efficacious  charm  we  scare  and  cause  to 

vanish  hence, 

12  Your  wives  are  the  Apsarases,  and  ye,  Gandharvas, 

are  their  lords. 

Run  ye,  immortal  omes^  away :  forbear  to  interfere 
with  men  I 


8  Irontpean:  the  stroQg  thorns  or  spines  of  the  plant.  Blyxa-fect.^ 
eaters  ol  Avak&  (Blyxa  Octandja),  a  water-plant,  called  Saivida  in  later 
times. 

10  Illumining  the  selfish  ones  :  jyotayamdmcMn ;:  the  meaning  ia 
obscure, 

11  'The  Gandharvas^  a  class  of  gods^  who  are  described  as  hairy,  like 
dogs  and  monkeys,  but  as  assuming  a  handsome  appearance  to  seduce 
the  affections  of  earthly  females,  are  called  upon  to  desist  from  this  un- 
becoming practice,  and  not  to  interfere  with  mortals,  as  they  have  wives 
of  their  own,  the  Apasarases'  (Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  309).  The  Gan- 
dharvas here  resemble  the  Faimi  and  the  Satyri  of  Italy,  the  latter 
being  represented  as  woodland  genii  or  deities^  ape-like  and  goat-footed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EYMir  38.]  THE  A  THA  R  VA-  VEDA.  185 

HYMN  XXXVIII. 

Hither   I  call  the   Apsaras,   victorious,  who  plays 

with  skill, 
Her  who  comes  freely  forth  to  view,  who  wins  the 

stakes  in  games  of  dice. 

2  Hither  I  call  that  Apsaras  who  scatters  and  who 

gathers  up, 
The   Apsaras   who  plays  with  skill   and  takes  her 
winnings  in  the  game. 

3  Dancing  around  us  with  the  dice,  winning  the  wager 

by  her  play. 
May  she  obtain  the  stake  for  us  and  gain  the  victory 

with  skill. 
May  she  approach  us  full  of  strength  :  let  them  not 

win  this  wealth  of  ours. 

4  Hither  I  call  that  Apsaras,  the  joyous^  the  delight- 

ful one — 
Those  nymphs  who  revel  in  the  dice^  who  suffer  grief 
and  yield  to  wrath. 

5  Who  follow  in  their  course  the  rays  of  SiSlrya,  or  as  a 

particle  of  light  attend  him. 

Whose  leader  from  afar,  with  store  of  riches,  com- 
passes quickly  all  the  worlds  and  guards  them. 

Pleased,  may  he  come  to  this  our  burnt  oblation, 
together  with  the  Air,  enriched  with  treasure. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  sucoess  in  gambling. 

1  The  Apsaras :  the  Apsarases  are  intimately  connected  with  gamble 
ing  with  dice.  See  II.  2.  5. 

6  Stanzas  5 — 7,  diflTering  in  metre  and  unconnected  with  the  object 
of  the  charm,  are  evidently  a  later  addition  to  the  original  hymn.  They 
are  employed  in  Kausika-Sutra  XXI.  11  as  a  charm  for  the  protection 
of  cattle.  Who :  apparently  the  Apsarases  as  nymphs  of  the  mists  of 
morning,  Leader :  perhaps  the  Sun. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1«4  THB  SYMPS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

6  Together  with  the  Air,  O  rich   in  treasure,   guard 

here  the  white  cow  and  the  calf,  O  nrighty ! 
Here  are  abundant   drops   for   thee,   come   hither ! 
Here  is  thy  white  calf,  let  thy  mind  be  with  us. 

7  Together  with  the  Air,  O  rich  in  treasure,  keep  the 

white  calf  in  safety  here,  O  mighty  ! 
Here  is  the  grass,  here  is  the  stall,  here  do  we    birtd 
the   calf.     We  are  your  masters,  name  by  name. 
All  Hafl  1 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

Aqni  on  earth  hath  had  mine  homage.  May  be  bless 

me. 
As  I  have  bowed  me  down  to  Agni  on  the  earth,  so 

let  the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me. 

2  Earth  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  is  Agni.     May  she  with 

her  calf  Agni  yield  me  food,  strength,  all  my  wish, 
life  first  of  all,  and  offspring,  plenty,  wealth.  All 
Hail! 

3  Vdyu  in  air  hath  had  mine  homage.  May  he  bless  me. 
As  I  have  bowed  me  down  to  V4yu  in  the  air,  so  let 

the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me. 

4  Air  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  is  V&yu.  May  she  with  her 

calf  VSyu  yield  me  food,  strength,  all  my  wish, 
life  first  of  all,  and  offspring,  plenty,  wealth.  All 
Hail! 

6  0  mighty!:  vdfin;  according  to  Ludwig,  the  horse  of  the  Gan- 
dharra  is  addressed. 

7  Your  masters^  name  hy  name  :  we  have  jwwer  over  you  (Gandhar- 
vas  or  Apsarases)  collectively  and  severally. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  454; 
and  stanzas  1 — 4,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.71, 140. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  to  various  deities  for  health,  wealth,  and 
general  prosperity. 

1  The  Favouring  Graca  :  the  condescending  loving-kindnesses  of  the 
Gods,  personified. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  40.]  THE  ATBARTA-VEDA.  185 

5  The  San  in  heaven  hath  had  my  homage.   May  he 

bless  me. 
As  I  have  bowed  me  down  unto  the  Sun  in  heaven, 
so  let  the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me, 

6  Heaven  is  the  Cow,  her  calf  Aditya.   May  she  yield 

with  her  calf  the  Sun  food,  strength,  and  all  my 
wish,  life  first  of  all,  and  offispring,  plenty,  wealth 
All  Hail  1 

7  To  Chandra  in  the  quarters  have  I  bowed  me.  May 

he  bless  me. 
As  unto  Chandra  in  the  quarters  I  have  bent,  so  let 
the  Favouring  Graces  bow  them  down  to  me. 

8  The  quarters  are  the  Cows,  their  calf  is   Chanara. 

May  they  yield  with  their  calf  the  Moon  food; 
strength,  and  all  my  wish,  life  first  of  all,  and  ofi* 
spring,  plenty,  wealth.  All  Hail  f 

9  Agni  moves  having  entered  into   Agni,  the  Kishis' 

son,  who  guards  from  imprecations. 
I  offer  unto  thee  with   reverent   worship.     Let  me 
not  mar  the  Gods'  appointed  service. 

10  Skilled  in  all  ways,  O  God,    O  JAtavedas,    I  offer 
what  is  cleansed  by  heart  and  spirit 
To  all  thy  seven  mouths,   O  J4tavedas.    Do  thou 
accept  with  pleasure  my  libation. 

HYMN  XL. 

O  JAtavedas,  eastward  sacrificers,  as  foes  assail  us 
from  the  eastern  quarter. 

6  Aditya  :  meaning  here  the  Sun. 

7  Chandra :  the  Moon. 

9  Having  entered  into  Agni :  the  consecrated  fire  being  taken  from 
the  householder's  perpetual  fire.  The  JRiahis*  son :  first  produced  on 
eafth  by  Bishis,  as  Atharvan,  in  the  olden  time.  Seven  mouths :  the 
seven  mouths  (tongues  or  flames)  of  Agni  are  frequently  mentioned  in 
the  Eigveda. 

Th6  hjTAHi  addressed  to  Agni  Jitavedas,  is  a  charm  directed  against 
rival  worshippers. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ISe  THE  ATHARVA'7BDA.  [BOOK  IV, 

May  they,  turned  back,  be  pained  for  harming  Agni. 
I  drive  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

2  O  JdtavedaSy  southward  sacrificers  as  foes  assail  us 

from  the  southern  quarter. 
May  they,  turned  baok,  be  pained  for  harming  Yama. 
I  smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

3  O  J&tavedas,  westward  saorifioers  as  foes  assail  us 

from  the  western  quarter. 
For  harming  Varupa  be  they  turned  and  troubled! 
I  smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

4  O  J&tavedas,  northward  sacrifioers  as  foes  assail  ua 

from  the  northern  quarter. 
For  harming  Soma  be  they  turned   and  troubled  I  I 
smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

5  O  Jdtavedas,  nether  saorificers  as  foes  assail  us  from 

the  stedfast  quarter. 
For  harming  Earth  let  them  be  turned  and  troubled. 
I  smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

6  Those  who  pay  sacrifice,  0  J^tavedas,  from  air  assail 

us  from  the  midway  quarter. 
For  harming  V^yu  be  they  turned   and   troubled!  I 
smite  tliem  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

7  The  sacrificers  from  above  assail  us,  O  J&tavedas, 

from  the  lofty  quarter. 
For  wronging  SArya  be  they  turned  and  troubled  I 
1  smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

8  Those   from   all   points   assail    us,    J4tavedas,   who 

sacrifice  from  intermediate  regions. 
For  wronging  Prayer  let  them  be  turned  and  troubled. 
I  smite  them  backward  with  mine  incantation. 

1  For  harming  Agni  :  as  Heg^nt  of  the  East.  The  rival  and  heterodox 
worshippers  are  considered  to  insult  and  injure  the  deity  who  preside 
over  the  region  of  the  heaven  under  which  they  oflF^r  their  saqrifices. 

5  Stedfast  quarter :  or,  region  ;  the  nadir, 

6  Midway :  between  heaven  and  earth. 

7  Lofty  quarter :  or,  region ;  the  zenith. 

For  the  Regents  or  presiding  deities  of  the  regions,  see  note  on  1. 31.  L 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  V, 


HYMN  L 

He  who   with   special   plans  and    deathless   spirit, 

waxing,  well-born,  hath  come  unto  his  birth-place, 
As  he  who  shines  upholds  the  days,  thus  Trita,  of 

pure  life,  bears  the  Three  as  their  supporter. 
He  who,  the   first,   approached    the   holy   statutes 

makes,  after,  many  beauteous  forms  and  figures. 
Eager  to  drink,  his  birth-place  first  he  entered  who 

understands  the  word  when  yet  unspoken. 


This  very  obscure  introductory  hymn  appears  to  be  a  glorification 
of  Trita  and  Varuna. 

1  H€  who  shines :  Sfirya,  the  Sun-God.  Trita  :  a  mysterious  ancient 
deity  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveia,  principally  in  connexion 
with  the  Maruts,  V^yu,  and  Indra.  His  home  is  in  the  remotest  part 
of  heaven,  and  he  is  called  A  ptya,  the  Watery,  that  is,  sprung  from, 
or  dwelling  in,  the  sea  of  cloud  and  vapour.  In  the  Higveda  he  is 
identified  with  the  Sacrificial  Horse  (I.  163.  3);  he  is  said  to  have 
*  rent  Vritra  limb  from  limb'  (I,  187. 1),  and  to  have  combated  and  con- 
quered other  meteoric  demons  ;  as  VHyu  or  Wind  he  fans  and  quickens 
Agni  in  the  height  of  heaven  (V.  9.  5) ;  he  appears  to  be  the  celestial 
purifier  of  the  Soma  for  Indiu  (II.  11.  20 ;  IX.  32.  2;  34.  4 ;  37.  4 ; 
102.  2) ;  and  he  surrounds  the  Maruts  with  the  lightning  flash  and 
roar  (V.  54.  2).  Soma  identifies  Trita  sometimes  with  V4yu  ;  some- 
times with  Indra  as  the  pervader  of  the  three  worlds  ;  and  sometimes 
with  Agni  stationed  in  the  three  fire-receptacles.  See  Bergaigne,  La 
Beligion  V^dique,  II.  pp.  326 — 330.  In  this  hymn  Trita  appears  as  a 
creative  and  protecting  power.  The  Three :  the  worlds,  earth,  middle 
air,  and  heaven. 

2  Eager  to  drink;  or,  to  form,  to  create;  'Bohaflenslustiger/ — Ludwig. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


188  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Y. 

3  He  who — the  fluid  gold,  with  radiant  kinsmen — ^to 

fervent  glow  delivered  up  thy  body, 
On  him  both  set  names  that   shall   live  for  evec: 
to  him  the  regions  shall  send  robes  to  clothe  him. 

4  As  these  have  gone  to  their  primeval  station,  each 

gaining  an  imperishable  dwelling. 
May  kissing  mothers  of  the  bards'  belovM  bring  the 
pole-drawing  husband  to  the  sister. 

5  By  holv  wisdom  I  a  sage,  Far-Strider  !  offer  to  thee 

this  lofty  adoration. 
This  worship  both  the  mighty  eddying  rivers,  com- 
ing together  to  this  station,  heighten. 

6  Seven  are  the  pathways  which  the  wise  have  fashioned: 

to  one  of  these  may  come  the  troubled  mortal. 
On  sure  ground  where  the  ways  are  parted  standeth 
Life's  Pillar  in  the  dwelling  of  the  Highest. 


3  He :  Trita,  that  is,  Agni  as  the  Sun,  t\iQ  fluid  gold  whose  kinvnm 
are  the  flashes.  Thy  body  :  Soma's,  according  to  Ludwig.  The  mean- 
ing of  the  hemistich  is  not  clear.  Both :  the  dual  verb  has  no  express- 
ed subject.  Heaven  and  £arth  are  intended.  Regions :  (dirnh  instead 
of  vf«aj^)  of  the  heavens.  Robes :  clouds  with  which  the  sun  is  invested. 

4  2*he8e  .-^Heaven  and  Earth.  Primeval  station :  the  position  which 
they  have  occupied  from  the  earliest  time  since  their  separation.  See 
rV.  L  4.  Kissing  mothers:  Heaven  and  £arth.  Oft?ie  bards^  beloved: 
kavif^  fushdsya  of  the  text  is  absolutely  imintelligible  and  is  probably 
corrupt.  Sdi^a  appears  to  be  meant :  *  des  von  den  weisen  besungenen 
[Agni-Surya?].' — Ludwig.  Pole-drawing  husband :  Daj,  Sister :  Night. 

5  Far-Strider :  or,  having  a  broad  path  ;  Sdrya,  the  Sun.  Eddying 
rivers:  here  apparently,  Heaven  and  Earth:  'Rodha  imd  Chakrk 
[Himmel*und  Erde].' — Ludwig. 

6  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  5.  6.  Pathways :  mary^dh  / 
long  lines  or  divisions  of  light  The  wise :  the  sages,  the  Fathers. 
The  troubled  fnortal :  the  man  who  is  longing  for  daybreak  may  ap- 
proach the  pathway   of  light.   Prof.  M.  Miiller  translates  diflferently 

(Vedic  Hymns,  Part  L  p.  253) :   *  The  sages  established  the  seven 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B¥Mir2.]  THE  ATHASVA-7EDA.  189 

7   Working,  I  go  my  way  with  deathless  spirit;  life, 
spirit,  bodies  have  gone  gladly  thither. 
Aye,  Sakra  also  gives  his  gift  of  treasure  as  when  the 
sacrificer  meets  with  power. 

S  Yea,  the  son  asks  dominion  of  his  father  :  this  they 
declared  the  noblest  path  to  welfare. 
Varuna,  let  them  see  thy  revelations :    display  the 
wondrous  shapes  of  times  to  follow. 

9  Half  with  the  milk,  its  other  half,  thou  minglest, 
and  with  that  half,  strong !  unbeguiled  !  increasest. 

Let  us  exalt  the  gracious  friend,  the  mighty,  VaruQa 
son  of  Aditi,  strength-giver. 

We  have  told  him  the  marvels  sung  by  poets.  The 
utterance  of  Heaven  and  Earth  is  truthful. 

HYMN  II. 
In  all  the   worlds  That  was  the   best  and  highest 

whence  sprang  the  Mighty  One  of  splendid  valour. 
As  soon  as  born  he  overcomes  his  foemen,  when  those 

rejoice  in  him  who  bring  him  succour. 

divisions,  but  mischief  befell  one  of  them.'  Where  the  wayi  are  parted  : 
where  ends  the  dark  road  which  the  Sun  travels  by  night,  and  the 
bright  path  of  his  daily  course  begins.  Lift^i  Pillar :  apparently,  Agni. 
The  meaning  of  the  whole  stanza  is  uncertain. 

7  Bakra  :  the  mighty  Indra.  Meets  unthpower :  obtains  the  expected 
reward  of  his  oblations. 

9  Half  ....  thou  minglest :  preparest  a  libation  consisting  of 
equal  parts  of  Soma  juice  and  milk.  Gracious:  dvim/  'das  schaf/ 
*  the  sheep.' — Ludwig. 

The  hymn,  like  the  inti-oductory  hymn  of  Book  IV.,  is  a  Brdhmodyumf 
an  enunciation  in  designedly  enigmatical  language  of  cosmogonical 
and  mysto-theological  doctrine.  Translation  and  explanation  can  be 
only  conjectural,  and  some  passages  do  not  lend  themselves  to  either. 
See  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  39  i. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  X.  120 
ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Brihaddiva,  son  of  Atharvan,  is  a  glorification  of 
Indra. 

1  That :  meaning,  according  to  S&yaTia,  Brahma  the  original  cause 
of  the  Universe.     The  Mighty  One :  Indra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


190  THE  HtMNS  OP  [BOOK  f. 

2  Grown  mighty  in  his  strength,  with  ample  vigour, 

he  as  a  foe  strikes  fear  into  the  Dilsa, 
Eager  to  win  the  breathing  and  the  breathless  :  All 
sang  thy  praise  at  banquet  and  oblation, 

3  All   concentrate  on  thee  their  mental  vigour  what 

time  these,  twice  or  thrice,  are  thine  assistants. 
Blend  what  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness  ; 
win  quickly  with  our  meath  that  meath  in  battle. 

4  If  verily  in  every  war  the  sages  joy  and  exult  in  thee 

who  winnest  treasures, 
With  mightier  power,  strong  God,  extend  thy  firmness : 
let  not  malevolent  Kasokas  harm  thee. 

5  Proudly  we  put  our  trust  in  thee  in  battles,  when  we 

behold  great  wealth  the  prize  of  combat. 
I  with  my  words  impel   thy   weapons   onward,  and 
sharpen  with  my  prayer  thy  vital  vigour. 


2  Ddaa :  the  demon  enemies  of  the  Gods.  Eager  to  win  :  Prof.  Lud- 
wig  makes  sdsni  an  infinitive.  The  correct  reading  is  probably  sdsnis 
as  suggested  by  Prof.  Grassmann.  The  breathing  and  the  breathleu  : 
the  animate  and  the  inanimate  world. 

3  Mental  vigour :  krdtum;  *  adoration.' — Wilson.  Then:  Soma  juices. 
Twice  or  thrice :  with  reference,  perhaps,  to  the  three  daily  libations. 
These  invigorate  Indra  for  the  performance  of  his  mighty  deeds.  What 
is  sweeter :  thine  own  celestial  Soma  which  is  sweeter  than  that  of 
earth.  S&yana  explains  the  stanza  differently  : — *  To  thee  all  (wor- 
shippers) offer  adoration,  whether  those  propitiators  be  two  or  three. 
Combine  that  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness,  unite 
that  honey  with  honey.' — Wilson.  The  *  two  or  three '  are  according 
to  SHyana,  the  saorificer  and  his  wife  and  child,  and  the  second  half 
of  the  stanza  contains  a  reference  to  the  propagation  of  children. 

4  Kasokas :  a  class  of  demons,  according  to  the  St.  P.  Dictionary. 
The  Rigveda  has  '  Ydtudhdnas  ;  *  and  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  the 
Atharva-veda  hymn  was  employed  as  a  charm  on  some  special  occasion, 
and  Kasokas,  meaning  perhaps  people  living  on  the  stream  Kas^,  took 
the  place  of  Yiltudh&nas. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMir  1]  fHE  ATHAKVA-VEDA.  191 

6  Thou  in  that  house,  the  highest  or  the  lowest,  which 

thy  protection  guards,  bestowest  riches- 
Establish  ye  the  ever-wandering  mother,  and  bring 
full  many  deeds  to  their  completion. 

7  Praise  in  the  height  him  who  hath  many  pathways, 

courageous,  strongest,  Aptya  of  the  Aptyas. 
Through  strength  he  shows  himself  of  ample  power  : 
pattern  of  Prithivl,  he  fights  and  conquers. 

8  Brihaddiva,  the  foremost  of  light-winners,  hath  made 

these  holy  prayers,  this  strength  for  Indra. 
Free  Lord,  he  rules  the  mighty  fold   of  cattle,   win- 
ning, aglow,  even  all  the  billowy  waters. 

9  Thus  hath  Brihaddiva,  the  great  Atharvan,  spoken 

to  Indra  as  himself  in  person. 
Two  sisters  free  from  stain,  the  M^tarisvans,  with 
power  impel  him  onward  and  exalt  him. 

6  Establish  yt :  apparently  the  Grods  are  addressed.  The  ever-wan- 
dering  motJier :  the  earth  before  her  foundations  were  fixed.  The  reading 
of  the  Rigveda  differs  : — *Thou  stablishest  the  two  much-wandering 
mothers'  (heaven  and  earth). 

7  Aptya  of  the  Aptyas:  chief  of  the  class  of  deities  called  Aptyti, 
dwelling  in  the  waters  of  the  sea  of  air,  and  so  identified  with,  or  likened 
to,  Trita  Aptya.  See  V.  1.  1.  Pattern  of  Prithtvt:  vast  and  strong 
as  the  earth :  *  Thou  art  the  counterpart  of  earth'  (Rigveda  I.  52.  13). 

8  Foremost  of  light-winners :  according  to  Sflyana,  '  chief  of  Rishis, 
and  enjoyer  of  heaven,  or  servant  of  Aditya,  the  Sun,  Indra.'  I/e : 
Indra.  Fold  of  cattle :  the  realm  of  the  celestial  cows  or  rays  of  light. 
Billowy  waters :  of  the  sea  of  air. 

9  The  grmt  Atharvan  :  *the  great  priest.' — Grassmann.  As  himself: 
the  priest  identifies  himself  with  the  God  whom  he  worships.  Two  sis- 
ters :  Heaven  and  Earth.  Mdtarisvans :  MUtarisvan  in  the  Rigveda 
is  the  divine  being  who  brought  Agni  down  from  heaven  to  the  Bhri- 
gus,  and  is  sometimes  a  mystic  name  (perhaps.  Growing  in  the  mother, 
the  fire-drill)  of  Agni  himself.  How  the  term  is  applicable  to  Heaven 
and  Earth  is  not  clear.  The  Rigveda  has  svdsdrahy  sisters,  in  the  plu- 
ral, explained  by  Sayana  as  [  the  sister  rivers  which  abide  in  th« 
mother  (mdtdri)  Earth.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


192  TEE  STMNS  OF  [ROOK  T. 

HYMN  III. 

Lkt  strength  be  mine  while  I  invoke  thee,  Agni  f 
enkindling  thee  may  we  support  our  bodies. 

May  the  four  regions  bend  and  bow  before  me  :  with 
thee  for  guardian  may  we  win  the  combat. 

2  Baffling  the  rage  of  our  opponents,  Agni !  guard   us 

as  our  protector  round  about  us. 
Down  the  steep  slope  go  they  who  hate  us,  backward, 
and  let  their  thought  who  watch  at  home  be  ruined. 

3  May  all  the  Gods   be   on   my   side   in   battle,   the 

Maruts  led  by  Indra,  Vishnu,  Agni. 
Mine  be  the  middle  air's  extended  region,  and  may 
the  Wind  blow  favouring  these  my  wishes. 

4  For  me  let  them  present  all  mine  oblations,  and  let 

my  mind's  intention  be  accomplished. 
May  I  be  guiltless  of  the  least  transgression  :  may 
all  the  Gods  come  hither  and  protect  me. 

5  May  the  Gods  grant  me  riches,  may  the  blessing  and 

invocation  of  the  Gods  assist  me. 
This  boon  shall  the  celestial  Hotars  win  us :  may  we, 
un wounded,  have  brave  heroes  round  us. 

6  Ye  six  divine  Expanses,  give  us  freedom.  Here,  all 

ye  Gods,  acquit  yourselves  like  heroes. 
lict  not  calamity  or  curse  overtake  us,   nor  deeds  of 
wickedness  that  merit  hatred. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Bigveda  X.  128, 
ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Vihavya  of  the  family  of  Angiras,  is  a  prayer 
addressed  by  a  King  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  various  other  deities  for  vic- 
tory in  battle,  and  general  protection  and  prosperity. 

1  The  four  regions  :  the  King  is  about  to  undertake  a  Digvijaya^ 
the  subjugation  of  the  neighbouring  countries  in  all  directions. 

2  Dovm  the  steep  slope :  that  leads  to  destruction. 

5  Celestial  Hotars :  the  Hotar-priests  of  the  Gods.  According  to 
S&yana,  *  my  invokers  of  the  Gods.' 

6  Six  divine  Expanses :  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  upper  and 
lower  spaces  or  zenith  and  nadir. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  «.]  THE  ATRARYA^TBirA.  193 

7  Do  ye  three  Goddesses  give  ample  shelter  and  all 

success  to  us  ourselves  and  children. 
Let  us  not  lose  our  children  or  our  bodies :  let  us 
not  benefit  the  foe,  King  Soma ! 

8  Foodful  and  much-invoked,  at  this  our  calling  may 

the  far-reaching  Bull  grant  us  wide  shelter. 
Lord  of  bay  coursers,  Indra,  bless  our  children  :  harm 
us  not,  give  us  not  as  prey  to  others. 

9  Lord  of  the  world.  Creator  and  Disposer,  may  the 

God  Savitar  who  quells  assailants. 
May  the  Adityas,  Rudras,  both  the  Asvins,   Gods, 
guard  the  sacrificer  from  destruction. 

10  Let  those  who  are  our  foemen  stay  afar  from  us : 

with  Indra  and  with  Agni  we  will  drive  them  off. 
The  Adityas  and  the  Rudras,  over  us  on  high,  have 
made  me  strong,  a  thinker,  and  a  sovran  lord. 

11  Yea,  we  call  Indra  hitherward,  the  winner  of  wealth 

in  battle  and  of  kine  and  horsey. 
May  he  mark  this  our  worship  when  we  call  him 
Lord  of  bay  steeds,  thou  art  our  friend  and  comrade. 

HYMN  IV. 

Thou  who  wast  born  on  mountains,  thou  most  mighty 

of  all  plants  that  grow. 
Thou   Banrsher  of  Fever,   come,   Kushtha!    make 

Fever  pass  away. 

7  Three  Goddesses :  IlA,  Sarasvati,  and  Mahi  or  Bharati,  personifica- 
tions of  prayer  and  worship.  Thej  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda 
hymn. 

8  The  far-reaching  Bull :  Indra. 

11  This  stanza  is  not  taken  from  the  Rigveda  hymn. 


The  hynm  is  a  charm  against  Fever  and  other  aikuents. 
1  Fever:  see  1.  25.  Kushtha:  a  medicinal  plants  Costus  Speciosus 
or  Arabicus.  See  VI.  95  ;  102.  3 ;  XIX.  39. 

13 


Digitized  by 


Google 


W4  THS  HYMNS  Of  {BOOK  K 

2  Brought  from  the  Snowy  Mountain,  born  on  the 
high  hill  where  eagles  breed, 
Men  seek  to  buy  thee  when  they  hear :  for  Fever's 
Banisher  they  know, 
S  In  the  third  heaven  above  us  stands  the  Afvattha 
tree,  the  seat  of  Gods, 
There  the  Gods  sought  the  Kush^ha  Plant,  embodi* 
ment  of  endless  life. 

4  There  moved  through  heaven  a  golden  ship,  a  ship 

with  cordage  wrought  of  gold. 
There  the  G(k1s  won  the  Kush^a  Plant,  the  blossom 
of  eternal  life. 

5  They  sailed  on  pathways  paved  with  gold,  the  oars 

they  plied  were  wrought  of  gold  t 
All  golden  were  the  ships  wherein  they  carried  Kush« 
tha  down  to  earth. 

6  0  Kushtha,  bring  thou  hitherward  this  man  of  mine, 

restore  his  health. 
Yea,  free  him  from  disease  for  me. 

7  Thou  art  descended  from  the  Gods,  Soma's  benig* 

nant  friend  art  thou. 
Befriend  my  breath  and  vital  air,  be  gracious  unto 
this  mine  eye* 

8  Sprung,  northward,  from  the  Snowy  Hill  thou  art 

conveyed  to  eastern  men. 
There  they  deal  out  among  themselves  Kushiha's 
most  noble  qualities. 

9  Most  excellent,  indeed,  art  thon,  Kushtha  1  most 

noble  is  thy  sire. 

3  Awattha  tree:  Fious  Religiosa  or  Holy  Fig-tree;  see  II J^ 6.  1, 
note.  The  Tirtues  ascribed  to  Kushtha  are  so  manifold  and  mighty 
that  the  plant  must  have  a  celestial  origin.  '  The  Samoans  think  that 
their  most  valued  vegetables  were  stolen  from  heaven  by  a  Samoan 
visitor*  (Lang's  Custom  and  Myth). 

9  Thy  sire :  Kushtha's  father  is  said  to  be  Jivala,  Vivifier  (XIX.  39.  3), 

The  hymn  hais  been  translated  with  notes  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  9,  141. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


aniN  5.1  THJS  ATHARrA'YEDA.  Ifl6 

Make  all  Consumption  pass  away  and  render  Fever 
powerless. 

10  Malady  that  affects  the  head^  eye-weakness»  bodily 
defect- 
All  this  let  Kushtha  heal  and  cure :  aye,  godlike  is 
the  vigorous  power. 

HYMN  \r. 

Artamak  is  thy  grandsire,  Night  thy  mother,  and 

the  Cloud  thy  sire. 
Thy  name  is  called  Sil&cht  Thou,  thyself,  art  sister 

of  the  Gods. 

2  Whoever  drinketh  thee  hath  life :  thou  savest  and 

protectest  man. 
As  nursing  mother  of  mankind^  thou  takest  all  upoa 
thy  lap. 

3  Thou  clingest  close  to  every  tree,  as  a  fond  damsel 

clasps  her  love. 
Thy  name  is  called  The  Conqueror,  She  who  Stands 
Fast,  The  Rescuer. 

4  Whatever  wound  the  arrow,  or  the  staff,  or  violence 

inflicts, 
Thereof  thou  art  the  remedy :  as  such  restore  this 
man  to  healths  , 

6  Thou  springest  from  blest  Plaxa,  or  Asvattha,  Dhava, 
Khadira, 
Parqa,  or  blest  -  Nyagrodha,   so  come  thou  to  us, 
Arundhati  I 

The  hymn  is  a  ohann,  addressed  to  a  Plant,  to  mend  a  broken  bone. 

1  SUdchi :  more  usually  caUed  Arundhatt  as  in  stanzas  5  and  9,  a 
medicinal  climbing  plant  formerly  applied  in  cases  of  severe  contusion 
or  fracture.  See  IV»  12. 1,  note.  £l%$ter  of  the  Gods :  see  note  on  V.  4. 3. 

5  Plaxa:  the  Waved-leaf  Fig-tree,  Ficiis  Infeotoria,  a  large  and  beauti- 
ful tree  with  small  white  fruit.  Asvattha  ;  Ficus  Religiosa.  See  III. 
6.  1.  Dhava  :  a  shrub,  Grislea  Tormentosa.  Khadira:  Acacia  Catechu. 
See  III.  6.  1.  Parna:  Butea  Frotidosa.  See  III.  5.  4.  Nyagrodha: 
Ficus  Indica.  See  IV.  37.  4.  Ldkshd  :  meaning  apparently  a  plant  on 
which  the  cochineal  insect  which  produces  the  red  dye  (Ukh,  lac)  is  found. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


196  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Fv 

6  Gold -coloured,   bringing     happy  fate,    most  lovely, 

brilliant  as  the  Sun, 
Mayst  thou,   O  Healing !  come  unto  the  fracture : 
Healing  is  thy  name. 

7  Gold-coloured,  bringing  happy  fate,  odorous,  hairy- 

bodied  one, 
The  sister  of  the  Waters  art  thou,  L4ksh& !  and  tby 
soul  is  Wind. 

8  Sil&chl   is   thy  name :  thy  sire,  0  goat-brown !  is  a 

damsel's  son. 
Thou  hast  been  sprinkled  by  the  mouth  of  Yama's 
tawny-coloured  horse. 

9  Issuing  from  the  horse's  blood  away  she  glided  to 

the  trees. 
Become  a   wingM   water-brook,   and   come   to   us, 
Aruudhatl !  .     . 

HYMN  VI. 

Eastward  at  first  the  prayer  was  generated :  Vena 
disclosed  bright  flashes  fr6m  the  summit, 

Disclosed  his  deepest  nearest  revelations,  womb  of 
the  non-existent  and  existent. 

8  Thy  sire :  the  Cloud.  I  have  translated  the  text  as  it  stands  ;  but 
the  meaning  is  not  clear.  Dr.  Grill  says,  *  I  read  kdntnd^  ajdbahkruh'* 
and  translates  accordingly  :  *  Sil&chi  is  a  damsePs  child  (daughter  of 
Night),  thy  father  brown-red  like  the  goat.'  Zimmer,  doubtingly, 
translates  similarly.  Hast  been  sprinkled  by  the  mouth :  it  would  be 
better,  perhaps,  to  read  asndl  *  with  the  blood,'  instead  of  dsfid^  '  by  the 
mouth,*  as  suggested  by  Prof.  Whitney,  in  his  Index  Verborum,  follow-  . 
ed  by  Dr.  Grill  who  refers  to  the  ancient  German  custom  of  sprinkling 
holy  trees  with  blood.  Yama's  horse  does  not  appear  to  be  mentioned 
elsewhere. 

9  Became  a  vnnghd  water-brook :  come  swiftly  as  a  rapid  stream. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  67 ;  and, 
with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  10,  142. 


The  hymn  is  mainly  a  prayer  for  protection  and  prosperity, 
1  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  IV.  1.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^7MS  6.]  THE  ATHARVA^YEDA.  197 

2  None  have   attained   to  those    of  old,  those   who 
wrought  holy  acts  for  you* 
Let  them  not  harm  our  heroes  here.   Therefore  I  set 
before  you  this. 
.3  Sweet-tongued,    exhaustless,   they  have   sent  their 
voices  down  together  in  heaven's  vault  that  pours 
a  thousand  streams. 
His  wildly-restless  warders  never  close  an  eye :  in 
every  place  the  snarers  stand  to  bind  men  fast. 
,  4  Speed  forward,  conquering  all  foes,  to  win  the  spoil. 
Thou  comest  on  thy  haters  with  a  surging  sea.    Thy 
name  is  Fraorile.     The  thirteenth  month  is  Indra's 
home. 
.  5  Through  this  now  hast  thou  sent  thy  gifts.   All  haill 
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly, 
be  gracious  unto  us,  Soma  and  Kudra  ! 

6  Through  this  hast  thou  been  left  in  want.     All  hail ! 
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly, 

be  gracious  unto  us.  Soma  and  Rudra ! 

7  Through  this  hast  thou  committed  faults.  All  hail !  ^ 
With  sharpened  arms  and  missiles,  kind  and  friendly, 

be  gracious  unto  us.  Soma  and  Rudra  I 

i  Repeated  from  IV.  7.  7. 

3  Taken,  with  a  slight  variation,  from  Rigveda  IX.  73.  4.  They  : 
the  beams  of  light  which  radiate  from  the  Soma  juices  as  they  undergo 
purification.  His  warders :  Soma's  rays  which  watch  the  actions  of  men, 
detecting  and  capturing  the  wicked  like  hunters  with  snares  and  nooses. 

4  The  first  line  is  taken  from  Rigveda  IX.  110.  1,  and  is  addressed 
to  Soma  Pavam^ua  (the  Soma  as  it  is  purified)  in  the  original  hymn, 
Thx>u sea  :  dvishdstddddkyarnavineyase  seems  to  be  a  corrup- 
tion of  dvishds  tarddkyd  rinayd^  na  iyase,  '  As  a  debt-claimer  thou 
speedest  to  quell  thy  foes,'  the  second  hemistich  of  the  same  hymn. 
Thy  name  is  Fragile :  here  the  chief  subject  of  the  hymn,  the  thirteenth 
or  intercalary  month  of  the  Indian  calendar.  Indra's  home:  the 
thirteenth  month  being  created  by  the  Sun  or  Indra.     See  XIII.  3.  8. 

5  The  first  line  of  this,  as  of  each  of  the  two  following  stanzas,  is 
unintelligible  to  me. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


198  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  T. 

8  Free  us  from  trouble,  free  us  from  dishonour,  accept 

our  worship,  give  us  life  immortal. 

9  0  missile  of  the  eye,  missile  of  spirit,  thou  missile  of 

devotion  and  of  fervour ! 
Thou  art  the  weapon  shot  against  the  weapon.     Lot 
those  be  weaponless  who  sin  against  ua 

10  Make  with   thy    weapon   weaponless,    O  Agni,  all 

wicked  men  who  deal  with  us  as  foemen  with  eye,^ 
with  thought,  with  spirit,  or  intention. 

11  Thou  art  the  house  of  Indra.  I  betake  me  to  thee^ 

I  enter  thee  with  all  my  oattle, 
With  all  my  people  and  with  all  my  body,  with  all 
my  soul,  with  mine  entire  possessions. 

12  Thou  art  the  guard  of  Indra.  I  betake  me  to  thee,  etc. 

13  Thou  art  the  shield  of  Indra.  I  betake  me  to  thee,  eto. 

14  Indra's  protection  art  thou.     I  betake  me  to  thee^ 

I  enter  thee  with  all  my  oattle, 
With  all  my  people  and  with  all  my  body,  with  aU 
my  soul,  with  mine  entire  possessions. 

HYMN  VII. 

Bbing  thou  to  us,  bar  not  the  way^  Ar&ti  t  Stay  net 
the  guerdon  that  is  being  brought  us. 

Homage  be  paid  to  Failure^  to  Misfortune^  and 
Malignity. 

9  The  remainder  of  the  hymn  is  noo-metrioaK 

11  The  house  of  Indra :  the  thirteenth  month  is  the  subject  of  many 
wildly  fanciful  peculations  in  the  later  Yedic  literature.  Here  the  nexjb 
world  appears  to  be  referred  to. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  deprecate  Arftti,  or  Malignity  personified. 

1  Guerdon :  the  dakshind  or  honorarium  given  to  the  priests  who 
officiate  at  a  sacrifice.  The  speaker,  who  belongs  to  the  sacerdotal 
dass,  hopes  that  his  fees  may  not  diminish.  See  J^igyeda  X»  107| 
addressed  to  Dakshini. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  T.)  TBE  JLTBARTA-rSDA,  19* 

2  1^6  man  whom  tbou  preferrest^  O  Arftti,  he  who 
prates  to  us — 
This  mao  of  thine^  we  reverence.  Baffle  not  thou  my 
heart's  desire* 

8  May  our  desire  whioh  Gk>ds  have  roused  fulfil  itself 

by  day  and  ni^ht. 
We  seek  to  win  Ar&ti :  to  Arftti  be  our  homage  paid. 

4  We,  suppliant,  call  on  Bhaga,  ob  Sarasvatt,  Anumati. 
Pleasant  words  have  I  spokeUi  sweet  as  honey  is» 

at  invocations  of  the  Gods, 

5  The  portion  that  I  crave  with  speech  intelligent  and 

full  of  power,. 
May  faith,  presented  with  the  gifL  of  tawny  Soma» 
fiiid  to-day. 

6  Do  no.t  thou  make  our  words  or  wishes  fruitless.  Let 

the  twain,  Indra  Agni,  bring  us  treasures. 
All,  fain  to-day  to  give  us  gifts,  welcome  Ar&ti  with 
your  love. 

7  Misfortune !  ga  thou  fkr  away  :  we  tura  thy  harmful 

dart  aside^ 
I  know   thee  well,   Ar&ti!  as  oppressor,   onie  who- 

penetrate& 
%  Oft,  coming  as  a  naked  girl  thou  haontest  people  iik 

their  sleep. 
Baffling  the  thought,  Arati !  and  the  firm  intentioni 

of  a  man^. 

9  To  her  the  mighty,  vast  in  size^  who  penetrates  alt 

points  of  space, 
To  her  mine-  homage  have  I  paid^  Niqfiti  with  heir 
golden  hain 

4  The  second  hemistiish  has  four  hypermetribal  syllables :  mddhu'- 
fnaeint,  sweet  as  honey,  may  be  a  gloss  that  has  crept  into  the  text. 

8  Cf.  Burton's  account  o(  succubae  (Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  Part  3;, 
Stec.  ^)» 

Nitjiti:  the  speaker  gives  Arlkti  the  name  of  the  far  more  powerful 
Goddess  of  Misfortune,  Destruction^  and  Death. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigvedit,  111.  p.  305^ 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  39,  li5. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


200  THE  BTMNS  OF    :  [BOOK  F. 

10  Auspicious,  with  her  golden  hue,  pillowed  on  gold, 
the  mighty  one, — 
To  this  Ar&ti  clad  in  robes  of  gold   mine  bondage 
have  I  paid. 

HYMN  VIIL 

"With  fuel  of  Vikankata  bring  molten  butter  to  the 

Gods. 
O  Agni,  make  them  joyful  here  :  let  them  all  con^ 

unto  my  call. 

2  O  Indra,  come  unto  my  call.  This  will  I  do.  So  hear 

it  thou. 
Let  these  exertions  for  the  sake  of  Indra  guide  my 

wish  aright. 
Therewith,  O  J^tavedas,  Lord  of  Bodies !  may  we 

win  us  strength. 

3  Whatever  plot  from  yonder,  O  ye  Gods,  that  godless 

man  would  frame. 
Let  not  the  Gods  come  to  his  call,  nor  Agni  bear  his 
offering  up.  Come  ye,  come  hither  to  my  call. 

4  Run,   ye  Exertions,  farther  on.     By  Indra's  order 

smite  and  slay. 
As  a  wolf  worrieth  a  sheep,  so  let  not  him   escape 
from  you  while  life  remains.     Stop  fast  his  breath. 

5  The  Brahman  whom  those  yonder  have   appointed 

priest,  for  injury. 
He,   Indra!  is  beneath  thy  feet.     I  cast  him  to  the 
God  of  Death. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  disoomfiture  and  destruction  of  hostile 
priests. 

1  Vikankata :  a  thorny  tree  (Flacourtia  Sapida)  used  as  fuel  at 
sacrifices  and  as  the  material  of  the  great  ladle  cieJled  dhruvd,  and 
saucers  for  Soma  juice. 

4  Exertions :  the  eflforts  made  by  the  priests  to  secure  the  due  perfor- 
mance of  the  sacrifice,  personified.     Smite  cuid  slay :  the  hostile  priests. 

5  Muir  observes  (0.  S.  Texts,  I.  289):  'and  yet  with  aU  this  sacred- 
ness  of  his  character  the  priest  must  be  devoted  to  destruction,  if,  in 
the  interest  of  an  enemv,  he  is  seeking  by  his  ceremonies  to  effect  the 
ruin  of- the  worshipper/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  9.]  THB  ATHABVA^rspA.  80| 

6  If  they  have  issued  forth,  strongholds  of  Gods,  a^d 

made  their  shield  of  prayer, 
Gaining  protection  for  their  lives,  protection  round 
about,  make  all  their  instigation  powerless. 

7  Exertions  which   that  man   hath   made.  Exertions 

which  he  yet  will  make — 
Turn  them,  O  Indra,  back   again,   O   Vritra-slayer, 
back  again  on  him  that  they  may  kill  that  man. 

8  As   Indra,   having  seized  him,    set   his   foot   upon 

Udv&chana, 
Even  so  for  all  the  coming  years  I   cast  those  men 
beneath  my  feet. 

9  Here,  Indra  Vritra-slayer,   in  thy   strength  pierce 

thou  their  vital  parts. 
Here,  even  here,  attack  them,  O  Indra.    Thine  own 

dear  friend  am  I. 
Indra,  we  closely  cling  to  thee.     May  we  be  in  thy 

favouring  grace. 

HYMN  IX. 

All  hail  to  Heaven ! 

2  All  hail  to  Earth  ! 

3  All  hail  to  Airl 

4  All  hail  to  Air! 

5  All  hail  to  Heaven  I 

6  All  hail  to  Earth! 

—  "  i — 

8  Udvdchana:  one  who  screams  out;  perhaps  some  demon  con- 
quered by  Indra.  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionaxy  the 
reading  is  probably  incorrect. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  439. 

The  hymais  a  prayer  to  HeAyen  and  Earth  for  protection  and  assistaace. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


204  THE  HYMNS  Of  {BOOK-  K 

7  Mine  eye  is  S Arya  and  my  breath  is  V&ta,  Air  is  my 

soul  and  Prithiv!  my  body. 
I  verily  who  never  have  been  conquered  give  up  my 
life  to  Heaven  and  Earth  for  keeping. 

8  Exalt  my   life,   my  strength,  my  deed  and  actioo ; 

increase  my  understanding  and  my  vigour. 
Be  ye  my  powerful  keepers,  watch  and  guard  me, 
ye  mistresses  of  life  and  lifers   creators  t  Dwell 
ye  within  me,  and  forbear  to  harm  me« 

HYMN  X. 

Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who 

fights  against  me  from  the  eastern  quarter* 
May  he  encounter  it! 

2  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  wba 

fights  against  me  from  the  southern  quarter. 
May  he  encounter  it ! 

3  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  ajrainst  the  sinner  who 

fights  against  me  from  the  weatern  quarter. 
May  he  encounter  it ! 

4  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who 

fights  against  me  from  the  northern  quarter. 
May  he  encounter  it ! 


7  Mine  eye  i$  SHrya:  of.  'Maj  SArya,  sovran  Loid  of  eyes,  protect 
me'  (V.  24.  9).  So  Socrates  says  (Plato,  Republic,  VI.  18) :  « I  regard 
it  (the  eye)  as  the  most  sunlike  of  all  the  oi^ns  of  sensation '  (see 
Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  298).  Compare  also  the  Funeral  Hymn,  ^igveda 
X.  16.  3 :  *The  sun  receive  thine  eye,  the  wind  thy  spirit :  go,  as  thv 
merit  is,  to  earth  or  heaven.' 

The  hymn  contains  a  separate  prayer  to  each  of  the  deities  who 
preside  over  the  regions  (see  I.  31.  1)  for  protection  from  the  eneo^ 
who  threatens  the  speaker  from  the  quarter  under  the  God's  special 
jurisdiction.  The  deities  are  (1)  Agni  (2)  Yama  (3)  Varuna  (4)  Soma. 

1  May  he  encounter  it:  may  the  enemy  knock  his  head  agamst  thatwaU* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  H.]  TOE  ATHARVA7EDA.  203 

5  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who 

fights  against  me  from  the  stedfast  region. 
May  he  encounter  it ! 

6  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who 

fights  against  me  from  the  lofty  r^ion ! 
May  he  encounter  it ! 

7  Thou  art  my  wall  of  stone  against  the  sinner  who 

from  points  intermediate  fights  against  me. 
May  he  encounter  it ! 

8  With  Bfihat  I  invoke  the  mind,  with  M&tariBvan 

both  the  breaths, 
The  eye  from  SArya,  and  the  ear  from  Air,  the  body 

from  the  Earth. 
We,  with  Sarasvatl  who  suits  the  mind,  call  Speech 

to  come  to  us. 

HYMN  XI. 

How,  terrible  in  might,  bast  thou  here  spoken  to  the 
great  God,  how  to  the  gold-hued  Father  ? 

Thy  mind  watched,  greedy  Varuna !  to  recover  the 
brindled  cow  thou  hadst  bestowed  as  guerdon. 

5  Stedfast  rtffion :  the  nadir. 

6  Lofty  region  :  the  zenith. 

8  Brihat :  a  S^man,  psalm  or  sacred  song  in  the  Brihati  metre.  See 
III.  3.  2.  Mdt(vri9v<m :  here  apparently  meaning  Ykta.  or  Wind.  Both 
the  breaths :  inspiration  and  expiration.  The  eye  from  SHrya :  see  V. 
9.  7.  Air:  as  the  conductor  of  sound.  Earth :  see  V.  9,  7.  Who  suits 
the  mind :  being  the  wise  Goddess  of  eloquence  and  learning.  Speech : 
Vik,  speech  persopiGed  and  deified.  See  IV.  1.  2. 

This  curious  hymn  contains  a  dialogue  betMreen  the  primeval  priest 
Atharvan  and  Varupa  about  the  possession  of  a  wonderful  brindled 
cow.  The  God  has  bestowed  the  cow  upon  the  priest)  and  now  retracts 
bis  gift.    Atharvan  remonstrates, 

1  Atharvan  speaks.  Spoken  :  declared  thy  promise  to  give  me  the 
oow.  The  great  God :  Heaven.    The  gdd-hued  Father :  the  Sua. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2(k  THE  HYJtNS  OF    :  [BOOK  V. 

2  Not  through  desire  do  I  revoke  my  present :  I  bripg 

this  brindled  cow  to  contemplate  her. 
Now  by  what  lore,  by  what  inherent  nature,  knowest 
thou  all  things  that  exist,  Atharvan  ? 

3  Truly  I  am  profound  in  wisdom,  truly  I  know  by 

nature  all  existing  creatures, 
t       No  D&sa  by  his  greatness,  not  an  Arya,  may  violate 
the  law  that  I  will  stablish. 

4  None,  self-dependent  -Varu^a!  existeth  wiser  than 

thou  or  sager  by  his  wisdom. 
Thou  knowest  well  all  these  created  beings:   even 
the  man  of  wondrous  powers  fears  thee. 

5  0  self-dependent  Varupa,  wise  director,  thou  knowest 

verily  all  generations. 
What  is,  unerring  one !  beyond  this  region  ?.  What 
more  remote  than  that  which  is  most  distant  ? 

6  One  thing  there  is  beyond  this  air,  and  something 

beyond  that  one,  most  hard  to  reach,  remotest. 
I,  Varupa,  who  know,  to  thee  declare  it.    Let  churls 
be  mighty  in  the  lower  regions.    Let  B&sas  sink 
into  the  earth  beneath  them. 

7  Many  reproaches,  Varupa,  dost  thou  utter  against 

the  misers  who  revoke  their  presents. 
Be  not  thou  added  to  that  crowd  of  niggards:  let 
not  men  call  thee  an  illiberal  giver. 

2  Varuna  replies.     To  contemplate  her :  or,  to  count  her  with  the 
rest  of  the  herd. 

3  In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  Atharvan  speaks. 

6  Varuna  replies.  Beyond  the  air  is  heaven,  and  beyond  that  ia 
infinity.  But  the  question  and  answer  are  obscurely  worded.  Muir 
translates  the  question  and  answer  differently  :  '  What  other  thing  is 
beyond  this  atmosphere  t  and  what  is  nearer  Uian  that  remotest  thing, 
O  thou  unerring  1  There  is  one  thing  beyond  this  atmosphere ;  and 
on  this  side  of  that  one  there  is  that  which  is  near  though  inaccessible.* 
/,  Varuna :  the  nominative,  as  required  by  the  context.  The  text  haa 
Varuna  in  the  vocative. 
7  Atharvan  speaks. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  12.1  ^^X  ATHARVA^YKDA.  205 

B  Let  not  men  call  me  an  illiberal  given     I  give  thee 
back  the  brindled  cow,  O  singer. 
Attend,  in  every  place  where  men  inhabit,  with  all 
thy  powers,  the  hymn  that  tells  my  praises. 
9  Let  hymns  of  praise  ascend  to  thee,  uplifted  in  every 
place  of  human  habitation. 
But  give  me  now  the  gift  thou  hast  not  given.  Thou 
art  my  friend  for  ever  firm  and  faithful. 

10  One  origin,  Varu^a!  one  bond  unites  us:  I   know 

the  nature  of  that  common  kinship. 
I  give  thee  now  the  gift  that  I  retracted.     I  am 
thy  friend  for  ever  firm  and  faithful. 

11  God,  giving  life  unto  the  god  who  lauds  me,  Sage 

strengthener  of  the  sage  who  sings  my  praises. 
Thou,  self-dependent  Varu^a!    hast    begotten   th§ 

kinsman  of  the  Gods,  our  sire  Atbarvan. 
On  him  bestow   most  highly-lauded  riches.     Tbou 

art  our  friend,  high  over  all,  our  kinsman. 

HYMNXIL 

Thou  in  the  house  of  man  this  day  enkindled  wor- 
shippest  Gods  as  God,  O  Jdtavedas. 

8  Varuna  speaks.  VikiM  should  be  read  instead  of  dik$h4  in  this 
and  in  the  following  stanza. 

9  Atharvan  speaks  this  stanza  and  the  first  hemistich  of  10.  Evtr 
firm  and  faithful :  saptdpadas;  literally   *  having  taken   seven   steps* 

by  which  an  alliance  or  a  marriage  is  confirmed. 

10  One  origin:  the  ancient  Kishis  frequently  assert  their  kinship 
with  the  Gods,  as  sons  of  Dyaus  or  Father  Heaven.  Varuna  speaks 
the  second  hemistich  and  the  first  of  the  following  stanza. 

1 1  Unio  the  god :  the  priest  Atharvan.  The  second  and  third  lines 
are  spoken  by  the  poet  of  the  hymn. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  396.  See 
also  Rot^,  Abhandlung  aber  den  Atharva  Veda,  p.  9. 

This  hymn,  which  is  one  of  the  %  pris  or  Propitiatory  Hymns,  consist- 
ing of  invocations  of  a  series  of  deified  objects  said  to  be  forms  of  Agni, 
is  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  110,  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Jamadagni,  son  of 
Bhrigu,  or  to  Bhjrigu's  son  Mma  who  is  generally  called  ParasurAma. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


204  TBE  HTMirs  OF  [BOOK  Y. 

Observant,  bright  as  Mitra,  bring  them  hither.  Thott 
art  a  sapient  and  foreknowing  envoy. 

2  Tani!lnap&t,  fair-tongued  !  with  sweet  meath  balming 

the  paths  and  ways  of  Order,  make  them  pleasant. 
Bear  to  the  Gods  our  sacrifice,  exalting  with  holy 
thoughts  our  hymns  of  praise  and  worship. 

3  Invoked,  deserving  prayer  and  adoration,  O  Agni, 

come  accordant  with  the  Vasus. 
Thou  art,  O  youthful  Lord,  the  Gbds'  Invoker,  so, 
best  of  sacrificers,  bring  them  quickly. 

4  By  rule  the  Sacred  Grass  is  scattered  eastward,  a 

robe  to  clothe  this  earth  when  dawns  are  breakings 
Widely  it  spreads  around  and  far  extended,  fair  for 
the  Gods  and  bringing  peace  and  freedom. 

5  Let  the   expansive  Doors  be  widely  opened,  like 

wives  who  deck  their  beauty  for  their  husbands. 
Lofty,  celestial,  all-impelling  Portals,  admit  the  Gods 
and  give  them  easy  entrance ! 

6  Pouring  sweet  dews  let  holy  Night  and  Morning, 

each  close  to  each,  be  seated  at  their  station, — 
Lofty,   celestial    Dames  with  gold  to    deck  them, 
assuming  all  their  &ir  and  radiant  beauty. 


2  Tandnapdt :  or,  Son  of  Thyself ;  a  frequently  recurring  name  of 
Agni,  so  called  because  fire  is  sometimes  self-generated,  as  in  the  light- 
ning, or  produced  by  attrition,  and  not  necessarily  derived  from  other 
fire.  Other  fanciful  derivations  of  the  word  are  given.  Onier :  saori« 
fice  ordained  by  divine  law. 

3  Va$ui  :  Qods.  T(nithful :  continually  reproduced  by  the  fire-drilL 

4  Sacred  Gra$$ :  barhU ;  generally  kusa  grass,  strewn  on  the  place 
of  sacrifice,  especially  on  the  Vedi  or  altar,  and  forming  a  layer  on 
which  the  offerings  are  placed,  and  a  seat  for  the  sacrificers  and  the 
Gods  who  are  present  at  the  ceremony.  Here  the  Sacred  Grass  ia 
personified  and  deified. 

5  Doors :  of  the  sacrificial  chamber,  representing  the  portals  of  the 
eastern  heaven. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ttYMir  12.]  THE  ATBARYA^YEDA.  307 

7  Come  the  first  two  celestial  sweet-voioed  Hotars, 

arranging  sacrifice  for  man  to  worship, 
As  singers  who  inspire  us  in  assemblies,  showing  the 
eastern  light  with  their  direction  I 

8  Let  Bh&rati  come  quickly  to  our  worship  and  II& 

showing  like  a  human  being. 

So  let  Saras vatt  and  both  her  fellows,  deft  Gknldesses, 
on  this  fair  grass  be  seated. 

9  Hotar  more  skilled  in  sacrifice,  bring  hither  with 

speed  to-day  Gk)d  Tvashtar,  thou  who  knowest,. 
Even  him  who  formed   these  two,   the  Earth  and 
Heaven,  the  Parents,  with  their  forms,  and  every 
creature. 

10  Bring  thou  to  our  oblations  which  thou  balmest  the 

companies  of  Gods  in  ordered  season. 
Agni,  Vanaspati,  the  Immolator  sweeten  our  offered 
gifts  with  meath  and  butter  I 

11  Agni  as  soon  as  he  was  bom  made  ready  the  sacri- 

fice and  was  the  Gods'  preceder. 
May  the  Gods  eat  our  offering  consecrated  according 
to  this  true  Priest's  voice  and  guidance. 


7  Hotars :  perhaps  Agni  and  Varuna. 

8  Bhdratt  (called  also  Maht),  lld^  and  Sarasvati  are  Goddesses  who 
preside  oyer  sacred  speech,  prayer  and  praise. 

9  Hotar  more  tkUUd:  Agni,  superior  in  sacrificial  knowledge  and 
skill  to  all  human  priests.  Tvashtar :  the  divine  artificer.  See  II.  5.  6. 

10  Vanatpatt:  literally.  Lord  of  the  Wood;  here  meaning  the 
sacrificial  post^  which  is  enumerated  among  the  ApH  deities  or  deified 
objects,  and  regarded  as  a  form  of  Agni. 

Other  Apri  hymns,  generally  addressed  to  the  same  deities  or  deified 
objects,  are  Rigveda  I.  13,  142,  188;  IL  3;  III.  4;  V.  5;  VII.  2; 
IX.  5. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


208  •  THF  tiridMoP  [soor  r 

HYMN  XIIL 

.  Varuna,  Sage  of  heaven,  hath   given   me   the  gift : 
with  spells  of  mighty  power  I  draw  thy  poison  out. 
Dug  up,  not  dug,  adherent,  I  have  seized  it  fast :  low 
hath  thy  venom  sunk  like  water  in  the  sands. 

2  All  the  non-fluid  portion  of  thy  venom,  I  receive  in 

these. 
I  take  thy  middlemost,  thy  highest,  lowest  juice : 
*  *     may  it  be  spent  and  lost  by  reason  of  thy  fear. 

3  Strong  is  my  cry  like   thunder  with  the  rainy  cloud  : 

with  powerful   incantation   let  thy  strength   be 
stayed. 
I,  with  the  men  to  aid,  have  seized  that  juice  of  his  ; 
as  light  from  out  the  gloom,  let  SArya  rise  on  high. 

4  I  with  this  eye  destroy  thine  eye,  and  with  this  poi- 

son conquer  thine. 
Live  not,  0  Snake,  but  die  the  death  :  back  go  thy 
venom  on  thyself. 

5  Listen  to  me.  Black   Snakes  and  hateful  creatures, 

Lurker-in -Grass,  Karait,  and  Brown,  and  Spotty, 
Approach  not  near  the  house  my  friend  inhabits: 
give  warning,  and  rest  quiet  with  your  poison. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  snakes. 
^  1  Thj/  patsofi :  a  snake  is  addressed. 

2  In  these :  there  is  no  clue  to  the  feminine  substantive  :  perhaps 
some  herbs  are  intended. 

3  The  text  of  the  second  pada  of  the  first  hemistich  is  corrupt,  and 
Qiy  translation  thereof  is  only  a  makeshift. 

5  Karait :  kairdta,  the  name  of  a  variety  of  snake,  means  '  found 
among  the  Eir^tas,'  one  of  the  barbarous  tribes  who  inhabit  woods  and' 
mountains  and  live  by  hunting  (the  Kirrhadae  of  Arrian).  The  Karait 
}fi  one  of  the  most  deadly  of  Indian  Thanatophidia.  The  house  my 
friend  inhabits :  a  conjectural  version,  stdmdham  of  the  text  being  a 
vox  nihili. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jrrjfJiria.]  the  ATBASrA-TBDA.  M9 

6  Even  as  the  cord  that  stHogs  the  bow,  I  slacken,  as 

it  were,  the  cars 
Of  the  All-conquering  serpent^s  wrath,  of  the  fierce 
rage  of  Blacky  and  Brown,  Taim&ta,  and  Apodaka. 

7  And  Aligi  and  Viligi,  their  father  and  the  mother 

too, — 
What  will  ye  do  ?     Your  venomed  sap,  we  know,  is 
utterly  powerless. 

8  Daughter  of  UrugAlA,   she-fiend   whom   the   black- 

skinned  mother  bare-^ 
All  female  serpents'  poison  who  crept  swiftly  near  is 
impotent 

9  Dwelling  beside   the  mountain's  l^lope,   the   quick- 

eared  poroupitie  exclaimed : 
Of  all  these  she-snakes  homed  in  earth  the  poison  is 
most  powerless. 

10  TAbuva  or  not  TAbuva,  thou  verily  art  not  T&buva  : 
poison  is  killed  by  TAbuva. 
Tastuva  or  not  Tastuva,  thou  verily  art  not  Tastuva: 
poison  is  killed  by  Tadtuva. 

6  Atl-eonquering  (sdtrAsdkd),  Tatrndta,  and  Apodaka  (waterless,  non- 
aquatio)  are  unidentifiable  varieties  of  snakes. 

7  Attgi  and  Viligi :  not  identified. 

8  UruffdUd :  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and  the  snake  indicated  are 
hot  known. 

9  Tke  qtiiek-tared  porcupine:  whose  quills  moreover  protect  her  from 
the  attacks  of  snakes.  G( :  ^  ^ortii  issuing  from  the  mountain's  side  the 
mungoose  (the  deadly  enemy  of  snakes)  spake  th^se  words  and  said  : 
The  scorpion's  venom  hath  no  strength  :  Scorpion,  thy  venom  is  but 
weak'  (Rigvedal.  191.  16). 

10  Tdbuva  and  Taituva  are  supposed  antidotes  that  render  snakes' 
poiscm  ineffectual.  Snake-charmers  at  the  present  day  exhibit  stones 
which  they  say  have  the  power  of  drawing  the  poison  out  of  a  wound 
inflicted  by  a  snake.  In  England,  formerly,  Braail  Wood  was  held  to 
be  a  certain  preventive  of  sns^e-bites. 

U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


210  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Fl 

HYMN  XIV. 

An  eagle  found  thee  :  with  his  snout  a  wild  boar  dug 

thee  from  the  earth. 
Harm  thou,  O  Plant,  the  mischievous,  and  drive  the 

sorcerer  away. 

2  Beat  thou  the  Y4tudh4nas  back,  drive  thou  away  the 

sorcerer ; 
And  chase  afar,  O  Plant,  the  man  who  fain  would  do 
us  injury. 

3  As  'twere  a  strip  cut  round  from  skin  of  a  white- 

footed  antelope, 
Bind,  like  a  golden  chain,  O  God,  his  witchcraft  on 
the  sorcerer. 

4  Take  thou  his  sorcery  by  the  hand,  and  to  the  sor- 

cerer lead  it  back. 
Lay  it  before  him,  face  to  face,  that  it  may  kill  the 
sorcerer. 

5  Back   on   the  wizard  fall  his  craft,  upon  the  cursor 

light  his  curse ! 
Let  witchcraft,  like  a  well-naved  car,  roll  back  upon 
the  sorcerer. 

6  Whoso,  for  other's  harm  hath  dealt — woman  or  man — 

in  magic  arts. 
To  him  we  lead  the  sorcery  back,  even  as  a  courser 
with  a  rope. 

7  Now  whether  thou  hast  been  prepared  by  Gods  or 

been  prepared  by  men. 
We,  with  our  Indra  at  our  side  to  aid  us,  lead  thee 
back  again. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  witchcraft. 

\  An  eagle  found  thee  :  the  efficacy  of  magical  plants  depends  in  a  great 
measure,  upon  the  difficulty  of  procuring  them.  See  Lang  (Custom  and 
Myth,  pp.  149  sqq.  *  Moly  and  Mandragora').     See  also  AV.  II.  27.  2. 

4  Thou :  0  Plant 

7  Thou :  the  Spell  cast  by  the  enemy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  15.]  TEB  ATHAMVA-VEDA.  «U 

8  Agni,  victorious  in  fight,  subdue  the  armies  of  our 

foes! 
Back  on  the  sorcerer  we  cast  his  sorcery,  and  beat 
it  home. 

9  Thou  who  hast  piercing  weapons,  pierce   him   who 

hath  wrought  it ;  conquer  him. 
We  do  not  sharpen  thee  to  slay  the  man  who  hath 
not  practised  it, 

10  Go  as  a  son  goes  to   his  sire  :  bite  as  a  trampled 

viper  bites. 
As  one  who  flies  from  bonds,  go  back,  O  Witchcraft, 
to  the  sorcerer* 

11  Even  as  the  timid  antelope  or  hind  from  her  assailant 

flees, 
So  swiftly  let  the  sorcery  overtake  and  reach  the 
sorcerer. 

12  Straighter  than  any  arrow  let   it  fly  against   him, 

Heaven  and  Earth ! 
So  let  that  witchcraft  seize  again  the  wizard  like  a 
beast  of  chase. 

13  Let  it  go  contrary  like  flame,  like  water  following 

its  course. 
Let  witchcraft,  like  a  well-naved  car,  roll  back  upon 
the  sorcerer. 

HYMN  XV. 

Plant  !  I  have  those  who  shall  avert  the  threatened 

danger,  ten  and  one. 
O  sacred  Plant,  produced  aright!    make  sweetness, 

sweet  thyself,  for  me. 

10  As  one  who  jiies  from  bonds  :  or,  if  bdndhum.  the  alteration  sug- 
gested in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  be  read  instead  of  handhdm : 
As,  to  his  friend,  the  fugitive,  back.  Witchcraft,  to  the  sorcerer ! 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  annotated  by  Grill,  Hundert 
Lieder,  pp.  26,  147. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ill  tHM  HtJiiirs  dp  [ioot  r, 

2  Twenty  ftnd  two,  O  Plant,  have  I  who  shall  avert 
the  threatened  ill. 
O  0acred   Plant,  produced  aright !  make  sweetness, 
sweet  thyself,  for  me, 

HYxMN  XVI 

Bull  !  if  thou  art  the  single  bull,  beget.  Thou  hast 
no  vital  sap. 

HYMN  XVIL 

These  first,  the  boundless  Sea,  and  M&tarisvan,  fierce- 
glowing  Fire,  the  Strong,  the  Bliss-bes tower, 

And  heavenly  Floods,  first-born  by  holy  Order, 
exclaimed  against  the  outrage  on  a  Brahman. 

2  King  Soma  first  of  all,  without  reluctance,  made  res- 
titution of  the  Brahman's  consort. 
Mitra  and  Varurja  were  the  inviters  :  Agni  as  Hotar 
took  her  hand  and  kd  her. 

Stanzas  3 — 11  of  the  hymn,  wkick  is  a  charm  for  general  prosperitj, 
«k.re  exactly  the  same  with  the  exception  of  the  numbers  which  increase 
l>y  eleven  in  each  stanza  (thirty  and  three,  forty  and  four,  and  so  on) 
up  to  one  hundred  and  ten  in  stanza  10,  stanza  11  concluding  with 
<one  thousand  and  one  hundred. 

The  hymn,  which  is  a  charm  for  the  increase  and  prosperity  of  cattle, 
contains  ten  other  similar  lines,  the  only  difference  being  that  in 
the  place  ef  ekavrishdh^  single  bull,  dvivrishdh,  double  bull,  or,  worth 
two  bulls,  trivrishdhj  triple  bull,  or,  worth  three  bulls,  and  so  on, 
follow  in  regular  order  up  to  ekdditfah,  eleven-fold,  in  stanza  11, 
in  which  dpodakahy  waterless,  stands  instead  of  the  amsdhy  sapless,  of 
the  preceding  lines. 

The  subject  of  the  hymn,  parts  of  which  are  taken  fi^m  Bigreda  X. 
109,  is  the  abduction  by  a  Eshatriya  of  a  Brahman's  wife,  and  her 
subsequent  restoration  to  ker  kusband.  Tke  Rigveda  hymn  contains  only 
-seven  stanzas,  concluding  with  stanza  11  of  the  Atharva^veda  hymn. 

1  Sea :  tke  ocean  of  air.  Mdtari§van  :  probably  Wind.  Fire :  Agni. 
The  Strong :  Indra.  Bliss-bestower :  Soma.  Outrage  on  a  Brahman  : 
^  Brahmi's  sin,'  according  to  Siyana.     See  note  on  stanza  5. 

2  Were  the  inviters :  acted  as  interceders,  or  match-makers,  at  the 
irenew«d  marriage. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SrMN  ir.]  THM  ATBARVA'VEDA.  >I5 

3  The  Qutii,  ber  pledge^  most  by  the  hand  be  takeo 

when  he  hath  cried,  She  is  a  Brahman^s  consort. 
She  stayed  ikot  for  a  herald  to  conduet  ber  r  thiis  is 
the  kingdooi  of  a  ruler  guarded. 

4  She  whom  they  eall  the  star  with  looeened  tresee^i 

desceiKling  as  Busfbrtune  on  the  village. 
The  Btebman^s  consort,  she  disturbs  the  kingdom 
where  hath  appeared  the  liare  with  fiery  ftashing. 

5  Active   ia  duty  serves   the  BrakonaehArl :  he   ia  a 

member  of  the  Gods'  o-wn  body. 
Through  him  Brihaspati  obtained  l!tts  coneort^  as  the 
Gods  gained  the  ladle  brought  by  Soma.. 

6  Thus  spake  of  her  those  Gods  of  old,.  Seven  Ilishis^ 

wha  sate  them  down  to  their  austere  devotion  : 
Dire  is  a  Brahman's  wife  led  home  by  others  :  in  the 
suprenxest  h^avep.  she  plants  confusion.. 


3"  Her  ptedge  :  her  sponsor;  THmb  :  by  observing  xnstice  and  causing 
the  abducted  wife  to  be^  restored  These  three  stanzas  cocrespond^  with 
slight  variations,  to  stanzas.  1 — 3  o£  the  Bigyeda  hijmni 

4  The  real  cause  of  the  misfortime  attvibuted  to  meteoric  iniiience 
k  soma  discespect  diown  to  a  BBahinan!s>md£e.  Hare  voUk  fisry  fiashr 
ing  :  some  meteona  phenomenon. 

5  Rigveda  X,  10&  5«  BrahmachAr^ :  a  jouth-  in  the  fint  stage  of  a 
Brahman's  religious  life  ;  &  religious  student.  Bfthatpaii:  that  is^  the 
injured  Brahmaa;  Bphaspati  representing  the  saeerdotat  oUtss.  Tlu 
kidU :  jtJvAm^  ifrtHcbc  Prof.  Ludwig  takes-  to  be  the-  lad j's  name :  '  «hihd, 
0  Gods,  conducted  home  hff  Soma.'  The  meaning  is  obeoure.  A  legend 
quoted  by  Slyana  sajs  that  XuUL  or  Y&k,  the  wife  of  Bnha9pati  wh<> 
is  identified  with.  Brahm^  ^^  heen  desevted  by  h^r  husband;  The 
Gods  theni  consulted:  together  as  to  the  means. ol' expiating  his  sin,  and 
restored,  her  to  him*  The  legend  ha&evidenlJ^  grown,  ou^  pi  the  misr* 
H»der8tanding  of  the  ancient  hymn. 

6  Stansa  4  of  the  Rigveda  hynm.  $iven  ^iki& :  celebrated  sainty, 
sages,  and  inspired  seers  of  ancient  times,  BharadHja,  Kafyapa,, 
€k)tamm  Atri,.  Yasishtha,  Visy&mitra,  and  Jamad^gnl. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


214  •  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  T, 

7  When  infants  die,  untimely  barn,  when  herds  of  cat- 

tle waste  away. 
When  heroes  strike  eadi  other  dead,  the  Brahmatf » 
wife  destroyeth  them. 

8  Even  if  ten  former  husbands — none  a  Br&bman — had 

espoused  a  dame. 
And  then  a  Brahman  took  her  hand»  he  is  her  hus- 
band, only  he. 

9  Not  Vaisya,  not  R&janya^  no,  the  Br4hman  is  indeed 

her  lord  : 
This  SArya  in  his  course  proclaims  to  the  Five  Baces 
of  mankind. 

10  So  then  the  Gods  restored  her,   so  men  gave  the 

woman  back  again. 
Princes  who  kept  their  promises  restored  the  Brah- 
man's wedded  wife. 

11  Having  restored  the  Brahman's  wife,  and  freed  them^ 

with  Gods'  aid,  from  sin. 
They  shared  the  fulness  of  the  earth  and  won  them- 
selves extended  sway. 

12  No  lovely  wife  who  brings  her  dower  in  hundreds 

rests  upon  his  bed, 


8  RAjanya :  man  of  the  military  and  princely  class  =  Eshatriya. 

10  Stanza  6  of  the  Rigveda  hymn. 

11  Stanza  7  of  the  Itigveda  hymn. 

Mr.  Muir  observes  at  the  end  of  his  translation  of  the  non-Bigyeda 
portion  of  the  hymn  (O.  S.  Texts,  I.  p.  281) :  *  This  hymn  appears  to 
show  that,  however  extravagant  the  pretensions  of  the  Brahmans  wer^ 
in  other  respects,  they  had,  even  at  the  comparatively  late  period  when 
it  was  composed,  but  little  regard  to  the  purity  of  the  sacerdotal  bloody 
as  they  ....  were  in  the  habit  of  forming  unions  with  the  widows 
of  Rajanyas  or  Vaisyas,  even  if  they  did  not  even  take  possession  of 
the  wives  of  such  men  while  they  were  alive.* 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  also  by  Zunmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
p.  197,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  446. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  18.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA,  215 

Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of 
sense,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

13  No  broad-browed  calf  with  wide-set  ears  is  ever  in 

his  homestead  born, 
Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of 
sense,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

14  No  steward,  golden-necklaced,  goes  before  the  meat- 

trays  of  the  man 
Within  whose  kingdom  is  detained,  through  want  of 
sense,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

15  No  black-eared  courser,  white  of  hue,  moves  proudly, 

harnessed  to  his  car, 
In  whose   dominion   is  detained,  through   want  of 
sense,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

^16  No  lily  grows  with  oval  bulbs,  no  lotus-pool  is  in  his 
field, 
In   whose   dominion   is  detained,  through  senseless 
love,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

17  The  men  whose  task  it  is  to  milk  drain  not  the  brindled 

cow  for  him 
In  whose  dominion   is   detained,  through   senseless 
love,  a  Brahman's  dame. 

18  His  milch-cow  doth  not  profit  one,  his  draught-ox 

masters  not  the  yoke 
Wherever,  severed  from  his  wife,  a  Brahman  spends 
the  mournful  night. 

HYMN  XVIII. 

Thb  Gods,  O  Prince,  have  not  bestowed  this  cow  on 

thee  to  eat  thereof. 
Seek  not,  RAjanya,  to  devour  the  Brahman's  cow 

which  none  may  eat. 

The  hymn*  declares  ihe  wickedness  and  ruinous    consequenees  ^f 
oppressing  and  robbing  Br&hmans. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


216  THE  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  r. 

2  A  base  R^jitnja^  spoiled  at  dice,  and  ruined  by  him- 

self,  may  eat 

The  Brdhinan's  cow,  apd  think,  Ta-day,  and  not  to* 
morrow,  let  me  live  t 

8  The  Brihrnan^s  cow  i«  like  a  snake,  chained  with 
dire  poison,  clothed  with  skin. 

B&janyi^!  hitter  to  the  tostc  is  she,  and  none  may 
eat  of  her^ 

4  She  takes  away  his  strength,  she  mars  his  splendour, 

she  ruins  everything  like  fire  enkindled^ 
That  man  driip^ks  poison  of  the  deadly  serpent  who 
counts  the  Br^man  as  mere  food  to  feed  him, 

5  Whoever  smites  him,  deeming  him  a  weakling--rblas- 

phemer,  ooveting  his  wealth  through  folly-^ 
Indra  sets  fire  alight  withiot  his  hosofQ.  Se  who  i^cts 
thus  is  loathed  by  Earth  and  Heaven^ 

6  No  Br&hman  vawt  be  injured,  safe  as  fire  from  him 

who  loves  himself 

For  Soma  is  ^kw  to  him  ^n4  Iw)!"!!^  gut^rds  him  from 
the  curse, 

7  The  fool  who  eats  the  Brahmans^  food  and  thinks  it 

pleasant  to  the  taste. 
Eats,  but  can  ne'?r  d^est^  the  ^w  that  bristles  with 
a  hundred  barbs, 

8  His  voice  an  arrow's  neck,  his  tongue  a  bowstring, 

his  windpipes  fire-enveloped  heads  of  arrows, 
With  these  the  Brahman  pierces  through  blasphe- 
mers, with  Qod^ped  tows  that  quell  the  hearts 
within  th^m^ 

9  Keen  arrows  have  the  Br&hmans,  armed  with  missiles : 

the  shaft,  when  they  discharge  it,  never  fitileth. 
Pursuing  him  with  fiery  a^al  and  ^nger,  they  pierce 
the  foeman  even  from  a  distance. 

)_ J  'If        — r  -  -•      ■       .W.'      t*  |i  i.l        111.      Ut.i    MJ      AtM-L-    I   -H       ml    ■ 

i  Deadly  serpent:  the  Taimita,  nefttioned  m  V.  15.  C. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


mrun  1$,J  WW  ATEARTA^YEtA.  tlT 

10  They  who,  themselves  ten  hundred,  were  the  rulers 

of  a  thousand  men. 
The  VaitahavyaSy  were  destroyed  for  that  tbey  ate  a 
Br&hman's  cow. 

11  The  cow,  indeed,  when  she  was  slain  overthrew  those 

Vaitahavyas,  who 
Cooked  the  last  she^goat  that  remained  of  Kesara- 
pr&bandh&'s  flook. 

12  One  and  a  hundred  were  the  folk,  those  whom  the 

Earth  shook  d&  from  her  : 
When  they  had  wronged  the  Brihman  race  they 
perished  inconceivably. 

13  Among   mankind   the   Gk>ds*  despiser  moveth:    be 

hath  drunk  poison,  naught  but  bone  is  left  him. 
Who  wrongs  the  kinsman  of  the  Gods,  the  Br&hman, 
gains  not  the  cohere  to  which  the  Fathers  travelled. 

14  Agni,  in  sooth,  is  called  our  guide,  Soma  is  called 

our  next  of  kin. 
Indra  quells  him  who  curses  us.     Sages  know  well 
that  this  is  aa 

10  TaiUiKwyM :  a  tribe  ov  pecple  in  th9  north ;  literally,  desoeudanis 
or  people  of  Yttahav ja*  A  Biahi  o|  this  name  appears  to  be  mentioned 
in  9ig^^  VI,  1$,  a  hji»n  ascribed  to  him  by  Siyana.  The  Vaitahayjaa 
are  mentioi^ed  in  the  Anus&sanaParva  of  the  Mahl^bhsyoata,  195^-^1977, 
where  they  are  said  to  have  b^ea  defeated  and  slain  in  battle, 

11  K^ioraprdbandhd :  I  eao  find  no  other  mention  of  this  woman. 

12  One  and  a  hundred:  *an  unluoky  number  (used  with  reference 
to  phases  el  iiisease,  modes  of  death,  and  the  like),  ei.  HI.  9.  6 ;  YIII^ 
i.  27/-^TGrill's  note  on  VII.  115.  a.  The  Earth  $hoak  of:  in  horror  at 
Iheir  wicke^QMS.  Of.  Jfob,  S8.  12  ;  ^  Qast  thon  ooB^manded  the  morn- 
ing .  .  ^  ^  And  eansed  the  dayi^cmi^  to  know  his  plaoe;  That  it  might 
take  hold  of  the  wM  of  the  earth,  That  the  wicked  mi^t  be  shaken 
out  of  it  r 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  UnWy  O.  S.  T^ts,  I.  285  (2nd 
edition) ;  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  447  ;  with  annotations,  by 
Grill,  Hunclert  I^odof,  pp.  41)  148 ;  aud  by  Zi«i9ier,  A- 1.  Leben,  p.  1^9. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


218  THE  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  K 

15  Prince!  like  a  poisoned  arrow,  like  a  deadly  snake, 
O  lord  of  kine ! 
Dire  is  the  Brihman's  arrow :  he  pierces  his  enemies 
therewith. 

HYMN  XIX. 

The  sons  of  Vltahavya,  the  Srifijayas,  waxed  exceed- 
ing strong. 

They  well-nigh  touched  the  heavens,  but  they 
wronged  Bhrigu  and  were  overthrown. 

2  When  men  pierced  Brihatsdman  through,  the  Brdh- 

man,  son  of  Angiras, 
The   ram    with   teeth   in   both  his  jaws,  the  sheep, 
devoured  their  progeny. 

3  If  men  have  spat  upon,  or  shot  their  rheum  upon  a 

Br&hman,  they 
Sit  in  the  middle  of  a  stream  running  with  blood, 
devouring  hair. 

4  While  yet  the  Brahman's  cow  which  men  are  dressing 

quivers  in  her  throes. 
She  mars  the  kingdom's  splendour :  there  no  vigor- 
ous hero  springs  to  life. 

5  Terrible  is  her  cutting-up:  her  bitter  flesh  is  cast 

away. 
And  it  is  counted  sin  among  the  Fathers  if  her  milk 
is  drunk. 

.  The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  wickedness  and  the  niinous  conse- 
quences of  oppressing,  robbing,  or  insulting  a  Brahman. 

1  Vitahavya:  see  V.  18.  1.  Srifijayas:  a  people  in  the  north.  See 
Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  p.  132.  Bhrigu :  see  II.  5.  3.  The  story  of  the 
overthrow  of  the  Yaitahavjas  is  told  in  the  Mah&bharata,  Anusisana 
Parva,  1952 — 1977,  but  Bhrigu  is  there  said  to  have  given  refuge  to 
the  King  Yitahavja  after  his  defeat. 

2  Brihatsdman  :  the  name  of  this  descendant  of  the  ancient  Rishi 
Angiras  does  not  recur  in  the  Veda,  and  his  story  is  not  mentioned 
elsewhere. 

3  They  sit :  after  death,  in  the  infernal  regions. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  19.]  THE  ATBARYAVEDA.  21^ 

6  If  any  King  who  deems  hinaself  mighty  would  eat  a 

Brdhman  up, 
Rent  and  disrupted  is  that  realm  wherein  a  Br&hman 
is  oppressed. 

7  She  grows  eight-footed,  and  four-eyed,  four-eared, 

four-jawed,  two-faced,  two-tongued. 
And  shatters  down  the  kingdom  of  the  man  who  doth 
the  Br4hman  wrong. 

8  As  water  swamps  a  leaky  ship  so  ruin  overflows  that 

realm. 
Misfortune  smites   the   realm   wherein  a  Br&hman 
suffers  scath  and  harm. 

9  The  very  trees  repel  the  man,  and  drive  him  from 

their  sheltering  shade. 
Whoever   claims,    O   N&rada,  the    treasure   that  a 
Brahman  owns. 

10  That  wealth,  King  Varui^a  hath  said,  is  poison  by  the 

Gods  prepared. 
None  hath  kept  watch  to  guard  his  realm  who  hath 
devoured  a  Br4hman's  cow. 

11  Those  nine-and-ninety  people  whom  Earth  shook  and 

cast  away  from  her, 
When   they  had  wronged  the  Brahman   race  were 
ruined  inconceivably. 

12  Oppressor  of  the  Brahmans !  thus  the  Gods  have 

spoken  and  declared, 


7  She  :  the  cow. 

9  Ndrada :  a  devarshi  or  saint  of  the  celestial  class  who  often  comes 
down  to  earth  to  report  what  is  going  on  in  heaven  and  return  with  his 
account  of  what  is  being  done  on  esu-th.  His  name  is  introduced  to 
make  the  warning  more  solemn  and  impressive. 

11  Those  nine-and-ninety:  cf.  V.  18.  12,  where  ^ey  are  said  to  have 
been  a  hundred  and  one. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


no  TBS  aritJfs  of  {book  r. 

The  9tep-effitciog  wbp  they  biad  upon  the  decul  eheiM 
be  thy  couch. 

18  Oppressor  of  the  BrabmimB  1  tears  wept  by  the  man 
who  suflfers  wrong, 
The^e  are  the  share  of  water  which  the  Gods  hare 
destined  to  be  thine. 

X4  The  share  of  water  which  the  Qods  have  destined  to 
be  thine,  is  that, 
Oppressor  of  the  priest!  wherewith  men  lave  the 
corpse  and  wet  the  beard. 

15  The  rain  of  Mitra-Varupa  falls  not  on  him  who 
wrongs  the  priest. 
To  him  no  counsel  brings  success  :  he  wins  no  friend 
to  do  his  will. 

HYMN  XX. 

FoRMBD  out  of  wood,  compact  with  straps  of  leather,. 

loud  is  the  War-drum  as  he  plays  the  hero. 
Whetting  thy  voice  and  vanquishing  opponents,  roar 

at  them  like  a  lion  &in  to  conquer ! 

2  The  fastened  frame  hath  roared  as  ^twere  a  ILon^  like 
a  bull  bellowing  to  meet  the  heifer^ 

12  The  step^ffdcing  wifp  :  obliterating  the  footsteps  of  the  dead  on» 
his  journey  to  the  other  woric^  so  that  ]>eath  maj  not  reach  the- 
surviving  kinsmen  by  the  same  path.  Muir  tranfilates  kd^m  (wisp) 
by  'cloth,'  Ludwig,  Zimmer,  and  Hillebrandt  by  'fessel,'  *f^tter,^ 
and  Roth  and  Grill  by  *  BOscher   *  tuft^  or  *  wisp^'    See  GwlFs  note#. 

14  The  beard :  to  be  shaved  off  before  cremation^ 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Laid  wig,  Der  Rigvedit,.  III.  p.  45 1^: 
by  Zimmer,  A.  I.  L.  p.  201;  by  Grill,  with  annotations,  Hundert  Lieder,. 
pp.  43,  160 ;  and  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  286,  who  observes:  *The 
attention  of  the  reader  is  directed  to  the  intensity  of  contempt  and^ 
abhorrence  which  is  sought  to  be  conveyed  by  the  coame^  iiaagery  oonr 
tained  in  verses  3,  and  12 — 14/ 

The  hyima,  addressed  to  the  War-drum,  is  a  charm  to  securt  Tict^ 
in  a  coming  battle.  Compare  Rigveda  VI.  47.  29 — &!.. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMir  20.]  THE  ATHAMVAVEDA.  %%\ 

Thou  art  a  bull,  thine  enemies  are  weaklings :  thine 
is  the  foe^subduing  strength  of  Indra. 
8  Like  a  bull  marked  by  strength  among  the  cattle, 
roar  seeking  kine  and  gathering  up  the  booty. 

Pierce  through  our  adversaries'  heart  with  sorrow, 
and  let  our  routed  foes  desert  their  hamlets. 

4  Victorious  in  the  battle,  loudly  roaring,  seizing  what 

may  be  seized,  look  all  around  thee. 
Utter,  O  Drum,  thy  heavenly  voice  with  triumph. 
Bring,  as  a  priest,  our  enemies'  possessions. 

5  Hearing  the  Drum's  far-reaching  voice  resounding, 

let  the  foe's  darne^  waked  by  the  roar,  afflicted, 
Orasping  her  son,  run  forward  in  her  terror  amid  the 
conflict  of  the  deadly  weapons. 

6  Thou,  first  of  all,  O  Drum,  thy  voice  shalt  utter  : 

over  the  ridge  of  earth  speak  forth  exultant. 
Crunching   with    might   the   army   of  the   foemen, 
declare  thy  message  pleasantly  and  clearly. 

7  Loud  be  thy  roar  between  the  earth   and   heaven. 

Swift  let  thy  sounds  go  forth  in  all  directions. 
Neigh  at  them,  thunder,   set  in  opposition,   song- 
maker,  good  ally  that  friends  may  conquer. 

8  He  shall  send  forth  his  voice  whom  art  hath  fashioned. 

Make  thou  the  weapons  of  our  warriors  bristle. 
With  Indra  for  ally  call  out  our  heroes,  and  with  thy 
friends  scatter  and  chase  the  foemen. 

9  Hesonant,    roaring,    with    thy    powerful    weapons, 

warning,  and  heard  by  troops  in  many  places. 
Knowing  all  rules  and  winning  us  advantage,  deal 
fame  to  many  where  two  kings  are  fighting. 
' '  —  ■-■  ■    ■  I  ■  1 11^ 

4  i44  a  prie$i  :  skilled  in  the  use  of  incantatiena. 
9  All  rules  :  of  warfare. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


225  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V. 

10  Bent  on  advantage,  mightier,  gaining  treasures,  victor 

in  war,  the  spell  hath  made  thee  keener. 
As,  in  the  press,  the  stone  to  stalks  of  Soma,  thus, 
Drum  !  go  dancing  to  our  foes'  possessions. 

11  Foe-conqueror,  victor,  vanquishing  opponents,  seeker 

of  booty,  mastering,  destroying, 
Speak  out  as  a  skilled  speaker  tells  his  counsel,  speak 
strength  to  us  that  we  may  win  the  battle. 

12  Shaker  of  things  unshaken,  readiest  comer  to  battles; 

conquering  foes,  resistless  leader, 
Guarded  by  Indra,  watching  our  assemblies,  go  quickly, 
breaker  of  their  hearts  who  hate  us. 

HYMN  XXI. 

Speak  to  our  enemies,  O  Drum,  discouragement  and 
wild  dismay. 

We  bring  upon  our  foemen  fear  and  discord  and  dis- 
comfiture.    Drum!  drive  these  enemies  away. 

2  When  sacrificial  butter   hath   been   ofiered,  let  our 

foemen  flee 
Through  consternation,  terrified,  trembling  in  mind 
and  eye  and  heart. 

3  Wrought  out  of  wood,  compact  with  straps  of  leather, 

dear  to  all  the  clan. 
Bedewed    with   sacrificial   oil,   speak   terror  to  our 
enemies. 

4  As  the  wild  creatures  of  the  wood  flee  in  their  terror 

from  a  man. 
Even  so  do  thou,  O  Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes  to 
frighten  them,  and  then  bewilder  thou  their  thoughts. 

12  Watching  our  assemblies:  favourably  regarding  oxir  gatherings 
for  sacrificial  purposes. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III,  p.  460, 
and,  with  annotations  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  68,  153. 

The  hymn,  addressed  to  the  personified  War-drum  (cf.  V.  20.)  and 
various  deities,  is  a  charm  to  secure  victory  in  battle. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iruy  21.]  THE  ATUARVA-VEDA.  iti 

5  As,  when  the  wolf  approaches,  goats  and  sheep  run 

sorely  terrified, 
Even  so  do  thou,  O  Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes 
to  frighten  them,   and   then   bewilder   thou  their 
thought^s. 

6  As  birds  of  air,  day  after  day,  fly  in  wild  terror  from 

the  hawk,  as  from  a  roaring  lion's  voice, 
Even  so  do  thou,  O  Drum,  roar  out  against  our  foes 
to   frighten   them,  and  then   bewilder  thou  their 
thoughts, 

7  May  all  the  deities  whose  might  controls  the  fortune 

of  the  fray 
Frighten  away  our  enemies  with  Drum  and  skin  of 
antelope. 

8  Let  those    our    enemies  who   go   yonder   in   their 

battalions  shake 
In  fear  at  shadows  and    the   sounds  of  feet  which 
.  Indra  sporteth  with, 

9  To  all  the  quarters  of  the  sky  let  clang  of  bowstrings 

and  our  Drums 
Cry  out  to  hosts  of  foes  that  go  discomfited  in  serried 
ranks. 

10  Aditya,  take  their  sight  away!     Follow  them  close, 

ye  motes  of  light. 
Let   them   cleave    fast   to   foot-bound   hosts   when 
strength  of  arm  hath  past  away. 

11  Do  ye,  O  mighty  Maruts,  sons  of  Prisni,  crush  down, 

with  Indra  for  ally,  our  foeraen. 
King  Soma,  Varuna,  great  God  and  sovran,  Indra  too, 
aye.  Death, — 

12  May  these  embattled  Gods,  brilliant  as  SArya — All 

hail ! — one-minded,  conquer  those  who  hate  us. 

10  Aditya:  0  Sun.  Let  them  cleave  fast:  I  can  get  no  intelligible 
meaning  out  of  the  patsanginih  of  this  pdda.  *  Fusz-schlingen  [patsan- 
gini?]  soUen  [an  ihnen]  haften,'  *let  footrsnares  cling  to  them.' — 
Ludwig. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  374. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


»H  THB  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  T. 

HYMN  XXII. 
Hbngb,  filled  with  holy  strength  let   Agni,   Soma, 

and  Yaru^a,  the  Press-stone,  and  the  Altar, 
Aad  Grass,  and  glowing  Fuel  banish  Fever.     Let 

hateful  things  stay  at  a  distance  yonder. 

2  And    thou    thyself    who    makest  all  men    yellow, 

consuming  them  with  hurtling  heat  like  Agni, 
Thou,  Fever!  then  be  weak  and  ineffective.     !t^ass 
hence  into  the  realms  below  or  vanish. 

3  Endowed  with  universal  power!   send  Fever  down- 

Ward,  far  away. 
The   spotty,  like  red-coloured  dust,  sprung  from  a 
spotty  ancestor. 

4  When  I  have  paid  obeisance  to  Fever  I  send  him 

downward  forth. 
So  let  Sakambhara's  boxer  go  again  to  the  Mah&- 
vrishad. 

5  His  mansions  are  the  Mdjavans,  and  the  Mah4vrishas 

his  home. 
Thou,  Fever,  ever  since  thy  birth  hast  lived  among 
the  Bahlikas. 

6  Fever,  snake,  limbless  otie,^ speak   out!  i^eep  thyself 

far  away  from  us. 
Seek  thou  a  wanton  D&sl  girl  and  strike  her  with  thy 
thunderbolt. 

.,... ... — ■ ■ — *-^ 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  against  Fever. 

1  OraM :  the  Sacred  Grass  strewn  in  the  sacrificial  court  or  chamber. 
See  y.  12.  4.  Fever:  uJcmdn :  meaning  especially  malarial  fever. 
See.  I.  25.  1. 

i  Endowed  with  universal  power:  the  Wonderful  plant  KushthA 
(Costus  SpeciosuS,  or  Arabicufi),  is  addressed. 

4  Sahambhara's  boxer :  Fever.  Sakambhara  (Dtmg-bringer)   appears 
to  be  the  name  of  one  of  the  demons  of  disease. 

5  Mi^avans :  apparently  a  hill  tribe  in  the  north-west  of  Indilu 
McUidvrishas :  a  people  in  the  same  region.  Bahlikas :  a  Bactrian  rac«, 
th^  people  of  Balkh.  See  Mair,  0.  S.  Texts,  II,  351. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HT^N  22.]  TBS  ATBARVA'VSDA.  S26 

7  Go,  Fever,   to   the  MAjavans,   or,   farther,   to  the 

Bahlikas. 
Seek  a  lascivious  S(idra  girl  and  seem  to  shake  her 
through  and  through, 

8  Oto  hence  and  eat  thy  kinsmen  the  Mah4vrishas  and 

MCljavans. 
These  or  those  foreign  regions  we  proclaim  to  Fever 
for  his  home. 

9  In  a  strange  land  thou  joyest  not:  subdued,   thou 

wilt  be  kind  to  us. 
Fever  is  eager  to  depart,  and  to  the  Bahlikas  will  go. 

10  Since  thou  now  cold,  now  burning  hot,  with  cough 

besides,  hast  made  us  shake, 
Terrible,  Fever,  are  thy  darts :  forbear  to  injure  us 
with  these. 

11  Take  none  of  these  to  be  thy  friends,  Cough,  or  Con- 

sumption, or  Decline  : 
Never  come  thence  again  to  us !  O  Fever,   thus  I 
counsel  thee. 

12  Go,  Fever,  with  Consumption,  thy  brother,  and  with 

thy  sister.  Cough, 
And  with  thy  nephew  Herpes,  go  away  unto  that 
alien  folk. 

13  Chase  Fever  whether  cold  or  hot,  brought  by  the 

summer  or  the  rains, 
Tertian,  intermittent,  or  autumnal,  or  continual. 

14  We    to    Gandh&ris,   Mi^javans,    to    Angas    and    to 

Magadhas 
Hand  over  Fever  as  it  were  a  servant  and  \  thing  of 
price. 

12  Herpes:  pdmdn, 

14  GandhAns :  the  oouatvy  of  Gandh4ra  is  placed  b^  Lassen  to  the 
west  of  the  Indus,  a»d  to  the  south  of  the  Kophen  or  Kftbut  river. 
King  Darius  in  a  rook-inscription  mentions  the  Qa(n)dara  together 
with  the  Hi(n)du  as  people  subject  ta  him,  and  the  G^ndarii,  to- 
gether with  the  Parthians,  Khorasmians,  Sogdians,  and   Dadikae,   are 

15 


Digitized  by 


Google 


226  THE  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  F. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

I  HAVE  called  Heaven  and  Earth  to  aid,  have  called 

divine  Saras vatt, 
Indra  and  Agni  have  I  called  :  Let  these  destroy  the 

worm,  I  prayed. 

2  O  Indra,  Lord  of  Treasures,  kill  the  worms  that 

prey  upon  this  boy- 
All  the  malignant  spirits  have  been  smitten  by  my 
potent  spelL 

3  We  utterly  destroy  the  worm,  the  worm  that  creeps 

around  the  eyes, 
The  worm  that  crawls  about  the  nose,  the  worm  that 
gets  between  the  teeth, 

4  Two  of  like  colour,  two  unlike,  two  coloured  black, 

two  coloured  red, 
The  tawny  and  the  tawny-eared,  Vulture  and  Wolf, 
all  these  are  killed. 

5  Worms  that  are  white  about  the  sides,  those  that  are 

black  with  black-hued  arms, 
All  that  show  various  tints  and  hues,  these  worms 
we  utterly  destroy. 

said  by  Herodotus  to  have  formed  part  of  the  army  of  Xerxes.  The 
name  of  the  country  is  preserved  in  the  modem  Kandahar.  See  Muir 
O.  S.  Texts,  II.  342,  and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  30.  *  The 
Angas  and  Magadhas  are  tribes  living  in  South  Behar,  and  the  country 
bordering  it  on  the  west.  We  have  thus  in  this  verse  two  nations 
situated  to  the  north-west,  and  two  to  the  south-east,  whom  we  may 
suppose,  from  the  maledictions  pronounced  on  them,  to  have  been 
hostile  or  alien  tribes,  who  lived  on  the  borders  of  Brahmanical  India, 
and  to  have  been  beyond  its  boundaries  at  the  time  this  incantation  was 
composed '  (Roth,  Lit.  and  Hist,  of  the  Veda,  p.  42,  quoted  by  Muir, 
O.  S.  T.,  II.  352). 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig^Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  &10, 
and,  vrith  annotations,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  12,  154. 

The  hymn,  which  is  very  similar  to  II.  32,  is   a  charm  for  the  des- 
truction of  paraaitic  worms. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nTMIf  23. J  THE  A TUARVA- VEDA.  227 

6  Eastward  the  Suii  is  mounting,  seen  of  all,  destroy- 

ing things  unseen, 
Crushing  and   killing  all   the  worms  invisible  and 
visible. 

7  Let  the  Yevishas,  Kaskashas,  Ejatkas,  Sipavitnukas, 
Let  both  the  worm  that  we  can  see,  and  that  we  see 

not,  be  destroyed^ 

8  Slain  the  Yev4sba  of  the  worms,  slain  too  is  the 

Nadaniman. 
I  have  reduced  them  all  to  dust  like  vetches  with 
the  pounding-stone. 

9  The  worm  S&ranga,  white  of  hue,  three-headed,  with 

a  triple  hump,-— 
I  split  and  tear  his  ribs  away,  I  wrench  off  every 
head  he  has. 

10  I  kill  you,  worms,  as  Atri,  as  Kai^va  and  Jamadaorni 

killed. 
I  crush  the  worms  to  pieces  with  a  spell  that  erst 
Agastya  used. 

1 1  The  King  of  worms  hath  been  destroyed,  he  who 

.  was  lord  of  these  is  slain. 

Slain  is  the  worm  whose  mother,  whose  brother  and 
sister  have  been  slain. 

12  Destroyed  are  his  dependants,  those  who  dwell  around 

him  are  destroyed. 
And  all  the  worms  that  seem  to  be  the  little  ones 
are  done  to  death. 

13  Of  every  worm  and  insect,  of  the  female  and  the 

male  alike, 
I  crush  the  head  to  pieces  with  a  stone  and  burn  the 
face  with  fire. 

6  An  adaptation  of  Rigveia  1.  l&l.  8  t  *  Slayer  of  things  unseen,  the 
Sun,  beheld  of  all  mounts,  eastward,  up.  Consuming  all  that  are  not 
seen,  and  evil  spirits  of  the  night  (Yitudh&nis).* 

7  Yevdshai:  this  word  and  those  that  follow  are  names  of  varieties 
of  vermin  or  noxious  insects  that  cannot  be  identified. 

10  Cf.  II.  32.  3. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  501. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


22S  ,   TUB.  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V. 

HYMN  XX|V. 

Savitar,  Lord  of  furthering  aids,  protect  me,  in  this 
my  prayer,  in  this  mine  act,  in  this  my  sacerdotal 
charge,  in  this  performance,  in  this  thought,  in  this 
my  plan  and  wish,  in  this  my  calling  on  the  God^ ! 
All  hail! 

2  May  Agni,  Lord  of  forest  trees,  protect  me,  in,  etc. 

3  May  Heaven  and  Earth,   the  Queens  of  bounties, 

save  me. 

4  May  Varupa,  the  Lord  of  waters,  save  me. 

5  May  Mi^ra-Varuna,  Lords  of  rain,  preserve  me. 

6  Lords  of  the  mountains,  may  the  Maruts  save  me. 

7  May  Soma,  Lord  of  plants  and  herbs,  protect  me. 

8  May  V4yu,  Lord  of  middle  air,  protect  me. 

9  May  SArya,  sovran  Lord  of  eyes,  protect  me. 

10  May  the  Moon,  Lord  of  constellations,  save  me. 

11  May  Indra  who  is  Lord  of  heaven  protect  me, 

12  The  Maruts'  father,  Lord  of  cattle,  save  me. 

1 3  May  Mrityu,  Lord  of  living  creatures,  save  me. 

14  May  Yaraa,  Regent  of  the  Fathers,  save  me. 

15  May  the  Forefathers  of  old  time  protect  me. 

The  hymn  is  the  prayer  of  a  priest  for  protection  and  effectuaj  aid 
in  the  discharge  of  his  sacerdotal  duties.  The  refrain  of  stanza  1  is 
repeated  in  every  stanza. 

6  Afountains :  ot,  great  plouds;  pdrvatp,  (knotty,  consisting  of  rugged 
masses)  having  both  these  meanings  in  the  Veda. 

12  Th^  Marut£  father  :  Rudra.  Sea  I.  19.  3. 

13  Mrityu:  God  of  Death. 

14  Yama  :  King  of  th^  Departed, 

15 — 17  *  When  His  Maiosty  [the  Emperor  of  Ja|>an]  promulga,ted 
the  Constitution  he  did  "  humbly  and  solemnly  swear  to  the  Imperial 
Founder  of  Our  House  and  to  Our  other  Imperial  Ancestors,"  and  did 
"  now  reverently  make  Our  prayer  to  Them  and  to  Our  Illustrious 
Father,  and  implore  the  help  of  Their  SacreJ  Spirits." ' — Henry  Norman, 
The  Real  Japan. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Srifir  25.]  THM  AftikRVA-VEbA.  229 

16  Miay  Fiathers  of  succeeding  agefs  save  trie. 

17  Next  may  the  Fathers  of  our  fathers  save  me,  in  this 

my  prayer,  in  this  mine  act,  in  this  my  sacerdot«l 
charge,  in  this  performance,  in  this  thought,  in  this 
my  plan  and  wish,  in  thii^  iny  calling  on  the  Gods ! 
All  hail! 

HYMN  XXV. 

Let  the  man,  sower  of  the  germ,  lay,  as  a  feather,  on 

a  shaft. 
Limb  drawn  from  limb,  whatever  is  culled  from  cloud 

and  from  the  womb  of  heaven; 

2  Even  as  this  broad  earth  deceived  the  germ  of  all 

the  things  that  be. 
Thus  within  thee  I  lay  the  germ.  I  call  thee,  Earth, 
to  strengthen  it. 

3  O  Sinlv&ll,  set  the  germ,  set  thou  the  germ,  SarasvatJ ! 
in  thee  let  both  the  Asvins,  crowned  with  lotuses, 

bestow  the  germ. 

4  Let  Mitra-Varufta  and  God  Brihaspati  lay  the  germ 

in  thee. 
Indra  and  Agni  lay  the  germ,   Dh&tar  bestow  the 
germ  in  thee. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  aooompany  the  Garbh&dhllna  ceremony  to 
ensure  or  facilitate  and  bless  conception. 

1  From  cloud:  *out  of  the  mountain.' — Ludwig.  In  I.  11.  2,  the 
Gods  are  said  to  bring  the  embryo  from  all  the  regions  of  the  sky  and 
earth. 

3  Sintvdlt :  the  Goddess  of  the  day  of  new  moon,  aiid  atlso  of  fecun- 
dity and  ^iwy  birth,  like  the  Latin  Goddess  Lucinat  (lucna,  luna,  the 
Moon).  lUkd,  the'  Goddess  pi^siding  6\er  the  itotual  day  of  full  moon, 
and  Gungii  identified  by  SAya^a  with  Kuhi^,  another  Goddess  presid- 
ing orer  the  day  of  oonjunctioii  when  the  moon  riseis  ihviiSible,  also 
appear  to  be  associatted  v^iih  childbirth.  So  in  old  Eddie  poetry,  the 
Norns  are  called  the  ihid wives  of  mankind.  The  stanza  is  tak«n  from 
Bigveda  X.  184.  2. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


230  TBE  HYJtNS  OF  BOOK  F. 

5  Let  Vishnu  form  and  mould  the  womb,  let  Tvashtar 

duly  shape  the  forms, 
Praj^pati  infuse  the  stream^  and  Dhdtar  lay  for  thee 
the  germ. 

6  Drink  thou  the  procreative  draught  well-known  to 

Varuqa  the  King, 
Known  to  divine  Sarasvatl,  and  Indra  slayer  of  the  foe. 

7  Thou  art  the  germ  of  plants  and  herbs,  thou  art  the 

germ  of  forest  trees, 
The  germ  of  each  existing  thing,  so  here,  O  Agni, 
lay  the  germ. 

8  Rise  up,  put  forth  thy  manly  strength,  and  lay  the 

germ  within  the  womb, 
A  bull  art  thou  with  vigorous  strength  :  for  progeny 
we  bring  thee  near* 

9  Prepare   thee,   B&rhats&md,    let  the   germ   be   laid 

within  thy  side. 
The  Soma-drinking  Grods  have  given  a  son  to  thee, 
thy  son  and  mine. 

10  O  Dhfi^tar,  thou  Disposer,   lay  within  the  body  of 

this  dame 
A  male  germ  with  the  noblest  form,  for  her,  in  the 
•   tenth  month,  to  bear. 

11  Tvashtar,   celestial  artist,   lay   within  the   body  of 

this  dame 
A  male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the 
tenth  month  to  bear. 


5  Taken  from  Bigveda  X.  184.  1. 

7  This  and  the  following  stansa  are  addressed  to  Agni  who  is 
regarded  as  the  special  giver  ol  children.  See  Rigyeda  I.  66.  4 ;  68.  4 ; 
III.  1.  23. 

9  Bdrhat$dmd:  (from  hcihat-sdmctn)  the  name  of  the  woman  who  is 
the  subject  of  the  hymn ;  daughter  of  Brihatsiman. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  explained  by  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  V.  p.  227,  and  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigyeda,  IIL  p.  478. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  26.]  !rnE  ATHARTAVBDA.  231 

12  Savitar,  vivifier,  lay  within  the  body  of  this  dame 

A  male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the 
tenth  month  to  bear. 

13  0  liord  of  Life,  Praj&pati,  within  this  woman's  body 

lay 
A  male  germ  with  the  noblest  form  for  her  in  the 
tenth  month  to  bear, 

HYMN  XXVI. 

In  sacrifice  for  you  may  sapient  Agni — All  hail  I— 
use  Yajus  texts  and  fuel. 

2  May  Savitar  the  God — All  hail  I — foreknowing,  chief 

in  this  sacrifice,  employ  them. 

3  In  this  great  rite — All  hail  1— may  sapient  Indra  use 

lauds,  rejoicings,  well-yoked  coursers. 

4  Bring  Praishas  in  the  rite — All  hail! — and  Nivids, 

loarnkl,  connected,  with  the  Consorts. 

5  As  a  dame  brings   her  son — All  hail!  — O  Maruts, 

oonneotedi  in  the  rite  bring  measures. 

6  Here  Aditi  is  come — All  hail! — preparing  the  rite 

with  grass  and  lustral  waters. 

7  Let  Vishnu  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — All  hail ! 

use  w^U-yoked  steeds,  his  fervours. 

The  hyn^a  is  a  bidding  prayer,  inviting  the  Gtods'  presence  and  as- 
sistance at  a  sacrifice. 

1  Yajus  texts:  sacrificial  formuta^  as^  opposed  to  fichaty  recited 
hymns,  and  tdmans^  chanted  psalms. 

3  J&aurf«,r^ow?ti^«:  j.oyous.reoitatiQn3  of  praise.  Well-yok^  coururs  : 
a  figurative  expression  for  the  well-adapted  partaotth^d  ceremony  which 
the  deity  coutributes  a»nd  directs.. 

4  Praishas :  liturgical  exhortations  or  invitations.  Nivids :  invoca- 
tions o{  the  Gods^  inserted  in  certain  paxtaof  d^  liturgy.  The  Consorts : 
of  the  Gods.  See  note  on  III.  20.  3. 

5  Maruts :  addressed  as  singers,  chanters  of  their  thunder-psalm. 
Measures :  chkdndd^;  sacred  ox  magical  hymns,  differing  from  richy 
sdmarit  and  yaju$. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


232  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V. 

8  Let  Tvashtar   in  this   rite  in   varied   manner— All 

hail ! — use  forms,  his  well-yoked  coursers. 

9  Let  Bhaga  in  this  rite  use  prayers,  foreknowing — 

All  hail!  for  this  use  well-yoked  coursers. 

10  Let  Soma  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — All  hail ! — 

use  milk-streams,  well-yoked  coursers. 

11  Let  Indra  in  this  rite  in  varied  manner — All  hail! — 

use  powers,  his  well-yoked  coursers. 

12  Hitherward  come  ye  with  the  prayer,  O  Asvins, 

exalting  sacrifice  with  cry  of  Vashat! 
Brihaspatit — All   hail! — with   prayer  come   hither. 
Here  is  the  rite,  here  heaven  for  him  who  worships. 

HYMN  XXVII. 

Upufted  be  this  sacrificer's  fuel :  lofty  and  brilliant 
be  the  flames  of  Agni  t 
Splendidly  bright,  fair-faced,  with  all  his  offspring, 
TanC^nap&t  the  Asura,  many -handed. 

2  GUk)  among  Grods,  the  God  bedews  the  paths  with 

fatness  and  with  mead. 

3  With  store  of  mead  to  sacrifice  comes  Agni,  comes 

Nar&sansa  Agni,  friendly-minded,  comes  Savitar, 
righteous  Gk>d  who  brings  all  blessings. 

8  Forms :  Tvashtar  being  the  great  artifioer,  creator  of  all  forms  of  life. 

1 1  Foifftrs  :  Indra's  heroic  might. 

12  Vashat:  the  sacrificial  exclamation,  when  the  oblation  is  cast 
into  the  fire.     See  I.  11.  1. 

Brihaspati :  Lord  of  Prayer.  See  I.  8.  2. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  jk  27. 

An  Apri  or  Propitiatory  hymn  addressed  to  a  series  of  deities  or 
deified  objects. 

1  With  all  ki$  offspring :  other  fires.  '  The  other  fires  are  rerily  thy 
branches/ — Rigveda  I.  59. 1.  Taniknapdt :  Son  of  Thyse^^  self-generated^ 
See  V.  12.  2.  Asura :  Lord  divine. 

3  Nardsatisa :  Praise  of  Men ;  a  name  or  epithet  of  Agni  in  Apri 
^ymna. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  27.]  THB  ATBARVAVEDA.  233 

4  Hither  he  comes  with  power  and  fatness  also,  the 

luminous,  implored  with  adoration. 

5  At  holy  rites  and  offerings  Agni  loveth  the  scoops  : 

let  this  man  worship  Agni's  greatness. 

6  He  is  the  furtberer  at  glad  oblations:  there  stood 

the  Vasus  and  the  treasure-givers. 

7  Ever   the   Doors   divine,  and  all  protect  this  Ivor- 

shipper's  holy  work. 

8  Far-reaching,  ruling  by  the  Law  of  Agni, 

May  Dawn  and  Night,  the  holy,  speeding  near  us, 
aid  this  our  sacrificial  ceremony. 

9  Celestial  Hotars,  with  the  tongues  of  Agni  praise 

and  extol  our  lofty  ceremony,  so  that  our  sacrifice 
be  well  conducted  I 

10  Three  Goddesses  upon  this  grass  be   seated,    I4&, 

Sarasvatl,  Mahl,  and  Bh&rati  adored  with  praise. 

11  This  our  nutritious  genial  flow,  God  Tvashtar!  and 

growth  of  wealth,  pour  down  on  this  man's  kindred. 

12  Vanaspati,  rejoicing,  of  thyself  send  God-ward  !  Let 

Agni,  Immolator,  sweeten  our  libation. 

4  The  luminous :  vdhnta :  or,  the  priest ;  or,  the  furtherer  (of  obla* 
tions).  See  M.  Miiller,  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  pp.  37  sqq. 

5  The  scoops :  or  ladles,  used  for  pouring  the  butter  on  the  sacrificial 
fire.     Tkis  man :  the  mstitutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

6  Vasus  and  the  treaswre-givers :  the  Gods  who  enrich  the  men  who 
worship  them. 

7  Doors  divine:  of  the  sacrificial  court  or  chamber.  See  Y.  12.  5. 
And  all :  there  is  no  substantire.  Devdh,  Gods,  is  probably  understood. 

8  Dawn  and  Night :  personified  as  Goddesses. 

9  Celestial  Hotars:  priests  of  the  Gods.  See  Y.  12.  7.,  where  two 
only  are  invoked. 

10  l^dy  Sarasvatij  Maht :  Goddesses  who  preside  over  prayer  and 
praise.  See  Y.  12.  8.  Idk  is  the  same  as  IHL  Bhdrati  is  said  to  be 
another  name  of  Maht. 

12  Vanaspati:  the  sacrificial  post,  regarded  as  a  form  of  Agni.  See 
Y.   12.  10.  Send  God-ward:  convey  our  offerings  to  the  Gods  in  heaven. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


234  THE  HYMNS  OF  BOOK  V. 

13  Pay  sacrifice  to  Indra.  Jdtavedas  Agni,  with  Hail ! 
Let  all  the  Gods  accept  the  gifts  we  offer. 

HYMN  XXVIII. 

For  lengthened  life,  to  last  through  hundred  autumns^ 
they  equalize  with  nine  the  nine  spirations. 

Tliree  in  gold,  three  in  silver,  three  in  iron  by  heat 
are  stablished  in  their  several  places. 

2  May  Agni,  Sun,  and  Moon,  and  Ektrth,  and  Waters, 

Sky,  Air,  the  Quarters  and  the  Points   between 
them. 
And  Parts  of  Years  accordant  with  the  Seasons  by 
this  three-threaded  Amulet  preserve  me. 

3  In  the  three-threaded  Charm  rest  triple  fulness!  Let 

PAshan  cover  it  with  milk  and  butter. 
Here  rest  abundant  store  of  food  and  people,  may 
ample  store  of  oattle  rest  within  it. 

4  Enrich  this   charm,   Adityas,   with   your   treasure ; 

magnify  this,  when  magnified,  O  Agni. 
Endow  it  with  heroic  strength,  O  Indra :  therein  be 
lodged  a  triple  power  of  increase. 

13  Hail! :  Bvd^hd;  the  sacrificial  exclamation  which  consecrates  the 
offering,  regarded  also  as  an  Apri  deity  and  a  form  of  Agni. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  434. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm,  accompanying  investiture  with  an  Amulet, 
to  ensure  general  protection  and  prosperity  for  the  wearer. 

1  Nine  spiratioM  :  the  vital  airs  (of.  our  vapours,  spirits)  are  usual- 
ly enumerated  as  three  or  five ;  or,  with  the  other  vital  organs,  six, 
seven,  nine  (as  here)  or  ten,  or  thirteen.  The  amulet  consists  of  three 
strands  or  threads,  one  of  gold,  one  of  silver,  and  one  of  iron,  each  of 
which  contains  three  protective  powers,  that  is,  one  for  each  of  the 
vital  airs  on  which  the  life  of  the  wearer  depends,  -ffy  heat :  through 
the  fervour  of  the  priest  who  prepared  the  charm ;  or,  possibly  through 
the  fire  that  was  used  in  melting  the  metals. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  28.]  THE  ATUARYAYEDA.  235 

5  With  gold  let  Earth  protect  thee,  iand   with  iron, 

accordant,  all-sustaiDing.  Agni  save  tbee! 
And   in    accordance    with   the    plants   may   silver, 
regarding  thee  with  favour,  grant  thee  vigour. 

6  This  gold,    born   threefold   at  its   first    production, 

grew  the  one  thing  that  Agni  loved  most  dearly  : 
it  fell  away,  one  part  of  injured  Soma. 
One  part  they  call  seed  of  the  sapient  Waters.     This 
gold  bring  thee  long  life  when  triply  threaded ! 

7  Three  lives  of  Jamadagni^  thrice  the  vital  force  of 

Kasyapa, 
Three  sights  of  immortality,  three  lives  have  I  pre- 
pared for  thee. 

8  When  with   the   three-stringed   charm   came   three 

strong  eagles,  sharingtheSacred  Syllable  and  mighty. 
With  immortality  they  drove  oflF  Mrityu,  obscuring 
and  concealing  all  distresses. 

9  The  golden   guard  thee  from   the   sky,  the  silvern 

guard  thee  from  the  air. 
The  iron  guard  thee  from  the  earth !    This  man  hath 
reached  the  forts  of  Grods. 

10  May  these  three  castles  of  the  Gods  keep  thee  secure 

on  every  side. 
Endowed  with  strength,   possessing  these,  be  thou 
the  master  of  thy  foes. 

11  The   God  who  first  bound  on  in  the  beginning  the 

deities'  immortal  golden  castle, — 
Him  I  salute  with  ten  extended  fingers.  Blest  be  the 
three-stringed  charm  I  bind  upon  thee. 

5  Addressed  to  the  person  who  is  to  wear  the  amulet. 

6  Ont  pari  of  injurtd  Soma :  meaning,  apparently,  that  originally 
it  came  partly  from  the  Moon  (Soma)  when  eclipsed. 

8  Scicred  Syllable :  the  mystical  syllable  Om.  With  imm&riality  ; 
or  with  Amrit)  the  drink  of  Gods,  the  Water  of  Life,  which  confers 
unmortality.  The  meaning  is  not  clear.  The  priest  is  asoribin<;  a 
mysterious  origin  and  supernatural  powers  to  the  amulet  Mfityu: 
Death;  the  God  of  Death. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


236  THE  B7MN8  OF  [BOOK  K 

12  Aryaman    be    thy     biuder-on,    and     PAshttn     and 

Brihaspati : 
Whatever  name  the  brood  of  day  possess^  therewith 
we  fasten  thee. 

13  With  Seasons  and  with  Lengths  of  1*1016,  for  vigoiir 

and  extended  life, 
With  all  the  splendour  of  the  Sun   we  fasten  thee 
about  the  nedk* 

14  Drawn  forth  from  butter  and  with  meatfa  besprinkled^ 

firm  as  the  earth,  Unshakable^  triumphant, 
Breaking  down   foes  and  casting  them  beneath  me, 
be  fastened  on  ine  for  exalted  fortune ! 

HYMN  XXIX. 

Made  ready  in  the  east  drive  f(M*th,  take  notice  of 
what  is  happening  here,  omniscient  Agt>i ! 

Thou  bringest  medicine  and  bealest  sickness: 
through  thee  may  we  win  horses,  kine,  and  people* 

2  Accordant  with  all  Gods,  O  J&tavedas  Agni  perform 

this  work  as  we  beseech  thee, 
That  this  defence   of  his   may   fall,   whoever   hatb 
caused  us  pain,  whoever  hath  consumed  us. 

3  Unanimous,  with  all  the  Gods  together,  so  do  this 

thing  O  Agni  J&tavedas,  that  this  defence  of  his 
may  fall  and  fail  him. 

4  Pierce  both  his  eyes,  pierce  thou  the  heart  within  him> 

crush  thou  his  teeth  and  cleave  his  tongue  asunder. 
Rend  thou,  most  youthful  Agni,  that  Fis4cha  whoso 
amid  them  all  of  this  hath  eaten. 

12  The  brood  of  day :  auspicious  things,  produced  in  the  sunlight 
as  opposed  to  ill-omeiied  creatures  of  night  and  darkness. 

14  Spoken  by  the  Recipient  of  the  amulet. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  i)er  Rigveda,  111.  p.  387. 
See  also  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  53,  56. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  destruction  of  Pi84chas. 

1  In  the  east :  the  region  of  the  heavens  over  which  Agni  presides; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^XMN  29.]  TUf!  ATffAfiVA-VBDA.  33T 

5  Whatever  of  liis   body  hath  been  taken,  plundered, 

borne  off,  or  eaten  by  Pisdchas, 
This,  Agni,  knowing  it,  agaip  bring  hither!  We  give 
back  flesh  and  spirit  to  his  body. 

6  If  some  Pis4cha  in  my  food  raw,  ready,  thoroughly 

cooked,  or,  spotty,  hath  deceived  me. 
Let  the  !Pis^ohas  with  their  lives  and  offspring  atone 
for  this,  and  let  this  man  be  healthy. 

7  If  one  ha^h  cheated  me  in  milk  or  porridge,  in  food 

from  grain  or  plants  that  need  no  culture. 
Let  the  Pisachas,  etc. 

8  If  one,  flesh-eater,  in  a  draught  of  water  have  wrong* 

ed  me  lying  in  the  bed  of  goblins, 
Let  the  Pisichas,  etc. 

9  If  one,  flesh-eater,  in  the  day   or  night-time  have 

wronged  me  lying  in  the  bed  of  goblins, 
Let  the  Pis&chas,  etc. 

10  O  Agni  J4tavedas,  slay  the  bloody   PisAcha,  flesh* 

devourer,  mind-destroyer. 
Strong  Indra  strike  him  with  his  bolt  of  thunder, 
courageous  Soma  cut  his  head  to  pieces ! 

11  Thou,  Agni,   ever   slayest   Yfttudh&nas,  the   fiends 

have  never  conquered  thee  in  battles. 
Consume  thou    from    the    root  the  flesh-devourers, 
let  none  of  them  escape  thy  heavenly  weapon. 

12  Collect,  O  Jitavedas,  what  hath  been  removed  and 

borne  away. 
Let  this  man's  members  grow,  let  him  swell  like  the 
tendril  of  a  plant. 


5  0/  ikU :  of  the  body  of  this  sick  man,  whose  emaciation  is  attri* 
buted  to  the  diabolical  arts  of  Pisichas. 

8  Lying  (m  the  bed  of  goblins :  sdydnam,  lying,  agrees  with  md,  me. 
Ludwig  suggests  that  sdydnas  should  be  read,  to  agree  with  kravyad^ 
ilesh-eater,  which  would  be  more  intelligible  and  appropriate. 

12   What  kath  been  removed :  all  the  flesh  that  the  sick  man  has  lost. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


238  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V 

13  Like  as   the   Soma's  tendril,    thus,    O   JdtavedaSi 

let  him  swell. 
Let   him    live,    Aorni !     Make  him   fat,    free   from 
consumption,  full  of  sap. 

14  Here,   Agni,   is  the  fuel|  here  are  logs  that  crush 

Pis4chas  down. 
O  J^tavedas,   willingly  accept  them  and  be  pleased 
therewith. 

15  Accept,   O   Agni,   with   thy    flame    the   billets   of 

T4rshtAgha  wood. 
Let  the  flesh -eater  who  would  take  the  flesh  of  this 
man  lose  his  form. 

HYMN  XXX. 

From  thy  vicinity  I  call,  from  near,  from  far,  from 

nigh  at  hand. 
Stay  here:  depart  not:  follow   not  the   Fathers  of 

the  olden  time.     I  bind  thy  vital  spirit  fast. 

15  T^ilUdgha  wood:  the  word  does  not  occur  again  in  the  hymns ; 
and  the  tree,  probably  c  tiled  TrishUgha,  which  supplied  the  fuel,  can- 
not be  identified.  T&rshUlgha  fuel  is  mentioned  in  the  Kau^ika-Sutra, 
XXV.  27.  Lost  his  form:  and  so  be  annihilated. 

This  invocation  of  Agni  to  counteract  and  destroy  the  malevolent 
fiends  who  sapped  men's  strength  and  took  their  lives  is  a  far  more 
sensible  proceeding  than  the  £tm)pean  belief,  countenanced  by  the  law 
and  generally  prevalent  even  at  the  beginning  of  last  century,  which 
attributed  any  insidious  and  imaccountable  illness  to  the  malevolent 
machinations  and  noxious  charms  of  witches,  who  were  usually  poor 
old  women  with  wrinkled  faces,  hairy  lips,  squinting  eyes,  squeaking 
voices,  and  scolding  tongues.  *Dr.  Sprenger,  in  his  Life  of  Mohammed^ 
computes  the  entire  number  of  persons  who  have  been  burned  as 
witches  during  the  Christian  epoch  at  nine  miUions.* — Chambers's 
Ency  clopae  i  ia. — Wi  tchcraf  t. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by.  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  526. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  restore  to  life  and   health  a  man  who  is 
dangerously  ill. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  30.]  TBS  ATHAR7A7EDA.  539 

2  If  any  man,  a  stranger  or  akin,  hath  cast  a  spell  on 

thee, 
I  with  my  voice  to  thee  declare  thy  freedom  and 
release  therefrom. 

3  If  in  thy  folly  thou  hast  lied  or  cursed  a  woman  or 

a  man, 
I  with  my  voice  declare  to  thee   thy  freedom  and 
release  therefrom. 

4  If  thou  art  lying  there    because    of    mother's    or 

of  father's  sin, 
I  with  my  voice  declare  to  thee   thy   freedom  and 
release  therefrom. 

5  Accept  the  healing  medicine,  the  balm  thy  mother 

and  thy  sire, 
Thy  sister  and  thy  brother  bring.      I  make  thee  live 
through  lengthened  years. 

6  0  man,  stay  here  among  us ;  stay  with  all  thy  spirit : 

follow  not 
Yama's  two  messengers.  Approach  the  castles  where 
the  living  dwell. 


4  Because  of  niother*$  or  of  fatker^s  stn :  bo  in  the  Kigveda  ;  *  Let 
U8  not  suffer  for  the  sin  of  others'  (  VI.  51.  7  ) ;  and  *  Loose  us  from 
sins  committed  by  our  fathers'  (VII.  86.  5).  Compare  ako  Taittiriya- 
Brahmapa  III.  7.  12.  3  cited  by  Muir:  *May  Agni  free  me  from  any 
sin  which  my  mother  or  my  father  committed  when  I  was  a  babe  un- 
born ; '  and  '  And  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Master,  who  did  sin, 
this  man,  or  liis  parents,  that  he  was  bom  blind?'  (St.  John  IX.  2). 
Disease,  if  not  caused  by  some  malevolent  demon,  was  generally  re- 
garded as  the  punishment  of  sin  against  Gods  or  men. 

6  Yama^s  two  messengers :  *  And  those  two  dogs  of  thine,  Yama  f 
the  watchers,  four-eyed,  who  look  on  men  and  guard  the  pathway 
....  Dark-hued,  insatiate,  with  distended  nostrils,  Yama's  two 
envoys  roam  among  the  people'  (Rigveda  X.  14.  11,  12).  See  also 
Atharva-veda  VIII  1.  9;  2.  11  ;  8.  10.  In  England  there  is  a  some- 
what similar  popular  belief.  *  In  Yorkshire,  the  Kirk-Grim  [Church- 
spectre]  is  usually  a  huge  black  dog  with  eyes  like  saucers,  and  is 
called  a  padfoot.  It  generally  frequents  the  church  lanes ;  and  he 
who  sees  it  knows  that  he  must  die  within  the  year.' — S.  Baring-Gould, 
Strange  Survivals,  p.  16. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


240  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V. 

7  Come  back  as  thou  art  called  to  come,  knowing  the 

outlet  of  the  path, 
And  the  approach  and  its  ascent,  the  way  of  every 
living  man. 

8  Be  not  alarmed  :  thou  wilt  not  die.     I  give  thee 

lengthened  years  of  life. 
Forth  from  thy  members  have  I  charmed  Decline 
that  caused  the  fever  there. 

9  Gone  is  the  pain  that  racked  thee,  gone  thy  fever, 

gone  thy  heart's  disease. 
Consumption,  conquered  by  my  voice,  hath,  like  a 
hawk,  fled  far  away. 

10  Two  sages,  Sense  and  Vigilance,  the  sleepless  and 

the  watchful  one, 
These,  the  protectors  of  thy  life,  shall  be  awake  both 
day  and  night. 

11  This  Agni  must  be  waited  on.     Here  let  the  Sun 

mount  up  for  thee. 
Rise  from  deep  death  and  come  away,  yea,  from  black 
darkness  rise  thou  up ! 

12  Homage  be  paid  to  Yama,  and  to  Mrityu,  and  to 

the  Fathers,  and  to  those  who  guide  us  ! 
I  honour  first,  for  this  man's  preservation,^  that  Agni 
who  well  knoweth  how  to  save  him. 

13  Let  breath  and  mind  return  to  him,  let  sight  and 

vigour  come  again. 
Let  all  his  body  be  restored  and  firmly  stand  upon 
its  feet. 

14  Provide  this  man  with  breath  and  sight,  O  Agni, 

and  with  his  body  and  his  strength  uniite  him. 
Thau  knowest  Amrit :  let  him    not  go  hence,  nor 
dwell  in  house  of  clay. 

■  '      -      J* 
10  Sense  and  Vigilaiice :  *  Alert  and  Watchful.* — Muir. 
14  Tfiou  knowest  Amrit:  'thou  hast  the   knowledge  of  immort^- 
ity.' — Muir. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMK  31  ]  THE  ATHARVA^VEDA,  %i\ 

X5  Let  not  thine  inward  breathing  fail,   let  not  thine 
outward  breath  be  lost. 
Let  Sftrya  who  is  Lord  Supreme  raise  thee  from 
death  with  beams  of  light. 

16  Tied,  tremulously  moving,  here  the  tongue  is  speaking 

in  the  mouth. 
With  thee   I  charmed   Decline   away  and    Fevers 
hundred  agonies. 

17  This  living  world,  unconquered  of  the  Gods,  is  most 

beloved  of  all. 
To  whatsoever  death  thou  wast  destined  when  thou 

wast  born,  O  man. 
This  death  and  we  call  after  thee.     Die  not  before 

decrepit  age! 

HYMN  XXXL 

Thb  spell  that  they  have  cast  for  thee  on  unbaked 

dish  or  minified  meal, 
The   witchcraft   wrought   on  undressed   meat,   this 

I  strike  back  again  on  them. 

2  Th3  spell  that  they  have  cast  for  thee  on  jungle- 
cock,  goat,  horned  ram, 


16  Fevers  hundvBd  agonies :  so  in  BohemUn  popular  belief  there 
were  originally  a  hundred  varieties  of  fever.  See  Grohmann,  Medici- 
nisches  aus  dem  Atharva-Veda,  Indischo  Studien,  IX.  p.  390. 

17  Life  is  sweet;  and  you  must  not  die  before  your  time,  before 
the  natural  termination  of  your  life  in  extreme  old  age. 

The  hymn  has  been  translate!  by  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  440,  and  by 
Ludwig,  Der  Rlgveda,  III.  494. 

The  hymn  is  a  counter-charm  to  secure  protection  from  all  kinds  of 
spells  and  incantations  of  an  enemy. 

2  HotiM  ram:  kurtrint ;  literally,  (the  animal)  decorated  with 
the  kurtra,  a  kind  of  head-dress  for  women.  According  to  Zimmcr, 
some  domestic  bird,  like  the  cock,  the  crested  bird,  must  be  meant. 
Coming  between  goat  ani  ewe^  I  think  ram  is  the  most  suitable  mean- 
ing, his  horns  representing  the  kurira  with  the  nature  of  which  we  are 
not  acquainted.  Or  kurirint  may  be  an  epithet  of  cyV,  as  Prof.  Geld- 
nor  explains :  *  or  hornW  goat.'    See  Vedische  Studien,  Part  I.  p.  130. 

16 


Digitized  by 


Google 


242  THK  HYMNS  OF  BOOK  V. 

The  witchcraft  wrought  upon  thy  ewe,  this  I  strike 
back  again  on  them. 

3  The  spell  that  they  have  cast  upon  thy  beast  that 

hath  uncloven  hooves, 
The  ass  with  teeth  in  both  his  jaws,  this  I  strike 
back  again  on  them. 

4  The  secret  spell  upon  thy  plants  AmAld  or  Nar&chi, 

spell 
That  they  have  cast  upon  thy  field,  this  I  strike  back 
again  on  them. 

5  The  spell  that  wicked  men  have  cast  on  thine  original 

household-fire, 
And  on  thy  sacrificial  hall,  this  I  strike  back  again 
on  them. 

6  The  spell  that  they  have  cast  upon  thy  public  room, 

thy  gambling-board. 
Spell  they  have  cast  upon  thy  dice,  this  I  strike  back 
again  on  them. 

7  The  spell  that  they  have  cast  upon  thine  army  or 

thy  shafts  and  arms, 
Spell  they  have  cast  upon  the  drum,  this  I  throw 
back  again  on  them. 

8  Charm  they  have  laid  within  thy  well  or  buried  in 

the  burning-ground, 
Charm  they  have  laid  within  thy  home,  this  I  throw 
back  again  on  them. 

9  The  spell  that  they  have  wrought  for  thee  in  flickering 

fire  of  human  bones, — 
Mroka,  consuming,  cannibal,  this  I  throw  back  again 
on  them. 


4  AmUld:   the   Methonica  Superba;   a  species  of  lily.     Nardcht: 
some  unidentified  plant. 

5  Hcusehold  fire :  GSlrhapatya  (agni);  the  western  sacred  fire  main- 
tained by  every  master  of  a  house. 

9  Mroka:  Agni  in  his  most  dreaded  form;  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  31.]  THB  ATHARVA^VBDA.  243 

10  He  brought    this  by  no  proper  path,  by  the  right 

path  we  drive  it  back. 
The  fool  in  folly  brought  it  to  those  who  observe 
established  bounds. 

11  No  power  had  he  who  wrought  the  spell :  he  hurt 

his  foot,  he  broke  his  toe. 
Unlucky   for   his   wealthy   lords,  he   hath  wrought 
happiness  for  us. 

12  May  Indra  slay  with  mighty  bolt,  may  Agni  with 

his  missile  pierce 
The  sorcerer  w^ho  brings  the  curse,  who  deals  with 
roots  and  secret  spells. 

10  He :  the  hostile  enchanter,  whose  incantations  have  been  im- 
properly conducted,  and  launched  against  honest  men  who  are  proof 
against  them. 

11  Cf.  IV.  18.  6.  His  wealthy  lards:  the  rich  men  who  hired  his 
services  who  has  cursed  us  in  vain. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  VL 


HYMN  I. 

Sing,  Atharvapa,  at  eve,  sing  loudly,  bring  a  splendid 
present :  hymn  God  Savitar  with  praises. 

2  Yea,  praise  him  whose  home  is  in  the  river,  Son  of 

Truth,  the  youthful,  gracious  friend  whose  word  is 
guileless. 

3  Savitar  our  God  shall  send  us  many  everlasting  trea- 

sures, that  both  paths  may  well  be  travelled. 

HYMN  II. 

For  Indra,  ministering  priests!  run  ye  and  press  the 

Soma  juice, 
That  he  may  hear  his  praiser's  word,  and  this  my  call. 

2  Thou  into  whom  the  drops  find  way  as  sap  pours  life 

into  a  tree. 
Drive  off  in  thine  abundant  might  our  demon  foes. 

3  For  Indra^  thunder-armed,   who  drinks   the   Soma 

press  the  Soma  out : 
He»  youthful^  conqueror,  and  Lord,  is  praised  by  alL 

A  hymn  of  praise  to  Savitar^ 

.1  Jtharvana :  descendant  of  the  great  Rishi  Atharvan ;  Atharva- 
priest     The  Adhvaiyu  addresses  the  Udg&tar  or  Chanting  Priest. 

2  River:  the  sea  of  air;  the  heavens.  Youthful:  ever  joung  and 
strong. 

3  Savitar  .  .  .  ^uill  tend :  Mvitd^  $^i$hat ;  a  frequently  recurring 
play  upon  the  two  words,  both  from  the  root  t<2  to  set  in  motion,  vivify^ 
produce.  That  both  paths  :  of  the  rising  and  declining  Sun  ;  srtitt  being 
read,  as  suggested  in  the  St.  P.  Dictionary,  instead  of  the  manifeetlf 
corrupt  su9htutfi  eulogies. 

A  hymn  in  praise  of  Indra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


246  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  III. 

Guard   us   the   Maruts!  Guard   us    well,    O  Indra, 

PAshan,  Aditi. 
Guard  us,  O  Waters'  Child,  and  Rivers  Seven.    May 

Vishpu  guard  us,  and  the  Sky, 

2  May  Heaven  and  Earth  take  care  of  us  for  victory, 

may  Pressin^j-Stone  and  Soma  save  us  from  distress. 
Sarasvatl,  auspicious  Goddess,    guard  us  well ;  pre- 
serve us  Agni  and  his  kind  protecting  powers. 

3  Preserve  us  both   the   Asvins,   Gods  and  Lords  of 

Light,   and   let  the   Dawns   and    Night  bring  us 
deliverance. 
The  Waters'  Child  protect  our  house  from  every  harm. 
Do  thou,  God  Tvashtar,  make  us  strong  for  health 
and  wealth. 

HYMN  IV. 

Mat  Tvashtar,  Brahmanaspati,   Parjanya   hear   my 

holy  prayer. 
May  Aditi  with  all  her  sons,  the  brothers,  guard  us, 

invincible,  protecting  power. 

2  May  AAsa,    Bhaga,    Varupa,  and  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Aditi,  and  Maruts  guard  us. 
May   we    be   freCvi    from    that  oppressor's    hatred. 
May  he  keep  off  that  foeman  who  is  near  us. 


A  hymn  to  various  deities  for  protection  and  prosperity. 

1  Waters^  Child :  a  frequently  occurring  appellation  of  Agni,  bom 
in  the  form  of  lightning  from  the  watery  clouds  of  the  firmament. 
Mivers  Seven:  the  Indus,  the  Five  Rivera  of  the  Panj&b,  and  either  the 
Sarasvatl  or  the  Kubh&.     See  IV.  6.  2. 


A  hymn  to  various  deities  for  protection. 

1  Parjanya :  God  of  the  rain-cloud.  See  I.  2.  1 .     Aditi  with  all  her 
ions :  see  note  on  I.  9.  1. 

2  Aiiia:  one  of  the  Adityas.  He:  any  one  or  each  of  the  friendly 
Qods. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  6.]  THE  ATHARVAVBDA.  247 

3  May  both  the  Asvins  further  our  devotion.  With 
ceaseless  care  deliver  us,  Wide-Ranger  I  O  Father 
Heaven,  keep  from  us  all  misfortunes. 

HYMN  V. 

Aqni,  adored  with  sacred  oil,  lift  up  this  man  to  high 

estate. 
Endow  him  with  full  store  of  strength  and  make  him 

rich  in  progeny. 

2  Advance  him,  Indra !  Let  him  be  ruler  of  all  akin  to 

him. 
Grant  him  sufficiency  of  wealth :  guide  him   to  life 
and  length  of  days. 

3  Prosper  this  man,  O  Agni,  in  whose  house  we  offer 

sacrifice. 
May  Soma  bless  him,   and    the  God   here   present, 
Brahmanaspati. 

HYMN  VI. 

The  godless  man  whoever  plots  against   us,    Brah- 
manaspati, 
Thou  shalt  give  up  as  prey  to  me  the  worshipper 
who  pour  the  juice. 

2  Tf,  Soma,  any  spiteful  man  hath  aimed  at  us  whose 
thoughts  are  kind, 
Smite  with  thy  bolt  upon  his  face :  he,  crushed  to 
pieces,  vanisheth. 

3   Wide-Ranger  ;  far-reaching  Heaven.  Faih&r  Heaven  .*  dyaushpikir 
s  Zeu  pater,  Jupiter. 

A  prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  well-being  of  a  princely  patron. 

S  Here  present:  Brahmanaspati   being  sometimes    identified   with 
Agni  who  is  present  as  the  sacdficial  fire« 

'Hie  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  431. 

A  hymn  for  protection  from  wicked  men. 

2   With  thy  bolt :  more  usually  the  weapon  of  Indra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


248  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  Vl 

3  Soma,  whoever  troubleth  us,  be  he  a  stranger  or  akin, 
Deprive  him  of  the  strength  he  hath  :  slay  him  thy- 
self like  mighty  Dyaus ! 

HYMN  VII. 

Soma  !  what  pathway  Aditi  and  the  three  guifeless 
Mitras  use,  come  thou  with  help  to  us  thereby. 

2  Thereby  thou,  conquering  Soma,  wilt  give  Asuras 

to  be  our  prey,  thereby  be  ye  our  advocates. 

3  Whereby  ye  Gods  repelled  and  stayed  the  powers  of 

the  Asuras,  thereby  give  shelter  unto  us. 

HYMN  VIII. 

Like  as  the  creeper  throws  her  arms  on  every  side 

around  the  tree, 
So  hold  thou  me  in  thine  embrace  that  thou   nmyst 

be  in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart. 

2  As,  when  he  mounts,  the  eagle  strikes  his  pinions 
downward  on  the  earth. 
So  do  I  strike  thy  spirit  down  that  thou  mayst  be  in 
love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart 


3  Dyaus:  Heaven;   *the  bright  sky  itself,   the   old   Dyaus,    wor- 
shipped as  we  know  by  the  Aryaa  before  they  broke  up  into  separate 
peoples  and  languages,   and   surviving   in   Greece  as  Zeus,  in  Italy  as 
Jupiter,  Heaven-father,  and  among  the   Teutonic  tribes  as    T^r  and . 
yv«/— M.  Muller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  pi  194. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  430. 

A  prayer  to  Soma  and  other  Gods  for  help  and  protection. 
1    Three  ^leless  Mitras  :  Mitra  and  the  two  other  Adityaa,  Varuna 
and  Aryaman,  who  are  usually  associated  with  him. 

A  charm  to  win  a  maiden^s  love« 

1  Creeper:  llbujd;  probably,  woodbine.  See  Rigveda  X.  10.  13. 
The  refrain  of  the  three  stanzas  occurs  also  in  I.  34.  5,  and  II.  30,  I. 
The  more  literal  translation  is  :  That  thou  mayst  nevermore  depart,  or, 
be  estranged. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  explained  by  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  V.  261  sqq. ;  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Licder,  pp.  54,  158. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMl^  10.]  THB  ATHARrA-rBDA.  249 

3  As  in  his  rapid   course   the   Sun   encompasses   the 
heaven  and  earth, 
So  do  I  compass  round  thy  mind  that  thou  mayst  be 
in  love  with  me,  my  darling,  never  to  depart. 

HYMN  IX. 

Desirr  my  body,  love  my  feet,  love  thou  mine  eyes, 

and  love  my  legs. 
Let  both  thine  eyes  and  hair,  fond  girl!  be  dried  and 

parched  through  love  of  me. 

2  I  make  thee  hang  upon  mine  arm,  I  make  thee  lie 

upon  my  heart. 
Thou  yieldest  to  my  wish,  that  thou  mayst  be  sub- 
missive to  my  will. 

3  May  they  whose  kisses  are  a  bond,  a  love-charm  laid 

within  the  heart, 
Mothers  of  butter,  may  the  cows  incline  that  maid  to 
love  of  me. 

HYMN  X. 

All  hail  for  hearing  to  the  Earth,  to  Trees,  to  Agni, 
sovran  Lord ! 

2  All  hail  for  breath  to  Air,  for  powers  of  life  to  Vayu, 
sovran  Lord ! 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  win  a  maiden's  love. 

1  Fond  girl ! :  said  proleptioally. 

2  /  niake :  the  wish  is  regarded  as  already  obtained. 

3  Whose  kisses  are  a  bond :  whose  caresses  make  their  calves  love 
them.  The  cows,  *  the  milky  mothers,'  the  patterns  of  strong  affection, 
are  to  soften  the  maiden's  heart  and  fill  it  with  a  portion  of  their  own 
passionate  love.     See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  264. 

A  thanksgiving  for  life,  hearing,  and  sight. 

1  £arth :  perhaps  as  being  a  good  conductor  of  sound,  and  so  con- 
nected with  hearing.  Sovran  Lord :  of  trees  and  plants,  the  most  im- 
portant productions  of  the  earth. 

2  Vdyu :  as  God  of  Wind  and  the  air  which  supports  life. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


260  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI, 

3  AH  hail  for  vision  to  the  Stars,  to  Heaven,  to  SArya, 
sovran  Lord ! 

HYMN  XL 

AsvATTHA  on  the  Saml-tree.     There  a  male  birth  is 

certified. 
There  is  the  finding  of  a  son :  this  bring  we  to  the 

women-folk. 

2  The  father  sows  the  genial  seed,  the  woman  tends 

and  fosters  it. 
This  is  the  finding  of  a  son :  thus  hath  Fraj&pati 
declared. 

3  PrajApati,  Anumati,  Siniv&U  have  ordered  it. 
Elsewhere  may  he  effect  the  birth  of  maids,  but  here 

prepare  a  boy. 

HYMN  XII. 

I,  AS  the  Sun  goes  round  the  heaven,  have  travelled 

round  the  Serpents'  race. 
I  ward  thy  poison  oflF,  as  Night  parts  all  else  living 

from  the  Sun. 

.3  Star$  :  the  eyes  of  heaven.  Sikrya :  as  the  God  of  light.  Cf.  *  May 
SiHrya,  sovran  Lord  of  eyes,  protect  me'  (V.  24.  9.) 

An  epithalamian  charm  to  ensure  the  birth  of  a  boy. 

1  The  production  of  fire  by  means  of  the  drill,  the  upper  part  of 
which  is  made  of  Asvattha,  and  the  lower  part  or  receptacle  of  Sami 
wood,  represents  the  union  of  man  and  wife.  Moreover,  the  Asvattha, 
which  has  a  masculine  name,  springing  from,  and  growing  on,  the 
feminine  Sami-tree,  is  typical  of  the  male  child  in  due  time  to  be  horn. 
See  III.  6.  1. 

2  Prajdpati :  Lord  of  Life,  whbse  favoiiring  aid  is  invoked  on  these 
occasions.     See  Eigveda  X.  184.  1,  and  Atharva-veda  V.  25.  13. 

3  Anumati  and  Stntvdlt  (see  V.  25.  3)  are  deities  presiding  over 
different  phases  of  the  moon  and  associated  with  conception  and  child- 
birth. See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  pp.  228  sqq. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  elucidated  by  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  V.  p.  264.  See  also  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  477. 


A  charm  against  venomous  serpents. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  13.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA,  251 

2  With  this,  discovered  in  the  days  of  old  by  Brahmans, 

Rishis,  Gods, 
With  this  I  ward  thy  poison  off,  thou  Biter!  formed 
and  forming  now. 

3  With  mead  I  mingle  flowing  streams:  the  hills  and 

mountains  shall  be  mead, 
Parush^i  and   SlpftlA  mead.    May   it  be  well  with 
mouth  and  heart. 

HYMN  XIII. 

Worship  to  weapons  of  the  Gods!  worship  to  weapons 

of  the  Kings ! 
Then     worship   to   the   people's  arms!  worship,    O 

Death,  be  paid  to  thee  1 

2  Let  worship  be  to  thy  defence  and  to  thine  accusa- 

tion paid. 
Death  !  be  this  worship  paid  to  thy  good-will  and  thy 
malevolence  ! 

3  Worship   to   thy   physicians,    to   thy    sorcerers   be 

worship  paid ! 
Death!  let  this  reverence  be  done  unto  thy  Br&h- 
mans  and  thy  roots. 


2  With  this  :  drug  or  charm,  understood. 

3  Parushni :  one  of  the  rivers  of  the  Panjilb,  now  called  the  B^vl. 
Sipdld :  a  stream  full  of  the  aquatic  plant  Sip&la,  Saivala,  or  Avaki 
(Blyxa  Octandra). 

A  hymn  of  homi^e  to  Death. 

1  Gods :  priests,  whose  weapons  are  religious  fervour,  and  the  power 
of  blessing  and  cursing.  The  people^s :  belonging  to  the  Vaisyas,  the 
men  who  constitute  the  third  class  or  caste  of  the  community,  agricul- 
turists and  tradesmen. 

2  Defence  and  .  .  .  accusation:  all  that  is  said  in  thy  favour  and 
against  thee. 

3  Boots :  used  in  incantations  to  destroy  enemies. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


252  TBS  BTMNS  Ot  [BOOK  VI. 

HYMN  XIV. 
Kemovb    thou    all    Decline  that    lurks   within  the 

members  and  the  joints^ 
The  firmly-settled  heart-disease  that  racks  the  bones 

and  rends  the  limbs. 

2  From  the  consumptive  man  I  pluck  Decline  as  'twere 

a  severed  part. 
I  cut  the  bond  that  fetters  him^  even  as  a  root  of 
cucumber. 

3  Begone,  Consumption,  hence  away,  like  a  young  foal 

that  runs  at  speed. 
Then,  not  pernicious  to  our  men,  flee,  yearly  visitant 
like  grass ! 

HYMN  XV. 

Most  excellent  of  all  the  plants  art  thou :  thy  vassala 

are  the  trees. 
Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks 

to  injure  us. 
2  Whoever  seeks  to  injure  us^  with  kinsmen  or  no  kin 

to  aid. 
May  I  be  uppermost  of  all,  even  as  this  Plant  is 

queen  of  trees. 

A  charm  against  Consumption. 

1  Decline:  baldiam;  the  gradual  wasting  away  that  frequently 
follows  Takman  or  malarial  fever.  See  Zimmer,  A.  I.  Leben,  386,  387. 
The  stanza  is  addressed  to  some  medicinal  plant. 

2  As  Hwere  a  severed  part :  mtuhkardm  ydtkd  ;  sicut  testioukim. 

3  Yearly  vintant  like  grass :  usually  prevalent  in  the  rainy  season 
when  grass  suddenly  springs  up  in  the  greatest  abundance. 

A  charm  for  power  and  preeminence. 

2  This  Plant :  the  TaUsal  of  stanza  3,  an  unidentified  shrub  or 
tree ;  vetast,  ratan,  according  to  Kesava. 

3  Soma :  this  famous  plant  has  remained  unidentified  till  recently 
(see  Max  Miiller,  Biographies  of  Words,  Appendix  III.,  quoted  in 
The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  Vol.  I.  p.  3).  *  Dr.  Aitchison  has  lately 
stated  that  Soma  must  be  the  Ephedra  pachyelade^  which  in  the  Hari- 
rud  valley  is  said  to  bear  the  name  of  hum,  huma,  and   yahma.     This 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  IG]  THE  ATHARVA-TEDA.  253 

3  As  Soma  hath  been  made  the  best  of  all  oblations 
'mid  the  plants. 
So,  as  Tal48&  is  the  queen  of  trees^  may  I  be  chief 
of  all. 

HYMN  XVI. 

O  Abatct,  non-Abayu,  dire  is  thy  juice,  O  Abaju : 
ive  eat  the  gruel  made  of  thee. 

2  Vihalha   is    thy    father's    name,     thy   mother's   is 

Mad^vati. 
Yea,  verily  thou  art  not  he,   thou   who  hast  well 
protected  life. 

3  Go  thou  to  rest,   Tauvilik4!     This  noisy  cry  hath 

sunk  to  rest. 
Go  hence,  depart,  Nir&Ia,  thou !  the  tawny  and  the 
tawny-eared. 


supposition  is  coniinned  by  Dr.  Joseph  Bommttller,  a  botanist  long  resi- 
dent in  Kerman,  who  identifies  the  Soma  plant  with  some  kind  of 
Ephedra,  probably  Ephedra  dUtachpa,  but  who  remarks  that  different 
varieties  of  Ephedra  are  to  be  found  from  Siberia  to  the  Iberian  penin- 
sula, so  that  we  must  give  up  the  hope  of  determining  the  original 
home  of  the  Aryas  by  means  of  the  habitat  of  the  Soma  plant'  (Quar- 
tarly  Review,  No.  354,  October  1894,  p.  455). 

Apparently  a  medicinal  charm. 

1  Ahayu :  a  non-identified  plant.  It  seems  to  have  been  poisonous 
in  its  natural  condition,  but  medicinal  when  cooked  and  properly  pre- 
pared.    Non- Ahayu :  no  longer  retaining  thy  poisonous  properties. 

2  Vihalha  and  Maddvatt  appear  to  be  unidentified  plants.  Thou 
art  not  he :  thou  art  no  longer  the  poisonous  plant  thou  wast 

3  TauvUikd :  some  kind  of  animal  or  plant  Nirdla :  said  to  be  a 
kind  of  fish. 

The  fourth  verse,  consisting  of  one  line,  is  untranslatable :  Thou 
art  AlasiU  in  front,  thou  art  Silanjili  (a  weed  growing  in  com)  be- 
hind :  Nilafalasi^Ul  (probably  a  weed  of  similar  kind). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S64  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vt, 

HYMN  XVII. 

Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  conceived  the  germ  of  all 
the  tbiDgs  that  be, 
So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  laid  in  thee  that  thou  mayst 
bear  a  son. 

2  Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  hath  borne  and  bears  the 
stately  forest  trees, 
So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou 
mayst  bear  a  son. 

S  Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  hath  borne  and  bears  the 
mountains  and  the  hills, 
So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou 
mayst  bear  a  son. 

Even  as  this  mighty  Earth  supports  the  moving  world 

that  dwells  thereon, 
So  may  the  germ  of  life  be  borne  in  thee  that  thou 

mayst  bear  a  son. 

HYMN  XVIII. 

The  first  approach  of  Jealousy,  and  that  which  fol- 

loweth  the  first, 
The  pain,  the  fire  that  burns  within  thy  heart  we 

quench  and  drive  away. 

2  Even  as  the  earth  is  dead  to  sense,  yea,  more  uncon- 
scious than  the  dead. 
Even  as  a  corpse's  spirit  is  the  spirit  of  the  jealous  man. 

A  charm  to  ensure  conception  and  the  birth  of  a  ton. 

1  Earth :  the  Mother  of  all :  Heaven  and  £arth,  Ouranos  and  (jaia, 
being  regarded  as  the  Universal  Parents.  So  in  the  Genesis  of  the 
New  Zealanders  :  *  The  Heavens  which  are  above  us  and  the  Earth 
which  lies  beneath  us,  are  the  progenitors  of  men,  and  the  origin  of 
all  things.' — Max  Miiller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us?  p.  154. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  477. 

A  charm  to  banish  Jealousy. 

2  Dead  to  $enu :  cf.  <bruta  tellus'  (Horace,  Odes  I.  34.  &). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  20.]  TEE  ATHARVAVEDA.  256 

3  The  thought  that  harbours  in  thy  heart,  the  flutter- 
ing doubt  that  dwells  therein, 
Yea,  a]l  thy  jealousy,  like  heat  born  of  the  dance, 
I  banish  thence. 

HYMN  XIX. 
Let  the  Gods  purify  me,  let  men  purify  me  with  a 

prayer. 
Cleanse  me  all  creatures  that  exist !  may  Pavamdna 

make  me  pure. 

2  May  Favam&na  make  me  pure  for  wisdom  and  for 

power  and  life,  and  unassailed  security. 

3  God  Savitar,  by  both  of  these,  filter  and  pressing  out 

the  juice,  purify  us  that  we  may  see. 

HYMN  XX. 

Hk  goes  away  as  'twere  from  this  fierce  burning  fire, 
inebriated  and  lamenting  he  departs. 

Let   him,   the   lawless,   seek   another    and    not   us. 
Worship  be  paid  to  Fever  armed  with  fiery  heat. 
2  To  Rudra  and  to  Fever  be  our  worship  paid  :  worship 
be  paid  to  Varupa  the  splendid  King ! 

Worship  to  Dyaus,  to  Eartb,  worship  be  paid  to  Plants! 

3  Like  heat  horn  of  the  dance  :  or,  if  driter^  as  suggested  in  the  St. 
P.  Dictionary  and  adopted  by  Weber,  be  read  instead  of  nriter,  *  like 
breath  from  leathern  bag.' 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  514, 
by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  235,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  28,  159. 

A  prayer  for  purification. 

1  Pavamdna :  the  deified  Soma  juice  as  it  is  clarified  by  passing 
through  the  filter. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  431. 

A  charm  against  Fever. 

1  He:  Fever  personified. 

2  Hvdra :  as  sender  of  disease  and  death.  See  I.  19.  3.  Fever  : 
see  I.  25.  1.     Dpaus :  Hejiven. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J56  THE  HTUNS  OF  [BOOK  F/. 

3  Thoti  who,  aglow  with  heat,  makest  all  bodies  green, 
to  thee,  red,  brown,  I  bow,  the  Fever  of  the  wood. 

HYMN  XXI. 

Of  all   the  three  terrestrial   realms  the   ground  is 

verily  the  best. 
I  from  the  skin  that  covers  these  gather  a  healing 

medicine. 

2  Thou  art  the  best  of  medicines,   most  excellent  of 

Plants  art  thou, 
As  Soma  'mid  the  wandering  stars,  as  Varuija  among 
the  Gods. 

3  Endowed  with  wealth,  denying  not,  give  freely  fain 

to  give  your  gifts! 
Ye  stay  the  hair  from  falling  off:  ye  strengthen  and 

increase  its  growth. 

HYMN  XXII. 
Dark   the   descent;    the     strong-winged   birds   are 

golden :  they  tiy  aloft  to  heaven,  enrobed  in  waters. 
They  have  come  hither  from  the  seat  of  Order,  and 

inundated  earth  with  streams  of  fatness. 

3  Green :  or  yellow.  See  I.  25.  3,  where  Fever  is  called  *  God  of  the 
sickly  yellow.* 

Of  the  wood :  especially  prevalent  in  densely  wooded  districts. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  511. 

A  charm  to  strengthen  hair  and  promote  its  growth. 

1  Three  ieirestrial  realms  :  the  world  is  divided  into  heaven,  firma- 
ment, and  earth,  and  each  of  these,  again,  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as 
threefold.  Cf.  Rigveda  IV.  53.  5,  and  VIl.  87.  5.  The  skin  that  covers 
these :  the  surface  of  the  gromid ;  the  skin  on  which  the  plants  grow  as 
hair  grows  on  the  skin  of  the  head. 

2  Soma  :  the  Moon. 

3  Ye  stay  the  hair  from  falling  off :  the  plants  endowed  with  these 
virtues  are  left  unnamed. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  pp.  50,  160. 

A  hymn  to  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods. 

1  This  stanza,  which  recurs  in  IX.  10.  22,  is  taken  from  Rigveda  T. 
14.  47.     Strong-winged  birds:  here  the  Maruts. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  23]  TBS  ATH'AB7A'VMDA.  857 

2  Yo  make  floods  rich  in  milk,  make  plants  propitious, 

what  time  ya  9tir,  O  golden-breasted  Maruts  ! 
Pour  down  your  showers  of  vigorous  strength  and 
favour  there  where  ye  sprinkle  mead,  O  Maruts, 
heroes ! 

3  0  Maruts,  send  ye  down,  streaming  with  water,  rain 

which,  may,  filling  all  the  sloping  valleys. 
Leap  like  a  bold  girl  in  a  man's  embraces,  or  like  a 
matron  tumbled  by  her  husband. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

Herb  flow  the  restless  ones,   they  flow  unceasing 

through  the  day  and  night. " 
Most   excellently  wise  I  call   the  Goddess   Waters 

hitherward. 

2  Let  the  deft  Waters,  summoned,  give  permission  that 

we  bear  them  off. 
And  quickly  set  us  on  our  way. 

3  Let  all  the  people  celebrate  the  rite  of  Savitar  the 

God. 
Sweet  unto  us  be  Waters,  Plants  propitious ! 


2  Golden-breasted:  wearing  ornaments  of  gold  on  their  breasts,  the 
lightning  flashing  from  the  stormy  clouds.  Cf.  Rigveda  II.  34.  2  ;  V. 
55.  1 ;  57.  5. 

3  This  stanza  contains  two.difficvdt  wotisy'^ldhd  and  '^riMn,  in  the 
second  line.  See  Prof.  PischeFs  explanation,  Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp. 
«2— 85. 

Stanzas  1  and  2  have  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III. 
p,  463.  

A  hymn  to  the  Waters. 

2  Bear  them  off :  fetching  the  water  required  for  sacrificial  purposes 
was  part  of  the  religious  service,  and  accompanied  with  duly  prescribed 
ceremanies  preceded  by  a  prayer  to  ther  Goddesses  for  their  assent. 

17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


25S  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VJ. 

HYMN   XXIV. 

Forth  from  the  Hills  of  Snow  they  stream,  and  meet 

in  Sindhu  here  or  there. 
To  me  the  sacred  Waters  gave  the  balm  that  heals^ 

the  heart's  disease. 

2  Whatever  rupture  I  have  had  that  injured  eyes  or 
heels  or  toes, 
All  this  the  Waters,  skilfullest  physicians,  shall  make 
well  again. 

8  AH  Rivers  who  have  Sindhu  for  your  Lady,  Sindhu 
for  your  Queen, 
Give  us  the  balm  that  heals  this  ill :  this  boon  let 
us  enjoy  from  yon. 

HYMN  XXV. 

Mat  all  the  five-and-fifty  which  meet  round  the  ten- 
dons of  the  neck 

Depart  and  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects' 
buzz  and  hum! 

2  Those  seventy-and-seven  which  meet  round  the  upper 
vertebrae, 
Let  them  all  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects' 
buzz  and  hum ! 


A  hymn  to  the  Rivers. 

1  Sindhu:  the  Indus. 

2  Skilfullest  physicians :  cf.  I.  6.  2,  3,  and  III.  7.  5. 

3  Far  yow  Lady :  Sindhu  or  Um  deity  of  the  river  is  sometimes 
feminine  in  the  Veda. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  13,  161. 

A  charm  against  Apachitas,  pustules  or  scrofulous  swellings.  See 
Bloomfield,  Kausika-S&tra,  p.  xliv.-  Dr.  Wise  (Hindu  System  of 
Medicine)  says :  *  When  many  small  tumours  like  plums  appear  in  the 
axilla,  neck,  back,  and  groins,  they  are  produced  by  diseased  fat,  and 
phlegm.  They  suppurate  slowly,  and  continue  to  appear  and  suppurate 
for  a  long  period,  when  it  is  called  Apachi:  Cf.  AV.  VI.  83 ;  VII.  74. 
1,  2 ;  76.  I,  2. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  27.)  THE  ATBARVAYEDA.  26« 

3  Those  nine-and-ninety   which,  combined,  attack   the 
shoulder  round  about, 
Let  them  all  vanish  hence  away  like  plaguing  insects' 
buzz  and  hum ! 

HYMN  XXVI. 

Let  me  go  free,   O  Misery:  do  thou,   the   mighty, 

pity  us. 
Set  me  uninjured  in  the  world  of  happiness,  O  Misery. 

2  From  thee,  from   thee  who  fliest  not  from  us,   O 

Misery,  we  fly. 
Then  at  the  turning  of  the  paths  let  Misery  fall  on 
someone  else. 

3  May  the  immortal,  thousand-eyed,  dwell  otherwhere 

apart  from  us. 
Let  him  afflict  the  man  we  hate  :  smite  only  him  who 
is  our  foe. 

HYMN   XXVIL 

Gods!  whatsoe'er   the   Dove   came   hither  seeking, 
sent  to  us  as  the  envoy  of  Destruction, 
.    For  that  let  us  sing  hymns  and   make  atonement. 
Well  be  it  with  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds  t 

2  Auspioious  be  the  Dove  that  hath   been  sent  us,   a 
harmless  bird,  O  Gods,  that  seeks  our  dwelling  ! 
May  Agni,  Sage,  be  pleased  with  our  oblation,  and 
may  the  missile  borne  on  wings  avoid  us. 

A  hymn  to  Affliction. 

1  0  Misery :  pdpman  ;  meaning  both  sin  and  distreas. 

A  charm  to  avert  threatened  misfortune. 

1  The  hymn,  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  165,  is  ascribed  to  the  Bishi 
Eapota  (Pigeon  or  Dove)  son  of  Nirpti  or  Destruction.  A  dove,  re- 
gaided  as  an  ill-omened  bird  and  the  messenger  of  Death,  has  flown 
into  the  house,  and  the  Gods  are  entreated  to  turn  the  inauspicious 
visit  to  a  blessing. 

In  England  the  dove  who  *  returning  bore  the  mark  of  earth  res- 
tored to  the  long  labouring  ark'  (see  Genesis  8.  11)}  is  regarded  as 
*  the  very  blessed  spirit  of  peace '  and  love. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


260  ^HE  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  P/. 

8  L^t  not  the  arrow   that  bath  wings  distract  us. 
Beside  the  fire-place,  on  the  hearth  it  settles. 
May  it  bring  welfare  to  our  men  and  cattle :  'here 
let  the  Dove,  ye  Gods,  forbear  to  harm  us. 

HYMN  XXVni. 

Drive  forth  the  Dove,  chase  it  with  holy  verses : 
rejoiciqg  briqg  ,we  hither  food  and  cattle, 

Oblitenating  traces  of  misfortune.  Most  fleet  voAy  it 
fly  forth  and  leave  us  vigour. 

2  These  men  have  strengthened  Agni's  might,  these 

men  have  brought  the  kine  to  us. 
They  have,9ung^lory  to  the  Gods.    Who  is  .the  man 
that  conquers  them  ? 

3  Be  reverence -paidf  to  him  who,  while   exploring  the 

path  for  many,  first  approached  the  river. 
Lord  of  this  world  of  quadrupeds  and  bipeds  :  to  him 
be  reverence  paid,  to  Death,  to  Yama ! 

HYMN  XXIX. 

On  ^tho36  men  yonder  fall  the   wingkl  missile :  the 

screeching  of  the  Owl  is  ineflfective, 
And  that  the.Dove  beside  the  fii^.hath  settled. 


.A  diaimtaavert  threatened  miafortune.Soe  VI.  27.  l,and  Rigveda 
X.165.  6. 

2  iT^ese  fRdcnr.'&e  piJtaAs. 

3  iTAe  rtvfr.*  which  separates- the- world  of  life  from  the  hpme  of 
the  dead.     *  Yama  first  found  for  us  the  road  to  travel ;  this  pasture 

•nerer  can  be  taken  from  us.  'Men  bom  on  earth  tread  their  own 
paths  that  lead  them  whither  our  ancient  \  Fathers  have  de|)arted ' 
(Rigveda  X.  14. 2).  Compare  Atharna.veda,XVUI.)3. 1 3,.aftd,Mwiri.0.S. 
Texts,  V.  288  sqq. 

A  charm  to  avert  threatened  misfortune. 

1  P&das  2  and  3  are  taken  from  Eigveda  X.  165.4.  Ineffectivt:  on  us. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  30.];  THB  ATHABT^A^VEDA,  2$1. 

2  Thine  envoys  wha  oattife  hither;  0  Destruction,  sent 

or  not  sent  by  thee  unto  our  dwelling. 
The  Dove  and  Owl,  eflfectless  be  their  visit ! 

3  Oft  may  it  fly  to  u*  to  save  our  heroes  from  slaughter, 

oft  perch  here  to  bring  fair  offspring. 
Turn  thee  and  send  thy  voice  afar :  cry  to  the  region 

far  away ; 
That  I  may  see  thee  in  the  home  of  Yiania  reft  of  all 

thy  power,  that  I  may  see  thee  impoteflt. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Over  a  magic  stone,  beside  Sarasvati,  the  Gods 
ploughed  in  this  barley  that  \tt5&  blent  witti  mead. 

Lord  of  the  plough  was  Indra;  strong  with  hundred 
powers :  the  plbughers  Were  the  Marutis,  they  who 
give  rich  gifts. 

2  Thy  joy  ifi  hair  that  falleth  or  is^  scattered,  where- 

with thou  subjectest  a  man  to  laughter^ — 
To  other  trees,  far  from  thee  ^11  I  drive  it.     Grbw 
up,  thou  Sami,  with  a  hundr^  branches. 

3  Auspicious,  bearing  mighty  leaves;   holy  otle,   nur- 

tured by  the  rain, 
Even  as  a  mother  to  her  sons,  be  gracious,  Sami, 
to  our  hair. 


3  Oft  may  it  fly  to  us:  may  the  ill-oriJien^  bird^  becon^e  ati  auspi- 
cious visitant.  Of  Yania :  the  King  of  the*  D^p&rted '  who  sent  thee 
forth. 

A  charm  to  promote-  the  growth  of  hair. 

1  This  barfey :  used  in  the  sacrifice. 

2  Samt :  Prosopis  Spicigera  or  Aeacia  •  Soma,  regaFded  as  a  holy 
tree  as  its  wood  was  used  to  form  part  of  the  drill  by  which  the  sacri- 
ficial fire  was  kindled.  With  a  hundred  branches :  and  S9  symbolical 
of  an  abundant  crop  of  hair. 

The  hymn  ha»  been  translated  by  Ludwig,.  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p^  511, 
See  also  Zimmer^  AltindisohesLeben,  pp^  59)  274r 


Digitized  by 


Google 


262  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  XXXI. 

This  spotted   Bull  hath  come   and   sat  before  his 

mother  in  the  east, 
Advancing  to  his  father  Heaven. 

2  As  expiration  from  his  breath  his  radiance  penetrates 

within.    The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky. 

3  He    rules    supreme    through    thirty    realms — One 

winged  with  song  hath  made  him  mount — 
Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn. 

HYMN    XXXII. 

With  butter,  in  his  hall  where  fire  is  burning, 
perform  that  sacrifice  which  quells  the  goblins. 

Burn  from  afar  against  the  demons.  Agni !  Afflict 
not  in  thy  fury  us  who  praise  thee. 

2  Let  Rudra  break  your  necks,  O  ye  Pis4chas,  and  split 

your  ribs  asunder,  YAtudh&nas ! 
Here,   Mitra-Varupa !  may   we  dwell  safely  :   with 

splendour  drive  the  greedy  demons  backward. 
Let  them  not  find  a  surety  or  a  refuge,  but  torn  away 

go  down  to  Death  together. 


A  hymn  to  S&rya  the  Sun-God,  taken  with  variations  from  Rigveda 
X.  189. 

1   TkU  spotted  Bull ;  the  Sun.     His  mother  :  Earth,  or  Dawn. 

3  Thirty  realms :  all  the  divisions  of  the  world.  One  winged  with 
song :  perhaps  Agni,  whose  flames  ascend  amid  the  hymns  of  the  priests, 
The  reading  of  the  Bigveda  is  :  vd^k  patang^ya  dhtyate^  Song  is 
bestowed  upon  the  Bird,  that  is,  on  the  Sun  whose  morning  song  repre* 
sents  prayer.     See  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IV.  p.  159. 

A  charm  against  fiends  and  goblins, 

1  Goblins:  YHtudh&nas;  see  I.  7,  I.  Demons:  R&kshasas;  fierce 
nocturnal  fiends  or  ogres. 

2  Pisdchas  :  malignant  imps ;  seel.  16.  3,  note.  Mitra-Varuna : 
the  two  Gods  addressed  as  a  dual  deity,  mitrdvamnau.  Greedy  demons : 
atrittcLS  ;  or  *  tusky  fiends,*  as  Prof.  A£ax  Mmier  renders  the  word. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  34,]  THE  ATHAJtVA-VEDA.  260 

HYMNXXXIIL 

He  who  controls  this  air  and  men  who  aid  his 
strength,  and  wood,  and  heaven,  the  lofty  seat 
which  Indra  loves. 

2  The   bold  whose   overpowering  might  the  boldest 

never  hath  defied,—. 
Fortress-like,  unassailable  Is  Indra's  wrath,  and  fame, 
and  force. 

3  May  he  bestow  on   us  that  wealth,  far-spreading, 

bright  with  yellow  hue. 
Indra  is  mightiest  Lord  among  the  folk. 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

Send  forth  thy  voice  to  Agoi,  to  the  manly  hero  of 

our  homes. 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

2  That  Agni  who  with  sharpened  flame  of  fire  consumes 

the  Rdkshasas, 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

3  He  who  from  distance  far  remote  shineth  across  the 

tracts  of  land, 
May  he  transport  us  past  our  foes. 

4  He  who  beholds  all  creatures,   who  observes  them 

with  a  careful  eye. 
May  he  transport  us  past  our  foes. 

5  That  brilliant  Agni  who  was  born  beyond  this  region 

of  the  air. 
May  he  transport  us  past  our  foes  1 

A  hymn  to  Indra  for  the  gift  of  riches.  In  stanzaa  1  and  2  the 
phraseology  is  obscure  and  the  construction  loose,  and  the  correctness 
of  the  text  is  not  free  from  suspicion. 

In  stanza  2,  line  2  I  have  adopted  Prof.  Geldnei^s  explanation  of 
vydthihy  wrath,  and  pur^  fortress,  as  a  secondary  form  ol  jnir.  See 
Vedische  Studien,  II.  p.  29. 


A  hymn  to  Agni  for  protection  from  enemies. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2©4  THt^HTMNS  OF  {BOOK  VL 

HYMN  XXXV. 

Forth  from  the  distance  far  away  Vaisvauara  come 
tb  sucooBr  ua!  Agni  approach  our  eulogies ! 

2  Vaisv&nara  with  friendly  thoughts  hath  come  to  this 

oufT  sacrifice,  Agl^i  who  slaves  from  Woe,  to  lauds. 

3  Vaisv4nara  hath  formed  the  hymn  and  laud  of  the 

Angirases;  Tt)  these  may  he  bring  glorious  light. 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

Holt  Vaisv&nara  we  seek,  the  Lord  of  light  and 
endless  lifb,  the  burning  One  who  fadetb  not. 

2  He  hath   directed   all   things;    he  sends  forth   the 

Seasons  in  his  might,  furtheri  hg  sacrifice's  power. 

3  Agni  K&ma  iu  other  homes  sbines  forth  the  sole 

imperial  Lord  of  all  that  is  and  is  to  be. 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

HiTHERWARD,  having  yoked  his  steeds,  came  Impre- 
cation, thousand-eyed. 

Seeking  my  curser,  as  a  wolf  the  home  of  one  who 
owneth  sheep. 

A  bytnnto  Agni'ViiftYllnai^  the  Qod  of^all  Aiyan  men. 

3  Angirases:  descendants  of  the  famous  Rshi  AngirftB,  the  priests 
who  by  using  the  magical  formalas  of  the  Athiorva^veda  protect  the 
sacrifice  from;  the  effects'  of  inauspicious  accidents.  These :  the  officiat- 
ing priests  and  the  ii^titutor  of  the  sacrifice. 


A  hymn  in  honour  of 'AgniTaisvslnarai 

2  He  hath  directed  all  things  .*  the  xleity  who  is  the  object  of  worship 
being  at  the  time  of  adoration  i-egarded  as  the  supreme  Qod. 

3  Agni  Kdmm:  the  twaOods  being  identified <  here  as  in  III.  21«  4^ 
See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  403,  aad  Weber,  In<Maohe  Studien,  V.  jq?. 

A  charm  to  divert  Imprecation. 

The  hyma  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  25,  161. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMiVn.]  THE  ATIIABVA-WDA.  266 

2-  Avoid  uSy  Imprecation !  as  consuminfg'fire  avoids  the 
lake. 
Smite  tbou  the  man  i«rho   enrses  us,   as  the  sky's 
lightning  strikes  the  tuse. 
3  Who  curses  us,  himself  uneursedy  or,  cursed,  wha 
curses  us  again, 
Him  cast'  I  as  a  sop  to  Death,  as  to  a  dog  one  throws 
a  bone. 

HYMN  XXXVIII. 

What  energy  the^  lion  hath,  the  tiger,   adder,   wid 

burning  fire,  Br^man,  or  S<irya, 
And  the  blest  Goddess  who  gave  birth   to   Indra, 

come  unto  us  conjoined  with  strength  and  vigour ! 

2  All  energy  of  elephant  and  panther,  all  energy  of 

gold,  men,  kine,  and  waters, 
And  the  blest  Goddess  who  gave  birth  to  Indra  come 
unto  us  conjoined  with  strength  and  vigour. 

3  Might  in  car,   axles,  in  the   strong   buU^s   courage, 

in  Varuna's  breath,  in  VAta,  in  Parjanya, 
In  Warrior,  in  the  war-drum   stretched  for  battle, 

in  the  man's  roar  and  in  th^  horse's  mettle, 
May  the  blest  Goddess  who  gave  birth  to  Indra  come 

unto  us  conjoined  with  strength  and  vigour. 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

Let  sacrifice,  like  fame,  thrive  sped  by  Indra, 
inspired,  well-ordered^  with  a  thousand  powers. 

To  highest  rank  raise  me  who  bring  oblation,  me 
who  move  forth  to  far-extended  vision. 

A  prayer  forsarpasslng  strength  and -energy. 
1   The  blest  Goddess  :  Aditi. 

3  In  Warrior :  in  RAjanya  or  Kshatriya,  one  of  the  military   and 
princely  class.     War-drum :  see  V.  20. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  240. 


A  priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory. 

1  Jiaise  me :  the  sacrifice  is  addressed.  Far-extended  vision  :  mean- 
ing, life  of  long  duration. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


266  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI, 

2  We  will  pay  sacrifice  and  serve  with  worship  our 
glorious  Indra,  famous  for  his  glories. 

.  Give  thou  us  sway  which  Indra  hath  promotedi  and 
in  this  boon  of  thine  may  we  be  famous. 

S  Indra  was  glorious  at  his  birth ;  Agni,  Soma  were 
born  renowned. 
And  glorious  am  I,  the  most  illustrious  of  all  that  is. 

HYMN  XL. 

Here  may  we  dwell,  O  Heaven  and  Earth,  in  safety. 

May  Savitar  and  Soma  send  us  safety. 
Our  safety  be  the  wide  air :  ours  be  safety  through 

the  oblation  of  the  Seven  Kishis. 

2  May  the  Four  Quarters  give   this  hamlet  power: 

Savitar  favour  us  and  make  us  happy ! 
May  Indra  make  us  free  from  foes  and  danger :  may 
wrath  of  Kings  be  turned  to  other  places. 

3  Make  thou  us  free  from  enemies  both  from  below 

and  from  above. 
O  Indra,  give  us  perfect  peace,  peace  from  behind 
and  from  before.    • 

HYMN  XLI. 

For  mind,  for  intellect,  for  thought,  for  purpose, 

for  intelligence. 
For  sense,  for  hearing,  and  for  sight,   let  us  adore 

with  sacrifice. 


3  Glorioui  am  I:  the  prayer  is  regarded  as  already  fulfilled. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  240. 

A  prayer  for  peace  and  security. 
1  Seven  RUhU:  see  IV.  11.  9. 

A  prayer  for  protection,  long  life,  and  various  blessings. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYM!f  43.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  267 

2  For  expiration,   vital   air,   and    breath  that  amply 

nourishes, 
Let  us  with  sacrifice  adore  Sarasvati  whose  reach  is 
wide. 

3  Let  not  the  Rishis,  the  divine,  forsake  us,  our  own, 

our  very  selves,  our  lives'  protectors. 
Do  ye,  immortal,  still  attend  us  mortals,  and  give  us 
vital  power  to  live  the  longer. 

HYMN  XLIL 

I  LOOSE  the   anger   from   thy   heart  as   'twere   the 

bowstring  from  a  bow, 
That  we,  one-minded  now,   may   walk   together   as 

familiar  friends. 

2  Together  let  us  walk  as  friends :  thy  wrathful  fee}ing 

I  remove. 
Beneath  a  heavy  stone  we  cast  thy  wrath  away  and 
bury  it. 

3  I  trample  on  thine  anger  thus,  I  tread  it  down  with 

heel  and  toe  : 
So  dost  thou  yield  thee  to  my  will,  to  speak  no  more 
rebelliously. 

HYMN  XLTII. 

For  stranger  and  for  friend  alike  this  Darbha-grass 

removeth  wrath. 
Soother  of  Anger  is  it  called   because  it  calms  the 

angry  man. 


A  charm  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between  estranged  friends. 

2  Beneath  a  heavy  stone  :  the  symbolical  action  somewhat  resemHles 
the  North-American  InJians'  custom  of  *  burying  the  hatchet'  as  a 
sign  and  pledge  of  peace. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  515, 
and,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  29,  162. 

A  charm  to  effect  the  reconciliation  of  estranged  friends. 
1  Darbha:  see  II.  7.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


26S  TBE.HTJINS  OF  [BOOR  71. 

2  This  Plant  that  bath  abaodant  roots  spreads  to  the 
place  where  waters  meet. 
Soother  of  Anger  is  the  name  of  Darbha^grass  that 
springs  from  earth, 
a  We  draw  thine  obstinacy  forth,   set' in  thy  mouth 
and  in  thy  jaw : 
So  dost  thou  yield  thee  to  my  will,  to  speak  no  more 
rebelliously. 

HYMN  XLIV, 

Firm  stood  the  heaven,  firm  stood  the  earth,   firm 

stbod  this  universal  world. 
Firm  stood  the  trees  that  sleep  erect:  let  this  thy 

malady  be  still. 

2  Of  all  thy  hundred  remedies,  a  thousand  remedies 

combined, 
This  is  the  surest  cure  for  flux,   most  excellent  to 
heal  disease. 

3  Thou  art  the  stream  that  Rudra  pours,  the  closest 

kin  of  Amrit^. 
Thy  name  is  called  VishAijakA :  thou  sprangest  from 
the  Fathers'  root,  removing  illness  caused  by  wind. 


3  Obstinacy:  the  rebellious  and  provoking  words  that  thou  hast 
spoken. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  notes,  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder 
pp.  30,  162. 

A  charm  to  remove  disease. 

1  Firm  stood  the  heaven :  when  it  had  been  separated  from  the  earth 
and  established  in  its  present  place.  See  IV.  1.  4. 

2  Flux:  dsrdtfd;  see  I.  2.  4. 

3  Vishdiiakd :  an  unidentified  plant  or  tree.  Front  the  lathers 
root :  thou  earnest  originally  from  the  saints  in  heaven.  Removing 
illness  caused  by  wind:  vdttkfitandsant;  wind  meaning  one  of  thd 
bolily  hUmouriHj  The  disease  is  probably  rheumatism,  called  bdi  in 
Hind?,  explained  in  MathufH  Pras&da  Misra's  Trilin:^al  Dictionary  by 
vdtarog,  vdyurog^  and  other  words  signifying  wind-disease  and  wind. 
Zimmer  (Altindisches  Leben,  p*  389)  explains  differently. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigvcda,  III.  p.  509/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  46.]  THE  A  THA  R VA*  VEDA.  269 

JHYMN  XLV. 

jSiN  of  the  Mind,  avaunt !  begone !  Why  sayest  thou 

what  none  should  say  ? 
Go  hence  away,  I  love  thee  not     Go  to  the  forests 

and  the. trees.  My  heart  is  in  our  homes  and  cows. 

2  Whatever   wrong   we   have   committed,  sleeping  or 
waking,  by  ill-wish,  dislike,  or  slander, 
All  these  offojQces,  which  deserve  displeasure,  may 
Agni  take  from  us  and  keep  them  distant. 

S  Indra  and  Brahma^aspati !  whatever  foolish  deed  we 
plan, 
May  provident  Angirasa  preserve  us  from  the  sin 
and  woe. 

HYMN  XLVI. 

Thou,  neither  quick  nor  dead,  O  Sleep,  art  fraught 

with  Amrit  of  the  Gods. 
Thy  name  is  Araru:  thy  sire  is  Yama;    Varupinl 

bare  thee. 

2  We  know  thy  birth,  O  Sleep,  thou  art  son  of  the 
sisters  of  the  Gods :  the  minister  of  Yama  thou, 
thou  art  Antaka,  thou  art  Death. 
So' well  we  know  thee  who  thou  art.  Sleep,  guard 
us  from  the.eyil  dream. 

A  prayer  for  preservation  from  mental  sin  and  promptings  to  do  wrong. 

3  Jngira$a :  descended  from  th&ancient  Kishi  Angii;a8,  a  priest  after 
the  order  of  Angiras,  especiatija  name  of  Bnhaspati  or  Brahma^aspati. 
According  to  Prof.  Ludwig,  Agni  is  meant.  See  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p. 
443,  where  the  hymn  is  translated. 

Stanzas  2  and  3  are  tal^en,  with  yariants,  from  l^veda  X.  .164. 3, 4, 

A  charm  n^inst  evil  dreams. 

1  Araru :  an  enemy,  w  being  akin  to  Death.  Varundnt :  Consort 
of  Yaruna. 

2  Antaka :  the  Finisher. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


270  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  71. 

3  As  men  discharge  a  debt,  as  they  pay  up  an  eighth 
and  half-an-eighth, 
So  the  whole  evil  dream  do  we  pay  and  assign  unto 
our  foe. 

HYMN  XLVII. 
Dear  to  all  men,  all-prosperer,  all-creating,  may  Agni, 

guard  us  at  the  morn's  libation. 
May  he,  the  brightly  pure  one,  give  us  riches :  may 
we  have  life,  enjoying  food  together. 

2  At  this  our  second  offering  may  Indra,  Maruts,  and 

Visve  Devas  never  fail  us. 
Still  may  the  favour  of  the  Gods  be    with   us,    blest 
with  long  life  and  speaking  words  that  please  them. 

3  We   pour   this   third   libation    of    the   Sages    who 

fashioned  forth  the  cup  in  proper  order. 
Winners  of  heaven,  may  they,  Sudhan  van's  children, 
lead  our  fair  sacrifice  to  happy  fortune. 

3  The  stanza  is  an  imitation  of  Rigveda  VIII.  47.  17  :  *  As  we  collect 
(or,  discharge)  the  utmost  debt,  even  the  eighth  and  sixteenth  part, 
So  unto  Aptya  (Trita  Aptya,  a  mythical  being  residing  in  the  remotest 
part  of  heaven,  to  whom  it  was  customary  to  ivish  away  and  consign 
any  threatened  calamity)  we  consign  together  all  the  evil  dream.' 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498. 

A  hymn  to  accompany  the  three  daily  libations. 

1  Dear  to  all  men :  or,  Vaisvanara. 

2  Second  offering :  at  mid-day. 

3  The  Sages :  the  Ribhus,  the  three  sons  of  Sudhanvan  who  is  said 
to  have  been  a  descendant  of  Angiras.  They  were  named  Severally 
Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and  Vija,  and  styled  collectively  Ribhus  from  the 
name  of  the  eldest.  '  Through  their  assiduous  performance  of  good 
works  they  obtained  divinity,  and  became  entitled  to  receive  praise 
and  adoration.  They  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  solar  sphere,  and 
there  is  an  indistinct  identification  of  them  with  the  rays  of  the  sun : 
but,  whether  typical  or  not^  they  prove  the  admission,  at  an  early  date, 
of  the  doctrine,  that  men  might  become  divinities.' — Wilson.  The 
Klbhus  are  said  to  have  made  four  sacrificial  cups  out  of  the  single 
chalice  that  had  been  fabricated  by  Tvashtar,  signifying,  perhaps, 
that  some  innovation  in  sacrificial  procedure  was  attributed  to  them. 
See  Rigveda  I.  20,  and  161. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  48.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  Wl 

HYMN  XLVIII. 

Thou  art  the  Hawk,  G&yatrf  s  lord :  I  hold  thee  fast. 
Happily  bear  me  to  the  goal  of  this  my  sacrifice. 
All  hail! 

2  Thou  art  the  Tlibhu,  lord  of  Jagatl :  I  hold  thee  fast. 

Happily  bear  me  to  the  goal  of  this  my  sacrifice. 
All  hail  1 

3  Thou  art  the  Bull,  the  Trishtup's  lord  :  I  hold  thee 

fast.     Happily  bear  me   to   the  goal  of  this  my 
sacrifice.     All  hail ! 


A  non-metrical  hymn  of  sacrificial  formulas  used  at  the  three  daily 
libations  or  Soma-pressings. 

1  The  Hawk :  this  verse  is  addressed  at  the  morning  libation  to 
Agni  who  from  his  rapid  motion  in  his  form  of  lightning  is  called  the 
hawk  :  cf .  '  I  have  begotten  this  new  hymn  for  Agni,  falcon  of  the 
sky'  (Rigveda  VII.  15.  4).  In  the  myth  of  the  rape  Df  the  celestial 
Soma  by  the  falcon — one  of  the  favourite  subjects  of  the  Veiic  poets 
(see  Rigveda  1.  80.  2 ;  93.  6 ;  III.  43.  7 ;  IV.  26.  4—7 ;  27.  3,  4 ;  IX. 
72.  3) — the  falcon  represents  Agni  who  in  the  form  of  lightning  pene- 
trates the  laden  thunder-clouds  and  carries  off  their  heavenly  treasure, 
the  ambrosial,  life-giving  rain.  Gdyatri'a  lard :  Agni  being  identified 
with  the  Gstyatrt  metre  in  which  his  praises  are  sung,  and  which  is  the 
prominent  metre  in  invocations  addressed  to  him  at  the  morning 
libation. 

2  The  Rihhu :  the  representative  of  the  three  Ribhus  (see  VI.  47. 
3),  to  whom  this  verse  is  addressed  at  the  evening  libation.  Jagati : 
this  being  the  chief  metre  employed  at  the  evening  libation. 

3  The  BvU :  the  Mighty  One,  Indra,  to  whom  the  verse  is  address- 
ed at  the  mid-day  libation.  Cf.  '  Thine,  only  thine,  is  the  noonday 
libation'  (Rigveda  IV.  35.  7). 

The  hymn  has  been  thoroughly  discussed  by  Prof.  Bloomfield  in  his 
article  entitled  The  Myth  of  Soma  and  the  Eagle,  in  the  FestgrOss 
an  Rudolph  von  Roth  zum  Doktor-Jubilaum,  24  August,  1893. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


«72  TBEEYMNS  OF  [BOaK  KL 

HYMN  XLIX. 
0  Agni,  in  thy  body  man  bath  never  found  a  wounded 

part. 
The  Ape  devours  the  arro\^*s  shaft  as  a  cow  cats  her 

afterbirth. 

2  Thou  like  a  fleece   eontractest  aod  expandest  thee 

what  time  the  upper  stone  and  rthat.  below  devour. 
Closely  compressing  head  with  head  and  breast  with 
breast  he  crunches  up  the  tendrils  with  his  yellow 
jaws. 

3  The  Eagles   have   sent  forth   their   voice   aloud  to 

heaven :  in  the  sky's   vault   the   dark   impetuous 
ones  have  danced. 
When  they  come  downward  to  repair  the  lower  stone, 
they,  dwellers  with  the  Sun,  have  gained  abundant 
seed. 

HYMN  L. 

Destroy  the  rat,  the  mole,  the  boring  beetle,  cut  off 
their  heads  and  crush  their  ribs,  O  Asvins. 

A  hymn  in  honour  of  Agni. 

1  The  Ape  :  kapiJi ;  *<Jer  braune/  the  brown. — Ludwig.  The  arrow* $ 
$haft :  the  reed  of  which  the  arrow  is  made.  There  seems  to  be  a 
play  on  the  word  t^Janam  which  means  both  inflammation  and  reed. 
As  the  monkey  is  not  injured  by  the    reed  or  possible    arrowHshaft 

•  which  he  chews,  so  nimble  lire  only  absorbs  additional  heat.  Aooordiog 
to  an  Indian  lexicographer  kapih  is  a  name  of  the  S^un. 

2  The  upper  stone :  uttaradrd  ( — dru  I — Whitney's  Index).  The 
reading  appears  to  be  corrupt. 

3  The  Eagles :  the  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X. 
'  94.  5  where  the  Ea^s  are  the  rapidly-movii^  stoiies  which  press  out 
.  the  Somarjuiee.     The  meaning  here  may   perhaps  be :  The  mighty, 

roaring  fla^nes  of  Agni  rise  on  high,  dark  clouds  gather  and  are  tossed 

About  in  the  upper  air,  and  finally  descend  in  the  shape  of  fertilizing 

rain.     The  lower  stone :  perhaps  the  earth.  The  stanza  is  very  obscure. 

The  hymn  has  been  toanslated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigyeda,  UI.p.  432. 

A  charm  for  the  destruction  of  vermin. 

1  7'he  boring  beetle :  tarddm  (from  trid,  to  cut  through,  or  bore)  ; 
*  borer,*  getreide-wurm  ? :  Ludwig.  According  to  the  St  Petersburg 
Dictionary  some  bird  (cf.  Latin  turdus,  a  thrush)  is  meant.  . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EYMN  52.]  THE  ATHARVA-TEDA.  278 

Bind  fast  their  mouths ;  let  them  not  eat  our  barley : 
so  guard,  ye  twain,  our  growing  corn  from  danger. 

2  Ho!  boring   beetle,   ho!  thou   worm,   ho!    noxious 

grub  and  grasshopper ! 
As  a  priest  leaves  the  unfinished  sacrifice,  go  hence 
devouring  not,  injuring  not  this  corn. 

3  Heai*ken  to  me,  lord  of  the  female  borer,  lord  of  the 

female  grub !  ye  rough-toothed  vermin ! 
Whate'er  ye  be,  dwelling   in    woods,  and   piercing, 
we  crush  and  mangle  all  those  piercing  insects. 

^YMN  LI. 

Cleansed  by  the  filter  of  the  Wind  comes  Soma  past 
all  our  enemies,  meet  friend  of  Indra. 

2  May  the  maternal  Waters  make  us  ready:  cleanse 

us  with  fatness  they  who  cleanse  with  fatness! 
The  Goddesses  bear  oflF  each   blot  rand  tarnish :    I 
come  forth  from  the  waters  cleansed  and  stainless. 

3  O  Varuqa,  whatever    the  offence   may  be,    the   sin 

which  men  commit  against  the  heavenly  folk— -^ 
When,  through  our  want  of  thought  we  vidlate  thy 
laws,  punish  us  not,  O  God,  for  that  iniquity. 

HYMN  LII. 

Slating  the  R&kshasas,  the  Sun  mounts  upward  in 

the  front  of  heaven, 
Aditya,  from  the  mountains,  seen  of  all,  destroying 

things  unseen. 


A  prayer  for  purification  and  forgiyeness  of  sins. 
3   Varuna :  addressed  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world.     The 
stanza  is  taken,  with  a  sljight  variant,  from  Bigveda  YII.  80.  5. 

A  charm  against  noxious  reptiles  and  insects. 
1  The  stanza  is  made  op  of  fnigments  of  Rigveda  I.  191.  8,  9. 

18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


274  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI 

2  The  kine  had  settled  ia  their  pen,  wild  animals  had 

sought  their  lairs  ; 
The  wavelets  of  the  brooks  had  passed  away,  and 
were  beheld  no  more. 

3  I  have  brought  KaQva's  famous  Plant,   life-giving, 

and  itself  inspired, 
The  medicine  that  healeth  all :  may  it  suppress  my 
hidden  foes. 

HYMN  LIII. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth,  wise  pair,  may  lofty  Sukra 
grant  me  this  thing  by  reason  of  the  guerdon. 

May  Agni,  Soma  mark  through  this  libation  :  may 
V4yu,  Savitar,  and  Bhaga  guard  usw 

2  Again  return  to  us  our  breath  and  spirit,  again  come 

back  to  us  our  life  and  vision ! 
Vaisv&nara,  unscathed,  our  bodies'  guardian,  stand 
between  us  and  every  woe  and  danger ! 

3  We  are  again  united  with  our  bodies,  with   happy 

mind,  with  spirit,  strength,  and  splendour. 
May  Tvashtar  here  make  room  for  us,  and  freedom, 
and  smooth  whatever  is  injured  in  our  bodies. 


2  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  stanza  4  of  the  same 
hymn,  the  Rigveda  reading  being  keidvo  jdndndm,  the  lights  of  men, 
instead  of  ikrmdyo  nadtudiay  the  wavelets  of  the  brooks.  The  poet 
means  that  he  has  been  bitten  or  stung  by  some  venomous  creature 
Hince  sunset,  and  that  now  with  the  help  of  the  rising  sun  and  a  magi- 
cal plant  he  will  destroy  the  unseen  enemies  who  attacked  him. 

3  Kanva  has  been  mentioned  before  (II.  32.  3),  together  with  Atri, 
Agastya,  and  Jamadagni,  as  a  celebrated  Rishi  regarded  as  a  master 
of  magic  arts. 

A  prayer  for  reooveiy  and  preservation  of  healdi  and  security. 
1  Siikra :  the  bright  and   pure ;  Soma.    Guerdon :  the  honorarium 
given  to  the  officiating  priests. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  506. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  55.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  275 

HYMN  LIV. 
t  Win  the  love  of  Indra  that  his  friend  may  reach  yet 

higher  state. 
Increase)  as  rain  the  grass,  this  man's  dominion  and 

his  lofty  fame. 

2  Confirm  the  princely  power  in  him,  Agni  and  Soma! 

grant  him  wealth. 
In  all  the  circuit  of  his  rule  make  him  yet  higher  for 
your  friend. 

3  The  man  who  shows  us  enmity,  whether  a  stranger 

or  akin, 
Thou  wilt  give  up  entire  to  me   who  sacrifice  and 
press  the  juice. 

HYMN   LV. 

Of  all   the   many    God-frequented    pathways  that 

trn  verse  realms  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 
Consign  me,  all  ye  Gods,  to  that  which  leadeth  to 

perfect  and  inviolable  safety. 

2  Maintain  us  in  well-being  Summer,  Winter,   Dew- 

time,  and  Spring,  Autumn,  and  Rainy  Season. 
Give  us  our  share  of  cattle  and  of  children.  May  we 
enjoy  youf  unassailed  protection. 

3  Pay  to  the  Year  your  lofty  adoration,  to  the  first 

X  ear,  the  second,  and  the  present. 
May  we  abide  in  the  auspicious  favour  and  gracious 
love  of  these  who  claim  our  worship. 

A  benediction  on  a  newly  elected  King. 

1  Increa$e :  Indra  is  addressed. 

.    2  Far  yowr  friend:  for  Indra's  sake. 

A  prayer  for  general  protection  and  prosperity. 

2  Deuhtime :  nftroA  /  the  cool  season  or  first  spring,  comprising  the 
months  M^ha  and  Philguna,  from  the  middle  of  January  to  th« 
middle  of  March. 

.  3  Thefirtt  Tear^  the  tecond^  and  the  pre$ent :  making  up  the  cycle  of 
three  lunar  years  at  the  end  of  which  an  interceJary  month  was 
added.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisohes  Leben,  p.  370. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigreda,  III.  p.  218. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2H  TME  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TL 

HYMN  LVI. 
LsTnot the  serpent  slay  us,  O  Gods,  with  our  child- 
ren and  our  folk. 
Xiet  it  not  close  the  opened   mouth  nor  open  that 
which  now  is  closed. 
2  Be  worship  paid  unto  the   black,   worship  to  thact 
with  stripes  across ! 
To  the  brown  viper  reverence,  reverence  to  the  demon 
brood ! 
8  I  close  ttogether  fangs  with  fang,   I  close  together 
jaws  with  jaw. 
I  close  together  tongue  with  tongue,  I  close  together 
mouth  with  mouth. 

HYMN  LVII. 
Tmsis  a  medicine  indeed,  Rudra's  own  medicine  is  this. 
Wherewith   he  warns   the  arrow    off,    one-shafbed, 
with  a  hundred  tips. 

2  Besprinkle  it  with  anodyne,  bedew  it  with  relieving 

balm  : 
Strong,  soothing  is  the  medicine :  bless  us  therewith 
that  we  may  Uve. 

3  Let  it  be  health  and  joy  to  us.     Let  nothing  vex  or 

injure  us. 
Down  with  the  wound!  Let  all  to  us  be  balm,  the 
whole  be  medicine. 


i 


A  charm  against  anakea. 

2  The  black:  Asita.  With  sir^  aero$$:  TirafohMji.  See  III.  27.  2. 
Viper :  Svaja ;  meaning  according  to  an  Indian  Commentator  '  self- 
produced  : '  perhaps  =  iktin  vipera,  i.  e.  vivipara,  producing  its  young 
alive,  or  from  the  root  cvc^',  to  twist  or  cling  round. 

The  hymn  has  been  tntnslatad  b j  Ludwig,  Der  Big^eda,  III.  p,  502, 
and,  with  annotations,  by  Qrill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  5,  162. 

A  charm  70r  a  wound  or  bruise. 

I  Rudra^i  own  medicine :  Rudra  being  the  healer  as  well  as  the 
inflicter  of  wounds  and  diseases.     See  I.  19.  3. 

3  Doutn  with  the  wound  !  :  so  (RigVeda  VIII.  20.  26)  <  Cast,  Maruts ! 
to  the  .ground  our  sick  man's  malady :  replace  the  dislocated  limb.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


flTJTJT  59:]  TH^  ATUABVArYSDA.  VPl 

HYMN  LVIII. 
Mat    Indra  Maghavan  give  me  name  aod  g^ory. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth,  thia  oouple,  make  me 

famous. 
May  Savitar  the  deit^  make  me  honoured.     Here 

may  the  man  who  gives  the  guerdon  love  me. 

2  Indra  from   Heaven   and    Earth    receiveth  glory, 

among  the  plants  the  Waters*  have  their  glory ; 
Even  so  may  we  be  glorious  'mid  all  the  U  niversal 
Gods* 

3  Indra  and  Agni  were  renowned,  famous  was  Soma  at 

his  birth; 
So  too  am  I  illustrious,  most  glorious  of  all  that  is. 

HYMN  LIX. 
First,  0  Arundhatt,  protect  our  oxen  and  our  milky 

kine  : 
Protect  each  one  that  is  infirm,  each  quadruped  that 

yields  no  milk. 

2  Let  the  Plant  give  us  sheltering  aid,   Arundhati 

allied  with  Gods ; 
Avert  Consumption  from  our  men  and  make  our 
cow-pen  rich  in  milk. 

3  I  welcome  the  auspicious  Plant,  life-giving,  wearing 

every  hue. 
Far  from  our  cattle  may   it  turn  the  deadly  dart 
which  Rudra  casts. 

A  priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory. 

1  The  man  who  gives  the  guerdon :  the  institutor  of  die  sacrifice 
who  pays  the  expenses  and  rewards'  the  priests. 
3  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  Tli  39.  3. 

A  charm  to  protect  cattle  and  men. 

1  Arundhati:  a  medicinal  climbing  plant,  called  also  Silftcht.  See 
IV.  12.  1 ;  V.  5.  5. 

3  £udra :  see  I.  19.  3. 

According  to  the  KausikarSAtra  L.  13,  tiie  hymn  is  '  piart  of  tlie  ritual 
of  a  travelling  merchant  when  about  to  start  on  a  trading  expedition.' 
See  III.  15,  and  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  YII.  467. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


278  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  LX. 

With  forelock  loosened  o'er  his  brow  here  comes  the 

wooer  of  the  bride, 
Seeking  a  husband  for  this  maid,   a  wife  for  this 

unmarried  man. 

2  Wooer !  this  girl  hath  toiled  in  vain,  going  to  others' 

marriages. 
Now  to  her  wedding,  verily,  wooer!  another  maid 
shall  come. 

3  Dh&tar  upholds  the  spacious  earth,  upholds  the  sky, 

upholds  the  Sun. 
Dh&tar  bestow  upon  this  maid  a  husband  suited  to 
her  wish ! 

HYMN  LXI. 

The  Waters  send  me  what  is  sweet  and  pleasant, 
StUra  bring  all  I  need  for  light  and  vision  I 

The  deities,  and  all  of  pious  nature,  and  Savitar  the 
Ood  afford  me  freedom  ! 

2  I  set  the  heaven  and  the  earth  asunder,  I  brought 
all  seven  seasons  into  being. 
My  word  is  truth,  what  I  deny  is  falsehood,  above 
celestial  Vftk^  above  the  nations. 


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  Wooing  of  a  Bride. 

1  The  wooer :  aryamd^;  the  interoeder  or  match-maker  whose  busi- 
ness is  to  find  a  suitable  wife  for  his  friend  or  employer.  See  II.  86.  1. 

3  Dhdiar :  here  regarded  as  the  Upholder  of  the  sacrament  of 
marriage.  See  II.  36.  2. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  annotated  by  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  V.  pp.  236—238,  and  by  Qrill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  56,  164. 
Zimmer  also  has  translated  it  in  Altindisches  Leben,  p  306. 

A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  greatness. 

1  Freedom :  vydchas  ;  literally,  expansion,  amplitude,  ample  room. 

2  This  and  the  following  stanza  must  be  taken  to  signify  hyperboli- 
eally  the  possession  of  infinite  power.  Seven  seasons :  the  six  pairs  of 
months  and  the  thirteentl^  or  intercalary  mouth.  Six  seasons  only 
ar^  known  by  name :  see  VI.  55,  9. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN^  63.]  THB  A  THA  R VA- VEDA.  279 

3  I  gave  existence  to  the  earth  and  heaven,  I  made 
the  seasons  and  the  seven  rivers. 
My  word  is  truth,  what  I  deny  is  falsehood,  I  who 
rejoice  in  Agni's,  Soma's  friendship. 

HYMN  LXII. 

Cleanse   us  Vaisv4nara   with    rays  of  splendour  ! 

With    breath   and   clouds  let   quickening   V4yu 

cleanse  us. 
And,  rich  in   milky  rain,   let   Earth   and   Heaven, 

worshipful,  holy,  cleanse  us  with  their  water. 

2  Lay  hold  on  St!inrit&  whose  forms  and  regions  have 

fair  smooth  backs,  her  who  is  all  men's  treasure. 
Through  her  may  we,  in  sacrificial  banquets  singing 
her  glory,  be  the  lords  of  riches. 

3  For  splendour,  seize  on  her  whom  all  men  worship, 

becoming  pure  yourselves,  and  bright,  and  brilliant. 
Here,  through  our  prayer,  rejoicing  in  the  banquet, 
long  may  we  look  upon  the  Sun  ascending. 

HYMN  LXIIL 

That  collar  round  thy  neck,  not  to  be  loosened, 
which  Nirriti  the  Goddess  bound  and  fastened, 

I  loose  for  thy  long  life  and  strength  and  vigour. 
Eat,  liberated,  food  that  brings  no  sorrow. 

2  To  thee,  sharp-pointed  Nirriti,  be  homage !    Loose 
thou  the  binding  fetters  wrought  of  iron. 
To  me,  in  truth,  again  doth  Yama  give  thee.  To  him, 
to  Yama,  yea,  to  Death,  be  homage  ! 

A  prayer  for  purification  and  riches. 

2  S^nritA :  Excellence,  Pleasantness,  Gladness,  or  Glory,  personified. 
The  etymology  and  the  exact  meaning  are  uncertain.  Here,  In  con- 
nexion with  Agni  and  Vs^yu,  the  meaning  '  Dawn '  (see  M.  Mtiller, 
Vedic  Hymns,  I.  p.  446)  would  be  suitable. 


The  subject  is  the  symbolical  liberation  of  a  victim  from  the  sacri 
ficiavl  stake  representing  the  recovery  of  a  sick  man  from  a  dangerous 
illness. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28a  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Tl 

3  Compassed   by    death    which    comes  in   thousand 

manners,  here  art  thou  fastened  to  the  iron  pillar. 
Unanimous  with  Yama  and  the  Fathers,  make  this 
man  rise  and  reach  the  loftiest  heaven. 

4  Thou,  mighty  Agni,  good  and  true,  gatherest  up  all 

precious  things. 
Bring  us  all  treasures  as  thou  art  enkindled  at  liba- 
tion's place. 

HYMK  LXIV. 

Agree  and  be  united :  let  your  minds  be  all  of  one 

accord, 
Even  as  the  Gods  of  ancient  days,  unanimous,  await 

their  share. 

2  The  rede  is  common,  common  the  assembly,  common 

the  law,  so  be  their  thoughts  united. 
I  offer  up  your  general  oblation  :  together  entertain 
one  common  purpose. 

3  One  and  the  same  be  your  resolve,  be  all  your  hearts 

in  harmony : 
One  and  the  same  be  all  your  minds  that  all  may 
happily  consent. 

3  Lof(ie$t  heaven :  the  summit  of  human  felicity.  See  I.  9.  2. 

4  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  191.  1.  At  libatio/fCs  place  : 
in  the  8anctua,ry  where  libations  are  offered. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  433. 


A  hymn  to  promote  Agreement  or  Unanimity  in  an  assembly. 

1  A^u  and  he  vnited:  the  Rigveda  has  *  Assemble,  speak  together.' 

2  Common  the  assembly :  this  sdmitis  appears  to  have  been  a  general 
assembly  of  the  people  on  some  important  occasion,  such  as  the  elec- 
tion of  a  king. 

The  hymn,  which  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.  191. 
2 — 4^  has  been:  translated,  with  notes,  by  Orill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp. 
30,  16i,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  111.  p.  372. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MYMK  «6.]  TKB  A¥BARrA^VEI>A.  281 

HYMN  LXV. 
This  angry  spirit  bath  r^xed :  loose  are  the  arms 

that  act  with  mind. 
Bo  them,  destroyer,  overcome  aod  drive  these  foemeu's 

might  away,  and  then  bring  opulenee  to  usi 

2  The  sheift  for  hendless  fiendis  which,  God&  I  ye  cast 

against  the  handless  ones,— 
With  this^  in  shape  of  sacrifice,  I  rend  the  arms  of 
enemies. 

3  Indra  made  first  for  Asuras  the  shaft  designed  for 

handless  foes  : 
Victorious  shall  my  heroes  be  with  Indra  as  their 
constant  friend. 

HYMN  LXVI. 

Handlsss  be  every  foeman  who  assaileth,  they  who 
with  missiles  come  to  fight  against  us ! 

Dash  them  together  with  great  slaughter,  Indra ! 
and  let  their  robber  chief  run  pierced  with  arrows. 

2  Ye  who  run  hither  bending  bows,  brandishing  swords 

and  casting  darts, 
Handless  be  ye,  O  enemies !  Let  Indra  mangle  you 
to-day. 

3  Handless  be  these  our  enemies !    We  enervate  their 

languid  limbs. 
So  let  us  part  among  ourselves,  in  hundreds,  Indra  ! 
all  their  wealth. 


A  sacrificial  charm  against  enemies. 

1  Destroyer :  pdrdsara  ;  Indra,  conqueror  and  destroyer  of  Asuras 
wlio  fought  against  the  Gods,  tod  of  the  demons  who  harass  men. 

2  Handht$:  who  fight  without  human  hands  and  arms.  The 
magical  missile  employed  against  these  demons  is  called  nairkastdm 
ihtended  for  nirhftsta^  or  handless,  fiends.  Of.  III.  1.  1,  2.  1. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372. 


A  charm  for  the  destruction  ani  plunder  of  enemies. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


282  THE  H7MNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  LXVII. 

Indra  and  Piishan  have  gone  forth  along  the  ways 

on  every  side. 
To-day  those  hosts  of  enemies  roust  flee  bewildered 

far  away. 

2  Ya  foes,  come  hitherward  dismayed  like   serpents 

when  their  heads  are  ^one. 
Let  Indra  slay  each  bravest  one  of  you  whom  Agni 
hath  confused. 

3  Gird  thou  a  bullock's  hide  on  these,  make  those  as 

timid  as  the  deer. 
Let  the  foe  flee  away,  and  let  his  kine  come  hither- 
ward  to  us. 

HYMN  LXVIIL 

Savitar  hath  come  hither  with  the  razor :  come 
thou,  O  V4yu,  with  the  heated  water. 

One-minded  let  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus  moisten  the 
hair :  shave,  ye  who  know  King  Soma. 

2  Let  A.diti  shave  the  beard,  and  let  the  Waters  bathe 

it  with  their  strength  : 
Praj&pati  restore  his  health  for  sight  and  days   of 
lengthened  life ! 

3  The  razor  used  by  Savitar,  for  shaving,  who  knoweth 

Varuija  and  royal  Soma, — 
Even  with    this   shave  ye  this  man,    O  Brahn^n. 
Let  him  be  rich  in  horses,  kine,  and  children. 

A  charm  for  the  destruction  and  plunder  of  enemies. 
3  Gird  thou  a  bullock^s  hide  on  these :  make  our  men   invulnerable. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  372. 

A  charm  to  accompany  the  shaving  of  the  beard. 

1  The  formal  shaving  may  be  part  of  the  Gkxl&navidhi,  the  ceremony 
of  anointing  part  of  the  head  of  a  youth  when  he  has  attained  the  age 
of  sixteen  or  eighteen  years  (see  II.  13) ;  or  it  may  be  connected  with 
the  Dikshi,  the  religious  ceremony  of  initiation  or  Confirmation.  In 
this  case  the  operation  appears  to  be  performed  on  a  sick  man  (stanza 
2)  to  expedite  his  restoration  to  health. 

Translated  bj  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  430. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTUN  70.]  THE  ATHARVA-TEDA.  283 

HYMN  LXIX. 

Mine  be  the  glory  in  the  hill,  in  vales,  in  cattle,  and 

in  gold. 
Mine  be  the  sweetness  that  is  found  in  nectar  and  in 

flowing  wine ! 

2  With  your  delicious  honey  balm  me,  Asvins,  Lords 

of  splendid  light ! 
That  clear  and  resonant  may  be  the  voice  I  utter  to 
mankind. 

3  In  me  be  strength,  in  me  be  fame,  in  me  the  power 

of  sacrifice : 
Praj&pati  establish  this  in  me  as  firm  as  light   in 
heaven ! 

HYMN  LXX. 

As   wine  associates   with   flesh,  as  dice  attend  the 

gaming-board. 
As  an  enamoured  man's  desire  is  firmly  set  upon  a 

dame, 
So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  O  Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon 

thy  calf. 

2  As  the  male  elephant  pursues  with  eager  step  his 

female's  track, 
As  an  enamoured  man's  desire  is  firmly  set  upon  a 

dame. 
So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  O  Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon 

thy  calf. 

3  Close  as  the  felly  and  the  spoke,  fixt  as  the  wheeUrim 

on  the  nave. 
As  an  enamoured  man's  desire  is  firmly  set  upon  a 

dame. 
So  let  thy  heart  and  soul,  O  Cow,  be  firmly  set  upon 

thy  calf 

A  priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory. 


A  benediction  on  cow  and  calf. 

Translated  and  annotated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  66,  165. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


im  TBS  HYUm  OT  [BOOK  Tt 

HYMN  LXXI. 
What  food  I  eat  of  varied  form  and  nature,   food 

whether  gold,  or  horse,  sheep,  goat«  or  bullock, 
Whatever  gift  I  have  received,  may  Agni  the  Hotar 

make  it  sacrifice  well-offered. 

2  Whatever,   sacrificed   or    not|    hath    reached    me, 

bestowed  by  men  and  sanctioned  by  the  Fathers, 
Whereby  my  heart  seems  to  leap  up^  may  Agni  the 
Hotar  make  that  sacrifice  well-offered. 

3  What  food  I  eat  unjustly^  Qodsl  or,  doubtful  between 

bestowing  and  refusing,  swallow, 
Through  greatness  of  Vaisvdnaiu  the  mighty  may 
that  same  food  be  sweet  to  me  and  bless^  I 

HYMN  LXXIL 

SsE  Appendix. 

HYMN  LXXIII. 

Let  Varupa  come  hither,   Soma,  Agni,  Btihaspati 

come  hither  with  the  Vasus  1 
Unanimous,  ye  kinsmen,  come  united,  come  to  the 

glory  of  this  mighty  guardian. 

2  The  inclination  which  your  hearts  have  harboured, 

the  purpose  which  hath  occupied  your  spirits. 
This  I  annul  with  sacrifice  and  butter.     In  me  be 
your  sweet  resting-place,  O  kinsmen. 

3  Stand  even  here :  forsake  me  not.     Before  us  may 

P6shan  make  your  path  unfit  to  travel. 
Vdstoshpati  incessantly  recall  you !  In  me  be  your 
sweet  resting-place,  O  kinsmen  ! 

A  priest's  benediction  after  eating. 

1  Make  it  tacrifice:  make  it  benefit  me  as  a  duly  performed  sacri- 
fice would  do. 

A  charm  pronoimced  by  a  King  to  wo&rm  the  fidelity  of  discon- 
tented kinsmen. 

1  2'hU  mighty  guardian :  meaning  himself. 

2  The  inclination :  to  desert  me. 

3  Vdstozhpati :  Lord  of  the  Hom«.    Sometimes  a  name  of  Indra. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


STMN  n.]  TES  A  THARVA-  VEDA.  385 

HYMN  LXXIV. 

Close  gathered  be  your  bodies :  be  your  miuds  and 

vows  in  unison ! 
Here    present   Brahma^aspati    and     Bhaga    have 

assembled  you. 

2  Let  there  be  union  of  your  minds,  let  there  be  union 

of  your  hearts : 
All  that  is  troubled  in  your  lot  with  this  I  mend  and 
harmonize. 

3  As,  free  from  jealousy,  the  strong  Adityas  have  been 

the  Vasus'  and  the  Rudras'  fellows, 
So  free  from  jealousy,  Lord  of  Three  Titles !  cause 
thou  these  people  here  to  be  one-minded. 

HYMN  LXXV. 

Forth  from  his  dwelling  drive  that  man,  the  foeman 

who  assaileth  us : 
Through  the   Expellent  sacri&ce   hath   Indra   rent 

a^d  mangled  him. 

2  Indra,  Foe«^Slayer,  drive  liim  forth  into  the  distance 

most  remote, 
Whence  never  more  shall  he  return  in  all  the  years 
that  are  to  come. 

3  To  the  thre0  distances,    i)eyond    mankind's   Five 

Haces,  let  him  go, 

A  charm  pronounced  by  a  King  0  secure  the  unanimity  and  fidelity 
^t  his  people. 

2  With  tkU :  sacrifice. 

3  Lord  of  Three  TiUe$ :  probably  Agni,  who  is  called  also  Vaisvinara 
and  Jltaredas. 

A  ol^arm  to  effect  the  removal  of  an  enen^y, 

1  Expellent  iacrifice ;  nairbddh^am  (havi^) ;  an  oblation  to  secure 
expulsion. 

3  Three  dutancee :  beyond  eai^b,   firmament,  and  heaven.     Three 
$kie8:  see  JV.  20.  1. 

Tmnslated  by  Ludwig,   Der  Rigveda,   IIL  p.  373,  and  by  GrilL 
Hundert  LJeder,  pp.  2?,  X66. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


286  THE  BYMm  OF  [BOOK  VI. 

Beyond  the  three  skies  let  him  go,  whence  he  shall 

never  come  again 
In  all  the  years  that  are  to  be,  long  as  the  Sun  is  in 

the  heaven. 

HYMN  LXXVL 

Those  who  are  sitting  round  this  babe  prepare  him 

to  be  looked  upon. 
Let  Agni  thoroughly  inflamed  with  all  his  tongues 

rise  from  his  heart. 

2  For   length  of  life   I   use   the  name   of  Agni   the 

Consuming  God, 
Whose  smoke  the  sage  who  knows  the  truth  beholds 
proceeding  from  his  mouth. 

3  The   man   who   knows   his     fuel   laid  in   order     by 

the  Kshatriya 
Sets    not  his   foot   upon  the   steep   declivity   that 
leads  to  Death. 

4  Those  who  encompass  slay  him  not:  he  goes  not  near 

his  lurking  foes— 
The   Kshatriya  who,    knowing   well,  takes  Agni's 
name  for  length  of  life. 

HYMN  LXXVII. 

Firm  stands  the  heaven,  firm  stands  the  earth,  firm 

stands  this  universal  world, 
Firm  stand  the  rooted   mountains.     I  have  put  the 

horses  in  the  stall 


A  benediction  pronounced  over  a  newborn  child  of  the  Kshatriya 
or  military  and  royal  class. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  459. 

A  charm  to  bring  the  cattle  home. 

1  Have  put:  atishthipam;   from  ithd,  to  stand:  literally,  hare 
caused  to  stand. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HFifir  78.]  THE  ATHARVA'VEDA,  287 

2  I  call  the  Herdsman,  him  who  knows  the  way  to 

drive  the  cattle  forth, 
Who  knows  the  way  to  drive  them  home,  to  drive 
them  back  and  drive  them  in. 

3  O  J&taveda9,  turn  them  back  :  a  hundred  homeward 

ways  be  thine  1 
Thou  hast  a  thousand  avenues  :  by  these  restore  our 
kine  to  us. 

HYMN  LXXVIII. 

Let  this  man  be  again  bedewed  with  this  presented 

sacrifice, 
And  comfort  with  the  sap  of  life  the    bride   whom 

they  have  brought  to  him. 

2  With  life's  sap  let  him  comfort  her,  and  raise  her  high 

with  princely  sway. 
In  wealth  that  hath  a  thousand  powers,  this  pair  be 
inexhaustible ! 

3  Tvashtar  formed  her  to  be  thy  dame,  Tvasbtar  made 

thee  to  be  her  lord. 
Long  life  let  Tvashtar  give  you  both.    Let  Tvashtar 
give  a  thousand  lives. 


2  The  Herdsman:  Agni.     The   stanza  is  taken,   with   variations, 
from  Rigveda  X.  19.  4. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigreda,  IIL  p.  468. 

A  nuptial  benediction. 

1  Be  again  bedewed :  refreshed  and  made  stronger  than  before.  With 
this  presented  sacrifice :  or,  with  this  oblation  for  success.    '  Mit  diesem 
bhCLtam  havih.' — Ludwig.  *  Durch  diese  kraft'ge  Darbringung,'  through 
this  powerful  offering. — Weber.  See  Grill's  note. 

3  Tvashtar :  who  develops  the  embryo,  shapes  all  forms,  and  creates 
husband  and  wife  for  each  other. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  7.  p.  238,  by  Ludwig,  Der 
Rigveda,  IIL  p.  371,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  57,  166. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TEE  HTMTTS  OF  [BOOK  Tt. 

HYMN  LXXIX. 

May  thi3  our  Lord  of  Cloudy   Sky,   bedewed  with 
liquid  drops,  preserve  unequalled  richesin  our  homes. 

2  Lord  of  the  Cloudy  Sky,  bestow  vigour  and  strength 

on  our  abodes.     Let  wealth  and  treasure  come  to  ub. 

3  Thou,  God  bedewed  with  drops,  art  Lord  of  infinite 

prosperity. 
Grant  us  thereof,   give   us   thereof;  may  we   enjoy 
this  boon  of  thine. 

HYMN  LXXX, 

He  flieth  in  the  firmament  observing  all  the  things 

that  be : 
We  with  this  offering  will  adore  the  greatness  of  the 

Heavenly  Hound. 

2  The  three,  the  K&lakdnjas,   set  aloft  in  heaven  as 

they  were  Gods — 
All  these  I  call  to  be  our  help  and  keep  this  man 
secure  from  harm. 

3  In  waters  is  thy  birth,  in  heaven  thy  station,   thy 

majesty  on  earth  and  in  the  ocean. 
We  with  this  offering  will  adore  the  greatness  of  the 
Heavenly  Hound, 

A  prayer  for  prosperity. 

1  Lord  of  Cloudy  Sky  :  P^rjanya,  Qod  of  the  vain^loud,  on  whose 
favour  the  growth  of  grass  and  grain  depends.  See  I.  2.  1. 

A  prayer  for  help  and  protection, 

1  The  Heavenly  Hound :  some  oonspicuous  star,  perhaps  the  Bog-star, 
SiriUs,  which  was  called  tciwvhj  the  Greeks  and  Oanis  gr  Canicula  \^y 
the  Latins,  both  words  being  closely  connected  with  the  Sanskrit  §vdn. 

2  Kdlakdf^:  meaning  originally,  black-spotted;  stars  of  some 
unidentifiable  constellation. 

3  Thy  birth :  the  origin  of  the  Heavenly  Hound.  So  with  the 
Greeks  Sirius  was  said  to  have  been  the  dog  of  the  great  hunter  Orion, 
and  the  Latin  Canis  or  Canicula  was  the  dog  of  Erigone  translated 
with  its  mistress  to  the  sky. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigtdda,  IIL  p.  373. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UtMN  83.]  THB  ATHARVAVEDA.  2«ft 

HYMN  LXXXI. 

Thou  art  a  grasper,  holding  fast  both  hands  :  thou 

drivest  fiends  away. 
A  holder  both  of  progeny  and  riches  hath  this  Ring 

become. 

2  Prepare   accordantly,    O  King,   the  mother  for  the 

infant's  birth. 
On  the  right  way  bring  forth   the  boy.    Make  him 
come  hither.  I  am  here. 

3  The  Amulet  which  Aditi  wore  when  desirous  of  a  son, 
Tvashtar   hath    bound    upon    this    dame   and   said, 

Be  mother  of  a  boy. 

HYMN  LXXXII. 

t  GALL  the  name  of  him  who  comes,  hath  come,  and 

still  draws  nigh  to  us. 
Foe-slaying  Indra's  name  I  love,  the  Vasus'   friend 
with  hundred  powers. 

2  Thus    Bhaga  spake  to  me :   .  Let  him  bring   thee 
a  consort  by  the  path 
Whereon  the  Asvins  brought   the  bride  Sftrysl  the 
child  of  Savitar. 


A  chdrra  to  facilitate  child-birth. 

1  Holding  fait  hoik  hands :  the  ring  or  bracelet  was  apparently  placed 
finat  on  one  hand  or  arm  and  then  on  the  other ;  or  there  were  two 
connected  rings,  regarded  as  one  amulet.  See  Kausika-Sutra  XXXV.  11. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  239,  by  Ludwig,  Der 
Rigveda,  IIL  p.  477. 

A  charm  to  win  a  bride. 

1  0/  him  :  of  Indra  who  is  always  ready  to  come  and  help  us. 

The  Va^tu*  friend :  whose  associates  are  the  Vasus,  sometimes  the 
Gods  in  general,  sometimes  a  special  class  of  deities.     See  I.  30.  1 . 

2  Whereon  the  Jsvins  brought  the  bride :  see  II.  30.  2,  and  Rigvedfi 
X.  85,  which  contains  a  full  account  of  Surya's  wediing, 

19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


290  THE  UYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

3  Great,    Indra,    is    that  hook   of  thine,   bestowing 
treasure,  wrought  of  gold  : 
Therewith,  0  Lord  of  Might,  bestow  a  wife  on  me 
who  long  to  wed. 

HYMN  LXXXIII. 

Henob,  Sores  and  Pustules,  fly  away  even  as  the 

eagle  from  his  home. 
Let  SArya  bring  a  remedy,   the  Moon  shine  forth 

and  banish  you. 

2  One  bright  with  variegated  tints,   one  white,   one 
black,  a  couple  red  : — 
The  names  of   all  have  I  declared.     Begone,  and 
injure  not  our  men. 

8  Hence,  childless,  shall  the  Pustule  flee,  grand- 
daughter of  the  dusky  one. 

The  Boil  shall  fly  away  from  us,  the  morbid  growth 
shall  vanish  hence. 

Taste,  happy  in  thy  mind,  thine  own  oblation,  as 
I  with  Sv4h4  with  my  heart  present  it. 

3  That  hook:  of.  'Long  be  thy  grasping-hook  wherewith  thou 
givest  ample  wealth  to  him  Who  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  thee' 
(Rigveda  VIII.  17.  10);  the  expression  being  borrowed  from  the 
employment  of  a  hook  to  draw  down  the  high  branches  of  a  fruit-tree. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Dcr  Kigveda,  III.  470,  and  with  notes,  by 
Weber,  Indiscbe  Studieu,  V.  p.  239—241,  and  Grill,  Huudert  Lieder, 
pp.  57,  167. 

A  charm  against  sores  and  pustules. 

1  Hence,  Sores  and  Pustules:  dpaohitas ;  see  VI.  25.  1. 

3  Boil:  glaiih;  explained  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  as  a 
roiuid  lump,  a  wen-like  excrescence  (perhaps  related  to  globus  and 
glomus).  Morbid  growth :  galuntdh  ;  an  unknown  word,  not  explained 
in  the  St  Petersburg  Dictionary,  meaning,  apparently,  a  tumour  of 
some  kind.  Thin^  own  oblation:  offered  for  the  express  purpose  of 
removing  thee.     Svdhd :  the  exclamation.  All  hail ! 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  500. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  S5.J  THE  ATUARVA^VEDA.  2»1 

HYMN  LXXXIV. 

Thou  in  whose  dread  mouth  I  present  oblation,  that 
these  bound  victims  may  obtain  their  freedom, 

The  people  deem  that  thou  art  Earth :  I  know  thee 
thoroughly,  and  I  say  thou  art  Destruction. 

2  Be  thou  enriched,  O  Welfare,  with  oblations,  here, 

among  us  is  thine  allotted  portion. 
Free — Hail  to  thee  1 — from  sin  those  here  and  yonder. 

3  Do  thou,  Destruction,  thurt,  without  a  rival,  release 

us  from  the  iron  bonds  that  biad  us. 
To  me  doth  Yama  verily  restore  thee.     To  him,  to 
Yama,  yea,  to  Death  be  worship ! 

4  Thou  hast  been  fastened  to  an  iron  pillar,  here  com- 

passed with  a  thousand  deaths  around  thee. 
In  full  accord  with  Yama  and  the  Fathers,  send  this 
man  upward  to  the  loftiest  heaven. 

HYMN  LXXXV. 

Let  Varapa  the  heavenly  tree  here  present  keep 

disease  away. 
The  Gods  have  driven  off  Decline  that  entered  and 

possessed  this  man. 

A  charm  to  acoompany  the  symbolical  loosing  of  sacrificial  victims. 

1  EaHh :  one  meaning  of  the  word  nirritth,  Destruction  or  Death, 
being  the  bottom  or  lower  parts  of  the  earth. 

2  0  Welfare :  apparently  an  euphemistic  expression  for  Destruction, 
as  the  Qreek  Eumenides,  Gracious  Goddesses,  was  for  the  Furies.  Prof. 
Ludwig  reads  bhAme^  0  £arth,  instead  of  the  bhdte^  0  Welfare,  of  the 
text. 

3  Th6  iron  bonds :  of  sin.  Thee :  some  man  who  has  been  danger- 
ously ill. 

4  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  VI.  63.  3. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  444. 

A  charm  against  Consumption  or  Decline. 

1  Varana  :  the  tree  Grataeva  Roxburghii,  found  in  all  parts  of  India, 
used  in  medicine  and  supposed  to  possess  magical  virtues.     See  X.  3. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


292  THE  HYMNS  OF  BOOK  VL 

2  We  with  the  speech  of  ludra  and  of  Mitra  and  of 

Varuna, 
We  with  the  speech  of  all  the  Grods  will  drive  Decline 
away  from  thee. 

3  Even  as  Vritra  checked   and   stayed   these   waters 

flowing  every  way, 
With  Agni,  Grod  of  all  mankind.  I  check  and  banish 
thy  Decline. 

HYMN  LXXXVI. 

This  is  the  liord  of  Indra,  this  the  Lord  of  Heaven^ 

the  Lord  of  Earth, 
The  Lord  of  all  existing  things :  the  one  and  only 

Lord  be  thou. 

2  The  Sea  is  regent  of  the  fioi>ds,  Agni  is  ruler  of  the 

land^ 
The  Moon  is  regent  of  the  stars :  the  one  a»d  only 
Lord  be  thou. 

3  Thou  art  the  King  of  Asuras,  the  crown  and  summit 

of  mankind : 
Thou  art  the  partner  of  the  Gods  :  the  one  and  only 
Lord  be  thou. 

HYMN  LXXXVII, 

Here  art  thou  :  I  have  chosen  thee.     Stand  stedfast 

and  immovable. 
Let  all  the  clans  desire  thee :  let  not  thy  kingdom 

fall  away. 

A  glorification  of  a  newly  consecrated  King. 

3  Awtrai :  earthly  lords. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  241. 

A  benediction  addressed  to  a  newly  elected  King. 
The  hymn  is  taken,  with  slight  variations,  from  Rigveia  X.  175. 
1—3. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  89.]  TEE  ATRARVA-VEDA,  293 

2  Be  even  here :  fall  not  away :  be  like  a  mountain 

unremoved. 
Stand  stedfast  here  like  Indra's  self,  and  hold  the 
kingship  in  thy  grasp. 

3  This  man  hath    Indra  stablished,   made   secure  by 

constant  sacrifice. 
Soma,  and  Brahmaoaspati  here  preseat  bless  and 
comfort  him  ! 

HYMN  LXXXVIII. 

Firm  is  the  sky,  firm  is  the  earth,  and  firm  is  all  this 

living  world ; 
Firm  are  these  mountains  on  their  base,  and  stedfast 

is  this  King  of  men. 

2  Stedfast  may  VaruQa  the  King^   sted&st  the  God 

Brihaspati, 
Stedfast  may  Indra,  stedfast,  too,  may  Agni  keep 
thy  stedfast  reign. 

3  Firm,  never  to  be  shaken,  crush  thy  foemen,  under 

thy  feet  lay  those  who  strive  against  thee. 
One-minded,  true  to  thee  be  all  the  regions :  faithful 
to  thee,  the  firm,  be  this  assembly ! 

HYMN  LXXXIX. 

This  strength  that  Soma  hath  bestowed,  the  head  of 

her  who  gladdeneth, — 
With  that   which   thence   hath  been  produced   we 

make  thy  spirit  sorrowful 


A  benediction  addressed  to  a  newly  elected  King.  Stanzas  1  and  2 
are  taken  from  Bigveda  X,  173.  4,  5. 

A.  charm  to  win  a  maiden's  love. 

1  Soma :  as  Lord  of  Plants.  0/  her  toko  gladdeneik :  prtnydh  is 
apparently  the  genitive  case  of  prent  the  feminine  of  preni  which  is 
found  in  the  Rigveda,  (I.  112.  10)  with  the  meaning  of  Moving,' 
*  friendly,'  derived  from  /wi,  to  please  or  gladden.  Prenf  then  may 
mean   some  plant  that  possesses  the  power  of    awaking  love,   like 


Digitized  by 


Google 


-294  THE  HYMNS  OF  [MOOK  VI 

2  We  make  thy  apirit  sorrowful,  we  fill  thy  miod  with 

pain  and  grief. 

Aa  smoke  aoeompanies  the  wind,  so  let  thy  fancy 
follow  me. 

3  May  VaruQa  and  Mitra,  may  SarasTati  the  Qoddess, 

may 
The  centre  of  the  earth,  and  both  her  limits  bring 
thee  close  to  me. 

HYMN  XC. 

The  shaft  that  Hndra  hath  shot  forth  against  thy 

members  and  thy  heart, 
Here  do  we  draw  from  thee  to-day,  and  turn  it  hence 

to  every  side^ 

2  From  all  the  hundred  vessels  spread  throu^K)ut  the 

members  of  thy  frame, 
From  all  those  vessels  and  canals  we  call  the  poison- 
ous matter  forth. 

3  Worship  to  thee,  the  archer,  and,  O  Rudra,  to  thy 

levelled  shaft ! 
Yea,    worship  to  thine  arrow  when  it  leffc  the  bow, 
and  when  it  fell ! 


S;at3mon^  Yervaiq^  Baail,  Mallow,  and  others  in  flurope.    The  head  of 
the  Prentf  was  perhaps  dried  and  powdered  and  adimoistered  hi  food» 
or  in  some  other  way  employed  in  the  incantation. 
Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  242. 

A  charm  to  cure  a  man  who  has  been  poisoned. 

1  Rudra :  the  terrible  God  whose  shafts  bring  death  or  disease  on 
men  and  cattle.  In  this  case  the  body  of  the  sufibrer  has  been  poisoned. 

2  Uundrtd  vesieh:  aatdm  dhamdnayah ;  a)!  the  countless  vessels 
and  nerves  by  means  of  which  the  different  functions  of  the  body  are 
perfoitned.     See  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  pp.  63,  64. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Ueder,  pp.  li,  16?. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  ^:]  TBR  ATHARYA'fBIM.  295* 

HYMN  XCI. 

Thet  made  this  barley  ready  with  a  team  of  eighty 

a  team  of  six. 
With  this  I  drive  to  westward,  far  away,  thy  bodily 

disease. 

2  V&ta  breathes  downward  from  above,  and  downward 

SArya  sends  his  heat ; 
Downward  is  drawn  the  milch-cow's  milk :  so  down- 
ward go  thy  malady ! 

3  The  Waters  verily  bring  health,  the  Waters  drive 

disease  away. 
The  Waters  cure  all  malady :  may  they  bring  medi- 
cine for  thee. 

HYMN  XCIL 

Be  fleet  as  wind,  Strong  Steed,  when  thou  art  har- 
nessed; go  forth  as  swift  as  thought  at  India's 
sending. 

Let  the  possessors  of  all  wealth,  the  Maruts,  yoke 
thee,  and  Tvashtar  in  thy  feet  lay  swiftnesa 

2  That  speed,  that  lies  concealed  in  thee,  O  Charger, 

speed  granted  to  the  hawk  or  wind  that  wandered, — 

Therewith,  Strong  Steed,  saving  in  shock  of  battle, 

endowed  with  might  by  might  win  thou  the  contest. 


A  charm  against  disease. 

1  They  made  thin  barley  ready :  prepared  the  ground  by  ploughing 
for  the  growth  of  the  grain  used  in  the  incantation.  The  number  of 
oxen  employed  has  increajsed  the  efficacy  of  the  eom. 

a  The  Waier$  cure  all  malady :  cf.  III.  7.  5.  So  Pastor  Kjieipp, 
the  famoiK  Bayarian  water-doctor,  maintains  that  what  cannot  he  cured 
by  water  is  altogether  incurable.  Water  is  the  panacea.  Hydropathy 
is  the  one  saving  principle  which  can  be  applied  in  every  case. 

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Licder,  pp.  14,  168. 

A  charm  to  strengthen  and  inspirit  a  War-honse. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


296  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

S  Bearing  thy  body,  Charger,  may  thy  body  run  bless- 
ing us  anid  winning  thee  protection. 
May  he,  unswerving,  to  uphold  the  mighty,  stablish 
his  lustre  as  a  God  in  heaven. 

HYMN  XCIII. 

Yama,  Death  direly  fatal,  the  Destroyer,  with  his 

black  crest,  Sarva  the  tawny  archer. 
And  all  the  Gods  uprisen  with  their  army,  may  these 

on  every  side  avoid  our  heroes. 

2  With    mind,   burnt-offerings,    butter,   and   libation, 

to  royal  Bhava  and  the  archer  Sarva, 
To  these  the   worshipful   I   pay   my   worship  :  may 
they  turn  elsewhere  things  with  deadly  venom. 

3  Save  us,  AU-Gods  and  all -possessing  Maruts,  from 

murderous  stroke  and  things  that  slay  with  poison. 
Pure  is  the  might  of  Varu^ia,  Agni,  Soma.     May 
VAta's  and  Parjanya's  favour  bless  us. 

HYMN  XCIV. 

We  bend  your  minds  in  union,  bend  in  harmony  your 

hopes  and  plans  : 
You  tliere,  who  turn  to  sundered  ways,  we  bend  and 

bow  in  unison. 


3  This  stanssa  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.  56. 2,  a  funeral 
hymn,  and  is  there  addressed  to  the  spirit  of  the  departed,  Vajin 
(strong,  strong  steed,  charger  or  racer)  being  either  the  dead  man's 
name  or  meaning  '  hero.'     The  second  line  is  obscure. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Higveda,  III.  p.  459. 

A  prayer  for  protection  from  poison. 

1  Yama  :  the  King  of  the  Departed,  distinguished  from  Death  the 
Destroyer.  Sarva :  a  deity,  generally  mentioned  together  with  Bhava 
(see  IV.  28.  1 ).     His  name  does  not  occur  in  the  Higveda. 

2  Bhava  :  a  deity  attending  on  Rudra :  in  later  mythology  a  name 
or  form  of  Siva  whose  consort  is  the  awful  Goddess  Bhavani. 

A  charm  to  reconcile  a  King's  discontented  people. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  514. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  96.]  THE  ATHARVAVBDA.  297 

2  I  with  my  spirit  make  your  spirits  captive :  these 

with  their  thoughts  follow  my  thought  and  wishes. 
I  make  your  hearts  submissive  to  mine  order :  close- 
ly attending  go  where  I  precede  you. 

3  I  have  invoked   both   Heaven  and  Earth,  invoked 

divine  Sarasvati, 
Indra  and  Agni  have  I  called :  Sarasvati^  so  may  we 
thrive ! 

HYMN  XGV, 

In  the  third  heaven  above  us  stands  the  Asvattha 
tree,  the  seat  of  Gods. 

There  the  Gods  gained  the  Kush^ha  plant,  embodi- 
ment of  endless  life. 

2  There  moved  through  heairen  a  golden  ship,  a  ship 
with  cordage  wrought  of  gold. 
There  Gods  obtained  the  Kushitha  plant,  the  flower 
of  immortality. 

8  Thou  art  the  infant  of  the  plants,  the  infant  of  the 
Snowy  Hills : 
The  germ  of  every  thing  that  is :  free  this  my  friend 
from  his  disease. 

HYMN  XCVI. 

The  many  plants  of  hundred  shapes  and  forms  that 

Soma  rules  as  King, 
Commanded  by  Brihaspabi,  deliver  us  from  grief  and 

woe! 


A  charm  to  remove  disease. 

1  This  and  the  following  stanza  are  repeated  from  V.  4.  3,  4. 

A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  sorrow. 
1  Commanded:    or,   commissioned,   or,   engendered.     The   line    is 
taken  from  Rigveda  X.  97.  15. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


298  fax  Btitifs  OP  [Moot  ft^ 

2  Let  them  release  me  from  the  cttrae  and  from  the 
noose  of  Vann>a, 
f^ree  me  from   Yama^s  fetter,  and  from  every  sin 
against  the  Gkxls  t 

8  B*rom  eVery  fault  in  look,  in  word,  in  spirit  that  we, 
awake  or  sleeping,  haVe  committed, 
May  Soma,  with  his  godlike  natare,  cleanse  a& 

HYMN  XCVit 

^tist   sacrifice  is  victor^  Agni  victor,   victoriooa  is 

Soma,  Indra  conquers : 
So  will  We  bring  oblation  Unto  Agni>  thki  sacrifice 

that  I  may  win  all  battles* 

2  Praise  to  you,  Mitra^Varuga,  hymn-singers !     Here 

swell  with  meath  dominion  blest  with  children. 
f*ar  into  distant  regions  drive  Destruction,  and  even 
from  committed  sin  absolve  us. 

3  In  this  strong  hero  be  ye  glad  and  joy  fill  j  cleave  ye 

to  him  even  as  ye  des^ve  to  Indra, 
Victorious,  kine-winner,  thunder-wielder,  who  quells 
a  host  and  with  his  might  destroys  it« 

2  T*akeii,  witli  a  varfant,  from  fiigVeda  X.  97.  16. 
Translated  by  Ludwi'^,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  506,  and  by  Orifl,  Hur- 
dert  Lieder,  pp.  58,  168< 

A  prayer  for  the  success  and  prosperity  of  a  Sing. 

1  This  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  instituton*  of  the  sacrifice  for  axiccesf' 
In  war. 

2  This  and  the  foUotring  stanifia  are  spoken  by  the  officiating  priesk 
Pi-aine :  $vad/i/Lt;  here  a  sacrificial  exclamation,  like  Svfthi»  All  hail ! 

3  Addressed  to  the  King's  subjects. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIt<  p<  460. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UTMN  99]  THM  ATHARTAfBDA.  ^99 

HYMN  XCVIII. 

Indra  be  victor,  never  to  be  vanquished,  ta  reign 

among  the  Kings  as  sovran  ruler  \ 
Here  be  thou  meet  for  praise  and  supplication,  to  be 

revered  and  waited  on  and  worshipped. 

2  Thou  fain  for  glory,  an   imperial  ruler,  bast  won 

dominion  over  men,  O  Indra. 
Of  these  celestial  tribes  be  thou  the  sovran :  long-' 
lasting  be  thy  sway  and  undecaying  { 

3  Thou  governest  the  north  and  eastern  regions«  Indtaf 

fiena-slayer  !  thou  destroyest  foemen. 
Thou  hast  won  all,  far  as  the  rivers  wander.   Bulf^ 
called  to  help,  on  our  right  band  thou  goest. 

HYMN  XCIX. 

Indra,  before  affliction  eon>es,  I  call  thee  from  the 

wide  expanse. 
The  mighty  gnardian,  born  alone,  wearer  of  many 

names,  I  call. 

2  Whatever  deadly  missile  lauuebed  to-day  flies  fortb 

to  slaughter  us, 
We  take  both  arms  of  Indra  to  einrompasa  ns   on 
every  side. 

3  We  draw  about  ns  boib   the  arms  of  Indra,  our 

deliverer.     May  they  protect  us  thoroughly. 
O  Savitar,  thou  Gk)d,  O  royal  Sonaa,  make  tl>ou  vae 
pious-minded  for  my  welfare. 

A  hymn  of  praise  to  Indnt* 

2  Th€9€  edesttal  tribts :  the  heavenlj  Godt^ 

3  BmII  :  or,  Stvong. 

A  hymn  for  protection  in  battle. 

1  Bam  alofu  :  peerless  from  thy  births 

3  Make  thou  :  each  of  you  separately. 

Translated  by  Grille  Hundert  Liedbr,  pp.  18,  168. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


300  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  C. 

The  Gods  and  SArya  gave  the  gift,  the  Earth  and 

Heaven  bestowed  the  boon. 
Tbe  three  Sarasvatis   in  full  accord   bestowed   the 

antidote. 

2  That  water,  Upajlk&s!  which  Gods  poured  for  you 

on  thirsty  land, 
With  that  same  water  sent  by  Gods,  drive  ye  away 
this  poison  here. 

3  The  daughter  of  the  Asuras  art  thou,  and  sister  of 

the  Gods. 
Thou  who  hast  sprung  from  heaven  and  earth  hast 
robbed  the  poison  of  its  power. 

HYMN  CI. 

See  Appendix. 


A  charm  against  poison. 

1  Three  SarasvatU :  the  multiplication  is  analogous  to  that  of  the 
three  heavens  and  three  earths.  See  IV.  20.  2. 

2  Upajtkds :  termites  or  white  ants.  See  note  on  II.  3.  2.  *  Whence 
do  these  Ants  get  their  moisture  ?  Our  house  was  built  on  a  hard  ferru- 
ginous conglomerate,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  White  Ants, 
but  they  came  despite  the  precaution,  and  not  only  were  they  in  this 
sultry  weather  able  individually  to  moisten  soil  to  the  consistency  of 
mortar  for  the  formation  of  galleries  ....  but  when  their  inner 
chambers  were  laid  open,  these  were  also  surprisingly  humid ;  yet 
there  was  no  dew,  and  the  house  being  placed  on  a  rock  they  could 
have  no  subterranean  passage  to  the  bed  of  the  river,  which  ran  about 
three  hundred  yards  bebw  the  hill.  Can  it  be  that  they  have  the 
power  of  combining  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  of  their  vegetable  food 
by  vital  force  [so]  as  to  form  water?'  (Quoted  from  Dr.  Livingstone's 
well-known  work  by  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  "Strange  Dwellings,"  p.  280.) 

3  Addressed  to  some  magical  herb,  probably  Arundhati  or  Silacht 
%hich  is  called  sister  of  the  Gods  in  V.  5.  1.  Asuras  :  divine  beings;  Gods. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  511. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  103  ]  THE  ATHARVAVJtDA.  301 

HYMN  CII. 

Even  as  this  ox,  O  Asvins,  steps  and  turns  together 

with  his  mate, 
So  let  thy  fancy  turn  itself,  come  nearer,  and  unite 

with  me. 

2  I,  as  the  shaft-horse  draws  the  mare  beside  him,  draw 

thee  to  myself. 
Like  grass  that  storm  and  wind  have  rent,  so  be  thy 
mind  attached  to  me  I 

3  Swiftly   from   Bhaga's   hands   I   bear   away  a  love- 

compelling  charm 
Of  ointment  and  of  sugar-cane,  of  Spikenard  and  the 
Kushtha  plant. 

HYMN  CHI. 

Brihaspati  and  Savitar  prepare  a  rope  to  bind  you 

fast! 
Let  Bhaga,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and   both   the  Asvins 

make  the  bond. 

2  I  bind   together  all  of  them,  the  first,  the  last,  the 
middlemost, 
Indra   hath    girded   these   with    cord :    bind   them 
together,  Agni,  thou  I 


A  cfaarm  to  win  a  maiden's  love. 

1  The  Asvins  are  addressed  as  having  been  the  first  teachers  of 
ploughing  (Rigveda  I.  117.  21),  and  also  perhaps  as  groomsmen  and 
conductors  of  the  bride  at  Surya's  wedding  (Rigveda  X.  85.  8,  9). 
The  second  line  is  addressed  to  the  absent  maiden. 

2  Grass :  trinam  (Whitney's  Index  Verborum)  instead  of  trinma  of 
the  text.     Cf.  li.  30.  1. 

3  Bhagc^s  hands :  BbAgA  being  a  deity  who  presides  over  love  and 
marriage. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Stndien,  V.  243,  and  by  Grill,  Hun- 
dert  Lieder,  pp.  54,  169. 

A  charm  to  check  the  approach  of  a  hostile  army. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  518* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Mt  THE  HYMNS  OF  BOOK  fi. 

3  Those  yonder  who  approach  to  fight,  with  banners 
raised  along  their  ranks, 
Indra  hath   girded   these   with    eord  :    bind  them 
together,  A^ni,  thou  I 

HYMN  CIV. 

Wb  bind  our  foemen  with  a  bond  that  binds  them 

close  and  holds  them  fast. 
Their  breath  and  respiration  I  dissever,  and  their 

lives  from  life. 

2  This  bond,  made  keen  by  Indra,  I  have  formed  with 

heat  of  holy  zeal. 
Securely  bind  our  enemies,  O  Agni,  who  are  stand- 
ing here. 

3  Indra  and   Agni   bind    them   fast.  Soma  the  King, 

and  both  the  Friends  ! 
Hay  Indra,  girt  by  Maruts,  make  a   bond  to   bind 
our  enemies. 

HYMN  CV. 

Kapidlt  as  the  fancy  flies  forth  with  conceptions  of 

the  mind, 
So  following  the  fancy's  flight,  O  Cough,  flee  rapidly 

a^ay. 

2  Rapidly  as  an  arrow  flies  away  with  keenly-sharpen- 

ed point, 
So  swiftly  flee  away,  O  Cough,   over  ttie  region  of 
the  earth ! 

3  Rapidly  as  the  beams  of  light,  the  rays  of  Siirya, 

fly  away. 
So,  Cough!  fly  rapidly  away  over  the  current  of  the 
sea! 
•    ■•■■•■    ■■■    ■■     ■   —..■■■...   ...  -   ,  — ■ — .. — 

A  charm  to  check  the  approach  of  a  hostile  army. 
3  Both  the  Friends :  Mitra  and  Varu^. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  518. 

A  charm  to  cure  Cough. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigyeda,  III.  p.  510. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  107.]  TBB  ATBARVAVBDA.  303 

HYMN  CVI. 

Lbt  flowery  Ddrv4  grass  grow  up  about  thine  exit 

and  approach. 
There    let  a  spring  of    water  rise,   or  lake   with 

blooming  lotuses. 

2  This  is  the  place   where   waters   meet,  here  is  the 

gathering  of  the  flood. 
Our  home  is  set  amid  the  lake  :  turn  thou  thy  jaws 
away  from  it. 

3  O  House,  we  compass  thee  about  with  coolness  to 

envelop  thee. 
Cool  as  a  lake  be  thou  to  us*     I^et  Agni  bring  us 
healing  balm ! 

HYMN  CVII. 

Entrust  me,  Visvajit,  to  Tr^yamA^A. 
Guard,  TrAyam^^A,  all  our  men,  guard  all  our  wealth 
of  quadrupeds. 

2  To  Visvajit  entrust  me,  TrAyam^nd. 
O  Visvajit,  guard  all  our  men,  etc. 

3  To  Visvajit  entrust  me,  O  KalyA^l. 
Guard,  O  KalyAol,  all  our  men,  etc. 

A  charm  to  protect  a  hou^e  from  firo* 

1  DUrvd grai$ :  P^nicum  Dactjion ;  a  creeping  grass  with  'flower- 
bearing  branches  erect.  B^  f^r  the  most  common  and  useful  grass  in 
India.  It  grows  everywhere  abundantly,  and  flowers  all  the  year.' — 
Roxburgh.  Ii^  Hindiist^ni  it  is  called  dUb.  The  speaker  is  addressing 
his  house. 

2  Thou :  Agni  or  Fire  is  addressed*  The  hymn  may  be  compared 
with  Rigveda  X.  143.  6—8. 

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  63,  170. 

A  charm  to  protect  men  and  ot^ttle. 

1  Viimijit :  All-subduing ;  an  epithet  of  Indra ;  also  the  name  of  an 
ekdha  or  one-day  sacrifice  performed  in  the  course  of  the  gavdmayana^ 
a  mitra  (see  1. 30. 4)  or  prolonged  Soma  sacrifice  lasting  a  whole  year. 
Trdyamdnd :  Protectress ;  the  name  of  a  medicinal  plant. 

3  Kalydt^t:  Propitious  one;  the  name  of  a  leguminous  shrub, 
Glycine  Debilis. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


304  THE  HYMm  OP  [BOOK  Yl 

4  To  Sarvavid  entrust  me,  O  Kaly^oi. 

O  Sarvavid,  guard  all  Qur  men,  guard  all  our  wealth 
of  quadrupeds. 

HYMN  CVIII. 

Intelligkncb,  come  first  to  as  with  store  of  horses 

and  of  kine ! 
Thou  with  the  rays  of  SArya  art  our  worshipful  and 

holy  one. 

2  The  first,  devoctt  Intelligence,  lauded  by  sages,  sped 

by  prayer, 
Trusted  by  Brahmachtris,  for  the  favour  of  the  Gods 
I  call. 

3  That  excellent  Intellrgence  which  !^ibhus  know,  and 

Asuras, 
Intelligence  which  sages   know,  we  cause  to  enter 
into  me. 

4  Do  thou,  O  Agni,  make  me  wise  this  day  with  that 

Intelligence 
Which  the  creative  Tlishis,  which  the  men  endowed 
with  wisdom  knew. 

5  Intelligence  at  eve,  at  morn,    Intelligence  at  nooft 

of  day. 
With  the  Sun's  beams,  and  by  our  speech  we  plant 
in  us  Intelligence. 

4  Sarvaind:  Omniscient;  an  epithet  of  Agni. 

A  prayer  for  wisdom. 

2  Brahmachdrts  :  religious  students. 

3  Bibhus :  who  were  deified  on  account  of  their  artistic  skill.     See 
III.  5.  6,  note.     Aiuran:  divine  beings. 

A:  Creative  RUhiB :  rUhayo  hkHtakritah ;  ^^  III.    28.    1.   and    IV. 
35.  2. 

5  Speech  :  or  prayer. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RYMN  110.]  THE  A  THA R VA-  VEDA.  305 

HYMN   CIX. 

The  Berry   heals   the   missile's   rent,   it   heals  the 

deeply-piercing  wound. 
The   Gods   prepared   and   fashioned  it.     This  hath 

sufficient  power  for  life. 

2  When  from  their  origin  they  came,  the  Berries  spake 
among  themselves  : 
The  man  whom  we  shall  find  alive  shall  never  suffer 
injury. 
8  Asuras    buried    thee   in   earth ;     the    Gods   again 
uplifted  thee, 
Healer  of  sickness  caused  by  wounds  and  healer  of 
the  missile's  rent. 

HYxMN   ex. 

Yea,  ancient,  meet  for  praise  at  sacrifices,  ever  and 

now  thou  sittest  down  as  Hotar. 
And  now,  O  Agni,  make  thy  person  friendly,  and 

win  felicity  for  us  by  worship. 

2  'Neath  Jyaishthaghiil  and  Yama's  Two  Releasers  this 
child  was  born  :  preserve  him  from  uprooting. 
He  shall  conduct  him  safe  past  all  misfortunes  to 
lengthened  life  that  lasts  a  hundred  autumns. 

A  charm  to  heal  punotured  wounds. 

1  The  Berry :  pippalt;  the  fruit  of  the  Asvattha,  Pippal  or  Peepul, 
the  Ficus  Religiosa,  or  Holy  Fig-tree.     See  III.  6.  1. 

2  From  their  origin :  from  the  hands  of  their  Creator.  Whom  we 
shall  find  cdive:  to  whom  we  are  brought  before  his  life  is  extinct. 

3  Aiuras :  fiends.  Buried  thee :  to  prevent  thee  from  saving  human 
life.     Cf.  II.  3.  3. 

Translated  by  Ladwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  509,  and  by  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  p.  389. 

A  benediction  on  a  new-bom  child. 

2  Jyaisihaghni :  or  Jyeshtha^hni :  the  sixteenth  lunar  mansion, 
oalled  Jyeshth^  in  XIX.  7.  3.  Yama's  Two  Releasers :  two  auspicious 
staiB  whose  rising  releases  from  Death  and  disease ;  Vichritau.  See 
II.  8.  1.  From  uprooting:  miUabdrhandt ;  a  play  upon  the  word,  the 
asterism  being  called  also  Mulabarha^i.     Ide ;  Agoi* 

20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


20«  TBB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI, 

3  Born    on    the    Tiger's    day    was   he,    a   hero,    the 
Constellations'  child,  born  brave  and  manly. 
Let  him. not  wound,   when  grown  in  strength,   his 
father,  nor  disregard  his  mother,  her  who  bare  him, 

HYMN  CXI. 

Unbind  and  loose  for  me  this  map,  O  Agni,  who 
bound  and  well  restrained  is  chattering  folly. 

Afterward  he  will  offer  thee  thy  portion  when  he 
hath  been  delivered  from  his  madness. 

2  Let  Agni  gently  soothe  thy  mind  when  fierce  exciter 

ment  troubles  it. 
Well-skilled  I  make  a  medicine  that  thou  no  longer 
mayst  be  mad, 

3  Insane  through  sin  against  the  Gods,  or  maddened 

by  a  demon's  power — 
Well-skilled  I  make   a  medicine  to  free  thee  from 
insanity. 

4  May   the   Apsarases  release,   Indra  and  Bhaga  let 

thee  go. 
May  all  the  Gods  deliver  thee  that  thou  no  longer 
mayst  be  mad. 

HYMN  CXIL 

Let  not  this  one,   O  Agni,  wound   the   highest  of 
these  :  preserve  thou  him  from  utter  ruin. 

3  Tiger^s  day :  the  tiger  being  in  the  Atharya-veda  the  type  of  valour, 
Translated  by  Ludwig  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  431, 

A  charm  to  cure  insanity. 

4  Ap^reues:  who  as  Goddesses  of  gambling,  '  dioe-lovers,  mad- 
deners  of  the  mind'  (II.  2.  5),  may  have  caused  the  insanity. 

Translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  393,  and  by  Grill, 
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  21,  170. 

A  health-oharm  for  man,  woman,  and  son* 

1  2'Am  one :  a$fdm,  this,  hie,  stands  without  a  substantive.  Dr.  Grill 
suggests  that  ipdmj  haec,  this  (she-fiend),  should  be  read.  The  htt/heU : 
the  father,  the  chief  of  the  household.  The  ihe-ftend:  Grdkt.  See  II.  9.  ). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  113.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  SOT 

Knowing  the  way  do  thou  untie  the  nooses  of  the 
she-fiend :  l«t  all  the  Gods  approve  thee. 

2  Rend  thou  the  bonds  of  these  asunder,  Agni!  the 

threefold  noose  whereby  the  three  were  fastened. 
Knowing  the  way  untie  the  she-fiend's  nooses  :  free 
all,  the  son,  the  father,  and  the  mother. 

3  The  elder  brother's  bonds,  still  left  unwedded,  fetter- 

ed in  every  limb  and  bound  securely. 
Loose  these,  for  they  are  bonds  for  loosing  :  Piishan, 
turn  woes  away  upon  the  babe-destroyer. 

HYMN  CXIII. 

This  sin  the  Gods  wiped  off  and  laid  on  Trita, 
and  Trita  wiped  it  off  on  human  beings. 

Thence  if  the  female  fiend  hath  made  thee  captive, 
the  Gods  by  prayer  shall  banish  her  and  free  thee. 

2  Enter  the  particles  of  light  and  vapours,  go  to  the 

rising  fogs  or  mists,  O  Evil ! 
Hence!  vanish  in  the  foams  of  rivers.    Pilshan,  wipe 
woes  away  upon  the  babe-destroyer  I 

3  Stored    in   twelve  separate  places  lies   what   Trita 

hath  wiped  away,  the  sins  of  human  beings. 
Thence  if  the  female  fiend  hath  made  thee  captive, 
the  Gods  by  prayer  shall  banish  her  and  free  thee. 

%  Ofiktie:  father,  mother,  and  son. 

3  PiUhan;  as  the  Qod  who  cherishes  and  multiplies  life.  Bahe- 
detProyer :  the  fiend  who  kills  the  unborn  babe.  See  II.  25.  4. 

Translated  by  liudwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  469,  and  by  Grill, 
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  15,  171. 

A  charm  to  banish  the  fiend  Qr&ht 

1  Trita:  the  mysterious  being  to  whom  unpleasant  things  are 
consigned.  See  V.  1.  1. 

3  Trita's  repository  may  be  compared  to  Milton's  limbo  (Paradise 
Ijost,  III.  490)  into  which  follies  and  vanities  *  upwhirled  aloft  Fly 
o'er  the  backside  of  the  world  far  off.' 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  444,  and  by  Grill,  Hun- 
4ert  iiieder,  pp.  15,  17L  « 


Digitized  by 


Google 


308  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  CXIV. 

Whatever  God-provoking  virrong   we   priesta  bave 

done,  O  Deities, 
Therefrom  do  ye  deliver  us,  Adityas  I  by  the  right 

of  Law. 

2  Here  set  us  free,  O  holy  ones,  Adityas,  by  the  right 

of  Law, 
When  striving,  bringing  sacriiiee,  we  failed  to  offer 
it  aright. 

3  With  ladle  full  of  fatness  we,  worshippers,  pouring 

holy  oil, 
Striving,  have  failed,  O  atl  ye  Gods,  against  our  will,, 
to  offer  it. 

HYMN  CXV. 

Whatever  wroag  we  wittingly  or  in  our  ignorance 

have  done, 
Do  ye  deliver  us  therefrom,  O  all  ye  Gods,  of  one 

accord. 

2  If  I,  a  sinner,  when  awake  or  sleeping  have  commit- 

ted sin, 
Free  me  therefrom  as  from  a  stake,  from  present  and 
from  future  guilt. 

3  As  one  unfastened    from  a  stake,   or  cleansed  by 

bathing  after  toil. 
As  butter  which  the  sieve  hath  cleansed,  so  all  shall 
purge  me  from  the  sin. 

A  prayer  asking  pardon  for  faults  and  errors  in  the  performance 
of  sacrifice. 

1  We  prieits :  devdsas  instead  of  d4vd$as  of  the  text ;  literally,  we 
gods.  See  III.  3.2;  10.  2. 

3  To  offer  it :  in  the  proper  manner. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  443,  and  by  QriU,  H.  Lv 
pp.  45,  172. 

A  prayer  asking  pardon  for  sin. 

Translated  by  Ludwig^  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  443,  and  by  Qrill  H. 
U  pp.  46,  172. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SFMN^U.]  TEE  ATEARVA-VEDA,  309 

HYMN  CXVI. 

The  wealth  which  husbandmen  aforetime,  digging,  like 
men  who  find  their  food  with  knowledge,  buried, 

This  to  the  King,  Vivasv&n's  son,  I  offer.  Sweet  be 
our  food  and  fit  for  sacrificing ! 

2  May  he,  Vaivasvata,  prepare  our  portion.     May  he 

whose  share  is  mead  with  mead  besprinkle 
Our  sin  in  hasty  mood  against  our  mother,  or  guilt 
whereby  a  sire  is  wronged  and  angered. 

3  Whether  this  sin  into  our  heart  hath  entered  regard- 

ing mother,  father,  son  or  brother. 
Auspicious  be  to  us  the  zeal  and  spirit  of  air  the 
fathers  who  are  here  among  us. 

HYMN  CXVII. 
That  which    I  eat,  a  debt   which  still    is   owing, 

the  tribute  due  to  Yama,  which  supports  me, 
Thereby  may  I  be  free  from  debt,  O  Agni.    Thou 

knowest  how  to  rend  all  bonds  asunder. 

2  Still  dwelling   here    we    give   again   this   present ; 

we  send  it  forth,  the  living  from  the  living. 
Throwing  away   the   grain   whence   I   have  eaten, 
thereby  shall  I  be  free  from  debt,  O  Agni. 

3  May  we  be  free  in  this  world  and  that  yonder,  in  the 

third  world  may  we  be  unindebted. 
May  we,  debt-free,  abide  in  all  the  pathways,  in  all 
the  worlds  which  Gods  and  Fathers  visit. 


A  prayer  for  ]Mur(ioii  of  sm  again«t  mother,  father,  son,  or  brother. 

1  Wealth :  in  the  shape  of  seed-corn.    Vivasviri's  son :    Yama,  King 
of  the  Departed,  son  of  Vivasviln  or  the  Sun. 

2  FcMfOivata :  son  of  Vivasvln. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  443. 

A  prayer  for  freedom  from  Debt. 
I  Dwito  Yama ;  see  VL  1 16.  L 

3  In  the  third  world :  in  heayen.    Unindebted:    free  from  the  tax 
which  new-comers  have  to  pay.  See  III.  29.  1. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  444. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


310  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Yl. 

HYMN  CXVIII. 
If  we  have  sinned  with  both  our  hands,  desiring  to 

take  the  host  of  dice  for  our  possession. 
May  both  Apsarases  to-day  forgive  us  that  debt,  the 

fiercely-conq  uering,  fiercely-looking. 

2  Stern  viewers  of  their  sins  who  rale  the  people,  for- 

give us  what  hath  happened  as  we  gambled. 
Not  urging  us  to  pay  the  debt  we  owed  him,  he  with 
a  cord  hath  gone  to  Yama's  kingdom. 

3  My  creditor,  the  man  whose  wife  I  visit,  be,  Gods ! 

whom  I  approach  with  supplication, — 
Let  not  these  men  dominate  me  in  speaking.     Mind 
this,  ye  two  Apsarases,  Gods'  Consorts  I 

HYMN  CXIX. 
The  debt  which  I  incur,  not  gaming,  Agni  I  and,  not 

intending  to  repay,  acknowledge. 
That  may  Vaisvdnara,  the   best,  our  sovran,  carry 

away  into  the  world  of  virtue. 

2  I  cause  Vaisv&Dara  to  know,  canfe9sing   the   debt 

whose  payment  to  the  Gods  is  promised. 
He  knows  to  tear  asunder  all  these  nooses :  so  may 
we  dwell  with  him  the  gentle-minded. 

3  Vaisvftnara  the  Purifier  purge   me  when   I  oppose 

their  hope  and  break  my  promise. 
Unknowing  in  my  heart.  With  supplication,  what- 
ever guilt  there  is  in  that,  I  banish. 


A  prayer  asking  forgiveness  of  cheating  at  play. 

1  Fiercely-conquering,  fiercely-looking :  according  to  Mnir  (O.  S.  Texta^ 
V.  430)  Ugrajit  and  Ugrampasyi  are  the  names  of  the  two  Apsarases. 

2  With  a  cord :  to  keep  us  bound  as  debtors  in  the  other  world. 

3  Gods*  Consorts :  wives  of  the  celestial  Gandharvas.    See  II.  2. 3,  note. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  455. 

A  prayer  for  release  from  debts  incurred  without  intentionof  payment. 

1  Into  the  world  of  virtue  :  not  imputing  my  action  to  me  as  a  fault. 

2  Nooses:  bonds  of  debt. 

3  Their  hopes:  my  creditors'  hopes  of  payment. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  442. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


titUN  121.]  fas  ATUARYA-YEDA.  811 

HYMN  CXX. 

If  we  have  injured  Air,  or  Earth,  or  Heaven,  if  we 
have  wronged  our  Mother  or  our  Father, 

May  Agni  Grftrhapatya  here  absolve  us,  and  bear  us 
up  into  the  world  of*  virtue. 

2  Earth  is  our    Mother,   Aditi  our  birth-place:    our 
brother  Air  save  us  from  imprecation ! 
Dyaus,  Father,  save  us,  from  the  world  of  Fathers ! 
My  world  not  lost,  may  1  approach  my  kindred. 
8  There  where  our  virtuous  friends,  who  left  behind 
them  their  bodily  infirmities,  are  happy, 
Free  from  distortion  of  the  limbs  and  lameness,  may 
we  behold,  in  heaven,  our  sons  and  patents. 

HYMN  CXXI. 

Si^EBADiNO  them  out,  untie  the  snares  that  hold  us, 

Varupa's  bonds,  the  upper  and  the  lower. 
Drive  from  us  evil  dream,  drive  off  misfortune ;  then 

let  us  go  into  the  world  of  virtue. 
2  If  thou  art  bound  with  cord,  or  tied  to  timber,  fixt 

in  the  earth,  or  by  a  word  imprisoned. 
Our  Agni  G&rhapatya  here  shall  free  thee,  and  lead 

thee  up  into  the  world  of  virtue. 

A  prayer  for  fcn^giveiiess  of  sins  and  for  felicity  hereafter. 

1  Agni  Odrhapatj/a :  the  saored  fire  perpetually  maintained  by  a 
householder  (jgrthapaH)^  received  from  his  father  and  transmitted  to 
his  son. 

2  ify  Ufortd:  my  home  in  heayen. 

3  Compare  III.  28.  5.  sqq« 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  442,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert 
Ueder,  72^  123.  See  also  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  pp.  41,  299,  306. 

A  prayer  for  felicity  in  the  other  world. 

1  Untie :  addressed  to  Agni  G&rhapatya,  the  deity  of  th*;  hoils^ 
holder's  saored  fire. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


312  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI. 

3  The  two   auspicious   stars   whose    name   b    called 

Releasers  have  gone  up. 
Send  Amrit  hither,  let  it  come  freeing  the  captive 
from  bis  bonds ! 

4  Open  thyself,  make  room :  from  bonds  thou  shalt 

release  the  prisoner. 
Freed,  like  an  infant  newly  born,  dwell  in  all  path* 
ways  where  thou  wilt. 

HYMN  CXXII. 
This  portion  I  who  understand  deliver  to  Visvakar- 

man  first-born  son  of  Order. 
So  may  we  follow  to  the  end,  unbroken,  beyond  old 

age,  the  thread  which  we  have  given. 

2  This  long-drawn  thread  some  follow  who  have  oflTer- 

ed  in  ordered  course  oblation  to  the  Fathers : 
Some,  oflfering  and  giving  to  the  friendless,  if  they 
can  give :  herein  they  find  their  heaven. 

3  Stand  on  my   side  and  range    yourselves  in  order, 

ye  two !  The  faithful  reach  this  world  of  Svarga. 
When  your  dressed  food  hath  been  bestowed  on  Agni, 
to  guard  it,  wife  and  husband,  come  together  I 

4  Dwelling  with  zeal  I  mount  in  spirit  after  the  lofty 

sacrifice  as  it  departeth. 

3  Releasers:  see  II.  8.  1. 

4  In  the  first  line  Amrit,  the  Water  of  Life,  is  addressed,  and  i^ 
the  second  the  person  who  is  to  be  benefited. 

Translated  by  Lndwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p  443. 

A  prayer  for  felicity  in  the  other  world. 

1  Vi^vakarman :  the  Omnific ;  the  architect  of  the  uniyerse,  a  deity 
closely  resembling  Prajllpati  the  Lord  of  Life  and  often  not  distingui- 
shed from  him.  The  thread  which  we  have  given :  the  thread  of  life 
which  we  hand  on  to  our  children.  *  Let  not  my  thread,  while  I 
weave  song,  be  severed,  nor  my  work's  sum,  before  the  time,  be 
flhattered'  (Rigveda  II.  28.  5). 

3  Ye  two :  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  and  his  wife. 

4  After  the  lofty  sacrifice :  sacrifices  go  to  heaven,  and  are  stored 
up  there  to  await  and  reward  their  performer  on  his  arrival.  Cf^ 
Rigveda  X.  14. 8,  and  Atharva-veda  VI.  123,  2;  XL  1. 36 ;  XVIII.  2. 30, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  123.]  TEE  ATIURVA^VEDA.  313 

Agni^  may  we,  beyond  decay,  invited,  in  the  third 
heaven,  feast  aad  enjoy  the  banquet. 

5  These   women   here,    cleansed,    purified,  and   holy, 
I  place  at  rest,  singly,  in  hands  of  Brahmans. 
May  Indra,  Marut-girt,  grant  me  the  blessing  I  long 
lor  as  I  pour  you  this  Bbation. 

HYMN  CXXIII. 

Yjb  who  are  present,  unto  you  I  offer  this  treasure 

brought  to  us  by  J&tavedas. 
Happily  will  the  sacrificer  follow :  do  ye  acknowledge 

him  in  highest  beavea. 

2  Do  ye  acknowledge  him  in  highest  heaven  :  ye  know 

the  world  here  present  in  assembly. 
In  f>eace  will  he  who  sacrifices  follow :  show  him  the 
joy  which  comes  from  pious  actions. 

3  Gods  are  the  Fathers,  and  the  Fathers  Gods.     I  am 

the  very  man  I  am. 

4  I   cook,   I   give^    I   offer   up  oblation^  From   what 

I  gave  let  me  not  be  disparted. 

5  O  King,  take  thou  thy  stand  in  heaven,  there  aIso 

Jet  that  gift  be  placed. 
Recognize,  King,  the  gift  which  vc  have  given,  and 
be  gracious,  Gx)d  j 


$  You :  Visvakarman,  Agoi,  an<}  Indra. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  432. 

A  prayer  for  felicity  in  heaven. 

1  Ye  who  are  present :  Gods  who  attend  the  sacrifice.  Follow :  to 
Jieaven,  and  enjoy  the  reward  of  his  sacrifice  there.  See  VI.  122.  4. 

5  The  joy  which  oome$  from  pious  actions :  ishtdpHrtdm  ;  see  IL 
12.  4.  note. 

5  0  King:  Tama  as  King  of  the  Departed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


m  ftiB  ttiMita  OP  {BOOK  fh 

Hymn  cxxiv. 

f^ROM  tbe  high  firmament,  yea,  ottt  of  heaven  a 
water-drop  with  dew  on  me  ilath  fallen. 

t^  Agni !  share  the  merit  of  the  pious,  with  vigour^ 
milk^  and  hjrmns  and  sacrifices^ 

2  it  is  a  fruit  if  any  tree  hath  dropped  it,  a  breathy 
if  ftom  the  sky  it  hath  descended. 
Where  it  hath  touched  my  body  or  my  garmenty 
tbence  may  the  Waters  drive  Destruction  backward. 

d  It  is  a  fragrant  ointment,  happy  fortune,  sheen  all  of 
gold,  yea,  purified  from  blefDish. 
Spread   over  us   are   all   purifications.    Defttb   and 
Malignity  shall  not  subdue  us. 

HYMN  CXXV. 

Matst  thou,  O  Tree,  be  firm  indeed  in  body,  oUf 
friend  that  furthers  us,  a  goodly  hero. 

Put  forth  thy  strength,  compact  with  thongs  of 
leather,  and  let  thy  rider  irin  all  spoils  of  battle. 

2  Its  mighty  strength  was  borrowed  from  the  heaven 
and  earth :  its  conquering  force  was  brought  from 
sovrans  of  the  wood. 
Honour  with  sacrifice  the  Car  like  Indra's  bolt,  the 
Car  girt  round  with  straps,  the  vigour  of  the 
floods. 

8  Thou  bolt  of  Indra,  vanguard  of  the  Maruts,   close 
knit  to  Varupa  and  child  of  Mitra, — 
As  such,  accepting  gifts  which  here  we  offer,  receive^ 
O  godlike  Chariot,  these  oblations. 

■  'I  i  I  I  I  I  I   1  ■!     tf 

An  Omen  from  the  sky. 

Translated  by  Ludwig^  Det  ftigveda,  Ul.  p<  408^ 

Glorification  of  a  Warchafiot. 

1  The  hymn  is  taken  from  ttigveda  VI.  47.   26 — 2f8.    0   Trtti 
ixinaspaU  ;  literally,  lord  of  the  wood  :  the  chariot. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  459. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  127.]  TUB  ATUARtAtUDA.  31* 

HYMN  CXXVI. 

SftND  forth  thy  voice  aloud  through  eatth  and  heaveti/ 
and  let  the  world  in  all  its  breadth  regard  thee. 

0  Drum,  accordant  with  the  Qods  and  Indra,  drive 
thou  afar,  jrea,  very  far,  our  foemen. 

2  Thunder  out  strength  and  fill  us  full  of  vigfotfr,  yea^ 
thunder  forth  and  drive  away  misfortunes. 
Drive  hence,  O  Drum,  drive  thou  away  mlschanceau 
Thou  art  the  fist  of  Indra,  show  thy  firmness. 

:  3  Conquer  those  yonder  and  let  these  be  victors^     Let 
the  Drum  speak  aloud  as  battle's  signal. 
Let  our  men,  winged  with  horses,  fly  together.     Liet 
our  car- warriors,  Indra !  be  triumphant 

HYMN  CXXVIL 

Of  abscess,  of  decline,  of  inflammation  of  the  eyesr^ 

O  Plant, 
Of  penetrating  pain,  thou  Herb,  kt  not  a  particle 

remain. 

2  Those  nerves  of  thine.  Consumption !  which  stand 
closely  hidden  in  thy  groin — 

1  know  the  balm  for  that  disease :  the  magic  cure  ia 
Slpudru. 

GlorifiGation  of  the  War-dram. 

1  The  hymn  is  taken,  with  varianta,  from  Rigveda  Vl.  47^  29— 3L 

3  Tho9t :  the  enemy.  The$e :  our  own  men. 

A  charm  to  banish  yarious  diseases. 

1  Abaeess:  vidradhd;  probably  the  same  as  Indradhi ;  'internaf 
abscesses  of  the  abdomen.' — ^Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  210. 
Decline:  baldsa;  see  IV.  9.  8.  I^flammcttion  of  the  eyes:  Idktta. 
Penetrating  pain :  visdlyaka, 

2  The  sick  man  is  addressed,  the  apostrophe  to  personified  Consump^ 
tion  bein.i?  parenthetical.  Sipudru :  apparently  some  unknown  tree  or 
plant.    The  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


316  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI. 

3  We  draw  from  tbee  the  piercing  pain  that  penetrates 

and  racks  thy  limbs, 
That    pierces   ^ars,   that  pierces  eyes,  the  abscess, 

and  the  heart's  disease. 
Downward  and  far  away  from  thee  we  banish  that 

unknown  decline. 

HYMN  CXXVIII. 

What  time  the  heavenly  bodies  chose  the  Weather 

Prophet  as  their  King, 
They  brought  him  favouring  weather^  and,  Let  this 

be  his  -domain,  they  said. 

2  May  we  have  weather  fair   at  noon^  may  we  have 

weather  fair  at  eve, 
Fair  weather  when  the  morning  breaks,  fair  weather 
when  the  night  is  came. 

3  Fair  weather  to  the  day  and  night,  and,  to  the  stars 

and  sun  and  moon, 
Oive    favourable    weather    thou.    King,    Weather 
Prophet,  unto  us. 

3  Unknoum  decline:  €ijfKitayakskmd ;  see  III.  11.  I. 

The  hymn,  with  exception  of  the  last  line  which  appears  to  foe  a 
later  addition,  has  been  translated,  with  much  information  regarding 
the  diseases  mentioned,  in  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  386. 

A  prayer  for  Fair  Weatlier. 

1  The  heavenly  bodies :  ndkshatrdni;  the  stars  and  constellations 
regarded  as  the  controllers  of  the  weather.  The  moon  is,  even  now, 
similarly  regarded  by  some  people.  The  Weather  Prophet :  sakadhU- 
mam;  liteiaUy  'him  of  the  dung-smoke,'  one  who  foretells  the 
weather  by  the  way  in  which  smoke  rises  from  a  fire  of  cow-dung. 
The  Sakadhdma  was  ao  old  Brihman,  who,  as  supposed  to  have  the 
power  of  foretelling  the  weather,  was  naturally  regarded  as  ita  controller. 

The  hymn  is  prescribed  in  the  Kausika-SC^tra,  XXX.  13,  as  part  of 
the  ritual  of  a  merchant  when  about  to  start  on  an  expedition.  It  has 
been  translated  and  thwou^ly  discussed  by  ProL  Bloomfield  (Ameri- 
/can  Journal  of  Philology,  VII.  pp.  484 — 488).  See  also  Weber,  Omina 
Bt  Portenta,  p.  363,  and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  353. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  130.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  317 

4  Be  worship  ever  paid  to  thee,  O  Weather  Prophet, 
King  of  Stars, 
Who  gavest  us  good  weather  in  the  evening  and  by 
night  and  day ! 

HYMN  CXXIX, 

With  fortune  of  the  Sisu  tree— with  Indra  as  my 

friend  to  aid — 
I   give   n3yself  a    happy    fate.     Fly    and   begone^ 

Malignities  t 

2  That  splendour   and  felicity    wherewith   thou  liAst 

excelled  the  trees — 
Give  me  therewith  a  happy  fate.     Fly  and  begone,, 
Malignities  ! 

3  Blind  fortune,  with  reverted  leaves  that  is  deposited 

ID  trees — 
Give  me  therewith  a  happy  fate.     Fly  and  begone^ 
Malignities. 

HYMN  CXXX. 

This  is   the   Apsarases'   love-spell,    the  conquering 

resistless  ones'. 
Send  the  spell  forth ^  ye  Deities!  Let  him  consume 

with  love  of  me. 


A  chann  to  obtain  success  and  happiness. 

1  Sim :  Dalbergia  l%su ;  commonly  spelt  Sissoo :  a  stately  timber 
tree  common  in  Bengal  and  Northern  India.  For  rapid  growth, 
beauty,  and  usefulness  few  trees  can  be  compared  with  it. 

3  With  reverted  leavu :  referring  to  the  plant  called  Apim&rga.  See 
IV.  19. 

A  woman's  love-charm. 

1  The  conquering  resistless  <mes^ :  rathajitAm  rdthajtteytndm ;  the 
words  are  hardly  explicable.  See  Grill,  who  reads  instead  arthajttdm 
artkc{jittndm,  and  translates  *  Der  altgewohnt  ausrichtigen.' 

Translated  by  Weber,  Ii^dische  Studien,  V.  p.  244,  by  Ludwig,  Der 
Rigve4a,  III.  p.  515,  and  by  Orill,  Huudert  Lieder,  pp.  58,  174. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


318  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VL 

2  I  pray,  may  he  remember  me,  think  of  me,  loving 

and  beloved. 
Send  forth  the  spell,  ye  Deities !  Let  him  consume 
with  love  of  me, 

3  That  he  may  think  of  me,  that  I  may  never,  never 

think  of  bim, 
Send  forth  the  spell,  ye  Deities  1  Let  him  consume 
with  love  of  me. 

4  Madden  him,  Maruts,  madden  him.     Madden  him, 

madden  him,  O  Air. 
Madden  him,  Agni,  madden  him.    Let  him  consume 
with  love  of  me. 

HYMN  CXXXI. 

Down  upon  thee,   from   head    to  foot,    I  draw  the 

pangs  of  longing  love. 
Send  forth  the  oharm,  ye  Deities!   Let  him  consume 

with  love  of  me. 

2  Assent  to  this,  O  Heavenly  Grace !    Celestial  Pur- 

pose, guide  it  well ! 
Send  forth  the  charm,  ye  Deities!    Let  him  consume 
with  love  of  me. 

3  If  tbou  shouldst  run  three  leagues  away,  ^ve  leagues, 

a  horse's  daily  stage. 
Thence  thou  shalt  come  to  me  again  and  be  the 
father  of  our  sons. 


A  woman's  lova-chariQ. 

2  Heavenly  Grace :  Anumati ;  Favour  of  the  Gods.  See  I.  18.  2,  note. 
Celeitial  Purpose  :  Akfiti ;  Plan  or  Intention,  personified  as  a  Goddess. 

3  Leagues :  the  ydjanam,  sometimes  regarded  as  a  distance  of  four 
or  five  miles,  is  more  correctly  eetin^ated  at  four  kro$a$  or  kos,  or  about 
eight  miles. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Tndische  Studien,  V.  p.  244,  and  by  Ghl), 
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  58,  175. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffTMN  153.]  TEE  ATHARVAVBDA.  319 

HYMN  CXXXII. 

Thb  Philter,  burning  with  the  pangs  of  yearning  love, 
vhioh  Gods  have  poured  within  the  bosom  of  the 
floods, 

That  spell  for  thee  I  heat  by  Varuoa's  decree. 

2  The  charn^  whioh,  burning  with  the  pangs  of  love, 

the  General  Gods  have  poured  within  the  bosom 
of  the  floods. 
That  spell  for  thee  I  heat  by  Vamija's  decree, 

3  The  Philter,   burning  with   the   pangs   of  longing, 

which  Indr^pl  hath  effused  within  the  waters' depth. 
That  spell  for  thee  I  heat  by  Vanji^a's  decree, 

4  The   charm,   aglow  with   longing,  whioh  Indra  and 

Agni  have  effused  within  the  bosom  of  the  floods, 
That  spell  for  thee  I  heat  by  Varupa^s  decree. 

3  The  charm   aglow   with   loQgiQg  whioh   Mitra  and 
Varu^a  have  poured  within  the  bosom  of  the  floods, 
That  spell  for  thee  I  beat  by  Varu^a's  decree. 

HYMN  CXXXIIL 

Bt  the  direction  of  that  God  we  journey,  he  will 
seek  means  to  save  and  he  will  free  us ; 

The  God  who  hath  engirt  us  with  this  Girdle,  he  who 
hath  fastened  it,  and  made  us  re^y, 

J2  Thou,  weapon  of  the  Kisbis,  art  adored  and  served 
with  sacrifiise. 
First  tasting  of  the  yotive  i^ilk,   jSone,  be  a  hero- 
slayer  thou ! 


A  woman's  love-chann. 

2  General  Gods:  the  Visve  Devas  or  All-Godg, 

Translated  by  Weber,  Inditche  Studien,  V.  p.  245. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorificatioi^  of  the  sacred  Girdle, 
)  Journey :  pursue  our  course  through  life. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


320  THE  HYMUrS  OF  IBOOK  VI, 

3  As  I  am  now  Death's  Brahmachdri  claiming  out  of 

the  living  world  a  man  for  Yama^ 
So  with  Austerity  and  Prayer  and  Fervour  I  bind 
this  Girdle  round  the  man  before  me. 

4  She  hath   become,    Faith's    daughter,   sprung  from' 

Fervour,  the  sister  of  the  world-creating  Rishis ; 
As  such,  O  Girdle,  give   us  thought  and   vvisdona^ 
give  us  religious  zeal  and  mental  vigour. 

5  Thou  whom  primeval  Kishis  girt  about  them,  they 

who  made  the  world, 
As  such  do  thou  encircle  me,  O  Girdle,  for  long  days- 
of  life, 

HYMN  CXXXIV. 

This  Thundeibolt  shall  take  its  fill  of  Order,  scare 
life  away  and  overthrow  the  kingdom, 

Tear  necks  in  pieces,  rend  the  napes  asunder,  evei^ 
as  the  Lord  of  Might  the  neck  of  Vritra. 

2  Down,   down   beneath  the  conquerors,   let  him    not 

rrse,  concealed  in  earth,  but  lie  down-snritten  with 
the  bolt. 

3  Seek  out  the  fierce  oppressor,   yea,   strike   only   tbe 

oppressor  dead. 
Down  on  the    fierce  oppressor's,  bead  strike  at  full 
length,  O  Thunderbolt  I 

3  Death's  Brahmachdri  :  a  religious  student  endowed  with  power  by 
Mtityu,  the  God  of  Death. 

4  She :  the  girdle.    World^ectiing  Riskis:  see  III.  28.  I ;  IV.  I.  2. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  432. 

A  priest's  prayer  for  power  to  punish  wrong-doers. 

1  This  Thunderbolt:  this  sacrifice,  which  when  employed  against 
enemies  is  as  powerful  a  weapon  as  the  bolt  of  Indra.  So  Milton 
speaks  of  *  sermons,  prayers,  and  fulminations.'  and  G«orge  Herbert 
calls  Prayer  *  reversM  thunder.*     Lard  of  Might :  Indra. 

2  Him :  the  wicked  man. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  II L  p.  449* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN 1S7.]  rnS  ATBASriVSDA.  821 

HYMN  OXXXV. 
Whatb^SR  I  eat  I  turn  to  strength,  and  thus  I  grasp 

the  Thunderbolt, 
Hending  the  shoulders  of  that  man  as  Indra  shattered 

Vtitra*8  neck 

2  I  drink  together  what  I  drink,  even  as  the  sea  that 

swallows  all. 
Drinking  the  life-breath  of  that  man,  we  drink  that 
man  and  swallow  him* 

3  Whate'er  I  eat  I  swallow  up,  even  as  ihe  sea  that 

swallows  all. 
Swallowing  that  man's  vital  breath,  we  swallow  him 

completely  up. 

HYMN  CXXXVI. 
Born  from  the  bosom  of  wide  Earth  the  Goddess, 

godlike  Plant,  art  thou  : 
So  we,  Nitatnt !  dig  thee  up  to  strengthen  and  fix 

fast  the  hair» 

2  Make  the  old  firm,  make  new  hair  spring,  lengthen 

what  has  already  grown. 

3  Thy  hair  where  it  ia  falling  off,  and  with  the  roots  is 

torn  away, 
I  wet  and  sprinkle  with  the  Plant,  the  remedy  for 

all  disease. 

HYMN  CXXXVII. 
Ths     Plant    which     Jamadagni   dug  to   make   his 

daughter's  locks  grow  long, 

A  priest^B  fulmination  against  an  enemy. 

A  charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair. 

1  ifitatnl :  an  unidentified  plant  with  deep  roots,  and  therefore  sttp' 
poeed  to  strengthen  the  roots  of  the  hair. 

Translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  68,  and  by  Grill, 
JBLundert  Lieder,  pp.  50,  176. 

A  charm  to  promote  the  growth  (rf  hair. 

1  The  Plant:  Nitatnl;  see  VI.  136.  1.  Jamadagni:  see  II.  32.  3 
Tftahavya:  an  ancient  Rishi,  the  seer  of  Rigveda  VI.  15,  here  regard- 
ed as  a  magician  as  Virgil  was  in  the  Middle  Ages.  Aeita :  see  I.  14.  4 

21 


Digitized  by 


Google 


322  TBE  HTUNS  OF .  [BOOK  FL 

This  same  hath  Vitahavya  brought  to  us  from  Asita^s 
abode. 

2  They  might  be  measured  with  a  rein,   meted  with 

both  extended  arms. 
Let  the  black  locks  spring  thick  and  strong  and  grow 
like  reeds  upon  thy  head. 

3  Strengthen  the  roots,  prolong  the  points,  lengthen 

the  middle  part,  O  Plant. 
Let  the  black  locks  spring  thick  and  strong  and  grow 
like  reeds  upon  thy  head. 

HYMN   CXXXVIIL 
O  Plant,  thy  fame  is  spread  abroad  as  best  of  all  the 

herbs  that  grow. 
Unman  for  me  to-day  this  man  that  he  may  wear  the 

horn  of  hair. 

2  Make  him  a  eunuch  with  a  horn,  set  thou  the  crest 

upon  his  head. 
Let  Indra  with  two  pressing-stones  deprive  him  of 
his  manly  strength. 

3  I  have  unmanned  thee,  eunuch !  yea,  impotent!  made 

thee  impotent,  and  robbed  thee,  weakling  I  of  thy 
strength. 
Upon  his  head  we  set  the  horn,  we  set  the  branching 
ornament. 

2  Th^:  the  lady's  locks. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  512,  by  Zimmer,  Altiii' 
disches  Leben,  p.  68,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  50,  176. 

A  woman's  imprecation  on  her  unfaithful  lover. 

1  The  horti  of  hair :  the  opasdy  meaning  a  horn-like  arrangement  or 
ornament  of  the  hair  :  here  reganled  as  a  mark  of  effeminacy. 

2  The  crtU  :  kurtra  ;  apparently  the  same  as  the  opa^.  See  V.  31.  2. 

3  The  horn :  hdmba ;  another  word  with  the  same  meaning  as  opafi 
and  kurfra.  See  Geldner,  Yedische  Studien,  pp.  130 — 132. 

For  stanzas  4  and  5  see  Appendix. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,   V.  p. 
246,  and  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  470. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


»TMir  140.]  itBE  ATSABVAVBDA.  31d 

HYMN  OXXXIX. 

Thou  hast  grown  up,  a  source  of  joy  to  bless  me  with 
prosperitv.  _ 

A  hundred  are  thy  tendrils,  three-and-thirty  thy 
descending  shoots. 

With  this  that  bears  a  thousand  leaves  I  dry  thy 
heart  and  wither  it^ 

2  Let  thy  heart  wither  for  my  love  and  let  thy  mouth 

be  dry  for  me. 
Parch  and  dry  up  with  longing,  go  with  lips  that 
love  of  me  hath  dried. 

3  Drive  us  together,  taWny  1  fair  I  a  go-between  who 

wakens  love. 
Drive  us  together,  him  and  me^  and  give  us  both  one 
heart  and  mind. 

4  Even  as  his  mouth  is  parched  who  finds  no  water  for 

his  burning  thirst, 
So  parch  and  burn  with  longing,  go  With  lips  that 
,     love  of  me  hath  dried. 
6  Even  as  the  Mungoose   bites  and  rends  and  then 
restores  the  wounded  snake, 
So  do  thou,  mighty  one,  restore  the  fracture  of  our 
severed  love. 

HYMN  C:^L. 

Two  tigers  have  grown  up  who  long  to  eat  the 
mother  and  the  sire : 

T  ■  I  ■  •        ^ 

A  woman's  love-charm. 

1  A  source  of  joy :  nya$ttJUt;  the  meanmg  of  the  word   is  unknown. 

5  Re8tore$the  wounded  snake :  the  mungoose  [Viverra  Ichneumon]  is 
t>opularly  believed  to  protect  itself,  and  cure  its  woimds  received  in 
encounters  with  snakes,  by  means  of  a  medicinal  plant ;  but  it  is  not 
now  credited  with  the  chivalrous  generosity  here  ascribed  to  it. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Indisohe  Studien,  V.  p.  247,  and  by  Ludwig, 
Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  515. 

A  blessing  on  a  child's  first  two  teeth. 

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  49,  176,  and  by  Zimmer, 
A.  I.  L.  p.  321. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


331  TBS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI 

Soothe,  Brahma^aspati,  ikad  thou,  O  J&tavedas,  botl^ 
these  teeth. 

2  Let  rice  and  barley  be  your  food,  eat  also  beans  and 

sesamum. 
This  is  the  share  allotted  you^  to  be  your  portion,  ye 
two  Teeth.  Harm  not  your  mother  and  your  sire. 

3  Both  fellow  teeth  have  been  invoked,  gentle  and 

bringing  happiness. 
Elsewhither  let  the  fierceness  of  your  nature  turn  away, 
0  Teetii !  Harm  not  your  mother  or  your  sire* 

HYMN  CXLI. 

VAtu  collected  these:  to  find  their  sustenance  be 

Tvashtar's  care : 
May  tndra  bless  and  comfort  them,  and  Rudra  look 

that  they  increase. 

2  Take  thou  the  iron  axe  and  make  a  pair  by  marks 

upon  their  ears. 
This  sign  the  Asvins  have   impressed:    let  these 
increase  and  multiply.  * 

3  Even  as  Qoda  and  Asuras,  even  as  mortal  men  have 

dpne, 
Do  ye,  that  these  may  multiply  in  thousands,  Asvins  I 
make  the  mark. 

HYMN  CXLII. 

Spring  high,  O  Barley,  and  become  much  through 
thine  own  magnificence : 

A  Ueaeing  on  oattle. 

1    Vdpu  collected  theie :  d.  II.  26.  1.   Tvashtar's :  as  the  God  who 
multiplies  catUe. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  469. 

A  prayef  for  a  plentiful  harvest. 

1  Burst  all  the  vessels :  fill  all  the  lai*ge  earthen  jars  in  which  the 
grain  is  stored  till  they  burst  with  the  weight 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  463,  by  Zimmer,  Alt- 
hidisches  Leben,  p.  237,  and  by  QrUl,  Huudert  Lieder,  pp.  66,  177. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  142.]  THE  ATEARVAVBDA.  825 

Burst  all  the  vessels ;  let  the  bolt  from  heaven  forbear 
to  strike  thee  down. 

2  As  we  invite  and  call  to  thee.  Barley,  a  God  who 

heareth  us, 
Kaise  thyself  up  like  heaven  on  high  and  be  exhaust* 
less  as  the  sea« 

3  Exhaustless  let  thine  out-turns  be,  exhaustless  be 

thy  gathered  heaps, 
Exhaustless  be  thy  givers,  and  exhaustless  those 
who  eat  of  thee. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  VII. 


HYMN  I. 

Thit  who  by  thought  have  guided  all  that  Speech 

hath  best^  or  they   who  with  their   heart  have 

uttered  words  of  truth. 
Made   stronger  by   the   strength   which   the  third 

prayer  bestows,  have  by  the   fourth  prayer  learned 

the  nature  of  the  Cow. 
2  Well  knows  this  son  his  sire,  he  knows  his  mother 

well :  he  hath  been  son,  and  he  hath  been  illiberal. 
He  bath  encompassed  heaven,  and  air's  mid-realm, 

and  sky :  he  hath  become  this  AU  ;  he  hath  come 

nigh  to  us. 

This  introduotory  hymn  ia  a  glorification  of  the  powqr  of  prayer 
.  and  of  Agni. 

1  Or :  not  disjunctive  here,  both  clauses  referring  to  the  same  per^ 

sons.  Third fourth  prayer :  *  mystic   formulas  of  heavenly 

Prayer.* — Victor  Henry.  The  nature  of  the  Cow  :  ndma  (name)  mean- 
ing here  mystic  character,  essence,  or  nature.  The  Cow  is  Yak,  Voice, 
Speech,  especially  Prayer.  Cf .  *  The  Milch-cow's  earliest  name  they 
comprehended'  (Bigveda  IV.  1.  16). 

2  This  son:  Agni,  the  offspring  of  Heaven  and  Earth.  Illiberal: 
this  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  piinarmaghaf^  in  the  only  other  Vedic 
hymn  (Atharva-veda  V.  11.  2)  in  which  it  occurs,  and  it  may  refer 
to  Agni's  flight  from  his  sacrificial  duties  (RV.  I.  65.  1 ;  X.  46.  2.  3) 
and  general  reluctance  to  appear,  that  is,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
fire  by  means  of  the  wooden  drill.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  gives 
an  opposite  meaning  to  the  word  in  this  place,  explaining  it,  in  accord- 
ance with  an  Indian  commentator,  not  as  '  illiberal,'  but  as  ^  repeated- 
ly granting  gifts,'  which  is  Agni's  usual  character. 

The  hymns  of  this  Book  have  been  translated  and  commented  by 
M.  Victor  Henry  (J.  Maisonneuve:  Paris.  1892).  Professor  Ludwig 
has  translated  some  thirty-five  hymns  in  Der  Kigveda,  III.,  and  Dr. 
Grill  fifteen  in  his  Hundert  lieder  des  Atharva-veda. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


328  THE  ETMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

HYMN  II. 

Invoke  for  us,  proclaim  in  sundry  places,  the  kins- 
man of  the  Gods,  our  sire  Atharvan, 

His  mother's  germ,  his  father's  breath,  the  youthful^ 
who  with  his  mind  hath  noticed  this  oblation. 

HYMN  III. 

He,  in  this  manner  showing  forth  his  exploits — for 
he,  bright  God,  is  our  broad  way  for  choosing — 

Hose  up  to  meet  his  stay,  the  mead's  best  portion : 
of  his  own  self  he  sent  his  body  forward. 

HYMN  IV. 

With  thine  eleven  teams,  to  aid  our  wishes,  yea, 
with  thy  two-and- twenty  teams,  O  V&yu, 

With  all  thy  three-and-thirty  teams  for  drawing, 
here  loose  these  teams,  thou  who  art  prompt  to 
listen ! 

Praise  of  Atharvan. 

1  Atharvan, :  cf.  IV.  1.  7.  Atharvan,  as  the  disooverer  of  fire  and 
the  earliest  fire-priest,  is  the  father  of  Agni,  and  in  this  place  is  iden- 
tified with  him.  The  youthful :  a  frequently  oociirring  epithet  of  Agni 
as  being  oontinually  reproduced. 

Praise  of  Agni  as  the  Sun. 

1  tits  stay :  Soma  is  called  the  most '  excellent  pillar  of  the  heavens,' 
and  <  sustainer  of  the  sky '  (Rigveda  IX.  108.  16,  and  109.  6). 

According  to  the  Kaufika-Si^tra,  XV.  11,  the  stanza  is  to  be  em- 
ployed in  a  charm  for  victory  in  battle,  the  King  and  his  charioteer 
being  mounted  on  a  new  car. 

A  hymn  to  V4yu  the  God  of  the  Wind. 

1  Teams :  viyiighhis ;  used  instead  of  (according  to  the  St.  P. 
Dictionary  a  false  reading  for)  nty^bhis  the  usual  word  in  the  Rig- 
veda for  the  horses  of  V&yu,  *  the  viewless  coursers  of  the  wind.' 
To  aid  our  mshes :  to  help  us  to  success.  The  recitation  of  the  stanaa 
three  times  concludes  the  ceremony  of  blessing  the  horses  (Kau^kft-j 
Satra  XLI.  26).  See  Victor  Henry's  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


STMN  5.]  THE  ATnARVA-YEDA.  329 

HYMN  V. 

The  Gods  adored  the  Sacrifice  with  worship :  these 

were  the  statutes  of  primeval  ages. 
Those  mighty  ones  attamed  the  cope  of  heaven,  there 

where  the  SAdhyas,  Gods  of  old,  are  dwelling. 

2  Sacrifice  was,  was  manifest  among  us :  it  sprang  to 

life  and  then  in  time  grew  stronger. 
Then  it  became  the  deities'  lord  and  ruler :  may  it 
bestow  on  us  abundant  riches. 

3  Where  the  Gods  worshipped  Gods  with  their  obla- 

tion, worshipped  immortals  with  immortal  spirit, 
There  in  the  loftiest  heaven  may  we  be  happy,  and 
look  upon  that  light  when  S^rya  rises. 

4  With  their  oblation,  Purusha,  the  Gods  performed  a 

sacrifice. 
A  sacrifice  more  potent  still  they  paid  with  the 
invoking  hymn. 

5  With  dog  the  Gods,  perplexed,  have  paid  oblation, 

and  with  cow's  limbs  in  sundry  sacrinces. 
Invoke  for  us,  in  many  a  place  declare  him  who  with 
his  mind  hath  noticed  this  our  worship. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  Sacrifice. 

1  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  a  change  in  the  meaning,  from  Rigveda 
I.  164.  50.  It  appears  also  in  BY.  X.  90.  16.  Sddhyaz  :  meaning  pro- 
bably, '  those  who  are  to  be  propitiated.'  According  to  Y&ska  '  the 
Gods  whose  dwelling-place  is  the  sky.'  In  the  Amarahosha  they  are 
named  among  the  minor  deities,  but  they  seem  rather  to  be  the  most 
ancient  of  the  Gods. 

4  With  their  oblation^  Pwu^a :  see  Rigveda  X.  90,  the  Purusha- 
Sdkta  or  hymn  which  describes  the  sacrifice  of  Purusha,  embodied  spirit, 
or  Man  personified  and  regarded  as  the  soul  and  original  source  of  the 
universe,  the  personal  and  life-giving  principle  in  all  animated  beings ; 
a  pantheistic  hymn  which  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  harmonize  the 
two  ideas  of  sacrifice  and  creation. 

5  With  dog :  no  legend  referring  to  this  extraordinary  sacrifice  has 
Burvived.  Perplexed:  it  seems  impossible  that  mtigdhds  (perplexed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


330  THE  B7MNS  OF  {BOOK  TIL 

HYMN  VI. 

Aditi  is  the  sky,  and  air's  mid-region,  Aditi  is  the 

father,  son,  and  mother, 
Aditi  all  the  Gods  and  the  Five  Nations^  Aditi  what 
is  now  and  what  is  future. 
2   We  call  for  help  the  Queen  of  Law  and  Order,  great 
mother  of  all  those  whose  ways  are  righteous. 
Far-spread,  unwasting,  stroog  in  her  dominion,  Aditi 
wisely  leading,  well  protecting. 
3  Sinless  inay  we  ascend,  for  weal,  the  vessel,  rowed 
with  good  oars,  divine,  that  never  leaketh, 
Earth,    our  strong  guard,     incomparaUe    Heaven^ 
Aditi  wisely  leading,  well  protecting. 
4  Let  us  bring  hither,  in  pursuit  of  riches,  Aditi  with 
our  word,  the  mighty  mother, 
Het*  in  whose  lap  the  spacious  air  is  lying:  may  she 
afford  us  triply -guarding  shelter ! 

infatuated)  can  be  the  right  reading  here.  A  substantive  in  the  instru- 
mental case  is  required  by  the  context.  M.  Victor  Henry  reads  mUr- 
dhnd^  with  the  head,'  that  is,  with  the  horse's  head  given  to  Dadbyach^ 
which,  according  to  M.  Bergaigne  (Religion  V^que^  II.  p^  458)  sym- 
bolizes Agni  or  Soma.  *  That  mighty  deed  of  yours,  for  gain,  O  heroes^ 
as  thunder  heraldeth  the  rain,  I  publish,  when  by  the  horse's  head 
Atharvan's  offspring  Dadhyaoh  made  known  to  you  the  Soma's  sweet- 
ness' (Rigveda  I.  116.  12).  According  to  M.  Victor  Henry's  suggested 
reading  the  translation  would  be :  With  head,  with  dog  the  Goda 
have  paid  oblation ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  line  ia  still  obscure.  Himz 
probably  Agni. 

A  prayer  to  Aditi  for  help  and  protection. 

1  Aditi :  Infinity  personified.  See  I.  9.  1,  note.  The  stansa,  takes 
from  Rigveda  I.  89.  10,  is  used  in  the  ritual  and  in  charms  and  in«anr 
tations. 

2  The  stanza  is  employed  in  the  benediction  of  boatSj  in  the  prepa- 
ration of  the  domestic  fire,  in  blessing  the  marriage  bed,  in  funerals^ 
and  in  other  ceremonies.  See  M.  Victor  Henryla  note. 

3  Taken,  with  a  variant,  from  Rigveda  X.  63.  10.  According  to 
S4yana,  the  divine  vessel  is  a  metaphorical  expression  for  sacrifice ; 
but  Aditi,  including  heaven  and  earth,  is  intended. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  533w 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYMN  8]  THE  ATHARVA-TBDA.  331 

HYMN  VII. 

I  HAYB  sung  praise  to  Diti's  sons  and  Aditi's,  those 

very  lofty  and  invulnerable  Gods. 
For  far  within  the  depths  of  ocean  is  their  home,  and 

in  the  worship  paid  them  none  exoelleth  these. 

HYMN  VIII. 

Go  forward  on  thy  way  from  good  to  better  :  Brihas- 
pati  precede  thy  steps  and  guide  thee ! 

Place  this  man  here,  within  this  earth's  enclosure, 
afar  from  foes  with  all  his  men  about  him. 


Praise  of  the  Adityas. 

1  The  poet  gives  two  mothers,  Diti  and  Aditi,  to  the  Adityas.  The 
former  is  a  personification,  distinguished  by  no  special  character,  and 
miknown  to  the  poets  of  the  ttigveda.  She  is  mentioned  again  in  XL 
3.  4;  XV.  6.  7,  and  18.  i.  The  name  is  evolved  from  Aditi  in  the  same 
way  as  Sura,  a  God,  is  from  Asura,  a  demon.  Thou :  I  omit  to  notice 
dva  which  in  this  place  is  unintelligible.  M.  Victor  Henry  suggests 
ndvOy  nine,  although  the  number  of  the  Adityas  is  at  most  eight. 
Jnvulnerahle :  I  can  make  nothing  of  the  anarmdndm  of  the  text  which, 
xeaA  an-armdndm^  would  mean  '  free  from  ophthalmia.'  M.  Henry 
divides  the  word  a-narmdndTn^  a  word  of  his  own  coinage,  which  might 
signify  '  who  do  not  sport  and  tiifle.'  I  think  one  may  as  well  change 
the  word  into  atMrvdrndm  (unscathed,  unassailed,  invulnerable)  which 
is  frequently  applied  to  the  Gods  in  the  Rigveda.  Ocean :  the  sea  of  air, 
M.  Henry  translates :  '  for  their  mysterious  essence  is  that  of  th« 
celestial  Oceap,' 

Godspeed  to  a  departing  traveller. 

1  Place :  addressed  to  Brihaspati, 

The  hymn  appears,  with  variations,  in  the  Aitare3ra-Bdlhmana,  1.  X 
13,  as  an  address  by  the  Hotar  to  the  ^acrificer,  the  words  '  from 
good  to  better'  meaning  from  this  world  to  heaven.  By  the  second  line 
the  Hotar  makes  the  Soma  remain  in  the  sacrificial  court,  and  expels 
the  enemy  who  would  iiymre  the  sacrificer. 

Trimsli^ted  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p,  43). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


$32  THB  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

HYMN  IX. 
PCrsHAiff  was  boro  to  move  on  distant  pathways,  on 

roads  remote  from  earthy  remote  from  heaven. 
To  both  most  lovely  plaoes  of  assembly  he  travels 

and  returns  with  perfect  knowledge. 

2  Piishan  knows  all  these  realms :  may  he  conduct  us 

by  ways  that  are  most  free  from  fear  and  danger. 
Giver  of  blessings,  glowing,  all  heroic,  may  he  the 
wise  and  watchAil  go  before  us. 

3  We  are  thy  praisers  here,  O  Piishan :  never  let  us 

be  injured  under  thy  protection. 

4  From  out  the  distance,  far  and  wide,  may  Fftshan 

stretch  his  right  hand  forth. 
Let  him  drive  back  our  lost  to  us,  let  us  return  with 

what  is  lost. 

HYMN  X. 
That  breast  of  thine,  exhaustless  and  delightful,  good 

to  invoke,  beneficent,  free  giver. 
Wherewith  thou  feedest  all  things  that  are  choicest, 

bring  that,  Sarasvati,  that  we  may  drain  it. 


A  prayer  for  protection  and  recovery  of  lost  property. 

1  F^liAkaan :  as  the  Sim,  allnseeing,  guide  of  traveUera,  and  guardian 
of  cattle  and  property  in  general.  B<Uk  places  of  assembly :  heaven  and 
earth.  Stansaa  1  and  2  are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  17.  6,  5. 

3  Protection :  or  dominion.  This  and  the  following  stanza  are 
taken  from  Rigveda  VI.  54,  9,  la 

A  prayer  for  the  favour  of  SarasvatS. 

Exliaustless :  samyiir^  pursuing  the  hare,  is  unintelligible  here,  and 
I  translate  the  reading  sasayd  of  the  Rigveda  hymn.  But  see  M. 
Henry's  note. 

The  stanza,  taken,  with  this  variant,  from  Rigveda  I.  164.  49,  is 
used  to  soothe  an  infant  seized  by  Jambha,  that  is,  probably,  when 
teething.  See  II.  4.  3,  and  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


aritK  12.1  ^^^  ATBARVA'VSDA.  33* 

HYMN  XI. 

That  far-spread  thunder,  sent  from  thee,  which 
Cometh  on  all  this  world,  a  high  celestial  signal — 

Strike  not,  O  (Jod,  our  growing  corn  with  lightning, 
nor  kill  it  with  the  burning  rays  of  Siirya. 

HYMN  Xll. 

In  concord  may  Praj&pati's  two  daughters,  Gathering 

and  Assembly,  both  protect  me. 
May  every  man  I  meet  respect  and  aid  me.     Fair 

be  my  words,  O  Fathers,  at  the  meetings. 

2  We  know  thy  name,   O  Conference:  thy   name   is 

interchange  of  talk. 
Let  all  the  company  who  join  the  Conference  agree 
with  me. 

3  Of  these  men  seated  here  I  make  the  splendour  and 

the  lore  mine  own. 
Indra,  make  me   conspicuous  in  all   this  gathered 
company. 

4  Whether  your  thoughts  are  turned  away,  or  bound 

and  fastened  here  or  there. 
We  draw  them  hitherward  again:  let  your  mind 
firmly  rest  on  me. 


A  prayer  to  protect  com  ftom  lightning  and  drought. 

0  God:  addressed  to  Indra. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  III.  463,  and  by  Grill,  66,  178. 

A  prayer  or  charm  for  influence  at  deliberative  and  religious  meet- 
ings. 

1  Gathering:  sahhS;  meeting  of  the  people  of  a  village.     Assemblff: 
idmttis  ;  a  congregation  for  sacrificial  and  religious  purposes. 

2  Conference :  or  Gathering. 

Translated  by  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  Y.  439,  by  Ludwig,  III.   253,   and 
by  Grill,  15,  178.  See  also  Zimmer,  Altindisch^  Leben,  p.  173. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


534  THE  BTMNS  OP     ,  [BOOH:  Vll 

HYMN   XIII. 

As  the  Sun,  rieiog,  takeih  to  himself  the  brightness 

of  the  stars, 
So  I  assume  the  glory  of  women  and  men  mine 

enemies. 
2  All  ye  among  my  rivals  who  behold  me  as  I  come 

to  you, 
I  seize  the  glory  of  my  foes  as  the  Sun,  rising,  theirs 

who  sleep. 

HYMNS  XIV. 

I  PRAISE  this  God,  parent  of  heaven  and  earth,  ex-* 
ceeding  wise,  possessed  of  real  energy,  giver  of 
treasure,  thinker  dear  to  all, 

2  Whose   splendour   is  sublime,     whose  light  shone 

brilliant  in  creation,  who,  wise,  and  golden-handed, 
in  his  beauty  made  the  sky. 

3  As  thou,  God!  quickening,  for  our  ancient  father, 

sentest  him  height  above  and  room  about  him, 
So  unto  us,  O  Savitar,  send  treasures,  abundant,  day 
by  day,  in  shape  of  cattle. 

A  charnoL  to  win  superiority  over  foes  and  rivals. 

2  Theirs  who  sleep :  the  comparison  or  illustration  is  vague.  The 
meaning  is,  probably,  as  M.  Henry  says :  I  have  surprised  my  rivals 
by  taking  their  glory  to  myself  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  sur- 
prises late  sleepers. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  III.  p.  241,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder, 
pp.  23,  179. 

A  prayer,  for  prosperity,  to  Savitar  as  the  Vivifier  or  Generator. 

1  Stanzas  1  and  2  are  taken  from  S&maveda  I.  V.  ii.  3. 8.  This  God: 
Savitar,  the  Sun.  Parent :  savitdram.  Of  heaven  and  earth :  onyos  == 
onios  ;  literally,  two  bowls  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma  juice, 
and,  figuratively,  heaven  and  earth  regarded  as  two  hemispheres.  In 
his  beauty :  kripd,  as  suggested  in  Prof.  Whitney's  Iud:ex  Yerboram^ 
must  be  read  instead  of  the  kripdi  of  the  text. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMK  17.]  THB  ATHARVAVEDA.  835 

4  Savitar>  God,  our  household  friend,   most  precious, 
hath  sent  our  fathers  life  and  power  and  riches. 
Let  him  drink  Soma  and  rejoice  when  worshipped. 
Under  his  law  even  the  Wanderer  travels. 

HYMN  XV. 
1    OHOOSB,   O   Savitar,   that  glorious   favour,   with 

fruitful  energy  and  every  blessing, 
Even  this  one's  teeming  cow,  erst  milked  by  Kaova, 

thousand -streamed,  milked  for  happiness   by  the 

mighty. 

HYMN  XVI. 
Increase  this  man  Brihaspati  I  Illume  him,  O  Savitar, 

for  high  and  happy  fortune. 
Sharpen  him  throughly  though  already  sharpened : 

with  glad  acclaim  let  all  the  Gods  receive  him, 

HYMN  XVII. 

Mat  the  Ordainer  give  us  wealth.  Lord,  ruler  of  the 
world  of  life  :  with  full  hand  may  he  give  to  us. 

4  The  Wanderer :  the  Sun  who  journeys  round  the  sky. 

The  hymn  abounds  in  plays  upon  the  root  su,  from  which  Savitar, 
and  tdvtman  (creation)  are  formed,  and  which  means  '  to  press  or  pour 
out  (Soma  juice)'  as  well  as  'to  send.'  Hence  in  the  ritual  of  the 
Atharvans  the  two  stanzas  are  recited,  during  the  purification  of  the 
Soma  juice,  by  a  priest  who  holds  gold  in  his  hand  or  wears  a  gold 
ring  with  reference  to  the  goldenrhanded  of  the  text. 

A  charm  for  divine  favour  and  felicity. 

1  This  one's:  Savitar's.  Cow:  the  emblem  of  plenty.  Kanva:  the 
famous  Rishi  of  the  Bigveda. 

.    A  prayer  for  prosperity. 

The  stanza  is  employed  in  various  incantations,  and  also  in  the 
ritual  to  wake  the  sleeping  priests :  brihaspate  savitariti  svapatq 
hodhayet,  Yaitdna-Siitra  V.  9.  In  the  latter  case  this  moHf  enam  (hunc) 
will  be  *  this  God,'  that  is,  Agni.    See  M.  Henry's  note. 

A  prayer  for  wealth  and  children. 

1  The  Ordainer :  Dh4tar  regarded  in  this  hymn  more  especially  as 
the  Upholder  of  the  sacrament  of  marriage  (see  II.  36.  2,  and  note), 
and  the  giver  of  children. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


83fl  TSB  BYMNS  OP  [BOOR  VtL 

2  May  Dhatar  grant   the   worshipper  henceforth  im- 

perishable life. 
May  we  obtain  the  favour  of  the  God  who  giveth 
every  boon. 

3  To  him  may  Dh&tar  grant  all  kinds  of  blessings  who, 

craving  children,  serves  him  in  his  dwelling. 
Him  may  the  Gods  invest  with  life  eternali  yea,  all 
the  Gtxls  and  Aditi  accordant. 

4  May  this  our  gift   please   Savitar,   Rdti,   Dh&tar, 

Praj^patiy  and  Agni  Lord  of  Treasures. 
May  Tvashtar,  VishQU,  blessing  him  with  childreni 
give  store  of  riches  to  the  sacrificer. 

HYMN  XVIII. 

BcRST  open,  Pfithivt,  and  cleave  asunder  this  celes^ 

tial  cloud. 
Untie,  O  DhAtar — for  thou  canst— the  bottle  of  the 

breast  of  heaven. 
2  Let  not  the  Sun's  heat  burn,  nor  cold  destroy  her. 

Let  Earth  with  all  her  quickening  drops  burst  open. 
Even  for  her  the  waters  flow,  and  fatness  :  where 

Soma  is  even  there  is  bliss  for  ever. 

4  R^i :  gift ;  the  Oblation  personified  aa  a  Ooddea*. 

A  prayer  for  rain. 

1  Pf^thivi  r  meaning  here  not  Earth  personified,  but  a  deity  of 
the  middle  air  or  firmament :  dvirHpd  pfrithivt^  says  Sayapa :  Pfithiyt 
has  two  forms.  *  Thou,  of  a  truth,  O  Pf ithivl,  b^treet  the  tool  that 
rends  the  hills :  Thou  rioh  in  torrents  who  with  might  quickenest 
earth,  O  mighty  one'  (Bigveda  V.  84.  1).  The  hotiU  of  the  breast  of 
heaven :  *  Who  can  number  the  clouds  in  wisdom  t  Or  who  can  stay 
the  bottles  of  heaven  T  (Job,  38.  37.) 

2  Her:  Earth. 

Hoe  hymn  is  employed  also  in  charms  to  avert  inundations.  See 
Kausika-Sfttra  GUI.  3,  and  Weber's  Omiua  und  Pertenta,  p.  366. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ttYltlSr  20.]  TOIS  AfBARVAVEi)A.  S37 

HYMl^  XIX. 

PrajApati  engenders  earthly  creatures :    laay  the 

benevolent  Ordainer  form  them, 
Having  one  common  womb,  and  mind,  and  spirit. 

He  who  is  Lord  of  Plenty  give  me  plenty  1 

HYMN  XX. 

Anumati  approve  to-day  oar  sacrifice  dmong  the 

Gods  I 
May  Agni   beat  mine  offerings  away  for  me  the 

worshipper. 

2  Do  thou,  Anumati  t  approve^  and  grant  us  health 

and  happiness. 
Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  apd,  Goddess,  give  us 
progeny. 

3  May  he  approving  in  return  accord  us  wealth  in* 

exhaustible  with  store  of  children. 
Never  may  we  be  subject  to  his  anger,  but  rest  in 
his  benevolence  and  inercy. 

4  Thy  name  is  easy  to  invoke,  good  leader!  approved, 

Anumati !  and  rich  in  iDOunty. 
Source  of  all  boons  1*  fill  up  therewith  our  worship, 
and,   Blest   One  I  grant   us   wealth  with  goodly 
hetoes. 


A  prayer  for  prosperity. 

1  Havin§  one  common  toomh :  or,  One  common  womb  (or  source) 
have  they :  the  adjective  sdyonayaa  being  in  the  nominative  case. 

A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  happiness* 

1  Anumati:  Favour,  or  divine  Grace  personified.  See  I.  18.  2,  note. 
According  to  the  ritualists  Anumati  is  also  the  personification  of  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  Moon's  age,  and  sometimes  the  New  Moon. 

3  He:  Rudra. 

As  Anumati  is  a  deity  connected  with  procreation  the  hymn  is  used 
in  charms  to  remove  sterility  in  cows. 

22 


Digitized  by 


Google 


338  .    THE  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  VTL 

5  Anumati  hath  come  to  this  oar  worship  well- formed 
to  give  good  lands  and  valiant  heroes  : 
For  her  kind  care  hath  blessed  us.     God-protected^ 
may  she  assist  the  sacrifice  we  offer. 
S  Anumati  became  this    AH,   whatever  standeth  or 
walketh,  everything  that  moveth. 
May  we  enjoy  thy  gracious  love,  O  Goddess.  Kegard 
us,  O  Anumati,  with  favour. 

HYMN  XXI. 
With  prayer  come  all  together  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven : 

he  is  the  peerless  one,  far-reaching,  guest  of  men. 
He,  God  of  ancient  time,  hath  gained  a  recent  thrall : 

to  him  alone  is  turned  the  path  which  all  must  tread. 

HYMN  XXII. 

Unto  a  thousand  sages  he  hath  given  sight :  thought, 

light  is  he  in  ranging  all. 
2  The  Bright  One  bath  sent  forth  the  Dawns,  a  closely 

gathered  band. 
Immaculate,  unanimous,  brightly  refulgent  in  their 

homes. 

HYMN  XXIII. 
The  fearful  dream,  and  indigence,  the  monster,  the 

malignant  hags, 
All  female  fiends  of  evil  name  and  wicked  tongue 

we  drive  afar. 

A  stanza  to  be  recited  at  a  funeral. 

1  3'ke  Lord  of  heaven  ;  here  Yama  must  be  meant  A  recent  thrall : 
the  man  whose  funeral  rites  are  bemg  performed. 

To  Savitar,  or  to  Yama  invested  with  some  of  Savitar's  attributes. 

1  If,  as  M.  Victor  Heniy  thinks,  Yama  is  the  God  of  the  hymn, 
tight  means  life  in  the  world  of  the  departed.  The  hymn  is  very 
difficulty  and  no  sense  can  be  made  of  it  without  alterations  of  the 
text.  I  have  adopted  those  proposed  by  M.  Henry,  Le  Livre  VII  de  V 
Atharva-veda,  p.  62. 

A  charm  to  bansh  fiends  and  tjroubles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  26.]  IHE  ATBARVA^VEDA.  339 

HYMN  XXIV. 

What  treasure  hath  been  dug  for  us  by  Indra,  by 

Agni,  Visvedevas,  tuneful  Maruts, 
On  us  may  Savitar  whose  laws  are  faithful,  Praj&pati, 

and  Heavenly  Grace  bestow  it 

HYMN  XXV. 

Thb  early  morning  prayer  hath  come  to  Vish^iu  and 

VaruQa,  Lords  through  might,  whom  none  hath 

equalled, 
Gods  by  whose  power  the  realms  of  air  were  stablished, 

strongest  and  most  heroic  in  their  vigour. 
2  The  early  prayer  hath   ever  come  to  Vishrjiu  and 

Varuoa  by  that  God's  high  power  and  statute 
In   whose   control   is   all   this  world   that  shineth, 

all  that  hath  powers  to  see  and  all  that  breatheth. 

HYMN  XXVI. 

I  WILL  declare  the  mighty  deeds  of  Vishnu,  of  him 
who  measured  out  the  earthlv  regions, 

Who  propped  the   highest  place  of  congregation, 
thrice  setting  down  his  footstep,  widely  striding. 
2  Loud  boast  doth  Vishnu  make  of  this  achievement,  like 
some  wild  beast,  dread,  prowling,  mountain-roaming. 

May  he  approach  us  from  the  farthest  distance. 

A  prayer  for  riches. 

T«ne/ii/;  alluding  to  the  wild  music  of  the  winds,  the  Hhunder« 
psalm'  of  the  Storm-Gods. 

A  prayer  of  praise  to  Vish^iu  and  Varupa. 

2  That  GocTa :  Siirya  the  Sun-Ood  is  intended. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Bigveda,  III.  p.  429. 

In  praise  of  Vishnu. 

1  The  stanza  is  found  in  l^igveda  I.  164.  1.  The  highest  place  of 
eongregation :  heaven,  where  the  Gods  are  assembled.  Thrice:  at 
rising,  culmination,  and  setting ;  Vishnu  being  the  Sun. 

2  The  stanza  is  a  combination,  with  variants,  of  !|Ugveda  I.  154.  2 
and  X.  180.  2. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


340  THE  BYMN8  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

3  Thou  within  whose  three  wide-extended   paces  all 

worlds  and  creatures  have  their  habitation. 
Drink  oil,  thou  homed  in  oil  I  promote  the  sacrificer 
more  and  more. 

4  Through  all  this  world  strode  Vishnu  :  thrice  his 

foot  be  planted,  and  the  whole 
Was  gathered  in  his  footstep's  dust. 

5  Vishnu  the  guardian,  he  whom  none  deceiveth,  made 

three  steps,  thenceforth 
Establishing  these  high  decrees. 

6  Look  ye  on  Vish^u's  works,  whereby  the  friend  of 

Indra,  close*allied, 
Hath  let  his  holy  ways  be  seen. 

7  The  princes  evermore  behold  that  loftiest  place  where 

VisbQU  is, 
Xiike  an  extended  eye  in  heaven. 

8  From  heaven,  O  Vish^iu,  or  from  earth,  0  Vishnu, 

or  from  the  great  far-spreading  air's  mid-region. 

Fill  both  thy  hands  full   of    abundant  treasures, 

and  from  the  right  and  left  bestow  them  freely. 


3  The  first  line  occurs  in  Bigveda  I.  154.  2.  Eomed  in  ail :  dwell- 
ing in  the  molten  butter  used  in  sacrifice. 

4  This  stanza  and  the  three  that  follow  it  are  found  in  Rigveda  I. 
22.  17 — 20.  In  hiaifootstep'B  dusi:  so  mighty  was  Vishnu  that  the 
diist  raised  by  his  footsteps  envek^ped  the  whole  world,  or  the  earth 
was  formed  from  the  dust  of  his  strides. 

7  Theprince$:  Sdris,  wealthy  householders  who  institute  sacrificea 
and  remunerate  the  officiating  priests. 

See  Mttir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  63,  68,  where  stansas  1—7  are  translated 
and  thoroughly  discussed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  20.]  THE  ATEAEVA-YRDA.  3*1 

HYMN  XXVII. 

Mat  Id&  with  her  statute  dwell  beside  us,  she  in 
whose  place  the  pious  purge  and  cleanse  them. 

She,  mighty,  Soma-decked,  whose  foot  drops  fatnesSi 
meet  for  All-Gods,  hath  come  to  aid  our  worship. 

HYMN  XXVIIL 
Blest  be  the  Broom,  may  the  Mace  bring  a  blessing, 

and  may  the  Altar  and  the  Hatchet  bless  us. 
Worshipful  Gods,   may  they  accept  tiiis  worship, 

lovers  of  sacrifice,  and  sacrificers. 

HYMN  XXIX. 

This  is  your  glorious  might,  Agni  and  Vishvu !  Ye 
drink  the  essence  of  the  mystic  butter, 

Placing  in  every  home  seven  costly  treasures.  Let 
your  tongue  stretch  to  take  the  offered  fatness. 

2  Ye  love  the  great  law,  Agni  Vishnu !  joying,  ye  feast 
on  mystic  essences  of  butter. 
Exalted  in  each  house  with  fair  laudation.   Let  your 
tongue  stretch  to  take  the  offered  fatness. 

A  prayer  to  Id&,  Goddess  of  Devotion. 

1  I^d:  also  DH  and  11^  usually  mentioned  in  oonnexion  with 
Sarasvat!,  and  Bhtett!  or  Mahi,  all  being  deities  of  sacred  speech, 
prayer,  and  praise.   See  V.  12.  8. 

Her  plaie  is  the  sanctuary  or  chapel  in  which  libations  and  sacrifices 
are  offered. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  III.  p.  433. 

In  praise  of  the  sacrificial  utensils. 

Broom :  vedds  ;  a  bunch  of  stiff  grass  tied  up  for  sweeping  the  place 
of  sacrifice. 

Mact :  to  keep  off  improper  visitants.  6od8 :  the  sacrificial  imple- 
ments, deified. 

A  hymn  to  Agni  and  Vishnu. 

1  Seven:  used  indefinitely  for  a  great  number.  Your  tongue;  the 
sacrificial  fire. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


342  THB  H7MNS  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Heaven,  Earth,  and  Mitra  here  have  caused   mine 

eyes  to  be  anointed  well, 
Savitar,  BrahmaQaspati  take  care  that  they  be  duly 

balmed ! 

HYMN  XXXI. 
Rouse  us  to-day  O  Indra,  Maghavan,   hero,   with 

thy  best  possible  and  varied  succours. 
May  he  who  hateth  us  fall  low  beneath  us,  and  him 

whom  we  detest  let  life  abandon. 

HYMN   XXXII. 

Wb  bringing  homage  have   approached  the   friend 

who  seeks  our  wondering  praise, 
Young,  strengthener  of  the  sacrifice.  May  he  bestow 

long  life  on  me. 

HYMN  XXXIII. 

Let  P^lshan,  let  the  Maruts,   let  Bphaspati  pour 

forth  on  me; 
This  present  Agni  pour  on  me  children  and  riches 

in  a  stream ! 
May  he  bestow  long  life  on  me. 

A  charm  aooompanying  the  anointing  of  eyes. 

The  stanza  is  used  in  anointing  the  Yupa  or  sacrifioial  post  (Vait^na- 
SAtra  X.  5) ;  and  in  the  God^nam  ceremony  (A.  V.  II.  13),  when  the 
youth's  eyes  are  anointed  as  part  of  the  procedure  (Kausika-Sdtra 
LIV.  6). 

A  prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  enemies. 

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  III.  53.  21. 

A  prayer  for  long  life,  addressed  to  Agni. 

The  stanza  is  taken,  excepting  the  final  p&da,  from  Rigveda  IX, 
67.  29. 

A  prayer  £or  long  life,  children,  and  riches. 

4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  37.]  THE  ATBARVA-TBDA.  343 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

Aqni,  drive  oflF  my  rivals  bom  and  living,  repel  those 

yet  unborn,  O  J&tavedas. 
Cast  down  beneath   my  feet  mine  adversaries.     In 

Aditi's  regard  may  we  be  sinless. 

HYMN  XXXV. 

Subdue  with  conquering  might  his  other  rivals,  those 

yet  unborn  repel,  O  J&tavedas. 
For  great  felicity  protect  this  kingdom,  and  in  this 

man  let  all  the  Gods  be  joyful. 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

Sweet  are  the  glances  of  our  eyes,  our  faces  are  as 

smooth  as  balm. 
Within  thy  bosom  harbour  me ;  one  spirit  dwell  in 

both  of  us ! 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

With  this  my  robe,  inherited  from  Manu,  I  envelop 

thee, 
So  that  thou  mayst  be  all  mine  own  and  give  no 

thought  to  other  dames. 

A  prayer  for  freedom  from  sin,  and  the  overthrow  of  enemies. 

A  prayer  for  the  prosperity  of  a  King  and  his  J^ingdom. 
Stanzas  2  and  3  have  a  totally  different  object.  See  Appendix. 


^m. 
eyes  aa  part  of  the 


A  charm  to  be  pronounced  by  bride  and  bridegrooi 
Smooth  as  halm :  the  pair  anoint  each  other's  eyes 
marriage  ceremony  (Kausika-Sdtra  LXXIX.  2). 
Translated  by  Grill,  pp.  55,  179. 

A  nuptial  charm,  spoken  by  the  bride. 

From  Manu :  the  father  of  mankind,  Man,  the  Old  German  Mannus, 
with  reference  to  the  great  antiquity  of  the  custom.  See  M.  Henry's 
note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


311  TB3  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VH 

HYMN  XXXVIII. 

I  pia  this  Healing  Herb  that  makes  my  lover  look 

on  me  and  weep  ; 
That  bids  the  parting  friend  return  and  kindly  greets 

him  as  he  comes. 

2  This  Herb  wherewith  the  Asurl  drew  Indra  down- 

ward from  the  Gk)ds, 
With  this  same  Herb  I  draw  thee  dose  that  I  may 
be  most  dear  to  thee. 

3  Thou  art  the  peer  of  Soma,  yea,  thou  art  the  equal 

of  the  Sun, 
The  peer  of  all  the  Gods  art  thou  :  therefore  we  call 
thee  hitherward. 

4  I  am  the  speaker  here,  not  thou :  speak  thou  where 

the  assembly  meets. 
Thou  shalt  be  mine  and  only  mine,  and  never  men- 
tion other  dames. 

5  If  thou  art  far  away  beyond  the  rivers,  far  away 

from  men, 
This  Herb  sh^U  seem  to  bind  thee  fast  and  bring 
thee  back  my  prisoner. 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

Mat  he  establish  in  our  home  the  master  of  riches, 

gladdening  with  rain  in  season, 
Mighty,  strong-winged,  celestial,  dropping  moisture, 

Bull  of  the  plants  and  embryo  of  waters. 

A  maiden's  love-charm. 

2  The  Asurl :  a  female  fiend,  naitied  Y ilistefig^  according  to  the 
legend.  See  Weber,  Indisohe  Studien,  V.  p.  250. 

3  Thou :  addressed  to  the  plant. 

4  Addressed  to  the  man  she  loves. 

Translated  by  Weber,  I.  S.  V.  249,  by  Ludwig,   III.   515,  and  by 
Grill,  pp.  59,  179. 

A  sacrificial  charm  for  rain  and  prosperity. 

1  Home:  goshthS ;  literally,  fold  or  pen  for  cattle.  Master  of  riches: 
or,  wealthy  possessor.    In  season:  alhipatds;  the  meaning  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  41.J  TBS  ATHARYA^VBDA.  S45 

HYMN  XL, 

Wb  call  SarasvAo,  under  whose  proieeiion  aU  cattle 

wander,  to  preserve  and  aid  us» 
Him  in  whose  ordinance  abide  1^  waters,  ta  whose 

oommand  the  Lord  of  Fleenty  listens. 

2  Abiding  here  let  us  invoke   Sarasv&n,  the  seat  of 
riches,  glorious,  wealth-increaser, 
Hi^m  who  inclines  ai¥i  gives  to  him  who  worships, 
the  rich  possessor  and  th^  Lord  of  Fuhiess. 

HYMN  XLI. 

OBssiRviNa  n^en^  and  viewing  home,  t^^e  Falcon  hai^h 
cleft  his  swift  way  over  wastes  and  waters. 

word  is  uncertain.  Prof,  Ludwig  translates  it  by  •  ana  der  nahe,  *  from 
near  at  hand ; '  Prof.  Grassmann  by  •  vom  Wolkenraume,'  *  from  the 
region  of  cloud/  and  M.  Henry  changes  it  to  ahktyaUU  '  those  who 
come  to  him.'  Dropping  ijnoi^ture :  or,  milk-exuding  :  payasdm  being 
another  obscure  word,  occurring  in  only  one  pther  passage  (A.  V.  IV. 
14.  6)  where  it  is  applied  to  a  slaughtered  victim,  and  appears  to 
mean  '  full  of  juices.'  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  the- 
word  is  a  corruption  of  vdya^dm^  great  bird,  of  the  Rigveda  stanza. 
Bull :  •  He  (Parjanya)  is  the  Bull  of  all  (the  plants)  and  their  impreg- 
ner*  (R.  V.  VII.  101. 6^).  Nearly  the  whole  stanza  is  taken  from  RigYe<^ 
1.164.52:  *  The  bird  celestial,  vast^  with  noble  pinion,  the  lovely 
germ  of  plants,  the  germ  of  waters,  Him  who  delighteth  us  with  rain 
in  season,  Sarasvan  I  invoke  that  he  may  help  us.'  Sarasv^n  in  this 
place  is  not  the  River-God,  consort  of  Sarasvatt,  but  may  be  taken  as 
an  epithet  (rich  in  water)  of  Parjanya,  or  any  God  who  sends  the  rain. 
According  to  the  Kausika-Siitra,  XXIV.  9,  the  stanza  is  to  be  re- 
cited at  the  sacrifice  of  the  omentum  of  a  bull  to  Indra.  The  sacrificed 
bull  (he  of  the  first  lin^)  is  to  establish  the  Rain-God,  who  is  also 
called  a  bull  or  chief,  in  the  home  or  oow-pen  of  the  worshipper, 

A  prayer  for  prosperity.  Sequel  to  Hymn  XXXIX. 

1  Sarasvdn:  rich  in  water;  the  God  who  sends  the  rain ;  Parjanya. 
Zord  of  Plenty :  here,  probably,  P^shan,  the  nourisher  and  increaser 
of  cattle  and  property  in  general. 

A  prayer  for  prosperity* 

1  The  Falcon :  the  swift  Sun ;  with  allusion  also  to  the  falcon  who 
brought  the  Soma  from  heaven.  See  dymns  of  the  Rigveda,  General 
.  Index.  Hatk  cleft  kU  swifi  vmy :  M.  Henry  translates  this  p&da  differ- 
ently :  *  bath  pierced  the  arid  deserts  and  made  the  waters  spnng  focthi' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


346  THE  HYMirS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

May  he,  with  Indra  for  a  friend,  auspicious,  travers- 
ing all  air's  lower  realms,  come  hither. 
2  The  heavenly  Falcon,  viewing  men,  well-pinioned, 
strength-giver,  hundred-footed,  hundred-nested, 

Shall  give  us  treasure  which   was   taken  from   us. 
May  it  be  rich  in  food  among  our  Fathers. 

HYMN  XLII. 

SoATTER  and  drive  away,  Soma  and  Rudra,  the  sick- 
ness that  hath  come  within  our  dwelling. 
Afar  into  the  distance  chase  Destruction,  and  even 
from  committed  sin  release  us. 
2  Lay  on  our  bodies,  O  ye  twain,  O  Soma  and  Rudra, 
all  those  balms  that  heal  diseases. 
Set  free  and  draw  away  the  sin  committed,  which  we 
have  still  inherent  in  our  persons. 

HYMN  XLIII. 

Some  of  thy  words  bode  weal  and  some  misfortune  : 
thou  scatterest  them  all  with  friendly  feeling. 

3  Hundred-footed:  exceedingly  swift.  Hundred-netted:  visiting  and 
resting  for  a  while  in  countless  places.  Rich  in  food:  supplying  the 
means  of  offering  libations  to  the  Manes  of  our  ancestors. 

On  the  strength  of  the  word  ?icme  or  house  in  the  first  line,  the  hymn 
is  used  in  the  ceremony  of  blessing  the  construction  of  a  new  house 
(Kausika-Siitra  XLIII.  3),  and  purifying  the  ground  on  which  it  is 
to  stand.   See  M.  Henry's  note. 

A  prayer  for  deliveiy  from  sin  and  sickness. 

1  The  hymn  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Eigveda  VI.  74.  2,  3.  And 
even  from  committed  sin  release  us  :  taken  from  Eigveda  I.  24.  9  :-^the 
original  hymn  (VI.  74. 2)  has :  *may  ours  be  excellent  and  happy  glories.* 

A  charm  against  lightning,  addressed  to  Parjanya. 

Words :  mutterings  of  the  thunder-cloud.  Weal :  in  the  shape  of 
rain.  Misfortune:  in  the  shape  of  destructive  lightning.  Within  this: 
or,  him :  the  cloud  or  the  God.  Three  words :  denoting  thunder,  rain, 
lightning.  Cf.  the  hymn  to  Parjanya  (R.  V.  VII.  101.  1)  where  three 
words  are  said  to  draw  down  the  nectar  from  the  cloud.  One  hath 
flown  off:  a  mere  clap  of  thunder  has  been  heard,  which  passed  away 
without  rain  or  lightning. 

According  to  Kausika-Sdtra  XL VI.  1,  the  stanza  is  to  be  recited  as 
a  charm  to  rebut  a  calumnious  accxisation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  46.]  THE  ATBARVATEDA.  347 

Deep  within  this  three  words  are  laid  :  among  them 
one  hath  flown  off  even  as  the  sound  was  uttered. 

HYMN  XLIV. 

Yb  twain  have  conquered,  and  have  not  been  van- 
quished :  not  either  of  the  pair  hath  been  defeated. 

Ye,  Indra  Vishpu,  when  ye  fought  your  battle ; 
produced  this  infinite  with  three  divisions. 

HYMN  XLV. 
Brought  hitherward  from  Sindhu,   from  a  folk  of 

every  mingled  race. 
Fetched  from  afar,  thou  art  I  deem,  a  balm  that 
cureth  jealousy. 
2  As  one  with  water  quencheth  fire,  so  calm  this  lover's 
jealousy, 
Like  heat  of  fire  that  burneth  here,  or  flame  that 
rageth  through  the  wood. 

HYMN  XLVI. 

O  BROAD-TRESSED  Siuiv&li,  thou  who  art  the  sister  of 

the  Gods, 
Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and.  Goddess,  grant  us 

progeny. 

"In  praise  of  Indra  and  Vishnu. 

ThtB  infinite  vnth  three  divisions :  the  vast  world  with  all  its  crea- 
tures ;  the  three  divisions  are  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth. 

The  stanza,  taken  with  variants  from  B.  V.  VI.  69.  8,  is,  according 
to  Kausika-Sdtra  XLII.  6,  to  be  used  as  a  charm  to  reconcile  two 
enemies. 

A  charm  against  Jealousy. 

1  Sindhu :  the  Indus.  From  afar :  obtained  with  difficulty,  and 
therefore  more  efficacious. 

Translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  250,  by  Ludwig,  III. 
514,  and  by  GriU,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  29,  180. 

A  charm  for  offispring  and  prosperity. 

1  Stanzas  1  and  2  are  taken  from  Bigveda  II.  32.  6.  7.  Sintvdlt : 
a  lunar  Goddess,  the  day  of  New  Moon  personified,  who  aids  the  birth 
of  children.    See  II.  26.  2. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


348  TBE  HYMNS  0¥  \BOOK  VU. 

2  Present  the  sacrifice  to  her,  to  Sinivill,  Queen  of  men, 
Beautiful-fiiJgered,    lovely-armed,    prolific,    bearing 

many  a  child. 

3  Thou  who  as  Queen  of  men  art  Indra's  equals  a  God- 

dess coming  with  a  thousand  tresses, 
To  thee  our  sacrifices  are  performed,  O  Consort  of 
Vishiju  :  Goddess,  urge  thy  Lord  to  bounty  ! 

HYMN  XLVIL 

Oft  in  this  sacrifice  with  favoured  cry  I  call  Kuh^k, 

beneficent  Goddess,  skilled  in  all  her  works. 
May  she  vouchsafe  us  wealth  with  every  boon,  and 

give  a  hero  meet  for  praise  who  gives  a  hundred  gifts. 
2  Kuhii,  the  Queen  of  Gods  and  immortality,  called  to 

assist,  enjoy  this  sacrifice  of  ours  ! 
Let  her,  desirous  of  our  worship,  hear  to-day  :  may 

she,  intelligent,  give  increase  of  our  wealth. 

HYMN  XLVIII. 
I  CALL  on  R4k4  with  fair  laud  and  reverent  cry: 

may  she,  auspicious,  hear  us  and  herself  observe. 
With  never-breaking:  needle  may  she  sew  her  work, 

and  send  a  glorious  man  who  gives  a  hundred  gifts. 
2  All  thy  kind  favours,  K&kd !  lovely  in  their  form, 

wherewith^  thou  grantest  treasures  to  the   man 

who  gives^ 
With,  these  come  thou  to  us  this  day  benevolent, 

O  blessM  one,  bestowing  wealth  of  thousand  sorts. 

A  prayer  for  wealth  and  the  birth  of  a  son. 

1  Kukd :  the  Goddess  of  the  Waning  Moon,  presiding  over  child- 
birth. The  phages  of  the  Moon  represented  by  Kuhu  and  other  lunar 
Goddesses  vary  considerably,  as  they  were  not  precisely  determined 
till  more  recent  times. 

A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  the  birth  of  a  son. 

1  The  hymn  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Kigveda  II.  32.  4.  5. 
'Bdkd :  a  Goddess  associated  with  childbirth  and  presiding  over  the 
actual  day  of  full  moon,  Anumati  (see  II.  26.  2)  being  strictly  the  God^ 
dess  of  the  preceding  day  when  the  moon  rises  one  digit  less  than  full. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UTMK  60.]  THE  ATBARVA7SDA.  349 

HYMN  XLIX. 

May  the  Gods'  Consorts  aid  us  of  their  own  free  will, 

help  us  to  offspring  and  the  winning  of  the  spoil. 

May  Goddesses  who  quickly  listen  shelter  us,  both 

those  on  earth  and  they  within  the  waters'  realm. 

2  May  the  Dames,  wives  of  Gods,  enjoy  our  presents, 
Rd^,  Asvini,  Indrdiji,  and  Agn&yi ; 
May  Rodasi  and  YaruQ&ni  hear  us,  and  Goddesses 
come  at  the  matrons'  season* 

HYMN  L. 

As  evermore  the  lightning  flash  strikes,  irresistible, 

the  tree, 
So,  irresistible,  may  I  conquer  the  gamblers  with 

the  dice. 

2  From  every  side,  from  hale  and  sick,  impotent  to 

defend  themselves. 
May  all  the  fortune  of  the  folk  as  winnings  pass  into 
my  hands. 

3  I- pray  to  Agni,  him  who  guards  his  treasure  :  here, 

won  by  homage,  may  he  pile  our  winnings. 
As  'twere  with  racing  cars  I  bring  my  presents :  duly 
with  reverence,  let  me  laud  the  Maruts. 


A  prayer  for  children  and  booty. 

1  Rdl :  the  name  of  a  Goddess,  the  Bright  One,  Clara;  or  the  word 
may  be  an  adjective  qualifying  Asvini:  'Asvini  the  sovereign:' — 
Henry.  A§vini  is  the  consort  of  the  Asvins,  Agndyl  of  Agni,  Eodcui  of 
Rudra. 

The  hymn  is  taken  from  B^preda  V.  46.  7,  8. 

A  gambler's  prayer  for  success  in  gaming. 

2  From  hale  and  sick :  or,  from  quick  and  slow ;  from  players  both 
good  and  bad  alike. 

3  Taken,  with  a  variant,  from  Rigveda  V.  60.  1.  Duly,  with  revet' 
ence :  pradakshindm :  literally,  turned  rightward ;  makmg  reverential 
salutation  by  circumambulation  from  left  to  right ;  the  Gaelic  deasiL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


350  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  VIL 

4  With  thee  to  aid   us  may  we  win  the  treasure : 

do  thou  assist  our  side  in  every  battle. 
Give  us  wide  room  and  easy  way,  O  Indra ;  break 
down,  O  Maghavan,  the  foemen's  valour. 

5  I  have  completely  cleaned  thee  out,  won  from  thee 

what  thou  keptest  back. 
As  a  wolf  tears  and  rends  a  sheep,  so  do  I  tear  thy 
stake  away. 

6  Yea,  by  superior  play  one  gains  advantage :  in  time 

he  piles  his  spoil  as  doth  a  gambler. 
He  overwhelms  with  wealth's  inherent  powers  the 
devotee  who  keeps  not  back  his  riches. 

7  May  we  all,  much-invoked!  repel  with  cattle  want 

that  brings  sin,  hunger  with  store  of  barley. 
May  we  uninjured,  first  among  the  princes,  obtain 
possessions  by  our  own  exertions. 

8  My  right  hand  holds  my  winnings  fast,  and  in  my 

left  is  victory. 
I  would  that  I  were  winner  of  cattle  and  horses, 
wealth  and  gold. 

9  Dice,   give  me  play  that   bringeth   fruit  as  *twere 

a  cow  with  flowing  milk  ! 
And,  as  the  bowstring  binds  the  bow,  unite  me  with 
a  stream  of  gains. 


4  Taken  from  Rigveda  1. 102.  4. 

5  I  have  completely  cleaned  thee  out:  a  conjectural  translation 
of  this  line  is  all  that  can  be  given  ;  the  precise  meaning  of  sdmlikhi- 
tarn  and  mmrddham,  probably  technical  or  slang  expressions,  being 
imdiscoverable. 

6  This  and  the  following  stanza  are  taken,  with  variants,  from 
R.  V.  X.  42.  9,  10.  He :  the  die.  See  Ludwig,  III.  455,  and  Grill, 
pp.  71^  180. 


■  Digitized  by 


Google 


MTMN  53.]  THB  ATEARVAVEDA.  361 

HYMN  LI. 

B91HASPATI  protect  us  from  the  sinner,  from  rearward, 

from  above,  and  from  below  us  1 
May  Indra  from  the  front  and  from  the  centre,  as 

friend  to  friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 
HYMN  LIL 
Give  us  agreement  with  our  own,  with  strangers  give 

us  unity  : 
Do  ye,  O  Asvins,  in  this  place  join  us  in  sympathy 

and  love. 
2  May  we  agree  in  mind,  agree  in  purpose  :  let  us  not 

fight  against  the  heavenly  spirit. 
Around  us  rise  no  din  of  frequent  slaughter,  nor 

Indra's  arrow  fly,  for  day  is  present  I 
HYMN  LIII. 
As  thou,  Brihaspati,  from  the  curse  hast  saved  us, 

from  dwelling  yonder  in  the  realm  of  Yama, 
The  Asvins,   leeches  of  the  Gods,   O  Agni,   have 

chased  Death  far  from  us  with  mighty  powers. 
2  Move  both  together ;  do  not  leave  the  body.     Let 

both  the  breathings  stay  for  thee  united. 

A  prayer  for  protection. 

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  a  variant,  from  Eigveda  X.  42.  11. 

A  prayer  for  peace  and  concord. 

2  The  heavenly  spirit:  which  inspires  concord.  See  M.  Heniy's 
note.  For  day  is  present :  we  are  no  longer  exposed  to  danger  from 
nocturnal  fiends,  and  can  enjoy  the  safety  and  blessings  of  daylight. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Eigveda,  III.  p.  428,  and  by  GrUl,  Hun- 
dert  Lieder,  pp.  31,  181. 

A  charm  to  recover  a  sick  man  at  the  point  of  death,  or  to  restore 
animation  to  one  apparently  dead. 

1  Brihaspati :  as  Lord  of  Prayer  including  incantations.  Leeches 
of  the  Gods :  *  And  may  the  Asvins,  the  divine  pair  of  physicians,  send 
us  health'  (E.  V.  VIII.  18.  8).' 

2  Move  both  together :  the  two  breathings,  inspiration  and  expira- 
tion, are  addressed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3B2  fBB  STUNS  OF  [bOOt  Vth 

Waxing  in  strength  live  thou  a  hundred  autumns. 
Thy  noblest  guardian  and  tby  lord  is  Agni. 

3  Return,  thy  life  now  vanished  into  distance  1  Return, 

the  breath  thou  drawest  and  exhalest  I 
Agni  hath  snatched  it  from  Destruction's  bosom : 
into  thyself  again  I  introduce  it. 

4  Let  not    the  vital  breath  he  draws  forsake   him, 

let  not  his  expiration  part  and  leave  him., 
I  give  him  over  to  the  Seven  Rishis  :  let  them  eon^ 
duct  him  to  old  age  in  safety. 

5  Enter  him,  both  ye  breaths,  like  two  draught-oxen 

entering  their  stall. 
Let  him,  the  treasure  of  old  age,  still  wax  in  strength, 
uninjured,  here. 

6  I  send  thee  back  thy  vital  breath  ;  I  drive  Consump* 

tion  far  from  thee. 
May  Agni  here,  most  excellent,  sustain  our  life  on 
every  side. 

7  From  out  the  depth  of  darkness,  we,  ascending  to  the 

highest  heaven. 
Have    come    to    the    sublimest    light,    to    SArya, 
God  among  the  Gods. 

HYMN  LIV. 
Wh  worship  holy  Verse  and  Song,  by  which  they 

carry  out  their  acts. 
Shining  in   Order's  seat   these  twain  present  the 

sacrifice  to  Gods. 

4  Seven  Rishu :  Bhamdvftja,  Ka8yapa,Gotama,  Atri,  Vasishtfaa,  Visva- 
mitra,  and  Jatnadagnv  represented  by  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear. 

Translated  by  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  443,  and  by  Grill,  Hundert 
Lieder,  pp.  15,  182. 

A  cbarm  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  Veda. 

1  Ver$e :  rickam ;  recited  verse  or  hymn  of  pmise,  contained  in  the 
!^i<^eda.  Song:  sdma ;  sung  or  chanted  hymn,  contained  in  the 
S^maveda.  They  carry  out  their  acts :  men  perform  the  rites  of  divine 
worship.  In  OrcUf^s  seat :  in  the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  text  has  only 
sMaUy  in  the  seat ;  meaumg,  specially,  a  certain  shed  erected  in  tlko 
sacrificial  enclosure. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  56.]  THE  ATHAEVA-VBDA.  85$ 

JS  As   I   have   asked   about   Verse,     Song,    Sacrifice, 
strength,  force,  Yajus-text> 
So  never  let  this  lore  that  I  have  sought  forsake  toe, 
Lord  of  Might ! 

HYMN  LV. 

Thy  downward  paths  from  heaven,  whereby  thoU 

hast  raised  all  the  world  to  life, 
Give  us  in  gracious  love,  good  Lord ! 

HYMN  LVL 

WnEtHBR  it  came  from  viper,  from  black  snake  or 

snake  with  transverse  stripes, 
Or   Kanka  par  van's  bite,  this  herb  hath  made  the 

poison  powerless. 

2  Honey -born,  honey -dropping,  rich  in  honey,  honey- 

sweet,  this  herb 
Is  medicine  that  heals  the  wound  and  kills  the  gnat 
that  bites  and  stings. 

3  Whatever   bit,  or   sucked   thy   blood,   we   summon 

thence  away  from  thee 
The  ineffectual  poison  of  the  little  sharply -stinging 
gnat. 

3  A  iked :  mj  teacher.  Sdcrifice^  itrengtk :  saorifioe  whioh  is  strength 
or  makes  the  8^crificer  powerful.  Yajtts-text :  sacrificial  formula,  oon* 
tained  in  the  Yajur-Veda,  which  gives  force  to  him  who  employs  it. 
Lord  of  Might :  ^achtpate  ;  Lord  of  f<icA2,  power,  afterwards  personi-> 
fied  as  the  spouse  of  Indra.  Lort :  veddh  ;  (from  vidy  to  know)  sciencoi 
especially  sacred  knowledge,  ritual  and  theological  lore. 

A  charm  to  ensure  a  prosperous  journey. 

Thy :  the  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  Sun.  tn  the  third  pdda  thd 
Ubhih  of  the  text  is  superfluous.  It  mars  the  metre,  and  appears  to 
have  been  inserted  to  correspond  to  ytbhir^  whereby,  of  the  second 
pMa. 

A  charm  against  poisonous  bites  and  stings. 

1  Kankaparvan :  apparently  the  name  of  some  species  of  poisonous 
snake. 

2  The  gnat :  maehdka  ;  Latin,  musca ;  mosquito ;  Hindi,  machchhar* 

23 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S54  THE  nrMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIL 

4  Thou  here  who  crookest  wicked  jaws,  thou  tortuous, 

jointless,  limbless  thing, 
These  jaws  thou,  Brahraa^aspati !  shalt  bend  together 
like  a  reed. 

5  This  scorpion   here   that  creeps  along,  low  on  the 

ground  and  powerless — 
I  have  removed  his  poison  and  then  utterly  demol- 
ished him. 

6  No  strength  in  thy  two  arms  hast  thou,  nor  in  thy 

head,  nor  in  thy  waist : 
Then  what   is  that   small  thing  thou  so    viciously 
bearest  in  thy  tail  ? 

7  The  emmets  make  a  meal  of  thee  and  peahens  tear 

and  mangle  thee  : 
All  ye  are  crying  out,  In  sooth  the  scorpion's  poison 
hath  no  strength. 

8  Thou  creature  who  inflictest  wounds  both  with  thy 

mouth  and  with  thy  tail, 
No  poison  in  thy  mouth  hast  thou :  what  at  thy 
tail's  root  will  there  be  ? 

HYMN  LVII. 

Whatever  trouble  hath  disturbed  and  shaken  me — I 
speak  with  hope,  I  move,  imploring,  'mid  the  folk — 

What  harm  my  body  in  myself  hath  suffered,  now 
let  Sarasvatl  relieve  with  fatness. 


4  Crookest  ttnckedjawa :  according  to  M.  Henry,  twistest  the  faces 
(of  men)  askew.  Brahmanaspati :  as  the  God  of  charms  and  prayer. 
Shall  bend  together:  according  to  M.  Henry,  to  restore  them  (men's 
faces)  to  their  natural  shape. 

7  Peahens :  the  inveterate  enemies  of  snakes.  The  scorpion^s  poison 
hath  no  strength  :  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  191.  16. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  502,  and  by  Grill, 
Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  5,  153. 

A  charm  for  9ome  physical  disorder^ 

1  Trouble:  disorder  of  the  body.  Imploring:  asking  help.  Believe: 
lit«»ally,  fill  up. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  59.]  THB  A  TEAR 7A-VBDA.  «X5 

2  Seven  flow  for  him,  the  youth  on  whom  the  Maruts 
wait :  the  sons  have  taught  the  Father  everlasting 
laws. 
Both  worlds  are  his  :  both  shine  belonging  unto  him. 
Both  move  together :  both,  as  his  possession, 
thrive- 

HYMN  LVIIL 

True  to  laws,  Indra  Varuna,  drinkers  of  the  juice, 

quatf  this   pressed   Soma   which    shall   give  you 

rapturous  joy  ! 
Let   sacrifice,   your  car,   to   entertain     the     Gods, 

approach  its  resting-place   that  they   may   drink 

thereof, 
2  O  Indra  Varuna,  drink  your  fill,  ye  heroes,  of  this 

effectual  and  sweetest  Soma. 
This  juice  was  shed  by  us  that  ye  might  quaff  it. 

On  this  trimmed  grass  be  seated  and  rejoice  you. 

HYMN  LIX, 

Like  a  tree  struck  by  lightning  may  the  man   be 

withered  from  the  root, 
Who  curseth  us  who  curse  not  him,  or,  when  we 

curse  him,  curseth  us. 


2  Taken,  with  rariants,  from  Rigveda  X.  13.  5.  Stvm :  rivers,  un- 
cleratood.  The  youth :  Indra.  The  sons :  the  Maruts.  The  Father : 
Indra.  Everlasting  laws:  which  inculcate  liberality.  The  flow  of  the 
luU  rivers  symbolizes  generosity,  and  the  Gods  of  storm  and  rain  are 
represented  as  having  taught  Indra  the  divine  law  of  liberality,  and 
induced  him  to  shatter  the  cloud  and  pour  down  the  treasures  of  tho 
«ky.     See  M.  Henry *s  note. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  446, 

An  invitation  addi*essed  to  Indra  and  Varuna. 

1  The  hymn  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  VI.  68.  10.  !!• 
Indra  Varttna :  indrdvarund :  a  compound  in  the  dual  number  to 
signify  the  dual  deity. 

An  imprecation. 
Cf.  VL  37.  8. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


«W  TUB  HYMirs  OF  [BOOK  fit. 

HYMN  LX. 

1,  PRUDENT,  bringing  power,  a  treasure-winner,  with 

amicable  eye  that  strikes  no  terror, 
Come,  praising  and  kind-thougbted,  to  these  houses: 

be  not  afraid  of  me,  be  glad  and  joyful. 

2  Let  these  delightful  Houses  that  are  rich  in  power 

and  store  of  milk, 
Replete  with  wealth  and  standing  firm,  become  aware 
of  our  approach. 

3  These  Houses  we  invoke,  whereon  the  distant  exile 

sets  his  thought, 
Wherein  dwells  many  a  friendly  heart  :  let  them  be 
ware  of  our  approach. 

4  Thus  greeted,  ye  of  ample  wealth,  friends  who  enjoy 

delightful  sweets. 
Be   ever   free   from    hunger,    free  from  thirst !  Ye 
Houses,  fear  us  not. 

5  Kind   greeting   to   the   cattle   here,    kind  greeting 

to  the  goats  and  sheep  I 
Then,  of  the  food  within  our  homes,  kind  greeting 
to  the  pleasant  drink  \ 

6  Full  of  refreshment,  full  of  charms,  of  laughter  and 

felicity, 
Be  ever  free   from   hanger,    free   from   thirst !  Ye 
Houses,  fear  us  not. 

7  Stay  here,  and  come  not  after  me  :  prosper  in  every 

form  and  shape. 
With  happy  fortune  will  I  come.     Grow  more  abun- 
dant still  through  me ! 


A  parting  traveller's  address  to  the  houses  of  his  village. 

2  Become  aware  of  our  approach:  that  is,  recognize  and  welcome  us 
when  we  return. 

4  Fear  u$  not :  gladly  welooaie  us. 

The  hymn  is  used  as  a  charm  to  inaugurate  the  construction  of  a 
bouse,  and  on  starting  on  a  journey. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMK  ti.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  367 

HYMN  LXI. 

Since,  Agni,    with    our    fervent   zeal    we   undergo 

austerity, 
May  we  be  dear  to  Sacred  Lore,  may  we  be  wise  and 

live  long  lives. 
2  Agni,  we  practise  acts  austere,  we  undergo  austerity. 
So  listening  to  Holy  Lore  may  we  grow  wise  and 

full  of  days. 

HYMN  LXII. 
Like  a  car-warrior,  Agni  here,  grown  mighty,  Lord 

of  the  brave,  Chief  Priest,  hath  conquered  footmen. 
Laid  on  earth's  centre  he  hath  flashed  and  glittered. 

Low  may  he  lay  our  enemies  beneath  us. 

HYMN  LXIIL 

We  call  with  lauds  from  his  most  lofty  dwelling 
victorious  Agni,  conqueror  in  battles. 

May  he  convey  us  over  all  distresses,  may  the  God 
Agni  bear  us  past  our  troubles. 

HYMN  LXIV. 
From  all  that  woe  and  trouble  may  the  Waters  save 
and  rescue  me, 


A  prayer  for  the  acquisition  of  saored  knowledge  and  its  fruits. 

1  M.  Henry  translates  the  first  line  differently,  taking  tdpaa  as  a 
verb  :  *  Since,  O  Agni,  thou  hast  warmed  (the  world)  by  (thy)  heat, 
(we  also)  we  practise  austerity.' 

The  stanza  is  employed  in  the  religious  initiation  (upanayanam)  of 
a  novice,  and  in  the  ceremony  called  god&nam  (see  II.  13.  1 ). 


A  prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  adversaries. 

Chief  Priest :  purdhitah  ;  usually,  the  domestic  chaplain  and  coun- 
sellor of  a  prince.  Earth* s  centre :  literally,  on  the  centre,  on  the  earth ; 
meaning  the  H  re-receptacle  or  altar. 

The  stanza  is  employed  at  the  preparation  of  the  domestic  fire. 

A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  affliction. 

The  stanza  is  employed  at  the  preparation  of  the  domestio  fire^  - 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X8  THE  H7MFS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

Whate'er  the  Raven,  black  of  hue,  flying  out  hither- 
ward,  hath  dropped. 
2  May  Agni  G&rhapatya  save  and  set  me  free  from  all 
this  guilt 
Which  the  black  Raven  with  thy  mouth,  O  Nirriti, 
hath  wiped  away. 

HYMN  LXV. 

With  retroverted    fruit    hast  thou,  O  Ap4m&rga, 

sprung  and  grown. 
Hence  into  distance  most  remote  drive  every  curse 

away  from  me. 

2  Whatever  evil  we  have  done,  whatever  vile  or  sinful 

act, 
With   thee,    O  ApAm&rga,    who  lookest   all    ways, 
we  wipe  it  off. 

3  If  with  the  cripple  we   have  lived,  whose  teeth  are 

black  and  nails  deformed, 
With  thee,  O  Apslinarga,  we  wipe  all  that  ill  away 
from  us, 

A  charm  to  avert  an  evil  omen. 

1  Raven  :  mhilnU ;  a  bird,  especially  a  large  carnivorous  bird, 
vulture  or  the  like.  The  epithet  *  black  '  points  to  the  raven  or  the 
carrion  crow. 

2  Agni  Gdrhapatya  :  the  sacred  fire  of  the  householder.  See  V.  31. 
5.  Thy  mouth,  that  is,  the  raven  himself,  the  evil-boding  herald  of 
misfortune.  Hath  wiped  away  :  on  himself,  and  so  still  liable  to  fall 
upon  the  speaker.  See  M.  Henry's  note. 

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  41,  186. 

A  charm  against  imprecations  and  threatened  evils. 

1  Apdmdrga:  the  plant  Achyranthes  Aspera.  See  IV.  17.  6. 

2  Lookest  all  ways :  the  branches  tending  in  one   direction  and  the 
fruit  in  another,  the  plant  is   regarded  as  the  symbol  of  vigilant  cir- 
cumspection. 

3  The  cripple :  M.  Henry  observes :  *  This  lame  and  hideous  person- 
age, the  incarnation  of  sin  and  disease,  strongly  resembles  our  popular 
devil.'  We  wipe  away :  with  allusion  to  the  derivation  of  Apamarga 
from  mrijy  to  wipe,  with  the  particles  apa  and  d  prefixed. 

Translated  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  38,  186. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  68.]  TEX  ATHABYA^YEDA.  U% 

HYMN  LXVI. 

If  it  was  in  the  wind  or  air's  mid-region,  if  it  was  in 

the  trees  or  in  the  bushes, 
To  meet  whose  utterance  forth  streamed  the  cattle, 

may  that  Celestial  Power  again  approach  us. 

HYMN  LXVII. 

Mat  sense  return  to  me  again,  and  spirit,  return  my 

Sacred  Power  and  my  possessions ! 
Again  let  fires,  aflame  on  lesser  altars,  each  duly 

stationed,  here  succeed  and  prosper, 

HYMN  LXVIII. 

SarasvatI,  in  thy  decrees,  Goddess,  in  thy  celestial 

laws, 
Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and.  Goddess,  grant  us 

progeny. 

2  Here  is,   SarasvatI,   thy  fat  libation,   this   sacrifice 
passing  to  the  mouth  of  Fathers. 
These  most  auspicious  offerings  have  ascended  to 
thee  :  through  these  may  we  be  full  of  sweetness. 

8  Be  kind   and  most   auspicious,    be   gracious   to  us, 
SarasvatI.  May  we  be  ever  in  thy  sight. 


A  prayer  to  V4k. 

The  Cdesttal  Power :  for  whose  return  the  poet  prays  is  the  first 
Word,  the  first  emanation  of  the  Eternal,  the  omnific  Logos,  the  type 
ol  which  is  V&k  (see  IV.  30.  7),  in  this  place  the  voice  of  thunder 
which  calls  forth  the  cattle,  the  imprisoned  waters  in  the  cloud.  See 
M.  Henry's  note. 

A  priest's  prayer  to  the  Agnayo  Dhishny&h,  the  Agnis  or  fires  on 
the  side  altars.  Sacred  Power :  hrdhmatfam  ;  *  tho  sacred  formula.' — 
Henry. 

A  prayer  for  children  and  prosperity. 

The  hymn  is  employed,  according  to  the  Vait^na-Sfitra,  in  oblation 
to  the  Full  Moon  and  to  the  Visve  Devah,  and,  accenting  to  the 
Kaufika-Sutra,  in  the  funeral  ritual. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


9M  THR  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

HYMN  LXIX. 

Mat  the  wind  kindly  breathe  on  us,  may  the  Sun 
warm  us  pleasantly. 

May  days  pass  happily  for  us,  may  night  draw  near 
delightfully,  may  dawn  break  joyfully  for  us ! 

HYMN  LXX. 

Whatever  sacrifice  that  man  performeth  with  voice^ 
mind,  sacred  formula,  oblation. 

May,   in   accord  with  Death,  Destruction  ruin  hia 
offering  before  it  gain  fulfilment. 

2  For  him   may  sorcerers.  Destruction,  demons  strike 
and  prevent  fulfilment  through  their  falsehood. 

Let  Gods,  by  Indra  sent>  destroy  his  butter,  aad  let 
his  sacrifice  be  ineffective. 

S  Let   the   two  Sovrans,   swift  to   come,  like   falcooa 
swooping  on  their  prey. 

Destroy  the  butter  of  the  foe  whoever  plats  to  iiyure- 
us, 

4  I  seize  thine  arms  and  draw  them  back^  I  bind  a 

bandage  on  thy  mouth. 

I  with  the  anger  of  the  God  Agni  have  killed  thy 
sacrifice. 

5  Behind  thy  back  I  tie  thine  arms,  I  bind  a  bandage 

on  thy  mouth : 

With  the  terrific  Agni's  wrath  have  I  destroyed  thy 
sacrifice. 


A  ^uyer  for  prosperity  ^ 

A  charm  to  frustrato  and  ruiix  the  sacrifice  offered  by  an  eQemy^ 
3  The  two  Sovrans :  Death  and  Destruction,  Mrityu  and  Nirfiti 
Translated  by  Ludwig^  Der  Rigveda,   IH.  p.  374>  and  by   Qrill; 
Huftdert  U^er.  pp.  46,  187. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  73.]  TUE  ArHAHVAVEDA.  3M 

HYMN  LXXL 

Wb  set  thee  round  us  as  a  fort,  victorious  Agni ! 

thee  a  sage, 
Bold  in  thy   colour  day   by  day,  destroyer  of  the 

treacherous  foe. 

HYMN    LXXIL 

Rise  up  and  look  upon  the  share  of  Indra  fixt  by 

ritual  use. 
Whether  ye  poured  libation  dressed  or  took  delight 

in  it  uncooked. 

2  Libation  is  prepared.  Come  to  us,   Indra  :  the  Sun 
hath  travelled  over  half  his  journey. 
Friends  with  their  treasures  sit  around  thee,  waiting 
like  beads  of  houses  for  their  wandering  chieftain. 

S  Dressed    in  the    udder  and    on    fire,    I    fancy  ;  well 
dressed,  I  fancy,  is  this  new  oblation. 
Quaff  thickened  milk  of  noon's  libation,   Indra,    well 
pleased,  O  Thunden^r,  famed  for  many  an  exploit! 

HYMN  LXXIII. 

Inflamed  is  Agni,  Heroes  t  charioteer  of  heaven.  The 
caldron  boils  :  the  meath  is  drained  to  be  your  food. 


In  praise  of  Agni. 

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  one  yariant,.  from  Rigveda  X«  87.  22. 


The  hymn  is  an  invitation  to  Indra  to  drink   the  mid-day  tibatioiK 
I  The   whc^e  hymn  is  a  reproduction,    with  variants,   of  Rigveda 

X.  179.     Rise  up:  the  Hotar  calls  upon  the  Adhvaryu  priests  (see  L 

11.  1)  to  rise  and  milk  the  cow  for  milk  required  for  the  libation.  See 

Vaitilna-Siitra  XIV.  3. 

3  Dressed :  the   milk  is   twice   dressed  or  cooked  ;  first  matui*ed  m 

the  cow's  udder  and  then  heated  in  a  caldron  on  the  tiro. 


An  ivitation  to  the  Asvins  to  come  to  the  morning  libation.. 

1  Heroes :  the  many  mighty  acts  of  the  Asvins  are  recounted  in 
Rigveda  I.  112,  116,  117,  118,  119,  .182;  VII.  68;  X.  39,  40.  Th^ 
caldron :  in  which  the  milk  fw  the  Hbation  is  heated.  Meath  :  mddhuj; 
the  sweet  fluid  ;  milk. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SW  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

For  we,  0  Asvins,  singers  sprung  from  many  a  house, 
invite  you  to  be  present  at  our  banquetings. 

2  Asvins,  the  fire  is  all  aglow  :  your  caldron  hath  been 

heated  ;  come  1 
Here,  even  now,  0  Heroes,  are  the  milch-kine  milk- 
ed.  The  priests,  ye  mighty  ones  1  rejoice, 

3  Pure  with  the  Gods  is  sacrifice  with  cry  of  Hail !  That 

is  the  Asvins'  cup  whence  Gods  are  wont  to  drink. 

Yea,  the  Immort  il  Ones  accept  it,  one  and  all,  and 

come  to  kiss  that  cup  with  the  Gandharva's  mouth. 

4  Milk,  molten  butter  offered  when  the  mornings  break, 
— this  is  your  portion,  Asvins!  Come  ye  hitherward. 
Lords  of  the  brave,    balm-lovers,  guards  of  sacrifice, 

drink  ye  the  warm  libation  in  the  light  of  heaven. 

5  Let  the  warm  drink  approach  you  with  its  Hotar- 

priest :  let  the  Adhvaryu  come  to  you  with  store 
of  milk. 
Come,  O  ye  Asvins,  taste  the  meath  that   hath  been 
drained,  drink  of  the  milk  provided  by  this  radiant 
cow. 

6  Come  hither,  quickly  come,  thou  milker  of  the  kine : 

into  the  caldron  pour  milk  of  the  radiant  cow. 
Most  precious  Savitar  hath  looked  upon  the  heaven. 
After  Dawn's  going-forth  he  sends  his  light  abroad. 

7  I  invocate  this  milch-cow  good  for  milking,  so  that 

the  milker,  deft  of  band,  may  milk  her. 
May  Savitar  give  goodliest  stimulation.  The  caldron 
hath  been  warmed.     Let  him  proclaim  it. 

3  With  the  Oandharva^s  mouth :  that  is,  by  means  of  Agni,  tht 
sacrificial  fire  which  bears  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

5   With  its  l/otar priest :  whose  duty  it  is  to  present  the  libation. 

7  /  invocate  this  milch-cow :  this  is  recited  by  the  Adhvaryu  when 
the  cow  is  to  be  milked.  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from 
Bigveda  I.  164.  26.  In  the  original  hymn,  which  from  beginning  to 
end  is  a  series  of  enigmas,  the  cow  may,  according  to  S&y  ana,  be  the  rain^ 
the  milk  being  the  rain  and  the  milker  V&y  u  the  God  of  Wind  who  causes 
it  to  flow. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTKir  74.]  THE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  36» 

8  She,  sovran  of  all  treasures,  is  come  hither  yearning 

in  spirit  for  her  calf,  and  lowing. 
May  this  cow  yield  her  milk   for  both  the   Asvins, 
and  may  she  prosper  to  our  great  advantage. 

9  As  dear  house-friend,  guest  welcome  in  the  dwelling, 

to  this  our  sacrifice  come  thou  who  knowest. 
And,  Agni,  having  scattered   all  assailants,  bring  to 
us  the  possessions  of  our  foemen. 

10  Show  thyself  strong  for  mighty  bliss,  O  Agni !  Most 

excellent  be  thine  effulgent  splendours ! 
Make  easy  to  maintain  our  household  lordship,  and 
overcome  the  might  of  those  who  hate  us. 

11  Fortunate  mayst  thou  be  with  goodly  pasture,  and 

may  we  also  be  exceeding  wealthy. 
Feed  on    the   grass,  O    Cow,  at   every  season,   and, 
coming  hither,  drink  the  limpid  water. 

HYMN  LXXIV. 
Black  is  the  mother,  we  have  heard,  from  whom  the 

red-hued  Pustules  sprang. 
With  the  divine  ascetic  s  root  I  pierce  and  penetrate 
them  all. 
2  I  pierce  the  foremost  one  of  these,   I  perforate  the 
middlemost. 
And  here  I  cut  the  hindermost   asunder  like  a  lock 
of  hair. 


8  Taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  I.  164.  27.  In  the  original 
hymn  the  calf  is  the  world  longing  for  the  rain  to  fall. 

9  Taken  from  Bigveda  V.  4.  5. 

10  Taken  from  Ri:^eda  V.  28.  3.  Make  easy  to  mnintain  our 
household  lordship  :  according  to  S^yana :  Perfect  Uie  well-knit  bond 
of  wife  and  husband. 

11  Taken  from  Rigveda  I.  164.  40. 


A  charm  to  cure  pustules  or  scrofulous  tumours. 

1  Pubtules:  apachitas ;  see  VI.  25.  1.  Scrofulous  or  inflammatory 
swellings  affecting  the  glands  of  the  neck,  gan^amdld  or  king's-evil, 
appear  to  be  intended.  7^he  divine  ascetic's  root :  there  is  no  clue  to  th« 
name  of  the  root  or  of  its  divine  discoverer. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


364  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  riL 

3  With  spell  that  Tvashtar  sent  to  us  I  have  dispelled 

thy  jealousy. 
We  mitigate  and  pacify  the  anger  that  thou  feltest, 
Lord! 

4  Lord  of  religious  rites,  by  law,  anointed,  shine  thou 

forth  here  for  ever  friendly-minded. 
So  may  we   all    with   children,   J&tavedas !  worship 
and  humbly  wait  on  thee  enkindled. 

HYMN  LXXV. 

Let  not  a  thief  or  wicked  man  possess  you  :  let  not 

the  dart  of  Rudra  come  anear  you. 
Prolific,  shining  in  the  goodly  pasture,  drinking  at 

pleasant  pools  the  limpid  water. 
2  Ye  know  the  place  and  rest  content,  close-gathered, 

called  by  many  a  name.    Come  to  me,  Goddesses, 

with  Gods. 
Bedew  with  streams  of  fatness  us,  this  cattle-pen, 

and  all  this  place. 

HYMN  LXXVL 

Rapidly  dropping,  quick  to  drop,  more  evil  than  the 

evil  ones. 
More  sapless  than  a  dried-up  bone,  swifter  than  salt 

to  melt  away  : 


A  blessing  on  cows. 

1  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  Yariations,  from  Rigveda  VI.  28.  7. 
The  dart  of  Rwira  :  *  Far  be  thy  dart  that  killeth  men  or  cattle ' 
(Rigveda  I.  114.  10.) 

2  Goddesses :  so  in  the  hymn  from  which  stanza  1  is  taken  the  cows 
are  addressed  as  deiBed  beings  :  '  Prosper  my  house,  ye  with  auspici- 
ous voices.  Your  power  is  glorified  in  our  assemblies ; '  and  '  To  m« 
the  cows  seem  Bhaga,  they  seem  Indra,  they  seem  a  portion  of  th« 
firstrpoured  Soma,' 

A  charm  to  cure  scrofulous  pustules. 

1  Rapidly  dropping^  quick  to  drop :  6l  tusrdsah  sturdso  ;  the  texi 
appears  to  be  corrupt.  Prof.  Bloomfield  proposes  to  read  <r  susrdso 
giisrditurdy  more  swift  to  fall  than  what  falls  fast,  which  would  restort 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTIfN  76.]  THt  ATBARrA'TBDA.  865 

2  Pustules  that  rise  upon  the  neck,  Pustules  Upou  the 
shoulder-joints, 
Pustules  that,  falling  of  themselvesi  spring  up  on 
every  twofold  limb : 

8  I  have  expelled  and  banished  all  Scrofula  harboured 
in  the  head, 
And  that  which  bores  the  breast-bone  through,  and 
that  which  settles  in  the  sole. 

4  Scrofula  flies  borne  on  by  wings  :  it   penetrates  and 

holds  the  man. 
Here  is  the  cure  of  either  kind,  the  chronic  and  the 
transient. 

5  We  know  thine  origin,  Scrofula !  know  whence  thoUi 

Scrofula,  art  born. 
How  hast  thou  then  struck  this  man  here,  him  in 
whose  house  we  sacrifice  ? 


the  metre  without,  however,  disposing  of  the  superfluous  <!t  M.  Henry 
suggests  a  causative  verb  atitraso^  thou  (the  remedy)  hast  caused  to 
fall,  with  which  the  prefix  d'  might  be  construed,  instead  of  twrdUo. 
The  drying  and  falling  off  of  the  pustules  is  a  sign  that  the  disease  is 
yielding  to  the  remedy.  Afore  sapless  than  a  dried-up  hone :  sihora- 
rasdfard  ;  the  text  is  unintelligible  and  probably  corrupt,  sdhu  mean- 
ing, not  bone,  but  some  internal  organ  of  the  body,  although  the  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary  gives  the  word  in  this  passage  the  meaning  of 
'  a  certain  dry  material/  M.  Heniy  reads  arasdd  arasdtard^  drier  than 
the  dry. 

2  On  every  two/old  limh  :  mjdmni ;  on  the  legs  and  arms.  *•  Erup- 
tion that  appears  upon  the  twofold  joints*  (Rigveda  VII.  50.  2). 

3  Scrofula  :  ^jdydhya  appears  to  be  the  general  scrofulous  habit  of 
which  the  apachitas  or  pustules  are  the  external  manifestation.' — 
Henry.  I  adopt  M.  Henry's  reading  nir  dsyain  in  place  of  nirdstatf 
of  the  text. 

4  The  chronic  and  the  transient :  I  read  stikshitasya  with  Prof. 
Ludwig  instead  of  sdkshatasya, 

5  Scrofula,  art  horn :  jdydnya  jd'yase  ;  a  play  on  the  words,  both 
from  the  root  Jan,  to  generate. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


36«  THE  HTM NS  OF  [BOOK  YtL 

6  Boldly  drink  Soraa  from  the  beaker,  In^T^ '  \Lexo  in 
war  fur  treasure  !  Vritra-slayer. 
Fill  thyself  full  at  the  raid-day  libation  :  thyself  pos- 
sessing riches  grant  us  riches. 

HYMN  LXXVII. 

Ye  Maruts,  full  of  fiery  heat,  accept  this  offering 
brought  for  you 

To  help  us,  ye  who  slay  the  foe. 
2  Maruts,  the  man  who  filled  with  rage  against  us  be- 
yond our  thoughts  would  harm  us,  O  ye  Vasus, 

May  he  be  tangled  in  the  toils  of  Miecliief :  smite  ye 
him  down  with  your  most  flaming  weapon. 
8  Each  year  come,  friends  to  man,  the  tuneful  Maruts, 
dwelling  in  spacious  mansions,  trooped  together. 

Exhilarating,  gladdening,  full  of  fiery  heat,  may  they 
deliver  us  from  binding  bonds  of  sin. 
HYMN  LXXVIII. 

I  FREE  thee  from  the  cord,  I  loose  the  bond,  I  loose 
the  fastening. 

Even  here,  perpetual,  Agni,  wax  thou  strong. 

2  I  with  celestial  prayer  appoint  thee,  Agni,  main- 
tainer  of  this  man  in  princely  powers. 
Here  brightly  shine  for  us  with  wealth :  declare  thou 
to  Gods  this  favoured  giver  of  oblations. 

—  -^  •■  ■ 

6  The  stanza,  taken  from  Rigveda  VI.  47.  6,  has  no  apparent  con- 
nexion with  the  object  of  the  charm. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  500.  See  also  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  p.  377. 

An  incantation  against  an  enemy. 

1  Stanzas  1  and  2  are  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  Vlt.  59. 

2  Mischief:  or  one  of  the  malicious  spirits  called  Druhs. 

A  charm  for  a  prince's  prosperity. 

1  Thee :  according  to  the  Vaitina-SAtra  IV.  1 1  the  stanza  is  i^itdd 
when  the  symbolical  band  is  removed  from  the  sacrificer^s  wife. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7MN  80.]  TUB  ATnAnVA-YEDA.  Ztl 

HYMN  LXXIX. 

Night  of  the  New-born  Moon,  whatever  fortune  the 
Gods  who  dwell  with  greatness  have  assigned  thee, 

Therewith  fulfil  our  sacrifice,  all-bounteous  !  BlessM 
One,  grant  us  wealth  with  manly  offspring. 

2  I  am  the  New  Moon's  Night,  the  good  and  pious  are 

my  inhabitants,  these  dwell  within  me. 
In  me  have  Gods  of  both  the  spheres,  and  SAdhyas, 
with  Indra  as  their  chief,  all  met  together. 

3  The   Night  hath  come,  the  gatherer  of  treasures, 

bestowing  strength,  prosperity,  and  riches. 
To   New   Moon's   Night  let   us   present   oblation : 
pouring  out  strength,   with  milk  hath  she  come 
hither. 

4  Night  of  New  Moon  !  ne'er  hath  been  born  another 

than  thou  embracing  all  these  forms  and  natures. 
May  we  have  what  we  longed  for  when   we  brought 
thee  oblations  :  may  we  be  the  lords  of  riches. 

HYMN  LXXX. 

Full  in  the  front,  full  rearward,  from  the  middle  the 
Full  Moon's  Night  hath  conquered  in  the  battle. 

In  her  may  we,  dwelling  with  Gods  and  greatness, 
feast  in  the  height  of  heaven,  on  strengthening 
viands. 


A  hymn  to  the  New  Moon. 

1  Night  of  the  New-hom  Moon:  amdvdsy^  (from  vas,  to  dwell,  and 
amd,  together,  is  the  night  during  which  the  moon  dwells  together 
with  or  in  the  same  quarter  as  the  sun ;  Night  of  New  Moon  personi- 
fied as  a  Goddess. 

2  Sddhyas  :  a  class  of  ancient  Gods.  See  YII.  5.  I. 
4  Cf.  stanza  3  of  Hymn  LXXX. 

A  hymn  to  the  Full  Moon. 

1  From  the  middle :  of  the  lunar  month. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8««  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

2  To  him,  the   Full  Moon's  mighty  Bull,  we  pay  our 
solemn  sacrifice. 
May  he  bestow  upon  us  wealth  un wasting,  inexhaus- 
tible. 
8  No  one  but  thou,  Praj4pati,  none  beside  thee,  per- 
vading, gave  to  all  these  forms  their  being. 
Grant  us   our  hearts'  desire  when  we  invoke  thee  : 
may  we  have  store  of  riches  in  possession. 

4  First  was  the  Full  Moon  meet  for  adoration  among 

the  days  and  in  the  nights'  deep  darkness. 
Into  thy  heaven,  O  Holy  One,  have   entered  those 
pious  men  who  honour  thee  with  worship. 

HYMN  LXXXI. 

Forward  and  backward  by  their  wondrous  power 
move  these  two  youths,  disporting,  round  the  ocean. 

One  views  all  living  things,  and  thou,  the  other,  art 
born  again  arranging  times  and  seasons. 
2  Thou  art  re-born  for  ever  new :  thou  marchest,  en- 
sign of  days,  in  forefront  of  the  mornings. 

Marching  thou  dealest  to  the  Gods  their  portion.  Thou 
lengthenest.  Moon  !  the  days  of  man's  existence. 

5  0  spray  of  Soma,  Lord  of  Wars  1  all-perfect  verily 

art  thou. 
Make  me  all-perfect,  Beauteous  One  !  in  riches  and 
in  progeny. 

2  Bull :  the  God  of  the  Moon* 

3  Taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  X.  121.  10,  which  appears  to 
be  a  later  addition  to  the  original  hymn. 

A  hymn  to  the  New  Moon. 

1  The  introductory  stanzas  1  and  2  are  taken,  with  variations, 
from  Kigveda  X.  85.  18,  19.  Ttco  youths :  Si^rya  and  Soma,  or  Sun  and 
Moon.     Ocean:  of  air. 

2  Enngn  of  dayt :  referring  to  the  waning  moon  which  precedes  tha 
dawn. 

3  0  9pray  of  Soma :  Soma  the  Moon  identified  with  Soma  the  plant. 
Lord  of  Wars :  probably  because  the  first  quarter  of  the  moon  wa» 

considered  a  favourable  time  for  predatory  exclusions. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RYMN  82.]  THE.  ATHARVA-7E3A.  869 

4  Thou  art  the  New  Moon,  fair  to  see,  thou  art  com- 

plete in  every  part 
May  I  be  perfect,  fuUy  blest  in  every  way  in  steeds 
and  kine,  in  children,  cattle,  home,  and  wealth. 

5  Inflate  thee  with  his  vital  breath  who  hates  us  and 

whom  we  detest. 
May  we  grow  rich  in  steeds  and  kine,  in  children, 
cattle,  houses,  wealth. 

6  With  that  unwasting  stalk  which  Gods,  unwasting 

Gods,  increase  and  eat. 
May  Varuna,  Brihaspati,  and  Indra,  the  Lords  and 
Guardians  of  the  world,  increase  us. 

HYMN  LXXXIL 

SiNO  with  fair  laud  the  combat  for  the  cattle.   Bestow 

upon  us  excellent  possessions. 
Lead  to  the  Gods  the  sacrifice  we  offer :  let  streams 

of  oil  flow  pure  and  full  of  sweetness. 
.  2  Agni  I  first  appropriate  with  power,  with  splendour, 

and  with  might. 
I  give  myself  children  and  lengthened  life,  with  Hail! 

take  Agni  to  myself 


4  New  Moon :  darsds.  Fair  to  see  .•  darsatds.  Tkon  art  complete  : 
said  euphemistically  and  prolepticallj. 

6  Stalk :  the  Soma  plant,  identified  with  the  Moon.  Increase  : 
dpydydyanti ;  this  verb,  here  in  the  indicative  and  in  the  second 
line  in  the  imperative,  is  used  with  a  quibbling  reference  to  dpydyana 
(causing  to  swell  or  increase),  a  technical  word  for  a  part  of  the 
procedure  followed  in  preparing  Soma  juice.     See  M.  Henry's  note. 

According  to  the  Kauslka-Sutra  XXIV.  18,  the  hymn  is  to  be  recit- 
ed  on  return  from  a  journey. 

A  hymn  in  praise  of  AgnL 

1  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Rigveda  IV.  58.  10.  Sing : 
ahhydrchata;  addressed  to  the  singers.  The  Kigveda  has  dbhydrskata, 
addressed  to  the  Gods  :  '  Send  to  our  eulogy  a  herd  of  cattle,'  accord- 
ing to  Silyana.  Bestow :  addressed  to  the  Crods.  Oil :  molten  butter. 

2  With  Hail ! :  that  is,  while  I  offer  sacrifice  and  utter  the  pres- 
cribed exclamation  Svahsl,  Ave,  or  Hail ! 

24 


Digitized  by 


Google 


870  THE  HTJiirS  OF  [BOOK  7IL 

3  Even  here  do  thou,  O  Agni,  stablish  wealth  :  let  not 

oppressors  injure  thee  by  thinking  of  thee  first. 
Light  be  thy  task  of  ruling,  Agni,  with  thy  power : 
may  he  who  worships  thee  wax  strong,  invincible. 

4  Agni  hath  looked  upon  the  spring  of  Mornings,  looked 

on  the  days,  the  earliest  J&tavedas. 
So,  following  the  gleams   of  Morning,  SArya  hath 
entered  heaven  and  earth  as  his  possession. 

5  Agni  hath  looked  upon  the  spring  of  Mornings,  looked 

on  the  days,  the  earliest  Jdtavedas. 
So  he  in  countless  places  hath  extended,  full  against 
heaven  and  earth,  the  beams  of  SArya. 

6  Butter  to  thee  in  heaven  thy  home,  O  Agni !  Manu 

this  day  hath  kindled  thee  with  butter. 
Let  the  Celestial  Daughters  bring  thee  butter  :  let 
cows  pour  butter  forth  for  thee,  O  Agni. 

HYMN  LXXXIIL 

StABLiSHED  amid  the  waters  is.  King  Varuflia,  thy 

golden  home. 
Thence  let  the  Sovran  who  maintains  the  statutes 

loose  all  binding  cords. 

2  Hence  free  thou  us.  King  Varuija,  from  each  suc- 
cessive bond  and  tie. 


3  Let  not  oppressors :  let  not  the  wicked,  anticipating  our  worship, 
secure  thy  attentioij  before  us,  and,  as  unworthy  adorers,  insult  and 
degrade  thy  majesty. 

.  4  SHrya :  that  is,  Agni  as  the  Sun. 

6  Manu :  the  priest  as  representative  of  Manu  regarded  as  the  first 
institutor  of  religious  ceremonies.  Celestial  Daughters :  the  heavenly 
Waters. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  428. 

A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  other  evils. 

1  Amid  the  waters :  Varuna,  Qod  of  the  starry  firmament  and  the 
celestial  ocean,  presiding  also  over  the  waters  of  earth.  See  Muir,  0.  S. 
Texts,  V.  pp.  72—74.     The  iSovran  :  Yaruna. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYM.^  84.]  TBB  ATHARrA^YMDA.  371 

As  we  have  cried,  0  Varuna !  have  said,  The  Waters, 
they  are  kine,  thence  set  us  free,  O  Varuija. 

3  Loosen  the  bonds,  O  Varupa,  that  hold  us,  loosen 

the  bond  above,  between,  and  under. 
So  before  Aditi  may  we  be  sinless  under  thy  favour- 
ing auspices,  Adityal 

4  Varuija,  free  us  from  all  snares  that  bind  us,  Varuflia'a 

bonds,  the  upper  and  the  lower. 
Drive  from  us  evil  dream,  drive  off  misfortune  :  then 
let  us  pass  into  the  world  of  virtue, 

HYMN  LXXXIV. 

Holder  of  sway,  shine  here  refulgent,  Agni!  invinci- 
ble, immortal  J^tavedas. 

With  succours  friendly  to  mankind,  auspicious,  driv- 
ing away  all  maladies,  guard  our  dwelling. 

2  Thou,  Indra,  lord  and  leader  of  the  people,  wast  born 
for  lovely  strength  and  high  dominion. 
Thou.dravest  off  the  folk  who  were  unfriendly,  and 
madest  for  the  Gods  wide  room  and  freedom. 


2  Have  cried^  0  Varvna  ! :  have  invoked  thy  name.  The  Watern, 
they  are  kine :  have  glorified  the  waters  in  which  thou  dwellest  by 
likening  them  to  beneficent  and  sacred  cows. 

3  The  stanza  is  taken  from  ^igveda  I.  24.  15. 

4  llepeatod,  with  variants,  from  A.  V.  VI,  121.  1. 

According  to  the  Kaui|ika-S(itra  CXXVII.  4,  the  hymn  is  to  be  reeiC- 
ed  toj^ether  with  other  verses  of  the  Atharva-veda  at  a  propitiatory 
sacrifice  when  a  comet  has  darkened  the  constellation  of  the  Seven 
Kishis  or  Ursa  Major.  See  Weber^s  Omina  und  Portenta,  p.  3S7.  Parts 
of  the  hymn  are  also  to  be  recited  in  incantations  against  dropsy, 
a  disease  especially  attributed  to  the  displeasure  of  Varuna.  See 
l^igveda  VII.  89. 

A  prayer  for  protection. 

1  Sueoovrs :  or,  perhaps,  Croddesses,  the  Waters  or  the  Dawns.  Tho 
adjectives  stan  1,  in  the  feminine  gender,  withoHt  a  substautive. 

2  This  and  the  following  stanea  are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  180.  5,  3, 
Stanza  2  was  recited  at  the  coronation  of  a  King. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


372  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIV 

8  Like  a  dread  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain, 
may  he  approach  us  from  the  farthest  distance. 
Whetting  thy  bolt  and  tby  sharp  blade,  O   Indra, 
crush  down  our  foes  and  scatter  those  who  hate  us, 

HYMN  LXXXV. 

This  very  mighty  one  whom  Gods  urge  onward,  the 

conqueror  of  cars,  ever  triumphant, 
Swift,  fleet  to  battle,  with  uninjured  fellies,  even 

Tdrkshya  for  our  weal  will  we  call  hither. 

HYMN  LXXXVL 

Indra  the  rescuer,  Indra  the  helper,  Indra  the  brave 

who  hears  each  invocation, 
Sakra  I  call,  Indra  invoked  of  many.     May  Indra 

Maghavan  prosper  and  bless  us. 

HYMN  LXXXVII. 

To  Rudra  in  the  fire,  to  him  who  dwells  in  floods, 
to  Rudra  who  hath  entered  into  herbs  and  plants, 

To  him  who  formed  and  fashioned  all  these  worlds, 
to  him  this  Rudra,  yea,  to  Agni,  reverence  be 
paid  I 

A  charm  to  ensure  saccess  in  battle. 

The  stanza  is  taken  from  Kigveda  X,  178.   1.  TMczhya:  a  personi- 
fication of  the  Sun,  usually  described  as  a  kind  of  celestial  horse. 

A  prayer  to  ensure  success  in  battle. 
"•'The  stanza  is  taken  from  Kigveda  YI.  47.  11. 

A  prayer  to  Rudra  as  Agni. 

Budra :  here,  as  in  other  passages,  regarded  as  a' form  of  Agni. 
.     In  .floods :  as  lightning,  in  the  watery  clouds,  the  waters  of  the 
ocean  of  air.     Hfrbs  and  plants :  which  Agni  enters  in  the  form  of 
lightnjb»g  descending  with  the  rain.     All  these  toorlds:  all  living 
creatures. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J?ri/if89.]  THE  ATHAnVATEDA.     .  373 

HYMN  LXXXVIIL 

Depart  I  thou  art  a  foe,  a  foe.     Poison  with  poison 
hast  thou  niixt.  Yea,  verily  poison  hast  thou  mixt 
Go  to  the  serpent :  strike  him  dead. 

HYMN  LXXXIX. 

The  heavenly  Waters  have  I  ranged  :  we  have  been 

sated  with  their  dew. 
Here,  Agni,  bearing  milk,  am  I.  Endow  me  with  the 

gift  of  strength. 

2  Endow  me  with  the  gift  of  strength,  with  children, 

and  a  lengthened  life. 
May  the  Gods  mark  this  prayer  of  mine,  may  Indra 
with  the  Rishis  mark. 

3  Ye  Waters,  wash  away  this  stain  and  whatsoever 

taint  be  here. 
Each  sinful  wrong  that  I  have  done  and  every  harm- 
less curse  of  mine. 

4  Thou  art  the  wood,  may  I  succeed !  fuel,  may  I  be 

glorified  !  splendour,  give  splendour  unto  me. 


A  cbann  to  cure  a  enake-brte. 

The  stanza  is  apparently  addressed  to  the  poison  in  the  woand. 
Poison  tcttk  poison :  thou  hast  made  thyself  doubly  strong.  Accord- 
ing to  M.  Henry,  who  considers-  the  literal  meaning  to  be  very  vague 
and  inapplicable  to  the  procedure  prescribed  in  Kausika-Sutm  XXIX. 
.  €,  the  words  are  addressed  to  the  blade  of  gra^  used  in  the  charm, 
which  has  become  impregnated  with  the  poison  which  hy  its  means 
has  been  extracted  from  the  wound.  M.  Henry  accordingly  translates : 
*  In  the  poison  thou  hast  filled  thyself  with  poison/ 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  51 1. 

A  prayer  for  purification  and  prosperity. 

The  hymn-  is^recited  in  the  ceremony  of  purification  with  hofy  water. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


W4  »  THE  ETMJfS  OF  [BOOK  fiL 

HYMN  XC. 
Tear  thou  asunder,  as  of  old,  like  tangles  of  a  creep- 
ing plant.     Demolish  thou  the  D&sa's  might. 
2  May  we  with  Indra's  help  divide  the  gathered  trea- 
sure of  the  foe. 
I,  by  the  law  of  Varui?a,  bring  down  thy  pride  and 
wantonness. 

HYMN  XCI. 
Mat  Indra  with  his  help,  Lord  of  all  treasures,   be 

unto  us  a  careful  good  protector, 
Drive  off  our    foes  and  give  us   peace  and  safety. 
May  we  be  lordtt  of  goodly  store  of  heroes. 

HYMN  XCII. 

Mat  this  rich  Indra  as  our  good  protector  keep  even 
far  away  the  men  who  hate  us. 

May  we  enjoy  his  favour,  his  the  holy  :  may  we  en- 
joy his  blessed  loving-kindness, 

HYMN  XCIII. 
With  Indra's  and  with  Manyu's  aid  may  wo  subdue 
our  enemies,  resistlessly  destroying  foes. 


A  ohann  to  prevent  the  succesa  of  a  rival  in  love. 

Stanzas  1  and  2  are  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  VI  f  I.  40. 
6,  and  are  originally  part  of  a  prayer  to  Indra  and  Agni  for  victory 
over  hostile  natives  of  the  land.  According  to  the  Kausika-Sutra, 
XXXVI.  35  sqq.,  the  hymn  is  to  be  used,  with  Certain  prescribed  cere^ 
monies,  as  a  charm  against  a  rival.    For  staussa  3  see  Appendi^c. 

A  prayer  for  protection. 

The  stanza  ooours,  with  variants,  in  BigvecU  VI.  47.  12,  and 
X.  131.  6. 

A  prayer  for  protection. 

The  stanza  occurs,  with  variants,  in  Rigveda  VI.  47.  13,  and  X. 
131.  7. 

A  prayer  for  success  in  battle. 

Manyu's  aid:  the  aid  of  warlike  Anger  or  Rage  personified.  See 
IV.  31.  '^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S7MN  95.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  875 

HYMN  XCIV. 

We  lead  the  constant  Soma  on  with  constant  sacri- 
ficial gift, 

That  Indra  may  make  all  the  tribes  unanimous  and 
only  ours. 

HYMM   XCV. 

To  heaven,  as  'twere,  have  soared  this  man's  two 

vultures,  staggering,  dusky  hued, 
The  Parcher  and  tlie  Drier-up,  the  pair  who  parch 

and  dry  his  heart. 

2  I  verily  have  stirred  them  up  like  oxen  resting  after 

toil, 

Like  two  loud-snarling  curs,  or  like  two  wolves  who 
watch  to  make  their  spring  : 

3  Like  two  that  thrust,  like  two  that  pierce,  like  two 

that  strike  with  mutual  blows. 
I  bind  the  conduit  of  the  man  or  dame  who  hence 
hath  taken  aught. 


A  charm  to  ensure  the  obedience  of  subjects. 

The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variants,  from  Bigveda  X.  173.  6,  the 
subject  of  the  original  hymn  being  the  benediction  of  a  newly  elected 
King. 

An  incantation  against  an  undiscoyered  thief. 

1  The  stanza  is  unintelligible. 

2  Stirred  them  up  :  M.  Henry  strikes  out  Hd  which  mars  the  metre, 
and  translates :  *  I  have  reduced  them  to  immobility.* 

3  Two  that  thrust :  perhaps  bulls. 

The  procedure  prescribed  in  connexion  with  this  hymn  in  the  Kau- 
Bika-SAtra  XLVIII.  40 — 43,  which  consists  in  tying  two  threads,  one 
black  and  one  red,  to  a  striped  frog  and  plunging  the  animal  into  hot 
water,  does  not  throw  much  light  on  this  very  obscure  incantation. 
See  M.  Henry's  note. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  617. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S76  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIL 

HYMN  XCVI. 

The  kine  are  resting  ia  the  stall,  home  to  her  nest 

hath  flown  the  bird, 
The  hills  are  firmly  rooted  :  I  have  fixed  the  kidneys 

in  their  place. 

HYMN  XCVII. 

!      As  we  have  here  elected  thee,  skilled  Hotar  !  to-day 
as  this  our  sacrifice  proceedetb, 
Come  to  the  firm  place,  mightiest !  yea,  come  firmly. 
Knowing  the  sacrifice,  approach  the  Soma. 

2  With  kine  connect  us,  and  with  spirit,  Indra !  Lord 

of  Bay  Steeds,  with  princes  and  with  favour, 
With  the  God-destined    portion  of   the  Brahmans, 
and  the  good -will  of  Gods  who  merit  worship. 

3  The  willing  Gods  whom,    God,  thou  hast  brought 

hither,   send  thou   to   their  own  dwelling-place, 
O  Agni. 
When  ye  have  eaten  and  have  drunk  sweet  juices, 
endow  this  man  with  precious  wealth,  ye  Vasus. 

4  Gods,  we  have  made  your  seats  of  easy  access,  who, 

pleased  with  me,  have  come  to  my  libation. 
Bearing  and   bringing   hitherward   your   treasures, 
after  the  rich  warm  beverage  mount  to  heaven. 

5  Go  to  the  sacrifice,  go  to  its  master.  Sacrifice !  To 

thy  birth-place  go  with  Sv4h&. 


An  incantation  against  an  undiscovered  tbief. 
Hie  stanza  is  a  sequel  to  Hymn  XCV. 


The  hymn  consists  of  a  series  of  sacrificial  formulas. 

1  The  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Rigveda  III.  29.  16. 
To  the  firm  place :  the  sanctuary.  Or  the  translation  may  be  :  Come 
firmly,  0  most  mighty !  yea,  come  firmly. 

2  Taken,  with  variations,  from  Kigveda  V.  42.  4. 

4  Easy  of  access  :  that  is,  '  we  have  kindled  Agni  in  order  that  he 
may  show  us  the  way  to  heaven.' — Henry. 

5  Stanzas  5 — 8  are  n(Hi-metrical  in  the  original. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


'  HYMN  99.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  377 

6  This  is  thy  sacrifice  with  holy  hymnal.  Lord  of  the 

Rite,  Sv&h& !  and  fraught  with  vigour. 

7  Vashat  to  paid  and  yet  unpaid  oblations !  Ye  Gods 

who  know  the  way,  find  and  pursue  it ! 

8  Lord  of  the  Mind,  lay  this  our  sacrifice  in  heaven 

among  the  Gods,  Sv&h4  in  heaven!  Sv4h4  on  earth ! 
Sv&h&  in  air  !  In  wind  have  I  paid  offerings.  Hail ! 

HYMN  XCVIIL 

Balmed  is  the  Grass  with  butter  and  libation,  with 
Indra  gracious  Lord,  and  with  the  Maruts. 

Hail  \  let  the  sacrifice  go  forth  anointed  to  Indra 
with  the  Gods  and  Visve  Devas. 

HYMN  XCIX 

Strew  thou  the  Grass,  and  spread  it  on  the  Altar : 
rob  not  the  sister  who  is  lying  yonder. 

The  Hotar's  seat  is  green  and  golden  :  these  are  gold 
necklets  in  the  place  of  him  who  worships. 


6  Fraught  with  vigour :  bringing  us  the  strength  of  heroes. 

^7  To  paid  and  yet  unpaid  oblations  I :  or,  to  those  (Gods)  who  have 
been  worshipped,  and  to  those  who  have  not  (yet)  been  worshipped, 
with  oblations. 

8  Lord  of  the  Mind:  Lord  of  the  mental  powers  and  life  of  men ; 
here,  Agni. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  429. 


The  subject  is  the  anointing  of  the  Sacred  Grass. 
1   With  Indra  :  graced  by  the  presence  of  Indra. 

The  subject  is  the  preparation  of  the  Altar. 

Strew :  on  the  floor  of  the  sacriiicial  chamber  for  the  Gods  to  sit  on. 
The  sister :  the  altar,  regarded  as  closely  connected  with  the  priest. 
Green  and  golden :  being  strewn  with  fresh  bright  grass.  These  :  the 
tufts  of  grass.  In  the  place  of  him  who  worships:  in  the  sanctuary  or 
place  of  sacrifice.  See  M.  Henry's  note  for  an  exhaustive  discussion  of 
the  stanza. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  434. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


378  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIL 

HYMN  C. 

I  TURN  away  from  evil  dream,  from  dream  of  sin^ 

from  indigence. 
I  make   the    prayer   mine  inmost  friend.     Hence  I 

torturing  dreamy  phantasies ! 

HYMN  CI. 

The   food   that  in  a  dream   I  eat  is  Dot  perceived 

at  early   morn. 
May  all  that  food  be  blest  to  me  because  it  is  not 

seen  by  day. 

HYMN  CII. 

When  I  have  worshipped  Heaven  and  Earth,  rever- 
enced Firmament  and  Death, 

I  will  make  water  standing  up.  Let  not  the  Sov- 
rans injure  me. 

HYMN  CHI.      • 

What  princely  warrior,  seeking  higher  fortune,  will 
free  us  from  this  shameful  fiend  of  mischief  ? 

What  friend  of  sacrifice  ?  what  guerdon-lover  ?  Who 
winneth  'mid  the  Gods  a  long  existence  ? 

A  charm  against  nightmare. 

/ turn  away :  and  lie  on  my  other  side.  Mim  immost  friend :  cf .  1. 1 9. 4. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  498. 


A  charm  against  nightmare. 

l^ke  food :  dreaming  of  eaten  food  is  unlucky,  and  requires  a  purifi- 
cation. 

A  charm  to  obtain  pardon  for  an  indecent  act. 
The  stanza  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  svastyayanas  or  charms  to 
ensure  success.  See  Kausika-Sdtra  LII.  15. 

The  cry  of  an  unemployed  priest. 

Princely  warrior:  or  Kshatriya.  Fiend  ofmiichief:  here,  apparent- 
ly, meaning  the  demon  of  poverty.  A  long  existence :  a  long  life  in 
heaven  as  the  reward  of  the  sacrifices  which  I  am  ready  to  perform 
for  any  employer.    See  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  269. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  107.]  THB  ATHARVAYEDA.  379 

HYMN  CIV. 

Who  will  prepare  the  dappled  Cow,  good  milker, 
ne'er  without  calf,  whom  Varuijia  gave  Atharvan, 

And,  joying  in  Brihaspati's  alliance,  arrange  accord- 
ing to  his  will  her  body  ? 

HYMN  CV. 

Lkavinq   humanity   behind,    making   the   heavenly 

word  thy  choice, 
With  all  thy  friends  address  thyself  to   furthering 

and  guiding  men. 

HYMN  CVI. 

Each  thoughtless  ill  that  we  have  done,    0  Agni, 

all  error  in  our  conduct,  J4tavedas ! 
Therefrom   do  thou,   O  sapient  God,   preserve   us. 

May  we  thy  friends,  for  bliss,  have  life  eternal. 

HYMN  CVII. 

The  seven  bright  beams  of  SArya  bring  the  waters 

downward  from  the  sky, 
The  streams  of  ocean  :  these  have  made  the  sting 

that  pained  thee  drop  away. 

A  prayer  for  prosperity. 

Who :  what  God.  The  dappled  Caw  :  the  symbol  of  Plenty.  Whom 
Vmrutfa  gave  Atharvan:  Bee  V.  11. 

An  initiation  formula. 

The  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  Acharya  or  spiritual  teacher  in  the 
vpanayana  ceremony,  when  he  invests  the  religious  student  with  the 
sacrificial  thread,  instructs  him  in  the  Veda,  and  gives  him  authority 
to  teach. 

A  prayer  for  pardon. 

Agni  is  entreated  to  preserve  the  priests  from  the  consequences  of 
'  any  error  in  conducting  divine  worship. 

A  charm  against  cough. 

The  sunbeams  may  be  said  to  cause  the  waters  to  descend  in-as- 
much  as  they  have  first  drawn  them  up  in  the  shape  of  vapour.  The 
water  is  to  be  used  in  rinsing  the  mouth  of  the  patient,  27ie  sting  : 
tixe  pricking  or  tickling  sensatiop  in  (he  tbroat* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


380  Tna  H7JJNS  OF  [BOOK  TIL 

HYMN  CVIII. 

Whoso  by  stealth  or  openly  would  harm  us,  a  friend 

who  knows  us,  or  a  stranger,  Agni ! 
May  the  strange  she-fiend  armed  with  teeth  attack 

them:  0  Agai,  theirs  be  neither  home  nor  children! 
2.  Whoso  oppresseth  us,  0  J4tavedas,  asleep  or  waking, 

standing  still  or  moving, 
Accordant  with  Vais v4nara  thy  comrade,  O  J&tavedas, 

meet  them  and  consume  them. 

HYMN  CIX. 

My  homage  to  the  strong,  the  brown,   the  sovran 

lord  among  the  dice  ! 
Butter  on  KaJi  I  bestow:  may  he  be  kind  to  one  like  me. 

2  Bear  butter  to  the   Apsarases,  0  Agni,  and  to  the 

Dice  bear  dust  and  sand  and  water. 
The  Gods  delight  in  both  oblations,  joying  in  sacri- 
ficial gifts  apportioned  duly. 

3  The  Apsarases  take  pleasure  in  the  banquet  between 

the  Sun  and  the  libation-holder. 
With   butter  let  them  fill  my  hands,  and  give  me, 
to  be  my  prey,  the  man  who  plays  against  me. 

4  Evil  be  mine  opponent's  luck  !  Sprinkle  thou  butter 

over  us. 

A  prayer  for  protection. 

2  With  Vatsvdnara  :  Agni  in  another  character  being  here  regarded 
as  a  separate  deity. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  517. 

A  prayer  to  ensure  success  in  gambling. 

1  The  brown :  the  nuts  of  the  Vibhidaka,  or,  later,  Vibhttaka,  tree 
(Terminalia  Bellerica)  were  uaed  as  dice  in  early  times.  See  Rigveda 
X.  34.  1.  Kali:  the  die,  or  side  of  a  die,  which  is  marked  with  one 
point ;  the  ace  (personified  as  an  evil  genius  in  the  poem  of  Nala). 
Kali  is  propitiated  with  sacrificial  butter  on  account  of  his  ruinous 
power  as  the  worst  throw. 

2  To  the  Apsarases :  who  preside  over  dice  and  influence  the  gam- 
bler's luck.  See  II.  2.  5;  IV.  38.  1—4 ;  VI.  118.  1.  Dnst .  apparently, 
the  dice,  after  being  dipped  in  butter,  were  dried  in  sand,  and  then 
washed  with  water.  See  M.  Henry's  note. 

3  Between  the  Swn  and  the  libation-holder :  that  is,  in  mid-air. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffFJ/.V  110.]  TnH  ATHARVA'TEDA.  381 

Strike,  as  a  tree  with  lightning  flash,  mine  adversary 
io  the  game. 
5  The  God  who  found  for  us  this  wealth  for  gambling, 
to  east  the  dice  and  count  the  winning  number, 
May  he  accept  the  sacrifice  we  offer,  and  with  Gan- 
dharvas  revel  in  the  banquet. 
€  Fellow-inhabitants,  such  is  your  title,  for  Dice  with 
looks  of  power  support  dominion. 
As  such  with  offerings  may  we  serve  you,  Indus ! 
May  we  have  riches  in  our  own  possession. 
7  As  I  invoke  the  Gods  at  need,  as  I  have  lived  in 
chastity. 
May  these,  when  I  have  grasped  the  Dice,  the  brown, 
be  kind  to  one  like  me. 

HYMN  ex. 

Resistless,  Agni,  Indra,  smite  his  foemen  for  the 

worshipper, 
For  best  foe-slayers  are  ye  both. 

2  Agni  I  call,  and  Indra,  foe-destroyers,  swift  moving, 

heroes,  Gods  who  wield  the  thunder. 
Through  whom  they  won  the  light  in  the  beginning, 
these  who  have  made  all  worlds  their  habitation. 

3  The  God  Brihaspati  hath  won  thy  friendly   favour 

with  the  cup. 
With  hymns,  O  Indra,  enter  us  for  the  juice-pouring 
worshipper. 

5  Gandharvas :  as  the  husbands  of  the  dice-loYing  Apsarases. 

6  Fellow-inhabitants:  idmvasavas;  equivalent,  according  to  M. 
Henry,  to  the  Etrusco-Roman  Dii  Consentes.  According  to  Prof. 
Ludwig  *  Containers  of  all  wealth.'  Indus:  drops  of  Soma  juice. 
M.  Henry  would  read  devd,  Gods  ! 

7  Lived  in  chastity:  led  the  chaste  life  of  the  Brahmach&ri  or 
religious  student. 

Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  456. 

A  prayer  for  success  in  battle. 

2  They  won  the  light :  the  Gods  obtained  the  light  of  heaven. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


382  THE  BY  Mm  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

HYMN  CXI. 
Belly  of  Indra  art  thou,  Soma-holder !  the  very  soul 

of  Gods  and  human  beings. 
Here   be   the  sire  of  offspring,    thine  here  present ! 
Here  be  they  glad  in  thee  who  now  are  elsewhere. 
HYMN  CXII. 
Radiant  with  light  are   Heaven   and  Earth,  whose 

grace  is  nigh,  whose  sway  is  vast. 
Seven  Goddesses  have  flowed  to  us:  may  they  deliver 
us  from  woe; 
2  Release  me  from  the  curse's  bond  and  plague  that 
comes  from  Varuoa  ; 
Free   me   from    Yama's   fetter  and   from  every   sin 
against  the  Gods. 

HYMN  CXIII. 
Rough  Plant,   thou    rough  rude  parasite,  cut  thou 

that  man,  O  Rough  and  Rude, 
That  thou  mayst  hinder  from  his  act  that  man  in  all 
his  manly  strength. 
2  Thou,   rugged   Plant,   art   rude   and  rough,  Vish4, 
Vish&takl  art  thou, 

A  prayer  for  progeny. 

Soma-holder:  the  reservoir  containing  the  clarified  Soma  juice  is 
addressed  as  the  representative  of  the  deity.  /Jere  present :  dtrd,  here, 
instead  of  dsH^  in  these  females.  The  reading  of  the  text  may  be  traced 
to  the  employment  of  the  stanza  at  a  vrishotsargay  the  liberation 
of  a  bull  (according  to  some  authorities,  with  four  heifers)  on  the 
occasion  of  a  sacrifice  or  as  a  religious  observance  generally.  See  M. 
Henry's  note.     Elsewhere :  in  the  other  world. 

A  prayer  for  protection  and  freedom  from  sin. 

1  Seven  Goddesses:  the  Seven  Rivers.  See  IV.  6.  2.  Jpas:  a  gloss 
that  mars  the  metre :  (T  should  be  read.     See  M.  Henry's  note. 

2  This  stanza,  taken  from  Bigveda  X.  97.  16,  occurs  also  in  A.  V. 
VI.  96.  2. 

A  woman's  incantation  against  a  rival. 

1  The  woman  appears  to  address  some  anti-aphrodisiac  plant. 

2  Vishdy  TishdUiki :  some  unknown  herbs :  *  Poison  and  Poison* 
draught'  according  to  Prof.  Weber.  The  second  line  is  addressed 
to  the  absent  rival.     A  barren  cow :  on  account  of  great  age. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  V.  p.  252. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYMN  115.1  THE  ATUARVA-VEDA,  383 

That  thou  mayst  be  cast  off  by  him,  a8  by   a   bull   a 

barren  cow. 

HYMN  CXIV. 
I  HAVE  extracted  from    thy   sides,    I  have  extracted 

from  thy  heart, 
I  have  extracted  from   thy   face   the   strength   and 

splendour  that  were  thine. 
2  Let  pain  and  suffering  pass  away,  let  cares  and  curses 

vanish  hence. 
Let  A^ni  slay  the  fiendish  hags,  Soma  kill  bags  who 

trouble  us. 

HYMN  CXV. 
Hence,   Evil   Fortune!  fly  away,   vanish  from  this 

place  and  from  that. 
We  fix  thee  with  an   iron  hook  unto  the  man  who 

hateth  us. 

2  Granting  us  riches,    Savitar!  golden-handed,   send 

thou  away  from  us  to  other  regions 
That  Fortune   who,  flying,  abominable,  hath,  as  a 
creeper  climbs  a  tree,  assailed  me, 

3  One  and  a  hundred  Fortunes  all  together  are  at  his 

birth  born  with  a  mortal's  body. 
Of  these   we   send  away   the   most   unlucky :  keep 
lucky  ones  for  us,  O  JAtavedas. 

Conclusion  of  the  incantation  in  Hymn  CXIII. 

1  Addressed  to  the  bewitched  rival. 

2  Fiendish  hags :  said  with  reference  to  the  woman  who  has  been 
her  rival. 


A  charm  against  Misfortune. 

1  Evil  Fortune:  Lakshmi ;  more  usually  the  Goddess  of  good  luck. 
See  I.  18.  1. 

3  One  and  a  hundred:  see  V.  18.  12. 

According  to  the  procedure  prescribed  in  the  Kausika-Sfttra,  XVIII. 
16 — 18,  a  hook  is  to  be  attached  to  the  left  leg  of  a  black  bird 
(explained  by  D^rila  as  a  crow),  a  rice-cake  is  to  be  hung  on  the  hook, 
and  the  bird  is  to  be  let  fly  as  the  first  stansa  is  recited. 

Translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  348 ;  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda, 
III.  p.  499.;  and  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,  pp.  41,  187. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


384  THE  ATHARTA-VEDA.  '    [BOOK  VIL 

4  I  have  disparted  these  and  those  like  cows  who  stray 
on  common  land. 
Here  let  auspicious   Fortunes  stay:  hence  have   I 
banished  evil  ones. 

HYMN  CXVI. 

Homage  to  him  the  burning  one,  shaker,  exciter,  violent! 
Homage  to  him  the   cold  who  acts  according  to  his 

ancient  will ! 
2  May  he,  the  lawless  one,  who  comes  alternate  or  two 

following  days,  pass  over  and  possess  the  frog. 

HYMN  CXVII. 

Come   hither,  Indra,  with  bay  steeds,  joyous,  with 

tails  like  peacock  plumes. 
Let  nonjs  impede  thy  way  as  fowlers  stay  the  bird  : 

pass  o'er  them  as  o'er  desert  lands. 

HYMN  CXVIII. 

Thy  vital  parts   I  cover  with   thine   armour :  with 

immortality  King  Soma  clothe  thee  ! 
Varuga  give  thee  what  is  more  than  ample,  and  in 

thy  triumph  let  the  Gods  be  joyful. 

'  — ■ 

A  charm  against  Fever. 

1  Homage :  Takman  or  Fever  is  addressed  as  a  devd,  a  supema* 
tural  being  or  God  to  whose  influence  the  disease  may  be  attributed. 
See  note  on  I.  25.  1.  Similarly  *  pest  or  fever  was  formerly,  and  is 
still  among  the  superstitious  Slaves,  held  to  be  a  female  deity  or  spirit 
of  evil.' — Baring-Gould,  Strange  Survivals,  p.  47. 

2  The  frog :  which  occupies  an  important  place  in  the  attendant 
procedure  prescribed  in  the  Kausika-Sdtra,  XXXII.  17.  The  frog, 
which  has  two  dififerent  coloured  strings  tied  round  it,  relieves  the 
patient  of  his  disease.     See  VII.  95.  3,  note. 

An  auspicious  formula  to  ensure  prosperity. 

The  stanza  is  taken  from  Kigveda  III.  45.  1,  found  also  in  Sima- 
veda  I.  iii.  ii.  1.  4,  and  II.  viii.  iii.  1. 

A  benediction  on  a  warrior. 

The  stanza  is  taken  from  Bigveda  VI.  75.  18,  the  deified  objects  pf 
the  original  hymn  being  armour  and  warlike  weapons,  charioteer, 
chariot,  horses,  and  tutelary  deities.  It  occurs  also  in  S&maveda  II. 
ix.  iii.  8.  1.  Armour :  the  vdrman  or  coat  of  mail  protected  the  should- 
ers, back,  chest,  and  lower  parts  of  the  body.  If  not  made  of  metal, 
it  was  strengthened  and  adorned  with  metal  of  some  kind. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  VIII 


HYMN  I. 

Homage  to  Death  the  Ender!  May  thy  breathings, 
inward  and  outward,  still  remain  within  thee. 

Here  stay  this  man  united  with  his  spirit  in  the 
Sun's  realm,  the  world  of  life  eternal ! 

2  Bhaga  hath  lifted  up  this  man,  and  Soma  with  his 

filaments, 
Indra  and  Agni,  and  the  Gods  the  Maruts,  raised 
him  up  to  health. 

3  Here  is  thy  spirit,  here  thy  breath,  here  is  thy  life, 

here  is  thy  soul : 
By  a  celestial  utterance  we  raise  thee  from  Destruc- 
tion's bonds. 

4  Up  from  this  place,  O  man,  rise!  sink  not  downward, 

casting  away  the  bonds  of  Death  that  hold  thee. 
Be  not  thou  parted  from  this  world,  from  sight  of 
Agni  and  the  Sun. 

5  Purely    for    thee    breathe    Wind   and   MAtarisvan, 

and  let  the  Waters  rain  on  thee  their  nectar. 
The  Sun   shall    shine    with  healing   on    thy  body ; 
Death  shall  have  mercy  on  thee :  do  not  leave  us! 

6  Upward  must  be  thy  way,   O  man,  not  downward  : 

with  life  and  mental  vigour  I  endow  thee. 
Ascend  this  car  eternal,  lightly  rolling ;  then  full  of 
years  shalt  thou  address  the  meeting. 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  or  incantation  designed  to  reeover  a  mis^n 
who  is  at  the  point  of  death,  or  even  to  recall  the  departed  spirit. 

5  Mdtarifvan  :  here  a  name  of  Ykju  or  Wind.  See  V.  17.  1. 

6  Aicend  this  car :  be  borne  back  to  life  bj  our  incantation. 

25 


Digitized  by 


Google 


386  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

7  Let  not  thy  soul  go  thither,  nor  be  lost  to  us :  slight 

ndt  the  living,  go  not  where  the  Fathers  are. 
Let  all  the  Gods  retain  thee  here  in  safety. 

8  Yearn  not  for  the  departed  ones,  for  those  who  lead 

men  far  away. 
Kise  up  from  darkness  into  light :  come,  both  thy 
hands  we  cksp  in  ours. 

9  Let  not  the  black  dog  and  the  brindled  seize  thee, 

two  warders  of  the  way  sent  forth  by  Yama. 
Come  hither ;  do  not  hesitate  :  with  niind  averted 
stay  not  there. 

10  Forbear  to  tread  this  path,  for  it  is  awful :  that  path 

I  speak  of  which  thou  hast  not  travelled. 
Enter  it  not,  O  man  ;  this  way  is  darkness :  forward 
is  danger,  hitherward  is  safety. 

11  Thy  guardians  be   the   Fires    within    the   Waters, 

thy  guardian  be  the  Fire  which  men  enkindle. 
Thy   guardian   be   Vaisv4nara    J&tavedas :    let.  not 
celestial  Fire  with  lightning  burn  thee. 

12  Let    not    the    Flesh-Consumer  plot  against   thee: 

depart  thou  far  away  from  the  Destroyer. 
Be  Heaven  and  Earth  and  Sun  and  Moon  thy  keepers, 
and  from  the  dart  of  Gods  may  Air  protect  thee. 

13  May  Vigilance  and  Watchfulness  protect  thee,  Sleep- 

less and  Slumberless  keep  guard  above  thee ! 
Let  Guardian  and  let  Wakeful  be  thy  warders. 

14  Let  these   be   thy   preservers,   these    thy   keepers. 

All  hail  to  these,  to  these  be  lowly  worship ! 

15  May  saving  Savitar,  Vdyu,    Indra,  Dh&tar  restore 

thee  to  communion  with  the  living. 
Let  not  thy  vigour  or  thy  breath  forsake  thee :  we 
recall  thy  life. 


9   Two  warden :  see  V.  30.  6. 

12  The  FUsh-Consumer :  Agiii  Kravyad,  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile. 
Cf.  in.  21.9. 

1 3  Vigilance^  Watchfulness,  and  the  others  are  the  Genii  of  living  men. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B7MN  1.]  TBB  ATHARVA-YBDA.  387 

16  Let  not  the  fiend  with  snapping  jaws,  nor  darkness  find 

thee:  tongue,  holy  grass :  how  shouldst  thou  perish? 
May  the  Adityas  and  the  Vasus,  Indra  and  Agni 
raise  thee  and  to  health  restore  thee. 

17  The  Sky  hath  raised  thee,  and  the  Earth,  Praj4pati 

hath  raised  thee  up. 
The  Plants  and  Herbs  with  Soma  as  their  King  have 
rescued  thee  from  Death. 

18  Here  let  this  man,  O  Gods,  remain :  let  him  not  go 

to  yonder  world. 
We  rescue  him  from  Mrityu  with  a  charm  that  hath 
a  thousand  powers. 

19  I  have  delivered  thee  from  Death.     Strength-givers 

smelt  and  fashion  thee  ! 
Let  not  she-fiends  with  wild  loose  locks,  or  fearful 
howlers  yell  at  thee. 

20  I  have  attained  and  captured  thee  :  thou  hast  return- 

ed restored  to  youth. 
Perfect  in  body  :  so  have  I  found  all  thy  sight  and 
all  thy  life. 

21  Life  hath  breathed  on  thee  ;  light  hath  come  :  dark- 

ness hath  past  away  from  thee. 
Far  from  thee  we  have  buried  Death,  buried  De- 
struction and  Decline. 

16  The  fiend  with  snapping  jaws :  jambhdh  sdmhanus;  see  IL  4.  2. 
J^ongue,  holy  grass :  the  construction  and  meaning  are  obscure.  Prof. 
Ludwig  suggests  dbarhih  instead  of  barhth,  and  translates  *  nicht  die 
zunge  au  sich  reiszen.' 

1 9  Strength-givers  smelt  and  fashion  thee ;  *  may  the  vigorous  breathe 
upoa  thee/— Muir.     See  VIII.  2.  4. 

21  Decline  :  ydkshmay  pulmonary  consumption. 

Translated  by  Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  444,  and  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda, 
III.  p.  49.'^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


388  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  VIIL 

HYMN  II. 

Seize  to  thyself  this  trust  of  life  for  eyer  :  thine  be 

longevity  which  nothing  shortens. 
Thy  spirit  and  thy  life  again  I  bring  thee  :  die  not, 

nor  vanish  into  mist  and  darkness. 

2  Come   to   the  light  of    living   men,   come  hither  : 

I  draw  thee  to  a  life  of  hundred  autumns. 
Loosing  the  bonds  of  Death,   the  curse  that  holds 
thee,  I  give  thee  age  of  very  long  duration. 

3  Thy  breath  have  I  recovered  from  the  Wind,  thy 

vision  from  the  Sun. 
Thy  mind  I  stablish  and  secure  within  thee  :  feel  in 
thy  members,  use  thy  tongue,  conversing. 

4  I   blow   upon   thee  with   the   breath  of  bipeds   and 

quadrupeds,  as  on  a  fire  new-kindled. 
To  thee,  O  Death,  and  to  thy  sight  and  breath  have 
I  paid  reverence. 

5  Let  this  man  live,  let  him  not  die  :  we  raise   him, 

we  recover  him. 
I  make  for  him  a  healing  balm.  O  Death,  forbear  to 
slay  this  man. 

6  Here  for  sound  health  I  invocate  a  living  animating 

plant. 
Preserving,   queller  of  disease,    victorious,   full   of 
power  and  might. 

7  Seize  him  not,  but  encourage  and    elease  him  :  here 

let  him  stay,  though  thine,  in  ah  his  vigour. 
Bhava  and  Sarva,  pity  and  protect  him  :  give  him 
full  life  an^  drive  away  misfortunes. 

A  charm  or  incantation  designed  to  recover  a  man  iptEo  is  at  the 
point  of  death,  or  even  to  recall  the  departed  spirit. 

3  Thy  breath :  at  death,  like  goes  to  like  :  '  The  sun  receive  thine 
eye  (or  thy  sight),  the  wind  thy  spirit'  (Rigveda  X.  16.  3).  Cf.  also 
A.V.  XI.  8.  31. 

7  Bhava  and  Sarva :  see  note  on  lY.  28.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  2.]  THE  ATBARVA-VBDA.  389 

8  Comfort  him,  Death,  and  pity  him  :  let  him   arise 

and  pass  away. 
Unharmed,  with  all  his  members,  hearing  well,  with 
eld,  may   he   through   hundred   years   win  profit 
with  his  soul. 

9  May  the  Gods'  missile  pass  thee  by.     I  bring  thee  safe 

from  the  mist:  from  death  have  I  preserved  thee. 
Far  have  I  banished  flesh-consuming  Agni :  I  place 
a  rampart  for  thy  life's  protection. 

10  Saving  him  from  that  misty   path  of  thine  which 
cannot  be  defied. 
From  that  descent  of  thine,  0  Death,  we  make  for 
him  a  shield  of  prayer. 

Ill  give  thee  both  the  acts  of  breath,  health,  lengthen- 
ed life,  and  death  by  age. 
All  Yama's  messengers  who  roam  around,  sent   by 
Vaivasvata,  I  chase  away. 

12  Far  oflf  we   drive  Malignity,  Destruction,  PisAchas 

banqueters  on  flesh,  and  Gr&hl. 
And  all  the  demon  kind,  the  brood  of  sin,  like  dark- 
ness, we  dispel. 

13  I  win  thy  life  from  Agni,  from  the  living  everlasting 

Jdtavedas. 
This  I  procure  for  thee,  that  thou,  undying,  mayst 
not  suffer  harm,  that  thou  mayst  be  content,  that 
all  be  well  with  thee. 

14  Gracious  to  thee  be  Heaven  and  Earth,  bringing  qo 

grief,  and  drawing  nigh  I 


9  Fle$h-con$uming  Agni  :  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile.  A  rampart : 
cf.  '  Here  I  erect  this  rampart  for  the  living'  (Rigveda  X.  IS.  4) ;  a 
line  of  demarcation  luniting  the  jurisdiction  of  Death  until  the  natural 
time  for  his  approach. 

1 1  Vaiva$vata  :  Vivas  van's  son,  Tama. 

12  Fi$dcha$ :  see  I.  16.  3.  Gr4ht :  see  II.  9. 1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


390  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIIL 

Pleasantly  shine  the  Sun  for  thee,  the  Wind  blow 

sweetly  to  thy  heart ! . 
Let  the  celestial  Waters  full  of  milk  flow  happily  for 

thee. 

15  Auspicious  be  the  Plants  to  thee!  I  have  upraised 

thee,  borne  thee  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  earth: 
Let  the   two   Sons  of  Aditi,   the  Sua   and   Moon, 
protect  thee  there. 

16  Whatever  robe  to  cover  thee  or  zone  thou  makest  for 

thyself, 
We  make  it  pleasant  to  thy  frame  :  may  it  be  soft 
and  smooth  to  touch. 

17  When,  with  a  very  keen  and  cleansing  razor,  our  hair 

and  beards  thou  shavest  as  a  barber, 
Smoothing  our  face  steal  not  our  vital  forces. 

18  Auspicious  unto  thee  be  rice  and  barley,  causing  no 

painful  sickness  or  consumption. 
These  two   expel   consumption,    these  deliver   from 
calamity. 

19  Thy  food,  thy  drink,  whatever  they  be,  corn  grown  by 

cultivation,  milk, — 
Food  eatable,  uneatable,   I  make   all  poisonless  for 
thee. 

20  We  give  thee  over  as  a  charge  to  Day  and  Night, 

in  trust  to  both. 
Keep  him  for  me  from  stingy  fiends,  from  those  who 
fain  would  feed  on  him. 

21  A  hundred,  yea,  ten  thousand   years  we  give  tbee, 

ages  two,  three,  four. 
May  Indra,  Agni,  all  the  Gods,  with  willing  favour 
look  on  thee. 

15  Moon :  *  The  Moon  is  not  in  the  Vedaa  generally  reckoned  among 
the  Adityas'. — Muir. 

17  Then  shavest :  causest  us  to  shave  as  a  sign  of  mourning. 
21  Ages  :  yugas  here  meaning  probably  generations. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  2.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  391 

22  To  Autumn  we  deliver  tbee,  to  Winter,   Spring,  and 

Summer's  care. 
We  trust   thee  with   auspicious   years   wherein  the 
plants  and  herbs  grow  up. 

23  Death  is  the  lord  of  bipeds.  Death  is  sovran  lord  of 

quadrupeds. 
Away  I  bear  thee  from  that  Death  the  ruler  :  be  not 
thou  afraid. 

24  Thou,  still  uninjured,  shalt   not  die  :  be  not  afraid  ; 

thou  shalt  not  die. 
Here  where  I  am  men  do  not  die  or  go  to  lowest 
depths  of  gloom. 

25  Here  verily  all  creatures  live,  the  cow,  the  horse,  the 

man,  the  beast, 
Here  where  this  holy  prayer  is  used>  a  rampart  that 

protecteth  life. 
Let  it  preserve  thee  from  thy  peers,  from  incantation, 

from  thy  friends. 

26  Live  very  long,  be  healthy,  be  immortal :  let  not  the 

vital  breath  forsake  thy  body* 

27  One  and  a  hundred  modes  of  death,  dangers  that  may 

be  overcome, — 
May  Gods  deliver  thee  from  this  when  Agni,  dear  to 
all  men,  bids. 

28  Body  of  Agni  prompt  to  save,  slayer  of  fiends  and 

foes  art  thou, 
Yea,    banisher  of  malady,  the  healing   hahn   called 
PAtudru. 


27  One  and  a  hundred  modes  of  death :  see  note  on  V.  18.  12. 

28  PHtudm:  the  Khadira  (Acacia  Catechu),^  or,  according  to  others, 
the  Devadjlru  (Pinus  Deodar).  Muir  and  Zimmor  writ©  *  Putadru,* 
which  is  said  to  be  a  name  of  the  PaRsa  (Butea  Frondosa). 

Translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  447,  and  by  Luiwig,  Der 
Bigveda,  III.  p.  496. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


392  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIIL 

HYMN   III. 

I  BALM  with  oil  the  mighty  demon-slayer,  to  the  most 

famous  friend  I  come  for  shelter. 
Enkindled,  sharpened  by  our  rites,  may  Agni  protect 

us  in  the  day  and  night  from  evil. 

2  O  J4tavedas,  armed  with   teeth  of  iron,   enkindled 

with  thy  flame,  attack  the  demons. 
Seize  with  thy  tongue  the  foolish  gods'  adorers:  rend, 
put  within  thy  mouth  the  raw-flesh-eaters. 

3  Apply  thy  teeth,  the  upper  and  the  lower,  thou  who 

hast  both,  enkindled  and  destroying. 
Roam  also  in  the  air,  O  King,  around  us,  and  with 
thy  jaws  assail  the  wicked  spirits. 

4  Pierce   through   the    YditudhAna's    skin,    O  Agni ; 

let  the  destroying  dart  with  fire  consume  him. 
Rend  his  joints,  JS,tavedas!  let  the  eater  of  raw  flesh, 
seeking  flesh,  tear  and  destroy  him. 

5  Where  now  thou  seest,  Agni  J&tavedas!  a  YAtudhdna, 

standing  still  or  roaming. 
Or  one   that    flieth   through   the   air's   mid-region, 
kindled  to  fury  as  an  archer  pierce  him. 

6  Bending  thy  shafts  through  sacrifices,  Agni !  dipping 

thine  arrows  in  the  hymn  to  point  them. 
Pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  Yfttudh&nas,  and 
break  their  arms  uplifted  to  attack  thee. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  the  destruction  of  demons. 

1  Stanzas  1 — 23  are  taken,  with  transpositions  and  other  variations, 
from  Rigveda  X.  87.  1 — 23,  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Pllyu  and  addressed 
to  Agni  Rakshohi,  the  Slayer  of  R^kshasas. 

2  Demons:  Y&tudh4nas  (see  I.  7.  1)  explained  by  S&yana  as  Rak- 
shasas.  Foolish  gods'  adorers :  mUradevdn :  according  to  Sliyana  =» 
mAranakri^r^  '  sporting  in  destruction/  an  epithet  of  a  particular 
class  of  demons. 

4  The  eater  of  raw  flesh :  the  wolf  or  other  carnivorous  wild  beast. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  3.]  THE  ATnARVA-VEDA,  393 

7  Rescue  the  captives  also,  JMavedas  !  yea,  those  whom 

Y&tudb4nas'  spears  have  captured/ 
Strike  down  that  fiend,  blazing  before  him,   Agni ! 
Let  spotted  carrion-eating  kites  devour  him. 

8  Here    tell    this    forth,    O  Agni :    whosoever  is,  he 

himself,  or  acteth  as,  a  demon, 
Grasp  him,  O  thou  most  youthful,   with  thy  fuel : 
to  the  Man-Seer's  eye  give  him  as  booty. 

9  With  keen  glance  guard  the  sacrifice,  O  Agni  :  thou 

Sage,  conduct  it  onward  to  the  Vasus. 
Let  not   the   fiends,    O    Man-Beholder,   harm   thee 
burning  against  the  Bdkshasas  to  slay  them. 

10  Look  on   the    fiend,    'mid    men,   as   Man-Beholder  : 

rend  thou  his  three  extremities  in  pieces. 
Demolish  with   thy   flame   his   ribs,    O   Agni :   the 
y&tudh&na's  root  destroy  thou  triply. 

11  Thrice,  Agni,  let  thy  noose  surround  the  demon  who 

with  his  falsehood  injures  holy  Order. 
Loud  roaring  with   thy   flame,    O  Jdtavedas,  fetter 
him  in  the  presence  of  the  singer. 

12  Agni,  what  curse  the  pair  this  day  may  utter,  what 

rude  rough  word  the  worshippers  have  spoken, 

7  I  translate  the  first  line  in  accordance  with  Prof.  Ludwig'a 
suorgestion  (Der  Rigveda,  IV.  p.  415)  that  ydtudhdhdn  stands  for 
ydtudhdndndm.  The  Rigveda  reading  is  simpler ;  *  Tear  from  the 
Yatudh&na,  Jatavedas !  what  he  hath  seized  and  with  bis  spears  hath 
captured.' 

8  To  the  Man-Seef'^s  eye :  the  Man-Seer,  the  Viewer  of  all  Mankind, 
is  Agni  himself. 

9  2^0  the  Va$tu:  to  the  Gods  to  whom  the  oblations  are  made. 
Sayaiia  explains  vdsubhyah  by  vasHndmarthdya :  *  to  (the  acquisition  of) 
riches.' — Wilson. 

10  His  three  extremities  :  his  three  heads,  according  to  S&ya^a.  His 
head  and  shoulders,  according  to  Prof.  Grassmann.  Boot :  his  feet. 
Triply :  used  vaguely,  to  correspond  with  the  three  upper  extremities. 

12  The  pair :  the  married  pair;  perhaps  the  sacrificer  and  his  wife. 
The  Rishi  prays  that  every  hasty  word  that  may  have  been  uttered 
by  pious  people  in  their  anger  may  be  used  as  a  weapon  to  wound  the 
Yatudh&na. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


394  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIl, 

Each  arrowy  taunt  sped  from  the  angry  spirit, — 
pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  Y4tudhd»as. 

13  With  fervent  heat  exterminate  the  demans  :  destroy 

the  fiends  with  glow  and  flame,  O  Agni. 
Destroy  with  fire  the  foolish  gods*  adorers  :  destroy 
the  insatiate  fiercely -burning  creatures. 

14  May  Gods  destroy  to-day  the  evil-doer:  may  uttered 

curses  turn  again  and  strike  him. 
Let  arrows  pierce  the  liar  in  his  vitals,  and  Visva's 
net  enclose  the  Y&tudh&na. 

15  The  fiend  who  smears  himself  with  flesh  of  cattle^ 

with  flesh  of  horses  and  of  human  bodies, 
Who  steals  the  milch-cow's  milk  away,  O  Agni, — 
tear  oflf  the  heads  of  such  with  fiery  fury. 

16  Let  the  fiends  steal  the  poison  of  the  cattle  :  may 

Aditi  cast  off  the  evil-doers. 
May  the  Grod  Savitar  give  them  up  to  ruin,  and  be 
their  share  of  herbs  and  plants  denied  them. 

17  The  cow  gives  milk  each  year,    O  Man-Beholder  : 

let  not  the  Y&tudhana  ever  taste  it. 
Agni,  if  one   should  glut  him    with   the    biestings, 
pierce  with  thy  flame  his  vitals  as  he  meets  thee. 

18  Agni,  from  days  of  old  thou  slayest  demons  :  never 

have  K&kshasas  in  fight  o'ercome  thee. 
Burn  up  the  foolish  ones,  the  flesh-devourers  :  let 
none  of  them  escape  thy  heavenly  arrow. 

19  Guard  us,  O  Agni,  from  above  and  under,  protect  u» 

from  behind  and  from  before  us  ; 
And  may  thy  flames,  most  fierce  and  never  wasting^ 
glowing  with  fervent  heat,  consume  the  sinner. 

14  Viwa!%  net :  the  noose  of  alt-pervading  Agni. 

16  Steal  the  poison  of  (he  cattle  :  if  they  take  the  milk  and  drink  it^ 
let  it  poison  them.  According  to  Sdyana :  let  them  drink  (the  Rigveda 
has  ptbantu)  the  poison  of  the  cattle  (which  is  kept  in  the  houseX 
perhaps  some  poisonous  ointment  used  for  external  application  only. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  3.]  THE  ATHARVAVEDA.  395 

20  From  rear,  from  front,  from  under,  from  above  us, 

Agni,  protect  us  as  a  sage  with  wisdom. 
Guard    to   old    age   thy    friend   as   friend    eternal : 
O  Agni,  as  immortal,  guard  us  mortals. 

21  Lend  thou  the  worshipper  that  eye,  O  Agni,  where- 

with thou  lookest  on  the  hoof-armed  demons. 
With  light  celestial  in  Atharvan's  manner  burn  up 
the  fool  who  ruins  truth  with  falsehood. 

22  We  set  thee   round  us  as  a  fort,   victorious  Agni ! 

thee,  a  sage. 
In  conquering  colour  day  by  day,  destroyer  of  the 
treacherous  foe. 

23  With  deadly  poison  strike  thou  back  the  treacherous 

brood  of  K&ksbasas, 
O  Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  glow,   with  rays   that 
flash  with  points  of  flame. 

24  Agni  shines    far    and    wide  with  lofty    splendour, 

and  by  his  greatness  makes  all  things  apparent. 
He    conquers    godless    and    malign    enchantments, 
and  sharpens  both  bis  horns  to  gore  the  ogres. 

25  Thy  two  unwasting  horns,  O  J4tavedas,  keen-pointed 

weapons,  sharpened  by  devotion — 
With  these  transfix  the  wicked-souled  Kimidin,  with 
fierce  flame,  J&tavedas  !  when  he  meets  thee. 

26  Bright,  radiant,  meet  to  be  adored,  immortal  with 

refulgent  glow, 
Agni  drives  R4kshasas  away. 

21  Hoof-armed:  striking  with  the  hoof.  According  to  S^jana, 
'having  nails  like  hoofs.'  In  AtkarvarCs  manner :  like  Atharvan  the 
ancient  priest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  obtained  fire  and 
offered  burnt  oblations. 

22  This  Anushtup  stanza  is  found  also  in  VII.  71. 

24  Taken  from  Rigveda  V,  2.  9. 

25  Kimtdin:  se^  I.  VII.  1. 

26  Taken  from  Rigveda  VII.  15.  10. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


396  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

HYMNT  IV. 

Indra   and    Soma,    burn,   destroy  the    demon   foe ! 

Send  downward,  O  ye  Bulls,  those  who  add  gloom 

to  gloom. 
Annihilate  the  fools,  slay  them  and  burn  them  up : 

chase  them   away  from  us,   pierce  the  voracious 

fiends. 

2  Let  sin,  Indra  and  Soma !  round  the  wicked  boil,  like 

as  a  caldron  set  amid  the  flames  of  fire. 
Against   the   foe   of    prayer,    eater   of   gory   flesh, 
the  fearful-eyed  Kimidiu,  keep  perpetual  hate. 

3  Indra  and  Soma,  plunge  the  wicked  in  the  depth, 

yea,  cast  them  into  darkness  that  hath  no  support, 

So  that  not  one  of  them  may  ever  thence  return  :  so 

may  your  wrathful  might  prevail  and  conquer  them. 

4  Indra  and   Soma,    hurl   your   deadly   crushing   bolt 

down  on  the  wicked  fiend  from  heaven  and  from 
the  earth. 
Yea,  fashion  from  the  big  clouds  your  celestial  dart 
wherewith  ye  burn   to  death   the  waxing   demon 
race. 

5  Indra  and  Soma,  cast  ye  downward   from    the  sky 

your   deadly    bolts   of    stone    burning  with   fiery 
flame, 
Eternal,  scorching  darts.  Plunge  the  voracious  fiends 
within   the   depth,  and   let    them  pass  without  a 
sound. 

The  hymn  consists  mainly  of  a  series  of  imprecations  directed  against 
demons  and  evil  spirits,  Rikshasas  and  Yatudhllnas. 

I  The  whole  hymn  is  taken,  with  unimportant  variants,  from  Rig- 
veda  VII.  104,  attributed  to  the  famous  Rishi  Vasishtha.  Indra  and 
Soma  :  indidsomd;  addressed  as  a  dual  deity.  The  demon  foe  :  R&k- 
shasas,  fiends,  demons,  who  wander  about  at  night,  disturbing  sacri- 
fices and  devout  men,  ensnaring  and  even  devouring  human  beings, 
and  generally  hostile  to  the  human  race. 

I  Kimtdin:  see  I.  7.  1. 

5  Without  a  $ound :  so  suddenly  that  they  have  not  time  to  cry  out. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EYMy-L]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA,  397 

6  Indra  and  Soma,  let  this  hymn  control  you  both, 

even  as  the  girth  encompasses  two  vigorous  steeds — 

The  song  of  praise  which  I  with  wisdom  offer  you. 

Do  ye,  as  Lords  of  men,  animate  these  my  prayers. 

7  In  your  impetuous  manner  think  ye  both    thereon  : 

destroy  those  evil  spirits,  kill  the  treacherous  fiends. 
Indra  and  Soma,  let  the  wicked  have  no  bliss  whoso 
at  any  time  attacks  and  injures  us. 

8  Whoso   accuses   me   with    words  of  falsehood  when 

I  pursue  my  way  with  guileless  spirit. 
May  he,  the  speaker  of  untruth,  be,  Indra !  like  water 
which  the  hollowed  hand  compresses. 

9  Those    who    destroy,  as  is  their   wont,  the  simple, 

and  with  their  evil  natures  harm  the  righteous. 
May  Soma  give  them  over  to  the  serpent,  or  to  the 
lap  of  Nirriti  consign  them. 

10  O  Agni,  whosoever  seeks  to  injure  the  essence  of  our 

food,  kine,  steeds,  or  bodies. 
May  he,  the  adversary,  thief,  and   robber,  sink   to 
destruction,  both  himself  and  offspring. 

11  May  he  be  swept  away,  himself  and  children ;  may 

all  the  three  earths  press  him  down  beneath  them. 
May  his  fair  glory,  O  ye  Gods,  be  blighted,  who  in 
the  day  or  night  would  fain  destroy  us. 

12  The  prudent  finds  it  easy  to  distinguish  the  true  and 

false  :  their  words  oppose  each  other. 
Of  these  two  that  which  is  the  true  and  honest  Soma 
protects,  and  brings  the  false  to  nothing. 

8  Whoso  accuses  me  :  Vasishtha  himeelf  had  been  accused  of  demo- 
niacal practices.     See  note  on  stanza  13. 

9  To  the  serpent :  that  is,  to  death  by  serpents'  bites.     Nirriti: 
Destruction,  personified. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


398  TBS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

13  Never  doth  Soma  aid  and  guide  the  wicked  or  him 

who  falsely  claims  the  Warrior's  title. 
He   slays  the  fiend  and  him    who  speaks   untruly  : 
both  lie  entangled  in  the  noose  of  Indra. 

14  As  if  I  worshipped  deities  of  falsehood,  or  thought 

vain  thoughts  about  the  Gods,  O  Agni ! 
Why  art  thou  angry  with  us,  J4tavedas?  Destruc- 
tion fall  on  those  who  lie  against  thee  ! 

15  So  may  I  die  this  day  if  I  have  harassed  any  man's 

life,  or  if  I  be  a  demon. 
Yea,  may  he  lose  all  his  ten  sons  together  who  with 
false  tongue  hath  called  me  Y&tudh4na. 

16  May  Indra  slay  him  with  a  mighty  weapon,  and  let 

the  vilest  of  all  creatures  perish, 
The  fiend   who   says  that  he  is  pure,  who  calls  me 
a  demon  though  devoid  of  demon  nature. 

17  She  too  who  wanders   like  an   owl   at  night-time, 

hiding  her  body  in  her  guile  and  malice. 
May  she  fall  downward  into  endless  caverns.    May 
press-stones  with  loud  ring  destroy  the  demons. 


1 3  The  Warrior's  title :  the  rank  of  a  Kshatriya  or  prince  of  the 
military  order.  The  first  eleven  verses  *  are  considered  to  be  a  male- 
diction on  the  Bdkshasas  by  the  Rishi,  To  account  for  the  change  of  tone 
[in  12 — 16]  Sdyana  gives  an  unusual  version  of  the  legend  told  in  the 
Mahdbhdrata  of  king  Kalmdshapdda  being  transformed  to  a  Rdkskasa, 
and  devouring  the  100  sons  of  Vasishtha :  here  it  is  said  that  a 
Rdhsham,  having  devoured  the  Rishi^s  sons,  assumed  his  shape,  and 
said  to  him,  "  I  am  Vasishtha,  thou  art  the  Rdkshasa ; "  to  which 
Vasishtha  replied  by  repeating  this  verse  [stanza  12]  declaratory  of 
his  discriminating  between  truth  and  falsehood/ — Wilson. 

*  The  verses  may,  as  Professor  Max  MUller  supposes,  have  arisen  out 
of  Vasishtha's  contest  with  Visvamitra,  and  it  may  have  been  the  latr 
ter  personage  who  brought  those  charges  of  heresy,  and  of  murderous 
and  demoniacal  character  against  his  rival.' — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  J.  p.  527. 

17  Here  the  malediction  on  evil  spirits  in  general  is  resumed  and 
continued  to  the  end  of  the  hymn.    She  too :  the  Rakshasi  or  female  fiend. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  4]  THE  ATIIARVA-VEDA.  399 

18  Spread  out,  ye  Maruts,  search  among   the   people  : 

seize  ye  and  grind  the  Rdkshasas  to  pieces, 
Who  fly  abroad,  transformed  to  birds,  at  night-time, 
and  sully  and  pollute  our  holy  worship. 

19  Hurl  down  from  heaven  thy  bolt  of  stone,  O  Indra  : 

sharpen  it,  Maghavan,  made  keen  by  Soma. 
Forward,  behind,  and  from  above  and  under,  smite 
down  the  demons  with  thy  rocky  weapon. 

20  They  fly,   the  demon  dogs,  and,  bent  on  mischief, 

fain  would  they  harm  indomitable  Indra. 
Sakra   makes    sharp   his   weapon   for   the   wicked  : 
now  let  him  cast  his  bolt  at  fiendish  wizards. 

21  Indra  hath  ever  been  the  fiends'  destroyer  who  spoil 

oblations  of  the  Gods'  invokers. 
Yea,  Sakra,  like  an  axe  that  splits  the  timber,  assails 
and  smashes  them  like  earthen  vessels. 

22  Destroy   the   fiend  shaped   like  an    owl    or   owlet, 

destroy  him  in  the  form  of  dog  or  cuckoo. 
Destroy  him  shaped  as  eagle  or  as  vulture  :  as  with 
a  stone,  O  Indra,  crush  the  demon. 

23  Let  not  the  fiend  of  witchcraft-workers   reach   us  •. 

may  Dawn  drive  oflf  the  couples  of  Kimidins. 
Earth  keep  us  safe  from  earthly  woe  and  trouble  ! 
From    grief    that  comes    from   heaven    Mid-air 
preserve  us  ! 

24  Indra  destroy  the  demon,  male  and  female,  joying 

and  triumphing  in  arts  of  magic  1 
Let  the  fools'  gods  with  bent  necks  fall  and  perish, 
and  see  no  more  the  Sun  when  he  arises. 

25  Look,   each   one,   hither,   look  around.     Indra  and 

Soma,  watch  ye  well. 
Cast  forth  your  weapon  at  the  fiends  :  against  the 
sorcerers  hurl  your  bolt. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


400  THE  HYMNS  .OF  [BOOK  VII L 

HYMN  V. 

Upon  the  strong  is  bound  the  strong,  this  magic  cord, 

this  Amulet, 
Potent,  foe-slayer,  served  by  valiant  heroes,  happy 

and  fortunate  defence. 

2  This  Charm,  foe-slayer,  served  by  many  heroes,  strong, 

powerful,    victorious,    and     mighty,   goes    bravely 
forth  to  meet  and  ruin  witchcraft. 

3  With  this   same     Amulet   wise     Indra   routed  the 

Asuras,  with  this  he  slaifghtered  Vritra, 
With  this  he  won  this  pair,  both  Earth  and  Heaven, 
and  made  the  sky's  four  regions  his  possession. 

4  May   this   encircling    magic   cord,   this   Amulet   of 

Sr4ktya  wood. 
Mighty,  subduing  enemies,  keep  us  secure  on  every 
side. 

5  This  Agni  hath  declared,  Soma  declared  it,  Brihas- 

pati,  and  Savitar,  and  Indra. 
So  may  these   Gods   whom   I  have  set  before    me 
oppose  with  saving  charms  and  banish  witchcraft. 

6  Whoever  for   his  armour   takes   an   amulet   of  the 

Sraktya  tree. 
Like  the  Sun  risen  up  to  heaven,  quells  witchcraft 
with  superior  might. 

7  With  Amulet  of  Sr4ktya  wood,  as  with  a  thoughtful 

Rishi's  aid. 
In  every  fight  have  I  prevailed  ;  I  smite  the  foes  and 
H^kshasas. 


The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  accompany  inyestiture  with  an  Amulet  of 
Sr&ktya  wood. 

1  Upon  the  strong :  the  man  who  is  to  be  invested  being  a  Kshatriya 
or  man  of  the  military  and  princely  order. 

3  Routed  the  Asuras :  cf.  IX.  2.  17.  In  the  Rigveda  Indra  is  armed 
only  with  thmiderbolt,  arrows,  and  hook. 

4  Srdktya  wood :  wood  of  the  Sraktya  tree.  See  II.  11,  2. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMF  5.]  TBB  ATEAUYA^Y^PA.  401 

8  All  witchcraft  of  Angirases,  all  witchcraft  wrought 

by  Asuras, 
All  witchcraft  self- originate,  and  all  that  others  have 

prepared, 
May  these   depart  to  both  remotest    spaces,  past 
ninety  ample  water-floods. 

9  May  the  Gods  bind  the  Charm  on  him  for  armour, 

Indra,  and  Vishnu,  Savitar,  Rudra,  Agni, 
PrajApati,  sublimest  Paramesh^hin,  Vir&j,  yaisyd.nara, 
and  all  the  Bishis. 

10  Thou  art  the  chief  of  all  the  plants,  even  as  a  bull 

among  the  beasts, 
A  tiger  of  the  beasts  of  prey.    Him  whom  we  sought 
for  have  we  found,  him  lying  near  in  wait  for  us. 

1 1  A  tiger  verily  is  he,  he  is  a  lion,  and  a  bull, 
Subduer  of  his  foes  is  he,  the  man  who  wears  this 

Amulet. 

12  No   mortal   beings   slay  him,   no    Gandharvas,   no 

Apsarases ; 
O'er  all  the  regions  he  is  king,  the  man  who  wears 
this  Amulet. 


8  Angirases :  magical  powers  were  ascribed  to  this  ancient  family  of 
l^ishis  as  Solomon  was  regarded  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  as  the  great 
master  of  all  arts  of  enchantment.  Both  remotest  spaces  :  places  beyond 
the  limits  of  heaven  and  earth.  Of.  VI.  75.  3.  Ninety  ample  water* 
floods  :  or,  literally,  navigable  streams,  the  waters  of  the  ocean  of  air. 

'  Far  over  ninety  spacioxis  floods  thy  thunderbolts  were  cast  abroad ' 
(R.  V.  I.  80.  8)  :  *  Casting  them  forth  beyond  the  ninety  rivers,  thou 
dravest  down  into  the  pit  the  godless'  (R.  V.  I.  121.  13).  In  other 
places  (R.  V.  I.  32.  14 ;  X.  104.  8)  ninety-nine  rivers  of  the  air  are 
spoken  of,  both  numbers  being  used  indefinitely. 

9  Parameshthin :  standing  in  the  highest  place,  supreme ;  here  an 
epithet  of  Praj4pati,  the  Lord  of  Life,  the  Creator.  Virdy :  a  divine 
being,  evolved  by  speculation,  identified  with  Purusha,  Prajllpati« 
Agni,  and,  later,  Vishpu.  See  VIII.  10.  1,  note. 

10  Thou :  the  Sraktya  tree  of  wliose  wood  the  amulet  is  made. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


402  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

14  Katsyapa  formed  and  fashioned  thee,  Kasyapa  raised 

and  sent  thee  forth. 
Indra   wore   thee,   and,  wearing   thee,    won   in   the 

wrestling-match  with  man. 
The  Amulet  of  boundless  might  <iie  Gods  have  made 

a  coat  of  mail. 

15  Whoever  would    destroy   thee   with     DikshA-rites, 

sacrifices,  spells, 
Meet  him  and  smite  him,   Indra!  with  thy  hundred- 
knotted  thunderbolt. 

16  Verily  let  this  Amulet,  circular,  potent,  conquering, 
Happy  and  fortunate  defence,  preserve  thy  children 

and  thy  wealth. 

17  Brave  Indra,  set  before  us  light,  peace  and  security 

from  below, 
Peace  and  security  from  above,  peace  and  security 
from  behind. 

18  My  coat  of  mail  is  Heaven  and  Earth,   my  coat  of 

mail  is  Day  and  Sun  : 
A  coat  of  mail   may  Indra  and  Agni  and  Dhdtar 
grant  to  me. 

19  Not  all  the  Gods  may  pierce,  all  leagued  together, 

the  vast  strong  shield  which  Indra  gives,  and  Agni. 
May  that  great  shield  on  all  sides  guard  my  body, 
that  to  full  eld  my  life  may  be  extended. 

20  Lot  the  Gods'  Charm  be  bound  on  me  to  keep  me 

safe  from  every  ill. 
Come  ye  and  enter  all  within  this  pillar,  the  safe- 
guard of  the  body,  thrice-defended. 

14  Kanyapa:  cf.  L  14.  4,  and  II.  33.  7. 

15  Dikshd-ritts:    religious    observances   designed   to   consecrate  a 
person  for  some  special  purpose. 

16  Addressed  to  the  recipient  of  the  amulet. 

19  This  and  the  following  stanza  are  spoken  by  the  recipient  of  the 
charm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OYMN  6.]  THl^  ATHARVAVBDA,  403 

21  In  this  let  Indra  lay  a  store  of  valour :    approach 

ye  Gods,  and  enter  it  together, 
For  his  long  life,  to  last  a  hundred  autumns,  that  to 
full  age  his  days  may  be  extended. 

22  Lord  of  the  clan  who   brings  us  bliss,   fiend-slayer, 

queller  of  the  foe, 

May  he,  the  conqueror,  ne'er  subdued,  may  Indra 

bind  the  Charm  on  thee, 
Bull,  Somadrinker,  he  who  gives  us  peace. 
May  he  protect  thee  round  about,  by  night  and  day 

on  every  side. 

HYMN  VI. 

Let  neither  fiend  of  evil  name^  Alifisa,  Vatsapa, 
desire 

Thy  pair  of  husband-wooers  which  thy  mother  cleans- 
ed when  thou  wast  born. 

2  Pal41a,  Anupal&la,  Sarku>  Koka,  Malimlucha,  Falijaka, 
Vavrivdsas  and  Asresha,  l^^ikshagriva  and  Pramilin. 

3  Approach  not,  come  not  hither  ward  :  creep  not  thou 

in  between  her  thighs. 


21  TAm />»7/ar ;  this  protective  amulet. 

22  Portions  of  this  stanza  are  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  152.  2. 

The  hymn  is  an  incantation  designed  to  exorcise  various  evil  spirits 
who  beset  women^ 

1  Alififa :  the  meaning  of  this  demon's  name  is  unknown.  Vatsapa  : 
meaning,  probably,  as  Prof.  Weber  suggests,  *  drinking  like  a  calf,'  the 
name  of  a  demon  who  robs  the  young  mother  of  her  milk.  Husband- 
wooers  :  the  dainties  which  attract  the  future  husband ;  the  breasts. 
Cleansed :  squeezed  dry. 

2  The  meaning  of  some  of  these  demons'  names  is  obscure ;  and 
where  the  meaning  is  obvious  as  in  the  case  of  Paldla  (Straw),  Malim- 
lucha (Robber),  Koka  (Wolf),  Ifikshagrtva  (Bear-necked),  the  special 
suitability  of  the  name  is  not  apparent.  They  stand  in  the  accusative 
case,  and  must  be  governed  by  some  verb  as  '  I  banish,'  understood. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


404  .  TBB  HTMNS  Of  [BOOK  VJtL 

I  set,  to  guard  her,  Baja,  that  which  chases  him  of 
evil  name. 

4  Darnim&  and  Sun&m&  both  are  eager  to  converse  with 

her. 
We  drive  away  Ar&yas  :  let  Sun4m&  seek  the  women- 
folk. 

5  The  black  and    hairy  Asura,    and   Stambaja  and 

Tui^(Jika, 
Ar&yas  from  this  girl  we  drive,  from  bosom,  waist, 
and  parts  below. 

6  Sniffer,  and  Feeler,  him  who  eats  raw  flesh,  and  him 

who  licks  his  lips, 
Ar^yas  with  the  tails  of  dogs,  the  yellow  Baja  hath 
destroyed. 

r  Whoever,  in  thy  brother's  shape  or  father's  comes  to 
thee  in  sleep, — 
Let  Baja  rout  and   chase  them   like  eunuchs  with 
woman's  head-dress  on. 

8  Whoever  steals  to  thee  asleep  or  thinks  to  harm  thee 
when  awake, — 
These  hath  it  banished,  as  the  Sun  travelling  round 
drives  shade  away. 

3  Baja :  apparently  some  strong-flmelling  herb  (see  stanza  10),  by 
whose  scent  the  demon  is  chased  away  as  was  Asmodeus  by  '  the  fishy 
fume,  That  drove  him,  though  enamoured,  from  the  spouse  Of  Tobit's 
son'  (Paradise  Lost,  IV.  168).  See  Apocrypha.  Tobit,  VIII.  3. 

4  Dwmdmd  and  Sundmd :  Ill-named  and  Well-named.  The  latter  is 
apparently  a  good  genius  who  protects  women,  whereas  the  former  in- 
jures them.  Ardyas :  a  class  of  malevolent  spirits,  the  female  fiends 
being  called  Ar&yls.  See  I.  28.  4. 

5  Stambaja :  growing  in  a  clump  or  bush,  or  in  a  pillar.  Tw^4^a : 
furnished  with  a  snout. 

6  Him  who  licks  his  lips :  rerih4m  ;  so  Viledht,  Lioker,  is  the  name 
of  a  sorceress,  witch,  or  female  fiend  in  I.  18.  4. 

8  Tkes4  hath  it  banished :  the  purpose  of  the  charm  being  regarded 
at  already  effected. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nTMN  6.]  TBE  ATEARVA-7EDA.  406 

9  Whoever  causeth  her  to  lose  her  ehfld  or  bear  un- 
timely fruit,— 
Destroy  him,  O  thou  Plant,  destroy  the  slippery  fiend 
who  lusts  for  her. 

10  Those  who  at  evening,  with  the  bray  of  asses,  danoe 

around  the  house,   Kukshilas,  and  Kusdlas,  and 
Kakubhas,  Srimas,  Karumas, 
These  with  thine  odour,  O  thou  Plant,  drive  far  away 
to  every  side. 

11  Kukundhas  and  Kuk^rabhas  who  dress  themselves 

in  hides  and  skins, 
Who  dance  about   like   eunuchs,  who  raise  a   wild 
clamour  in  the  wood,  all  these  we  banish  far  away. 

12  All  those   who  cannot  bear  the  Sun   who  warms  us 

yonder  from  the  sky, 
ArAyas  with   the  smell  of  goats,   malodorous,  with 
bloody  mouths,  the  Makakas  we  drive  afar. 

13  All  those  who   on   their   shoulders   bear  a  head   of 

monstrous  magnitude. 
Who   pierce  the   women's   loins   with   pain, — those 
demons,  Indra  1  drive  away  ! 

14  Those,  bearing  horns  upon  their  hands,  who  first  of 

all  approach  the  brides  ; 
Standing  in  ovens,  laughing  loud,  those  who  in  bushes 
flash  forth  light,  all  these  we  banish  hence  away. 

15  Those  who  have  retroverted  toes,  and  heels  and  faces 

in  the  front. 


10  KukihUas:  big-bellied  fiends.  KusHUas:  the  meaning  iis  uncertain. 
Kakubhas :  humpbackB.  Srimas :  the  meaning  is  unknown.  Xarumas  : 
dissonant. 

n  Kukundhas:  the  meaning  is  unknown.  Kukilrahh(u:  perhaps, 
howlers. 

12  Makakas :  the  meaning  is  unknown. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


406  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

Kbalajas  Sakadh<!lmajas,  Urupdas,  all  the  Matmatas, 

impotent  Kumbhamushkas,  these, 
Drive  thou,  O  Brahmaoaspati,  far  from  this  girl  with 

vigilance. 

16  Sightless  and  with  distorted  eyes,  impotent,  woman- 

loss  he  they. 
O  Healing  Plant,  oast  each  away  who,  not  her  hus- 
band, would  approach,  this  woman  wedded  to  her 
lord. 

17  The  Bristly-haired,  the  Maniac-haired,  the  Biter,  and 

the  Groper-fiend, 
The  Creeper-near,  the  Copper-hued,  the  Snouty,  and 

the  Sdluda, 
With  foot  and  heel  kick  over,  as  a  hasty  cow  her 

milking-pan. 

18  If  one  should  touch  thy  coming  babe  or  kill  thine 

infant  newly  born, 
The  yellow  Plant  with  mighty  bow  shall  pierce  him 
even  to  the  heart. 

19  Those  who  kill  infants  unawares,  and  near  the  new- 

made  mothers  lie, — 
Let  Pii^ga  chase  the  amorous  Gandharvas  as  wind 
chases  cloud. 

20  Let  it  maintain  the  genial  seed  :  let  the  laid  embryo 

rest  secure. 
Let  both  strong  Healers,  to  be  worn  within  the  girdle, 
guard  the  babe« 

15  Khalajas:  produced  on  threehing-floorB.  SakadhUmaJckB :  pro< 
duced  from  the  smoke  of  cow-dung.  KumhhamuMcoA :  urceis  similea 
testiculos  habentes.  The  meanit>g  of  Unmdas  and  MapnaliM  ia 
unknown,  and  that  of  ayasdvas  (impotent)  is  uncertain. 

19  PiAga:  yellow;  another  name  of  Baja.  Amorous,  Gundharvat: 
See  I  v.  37.  11. 

20  It :  Baja.  Both  strong  Healers :  Pif^a  and  Baja  regarded  as  two 
separate  plants* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMN  ej  THE  ATEARTA7EDA.  4OT 

21  Prom  th^  Kimidin,  for  thy  lord  and  ebltdren,  PiAga 

shield  thee  well, 
Prom  Sdyaka,  and  Nagnaka,  Tangalva,  and  Pavlnasa. 

22  Prom  the-  five-footed,,  fingerless^  from  the  four-eyed^ 

the  double-faced, 
From  the  Close-creeper^  from  the  Worm,  from  the 
QuiekHToUer  guard  her  welL 

2a  Those  who  eat  fiesh  uncooked,  and  those  who  eat  the 
bleedi  ng  flesh  of  men> 
Peeders  ou  babes  unborn,,  long-haired,  far  from  this 
place  we  banish  these. 

24  Shy  slinkers  from  the  Sui>,  as  slinks  a  woman*  from 
her  husband's  sire, — 
Deep  down  into  the  heart  of  these  let  Baja  and  let 
Pinga  pierce. 

35  Pinga,  preserve  the  babe  at  birth,  make  not  the  boy 
a  female  child. 
Let  not  Egg-eaters  mar  the  germs  :  drive  the  Kiml- 
dins  far  away. 

26  Sterility,  and  infants'^  d)eath^  and  weepings  that  an- 
nouQceth  wooj — 
Dear  I  lay  them,  oa  the  fiend  as  thou  wouldst  pluek  a 
garland  from  a  tree. 


21  Nagnaka :  naked;  Pnvtnata :  having  a  nose  like  a  spear-head.. 
The  meanings  of  Sdyaka  and  Tangalva  are  unknown.. 

24  A$  dinki^a  vfoman^  from  her  hfusbancTa  sire :  the  timid'  leverence 
of  a  daiighter-inrlaw  for  her  father-in-law  was  proverbial.  See 
Zimmec,  Altiudisches  Leben,  p.  327. 

25  Egg-eaters ;  fiends  who  de^^our  the  unborn  babe.  Cf.  II.  25.  4.. 

26  Dear  I :.  the  plant  Baja  is  addicssed. 

The  belief  ia  Incubi  was  common  among  tiie  Jews  and  the  Latins.. 
*Slich  pretty  pranks,'' says  Burton,  *can  love  play  with  birds,  fishes,, 
beasts,  and  if  all  be  certain  that  is  credibly  reported,  with  the  spirits- 
of  the  air,  and  devils  of  hell  themselves,  who  are  as  much  enamoured 
amd  dote  {\t  I  may  use*  that  word)  as  any  other  creatures  whatsoever. 
For  if  those  stories  be  true  that  are  written  of  incubus  and  succubus^ 
of  nymphs,  lascivious  fauns,  satyrs,  and  those  heathen  j^ods  wiiich^wer^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


408  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

HYMN  VII. 

The  tawny-coloured,  and  the  pale,  the  variegated, 
and  the  red, 

The  dusky-tinted,  and  the  black, — all  Plants  we  sum- 
mon hitherward. 

2  This  man  let  them  deliver  from  Consumption  which 
the  Gods  have  sent. 
The  father  of  these  Herbs  was  Heaven,  their  mother 
Earth,  the  Sea  their  root. 

S  The  Waters  are  the  beat,  and  heavenly  Plants  : 
From  every  limb  of  thine  have  they  removed  Con- 
sumption caused  by  sin. 

4  I  speak  to  Healing  Herbs  spreading,  and  bushy,  to 

creepers,  and  to  those  whose  sheath  is  single, 
I  call  for  thee  the   fibrous  and    the   reed-like,   and 
branching  Plants,  dear  to  the  Visve  Devas,  power- 
ful, giving  life  to  men. 

5  The  conquering  strength,  the  power  and  might  which 

ye,  victorious  Plants,  possess. 
Therewith  deliver  this  man  here  from  this  Consump- 
tion,  O  ye  Plants :  so  I  prepare  the  remedy. 

6  The  living  Plant  that  giveth  life,  that  driveth  malady 

away, 

devils,  those  lascivious  Telchines,  of  whom  the  Platonists  tell  so  many 
fables ;  or  those  familiar  meetings  in  our  days,  and  company  of  witches 
and  devilad  there  is  some  probability  for  it.' — Anatomy  of  Melancholy, 
Part  3,  Sect.  2,  Memb.  I.  Subs.  I.  Prof.  Weber  refers  to  the  Incuhones 
of  the  Romans  (Preller,  Roman  Mythology,  p.  337),  and  to  the  Ger- 
man Alpdrttcken  and  Teufelsbuhlschaf t. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated,  with  an  exhaustive  commentary,  by 
Weber,  Indisqhe  Studien,  V.  pp.  252 — 261,  and,  without  commentary, 
by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  pp.  523—525. 

The  hymn,  which  extols  the  excellence  of  medicinal  herbs,   is  an 
incantation  designed  to  restore  a  sick  man  to  health. 
2  The  Sea :  the  ocean  of  the  air. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7MN  7.]  THE  ATBARYA^VSDA.  409 

Arundbati,  the  rescuer,  strengthening,  rich  in  sweets 
I  call,  to  free  this  man  from  scath  and  harm. 

7  Hitherward  let  the  sapient  come,  the  friendly  sharers 

of  my  speech, 

That  we  may  give  this  man  relief  and  raise  him  from 
his  evil  plight. 

8  Germ  of  the  Waters,  Agni's  food.  Plants  ever  grow- 

ing fresh  and  new. 
Sure,  healing,  bearing  thousand  names,  let  them  be 
all  collected  here. 

9  Let  Plants  whose  soul  is  water,  girt  with  Avak&s, 

piercing  with  their  sharp  horns  expel  the  malady. 

10  Strong,  antidotes  of  poison,  those  releasers,  free  from 

Varuna, 
And  those  that  drive  away  Catarrh,  and  those  that 
frustrate  magic  arts,   let  all  those   Plants  come 
hitherward. 

1 1  Let  purchased  Plants  of  mightier  power,  Plants  that 

are  praised  for  excellence,  ^    ' 

Here  in  this  village  safely  keep  cattle  and  horses, 
man  and  beast. 

12  Sweet  is  their  root,   sweet  are  these   Plants'  top 

branches,  sweet  also  is  their  intermediate  portion  ; 
Sweet  is  their  foliage,  and  sweet  their  blossom,  com- 
bined with  sweetness  is  their  taste  of  Amrit :  food, 
fatness  let  them  yield,  with  kine  preceding. 

6  Arundkatt :  a  creeping  plant  used  in  medicine ;  called  also  Sil&chi. 
See  IV.  12.  1  ;  V.  5 ;  VI.  59.  1. 

7  The  sapient :  the  plants  which  understand  the  cure  of  disease. 

9  Avakdt :  Avakk  is  a  grassy  plant  growing  in  marshy  land  (Blyza 
Octandm).   See  IV.  37.  8. 

10  Frufrom  Varuna :  independent  of  his  power,  and  able  to  ward 
off  the  diseases  which  he  sends.  Catarrh :  baldsah ;  the  exact  nature 
of  the  disease  is  somewhat  uncertain.  See  IV.  9. 8. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


410  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

13  These  IMants  that  grow  upon  the  earth,   whate'er 

their  number  and  their  siae^ — 
Let  these  with  all  their  thousand  leaves  free  me  from 
Death  and  misery. 

14  May  the  Plants'  Tiger-amulet,  proteotive^  guardiaa 

from  the  curse, 
Beat  off  the  brood  of  demons,  drive  all  maladies  afar 
from  us. 

15  Before  the  gathered  Plants  they  fly  and  scatter^  as 

though  a  lion*s  roar  or  fire  dismayed  them. 
Expelled  by  Plants,  let  men's  and  kine's  Consumptioa 
pass  from  us  to  the  navigable  rivers. 
1$  Emancipated  from  the  sway  of  Agni,.  of  Vaisv^ara^ 
go,  covering  the  earth,  ye  Plants  whose  ruler  ia 
Vanaspati. 

17  May  these  be  pleasant  to  our  heart,  auspieiotts^  rich 

in  store  of  milk^ 
These  Plants  of  the  Angirasee  which  grow  on  moun- 
tains and  on  plains. 

18  The  Plants  I  know  myself,  the  plants  that  with  mine 

eye  I  look  upon,. 
Plants  yet  unknown,  and  those  we  know^  wherein  we 
find  that  power  is  stored, 

19  Let  all  the  congr^ated  Plants  attend  and  mark  nune 

utterance. 
That  we  may  rescue  this  m^n  here  and  save  him  from 
severe  distress. 

20  Asvattha,  Datbha,  King  of  Plants,  i&  Soma,  death-^ 

less  sacrifice  : 
Barley  and   Rice  are  healing  baloks,   the  sons   of 
Heaven  who  never  die. 


14  Tiger-amidet :  an  exceedingry  potent  charm^ 
16  Vanatpati :  lord  of  the  wood  ;  here  the  Soma  Plant. 
20  Afvattha:  Ficus  Religiosa ;  the  Sacred  Fig-tree.  Darhhxit:  Sa^ri- 
ficial  Grass.  See  VI.  43.  K 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  7.]  TEE  ATBARVA-VBDA.  411 

21  Lift  yourselves  up,  ye  Healing  Plants,  loud  is  the 

thunder's  crash  and  roar 
When  with  full  flow  Parjanya,  ye  Children  of  Prisni ! 
blesseth  you. 

22  We  give  the  essence  of  that  stream  of  nectar  to  this 

man  to  drink : 
So  I  prepare  a  remedy  that  he  may  live  a  .hundred 
years. 

23  Well  doth  the  wild  boar  know  a  Plant,  the  mungoose 

knows  the  Healing  Herb. 
I  call,  to  aid  this  man,  the  Plants  which  Serpents 
and  Gandbarvas  know. 

24  Plants  of  Angirases  which  hawks,  celestial  Plants 

which  eagles  know  ; 
Plants  known  to  swans  and  lesser  fowl.  Plants  known 

to  all  the  birds  that  fly. 
Plants  that  are  known  to  sylvan  beasts^ — I  call  them 

all  to  aid  this  man. 

25  The  multitude  of  herbs  whereon  the  Cows  whom  none 

may  slaughter  feed,  all  that  are  food  for  goats  and 
sheep. 
So  many  Plants,  brought  hitherward,   give  shelter 
and  defence  to  thee ! 

26  Hitherward  unto  thee  I  bring  the  Plants  that  cure 

all  maladies. 
All    Plants    wherein    physicians    have   discovered 
health-bestowing  power. 

27  Let  Plants  with  flower  and  Plants  with  bud,  the 

fruitful  and  the  fruitless,  all, 
Like  children  of  one  mother^  yield  their  stores  for 
this  man's  perfect  health. 


21  Primi :  here  meaning  Earth,  the  mother  of  planta.  Farjaivya  : 
the  deity  of  the  rain-oloivl.  See  I.  2.  1. 

23  Wild  boar:  of.  II.  27.  2,  and  V.  14.  1.  Wild  pigs  are  extraordi- 
narily quick  at  discovering  and  unearthing  potatoes  and  all  sorts  o£ 
edible  roots.     T&c  mungoose:  cf.  VI.  139.  5. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


41^  TBE  BTMtrS  OF  [BOOK  TltL 

28  From  the  Five-afrowed,  from  the  Ten-arrowed  have 
I  delivered  thee, 
Freed  thee  from  Yama's  fetter  and  from  all  ofiFence 
against  the  Gods. 

HYMN  VIIL 

Indra  the  Shaker  shake  them  up,  brave,  hero,  fort- 

detnolisher, 
That  into  thousand  fragments  we  may  strike  the 

armies  of  our  foes ! 

2  Let  PAtirajju  with  her  breath  corrupt  and  putrefy 

that  host. 
And  terror  smite  our  foemen's  heart  when  fire  and 
smoke  are  seen  afar. 

3  Asvattha,   rend  those   men  ;  do  thou  devour   them 

quickly,  Khadira ! 
Like  reeds  let  them  be  broken  through,  down-smit- 
ten by  a  lifted  rush. 

4  Let  Parush&hva  make  them  reeds,  and  let  the  bul- 

rush strike  them  down ; 
Bound  in  a  mighty  net  let  them  break  quickly  like  an 
arrow's  shaft. 


28  Five-arrowed :  this  and  Ten-arrowed  appear  to  be  fanciful  epithets 
of  fever  or  other  severe  disease  personified. 

With  this  hymn  may  be  compared  Ri^veda  X.  97,  Praise  of  Herbs. 
Translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  1X1.  p.  504. 

The  hymn  consists  of  a  series  of  imprecations  directed  against  a 
hostile  army. 

2  PHtirajju :  some  unidentifiable  malodorous  plant.  According  to 
Prof.  Ludwig,  a  species  of  serpent. 

3  Rend  :  the  Asvattha  or  Ficus  Religiosa  is  called  Burster  or  Ren- 
der because  it  splits  asunder  the  wood,  masonry,  or  stone  in  whose 
crevices  its  seed  has  germinated  and  grown.  See  III.  6.  2,  3.  Devour 
them  .  .  .  Khadira  I :  khdda  khadira  ;  a  play  upon  the  words.  The 
Khadira  is  the  Acacia  Catechu,  a  tree  with  solid  hard  wood. 

4  FaruBh&hva :  a  kind  of  reed  or  rush.  Feeds :  weak  and  fragile  as 
reeds.  Prof.  Ludwig  translates  differently :  *  diser  rauhen  feinde 
schlachtruf  mache  er  heiser.' — Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  527. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


E7MN  8.]  THE  ATHARVA-7MDA.  413 

5  Air  was  the  net ;  the  poles  thereof  were  the  great 

quarters  of  the  sky  : 
Sakra  therewith  enveloped  and  cast  on  the  ground 
the  Dasyus'  host. 

6  Verily  mighty  is  the  net  of  mighty  Sakra  rich  in 

wealth  : 
Therewith  press  all  the  foemen  down  so  that  not  one 
of  them  escape  ! 

7  Great  is  thy  net,  brave   Indra,  thine  the  mighty^ 

match  for  a  thousand,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers  ! 
Holding  them,  with  his  host,  therewith  hath  Indra 
slaughtered  Dasyus  a  hundred,  thousand,  myriad, 
jhundred  millions. 

8  This  world  so  mighty  was  the  net  of  Sakra,  of  the 

Mighty  One  : 
With  this,  the  net  of  Indra,  I  envelop  all  those  men 
with  gloom. 

9  Great  weakness  and  misfortune,  pain  which  words 

can  never  charm  away. 
Languor,  fatigue,  bewilderment,  with  these  I  compass 
all  the  foes, 

10  I  give  those  foemen  up  to  Death  :  bound  in  the  bonds 

of  Death  are  they. 

I  bind  and  carry  them  away  to  meet  Death's  wicked 
messengers. 

11  Bear  them   away.   Death's   messengers!  envoys   of 

Yama !  bind  them  fast. 
More  than  a  thousand  be   their  slain :  the  club  of 
Bhava  pierce  them  through ! 

5  Sakra:  the  powerful  Indra.  The  Datyut^  hat:  demons  who 
fought  against  the  Gods. 

8  Ilet  of  Indra :  indrajdld  is,  in  the  Mah&bh&rata,  the  name  of  a 
wonderful  weapon  wielded  by  the  hero  Arjuna,  and  in  later  Sanskrit 
means  incantation,  magio,  trickery,  and  delusion  in  general. 

II  Bhava:  see  note  on  IV.  28.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


414  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  VtlL 

12  Forth  go  the  S4dhyas  in  their  might  bearing  one  net- 

pole  raised  aloft. 
One  pole  the  Rudras  carry,  one  the  Vasus,  and  the 
Adityas  one. 

13  The  Visve  Devas  from  above  shall  come  depressing 

it  with  might, 
And  in  the  midst  the  Angirases,  slaying  the  mighty 
host,  shall  go. 

14  Trees  of  the  forest,  trees  that  bear  flower  and  fruit, 

and  herbs  and  plants, 
Quadruped,  biped  send  I  forth  that  they  may  strike 
this  army  dead. 

15  Gandharvas,  and  Apsarases,  Gods,  Serpents,  Fathers, 

Holy  Men, 
Seen  and  unseen,  I  send  them  forth  that  they  may 
strike  this  army  dead. 

16  Here  spread  are  snares  of  Death  wherefrom  thou, 

once  within  them,  ne'er  art  freed  : 
Full  many  a  thousand  of  the  host  yonder  this  horn 
shall  smite  and  slay. 

17  The  Gharma  hath  been  warmed  with  fire  :  this  Homa 

slays  a  thousand  men. 
Let   Bhava,   Prisnibdhu,   and  Sarva    destroy   that 
armament. 

18  Their  portion  be  the  fire  of  Death,  hunger,  exhaus- 

tion, slaughter,  fear. 


12  SAdhyas:  see  VII.  5.  1. 

15  Seen  and  unseen:  '  According  to  the  Mahabharata,  Sabhaparvan, 
461,  there  are  seven  groups  of  Pitris  or  Fathers,  four  embodied  {murf- 
timantah)  and  three  bodiless  {aiaHrinahy — Muir,  O.  S.  Texts,  V. 
p.  296. 

16  Horn:  the  symbol  of  power. 

17  Gharma :  the  libation  of  hot  milk  ofifered  especially  to  the  Asvma. 
Iloma :  an  oblation  poured  into  the  fire  ;  a  burnt-offering.  PrimibAhu  : 
having  speckled  arms ;  the  name  of  a  mythical  being,  not  mentioned 
elsewhere.  Sarva:  see  note  on  IV.  28.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  8.]  THE  ATHARVA^VEDA.  415 

With  your  entangling  snares  and   nets,  Sarva   and 
Indra  !  ^lay  that  host. 

19  Fly,  conquered,  in  alarm,  ye  foes,  run  driven  by  the 

spell  away  ! 
Let   not   one  man   escape  of  those  when  routed  by 
Brihaspati. 

20  Down  fall  their  weapons  on  the  ground  :  no  strength 

be  theirs  to  point  a  shaft : 
Then  in  their  dreadful  terror  let  their  arrows  wound 
their  vital  parts. 

21  Let  Heaven  and  Earth  roar  out  in   wrath  against 

them,  and  Air  with  all  the  Deities  in  concert. 
Let  them  not  find  a  surety  or  a  refuge,   but  torn 
away  go  down  to  Death  together. 

22  The  mules  of  the  Gods'  car  are  heaven's  four  quarters; 

their  hooves  are  sacred  cakes,  the  air  its  body. 
Its  sides  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  its  reins  the  Seasons, 
Voice  is  its  hood,  its  grooms  are  sky's  mid-regions. 

23  Year  is  the  car.  Full  Year  the  seat  for  driving,  Vir4j 

the  pole,  the  chariot's   front  is  Agcii,    Indra  the 
warrior,  and  the  Moon  the  driver. 

24  Hence  conquer,  conquer.  Hail !  be  thou  the  victor ! 

Let  these  be  conquerors  and  those  be  conquered. 
Good  luck  to  these,  ill  luck  to  those  men  yonder ! 
With  the  dark-blue-and-red  our  foes  I  cover. 


21  The  second  line  occurs  also  in  VI.  32.  2. 

22  Voice:  or  Vak ;  see  IV.  1.  2. 

23  Virdj:  or  Virat ;  a  mystical  being,  evolved  by  speculation.  See 
VIII.  10.  1,  note. 

24  With  the  dark-blue-and-red :  that  is,  with  two  strings  or  threads 
of  these  colours  which  are  to  be  used  in  the  incantation.  See  Eausika- 
Sutra,  XVI.  19. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


416  THE  HTMNS  OF  [BOOK  7111. 

HYMN  IX. 

Whence  were  these  two  produced?  which  was  that 
region  ?  From  what  world,  from  which  earth  had 
they  their  being  ? 

Calves  of  Vir4j,  these  two  arose  from  water,  I  ask 
thee  of  these  twain,  who  was  their  milker. 

2  He  who  prepared  a  threefold  home,  and  lying  there 

made  the  water  bellow  through  his  greatness, 
Calf  of  VirSj,  giving  each   wish   fulfilment,   made 
bodies  for  himself  far  off,  in  secret. 

3  Which  are  the  three,  the  mighty  three,  whereof  the 

fourth  divides  the  voice. 
This  may  the  Brahman  know  by  prayer  and  fervour, 
whereto  belongs  the  one,  whereto  the  other. 

4  Out  of  the  Brihat  as  the  sixth  five  Samans  have  been 

fashioned  forth  : 
From  Brihati  was  Brihat  formed :  whence  was  the 
Brihati  composed  ? 


The  hymn,  which  is  a  kind  of  Brahmodyam  (see  note  at  the  end  of 
v.  1),  consists  of  a  series  of  purposely  enigmatical  questions  and  dark 
answers  on  oosmogonical,  ritual,  and  metrical  doctrine.  It  is  obscure 
throughout,  and  in  many  parts  I  find  it  absolutely  unintelligible. 

1  These  two :  perhaps  the  Sun  and  Lightning.  Vtr/^j :  a  mysterious 
Divine  Being  or  Abstraction,  evolved  by  speculation,  endowed  with 
creative  and  other  miraculous  powers,  and  the  subject  of  many  fanci- 
ful allegories.  See  the  following  hymn. 

2  Threefold  home:  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth,  wherein  Agni 
dwells  as  Sun,  lightning,  and  fire. 

3  ITie  mighty  three :  or,  the  three  Bfihats ;  a  mystical  power  is  repre- 
sented as  residing  in  the  metres  which  are  regarded  as  divine  beings. 

4  Brihat :  the  name  of  various  S&mans  or  chanted  songs  in  the 
Bphati  metre  which  consists  of  thirty-six  syllables  in  four  Pidas, 
8  +  8  +  12  +  8. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  9J  THB  ATUARrAVEDA.  41? 

5  On  measure  Brihati  is  based>  and  measure  on  the 

measurer : 
From  magic  might  came  magic  might,  from  magic 
might  came  M&tall. 

6  VaisvA^nara's  image  is  the  sky  above  us,  so  far   ai» 

Agni  forced  both  spheres  asunder. 
Thence  from  that  region  as  the  sixth  come  praise- 
songs,  and  every  sixth  day  hence  again  go  upward. 

7  We,  Kaisyapa!  six  present  Rishis,  ask  thee — for  thoit 

hast  proved  things  tried  and  meet  for  trial — 
They  call  Vir^  the  father  of  Devotion  :  tell  her  to  us 
thy  friends  in  all  her  figures. 

8  She   whom,  advancing,  sacrifices  follow,  and  whdn 

she  takes  her  station  stand  beside  her. 
By  whose  control  and  best  the  spirit  moveth,  she  is 
Virdj,  in  highest  heaven,  O  Rishis. 

9  Breathless,  she  moves  by  breath  of  living  creatures. 

Svardj  precedes,  VirAj  comes  closely  after. 
Some  men  behold  her  not,  and  some  behold  her, 
Vir4j  meet-shaped,  who  thinks  of  all  existence. 


5  Sfdtalt :  the  name  of  a  divine  bein^  associated  wtih  Yama  and 
the  Fathers.  But  the  meaning  here  is  unoertain,  the  name  being, 
perhaps,  introduced  with  punning  reference  to  the  md  in  mdbrd^dhf 
measure,  mdtur,  measurer,  in  the  preceding,  and  mdyd'^  mdydydh^ 
magic  power,  in  the  same  line,  and  intended,  as  Ludwig  suggests, 
to  signify  mdtar,  a  measurer. 

6  Every  sixth  day :  in  ceremonies  performed  on  each  sixth  day  of 
tke  lunar  fortnight. 

7  Kasyapa:  the   celebrated  Rishi  of  the  Rigveda.     See  Index  ef 
Names,  Etc.  Father  ....  her :  Vir3tj,  or  Vir&t,  appears  smnetimee  as 
a  male  being,  identified  with  Purusha,  PrajApati,  and  Agni,  sometimes ' 
as  a  female,   the  daughter  of  one  of  these  deities;    See  the  following 
hymn. 

9  Svardj :  or  Svar^t,  self-luminous ;  the  Supreme  Being. 

27 


Digitized  by 


Google 


418  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

10  Who  hath  perceiyed  Vir&j's  duplication,  perceived 

her  seasons  and  her  rule  and  practice  ? 
Who  knows  her  steps,  how  oft,   how  far  extended, 
who  knows  her  home  and  number  of  her  dawnings  ? 

11  She  here  who  first  of  all  sent  forth  her  lustre  moves 

onward  resting  on  these  lower  creatures. 
IBxalted  power  and  might  are  stored  within  her  :  the 
woman  hath  prevailed,  the  new-come  mother. 

12  Both  Dawns  on  wings  of  song,  with  rich  adornment, 

move  on  tc^gether  to  their  common  dwelling. 
S6rya's  two  wives,  un wasting,  most  prolific,  knowing 
their  way,  move,  rich  in  light,  together. 

13  The  three  have  passed  along  the  path  of  Order — 

three  warm  libations  have  regarded  offspring — 
One  quickens  progeny,  one  strengthens  vigour,  and 
one  protects  the  kingdom  of  the  pious. 

14  She  who  was  fourth  was  made  by  Agni,  Soma,  and 

Rishis  as  they  formed  both  halves  of  worship, 
Gdyatri,  Trislitup,    Jagati,    Anushtup,    Brihadarkl 
lightening  the  sacrificer. 

15  Pive  milkings  answer  to  the  fivefold  dawning,  five 

seasons  to  the  cow  who  bears  five  titles. 
.    The  five  sky-regions  made  fifteen  in  number,  one 
head  have  these  to  one  sole  world  directed. 

16  Six  Elements  arose,  first-born  of  Order:  the  six-day 

time  is  carried  by  six  S4mans. 

1 2  Both  Dawns  :  Morning  and  her  sister  Night. 

13  T/te  three  :  Dawn,  Sunlight^  and  Night. 

14  BrihadarH:  containing  or  forming  the  great  or  best  hymn  of 
praise.     Lightening :  winning  the  light  of  heaven  for. 

15  Five  seasons :  instead  of  the  more  usual  six  ;  the  Dewy  and  the 
Gold  seasons  being  counted  together  as  one.  Made  fifteen :  by  the 
addition  of  intermediate  spaces,  or  multiplication  by  three. 

16  Six  elements  :  earth,  air,  fire,  water,  ether,  and  the  subtile 
element.  Both  broad  ones :  heaven  and  earth,  each  of  which  is  regarded 
as  threefold. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMJF^}  THE  ATHARVA-rSDA.  419 

Six-yoked  the  plongh  is,  as  each  trace  is  numbered  : 
they  call  both  broad  ones  six;  six.  Earth  and 
Heaven. 

17  They  call  the  cold  months  six,  and  six  the  hot  ones. 

Which,  tell  us,  of  the  seasons  is  redundant  ? 
Seven  sages,  eagles,  have  sat  down  together :  seven 
metres  match  the  seven  Consecrations. 

18  Seven  are  the  Homas,  seven  the  logs  for  burning, 

seven  are   the  streams  of  mead,  and  seven  the 
seasons. 
Into  the  world  have  come  seven  streams  of  butter  : 
those  we  have  heard  of  as  the  Seven  Vultures. 

19  Seven  metres,  by  four  syllables  increasing,  each  of 

the  seven  founded  upon  another — 
How  are  the  hymns  of  praise  on  these  supported,  and 
how  are  these  imposed  upon  the  praise-songs  ? 

20  How  hath  the  G^yatri  filled  out  three  triads  ?  On  the 

fifteen  how  is  the  Trishtup  moulded, 
Jagatt  fashioned  on  the  three-and-thirty  ?  How  is 
Anushtup  formed  ?  how  EkaviAsa  ? 


17  Seven  Bages  :  the  Seven  Rishis.  See  V.  17.  6.  Seven  metres  :  the 
seven  generic  metres  of  the  Veda.  Consecrations:  dtkshds ;  solemn 
initiatory  or  preparatory  ceremonies. 

18  Homas :  oblations  of  clarified  butter  poured  into  the  fire.  Seven 
Vultures :  this  literal  translation  is  unintelligible.  Professor  Ludwig 
suggests  that  the  meaning  is :  as  (men)  eager  after  everything  that  is 
sevenfold,  or  wishing  to  turn  all  things  into  sevens. 

20  Triads :  or  triplets.  '  The  Siman  consists  of  two  verses  only,  it  is 
first  to  be  made  to  consist  of  three  by  repetition  of  some  part  of  the  two 
principal  verses  before  it  can  be  used  as  a^  chant  at  a  Soma  sacrifice. 
After  a  triplet  of  verses  has  been  thus  obtained,  it  is  to  be  chanted  in 
three  turns,  each  turn  containing  in  three  subdivisions  a  certain  number 
of  repetitions.'  Haug,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  Translation,  Book  III.  2. 
17,  note.  These  questions  on  the  formation  of  the  metres  are  not 
easily  explained  or  answered,  nor  are  they  of  any  general  importance. 
Ekavihsa :  a  Stoma  or  hymn  consisting  of  twenty-one  parts. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iaO  THB  B7MNS  OP  [BOOK.  VIII 

21  Eight  Elements  sprang  up,  first  born  6f  Order  :  the 

Priests  cjivine  are  eight  in  number,  Indra  ! 
Eight  are  the  wombs  of  Aditi,  eight  her  children  : 
for  the  eighth  night  is  the  liba,bion  destined. 

22  So  planning  bliss  for  you  have  I  come  hither  to  win 

your  friendship  :  kind  am  I,  and  gracious. 
Born  from  one  source,   propitious  is  your  wisdom  : 
knowing  full  well  to  all  of  you  it  cometh. 

23  To  Indra  eight,  to  Yama  six,  seven  to  the  Rishis, 

seven  to  each  : 
The  number  five  acpona panics  waters  and  men  and 
healing  herbs. 

24  The  Heifer,  all  his  own,  poured  forth  for  Indra  control 

and  milk  at  her  first  time  of  milking  ; 
And  he  then  satisfied  the  four  divisions,  the  Gods 
and  men  and  Asuras  and  Rishis. 

25  Who  is  the  Cow  ?    Who  is  the  Single  Rishi  ?   What 

is  the  law,  what  are  the  benedictions  ? 
What  on  the  earth  is  the  one  only  Spirit  ?    Which  of 
the  number  is  the  Single  Season  ? 


21  Eight  elements :  apparently  the  six  of  stansa  16  with  Intellect 
and  Mind  added.  Eight  her  childrm :  the  Adityas  or  sons  of  Aditi 
(see  I.  9.  1,  note)  are  in  the  Rigveda  (IX.  114.  3)  said  to  be  seven. 
In  the  period  of  the  Br4hmaiias  they  were  twelve,  as  representing 
the  sun  in  the  twelve  months  of  the  year.  Eighth  night :  the  Ashtaml 
or  eighth  lunar  day  in  each  half-month. 

22  /;  Virflj  may  be  meant. 

23  Waters  :  with  reference  to  the  five  rivers  of  the  Pan  jab.  Men : 
referring  to  the  Five  Nations,  or  Races  of  Aryans. 

24  The  Heifer  :  perhaps  the  rain-cloud,  the  milk  being  the  rain,  and 
control  the  power  which  Indra  derives  from  the  saoritioes  which  the 
fertilizing  rain  enables  men  to  offer  to  him. 

25  The  Single  Rishi :  meaning  the  first  or  chief  sage.  Single  Spirit : 
yakshdi/if  here  rendered  by  spirit,  means  a  living  supematui'al  being 
deserving  worship.  Professor  Ludwig  hero  and  elsewhere  renders  the 
woril  by  Fost,  feast  or  festival.  The  Single  Season  :  the  hitercalary 
month.  These  questions  of  the  Rishis  and  Kasyapa's  replies  are  un- 
intelligible. The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda^ 
III.  p.  439. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  10]  THE  ATHARYAYEhA.  421 

26  One  is  the  Cow,  one  is  the  Single  Spirit,  one  is  the 
law,  single  are  benedictions. 
The  Spirit  dwelling  on  the  earth  is  single  :  the  Single 
Season  never  is  transcended. 

HYMN  X. 

VirAj  at  first  was  I'his.    At  birth  all  feared  her ;  the 
thought,  She  will  become  this  All,  struck  terror. 

2  She  rose,  the  GArbapatya  fire  she  entered.     He  who 

knows  this  becomes  lord  of  a  household,  performer 
of  domestic  sacrifices. 

3  She    mounted    up,    the    Eastward  fire  she  entered. 

He  who  knows  this  becomes  the  Gods'   belov^d^ 
and  to  his  call  they  come  when  he  invokes  them. 

4  She  mounted  up,  the  Southward    fire  she  entered. 

He  who    knows  this  becomes  a  fit  performer  of 
sacrifice,  meet  for  honour,  shelter-giver. 

5  She  mounted  up,  she   entered  the  Assembly.     He 

who  knows  this  becomes  polite  and  courtly,  anct 
people  come  as  guests  to  hisassembly. 


The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  mystical  abstraction  Yirl^j; 

1  YirAj :  in  Kigveda  X.  90.  5.  Virij  is  said  to  have  been  bom  from 
Pumsha  (the  Primeval  Male  from  whom  the  universe  was  evolved). 
In  A.  V.  IX.  2.  5,  she  is  identified  with  V&k,  the  Word,  and,  in  IX.  10. 
24,  with  V&k,  Air,  Earth,  Praj^pati  the  Creator,  with  Death,  and  the 
Regent  of  the  Sadhyas.  In  XI.  4.  1 2  she  is  identified  with  PrILna  or 
Vital  Spirit.  Vir&j  is  also  the  personified  forty-syllable  metre  of  that 
name  to  which  miraculous  powers  were  attributed.  In  some  Vedio 
passages  vircQ  is  an  epithet  (radiant^  splendid)  applied  to  Indra,  Prajdr 
pati,  and  Paramesbthin  the  Supreme.  See  Moir,  O.  S.  Texts,  Y., 
pp.  369,  37a     Thi$:  the  universe. 

2  The  Gdrhapatya  fire  $he  entered  r  here  Viraj  is  a  mysterioua 
divine  influence  completing  the  sanctity  and  efficacy  of  the  western 
eacred  fire  which  it  is  the  householder's  privilege  and  duty  to  maintaio. 

5  The  Assembly :  of  the  people  of  the  village  or  haoj^t^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


422  THE  EYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Till. 

6  She  mounted  up,  she  passed  within  the  meeting.  He 

who  knows  this  becomes  fit  for  the  meeting,  and 
to  his  hall  of  meeting  come  the  people.  - 

7  She  mounted  up,  she  entered  Consultation.     Whoso 

knows  this  is  fit  to  be  consulted,  and  to  his  consul- 
tation come  the  people. 

8  She  mounted  up,  and,  into  four  divided,  she  took 

her  station  in  the  air's  mid-region. 

9  Of  her  the  Gods  and  men  said,  This  she  knoweth. 

That  we  may  both  have  life  let  us  invoke  lier. 

10  Thus  did  they  cry  to  her  : 

11  Come,  Strength!  come.  Food !  come,  Charmer !  come, 

Free-giver  1 

12  Her  calf,  her  well-belovfed  calf,  was  Indra :  G&yatrl 

was  her  rope,  the  cloud  her  udder. 

13  Two  teats  she  had,   Rathantara  and  Brihat,  two, 

YajfiAyajfiiya  and  Vdmadevya. 

14  With  the  Rathantara  the  Gods  milked  from  her  the 

Plants,  and  all  the  wide  expanse  with  Bpihat. 

6  The  meeting  :  of  the  people  of  the  district.  On  w6M^  assembly, 
and  tdmiiiy  meetmg  or  congress,  see  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
pp.  172—175. 

11  Food! :  svddhe;  *But  svadh^  means  also  food,  lit.  one's  own 
portion,  the  sacrificial  portion  due  to  each  god»  and  lastly,  food  in 
general.' — Max  Miiller,  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  p.  35. 

12  Her  calf:  Viraj,  identi6ed  with  V&k,  is  in  A.  V.  IX.  2.  5  called 
the  Cow,  representing  the  creative  power  of  Nature  like  the  Cow 
Audhiunbla  in  Teutonic  mythology.  See  Simrock,  Handbuch  der 
Deutschen  Mythologie,  pp.  18,  215. 

13  Rathantara:  the  name  of  various  Samans  or  chanted  Vedic 
verses.  Brihat :  the  name  of  chanted  verses  in  the  Brihati  metre  of 
thirty-six  syllables.    See  IV.  34.  1,  note. 

Yajndyajfiiya  :  a  Saman  so  called  after  the  beginning  (Yajiil^-yajfi4) 
of  Rigveda  I.  168.  1.  Vdmadevya:  the  name  of  various  S&mans.  See 
IV.'34.  1,  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  10.]  THE  ATBARVA-VEDA.  4M 

15  They  drew  the  Waters  forth  with  Vdrtiadevya,  with 

Yajfidyajftiya  they  milked  out  worship. 

16  For  him  who  ki>oweth  this,  Rathantara  poureth  tjut 

Plants,  and  Brihat  yieldeth  wide  expansion. 

17  Waters  from  V4madevya  comej  from  Yajnayajniya 

sacrifice. 

18  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  trees:  they  icilled  ber. 

A  year  went  by  and  she  again  existed. 
Hence  in  a  year  the  wounds  of  trees  heal  over.     Ha 
who  knows  this  sees  his  loathed  rival  wounded! 

19  She  mounted  up,  she  came  unto  the  Fathers :  they 

killed  her  :  in  a  month  she  re-existed. 
Hence  men  give  monthly  oflferings  to  the  Fathers :  who 
knows  this^  knows  the  path  which  they  have  trodden. 

20  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Gods  :  they  killed  her ; 

but  in  a  fortnight  she  again  was  living. 
Fortnightly,  hence,  men  serve  the  Gods  with  Vashat! 
Whoknows  this  knows  the  way  which  Gods  pass  over. 

21  She  mounted  up,  she  came  to  men :  they  killed  her. 

Pi'esently  she  regained  her  life  and  being. 
Hence  on  both  days  to  men  they  bring  and  offer ^— 
whoso  knows  this— near-seated  in  the  dwelling. 

22  She  rose,  approached  the  Asuras  :  they  called  her : 

their  cry  was,  Come,  O  M4y4,  come  thou  hither. 


IS  Proper  reoogi>ition  of  the  power  of  Viraj,  as  renoyating  Nature^ 
to  rep{iir  the  inj^uries  which  trees  may  have  sufiered  will  be  rewarded 
by  triumph  over  a  sufFeriug  enemy. 

19  Afonthly  offerings :  oblations  presented  on  the  day  of  full  moon. 
The  path  which  they  have  trodden:  and,  cousequently,  how  to  reach 
heaven  themselves. 

21  Both  days  :  meaning  two  conseetitive  day  a. 

22  7'he  Asuras :  the  fiends  who  fought  against  the  Gods,  ifdyd  : 
Miraculous  Power,  Miglit  of  Gods,  personified.  Vimrhann  Prdhrddi  : 
a  chief  of  the  Asuras,  son  of  Prahrada.  Dvimitrdhd  AHvya  :  the  name 
of  a  two-headed  Asora.  A  fit  supporter:  ttpfijtvantyah ;.  a  wealthy 
man,  on  whom  others  can  depend  for  their  livelihoqd* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


42t  TBS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Ylli. 

Her  dear  calf  was  Virochana  Pr&hr^i :  her  milking- 

vessel  was^a  pan  of  iron. 
DvimArdhft  Artvya  milked  her,  yea,  this  Mdyd.   The 

Asuras  depend  for  life  on  M&y&.    He  who  knows 

this  beoomes  a  fit  supporter. 

23  She  mounted  up,  she  came  unto  the  Fathers.    The 

Fathers  called  to  her,  O  Food,  conxe  hither. 
King   Yama  was   her   calf,   her   pail   was    silvern. 

Antaka,  Mrityu's  son,  milked  her,  this  Svadhft. 
This  Food  the  Fathers  make  their  lives'  sustainer. 

He  who  knows  this  becomes  a  meet  supporter. 

24  She  mounted  up,  she  came  to  men.    They  called  her, 

Come  unto  us,  come  hither  thou  Free-giver ! 
Earth   was  her    milking-pail,   the   calf  beside   her 
Manu  Vaivasvata,  Vivasv^n's  oflfspring. 

23  0  Food:  see  note  on  stansa  11.  Antaha  :  the  Ender;  generally 
a  name  of  Death  himself,  as  in  VI,  46.  2,  and  VIII.  1.  1.  Their  Hv€t* 
sustainer :  the  Manes  depend  for  their  existence  on  the  oblations  pre- 
sented to  them  by  their  relations  on  earth.  A  somewhat  similar  idea 
led  the  Greeks  and  Romans  to  visit  the  tombs  of  their  relatives  at  cer- 
tain periods,  and  to  offer  to  them  sacrifices,  food,  and  various  gifts. 
'  The  parkin  cakes  baked  in  Yorkshire  in  November,  the  simnel  or 
soul-mass  cakes  of  Lancashire,  the  gaujfres  baked  at  All  Souls-tide  in 
Belgium,  are  all  reminiscences  of  the  food  prepared  and  ofiered  to  the 
dead  at  All  Souls,  the  great  day  of  commemoration  of  the  departed 
....  In  the  north  of  England  all  idea  as  to  the  connection  between 
these  cakes  and  the  dead  is  lost,  but  the  cakes  are  still  made.  This 
custom  is  a  transformation  under  Christian  influence  of  the  still  earlier 
usage  of  putting  food  on  the  graves,' — S.  Baring-Gould,  Strange 
Survivals,  p.  272. 

24  JUanu  Vaivasvata :  the  seventh  Manu,  son  of  Vivasv^n  or  the 
Sun,  regarded  as  the  progenitor  of  the  present  race  of  human  beings. 
Priihi:  called  Vainya  or  son  of  Vena  (see  RV,  VIII.  9.  10),  said  to 
have  been  the  first  anointed  sovereign  of  men,  and  to  have  introduced^ 
the  arts  of  husbandry  into  the  world.  He  is  also  called  Pfithu,  and  is 
counted  among  the  Hishis,  Rigveda  X.  148  having  been  revealed  to 
him. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7MX  10]  TBB  ATHARTA-TBDA.  425 

Prithl  the  son  of  Veda  was  her  milker :  he  milked 
forth  husbandry  and  grain  for  sowing. 

These  men  depend  for  life  on  corn  and  tillage.  He 
who  knows  this  becomes  a  meet  supporter,  success- 
ful in  the  culture  of  his  corn-land. 

25  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Seven  Rishis.     They 

called  her,  Come,  Rich  in  Devotion !  hither. 
King  Soma  was  her  calf,  the  Moon  her  milk-pail. 

Brihaspati  Angirasa,  her  milker, 
Drew  from  her  udder  Prayer   and  Holy   Fervour, 

Fervour  and  Prayer  maintain  the  Seven  Rishis. 
He  who  knows  this  becomes  a  meet  supporter,  a  priest 

illustrious  for  his  sacred  knowledge. 

^6  She  rose,  she  came  unto  the  Gods.     They  called  her, 
crying,  O  Vigour,  come  to  us,  come  hither  ! 
God  Savitar  milked  her,  he  milked  forth  Vigour. 
The  Gods  depend  for  life  upon   that   Vigour.    He 
who  knows  this  becomes  a  meet  supporter. 

27  She  rose,  approached  the  Apsarases  and  Gandharvas. 

They  called  her.  Come  to  us,  O  Fragrant-scented! 
The  son  of  SAryavarchas,  Chitraratha,  was  her  dear 

calf,  her  pail  a  lotus-petal. 
The   son   of  SAryavarchas,  Vasuruchi,   milked   and 

drew  from  her  most  delightful  fragrance. 
That    scent  supports    Apsarases   and  Gandharvas. 

He  who  knows  this  becomes  a  meet   supporter, 

and  round  him  over  breathes  delicious  odour. 

25  Tlie  Seven  Rishis :  Bharadvaja,  Kasyapa,  Gotama,  Atri,  Vasishlha, 
yisv^mitra,  and  Jamadagni.  Angirasa :  closely  connected  with  Anglras 
or  his  descendants. 

27  SAryawrrckas :  Sun-bright.  Chitraratha :  Borne  on  a  brilliant 
oar;  th«  King  of  the  Gandharvas.  Vasuruchi:  Radiant  as  a  God; 
one  of  the  chief  Gandharvas.  That  scent  supports:  the  names  of 
four  of  the  Apsarases  mentioned  in  IV.  37.  3  are  derived  from  fragrant 
plants  or  sweet  scents,  and  the  word  Gandharva  is  supposed  to  b« 
oopneoted  with  gandha^  scent. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


426  THE  ArnARTA'TEDA.  [BOOK  VIIF, 

28  She  mounfted  up,  she  came  to  Other  People.     They 

called  her,  crjriDg,  Come,  C<>nceali»ei>t !  hither. 
Her  dear  calf  was  Vaisravapa  Kubeia,  a  vessel  never 

teaipered  was  her  milk-pail. 
Rajatan4bhi,  offspring  of  Kubera,  milked  her,  and 

from  her  udder  drew  concealment. 
By  that  concealment  live  the  Other  People.  He  who 

knows  this  becomes  a  meet  supporter,  and  makea 

all  evil  disappear  and  vanish. 

29  She  mounted  op,  she  came  unto  the  Serpents.     The 

Serpents  called  her,  Venomous  I  come  hither. 

Her  calf  was  Takshaka,  Visdla's  offspring  :  a  bottle- 
gourd  supplied  a  milking-vesseL 

Iravdn's  offspring,  Dhritar^htra  milked  her,  and  from 
her  udder  drew  forth  only  poison. 

That  poison  quickens  and  supports  the  Serpents  : 
He  who  knows  this  becon>es  a  meet  supporter. 

30  One  would  ward  off,  for  him  who  bath  this  know- 

ledge, if  with  a  bottle-gourd  he  sprinkled  water. 

31  And  did  he  not  repel,  if  in  his  spirit  he  said^  I  drive 

thee  back,  he  would  repel  it. 

32  The  poison  that  it  drives  away,  that  poison  verily 

repels. 

33  The  man  who  hath  this  knowledge  pours  its  venom 

on  his  hated  foe. 

28  Other  People :  a  euphemistic  expression  for  certain  beings  who 
appear  to  be  considered  as  spirits  of  darkness.  So  in  England  fairies, 
are  called  folk,  people,  neighbours;  in  Gernwiny,  little  folk;  and  in 
Switzerland  hill  people,  and  earth  people.  Vaivravana  Kubera:  in 
later  Sanskrit,  Kuvera,  sou  of  Visravas,  chief  of  the  spirits  of  darkness 
and  afterwards  the  God  of  riches  and  treasure. 

29  Takshaka :  one  of  the  principal  N&gas  or  Serpents  of  P&t4la  or 
the  under-world.  DhritarAsh^a  :  a  chief  Ni^a,  called  AiraL^ata  or  soa 
of  Ira  van. 

31  The  knowledge  and  the  mere  wish  or  thought  without  any 
external  action  would  be  sufficient  to  counteract  the  deadliest  poison. 

33  The  same  knowledge  enables  a  man  to  poison  his  enemy  secretly... 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOOK  IX^ 


HYMN  I. 

The  Asvins*  Honey-whip  was  bortt  from  heaven  and 
earth,  from  middle  air^  and  oceatii  and  from  fire 
and  wind. 

All  living  creatures  welcome  it  with  joyful  hearts, 
fraught  with  the  store  of  Amrit  it  hatn  gathered  up. 

2  They  call  thee  earth's  great  strength  ih  every  form, 

they  call  thee  too  the  ocean's  genial  seed. 
Whence  comes  the  Honey-whip  bestowing  bounty, 
there  Vital  Spirit  is,  and  Amrit  treasured. 

3  In  sundry  spots,   repeatedly  reflecting,   men   view 

upon  the  earth  her  course  and  action  ; 
For   she,   the   first-born   daughter   of  the   Maruts, 
derives  her  origin  from  Wind  and  Agnii 

4  Daughter  of  Vasus,  mother  of  Adityas,  centre  of 

Amrit,  breath  of  living  creatures. 
The   Honey-whip,  gold-coloured,    dropping  fatness, 
moves  as  a  mighty  embryo  'mid  mortals. 

5  The  deities  begat  the  Whip  of  Honey  :  her  embryo 

assumed  all  forms  and  fashions. 


The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  Whip  of  the  Asvins,  and  a  prayer 
for  the  gift  of  sweetness,  splendour,  and  strength  from  them  and  other 
deities. 

1  Honey-whip:  madhttkasd'^: kdsd  mddkumati  (R.  V.  I.  22.  8),  with 
which  the  Asvins  are  prayed  to  '  sprinkle  the  sacrifice.'  It  signifies, 
perhaps,  the  early  stimulating  and  life-giving  morning  breeze  which 
accompanies  the  first  appearance  of  the  Asvins,  the  Lords  of  Light) 
who  precede  the  Dawn,  and  represents  in  this  hymn  all  creative, 
vivifying,  and  sustaining  power. 

3  Her  cour$e  and  action :  the  coming  and  operation  of  the  wondrous 
Honey-whip. 

5  The  Whip  of  Honey:  mddhoh  kdsdm. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


428  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX, 

The  mother  nourishes  that  tender  infant  which  at  its 
birth  looks  on  all  worlds  and  beings. 

6  Who   understandeth   well,    who   hath   perceived  it» 

her  heart's  uninjured  Soma-holding  beaker  ? 
Ijet  the  wise  Brahman  priest  therein  be  joyful. 

7  He  understandeth  them,  he  hath  perceived  them,  her 

breasts  that  pour  a  thousand  streams,  uninjured  : 
They  unreluctantly  yield  strength  and  vigour. 

8  She  who  with  voice  upraised  in  constant  clamour, 

mighty,  life-giving,  goes  unto  her  function, 
Bellowing  to  the  heated  three  libations,  suckles  with 
streams  of  milk,  and  still  is  lowing. 

9  On  whom,  well-fed,  the  Waters  wait  in  worship,  and 

steers  and  self-refulgent  bulls  attend  her. 
For  thee,  for  one  like  thee  down  pour  the  Waters, 
and  cause  desire  and  strength  to  rain  upon  thee.- 

10  The  thunder  is   thy  voice,  O  Lord   of  Creatures  : 

a  Bull,  thou  castest  on  the  earth  thy  vigour. 
The  Honey-whip,  the  Maruts'  first-born  daughter, 
derives  her  origin  from  Wind  and  Agni. 

11  As  at  the  morning  sacrifice  the  Asvins  twain  love 

Soma  well. 
Even    so  may  both   the  Asvins  lay  splendour  and 
strength  within  my  soul. 

12  As  at  the  second  sacrifice  Indra  and  Agni  love  him 

well, 
Let  the  pair,  Indra  Agni,  lay  splendour  and  strength 
within  my  soul. 

13  As  at  third  sacrifice  Soma  is  the  Bibhus^  well-belov^ 

one, 
Even  so  may  they,  the  Ribhus,  store  splendour  and 
strength  within  my  soul. 

10  Lord  of  Creatures :  Prajapati.  Thunder  ia  his  voice  inasmuch  a» 

Jt  heralds  the  seasonable  rain  which  sustains  the  life  of  his  creatures. 

Thy  vigour:  thy  generative  power  from  which  living  beings  are  produced. 

13  HilJiwt:  the  three  renowned  artists  who  by  their  excellent  work 
obtained  divinity,  exercised  superhuman  powers,  and  became  entitled 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jrFJ/JTl.l  THE  JLTBARVA-VSPA,  439 

14  Fain  would  I  bring  forth  sweetness,  fain  would  make 

it  mine. 
Bringing  milk,  Agni !  haye  I  come  :  splendour  and 
strength  bestow  on  me ! 

15  Grant  me,  O  Agni,  splendid  strength,  and  progeny, 

and  lengthened  life. 
Hay  the  Gods  know  me  as  I  am,  may  Indra  with  the 
Rishis  knpw. 

16  As  honey-bees  collect  and  add  fresh  honey  to  their 

hpney  store. 
Even  so  may  both    the  Asvins  lay   splendour   and 
strength  within  my  soul. 

17  As  over  honey  flies  besmear  this  honey  which  the 

bees  have  made. 
So    may   both    Asvins   lay    in    m^  splendour   and 
strength  and  power  and  might. 

18  May  all  the  sweetness  that  is  found  in  hills  and 

mountains,  steeds  and  kine. 
And  wine  that  floweth  from  the  cup,— may  all  that 
sweetness  be  in  me. 

19  May  both  the  Asvins,  Lords  of  Light,  balm  me  with 

honey  of  the  bees. 
That  I  may  speak  among  the  folk  words  full  of  splend- 
our and  of  strength. 

20  The   thunder  is  thy  voice,   O  Lord  of  Creatures : 

a  Bull,  thou  castest  strength  on  earth  and  heaven. 
To  that  all  cattle  look  for  their  existence :  with  this 
she  nourishes  their  force  and  vigour. 


to  worship.  They  are  called  collectively  Ribhus  from  Ribhu  the  eldest 
of:  the  three  brothers,  the  others  being  named  separately  Vibhvau  and 
V&ja.     Several  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  are  addressed  to  these  deities. 


15  The  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  I.  23,  24. 
20  See  stanza  11.  She:  the  Whip  of  the  Asvins. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


430  '   THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  UT. 

21  The   Whip   itself  is  Heaven,  Earth  ia  the  haadle, 

the  point  of  juncture  is  the  Air's  inid-i^gion. 
The  lash  is  lightning,  and  the  tip  is  goldeiu 

22  Whoever  knows  the  Whip's  seven  kinds  of  honey, 

becomes  himself  a  man  endowed  with  sweetness. 
Br4hman  and  King,  the  draught-ox  and  the  milch- 
cow,  barley  and  rice,  and  honey  is  the  seventh. 

23  Sweet  is  the  man,  sweet  are  his  goods  and  chattels  : 

he  who  knows  this  conquers  the  worlds  of  sweetness, 

24  The  thundering    of   Praj&pati  in  heaven  is  verily 

manifest  to  living  creatures. 
Therefore  I  stand  from  right  to  left  invested,  and, 

O  Praj^pati,  I  cry,  regard  me ! 
The  man  who  hath  this  knowledge  is  regarded  by 

living  beings  and  the  Lord  of  Creatures. 

HYMN  II. 

Kama  the  Bull,  slayer  of  foes,  I  worship  with  molten 

butter,  sacrifice,  oblation. 
Beneath  my  feet  cast  down  mine  adversaries,  with 

thy  great  manly  power,  when  I  have  praised  thee. 

2  That  which  is  hateful  to  mine  eye  and  spirit,  that 

harasses  and  robs  me  of  enjoyment. 
The  evil  dream   I  loose  upon  my  foemen.     May  I 
rend  him  when  I  have  lauded  K&ma. 

3  K4ma,  do  thou,  a  mighty  Lord  and  Ruler,  let  loose 

ill  dream,  misfortune,  want  of  children. 


21  The  point  of  juncture:  gdrhhah  (from  grahh=grnhy  to  take, 
to  conceive) ;  the  receptacle,  meaning  here  the  place  where  the  thong 
is  attached  to  the  whip-stock. 

23  Conquers  the  worlds  of  sweetness :  gains  admittance  into  heaven. 

24  From  right  to  left  invested:  prdchinopavitdh ;  wearing  the 
sacrificial  cord  over  the  right  shoulder  and  passed  under  the  left  arm. 


The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  Kama  or  Love,  the  God  of  general 
desire  of  all  thaf  is  good. 

1  Tlie  BuU  :  or,  the  strong ;  the  hero. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^ri/.V  2.]  TSE  ATHARVA'VEDA.  431 

Homelessness,  K^ma!   utter  destitution,   upon  the 
sinner  who  designs  my  ruin. 

4  Drive  them  away,  drive  them  afar,  O  K&ma ;  indigence 

fall  on  those  who  are  my  foemen ! 
When  they  have  been  cast  down  to  deepest  darkness, 
consume  their  dwellings  with  thy  fire,  O  Agni. 

5  She,  KSima !  she  is  called  the  Cow,  thy  daughter, 

she  who  is  named  V4k  and  VirAj  by  sages. 
By  her  drive  thou  my  foemen  to  a  distance.    May 
cattle,  vital  breath,  and  life  forsake  them. 

6  By  K&ma's  might.  King  Varu^ia's  and  Indra^s,  by 

Vish^u's  strength,  and  Savitar's  instigation, 
I  chase  my  foes  with  sacrifice  to  Agni,  as  a  deft 
steersman  drives  his  boat  through  waters. 

7  May  K&ma,  mighty  one,  my  potent  warder,  give  me 

full  freedom  from  mine  adversaries. 
May  all  the  Deities  be  my  protection,  all  Gods  come 
nigh  to  this  mine  invocation. 

^  Acceptiag  this  oblation  rich  with  fatness,  be  joyful 
here,  ye  Gods  whose  chief  is  K&ma, 
Giving  «ie  freedom  from  mine  adversaries, 

9  Ye,  Indra,  Ag«i,  K4ma.!  come  together  and  oast 
mine  adversaries  down  beneath  me. 
When   they  hav^  sunk  into  the  deepest   darkness, 
O  Agni,  with  thy  fire  consume  their  dwellings. 

1.0  Slay  those  who  are  mine  enemies,  O  K^a :  headlong 
to  depth  of  blinding  darkness  hurl  them. 
Beft  be  they  all  of  manly  strength  and  vigour  !  Let 
them  not  have  a  single  day's  existence. 


5  Tfhe  Cow :  kdmadhuk  or  hdmadhenu  ;  the  Cow  of  Plenty  who  yields 
every  thing  that  is  desired.  Vdk :  Goddess  of  Speech ;  the  Creative 
Word.   Virdj :  here,  apparently,  the  productive  power  of  Nature.    See 

yirr.  lo. 

/  6  SavitarU  instigation :  savittih  sav^na ;  a  play  up<ft  the  words,  as 
though  it  were  'Savitai-'s  saving  guidance.' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


432  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  121^ 

11  K4ma  hath  slain  Chose  who  were  mine  oppohents,  and 

given  me  ample  room  to  grow  and  prosper. 
Let  the  four  regions  bow  them  down   before    me, 
and  let  the  six  expanses  bring  me  fatness. 

12  Let  them  drift  downward  like  a  boat  torn  from  the 

rope  that  held  it  fast. 
There  is  no  turning  back  for  those  whom  our  keen 
arrows  have  repelled. 

13  Agni  averts,    Indra  averts,    and  Soma :    may  the 

averting  Gods  avert  this  foeman; 
li  To  be  avoided  by  his  friends,  detested,  repelled,  wit^ 
few  men  round  him,  let  him  wander. 
Yea,   on   the   earth   descend   the   lightning-flashes : 
may  the  strong  God  destroy  your  adversaries. 

15  This  potent  lightning  nourishes  things  shaken,  and 

things  unshaken  yet,  and  all  the  thunders* 
May  the  Siin,  rising  with  his  wealth  and  splendour, 
drive  in  victorious  might  my  foemen  downward. 

16  Thy. firm  and  triply-barred  protection,  K4ma  1  thy 

spell,  made  weapon-proof  extended  armour — 
With  that  drive  thou  my  foemen  to  a  distance.    May 
cattle,  vital  breath,  and  life  forsake  them. 

17  Far  from  the   world   wherein    we    live,    O  K&ma, 

drive  thou  my  foemen  with  that  selfsame  weapon 
Wherewith  the  Gods  repelled  the  fiends,  and  Indra 
cast  down  the  Dasyus  into  deepest  darkness. 

18  As  G^ds  repelled  the  Asuras,  and  Indra  down  to  the 

lowest  darkness  drove  the  demons. 
So,  Kdma,  from  this  World,  to  distant  places,  drive 
thou  the  men  who  are  mine  adversaries. 

1 1  Six  expanHS :  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  the  upper  and  lower 
spaces  ;  or,  according  to  another  account,  Heaven,  Earth,  Day,  Night, 
Water,  and  Plants. 

12  The  stanza  is  repeated,  with  a  variation,  from  III.  6.  7. 

lb  Shaken  ....  «<n«AaI'e».- perishable  and  imperishable  ;  all  nature. 
17   With  that  8e{f8ame  weapon :  the  text  has  merely  t^na,  with  that. 
See  VII  I.  5.  3;  8.  5sqq. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  2.]  TBE  ATHARYA-YEDA.  433 

19  First   before  all  sprang  Kftma  into  being.     Gods, 

Fathers,  mortal  men  have  never  matched  him. 
Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever. 
Kama,  to  thee,  to  thee  I  offer  worship. 

20  Wide  as  the  space  which  heaven  and  earth  encompass, 

far  as  the  flow  of  waters,  far  as  Agni, 
Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever, 
K&ma,  to  thee,  to  thee  1  offer  worship. 

21  Vast  as  the  quarters  of  the  sky  and  regions  that  lie 

between  them    spread  in   all  directions,  vast  as 
celestial  tracts  and  views  of  heaven, 
Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever. 
K&ma,  to  thee,  to  thee  I  offer  worship. 

22  Many  as  are  the  bees,  and  bats,  and  reptiles,  and 

female  serpents  of  the  trees,  and  beetles. 
Stronger  art  thou  than   these,  and  great  for  ever. 
K&ma,  to  thee,  to  thee  I  offer  worship. 

23  Stronger  art  thou  than  aught  that  stands  or  twinkles, 

stronger  art  thou  than  ocean,  KSma!  Manyu ! 
Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever. 
K4ma,  to  thee,  to  thee  I  offer  worship. 

19  First  before  all :  'Thereafter  rose  Desire  in  the  beginning,  Desire, 
the  primal  seed  and  germ  of  Spirit'  (Higveda  X.  129.  4).  Similarly,  in 
Greek  mythology  Erds  or  Love  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  of  all  the 
Gods.  See  the  passage  from  Plata  (Symposium,  section  6),  quoted  and 
translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.,  406. 

20  Far  a$  Agni :  shines,  or,  extends. 

22  BeetUi  :  the  meaning  of  vdgdf^  is  obscure.  By  comparison  with 
vdghdpate  (VI.  50.  3)  noxious  or  troublesome  insects  of  some  kind 
appear  to  be  meant. 

23  Stands  or  twinkles:  inanimate  and  animate  nature.  All  that 
stands  without  the  power  of  moving  away,  as  trees  and  plants,  and  all 
creatures  that  open  and  shut  their  eyelids,  as  men,  beasts,  and  birds. 
Manyu  :  Passion  or  Ardour  personified.  See  Rigveda  X.  83,  2 — 6, 
where  Manyu  is  addressed  as  a  mighty  God,  identified  with  Indra, 
Yaruna,  and  Agni. 

28 


Digitized  by 


Google 


434  TBB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

24  Not  even  VAta  is  the   peer  of  K&ma,   not  Agni, 

Chandramas  the  Moon.,  nor  Silirya. 
^Stronger  than  these  art  thou,  and  great  for  ever, 
JK14ma,  to  thee,  to  thee  I  oflfer  worship. 

25  Thy  lovely  and  auspicious  forms,   O  KAma,  whereby 

the  thiog  thou  wilt  becometh  real. 
With  these  come  thou  and  make  thy  home  among  us, 
And  make  malignant  thoughts  inhabit  elsewhere. 

HYMN  IIL 

We  loose  the  ties  and  fastenings  of  the  house  that 

holds  all  precious  things, 
The  bands  of  pillars  and  of  stays,  the  ties  of  beams 
that  form  the  roof. 

2  All-wealthy  House  I  ^ach  knot  and  band,  each  cord 

that  is  attached  to  thee 
I  with  my  spell  untie,  as  erst  Brihaspati  disclosed 
the  cave. 

3  He  drew  them  close,  he  pressed  them  fast,  he  made 

thy  knotted  bands  secure : 

25  The  thing  thou  wilt :  or,  cbooeest.  Kama,  the  God  of  Desire,  is 
the  fulfiller,  as  well  at  the  inspirer,  of  his  worshippers'  wishes. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  404,  and  by 
Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  IIL  p.  519. 

The  occasion  of  the  hymn  is  the  consecration  of  a  newly  built  house. 

1  We  loose  the  ties :  symbolizing  the  removal  by  prayer  of  all  malig- 
nant spells  and  charms  by  which  the  various  parts  of  the  house  are 
tied  and  bound.  Prof.  Ludwig  imderstands  the  words  literally  as 
signifying  the  actual  dismantling  of  a  dwelling-house.  Pillars :  the 
comer-posts.     Stays :  the  slanting  poles  which  strengthen  the  pillars. 

2  As  erst  Brihaspati :  with  prayer,  or  with  my  spell,  as  Brihaspati, 
Lord  of  Prayer,  opened  therewith  the  hiding-place  of  the  demon  of 
drought.  See  Rigveda  L  62.  3  ;  II.  23. 18 ;  24.  2  ;  IV.  50.  5  ;  VI.  73.  1. 

3  Be:  the  hostile  enchanter.  Slaughterer:  the  Immolator,  who 
imderstands  the  important  work  of  deftly  cutting  up  the  victim  whoso 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HTMN  3.]  THE  ATHARYA-VBDA.  435 

With    Indra's    help    we   loose   them   as   a   skilful 
Slaughterer  severs  joints. 

4  We  loose  the  bands  of  thy  bamboos,  of  bolts,  of 

fastening,  of  thatch. 
We  loose  the  ties  of  thy  side-posts,  O  House  that 
boldest  all  we  prize. 

5  We  loosen  here  the  ties  and  bands  of  straw  in  bundles, 

and  of  clamps, 
Of  all  that  compasses  and  binds  the  Lady  Genius  of 
the  Home. 

6  We  loose  the  loops  which  men  have  bound  within 

thee,  loops  to  tie  and  hold. 
Be  gracious,  when  erected,  to  our  bodies,  Lady  of 
the  Home ! 

7  Store-house  of  Soma,  Agni's  hall,  the  ladies'  bower, 

the  residence. 
The  seat  of  Gods  art  thou,  O  Goddess  House. 

8  We  with  our  incantation  loose  the  net  that  hath  a 

thousand  eyes. 
The  diadem,  securely  tied  and  laid  upon  the  central 
beam. 

9  The  man  who  takes  thee  as  his  own,  and  he  who  was 

thy  builder,  House  ! 
Both  these,  O  Lady  of  the  Home,  shall  live  to  long- 
extended  years. 

joints  are  to  be  carefully  apportioned  to  the  several  Gods  to  whom  the 
offering  is  made. 

5  Strato  in  hundlts :  with  which  the  house  is  thatched,  or  which 
line  the  walls. 

7  Store-house  of  Soma :  a  chamber  in  which  bundles  of  Soma  plants, 
ready  for  pressing,  were  kept ;  secondarily,  a  pantry  or  store-room  in 
general.  AgnCe  hail :  the  chamber  in  which  the  domestic  fire  is  kept 
up.  The  residence :  the  men's  general  living-room.  Dr.  Grill  omits 
this  *  schlechte  Vers'  as  being  an  interpolation. 

8  The  net  that  hath  a  thousand  eyes :  probably  a  coarse  reed  mat, 
serving  as  a  ceiling-cloth. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


436  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IZ. 

10  There  let  her  come  to  meet  this  man.    Firm,  strong- 

ly fastened,  and  prepared 
Art  thou  whose  several  limbs  and  joints  we  part  and 
loosen  one  by  one. 

11  He  who  collected  timber  for  the  work  and  built  thee 

up,  O  House, 
Made  thee  for  coming  progeny,  PrajApati,  the  Lord 
Supreme. 

12  Homage  to  him  !  We  worship  too  the  giver  and  the 

Mansion's  lord  : 
Homage  to  Agni !  to  the  man  who  serves  at  holy 
rites  for  thee. 

13  Homage  to  kine  and  steeds  !  to  all  that  shall  be  born 

within  the  house ! 
We  loose  the  bonds  that  fasten  thee,  mother  of  mul- 
titudes to  come ! 

14  Agni  thou  shelterest  within,  and  people  with  domes- 

tic beasts. 
We  loose  the  bonds  that  fasten   thee,   mother  of 
multitudes  to  come ! 

15  All  space  that  lies  between  the  earth  and  heaven, 

therewith  I  take  this  house  for  thy  possession, 
And  all  that  measures  out  the  air's  mid-region  I 
make  a  hollow  to  contain  thy  treasures.     There- 
with I  take  the  house  for  his  possession. 

\%  Rich  in  prosperity,  rich  in  milk,  founded  and  built 
upon  the  earth, 
Injure  not  thy  receivers,  House  who  boldest  food  of 
every  sort ! 

10  Thii  man  :  the  owner  of  the  house. 

1 1  PrajApati :  the  builder  is  a  second  Praj&pati  or  Lord  of  Life  as 
he  built  thee  for  the  sake  ot  pro jd^  or  progeny. 

12  The  giver  :  the   institutor  of  the  sacrificd  which  the  hymn  ac- 
companies. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  S.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA.  437 

17  Grass-covered,    clad   with    straw,   the   house,   like 

Night,  gives  rest  to  man  and  beast. 
Thou  standest,   built  upon   the   earth,   like  a  she- 
elephant,  borne  on  feet. 

18  I  loosen  and  remove  from  thee  thy  covering  formed 

by  mats  of  reed. 
What  Varu^a  hath  firmly  closed  Mitra  shall  ope  at 
early  morn. 

19  May  Indra,  Agni,  deathless  Gods,  protect  the  house 

where  Soma  dwells. 
House  that  was  founded  with  the  prayer,  built  and 
erected  by  the  wise. 

20  Nest  upon  nest  hath  been  imposed,  compartment  on 

compartment  laid  : 
There  man  shall  propagate  his  kind,  and  there  shall 
everything  be  Dorn. 

21  Within  the  house  constructed  with  two  side-posts,  or 

with  four,  or  six, 
Built  with  eight  side-posts,  or  with  ten,  lies  Agni 
like  a  babe  unborn. 

22  Turned  to  thee,  House  1  I  come  to  thee,  innocent, 

turned  to  welcome  me  : 
For  Fire  and  Water  are  within,  the  first  chief  door 
of  sacrifice. 

23  Water  that  kills  Consumption,  free  from  all  Con- 

sumption, here  I  bring. 
With  Agni,  the  immortal  one,  I  enter  and  possess 
the  house. 


17  Borne  on  feet:  the  four  corner  piUars  representing  the  elephant's 
legs. 

18  Va/nma:  God  of  the  starry  firmament;  the  heaven  at  night, 
that  is,  night.     Mitra :  God  of  day ;  the  morning  sun. 

20  Compartment :  it  is  difficult  to  decide  which  of  its  many  mean-' 
ings  kdsah  has  here.  Ludwig  renders  it  by  *  korb,'  basket,  Zimmer  by 
*  Beh&lter,'  receptacle,  and  Grill  by  *  Fachwerk,'  panelling. 

23  This  stansa  is  repeated  from  III.  12.  9. . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


438  THS  HYMNS  OF  [POOK  JZ. 

24  Lay  thou  no  cord  or  noose  on  us:  a  weighty  burthen, 

still  be  light ! 
Withersoever  be  our  will,  O  House,  we  bear  thee 
like  a  bride. 

25  Now  from  the  east  side  of  the  house  to  the  Great 

Power  be  homage  paid  ! 
Hail  to  the  Gods  whose  due  is  Hail  f 

26  Now  from  the  south  side  of  the  house,  eto, 

27  Now  from  the  west  side  of  the  house,  etc, 

28  Now  from  the  north  side  of  the  house,  etc 

29  So  from  the  mansion's  every    side  to    the  Great 

Power  be  homage  paid  ! 
Hail  to  the  Gods  whose  due  is  Hail  \ 

HYMN    IV, 

The  Bull,  fierce,  thousandfold,  filled  full  of  vigour, 

bearing  within  his  fianks  all  forms  and  natures, 
Byihaspati's  Steeif,  hath   stretched    the  thread,  be-. 

stowing  bliss  on  the  worshipper,  the  liberal  giver. 
2  He  who  at  first  became  the  Waters'  model,  a  match 

for  everyone,  like  Earth  the  Goddess ; 
The  husband  of  the  cows,  the  young  calves'  father, 

may  he  secure  qs  thousandfold  abundance. 

24  The  stanza  appears  to  point  to  the  future  removal  of  the  house, 
built  entirely  of  timber,  ban^boos,  reeds,  and  straw,  to  some  ocher  situ-, 
ation.  Accordiixg  to  Grill  the  meaning  is  merely,  We  intend  to  make 
the  house  useful  as  a  young  married  woman  ought  to  be. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  464; 
by  Zimmei^  Altmdisches  Leben,  p.  151 ;  and  by  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder^ 
pp:  60,  18a 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  in  mystical  language  o{  the  typical 
Sacrificial  Bull. 

»  1  Stretched  the  thread :  a  figurative  expression,  frequently  occurring 
\a  the  Yeda,  for,  commenced  the  uninterrupted  course  of  sacrifice^. 
Giver :  of  guerdon  or  fees,  to  the  officiating  pries^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  4.J  TBB  ATEARVA-TEDA.  439 

3  Masculine,  pregnant,  stedfast,  full  of  vigour,  the  Bull 

sustains  a  trunk  of  goodly  treasure. 
May  Agni  J&tavedas  bear  him  offered,  on  pathways 
traversed  by  the  Gods,  to  Indra^ 

4  The  husband  of  the  cows,  the  young  calves'  father, 

father  is  he  of  mighty  water-eddies. 
Calf,  after-btrth,  new  milk  drawn  hot,  and  biestings^ 
curdi9,  butter,  that  is  his  best  genial  humour. 

5  He  is  the  G'ods^  allotted  share  and  bundle,  essence 

of  waters,  and  of  plants,  and  butter, 
Sakra  elected  him,  the  draught  of  Soma;.    What  was 
his  body  was  a  lofty  mountain. 

6  A  beaker  filled  with  Soma  juice  thou  bearest;,framer 

of  forms,  begetter  of  the  cattle. 
Kindly  tons  be  these  thy  wombs  here  present;,  and 
stay  for  us,  O  Axe,  those  that  are  yonder. 

T  He  bears  obliation,  and  his  seed  is  butter.  Thousand- 
fold plenty  ;  sacrifice  they  call  him. 
May  he,  the  Bull,  wearing  the  shape  of  Indra,  come  • 
unto  us,  O  Gods,  bestowed,  with  blessing. 

8  Both  arms   of  Varuqa,   and    Indra's    vigour,    the 
Maruts'  hump  is  he,  the  A&vins*  shoulders. 
They  who  are  sages,   bards  endowed  with   wisdom,, 
call  hint  Brihaspati  compact  and  heightened. 


3  Ptegnant :  laden  with  blessings. 

4  All  that  the  cow  produces  originates  from  him. 

6  Kindly  to  tu :  meaning,  apparently  :  May  the  sacrificial  axe  of  the- 
typical  immolator  of  the  victim  secura  to  us  blessings  both  present 
and  future. 

8  The  Maruts"^  hump^:  m  Bigveda  VIII.  20.  20  the  Marute  are 
likened  to  '  brightnshining  bulls.'  Bfihatpati :  that  is,  the  embodi> 
ment  of  sacerdotal  rank  and  dignity,  Brihaspati  being  the  prototype  ot 
the  priestly  order;. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


440  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

9  Thou,  vigorous,   reachest  to  the   tribes  of  heaven. 
Thee  they  call  Indra,  thee  they  call  Sarasv4n. 
Turned  to  one  aim,  that  Brahman  gives  a  thousand 
who  offers  up  the  Bull  as  his  oblation. 

10  Brihaspati,   Savitar   gave   thee   vital   vigour  :    tby 

breath  was  brought  from  Tvashtar  and  from  V4yu. 
In  thought  I  offer   thee   in   air's  mid-region.     Thy 
sacrificial  grass  be  Earth  and  Heaven ! 

11  Let  the  priest  joyfully  extol  the  limbs  and  members 

of  the  Bull 
Who  moved  and  roared  among  the  kine  as  Indra 
moves  among  the  Gods. 

12  The  sides  must  be  Anumati's,  and  both  rib-pieces 

Bhaga's  share. 
Of  the  knee-bones  hath  Mitra  said,  Both  these  are 
mine,  and  only  mine. 

13  The  Adityas  claim  the   hinder  parts,  the  loins  must 

be  Brihaspati*s. 
Vdta,  the  God,  receives  the  tail :  he  stirs  the  plants 
and  herbs  therewith. 

14  To  SAryi  they  assigned  the  skin,  to  Sinlv411  inward 

parts. 
The  Slaughterer  hath  the  feet,  ^ey  said,  when  they 
distributed  the  Bull. 


9  Sarasvdn :  a  divinity  of  the  upper  region,  guardian  of  the  heaven- 
ly waters  (of.  '  father  is  he  of  mighty  water-eddies'  in  stanza  4),  and 
bestower  of  fertility. 

11  Let  the  prieat  joy  fully  extol :  in  animal  sacrifioes  the  carvers  or 
dissectors  of  the  victim  are  to  call  out  the  names  of  the  several  parts 
of  the  carcase  as  they  divide  them,  each  portion  being  assigned  to  a 
separate  divinity.  See  Rigveda  I.  162.  18. 

12  Anumatt'i :  the  portion  of  Divine  Favour  personified.  See  I.  18. 
2,  note. 

14  SHryd :  the  daughter  of  the  Sim.  They  :  the  Gods  who  portioned 
out  the  ideal  archetypal  Bull.  Sinivdlt :  Goddess  of  the  New  Moon. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYMN  4.]  TEE  ATHAR7A-YEDA.  441 

15  They  made  a  jest  of  kindred's  curse  :  a  jar  of  Soma 
juice  was  set, 
What  time  the  deities,  convened,  assigned  the  Bull's 
divided  parts. 
X6  They  gave  the  hooves  to  tortoises,  to  Saram^  scraps 
of  the  feet : 
His  undigested  food  they  gave  to  worms  and  things 
that  creep  and  crawL 

17  That  Bull,  the  husband  of  the  kine,   pierces   the 

demons  with  his  horns, 
Banishes  famine  with  his  eye,  and  hears  good  tidings 
with  his  ears, 

18  With  hundred    sacrifices    he   worships :    the   fires 

consume  him  not : 
All  Gods  promote  the  Br4hman  who  offers  the  Bull 
in  sacrifice. 

19  He  who  hath  given  away  the  Bull  to  Br4hmans  frees 

and  cheers  his  soul. 
In  his  own  cattle-pen  he  sees  the  growth  and  increase 
of  his  cows. 

20  Let  there  be  cattle,  let  there  be  bodily  strength  and 

progeny  : 
All  this  may  the  Gods  kindly  grant  to  him  who  gives 
away  the  Bull. 

21  Indra  here   verily  hath  rejoiced  :  let  him  bestow 

conspicuous  wealth. 
May  he  draw  forth  at  will  from  yonder  side  of  heaven 
a  deft  cow,  good  to  milk,  whose   calf  is  never 
wanting. 

15  They  made  aje$t:  they  made  light  of  the  angry  imprecations  of 
the  Gods  who  were  dissatisfied  with  the  portions  assigned  to  them. 

16  To  tortoises:  that  they  might  renovate  their  shells  with  thd 
homy  materiaL  Saramd :  the  hound  of  Indra,  represented  in  Bigveda 
X.  14.  10  as  the  mother  of  Yama's  two  brindled  four-eyed  dogs.  See 
V.  30.  6.  Scraps  of  the  feet :  kdehtkiJUtfy ;  according  to  Slyana,  the 
contents  of  the  entrails.  Cf.  IX.  7.  10 ;  X.  9.  23. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


442  THk  EYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

22  With  close  connexion  mingle  with  the  cows  in  this 

our  cattle-pen : 
Mingle,  the  Bull's  prolific  flow,  and,  Indra !  thine 
heroic  strength  ! 

23  Here  we  restore  this  Bull,  your  youthful  leader : 

sporting  with  him,  go,  wander  at  your  pleasure. 
Ne'er,  wealthy  ones !  may  he  be  reft  of  ofl&pring ; 
and  do  ye  favour  us  with  growth  of  riches. 

HYMN  V. 

Seize  him  and  bring  him  hither.  Let  him  travel^ 
foreknowing,  to  the  regions  of  the  pious. 

Crossing  in  many  a  place  the  mighty  darkness,  let 
the  Goat  mount  to  the  third  heaven  above  us. 

2  1  bring  thee  hither  as  a  share  for  Indra ;  prince,  at 
this  sacrifice,  for  him  who  worships. 
Grasp  firmly  from  behind  all  those  who  hate  us :  so 
let  the  sacrificer's  men  be  sinless. 


22  This  stanza  is  taken,  with  variations,  from  Bigveda  YI.   2&  8. 
The  impregnation  of  the  cows  is  the  object  of  the  wish* 

23  The  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  cows. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorifioation«  partly  in  mystical  language,  of  the- 
Sacrificial  Goat. 

1  Him :  the  victim ;  the  Goat.  Regions  of  the  ptaut :  the  victun 
sacrificed  to  the  Gods  goes  immediately  to  heaven.  So,  of  the  sacri- 
ficed Horse  :  *  The  Steed  is  come  unto  the  noblest  mansion,  is  come 
unto  his  father  and  his  mother  (Heaven  and  Earth).  This  day  shall 
he  approach  the  Gods,  most  welcome  :  then  he^  declares  good  gift& 
to  him  who  oflfers'  (Rigveda  L  163.  13).  Third  heaven :  cf.  A.  V.  XVIII. 
2.  48,  where  three  heavens  are  mentioned,  the  lowest^  the  intermediate 
and  the  third  in  which  the  Fathers  dwell. 

2  Prince  :  the  Siiri  is  the  prince,  noble,  or  wealthy  householder  who 
institutes  the  sacrifice  and  rewarda  the  officiating  priests ;  and  the 
goat  when  sacrificed  is  to  be  the  prince  who  brings  a  reward  to  the 
sacrificer  in  the  shape  of  blessings  from  the  God  to  wh(»i  the  off&riog^ 
ia  presented. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  3,]  THB  ATHJLBYA'7BDA.  443 

3  Wash  from   his   feet  all  trace  of  evil-doing :  fore- 

knowing, with  cleansed  hooves  let  him  go  upward. 
Gazing  on  many  a  spot,  crossing  the  darkness,  let 
the  Goat  mount  to  the  third  heaven  above  us. 

4  Cut  up  this  skin  with  the  grey   knife,   Dissector ! 

dividing  joint  from  joint,  and  mangle  nothing. 
Do  him  no  injury  :  limb  by  limb  arrange  him,  and 
send  him  up  to  the  third  oope  of  heaven. 

6  With  verse  upon  the  fire  I  set  the  caldron  :  pour  in 
the   water  ;  lay  him  down  within  it! 
Encompass  him  with  fire,  ye  Immolators.     Cooked, 
let  him  reach  the  world  where  dwell  the  righteous. 

6  Hence  come  thou  forth,  vexed  by  no  pain  or  torment. 

Mount  to  the  third  heaven  from  the  heated  vessel. 
As  fire  out  of  the  fire  hast  thou  arisen.  Conquer  aucj 
win  this  lucid  world  of  splendour. 

7  The  Goat  is  Agni :  light  they  call  him,   saying  that 

living  man  must  give  him  to  the  Brahman. 
Given  in  this  world  by  a  devout  believer,  the   Goat 
dispels  and  drives  afar  the  darkness. 

g  Let  the  Pafichaudana  Goat,  about  to  visit  the  three 
lights,  pass  away  in  five  divisiona 


4  The  carcase  is  to  be  most  carefully  cut  up  and  the  joints  neatly 
divided.  *  Let  not  a  greedy  clumsy  Immolator,  missing  the  joints^ 
paangle  thy  limbs  unduly'  (Rigveda  I.  162.  20). 

5  With  verse :  reciting  a  richy  a  sacred  verse  or  hymn  of  praise, 
(listinguishe4  from  the  adman  which  is  si^ng  or  cl^anted,  and  from  the 
yajus  or  sacrificial  formula. 

6  As  flre  out  of  the  jWe :  or,  As  Agni  out  of  fire.     See  stanza  6. 

7  ITie  Goat  is  Agni:  somewhat  similar  is  the  old  Scandinavian 
belief  that  a  victim  offered  to  a  god  became  incorporate  in  the  god 
and  obtained  a  portion  of  his  4iviue  power.  Brc^man :  the  chief 
priest  who  directs  the  sacrifice. 

8  Pafichaudana :  offered  with  a  fivefold  mess,  or  five  messes,  of 
boiled  rice,  or  grain  mashed  and  cooked  with  milk.  Three  lights :  three 
liuninous  heavens.  See  stanza  1.  In  Jive  divisions:  one  for  each  odana 
^X  lueiis  of  boiled  rice.  Farted :  referring  to  th^  goat,  divided  into  fiye. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


444  TBB  HTMF8  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

Go  midst  the  pious  who  have  paid  their  worship,  and, 
parted,  dwell  on  the  third  cope  of  heaven. 

9  Rise  to  that  world,  O  Goat,  where   dwell  the  right- 
eous :  pass,  like  a  Sarabha  veiled,  all  difficult  places. 
The  Goat  Paflchaudana,  given  to  a  Brahman,  shall 
with  all  fulness  satisfy  the  giver. 

10  The  Goat  Paflchaudana,  given  to  a  Brahman,  sets 

the  bestower  on  the  pitch  of  heaven, 
In  the  third  vault,  third  sky,  third  ridge.    One  only 
Cow  omniform  art  thou,  that  yields  all  wishes. 

11  That  is  the  third  light  that  is  yours,  ye  Fathers.  He 

gives  the  Goat  Paflchaudana  to  the  Brahman. 
Given  in  this  world  by  the  devout  believer,  the  Groat 
dispels  and  drives  afar  the  darkness. 

12  Seeking  the  world  of  good  men  who  have  worshipped, 

he  gives  the  Goat  Fa&chaudana  to  the  Brahman. 
Win  thou  this   world  as  thy   complete  possession. 
Auspicious  unto  us  be  he,  accepted ! 

13  Truly  the  Goat  sprang  from  the  glow  of  Agni,  in- 

spired as  sage  with  all  a  sage's  power. 
Sacrifice,  filled,  filled   full,  offered  with  Vashat — ^this 
let  the  Gods  arrange  at  proper  seasons. 

14  Home- woven   raiment   let  him    give,   and   gold  as 

guerdon  to  the  priests. 
So  he  obtains  completely  all  celestial  and  terrestrial 
worlds. 


9  Sarabha :  probably  some  kind  of  deer ;  according  to  Mahidhara 
an  eight-legged  animal,  a  dangerous  enemy  of  the  lion. 

10  One  only  Cow :  the  Cow  of  Plenty. 

1 1  Tht  third  light :  the  highest  heaven.  See  note  on  stanza  1.  Be: 
the  sacrificer. 

12  He:  the  sacrificed  goat.  Accepted:  by  the  God. 

13  Filled,  filled  full:  instead  of  2!>ilrtdtn  abhipHrtam  Prof.  Ludwig 
would  read  gUrtam  abhigHartamf  approred,  accepted. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  5.]  THE  ATHAR7A'VBDA.  445 

15  Near  to  thee,  Goat !  approach  these  streams  of  Soma, 

divine,  distilling  meath,  bedecked  with  butter ! 
Stay  thou  the  earth  and  sky  and  fix  them  firmly  up 
on  the  seven-rayed  pitch  and  height  of  heaven. 

16  Unborn   art  thou,  O   Goat :  to  heaven  thou  goest. 

Through  thee  Angirases  knew  that  radiant  region. 
So  may  I  know  that  holy  world. 

17  Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven,  that  it  may  reach  the 

Gods,  with  that 
Whereby  thou,  Agni,  bearest  wealth  in  thousands, 
and  all  precious  things. 

18  The  Goat  Pafichaudana,  when  cooked,  transporteth, 

repelling  Nirriti,  to  the  world  of  Svarga. 
By  him  may  we  win  worlds  which  SArya  brightens. 

19  The  droppings  of  the   Odanas   attending  the   Goat 

which  I  have  lodged  with  priest  or  people — 
May  all  this  know  us  in  the  world  of  virtue,  O  Agni, 
at  the  meeting  of  the  pathways. 

20  This  Unborn  cleft  apart  in  the  beginning  :  his  breast 

became  the  earth,  his  back  was  heaven. 
His  middle   was  the  air,  his   sides  the  regions  ;  the 
hollows  of  his  belly  formed  both  oceans. 


16  Unborn  art  thou,  0  Goat :  the  goat  (ajd)  is  identified,  mystical- 
ly, with  the  Unborn  Spirit  (ajd),  and  in  sacrificial  hymns  the  two 
meanings  are  sometimes  difficult  to  distinguish.  In  Bigveda  X.  16.  4, 
it  is  not  absolutely  certain  whether  ajdk)  means  *  goat '  or  *  unborn 
(soul) ; '  and  in  stanza  7  of  this  hymn  the  word  which  I  have  trans- 
lated by  *  Goat '  is  rendered  by  *  unborn '  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Die 
tionary.  See  Muir's  note,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  304. 

17  With  that :  power  understood. 

18  Transporteth :  removes  the  sacrificer  after  death. 

19  May  all  this  know  us :  may  the  whole  sacrifice,  even  the  particles 
fallen  on  the  ground  from  the  messes  of  boiled  rice,  recognize  us  in 
heaven  as  the  origiuators  or  performers  of  the  ceremony. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


44e  TaS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX: 

21  His  eyes  were  Truth  and  Right.  The  whole  together 

was  Truth:  Vir4j  his  head,  and  Faith  his  breathing. 
This  Goat  Panehaudana  was  indeed  a  sacrifice  un- 
limited. 

22  A  boundless  sacrifice  he  performs,  he  wins  himself  a 

boundless  world 
Who  gives  the  Goat  Panehaudana  illumined  with  a 
priestly  fee. 

23  Let  him  not  break  the   victim's  bones,  let  him  not 

suck  the  marrow  out. 
Let  the  man,  taking  him  entire,  here,  even  here 
deposit  him. 

24  This,  eve.n  this  is  his  true  form :  the  man  uniteth 

him  therewith. 
Food,  greatness,  strength  he  bringeth  him  who  giveth 
the  Goat  Pailchaudana  illumed  with  guerdon. 

25  The  five  gold  pieces,  and  the  five  new  garments,  and 

the  five  milch-kine  yield  him  all  his  wishes 
Who  gives  the  Goat  Panehaudana  illumined  with  a 
priestly  fee. 

26  The  five  gold   pieces  are  a  light  to  light  him,  robes 

become  armour  to  defend  his  body  ; 
He  winneth  Svarga   as  his   home   who  giveth   the 
Goat  Pailchaudana  illumed  with  bounty. 

27  When   she   who   hath   been   wedded   finds  a  second 

husband  afterward, 
The  twain  shall  not  be  parted  if  they  give  the  Goat 
Panehaudana. 


21  Virdj:  see  VIII.  10. 

22  Illumined  :  enhanced  in  value. 

25  Gold  pieces :  rukmd';  or  gold  necklets.  These  and  the  other 
presents  mentioned  are  the  dakshind  or  honorarium  bestowed  on  the 
priests  by  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

21  A  iecond  hu$band :  after  th«  death  of  the  first. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ETMN  5,]  THE  ATHAMVA-7BDA.  447 

28  One   world  with   the  re-wedded   wife   becomes  the 

second  husband's  home 
Who  gives  the  Goat  Paflchaudana  illumined  with 
the  priestly  fee, 

29  They  who  have  given  a  cow   who  drops  a  calf  each 

season,  or  an  ox, 
A  coverlet,  a  robe,  or  gold,  go  to  the  loftiest  sphere 
of  heaven, 

30  Himself,  the  father  and  the  son,   the  grandson,  and 

the  father's  sire. 
Mother,  wife,  her  who  bore  his  babes,  all  the  belovM 
ones  I  calL 

31  The  man  who  knows  the  season  named  the  Scorching 

— the  Goat  Paflchaudana  is  this  scorching  season — 
He  lives  himself,  he  verily  burns  up  his  hated  rival's 

fame, 
Who  gives  the  Goat  Paftchaudana  illumined  with 

the  priestly  fee. 

32  The  man  who  knows  the  season  called  the   Working 

takes  to  himself  the  active  fame,  his  hated  rival's 

active  fame. 
The  Goat  Paftchaudana  is  this  Working  season. 
He  lives  himself,  etc. 

33  The  man  who  knows  the  season   called  the   Meeting 

takes  to   himself  the  gathering   fame,  his   hated 
rival's  gathering  fame. 
The  Goat  Paftchaudana  is  this  Meeting  season. 

34  The  man  who  knows  the  season  called  the   Swelling 

takes  to  himself  the  swelling  fame,  his  hated  rival's 
swelling  fame. 

28  One  world :  heaven  after  death. 

31  The  Scorching :  naiddgha ;  summer,  the  hot  weather  before  the 
Rains. 

.^2  The  Working:  the  cold  weather.  The  other  divisions  of  the 
year  in  stanzas  33 — 36  are  probably  fanciful  and  variable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


448  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

The  Goat  Pafichaudana  is  this  Swelling  season. 
He  lives  himself,  etc. 

35  The  man  who  knows  the   season   called  the  Rising 

takes  to  himself  the  rising  fame,  his  hated  rivals 
rising  fame. 
The  Goat  Panchaudana  is  this  Kising  season. 

36  The  man  who  knows  the  season  called  Surpassing 

takes  to  himself  the   conquering   fame,  his   hated 

rival's  conquering  fame. 

The  Goat  Pafichaudana  is  this  Conquering  season. 
He  lives  himself,  he  verily  burns  up  his  hated  rival's 

fame 
Who  gives  the  Goat  Pafichaudana  illumined  with  a 

priestly  fee. 

37  He  cooks  the  Goat  and  the  five  boiled  rice  messes. 

May  the  united  Quarters,  all  accordant,  and  in- 
termediate points,  accept  him  from  thee. 

38  May  these  preserve  him  for  thee.     Here  I  offer  to 

these  the  molten  butter  as  oblation. 

HYMN  VI. 

Whoso  will  know  Prayer  with  immediate  knowledge, 
whose  members  are  the  stuff,  whose  spine  the 
verses : 


38  These :  the  Quarters  of  the  sky,  with  the  intermediate  points. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  435. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  the  hospitable  reception  of  guests, 
regarded  as  identical  with  sacrifice  offered  to  the  Gods.  Stanzas  3 — 62 
are  in  prose. 

1  With  immediate  knowledge :  pratydJcsham ;  literally,  before  the 
eyes,  face  to  face  ;  meaning  here,  embodied  in  practice.  Cf.  *  laborare 
est  orare.*  2^he  stuff:  the  material  of  which  the  sacred  verses  ar« 
composed.  The  verses:  fichas ;  the  holy  verses  of  prayer  and  praise  in 
the  form  in  which  they  have  been  revealed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HT31N  6-]  THS  ATBARrAVEDA.  449 

2  Whose  hairs  are  psalms,  whose  heart  is  called  the 
Yajus,  whose  coverlet  is  verily  oblation — 

3  Verily  when  a  host  looks  at  his  guests  he  looks  at 
the  place  of  sacrifice  to  the  Gods.  4  When  he  salu- 
tes them  reverently  he  undergoes  preparation  for  a 
religious  ceremony :  when  he  calls  for  water,  he 
solemnly  brings  sacrificial  waten  5  The  water  that 
is  solemnly  brought  at  a  sacrifice  is  this  same  water, 
6  The  libation  which  they  bring,  the  sacrificial  victim 
dedicated  to  Agni  and  Soma  which  is  tied  to  the 
post,  that,  verily,  is  this  man.  7  When  they  arrange 
dwelling-rooms  they  arrange  the  sacred  chamber  and 
the  shed  for  housing  the  Soma  cars.  8  What  they 
spread  upon  the  floor  is  just  Sacrificial  Grass.  9  With 
the  couch  that  the  men  bring,  he  wins  for  himself 
the  world  of  Svarga.  10  The  pillow-coverings  that 
they  bring  are  the  green  sticks  that  surround  the 
sacrificial  altar.  11  The  ointment  that  they  bring 
for  inunction  is  just  clarified  liquid  butter.  12  The 
food  they  bring  before  the  general  distribution 
represents  the  two  sacrificial  cakes  of  rice  meal. 
13  When  they  call  the  man  who  prepares  food  they 
summon  the  preparer  of  oblation.  14  The  grains  of 
rice  and  barley  that  are  selected  are  just  filaments  of 
the  Soma  plant.  15  The  pestle  and  mortar  are 
really  the  stones  of  the  Soma  press.  1 6  The  win- 
nowing*basket  is  the  filter,  the  chaff  the  Soma  dregs, 


2  Psalms;  sdhidni ;  chanted   hymns   or  songs.    The   Tc0us:  sacri- 
^cial  text  or  formula.  The  sense  of  the  two  stanzas  is   incomplete 
should  hear  what  follows,  or  something  similar,  maj  be  understood. 

8  Preparation  for  a  religious  ceremony :  the  initiatory  or  prepara- 
tory rite  called  Diksh^  or  Consecration.  7  Sacred  chamber :  sddas ; 
literally,  seat  (of  the  Oods) ;  a  shed  erected  in  the  sacrifioial  court  or 
enclosure  to  the  east  of  the  Pr&chinavansa  chamber,  which  has  itd 
supporting  beam  turned  towards  the  east.  Soma  cars :  light  carts  iii 
which  the  plants  are  brought  to  be  pressed.    10  Green  sticks :  which 

29 


Digitized  by 


Google 


450  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

the  water  the  pressing-gear.  17  Spoon,  ladle,  fork, 
stirring-prong  are  the  wooden  Soma  tubs;  the 
earthen  cooking-pots  are  the  mortar-shaped  Soma 
vessels ;  this  earth  is  just  the  black-antelope's  skin. 

18  Or  the  host  acts  in  this  way  to  a  Yajam&na's 
Br4hman  :  when  he  looks  at  the  furniture  and  uten- 
sils he  says,  More  here !  Yet  more  here.  19  When 
he  says,  Bring  out  more,  he  lengthens  his  life  thereby. 

20  He  brings  oblations  :  he  makes  the  men  sit  down. 

21  As  the  guest  of  the  seated  company  he  himself 
offers  up  sacrifice.  22  With  ladle,  with  hand,  in  life, 
at  the  sacrificial  post,  with  cry  of  Ladle  !  with  ex- 
clamation of  Vashat !  23  Now  these  guests,  as 
priests  beloved  or  not  beloved,  bring  one  to  the  world 
of  Svarga.  24  He  who  bath  this  knowledge  should 
not  eat  hating,  phould  not  eat  the  food  of  one  who 
hates  him,  nor  of  one  who  is  doubtful,  nor  of  one 
who  is  undecided.  25  This  man  whose  food  they  eat 
hath  all  his  wickedness  blotted  out.  26  All  that  man's 
sin  whose  food  they  do  not  eat  remains  un blotted  out. 
27  The  man  who  supplies  food  hath  always  pressing 
stones  adjusted,  a  wet  Soma  filter,  well  prepared 
religious  rites,  and  mental  power  to  complete  the 
arranged  sacrifice.  28  The  arranged  sacrifice  of  the 
man  who  offers  food  is  a  sacrifice  to  Praj&pati. 
29  The  man  who  offers  food  follows  the  steps  of 
PrajApati.  30  The  fire  of  the  guest«  is  the  Ahava- 
niya,  the  fire  in  the  dwelling  is  the  G4rhapatya,  that 
whereon  they  cook  food  is  the  Southern  Sacrificial  Fire. 

serve  as  a  fence  to  restrict  the  range  of  the  fire.  17  Wooden  Soma 
tubi :  dronakalafd^h ;  large  vessels  that  receive  and  hold  the  Soma 
juice  as  it  flows  from  the  press.  Black-anUlope's  skin:  which  is  to  be 
spread  on  the  floor. 

18  Yajamdna :  a  wealthy  householder  who  institutes  sacrifices  and 
defrays  all  the' expenses.  22  Ladle  I...  Vashat  I :  exclamations  of 
the  oflSciating  priest  as  he  offers  the  libation.  25  Blotted  out :  literal- 
ly, burnt  up.  30  Ahavantya :  the  eastern  sacrificial  fire.  Qdrhapiya  : 
the  householder's  western  sacred  fire.    Soutl^em :  the  Dakshi^&gni. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jrrjfxve.]  the  atharva^vbda.  451 

31  Now  that  man  who  eats  before  the  guest  eats  up 
the  sacrifice  and  the  merit  of  the  house.  32  He 
devours  the  milk  and  the.  sap  :  33  And  the  vigour 
and  prosperity :  34  And  the  progeny  and  the  cattle  : 
35  And  the  fame  and  reputation.  36  The  man  who 
eats  before  the  guest  eats  up  the  glory  and  the  un- 
derstanding of  the  house.  37  The  man  should  not 
eat  before  the  guest  who  is  a  BrAhman  versed  in 
holy  lore.  38  When  the  guest  hath  eaten  he  should 
eat.  This  is  the  rule  for  the  animation  of  the  sacri- 
fice and  the  preservation  of  its  continuity.  39  Now 
the  sweetest  portion,  the  produce  of  the  cow,  milk, 
or  flesh,  that  verily  he  should  not  eat. 

40  The  man  who  having  this  knowledge  pours  out 
milk  and  offers  it  wins  for  himself  as  much  thereby 
as  he  gains  by  the  performance  of  a  very  successful 
Aguish toma  sacrifice.  41  The  man  who  having  this 
knowledge  pours  out  clarified  butter  and  offers  it  wins 
for  himself  thereby  as  much  as  he  gains  by  the  per- 
formance  of   a    very   successful   Atirdtra   sacrifice. 

42  He  who  pours  out  mead  and  offers  it  wins  for 
himself  thereby  as  much  as  he  gains  by  the  perfor- 
mance  of  a   very   successful    Sattrasadya    sacrifice, 

43  He  who  having  this  knowledge  besprinkles  flesh 
and  offers  it  wins  for  himself  thereby  as  much  as  he 
gains  by  the  performance  of  a  very  successful  Twelve- 
Day  sacrifice.  44  The  man  who  having  this  know- 
ledge pours  out  water  and  offers  it  obtains  a  resting- 
place  for  the  procreation  of  living  beings  and  becomes 

31  The  merit :  of  good  works  that  will  be  rewarded  in  heaven. 

40  AgnUhioma :  (praise  of  Agni),  a  protracted  ceremony,  extending 
over  several  days,  and  forming  an  essential  part  of  the  Jjotishtoma 
which,  consisting  of  four  or  seven  divisions,  is  considered  as  the  typi- 
cal form  of  a  whole  class  of  Soma  ceremonies.  41  Atirdtra :  an  optional 
part  of  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice.  42  Sattrasadya :  a  long  sacrifice, 
sacrificial  session,  or  Soma  ceremony,  conducted  by  many  officiating 
priests,  and  lasting,  according  to  some  authorities,  from  thirteen  to  a 
hundred  days.    See  note  on  I.  30.  4. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


452  THE  STMJfS  OP  [BOOS  JJt. 

dear  to  living  beings,  even  the  man  who  having  this 
knowledge  pours  out  water  and  offers  it. 

45  For  him  Dawn  murmurs,  and  Savitar  sings  the 
prelude;  Brihaspati  chants  with  vigour,  and  Tvashtar 
joins  in  with  increase  ;  the  Visve  DevAh  take  up  the 
conclusion.  He  who  hath  this  knowledge  is  the 
abiding-place  of  welfare,  of  progeny,  and  of  cattle. 
46  For  him  the  rising  Sun  murmurs,  and  Early 
Morning  sings  the  prelude  ;  Noon  chants  the  psalm. 
Afternoon  joins  in  ;  the  setting  Sun  takes  up  the  con- 
clusion. He  who  hath  this  knowledge  is  the  abiding 
Elace  of  welfare,  of  progeny,  and  of  cattle.  47  For 
im  the  Rain-cloud  murmurs  when  present,  sings  the 
prelude  wlien  thundering,  joins  in  when  lightening, 
chants  the  psalm  when  raining,  and  takes  up  the  con- 
clusion when  it  stays  the  downpour.  He  who  hath 
this  knowledge  is  the  abiding- place  of  welfare,  of 
progeny,  and  of  cattle.  48  He  looks  at  the  guests, 
he  utters  a  gentle  sound  ;  he  speaks,  he  sings  the 
prelude ;  he  calls  for  water,  he  chants  the  psalm  ;  he 
offers  the  residue  of  the  sacrifice,  he  takes  up  the 
conclusion. 

49  When  he  summons  the  door-keeper  he  gives  in- 
struction. 50  He  (the  door-keeper)  pronounces  the 
sacrificial  formula  in  his  answer  to  what  he  hears. 
51  When  the  attendants  with  vessels  in  their  hands, 
foremost  and  hindmost,  come  in,  they  are  just  the 
priests  who  manage  the  Soma  cups.     52  Not  one  of 

45  The  Gods  themselves  form  a  ohoir  for  the  liberal  host,  and  chant 
for  him  a  song  of  praise.  Dawn  mwinurs :  utters  a  low  sound,  intro- 
ducing, or  giving  the  key-note  of,  the  hymn.  Sings  the  preMe :  acta 
as  Prastotar,  or  precentor.  Chants:  acts  as  Udgl^tar.  Joins  in :  ^ts 
as  Pratihartar,  or  assistant  of  the  Udgatar,  and  joins  in  the  chanting 
of  the  last  Pada  of  the  verse.  48  Not  only  do  the  Gods»  the  Sun  in 
his  divers  statues,  and  the  Rain-cloud  form  the  host's  priestly  chorus, 
h(\it  each  hospitable  act  of  his  represents  a  portion  of  the  choral  service. 

51  Priests  uho  numage  the  Soma  e%qr)s :  ckamasdUkvarpava^  :  thft 
Adhvaryus  or  priests  in  charge  of  the  vessels  out  of  which  the  Soma 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  7.)  TUB  ATHARVA^TEDA.  454 

them  is  iix^ooipetent  to  sucriBce.  53  Of  if  the  host, 
having  offered  food  to  his  guest,  goes  up  to  the  house, 
he  virtually  enters  the  bath  of  purification.  54  When 
he  distributes  food  he  distributes  priestly  fees ;  what 
he  performs  be  asks  as  favour.  55  He,  having  been 
invi^ted  on  ^arth,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears 
all  various  forme  on  earth.  56  He,  having  been  in- 
vited in  air,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  weal^  all 
various  forms  in  air.  57  He  having  be^n  invited  in 
the  sky,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears  all  Vari- 
ous forms  in  the  sky.  58  He,  having  been  invited 
among  the  Gods,  regales,  invited,  in  that  which  wears 
all  various  forms  among  the  Gods.  59  He,  having 
been  invited  in  the  worlds,  regales,  invited,  in  that 
which  wears  all  various  forms  in  the  worlds.  60  He, 
having  been  invited,  hath  been  invited.  61  He  gains 
this  world  and  the  world  yonder.  62  He  who  hath 
this  knowledge  wins  the  luminous  spheres. 

HYMN   VII. 

PrajApati  and  Parameshthin  are  the  two  horns, 
Indra  is  the  head,  Agni  the  forehead,  Yama  the  joint 
of  the  neck.  2  King  Soma  is  the  brain,  Sky  is  the 
upper  jaw.  Earth  is  the  lower  jaw.  3  Lightning  is 
the  tongue,  the  Maruts  are  the  teeth,  Revatl  is  the 
neck,  the  Krittik4s  are  the  shoulders,  the  Gharma  is 


juice  is  drunk.  53  The  hath  of  purifieati<m :  the  avabhrttha^  water  for 
the  purification  of  the  sacrificer  and  the  sacrificial  vessels  at  the  con- 
clusion of  the  ceremony.  54  Pritstly  f^t:  diikshind;  meaning  origi- 
nally a  good  milch-cow,  which  iu  the  earliest  timefr  was  tba  usual 
honorarium. 

The  hymn,  which  is  entirely  prose,  lis  a  glorification  of  the'  typical 
Bull  and  Cow. 

1  Parameshthin :  Lord  Supreme.  In  T.  7.  2,  Jitayedas  (Agni)  is  so 
called ;  in  IX.  3.  11,  the  title  is  given  to  Prajllpati.  3  Revatt :  one  of 
the  Lunar  Mansions.  The  KrittikAs :  the  Pleiades  (a  Lunar  Mansion) 
personified  as  the  nurses  of  Skauda  or  Kum4ra  the  War-God,  who  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


454  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

the  shoulder-bar.  4  His  universe  is  Vftyu,  Svarga 
is  bis  world,  Krishnadram  is  the  tendons  and  verte- 
brae. 5  The  Syeua  ceremony  is  the  breast,  Air  is 
the  region  of  the  belly,  B^ihaspati  is  the  hump, 
Brihatl  the  breast-bone  and  cartilages  of  the  ribs. 
6  The  consorts  of  the  Gods  are  the  ribs,  the  attend- 
ants are  ribs.  7  Mitra  and  Varupa  are  the  shoulder- 
blades,  Tvashtar  and  Aryaman  the  fore-arms,  Mah4- 
deva  is  the  arms.  8  Indr&Ql  is  the  hinder  parts, 
V4yu  the  tail,  Pavam^na  the  hair.  9  Priestly  rank 
and  princely  power  are  the  hips,  and  strength  is  the 
thigh.  10  DhAtar  and  Savitar  are  the  two  knee- 
bones,  the  Gandharvas  are  the  legs,  the  Apsarases 
are  bits  of  the  feet,  Aditi  is  the  hooves.  1 1  Thought 
is  the  heart,  intelligence  is  the  liver,  law  the  pericar- 
dium. 12  Hunger  is  the  belly,  refreshing  drink  is  the 
rectum,  mountains  are  the  inward  parts.  13  Wrath 
is  the  kidneys,  anj^er  the  testes,  oflEspring  the  genera- 
tive organ.  14  The  river  is  the  womb,  the  Lords  of 
the  Rain  ar«  the  breasts,  the  thunder  is  the  udder. 

15  The  All-embracing  (Aditi)  is  the  hide,  the  herbs 
are   her   hair,   and   the   Lunar  Mansions  her  form. 

16  The  hosts  of  Gods  are  her  entrails,  men  are  her 
bowels,  and  demons  her  abdomen.  17  R4kshasas 
are  the  blood,  the  Other  Folk  are  the  contents  of  the 
stomach.  18  The  rain-cloud  is  her  fat,  her  resting- 
place  her  marrow.  19  Sitting  he  is  Agni,  when  he 
hath  stood  up  he  is  the  Asvins.  20  Standing  east- 
wards  he   is   Indra,    standing   southwards,     lama. 

henoe  called  Kilrttikeya.  4  Krishnadram :  the  word  is  unintelligible. 
5  Syena:  a  kind  of  Ek&ha  or  Soma  sacrifice  lasting  one  day. 
7  MahAdeva:  Great  God,  an  appellation  usually  giyen  to  Rudra  or  one 
of  the  Gods  connected  with  him.  In  classical  Sanskrit,  and  at  the 
present  time,  the  title  is  applied  to  Siva,  Mah&deo.  8  Indrdni :  the 
Consort  of  Indra.  Favamdna:  the  deified  Soma  juice.  \0  Dhdtar : 
the  Ordainer.  14  The  Cow  is  now  the  subject  of  glorification. 
17  Other  Folk :  a  euphemistic  expression  for  certain  beings  considered 
to  be  spirite  of  darkness.  Cf.  VIII.  10.  28.  19  The  Bull  is  again  the 
subject.  Sitting :  Agni  as  Sacrifio  al  Fire  being  stationary.  20  Indra  : 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  8.]  TEB  ATHAR7A^7BDA.  465 

21  Standing  westwards  he  is  Dh^tar,  standing 
northwards  Savitar.  22  When  he  hath  got  his  grass 
he  is  King  Soma.  23  He  is  Mitra  when  he  looks 
ahout  him,  and  when  he  hath  turned  round  he  is  joy. 

24  When  he  is  yoking  he  belongs  to  the  All-Gods, 
when  yoked  be  is  Prajipati,  when  unyoked  be  is  All. 

25  This  verily  is  omniform,  wearing  all  forms,  bovine- 
formed.  26  Upon  him  wait  omniform  beasts,  wearing 
every  shape,  each  one  who  hath  this  knowledge. 

HYMN  VIIL 

Each  pain  and  ache  that  racks  the  head,  earacbe, 

and  erysipelas. 
All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with 

this  our  spelt 

2  From  both  thine  ears,  from  parts  tbereof,  thine  ear- 

ache, and  tbe  throbbing  pain. 
All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with 
tbis  our  spell. 

3  So  that  Consumption  may  depart  forth  from  thine 

ears  and  from  thy  mouth. 
All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  cbarm  away  with 
tbis  our  spelL 


regarded  as  Warder  of  the  East.    23  Mitra:  the  allwsurveying  Sun, 

The  hymn  is  a  charm  for  the  cure  of  various  diseases  and  pains 
more  or  less  connected,  or  supposed  to  be  connected,  with  Consump- 
tion. 

1  Eryvipelat :  vilohitdh  (dark-red,  or  purple) ;  apparently  an  in- 
flammatoiy  disease  attacking  the  head;  probably  erysipelas.  See  Wise, 
Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  270. 

2  From  pat-U  thereof:  JodnkAshehhyah  ;  what  these  kdtihUkas  are  is 
unknown.  Throbbing  pain :  or  the  .disease  that  causes  throbbing  or 
piercing  pains  in  yarious  parts  of  the  body,  called  viMyaka,  Cf.  VI. 
127.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


456  TBE  BYMlSrS  OF  [BOOK  /X 

4  The  malady  that  makes  one  deaf>  the  malady  that 

makes  one  blind, 
AH  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with 
this  our  spell. 

5  The  throbbing  pain  in  all  thy  limbs  that  rends  thy 

frame  with  fever-throes, 
All  malady  that  wrings  thy  brow  we  charm  away  with 
this  our  spell. 

6  The  malady  whose  awful  look  makes  a  man  quiver 

with  alarm. 
Fever  whom  every  Autumn  brings  we  charm  away 
with  this  our  spell. 

7  Disease   that  creeps  about  the  thighs  and,  after, 

reaches  both  the  groins. 
Consumption  from  thine  inward  parts  we  charm  away 
with  this  our  spell. 

8  If  the  disease  originates  from  love,  from  hatred,  from 

the  heart, 
Forth  from  the  heart  and  from  the  limbs  we  charm 
the  wasting  malady. 

9  The  yellow  Jaundiee  from  thy  limbs,  and  Colic  from 

the  parts  within, 
And  Phthisis  from  thine  inward  soul  we  charm  away 
with  this  our  spell. 
10  Let  wasting  malady  turn  to  dust,  become  the  water 
of  disease. 
I  have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions 
out  of  thee. 


4  Deaf:  pramdtam^  explained  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  as 
%  certain  disease^  must  be  an  adjective  like  andhdm^  blinds  and  means 
probably  either  deaf,  of  dumb.  See  Zimmer's  note,  Altindiscbes  Leben^ 
p.  378. 

6  Whom  every  Autitmn  brings :  malarial  fever  begins  to  be  preva- 
lent at  the  commencement  <^  the  Rains,  and  frequently  becomes 
epidemic  when  the  Rains  are  over,  and  the  Autumn  sun  begins  to  dry^ 
up  the  deposits  left  by  thfit  swollen  ri,vers,  tanks,  and  inundations. 
Cf.  note  on  I.  25.  1. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  8.)  TBE  ATHIRVAVBDA.  457 

1 1  Forth  from  the  hollow  let  it  run,  and  rumbling  sounds 

from  thine  inside. 
I  have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions 
out  of  thee. 

12  Forth  from  thy  belly  and  thy  lungs,  forth  from  thy 

navel  and  thy  heart 
I  have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions 
out  of  thee. 

13  The  penetrating  stabs  of  pain  which  rend  asunder 

crown  and  head. 
Let  them  depart  and  pasa  away,  free  from  disease 
and  harming  not. 

14  The  pangs  that  stab  the  heart  and  reach  the  breast- 

bone and  connected  parts, 
Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease 
and  harming  not. 

15  The  stabs  that  penetrate  the  sides  and  pierce  their 

way  along  the  ribs, 
Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,   free  from  disease 
and  harming  not. 

16  The  penetrating  pangs  that  pierce   thy  stomach  as 

they  shoot  across, 
Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease 
and  harming  not. 

17  The  pains  that  through  the  bowels  creep,  disorder- 

ing the  inward  parts. 
Let  them  depart  and  pass  away,  free  from  disease 
and  harming  not. 

1$  The  pains  that  suck  the  marrow  out,  and  rend  and 
tear  the  bones  apart. 
May  they  speed  forth   and  pass  away,   free   from 
disease  and  harming  not. 

19  Consumptions  with  their  Colic  pains  which  make  thy 
limbs  insensible — 
I  have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions 
out  of  thee. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


458  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IZ. 

20  Of  piercing    pain,  of    abscesses,  rheumatic  ache, 

ophthalmia— 
I  have  evoked  the  poison-taint  of  all  Consumptions 
out  of  thee. 

21  I  have  dispelled  the  piercing  pains  from  feet,  knees, 

hips,  and  hinder  parts, 
And  spine,  and  from  the  neck  and  nape  the  malady 
that  racked  the  head. 

22  Sound   are   the   skull-bones   of  thy  head   and  thy 

heart's  beat  is  regular. 
Thou,  Sun,  arising  with  thy  beams  hast  chased  away 
the  head's  disease,  hast  stilled  the  pain  that  racked 
the  limbs. 

HYMN  IX 

Thb  second  brother  of  this  lovely  Hotar,  hoary  with 

eld,  is  the  voracious  Lightning. 
The  third  is  he  whose  back  is  balmed  with  butter. 

Here   have   I   seen   the   King   with  seven   male 

children. 

20  Ophthalmia :  alaji ;  more  precisely,  disease  of  the  eye  attended 
with  the  appearance  of  small  red  pimples  at  the  jmicture  of  the  cornea 
and  sclerotica.  See  Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  p.  296. 

22  Ha$t  chased  away  the  heacTi  disease :  cf.  *  Surya,  remove  my 
heart's  disease'  (Rigveda  I.  50.  11). 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p. 
378,  whose  work  may  be  consulted  for  further  information  regarding 
the  pains  and  diseases  mentioned  in  the  text. 


The  hymn,  which  is  taken  with  variations  and  transpositions,  from 
stanzas  1 — 22  of  Bigveda  I.  164 — one  of  the  most  abstruse  and  diffi- 
cult of  that  Collection — consists  mainly  of  questions  ani  enigmatical 
enunciations  of  doctrine  on  mystico-theological  and  cosmogonical 
subjects. 

1  Thr's  lovely  Hotar :  or  gracious  and  benign  Priest,  is  Agni  in  his 
celestial  form  as  the  Sun.  Lightning  :  the  secondary  form  of  Agni. 
The  text  has  dsuah,  voracious,  that  is,  destructive,  without  a  substan- 
tive expressed.  The  third :  brother,  or  form,  of  Agni  is  the  G&rhapa- 
tya  or  sacred  fire  maintained  by  each  householder  and  fed  with 
oblations  of  clarified  butter.  The  King  with  seven  male  children : 
Agni  or  Sacrificial  Fire  with  the  attendant  priests. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7MN  9,]  THB  ATHABVA-VBDA.  459 

2  The  seven   make  the   one-wheeled   chariot   ready  : 

bearing  seven  names  the  single  Courser  draws  it. 
The  wheel,  three-naved,  is  sound   and   undecaying : 
thereon  these  worlds  of  life  are  all  dependent. 

3  The  seven  who  on  this  seven- wheeled  car  are  mounted 

have  horses,  seven  in  tale,  who  draw  them  onward. 
Seven  sisters  utter  songs  of  praise  together,  in  whom 
the  Cows'  seven  names  are  held  and  treasured 

4  Who  hath  beheld  at  birth  the  Primal  Being,   when 

She  who  hath  no  bone  supports  the  bony? 
Where  is  the  blood  of  earth,   the   life,    the   spirit  ? 
Who  may  approach  the  man  who  knows,  to  ask  it  ? 

2  The  Seven :  priests,  according  to  Prof.  Grassmann.  Perhaps  the 
Maruts  are  meant,  who  appear  in  Rigveda  I.  6.  I  to  be  the  hamessers 
of  the  bright  red  steed  the  Sun.  In  Rigveda  VIII.  28.  6,  « The 
Seven'  are  the  Maruts,  generally  represented  as  seven  times  nine  in 
number.  The  one-wheeled  chariot :  the  Sun.  Seven  names :  perhaps 
the  seven  rays  of  Agni  or  the  Sun.  Three-naved :  with  reference, 
probably,  to  the  three  seasons,  the  hot  weather,  the  rains,  and  the  cold 
weather ;  or  to  morning,  noon,  and  evening.  On  this  wheel  of  the 
Sun  all  living  creatures  depend. 

3  The  seven  :  according  to  S&yana,  the  seven  solar  rays,  or  the 
seven  divisions  of  the  year,  solstice,  season,  month,  fortnight,  day, 
night,  hour.  The  seven  wheels  of  the  chariot,  and  the  seven  horses 
may  also,  according  to  S4yana,  be  solar  rays.  According  to  Dr.  Haug, 
the  seven-whefletl  ear  is  the  Jyotishtoma  sacrifice  with  its  seven  divi- 
sions, and  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  six  pairs  of  months  and  the 
intercalary  month  -  are  meant.  Seven  Hsters :  probably  the  seven 
celestial  rivers,  counterparts  of  the  Seven  Rivers  of  earth.  These,  as 
emblems  of  fertility,  may  be  said  to  bear  the  names  of  the  seven  cows, 
that  is,  each  may  be  called  a  cow,  symbolizing  the  abundance  which 
tliey  produce  on  earth.     Sayana  explains  the  seven  sisters  as   the  solar 

rays,  or  the  six  seasons  and  the  year,  or  the  six  pairs  of  months  with 
the  intercalary  month,  and  the  seven  cows  as  the  seven  notes  of  music 
as  employed  in  chanting  the  praises  of  the  Sun. 

4  She  who  hath  no  bane:  the  boneless  female  is  probably  Prakriti  or 
Nature,  the  original  source  of  the  bony  or  substantial  one,  that  is,  the 
material  and  visible  world.     Or  Earth  and  Map  may  be  intended. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


460  THB  HYMNS  OF  [MOOK  IX. 

5  Let  him  who  knowetb  presently  declare  it,  this  lovely 
Bird's  securely-founded  station. 
Forth  from  his  head  the  Cows  draw  milk,  and  wear- 
ing his  vesture  with  their  foot  have  drunk  the 
water. 
t  Unripe  in  mind,  in  spirit  undiscerning,  I  ask  of  these 
the  Gods'  established  places. 
High  up  above  the  yearling  Calf  the  sages,  to  form 
a  web,  their  own  seven  threads  have  woven. 

7  Here,  ignorant,  I  ask  the  wise  who  know  it,  as  one 

who  knows  not,  for  the  sake  of  knowledge. 
What  is  That  One,  who  in  the  Unborn's  image  hath 
stablished  and  fixed  firm  this  world's  six  regions. 

8  The  Mother  gave  the  Sire  his  share  of  Order.    With 

thought  at  first  she  wedded  him  in  spirit. 
She,  coyly  loth,  was  filled  with  dew   prolific.     With 
adoration  men  approached  to  praise  her. 

5  This  lovely  Btrcts  securely-founded  statum :  the  place  of  the  Sun, 
and  how  he  stands  in  heaven  secure  although  apparently  unsupported. 
The  Cows  :  the  rays  of-  the  Sun  which  draw  light  and  vivifying  power 
from  his  head  or  crown,  and  reabsorb  from  earth  the  water  which  they 
send  down  in  rain. 

6  The  yearling  Calf:  probably  the  Sun,  in  reference  to  his  yearly 
course.  What  the  seven  threads  are  is  uncertain.  S^yana  says  they^ 
are  the  seven  forms  or  divisions  of  a  Soma  sacrifice  (the  Jyotishtoma^ 
or  the  seven  metres  of  the  Veda.  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  general 
meaning  of  the  stanza  is  :  I  (the  poet)  content  myself  with  asking  in- 
formation regarding  the  places  or  traces  of  the  Gods  in  our  world  ; 
but  the  sages  talk  about  matters  which  are  beyond  my  power  of  com- 
prehension. According  to  Prof.  Grassmann,  the  sages  here  are  the  wise 
Gods,  and  the  seven  threads  are  the  seven  year-sacritices  of  a  sacrificial 
cycle. 

7  In  the  Unbom^s  image :  in  the  form  of  the  Sun,  the  main  type 
and  agent  of  generation,  who  as  being  the  first  of  created  things  is 
represented  as  Aja  the  Unborn,  the  Creator.  Of.  'He  (Agni),  like  the 
Unborn,  holds  the  broad  earth  up,  and  with  effective  utterance  fixed 
the  sky '  (Rigveda  I.  67.  3). 

8  The  Mother:  Earth.  The  Sire:  Heaven.  Of  Ord^:  that  is, 
in  the  great  work  of  oosmical  production  or  creation.  Dew  prolific  : 
in  the  shape:  of  fertilizing  rain. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BTMN  ».]  THB  ATHARVA-VBDA.  461 

9  Yoked  was  the  Mother  to  the  boon  Cow's   car-pole: 
in  humid  folds  of  cloud  the  infant  rested. 
Then  the  Calf  lowed  and  looked  upon   the  Mother, 
the  Cow  who  wears  all  shapes  in  three  directions. 

10  Bearing  three  mothers  and  three  fathers,  single  he 

stood  erect :  they  never  made  him  weary. 
On  yonder  heaven's  high  ridge  they  speak  together 
in  speech  not  known  to  all,  themselves  all-knowing. 

11  Upon  the  five-spoked  wheel  revolving  ever,  whereon 

all  creatures  rest  and  are  dependent. 
The  axle,  heavy-laden,  is  not  heated  :  the  nave  from 
ancient  time  remains  unhej  t»l. 

12  They  call  him  in  the  farther  laif  of  heaven    the  Sire 

five-footed,    of  twelve    forms,    wealthy  in    watery 
store. 
These  others,  later  still,  say  that  he  takes   his  stand 
upon  a  seven-wheeled  car,  six-spoked,  whose  sight 
is  clear. 


9  Yoked  toot  the  mother :  Earth  undertook  the  functions  of  the  cow 
who  supplies  milk  for  sc^sriBcial  purposes.  The  infant :  the  young  Sun. 
Three  direct%on9 :  heaven,  mid-air,  and  earth. 

10  Three  mothen  and  three  father$  :  the  three  earths  and  the  three 
heavens.  The  world  is  divided  into  heaven,  sky  or  air,  and  earth,  and 
each  of  these,  again,  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  threefold.  Cf.  *  Now 
clear  the  triple  region  of  the  air'  (Marlowe's  Tamburlaine  the 
Great,  Act  I.  Scene  11.  Part  I.)  He :  the  JSun.  They :  the  Gods.  Speak 
together :  converse  about  the  Sun,  says  S&yana.  The  reading  of  the 
Atharvarveda  ip  the  last  pada  is  decidedly  better  than  that  of  the 
Eigveda,  *  in  speech  all-knowing  but  not  alHippelHog*' 

11  The  five-spoked  wheel:  the  year  with  five  seasons,  elsewhere  said 
to  be  six,  or  seven,  in  number.  See  stanza  12. 

12  Five-footed :  the  five  feet  of  the  Sire  or  Sun  are  according  to 
B^yana,  the  five  seasons,  the  dewy  and  the  cold  seasons  being  counted 
as  one.  The  twelve  forms  eae  the  twelve  months.  The  seven  wheels  art 
said  to  be  the  solar  rays,  and  the  six  spoken  of  e^ch  wheel  fire  the  mx 
seasons,  Vasanta  or  Spring,  Grishma  or  Summer^  Varsh&h  or  the  Hains, 
Sarad  or  Autua)n,  Hemanta  or  Winter,  and  Sisira  or  the  Cool  or 
l)ewy  Season.  Whose  sight  is  clear :  instead  of  vichakshan^,  qualifying 
rdthe,  the  car,  the  Kigv^a  has  vichaksha^dm,  referring  to  the  Sun. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


462  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IZ. 

13  Formed  with  twelve  spokes,  too  strong   for   age   to 

weaken,  this  wheel  of  during  Order  rolls  round 
heaven. 
Herein  established,  joined  in  pairs  together,  seven 
hundred  sons  and  twenty  stand,  O  Agni. 

14  The  wheel  revolves,  unwasting,  with  its  felly  :  ten 

draw  it,  yoked  to  the  far-stretching  car-pole. 
Girt  by  the  region  moves  the  eye  of  SArya,  on  whom 
dependent  rest  all  living  creatures. 

15  They  told  me  these  were  males,  though  truly  females. 

He  who  hath  eyes  sees  this,  the  blind  discerns  not. 
The  son  who  is   a   snge    hath    comprehended  ;  who 
knows  this  rightly  is  his  father's  father. 

16  Of  the  co-born  they   call    the   seventh   single-born: 

the  six  twin  pairs  are  called  the  Hishis,  sons  of 
Gods. 
Their  good  gifts  sought  of  men  are  ranged  in  order 
due,  and,   various,  form  by  form,  move  for  their 
guiding  Lord. 


14  Ten:  probably  the  ten  regions  of  space,  the  four  cardinal  and 
the  four  intermediate  points,  with  the  zenith  and  the  nadir.  The  region: 
mid-air,  the  firmament  between  heaven  and  earth. 

15  They  told  me  then  were  males  :  Prof.  Wilson  observes  :  •  This  is 
a  piece  of  grammatical  mysticism  ;  raqmi^  a  ray  of  the  sun,  here  per- 
sonified as  a  female,  is  properly  a  noun  masculine.'  But  this  is  just 
the  reverse  of  the  explanation  that  is  required.  Prof.  Grassmann  sug- 
gests that  the  meaning  may  be  that  Night  and  Morning,  both  femi- 
nine, have  received  the  name  of  Day.  The  son  who  u  a  sage :  an  in- 
telligent son  may  be  called  the  parent  of  an  ignorant  father  as  being 
his  superior  in  knowledge. 

1 6  The  co-bom :  the  six  pairs  of  months,  or  six  seasons  of  two 
months  each.  The  nngU-bom  is  the  thirteenth  and  intercalary 
month  of  the  luni-solar  year:  *  the  moon  of  later  birth'  (Rigveda  I. 
25.  8).  The  ftishis :  according  to  S^yaiia,  rUhagah  here  means  gan- 
tdraf^i  goers,  but  in  what  sense  is  uncertain.  Guiding  Lord :  their 
controller,  the  Sun. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H7My  9.]  TUB  ATHARVA-VEDA.  4^3 

17  Beneath  the  upper  realm,  above  this  lower,  bearing 

her  Calf  at  foot,  the  Cow  hath  risen. 
Whitherward,  to  what   place   hath   she   departed  ? 
Where  doth  she  calve  ?  Not  in  this  herd  of  cattle. 

18  Who,  that  the  father  of  this  Calf  discerneth  beneath 

the  upper  realm,  above  the  lower, 
Showing  himself  a   sage,    may   here   declare  him  ? 
Whence  hath  the  godlike  spirit  had  its  rising  ? 

19  Those  that  come  hitherward   they  call  departing, 

those  that  depart  they  call  directed  hither. 
Whatever  ye  have  made,  Indra  and  Soma  !  steeds 
draw,  as  'twere,  yoked  to  the  region's  car-pole. 

20  Two  Birds  with  fair  wings,  knit  with  bonds  of  friend- 

ship, in  the  same   sheltering  tree  have  found  a 
refuge. 
One  of  the  twain  eats   the  sweet  Fig-tree's  berry  : 
the  other,  eating  not,  regardeth  only. 

21  The  tree  whereon  the  fine  Birds  eat  the  sweetness, 

where  they  all  rest  and  procreate  their  offspring — 
Upon  the  top,  they  say,  the  fruit  is  luscious  :  none 
gaineth  it  who  knoweth  not  the  Father. 

17  Ushas  or  Dawn  has  risen  between  heaven  and  earth,  carrying 
with  her  the  young  Sun  her  offspring.  Where  doth  she  calve  f  :  Where 
does  she  bring  forth  the  Sun  ?  This  herd  of  cattle :  the  visible  world 
wherein  we  live. 

18  Ushas  is  the  mother,  but  who  can  say  who  the  father  of  the 
Sun  is  ?     The  godlike  spirit :  the  Sun. 

19  This  stanza  refers  to  the  planets  which  change  their  relative 
position  as  they  revolve.     Indra  is  here  the  Sun,  and  Soma  the  Moon. 

20  Two  Birds  with  fair  wings:  according  to  S^yana,  the  vital  and 
the  Supreme  Spirit  dwelling  in  one  body.  The  vital  spirit  enjoys  the 
fruit  or  reward  of  actions  while  the  Supreme  Spirit  is  merely  a  passive 
spectator. 

21  In  this  stanza  the  fine  Birds  are  perhaps  the  Fathers  or  Spirits 
of  the  Departed  who  enjoy  in  heaven  the  reward  of  their  actions  on 
earth.  ProcreaU  their  of^ng:  see  Bigveda  X.  64.  14,   where  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


464  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

22  Where  the  fine  birds  hymn  ceaselessly  their ''portion 
of  life  eternal,  and  the  sacred  synods. 
There  is  the  Universe's  Guard  and  Keeper  who,  wise 
hath  entered  into  me  the  simple. 

HYMN  X. 

How  on  the  Giyatri  the  G4yatrl  was  based  ;  how 
from  the  Trish^up  they  fashioned  the  Trishtup  forth  ; 

How  on  the  Jagati  was  based  the  Jagati — they  who 
know  this  have  won  themselves  immortal  life. 

Fathers  are  represented  as  the  caiise  of  the  fruitfulness  of  the  mothers, 
Heaven  and  E^rth,  who  give  birth  to  Gods  and  men.  Notie  gaineth  it : 
this  enjoyment  in  heaven  is  not  obtained  by  meritorious  actions  only, 
but  knowledge  of  the  Father,  the  great  Primal  Cause  of  being,  is  also 
necessary.  S&yana  explains  ntparnd'h,  *  having  beautiful  wings,'  'fine 
birds,'  in  this  and  the  following  stanza  as  *  smooth-gliding  (rays).' 
Their  offspring  is,  he  says,  the  light,  and  the  Father  is  the  cherishing 
and  protecting  Sun.  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  stanzas  23 — 22  are 
originally  unconnected  fragments  inserted  together  in  this  hymn 
merely  because  the  word  supcurnd^h  (used,  apparently,  in  various  senses) 
has  a  prominent  place  in  each  verse.  Suparnd^h  has  been  explained 
by  vajiouB  scholars  as  two  species  of  souls  ;  rays  of  light ;  metres ; 
Spirits  of  the  Dead  ;  priests ;  Day  and  Night ;  and  the  tree  on  which 
they  rest  is  the  body  ;  the  orb  or  region  of  the  Sun  ;  the  Sacrificial 
Post ;  the  world  ;  the  mythical  World-Tree.  A  generally  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  three  stanzas  is  hardly  to  be  hoped  for. 

22  The  fine  birds  here  Are  perhaps  the  priests,  and  the  Universe's 
Guard  and  Keeper  may  be  the  deified  Soma,  the  inspirer  of  the  poet. 

The  hymn,  which  is  a  continuation  of  Hymn  IX,,  is  taken,  with 
Yariations,  transpositions,  omissions,  and  additions,  from  Bigveda  I. 
164.  23—47. 

1  Prof.  Wilson,  following  SAya^  paraphrases  this  atanga  as  follows: 
'  They  who  know  the  station  of  Agni  upon  the  earth ;  the  station  of 
V4yu  that  was  fabricated  from  the  firmament,  and  that  station  of  the 
Sun  which  is  placed  in  heaven,  obtain  immortality.*  He  observes  that 
the  purport  of  the  phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres 
Giyatri,  Trishtubh,  and  Jagatt,  is  not  very  dear,  and  that  it  may  hm 
merely  an  obscure  and  mystic  reference  to  the  text  of  the  Veda,  a 
knowledge  of  which  is  essential  to  final  felicity.  The  meanhig  seems  to 
be  that  those  who  are  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  appropriate  re- 
wards that  follow  the  due  employment  of  each  of  the  sacred  metres 
named  are  on  the  right  road  to  immortal  life  and  happuciess  in  heaveiU 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jrr.Vi\P  10.]  THR  ATHARTA-TEDA.  463 

2  With   GAyatrl   he   measures   out    the    praise-song, 
S4man  with  praise-song,  triplet  with  the  Trishtup, 
The  triplet  with  the  two  or  four-foot  measure,  and 
with  the  syllable  they  form  seven  metres; 

S  With  Jagatl  the  flood  in  heaven  he  stablished,  and 
saw  the  Sun  in  the  Kathantara  SS;man. 
Gftyatri  hath,  they  say,  three  logs  for  burning  :  hence 
it  excels  in  majesty  and  vigour; 

4  I  invoeate  this  Milch-cow  good  at  milking,  so  that 

the  Milker,  deft  of  hand,  may  milk  her. 
May  Savitar  give  goodliest  stimulation.  The  caldron 
is  made  hot:  be  will  proclaim  it. 

5  She,  Lady  of  all  treasures,  hath  come  hither,  yearn- 

ing in  spirit  for  her  calf,  and  lowing. 
May  this  Cow  j'ieM  her  milk  for  both    the    Asvins, 
and  may  she  prosper  to  our  high  advantAge, 


3  The  GijQ,tr|  metre  consiatfi  of  three  p&das  ov  (jliviflionA,  apd  t^ 
Saman  or  cbantei  hymn  is  generally  composed  of  three  riehat  or  verses 
of  praise.  Triplet :  the  word  vdkd  in  the  text  is  said  to  mean  either 
two  or  three  connected  stanzas,  that  is,  a  short  hymn.  Two  or  fowr- 
foot  measure :  consisting  of  two  or  four  padas,  divisions,  or  hemistichs. 
The  meaning  is  not  dear.  With  tfu  syllabU :  they  form  the  seven 
generic  metres  of  the  Veda  with  the  syllable,  which  is  the  chief  element 
of  metre,  the  G&yatrt  consisting  of  eight  syllables  iu  a  p&da^  the 
Trishtup  of  eleven,  aod  the  Jagati  of  twelve. 

3  With  Jagatl :  through  the  power  of  this  metre.  Hie :  the  Creator ; 
Brahmi,  according  to  Sayana.  Tfie  flood :  the  celestial  ocean ;  the 
waters  above  the  firmament.  Hathantara  :  a  name  of  various  Siman$. 
Tkree  logs :  the  three  pidas  or  divisions  of  the  stanza  being  fancifuHy 
likened  to  pieces  of  fuel  used  for  the  sacrificial  fire. 

4 .  The  Milch-cow  in  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  may  be  the 
Cow  who  supplies  milk  for  the  sacrifice.  According  to  S&yana,  the 
cow  may  be  the  rain-cloud,  her  milk  being  the  rain,  and  her  milker 
VAyu,  the  God  of  Wind,  who  causes  it  to  flow.  The  calf,  Sayana  says, 
is  the  world  longing  for  the  rain  to  fall.  T?ie  caldron  :  in  which  the 
milk  that  is  to  be  offered  as  a  libation  is  heated. 

5  Lad^  of  all  Treasures :  as  supplying  the  milk  used  in  the  sacrificfo 
which  brings  prosperity  to  the  worshipper.  The  Aspins ;  who  are 
Especially  worshipped  witl^  the  Gbarma  or  libation,  of  hot  milk. 

30 


Digitized  by 


Google 


466  TUE  HYMNS  OF  BOOK  IX. 

6  The  Cow  hath   lowed  after  her   blinking  youngling  : 

she  licks  his  forehead  as  she  lows,  to  form  it. 
His  mouth  she  fondly  calls    to  her  warm  udder,  and 
suckles  him  with  milk  while  gently  lowing. 

7  He  also  snorts,  by  whom  encompassed  round  the  Cow 

lows  as  she  closely  clings  to  him  who  sheds  the  rain. 
She  with   her   shrilling   cries  hath  humbled    mortal 
men,  and,  turned  to  lightning,  hath  stripped  off  her 
covering  robe. 

8  That  which  hath  breath  and  life  and  speed    and  mo- 

tion lies  firmly  stablished  in  the  midst  of  houses. 
The  living  moves  by    powers   of  the   departed  :  the 
immortal  is  the  brother  of  the  mortal. 

9  The  old  hath  waked  tlie  young  Moon  from  his  slum- 

ber, who  runs  his  circling  course  with  many  round 
him. 
Behold  the  God's  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness  :  he 
who  died  yesterday  to-day  is  living. 
10  He  who   hath  made   him  doth  not  comprehend  him  : 
from  him  who  saw  him  surely  he  is  hidden. 


7  He:  probably  Parjanya,  the  Gol  of  the  min-cloud.  The  Cow: 
the  cloud.  To  form  it :  or,  in  order  to  low  :  *  sie  brttlt  ihr  Gebriill.' — 
Qrassmann.  ShrilUny  cries :  the  whizziug  sound  supposed  to  be  made 
by  lightning. 

8  The  subject  of  the  first  line  is  apparently  Agni.  By  powers :  or, 
after  the  manner.  Brother  of :  or,  sharer  of  one  dwelling  with.  Liv- 
ing man  follows  the  steps  of,  or  is  8upp)orted  by  those  who  have  gone 
before,  and  finally  enjoys  a  home  with  them  in  heaven.  Prof.  Wilson, 
following  Sayana,  translates  the  second  line  differently  :  *  the  life  of 
the  mortal  body,  cognate  with  the  mortal  frame,  endures  immortal, 
(sustained)  by  (obsequial)  offerings.'     The  stanza  is  very  obscure. 

9  This  stanza  is  taken  from  Rigveda  X.  55.  5.  Sayana  explains  it 
difterently,  making  Indra,  identified  with  Time,  the  subject.  I  follow 
Prof.  Lud wig's  interpretation  which  is  simpler  and  more  rational. 
Many  round  him :  stars  of  the  asterisms  through  which  the  Moon 
passes. 

10  Lightning,  regarded  as  the  immediate  cause  of  rain,  appears  to 
be  the  subject  of  the  stanza.  He  springs  from  the  bosom  of  his 
mother,  the  cloud,  with  his  countless  offspring  in  the  shape  of  fertilis- 
ing raiu-drops,  appears  for  a  moment  and  then  is  lost  to  si;;ht. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HYMN  10.]  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA,  467 

He,  yet  enveloped  in  his  mother's  bosom,    source    of 
much  life,  hath  sunk  into  destruction. 

11  I    saw   the   Herdsman,    him   who   never   gtumbles, 

approaching  by  his  pathways  and  departing. 
He,  clothed  with  gathered  and  diffusive  splendours, 
within  the  worlds  continually  travels. 

12  Dyaus  is  our  father,  our   begetter  :    kinship  is    here. 

This  great  Earth  is  our  kin  and  mother. 
Between  the  wide-spread  world-halves  is    the    birth- 
place. The  Father  laid  the  Daughter's  germ  within  it. 

13  I  bid  thee  tell  me  earth's  extremest   limit,  about  the 

Stallion's  genial  flow  I  ask  thee ; 
I  ask    about    the    universe's    centre,    and    touching 
highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth. 

14  The  earth's    most   distant   limit  is   this   altar:  this 

Soma  is  the  Stallion's  genial  humour  ; 
This  sacrifice   the  universe's    centre  :  this   Brahman 
highest  heaven  where  Speech  abideth. 

15  What  thing  I  truly  am  I  know  not   clearly  :  myste- 

rious, fettered  in  my  mind  I  wander. 
When  the    first-born  of  holy    Law   approached    me, 
then  of  this  Speech  I  first  obtain  a  portion. 


11  The  Herdsman  :  the  Sun  who  surveys  and  guards  the  world. 

1 2  Dyaus :  Heaven.  World-Jialvts :  literaUy  two  bowls  or  vessels 
into  which  the  Soma  juice  is  poured,  or  the  upper  and  the  lower  board 
of  the  Soma  press,  and  figuratively  an  expression  for  heaven  and  earth. 
The  firmament  or  space  between  these  two  is,  as  the  region  of  the  rain, 
the  womb  of  all  beings.  The  Father  is  Dyaus,  and  the  Daughter  is 
Earth  whose  fertility  depends  upon  the  germ  of  rain  laid  in  the  firma- 
ment. 

14  This  altar :  as  the  place  nearest  to  heaven,  the  place  where  Gods 
visit  men.  Soma  :  regarded  as  the  principle  of  life  and  fertility.  The 
Stallion  is  Dyaus  or  Father  Heaven  who  impregnates  the  clouds  and 
Earth.     Speech  :  personified  as  the  Goddess  Vak. 

15  The  first-bo-n  of  holy  Law :  di,ccord[ng  to  Sayapa,  the  first-bom 
(perceptions)  of  the  truth. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


468,  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  ZX 

16  Back,  forward  goea  he,  grasped  by   power   inherent, 

immortal  born  the  brother  of  the  montal. 
Ceaseless   they   move   in    opposite   directions :  men 
mark  the  one  and  fail  to  maj  k  the  other. 

17  Seven  germs  unripened   yet  are   Heaven's   proHBc 

seed  :  their  functions  they   maintain  by   Vishi^u's 
ordinance. 
Endued  with  wisdom  through  intelligence  and  thought, 
present  on  every  side  they  compass  us  about. 

18  Upon  what  syllable  of  holy   praise-hymn^,  as  'twere 

their  highest  heaven,  the  Gods  repose  them — 
Who  knows  not  this,  what   will   he  do  with   praise- 
hymn?  But  they  who  know  it  well  sit  here  assembled. 

19  They,  ordering  the  verse's  foot  by  measure,  with  the 

half-verse  arranged  each  thing  that  moveth. 
Prayer   was   diflFused    in    many   forms  three-footed  : 
thereby  the  world's  four  regions  have  their  being. 

20  Fortunate  mayst  thou   be  with  goodly  pasture,  and 

may  we  also  be  exceeding  wealthy. 
Feed  on  the  grass,  O  Cow,  through  all  the  seasons, 
and  coming  hitherward  drink  limpid  water. 

16  This  stanBa  appears  to  refer  to  the  Sun  in  his  daily  course  from 
east  to  west  and  his  nightly  return  to  the  east,  the  former  visible  to 
men  and  the  latter  invisible.  2'htify  in  this  case,  would  mean  the  Sun 
by  dfty  and  the  invisible  Sun  at  night. 

17  This  stanza,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  remarks,  ie^one-of  the  most  unin- 
telligible in  the  whole  Veda.  The  seven^  aooording^  to  Sfyana,  are  the 
solar  ray8>  and  Vishnu  is  said,  to  be  the  Sun. 

18  The  Byllabh  is  probably  the  PranfuvOy  the  mystical,  sacved; 
syllable  Om.  This  syllable  is  set  forth  in  t^e  Upanishad^-  as  th» 
onject  of  profound  religious  meditation,  and  the  highest  spiritual, 
efficacy  is  attributed  to  it. 

19  ITuy  :  the  6At2^7A;rtm/»  or  creative  Rishis.  See  III.  28.  I.  Three- 
footed  :  expressed  in  the  Gayatri  metre  of  three  p&das  or  divisions. 
Have  their  being :  the  whole  world  is  supported  and  kept  alive  by 
prayer.  This  stanza  is  not  taken  from  the  Rig^eda. 

20  Addressed  to  the  cow  who  supplies  milk  fbr  the  libations,  when 
sh*  is  let  loose. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BYM^  10.]  Tim  ATHARVAVEDA.  469 

81  Forming  the    water-floods  the    Cow   herself  hath 

kywed,  »on^-footed  or  two-footed  or  four-footed,  she, 

Who  hath  become  eight-footed  or  acquired  nine  feet, 

the  universe's  thousand-syllabled   iPankti.     From 

her  descend  in  streams  the  seas  of  water. 

22  Bark   the   descent :  the   birds   are  golden-coloured. 
Robed  fin  ^the  floods  they  fly  aloft  to  heaven. 
Again  from  Order's  seat  have  they  descended,  and 
inundated  all  the  earth  with  fatness. 

28  The  footless  Maid  precedeith  footed  creatures.     "Who 
marfceth,  Mitra  Varana  !  this  your  doing  ? 
The  Babe  unborn   supporteth  this    world's   burthen, 
supporteth  Right  and  watcheth  Wrong  and  False- 
Jiood. 

24  Vir&j  is  Speech,  and    Earth,    and  Air's   mid-region. 
lie  is  BrajApati,  and  he  is  Mrityu. 

21  The  Cow  her ielf  hath  lowed:  the  great  rain-cloud,  ''regarded  as 
V4k,  Speech  or  Soimd,  has  thundered.  Sayan-i  explains  one-footed  as 
Bounding  from  the  cloud  ;  two-footed,  from  cloud  and  sky  ;  four-footed^ 
from  the  four  cardinal  points ;  eight-footed^  from  the  four  points  and 
the  four  intermediate  points  ;  the  nine  feet  being  these  eight  and  the 
zenith.  The  Rigveda  has  gnurth,  female  buffalo,  instead  of  gaiihy  cow. 
Pankti :  a  fivefold  metre  consisting  of  fi^^e  padas  of  eight  syllables 
ettdh,  here  representing  the  long  roll  of  the  thunder. 

22  Dark  the  descent :  the  rays  of  light  descend  into  the  darkness  of 
the  earth  when  wrapped  in  night,  and  rise  again  to  heaven  with  the 
moisture  which  they  have  absorbed  to  descend  again  in  the  form  of 
fertilizing  raki.     See  Ludwig. 

23  This  stanza  is  taken,  with  an  unimportant  variant,  from  Bigveda 
I.  152.  3.  The  footless  Maid :  Ushas  or  Dawn,  who  moves  unsupported 
in  "the  sky:  Cf.  *  First,  Indra  Agni!  hath  this  Maid  come  footless  unto 
those  with  feet  *  (Rigveda  VI.  59.  6).  The  Babe  unborn:  the  Sun 
before  his  appearance  in  heaven. 

24  VirAj :  see.  A.  V.  VIII.  10.  1,  note.  Sddhyas  :  said  by  Y^ska  to 
be  *  Gods  whose  dwelling-place  is  the  sky.'  They  are  named  among 
the  minor  divinities  in  the  Amarakosha,  and,  as  Wilson  observes, 
it  would  seem  that  in  Sayana*8  day  the  purport  of  the  designation  had 
become  uncertain.*  See  VII*  5.  1  ;  79.  2  ;  VIll.  8.  12.  The  sUiiza  is 
not  taken  from  the  BigveJa. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


470  THE  ATIIABVA'VEDA,  [BOOK  I  J. 

He  is  the  Lord  Imperial  of  the  S&dhyas.  He  ruleq 
w  hat  is  and  what  shall  be  hereafter.  May  he  make 
me  lord  of  what  is  and  shall  be. 

25  I  saw  from  far  away  the    smote   of  fuel  with   spires 

that  rose  on  high  o'er  that  beneath  it. 
The  heroes  cooked  and  dressed  the  spotted  bullock. 
These  were  the  customs  in  the  days  aforetime. 

26  Three  with  long  tresses  show  in  ordered  season.  One 

of  them  sheareth  when  the  year  is  ended. 
One  with  his  powers   the  universe   regardeth.     Of 
one  the  sweep  is  seen,  but  not  the  figure. 

27  Speech  hath  been  measured    out   in   four   divisions : 

the  Br&hmans  who  have  wisdom  comprehend  them. 
Three,  kept  in  close  concealment,    cause  no  motion. 
Of  Speech  men  speak  the  fourth  division  only. 

28  They  call  him  Indra,  Mitra,  Varupa,    Agni ;  and  he 

is  heavenly  nobly-winged  GarutmSn. 
That  which  is  One  bard^  call  by  many  a   title  :  they 
call  It  Agni,  Yama,  MS.tarisvan. 

25  The  smoke  of  fuel :  arising  from  burning  cow-dung.  The  heroes  : 
the  Gods.  This  is,  perhaps,  a  figurative  description  of  the  gathering 
of  the  rain-clouds. 

26  The  three  are  k%x\\  who  burns  up  the  vegetation,  the  all-seeing 
Su  1,  and  V4yu  the  invisible  wind. 

27  Three  might,  apparently,  mean  the  three  Vedas  ;  but  these  can- 
not be  said  to  be  kept  in  dose  concealment.  The  fourth  division  :  ordi- 
nary language.  See  Wilson's  Translation  of  the  Rigveda-Sanhita  for 
Sayana's  elaborate  explanation  of  the  stanza  as  interpreted  by  the 
scholars  of  his  time. 

28  Garutmdn  :  the  celestial  Bird  ;  the  Sun.  All  these  names,  says 
the  poet,  are  names  of  one  and  the  same  Divine  Being,  the  One 
Supreme  Spirit  under  various  manifestations. 

The  original  Rigveda  hymn  contains  five  stanzas  more.  A  very  full 
commentary — to  which  I  am  indebted  for  much  valuable  assistance — 
will  be  found  in  Vol.  V.  of  Ludwig^s  Der  Rigveda,  pp.  445—457.  The 
hymn  has  been  discussed  also  by  Dr.  Haug,  Sitz.  ber.  der  philos.  philol. 
Classe  der  k.  bayer  Akadcmie  der  Wiszenschaften,  bd,  II.  heft  3.  1875. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDICES. 


I.     Latin  version  of  Hymns  and  Stanzas  omittkd  in 
THE  English  Translation. 

II.     Index  of  Hymns. 

III.     Index  of  Names,  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I.  APPENDIX. 
OMITTED  HYMNS  AND  VERSES. 

Book  I.  11.  3—6. 

3  Puerpera  (infantem)  detfegat :  nos  uterum  aperimus. 

Laxa  teipsam,   puerpera.    Tu,   parturiefnfe  !  eniitte 
euni  non  carni,  non  adipi,  non  meduHae  adhaerefntem. 

4  Descendat  yiscosa  placeata,  cani  camedetida  plaeetita ; 

decidat  placenta. 

5  Diffindo   tuum    urinae     ductum,   diffindo   vaginam, 

diffindo  inguina.      Matrem  natumque  divido,  pue- 
rum  a  placenta  divido  :  decidat  placenta. 

6  Sicut  ventus,   sicut   mens,   sicut   alites    volant,    sic, 

decern    mensium    puer,    cttm    placenta   descende  : 
descendat  placenta. 

Book  TV.  4.  3—9. 

2  Siout  tui  surgentis  (membrum  virile)  tanquam  inflam- 
matam  palpitat,  hoc  illud  tui  ardentius  baec  berbu 
faciat. 

4  Sursum  .(^8tote)herbarum  vires,  taurorum  vigor.  Tu, 

Indra,  corporis  .potens,  virorum   niasculutn  robtfr 
in  hoc  homine  depone. 

5  Ros   aquarum   priuiigenitus  atque  arborum,  Soiuae 

etiam  frater  es,  vatuni  sacrorum  uiasculus  vigor  es. 

6  Hodie,  Agnis  !  hodie  Savitar  !  hodie  dea  Sarasvatis  ! 

liodie  Brahmariaspatis!  hujus  fasdinuni  velat   ar- 
cum  extende. 

7  Velut  nervum  in  arcu  ego  tuum  fascinum  extendo. 

Aigredere    (mulierem)     semper   indefessus   velut 
cervus  damam. 
S  Quae   sunt   equi    vires,    rauli,   capri,   arietis,   atque 
tauri,  illas,  corporis  potens!  in  hoc  homine  depone. 

3  Puerpera  :  8il$h(V=  silshandj  from  ^he  root  tii,  to  bring  iorth  ;  oi» 
desiring  to  bring  forth  ;  a  parturient. 
6  Cf.  Rigveda  V.  78.  8. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Lud wig,  Der  Rigreda,  III/p.  478. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


474 


APPENDIX. 


Book  VL  72. 

1  Sicut  anofuis  niger  ad  voluntatem  se  extendit,  Asura- 

rum  arte  magica  fonnas  novas  efBciens,  sic  fasci- 
num  tuum,  partem  cum  parte,  conjunctum,  hie 
hymnus  efficiat. 

2  Velut  penis    (tayadarus)   quern   ventus   permagnum 

fecit,  quautus  est  onagri  penis,  tantus  penis  tuus 
increscat. 

3  Quantum  est  onagri  membrum  masculinum,  elephant!, 

asinique,  quantum  est  fortis  equi,  tantus  penis  tuus 
increscat. 

Book  VL  101. 

1  Taucum  age,  palpi ta,  incresce   et  teipsum  extende  : 

per  totum  membrum  increscat  penis  :  hoc  tu  caede 
feminam. 

2  Quo  debilem  stimulant,    quo   aegrum    excitant   (ho- 

mines), hoc,  O  Brahmanaspatis,  hujus  penem  in 
arcus  modum  extende. 

3  Velut  nervum  in  arcu  ego   tuum   fascinum   extendo. 

Aggredere  (mulierem)  semper  indefessus  velut 
cervus  damam. 

Book  VI.  138. 

4  Duas  tuas  venas,  a  Diis  factas,  in  quibus  stat  vigor 

virilis,  paxillo  ligneo  in  testiculis  ob  istam  mulie- 
rem tibi  findo. 

5  Ut  mulieres  mattam    (tegetem)  facturae   arundinem 

lapide  findunt,  sic  fascinum  tuum  cum  testiculis 
ob  istam  mulierem  findo. 

2  Tayadam* :  the  meaning  of  the  word  tdyddardm  in  the  t«xt  is 
not  discoverable.  Onagri  :  pdrasvatah ;  the  animal  called  Parasv&n 
is  probably,  as  conjectured  by  von  Roth,  the  wild  ass  or  Onager  found 
on  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  and  in  former  times  even  in  Southern  India. 
The  animal  is  mentioned  in  Kigveda  X.  86.  18,  and  again  in  Atharva- 
veda  XX.  131.  22. 

2  Hoc ;  that  is,  by  virtue  of  this  charm,  or  with  this  drug. 

3  The  stanza  is  repeated  from  IV.  4.  7. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX.  475 

Book  VII.  35. 

2  Hae  quot  tlbi  sunt  venae  atque  arteriae  harum   om- 

nium OS  tibi  lapide  occlusi. 

3  Uteri  tui    summam    partem  inferam    facio  :  ne   tibi 

soboles  neque  filius  eveniat.      Sterilem  et  infecun- 
dam  te  facio  :  lapidem  tuum  opeiimentum  facio. 

Book  VII.  90. 
3  XJt  virga  abeat  et  feminis  innocua  fiat,  (virga)  mem- 
bri  humidi,  membri  quod  verberat  penetratque,  id 
quod  tentum  est  laxa,  id  quod  sursum  tentum  est 
deorsum  tende. 

Innociuz  :  inoffensive.  *  C'est  pour  dndvaydi  le  seul  sens  possible, 
indiqu^  par  Tesprit  du  morceau,  et  d'ailleurs  la  derivation  par  dva  yd 
(P.  W.)  n'explique  pas  la  longue.  Je  conjecture  un  compost,  k  coup 
sur  recent  et  tr^  exceptionel  (mais  aussi  est-ce  un  aira^)  fait  sur 
dvdyoUi  **  il  devore,"  cf .  le  rapport  cSiati :  achetds  (1*  accentuation 
importe  pen  pour  une  formation  aussi  hyst^rog^ne  et  ar'oitraire). 
L'assimilation  du  menibre  viril  k  une  bdte  f^roce  qui  assaille  les  fern- 
mos  est  de  tons  les  temps  et  de  tons  les  lieux.' — M.  Victor  Henry, 
whose  version  of  the  obscure  stanza  I  have  put  into  the  Latin  above. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


BOOK  I. 
Hymn.  Pa^b. 

1  A  prayer  to  Vachaspati  for  divine  illumination  and  help.  1 

2  A  charm  against  dysentery               ...              ...              ••  3 

3  A  charm  against  constipation  and  suppression  of  urine...  4 

4  To  the  Waters,  for  the  prosperity  of  cattle    ...              ...  6 

5  To  the  Waters,  for  strength  and  power          ...              ...  7 

6  To  the  Waters,  for  health  and  wealth             ...             ...  8 

7  To  Indra  and  Agni,  for  the  detection  and  destruction  of 

evil  spirits    ...             ...              ...               ..               ..  9 

8  To  Indra,  Brihaspati,  Soma,  and  Agni,  for  the  destruction 

of  sorcerers  ...              ...              ...              ...              ...  11 

9  Benediction  on  a  King  at  his  inau '^ration     ...              ...  12 

10  Absolution  of  a  sinner  after  intercession  with  Varuna  ...  13 

11  A  charm  to  be  used. at  chill-birth  ...             ...             ...  14 

12  A  prayer  to  Lightning,  against  fever,  headache,  and  cough.  1 5 

13  A  prayer  to  Lightning,  for  happiness              ...             ...  16 

14  A  woman's  incantation  against  a  rival             ...              ...  17 

15  A  prayer  for  the   prosperity  of  an  insti tutor  of  sacrifice.  19 

16  A  prayer  and  charm  against  demons               ...             ...  20 

17  A  charm  to  be  used  at  venesection....             ...             ...  21 

18  A  charm  to  avert  evil  spirits  of  misfortune  and  to  secure 

prosperity     ...             ...              ...              ...              ...  22 

19  A  prayer  for  protection  from  arrowa  and  for   the  punish- 

ment of  enemies          ...             ...             ...             ...  23 

20  A  prayer  to  Soma,  the  Maruts,  Mitra,  and   Varuna,   for 

protection     ...              ...              ...              ...             ...  2% 

21  A  prayer  to  Indra  for  protection     ...              ...             ...  25 

22  A  charm  against  jaundice...              ...              ...             ...  26 

23  A  charm  agai^aet  leprosy  ...             ...              ...              ...  27 

24  A  charm  against  leprosy  ...              ...             ...             ...  28 

25  A  prayer  to  Fever,  as  a  charm  against'his  attacks        ...  29 

26  A  prayer  for^protection,  guidance,  and  prosperity         •..  31 

27  A  charm  to  obtain  invisibility          ...              ...              ...  32 

28  A  prayer  to  Agni  for  the  destruction  of  evil  spirits       ...  33 

29  A  charm  t)0  secure  the  supremacy  of  a  dethroned  King.  33 


Digitized  by 


Google 


478 


INDEX   OF   HTMNS. 


[Book  IL 


Hymn.  Paob. 

30  A  beneciiction  on  a  King  at  his  consecmtlon  ...  ...  34 

31  A  prajei-  for  protection  and  general  prosperity  ...  35 

32  In  praise  of  Heaven  and  Earth        ...              ...  ...  36 

33  To  the  Waters,  for  health  and  happiness        ...  ...  37 

34  A  youn'^  man's  love-charm               ...              ...  ...  38 

35  A  charm  to  ensure  long  life  and   glory  to   the  wearer  of 

an  amulet     ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  39 

BOOK  II. 

1  Glorification  of  the  Prime  Cause  of  all  things...  ...  41 

2  A  chaim  to  ensure  success  in  gambling           ...  ...  42 

3  A  water-cure  charm           ...              ...              ...  ...  43 

4  A  charm  tx)  ensure  health  and  prosperity  by  wearing  an 

amulet          ...              ...              ...              ...  ...  45 

5  Invitation  to,  and  praise  of  Indra    ...              ...  ...  46 

6  A  prayer  to  Agni  for  protection       ...              ...  ...  48 

7  A  counter-charm  against  imprecation  and  mali ;nity     ...  49 

8  A  charm  against  hereditary  disease  (A:irA«(r/ya)  ...  60 

9  A  charm  to  cure  dangerous  disease                 ...  ...  51 

•  10  Absolution  and  benediction              ...              ..  ...  52 

1 1  Counter-charm,  with  an  amulet,  against  an  enemy's  spells.  54 

12  A  prayer  for  vengejince  on  a  malicious  rival  worshipper.  55 

13  A  youth's  Investiture  ceremony  {godAnam)    ...  ...  57 

14  A  charm  to  banish  vermin  and  noxious  creatures  ...  58 

15  A  charm  against  fear        ...              ...              ...  ...  59 

16  A  prayer  for  general  protection       ...              ...  ...  60. 

17  A  prayer  to  an  amulet  for  health  and  strength  .  .  61 

18  A  charm  against  enemies,  goblins,  and  other  evil  creatures.  61 

19  A  prayer  to  Agni  for  aid  against  an  enemy    ...  ...  62 

20-23  Repetitions   of    19,    but    addressed    to   Vayu,  Surya, 

Chandra,  and  the  Waters  instead  of  Agni 

24  A  charm  against  the  magic  arts  of  fienis       ...  ...  62 

25  A  charm  against  fiends  who  cause  abortion    ...  ...  64 

26  A  benediction  on  homeward  coming  cattle     ...  ...  65 

27  A  charm  against  an  opponent  in  debate         ...  ...  66 

28  A  prayer  for  a  boy's  long  and  happy  life        ...  ...  67 

29  A  benediction  on  a  sick  man            ...             ...  ..  68 

30  A  man's  love-charm           ...              ...             ...  ...  70 

31  A  charm  against  all  sorts  of  worms                •..  ...  71 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Book  III.]                                   INDEX   OF   HYMNS.  479 

Hymn.  Page. 

32  A  charm  against  worms  or  bots  in  cows         ...             ...  72 

33  A  charm  against  Consumption  (i/(fksftma)       ...              ...  74 

34  A  pray ei*  accompanying  an  animal  sacrifice    ...              ...  75 

35  Expiation  for  an  imperfectly  performed  sacrifice            ...  76 

36  A  cbirm  to  secure  a  husband  for  a  marriageable  giii    ...  78 

BOOK  III. 

1  A  prayer  or  charm   for  the   defeat  and  destruction   of 

enemies  in  battle         ...              ...              ...              ...  81 

2  A  r//acamtf»/o  or  recension  of  1       ..               ...              ..  82 

3  A  charm  for  the  restoration  of  an  expelled  King           ...  83 

4  A  benediction  at  the  election  of  a  King         ...              ...  84 

5  A  King's  address  to  an  amulet  which  is  to  strengthen  his 

authority     ...              ...              ...              ...              ...  86 

6  Address  to  an  amulet  which  is  to  secure  the  defeat  of 

the  wearer's  enemies   ...              ...              ...              ...  87 

7  A  charm  with  an  amulet   of  buck-horn   to   drive   away 

hereditary  disease        ...              ...             ...              ...  89 

8  A  charm  to  secure  the  submission,  love,   and  fidelity  of 

kinsmen       ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  90 

9  A  charm  against  rheumatism  {vishkandha)     ...              ...  91 

10  A  New  Year  prayer           ...              ...             ...              ...  93 

11  A  charm  for  the  recovery  of  a  dangerously  sick  man     ...  95 

12  A  benediction  on  a  newly  built  house             ...              ...  97 

13  A  benediction  un  a  newly  cut  water  channel                 ...  99 

14  A  benediction  on  a  cattle  pen          ...             ...               ..  101 

15  A  merchant's  prayer  for  success  in  his  business             ...  102 

16  A  Kishi's  morning  prayer                 ..               ...              ...  104 

17  A  farmer's  song  and  prayer  to  speed  the  plough            ...  106 

18  A  jealous  wife's  incantation  against  a  rival                     ...  108 

19  A  glorification  of  the  ofl&ce  of  a  King's  household  priest.  109 

20  A  prayer  for  riches  and  general  prosperity     ...              ...  Ill 

21  In  honour  of  fire  in  all  shapes,  to  appease  Agni   of  the 

funeral  pile  and  to  quench  the  flames  of  cremation.  113 

22  The  taming  and  training  of  an   elephant  for  a   King  to 

ride  on         ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  115 

23  A  charm   to  remove  a  woman's   sterility,  and  to  assure 

the  birth  of  boys         ...              ...              ...              ...  116 

24  A  song  of  harvest             ...             ...             ...             ••.  117 


Digitized  by 


Google 


480  INDBX   OF   HTMiYS.  [Book  IV. 

Hymn.  PA<3ft 

25  A  man*8  love-chawn  ...  ...  ...  ...     119 

26  A  charm  to  win  the  favour  of  all  serpents     ...  ...  120 

27  A  charm  consigning  an  enemy  to  the  serpents  for  punish- 

ment ...  ....  ...  ...  ...  121 

28  A  charm  to  change-  the  ill-omened  birth  of  twin  oalves 

into  a  blessing  ...  ...  ...  ...  122 

29  On  the  means  to  obtain  immunity  f;rom  t^^^ation  in  t}ie 

next  world  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  124 

30  A  charm  to  secure  love  and  concord  in  a  family  ...  125 

31  A  charm  for  the  recovery  of  one  dangerously  ill  ...  127 

BOOK  IV. 

1  Cosmogonical  and  mystioo-theologioal  doctrine  •••  129 

2  To  The  Unknown  God      ...  ...  ...  ...  131 

3  A   charm   against   tigers,    wolves,    thieves,    and   other 

noxious  creatures        ...  ...  ...  ...  133 

4  A  charm  to  restore  virile^ power        ..  ...  ...  134 

5  A  lover's  sleep-charm        ..  ...  ...  ...  135 

6  A  charm  to  make  a  poisoned  arrow  harmless  ...  136 

7  A  charm  to  make  a  poisonous  plant  innocuous  ...  138 

8  A  beueiiction  at  the  oonpeomtion. of  a  King  ...  139 

9  A  charm  addressed  to  a  precious  ointment  for  safety  and 

wealth  ...  ...  ...  ...  .  .  141 

10  A  charm  accompanying  investiture  with  an  amulet  of  shell.  142 

11  A  glorification  of  the  sacialioial  Gharma  or  milk-caldron.  144 

12  A  charm  to  mend  a  broken  bone     ...  ...  ...  146 

13  A  charm  to  restore  a  sick  man  to  health        ...  ...  147 

14  Accompanying  the  sacrifice  of  a  he-goiUi         ...  ...  149 

15  A  charm,  to  h^ten  the  coming  of  the  Rains  ...  150 

16  On  the  omnipresence  and  omniscience  of  VaruQa  ...  153 

17  A  charm  to  secure  freedom  from  various  evils  ....  155 

18  A  counter-charm  against  the  incantations  of  enemiea    ...  156 

19  A  counter-charm  and  charm  to  secure  general  protection.  157 

20  A  charm  for  the  acquisition  oi  superhumfin,  powers  of 

sight  ...  ...  M%.  •»•  ...  159 

,    31     Glorification  and  benedictiop. of  Cows  m«  ...  161 

22     A  benediotion  on  anewjy  QOQseciatedJ^iQg    ...  ...  163 

.     23     Maj^nification  of  Agni  and  prayer  foij  his^  pijoteotioil      ...  163 

24     A  hymn  of  prayer apd  praise  to  I ndr%  ...  ...  165 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Book  v.]                                          INDEX   OF   HTMNS.  481 

Htmn.  Page. 

25  A  hjniii  of  prayer  and  praise  to  Vaju  and  Savitar       ...  166 

26  A  hymn  to  Heaven  and  Earth        ...             ...             ...  167 

27  A  hymn  to  the  Maruts     ...             ...             ...             ...  168 

28  A  hymn  to  Bhava  and  Sarva           ...             ...             ...  169 

29  A  hymn  toMitra-Varuna  ...             ...             ...             •••  170 

30  A  glorification  of  V&k  or  Speech      ...             ...             ...  171 

31  A  hymn  to  Manyu  or  Wrath           ...             •..             •••  173 

32  A  hymn  to  Manyu            ...             ...             ...             ,..  174 

33  A  prayer  to  Agni  for  protection  and  prosperity            ...  175 

34  Glorification  of  the  Vishtirt  sacrifice               ...             •«.  176 

35  Magnification  of  the  Odana  or  oblation  of  milk  and  rice.  177 

36  A  charm  against  fiends,  human  enemies,  and  other  pests.  179 

37  A  charm  against  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases                  ...  180 

38  A  charm  for  success  in  gambling     ...             •  .             ...  183 

39  A  prayer  to  various  deities   for  health,   wealth,   and 

prosperity    ...             ...             ...             ...             •••  184 

40  A  charm  against  rival  worshippers  ...             ...             •••  185 

BOOK  V. 

1  A  glorification  of  Trita  and  Yaruna                ...             ...  187 

2  A  glorification  of  Indra    ...             ...             ...             ...  189 

3  A  prayer  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  other  deities  for  victory 

and  prosperity             ...             ...             ...             ...  192 

4  A  charm  against  fever  and  other  ailments      ...             ...  193 

5  A  charm  to  mend  a  broken  bone     ...             .••             ...  195 

6  A  prayer  for  protection  and  prosperity           ...             ...  196 

7  A  charm  to  deprecate  AdLti  or  Malignity       ...             ...  198 

8  A  charm  for  the  discomfiture  and  destruction  of  hostile 

priests          ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  200 

i    A  prayer  to  Heaven  and  Earth  for  protection  and  assistance.  201 

10  A  prayer  to  the  presiding  deities  of  the  four  quarters  for 

protection     ...             ...             ...             ...             ...  202 

11  A  dialogue  between  Atharvao  and  Yaruna     ...             ...  203 

12  An  Apr!  or  Propitiatory  Hymn       ...             ...             ...  205 

13  A  charm  against  snakes    ...             ...             ...             ...  208 

14  A  charm  against  witchcraft             ...             ...             ...  210 

15  A  charm  for  general  prosperity       ...             ...             ...  211 

16  A  charm  for  the  increase  of  cattle  ...             ...             ...  212 

17  The  abduction  and  restoration  of  a  Brilhman's  wife       •••  21 S 

31 


Digitized  by 


Google 


482  INDEX  OF  HTMNS.  [Book  VL 

Hymn.  Page. 

18  The  wickedneM  of  oppressing  and  robbing  Br&hmans   ...  215 

19  The  wickedness  of  robbing  or  insulting  Brihmans        ...  218 

20  A  hymn  to  the  War-drum  to  secure  victory   ...             ...  220 

21  A  hymn  to  the  War-drum  and  various  deities  for  victory.  222 

22  A  charm  against  fever      ...             •••             ...             ...  224 

23  A  charm  against  parasitic  worms    ..*.             ...             ...  225 

24  A  priest's  prayer  for  protection  and  assistance               ...  228 

25  A  charm  to  facilitate  conception     ...             ...             ...  229 

26  A  hymn  of  invitation  to  the  Gods  ...             ...             ...  231 

27  An  Aprt  or  Propitiatory  Hymn       ...             »..             ...  232 

28  A  charm  to  ensure  general  protection  and  prosperity    ...  234 

29  A  charm  for  the  destruction  of  malignant  goblins         ...  235 

30  A  charm  to  restore  life  and  health  ...             ...             ...  238 

31  A  counter-charm  against  the  incantations  of  an   enemy  241 

BOOK  VI. 

1  In  praise  of  Savitar           ...             ...             .,.             ...  245 

2  In  praise  of  Indra              ...              ...              ...              ,.,  245 

3  A  prayer  to  various  deities  for  protection  and  prosperity.  245 

4  A  prayer  to  various  deities  for  protection       .;.             ...  245 
h  A  prayer  to  Agni  and  Indra  for  the  well-being  of  a 

princely  patron            .,.             ...             ...             ...  247 

6  A  prayer  to  Brahmanaspati  for  protection  from  wicked  men.  247 

7  A  prayer  to  Soma  and  other  Gods  for  help  and  protection.  248 

8  A  man's  love-charm           ...             •..             ...             ...  248 

9  A  man's  love-charm           ...             ...             ...             ...  249 

10  A  thanksgiving  for  life,  hearing,  and  sight    ...             ...  249 

11  An  epithalamian  charm  to  ensure  the  birth  of  a  boy     ...  250 

12  A  charm  against  venomous  serpents                ...             ...  250 

13  Homage  to  Death             ...             ...             ...             ...  251 

14  A  charm  against  Consumption         ...             ...             ...  252 

15  A  charm  for  power  and  preeminence               ...             ...  252 

16  A  medicinal  charm            ...             ...             ...             ...  253 

17  A  charm  to  ensure  conception         ...             ...             ...  254 

18  A  charm  to  banish  jealousy             ...             ...             ...  254 

19  A  prayer  for  purification  ...             ...             ...             •••  255 

20  A  charm  against  fever      ...             ...             ...             ...  255 

21  A  charm  to  strengthen  hair  and  promote  its  growth     ...  256 

22  To  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods          ...             ...             ...  256 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Book  r/.] 


INDEX   OF  BTMNS. 


48$ 


Htmit. 
23 
24 
25 

26 
.    27 

28 
29 

30 

31 
32 
33 
34 

35 
36 
37 
.  38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 

46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 

54 
55 


Paos. 

To  the  Waters  ...             .•.             ...             ...  ...  257 

To  the  Rivers    ...             ...             —             ...  ...  258 

A  charm  to  remove  pustules  or  scrofulous  swellings 

(apachitas)  ...              ...             ...             ...  ..;  258 

To  Afliiction      ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  259 

A  charm  to  avert  misfortune  foreshown  by  the  coming 

of  a  dove     ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  260 

The  same           ...             ••              ...             ...  ...  260 

A  charm  to  avert  misfortune  foreshown  by  the  coming 

of  a  dove  and  an  owl  ...             ...             •*•  ...  261 

A  charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair         ...  ....  261 

To  SArya  the  Sun-God     ...             ...             ...  ...  262 

A  chann  against  fiends  and  goblins             ./.  ...  262 

A  prayer  to  Indra  for  riches            ...             ...  ...  263 

A  prayer  to  Agni  for  protection  from  enemies  ...  263 

To  Agni  Vaisvinara          ...             ...             ...  ...  264 

In  praise  of  Agni  Vaisv&nara            ..  .           ...  ...  264 

A  charm  to  divert  Imprecation  personified     ...  ...  264 

A  prayer  for  surpassing  strength  and  eaexgj  ...  265 

A  priest'?  prayer  for  power  aod  glofy             ...  ...  265 

A  prayer  foif  peace  and  security      ...            ...  ...  266 

A  prayer  for  protection,  long  life,  and  various  blessings.  266 

A  charm  to  reconcile  estranged  friends           ...  ...  267 

The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  267 

A  charm  to  remove  disease              ...             ...  ...  268 

A  prayer  for  preservation  from  mental  sin  and  evil 

promptmgs  ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  269 

A  charm  against  evil  dreams            ...             ...  ...  269 

To  accompany  the  three  daily  libations         ...  ...  270 

Formulas  to  be  used  at  the  three  daily  libations  ..  271 

In  praise  of  Agni              ...             ^.             ...  ...  272 

A  charm  for  the  destruction  of  vermin          ...  ...  272 

A  prayer  for  puri&cation  and  forgiveness  of  sins  ...  273 

A  charm  against  noxious  reptiles  and  insects  ...  273 

A  prayer  for  recovery  and  preservation  of  health  and 

security        ...             ...             ...            ...  ,..  274 

A  benediction  on  a  newly  elected  King          ...  .,,  275 

A  prayer  for  general  protection  and  prosperi^  ,^.  275 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iH                                           \irbET  OF  HYMNS.  [Book  VI, 

Hymk,  Page. 

56  A  charar  against  snakes    ••«             ...             ,.,  ...  276 

57  A  charm  for  a  wound  or  bruise       ...             ...  ...  276 

68  A  priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory             ...  ...  277 

59  A  charm  to  protect  cattle  and  men                ...  ...  277 

60  The  wooing  of  a  bride     ...             ...             ...  ...  278 

61  A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  greatness           ...  ...  278 

62  A  prayer  for  purification  and  riches                ...  ...  279 

63  The  symbolical  liberation  of  a  sacrificial  victim  ...  279 
(14  To  promote  unanimity  in  an  assembly           ...  ...  280 

65  A  sacrificial  charm  against  enemies                ...  ...  281 

^6  A  charm  for  the  destruction  and  plunder  of  enemies    ...  281 

67  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  282 

68  A  charm  to  accompany  the  shaving  of  the  beard  ...  282 
6d  A  priest's  prayer  for  power  and  glory             ...  ...  283 

70  A  benediction  on  cow  and  calf         ...             ...  ...  283 

71  A  priest's  benediction  after  meat    ...             ...  ...  284 

72  A  charm  to  restore  or  increase  virile  power  (Appendix)  474 
7S  A  King's  charm  to  oonciliate  his  discontented  kinsmen.  284 

74  k  King's  charm  to  secure  the  fiddity  o^  his  people       ...  285 

75  A  charm  to  effect  the  removal  of  an  enemy  ...  ...  285 

76  A  benediction  on  a  new-bom  Kshatriya  chiki  ...  286 

77  A  diarm  to  bring  the  cattle  home  ...             ...  ...  286 

.  78  A  nuptial  benediction       ...             ...             ...  ...  287 

79  A  prayer  lor  seasonable  rain  and  prosperity  ...  ...  288 

80  A  prayer  for  help  and  protection    ...             ...  ...  288 

81  A  charm  to  facilitate  child-birth     ...             ..,  ...  289 
.82  A  charm  to  win  a  bride    ...             ...             .<.  ...  289 

83  A  charm  against  sores  and  pustules  (apachitas)  ...  ^90 

84  A  charm  to  accompany  the  symbolical  loosing  of  sacrifi- 

cial victims ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  291 

85  A  charm  against  Consumption        ...             ...  ...  291 

86  A  glorification  of  a  newly  consecrated  King  ...  ...  292 

87  A  benediction  addressed  to  a  newly  elected  King  ...  292 
.  88  The  aame          ...            ...            ...            ••.  ...  293 

89  A  matins  love-charm          ...             ...             ...  ...  293 

90  A  charm  to  cure  a  poisoned  man     ...             ...  ....  294 

91  A  charm  against  disease  ...             ...             ...  ...  295 

,   92  A  charm  to  strengthen  and  inspirit  a  war-horse  ••«  295 


Digitized  by 


Google 


£0Qi  VL]                                        INDEX  OF  HTHKS.  .  4^5 

Htmn.  Paqb. 

93  A  prayer  for  protection  from  poison               ...  ...  296 

94  A  charm  to  reconcile  a  King's  discontented  people  ...  296 

95  A  charm  to  remove  disease              ...             ...  ...  297 

96  A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  sorrow  ...  297 

97  A  prayer  for  the  success  and  prosperity  of  a  King  ...  298 

98  Praise  of  Indni...             ...             ...             ...  ...  299 

99  A  prayer  for  protection  in  battle     ...             ...  ...  299 

100  A  charm  against  poison   ...             ...             ...  ...  300 

101  A  charm  to  promote  virile  vigour  (Appendix)  ...  474 
lO'J  A  man's  love-charm          ...             ...             ...  ...  301 

103  A  charm  to  check  the  approach  ol  a  hostile  army  ...  301 

104  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  802 

105  A  charm  to  cure  cough    ...             ...             ...  ...  302 

.106  A  charm  to  protect  a  house  from  fire             ...  ...  303 

107  A  charm  to  protect  mea  and  cattle                 ...  ...  303 

108  A  prayer  for  wisdom         ...             ...             ...  ...  304 

109  A  charm  to  heal  punctured  wounds                ...  ...  306 

110  A  benediction  on  a  new-bom  child  ...             ...  ...  305 

111  A  charm  for  insanity        ...             ...             ...  ...  306 

112  A  health-charm  for  man,  woman,  and  son      ...  ...  306 

113  Acharm  to  banish  the  fiend  Griht...             ...  ...  307 

114  A  prayer  for  pardon  of  faults  and  errors  in  sacrificing  ...  308 

115  A  prayer  for  forgiveness  of  sins      ...             ...  ...  308 

116  A  prayer  for  pardon  of  sin  against  mother,  father,   BOUp 

or  brother    ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  309 

117  A  prayer  for  freedom  from  debt      ...             ...  ...  309 

118  A  prayer  for  pardon  of  cheating  at  play         ...  ...  310 

119  A  prayer  for  release  from  debts  incurred  without   inten^ 

tion  of  paynMnt          ...             ...             ...  .^.  310 

120  A  prayer  for  pardon  of  sins  and  felicity  hereafter-  .^  311 

121  A  prayer  for  happiness  in  heaven    ...             ...  ...  311 

122  The  same           ...             ..              ...             ...  ^  312 

123  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  .„  313 

124  An  Omen  from  the  sl^y     ...             ...             •..  ...  314 

125  Glorification  of  a  war-chariot           ...             ...  ...  314 

126  Glorification  of  the  war-drum          ...^             ...  ...  315 

127  A  charm  to  banish  various  diseases  ..             ,..  ..  315 

128  A  charmfor  fair  weather ...             ..,             ...  ...  316 


Digitized  by 


Google 


486 


im>EX   OF  HTMN8. 


•Book  VII. 


Htmn.  Page. 

129  A  charm  for  success  and  happiness...             ...  ...  317 

130  A  woman's  love-charm      ...             ...             ...  ...  317 

131  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  318 

132  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  319 

133  A  glorification  of  the  sacred  girdle  ...             ...  «•.  319 

134  A  priest's  prayer  for  power  to  punish  wrong-doers  ...  320 

135  A  priest's  fulmination  against  an  enemy         ...  ...  321 

136  A  charm  to  promote  the  growth  of  hair         ...  ...  321 

137  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  321 

138  A  woman's  imprecation  on  her  unfaithful  lover  ...  322 

139  A  woman's  love-charm      ...             ...             ...  ...  323 

140  A  blessing  on  a  child's  first  two  teeth            ^.  ...  323 

141  A  blessing  on  cattle          ...             ...             ...  •*.  324 

142  A  prayer  for  a  plentiful  harvest      ...             ...  ...  324 

BOOK  VII. 

1  Glorification  of  the  power  of  prayer  and  of  Agni  ...  327 

2  Praise  of  Atharvan           ...             ...             ...  ,.,  328 

3  Praise  of  Agni  as  the  Sun                •••             ...  ...  328 

4  To  Vayu  God  of  the  Wind               ...             ...  ...  328 

5  A  glorification  of  sacrifice  ..             ...             ...  •*  329 

6  A  prayer  to  Aditi  for  help  and  protection      ...  ...  330 

7  Praise  of  the  Adityas       ...             ...             ...  ...  331 

8  Godspeed  to  a  departing  traveller  ...             ...  ...  331 

9  A  prayer  to  Pdshan  for  protection  and  the  recovery  of 

lost  property               ...             ...             ...  ...  332 

10  A  prayer  for  the  favour  of  Sarasvatt               ...  ...  332 

11  A  prayer  to  protect  com  from  lightning  and  drought  ...  333 

12  A  prayer  for  influence  at  deliberative  and  religious  meetings.  333 

13  A  charm  to  win  superiority  over  foes  and  rivals  ...  334 

14  A  prayer  to  Savitar  for  prosperity  ...             ...  ...  334 

15  A  charm  to  win  divine  favour  and  felicity     ...  ...  335 

16  A  prayer  for  prosperity    ...             ...             ...  ...  335 

17  A  prayer  for  wealth  and  children    ...             ...  ...  335 

18  A  prayer  for  rain              ...             ...             ...  ...  336 

19  A  prayer  for  prosperity    ...             ...             ...  ...  337 

20  A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  happiness             ...  ..«  ^37 

21  A  funeral  stanza                ...             ...             ...  ...  338 

22  To  Savitar,  or  Yama  invested  with  Savitar's  attributes.  338 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Sool  VII.]                               INDEX   OP  HTlCNSt  48T 

Htmn.  Paoi; 

23  A  charm  to  banish  fiends  and  troublea           ...  ...  33a 

24  A  prayer  for  riches            ...             ...             ...  ...  33ft 

25  Praise  of  Vishnu  and  Varuna           ...             ...  ...  83ft 

26  Praise  of  Vishnu                ...             ...             ...  ...  33ft 

27  A  prayer  to  Idi,  Goddess  of  Demotion            ...  ...  341 

28  Praiseof  the  sacrificial  utensila        ...             ...  ...  341 

29  To  Agni  and  Vishnu         ...             ...             ...  ...  841 

30  A  charm  to  be  used  when  the  eyes  are  anointed  ...  342 

31  A  prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  enemies           ..."  .*.  342 
82  A  prayer  to  Agni  for  long  life         ...             ... .  ...  342 

33  A  prayer  for  long  life,  children,  and  riches    ...  ...  342 

34  A  prayer  tor  freedom  from  sin  and   the  overtluraw   of 

enemies         ...             ...              ...              ...  ...  34$ 

35  A  prayer  for  the  prosperity  of  a  King  and  his  kingdom.  343 

36  A  charm  to  be  pronounced  by  bride  and  bridegroom     ...  343 

37  A  nuptial  charm  to  be< spoken  by  the  bride    ...  ...  343 

38  A  maiden's  love-charm     ...             ...             ...  ...  344 

39  A  sacrificial  charm  for  rain  and  prosperity    ...  »..  344 

40  A  prayer  for  prosperity    ..,             ...             ...  ...  345 

41  The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  345 

42  A  prayer  for  delivery  from  sin  and  sickness  ...  ...  346 

43  A  charm  against  lightning               ...              ...  ...  346 

44  In  praise  of  Indra  and  Vishnu         ...             .•.  ...  347 

45  A  charm  against  jealousy...             ...             ...  ...  347 

46  A  charm  for  offapring  and  prosperity             ...  ...  347 

47  A  prayer  for  wealth  and  the  birth  of  a  son     ...  ...  348 

48  A  prayer  for  prosperity  and  the  birth  of  a  son  ...  348 

49  A  prayer  for  children  and  booty     ...             ...  ...  349 

50  A  gambler's  prayer  for  success  in  gaming      ...  ^..  349 

51  A  prayer  for  Brihaspati's  and  Indra's  protection  4.  351 

52  A  prayer  for  peace  and  concord       ...             ...  ...  351 

53  A  charm  to  recover  a  sick  man  at  the  point  of  death     ...  351 

54  A  charm  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  Veda      ...  ...  352 

55  A  charm  to  ensure  a  prosperous  journey        ...  ...  353 

56  A  charm  against  poisonous  bites  and  stings  .r.  353 

57  A  charm  for  some  physical  disorder                ...  ...  354 

68  An  invitation  to  Indra  and  Varuna                 ...  ...  355 

59  An  imprecation ...             ...             ...             —  ..^  355 


Digitized  by 


Google 


488 


IKDSZ  OF  HTMN9. 


[Book  VIL 


Htmn.  Pao«. 

60  A  parting  traveller's  address  to  the  houses  of  his  village.  356 

61  A  prayer  for  sacred  knowledge  and  its  fruits...  ...  357 

62  A  prayer  for  the  overthrow  of  eneoiies  ..  ...  357 

63  A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  affliction  ...  ...  357 

64  A  charm  to  avert  an  evil  omen        ...  ...  .«  358 

65  A  charm  against  imprecations  and  threatened  evils      ...  358 

66  A  prayer  to  Vik  ...  ...  ...  ...  359 

67  A  print's  prayer  to  the  Agnayo  DhishnyAl^  ...  ...  359 

68  A  prayer  fw  children  and  prosperity  ...  ...  359 

69  A  prayer  for  prosperity     ...  .„  ,,,  ...  360 

70  A  charm  to  frustrate  an  enemy's  sacrifice      ...  ...  360 

71  In  praise  of  Agni  ...  ...  ...  ...  361 

72  An  invitation  to  Indra      ...  ...  „.  ...  361 

73  An  invitation  to  the  Asvins  ...  ...  ...  361 

74  A  charm  to  cure  pustules,  sores,  or  scrofulous  swellings 

(apaohitas)  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  363 

75  A  blessing  on  cows  ...  ...  ...  ...  364 

76  A  charm  to  cure  scrofulous  pustules  and  scrofula  ...  364 

77  An  incantation  against  an  enemy    ...  ...  ...  366 

78  A  charm  for  a  prince's  prosperity    ...  ...  ...  366 

79  A  hymn  to  the  New  Moon  ...  ...  ...  367 

80  A  hymn  to  the  Full  Moon  ...  ...  ...  367 

81  A  hymn  to  the  New  Moon  ...  ...  ...  368 

82  In  praise  of  Agni  ...  ...  ...  ...  369 

83  A  prayer  for  deliverance  from  sin  and  other  evils  ...  370 

84  A  prayer  for  protection    ...  ..  ...  ...  371 

85  A  charm  to  ensure  victory  in  battle  ...  ...  372 

86  The  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ^.  372 

87  A  prayer  to  Rudra  as  Agni  ...  ...  ...  372 

88  A  charm  to  cure  a  snake-bite  ...  ...  ...  373 

89  A  prayer  for  purification  and  prosperity         ...  ...  373 

90  A  charm  against  a  rival  in  love         ••  ...  ...  374 

91  A  prayer  for  protection    ...  ...  ...  ...  374 

92  The  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  374 

93  A  prayer  for  success  in  battle  ...  ...  ...  374 

94  A  charm  to  ensure  the  obedience  of    subjects  ...  376 

95  An  incantation  against  an  undetected  thief   ...  ...  375 

96  The  same  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  176 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Book  IX.] 


INDEX  OF  HTHNS. 


4S9 


Hymn. 
97 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
lU 
115 
116 
117 
118 


10 


Pagb. 

Sacrificial  formulas           ...             ...             ...  ...  376 

Anointing  the  sacred  grass              ...             ...  ...  377 

The  preparation  of  the  altar            ...             ...  ...  377 

A  charm  against  nightmare             ...             ...  ...  378 

The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  378 

A  charm  to  obtain  pardon  for  an  indecent  act  ...  378 

The  cry  of  an  unemployed  priest    ...             ...  ...  378 

A  prayer  for  prosperity    ...             ...             ...  ...  379 

An  initiation  formula       ...              ...             ...  ...  379 

A  prayer  for  pardon  of  sin                ...             ...  ...  379 

A  charm  against  Cough    ...             ...             ...  ...  379 

A  prayer  for  protection    ...             ...             ...  ...  380 

A  prayer  for  success  in  gambling    ...             ...  ...  380 

A  prayer  for  success  in  battle         ...             ...  ...  381 

A  prayer  for  offspring      ...             ...             ...  ...  382 

A  prayer  for  protection  and  freedom  from  sin  ...  382 

A  woman's  incantation  against  a  rival            ...  ...  382 

The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  383 

A  charm  against  Misfortune            ...             ^,  ...  383 

A  charm  against  Fever     ...             ...             ...  ...  384 

A  charm  to  ensure  prosperity          ...             ...  ...  ^84 

A  benediction  on  a  warrior              •••             ...  ...  384 

BOOK  VIII. 

A  charm  to  recover  a  dying  man     ...             ...  ...  386 

The  same           ...             ...             ...             ...  ...  388 

A  prayer  for  the  destruction  of  demons         ...  ...  392 

Imprecations  on  demons  ...             ...             ...  ...  396 

A  charm  accompanying  investiture  with  an  amulet      ...  400 

A  charm  to  exorcise  evil  spirits  who  beset  women  ...  403 

A  charm  to  restore  a  sick  man  to  health        ...  ...  408 

Imprecations  directed  against  a  hostile   army  ...  412 
An  enunciation  of  cosmogonical,   ritual,  and  metrical 

doctrine       ...             ...  '           ...             ...  ...  416 

A  glorification  of  the  mystical  abstraction  Viraj  ...  421 

BOOK  IX. 
A  glorifioation  of  the  Asvins'  Whip  and  a  pray^  for 

blessings      ...            ...            ...            •••  ...  427 


Digitized  by 


Google 


490                                                INDEX   OF   HTMN8«  [Book  IX. 

Hymk.  Page. 

2  A  glorificatioQ  of  K&ma  as  God  of  desire  of  aU  that  is  good.  430 

3  On  the  consecration  of  a  newly  built  house    ...  ...  434 

4  A  glorification  of  the  ty^Hcal  sacrificial  bull    •••  «..  438 

5  A  glorification  of  a  sacrificial  goat  ...             ...  •••  442 

6  A  glorification  of  hospitable  reception  of  guests  ...  448 

7  A  glorification  of  the  typical  bull  and  cow     ...  ...  453 

8  A  charm  for  the  cure  of  various  diseases  connected  with 

Consumption                ...             •••             ...  ...  455 

9  Enunciation  of  mystieo-theological    and    eoamological 

doctrine        .•.             ...             ...             ...  ...  458 

10  Continuation  of  Hymn  9  ...             «••             ...  ...  464 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OF  NAMES, 

XskYXj,  p.  253. 
Abhiplava,  48  note. 
Abhisheka,  1 1, 140»o^e«. 
Absolute,  The,  IV,  36, 


41  notet. 

Absolution,  52,  77  notet, 

Ach&rya,  379. 

Adder,*  32. 

Adding  (name  of  a 
gobliu),  119. 

Adhvarju,  IV,  15,  245, 
361,  362,  452. 

Aditi,  12,  39,  68,  90, 
104,  115,  189,  231, 
246,  248,  265,  282, 
289,  311,  336,  343, 

.  371,  390,  394,  420, 
454. 

Aditya,  107,  185,  191, 
278,330,  331,371, 

lditja8,12, 14,  15,S1, 
34,  39,  40,  56,  90, 
91,  111,  115,  121, 
171,  193,  234,  246, 
282,  285,  308,  331, 
387,  890,  414,  420, 

.      427,  440. 

Affliction  (personified), 
259. 

Agasti,  170,  171. 

Agastja,  73,  134,  170, 
180,  227,  274. 

Aghn ja  (oow),  1 25  note, 
Agii&yi,  111,349. 

Agnayo  Dhisbpy^h,  76, 
859  noU$. 


Agni,  III,  X,  XII,  13,20, 
29,  30  nofe,  31  note, 
38,  35  note,  36  note, 
37,  38,  40,  42  note, 
47  note,  48,  49,  61 
note,  53,  56,  57,  59, 
note,  61,  62,  67,  68, 
76,  78,  81,  85,  90, 
94  note,  96, 100, 102, 
103,  105  note,  110, 
111,  113  noU,  114, 
115,  120,  121,  123, 
126,  128,  130  noU, 
131  note,  145  note, 
149,  152,  168,  164, 
110  note,  175,  179, 
184,  187  noU,  188 
noU,  189  note,  191 
note,192, 193, 198— 
200,  202  noU,  205 
note,  206  note,  207, 
211,  212,  224,  226, 
228,  229,  231—238, 
240,  242  noU,  243, 
246,  247,  249,  259, 
260,  262—264,  266, 
269  no(«,  270,  271 
note,  272,  274,  275, 
277,  279,  280,  282, 
284,  285  noU,  286, 
287  noU,  292,  298,  • 
296—298,  301—307, 
309,312—314,  818, 
319,  327  note,  828 
note,  330  note^  335 
note,  336,  337,  339, 


ETC. 

342,  843,  849,  851, 
352,  857,  360,  861, 
363,  366,  369, 370— 
873,  374  note,  376, 
379,  3^0,  381,  883, 
385,  387,  389—395, 
397,  398,  400—402. 
410,415,418,427— 
429,431—433,  435— 
487,  439,  443,  444, 
449,  453,  454,  458, 
460,  462,  464,  466, 
469,  470. 

-^—  alone    originally 
immortal,  42  note. 

as  lightning,  Snote, 

30  note,  37,  458  note. 

as  the  Sun,  78  note, 

ISS  note,  328,   370, 
416,  458  no^e. 

flight  of,  30  note, 

327  note. 

three  homes  of, 

416. 

^—  kravy&d    (Flesh- 
consumer),  386  note, 

identified     with 

Kama,  113,  264. 

patron  of  marriage, 

78  note. 

Lord  of  Seasons,94 

nott. 

—  Lord  of  the  Fife 
Tribes,  163. 

—  Son  of  the  Rishis, 
185. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


492 


Agnishtoma,  451. 
Agriculture,  106. 

—  genii  of  IX. 
Agriculturist,  life  of 

an,  IX— XI. 
Agriculturists,  251,  Sd9. 
Ahi,  47,  99,  165. 
Abavauija  Fire,  450. 
Ahui  a  Mazd^,  1 3  note. 
Air,  55, 201— 203,234, 

311,  818,  386,  415, 

421,  430,  469. 

—  triple,  461. 
Airlfata,  426. 
Airs,  vital,  234. 
AitareyaBr&hmana, 

331,  419. 
Aitchison,  Dr.,  252. 
Aja,  445  note,  460  note, 
Ajy«,  lo  note, 
AJRsringi,  181. 
Akuti  (Purpose,  perso- 

iiihed),  SI''. 
AlHridus,  71,  72. 
Alajt,  458  noU. 
AlasUli,  253. 
Aligi,  209. 
AliAfa,  403. 
All,  455. 
All-Gods,  13  noU,  58 

noUy  61   note,   296, 

819  noU,  341,  455. 
AllSustainer,  61. 
Almighty  Creator,   42 

note. 
Almighty  God,  105no^ 
Alpdriicken,  408  note. 
Altar,  224, 357, 377,467 
—  northern,  HI. 


INDEX  OF  NAMBS,   Sta 

Amarakosha,  469.  Anus  (a  people),  1 14  noU 

Ambartsha,  7»  Anusarpa,  63. 

Amrit,  Amrtta,  6,  98,  Annslilup,  418,  419. 
100,  126,    188,  141,  Anuyijas,  35. 
152,  167,  178,  235,  Apachitas,    258,    a63: 
240,  267,  269,  312,       note*^  See  Pustules. 
427.  Apah  (Waters),  6  note. 

Amiiia,  242.  Aplmftrga,    156^,   157,. 

Amulet,    83,   34,    89,       317  note,  358. 
51,  53v  61,  86,  92,  Apimnap&t,  152  noU^ 
234,289,  400—402.  Ape,  272. 
Ancestral  Spirita,   56,  Apodaka,  209. 
121     notes.     See       Apollo,  48  noU 

Aprt  (8),  205,  207,  232; 

234  noee^. 
Apsaraer,  1'83, 
Apsarases,    43,    180 — 
184,  306,  310,  317,. 


Fathers. 
Angas,  205,  206,  226. 
Anger    (personified). 

See  Manyu. 
Angiras,  56.  114,  264, 

401,  410,  411,  414.        880,  381,  401,  414,. 
Angirases,  III,  56, 114,     425,  454. 

264,  401,  410,   411,  Aptya,  1p87,  >91,  270v 

414,445.  See  Trita. 

Angii-asa,  269,  425.       Apty*?,  191. 
Augirasa-yeda,  III.        Apva,  82. 
Animal    sacrifice,    75,  Araai,  '12, 

149.  See  Sacrifice.      Araru,  26^. 
Animals,  sacrificial,  75,  Arataki,  ISl. 

94  notes,  Ai-iti,  22,  198—200. 
tj  me,  94,  9S  note,  Arfiyas,  404,  405. 

127.  Ardour     (personifiedX 

Ansa,  246.  433  note.  See  Maayuw 

Antaka,  269,  424.  Arjnna,  4iano««. 

Antarik8ha(m),87,l49  Arjun!,  63. 

notes,  Armottf,  384,  402,  431 

Antelopefoot,  22.  Arrian,  208. 

Anumati,  199,  25^,  8 18, Arrow  (lightning,  17. 

337,  338,  440.  (personified),  I  Id. 

Anumroka,  63.  —  (used  in  charm«), 

Auupalila,  408.  46,  116. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OP  NAMIS8,   STC.  493 

Attow  (in  tear),  110,       Ass,  wild,  474.  Atliarvan-(Teda),  V,  VI, 

—  (the  parts  of  an),  ABsembly  (personified),  Atharvana,  245. 

137.  333, 421.  Atharvai^a-veda,  III. 
— •  (poisoned),    137,  Asura,  143,  232.  Atharv&ugirasas,    III, 

138,  21 8.  Asura  (s)  <God,  Gods),       VI. 

(Agui's,  394.  300,  304,  324,  Atharva-veda,  III,  IV. 

—  (lndra*8),  351.       —  (fiend,  fiends),  44,  —  Anukraman!,XIV« 

— —  (K&ma'8)119.  66,92,95,158,164, Biihma^a,'    III, 

(Rudra*8)  23,  173,      248,  281,  305,   400,       XV. 

^94.  401,  404,  420,   423,  Commentary,  XIV, 

-^ —  (the  Brahmatfs),       432.  XV. 

218.  Asuras  (kings),  292.       Pritifikhya,  VIII, 

Arrowsof  Gods,  120— Asur!  (sfae-fiend;,  28,       XIV. 

W2.  29.  Sutras,  XIV. 

Artificer  of  the  Gods,  Asvattha,  87 — 89,181,  Upaniahads,  XV. 

47,  65  notes.  194,  195,  260,  297,  Atiritra,  461. 

Arundhat!,    146,    195,       305,  410,  412.  Atri,  73,  146,  170, 171, 

196,  277,  300.  Aflvins,  69,  70,  84,  85,       213,  227,  274. 

Arya(s),  174,  204,  248,      104,  105,  116,   126,  Aubrey,  John,  32. 

253.  129,  144,   170,  171,  Audhumbla,41,422no<<» 

Aryaman,  14,15,  22,       193,229,232,  246,  Aufrecht,      Professor, 

31,  78,  86, 101,  111,      247,  272,  283,  289,       135,  136. 

112,  195,  236,  246,      301,  324,  351,   861,  Auksha,  79. 

248,  301,  454.  363,  414,  427—429,  Aukshagaudhi,  181. 

Aryan,    IX,     25,    42,       439,  454,  465.  Austerity     (religious), 

111,  113,  Hi,  118,  Whip  of  the,  427,      320.    See  Fervour. 

160,  161,  163,  174,      428,  430.  Autumn,  275,  391. 

264.  Asvint,  344.  fever  prevalent  in, 

Aryans,  3,  9,  118,  420.  Atharvan,     III,    131,       29,  30  notes,  456. 
Aslp&lna,  36  note.  134,  180,   189,  191,  Autumns,  a  hundred. 

Asbtaka,  93,  95.  203—205,  245,  328,      See     Hundred    Au- 

Ashtamt,  420.  330,  379,  395.  tumns. 

Asikut,  136  note.  Atharvans,    III,    180,  Avabhritha,  453. 

Asita,   18,    134,   276,       335.  Avaki,  100    182,  251 

321,  322.  Atharvan-pnest,  245.         notes,  409. 

Asita    (Black  Snake),  Atharva-Samhiti,     V,  Avaskava,  72. 

121.  VI,  VII.  Averting  Gods,  432. 

Asmodeus,  404  note,      translations  from  Axe,  55. 

Asresha,  403.  the,  XV,  XVI.  Ayus^  48  note,  439. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4ii  INDSa  OF  NAMSS,   WTO. 

Babhru,  170.  Bhav&ut,  296  not4*         Brahma  (prayer,  charm), 

Baotrians,  224  noH.       Bhfiga,  47,    149,  205,       36,  78,  notes. 
Baga,  31  note.  218.  Brahmi  (the  pbeuome- 

Bahlikas,  224,  225.        Bhrigus,  III,  47,  149.        oal     Creator),     40, 
Baja,  404,  407.  Bhrigvangiraaaa,  III.         132,  212,  213,    465 

Bal&sa,   142,  252,  409  Bhiitak|ftta6,  122,  304      notes. 

fiotes.  notes.  Brahmaohirl,  218, 304, 

Balkb,  224  note.  BhuUpati,  59.  320,  381. 

B&rhat8&m&,  230.  Bird,  the  (the  Sud),  28,  Brahmaveda,  III,  IV,  V. 

Barhis,  206  note.  137,  262,  460,  470.  Brahman  (priest),  111, 

BaringGould,  S.,  239,  Birds,  the  two,  463.  123,  200,  212—216, 

384, 429.  Birth-ritual,  52,  67.  218,  220,   382,  410, 

Barley,  51,  261,  273,     Biter,  the,  406.  42^  443,  444,  467. 

295,^  350.  Bleut     Offerings.   See  Brihma^as,     YI,    420 

r deified,  324,  325.      Mixt  Oblations.  note. 

and  rioe,  410,430.  Bloomfield,  Prof.,  XIV,  Brahnians  (priesU),  52, 

Bdellium,  XII,  79, 181.      XVI,  4, 16,  16—18,        172,  177,  178,  251, 
Beasts,  Lord  of,  75.  44,  64,  66,  104,  268,      313,  376,  440,  441. 

Beer,  98  note.  271,  277,  364.  Br&hroan  (s),  4,  8,  136, 

Bees,  429,  433.  Blyxa,  Ootandra,  182,       152,   160,  177,  178, 

Being,  the  Diviue,  139,      261  notes.  213,  21 9,  251,   266, 

Behar,  226  note.  Boat,  88.  See  Ship.  440,  441,    450,  451, 

Benfey,  Prof.,  8.  Boats,  benediction  of,       470. 

Bent,  T.,  123.  330  noU.  Brfthmanhood,  60. 

Bergaigne,    M.    Abel,  Boar,  66,  210,  411.        Brahiiia9aspati,ll;»ol#, 

187,  830.  Body,  parU  of  the,  74,       33,  34, 104,  246,247, 

Bhaga,  81,  79,  97,  104,      455—468.  269,  285,  293,  324, 

.  105,  111,   162,  172,  Bogii,  31  noU.  342,  354,  406. 

199,  232,  246,    274,  Boneless,  the,  463.         Brahmaudana,  178. 

285,  289,  301,   806,  Bony,  the,  463.  Bi-ahmodyam,  129,189, 

364,  385,  440.  Bommxiller,  Dr.  J.,  253.     416  notes. 

Bharadvlija25,55,146,  Borer,  72.  Brazil  wood,  209  note. 

171,  213,  352.  Bounteous    One,    the,  Breath  (returns  to  the 

Bharati,  193,  207,  233,       (Indra),  48,  79.  wind),  388. 

241.  (Bhaga),  105.  Breaths,  two,  208. 

Bhariijt,  63.  Bounteous  Paths,  85.     Bridal  oracle,  78. 

Bhava,   59,    76,    169,  Brahma    (the    Divine  Bride,  wooing  of  the,  78, 

170,  296,  388,   418,       Essence),  7,  41,  78,       278. 

414,  189.  Bright  One,  the,  349.  • 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i 


INDEX   OF  VAUlsd,   KTC.  495 

Brihaddiva,  189,  191.    Bullock  (caldron  called),  Chanda,  68. 
Brihaspati,  11,  83,  37,       145.  Chandra    (the    Moon) 

57,  65,  68,  77,  96,  Bullock- tooth,  22.  36,  62  notes,  185. 

97,  101,   111,   112,  Bullff    (ludra-Soma),     Chandramas (the Moon), 

114,121,122,130,       396.  434. 

131,  172,   213,  229,  Burster,  the,  412  note.  Chapman,  George,  110. 

«32,  236,    269,  284,  Burton,    Robert,    118,  Chariot,  314. 

293,  297,    301,  331,       199,  407.  Cliarioteers,  87. 

335,342,351,    369,  Chariot.racing,105«o<^, 

379,  381,  400,  415,  Cakes  (offered  to  the       349. 

425,  434,  438—440^       spirits  of  the  dead),  Chhalunas,  71. 

452,  454.  424  Mte.  Chhand&nsi     (hymna), 

Bfihat,  176,  203,  416,  Caldron    (personified),       231  note. 

422,  423.  144,  145.  Chief  Priest,   48,   67, 

Bfihatt,  83,   76,    203,     Calf=  darling,  100, 125.      357. 

416,  417,  422,  454.    (Agni),  184.  Childbirtk  (charm  for), 

BrihatsAman,  218,  230. (the   Sun),    185,       14. 

Bristlj -haired  (a  fiend),      460,  463.  Chitraratha,  425. 

406.  (V&yu),  184.  Clau(8),    Lord  of  the, 

Broom  (veda),  341.         (Chandra),  185.         288, 

Bull  (Agni),  179.  (the  world),  465.  Cleaver,  158. 

(Indra),  25,  144,  Canis,    Canicula,    288  Close-creeper  (a  fiend), 

193,271,599,403.        ne(e.  406. 

— ^  (Kama),  430.         Cannabis  (hemp),  46.     Cloudy  sky,  Lord  of, 
*-^— (Lord ofthe  Moon),  Canopus,  170  note,  288. 

368.  Carpenter,  S7  note*        Coborn,  462, 

.-^— (Parjanya),   150,  Car- warrior,  357.  Cold  season,  418  iio<f. 

151,  345  »©<<?.  Caste,  the  third,   251  Colebrooke,  H.  T.,  8. 
(Prajipati),  428,       note.  Colic,  456,  457. 

429,  Castes,  four,  160  note.    Collective  Gods,  IS. 
—  (the  Sun),  262.      Cat,  23  n^te.  Conference    (personifi- 
(Sun,  Moon,  Hea-  Catarrh,  409.  ed),  333. 

Yen),  \Zb  n^te,  Cattle^waters   in  Confirmation,  282  nof«. 
(the  Typical),  453,      clouds,  359.  Consecration.  See  Dtk- 

455.  Cattle-pen,  101,  102.         sh&. 

.  liberation  of   a.  Celestial  Dames,  111.    Consecration  of  a  King, 

382no««.  Chakra,  188.  115,  139,  140. 

i sacrificial,  438 —     Chambers's     Encyclo-  Consort  of  the  Year, 

442.  p»dia,  VII.  93—95. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


496  INBBX  OF   NAMES,    ETC. 

Consorts  of  the  Gods,  Cow,  glorification  of.  454.  Daksh&yaiias,  40  note. 

Ill,  231,  349,  454. benediction   of,  DakshinA,    145,     198, 

Cuustellations  (iiifluen-      283.  446  note.  453. 

cing  weather),  316. first  priestly  fee,  Dakahin&gni,  450. 

Lord      of     (the       112,  145  notes.  Dames,  Celestial,  111, 

Moon),  22S.  (the  typical),  453,      note,  206,  849. 

Consnltation  (person!-       454.  Darbha,  49,  267,  268^ 

fied),  422.  Cows,  101,   102,   112,       410. 

Consumption,    16,    49,       161,162,249.  ^*"^*»  ^l^'A  !^  ^Ji 

53,  74,  99,  127,  142, called  Goddesses,       54,  67,  109, 159,  3^^. 

195,  225,  252,   277,       364.  Darius,  225  note. 

291,  315,  352,  408,  rays  of  light,  165,  Disa  (s)  174, 190,  204, 

410,437,455-458.       191,460.  374. 

Copper-hued  (a   fiend), regions  of    the   Dasavriksha,  51. 

406.  sky,  185.  D&st,  224. 

Corruption    (personifi-  Cow-terrifier  (a  goblin),  Dasyu  (s),  9,    59,   95, 

Bd),  36.  22.  174,413,432. 

Cough,    15,    16,    225,  Ci-arop,  30  noU.  Daughter,  birth   of  a, 

302.  Creation,  Lord  of,  128,      deprecated,  250,407. 

Cousin « enemy,       52       132.  Daughters,    Celestial, 

noU.  Creative  Rishis,    122,       370. 

Cow,   One,    420,    421,     178,  304,  320,  468.    Dawn,  101,  233,   262, 

444.  Creator,   the,   41,    42,       279,  362,  399,   418," 
Creative  Power  of     76, 95, 132, 139,177,       452,  469. 

Nature,  422  193,  401,  460,  465.    and  Night,  233. 

Vak,  Vidlj,  431.    Creatures,  Lord  of,  95,  Dawns,  the,  105,   246,' 

Cloud,  466,  469.       428-430  338,  371. 

^ —  Earth,  1^6.  Creeper-near  (a  fiend),  Dawns,  two  (night  and 

—1- Dawn,  463.  406.  morning)  418. 

Prayer,  327.  Cuckoo,  399.  Day,  188,  432. 

Priaiii,  41.  Cupid  (Indian),  70  not«. Day,  Lord  of,  143. 

of  Plenty,    444,  Day  and    Night,   60, 

noU.  Dadhtkr^,  105,  noU.        390,  464. 

.. —  Kama's  daughter,  Dadhikr^,  145  note.      Day  and  Sun,  402. 

431.  Dadhikr^van,  105.         Deasil,  349  noU. 
emblem  of  plenty,  Dadhyach,  330  note.       Death,  (personified), 36, 

93,  177,  335,  379.      Dadikae,  325  noU.  62—54,  64,  88,  96, 
Atharvan's,  203—  Daksha,  3^,  40.                  180,  199,  200,  220, 

205.  Daksha'schildren,  39,40.     223,  235,  251,  259, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


txthsi  09  HAiOBs,  fiia  497 

260,  263,  265,  269,  Dewy  season,  418.         Dnihyus,  114  note. 

279,  286,  291,    296,  Dharma,  IV.  Drum,  220—223,  315. 

305,  314,   320,  351,  Dh^tar,    78,    90,    95,  Dual  deity,  170,  262, 

360,  378,  385,  387—      U7.  229,  230,  278,       355,  396  notes. 

389,  391,  410,  413—      335,  336,  386,   402,  Durga,  2. 

415,  421,  424.  462,  455.  Duru&m4,  404. 

meBsenger8of,413.  Dhava,  195.  DArva,  303. 

Debt,  309,  310.  Dhritar&ahtra,  426.        DvimArdU       Irtvya, 

Decay  (per8onified),36.  Dice,    43,    154,    216,       423,424. 

Decline,  225,240,  241,       242,283,  310,  350,  Dvipa(laTri8htup,3wo<«. 

252,  291,  292,  315,      380,  381.  Dyaus,  72,  205,   248, 

387,                             Dierbaoh,  45.                      255,  467. 
Delbiilck,  Prof,  XVL    Digvijaya,  192  note.       Dyaushpitar,  247  note. 
Demiurgus,  41  note.       Dii  Conseutes,  'iSlnote,  Dysentery, 3, 4, 82 no<e«. 
Demons,   of  darkness,  Diksh^,  282,  402,  419,   charm  for,  3,   4. 

164  noU.  449.  Dyu,  172,  note. 
of  drought,  9,  47  Diosoorides,  143. 

notes.  Diseases,  various,  316,  Eaoeb  (a  class  of  Gods), 
various.  See  Asuras,     3 1 7,  465  —458.  1 20. 

Pisslchas,    KimUius,  Dispenser,  the,  79.        Eagle(s),    210,    271, 

Yitudhiuas,  Kaksha-  Disposer,  the,  95,  104,       272,  290,  399. 

sas.  193.  — —  Celestial  (the  Sun), 

Desire,  119,  126,   433  Dissector,  443.  160.    * 

note.  Disturber, the,  1X9 note.  Ear,  the  (comes  from 

Destroyer,    the,    296,  DiU,  831.  Air),  203. 

386.  Divine  Being,  the,  470.  Earache,  456. 
Destruction    (personi-  Dog    (sacrificed     by    Earth  (personiHed),  3, 

fied),   36,     52—54,      Gods),  329.  37,  68, 91, 116,  125, 

64,  88,  96, 180, 199,  Dog-star,  288.  184,  186,  191,  201, 

269,  261,   291,  298,  Doors,  divine,  206, 233.  203,  217,  219,  229, 

314,  346,   352,  360,  Dove,  259—261.  234,  235,  249,  254, 

387,  339,  397.  Dragon,  the,  47,  48,99,  255,  262,  291,  311, 
Devad&ru,  391  note.  113,  165.  821,  336,  342,  387, 
Devarshi,  219  no<«.  Dream(s),  evil,  141,  399,411,  421,  430, 
Devas,  34  noU.                  269,  371,  378,  430.  432,  438,  453,  469, 

Devaty&s,  27.  Dropsy,  154,  371  note.  mother  of   men. 

Devotion,  417.               Drudging    goblin,   51,  311,  467. 

i— -  Goddess  of,  341.       118,  119  notes.  *— -  centre  of  (altar), 

Dew-time,  275.  Druh,  52—54,  366.  357. 

32 


Digitized  by 


Google 


498  INDEX  OF  NAMES,   ETC. 

Earth,  lower  and  upper,  Erigone,  288,  note.         Father  (the  Sun),  203, 
390.  Er6s,  433.  464  note. 

Earths,  three,  159.         Erysipelas,  466.  (the  Primal  Cause), 

Eastward  fire,  421,450.  Establisher,  the,  7  8 no<«.      464  note. 

Eclipse    of    the    sun,  Eternity,  12,  39  note«,  41. and  Mother  (Hea- 

54  note,  Eumenides,  291  note,         yen  and  Earth),  36 

Egg-eaters  (fiends),  407.  Euphrusy,  159  note.  note. 

Eight  elements,  420.      Evil  eye,  50,  141.  Fathers        (Ancestral 

^—  marrows,  56.  Excellence       (person!-      Spirits),  XI,  10,  56, 

divine  priests,  420.     fied),  279.  121,  124,  188,    217, 

-: —  Sons  of  Aditi,420.  Exertions  (personified),      218,  229,  238,   240, 

Indra's   number,       200,  201.  260,  268.  280,  284, 

420.  Expanses,  six,  192.  291,  309,    312,  313, 

Eight-footed,  469.  Expellent  sacrifice,  285.      333,   346,359,386, 

Eighth  night,  420.         Eye,  the  (comes  from       414,  417,    423,  424, 
Eighty,  56  noU.  the  sun),  203.  433,  442  note,  463. 

Ejatkas,  227.  returns    to    the monthly  oflferings 

EUha,  303,  454  notes.      sun),  202,  388.  to,  423. 

Ek&8htak4,  94,  95. (precious  trea-      (cause  of  fruitful- 

Ekavinsa,  419.  sure),  141.  less),  464  no<«. 

Elements,  six,  418.         Eyebright,  159  note.      (embodied    and 

eiglit,  420.  bodiless),  414. 

Elephant,     115,     116,  Failure  (personified), Regent    of   the 

265,  283,  437.  198.  (Yama),  228. 

taming  of,  115.      Fairies,  euphemistic      Fauni,  Faunus,  118  note. 

Emmets,  44,  354.  names  of,  426.  Favour  of  the  Gods,  22, 

Empyrean,    the,     149  Faith,  320,  446.  90,  818,  337, 440 nofe. 

note.  Falcon  (Agni),  271.        Fear  (personified),  59. 

Encompasser,  the  (Va- (the   Sun),    345,  Feeler  (a  fiend),  404. 

runa),  83  note.  346.  Felicity  in  heaven,  56, 

Encyclopedia    Britan- (bringerofSoma),      311 — 313. 

nica,  VII.  345  note.  Fern,  86  note. 

Ender,    the    (Death),  Falsehood,  60, 154, 469.  Fem-seed,  86  noU. 

385,  424.  Far-strider  (the   Sun),  Fervour  (religious),  145, 

Ephedra,  252, 253  notes.      1 88.  1 74,  320,  425. 

Pachyclade  (Soma  Father  (Heaven),   129,  Fever,  15,  29,   30,31, 

plant),  252  note,  172,  203,   205,  247,       92,  142,   193—195, 

Distachya,      253       267.  224,  225,  241,   252, 

no^'  (Indra),  355.  255, 256,  384,  456. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Fever,  hundred  agonies  Five,    Raoes,     Tribes,  Four-eyed    dog,    160, 


of,  241. 

Nations,     42,    114,       441  noU. 

Ficus     Religiosa,     87, 

118,  163,  214,  285,  Four-footed,  469. 

194,410.  SeeAfva- 

330,  420.                    Four  regions,    15,  48, 

ttha. 

messes  of  boiled       192,  266,  432. 

Field,  Lord  of  the,  51. 

rice,  443  note,  448.     Fourth  Veda,  VI. 

Queen  of  the,  55. 

regions,  84,  112,  Fragile  (the  intercalary 

Fifteen  regions  of  the 

118.                                month),  197. 

sky,  418. 

rivers,  246.            Friend,  the,  5,  49,  90. 

Finisher,  the  (Death), 

seasons,  418,  461  Friends,  the  two,  302. 

269. 

noU.                            Frog  (used  in  charms). 

Fire,  Sacrificial,  48,  88, 

, ^healing  herbs,  420.      100,  875  notes,  384. 

85,  91. 

sons  of  man,  114.  Frogs      (compared    to 

Garhapatya,  358. 

Waters,  420.            Bnlhmans),  152,  153. 

See  Garhapatya. 

Five-arrowed,  412.         Fuel,  224. 

household,    243, 

Five-footed  (the  Sun),  Funeral  fire,  242,  886, 

357,  421. 

461.                                 389. 

eastward,  421, 

Five-spoked  wheel,  461. quenching  of  the. 

450. 

Flesh-consumer,      the       114. 

southward,    421, 

(Agni),     114,    115,  Furies,  291  note. 

450. 

386,  389.                    Furrow     (personified), 

westward,  421 

Fiood,Child  of  the,  16,      106,  107. 

notCy  242,  450. 

17. 

ordeal  by,  55  note.  Floods  (Waters)   6,  7,  Gaia,  254  noU. 

of  the  funeral  pile,      212.  Gambling,  XIII,  42, 43, 

242,  386,  389.  Florenz,Profe8sor,XVI.      183,  306,  310,  349, 
and   Water,   X,  Footless  Maid  (Dawn),      380,  381. 

437.  469.  cheating  at,  XIII, 

Fire-drill,     191,    206,  Forefathers,  229.  310. 

250  notes.  Fort •demoli8her(Indra),  Gambling-board,    242, 

Fire-priest,    180,   328      412.  283. 

notes,  Fortuna,  22  note.  Gandarii,  225  note. 

Fires,     various,    113,  Fortune,  22,  79,  95.       Gandh&ra,  225  note. 

114.    *  evil,  883.  GandhAris,  225. 

Firmament  (personifi-  Fortunes,  one  hundred  Gaudharva,      41 — 43, 

ed),  55,  378.  and  one,  383.  134,  181,  182,  184, 

First,  the  (of  the  New  Four  castes,  160  note.        362. 

Year),  93.  divisions  of  speech,  Gandharvas,   43,  118, 

First  Ashtaka,  93-95.      470.  176, 180-182, 184, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


jm 


tttbtA  OF  KAinss-,  etc. 


310,  581,  40«,  411, 

4U,  425,  454. 
—  King  of  the,  4^5, 
Garbe,   Dr.  R.,   XIV, 

XVIT. 
Garbh&db&n^  229. 
G&rhapatya       (Agni), 

242,  311,  358>  421> 

460,  458. 
Gaanitm&n,137, 160, 470. 
Gatherer,  117, 
Gathering,  119,  333. 
Gauffres,  424  note, 
Gau^,  48  note, 
Gavishthira,  171. 
Gaya,  18,  134  note, 
G^yati-i,  XVII,    7,  83, 

178,  271,  418,  419, 

422,  464,  465. 
Geldner,    Prof.,    XVI, 

241,  263,  322. 
General  breath,  57. 
General  Gods,  319.  See 

Viave  Devas. 
Genesis,  132,  259. 
Genii  of  no  en,  386  note. 
Genius  loci,  51  note, 
Gbarma,  129,144,145, 

414,  453,  465. 
Ghora,  158. 
Ghrita(m),38,97no<<f«. 
Girdle,    sacred,    319, 

320. 
Gladness  (personi6ed), 

111,279. 
Glory       (personified), 

111,  279, 
Gn^s,   111.    See  Con- 
sorts of  the  Gods. 


Goat,  149,  150. 

—  sacrificial,  149, 
150,  442—448. 

God,  the  Supreme,  42 

n^te. 
— -  the  Unknown, 

131  note. 
Godanam,  57,282,343, 

357. 
Goddesses,  43,  53,  99, 

111,  193,  207,    257, 

273,  291,  349,  364. 

Rivers,  382. 

Gods,  passim, 

—  Father  of,  95  note, 

—  Mother  of,  95  note. 

—  Consorts  of,  349. 
See  Consorts  of  Gods. 

—  Artificer  of,  47. 

—  physicians  of,  351. 
— made  immortal  by 

Agni,  42,116,  145, 
149. 

—  ...  by  Savitar,  42. 

—  ...  by    Soma,    42, 
116,  145. 

—  ...  by  religious  de- 
votion, 145. 

—  priests    called,    83, 
93,  308. 

Gold,  39,  40,  79,  188, 
234,  235,  282,  314, 
835,  444,  446,  447. 

—  ornaments,  39,  79 
noUy  215,  335. 

Good  works,  reward  of, 

56,  98. 
Gopatha-Brahmana, 
III,  XX. 


Gosfaedha,  22. 

Gotama,  146, 171, 213, 
352. 

Grace,  divine,  31,  90, 
31 8»  337,  339. 

Graces,  Favouring,  18i« 

Gi&h!  (a  she-fiend),  51, 
53,95,306,307,389. 

Grass,  Sacred,  206, 224, 
377. 

Gratssmann,  Prof.,  7,  58, 
107,  135,  190,  191, 
345,  393,  459,  460, 
462,  466. 

Great  Bear,  352  note, 

Greeks,  424. 

Grill,  Dr.,  XVI,  2,  21, 
28,  29,  38,  39,  42, 
44,  50,  51,  57—59, 
64,  65,  67,  68,  71  — 
73,  78—80,  82,  89, 
90,  99,  102—104, 
119,  126,  136,  139, 
141,  U2,  144,  147, 
154,  156,  158,  169, 
161,  163,  179,  180, 
184,  194,  196,  199, 
210,  217,  220,  226, 
248,  255,  266,  258, 
264,  268,  276,  278, 
280,  283,  285,  287, 
290,  295,  298,  299, 
301,  303,306—308, 
311,317,318,321-^ 
324,  327,  333,  343, 
344,  347,  350,  351, 
354,  358,  360,  383, 
437,  438. 

Grishma,  461. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OF  NAM98;   BTa  501 

Grohmann,  Dr.,  30,  92,  Heaven,  life  in,  149,     Herd,  the  (Pii8han),91. 

241.  311,  313.  Herdsman,  the  (Agni), 

Groper,  (a  fiend),  406.  taxation  in,  124.       287. 

Guardian    (a   Geuiue), highest,  149,  444  (the  Sun),  467. 

3S6.  noU,  Herodotus,  226. 

Guerdon  to  priests,  277.  Heaven  and  £arth  (per-  Herpes,  225. 

See  Dakshi^l  sonified),    36,    54—  Herrick,  20. 

Guests,  hospitality  to,       56,  59,  60,  69,  85,  Heti  (a  class  of  Gods), 

448-463.  105,  129,   130,  132,       120. 

Guggulu  (bdellium),  79     163,  167,   188,  189,  Highest,  That,  41. 

note.  191,  201,  202,  207,  Hillebrandt,  Prof.,  73. 

Gnggum  (an  Apsaras),       216,  226,  228,  246,  Himalaya,  142  note. 

181.  254,266,274,   277,  Himas     (winters),    96 

GuugA,  229.  279,  297,  300,  327,      note. 

328,  382,   386,  389,  Hiranyagarbha,  132. 
Hair,  oharm  tostreng-      402,  415,  440,  442  Holy  Men,  414. 

then,  261,  321.  note,  464.  Homa(8),  414,  419. 

Half-years,  94.  separation  of,  1 80,  Home,  Lord  of  the,  284. 

Handless  (fiends),  281.       268,  417.  Lady  of  the,  435. 

Hiiudsjlayingonof,  148,  Heavenly   Hound,  the, Queen  of  the,  X, 

Harirud,  252  note.  28S.  98. 

Hariiala,  27  noU.  Heavens,   three,    159,  Homer,  45,  110,  173. 

Harvest-home,  119.  442—444.  Honey,  38,    39,    126, 

Hatchet  (sacrificial).       Heifer,  the,  420.  177,  353,  429,  430. 

341.  Hemnnta  (winter),  461.  Honey-bees,  429. 

Haug,  Prof.,  419,  459,  Hemispheres,  the  two,  Hcney-whip,  427,  428, 

470.  37.  430. 

Bavamal,  39  note.        Hemp,  46.  Hoof  armed  (demons), 

Hawk  (Agni),  271.         Henry,  M.  Victor,  327,      395. 
Heaven     (personified),       328,  330—332,  334,  Horace,  254. 

37,  56,  68,  91,  116,       335,  338,  343,   345,  Horse  (sacrificial),  487 

129,  172,  201,   205,       346,  349,  351,   864,       note. 

247,  250,   255,  262,       355,  357-  359,  365,  Hotar,      Hotar-priest, 

311,  330,   342,  430,       369,  873,  375-377,       IV,  14,  15,  67,  103, 

432,  467,  468.  380—382.  114,  165,  174,  207, 

Father,  248,  311.  Hephaestus  (the  Indian)     212,  284,  331,  361, 

felicity  in,    56,       47.  362,  376,  377,  458. 

177,  311—313,  329.  Herbert,  George,  320.    Hotars,  celestial,  192, 
Lord  of,  338.        Herbs,  387.  See  Plants.     207,  233. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


502 


IKDBX  OF  NAMBS,   ETCT. 


House  (deified),  435.      Ictbrici,  27  note. 
House,  charm  to  inaugii-  Icterus,  27  note, 

rate  a,  356  note,  434.  Idi,  233,  341. 
Household    fire,    185,  Ilk,  341. 

242,  311,  358,  420.    im,  94,  193,  207,  233, 
priest,  109.    See       341. 

Purohita.  Immolator,    207,  233, 

House-warmiug,  97,  98.     439  note,  443. 
Houses,  farewell  ad-        Immortality,  235. 

dress  to,  356.  Impeller,  the  (K&ma), 

Hundred  years  (dura-       119. 

tion  of  life),  35,  389.  Imprecation    (personi- 
Autumns  (ditto),       fied),  264,  265. 

14,  40,  57,  96,    98,  Incubi,  407  note. 

388,  403.  Incubones,  408  note. 
winters  ....  40,  Incubus,  407  note. 

68,  96.  Indians,  N.  American, 

^—  springs  ....  96.      267. 
. Powers,  Lord  of,  Indra,  3,  9  note,  10, 12, 


413. 

. fevers,  92. 

agonies  of  fever, 

241. 
— —  pains,  92. 
Hundred-and-one   (un- 
lucky number),  217. 
modes  of    death, 

36,  67,  96,  391. 
Hundred* autumned,  96 

note. 
Huudred-eyed,  96. 
Hundred-handed,  118. 
Hundred-lived,  96. 
Hundred-powered,  96. 
Husbandry  (introduced 

by  Pritht),  425. 
Hymns    Ancient   and 

Modem,  106. 
Hypnotizing,  148. 


13,  20,  23,  25,  31, 
33,  36  note,  40,  44, 
46,  47,  65,  59,  66, 
67,  69,  71,  79  noU, 
81—86,  88,  90,  95, 
96,  99,  100  noU, 
101—104,  106,110, 
112—115,  121,  124 
note,  127  note,  132 
note,  134—136, 145, 
158  note,  159—166, 
167  noU,  173,  174, 
182,  187  note,  189 
note,  190  note,  191 
note,  197— 201,210, 
212  note,  216,  217, 
221  -223,  226,  228 
—232,  234,  237, 
243,  245—247,  261, 
263,  265,  266,  269, 


270,  273,  275,  277, 
281,  282,  284  note, 
285,  289,  290,  292, 
293,  295,  297—299, 
301,  302,  313—315, 
317,  319,  320  note, 
321,  322,  324,  339, 
342,  346—348,  350, 
851,  355,  360,  361, 
364  note,  366,  367, 
369,371,372,374— 
377,381,382,384— 
387,  390,  397-403, 
412,  413,  415,  420, 
422,  428,  429,  431, 
432,  433  note,  439— 
442,  453,  454,  463, 
466,  470. 

Indra  <=  King,  83,  85. 

Indra  (and)  Agni  (as  a 
dual  deity),  40,  84, 
95,  193,  199,  302, 
319,  385,  387,  390, 
431. 

IndraSoma,  396. 

Indra-Varuna,  355, 

Indra's  horses,  46. 

Indra's  net,  413. 

Indnlnt,  32,  111  note, 
319,  349,  454. 

Indus,  136,  143,  148, 
175,  225,  246,  258, 
347  notes. 

Indus  (plural  of  indu, 
a  drop),  381. 

Infinity,  12,  39,  330. 

Initiation,  282,  367 
notes. 

Insanity,  306. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OF   NAMES,   ETC.  503 

Insanity,  punishment    Job,  38,41,  217,  336.    K^rttikeya,  454. 

of  sin,  306.  John,  St,  129,  239.        Karumas,  405. 

Intellect  (au  element),  Jubii,  213.  Kaskashas,  227. 

420.  Jumna,  142  not€.  Kasokas,  190. 

Intelligence  (personifi-  Jupiter,  247,  248  note»   Kasyapa,  18,  74,  146, 

ed),  304.                     Jumt,63.  170,171,   180,213," 

Mv^n,  426.                    Jwara,  30  note.  235,  352,  402,   417, 

Iron,   234,    235,    279, Paittik,  30  note.         420. 

280,  291,   324,  383,  Jyaishthaghni,  305.        Kausika-SAtra,  XIV,  4,' 

392.  Jyeshtk,  305  note.  6,  16, 17, 29,  30,  45, 
used  as  a  charm  Jyeshthagbnt,  305  note.      51,54,  58,   66,  69, 

in  England,  20.  Jyotis,  48  note.  70,  72,  76,  82,  100, 

Isaiah,  40  note.  Jyotishtoma,  451,  459,      104,  107,    114,  11*6, 

460.'  122,   183,  238,  258, 

JAGATt,  XVII,  15,  271,  277,  289,  328,  336, 

418,  419,  464,  465.  Ka,  131  note.  342,  345-347,359, 

Jamadagni,  73, 134,1 46,  K&bava,  92.  369,  371,  373—375, 

170,  171,  205,  213,  Kflbul  (river),  225  note.      378,  383,  884,   415. 

227,  235,  274,  321,  Kaegi,  Prof.,  154.  Kavi,  171. 

352.  Kakshiv4n,  171.  Kesaraprabandhi,  217. 

Jambha,  45,  332.  Kakubhas,  405.  Kesava,  XIV,  252. 

Jamuna,  142  noU.         K&lakanjas,  288.  Khadira,  87,   88,    195, 

Jangidrt,  45,  46.  Kali,  380.  391,  412. 

Japan,  oath  of  Emperor  Kalm^shagrfva,  122.      Khaimakh4,  153. 

of,  228.  Ealm&shapada,       398  Khalajas,  406. 

Jatavedas,  9, 1 2,  1 3, 57,      note.  Khanvakb^,  153. 

68,  81,  82,  94,  103,  Kalydni,  303,  304.  Khorasmians,  225  note. 

116,  130,  152,164,  KAma,   70,    113,   119,  Kimidin(s)  9,  10,  33, 

174,  185,  186,   200,       120,  125,264,430—      62,  160,    170,    395, 

205,  234,  236—238,       434.  396,  399,  407. 

285,  313,   324,  343,  Kandahar,  226  note.       Kimldinis,  62,  63. 

364,  370,  371,  379,  Kankaparvan,  333.         King,  the  (Varuua),  1 3, 

S80,3S3,  386,  389,  Kanva,  61,    73,    158,       85,  154,   219,    230, 

392,  393,  395,  398,       171,  180,  227,  274,       255,  293,  431. 

439,  453.  335.  (Soma),  57,  lU, 

Jaundice,  26,  27,  141,  Kanvas,  64.  193,  212,  224,   282, 

456.  Kapota,  259.  302,  425. 

Jealousy,  254,  347.        Karait,  208.  (Yama),  309,  313. 

Jivala,  194.  Karsavpha,  91.  (Agni)*  392^  458. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


504 


IKDEX  OF  NAMES,   STC. 


King,  33,  34,  430.  Eurtra,  241  note, 
eleotion  of  a,  84.   Kurdru,  71. 

—  consecration  of  a,  Kusa   grass,   49,    206 
12,  115,  340,37L  notes. 

benediction  on  a,  Kushtha,     VIII,     70, 

139,  162,  163,  292,       193—195,224,  297, 
293,298.  301. 

—  restoration  of  a,  Kusiilas,  405. 
83,  84.  Kutsa,  171,  175. 

King's  evil,  363  note.    Euvera,    Kubera,    36 
Kings,  the  two.  note. 

Kings  »  £shatriya8,25l, 

266.  Ladle,  94,  213. 

Kiiitas,  208  note.  Lflkshi,  195,  196. 

Ktrkgrim,  239  note.       Lakshm!,  22,  3S3 noto«. 


Kirrhadae,  208  note. 
Kites,  893. 
Kneipp,  Pastor^  295. 
Koka,  403. 
Kophen,  225  note. 


Lal&mi,  22. 

Lang,  A.,  46,  66,  130, 

194. 
Lassen,  Prof.,  136,  225. 
Law,  42,  54,  132,  308, 


Kravyftd(Agni),386»o<«.     330. 

Kfisbnadram,  454.  —  Queen  of,  830. 

Krittik&s,  453.  Law -observers,  29,  30. 

K8hatriya(s),  187,  160,  Lazarus,  Messrs.  E.  J. 
162,  212,    214,  265,       &  Co.,  XVIIL 
286,  378,  398,  400.    Lead  (used  as  a  charm), 

Kshetrapati,  51  note.         20,  21. 

Kshetriya,  50,  52,  89,  Leopard,  140. 

157  notes.  Leprosy,  27—29,  63. 

Kubera,  Euvera,  426.    Licker  (a  fiend),  22. 

Kubhfl,  136,  246  notes.  Licorice,  39. 

Kuhii,  229  note^  848.      Life,  duration  of.     See 


Kukshilas,  405. 
Kukundbas,  405. 
Kukurabbas,  405. 
Kum&ra,  453. 
Kum&rila,  128  note. 
KumbbamusbkaSy  406. 
Kuntipa,  VIII. 


Hundred  years. 

—  Lord  of,  135,  177, 
250,  401,  436  note. 

—  Tree  of,  188  note. 

—  Water  of,  235,  312 
notes.    See  Amrit. 

Light,    Lords  of   (the 


Asvins),    246,    383, 

427,  429. 
Lightning   (a   form  of 

Agiii),   30,    31,    37, 

246  notes. 
(cause    of    head- 
ache), 15  note,  16. 

prayer  to,  15, 16. 

Lion,   140,    180,   220, 

223,  401,  410. 
Livingstone,  Dr.,  300. 
Logos,  the,    129,  359 

notes. 
Lokap^las,  36  note. 
Lord    Supreme,     436, 

453. 
Lore,  Holy,  2,  353,  357. 
Lotus,  177   note,   229, 

303. 
Love,  the  God  of,  119, 

430.  See  K&ma. 
Lucina,  229  note. 
Ludwig,  Prof.,  VII,  XV, 

et  passim. 
Lunar  Mansions,  459. 

460,  464. 

MacDonald,  Dr.  G.,  15. 

Macdonell,  Prof.,  XVL 

Mace  (sacrificial),  341. 

Madana,  119  note. 

Mad&vatt,  253. 

Maddener,  the,  119  note. 

Madugha,  39,  70  notes. 

Magadhas,  225,  226 
note. 

Maghavan  (Indra),  48, 
79.  81,  110,  277, 
342,  350,  372,  399. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OF  NAMBB,    ETC.  505 

Maghavin  (rich  pa-         Manyu,  173, 174,  374,  Might  of  Gods,  423. 

troii),  109  note.  433.  Military  claas,  109.  See 

Mngundt,  59.  Marlowe,  461.  Kshatriya. 

Mahabh^rata,  217,         Marriage  (Upholder  of),  Milton,  51,   159,    307, 

218,  398,  413,  414.        335  note.  320,  404. 

Mahadeo,  454.  Mars,  81.  Mind,  420. 

Mahadeva.  454.  Maruts,    1,  2.  28,  31, Agitator  of  the, 

Mahavri8»«w,  224,  225.      41,56,69,    81—83,       119  no<^. 

Mihi,  193,   207,    233,       85,97,108,110,146, Lord  of  the,  377. 

341.  151—153,  168,  171,  Mischief  (personified), 

Mahidhara,  41,  48,  82,      173,  187,   192,  223,       366. 

4*4.  228,  231,  246,    256,  Misery  (personified),  259. 

Maina,  101  note,  257,  261,    270,  276,  Misfortune,  22,  36,  52, 

Makakas,  405.  295,  296,  302,314,       88,180,19^199,383. 

Male,     the    Primeval,       318,  389,  342,   849,  Misi-a,  Pandit  Mathuri 

421  nou.  355,  366,    385,  399,       Prasila,  268. 

Malignities(per8onified),     427,  428,   439,  453,  Mithra,  5. 

317.  459.  Mitra,  5,    12,    15,   22, 

Malignity  (personified),  Matali,  417.  24,31,47,    49,    67, 

22,  198,  314,  389.      M&tarisvan,    191  note,       68,  85,  88,  90,  104, 
Malirnlucha,  403.  203,  212,  385,  470.        105,  114,    115,  120, 

Man  (personified),  829  M&tarisvans,  191.  162,  170,  171,  206, 

note.  Match-maker,  212, 278.      212,  246,  248,  292* 
father    of  man-  Matmatas,  406.  294,  302,  314,  342 

kind,  343  note.  Ukyi,  423.  437,  440,   454,  455, 
a  sacrificial   ani-  Mead,  Meath,  6,  171.         469,  470. 

mal,  75,  94  notes.        Medh&tithi,  6.  Mitra- Varana,  170,  220, 

Man-beholder,  the,  393.  Meeting,  422.  228,  229,  262,  298 

Man-seer,  the,  393.         Men,  deified,  170,  304       469. 
MUnavas,  Code  of  the,       notes.  Mitras,  three,  24S. 

137.  Merchant  (Tndra),  102.  Mixt  oblation,  19,  65. 

Mandragora,  66  note.     — —  travelling,  102.      Moksha,  IV. 

Mandrake,  45,  66  notes. life  of  a,  XI-XIII.  Moly,  45,  66  notes. 

Manes,    10,    56,   121,  prayer  of  a,  102,  Monier- Williams,     Sir 

846.  See  Fathers.  104.  M.,  XVI. 

Manmatha,  119wo««.      Merits,    56,  98,    124,  Moiikey(s),  92,  182. 
MannuB,  343  noU.  313,  464.  Month,  the  thirteenth, 

Manu,  36,  92, 137, 343,  Metres  (mystic  powers      197,  198  notes,  469, 

370,424.  of),  lie  note.  462. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


506  INDEX   OF   NAMES,    ETC. 

Months,  94,  96,  178.  340,  370,  383,  387,  Night  (personified^  3, 

Moon,  5,    86,   62,   70,       390,  391,  398,    414,       94,  188,    195,  233, 

128,   185,  228,  335,       421,  433,  434,  445.        246,  250,  418,  432. 

256,  290,   292,  316,  Mujavans,  224,  225. of  New  Mood,357. 

390,  415,  425,  463,  Mdla,  50  note.  of  Full  Moon,  377. 

466.  Miilabarhani,  50,  305     and  Morning,  206, 

~  New,  20,  65,  229,      notes.  462. 

347,  367—369,  440  Mulalin,  177  note.  NSlagala841»,  253. 

note.  Mulesof tbeGod8,415.    Nilimpas,  120. 

Full,    65,    348,  Mttller,  Prof.  Max,  VI,  Nine  feet,  469. 

369,  367,  368.  VII,  1,  3,  9,  14,  24,  Nine  vital  airs,  234. 

Waning,  348  no<«.      86,   81,     128,    131,  Ninety  water-floods,  401. 

Morning,  418,  452.             133,  136,    149,  154,  Ninety-nine  ditto,  401. 

Mornings,    105,     370.       188,  248,  252,  254,  noU. 

See  Dawns.                     262,  279,  398,  422.  Nirala,  253. 

Mosquito,  353.                Mungoose,    209,    224,  Nirriti,  36,  52,  53,  64, 

Mother    of  the  Gods,       323,411.  5«,  180,    199,   259, 

115  note.                     Munja  grass,  4.  279,  358,  360,  397, 

—  of  the  world,  115  MAradevas,  392  note.  445. 

note.  Nirukta,    1,   2,   9,  58 

(earth)  460.  Nadaniman,  227.  notes. 

Mothers,  the  (Waters),  Nadir,  120,  122,    144,  Nitatnt,  321. 

6.  159,  186,  203  notes.  Nivids,  231. 

Mountains  =  clouds,        N4gas,  426.  Noon,  452. 

228.  Nagnaka,  407,  Norman,  H.,  228. 

Mrityu,  139,  177,  178,  Nala(poemof),  3S0note.  Norns,  229  note. 

228,  235,  240,  320,  Naladi,  181.  Nrishad,  158. 

360,  387,  424,  469.     Narachi,  242.  Nyagrodha,  181, 195. 

Mroka,  63,  242,  243.      N&rada,  219. 

Mudgala,  171.  Narasansa,  232.  Oblation,  (persoui Bed), 

Muir,  Dr.  J.,  VII,  XV,  N&rshada,  158.  336  note. 

11,  13,  82j  83,  110,  Nature,  41,  423,  431,  Ocean,     the    celestial, 

119,125,    126,128,       Ud  notes.  117,132,368. 

133,146,149,    154,  Powers  of,    1,11  Oceans,  two   (air  and 

160,  163,  169,  176,       notes.  water),  153,  445. 

182,  200,  202,  204,  Netof  lndra,413,414.    Odana,  176—178,  445, 

205,  214,  217,  220,  New  Year,  93,  94.         Odin,  48. 

226,  239—241,  260,  New  Zealanders,  Gene-  Om,  235,  468  notes. 

26*,  310,  311,  333,      sis  of  the,  254.  Omen,  314. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


IKDEX   OP  NAlfIS,   BTC. 


507 


Omnific,  the,  76,  312. 
Omniscient,  the,  30-i. 
Onager,  474. 
One,  the,  460,  470. 

Spirit,  42U 

Supreme  Spirit, 

470. 

law,  421. 

Cow,    420,    421, 

444. 
One  and  a  hundred,  92, 

217,  383,    391.  See 

Hundred  and  one. 
One  day  sacrifice,  303 

note, 
Ouefooted,  469. 
One-wheeled    chariot 

(the  Sun),  459. 
Ophthalmia,  458. 
Ordainer,  the,    78,  95, 

335,  337,  454. 
Ordeal  by  fire,  65  note. 
Order,  42,  54  note,  60, 

122,  132,  177,  206, 

212,  256,  312,  330, 

352,393,   418,420, 

460,  462,  469. 

Son  of,  42,  312. 

Orion,  288  note. 
Other  People  (spirits), 

426,  454. 
Ouranos,  37,  254  note. 
Owl,  260,  261,  398,399. 
Owlet,  399. 
Ox- Caldron,  145,146. 

PaippalIda,  29  note. 
Pallia,  403. 
Fal&sa,  86  note. 


Palijaka,  403.  Peahens,  2  note  354. 

Pafichaudana,443— 448.  Pearl,  142,  liZ  note. 
Pandit,  Shankar  Pandu-  Perkdnas,  3  note. 

rang,  XIV,  29.  Peterson,  Prof.,  133. 

Panis,  164.  Philter,  319. 

Panjab,  136,  246,  251,  Phthisis,  53.    See   Con- 

420  notes.  sumption. 

Pankti,  XVII,  4,  469.    Physicians  of  the  Gods, 
Panther,  265.  361. 

Paramatma,  172  note,    of  Death,  251. 

Paramesthin,  401,  421  Piercers,  120. 

note,  463.  Pila,  181. 

Parasurainn,  205  note,    Pindar,  100. 
Parasvau,  474.  Pinga,  406,  407. 

Parents,  the   (Heaven  Pippal,     Peepal,     87, 

and  Earth),  207.  note.     See  Asvattha. 
the     Universal  Pi8flcha(8)  20,  40,  61, 

(ditto),  254  note.  179,  180,  182,  236— 

Parjanya,  3,  4,  107,115,      238,  262,  389. 

128,  145,  150—152,  Pis4chi,  20  note. 

246,  265,  288,  296,  PisAchl,  20,  58  note. 

345,  346,  411,  466.    Pis&chni,  20  note. 
Parkin  cakes,  424  note.  Pischel,     Prof.,    XVI, 
Pania,  86,  87,  196.  105,  257. 

Parthians,  225  note.       Planets,  463. 


Parushahva,  412. 
Parushnt,  136,  251. 
Passion     (personified). 

See  Manyu. 
Past  and  Future,  60. 
Pasupati,  75. 
PaU,  66,  108,  158. 
P4t41a,  426  note. 
Patha,  66,  108  note. 


Plante,  36,  37,  44,  53, 

357,  387,  390,  408— 

411,  432. 
King  of  (Soma), 

53,  134,   228,   293, 

297,  387,  410. 

(Indra),   159. 

(Agni)    1,    152, 

249. 


Pavamana,    127,    145, Celestial,    117, 

179,  197,  255,  454.  194,'  268  note,  408, 

Pavana,  36  note.  411. 

Pavinasa,  407.  • magical,  diificult 

Piyu,  392  noU,  to  obtain,  210  note. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


508  INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 

Plato,  202,  433.  Pramandint,  lei.  Prianiparnt,  64. 

Plaxa,  195.  Pramiliu,  403.  Prltlji,  424  note,  425. 

Pleasautneas  (personi-  Piwia,  421.  Prithivi,  3,  191,  202, 

fied),  279.  Pranava,  46S.  336. 

Pleiades,  the,  463.  PrastotHr,  452  Prithu,  424. 

Plenty,    Lord  of,    237,  Pratihartar,  452.  Propitiatory    hymns, 

346.  Pravargya,  146  note.  205  note. 

cow  of,  431.  Praylljas,  35.  Prosperity  (personified), 

Pliny,  27,  143.  Prayer,    24,    78,    186,       95. 

Plough,  106,  107,  261^       327,  426,  434,  448.    Protection,  303. 

418.  Lord  of,    11,  33,  Protectress   (a   plant), 

Ploughing,     96,    106,      37,66,77,232,351,       303. 

107,  301  note.  434.  Psalms,  38,  153. 

Plough  Monday,  107. =      'reversM  Pura-ushnih,  7. 

Pioughers(Marut8)261.     thunder,'  320.  Purohita,  11,  109,  110, 

Plough-money,    107       Prayers,  the Vedao^  IV.      357. 

note.  Prent,  293, 294.  Purifier  (Agni),  310. 

Plougher  and  ox=  Pressing-stone  (deified ),PurumJ!ha,  171. 

priest  and  caldron,  146.     224,  246.  P^ius,  114  note. 

Points,     intermediate,  PridA.ku,  32,  121.  Purusha,  41,  329,  401, 

234.  Priest,  Household,  109.      417,  421. 

Poison,  of  snakes,  208,       See  Purohita.  Purusha-SAkta,  41,  329 

209,  250,  373.  and  President,  110.     note. 

on  arrows,  137.     Priests,  seven,  165.         P^ishan,  V,  12,  14,  15, 

for  human  enemies, called  Gods,   83,       31,  68,  91,  101,  104, 

426.  93, 251,  308  note.  106,  112,  172,   234r, 

Porcupine,  224.  hostile,  200,  360,      236,  246,   282,  284, 

Prahr\da,  423.  398  note.  307,  332,  342,  345. 

Praishas,  231.  Pneatly  fee.  See  Dak-  Pustules,290,363-365. 

Praj\pati,42,76,95,103,     shirA.  Piita'lru,  391. 

119,  128,  131,  135,  Primal  Being,  459.  Putirajju,  412. 
145,  146,  177,  230,  Primal  Cause  of  being,  Pdtudru,  391. 
281,    250,  282,  283,       464.  Python,  48  noU. 

312,  833,  336,  337,  Primeval  male,  421.      Pythons  (clouds),  151 
339,  368,  387,  401,  Prime  Cause,  41.  note- 

417,  421,  428,  430,  Princely  Power,  60. 

436,450,465,469.    Prifni,  41,   168,   223,  Quarterly  Review,25S. 
Prajllpatis,  40.  411.  Quarters  of  the  sky. 

Prakyiti,  459.  Prisnib&hu,  414.  234,  448.  SeeEegioos. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


mDBi  of  i^AMd,  mOi  IK)9 

Queen,  the  (Y&k),  129>  Riroijapa^  170  not^     Rigbt,  446,  469. 

171.  Rawl,  132.  Rigveda  IV,  VIII,   1, 

of  the  aeld,  6(k     Kit,  849.  2,  6—9,  li,  18,  24— 

of  rivers,  258.        Rathat]tara(m),    422,  28,30,31,   33,    34, 

of  the  home,  98.       423,  466.  37,  41,  42—44,  46, 

of  Gods,  34a         R^ti,  90*  47,  51,  53,   55,  56, 

of  men,  348.  Rats,  King  of  the,  08  62,  64,   65,  69—71, 

Quick-roller  (fiend),407.     note.  73—75,  78,  82,  83, 

Raven,  858.  85,  90,   92—96,  99^ 

Racing.   See   Chariot-  B4vi,  251  noU.  102,  103-108,  110, 

racing.  Regions  of  the  sky,  111,114,115,  117, 

Rack  (Cramp),  30. four   15,  48,  M,  127,  129,  130—133, 

Radiant  (a  class  of  Gods)     116,  192.  137,  139,  142,   143, 

1-20.  five,  35,  84,  112,  145,  145—154,  158, 

Rain,  Lords  of  the,  454.     118.  160—162,  164,  166, 

Raiucloud.  SeeParja- six,  121, 144, 159,  170-178, 181, 185, 

nya.  460.  187,188—193,197, 

RainGod,  345.  ten  462.  198,  202,  207,  211, 

Rains,   the,   8,   30, Warders   or  Re-  213,  214,  217,  220, 

150—152,  158.  gents  of  the,  35,  36,  227,  229,  230,  232, 

Rainy  Season,  275.  185,  186,  202.  239,  248,  250,  256, 

Rajani,  27.  Regions  of  the  earth,15.  257,  259,  260,  262, 

RAjanya(8),  160,214     Releasers  (two   stars),  269,270-274,276, 

—216,     265.    See         50,  90,  305,  312.  280,  287,  289,  290, 

Kshatrija.  Render,  the  (Ficus  292, 293, 296—298, 

Rajas^a,  139  note.  Religiosa),  412  noU.  301,  803,  312,  315, 

Rajataiiflbhi,  426.  Resolve,  119.  321, 327—332,  335, 

R4ka,  229  note,  348.       Rcvatl,  453.  336,  339,  340,  342, 

Rslkshasa(s),  9,  45,143,  Rheumatism,    45,    91,  345—351,354,355, 

155,  262,   263,  278,       141,  268  notes,  458.  361-366,  868,  369, 

392— 396, 398-400,  Ribhu,  270  noU,  271,  871,  372,  374,  376, 

454.  429  note.  3«0,  382,  384,  388, 

RUshasi,  398.  Ribhus,  87,  270  notes,  389,  892—394,  395, 

Rakshoba  (Agni),  392       304,  428,  429.  396,  400,  401,  403, 

noU.  Rich,  443  note.  412,  420,  421,  422, 

Ram,  241.  Kichas,  231,   448,  465  424,  427,  429,  433, 

(Indra)  124.  notes,  439—443,  445,  458 

sacrifice  of  a,  124.  Riches,  God  of,  36  note.  —464,  466-470. 

R4ma,  170,  205  notes.       See  Kubera.  Rik,  III,  IV,  V,  VI. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


510  IKDBX  OP  NAMES,   ETa 

Rik,  Samhita,  V.  168,  169,  171,  172,  Sacri6oial  hall,  75  note, 

Rikshagriva,  403.  197,  228,   255,  262,       242. 

Ri8hi(8),    18,   48,  56,      268,  276,  277,  294, horse,   187,  442 

77,  164,    170,    172,       324,  337,   346,  364,       note. 

185,  205,   251,  267,       373,  401,  454.  implemente  dei6- 

304,  319,  320,   370,  =  Agni,  372.  ed,  341. 

373,  401,  417—420,  Rudras,  34,  171,    193, victim  deified,  75, 

424,  429,  468.                282,  285,  414.                76,  150, 442. 
seven,   146,  170,  Rue,  159.  animals,  75. 

213,  352,  371.  fire,  48,   76,  78, 

celestial,  219.        SachJ,  358  note.  83,  85,  91,  247,  460. 

akin  to  the  Gods,  Sachipati,  853  not^         —  cord,  430. 

205.  Sacred  Girdle,  319.        grass,    410.    See 

Rishyapadl,  22.  Grass,  206,   377,       Grass,  sacred. 

Rita,  42,  132.  449.  post,  165, 207, 342. 

Rival  worshippers,  185, Knowledge,  2, 337, waters,  257. 

186,  200,  360.                353,  357.  Sadinvas,  68,  59,  61, 
Rivers,  99,  100,  258. Syllable,  235.  143. 

five,  246;  seven,  Sacrifice  (peraonified),  Sadas,  449. 

136,  246,  382.                265,  276.  S&dhyas,  329,  867,  414, 
(Goddesses), of  an  animal,  75,      469,  470. 

382.  76.  Regent  of  the,  421, 

River-God,    345   note. of  a  bull,  345.  470. 

See  Sarasvjln.  of  a  cow,  329.        Saivala,  1J^2,  251  notes. 

River- Goddess.  See  Sa of  a  dog,  329.        Sakadh^ma,  316  note. 

rasvatt.  of  a  goat,    149,  SakadhAmajas,  406. 

Robin   Goodfellow,  V,       150.  Sakambhara,  224. 

62,  l\8  notes.  of  a  ram,  124.        Sakra,  127,  144,   189, 

Rodast  (Consort  of  Ru faults  in   perfor-       372,  399,  413,  439. 

dra),  349.  mauce  of,  308,  379.  Salt,  364. 

Rodha,  188  note.  goes  to   heaven,  Saluda,  406. 

Roebuck,  89.  312,  313.  S«lliika,  177. 

Romans,  27,  424.  =    thunderbolt,  Sam&  (half-year),    40, 

Roman,  66  note.                 71,  320,  321.  48  notes. 

Roth,  von,   VI,   XIII, One-day,  303  note.  Sjlma,  28,  29. 

XV,  13,  48, 118, 164,  Twelve-day,  451.  Sama,  S&man,  Samans, 

205,  220,  226.  Sacrificial  bull,   438—       66,  231,  416,    419, 

Rudra,  21,  51,  69,  67,       442.  422,  443  note,  449, 

68,75, 104, 1 15, 162, goat,  442—448.         465. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX   OP  NAMES,   ETC. 


511 


S^man  (Veda),  III,  VI. 
S&ma-BiDgers,  56. 
S^maveda,    7,   8,   46, 

334,  384. 
Sami,  88  note,  250,  261 
Samoans,  194. 
Sam&ha,  119  note. 
Saphaka,  177. 
Saptavadhri^   170  note, 

171. 
Sara,  3  note. 
Sarabha,  444. 
Sarad,  461. 
SaramU,  441. 
Sllraoga,  227. 
SarasvsLn,  345,  440. 
Sarasvati  (River),  136, 
246  notes. 

(Goddess)   112, 

170,  193,   199,  3803, 
207,  226,  229,  230, 
233,  246,   261,  267, 
294,  297,  300,   332, 
341,  345,  354,  359. 
Sarasvatis,  three,  300. 
Sar!,  S&rika,  101. 
Sarku,  403, 
Sarpa,  63. 

Sarva,   59,   169,   296, 
*  388,414,415. 
Sarvavid,  304. 
S^,  25. 
Sat^ulka,  39,  40. 
Satapatha-Bralxmana, 

40,  146,  176. 
Sattra,  35,  note. 
Sattrasadas,  35  note, 
ISattrasadja,  451. 
Satyavan,  170. 


Satyri,  187  note.  Serpents,  120,  121,  250, 

Sautrslmani,  83.  414,  426. 

Savitar,  22,  81,  33,  37,  Sesamum,  61. 

42,  65,  68,   80,    90,  Sevalla,  Sevala,  100  no<«. 
.     91,  96,  97,  103, 112,  Seven    (an     indefinite 

114,  140,    166,  167,      number),  341. 

193,  231,   232,  245,  Adityas,  420. 

267,  266,  274,  277,  cows,  459. 

278,  282,  289,  299,  consecrations,  419. 

801,334—336,338,  divisions  of   the 

839,  342,  362,   386,       year,  459. 

894,  400,   401,  425,  Homas,  419. 

431,  440,  452,    455,  Hotars,  165. 

465.  logs,  419. 

S^yaka,  407.  Maruts,  459. 

S&yana,  XIV,  8,  9,  27,  metres,  419,  460, 

48,  58,   67,  78,   79,       465. 

82,   «09,    136,  149,  mouths  of   Agni, 

161,  162,   179,  189,       185. 

190—192,  211,  213, names,  459. 

217,229,  330,  336,  pathways,  188. 

362,  369,  392—395, priests,  458,  459. 

398,  441,  459—462,  Rishis,  146,  213, 

464—470.  266,352,    371,419, 

Scandinavian  mytho-  426. 

logy,  41,  443  notes.     Rivers,  136,  246, 

Scherraan,  Dr.  L.,  XVI.      279,  355,  3S2. 

Scorpion,  209  note,  354. sages,  419. 

Scrofula,  365.  —   sisters    (rivers). 

Sea,  57,  125,  321,  325.      459. 

(personified),  292.  — -  solar   rays,    379, 

of  air,  191,  211.         459. 

Seasons,    90,    94,    95,  —  steps,  205  note. 

234,  236,  278,  415.    streams  of  butter, 

*        fanciful  names  of,      41 9 ;  of  mead,  4 1 9. 

447,  448.  —  sweetnesses,  430. 

—  Lord  of  (Agni),94.  tame  animals,  94. 

Lords  of,  94.         threads,  460. 

Serabha,Serabhaka,62. wheels  459. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


512  umsx  OF  KAites,  8va 

Seven,  the  Rishis'        Siudhn,  99,  U3,    148,  Six  spokes,  461. 

Dumber,  420.  175,  268,  347.  — — '  Yama's  numboTi 

the  triple,  I,  2.     Siudhudvipa,  7.  420. 

Sevenfold  breath,  56.     Single  Bishi,  420.  Six-day  time,  418. 

Seveu^wheeled  car,  459..  — —  season  (interoala-  Sixth  day,  417. 
Sevridha,Sevridhaka,62.    ry  mouth),  420,  421.  Skanda,  453. 
Shadvinsa-Br&bmapa,     Spirit,  424,  421.    Sky  (personified),  .%7, 

35.  Siuiv^ll,  65,    229,  250,       453.  See  Heaven. 

Shaker,the(Indra),412.      347,  348,  440.  Slaughterer,  435,  440. 

Shakespear,  63.  Sinless,  54,  330,  342.     Slaves,  superstition 

Shankar  Pandurang       Sins     committed     by       among  the,  384  note. 

Pandit,  XIV,  29.  others,    punishment  Sleep,  136,  269. 

Shaving  (sign  of  mourn-     for,  53.  Sleep-charm,  135. 

iug),  390.  Sipala,  S!p&l&,  251.         Sleepless,  386. 

Shell,  amulet  of,  U2--  Sipavituukas,  227.  Slumberless,  3S6. 

144.  Sipudru,  315.  Smashers,  the  (Maruts) 

Ship,  175,  194,  219.       Slra,  107.  81  rujte. 

*- — ofBhaga,  79.        Sire,  the  (Heaven),  460.  Snake  charmers,      209 
Sickness  sent  to  punish  Sirins,  288  note,  note. 

sin,  30,  148.                Sisirah,  275  note,  461.    Snakes,  various  names 
Siegerstein,  34  note.      Sisu,  Sissoo,  317.               of,  208,  209,  276. 
Sil&oht,  195,  196,  277  Sister  of  priest  a  altar,  skins  of,  used  as 

note,  300  note,  409       377.  charms,  32. 

note.  Sisters    (Heaven    and  — —  powder  of,  makes 

Silanjala,  253.  Earth),  191.  invisible,  32  note. 

Silver,  285.  (Waters),  6.  Sniffer  (a  fiend),  406. 

Simid4,  166.  Sita  (Furrow   personi-  Snouty  (a  fiend),  406. 

Simnel  cakes,  424  note,      fied),  107,  108.  Snowy  Hill(s),    194, 

Simrock,  Karl,  P6,  422.  Siva,  296  noU.  297. 

Sin,  54,  291,  308,  309.  Six  elements,  418.  M:ountain(s),  132, 

mental,  269.  expanses,     192,       142,194,257,297. 

—cause  of  cousump-      432.  Socrates,  202  note. 

tion,  408.                    —cold  months,  419.  Sogdians,  225  note, 
—  prayer  for  pardon  heavensand earths,  Solomon,  401  note, 

of,  273.  419.  Soma  (the   God),  1,  5, 

—prayer  for  freedom  —  hot  months,  419,       6,  8,  11,  24,  33,  34, 

from,  298,  30?,  809, regions,  121,  144,      36,  53,  57,  70,  78, 

311,  342,  346,  866,       159,  460.  ^3,  86,  91,    95,   99, 

371,  373,  279,  3S2.   seasons,  461 ,  108,  111,  113,  122, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


txDnt  09  KAioB,  Bra  513 

127,  ISO)   134,  145,  Southern  fire,  421,450.  Storm-Gods,      1,     23, 

172,  179,  1S6,    188,  Sovraus    (Death     and       171,  256.  See  Maruta. 

194,  197,  202,   212,       Destruction),  360.      Succubae,  199  note. 

213,  216,  217,  223,  Speech,  203,  327,  467,  Succubus,  407  noU. 

224,  228,  232,  2H5,       469,  470.  Sudhanvan,  270. 

237,  246—248,  266, God  o^    1,    171,  Sddra,  160,  161,  225. 

273,  274,  277,  278,       172,  431.  Sugar-cane,  38,  39. 

282,284,293,296 Goddess  of,   106,  Sukra,  274. 

299,  302,    328,  330,       112,  129,  203.  Summer,  275,  391. 

336,  344,346,    368,  Speckled     Cow,     the  Sun  (the  God),  5,    12, 

369,383,387,  396—      (cloud),  41.  26,  37,  41,  42,  48, 

400,425,   432,  449,  Spikenard,    ISl    note,      54,55,70,    72,    78, 

453,  455,  463.  301.  80,  104,  105,  112, 
Soma  (the  Moon),  256.  Spirit  (Father  of  Vak  122,  128—130,  132, 
identified  with  the      the  Word),  129.              137,  140,  160,    166, 

plant,  368.  Spotted  Hag,  22.  168,  183,   185,  187, 

—  (thejuice),pd«nm.  Sprenger,  Dr.,  238.  188,  191,  197,  22T, 
Somaoars,  shed  for,  Spring,  275,  391.  236,  272,  273,  304, 
449.                             Sraktja,  54,   400,  401       328,    334,  339,  344, 

Soma-cups,  priests  who      note.  358,  372,   440  note^ 

manage,  452.              Srimas,  4^5.  466,  462,  470. 

Soma-drinker,  the  (In-  Srifijayas,  218.  Sun «  Apollo  and  Odin, 

dra),  11,25,55,403.  Stallion,      the    (rainj  48,  129  notes. 

Soma,  the  plant,  identi*       cloud),  152.  Sun    and    Moon,    60, 

fied,  252,  253.             (Heaven)     465,  234,  336,  390. 

Soma,  the  heavenly,  42,      468.  (Sons  of  AdiU) 

190.                            St.  John's  Wort,  66.  390. 

—  rape  of,  271,  345.  Stamb^jas,  404.  Sun,  genii  who  regulate 
— —  sacrifice,  35,   76,  Stars,  250,  334.  the,  160. 

77,  419  notes.  regent  of,  291.       Suna,  107. 

Song  (deified),  353.        Sterility, charm  against,  Suu&m&,  404. 
Sorcerer,   10,    11,   59,       116.  Sunlight  (personified), 

155,  157,  158.  Stinginess  (personified),      418. 

Sorceress,  12,  23,   59,       22.  S^njit^,  111,  279. 

157,  251.  Stoma,  419  note*  Suparnih  (variously  ex- 

Soul,  the  Supreme,  172     Stone(thunderbolt),16,      plained),  464, 

f^oU.                                31,  3i*6,  399.  Supporter,  the,  104nofif, 

Soul-mass   cakes,    424 of   Victory^  34    Supreme  Bt;ing,   ilT, 

noU.  noU.  421, 

33 


Digitized  by 


GooglQ 


914  IKDIX   OP   NAMES,    BTa 

Supreme  First  Cause,  Svitra,  122.  Third    caste   or  class, 

41.                               Swan,  411.                          351  note. 
Supreme  Spirit,  463,     Sjavasva,  171.  heaven,  194,  297, 

470.                            Syllable,  the,  465,  468.      313,  442—444. 
Supreme  God,  42.         Syena,  454.                    — '-  light,  444. 
Supreme  Self,  Soul,  or  world,  309. 

Spirit,  IV.  Tabuva,  209.  Thirteen  creatures,  1 1 3. 

Sura  (the  Sun),  278.      Taduri,  153.  Thirteenth  month,  463. 

Suri   (iusti tutor    of  a  Taimata,  209,  216.         Thirty  realms,  262. 

sacrifice),    64,    109,  Taittiiiya-Bi4hmana,      Thousand-eyed  (Impre- 

340,  442  note.                239.                                 cation),  264. 
Sarya,  26,  36,  60,    62,  Takman,  30,    92,    352 (Indra),.160. 

68,111,   135,    160,       no^«.  See  Fever.         (Misery),  259. 

179,  183,  186—188,  Takshaka,  426.  (Varuna's  envoys), 

202,  203,    208,  214,  Talasa,  252,  253.  154. 

223,  228,   241,  250,  Tangalva,  407.  Bhava  and  Sarva, 

262,  266,  290,   295,  TanAnapAt,  206,  232.         169. 

300,  302,  304,  329,  T4rkshya,105  no<€  372.  Thread  of  life,  312. 

833,  339,  352,    368,  TarshUgha,  238.  of  sacrifice,  438. 

370,  379,   418,  434,  Tastuva,  209.  Three,  the,   418,    187, 

445,  462.  Tauvilika,  253.  470. 
wives  of  (Night  Tax  on   newcomers  to  — —  the  mighty,  416. 

and  Morning)  418.  heaven,     124,     3o9 daily    libations, 

SArya,   Lord  Supreme,       not^s.  146,  190  note^   270, 

241.                             Telchines,  408  nou.            271  note,  418,  428. 
Sary&,70,78,289,301,    Ten  decades  of  life,  86. distances,  285. 

440.  kinds  of  wood,       earths,  169,  260, 

Si^ryavarchas,  425.  amulet  of,  61  note.        397,  461. 

Susruta,  27, 30,64 noe^. regions  of  space, fire-receptacles, 

SutrHman,  83  note.  462.  187. 

Sutudri,  136  note.  Ten-arrowed,  412. Goddesses,    193, 

Svadh&,  424.  Ten-headed,  136.  207,  233. 

Svaja,  122,  276  noU.     Ten-month  child,  116, heavens,  159,  285, 

Sv4h&,   60,   290,   298,       231.  286,461. 

369,  376.  Teufelsbubl8chaft,408 lights,  443. 

Svarij,  svarU,  417.  note.  logs,  466, 

i^varga,    75,    76,   176,  Teutonic     mythology,^ lunar  years,  275. 

177,  312,   445,  446,       422.  Mitras,  248. 

4i9,  450,  454.  Theophrastus,  45. pathways,  144« 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  OP   NAIOS,   BTO. 


515 


Three  seasons,  459.        Trayam&n^,  303.  Twelve-day     sacrifice, 

steps,  41.  Treasure(s),  fiOrd  of,  451. 

steps  of  Vishnu,        2  note,  226.  Twelve-spoked  year,  178, 

339,  340.                     Tree,  the  Celestial,  133.     462. 
strides  of  the  Sun,  of  Life,  133  note.  Twin  calves,   birth  of, 

55  note.                       Trees,  40,  249,  414.  122. 
Titles,   Lord   of  Holy,  54  7iote.        Twins,  birth   of,   122, 

(Agni),  285.  Triads,  419.  123  notes. 

Vedas,  470.  Tribes,   the   Five,  42,  Two-footed,  469. 

-^ words,  347.  114.  See  Five  Races.  Tyr,  248  note. 

worlds,  55   noie^  ——Sovran  of  the,  111. 

187,  347.  Trikadrukas,  48  note.     Udgatab,  IV.  245  note, 

Threefold  heaven  and  Trikiita,  142  note.  452. 

earth.  418  note.  Triple  air,  461.  Udvjlchana,  201. 

—^  home  of  Agni,  416.  Triple-peaked  mountain,  Ugraj  it,  310. 
Three-naved,  459.  142.  Ugrampasj&,  310. 

Three-peaked  mountain,  Triple  seven,  the,  1,  2,  Ulysses,  45  note. 

142.                                 32.                               Unborn,  the,  445,  460. 
Three-threaded  amulet,  Triplets,  419  note,  465. spirit,  445  note. 

234.  Trishttgha,  238  note.     Universal  Gods,  13,  57, 

Thunder,  God  of,  3.       Trishtup,  XVI  I,  9,  271,     58, 85,  277.  See  Vis- 
Thunderbolt  =  sacrifice,      418,  419,  465.  vedevas. 

320.  Trisiras,  7.  • Soul,  172  note. 

Thunder-storm,  charm  Trisoka,  171.  Upabdi,  63. 

against,  16.  Trita,    187,    IftJ^,    191  Upajikfls,  44,  300. 

Tiger,  133,  134,   140,       note,  270,  307.  Upanayana(m)   357, 


180,  306,  401. 
Tiger-amulet,  410. 
Tigei-'s  day,  306. 
Tiger-skin,  140. 
Tilaka,  54. 
Time,  466. 

Tiraschiraji,  121,  276. 
Titans,  66  note. 
Tin,  248  note. 
Tobit,  404  note. 


Truth,  97,  446.  379  notes. 

and  Falsehood,60.  Upaniahads,  VIII,  XV, 

Tundika,  404.  468. 

Turvasas,  1 1 4  note.        Upholder  (of  marriageX 
Tvashtar,  7,  47,  65,  68,     278,  335  notes. 
90,  127,    172,    207,  Upoha,  119  note. 
230,  232,   233,  246,  Ursa  Major,  371  note. 
270,  274,    287,  295,  Urugfilft,  406. 
324,  336,  364,    440,  Uiundas,  406. 
452,  454.  Usana,  171. 

Toga  virilis,  IX,  58  fiofe.Twelve    Adityas,     12,  Ushas,  104,106,   128, 
Tortoises,  441.  420  «o<€«.  135,463,   469.   Sc« 

Tradesmen,  251  note.    Twelve  months,  461.         Dawn. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


516 


INDIX  OF  NAMES,   BTO. 


VicHAflPXTi,  1,  2.  Varuna,  5,  12—14,  16  Vashat,  14,   232,  377, 

Vadhryafva,  170,  171.       note,  20,  22,  24,  25,       423,  444,  461. 


Vainya,  424, 
Vaifravana,  426. 
YaiBvsliiara  (Agni),  61, 

103,  113,   114,  164, 

179,  264,    270,  274, 

279,   284,  285,  310, 

380,  386,  401,  410, 

417. 
— —  (Varuna),  14. 
VaiBya(8),    160   note^ 

214,  251  note. 
Vaitahavyas,  217,  218. 
VaitHna-Siltra,      XIV, 

XVII,  335,  342,  359, 

361,  366. 
Vaivasyata,  309,  389, 

424. 
Vslja,  270,  429  notes. 
Vlljapeya,  112. 
V&japrasaviy  aui,     112 

note, 
VSjin,  296  note. 
Yak,    106,    112,    129, 

171,  172,  203,  213, 


30,  31  noU.  dQnote,  Vaainhtha,     104,    146, 
37  note,  38,  53,  54,  .     170,'  213,352,396— 
67—69,  83,  85,  86,       398  notes,  171. 
88,  90,  99,  104,  105  Vasishthas,  105  note, 
note,  111  note,  114,  Vasoshpati,  2. 
115,  120,  121,  130  V^stoshpaU,  284. 
note,  133  note,  134,  Vasuruohi,  425. 
152—155,  162  note,  Vasus,  34,  56,  81,  171, 
170,  171,  173,  174,       206,  233,    282,  284, 
186,  187  noU,  189,       285,  289,    366,  376, 
202  noU,  203  fwte,       387,  393,  414,  427. 
205  note,  207  note,  Vata,  53,  55,   81,   82, 
208,  212,  219,  224,       112,   120,   202,  20a 
228,  230,   246,  248      note,  265,  295,  296, 
note,  255,  256,  265,       434,  440. 
269  noU,   273,  282,  Vatsapa,  403. 
284,  292—294,  296,  VavrivlUas,  403. 
298,302,  311,  819,  V&yu,  36,   53,  55,    62 
339,  3C9— 371,  374,       notes,  65,  76,  90,  97, 
379,  382,  409,  431, 
437,  439,  454,  469, 
470. 

King  of  Waters, 

370. 


107  no^!,  112,  166, 
167,  184,  186,  1«7 
note,  228,  249,  274, 
279,  282,  324,  328, 
362  note,    385    note, 

327,  359,  415,  421,  nooses   or  snares       386,  440,    454,  464, 

422  notes,  278,  431,      of,  52—54,154,298,       465,  470. 

469.  311,  370,  371.  Veda  (bunch  of  grass), 

Vala,  47.  omnipresence  of,       341  note. 

Vamadeva,  176  note.  153,  154.  Veda,  2,  9  notes. 

Valmadevya,    176,  422,  sickness  sent  by,  the  Fourth,  VI. 

423.  30,    154,    155,    371  Vedas,  178,470. 

Vanaspati,207,233,410.     note,  409,  382.  the  three  ancient, 

Varana,  133,  291.  spies  or  envoys  of.       III,  470. 

Varan&vati,  138.  154.  Vedi,  206  note. 

Varsb%  461.  Varunllnt,  111  noU.        Veins,  21. 

Varshi^i    (Rains),    96  Varunas,  85.  Vena,   41,    129,    196, 

note.  Vasauta,  461.  424  note,  425. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nCDEX   OF   NAMES,    ETC.  617 

Venesection,  21.  340,  347,  348,  401,      165  note,  174,   187 

Verities,  thej  48.  431,  468.  noU,  292,  320,   321, 

Verse  (deified),  352. Consort  of,  348.         400. 

Vibhidaka,   Vibhitaka,  VishUri,  176,  177.         Vritra-slayer     (Indra), 

380  note.  Visravas,  426  note.  26,  201,  366. 

Vibhvan,  270, 429  noe«.  Visva,  394.  Vulcan,  the  Indian,  47 

Vicbfitan,60,305wote#.  Visvajit,  303.  noU, 

VidhamU,  23.  Visvakarman,   76,  77,  Vulture     (name    of  a 

Vidh&tar,  95.  312, 313  note,  worm),  226. 

Vigilance,  240,  386.       Visvambhara,  61.  Vultures,  399,  419. 

Vigour,  425.  Visv^mitra,    146,  170, 

Vihalha,  253.  213,  352,  398  notes;  Wakeful,  386. 

Vihavya,  192  no<«.  171.  Wallis,    H.    W.,    132, 

Vikankata,  200.  VisvaLnara,  145.  133,  159,  172. 

Viledhi,  23,  404  notes,   Visv&vasu,  42,  43.  Wanderer,     the     (the 

Vileatenga,  344  note,      Visve     Devas,      Visve       Sun)  335. 
Viligl,  209.  Dev4h,    Visvedevas,  Wandering  stars,  256. 

Vilohita,  455.  12,  5S  note,  61  woe<j.  War-chariot,  314. 

Vimada,  171.  108,  114,  171    note,  Warder-God,  36. 

Vindhjan   Mountains,       270,319  note,  339,  Warders  of  the  regions, 

170  note.  359,  408,  414,  452.         XII,  35,  36. 

Vipas,  136  no««.  Vttahavya,    217    noe«.  War-drum,    220—223, 

Viper(8),  32,  122,  276.       218,  321  note,  322.         265,  315. 
Vir^j,  106,   401,   416,  Vital  airs,  234  note,       War-God,  453. 

416—418,421—423, two,  60,  96.  War-horse,  295,  296. 

431,  446,  469.  spirit,  421    note,  Warrior,  265,  398.  See 

Virgil,  116,  321.  427.  Kshatriya. 

Virochana      Prahridi, breath,  sevenfold.  Watchfulness  (personi* 

423,  424.  66.  fied),  386. 

Vis41a,  426.  Vitasta,  136  note.  Water,  100,  432. 

Visalyaka,  455.  Vivasv^n,  309,  389 wo^, and  fire,  99. 

Visapha,  91.  424.  of  Life,  235,  312 

Visha,  Visbatakl,  382.  Vivyiha,  74.  notes. 

Vishlinak4,  268.  Voice,  415.  Waterflood,  Offspring  of 

Vishkandha,     20,    45,  Vi^tya,  VII.  the  (Agni),  81. 

46,  91  note,  92,  141.  VrishA,  25  note.  Waters,  the,  6— -8,  30, 

Vishnu,  55,  61   notes,  Vyishadatf,  22  note.  31,  37,  38,  40,   44, 

Ul,  112,  122,  192,  Vritra,25  note,  26,  47,      63,  62,  69,  100, 132, 

230,  246,  336,   389,      99  note,  113,   143,      162,  234,  235,  246, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


518  INDRX  OF  NAMES,   Bta 

257,  258,  273,    277,  Winter,  271,  391.  Yajus  text,  363. 

278,  282,  295,  314,  Wise,  Dr.,  21,  26,  27,  Yajyi,  U  note. 

371,  373,  385,  386,       30,  64,  72,  74,  258,  Yakshma,  53,  74,  127^ 

390,  409,  423,  428,       294,  315,  455,  458,        141,  387  note$.    See 

438.  Witchcraft,    157,  210,       CooBuraption. 
before    creatioo,       211,  238,  241,  242,  Yama,  18,  35,  36,  56, 

132  note.  400,  401.  93,  121,    123,    124, 
Offdpringof  (Agni),  Witches,  23,  49,  161,       142,  176,   186,  202, 

152,  246.  238.  228,  239,  240, 260, 

Wealth,  Lord  of,  79.       Wizard,  211,  899.  261,  269,   280,  291, 

Weapons   (a    clasjs  of  Woden,  39  note.  296,  298,  805,   313, 

Gods),  120.  Wolf,  200,  223,  226.  320,  338,    351,  386, 

Weather-prophet,  XII,  Wood,  Rev.  J.  G.,  300.       389,  412,   417,  420, 

316,  317.                    Word,  the  C  reative,  1 29,     424,  453,  454, 470. 
Weber,  Prof.  A.,  V,VI,       171,  359,  431  notes. dogs  of,  160,  239, 

XV,  et  passim,            World-creatora,      178,       386,  441  note. 
Welfare    (personified),       320.  horse  of,  196. 

291.  World -protector,     36,  messengers    o^ 

Westward  fire,  421.  569.  389, 413. 

White  ants,    44,    300  World-Tree,  136  note,  Yamuw4,  142. 

notes.  464  note.  Yiska,  107,  329,  469. 

Whitney,  Prof.,  V,  VI,  Worlds,  the  three,  55  Yati,  47. 

XIII,  XIV,  XVI,  85,      note,  187,  347.  Yl^tus,  20. 

180,  196,  272,   301,  Worm  (a  fiend),  407.      Yatudh&iia(8),    9—12, 

334.  Worms,  71— 73,    226,      30,53,160,161,169, 

Wide-strider,  the  (Vish-     227.  190,  210,    237,  262, 

iiu,  the  Sun),  55.        Wrath      (personified),       392—394,  396,  398. 
Widow,  re-marriage  of,       173,  174.  transfbrmationa 

446,  447.  Wright,  Mr.  W.  H.,  XIV.      of,  399. 

Wild  ass,  474.  Wrong,  469.  flying,  392. 

Wild  boar,66, 210, 411.  Y&tudhjlui(s),    11,38, 

Wildon,   Prof.    H.   H.,  Xbrxbs,  226  note.  59,  160,  227. 

190,  270,    393,  398,  Year,  the  (personified), 

462,  464,  466,    469,  Yadus,  114  note.  275,  415. 

470.  Yajfi&yajfiiya,  422,  423. consort  of,  93— 95. 

Wind  (personified),  53,  Yajur-veda,  353  note. model  of,  93. 

203,  249,  385,    427,  Yajus,  443  note,  449.      parts  of,  234. 

428.  Yajus-ritual,  112  note. New,  93,  94. 

Wine,  177,  283.  Yajus  (Veda),  III.  Yearuers,  121. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INBBX  OF  NAMES,   BTC.  519 

Years,  94,  95.  Zenith,  122,  144, 159,  142,  149,  154,  156, 

three  lunar,  275.       186,  203, 469  notes.  160, 163,   196,  214, 

Y€v&8ha(8),  227.  Zeus,   172,   247,   248  217,  218,  226,  236, 

Yojanam,  318  no^.  notes.  241,252,261,268, 

Yugas,  390  noU.  Zimmer,Prof.H.,  XVI,  275,   278,  305,  306, 

YApa,  342  note.  4,  17, 18,  75,  82, 85,  316,  321—324,  333, 

95,  103,    104,    118,  336,  391,  407,  437, 

ZACHARUB,Dr.T.,XVI.      119, 126,   136,  140,  438,  458. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


520 


CORRIGENDA' ET  ADDENDA. 


ige    7  line 

1  of  note        read  Pura*U8hl^     for  Pura^uBhoiJ^ 

■     11 

3 

18  from  below  read  t^irohita           for  Puroh  Uk 

•     27 

II 

3                       read  force                for  age 

"     30 

V 

14  from  below  read  Medicmiflches  fbr  Medecinischtti 

"     42 

* 

7  of  note          read  etem&l            for  immortal 

•     49 

II 

7                       read  bear                 for  hear 

•     76 

■ 

16  from  below  read  biped               for  indifttinct  word  e^fter  and 

»     88 

II 

2  from  below  omit  as  yet  unidentified 

•     99 

H 

8  from  below  recul  daiadatd  for  dnadatd 

•  115 

* 

$  from  below  after  World,    add  The  legend  says  that  the  elephant 
was  produced  from  shaTings  of  the  flesh  of  M&rtfc&r^  the  mia- 
Bhapen  son  of  AditL    See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  p.  16 

»  131 

• 

7  of  note         intert  is  after  ^jUgveda  X.  121 

•  131 

N 

9  of  note           read  deo  ?                 for  deo 

•  173 

• 

9                        rfwfr  On  1                  /"i^r  On                                     

•  181 

7  froniJMlm«         1  "                 "^ 

P^e  ISl  in  stands  S  and  4  for  the  U^t  Une  ,uI.tiU...- 
^"^^  depart,  ye  have  been  i^cogm^d. 


-Pass,  0  Apsarases,  away  : 


.^vmMui  notes  rscMi  164  for  16 

»  263     1      6  react  As  erst,  still  for  Fortress-like,  and  oanoel  the  portion  of  note 

referring  to  ptird' 
heading  of  second  hymn  read  CXV.  for  CXC< 
10  from  below  read  release  for  elease 

after  stanza  5  in$ert :  6  I  have  obscured  the  heaTen  and  earth,  yea, 

and  the  daylight  and  the  Sun. 
So  may  these  Qods  whom  I  have  set  before  me  oppose  with  saving 

charms  and  banish  vdtchcraft. 
And  alter  accordingly  the  numbers  of  stanzas  6—12 

1  irueri  a  comma  after  Ehalajas 
18  read  his  assembly  for  hisassembly 

2  from  below  read  Behalter/or  Behilter 


808 
888 
400 


406 
421 
437 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  UBRARY 
BERKELEY 

Return  to  desk  from  which  borrowed. 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


MAR  27  1948 

5Jan'56R£Q 
DEC  1  5  1955  Llf 

JAN  17  1357 


24Nov'59FK 


FLB  1  8  1976 

VOX-- 

Kino     ^  r  INTERpBRARY  LOAN 


^*^'r>  05 


^^ 


^. 


REC'D  LD 

HAY  2  5 '64 -7  PM 


'EC.  CiB.  AM  2  on 

AUG    8l9Ta 


Upr'59jT     j|^     3  1968  96 


JUH  18*68^^  ^'^ 


LD  21-100m-9,'47  CASTOR  H7fl 


Digrtized  by 


Google] 


YD  25706 


ivi206532 

THE  UNn^:RSlTY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


Digitized  by 


Google 


.p    ♦ 


