THE MANDUKYA UPANISHAD

Translated by F. Max Müller
Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XV
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1884

Source: Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XV (public domain)


MANDUKYA UPANISHAD

1. Om! — this syllable is all this. A bright explanation of it follows. All that is past, present, and future, all this is indeed Om. And whatever is beyond these three times, that also is indeed Om.

2. All this is Brahman. This Atman is Brahman. This same Atman has four feet (quarters).

3. The waking state, outwardly cognitive, having seven limbs, having nineteen mouths, enjoying the gross, the Vaishvanara, is the first quarter (foot).

4. The dreaming state, inwardly cognitive, having seven limbs, having nineteen mouths, enjoying the exquisite, the Taijasa, is the second quarter.

5. Where one asleep desires no desire whatsoever, sees no dream whatsoever, that is deep sleep. The sleeping state, having become one, a consolidated mass of cognition, consisting of bliss, enjoying bliss, whose face is thought, the Prajna, is the third quarter.

6. This is the lord of all, this is the omniscient, this is the inner controller, this is the source of all, this is the beginning and end of all beings.

7. Not that which is conscious of the internal world, nor that which is conscious of the external world, nor that which is conscious of both, nor that which is a consolidated mass of consciousness, nor which is all cognitive, nor which is not cognitive — unseen, with which there can be no dealing, ungraspable, having no distinctive mark, non-thinkable, that cannot be designated, the essence of the assurance of which is the state of being one with the Self, the cessation of the visible world, the peaceful, the benign, the non-dual — they consider to be the fourth. He is the Atman; he should be discerned.

8. This same Atman, as regards its syllabic nature, is Om; as regards its syllables, Om has three measures (matras) — a, u, m.

9. The waking state, the Vaishvanara, is the first measure a, from the root ap (to obtain), or from being the first (adimattva). He who thus knows obtains all desires and becomes first.

10. The sleeping state, the Taijasa, is the second measure u, from the root ut (to exalt), or from being in the middle. He who thus knows exalts the continuity of knowledge, and is treated equally (by all), and no one ignorant of Brahman is born in his family.

11. The deep sleep state, the Prajna, is the third measure m, from the root mi (to erect), or from ma (to measure). He who thus knows erects this world and they merge in him.

12. The fourth is without a measure, with which there can be no dealing, the cessation of the phenomenal world, the blissful, the non-dual, thus Om is the Atman indeed. He who knows this merges with the Self.


END OF THE MANDUKYA UPANISHAD
