~*  »  /    r 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[25] 


$0tt00tt 
HENRY    FROWDE 


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse 
Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


« 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 


F.   MAX    MULLER 


VOL.    XXV 


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
1886 

[All  rights  reserved] 


THE  LAWS  OF  MANU 


TRANSLATED 


WITH  EXTRACTS  FROM  SEVEN  COMMENTARIES 


BY 


g.  bOhler 


<®Vfovti 

AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1886 

[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


& 

W 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

PAGE 

I.  The  origin  of  the  Manu-smrz'ti  according  to  the  Hindus .  xi 
The   Manu-smr/ti   based   on    a   Dharma-sutra  of  the 

Manavas xviii 

II.  The  Manava  Dh.  S.  converted  into  a  metrical  Sm/7*ti  by 

a  special  school  of  lawyers xlv 

The  Manava  Dh.  S.  chosen  for  conversion  on  account 

of  the  myths  current  regarding  Manu      .         .  lvi 

Old  and  new  parts  of  the  work lxvi 

The  sources  of  the  additions   made  by  the  editor  of 

the  metrical  version Ixxiv 

The  position  of  Bhrzgu's  Sawhita  among  the  various 

metrical  recensions xcii 

The  probable  date  of  Bhn'gu's  Sawhitd        .        .  cvi 

III.  The  commentaries  of  Manu  and  principles  of  translation  cxviii 

THE  LAWS   OF   MANU. 

The  Creation i 

Summary  of  Contents 26 

Sources  of  the  Law 29             <~- 

Sacraments 33 

Initiation 37 

Studentship 43 

Householder 74 

Marriage 75 


Vlll 


CONTENTS. 


Daily  Rites 

-Sraddhas 

Mode  of  Subsistence 

Rules  for  a  Snataka 

Veda-Study      . 

Rules  for  a  Snataka 

Lawful  and  Forbidden  Food 

Impurity  . 

Purification 

Duties  of  Women    . 

Hermits  in  the  Forest 

Ascetics  . 


The  King 

Civil  and  Criminal  Law 
Titles  of  . 
Judicial  Procedure 
Recovery  of  Debts 
Witnesses 

Weights  of  Gold,  &c. 
Recovery  of  Debts 
Deposits  . 

Sale  without  Ownership 
Concerns  among  Partners 
Subtraction  of  Gifts 
Non-payment  of  Wages 
Non-performance  of  Agreement 
Rescission  of  Sale  and  Purchase 
Masters  and  Herdsmen    . 
Disputes  concerning  Boundaries 
Defamation 
Assault  and  Hurt 
Theft 

Violence  (Sahasa) 
Adultery  . 


CONTENTS. 

IX 

PAGE 

Miscellaneous  Rules 

321 

Duties  of  Husband  and  Wife  . 

.              327 

Inheritance  and  Partition 

•       345 

Gambling  and  Betting 

.       380 

Miscellaneous  Rules 

.       382 

Times  of  Distress: — 

Mixed  Castes 

.       401    ^ 

Occupations  and  Livelihood 

.       419 

Gifts 

430 

Sacrifices 

.       432 

Necessity  of  Penances     .... 

•       439 

Classification  of  Crimes 

.       441 

Penances          

•       445 

Transmigration 

.       483 

Supreme  Bliss 

502 

Doubtful  Points  of  Law          . 

.       508 

Conclusion.      ....... 

.       511 

Appendix  : — 

Quotations  from  Manu  in  the  translated 

Law-Books       515 

Synopsis  of  Parallel  Passages    . 

•       533 

Index       

•       583 

Additions  and  Corrections 

613 

Transliteration    of   Oriental    Alphabets   adopted    for    the 
Translations  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East 


617 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. 


Difficult  as  the  historical  problems  are  which  the 
Dharma-sutras  translated  in  vols,  ii  and  xiv  of  this  Series 
offer,  they  are  infinitely  less  complicated  than  those  con- 
nected with  the  metrical  law-books  and  especially  with 
the  Manu-smrzti,  or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  with  Bhrzgu's 
version  of  the  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law  proclaimed  by 
Manu.  Though  mostly  the  materials  available  for  the 
inquiry  into  the  history  of  the  Dharma-sutras  are  scanty, 
and  in  part  at  least  belong  to  the  floating  traditions 
which  are  generally  current  among  the  learned,'  but  of 
uncertain  origin,  they  not  only  exhibit  no  extravagancies, 
but  agree  fully  with  the  facts  known  from  strictly  historical 
sources.  Moreover,  and  this  is  the  most  important  point, 
though  the  text  of  the  Dharma-sutras  has  not  always  been 
preserved  with  perfect  purity,  they  have  evidently  retained 
their  original  character.  They  do  not  pretend  to  be  any- 
thing more  than  the  compositions  of  ordinary  mortals, 
based  on  the  teaching  of  the  Vedas,  on  the  decisions  of 
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  law,  and  on  the  customs 
of  virtuous  Aryas.  In  some  cases  their  authors  say  as 
much  in  plain  words.  Thus  Apastamba  repeatedly  laments 
the  sinfulness  and  the  weakness  of  '  the  men  of  later  times/ 
and  Gautama  warns  against  an  imitation  of  the  irregular 
conduct  of  the  ancients  whose  great  'lustre'  preserved  them 
from  falling.  It  is,  further,  still  possible  to  recognise,  even 
on  a  superficial  examination,  for  what  purpose  the  Dharma- 
sutras  were  originally  composed.  Nobody  can  doubt  for 
a  moment  that  they  are  manuals  written  by  the  teachers  of 
the  Vedic  schools  for  the  guidance  of  their  pupils,  that  at 
first  they  were  held  to  be  authoritative  in  restricted  circles, 
and  that  they  were  later  only  acknowledged  as  sources  of 


Xll 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


the  sacred  law  applicable  to  all  Aryas.  This  fact  is  fully- 
acknowledged  by  the  Hindu  tradition,  even  in  cases  where 
the  Dharma-sutras  no  longer  are  the  property  of  particular 
Vedic  schools. 

The  metrical  Smrztis,  on  the  other  hand,  are  surrounded 
by  clearly  fictitious  traditions,  by  mythological  legends 
which  either  may  have  grown  up  spontaneously,  because 
the  real  origin  had  been  forgotten,  or  may  have  been 
fabricated  intentionally  in  order  to  show  that  these  works 
possess  divine  authority  and,  hence,  have  a  claim  to  implicit 
obedience  on  the  part  of  all  Aryas.  Nay,  what  is  more, 
such  legends  or  portions  of  them  have  been  introduced 
into  the  text,  and  obscure  the  real  character  of  the 
Smrz'tis.  These  peculiarities  are  particularly  marked  in  the 
Manava  Dharma^astra,  where  the  whole  first  chapter  is 
devoted  to  the  purpose  of  showing  the  mighty  scope  of  the 
book,  and  of  setting  forth  its  divine  origin  as  well  as  the 
manner  in  which  it  was  revealed  to  mankind.  L_Its  opening 
verses  narrate  how  the  great  sages  approached  Manu,  the 
descendant  of  self-existent  Brahman,  and  asked  him  to  ex- 
plain the  sacred  law.  Manu  agrees  to  their  request,  and 
gives  to  them  an  account  of  the  creation  as  well  as  of  his 
own  origin  from  Brahman.  After  mentioning  that  he  learnt 
*  these  Institutes  of  the  Sacred  Law'  from  the  creator  who 
himself  produced  them,  and  that  he  taught  them  to  the  ten 
sages  whom  he  created  in  the  beginning,  he  transfers  the 
work  of  expounding  them  to  Bhrigu,  one  of  his  ten  mind- 
born  sons.  The  latter  begins  his  task  by  completing,  as 
the  commentators  call  it,  Manu's  account  of  the  creation. 
First  he  gives  the  theory  of  the  seven  Manvantaras,  the 
Yugas,  and  other  divisions  of  time,  as  well  as  an  incidental 
description  of  the  order  of  the  creation.  Next  he  briefly 
describes  the  duties  of  the  four  principal  castes,  passes  then 
to  an  encomium  of  the  Brahma;zas  and  of  the  Institutes  of 
Manu,  and  winds  up  with  an  enumeration  of  the  contents 
of  all  the  twelve  chapters  of  the  work,  which  he  promises 
to  expound  '  exactly  as  it  was  revealed  to  him.'  In  the 
following  chapters  we  find  frequent  allusions  to  the  situation 
which  the  first  describes.     In  about  forty  passages  a  new 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 


topic  is  introduced  by  a  prefatory  verse  which  contains 
phrases  like  '  such  and  such  a  matter  has  been  explained 
to  you,  now  listen  to/  &c,  or  '  I  will  next  declare/  &c. 

Twice  (V,  1-3  and  XII,  1-2)  the  sages  are  represented 
as  interrupting  Bhrzgu's  discourse  and  expressing  their 
desire  to  be  instructed  on  particular  points,  and  on  both 
occasions  Bhrzgu  is  again  named  as  the  narrator.  More- 
over in  a  number  of  verses1  Manu  is  particularly  mentioned 
as  the  author  of  certain  rules,  and  II,  7  the  authoritative- 
ness  of  Manu's  teaching  is  emphatically  asserted,  '  because 
he  was  omniscient.'  In  two  other  passages  Manu  appears, 
however,  in  different  characters.  VII,  42  he  is  enume- 
rated among  the  kings  who  gained  sovereignty  by  their 
humility,  and  XII,  123  he  is  identified  with  the  supreme 
Brahman. 

This  account  of  the  origin  of  our  Manu-smrz'ti  would  have 
to  be  slightly  modified  by  those  who  accept  as  genuine  the 
verse2  which  stands  at  the  beginning  of  the  Smrzti  accord- 
ing to  the  commentators  Govindara^a,  Naraya^a,  and  Ragha- 
vananda,  as  well  as  according  to  the  Ka^mir  copy  and  other 
MSS.  As  this  verse  contains  an  invocation  of  the  self- 
existent  Brahman,  and  a  promise  to  explain  the  laws  which 
Manu  taught,  it  indicates,  as  Govindara^-a  says3,  that  'some 
pupil  of  Bhrzgu  recites  the  work  which  had  descended  to 
him  through  an  unbroken  line  of  teachers.'  According  to 
this  version  we  have,  therefore,  a  triple  exordium  instead 
of  a  double  one,  and  our  Manu-smrz'ti  does  not  contain  the 
original  words  of  Bhrzgu,  but  a  recension  of  his  recension 
such  as  it  had  been  handed  down  among  his  pupils.  The 
additional  verse  is  apparently  intended  to  make  the  story 
more  plausible. 

The  remarks  which  the  commentators  make  on  this 
narrative  are  scanty,  and,  though  they  are  meant  to  sup- 
port its  credibility,  they  are,  partly  at  least,  calculated  to 
discredit  it.  Medhatithi  states  in  his  remarks  on  Manu  1, 1, 
that  the  Pra^apati  Manu  was  'a  particular  individual,  perfect 

1  See  the  index  s.  v.  Manu.  2  See  note  on  Manu  I,  1. 

3 1^  *J3f*TO  ^^faf^^tTOqraspp^jnRtf'T^ni  u 


XIV  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


in  the  study  of  many  branches  of  the  Veda,  in  the  know- 
ledge (of  its  meaning)  and  in  the  performance  (of  its 
precepts),  and  known  through  the  sacred  tradition  which 
has  been  handed  down  in  regular  succession1/  Govinda- 
ra^a  closely  agrees,  and  says  that  Manu  is  '  a  great  sage, 
who  received  his  name  on  account  of  his  acquaintance  with 
the  meaning  of  the  whole  Veda,  who  is  known  to  all  learned 
men  through  the  tradition  handed  down  in  regular  suc- 
cession, and  who  is  entrusted  with  causing  the  creation, 
preservation,  and  destruction  (of  the  world)2.'  Kulluka,  on 
the  other  hand,  though  he  agrees  with  respect  to  the  ety- 
mology and  explanation  of  Manu's  name,  deriving  it  from 
man, 'to  know  (the  meaning  of  the  Veda),'  and  though  he 
admits  the  human  character  of  his  5astra,  somewhat  differs 
in  the  description  of  the  person.  Referring  to  XII,  123,  he 
declares  Manu  to  be  a  manifestation  or  incarnation  of  the 
supreme  Soul.  Further,  Medhatithi  and  Kulluka  adduce  in 
their  remarks  on  the  same  verse  various  passages  from  the 
Sruti  and  the  Smrzti,  tending  to  prove  the  authoritative- 
ness  of  the  Manu-smrzti.  Both  quote  slightly  varying  ver- 
sions of  the  famous  Vedic  passage  which  declares  that '  All 
Manu  said  is  medicine.'  Medhatithi  adds  only  one  more 
anonymous  verse,  to  the  effect  that  '  the  Vedas  were  pro- 
claimed by  the  great  sages,  but  the  Smarta  or  traditional 
lore  by  Manu3.'  Kulluka  gives  two  other  passages,  one 
from  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti  which  places  Manu's  5astra  at 
the  head  of  all  works  of  the  same  class,  and  another  from 
the  Mahabharata  which  declares  that  '  the  Pura^as,  Manu's 
laws,  the  Vedas,  and  the  medical  works  must  not  be  op- 
posed by  (adverse)  reasoning.'  Both  commentators  men- 
tion also  that  the  pre-eminence  of  Manu's  teaching  is 
admitted  in  other  passages  of  the  Vedas,  the  Pura/zas,  the 

*rgra^fa^  11 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 


Itihasas,  and  the  Smrztis.  Finally,  in  the  notes  on  Manu 
I,  58,  they  discuss  the  question,  how  the  Smrzti  can  be 
called  the  Manava  Dharmai-astra,  though,  as  is  admitted  in 
the  work  itself,  Brahman  was  its  real  author.  Medhatithi 
offers  two  explanations.  First  he  contends  that  Brahman 
produced  only  *  the  multitude  of  injunctions  and  prohibi- 
tions,' while  the  work  itself  was  composed  by  Manu.  Next 
he  says  that,  according  to  others,  the  6astra  may  be  called 
Manu's,  even  if  it  were  first  composed  by  Brahman.  In 
proof  of  this  assertion  he  points  to  the  analogous  case  of 
the  river  Ganges,  which,  though  originating  elsewhere,  i.e.  in 
heaven,  is  called  Haimavatf,  because  it  is  first  seen  in  the 
Himavat  or  Himalaya,  and  to  that  of  the  Kanaka  6akha, 
which,  though  studied  and  taught  by  many  others,  is  named 
after  Ka/^a.  In  conclusion,  he  adds, '  Narada  also  records, 
"  This  work,  consisting  of  one  hundred  thousand  verses, 
was  composed  by  Pra^apati  (Brahman) ;  it  was  successively 
abridged  by  Manu  and  others1."'  Kulluka,  who  gives  a 
somewhat  insufficient  abstract  of  Medhatithi's  discussion, 
refers  to  the  same  passage  of  Narada,  and  bases  on  it  his 
own  explanation  of  I,  58,  according  to  which  it  means  that 
Brahman  first  composed  the  law-book,  and  that  Manu  con- 
densed its  contents  in  his  own  language  and  taught  it  in 
that  form  to  his  pupils. 

This  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  all  that  the  commentaries  say 
about  Manu  and  the  history  of  the  Manava  Dharmai-astra, 
and  their  remarks  contain  also  the  substance  of  all  that  has 
been  brought  forward  in  other  discussions  on  the  same 
subject,  with  which  we  meet  elsewhere  2.  Important  as  they 
may  appear  to  a  Hindu  who  views  the  question  of  the  origin 
of  the  Manu-smrzti  with  the  eye  of  faith,  they  are  of  little 
value  for  the  historical  student  who  stands  outside  the  circle 
of  the  Brahmanical  doctrines.  The  statements  regarding 
the  person  of  Manu  can,  at  the  best,  only  furnish  materials 

^r  tf  fsr?r  ^fw n 

2  See  e.  g.  the  passages  translated  ia  Professor  Max  Muller's  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  pp.  87-94. 


XVI  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


for  mythological  research.  The  arguments  in  support  of 
the  authenticity  and  authoritativeness  of  the  Manu-sm^/ti 
are  extremely  weak.  For  the  Vedic  passage  which  the 
commentators  adduce  is,  strictly  speaking,  a  misquotation. 
It  occurs  in  four  slightly  differing  versions  in  three  Sa^hitas 
and  in  one  Brahmawa 1.  But  in  all  the  four  places  it  refers, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  Vedic  Mantras  which  Manu  is  said  to 
have  revealed  or  seen.  As,  however,  the  assertion  of  the 
wholesomeness  of  Manu's  teaching  is  couched  in  general 
terms,  it  may  probably  be  inferred  that  many  sayings, 
attributed  to  the  father  of  mankind,  were  known  to  the 
authors  of  the  four  Vedic  works,  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  legal  maxims  were  included  amongst  them2.  But 
Medhatithi's  and  Kulluka's  assumption  that  our  Manu-snWti 
is  meant  in  the  passages  quoted  would  require  very  strong 
special  proof,  as  its  language  and  part  of  its  doctrines  by  no 
means  agree  with  those  of  the  Vedic  times.  Of  course,  no 
such  proof  is  offered,  and  it  is  not  probable  that  it  ever  will 
be  offered.  The  quotations  made  by  the  commentators 
from  the  Mahabharata  and  from  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti,  as 
well  as  their  well-founded  assertion  that  in  the  Pura^as  and 
in  many  Smrztis  Manu  is  frequently  referred  to  as  an 
authority  on  the  sacred  law,  are  of  greater  importance.  It 
is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  two  works  mentioned  by 
Kulluka  refer  to  a  particular  Dharmaj-astra  attributed  to 
Manu,  and  the  same  remark  holds  good  with  respect  to 
those  passages  of  the  Pura^as  and  of  the  Smrztis  where, 
in  enumerations  of  the  authors  of  Dharmajastras,  Manu  is 
placed  at  the  head  of  the  list.  Yet  even  this  evidence  is  of 
little  use,  because  on  the  one  hand  the  antiquity  of  many 
of  the  works  in  which  Manu's  name  occurs  is  extremely 
doubtful,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  existence  of  several 
recensions  of  Manu's  laws  is  admitted,  and  can  be  shown  to 
have  been  a  fact.     Hence  a  reference  to  a  Manu-smrzti  in  a 

1  Kanaka  XI,  5  (apparently  quoted  by  Medhatithi) ;  Maitrayawiya  Sawhita 
I,  1,  5  ;  Taittiriya  Sawhita  II,  2,  10,  2  ;  and  Tawaya  Brahmawa  XXIII,  16,  7 
(quoted  by  Kulluka). 

2  I  would  not  infer  with  Professor  Max  Miiller,  India,  what  can  it  teach  us  ? 
p.  364,  that  a  legal  work  ascribed  to  a  Manu  was  known  to  the  authors  of  the 
four  works ;  see  also  below,  p.  lx. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVU 


Pura^a  or  a  Smrzti  does  not  prove  much  for  Bhrzgu's 
Sawhita,  if,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  not  made  evident  that 
the  latter  is  really  meant,  and  that  the  work  in  which  it  is 
contained  really  has  a  claim  to  be  considered  ancient.  In 
illustration  of  this  point  it  may  suffice  to  remark  here 
n  that  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti,  which  Kulluka  adduces  as  a 
'  i  witness,  is  by  no  means  an  ancient  work,  but  considerably 
later  than  the  beginning  of  our  era,  because  it  gives  a  defini- 
tion of  golden  dinaras,  an  Indian  coin  struck  in  imitation  of 
and  called  after  the  Roman  denarii l.  Regarding  Manu  and 
the  Mahabharata  more  will  be  said  below.  Medhatithi's 
quotation  from  Narada  is  very  unlucky ;  for  it  is  inexact, 
and  worded  in  such  a  manner  as  to  veil  the  serious  dis- 
crepancy which  exists  between  the  stories  told  in  the 
Manava  Dharma^astra  and  in  the  Narada-smrzti.  The 
introduction  to  the  latter,  as  read  in  the  MSS.  of  the 
vulgata,  does  not  state  that  the  original  law-book  of  one 
hundred  thousand  verses  was  composed  by  Pra^apati 
and  abridged  by  Manu  and  others,  but  alleges  that  its 
author  was  Manu  Pra^-apati,  and  that  Narada  and  Sumati 
the  son  of  Bhrzgu  summarised  it2.  The  text  of  Narada, 
which  is  accompanied  by  Kalya/zabhazYa's  edition  of  Asa- 
haya's  commentary,  names  one  more  sage,  Markazzafeya, 
who  also  tried  his  hand  at  Manu  Pra^-apati's  enormous 
work.  Whichever  of  the  two  versions  may  be  the  original 
one,  it  is  evident  that  Medhatithi's  representation  of 
Narada's  statement  is  inexact,  and  that  the  latter  differs 
considerably  from  the  story  in  our  Manu-smrzti,  which 
asserts  that  it  is  the  original  work  composed  by  Brahman, 
and  revealed  by  Manu  to  Bhr/gu,  who  explains  it  to  the 
great  sages  '  exactly  as  he  received  it.'  Hence  Narada's 
story  discredits  the  details  of  the  account  given  in  the 
Manava  Dharmai-astra.  It  might,  at  the  best,  be  only 
quoted  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  general  belief  that 
Manu  was  the  first  lawgiver  of  India.     These  remarks  will 

1  West  and  Biihler,  Digest,  p.  48,  third  edition. 

2  See  Jolly,  Narada,  p.  2,  and  Tagore  Lectures  of  1883,  p.  46.  My  conjec- 
ture that  the  introduction  to  Narada  belongs  to  Asahaya,  not  to  the  Smriti 
itself  (West  and  Biihler,  Digest,  p.  49),  is  not  tenable. 

05]  b 


XV111  LAWS    OF   MANU. 


suffice  to  show  that  the  explanatory  notes  offered  by  the 
Indian  commentators  on  the  origin  and  history  of  the 
Manu-smrz'ti  are  not  suited  to  furnish  a  basis  for  a  critical 
discussion  of  these  questions,  and  that  hence  they  have  been 
deservedly  set  aside  by  most  modern  Sanskritists  who  have 
written  on  the  subject.  As  regards  the  theories  of  the 
latter,  it  would  be  useless  to  enumerate  those  preceding 
Professor  Max  Miiller's  now  generally  accepted  view, 
according  to  which  our  Manu-smrz'ti  is  based  on,  or  is  in  fact 
a  recast  of  an  ancient  Dharma-sutra.  But,  well  known  as  are 
his  hypotheses  and  the  later  discoveries  confirming  them,  an 
introduction  to  the  laws  of  Manu  would,  I  think,  be  incom- 
plete without  a  full  restatement  of  his  arguments  and  of 
their  additional  supports  furnished  by  others. 

The  considerations  on  which  Professor  Max  M tiller  based 
his  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  Manu-smrzti  may  be 
briefly  stated  as  follows  l.  The  systematic  cultivation  of 
the  sacred  sciences  of  the  Brahmans  began  and  for  a  long 
time  had  its  centre  in  the  ancient  Sutra^ara^as,  the  schools 
which  first  collected  the  fragmentary  doctrines,  scattered 
in  the  older  Vedic  works,  and  arranged  them  for  the  con- 
venience of  oral  instruction  in  Sutras  or  strings  of  aphorisms. 
To  the  subjects  which  these  schools  chiefly  cultivated,  be- 
longs besides  the  ritual,  grammar,  phonetics,  and  the  other 
so-called  Arigas  of  the  Veda,  the  sacred  law  also.  The  latter 
includes  not  only  the  precepts  for  the  moral  duties  of  all 
Aryas,  but  also  the  special  rules  regarding  the  conduct  of 
kings  and  the  administration  of  justice.  The  Sutra  treatises 
on  law  thus  cover  the  whole  range  of  topics,  contained  in 
the  metrical  Smrztis  attributed  to  Manu,  Ya^wavalkya,  and 
other  sages.  Though  only  one  Dharma-sutra,  that  of  the 
Apastambiyas,  actually  remains  connected  with  the  aphor- 
isms on  the  ritual  and  other  sacred  subjects,  the  existence 
of  the  Dharma^-astras  of  Gautama,  Vasish//£a,  and  Vishnu, 
which  are  likewise  composed  in  Sutras,  proves  that  formerly 

1  See  his  letter  to  Mr.  Morley,  reprinted  in  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii, 
pp.  ix-xi,  and  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.  pp.  132-134.  Compare  also  the  ana- 
logous views  formed  independently  by  Professors  Weber  and  Stenzler,  Indische 
Studien,  vol.  i,  pp.  69,  143,  243-4. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 


they  were  more  numerous.     The  perfectly  credible  tradi- 
tion of  the  Mimawsa  school,  which  declares  that  originally 
each  Vedic  school  or  Ka.ra.na.  possessed  a  peculiar  work  on 
Dharma,  confirms  this  assumption.     While  the  Dharma- 
sutras  possess  a  considerable  antiquity,  dating  between  600- 
200  B.  C,  the  metrical  Smritls  cannot  be  equally  ancient, 
because  there  is  much  in  their  form  that  is  modern,  and  espe- 
cially because  the  epic  AnushAibh  Sloka,  in  which  they  are 
written,  was  not  used  for  continuous  composition  during  the 
Sutra  period.     As  the  metrical  Smrztis  are  later  than  the 
Dharma-sutras,  it  is,  under  the  circumstances  stated,  very 
probable  that  each  of  them  is  based  on  a  particular  Dharma- 
sutra.     The  Manava  Dharma^astra  in  particular  may  be 
considered  as  a  recast  and  versification  of  the  Dharma-sutra 
of  the  Manava  Sutra^ara^a,  a  subdivision  of  the  Maitrayamya 
school,  which  adheres  to  a  redaction  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda. 
Considering  the  state  of  our  knowledge  of  Vedic  litera- 
ture thirty  years  ago,  the  enunciation  of  this  hypothesis 
was  certainly  a  bold  step.     The  facts  on  which  it  rested 
were  few,  and  the  want  of  important  links  in  the  premises 
laid  it  open  to  weighty  objections.     No  proof  was  or  could 
be  furnished  that  the  Sutras  of  Gautama,  Vasish/^a,  and 
Vish/m  originally  were  manuals  of  Vedic  schools,  not  codes 
promulgated  for  the  guidance  of  all  Aryas,  as  the  Hindu 
tradition,  then  known,  asserted.     The  assumption  that  it 
was  so,  rested  solely  on  the  resemblance  of  their  form  and 
contents  to  those  of  the  Apastambiya  Dharma-sutra.     No 
trace   of  a    Manava    Dharma-sutra   could  be  shown,  nor 
could  any  connexion  between  the  Manava  Dharmai'astra 
and  the  school  of  the  Manavas,  except  through  their  titles, 
be   established.     The   assertion   that   the    Brahmans   had 
turned   older   Sutras,  and  especially  Dharma-sutras,  into 
metrical  works,  written  in  epic  Slokas,  had  to  be  left  with- 
out any  illustration,  and  no  cause  was  assigned  which  would 
explain  this  remarkable  change.     As  a  set  off  against  these 
undeniable  weaknesses,  Professor  Max  Miiller's  hypothesis 
possessed  two  strong  points  which  secured  for  it  from  the 
outset  a  favourable  reception  on  the  part  of  all  Sanskritists 
of  the  historical  school.    First,  it  substituted  a  rational  theory 

b2 


XX  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


of  historical  development  for  the  fantastic  fables  of  the 
Hindu  tradition  and  for  the  hopeless  uncertainty  which 
characterised  the  earlier  speculations  of  European  scholars 
concerning  the  origin  of  the  so-called  Indian  codes  of  law. 
Secondly,  it  fully  agreed  with  many  facts  which  the  begin- 
ning exploration  of  Vedic  literature  had  brought  to  light, 
and  which,  taken  as  a  whole,  forced  on  all  serious  students 
the  conviction  that  the  systematic  cultivation  of  all  the 
Indian  5astras  had  begun  in  the  Vedic  schools.  Subsequent 
events  have  shown  that  Professor  Max  Miiller  was  right  to 
rely  on  these  two  leading  ideas,  and  that  his  fellow  Sanskrit- 
ists  did  well  to  follow  him,  instead  of  taking  umbrage  at  the 
minor  flaws.  Slowly  but  steadily  a  great  number  of  the 
missing  links  in  the  chain  of  evidence  has  been  brought  to 
light  by  subsequent  investigations.  We  now  know  that  the 
Sutra  works  of  other  schools  than  the  Apastambiyas  in- 
cluded or  still  include  treatises  on  the  sacred  law.  The 
Dharma-sutra  of  the  Baudhayaniyas,  the  oldest  Sutra - 
£ara/za  of  the  Taittiriya  Veda,  has  been  recovered.  Though 
the  connexion  between  the  several  parts  of  the  great  body 
of  Sutras  has  been  severed,  it  is  yet  possible  to  recognise 
that  it  once  was  closely  joined  to  the  G^zhya-sutra1.  The 
recovery  of  the  entire  collection  of  Hira/zyakcsi-sutras  has 
proved  that  these  too  include  a  Dharma-sutra,  which  in  this 
instance  has  been  borrowed  from  the  earlier  Apastam- 
biyas2. The  mystery  which  surrounded  the  position  of  the 
Dharmai-astras  of  Gautama,  Vish/zu,  and  Vasishz7za  has  been 
cleared  up.  To  the  assertion  that  they  were  composed  by 
ancient  ./^zshis  for  the  welfare  of  mankind,  we  can  at  present 
oppose  another  tradition  according  to  which  they  were  at 
first  studied  and  recognised  as  authoritative  by  particular 
schools  only,  adhering  respectively  to  the  Sama-veda,  Black 
Ya^ur-veda,  and  the  Rig-veda  3.  Internal  evidence  confirm- 
ing this  tradition  has  been  found  in  the  case  of  Gautama's 
Dharma^astra  and  of  the  Vishnu-smriti,  or,  more  correctly, 

1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xxxi. 

2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxiii. 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  pp.  xlv-xlviii ;  vol.  vii,  pp.  x-xvi ;  vol. 
xiv,  pp.  xl-xlv. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 


of  the  Kanaka  Sutras.  These  latter  discoveries  are  of  par- 
ticularly great  importance,  because  they  fully  establish  the 
truth  of  the  assumption,  underlying  Professor  Max  Miiller's 
theory,  that  in  post-Vedic  times  the  Br&hmans  did  not 
hesitate  to  change  the  character  of  ancient  school-books  and 
to  convert  them  into  generally  binding  law-codes,  either  by 
simply  taking  them  out  of  their  connexion  with  the  Srauta 
and  Grzliya-sutras  or  by  adding  besides  matter  which,  in 
the  eyes  of  orthodox  Hindus,  must  greatly  increase  the 
sentiment  of  reverence  felt  for  them.  It  is  especially 
the  case  of  the  so-called  Vish/zu-smrzti,  which  deserves  the 
most  careful  attention.  The  beginning  and  the  end  of  the 
work  distinctly  characterise  it  as  a  revelation  of  the  god 
Vishnu.  Vishnu,  Vaish/zava  worship  and  philosophy  are  on 
various  occasions  praised  and  recommended  in  the  course 
of  the  discussions.  Yet  the  difference  in  the  style  of  the 
introductory  and  concluding  chapters  leaves  no  doubt 
that  they  are  later  additions,  and  the  perfectly  credible 
tradition  of  the  Pandits  of  Pu/za  and  Benares,  the  occurrence 
of  particular  sacred  texts  known  to  the  Kanakas  alone,  as 
well  as  the  special  resemblance  of  its  contents  to  those  of 
the  Kanaka  Grzhya-sutra,  make  it  perfectly  certain  that 
the  work  is  only  a  Vaish/zava  recast  of  the  Kanaka  Dharma- 
sutra1.  We  thus  obtain  in  this  case  the  confirmation  of  almost 
every  fact  which  the  conversion  of  the  Dharma-sutra  of  the 
Manavas  into  the  revealed  code  of  the  Pra^apati  Manu 
presupposes,  with  the  sole  exception  of  the  substitution  of 
epic  51okas  for  aphoristic  prose.  With  respect  to  the  last 
point,  the  further  exploration  of  the  Smrz'ti  literature  has 
furnished  numerous  analogies.  As  an  instance  to  the  point 
we  can  now  cite  the  fragments  of  the  so-called  Brzhat 
Sahkha  Dharmajastra,  which,  as  the  quotations  show,  must 

1  A  quotation  in  Govindara^a's  Smrz'tima^ari,  fol.  1 2b,  1.  8  (India  Office  Collec- 
tion, No.  1736),  contains  a  very  small  portion  of  this  work.  When  explaining 
the  penance  for  the  murder  of  a  Brahmawa,  mentioned  Manu  XI,  74,  Govinda  - 

ra^a  says,  ^R^JJR  SFS^^UT  ^n^?T«f  [ff]  I  t^^TPft  H^iFTFft  ^^WT^ 
^ffT  II  r**T  [H^ajTn:]  ^TTf^TT  V^W^T^  H  The  quotation  shows  that  the 
Dharma-sutra  of  the  KaMas  mentioned  the  fanciful  expiations  ending  in  death, 
which  are  given  in  all  the  ancient  law-books,  but  omitted  in  theVishmi-smrcti. 


XX11  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


formerly  have  consisted  of  prose  and  verse,  while  the  avail- 
able MSS.  show  Sutras  and  Anush/ubhs  in  one  chapter 
only,  and    51okas   alone   in  the   remainder1.     There   are, 
further,  such  works  like  the  two  A^valayana  Smrztis  and 
the  •Saunaka-sm/'z'ti,  evidently  versifications  of  the  corre- 
sponding G^zhya-sutras,  with  or  without  the  additions  of 
extraneous    matter2.     In    short,   among    all   the  general 
propositions  concerning  the  origin  of  the  metrical  Smr/tis, 
which  Professor  Max  Miiller  advanced,  only  one,  the  asser- 
tion that  during  the  Sutra  period  of  600-200  B.C.  works 
written  in  continuous  epic  verse  were  unknown,  has  proved 
untenable  in  its  full  extent.     It  seems  no  longer  advisable  to 
limit  the  production  of  Sutras  to  so  short  and  so  late  a  period 
as  600-200  B.C.,  and  the  existence  of  metrical  school-manuals 
at  a  much  earlier  date  has  been  clearly  demonstrated3.     It  is 
now  evident  that  the  use  of  the  heroic  metre  for  such  works 
did  not  begin  all  of  a  sudden  and  at  a  certain  given  date.    But 
it  seems,  nevertheless,  indisputable  that  the  use  of  aphoristic 
prose  was  adopted  earlier  than  that  of  verse.     For  in  all 
known  cases  a  Sutra,  not  a  metrical  Sa^graha,  Varttika,  or 
Karika,  stands  at  the  head  of  each  series  of  school-books, 
and  some  of  the  most  salient  peculiarities  of  the  Sutra 
style   reappear   in  that  of  the  metrical  manuals4.     With 
respect  to  the  conjectures  specially  affecting  the  Manava 
Dharma^astra,  the  former  existence  of  a  Manava  Dharma- 
sutra,  consisting  of  prose   mixed   with  verses   in   several 
metres,  has   been  established   by  the   discovery  of  some 
quotations  in  the  Vasish^a  Dharma-sutra,  and  their  con- 
tents show  that  the  work  known  to  the  author  of  the  latter 
6astra  was  closely  related  to  our  Manu-smrzti.     As  regards 
the  connexion  of  this  Dharma-sutra,  and  consequently  of 
our  Manu-smrzti  with  the  Sutra£ara/za  of  the  Manavas,  the 
results  of  the  late  researches  have  not  been  equally  satis- 
factory.    The  recovery  of  the  writings  of  the  Manavas  has 
not  only  not  furnished  any  facts  in  support  of  the  supposed 
connexion,  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  raised  difficulties,  as  it 

1  West  and  Biihler,  Digest  of  H.  L.  p.  40,  third  edition. 

2  West  and  Biihler,  loc.  cit.  p.  51. 

3  Goldstucker,  Manavakalpa-sutra,  p.  78. 
*  West  and  Biihler,  loc.  cit.  pp.  42.44. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxiii 


appears  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Manava  Grmya-sutra  differ 
very  considerably  from  those  of  our  Manava  Dharma^astra. 
All  that  has  been  brought  forward  in  substantiation  of  this 
portion  of  Professor  Max  Muller's  hypothesis  is  that  as  close 
an  affinity  exists  between  the  Vishz/usmrz'ti,  the  modern 
recension  of  the  Kanaka  Dharma-sutra,  and  our  Manu- 
smriti,  as  is  found  between  the  Kanaka  and  Manava 
Grzhya-sutras  and  between  the  Kanaka  and  Manava 
Sa^hitas,  and  that  hence  the  Vedic  original  of  the  Manu- 
smrz'ti  may  be  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  the  Manava 
school1.  The  conclusive  force  of  this  argument  is  no  doubt 
somewhat  weakened,  as  Dr.  von  Bradke  has  pointed  out,  by 
the  fact  that  the  Vish/zu-smrzti  is  not  the  original  Kanaka 
Dharma-sutra.  But  to  reject  it  altogether  on  account  of 
this  circumstance  would  be  going  too  far.  For  the  agree- 
ment between  the  Smrztis  of  Manu  and  Vishnu  extends  to 
many  subjects  where  the  latter  shows  no  traces  of  recasting, 
and  may  be  reasonably  supposed  to  faithfully  represent  the 
original  Dharma-sutra.  Nevertheless  a  full  reconsideration 
of  this  point  is  indispensable.  Before  we  proceed  to  that, 
it  will,  however,  be  advisable  first  to  supplement  Professor 
Max  Muller's  arguments  against  the  antiquity  of  our  Manu- 
smrz'ti  by  the  discussion  of  some  of  its  passages  which 
clearly  admit  an  acquaintance  with  a  large  body  of  older 
legal  literature  and  particularly  with  Dharma-sutras,  and, 
secondly,  to  re-examine  and  complete  the  proof  for  the 
former  existence  of  a  Manava  Dharma-sutra  and  for  its 
having  been  the  precursor  of  the  metrical  law-book. 

Among  the  passages  of  the  Manu-smrzti  which  disprove 
the  claim,  set  up  by  its  author,  to  be  the  first  legislator, 
and  which  show  that  he  had  many  predecessors,  the  first 
place  must  be  allotted  to  its  statements  regarding  con- 
troversies and  conflicting  decisions  on  certain  points  of  the 
ritual  and  of  the  law.  Such  cases  are  by  no  means  rare. 
Thus  the  observances  of  '  some,'  with  respect  to  the  order 
of  the  several  ceremonies  at  a  6raddha2  and  to  the  disposal 

1  Professor  Jolly,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  vii,  pp.  xxvi-xxvii ;  and 
Dr.  von  Bradke,  Jour.  Germ.  Or.  Soc.  vol.  xxxii,  pp.  438-441. 

a  The  same  difference  of  opinion  is  mentioned  in  .Sankhayana  Gnhya-sutra 
IV,  1,  10. 


XXIV  LAWS   OF    MANU. 


of  the  funeral  cakes,  are  mentioned  Manu  III,  261.  Dis- 
cussions of  the  ancient  sages,  exactly  resembling  those 
met  with  in  the  Dharma-sutras1,  are  given  IX,  31-55  re- 
garding the  long-disputed  question  whether  a  son  begotten 
on  a  wife  by  a  stranger,  but  with  the  husband's  consent, 
belongs  to  the  natural  parent  or  to  '  the  owner  of  the  soil.' 
In  the  same  chapter  it  is  stated,  just  as  in  Gautama's 
Dharma-sutra2,  that  'some'  permit  the  procreation  of  a 
second  son  with  an  appointed  widow.  Manu  X,  70—71, 
we  find  a  decision  on  the  question  whether,  as  'some' 
assert,  the  seed  be  more  important,  or,  as  'others'  state, 
the  soil,  or,  as  ■  again  others '  maintain,  the  seed  and  the 
soil  have  equal  importance,  and,  XI,  45,  we  are  told  that 
the  sages,  i.  e.  all  sages,  are  convinced  of  the  efficacy  of 
penances  for  atoning  unintentional  offences,  while  ■  some ' 
declare  that  they  even  destroy  the  guilt  of  him  who  sinned 
intentionally.  The  latter  point  is  discussed  in  exactly 
the  same  manner  Gaut.  XIX,  $-6.  In  other  cases  the 
author  is  less  explicit.  He  merely  places  conflicting 
opinions  side  by  side  without  indicating  that  they  belong 
to  different  authorities,  and  hence  he  has  mostly  succeeded 
in  misleading  the  commentators  as  to  his  real  meaning. 
Thus  we  read  Manu  II,  145,  that  the  teacher  is  less 
venerable  than  the  father  and  the  mother,  while  the  next 
following  verses  teach  exactly  the  contrary  doctrine.  The 
commentators  are  much  perplexed  by  this  contradiction. 
But  if  we  turn  to  Gautama  II,  50-51,  where  it  is  said,  '  The 
teacher  is  chief  among  all  Gurus ;  some  say  (that)  the 
mother  (holds  the  first  place),'  it  is  not  doubtful  that  the 
Manu-smrzti  gives  in  the  first  verse  the  opinion  of  Gautama's 
1  some '  as  the  purvapaksha,  and  adduces  the  following  one 
in  order  to  prove  its  incorrectness.  A  similar  case  occurs 
Manu  III,  23-25,  where  three  opinions  regarding  the  per- 
missibility of  certain  marriage-rites  are  enumerated,  the  last 
of  which  is  the  siddhanta  or  the  author's  own  view. 

It  might  be  contended  that  these  passages,  the  list  of 

1  See  especially  Vas.  XVII,  6-9,  where  one  of  the  verses  of  the  Manu-sirmti 
occurs. 

a  Gaut.  XVIII,  8. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 


which  might  be  considerably  enlarged,  do  not  necessarily 
force  on  us  the  conviction  that  they  refer  to  actual  law- 
books which  preceded  our  Manu-smrzti.  If  they  stood  by 
themselves,  they  might  possibly  be  explained  as  showing 
nothing  more  than  that  legal  and  ritual  questions  had  long 
engaged  the  attention  of  the  learned.  But  this  subterfuge 
becomes  impossible,  as  we  find  in  other  verses  the  explicit 
confession  that  the  author  of  the  Manu-smrzti  knew 
Dharmai-astras.  Three  passages  allude  to  their  existence 
in  general  terms.  The  first  occurs  in  the  definition  of  the 
terms  Sruti  and  Smrzti,  Manu  II,  10,  '  But  by  Sruti 
(revelation)  is  meant  the  Veda,  and  by  Smrz'ti  (tradition) 
the  Institutes  of  the  sacred  law.'  In  the  text  the  last 
word,  dharma^astram,  stands  in  the  singular.  But  it  must 
doubtlessly  be  taken,  as  Kulluka1  and  Naraya/za2  indicate, 
in  a  collective  sense.  Another  mention  of  law-books 
is  found  Manu  XII,  III.  where  a  dharmapa/^aka^,  'one 
who  recites  (the  Institutes  of)  the  sacred  law,'  is  named 
among  the  members  of  a  parishad  or  assembly  entitled  to 
decide  difficult  points  of  law.  The  commentators  are 
unanimous  in  explaining  dharma,  literally  '  the  sacred  law,' 
by '  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred  law'  or  'the  Smrztis  of  Manu 
and  others,'  and  it  is  indeed  impossible  to  take  the  word  in 
any  other  sense  than  that  of  'law-books3.'  The  third 
passage  is  perfectly  explicit,  as  the  word  Dharma^astra  is 
used  in  the  plural.  It  occurs  in  the  section  on  funeral 
sacrifices,  Manu  III,  232,  '  At  a  (sacrifice  in  honour)  of  the 
manes  he  must  let  (his  guests)  hear  the  Veda,  the  Insti- 
tutes of  the  sacred  law  (dharma.rastrazzi),'  &c.4  Here  the 
existence  of  many  earlier  law-books  is  plainly  acknow- 
ledged. The  character  of  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred 
law,  known  to  the  author  of  our  Manu,  may  be  inferred 

1  H^Tf^T^  *Tfrr.  II 

1  V%T^  TJTVT^T  I  W^^rW  cT^T^  II 

*  Medh.  VHtn^Ft^^rf^ffr^fT^TOTWTTTU  Gov.HT^RTf^TWTU 

Kull.  *Fnnf^%T^^  II  Nand.  V^IT^TOsp:  II  The  full  significance 
of  this  passage  will  be  shown  below,  p.  lii. 

*  See  also  Professor  Stenzler  in  the  Indische  Studien,  vol.  i,  p.  245 ;  Dr. 
Johanntgen,  Das  Gesetzbuch  des  Manu,  p.  76. 


XXVI  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


from  some  other  passages  which  reveal  an  acquaintance 
with  the  Angas  of  the  Veda1.  Manu  II,  141,  and  IV,  98, 
these  auxiliary  sciences  are  mentioned  in  a  general  way. 
From  Manu  III,  185,  where  it  is  said  that  a  Brahma/za  who 
knows  the  six  Ahgas  sanctifies  the  company  at  a  5raddha 
dinner,  we  learn  that  their  number,  as  known  to  our  author, 
did  not  differ  from  that  mentioned  in  all  Vedic  works. 
Further,  the  name  of  the  first  Anga,  the  Kalpa,  occurs 
III,  185,  and  the  mention  of  a  Nairukta  among  the  members 
of  a  parishad  shows  that  the  fourth,  the  Nirukta,  was  also 
known.  With  the  latter  and  the  remaining  four,  which  the 
author  of  the  Manu-smrzti  in  all  probability  also  knew,  we 
are  not  immediately  concerned.  But  the  first,  the  Kalpa, 
possesses  a  very  great  interest  for  our  purposes.  This 
term,  as  is  well  known,  denotes  collectively  those  Sutras 
of  the  Vedic  schools  which  teach  the  performance  of  the 
6rauta  sacrifices,  the  rites  especially  described  in  the  5ruti. 
Hence  both  5rauta-sutras  and,  of  course,  also  Sutra- 
£ara;zas  must  have  preceded  the  Manu-smrzti.  If  it  is 
now  borne  in  mind  that  according  to  the  Hindu  tradition, 
mentioned  above,  all  Sutra^ara/zas  formerly  possessed 
Dharma-sutras,  and  that  in  some  existing  Kalpas  the 
Dharma-sutras  are  closely  connected  with  the  Srauta-sutras, 
it  becomes  exceedingly  probable,  nay,  certain,  that  our 
Manava  Dharma^astra  is  later  than  some  of  the  Dharma- 
sutras.  This  conclusion  is  further  corroborated  by  those 
passages  of  the  Manu-smrzti  where  the  author  quotes 
the  opinions  of  individual  predecessors.  Manu  III,  16 
we  read,  '  According  to  Atri  and  (Gautama)  the  son  of 
Utathya2  he  who  weds  a  Sudra  woman  becomes  an  out- 
cast, according  to  Saunaka  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  and 
according  to  Bhrz'gu  he  who  has  (male)  offspring  from  a. 
(Sudra  female  alone).'  Under  the  above  explanation, 
which  is  adopted  by  the  majority  of  the  commentators, 

1  See  also  Professor  Stenzler,  loc.  cit. ;  Dr.  Johanntgen,  loc.  cit.  p.  74. 

2  The  form  Utathya  is  a  corruption  of  the  Vedic  Utathya,  and  shows  the 
substitution  of  a  dental  for  a  palatal,  which  is  not  uncommon  in  the  Prakrit 
dialects.  Hence  it  possesses  a  certain  value  as  an  additional  proof  for  the  post- 
Vedic  origin  of  the  Manu-smrz'ti. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXvii 


and  is  confirmed  by  an  analogous  passage  of  the  aphoristic 
Dharmaj-astra  of  U^anas  \  the  author  adduces  there  the 
opinions  of  four  older  authorities,  all  of  which  are  credited 
by  the  Hindu  tradition  with  the  revelation  of  law-books. 
We  still  possess  several  Smrztis  attributed  to  Atri,  vSaunaka, 
and  to  Gautama,  as  well  as  one  said  to  belong  to  Bhrzgu. 
With  the  exception  of  the  aphoristic  Gautamiya  Dharma- 
jastra  all  these  works  are  modern,  some  being  metrical 
recensions  of  older  Sutras,  and  some  of  very  doubtful 
origin.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible  that  any  of  the  existing 
Dharma^astras,  Atri,  6aunaka,  and  Bhrzgu,  can  be  referred 
to  by  Manu,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  opinions  quoted 
cannot  be  traced  in  them.  But  if  we  turn  to  Gautama's 
Sutra  we  find  among  those  persons  who  defile  the  company 
at  a  6raddha  dinner,  and  who  are  thus  excluded  from  the 
community  of  the  virtuous,  the  judrapati,  literally  { the 
husband  of  a  5udra  female2.'  The  real  signification  of  the 
compound  seems,  however,  to  be,  as  Haradatta  suggests, 
'  he  whose  only  wife  or  dharmapatni  is  a  vSudra.'  As  it 
appears  from  Manu  III,  17-19,  that  the  opinion  attributed 
to  the  son  Utathya  was  the  same,  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely 
that  the  Manu-smrzti  actually  quotes  the  still  existing  Sutra 
of  Gautama.  Another  reference  to  a  lost  Sutra  occurs  at 
Manu  VI,  21,  where  it  is  said  of  the  hermit  in  the  forest, 
'  Or  he  may  constantly  subsist  on  flowers,  roots,  and  fruit 

alone ,   following   the   rule   of  the   (Institutes)   of 

Vikhanas.'  The  original  Sanskrit  of  the  participial  clause 
is  '  vaikhanasamate  sthita^,'  and  means  literally  '  abiding 
by  the  Vaikhanasa  opinion.'  The  commentators,  with  the 
exception  of  Naraya/za,  are  unanimous  in  declaring  that 

1  Uj.  Dharmajastra,  chap.  Ill,  tfftTjft  ^McVWPirU  I  «T  ^iTrflr*!^  I  "^Rl^r^T 

^r:  i  ^r^rf  Hinftfii  ^nffrt:  i  *ph  irMiiiftfci  3ft  «ra:  1  n^*m: 

■*TrRT THf  TnWt  II  Though  U-ranas'  statements  regarding  the  opinions  of  the 
ancient  lawyers  do  not  agree  with  those  of  the  Manu-smr/ti,  except  in  the  case 
of  -Saunaka,  they  are  yet  important,  because  they  show  that  differences  of 
opinion  regarding  the  effects  of  a  marriage  with  a  .5udra  did  occur.  See  also 
Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  53. 

2  Gautama  XV,  18  ;  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  255. 


XXV111  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


the  word  Vaikhanasa  here  denotes  a  5astra  or  Sutra 
promulgated  by  Vikhanas,  in  which  the  duties  of  hermits 
were  described  at  length1.  The  correctness  of  this  opinion 
seems  to  me  indisputable.  For  the  word  mata,  '  opinion,' 
in  Manu's  verse,  requires  that  the  preceding  part  of  the 
compound  should  denote  either  a  person,  or  a  school,  or  a 
work.  If  we  take  vaikhanasa  in  the  sense  of  hermit  in  the 
forest,  we  obtain  the  meaningless  translation,  ;  a  hermit 
may  subsist  on  flowers,  &c,  following  the  opinion  of 
hermits.'  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  interpret  vaikhanasa 
with  the  commentators  in  the  sense  of  vaikhanasa  ^astra,  and 
to  refer  it  to  a  particular  work  which  taught  the  duties  of 
hermits.  The  existence  of  such  a  book  is  attested  not  only 
by  Manu's  commentators,,  but  also  by  other  ancient  and 
modern  authors.  Baudhayana  mentions  it  explicitly2,  and 
seems  to  give  a  short  summary  of  its  contents  in  the  third 
chapter  of  the  third  Pra^na  of  his  Dharmajastra.  Hara- 
datta,  the  commentator  of  Apastamba  and  Gautama,  also 
appears  to  have  known  it.  In  his  notes  on  Gautama  III,  2, 
he  gives  the  derivation  of  vaikhanasa,  a  hermit  in  the  forest, 
saying,  '  The  vanaprastha  is  called  vaikhanasa,  because  he 
lives  according  to  the  rule  promulgated  by  Vikhanas,'  and 
adds,  'For  that  (sage)  chiefly  taught  that  order3.'  If  the 
statements  made  to  me  by  Indian  "Pandits  are  to  be  trusted, 
we  may  even  hope  to  recover  the  work  in  course  of  time. 
It  must  be  an  exceedingly  ancient  book,  as  the  secondary 
meaning  of  vaikhanasa,  a  hermit,  which  can  have  arisen 
only  in  the  manner  suggested  by  Haradatta4,  occurs  in  the 

1  Medh.  I^rr^w  im  sn^  *nr  qumwm  v^t  f¥^m*fti  *r*  faun  u 
Gov.  I^tt^t^  ^TTO^rsn^^  fmw  n  Kuii.  I^rtA  *trtoi:  i 

«I$Hfil MI<«9I W[$ft    fWW:   I      Nand.  |TJT[^T]^^flW  fa*[*]*flBI 

2  Baudh.  Dharma.  II,  II,  14;  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  p.  259. 

4  The  double  vr/ddhi  in  vaikhanasa  is  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  words 
enumerated  in  the  akrz'ti-garca  anujatikadi,  Paw.  VII,  3,  20. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 


oldest  known  Dharma-sutra.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
is  not  advisable  to  assume  that  it  had  any  connexion  with 
the  Vaikhanasa  Sutra^ara/za,  a  subdivision  of  the  Taitti- 
riyas,  which  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  youngest 
schools  adhering  to  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda1.  But  it  is 
evident  that  the  ancient  Vaikhanasa  Sutra,  which  treated 
of  an  important  portion  of  the  sacred  law,  preceded  our 
Manu-smrzti. 

Another  reference  to  the  opinion  of  a  person  who  is  the 
reputed  author  of  a  still  existing  Dharma-sutra  is  found  at 
Manu  VIII,  140,  where  the  rate  of  legal  interest  on  secured 
loans  is  thus  described  :  '  A  money-lender  may  stipulate, 
as  an  increase  on  his  capital,  for  the  interest  allowed  by 
Vasish^a,  and  take  monthly  the  eightieth  part  of  a  hun- 
dred.'    If  we  turn  to  the  Vasish/^a_Dliarma^stra,  we  read, 
III,  51 2, '  Hear  the  interest  for  a  money-lender,  declared  by 
Vasish/^a,  five  mashas  (may  be  taken  every  month)  for 
twenty  (karshapa^as).'     Though  the  wording  of  the  Manu- 
smriti  differs  from  that  adopted  in  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma- 
jastra,  the  meaning  of  both  passages  is  the  same.     The 
eightieth  part  of  one  hundred  is  one  and  a  quarter  per  cent, 
and  the  same  rate  is  obtained  if  five  mashas  are  charged  for 
twenty  karshapa^as,  i.  e.  for  four  hundred  mashas  3.     Both 
law-books,  therefore,  evidently  refer  to  the  same  rule  of 
Vasish^a.    But  the  correctness  of  the  further  inference  that 
the  author  of  the  Manu-smr/ti  used  the  Vasish/^a  Dharma- 
jastra  is  not  so  easily  demonstrable  as  might  seem  from  the 
extracts  given  above.     For  Vas.  Ill,  51  itself  is  a  quotation, 
marked  as  such  by  its  final  iti  (left  untranslated)  and  the 
phrase, '  Now  they  quote  also,'  which  is  prefixed  to  Sutra 
48.     Hence  it  might  be  argued  that  the  agreement  of  the 


1  See  ProfessorMaxMuller,  Anc.Sansk.  Lit.  p.  199;  Professor  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  vol.  i,  p.  83.  A  portion  of  the  Vaikhanasa  6rauta-sutra  is  preserved 
in  the  modern  transcripts,  belonging  to  the  Bombay  University  and  the  Munich 
Royal  Libraries,  which  Professor  Haug  had  made  from  a  Baro^/a  MS. 

2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  p.  16 ;  according  to  Dr.  Fuhrer's  edition, 
Vas.  Ill,  50. 

3  Gagannatha,  in  Col.  Dig.  I,  25,  gives  a  somewhat  different  calculation. 
But  the  general  sense  remains  the  same.  I  follow  K>zsh«apa»^ita  and  Hara- 
datta  on  Gautama  XII,  29. 


XXX  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


two  passages  furnishes  no  stringent  proof  for  the  posteriority 
of  the  Manu-sm^ti  to  that  which  bears  Vasish^a's  name, 
that,  on  the  contrary,  it  perhaps  merely  indicates  the  de- 
pendence of  both  works  on  a  common  source,  be  it  on  some 
older  work  or  on  the  tradition  current  in  the  Brahmamcal 
schools.  Such  an  objection  would  in  most  similar  cases  be 
perfectly  legitimate,  but  in  the  present  one  it  is,  I  think, 
barred  by  some  peculiar  circumstances.  From  the  above- 
mentioned  Hindu  tradition,  preserved  by  Govindasvamin1, 
we  learn  that  the  Vasish/^a  Dharmajastra  originally  be- 
longed to  a  school  of  Rig-vedins  who  ascribed  the  settle- 
ment of  their  laws  to  the  famous  Vedic  Rishi  Vasish^a. 
The  rule  limiting  the  monthly  interest  on  secured  loans  to 
one  and  a  quarter  per  cent  is  found  also  in  Gautama's 
Dharma-sutra  XII,  29,  a  work  which,  as  has  been  shown 
elsewhere2,  is  older  than  the  Vasish/^a-smrzti.  But  neither 
there  nor  in  any  other  work  where  it  occurs3  is  its  enuncia- 
tion attributed  to  Vasish^a.  Hence  it  is  most  probable 
that  this  addition  was  made  by  those  who  attributed  their 
laws  to  Vasish/^a,  and  who,  therefore,  had  an  interest  in 
vindicating  the  invention  of  an  important  legal  maxim  for 
their  spiritual  head.  If  their  law-book  gives  the  rule  in  the 
form  of  a  quotation,  they  probably  do  not  mean  to  indicate 
that  an  older  verse  ascribing  it  to  Vasish^a  existed,  but 
that  the  rule  itself  was  an  ancient  one,  and  had  been  taken 
from  a  law-book  or  from  the  tradition  of  the  Brahma/zical 
schools.  With  this  explanation  the  mention  of  Vasish/^a's 
name,  made  in  Manu  VIII,  140,  still  remains  an  indication 
that  its  author  knew  and  referred  to  the  existing  Vasish^a 
Dharma^astra. 

These  passages  are  far  too  numerous  to  be  set  aside  as 
possibly  later  interpolations,  and  there  is,  indeed,  no  circum- 
stance connected  with  any  of  them  which  could  lead  to 
such  a  supposition.  We  must,  therefore,  admit  that  they 
clearly  disprove  the  claim  of  the  Manu-sm^'ti  to  the  first 

1  See  above,  p.  xx. 

2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  pp.  liii,  liv. 

8  See  e.  g.  Ya^.  II,  37,  and  the  texts  of  Brzhaspati  and  Vyasa  quoted  in  Col. 
Dig.  I,  26-27. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxxi 


place  among  Indian  law-books  which  the  first  chapter  sets 
up,  and  that  they  furnish  a  strong  support  to  the  view 
according  to  which  the  Manu-smrzti  belongs  to  a  later  stage 
of  literary  development  than  the  Dharma-sutras. 

In  turning  to  the  second  point  of  our  supplement,  it  will 
be  advisable  to  reconsider  in  detail  the  passages  of  the 
VasishzV&a-smrzti,  which  prove  the  former  existence  of  a 
Manava  Dharma-sutra,  and  which,  as  the  preceding  dis- 
cussion has  established  the  priority  of  the  Vasish^a-smrzti 
to  our  Manu,  possess  a  particularly  great  importance.  The 
chief  passage  occurs  Vasish^a  IV,  5-8  1,  where  we  read  : 

5.  The  Manava  (Sutra  states),  '  Only  when  worshipping 
the  manes  and  the  gods,  or  when  honouring  guests,  he  may 
certainly  do  injury  to  animals.' 

6.  'On  offering  the  honey- mixture  (to  a  guest),  at  a 
sacrifice  and  at  the  rites  in  honour  of  the  manes,  but  on 
these  occasions  only,  may  an  animal  be  slain ;  that  (rule) 
Manu  proclaimed.' 

7.  'Meat  can  never  be  obtained  without  injury  to  liv- 
ing beings,  and  injury  to  living  beings  does  not  procure 
heavenly  bliss :  hence  (the  sages  declare)  the  slaughter  (of 
beasts)  at  a  sacrifice  not  (to  be)  slaughter  (in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word).' 

8.  'Now  he  may  also  cook  a  full-grown  ox  or  a  full- 
grown  he-goat  for  a  Brahma/za  or  a  Kshatriya  guest;  in 
this  manner  they  offer  hospitality  to  such  (a  man).' 

As  has  been  stated  in  the  introduction  to  Vasish^a2,  all 
the  four  Sutras  must  be  taken  as  a  quotation,  because  the 
particle  iti,  '  thus,'  occurs  at  the  end  of  IV,  8,  and  because 
the  identity  of  Sutra  6  with  Manu  V,  41,  as  well  as  the  close 
resemblance  of  Sutra 7  to  Manu  V,  48,  shows  that  the  quota- 
tion is  not  finished  with  Sutra  5.  If  we  accept  this  explanation 

1  flij^irrifa^nqiHUW   ^  f^Tf^fff  HR^(  II  M  II    H^xreS    ^ 

*iijr  ^r  ftr^^ra^fa  1  ^-^h  ^  ^  f^wtfi^tf  sNfarg:  11  ^  11 
•n^r^T  Tm%«rf  f^ri  *rUr*j rMsiri  ufa^  1  ^t  ^  Jnf*nw  ^**h<raT- 
stt*t  ^nft^v:  11  $  11  ^r*TTftr  ^reranr  ^t  Ti*p*rni  ^Twuiini  H^lujmi 
^t  j^tst  ^t  tf^criTOT  mfim  f  t^fiftfrr  n  t  n 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  pp.  xviii-xix. 


XXXI 1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


we  have  in  our  passage  the  usual  arrangement  followed  in 
the  Dharma-sutras.  First  comes  the  prose  rule,  next  the 
verses  which  confirm  it,  and  finally  a  Vedic  passage  on 
which  both  the  rule  and  the  verses  rest.  It  may  be  added 
that  the  explanation  of  the  passage  given  by  Krishna- 
pandita.  Dharmadhikarin  in  his  commentary  on  Vasish/^a, 
according  to  which  the  word  Manavam,  explained  above  by 
'the  Manava  (Sutra),'  is  to  mean  'the  (opinion)  of  Manu' 
(manumatam),  cannot  be  upheld,  for  several  reasons. 
First,  the  wording  of  the  text  of  Sutra  5  looks  like  a  real 
quotation,  not  like  a  summary  of  Manu's  views  by  Vasish- 
tka..  This  becomes  quite  clear,  if  we  compare  Vasish^a 
I,  17,  where  undoubtedly  a  rule  of  Manu,  corresponding  to 
Manava  Dh.  VII,  203,  and  VIII,  41,  is  given  in  Vasish/^a's 
words,  '  Manu  has  declared  (that)  the  (peculiar)  laws  of 
countries,  castes,  and  families  (may  be  followed)  in  the 
absence  of  (rules  of)  the  revealed  texts1.'  Secondly,  the 
great  differences  between  several  other  passages,  quoted  by 
Vasish/^a  as  Manu's,  and  the  corresponding  passages  of  the 
text  of  our  Manu-smrzti,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  latter, 
as  we  have  seen,  refers  to  the  Vasish/^a  Dharmaj-astra,  do  not 
permit  us  to  assume,  with  KWsh/zapa^dita,  that  Vasish^a 
knew  and  referred  to  our  Manu. 

If  it  is  thus  necessary  to  admit  that  Vasish//za's  quotation 
is  taken  from  a  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  the  agreement  of 
the  doctrine  taught  in  the  quotation  and  of  a  portion  of  the 
text  with  those  of  our  Manu-smrzti  show  further  that  this 
Dharma-sutra  must  have  been  the  forerunner  of  our  metrical 
law-book.  An  examination  of  the  other  quotations  from 
Manu,  which  occur  in  the  Vasish/^a-smr/ti,  will  show  that 
this  agreement  was,  though  pretty  close,  not  complete. 
The  identity  of  the  view,  ascribed  to  Manu  by  Vasish//za 
I,  17,  with  the  contents  of  Manu  VII,  203,  and  VIII,  41, 
has  already  been  mentioned.  Vasish^/za  III,  2,  a  Manava 
51oka  is  quoted  which  agrees  literally  with  Manu  II,  168. 
The  same  remark  applies  to  the  quotation  at  VasishzV&a 
XX,  18,  which  is  found  Manu  XI,  152.     Another  passage, 

1  ^v^^nfin^^<4viH(>'4i?wr^y^»H^:  11 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlli 


Vas.  XIII,  1 6,  shows  considerable  verbal  differences. 
According  to  Vasish^a,  Manu's  verse  is :  'Be  it  fruit,  or 
water,  or  sesamum,  or  food,  or  whatever  be  (the  gift)  at  a 
6raddha,  let  him  not,  having  just  accepted  it,  recite  the 
Veda;  for  it  is  declared  in  the  Smrtti  that  the  hands  of 
Brahmawas  are  their  mouths,'  while  we  read  Manu  IV,  117, 
'Be  it  an  animal  or  a  thing  inanimate,  whatever  be  the 
(gift)  at  a  Sraddria,  let  him  not,  having  just  accepted  it, 
recite  the  Veda ;  for  it  is  declared  in  the  Smrtti  that  the 
hand  of  a  Brahma^a  is  his  mouth1.'  The  last  quota- 
tion which  occurs  Vas.  XIX,  37,  and  refers  to  the  j-ulka, 
(exemptions  from)  taxes  and  duties2,  is  in  the  TrishAibh 
metre,  and,  hence,  cannot  have  a  place  in  our  Manu-smrzti. 
But  it  is  remarkable  that  the  latter  does  not  even  show  a 
corresponding  Anush/ubh  verse,  and  that  the  contents  of 
the  quotation  do  not  quite  agree  with  the  teaching  of 
our  Manu.  The  latter  mentions  the  exemption  of  a  sum 
less  than  a  karshapa;/a  incidentally  X,  1 20.  It  agrees  also 
with  Manu's  doctrines  that  5rotriyas,  ascetics,  alms,  and 
sacrifices  should  not  be  taxed.  But  there  are  no  indica- 
tions that  infants,  messengers,  and  ambassadors,  or  the 
remnant  left  to  a  plundered  trader,  should  go  free.  With 
respect  to  those  living  by  arts  (.rilpa),  our  Manu  teaches, 
VII,  138,  and  X,  120,  just  like  most  other  ancient  authors, 
that  artisans  are  to  do  monthly  one  piece  of  work  for  the 
king.  Though  this  corvee  amounts  to  a  pretty  severe  tax, 
it  is,  of  course,  possible  to  contend  that  Manu's  rule  does 
not  exactly  contradict  that  quoted  by  Vasish//za.  Besides 
these  passages,  there  are  some  other  verses3  which  contain 
the  well-known  phrase,  '  manur  abravit,  thus  Manu  spoke/ 

1  vas.  m^f  ^r*  ^fanjsp^Tfcr  1  Tfic*T^nrf%<3T»T sir^ ^  1  ^ *§t- 

f&X  *^  I  irfd^lUH^ITO:  tnTRTTCJT  KT$mV.   ^JWT  ^fW  II    Manu, 

Tprreft  f*r  fgw.  ^jw:  11 

2  'No  duty  (is  paid)  on  a  sum  less  than  a  karshapawa,  there  is  no  tax  on  a 
livelihood  gained  by  arts,  nor  on  an  infant,  nor  on  a  messenger,  nor  on  what 
has  been  received  as  alms,  nor  on  the  remnants  of  property  left  after  a  robbery, 
nor  on  a  irotriya,  nor  on  an  ascetic,  nor  on  a  sacrifice.' 

3  Vas.  XI,  23 ;  XII,  16 ;  XXIII,  43  ;  XXVI,  8. 

[25]  C 


XXXIV  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


and  mention  Manu  as  the  authority  for  the  rule  taught. 
With  respect  to  these  references  it  seems  to  me  not 
probable  that  they  have  been  taken  from  the  Manava 
Dharma-sutra.  We  shall  see  below x  that  from  the  earliest 
times  the  mythical  Manu,  the  father  of  mankind,  was 
considered  as  the  founder  of  the  social  and  moral  order, 
and  that  he  was  considered  to  have  first  taught  or  revealed 
religious  rites  and  legal  maxims.  Hence  I  believe  that 
these  four  verses  give  nothing  more  than  an  expression  of 
the  belief  that  their  doctrines  go  back  to  the  first  progenitor 
of  men2.  The  first  three  among  them  either  contradict  or 
find  no  counterpart  in  our  Manu-smrzti.  The  fourth  agrees 
in  substance  with  Manu  XI,  260-261.  But  it  occurs  in  a 
chapter  which  is  probably  spurious,  or,  at  least,  full  of 
interpolations.  Whatever  view  may  be  taken  concerning 
these  passages,  the  allegation  that  the  Manava  Dharma- 
sutra,  known  to  Vasish//£a,  closely  resembled,  but  was  not 
identical  with  our  Manu,  need  not  be  modified. 

If  we  look  for  other  traces  of  the  Sutra,  quoted  by  Vasish- 
tka,,  it  is  possible  that  Gautama,  who  mentions  an  opinion  of 
Manu,  XXI,  7,  refers  to  it.  His  Dharma-sutra  is  even  older 
than Vasish  ^a's,  and  long  anterior  to  our  Manu-smrzti.  But 
the  possibility  that  Gautama  refers  not  to  a  rule  of  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra,  but  to  a  maxim  generally  attributed 
to  the  mythical  Manu,  is  not  altogether  excluded.  Gautama 
says,  '  Manu  (declares  that)  the  first  three  (crimes,  the 
intentional  murder  of  a  Brahma^a,  drinking  Sura,  and  the 
violation  of  a  Guru's  bed)  cannot  be  expiated3.'  The 
wording  of  the  Sutra  shows  that  it  is  not  a  quotation,  but  a 
summary  of  Manu's  opinion.  Our  Manu-smrzti  explicitly 
teaches,  XI,  90,  the  same  doctrine  with  respect  to  the 
intentional  murder  of  a  Brahma^a,  and,  if  my  explanation 
of  XI,  147  is  accepted,  also  with  respect  to  the  intentional 
drinking  of  Sura.     As  regards  the  third  offence,  there  is  no 

1  See  p.  lviii. 

a  The  meaning  of  the  phrase  in  the  verse,  occurring  in  the  quotation  from  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra,  is  probably  the  same. 

3  "^fill  irsjTTOf»T^*nftT  T«J»  II  The  same  opinion  is  expressed  in  the 
MahabhSrata  XII,  165,  34,  but  not  attributed  to  Manu. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 


direct  statement.  But  the  expiations,  prescribed  XI,  104- 
105,  amount  to  a  sentence  of  death.  Hence  our  Manu- 
smrtti,  too,  practically  declares  the  crime  to  be  inexpiable 
during  the  offender's  lifetime.  Its  original,  the  Dharma- 
sutra,  may,  therefore,  be  supposed  to  have  had  the  rule 
which  Gautama  attributes  to  Manu.  Nevertheless,  owing 
to  the  circumstances  mentioned  above,  Gautama's  passage 
cannot  be  adduced  as  a  perfectly  certain  proof  of  the  early 
existence  of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra. 

Among  the  remaining  Dharma-sutras1  there  is  only 
the  fragment  attributed  to  lianas  which  seems  to  quote  a 
Sutra  of  Manu.  At  the  beginning  of  the  first  chapter2  we 
find  a  very  corrupt  passage  containing  a  prose-quotation 
which  according  to  two  of  my  MSS.  belongs  to  Manu,  but 
according  to  a  third  to  Sumantu.  As  the  latter  copy  is, 
however,  clearly  more  incorrect  than  the  other  two,  and 
as  a  Sutra  by  Sumantu  is  not  known  from  other  sources, 
the  reading  of  the  first  two  seems  to  be  preferable.  The 
contents  of  the  quotation  which  apparently  prescribes  that 
on  the  death  of  an  infant,  of  an  emigrant,  of  one  who  keeps 
no  sacred  fires,  of  one  who  kills  himself  by  starvation  or  by 
self-cremation,  and  of  one  slain  in  battle,  no  period  of  im- 
purity need  be  kept,  agree  with  the  teaching  of  our  Manu- 
smrz'ti,  V,  78,  89,  94,  98. 

There  is,  further,  one  among  the  Vedic  books  on  the 
ritual,  the  >Sankhayana  Grz'hya-sutra,  which  possibly  refers 
to  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra.  This  work  quotes  the  verse, 
Manu  V,  41,  which,  as  has  been  shown  above,  occurred 
also  in  the  Dharma-sutra  as  well  as  several  other  51okas  of 

1  Regarding  the  passage  of  Apastamba  II,  16,  I,  which  ascribes  the  revelation 
of  the  6raddhas  to  Manu,  see  below,  p.  lix. 

2  I  transcribe  the  whole  beginning  of  the  work,    W^T    *l«H«l<.<u*rTt    *<$Yc3 

*rJTT^  II  W  ^STTffR^I  ^TOf*^  ^TJ&tTH  (?)  ^«fl$N»fanre$r 
P^ff   ^  TOt  II  S^fnre  Tff^f>TWfaf^FT^TbT  S?  *N^ »      Thus 

two  MSS. ;  the  third  reads,  3  4**^  fj  'pT'gTT*?  I  and  further  on,  S?NM- 
inffT  rTrfW^r0  \  It  is  impossible  to  restore  the  whole  passage.  The  end  of  the 
quotation  may  have  been  H3K  ^n^f*!  8  fafff  II 

C  2 


XXXVI  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


our  Manu-smr/ti,  partly  in  better  versions 1.  As  the  Grz'hya- 
sutra  agrees  also  in  a  number  of  its  rules  very  characteris- 
tically with  Manu,  it  is  not  improbable  that  its  author  may 
have  drawn  on  the  original  of  the  latter.  But  before  one 
can  be  perfectly  confident  on  this  point,  it  is  necessary  that 
some  difficult  questions  regarding  the  critical  condition  of 
6ankhayana's  text  should  be  cleared  up  more  fully  than 
has  been  done  hitherto.  More  important  than  the  passages 
from  the  last  work  is  the  evidence  which  the  Kamandakiya 
Nitisara  furnishes,  where  twice  opinions  of  the  Manava^ 
and  once  an  opinion  of  Manu  are  quoted,  but  rejected  in 
favour  of  the  views  of  the  author's  teacher,  ATanakya 
Kaurilya.  In  one  case  the  doctrine,  attributed  to  the 
Manava//,  agrees  with  the  teaching  of  our  Manu-smrzti. 
We  read  in  the  discussion  on  the  number  of  the  prakf  z'tis, 
the  constituent  elements  of  the  ma^ala  or  political  circle 
to  which  a  king  must  pay  attention,  Kam.  Nit.  VII,  24-25, 
4  With  respect  to  this  (question)  the  Manavas  record  that 
five  constituent  elements,  the  ministers  and  the  rest,  belong 
severally  to  each  of  the  twelve  kings.  But  those  original 
twelve  (kings)  and  those  (others),  the  ministers  and  the 
rest,  (are)  seventy-two-  (in  number,  and  form)  the  whole 
circle  of  constituent  elements2/  Our  Manu-smrzti  states, 
VII,  155-156,  that  twelve  kings  belong  to  the  mandaila, 
and  adds  ver.  157, 'The  minister,  the  kingdom,  the  fortress, 
the  treasury,  and  the  army  are  five  other  (constituent 
elements  of  the  circle) ;  for  these  are  mentioned  in  con- 
nexion with  each  (of  the  first  twelve) ;  thus  the  whole  circle 
(consists),  briefly  (speaking,  of)  seventy-two  (constituent 
parts).'  The  other  two  passages  differ.  According  to 
Kamandaki  II,  3,  the  Manavas  teach  that  the  sciences, 
which  a  king  must  study,  are  three  only,  the  threefold 
(Veda),    the   theory   of  professions    and   trades,   and    the 

1  Oldenberg,  .Sankh.  Grt.  S.  in  the  Indische  Studien,  vol.  xv,  p.  1 1 . 

iSTirrc   ^W   IT«{ifrl*Klie6^  II  ^M  II       I  read  according  to  the  commentary 
^TffffT^fWr  instead  of  the  senseless  JT&ffTOTfWT  0f  the  text. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV11 


science  of  government,  '  because  the  science  of  dialectics  or 
reasoning  is  a  subdivision  of  the  threefold  (Vedic  lore1),' 
while  Manu  VII,  43  enumerates  five  branches  of  learning, 
or  at  least  four,  if  either  Medhatithi's  or  Naraya^a's 
explanation  of  the  term  atmavidya,  rendered  in  the  transla- 
tion by  '  the  knowledge  of  the  (supreme)  Soul,'  is  accepted2. 
Again,  we  hear,  Kamandaki  XI,  6j,  that  Manu  fixed  the 
number  of  ministers  (amatya),  which  the  king  must  appoint, 
at  twelve.  But  according  to  Manu  VII,  54,  no  more  than 
seven  or  eight  are  required.  These  quotations  show  that 
Kamandaki  knew  a  work,  attributed  to  Manu,  which  con- 
tained rules  on  the  duties  of  kings,  and  in  some  respects 
agreed  with  the  seventh  chapter  of  our  Manu-smn'tL  If  I 
conclude  that  this  must  have  been  the  old  Manava 
Dharma-sutra,  it  is  because  Kamandaki  twice  alludes  to  it 
by  the  title  Manava/*,  literally  '  those  who  study  a  work 
proclaimed  by  Manu,'  or,  more  freely  rendered,  '  the 
Manava  school.'  It  is  a  very  common  practice  of  Indian 
authors  to  refer  in  this  manner  to  the  books  restricted  to 
special  schools.  But  I  know  of  no  case  where  the  doctrines 
of  the  Manava  Dharmaj-astra,  or  of  any  other  work  which 
is  destined  for  all  Aryans  and  acknowledged  as  authorita- 
tive by  all,  are  cited  in  the  same  or  in  a  similar  way.  Nor  is 
it  usual  to  contrast,  as  Kamandaki  does,  the  rules  taught 
by  Manu  with  those  of  other  teachers  and  afterwards  to 
reject  them3.  If  a  Hindu  writer  on  law  finds  it  necessary 
to  set  aside  an  opinion  of  Manu,  he  either  passes  by  it  in 
silence  or  he  interprets  the  passage  where  it  occurs  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  of  some  other  Smriti  with 

iw^Tf^ift  inn  11311 

2  With  respect  to  Medhatithi's  and  Narayarca's  explanations,  see  the  note  to 
the  translation.  I  will  add  that  Kam.  Nit.  II,  7,  ^^TfWWrRfa$CT«T^ 
'  The  science  of  dialectics  (is)  a  means  of  fully  recognising  the  Soul  or  Self,' 
speaks  in  favour  of  Narayawa's  explanation,  and  that  it  would  perhaps  have 
been  better  if  I  had  placed  the  latter  in  the  text. 

*  As  the  learned  editor  of  the  Nitisara  (Preface,  p.  2)  asserts  that  its  author 
was  a  Buddhist,  it  might  be  conjectured  that  the  latter  treated  Manu  with  small 
respect,  because  he  belonged  to  a  heterodox  sect.  But  it  ought  to  be  noted 
that  no  proof  is  offered  for  the  above  assertion,  and  that  the  work  contains  no 
trace  of  Buddhism. 


XXXV111  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


which  he  himself  agrees.  Hence  it  is  not  doubtful  that 
Kamandaki's  references  point  to  a  work  of  Manu  which, 
though  highly  esteemed,  did  not  hold  the  same  paramount 
position  as  Bhrzgu's  version  of  Manu's  laws.  In  other 
words,  Kamandaki's  Manu  must  have  been  the  property  of 
a  particular  school,  and  that  was  just  the  case  with  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra.  The  fact  that  all  the  known 
Dharma-sutras  contain  a  more  or  less  detailed  description 
of  the  duties  of  kings  agrees  well  with  this  supposition,  and 
so  does  the  circumstance  that  Kamandaki's  Nitisara  is 
either  really  an  ancient  work,  composed  long  before  the 
beginning  of  our  era,  or  at  least  a  later  recension  of  such 
an  old  book1.  These  are  all  the  certain  indications  of  the 
former  existence  of  a  Manava  Dharma-sutra  which  I  have 
been  able  to  find.  It  is  possible  that  the  same  work  is 
also  alluded  to  in  some  verses  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
Parvans  of  the  Mahabharata.  But  this  question  is,  as  we 
shall  see  below,  surrounded  with  great  difficulties,  and  its 
solution  somewhat  doubtful.  Among  the  passages,  dis- 
cussed above,  none  are  so  important  as  Vasish/^a's  quota- 
tions. The  remainder  contribute,  however,  to  give  a  more 
definite  idea  of  the  range  of  subjects  included  in  the  lost 
work,  and  they  confirm  the  conclusion,  drawn  from  the 
former,  that  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  closely  resembled 
our  Manu-smrzti. 

The  investigations  concerning  the  last  point,  the  question 
if  any  traces  of  a  connexion  of  our  Manu-smrzti  with  the 
writings  of  the  Manava  school  are  discoverable,  have 
hitherto  led,  as  stated  above,  to  a  negative  result.  They 
were,  of  course,  directed  to  a  comparison  of  the  Manava 
Gr/hya-sutra  with  the   Dharma^astra,   as   both  works    of 

1  The  work  claims  to  be  the  composition  of  a  pupil  of  Aandragupta's  famous 
minister,  Aa#akya  Kau/ilya  or  Kau/alya,  to  whom  a  portion  of  the  Mangala- 
£ara«a  is  dedicated,  and  who  is  frequently  referred  to  as  the  Guru  or  teacher. 
Though  there  is  no  clear  evidence  corroborating  this  statement,  there  is  also 
none  to  rebut  it.  In  favour  of  this  claim  speaks  the  fact  that  the  name  of  the 
author  is  a  nomen  gentile.  For  among  the  ancient  writers  the  practice  of 
signing  their  books  with  the  family-name  is  almost  universal.  Later  it  seems  to 
have  fallen  into  disuse.  The  Nitisara  is  quoted  by  the  oldest  commentator  of 
Manu,  Medhatithi. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 


necessity  frequently  treat  of  the  same  subjects.  On  com- 
paring the  corresponding  portions  of  the  two  works,  Pro- 
fessor Jolly1  found  no  special  agreement  with  respect  to 
the  ages  prescribed  for  the  performance  of  the  Sawskaras, 
with  respect  to  the  marriage-rites  and  to  the  rules  for  the 
conduct  of  students  and  of  Snatakas.  Nor  was  he  able  to 
discover  in  the  Manu-smrzti  any  of  the  curious  technical 
terms  and  phrases  used  in  the  Grzhya-sutra,  while  the 
somewhat  closer  resemblance  in  the  Mantras  of  the  Vai^va- 
deva  ceremony  and  in  a  few  other  points  turned  out  to 
be  without  conclusiveness  on  account  of  the  concurrent 
agreement  of  other  Gr/hya-sutras.  Dr.  von  Bradke's  re- 
examination of  the  question  2  did  not  yield  any  other  result. 
I  can  only  bear  witness  to  the  general  correctness  of  these 
remarks.  Though  it  is  possible  to  adduce  some  passages, 
not  mentioned  by  Professor  Jolly3,  in  which  the  Grzhya- 
sutra  shows  a  special  affinity  with  the  Smr/ti,  the  very 
great  differences  which  occur  in  other  sections  4,  the  absence 
of  an  agreement  in  particularly  characteristic  rules5,  and  the 


1  On  the  Vishnu  Dharma-sutra  and  the  Kanaka ;  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Bavarian  Academy,  1879,  ii,  p.  82  seq. 

2  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xxxii,  p.  438. 

3  Among  the  rules  which  specially  agree,  I  may  mention  one  from  the  section 

on  the  Initiation,  Man.  Gri.  Su.  I,  22  (end),  ^1  *tc|  ^Tff  [^^]  I  TTiTT^- 

smi  i  *maT*n:  *jf ^  Tmuft  ^rr  #faf£rn:  ^g:  «     '  Next  he  shaii 

go  out  to  beg,  first,  to  his  mother  and  to  other  females  who  are  friendly,  or  to 
as  many  as  may  be  near.'  These  Sutras  correspond  to  Manu  II,  50,  '  Let  him 
first  beg  food  of  his  mother,  or  of  his  sister,  or  of  his  own  maternal  aunt,  or  of 
(some  other)  female  who  will  not  disgrace  him  (by  a  refusal).'  I  am  not  aware 
that  this  rule  occurs  in  any  other  Smr/ti. 

4  Among  the  very  great  discrepancies  I  would  point  to  such  as  those  occurring 
in  the  section  on  the  marriage-rites.  The  Manu-smrz'ti  III,  20-34,  describes  the 
well-known  eight  modes  by  which  a  woman  may  be  obtained  from  her  family. 
But  the  Manava  Gre'hya-sutra  I,  7-8,  knows  two  only,  the  Brahma  and  the  6aulka 
rites,  the  latter  of  which  corresponds  to  the  Asura  or  Manusha  rite  of  the  other 
Smr/tis,  and  sanctions  the  purchase  of  the  bride  from  her  parents. 

5  The  absence  of  an  agreement  in  characteristic  rules  is  particularly  notice- 
able in  the  chapter  on  the  study  of  the  Veda  and  the  stoppages  of  the  Veda 
study.  There  the  general  rules,  e.  g.  regarding  the  beginning,  length,  and  end- 
ing of  the  school-term,  which  are  found  also  in  other  Snm'tis,  agree  in  both 
works.  But  none  of  those  special  prescriptions  which  the  Manava  Grzhya-sutra 
gives  for  the  time  when  and  the  ceremonies  with  which  particular  portions  of 
the  Maitrayam  Sawhita  are  to  be  learnt  can  be  traced  in  the  Manu-smrzti. 


xl  LAWS    OF   MANU. 


non-occurrence  of  Mantras,  peculiar  to  the  Maitrayamya- 
Manava  school  in  the  Manu-smrzti,  do  not  permit  us  to 
consider  them  as  decisive  for  the  settlement  of  the  question. 
On  the  other  hand,  this  negative  result  does  not  preclude 
the  possibility  that  the  supposed  connexion  between  the 
original  of  the  Manu-smrz'ti  and  the  Manava  school  may 
nevertheless  have  existed.  For  the  examples  of  the  Haira- 
nyakesa,s  and  Madhyawdinas  show  that  the  Sutras,  adopted 
by  a  school,  are  not  always  composed  by  one  and  the 
same  teacher,  but  sometimes  are  made  up  of  fragments 
originally  belonging  to  different  authors.  In  the  case  of 
the  Madhyawdinas  the  author  of  the  5rauta-sutra  is  a 
Katyayana,  while  the  Grzhya-sutra  bears  the  name  of  a 
Paraskara.  In  the  case  of  the  Haira/zyakcras  the  Dharma- 
sutra,  though  it  is  ascribed  to  Hira/zyake.rin  Satyasha^a, 
is  in  reality  the  work  of  Apastamba,  and  differs  both  in 
its  language  and  in  its  contents  very  much  from  the 
Grzhya-sutra 1.  Moreover,  the  Haira/zyakcra  A"ayana- 
sutra  has  been  taken  over,  as  its  colophon  clearly  proves, 
from  the  Bharadva^as.  It  is,  therefore,  still  possible  that 
the  ancient  Manava  Dharma-sutra  was  considered  as  the 
special  property  of  the  Manavas,  but  was  not  composed 
by  the  same  teacher  as  the  Grzhya-sutra,  or  that,  though 
both  works  had  the  same  author,  the  materials  for  their 
composition  were  borrowed  from  different  sources.  Either 
supposition  would  explain  the  discrepancies  between  the 
two  works.  If  we  now  could  show  that  some  other  work 
belonging  to  the  Manava  Ka.ra.na.  shows  a  special  affinity 
to  the  Manu-smrzti,  the  view  that  the  original  of  the  latter 
was  first  the  property  of  that  school  might  be  still  upheld. 
A  renewed  examination  of  the  various  treatises,  studied 
and  claimed  as  their  own  by  the  Manavas,  has  convinced 
me  that  such  a  connecting  link  is  actually  found  among 
them.  This  is  the  *Sraddhakalpa,  a  description  of  the 
ordinary  funeral  sacrifices  which  the  Manava  Grzhya- 
sutra  does  not  treat  in  detail,  but  barely  touches  in  the 
sections  on  the  Ash/aka  rites  (II,  8-9).  If  this  treatise  has 
not  been  taken  into  consideration  by  Professor  Jolly  and 

1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxiii. 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 


Dr.  von  Bradke,  the  reason  is  that  it  is  not  contained  in 
Professor  Haug's  collection  of  the  Manava  Sutras,  the 
only  one  which  has  hitherto  been  accessible  to  European 
students.  In  my  copy  of  the  works  of  the  Manava  school 
it  stands  after  the  Pravaradhyaya l.  It  consists  of  four 
short  Khandas.  The  first  begins  with  the  words,  '  Now  we 
will  explain  the  rules  for  the  funeral  sacrifices,'  and  treats  of 
the  following  points  :  the  invitation  of  qualified  Brahma/zas, 
their  hospitable  reception  with  the  Arghya  in  the  house  of 
the  sacrificer,  the  invocations  asking  the  Vuvedevas  and  the 
manes  to  attend,  and  the  burnt  oblations  offered  to  Soma, 
Yama,  and  Agni.  The  Mantras  which  are  to  be  used 
seem,  if  not  all,  at  least  for  the  greater  part,  to  have  been 
taken  from  the  Maitraya/zi  Sawhita.  This  section  shows 
hardly  any  special  agreement  with  the  Manu-smrzti,  except 
in  the  rule,  known  also  from  other  Dharma-sutras,  which 
prescribes  the  entertainment  of  two  guests  at  the  rite  in 
honour  of  the  gods,  and  of  three  at  the  offering  to  the 
manes  or  of  one  on  either  occasion,  as  well  as  in  the 
number  and  the  deities  of  the  burnt  oblations  which  precede 
the  5raddha  (Manu  III,  123,  211).  But  the  second  YLhanda, 
which  contains  the  description  of  the  Sraddha  ceremony, 
opens  with  a  couple  of  verses,  the  first  of  which  corres- 
ponds almost  literally2  with  Manu  III,  274.  The  only  im- 
portant difference  is  that  at  the  end  the  words  '  in  the  rainy 
season  and  under  (the  constellation)  Magha/z '  take  the 
place  of  Manu's  '  when  the  shadow  of  the  elephant  falls 
towards  the  east.'  It  must  be  noted  that,  though  Vishnu 
LXXVIII,  52-53  and  Vasish/^a  XI,  40  have  passages  which 
contain  similar  prayers  of  the  manes,  their  wording  differs 
very  considerably  from  that  of  the  5raddhakalpa  and  of 

1  My  MS.  of  the  writings  of  the  Manava  Aa.ra.na.,  which  was  copied  in  1864-65 
at  Nasik,  includes,  besides  the  Sawhita  and  the  Upanishad,  counted  as  the  fifth 
Kanda,  all  the  portions  of  the  6rauta-sutra,  known  from  Professor  Haug's  MSS. 
together  with  the  Kumara  or  Kumarila  Bhashya  and  portions  of  a  later  vrz'tti 
by  Mijra  Balakrr sh«a,  as  well  as  the  Grzhya-sutra  with  its  Bhashya,  the  Purawa- 
khya,  by  Bha#a  Ash/avakra  (not  by  Kumarila,  as  I  conjectured  in  West  and 
Buhler's  Digest,  p.  46,  note  a),  and  the  iSraddhakalpa. 


xlii  LAWS   OF    MANU. 


the  Mahu-smr/ti.  The  second  verse1  bears  a  faint  resem- 
blance to  Manu  III,  202,  as  it  declares  that  water  offered 
in  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  or  Udumbara  '  becomes  imperish- 
able.' The  following  prose  portion  has  little  in  common 
with  Manu's  rules.  Curiously  enough,  it  prescribes  that 
the  funeral  cakes  are  to  be  offered  after  the  guests  have 
finished  their  meal,  a  custom  which  Manu  III,  261  attri- 
butes to  '  some.'  The  section  closes  with  some  51okas2,  the 
last  of  which  is  nearly  identical  with  Manu  III,  283.  The 
chief  difference  is,  that  in  the  first  line  the  word  5raddhe, '  at 
a  6raddha,'  occurs  instead  of  snatva, '  after  his  bath.'  The 
second  var.lect.  samahita^, '  with  a  concentrated  mind,'  instead 
of  dvi^ottama^, '  a  Brahma^a,' is  found  in  the  Southern  MSS. 
of  Manu.  The  next  section,  which  is  not  numbered  in  the 
colophon  as  Khanda,  3,  but  separately,  treats  of  the  Abhyu- 
daya,  or  VWddhi-jraddha,  the  funeral  oblations  which  must 
be  offered  on  all  joyful  occasions,  such  as  the  celebration  of 
the  birth  of  a  son,  a  wedding,  and  so  forth3.  As  Manu 
mentions  this  variety  of  the  6raddha  only  incidentally,  III, 
254,  the  contents  of  this  Khanda  find  no  counterpart  in  the 
Smrzti.  But  among  its  numerous  51okas  one  line  agrees 
literally  with  Manu  IX,  186  a4.  The  fourth  and  last  section 
of  the  Kalpa,  which  is  marked  as  the  Paruishta,  the  addenda, 
gives  miscellaneous  rules  regarding  the  times  when  5raddhas 
may  be  performed,  the  manner  in  which  the  fulfilment  of 
certain  special  wishes  may  be  secured,  and  the  persons  to 
be  entertained   on  such  occasions.     It  consists  chiefly  of 

^  (sic)  || 

2  ^$r  J^fWHwnrJMf  *?fii^  (sic)  i  ^n^^^l^rqrm^^- 
ifc^r*:  fxnr^  u  mi  *r  *ft  ?t  ^frqiprcaf  g^r*rc  (sic)  1  irf^f^- 
HTftn  fasroi  sn*nr  f  fa:  u  i$q  cr^qwfk:  fqTpsrrir  *m%:  \  tt^t 

SPTTWt  II 

8  Beginning  ^HT  ^f^tnt  ^TTOT^W  II  Colophon,  ^fft  *ll»iq<J^ 
^J^n^  II 

4  -^rcraTij^  ^RT§f^  fife:  iref*  11 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 


verses,  seven1  of  which  are  either  quite  or  nearly  identical 
with  passages  of  the  Manu-smrzti  III,  82,  125-126,  145, 
185,  148,  and  186,  while  another,  which  teaches  that  the 
invited  Brahmawas  and  the  sacrificer  must  remain  chaste 
'  because  the  manes  dwell  with  them2,'  agrees  in  substance 
with  Manu  III,  189.  Two  among  the  seven  51okas,  those 
corresponding  to  Manu  III,  125-126,  occur  also  in  the  Va- 
sish/y^a  and  Baudhayana  Dharma^astras.  The  remainder 
are  not  traceable  in  the  ancient  Sutras. 

These  remarks  show  that  the  Manava  Sraddhakalpa 
consists,  like  many  other  handbooks  ofVedic  schools,  of 
several  pieces,  which  probably  have  been  composed  succes- 
sively at  different  times.  Even  the  whole  treatise  may  be 
possibly  later  than  the  Grzhya-sutra,  and  may  have  been 
added  in  order  to  supplement  its  too  curt  rules  on  funeral 
sacrifices.  But  in  spite  of  these  admissions,  the  fact  that  it 
contains  so  many  verses  partly  or  wholly  agreeing  with  the 
Manu-smrzti,  keeps  its  importance  for  the  point  under 
consideration.  If  an  adherent  of  the  Manava  school  found 
it  necessary  to  compose  a  treatise  on  a  subject  like  the 
5raddhas,  he  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  base  it  on  the 
usage  and  the  teaching  of  his  school.  Hence  it  may  be 
assumed  that  the  verses  which  he  inserted  were  current  in 

"nWTspni  II  In  the  corresponding  verse  of  Manu,  Medh.  and  Gov.  read  W^Tr^ 
instead  of  Kulluka's  ^Tq^ll    b.  ^  ^  WrTnr  [V]  stftilJ^Tnr  ^T I 

*nsrcw^:  1  v^mf*  [wifo]  wd  *far  ircnt^i  [%f  1]  fa^ri  [t]  1 

fTrn^u  a.  tRnfT^  Mfr^f^]  ^nS  1  W  fwf>raw:  *rj*Tf^i 
"^m^iT^jTn^ft  ^^Finn  ^  ^  11    e.  hthtoi  mijcs  ^  ^reW  ^t  *J%  I 

^  wqur  [^v]  *t^t  fwav.  [tt:]  i  ^nng^hr  faiftT  srarcn:  tf%- 

*Tre*TK  II  The  fifth  and  sixth  verses  have  been  transposed  by  a  mistake  of 
the  copyist. 

2  ^rnif^nft  fsm  [^fl°]  faro  Hwfw  1 1  *pwtto  ttt  ufv 
^gSa^Tftjn:  (sic)  a 


xliv  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


the  latter,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  may  have 
occurred  in  one  of  its  written  works.  As,  further,  the 
Manu-smrz'ti  rests  on  a  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  and  has 
derived  from  the  latter  a  number  of  its  verses,  the  most 
natural  explanation  of  the  partial  agreement  between  the 
5raddhakalpa  and  the  Sm^'ti  is  that  both  have  drawn  on 
the  same  source,  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra.  If  that  is  so, 
the  latter  must  have  been  considered  as  authoritative  by  the 
Manavas,  and  have  been  their  peculiar  property.  Though 
several  links  in  this  chain  of  arguments  must  unfortunately 
remain  hypothetical,  it  seems  to  me,  especially  if  taken 
together  with  Professor  Jolly's  and  Dr.  von  Schroder's 
above-mentioned  discoveries  regarding  the  relation  of  the 
books  of  the  Kanaka  school  to  those  of  the  Maitrayamya- 
Manavas  and  of  the  Vish^u-smr/'ti  to  the  Manu-smrzti,  suffi- 
ciently strong  to  show  that  also  this  part  of  Professor  Max 
Miiller's  hypothesis  is  more  than  an  ingenious  conjecture. 

In  conclusion,  I  may  mention  that  two  other  circum- 
stances— a  certain  agreement  between  the  Maitraya^a- 
brahma^opanishad  and  the  Manu-smrzti,  as  well  as  the 
preference  which  the  latter  shows  for  North-western  India 
in  its  description  of  the  countries  where  pure  Aryan  cus- 
toms prevail  (II,  17-22) — may  also  point  to  a  connexion 
of  the  Manu-smnti  and  of  its  original  with  the  Manava 
school.  In  the  Upanishad  VI,  37,  we  find  quoted,  as  a 
generally  known  maxim,  a  verse  which  occurs  Manu 
III,  76.  Two  other  verses,  Manu  VI,  76—77,  agree  in 
substance  with  Maitr.  Up.  Ill,  41,  and  some  of  Manu's 
statements  regarding  the  Atman  and  the  results  of  the  gu?*as 
or  qualities  closely  correspond  to  the  doctrines  taught  in 
the  Upanishad2.  On  a  closer  examination  these  resem- 
blances lose,  however,  a  good  deal  of  their  significance. 
For  the  ideas  expressed  in  Manu  III,  76  are  likewise 
traceable  in  a  Vedic  passage  quoted  in  Vasish/^a's  Dharma- 
sutra.  The  comparison  of  the  human  body  to  an  impure 
dwelling  (Manu  VI,  76-77)  reappears  even  in  Buddhistic 
works3.     The  corresponding  philosophical  tenets,  finally, 

1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xv,  p.  298,  note  I.        2  See  below,  p.  lxxiii. 
3  Dhammapada,  147-150;  Johanntgen,  Das  Gesetzbuch  des  Manu,  p.  93. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 


occur  in  a  portion  of  the  Manu-smrzti  which  probably  is 
not  ancient  \  and  they  are  held  by  several  of  the  special 
schools  of  philosophy.  As  regards  the  passages  in  Manu's 
second  chapter  which  praise  the  holiness  of  the  districts 
between  the  Drzshadvati  and  the  Sarasvati,  and  between 
the  Yamuna  and  the  Ganga,  they  may  indicate,  as  Dr. 
Johanntgen  thinks2,  that  the  home  of  the  school  which 
produced  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  lies  in  those  districts. 
If  that  were  certain,  it  would  agree  well  enough  with  the 
facts  known  regarding  the  ancient  seats  of  the  Manavas. 
The  latter  are  a  North-western  sect,  and  extended,  as  the 
Mahanzava  asserts3,  from  the  Mayura  hill  to  Gujarat. 
Unfortunately,  however,  the  Dharma-sutras  of  Vasish^a  and 
Baudhayana  contain  almost  exactly  the  same  statements 
as  Manu,  and  hence  the  verses  of  the  latter  possibly  mean 
nothing  more  than  that  the  Manavas,  like  many  other 
Vedic  schools,  considered  India  north  of  the  Vindhyas,  and 
especially  the  districts  adjoining  the  sacred  rivers,  as  the 
true  home  of  Brahmanism  and  of  Aryan  purity. 

II. 

While  the  preceding  discussion  has  shown  that  our 
Manava  Dharma^astra  is  based  on  a  Manava  Dharma-sutra 
which  probably  was  the  exclusive  property  of  the  Maitra- 
yawiya- Manava  school,  we  have  now  to  consider  some 
questions  connected  with  the  conversion  of  the  locally 
authoritative  Sutra  into  a  law-book  claiming  the  allegiance 
of  all  Aryans  and  generally  acknowledged  by  them.  The 
problems  which  now  have  to  be  solved,  or  at  least  to  be 
attempted,  are  the  following:  I.  what  circumstances  led  to 
the  substitution  of  a  universally  binding  Manava  Dharma- 
.yastra  for  the  manual  of  the  Vedic  school  ?  2.  why  was  so 
prominent  a  position  allotted  to  the  remodelled  Smrttl? 

1  See  below,  p.  lxix. 

2  Loc.  cit.  pp.  109-110. 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxxi ;  and  L.  von  Schroder,  Maitrayawi 
Sawh.  I,  pp.xxiv-xxviii.  The  ancient  inscriptions  name  Maitrayawa  Brahma«as 
as  donees  in  the  Central  India  Agency  and  Gujarat.  The  Manava  school  still 
exists  in  the  latter  country  and  in  Khandesh. 


xlvi  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


3.  how  was  the  conversion   effected?  and  4.  when  did  it 
probably  take  place  ? 

Though  the  absence  of  all  historical  information,  and 
even  of  a  trustworthy  tradition,  makes  it  impossible  to 
give  full  and  precise  details  in  answering  the  first  question, 
it  is  yet,  I  think,  possible  to  recognise  the  general  cause 
which  led  to  the  production  of  that  class  of  secondary 
Smrztis  to  which  the  Manava  Dharmajastra  belongs  *. 
This  cause  lies,  it  seems  to  me,  in  the  establishment  of 
special  law  schools  which  were  independent  of  any  parti- 
cular .Sakha  of  the  Veda,  and  which  supplanted  the  Vedic 
Karanas  as  far  as  the  teaching  of  the  sacred  law  is  con- 
cerned. Evident  as  it  is  that  the  Vedic  schools  first 
systematised  and  cultivated  the  six  sciences  which,  on 
account  of  their  close  connexion  with  the  Veda,  are  called 
its  Angas  or  limbs,  it  is  no  less  apparent  that,  as  the 
materials  for  each  of  these  subjects  accumulated  and  the 
method  of  their  treatment  was  perfected,  the  enormous 
quantity  of  the  matter  to  be  learnt,  and  the  difficulty  of  its 
acquisition  depressed  the  Vedic  schools  from  their  high 
position  as  centres  of  the  intellectual  life  of  the  Aryas,  and 
caused  the  establishment  of  new  special  schools  of  science, 
which,  while  they  restricted  the  range  of  their  teaching, 
taught  their  curriculum  thoroughly  and  intelligently.  In 
the  Vedic  schools  a  full  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the 
sacred  texts  was,  of  course,  always  the  primary  object. 
In  order  to  gain  that  the  pupils  had  to  learn  not  only  the 
Sawhita  text  of  the  Mantras  and  Brahma^as,  but  also  their 
Pada,  Krama,  and  perhaps  still  more  difficult  pa/^as  or 
modes  of  recitation.  This  task  no  doubt  required  a  con- 
siderable time,  and  must  have  fully  occupied  the  twelve 
terms  of  four  and  a  half  or  five  and  a  half  months  which 
the  Smrztis  give  as  the  average  duration  of  the  studentship 
for  the  acquisition  of  one  Veda2.  As  long  as  the  Ahgas 
consisted  of  short  simple  treatises,  it  was  also  possible  to. 

1  Regarding  the  various  classes  of  secondary  Smr/tis,  see  West  and  Biihler, 
Digest,  p.  32,  third  edition. 

2  See  Manu  III,  1,  and  IV,  95,  as  well  as  the  parallel  passages  quoted  in  the 
notes. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvil 


commit  them  to  memory  and  to  master  their  contents  in 
the  twelve  terms,  consisting  of  the  seven  or  eight  dark 
fortnights  from  the  month  Pausha  to  Vafcakha1.  But 
when  the  Kalpa  or  ritual  alone  reached  dimensions  as  in 
the  Sutras  of  the  Baudhayaniyas  and  Apastambiyas,  while 
the  grammar  developed  into  as  artificial  a  system  as  that 
of  Pa/zini,  it  became  a  matter  of  sheer  impossibility  for  one 
man  to  commit  to  memory  and  to  fully  understand  the 
sacred  texts  together  with  the  auxiliary  sciences,  especially 
as  the  number  of  the  latter  was  increased  in  early  times  by 
the  addition  of  the  Nyaya  or  Purva  Mima.7/zsa,  the  art  of 
interpreting  the  rules  of  the  Veda2.  The  members  of  the 
Vedic  schools  were  then  placed  before  two  alternatives. 
They  might  either  commit  to  memory  all  the  Vedic  texts 
of  their  Sakhas  together  with  the  Angas,  renouncing  the 
attempt  at  understanding  what  they  learnt,  or  they  had  to 
restrict  the  number  of  the  treatises  which  they  learnt  by 
heart,  while  they  thoroughly  mastered  those  which  they 
acquired.  Those  who  adhered  to  the  former  course  be- 
came living  libraries,  but  were  unable  to  make  any  real  use 
of  their  learning.  Those  who  adopted  the  second  alterna- 
tive might  become  great  scholars  in  the  science  of  the 
sacrifice,  grammar,  law  or  astronomy,  but  they  could  not 
rival  with  the  others  in  the  extent  of  the  verbal  knowledge 
of  the  sacred  books.  Thus  the  Vedic  schools  ceased  to  be 
the  centres  of  intellectual,  and  were  supplanted  by  the 
special,  schools  of  science. 

The  present  state  of  learning  in  India  proves  beyond 
doubt  that  this  change  actually  took  place  in  the  manner 
described,  and  direct  statements  in  the  ancient  text-books, 
as  well  as  their  condition,  allow  us  to  recognise  the  various 
stages  which  led  up  to  it.  The  true  modern  representa- 
tives of  the  ancient  Karanas  are  the  so-called  Vaidiks,  men 
who,  mostly  living  on  charity,  devote  their  energy  exclu- 
sively to   the   acquisition   of  a   verbal   knowledge  of  the 

1  See  Manu  IV,  98,  and  the  parallel  passages  quoted  in  the  note.  According  to 
some  Smrz'tis  the  Angas  might  be  studied  at  any  time  out  of  term  (Vas.  XIII,  7). 

2  Regarding  the  early  existence  of  the  Purva  Mfmawsa,  see  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  vol.  ii,  p.  xxvii ;  and  the  verse  on  the  constitution  of  a  Parishad, 
quoted  Baudh.  I,  1,  8  j  Vas.  Ill,  20. 


Xlviii  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


sacred  texts  and  of  the  Aiigas  of  their  Sakhas  as  well  as  of 
some  other  works,  more  or  less  closely  connected  with  the 
Veda.  A  perfect  Vaidik  of  the  A^valayana  school  knows 
the  Rig-veda  according  to  the  Sawhita,  Pada,  Krama,  Ca/a 
and  Ghana  Pa/^as,  the  Aitareya  Brahma/za  and  Ara^yaka, 
the  ritualistic  Sutras  of  Awalayana,  Saunaka's  Pratuakhya 
and  the  Siksha,  Yaska's  Nirukta,  the  grammar  of  Pa/zini, 
the  Vedic  calendar  or  (Syotisha,  the  metrical  treatise  called 
the  TT^andas,  Ya^avalkya's  Dharma^astra,  portions  of  the 
Mahabharata,  and  the  philosophical  Sutras  of  Ka^ada, 
(^aimini,  and  Badaraya^a.  Similarly  the  Vaidiks  of  the 
Ya^us,  Saman,  and  Atharvan  schools  are  able  to  recite, 
more  or  less  perfectly,  the  whole  of  the  works  of  their 
respective  5akhas  as  well  as  some  other  non-Vedic  books1. 
But  it  would  be  in  vain  to  expect  from  such  men  an  ex- 
planation of  the  literary  treasures  which  they  possess.  It 
is  not  the  professional  Vaidik  who  can  perform  the  great 
sacrifices  according  to  the  5rauta-sutras,  interpret  the  intri- 
cate system  of  Pacini's  grammar,  or  decide  a  knotty  point 
of  law  according  to  the  Dharma-sutra  or  the  secondary 
Smriti  which  he  knows  by  heart.  For  these  purposes  one 
must  go  to  quite  different  classes  of  men.  The  performance 
of  the  great  Srauta  sacrifices  lies  in  the  hands  of  the  5rotriya 
or  Srauti,  who  unites  with  a  thoroughly  verbal  knowledge  of 
the  sacred  texts  of  his  ^akha  a  full  acquaintance  with  the 
meaning  of  the  Srauta-sutras  and  with  the  actual  kriya  or 
manual  work,  described  in  the  Prayogas.  The  vSrauti,  as 
well  as  his  humbler  fellow- worker,  the  so-called  Ya^ika  or 
Bha#a£-i,  who  knows  the  Grzhya-sutras  and  performs  the 
rites  prescribed  for  domestic  occurrences,  likewise  both 
belong  to  the  representatives  of  the  Vedic  schools.  They 
make,  however,  no  pretence  to  a  knowledge  of  the  whole 
range  of  the  Angas,  but  content  themselves  with  studying 
the  Kalpa,  or  parts  of  it,  and  perhaps  the  5iksha2.     Real 

1  Regarding  the  necessity  for  a  Vaidik  to  learn  non-Vedic  books,  see  Vas. 
XXVIL  6. 

2  Regarding  the  present  condition  of  the  Vedic  schools  and  of  Vedic  learning, 
see  Haug,  Brahma  und  die  Brahmanen,  p.  47 ;  and  R.  G.  BhaWarkar's  careful 
paper,  'The  Veda  in  India'  (Ind.  Ant.  Ill,  132  sqq.)     P'rom  personal  observa- 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 


proficiency  in  the  other  still  surviving  Aiigas,  grammar, 
law,  and  astronomy  is  to  be  found  only  with  those  Vandits 
who  fulfil  their  duty  of  studying  the  Veda  by  committing 
to  memory  a  few  particularly  important  sections,  such  as 
the  Pavamani-hymns  of  the  Rig-veda  or  the  5atarudriya 
of  the  Ya^*ur-veda,  or  by  confining  themselves  to  the  few 
verses  which  occur  in  the  Brahmaya^a  and  the  Samdhya.- 
vandana1.  Their  chief  aim  is  to  be  perfect  in  one  or  more 
of  the  special  sciences  which  they  study,  without  reference 
to  a  particular  Vedic  school.  Thus,  though  a  Vand'it  who 
chiefly  devotes  himself  to  the  sacred  law  may  belong  to  the 
Vedic  school  of  Baudhayana  or  Apastamba,  he  will  not 
make  Baudhayana's  or  Apastamba's  Dharma-sutra  the 
starting-point  of  his  studies.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  fre- 
quently happen  that  he  possesses  no  knowledge  of  the 
Dharma-sutra  of  his  school,  except  a  few  passages  quoted 
in  the  commentaries  and  digests.  If  he  has  read  the  whole 
work,  he  will  consult  it  only  as  one  of  the  many  utterances 
of  the  ancient  sages.  He  will  not  attribute  to  it  a  higher 
authority  than  to  other  Smrztis,  but  interpret  it  in  accord- 
ance with  the  rules  of  the  secondary  Dharma.s-astras  of 
Manu  or  Ya^lavalkya.  A  good  illustration  of  this  state 
of  things  is  furnished  by  Saya;za-Madhava's  treatment  of 
Baudhayana  in  hisVyavaharamadhava,  a  treatise  on  civil  and- 
criminal  law  supplementing  his  commentary  on  Para^ara's 
Smrz'ti.  Though  he  himself  tells  us,  in  the  introduction  to 
the  Parlyara-smrzti-vyakhya2,  that  he  belonged  to  the 
school  of  Baudhayana,  and  though  he  seems  to  have  written 
a  commentary  on  Baudhayana's  Sutras,  he  relies,  e.  g.  for 
the  law  of  Inheritance,  not  on  Baudhayana's  Dharma- 
sutra,  but  on  Vi£v7&ne.svara's  exposition  of  Ya^vzavalkya. 
He  quotes  Baudhayana  only  in  three  places3.  As  far  as 
the  law  is  concerned,  Saya^a  follows  the  theories  of  the 

tion  I  can  add  to  Professor  BhaWarkar's  statements  that  Vaidiks  of  the  White 
Ya^r-veda  are  found  also  in  Northern  India.  I  have  also  heard  of  Vaidiks  of 
the  Safna-veda  among  the  Parvatiyas  in  the  Panjab,  and  of  the  Atharva-veda 
in  the  Central  India  Agency. 

1  Bha«</arkar,  loc.  cit.  p.  132  note. 

2  Pararara-smrz'ti-vyakhya,  p.  3,  ver.  7  (Calcutta  edition). 

3  Burnell,  Dayavibhaga,  pp.  9,  39, 41. 

[25]  d 


1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


special  law  school  of  his  time  and  of  his  country,  without 
particular  reference  to  the  teaching  of  his  Vedic  iTara^a. 

This  depression  of  the  Vedic  iTara/zas  through  special 
schools,  which  took  over  the  scientific  cultivation  of  a  most 
important  portion  of  the  Angas,  is  not  of  modern  date.     It 
goes  back  to  a  time  which  lies  long  before  the  beginning  of 
the  historical  period  of  India.     We  have  various  indications 
in  the  ancient  books  which  force  us  towards  this  conclusion. 
Thus  Yaska's  Nirukta,  a  work  which  undoubtedly  belongs 
to  a  very  early  period,  quotes  Vaiyakara/zas,  grammarians ; 
Nairuktas,  etymological  exegetes  ;  and  Ya^mkas,  ritualists  ; 
and  contrasts  their  conflicting  opinions1.     If  these  schools 
were  at  issue  with  respect  to  grammatical  or  exegetical 
questions,  it  follows  that  the  subjects  which  they  taught 
were  no  longer  cultivated  by  the  same  persons  as  auxiliary 
branches  of  the  Vedic  lore,  but  that  each  had  received  in  a 
special  school  a  separate  development  as  an  independent 
science.     The  actual  condition  in  which  the  various  Angas 
have  been  preserved,  fully  agrees  with  this  view.     It  shows 
that  two  at  least,  grammar  and  astronomy,  slipped  away 
from  the  control  of  the  Vedic  TTara/zas  in  very  early  times. 
For  not  one  of  those  schools,  the  text-books  of  which  have 
survived,  possesses  a  grammatical  or  an  astronomical  hand- 
book of  its  own.     Pacini's  Ash/adhyayf  is  the  sole  repre- 
sentative of  the  Vyakara/za   class   of  the  Angas,  and  is 
equally  acknowledged  by  the  followers  of  all  Vedas.     But 
grammar,  as  taught  by  Pacini,  is  no  longer  a  mere  hand- 
maiden of  the  Vedavidya.     It  is  an  independent  science 
which  lays  down  the  laws,  applicable  to  the  whole  Sanskrit 
language,  and  treats  what  we  now  call  the  classical  San- 
skrit as  the  standard  of  Aryan  speech,  the  Vedic  forms  as 
anomalies.     As  the  numerous  quotations  of  older  schools 
and  older  teachers  in  Pacini's  own  work,  in  the  PratiVakhyas, 
and  in  Yaska's  Nirukta  clearly  show,  a  very  considerable 
number  of  more  ancient  works   did   precede  the  Ash/a- 
dhyayi,  and  the  latter  is  undoubtedly  the  final  outgrowth 
of  a  long  scientific  development2.   A  good  many  of  the  lost 


1  Nirukta  I,  12  ;  V,  n ;  VII,  4 ;  XIII,  9. 

8  See  Max  Muller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  150,  who  says 


INTRODUCTION.  ll 


works  seem  to  have  treated  grammar  from  the  same  stand- 
point as  Pacini's  book.  But  it  may  be  reasonably  supposed 
that  the  earliest  among  them  mainly  or  even  exclusively 
taught  the  rules  applicable  to  the  Vedic  texts,  studied  by 
the  several  ATara/zas  to  which  the  authors  belonged.  This 
stage  of  grammatical  research  belongs,  however,  to  a  remote 
past.  Indian  grammar,  as  it  first  becomes  known  to  us,  is 
no  longer  entirely  subservient  to  the  wants  of  the  Veda- 
study,  but  works,  though  it  still  takes  account  of  the  Veda, 
for  its  own  ends. 

The  science  of  astronomy  is  still  more  loosely  connected 
with  the  Vedic  schools.  All  the  traces  of  its  really  having 
been  an  Anga  consist  in  the  small  treatise,  entitled  (Syotisha, 
of  which  two  slightly  different  recensions  are  extant,  one 
belonging  to  the  Rig-veda  and  one  to  the  Ya^ur-veda.  All 
the  other  works  on  this  subject,  even  the  ancient  ones  such 
as  the  Gargi  Sawhita,  as  well  as  the  Vasish///a  Sawhita 
and  Siddhanta,  show  no  connexion  with  the  Veda  or  Vedic 
schools,  except  that  their  authorship  is  ascribed  to  Rishls 
or  descendants  of  the  families  of  ^z'shis. 

As  regards  the  sacred  law,  the  fact  that  such  late  off- 
shoots of  the  Vedic  tree,  as  the  Apastambiyas  and  the 
Haira^yake^as,  possess  Dharma-sutras,  proves  that  this 
subject  much  longer  formed  part  of  the  curriculum  of 
the  Vedic  schools.  But  already  one  of  the  most  ancient 
grammarians  of  the  historical  period  of  India,  Pata/^ali, 
hints  that  in  his  times  the  Dharma  was  taught  not  only 
in  the  Vedic  but  also  in  special  schools.  For  on  the  one 
hand  he  refers  to  the  Dharma-sutras1,  on  the  other  he 
teaches  the  formation  of  a  special  word,  dharmavidya, 
which  denotes  '  a  person  who  studies  or  knows  the  dharma- 
vidya, the  science  of  the  sacred  law2.'  Possibly  the  word 
dharmajastra,  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred  law,  which  occurs 

most  appropriately  that  the  Hindus  ought  to  speak  not  of  the  Pawinyadya 
vaiyakarawa^,  but  of  the  PamnyantjU. 

1  See  the  remarks  on  Pawini  I,  I,  47. 

2  See  the  remarks  on  Pacini  IV,  2,  60  (vol.  ii,  p.  248,  Kielhorn).  I  follow 
Dr.  Kielhorn,  who  prints  the  words  '  vidya  /£anangakshatradharmatripurva '  as 
a  remark  of  Pata«£ali,  not  as  a  Varttika  of  Katyayana. 

d  2 


Ill  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


occasionally  in  his  Bhashya1,  may  also  point  to  manuals, 
studied  by  the  special  schools,  which  differed  from  the 
Dharma-sutras.  But  it  is  not  absolutely  conclusive,  as  a 
Dharma-sutra  too  may  be  called  a  Dharma^astra,  because 
it  teaches  the  sacred  law.  If  we  go  back  to  still  earlier 
times  we  find  the  existence  of  special  law  schools  clearly 
indicated  even  in  some  of  the  Dharma-sutras.  The  passages 
which  are  most  explicit  on  this  point  are  those  which 
describe  the  constitution  of  a  Parishad  or  an  assembly  of 
learned  men,  entitled  to  decide  doubtful  law  cases.  For  we 
read,  Vasish^a  III,  20,  and  Baudhayana  I,  1,  8, '  Four  men 
who  each  know  one  of  the  four  Vedas,  a  student  of  the 
Mima^sa,  one  who  knows  the  Angas,  one  who  recites  (the 
works  on)  the  sacred  law  (dharmapa^aka),  and  three 
Brahma^as  belonging  to  (three  different)  orders  (constitute) 
an  assembly  consisting  of,  at  least,  ten  (members)2.'  Here 
the  reciter  or  teacher  of  the  sacred  law  is  named  side  by 
side  with  him  who  knows  the  Angas.  As  the  two  works 
in  which  the  verse  occurs  are  Dharma-sutras  belonging  to 
the  Kalpa  section  of  the  Angas,  it  is  evident  that  the 
teacher  of  the  sacred  law  must  be  a  person  who  specially 
devotes  himself  to  the  study  of  that  subject,  and  knows 
more  than  one  Dharma-sutra.  Hence  it  follows  that 
special  law  schools  must  have  existed  at  the  time  when 
these  two  Dharma-sutras  were  composed3.  It  may  also  be 
that   already   then   these   special   schools    had   elaborated 

1  See  Katyayana's  Varttika  39  on  Pacini  I,  2,  64,  and  Pataw^ali's  remarks 
thereon  (Kielhorn,  Mali.  vol.  i,  p.  242). 

2  See  also  Manu  XII,  1 1 1 ;  and  above,  p.  xxv. 

3  The  significance  of  the  passage  quote'd  comes  out  still  stronger,  if  we  com- 
pare Gautama's  rule  (XXVIII,  49),  which  differs  very  considerably:  'They 
declare  that  an  assembly  (parishad,  shall  consist)  at  least  (of)  the  ten  follow- 
ing (members,  viz.)  four  men  who  have  completely  studied  the  four  Vedas,  three 
men  belonging  to  the  (three)  orders  enumerated  first,  (and)  three  men  who 
know  (three)  different  (institutes  of)  law.'  Gautama  says  nothing  of  men  speci- 
ally devoted  to  the  study  of  the  sacred  law.  He  requires  three  persons,  knowing 
three  different  Dharma-sutras.  He  and  Apastamba  are  perfectly  aware  of 
the  fragmentary  character  of  their  rules,  and  particularly  refer  their  pupils 
(Gaut.  XVI,  49;  Ap.  I,  3, 11,  38)  in  certain  cases  to  the  teaching  of  other 
schools,  which,  being  comprised  under  the  general  term  Smrz'ti,  have  authority, 
provided  the  teachers  were  orthodox  ilshfas  (Gaut.  I,  2  ;  Ap.  I,  1,  1,2;  Vas. 
I,  4;  Baudh.  I,  1,  1,  3). 


INTRODUCTION.  liii 


manuals  of  their  own  which  differed  from  the  Dharma- 
sutras.  In  favour  of  this  opinion  the  metrical  quotation  at 
Baudhayana  II,  4,  14-15  may  be  adduced,  as  it  seems  to 
have  been  taken  from  a  work  in  AnushAibh-Slokas1. 
Though  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  the  text  of  Baudhayana 
does  not  allow  us  to  insist  too  strongly  on  this  passage,  it 
is  undeniable  that  the  formation  of  special  law  schools  must 
inevitably  lead  after  a  short  time  to  the  composition  of 
manuals  for  their  use.  It  is,  no  doubt,  true  that  their 
founders  possessed  in  the  Dharma-sutras,  the  number 
of  which,  to  judge  from  the  quotations,  must  have  been 
very  great,  plentiful  materials  on  which  they  could  base 
their  investigations.  But  the  treatment  of  a  science  from 
a  new  point  of  view  was  in  itself  an  incentive  to  the 
production  of  new  manuals,  and  there  were  in  the  case  of 
the  special  law  schools  also  other  reasons  which  made  such 
a  course  desirable.  Minute  as  the  Dharma-sutras  generally 
are  on  the  majority  of  the  topics  connected  with  the  moral 
duties  of  Aryas,  their  arrangement  of  the  rules  is  fre- 
quently unsystematic,  and  their  treatment  of  the  legal 
procedure,  the  civil  and  the  criminal  law,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  one  single  title,  the  dayavibhaga,  i.  e.  the  law  of 
inheritance  and  partition,  extremely  unsatisfactory.  With 
respect  to  the  other  titles,  the  Dharma-sutras  give  nothing 
more  than  a  few  hints,  intended  to  indicate  the  general 
principles,  but  they  never  proceed  systematically,  and 
always  show  most  embarrassing  omissions.  From  the 
standpoint  of  the  Vedic  schools,  a  more  detailed  and 
orderly  treatment  of  these  matters  was,  of  course,  irrele- 
vant, as  their  chief  aim  was  to  point  out  the  road  to  the 
acquisition  of  spiritual  merit,  and  to  guard  their  pupils 
against  committing  sin.  Though  some  of  their  members 
might  be  called  upon,  and  no  doubt  actually  were  destined 
in  later  life,  to  become  practical  lawyers,  as  Dharmadhi- 
karins,  i.  e.  legal  advisers  of  kings  and  chiefs,  or  as  judges, 
and  to  settle  the  law  between  man  and  man,  the  few 
general  principles  which  they  had  learnt  during  their  course 
of  instruction  would  suffice  for  their  wants.     For  the  details 


Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  p.  xli. 


llV  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


were  settled  according  to  the  law  of  custom,  which,  as  the 
Dharma-sutras  themselves  indicate,  was  in  ancient  times 
even  a  greater  power  in  India  than  it  is  in  our  days. 
When  the  sacred  law  became  a  separate  science  to  which 
men  devoted  all  or  the  best  part  of  their  energy,  the  case 
became  different.  However  much  the  specialists  might  be 
convinced  of  the  supreme  importance  of  the  moral  side 
of  the  Dharma,  they  could  not  possibly  shut  their  eyes 
against  the  glaring-  deficiencies  of  the  old  text-books,  and 
they  were,  of  a  necessity,  driven  to  remedy  them.  In 
order  to  effect  this,  two  courses  were  open  to  them.  They 
might  either  remodel  the  old  existing  works  or  compose 
entirely  new  ones.  As  might  be  expected  from  the 
universal  tendency,  observable  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
sacred  literature  of  India,  they  gave  preference  to  the 
former  alternative,  and  the  result  of  their  work  was  that 
class  of  the  secondary  Smrztis,  the  chief  surviving  repre- 
sentatives of  which  are  the  Dharma^astras  of  Manu  and 
Ya^avalkya.  These  works  reveal  their  origin  by  the 
following  marks.  They  are  the  exclusive  property  of  the 
special  law  schools,  and  they  show  a  fuller  and  more 
systematic  treatment  of  all  legal  topics,  while,  at  the 
same  time,  more  or  less  clear  traces  of  older  redactions, 
connected  with  the  Vedic  schools,  are  to  be  found.  They 
are  free  from  all  signs  of  sectarian  influence,  or  of  having 
been  composed,  like  many  of  the  later  Digests,  at  royal 
command.  They,  finally,  exhibit  unmistakable  marks  of 
being  school-books.  If  we  examine  our  Manu-smrzti  with 
respect  to  these  points,  its  connexion  with  an  older  Vedic 
work  has  been  shown  above,  and  the  fact  that  it  is,  and  has 
been  ever  since  we  have  any  information  regarding  its 
existence,  in  the  keeping  of  the  Pa^its,  who  especially 
devote  themselves  to  the  study  of  law,  will  be  patent  to 
every  student  of  the  Dharma^astras.  That  it  treats  all 
legal  topics  more  fully  and  more  systematically  than  the 
Dharma-sutras,  and  especially  devotes  much  more  space  to 
those  subjects  which  are  briefly  noticed  in  the  latter  works, 
is  no  less  evident.  It  will  suffice  here  to  point  out  the 
fact  that  the  description  of  the  duties  of  the  king,  including 


INTRODUCTION.  lv 


the  administration  of  justice  and  the  civil  and  criminal  law, 
occupies  considerably  more  than  one-third  of  the  whole. 
For  chapters  vii-ix  contain  no  less  than  983  verses,  while 
the  total  number  amounts  to  2,684  l.  None  of  the  older 
law-books  devotes  more  than  one-fifth  of  its  text  to  such 
matters 2.  The  freedom  of  the  Manu-snWti  from  all 
sectarian  influence  is  perfect.  It  nowhere  teaches  the 
performance  of  other  rites  than  those  prescribed  in  the 
Vedic  writings,  and  it  nowhere  inculcates  the  exclusive 
worship  of  one  of  the  deities  of  the  Pauramk  sects  as  we 
find  it  recommended,  for  instance,  in  the  Vish/m-smrz'ti. 
Nor  is  there  any  hint  that  it  was  written  by  order  of  some 
king  or  chief  with  the  purpose  of  serving  as  a  Digest  of  the 
sacred  law.  Finally,  the  marks  of  its  being  a  school-book, 
intended  for  the  instruction  of  all  Aryas,  are  unmistakable. 
We  are  told,  Manu  I,  103,  that  'a  learned  Brahma^a 
must  carefully  study  these  (Institutes),  and  must  duly 
instruct  his  pupils  in  them,'  but  that  '  nobody  else  (shall  do 
it).'  Who  the  pupils,  entitled  to  learn  the  work,  are,  is 
explained  II,  16.  There  it  is  said  that  'he  for  whom 
(the  performance  of)  the  rites,  beginning  with  the  Garbha- 
dhana  and  ending  with  the  Antyeshtf,  is  ordained  together 
with  recitation  of  sacred  formulas,  is  entitled  to  study  it, 
but  no  other  man  whatsoever.'  Hence  Brahmans  are  to 
teach  the  5astra,  and  all  Aryas  may  learn  it.  It  further 
agrees  with  its  character  as  a  school-book,  if  the  phala^ruti 
or  statement  of  the  rewards  to  be  gained  by  its  study, 
Manu  XII,  126,  asserts  that  a  twice-born  man,  who  is  able 
to  recite  '  these  Institutes,  will  be  always  virtuous  in  con- 
duct, and  will  reach  (i.  e.  after  death)  whatever  condition  he 
desires.'  The  first  object  which  the  student  may  gain  is 
self-improvement,  and  the  second  happiness  after  death  3. 

1  About  the  same  ratio,  367  :  1009  is  found  in  Ya^vlavalkya's  Smrz'ti. 

2  Thus  in  the  Gautamiya,  seven  pages  of  the  text  out  of  thirty-four  are  filled 
with  legal  matters ;  in  the  VasishMa,  twelve  pages  out  of  eighty-one ;  in  the 
Apastambiya,  ten  out  of  ninety-eight ;  and  in  the  Baudhayaniya,  about  seven 
out  of  a  hundred  and  fifteen. 

3  Other  secondary  SmWtis,  e.  g.  Ya^avalkya's  (III,  330-334),  give  much 
more  detailed  statements  regarding  the  rewards  to  be  obtained.  But  in 
substance  they  always  agree  with  Manu. 


Ivi  LAWS   OF   MANU. 


If  we  accept  the  conclusion  which  the  preceding  discussion 
tends  to  establish,  that  the  special  law  schools  produced 
the  first  and  the  most  ancient  division  of  the  secondary 
Smrztis  on  the  basis  of  older  Dharma-sutras,  and  that  one 
among  these  schools,  which,  however,  cannot  be  further 
specified,  turned  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  into  our 
metrical  Smrz'ti1,  we  obtain  also  satisfactory  answers  to  two 
other  questions.  First,  it  becomes  explicable  why  the 
latter  work  shows  so  little  connexion  with  the  special 
doctrines  and  usages  of  the  Manavas.  If  adherents  of  the 
Vedic  Manava  school,  as  Professor  E.  Hopkins  conjectures2, 
had  undertaken  the  revision  of  their  Dharma-sutra,  they 
would  not  have  forgotten  to  mention  such  ceremonies  as 
those  which,  according  to  their  Grzhya-sutra,  must  be  per- 
formed on  beginning  the  study  of  particular  portions  of  their 
Sa;/zhita3,  and,  above  all,  they  would  have  allowed  Man- 
tras belonging  to  the  Maitraya/zi  5akha  to  stand.  Again, 
if  the  task  had  fallen  to  the  share  of  the  members  of  some 
other  Vedic  school,  we  should  find  some  points  mentioned 
which  were  of  special  interest  to  them.  The  entire  absence 
of  all  distinctive  marks  of  any  Vedic  school  which  the 
Manu-smWti  exhibits  can  only  be  explained  on  the  hypo- 
thesis that  it  was  remodelled  by  persons  for  whom  such 
minute  distinctions  had  no  interest,  and  who  concentrated 
their  attention  on  those  rules  which  they  considered 
essential  for  all  Aryas.  Secondly,  the  view  expressed 
above  furnishes  us  with  an  answer  to  the  question  why  the 
Manu-smrzti,  like  all  other  works  of  its  class,  emphatically 
claims  the  allegiance  of  all  Hindus.  It  is  obvious  that 
every  special  law  school  must  assert,  if  its  labour  is  not  to 
be  in  vain,  the  general  applicability  of  its  doctrines  and 
rules  to  all  mankind. 

If  we  now  turn  to  the  second  point,  what  reasons 
induced  the  special  law  schools  to  select  just  the  Manava 
Dharma-sutra  among  the  large  number  of  similar  works 

1  This  view,  which  I  first  taught  in  my  lectures  on  the  Hindu  law,  delivered  in 
the  Vienna  University  during  the  winter,  1881-82,  has  been  accepted  by  Professor 
J.  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  41,  and  Lecture  II  passim,  as  well  as  p.  347  (end). 

2  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  October,  i8S3,p.  xix. 

3  See  above,  p.  xxxix,  note  5. 


INTRODUCTION.  lvil 


for  the  basis  of  their  studies  and  to  recast  it,  the  answer 
is  not  difficult  to  find.  The  reason  for  this  selection, 
and  for  the  high  veneration  in  which  the  Manu-smrzti  has 
been  held  and  is  still  held  by  Hindus,  lies,  without  doubt, 
in  the  myths  which,  since  very  early  times,  have  clustered 
round  the  name  of  Manu,  and  in  progress  of  time  have  been 
more  and  more  developed  and  brought  into  a  system. 

In  Vedic  mythology,  Manu,  or  Manus^  as  he  is  also 
called  in  the  Rig-veda,  is  the  heros  eponymos  of  the 
human  race,  and  by  his  nature  belongs  both  to  gods  and 
to  men.  As  a  divine  being  he  is  described  as  the  son  of 
the  Aditya  Vivasvat  and  of  '  the  female  of  equal  colour,' 
whom  Vivasvat's  wife,  Sara/zyu,  made  to  take  her  place1, 
or  as  the  offspring  of  Svayambhu,  self-existent  Brahman2. 
In  the  same  quality  he  is  invoked  at  the  sacrifices  as 
pra^*apati,  the  Lord  of  created  beings3,  and  in  Kutsa- 
yana's  hymn  of  praise,  which  is  quoted  in  the  Maitraya^a 
Brahma^opanishad  (V,  i),  he  is  identified  with  Brahman, 
the  supreme  Soul4.  In  the  systematised  theology  of  the 
Nairuktas  he  appears  as  one  of  the  deities  residing  in 
heaven 5.  His  human  character  comes  out  still  more 
frequently.  He  is  named  in  the  Rig-veda  together  with 
other  sages  of  a  remote  antiquity6,  the  Taittiriya-sawhita 
speaks  of  him  as  of  the  father  of  a  family  who  divides  his 
estate  among  his  sons 7,  and  the  5atapatha-brahma;za  opens 
one  of  its  legends  regarding  him  with  a  passage  which  repre- 
sents him  as  following  the  usual  daily  customs  of  men 8. 

Manu's  position  as  the  progenitor  of  mankind  is  usually 

1  Valakhilya  IV,  i;  Atharva-veda  VIII,  10,  24;  .Sat.  Br.  XIII,  4,  3,  3;  and 
Nirukta  XII,  10. 

"  See  the  Vedic  jloka  quoted  Nirukta  III,  4,  about  which  more  will  be  said 
below.  A  third  account,  Valakhilya  III,  1,  makes  him  the  son  of  Saravararca, 
who  possibly  may  be  identical  with  the  J^zshi  mentioned  RV.  V,  33,  10. 

3  Taitt.  Sawh.  Ill,  2, 8, 1 ;  IV,  1, 9,  1 ;  \%.  Samh.  XI,  66  ;  Maitr.  Sa/?zh.  II,  7,  7. 

4  The  edition  reads  annaw,  food.  But  Professor  Max  Mutter's  MS.  has  cor- 
rectly Manu  (S.  B.  E.  XV,  p.  303  note).     My  copy  has  TsH  • 

5  Nirukta  XII,  33-34.  6  RV.  I,  80,  16  ;  1, 112,  16,  &c. 

7  Taitt.  Sawh.  Ill,  1,  9,  4. 

8  Sat.  Br.  I,  8, 1 ;  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xii,  p.  216, '  In  the  morning 
they  brought  to  Manu  water  for  washing,  just  as  they  (are  wont  to)  bring 
(water)  for  washing  the  hands.' 


lviii  LAWS   OF   MANU. 


indicated  in  general  terms  only.  In  the  Rig-veda  he  is 
repeatedly  called  '  Father  Manu  V  In  other  passages  we 
meet  frequently  with  the  assertion  that  '  the  five  tribes^  or 
'  these  created  beings,'  or  f  the  races  of  men  ■  are  his  off- 
spring 2.  But  in  the  famous  legend  of  the  flood,  given  by 
the  5atapatha-brahma^a  3,  we  have  a  circumstantial  account 
of  the  manner  in  which  he  produced  the  human  race. 
According  to  that  Brahma//a,  Manu  alone  was  saved  by 
the  advice  of  a  fish  from  a  great  flood  which  destroyed  all 
created  beings.  Being  desirous  of  offspring  he  engaged  in 
worshipping  and  in  performing  austerities.  During  this 
time  he  offered  a  Paka-ya^vla.  His  oblations  produced  a 
woman,  Ida.  or  I/a,  a  personification  of  the  \dk  ceremony 
and  of  '  the  blessing  of  the  sacrifice.'  Though  solicited  by 
Mitra  and  Varu;/a  to  become  theirs,  she  acknowledged 
herself  Manu's  daughter,  and  stayed  with  him.  '  With  her,' 
the  Brahmawa  concludes  in  somewhat  ambiguous  terms, 
'  he  went  on  worshipping  and  performing  austerities. 
Through  her  he  generated  this  race,  which  is  called  the 
race  of  Manu.'  Though  this  legend  is  alluded  to  in  another 
Brahma/za4,  and  repeated  in  later  Sanskrit  works,  it  maybe 
reasonably  doubted  whether  it  contains  the  original  version 
of  the  production  of  mankind  through  Manu.  It  seems 
more  probable  that  an  older  myth  ascribed  to  him  not  a 
reproduction,  but  the  first  creation  or  procreation  of  the 
human  race. 

Being  the  father  of  mankind,  Manu  is  naturally  con- 
sidered as  the  founder  of  social  and  moral  order,  as  a  ruler 
of  men,  and  as  a  Rzshi  to  whom  sacred  texts  were  revealed, 
as  the  inventor  of  sacrificial  rites,  and  the  author  of  legal 
maxims.  We  find,  therefore,  passages  which  assert  that  he 
was  a  king  5,  which  speak  of  his  coronation,  or  make  him 


1  RV.  I,  80,  16  ;  1, 124,  2  ;  II,  33,  13,  &c. 

2  RV.  Ill,  24,  3  ;  Taitt.  Sawh.  I,  5, 1,  3  ;  I,  5,  6, 1 ;   III,  4,  22  ;    III,  4,  3,  1  i 
VI,  1,  5,  6,  &c. ;  .Sat.  Br.  XIII,  4,  3,  3. 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xii,  pp.  216-219. 
*  Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  vol.  i,  p.  11,  note  3. 

5  See  e.g.  .Satapatha-brahmawa  XIII,  4,  3,  3,  and  RV.  I,  112,  8.    In  the 
latter  passage  the  epithet  .rara,  the  hero,  characterises  Manu  as  a  royal  personage. 


INTRODUCTION.  lix 


the  ancestor  of  kings.  Thus  a  Mantra,  recited  at  the 
Abhisheka  of  a  king1,  asserts  that  Pra^apati  formerly- 
anointed  Indra,  Soma,  Varu/za,  Yama,  and  Manu,  and 
among  the  mythical  kings  vSaryata  is  called  Manu's  son2, 
while  Pururavas  is  the  offspring  of  Manu's  daughter,  Ids.  or 
I/a 3.  In  later  times  this  ancient  idea,  which  makes  Manu 
the  first  king  of  men  and  the  ancestor  of  kings,  has  led  to 
his  being  placed  at  the  head  of  mythical  and  of  partly 
historical  genealogies.  From  him  springs  Ikshvaku,  the 
first  king  of  the  solar  dynasty  and  the  historical  TTalukya,  Ct-^^^f^ 
and  ifolajdngs  name  Manu  as  the  founder  of  their  families.  0U/1+-  ($'X*/* 

Much  more  frequently  the  Veda  alludes  to,  or  explicitly 
mentions,  Manu  as  the  inventor  of  sacrificial  rites.  The 
Rig-veda  contains  a  very  large  number  of  passages4  which 
speak  of  Manu's  sacrifices,  and  of  his  having  kindled  the 
sacred  fire,  or  invoked  the  gods  to  accept  the  offerings  of  the 
AVshis  just  as  they  accepted  those  of  Manu.  The  same 
assertions  are  repeated  in  the  Ya^ur-veda5,  and  the  5ata- 
patha-brahma/za  (I,  5,  1-7)  says  very  explicitly,  '  Manu, 
indeed,  worshipped  with  sacrifices  in  the  beginning ;  imitat- 
ing that,  this  progeny  (of  his  now)  sacrifices/  In  addition 
to  the  fire-worship,  Manu  is  also  said  to  have  invented  the 
*Sraddhas  or  funeral  sacrifices.  The  chief  passage  bearing 
on  this  point  occurs  in  Apastamba's  Dharma-sutra  II,  18, 1, 
where  it  is  stated  that  the  gods  went  to  heaven  in  reward 
of  their  sacrifices,  and  that  Manu,  seeing  men  left  behind, 
'  revealed  this  ceremony,  which  is  designated  by  the  word 
vSraddha.'  Though  this  passage  is  not  marked  as  a 
quotation,  its  style  clearly  shows  that  it  has  either  been 
borrowed  from  a  Brahma^a,  or  that  it  gives  a  summary  of 


1  Ait.  Br.  VIII,  8, 1. 

2  Sat.  Br.  IV,  1,  5,  2  ;  compare  also  Ait.  Br.  IV,  32  ;  VIII,  21,  where  the 
name  is  Saryata. 

3  RV.  I,  31,  4 ;  X,  95  ;  and  .Sat.  Br.  XI,  5,  1,  1.  In  the  first  passage  I  take 
manave  in  the  sense  of  manavaya. 

*  See  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  I,  62-70,  where,  it  seems  to  me,  a  great 
many  difficult  passages  have  been  explained  more  successfully  than  in  the 
translations  of  other  Vedists,  who  take  the  word  manu  too  freely  in  the  sense 
of  man. 

5  See  e.  g.  Taitt.  Sawh.  I,  7,  1,  3 ;  II,  5,  9,  1 ;  III,  3,  2,  1 ;  V,  4,  10,  5. 


lx  LAWS    OF   MANTT. 


a  longer  story  contained  in  such  a  work1.  It  is  probably 
on  account  of  this  legend  that  '  Manu,  the  offspring  of  the 
Sun,'  receives  in  the  Mahabharata2  the  epithet  5raddha- 
deva,  which  may  be  rendered  either  '  the  deity  of  the 
vSraddha,'  or,  perhaps  better, '  he  whose  deity  is  the  5raddha, 
i.  e.  the  vSraddha-worshipper.'  Closely  connected  with 
Manu's  position  as  inventor  of  sacrifices  is  the  ancient  myth, 
mentioned  above,  which  makes  him  the  father  of  Ida. ;  and 
from  the  same  idea  spring  probably  the  legends  regarding 
hisjaujj,  whose  voice  destroyed  the  demons,  and  regarding 
the  sacrifice  of  his  wife,  Manavi3. 

That  Manu  was  credited  with  the  revelation  of  Mantras 
has  been  stated  above4  in  the  remarks  on  the  passages 
from  the  three  redactions  of  the  Ya^-ur-veda  and  of  the 
Tandy  a-brahmana.  The  older  works,  however,  nowhere 
attribute  to  him  entire  hymns,  but  mostly  small  numbers 
of  verses  only.  The  same  is  the  case  in  the  Index  of  the 
Rishis  of  the  White  Ya^"ur-veda,  while  the  Sarvanukramam 
of  the  Rig-veda  ascribes  five  entire  Suktas,  VIII,  27-31,  to 
Manu  Vaivasvata,  as  well  as  a  few  verses  to  Manu  Apsava 
and  to  Manu  Sa;^vara^a.  An  interesting  passage  in  the 
beginning  of  the  last  section  of  the  iT/zandogyopanishad 5 
informs  us  that  that  work  was  revealed  by  Brahma  (Hira- 
/zyagarbha)  to  Pra^apati  (Ka^yapa),  by  Pra^apati  to  Manu, 
and  by  Manu  to  mankind.  This  legend  proves  that  the 
ancient  Vedic  schools  believed  Manu  to  have  taught  more 
than  a  few  verses  and  hymns.  It  also  helps  us  to  under- 
stand better  the  phrase  of  the  four  Vedic  books  quoted,  'All 

1  If  Professor  Max  Miiller,  India,  What  can  it  teach  us?  pp.  234-235  and 
365,  thinks  that  Apastamba's  passage  betrays  a  consciousness  of  the  later  origin 
of  the  Sraddha  rites,  I  am  unable  to  follow  him.  It  seems  to  me  more  pro- 
bable that  it  is  only  intended  to  explain  the  holiness  and  efficacy  of  the  funeral 
sacrifices,  and  why  they  secure  heaven  for  the  worshipper  and  the  worshipped 
ancestor.  In  the  Brahma^as  similar  introductions,  in  which  the  Devas  play  the 
part  of  Manu,  are  prefixed  to  the  descriptions  of  most  sacrifices.  As  the  Sraddhas 
specially  concern  men,  the  father  of  mankind  is  very  appropriately  represented 
as  their  inventor. 

2  Mah.  XII,  121,  29. 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xii,  pp.  29-30 ;  see  also  the  passages  and 
essays  quoted  there  in  note  1. 

*  See  p.  xvi. 

5  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  i,  p.  144. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 


XI 


Manu  said  is  medicine.'  As  has  been  pointed  out  above, 
the  assertion  contained  in  this  sentence  is  so  general  that  it 
makes  us  suspect  the  existence  of  many  sayings  of  Manu 
on  religious  subjects.  Though  the  K/iandogya.  is  probably 
not  as  ancient  as  the  Sa^hitas  of  the  Ya^ur-veda,  or  even 
as  the  Ta/^ya,  and  though  it  hence  would  be  more  than 
hazardous  to  assume  that  this  very  passage  is  alluded  to  in 
the  latter,  the  idea  that  Manu  acted  as  mediator  between 
Brahman  and  mankind,  and  that  he  taught  the  way  to 
final  liberation,  may  yet  belong  to  very  early  times,  and 
may  have  been  one  of  the  causes  which  led  to  the 
sweeping  generalisation.  The  same  passages  probably 
testify  also  to  the  early  existence  of  the  belief  that  Manu 
first  settled  the  Dharma,  which,  as  the  preceding  discussion 
shows,  is  but  a  natural  outgrowth  from  the  conceptions 
which  make  him  the  founder  of  the  moral  and  social  order 
of  the  world.  The  published  Sawhitas  and  Brahma^as 
contain,  as  far  as  I  know,  no  explicit  statement  on  this 
subject.  But  an  allusion  to  it  seems  to  occur  in  the 
passage  of  the  Taittiriya-sa;^hita  which  declares  that  Manu 
divided  his  estate  among  his  sons.  Baudhayana1,  at  least3 
has  taken  it  in  this  sense,  as  he  places  it  at  the  head  of  his 
rules  on  inheritance.  The  oldest  direct  testimony  on  this 
point  is  the  Sloka  quoted  in  Yaska's  Nirukta  III,  4,  which 
says,  '  According  to  the  sacred  law  the  inheritance  goes 
without  a  distinction  to  the  children  of  both  sexes,  (that) 
Manu,  the  offspring  of  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhuva), 
has  declared  at  the  beginning  of  the  creation 2.'  The  text 
shows  the  Vedic  accents,  the  use  of  which  appears  to  be 
confined  to  the  Sa;;mitas  and  Brahma/zas.  As  the  verse  is 
emphatically  called  a  6Ioka,  it  cannot  have  been  taken 

1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv,  p.  224. 

2  I  do  not  share  Professor  von  Roth's  misgivings  (Nirukta,  Notes,  pp.  24-26) 
regarding  the  genuineness  of  this  verse,  and  of  the  whole  legal  discussion  in 
sections  4-6  of  the  third  book  of  the  Nirukta.  We  know  now  that  the  views  of 
the  ancient  authors  on  the  succession  of  daughters  differed  very  considerably. 
Hence  the  incidental  discussion  of  this  vexed  question  in  the  Nirukta  need  not 
raise  any  suspicion.  Similar  digressions  are  not  uncommon  in  other  Vedic 
works.  The  difficulty  with  respect  to  the  compound  rzkjlokabhyam,  in  the 
words  introducing  the  verse,  disappears  if  it  is  taken  as  a  Dvandva,  and  not,  as 
Professor  von  Roth  seems  to  do,  as  a  Karmadharaya. 


I 


lxii  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


from  a  work  of  the  former  class.  It  probably  belongs  to 
one  of  the  lost  accented  Brahma/zas.  That  it  did  not  form 
part  of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  follows,  not  only  from  the 
use  of  the  accents,  but  also  from  its  contents.  Its  doctrine 
does  not  agree  with  that  of  our  Manu-smrz'ti,  which,  with 
respect  to  the  greater  part  of  the  rules  on  inheritance,  may 
be  considered  as  a  faithful  representative  of  the  original 
Dharma-sutra.  Though  Manu  IX,  131-139  strongly  insists 
on  the  right  of  an  appointed  daughter,  and,  indeed,  of  every 
daughter  who  has  no  brothers,  to  succeed  to  the  paternal 
estate,  he  nowhere  lays  down  the  rule,  which,  according  to 
Yaska,  is  taught  in  our  verse,  that  daughters  under  all 
circumstances  share  equally  with  sons.  To  daughters  who 
have  brothers  Manu  allots  one-fourth  of  a  share. 

In  the  Dharma-sutras  the  verses  which  contain  the  phrase 
1  manur  abravit,  thus  Manu  has  said,'  or  equivalents  thereof, 
become  more  frequent.  The  passages  of  Vasish/^a  and  of 
»Sankhayana  in  which  it  occurs  have  been  discussed  above. 
Two  verses  of  this  description  are  found  in  Baudhayana's 
Dharma-sutra  (IV,  1,  13;  2,  15),  and  a  considerable  number 
in  LLyanas'  aphoristic  Dharma^astra1.  In  the  Mahabharata2, 
in  our  Manu-smrzti  itself,  in  the  Narada-smrzti3,  and  in 
other  secondary  law-books  it  is  also  of  common  occurrence. 
Its  real  meaning  is,  as  Professor  Hopkins  (loc.  cit.)  has 
pointed  out,  no  other  than  that  the  rule  to  which  it  is 
appended  was  thought  to  be  ancient  and  indisputable. 
Hence  it  is  sometimes  used  vicariously  for  appeals  to  the 
teaching  of  the  Veda4  and  of  Pra^apati.     That  the  cause  of 

1  Instances  of  this  kind  occur,  especially  in  the  Sraddhakalpa,  chapter  IV, 
*Rfa  ^ra  ^W.  I  ^I'J'ftlTlFTlTft:  trflTcn«HrjOsHl'^  (sic)  II    " 

(sic)  II  and  in  chapter  VI,  TO  ^WSTTTCJ  Stfftl  ^ftfT^nm  I   WJ^Bh 

Tq^tmfw  13:  ^rtf>j^te^ftf^  ir^ngfTitrifH  *c*Tfa  vi-jjow:  s^^ 
ft:  i  TOTrafH<jffHT  *ftr*n^  *3tiNh(n  ^*j&  *  *pr*r**ro^- 
wjtsnrfi^ii 

2  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  October,  1883,  p.  xix. 

3  J.  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  46. 

*  Compare  e.  g.  Vas.  XVII,  10-11,  and  Manu  IX,  182-3. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxiil 


its  adoption  was  not  the  existence  of  a  primeval  Manava 
Dharma-sutra  or  Sastra,  but  the  belief  in  the  revelation  of 
the  law  by  Manu  is  proved  also  by  the  wide  divergence  of 
the  doctrines  attributed  to  the  father  of  mankind  from  each 
other  and  from  the  teaching  of  the  Manu-smrzti. 

These  legends  and  mythological  conceptions  are  amply 
sufficient  to  show  why  the  special  law  school's  should  have 
directed  their  attention  to  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  and 
should  have  chosen  that  in  preference  to  other  similar  works 
as  the  basis  of  one  of  their  text-books.  Even  if  the  author  of 
the  Sutra,  who  in  the  tradition  of  the  Manavas1  is  sometimes 
called  Manva^arya  and  sometimes  Manava^arya,  really  was 
a  historical  personage  named  after  the  progenitor  of  men,  and 
was  considered  as  such  by  the  adherents  of  his  own  school, 
yet  a  confusion  between  him  and  his  mythical  namesake 
was  in  course  of  time  inevitable.  Even  Apastamba,  who 
himself  claims  to  be  no  more  than  a  common  sinful  mortal, 
has  not  escaped  the  fate  of  being  turned  into  a  half-divine 
being  by  the  authors  of  the  Mahabharata2  and  of  the  Pura;/as. 

1  All  I  can  adduce  regarding  the  tradition  of  the  Manavas  is  found  in  some 
not  very  clear  verses  of  the  Mahgalafrarawas,  prefixed  to  the  two  books  of 
Ash^avakra's  commentary  on  the  Grzhya-sutra.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
prathamapurushabhashya  he  says,  according  to  Professor  Haug's  MS.  (Munich 

Roy.  Lib.  Sansk.  MSS.,  No.  51),  ^\  *n*PffTO[V]  *T?RT^TC  ^T:  I  TOT: 

^Ktg  rtt  II  My  MS.  omits  the  invocation  of  the  Bhashyakara  and  of  Manava- 
Hrya  and  reads  in  the  last  line  SU^  rM  HTf«T  o|r<?PT3  ^T°  II  The  dvitiyapuru- 
shabhashya  begins,  according  to  my  MS.,  ^K*Si*rU  U^Tl^"q  ^rtrjiH^T^JTT ' 

hwu^t^to:  ^wretf  jpj^tt:  inn  ■srera^rci  ^^t  wf  ijfT  3  (?) 
*rc*n  i>^  iwT^ra:  i  ttttt  Tr^^rppiT  [inT^ig^  X]  ^g^ftrenrar^iisii 

In  the  first  line  of  the  second  verse  I  propose  to  read  ^nTN^I  ^T«T  ^rt  (J^T 
^H.taWl^ir  and  to  translate,  'As  the  venerable  ManavaMrya  composed  this 
(Sutra)  by  the  favour  of  Sarasvati,  (even  so)  the  (commentary)  called  Purawa 
was  carefully  written  by  Ash/avakradeva  after  he  had  pleased  Sarasvati,  when 
one  hundred  years  (of  the  Lokakala)  were  completed,  in  the  season  called  the 
dewy  one.'  These  verses  seem  to  indicate  that,  according  to  the  tradition  of 
the  Manavas,  a  historical  ManavaMrya  or  Manva^arya  composed  the  Grz'hya- 
sutra,  which  was  also  called  Brzhaddharma,  by  the  special  favour  of  the  goddess 
Sarasvati. 

2  See  Mah.  XIII,  66,  12. 


lxiv  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


A  Manu  who  composed  a  treatise  on  the  sacred  law  which 
gained  some  notoriety  was,  therefore,  sure  of  divine  honours. 
As  soon  as  the  identification  of  the  author  of  the  Sutra 
with  the  father  of  mankind  was  made,  it  was  a  matter  of 
course  that  the  Manu-smrzti  obtained  a  particularly  high 
position,  and  was  accepted  as  the  paramount  authority  on 
the  sacred  law. 

The  legends  given  above  render  us  yet  another  service. 
They  explain  the  origin  of  the  seemingly  contradictory 
statements  of  the  Smr/ti  regarding  Manu.  When  he  is 
represented  there  as  a  descendant  "of  self-existent  Brahman 
and  a  Pra^apati  who  takes  a  prominent  part  in  the  creation, 
or  as  identical  with  the  supreme  Brahman1,  and  on  the 
other  hand  as  a  Rishi  and  as  a  king  of  the  remotest 
antiquity,  it  is  now  patent  that  these  conceptions  have  been 
taken  over  from  Vedic  literature  and  that,  different  as  they 
are,  they  have  all  grown  out  of  the  one  fundamental  idea 
which  makes  the  first  man  and  progenitor  a  half-divine  and 
half-human  being,  an  assistant  in  the  work  of  creation,  and 
the  founder  of  moral  and  social  order  among  men.  Some  of 
the  remaining  elements  of  the  myth  of  Manu,  as  told  in  the 
Smrtti,  are  likewise  clearly  developments  of  Vedic  ideas. 
Thus  the  interposition  of  the  androgynous  Vira^-  in  Manu's 
genealogy  (I,  32-33)  is  foreshadowed  by  a  curious  passage 
of  the  Atharva-veda,  VIII,  10,  where  the  female  Vira^-is  said 
to  have  been  '  in  the  beginning  this  (whole  world),'  and  to 
have  yielded  blessings  to  various  classes  of  beings.  According 
to  verse  24,  '  Manu,  the  son  of  Vivasvat,  was  her  calf2,  when 
Przthi  Vainya  milked  from  her  agriculture  and  grain-bearing 
plants.'  It  would,  therefore,  seem  that  Vira^,  who  repeatedly 
plays  a  part  in  Vedic  cosmogony,  was  already  there  connected 
with  Manu.  Further,  the  substitution  of  seven  or  more 
Manus  for  one,  has  probably  been  caused,  as  the  Peters- 
burg Dictionary  (s.  v.  manu)  suggests,  by  the  diversity  of  the 
genealogies  found  in  the  various  Vedic  passages.  It  is  even 
not  improbable  that  the  Vedic  schools  believed,  when  Katya- 

1  The  same  identification  occurs  Man.  I,  I,  32. 

2  This  statement  alludes  to  the  fact  that  Indian  cows  do  not  allow  themselves 
to  be  milked,  except  when  their  calves  stand  by. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 


XV 


yana  composed  his  Sarvanukramamka  of  the  Rig-veda, 
in  the  existence  of  several  distinct  Manus.  Finally,  the 
association  of  the  ten  great  sages  whom  Manu  Svayam- 
bhuva  created,  and  who  in  turn  created  other  Manus 
(I,  34-36),  in  the  work  of  creation,  rests  on  such  passages 
as  those  quoted  by  Apastamba  II,  24,  3-6,  13,  where  suc- 
cessive destructions  of  the  world  are  mentioned,  and  '  this 
creation  is  declared  to  be  the  work  of  Pra^-apati  and  of  the 
sages.'  But  the  complete  development  of  the  myth  of 
Manu  belongs  to  the  schools  of  the  faura/zikas  and 
Aitihasikas,  and  we  find  in  the  Pura/zas  and  in  the 
Mahabhcirata  many  legends  which  are  partly  identical  with 
or  closely  related  to  that  told  in  our  Smrz'ti *. 

The  third  problem,  to  say  how  the  conversion  of  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra  into  cmrJVlaau^amr/ti  was  effected, 
presents  very  considerable  difficulties,  and  admits  of  an 
approximative  solution  only.  It  involves  the  consideration 
of  three  questions.  First,  which  portions  of  our  Manu- 
smrzti  are  ancient  and  which  are  later  additions  ?  secondly, 
whence  have  the  additions  been  derived?  and  thirdly, 
whether  they  have  been  added  at  one  time  or  successively  ? 
In  our  attempts  to  distinguish  between  the  old  and  the 
modern  elements  in  our  Manu-sawhita  we  must  be 
guided,  except  where  we  have  quotations  from  the  old 
Dharma-sutra,  by  the  analogies  which  the  other  existing 
Dharma-sutras  furnish.  For  it  may  be  assumed  as  a 
general  maxim,  that  rules  and  other  statements  of  our 
Manu,  which  find  counterparts  in  the  critically  unsus- 
picious portions  of  the  Sutras  of  Gautama,  Baudhayana, 
Apastamba,  and  Vasish^a,  probably  occurred  also  in  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra.  Single  exceptions  are,  of  course, 
possible,  because,  though  the  Dharma-sutras  show  a  very 
decided  class-affinity,  they  yet  differ  in  the  details.  The 
one  devotes  greater  attention  to  one  subject,  and  the  other 
to  others.  Hence  it  may  be,  that  occasionally  a  rule 
which  is  found  in  the  Dharma-sutras,  nevertheless  did 
not   occur   in   the   Manava-sutra,  but   was   added  on    its 

1  See  H.  H.  Wilson,  Vishmi-pura^a,  vol.  i,  pp.  104-5  (ed.  Hall) ;  Professor 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi,  pp.  247-256. 

[25]  e 


Ixvi  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


revision.  To  a  certain  extent  we  may  also  avail  ourselves 
of  the  Vishmi-smWti  for  the  same  purpose.  But  a  greater 
degree  of  caution  will  be  necessary,  as  this  work,  though  in 
the  main  a  representative  of  the  Kanaka  Dharma-sutra, 
contains  also  an  admixture  of  modern  elements.  On  the 
other  hand,  those  rules  and  discussions  which  cannot  be 
traced  in  one  of  the  old  Sutras,  are  at  least  suspicious, 
and  require  careful  consideration.  The  ultimate  decision, 
if  such  passages  have  indeed  to  be  considered  as  additions, 
must  depend  on  various  collateral  circumstances.  The 
safest  criterion  will  always  be  the  character  of  the  ideas 
which  they  express.  If  these  are  entirely  foreign  to  the 
Sutras  or  to  Vedic  literature,  they  may  be  confidently 
rejected  as  interpolations.  A  good  deal  depends  also  on 
their  position  and  on  the  manner  in  which  they  fit  into  the 
context.     Numerous  cases  will,  however,  remain  doubtful. 

If  we  examine  Manu's  text  according  to  these  principles, 
the  more  important  results  will  be  as  follows  : — The  whole 
first  chapter  must  be  considered  as  a  later  addition.  No 
Dharma-sutra  begins  with  a  description  of  its  own  origin, 
much  less  with  an  account  of  the  creation.  The  former,  which 
would  be  absurd  in  a  Dharma-sutra,  has  been  added  in  order 
to  give  authority  to  a  remodelled  version.  The  latter  has 
been  dragged  in,  because  the  myths  connected  with  Manu 
presented  a  good  opportunity  '  to  show  the  greatness  of  the 
scope  of  the  work,'  as  Medhatithi  says.  The  table  of  con- 
tents, given  at  the  end  of  chapter  I,  was,  of  course,  also 
foreign  to  the  original  Sutra.  Chapters  II-VI,  on  the 
other  hand,  seem  to  represent  with  tolerable  faithfulness 
the  contents  of  the  corresponding  sections  of  the  Manava 
Dharma-sutra.  Nearly  all  the  rules  are  found  in  the  other 
Dharma-sutras  and  in  the  Vish/^u-smrzti,  and  more  than 
three-fourths  of  the  verses  find  counterparts  in  the  aphorisms 
and  verses  of  the  older  law-books.  Nevertheless,  the  hand  of 
the  remodeller  is  not  rarely  visible.  There  are,  besides  the 
verses  which  announce  the  transition  from  one  subject  to 
the  other1,  a   considerable  number  of  smaller  and  some 

1  These  verses  probably  mark  the  subdivisions  of  the  Adhyayas,  the  Kawdikas 
or  Khatt</as  of  the  ancient  Sfitra. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxvii 


larger  interpolations.  To  the  latter  belong,  in  the  second 
chapter,  vv.  i-ii  and  vv.  88-100.  The  first  passage  gives 
a  philosophical  account  of  the  origin  of  actions  (1-5),  such 
as  is  not  found  in  any  older  law-book  ;  further,  a  verse  (v.  6) 
stating  the  sources  of  the  sacred  law,  which  is  unnecessary 
on  account  of  v.  12,  and  suspicious  on  account  of  the  double 
description  of  the  third  source  of  the  law,  by  the  synonymous 
terms  sila.  and  a£ara 1.  The  contents  of  the  remaining 
verses,  the  praise  of  the  Manu-smrzti  (v.  7),  the  advice  how 
the  different  authorities  are  to  be  studied  (v.  8),  the  decla- 
ration of  the  reward  for  obedience  to  the  revealed  texts 
(v.  9),  the  definition  of  the  terms  6ruti  and  Smriti,  and  the 
declaration  of  their  authoritativeness,  are  likewise  super- 
fluous, and  clearly  later  enlargements.  The  second  passage 
(vv.  88-100),  which  enumerates  the  organs  of  sensation  and 
action  and  teaches  the  necessity  of  controlling  them,  inter- 
rupts the  continuity  of  the  text  very  needlessly,  and  has 
nothing  whatsoever  to  do  with  the  matter  treated  of. 
Among  the  smaller  interpolations  in  this  chapter,  vv.  13, 
16,  27,  28,  142,  143,  213-215,  221,  and  239  must  certainly  be 
reckoned.  It  also  seems  probable  that  the  passage  on  the 
importance  of  the  syllable  Om,  of  the  Vyahrztis,  and  of 
the  Savitrt  (vv.  76-87),  as  well  as  that  on  the  humility  and 
meekness  required  of  a  Brahma//a  (vv.  160-163),  and  that 
on  the  worship  due  to  parents  and  a  teacher  (vv.  225-237), 
have  been  enlarged,  though  in  each  case  something  of  the 
kind  may  have  occurred  in  the  Dharma-sutra.  In  the  third 
chapter,  there  is  one  longer  passage  (vv.  192-201)  which, 
beyond  all  doubt,  has  been  added  by  a  later  hand.  For 
the  classification  of  the  Manes,  which  it  contains,  is  in  this 
form  foreign  to  Vedic  literature.  More  doubtful  are  the 
discussions  on  the  duty  of  conjugal  intercourse  (vv.  46-50), 
on  the  honour  due  to  women  (vv.  55-60),  on  the  excellence 
of  the  order  of  householders  (vv.  79-80),  and  on  the  results  of 
inviting  sinners  and  men  of  bad  conduct  to  6Yaddhas  (vv. 
169-182).  Possibly  the  ancient  Sutra  contained  hints  on 
some  of  these  subjects,  but  it  is  most  improbable  that  it 

1  See  note  to  the  translation. 

e  2 


lxvili  LAWS   OF   MANU. 


should  have  entered  into  all  the  details  which  our  text  gives. 
The  passage  on  the  householders  has  probably  been  placed 
wrongly.  Most  of  its  verses  ought  to  stand  in  the  discussion 
on  the  relative  importance  of  the  orders  at  the  end  of  chapter 
VI.  In  the  fourth  chapter  the  first  section  on  the  means  by 
which  a  Brahma/za  may  subsist  (vv.  1-24)  is  exceedingly 
suspicious.  The  Dharma-sutras,  e.g.  VasishzVza  XII,  2-4,  no 
doubt  sometimes  prefix  brief  hints  on  the  manner  in  which 
a  Snataka  may  support  himself,  to  the  rules  regarding  his 
behaviour.  But  they  do  not  mention  the  curious  classifica- 
tion of  the  means  of  subsistence,  Rita.,  Amrz'ta,  Mrz'ta, 
Pramrzta,  and  Svavrtttl  (vv.  5,  6),  which,  though  common 
in  the  Pura/zas  and  other  later  works,  is  unknown  in  Vedic 
literature.  As,  moreover,  Vasish/^a's  rules,  which  enumerate 
the  persons  by  whom  a  Snataka  may  be  supported,  occur 
further  on  (IV,  33—34),  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  whole 
section  consisting  of  the  first  twenty-four  verses  is  a  later 
addition.  With  still  greater  certainty  the  same  may  be  said 
of  vv.  85-91,  which  describe  the  heinousness  of  the  offence 
committed  by  him  who  accepts  gifts  from  a  royal  usurper  and 
other  wicked  persons,  and  enumerate  the  twenty-one  hells 
which  will  be  the  offender's  portion.  For  it  is  not  doubtful 
that,  even  if  the  Sutrakaras  were  acquainted  with  a  classifi- 
cation of  the  regions  of  punishment,  their  enumeration  ought 
not  to  stand  here,  but,  as  in  the  Vish«u-sm/7ti,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  section  on  crimes  and  penances.  Other 
probable  interpolations  are  vv.  172-174  on  the  results  of  sin, 
vv.  180-185  on  the  reasons  why  quarrels  with  near  relatives 
should  be  avoided,  vv.  238-243  on  the  reasons  why  spiritual 
merit  should  be  accumulated.  Finally,  the  section  on  gifts 
and  the  acceptance  of  gifts  (vv.  186-197)  seems  to  be 
strongly  mixed  with  modem  elements.  The  next  fol- 
lowing two  chapters  present  fewer  suspicious  passages. 
Nevertheless,  the  preamble  to  the  section  on  forbidden 
food,  V,  1-4,  the  verses  19-21,  which  prescribe  the  penances 
for  eating  mushrooms,  onions,  leeks,  and  so  forth,  must  be 
certainly  rejected.  For  the  former  belong  to  the  artificial 
framework  which  has  been  placed  round  the  old  Sutra,  and  the 
latter  ought  to  stand  in  chapter  XI.     From  the  quotation  in 


INTRODUCTION.  IxiX 


Vasish/^a  IV,  5-8,  it  is  further  evident  that  the  rules  on  the 
permissibility  of  meat  have  been  much  altered  and  enlarged 
in  accordance  with  the  growing  repugnance  against  the 
slaughter  of  animals.  The  last  section  of  the  same  chapter, 
on  the  duties  of  women,  has  probably  had  the  same  fate. 
The  example  of  the  Vasish^a  Dharmaj-astra  shows  that 
some  of  the  old  Sutrakaras  treated  the  duties  of  women  in 
two  separate  sections  1.  But  it  also  proves  that  they  did 
not,  as  our  Manu-smrzti  does,  go  twice  over  the  same  matter. 
It  is  evident  that  either  here  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  ninth 
chapter  the  same  verses  have  been  needlessly  repeated  by 
the  author  of  the  remodelled  version.  In  the  sixth  chapter 
there  is  only  one  passage,  vv.  61-82,  which  goes  beyond 
the  range  of  the  Dharma-sutras.  None  of  the  latter  enters 
into  such  details  regarding  the  meditations  to  which  an 
ascetic  must  give  himself  up  in  order  to  attain  salvation. 
The  subject  naturally  tempted  the  remodeller  of  the  Smnti 
to  expand  the  shorter  notes  of  the  original.  Very  different 
is  the  case  of  the  next  three  chapters,  VII-IX,  which  treat 
of  the  duties  of  a  king,  and  of  civil  and  criminal  law. 
These  sections  probably  bear  only  a  faint  resemblance  to 
the  corresponding  portions  of  the  original  work.  Among 
the  226  verses  of  the  seventh  chapter  there  are  only  fifty-four 
to  which  passages  of  the  Dharma-sutras  and  the  Vish/m- 
smrtti  correspond.  If  one  pays  attention  to  the  rules 
regarding  the  king's  duties,  given  in  the  Dharma-sutras  of 
Gautama,  Apastamba,  and  Vasish^a,  as  well  as  to  the 
references  to  the  opinions  of  the  Manavas  and  of  Manu, 
made  in  the  Kamandakiya  Nitisara2,  it  would  seem  probable 
that  the  contents  of  this  section  of  the  Manava  Dharma- 
sutra  cannot  have  differed  very  much  from  those  of  the 
third  chapter  of  Vish/zu,  and  that  about  two-thirds  of 
the  seventh  Adhyaya  of  our  Manu-smrz'ti  have  been  added 
when  it  was  recast.  With  respect  to  the  eighth  chapter  and 
the  first  224  verses  of  the  ninth,  which  give  the  rules 
regarding  the  eighteen  titles  of  the  law,  the  remodeller 
seems  to  have  been  equally  active.     We  must  ascribe  to 

1  See  Vas.  V  and  XVII,  55-80.  2  See  above,  p.  xxxvi. 


lxx  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


him  the  systematic  arrangement  of  the  legal  rules,  which  is 
not  found  in  any  of  the  ancient  Dharma-sutras,  and  is  even 
neglected  in  the  Vish/m-smrz'ti.  He  is  most  probably  also 
responsible  for  more  than  one-half  of  the  verses  of  these 
chapters.  In  the  eighth  Adhyaya  only  three-sevenths  of 
the  rules  of  our  Manu  can  be  traced  in  the  Dharma-sutras 
or  in  the  Vish^u-smr/ti,  which  latter,  as  far  as  these  topics 
are  concerned,  may  be  considered  a  faithful  representative 
of  the  Kanaka  Dharma-sutra  1.  Two  of  Manu's  titles,  con- 
cerns among  partners  2  and  the  resumption  of  gifts,  are 
not  mentioned  in  the  older  works  ;  and  the  rules  under  a 
third,  rescission  of  purchase  and  sale,  have  no  resemblance 
to  those  of  Vishnu.  In  the  ninth  chapter  the  chief  topics, 
treated  under  the  head,  duties  of  husband  and  wife,  are 
discussed  or  at  least  touched  on  in  the  Sutras.  But  the 
latter  place  them  differently,  and  give  them  much  more  con- 
cisely. The  notes  to  the  translation  show  that  only  one-fourth 
of  Manu's  verses  corresponds  to  utterances  of  the  ancient 
teachers.  The  section  on  inheritance  has  probably  suffered 
much  less,  since  upwards  of  eighty  verses  out  of  one  hundred 
and  seventeen  agree  with  the  teaching  of  the  Sutras,  and  since 
among  those,  the  contents  of  which  are  not  represented  in 
the  older  works,  only  eleven,  vv.  108-110, 128-129,  133,  138, 
147,  184,  215,  and  217,  are  really  suspicious  or  clearly  inter- 
polated. Most  of  these  latter  contain  clumsy  repetitions  of 
matters  discussed  in  other  places,  and  v.  217  gives  a  supple- 
mentary rule  which  but  ill  agrees  with  the  spirit  pervading 
the  remainder  of  the  section.  Some  of  the  other,  apparently 
unsuspicious,  verses  may,  of  course,  possibly  be  interpola- 
tions. But  their  contents  are  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of 
the  Dharma-sutras,  and  with  the  eliminations,  proposed 
above,  Manu's  theory  of  inheritance  and  partition  is  self- 
consistent.  The  views,  expressed  under  the  eighteenth  title, 
on  gambling  and  betting,  agree  with  those  of  Gautama  and 
Baudhayana,  who  both  strongly  disapprove  of  these  prac- 

1  To  this  conclusion  points  the  absence  of  systematic  arrangement  in  Vishnu 
III-V. 

3  Manu's  rules  on  this  subject  have  probably  been  borrowed  from  a  Srauta- 
sutra,  where  the  distribution  of  the  sacrificial  fees  is  usually  explained. 


INTRODUCTION.  I 


XXI 


tices.  The  former  enumerates  the  gambler  among  the  men 
who  defile  the  company  at  a  5raddha,  and  the  latter  names 
gambling  among  the  crimes  which  render  men  impure. 
Though  Apastamba  and  Vish/zu  are  less  puritanical,  and 
permit  gambling  under  royal,  i.  e.  police-supervision,  or  pro- 
vide only  punishments  for  cheating  (Vish/zu  V,  134-135),  the 
teaching  of  our  Smrz'ti  is,  nevertheless,  probably  ancient. 
But  the  section  has  been  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  mis- 
cellaneous rules  and  by  the  allusion  to  the  evil  results  of 
gambling  '  in  former  ages/  i.  e.  to  those  exemplified  by  the 
fate  of  Yudhishz7zira  and  Nala.  The  last  106  verses  of  the 
ninth  chapter  which,  according  to  the  table  of  contents  in  the 
first  chapter,  teach  the  removal  of  (men  nocuous  like)  thorns 
(ka/zzakoddharaz^a),  correspond  to  a  part  of  the  prakirzzaka 
or  miscellaneous  rules  of  Ya^vmvalkya  and  Narada.  This 
section  seems  to  have  grown  out  of  those  legal  rules  in  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra  which  did  not  fit  into  the  system  of 
the  eighteen  titles.  But,  as  very  few  verses  only  correspond 
to  rules  of  the  Dharma-sutras,  its  ancient  portion  is  probably 
small.  The  greater  part  of  its  contents  is  made  up  of 
repetitions  and  additions  inserted  by  the  author  of  the 
remodelled  version. 

The  rules  on  times  of  distress,  given  in  chapter  X,  differ 
considerably  from  those  of  the  Dharma-sutras,  as  they  in- 
clude also  the  theory  of  the  descent  of  the  mixed  castes. 
The  older  works  treat  this  subject  either  in  connexion  with 
the  law  of  marriage  or  with  the  rules  of  inheritance. 
Considering  the  great  inequality  which  the  Sutras  show  in 
the  arrangement  of  the  various  topics,  it  is,  however,  not 
impossible  that  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  placed  the  section 
on  the  mixed  castes  just  before  the  apaddharmas,  and  that 
the  author  of  the  metrical  version  combined  both  in  one 
chapter  and  gave  them  a  common  title.  But  it  is  not  in 
the  least  doubtful  that  the  treatment  of  the  subject  in  the 
former  work  must  have  been  very  different  from  that  which 
it  receives  in  vv.  1-74.  The  Dharma-sutras  enumerate 
either  one  or  two  sets  of  mixed  castes,  briefly  indicating 
their  origin,  and,  sometimes,  their  modes  of  life.  They 
also  add  a  few  verses  or  rules  regarding  the  changes  to  be 


lxxil  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


attained  in  successive  generations,  as  well  as  regarding  the 
manner  in  which  men  of  low  descent  may  be  detected. 
Our  Manu-smrzti,  on  the  other  hand,  is  much  more  minute 
in  its  details,  and  introduces  a  good  many  new  names  of 
which  the  Sutras  know  nothing.  These  additions  have 
probably  expanded  the  section  to  three  times  its  original 
extent.  The  immediately  following  rules,  vv.  75-100,  on 
the  occupations  of  the  castes  and  their  manner  of  subsisting 
in  times  of  distress,  agree,  in  the  main,  with  the  Sutras,  and 
seem  to  have  been  changed  very  little.  But  the  supple- 
mentary notes  on  the  same  subject,  vv.  101-131,  are 
probably  additions  made  on  the  revision  of  the  work.  The 
few  ancient  rules  which  they  contain  are  partly  repetitions 
of  matters  already  discussed  (e.  g.  vv.  11 3-1 14)  and  partly 
misplaced  (e.  g.  vv.  ill,  11 5-1 17, 119)1. 

The  eleventh  chapter  is  again,  like  chapters  1 1- VI,  in 
all  probability  a  faithful  representative  of  the  corresponding 
portion  of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra.  We  find  here  again 
that  the  great  majority  of  the  rules  corresponds  to  those  of 
the  Dharma-sutras  and  of  the  Vish/m-smrz'ti.  The  agreement 
with  the  latter  is  particularly  close,  and  appears  especially 
in  the  classification  of  crimes,  the  enumeration  of  the 
diseases  caused  by  offences  committed  in  a  former  life,  and 
in  many  details  referring  to  penances.  Curious  and  against 
the  practice  of  the  older  works  is  the  combination  of  the 
rules  on  gifts  and  the  performance  of  sacrifices,  vv.  1-43, 
with  the  section  on  penances.  The  excuses  which  the 
commentators  offer  for  this  anomaly2  are,  I  fear,  insufficient 
to  explain  it.  It  seems  more  probable  that  here,  as  in  the 
preceding  chapter,  two  separate  sections  of  the  original 
work  have  been  welded  together  into  one  Adhyaya.  In 
favour  of  this  view  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  in  Gautama's 
Dharma-sutra,  XVIII,  28-32,  a  number  of  rules,  corres- 
ponding to  Manu  XI,  1 1-23,  stand  just  before  the  Praya- 
skittakanda.     A  passage  of  the  Mahabharata,  which  will  be 

1  A  characteristic  sign  of  the  great  changes  which  chapters  VII-X  have 
undergone  consists  in  the  allusions  to  legends  famous  in  the  Purawas  and  the 
Mahabharata  ;  see  also  below,  p.  lxxix. 

2  See  note  on  Manu  XI,  1. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxiii 


discussed  below,  shows  exactly  the  same  combination  as 
our  Smrzti. 

The  twelfth  chapter,  finally,  is  certainly  almost  entirely 
due  to  the  author  of  the  metrical  version.  Its  contents  are 
partly  foreign  to  the  Dharma-sutras  and  partly  repetitions. 
The  classification  of  actions  and  existences  as  sattvika, 
ra^-asa,  and  tamasa,  i.  e.  as  modified  by  the  three  qualities 
of  Goodness,  Activity,  and  Darkness,  finds  no  place  in  the 
older  law-books.  It  is  based  on  the  doctrines  which  are 
taught  in  the  Sawkhya,  Yoga,  and  Vedanta  systems,  and 
some  traces  of  which  are  found  in  the  Maitraya/zabrahma/zo- 
panishad1.  Equally  or  similarly  minute  details  are,  how- 
ever, to  be  met  with  only  in  the  Pura/zas,  the  Mahabharata, 
and  some  of  the  metrical  Smrztis,  which  blend  philosophical 
ideas  with  the  sacred  law.  The  next  following  discussion 
on  the  karmavipaka,  the  results  of  sinful  acts  in  future 
births,  vv.  51-81,  is  altogether  wrongly  placed.  It  evidently 
ought  to  stand  in  the  beginning  of  the  section  on  penances, 
where  Vish/zu  and  Ya^avalkya  have  a  number  of  corres- 
ponding Sutras  and  verses.  As  it  is  found  in  the  Manu- 
smrz'ti  in  a  different  position,  it  is  most  probably  an 
addition  made  on  the  revision  of  the  work.  The  section 
on  the  means  of  attaining  supreme  bliss,  vv.  82-104,  returns 
to  the  questions  which  have  already  been  discussed  in  the 
fourth  and  sixth  chapters,  and  adds  nothing  that  is  new. 
The  long  peroration  at  the  end,  vv.  1 16-126,  cannot  have 
formed  part  of  the  Dharma-sutra,  as  it  again  refers  to  the 
myth  concerning  the  origin  of  the  5astra,  narrated  in  the 
spurious  first  chapter.  But  the  small  piece  on  the  manner 
of  deciding  doubtful  legal  questions,  vv.  105-115,  belonged 
probably  to  the  original  work.  To  this  conclusion  point 
its  close  agreement  with  the  rules  of  the  Dharma-sutras, 
and  the  circumstance  that  Gautama  also  places  the  corres- 
ponding Sutras  just  at  the  end  of  his  work. 

If  thus  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the  contents  of 
more  than  half  the  verses  in  our  Manu-smrzti  cannot  have 
been  derived  from  the  ancient  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  we 

1  Maitr.  Up.  Ill,  3,  5,  6  ;  compare  Manu  XII,  xii,  32-33. 


lxxiv  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


have  now  to  face  the  question  whence  this  large  amount  of 
additional,  matter  has  been  taken.  A  clue  to  the  solution 
of  this  problem  is  furnished  by  the  peculiar  relation  of  the 
Manu-smrzti  to  the  Mahabharata,  which  undoubtedly  is 
one  of  the  most  ancient  metrical  works  of  Indian  literature, 
and  the  great  storehouse  of  the  earliest  forms  of  post-Vedic 
mythology  and  doctrine.  The  connexion  existing  between 
these  two  works,  and  its  importance  for  the  history  of  the 
Institutes  of  Manu,  has  been  recognised  by  most  San- 
skritists  who  have  directed  their  attention  to  the  investiga- 
tion of  the  origin  of  the  secondary  Smrztis.  Many  years 
ago  Professor  Weber1  pointed  out  that  the  Mahabharata 
contains  not  only  a  number  of  quotations  from  Manu,  some 
of  which  are  found  either  with  or  without  variations  in  the 
existing  Smriti,  while  others  are  not  traceable,  but  also  a 
considerable  number  of  verses,  not  attributed  to  Manu, 
which,  nevertheless,  are  included  in  the  Dharma^astra. 
He  inferred  from  these  facts  that  the  existing  Manu-smrzti 
cannot  have  been  extant  in  its  present  shape  even  at  the 
period  to  which  the  later  portions  of  the  Mahabharata 
belong,  and  that  the  author  or  authors  of  the  latter  work 
must  have  known  and  used  an  older  redaction  of  Manu's 
law-book.  Another  conclusion,  based  on  the  agreement  of 
numerous  Slokas,  especially  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
Parvans  of  the  great  epic  with  verses  of  the  Manu-smrzti, 
has  been  drawn  by  Rao  Saheb  V.  N.  Ma^lik2,  who  is 
convinced  that  the  editor  of  the  latter  has  drawn,  to  a 
large  extent,  on  the  former  work.  Of  late  Professor 
Hopkins3  has  made  a  careful  analysis  of  the  quotations 
from  Manu  found  in  the  Mahabharata.  According  to  him, 
their  number  is  thirty-three,  among  which  seventeen  are 
traceable,  five  being  verbal  quotations,  the  rest  agreeing  in 
doctrine  only.  His  explanation  for  the  untraceable  quota- 
tions is  not  that  they  have  been  taken  from  an  older 
recension  of  the  Manu-smr/ti,  but  that  a  floating  mass  of 

1  History  of  Indian  Literature,  p.  279 ;  compare  also  Professor  Stenzler  in  the 
Indische  Studien,  vol.  i,  p.  245. 

2  The  Mayukha  and  Ya^/zavalkya,  introd.  to  Yagfi.  p.  xlvii. 

3  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  October,  1883,  pp.  xix-xx, 
and  now  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi,  p.  257  seqq. 


INTRODUCTION.  1 


XXV 


unwritten  sayings  of  Manu  existed,  some  of  which  were 
incorporated  with  the  Dharma-sutra  of  the  Manavas  in  its 
revision,  while  others  were  not.  He  also  notices  the  fact 
that  our  Manu-sm/^'ti  contains  many  verses  which  occur 
also  in  the  Mahabharata  without  being  attributed  to  Manu, 
as  well  as  some  which  are  ascribed  to  other  authorities. 

These  somewhat  divergent  results  of  my  predecessors 
show  very  clearly  that  the  Mahabharata  may  be  expected 
to  render  some  assistance  for  the  solution  of  our  problem. 
But  they  indicate  also  that  the  utilisation  of  the  facts  which 
it  offers  requires  some  caution. 

In  resuming  the  enquiry  into  the  relation  of  the  two  works 
and  its  bearing  on  the  history  of  our  Manu  text,  the  first 
point  to  be  ascertained  is,  whether  the  Mahabharata  really 
mentions  a  law-book  of  Manu,  and  whether  this  work  is 
identical  either  with  the  ancient  Dharma-sutra  or  with  the 
existing  Smrzti,  or  if  it  differed  from  both.  According 
to  what  has  been  said  above1  regarding  the  ancient  belief 
ascribing  the  settlement  of  social  and  religious  institutions 
to  the  Father  of  mankind,  and  the  real  meaning  of  the  phrase 
'thus  Manu  has  spoken,'  it  is  evident  that  Professor  Hopkins 
has  correctly  distinguished  between  sayings  of  Manu  on 
religious  and  legal  matters,  and  law-books  attributed  to 
him,  and  that  he  is  right  in  refusing  to  recognise  in  every 
mention  of  Manu's  name  a  reference  to  a  Smrzti  of  his. 
Hence  the  number  of  passages  useful  for  comparison  is  very 
much  restricted.  Those  only  which  explicitly  mention  a 
vSastra  of  Manu  are  really  indisputable  evidence.  The 
estimation  of  the  value  of  the  remainder  must  depend  on 
collateral  circumstances.  Quotations  of  the  former  kind 
are  not  numerous  in  the  Mahabharata.  Nevertheless,  some 
do  occur  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  Parvans,  and  they 
clearly  prove  that  the  authors  of  these  books  knew  a 
Manava  Dharma^astra  not  identical  but  closely  connected 
with  our  Smrzti.  Thus  we  read,  Mah.  XII,  56,  23-25, 
where  the  power  of  Brahma^as  is  being  described,  '  High- 
minded  Manu  likewise,  O  king  of  kings,  sang  two  Slokas  in 
his  Laws  (sveshu  dharmeshu),  those,  O  descendant  of  Kuru, 


1  See  p. lx. 


lxxvi  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


thou  shouldst  keep  in  thy  heart  (23).  Fire  sprang  from 
water,  Kshatriyas  from  Brahmaz/as,  iron  from  stone,  the 
all-penetrating  power  of  these  (three)  has  no  effect  on  that 
whence  they  were  produced  (24).  When  iron  strikes  stone, 
when  fire  meets  water,  when  a  Kshatriya  shows  hostility  to 
a  Brahma^a,  then  these  (three  assailants)  perish.'  Again, 
Mali.  XIII,  46,  30-36,  in  a  discussion  on  the  prerogatives  of 
a  Brahma^a's  Brahma/zi  wife  who,  we  are  told,  is  alone 
entitled  to  attend  her  husband  and  to  assist  him  in  the 
performance  of  his  religious  duties,  the  conclusion  runs  as 
follows :  '  And  in  those  Institutes  which  Manu  proclaimed 
(manunabhihita^  jastram),  O  great  king,  descended  from 
Kuru,  this  same  eternal  law  is  found  (35).  Now  if  (a  man) 
out  of  love  acts  differently,  O  Yudhish/^ira,  he  is  declared 
to  be  (as  despicable  as)  a  Ka.nda.la.  (sprung  from  the) 
BrahmaTza  (caste  36).'  Nothing  can  be  clearer  than  these 
two  passages.  The  second  speaks  plainly  of  a  5astra  pro- 
claimed by  Manu,  and  the  first  of  his  Dharma/£,  a  word  in 
the  plural,  very  commonly  used  to  denote  a  book  on  the 
sacred  law.  Moreover,  the  second  is  clearly  a  paraphrase 
of  Manu  IX,  87,  and  reproduces  its  second  line  to  the 
letter.  Of  the  two  verses  quoted  in  the  first,  one  agrees 
with  Manu  IX,  321,  but  the  other  one  is  not  traceable. 
While  these  two  quotations  would  seem  to  indicate  a  very 
close  connexion  between  the  Manava  5astra  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  and  our  Smr/ti,  a  third  from  the  Ra^adharmas 
of  Manu  Pra^etasa — i.  e.  from  the  section  on  the  duties  of 
kings   belonging   to  the  Manava1 — reveals  a  greater  dis- 

1  Though  I  will  not  deny  that  some  show  of  argument  might  be  made  for 
the  supposition  that  the  Ra§adharmas  of  Manu  PnL£etasa  were  a  separate  work, 
different  from  the  <Sastra  referred  to  in  the  preceding  quotations,  because  the 
epithet  Pra/£etasa  is  here  added  to  Manu's  name,  and  because  at  Mah.  XII,  38,  2, 
we  find  Manu  Pra/£etasa  named  as  the  author  of  a  Ra^ajastra  in  company  with 
Br/haspati  and  ILranas,  to  whom  separate  Nitirastras  were  attributed,  I  yet  hold 
this  to  be  improbable.  For  the  legends  regarding  the  descent  of  the  lawgiver 
Manu  vary  in  the  Mahabharata.  He  is  in  other  passages  sometimes  called 
Svayambhuva,  and  sometimes  (e.  g.  XII,  349,  51)  Vaivasvata.  Further,  a  sepa- 
rate Nituastra  of  Manu  is  not  quoted  elsewhere.  On  the  other  hand,  the  section 
on  the  duties  of  kings  bears  in  every  law-book  the  separate  title  Ra^adharma/z, 
and  the  commentators  of  our  Manu-smr/ti  call  its  seventh  chapter  expressly  by 
this  name. 


INTRODUCTION.  Ixxvii 


crepancy.  We  read,  Mah.  XII,  $?,  43-45,  '  And  the 
following  two  verses  are  pronounced1  by  Manu  Pra^etasa 
in  the  Law  of  kings,  listen  to  them  attentively,  O  lord  of 
kings  !  (43.)  A  man  should  abandon,  like  a  leaky  ship  in 
the  ocean,  the  following  six  persons, — a  teacher  who  does 
not  instruct,  a  priest  unable  to  recite  the  Veda,  a  king  who 
affords  no  protection,  a  quarrelsome  wife,  a  herdsman  who 
loves  to  stay  in  the  village,  and  a  barber  who  seeks  the 
forest.'  Neither  of  these  verses  is  found  in  our  Manu, 
though  the  latter  inveighs  against  kings  who  do  not  protect 
their  subjects  (VII,  143-144). 

If  we  turn  to  the  passages  in  which  Manu — not  his 
6astra — is  named  as  an  authority,  I  know  only  of  one  that 
may  be  confidently  considered  to  contain  a  reference  to  a 
law-book.  In  the  _5akuntalopakhyana.,  ftiah.  T3  y$,  8-13, 
king  Dushyanta  tries  to  persuade  the  reluctant  object  of 
his  affections  to  consent  to  a  Gandharva  union  by  a  dis- 
cussion of  the  law  of  marriage.  He  first  briefly  mentions 
the  number  of  the  marriage-rites  (v.  8a)  and  their  names 
(vv.  8b~9a)  in  the  same  order  as  Manu,  and  then  goes  on, 
'  Learn  that  among  these  (rites),  as  Manu  Svayambhuva 
has  formerly  declared,  the  first  four  are  lawful  and  recom- 
mended for  a  Brahma^a ;  know,  O  blameless  one,  that  six, 
according  to  their  order,  are  lawful  for  a  Kshatriya  (9b-io). 
But  the  Rakshasa  rite  also  is  ordained  for  men  of  the  royal 
caste,  and  the  Asura  rite  is  prescribed  for  VaLsyas  and 
vSudras.  But  among  the  (last)  five,  three  are  declared 
lawful  and  two  unlawful  (v.  11).  The  PaLra^a  and  Asura 
(rites)  must  never  be  used.  According  to  this  rule 
(marriages)  must  be  concluded,  this  is  the  path  of  duty 
(v.  12).  Do  not  question  the  legality  of  the  Gandharva  and 
Rakshasa  (rites)  for  Kshatriyas.  Without  a  doubt  they 
may  be  used,  be  it  separate  or  mixed  '  (v.  13). 

The  close  verbal  agreement  of  this  passage  with  Manu 
III,  20-26,  on  the  one  hand,  and  its  serious  discrepancy 
with  respect  to  a  portion  of  the  doctrine,  make  it,  I  think, 
very  probable  that  it  is  a  paraphrase  or  adaptation  of  a  part 

1  The  original  has  udalm'tau,  which  is  ambiguous  and  may  also  mean 
'  quoted.' 


lxxviii  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


of  a  Manava  Dharma^astra  which  closely  resembled,  but 
was  not  quite  identical  with,  the  existing  text.  Verse  8b- 
9a  agrees  literally  with  Manu  III,  21 ;  and  vv.  nb-i3  come 
close  to  Manu  III,  25-26.  But  vv.  9b-na,  though  they 
have  a  certain  affinity  to  Manu  III,  23-24,  show,  neverthe- 
less, a  considerable  difference  in  doctrine.  For  Manu 
declares  (v.  23)  the  first  six  rites  to  be  lawful  for  a  Brah- 
ma/za,  the  four  following  ones  for  a  Kshatriya,  and  the  same 
four,  with  the  exception  of  the  Rakshasa  rite,  for  6udras 
and  Vaisyas,  while  v.  24  says  that  the  first  four  rites  are 
recommended,  and  that  the  Rakshasa  rite  alone  is  per- 
missible to  Kshatriyas,  and  the  Asura  to  the  two  lowest 
classes.  According  to  the  Mahabharata,  on  the  other  hand, 
Manu  approved  of  the  first  four  rites  in  the  case  of  Brah- 
ma^as,  and  of  the  first  six  in  case  of  Kshatriyas.  To  the 
latter  he  allowed  also  the  seventh,  the  Rakshasa  rite,  and 
confined  Vaijyas  and  5udras  to  the  purchase  of  their 
brides,  the  Asura  rite.  The  most  probable  explanation  of 
this  contradiction  seems  to  me  the  assumption  that  the  text 
of  Manu,  known  to  the  author  of  the  Upakhyana,  slightly 
differed  from  that  which  we  find  at  present. 

Another  passage  is  more  doubtful.  _Mah.  XIII,  61, 
34-35,  various  opinions  are  enumerated  with  respect  to  the 
question  how  large  a  share  of  the  guilt  incurred  by  ill- 
protected  and  ill-governed  subjects  falls  on  the  king1.  The 
decision  is  that,  according  to  the  teaching  of  Manu,  the 
negligent  ruler  is  loaded  with  a  fourth  share.  This  doctrine, 
which  is  found  also  in  other  passages  of  the  Mahabharata, 
contradicts  that  taught  in  our  Manu-smrzti  as  well  as  in  the 
older  Dharma-sutras,  where  a  sixth  part  of  the  sins  com- 
mitted by  subjects  is  said  to  fall  on  their  lord.  The  cir- 
cumstance that  several  opinions  are  contrasted  may  be  used 
as  an  argument  for  the  opinion  that  here,  too,  an  individual 
law-book  of  Manu's  is  referred  to.  If  that  were  so,  the 
passage  would  reveal  another  remarkable  discrepancy 
between  the  older  and  the  present  texts.     But  to  my  mind 

1  **n$  tot  tnrreq  u?n  f^fir  mxn  n  38 11  ^stotj:  *%*tfiT 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxix 


it  seems,  just  because  the  teaching  of  our  Manu  agrees  with 
the  Dharma-sutras,  more  probable  that  the  author  of  the 
Mahabharata  makes  here,  as  in  other  cases,  a  random 
appeal  to  Manu's  name  merely  in  order  to  give  weight  to 
his  peculiar  opinion. 

There  are  two  other  longer  pieces  in  the  Mahabharata 
which  are  ascribed  to  Manu.  In  one  case  it  is  perfectly  evi- 
dent that  there  exists  no  connexion  with  our  Smrz'ti.  The 
philosophical  conversation  between  Manu  and  Brzhaspati, 
which  fills  chapters  200-206  of  Mah.  XII,  has  neither  any 
distinctive  doctrines  nor  any  verses  in  common  with  the 
Manava  Dharmaj-astra.  On  the  contrary,  it  shows  a  leaning 
towards  the  Vaish/zava  creed. 

With  respect  to  the  second  passage,  Mah.  XII,  36,  3-50,  a 
doubt  is  at  least  possible.  It  contains  an  '  ancient  legend  ' 
(pura/za  itihasa),  narrating  how  Manu  revealed  in  the  be- 
ginning to  the  sages  the  law  regarding  food,  and  some 
miscellaneous  rules  concerning  worthy  recipients,  gifts, 
Veda-study,  and  penances.  Manu's  speech  consists  of 
forty-five  verses,  among  which  two  agree  fully  and  five 
partly  with  51okas  of  our  Smrz'ti l.  But  one  of  the  fully 
agreeing  verses  (v.  46)  occurs  also  in  two  Dharma-sutras, 
and  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  traditional  lore  of  the  Vedic 
schools.  Though  the  remainder  is  not  traceable  in  the 
older  works,  the  faintness  of  the  resemblance  makes  it,  I 
think,  more  probable  that  the  Mahabharata  accidentally 
attributes  to  Manu  verses  now  read  in  his  Smrz'ti,  than  that 
its  author  extracted  them  and  the  whole  piece  from  a 
Manava  5astra. 

But  whatever  may  be  the  correct  interpretation  of  the 
mention  of  Manu  in  these  passages,  it  remains  indis- 
putable that  the  author  or  authors  of  the  first,  twelfth, 
and  thirteenth  Parvans  of  the  Mahabharata  knew  a  Manava 
Dharma^astra  which  was  closely  connected,  but  not  identical 
with  the  existing  text.  The  latter  must,  therefore,  as  Pro- 
fessor Weber  has  pointed  out,  be   considered   later  than 

1  Mah.  XII,  36,  27  =  Manu  IV,  218;  first  pada  of  ver.  28*  =  first  pada  of  Manu 
IV,  220;  ver.  28b  =  Manu  IV,  217*;  first  pada  of  ver.  29*  =  first  pada  of  Manu 
IV,  2iob;  ver.  46  =  Manu  II,  157;  ver.  47*  =  Manu  II,  158*. 


lxxx  LAWS    OF   MANU. 


these  '  latest  portions  of  the  epic.'  The  latter  conclusion 
is,  it  seems  to  me,  confirmed  by  some  indications  in  the 
Smrtti  which  point  to  an  acquaintance  with  the  Mahabha- 
rata.  The  warning  regarding  the  consequences  of  gambling, 
Manu  IX,  227,  certainly  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the 
legend  of  the  Kurus  and  Pa^avas.  When  it  is  stated 
there  that '  in  a  former  Kalpa  the  vice  of  gambling  has  been 
seen  to  cause  great  enmity,'  this  assertion  can  only  point 
in  the  first  instance  to  the  match  played  between  Yudhish- 
tkirsi  and  Duryodhana,  which  was  the  immediate  cause  of 
the  great  war.  It  may  also  contain,  as  some  commentators 
think,  an  allusion  to  the  fate  of  king  Nala,  but  that  can  only 
be  a  secondary  meaning,  because  war  was  not  the  result  of 
his  gambling.  More  significant  than  this  passage  is  the 
fact  that  in  chapters  VII-X  of  the  Manu-smrzti  a  number 
of  legends  are  quoted  in  illustration  or  in  support  of  rules 
which,  as  the  commentators  repeatedly  assert 1,  are  taken 
from  the  Mahabharata,  and  that  in  one  case  just  those 
which  are  mentioned  in  one  verse  of  Manu  (IX,  314)  are 
found  close  together  in  the  same  chapter  of  the  Maha- 
bharata. 

This  relative  position  of  the  two  works  might  induce  us  to 
assume  with  Rao  Saheb  V.N.  Mandlik  that  the  Mahabharata 
had  a  direct  influence  on  the  final  redaction  of  the  Manu- 
smrtti,  and  that  the  author  of  the  latter  appropriated  from 
the  former  the  very  large  number  of  identical  verses  which 
in  the  Mahabharata  are  not  ascribed  to  Manu. 

Tempting  as  the  hypothesis  of  the  dependence  of  the 
Smrtti  on  the  epic  is,  because  it  would  account  for 
the  adoption  of  the  Anush/ubh  metre  in  the  latter,  a 
careful  examination  of  the  corresponding  passages  leads 
to  a  very  different  result.  On  going  over  the  third,  twelfth, 
and  thirteenth  Parvans  of  the  Mahabharata  I  have  succeeded 
in  identifying  upwards  of  260  verses  or  portions  of  verses,  not 
attributed  to  Manu,  with  51okas  of  the  Manu-smrzti.  This 
number,  which  corresponds  to  about  one-tenth  of  the  bulk 
of  the  latter  work,  would  no  doubt  be  considerably  swelled 
by  a  comparison  of  the  remaining  portions  of  the  epic,  and 


1  See  notes  to  VII,  41 ;  VIII,  no;  IX,  23, 129,  314-315,  &c. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXI 


it  may  be  that  even  in  the  Parvans  examined  some  iden- 
tical pieces  have  escaped  my  notice.  The  number  of  the 
verses  which  has  to  be  compared  is  so  enormous  that 
mistakes  are  easily  possible ;  but  the  identifications  made 
are  amply  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  rela- 
tion between  the  two  works.  The  corresponding  passages 
vary  considerably  in  extent,  from  a  single  pada  or  a  single 
line  to  sections  of  twenty  to  forty  verses.  Where  larger 
sections  agree,  it  is  rare  that  more  than  half-a-dozen  verses 
stand  in  the  same  order  in  both  works,  and  it  happens  not 
rarely  that  a  series  of  identical  51okas  is  interrupted  by  the 
expansion  of  one  verse  into  two,  or  by  a  contraction  of  two 
into  one.  Further,  the  purpose  which  an  identical  line  or 
verse  is  made  to  serve  sometimes  differs,  and  sometimes 
a  various  reading  alters  its  sense  entirely.  The  various 
readings  are  exceedingly  numerous,  and  the  better  one  is 
sometimes  found  in  the  Mahabharata  and  sometimes  in 
Manu.  If  we  enter  on  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the 
corresponding  passages,  there  are  three  cases  in  which  one 
or  two  consecutive  chapters  of  the  Mahabharata  contain 
from  twenty  to  forty  verses  which  occur  in  our  Manu. 
Mah.  XII,  232-233  include  the  greater  portion  of  Bhrzgu's 
account  of  the  creation  and  some  of  the  verses,  said  to  have 
been  enunciated  by  Manu  himself  on  the  same  subject,  i.  e. 
Manu  I,  i8b,  20,  28-29,  64-78,  81-86. 

Further,  Mah.  XIII,  48,  14-44  gives  a  portion  of  Manu's 
definitions  of  and  rules  regarding  the  mixed  castes,  and 
contains  the  verses  X,  27-32,  33%  34-37.  38%  39-40,  50,  52b, 
58-60,  and  62,  mostly  with  considerable  variations,  and 
51okas  resembling  Manu  X,  42-43  are  found  Mah.  XIII, 
33,  21-22,  and  35,  17-18. 

Finally,  Mah.  XII,  165,  which  treats  of  gifts,  sacrifices, 
and  penances  much  in  the  same  manner  as  the  eleventh 
chapter  of  Manu,  exhibits,  mostly  in  the  beginning,  the  fol- 
lowing verses,  partly  in  somewhat  different  versions,  XI,  2b, 
3b,  4a,  7,  11-17,  20,  22b,  23a,  27%  29-31,  34-40,  9ib,  105, 150, 
i77b,  181,  207.  The  general  sense  of  some  other  61okas 
corresponds  without  a  real  agreement  in  words,  and  the 
same  chapter  of  the  Mah.  contains  also  vv.  31*  and  32% 
[25]  f 


lxxxii  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


three-quarters  of  Manu  II,  238,  and  v.  68a  the  first  half  of 
Manu  III,  172.  Equivalents  of  Manu  XI,  44,  74,  76%  77, 
84  are  found  Mah.  XII,  34,  2 ;  35,  4-6  ;  263,  45b-4<5a- 
Among  other  somewhat  longer  corresponding  passages  the 
following  are  the  most  noteworthy.  Portions  of  the  discus- 
sion on  the  reverence  due  to  parents  and  teachers,  Manu  II, 
229-234,  occur  Mah.  XII,  108,  5-12.  The  rules  regarding 
the  disposal  of  the  fee  at  an  Arsha  wedding  and  the  respect 
to  be  shown  to  females  are  found  Mah.  XIII,  45*  20 ;  46,. 
1-7,  and  some  verses,  Manu  III,  134-135,  140-142,  158-. 
159,  172,  180-181,  184-185,  from  the  section  on  Sraddhas, 
Mah.  XIII,  90,  as  well  as  fragments  of  IJI, 267-274  in  the 
beginning  of  Mah.  XIII,  88.  The  warning  against  quarrels 
with  relatives,  Manu  IV,  179-185,  is  repeated  Mah.  XII,  244, 
i4b-2ia.  A  number  of  the  rules  applicable  to  the  ascetic, 
Manu  VI,  42-48,  57b,  58*  reappears  in  the  beginning  of 
Mah.  XII,  246  and  279,  while  Manu  VI,  49  is  read  Mah. 

XII,  331,  30.  The  sketch  of  the  state  administration,  Manu 
VII,  1 15-122,  is  given  mostly  in  the  same  words,  Mah.  XII, 
87,  3-1  ia,  and  the  same  chapter  contains  also  closely 
agreeing  precepts  regarding  taxation  together  with  the 
verses  Manu  VII,  127  and  139*.  The  remainder  of  the 
corresponding  passages  ranges  between  triplets  and  single 
feet  of  51okas,  and  is  scattered  over  all  the  twelve  chapters 
of  Manu.  The  portions  of  the  Mahabharata  where  we  chiefly 
meet  with  them,  are  III,  94,  180;  XII,  15,  244-245,  265  ; 

XIII,  44-46,  9°>  104-105,  115,  152  \ 

In  order  to  complete  this  sketch  of  the  relation  in  which 
the  two  works  stand  towards  each  other,  it  will  be  advisable 
to  give  one  of  the  three  longest  corresponding  passages  in 
full,  and  to  carefully  note  both  the  points  of  contact  and  of 
difference.  The  piece  most  suitable  for  such  a  comparison 
is  that  from  the  first  book  of  Manu.  For  the  latter  doubt- 
lessly belongs  to  the  additions  made  by  the  editor  of  the 
metrical  version,  and  its  account  of  the  creation  presents 
numerous  problems  which  have   sorely  puzzled  the  com- 

1  It  is  impossible  to  give  here  more  than  these  general  indications.  A  more 
complete  list  of  the  verses  of  the  Manu-smr/ti  occurring  in  the  Mah.  will  be 
found  in  the  Appendix. 


I 


INTRODUCTION. 


lxxxi 


Xlll 


mentators.  The  solution  of  some  of  these  difficulties  is 
furnished  by  the  corresponding  passage  of  the  Mahabharata. 
This  passage  occurs  in  an  account  of  the  creation,  com- 
municated by  Vyasa-K>z'sh?2a-Dvaipayana  to  his  son  Suka, 
which  Bhishma  narrates  to  Yudhish^ira. 


Mahabharata  XII,  232. 

1 1 .  Vyasa  said :  In  the  com- 
mencement exists  the  Brahman 
without  beginning  or  end,  un- 
born, luminous,  free  from  decay, 
immutable,  eternal,  unfathom- 
able by  reasoning,  not  to  be 
fully  known. 

12.  Fifteen  nimeshas\ 
(twinklings  of  the  eye  are) 
one  kash/M1,  but  thirty  kash- 
Mas  one  should  reckon  as  one 
kala;  moreover,  thirty  kalas 
and  that  which  may  amount 
to  the  tenth  part  of  a  kala 
shall  be  one  muhtirta ; 

13.  Thirty  muhurtas  shall 
make  a  day  and  a  night — that 
number  has  been  fixed  by  the 
sages;  a  month  is  declared  (to 
consist  of)  thirty  nights  and  days, 
and  a  year  of  twelve  months.      / 

14.  But  those  acquainted  with 
calculations  call  two  progresses 
of  the  sun,  the  southern  and  the 
northern  one,  a  year2. 

15.  The  sun  divides  the  days 
and  nights  of  the  world  of 
men3,  the  night  (being  intended) 


MANU   I. 


64.  Eighteen  nimeshas 
(twinklings  of  the  eye  are 
one  kashM  a1),  thirty  kash/Ms 
one  kala,  thirty  kalas  one 
muhurta,  and  as  many  (mu- 
hurtas) one  day  and  night 


65.  The  sun  divides  days  and 
nights,  both  human  and  di- 
vine, the  night  (being  intended) 


1  Regarding   the   difference    between   the    two   computations,  see  Wilson, 
Vishwu-pura/za  I,  47  (ed.  Hall). 

a  The  verse  marked  as  14  in  the  Bombay  edition  consists  of  a  single  line 
only. 

3  The  reading  of  the  Mahabharata,  manushalaukike  for  manushadaivike, 
seems  the  better  one. 

f  2 


lxxxiv 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


I 


for  the  repose  of  created  beings 
and  the  day  for  exertion. 

1 6.  A  month  is  a  day  and  a 
night  of  the  manes,  but  their 
division  (is  as  follows):  the 
bright  (fortnight)1  is  their 
day  for  active  exertion,  the 
dark  (fortnight)  their  night 
for  sleep. 

17.  A  year  is  a  day  and  a 
night  of  the  gods ;  the  division 
is  (as  follows):  the  half  year 
during  which  the  sun  progresses 
to  the  north  will  be  the  day,  that 
during  which  it  goes  southwards 
the  night. 

18.  Counting  the  sum  of\ 
years  (consisting)  of  those  hu- 
man days  and  nights  which  have 
been  mentioned  above,  I  will 
declare  (the  duration  of)  a  day 
and  night  of  Brahman. 

19.  I  will  declare  severally 
and  in  due  order  the  totals  of 
the  years  in  the  Kn'ta,  Treta\ 
Dvapara,  and  Kali  ages2. 

20.  They  declare  that  the 
Kn'ta  age  (consists  of)  four 
thousand  years  (of  the  gods); 
the  twilight  preceding  it  con- 
sists of  as  many  hundreds,  and 
the  twilight  following  it  of  the 
same  number. 

21.  In  the  (other)  three  ages, 


for  the  repose  of  created  beings 
and  the  day  for  exertion. 

66.  A  month  is  a  day  and  a 
night  of  the  manes,  but  the 
division  is  according  to 
fortnights.  The  dark  (fort- 
night) is  their  day  for  active 
exertion,  the  bright  (fort- 
night) their  night  for  sleep. 

67.  A  year  is  a  day  and  a 
night  of  the  gods ;  the  division 
is  (as  follows):  the  half  year 
during  which  the  sun  progresses 
to  the  north  will  be  the  day,  that 
during  which  it  goes  southwards 
the  night. 


68.  But  hear  now  the  brief 
(description  of)  the  duration  of 
a  night  and  day  of  Brahman 
and  of  the  several  ages  (of  the 
world)  according  to  their  order. 


69.  They  declare  that  the 
Kn'ta  age  (consists  of)  four 
thousand  years  of  the  gods ; 
the  twilight  preceding  it  con- 
sists of  as  many  hundreds,  and 
the  twilight  following  it  of  the 
same  number. 

70.  In  the  (other)  three  ages, 


1  The  reading  of  the  Mahabharata  is  obviously  faulty,  as  it  is  well  known 
that  the  dark  fortnight  is,  according  to  the  Hindus,  the  day  of  the  manes.  The 
fault  has  probably  arisen  by  an  accidental  transposition  of  the  words  suk\a/i 
and  krishnaA.  The  second  var.  lect.  of  the  Mah.  tayo/j  puna/j  for  tu  pakshayo/t 
is  less  intelligible  than  Manu's,  because  a  substantive  is  required  to  which  sulda/i 
and  krtshnaA  can  be  referred. 

2  It  is  a  particularly  significant  fact  that  in  spite  of  the  great  difference 
between  the  two  works,  both  show  the  intercalation  of  a  fresh  exordium. 


INTRODUCTION. 


lxxxv 


with  the  preceding  twi- 
lights and  in  the  twilights 
following  them,  the  thousands 
and  hundreds  are  diminished  by 
one-fourth  (in  each)1. 

22.  These  support  the  eternal, 
everlasting  worlds;  this  is  known 
as  the  eternal  Brahman  to  those 
who  know  Brahman. 

23.  In  the  Krz'ta  age  Dharma 
is  four-footed  and  entire,  and  (so 
is)  Truth ;  nor  does  any  gain 
which  is  opposed  to  that 
(spirit  of  justice)  accrue  by 
unrighteousness 2. 

24.  In  the  other  (three  ages), 
by  reason  of  (unjust)  gains, 
Dharma  is  deprived  successively 
of  one  foot,  and  unrighteous- 
ness increases  through  theft, 
falsehood,  and  fraud. 


25.  (Men  are)  free  from  dis- 
ease, accomplish  all  their  aims, 
and  live  four  hundred  years  in 
the  Krz'ta  (age);  but  in  the 
Tret&  age  (and  the  follow- 
ing ones)  their  life  is  lessened 
by  one  quarter  in  each3; 

26.  And  the  doctrines  of 
the  Veda   decrease,   as    we 


with  their  twilights  pre- 
ceding and  following,  the 
thousands  and  hundreds  are 
diminished  by  one  (in  each). 


81.  In  the  Kr/ta  age  Dharma 
is  four-footed  and  entire,  and 
(so  is)  Truth ;  nor  does  any  gain 
accrue  to  men  by  unrighteous- 
ness. 

82.  In  the  other  (three  ages), 
by  reason  of  (unjust)  gains, 
Dharma  is  deprived  successively 
of  one  foot,  and  through  (the 
prevalence  of)  theft,  falsehood, 
and  fraud  the  merit  (gained 
by  men)  is  diminished  by 
one-fourth  (in  each). 

83.  (Men  are)  free  from  dis- 
ease, accomplish  all  their  aims, 
and  live  four  hundred  years  in 
the  Krz'ta  (age),  but  in  the 
Treta  and  (in  each  of)  the 
succeeding  (ages)  their  life  is 
lessened  by  one  quarter. 

84.  The  life  of  mortals,  men- 
tioned in  the  Veda,  the  de- 


1  The  reading  of  Manu,  sasa/7zdhya;/weshu  £a  for  samdhamseshu  tata4,  seem> 
preferable,  but  his  ekapayena  is  inferior  to  the  ekapadena  of  the  Mahabharata. 

2  Nilaka7^/za  explains  agama  in  this  verse  and  the  next  by  •  doctrine.'  I 
translate  it  by  'gain,'  in  accordance  with  the  rendering  adopted  for  Manu,  but 
willingly  acknowledge  that  the  other  rendering  is  possible  in  both  works,  and 
that  the  meaning  maybe  'nor  does  any  unrighteous  doctrine,  opposed  to  that 
(Dharma),  prevail'  (Mah.),  'nor  is  any  unrighteous  doctrine  spread  among 
men'  (Manu). 

3  The  reading  kr/te  tretayuge  tveshSm  instead  of  Manu's  k/7'te  tret.ulishu 
hyesham  is  more  archaic. 


lxxxvi 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


hear,  ineachsuccessiveage, 
as  well  as  the  lives  (of  men), 
their  blessings  (a^isha^),  and 
the  rewards  which  the  Veda 
yields1. 


27.  One  set  of  duties  (is  pre- 
scribed) for  men  in  the  Krz'ta 
age,  different  ones  in  the  Treta 
and  in  the  Dvapara,  and  (again) 
another  (set)  in  the  Kali  age,  in 
proportion  as  (those)  ages  de- 
crease in  length. 

28.  In  the  Krz'ta  age  the  chief 
(virtue  is  the  performance 
of)  austerities,  in  the  Treta  (di- 
vine) knowledge  is  most  ex- 
cellent, in  the  Dvapara  they 
declare  sacrifices  (to  be  best),  in 
the  Kali  liberality  alone. 

29.  The  wise  know  such 
(a  period  of)  twelve  thousand 
(divine)  years  (to  be  understood 
by)  the  term  an  age  (of  the 
gods) ;  that  (period)  being  multi- 
plied by  one  thousand  is  called 
a  day  of  Brahman. 

30.  (Know  his)  night  to  be 
as  long2.  At  the  beginning  of 
that  (day)  the  lord  who  is  the 
Universe  finally  awakes,  after 
having  entered  deep  meditation 


sired  results  (a^isha^)  of  sacri- 
ficial rites,  and  the  (super- 
natural) power  of  embodied 
(spirits)  are  fruits  propor- 
tioned among  men  accord- 
ing to  (the  character  of)  the 
age1. 

85.  One  set  of  duties  (is  pre- 
scribed) for  men  in  the  Krz'ta  age, 
different  ones  in  the  Treta  and 
in  the  Dvapara,  and  again  an- 
other (set)  in  the  Kali  age,  in 
proportion  as  (those)  ages  de- 
crease in  length. 

86.  In  the  Krz'ta  age  the  chief 
(virtue)  is  declared  to  be  (the 
performance  of)  austerities,  in  the 
Treta  (divine)  knowledge,  in  the 
Dvapara  (the  performance  of) 
sacrifices,  in  the  Kali  liberality 
alone. 

71-72.  These  twelve  thousand 
(years),  which  thus  have  been 
mentioned  above  as  the 
total  of  four  (human)  ages, 
are  called  one  age  of  the  gods. 
But  know  that  the  sum  of  one 
thousand  ages  of  the  gods 
(makes)  one  day  of  Brahman, 
and  that  his  night  has  the  same 
length2. 


1  The  Sanskrit  text  of  the  two  Slokas  agrees  somewhat  better  than  the  trans- 
lation. It  looks  as  if  neither  of  them  was  the  original  version,  which  probably 
declared  that  the  age  of  men,  their  blessings,  and  the  rewards  of  deeds,  such  as 
they  are  promised  in  the  Veda,  diminish  in  each  successive  age.  Another  ver- 
sion, which  almost  exactly  agrees  with  Manu's,  occurs  Mah.  Ill,  200, 115. 

2  Both  the  Mah.  and  Manu  have  the  accusative  case  ratrim,  which  does  not 
agree  with  the  preceding  verb  gneyaxa.  (Manu)  u^yate  (Mah.)  It  would  seem 
that  both  give  adaptations  of  an  older  verse,  where  a  word  like  ahwk,  which 
governed  the  accusative,  occurred.  Though  the  verb  was  changed,  the  further 
alteration  of  the  case  was  forgotten. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV11 


and    having   slept    during    the 
period  of  destruction. 

31.  Those  (only)  who  know 
that  Brahman's  day  ends  after 
(the  completion  of)  one  thousand 
ages  (of  the  gods)  and  that  his 
night  lasts  a  thousand  ages, 
are  (really)  men  acquainted  with 
(the  length  of)  days  and  nights. 

32.  When  imperishable  Brah- 
man awakes  at  the  end  of  his 
night,  he  modifies  himself  and 
creates  the  element  (called)  the 
Great  One  (and)  from  that  mind 
which  is  discrete. 


73.  Those  (only)  who  know 
that  the  holy  day  of  Brahman, 
indeed,  ends  after  (the  com- 
pletion of)  one  thousand  ages 
(of  the  gods),  and  that  his  night 
lasts  as  long,  are  (really)  men 
acquainted  with  (the  length  of) 
days  and  nights. 


Mahabharata  II,  233. 

1.  Luminous  Brahman  is  the 
seed  from  which  single  element 
this  whole  twofold  creation,  the 
immovable  and  the  movable, 
has  been  produced. 

2.  Awaking  at  the  beginning 
of  his  day,  he  creates  the  world 
by  means  of  Ignorance — even 
first  the  element,  (called)  the 
Great  One,  (next)  speedily  mind 
which  is  discrete ; 

3.  And  conquering  here  re- 
splendent (mind)  which  goes 
far,  enters  many  paths,  and  has 
the  nature  of  desire  and  doubt, 
creates  the  seven  mind-born 
ones. 

4.  Mind,  impelled  by  the  de- 
sire to  create,  performs  the  work 
of  creation  by  modifying  itself ; 
thence  ether  is  produced ;  they 
declare  that  sound  is  the  quality 
of  the  latter. 


75.  Mind,  impelled  by  the  de- 
sire to  create,  performs  the  work 
of  creation  by  modifying  itself; 
thence  ether  is  produced ;  they 
declare  that  sound  is  the  quality 
of  the  latter. 


Ixxxviii 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


5.  But  from  ether,  modifying 
itself,  springs  the  pure,  powerful 
wind,  the  vehicle  of  all  perfumes ; 
touch  is  considered  to  be 
its  quality. 

6.  Next  from  wind,  modifying 
itself,  proceeds  the  brilliant  light 
which  illuminates  and  is  white; 
that  is  declared  to  possess  the 
quality  of  colour ; 

7.  And  from  light,  modifying 
itself,  (comes)  water  which  pos- 
sesses taste;  from  water  smell 
and  earth;  (such)  is  declared 
(to  be)  the  creation  of  (them) 
all. 

8.  The  qualities  of  each 
earlier-named  (element)  en- 
ter each  of  the  later-named 
ones,  and  whatever  place  (in 
the  sequence)  each  of  them  oc- 
cupies, even  so  many  qualities  it 
is  declared  to  possess1. 

9.  If  some,  perceiving  a  smell 
in  water  through  a  want  of  care, 
attribute  (that  quality  to  water), 
one  must  know  that  it  belongs 
to  earth  alone,  (and  that  it  is) 
adventitious  in  water  and  wind. 

10.  Those  Atmans  of  seven 
kinds2,  which  possess  various 
powers,  were  severally  unable 
to  create  beings  without  fully 
uniting  themselves. 

11.  These  great  Atmans, 
uniting  and  mutually  combining 


76.  But  from  ether,  modifying 
itself,  springs  the  pure,  powerful 
wind,  the  vehicle  of  all  perfumes ; 
that  is  held  to  possess  the 
quality  of  touch. 

77.  Next  from  wind,  modifying 
itself,  proceeds  the  brilliant  light 
which  illuminates  and  dispels 
darkness;  that  is  declared  to 
possess  the  quality  of  colour. 

78.  And  from  light,  modifying 
itself,  (is  produced)  water,  de- 
clared to  possess  the  quality 
of  taste;  from  water  earth, 
which  has  the  quality  of 
smell;  such  is  the  creation 
in  the  beginning. 

20.  Among  them  each 
succeeding  (element)  ac- 
quiresthe  qualityofthe  pre- 
cedingone,  and  whatever  place 
(in  the  sequence)  each  of  them 
occupies,  even  so  many  qualities 
it  is  declared  to  possess. 


1  The  position  of  this  verse  in  the  Mahabharata  makes  the  conjecture,  put 
forward  in  the  note  to  the  translation,  that  the  correct  position  of  Manu  I,  20 
is  after  verse  78,  exceedingly  probable. 

2  According  to  Nilaka/z///a,  the  seven  Atmans,  called  above,  ver.  3,  the  seven 
mind-born  ones,  are  Mahat,  Ahawkara,  and  the  five  subtile  elements. 


i 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXIX 


with  each  other,  entered  the 
body;  hence  one  speaks  of  Pu- 
rusha  [i.  e.  him  who  resides 
(usha)  in  a  fortress  (pur)]. 

12.  In  consequence  of  that 
entering  (jrayawa),  the  body 
(jarira)  becomes  endowed  with 
a  (perceptible)  form,  and  con- 
sists of  sixteen1  (constituent 
parts). 

That  the  great  elements2  enter 
together  with  the  karman  (merit 
and  demerit). 

13.  Taking  with  him  all  the 
elements,  that  first  creator  of 
created  beings  (enters  it)  in 
order  to  perform  austerities; 
him  they  call  the  lord  of  created 
beings. 

•  14.  He,  indeed,  creates  the 
creatures,  both  the  immovable 
and  the  movable ;  then  that 
Brahma  creates  gods,  sages, 
manes,  and  men, 

15.  The  worlds,  rivers,  oceans, 
the  quarters  of  the  compass, 
mountains,  trees,  men,  Kinnaras, 
Rakshas,.  birds,  tame  and  wild 
beasts,  and  snakes,  the  imperish- 
able and  the  perishable,  both  the 
immovable  and  the  movable. 

16.  Whatever  course  of 
action  they  adopted  in  a 
former    creation,    even    that 


i8b.  That  the  great  elements 
enter  together  with  their  func- 
tions (karman)3. 


28.  But  to  whatever  course 
of  action  the  Lord  at  first 
appointed     each    (kind     of 


1  The  sixteen  constituent  parts  are,  according  to  NilakawMa,  the  five  gross 
elements  and  the  eleven  organs. 

2  NilakawMa  takes  mahanti  bhutani,  'the  great  elements,'  in  the  sense  of 
'  the  subtile  elements,  and  the  great  ones,  the  mahattattvas'  (bhutani  sukshmam 
mahanti  mahattatattvani). 

8  This  line  is  a  good  example,  showing  how  the  same  words  of  the  ancient 
school- tradition  were  made  to  serve  different  purposes. 


XC  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


alone  they  adopt  in  each  sue-  beings),    that     alone    it    has 

ceeding  creation.  spontaneously   adopted    in 

each  succeeding  creation. 
17.  They  turn  to  noxious-  29.  Whatever  he  assigned 
ness  or  harmlessness,  gentleness  to  each  at  the  (first)  crea- 
or  ferocity,  virtue  or  sin,  truth  or  tion,  noxiousness  or  harmless- 
falsehood,  according  to  the  ness,  gentleness  or  ferocity, 
disposition  with  which  they  virtue  or  sin,  truth  or  falsehood, 
were  (first)  created;  hence  that clung(afterwards)spon- 
that  (particular  course  of  action)  taneouslytoit. 
pleases  each. 

The  remainder  of  Vyasa's  narrative,  which  continues 
through  the  following  twenty-six  verses,  may  be  omitted, 
as,  further  on,  it  presents  few  points  of  contact  with  our 
Smrz'ti.  It  must,  however,  be  noticed  that,  according  to 
verses  i$-z6<>  'the  Lord  assigned  to  his  creatures  their 
names  and  conditions,  in  accordance  with  the  words  of  the 
Veda.'  This  idea  agrees  with  Manu  I,  21,  but  the  wording 
of  the  two  passages  differs  very  considerably. 

The  lesson  which  the  facts,  revealed  by  the  above  dis- 
cussion, teach,  is  a  double  one.  First,  they  clearly  show 
that  the  editor  of  our  metrical  Manu-smr/ti  has  not  drawn 
on  the  Mahabharata,  but  that  the  authors  of  both  works 
have  utilised  the  same  materials.  Secondly,  they  make  it 
highly  probable  that  the  materials,  on  which  both  works 
are  based,  were  not  systematic  treatises  on  law  and  philo- 
sophy, but  the  floating  proverbial  wisdom  of  the  philoso- 
phical and  legal  schools  which  already  existed  in  metrical 
form.  The  first  point  is  so  evident  that  it  seems  to  me 
unnecessary  to  waste  any  more  words  on  it.  With  respect 
to  the  second  conclusion,  I  would  point  out  that  it  is  made 
unavoidable  by  the  peculiar  character  of  the  differences 
found  in  closely  connected  51okas,  by  the  occurrence  of 
identical  lines  and  padas  in  verses  whereof  the  general 
sense  differs,  and  by  the  faint,  shadowy  resemblance  in 
words  and  ideas,  observable  in  other  pieces.  I  may  add, 
further,  that  the  supposition  that  each  special  school  pos- 
sessed such  a  body  of  metrical  maxims  is  perfectly  wel 
founded. 


INTRODUCTION.  XC1 


As  has  been  repeatedly  stated,  the  text-books  of  the 
ancient  Vedic  schools,  the  Sutras  and  the  Upanishads,  con- 
tain already  a  not  inconsiderable  proportion  of  Anush^ubh 
verses  which  sometimes  recur  in  identical  or  slightly  varying 
forms.  Hence  it  is  no  more  than  might  be  expected  that 
the  teachers  of  the  special  schools  should  have  continued 
in  the  path  of  their  predecessors,  and  should  have  gradually 
augmented  the  stock  of  their  '  Spruchweisheit,'  until  it 
extended  to  all  legal  and  philosophical  topics,  and  the 
accumulation  of  these  detached  verses  made  it  easy  and 
tempting  to  convert  the  old  aphoristic  handbooks  into 
metrical  treatises1.  The  answer,  which  we  are  thus  obliged 
to  give  to  the  question  whence  the  editor  of  our  Manu-smrzti 
took  his  additional  materials,  agrees  very  closely  with  Pro- 
fessor Hopkins'  hypothesis,  who,  as  mentioned  above,  con- 
siders the  law-book  to  be  a  conglomerate  of  the  Manava 
Dharma-sutra  and  of  the  floating  sayings  attributed  to 
Manu,  the  father  of  mankind.  The  latter  restriction  seems 
to  me  unadvisable,  because  among  the  mass  of  correspond- 
ing pieces  found  in  the  Mahabharata  comparatively  few  are 
attributed  to  the  Pra^apati,  and  because  a  Hindu  who  was 

1  The  probability  of  the  existence  of  such  a  body  of  metrical  maxims  would 
become  still  more  apparent,  if  it  were  possible  to  enter  here  on  a  comparison 
of  portions  of  the  older  Pura«as  with  the  Mahabharata  and  the  metrical 
Smrztis,  as  well  as  on  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  ancient  Buddhist  litera- 
ture. Though  the  difficulty  and  magnitude  of  such  a  task  forbid  its  being 
attempted  in  this  Introduction,  I  cannot  refrain  from  inserting  a  few  general 
hints.  The  Pura;zas  contain  a  good  deal  that  is  identical  with  or  similar  to 
passages  of  the  Mahabharata  and  Manu,  and  it  is  in  many  cases  impossible  to 
assume  that  the  corresponding  verses  have  been  borrowed  from  the  latter 
works.  The  Purawas,  some  of  which,  like  the  Vayu,  even  in  their  present 
shape,  go  back  to  a  very  respectable  antiquity,  are  popular  sectarian  compila- 
tions of  mythology,  philosophy,  history,  and  the  sacred  law,  intended,  as  they 
are  now  used,  for  the  instruction  of  the  unlettered  classes,  including  the  upper 
divisions  of  the  tfudra  varaa,  the  so-called  SaM/zudras.  It  was  only  natural  that 
their  authors  should  have  appropriated  suitable  portions  of  the  floating  metrical 
wisdom  of  the  philosophical  and  legal  schools. 

The  comparison  of  the  ancient  Buddhist  literature  is  particularly  instructive, 
because  the  Buddhists  are  a  special  philosophical  school,  and  because  their 
oldest  works,  though  mostly  consisting  of  prose,  include  a  considerable  number 
of  61okas,  among  which  a  certain  number,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Dhamma- 
pada,  shows  affinities  to  verses  of  the  Mahabharata  and  even  of  Manu.  They 
probably  took  over  a  certain  stock  of  ancient  metrical  maxims,  and  added  a 
great  number  of  new  ones. 


XC11  LAWS    OF    MANU, 


I 


thoroughly  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  dogma  that  Manu 
first  taught  the  sacred  law,  would  not  hesitate  to  ascribe  to 
that  sage  all  the  maxims  which  seemed  to  him  to  bear  the 
stamp  of  authenticity,  even  if  others  attributed  them  to 
different  authorities. 

The  answer  to  the  next  question,  whether  the  conversion 
of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  was  effected  at  one  time  or  by 
degrees,  and  whether  Bhrz'gu's  recension  has  to  be  considered 
as  the  immediate  offspring  or  as  a  remoter  descendant  of  the 
Sutra,  must,  I  think,  be  answered,  as  has  been  tacitly  assumed 
in  the  preceding  discussion,  in  the  sense  of  the  first  alterna- 
tive. Not  long  ago  it  seemed  that  the  contrary  opinion  was 
the  more  probable  one.  But  the  closer  one  examines  the 
facts  which  at  first  sight  seem  to  lead  up  to  the  inference  that 
Bhrzgu's  Manu-sa^hita  forms  the  last  link  in  a  long  chain  of 
metrical  Manu-smrztis,  the  more  one  sees  that  they  possess 
no,  or  very  little,  importance.  On  the  other  hand,  those 
arguments  which  speak  in  favour  of  our  text  being,  if  not 
the  first,  at  least  one  of  the  first  attempts  at  a  conversion 
of  a  Vedic  school-book  into  a  special  law-book,  gain  by 
the  same  process  in  force  and  increase  in  number. 
The  points  which  have  been  brought  forward  in  order  to 
prove  that  the  existing  text  of  Manu  has  suffered  many 
recasts  are,  first,  its  numerous  contradictory  passages ; 
secondly,  the  explicit  statement  of  the  Hindu  tradition  in 
the  preface  to  the  Narada-smr/ti ;  thirdly,  the  quotations 
from  a  Br/hat  Manu  and  a  Vrzddha  Manu  met  with  in  the 
medieval  Digests  of  law  ;  and  fourthly,  the  untraceable  or 
partly  traceable  quotations  from  Manu's  Dharma^astra 
found  in  some  of  the  older  Sanskrit  works.  The  existence 
of  these  facts  is  undeniable.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to  show 
that  they  are  partly  useless  as  arguments,  and  partly,  under 
a  better  interpretation,  lead  to  quite  other  conclusions. 
Thus  in  weighing  the  value  of  the  argument  drawn  from  the 
occurrence  of  contradictory  passages,  two  circumstances, 
which  mostly  have  been  left  out  of  account,  must  be  kept 
in  mind  :  first,  that  it  is  a  common  habit  of  Indian  authors 
to  place  conflicting  opinions,  supported  by  authorities  of 
equal  weight,  side  by  side,  and  to  allow  an  option,  or  to 


INTRODUCTION.  XC1U 


mention  time-honoured  rules,  legal  customs,  and  social 
institutions,  and  afterwards  to  disapprove  of  them  ;  and 
secondly,  that,  as  our  Smrzti  is  in  any  case  a  recast  of  an 
earlier  Sutra,  that  fact  alone  is  sufficient  to  account  for 
contradictions.  It  has  been  shown  above1,  that  some  con- 
tradictory passages,  such  as  those  concerning  the  respective 
rank  of  the  mother  and  the  teacher,  or  regarding  the  per- 
missibility of  certain  marriage-rites,  express  conflicting 
views,  mentioned  also  in  the  Dharma-sutras.  The  Manu- 
smrzti  only  reproduces  the  ancient  opinions,  but  omits, 
possibly  for  metrical  reasons,  to  mark  them  as  belonging  to 
different  authors  or  schools.  In  other  cases  we  may  hesi- 
tate between  two  explanations.  If  we  find,  for  instance, 
that  our  text  in  the  third  and  ninth  chapters2  violently 
inveighs  against  Asura  marriages,  and  in  the  eighth  and 
ninth3  lays  down  rules  which  presuppose  the  legality  of  the 
sale  or  purchase  of  a  bride,  we  may  assume  that  the  first 
utterance  is  due  to  the  editor  of  the  metrical  version,  and 
that  the  second  represents  the  more  archaic  doctrine  of 
the  Dharma-sutra.  In  favour  of  this  supposition  it  may  be 
urged  that  the  Manava  Grzhya-sutra  unhesitatingly  admits 
the  acquisition  of  a  bride  by  purchase4.  But  it  is  also 
possible  that  the  Dharma-sutra  itself  contained  both  the 
condemnation  of  the  custom  and  the  rules  regulating  it. 
For  similar  contradictions  occur  also  in  other  Sutras.  Thus 
Apastamba  expressly  forbids,  in  his  sections  on  Dharma, 
the  sale  and  gift  of  children  and  the  procreation  of  Kshe- 
tra^a  sons5.  Yet,  in  his  5rauta-sutra  I,  9,  7,  he  gives  a  rule 
showing  how  the  Pi/z^/apitrzya^Tia  is  to  be  performed  by 
the  son  of  two  fathers  (dvipita).  Such  a  person  can  only 
be  a  Kshetra^a,  a  Dvyamushyayawa  Dattaka,  or  a  Putrika- 
putra.  If  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  Baudhayana,  on  whose 
works  Apastamba' s  Sutras  are  based,  admits  the  affiliation 
which  the  later  member  of  his  vidyava;;^a  rejects,  the 
obvious  explanation  of  the  contradiction  is  that  Apastamba, 
in  spite  of  his  disapproval  of  other  than  Aurasa  sons,  did 

1  See  p.  xxiv.  2  Manu  III,  25,  51-54;  IX,  98-100. 

3  Manu  VIII,  204,  224-225;  IX,  97.  *  See  above,  p.  xxxix. 

5  Ap.  Dh.  S.  II,  13,  11;  27,  2. 


XC1V  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


not  venture  to  change  the  prescriptions  which  he  found  in 
the  older  .Srauta-sutra.  Similarly,  the  supposition  that  the 
author  of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  though  condemning 
Asura  marriages,  was  unwilling  to  expunge  the  rules  regu- 
lating the  sale,  is  not  at  all  improbable.  It  seems  to  be 
even  better  than  the  explanation  proposed  first.  For  the 
prohibition  of  the  Asura  rite  occurs  in  the  quotation  found 
in  the  6akuntalopakhyana,  and  the  latter,  as  we  shall  see 
presently,  in  all  probability  refers  to  the  Manava  Dharma- 
sutra.  Hence  I  think  that  at  least  the  remarks  made  Manu 
III,  26  did  stand  in  the  ancient  text.  The  other  repetitions  of 
the  same  sentiments  may  have  been  added  on  the  revision. 
Another  famous  instance  of  a  contradiction,  Manu  IX,  58- 
70,  where  the  appointment  of  a  widow  is  first  permitted 
and  next  forbidden,  has  probably  to  be  explained  in  the 
same  manner.  If  I  here  differ  from  Professor  Jolly1  and 
others,  who  ascribe  the  prohibition  to  the  remodeller  of  the 
Dharma-sutra,  and  if  I  adhere  to  the  view  expressed  by 
Brzhaspati  and  some  Indian  commentators,  my  reasons  are 
that,  as  the  conflicting  statements  of  the  Dharma-sutras  show, 
the  propriety  of  the  Niyoga  was  not  generally  acknow- 
ledged even  in  ancient  times,  and  that  the  medieval  Niban- 
dhakaras  frequently  follow  the  strange  method  of  teaching 
adopted  by  Manu.  They,  too,  describe  various  antiquated 
customs,  and  afterwards  add  the  remark  that  the  matter 
taught  is  forbidden  in  the  Kali  age.  Among  the  clear  cases 
where  a  conflict  of  statements  has  been  caused  by  additions 
of  the  editor,  I  may  mention  the  rule,  Manu  IV,  222,  pre- 
scribing a  penance  for  an  unlawful  acceptance  of  food,  which 
differs  from  that  given  XI,  153.  Here  the  former  must  be 
considered  spurious,  because  it  occurs  in  a  chapter  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  penances.  It  is  evident  that  neither 
the  instances  just  mentioned,  nor  indeed  any  other,  where 
our  Smrz'ti  exhibits  either  two  ancient  conflicting  rules  or  a 
modern  precept  contradicting  an  ancient  one,  can  be  used 
as  arguments  showing  that  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  under- 
went more  than  one  revision.  Under  these  circumstances 
it  might  appear  advisable  to  rely  on  those  contradictions 


I 


Tagore  Lectures,  pp.  48,  61. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCV 


which  occur  in  the  decidedly  modern  portions  of  our  text, 
in  the  additions  to  the  ancient  Dharma-sutra,  and  to  main- 
tain that  e.  g.  the  differences  in  the  two  accounts  of  the 
creation1,  Manu  I,  7-58  and  62-86,  indicate  that  the  first 
chapter  owes  its  present  shape  to  two  different  authors. 
Such  a  mode  of  reasoning  would,  no  doubt,  be  correct  if 
the  additions  to  the  Dharma-sutra  were  independent,  ori- 
ginal productions.  But  as  the  preceding  discussion  on  the 
sources  of  this  additional  matter  has  shown  that  the  first 
chapter  is  a  compilation  from  older  versus  memoriales, 
which  certainly  contained  portions  and  possibly  even  the 
whole  of  both  accounts,  it  becomes  inconclusive.  The 
contradictory  verses  may  either  have  been  strung  together, 
as  Medhatithi  seems  to  suggest2,  merely  because  they  really 
are  or  were  considered  paraphrases  of  Vedic  passages,  or 
they  may  have  been  reconciled  with  each  other  by  one  of 
those  ingenious  methods  of  interpretation  of  which  the 
Indian  schoolmen  are  such  great  masters. 

As  regards  the  second  argument,  the  assertion  of  the 
Narada-smrzti 3,  that  Manu  composed  a  Dharma^astra  in 
100,000  verses  arranged  in  1080  chapters,  which  was  suc- 
cessively reduced  by  Narada  to  12,000,  by  Marka/zafeya  to 
8,000,  and  by  Bhrzgu's  son,  Sumati,  to  4,000  verses,  is  so 
circumstantial  that,  in  spite  of  its  obvious  exaggerations, 
it  might  be  considered  to  have  a  substratum  of  truth, 
and  to  be  important  for  the  history  of  Manu's  law-book. 
Abridgments  of  larger  works  4  are  in  literature  as  common  as 
expansions  of  shorter  ones.  Yet  the  only  assertion  in  the 
above  account,  which  we  can  test,  is  certainly  not  true,  that 
Narada's  version  of  Manu's  laws  is  more  ancient  than  that 
by  Sumati  Bhargava  or  Bhrz'gu.    The  actual  position  of  the 

1  See  also  Dr.  Johanntgen,  Uber  das  Gesetzbuch  des  Manu,  p.  15. 

2  In  his  discussion  on  the  aim  of  the  first  chapter  Medhatithi  says  (comm.  on 

1,6): fatfrT^^^^Tf^tffPSW5*:  I    rT^xrft^T^l^^ 

*lift  -£#  ^  I  (HIT   ^   H^H  I  !W  ^TBTf^WTf^  n 

3  See  above,  p.  xvii;  and  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  57. 

4  The  two  versions  of  Narada  furnish  an  interesting  instance ;  see  Jolly,  loc. 
cit.  p.  57. 


XCV1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


two  works  has  been  inverted.  Narada's  Vyavaharamatrzka 
shows  a  far  more  advanced  development  of  the  judicial 
theories  than  Bhrzgu's  Sawhita,  and  contains  matter  which 
conclusively  proves  that  it  cannot  date  from  an  earlier  time 
than  the  fourth  or  fifth  century  of  our  era x.  As  this  test 
fails,  Narada's  statement  cannot  be  used  for  the  determina- 
tion of  the  order  in  which  the  various  versions  of  Manu's 
laws  were  composed.  It  becomes  more  probable  that  it 
has  been  framed,  with  a  view  to  enhance  the  importance  of 
the  Narada-smrzti,  on  the  model  of  such  purely  fictitious 
stories  respecting  the  origin  of  the  Dharma,  as  that  given 
in  the  Mahabharata  XII,  59,  22,  and  80  seqq.,  where  we  are 
told  that  Brahman,  assisted  by  the  gods,  first  produced  a 
Dharmaj-astra  in  100,000  chapters,  which  was  successively 
abridged  by  Sa/^kara  in  10,000,  by  Indra  in  5,000,  by 
Brzhaspati  in  3,000,  and  by  Kavya  in  1,000  Adhyayas. 
Against  the  genuineness  of  Narada's  story  we  may  also 
adduce  the  Pauramk  statement,  according  to  which  Manu's 
laws  were  remodelled  first  by  Bhrz'gu,  secondly  by  Narada, 
thirdly  by  BWhaspati,  and  fourthly  by  Arigiras2. 

The  third  argument,  drawn  from  the  fact  that  the  medie- 
val Nibandhas  and  commentaries  quote  passages  from  a 
Brzhat  (great)  and  VWddha  (old)  Manu,  has  still  less  value. 
Professor  Jolly  has  of  late  asserted  in  his  able  discussion  3 
of  the  quotations  from  these  works  that  they  are  later,  not 
earlier,  than  the  existing  text  of  Manu,  because  some  of 
their  rules  resemble  the  advanced  teaching  of  Ya£7?avalkya 
and  Narada,  while  others  contradict  our  Manu  on  points 
where  he  holds  archaic  views.  Moreover,  a  passage  of 
Wzddha  Manu,  to  which  Professor  Max  Miiller  has  first  called 
attention4,  possibly  indicates  an  acquaintance  with  Greek 
astrology.  I  can  only  agree  with  Professor  J  oily  s  conclusions, 
and  add  that  a  comparison  of  the  quotations  from  Brz'hat 
and  Wzddha  Manu  with  Bhrzgu's  Sawhita  produces  the 
impression   that   both   works  —  if  indeed   the   titles    refer 

1  West  and  Buhler,  Digest,  pp.  48-50,  third  edition  ;  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures, 
p.  56 ;  Preface  to  the  Translation  of  Narada,  pp.  xv-xvii. 

2  Mandlik,   the  Vyavaharamayukha   and  Yagn.,    p.  xlvii ;    Jolly,   Tagore 
Lectures,  p.  44. 

3  Tagore  Lectures,  pp.  65-66.  *  India,  what  can  it  teach  us?  p.  366. 


INTRODUCTION.  XCVli 


to  two  and  not  to  one — must  have  been  enlarged  versions 
of  the  latter1.  As  it  thus  appears  that  there  existed 
recensions  posterior  to  our  Mahu-smrzti,  the  existence  of 
untraceable  or  partly  traceable  quotations  from  Manu's 
Dharma^astra  in  Ajvaghosha's  Va^rasu^i 2  and  from  Manu 
in  Varahamihira's  Brzhat-sa^hita3  possesses  no  great 
significance.  With  respect  to  Varahamihira's  reference,  it 
must  be  noted  that,  according  to  Albiruni's  Indica,  two 
astrological  Sawhitas,  called  after  Manu,  existed  in  the 
eleventh  century  A.  D.,  the  smaller  of  which  was  an  abridg- 
ment made  by  a  perfectly  well-known  human  author4. 
Hence  Varahamihira  may  have  taken  his  verses  on  the 
character  of  women  from  the  latter.  In  both  quotations 
the  51okas,  not  found  in  our  Smrz'ti,  have  a  very  modern 
look.  The  case  is,  however,  different  with  the  quotations 
from  Manu,  which,  as  has  been  shown  above,  occur  in  the 
Mahabharata.  We  have  been  compelled  to  admit  that 
the  existing  text  of  our  Smrzti  is  younger  than  the  epic. 
If,  therefore,  the  law-book  referred  to  in  the  latter  is  not 
the  ancient  Dharma-sutra,  we  must  also  concede  the 
existence  of  a  secondary  recension  which  preceded  Bhrzgu's 
Sa.mh.itd..     The  solution  of  this  question  is,  owing  to  the 

1  In  order  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own  judgment  on  this  point,  I  add 
a  list  of  the  quotations  which  I  have  noted.  Those  from  Brihat  Manu  occur, 
i.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  26  ;    2.  Col.  Dig.  V,  428  =  Gi.  Day.  XI,  6,  34 ;  3.  Datt.  Mim. 

II,  8  ;  4.  May.  IV,  5,  53  ; — those  from  Vrtddha.  Manu,  1.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  69 ; 
2.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  83  =  May.  XI,  5  -  Viv.  J^int.  p.  99 ;  3.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  86 
=  Viv.  A"int.  p.  89 ;  4.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  90  =  May.  XI,  5  =  Viv.  JTint.  p.  100; 
5.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  93  =  Viv.  Amt.  p.  103 ;  6.  Col.  Dig.  V,  162  =  Viv.  Jfint. 
p.  272  =  Varad.  p.  21  =  Gi.  Day.  IX,  17  (where  attrib.  to  Bn'hat  M.) ;  7.  Col. 
Dig.  V,  408  =  Smrz.  jTand.  XI,  1,15  =  Sar.  Vil.  504  =  Varad.  pp.  33, 40  =  Viram. 

III,  1,  2  -  Gi.  Day.  XI,  1,  7  and  Viv.  A'int.  p.  289  (where  attrib.  to  Bn'hat  M.) ; 
8.  Mit.  II,  5, 6  •=  Viv.  A"int.  p.  289  and  Varad.  p.  37  (where  attrib.  to  Brz'hat  M.)  = 
Sar. Vil.  591  (where  attrib.  to  M.)  ;  9.  Viv.  A"int.  pp.  126-7;  io.Viv.  Alnt.  p.  180 ; 
11.  Varad.  p.  50 ;  12.  Varad.  p.  28,  where  in  reality  Manu  IX,  206  seems  to  be 
quoted. 

2  Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  vol.  i,  pp.  190, 192,  198. 

8  Kern,  Brzhat-sawhita,  chapter  74,  vv.  7-15,  and  Preface,  p.  43. 

*  Albiruni,  Indica,  chapter  xiv;  see  also  Kern,  loc.  cit.  p.  42,  where  the 
probability  of  the  existence  of  a  Manavi  Sa^hita  has  been  shown.  Albiruni 
says  that  the  title  of  the  two  works  was  Manasa  (Manavi?),  and  that  the 
shorter  one  had  been  composed  by  one  PNA"L,  a  native  of  Southern  India. 
I  owe  these  notes  to  the  kindness  of  Professor  Sachau,  the  learned  editor  and 
translator  of  Albiruni's  important  work. 

I>6]  g 


XCV1U  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


shortness  of  the  extracts,  very  difficult.  But,  considering 
all  things,  I  feel  inclined  to  assume  that  the  author  or 
authors  of  the  Mahabharata  knew  only  the  Dharma-sutra. 
The  character  of  the  four  verses  and  a  half,  quoted  verbally, 
as  well  as  of  the  paraphrase  in  the  Sakuntalopakhyana 
agrees  well  enough  with  this  assumption,  because  the 
Manava  Dharma-sutra,  as  we  have  seen,  certainly  did 
contain  numerous  51okas.  It  is  further  corroborated  by 
the  fact  that  the  Mahabharata  does  not  differ  in  its  arrange- 
ment, or  rather  in  its  want  of  an  arrangement  of  the  civil 
and  criminal  law,  from  the  Dharma-sutras.  Though  the  epic 
contains  numerous  verses  on  these  topics,  it  nowhere  shows 
an  acquaintance  with  the  eighteen  titles  of  the  law  which 
are  so  characteristic  of  the  secondary  Smrztis,  the  hand- 
books of  the  special  law  schools.  On  the  other  side  it  may 
be  urged  that  the  Mahabharata  says  nothing  of  Dharma- 
sutras,  and  that  its  general  view  of  the  origin  of  the  sacred 
law  coincides  with  that  expressed  in  the  later  law-books. 
It  holds  that  the  moral  and  legal  doctrines  were  revealed 
for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race,  first  by  Brahman  to 
various  mythical  i^zshis,  and  by  them  to  mankind.  This 
objection  may,  however,  be  met  by  the  not  unreasonable 
assumption  that  at  the  time  when  the  Mahabharata  was 
composed,  the  real  origin  of  the  old  Sutras  had  been  for- 
gotten, while  the  text  had  not  yet  been  materially  altered. 
What  has  been  said  above  regarding  the  rise  of  the 
special  law  schools,  and  the  facts  known  regarding  the 
change  in  the  tradition  concerning  the  Sutras  of  Gautama 
and  VasishzV^a,  make  the  hypothesis  of  such  a  transitional 
period  not  at  all  improbable.  Should,  nevertheless,  the 
possibility  of  the  existence  of  a  metrical  redaction  of  the 
Manava-sutra,  preceding  that  ascribed  to  Bhrzgu,  be 
considered  as  not  altogether  excluded,  it  would  at  least 
be  necessary  to  concede  that  it  could  not  have  contained 
the  present  arrangement  of  the  Vyavahara  portion  under 
titles. 

While  there  is  thus  no  proof  for  the  opinion  that  the 
modern  portions  of  the  Manu-smrzti  have  been  gradually 
added  one  to  the  other,  or  that  the  present  text  is  one  of 


INTRODUCTION.  XC1X 


the  last  links  in  a  long  chain  of  metrical  recensions,  there 
are  several  points  which  tend  to  show  that  our  Manu-sa/diita 
is  one  of  the  first  attempts  at  remodelling  a  Dharma-sutra. 
The  most  important  argument  for  its  comparatively  early 
date  is  furnished  by  the  incompleteness  and  awkwardness 
of  its  rules  on  judicial  procedure  and  on  civil  law1.  If  we 
compare  these  rules  with  those  of  the  Dharma-sutras  and 
with  those  of  the  other  metrical  Sm/'ztis,  they  are  some- 
what more  explicit  than  the  former,  but  very  much  inferior 
to  the  latter.  As  regards  procedure,  the  Manu-smrzti  pays 
more  attention  to  the  moral  side  of  the  duties,  incumbent 
on  the  judge  and  the  other  persons  concerned,  than  to  the 
technicalities,  which  are  much  more  clearly  and  minutely 
described  in  the  Dharma^astras  of  Ya^avalkya  and 
Narada.  In  this  respect  it  comes  close  to  the  Dharma- 
sutras,  with  which  it  particularly  agrees  in  the  absence  of 
all  mention  of  written  plaints  and  of  documentary  evi- 
dence, as  well  as  in  the  shortness  of  its  remarks  on  ordeals. 
Among  the  ancient  law-books  the  Vasish//za  Dharma^astra 
is  the  only  one  which  has  allusions  to  written  documents, 
and  names  them,  XVI,  10,  14-15,  as  one  of  the  means  of 
legal  proof.  In  the  other  Dharma-sutras  there  is  no  indica- 
tion that  their  authors  were  acquainted  with  the  art  of 
writing.  I  have  already  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction  to 
my  translation  of  Vasish^/za2  that  most  probably  this 
omission  has  to  be  explained  not  by  the  assumption  that  in 
the  times  of  Gautama,  Baudhayana,  and  Apastamba  writing 
was  unknown  or  little  used  in  India,  but  by  the  considera- 
tion that  the  general  character  of  the  Dharma-sutras,  which 
principally  pay  attention  to  the  moral  side  of  the  law,  does 
not  require  the  introduction  of  matters  belonging  more 
properly  to  the  customs  of  the  country  or  to  the  Artha- 
j-astra.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  prevalence  of 
writing  during  the  earlier  times  and  of  the  value  of  my 
explanation,  it  may  be  regarded  as  perfectly  certain  that 

1  See  on  this  subject  and  the  following  discussion,  Weber,  History  of  Indian 
Literature,  pp.  279-281;  Stenzler,Ya£-/zavalkya,  pp.  vii-x ;  Journal  of  the  German 
Or.  Soc.  vol.  ix,  on  the  Indian  Ordeals  ;  and  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  pp.  45-49. 

2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xvi,  p.  xxvi. 

s2 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Bhrigus  Manu-sa^hita  belongs  to  a  period  when  the  art  of 
writing  was  known  and  generally  practised.  For,  first,  we 
find  two  clear  references  to  written  documents,  'what  has 
been  caused  to  be  written  by  force'  (lekhita,  VIII,  168) 
and  royal  edicts  (rasana,  IX,  232).  Secondly,  we  have  the 
expression  nibandh,  '  to  record,'  in  a  passage  (VIII,  2,55) 
where  the  context  leaves  no  doubt  that  a  written  entry  is 
referred  to.  When  it  is  said  there,  that  in  a  boundary- 
dispute  the  king  shall  record  the  boundary,  according  to 
the  unanimous  declaration  of  the  witnesses,  together  with 
their  names,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  how  he  can  do  so 
without  drawing  up  a  written  document,  which,  of  a 
necessity,  must  have  legal  force  for  the  future.  This  use  of 
the  verb  nibandh  makes  it  further  probable  that  Medhatithi 
is  not  altogether  wrong,  when  he  explains  (VIII,  J 6)  the 
compound  anibaddha^,  'a  person  not  appointed  (to  be  a 
witness  to  a  transaction),'  by  'a  person  not  entered  (as  a 
witness  in  the  document),'  and  refers  the  rule  to  cases  of 
loans  and  other  commercial  transactions.  Thirdly,  there  is 
the  term  kara/za  (VIII,  54  and  154),  which,  though  less 
explicit,  likewise  points  to  the  use  of  written  bonds  for 
loans.  The  former  passage  declares  that  '  a  debt  which  is 
proved  by  kara^a '  (kara/zena  vibhavitam)  must  be  paid, 
and  the  commentators  explain  kara/za  to  mean  'written 
bonds,  witnesses,  and  so  forth.'  Hence  it  has  been  rendered 
in  the  translation  by  '  good  evidence.'  Verse  154  prescribes 
that  a  debtor  '  who,  unable  to  pay  a  debt  (at  the  fixed 
time),  wishes  to  make  a  new  contract,  may  renew  (lit. 
change)  the  kara;zam  (kara^am  parivartayet1).'  Two  com- 
mentators, Kulluka  and  Raghava,  take  the  word  here  in  the 
sense  of  'a  written  bond,'  while  the  older  ones,  Govinda, 
Naraya^a,  and  probably  also  Medhatithi,  explain  it  by 
'  bonds  and  so  forth,'  and  make  it  include  agreements  before 
witnesses.  From  these  explanations  and  the  use  of  the 
word  kara^a  in  other  legal*  works  it  would  appear  that 
kara/za  may  also  be  cited  as  a  witness  for  the  acquaintance 
of  our  author  with  the  art  of  writing.  To  the  conclusion 
that  writing  must  have  been  extensively  used  in  business- 

1  Nandana's  reading  karawam  is  clearly  erroneous ;  see  below,  p.  cxxxiv. 


INTRODUCTION.  CI 


dealings  points,  finally,  the  whole  state  of  civilisation  to 
which  Manu's  rules  are  adapted.  The  highly  developed 
trade  by  land  and  by  sea1,  on  which  ad  valorem  duties 
were  imposed2,  the  existence  of  official  lists  of  prices  which 
were  renewed  periodically3,  the  complicated  system  of 
calculations  of  interest,  among  which  we  find  compound 
interest4,  and  the  occurrence  of  mortgages5,  would  be  im- 
possible without  written  documents.  These  facts  appear  to 
me  so  eloquent  that  even  though  all  the  passages  adduced 
above,  which  explicitly  mention  written  documents,  could  be 
proved  to  be  late  interpolations,  the  general  aspect  of  this 
question  would  remain  unchanged.  If,  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, Manu's  rules  on  evidence  contain  nothing 
definite  on  the  admissibility  of  documents,  and  if  he 
agrees  in  this  particular  with  the  Dharma-sutras  and  differs 
strongly  from  the  Dharmaj-astras  of  Ya^/zavalkya  and 
Narada  as  well  as  other  metrical  Smrztis,  this  omission 
gains  a  great  importance  for  the  historical  position  of  the 
Sawhita.  Whether  we  explain  it  by  an  oversight  of  the 
editor  or  by  the  assumption  that  he  left  the  determination 
of  the  value  of  written  documents  to  custom  or  to  another 
^Sastra,  it  shows  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  Dharma- 
sutras  alone  or  with  Dharma-sutras  and  such  metrical 
Smrztis  as  excluded  the  section  on  documents.  As  he 
certainly  was  an  adherent  of  a  special  law  school,  and  bent 
on  making  his  work  as  complete  as  possible,  he  would  not 
have  omitted  so  important  a  point  if  he  had  known  law- 
books like  the  Ya^Tiavalkya-smrzti. 

The  omission  of  the  details  regarding  ordeals  is  no 
less  significant.  Manu  VIII,  109-116  describes  only  the 
administration  of  oaths  more  fully,  and  mentions  the  ordeals 
by  fire  and  water  in  a  cursory  manner.  Among  the  Dhar- 
ma-sutras there  is  only  the  Apastambiya  which  (II,  29,  6) 
recommends  the  employment  of  divine  proof  (daiva)  or 
ordeals  in  a  general  way  without  adding  any  particulars. 
The  secondary  law-books  of  Ya^avalkya  and  Narada 
describe  five  kinds  of  ordeals,  and  enter,  the  second  more 

1  VIII,  156-157.  2  VII,  127-128;  VIII,  348. 

3  viii,  401-402.  4  VIII,  139-142, 151-153-  5  VIII,  165. 


Cll  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


fully  than  the  first,  on  descriptions  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  must  be  performed.  Even  the  Vish/zu-smrzti  agrees 
with  them,  and  the  fragments  of  the  lost  metrical  Smrztis 
show  that  most  of  the  latter,  too,  contained  sections  re- 
sembling those  of  Ya^vzavalkya  and  Narada.  It  would  be, 
in  my  opinion,  a  mistake  to  infer  from  the  silence  of  Gau- 
tama, Baudhayana,  and  Vasish//£a  that  in  ancient  times 
ordeals  were  unknown  in  India.  Traces  of  such  practices, 
which  were  formerly  prevalent  in  various  forms  also  among 
other  Indo-European  races,  are  found,  as  might  be  expected, 
even  in  Vedic  works.  If  the  authors  of  the  Dharma-sutras 
ignore  them  or  just  indicate  their  existence,  the  correct 
explanation  of  this  fact,  too,  is  that  they  considered  the 
subject  not  important  enough  for  giving  details,  and  left  it 
to  custom.  The  authors  of  the  secondary  Smrztis,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  were  anxious  to  fill  up  the  blank  left  by 
their  predecessors.  But  they  probably  did  nothing  more 
than  bring  the  various  local  customs  into  a  system  which 
gradually  was  made  more  and  more  complete.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  fact  that  Manu's  rules  stand  mid- 
way between  those  of  the  Dharma-sutras  and  of  the  other 
metrical  law-books  is  another  argument  for  allotting  the 
first  place  to  his  Sawhita.  In  the  treatment  of  the  civil 
and  criminal  law  the  inferiority  of  the  Manu-smrzti  to  the 
other  Dharma^astras  of  the  same  class,  even  to  Ya^*/7a- 
valkya's,  which  contains  a  much  smaller  number  of  verses 
on  Vyavahara,  manifests  itself  in  various  ways.  In  spite  of 
the  attempt  at  a  scientific  classification  of  the  rules  under 
certain  heads,  the  arrangement  of  these  sections  is  cumbrous 
and  disorderly.  Twice,  at  the  end  of  the  eighth  and  ninth 
chapters,  we  find  collections  of  miscellaneous  rules,  which, 
as  a  comparison  of  the  works  of  Ya^iavalkya  and  Narada 
shows,  might  for  the  greater  part  have  been  easily  fitted 
in  to  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  eighteen  titles.  Under  the 
single  titles  the  rules  are  sometimes  badly  arranged.  This 
is  particularly  visible  in  the  chapter  on  inheritance,  where, 
to  mention  only  one  most  conspicuous  instance  of  this  want 
of  care,  the  verse  asserting  the  right  of  the  mother  and  grand 
mother  to  take  the  estate  of  a  predeceased  son  or  grandson 


INTRODUCTION.  Clll 


is  placed  so  awkwardly  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to 
guess  which  place  in  the  sequence  of  heirs  the  author  meant 
to  allot  to  them.  As  stated  above,  the  verse  most  probably 
was  inserted  by  the  editor  of  the  ancient  Dharma-sutra.  If 
he  had  cared  at  all  for  order  and  intelligibility,  he  ought 
not  to  have  contented  himself  with  the  enunciation  of  the 
maxim  that  these  persons  do  inherit,  but  he  ought  to  have 
indicated  where  the  preceding  close  series  of  heirs  has  to  be 
broken  in  order  to  admit  them.  Very  significant,  too,  are 
the  constant  mingling  of  moral  exhortations  with  the  legal 
rules  and  the  occasional  recommendation  of  quaint  judicial 
devices  which  are  common  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  de- 
velopment of  the  law.  Though  the  duty  of  kings  to  protect 
their  subjects  and  to  restrain  the  wicked  has  been  fully 
explained  in  the  seventh  chapter,  yet  in  the  sections  on 
theft  (VIII,  303-311),  on  violence  (VIII,  343-347),  and  on 
adultery  (VIII,  386-387),  the  author  expatiates  again  and 
again  on  the  necessity  of  eradicating  such  offences.  In  the 
second  case  the  specific  rules,  providing  for  the  punishment 
of  sahasa  crimes,  are  left  out,  the  omission  being  repaired 
at  the  end  of  the  ninth  chapter.  Both  Ya^avalkya  and 
Narada  think  it  unnecessary  to  recur  to  the  moral  obliga- 
tions of  the  king  after  pointing  them  out  once.  Both 
refrain  also  from  mentioning  the  curious  expedient  which 
Manu  recommends  (VIII,  182-184)  for  the  decision  of 
doubtful  disputes  regarding  deposits.  Another  important 
point  is  that  Manu's  rules  on  some  titles  are  exceedingly 
incomplete,  and  touch  one  particular  case  only,  from  which 
it  is  not  always  easy  to  deduce  the  general  principle.  Thus, 
in  treating  of  the  subtraction  or  resumption  of  gifts,  Manu 
(VIII,  212-213)  confines  his  remarks  to  pious  gifts  which  are 
not  applied  in  the  manner  stipulated.  Ya^navalkya  (II, 
175-177)  gives  under  this  head  at  least  some  general  prin- 
ciples, showing  what  is  required  for  the  validity  of  gifts ; 
while  Narada1  offers  a  fairly  full  and  systematic  treatment 
of  the  whole  law  of  gifts.  A  similarly  gradual  development 
is  visible  under  other  heads,  especially  concerns  among 


Professor  Jolly's  Translation,  pp.  59-60. 


CIV  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


partners  and  rescission  of  sale  and  purchase,  the  rules  under 
which  latter  head  Manu  gives  partly  in  their  proper  place 
and  partly  among  the  miscellaneous  precepts  at  the  end  of 
the  eighth  chapter.  A  third  point,  finally,  which  deserves 
to  be  noted  here,  is  the  fact  that  legal  definitions  are  almost 
entirely  wanting  in  the  Manu-smrz'ti,  become  more  frequent 
in  Ya^viavalkya's  work,  and  are  regularly  given  by  Narada, 
as  well  as  that  many  single  rules  which  are  common  to 
Manu  and  Ya^avalkya,  or  to  Manu,  Ya^avalkya,  and 
Narada,  are  framed  in  the  latter  works  with  much  greater 
precision  than  in  the  former1.  The  inferiority  of  the  Manu- 
smrzti  in  all  these  points  can  only  be  explained  by  the 
assumption  that  it  was  composed  at  a  time  when  the  syste- 
matic treatment  of  the  law  had  been  begun,  but  had  not 
reached  a  high  state  of  perfection,  while  the  superiority  of 
the  other  metrical  Smrztis  permits  us  to  infer  that  they 
belong  to  a  much  later  period  when  the  special  law  schools 
had  made  a  considerable  progress  in  the  elaboration  of  their 
theories.  This  argument  is,  it  seems  to  me,  the  strongest 
which  can  be  brought  forward  as  a  firm  basis  for  the 
universally  prevalent  belief  of  all  European  and  Indian 
Sanskritists  in  the  priority  of  our  Manu  to  all  other  known 
secondary  law-books.  For  wherever  we  are  able  to  trace 
larger  portions  of  the  history  of  a  special  Brahmanical 
science,  as  e.g.  in  the  case  of  grammar,  we  find  that  the 
later  authors,  though  belonging  to  different  schools  and 
creeds,  and  though  differing  in  the  actual  doctrines,  invari- 
ably avail  themselves  of  the  method  of  their  predecessors, 
developing  and  refining  it  more  and  more.  Retrogressive 
steps,  examples  of  which  seem  to  occur  in  the  handbooks 
of  the  Vedic  schools2,  have  hitherto  not  been  found3.     All 


1  Compare  e.  g.  the  rules  regarding  lawful  interest,  Manu  VIII,  140-142,  and 
Yagn.  II,  34. 

2  Compare  e.  g.  the  case  of  the  Gautamiya  and  Baudhayaniya  Dharma-sutras, 
where  the  second  and  later  work  is  inferior  in  method  to  the  earlier  one. 

3  Should  it  be  objected  that  the  Vishwu-smr/ti,  though  certainly  younger 
than  Manu's  and  Ya^avalkya's  Dharma^astras,  is  deficient  in  a  systematic 
arrangement  of  the  rules  on  civil  and  criminal  law,  the  answer  would  be  that 
the  editor  of  this  work  appears  to  have  been  a  Vaishrcava  sectarian,  not  an 
adherent  of  a  school  which  made  the  law  its  special  object  of  study. 


INTRODUCTION.  CV 


the  other  arguments  which  have  been  or  can  be  adduced  to 
prove  the  antiquity  of  our  Manu-smrzti  are  less  conclusive. 
If  it  has  been  said  that  this  work  contains  some  very  archaic 
doctrines1  which  are  not  found  in  the  other  secondary  law- 
books, that  is  perfectly  true.  But  the  inference  regarding 
its  age  becomes  doubtful,  because  on  other  subjects  Manu 
is  ahead  of  the  other  Smrztis2,  and  because  in  general  the 
development  of  the  actual  doctrines  seems  to  have  been  not 
quite  steady  and  continuous.  Still  more  precarious  are  the 
arguments,  based  on  the  language  of  the  Manu-smrzti,  on 
its  not  mentioning  the  Greek  astrology  or  Greek  coinage 
and  similar  points.  As  we  have  to  deal  with  a  recast  of 
a  very  ancient  book,  and  as  its  editor  has  utilised  a  good 
many  ancient  verses  in  compiling  his  recension,  it  is  only 
to  be  expected  that  a  number  of  archaic  forms  and  phrases 
should  be  found.  But  it  is  evident  that  they  prove  nothing 
with  respect  to  the  period  when  the  compilation  was  made, 
because  it  is  impossible  to  decide  in  each  case  to  which  of 
its  component  parts  the  archaism  belongs.  As  regards  the 
remaining  argumenta  a  silentio,  they  are  equally  incon- 
clusive. Even  if  we  grant,  for  argument's  sake,  the  correct- 
ness of  the  assertion  that  our  Manu  contains  no  allusion  to 
the  Greek  order  of  the  planets,  to  the  zodiac,  to  judicial 
astrology,  and  to  Greek  or  Scythian  dinaras,  drammas,  and 
na^akas,  while  all  the  other  secondary  law-books  mention 
one  or  the  other  of  these  foreign  importations,  the  omission 
may  be  purely  accidental.  These  and  similar  points  can 
be  used  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  show  that  there  is 
nothing  in  Manu's  text  that  compels  us  to  place  it  in  or 
after  the  period  between  300-500  A.  D.,  during  which  Greek 
influence  made  itself  strongly  felt  in  India.     They  possess 

1  One  of  the  clearest  instances  of  this  kind  is  Manu's  doctrine  with  regard  to 
the  succession  of  females  to  the  estate  of  males,  where  the  exclusion  of  the  wife 
agrees  with  the  teaching  of  the  Dharma-sutras  (Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  48). 
The  assertion  of  Professor  Hopkins  (Castes  according  to  the  M.  Dh.  p.  108 
seqq.),  that  the  prerogatives  of  Brahma  was  are  greater  according  to  Yagn.  than 
according  to  Manu,  seems  to  me  erroneous,  and  chiefly  based  on  an  inadmissible 
interpretation  of  some  passages  of  Manu.  In  my  opinion  the  mutual  relations 
of  the  castes,  as  described  in  the  two  law-books,  cannot  be  used  to  prove  a 
priority  of  the  one  to  the  other. 

2  E.  g.  in  the  doctrine  concerning  the  Niyoga. 


CV1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


a  certain  importance  only  as  auxiliaries  to  the  chief  argu- 
ment derived  from  the  imperfect  development  of  the  method 
or  formal  treatment  of  the  law.  But  considering  all  that 
has  been  said  in  the  preceding  discussion,  it  is,  I  think,  not 
too  much  to  say  that  there  is  no  obstacle  against,  and  some 
reason  for,  our  accepting  as  true  the  assertion,  which  is  made 
in  the  Manu-smrzti  itself  and  supported  by  the  tradition 
preserved  in  the  Skanda-pura/za,  that  Bhrzgu's1  Sawhita  is 
the  first  and  most  ancient  recast  of  a  Dharmajrastra  attri- 
buted to  Manu,  which  latter,  owing  to  the  facts  pointed  out 
in  the  first  part  of  this  Introduction,  must  be  identified  with 
the  Manava  Dharma-sutra.  Though  this  recast  must  be 
considered  the  work  of  one  hand,  the  possibility  that  single 
verses  may  have  been  added  later  or  altered,  is  of  course 
not  excluded.  A  perfectly  intact  preservation  of  an  Indian 
work  which  has  been  much  studied,  is  a  priori  improbable, 
and  the  divergence  of  the  commentators  with  respect  to 
certain  verses  shows  that  some  of  those  contained  in  our 
text  were  suspected  by  the  one  or  the  other  of  them.  But 
the  number  of  61okas  with  regard  to  which  real  doubts  can 
be  entertained  is  comparatively  small,  and  hardly  amounts 
to  more  than  a  dozen2. 

The  above  discussion  has  also  to  a  certain  extent  defined 
the  relative  position  of  our  Manu-smrzti  in  Brahmanical 
literature,  and  has  thus  opened  the  way  for  the  consideration 
of  the  last  remaining  problem,  the  question  when  the  conver- 
sion of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra  into  a  metrical  law-book 

1  A  clear  and  definite  explanation  of  the  question  why  the  Hindu  tradition 
ascribes  the  promulgation  of  Manu's  laws  to  Bhrz'gu  has  hitherto  not  been 
traced.  Bhrz'gu' s  only  connexion  with  Manu  is  that  mentioned  in  the  text, 
according  to  which  he  is  one  of  the  mind-born  sons  or  creatures  of  the  father  of 
mankind.  This  version  of  the  legend  of  his  origin  is,  however,  by  no  means 
common.  In  the  Mahabharata  XII,  182-192,  we  find  'a  condensed  Dharma- 
j-astra,'  which  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  by  Bhrz'gu  to  Bharadva^a.  It  in- 
cludes an  account  of  the  creation,  but  makes  no  mention  of  Manu.  As  Bhrz'gu 
appears  also  elsewhere  as  the  author  of  a  Dharma-sustra,  it  is  just  possible  that 
the  legend  may  be  based  on  Bhrz'gu's  fame  as  a  legislator  and  as  the  offspring 
of  Manu. 

a  Many  more  verses  are  left  out  partly  in  Medhatithi's  Bhashya  and  partly  in 
Nandana's  commentary.  But  see  below,  pp.  cxxvi  and  cxxxv,  where  it  has  been 
shown  that  omissions  in  the  accessible  MSS.  of  these  two  works  alone  do  not 
mean  much. 


INTRODUCTION.  CV11 


may  have  taken  place.  The  terminus  a  quo  which  has 
been  gained  for  the  composition  of  Bhrzgu's  Sa/^hita  is 
the  age  of  the  Mahabharata,  and  the  terminus  ad  quern 
the  dates  of  the  metrical  Smrztis  of  Ya^zavalkya  and 
Narada.  Though  we  are  at  present  not  in  a  position  to 
assert  anything  positive  regarding  the  period  when  the 
Mahabharata  and  especially  its  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
Parvans  were  written,  and  though  the  date  of  Ya^avalkya's 
Dharma^astra  is  very  doubtful,  yet  some  facts  known 
regarding  the  Narada-smrzti  are  not  without  importance  for 
framing  our  answer  to  the  difficult  question  now  proposed. 
Both  Professor  Jolly  and  myself1  have  lately  discussed  the 
significance  of  the  mention  of  golden  dinaras  or  denarii  in 
the  longer  and  more  authentic  version  of  Narada  and  of  the 
circumstance  that  Asahaya,  a  predecessor  of  Manu's  earliest 
commentator,  Medhatithi,  explained  it  and  have  arrived  at 
a  very  similar  conclusion,  viz.  that  the  Narada-smrzti  dates 
either  shortly  before  or  shortly  after  the  middle  of  the  first 
thousand  years  of  our  era.  If  that  is  so,  Bhrzgu's  Sa^hita 
must,  in  consideration  of  the  arguments  just  stated,  be 
placed  not  only  earlier,  but  considerably  earlier,  and  the 
assertion  that  it  must  have  existed  at  least  in  the  second 
century  of  our  era  is  not  unwarranted.  This  latter  inference 
is  also  made  inevitable  by  the  discovery  that  we  have  to 
admit  the  former  existence  of  very  ancient  commentaries, 
and  of  at  least  one  ancient  Varttika  or  Karika  which  referred 
to  the  text  of  Manu,  known  to  us.  With  respect  to  the 
commentaries,  Medhatithi,  the  author  of  the  Manubhashya, 
is  a  most  valuable  and  clear  witness.  This  author,  who 
probably  wrote  in  the  ninth  century  A.D. 2,  very  frequently 
quotes  opinions  and  various  readings,  expressed  or  men- 


1  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  56 ;  West  and  Biihler,  Digest,  p.  48.  To  the 
arguments  adduced  there  I  would  add  that  Bawa,  the  friend  of  .Sriharsha- 
Harshavardhana  (606-7-648  A.D.),  makes  a  pretty  clear  allusion  to  the  Nara- 
diya  Dharma^astra  in  the  Kadambari,  p.  91, 1.  13  (Peterson's  edition),  where  he 
calls  a  royal  palace  naradiyam  ivavarayamanara^adharmam,  '  similar  to  the 
Naradiya  (Dharmaj-astra),  because  there  the  duties  of  kings  were  taught  (by 
the  conduct  of  the  ruler)  just  as  they  are  taught  (in  the  law-book).' 

2  For  the  details,  see  below,  pp.  cxxi-cxxiii. 


CV111  LAWS   OF   MANU. 


tioned  by  his  predecessors,  and  shows  by  the  number  of  the 
conflicting  explanations  which  he  sometimes  adduces  for 
a  passage  of  the  text,  that  in  his  time  a  very  large  number 
of  commentaries  on  the  Manu-smrzti  existed.  Among  the 
persons  thus  quoted,  he  designates  some  by  the  terms  Purva 
and  iHra/zztana.  Purva,  which  means  both  ■'  former  '  and 
'ancient,'  is  an  ambiguous  word.  It  can  be  applied  to  all 
persons  who  wrote  before  the  author,  though  it  frequently 
is  used  in  speaking  of  those  who  lived  centuries  ago. 
iHrawtana,  'long  previous  or  ancient,'  is  much  stronger, 
and,  according  to  the  usage  of  Indian  authors,  denotes  a 
predecessor  belonging  to  a  remote  antiquity.  As  Medha- 
tithi,  writing  in  the  ninth  century,  knew  of  commentaries 
to  which  he  was  compelled  to  assign  a  remote  antiquity,  it 
is  only  a  moderate  estimate  if  we  assume  that  the  earliest 
among  them  were  in  his  time  from  three  to  four  hundred 
years  old.  But  if  in  the  sixth  or  even  in  the  fifth  century 
A.D.  glosses  on  our  text  existed,  its  composition  must  go 
back  to  much  earlier  times.  For  the  widely  divergent  and 
frequently  very  questionable  explanations  of  the  more  diffi- 
cult passages,  which  Medhatithi  adduces  from  his  prede- 
cessors, indicate  that  even  the  earliest  among  them  were 
separated  by  a  considerable  interval  from  the  compilator  of 
the  Manu-samhita,  an  interval  so  great  that  the  real  meaning 
of  the  text  had  been  forgotten. 

The  merit  of  the  discovery  that  one  of  the  lost  metrical 
Dharmajastras,  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti,  was  a  Varttika  on  our 
text  of  Manu,  belongs  to  Professor  Jolly,  whose  careful 
investigation  of  the  fragments  of  the  lost  law-books,  con- 
tained in  the  modern  Digests,  has  contributed  very  mate- 
rially to  the  elucidation  of  a  difficult  chapter  in  the  history 
of  Indian  legal  literature.  He  shows x  that  Brzhaspati  not 
only  allots  to  Manu's  Smrzti  the  first  place  among  all  law- 
books, but  that  he  explains,  amplifies,  and  occasionally 
corrects  its  rules  on  various  portions  of  the  Vyavahara. 
The  particulars  from  Manu  which  Brzhaspati  mentions  are 
such  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  text  which  he  knew  in 

1  Tagore  Lectures,  pp.  60-62  ;  see  also  above,  p.  xvi. 


i 


INTRODUCTION.  C1X 


no  way  differed  from  that  known  to  us.  He  explains,  as  Pro- 
fessor Jolly  points  out,  the  curious  terms,  used  Manu  VIII, 
49,  for  the  various  modes  by  which  a  creditor  may  recover 
a  debt,  as  well  as  the  expression  asvamin,  which  occurs  in 
the  title  of  law,  called  Asvamivikraya.  He  further  mentions 
that  Manu  IX,  57-68  first  teaches  and  afterwards  forbids 
the  practice  of  Niyoga,  and  gives,  as  it  seems  to  me  \  the 
correct  explanation  of  this  contradiction.  He  also  notes 
that  Manu  IX,  221-228  forbids  gambling,  which  other 
writers  on  law  permit  under  due  supervision,  and  he  corrects 
Manu's  rules  regarding  the  indivisibility  of  clothes  and  other 
objects  enumerated  IX,  219.  An  apparent  contradiction 
in  Brzhaspati's  rules  with  respect  to  subsidiary  sons  a  proves 
that  he  knew  and  accepted  Manu's  teaching  on  this  subject. 
He  declares  that  the  substitutes  for  a  legitimate  son  of  the 
body  are  forbidden  in  the  Kaliyuga,  and  yet  admits  the  rights 
of  a  Putrika  or  appointed  daughter,  who  mostly  is  reckoned 
among  the  substitutes.  This  difficulty  is  easily  solved,  if  it 
is  borne  in  mind  that  Manu,  differing  from  the  other  ancient 
law-books,  does  not  reckon  the  Putrika  among  the  subsidiary 
sons.  He  separates  her,  IX,  127-140,  from  the  Gau;za 
Putras,  IX,  158-181,  and  strongly  insists  on  her  rights, 
while  he  restricts  those  of  the  others  very  much.  The  list 
of  instances  where  Brzhaspati  alludes  to,  annotates,  or 
amplifies  rules  of  Manu  might,  I  think,  be  enlarged  still 
further,  and  it  seems  to  me  that  a  comparison  of  those 
verses  of  his,  which  Colebrooke's  Digest  contains,  with 
Manu  gives  one  the  impression  that  Brzhaspati's  work  is 
throughout  a  revised  and  enlarged  edition  of  the  Bhrzgu- 
sa;/zhita,  or,  to  use  the  Indian  expression,  a  Manuvarttika 
or  Manukarika.  Professor  Jolly,  finally,  has  pointed  out 
that  this  evidence  concerning  the  relation  between  Manu 
and  Brmaspati  agrees  with  and  gives  some  weight  to  the 
tradition  preserved  in  the  Skanda-pura/za,  according  to 
which  Brzhaspati  composed  the  third  of  the  four  versions 
of  Manu's  Dharma.rastra.    The  age  of  the  Brzhaspati-smrz'ti 


1  See  also  above,  p.  xciv. 

2  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  158. 


CX  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


is  circumscribed  by  its  definition  of  the  value  of  golden 
dinaras,  and  by  the  quotations  from  it  which  occur  already 
in  the  oldest  commentaries  and  Nibandhas  from  the  ninth 
century  A.D.  downwards.  Since  the  latter  period  it  has 
been  considered  as  a  work  of  divine  origin,  revealed  by  the 
teacher  of  the  gods.  Hence  Professor  Jolly's  supposition, 
that  it  must  have  existed  some  two  or  three  hundred  years 
earlier,  places  it  not  too  early,  but,  in  my  opinion,  rather 
too  late.  But  even  if  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti  dates  only  about 
600  A.D.,  its  statements  regarding  the  high  authority  of 
Manu's  teaching  show  that  our  version  of  the  latter  must 
have  preceded  it  by  many  centuries. 

The  three  points  just  discussed  are,  in  my  opinion,  the 
only  ones  that  are  really  useful  for  fixing  the  lower  date  of 
our  Manu-smrz'ti.  All  the  other  facts  known  to  me  which 
bear  on  the  question  are  made  valueless  by  flaws  of  one 
kind  or  the  other.  Thus  if  we  find  that  another  metrical 
Dharmai-astra,the  Katyayana-smrzti,which  probably  belongs 
to  the  same  period  as  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti,  repeatedly 
quotes  doctrines  of  Manu  or  Bhrz'gu  found  in  our  text,  it  is 
nevertheless  not  permissible  to  assume  confidently  with 
Kulluka  on  Manu  VIII,  3501,  that  its  author  knew  and 
explained  our  text.  For,  as  Professor  Jolly  has  shown2, 
there  are  other  cases  in  which  the  teaching  attributed  by 
Katyayana  to  Bhrzgu  or  Manu  differs  from  the  opinion 
advanced  in  our  Smrz'ti.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the 
author,  who  assumes  the  name  of  Katyayana,  may  have 
made  a  slip,  or  may  have  known  several  Manu-smrz'tis  or 
Bhrzgu-smrztis,  and  have  referred  in  different  places  to 
different  works.  But,  making  every  allowance  for  such 
possibilities,  it  cannot  be  said  that  his  references  furnish  a 
really  conclusive  argument.  Again,  it  has  been  pointed 
out 3  that  the  author  of  the  Bhavishya-pura/za  has  largely 
drawn  on  the  first  three  chapters  of  our  Manu,  whom  he 
also  names,  and  nobody  who  carefully  compares  the  two 

2  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  62,  11.  22  and  24,  Br/haspati  has  been  printed  twice  by 
mistake  for  Katyayana. 

3  Professor  Aufrecht's  Gatal.  Sansk.  MSS.  Bodl.  Libr.  p.  30. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXI 


texts  can  have  any  doubt  who  the  borrower  is,  as  the 
Purazza  regularly  substitutes  easy  readings  for  difficult 
ones,  and  adds  numerous  explanatory  verses.  Besides, 
Naraya/za,  as  well  as  Kulluka1,  quotes  verses  of  the  Bhavi- 
shya-purazza  from  a  section  on  penances  not  found  in  the 
accessible  MSS.,  which  likewise  are  clearly  intended  to 
explain  the  text  of  our  Sa/zzhita.  All  this  is  however 
useless,  as  for  the  present  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the 
date  of  the  Purazza  even  approximatively.  Professor  H.  H. 
Wilson2,  who  has  a  very  mean  opinion  of  the  book,  declares 
that  it  cannot  lay  claim  to  a  high  antiquity,  and  seems  to 
consider  it  a  production  of  the  ninth  or  tenth  century  A.D. 
Professor  Aufrecht's  discovery3  that  the  Matsya-purazza, 
which  mentions  a  Bhavishya-purazza  in  14,500  verses,  con- 
tains actually  several  sections  which  have  been  borrowed 
from  the  portions  of  the  latter  work  preserved  in  the  MSS., 
makes  Professor  Wilson's  estimate  improbable.  For  the 
Matsya-purazza  was  considered  a  canonical  work  about  the 
year  1000  A.  D.,  and  used  by  Albiruni  for  his  work  on 
India4.  Though  it,  therefore,  becomes  probable  that  the 
Bhavishya-purazza  is  much  older  than  Professor  Wilson 
was  inclined  to  assume,  the  data  thus  gained  are  much  too 
vague  for  inferences  regarding  the  age  of  our  Manu-smz'zti. 
Equally  unsatisfactory  are  the  results  which  an  examina- 
tion of  the  quotations  from  the  Manu-smrz'ti,  found  in 
various  Sanskrit  works,  yields  us.  Perfectly  indisputable 
quotations  are  not  very  common,  and  they  occur  mostly  in 
works  of  comparatively  recent  date,  e.  g.  in  the  Ya^astilaka 
of  the  Digambara-Gaina  poet  Somadeva,  959  A.  D.5,  in 
vSankaraMrya's  5arirakabhashya,  804  A.  D.6,  and  in  Kshi- 

1  See  e.  g.  his  remarks  on  Manu  XI,  101,  and  Narayawa's  on  XI,  131. 

2  Vishwu-purawa,  vol.  i,  pp.  lxii-lxiv,  and  Reinaud,  Memoire  sur  l'lnde, 
p.  396. 

3  Catalogue,  p.  43. 

*  I  owe  the  knowledge  of  this  fact  also  to  the  kindness  of  Professor  Sachau. 

5  See  Professor  Peterson's  Report  on  the  Search  for  Sanskrit  MSS.,  1883-84, 
pp.  42-43. 

6  Deussen,  Vedanta,  p.  36.  With  respect  to  the  date  of  .Sankara^arya's  work, 
I  follow  the  Hindu  tradition,  which  places  the  birth  of  the  author  in  788  A.  D. 
According  to  the  statement  of  the  late  Ya^ervara  .Sastri,  with  whom  I  discussed 
the  passages  which  he  adduces  in  the  Aryavidyasudhakara,  p.  226,  the  sampra- 


CX11  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


rasvamin's  Amarakoshodgha/ana1.  Other  cases,  where  we 
find  verses  from  the  Manu-sa^hita  quoted  in  ancient  works, 
are  made  inconclusive  by  the  vagueness  of  the  reference  or 
by  the  circumstance  that  the  same  passages  occur  also  in 
other  works.  Thus  we  find  Manu  VIII,  416,  with  a  slight 
verbal  difference  at  the  end  of  the  first  line2,  in  the  5abara- 
bhashya  on  Mim.  Su.  VI,  1,  12.  Though  the  exact  date 
of  the  latter  work  is  uncertain,  we  know  that  it  preceded 
Kumarilabha^a's  Tantravarttika,  and  its  style,  which  closely 
resembles  that  of  Pata/^ali's  Mahabhashya,  makes  it 
probable  that  its  author  lived  not  much  later  than  the 
beginning  of  our  era.  Hence  its  testimony  would  be  of  the 
greatest  interest,  provided  it  were  perfectly  clear.  Un- 
fortunately the  Bhashya  introduces  the  verse  merely  by 
the  words  evam  ka.  smarati, '  and  thus  he  records  or  states 
in  the  Smrz'ti,'  without  specifying  the  author.  As  the 
doctrine  of  the  verse  which  declares  a  wife,  a  son,  and  a 
slave  to  be  incapable  of  holding  and  acquiring  property  is 
found,  though  expressed  differently,  also  in  the  Narada- 
smrzti,  Vivadapada  V,  39,  it  may  be  that  5abara  took  the 
passage  from  some  other  work  than  the  Manu-smrzti. 
Again,  though  Pata#£"ali  in  the  Vyakara^amahabhashya 
on  Pa/zini  VI,  1,  84  adduces  Manu  II,  120  without  any 
variant3,  it  would  be  extremely  hazardous  to  conclude  that 
he  quotes  from  our  text  of  Manu.  For  the  Mahabharata 
(XIII,  104,  64b-65a)  has  exactly  the  same  words. 


daya,  referred  to  in  his  work,  is  that  of  .Sringeri,  where  also  documentary  evi- 
dence for  its  correctness  is  said  to  exist.  Hence  I  hesitate  to  accept  Mr.  Telang's 
conclusions,  who  places  ^ankara  in  the  latter  half  of  the  sixth  century,  Mudra- 
rakshasa,  Appendix,  and  Ind.  Ant.  vol,  xiii,  p.  95  seqq. 

1  Aufrecht,  Journal  of  the  Germ.  Or.  Soc.  vol.  xxviii,  p.  107.  The  date  of 
this  author,  who  used  to  be  identified  with  the  teacher  of  GayapWa  of  Karmir 
(779-813  a.  D.),  seems,  according  to  the  latest  researches,  more  recent. 

2  See  the  edition  in  the  Bibl.  Ind.  vol.  i,  p.  611:  HT^T  ^T^3  $^3f 
fMNi:  Sf%  T&  ^  I  *!W  *mf\FrafVfr  X^  ^  ffSJ  tT^R^  ll  At  the  end 
of  the  first  line  Manu  has  "^1  T*^T>RT:  ^RiTT:  II 

3  See  vol.  iii,  p.  58  of  Professor  Kielhorn's  edition.  I  may  add  that  the  same 
work  on  Pacini  II,  3,  35  (vol.  i,  p.  457,  Kielhorn)  quotes  another  verse,  the 
first  line  of  which  agrees  with  Manu  IV,  151%  while  the  second  entirely  differs. 
In  this  case,  too,  the  Mahabharata  XIII,  104,  82  has  a  version  closely  resembling 
that  of  Manu. 


I 


INTRODUCTION.  CX1U 


More  important  are  some  allusions  to  the  laws  of  Manu 
found  in  several  works  of  considerable  antiquity,  and  in 
inscriptions.  Taken  by  themselves  they  would,  indeed,  not 
prove  much.  But  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  results 
of  the  three  chief  arguments,  they  certainly  furnish  a  con- 
firmation of  the  latter.  The  clearest  case,  perhaps,  occurs 
in  the  Kiratar^-uniya  of  Bharavi,  a  poet,  whose  fame  on  the 
evidence  of  the  Aihole  inscription  was  well  established  in 
634  A.  D.,  and  who,  therefore,  cannot  possibly  have  lived 
later  than  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  but  may 
be  considerably  older.  He  makes  (Kir.  I,  9)  Yudhish/^ira's 
spy  say,  '  He  (Duryodhana),  conquering  the  six  (internal) 
foes,  desiring  to  enter  on  the  path,  taught  by  Manu,  that  is 
difficult  to  tread,  and  casting  off  (all)  sloth,  since  by  day 
and  by  night  he  adheres  to  the  (prescribed)  division  (of  the 
royal  duties),  shows  increased  manly  energy  in  accordance 
with  the  Niti.'  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  as  if  this 
passage  contained  nothing  more  than  an  expression  of  the 
ancient  belief  according  to  which  Manu  settled  the  duties  of 
mankind,  and  among  them  also  those  of  kings.  But  if  we  keep 
in  mind  the  inferences  made  unavoidable  by  Medhatithi's 
statements  regarding  the  ancient  commentaries  and  by  the 
character  of  the  Brzhaspati-smr/ti,  it  becomes  more  probable 
that  Bharavi  alludes  to  the  seventh  chapter  of  Bhrzgu's 
version  of  the  Manu-smrzti,  which  declares  vinaya,  humility 
or  self-conquest,  i.  e.  the  conquest  of  the  six  internal  foes, 
to  be  one  of  the  chief  qualities  requisite  for  a  king,  and 
which  carefully  and  minutely  describes  the  employment  of 
each  watch  of  the  day  and  the  night.  Other  much  less 
explicit  allusions  occur  in  the  land-grants.  It  will  suffice 
to  adduce  those  found  in  the  commencement  of  the 
Valabhi  inscriptions  of  Dhruvasena  I,  Guhasena,  and 
Dharasena  II,  to  which  I  have  called  attention  some  time 
ago1.  The  oldest  of  them  is  dated  Sa;/zvat  207,  i.  e.  not 
later  than  526  A.  D.2     There  it  is  said  in  the  description 

1  See  West  and  Buhler,  Digest,  p.  46,  and  for  the  inscriptions,  Indian  Antiquary, 
vols,  iv,  p.  104;  v,  28  ;  vi,  11 ;  vii,  67,  69,  71 :  viii,  302.  For  other  passages, 
see  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi,  pp.  243-246. 

2  This  is  on  the  supposition  that  the  era  of  the  Valabhi  plates  began  in 
319  A.  D.,  the  latest  date  ever  assigned  to  it. 

[25]  h 


CX1V  LAWS    OF    MANU. 

of  Dronasi^ha,  the  first  Maharaja  of  Valabhi  and  the 
immediate  predecessor  of  Dhruvasena  I,  that  '  like  Dharma- 
ra^-a  (Yudhish//zira)  he  observed  as  his  law  the  rules  and 
ordinances  taught  by  Manu  and  other  (sages).'  Strictly 
interpreted,  the  passage  says  nothing  more  than  that  in 
Dronasiz/ma's  times  various  law-books  existed,  one  and  the 
chief  of  which  was  attributed.  But,  considering  what  we 
know  from  other  sources,  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  refers 
to  our  Sawhita,  which  is  acknowledged  by  Brzhaspati  as 
the  paramount  authority.  This  is  all  I  am  able  to  bring 
forward  in  order  to  fix  the  lower  limit  of  the  Manu-smrzti. 
But  the  facts  stated  are,  I  think,  sufficient  to  permit  the 
inference  that  the  work,  such  as  we  know  it,  existed  in 
the  second  century  A.  D. 

For  an  answer  to  the  question  whether  our  Manu-smrztl 
can  go  back  to  a  higher  antiquity,  and  how  much  older  it 
may  be,  we  have  at  present  very  scant  data.  Its  pos- 
teriority to  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  Parvans  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  teaches  us,  as  already  stated,  nothing  definite. 
But  there  is  a  passage  in  its  tenth  chapter,  w.  43-44,  which 
has  been  frequently  supposed  to  convey,  and  probably  does 
contain,  a  hint  regarding  its  lower  limit.  There  the  Kam- 
hoga.s,  Yavanas,  5akas,  and  Pahlavas  are  enumerated  among 
the  races  which,  originally  of  Kshatriya  descent,  were 
degraded  to  the  condition  of  5udras  in  consequence  of 
their  neglect  of  the  Brahma^as1.  As  the  Yavanas  are 
named  together  with  the  Kambo^as  or  Kabulis  exactly  in 
the  same  manner  as  in  the  edicts  of  A^oka  2,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  Greek  subjects  of  Alexander's  successors, 
and  especially  the  Bactrian  Greeks,  are  meant.  This  point, 
as  well  as  the  mention  of  the  5akas  3  or  Scythians,  would 

1  The  verse  contains  also  the  name  of  the  ./Tinas,  which  formerly  has  been 
taken  to  be  valuable  as  a  chronological  landmark.  More  modern  researches 
have  proved  this  view  to  be  untenable  ;  see  A.  von  Gutschmid,  Journal  of  the 
German  Or.  Soc.  vol.  xxxiv,  pp.  202-208 ;  Max  Miiller,  India,  what  can  it  teach 
us?  p.  131  ;  Rig-veda,  vol.  iv,  p.  li. 

2  See  e.  g.  the  fifth  rock-edict,  where  the  Yona-Kawbo^a-Gawdhara  or  Gam- 
dhala  are  mentioned  as  Axoka's  neighbours,  the  most  distant  being  placed  first. 

3  The  earliest  mention  of  the  6akas  probably  occurs  in  a  Varttika  of  Katya- 
yana  on  Paw.VI,  1,  94,  where  jakandhu  is  explained  by  .raka  +  andhu.  According 
to  the  traditional  explanation  the  compound  means  '  the  well  of  the  .Saka  king. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXV 


indicate  that  the  51okas  could  in  no  case  have  been  written 
before  the  third  century  B.  C.  This  limit  would  be  still 
further  and  very  considerably  contracted  if  the  mention  of 
the  Pahlavas  were  quite  above  suspicion,  and  if  the  deduc- 
tions of  my  learned  friend,  Professor  Noldeke1,  regarding 
the  age  of  this  word  were  perfectly  certain.  Pahlava  and 
its  Iranian  prototype  Pahlav  are,  according  to  the  con- 
current testimony  of  the  most  distinguished  Orientialists, 
corruptions  of  Parthava,  the  indigenous  name  of  the 
Parthians2.  Relying  on  the  fact  that  the  change  of  the 
Iranian  th  to  h  is  first  traceable  in  the  name  Meherdates, 
mentioned  by  Tacitus,  and  in  the  word  Miiro,  i.  e.  Mihira, 
on  the  coins  of  Kanishka  or  Kanerki3,  Professor  Noldeke 
concludes  that  the  form  Pahlav  cannot  have  originated 
among  the  Iranians  earlier  than  in  the  first  century  A.  D., 
and  that  it  cannot  have  been  introduced  into  India  before 
the  second  century  of  our  era.  If  this  inference  were  un- 
assailable, the  remoter  limit  of  the  Manu-smrzti  would  fall 
together  with  its  lower  one.  But,  with  all  due  deference  to 
the  weight  of  Professor  Noldeke's  name,  I  must  confess  that 
it  appears  to  me  very  hazardous.  For,  first,  the  foundations 
of  his  theory  are  very  narrow  :  secondly,  one  of  his  own  facts 
is  not  quite  in  harmony  with  his  assertions.  However  late 
we  may  place  Kanishka,  he  cannot  be  later  than  the  last 
quarter  of  the  first  century  A.  D.  Kanishka  was  not  a 
Parthian,  and  his  coins  probably  were  struck  in  the  North 
of  India.  Hence  it  would  appear  that  Iranian  word-forms 
with  the  softening  of  th  to  h  were  known  in  India  towards  the 
end  of  the  first  century.  Moreover,  the  word  Pahlava  occurs 
in  the  Girnar  inscription  of  Rudradaman  4,  which  was  incised 
shortly  before  the  year  73  of  the  era  of  the  Western  Ksha- 
trapas.  This  era,  as  has  been  long  ago  conjectured,  and  is  now 
incontestably  proved  by  Mr.  Fleet's  important  discoveries,  is 

1  Weber,  History  of  Indian  Literature,  pp.  187-8,  note  201*. 

3  Olshausen,  Parthava  und  Pahlav,  Mada  und  Mah  (Monatsberichte  der 
Berliner  Akademie,  1877),  and  Noldeke,  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental 
Society,  vol.  xxxi,  p.  557. 

3  Sallet,  Die  Nachfalger  Alexanders  des  Gr.  p.  197. 

*  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vii,  p.  261.  Rudradaman's  lieutenant  at  Girnar  was  the 
Pahlava  Kulaipa  (Khoraib  ?),  son  of  Suvirakha. 

h  2 


CXV1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


the  so-called  Vikramasawvat  or,  more  correctly,  the  Sa^zvat 
of  the  Malaveyas,  the  lords  of  Malava,  which  began  in  $J 
B.  C.  Rudradaman's  inscription  consequently  dates  from  the 
year  21-22  A.D.,  and  it  is  thus  certain  that  the  word  Pahlava 
was  used  in  India  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  A.D. 
These  circumstances  make  it  impossible  to  accept  Professor 
Noldeke's  inferences  from  the  occurrence  of  the  softened 
Iranian  forms.  But  the  mere  mention  of  the  Pahlavas 
would  show  that  Manu's  verse  cannot  have  been  composed 
before  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.C.  The  Parthian 
dynasty  of  the  Arsacides  was  founded  in  the  middle  of  the 
third  century  B.  c,  and  its  sixth  ruler,  Mithradates  I, 
according  to  some  classical  authors,  invaded  India  about 
the  middle  of  the  second  century  1.  Coins  of  an  Arsaces 
Theos  and  of  an  Arsaces  Dikaios,  who  uses  also  the  Prakrit 
language  and  the  North- Indian  alphabet,  have  been  found 
in  the  Panjab,  and  belong  to  the  same  or  a  little  later 
times  2.  As  the  Brahmans  are  ever  ready  to  give  foreign 
nations,  with  which  they  come  into  contact,  a  place  in  their 
ethnological  system,  it  is  quite  possible  that  about  the 
beginning  of  the  first  century  B.  c.  an  Indian  origin  might 
have  been  invented  for  the  Pahlavas.  But  even  this  reduc- 
tion of  the  remoter  limit  of  the  Manu-smr/ti  is,  in  my  opinion, 
not  quite  safe.  For  though  the  evidence  for  the  genuine- 
ness of  Manu  X,  43-44  is  as  complete  as  possible,  and 
though  the  varia  lectio  for  Pahlava,  which  Govinda  offers, 
probably  deserves  no  credit 3,  there  is  yet  a  circumstance 
which  raises  a  suspicion  against  the  latter  reading.  Parallel 
passages,  closely  resembling  Manu's  two  verses,  are  found 
in  the  Mahabharata  XIII,  33,  21-23*  and  XIII,  35,  17-18, 
where  the  names  of  the  degraded  Kshatriya  races  are  like- 
wise enumerated,  and  the  cause  of  their  degradation  is  stated 

1  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumsltunde,  II2,  334. 

2  Sallet,  Die  Nachfalger  Alexanders  des  Gr.  pp.  51,  156-157. 

3  The  commentators  and  MSS.  all  give  the  two  verses.  If  some  MSS.  of 
Medhatithi  read  Pahnava  for  Pahlava,  that  is  a  clerical  mistake  caused  by  the 
similarity  of  the  subscribed  Devanagari  la  and  na.  Govinda's  var.  lect.  Pallava 
is  improbable,  because  the  other  races  mentioned  in  the  second  line  of  verse  44 
all  belong  to  the  North  of  India,  while  the  Pallavas  are,  as  far  as  we  know, 
confined  to  the  South. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXVU 


in  exactly  the  same  or  similar  words.  Both  passages  name 
the  Yavanas,  and  one  also  the  6akas.  But  neither  men- 
tions the  Pahlavas.  Hence  it  becomes  doubtful  if  the 
original  version  of  these  Slokas  really  did  contain  the  latter 
name.  It  is  further  not  impossible  that  its  insertion  is  not 
due  to  the  first  remodeller  of  the  Manava  Dharma-sutra,  but 
has  crept  in  later  accidentally,  in  the  place  of  some  other  name. 
The  Indian  ~Pandits  are  not  strong  in  ethnology  and  history, 
and  habitually  careless  with  respect  to  the  names  of  peoples 
and  countries,  which  they  frequently  alter,  or  substitute 
in  their  works  one  for  the  other.  I  have,  therefore,  not  the 
courage  to  reduce  the  terminus  a  quo  by  more  than  a 
hundred  years  on  the  strength  of  this  single  word,  which 
occurs  in  a  verse  that  evidently  has  had  originally  a  different 
form.  I  think  it  safer  to  rely  more  on  the  mention  of  the 
Yavanas,  Kambq^as,  and  5akas,  and  to  fix  the  remoter 
limit  of  the  work  about  the  beginning  of  the  second  century 
A.  D.,  or  somewhat  earlier. 

This  estimate  of  the  age  of  the  Bhrtgu  Sa/^hita,  according 
to  which  it  certainly  existed  in  the  second  century  A.  D.,  and 
seems  to  have  been  composed  between  that  date  and  the 
second  century  B.  c,  agrees  very  closely  with  the  views 
of  Professor  Cowell l  and  Mr.  Talboys  Wheeler  2.  It  differs 
considerably  from  that  lately  expressed  by  Professor  Max 
Miiller,  who  considers  our  Manu  to  be  later  than  the  fourth 
century3,  apparently  because  a  passage  quoted  from  VWddha 
Manu,  which  he  takes  to  be  a  predecessor  of  our  Sa;?/hita, 
mentions  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac.  I  do  not  think 
that  it  has  been  proved  that  every  work  which  enumerates 
the  raj-is  must  be  later  than  the  period  when  Ptolemy's 
astronomy  and  astrology  were  introduced  into  India.  But 
irrespective  of  this  objection,  Professor  Max  Miiller's  opinion 
seems  to  me  untenable,  because,  according  to  Professor 
Jolly's  and  my  own  researches4,  the  VWddha  or  Brzhat  Manu, 
quoted  in  the  digests  and  commentaries,  is  not  earlier,  but 
later  than  Bhrzgu's  Sa//zhita.    Whatever  may  be  thought 

1  Elphinstone,  History  of  India,  p.  249  (edition  of  1874). 

2  History  of  India,  vol.  ii,  p.  422. 

3  India,  what  can  it  teach  us  ?  p.  366.  *  See  above,  p.  xcvii. 


CXV111  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


of  the  details  of  my  inferences  and  conclusions,  I  believe 
that  the  rudimentary  state  of  the  legal  theories  in  our 
Sa;/mita,  as  compared  with  Ya^-;?avalkya  and  Narada  (fourth 
or  fifth  century  A.  D.),  the  fact  that  the  Brzhaspati-smrzti  of 
the  sixth  or  seventh  century  A.  D.  was  a  Varttika  on  our 
text,  and  the  assertion  of  Medhatithi,  that  he  knew  in  the 
ninth  century  commentaries  belonging  to  a  remote  antiquity, 
force  us  to  place  it  considerably  before  the  term  mentioned 
by  Professor  Max  Miiller. 


III. 

It  now  remains  to  give  an  account  of  the  materials  on 
which  my  translation  is  based,  and  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  have  been  used.  Among  Sanskrit  works  the  com- 
mentaries of  Medhatithi,  Govindara^a,  Sarva^vm-Naraya^a, 
Kullukabha//a,  Raghavananda,  and  NandanaMrya,  as  well 
as  an  anonymous  71ppa#a,  contained  in  a  Ka^mir  MS.  of 
the  Manu-sa^hita,  are  the  sources  on  which  I  have  chiefly 
relied.  Among  the  earlier  translations,  Sir  William  Jones' 
famous  versio  princeps  and  Professor  J.  Jolly's  annotated 
German  translation1  of  chapter  VIII  and  chapter  IX,  i- 
102  have  been  carefully  used.  Occasionally  Mr.  Loiseleur 
Deslongchamps'  well-known  edition  of  the  text,  the  Eng- 
lish translation  of  chapters  I— III,  33  by  Tara^and  Kskra.- 
varti  (Afuckerbutty) 2,  and  the  Mara/^i  translation  of  £anar- 
dan  Vasudev  Gur^ar 3  have  been  consulted.  Sir  G.  C. 
Haughton's  edition  and  various  Indian  reprints  of  the  text 
have  been  left  aside,  because  they  mostly  repeat  Kulluka's 
readings  or  give  variae  lectiones  for  which  no  sufficient 
authority  is  shown. 

Among  the  Sanskrit  commentaries  on  the  Manu-smrzti 
the  oldest  extant  is  the  voluminous  Manubhashya  of  Bha#a 

1  Published  in  the  Zeitschrift  flir  vergleichende  Rechtswissenschaft,  vol.  iii. 

2  I  have  used  the  copy  of  the  India  Office  Library,  19-27,  17.  The  name 
of  the  author  is  given  by  Professor  Goldstucker,  On  the  Deficiencies,  &c,  p.  5, 
note. 

3  Published  with  the  text  of  Manu,  at  the  Nimayasagar  Press,  Bombay,  1877. 


INTRODUCTION.  CX1X 


Medhatithi,  the  son  of  Bha#a  Virasvamin.  As  its  title, 
bhashya,  indicates,  it  is  not  a  gloss  which  paraphrases  every 
word  of  the  text.  Its  aim  is  to  show  the  general  sense  of 
Manu's  dicta,  to  elucidate  all  really  difficult  passages,  and 
to  settle  all  doubtful  points  by  a  full  discussion  of  the 
various  possible  interpretations,  and  of  the  opinions  ad- 
vanced by  others.  In  carrying  out  this  plan  Medhatithi 
displays  a  great  amount  of  learning  and  not  inconsiderable 
ability.  He  carefully  uses  a  number  of  more  ancient  com- 
mentaries on  Manu,  and  shows  a  full  acquaintance  with  the 
•Sastras  requisite  for  the  successful  explanation  of  his  text, 
with  Vedic  literature,  grammar,  Mima;//sa,  the  Dharma- 
sutras  1  and  other  Smrztis,  Vedanta,  and  the  Mahabharata. 
At  the  same  time  he  avoids  the  common  fault  of  Sanskrit 
commentators, — an  undue  copiousness  in  quotations  which 
bear  only  remotely  on  the  subject  under  consideration. 
Moreover,  he  frequently  enhances  the  value  of  his  explana- 
tions by  illustrating  Manu's  rules  by  instances  taken  from 
every-day  life,  a  point  which  most  Hindu  writers  on  law 
and  on  kindred  subjects  entirely  neglect.  Finally,  he  fre- 
quently takes  up  a  much  more  independent  position 
towards  his  author  than  the  other  commentators  dare  to 
assume.  Thus  he  does  not  shrink  from  declaring  that 
many  verses  are  arthavadas,  without  legal  force,  and  that 
many  single  words  have  been  inserted  merely  vrzttapu- 
ra/zartham,  'in  order  to  make  up  the  verse.'  His  chief 
weakness,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  not  unfrequently 
observable,  and  which  has  drawn  on  him  Kulluka's  stric- 
ture 2  that  he  brings  forward  'both  valuable  and  valueless' 
remarks,  consists  in  a  disinclination  to  decide  between  con- 
flicting interpretations  and   in  his  sometimes  placing  side 


1  Medhatithi  quotes  the  Dharma-sutras  in  general,  and  Gautama,  Baudhayana, 
Apastamba,  and  VasishMa,  as  well  as  some  other  lost  works,  in  particular. 
Among  the  lost  Dharma-sutras  which  he  used,  is  a  Katyayaniya-sutra,  quoted  on 
Manu  VIII,  215,  which  seems  to  have  treated  the  civil  law  in  detail,  and  pro- 
bably is  the  original  of  the  metrical  Katyayana-snWti,  from  which  the  digests 
give  so  numerous  extracts. 

2  See  the  concluding  verses  of  Kulluka's  commentary.  Sir  W.  Jones'  state- 
ment that  Medhatithi's  work  is  reckoned  '  prolix  and  unequal '  (Preface  to  the 
Translation,  p.  xvii,  St.  Grady)  is  probably  based  on  this  remark  of  Kulluka. 


CXX  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


by  side,  as  equally  admissible,  widely  divergent  opinions. 
This  vacillation  is  perhaps  justified  in  a  restricted  number 
of  passages,  where  the  text  is  really  ambiguous  or  very 
obscure.  But  more  commonly  it  seems  to  be  due  solely  to 
an  excessive  veneration  for  the  views  of  his  predecessors  1, 
whose  commentaries,  in  part  at  least,  possessed  a  high 
antiquity  and  a  great  reputation,  or  whom  he  had  personal 
reasons  to  respect.  On  several  occasions  he  mentions 
certain  explanations  as  those  of  the  Purvas  or  iTirawtanas, 
i.  e.  of  the  ancient  commentators.  Thus  he  remarks  on 
Manu  IV,  223,  'But  the  exposition  given  above  is  the  view 
of  the  Ancients  ;  hence  it  has  also  been  given  by  us  V  In 
another  case,  when  explaining  Manu  IX,  141  and  147,  he 
notes  that  his  interpretation  is  that  of  upadhyaya,  i.  e.  of 
his  own  teacher  from  whom  he  learnt  the  Manu-sawhita. 
Disagreeable  as  this  want  of  decision  may  be  to  those  who 
look  to  a  commentary  for  a  concise  and  authoritative 
explanation  of  its  text,  yet  it  is  not  without  advantages. 
His  copiousness  in  quoting  the  opinions  of  his  predecessors 
makes  his  work  extremely  important  for  the  student  of 
the  history  of  the  Manu-smrzti  and  of  the  Hindu  law.  The 
Bhashya  clearly  proves  that  Manu's  text  had  been  made 
for  centuries  an  object  of  deep  research,  and  that  many  of 
its  verses  had  given  rise  to  widely  different  interpretations. 
It  shows,  further,  that  a  good  many  various  readings 
existed.  Finally,  a  comparison  of  the  later  still  extant 
commentaries  leaves  no  doubt  that  these  in  general  are 
based  on  the  Manubhashya,  and  that  even  their  divergent 
opinions  and  readings  are  frequently  derived  from  the 
earlier  work.     Under  these  circumstances  the  question  of 


1  Though  the  opinions  of  '  others '  are  mentioned  very  frequently,  and  though 
sometimes  those  of  three  or  four  predecessors  are  contrasted,  Medhatithi  gives 
only  once  the  name  of  an  earlier  commentator,  Manu  IX,  253,  ^T^T  TT^rft 

mPjW^ra:  *t  atr^ns  ^fa  *re*  (?)  [v.i.  -^k  (?>]  ftnjprTitf  i 

1^  cT^  ff^fshnTOWIfJJI     The  name  seems  to  be  Vishmisvamin.     But  it 
is  uncertain  what  the  corrupt  word,  preceding  it,  may  hide. 

2  inj  Tn^^TT^TTTT  WFmf  S^ftnTOTftrcftl  ^rfSff^  U  Compare  also 
the  remark  on  Manu  V,  128,  IHf  fq^fT%^T^Ilff*^  U 


INTRODUCTION.  CXX1 


Medhatithi's  date  acquires  great  importance.  It  is  a 
matter  of  regret  that  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  we 
do  not  possess  any  trustworthy  historical  information,  but 
have  to  depend  on  such  circumstantial  evidence  as  can 
be  collected  from  Medhatithi's  own  quotations  and  from 
the  quotations  made  by  other  authors  from  the  Bhashya. 
If  we  begin  with  the  latter,  the  lower  limit  for  the  com- 
position of  Medhatithi's  work  is  fixed  by  Vi^/Iancsvara's 
reference  to  his  explanation  of  Manu  IX,  1181.  Vigvl&ne- 
.rvara  wrote  his  commentary  on  Ya^;?avalkya  in  the  reign  of 
the  iifalukya  king,  Vikramaditya  VI,  who  ruled  at  Kalya;/a 
from  vSakasawvat  997-1048,  or  1073-1 126-7  A.D.2  The 
manner  in  which  Vi^/vane^vara's  reference  is  made,  shows 
that  in  his  times  the  Bhashya  possessed  an  established  repu- 
tation. Hence  it  may  be  inferred  that  it  was  then  not  of 
recent  date.  To  the  same  conclusion  points  also  a  passage 
in  Kulluka's  commentary  on  Manu  VIII,  184  3,  where,  in  a 
remark  on  the  arrangement  of  verses  1 81-184,  Medhatithi's 
name  is  placed  before  that  of  Bhq^ara^a.  As  in  enu- 
merating their  predecessors  the  commentators  usually 
adhere  to  the  natural  order,  and  place  the  oldest  name  first, 
it  is  very  probable  that  Kulluka  means  to  indicate  that 
Medhatithi  preceded  Bhq^ara^a.  If,  as  again  is  most 
likely,  the  latter  is  identical  with  the  royal  polyhistor 
who  reigned  at  Dhara  during  the  first  half  of  the  eleventh 
century  A.  D.,  it  follows  that  Medhatithi  cannot  have 
written  later  than  in  the  tenth  century.  With  respect  to 
the  remoter  limit  for  the  composition  of  the  Bhashya,  I 
have  formerly  stated4  that  Medhatithi  quotes  Kumarila 
and  .SankaraMrya,  the  great  authorities  on  Mima/zzsa  and 
Vedanta.  The  former  is  mentioned  by  name  in  the 
remarks  on  Manu  I,  3,  and  by  his  usual  title  Bha//apada/*, 


1  Colebrooke,  Mit.  I,  7,  13. 

3  See  Journ.  Bo.  Br.  Roy.  As.  Soc.  vol.  ix,  pp.  134-138,  and  West  and  Biihler, 
Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  pp.  15-17,  third  edition. 

fafWfajcT:  II     See  also  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  8. 

4  West  and  Biihler,  Digest,  p.  v,  first  edition. 


CXX11  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


{the  venerable  Bha//a,'  in  the  commentary  on  Manu  II,  18  1. 
As  regards  vSankara/£arya,  I  find  that  Medhatithi's  ac- 
quaintance with  his  writings  is  by  no  means  as  certain  as  I 
formerly  thought.  For  in  the  passage  where  my  own  copy, 
a  transcript  of  a  Pu/za  MS.,  makes  Medhatithi  quote  the 
vSarirakabhashya,  the  older  and  better  MSS.  of  the  India 
Office  read  vSariraka,  which  probably  implies  a  reference  to 
the  5ariraka-sutras 2.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  no 
longer  possible  to  assert  that  the  Bhashya  is  later  than  the 
works  of  the  great  Vedantist,  who  wrote  in  the  beginning 
of  the  ninth  century  A.  D.  We  have  now  only  the  quota- 
tions from  Kumarila  to  fall  back  upon,  whose  date  is  much 
less  certain.  We  know  that  Kumarila  preceded  5ankara- 
£arya  3,  but  the  length  of  time  which  lies  between  them  has 
hitherto  not  been  exactly  ascertained.  Mr.  Colebrooke, 
Dr.  Burnell,  and  Professor  Max  Miiller  believe,  for  various 
reasons,  that  he  lived  in  the  seventh  century  or  not  later 
than  700  A.D.4  Though,  as  far  as  his  quotations  go,  Me- 
dhatithi might  have  written  earlier  than  the  ninth  century 
A.  D.,  I  still  feel  inclined  to  adhere  to  my  former  opinion. 
For  a  closer  examination  of  the  Bhashya  has  revealed 
some  other  points  which  speak  in  favour  of  my  view. 
Medhatithi  repeatedly  quotes  the  metrical  law-books  of 
Ya^avalkya,  Narada,  and  Para^ara,  as  well  as  the  version 
of  the  Kanaka  Dharma-sutra,  known  as  the  Vish?zu-smrzti, 
and  considers  all  as  canonical.  None  of  these  works  has, 
however,  a  claim  to  a  high  antiquity ;  and  the  Vish/zu-smrzti, 
in  particular,  which  mentions  the  Greek  name  of  a  week- 
day, cannot  be  older  than  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  A.D. 

1 1, 5,  ^fa  f  mftaroi:  11  11, 18,  t#  ^  *s^:  i  f^^^T  ^  fajfftn 
^  ^et^t  ^^w  [tut?]  1  wfir^  ^fmjc5T  srraT  [wwri]  ^m  [m] 

2  Manu  XII,   19,    ^   ^   V^TO^xffrfw  Sfa    fW^   [r*]    $^R 

^*nr  (  irt  ^fif  sntfc^  [v.  1.  of  my  ms.  ^TtfwrTO]  ^^  *Tirr 

^f^TrT  II 

3  See  Professor  Cowell's  note  to  Colebrooke's  Essays,  I,  p.  323. 
*  See  Professor  Max  Miiller,  India,  what  can  it  teach  us  ?  p.  308,  note. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXlil 


If  Medhatithi,  nevertheless,  considers  it  to  be  an  inspired 
work,  revealed  by  the  god  Vishnu,  it  is  only  reasonable 
to  assume  that  a  very  considerable  interval  lies  between 
the  date  of  its  composition  and  his  own  times.  This  is  so 
much  more  probable,  as  the  Vish/m-smrz'ti  was  probably 
written  in  Ka^mir,  which,  as  will  be  shown  presently,  was 
also  Medhatithi's  home.  A  more  definite  result  with 
respect  to  Medhatithi's  date  is,  I  fear,  at  present  not 
obtainable.  His  references  to  other  works,  such  as  a 
Vakyapradipa  by  one — rimLsra^an  Abhidhanakosha 2,  Pin- 
gala's  treatise  on  metrics  3,  a  work  of  the  ancient  writer  on 
Sa//zkhya,  Vindhyavasin,  and  so  forth,  are,  in  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature, 
not  particularly  useful.  The  Bhashya  furnishes,  however, 
two  interesting  details  regarding  Medhatithi's  personal 
history.  First,  we  hear  that  he  wrote  a  metrical  treatise  on 
the  sacred  law,  called  Smrztiviveka.  Secondly,  it  appears 
that  the  valley  of  Ka^mir,  which  has  produced  so  many 
Indian  men  of  letters,  was  his  native  country.  The  Smn'ti- 
viveka  is  mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  Bhashya  as  a  com- 
prehensive work,  in  which  difficult  legal  questions  were 
fully  discussed  4.  As  regards  the  other  point,  there  is  no 
direct  statement  in  the  Bhashya  which  mentions  Medha- 
tithi's birthplace.  But  the  author  refers  so  frequently  to 
Kajmir,  its  laws,  its  Vedic  vSakha,  and  even  to  its  language, 
that  the  inference  that  it  was  his  native  country  becomes 
unavoidable.  Thus  in  explaining  the  word  svarash/re,  '  in 
his  own  kingdom'  (Manu  VII,  32), and  the  term  ^anapada//, 
{  country  or  province  '  (Manu  VIII,  41),  he  .introduces  the 

1  Manu  XII,  118,  X?mT0T^*r^i3JlfWTn^^rSn^  ?JTff^r:  HflTCW" 

Professor  Kielhorn  informs  me  that  the  verse  does  not  occur  in  Hari's  Vakyapa- 
diya,  which  sometimes  is  called  Vakyapradipa. 

2  Manu  IX,  185-6  ;  the  words  quoted  are,  ^PTTSr  VrTfcrsnT  II 

3  Manu  IX,  42,  ipzNi   ftrj^T    I    ^HTT^f^  |Y]   Tl^fa  H      Pingala 
VIII,  1 ;  see  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  VIII,  147. 

*  See  e.g.  comm.  on  II,  6,  ftTJpnW^r  WfTOfiPTOTfai  ^jfwfe^i  I  and 

ibidem,   f^lf^lft^RTfw^^  I  fWT3$  ^jfwf^Ri  ^^Tt  II 


CXX1V  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


name  of  Ka^mir  as  an  illustration 1.  Again,  in  giving 
examples  of  royal  monopolies  in  the  remarks  on  Manu 
VIII,  399,  he  states  correctly  that  the  sale  of  saffron  is  a 
prerogative  of  the  king  of  Ka^mir.  Further,  he  repeatedly 
refers  to  the  Kanaka  .Sakha  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda, 
which  for  a  long  time  has  been  confined  to  Ka^mir  alone ; 
and,  when  trying  to  prove  in  the  notes  on  Manu  I,  58,  that 
the  Manava  Dharma^astra  may  be  called  Manu's,  though 
it  was  first  taught  by  Hira;zyagarbha,  he  adduces  as  an 
analogous  instance  the  Kanaka,  which,  though  studied  and 
taught  by  many  others,  is  named  after  Ka//za.  Such  an 
illustration  would  hardly  occur  to  anybody  but  a  student 
of  the  Kanaka  .Sakha.  Still  more  decisive,  finally,  is  his 
remark  in  the  commentary  on  Manu  IV,  59.  where  he  says 
that  the  rainbow  is  called  in  Ka.rmir  vina/£/zaya  2. 

As  regards  the  history  of  the  text  of  Medhatithi's  com- 
mentary, Mr.  Colebrooke  states  in  the  preface  to  the 
Digest,  p.  xv  (Madras  edition),  that  '  the  Bhashya '  having 
been  partly  lost,  has  been  completed  by  other  hands  at  the 
court  of  Madanapala,  a  prince  of  Digh.  This  assertion 
probably  rests  on  the  authority  of  a  stanza  in  the  vSardula- 
vikri^ita  measure,  found  in  a  number  of  copies  at  the  end 
of  a  good  many  chapters,  which  says  that  '  the  Bhashya 
being  mutilated,  prince  Madanapala,  the  son  of  Sahara^a, 
brought  a  MS.  from  another  country  and  made  a  ^trnod- 
dhara,  or  restoration  of  the  ruin,  by  causing  copies  to  be 
taken  from  that  V     Considering  the  wording  of  the  verse, 

1  VII,  22,  ft^fqfnH^Tf^HTTTWt^  3*TK^jj:  I  3RT$*ft^^?  ^*ft- 

u:  it^t<*rt  *Ntc*t:  ii  viii,  4i,  f  ^fifT^ifajf^ftrw^i#- 
2  V&T*  srcvgfti^acnifTr  *n  sF^ifftj  ^wn  n   1  must  note  that 

Professor  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  6,  offers  a  different  opinion,  and  takes 
Medhatithi  to  be  a  southerner.  His  reasons — the  termination  svamin  in  the 
name  of  Medhatithi's  father's  name,  Virasvamin,  and  the  attention  paid  by 
the  ancient  southern  authors  to  the  Bhashya — do  not  seem  to  me  sufficiently 
strong.  For,  as  the  Kajmirian  name  Kshirasvamin  and  scores  of  Svamins  in 
the  northern  inscriptions  show,  the  title  was,  at  least,  formerly  not  confined 
to  the  south.  Further,  the  intercourse  between  Kajmir  and  southern  India  in 
the  time  of  Bilhawa  and  of  Harshadeva  accounts  for  the  introduction  of  a  Kaj- 
mirian  work  to  the  notice  of  the  southern  Pandits. 

3  Professor  Jolly  states,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  7,  that  he  has  found  the  verse, 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV 


I  can  only  agree  with  Professor  Jolly  (loc.  cit.)  that  Mada- 
napala  did  not  cause  portions  of  the  Bhashya  to  be  recom- 
posed,  but  merely  completed  the  defective  MS.  of  his 
library  from  a  copy  purchased  in  some  other  part  of  India. 
The  place  where  this  ^ir/zoddhara  was  made,  was  Kash/M, 
near  Delhi.  For  as  the  verse  says  that  Madana  was  the 
son  of  Sahara/za,  it  is  not  doubtful  that  this  person  is 
identical  with  Madana  or  Madanapala,  the  patron  of 
Vi^ve^varabha//a,  who  wrote  the  Subodhini  on  the  Mita- 
kshara  and  the  Prayoga-  or  Madanapari^ata.  Vi^ve^vara 
gives,  in  the  introduction  to  the  latter  work,  a  portion  of  his 
patron's  genealogy 1,  and  states  that  Madana  belonged  to 
the  family  of  the  chiefs  of  Kash/Zza,  and  was  the  second  son 
of  one  Sadhara/za.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  the  verse 
quoted  above  the  Prakritic  form  Sahara?za  has  been  used 
instead  of  Sadhara^a  for  metrical  reasons.  This  Madana  has 
been  identified  by  Mr.  Colebrooke  with  the  homonymous 
author  of  the  Madanavinoda,  which  is  dated  in  Vikrama- 
sawvat  1431  or  1375  A.D.,  and  Mr.  Sarvadhikari2  confirms 
this  identification,  by  telling  us  that  the  Madanavinoda 
contains  the  same  pedigree  of  Madana  as  the  Pari^ata. 
Hence "  the  restoration '  of  the  Bhashya  must  have  occurred 
about  five  hundred  years  ago. 


more  or  less  correctly  given,  in  seven  old  MSS.  from  various  parts  of  India.  In 
my  opinion  it  should  be  read   as  follows :    TT^TT   ^iffa    TgwfiT^rgfqrfT 

VRtfl  II  I  differ  from  Professor  Jolly  at  the  end  of  the  second  pada,  where  he 
reads  with  a  Benares  MS.  TTTB?  «T  ^rtjW'1*^  and  at  the  end  of  the  third 
pada,  where  he  changes  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  -su^  ri  or  ^rTg"rU  to  ^TTa  KJ. 

1  Aufrecht,  Cat.  Sansk.  MSS.  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  p.  274. 

8  Tagore  Lectures  of  1880,  p.  389.  Mr.  Sarvadhikari  wishes  to  read  the  date 
brahma(i)^agat  (3)  yuga  (4)  indu  (1),  (Magha  sudi  6,  Monday,)  as  1231.  He 
thinks  that  yuga  may  also  denote  the  figure  2,  and  that  the  reading  Vikrama- 
sawvat  1 231  is  necessary,  because  the  Pari^ata  is  quoted  by  Randzsvaxa.,  who 
wrote  in  the  thirteenth  century.  He  is,  however,  mistaken,  as  the  astronomical 
calculation  shows  that  Magha  sudi  6  of  Vikramasawvat  1431  did  fall  on  a 
Monday  (Jan.  8,  1375),  while  the  same  day  in  V.  S.  1231  was  a  Thursday.  The 
Pario-ata  quoted  by  Jia.ndesYa.ra.  must,  therefore,  be  some  other  work  on  law. 
The  title  is  a  not  uncommon  one. 


CXXV1  LAWS    OF    MANU, 


It  would,  however,  seem  that  it  either  was  not  thorough, 
or  that  its  effects  were  not  lasting.  For  all  the  copies 
of  Medhatithi's  commentary  which  I  have  seen  or  used 
are  throughout  more  or  less  corrupt,  and  in  some  parts, 
especially  in  chapters  VIII  and  IX,  as  well  as  at  the 
end  of  chapter  XII,  in  a  desperate  condition.  The  latter 
portion  is  in  great  confusion,  some  pieces  being  missing, 
and  others  being  given  twice  over.  In  chapters  VIII 
and  IX  many  verses  are  left  out,  though  it  is  evident 
from  cross-references,  or  from  remarks  made  by  Kulluka, 
that  they  must  have  been  explained  by  Medhatithi. 
In  the  parts  of  the  commentary  still  extant,  the  cor- 
ruptions are  often  very  bad,  and  the  sense  frequently 
doubtful  or  only  to  be  made  out  conjecturally.  Under 
these  circumstances  I  believe  that  it  would  be  unwise  to 
attach  too  much  weight  to  the  omission  of  verses  with 
respect  to  which  the  Bhashya  stands  alone.  Before  we 
can  attempt  to  come  to  a  decision  regarding  the  exact 
state  of  the  Manu-smrzti  in  Medhatithi's  times,  we 
require,  I  think,  better  MSS.  of  his  work.  The  officers 
in  charge  of  the  search  for  Sanskrit  MSS.  in  India  could 
render  a  very  great  service  to  the  history  of  the  Indian 
law,  if  they  would  direct  their  efforts  to  the  acquisition  of 
really  good  MSS.  of  the  Bhashya,  and  if  thus  a  competent 
scholar  were  enabled  to  publish  a  trustworthy  edition. 
The  MSS.  used  for  the  notes  to  my  translation  are,  my 
own  apograph  of  chapters  I-VI  and  X-XII,  made  in  1864 
from  a  Pu^a  MS.,  and  the  copies  of  the  India  Office 
Library,  Nos.  934-935,  1407-1409,  HH,  155^-^55^  All 
of  them  go  back  to  one  codex  archetypus,  derived  from 
Madana's  restored  copy,  and  the  best  is  that  contained  in 
the  Indian  Office  Library,  Nos.  1 551-1552,  which  is  dated 
Sawvat  1648,  margaj-irsha  sudi  3,  somavasare,  or  Monday, 
November  18,  1591  A.D.1 

Next,  after  the  Manubhashya,  but  probably  at  a  con- 
siderable interval,  follows  the  Manu/ika  of  Govindara^a, 


I 


1  For  this  and  some  other  calculations  of  dates  I  have  to  thank  Dr.  Schram 
Privat-Docent  of  astronomical  chronology  in  the  University  of  Vienna. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV11 


the  son  of  Bhaz7a  Madhava.  The  exact  date  of  this  author 
is  likewise  not  ascertainable.  He  is  extremely  reticent 
about  himself  and  his  predecessors,  and  quotes,  with  the 
exception  of  Smrztis,  not  a  single  work  on  law  except  his 
own  Smrzti-ma/^ari  or  Smnti-ma/^aripa/^ika,  a  compila- 
tion of  rules  on  penances1,  derived  from  various  Dhar- 
ma^astras.  The  remoter  limit  of  his  age  can,  however, 
be  deduced  from  Kulluka's  remarks  on  Manu  VIII,  184, 
whence  it  appears  that  Govindara^a  was  later  than 
Bho^a  of  Dhara  (first  half  of  the  eleventh  century).  The 
lower  limit  is  fixed  by  the  mention  of  his  name  in 
^imutavahana's  Dayabhaga2  and  in  >Sulapa/zi's  work  on 
penances3.  I  can  only  agree  with  Professor  Jolly,  who 
thinks  that  he  lived  in  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century4. 
The  termination  of  Govindara^a's  name  has  induced  several 
scholars  (see  Jolly,  loc.  cit.)  to  assume  that  he  was  a  prince, 
and  it  has  been  proposed  to  identify  him  with  a  Govinda- 
£andra  of  Benares  or  with  a  homonymous  king  of  Kano^*. 
But  the  son  of  a  BhazVa  can  only  be  a  Brahma/za,  and  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  that  Govindara£*a  is  the  equivalent 
of  Govindrao,  a  name  very  common  among  the  Manila 
Brahmazzas. 

The  Manu/ika  is  a  very  concise,  but  by  no  means  obscure  5 

1  Commentary  on  Manu  III,  247  and  248  ;  see  also  Kulluka  on  Manu  IV,  212. 
A  copy  of  this  work,  written  at  Vasuravi  in  Sawvat  1467,  arvina  badi  —  janau, 
during  the  reign  of  Maharawa  Udayasi/zzha,  is  preserved  in  the  India  Office 
Library,  No.  1736.  Colebrooke  thought  that  the  date  had  to  be  referred  to  the 
Vikrama  era,  and  the  editors  of  the  series  of  facsimiles  issued  by  the  Palaeogra- 
phical  Society,  No.  Ill,  have  followed  him.  But  it  is  not  doubtful  that  the  prince 
mentioned  in  the  colophon  is  Maharaja  Udayasiwha  of  Mevju/,  who  ascended 
the  throne  in  1541  a.  d.  Hence  the  date  of  the  MS.  refers  to  the  6aka  era,  and 
corresponds  to  1 545  A.  D.  The  Smrz'ti-ma^ari  contains  no  quotations  from  other 
law-books  than  Smrz'tis.  The  name  of  Govindara^a's  father,  Bha//a  Madhava, 
occurs  frequently  in  the  colophons  of  the  several  sections. 

2  Colebrooke,  Day.  XI,  2,  31,  where  Govinda's  name  is  also  placed  after 
Bho^ara^a's. 

3  Aufrecht,  Cat.  Sansk.  MSS.  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  p.  283*. 
*  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  9. 

5  'Obscure'  is  the  epithet  applied  to  it  by  SirW.  Jones,  Pref.tothe  transl.ofManu, 
p.  xvii.  (St.  Grady).  This  estimate  is  probably  derived  from  Kulluka' s  utterance 
in  the  concluding  verses  of  his  commentary,  *Rn3i  "^^  f«TJ([<3  H  <24T^«TTsnfa- 
r<*TT*ft  ^T^TT.  It  is  only  what  might  be  expected  from  a  plagiary  who  bitterly 
hated  the  man  whose  work  he  wished  to  supersede. 


CXXV111  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


verbal  paraphrase  of  Manu's  text.  In  the  main  it  is 
an  abstract  of  Medhatithi's  Bhashya  from  which  Govinda 
has  appropriated  whatever  seemed  to  him  most  valuable. 
He  has  discarded  the  greater  number  of  his  predecessor's 
optional  explanations,  as  well  as  his  lengthy  controversial 
disquisitions  on  difficult  points  of  law,  while  he  has  greatly 
condensed  others.  He  has  added  explanations  of  those 
words  on  which  Medhatithi  does  not  comment,  and  he 
sometimes  also  puts  forward  opinions,  not  traceable  in  the 
earlier  work,  which  may  be  either  his  own  or  derived  from 
sources  inaccessible  to  us.  But  in  such  cases  he  is  occa- 
sionally unlucky,  and  arrives  at  results  which  his  successor 
Kulluka  ridicules,  not  without  reason.  Thus  in  his  remarks 
on  Manu  III,  50,  where  the  text  says  that  a  man  who 
restricts  conjugal  intercourse  to  a  minimum,  is  equal  in 
chastity  to  a  student  'in  whichever  order  he  may  live,' 
Govinda  takes  the  last  words  in  too  literal  a  sense  and 
enunciates  the,  for  a  Hindu,  monstrous  doctrine  that 
Manu  intends  to  permit  ascetics,  whose  children  have  all 
died,  to  return  to  conjugal  life  and  to  repair  the  loss  which 
they  have  suffered.  Some  other  strange  errors  have  been 
pointed  out  by  Professor  Jolly  in  his  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  9, 
note  1.  These  occasional  eccentricities  do  not,  however, 
seriously  diminish  the  usefulness  of  the  Manu/ika.  It  re- 
mains not  only  the  earliest,  but  the  best  complete  explana- 
tion of  Manu's  text.  It  frequently  assists  the  student  to 
find  his  way  through  the  tangled  forest  of  the  Bhashya, 
and  it  contains  many  valuable  interpretations  of  words  left 
unexplained  by  Medhatithi.  The  MS.  used  for  the  notes 
is  the  unique  copy,  acquired  by  myself  for  the  Government 
of  Bombay  (Deccan  College  Library,  Coll.  of  1 879-1 880, 
No.  239).  It  is  in  a  very  fair  condition,  and  contains  the 
whole  text  and  the  commentary,  excepting  that  on  IX,  71- 
336.  It  was  written  at  Stambhatirtha  or  Cambay,  probably 
about  250-300  years  ago. 

The  chronological  position  of  the  next  commentary  on 
our  list,  Sarva^a-Naraya/za's  Manvarthavivrzti  or  Manvar- 
thanibandha,  is  fixed,  as  Professor  Jolly  has  first  pointed 
out,  by  a  passage  in  the  introduction  to  Raghavananda's 


INTRODUCTION.  CXxix 


commentary1.  The  latter  author  says  there  that  ■  he  has 
taken  cognisance  of  (the  opinions)  approved  by  Kulluka 
and  Naraya^a,  and  of  those  entertained  in  their  hearts 
by  Govinda  and  Medhatithi.'  As  it  is  evident  that  in  the 
second  group  the  later  author  has  been  placed  first,  the 
assumption  that  the  same  order  has  been  observed  with 
respect  to  the  first  pair,  and  that  Raghavananda,  applying 
the  principle  of  uttarottaragariyastva,  i.  e.  naming  the  more 
important  persons  later,  intends  the  whole  series  to  be  read 
backwards 2,  is  not  unreasonable.  In  its  favour  speaks  also 
the  fact  that  Naraya/za  quotes  Govindara^a  on  Manu  VIII, 
123.  In  order  to  fix  the  date  when  Naraya^a  wrote,  we 
have  to  rely  chiefly  on  some  quotations.  His  opinions  on 
law  are  first  quoted  by  Kamalakara,  who  wrote  in  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century 3.  But  a  Namani- 
dhana  by  Naraya/za  Sarva^a  is  mentioned  by  Rayamuku/a 
in  his  commentary  on  the  Amarakosha,  which  was  com- 
posed in  143 1  A.D.4  The  only  MS.  of  the  Manvarthavi- 
vrtti5  hitherto  found  (Deccan  College  Collection  of  1879- 
1880,  No.  238)  bears  at  the  end  of  Adhyaya  VIII,  the  date 
Saw.  1544  £aitra  badi  9  ravau,  which  corresponds  to 
Sunday,  March  27,  1497  A.D.  Hence  it  follows  that 
Naraya/za  cannot  have  written  later  than  in  the  last  half 
of  the  fourteenth  century.  Possibly  he  may  be  somewhat 
older. 

The  Manvarthavivrzti  is  not  a  running  commentary 
which  explains  every  word  of  the  text.  It  confines  itself 
to  the  elucidation  of  selected  difficult  passages  and  words. 
It  was  written  with  the  avowed  intention  of  undoing  the 
work  of  the  author's  predecessors.     At  the  end  of  chapters 


1  Jolly,  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  1 1 ;  the  passage  has  been  printed  in  Dr.  Burnett's 
Tanjore  Catalogue,  p.  126. 

3  This  manner  of  enumerating  a  series  of  persons  or  of  arguments  is  also  found 
occasionally  in  older  Sanskrit  works  ;  see  e.  g.  Vasish/^a  XIII,  58. 

3  Aufrecht,  Catalogue  Sansk.  MSS.  Bodl.  Libr.  p.  279. 

*  See  Professor  Aufrecht's  Analysis  in  the  Journal  of  the  German  Oriental 
Society,  vol.  xxviii,  p.  1 14. 

5  This  MS.,  which  has  been  used  for  the  notes  to  the  translation,  is  a  very  fair 
copy,  containing  the  commentary  alone.  Fols.  1-8  have  been  half  eaten  by  rats. 
Fols.  192-3  have  been  lost. 

[25]  i 


CXXX  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


I,  VI,  and  VIII  we  find  a  verse,  apparently  belonging  to 
Naraya/za,  which  says,'  This  commentary  of  the  Manu-smnti, 
composed  by  the  illustrious  Naraya/za  Sarva£"«a,  thrusts  far 
away  the  exposition  given  in  contemptible  compilations  V 
Again,  at  the  end  of  chapter  IV  we  read, '  Direct  your  atten- 
tion to  the  good  words  of  Naraya^a  Sarva£v?a,  which 
propound  the  real  meaning  of  Manu  and  repel  the  exposi- 
tion given  in  contemptible  compilations2.'  As  might  be 
expected  from  these  utterances,  Naraya/za  shows  a  great 
anxiety  to  find  explanations  differing  from  those  of  Medha- 
tithi  and  Govinda.  Sometimes  he  attains  this  aim  by 
returning  to  views  which  Medhatithi  mentions  and  rejects ; 
but  more  frequently  his  explanations  have  been  either 
taken  from  commentaries  inaccessible  to  us,  or  represent 
opinions  formed  by  him  independently.  All  his  peculiar 
interpretations  deserve  careful  attention.  In  many  cases 
they  are  decidedly  preferable  to  those  of  the  other  com- 
mentators, and  have  therefore  been  not  rarely  followed  in 
the  translation.  Narayawa  seems  to  have  been  not  only 
deeply  versed  in  the  sacred  law,  but  to  have  possessed  also 
a  knowledge  of  various  other  Sastras.  As  we  learn  from 
his  commentary  on  Manu  V,  $6,  80,  104,  XI,  72,  he  also 
wrote  two  other  works  on  Dharma,  a  Kamadhenudipika 
and  a  5uddhidipika.  His  Kosha  has  been  mentioned  above. 
Commentaries  of  his  on  parts  of  the  Mahabharata,  e.  g.  on 
the  Udyogaparvan,  on  the  Svargaroha^aparvan  3,  and  on  the 
Sanatsu^-atiya,  are  still  extant 4. 

^?TW  It  Thus  at  the  end  of  chapter  I ;  in  the  other  two  passages  the 
MS.  has  the  faulty  form  f*RF^. 

JSW^WfW  II     Three  other  boastful  verses  occur  at  the  end,  1.  of  chapter 

in,  ^t^m^cra%^^%#^KT^n:  1  sgwfTrftrcT^  [t]  ^fVm^iT 
^nr:  11    2.  of  chapter  v,  ^rtaTcurcra^fcrWirf  i\^t  *rafl^  1  v^s? 

ftfW   WrT   *T^TCrcjf»Tf53fP^  II      3.  of  chapter  IX,  ^ffaTTUTOSWNi 

*^ntf>T5rwra[  \  wtez  vW  ftct  i|H  ^[ftr]w  *re  cfrr  [m]  f  wf{  u 

3  Weber,  Berlin  Catalogue,  Nos.  394,  399;  Aufrecht, Catalogue,  Bodl.  Libr.  p.  2. 

4  Telang,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  viii,  p.  148. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXX1 


The  fourth  work  on  our  list,  the  well-known  Manvartha- 
muktavali  of  Kullukabha^a,  the  son  of  Divakarabha^/a,  was 
considered  until  lately  the  most  trustworthy  guide  for  the 
exposition  of  Manu.  In  the  introductory  verses  to  his 
commentary  Kulluka  informs  us  that  he  was  a  Gau</a  or 
Bengali  by  birth,  his  father  residing  in  Nandana  in  Va- 
rendrt1,  and  that  he  wrote  his  work  at  Benares  with  the 
assistance  of  other  Vandits.  As  regards  his  times,  we  only 
know  that  Naraya^a  Sarva^a  and  another  commentator, 
Dharamdhara  2,  stood  between  him  and  Govindara^a,  and 
that  Raghunandana,  who  wrote  in  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  is  the  earliest  author  who  quotes  him  3. 
He,  therefore,  lived  probably  in  the  fifteenth  century. 

The  Manvarthamuktavali  is,  as  Professor  Jolly  has  been 
the  first  to  recognise  4,  little  more  than  an  improved  edition 
of  Govindara^a's  Manu/ika.  In  spite  of  the  asperity  with 
which  Kulluka  repeatedly  inveighs  against  his  predecessor, 
he  has  not  disdained  to  copy  very  large  portions  of  the 
Manu/ika,  sometimes  verbatim  and  sometimes  in  very  in- 
sufficient extracts,  where  the  omissions  make  the  meaning 
obscure.  Moreover,  even  where  the  wording  of  the  two 
commentaries  differs,  the  influence  of  Govinda  is  distinctly 
visible.  Under  these  circumstances  the  value  of  the  Mukta- 
vali  is,  since  the  recovery  of  the  Manutfka,  not  very  great, 
though  it  is  undeniable  that  in  certain  cases  Kulluka's  inde- 
pendent remarks  or  criticisms  of  the  earlier  works  are  useful. 
Its  great  fame  in  India  and  its  frequent  occurrence  in  the 
libraries  of  native  lawyers  in  all  parts  of  the  Peninsula  may 
be  explained  by  the  fact  that  it  was  written  and  approved 
at  Benares,  which  town  has,  since  remote  times,  been  a  most 
important  literary  centre  and  the  chief  source  from  which 
the  Ta.ndits  draw  their  supplies  of  books.     For  the  notes  I 


1  In  the  colophon  of  chapter  XII,  the  place  is  called  Varendranandana.  The 
district  of  Varendra  lies  between  Dinajpur  and  the  Ganges,  Cunningham,  Arch. 
Reports,  XV,  Plate  i,  and  p.  40. 

2  See  concluding  verses  at  the  end  of  chapter  XII. 

3  Aufrecht,  loc.  cit.  p.  292. 

4  Die  Juristischen  Abschnitte  aus  dem  Gesetzbuche  des  Manu,  p.  3,  des 
Separatabdrucks ;  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  10. 

1  2 


CXXX11  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


have  used  no  MSS.  of  the  Muktavali ;  but  two  editions, 
(^ibanand's  reprint  of  the  earlier  Calcutta  edition *  and  the 
Bombay  lithographed  edition  of  6akasa^vat  1780.  The 
latter  is  by  far  the  better  one,  but  leaves,  like  all  other 
editions  which  I  have  seen,  much  to  desire  from  a  critical 
point  of  view.  There  are  a  good  many  passages  in  which 
the  text  does  not  agree  with  the  commentary. 

On  the  Manvarthamuktavali  rests  the  Manvartha^an- 
drika,  written  by  Raghavananda  Sarasvati,  an  ascetic  of 
•Sankard^arya's  school2,  and  a  pupil  of  one  VLrveyvara- 
bhagavatpada.  Though  the  author  asserts,  as  stated  above, 
that  he  used  four  older  commentaries,  he  mostly  adheres  to 
Kulluka's  opinions.  It  is  only  rarely  that  he  prefers  Nara- 
ya/za's  interpretations  or  recurs  to  views  of  Govindara^a  and 
Medhatithi,  which  Kulluka  refuted  or  left  unnoticed.  His 
exposition  of  the  philosophical  portions  of  the  text  is,  how- 
ever, mostly  independent,  and  he  interprets  them  throughout 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  agree  with  the  Vedanta  doctrines  of 
his  school.  The  ^Tandrika  is  not  a  running  commentary 
which  paraphrases  every  word  of  Manu,  but  gives  mostly, 
besides  a  short  summary  of  the  general  meaning,  merely 
remarks  on  difficult  words  and  passages.  It  is  probably  a 
modern  work,  dating  from  the  sixteenth  or  the  beginning  of 
the  seventeenth  century  3.  I  have  not  met  with  any  quota- 
tions from  it  in  other  law-books.  The  oldest  known  MS.  is 
that  brought  by  Anquetil  from  Gujarat  and  deposited  in 
the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris  (Devanagari  49,  fonds 
d' Anquetil,  No.  16).  Its  date,  Sawvat  1706  varshe  karttika 
badi  10  somadine,  corresponds,  according  to  Dr.  Schram's 

1  The  reason  why  I  used  this  very  incorrect  text,  was  that  Professor  Jolly 
kindly  lent  me  his  copy  in  which  he  has  entered  the  various  readings  of  Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  of  the  Ka^mir  copy  and  other  MSS. 

2  According  to  H.  H.  Wilson,  Works,  I,  pp.  202-3  (ed.  Rost),  the  ascetics, 
bearing  the  title  Sarasvati,  follow  the  sawpradaya  of  i'ankaraiarya.  See  also 
Aufrecht,  Catalogue  Sansk.  MSS.  Bodl.  Libr.  p.  227. 

8  Mr.  Loiseleur  Deslongchamps'  attempt  (Lois  de  Manou,  p.  xvi)  to  identify 
Raghavananda  with  Raghunandana,  the  bhatfaHrya  of  the  sixteenth  century,  is 
an  unlucky  guess.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  author  of  the  Aandrika  is  identical 
with  the  ascetic  Raghavananda,  pupil  of  Advayananda,  pupil  of  VLrvervara, 
who  is  mentioned  as  an  author  on  Sawkhya  and  Vedanta  philosophy  by  Dr.  F.  E 
Hall,  Catalogue,  pp.  6,  91,  &c. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXlil 


calculation,  to  Monday,  November  29,  1649.  Another  old 
MS.  of  about  the  same  date  is  mentioned  by  Dr.  Bur- 
nell,  Tanjore  Catalogue,  p.  126.  For  the  notes  I  have  used 
the  Paris  MS.,  which  was  kindly  lent  to  me  by  the  French 
Government,  as  far  as  Manu  IX,  187.  It  contains  both  the 
commentary  and  the  text,  the  former  being,  however,  left 
out  on  I,  45-78.  For  the  remaining  portion  I  have  con- 
sulted a  very  old,  but  much  damaged  copy  of  the  Deccan 
College  Collection  of  1 882-1883,  acquired  by  Professor 
Bha/^arkar  for  the  Government  of  Bombay. 

The  name  of  the  sixth  commentary  is,  according  to  the 
MS.,  the  loan  of  which  I  owe  to  the  courtesy  of  Divan 
Bahadur  Raghunathrao  of  Madras,  Manuvyakhyana,  but 
according  to  Dr.  Burnell,  Tanjore  Catalogue,  p.  126, 
Nandini.  Its  author  calls  himself  Nandana  (Nandana^arya 
according  to  Dr.  Burnell),  the  son  of  Lakshma^a,  a  member 
of  the  Bharadva^a  gotra,  and  the  dear  friend  of  the  illus- 
trious Viramalla1.  In  all  probability  he  was  a  native  of 
Southern  India.  For  his  work  is,  as  far  as  I  am  aware, 
known  in  Southern  India  alone;  its  MSS.  are  met  with  only 
in  the  Madras  Presidency,  and  Professor  Jolly  (loc.  cit., 
p.  12)  has  found  that  many  of  his  peculiar  readings  agree 
with  those  found  in  Southern  MSS.  of  the  Manu-smrzti. 
As  his  name  is  not  quoted  in  any  commentary  on  Manu  or 
in  any  work  on  law,  known  to  me,  it  would  seem  that  he  is 
either  of  very  modern  date  or  that  his  opinions  were  not 
held  in  any  great  esteem.  Mr.  Raghunathrao's  MS.  is 
dated  5akasawvat  1724,  Magna  sudi  pratipad,  or  1803  A.  D. 
The  Manuvyakhyana  is  a  very  short  commentary,  which 
mostly  repeats  and  explains  only  a  few  words  or  phrases  of 
the  text.  It  dismisses  many  verses  which  stand  in  need  of 
elucidation   with   the   curt   remark   spash/a^,   'clear,'  and 

1  The  colophon  of  chapter  XII  runs  as  follows :   yfif  ^HT^1'T*fTTt"^'TTJ 

*JJJlfl3iT*lf  Sfff^rfT^rf  ^T^ffaflTO:  II  Viramalla  was  probably  a  prince  or 
chief,  and  the  mention  of  his  name  will  eventually  aid  to  ascertain  Nandana's 
time.  A  third  variety  of  the  latter's  name  occurs  in  the  Madras  edition  of  Cole- 
brooke's  Digest,  p.  xv,  note  6,  where  the  editor  speaks  of  a  commentary  on  Manu, 
Nandara^krit  (?)  by  Nandar%a. 


CXXX1V  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


passes  by  others  without  any  note.  Though  no  names  are 
ever  quoted,  most  of  the  explanations  have  been  taken  on 
purely  eclectic  principles  from  the  earlier  commentaries, 
among  which  the  first  four  of  our  list  must  certainly  be 
reckoned.  The  favourite  among  them  is  the  Manvartha- 
vivrzti.  The  notes  to  the  translation  show  a  considerable 
number  of  cases  where  'Nar.  and  Nand.'  form  a  separate 
group,  and  on  important  points  advocate  opinions  opposed 
to  those  of  Medhatithi,  Govinda,  and  Kulluka.  But  there 
are  also  other  passages,  concerning  which  Nandana  agrees 
either  with  Medhatithi  alone,  or  with  '  others,'  quoted  by 
Medhatithi,  with  Kulluka  or  even  with  Govinda.  Finally, 
he  offers  in  a  certain  number  of  cases  expositions  not 
traceable  elsewhere,  some  of  which,  especially  those  on  the 
philosophical  pieces,  deserve  attention.  The  text  which 
Nandana  follows,  differs  not  inconsiderably  from  the 
vulgata.  It  shows,  besides  very  numerous,  more  or  less 
important  variae  lectiones,  some  omissions,  additions,  and 
transpositions  of  entire  verses.  Many  of  Nandana's  various 
readings  are  derived  from  Medhatithi,  Naraya^a,  and  other 
older  commentators,  who  either  themselves  follow  them  or 
at  least  mention  their  existence.  As  regards  those  which 
Nandana  alone  offers,  the  majority  seem  to  be  either  cor- 
ruptelae  or  conjectures,  and  sometimes  very  unlucky  ones1. 
The  transpositions,  which  partly  occur  in  passages  regarding 
the  order  of  which  the  other  commentators  agree,  appear 
to  have  sometimes  at  least  no  better  authority  than  guesses 
made  by  Nandana.  Thus  if  he  places  Manu  I,  27  after 
verse  19,  and  X,  14  after  verse  6,  and  adds  in  each  case 
that,  '  if  some  read  the  verses  further  on,  that  must  be  due 
to  an  error  of  the  copyists,'  I  can  only  see  in  this  remark  a 

1  To  the  first  class  belongs  *^Tftnfh  for  ^rftprfl":  M.  Ill,  114,  the  sense- 
less ^TR^  for  o&TJU^  M.  VIII,  154  (not  given  in  the  notes),  ^T«T^  for 
NNW^'H IX'  2°2>  and  so  forth »  t0  the  second>  $K*$WH»JJ'«fi  for  ^TT^frT 
*^  M.  Ill,  5,  qOHj°hT^  for  qftftfin^  M.  VII,  54,  ■SMfvSJfi:  for  ^Wl 
M.  VIII,  162,  «TT%ohH(U  for  ^Tfde|i|4|i:  M.  VIII,  283  (not  given  in  the  notes), 

^mntHfomnfa  for  *mt^r  w*j  m.  ix,  126,  ^nrff^  (ioc.  sing,  of 

^•5^3"  !)  for  Wt^RTlM.  X,  28,  and  so  forth. 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXV 


confession  of  his  having  done  violence  to  the  traditional 
text.  The  verses  which  Nandana  adds  are,  I  think,  all 
interpolations,  some  of  which  perhaps  go  back  to  early 
times,  as  they  occur  also  in  the  Southern  MSS.  and  in  the 
Ka^-mir  copy.  With  respect  to  the  omissions,  Nandana 
sometimes  follows  one  or  several  of  the  other  commen- 
tators. In  other  cases  he  agrees  with  the  Southern  MSS. 
alone,  and  again  in  others  he  stands  quite  by  himself.  One 
of  the  omissions  of  the  last  class,  Manu  V,  61,  is,  as  has 
been  pointed  out  in  the  notes,  purely  due  to  an  accidental 
lacuna  in  the  MS.  which  Nandana  used.  With  respect  to 
numerous  other  cases  it  must  be  noted  that  the  two  copies 
of  the  Manuvyakhyana  which  European  scholars  have 
examined,  Mr.  Raghunathrao's  and  Dr.  Burnell's  (chapters 
VIII-IX,  now  in  the  India  Office  Library),  differ  very  con- 
siderably. Thus  in  chapter  VIII,  Dr.  Burnell's  copy  omits, 
according  to  Professor  Jolly's  collation1,  verses  8,  n,  14, 
74,  81,  103,  227-238,  231,  332,  while  Mr.  Raghunathrao's 
MS.  has  them  all  excepting  verses  8,  228,  and  231,  and 
gives  even  notes  on  11,  14,  81,  103,  227.  These  differences 
between  the  two  copies  seem  to  extend  also  to  readings  in 
Manu's  text  and  to  explanations.  But  it  is  not  rarely 
difficult  to  give  a  definite  opinion  on  these  points,  because 
Mr.  Raghunathrao's  MS.  sometimes  gives  only  the  Pratikas 
of  the  verses,  and  is  often  so  corrupt  that  the  sense  can  be 
made  out  only  by  means  of  conjectural  emendations. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  will  not  be  advisable  to 
attach  too  much  weight  to  variae  lectiones,  derived  from 
the  Manuvyakhyana,  which  are  not  supported  by  the 
authority  of  other  commentaries. 

The  anonymous  71ppa//a,  or  collection  of  detached  ex- 
planatory remarks,  in  the  Ka^mir  birch  bark  MS.2  is  of 
very  small  importance.  It  looks  as  if  it  owed  its  origin  to 
the  marginal  notes  of  some  learned  Tandit,  which,  later, 
were  copied  with  the  text  and  placed  after  the  verses  to 

1  Compare  also  Professor  Hopkins,  Notes  on  the  Nandini,  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  October,  1883,  p.  xviii,  where,  however,  only  verses 
8,  11,  74,  81,  and  332  are  enumerated  as  missing. 

2  Deccan  College  Collection  of  1876-1877,  No.  355. 


CXXXV1  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


which  they  refer.  Professor  Jolly 1  has  pointed  out  that  in 
one  case  it  characteristically  agrees  with  Govindara^a  ;  and 
other  instances,  e.g.  the  remarks  on  Manu  I,  52,  may  be 
added.  There  are  also  some  cases  (see  e.g.  the  explanation 
of  aftmbha,  Manu  V,  91)  where  the  Ka^mir  commentary 
agrees  with  curious  explanations  given  by  Nandana.  The 
text  also  agrees  occasionally  with  peculiar  readings  adopted 
by  Nandana  or  by  Naraya^a  and  Nandana2.  But  I  should 
consider  it  hazardous  to  draw  from  these  instances  any 
conclusions  regarding  the  sources  of  the  Tippana.  The 
Kajmir  MS.,  which  has  been  very  carefully  written  and 
corrected,  is  mutilated  at  the  end,  about  one-third  of  each 
of  the  last  dozen  leaves  being  torn  off.  The  loss  falls  on 
Manu  XI,  218-XII,  126. 

The  above  remarks  on  the  materials  which  I  had  at  my 
disposal  show  that,  in  spite  of  their  undeniable  importance, 
they  were  insufficient  for  a  radical  change  in  the  treatment 
of  Manu's  text.  As  the  recension,  given  by  Kulluka,  was 
the  only  one  accessible  in  its  entirety  and  in  tolerably  trust- 
worthy copies,  I  could  not  do  anything  else  than  take  that 
for  the  basis  of  my  translation.  Practical  reasons,  too,  espe- 
cially the  consideration  that  the  Indian  public  has  been  accus- 
tomed to  Kulluka's  text,  and  that  the  numerous  references 
in  the  translations  of  Hindu  law-books  point  to  the  Manu  of 
Kulluka,  made  the  adoption  of  this  principle  highly  desir- 
able. I  have,  therefore,  retained  every  verse  which  Kulluka 
explains,  though  the  weight  of  the  authorities  might  be 
against  its  genuineness,  and  I  have  refrained  from  receiving 
into  the  text  any  verse  which  he  omits.  In  cases  of  the 
former  kind  the  names  of  the  dissenting  commentators  have 
been  given  in  the  notes,  where  also  translations  of  the  best 
accredited  and  more  important  additional  verses,  given  by 
other  commentators,  will  be  found3.      I  have,  moreover, 


1  Tagore  Lectures,  p.  1 1 . 

2  See  e.g.  notes  on  Manu  I,  2;  III,  59,  73,  195. 

3  I  may  add  that  I  have  paid  no  attention  to  those  verses  which  the  medieval 
Nibandhas  on  law  quote  as  Manu's,  but  which  are  not  traceable  in  the  recension 
approved  of  by  the  commentators.  These  verses  are  in  my  opinion  all  spurious. 
In  most  cases  we  have  simply  to  deal  with  misquotations  caused  by  the  careless- 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXXVli 


adhered  to  Kulluka's  order  of  the  verses,  except  in  some 
cases  where  he  is  evidently  in  the  wrong,  and  the  transposi- 
tion causes  no  great  inconvenience.  On  the  other  hand, 
I  have  tried  to  remove  the  numerous  palpable  blunders  in 
the  readings  of  the  editions,  which  are  mostly  due,  not  to 
Kulluka  himself,  but  to  the  editors  of  his  text.  The  notes 
show  what  has  been  changed,  and  on  whose  authority  it  has 
been  done.  I  have,  finally,  added  a  selection  of  the  more 
important  various  readings  given  in  the  other  commentaries. 
With  respect  to  the  translation,  my  proceeding  has  been 
somewhat  different.  Though  I  should  have  liked  to  follow 
in  the  text  Kulluka's  commentary  alone,  and  to  give  the 
renderings  of  the  other  commentators  in  the  notes,  I  found 
that  to  be  impracticable.  The  bulk  of  my  volume  would 
have  become  enormous,  and  in  very  many  passages  I  should 
have  been  compelled  to  declare  the  rendering  placed  in  the 
text  to  be  utterly  erroneous.  In  order  to  escape  these 
difficulties  I  have  generally,  except  in  very  doubtful 
passages,  translated  in  accordance  with  that  exposition 
which  seemed  to  me  most  reasonable,  and  have  placed 
some  of  the  other  particularly  noteworthy  explanations  in 
the  notes.  In  a  certain  number  of  verses  where  the  real 
meaning  of  the  text  is  very  doubtful,  I  have  not  gone 
beyond  a  literal  rendering  of  Manu's  words,  which,  like  the 
original,  may  be  interpreted  in  different  ways.  In  such 
cases  the  notes  exhibit  all  the  various  interpretations 
found  in  the  commentaries.  In  a  very  small  number  of 
verses  the  explanations  of  the  commentators  have  been  set 
aside  altogether  for  reasons  duly  stated  in  the  notes.  The 
length  of  my  notes  varies  very  much,  according  to  the 
interest  or  difficulty  of  the  subject  treated  in  the  text. 
Thus  the  summary  of  the  opinions  of  the  commentators 
on  the  practically  important  titles  of  the  Hindu  law,  Manu 
IX,  1-219,  is  as  complete  as  the  state  of  the  MSS.  allowed 
me  to  make  it.  Almost  all  the  explanations  of  the  difficult 
philosophical  portions  of  chapters  I  and  XII  have  likewise 

ness  of  the  Nibandhakaras,  who  are  as  little  to  be  depended  upon  for  accuracy 
as  Indian  writers  on  other  scientific  subjects  or  as  the  European  medieval  writers 
on  classical  philology.    They  quoted  mostly,  if  not  invariably,  from  memory. 

05]  k 


CXXXV111  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


been  given.  But  the  extracts  from  the  commentaries 
on  the  easier  sections  referring  to  the  duties  of  students, 
householders,  Snatakas,  and  so  forth,  have  been  made  very 
short,  as  for  the  right  understanding  of  the  greater  part  of 
their  verses  little  more  is  wanted  than  the  parallel  passages 
of  the  other  ancient  Smrztis.  Among  the  latter,  those 
translated  in  vols,  ii,  vii,  and  xiv  of  this  series  have  been 
quoted  everywhere.  If  Narada  has  been  excluded,  the 
reason  is  that  the  new  translation,  which  Professor  Jolly 
will  soon  publish  according  to  recently  discovered  materials, 
would  have  made  the  references  useless.  The  quotations 
from  Manu,  which  occur  in  the  translated  Nibandhas  on 
Hindu  law,  have  been  collected,  for  the  convenience  of 
practical  lawyers,  in  the  Appendix.  As  regards  the  rela- 
tion of  my  version  to  those  of  earlier  translators,  it  will  be 
evident  to  everybody  how  much  I  am  indebted  to  Sir 
William  Jones'  great  work,  which,  in  spite  of  the  progress 
made  by  Sanskrit  philology  during  the  last  hundred  years, 
still  possesses  a  very  high  value.  I  have  also  to  acknowledge 
my  obligation  to  the  German  translation  of  chapter  VIII 
and  of  vv.  1-102  of  chapter  IX  by  Professor  Jolly,  which 
is  based  on  the  materials  used  by  myself.  If  no  reference 
has  been  made  to  the  translation  lately  published  by 
Drs.  Burnell  and  Hopkins,  the  reason  is  that  the  printing 
of  mine  was  complete  some  time  before  its  appearance. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  express  my  thanks  to  several  col- 
leagues, especially  to  Professors  Jolly  and  Kielhorn,  for 
assistance  rendered  in  various  ways,  as  well  as  to  Dr.  R. 
Rost,  Chief  Librarian  at  the  India  Office;  to  K.  M.  Chat- 
field,  Esq.,  Director  of  Public  Instruction,  Bombay;  to  the 
Director  of  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  of  France ;  and  to 
Divan  Bahadur  Raghunath  Rao  of  Mylapur,  Madras,  for 
liberal  loans  of  MSS. 


LAWS    OF    MANU 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


Chapter   I. 

i.  The  great  sages  approached  Manu,  who  was 
seated  with  a  collected  mind,  and,  having  duly 
worshipped  him,  spoke  as  follows  : 

2.  '  Deign,  divine  one,  to  declare  to  us  precisely 
and  in  due  order  the  sacred  laws  of  each  of  the  (four 
chief)  castes  (vama)  and  of  the  intermediate  ones. 

3.  '  For  thou,  O  Lord,  alone  knowest  the  purport, 
(i.  e.)  the  rites,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  soul, 
(taught)  in  this  whole  ordinance  of  the  Self-existent 
(Svayambhu),  which  is  unknowable  and  unfathom- 
able.' 

1.  1.  Kull.  thinks  that  pratipu^y a, '  having  worshipped,'  may  also 
mean  '  after  mutual  salutations/  and  he  connects,  against  the  opinion 
of  the  other  commentators, 'duly'  with  '  spoke.'  Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh., 
and  K.,  as  well  as  various  MSS.  (Loiseleur  I,  p.  313  ;  Bikaner  Cat. 
p.  419),  begin  the  Sawhita  with  the  following  verse,  omitted  by 
Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Nand. :  '  Having  adored  the  self-existent  Brahman, 
possessing  immeasurable  power,  I  will  declare  the  various  eternal 
laws  which  Manu  promulgated/ 

2.  After  this  verse  Nand.  inserts  four  lines,  the  first  and  last  of 
which  are  also  found  in  K. :  (a)  '  The  origin  of  the  whole  multi- 
tude of  created  beings,  of  those  born  from  the  womb,  of  those 
born  from  eggs,  of  those  produced  from  exudations  and  from  ger- 
minating seeds,  and  their  destruction;'  (b)  'The  settled  rule  of  all 
customs  and  rites  deign  to  describe  at  large,  according  to  their 
times  and  fitness/ 

3.  'The  ordinance  of  the  Self-existent,'  i.e.  'the  Veda'  (Kull., 
Nar.,  and  Ragh.),  or  'the  Veda  or  the  prescriptive  rules  (vidhi) 

**  I      [25]  B 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


1,4- 


4.  He,  whose  power  is  measureless,  being  thus 
asked  by  the  high-minded  great  sages,  duly  honoured 
them,  and  answered, '  Listen  !' 

5.  This  (universe)  existed  in  the  shape  of  Dark- 
ness, unperceived,  destitute  of  distinctive  marks, 
unattainable  by  reasoning,  unknowable,  wholly  im- 
mersed, as  it  were,  in  deep  sleep. 


contained  in  it'  (Medh.),  or  '  the  institutes'  (Gov.).  A&ntya, '  un- 
knowable/ i.e.  'the  extent  of  which  is  unknowable'  (Kull.  and 
Ragh.),  or  '  unknowable  on  account  of  its  depth'  (Gov.),  or '  the 
meaning  of  which  cannot  be  known  by  reasoning'  (Nar.),  or  'not 
perceptible  by  the  senses'  (Medh.),  or  '  difficult  to  understand' 
(Nand.).  Aprameya,  'unfathomable,'  i.e.  'not  to  be  understood 
without  the  help  of  the  Mimawsa  and  other  methods  of  reasoning' 
(Kull.),  or  '  unfathomable  on  account  of  its  extent'  (Gov.,  Nand.), 
or  '  unfathomable  on  account  of  its  extent,  or  not  directly  know- 
able  but  to  be  inferred  as  the  foundation  of  the  Smrzti'  (Medh.), 
or '  difficult  to  understand'  (Ragh.).  Kull.  and  Ragh.  explain  karya- 
tattvartha  by  '  the  purport,  i.e.  the  rites,  and  the  nature  of  the  soul;' 
Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nand.  by  '  the  true  purport,  i.e.  the  rites.'  Nand. 
takes  sarvasya,  '  whole,'  as  depending  on  '  ordinance/  and  in  the 
sense  of  '  prescribed  for  all  created  beings/ 

In  the  commentary  on  verse  1 1  Medh.  gives  still  another  explana- 
tion of  this  verse,  according  to  which  it  has  to  be  translated  as 
follows  :  '  For  thou,  O  Lord,  alone  knowest  the  nature  and  the  object 
of  the  products  employed  in  the  creation  of  this  universe,  which  is 
unthinkable  on  account  of  its  greatness,  and  unknowable/  This 
version  belongs  to  'other'  commentators,  who  explain  Manu's  whole 
account  of  the  creation  purely  on  Sawkhya  principles. 

5.  The  account  of  the  creation  given  in  verses  5-13  bears,  as 
Dr.Muir  remarks  (Sanskrit  Texts,  IV,  p.  2  6),  some  resemblance  to  that 
contained  in  some  passages  of  the  -Satapatha-brahmawa,  especially 
XI,  1,  6,  1  seqq.,  and  is  probably  founded  on  some  Vedic  work, 
1  with  an  intermixture  of  more  modern  doctrines/  In  explanation 
of  the  wording  of  verse  5,  Medh.  and  Kull.  point  to  passages  like  Rv. 
X,  129,  3,  and  Taittiriya-brahmawa  II,  8,  9,  4.  Sayawa,  too,  quotes 
the  verse  in  his  commentary  on  the  latter  passage. 

The  commentators  Medh.  and  Gov.  explain  the  fact  that  Manu, 
being  asked  to  expound  the  law,  gives  an  account  of  the  creation, 


1,6.  THE    CREATION. 


6.  Then  the  divine  Self-existent  (Svayambhu, 
himself)  indiscernible,  (but)  making  (all)  this,  the 
great  elements  and  the  rest,  discernible,  appeared 
with  irresistible  (creative)  power,  dispelling  the 
darkness. 

by  the  supposition  that  it  is  intended  to  show  what  a  great  scope 
the  work  has,  and  how  necessary  its  study  is,  as  the  production  of 
the  various  created  beings  depends  on  merit  and  demerit.  Kull., 
on  the  other  hand,  tries  to  prove  that  the  account  of  the  creation, 
which  belongs  to  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  soul,  is  part  of  the 
sacred  law,  and  hence  properly  finds  its  place  here.  All  the  com- 
mentators, with  the  exception  of  Ragh.,  explain  tama^, '  darkness,' 
by  mulaprakrzti-6,  'the  root-evolvent'  of  the  Sawkhya  philosophy, 
and  tamobhutam, '  in  the  shape  of  darkness,'  by  *  absorbed  in  the 
root-evolvent.'  Ragh.,  who  throughout  explains  Manu's  sayings  in 
the  sense  of  the  Vedanta  school,  takes  it  for  an  equivalent  of 
avidya, '  ignorance.'  The  explanation  of  the  four  adjectives,  which 
express  in  different  terms  the  impossibility  of  knowing  the  mula- 
prakrz'ti,  differs  very  much  in  the  six  commentaries.  The  most 
reasonable  appears  to  be  Kulluka's  view,  who  assumes  that  the  four 
words  refer  to  the  impossibility  of  attaining  a  knowledge  of  the 
prakn'ti  by  the  three  means  mentioned  below,  XII,  105,  and  'by 
reasoning'  (tarka).  He  paraphrases  apra^Tiata,  '  unperceived,'  by 
'imperceptible  by  the  senses;'  alakshawa,  'destitute  of  marks,' 
by '  uninferrible ;'  avig-weya, '  unknowable,'  by  '  undefinable  by  words 
or  authoritative  statement.' 

6.  The  above  translation  follows  Gov.,  Nan,  and  Kull.  The  other 
three  commentators  take  mahabhutadivmtau^a^  as  a  relative  com- 
pound. On  this  supposition  the  translation  would  run  as  follows  : 
'  Then  the  divine  Self-existent,  (himself)  undiscernible,  (but)  making 
this  (universe)  discernible,  appeared, —  he  whose  (creative)  power 
works  in  the  great  elements  and  the  rest,  and  who  dispels  the 
darkness.' 

'  Then,'  i.  e.  at  the  end  of  the  period  of  destruction.  AvyaktaA, 
'  (himself)  undiscernible,'  i.  e. '  not  to  be  known  except  by  Yogins' 
(Medh.),  or  '  not  perceptible  by  the  external  senses'  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.),  or  '  not  to  be  known  except  through  the  texts  of  the  Upani- 
shads '  (Ragh.),  or  '  difficult  to  know '  (Nand.).  Medh.  would  prefer  to 
read  avyaktam, '  this  indiscernible  (universe).'  '  The  great  elements 
and  the  rest,'  i.e. '  the  other  principles,  the  great  one  and  so  forth' 

B    2 


4 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


1,7- 


7.  He  who  can  be  perceived  by  the  internal  organ 
(alone),  who  is  subtile,  indiscernible,  and  eternal, 
who  contains  all  created  beings  and  is  inconceivable, 
shone  forth  of  his  own  (will). 


(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  or  '  egoism'  (Ragh.).  'Appeared/ 
i.  e.  '  assumed  a  body  of  his  own  free  will,  not  in  consequence  of 
His  karman,  his  acts  in  a  former  existence'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull, 
Nand.),  or  '  became  discernible'  (vyakta),  (Nar.),  or  '  became  ready 
to  create'  (karyonmukha),  (Ragh.).  Gov.  explains  vrz'ttau^sU, 
'  with  irresistible  power,'  by  '  who  obtained  power'  (praptaw  balaw 
yena).  Kull.  explains  tamonuda^, 'dispelling  the  darkness  (i.e.  of 
destruction),'  by  'giving  an  impulse  to  the  root-evolvent,'  and  Ragh. 
takes  it  in  a  similar  way. 

The  commentators  whose  opinion  Medh.  adduces  under  verse  1 1, 
explained  this  verse  also  as  a  description  of  the  self-evolution  which 
the  praknti  performs  according  to  the  Sawkhyas.  They  took  sva- 
yambhu/z, '  the  self-existent,'  in  the  sense  of '  which  modifies  itself  of 
its  own  accord  ;'  bhagavan, 'divine,'  in  the  sense  of 'which  is  power- 
ful enough  to  perform  its  business'  (svavyapara  lsvara/i).  The  other 
words  presented,  of  course,  no  great  difficulties. 

7.  'By  the  two  pronouns  yo  'sau,  "he  who,"  he  indicates  the 
supreme  soul,  known  in  the  whole  world,  in  the  Vedas,  Pura/zas, 
Itihasas,  and  so  forth'  (Kull.  in  accordance  with  Medh.).  The  latter 
proposes,  besides  the  explanation  of  atindriyagrahya^, '  who  can  be 
perceived  by  the  internal  organ  (or  the  mind  alone),'  which  Gov., 
Kull.,  and  Nand.  adopt,  another  one, '  who,  being  beyond  the  cog- 
nisance of  the  senses,  can  be  perceived  by  Yoga-knowledge  alone.' 
Nar.  and  Ragh.,  too,  differ  from  the  interpretation  given  above. 
'Subtile,'  i.e.  'who  is  beyond  all  distinctions,  such  as  small  and 
great'  (Medh.),  or  'who  is  unperceivable  by  the  external  senses' 
(Kull.),  or  'who  is  perceivable  by  subtile  understanding  only'  (Gov.), 
or  'who  is  without  limbs  or  parts'  (Ragh.).  Nand.  points  to  the 
common  epithet  of  the  supreme  soul, '  smaller  than  small'  (Ka/Vi 
Up.  II,  20;  Bhagavadgita  VIII,  9).  A  vyakta^, 'indiscernible,' is 
taken  by  Kull.  to  mean  '  destitute  of  limbs  or  parts.'  Sarvabhuta- 
maya^,  'who  contains  all  created  beings,'  means,  according  to 
Medh.,  either  '  that  he  conceives  the  idea  of  creating  all  beings,'  or 
'  that,  in  accordance  with  the  Advaita  Vedanta,  all  beings  are  illusory 
modifications  of  him.'  The  latter  view  seems  to  be  the  one  adopted 
by  all  the  other  commentators.     '  Shone  forth,'  i.e.  either  '  assumed 


I,  10.  THE    CREATION.  5 

8.  He,  desiring  to  produce  beings  of  many  kinds 
from  his  own  body,  first  with  a  thought  created  the 
waters,  and  placed  his  seed  in  them. 

9.  That  (seed)  became  a  golden  egg}  in  brilliancy 
equal  to  the  sub  ;  in  that  (egg)  he  himself  was  born 
as  Brahman,  the  progenitor  of  the  whole  world. 

10.  The  waters  are  called  nara^,  (for)  the  waters 
are,  indeed,  the  offspring  of  Nara ;  as  they  were  his 
first  residence  (ayana),  he  thence  is  named  Nara- 
ya;/a. 

a  visible  body*  or  'was  self-luminous'  (Medh.),  'assumed  a  body' 
(Gov.),  '  appeared  in  the  form  of  the  evolutes,  the  great  one,  and 
so  forth'  (Kull.),  'became  discernible'  (Nand.). 

8.  Besides  the  passages  quoted  under  verse  5,  compare  also  the 
Paura;/ik  story  of  the  mundane  egg,  Wilson,  Visrmu-pura/za  I, 
pp.  39-40  (ed.  Hall).  'He'  is  according  to  Medh.  and  Ragh.  'Hira- 
rcyagarbha,'  according  to  the  other  commentators,  'the  supreme 
soul/  Medh.  refers  to  Rig-veda  X,  121,  1.  According  to  Medh. 
(verse  11)  those  who  understood  the  whole  passage  to  refer  to  the 
unintelligent  prakr/ti,  explained  abhidhyaya,  'with  a  thought,'  to 
mean  '  independently  of  all  external  action,  just  as  a  man  performs 
an  act  merely  by  a  thought.'  They  also  asserted  that  the  waters 
were  produced  as  the  first  element  only,  but  not  before  the  great 
one  and  the  other  principles.  Kull.,  on  the  other  hand,  sees  in  the 
expressions,  used  in  this  verse,  the  proof  that  Manu  was  an 
adherent  of  the  non-dualistic  Vedanta. 

9.  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Raghava  take  the  epithet  'golden'  figura- 
tively, and  consider  it  to  be  intended  to  convey  the  idea  of  purity  or, 
as  Ragh.  also  proposes,  of  brilliancy.  Instead  of  '  he  himself  was 
born  as  Brahman  (masc.),'  the  translation  may  also  be  '  Brahma 
himself  was  born.'  Medh.  gives  both  explanations.  The  other 
commentators  adopt  that  given  in  the  text.  The  being  produced 
is,  according  to  all  except  Ragh.,  Hirawyagarbha.  Ragh.,  as  a 
strict  Vedantin,  thinks  that  it  is  Vira/.  All  the  commentators 
point  out  that  pitamaha,  '  the  progenitor/  lit.  the  grandfather,  is 
a  common  name  of  Brahman  (masc). 

10.  This  punning  explanation  of  Brahman's  name  Narayawa 
occurs  in  most  of  the  Purarcas,  see  Wilson,  Vish«u-pura«a  I,  p.  56 
(ed.  Hall).     Both  Medh.  and  Gov.  seem  to  have  read  apo  nara//, 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


£ 


1 1.  From  that  (first)  cause,  which  is  indiscernible, 
eternal,  and  both  real  and  unreal,  was  produced  that 
male  (Purusha),  who  is  famed  in  this  world  (under 
the  appellation  of)  Brahman. 

12.  The  divine  one  resided  in  that  egg  during 
a  whole  year,  then  he  himself  by  his  thought  (alone) 
divided  it  into  two  halves  ; 

13.  And  out  of  those  two  halves  he  formed 
heaven  and  earth,  between  them  the  middle  sphere, 
the  eight  points  of  the  horizon,  and  the  eternal 
abode  of  the  waters. 

14.  From  himself  (atmana^)  he  also  drew  forth 
the  mind,  which  is  both  real  and  unreal,  likewise 
from  the  mind  egoism,  which  possesses  the  function 
of  self-consciousness  (and  is)  lordly  ; 

15.  Moreover,  the  great  one,   the_£auly.  and  all 


1  the  waters  are  called  nara^.'   Nara  is  another  name  of  the  supreme 
soul. 

11.  All  our  commentators  except  Ragh.,  whose  explanation  is 
wide  off  the  mark,  understand  by  the  '  (First)  cause '  the  supreme 
soul.  Sadasadatmaka, '  who  is  both  real  and  unreal,'  means  ac- 
cording to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull. '  who  is  existent  or  real,  because 
he  can  be  known  through  the  Veda  and  Vedanta,  but  non-existent 
or  unreal,  as  it  were,  because  he  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses.' 
Nand.'s  explanation,  'who  is  both  the  real,  the  efficient  cause  and  the 
unreal  the  products,  matter  and  the  rest,'  seems,  however,  preferable. 
He  says,  sad  iti  karawam  asad  iti  prakrz'tyadi  karyam.  Regarding 
the  ancient  Vedic  term  Purusha,  •  the  male '  or  '  spirit,'  see  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  V,  pp.  367-377. 

1 2.  Kull.  explains  the  term  *  a  year '  by  '  a  year  of  Brahman.'  But 
Medh.  and  Gov.,  who  say  that  a  human  year  is  meant,  are  in 
accordance  with  -Satapatha-brahma«a  XI,  1,  6,  2. 

1 3.  The  number  '  eight '  is  obtained  by  adding  to  the  four  cardinal 
points, '  the  intermediate  ones/  north-east,  south-east,  &c. 

14-15.  The  commentators  offer  two  entirely  different  explana- 
tions of  these  two  difficult  verses.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  and  Ragh.  they  describe  the  production  of  the  Tattvas,  the 


1,15.  THE    CREATION. 


(products)  affected  by  the  three  qualities,  and,  in 
their  order,  the  five  organs,  which  perceive  the 
objects  of  sensation. 

principles  of  the  Sa/rckhya  system,  the  first  three  of  which,  Mahat, 
Ahawkara,  and  Manas,  have  been  placed  in  an  inverted  order. 
Though  Manu  clearly  states  (verse  14)  that  the  creator  drew  the 
Manas  (which  they  take  to  mean  the  internal  organ)  from  the 
atman  (i.  e.  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  from  the  Pradhana,' 
which  is  his  own  shape  [tatpradhanad  atmana^  svasvarupat, 
Medh.],  or  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. '  from  the  Paramat- 
man,'  the  supreme  soul,  or  according  to  another  explanation  of 
Ragh.  'from  himself  [svasmat  |  ^fvasya  bhogarthaw  va]),  that  he 
drew  the  Aha/rckara,  egoism,  from  the  Manas,  and  that  he  after- 
wards created  the  mahantam  atmanam,  'the  great  one,  the  soul;' 
(i.  e.  according  to  Medh.  the  Mahat  which  is  called  the  soul 
because  like  the  soul  it  is  found  in  all  bodies,  or  according  to  Kull. 
the  Mahat  which  is  called  the  soul  because  it  is  rroduced  from 
the  soul  or  is  useful  to  the  soul),  yet  they  think  that  it  must  be 
understood  that  the  Mahat  was  produced  first,  from  it  the 
Ahawkara,  and  from  the  latter  the  Manas.  The  next  term  sarvam 
triguwani,  '  all  the  products  modified  by  the  three  qualities,'  they 
refer  to  all  products  or  evolutes  named  and  to  be  named  hereafter. 
They  are  thus  obliged  to  disregard  the  ^a,' and,' at  the  cad  of 
verse  15  a,  and  Ragh.  states  distinctly  that  £a  indicates  there  a 
stress  to  be  laid  on  the  preceding  word  (/fcakaro  'vadharawartha^). 
Finally,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  are  of  opinion  that  the  third  ka, 
'and,'  at  the  end  of  verse  15  3  indicates  that  the  organs  of  action 
and  the  subtile  elements  have  to  be  added  in  accordance  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  Sa^khya,  while  Medh.  holds  that  the  subtile 
elements  alone  have  to  be  understood. 

Nand.  and,  to  judge  from  the  fragments  of  his  commentary, 
Nar.  also  give  a  far  different  explanation.  According  to  them  the 
first  created  Manas  is  another  name  for  the  principle  usually  called 
Mahat.  In  proof  of  this  assertion  Nand.  adduces  a  passage  from 
a  Pura;za,  which  Medh.  quotes  on  verse  74,  where  Manas  is  given 
as  a  synonym  of  Mahat  (see  also  Cowell,  Sarvadanuna-sawgraha, 
p.  222,  note  1).  They  farther  take  mahantam  atmanam,  'the 
great  one,  the  soul,'  to  denote  the  Manas  or  internal  organ 
([mahantam]  k&  mano  nama  tattvam  atmanam  atmano  ^ivasya- 
va^Aedakatvad  vyapade.ra/2,  Ragh.).  By  the  expression  sarvam  tri- 
gu;/ani  Nand.  seems  to  understand  the  subtile  elements  (tanmatra), 


8  LAWS   OF    MANU. 


. 


16.  But,  joining  minute  particles  even  of  those  six, 
which  possess  measureless  power,  with  particles  of 
himself,  he  created  all  beings. 

and  he  too  believes  that  the  particle  ka.  at  the  end  of  verse  1 5  b 
shows  that  the  organs  of  action  have  to  be  understood.  The  object 
of  the  two  verses  is,  according  to  Nand.,  not  to  give  an  account  of 
the  actual  order  of  creation,  but  to  show  that  the  material  cause 
of  all  created  beings  consists  of  portions  of  the  creator's  body,  of 
the  Mahat,  Aha^kara,  the  Manas,  the  Tanmatras,  and  the  organs 
of  sensation  and  action  which  belong  to  him;  (anena  dokadva- 
yenaitad  ukta;;z  bhavati  |  atmiyanam  mahadaha^karamanastan- 
matra^anakarmendriyawam  2msVi  sarvabhutopadanam  iti  H)  It 
would  seem  that  Nand.  and  Nar/s  view,  as  regards  the  explana- 
tion of  Manas  (verse  14),  is  correct,  but  it  may  be  doubted 
whether,  with  respect  to  the  terms  in  verse  15,  mahan  atma 
and  sarvam  triguwani,  they  have  been  equally  lucky.  The 
explanation  of  the  first  four  commentators  seems  altogether 
inadmissible.  In  conclusion,  it  may  be  stated  that  Nand.  gives 
also  the  most  acceptable  explanation  of  the  epithet  of  the  Manas, 
sadasadatmakam,  which,  he  says,  means  '  partaking  of  the  nature 
of  an  evolvent  and  of  an  evolute '  (prakn'tivikrz'tyatmakam),  and  of 
lyvaram,  'lordly,'  'which  causes  all  actions  to  be  done'  (sarva- 
karmapravartakam). 

16.  The  translation  follows  Nand.,  Ragh.,  and  Vi^wanabhikshu 
(Saz/zkhyasara,  p.  19,  ed.  Hall),  who  agree  that  the  verse  derives 
the  subtile  or  rudimentary  bodies  of  individual  beings  from  the 
subtile  body  of  the  creator,  and  the  individual  souls  from  his  soul. 
They  explain  atmamatrasu  by  apari/£Minnasyaikasyatmana  upa- 
dhiva^ad  avayavavatpratiyamaneshu  atmasu  (Ragh.),  svag-ivaiweshu 
(Nand.),  and  svawsa^etaneshu  (Vign.).  But  they  differ  with  respect 
to  the  meaning  of  '  the  particles  of  those  six/  '  Those  six '  are, 
according  to  Ragh.  and  Vign.,  'the  six  senses/  i.e.  the  five  organs 
of  sensation  and  the  mind  (which  by  implication  indicate  the  whole 
subtile  body,  Vign.)  ;  according  to  Nand.,  the  six  classes  of  tattvas, 
which  he  believes  to  be  mentioned  in  the  preceding  two  verses,  viz, 
(1)  the  great  one,  (2)  egoism,  (3)  mind,  (4)  the  subtile  or  rudi- 
mentary elements,  (5,  6)  the  organs  of  sensation  and  action. 

Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.,  on  the  other  hand,  take  the  verse  as 
follows:  'Joining  minute  particles  of  those  six  (i.e.  of  egoism  and  of 
the  five  subtile  elements)  which  possess  immeasurable  power  to  par- 
ticles of  the  same  (i.e.  of  evolutes  from  the  same  six  [Gov.,  Kull.], 
i.e.  of  the  gross  elements  produced  from  theTanmatras  and  the  organs 


I,  17.  THE    CREATION. 


17.  Because  those  six  (kinds  of)  minute  particles, 
which  form  the  (creator's)  frame,  enter  (a-m)  these 
(creatures),  therefore  the  wise  call  his  frame  sarira, 
(the  body.) 

produced  from  egoism  [Medh.]),  he  framed  all  beings.'  It  would 
seem  that  Nand.'s  explanation  comes  nearest  to  the  truth,  though, 
as  stated  above,  his  manner  of  showing  that  six  principles  or  classes 
of  principles  are  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verses  is  not  altogether 
satisfactory.  But,  at  all  events,  he  has  seen  that  the  expression  '  those 
six'  must  refer  to  the  enumeration  in  the  preceding  two  verses. 

17.  The  translation  again  follows  Nand.,  with  whom  Nar.  seems 
to  have  agreed.  He  says, '  Because  six  (kinds  of)  particles  of  his 
frame,  i.e.  the  six  before-mentioned  portions  of  the  body  of  Brah- 
man, the  Mahat,  and  the  rest,  enter,  i.e.  pervade  these — all  the 
creatures  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  are  referred  to — on 
account  of  that  entering  (^rayawat),  they  call  the  body  of  that,  i.e. 
of  Brahman,  jarira.  The  meaning  is  as  follows:  The  body  of 
Hira?/yagarbha  is  called  jarira,  because  it  enters  (jrayati)  all  beings 
by  means  of  its  portions,  being  (their)  material  cause ;  but  it  is  not 
destroyed  (rfryate)  like  a  common  body.'  Nand.  thinks,  therefore, 
that  the  punning  explanation  of  the  word  jarira  from  shad  am,  or 
sri,  is  given  in  order  to  show  that  the  other  etymology,  which  derives 
it  from  srf,  *  to  destroy/  is  not  applicable  to  the  body  of  Brahman. 

Medh..  Gov.,  and  Kull.  take  the  verse  very  differently.  They  agree 
in  supposing  that  the  body  is  called  jarira,  because  the  six  elements 
mentioned  enter  into  or  produce  the  gross  elements  and  the  organs. 
Medh.  reads  tanimani  for  tasyemani,  and  according  to  his  interpre- 
tation the  translation  would  be, '  Because  the  six  (kinds  of)  minute 
particles  producing  the  body  enter  into  (being  their  cause)  or  produce 
these  (i.  e.  because  egoism,  the  before-mentioned  organs  and  the  sub- 
tile elements  enter  the  gross  elements  which  will  be  mentioned  here- 
after), therefore  the  wise  call  the  body,  which  is  the  visible  shape  of  that 
(Pradhana),  jarira.'  Kull.,  who  reads  tasya,  differs  from  this  version 
only  therein  that  he  refers  tasya  to  Brahman.  Ragh.  finally  gives, 
in  accordance  with  his  explanation  of '  those  six,'  the  following  ver- 
sion, 'Because  the  six  (kinds  of)  fine  particles  constituting  the 
subtile  frame  of  that  (Hirawyagarbha,  i.e.  the  mind  and  the  rest) 
enter  these  (gross  bodies  as  their  place  of  enjoyment),  therefore 
the  wise  call  the  visible  frame  of  that  (i.  e.  of  the  individual  soul)  the 
jarira.'  He  agrees,  therefore,  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  so  far  that 
he,  too,  refers  the  verse  to  the  gross  bodies. 


IO  LAWS   OF   MANU.  I,  18. 

1 8.  That  the  great  elements  enter,  together  with 
their  functions  and  the  mind,  through  its  minute 
parts  the  framer  of  all  beings,  the  imperishable  one. 

1 8.  The  commentators  give  five  different  versions  of  this  verse  : 
(i)  Meclh., 'That  (i.e.  the  Pradhana  is)  the  producer  of  all  beings 
and  imperishable,  because  these,  (viz.)  the  gross  elements  with  their 
functions  (and  before  them)  the  mind  with  its  minute  particles  (i.e. 
the  subtile  elements,  intelligence,  egoism,  and  the  organs),  enter  it.' 
(2)  Gov.  and  Kull.,  'From  that  (i.e.  the  Brahman,  which  has  the 
form  of  the  subtile  elements  and  of  egoism)  are  produced  the  gross 
elements,  together  with  their  functions  and  the  mind,  which  is  the 
producer  of  all  beings  through  its  minute  (i.e.  imperceptible)  portions 
(i.  e.  its  products,  good  and  bad  thoughts,  pleasure  and  pain,  and  so 
forth,  the  world  being  produced  by  the  good  and  evil  actions  origi- 
nating in  the  mind)  and  imperishable.'  (3)  Righ., 'That  (i.e.  the 
gross  body)  the  gross  elements  enter  (as  pr  cers  [or  produce]) 
and  the  mind,  which  is  the  producer  of  all  beings  and  imperishable, 
together  with  the  actions  (i.e.  merit  and  so  forth)  and  with  the 
(organs  which  are  chiefly)  limbs.'  (4)  Nand.,  '  (As)  that  (body  of 
Hira^yagarbha),  though  through  its  small  portions  it  produces  all 
beings,  yet  is  imperishable,  (even  thus)  the  great  b  ;:•  (egoism, 
mind,  the  trigu«as,  the  organs  of  sensation  and  action)  and  the 
mind  (i.e.  the  principle,  called  the  great  one),  with  the  actions  (i.e. 
the  individual  souls)  enter  it.'  (5)  Nar.'s  explanation  is  mutilated, 
but  seems  to  have  been  as  follows,  'That  (i.e.  the  subtile  body) 
the  gross  elements  (which  produce  the  gross  body)  enter,  together 
with  the  karman  (i.e  merit  and  demerit)  and  the  mind,  (which  is) 
the  producer  of  all  beings  and  imperishable,  together  with  (its 
functions,  knowledge,  desire,  hatred,  &c,  which  are,  as  it  were,  its) 
minute  portions.' 

It  seems  to  me  that  not  one  of  the  above  explanations  can  be 
accepted  in  its  entirety.  I  agree  with  Nar.  in  thinking  that  the 
word  'that'  refers  to  the  subtile  body  and  that  the  verse  describes 
the  origin  of  the  gross  body  as  the  result  of  the  union  of  the 
great,  i.e.  the  gross  elements  and  of  the  manas  with  the  subtile 
body.  If  the  mahanti  bhutani  are  the  gross  elements,  it  will,  how- 
ever, be  necessary  to  understand  by  karmabhi^, '  their  functions,' 
which,  as  Medh.  and  Kull.  mention,  are  '  the  function  of  supporting 
for  the  earth,  of  ripening  or  cooking  for  fire  and  so  forth.'  By 
manas  I  understand  here  the  internal  organ  which  forms  the  con- 


I,  20.  THE    CREATION.  I  I 

19.  But  from  minute  body(-framing)  particles  of 
these  seven  very  powerful  Purushas  springs  this 
(world),  the  perishable  from  the  imperishable. 

20.  Among  them  each  succeeding  (element)  ac- 
quires the  quality  of  the  preceding  one,  and  whatever 
place  (in  the  sequence)  each  of  them  occupies,  even 
so  many  qualities  it  is  declared  to  possess. 

necting  link  between  the  gross  senses  or  the  gross  body  and  the 
individual  soul,  and  thus  may  be  said  to  frame  or  fashion  all  beings. 
As  its  nature  is  atomic,  it  is  necessary  to  connect  avayavai^  suksh- 
mai^  with  sarvabhutakn't  and  to  take  avayava  either  in  the  manner 
proposed  by  Kull,  or  to  assume  that  the  several  mind-atoms  are 
referred  to,  which  belong  each  to  a  different  individual. 

19.  With  respect  to  the  explanation  of  the  expression  'the 
seven  Purushas.'  the  commentators  differ  as  much  as  regarding 
'the  six'  in  ver.  16.  .Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  aGu.  the  great  one '  or 
the  Mahat  to  their  previous  enumeration,  'egoism  and  the  five 
subtile  elements/  while  Nar.  and  Nand.  add  the  'portions  of  the 
Atman'  (ver.  16)  to  those  elements  which  they  understand  to  be  com- 
prised by  '  the  six.'  That  is,  probably,  the  meaning  of  R&gh,  also, 
who  says,  purusha^aw  manaadipurushantanam  saptsL/  ,  'of  the 
Purushas,  i.  e.  of  those  seven,  the  first  of  which  is  the  mind,  and  the 
last  of  which  is  the  Purusha.'  All  the  commentators  agree  that  the 
term  Purusha,  'male  or  spirit,'  is  applied  to  the  principles  in  a 
metaphorical  sense,  but  they  give  various  reasons  for  the  fact, 
'because  they  are  for  the  sake  of  the  soul/  purusha  (Medh.),  or 
'  because  they  were  produced  by  the  Purusha,  the  Atman'  (Kull.). 
Nar.  understands  'and'  with  avyayat  and  says,  'and  from  the  im- 
perishable, i.e.  from  Prakrni.'  'The  perishable'  designates,  of 
course,  'the  gross  bodies.' 

20.  This  verse  expresses  the  doctrine  that  the  first  element 
ether  (ak&ra)  possesses  one  quality,  sound,  alone  ;  the  next,  wind 
two,  sound  and  tangibility ;  the  third,  fire  or  light,  three  and  so  forth ; 
see  also  Sa/rckhyasara,  p.  18.  Nand.  places  ver.  27  before  this  verse, 
and  asserts  that  '  if  some  read  the  latter  seven  verses  further  on, 
that  is  only  due  to  an  error  of  the  copyists.'  Though  vers.  20  and 
27  are  without  any  connexion  with  what  precedes  and  follows,  I  do 
not  think  it  advisable  to  adopt  Nand.'s  proposal,  which  I  fear  is 
based  on  nothing  but  a  clever  guess,  against  the  authority  of  all 
the  other  commentators.     If  it  were  permissible  to  transpose  the 


12  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


21.  But  in  the  beginning  he  assigned  their  several 
names,  actions,  and  conditions  to  all  (created  beings), 
even  according  to  the  words  of  the  Veda. 

22.  He,  the  Lord,  also  created  the  class  of  the 
^god§,  who  are  endowed  with  life,  and  whose  nature 
is  action ;  and  the  subtile  class  of  the  Sadhyas,  and 
the  eternal  sacrifice. 

23.  But  from  fire^  wind,  and  the  sun  he  drew  forth 
the  threefold  eternal  Veda,  called  Rik,  Ya^us,  and 
Saman,  for  the  due  performance  of  the  sacrifice. 

24.  Time  and  the  divisions  of  time,  the  lunar 
mansions  and  the  planets,  the  rivers,  the  oceans, 
the  mountains,  plains,  and  uneven  ground, 

25.  Austerity,  speech, 'pleasure,  desire,  and  anger, 
this  whole  creation  he  likewise  produced,  as  he 
desired  to  call  these  beings  into  existence. 


verses,  I  would  propose  to  insert  here  ver.  27  and  to  place  this  verse 
(20)  after  ver.  78. 

22.  The  commentators  differ  very  much  regarding  the  explana- 
tion of  this  verse.  Medh.  proposes,  '  And  the  Lord  created  (for 
the  sake)  of  men  who  are  intent  on  performing  sacrificial  rites  (the 
multitude)  of  the  gods,  the  subtile  class  of  the  Sadhyas  and  the 
eternal  sacrifice/  '  Others'  mentioned  by  him,  Gov.  and  Kull,  insert 
another  'and'  between  karmatmanam  and  pramnam,  and  explain, 
'  The  Lord  created  the  multitude  of  the  gods  whose  nature  is  the 
sacrifice  and  of  those  endowed  with  life.'  By  the  'gods  whose 
nature  is  the  sacrifice'  they  understand  the  inanimate  implements, 
used  at  sacrifices,  but  frequently  addressed  in  the  Veda  as  divine 
beings,  while  the  gods  endowed  with  life  are  said  to  be  Indra,  and 
so  forth.  Ragh.,  with  whom  Nar.  seems  to  have  agreed,  says, 
'And  the  Lord  created  among  beings  endowed  with  life  the  to  us 
invisible  multitude  of  the  gods,  who  by  the  results  of  their  actions 
have  obtained  their  divine  station,  or  who  subsist  on  offerings.' 
None  of  these  speculations  is  of  much  use.  But  it  may  be  that 
karman  means  '  sacrificial  rites,'  and  karmatmanam  may  be  trans- 
lated by  '  whose  nature  is  the  sacrifice/  or  '  whose  divinity  depends 
on  the  performance  of  sacrifices/  Regarding  the  Sadhyas,  see 
Wilson,  Vish;m-pura«a  II,  p.  22  (ed.  Hall). 


I,  31.  THE    CREATION.  1 3 

26.  Moreover,  in  order  to  distinguish  actions,  he 
separated  merit  from  demerit,  and  he  caused  the 
creatures  to  be  affected  by  the  pairs  (of  opposites), 
such  as  pain  and  pleasure. 

.27.  But  with  the  minute  perishable  particles  of 
the  five  (elements)  which  have  been  mentioned,  this 
whole  (world)  is  framed  in  due  order. 

28.  But  to  whatever  course  of  action  the  Lord 
at  first  appointed  each  (kind  of  beings),  that  alone 
it  has  spontaneously  adopted  in  each  succeeding 
creation. 

29.  Whatever  he  assigned  to  each  at  the  (first) 
creation,  noxiousness  or  harmlessness,  gentleness  or 
ferocity,  virtue  or  sin,  truth  or  falsehood,  that  clung 
(afterwards)  spontaneously  to  it. 

30.  As  at  the  change  of  the  seasons  each  season 
of  its  own  accord  assumes  its  distinctive  marks,  even 
so  corporeal  beings  (resume  in  new  births)  their 
(appointed)  course  of  action. 

31.  But  for  the   sake  of  the   prosperity  of  the 

26.  Other  pairs  of  opposites  are  desire  and  anger,  passionate 
attachment  and  hatred,  hunger  and  thirst,  sorrow  and  delusion, 
and  so  forth  (Kull.). 

27.  'The  minute  perishable  particles  of  the  five  (elements)'  are 
according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  the  subtile  or  rudimentary  ele- 
ments which  may  be  called  '  perishable,'  because  they  are  changed 
to  gross  elements.  Ragh.  explains  the  epithet  'perishable'  by 
adding  \  because  they  have  been  produced.'  The  commentators 
offer  various  explanations  in  order  to  account  for  the  insertion  of 
this  verse  which  interrupts  the  continuity  of  the  text.  Medh.  thinks 
that  it  is  a  r£sume\  Gov.  and  Kull.  state  that  it  is  meant  to  remove 
the  doubt,  whether  Brahman's  mental  creation  was  effected  without 
the  help  of  the  '  principles,'  and  Nar.  asserts  that  it  is  meant  to  teach 
that  atoms  are  not  eternal.  Nand.,  as  stated  above,  note  on  ver.  20, 
places  the  verse  immediately  after  ver.  19. 

31.  Nar.  explains   lokavivrz'ddhyartham,  'for  the  sake   of  the 


14  LAWS    OF    MANU, 


worlds,  he  caused  the  Brdhma^a,  the  Kshatriya, 
the  Vaisya,  and  the  .Sudra  to  proceed  from  his 
mouth,  his  arms,  his  thighs,  and  his  feet. 

32.  Dividing  his  own  body,  the  Lord  became 
half  male  and  half  female ;  with  that  (female)  he 
produced  Vira^*. 

33.  But  know  me,  O  most  holy  among  the  twice- 
born,  to  be  the  creator  of  this  whole  (world),  whom 
that  male,  Vira^",  himself  produced,  having  per- 
formed austerities. 

34.  Then  I,  desiring  to  produce  created  beings, 
performed  very  difficult  austerities,  and  (thereby) 
called  into  existence  ten  great  sages,  lords  of  created 
beings, 

35.  Marl/£i,  Atri,  Ahgiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu, 
Pra^etas,  VasishMa,  Bhrzgu,  and  Narada. 

36.  They  created  seven  other  Manus  possessing 
great  brilliancy,  gods  and  classes  of  gods  and  great 
sages  of  measureless  power, 


prosperity  of  the  worlds/  by  varwair  lokarakshawasawvardhanartham, 
'  in  order  to  protect  the  world  by  means  of  the  castes  and  to  make 
it  prosperous/  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.,  who  interpret  the  compound 
by  '  in  order  that  (the  inhabitants  of)  the  worlds  might  multiply/ 
point  to  the  benefits  conferred  by  sacrifices  of  householders,  III, 
76.  Nand.  says  with  reference  to  the  bearing  of  the  verse, '  Now 
he  speaks  of  the  creation  of  the  deities  representing  the  four 
castes/    Regarding  the  origin  of  the  castes,  see  Rig-veda  X,  90,  12. 

32-33.  '  Produced/  i.  e.  '  begat '  (Medh.,  Kull.),  Wilson,  Vishmi- 
purawa  I,  p.  104,  note  2  (ed.  Hall). 

34-35.  Wilson,  Vishmi-pura«a  I,  p.  100,  note  2  (ed.  Hall). 

36.  'Manus/  i.e.  'creators  in  the  several  Manvantaras'  (Medh., 
Gov., Kull.,  Ragh.).  '  Gods/ i.e. 'such  gods  as  had  not  been  created 
by  Brahman'  (verse  22,  Medh.,  Kull.);  devanikayan,  ' classes  of 
gods '  (Nand.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. 
•  the  abodes  of  the  gods '  (devasthanani).  Ragh.  gives  also  the 
meaning  '  the  servants  of  the  gods/ 


I 


I,  44.  THE    CREATION.  1 5 

3  J.  Yakshas  (the  servants  of  Kubera,  the  demons 
called)  Rakshasas  and  Pi^a^as,  Gandharvas  (or 
musicians  of  the  gods),  Apsarases  (the  dancers  of 
the  gods),  Asuras,  (the  snake-deities  called)  Nagas 
and  Sarpas,  (the  bird-deities  called)  Supar/zas  and 
the  several  classes  of  the  manes, 

38.  Lightnings,  thunderbolts  and  clouds,  imperfect 
(rohita)  and  perfect  rainbows,  falling  meteors,  super- 
natural noises,  comets,  and  heavenly  lights  of  many 
kinds, 

39.  (Horse-faced)  Kinnaras,  monkeys,  fishes,  birds 
of  many  kinds,  cattle,  deer,  men,  and  carnivorous 
beasts  with  two  rows  of  teeth, 

40.  Small  and  large  worms  and  beetles,  moths, 
lice,  flies,  bugs,  all  stinging  and  biting  insects  and 
the  several  kinds  of  immovable  things. 

41.  Thus  was  this  whole  (creation),  both  the  im- 
movable and  the  movable,  produced  by  those  high- 
minded  ones  by  means  of  austerities  and  at  my 
command,  (each  being)  according  to  (the  results  of) 
its  actions. 

42.  But  whatever  act  is  stated  (to  belong)  to  (each 
of)  those  creatures  here  below,  that  I  will  truly 
declare  to  you,  as  well  as  their  order  in  respect  to 
birth. 

43.  Cattle,  deer,  carnivorous  beasts  with  two 
rows  of  teeth,  Rakshasas,  PLsa^as,  and  men  are 
born  from  the  womb. 

44.  From  eggs  are  born  birds,  snakes,  crocodiles, 


37.  The  several  classes  of  manes  are  enumerated  below,  III, 
194-199. 

38.  Rohita  is  said  to  be  an  imperfect  rainbow  which  appears 
to  be  straight,  known  according  to  Gov.  by  the  name  jastrotpata. 


1 6  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


fishes,  tortoises,  as  well  as  similar  terrestrial  and 
aquatic  (animals). 

45.  From  hot  moisture  spring  stinging  and  biting 
insects,  lice,  flies,  bugs,  and  all  other  (creatures)  of 
that  kind  which  are  produced  by  heat. 

46.  All  plants,  propagated  by  seed  or  by  slips, 
grow  from  shoots ;  annual  plants  (are  those)  which, 
bearing  many  flowers  and  fruits,  perish  after  the 
ripening  of  their  fruit ; 

47.  (Those  trees)  which  bear  fruit  without  flowers 
are  called  vanaspati  (lords  of  the  forest) ;  but  those 
which  bear  both  flowers  and  fruit  are  called  vr/ksha. 

48.  But  the  various  plants  with  many  stalks, 
growing  from  one  or  several  roots,  the  different 
kinds  of  grasses,  the  climbing  plants  and  the  creepers 
spring  all  from  seed  or  from  slips. 

49.  These  (plants)  which  are  surrounded  by  multi- 
form Darkness,  the  result  of  their  acts  (in  former 
existences),  possess  internal  consciousness  and  expe- 
rience pleasure  and  pain. 

50.  The  (various)  conditions  in  this  always  terrible 
and  constantly  changing  circle  of  births  and  deaths 
to  which  created  beings  are  subject,  are  stated  to 

46.  I  read,  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  Kull.,  tarava^  instead 
of  the  sthavara^  of  the  editions,  and  translate  it,  as  required  by  the 
context,  by  'plants.' 

47.  My  translation  of  ubhayata^,  'both/  is  based  on  Gov.'s  com- 
ment 'vriksha/i  puna£  pushpaphalenobhayenapi  yukta  bhavanti/ 
with  which  Nar.  and  Nand.  agree.  The  latter,  however,  proposes 
to  read  '  ubhayatha/ 

49.  'Multiform  Darkness/  see  below,  XII,  42. 

50.  Bhuta,  '  created  beings/  means  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull. 
kshetra^na,  '  embodied  souls/  According  to  Gov.  and  Nar.  nityam, 
'always/  must  be  construed  with  ghore,  'terrible/  Nar.,  however, 
considers  nitye,  'in  this  eternal/  to  be  a  better  reading,  which  Nand. 
also  gives. 


1,55-  THE   CREATION.  1 7 

begin  with  (that  of)  Brahman,  and  to  end  with  (that 
of)  these  (just  mentioned  immovable  creatures). 

51.  When  he  whose  power  is  incomprehensible, 
had  thus  produced  the  universe  and  me,  he  dis- 
appeared in  himself,  repeatedly  suppressing  one 
period  by  means  of  the  other. 

52.  When  that  divine  one  wakes,  then  this  world 
stirs  ;  when  he  slumbers  tranquilly,  then  the  universe 
sinks  to  sleep. 

53.  But  when  he  reposes  in  calm  sleep,  the  cor- 
poreal beings  whose  nature  is  action,  desist  from 
their  actions  and  mind  becomes  inert. 

54.  When  they  are  absorbed  all  at  once  in  that 
great  soul,  then  he  who  is  the  soul  of  all  beings 
sweetly  slumbers,  free  from  all  care  and  occupation. 

55.  When  this  (soul)  has  entered  darkness,  it 
remains  for  a  long  time  united  with  the  organs  (of 

51.  '  Disappeared  in  himself/  i.e. 'he  divested  himself  of  the  body 
which  he  had  assumed  at  his  own  will'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 
'One  period  by  means  of  the  other,' i.e.  'the  period  of  creation  by 
means  of  the  period  of  destruction'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

52.  Instead  of  the  figurative  nimilati,  'closes  the  eyes,  sinks  to 
sleep/  Gov.  and  K.,  read  praliyate, '  is  absorbed.' 

53.  .Sarirmah,  'corporeal  beings/  means  according  to  Medh., 
Gov.,  and  Kull.  'embodied  souls/  Karmatmana^,  'whose  nature 
is  action/  i.e.  who  are  endowed  with  actions  (Nand.,  Nar.),  means 
according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  '  who  in  consequence  of  their 
actions  became  incorporate/ 

54.  According  to  Gov.  and  Kull.,  this  verse  describes  the  maha- 
pralaya,  the  great  or  total  destruction  at  the  end  of  a  kalpa,  while 
the  preceding  referred  to  the  antaralapralaya,  the  intermediate  or 
incomplete  destruction.  Medh.  explains  'he  who  is  the  soul  of  all 
beings '  by  the  S&zwkhya  term  Pradhana, '  the  chief  cause  or  Nature/ 
while  Gov.  and  Kull.  refer  this  expression  as  well  as  mahatman  '  to 
the  supreme  soul  or  supreme  lord '  of  the  Vedanta. 

55-56.  The  commentators  offer  three  different  explanations  of 
these  two  verses.    Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.,  whom  the  translation 


1 8  LAWS   OF   MANU.  I,  56 

sensation),  but  performs  not  its  functions ;  it  then 
leaves  the  corporeal  frame. 

56.  When,  being  clothed  with  minute  particles 
(only),  it  enters  into  vegetable  or  animal  seed,  it 
then  assumes,  united  (with  the  fine  body),  a  (new) 
corporeal  frame. 

57.  Thus  he,  the  imperishable  one,  by  (alter- 
nately) waking  and  slumbering,  incessantly  revivifies 
and  destroys  this  whole  movable  and  immovable 
(creation). 

given  above  follows,  think  that  ayatn,  'this  (soul),'  refers  to  the 
individual  soul,  and  that  the  two  verses  incidentally  mention  what 
happens  to  it  on  the  death  of  the  individual  in  which  it  re- 
sides. First,  they  say,  it  enters  darkness,  i.e.  knowledge  (gwana) 
ceases,  and,  though  for  some  time  the  soul's  connection  with 
the  organs  continues,  it  does  not  perform  its  functions  of 
breathing,  and  so  forth.  Next  it  leaves  the  old  body.  It  then  is 
enveloped  by  the  elementary  body,  consisting  of  the  puryash/aka, 
the  eight  constituents,  i.e.  the  rudimentary  elements  (bhuta)  and 
organs  (indriya),  mind  (manas),  intelligence  (buddhi),  memory  of 
past  actions  (v&sana),  merit  or  demerit  (karman),  the  vital  airs 
(vayu),  and  avidya.  In  this  condition  it  enters  the  seed  of  some 
plant  or  the  embryo  of  some  animal  and  then  assumes  a  new  gross 
body.  Nar.,  on  the  other  hand,  considers  that  the  first  verse  gives 
a  description  of  the  fate  of  the  individual  soul  during  a  swoon 
(murk/ia),  and  the  second  alone  refers  to  its  migration  after  death. 
Under  this  supposition  verse  56  must  be  translated  as  follows : 
1  Being  of  atomic  size  (the  soul)  enters  vegetable  or  animal  seed 
and,  united  (with  the  rudimental  body),  leaves  its  (former)  corporeal 
frame.'  Nand.  finally  understands  by  ayam, '  this  (soul),'  the  creator 
(bhagavan),  and  thinks  that  the  first  verse  describes  his  behaviour 
during  the  time  of  destruction,  while  the  second  refers  to  a  new 
creation.  He  says,  'When  he  has  entered  darkness,'  i.e.  the  root- 
evolvent  or  nature, '  and  has  remained  there  for  a  long  time,'  i.  e.  as 
long  as  the  period  of  destruction  lasts, '  then,  endowed  with  organs, 
he  assumes  a  visible  shape/  i.e.  he  appears  in  the  shape  of  the 
creation.  His  note  on  verse  56,  where  he  reads  sawsrz'sh/au  for 
sawsn'sh/a^,  is  too  short  to  make  it  intelligible  how  he  gets  over 
the  difficulties  opposed  to  his  interpretation. 


I,  64.  THE    CREATION.  1 9 

58.  But  he  having  composed  these  Institutes 
(of  the  sacred  law),  himself  taught  them,  according 
to  the  rule,  to  me  alone  in  the  beginning ;  next  I 
(taught  them)  to  Mari/^i  and  the  other  sages. 

59.  Bhrzgu,  here,  will  fully  recite  to  you  these 
Institutes ;  for  that  sage  learned  the  whole  in  its 
entirety  from  me. 

60.  Then  that  great  sage  BhWgu,  being  thus 
addressed  by  Manu,  spoke,  pleased  in  his  heart,  to 
all  the  sages,  'Listen!' 

61.  Six  other  high-minded,  very  powerful  Manus, 
who  belong  to  the  race  of  this  Manu,  the  descendant 
of  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhu),  and  who  have 
severally  produced  created  beings, 

62.  (Are)  Svaro/£isha,  Auttami,  Tamasa,  Raivata, 
A^akshusha,  possessing  great  lustre,  and  the  son  of 
Vivasvat. 

63.  These  seven  very  glorious  Manus,  the  first 
among  whom  is  Svayambhuva,  produced  and  pro- 
tected this  whole  movable  and  immovable  (creation), 
each  during  the  period  (allotted  to  him). 

64.  Eighteen  nimeshas  (twinklings  of  the  eye,  are 
one  kash/M),  thirty  kash/^as  one  kala,  thirty  kalas 
one  muhurta,  and  as  many  (muhurtas)  one  day  and 
night. 

58.  'According  to  the  rule,'  i.e.  'with  the  subsidiary  ceremonies 
enjoined  in  the  -Sastra'  (Kull.),  or  'with  due  attention,  carefully' 
(Medh.,  Gov.). 

61.'  Who  belong  to  the  race  Of  this  Manu  Svayambhuva/  i.  e. '  who 
were  born  in  the  same  race  or  family,  for  they  were  all  immediately 
created  by  Brahman  and  thus  belong  to  one  race'  (Medh.). 

64.  As  tavata^, '  as  many/  stands  in  the  accusative,  Medh.,  Gov., 
and  Kull.  understand  vidyat  '  one  should  know  to  be.'  But  Nar. 
is  probably  right  in  assuming  a  vibhaktivyatyaya,  i.e.  that  the  author 
used  the  accusative  because  the  nominative  did  not  suit  the  metre. 

C    2 


20  LAWS    OF    MANU.  1,65. 

65.  The  sun  divides  days  and  nights,  both  human 
and  divine,  the  night  (being  intended)  for  the  repose 
of  created  beings  and  the  day  for  exertion. 

66.  A  month  is  a  day  and  a  night  of  the  manes, 
but  the  division  is  according  to  fortnights.  The 
dark  (fortnight)  is  their  day  for  active  exertion,  the 
bright  (fortnight)  their  night  for  sleep. 

67.  A  year  is  a  day  and  a  night  of  the  gods ;  their 
division  is  (as  follows) :  the  half  year  during  which 
the  sun  progresses  to  the  north  will  be  the  day,  that 
during  which  it  goes  southwards  the  night. 

68.  But  hear  now  the  brief  (description  of)  the 
duration  of  a  night  and  a  day  of  Brahman  and  of  the 
several  ages  (of  the  world,  yuga)  according  to  their 
order. 

69.  They  declare  that  the  Krzta  age  (consists  of) 
four  thousand  years  (of  the  gods) ;  the  twilight  pre- 
ceding it  consists  of  as  many  hundreds,  and  the 
twilight  following  it  of  the  same  number. 

70.  In  the  other  three  ages  with  their  twilights 
preceding  and  following,  the  thousands  and  hundreds 
are  diminished  by  one  (in  each). 

71.  These  twelve  thousand  (years)  which  thus 
have  been  just  mentioned  as  the  total  of  four 
(human)  ages,  are  called  one  age  of  the  gods. 

72.  But  know  that  the  sum  of  one  thousand  ages 
of  the  gods  (makes)  one  day  of  Brahman,  and  that 
his  night  has  the  same  length. 

73.  Those  (only,  who)  know  that  the  holy  day  of 

Nand.,  who  merely  substitutes  '  tavanta^ '  for  '  tavata^/  seems  to 
have  held  the  same  opinion. 

66.  Thus  the  moon  regulates  time  for  the  manes. 

69-71.  Wilson,  Vishwu-purawa  I,  pp.  49-50  (ed.  Hall). 

73.  According  to  ihe  commentators  the  word  pu«ya, '  holy/  is 


1,77-  THE    CREATION.  21 

Brahman,  indeed,  ends  after  (the  completion  of)  one 
thousand  ages  (of  the  gods)  and  that  his  night  lasts 
as  long,  (are  really)  men  acquainted  with  (the  length 
of)  days  and  nights. 

74.  At  the  end  of  that  day  and  night  he  who  was 
asleep,  awakes  and,  after  awaking,  creates  mind, 
which  is  both  real  and  unreal. 

75.  Mind,  impelled  by  (Brahman's)  desire  to 
create,  performs  the  work  of  creation  by  modifying 
itself,  thence  ether  is  produced;  they  declare  that 
sound  is  the  quality  of  the  latter. 

76.  But  from  ether,  modifying  itself,  springs  the 
pure,  powerful  wind,  the  vehicle  of  all  perfumes  ;  that 
is  held  to  possess  the  quality  of  touch, 

77.  Next  from  wind,  modifying  itself,  proceeds 
the    brilliant  light,    which    illuminates    and    dispels 

used  in  order  to  indicate  that  the  knowledge  of  the  duration  of 
Brahman's  day  is  '  meritorious.' 

74.  Two  explanations  of  the  second  half  of  the  verse  are  offered 
by  the  commentators.  It  may  mean  either  that  Brahman  on 
awaking  from  his  sleep  first  creates  the  great  principle  (mahat), 
which  here,  as  elsewhere,  is  called  manas,  '  mind/  or  that  he 
appoints  (srz^ati)  his  own  internal  organ  or  mind  (manas),  which 
at  an  intermediate  destruction  (avantara  or  antaralapralaya)  remains 
in  existence,  to  create  the  world.  Medh.  and  Kull.  give  both 
explanations,  and  prefer  the  former.  Gov.  gives  the  second  alone, 
while  Nar.  and  Nand.  adhere  to  the  first.  The  latter  takes  manas 
as  denoting  the  three  principles,  the  great  one,  egoism,  and  mind, 
and  explains  sadasadatmakam,  'which  is  both  real  and  unreal/ 
as  in  verse  14,  by  prakrz'tivikrz'tyatmakam,  'being  both  an  evolvent 
and  an  evolute.' 

75.  'Thence/  i.e.  'from  mind  changed  to  egoism/  Nar.  (simi- 
larly Kull.),  or  '  from  Brahman.' 

76.  As  the  Sawkhya  doctrine  (Sawkhyakarika,  ver.  25)  makes  all 
the  rudimentary  elements  proceed  from  egoism,  Medh.  takes  the 
first  words  of  the  verse  to  mean,  '  But  from  egoism  which  modifies 
itself,  wind  springs  next  after  ether.'  He,  of  course,  adopts  the 
same  trick  of  interpretation  in  the  following  three  verses. 


2  2  LAWS    OF    MANU.  I,  78 

darkness;  that   is   declared  to  possess  the  quality 
of  colour; 

yS.  And  from  light,  modifying  itself,  (is  produced) 
water,  possessing  the  quality  of  taste,  from  water 
earth  which  has  the  quality  of  smell;  such  is  the 
creation  in  the  beginning. 

79.  The  before-mentioned  age  of  the  gods,  (or) 
twelve  thousand  (of  their  years),  being  multiplied  by 
seventy-one,  (constitutes  what)  is  here  named  the 
period  of  a  Manu  (Manvantara). 

80.  The  Manvantaras,  the  creations  and  destruc- 
tions (of  the  world,  are)  numberless ;  sporting,  as  it 
were,  Brahman  repeats  this  again  and  again. 

81.  In  the  Kr/ta  age  Dharma  is  four-footed  and 
entire,  and  (so  is)  Truth ;  nor  does  any  gain  accrue  to 
men  by  unrighteousness. 

82.  In  the  other  (three  ages),  by  reason  of  (unjust) 
gains  (agama),  Dharma  is  deprived  successively  of 

78.  'In  the  beginning,'  i.e.  'after  a  total  destruction' (maM- 
pralaya),  (Kull.);  '  after  an  intermediate  destruction' (Gov.,  Nar.); 
'before  the  creation  of  the  mundane  egg1  (Nand.). 

81.  The  reason  why  Dharma,  'justice  or  law,'  is  said  to  be 
^atushpat  is  explained,  as  Kull.  points  out,  by  Manu  VIII,  16.  Re- 
garding the  ulterior  signification  of  the  myth  which  represents 
Dharma  as  a  four-footed  animal,  the  following  opinions  are  ad- 
vanced: 1.  The  four  feet  represent  the  four  principal  priests 
at  the  sacrifice  (Medh.) ;  2.  or  the  four  chief  castes  (Medh.,  Nand.)  ; 
3.  or  the  four  chief  means  of  gaining  merit,  austerities,  knowledge, 
sacrifices,  and  liberality,  see  below,  verse  86  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar., 
K.) ;  4.  or  finally  the  four  kinds  of  speech,  mentioned  Rig-veda  I, 
164,  45  (Medh.).  All  the  commentators  agree  in  stating  that 
Truth,  though  comprised  in  the  Dharma,  is  mentioned  specially 
in  order  to  show  its  paramount  importance.  Nand.  reads  the  last 
words  nadharmo  n&gama^  kask'm,  &c,  and  explains, '  Neither  any 
demerit  nor  any  sacred  lore,  »Sastra,  approached  men,  i.  e.  no 
Institutes  of  the  law  were  necessary.' 

82.  Medh.  explains  the  first  half-verse  differently,  'In  the  other 
three  ages,  Dharma,  the  sacred  law,  (which  is  derived)  from  the 


, 


1,85.  THE    CREATION.  23 

one  foot,  and  through  (the  prevalence  of)  theft, 
falsehood,  and  fraud  the  merit  (gained  by  men)  is 
diminished  by  one  fourth  (in  each). 

83.  (Men  are)  free  from  disease,  accomplish  all 
their  aims,  and  live  four  hundred  years  in  the  Knta 
age,  but  in  the  Treta  and  (in  each  of)  the  succeeding 
(ages)  their  life  is  lessened  by  one  quarter. 

84.  The  life  of  mortals,  mentioned  in  the  Veda, 
the  desired  results  of  sacrificial  rites  and  the  (super- 
natural) power  of  embodied  (spirits)  are  fruits  pro- 
portioned among  men  according  to  (the  character 
of)  the  age. 

85.  One  set  of  duties  (is  prescribed)  for  men  in 
the  Krz'ta  age,  different  ones  in  the  Treta  and  in  the 

sacred  lore  (agama),  i.e.  the  Veda,  is  made  to  withdraw  one  foot 
after  the  other,  one  foot  in  each  age,  i.e.  disappears  (gradually) 
because  the  power  of  men  to  learn  and  to  remember  the  sacred 
texts  diminishes.'  Gov.  says,  'But  in  the  Treta  and  the  other 
ages,  Dharma,  the  sacred  law,  (derived)  from  the  sacred  lore 
(agama),  the  -Sastra,  i.  e.  the  performance  of  sacrifices  and  so  forth, 
is  made  to  withdraw,  i.e.  is  diminished  successively  by  one 
quarter  in  each  age,  through  (the  prevalence  of)  theft,  falsehood, 
and  fraud/  Nand.  finally  differs  still  more,  '  In  the  other  three 
ages,  i.e.  the  Treta  and  the  rest,  Dharma,  (virtue  or  justice  is 
determined)  by  means  of  the  sacred  lore  (agama)/  the  -Sastra,  but 
this  Dharma  is  lessened  by  one  quarter  in  each;  'lessening  the 
Dharma '  is  intended  to  convey  the  meaning  of  '  lessening  the 
determination  of  the  Dharma/  The  translation  follows  Kull.,  Nar., 
and  Ragh. 

83.  In  order  to  reconcile  this  statement  regarding  the  age  of 
men  in  the  Krz'ta  age  with  various  passages  of  the  Mahabharata 
and  the  Pura/zas,  which  attribute  to  certain  heroes  and  sages  lives 
of  many  thousand  years,  the  commentators  explain  our  passage 
as  meaning  that  four  hundred  years  were  the  natural  term  of 
life,  which,  however,  might  be  lengthened  through  the  performance 
of  austerities.  They  further  assert  that  in  the  passage  Kanaka 
34,  5,  which  names  one  hundred  years  as  the  term  of  human 
existence,  the  numeral  is  used  in  the  sense  of '  many/ 


s 


A 


24  LAWS   OF    MANU.  1,86. 

Dvapara,  and  (again)  another  (set)  in  the  Kali,  in 
proportion  as  (those)  ages  decrease  in  length. 

86.  In  the  Krzta  age  the  chief  (virtue)  is  declared 
to  be  (the  performance  oO  austerities,  in  the  Treta 
(divine)  knowledge,  in  the  Dvapara  (the  performance 
of)  sacrifices,  in  the  Kali  liberality  alone. 

87.  But  in  order  to  protect  this  universe  He,  the 
most  resplendent  one,  assigned  separate  (duties  and) 
occupations  to  those  who  sprang  from  his  mouth, 
arms,  thighs,  and  feet. 

88.  To  Brahma^as  he  assigned  teaching  and 
studying  (the  Veda),  sacrificing  for  their  own  benefit 
and  for  others,  giving  and  accepting  (of  alms). 

89.  The  Kshatriya  he  commanded  to  protect  the 
people,  to  bestow  gifts,  to  offer  sacrifices,  to  study 
(the  Veda),  and  to  abstain  from  attaching  himself  to 
sensual  pleasures ; 

90.  The  Vaisya  to  tend  cattle,  to  bestow  gifts,  to 
offer  sacrifices,  to  study  (the  Veda),  to  trade,  to  lend 
money,  and  to  cultivate  land. 

91.  One  occupation  only  the  lord  prescribed  to 
the  6udra,  to  serve  meekly  even  these  (other)  three 
castes. 

92.  Man  is  stated  to  be  purer  above  the  navel 
(than  below) ;  hence  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhu) 
has  declared  the  purest  (part)  of  him  (to  be)  his 
mouth. 

93.  As  the  Brahma^a  sprang   from  (Brahman's) 

87.  See  above,  verse  31. 
88-91.  See  below,  X,  75-79,  99. 

89.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  samadwat,  'he  com- 
manded/ for  samasata/^,  '  briefly.'     Nand.  reads  akalpayat. 

92.  See  below,  V,  132. 

93.  Dharmata/fc  prabhii/$, '  by  right  the  lord/ agrees  with  Nar.'s 
and  Nand/s  glosses.    Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull,  and  Ragh.  say, '  he  is  with 


1,98.  THE   CREATION.  25 

mouth,  as  he  was  the  first-born,  and  as  he  possesses 
the  Veda,  he  is  by  right  the  lord  of  this  whole 
creation. 

94.  For  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhu),  having 
performed  austerities,  produced  him  first  from  his 
own  mouth,  in  order  that  the  offerings  might  be 
conveyed  to  the  gods  and  manes  and  that  this 
universe  might  be  preserved. 

95.  What  created  being  can  surpass  him,  through 
whose  mouth  the  gods  continually  consume  the 
sacrificial  viands  and  the  manes  the  offerings  to 
the  dead  ? 

96.  Of  created  beings  the  most  excellent  are  said 
to  be  those  which  are  animated ;  of  the  animated, 
those  which  subsist  by  intelligence;  of  the  intel- 
ligent, mankind  ;  and  of  men,  the  Brahma;ias ; 

97.  Of  Brahma^as,  those  learned  (in  the  Veda); 
of  the  learned,  those  who  recognise  (the  necessity  and 
the  manner  of  performing  the  prescribed  duties) ;  of 
those  who  possess  this  knowledge,  those  who  per- 
form them ;  of  the  performers,  those  who  know  the 
Brahman. 

98.  The  very  birth  of  a  Brahma^a  is  a^ri^etexnal 
incarnation  of  the  sacred  lawj  for  he  is  born  to 
(fulfil)  the  sacred  law,  and  becomes  one  with 
Brahman. 

respect  to  the  law  the  lord,  i.e.  entitled  to  prescribe  their  duties  to 
this  whole  creation.' 

94.  Tapas  taptva,  'having  performed  austerities,'  is  added,  as 
Nand.  says,  in  order  to  show ' particularly  great  consideration' (tapas 
taptvety  adarati^aya^).     See  above,  verses  33,  34,  41. 

95.  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  explain  kn'tabuddhaya^,'who  recog- 
nise (the  necessity  and  the  manner  of  performing  the  prescribed 
duties),'  by  'who  know  the  meaning  of  the  Veda.'  '  Those  who  know 
the  Brahman,'  i.e,'  the  sacred  lore  which  leads  to  final  emancipation/ 


26  LAWS    OF    MANU.  1,99. 

99.  A  Brahma^a,  coming  into  existence,  is  born  as 
the  highest  on  earth,  the  lord  of  all  created  beings, 
for  the  protection  of  the  treasury  of  the  law. 

100.  Whatever  exists  in  the  world  is  the  property 
of  the  Brahma^a ;  on  account  of  the  excellence  of 
his  origin  the  Brahma^a  is,  indeed,  entitled  to  it  all. 

10 1.  The  Brahma^a  eats  but  his  own  food,  wears 
but  his  own  apparel,  bestows  but  his  own  in  alms ; 
other  mortals  subsist  through  the  benevolence  of 
the  Brahma/za. 

102.  In  order  to  clearly  settle  his  duties  and  those 
of  the  other  (castes)  according  to  their  order,  wise 
Manu  sprung  from  the  Self-existent,  composed  these 
Institutes  (of  the  sacred  law). 

103.  A  learned  Brahma^a  must  carefully  study 
them,  and  he  must  duly  instruct  his  pupils  in  them, 
but  nobody  else  (shall  do  it). 

104.  A  Brahma/za  who  studies  these  Institutes 
(and)  faithfully  fulfils  the  duties  (prescribed  therein), 
is  never  tainted  by  sins,  arising  from  thoughts, 
words,  or  deeds.  I 

105.  He  sanctifies  any  company  (which  he  may 
enter),  seven  ancestors  and  seven  descendants,  and 
he  alone  deserves  (to  possess)  this  whole  earth. 

106.  (To  study)  this  (work)  is  the  best  means  of 
securing  welfare,  it  increases  understanding,  it  pro- 
cures fame  and  long  life,  it  (leads  to)  supreme  bliss. 

100.  '  On  account  of  the  excellence  of  his  origin,'  i.e.  because  he 
sprang  from  Brahman's  mouth. 

103.  The  verse  is  not  intended  to  exclude  Kshatriyas  and  Vaisyas 
from  the  right  of  studying  the  Manusawhita,  but  merely  from 
teaching  it. 

104.  Samitavrata^, '  who  faithfully  fulfils  the  duties,'  is  based  on 
Gov.'s  full  explanation  etadarthavabodhena  samitavrato  vmsh/a- 
yamaniyama^  san,  with  which  Medh.  closely  agrees. 


I,  in.  SUMMARY    OF    THE    CONTENTS.  2  J 

107.  In  this  (work)  the  sacred  law  has  been  fully- 
stated  as  well  as  the  good  and  bad  qualities  of 
(human)  actions  and  the  immemorial  rule  of  conduct, 
(to  be  followed)  by  all  the  four  castes  (var/za). 

108.  The  rule  of  conduct  is  transcendent  law, 
whether  it  be  taught  in  the  revealed  texts  or  in  the 
sacred  tradition ;  hence  a  twice-born  man  who  pos- 
sesses regard  for  himself,  should  be  always  careful 
to  (follow)  it. 

109.  A  Brahma^a  who  departs  from  the  rule  of 
conduct,  does  not  reap  the  fruit  of  the  Veda,  but  he 
who  duly  follows  it,  will  obtain  the  full  reward. 

no.  The  sages  who  saw  that  the  sacred  law  is 
thus  grounded  on  the  rule  of  conduct,  have  taken 
good  conduct  to  be  the  most  excellent  root  of  all 
austerity. 

in.  The  creation  of  the  universe,  the  rule  of 
the  sacraments,  the  ordinances  of  studentship,  and 
the  respectful  behaviour  (towards  Gurus),  the  most 
excellent  rule  of  bathing  (on  return  from  the  teachers 
house), 

107.  'The  good  and  bad  qualities  of  (human)  actions,'  i.e.  ac- 
cording to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull,  and  Nand.  '  the  good  and  the  bad 
results  of  actions,'  or  according  to  Ragh.  and  Nar. '  the  prescribed 
actions  which  are  good  and  the  forbidden  ones  which  are  bad/ 

108.  My  translation  of  atmavan,  'who  possesses  regard  for  him- 
self,' follows  Medh.  and  Kull.  Gov.  explains  it  by  '  of  excellent 
disposition,'  Nar.  by  '  endowed  with  firmness,'  and  Ragh.  by  '  who 
believes  in  a  life  after  death/ 

109.  Vedaphalam, '  the  fruit  of  the  Veda/  i.e. '  the  rewards  for  the 
acts  prescribed  by  the  Veda'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.). 

no.  Vas.  VI,  1-8.  'The  rule  of  conduct  or  good  conduct' 
(a£ara),  mentioned  here  and  in  the  preceding  verses,  comprises  the 
numerous  usages  prescribed  partly  in  the  Veda  and  partly  in  the 
Dharmarastras,  such  as  anointing  oneself  with  butter  on  the  occasion 
of  particular  sacrifices  or  sipping  water  on  certain  occasions. 


28  LAWS    OF   MANU.  I, 


112. 


112.  (The  law  of)  marriage  and  the  description  of 
the  (various)  marriage-rites,  the  regulations  for  the 
great  sacrifices  and  the  eternal  rule  of  the  funeral 
sacrifices, 

113.  The  description  of  the  modes  of  (gaining) 
subsistence  and  the  duties  of  a  Snataka,  (the  rules 
regarding)  lawful  and  forbidden  food,  the  purification 
of  men  and  of  things, 

114.  The  laws  concerning  women,  (the  law)  of 
hermits,  (the  manner  of  gaining)  final  emancipation 
and  (of)  renouncing  the  world,  the  whole  duty  of  a 
king  and  the  manner  of  deciding  lawsuits, 

115.  The  rules  for  the  examination  of  witnesses, 
the  laws  concerning  husband  and  wife,  the  law  of 
(inheritance  and)  division,  (the  law  concerning) 
gambling  and  the  removal  of  (men  nocuous  like) 
thorns, 

1 1 6.  (The  law  concerning)  the  behaviour  of 
VaLsyas  and  .Sudras,  the  origin  of  the  mixed  castes, 
the  law  for  all  castes  in  times  of  distress  and  the 
law  of  penances, 

117.  The  threefold  course  of  transmigrations,  the 
result  of  (good  or  bad)  actions,  (the  manner  of  at- 
taining) supreme  bliss  and  the  examination  of  the 
good  and  bad  qualities  of  actions, 

it 8.  The  primeval  laws  of  countries,  of  castes 
(^ati),  of  families,  and  the  rules  concerning  heretics 
and  companies  (of  traders  and  the  like)  —  (all  that) 
iManu  has  declared  in  these  Institutes. 

119.  As  Manu,  in  reply  to  my  questions,  formerly 
promulgated  these  Institutes,  even  so  learn  ye  also 
the  (whole  work)  from  me. 


IT,  5-  SOURCES    OF    THE   LAW.  29 


Chapter  II. 

1 .  Learn  that  sacred  law  which  is  followed  by  men 
learned  (in  the  Veda)  and  assented  to  in  their  hearts 
by  the  virtuous,  who  are  ever  exempt  from  hatred 
and  inordinate  affection. 

2.  To  act  solely  from  a  desire  for  rewards  is  not 
laudable,  yet  an  exemption  from  that  desire  is  not  (to 
be  found)  in  this  (world) :  for  on  (that)  desire  is 
grounded  the  study  of  the  Veda  and  the  performance 
of  the  actions,  prescribed  by  the  Veda. 

3.  The  desire  (for  rewards),  indeed,  has  its  root  in 
the  conception  that  an  act  can  yield  them,  and  in  con- 
sequence of  (that)  conception  sacrifices  are  performed; 
vows  and  the  laws  prescribing  restraints  are  all 
stated  to  be  kept  through  the  idea  that  they  will 
bear  fruit. 

4.  Not  a  single  act  here  (below)  appears  ever  to 
be  done  by  a  man  free  from  desire ;  for  whatever 
(man)  does,  it  is  (the  result  of)  the  impulse  of  desire. 

5.  He  who  persists  in  discharging  these  (prescribed 
duties)  in  the  right  manner,  reaches  the  deathless 

II.  2.  Ap.  I,  6,  20,  1-4.  '  Is  not  laudable,'  because  such  a  dispo- 
sition leads  not  to  final  liberation,  but  to  new  births'  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

3.  Nand.  takes  the  beginning  of  the  verse  differently,  'The  desire 
for  rewards  is  the  root  of  the  resolve  to  perform  an  act '  (sawkalpa). 
'Vows,'  i.e. 'acts  to  be  performed  during  one's  whole  lifetime,  like 
those  of  the  Snataka'  (chap.  IV),  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.;  'the  vows  of 
a  student,'  Nand.;  'the  laws  prescribing  restraints/  i.e.  'the  pro- 
hibitive rules,  e.  g.  those  forbidding  to  injure  living  beings/  Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.;  'the  rules  affecting  hermits  and  Sawnyasins/  Nand. 
Kull.  refers  both  terms  to  the  rules  in  chap.  IV. 

5.  '  In  the  right  manner/  i.e. '  as  they  are  prescribed  in  the  Vedas 
and  without  expecting  rewards.'  '  The  deathless  state/  i.  e.  '  final 
liberation.' 


30  LAWS   OF   MANU.  11,6. 

state  and  even  in  this  (life)  obtains  (the  fulfilment 
of)  all  the  desires  that  he  may  have  conceived. 
•  6.  The  whole  Veda  is  the  (first)  source  of  the 
sacred  law,  next  the  tradition  and  the  virtuous  con- 
duct of  those  who  know  the  (Veda  further),  also  the 
customs  of  holy  men,  and  (finally)  self-satisfaction. 

7.  Whatever  law  has  been  ordained  for  any  (per- 
son) by  Manu,  that  has  been  fully  declared  in  the 
Veda  :  for  that  (sage  was)  omniscient. 

8.  But  a  learned  man  after  fully  scrutinising  all 
this  with  the  eye  of  knowledge,  should,  in  accordance 

\  j(     with  the  authority  of  the  revealed  texts,  be  intent  on 
(the  performance  of)  his  duties. 


6.  Ap.  I,  1,  1,  1-3;  Gaut.  I,  1-4 ;  XXVIII,  48;  Vas.  I,  4-6; 
Baudh.  I,  1, 1, 1-6 ;  Yagn.  I,  7. 

^ila, '  virtuous  conduct,'  i.  e. '  the  suppression  of  inordinate  affec- 
tion and  hatred/  Medh.,  Gov. ;  '  the  thirteenfold  jila,  behaving  as 
becomes  a  Brahmaraa,  devotedness  to  gods  and  parents,  kindli- 
ness/ &c,  Kull. ;  '  that  towards  which  many  men  who  know  the 
Veda  naturally  incline/  Nar. ;  '  that  which  makes  one  honoured  by 
good  men/  Nand.  *  Customs/  e.  g.  such  as  tying  at  marriages  a 
thread  round  the  wrist  of  the  bride  (Medh.,  Gov.),  wearing  a  blanket 
or  a  garment  of  bark  (Kull.).  Though  the  commentators  try  to 
find  a  difference  between  jila  and  aMra,  it  may  be  that  both  terms 
are  used  here,  because  in  some  Dharma-sutras,  e.g.  Gaut.  I,  2,  the 
former  and  in  some  the  latter  (e.  g.  Vas.  I,  5)  is  mentioned.  The 
'self-satisfaction/  i.e.  of  the  virtuous  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.),  is  the 
rule  for  cases  not  to  be  settled  by  any  of  the  other  authorities 
(Nar.,  Nand.),  or  for  cases  where  an  option  is  permitted  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.). 

7.  The  last  clause  is  taken  differently  by  Gov.,  who  explains  it, 
'  for  that  (Veda)  is  made  up,  as  it  were,  of  all  knowledge.'  Medh. 
gives  substantially  the  same  explanation. 

8.  'All  this/  i.e. 'the  .Sastras'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull);  'these  Insti- 
tutes of  Manu'  (Nar.) ;  '  these  different  authorities'  (Nand.).  '  With 
the  eye  of  knowledge/  i.e.  'with  the  help  of  grammar,  of  the 
Mrmawsa,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Kull.). 


IT,  14.  SOURCES    OF    THE   LAW.  3 1 

9.  For  that  man  who  obeys  the  law  prescribed  in 
the  revealed  texts  and  in  the  sacred  tradition,  gains 
fame  in  this  (world)  and  after  death  unsurpassable 
bliss. 

10.  But  by  .Sruti  (revelation)  is  meant  the  Veda,  1 
and  by  Smrz'ti  (tradition)  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred 
law :  those  two  must  not  be  called  into  question  in 
any  matter,  since  from  those   two  the  sacred  law 
shone  forth. 

11.  Every  twice-born  man,  who,  relying  on  the 
Institutes  of  dialectics,  treats  with  contempt  those 
two  sources  (of  the  law),  must  be  cast  out  by  the  vir- 
tuous, as  an  atheist  and  a  scorner  of  the  Veda. 

12.  The  Veda,  the  sacred  tradition,  the  customs 
of  virtuous  men,  and  one's  own  pleasure,  they 
declare  to  be  visibly  the  fourfold  means  of  denning 
the  sacred  law. 

13.  The  knowledge  of  the  sacred  law  is  prescribed 
for  those  who  are  not  given  to  the  acquisition  of 
wealth  and  to  the  gratification  of  their  desires ;  to 
those  who  seek  the  knowledge  of  the  sacred  law  the 
supreme  authority  is  the  revelation  (.Sruti). 

14.  But  when  two  sacred  texts  (.Sruti)  are  con- 

11.  '  Relying  on  the  Institutes  of  dialectics,'  i.e.  '  relying  on  the 
atheistic  institutes  of  reasoning,  such  as  those  of  the  Bauddhas  and 
Aarvakas'  (Medh.);  'relying  on  methods  of  reasoning,  directed 
against  the  Veda'  (Kull.,  Nar.). 

12.  The  first  half  of  this  verse  agrees  literally  with  Y&gri.  I,  7. 

13.  According  to  'another'  commentator,  quoted  by  Medh.,  and 
according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.,  the  meaning  of  the  first  half  is, 
'  the  exhortation  to  learn  the  sacred  law  applies  to  those  only  who 
do  not  pursue  worldly  objects,  because  those  who  obey  (or  learn, 
Nar.)  the  sacred  law  merely  in  order  to  gain  worldly  advantages, 
such  as  wealth,  fame,  &c,  derive  no  spiritual  advantage  from  it 
(because  they  will  not  really  obey  it,'  Nar.).  Medh.,  on  the  other 
hand,  thinks  that  vidhiyate, '  is  prescribed,'  means  •  is  found  with.' 


32  LAWS   OF    MANU.  II,  15. 

flicting,  both  are  held  to  be  law ;  for  both  are  pro- 
nounced by  the  wise  (to  be)  valid  law. 

15.  (Thus)  the  (Agnihotra)  sacrifice  maybe  (op- 
tionally) performed,  at  any  time  after  the  sun  has 
risen,  before  he  has  risen,  or  when  neither  sun  nor 
stars  are  visible  ;  that  (is  declared)  by  Vedic  texts. 

16.  Know  that  he  for  whom  (the  performance  of) 
the  ceremonies  beginning  with  the  rite  of  impregna- 
tion (Garbhadhana)  and  ending  with  the  funeral  rite 
(Antyesh^i)  is  prescribed,  while  sacred  formulas  are 
being  recited,  is  entitled  (to  study)  these  Institutes, 
but  no  other  man  whatsoever. 

17.  That  land,  created  by  the  gods,  which  lies 
between  the  two  divine  rivers  Sarasvati  and  Dn- 
shadvati,  the  (sages)  call  Brahmavarta. 

18.  The  custom  handed  down  in  regular  succes- 
sion (since  time  immemorial)  among  the  (four  chief) 
castes  (var/za)  and  the  mixed  (races)  of  that  country, 
is  called  the  conduct  of  virtuous  men. 

19.  The  plain  of  the  Kurus,  the  (country  of  the) 
Matsyas,  Pa/^alas,  and  6urasenakas,  these  (form), 
indeed,  the  country  of  the  Brahmarshisj(Brahmanical 
sages,  which  ranks)  immediately  after  Brahmavarta. 


15.  The  Agnihotra,  here  referred  to,  consists  of  two  sets  of 
oblations,  one  of  which  is  offered  in  the  morning  and  the  other  in 
the  evening.  The  expression  samayadhyushite,  rendered  in  accord- 
ance  with  Kull.'s  gloss, '  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  are  visible/  is 
explained  by  Medh.  as  'the  time  of  dawn'  (ushasa/z  kala^),  or  'as 
the  time  when  the  night  disappears,'  with  which  latter  interpretation 
Gov.  agrees. 

1 6.  The  persons  meant  are  the  males  of  the  three  Aryan  varzzas. 
The  sacraments  may  be  performed  for  women  and  -Sudras  also, 
but  without  the  recitation  of  mantras  (II,  66  ;  X,  127). 

19.  This  tract  comprises  the  Doab  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
Delhi  as  far  as  Mathura,  the  capital  of  the  ancient  -Surasenakas. 


I 


II,  26.  SOURCES  OF  THE  LAW;    SACRAMENTS.  T>3 

20.  From  a  Brahma^a,  born  in  that  country,  let 
all  men  on  earth  learn  their  several  usages. 

21.  That  (country)  which  (lies)  between  the  Hi- 
mavat  and  the  Vindhya  (mountains)  to  the  east  of 
Prayaga  and  to  the  west  of  Vinasana  (the  place  where 
the  river  Sarasvati  disappears)  is  called  Madhyade^a 
(the  central  region). 

22.  But  (the  tract)  between  those  two  mountains 
(just  mentioned),  which  (extends)  as  far  as  the  eastern 
and  the  western  oceans,  the  wise  call  Aryavarta  (the 
country  of  the  Aryans). 

23.  That  land  where  the  black  antelope  naturally 
roams,  one  must  know  to  be  fit  for  the  performance 
of  sacrifices ;  (the  tract)  different  from  that  (is)  the 
country  of  the_311e£4&as~ (barbarians) . 

24.  Let  twice-born  men  seek  to  dwell  in  those 
(above-mentioned  countries) ;  but  a  .Sudra,  distressed 
for  subsistence,  may  reside  anywhere. 

25.  Thus  has  the  origin  of  the  sacred  law  been 
succinctly  described  to  you  and  the  origin  of  this 
universe;  learn  (now)  the  duties  of  the  castes  (vama). 

26.  With  holy  rites,  prescribed  by  the  Veda,  must 
the  ceremony  on  conception  and  other  sacraments 
be  performed  for  twice-born  men,  which  sanctify  the 
body  and  purify  (from  sin)  in  this  (life)  and  after 
death. 

2i.  The  place  where  the  river  Sarasvati  disappears  lies  in  the 
Hissar  districts.     Prayaga,  i.e.  Allahabad. 

22.  Vas.  I,  9;  Baudh.  I,  2,  10. 

23.  Vas.  I,  13-15 ;  Baudh.  I,  2,  12-15;  Yagii.  I,  2. 

25.  Gov.  explains  dharma, '  the  sacred  law,'  by  '  spiritual  merit.' 
26-35.  Gaut. VIII,  14-20;  Vi.  XXVII,  1-12;  Yagii.  I,  10-13. 

26.  Medh.  mentions  another  explanation  for  the  first  words, 
'  With  holy  rites,  accompanied  by  the  recitation  of  Vedic  texts/  and 
Gov.  thinks  that  'vaidika'  is  to  be  taken  in  both  meanings. 

[25]  D 


34 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  27, 


27.  By  burnt  oblations  during  (the  mother's) 
pregnancy,  by  the  (Satakarman  (the  ceremony  after 
birth),  the  Aauafa  (tonsure),  and  the  Mau/^ibandhana 
(the  tying  of  the  sacred  girdle  of  Mu^a  grass)  is 
the  taint,  derived  from  both  parents,  removed  from 
twice-born  men. 

28.  By  the  study  of  the  Veda,  by  vows,  by  burnt 
oblations,  by  (the  recitation  of)  sacred  texts,  by  the 
(acquisition  of  the)  threefold  sacred  science,  by 
offering  (to  the  gods,  7^'shis,  and  manes),  by  (the 
procreation  of)  sons,  by  the  great  sacrifices,  and 
by  (*Srauta)  rites  this  (human)  body  is  made  fit 
for  (union  with)  Brahman. 

29.  Before  the  navel-string  is  cut,  the  Catakarman 
(birth-rite)  must  be  performed  for  a  male  (child) ; 
and  while  sacred  formulas  are  being  recited,  he  must 
be  fed  with  gold,  honey,  and  butter. 

27.  'The  burnt  oblations  during  the  mother's  pregnancy' are  the 
Putfzsavana,  Simantonnayana,  and  so  forth ;  see  Asv.  Grzhya-sutra 

\  13-14- 

28.  'By  vows/ i.e.  'the  vows  undertaken  by  the  student  when 
he  learns  particular  portions  of  the  Vedas,  such  as  the  Savitrivrata' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.) ;  '  voluntary  restraints,  such  as  the  abstention 
from  honey,  meat,  &c.'  (Kull.,  Ragh.) ;  '  vows  such  as  the  Pra^apatya 
penance'  (Nand.).  '  By  burnt  oblations/  i.e. '  the  daily  offerings  of 
fuel'  (II,  108).  Traividyena,  'by  the  acquisition  of  the  threefold 
sacred  science/  i.e.  'by  learning  the  meaning  of  the  three  Vedas' 
(Medh.,  Nand.) ;  '  by  undertaking  the  vow  to  study  the  three  Vedas 
during  thirty-six  years' (III,  1;  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  I^yaya, 
'  by  offering  to  the  gods,  i?/shis,  and  manes/  i.e.  by  performing  the 
so-called  Tarpa/za  (Medh., Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'by  offering  the 
Pakaya^was  '  (Nar.,  Nand.).  Medh.  takes  brahmi,'  fit  for  union  with 
Brahman/  to  mean  'connected  with  Brahman,'  but  gives  our  version, 
which  all  the  other  commentators  adopt,  as  the  opinion  of 'others.' 

29.  Asv.  Grzriya-sfrtra  I,  15,  1;  Manava  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  17,  1; 
Paraskara  Grz'hya-sutra  1, 16,  4.  Though  the  text  clearly  says  that 
the  child  is  to  be  fed  with  gold,  honey,  and  butter,  it  appears  from 
the  Grzhya-sutras,  as  also  some  of  the  commentators  point  out, 


II,  S3-  SACRAMENTS.  35 

30.  But  let  (the  father  perform  or)  cause  to  be 
performed  the  Namadheya  (the  rite  of  naming  the 
child),  on  the  tenth  or  twelfth  (day  after  birth),  or 
on  a  lucky  lunar  day,  in  a  lucky  muhurta,  under  an 
auspicious  constellation. 

31.  Let  (the  first   part  of)  a   Brahma/za's   name  * 
(denote  something)  auspicious,  a  Kshatriya's  be  con- 
nected with  power,  and  a  Vaisya's  with  wealth,  but 

a  6udra's  (express  something)  contemptible.  y 

32.  (The  second  part  of)  a  Brahma^a's  (name) 
shall  be  (a  word)  implying  happiness,  of  a  Ksha- 
triya's (a  word)  implying  protection,  of  a  VaLsya's 
(a  term)  expressive  of  thriving,  and  of  a  .Sudra's 
(an  expression)  denoting  service. 

^^.  The  names  of  women  should  be  easy  to  pro- 
nounce, not  imply  anything  dreadful,  possess  a  plain 
meaning,  be  pleasing  and  auspicious,  end  in  long 
vowels,  and  contain  a  word  of  benediction. 

that  the  last  two  substances  only  are  to  be  given  to  the  child,  after 
they  have  been  touched  with  a  piece  of  gold,  or  a  golden  ring. 

30.  Aw.  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  15,  4-10  ;  Paraskara  I,  17,  1-6.  Nar. 
and  Nand.  are  in  doubt  whether  the  numerals  'the  tenth  or  twelfth' 
refer  to  lunar  or  solar  days,  because  they  stand  in  the  feminine 
gender  and  either  tithi  or  ratri  may  be  supplied.  Kull.  gives  an 
alternative  version  of  the  date, '  after  the  tenth  (the  last  day  of  im- 
purity, i.  e.)  on  the  eleventh  or  twelfth/  which  Medh.  also  mentions, 
but  rejects.  Kull.  considers  that  the  third  and  fourth  va,  'or,' 
which  stand  after  muhurta  and  nakshatra,  have  the  sense  of  'just,' 
and  do  not  introduce  a  third  alternative. 

31-32.  K.  omits  31b  and  32  a.  Nar.  and  Ragh.  think  that  the 
second  part  of  a  Brahmaraa's  name  must  contain  the  word  carman 
and  no  other,  while  the  general  opinion  of  the  others  is  that  it  may 
be  carman  or  some  synonym,  implying  'happiness  or  refuge.' 
Medh.  expressly  rejects  the  former  view,  and  gives  as  examples  of 
correct  formations,  Svamidatta,  Bhavabhuti,  Indrasvamin,  Indra- 
jrama,  Indradatta. 

33.  Medh.  irreverently,  but  pertinently,  remarks  that  there  is  no 

D   2 


36 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  34- 


/ 


34.  In  the  fourth  month  the  Nishkrama/za  (the 
first  leaving  of  the  house)  of  the  child  should  be 
performed,  in  the  sixth  month  the  Annapra^ana 
(first  feeding  with  rice),  and  optionally  (any  other) 
auspicious  ceremony  required  by  (the  custom  of) 
the  family. 

35.  According  to  the  teaching  of  the  revealed 
texts,  the  A"iWakarman  (tonsure)  must  be  performed, 
for  the  sake  of  spiritual  merit,  by  all  twice-born  men 
in  the  first  or  third  year. 

36.  In  the  eighth  year  after  conception,  one  should 
perform  the  initiation  (upanayana)  of  a  Brahma/za, 
in  the  eleventh  after  conception  (that)  of  a  Kshatriya, 
but  in  the  twelfth  that  of  a  Vaiiya. 

3J.  (The  initiation)  of  a  Brahma;za  who  desires 
proficiency  in  sacred  learning  should  take  place  in 
the  fifth  (year  after  conception),  (that)  of  a  Kshatriya 
who  wishes  to  become  powerful  in  the  sixth,  (and 
that)  of  a  Vaisya  who  longs  for  (success  in  his) 
business  in  the  eighth. 

38.  The   (time  for    the)    Savitri  (initiation)  of  a 


difference  between  '  auspiciousness'  (mahgala)  and  'benediction' 
(anrvada),  and  that  the  latter  word  has  been  added  merely  in  order 
to  complete  the  verse. 

34.  A^v.  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  16  ;  Paraskara  I,  17,  5;  19, 1-6.  The 
last  clause,  which  permits  the  adoption  of  particular  family-customs, 
refers,  according  to  Medh.,Gov.,  and  Kull.,  to  all  sacraments. 

35.  Ajv.  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  17,  1 ;  Paraskara  II,  1.  Nar.  and 
Nand.  explain  dharmata^,  'for  the  sake  of  spiritual  merit,'  by 
'according  to  the  law  of  the  family'  (see  Asv.  Grz'hya-sutra, 
loc.  cit). 

36-37.  Ap.1, 1,5,  8-21;  Gaut.  1,5-14;  Vas.  II,  3;  XI,  49~73; 
Baudh.  I,  3,  7-12;  Vi.  XXVII,  15-28;  Yagn.  I,  14. 

37.  As  the  commentators  point  out,  the  person  who  has  the  par- 
ticular wish  is  not  the  boy,  but  his  father. 

38-40.   Ap.  I,  1,  22-2,  10;   Gaut.  XXI,  11;  Vas.  XI,  74-79; 


IT,  42.  SACRAMENTS;    INITIATION.  37 

Brahma/za  does  not  pass  until  the  completion  of  the 
sixteenth  year  (after  conception),  of  a  Kshatriya 
until  the  completion  of  the  twenty-second,  and  of 
a  Vaisya  until  the  completion  of  the  twenty-fourth. 

39.  After  those  (periods  men  of)  these  three 
(castes)  who  have  not  received  the  sacrament  at  the 
proper  time,  become  Vratyas  (outcasts),  excluded 
from  the  Savitri  (initiation)  and  despised  by  the 
Aryans. 

40.  With  such  men,  if  they  have  not  been  purified 
according  to  the  rule,  let  no  Brahma^a  ever,  even 
in  times  of  distress,  form  a  connexion  either  through 
the  Veda  or  by  marriage. 

41.  Let  students,  according  to  the  order  (of  their 
castes),  wear  (as  upper  dresses)  the  skins  of  black 
antelopes,  spotted  deer,  and  he-goats,  and  (lower 
garments)  made  of  hemp,  flax  or  wool. 

42.  The  girdle  of  a  Brahma^a  shall  consist  of  a 
triple  cord  of  Munga,  grass,  smooth  and  soft ;  (that) 
of  a  Kshatriya,  of  a  bowstring,  made  of  Murva  fibres  ; 
(that)  of  a  Vaisya,  of  hempen  threads. 

Baudh.  1, 16, 16;  Vi.,  loc.  cit.,  and LIV,  26;  Y$gn.  I,  37-38.  '  Some' 
take  the  preposition  a, '  until/  in  the  sense  of  '  until  the  beginning 
of/  Kull. 

40.  '  Connexion  through  the  Veda/  i.  e.  teaching  them  or  study- 
ing under  them,  sacrificing  for  them,  or  electing  them  to  be  priests, 
accepting  religious  gifts  from  them  or  giving  them.  Ragh.  omits 
verse  40. 

41.  Ap.  I,  2,  39-3,  9;  Gaut.  I,  16,  21;  Vas.  XI,  61-67  ;  Baudh. 
I,  3,  14  ;  Vi.  XXVII,  19-20.  Ragh.  explains  ruru, '  a  spotted  deer/ 
by  '  a  tiger/ 

42.  Ap.I,  2,  33-37;  Gaut.  1. 15;  Vas.  XI,  58-60;  Baudh.  I,  3, 13; 
Vi.  XXVII,  18 ;  Yagn.  I,  29.  Medh.  and  Gov.  think  that  the  girdle 
of  a  Kshatriya  is  not  to  consist  of  three  separate  strings  twisted 
together,  and  Kull.  apparently  holds  the  same  opinion.  Ragh.  and 
Nar.  say  that  every  bowstring  naturally  consists  of  three  strings. 


38 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  43- 


43.  If  Mu»/a  grass  (and  so  forth)  be  not  pro- 
curable, (the  girdles)  may  be  made  of  Kara,  Asman- 
taka,  and  Balba^a  (fibres),  with  a  single  threefold 
knot,  or  with  three  or  five  (knots  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  family). 

44.  The  sacrificial  string  of  a  Brahma/za  shall  be 
made  of  cotton,  (shall  be)  twisted  to  the  right,  (and  con- 
sist) of  three  threads,  that  of  a  Kshatriya  of  hempen 
threads,  (and)  that  of  a  Vai^ya  of  woollen  threads. 

45.  A  Brahma;za  shall  (carry),  according  to  the 
sacred  law,  a  staff  of  Bilva  or  Palasa ;  a  Kshatriya, 
of  Va/a  or  Khadira;  (and)  a  VaL?ya,  of  Pilu  or 
Udumbara. 

46.  The  staff  of  a  Brahma/za  shall  be  made  of 
such  length  as  to  reach  the  end  of  his  hair ;  that  of 
a  Kshatriya,  to  reach  his  forehead ;  (and)  that  of  a 
VaLsya,  to  reach  (the  tip  of  his)  nose. 

47.  Let  all  the  staves  be  straight,  without  a 
blemish,  handsome  to  look  at,  not  likely  to  terrify 
men,  with  their  bark  perfect,  unhurt  by  fire. 

48.  Having  taken  a  staff  according  to  his  choice, 
having  worshipped  the  sun  and  walked  round  the 


43.  '  With  a  single  threefold  knot'  seems  to  mean  that  each  of 
the  strings  of  the  girdle  shall  first  be  knotted,  and  the  three  knots 
be  afterwards  tied  together  in  one.  Nar.  and  Ragh.,  however,  take 
trivrz'ta, '  threefold,'  separately,  and  refer  it  to  the  string.  They  thus 
support  Sir  W.  Jones'  translation, '  in  triple  strings,  with  one,  &c.' 

44.  Ap.  II,  4,  22 ;  Gaut.  I,  36;  Vas.  XII,  14;  Baudh.  I,  5,  5; 
Vi.  XXVII,  19. 

45-47.  Ap.  I,  2,  38;  Gaut.  I,  22;  Vas.  XI,  52-57;  Baudh.  I, 
3,  15;  Vi.  XXVII,  22-24;  YSgii.  I,  29. 

47.  Anudvegakara^,  'not  likely  to  terrify  anybody'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.),  means  according  to  Nar.  'not  causing  displeasure  (to  the 
wearer)  by  faults  such  as  roughness.' 

48-57.  Ap.  I,  3,  25-4,  4;  Gaut.  II,  35-41;  Vas.  XI,  68-70; 
Baudh.  I,  3,  16-18;  Vi.  XXVII,  25;  Ya^T.  I,  30;  51-57.   Ap.  II, 


IT,  54.  INITIATION.  39 

fire,  turning  his  right  hand  towards  it,  (the  student) 
should  beg  alms  according  to  the  prescribed  rule. 

49.  An  initiated  Brahma^a  should  beg,  beginning 
(his  request  with  the  word)  lady  (bhavati)  ;  a  Ksha- 
triya,  placing  (the  word)  lady  in  the  middle,  but  a 
VaLrya,  placing  it  at  the  end  (of  the  formula). 

50.  Let  him  first  beg  food  of  his  mother,  or  of  his 
sister,  or  of  his  own  maternal  aunt,  or  of  (some  other) 
female  who  will  not  disgrace  him  (by  a  refusal). 

51.  Having  collected  as  much  food  as  is  required 
(from  several  persons),  and  having  announced  it 
without  guile  to  his  teacher,  let  him  eat,  turning  his 
face  towards  the  east,  and  having  purified  himself 
by  sipping  water. 

52.  (His  meal  will  procure)  long  life,  if  he  eats 
facing  the  east ;  fame,  if  he  turns  to  the  south  ; 
prosperity,  if  he  turns  to  the  west ;  truthfulness,  if 
he  faces  the  east. 

53.  Let  a  twice-born  man  always  eat  his  food 
with  concentrated  mind,  after  performing  an  ablu- 
tion ;  and  after  he  has  eaten,  let  him  duly  cleanse 
himself  with  water  and  sprinkle  the  cavities  (of  his 
head). 

54.  Let  him  always  worship  his  food,  and  eat  it 
without  contempt ;  when  he  sees  it,  let  him  rejoice, 

r>  2-3;    3>  Il'f    Gaut.  IX,  59;  Vas.  Ill,  69;  XII,  18-20;  Baudh.. 
II,  5,  18,  21-6,  2;  13,  12;  Vi.  LVIII,  34-35,  40-44J  Ya^w.  I,  27, 
31,  112. 

52.  Medh.  and  Nar.  propose  for  n*tam,  'truthfulness,'  an  alter- 
native explanation,  '  the  sacrifice/ 

53.  The  word  nityam,  '  always/  indicates  that  this  rule  refers  to 
householders  also  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

54.  « Worship/  i.e.  '  consider  as  a  deity'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.),  or 
'  meditate  on  its  being  required  to  sustain  life'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.), 
or  'praise  it  with  the  verse/  Rig-veda  1, 187,  1  (Nar.). 


4Q 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IT,  55- 


show  a  pleased  face,  and  pray  that  he  may  always 
obtain  it. 

55.  Food,  that  is  always  worshipped,  gives 
strength  and  manly  vigour  ;  but  eaten  irreverently, 
it  destroys  them  both. 

56.  Let  him  not  give  to  any  man  what  he  leaves, 
and  beware  of  eating  between  (the  two  meal-times) ; 
let  him  not  over-eat  himself,  nor  go  anywhere  with- 
out having  purified  himself  (after  his  meal). 

57.  Excessive  eating  is  prejudicial  to  health,  to 
fame,  and  to  (bliss  in)  heaven ;  it  prevents  (the 
acquisition  of)  spiritual  merit,  and  is  odious  among 
men ;  one  ought,  for  these  reasons,  to  avoid  it 
carefully. 

58.  Let  a  Brahma/za  always  sip  water  out  of  the 
part  of  the  hand  (tirtha)  sacred  to  Brahman,  or  out 
of  that  sacred  to  Ka  (Pra^apati),  or  out  of  (that) 
sacred  to  the  gods,  never  out  of  that  sacred  to  the 
manes. 

59.  They  call  (the  part)  at  the  root  of  the  thumb 
the  tirtha  sacred  to  Brahman,  that  at  the  root  of  the 


55-  Ur^am,  'manly  vigour'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  or  'energy'  (Nar., 
Nand.),  or  'bulk' (Medh.). 

56.  Medh.  reads  nadyad  etat  tathantara,  and  gives,  besides  the 
explanation  adopted  in  the  translation,  two  alternative  interpretations: 
(1)  'let  him  not  eat  after  interrupting  his  meal;'  (2)  'let  him  not 
eat  taking  away  his  left  hand  from  the  dish.'  Nand.  reads  nadyad 
£aitat  tathantara, '  and  let  him  not  eat  such  a  (remnant)  given  to 
him  during  (a  meal  by  one  of  the  company).' 

58-62.  Ap.  I,  15,  1-16;  Vas.  Ill,  26-34;  Baudh.  I,  8,  12-23; 
Vi.  LXII,  1-9;  Ya^l.  I,  18-21. 

58.  Though  the  text  speaks  of  the  Brahma/za  only,  the  rule  refers, 
as  the  commentators  remark,  to  other  Aryans  too. 

59.  Arigulimule,  'at  the  root  of  the  little  finger'  (Kull.,  Nar., 
Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Nand.  '  at  the  root  of  the 
fingers.' 


11,64.  INITIATION.  41 

(little)  finger  (the  tirtha)  sacred  to  Ka  (Pra^apati), 
(that)  at  the  tips  (of  the  fingers,  the  tirtha)  sacred  to 
the  gods,  and  that  below  (between  the  index  and  the 
thumb,  the  tirtha)  sacred  to  the  manes. 

60.  Let  him  first  sip  water  thrice  ;  next  twice  wipe 
his  mouth ;  and,  lastly,  touch  with  water  the  cavities 
(of  the  head),  (the  seat  of)  the  soul  and  the  head. 

61.  He  who  knows  the  sacred  law  and  seeks 
purity  shall  always  perform  the  rite  of  sipping 
with  water  neither  hot  nor  frothy,  with  the  (pre- 
scribed) tirtha,  in  a  lonely  place,  and  turning  to 
the  east  or  to  the  north. 

62.  A  Brahma;za  is  purified  by  water  that  reaches 
his  heart,  a  Kshatriya  by  water  reaching  his  throat, 
a  VaLsya  by  water  taken  into  his  mouth,  (and)  a 
.5udra  by  water  touched  with  the  extremity  (of  his 
lips). 

63.  A  twice-born  man  is  called  upavitin  when  his 
right  arm  is  raised  (and  the  sacrificial  string  or  the 
dress,  passed  under  it,  rests  on  the  left  shoulder) ; 
(when  his)  left  (arm)  is  raised  (and  the  string,  or  the 
dress,  passed  under  it,  rests  on  the  right  shoulder,  he 
is  called)  pra^inavitin ;  and  nivitin  when  it  hangs 
down  (straight)  from  the  neck. 

64.  His  girdle,  the  skin  (which  serves  as  his  upper 
garment),  his  staff,  his  sacrificial  thread,  (and)  his 
water-pot  he  must  throw  into  water,  when  they 
have  been  damaged,  and  take  others,  reciting 
sacred  formulas. 

60.  '  (The  seat  of)  the  soul,'  i.  e/the  heart  '(all  except  Medh.,who 
adds,  or  '  the  navel '). 

61.  '  Neither  hot,'  i.  e. '  not  boiled  or  heated  on  the  fire '  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

63.  Baudh.  I,  8,  5-10. 

64.  Baudh.  I,  6,  7;  Vi.  XXVII,  29. 


42  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  65. 

65.  (The  ceremony  called)  Keranta  (clipping  the 
hair)  is  ordained  for  a  Brahma^a  in  the  sixteenth 
year  (from  conception) ;  for  a  Kshatriya,  in  the 
twenty-second ;  and  for  a  Vai^ya,  two  (years)  later 
than  that. 

66.  This  whole  series  (of  ceremonies)  must  be 
performed  for  females  (also),  in  order  to  sanctify 
the  body,  at  the  proper  time  and  in  the  proper 
order,  but  without  (the  recitation  of)  sacred 
texts. 

6  J.  The  nuptial  ceremony  is  stated  to  be  the 
Vedic  sacrament  for  women  (and  to  be  equal  to 
the  initiation),  serving  the  husband  (equivalent  to) 
the  residence  in  (the  house  of  the)  teacher,  and  the 
household  duties  (the  same)  as  the  (daily)  worship 
of  the  sacred  fire. 

68.  Thus  has  been  described  the  rule  for  the 
initiation  of  the  twice-born,  which  indicates  a  (new) 
birth,  and  sanctifies ;  learn  (now)  to  what  duties  they 
must  afterwards  apply  themselves. 

69.  Having  performed  the  (rite  of)  initiation, 
the  teacher  must  first  instruct  the  (pupil)  in  (the 
rules  of)  personal  purification,  of  conduct,  of  the 
fire-worship,  and  of  the  twilight  devotions. 

65.  Yagii.  I,  36.  This  is  the  ceremony  also  called  Godana;  Asv. 
Grz'hya-sutra  I,  18;   Paraskara  II,  1,  3-7. 

66-67.  Asv.  Gn'hya-sutra  I,  16,  16;  Vi.  XXVII,  13-14;  Y&gri. 
I,  13.  '  The  Vedic  sacrament,'  i.e.  'the  sacrament  performed  with 
sacred  texts '  (Nand.,  Ragh.),  or  '  having  for  its  object  the  study 
of  Vedic  texts'  (Medh.,  Nar.).  Hence  women  must  not  be  initiated. 
As  the  parallel  passage  of  Asv.  shows,  the  sacraments  preceding 
the  tonsure  alone  are  to  be  given  to  them. 

68.  '  Which  indicates  their  (real)  birth,  because  an  uninitiated 
man  is  equal  to  one  unborn '  (Medh.,  Gov.). 

69-73.  Gaut.  I,  46-56  ;  Vi.  XXX,  32  ;  Yagn.  I,  15,  27. 


11,74-  initiation;  studentship.  43 

70.  But  (a  student)  who  is  about  to  begin  the 
study  (of  the  Veda),  shall  receive  instruction,  after 
he  has  sipped  water  in  accordance  with  the  Insti- 
tutes (of  the  sacred  law),  has  made  the  Brahma^fali, 
(has  put  on)  a  clean  dress,  and  has  brought  his  organs 
under  due  control. 

71.  At  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  (a  lesson 
in  the)  Veda  he  must  always  clasp  both  the  feet  of 
his  teacher,  (and)  he  must  study,  joining  his  hands ; 
that  is  called  the  Brahma^ali  (joining  the  palms  for 
the  sake  of  the  Veda). 

72.  With  crossed  hands  he  must  clasp  (the  feet) 
of  the  teacher,  and  touch  the  left  (foot)  with  his  left 
(hand),  the  right  (foot)  with  his  right  (hand). 

73.  But  to  him  who  is  about  to  begin  studying, 
the  teacher,  always  unwearied,  must  say:  Ho,  recite  ! 
He  shall  leave  off  (when  the  teacher  says) :  Let  a 
stoppage  take  place ! 

74.  Let  him  always  pronounce  the  syllable  Om 
at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  (a  lesson  in)  the 
Veda ;  (for)  unless  the  syllable  Om  precede  (the 
lesson)  will  slip  away  (from  him),  and  unless  it  follow 
it  will  fade  away. 

70.  Laghuvasa^,  '  (has  put  on)  a  clean  dress '  (Medh.,  Kull.),  or 
c  a  dress  which  is  not  gorgeous'  (Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  i.e.  less  valuable 
than  the  teacher's  (Ragh.). 

71-72.  Ap.  I,  5,  19-23;  Baudh.  I,  3,  28;  Vi.  XXVIII,  14-16. 

73.  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  adhyeshyamawas  tu  gurum,  &c.  'But 
the  pupil,  desiring  to  study,  shall  say  to  his  teacher,  Venerable 
Sir,  recite!  &c.,'  and  this  agrees  with  Gaut.  I,  46.  Nar.  mentions  also 
the  reading  translated  above,  which  the  other  commentators  give. 

74.  Ap.  1, 1 3, 6-7 ;  Gaut.  1, 57 ;  Vi.  XXX,  33.  Vmryate,  translated 
according  to  Kull.  by  '  will  fade  away/  means  according  to  Medh. 
'  will  become  useless  for  practical  purposes;'  according  to  Gov.  and 
Nar. '  will  not  be  properly  understood  during  the  lesson/  Medh. 
adds  that  the  two  terms  contain  similes,  taken  from  boiling  milk, 


44  LAWS   OF    MANU. 


I 


75.  Seated  on  (blades  of  Kusa  grass)  with  their 
points  to  the  east,  purified  by  Pavitras  (blades  of 
Kusa  grass),  and  sanctified  by  three  suppressions  of 
the  breath  (Pra^ayama),  he  is  worthy  (to  pronounce) 
the  syllable  Om. 

76.  Pra^apati  (the  lord  of  creatures)  milked  out 
(as  it  were)  from  the  three  Vedas  the  sounds  A,  U, 
and  M,  and  (the  Vyahmis)  BhM,  Bhuva^,  Sva^. 

yy.  Moreover  from  the  three  Vedas  Pra^apati, 
who  dwells  in  the  highest  heaven  (Paramesh^in), 
milked  out  (as  it  were)  that  iv^'k-verse,  sacred  to 
Savitrz  (Savitri),  which  begins  with  the  word  tad, 
one  foot  from  each. 

j8.  A  Brahma/za,  learned  in  the  Veda,  who  recites 
during  both  twilights  that  syllable  and  that  (verse), 
preceded  by  the  Vyahmis,  gains  the  (whole)  merit 
which  (the  recitation  of)  the  Vedas  confers. 

79.  A  twice-born  man  who  (daily)  repeats  those 
three  one  thousand  times  outside  (the  village),  will 
be  freed  after  a  month  even  from  great  guilt,  as  a 
snake  from  its  slough. 

80.  The  Brahma;za,  the  Kshatriya,  and  the  Vaijya 
who  neglect  (the  recitation  of)  that  7^'k-verse  and  the 

and  that  one  speaks  also  of  the  vLraraTza,  i.e.  the  spoiling  of  boiled 
milk. 

75.  Gaut.  I,  48-50;  Yagn.  I,  23.  'Purified  by  Pavitras,' i.e. 
'  having  touched  the  seat  of  the  vital  airs  with  blades  of  Kara  grass' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.) ;  see  Gaut.  I,  48.  Medh.  mentions  another 
explanation  of  Pavitra,  adopted  by  Nand.  also,  according  to  which 
it  means  '  purificatory  texts.'  Regarding  the  term  '  suppression  of 
the  breath/  see  Vas.  XXV,  13;  Vi.  LV,  9. 

76.  Vi.  LV,  10. 

77.  Vi.  LV,  1 1.    The  Savitn,  i.e.  the  verse  tat  savitur  varewyam, 
,  Rig-veda  III,  62,  10. 

78.  Vi.  LV,  12;   Baudh.  II,  11,  6. 

79.  Vi.  LV,  13;  Baudh.  IV,  1,  29;  Vas.  XXVI,  4. 

80.  Vi.  LV,  14. 


TI,  85.  STUDENTSHIP.  45 

timely  (performance  of  the)  rites  (prescribed  for)  them, 
will  be  blamed  among  virtuous  men. 

81.  Know  that  the  three  imperishable  Mahavya- 
hrztis,  preceded  by  the  syllable  Om,  and  (followed)  by 
the  three-footed  Savitri  are  the  portal  of  the  Veda 
and  the  gate  leading  (to  union  with)  Brahman. 

82.  He  who  daily  recites  that  (verse),  untired, 
during  three  years,  will  enter  (after  death)  the  high- 
est Brahman,  move  as  free  as  air,  and  assume  an 
ethereal  form. 

83.  The  monosyllable  (Om)  is  the  highest  Brah- 
man, (three)  suppressions  of  the  breath  are  the  best 
(form  of)  austerity,  but  nothing  surpasses  the  Savitri; 
truthfulness  is  better  than  silence. 

84.  All  rites  ordained  in  the  Veda,  burnt  oblations 
and  (other)  sacrifices,  pass  away;  but  know  that  the 
syllable  (Om)  is  imperishable,  and  (it  is)  Brahman, 
(and)  the  Lord  of  creatures  (Pra^apati). 

85.  An  offering,  consisting  of  muttered  prayers,  is 
ten  times  more  efficacious  than  a  sacrifice  performed 

81.  Vi.  LV,  15.  Brahmawo  mukham,  literally,  '  the  mouth  of 
Brahman,'  is  probably  meant  to  convey  the  double  sense  given  in 
the  translation.  Both  interpretations  are  given  by  Medh.,  Kull., 
and  Ragh.,  while  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  explain  it  merely  by  'the 
beginning  or  portal  of  the  Veda;'  see  also  Ap.  I,  13,  6. 

82.  Vi.  LV,  16.  83.  Vi.  LV,  17. 

84.  Vi.  LVI,  18.  '  Pass  away/  i.e. '  as  far  as  their  results  are  con- 
cerned '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.), '  as  far  as  their  form  and  their 
results  are  concerned '  (Nand.).  Sacrifices  procure  only  the  perish- 
able bliss  of  heaven,  while  the  constant  recitation  of  the  syllable  Om 
secures  union  with  Brahman.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.,  Brahman  is  here  a  neuter ;  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.,  a 
masculine.  The  words  'and  (it  is)  Brahman  (and)  Pra^apati'(Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.)  are  taken  by  Kull.  as  '  since  it  is  Brahman  (and) 
Pra^apati,'  by  Nand.  as  '  just  like  Brahman,  the  Lord  of  creatures.' 

85.  Vi.  LVI,  19;  Vas.  XXVI,  9.  The  sacred  texts  meant  are, 
of  course,  Om,  the  Vyahrz'tis,  and  the  Gayatri. 


46 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  86. 


according  to  the  rules  (of  the  Veda);  a  (prayer)  which 
is  inaudible  (to  others)  surpasses  it  a  hundred  times, 
and  the  mental  (recitation  of  sacred  texts)  a  thousand 
times. 

86.  The  four  Pakaya^/zas  and  those  sacrifices 
which  are  enjoined  by  the  rules  (of  the  Veda)  are 
all  together  not  equal  in  value  to  a  sixteenth  part 
of  the  sacrifice  consisting  of  muttered  prayers. 

8  j.  But,  undoubtedly,  a  Brahma^a  reaches  the 
highest  goal  by  muttering  prayers  only;  (whether) 
he  perform  other  (rites)  or  neglect  them,  he  who 
befriends  (all  creatures)  is  declared  (to  be)  a  (true) 
Brahma/za. 

88.  A  wise  man  should  strive  to  restrain  his  organs 
which  run  wild  among  alluring  sensual  objects,  like 
a  charioteer  his  horses. 

89.  Those  eleven  organs  which  former  sages  have 
named,  I  will  properly  (and)  precisely  enumerate  in 
due  order, 

90.  (Viz.)  the  ear,  the  skin,  the  eyes,  the  tongue, 
and  the  nose  as  the  fifth,  the  anus,  the  organ  of  gene- 
ration, hands  and  feet,  and  the  (organ  of)  speech, 
named  as  the  tenth. 


86.  Vi.  LVI,  20;  Vas.  XXVI,  10.  'The  Pakaya^as,'  i.e.  'the 
so-called  great  sacrifices  to  gods,  manes,  goblins,  and  men  (III,  70) 
excluding  the  Brahmaya^na'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.).  Gov.  and 
Ragh.  understand  the  term  as  indicating  '  all  Smarta  and  -Srauta 
rites;'  see  also  Jolly  on  Vishmi,  loc.  cit. 

87.  Vi.  LVI,  2 1 ;  Vas.  XXVI,  1 1 .  Maitra^, '  one  who  befriends 
(all  creatures),'  i.  e. '  does  not  offer  animal  sacrifices/  Ragh.  proposes 
also  the  interpretation  '  he  who  worships  Mitra,  the  Sun/  Brah- 
ma«a^,  'a  (true)  Brahmawa/  i.e.  'one  connected  with  Brahman,' 
'one  who  will  be  absorbed  in  Brahman'  (Kull.),  'the  best  of 
Brahmawas '  (brahmish/^a/^,  Ragh.).  Medh.  and  Gov.  take  the  last 
clause  differently,  '  it  is  declared  (in  the  Veda  that)  a  Brahma«a 
(shall  be)  a  friend  (of  all  creatures)/ 


IT,  97.  STUDENTSHIP.  47 

91.  Five  of  them,  the  ear  and  the  rest  according 
to  their  order,  they  call  organs  of  sense,  and  five  of 
them,  the  anus  and  the  rest,  organs  of  action. 

92.  Know  that  the  internal  organ  (manas)  is  the 
eleventh,  which  by  its  quality  belongs  to  both  (sets)  ; 
when  that  has  been  subdued,  both  those  sets  of  five 
have  been  conquered. 

93.  Through  the  attachment  of  his  organs  (to 
sensual  pleasure)  a  man  doubtlessly  will  incur  guilt ; 
but  if  he  keep  them  under  complete  control,  he  will 
obtain  success  (in  gaining  all  his  aims). 

94.  Desire  is  never  extinguished  by  the  enjoyment 
of  desired  objects  ;  it  only  grows  stronger  like  a  fire 
(fed)  with  clarified  butter. 

95.  If  one  man  should  obtain  all  those  (sensual 
enjoyments)  and  another  should  renounce  them  all, 
the  renunciation  of  all  pleasure  is  far  better  than  the 
attainment  of  them. 

96.  Those  (organs)  which  are  strongly  attached  to 
sensual  pleasures,  cannot  so  effectually  be  restrained 
by  abstinence  (from  enjoyments)  as  by  a  constant 
(pursuit  of  true)  knowledge. 

97.  Neither  (the  study  of)  the  Vedas,  nor  libera- 


92.  '  By  its  quality,'  i.e.  by  the  quality  called  sa#zkalpa,  the  power 
of  determining  or  shaping  the  impressions  of  the  senses. 

93.  Dosham, '  guilt '  (NaT.),  is  taken  by  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  in 
the  sense  of  d/Ysh/adrzsh/aw  dosham, '  misery  and  guilt ; '  by  Ragh. 
as  sawsarakhyam, '  the  misery  of  repeated  births.'  '  Success  (in 
gaining  all  his  aims),' i.e.  'the  rewards  of  all  good  works  and  rites' 
(Medh.),  or  « final  liberation '  (Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  '  all  the  aims  of 
men,  final  liberation  and  the  rest'  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

96.  Asevaya, 'by  abstinence  from  enjoyments'  (Gov.,  Nar., 
Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Kull. '  by  avoiding  places 
where  enjoyments  are  to  be  obtained/  i.e.  'by  dwelling  in  the 
forest'  (Medh.). 


48  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  98. 

lity,  nor  sacrifices,  nor  any  (self-imposed)  restraint, 
nor  austerities,  ever  procure  the  attainment  (of  re- 
wards) to  a  man  whose  heart  is  contaminated  (by 
sensuality). 

98.  That  man  may  be  considered  to  have  (really) 
subdued  his  organs,  who  on  hearing  and  touching 
and  seeing,  on  tasting  and  smelling  (anything)  nei- 
ther rejoices  nor  repines. 

99.  But  when  one  among  all  the  organs  slips  away 
(from  control),  thereby  (man's)  wisdom  slips  away 
from  him,  even  as  the  water  (flows)  through  the  one 
(open)  foot  of  a  (water-carrier's)  skin. 

100.  If  he  keeps  all  the  (ten)  organs  as  well  as 
the  mind  in  subjection,  he  may  gain  all  his  aims, 
without  reducing  his  body  by  (the  practice)  of  Yoga. 

10 1.  Let  him  stand  during  the  morning  twilight, 
muttering  the  Savitri  until  the  sun  appears,  but  (let 
him  recite  it),  seated,  in  the  evening  until  the  constel- 
lations can  be  seen  distinctly. 

102.  He  who  stands  during  the  morning  twilight 
muttering  (the  Savitri),  removes  the  guilt  contracted 
during  the  (previous)  night ;  but  he  who  (recites  it), 


99.  'Wisdom,'  i.e.  'power  of  control  over  the  senses'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Ragh.),  or  'knowledge  of  the  truth'  (Kull.).  I  read  with 
Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  K.,  and  the  Bombay  edition 
padat,  instead  of  patrat.  The  explanation  of  the  simile  has 
been  given  correctly  by  Haughton  in  his  note  on  Sir  W.  Jones' 
translation. 

1 00.  Nar.  and  Nand.  take  yogata^,  '  by  the  practice  of  Yoga,' 
with  the  chief  clause,  and  Medh.  mentions  this  construction  too. 

101.  Ap.  I,  30,  8;  Gaut.  II,  10-11  ;  Vas.  VII,  16;  Baudh.  II,  7, 
Vi.  XXVIII,  2-3;  Yzgii.  I,  24-25. 

102.  Vas.  XXVI,  2-3;  Baudh.  II,  7,  18,  20.  Medh.  and  Gov. 
point  out  that  only  trifling  faults  can  be  expiated  in  this  manner, 
otherwise  the  chapter  on  penances  would  be  useless. 


IT,  107.  STUDENTSHIP.  49 

seated,  in  the  evening,  destroys  the  sin  he  committed 
during  the  day. 

103.  But  he  who  does  not  (worship)  standing  in 
the  morning,  nor  sitting  in  the  evening,  shall  be 
excluded,  just  like  a  .5udra,  from  all  the  duties  and 
rights  of  an  Aryan. 

104.  He  who  (desires  to)  perform  the  ceremony 
(of  the)  daily  (recitation),  may  even  recite  the  Savitri 
near  water,  retiring  into  the  forest,  controlling  his 
organs  and  concentrating  his  mind. 

105.  Both  when  (one  studies)  the  supplementary 
treatises  of  the  Veda,  and  when  (one  recites)  the  daily 
portion  of  the  Veda,  no  regard  need  be  paid  to  for- 
bidden days,  likewise  when  (one  repeats)  the  sacred 
texts  required  for  a  burnt  oblation. 

106.  There  are  no  forbidden  days  for  the  daily 
recitation,  since  that  is  declared  to  be  a  Brahma- 
sattra  (an  everlasting  sacrifice  offered  to  Brahman)  ; 
at  that  the  Veda  takes  the  place  of  the  burnt 
oblations,  and  it  is  meritorious  (even),  when  (natural 
phenomena,  requiring)  a  cessation  of  the  Veda-study, 
take  the  place  of  the  exclamation  Vasha£ 

107.  For  him  who,  being  pure  and  controlling  his 
organs,  during  a  year  daily  recites  the  Veda  according 
to  the  rule,  that  (daily  recitation)  will  ever  cause  sweet 
and  sour  milk,  clarified  butter  and  honey  to  flow. 

103.  Baudh.  II,  17,  15. 

104.  Baudh.  II,  1 1,  6.  '  Even,'  i.e.  '  if  he  is  unable  to  recite  other 
Vedic  texts.' 

105-106.  Ap.  I,  12,  1-9 ;  Vas.  XIII,  7.  The  last  clause  of  verse 
106  finds  its  explanation  by  the  passage  from  the  »Satapatha-brah- 
ma«a,  quoted  by  Ap.  1, 12,  3.  Anadhyaya/z  ('  not  studying ')  means 
*  a  cause  for  the  interruption  of  the  study,  such  as  thunder  or  a 
violent  wind,  which  takes  the  place  of  the  exclamation  Vasha/.' 

107.  Vi.  XXX,  34-38;  Yagii.  I,  41-46.  Nar.  and  Nand. 
explain  the  four  terms  '  sweet  and  sour  milk,  clarified  butter  and 

[25]  E 


5o 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  ro8. 


1 08.  Let  an  Aryan  who  has  been  initiated,  (daily) 
offer  fuel  in  the  sacred  fire,  beg  food,  sleep  on  the 
ground  and  do  what  is  beneficial  to  his  teacher,  until 
(he  performs  the  ceremony  of)  Samavartana  (on  re- 
turning home). 

109.  According  to  the  sacred  law  the  (following) 
ten  (persons,  viz.)  the  teacher's  son,  one  who  desires 
to  do  service,  one  who  imparts  knowledge,  one  who 
is  intent  on  fulfilling  the  law,  one  who  is  pure,  a  per- 
son connected  by  marriage  or  friendship,  one  who 
possesses  (mental)  ability,  one  who  makes  presents 
of  money,  one  who  is  honest,  and  a  relative,  may  be 
instructed  (in  the  Veda). 

no.  Unless  one  be  asked,  one  must  not  explain 
(anything)  to  anybody,  nor  (must  one  answer)  a  per- 
son who  asks  improperly;  let  a  wise  man,  though 
he  knows  (the  answer),  behave  among  men  as  (if  he 
were)  an  idiot. 

in.  Of  the  two  persons,  him  who  illegally  explains 
(anything),  and  him  who  illegally  asks  (a  question), 
one  (or  both)  will  die  or  incur  (the  other's)  enmity. 


honey/  as  symbolical  of  the  four  objects  of  human  existence,  merit, 
wealth,  pleasure,  and  liberation.  Medh.  quotes  this  interpretation  as 
the  opinion  of  '  others.' 

108.  Ap.  I,  4,  16,  23,  25,  28,  32;  Gaut.  II,  8,  30,  35;  Vas.VII, 
9,  15 ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  4,  7,  9,  12  ;  Baudh.  I,  3,  16,  4,  4-8;  Ya^ft.  I, 
25.     Regarding  the  Samavartana,  see  below,  III,  3-4. 

109.  Y&gri.  I,  28.  Dharmata^,  'according  to  the  sacred  law' 
(Kull.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  'for  the 
sake  of  spiritual  merit.' 

no.  Ap.  I,  32,  22-24;  Vas-  II,  12;  Baudh.  I,  4,  2;  Vi.  XXIX,  7. 
Ga.da./i}  '  an  idiot,'  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Kull.  '  dumb.' 

in.  Vi.  XXIX,  7.  The  person  who  will  die  is  in  either  case 
the  offender.  If  both  offend,  both  will  die.  Vidveshazw  vadhi- 
gakkkzti,  'will  incur  (the  other's)  enmity,'  means  according  to 
Medh.  and  Gov. 'will  incur  odium  among  men;'  according  to 
Ragh.  '  will  lose  the  reward.' 


II,  1 19.  STUDENTSHIP.  5 1 

112.  Where  merit  and  wealth  are  not  (obtained 
by  teaching)  nor  (at  least)  due  obedience,  in  such 
(soil)  sacred  knowledge  must  not  be  sown,  just  as 
good  seed  (must)  not  (be  thrown)  on  barren  land. 

1 1 3.  Even  in  times  of  dire  distress  a  teacher  of 
the  Veda  should  rather  die  with  his  knowledge  than 
sow  it  in  barren  soil. 

114.  Sacred  Learning  approached  a  Brahma/za  and 
said  to  him  :  '  I  am  thy  treasure,  preserve  me,  deliver 
me  not  to  a  scorner ;  so  (preserved)  I  shall  become 
supremely  strong.' 

115.  'But  deliver  me,  as  to  the  keeper  of  thy 
treasure,  to  a  Brahma^a  whom  thou  shalt  know  to 
be  pure,  of  subdued  senses,  chaste  and  attentive.' 

116.  But  he  who  acquires  without  permission  the 
Veda  from  one  who  recites  it,  incurs  the  guilt  of 
stealing  the  Veda,  and  shall  sink  into  hell. 

117.  (A  student)  shall  first  reverentially  salute 
that  (teacher)  from  whom  he  receives  (knowledge), 
referring  to  worldly  affairs,  to  the  Veda,  or  to  the 
Brahman. 

118.  A  Brahma^a  who  completely  governs  him- 
self, though  he  know  the  Savitri  only,  is  better  than 
he  who  knows  the  three  Vedas,  (but)  does  not  con- 
trol himself,  eats  all  (sorts  of)  food,  and  sells  all 
(sorts  of  goods). 

119.  One  must  not  sit  down  on  a  couch  or  seat 

112.  Baudh.  I,  4,  1  ;  Vi.  XXIX,  8. 

113.  This  verse  shows,  as  Medh.  and  Gov.  point  out,  that  under 
ordinary  circumstances  a  learned  man  must  teach  what  he  knows. 

114-115.  Vas.  II,  8-10;  Vi.  XXIX,  9-10;  Nirukta  II,  4. 

116.  Vi.  XXX,  41-42. 

117.  Ap.  I,  14,  7-9;Gaut.VI,i-3,  5;  Vas.  XIII,  41-43;  Baudh.  I, 
3,  25-28  ;  Vi.  XXXII,  1-4.  This  rule  refers  to  any  casual  meeting. 

119.  Ap.  I,  8,  11,  14,  17 ;  Gaut.  II,  21,  25. 

E    2 


52  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  12 


which  a  superior  occupies ;  and  he  who  occupies  a 
couch  or  seat  shall  rise  to  meet  a  (superior),  and 
(afterwards)  salute  him. 

120.  For  the  vital  airs  of  a  young  man  mount 
upwards  to  leave  his  body  when  an  elder  ap- 
proaches ;  but  by  rising  to  meet  him  and  saluting 
he  recovers  them. 

121.  He  who  habitually  salutes  and  constantly 
pays  reverence  to  the  aged  obtains  an  increase  of 
four  (things),  (viz.)  length  of  life,  knowledge,  fame, 
(and)  strength. 

122.  After  the  (word  of)  salutation,  a  Brahma^a 
who  greets  an  elder  must  pronounce  his  name,  say- 
ing, ■  I  am  N.  N.' 

123.  To  those  (persons)  who,  when  a  name  is 
pronounced,  do  not  understand  (the  meaning  of)  the 
salutation,  a  wise  man  should  say, '  It  is  I ;'  and  (he 
should  address)  in  the  same  manner  all  women. 

124.  In  saluting  he  should  pronounce  after  his 
name  the  word  bho/£;  for  the  sages  have  declared 
that  the  nature  of  bho/£  is  the  same  as  that  of  (all 
proper)  names. 

125.  A  Brahma/za  should  thus  be  saluted  in  re- 
turn, '  May'st  thou  be  long-lived,  O  gentle  one  ! ' 

121.  Ap.  I,  5,  15  ;  Baudh.  I,  3,  26.  Instead  of  vidy&  or  pra^wa, 
'  knowledge,'  Medh.  reads  dharma/$, '  spiritual  merit,'  and  the  same 
reading  is  given  sec.  man.  in  the  text  of  Gov. 

122.  Ap.  I,  5, 12  ;  Gaut.  VI,  5  ;  Vas.  XIII,  45 ;  Baudh.  I,  3,  27  ; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  17  ;  YagTi.  I,  26.  'After  the  word  of  salutation,'  i.  e. 
after  the  word  abhiv&daye, '  I  salute'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

123.  Vas.  XIII,  46.  I.e.  to  those  who  either  are  unacquainted 
with  grammar  or  with  the  Dharnmastra  (Medh.).  Nand.  places 
this  verse  after  verse  126. 

124.  Vi.  XXVIII,  17. 

125.  Ap.  I,  5,  18;  Vas.  XIII,  46.  The  translation  of  the  second 
half  of  the  verse  is  based  on  the  reading '  purvaksharapluta^,'  which 


= 


II,  128.  STUDENTSHIP.  53 

and  the  vowel  '  a '  must  be  added  at  the  end  of 
the  name  (of  the  person  addressed),  the  syllable 
preceding  it  being  drawn  out  to  the  length  of  three 
moras. 

126.  A  Brahma/za  who  does  not  know  the  form 
of  returning  a  salutation,  must  not  be  saluted  by  a 
learned  man  ;  as  a  6udra,  even  so  is  he. 

127.  Let  him  ask  a  Brahma^a,  on  meeting  him, 
after  (his  health,  with  the  word)  kui-ala,  a  Kshatriya 
(with  the  word)  anamaya,  a  Vai^ya  (with  the  word) 
kshema,  and  a  .Sudra  (with  the  word)  anarogya. 

128.  He  who  has  been  initiated  (to  perform  a 
6rauta  sacrifice)  must  not  be  addressed  by  his  name, 
even  though  he  be  a  younger  man ;  he  who  knows 

Nand.  gives,  and  Nar.  mentions  as  adopted  by  '  some.'  It  follows 
the  interpretation  of  these  two  commentators  which  agrees  in  sub- 
stance with  the  rule  of  Vasish//$a.  The  meaning  is  that  Devadatta 
is  to  be  pronounced  '  Devadatta3a,'  Harabhute, '  Harabhuta3ya,'  &c. 
Medh.  and  Kull.  take  the  passage  as  follows  :  '  and  the  vowel 
(i.e.)  "a"  (and  so  forth)  at  the  end  of  the  name,  (or  in  case  the 
word  ends  in  a  consonant)  that  of  the  preceding  syllable,  must  be 
drawn  out  the  length  of  the  three  moras.'  According  to  this  in- 
terpretation, which  requires  the  reading  '  purvakshara^  plutaA,' 
Manu's  rule  agrees  with  Ap.  and  Pamni  VIII,  2,  83.  The  obvious 
objection  is  that  Medh.  and  Kull.  are  forced  to  take  akara,  'the 
vowel  a,'  in  the  sense  of  '  a  vowel  such  as  a,'  and  to  understand 
with  purvakshara^  the  word  svara^,  which  does  not  occur  in  the 
verse.  Gov.  and  Ragh.  go  far  off  the  mark.  Most  commentators 
think  that  the  word  vipra^, '  a  Brahmaraa,'  is  meant  to  include  other 
Aryans  also;  but  see  Ap.  I,  14,  23. 

126.  It  follows  from  this  verse  that  .Sudras  must  never  be  greeted 
in  the  manner  prescribed  in  the  preceding  rule. 

127.  Ap.  I,  24,  26-29.  The  rule  refers  to  friends  or  relatives 
meeting,  not  to  every  one  who  returns  a  salute  (Gov.). 

128.  Gaut.  VI,  19.  The  rule  refers  to  the  time  between  the 
performance  of  the  Dikshawiyesh/i  or  initiatory  ceremony  and  the 
final  bath  on  completion  of  the  sacrifice  (Medh.,  Kull.).  Besides 
bhoh  and  bhavat,  the  titles  dikshita  or  ya^amana  are  to  be  used. 


54  LAWS    OF   MANU.  II,  12 


the  sacred  law  must  use  in  speaking  to  such  (a  man 
the  particle)  bho/£  and  (the  pronoun)  bhavat  (your 
worship). 

129.  But  to  a  female  who  is  the  wife  of  another 
man,  and  not  a  blood-relation,  he  must  say,  '  Lady' 
(bhavati)  or  '  Beloved  sister ! ' 

1 30.  To  his  maternal  and  paternal  uncles,  fathers- 
in-law,  officiating  priests,  (and  other)  venerable  per- 
sons, he  must  say,  '  I  am  N.  N.,'  and  rise  (to  meet 
them),  even  though  they  be  younger  (than  himself). 

131.  A  maternal  aunt,  the  wife  of  a  maternal 
uncle,  a  mother-in-law,  and  a  paternal  aunt  must  be 
honoured  like  the  wife  of  one's  teacher;  they  are 
equal  to  the  wife  of  one's  teacher. 

132.  (The  feet  of  the)  wife  of  one's  brother,  if  she 
be  of  the  same  caste  (var/za),  must  be  clasped  every 
day;  but  (the  feet  of)  wives  of  (other)  paternal  and 
maternal  relatives  need  only  be  embraced  on  one's 
return  from  a  journey. 

133.  Towards  a  sister  of  one's  father  and  of  one's 
mother,  and  towards  one's  own  elder  sister,  one  must 
behave  as  towards  one's  mother ;  (but)  the  mother  is 
more  venerable  than  they. 

134.  Fellow-citizens  are  called  friends  (and  equals 
though  one  be)  ten  years  (older  than  the  other),  men 

129.  yi.  xxxii,  7. 

130.  Ap.  I,  14,  11 ;  Gaut.  VI,  9;  Vas.  XIII,  41 ;  Baudh.  I,  4, 
45  ;  Vi.  XXXII,  4.  Gurun,  '  (other)  venerable  persons,  i.  e.  those 
venerable  on  account  of  their  learning  and  austerities'  (Kull.,  Ragh.), 
or '  his  betters,  because  they  are  richer  and  so  forth,  e.  g.  the  son  of 
a  sister '  (Medh.),  or  ■  the  husband  of  a  maternal  aunt  and  so  forth, 
but  not  those  more  learned  than  himself  (Gov.),  or  '  the  teacher 
and  the  rest '  (Nand.),  or  the  '  sub-teachers '  (upadhyaya,  Nar.). 

131-132.  Gaut.  VI,  9;  Ap.  I,  14;  Vi.  XXXII,  2-3. 

134.  Ap.  I,  14,  13;  Gaut.  VI,  14-17.   Those  who  are  'friends' 


II,  139-  STUDENTSHIP.  55 

practising  (the  same)  fine  art  (though  one  be)  five 
years  (older  than  the  other),  6rotriyas  (though) 
three  years  (intervene  between  their  ages),  but 
blood -relations  only  (if  the)  difference  of  age  be 
very  small. 

135.  Know  that  a  Brahma^a  of  ten  years  and 
Kshatriya  of  a  hundred  years  stand  to  each  other 
in  the  relation  of  father  and  son  ;  but  between  those 
two  the  Brahma^a  is  the  father. 

136.  Wealth,  kindred,  age,  (the  due  performance 
of)  rites,  and,  fifthly,  sacred  learning  are  titles  to 
respect ;  but  each  later- named  (cause)  is  more 
weighty  (than  the  preceding  ones). 

137.  Whatever  man  of  the  three  (highest)  castes 
possesses  most  of  those  five,  both  in  number  and 
degree,  that  man  is  worthy  of  honour  among  them ; 
and  (so  is)  also  a  6udra  who  has  entered  the  tenth 
(decade  of  his  life). 

138.  Way  must  be  made  for  a  man  in  a  carriage, 
for  one  who  is  above  ninety  years  old,  for  one  dis- 
eased, for  the  carrier  of  a  burden,  for  a  woman,  for 
a  Snataka,  for  the  king,  and  for  a  bridegroom. 

139.  Among  all  those,  if  they  meet  (at  one  time), 
a  Snataka  and  the  king  must  be  (most)  honoured ; 


and  equals  may  address  each  other  with  the  words  bho^,  bhavat, 
or  vayasya, '  friend.'  The  explanation  of  the  verse,  which  is  sub- 
stantially the  same "  in  all  the  commentaries,  is  based  on  Gaut/s 
passage,  while  Haradatta's  interpretation  of  Ap.  somewhat  differs. 

135.  Ap.  I,  14,  25;  Vi.  XXXII,  17. 

136.  Gaut.  VI,  20;  Vas.  XIII,  56-57;  Vi.  XXXII,  16;  Y&g%. 
I,  116. 

137.  Gaut.  VI,  10;  Yagii.  I,  116. 

138-139.  Ap.  II,  11,  5-7;  Gaut.  VI,  24-25;  Vas.  XIII,  58-60; 
Baudh.  II,  6,  30;  Vi.  LXIII,  51 ;  Yag-w.  I,  117.  For  the  explana- 
tion of  the  term  Snataka,  see  below,  IV,  31. 


56  LAWS   OF    MANU.  II,  14c 

and  if  the  king  and  a  Snataka  (meet),  the  latter 
receives  respect  from  the  king. 

140.  They  call  that  Br&hma^a  who  initiates  a 
pupil  and  teaches  him  the  Veda  together  with  the 
Kalpa  and  the  Rahasyas,  the  teacher  (a^arya,  of  the 
latter). 

141.  But  he  who  for  his  livelihood  teaches  a 
portion  only  of  the  Veda,  or  also  the  Ahgas  of 
the  Veda,  is  called  the  sub-teacher  (upadhyaya). 

142.  That  Brahma^a,  who  performs  in  accord- 
ance with  the  rules  (of  the  Veda)  the  rites,  the 
Garbhadhana  (conception -rite),  and  so  forth,  and 
gives  food  (to  the  child),  is  called  the  Guru  (the 
venerable  one). 

143.  He  who,  being  (duly)  chosen  (for  the  pur- 
pose), performs  the  Agnyadheya,  the  Pakaya^as, 
(and)  the  (6rauta)  sacrifices,  such  as  the  Agnish- 
/oma  (for  another  man),  is  called  (his)  officiating 
priest. 

144.  That  (man)  who  truthfully  fills  both  his  ears 
with  the  Veda,  (the  pupil)  shall  consider  as  his 
father  and  mother;  he  must  never  offend  him. 

145.  The   teacher    (a^arya)    is    ten    times    more 

1 40-1 4 1.  Ap.  1, 1,13;  Gaut.  I,  9-10;  Vas.  Ill,  21-23;  Vi.  XXIX, 
1-2 ;  Y&gri.  I,  34-35.  Kalpa,  i.  e.  the  Sutras  referring  to  sacrifices. 
Rahasyas,  lit.  'the  secret  portions/  i.e.  the  Upanishads  and  their 
explanation  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  or  '  the  extremely 
secret  explanation  of  the  Veda  and  Ahgas,  not  the  Upanishads, 
because  they  are  included  in  the  term  Veda '  (Nar). 

142.  Yagii.  I,  34.    The  person  meant  is  the  natural  father. 

143.  Vi.XXIX,  3;Ya^.I,  35. 

144.  Ap.  I,  1,  14;  Vas.  II,  10;  Vi.  XXX,  47.  < Truthfully/  i.e. 
in  such  a  manner  that  there  is  no  mistake  in  the  pronunciation 
or  in  the  text  of  the  Veda. 

145.  Vas.  XIII,  48 ;  Y&gri.  I,  35.  The  commentators  try  to 
reconcile  the  meaning  of  this  verse  and  the  next  following  one  by 


I 


II,150.  STUDENTSHIP.  57 

venerable  than  a  sub-teacher  (upadhyaya),  the  father 
a  hundred  times  more  than  the  teacher,  but  the 
mother  a  thousand  times  more  than  the  father. 

146.  Of  him  who  gives  natural  birth  and  him  who 
gives  (the  knowledge  of)  the  Veda,  the  giver  of  the 
Veda  is  the  more  venerable  father ;  for  the  birth 
for  the  sake  of  the  Veda  (ensures)  eternal  (rewards) 
both  in  this  (life)  and  after  death. 

147.  Let  him  consider  that  (he  received)  a  (mere 
animal)  existence,  when  his  parents  begat  him 
through  mutual  affection,  and  when  he  was  born 
from  the  womb  (of  his  mother). 

148.  But  that  birth  which  a  teacher  acquainted 
with  the  whole  Veda,  in  accordance  with  the  law, 
procures  for  him  through  the  Savitri,  is  real,  exempt 
from  age  and  death. 

149.  (The  pupil)  must  know  that  that  man  also 
who  benefits  him  by  (instruction  in)  the  Veda,  be 
it  little  or  much,  is  called  in  these  (Institutes)  his 
Guru,  in  consequence  of  that  benefit  (conferred  by 
instruction  in)  the  Veda. 

1 50.  That  Brahma/za  who  is  the  giver  of  the  birth 

assuming,  either  that  the  term  a/fcarya  refers  in  this  case  to  one 
who  merely  performs  the  rite  of  initiation  and  teaches  the  Gayatri 
only  (Medh.,  Kull.),  or  that  the  word  *  father '  denotes  a  father  who 
initiates  his  own  child  and  teaches  it  the  Veda  (Gov.,  Nar.).  But 
it  is  more  probable  that  two  conflicting  opinions*arfe  here  placed 
side  by  side,  because  both  are  based  on  an  ancient  tradition ;  see 
Gaut.  II,  50-51. 

146-148.  Ap.  I,  1,  15-17;  Gaut.  I,  8  ;  Vas.  II,  3-5;  Vi.  XXX, 
44-45.  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  utpadakabrahmapitro^,  'of  the 
two  fathers,  i.  e.  him  who  procreates  the  body  and  him  who  (gives 
the  birth)  for  the  Veda/ 

149.  Iha,  lit.  'here/  i.e.  in  these  Institutes  (Kull.),  or  'in  the 
chapter  on  saluting'  (Gov.).  But  it  may  also  mean  'in  this 
world/ 


58  LAWS   OF   MANU.  TT,  igl, 

for  the  sake  of  the  Veda  and  the  teacher  of  the 
prescribed  duties  becomes  by  law  the  father  of  an 
aged  man,  even  though  he  himself  be  a  child. 

151.  Young  Kavi,  the  son  of  Ahgiras,  taught 
his  (relatives  who  were  old  enough  to  be)  fathers, 
and,  as  he  excelled  them  in  (sacred)  knowledge,  he 
called  them  '  Little  sons/ 

152.  They,  moved  with  resentment,  asked  the 
gods  concerning  that  matter,  and  the  gods,  having 
assembled,  answered, '  The  child  has  addressed  you 
properly.' 

153.  'For  (a  man)  destitute  of  (sacred)  know- 
ledge is  indeed  a  child,  and  he  who  teaches  him 
the  Veda  is  his  father ;  for  (the  sages)  have  always 
said  "  child  "to  an  ignorant  man,  and  "  father"  to  a 
teacher  of  the  Veda.' 

154.  Neither  through  years,  nor  through  white 
(hairs),  nor  through  wealth,  nor  through  (powerful) 
kinsmen  (comes  greatness).  The  sages  have  made 
this  law, '  He  who  has  learnt  the  Veda  together  with 
the  Angas  (AnMana)  is  (considered)  great  by  us.' 

155.  The  seniority  of  Brahma^as  is  from  (sacred) 
knowledge,  that  of  Kshatriyas  from  valour,  that  of 
Vaisyas  from  wealth  in  grain  (and  other  goods),  but 
that  of  ^udras  alone  from  age. 

151.  Baudh.  I,  3,  42.  Sisu, *  young/  seems  to  be  a  name  or  nick- 
name in  Baudh/s  passage.  Parigrzhya,  'as  he  excelled  them'  (Nand.), 
means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Mgh.  'as  on 
account  of  his  learning  he  had  received  them  (as  his)  pupils/ 
Pitrzh,  lit.  'fathers/  means  according  to  Nar.  'the  manes,  i.e.  the 
Agnishvattas  and  the  rest.' 

154.  Anu£ana/$,  'who  has  learnt  the  Veda  and  the  Ahgas' 
(Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov. 
'  who  teaches  the  Veda  and  the  Angas/ 

155.  Vi.  XXXII,  18. 


11 


STUDENTSHIP.  59 


156.  A  man  is  not  therefore  (considered)  venerable 
because  his  head  is  gray ;  him  who,  though  young, 
has  learned  the  Veda,  the  gods  consider  to  be 
venerable. 

157.  As  an  elephant  made  of  wood,  as  an  antelope 
made  of  leather,  such  is  an  unlearned  Brahma^a  ; 
those  three  have  nothing  but  the  names  (of  their 
kind). 

158.  As  a  eunuch  is  unproductive  with  women,  as 
a  cow  with  a  cow  is  unprolific,  and  as  a  gift  made 
to  an  ignorant  man  yields  no  reward,  even  so  is  a 
Brahma/za  useless,  who  (does)  not  (know)  the  Rik&s. 

159.  Created  beings  must  be  instructed  in  (what 
concerns)  their  welfare  without  giving  them  pain,  and 
sweet  and  gentle  speech  must  be  used  by  (a  teacher) 
who  desires  (to  abide  by)  the  sacred  law. 

160.  He,  forsooth,  whose  speech  and  thoughts  are 
pure  and  ever  perfectly  guarded,  gains  the  whole 
reward  which  is  conferred  by  the  Vedanta. 

161.  Let  him  not,  even  though  in  pain,  (speak 
words)  cutting  (others)  to  the  quick;  let  him  not 
injure  others  in  thought  or  deed ;  let  him  not  utter 
speeches  which  make  (others)  afraid  of  him,  since 
that  will  prevent  him  from  gaining  heaven. 

156.  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  sthaviro  bhavati,  K.  sthaviro  gneyo 
for  vrz'ddho,  '  venerable.' 

157.  Vas.  Ill,  11  ;  Baudh.  I,  1,  10. 

158.  7?z/£as,  i.e.  the  Veda  (Gov.,  Nar.). 

159.  Ap.  I,  8,  25-30;  Gaut.  II,  42.  This  and  the  following 
verses  refer  in  the  first  instance  to  the  behaviour  of  the  teacher 
towards  his  pupils;  see  also  below,  VIII,  299-300. 

160.  The  Vedanta  are  the  Upanishads,  and  the  reward  meant 
is  'final  liberation'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.).  Medh., 
however,  prefers  to  take  Vedanta  in  the  sense  of '  the  maxims  or 
teaching  of  the  Veda/  and  thinks  that  the  reward  includes  all 
rewards  for  Vedic  rites. 


60  LAWS   OF   MANU.  II, 


. 


162.  A  Brahma^a  should  always  fear  homage  as 
if  it  were  poison ;  and  constantly  desire  (to  suffer) 
scorn  as  (he  would  long  for)  nectar. 

163.  For  he  who  is  scorned  (nevertheless  may) 
sleep  with  an  easy  mind,  awake  with  an  easy  mind, 
and  with  an  easy  mind  walk  here  among  men ;  but 
the  scorner  utterly  perishes. 

164.  A  twice-born  man  who  has  been  sanctified 
by  the  (employment  of)  the  means,  (described  above) 
in  due  order,  shall  gradually  and  cumulatively  per- 
form the  various  austerities  prescribed  for  (those 
who)  study  the  Veda. 

165.  An  Aryan  must  study  the  whole  Veda  to- 
gether with  the  Rahasyas,  performing  at  the  same 
time  various  kinds  of  austerities  and  the  vows  pre- 
scribed by  the  rules  (of  the  Veda). 

166.  Let  a  Brahma^a  who  desires  to  perform 
austerities,  constantly  repeat  the  Veda ;  for  the  study 


162.  This  verse  contains  an  advice  to  the  pupil  who  must  go 
begging  (Medh.). 

164.  'The  means  (described  above)/  i.e.  'the  various  sacra- 
ments.' Vedadhigamikaw  tapa^,  'the  (various)  austerities  (pre- 
scribed) for  (those  who  study)  the  Veda/  means  according  to  Nar. 
and  Nand.  '  the  austerities,  consisting  in  the  study  of  the  Veda  ; ' 
see  also  Ap.  I,  12,  1-2. 

165.  '  The  whole  Veda/  i.  e. '  the  Veda  with  the  Angas'  (Medh., 
'  others/  Nar.),  or  '  one  entire  -Sakha  consisting  of  the  Mantras  and 
the  Brahmawa '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.).  '  Rahasyas/  i.  e.  '  the  Upa- 
nishads'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  or  'the  secret  explanation  of 
the  Veda'  (Nar.).  'Various  kinds  of  austerities/  i.e.  'fasting, 
Krikkkras,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  or  'the  restrictive  rules 
applicable  to  students '  (Medh., '  others/  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  particular 
observances,  such  as  feeding  a  horse  while  one  reads  the  A^vamedha 
texts '  (Ragh.).  '  The  vows/  i.  e.  the  Mahanamnivrata,  &c. ;  see 
•Sahkhayana  Grz'hya-sutra  II,  11-13. 

166.  Ap.  I,  12,  1-2  ;  Yagn.  I,  40. 


II,  172.  STUDENTSHIP.  6 1 

of  the  Veda  is  declared  (to  be)  in  this  world  the 
highest  austerity  for  a  Brahma/za. 

167.  Verily,  that  twice-born  man  performs  the 
highest  austerity  up  to  the  extremities  of  his  nails, 
who,  though  wearing  a  garland,  daily  recites  the 
Veda  in  private  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability. 

168.  A  twice-born  man  who,  not  having  studied 
the  Veda,  applies  himself  to  other  (and  worldly 
study),  soon  falls,  even  while  living,  to  the  condition 
of  a  .Sudra  and  his  descendants  (after  him). 

169.  According  to  the  injunction  of  the  revealed 
texts  the  first  birth  of  an  Aryan  is  from  (his  natural) 
mother,  the  second  (happens)  on  the  tying  of  the 
girdle  of  Mui^a  grass,  and  the  third  on  the  initiation 
to  (the  performance  of)  a  (.Srauta)  sacrifice. 

1 70.  Among  those  (three)  the  birth  which  is  sym- 
bolised by  the  investiture  with  the  girdle  of  Mu^a 
grass,  is  his  birth  for  the  sake  of  the  Veda ;  they 
declare  that  in  that  (birth)  the  Savitrl  (verse)  is  his 
mother  and  the  teacher  his  father. 

171.  They  call  the  teacher  (the  pupil's)  father 
because  he  gives  the  Veda ;  for  nobody  can  perform 
a  (sacred)  rite  before  the  investiture  with  the  girdle 
of  Mu^a  grass. 

172.  (He  who  has  not  been  initiated)  should  not 
pronounce  (any)  Vedic  text  excepting  (those  required 
for)  the  performance  of  funeral  rites,  since  he  is  on  a 
level  with  a  .Sudra  before  his  birth  from  the  Veda. 

167.  -Satapatha-brahmawa  XI,  5,  7,  4. 

168.  Vas.  Ill,  2;  Vi.  XXVIII,  36. 

169-170.  Vi.  XXVIII,  37-38;  Vas.  II,  3;  YSgn.  I,  39 J 
Aitareya-brahmawa  I,  1;  Max  Muller,  Hist.  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit., 
p.  390  seq. 

1 71-17 2.  Ap.  II,  15,  19  ;  Gaut.  1, 10;  II,  4-5;  Vas.  II,  4,  6-7  ; 
Baudh.  I,  3,  6;  Vi.  XXVIII,  40. 


62  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  173. 

173.  The  (student)  who  has  been  initiated  must 
be  instructed  in  the  performance  of  the  vows,  and 
gradually  learn  the  Veda,  observing  the  prescribed 
rules. 

1 74.  Whatever  dress  of  skin,  sacred  thread,  girdle, 
staff,  and  lower  garment  are  prescribed  for  a  (student 
at  the  initiation),  the  like  (must  again  be  used)  at  the 
(performance  of  the)  vows. 

175.  But  a  student  who  resides  with  his  teacher 
must  observe  the  following  restrictive  rules,  duly 
controlling  all  his  organs,  in  order  to  increase  his 
spiritual  merit. 

1  j6.  Every  day,  having  bathed,  and  being  purified, 
he  must  offer  libations  of  water  to  the  gods,  sages 
and  manes,  worship  (the  images  of)  the  gods,  and 
place  fuel  on  (the  sacred  fire). 

177.  Let  him  abstain  from  honey,  meat,  perfumes, 
garlands,  substances  (used  for)  flavouring  (food), 
women,  all  substances  turned  acid,  and  from  doing 
injury  to  living  creatures, 

178.  From   anointing  (his  body),  applying  colly- 

173-174.  Vi.  XXVII,  28.  'The  vows,' i.e. 'the  observances  and 
the  restrictive  rules,  such  as  offering  fuel,  the  prohibition  of 
sleeping  in  the  day-time*  (Kull.,  Nar.),  or  'the  Veda-vows,  the 
Godana,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.),  or  'penances,  such  as  the 
Pra^apatya'  (Nand.  and  Nar.).  In  the  second  verse  Kull.  also 
adopts  the  explanation  of  Medh.  and  Gov. 

176-182.  Ap.  I,  2,  17,  23-30;  3,  11-25;  4,  13-23;  Gaut.  II, 
8-9,  12-17;  Vas.  VII,  15,  17;  Baudh.  I,  3,  19-20,  23-24;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  4-5,  n,  48-51 ;  Y&gn.  I,  25,  33. 

177.  Rasan,  '  substances  (used  for)  flavouring,'  i.e.  'molasses  and 
the  like '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.),  '  clarified  butter,  oil,  and  the  like ' 
(Nand.).  Nar.  adds  that  others  interpret  rasan  to  mean  the 
poetical  rasas  or  sentiments.  Medh.  mentions  the  same  ex- 
planation and  two  more:  (1)  spices;  (2)  juicy  fruits  and  canes 
like  sugar-cane. 


II,  184.  STUDENTSHIP.  6$ 

rium  to  his  eyes,  from  the  use  of  shoes  and  of  an 
umbrella  (or  parasol),  from  (sensual)  desire,  anger, 
covetousness,  dancing,  singing,  and  playing  (musical 
instruments), 

179.  From  gambling,  idle  disputes,  backbiting, 
and  lying,  from  looking  at  and  touching  women,  and 
from  hurting  others. 

180.  Let  him  always  sleep  alone,  let  him  never 
waste  his  manhood ;  for  he  who  voluntarily  wastes 
his  manhood,  breaks  his  vow. 

181.  A  twice-born  student,  who  has  involuntarily 
wasted  his  manly  strength  during  sleep,  must  bathe, 
worship  the  sun,  and  afterwards  thrice  mutter  the 
Rik- verse  (which  begins),  'Again  let  my  strength 
return  to  me/ 

182.  Let  him  fetch  a  pot  full  of  water,  flowers, 
cowdung,  earth,  and  Ku.ya  grass,  as  much  as  may  be 
required  (by  his  teacher),  and  daily  go  to  beg  food. 

183.  A  student,  being  pure,  shall  daily  bring  food 
from  the  houses  of  men  who  are  not  deficient  in  (the 
knowledge  of)  the  Veda  and  in  (performing)  sacrifices, 
and  who  are  famous  for  (following  their  lawful) 
occupations. 

184.  Let  him  not  beg  from  the  relatives  of  his 
teacher,  nor  from  his  own  or  his  mother's  blood- 
relations  ;  but  if  there  are  no  houses  belonging  to 

179.  Ganavada,  'idle  disputes'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or 
'  gossiping '  (Medh.,  Nar.). 

180.  Vi.  XXVIII,  48.  Regarding  the  consequences  of  com- 
mitting such  an  offence,  see  below,  XI,  1 19-124. 

181.  Vi.  XXVIII,  51.     The  verse  occurs  Taitt.  Ar.  I,  30. 

182.  Nand.  reads  udakumbhan,  'pots  filled^with  water/ 

183.  Baudh.  I,  3,  18;  Vi.  XXVIII,  9;   Ap.  I,  3,  25;   Gaut. 

II,  35. 

184.  Gaut.  II,  37-38. 


64  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  185. 

strangers,  let  him  go  to  one  of  those  named  above, 
taking  the  last-named  first ; 

185.  Or,  if  there  are  no  (virtuous  men  of  the  kind) 
mentioned  above,  he  may  go  to  each  (house  in  the) 
village,  being  pure  and  remaining  silent ;  but  let  him 
avoid  AbhLsastas  (those  accused  of  mortal  sin). 

186.  Having  brought  sacred  fuel  from  a  distance, 
let  him  place  it  anywhere  but  on  the  ground,  and 
let  him,  unwearied,  make  with  it  burnt  oblations  to 
the  sacred  fire,  both  evening  and  morning. 

187.  He  who,  without  being  sick,  neglects  during 
seven  (successive)  days  to  go  out  begging,  and  to 
offer  fuel  in  the  sacred  fire,  shall  perform  the  penance 
of  an  Avakirmn  (one  who  has  broken  his  vow). 

188.  He  who  performs  the  vow  (of  studentship) 
shall  constantly  subsist  on  alms,  (but)  not  eat  the 
food  of  one  (person  only) ;  the  subsistence  of  a 
student  on  begged  food  is  declared  to  be  equal  (in 
merit)  to  fasting. 

189.  At  his  pleasure  he  may  eat,  when  invited, 
the  food  of  one  man  at  (a  rite)  in  honour  of  the 

186.  'From  a  distance,'  i.e.  'from  a  lonely  place  in  the  forest 
not  denied  by  any  impurities/  Vihayasi,  '  anywhere  but  on  the 
ground/  means  lit.  '  in  the  air,'  and  is  explained  variously  by  '  on 
the  roof  of  the  house'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  'on  a  platform  and 
the  like'  (Nar.),  'in  the  open  air'  (Nand.),  'in  any  pure  place 
except  on  the  ground'  (Ragh.).  The  purpose  is,  as  most  com- 
mentators think,  to  preserve  the  wood  from  defilement.  But, 
according  to  '  others,'  quoted  by  Medh.,  with  whom  Nand.  seems 
to  agree,  the  object  is  to  let  it  become  dry  in  the  open  air. 

187.  Vi.  XXVIII,  52;  Yagii.  Ill,  281.  The  penance  for  an 
Avakrrmn  is  mentioned  below,  XI,  1 19-120. 

188.  Y&gn.  I,  32. 

189.  Y&gii.  I,  32.  'Observing  the  conditions  of  his  vow,' i.e. 
'  avoiding  honey,  meat,  and  the  like.'  ifoshivat,  '  like  a  hermit ' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,   Nand.),  or   'like    an    ascetic'  (yati,   Kull.). 


II,  ip4-  STUDENTSHIP.  65 

gods,  observing  (however  the  conditions  of)  his  vow, 
or  at  a  (funeral  meal)  in  honour  of  the  manes,  be- 
having (however)  like  a  hermit. 

190.  This  duty  is  prescribed  by  the  wise  for  a 
Brahma/za  only;  but  no  such  duty  is  ordained  for 
a  Kshatriya  and  a  Vai^ya. 

191.  Both  when  ordered  by  his  teacher,  and  with- 
out a  (special)  command,  (a  student)  shall  always 
exert  himself  in  studying  (the  Veda),  and  in  doing 
what  is  serviceable  to  his  teacher. 

192.  Controlling  his  body,  his  speech,  his  organs 
(of  sense),  and  his  mind,  let  him  stand  with  joined 
hands,  looking  at  the  face  of  his  teacher. 

193.  Let  him  always  keep  his  right  arm  uncovered, 
behave  decently  and  keep  his  body  well  covered, 
and  when  he  is  addressed  (with  the  words),  '  Be 
seated/  he  shall  sit  down,  facing  his  teacher. 

194.  In  the  presence  of  his  teacher  let  him  always 
eat  less,  wear  a  less  valuable  dress  and  ornaments 

According  to  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.,  the  last  phrase  means  that 
the  student  is  to  eat  at  a  funeral  dinner  a  little  wild-growing  rice 
and  other  food  fit  for  a  hermit  (munyanna),  while  Medh.  and 
Kull.  think  that  the  two  phrases  prohibit  the  eating  of  forbidden 
food  only. 

190.  'This  duty'  refers  to  the  permission  given  in  verse  189. 
According  to  Nar.  'others/  however,  thought  that  this  verse 
annulled  the  rule  given  in  verse  188. 

191.  Ap.  I,  5,  27,  4,  23;  Gaut.  I,  54;  II,  29-30;  Vi.  XXVIII, 
6-7;  Yagri.  I,  27. 

193.  Ap.  I,  6,  18-20.  I  read,  with  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh., 
susa/ftvriia^,  and  translate  it  according  to  the  latter  two,  'keep 
his  body  well  covered.'  Medh.  explains  it,  '  well  guarding  himself 
(in  his  speech).'  Nar.  and  K.  read  like  the  editions,  susawyata^, 
and  Nand.  samahita^,  '  concentrating  his  mind.'  Gov.  seems  to 
have  had  the  same  reading  as  Nar. 

194.  Ap.  I,  4,  22,  28;  Gaut.  II,  21;  Baudh.  I,  3,  21;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  13. 

[25]  F 


66  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  195. 

(than  the  former),  and  let  him  rise  earlier  (from  his 
bed),  and  go  to  rest  later. 

195.  Let  him  not  answer  or  converse  with  (his 
teacher),  reclining  on  a  bed,  nor  sitting,  nor  eating, 
nor  standing,  nor  with  an  averted  face. 

196.  Let  him  do  (that),  standing  up,  if  (his  teacher) 
is  seated,  advancing  towards  him  when  he  stands, 
going  to  meet  him  if  he  advances,  and  running  after 
him  when  he  runs ; 

197.  Going  (round)  to  face  (the  teacher),  if  his 
face  is  averted,  approaching  him  if  he  stands  at  a 
distance,  but  bending  towards  him  if  he  lies  on  a 
bed,  and  if  he  stands  in  a  lower  place. 

198.  When  his  teacher  is  nigh,  let  his  bed  or  seat 
be  low ;  but  within  sight  of  his  teacher  he  shall  not 
sit  carelessly  at  ease. 

199.  Let  him  not  pronounce  the  mere  name  of 
his  teacher  (without  adding  an  honorific  title)  behind 
his  back  even,  and  let  him  not  mimic  his  gait,  speech, 
and  deportment. 

200.  Wherever  (people)  justly  censure  or  falsely 
defame  his  teacher,  there  he  must  cover  his  ears  or 
depart  thence  to  another  place. 

201.  By  censuring  (his  teacher),  though  justly,  he 

195-197.  Ap.  I,  6,  5-9;  Gaut.  II,  25-28;  Vas.  VII,  12  ;  Baudh. 
I,  3,  38;  Vi.  XXVIII,  18-22. 

197.  Nidcre  tish/^ata^,  'if  he  stands  in  a  lower  place'  (Nar., 
Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  '  if  he 
stands  close.' 

198.  Ap.  I,  2,  21, 6, 1 3-1 7;  Gaut.  II,  1 4-15, 2 1 ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  1 2, 23. 

199.  Gaut.  II,  23;  Vi.  XXVIII,  24-25.  The  epithets  to  be 
added  to  the  teacher's  name  are  upadhyaya,  bha/Ya  (Medh.),  a^arya 
(Kull.),  or  Tarawa  and  the  like  (Nar.). 

200.  Vi.  XXVIII,  26. 

201.  Paribhokta, '  he  who  lives  on  his  teacher's  substance,'  means 


II,  206.  STUDENTSHIP.  6j 

will  become  (in  his  next  birth)  an  ass,  by  falsely 
defaming  him,  a  dog ;  he  who  lives  on  his  teacher's 
substance,  will  become  a  worm,  and  he  who  is  envious 
(of  his  merit),  a  (larger)  insect. 

202.  He  must  not  serve  the  (teacher  by  the  inter- 
vention of  another)  while  he  himself  stands  aloof, 
nor  when  he  (himself)  is  angry,  nor  when  a  woman 
is  near ;  if  he  is  seated  in  a  carnage  or  on  a  (raised) 
seat,  he  must  descend  and  afterwards  salute  his 
(teacher). 

203.  Let  him  not  sit  with  his  teacher,  to  the 
leeward  or  to  the  windward  (of  him);  nor  let  him 
say  anything  which  his  teacher  cannot  hear. 

204.  He  may  sit  with  his  teacher  in  a  carriage 
drawn  by  oxen,  horses,  or  camels,  on  a  terrace,  on 
a  bed  of  grass  or  leaves,  on  a  mat,  on  a  rock,  on  a 
wooden  bench,  or  in  a  boat. 

205.  If  his  teacher's  teacher  is  near,  let  him  be- 
have (towards  him)  as  towards  his  own  teacher ;  but 
let  him,  unless  he  has  received  permission  from  his 
teacher,  not  salute  venerable  persons  of  his  own 
(family). 

206.  This  is  likewise  (ordained  as)  his  constant 
behaviour  towards  (other)  instructors  in  science, 
towards    his    relatives  (to    whom    honour   is    due), 

according  to  NaT.  and  Nand.  'he  who  eats  without  the  teacher's 
permission  the  best  food,  obtained  by  begging.'  The  latter  ex- 
planation is  supported  by  the  meaning  of  the  preposition  ■  pari ' 
in  parivettd  and  paryadhata. 

202.  'Nor  when  a  woman  is  near/  i.e.  'if  the  teacher  is  in  the 
company  of  his  wife/ 

203.  Ap.  I,  6,  15. 

204.  Ap.  I,  7,  7,  12-13  ;  Vi-  XXVIII,  27-28. 

205.  Ap.  I,  7,  29-30,  8,  19-20;  Vi.  XXVIII,  29-30. 

206.  Ap.  I,  8,  28. 

F    2 


68  LAWS   OF    MANU.  II,  207. 

towards  all  who  may  restrain  him  from  sin,  or  may 
give  him  salutary  advice. 

207.  Towards  his  betters  let  him  always  behave 
as  towards  his  teacher,  likewise  towards  sons  of  his 
teacher,  born  by  wives  of  equal  caste,  and  towards 
the  teacher's  relatives  both  on  the  side  of  the  father 
and  of  the  mother. 

208.  The  son  of  the  teacher  who  imparts  in- 
struction (in  his  father's  stead),  whether  younger 
or  of  equal  age,  or  a  student  of  (the  science  of) 
sacrifices  (or  of  other  Angas),  deserves  the  same 
honour  as  the  teacher. 

209.  (A  student)  must  not  shampoo  the  limbs 
of  his  teacher's  son,  nor  assist  him  in  bathing, 
nor  eat  the  fragments  of  his  food,  nor  wash  his 
feet. 

210.  The  wives  of  the  teacher,  who  belong  to 
the  same  caste,  must  be  treated  as  respectfully  as 

207.  Ap.  I,  7,  29-30;  Baudh.  I,  3,  44.  Aryeshu,  'born  by  wives 
of  the  same  class/  i.e.  of  the  Brahmawa  caste  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Gov.), 
means  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  'who  are  virtuous.'  It  is, 
however,  probable  that  it  has  its  literal  meaning, '  who  are  Aryans, 
i.e.  born  by  wives  of  the  first  three  castes.'  Medh.  prefers  another 
reading,  guruputre  tatha^arye,  *  towards  the  teacher's  son  who 
(takes  the  place  of  his  father  as)  teacher.'  Ragh.  gives  the  same 
reading. 

208.  Ap.  I,  7,  30;  Vi.  XXVIII,  31.  The  translation,  given 
above,  follows  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  Nand.  differs  only  slightly, 
'  The  son  of  the  teacher  who  imparts  instruction  (while  his  father 
is  engaged)  in  a  sacrifice  (or  the  like),  whether  younger  or  of 
the  same  age,  or  a  student,  deserves,  &c.'  Kull.  and  R£gh.  con- 
strue quite  differently,  '  The  son  of  the  teacher,  whether  younger 
or  of  equal  age,  or  a  student,  if  he  (be  able  to)  teach  the  Veda, 
deserves  the  same  honour  as  the  teacher,  when  (he  is  present)  at 
the  performance  of  a  sacrifice.' 

209-212.  Ap.  I,  7,  27;  Gaut.  II,  31-34;  Baudh.  I,  3,  33-37; 

Vi.  xxviii,  32-33;  xxxii,  2, 5-7. 


II,  219.  STUDENTSHIP.  69 

the  teacher ;    but  those  who   belong  to  a  different 
caste,  must  be  honoured  by  rising  and  salutation. 

211.  Let  him  not  perform  for  a  wife  of  his  teacher 
(the  offices  of)  anointing  her,  assisting  her  in  the 
bath,  shampooing  her  limbs,  or  arranging  her  hair. 

212.  (A  pupil)  who  is  full  twenty  years  old,  and 
knows  what  is  becoming  and  unbecoming,  shall  not 
salute  a  young  wife  of  his  teacher  (by  clasping)  her 
feet. 

213.  It  is  the  nature  of  women  to  seduce  men  in 
this  (world) ;  for  that  reason  the  wise  are  never 
unguarded  in  (the  company  of)  females. 

214.  For  women  are  able  to  lead  astray  in  (this) 
world  not  only  a  fool,  but  even  a  learned  man,  and 
(to  make)  him  a  slave  of  desire  and  anger. 

215.  One  should  not  sit  in  a  lonely  place  with 
one's  mother,  sister,  or  daughter ;  for  the  senses  are 
powerful,  and  master  even  a  learned  man. 

216.  But  at  his  pleasure  a  young  student  may 
prostrate  himself  on  the  ground  before  the  young 
wife  of  a  teacher,  in  accordance  with  the  rule,  and 
say,  ■  I,  N.  N.,  (worship  thee,  O  lady).' 

217.  On  returning  from  a  journey  he  must  clasp 
the  feet  of  his  teacher's  wife  and  daily  salute  her  (in 
the  manner  just  mentioned),  remembering  the  duty 
of  the  virtuous. 

218.  As  the  man  who  digs  with  a  spade  (into  the 
ground)  obtains  water,  even  so  an  obedient  (pupil) 
obtains  the  knowledge  which  lies  (hidden)  in  his 
teacher. 

219.  A  (student)  may  either  shave  his  head,  or 

216-217.  Vi.  XXXII,  13-15. 

219.  Gaut.  I,  27  ;  Vas.  VII,  11 ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  41  ;  Ap.  I,  30,  8 ; 

Gaut.  II,  10.     Instead  of  'while  (he  sleeps)  in  the  village'  (Medh. 


7<D  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  220. 

wear  his  hair  in  braids,  or  braid  one  lock  on  the 
crown  of  his  head  ;  the  sun  must  never  set  or  rise 
while  he  (lies  asleep)  in  the  village. 

220.  If  the  sun  should  rise  or  set  while  he  is 
sleeping,  be  it  (that  he  offended)  intentionally  or 
unintentionally,  he  shall  fast  during  the  (next)  day, 
muttering  (the  Savitri). 

221.  For  he  who  lies  (sleeping),  while  the  sun 
sets  or  rises,  and  does  not  perform  (that)  penance,  is 
tainted  by  great  guilt. 

222.  Purified  by  sipping  water,  he  shall  daily 
worship  during  both  twilights  with  a  concentrated 
mind  in  a  pure  place,  muttering  the  prescribed 
text  according  to  the  rule. 

223.  If  a  woman  or  a  man  of  low  caste  perform 
anything  (leading  to)  happiness,  let  him  diligently 
practise  it,  as  well  as  (any  other  permitted  act)  in 
which  his  heart  finds  pleasure. 

jol.  224.  (Some  declare  that)  the  chief  good  consists 
in  (the  acquisition  of)  spiritual  merit  and  wealth, 
(others  place  it)  in  (the  gratification  of)  desire  and 
(the  acquisition    of)  wealth,  (others)  in   (the  acqui- 

1  others/  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  give  'while 
(he  stays)  in  the  village/  The  former  explanation  is,  however, 
more  probable  on  account  of  the  following  verse. 

220.  Ap.  II,  12,  13-14;  Gaut.  XXIII,  21;  Vas.  XX,  4;  Baudh. 
II,  7,  16  ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  53.  The  translation  of  the  last  words  follows 
Gov.  and  Kull.,  while  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  state  that  the  penance 
shall  be  performed  during  '  the  (next)  day  (or  night)/  and  that  he 
who  neglects  the  evening  prayer,  shall  fast  in  the  evening  and  repeat 
the  Gayatri  during  the  night.  The  parallel  passages  show  that  a 
difference  of  opinion  existed  with  respect  to  -the  performance  of 
this  penance. 

221.  Vas.  1, 18;  Ap.  II,  12,  22. 

222.  Ap.  I,  30,  8;  Gaut.  II,  11 ;  Baudh.  II,  7  ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  2. 

223.  Ap.  II,  29,  11. 


11,231.  STUDENTSHIP.  71 

sition  of)  spiritual  merit  alone,  and  (others  say  that 
the  acquisition  of)  wealth  alone  is  the  chief  good 
here  (below) ;  but  the  (correct)  decision  is  that  it 
consists  of  the  aggregate  of  (those)  three. 

225.  The  teacher,  the  father,  the  mother,  and  an 
elder  brother  must  not  be  treated  with  disrespect, 
especially  by  a  Brahma^a,  though  one  be  grievously 
offended  (by  them). 

226.  The  teacher  is  the  image  of  Brahman,  the 
father  the  image  of  Pra^apati  (the  lord  of  created 
beings),  the  mother  the  image  of  the  earth,  and  an 
(elder)  full  brother  the  image  of  oneself. 

227.  That  trouble  (and  pain)  which  the  parents 
undergo  on  the  birth  of  (their)  children,  cannot  be 
compensated  even  in  a  hundred  years. 

228.  Let  him  always  do  what  is  agreeable  to 
those  (two)  and  always  (what  may  please)  his 
teacher ;  when  those  three  are  pleased,  he  obtains 
all  (those  rewards  which)  austerities  (yield). 

229.  Obedience  towards  those  three  is  declared  to 
be  the  best  (form  of)  austerity ;  let  him  not  perform 
other  meritorious  acts  without  their  permission. 

230.  For  they  are  declared  to  be  the  three  worlds, 
they  the  three  (principal)  orders,  they  the  three 
Vedas,  and  they  the  three  sacred  fires. 

231.  The  father,  forsooth,  is  stated  to  be  the 
Garhapatya  fire,  the  mother  the  Dakshi/zagni,  but 

225.  Ap.  I,  14,  6;  Vi.  XXXI,  1-3.  This  verse  is  placed  by 
Kull.  alone  after  the  following  one,  while  all  the  other  com- 
mentators as  well  as  K.  observe  the  order  followed  above. 

229.  Vi.  XXXI,  6. 

230.  Vi.  XXXI,  7.  'The  three  worlds,'  i.e.  'the  earth,  the 
middle  sphere,  and  the  sky;'  'the  three  orders/  i.e.  'the  first  three 
orders'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  'the  last  three  orders'  (Medh.,  Gov.). 

231.  Ap.  I,  3,  44;  Vi.  XXXI,  8. 


72  LAWS    OF    MANU.  II,  232. 

the  teacher  the  Ahavanlya  fire  ;  this  triad  of  fires  is 
most  venerable. 

232.  He  who  neglects  not  those  three,  (even  after 
he  has  become)  a  householder,  will  conquer  the 
three  worlds  and,  radiant  in  body  like  a  god,  he  will 
enjoy  bliss  in  heaven. 

233.  By  honouring  his  mother  he  gains  this 
(nether)  world,  by  honouring  his  father  the  middle 
sphere,  but  by  obedience  to  his  teacher  the  world  of 
Brahman. 

234.  All  duties  have  been  fulfilled  by  him  who 
honours  those  three ;  but  to  him  who  honours  them 
not,  all  rites  remain  fruitless. 

235.  As  long  as  those  three  live,  so  long  let  him 
not  (independently)  perform  any  other  (meritorious 
acts) ;  let  him  always  serve  them,  rejoicing  (to  do 
what  is)  agreeable  and  beneficial  (to  them). 

236.  He  shall  inform  them  of  everything  that 
with  their  consent  he  may  perform  in  thought,  word, 
or  deed  for  the  sake  of  the  next  world. 

237.  By  (honouring)  these  three  all  that  ought  to 
be  done  by  man,  is  accomplished ;  that  is  clearly  the 
highest  duty,  every  other  (act)  is  a  subordinate 
duty. 

238.  He  who  possesses  faith  may  receive  pure 
learning  even  from  a  man  of  lower  caste,  the  highest 

232.  Vi.  XXXI,  9.  233.  Vi.  XXXI,  10. 

238.  Ap.  II,  29,  11.  'The  highest  law/  i.e. 'the  means  of 
obtaining  final  liberation '  (Kull.) ;  but  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Ragh. 
refer  the  expression  to  advice  in  worldly  matters.  *  From  a  base 
family,' i.e. 'from  a  family  where  the  sacred  rites  are  neglected' 
(Medh.),  'from  one  that  is  lower  than  oneself  (Kull.),  'from  the 
family  of  a  potter  or  a  similar  (low  caste)/  (Gov.)  But  probably 
the  rule  refers  to  the  practice  to  take  particularly  desirable  brides 
even  from  the  families  of  outcasts;  see  Vas.  XIII,  51-53. 


II,  245-  STUDENTSHIP.  73 

law  even  from  the  lowest,  and  an   excellent  wife 
even  from  a  base  family. 

239.  Even  from  poison  nectar  may  be  taken, 
even  from  a  child  good  advice,  even  from  a  foe  (a 
lesson  in)  good  conduct,  and  even  from  an  impure 
(substance)  gold. 

240.  Excellent  wives,  learning,  (the  knowledge 
of)  the  law,  (the  rules  of)  purity,  good  advice,  and 
various  arts  may  be  acquired  from  anybody. 

241.  It  is  prescribed  that  in  times  of  distress  (a 
student)  may  learn  (the  Veda)  from  one  who  is  not  a 
Brahma^a ;  and  that  he  shall  walk  behind  and  serve 
(such  a)  teacher,  as  long  as  the  instruction  lasts. 

242.  He  who  desires  incomparable  bliss  (in 
heaven)  shall  not  dwell  during  his  whole  life  in 
(the  house  of)  a  non-Brahma/ncal  teacher,  nor  with 
a  Brahma^a  who  does  not  know  the  whole  Veda 
and  the  Ahgas. 

243.  But  if  (a  student)  desires  to  pass  his  whole 
life  in  the  teacher's  house,  he  must  diligently  serve 
him,  until  he  is  freed  from  this  body. 

244.  A  Brahma/za  who  serves  his  teacher  till 
the  dissolution  of  his  body,  reaches  forthwith  the 
eternal  mansion  of  Brahman. 

245.  He  who  knows  the  sacred  law  must  hot 
present  any  gift  to  his  teacher  before  (the  Samavar- 
tana) ;  but  when,  with  the  permission  of  his  teacher, 
he  is  about  to  take  the  (final)  bath,  let  him  procure 


240.  Striyo  ratnani,  'excellent  wives'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  ac- 
cording to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  wives  and  gems.' 

241.  Ap.  II,  4,  25;  Gaut.  VII,  1-3;  Baudh.  I,  3,  4i~43- 

243.  Ap.  II,  21,  6;  Gaut.  III.  5-6;  Vas.  VII,  4  ;  Baudh.  II,  11. 
13;  Vi.  XXVIII,  43;Ya^.I,  49. 

245.  Ap.  I,  7,  19 ;  Gaut.  II,  48-49 ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  42  j  Ya§™.  I,  51. 


74 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


II,  246. 


(a  present)  for  the  venerable  man  according  to  his 
ability, 

246.  (Viz.)  a  field,  gold,  a  cow,  a  horse,  a  parasol 
and  shoes,  a  seat,  grain,  (even)  vegetables,  (and 
thus)  give  pleasure  to  his  teacher.     . 

247.  (A  perpetual  student)  must,  if  his  teacher 
dies,  serve  his  son  (provided  he  be)  endowed  with 
good  qualities,  or  his  widow,  or  his  Sapi^a,  in  the 
same  manner  as  the  teacher. 

248.  Should  none  of  these  be  alive,  he  must 
serve  the  sacred  fire,  standing  (by  day)  and  sitting 
(during  the  night),  arid  thus  finish  his  life. 

249.  A  Brahma^a  who  thus  passes  his  life  as  a 
student  without  breaking  his  vow,  reaches  (after 
death)  the  highest  abode  and  will  not  be  born  again 
in  this  world. 

Chapter   III. 

1.  The  vow  (of  studying)  the  three  Vedas  under 
a  teacher  must  be  kept  for  thirty-six  years,  or  for 


1 


246.  Most  commentators  read  pritimaharet  for  avahet,  and  with 
this  reading  the  translation  must  be, '  A  field,  gold  ....  he  should 
give  to  the  teacher  in  order  to  please  him/ 

247.  Gaut.  Ill,  7;  Vi.  XXVIII,  44-45;  Y%w.  1,49.  Regarding 
the  term  Sapiw^a,  see  below,  V,  60. 

248.  Gaut.  Ill,  8  ;  Vas.  VII,  5-6 ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  46  ;  Y&gn.  I,  49- 
Sariraw  sadhayet,  '  shall  finish  his  life '  (Medh.,  Gov.),  means  ac- 
cording to  Kull.  '  shall  make  the  soul  connected  with  his  body- 
perfect,  i.  e.  fit  for  the  union  with  Brahman.'  Nar.  and  Ragh.  take 
the  word  similarly. 

249.  VL  XXVIII,  49;  Y&gn.  I,  50. 

III.  1.  Ap.  I,  2,  12-16;  Gaut.  II,  45-47;  Vas. VIII,  1;  Baudh. 
I,  3,  1-4;  Vi.  XXVIII,  42;  Ya^.  I,  36. 

The  three  Vedas  meant  are  the  i?z'g-veda,  Ya^ur-veda,  and 
Sama-veda.  The  Atharva-veda  is  here,  as  in  most  of  the  ancient 
Dharma-sutras,  left  out  altogether.     Baudhayana,  alone,  states  that 


111,5-  householder;  marriage.  75 

half  that  time,  or  for  a  quarter,  or  until  the  (student) 
has  perfectly  learnt  them. 

2.  (A  student)  who  has  studied  in  due  order  the 
three  Vedas,  or  two,  or  even  one  only,  without  break- 
ing the  (rules  of)  studentship,  shall  enter  the  order 
of  householders. 

3.  He  who  is  famous  for  (the  strict  performance 
of)  his  duties  and  has  received  his  heritage,  the  Veda, 
from  his  father,  shall  be  honoured,  sitting  on  a  couch 
and  adorned  with  a  garland,  with  (the  present  of)  a 
cow  (and  the  honey-mixture). 

4.  Having  bathed,  with  the  permission  of  his 
teacher,  and  performed  according  to  the  rule  the 
Samavartana  (the  rite  on  returning  home),  a  twice- 
born  man  shall  marry  a  wife  of  equal  caste  who  is 
endowed  with  auspicious  (bodily)  marks. 

5.  A  (damsel)  who  is  neither  a  Sapi/^a  on  the 
mothers  side,  nor  belongs  to  the  same  family  on 

the  term  of  studentship  extends  over  forty-eight  years,  and  that  rule 
includes  the  Atharva-veda. 

2.  Y&gn.  I,  52. 

3.  The  meaning  is,  that  the  student  who,  after  completing  his 
term,  has  become  a  Snataka,  shall  receive  first,  i.e.  before  his  mar- 
riage, the  honour  of  the  Madhuparka  (Ap.  II,  8,  5-9)  from  the 
person  who  instructed  him.  The  phrase  '  who  has  received  his 
heritage,  the  Veda,  from  his  father/  indicates,  according  to  the 
commentators,  that,  as  a  rule,  the  father  is  to  teach  his  son.  As, 
however,  the  teacher  is  considered  the  spiritual  father  of  his  pupil, 
pitu/£  might  also  be  translated  '  from  his  (spiritual)  father.' 

4.  Gaut.  IV,  ij  Vas.  VIII,  1;  Ya^n.  I,  52.  Regarding  the  'aus- 
picious bodily  marks/  see  -Sahkhayana,  Grzhya-sutra  I,  5,  10.  See 
also  below,  vers.  7-10. 

5.  Ap.  II,  11,  15-16;  Gaut.  IV,  2-5;  Vas.  VIII,  1-2;  Baudh. 
II,  1,  32-38;  Vi.  XXIV,  9-10;  Y8gn.  I,  53- 

Asagotra  ka.  ya  pitu^,  'who  does  not  belong  to  the  same  family 
on  the  father's  side/  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Kull.  'between 
whose  father's  and  the  bridegroom's  family  no  blood-relationship  is 


j6  LAWS    OF    MANU.  111,6. 

the  father's  side,  is  recommended  to  twice-born  men 
for  wedlock  and  conjugal  union. 
!>*  6.  In  connecting  himself  with  a  wife,  let  him  care- 
fully avoid  the  ten  following  families,  be  they  ever 
so  great,  or  rich  in  kine,  horses,  sheep,  grain,  or 
(other)  property, 

7.  (Viz.)  one  which  neglects  the  sacred  rites,  one 
in  which  no  male  children  (are  born),  one  in  which 
the  Veda  is  not  studied,  one  (the  members  of)  which 
have  thick  hair  on  the  bodv,  those  which  are  sub- 
ject  to  hemorrhoids,  phthisis,  weakness  of  digestion, 
epilepsy,  or  white  and  black  leprosy. 

8.  Let  him  not  marry  a  maiden  (with)  reddish 
(hair),  nor  one  who  has  a  redundant  member,  nor 
one  who  is  sickly,  nor  one  either  with  no  hair  (on 
the  body)  or  too  much,  nor  one  who  is  garrulous  or 
has  red  (eyes), 

9.  Nor  one  named  after  a  constellation,  a  tree, 
or  a  river,  nor  one  bearing  the  name  of  a  low  caste, 
or  of  a  mountain,  nor  one  named  after  a  bird,  a 

traceable.'  It  is,  however,  very  probable  that  gotra  has  a  double  mean- 
ing, vaidika  and  laukika  gotra,  and  that,  in  the  case  of  Brahmaraas, 
intermarriages  between  families  descended  from  the  same  Rfchi,  and, 
in  the  case  of  other  Aryans,  between  families  bearing  the  same  name 
or  known  to  be  connected,  are  forbidden.  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  hold 
that  the  first  £a, '  and/  indicates  that  asagotra  refers  to  the  mother's 
side  also,  and  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  think  that  on 
account  of  the  second  £a,  the  word  asapMa  must  be  taken  to 
refer  to  the  father's  side  also,  and  that  thus  intermarriages  with  the 
daughter  of  a  paternal  aunt  or  with  the  paternal  grandfather's  sister's 
descendants  are  forbidden.  Maithune,  'for  conjugal  union'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh. '  for  the  holy  rites 
to  be  performed  by  the  husband  and  wife  together.'  Nand.  reads 
amaithuni, '  one  who  is  a  virgin.'  Regarding  the  term  Sapi«</a,  see 
below,  V,  60. 

7.  Vi.  XXIV,  11;  Y&g%.  I,  54. 

8.  Yfyn.  I,  53;  Vi.  XXIV,  12-16. 


Iii,i3.  householder;  marriage.  77 

snake,  or  a  slave,  nor  one  whose  name  inspires 
terror. 

10.  Let  him  wed  a  female  free  from  bodily  defects, 
who  has  an  agreeable  name,  the  (graceful)  gait  of  a 
Hawsa  or  of  an  elephant,  a  moderate  (quantity  of) 
hair  on  the  body  and  on  the  head,  small  teeth,  and 
soft  limbs. 

it.  But  a  prudent  man  should  not  marry  (a 
maiden)  who  has  no  brother,  nor  one  whose  father 
is  not  known,  through  fear  lest  (in  the  former  case 
she  be  made)  an  appointed  daughter  (and  in  the 
latter)  lest  (he  should  commit)  sin. 

12.  For  the  first  marriage  of  twice-born  men 
(wives)  of  equal  caste  are  recommended ;  but  for 
those  who  through  desire  proceed  (to  marry  again) 
the  following  females,  (chosen)  according  to  the 
(direct)  order  (of  the  castes),  are  most  approved. 

13.  It  is  declared  that  a  .Sudra  woman  alone  (can 
be)  the  wife  of  a  .Sudra,  she  and  one  of  his  own  caste 
(the  wives)  of  a  VaLyya,  those  two  and  one  of  his 
own  caste  (the  wives)  of  a  Kshatriya,  those  three 
and  one  of  his  own  caste  (the  wives)  of  a  Brijhma^a. 

11.  Yign.  I,  53.  'Lest  he  should  commit  sin,'  i.e.  marry  a  Sagotra 
or  one  sprung  from  an  illicit  union.  The  translation  follows  Kull.,Nar., 
Ragh.,  and  'others'  mentioned  by  Medh.  But  Medh.  himself  takes  the 
verse  differently, '  A  prudent  man  should  not  marry  a  (maiden)  who 
has  no  brother,  if  her  father  is  not  known  (i.e.  is  dead  or  absent), 
through  fear  lest  she  be  made  an  appointed  daughter;'  while  Gov. 
explains  it  as  follows,  'A  prudent  man  should  not  marry  a  (maiden) 
who  has  no  brother  or  whose  father  is  not  known,  through  fear  lest 
she  be  made  an  appointed  daughter.'  According  to  the  latter  it 
would  be  possible,  in  case  the  father  is  not  known,  that  she  might 
be  only  the  half-sister  of  her  brother,  and  her  real  father,  having  no 
children,  might  make  her  an  appointed  daughter. 

12.  Vi.  XXIV,  1-4;  Baudh.  I,  16,  2-5. 

13.  Y&gn.  I,  56 ;  Vas.  I,  25-26. 


78  LAWS  OF   MANU.  Ill,  14. 

14.  A  .Sudra  woman  is  not  mentioned  even  in 
any  (ancient)  story  as  the  (first)  wife  of  a  Brah- 
ma/za  or  of  a  Kshatriya,  though  they  lived  in  the 
(greatest)  distress. 

15.  Twice-born  men  who,  in  their  folly,  wed  wives 
of  the  low  (J9udra)  caste,  soon  degrade  their  families 
and  their  children  to  the  state  of  Madras. 

16.  According  to  Atri  and  to  (Gautama)  the  son 
of  Utathya,  he  who  weds  a  ^udra  woman  becomes  an 
outcast,  according  to  .Saunaka  on  the  birth  of  a  son, 
and  according  to  Bhrtgu  he  who  has  (male)  offspring 
from  a  (vSudra  female,  alone). 

17.  A  Brahma^a  who  takes  a  Sudra  wife  to  his 
bed,  will  (after  death)  sink  into  hell ;  if  he  begets 
a  child  by  her,  he  will  lose  the  rank  of  a  Brahma^a. 

18.  The  manes  and  the  gods  will  not  eat  the 
(offerings)  of  that  man  who  performs  the  rites  in 

14.  Vas.  I,  27;  Gaut.  XV,  18;  Ap.  I,  18,  33. 

15.  Vi.  XXV,  6. 

16.  Baudh.  II,  2-7.  The  above  translation  follows  Medh.,  Gov., 
Nand.,  and  Ragh.  But  Kull.  takes  the  last  clause  differently,  'accord- 
ing to  Bhrzgu  on  the  birth  of  a  son's  son.'  This  version  is  supported, 
as  a  quotation  given  by  Nar.  shows,  by  the  Bhavishya-purawa,  which, 
as  usual,  paraphrases  Manu's  text,  putrasya  putram  asadya  -Saunaka^ 
judrataw  gata^  I  bhrzgvadayo  'py  evam  eva  patitatvam  av&pnuyu^  II 
There  was,  moreover,  as  this  passage  shows,  an  ancient  explanation 
of  our  verse,  according  to  which  the  various  names  of  JZishis  do 
not  refer  to  authors  of  law-books,  but  to  founders  of  Gotras.  This 
view  is  adopted  by  Nar.,  and,  according  to  him,  the  translation 
should  run  as  follows :  ■  (A  man  of  the  family)  of  Atri  who  weds  a 
-Sudra  female,  becomes  an  outcast,  (one  of  the  race)  of  Utathya's 
son,  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  and  (one  of)  -Saunaka's  or  Bhrz'gu's 
(Gotras)  by  having  no  other  but  -Sudra  offspring.'  It  ought  to  be 
noted  that,  according  to  Kull.  alone,  the  three  clauses  refer  to 
Brahmawas,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaijyas  respectively.  Ragh.  particularly 
objects  to  this  opinion,  which,  according  to  him,  'some'  hold. 

18.  Vas.  XIV,  11;  Vi.  XXV,  7. 


Ill,  24.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    MARRIAGE.  79 

honour  of  the  gods,  of  the  manes,  and  of  guests 
chiefly  with  a  (6udra  wife's)  assistance,  and  such 
(a  man)  will  not  go  to  heaven. 

19.  For  him  who  drinks  the  moisture  of  a  6udra  s 
lips,  who  is  tainted  by  her  breath,  and  who  begets 
a  son  on  her,  no  expiation  is  prescribed. 

20.  Now  listen  to  (the)  brief  (description  of)  the 
following  eight  marriage-rites  used  by  the  four  castes 
(var^a)  which  partly  secure  benefits  and  partly  pro- 
duce evil  both  in  this  life  and  after  death. 

21.  (They  are)  the  rite  of  Brahman  (Brahma),  that 
of  the  gods  (Daiva),  that  of  the  i^zshis  (Arsha), 
that  of  Pra^apati  (Pra^apatya),  that  of  the  Asuras 
(Asura),  that  of  the  Gandharvas  (Gandharva),  that 
of  the  Rakshasas  (Rakshasa),  and  that  of  the  Pisa- 
/£as  (Pai^a/^a). 

22.  Which  is  lawful  for  each  caste  (var^a)  and 
which  are  the  virtues  or  faults  of  each  (rite),  all 
this  I  will  declare  to  you,  as  well  as  their  good 
and  evil  results  with  respect  to  the  offspring. 

23.  One  may  know  that  the  first  six  according  to 
the  order  (followed  above)  are  lawful  for  a  Brah- 
ma^a,  the  four  last  for  a  Kshatriya,  and  the  same 
four,  excepting  the  Rakshasa  rite,  for  a  Vai^ya  and 
a  6udra. 

24.  The  sages  state  that  the  first  four  are  approved 
(in  the  case)  of  a  Brahma/za,  one,  the  Rakshasa  (rite 


21-34.  Ap.  II,  11,  17-21;  Gaut.  IV,  6-15;  Vas.  I,  17-35; 
Baudh.  I,  20,  1-2 1,  23;  Vi.  XXIV,  18-28;  Yagri.  I,  58-61. 

23.  It  seems  extremely  probable  that  this  and  the  next  three 
verses  contain,  as  Sir  W.  Jones  thinks,  several  conflicting  opinions 
on  the  permissibility  of  the  different  marriage  rites.  The  commen- 
tators, however,  try  to  reconcile  them  by  various  tricks  of  inter- 
pretation. 


So 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


HI,  26. 


% 


in  the  case)  of  a  Kshatriya,  and  the  Asura  (marriage 
in  that)  of  a  VaLsya  and  of  a  .Sudra. 

25.  But  in  these  (Institutes  of  the  sacred  law) 
three  of  the  five  (last)  are  declared  to  be  lawful 
and  two  unlawful ;  the  Pai^a^a  and  the  Asura 
(rites)  must  never  be  used. 

26.  For  Kshatriyas  those  before-mentioned  two 
rites,  the  Gandharva  and  the  Rakshasa,  whether 
separate  or  mixed,  are  permitted  by  the  sacred 
tradition. 

27.  The  gift  of  a  daughter,  after  decking  her 
(with  costly  garments)  and  honouring  (her  by  pre- 
sents of  jewels),  to  a  man  learned  in  the  Veda  and 
of  good  conduct,  whom  (the  father)  himself  invites, 
is  called  the  Brahma  rite. 

28.  The  gift  of  a  daughter  who  has  been  decked 
with  ornaments,  to  a  priest  who  duly  officiates  at 
a  sacrifice,  during  the  course  of  its  performance, 
they  call  the  Daiva  rite. 

29.  When  (the  father)  gives  away  his  daughter 
according  to  the  rule,  after  receiving  from  the  bride- 
groom, for  (the  fulfilment  of)  the  sacred  law,  a  cow 
and  a  bull  or  two  pairs,  that  is  named  the  Arsha  rite. 

30.  The  gift  of  a  daughter  (by  her  father)  after 


26.  ■  Mixed,'  i.  e.  when  a  girl  is  forcibly  abducted  from  her  father's 
house  after  a  previous  understanding  with  her  lover. 

27.  Nar.  and  Ragh.  refer  ar^ayitva,  '  after  honouring,'  to  the 
bridegroom,  and  take  it  in  the  sense  of  '  after  honouring  (the  bride- 
groom with  the  honey-mixture).' 

29.  'For  the  (fulfilment  of)  the  sacred  law,'  i.e. 'not  with  the 
intention  of  selling  his  child'  (Medh.);  see  also  below,  vers.  51-54. 
'According  to  the  rule,'  i.  e. '  pronouncing  the  words  prescribed  for 
making  a  gift '  (N&r.). 

30.  'Has  shown  honour/ i. e. ' to  the  bridegroom  by  the  honey- 
mixture'  (Nar.,  Nand.). 


Ill,  34.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    MARRIAGE.  8 1 

he  has  addressed  (the  couple)  with  the  text,  '  May 
both  of  you  perform  together  your  duties,'  and  has 
shown  honour  (to  the  bridegroom),  is  called  in  the 
Smn'ti  the  Pra^apatya  rite. 

31.  When  (the  bridegroom)  receives  a  maiden, 
after  having  given  as  much  wealth  as  he  can  afford, 
to  the  kinsmen  and  to  the  bride  herself,  according 
to  his  own  will,  that  is  called  the  Asura  rite. 

32.  The  voluntary  union  of  a  maiden  and  her 
lover  one  must  know  (to  be)  the  Gandharva  rite, 
which  springs  from  desire  and  has  sexual  intercourse 
for  its  purpose. 

^2,-  The  forcible  abduction  of  a  maiden  from  her 
home,  while  she  cries  out  and  weeps,  after  (her  kins- 
men) have  been  slain  or  wounded  and  (their  houses) 
broken  open,  is  called  the  Rakshasa  rite. 

34.  When  (a  man)  by  stealth  seduces  a  girl  who 
is  sleeping,  intoxicated,  or  disordered  in  intellect, 
that  is  the  eighth,  the  most  base  and  sinful  rite 
of  the  PL^as. 


31.  '  According  to  his  own  will,'  i.  e.  '  not  in  accordance  with  the 
injunction  of  the  sacred  law,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Arsha  rite' 
(Medh.,Gov.,  Kull,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

32.  Gov.  and  Nar.  here  enter  on  a  discussion  of  the  question 
whether  the  prescribed  offerings  and  wedding  ceremonies  are  to  be 
performed  in  the  case  of  the  Gandharva,  Rakshasa,  and  Paija^a 
rites.  Relying  on  a  passage  of  Devala  and  of  the  Bahvrika.  Grzhya- 
parLrishta  (Saunaka)  they  are  of  opinion  that  the  homas  must  be 
performed,  at  least  in  the  case  of  Aryan  couples.  But  they  hold 
on  the  strength  of  Manu's  dictum,  VIII,  226,  which  restricts  the 
use  of  the  Mantras  to  women,  married  as  virgins,  that  the  Vedic 
nuptial  texts  must  not  be  recited.  From  the  comment  of  Medh. 
on  verse  34  it  would  appear  that  the  opinions  on  the  subject  were 
divided,  and  that  some  held  weddings  with  the  recitation  of  Mantras 
to  be  permissible,  while  others  denied  the  necessity  of  any 
wedding. 

[25]  G 


82  LAWS    OF    MANU.  Ill,  35. 

35.  The  gift  of  daughters  among  Brahma^as  is 
most  approved,  (if  it  is  preceded)  by  (a  libation  of) 
water ;  but  in  the  case  of  other  castes  (it  may  be 
performed)  by  (the  expression  of)  mutual  consent. 

36.  Listen  now  to  me,  ye  Brahma^as,  while  I 
fully  declare  what  quality  has  been  ascribed  by 
Manu  to  each  of  these  marriage-rites. 

37.  The  son  of  a  wife  wedded  according  to  the 
Brahma  rite,  if  he  performs  meritorious  acts,  libe- 
rates from  sin  ten  ancestors,  ten  descendants  and 
himself  as  the  twenty-first. 

38.  The  son  born  of  a  wife,  wedded  according  to 
the  Daiva  rite,  likewise  (saves)  seven  ancestors  and 
seven  descendants,  the  son  of  a  wife  married  by  the 
Arsha  rite  three  (in  the  ascending  and  descending 
lines),  and  the  son  of  a  wife  married  by  the  rite  of 
Ka  (Pra^apati)  six  (in  either  line). 

39.  From  the  four  marriages,  (enumerated)  suc- 
cessively, which  begin  with  the  Brahma  rite  spring 
sons,  radiant  with  knowledge  of  the  Veda  and 
honoured  by  the  .Sish/as  (good  men). 

40.  Endowed  with  the  qualities  of  beauty  and 
goodness,  possessing  wealth  and  fame,  obtaining  as 

35.  Itaretarakamyaya, '  by  (the  expression  of)  mutual  consent/ 
i.e.  by  the  parents,  means  according  to  Medh.  'in  consequence  of 
the  mutual  desire  of  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom.'  He  mentions, 
however,  the  other  explanation  too.  The  text  refers  probably  to 
customs  like  the  sending  of  a  cocoa-nut,  which  is  usually  adopted 
by  Kshatriyas. 

37-42.  Vi.  XXIV,  29-32;  Gaut.  IV,  29-33;  Baudh.  I,  21,  1; 
Ap.  II,  12,  4  ;  Yagn.  I,  58-60,  90. 

39.  Regarding  the  explanation  of  the  term  -Sish/as,  see  below, 
XII,  109. 

40.  Gov.  and  Kull.  take  the  first  adjective  differently, '  endowed 
with  beauty,  goodness,  and  other  excellent  qualities.'  Regarding 
the  term  'goodness'  (sattva),  see  below,  XII,  31. 


111,46.  HOUSEHOLDER;    MARRIAGE.  83 

many  enjoyments  as  they  desire   and  being  most 
righteous,  they  will  live  a  hundred  years. 

41.  But  from  the  remaining  (four)  blamable  mar- 
riages spring  sons  who  are  cruel  and  speakers  of 
untruth,  who  hate  the  Veda  and  the  sacred  law. 

42.  In  the  blameless  marriages  blameless  chil- 
dren are  born  to  men,  in  blamable  (marriages) 
blamable  (offspring) ;  one  should  therefore  avoid  the 
blamable  (forms  of  marriage). 

43.  The  ceremony  of  joining  the  hands  is  pre- 
scribed for  (marriages  with)  women  of  equal  caste 
(var/za) ;  know  that  the  following  rule  (applies)  to 
weddings  with  females  of  a  different  caste  (var/za). 

44.  On  marrying  a  man  of  a  higher  caste  a 
Kshatriya  bride  must  take  hold  of  an  arrow,  a 
Vai^ya  bride  of  a  goad,  and  a  6udra  female  of  the 
hem  of  the  (bridegroom's)  garment. 

45.  Let  (the  husband)  approach  his  wife  in  due  I 
season,  being  constantly  satisfied  with  her  (alone) ; 
he  may  also,  being  intent  on  pleasing  her,  approach 
her  with  a  desire  for  conjugal  union  (on  any  day) 
excepting  the  Parvans. 

46.  Sixteen  (days   and)  nights   (in  each  month), 


43.  Vi.  XXIV,  5-8  ;  Y&gn.  I,  62. 

44.  The  bridegroom  takes  hold  of  the  other  end  of  the  arrow  or 
of  the  goad,  pronouncing  the  same  texts  which  are  recited  on  taking 
the  hand  of  a  bride  of  equal  caste  (Nar.). 

45.  Y&gn.  I,  80-81;  Ap.  II,  1,  17-18;  Gaut.  V,  1-2  ;  Vas.  XII, 
21-24  ;  Vi.  LXIX,  1;  Baudh.  IV,  17-19.  Tadvrata^, '  being  intent 
on  pleasing  her'  (Medh.,  Kull.),  means  according  to  Nar.  'being 
careful  to  keep  that  rule  (regarding  the  Parvans).'  With  respect  to 
the  Parvans,  see  below,  IV,  128. 

46.  Ya^.  I,  79.  The  days  which  the  virtuous  declared  to  be 
unfit  for  conjugal  intercourse  are  the  first  four  after  the  appearance 
of  the  menses.  ^ 

G  2 


84  LAWS    OF    MANU.  HI,  47. 

including  four  days  which  differ  from  the  rest  and 
are  censured  by  the  virtuous,  (are  called)  the  natural 
season  of  women. 

47.  But  among  these  the  first  four,  the  eleventh 
and  the  thirteenth  are  (declared  to  be)  forbidden ; 
the  remaining  nights  are  recommended. 

48.  On  the  even  nights  sons  are  conceived  and 
daughters  on  the  uneven  ones ;  hence  a  man  who 
desires  to  have  sons  should  approach  his  wife  in  due 
season  on  the  even  (nights). 

49.  A  male  child  is  produced  by  a  greater  quan- 
tity of  male  seed,  a  female  child  by  the  prevalence 
of  the  female ;  if  (both  are)  equal,  a  hermaphrodite  or 
a  boy  and  a  girl  ;  if  (both  are)  weak  or  deficient  in 
quantity,  a  failure  of  conception  (results). 

50.  He  who  avoids  women  on  the^six  forbidden 
nights  and  on  eight  others,  is  (equal  in  chastity  to) 
a  student,  in  whichever  order  he  may  live. 

51.  No  father  who'  knows  (the  law)  must  take 
even  the  smallest  gratuity  for  his  daughter ;  for  a 
man  who,  through  avarice,  takes  a  gratuity,  is  a 
seller  of  his  offspring. 

52.  But  those  (male)  relations  who,  in  their  folly, 
live  on  the  separate  property  of  women,  (e.  g.  appro- 
priate) the  beasts  of  burden,  carriages,  and  clothes  of 
women,  commit  sin  and  will  sink  into  hell. 

48.  Y&gn.  I,  79. 

50.  '  In  whichever  order  he  may  live,'  i.e.  'whether  he  be  a  house- 
holder or  a  hermit  in  the  woods'  (Kull.,  Nar.).  Medh.  thinks  that 
it  is  merely  an  arthavada,  and  refers  to  no  other  order  but  that  of 
householders,  while  Govinda  thinks  that  the  verse  permits  even  to 
an  ascetic  who  has  lost  all  his  children,  to  approach  his  wife  during 
two  nights  in  each  month.     Kull.  justly  ridicules  the  last  opinion. 

51.  Ap.  II,  13,  n  ;  Vas.  I,  37-38;  Baudh.  I,  21,  2-3. 

52.  Medh.  gives  in  the  first  place  another  explanation  of  this 


111,59-  householder;  marriage.  85 

53.  Some  call  the  cow  and  the  bull  (given)  at  an 
Arsha  wedding  'a  gratuity;'  (but)  that  is  wrong, 
since  (the  acceptance  of)  a  fee,  be  it  small  or  great, 
is  a  sale  (of  the  daughter). 

54.  When  the  relatives  do  not  appropriate  (for 
their  use)  the  gratuity  (given),  it  is  not  a  sale ;  (in 
that  case)  the  (gift)  is  only  a  token  of  respect  and 
of  kindness  towards  the  maidens. 

55.  Women  must  be  honoured  and  adorned  by 
their  fathers,  brothers,  husbands,  and  brothers-in-law, 
who  desire  (their  own)  welfare. 

56.  Where  women  are  honoured,  there  the  gods 
are  pleased  ;  but  where  they  are  not  honoured,  no 
sacred  rite  yields  rewards. 

57.  Where  the  female  relations  live  in  grief,  the 
family  soon  wholly  perishes ;  but  that  family  where 
they  are  not  unhappy  ever  prospers. 

58.  The  houses  on  which  female  relations,  not  I 
being  duly  honoured,  pronounce  a  curse,  perish  j 
completely,  as  if  destroyed  by  magic. 

59.  Hence  men  who  seek  (their  own)  welfare,  should 
always  honour  women  on  holidays  and  festivals  with  \ 
(gifts  of)  ornaments,  clothes,  and  (dainty)  food.  _J 

verse,  which  Nar.  and  Nand.  consider  the  only  admissible  one : 
'  But  those  (male)  relations  who,  in  their  folly,  live  on  property  ob- 
tained by  (the  sale  of)  women,  (e.  g.)  carriages  or  beasts  of  burden 
and  clothes  (received  for)  females,  commit  sin,  &c.'  Nand.  and  K. 
read  narir  yanani, '  female  slaves,  carriages,  &c.'  The  objection  to 
Nar/s  explanation  is  that  nariyanani  can  hardly  mean  '  carriages 
received  for  females.'  The  reading  'narU'  is  obviously  a  conjec- 
tural emendation. 

53.  Ap.  II,  13,  12;  Vas.  I,  36. 

55-60.  YSgn.  I,  82. 

58.  Some  copies  of  Medh.  omit  verses  58-66. 

59.  Instead  of  satkareshu  (sawkareshu,  Gov.),  *  on  holidays/  like 
the  Kaumudr,  the  Mahanamni,  and  so  forth  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.), 


86 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Ill,  60. 


60.  In  that  family,  where  the  husband  is  pleased 
with  his  wife  and  the  wife  with  her  husband,  happi- 
ness will  assuredly  te  lasting. 

61.  For  if  the  wife  is  not  radiant  with  beauty,  she 
will  not  attract  her  husband ;  but  if  she  has  no 
attractions  for  him,  no  children  will  be  born. 

62.  If  the  wife  is  radiant  with  beauty,  the  whole 
house  is  bright ;  but  if  she  is  destitute  of  beauty,  all 
will  appear  dismal. 

63.  By  low  marriages,  by  omitting  (the  per- 
formance of)  sacred  rites,  by  neglecting  the  study 
of  the  Veda,  and  by  irreverence  towards  Brahma/zas, 
(great)  families  sink  low. 

64.  By  (practising)  handicrafts,  by  pecuniary  trans- 
actions, by  (begetting)  children  on  .Sudra  females 
only,  by  (trading  in)  cows,  horses,  and  carriages,  by 
(the  pursuit  of)  agriculture  and  by  taking  service 
under  a  king, 

65.  By  sacrificing  for  men  unworthy  to  offer  sacri- 
fices and  by  denying  (the  future  rewards  for  good) 
works,  families,  deficient  in  the  (knowledge  of  the) 
Veda,  quickly  perish. 

66.  But  families  that  are  rich  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  Veda,  though  possessing  little  wealth,  are 
numbered  among  the  great,  and  acquire  great 
fame. 


Nar.  and  Nand.  read  satkarewa,  which,  according  to  the  former, 
means  '  by  kind  speech.' 

64.  Baudh.  I,  10,  28.  Nar.  says,  'by  (keeping)  beasts  of  burden, 
such  as  bullocks  and  horses.' 

65.  Baudh.  I,  10,  26.  Instead  of  kulany  a\m  vi/myanti,  'families 
.  .  .  perish  quickly '  (Gov.,  Kull.),  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  read 
kulany  akulataw  yanti, '  (great)  families  lose  their  rank.' 

66.  Baudh.  L  10,  29. 


111,70.  householder;  daily  rites.  87 

67.  With  the  sacred  fire,  kindled  at  the  wedding, 
a  householder  shall  perform  according  to  the  law 
the  domestic  ceremonies  and  the  five  (great)  sacri- 
fices, and  (with  that)  he  shall  daily  cook  his  food. 

68.  A  householder  has  five  slaughter-houses  (as 
it  were,  viz.)  the  hearth,  the  grinding-stone,  the 
broom,  the  pestle  and  mortar,  the  water-vessel, 
by  using  which  he  is  bound  (with  the  fetters  of 
sin). 

69.  In  order  to  successively  expiate  (the  offences  ! 
committed  by  means)  of  all  these  (five)  the  great 
sages  have  prescribed  for  householders  the  daily 
(performance  of  the  five)  great  sacrifices. 

70.  Teaching  (and  studying)  is  the  sacrifice 
(offered)  to  Brahman,  the  (offerings  of  water  and 
food  called)  Tarpa/za  the  sacrifice  to  the  manes,  the 
burnt  oblation  the  sacrifice  offered  to  the  gods,  the 

67.  Yagn.  I,  97;  Gaut.  V,  7;  Vi.  LIX,  1;  Baudh.  II,  4,  22. 
1  The  domestic  ceremonies,'  i.  e.  '  all  the  rites  prescribed  in  the 
Grz'hya-sutras.' 

68.  Vi.  LIX,  19.  The  translation  of  upaskara^, '  the  broom/  rests 
on  the  authority  of  Nar.,  who  says,  peshawena  upakiraty  a^uddhanity 
upaskaro  'vaskarahetu^  1  sawmar^ani  bhuyishMapipilikadihi#zsahe- 
tuk  11  The  other  commentators  seem  to  take  upaskara^  in  its  usual 
sense, '  a  household  implement,'  as  they  explain  it  by  kurc^aka/ahadi, 
1  a  pot,  a  kettle,  and  the  like'  (Medh.),  kuwdasawmar^anyadi, '  a  pot, 
a  broom,  and  the  like'  (Kull.),  sawmarg-anyadi, ■  a  broom  and  the 
like'  (Ragh.),  uliikhalamusaladi, '  a  mortar  and  pestle  and  the  like' 
(K.).  But  it  is  clear  from  the  context  that  one  implement  only  is 
meant. 

69.  Vi.  LIX,  20. 

70.  Ap.  I,  12,  15-13,  1;  Gaut.  V,  3,  9;  Baudh.  II,  5,  n;  II,  11, 
1-6;  Vi.  LIX,  21-25;  Yagii.  I,  102.  By  Bhutas  either  'the  gob- 
lins' or  'the  living  creatures'  may  be  understood.  Medh.  takes  it 
in  the  former  sense.  Nand.  reads  adhyayanam  for  adhyapanam, 
and  adds  adhyayanam  eva  'dhyayanam,  'adhyayana  is  the  same  as 
adhyayana,  studying.' 


88 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


Ill,  7r. 


r 


) 


Ff 


Bali   offering    that   offered   to  the  Bhutas,  and  the 
hospitable  reception  of  guests  the  offering  to  men. 

71.  He  who  neglects  not  these  five  great  sacri- 
fices, while  he  is  able  (to  perform  them),  is  not 
tainted  by  the  sins  (committed)  in  the  five  places  of 
slaughter,  though  he  constantly  lives  in  the  (order 
of)  house(-holders). 

72.  But  he  who  does  not  feed  these  five,  the 
gods,  his  guests,  those  whom  he  is  bound  to  main- 
tain, the  manes,  and  himself,  lives  not,  though  he 
breathes. 

j$.  They  call  (these)  five  sacrifices  also,  Ahuta, 
Huta,  Prahuta,  Brahmya-huta,  and  Prasita. 

74.  Ahuta  (not  offered  in  the  fire)  is  the  muttering 
(of  Vedic  texts),  Huta  the  burnt  oblation  (offered  to 
the  gods),  Prahuta  (offered  by  scattering  it  on  the 
ground)  the  Bali  offering  given  to  the  Bhutas, 
Brahmya-huta  (offered  in  the  digestive  fire  of  Brah- 
ma/zas),  the  respectful  reception  of  Brahma^a 
(guests),  and  Pranta  (eaten)  the  (daily  oblation  to 
the  manes,  called)  Tarpaz^a. 

75.  Let  (every  man)  in  this  (second  order,  at  least) 
daily  apply  himself  to  the  private  recitation  of  the 
Veda,  and  also  to  the  performance  of  the  offering  to 
the  gods ;  for  he  who  is  diligent  in  the  performance 

72.  'Those  whom  he  is  bound  to  maintain/  i.e.  'aged  parents 
and  so  forth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  'animals  unfit  for  work' 
(Medh.),  or  '  the  Bhutas,  goblins  or  living  beings'  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 
Nand.  reads  bhutanam  for  bhrz'tyanam,  as  Nar.  and  Ragh.  seem  to 
have  done. 

73.  Medh.  remarks  that  these  technical  terms  must  belong  to  some 
particular  Sakha  of  the  Veda.  Two  of  them  occur  in  the  beginning 
of  Baudhayana's  Grz'hya-sutra,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  xiv, 
p.  xxxi,  and  four  in  Paraskara's  Grz'hya-sutra  I,  4, 1,  as  well  as  in 
-Sahkhay ana's,  I,  5,  1.  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  Brahmahuta  in 
this  and  the  next  verses. 


Ill,  81.  HOUSEHOLDER  ;    DAILY    RITES.  89 

of  sacrifices,  supports  both  the  movable  and  the 
immovable  creation. 

j6.  An  oblation  duly  thrown  into  the  fire,  reaches 
the  sun ;  from  the  sun  comes  rain,  from  rain  food, 
therefrom  the  living  creatures  (derive  their  sub- 
sistence). 

j  J.  As  all  living  creatures  subsist  by  receiving 
support  from  air,  even  so  (the  members  of)  all  orders 
subsist  by  receiving  support  from  the  householder. 

j8.  Because  men  of  the  three  (other)  orders  are 
daily  supported  by  the  householder  with  (gifts  of) 
sacred  knowledge  and  food,  therefore  (the  order  of) 
householders  is  the  most  excellent  order. 

79.  (The  duties  of)  this  order,  which  cannot  be 
practised  by  men  with  weak  organs,  must  be  carefully 
observed  by  him  who  desires  imperishable  (bliss  in) 
heaven,  and  constant  happiness  in  this  (life). 

80.  The  sages,  the  manes,  the  gods,  the  Bhutas, 
and  guests  ask  the  householders  (for  offerings  and 
gifts) ;  hence  he  who  knows  (the  law),  must  give  to 
them  (what  is  due  to  each). 

81.  Let  him  worship,  according  to  the  rule,  the 
sages  by  the  private  recitation  of  the  Veda,  the  gods 
by  burnt  oblations,  the  manes  by  funeral  offerings 

76.  Vas.  XI,  13. 

77-78.  Vas.  VIII,  14-16;  Vi.  LIX,  27-28. 

78.  Medh.  points  out  that  this  verse  indicates  that  householders 
alone  are,  as  a  rule,  to  be  the  teachers  of  the  Veda,  not  hermits  or 
ascetics.  He  adds,  however,  that  the  Institutes  of  the  Bhikshus 
prescribe  that  men  of  the  latter  two  orders,  too,  shall  teach.  Simi- 
larly Nar.  and  Nand.  point  out  that  householders  alone  shall  be 
teachers, '  except  in  times  of  distress'  (Nand.). 

79.  '  Of  weak  organs/  i.e.  'of  uncontrolled  organs'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
KulL).  Some  MSS.  of  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  atyantam, '  exces- 
sive/ for  nityam, '  constant.' 

80.  Vi.  LIX,  29.  81.  Y8gn.  I,  104. 


90  LAWS    OF    MANU.  111,82. 

(•Sraddha),  men  by  (gifts  of)  food,  and  the  Bhutas 
by  the  Bali  offering. 

82.  Let  him  daily  perform  a  funeral  sacrifice  with 
food,  or  with  water,  or  also  with  milk,  roots,  and 
fruits,  and  (thus)  please  the  manes. 

83.  Let  him  feed  even  one  Brahma^a  in  honour 
of  the  manes  at  (the  6raddha),  which  belongs  to  the 
five  great  sacrifices;  but  let  him  not  feed  on  that 
(occasion)  any  Brahma^a  on  account  of  the  Vaisva- 
deva  offering. 

84.  A  Brahma/za  shall  offer  according  to  the  rule 
(of  his  Grzhya-sutra  a  portion)  of  the  cooked  food 
destined  for  the  Vaisvadeva  in  the  sacred  domestic 
fire  to  the  following  deities  : 

85.  First  to  Agni,  and  (next)  to  Soma,  then  to 
both  these  gods  conjointly,  further  to  all  the  gods 
(Visve  Deva^),  and  (then)  to  Dhanvantari, 

86.  Further  to  Kuhu  (the  goddess  of  the  new- 
moon  day),  to  Anumati  (the  goddess  of  the  full-moon 
day),  to  Pra^apati  (the  lord  of  creatures),  to  heaven 
and  earth  conjointly,  and  finally  to  Agni  Svish^akrzt 
(the  fire  which  performs  the  sacrifice  well). 

82.  Vi.  LXVII,  23-25. 

83.  The  object  of  the  second  part  of  the  verse  is  to  forbid  that 
two  sets  of  Brahma/zas  are  to  be  fed  at  the  daily  -SYaddha,  as  is  done 
at  the  Parva/za  -Sraddha,  see  below,  verse  125  seq.  Nar.  adds, 
vijvesha/zz  devanaw  nitya^raddhe  priwanaw  nastiti  danitam  II '  It  is 
indicated  (hereby)  that  the  Visvedevas  are  not  gladdened  at  the 
daily  -Sraddha/  Medh.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  read  kimkit, '  any  (food),' 
for  ka^it, '  any  (Brahmawa).' 

84.  Ap.  II,  3, 16;  Gaut.  V,  10 ;  Vi.  LXVII,  3  (see  also  the  Grz'hya- 
sutras,  quoted  by  Professor  Jolly  on  the  last  passage).  The  term 
*  a  Brahmawa '  is  not  intended  to  exclude  other  Aryans  (Medh., 
Nand.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

85.  Each  offering  must  be  presented  with  a  mantra,  consisting 
of  the  name  of  the  deity  in  the  dative  case  and  the  word  '  svaha.' 


111,91.  householder;   daily  rites.  91 

87.  After  having  thus  duly  offered  the  sacrificial 
food,  let  him  throw  Bali  offerings  in  all  directions 
of  the  compass,  proceeding  (from  the  east)  to  the 
south,  to  Indra,  Yama,  Varu^a,  and  Soma,  as  well 
as  to  the  servants  (of  these  deities). 

88.  Saying,  '  (Adoration)  to  the  Maruts,'  he  shall 
scatter  (some  food)  near  the  door,  and  (some) 
in  water,  saying,  ( (Adoration  to  the  waters ; '  he 
shall  throw  (some)  on  the  pestle  and  the  mortar, 
speaking  thus,  '  (Adoration)  to  the  trees/ 

89.  Near  the  head  (of  the  bed)  he  shall  make 
an  offering  to  Sri  (fortune),  and  near  the  foot  (of 
his  bed)  to  Bhadrakali ;  in  the  centre  of  the  house 
let  him  place  a  Bali  for  Brahman  and  for  Vastoshpati 
(the  lord  of  the  dwelling)  conjointly. 

90.  Let  him  throw  up  into  the  air  a  Bali  for  all 
the  gods,  and  (in  the  day-time  one)  for  the  goblins 
roaming  about  by  day,  (and  in  the  evening  one)  for 
the  goblins  that  walk  at  night. 

91.  In  the  upper  story  let  him  offer  a  Bali  to 
Sarvatmabhuti ;  but  let  him  throw  what  remains 
(from  these  offerings)  in  a  southerly  direction  for 
the  manes. 

87-92.  Ap.  II,  3,  12-15,  18-4,  9  ;  Gaut.  V,  11-17  ;  Vi.  LXVII, 
4-22,  26. 

89.  UMrshake,  'near  the  head  of  the  bed'  (Medh.,  'others/ 
Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  '  in  the 
north-eastern  portion  of  the  house,  where  the  head  of  the  Vastu- 
purusha,  "the  Lar,"  is  situated.'  Medh.  says  that  the  spot  is 
known  as  the  deva^arawa.  The  same  authorities  refer  p&data^,  'at 
the  foot/  to  a  spot  in  the  south-west  part  of  the  building  where  the 
Lar  keeps  his  feet. 

9 1 .  Pnsh/^av&stuni, '  in  the  upper  story/  or  (if  the  house  has 
only  one)  '  on  the  top  of  the  house '  (Medh.),  may  also  mean 
according  to  Gov.  and  Nar.  'behind  the  house/  or  according 
to  Nand.  '  outside  the  house.'     Instead  of  '  Sarvatmabhuti '  (Kull., 


92 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Ill,  92. 


92.  Let  him  gently  place  on  the  ground  (some 
food)  for  dogs,  outcasts,  Aa^alas  (^vapa^),  those 
afflicted  with  diseases  that  are  punishments  of  former 
sins,  crows,  and  insects. 

93.  That  Brahma^a  who  thus  daily  honours  all 
beings,  goes,  endowed  with  a  resplendent  body,  by 
a  straight  road  to  the  highest  dwelling-place  (i.  e. 
Brahman). 

94.  Having  performed  this  Bali  offering,  he  shall 
first  feed  his  guest  and,  according  to  the  rule,  give 
alms  to  an  ascetic  (and)  to  a  student. 

95.  A   twice-born   householder   gains,  by   giving 
alms,  the  same  reward  for  his  meritorious  act  which 
(a  student)  obtains  for  presenting,  in  accordance  with ' 
the  rule,  a  cow  to  his  teacher. 

Ragh.),  Nar.  and  Nand.  have  '  Sarvanubhuti,'  Gov.  '  Sarvannabhuti.' 
NaT.  mentions  a  various  reading  '  Sarvannabhuta/  which  seems 
to  have  been  also  Medh.'s  version.  The  same  deity  occurs 
♦Sahkhayana  Grzriya-sutra  II,  14,  where  Professor  Oldenberg  has 
Sarvannabhuti,  while  the  Petersburg  Diet,  gives  Sarvanubhuti. 
Probably  one  of  the  last  two  readings  is  the  original  one,  but 
without  further  parallel  passages  it  is  difficult  to  say  which  has  to 
be  chosen. 

93.  Instead  of  te^omurti^, c  endowed  with  a  resplendent  body/ 
Kull.  and  Ragh.  read  te^omurti,  '  (to  the  highest)  resplendent 
(dwelling-place,  i.e.  Brahman).' 

94.  Vi.  LIX,  14;  LXVII,  27;  Vas.  XI,  5;  Baudh.  II,  5, 15;  Yagn. 
I,  107.  Bhikshave  brahma£ari«e, '  to  an  ascetic  and  to  a  student' 
(Kull.,  Ragh.),  may  mean  according  to  Medh.  (who  gives  Kull.'s 
view  also),  either  'to  a  begging  student'  or  'to  an  ascetic  who 
is  chaste.'  Gov.  adopts  the  former  explanation.  'According  to 
the  rule,'  i.  e. '  making  him  wish  welfare '  (Medh.,  Nand.) ;  see  also 
Gaut.  V,  18. 

95.  For  vidhivad  gurau  or  guroh, '  according  to  the  rule,  to  his 
teacher,'  Nand.  reads  agor  yathavidhi,  '  according  to  the  rule  to 
one  who  has  no  cow.'  The  var.  lect.  is  mentioned  by  Medh.  also. 
The  '  rule '  referred  to  is,  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.,  that  given 
Yagri.  I,  204. 


I 


111,102.  householder;  daily  rites.  93 

96.  Let  him  give,  in  accordance  with  the  rule,  to 
a  Brahma/za  who  knows  the  true  meaning  of  the 
Veda,  even  (a  small  portion  of  food  as)  alms,  or  a 
pot  full  of  water,  having  garnished  (the  food  with 
seasoning,  or  the  pot  with  flowers  and  fruit). 

97.  The  oblations  to  gods  and  manes,  made  by 
men  ignorant  (of  the  law  of  gifts),  are  lost,  if  the 
givers  in  their  folly  present  (shares  of  them)  to 
Brahma^as  who  are  mere  ashes. 

98.  An  offering  made  in  the  mouth-fire  of  Brah- 
ma^as  rich  in  sacred  learning  and  austerities,  saves 
from  misfortune  and  from  great  guilt. 

99.  But  let  him  offer,  in  accordance  with  the  rule, 
to  a  guest  who  has  come  (of  his  own  accord)  a  seat 
and  water,  as  well  as  food,  garnished  (with  seasoning), 
according  to  his  ability.  ^ 

100.  A  Brahma^a  who  stays  unhonoured  (in  the 
house),  takes  away  (with  him)  all  the  spiritual  merit 
even  of  a  man  who  subsists  by  gleaning  ears  of  corn, 
or  offers  oblations  in  five  fires. 

10 1.  Grass,  room  (for  resting),  water,  and  fourthly 
a  kind  word ;  these  (things)  never  fail  in  the  houses 
of  good  men. 

102.  But  a  Brahma/za  who  stays  one  night  only 
is  declared  to  be  a  guest  (atithi) ;  for  because  he 
stays  (sthita)  not  long  (anityam),  he  is  called  atithi 
(a  guest). 


96.  Satkrz'tya,  'having  garnished,  &c.'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means 
according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  'having  honoured  the  recipient' 
(with  fruits  and  flowers,  Gov.). 

97.  Vas.  Ill,  8. 

99-118.  Ap.  II,  4,  11,  13-20;  6,  5-9;  Gaut.  V,  25-45;  Vas. 
VIII,  4-5,  11-15;  Baudh.  II,  5,  11-18;  6,  36-37;  Vi.  LXVII, 
28-46;  Yagfi.  I,  104-109,  1 1 2-1 13. 


94  LAWS   OF   MANU.  Ill,  103. 

103.  One  must  not  consider  as  a  guest  a  Brah- 
mao  who  dwells  in  the  same  village,  nor  one  who 

I  seeks  his  livelihood  by  social  intercourse,  even  though 
he  has  come  to  a  house  where  (there  is)  a  wife,  and 
where  sacred  fires  (are  kept). 

104.  Those  foolish  householders  who  constantly 
seek  (to  live  on)  the  food  of  others,  become,  in  con- 
sequence of  that  (baseness),  after  death  the  cattle  of 
those  who  give  them  food. 

105.  A  guest  who  is  sent  by  the  (setting)  sun  in 
the  evening,  must  not  be  driven  away  by  a  house- 
holder; whether  he  have  come  at  (supper-)time  or 
at  an  inopportune  moment,  he  must  not  stay  in  the 
house  without  entertainment. 

106.  Let  him  not  eat  any  (dainty)  food  which  he 
does  not  offer  to  his  guest ;  the  hospitable  recep- 
tion of  guests  procures  wealth,  fame,  long  life,  and 
heavenly  bliss. 

107.  Let  him  offer  (to  his  guests)  seats,  rooms, 

103.  Sa#zgatika^,  'one  who  seeks  his  livelihood  by  social  inter- 
course,' is,  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  'one  who  makes 
his  living  by  telling  wonderful  or  laughable  stories  and  the  like/ 
Medh.  explains  the  word  first  by  'he  who  stays  being  a  fellow- 
student  (sahadhyayi),'  and  afterwards  by  '  a  Vaisya,  or  -Sudra,  or 
a  friend  who  makes  friends  with  everybody,  possessing  wonderful 
or  laughable  stories  and  the  like,  which  are  indicated  by  the  word 
saffzgati/  Nar.  says  that  sa#zgati  means  sambandha, '  connexion,' 
that  sa/^gatika  is  'one  who  comes  for  such  a  reason.'  Perhaps 
the  term  might  be  rendered  '  a  visitor  on  business  or  pleasure.' 
According  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  the  last  clause,  '  where  (there  is) 
a  wife  and  sacred  fires  (are  kept),'  indicates,  that  a  householder 
who  has  neither,  need  not  entertain  guests.  But  the  words  are 
taken  differently  by  Gov.  and  Nar.,  '  nor  him  who  travels  with 
his  wife  or  his  fires'  (tatha  yatra  yasya  pravasino  'pi  bharyagnayo 
va  saha  ga£/^anti  l  etadanyatamaw  svagr/ha  upasthitam  agatam 
apyathi  atithizrc  na  vidyat  I  natithidharmewar^ayet  II  Nar.). 

107.  Gaut.V,  38.  'The  rule  refers  to  the  case  when  many  guests 


111,113.  householder;  daily  rites.  95 

beds,  attendance  on  departure  and  honour  (while 
they  stay),  to  the  most  distinguished  in  the  best 
form,  to  the  lower  ones  in  a  lower  form,  to  equals 
in  an  equal  manner. 

108.  But  if  another  guest  comes  after  the  Vabva- 
deva  offering  has  been  finished,  (the  householder) 
must  give  him  food  according  to  his  ability,  (but) 
not  repeat  the  Bali  offering. 

109.  A  Brahma^a  shall  not  name  his  family  and 
(Vedic)  gotra  in  order  to  obtain  a  meal ;  for  he  who 
boasts  of  them  for  the  sake  of  a  meal,  is  called  by 
the  wise  a  foul  feeder  (vantaUin). 

no.  But  a  Kshatriya  (who  comes)  to  the  house 
of  a  Brahma^a  is  not  called  a  guest  (atithi),  nor  a 
Vai^ya,  nor  a  .Sudra,  nor  a  personal  friend,  nor 
a  relative,  nor  the  teacher. 

in.  But  if  a  Kshatriya  comes  to  the  house  of 
a  Brahma^a  in  the  manner  of  a  guest,  (the  house- 
holder) may  feed  him  according  to  his  desire,  after 
the  above-mentioned  Brahma/zas  have  eaten. 

112.  Even  a  VaLsya  and  a  6udra  who  have  ap- 
proached his  house  in  the  manner  of  guests,  he  may    I 
allow  to  eat  with  his  servants,  showing  (thereby)  his    / 
compassionate  disposition. 

113.  Even  to  others,  personal  friends  and  so  forth, 
who  have  come  to  his  house  out  of  affection,  he  may 

come  at  the  same  time.'  Upasanam,  '  honour  (while  they  stay)/ 
i.  e.  '  sitting  with  them  and  talking  to  them '  (Medh.). 

108.  'When  the  Vaijvadeva  offering  has  been  finished/  i.e. 
'  when  the  dinner  of  the  guests  is  over.' 

in.  'In  the  manner  of  a  guest/  i.e.  'having  consumed  his 
provisions  while  on  a  journey,  being  an  inhabitant  of  another 
village  or  arriving  at  meal-time '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

112.  Nar.  says,  'he  may  cause  them  to  be  fed  by  his  servants 
in  the  same  manner.' 


9  6  LAWS    OF    MANU.  JII, 


14. 


I 


give  food,  garnished  (with  seasoning)  according  to 
his  ability,  (at  the  same  time)  with  his  wife. 

114.  Without  hesitation  he  may  give  food,  even 
before  his  guests,  to  the  following  persons,  (viz.)  to 
newly-married  women,  to  infants,  to  the  sick,  and 
to  pregnant  women. 

115.  But  the  foolish  man  who  eats  first  without 
having  given  food  to  these  (persons)  does,  while  he 
crams,  not  know  that  (after  death)  he  himself  will 
be  devoured  by  dogs  and  vultures. 

1 1 6.  After  the  Brahma^as,  the  kinsmen,  and  the 
servants  have  dined,  the  householder  and  his  wife 
may  afterwards  eat  what  remains. 

117.  Having  honoured  the  gods,  the  sages,  men, 
the  manes,  and  the  guardian  deities  of  the  house,  the 
householder  shall  eat  afterwards  what  remains. 

118.  He  who  prepares  food  for  himself  (alone), 
eats  nothing  but  sin ;  for  it  is  ordained  that  the 
food  which  remains  after  (the  performance  of)  the 
sacrifices  shall  be  the  meal  of  virtuous  men. 

119.  Let  him  honour  with  the  honey-mixture  a 
king,  an  officiating  priest,  a  Snataka,  the  teacher, 
a  son-in-law,  a  father-in-law,  and  a  maternal  uncle, 
(if  they  come)  again  after  a  full  year  (has  elapsed 
since  their  last  visit). 

114.  Suvasini^,  'to  newly-married  women,'  i.e.  'daughters-in- 
law  and  daughters/  may  also  mean  according  to  '  others/  quoted 
by  Medh.  and  Gov., '  females  whose  fathers  or  fathers-in-law  live.' 
Nand.  reads  svavasinU  and  explains  it  by  '  sisters.' 

1 19-120.  Ap.  II,  8,  5-9;  Gaut.V,  27-30;  Vas.  XI,  1-2;  Baudh. 
H,  6,  36-37;  Y&gn.  I,  no. 

119.  Guru^,  'the  teacher/  means  according  to  Nar.  'the  teacher 
or  the  sub-teacher.'  Priya^,  which  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.  means  '  a  son-in-law/  is  taken  by  Nar.  and  Nand.  in  its 
etymological  sense,  '  a  friend.' 


in, T23.  householder;  sraddhas.  97 

120.  A  king  and  a  vSrotriya,  who  come  on  the 
performance  of  a  sacrifice,  must  be  honoured  with 
the  honey-mixture,  but  not  if  no  sacrifice  is  being 
performed ;   that  is  a  settled  rule. 

121.  But  the  wife  shall  offer  in  the  evening  (a 
portion)  of  the  dressed  food  as  a  Bali-oblation,  with- 
out (the  recitation  of)  sacred  formulas  ;  for  that  (rite 
which  is  called  the)  Vaisvadeva  is  prescribed  both 
for  the  morning  and  the  evening. 

122.  After  performing  the  Pitrzya^a,  a  Brahma^a 
who  keeps  a  sacred  fire  shall  offer,  month  by  month, 
on  the  new-moon  day,  the  funeral  sacrifice  (.5raddha, 
called)  Pi^anvaharyaka. 

123.  The  wise  call  the  monthly  funeral  offering 
to  the  manes   Anvaharya  (to  be  offered  after  the 


120.  According  to  one  opinion,  given  by  Medh.,  and  according 
to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  this  rule  is  a  limitation  of  verse  119,  and 
means  that  the  two  persons  mentioned  shall  not  receive  the  honey- 
mixture,  except  when  they  come  during  the  performance  of  a 
sacrifice,  however  long  a  period  may  have  elapsed  since  their  last 
visit.  According  to  another  explanation,  mentioned  by  Medh., 
and  according  to  Nand.  and  Ragh.,  the  verse  means  that  a  king 
and  a  -SYotriya,  who  come  before  a  year  since  their  last  visit 
elapsed,  on  the  occasion  of  a  sacrifice,  shall  receive  the  madhu- 
parka.  The  term  »Srotriya  refers  according  to  Medh.  to  a  Snataka 
or  to  an  officiating  priest,  according  to  others  quoted  by  him  to 
all  the  persons  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse,  according  to 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  to  a  Snataka.  The  latter  is  probably 
the  correct  opinion,  as  a  <Srotriya,  i.  e.  one  who  knows  a  whole 
recension  of  the  Veda,  must  be  a  Snataka.  Medh.  approves  of  the 
reading  ya^wakarma^y  upasthite. 

1  a  1.  Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

122.  Yagii.  I,  217;  Gaut.  XV,  2.  The  sacrifice  intended  by 
the  term  Pitr/ya^wa,  'sacrifice  offered  to  the  fathers,'  is  the  so- 
called  Piw^apitrzya^-na,  a  -Srauta  rite  (Ayvalayana,  *Srauta-sutra  II,. 
6-7),  and  Pi/z^anvaharyaka  is  another  name  for  the  monthly 
*S"raddha. 

[25]  H    j 


98  LAWS   OF   MANU.  Ill,  124. 

cakes),  and  that  must  be  carefully  performed  with 
the  approved  (sorts  of)  flesh  (mentioned  below). 

124.  I  will  fully  declare  what  and  how  many 
Brahma^as  must  be  fed  on  that  (occasion),  who 
must  be  avoided,  and  on  what  kinds  of  food  (they 
shall  dine). 

125.  One  must  feed  two  (Brahma^as)  at  the 
offering  to  the  gods,  and  three  at  the  offering  to 
the  manes,  or  one  only  on  either  occasion ;  even 
a  very  wealthy  man  shall  not  be  anxious  (to  enter- 
tain) a  large  company. 

126.  A  large  company  destroys  these  five  (advan- 
tages), the  respectful  treatment  (of  the  invited,  the 
propriety  of)  place  and  time,  purity  and  (the  selec- 
tion of)  virtuous  Brahma^a  (guests) ;  he  therefore 
shall  not  seek  (to  entertain)  a  large  company. 

127.  Famed  is  this  rite  for  the  dead,  called  (the 
sacrifice  sacred  to  the  manes  (and  performed)  on 
the  new-moon  day;  if  a  man  is  diligent  in  (per- 
forming) that,  (the  reward  of)  the  rite  for  the 
dead,  which  is  performed  according  to  Smarta  rules, 
reaches  him  constantly. 

125.  Vas.  XI,  27;  Baudh.  II,  15,  10;  Vi.  LXXIII,  3-4;  Gaut. 
XV,  8,  21 ;  Y&gii.  I,  228.  The  offering  to  the  gods,  mentioned  in 
this  verse,  is  an  Ahga  or  subsidiary  rite  preceding  the  offering  to 
the  manes.  Medh.  takes  the  first  part  of  this  verse  in  a  peculiar 
manner,  '  One  must  feed  two  (Brahmawas)  at  the  offering  to  the 
gods,  and  three  (for  each  ancestor,  or  nine  in  all)  at  the  offering 
to  the  manes,  or  one  on  either  occasion  (i.e.  one  at  the  offering 
to  the  gods  and  at  the  offering  to  the  manes,  one  for  each  ancestor, 
or  three  in  all).' 

126.  Vas.  XI,  28;  Baudh.  II,  15,  n. 

127.  Gov.  reads  vidhi^  kshaye  for  vidhukshaye,  'on  the  new- 
moon  day/  and  explains  the  first  half  of  the  verse  as  follows : 
*  The  ceremony  called  the  (sacrifice)  to  the  manes  (is)  a  rite  for 
the  benefit  of  the  dead,  (and)  prescribed  on  the  new-moon  day 


Ill,  132.  HOUSEHOLDER ;    SRADDHAS.  99 

128.  Oblations  to  the  gods  and  manes  must  be 
presented  by  the  givers  to  a  6Yotriya  alone ;  what 
is  given  to  such  a  most  worthy  Brahma^a  yields 
great  reward. 

129.  Let  him  feed  even  one  learned  man  at  (the 
sacrifice)  to  the  gods,  and  one  at  (the  sacrifice)  to 
the  manes ;  (thus)  he  will  gain  a  rich  reward,  not 
(if  he  entertains)  many  who  are  unacquainted  with 
the  Veda. 

1 30.  Let  him  make  inquiries  even  regarding  the 
remote  (ancestors  of)  a  Brahma/za  who  has  studied 
an  entire  (recension  of  the)  Veda ;  (if  descended  from 
a  virtuous  race)  such  a  man  is  a  worthy  recipient  of 
gifts  (consisting)  of  food  offered  to  the  gods  or  to 
the  manes,  he  is  declared  (to  procure  as  great  rewards 
as)  a  guest  (atithi). 

131.  Though  a  million  of  men,  unacquainted  with 
the  i?z'/£as,  were  to  dine  at  a  (funeral  sacrifice),  yet 
a  single  man,  learned  in  the  Veda,  who  is  satisfied 
(with  his  entertainment),  is  worth  them  all  as  far  as 
the  (production  of)  spiritual  merit  (is  concerned). 

132.  Food  sacred  to  the  manes  or  to  the  gods 
must  be  given  to  a  man  distinguished  by  sacred 


or  in  the  house,  i.e.  to  be  performed  by  householders,  not  by  men 
of  other  orders.'     Medh.,  too,  mentions  another  reading,  which  he 
explains  much  in  the  same  way  as  Gov.,  and  which  therefore  may 
have  been  vidhi^  kshaye,  though  the  MSS.  read  tithikshaye. 
128.  Vas.  Ill,  8;  Gaut.  XV,  9. 

130.  Vi.  LXXXII,  2.  The  examination  must  extend,  as  in 
the  case  of  officiating  priests,  to  ten  ancestors  on  the  mother's 
and  the  father's  side  (Medh.,  Gov.). 

131.  'The  ivV&is,'  i.e.  '  the  Veda.'  Nar.  reads  instead  of  prita^, 
'  who  is  satisfied,'  yukta^,  and  combines  it  with  dharmata^, '  who 
is  properly  invited.'  Nand.  has  vipra^, '  a  Brahmawa/  for  prita^. 
K.  has  prima  manu  vipra^,  sec.  manu  yukta^. 

H    2 


r" 


L- 


IOO  LAWS   OF   MANU.  Ill,  133. 

knowledge ;  for  hands,  smeared  with  blood,  cannot 
be  cleansed  with  blood. 

133.  As  many  mouthfuls  as  an  ignorant  man  swal- 
lows at  a  sacrifice  to  the  gods  or  to  the  manes,  so 
many  red-hot  spikes,  spears,  and  iron  balls  must  (the 
giver  of  the  repast)  swallow  after  death. 

134.  Some  grJ,hma;zas  are  devoted  to  (the  pur- 
suit of)  knowledge,  and  others  to  (the  performance... 
of)  austerities ;  some  to  austerities  and  to  the  reci- 
tation of  the  Veda,  and  others  to  (the  performance 
of)  sacred  rites. 

135.  Oblations  to  the  manes  ought  to  be  care- 
fully presented  to  those  devoted  to  knowledge,  but 
offerings  to  the  gods,  in  accordance  with  the  reason 
(of  the  sacred  law),  to  (men  of)  all  the  four  (above- 
mentioned  classes). 

136.  If  there  is  a  father  ignorant  of  the  sacred 
texts  whose  son  has  learned  one  whole  recension 
of  the  Veda  and  the  Angas,  and  a  son  ignorant  of 
the  sacred  texts  whose  father  knows  an  entire  recen- 
sion of  the  Veda  and  the  Arigas, 

133.  Nar.  thinks  that  the  eater,  not  the  giver  of  the  feast  will 
bear  the  punishment.  Medh.  gives  both  this  explanation  and  that 
adopted  in  the  translation.  Nar.  explains  ri'sh/i, '  spear,'  by  kha^/ga, 
'  sword.'  Nand.  reads  hulan  for  gudan, '  balls,'  and  says  that  hula 
means  '  a  double-edged  sword.' 

134.  '  Knowledge,'  i.  e. ' the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  soul' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  and  Nar.  say  that 
ascetics,  hermits,  students,  and  householders  are  intended  by  the 
four  divisions  mentioned  in  the  text. 

135.  Vas.  XI,  17;  Baudh.  II,  14,  3.  The  verse  indicates  that 
ascetics  are  particularly  desirable  guests. 

136-137.  Kull.  remarks  that  the  object  of  the  verse  is  to  teach 
that  at  a  -Sraddha  the  learned  son  of  a  learned  father  is  to  be 
entertained,  but  not  to  permit  the  admission  of  a  fool  whose  father 
is  learned. 


111,143-  householder;  sraddhas.  ioi 

137.  Know  that  he  whose  father  knows  the  Veda, 
is  the  more  venerable  one  (of  the  two) ;  yet  the  other 
one  is  worthy  of  honour,  because  respect  is  due  to 
the  Veda  (which  he  has  learned). 

138.  Let  him  not  entertain  a  personal  friend  at 
a  funeral  sacrifice ;  he  may  gain  his  affection  by 
(other)  valuable  gifts ;  let  him  feed  at  a  6raddha 
a  Brahma^a  whom  he  considers  neither  as  a  foe 
nor  as  a  friend. 

1 39.  He  who  performs  funeral  sacrifices  and  offer- 
ings to  the  gods  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  (gaining) 
friends,  reaps  after  death  no  reward  for  6raddhas 
and  sacrifices. 

140.  That  meanest  among  twice-born  men  who 
in  his  folly  contracts  friendships  through  a  funeral 
sacrifice,  loses  heaven,  because  he  performed  a 
•SYaddha  for  the  sake  of  friendship. 

141.  A  gift  (of  food)  by  twice-born  men,  con- 
sumed with  (friends  and  relatives),  is  said  to  be 
offered  to  the  Pisa^as ;  it  remains  in  this  (world) 
alone  like  a  blind  cow  in  one  stable. 

142.  As  a  husbandman  reaps  no  harvest  when 
he  has  sown  the  seed  in  barren  soil,  even  so  the 
giver  of  sacrificial  food  gains  no  reward  if  he  pre- 
sented it  to  a  man  unacquainted  with  the  Rikas. 

143.  But  a  present  made  in  accordance  with  the 
rules  to  a  learned  man,  makes  the  giver  and  the 


138-148.  Ap.  II,  17,  4-6;  Gaut.  XV,  12-14;  Baudh.  II,  14,  6; 
Ya^».  I,  220. 

141.  Ap.  II,  17,  8-9.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.  paira/fci  means  '  offered  after  the  manner  of  the  PLya/fcas.' 
But  the  version  given  above,  which  follows  Nar.  and  Nand.,  is 
supported  by  the  ancient  verse,  quoted  by  Apastamba,  from  which 
Manu's  Sloka  is  probably  derived. 


102 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


Ill,  fi 


recipient  partakers  of  rewards  both  in  this  (life)  2 
after  death. 

144.  (If  no  learned  Brahma^a  be  at  hand),  he 
may  rather  honour  a  (virtuous)  friend  than  an 
enemy,  though  the  latter  may  be  qualified  (by 
learning  and  so  forth) ;  for  sacrificial  food,  eaten  by 
a  foe,  bears  no  reward  after  death. 

145.  Let  him  (take)  pains  (to)  feed  at  a  .Sraddha 
an  adherent  of  the  J^tg-veda,  who  has  studied  one 
entire  (recension  of  that)  Veda,  or  a  follower  of  the 
Ya^ur-veda  who  has  finished  one  6akha,  or  a 
singer  of  Samans  who  (likewise)  has  completed  (the 
study  of  an  entire  recension). 

146.  If  one  of  these  three  dines,  duly  honoured, 
at  a  funeral  sacrifice,  the  ancestors  of  him  (who 
gives  the  feast),  as  far  as  the  seventh  person,  will 
be  satisfied  for  a  very  long  time. 

147.  This  is  the  chief  rule  (to  be  followed)  in 
offering  sacrifices  to  the  gods  and  manes ;  know 
that  the  virtuous  always  observe  the  following  sub- 
sidiary rule. 

148.  One  may  also  entertain  (on  such  occasions) 
one's  maternal  grandfather,  a  maternal  uncle,  a 
sister's  son,  a  father-in-law,  one's  teacher,  a 
daughter's  son,  a  daughter's  husband,  a  cognate 
kinsman,  one's  own  officiating  priest  or  a  man  for 
whom  one  offers  sacrifices. 

149.  For  a  rite  sacred  to  the  gods,  he  who  knows 
the  law  will  not  make  (too  close)  inquiries  regarding 
an  (invited)  Brahma/za ;  but  when  one  performs  a 


148.  Bandhum,  'a  cognate  kinsman*  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  is  taken  by 
Medh.  and  Gov.  in  its  widest  sense,  *  any  remoter  kinsman '  (sago- 
tradi/$). 

149-  Vi.  LXXXII,  1-2. 


in,  154-  householder;  sraddhas.  103 

ceremony  in  honour  of  the  manes,  one  must  care- 
fully examine  (the  qualities  and  parentage  of  the 
guest). 

150.  Manu  has  declared  that  those  Brahma^as 
who  are  thieves,  outcasts,  eunuchs,  or  atheists  are 
unworthy  (to  partake)  of  oblations  to  the  gods 
and  manes. 

151.  Let  him  not  entertain  at  a  .Sraddha  one  who 
wears  his  hair  in  braids  (a  student),  one  who  has  not 
studied  (the  Veda),  one  afflicted  with  a  skin-disease, 
a  gambler,  nor  those  who  sacrifice  for  a  multitude 
(of  sacrificers). 

152.  Physicians,  temple-priests,  sellers  of  meat, 
and  those  who  subsist -by  shop-keeping  must  be 
avoided  at  sacrifices  offered  to  the  gods  and  to  the 
manes. 

153.  A  paid  servant  of  a  village  or  of  a  king,  a 
man  with  deformed  nails  or  black  teeth,  one  who 
opposes  his  teacher,  one  who  has  forsaken  the 
sacred  fire,  and  a  usurer ; 

154.  One  suffering  from  consumption,  one  who 
subsists  by  tending  cattle,  a  younger  brother  who 

150-182.  Ap.  II,  17,  21;  Gaut.  XV,  16-19,  30-31;  Vas.  XI, 
19  ;  Vi.  LXXXII,  3-30 ;  Yagri.  I,  222-224. 

1 50.  For  the  term  nastikavrz'tti, '  atheist,'  Medh.  proposes,  besides 
the  explanation  given  above,  the  other  equally  possible  one, '  he  who 
derives  his  livelihood  from  atheists.' 

151.  Anadhiyanaw,  '  one  who  has  not  studied  the  Veda/ i.  e. 
1  one  who  has  been  initiated  only,  but  has  not  studied '  (Kull.),  or 
1  one  who  has  not  mastered  the  Veda '  (Medh.),  or  '  one  who  has  left 
off  studying'  (Nar.).  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  durvalam  for  durbalam, 
'  afflicted  with  a  skin-disease,'  and  the  former  explains  his  var.  lect. 
by  'a  bald  or  a  red-haired  man.'  'Those  who  sacrifice  for  a 
multitude/  i.  e.  *  who  offer  the  (forbidden)  Ahina  sacrifices,  for  on 
that  occasion  there  are  many  sacrificers'  (Nar.). 

154.  Nirakr/ti/^/one  who  neglects  the  five  great  sacrifices '(Medh., 


104  LAWS   OF    MANU.  Ill,  155. 

marries  or  kindles  the  sacred  fire  before  the  elder, 
one  who  neglects  the  five  great  sacrifices,  an  enemy 
of  the  Brahma^a  race,  an  elder  brother  who  marries 
or  kindles  the  sacred  fire  after  the  younger,  and  one 
who  belongs  to  a  company  or  corporation, 

155.  An  actor  or  singer,  one  who  has  broken  the 
vow  of  studentship,  one  whose  (only  or  first)  wife  is 
a  .5udra  female,  the  son  of  a  remarried  woman,  a 
one-eyed  man,  and  he  in  whose  house  a  paramour 
of  his  wife  (resides)  ; 

156.  He  who  teaches  for  a  stipulated  fee  and  he 
who  is  taught  on  that  condition,  he  who  instructs 
.Sudra  pupils  and  he  whose  teacher  is  a  .Sudra,  he  who 
speaks  rudely,  the  son  of  an  adulteress,  and  the  son 
of  a  widow, 

157.  He  who  forsakes  his  mother,  his  father,  or 
a  teacher  without  a  (sufficient)  reason,  he  who  has 

Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Gov.  'one  who  forsakes  the 
Vedas  (and  the  rest),'  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  '  one  who  does 
not  recite  the  Veda  privately/  or  '  who  has  forgotten  it.'  Ga«a- 
bhyantara^,  '  one  who  belongs  to  a  company  or  corporation/  i.e. 
'  of  men  who  live  by  one  trade '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.),  is  further  ex- 
plained by  Nar.  by  '  the  headman  of  a  village/  or  '  the  leader  of 
a  caravan.'  According  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  it  means  'one  who 
misappropriates  the  money  of  a  corporation.' 

155.  Kusilava,  'an  actor  or  singer/  is,  as  Medh.  states,  a  very 
wide  term,  including  all  '  bards,  actors,  jugglers,  dancers,  singers, 
and  the  like.'  Kull.  wrongly  understands  by  avakirwin, '  one  who 
has  broken  the  vow  of  studentship/  an  ascetic  also  who  has  become 
unchaste.     Such  an  ascetic  is  called  aru^apatita. 

156.  Vagdush/a^,  'one  who  speaks  rudely/  means  according  to 
'  others/  quoted  by  Medh.  and  Kull.,  '  one  who  is  accused  of  a 
great  crime '  (abhi^asta). 

157.  According  to  Nar.  guro/$,  'a  teacher/  denotes  the  aHrya 
alone.  Medh.  blames  this  explanation,  and  refers  it  to  the  sub- 
teacher.  The  same  explains  kundasi,  '  he  who  eats  the  food  of  the 
son  of  an  adulteress/  by  '  a  glutton  who  eats  sixty  Palas  of  rice.' 


Ill,  160.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    SRADDHAS.  105 

contracted  an  alliance  with  outcasts  either  through 
the  Veda  or  through  a  marriage, 

158.  An  incendiary,  a  prisoner,  he  who  eats  the 
food  given  by  the  son  of  an  adulteress,  a  seller  of 
Soma,  he  who  undertakes  voyages  by  sea,  a  bard, 
an  oil-man,  a  suborner  to  perjury, 

159.  He  who  wrangles  or  goes  to  law  with  his 
father,  the  keeper  of  a  gambling-house,  a  drunkard, 
he  who  is  afflicted  with  a  disease  (in  punishment  of 
former)  crimes,  he  who  is  accused  of  a  mortal  sin,  a 
hypocrite,  a  seller  of  substances  used  for  flavouring 
food, 

160.  A  maker  of  bows  and  of  arrows,  he  who 
lasciviously  dallies  with  a  brothers  widow,  the  be- 
trayer of  a  friend,  one  who  subsists  by  gambling, 
he  who  learns  (the  Veda)  from  his  son, 

158.  Agaradahi,  'an  incendiary/  includes  according  to  averse, 
quoted  by  Nand.  also, '  one  who  burns  corpses  for  money/  Ku/a- 
karaka/$,  '  a  suborner  to  perjury '  (Gov.,  Kull.),  means  according 
to  Medh.  and  Ragh.  'a  false  witness/  according  to  Nar.  and 
Nand.  'any  one  who  commits  fraud/  e.g.  a  forger,  a  falsifier 
of  weights  and  measures.  '  Others '  quoted  by  Medh.  explain 
somavikrayin  as  'one  who  sells  (the  merit  gained  by)  Soma 
(sacrifices).' 

159.  'He  who  wrangles  or  goes  to  law  with  his  father/  e.g. 
who  forces  him  to  divide  the  family  estate  (Medh.),  see  Gaut.  XV, 
19.  Kitava^,  'the  keeper  of  a  gambling-house'  (Medh.),  means 
according  to  Gov.  and  Nand.  'one  who  makes  others  play  for 
himself,'  according  to  Nar.  '  a  gambler  for  pleasure/  and  according 
to  Nand. '  a  rogue.'  '  Others/  however,  read  kekara^,  '  a  squinting 
man/  and  construe  it  with  madyapa^, '  a  drunkard '  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.).  Rasa, '  substances  used  for  flavouring 
food/  e.g. '  sugar-cane  juice '  (Gov.,  Kull,  Ragh.),  'molasses'  (Nar.). 
Medh.  explains  rasada^  by  vishada^,  '  a  poisoner/ 

160.  I  accept  Gov/s  and  Ragh.'s  explanation  of  agredidhishu- 
pati,  who  believe  it  to  be  equivalent  to  didhishupati  explained 
below,  verse  173.  Kull.  and  Nand.  take  it  as  'the  husband  of 
a   younger   sister   married  before  the   elder/  and   Medh.  as   an 


io6 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Ill,  161. 


161.  An  epileptic  man,  one  who  suffers  from  scro- 
fulous swellings  of  the  glands,  one  afflicted  with 
white  leprosy,  an  informer,  a  madman,  a  blind  man, 
and  he  who  cavils  at  the  Veda  must  (all)  be 
avoided. 

162.  A  trainer  of  elephants,  oxen,  horses,  or 
camels,  he  who  subsists  by  astrology,  a  bird-fancier, 
and  he  who  teaches  the  use  of  arms, 

163.  He  who  diverts  water-courses,  and  he  who 
delights  in  obstructing  them,  an  architect,  a  mes- 
senger, and  he  who  plants  trees  (for  money), 

164.  A  breeder  of  sporting-dogs,  a  falconer,  one 
who  defiles  maidens,  he  who  delights  in  injuring 
living  creatures,  he  who  gains  his  subsistence  from 
^udras,  and  he  who  offers  sacrifices  to  the  Ga^as, 

165.  He  who  does  not  follow  the  rule  of  conduct, 
a  (man  destitute  of  energy  like  a)  eunuch,  one  who 
constantly  asks  (for  favours),  he  who  lives  by  agri- 


irregular  compound  consisting  of  agredidhishupati  and  didhishu- 
pati,  see  Gaut.  XV,  16.  Though  in  some  Smn'tis  agredidhishu- 
pati has  the  meaning  given  by  Kull.,  it  seems  here  inadmissible, 
on  account  of  verse  173,  which  is  meaningless,  if  it  is  not  meant 
to  explain  this  term.  Dyutavrz'tti^, '  one  who  subsists  by  gambling,' 
means  according  to  Medh.  '  one  who  makes  others  play  for  his 
profit/  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  'the  keeper  of  a 
gambling-house/     Nar.  and  Nand.  take  it  in  its  literal  meaning. 

162.  Pakshbaw  poshaka/^,  {a  bird-fancier,'  means  according  to 
Medh.  '  a  trainer  of  hunting-falcons  and  hawks/ 

164.  The  commentators  mention  a  var.  lect.  vrzshalaputra^,  'one 
who  has  only  sons  by  a  -Sudra  wife,'  for  •  one  who  gains  his  subsist- 
ence from  -Sudras.'  Nar.  and  Nand.  explain  ga^anaw  yag-aka^  by 
'one  who  sacrifices  for  ga«as,'  i.e.  many  people  or  guilds.  Accord- 
ing to  the  explanation  of  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  which  has 
been  translated  above,  the  performance  of  the  Vinayaka  or  Ganesi- 
homa  (Y&gn.  I,  270-294)  may  be  meant.  But  it  is  also  possible 
to  think  of  the  Gawahomas,  which  according  to  Baudh.  IV,  8,  1 
must  not  be  performed  for  others. 


in,  171.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    SRADDHAS.  IO7 

culture,  a  club-footed  man,  and  he  who  is  censured 
by  virtuous  men, 

166.  A  shepherd,  a  keeper  of  buffaloes,  the  hus- 
band of  a  remarried  woman,  and  a  carrier  of  dead 
bodies,  (all  these)  must  be  carefully  avoided. 

167.  A  Brahma^a  who  knows  (the  sacred  law) 
should  shun  at  (sacrifices)  both  (to  the  gods  and  to 
the  manes)  these  lowest  of  twice-born  men,  whose 
conduct  is  reprehensible,  and  who  are  unworthy  (to 
sit)  in  the  company  (at  a  repast). 

168.  As  a  fire  of  dry  grass  is  (unable  to  consume 
the  offerings  and  is  quickly)  extinguished,  even  so 
(is  it  with)  an  unlearned  Brahma^a ;  sacrificial  food 
must  not  be  given  to  him,  since  it  (would  be)  offered 
in  ashes. 

169.  I  will  fully  declare  what  result  the  giver 
obtains  after  death,  if  he  gives  food,  destined  for  the 
gods  or  manes,  to  a  man  who  is  unworthy  to  sit  in 
the  company. 

170.  The  Rakshasas,  indeed,  consume  (the  food) 
eaten  by  Brahma^as  who  have  not  fulfilled  the  vow 
of  studentship,  by  a  Parivettrz  and  so  forth,  and  by 
other  men  not  admissible  into  the  company. 

171.  He  must  be  considered  as  a  Pari vettrz  who 

168.  According  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  the  object  of  this  verse  is 
to  admit  virtuous  and  learned  men,  afflicted  with  bodily  defects, 
as  guests  at  rites  in  honour  of  the  gods ;  see  Vas.  XI,  20.  Kull. 
thinks  that  the  injunction  to  avoid  ignorant  men  is  repeated  here 
in  order  to  show  that  they  are  as  unfit  as  real  'defilers  of  the 
company/ 

170.  Avratai/^,  'who  have  not  fulfilled  the  vow  of  studentship' 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  'of  bad  conduct/ 
and  according  to  Nar.  '  who  do  not  observe  the  rules  prescribed 
for  a  Snataka  and  so  forth/ 

171.  Usually  a  person  who  kindles  the  sacred  fire  before  his  elder 
brother  is  called  a  Paryadhatrz,  and  the  elder  brother  a  Paryahita. 


108  LAWS   OF   MANU.  Ill,  172. 

marries  or  begins  the  performance  of  the  Agnihotra 
before  his  elder  brother,  but  the  latter  as  a  Parivitti. 

172.  The  elder  brother  who  marries  after  the 
younger,  the  younger  brother  who  marries  before 
the  elder,  the  female  with  whom  such  a  marriage  is 
contracted,  he  who  gives  her  away,  and  the  sacri- 
ficing priest,  as  the  fifth,  all  fall  into  hell. 

173.  He  who  lasciviously  dallies  with  the  widow 
of  a  deceased  brother,  though  she  be  appointed  (to 
bear  a  child  by  him)  in  accordance  with  the  sacred 
law,  must  be  known  to  be  a  Didhishupati. 

1 74.  Two  (kinds  of)  sons,  a  Ku^a  and  a  Golaka, 
are  born  by  wives  of  other  men ;  (he  who  is  born) 
while  the  husband  lives,  will  be  a  Ku»rfa,  and  (he  who 
is  begotten)  after  the  husband's  death,  a  Golaka. 

175.  But  those  two  creatures,  who  are  born  of 
wives  of  other  men,  cause  to  the  giver  the  loss  (of 
the  rewards),  both  in  this  life  and  after  death,  for  the 
food  sacred  to  gods  or  manes  which  has  been  given 
(to  them). 

1 76.  The  foolish  giver  (of  a  funeral  repast)  does 
not  reap  the  re  ward. for  as  many  worthy  guests  as  a 
man,  inadmissible  into  company,  can  look  on  while 
they  are  feeding. 

177.  A  blind  man  by  his  presence  causes  to  the 
giver  (of  the  feast)  the  loss  of  the  reward  for  ninety 
(guests),  a  one-eyed  man  for  sixty,  one  who  suffers 
from  white  leprosy  for  a  hundred,  and  one  punished 
by  a  (terrible)  disease  for  a  thousand. 

1 78.  The  giver  (of  a  .Sraddha)  loses  the  reward, 

172.  Baudh.  II,  1,  39. 

177.  Regarding  the  diseases  which  are   punishments   for  sins 
committed  in  a  former  life,  see  below,  XI,  49  seq. 

178.  Paurtikam, '  due  for  such  a  non-sacrificial  gift/  i.e.  'for  one 


Ill,  183.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    SRADDHAS.  IO9 

due  for  such  a  non-sacrificial  gift,  for  as  many  Brah- 
ma^as  as  a  (guest)  who  sacrifices  for  6udras  may 
touch  (during  the  meal)  with  his  limbs. 

179.  And  if  a  Brahma^a,  though  learned  in  the 
Veda,  accepts  through  covetousness  a  gift  from  such 
(a  man),  he  will  quickly  perish,  like  a  vessel  of 
unburn  t  clay  in  water. 

180.  (Food)  given  to  a  seller  of  Soma  becomes 
ordure,  (that  given)  to  a  physician  pus  and  blood, 
but  (that  presented)  to  a  temple-priest  is  lost,  and 
(that  given)  to  a  usurer  finds  no  place  (in  the  world 
of  the  gods). 

181.  What  has  been  given  to  a  Brahma//a  who 
lives  by  trade  that  is  not  (useful)  in  this  world  and 
the  next,  and  (a  present)  to  a  Brahma^a  born  of 
a  remarried  woman  (resembles)  an  oblation  thrown 
into  ashes. 

182.  But  the  wise  declare  that  the  food  which 
(is  offered)  to  other  unholy,  inadmissible  men,  enu- 
merated above,  (is  turned  into)  adipose  secretions, 
blood,  flesh,  marrow,  and  bone. 

183.  Now  hear  by  what  chief  of  twice-born  men 

which  is  given  outside  the  sacrificial  enclosure*  (Medh.,  Gov.),  or 
'for  the  gift  of  food  at  a  -Sraddha'  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

179.'  From  such  a  man/  i.  e.  'from  one  who  sacrifices  for  -Sudras/ 

180.  The  meaning  is  that  the  giver  will  be  born  in  his  next  life 
among  the  animals,  feeding  on  the  unclean  substances  enumerated 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull,  Ragh.),  or  that  the  food  will  be  rejected  by 
the  manes  and  the  gods  as  impure  (Nar.).  Apratish/^am, '  finds  no 
place'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar.  and 
Nand. '  secures  no  fame  (to  the  giver).' 

182.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  it  must  be 
understood  that  the  giver  will  be  born  in  his  next  existence  as  a 
worm,  feeding  on  the  substances  mentioned. 

183-186.  Ap.  II,  17,  22;  Gaut.  XV,  28,  31;  Vas.  Ill,  19  ; 
Baudh.  II,  14,  2-3;  Vi.  LXXXIII;  Yagfi.  I,  219-221. 


IIO  LAWS    OF   MANU.  111,184. 

a  company  defiled  by  (the  presence  of)  unworthy 
(guests)  is  purified,  and  the  full  (description  of)  the 
Brahma^as  who  sanctify  a  company. 

184.  Those  men  must  be  considered  as  the  sanc- 
tifiers  of  a  company  who  are  most  learned  in  all  the 
Vedas  and  in  all  the  Angas,  and  who  are  the 
descendants  of  .Srotriyas. 

185.  A  Trma&keta,  one  who  keeps  five  sacred 
fires,  a  Trisupama,  one  who .  is  versed  in  the  six 
Angas,  the  son  of  a  woman  married  according  to 
the  Brahma  rite,  one  who  sings  the  Gyesh/^asaman, 

1  &6.  One  who  knows  the  meaning  of  the  Veda,  and 
he  who  expounds  it,  a  student,  one  who  has  given 
a  thousand  (cows),  and  a  centenarian  must  be  con- 
sidered as  Brahma^as  who  sanctify  a  company. 

187.  On  the  day  before  the  .Sraddha-rite  is  per- 
formed, or  on  the  day  when  it  takes  place,  let  him 
invite  with  due  respect  at  least  three  Brahma^as, 
such  as  have  been  mentioned  above. 

188.  A  Brahma^a  who  has  been  invited  to  a  (rite) 
in  honour  of  the  manes  shall  always  control  himself 
and  not  recite  the  Veda,  and  he  who  performs  the 
.Sraddha  (must  act  in  the  same  manner). 


185.  Regarding  the  term  Tri«a/£iketa,  see  Ap.  II,  17,  22,  note. 
Vankagni/iy '  one  who  keeps  five  sacred  fires'  (Medh.,  'others/  Gov., 
Kull.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Nar.  'one 
who  knows  the  parcMgnividya,  taught  in  the  A^andogyopanishad 
IV,  10  seq.  Trisupanza  means  according  to  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand. 
'  one  who  knows  the  texts  Taitt.  Ar.  X,  38-40 ;  but  according  to 
Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  'one  who  knows  the  portion  of  the  Rig-veda 
called  Trisuparwa,  Rig-veda  X,  114,  3-5. 

186.  Nand.  explains  brahma£ari,  'a  student,'  by  'a  chaste  man' 
(see  above,  verse  50). 

187.  Ap.  II,  17, 11-15;  Vas.  XI,  17;  Yagn.  I,  225. 

188.  Gaut.  XV.  23 ;  Yagn.  I,  225.  'Control  himself,'  i.e.  'remain 
chaste/ 


Ill,  195.  HOUSEHOLDER ;    SRADDHAS.  1 1  I 

189.  For  the  manes  attend  the  invited  Brahma/zas, 
follow  them  (when  they  walk)  like  the  wind,  and  sit 
near  them  when  they  are  seated. 

190.  But  a  Brahma/za  who,  being  duly  invited  to 
a  rite  in  honour  of  the  gods  or  of  the  manes,  in 
any  way  breaks  (the  appointment),  becomes  guilty 
(of  a  crime),  and  (in  his  next  birth)  a  hog. 

191.  But  he  who,  being  invited  to  a  .Sraddha, 
dallies  with  a  6iidra  woman,  takes  upon  himself  all 
the  sins  which  the  giver  (of  the  feast)  committed. 

192.  The  manes  are  primeval  deities,  freejfrom 
anger,  careful  of  purity,  ever  chaste,  averse  from 
strife,  and  endowed  with  great  virtues. 

193.  Now  learn  fully  from  whom  all  these  (manes 
derive)  their  origin,  and  with  what  ceremonies  they 
ought  to  be  worshipped. 

194.  The  (various)  classes  of  the  manes  are  de- 
clared to  be  the  sons  of  all  those  sages,  MarL£i  and 
the  rest,  who  are  children  of  Manu,  the  son  of 
Hira/zyagarbha. 

195.  The  Somasads,  the  sons  of  Vira^,  are  stated 
to  be  the  manes  of  the  Sadhyas,  and  the  Agnish- 

189.  'Like  the  wind/  i.e.  'like  the  vital  air,  the  breath'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.).  Medh.  thinks  that  the  manes  enter  the  body  of  the 
invited  guests. 

190.  Medh.  explains  atikraman, '  breaks  the  appointment' (Gov., 
Kull.,  Nar.,  R&gh.),  by  '  breaks  the  rules  of  chastity  and  the  like.' 
Medh.  mentions  a  second  '  improper'  explanation  given  by  'others/ 
'  does  not  accept  the  invitation.' 

191.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  take  vrzshali,  'a  Sudra 
woman/  in  the  sense  of  '  his  lascivious  wife.'  Probably  the  word 
is  used  in  its  proper  sense  and  indicates,  as  Nar.  states,  that  inter- 
course with  a  *Sudra  wife  is  the  worst  offence  in  such  a  case. 

194.  'MarUi  and  the  rest,'  see  above,  I,  35. 

195.  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  prima  manu  read  Somasuta/^  for 
Somasada^. 


rim!  s 


I  I  2  LAWS    OF    MANU.  Ill,  196. 

vattas,  the  children  of  Mari/£i,  are  famous  in  the 
world  (as  the  manes)  of  the  gods. 

196.  The  Barhishads,  born  of  Atri,  are  recorded 
to  be  (the  manes)  of  the  Daityas,  Danavas,  Yakshas, 
Gandharvas,  Snake-deities,  Rakshasas,  Supar/zas,  and 
Kiwnaras, 

197.  The  Somapas  those  of  theBrahma^as,theHa- 
virbhu£*s  those  of  the  Kshatriyas,  the  A^yapas  those 
of  the  VaLsyas,  but  the  Sukalins  those  of  the  .Sudras. 

198.  The  Somapas  are  the  sons  of  Kavi  (Bhrigu), 
the  Havishmats  the  children  of  Angiras,  the  A^yapas 
the  offspring  of  Pulastya,  but  the  Sukalins  (the  issue) 
of  Vasish^a. 

199.  One  should  know  that  (other  classes),  the 
Agnidagdhas,  the  Anagnidagdhas,  the  Kavyas,  the 
Barhishads,  the  Agnishvattas,  and  the  Saumyas,  are 
(the  manes)  of  the  Brahma^as  alone. 

200.  But  know  also  that  there  exist  in  this  (world) 
countless  sons  and  grandsons  of  those  chief  classes 
of  manes  which  have  been  enumerated. 

201.  From  the  sages  sprang  the  manes,  from  the 
manes  the  gods  and  the  Danavas,  but  from  the  gods 
the  whole  world,  both  the  movable  and  the  immov- 
able in  due  order. 

V  202.  Even  water  offered  with  faith  (to  the  manes) 

199.  Medh.  and  Gov.  place  the  Anagnidagdhas  first.  Nar.  reads 
at  the  end  of  the  first  half- verse  bahun, '  many/  instead  of  tatha, 
and  Nand.  has  vahan.  The  translation  follows  the  explanation 
given  by  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  The  other  three  commentators 
say  that  this  verse  gives  partly  different  names  for  the  several  classes 
of  manes,  enumerated  in  the  preceding  verses.  But  their  explana- 
tions are  not  very  clear,  and  they  are  forced  to  ignore  or  transpose 
the  particle  eva  which  stands  after  viprawam.  The  verse  probably 
contains  a  second  classification  of  the  manes,  which  differs  from 
the  preceding,  because  it  is  based  on  a  different  tradition. 

202.  Akshayayapakalpate, 'produces  endless  (bliss),' (Gov.,  Kull.), 


111,207.  householder;  sraddhas.  113 

in  vessels  made  of  silver  or  adorned  with  silver, 
produces  endless  (bliss). 

203.  For  twice-born  men  the  rite  in  honour  of 
the  manes  is  more  important  than  the  rite  in  honour 
of  the  gods ;  for  the  offering  to  the  gods  which  pre- 
cedes (the  .Sraddhas),  has  been  declared  to  be  a 
means  of  fortifying  (the  latter). 

204.  Let  him  first  invite  a  (Brahma^a)  in  honour 
of  the  gods  as  a  protection  for  the  (offering  to  the 
manes) ;  for  the  Rakshasas  destroy  a  funeral  sacri- 
fice which  is  left  without  such  a  protection. 

205.  Let  him  make  (the  ,5raddha)  begin  and  end 
with  (a  rite)  in  honour  of  the  gods ;  it  shall  not  begin 
and  end  with  a  (rite)  to  the  manes  ;  for  he  who  makes 
it  begin  and  end  with  a  (rite)  in  honour  of  the 
manes,  soon  perishes  together  with  his  progeny.       * 

206.  Let  him  smear  a  pure  and  secluded  place  i 
with  cowdung,  and  carefully  make  it  sloping  towards 
the  south. 

207.  The  manes  are  always  pleased  with  offerings 
made  in  open,  naturally  pure  places,  on  the  banks 
of  rivers,  and  in  secluded  spots. 

means   according  to  Medh.  'affords  to  them   imperishable   satis- 
faction.' 

203.  The  rite  in  honour  of  the  gods  meant  is  the  Vai^vadeva 
which  precedes  each  -Sraddha. 

204.  The  above  translation  of  the  first  half-verse  follows  Medh., 
Gov.,  and  Kull.  It  is,  however,  not  impossible  to  take,  with  Sir 
W.  Jones,  daivaw  as  a  neuter,  and  to  translate, '  Let  him  first  per- 
form the  rite  in  honour  of  the  gods  as  a  protection  for  the  (Sraddha).' 

205.  The  meaning  of  the  verse  is  that  the  Brahmawas,  fed  at  the 
Vawvadeva  which  precedes  the  -SYaddha,  must  be  invited  and  served 
before  and  dismissed  after  the  Brahma/zas  entertained  in  honour  of 
the  manes  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.).     See  also  below,  verse  209. 

206.  Ap.  II,  18,  14;  Gaut.  XV,  25;  Yagii.  I,  227. 

207.  Vi.  LXXXV,  54-63.    iToksheshu, '  naturally  pure'  (Medh., 

[25]  I 


ir 


*■ 


114  LAWS   OF   MANU.  Ill,  208. 

208.  The  (sacrificer)  shall  make  the  (invited) 
Brahma/zas,  who  have  duly  performed  their  ablu- 
tions, sit  down  on  separate,  prepared  seats,  on  which 
blades  of  Kusa.  grass  have  been  placed. 

209.  Having  placed  those  blameless  Brahma/zas 
on  their  seats,  he  shall  honour  them  with  fragrant 
garlands  and  perfumes,  beginning  with  (those  who 
are  invited  in  honour  of)  the  gods. 

210.  Having  presented  to  them  water,  sesamum 
grains,  and  blades  of  Ku^a  grass,  the  Brahma^a 
(sacrificer)  shall  offer  (oblations)  in  the  sacred  fire, 
after  having  received  permission  (to  do  so)  from 
(all)  the  Brahma^a  (guests)  conjointly. 

211.  Having  first,  according  to  the  rule,  performed, 
as  a  means  of  protecting  (the  6raddha),  oblations  to 
Agni,  to  Soma,  and  to  Yama,  let  him  afterwards 
satisfy  the  manes  by  a  gift  of  sacrificial  food. 

212.  But  if  no  (sacred)  fire  (is  available),  he  shall 
place  (the  offerings)  into  the  hand  of  a  Brahma^a ; 
for  Brahma^as  who  know  the  sacred  texts  declare, 
1  What  fire  is,  even  such  is  a  Brahma^a.' 

213.  They  (also)  call  those  first  of  twice-born  men 
the  ancient  deities  of  the  funeral  sacrifice,  free  from 
anger,  easily  pleased,  employed  in  making  men 
prosper. 

Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.)  or  'lovely'  (Nand.,  Ragh.), '  such  as  forest  glades' 
(Kull.). 

208.  Ya^ra.  I,  226.  209.  Vi.  LXXIII,  2;  YSgn.  I,  231. 

210.  Vi.  LXXXIII,  5;  Ap.  II,  17,  17-19;  Baudh.  II,  14,  7; 
Ya^w.  I,  229. 

211.  Vi.  LXXIII,  12;  Baudh.  II,  14,  7. 

212.  Afvalayana  Grzhya-sutra  IV,  8,  5-6.  Cases,  where  a  sacred 
fire  is  wanting,  are  those  in  which  a  child,  an  unmarried  man,  or  a 
widower  perform  a  »Sraddha  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

213.  The  object  of  the  verse  is  to  show  why  the  offerings  may 


111,217.  householder;  sraddhas.  115 

214.  After  he  has  performed  (the  oblations)  in 
the  fire,  (and)  the  whole  series  of  ceremonies  in  such 
a  manner  that  they  end  in  the  south,  let  him  sprinkle 
water  with  his  right  hand  on  the  spot  (where  the 
cakes  are  to  be  placed). 

215.  But  having  made  three  cakes  out  of  the 
remainder  of  that  sacrificial  food,  he  must,  concen- 
trating his  mind  and  turning  towards  the  south,  place 
them  on  (Kara  grass)  exactly  in  the  same  manner 
in  which  (he  poured  out  the  libations  of)  water. 

216.  Having  offered  those  cakes  according  to  the 
(prescribed)  rule,  being  pure,  let  him  wipe  the  same 
hand  with  (the  roots  of)  those  blades  of  Kusa,  grass 
for  the  sake  of  the  (three  ancestors)  who  partake 
of  the  wipings  (lepa). 

217.  Having  (next)  sipped  water,  turned  round 
(towards  the  north),  and  thrice    slowly  suppressed 

be  placed  into  the  hands  of  the  guests.  The  epithet  '  ancient'  is 
explained  to  mean  *  produced  in  the  kalpa  when  the  Sadhyas  were 
created'  (Medh.),  or  'those  whose  succession  has  been  uninterrupted 
since  immemorial  times'  (Gov.,  Kull,  Ragh.),  or  'those  who  were 
produced  before  all  other  castes'  (Nar.),  or  'those  who  receive 
gifts  before  others'  (Ragh.).  Medh.  prefers,  however,  to  read  pura- 
tana^,  'the  ancients  call,'  &c,  and  this  seems  to  have  stood  in 
Nand.'s  text  too. 

214.  '  The  whole  series  of  ceremonies,'  i.e. '  the  acts  of  sprinkling 
water  and  strewing  Kusa  grass  round  the  fire  and  so  forth,  which 
are  subsidiary  to  the  oblations  in  the  fire.'  Apasavyam, '  in  such  a 
manner  that  they  end  in  the  south'  (dakshiwasawstham),  means 
according  to  Nar.,  pra/£inavitena, '  passing  the  sacrificial  string  over 
the  right  shoulder  and  under  the  left  arm.'  Apasavyena  hastena, 
'with  his  right  hand'  (Medh.  'others,'  Kull,  Ragh.),  means  accord- 
ing to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.,'  out  of  the  Tirtha  of  the  right 
hand  which  is  sacred  to  the  manes'  (see  above,  II,  59). 

216.  The  three  ancestors  meant  are  the  great-grandfather,  his 
father  and  grandfather;  seeVi.  LXXIII,  22. 

217.  The  texts  to  be  pronounced  are, 'Adoration  to  Spring  !'&c, 

I    2 


n6 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Ill,  218. 


his  breath,  (the  sacrificer)  who  knows  the  sacred 
texts  shall  worship  (the  guardian  deities  of)  the  six 
seasons  and  the  manes. 

218.  Let  him  gently  pour  out  the  remainder  of 
the  water  near  the  cakes,  and,  with  fixed  attention, 
smell  those  cakes,  in  the  order  in  which  they  were 
placed  (on  the  ground). 

219.  But  taking  successively  very  small  portions 
from  the  cakes,  he  shall  make  those  seated  Brah- 
ma/zas  eat  them,  in  accordance  with  the  rule,  before 
(their  dinner). 

220.  But  if  the  (sacrificer  s)  father  is  living,  he 
must  offer  (the  cakes)  to  three  remoter  (ancestors) ; 
or  he  may  also  feed  his  father  at  the  funeral  sacri- 
fice as  (one  of  the)  Brahma/za  (guests). 

221.  But  he  whose  father  is  dead,  while  his  grand- 
father lives,  shall,  after  pronouncing  his  father's 
name,  mention  (that  of)  his  great-grandfather. 

222.  Manu  has  declared  that  either  the  grand- 
father may  eat  at  that  6Yaddha  (as  a  guest),  or  (the 

and  afterwards, '  Adoration  to  you,  oh  manes  ! '  &c.  Before  he  recites 
the  latter  texts,  the  worshipper  must  turn  round  towards  the  south. 

218.  Vi.  LXXIII,  23.  '  The  remainder  of  the  water,'  i.  e. '  which 
is  contained  in  the  vessel  from  which  he  took  the  water  for  sprinkling 
the  ground'  (verse  214). 

219.  'Those  seated  Brahmawas,'  i.e.  'those  invited  for  the 
funeral  rite,  not  those  invited  for  the  preceding  rite  in  honour  of 
the  gods.'  i  According  to  the  rule/  i.  e.  '  giving  to  the  representa- 
tive of  the  father  a  piece  from  the  cake  offered  to  the  manes  of  the 
father  and  so  forth'  (Kull.),  or  '  after  they  have  sipped  water  and  so 
forth'  (Nar.).  Nand.  inserts  here  verse  223,  and  states  that  it  is 
explanatory  of  the  term  '  according  to  the  rule.' 

220.  Vi.  LXXV,  1,  4.  Nar.  adds  that  this  case  happens  when 
a  son  has  kindled  the  sacred  fire  during  his  father's  lifetime, 
because  then  the  Pi/zdapitrzya^a  and  afterwards  the  Parvawa 
*Sraddha  must  be  performed. 

221-222.  Vi.  LXXV,  6. 


i 


Ill,  229.  HOUSEHOLDER  J    SRADDHAS.  I  I  7 

grandson)  having  received  permission,  may  perform 
it,  as  he  desires. 

223.  Having  poured  water  mixed  with  sesamum, 
in  which  a  blade  of  Kusa.  grass  has  been  placed, 
into  the  hands  of  the  (guests),  he  shall  give  (to  each) 
that  (above-mentioned)  portion  of  the  cake,  saying, 
*  To  those,  Svadha  ! ' 

224.  But  carrying  (the  vessel)  filled  with  food 
with  both  hands,  the  (sacrificer)  himself  shall  gently 
place  it  before  the  Brahma^as,  meditating  on  the 
manes. 

225.  The  malevolent  Asuras  forcibly  snatch  away 
that  food  which  is  brought  without  being  held  with 
both  hands. 

226.  Let  him,  being  pure  and  attentive,  carefully 
place  on  the  ground  the  seasoning  (for  the  rice), 
such  as  broths  and  pot  herbs,  sweet  and  sour  milk, 
and  honey, 

227.  (As  well  as)  various  (kinds  of)  hard  food 
which  require  mastication,  and  of  soft  food,  roots, 
fruits,  savoury  meat,  and  fragrant  drinks. 

228.  All  this  he  shall  present  (to  his  guests),  and, 
being  pure  and  attentive,  successively  invite  them 

to  partake  of  each  (dish),  proclaiming  its  qualities.    ^ 

229.  Let  him  on  no  account  drop  a  tear,  become 
angry  or  utter  an  untruth,  nor  let  him  touch  the  j\\ 

food  with  his  foot  nor  violently  shake  it.  \))D^T 

223.  Vi.  LXXIII,  23.  This  rule  is  a  supplement  to  verse  220. 
Instead  of  the  pronoun  the  names  are  to  be  used  (Medh.,  Gov.). 

225.  Vas.  XI,  25;  Baudh.  II,  15,  3. 

229.  Vi.  LXXIX,  19-21;  LXXXI,  1;  Yagn.  I,  239.  Avadhu- 
nayet,  'nor  violently  shake  it,'  is  explained  according  to  Medh. 
by  'others,'  'nor  remove  the  dust  with  his  dress.'  Nand.  places 
verse  230  immediately  after  verse  228. 


I  1 8  LAWS   OF    MANU.  Ill,  230. 

230.  A  tear  sends  the  (food)  to  the  Pretas,  anger 
to  his  enemies,  a  falsehood  to  the  dogs,  contact  with 
his  foot  to  the  Rakshasas,  a  shaking  to  the  sinners. 

231.  Whatever  may  please  the  Brahma/zas,  let 
him  give  without  grudging  it ;  let  him  give  riddles 
from  the  Veda,  for  that  is  agreeable  to  the  manes. 

232.  At  a  (sacrifice  in  honour)  of  the  manes,  he 
must  let  (his  guests)  hear  the  Veda,  the  Institutes 
of  the  sacred  law,  legends,  tales,  Pura^as,  and 
Khilas. 

233.  Himself  being  delighted,  let  him  give  delight 
to  the  Brahma;zas,  cause  them  to  partake  gradually 
and  slowly  (of  each  dish),  and  repeatedly  invite 
(them  to  eat)  by  (offering)  the  food  and  (praising) 
its  qualities. 

234.  Let  him  eagerly  entertain  at  a  funeral  sacri- 
fice a  daughter's  son,  though  he  be  a  student,  and 
let  him  place  a  Nepal  blanket  on  the  seat  (of  each 
guest),  scattering  sesamum  grains  on. the  ground. 


231.  Yagn.  I,  239.  Brahmodya^  katha-6,  'let  him  give  riddles 
from  the  Veda,'  such  as  those  collected  in  the  Awalayana  *Srauta- 
sutra  X,  9,  2  (Medh.,  Nand.).  Medh.  thinks  that  the  term 
brahmodya  may  also  refer  to  Vedic  stories,  such  as  that  of  the 
fights  of  the  Devas  and  Asuras,  or  of  Sarama  and  the  Pams, 
and  he  mentions  a  var.  lect.  brahmadya^,  'conversations  regard- 
ing the  Brahman,  the  supreme  soul/  This  latter  explanation  is 
adopted  by  Gov.,  Kull,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.,  though  the  text  every- 
where has  brahmodya^.  As  the  Brahmodya-riddles  were  a  favourite 
recreation  of  the  priests  during  the  tedious  performance  of  their 
sacrifices,  it  is  not  doubtful  that  the  explanation  given  in  the  trans- 
lation is  the  only  admissible  one. 

232.  Baudh.  II,  14,  5;  Vi.  LXXIII,  16;  Ya^n.  I,  239^  'Khilas,' 
i.  e. '  the  apocrypha  of  the  Veda,  such  as  the  -Srisukta.'  '  Akhyanani 
legends,  such  as  the  Sauparwa,  the  Maitravaruwa'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'such  as  occur  in  the  Brahma«as'  (Nar.),  or  ■  the 
death  of  Kawsa  and  so  forth'  (Nand.). 


J 
111,242.  householder;  sraddhas. 


no 


hp 


235.  There  are  three  means  of  sanctification,  (to 
be  used)  at  a  6raddha,  a  daughter's  son,  a  Nepal 
blanket,  and  sesamum  grains ;  and  they  recommend 
three  (other  things)  for  it,  cleanliness,  suppression 
of  anger,  and  absence  of  haste. 

236.  All  the  food  must  be  very  hot,  and  the 
(guests)  shall  eat  in  silence ;  (even  though)  asked 
by  the  giver  (of  the  feast),  the  Brahma^as  shall  not 
proclaim  the  qualities  of  the  sacrificial  food. 

237.  As  long  as  the  food  remains  warm,  as  long 
as  they  eat  in  silence,  as  long  as  the  qualities  of  the 
food  are  not  proclaimed,  so  long  the  manes  partake 
(of  it). 

238.  What  (a  guest)  eats,  covering  his  head,  what 
he  eats  with  his  face  turned  towards  the  south,  what 
he  eats  with  sandals  on  (his  feet),  that  the  Rakshasas 
consume. 

259.  A  Aa#dala,  a  village  pig,  a  cock,  a  dog,  a   | 
menstruating  woman,  and  a  eunuch  must  not  look 
at  the  Brahma^as  while  they  eat.  >^jf 

240.  What  (any  of)  these  sees  at  a  burnt-oblation, 
at  a  (solemn)  gift,  at  a  dinner  (given  to  Brahma/zas), 
or  at  any  rite  in  honour  of  the  gods  and  manes,  that 
produces  not  the  intended  result. 

241.  A  boar  makes  (the  rite)  useless  by  inhaling 
the  smell  (of  the  offerings),  a  cock  by  the  air  of  his 
wings,  a  dog  by  throwing  his  eye  (on  them),  a  low- 
caste  man  by  touching  (them). 

242.  If  a  lame  man,  a  one-eyed  man,  one  deficient 

235.  Vas.  XI,  35-36.  236.  Vi.  LXXXI,  n,  20. 

237.  Vi.  LXXXI,  20;  Vas.  XI,  32. 

238.  Vi.  LXXXI,  12-14. 

239.  Ap.  II,  17,  20;  Gaut.  XV,  24. 

241.  'A  low-caste  man,'  i.e.  'a  -Sudra.' 

242.  Vi.  LXXXI,  15-16.   According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.,     \ 


120  LAWS   OF   MANU.  111,243. 

in  a  limb,  or  one  with  a  redundant  limb,  be  even 
the  servant  of  the  performer  (of  the  .Sraddha),  he 
also  must  be  removed  from  that  place  (where  the 
.Sraddha  is  held). 

243.  To  a  Brahma/za  (householder),  or  to  an 
ascetic  who  comes  for  food,  he  may,  with  the  per- 
mission of  (his)  Brahma^a  (guests),  show  honour 
according  to  his  ability. 

244.  Let  him  mix  all  the  kinds  of  food  together, 
sprinkle  them  with  water  and  put  them,  scattering 
them  (on  Kusa  grass),  down  on  the  ground  in  front 
of  (his  guests),  when  they  have  finished  their  meal. 

245.  The  remnant  (in  the  dishes),  and  the  portion 
scattered  on  Kusa  grass,  shall  be  the  share  of 
deceased  (children)  who  received  not  the  sacrament 
(of  cremation)  and  of  those  who  (unjustly)  forsook 
noble  wives. 

246.  They  declare  the  fragments  which  have  fallen 
on  the  ground  at  a  (^Sraddha)  to  the  manes,  to  be 
the  share  of  honest,  dutiful  servants. 


the  word  api, '  even,'  indicates  that  others,  e.  g.  *Sudras,  must  also 
be  sent  away. 

243.  Vi.  LXXXI,  18.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  take  the  first 
words  differently,  '  To  a  Brahmawa  who  comes  as  a  guest  (atithi) 
or  any  other  mendicant.'  Nar.  and  Ragh.  give  the  explanation 
adopted  above. 

244.  Vi.  LXXXI,  21. 

245.  Vas.  XI,  23-24;  Vi.  LXXXI,  22.  Regarding  the  burial 
of  children,  see  below,  V,  69.  Tyaginaw  kulayoshitaw,  '  of  those 
who  unjustly  forsook  noble  wives'  (Medh.,  Kull.),  may  also  mean, 
according  to  Ragh.  and  to  '  others,'  quoted  by  Medh.  and  Kull., 
1  of  those  who  forsook  their  Gurus  and  of  unmarried  maidens ;  ■ 
according  to  Gov.,  '  of  women  who  forsook  their  families ; ' 
according  to  Nar.,  'of  suicides  and  childless  women.'  Nand. 
explains  the  first  word  by  '  of  ascetics.' 

246.  Vi.  LXXXI,  23. 


111,251.  HOUSEHOLDER  J-SRADDHAS.  121 

247.  But  before  the  performance  of  the  Sapi^i- 
kara/za,  one  must  feed  at  the  funeral  sacrifice  in 
honour  of  a  (recently-) deceased  Aryan  (one  Brah- 
ma/za)  without  (making  an  offering)  to  the  gods,  and 
give  one  cake  only. 

248.  But  after  the  Sapi^ikara^a  of  the  (deceased 
father)  has  been  performed  according  to  the  sacred 
law,  the  sons  must  offer  the  cakes  with  those  cere- 
monies, (described  above.) 

249.  The  foolish  man  who,  after  having  eaten  a 
•Sriddha(-dinner),  gives  the  leavings  to  a  .Sudra,  falls 
headlong  into  the  Kalasutra  hell. 

250.  If  the  partaker  of  a  .Sraddha(-dinner)  enters 
on  the  same  day  the  bed  of  a  ,5udra  female,  the 
manes  of  his  (ancestors)  will  lie  during  that  month 
in  her  ordure. 

251.  Having  addressed  the  question,  '  Have  you 
dined  well  V  (to  his  guests),  let  him  give  water  for 
sipping  to  them  who  are  satisfied,  and  dismiss  them, 
after  they  have  sipped  water,  (with  the  words)  '  Rest 
either  (here  or  at  home) ! ' 

247.  Vi.  XXI,  2-12,  19;  Y&gri.  I,  250.  The  Sapi#attkara#a,  'the 
solemn  reception  of  a  dead  person  among  the  partakers  of  the 
funeral  oblations,'  is  performed  either  on  the  thirteenth  day  or  a 
year  after  the  death.  Up  to  the  time  of  its  performance  the 
-Sraddhas  are  so-called  Ekoddish/as,  '  performed  for  one  person 
only.'  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  the  first  word  of  the 
verse  asapiwdakriyakarma,  and  according  to  this  var.  lect.  the  trans- 
lation must  be, '  The  rite  for  persons  not  made  Sapiwtfas  (i.  e.  the 
Ekoddish/a  *Sraddha,  must  be  performed)  for  an  Aryan  (recently) 
deceased ;  (on  that  occasion)  one  must/  &c. 

250.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  take  vnshali,  'a  -Sudra 
female'  (Nar.),  in  the  sense  of  'a  seducing  woman'  (vrzshasyanti). 

251.  Y&gn.  I,  242  ;  Vi.  LXXIII,  26-27.  Kull.  reads  abhi  bho 
ramyatam,  'Ho,  take  rest!'  and  Ragh.,  abhito  gamyatam,  'Go 
where  you  please ! ' 


122 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Ill,  252. 


252.  The  Brahma^a  (guests)  shall  then  answer 
him,  '  Let  there  be  Svadha ;'  for  at  all  rites  in 
honour  of  the  manes  the  word  Svadha  is  the  highest 
benison. 

253.  Next  let  him  inform  (his  guests)  who  have 
finished  their  meal,  of  the  food  which  remains  ;  with 
the  permission  of  the  Brahma^as  let  him  dispose 
(of  that),  as  they  may  direct. 

254.  At  a  (6Yaddha)  in  honour  of  the  manes  one 
must  use  (in  asking  the  guests  if  they  are  satisfied, 
the  word)  svaditam ;  at  a  Gosh/^i-^rraddha,  (the  word) 
sumitam  ;  at  a  Wz'ddhi-jraddha,  (the  word  )sampan- 
nam ;  and  at  (a  rite)  in  honour  of  the  gods,  (the  word) 
rii/£itam. 

255.  The  afternoon,  Ku^a  grass,  the  due  prepara- 
tion of  the  dwelling,  sesamum  grains,  liberality,  the 
careful  preparation  of  the  food,  and  (the  company 
of)  distinguished  Brahma^as  are  true  riches  at  all 
funeral  sacrifices. 

256.  Know  that  Kusa.  grass,  purificatory  (texts), 
the  morning,  sacrificial  viands  of  all  kinds,  and  those 
means  of  purification,  mentioned  above,  are  blessings 
at  a  sacrifice  to  the  gods. 

252.  Yagn.  I,  243.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  read  sva- 
dhetyeva,  (shall  then  answer  him)  '  Svadha" ! ' 

254.  'One  must  ask,'  i.  e.  'the  giver  of  the  feast  or  any  other 
person  who  comes'  (Medh.,  Gov.),  the  former  only  (Kull.).  Medh. 
and  Gov.  explain  goshMe, '  at  a  GoshMi-jraddha'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  by 
'  in  a  cow-pen'  (goshu  tish/$antishu,  gogawamadhye),  and  Nar.  by 
gosh/^e  gomawdalarthaw  gosht/ie  brahma«abho£-ane.  Abhyudaya 
or  Vrz'ddhwraddhas  are  those  performed  on  joyful  occasions,  such 
as  marriages. 

256.  Pavitram,  'purificatory  texts,'  means  according  to  Nar. 
'other  means  of  purification,  such  as  barley  and  water.'  Nand. 
reads  darbhapavitraw, '  blades  of  Kura  grass.'  '  Those  means  of 
purification  mentioned  above,'  i.e.  'the  preparation  of  the  house 


Ill,  261.  householder;  sraddhas.  123 

257.  The  food  eaten  by  hermits  in  the  forest, 
milk,  Soma-juice,  meat  which  is  not  prepared  (with 
spices),  and  salt  unprepared  by  art,  are  called,  on 
account  of  their  nature,  sacrificial  food. 

258.  Having  dismissed  the  (invited)  Brahma/zas, 
let  him,  with  a  concentrated  mind,  silent  and  pure, 
look  towards  the  south  and  ask  these  blessings  of 
the  manes  : 

259.  ' May  liberal  men  abound  with  us!  May  (our 
knowledge  of)  the  Vedas  and  (our)  progeny  increase ! 
May  faith  not  forsake  us !  May  we  have  much  to 
give  (to  the  needy)!' 

260.  Having  thus  offered  (the  cakes),  let  him, 
after  (the  prayer),  cause  a  cow,  a  Brahma^a,  a  goat, 
or  the  sacred  fire  to  consume  those  cakes,  or  let  him 
throw  them  into  water. 

261.  Some  make  the  offering  of  the  cakes  after 
(the  dinner);  some  cause  (them)  to  be  eaten  by 
birds  or  throw  them  into  fire  or  into  water. 


and  so  forth.'   Nand.  reads  havishyam  fa  jaktita^, '  sacrificial  viands 
(prepared)  according  to  one's  ability.' 

257.  Anupaskntam, '  which  is  not  prepared  (with  spices),'  (Gov., 
Nar.),  means  according  to  Nand. '  not  dressed  as  people  usually 
do,'  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh. '  not  tainted  by  a  bad  smell,'  and 
according  to  Medh. '  not  forbidden,  such  as  meat  from  a  slaughter- 
house.' '  Salt  unprepared  by  art,'  i.  e.  ■  rock  salt  or  salt  from  the 
sea'  (but  not  Bida.,  N&r.). 

259.  Ya.gn.  I,  245;  Vi.  LXXIII,  28. 

260.  Yagii.  I,  256.    'Thus/  i.e.  as  described  in  verse  215. 

261.  Baudh.  II,  14,  9.  According  to  the  MSS.  and  editions 
the  word  translated  in  accordance  with  the  clear  explanations 
of  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  K.,  and  with  the  requirements  of  the 
context,  by  'after  (the  dinner),'  is  purastat.  As  purastat  always 
means  '  before,'  it  would  seem  that  the  real  reading  of  the  three 
commentators  was  like  that  of  Ragh.'s  commentary  *  parastat,' 
the    sense   of   which    perfectly   agrees    with    their   explanation. 


124  LAWS    OF    MANU.  111,262. 

262.  The  (sacrificer's)  first  wife,  who  is  faithful  and 
intent  on  the  worship  of  the  manes,  may  eat  the 
middle-most  cake,  (if  she  be)  desirous  of  bearing 
a  son. 

263.  (Thus)  she  will  bring  forth  a  son  who  will 
be  long-lived,  famous,  intelligent,  rich,  the  father  of 
numerous  offspring,  endowed  with  (the  quality  of) 
goodness,  and  righteous. 

264.  Having  washed  his  hands  and  sipped  water, 
let  him  prepare  (food)  for  his  paternal  relations  and, 
after  giving  it  to  them  with  due  respect,  let  him 
feed  his  maternal  relatives  also. 

265.  But  the  remnants  shall  be  left  {where  they 
lie)  until  the  Brahma^as  have  been  dismissed; 
afterwards  he  shall  perform  the  (daily)  domestic  Bali- 
offering  ;  that  is  a  settled  (rule  of  the)  sacred  law. 

266.  I  will  now  fully  declare  what  kind  of  sacri- 
ficial food,  given  to  the  manes  according  to  the  rule, 
will  serve  for  a  long  time  or  for  eternity. 

267.  The  ancestors  of  men  are  satisfied  for  one 
month  with  sesamum  grains,  rice,  barley,  masha 
beans,  water,  roots,  and  fruits,  which  have  been 
given  according  to  the  prescribed  rule, 

268.  Two  months  with  fish,  three  months  with 
the  meat  of  gazelles,  four  with  mutton,  and  five 
indeed  with  the  flesh  of  birds, 

Nar.  and  Nand.  clearly  read  purastat,  and  explain  it  by  prak, 
'  before.'  But  the  meaning,  thus  obtained,  is  not  good,  because  it 
stands  to  reason  that  the  custom  mentioned  here  should  differ  from 
that  described  above,  verse  218  seq. 

264.  This  is  to  be  done  after  the  cakes  have  been  made  and 
placed  (Medh.,  Nand.).  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.  read  pu^ayet, '  let  him 
honour,'  instead  of  '  let  him  feed.' 

267-272.  Ap.  II,  16,  23-17,  3;  Gaut.  XV,  15;  Vi.LXXX;  Yagfi. 
I,  257-259. 


111,274-  householder;  sraddhas.  125 

269.  Six  months  with  the  flesh  of  kids,  seven 
with  that  of  spotted  deer,  eight  with  that  of  the 
black  antelope,  but  nine  with  that  of  the  (deer  called) 
Ruru, 

270.  Ten  months  they  are  satisfied  with  the  meat 
of  boars  and  buffaloes,  but  eleven  months  indeed 
with  that  of  hares  and  tortoises, 

271.  One  year  with  cow-milk  and  milk-rice;  from 
the  flesh  of  a  long-eared  white  he-goat  their  satisfac- 
tion endures  twelve  years. 

272.  The  (vegetable  called)  Kalasaka,  (the  fish 
called)  Mahasalka,  the  flesh  of  a  rhinoceros  and  that 
of  a  red  goat,  and  all  kinds  of  food  eaten  by  hermits 
in  the  forest  serve  for  an  endless  time. 

273.  Whatever  (food),  mixed  with  honey,  one 
gives  on  the  thirteenth  lunar  day  in  the  rainy 
season  under  the  asterism  of  Magha^,  that  also 
procures  endless  (satisfaction). 

2  74.  '  May  such  a  man  (the  manes  say)  be  born  in 
our  family  who  will  give  us  milk-rice,  with  honey  and 
clarified  butter,  on  the  thirteenth  lunar  day  (of  the 
month  of  Bhadrapada)  and  (in  the  afternoon)  when 
the  shadow  of  an  elephant  falls  towards  the  east/ 

269.  Gov.  states  the  Ruru  is  the  -Sambara,  or  Sambar  stag. 

271.  Nar.  explains  vardhrfoasa,  which  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.  declare,  on  the  strength  of  a  verse,  to  be  a  white  goat,  by 
1  a  black-necked,  white-winged  bird  with  a  red  head,'  and  quotes 
another  nigama  in  favour  of  his  view ;  see  also  Ap.  II,  17,  3,  where 
the  crane  called  Vardhrawasa  (var.  lect.  Vardhrfoasa)  is  mentioned. 

272.  Another  name  of  the  pot-herb  Kalaj-aka  is  according  to 
Medh.  Knsrwavasudeva,  according  to  Nand.  KWsrmanimba.  The 
Maha^alka  is  the  prawn.  Others  mentioned  by  Medh.  read 
sa-ralkan. 

273.  Vi.  LXXVI,  1;  Ya^w.  I,  260.  The  day  meant  is  Bha- 
drapada Badi  13. 

274.  Vi.  LXXVIII,  51-52 ;  Vas.  XI,  40.   Gov.  omits  this  verse. 


126  LAWS    OF    MANU.  111,275- 

275.  Whatever  (a  man),  full  of  faith,  duly  gives 
according  to  the  prescribed  rule,  that  becomes  in  the 
other  world  a  perpetual  and  imperishable  (gratifica- 
tion) for  the  manes. 

276.  The  days  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month, 
beginning  with  the  tenth,  but  excepting  the  four- 
teenth, are  recommended  for  a  funeral  sacrifice ;  (it 
is)  not  thus  (with)  the  others. 

277.  He  who  performs  it  on  the  even  (lunar) 
days  and  under  the  even  constellations,  gains  (the 
fulfilment  of)  all  his  wishes ;  he  who  honours  the 
manes  on  odd  (lunar  days)  and  under  odd  (constella- 
tions), obtains  distinguished  offspring. 

278.  As  the  second  half  of  the  month  is  prefer- 
able to  the  first  half,  even  so  the  afternoon  is  better 
for  (the  performance  of )  a  funeral  sacrifice  than  the 
forenoon. 

Medh.  says  that '  others '  improperly  explain  prak^aye  ku^arasya, 
'  (in  the  afternoon)  when  the  shadow  of  an  elephant  falls  towards 
the  east'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  by  'during  an  eclipse.'  He  also 
mentions  a  var.  lect.  prak^ayam.  It  seems,  however,  by  no  means 
certain  that  the  explanation,  adopted  by  him  and  most  commen- 
tators, is  the  correct  one.  It  is  much  more  probable  that  a 
particular  day  (see  Vi^wanejvara  on  Yagri.  I,  217)  is  meant.  The 
thirteenth  lunar  day  is,  of  course,  the  thirteenth  of  the  dark  half 
of  Bhadrapada,  the  day  of  the  Mahalaya  -Sraddha. 

276.  Ap.  II,  17,  6  ;  Gaut.  XV,  3 ;  Yagri.  I,  263;  Vas.  XI,  16. 
The  reason  why  the  fourteenth  is  excepted,  is  given  Vi.  LXXVIII, 
50,  and  Yagii.  loc.  cit. 

277.  Ap.  II,  17,  8-22;  Gaut.  XV,  4  ;  Vi.  LXXVIII,  8-49;  YSgn. 
I,  267.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  pitrm 
ar^an,  which,  to  judge  from  the  commentary,  must  have  been 
Kull.'s  reading  also,  instead  of  the  senseless  pitrzh  sarvan  of  the 
editions.  Nand.  adds  five  verses  and  a  half  which  give  the  details 
with  respect  to  the  rewards  obtained  by  performing  the  -Sraddhas 
on  particular  lunar  days.     They  are  clearly  an  interpolation. 

278.  Ap.  II,  17,5. 


in,  284.  householder;  sraddhas.  127 

279.  Let  him,  untired,  duly  perform  the  (rites)  in 
honour  of  the  manes  in  accordance  with  the  pre- 
scribed rule,  passing  the  sacred  thread  over  the  right 
shoulder,  proceeding  from  the  left  to  the  right 
(and)  holding  Kara  grass  in  his  hands,  up  to  the 
end  (of  the  ceremony). 

280.  Let  him  not  perform  a  funeral  sacrifice  at 
night,  because  the  (night)  is  declared  to  belong  to 
the  Rakshasas,  nor  in  the  twilight,  nor  when  the 
sun  has  just  risen. 

281.  Let  him  offer  here  below  a  funeral  sacrifice, 
according  to  the  rule  given  above,  (at  least)  thrice  a 
year,  in  winter,  in  summer,  and  in  the  rainy  season, 
but  that  which  is  included  among  the  five  great 
sacrifices,  every  day. 

282.  The  burnt-oblation,  offered  at  a  sacrifice  to 
the  manes,  must  not  be  made  in  a  common  fire ;  a 
Brahma^a  who  keeps  a  sacred  fire  (shall)  not  (per- 
form) a  funeral  sacrifice  except  on  the  new-moon 
day. 

283.  Even  when  a  Brahma^a,  after  bathing,  satis- 
fies the  manes  with  water,  he  obtains  thereby  the 
whole  reward  for  the  performance  of  the  (daily) 
•Sraddha. 

284.  They  call  (the  manes  of)  fathers  Vasus, 
(those  of)  grandfathers  Rudras,  and  (those  of)  great- 
grandfathers Adityas ;  thus  (speaks)  the  eternal 
Veda. 


279.  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  R&gh.  explain  apasavyam,  '  proceeding 
from  left  to  right '-  (Nar.),  by  '  with  the  Tirtha  of  the  hand,  that  is 
sacred  to  the  manes.'  Medh.  and  Gov.  think  that  a"  nidhanat, '  up 
to  the  end  (of  the  ceremony)/  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  means 
1  until  death.' 

280.  Ap.  II,  17,  23.  284.  Y&gii.  I,  268. 


128  LAWS    OF    MANU.  111,285. 

285.  Let  him  daily  partake  of  the  vighasa  and 
daily  eat  amrzta  (ambrosia);  but  vighasa  is  what 
remains  from  the  meal  (of  Brahma^a  guests)  and 
the  remainder  of  a  sacrifice  (is  called)  amnta. 

286.  Thus  all  the  ordinances  relating  to  the  five 
(daily  great)  sacrifices  have  been  declared  to  you  ; 
hear  now  the  law  for  the  manner  of  living  fit  for 
Brahma^as. 

Chapter  IV. 

1.  Having  dwelt  with  a  teacher  during  the  fourth 
part  of  (a  man's)  life,  a  Brahma^a  shall  live  during 
the  second  quarter  (of  his  existence)  in  his  house, 
after  he  has  wedded  a  wife. 

*•  2.  A  Brahma^a  must  seek  a  means  of  subsistence 
which  either  causes  no,  or  at  least  little  pain  (to 
others),  and  live  (by  that)  except  in  times  of  distress. 

3.  For  the  purpose  of  gaining  bare  subsistence, 
let  him  accumulate  property  by  (following  those) 
irreproachable  occupations  (which  are  prescribed  for) 
his  (caste),  without  (unduly)  fatiguing  his  body. 

4.  He  may  subsist  by  Rtta.  (truth),  and  Amrita. 

285.  Medh.  and  Nar.  seem  to  have  read  bhn'tyajeshaw,  'what 
remains  after  those  who  must  be  supported  (have  been  fed).'  The 
former  mentions  the  other  reading  too. 

IV.  2.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  particularly  state  that 
droha  and  adroha  are  not  equivalent  to  himssL  and  ahi^zsa,  because 
'injury  to  living  beings '  is  forbidden  under  any  circumstances.  What 
is  meant  by  droha  is  the  pain  caused  to  others  by  importunate 
begging.  Hence  the  meaning  of  Manu  is  that  householders  shall, 
if  possible,  not  subsist  by  begging,  but  rather  by  gleaning  corn. 
Nand.,  however,  explains  droha  by  hiwsa,  and  the  following  verses 
favour  his  opinion. 

3.  'For  the  purpose  of  gaining  bare  subsistence,  but  not  in 
order  to  procure  many  enjoyments  for  himself/ 


IV, 9.  householder;  subsistence.  129 

(ambrosia),  or  by  Mma  (death)  and  by  Pramrzta 
(what  causes  many  deaths) ;  or  even  by  (the  mode) 
called  Satyanrzta  (a  mixture  of  truth  and  falsehood), 
but  never  by  Svavritti  (a  dog's  mode  of  life). 

5.  By  7?/ta  shall  be  understood  the  gleaning  of 
corn  ;  by  Amrzta,  what  is  given  unasked ;  by  Mrzta, 
food  obtained  by  begging ;  and  agriculture  is  declared 
to  be  Pramr/ta. 

6.  But  trade  and  (money-lending)  are  Satyanr/ta, 
even  by  that  one  may  subsist.  Service  is  called 
Svavrztti ;  therefore  one  should  avoid  it. 

7.  He  may  either  possess  enough  to  fill  a  granary, 
or  a  store  filling  a  grain-jar ;  or  he  may  collect  what 
suffices  for  three  days,  or  make  no  provision  for  the 
morrow. 

8.  Moreover,  among  these  four  Brahma^a  house- 
holders, each  later-(named)  must  be  considered  more 
distinguished,  and  through  his  virtue  to  have  con- 
quered the  world  more  completely. 

9.  One  of  these  follows  six  occupations,  another 
subsists  by  three,  one  by  two,  but  the  fourth  lives 
by  the  Brahmasattra. 

7.  Yagri.  I,  128.  The  first  two  clauses  are  variously  interpreted. 
The  first  means  according  to  Medh., '  he  may  keep  a  store  of  grain 
or  other  property,  sufficient  to  maintain  a  large  family,  many 
servants  and  animals  during  three  years ;'  according  to  Gov.,  'a  store 
of  grain  sufficient  for  twelve  days ; '  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh., 
■  a  store  sufficient  to  fill  a  granary  which  holds  a  supply  for  three 
years  or  more  ; '  and  according  to  Nar., '  a  store  sufficient  for  a  year, 
six  months,  or  three  months.'  The  second  clause  is  interpreted 
by  Medh.  as  '  a  store  sufficient  for  six  months ; '  by  Gov.  and  Nar. 
as  '  a  store  sufficient  for  six  days ;  *  and  by  Kull.  and  Ragh.  as  '  a 
sufficiency  for  one  year.'  For  other  explanations  of  the  term  Kum- 
bhidhanya,  see  Baudh.  I,  1,  5  note.  Nand.  reads  dvyahaihika/^,  *  or 
he  may  collect  what  suffices  for  two  days/ 

9.  { Six  occupations,'  i.  e.  '  gleaning  corn,  acceptance   of  gifts 

[»6]  K 


130 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  io. 


10.  He  who  maintains  himself  by  picking  up 
grains  and  ears  of  corn,  must  be  always  intent  on 
(the  performance  of)  the  Agnihotra,  and  constantly 
offer  those  Ish^is  only,  which  are  prescribed  for  the 
days  of  the  conjunction  and  opposition  (of  the  moon), 
and  for  the  solstices. 

n.  Let  him  never,  for  the  sake  of  subsistence, 
follow  the  ways  of  the  world ;  let  him  live  the  pure, 
straightforward,  honest  life  of  a  Brahma/za. 

12.  He  who  desires  happiness  must  strive  after 
a  perfectly  contented  disposition  and  control  himself; 
for  happiness  has  contentment  for  its  root,  the  root 
of  unhappiness  is  the  contrary  (disposition). 

13.  A  Brahma/za,  who  is  a  Snataka  and  subsists 
by  one  of  the  (above-mentioned)  modes  of  life,  must 

given  unasked,  begging,  agriculture,  trade,  and  teaching '  (Medh.), 
or  '  those  mentioned  in  verses  5-6 '  (Gov.),  or  '  those  mentioned 
in  verses  5-6,  excepting  service  and  with  the  addition  of  money- 
lending  '  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  those  enumerated  in  verses  5-6,  and 
those  six,  mentioned  above,  I,  88 '  (Nar.),  or  *  those  mentioned 
above,  I,  88 '  (Nand.).  '  Subsists  by  three/  i.  e. ■  by  the  first  three, 
mentioned  in  verses  5-6 '  (Medh.),  or  '  by  teaching,  sacrificing, 
and  accepting  gifts'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  'by  teaching, 
sacrificing  and  accepting  gifts,  and  by  the  first  three,  mentioned 
in  verses  5-6 '  (Nar.).  ■  One  by  two,'  i.  e.  '  by  gleaning  and  ac- 
cepting voluntary  gifts '  (Medh.),  or  '  by  sacrificing  and  teaching ' 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  'by  gleaning  ears  and  single 
grains '  (Nar.).  '  The  Brahmasattra,'  i.  e.  '  gleaning  either  ears  or 
single  grains'  (Nar.),  or  'teaching'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.). 
Elsewhere  the  term  Brahmasattra  is  applied  to  the  daily  recitation 
of  the  Veda,  and  it  probably  means  here  '  teaching.' 

10.  The  Agnihotra,  i.e.  the  daily  morning  and  evening  oblations 
in  the  sacred  fire  or  fires.  The  sacrifices  intended  are  the  Darca- 
paur«amasas  and  the  Agraya«as. 

11.  Yagn.  I,  123. 
12-17.  Y&gn.  I,  129. 

13.  Nand.  places  verse  15  immediately  after  verse  12.  Regard- 
ing the  term  Snataka,  see  below,  verse  31,  Ap.  I,  30,  1-3. 


IV,  19.       HOUSEHOLDER  ;    RULES  FOR  A  SNATAKA.  131 

discharge  the  (following)  duties  which  secure  heavenly 
bliss,  long  life,  and  fame. 

14.  Let  him,  untired,  perform  daily  the  rites  pre- 
scribed for  him  in  the  Veda ;  for  he  who  performs 
those  according  to  his  ability,  attains  to  the  highest 
state. 

15.  Whether  he  be  rich  or  even  in  distress,  let 
him  not  seek  wealth  through  pursuits  to  which  men 
cleave,  nor  by  forbidden  occupations,  nor  (let  him 
accept  presents)  from  any  (giver  whosoever  he 
may  be).  , 

16.  Let  him  not,  out  of  desire  (for  enjoyments), 
attach  himself  to  any  sensual  pleasures,  and  let  him 
carefully  obviate  an  excessive  attachment  to  them,  by  { 
(reflecting  on  their  worthlessness  in)  his  heart.  — ^ 

1 7.  Let  him  avoid  all  (means  of  acquiring)  wealth 
which  impede  the  study  of  the  Veda ;  (let  him  main- 
tain himself)  anyhow,  but  study,  because  that  (de- 
votion to  the  Veda-study  secures)  the  realisation  of 
his  aims.  x 

18.  Let  him  walk  here  (on  earth),  bringing  his 
dress,  speech,  and  thoughts  to  a  conformity  with  his 
age,  his  occupation,  his  wealth,  his  sacred  learning, 
and  his  race. 

19.  Let  him  daily  pore  over  those  Institutes  of 
science  which  soon  give  increase  of  wisdom,  those 

15.  Prasahgena,  '  through  pursuits  to  which  men  cleave/  e.  g. 
'music  and  singing'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  Nar. 
interprets  the  word  by  '  with  too  great  eagerness.' 

17.  Vi.  LXXI,  4. 

18.  Yagn.  I,  123  ;  Vi.  LXXI,  5-6.  'His  race,'  e.g.  let  him  wear 
his  hair  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  usage  of  his  family 
(Vas.  II,  21). 

19.  Yagrt.  I,  99 ;  Vi.  LXXI,  8.  The  various  sciences  meant  are 
the  Itihasas,  Pura«as,  and  Nyaya,  the  Artha^astra,  medicine,  and 

K    2 


132 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  20. 


which  teach  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  those  which 
are  beneficial  (for  other  worldly  concerns),  and  like- 
wise over  the  Nigamas  which  explain  the  Veda. 

20.  For  the  more  a  man  completely  studies  the 
Institutes  of  science,  the  more  he  fully  understands 
(them),  and  his  great  learning  shines  brightly. 

21.  Let  him  never,  if  he  is  able  (to  perform 
them),  neglect  the  sacrifices  to  the  sages,  to  the 
gods,  to  the  Bhutas,  to  men,  and  to  the  manes. 

22.  Some  men  who  know  the  ordinances  for 
sacrificial  rites,  always  offer  these  great  sacrifices 
in  their  organs  (of  sensation),  without  any  (external) 
effort. 

23.  Knowing  that  the  (performance  of  the)  sacri- 
fice in  their  speech  and  their  breath  yields  im- 
perishable (rewards),  some  always  offer  their  breath 
in  their  speech,  and  their  speech  in  their  breath. 

24.  Other  Brahma;zas,  seeing  with  the  eye  of 
knowledge  that  the  performance  of  those  rites  has 
knowledge  for  its  root,  always  perform  them  through 
knowledge  alone. 

25.  A  Brahma/za  shall  always  offer  the  Agnihotra 
at  the  beginning  or  at  the  end  of  the  day  and  of 
the  night,  and  the  Darca  and  Pauraamasa  (Ish/is)  at 
the  end  of  each  half-month, 

26.  When  the  old  grain  has  been  consumed  the 


astrology.  The  Nigamas  are  the  Ahgas  (Medh.).  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Nar.  consider  the  Nigamas  to  be  a  separate  class  of  works,  teaching 
the  meaning  of  the  Veda,  i.  e.  the  naigamakaWa  of  the  Nirukta. 

22.  This  and  the  next  two  verses  refer  to  various  symbolical 
ways  of  performing  the  great  sacrifices,  which  are  mentioned  in 
the  Upanishads. 

23.  Kaushitaki-Up.  II,  5.  24.  Nand.  omits  this  verse. 
25-27.  Gaut.  VIII,  19-20;  Vas.  XI,  46;  Vi.  LIX,  2-9;  Baudh. 

II,  4,  23;  Yagfi.  I,  97,  124-125. 


IV,  31.       HOUSEHOLDER;    RULES  FOR  A  SNATAKA.  1 33 

(Agraya/za)  Ish^i  with  new  grain,  at  the  end  of  the 
(three)  seasons  the  (^Taturmasya-)sacrifices,  at  the 
solstices  an  animal  (sacrifice),  at  the  end  of  the  year 
Soma-offerings. 

27.  A  Brahma^a,  who  keeps  sacred  fires,  shall,  if 
he  desires  to  live  long,  not  eat  new  grain  or  meat, 
without  having  offered  the  (Agraya^a)  Ish^i  with 
new  grain  and  an  animal-(sacrifice). 

28.  For  his  fires,  not  being  worshipped  by  offer- 
ings of  new  grain  and  of  an  animal,  seek  to  devour 
his  vital  spirits,  (because  they  are)  greedy  for  new 
grain  and  flesh. 

29.  No  guest  must  stay  in  his  house  without  being 
honoured,  according  to  his  ability,  with  a  seat,  food, 
a  couch,  water,  or  roots  and  fruits. 

30.  Let  him  not  honour,  even  by  a  greeting, 
heretics,  men  who  follow  forbidden  occupations,  men 
who  live  like  cats,  rogues,  logicians,  (arguing  against 
the  Veda,)  and  those  who  live  like  herons. 

31.  Those  who  have  become  Snatakas  after 
studying  the  Veda,  or  after  completing  their  vows, 
(and)  householders,  who  are  6rotriyas,  one  must 
worship  by  (gifts  of  food)  sacred  to  gods  and  manes, 
but  one  must  avoid  those  who  are  different. 

30.  Yag?1.  I,  130.  Tashandinik, '  heretics/  i.e. '  non-Brahmamcal 
ascetics '  (vahyalihgina^,  Medh.),  or  '  ascetics  wearing  red  dresses 
and  the  like '  (Gov.),  or  '  non-Brahmamcal  ascetics,  such  as 
Bauddhas'  (Kull.,  Nar.),  or  'those  who  do  not  believe  in  the 
Vedas'  (Ragh.).  The  term  does  not  necessarily  refer  to  the 
Buddhists  and  Gainas,  though  the  latter  may  be  designated  by 
it.  The  correct  explanation  of  the  word  pasha^a  or  pashazz^in, 
'a  sectarian,'  has  been  given  by  Kern,  Jaartelling  der  zuidelijke 
Buddhisten,  p.  67.  Regarding  the  men  who  act  like  cats  or  herons, 
see  below,  verses  195-196. 

31.  Nand.  reads  griham  agatan,  'who  have  come  to  his  house,' 
instead  of  gr/hamedhina^, '  who  are  householders.' 


If 


L 


134  LAWS   OF   MANU.  IV,  32. 

32.  A  householder  must  give  (as  much  food)  as 
he  is  able  (to  spare)  to  those  who  do  not  cook  for 
themselves,  and  to  all  beings  one  must  distribute 
(food)  without  detriment  (to  one's  own  interest). 

33.  A  Snataka  who  pines  with  hunger,  may  beg 
wealth  of  a  king,  of  one  for  whom  he  sacrifices,  and 
of  a  pupil,  but  not  of  others  ;  that  is  a  settled  rule. 

34.  A  Snataka  who  is  able  (to  procure  food)  shall 
never  waste  himself  with  hunger,  nor  shall  he  wear 
old  or  dirty  clothes,  if  he  possesses  property. 

35.  Keeping  his  hair,  nails,  and  beard  clipped, 
subduing  his  passions  by  austerities,  wearing  white 
garments  and  (keeping  himself)  pure,  he  shall  be 
always  engaged  in  studying  the  Veda  and  (such  acts 
as  are)  conducive  to  his  welfare. 

36.  He  shall  carry  a  staff  of  bamboo,  a  pot  full  of 
water,  a  sacred  string,  a  bundle  of  Kara  grass,  and 
(wear)  two  bright  golden  ear-rings. 

32.  Ap.  II,  4,  14  ;  Gaut.  V,  22  ;  Baudh.  II,  5,  20.  '  Those  who 
do  not  cook  for  themselves/  i.e.  students  and  ascetics.  According 
to  Gov.  Pashaw^fas  are  included  by  this  term. 

33.  Gaut.  IX,  63-64;  Vas.  XII,  2;  Yagn.  I,  130.  'A  king/ 
i.e.  'a  Kshatriya  king  who  rules  in  accordance  with  the  .Sastras;' 
see  below,  verse  84. 

34.  Vas.  XII,  4;  Vi.  LXXI,  9;  Gaut.  IX,  3;  Ap.  I,  30, 13.  Sakt&k, 
'  who  is  able  (to  procure  food)/  (Nar.),  means  according  to  Nand. 
'  he  who  is  able  to  dine,  shall  not  stint  himself  through  avarice/ 
Gov.,  Kull.,  and  K.  explain  the  phrase,  '  A  Snataka,  who  is  a  fit 
(recipient  of  gifts),  must  not  pine  with  hunger  (as  long  as  the  king 
has  anything  to  give)/  i.  e.  he  must  be  relieved.  Ragh.  reads 
yukta^  instead  of  sakt&k,  '  A  Snataka  who  is  suffering  hunger  shall 
not  despair.'  If  taken  in  the  second  sense  the  rule  is  identical 
with  that  given  Ap.  II,  25,  n  ;  Gaut.  X,  9-10;  Vi.  Ill,  79. 

35.  Ap.  I,  30,  10-12;  Gaut.  IX,  4,  7;  Y&gn.  I,  131;  Baudh. 

I>  5>  7- 

36.  Vas.  XII,  14-17  ;  Baudh.  I,  5,  3-5  ;  6,  1-5;  II,  6,  7  ;  Vi. 
LXXI,  13-16;  Yagn.  I,  133. 


IV, 44.     householder;  rules  for  a  snataka.       135 

37.  Let  him  never  look  at  the  sun,  when  he  sets 
or  rises,  is  eclipsed  or  reflected  in  water,  or  stands 
in  the  middle  of  the  sky. 

38.  Let  him  not  step  over  a  rope  to  which  a  calf 
is  tied,  let  him  not  run  when  it  rains,  and  let  him  not 
look  at  his  own  image  in  water;  that  is  a  settled 
rule. 

39.  Let  him  pass  by  (a  mound  of)  earth,  a  cow, 
an  idol,  a  Brahma/za,  clarified  butter,  honey,  a  cross- 
way,  and  well-known  trees,  turning  his  right  hand 
towards  them. 

40.  Let  him,  though  mad  with  desire,  not  ap- 
proach his  wife  when  her  courses  appear ;  nor  let 
him  sleep  with  her  in  the  same  bed. 

41.  For  the  wisdom,  the  energy,  the  strength,  the 
sight,  and  the  vitality  of  a  man  who  approaches  a 
woman   covered  with /menstrual  excretions^]  utterly^ 


3 


42.  If  he  avoids  her,  while  she  is  in  that  condi- 
tion, his  wisdom,  energy,  strength,  sight,  and  vitality 
will  increase.  -< 

43.  Let  him  not  eat  in  the  company  of  his  wife, 
nor  look  at  her,  while  she  eats,  sneezes,  yawns,  or 
sits  at  her  ease. 

44.  A  Brahma^a  who  desires    energy  must   not 

37.  Ap.  I,  31,  20;  Vas.  XII,  10;  Baudh.  II,  6,  10;  Vi.  LXXI, 
17-21;  Yagfi.  I,  135. 

38.  Ap.  I,  31,  15;  Vas.  XII,  9;  Baudh.  II,  6,  15;  Vi.  LXXI, 
23;  LXIII,  41-43- 

39.  Gaut.  IX,  66;  Vi.  LXIII,  26-28 ;  Yagn.  I,  133. 
40-42.  Gaut.  IX,  29-30;  Vas.  XII,  7;  Vi.  LXIX,  n. 

42.  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  lakshmf,  'luck,'  instead  of  teg&k, 
' energy/ 

43.  Vas.  XII,  31 ;  Vi.LXVIII,  46;  Ya^l  I,  131 ;  Gaut.  IX,  32. 

44.  Gaut.  IX,  32. 


136 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  45- 


v^ 


.  look  at  (a  woman)  who  applies  collyrium  to  her  eyes, 
has  anointed  or  uncovered  herself  or  brings  forth 
(a  child). 

45.  Let  him  not  eat,  dressed  with  one  garment 
only ;  let  him  not  bathe  naked ;  let  him  not  void 
urine  on  a  road,  on  ashes,  or  in  a  cow-pen, 

46.  Nor  on  ploughed  land,  in  water,  on  an  altar 
of  bricks,  on  a  mountain,  on  the  ruins  of  a  temple, 
nor  ever  on  an  ant-hill, 

47.  Nor  in  holes  inhabited  by  living  creatures, 
nor  while  he  walks  or  stands,  nor  on  reaching  the 
bank  of  a  river,  nor  on  the  top  of  a  mountain. 

48.  Let  him  never  void  faeces  or  urine,  facing  the 
wind,  or  a  fire,  or  looking  towards  a  Brahma^a,  the 
sun,  water,  or  cows. 

49.  He  may  ease  himself,  having  covered  (the 
ground)  with  sticks,  clods,  leaves,  grass,  and  the  like, 
restraining  his  speech,  (keeping  himself)  pure,  wrap- 
ping up  his  body,  and  covering  his  head. 

50.  Let  him  void  faeces  and  urine,  in  the  day- 
time turning  to  the  north,  at  night  turning  towards 
the  south,  during  the  two  twilights  in  the  same 
(position)  as  by  day. 

45.  Ap.  I,  30,  18 ;  Gaut.  IX,  40,  45 ;  Vas.  XII,  11 ;  Baudh.  II, 
6,  24,  39;  Vi.  LXVIII,  14;  LXIV,  5;  LX,  n,  16,  19;  Y%#.  I, 
131,  134.  Govra^e,  'in  a  cow-pen'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  means  according 
lo  Medh.  '  a  place  where  cows  graze.' 

46.  Ap.  I,  30,  18;  Gaut.  IX,  40 ;  Vi.  LX,  4,  21,  10.  'Some 
omit  verses  46-47  '  (Nar.),  and  they  are  not  found  in  Nand. 

47.  Vi.  LX,  9. 

48.  Ap.  I,  30,  20;  Gaut.  II,  12;  Vi.  LX,  22;  Yagri.  I,  134. 
«  Looking  at  (things  moved  by)  the  wind '  (Medh.,  Kull.).  Medh. 
places  verse  52  immediately  after  this. 

49.  Ap.  I,  30,  14-15;  Gaut.  IX,  37-38,  41-43;  yas.  XII,  13; 
Vi.  LX^  2-3,  23. 

50.  Ap.  I,  31,  1;  Vi.  LX,  2-3. 


IV,  57-       HOUSEHOLDER  ;    RULES  FOR  A  SNATAK A.         137 

51.  In  the  shade  or  in  darkness  a  Brahma/za  may,     , 
both    by   day   and   at   night,  do    it,   assuming   any 
position  he  pleases  ;    likewise  when  his  life  is   in  / 
danger. 

52.  The  intellect  of  (a  man)  who  voids  urine 
against  a  fire,  the  sun,  the  moon,  in  water,  against  a 
Brahma/za,  a  cow,  or  the  wind,  perishes. 

53.  Let  him  not  blow  a  fire  with  his  mouth;  let 
him  not  look  at  a  naked  woman ;  let  him  not  throw 
any  impure  substance  into  the  fire,  and  let  him  not 
warm  his  feet  at  it. 

54.  Let  him  not  place  (fire)  under  (a  bed  or  the 
like) ;  nor  step  over  it,  nor  place  it  (when  he  sleeps) 
at  the  foot-(end  of  his  bed)  ;  let  him  not  torment 
living  creatures. 

55.  Let  him  not  eat,  nor  travel,  nor  sleep  during 
the  twilight;  let  him  not  scratch  the  ground;  let 
him  not  take  off  his  garland. 

56.  Let  him  not  throw  urine  or  faeces  into  the 
water,  nor  saliva,  nor  (clothes)  defiled  by  impure  I 
substances,  nor  any  other  (impurity),  nor  blood,  nor  \ 
poisonous  things.  A 

57.  Let  him  not  sleep  alone  in  a  deserted  dwell- 
ing ;  let  him  not  wake  (a  superior)  who  is  sleeping  ; 
let  him  not  converse  with  a  menstruating  woman  ; 


52.  Medh.  and  Nar.  mention  a  var.  lect.  for  prativatam, 
1  against  the  wind,'  pratisa/rcdhyaw,  '  in  the  twilights/  which  Nand. 
adopts. 

53.  Ap.  I,  15,  20-21 J  Gaut  IX,  32  ;  Vas.  XII,  27  ;  Vi.  LXXI, 
32-34,  37;  Ya§™.  I,  137. 

54.  Vi.  LXXI,  36;  YfyrL  I,  135,  137;  Gaut.  IX,  73. 

55.  Vi.  LXIII,  8;  LXVIII,  12;  LXXI,  41,  55. 

56.  Ap.  I,  30,  19;  Vi.  LXXI,  35;  Y&gn.  I,  137. 

57-  Gaut.  IX,  54-55 ;  Vas.  XII,  42  ;  Vi.  LXIII,  21 ;  LXX,  13  ; 
LXXI,  58;  Y8gn.  I,  138. 


138  LAWS   OF   MANU.  IV,  58. 

nor  let  him  go  to  a  sacrifice,  if  he  is  not  chosen  (to 
be  officiating  priest). 

58.  Let  him  keep  his  right  arm  uncovered  in  a 
place  where  a  sacred  fire  is  kept,  in  a  cow-pen,  in 
the  presence  of  Brahma^as,  during  the  private  reci- 
tation of  the  Veda,  and  at  meals. 

59.  Let  him  not  interrupt  a  cow  who  is  suckling 
(her  calf)7nor  tell  anybody  of  it.  A  wise  man,  if  he 
sees  a  rainbow  in  the  sky,  must  not  point  it  out  to 

.£  anybody. 

60.  Let  him  not  dwell  in  a  village  where  the 
sacred  law  is  not  obeyed,  nor  (stay)  long  where 
diseases  are  endemic  ;  let  him  not  go  alone  on  a 
journey,  nor  reside  long  on  a  mountain. 

61.  Let  him  not  dwell  in  a  country  where  the 
rulers  are  .Sudras,  nor  in  one  which  is  surrounded 
by  unrighteous  men,  nor  in  one  which  has  become 
subject  to  heretics,  nor  in  one  swarming  with  men 
of  the  lowest  castes. 

62.  Let  him  not  eat  anything  from  which  the  oil 
has  been  extracted  ;  let  him  not  be  a  glutton ;  let 
him  not  eat  very  early  (in  the  morning),  nor  very 
late  (in  the  evening),  nor  (take  any  food)  in  the 
evening,  if  he  has  eaten  (his  fill)  in  the  morning. 

63.  Let  him  not  exert  himself  without  a  purpose; 
let  him  not  drink  water  out  of  his  joined  palms  ;  let 

58.  Baudh.  II,  6,  38;  Vi.  LXXI,  60. 

59.  Ap.  I,  31,  10,  18 ;  Gaut.  IX,  23 ;  Vas.  XII,  33 ;  Baudh.  II, 
6,  11,  17  ;  Vi.  LXIII,  2  ;  LXXI,  62.  All  the  commentators  except 
Ragh.  explain  dhayantim, '  who  is  suckling  (her  calf),'  by  pibantim, 
'who  is  drinking'  (milk  or  water,  see  Yagn.  I,  140). 

60-61.  Ap.  I,  15,  22,  32,  18;  Gaut.  IX,  65;  Baudh.  II,  6,  21, 
31;  Vi.  LXXI,  64-68. 

62.  Vi.  LXVIII,  27,  48;  see  above,  II,  56-57. 

63.  Gaut.  IX,  9,  50,  56 ;  Baudh.  II,  6,  5 ;  Vi.  LXXI,  69. 


IV,  6g.      HOUSEHOLDER  J    RULES  FOR  A  SNATAKA.  I  39 

him  not  eat  food  (placed)  in  his  lap ;  let  him  not 
show  (idle)  curiosity. 

64.  Let  him  not  dance,  nor  sing,  nor  play  musical 
instruments,  nor  slap  (his  limbs),  nor  grind  his  teeth, 
nor  let  him  make  uncouth  noises,  though  he  be  in  a 
passion. 

65.  Let  him  never  wash  his  feet  in  a  vessel  of 
white  brass ;  let  him  not  eat  out  of  a  broken 
(earthen)  dish,  nor  out  of  one  that  (to  judge)  from 
its  appearance  (is)  defiled. 

66.  Let  him  not  use  shoes,  garments,  a  sacred 
string,  ornaments,  a  garland,  or  a  water-vessel  which 
have  been  used  by  others. 

6  j.  Let  him  not  travel  with  untrained  beasts  of 
burden,  nor  with   (animals)  that  are  tormented  by 
hunger  or  disease,  or  whose  horns,  eyes,  and  hoofs   \ 
have  been  injured,   or  whose  tails  have  been  dis- 
figured. 

68.  Let  him  always  travel  with  (beasts)  which 
are  well  broken  in,  swift,  endowed  with  lucky  marks, 
and  perfect  in  colour  and  form,  without  urging  them 
much  with  the  goad. 

69.  The  morning  'sun,  the  smoke  rising  from  a 
(burning)  corpse,  and  a  broken  seat  must  be  avoided. 
Let  him  not  clip  his  nails  or  hair,  and  not  tear  his 
nails  with  his  teeth. 

64.  Ap.  II,  20,  13;  Vi.  LXXI,  70-71.  Na  kshvedet,  'let  him 
not  grind  his  teeth,'  means  according  to  Nar., '  let  him  not  roar 
like  a  lion ;'  according  to  Nand., '  let  him  not  snap  his  fingers.'  Na 
spho/aye/,  *  he  shall  not  slap  (his  limbs),'  means  according  to  Nand., 
1  he  shall  not  make  his  fingers  crack.' 

65.  Vi.  LXVIII,  20  •  LXXI,  39. 

66.  Vi.  LXXI,  47.  67-68.  Vi.  LXIII,  13-18. 
69.  Vi.  LXXI,  44,  46 ;  Ya^ra.  1, 139.     Balatapa^,  'the  morning 

sun/  is  according  to  '  some,'  mentioned  by  Nar.,  and  according  to 


140 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


iv,  70. 


r> 


1 


70.  Let  him  not  crush  earth  or  clods,  nor  tear  off 
grass  with  his  nails ;  let  him  not  do  anything  that  is 
useless  or  will  have  disagreeable  results  in  the 
future. 

71.  A  man  who  crushes  clods,  tears  off  grass,  or 
bites  his  nails,  goes  soon  to  perdition,  likewise  an 
informer  and  he  who  neglects  (the  rules  of)  purifi- 
cation. 

72.  Let  him  not  wrangle  ;  let  him  not  wear  a 
garland  over  (his  hair).  To  ride  on  the  back  of 
cows  (or  of  oxen)  is  anyhow  a  blamable^act. 

73.  Let  him  not  enter  a  walled  village  or  house 
except  by  the  gate,  and  by  night  let  him  keep  at  a 
long  distance  from  the  roots  of  trees. 

74.  Let  him  never  play  with  dice,  nor  himself  take 
off  his  shoes ;  let  him  not  eat,  lying  on  a  bed,  nor 
what  has  been  placed  in  his  hand  or  on  a  seat. 


Ragh.  *  the  sun  in  the  sign  of  Kanya,  or  Virgo,'  i.  e.  '  the  sun  in 
autumn.'  The  same  explanation  is  mentioned  by  Nandapa/z/ita 
in  his  comment  on  the  parallel  passage  of  Vishnu.  It  is,  however, 
probably  wrong :  see  the  Introduction.  '  Let  him  not  clip  his  nails 
or  hair,'  i.  e.  '  not  himself,  but  let  him  employ  a  barber '  (Medh., 
Gov.),  or  '  before  they  have  grown  long '  (Kull.),  or  '  except  at  the 
proper  time  for  clipping '  (Nand.). 

70.  Ap.  I,  32,  18 ;  Gaut.  IX,  51 ;  Vi.  LXXI,  42-43. 

72.  Ap.  I,  32,  5 ;  Gaut.  IX,  32  ;  Baudh.  II,  69.  I  read  with  all  the 
commentators  '  vign'hya '  instead  of  the  '  vigarhya '  of  the  editions. 
'  Let  him  not  wear  a  garland  over  (his  dress),'  (Medh.),  or  '  let 
him  not  wear  a  garland  outside  (the  house)/  or  '  one  that  is  not 
fragrant '  (others,  Medh.). 

73.  Ap.  I,  31,  23;  Gaut.  IX,  32 ;  Baudh.  II,  6,  13  ;  Ya§^.  I,  140. 

74.  Gaut.  IX,  32;  Vas.  XII,  36;  Baudh.  II,  6,  6;  Vi.  LXVIII, 
23;  Vi.  LXXI,  45  ;  Y&gn.  1, 138.  '  Nor  what  has  been  placed  in  his 
hand/  i.e. '  in  his  left  hand  or  in  a  vessel  held  in  that  hand '  (Nar.). 
This  is  no  doubt  the  best  explanation,  as  Hindus  always  eat  with 
the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  and  the  left  hand  is  considered  un- 
clean for  very  good  reasons. 


J 


TV,  82.   HOUSEHOLDER  ;  RULES  FOR  A  SNATAKA.    141 

75.  Let  him  not  eat  after  sunset  any  (food)  con- 
taining sesamum  grains  ;  let  him  never  sleep  naked, 
nor  go  anywhere  unpurified  (after  meals). 

76.  Let  him  eat  while  his  feet  are  (yet)  wet  (from 
the  ablution),  but  let  him  not  go  to  bed  with  wet 
feet.  He  who  eats  while  his  feet  are  (still)  wet,  will 
attain  long  life. 

"j  J.  Let  him  never  enter  a  place,  difficult  of  access, 
which  is  impervious  to  his  eye ;  let  him  not  look  at 
urine  or  ordure,  nor  cross  a  river  (swimming)  with 
his  arms.  — ^ 

78.  Let  him  not  step  on  hair,  ashes,  bones,  pot-  \ 
sherds,  cotton-seed  or  chaff,  if  he  desires  long  life. 

79.  Let  him  not  stay  together  with  outcasts,  nor 
with  KdLtid&X&s,  nor  with  Pukkasas,  nor  with  fools, 
nor  with  overbearing  men,  nor  with  low-caste  men, 
nor  with  Antyavasayins. 

80.  Let  him  not  give  to  a  .Sudra  advice,  nor  the 
remnants  (of  his  meal),  nor  food  offered  to  the  gods ; 
nor  let  him  explain  the  sacred  law  (to  such  a  man), 
nor  impose  (upon  him)  a  penance.  / 

81.  For  he  who  explains  the   sacred  law  (to  a 
-Sudra)  or  dictates  to  him  a  penance,  will  sink  to-; 
gether  with  that  (man)  into  the  hell  (called)  Asaw-j 
vritSL. 

82.  Let  him  not  scratch  his  head  with  both  hands 

75.  Gaut.  IX,  60  ;  Vi.  LXVIII,  29 ;  LXXI,  3;  see  above,  II,  56. 

76.  Vi.  LXVIII,  34;  LXX,  1. 

77.  Ap.  I,  32,  26;  Gaut.  IX,  32;  Vas.  XII,  45;  Baudh.  II,  6, 
26;  VLLXIll,  46. 

78.  Ap.  II,  20,  11;  Gaut.  IX,  15  ;  Baudh.  II,  6, 16;  Y%w.  I,  139. 

79.  Regarding  the  Pukkasas  and  Antyavasayins,  see  below,  X, 
18,  39. 

80.  Ap.  I,  31,  24;  Vi.  LXXI,  48-52;  Vas.  XVIII,  14. 

81.  Vas.  XVIII,  15.  82.  Vi.  LXXI,  53. 


142 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


IV,  83. 


\ 


joined ;  let  him  not  touch  it  while  he  is  impure,  nor 
bathe  without  (submerging)  it. 

83.  Let  him  avoid  (in  anger)  to  lay  hold  of  (his 
own  or  other  men's)  hair,  or  to  strike  (himself  or 
others)  on  the  head.  When  he  has  bathed  (sub- 
merging) his  head,  he  shall  not  touch  any  of  his 

/limbs  with  oil. 

84.  Let  him  not  accept  presents  from  a  king  who 
is  not  descended  from  the  Kshatriya  race,  nor  from 
butchers,  oil-manufacturers,  and  publicans,  nor  from 
those  who  subsist  by  the  gain  of  prostitutes. 

85.  One  oil-press  is  as  (bad)  as  ten  slaughter- 
houses, one  tavern  as  (bad  as)  ten  oil-presses,  one 
brothel  as  (bad  as)  ten  taverns,  one  king  as  (bad  as) 
ten  brothels. 

86.  A  king  is  declared  to  be  equal  (in  wicked- 
ness) to  a  butcher  who  keeps  a  hundred  thousand 
slaughter-houses ;  to  accept  presents  from  him  is  a 
terrible  (crime). 

87.  He  who  accepts  presents  from  an  avaricious 
king  who  acts  contrary  to  the  Institutes  (of  the 
sacred  law),  will  go  in  succession  to  the  following 
twenty-one  hells : 

88.  Tamisra,  Andhatamisra,  Maharaurava,  Rau- 
rava,  the  Kalasutra  hell,  Mahanaraka, 

89.  Saw^lvana,  MahavL£i,  Tapana,  Sampratapana, 
Sawghata,  Sakakola,  Ku^mala,  Putimrzttika, 

83.  Vi.  LXIV,  12.  'When  he  has  bathed  (submerging)  his 
head'  should  be  according  to  others  (mentioned  by  Kull.  and 
Ragh.)  '  when  he  has  anointed  his  head  with  oil/ 

84.  Ya^w.  I,  140. 

85.  Ya§w.  I,  141.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  say, 'one 
king  as  bad  as  ten  prostitutes '  (ve^ya). 

88-90.  Vi.  XLIII,  2-22.  Nar.  and  Gov.  say  expressly  that  nara- 
kaw  kalasutraztf  ka.  means  '  the  Kalasutra  hell/  and  Nar.  that '  Vaita- 


IV,  95*  VEDA-STUDY.  1 43 

90.  Loha^anku,  JZtgisha.,  Pathin,  the  (flaming) 
river,  .Salmala,  Asipatravana,  and  LohaMraka. 

91.  Learned  Brahma^as,  who  know  that,  who 
study  the  Veda  and  desire  bliss  after  death,  do  not 
accept  presents  from  a  king. 

92.  Let  him  wake  in  the  muhurta,  sacred  to 
Brahman,  and  think  of  (the  acquisition  of)  spiritual 
merit  and  wealth,  of  the  bodily  fatigue  arising  there- 
from, and  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  Veda. 

93.  When  he  has  risen,  has  relieved  the  neces- 
sities of  nature  and  carefully  purified  himself,  let 
him  stand  during  the  morning  twilight,  muttering 
for  a  long  time  (the  Giyatri),  and  at  the  proper  time 
(he  must  similarly  perform)  the  evening  (devotion). 

94.  By  prolonging  the  twilight  devotions,  the  sages 
obtained  long  life,  wisdom,  honour,  fame,  and  excel- 
lence in  Vedic  knowledge. 

95.  Having  performed  the  Upakarman  according 
to  the  prescribed  rule  on  (the  full  moon  of  the  month) 
•5Yava;za,  or  on  that  of  Praush^apada  (Bhadrapada), 

ra#i '  must  be  understood  with  nadi,  '  the  river,'  while  Gov.  speaks 
of  a  hell  called  Nadi,  £  the  river.'  The  corresponding  passage  of 
Vishmi  shows  that  the  Dipanadi  is  meant.  The  editions  read 
Sazrahata  instead  of  Sawghata,  -Salmali  instead  of  .Salmala,  and 
Lohadaraka,  which  Ragh.  has  also,  instead  of  Lohadaraka. 

92.  Vas.  XII,  47;  Vi.  LX,  1.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  say,  'in  the 
muhurta,  sacred  to  Brahmi,'  or  Bharati,  the  goddess  of  speech.  But 
this  explanation  is  wrong,  as  the  expression  prag-apatya  muhurta, 
used  in  other  Smn'tis,  shows. 

93.  Vi.  LXXI,  77. 

94.  I  read  with  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  avapnuvan,  '  obtained,' 
instead  of  avapnuyu/^  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

95-97.  Ap.  I,  9,  1-3,  10,  2  ;  Gaut.  XVI,  1-2,  40;  Vas.  XIII, 
1-5  ;  Baudh.  I,  12-16  ;  Vi.  XXX,  1-2,  24-25 ;  Ya^Ti.  I,  142-144. 

The  Upakarman  is  the  solemn  opening  of  the  Brahmamcal 
school-term,  and   the   Utsar^ana  or  Utsarga  its   closing.     Their 


144 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  96. 


a  Brahma^a  shall  diligently  study  the  Vedas  during 
four  months  and  a  half. 

96.  When  the  Pushya-day  (of  the  month  Pausha), 
or  the  first  day  of  the  bright  half  of  Magna  has 
come,  a  Brahma^a  shall  perform  in  the  forenoon 
the  Utsar^ana  of  the  Vedas. 

97.  Having  performed  the  Utsarga  outside  (the 
village),  as  the  Institutes  (of  the  sacred  law)  pre- 
scribe, he  shall  stop  reading  during  two  days  and 
the  intervening  night,  or  during  that  day  (of  the 
Utsarga)  and  (the  following)  night. 

98.  Afterwards  he  shall  diligently  recite  the 
Vedas  during  the  bright  (halves  of  the  months),  and 
duly  study  all  the  Ahgas  of  the  Vedas  during  the 
dark  fortnights. 

99.  Let  him  not  recite  (the  texts)  indistinctly,  nor 
in  the  presence  of  .Sudras ;  nor  let  him,  if  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  night  he  is  tired  with  reciting  the 
Veda,  go  again  to  sleep. 

100.  According  to  the  rule  declared  above,  let 
him  recite  the  daily  (portion  of  the)  Mantras,  and 
a  zealous  Brahma^a,  (who  is)  not  in  distress,  (shall 
study)  the  Brahma^a  and  the  Mantrasawhita. 

10 1.  Let  him  who  studies  always  avoid  (reading) 
on  the  following  occasions  when  the  Veda -study  is 


description  is  found  in  the  GrzTiya-sutras,  e.g.  -Sankhayana  IV,  5-6. 
The  Pushya-day  is  the  sixth  lunar  day  of  each  month :  *Srava7za, 
July-August;  Bhadrapada,  August-September;  Pausha,  December- 
January  ;  Magna,  January-February. 

97.  But  see  below,  verse  119. 

98-129.  Ap.  I,  9,  4-1 1,  38  ;  32,  12-15  j  Gaut.  I,  58-60;  XVI, 
5-49 ;  Vas.  XIII,  6-40;  XVIII,  13  ;  Baudh.  I,  21,  4-22 ;  Vi.  XXX, 
3-30;  Yagn.  I,  144-151- 

100.  '  The  daily  (portion  of  the)  Mantras,'  i.e.  'the  Gayatri  and 
other  portions  of  the  ivV^as^a^ns,  and  Samans.' 


IV,  io6.  VEDA-STUDY.  I45 

forbidden,  and  (let)  him  who  teaches  pupils  according 
to  the  prescribed  rule  (do  it  likewise). 

102.  Those  who  know  the  (rules  of)  recitation 
declare  that  in  the  rainy  season  the  Veda-study 
must  be  stopped  on  these  two  (occasions),  when  the 
wind  is  audible  at  night,  and  when  it  whirls  up  the 
dust  in  the  day-time. 

103.  Manu  has  stated,  that  when  lightning, 
thunder,  and  rain  (are  observed  together),  or  when 
large  fiery  meteors  fall  on  all  sides,  the  recitation 
must  be  interrupted  until  the  same  hour  (on  the  next 
day,  counting  from  the  occurrence  of  the  event). 

104.  When  one  perceives  these  (phenomena)  all 
together  (in  the  twilight),  after  the  sacred  fires  have 
been  made  to  blaze  (for  the  performance  of  the 
Agnihotra),  then  one  must  know  the  recitation  of 
the  Veda  to  be  forbidden,  and  also  when  clouds 
appear  out  of  season. 

105.  On  (the  occasion  of)  a  preternatural  sound 
from  the  sky,  (of)  an  earthquake,  and  when  the 
lights  of  heaven  are  surrounded  by  a  halo,  let  him 
know  that  (the  Veda-study  must  be)  stopped  until 
the  same  hour  (on  the  next  day),  even  if  (these  phe- 
nomena happen)  in  the  (rainy)  season. 

106.  But  when  lightning  and  the  roar  of  thunder 
(are  observed)  after  the  sacred  fires  have  been  made 
to  blaze,  the  stoppage  shall  last  as  long  as  the  light 
(of  the  sun  or  of  the  stars  is  visible) ;  if  the  remain- 
ing (above-named  phenomenon,  rain,  occurs,  the 
reading  shall  cease),  both  in  the  day-time  and  at 
night. 

105.  Medh.  proposes  as  another  explanation  of  gyotisham  £opa- 
sarg-ane,  '  when  the  heavenly  lights  trouble  each  other,'  i.  e.  obscure 
each  other,  and  Nar.;  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  refer  the  phrase  to  eclipses. 

[25]  L 


u 


I46  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  107. 

107.  For  those  who  wish  to  acquire  exceedingly 
great  merit,  a  continual  interruption  of  the  Veda- 
study  (is  prescribed)  in  villages  and  in  towns,  and 
(the  Veda-study  must)  always  (cease)  when  any  kind 
of  foul  smell  (is  perceptible). 

108.  In  a  village  where  a  corpse  lies,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  a  (man  who  lives  as  unrighteously  as  a) 
.Sudra,  while  (the  sound  of)  weeping  (is  heard),  and 
in  a  crowd  of  men  the  (recitation  of  the  Veda  must 
be)  stopped. 

109.  In  water,  during  the  middle  part  of  the 
night,  while  he  voids  excrements,  or  is  impure, 
and  after  he  has  partaken  of  a  funeral  dinner, 
a  man  must  not  even  think  in  his  heart  (of  the 
sacred  texts). 

no.  A  learned  Brahma^a  shall  not  recite  the 
Veda  during  three  days,  when  he  has  accepted  an 
invitation  to  a  (funeral  rite)  in  honour  of  one  ancestor 
(ekoddish/a),  or  when  the  king  has  become  impure 
through  a  birth  or  death  in  his  family  (sutaka),  or 
when  Rahu  by  an  eclipse  makes  the  moon  impure. 

in.  As  long  as  the  smell  and  the  stains  of  the 
(food  given)  in  honour  of  one  ancestor  remain  on 
the  body  of  a  learned  Br&hma^a,  so  long  he  must 
not  recite  the  Veda. 

112.  While  lying  on  a  bed,  while  his  feet  are 
raised  (on  a  bench),  while  he  sits  on  his  hams  with 
a  cloth  tied  round  his  knees,  let  him  not  study,  nor 
when  he  has  eaten  meat  or  food  given  by  a  person 
impure  on  account  of  a  birth  or  a  death, 

107.  With  respect  to  this  verse,  see  especially  Baudh.  II,  6, 33-34. 
109.  Medh.  mentions  a  var.  lect.  udaye, '  at  sunrise,'  for  udake, 
'in  water/ 

no.  Eclipses  of  the  sun  are  of  course  included. 


IV,  n8.  VEDA-STUDY.  147 

113.  Nor  during  a  fog,  nor  while  the  sound  of 
arrows  is  audible,  nor  during  both  the  twilights,  nor 
on  the  new-moon  day,  nor  on  the  fourteenth  and 
the  eighth  (days  of  each  half-month),  nor  on  the  full- 
moon  day. 

114.  The  new-moon  day  destroys  the  teacher,  the 
fourteenth  (day)  the  pupil,  the  eighth  and  the  full- 
moon  days  (destroy  all  remembrance  of)  the  Veda ; 
let  him  therefore  avoid  (reading  on)  those  (days). 

115.  A  Brahma^a  shall  not  recite  (the  Veda) 
during  a  dust-storm,  nor  while  the  sky  is  preter- 
naturally  red,  nor  while  jackals  howl,  nor  while  the 
barking  of  dogs,  the  braying  of  donkeys,  or  the 
grunting  of  camels  (is  heard),  nor  while  (he  is  seated) 
in  a  company. 

116.  Let  him  not  study  near  a  burial-ground,  nor 
near  a  village,  nor  in  a  cow-pen,  nor  dressed  in  a 
garment  which  he  wore  during  conjugal  intercourse, 
nor  after  receiving  a  present  at  a  funeral  sacrifice. 

117.  Be  it  an  animal  or  a  thing  inanimate,  what- 
ever be  the  (gift)  at  a  6raddha,  let  him  not,  having 
just  accepted  it,  recite  the  Veda ;  for  the  hand  of  a 
Brahma^a  is  his  mouth. 

118.  When  the  village  has  been  beset  by  robbers, 
and  when  an  alarm  has  been  raised  by  fire,  let  him 
know  that  (the  Veda-study  must  be)  interrupted 
until  the  same  hour  (on  the  next  day),  and  on  (the 
occurrence  of)  all  portents. 

113.  Va/za, '  arrows/  may  also  mean  '  a  large  lute/ 
115.  Panktau,'  in  a  company' (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar., '  others'),  means 
according  to  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh. '  in  the  midst  of  dogs,  donkeys, 
or  camels/     Nar.  mentions  a  third  explanation, '  in  the  company 
of  unworthy  persons'  (apariktya). 

117.  I.e.  it  is  as  sinful  to  recite  the  Veda  after  accepting  a  pre- 
sent at  a  Sraddha,  as  to  study  after  partaking  of  a  funeral  dinner. 

L   2 


148 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


IV, 119. 


119.  On  (the  occasion  of)  the  Upakarman  and 
(of)  the  Vedotsarga  an  omission  (of  the  Veda-study) 
for  three  days  has  been  prescribed,  but  on  the 
Ash/akas  and  on  the  last  nights  of  the  seasons  for 
a  day  and  a  night. 

1 20.  Let  him  not  recite  the  Veda  on  horseback, 
nor  on  a  tree,  nor  on  an  elephant,  nor  in  a  boat  (or 
ship),  nor  on  a  donkey,  nor  on  a  camel,  nor  standing 
on  barren  ground,  nor  riding  in  a  carriage, 

"  121.  Nor  during  a  verbal  altercation,  nor  during 
a  mutual  assault,  nor  in  a  camp,  nor  during  a 
battle,  nor  when  he  has  just  eaten,  nor  during  an 
indigestion,  nor  after  vomiting,  nor  with  sour 
eructationsj    {/Aj1    (IV[   W±  $*& 

122.  Nor  without  receiving  permission  from  a 
guest  (who  stays  in  his  house),  nor  while  the  wind 
blows  vehemently,  nor  while  blood  flows  from  his 
body,  nor  when  he  is  wounded  by  a  weapon. 

123.  Let  him  never  recite  the  T&g-veda  or  the 
Ya^ur-veda  while  the  Saman  (melodies)  are  heard ; 
(let  him  stop  all  Veda-study  for  a  day  and  a 
night)  after  finishing  a  Veda  or  after  reciting  an 
Ara^yaka. 

124.  The  ifog-veda  is  declared  to  be  sacred  to 
the  gods,  the  Ya^ur-veda  sacred  to  men,  and  the 
Sama-veda  sacred  to  the  manes ;  hence  the  sound  of 
the  latter  is  impure  (as  it  were). 


119.  The  Ash/akas  are  the  three  or  four  days  for  the  Ash/aka 
Sraddhas,  which  are  placed  differently  by  different  writers ;  see 
Weber,  Die  Nakshatras  II,  337. 

121.  Nar.  interprets  na  vivade  na  kalahe  by  'neither  during  a 
dispute  on  legal  matters  nor  during  an  altercation.' 

124.  'Is  impure  (as  it  were),'  i.e.  'it  is  not  really  impure,  but 
when  it  is  heard,  one  must  not  study,  just  as  in  the  presence  of 
some  impure  thing  or  person'  (Medh.). 


IV,  130.   VEDA-STUDY  J  RULES  FOR  A  SNATAKA.     1 49 

125.  Knowing  this,  the  learned  daily  repeat  first 
in  due  order  the  essence  of  the  three  (Vedas)  and 
afterwards  the  (text  of  the)  Veda. 

126.  Know  that  (the  Veda-study  must  be)  inter-} 
rupted  for  a  day  and  a  night,  when  cattle,  a  frog, 
a  cat,  a  dog,  a  snake,  an  ichneumon,  or  a  rat  pass  . 
between  (the  teacher  and  his  pupil). 

127.  Let  a  twice-born  man  always  carefully  inter- 
rupt the  Veda-study  on  two  (occasions,  viz.)  when 
the  place  where  he  recites  is  impure,  and  when  he 
himself  is  unpurified. 

128.  A  twice-born  man  who  is  a  Snataka  shall 
remain  chaste  on  the  new-moon  day,  on  the  eighth 
(lunar  day  of  each  half-month),  on  the  full-moon  day, 
and  on  the  fourteenth,  even  (if  they  fall)  in  the  period 
(proper  for  conjugal  intercourse). 

129.  Let  him  not  bathe  (immediately)  after  a 
meal,  nor  when  he  is  sick,  nor  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  nor  frequently  dressed  in  all  his  garments, 
nor  in  a  pool  which  he  does  not  perfectly  know. 

130.  Let  him  not  intentionally  step  on  the  shadow 
of  (images  of)  the  gods,  of  a  Guru,  of  a  king,  of  a 
Snataka,  of  his  teacher,  of  a  reddish-brown  animal, 
or  of  one  who  has  been  initiated  to  the  performance 
of  a  6Vauta  sacrifice  (Dikshita).  — — ' 

125.  '  The  essence  of  three  (Vedas)/  i.e.  the  syllable  Om  and  the 
Gayatri ;  see  above,  II,  76-77. 

128.  Vi.  LXIX,  1;  Vas.  XII,  21.  According  to  others,  quoted 
by  Medh.,  the  word  brahma/fcari  translated  by  'chaste'  indicates 
that  a  Snataka  must  also  in  other  respects  behave  like  a  student. 
Medh.  thinks  it  possible  that  the  abstention  from  honey  and  meat 
may  also  be  indicated. 

129.  Ap.  I,  32,  8  ;  Baudh.  II,  6,  25 ;  Vi.  LXIV,  3-4,  6.  ■  Not 
frequently,'  i.e. '  only  for  particular  reasons,  such  as  being  touched 
by  a.A'aWala.' 

130.  Ya^l.  I,  152;  Vi.  LXIII,  40.    Babhru,  'a  reddish-brown 


15O  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  131. 

131.  At  midday  and  at  midnight,  after  partaking 
of  meat  at  a  funeral  dinner,  and  in  the  two  twilights 
let  him  not  stay  long  on  a  cross-road. 

132.  Let  him  not  step  intentionally  on  things 
used  for  cleansing  the  body,  on  water  used  for  a 

-q/^     bath,  on  urine  or  ordure,  on  blood,  on  mucus,  and 
on  anything  spat  out  or  vomited. 

133.  Let  him  not  show  particular  attention  to  an 
enemy,  to  the  friend  of  an  enemy,  to  a  wicked  man, 
to  a  thief,  or  to  the  wife  of  another  man. 

134.  For  in  this  world  there  is  nothing  so  detri- 
mental to  long  life  as  criminal  conversation  with 
another  man's  wife. 

135.  Let  him  who  desires  prosperity,  indeed, 
never  despise  a  Kshatriya,  a  snake,  and  a  learned 
Brahma^a,  be  they  ever  so  feeble. 

136.  Because  these  three,  when  treated  with  dis- 
respect, may  utterly  destroy  him ;  hence  a  wise  man 

L-  must  never  despise  them. 

137.  Let  him  not  despise  himself  on  account  of 
former  failures  ;  until  death  let  him  seek  fortune, 
nor  despair  of  gaining  it. 

138.  Let  him  say  what  is  true,  let  him  say  what 
is  pleasing,  let  him  utter  no  disagreeable  truth,  and 
let  him  utter  no  agreeable  falsehood  ;  that  is  the 
eternal  law. 

animal,'  is  not  clearly  explained  by  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  Medh. 
thinks  that '  a  brown  cow'  or  'the  Soma  creeper'  may  be  meant. 
Nand.  adopts  the  former  view,  and  Nar.  explains  it  by  '  a  brown 
creature.' 

132.  Vi.  LXIII,  41 ;  Yagri.  I,  152.  Apasnanam, '  water  used  for 
a  bath,'  means  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand. '  water  used  for  wash- 
ing a  corpse.' 

I.35-I36.  Yagn.  I,  153.  137.  Vi.  LXXI,  76;  Yagn.  1, 153. 

138.  Gaut.  IX,  68;  Vi.  LXXI,  73-74;  Yagfi.  I,  132. 


r 


IV,  145-  RULES   FOR   A    SNATAKA.  I  5  I 

139.  (What  is)  well,  let  him  call  well,  or  let  him 
say  'well'  only;  let  him  not  engage  in  a  useless 
enmity  or  dispute  with  anybody. 

140.  Let  him  not  journey  too  early  in  the 
morning,  nor  too  late  in  the  evening,  nor  just  during 
the  midday  (heat),  nor  with  an  unknown  (com- 
panion), nor  alone,  nor  with  .Sudras. 

141.  Let  him  not  insult  those  who  have  re- 
dundant limbs  or  are  deficient  in  limbs,  nor  those 
destitute  of  knowledge,  nor  very  aged'  men,  nor 
those  who  have  no  beauty  or  wealth,  nor  those  who 
are  of  low  birth. 

142.  A  Brahma^a  who  is  impure  must  not  touch  J 
with    his    hand   a   cow,   a   Brahma^a,  or  fire;   nor, j 
being  in  good  health,  let  him  look  at  the  luminaries 
in  the  sky,  while  he  is  impure. 

143.  If  he  has  touched  these,  while  impure,  let 
him  always  sprinkle  with  his  hand  water  on  the 
organs  of  sensation,  all-  his  limbs,  and  the  navel. 

144.  Except  when  sick  he  must  not  touch  the 
cavities  (of  the  body)  without  a  reason,  and  he  must 
avoid  (to  touch)  the  hair  on  the  secret  (parts).  _^, 

145.  Let  him  eagerly  follow  the  (customs  which 
are)  auspicious  and  the  rule  of  good  conduct,  be 
careful  of  purity,  and  control  all  his  organs,  let  him 
mutter  (prayers)  and,  untired,  daily  offer  oblations  in 
the  fire. 

139.  Ap.  I,  32,  11-14 ;  Gaut.  IX,  19-20 ;  Vi.  LXXI,  57;  Yagn. 
I,  132  ;  Gaut.  IX,  32.  '  Only/  i.e.  even  if  things  go  wrong.  I  follow 
Nar.'s  explanation,  which  is  the  only  correct  one :  bhadraw  vastuto 
ya^obhanaw  I  bhadram  ity  eva  va  'bhadram  api,  '  (let  him  call) 
well  what  is  really  well ;  or  (let  him  call)  well  even  that  which  is 
not  well.' 

140.  Baudh.  II,  6,  22-23  ;  Vi.  LXIII,  4,  6-7,  9. 

141.  Vi.  LXXI,  2.         142.  Yagn.  1, 155.  144.  Vi.  LXXI,  79. 


152  LAWS   OF   MANU.  TV,  146. 

146.  No  calamity  happens  to  those  who  eagerly 
follow  auspicious  customs  and  the  rule  of  good  con- 
duct, to  those  who  are  always  careful  of  purity,  and 
to  those  who  mutter  (sacred  texts)  and  offer  burnt- 
oblations. 

147.  Let  him,  without  tiring,  daily  mutter  the 
Veda  at  the  proper  time ;  for  they  declare  that  to  be 
one's  highest  duty ;  (all)  other  (observances)  are 
called  secondary  duties. 

148.  By  daily  reciting  the  Veda,  by  (the  observance 
of  the  rules  of)  purification,  by  (practising)  austeri- 
ties, and  by  doing  no  injury  to  created  beings,  one, 
(obtains  the  faculty  of)  remembering  former  births. 

149.  He  who,  recollecting  his  former  existences, 
again  recites  the  Veda,  gains  endless  bliss  by  the 
continual  study  of  the  Veda. 

150.  Let  him  always  offer  on  the  Parva-days  ob- 
lations to  Savitrz  and  such  as  avert  evil  omens,  and 
on  the  Ash/ak&s  and  Anvash/akis  let  him  constantly 
worship  the  manes. 

151.  Far  from  his  dwelling  let  him  remove  urine 
(and  ordure),  far  (let  him  remove)  the  water  used 
for  washing  his  feet,  and  far  the  remnants  of  food 
and  the  water  from  his  bath. 

152.  Early  in   the   morning   only   let   him   void 

146.  Vas.  XXVI,  14.  147.  Gaut.  IX,  72. 

150.  Vi.  LXXI,  86.  Nand.  reads  savitrya, '  with  the  Savitri,'  for 
savitran, '  to  Savitn','  and  Nar.  has  the  same  explanation. 

151.  Ap.  I,  31,  2-3;  Gaut.  IX,  39;  Yign.  I,  153.  Avasatha, 
'  his  dwelling,'  means  according  to  Kull. '  the  room  where  the  fires 
are  kept.'  Kull.  explains  nishekam,  'the  water  from  his  bath,'  by 
'  seminal  impurity.'  Gov.  and  Nar.  read  u^/^ish/dnnanishekaw  H, 
and  explain  nisheka  by  ty&ga,  '  throwing  away.' 

152.  According  to  Medh./ others'  explained  maitram,' defecation,' 
by  •  friendly  service/  or  by  '  the  worship  of  Mitra.' 


IV,  i59«  RULES    FOR   A    SNATAKA.  I  5  3 

faeces,  decorate  (his  body),  bathe,  clean  his  teeth, 
apply  collyrium  to  his  eyes,  and  worship  the  gods. 

153.  But  on  the  Parva-days  let  him  go  to  visit 
the  (images  of  the)  gods,  and  virtuous  Brahma^as, 
and  the  ruler  (of  the  country),  for  the  sake  of  pro- 
tection, as  well  as  his  Gurus. 

154.  Let  him  reverentially  salute  venerable  men 
(who  visit  him),  give  them  his  own  seat,  let  him 
sit  near  them  with  joined  hands  and,  when  they 
leave,  (accompany  them),  walking  behind  them. 

155.  Let  him,  untired,  follow  the  conduct  of  vir- 
tuous men,  connected  with  his  occupations,  which 
has  been  fully  declared  in  the  revealed  texts  and  in 
the  sacred  tradition  (Smrzti)  and  is  the  root  of  the 
sacred  law. 

156.  Through  virtuous  conduct  he  obtains  long 
life,  through  virtuous  conduct  desirable  offspring, 
through  virtuous  conduct  imperishable  wealth ;  vir- 
tuous conduct  destroys  (the  effect  of)  inauspicious 
marks.  ^ 

157.  For  a  man  of  bad  conduct  is  blamed  among 
people,  constantly  suffers  misfortunes,  is  afflicted 
with  diseases,  and  short-lived.  *J 

158.  A  man  who  follows  the  conduct  of  the  vir- 
tuous, has  faith  and  is  free  from  envy,  lives  a 
hundred  years,  though  he  be  entirely  destitute  of 
auspicious  marks. 

159.  Let  him  carefully  avoid  all  undertakings 
(the  success  of)  which  depends  on  others ;  but  let 


153.  Ap.  I,  31,  21-22.     Medh.  omits  verses  153-158. 

154.  Baudh.  II,  6,  35.         155.  Vas.  LXXI,  90 ;  Yagn.  I,  154. 
156.  Vas.  VI,  7;  Vi.  LXXI,  91.  157.  Vas. VI,  6. 
158.  Vas.  VI,  8;  Vi.  LXXI,  92. 


154  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  160. 

him   eagerly  pursue  that  (the   accomplishment  of) 
which  depends  on  himself. 

1 60.  Everything  that  depends  on  others  (gives) 
k.  pain,  everything   that  depends    on    oneself  (gives) 

"4^  pleasure;  know  that  this  is  the  short  definition  of 
pleasure  and  pain. 

161.  When  the  performance  of  an  act  gladdens 
his  heart,  let  him  perform  it  with  diligence  ;  but  let 
him  avoid  the  opposite. 

162.  Let  him  never  offend  the  teacher  who  in- 
itiated him,  nor  him  who  explained  the  Veda,  nor 
his  father  and  mother,  nor  (any  other)  Guru,  nor 
cows,  nor  Brahma/zas,  nor  any  men  performing 
austerities. 

163.  Let    him    avoid   atheism,    cavilling   at   the 
I     Vedas,    contempt    of    the    gods,    hatred,    want    of 

modesty,  pride,  anger,  and  harshness. 

164.  Let  him,  when  angry,  not  raise  a  stick  against 
another  man,  nor  strike  (anybody)  except  a  son  or  a 
pupil ;  those  two  he  may  beat  in  order  to  correct 

'    them. 


161.  This  rule  refers  to  indifferent  acts  or  cases  where  there  is 
an  option;  see  above,  II,  12. 

162.  Ya§7l.  I,  157-158.  Na  hiwsyat,  'let  him  never  offend' 
(Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Gov.  '  let  him 
never  injure  them,  though  they  attempt  his  life,  when  self-defence  is 
permitted'  (see  VIII,  350).  Tapasvina^  means  according  to  Medh. 
and  Gov.  'all  those  engaged  in  the  performance  of  austerities,' 
e.g.  even  sinners  who  perform  penances  (Medh.),  while  the  other 
commentators  understand  it  to  denote  '  ascetics.' 

163.  Ap.  I,  30,  25;  Vas.  XIII,  41;  Vi.  LXXI,  83.  I  read  with 
all  the  commentators  instead  of  dambham,  'hypocrisy,'  stam- 
bham,  which  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  means  '  want  of 
modesty,'  and  according  to  Kull.  '  want  of  energy  in  the  fulfilment 
of  duties/ 

164.  Vi.  LXXI,  81-82.     See  also  below,  VIII,  299-300. 


I 


\ 


IV,  172.  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  I  55 

165.  A  twice-born  man  who  has  merely  threat- 
ened a  Brahma^a  with  the  intention  of  (doing  him) 
a  corporal  injury,  will  wander  about  for  a  hundred 
years  in  the  Tamisra  hell. 

166.  Having  intentionally  struck  him  in  anger, 
even  with  a  blade  of  grass,  he  will  be  born  during 
twenty-one  existences  in  the  wombs  (of  such  beings 
where  men  are  born  in  punishment  of  their)  sins. 

167.  A  man  who  in  his  folly  caused  blood  to  flow 
from  the  body  of  a  Brahma/za  who  does  not  attack 
him,  will  suffer  after  death  exceedingly  great  pain. 

168.  As  many  particles  of  dust  as  the  blood  takes 
up  from  the  ground,  during  so  many  years  the  gpiller 
of  the  blood  will  be  devoured  by  other  (animals)  in 
the  next  world.  ~ 

169.  A  wise  man  should  therefore  never  threaten) 
a  Brahmazza,  nor  strike  him  even  with  a  blade  of  \ 
grass,  nor  cause  his  felood  tqjlow. 

170.  Neither  a  man  who  (lives)  unrighteously,  nor 
he  who  (acquires)  wealth  (by  telling)  falsehoods,  nor 
he  who  always  delights  in  doing  injury,  ever  attain 
happiness  in  this  world. 

171.  Let  him,  though  suffering  in  consequence  of 
his  righteousness,  never  turn  his  heart  to  unrighte- 
ousness ;  for  he  will  see  the  speedy  overthrow  of 
unrighteous,  wicked  men. 

172.  Unrighteousness,  practised  in  this  world, 
does  not  at  once  produce  its  fruit,  like  a  cow ;  but, 
advancing  slowly,  it  cuts  off  the  roots  of  him  who 
committed  it. 


165-167.  Gaut.  XXI,  20-22;  YSgn.  I,  155. 
172.  'Like  a  cow/  i.e.  'which  at  once  yields  benefits  by  its 
milk,  «fec.'  (Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.).    Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  take  gau/i 


156  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  173. 

173.  If  (the  punishment  falls)  not  on  (the  offender) 
himself,  (it  falls)  on  his  sons,  if  not  on  the  sons,  (at 
least)  on  his  grandsons ;  but  an  iniquity  (once)  com- 
mitted, never  fails  to  produce  fruit  to  him  who 
wrought  it. 

174.  He  prospers  for  a  while  through  unrighte- 
ousness, then  he  gains  great  good  fortune,  next  he 
conquers  his  enemies,  but  (at  last)  he  perishes 
(branch  and)  root. 

175.  Let  him  always  delight  in  truthfulness,  (obe- 
dience to)  the  sacred  law,  conduct  worthy  of  an 
Aryan,  and  purity  ;  let  him  chastise  his  pupils  accord- 
ing to  the  sacred  law ;  let  him  keep  his  speech,  his 
arms,  and  his  belly  under  control. 

176.  Let  him  avoid  (the  acquisition  of)  wealth 
and  (the  gratification  of  his)  desires,  if  they  are 
opposed  to  the  sacred  law,  and  even  lawful  acts 
which  may  cause  pain  in  the  future  or  are  offensive 
to  men. 

1 7  7.  Let  him  not  be  uselessly  active  with  his  hands 
and  feet,  or  with  his  eyes,  nor  crooked  (in  his  ways), 
nor  talk  idly,  nor  injure  others  by  deeds  or  even 
think  of  it. 

178.  Let  him   walk  in   that   path    of  holy  men 


in  its  other  sense,  'the  earth/  i.e.  'which  does  not  at  once  yield  a 
harvest/  but  mention  the  first  explanation  too.  It  is  not  impossible 
that  the  word  has  to  be  taken  both  ways,  and  that  the  author  wishes 
to  give  with  it  both  a  sadharmya  and  a  vaidharmyadrz'sh/anta. 

175.  Gaut.  IX,  50,  68-69. 

176.  Gaut.  IX,  47,  73  ;  Vi.  LXXI,  84-85 ;  Ysigri.  1, 156.  As  an 
example  of '  a  lawful  act  causing  pain  in  the  future/  Medh.  adduces 
'  the  gift  of  one's  whole  property.' 

177.  The  last  portion  of  the  verse,  'nor  injure  others,  &c./  may 
also  be  translated,  '  let  him  not  be  intent  on  deeds  (calculated)  to 
injure  others.' 


IV,  i84.  RULES   FOR   A   SNATAKA.  1 57 

which  his  fathers  and  his    grandfathers    followed ; 
while  he  walks  in  that,  he  will  not  suffer  harm. 

1 79.  With  an  officiating  or  a  domestic  priest,  with 
a  teacher,  with  a  maternal  uncle,  a  guest  and  a  de- 
pendant, with  infants,  aged  and  sick  men,  with 
learned  men,  with  his  paternal  relatives,  connexions 
by  marriage  and  maternal  relatives, 
•  180.  With  his  father  and  his  mother,  with  female 
relatives,  with  a  brother,  with  his  son  and  his  wife, 
with  his  daughter  and  with  his  slaves,  let  him  not 
have  quarrels. 

181.  If  he  avoids  quarrels  with  these  persons,  he 
will  be  freed  from  all  sins,  and  by  suppressing  (all) 
such  (quarrels)  a  householder  conquers  all  the  fol- 
lowing worlds. 

182.  The  teacher  is  the  lord  of  the  world  of 
Brahman,  the  father  has  power  over  the  world  of 
the  Lord  of  created  beings  (Pra^apati),  a  guest  rules 
over  the  world  of  Indra,  and  the  priests  over  the 
world  of  the  gods. 

183.  The  female  relatives  (have  power)  over  the 
world  of  the  Apsarases,  the  maternal  relatives  over 
that  of  the  Vi^ve  Devas,  the  connexions  by  marriage 
over  that  of  the  waters,  the  mother  and  the  maternal 
uncle  over  the  earth. 

184.  Infants,  aged,  poor  and  sick  men  must  be 
considered  as  rulers  of  the  middle  sphere,  the  eldest 

179-184.  Y&gn.  I,  itf-i$%. 

179.  Vaidyai^,  'with  learned  men,'  may  also  mean  'with 
physicians.' 

181.  Instead  of  etair  gitais  k% '  by  suppressing  (all)  such  (quarrels),' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  etair  ghas  £a, 
'allowing  himself  to  be  conquered  by  these,'  i.e.  'by  bearing  with 
these  persons.'  This  reading,  though  less  well  attested  than  the 
vulgata,  is  perhaps  preferable. 


158  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  185. 


brother  as  equal  to  one's  father,  one's  wife  andjone's 

son  as  one's  own  body, 

185.  Qne's  slaves  as  one's  shadow,  one's  daughter 

as  the  highest  object  of  tenderness  ;  hence  if  one  is 
\  offended  by  (any  one  of)  these,  one  must  bear  it 

without  resentment, 
y      186.  Though   (by  his  learning  and  sanctity)  he 

may  be    entitled  to   accept    presents,   let   him  not 

attach  himself  (too  much)  to  that  (habit) ;  for  through 

his  accepting  (many)  presents  the  divine  light  in  him 

is  soon  extinguished. 

187.  Without  a  full  knowledge  of  the  rules,  pre- 
scribed by  the  sacred  law  for  the  acceptance  of 
presents,  a  wise  man  should  not  take  anything,  even 
though  he  may  pine  with  hunger. 

188.  But  an  ignorant  (man)  who  accepts  gold, 
land,  a  horse,  a  cow,  food,  a  dress,  sesamum-grains, 
(or)  clarified  butter,  is  reduced  to  ashes  like  (a  piece 
of)  wood. 

189.  Gold  and  food  destroy  his  longevity,  land 
and  a  cow  his  body,  a  horse  his  eye(sight),  a  gar- 
ment his  skin,  clarified  butter  his  energy,  sesamum- 
grains  his  offspring. 

190.  A  Brahma^a  who  neither  performs  austerities 
nor  studies  the  Veda,  yet  delights  in  accepting  gifts, 
sinks  with  the  (donor  into  hell),  just  as  (he  who 
attempts  to  cross  over  in)  a  boat  made  of  stone  (is 
submerged)  in  the  water. 

191.  Hence  an  ignorant  (man)  should  be  afraid  of 
accepting  any  presents  ;  for  by  reason  of  a  very  small 
(gift)  even  a  fool  sinks  (into  hell)  as  a  cow  into  a 
morass. 

186.  Vi.  LVII,  6-7.  187.  Vi.  LVII,  8. 

188.  Yagn.  I,  201.  191.  Yagii.  I,  202. 


IV,  198.  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  1 59 

192.  (A  man)  who  knows  the  law  should  not  offer 
even  water  to  a  Brahma/za  who  acts  like  a  cat,  nor 
to  a  Brahma/za  who  acts  like  a  heron,  nor  to  one 
who  is  unacquainted  with  the  Veda. 

193.  For  property,  though  earned  in  accordance 
with  prescribed  rules,  which  is  given  to  these  three 
(persons),  causes  in  the  next  world  misery  both  to 
the  giver  and  to  the  recipient. 

194.  As  he  who  (attempts  to)  cross  water  in  a 
boat  of  stone  sinks  (to  the  bottom),  even  so  an  igno- 
rant donor  and  an  ignorant  donee  sink  low. 

195.  (A  man)  who,  ever  covetous,  displays  the 
flag  of  virtue,  (who  is)  a  hypocrite,  a  deceiver  of  the 
people,  intent  on  doing  injury,  (and)  a  detractor 
(from  the  merits)  of  all  men,  one  must  know  to  be 
one  who  acts  like  a  cat. 

196.  That  Brahma/za,  who  with  downcast  look,  of 
a  cruel  disposition,  is  solely  intent  on  attaining  his 
own  ends,  dishonest  and  falsely  gentle,  is  one  who 
acts  like  a  heron. 

197.  Those  Brahma^as  who  act  like  herons,  and 
those  who  display  the  characteristics  of  cats,  fall  in 
consequence  of  that  wicked  mode  of  acting  into  (the 
hell  called)  Andhatamisra. 

198.  When  he  has  committed  a  sin,  let  him  not 

192.  Vi.  XCIII,  7.  195.  Vi.  XCIII,  8. 

196-200.  Vi.  XCIII,  9-13. 

196.  I  have  everywhere  translated  the  word  baka  or  vaka  by 
1  heron/  though,  like  its  modern  representative  bagla,  it  is  used  also 
as  a  name  of  the  white  ibis  and  of  the  bittern.  But  from  other  verses, 
which  speak  of  the  baka  cautiously  wading  in  the  water  as  if  it 
were  afraid  of  hurting  the  aquatic  animals,  it  would  seem  that  the 
proceedings  of  the  heron,  which  one  can  watch  in  India  at  every 
village  tank,  gave  rise  to  the  proverbial  expressions  bakavrata  and 
bakavratin. 

198.  Several  penances,  e.g.  the  ^andrayawa  or  the  lunar  penance, 


i6o 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


TV,  199. 


«-. 


perform  a  penance  under  the  pretence  (that  the  act 
is  intended  to  gain)  spiritual  merit,  (thus)  hiding  his 
sin  under  (the  pretext  of)  a  vow  and  deceiving  women 
and  .Sudras. 

199.  Such  Brahma/zas  are  reprehended  after  death 
and  in  this  (life)  by  those  who  expound  the  Veda, 
and  a  vow,  performed  under  a  false  pretence,  goes 
to  the  Rakshasas. 

200.  He  who,  without  being  a  student,  gains  his 
livelihood  by  (wearing)  the  dress  of  a  student,  takes 
upon  himself  the  guilt  of  (all)  students  and  is  born 
again  in  the  womb  of  an  animal. 

201.  Let  him  never  bathe  in  tanks  belonging  to 
other  men ;  if  he  bathes  (in  such  a  one),  he  is  tainted 
by  a  portion  of  the  guilt  of  him  who  made  the  tank. 

202.  He  who  uses  without  permission  a  carriage, 
a  bed,  a  seat,  a  well,  a  garden  or  a  house  belonging 
to  an(other  man),  takes  upon  himself  one  fourth  of 
(the  owners)  guilt. 

203.  Let  him  always  bathe  in  rivers,  in  ponds, 
dug  by  the  gods  (themselves),  in  lakes,  and  in  water- 
holes  or  springs. 

204.  A  wise  man  should  constantly  discharge  the 
paramount  duties  (called  yama),  but  not  always  the 
minor  ones  (called  niyama) ;  for  he  who  does  not 


may  be  performed  either  by  a  sinner  in  order  to  atone  for  a  crime 
or  by  a  guiltless  man  in  order  to  gain  spiritual  merit ;  see  Baudh. 
Ill,  8,  27-31. 

201.  Vi.  LXIV,  1;  Y&gn.  I,  159;  Baudh.  II,  5,  6. 

202.  Yagn.  I,  1 60;  Baudh.  II,  6,  29. 

203.  Vi.  LXIV,  16;  Ya§™.  I,  159.  Garta,  'water-holes'  (Gov., 
Nar.),  means  according  to  Kull.,  who  quotes  a  verse  of  the  Khaxi- 
dogya-parmsh/a,  Nand.,  and  Ragh., '  a  brook/ 

204.  Regarding  the  two  classes  of  duties,  see  Y&gri.  Ill,  313- 
314.    Though  the  commentators  give  various  explanations  of  yama 


IV,  2io.  RULES    FOR   A    SNATAKA.  l6l 

discharge  the  former,  while  he  obeys  the  latter  alone, 
becomes  an  outcast. 

205.  A  Brahma^a  must  never  eat  (a  dinner  given) 
at  a  sacrifice  that  is  offered  by  one  who  is  not  a 
.Srotriya,  by  one  who  sacrifices  for  a  multitude  of 
men,  by  a  woman,  or  by  a  eunuch. 

206.  When  those  persons  offer  sacrificial  viands 
in  the  fire,  it  is  unlucky  for  holy  (men)  and  it  dis- 
pleases the  gods  ;  let  him  therefore  avoid  it. 

207.  Let  him  never   eat  (food  given)  by  intoxi-  j 
cated,  angry,  or  sick  (men),  nor  that  in  which  hair 
or  insects  are  found,  nor  what  has  been  touched 
intentionally  with  the  foot, 

208.  Nor  that  at  which  the  slayer  of  a  learned 
Brahma^a  has  looked,  nor  that  which  has  been 
touched  by  a  menstruating  woman,  nor  that  which 
has  been  pecked  at  by  birds  or  touched  by  a  dog,     — 

209.  Nor  food  at  which  a  cow  has  smelt,  nor  par- 
ticularly that  which  has  been  offered  by  an  invitation 
to  all  comers,  nor  that  (given)  by  a  multitude  or  by 
harlots,  nor  that  which  is  declared  to  be  bad  by  a 

.learned  (man), 

210.  Nor  the  food  (given)  by  a  thief,  a  musician, 
a  carpenter,  a  usurer,  one  who  has  been  initiated 
(for  the  performance  of  a  .SYauta  sacrifice),  a  miser, 
one  bound  with  fetters, 

and  niyama,  it  is  highly  probable  that  Kull.  is  right  in  supposing 
Manu  to  have  held  the  same  opinion  as  Y&gn. 

205.  Nar.  mentions  a  var.  lect.  judrewa,  'by  a  £udra,'  for  'by 
a  eunuch/ 

209.  Gov.  and  Kull.  give  as  an  instance  of  '  a  multitude,'  '  a  fra- 
ternity of  Brahmaraas  inhabiting  a  monastery.' 

210.  I  translate  baddhasya  niga</asya  ka.  according  to  Kull.  by 
'  one  bound  with  fetters/  because  in  the  older  Sanskrit  the  genitive 
is  occasionally  used  for  the  instrumental  with  passive  perfect  parti- 

[25]  M 


l62 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IV,  211. 


211.  By  one  accused  of  a  mortal  sin  (Abhisasta), 
a  hermaphrodite,  an  unchaste  woman,  or  a  hypocrite, 
nor  (any  sweet  thing)  that  has  turned  sour,  nor  what 
has  been  kept  a  whole  night,  nor  (the  food)  of  a 
.Sudra,  nor  the  leavings  (of  another  man), 

212.  Nor  (the  food  given)  by  a  physician,  a  hunter, 
a  cruel  man,  one  who  eats  the  fragments  (of  another's 
meal),  nor  the  food  of  an  Ugra,  nor  that  prepared 
for  a  woman  in  childbed,  nor  that  (given  at  a  dinner) 
where  (a  guest  rises)  prematurely  (and)  sips  water, 
nor  that  (given  by  a  woman)  whose  ten  days  of  im- 
purity have  not  elapsed, 

213.  Nor  (food)  given  without  due  respect,  nor 
(that  which  contains)  meat  eaten  for  no  sacred  pur- 
pose, nor  (that  given)  by  a  female  who  has  no  male 
(relatives),  nor  the  food  of  an  enemy,  nor  that  (given) 
by  the  lord  of  a  town,  nor  that  (given)  by  outcasts, 
nor  that  on  which  anybody  has  sneezed  ; 


ciples,  and  because  nigada  does  not  mean  '  bound  with  fetters/  as 
the  other  commentators  assume.  Nand.  adds  that  the  correct 
reading  is  nigalena,  which  is  found  in  some  southern  MSS. 

211.  *Sudrasyo/£/£y$ish/am  eva  ka,  'nor  (the  food)  of  a  -Sudra,  nor 
the  leavings  (of  any  other  man)/  (Kull.,  Nar.)  ;  or,  'the  leavings  of 
a  -Sudra/  which  are  mentioned  in  order  to  show  that  a  very  heavy 
penance  has  to  be  performed  (Medh.,  Ragh.) ;  or,  '  that  food  of 
which  a  -Sudra  has  eaten,  and  has  left  a  remnant  in  the  dish' 
(Gov.,  Nand.,  Medh.,  '  others').  Medh.  mentions  also  a  var.  lect. 
u^^ish/am  aguros  tatha, '  nor  the  leavings  of  any  man  excepting 
a  Guru.' 

212.  Ugra  is  explained  variously  as  '  a  man  of  the  Ugra  caste' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.);  or,  'a  king'  (Medh.,  Gov.  in 
the  Maw^ari);  or/ a  man  who  perpetrates  dreadful  deeds'  (Kull., 
Ragh.). 

213.  Kull.  and  Gov.  seem  to  take  nagaryannam, '  food  given  by 
the  lord  of  a  town/  i.e.  a  king  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  in  the  sense  of 
nagarannam, '  food  given  by  a  whole  town.' 


IV,  221.  RULES    FOR  A    SNATAKA.  163 

214.  Nor  the  food  (given)  by  an  informer,  by  one 
who  habitually  tells  falsehoods,  or  by  one  who  sells 
(the  rewards  for)  sacrifices,  nor  the  food  (given)  by 
an  actor,  a  tailor,  or  an  ungrateful  (man), 

215.  By  a  blacksmith,  a  Nishada,  a  stage-player, 
a  goldsmith,  a  basket-maker,  or  a  dealer  in  weapons, 

216.  By  trainers  of  hunting  dogs,  publicans,  a 
washerman,  a  dyer,  a  pitiless  (man),  and  a  man  in 
whose  house  (lives)  a  paramour  (of  his  wife), 

217.  Nor  (the  food  given)  by  those  who  knowingly 
bear  with  paramours  (of  their  wives),  and  by  those 
who  in  all  matters  are  ruled  by  women,  nor  food 
(given  by  men)  whose  ten  days  of  impurity  on 
account  of  a  death  have  not  passed,  nor  that  which 
is  unpalatable. 

218.  The  food  of  a  king  impairs  his  vigour,  the 
food  of  a  vSttdra  his  excellence  in  sacred  learning, 
the  food  of  a  goldsmith  his  longevity,  that  of  a 
leather-cutter  his  fame ; 

219.  The  food  of  an  artisan  destroys  his  offspring, 
that  of  a  washerman  his  (bodily)  strength ;  the  food 
of  a  multitude  and  of  harlots  excludes  him  from  (the 
higher)  worlds.  v^  "^     J  Of  ' 

220.  The  food  of  a  physician  (is  as  vile  as)  pus,  " 
that  of  an   unchaste  woman  (equal  to)  semen,  that  £5^ 
of  a  usurer  (as  vile  as)  ordure,  and  that  of  a  dealer  I 
in  weapons  (as  bad  as)  dirt. 

221.  The  food  of  those  other  persons  who  have  | 

215.  According  to  '  others,'  quoted  by  Medh.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.,, 
jailusha, '  an  actor/  may  also  mean  '  one  who  prostitutes  his  wife.' 

216.  Nmarasa,  'a  pitiless  man'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand., 
Ragh.),  may  also  mean  '  a  bard'  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

220.  I.e.  it  causes  him  to  be  reborn  as  an  animal  feeding  on  pus 
or  other  impure  substances  (Gov.). 

M    2 


164  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  222. 

been  successively  enumerated  as  such  whose  food 
must  not  be  eaten,  the  wise  declare  (to  be  as  impure 
as)  skin,  bones,  and  hair. 

222.  If  he  has  unwittingly  eaten  the  food  of  one 
of  those,  (he  must)  fast  for  three  days ;  if  he  has 
eaten  it  intentionally,  or  (has  swallowed)  semen, 
ordure,  or  urine,  he  must  perform  a  KriMkra. 
penance. 

223.  A  Brahma?2a  who  knows  (the  law)  must 
not  eat  cooked  food  (given)  by  a  .Sudra  who 
performs  no  .Sraddhas ;  but,  on  failure  of  (other) 
means  of  subsistence,  he  may  accept  raw  (grain), 
sufficient  for  one  night  (and  day). 

224.  The  gods,  having  considered  (the  respective 
merits)  of  a  niggardly  .Srotriya  and  of  a  liberal 
usurer,  declared  the  food  of  both  to  be  equal  (in 
quality). 

225.  The  Lord  of  created  beings  (Pra^apati)  came 
and  spake  to  them,  '  Do  not  make  that  equal,  which 
is  unequal.  The  food  of  that  liberal  (usurer)  is 
purified  by  faith ;  (that  of  the)  other  (man)  is 
defiled  by  a  want  of  faith.' 

226.  Let  him,  without  tiring,  always  offer  sacri 
fices  and  perform  works  of  charity  with  faith ;   for 
offerings    and    charitable    works    made   with    faith 
and  with  lawfully-earned  money,  (procure)  endless 
rewards. 

227.  Let  him   always   practise,  according  to    his 

222.  Gaut.  XXIII,  23-24.  Regarding  the  Kr/Mhra,  penance, 
see  below,  XI,  211. 

224.  Nar.  explains  a^raddhina^, '  who  performs  no  -Sraddhas,'  by 
'  destitute  of  faith,'  and  Nand.  writes  a>n-addhina>$. 

224-225.  Baudh.  I,  10,  5  ;  Vas.  XIV,  17. 

226-227.  Gov.  gives  and  explains  226a  and  227b  only. 


I 


IV,  234-  RULES    FOR    A    SNATAKA.  1 65 

ability,  with  a  cheerful  heart,  the  duty  of  liberality, 
both  by  sacrifices  and  by  charitable  works,  if  he  finds 
a  worthy  recipient  (for  his  gifts).  - 

228.  If  he   is  asked,  let  him  always  give  some-  ['  fl:  } 
thing,  be  it  ever  so  little,  without  grudging ;    for  a  ^ 
worthy  recipient  will  (perhaps)  be  found  who  saves   i 
him  from  all  (guilt).  -*£- 

229.  A  giver  of  water  obtains  the  satisfaction  (of 
his  hunger  and  thirst),  a  giver  of  food  imperishable    / 
happiness,  a  giver  of  sesamum  desirable  offspring,    / 
a  giver  of  a  lamp  a  most  excellent  eyesight.  — I 

230.  A  giver  of  land  obtains  land,  a  giver  of  gold 
long  life,  a  giver  of  a  house  most  excellent  mansions, 
a  giver  of  silver  (rupya)  exquisite  beauty  (rupa), 

231.  A  giver  of  a  garment  a  place  in  the  world 
of  the  moon,  a  giver  of  a  horse  (a>?va)  a  place  in  the 
world  of  the  Asvins,  a  giver  of  a  draught-ox  great 
good  fortune,  a  giver  of  a  cow  the  world  of  the  sun  ; 

232.  A  giver  of  a  carriage  or  of  a  bed  a  wife, 
a  giver  of  protection  supreme  dominion,  a  giver  of 
grain  eternal  bliss,  a  giver  of  the  Veda  (brahman) 
union  with  Brahman  ; 

233.  The  gift  of  the  Veda  surpasses  all  other 
gifts,  water,  food,  cows,  land,  clothes,  sesamum,  gold, 
and  clarified  butter. 

234.  For  whatever  purpose  (a  man)  bestows  any 
gift,  for  that  same  purpose  he  receives  (in  his  next 
birth)  with  due  honour  its  (reward). 

226-235.  Vas.  XXX;  Vi.  XCI-XCII ;  Yign.  I,  201,  203-212. 

234.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  take  the  verse  differently. 
1  With  whatever  disposition  (a  man)  bestows  any  gift,  with  that 
same  disposition  he  receives  (in  his  next  birth  its  reward),  being 
duly  honoured.'  Nand.  omits  it.  K.  follows  Kull.'s  explanation, 
which  is  mentioned  by  Medh.  also. 


1 66 


LAWS    OF    MANU, 


IV,  235. 


235.  Both  he  who  respectfully  receives  (a  gift), 
and  he  who  respectfully  bestows  it,  go  to  heaven ; 
in  the  contrary  case  (they  both  fall)  into  hell. 

236.  Let  him  not  be  proud  of  his  austerities;  let 
him  not  utter  a  falsehood  after  he  has  offered  a 
sacrifice ;  let  him  not  speak  ill  of  Brahma/zas,  though 
he  be  tormented  (by  them) ;  when  he  has  bestowed 
(a  gift),  let  him  not  boast  of  it. 

2 37-  By  falsehood  a  sacrifice  becomes  vain,  by 
self-complacency  (the  reward  for)  austerities  is  lost, 
longevity  by  speaking  evil  of  Brahma^as,  and  (the 
reward  of)  a  gift  by  boasting. 

238.  Giving  no  pain  to  any  creature,  let  him 
slowly  accumulate  spiritual  merit,  for  the  sake  (of 
acquiring)  a  companion  to  the  next  world,  just  as 
the  white  ant  (gradually  raises  its)  hill. 
•  239.  For  in  the  next  world  neither  father,  nor 
mother,  nor  wife,  nor  sons,  nor  relations  stay  to  be 
his  companions ;  spiritual  merit  alone  remains  (with 
^  him). 

240.  Single  is  each  being  born ;  single  it  dies ; 
single  it  enjoys  (the  reward  of  its)  virtue  ;  single 
(it  suffers  the  punishment  of  its)  sin. 

241.  Leaving  the  dead  body  on  the  ground  like 
a  log  of  wood,  or  a  clod  of  earth,  the  relatives  de- 
part with  averted  faces ;  but  spiritual  merit  follows 
the  (soul). 

242.  Let  him  therefore  always  slowly  accumu- 
late spiritual  merit,  in  order  (that  it  may  be  his) 
companion  (after  death) ;  for  with  merit  as  his 
companion  he  will  traverse  a  gloom  difficult  to 
traverse. 

243.  (That  companion)  speedily  conducts  the  man 
who    is    devoted  to    duty  and    effaces   his   sins   by 


IV,  250.  RULES    FOR    A   SNATAKA.  1 67 

— . ,_  . 

austerities,  to  the   next  world,  radiant  and  clothed 
with  an  ethereal  body. 

244.  Let  him,  who  desires  to  raise  his  race,  ever 
form  connexions  with  the  most  excellent  (men),  and  I 
shun  all  low  ones. 

245.  A  Brahma^a  who  always  connects  himself/ 
with  the  most  excellent  (ones),  and  shuns  all  inferior/ 
ones,  (himself)  becomes  most  distinguished ;  by  an] 
opposite  conduct  he  becomes  a  6udra.  ^X\ 

246.  He  who  is  persevering,  gentle,  (and)  patient,    M 
shuns  the   company  of  men  of  cruel  conduct,  and<fX' 
does  no  injury  (to  living  creatures),  gains,  if  he  con-  ' 
stantly   lives   in   that    manner,  by    controlling    his 
organs  and  by  liberality,  heavenly  bliss.  ~ ™ 

247.  He  may  accept  from  any  (man),  fuel,  water, 
roots,  fruit,  food  offered  without  asking,  and  honey, 
likewise  a  gift  (which  consists  in)  a  promise  of  pro- 
tection. 

248.  The  Lord  of  created  beings  (Pra^apati)  has 
declared  that  alms  freely  offered  and  brought  (by 
the  giver  himself)  may  be  accepted  even  from  a 
sinful  man,  provided  (the  gift)  had  not  been  (asked 
for  or)  promised  beforehand. 

249.  During  fifteen  years  the  manes  do  not  eat 
(the  food)  of  that  man  who  disdains  a  (freely-offered 
gift),  nor  does  the  fire  carry  his  offerings  (to  the 
gods). 

250.  A   couch,  a   house,   Kui*a   grass,  perfumes, 

247.  Ap.  I,  18,  1;  Gaut.  XVII,  5  ;  Vas.  XIV,  12  ;  Vi.  LVII,  11. 

248.  Ap.  1, 10,  12-14;  Vas.  XIV,  16;  Vi.  LVII,  11;  Y&gn.  I,  215. 
Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  take  apra^oditam,  '  not  asked  for  or  pro- 
mised,' in  the  sense  of  'not  promised'  only,  and  so  does  Nand., 
who  reads  apraveditam. 

249.  Ip.  1, 19,  14  ;  Vas.  XIV,  18  ;  Vi.  LVII,  12. 

250.  Gaut.  XVII,  5;  Vas.  XIV,  12 ;  Vi.  LVII,  11;  Ya^l  I,  214. 


1 68  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IV,  251. 

water,  flowers,  jewels,  sour  milk,  grain,  fish,  sweet 
milk,  meat,  and  vegetables  let  him  not  reject,  (if  they 
are  voluntarily  offered.) 

251.  He  who  desires  to  relieve  his  Gurus  and 
those  whom  he  is  bound  to  maintain,  or  wishes  to 
honour  the  gods  and  guests,  may  accept  (gifts)  from 
anybody ;  but  he  must  not  satisfy  his  (own  hunger) 
with  such  (presents). 

252.  But  if  his  Gurus  are  dead,  or  if  he  lives 
separate  from  them  in  (another)  house,  let  him, 
when  he  seeks  a  subsistence,  accept  (presents)  from 
good  men  alone. 

253.  His  labourer  in  tillage,  a  friend  of  his  family, 
his  cow-herd,  his  slave,  and  his  barber  are,  among 
•Sudras,  those  whose  food  he  may  eat,  likewise  (a 
poor  man)  who  offers  himself  (to  be  his  slave). 

254.  As  his  character  is,  as  the  work  is  which  he 
desires  to  perform,  and  as  the  manner  is  in  which 
he  means  to  serve,  even  so  (a  voluntary  slave)  must 
offer  himself. 

255.  He  who  describes  himself  to  virtuous  (men), 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  truth,  is  the  most  sinful 
(wretch)  in  this  world  ;  he  is  a  thief  who  makes  away 
with  his  own  self. 

256.  All  things  (have  their  nature)  determined  by 
speech ;  speech  is  their  root,  and  from  speech  they 
proceed ;  but  he  who  is  dishonest  with  respect  to 
speech,  is  dishonest  in  everything. 


251.  Ap.  I,  7,  20;  Gaut.  XVII,  4  ;  Vas.  XIV,  13;  Vi.  LVII, 
13  ;  Yagn.  I,  216. 

252.  Vi.  LVII,  15. 

253.  Ap.  1, 18, 14  ;  Gaut.  XVII,  5-6  ;  Vi.  LVII,  16. 

255.  I.  e.  by  denying  who  he  really  is,  he  destroys  his  own 
identity. 


V,  2.  LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  1 69 

257.  When  he  has  paid,  according  to  the  law,  his 
debts  to  the  great  sages,  to  the  manes,  and  to  the 
gods,  let  him  make  over  everything  to  his  son  and 
dwell   (in  his    house),   not    caring   for   any  worldly   j 
concerns. 

258.  Alone  let  him  constantly  meditate  in  solitude 
on  that  which  is  salutary  for  his  soul ;  for  he  who 
meditates  in  solitude  attains  supreme  bliss. 

259.  Thus  have  been  declared  the  means  by 
which  a  Brahma/za  householder  must  always  subsist, 
and  the  summary  of  the  ordinances  for  a  Snataka, 
which  cause  an  increase  of  holiness  and  are  praise- 
worthy. 

260.  A  Brahma^a  who,  being  learned  in  the  lore 
of  the  Vedas,  conducts  himself  in  this  manner  and 
daily  destroys  his  sins,  will  be  exalted  in  Brahman's 
world. 

Chapter  V. 

1.  The  sages,  having  heard  the  duties  of  a  Snataka 
thus  declared,  spoke  to  great-souled  Bhrzgu,  who 
sprang  from  fire  : 

2.  'How  can  Death  have  power  over  Brahma^as 


257.  Regarding  the  three  debts,  see  Vas.  XI,  48.  This  verse  and 
the  next  describe,  as  Medh.  points  out,  a  kind  of  informal  sa/?z- 
nyasa. 

260.  Vas.  VIII,  17  j  Baudh.  II,  3,  1 ;  Gaut.  IX,  74. 

V.  1.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Ragh.  state  correctly  that  Bhrzgu,  though 
above,  I,  35,  he  is  said  to  have  been  created  by  Manu,  and  has  there- 
fore been  named  Manava  below,  V,  3,  is  here  called  the  offspring  of 
Fire,  in  accordance  with  other  passages  of  the  Veda  and  of  the 
Mahabharata. 

2.  I.e.  'how  can  they  be  deprived  of  the  length  of  life,  one 
hundred  years,  allotted  to  men  in  the  Veda?'  (Gov..  Kull.) 


170 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


V,3- 


who  know  the  sacred  science,  the  Veda,  (and)  who 
fulfil  their  duties  as  they  have  been  explained  (by 
thee),  O  Lord?' 

3.  Righteous  Bhrzgu,  the  son  of  Manu,  (thus) 
answered  the  great  sages  :  '  Hear,  (in  punishment) 
of  what  faults  Death  seeks  to  shorten  the  lives  of 
Brahma^as ! ' 

4.  '  Through  neglect  of  the  Veda-study,  through 
deviation  from  the  rule  of  conduct,  through  remiss- 
ness (in  the  fulfilment  of  duties),  and  through  faults 
(committed  by  eating  forbidden)  food,  Death  be- 
comes eager  to  shorten  the  lives  of  Brahma^as.' 

5.  Garlic,  leeks  and  onions,  mushrooms  and  (all 
plants),  springing  from  impure  (substances),  are  unfit 
to  be  eaten  by  twice-born  men. 

6.  One  should  carefully  avoid  red  exudations  from 
trees  and  (juices)  flowing  from  incisions,  the  .Selu 
(fruit),  and  the  thickened  milk  of  a  cow  (which  she 
gives  after  calving). 

7.  Rice  boiled  with  sesamum,  wheat  mixed  with 
butter,  milk  and  sugar,  milk-rice  and  flour-cakes 
which  are  not  prepared  for  a  sacrifice,  meat  which 
has  not  been  sprinkled  with  water  while  sacred  texts 
were  recited,  food  offered  to  the  gods  and  sacrificial 
viands, 

8.  The  milk  of  a  cow  (or  other  female  animal) 
within   ten   days  after  her  calving,  that  of  camels, 


5-25.  Ap.  I,  17,  18-39  ;  Gaut.  XVII,  22-36  ;  Vas.  XIV,  33-48  ; 
Baudh.  I,  12,  1-15;  Vi.  LI,  3-6,  21-42;  Yagii.  I,  169-178.  .Selu, 
i.e.  Cordia  Myxa. 

7.  'Food  offered  to  the  gods/  i.e.  the  so-called  Naivedya.  This 
and  sacrificial  viands,  i.e.  those  destined  for  burnt-oblations,  must 
not  be  eaten  before  the  offering  has  been  made,  afterwards  the 
remnants  may  be  eaten  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

8.  Sandhini, '  a  cow  in  heat '  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  means  according 


LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  I  J I 


of  one-hoofed  animals,  of  sheep,  of  a  cow  in  heat, 
or  of  one  that  has  no  calf  with  her, 

9.  (The  milk)  of  all  wild  animals  excepting  buffalo- 
cows,  that  of  women,  and  all  (substances  turned) 
sour  must  be  avoided. 

10.  Among  (things  turned)  sour,  sour  milk,  and 
all  (food)  prepared  of  it  may  be  eaten,  likewise 
what  is  extracted  from  pure  flowers,  roots,  and  fruit. 

11.  Let  him  avoid  all  carnivorous  birds  and  those 
living  in  villages,  and  one-hoofed  animals  which  are 
not  specially  permitted  (to  be  eaten),  and  the  Txtti- 
bha  (Parra  Jacana), 

12.  The  sparrow,  the  Plava,  the  Ha;/zsa,  the 
Brahma^i  duck,  the  village-cock,  the  Sarasa  crane, 
the  Ra^udala,  the  woodpecker,  the  parrot,  and  the 
starling, 

13.  Those  which  feed  striking  with  their  beaks, 
web-footed  birds,  the  Koyash/i,  those  which  scratch 
with  their  toes,  those  which  dive  and  live  on  fish, 
meat  from  a  slaughter-house  and  dried  meat, 

14.  The  Baka  and  the  Balaka  crane,  the  raven, 
the  Kha/^ari/aka,  (animals)  that  eat  fish,  village- 
pigs,  and  all  kinds  of  fishes. 

15.  He   who    eats    the    flesh    of  any  (animal)  is 

to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  one  who  gives  milk  once  a  day  only/  and 
according  to  Nand.  and  K.  '  one  big  with  a  calf.' 

11.  The  permission  to  eat  one-hoofed  animals  is,  as  the  com- 
mentators observe,  not  given  in  the  Smr/ti.  The  expression  refers 
to  the  cases  where  the  Veda  prescribes  horses,  &c,  to  be  slain  and 
eaten  at  sacrifices. 

12.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  Ra^udala  instead  of 
Ra^g-uvala,  which  the  printed  editions  give.  The  Ra^udala  is 
according  to  Vig-«ane.fvara  the  jungle-fowl,  according  to  Nar.  an 
aquatic  bird. 

14.  Regarding  the  Vaka  or  Baka,  see  above,  IV,  196. 


172  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,  16. 

called  the  eater  of  the  flesh  of  that  (particular 
creature),  he  who  eats  fish  is  an  eater  of  every 
(kind  of)  flesh ;  let  him  therefore  avoid  fish. 

16.  (But  the  fish  called)  Patina  and  (that  called) 
Rohita  may  be  eaten,  if  used  for  offerings  to  the  gods 
or  to  the  manes ;  (one  may  eat)  likewise  Ra^ivas, 
Siwhatu/^as,  and  Sasalkas  on  all  (occasions). 

17.  Let  him  not  eat  solitary  or  unknown  beasts 
and  birds,  though  they  may  fall  under  (the  categories 
of)  eatable  (creatures),  nor  any  five-toed  (animals). 

18.  The  porcupine,  the  hedgehog,  the  iguana,  the 
rhinoceros,  the  tortoise,  and  the  hare  they  declare 
to  be  eatable  ;  likewise  those  (domestic  animals)  that 
have  teeth  in  one  jaw  only,  excepting  camels. 

19.  A  twice-born  man  who  knowingly  eats  mush- 
rooms, a  village-pig,  garlic,  a  village-cock,  onions,  or 
leeks,  will  become  an  outcast. 

20.  He  who  unwittingly  partakes  of  (any  of)  these 
six,  shall  perform  a  Sa;;ztapana  (Krz&Mra)  or  the 
lunar  penance  (A^andraya^a)  of  ascetics  ;  in  case  (he 
has  eaten)  any  other  (kind  of  forbidden  food)  he 
shall  fast  for  one  day  (and  a  night). 

21.  Once  a  year  a  Brahma^a  must  perform  a 
Y^rikkhx^  penance,  in  order  to  atone  for  uninten- 
tionally eating  (forbidden  food) ;  but  for  intentionally 
(eating  forbidden  food  he  must  perform  the  penances 
prescribed)  specially. 

22.  Beasts    and    birds   recommended    (for    con- 

16.  Nar.  explains  eka^aran,  'solitary  animals,'  by  'those  who  go 
in  herds'  (sa/;zgha£ari«a^). 

20.  Regarding  the  Sawtapana  KnWira.  and  the  lunar  penance 
of  ascetics,  see  below,  XI,  213  and  219. 

21.  Regarding  the  Krikkhra,  penance,  see  below,  XI,  212. 

22.  Vas.  XIV,  15. 


30.  LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  I  73 


sumption)  may  be  slain  by  Brahma^as  for  sacrifices, 
and  in  order  to  feed  those  whom  they  are  bound 
to  maintain  ;  for  Agastya  did  this  of  old. 

23.  For  in  ancient  (times)  the  sacrificial  cakes  were 
(made  of  the  flesh)  of  eatable  beasts  and  birds  at 
the  sacrifices  offered  by  Brahma^as  and  Kshatriyas. 

24.  All  lawful  hard  or  soft  food  may  be  eaten, 
though  stale,  (after  having  been)  mixed  with  fatty 
(substances),  and  so  may  the  remains  of  sacrificial 
viands. 

25.  But  all  preparations  of  barley  and  wheat,  as 
well  as  preparations  of  milk,  may  be  eaten  by  twice- 
born  men  without  being  mixed  with  fatty  (substances), 
though  they  may  have  stood  for  a  long  time. 

26.  Thus  has  the  food,  allowed  and  forbidden  to 
twice-born  men,  been  fully  described ;  I  will  now 
propound  the  rules  for  eating  and  avoiding  meat.      s\ 

27.  One  may  eat  meat  when  it  has  been  sprinkled  / 
with  water,  while  Mantras  were  recited,  when  Brah-  J 
ma/zas  desire  (one's  doing  it),  when  one  is  engaged  I 
(in  the  performance  of  a  rite)  according  to  the  law,  I 
and  when  one's  life  is  in  danger. 

28.  The  Lord  of  creatures  (Pra^apati)  created  this 
whole  (world  to  be)  the  sustenance  of  the  vital  spirit ; 
both  the  immovable  and  the  movable  (creation  is) 
the  food  of  the  vital  spirit. 

29.  What  is  destitute  of  motion  is  the  food  of 
those  endowed  with  locomotion ;  (animals)  without 
fangs  (are  the  food)  of  those  with  fangs,  those  with- 
out hands  of  those  who  possess  hands,  and  the 
timid  of  the  bold. 

30.  The    eater   who   daily    even   devours    those 

27-56.  Vas.  IV,  5-8;  Vi.  LI,  59-78;  Yagri.  I,  178-181. 
27.  Meat  is  sprinkled  with  water  at  the  -SYauta  sacrifices. 


174 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


W 

w 


f.31- 


\ 


destined  to  be  his  food,  commits  no  sin ;  for  the 
creator  himself  created  both  the  eaters  and  those 
who  are  to  be  eaten  (for  those  special  purposes). 

31.  *  The  consumption  of  meat  (is  befitting)  for 
sacrifices,'  that  is  declared  to  be  a  rule  made  by  the 
gods  ;  but  to  persist  (in  using  it)  on  other  (occasions) 
is  said  to  be  a  proceeding  worthy  of  Rakshasas. 

32.  He  who  eats  meat,  when  he  honours  the  gods 
and  manes,  commits  no  sin,  whether  he  has  bought 
it,  or  himself  has  killed  (the  animal),  or  has  received 
it  as  a  present  from  others. 

33.  A  twice-born  man  who  knows  the  law,  must 
not  eat  meat  except  in  conformity  with  the  law ;  for 
if  he  has  eaten  it  unlawfully,  he  will,  unable  to  save 
himself,  be  eaten  after  death  by  his  (victims). 

34.  After  death  the  guilt  of  one  who  slays  deer 
for  gain  is  not  as  (great)  as  that  of  him  who  eats 
meat  for  no  (sacred)  purpose. 

35.  But  a  man  who,  being  duly  engaged  (to 
officiate  or  to  dine  at  a  sacred  rite),  refuses  to  eat 
meat,  becomes  after  death  an  animal  during  twenty- 
one  existences. 

36.  A  Brahma^a  must  never  eat  (the  flesh  of) 
animals  unhallowed  by  Mantras ;  but,  obedient  to 
the  primeval  law,  he  may  eat  it,  consecrated  with 
Vedic  texts. 

3J.  If  he  has  a  strong  desire  (for  meat)  he  may 
make  an  animal  of  clarified  butter  or  one  of  flour, 
(and  eat  that) ;  but  let  him  never  seek  to  destroy  an 
animal  without  a  (lawful)  reason. 

34.  'Of  one  who  slays  deer  for  gain/  4.  e.  of  a  professional 
hunter  of  the  -Sahara  or  other  low  castes. 

35.  Vas.  XI,  34. 
37.  Sahge, '  if  (he  has)  a  strong  desire  (for  meat),'  (Kull.,  Ragh. 


V,  44-  LAWFUL    AND    FORBIDDEN    FOOD.  I  75 

38.  As  many  hairs  as  the  slain  beast  has,  so  often 
indeed  will  he  who  killed  it  without  a  (lawful)  reason 
suffer  a  violent  death  in  future  births.  ~- 

39.  Svayambhu  (the  Self-existent)  himself  created 
animals  for  the  sake  of  sacrifices ;  sacrifices  (have  I 
been  instituted)  for  the  good  of  this  whole  (world) ; 
hence  the  slaughtering  (of  beasts)  for  sacrifices  is 
not  slaughtering  (in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the 
word). 

40.  Herbs,  trees,  cattle,  birds,  and  (other)  animals 
that  have  been  destroyed  for  sacrifices,  receive  (being 
reborn)  higher  existences. 

41.  On  offering  the  honey-mixture  (to  a  guest),  at 
a  sacrifice  and  at  the  rites  in  honour  of  the  manes, 
but  on  these  occasions  only,  may  an  animal  be  slain  ; 
that  (rule)  Manu  proclaimed.  ^ 

42.  A  twice-born   man   who,   knowing   the  true 
meaning  of  the  Veda,  slays  an  animal  for  these  pur-| 
poses,  causes  both  himself  and  the  animal  to  enten 
a  most  blessed  state.  ^ 

43.  A   twice-born    man   of  virtuous   disposition,  J 
whether  he  dwells  in  (his  own)  house,  with  a  teacher, 
or  in  the  forest,  must  never,  even  in  times  of  distress,  j 
cause  an  injury  (to  any  creature)  which  is  not  sanc-j 
tioned  by  the  Veda. 

44.  Know  that  the  injury  to  moving  creatures  and 
to  those  destitute  of  motion,  which  the  Veda  has 

means  according  to  Medh.  and  K.  ■  if  an  occasion  (arises  to  slay 
an  animal  at  a  non-Vedic  rite)/  according  to  Gov.  '  in  case  (one 
suffers  from)  an  attack  by  evil  spirits  (Bhutas  and  the  like),'  and 
according  to  Nand.  '  on  the  occasion  of  social  meetings.'  Ragh. 
mentions  Medh/s  view  as  an  optional  explanation,  and  Nar. 
objects  to  Gov.'s  interpretation.  His  own  explanation  sahge- 
tyantekayam  is  corrupt,  but  is  probably  intended  for  atyante/££/za- 
yam,  and  thus  agrees  with  Kull.'s. 


176 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


V,  4.* 


prescribed  for  certain  occasions,  is  no  injury  at  all ; 
for  the  sacred  law  shone  forth  from  the  Veda. 

45.  He  who  injures  innoxious  beings  from  a  wish 
to  (give)  himself  pleasure,  never  finds  happiness, 
neither  living  nor  dead. 

46.  He  who  does  not  seek  to  cause  the  sufferings 
of  bonds  and  death  to  living  creatures,  (but)  desires 
the  good  of  all  (beings),  obtains  endless  bliss. 

47.  He  who  does  not  injure  any  (creature),  attains 
without  an  effort  what  he  thinks  of,  what  he  under- 
takes, and  what  he  fixes  his  mind  on. 

48.  Meat  can  never  be  obtained  without  injury  to 
living  creatures,  and  injury  to  sentient  beings  is 
detrimental  to  (the  attainment  of)  heavenly  bliss; 
let  him  therefore  shun  (the  use  of)  meat. 

49.  Having  well  considered  the  (disgusting)  origin 
of  flesh  and  the  (cruelty  of)  fettering  and  slaying 
corporeal  beings,  let  him  entirely  abstain  from  eating 
flesh. 

50.  He  who,  disregarding  the  rule  (given  above), 
does  not  eat  meat  like  a  Pi^a^a,  becomes  dear  to 
men,  and  will  not  be  tormented  by  diseases. 

51.  He  who  permits  (the  slaughter  of  an  animal), 
he  who  cuts  it  up,  he  who  kills  it,  he  who  buys  or 
sells  (meat),  he  who  cooks  it,  he  who  serves  it  up, 
and  he  who  eats  it,  (must  all  be  considered  as)  the 
slayers  (of  the  animal). 

r52.  There  is  no  greater  sinner  than  that  (man) 
who,  though  not  worshipping  the  gods  or  the  manes, 
seeks  to  increase  (the  bulk  of)  his  own  flesh  by  the 
flesh  of  other  (beings). 


ir 


t^f 


46.  The  latter  part  of  the  verse  may  also  be  translated  'will 
obtain  endless  bliss,  because  he  is  a  man  who  desires  the  good 
of  all  creatures '  (Gov.). 


V,  58.       LAWFUL  AND  FORBIDDEN  FOOD;  IMPURITY.       I  77 

— . __ 4  • 

53.  He   who    during   a   hundred  years  annually 
offers  a  horse-sacrifice,  and  he  who  entirely  abstains 
from  meat,  obtain  the  same  reward  for  their  meri-  J 
torious  (conduct).  ~--j 

54.  By  subsisting  on  pure  fruit  and  roots,  and  by 
eating  food  fit  for  ascetics  (in  the  forest),  one  does 
not  gain  (so  great)  a  reward  as  by  entirely  avoiding 
(the  use  of)  flesh. 

55.  'Me  he  (maw  sa^)'  will  devour  in  the  next 
(world),  whose  flesh  I  eat  in  this  (life) ;  the  wise 
declare  this  (to  be)  the  real  meaning  of  the  word 

'  flesh'  (ma^sa^).  ..♦» 

56.  There  is  no  sin  in  eating  meat,  in  (drinking)  » 
spirituous  liquor,  and  in  carnal  intercourse,  for  thafys 
is  the  natural  way  of  created  beings,  but  abstention  j  J 
brings  great  rewards. 

57.  I  will  now  in  due  order  explain  the  purifica- 
tion for  the  dead  and  the  purification  of  things  as 
they  are  prescribed  for  the  four  castes  (var/za). 

58.  When  (a  child)  dies  that  has  teethed,  or  that 
before  teething  has  received  (the  sacrament  of)  the 
tonsure  (A"\Wakara^a)  or  (of  the  initiation),  all  rela- 
tives (become)  impure,  and  on  the  birth  (of  a  child) 
the  same  (rule)  is  prescribed. 

54.  Munyannani,  'food  fit  for  ascetics  (in  the  forest)/  i.e.  'wild 
rice  and  other  produce  of  the  forest.' 

56.  'There  is  no  sin,'  i.e.  in  doing  these  things  when  they  are 
permitted  by  law. 

58-104.  Ap.  I,  15,  18;  II,  15,  2-1 1 ;  Gaut.  XI V ;  Vas.  IV,  16-37; 
Baudh.  I,  11,  1-8,  17-23,  27-32;  Vi.  XXII;  Yagn.  Ill,  1-30. 

58.  Medh.  and  Gov.  explain  animate,  translated  freely  by  '  before 
teething/  as  the  conventional  designation  of '  a  child  that  is  younger 
than  one  that  has  teethed '  (^atadantad  balatara  iti  smaranti),  and 
Nar.  and  Ragh.  agree  to  this  interpretation.  Kull.,  however,  seems 
to  take  it  in  the  sense  of  '  after  teething/  and  Nand.  explains  it  as 
'one  who  has  been  born  again,  i.e.  has  been  initiated/     Gov., 

[25]  N 


1 78 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


V,59. 


59.  It  is  ordained  (that)  among  Sap'mdas  the  im- 
purity on  account  of  a  death  (shall  last)  ten  days, 
(or)  until  the  bones  have  been  collected,  (or)  three 
days  or  one  day  only. 

60.  But  the  Sapi^a-relationship  ceases  with  the 
seventh  person  (in  the  ascending  and  descending 
lines),  the  Samanodaka-relationship  when  the  (com- 
mon) origin  and  the  (existence  of  a  common  family)- 
name  are  no  (longer)  known. 

61.  As  this  impurity  on  account  of  a  death  is  pre- 
scribed for  (all)  Sapi;^as,  even  so  it  shall  be  (held)  on 
a  birth  by  those  who  desire  to  be  absolutely  pure. 

62.  (Or  while)  the  impurity  on  account  of  a  death 
is  common  to  all  (Sapmdas),  that  caused  by  a  birth 
(falls)  on  the  parents  alone ;  (or)  it  shall  fall  on  the 
mother  alone,  and  the  father  shall  become  pure  by 
bathing ; 


Nar.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  think  that  on  account  of  the  second  £a,  'or,' 
the  words  '  of  the  initiation '  must  be  understood. 

59.  The  bones  of  a  Brahma/za  are  collected  on  the  fourth  day ; 
see  Vi.  XIX,  10.  The  commentators  are  of  opinion  that  the 
length  of  the  period  of  impurity  depends,  in  accordance  with  the 
express  teaching  of  other  Smrz'tis,  on  the  status  of  the  mourner, 
and  that  a  man  who  knows  the  Mantras  only  of  one  -Sakha  shall 
be  impure  during  four  days,  one  who  knows  a  whole  -Sakha  (or 
two  Vedas)  during  three  days,  one  who  knows  the  Veda  (or  three 
Vedas)  and  keeps  three  or  five  sacred  fires,  during  one  day.  Medh., 
however,  mentions  another  interpretation,  according  to  which  the 
four  periods  correspond  to  the  four  ages  of  the  deceased,  which 
have  been  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse.  According  to  this 
view  the  SapiWas  shall  mourn  for  an  initiated  person  ten  days, 
for  one  who  had  received  the  tonsure  four  days,  &c.  But  see 
verse  67. 

61-62.  Medh.  and  Gov.  have  only  one  verse  instead  of  the 
two :  ^-anane  'py  eva/ft  syan  matapitros  tu  sutakam  1  sutakaw 
matur  eva  syad  upasprzsya  pita  sx\k\h  II  'Even  thus  it  shall  be 
(held)  on  a  birth,  or  the  impurity  shall  fall  on  the  parents  alone, 


V,  66.  IMPURITY.  1 79 

63.  But  a  man,  having  spent  his  strength,  is  puri- 
fied merely  by  bathing ;  after  begetting  a  child  (on 
a  remarried  female),  he  shall  retain  the  impurity 
during  three  days.  .Ji 

64.  Those  who  have  touched  a  corpse  are  purified 
after  one  day  and  night  (added  to)  three  periods  of 
three  days ;  those  who  give  libations  of  water,  after 
three  days. 

65.  A  pupil  who  performs  the  Pitrzmedha  for  his 
deceased  teacher,  becomes  also  pure  after  ten  days, 
just  like  those  who  carry  the  corpse  out  (to  the 
burial-ground). 

66.  (A  woman)  is  purified  on  a  miscarriage  in  as 
many  (days  and)  nights   as  months  (elapsed  after 
conception),   and   a   menstruating   female   becomes  j 
pure  by  bathing  after  the  menstrual  secretion  has/ 
ceased  (to  flow). 

or  it  shall  fall  on  the  mother  alone,  and  the  father  (shall  become) 
pure  by  bathing.'  Nand.  leaves  out  the  first  half  of  verse  61,  and 
combines  the  second  half  of  61  with  the  first  half  of  62.  He 
continues  in  this  manner  down  to  65,  the  second  half  of  which  he 
takes  by  itself.  Hence  his  interpretation  of  the  following  verses 
is  perfectly  useless. 

63.  The  translation  given  above  follows  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and 
Ragh.     Medh.  differs. 

64.  According  to  Gov.  and  Nar.  the  rule  refers  to  such 
Brahma/zas  who  for  money  carry  a  dead  body  to  the  cemetery ; 
according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  to  SapMas  who  in  any  way  touch 
a  corpse  out  of  affection.  Medh.  thinks  that  it  applies  to  all  who 
touch  or  carry  out  a  dead  body,  be  it  for  love  or  for  money. 
Ragh.  thinks  that  the  text  mentions  three  alternative  periods  of 
impurity,  one  day,  three  days,  and  ten  days. 

65.  The  Pitnmedha,  i.e.  the  Antyesh/i  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.),  or  '  the  whole  of  the  obsequies '  ('  others/  Medh.). 

66.  Thus  according  to  Kull. ;  Nar.  and  Ragh.  think  that  this  rule 
refers  to  miscarriages  which  happen  during  the  first  six  months 
of  pregnancy ;  and  that  from  the  seventh  month,  whether  the  child 

N    2 


i8o 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


V,67. 


6  J.  (On  the  death)  of  children  whose  tonsure  [KiX- 
^akarman)  has  not  been  performed,  the  (Sapi^^as) 
are  declared  to  become  pure  in  one  (day  and)  night ; 
(on  the  death)  of  those  who  have  received  the 
tonsure  (but  not  the  initiation,  the  law)  ordains  (that) 
the  purification  (takes  place)  after  three  days. 

68.  A  child  that  has  died  before  the  completion 
of  its  second  year,  the  relatives  shall  carry  out  (of 
the  village),  decked  (with  flowers,  and  bury  it)  in  pure 
ground,  without  collecting  the  bones  (afterwards). 

69.  Such  (a  child)  shall  not  be  burnt  with  fire, 
and  no  libations  of  water  shall  be  offered  to  it; 
leaving  it  like  a  (log  of)  wood  in  the  forest,  (the  re- 
latives) shall  remain  impure  during  three  days  only. 

70.  The  relatives  shall  not  offer  libations  to  (a 
child)  that  has  not  reached  the  third  year ;  but  if  it 
had  teeth,  or  the  ceremony  of  naming  it  (Namakar- 
man)  had  been  performed,  (the  offering  of  water 
is)  optional. 

71.  If  a  fellow-student  has  died,  the  Smnti  pre- 
scribes an  impurity  of  one  day ;  on  a  birth  the  puri- 
fication of  the  Samanodakas  is  declared  (to  take 
place)  after  three  (days  and)  nights. 

72.  (On  the  death)  of  females  (betrothed  but)  not 
married  (the  bridegroom  and  his)  relatives  are  puri- 
fied after  three  days,  and  the  paternal  relatives 
become  pure  according  to  the  same  rule. 

lives  or  not,  the  full  period  of  impurity  must  be  kept.  Nar.,  more- 
over, asserts  that  in  the  first  and  second  months  the  impurity  shall 
last  three  days.  Sadhvr, '  becomes  pure/  i.  e. '  fit  to  perform  sacred 
rites '  (Gov.).     Nar.  takes  the  word  in  the  sense  of '  chaste/ 

67.  Nand.  inserts  verse  78  immediately  after  verse  66. 

72.  'According  to  the  same  rule/  i.e.  ' according  to  that  given 
in  verse  67 '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.),  or  'just  as  the  husband's 
relatives,  i.  e.  after  three  days '  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 


V,8o.                                        IMPURITY.                                           l8l 
— — — ^\ 

J2>>  Let  (mourners)  eat  food  without  factitious 
salt,  bathe  during  three  days,  abstain  from  meat, 
and  sleep  separate  on  the^round. 

74.  The  above  rule  regarding  impurity  on  ac- 
count of  a  death  has  been  prescribed  (for  cases 
where  the  kinsmen  live)  near  (the  deceased) ;  (Sa- 
Tpinddi)  kinsmen  and  (Samanodaka)  relatives  must 
know  the  following  rule  (to  refer  to  cases  where 
deceased  lived)  at  a  distance  (from  them). 

75.  He  who  may  hear  that  (a  relative)  residing 
in  a  distant  country  has  died,  before  ten  (days  after 
his  death  have  elapsed),  shall  be  impure  for  the 
remainder  of  the  period  of  ten  (days  and)  nights 
only. 

76.  If  the  ten  days  have  passed,  he  shall  be  im- 
pure during  three  (days  and)  nights ;  but  if  a  year 
has  elapsed  (since  the  occurrence  of  the  death),  he 
becomes  pure  merely  by  bathing. 

77.  A  man  who  hears  of  a  (Sapi^a)  relative's 
death,  or  of  the  birth  of  a  son  after  the  ten  days  (of 
impurity  have  passed),  becomes  pure  by  bathing, 
dressed  in  his  garments. 

78.  If  an  infant  (that  has  not  teethed),  or  a  (grown- 
up relative  who  is)  not  a  Sapi^da,  die  in  a  distant 
country,  one  becomes  at  once  pure  after  bathing  in 
one's  clothes. 

79.  If  within  the  ten  days  (of  impurity)  another 
birth  or  death  happens,  a  Brahma/za  shall  remain 
impure  only  until  the  (first)  period  of  ten  days  has 
expired. 

80.  They  declare  that,  when  the  teacher  (a/£arya) 
has   died,   the    impurity  (lasts)  three    days;    if  the 

73.  Nand.  reads  anvaham,  (bathe) '  daily '  instead  of 'during  three 
days/ 


l82  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,  8l. 

(teacher's)  son  or  wife  (is  dead,  it  lasts)  a  day  and 
a  night ;  that  is  a  settled  (rule). 

8 1.  For  a  6Yotriya  who  resides  with  (him  out  of 
affection),  a  man  shall  be  impure  for  three  days; 
for  a  maternal  uncle,  a  pupil,  an  officiating  priest, 
or,  a  maternal  relative,  for  one  night  together  with 
the  preceding  and  following  days. 

82.  If  the  king  in  whose  realm  he  resides  is 
dead,  (he  shall  be  impure)  as  long  as  the  light  (of 
the  sun  or  stars  shines),  but  for  (an  intimate  friend) 
who  is  not  a  .Srotriya  (the  impurity  lasts)  for  a 
whole  day,  likewise  for  a  Guru  who  knows  the  Veda 
and  the  Ahgas. 

&$.  A  Brahma^a  shall  be  pure  after  ten  days,  a 
Kshatriya  after  twelve,  a  Vai^ya  after  fifteen,  and 
a  6udra  is  purified  after  a  month. 

84.  Let  him  not  (unnecessarily)  lengthen  the 
period  of  impurity,  nor  interrupt  the  rites  to  be 
performed  with  the  sacred  fires ;  for  he  who  per- 
forms that  (Agnihotra)  rite  will  not  be  impure, 
though  (he  be)  a  (Sapi^a)  relative. 

81.  Upasampanne,  'who  resides  with  (him  out  of  affection)/ 
may  according  to  Medh.  also  mean  'who  is  virtuous.'  According 
to  Nar.  it  means  '  who  is  a  neighbour.' 

82.  Anu/£ane  tatha  gurau,  'likewise  for  a  Guru  who  knows  the 
Veda  and  Ahgas,'  i.  e.  '  such  a  one  who  is  mentioned  above,  II, 
149'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nar.  takes  the  two  words  separately. 
Medh.  connects  anuHne  with  a^rotriye,  and  thinks  that  a  man 
is  meant  who  does  not  know  the  Veda,  but  the  Ahgas.  He  also 
mentions  the  explanation  adopted  above.  Nand.  finally  reads 
anMane  tatha  'gurau,  '  likewise  for  one  who  knows  the  Veda  and 
the  Ahgas,  but  is  not  a  Guru.' 

84.  According  to  Medh.  the  meaning  of  the  first  clause  is  that, 
if  there  is  an  option  between  shorter  or  longer  periods  of  impurity, 
the  mourner  is  not  to  choose  the  longer  one  in  order  to  escape 
the  performance  of  his  sacred  duties.     He  adds,  that  others  think 


IMPURITY.  183 


85.  When  he  has  touched  a  -ATa/z^ala,  a  men- 
struating woman,  an  outcast,  a  woman  in  childbed, 
a  corpse,  or  one  who  has  touched  a  (corpse),  he 
becomes  pure  by  bathing. 

86.  He  who  has  purified  himself  by  sipping  water 
shall,  on  seeing  any  impure  (thing  or  person),  always 
mutter  the  sacred  texts,  addressed  to  Surya,  and  the 
Pavamani  (verses). 

87.  A  Brahma^a  who  has  touched  a  human  bone 
to  which  fat  adheres,  becomes  pure  by  bathing ;  if  it 
be  free  from  fat,  by  sipping  water  and  by  touching 
(afterwards)  a  cow  or  looking  at  the  sun. 

88.  He  who  has  undertaken  the  performance  of  a 
vow  shall  not  pour  out  libations  (to  the  dead)  until 
the  vow   has   been    completed  ;    but  when  he   has 

it  to  be  an  exhortation  not  to  delay  the  bath  which  must  be  taken 
at  the  expiration  of  the  period  of  impurity.  The  other  com- 
mentators mention  the  first  explanation  only.  The  second  clause, 
which  refers  to  the  continued  offering  of  the  -Srauta  Agnihotra, 
means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nand.,  that  an  Agnihotrin 
who  is  in  mourning  shall  not  perform  the  offerings  in  person,  but 
make  others,  who  may  even  be  his  near  relatives,  do  it  for  him. 
Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  think  that  the  performer  himself  may  also 
offer  them.  Nand.  explains  sanabhya^,  'a  Sapiw^a'  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.,  Ragh.),  by  sahodara^,  'a  full  brother.' 

85.  Tatsprish/inam,  '  one  who  has  touched  a  (corpse),'  (Medh., 
'others;'  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Nar., 
and  Nand.  '  one  who  has  touched  any  of  those  enumerated  before, 
a  Kandah  and  so  forth/ 

86.  '  He  who  has  purified  himself,'  i.  e.  '  before  he  begins  to 
worship  the  gods  or  manes'  (Medh.,  'others;'  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 
'An  impure  (thing  or  person),'  i.e. '  those  mentioned  above.'  Medh. 
and  Gov.  take  the  verse  differently,  'On  seeing  one  of  those  impure 
persons  mentioned  above,  let  him  sip  water  and,  thus  purified, 
recite,  &c.'  The  texts  addressed  to  Surya  are  found  Rig-veda  I, 
50,  1  seq.;  the  Pavamanis  in  Mam/ala  IX. 

88.  The  rule  refers  to  a  student,  who  must  not  during  his 
studentship  perform  the  last  rites  for  any  deceased  relative  except 


184  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,8g- 

offered  water  after  its  completion,  he  becomes  pure 
in  three  days  only. 

89.  Libations  of  water  shall  not  be  offered  to 
those  who  (neglect  the  prescribed  rites  and  may  be 
said  to)  have  been  born  in  vain,  to  those  born  in 
consequence  of  an  illegal  mixture  of  the  castes,  to 
those  who  are  ascetics  (of  heretical  sects),  and  to 
those  who  have  committed  suicide, 

90.  To  women  who  have  joined  a  heretical  sect, 
who  through  lust  live  (with  many  men),  who  have 
caused  an  abortion,  have  killed  their  husbands,  or 
drink  spirituous  liquor. 

91.  A  student  does  not  break  his  vow  by  carrying 
out  (to  the  place  of  cremation)  his  own  dead  teacher 
(a^arya),  sub-teacher  (upadhyaya),  father,  mother,  or 
Guru. 

92.  Let  him  carry  out  a  dead  .5udra  by  the 
southern   gate    of  the    town,  but   (the  corpses  of) 

his  mother  (Medh.),  or  except  his  mother  and  father  (Gov.),  or 
except  his  parents  and  his  teacher;  see  below,  verse  91  (Kull., 
Ragh.).  According  to  K.  'others'  think  that  the  rule  refers  to 
those  performing  a  lunar  penance  or  other  vows. 

89.  'To  those  who  (neglect  the  prescribed  rites  and  may  be  said 
to)  have  been  born  in  vain'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.,  Ragh.'),  i.e.  'to 
those  who  for  a  year  belonged  to  no  order'  (Medh.),  or  'to 
eunuchs '  (Nar.).  The  term  sa^kara^a^,  '  born  in  consequence 
of  an  illegal  mixture  of  the  castes/  includes  besides  those  sprung 
from  mothers  of  a  higher  and  fathers  of  a  lower  caste,  sons  of 
widows  not  appointed  and  of  adulteresses  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.). 
'Ascetics  (of  heretical  sects),'  i.e.  Kapalikas,  those  wearing  red 
garments,  &c.  (Medh.).  Nar.  and  Ragh.  refer  the  term  to  orthodox 
ascetics. 

90.  Pashatfrfam, '  a  heretical  sect,'  i.e.  the  Kapalikas,  those  wearing 
red  garments '  (Medh.),  or  '  Bauddhas  and  so  forth '  (Nar.). 

91.  'Guru,'  i.  e.  'one  who  explains  the  Veda'  (Nar.,  Kull.),  or 
'him  who  is  mentioned  above,  II,  149'  (Medh.,  Gov.). 

92.  I.e.   a  Vaijya   by  the  western   gate,  a   Kshatriya   by  the 


V,  97-  IMPURITY.  185 

twice-born   men,    as   is    proper,    by    the    western, 
northern,  or  eastern  (gates). 

93.  The  taint  of  impurity  does  not  fall  on  kings, 
and  those  engaged  in  the  performance  of  a  vow,  or 
of  a  Sattra ;  for  the  (first  are)  seated  on  the  throne 
of  Indra,  and  the  (last  two  are)  ever  pure  like 
Brahman. 

94.  For  a  king,  on  the  throne  of  magnanimity, 
immediate  purification  is  prescribed,  and  the  reason 
for  that  is  that  he  is  seated  (there)  for  the  protection 
of  (his)  subjects. 

95.  (The  same  rule  applies  to  the  kinsmen)  of  those 
who  have  fallen  in  a  riot  or  a  battle,  (of  those  who 
have  been  killed)  by  lightning  or  by  the  king,  and  (of 
those  who  perished  fighting)  for  cows  and  Brahma- 
/2as,  and  to  those  whom  the  king  wishes  (to  be  pure). 

96.  A  king  is  an  incarnation  of  the  eight  guardian 
deities  of  the  world,  the  Moon,  the  Fire,  the  Sun,   i 
the  Wind,   Indra,  the  Lords   of  wealth    and  water 
(Kubera  and  Varu/za),  and  Yama. 

97.  Because    the    king    is    pervaded   by  (those) 

northern,  and   a  Brahma/za  by  the   eastern  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Nand.,  Ragh.). 

93.  'A  vow,'  i.e.  'the  studentship  (Nar.),  also  a  lunar  penance 
and  the  like'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.);  'a  Sattra,'  i.e.  'a  long  sacrifice 
such  as  the  Gavamayana.'  Brahmabhuta^,  'pure  like  Brahman' 
(Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  '  they  have  reached 
Brahmahood.' 

95.  Nand.  and  K.  explain  <fimbha,  'in  a  riot,'  to  mean  'by  in- 
fants/ '  Whom  the  king  wishes  (to  be  pure)/  i.  e.  '  his  servants  and 
ministers  whom  he  wants  for  his  affairs.'  Nar.  inserts  another 
class, '  (the  kinsmen  of  those  who  have  been  killed)  by  Brahma^as, 
i.e.  by  incantations.'  But  I  do  not  understand  how  the  word  could 
be  made  to  suit  the  verse. 

96.  See  below,  VII,  4. 

97.  Medh.  reads   loke^aprabhavapyayau,  and  the   second  half 


1 


1 86  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,  98. 


lords  of  the  world,  no  impurity  is  ordained  for  him  ; 
for  purity  and  impurity  of  mortals   is  caused  and 
I   removed  by  (those)  lords  of  the  world. 

98.  By  him  who  is  slain  in  battle  with  brandished 
weapons  according  to  the  law  of  the  Kshatriyas,  a 
(.Srauta)  sacrifice  is  instantly  completed,  and  so  is 
the  period  of  impurity  (caused  by  his  death) ;  that 
is  a  settled  rule. 

99.  (At  the  end  of  the  period  of  impurity)  a  Brah- 
ma^a  who  has  performed  the  necessary  rites,  be- 
comes pure  by  touching  water,  a  Kshatriya  by 
touching  the  animal  on  which  he  rides,  and  his 
weapons,  a  Vaiiya  by  touching  his  goad  or  the 
nose-string  (of  his  oxen),  a  .5udra  by  touching  his 
staff. 

100.  Thus  the  purification  (required)  on  (the 
death  of)  Sapi/z^as  has  been  explained  to  you,  O 
best  of  twice-born  men ;  hear  now  the  manner  in 
which  men  are  purified  on  the  death  of  any  (relative 
who  is)  not  a  Saprnda. 

10 1.  A    Brahma^a,    having  carried    out   a   dead 

verse  must  then  be  translated  '  purity  and  impurity  affect  mortals, 
they  are  caused  and  removed  by  the  guardians  of  the  world/ 
Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  loke-raprabhavo  hy  ayam,  'but  he  (the) 
king  springs  from  the  guardians  of  the  world.'  Nar.  mentions 
also  a  reading  lokeyaprabhave  'pyaya/£,  'for  him  who  springs 
from  the  guardians  of  the  world,  (purity  and  impurity)  do  not 
exist.' 

98.  According  to  Medh.  some  contend  that  this  rule  refers  only 
to  those  who  die  on  the  battle-field,  not  to  those  who  die  later  of 
their  wounds.  Y&gn&h, '  a  (.Srauta)  sacrifice '  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.), 
means  according  to  Nar. '  the  funeral  sacrifice.' 

99.  'Touching  water,'  i.e.  'bathing'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.), '  washing 
his  hands '  (Gov.). 

1 01.  'The  relatives  of  his  mother  and  (the  Sagotras  of  his 
father),  or  connexions  by  marriage,  are  meant'  (Nar.). 


V,  io6.  IMPURITY. 


Brahma/za  who  is  not  a  Sapi/z^a,  as  (if  he  were)  a 
(near)  relative,  or  a  near  relative  of  his  mother, 
becomes  pure  after  three  days  ; 

1 02.  But  if  he  eats  the  food  of  the  (Sapi/z^as  of 
the  deceased),  he  is  purified  in  ten  days,  (but)  in 
one  day,  if  he  does  not  eat  their  food  nor  dwells  in 
their  house. 

103.  Having  voluntarily  followed  a  corpse,  whether 
(that  of)  a  paternal  kinsman  or  (of)  a  stranger,  he 
becomes  pure  by  bathing,  dressed  in  his  clothes,  by 
touching  fire  and  eating  clarified  butter. 

104.  Let  him  not  allow  a  dead  Brahma/za  to  be 
carried  out  by  a  .Sudra,  while  men  of  the  same  caste 
are  at  hand ;  for  that  burnt-offering  which  is  defiled 
by  a  6udra's  touch  is  detrimental  to  (the  deceased's 
passage  to)  heaven.  ^. 

105.  The  knowledge  (of  Brahman)  austerities,  fire,  / 
(holy)  food,  earth,  (restraint  of)  the  internal  organ,  I 
water,   sjnearing;  (with  _cowdung).   the  wind,  sacred 
rites,  the  sun,  and  time  are  the  purifiers  of  corporeal 
(beings).  "^ 

106.  Among  all  modes  of  purification,  purity  in 

(the  acquisition  of)  wealth  is  declared  to  be  the  best;  Jff% 
for  he  is  pure  who  gains  wealth  with  clean  hands,    ^ 
not  he  who  purifies  himself  with  earth  and  water. 


fl 


102.  In  case  he  stays  in  the  house  of  the  mourners,  he  becomes 
impure  for  three  days  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  K.). 

104.  According  to  Nar.  the  rule  refers  exclusively  to  Brahmaraas, 
according  to  Medh.  and  Kull.  to  all  Aryans.  The  burning  of  the 
body  is  euphemistically  called  a  burnt-offering. 

105.  Vi.  XXII,  88;  Y&gri.  Ill,  31;  Baudh.  I,  8,  52.  ManaA 
kshamakhya^  (?)  niyamayuktazrc  mano  ^ivasya  (Nar.).  The  other 
commentators  take  mana^, '  the  mind  or  internal  organ,'  in  the  sense 
of  '  a  sanctified  heart.' 

106.  Vi.  XXII;  89;  Y%7?.  Ill,  32. 


i88 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


V,  107. 


5) 


107.  The  learned  are  purified  by  a  forgiving 
disposition,  those  who  have  committed  forbidden 
actions  by  liberality,  secret  sinners  by  muttering 
(sacred  texts),  and  those  who  best  know  the  Veda 
by  austerities. 

108.  By  earth  and  water  is  purified_what  ought 
to  be  made  pure,  a  river  by  its  current,  a  woman 
whose  thoughts  have  been  impure  by  the  menstrual 
secretion,  a_jrahma^a_^^^andonjn^_the  wprld 
(sa^nyasa). 

109.  The  body  is  cleansed  by  water,  the  internal 
organ  is  purified  by  truthfulness,  the  individual  soul 
by  sacred  learning  and  austerities,  the  intellect  by 
(true)  knowledge. 

no.  Thus  the  precise  rules  for  the  purification  of 
the  body  have  been  declared  to  you ;  hear  now  the 
decision  (of  the  law)  regarding  the  purification  of 
the  various  (inanimate)  things. 

in.  The  wise  ordain  that  all  (objects)  made  of 
metal,  gems,  and  anything  made  of  stone  are  to  be 
cleansed  with  ashes,  earth,  and  water. 

112.  A  golden  vessel  which  shows  no  stains, 
becomes  pure  with  water  alone,  likewise  what  is 
produced  in  water  (as  shells  and  coral),  what  is  made 
of  stone,  and  a  silver  (vessel)  not  enchased. 


107.  Vi.  XXII,  90;  Ya^l  III,  33. 

108.  Vi.  XXII,  91 ;  Vas.  Ill,  58 ;  Ya^l.  Ill,  32. 

109.  Vi.  XXII,  92 ;  Vas.  Ill,  60;  Ya^fi.  Ill,  33-34. 
no.  Vi.  XXII,  93. 

111-126.^.1,17,8-13;  11,3,9;  Gaut.1, 29-34;  Vas.III,  44-57, 
59,  61-63  ;  Baudh.  I,  8,  32-53,  9,  1-4,  7-12,  10,  1-9 ;  13, 11-14, 
19;  Vi.  XXIII,  2-46,  56  j  YSgfi.  I,  182-190. 

112.  Anupaskrz'tam,  'not  enchased,'  may  also  mean  according  to 
Medh.  and  Nand.  '  not  defiled  very  much.'     Medh.  and  Nar.  add 


V,  n8.  PURIFICATION.  1 89 

113.  From  the  union  of  water  and  fire  arose  the 
glittering  gold  and  silver ;  those  two,  therefore,  are 
best  purified  by  (the  elements)  from  which  they 
sprang. 

114.  Copper,  iron,  brass,  pewter,  tin,  and  lead 
must  be  cleansed,  as  may  be  suitable  (for  each 
particular  case),  by  alkaline  (substances),  acids  or 
water. 

115.  The  purification  prescribed  for  all  (sorts  of) 
liquids  is  by  passing  two  blades  of  Ku^a  grass 
through  them,  for  solid  things  by  sprinkling  (them 
with  water),  for  (objects)  made  of  wood  by  planing 
them. 

116.  At  sacrifices  the  purification  of  (the  Soma 
cups  called)  Aamasas  and  Grahas,  and  of  (other) 
sacrificial  vessels  (takes  place)  by  rubbing  (them) 
with  the  hand,  and  (afterwards)  rinsing  (them  with 
water). 

1 1 7.  The  Ka.ru  and  (the  spoons  called)  Sru£  and 
Sruva  must  be  cleaned  with  hot  water,  likewise  (the 
wooden  sword,  called)  Sphya,  the  winnowing-basket 
(.Surpa),  the  cart  (for  bringing  the  grain),  the  pestle 
and  the  mortar. 

118.  The  manner  of  purifying  large  quantities  of 
grain  and  of  cloth  is  to  sprinkle  them  with  water ; 

that  this  last  term  applies  to  all  the  various  objects  mentioned  in 
the  verse. 

113.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  quote  a  Vedic  passage  which 
derives  the  origin  of  gold  from  Agni  and  the  goddess  Varuwani. 

115.  Utpavanam  or  utplavanam  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  'passing 
two  blades  of  Ku^a  grass  through  them/  means  according  to 
Medh.,  '  others,'  and  K.  '  purifying  by  pouring  them  into  another 
vessel,  filled  with  pure  liquids  of  the  same  kind/  according  to  Nar. 
by  ' straining  through  a  cloth/  '  Solid  things/  i. e.  'a  couch,  a  seat, 
and  the  like/ 


I90  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,  119. 

but  the  purification  of  small  quantities  is  prescribed 
(to  take  place)  by  washing  them. 

119.  Skins  and  (objects)  made  of  split  cane  must 
be  cleaned  like  clothes ;  vegetables,  roots,  and  fruit 
like  grain ; 

120.  Silk  and  woollen  stuffs  with  alkaline  earth; 
blankets  with  pounded  Arish/a  (fruit) ;  A^mpa^as 
with  Bel  fruit ;  linen  cloth  with  (a  paste  of)  yellow 
mustard. 

121.  A  man  who  knows  (the  law)  must  purify 
conch-shells,  horn,  bone  and  ivory,  like  linen  cloth, 
or  with  a  mixture  of  cow's  urine  and  water. 

122.  Grass,  wood,  and  straw  become  pure  by  being 
sprinkled  (with  water),  a  house  by  sweeping  and 
smearing  (it  with  cowdung  or  whitewash),  an  earthen 
(vessel)  by  a  second  burning. 

123.  An  earthen  vessel  which  has  been  defiled 
by  spirituous  liquor,  urine,  ordure,  saliva,  pus  or 
blood  cannot  be  purified  by  another  burning. 

124.  Land  is  purified  by  (the  following)  five 
(modes,  viz.)  "by  sweeping,  by  smearing  (it  with  cow- 
dung),  by  sprinkling  (it  with  cows'  urine  or  milk), 
by  scraping,  and  by  cows  staying  (on  it  during  a 
day  and  night). 

125.  (Food)  which  has  been  pecked  at  by  birds, 

119.  Vaidalanam, '  objects  made  of  split  cane'  (Kull.,  K.,  Ragh., 
Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  made  of  the 
bark  of  trees  and  the  like.'  Medh.  remarks  that  this  and  other 
rules,  where  skins  and  so  forth  are  mentioned,  apply  also  to  objects 
made  of  such  things,  e.g.  shoes. 

120.  Arish/a,  i.e.  Sapindus  detergens,  the  soap-berry  tree. 
Amupa//a  means  according  to  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  Nar.  '  cloth  made 
of  thinned  bark/  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  '  upper  garments 
for  women  (Saris)  made  of  fine  cloth '  (pa/Za^a/aka,  pa//a^a/i). 

125.  'By  birds/  i.e.  'by  parrots  and  the   like,  not  by  crows, 


V,  I2Q.  PURIFICATION.  I9I 

smelt  at  by  cows,  touched  (with  the  foot),  sneezed 
on,  or  denied  by  hair  or  insects,  becomes  pure  by 
scattering  earth  (over  it). 

126.  As  long  as  the  (foul)  smell  does  not  leave 
an  (object)  defiled  by  impure  substances,  and  the 
stain  caused  by  them  (does  not  disappear),  so  long 
must  earth  and  water  be  applied  in  cleansing  (in- 
animate) things.  ^__^ 

127.  The  gods  declared  three  things  (to  be)  pure    / 
to  Brahma/zas,  that  (on  which)  no  (taint  is)  visible, 
what  has  been  washed  with  water,  and  what  has 
been    commended    (as    pure)    by   the   word   (of  a 
Brahma/za). 

128.  Water,  sufficient  (in  quantity)  in  order  to 
slake  the  thirst  of  a  cow,  possessing  the  (proper) 
smell,  colour,  and  taste,  and  unmixed  with  impure 
substances,  is  pure,  if  it  is  collected  on  (pure) 
ground. 

129.  The  hand  of  an  artisan  is  always  pure,  so 
is  (every  vendible  commodity)  exposed  for  sale  in 

vultures,  and  other  impure  ones '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.).  Avadhutam, 
'  touched  (with  the  foot)/  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh. 
1  blown  upon  with  the  mouth,'  or  '  dusted  with  a  dress/  according 
to  Gov.  '  dusted  with  a  dress/  according  to  Nar.  '  moved  by  the 
wind  (caused  by  the  motion)  of  a  cloth,  the  foot  or  the  like/ 
according  to  Nand.  '  defiled  by  the  dust  of  a  broom  or  of  the  air 
moved  by  the  wings  (of  a  bird).' 

127.  Vas.  XIV,  24;  Baudh.  I,  9,  9;  Vi.  XXIII,  47;  Yfew.  I, 
191.  In  conformity  with  the  opinion  of  the  commentators  I 
translate  pavitram  by  '  pure.'  But  the  word  has  also  the  meaning 
of  'means  of  purification/  in  which  I  have  taken  it  in  the 
translations  of  the  parallel  passages.  The  general  sense  remains 
the  same. 

128.  Vas.  Ill,  35-36,  47;  Baudh.  I,  9,  10;  Vi.  XXIII,  43; 
Yagii.  I,  192. 

129.  Baudh.  I,  9,  i;  Vi.  XXIII,  43. 


192 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


V,  130. 


1 


the  market,  and  food  obtained  by  begging  which 
a  student  holds  (in  his  hand)  is  always  fit  for  use ; 
that  is  a  settled  rule. 

130.  The  mouth  of  a  woman  is  alwaysjpure,  like- 
wise a  bird  when  he  causes  a  fruit  to  fall ;  a  calf 
is  pure  on  the  flowing  of  the  milk,  and  a  dog  when 
he  catches  a  deer. 

131.  Manu  has  declared  that  the  flesh  (of  an 
animal)  killed  by  dogs  is  pure,  likewise  (that)  of 
a  (beast)  slain  by  carnivorous  (animals)  or  by  men 
of  low  caste  (Dasyu),  such  as  A'a/z^alas. 

132.  All  those  cavities  (of  the  body)  which  lie 
above  the  navel  are  pure,  (but)  those  which  are 
below  the  navel  are  impure,  as  well  as  excretions 
that  fall  from  the  body. 

133.  Flies,  drops  of  water,  a  shadow,  a  cow,  a 
horse,  the  rays  of  the  sun,  dust,  earth,  the  wind,  and 
fire  one  must  know  to  be  pure  to  the  touch. 

134.  In  order  to  cleanse  (the  organs)  by  which 
urine  and  faeces  are  ejected,  earth  and  water  must 
be  used,  as  they  may  be  required,  likewise  in  remov- 
ing the  (remaining  ones  among)  twelve  impurities 
of  the  body. 


130.  Baudh.  I,  9,  2  ;  Vi.  XXIII,  49 ;  Yagii.  I,  193. 

131.  Vas.  Ill,  45;  Vi.  XXIII,  50;  Yagn.  I,  192. 

132.  Vi.  XXIII,  51;  Yagri.  1, 194. 

133.  Vi.  XXIII,  51  ;  Yagn.  1, 193.  'Drops  of  water/  i.e.  'such 
as  are  only  perceptible  by  the  touch'  (Medh.,  Gov.),  or  'such  as 
come  from  the  mouth,  i.e.  of  saliva'  (Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nar.).  Ragh. 
adds, '  and  a  continuous  stream  of  water.' 

134.  Ap.  1, 16, 15  ;  Gaut.  I,  43  ;  Vas.  VI,  14  ;  Yagn.  I,  17.  '  As 
they  may  be  required,'  i.e.  'for  removing  the  first  six  kinds  of 
impurities  enumerated  in  the  next  verse,  as  much  water  and  earth 
as  may  be  required,  and  for  the  last  six  water  only'  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.,  Reign.). 


V,  140.  PURIFICATION.  1 93 

135.  Oily  exudations,  semen,  blood,  (the  fatty  sub- 
stance of  the)  brain,  urine,  faeces,  the  mucus  of  the 
nose,  ear-wax,  phlegm,  tears,  the  rheum  of  the  eyes, 
and  sweat  are  the  twelve  impurities  of  human 
(bodies). 

136.  He  who  desires  to  be  pure,  must  clean  the 
organ  by  one  (application  of)  earth,  the   anus  by 
(applying  earth)  three  (times),  the  (left)  hand  alone 
by  (applying  it)  ten   (times),  and  both  (hands)  byl 
(applying  it)  seven  (times).  ~*\ 

137.  Such  is  the  purification  ordained  for  house-  • 
holders ;  (it  shall  be)  double  for  students,  treble  for 
hermits,  but  quadruple  for  ascetics. 

138.  When  he  has  voided  urine  or  faeces,  let  him, 
after  sipping  water,  sprinkle  the  cavities,  likewise 
when  he  is  going  to  recite  the  Veda,  and  always 
before  he  takes  food. 

1 39.  Let  him  who  desires  bodily  purity  first  sip 
water  three  times,  and  then  twice  wipe  his  mouth ; 
but  a  woman  and  a  6udra  (shall  perform  each  act) 
once  (only). 

140.  6udras  who  live  according  to  the  law,  shall 
each  month  shave  (their  heads) ;  their  mode  of 
purification  (shall  be)  the  same  as  that  of  Vai.yyas, 
and  their  food  the  fragments  of  an  Aryan's  meal. 

136.  Vas.VI,  18;  Vi.  LX,  25. 

137.  Vas.VI,  19;  Vi.  LX,  26. 

138.  Gaut.  I,  36 ;  Baudh.  I,  8,  26  ;  Vi.  LXII,  8.  'The  cavities/ 
i.  e.  of  the  head  (Gov.),  and  also  the  navel,  the  heart,  and  the 
crown  of  the  head  (Nar.,  Kull.). 

139.  Ap.  I,  16,  3-8;  Gaut.  I,  36;  Vas.  Ill,  27-28;  Baudh.  I,  8, 
20-22;  Vi.  LXII,  6-8;  Ya^ft.  I,  20. 

140.  Ap.  II,  3,  4-6.  '  Who  live  according  to  the  law/  i.e.  'who 
serve  Aryans'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nand.  thinks  that 
masikaw  vapanaw  karyaw,  '  shall  shave  each  month/  means  '  shall 
offer  the  monthly  Sraddha.' 

[25]  o 


t 


194 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


141. 


X' 


> 


141.  Drops  (of  water)  from  the  mouth  which  do 
not  fall  on  a  limb,  do  not  make  (a  man)  impure, 
nor  the  hair  of  the  moustache  entering  the  mouth, 
nor  what  adheres  to  the  teeth. 

142.  Drops  which  trickle  on  the  feet  of  him  who 
offers  water  for  sipping  to  others,  must  be  con- 
sidered as  equal  to  (water)  collected  on  the  ground ; 
they  render  him  not  impure. 

143.  He  who,  while  carrying  anything  in  any 
manner,  is  touched  by  an  impure  (person  or  thing), 
shall  become  pure,  if  he  performs  an  ablution,  with- 
out putting  down  that  object. 

144.  He  who  has  vomited  or  purged  shall  bathe, 
and  afterwards  eat  clarified  butter ;  but  if  (the  attack 
comes  on)  after  he  has  eaten,  let  him  only  sip  water ; 
bathing  is  prescribed  for  him  who  has  had  intercourse 

I  with  a  woman. 

145.  Though  he  may  be  (already)  pure,  let  him  sip 
water  after  sleeping,  sneezing,  eating,  spitting,  telling 
untruths,  and  drinking  water,  likewise  when  he  is 
going  to  study  the  Veda. 

j  46.  Thus  the  rules  of  personal  purification  for 
men  of  all  castes,  and  those  for  cleaning  (inanimate) 
things,  have  been  fully  declared  to  you  :  hear  now 
the  duties  of  women. 


tba 

wi 


141.  Ap.  I,  16,  13;  Gaut.  I,  38-41;  Vas.  Ill,  37,40-41;  Baudh. 
I,  8,  23-25;  Vi.  XXIII,  53;  Y&gn.  I,  195.  I  read  with  Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  arigaw  na  yanti  ya^,  instead  of  ahge 
patanti,  'which  fall  on  a  limb,'  the  reading  of  Kull.  and  Ragh. 

142.  Vas.  Ill,  42;  Vi.  XXIII,  54. 

143-  Gaut.  I,  28;  Vas.  Ill,  43;  Baudh.  I,  8,  27-29;  Vi. 
XXIII,  55. 

145.  Ap.  I,  16,  14;  Gaut.  I,  37;  Vi.  XXII,  75;  Y&gn.  I,  196. 
According  to  Medh.,  some  refer  this  verse  to  a  repeated  sipping  of 
water. 


v,  152.  purification;  women.  195 

147.  By  a  girl,  by  a  young  woman,  or  even  by  an 
aged  one,  nothing  must  be  done  independently,  even 
in  her  own  house. 

148.  In  childhood  a  female  must  be  subject  to 
her  father,  in  youth  to  her  husband,  when  her  lord 
is  dead  to  her  sons ;  a  woman  must  never  be  in- 
dejDencjejjt. 

149.  She  must  not  seek  to  separate  herself  from 
her  father,  husband,  or  sons ;  by  leaving  them  she 
would  make  both  (her  own  and  her  husband's) 
families  contemptible. 

150.  She  must  always  be  cheerful,  clever  in  (the 
management  of  her)  household  affairs,  careful  in 
cleaning  her  utensils,  and  economical  in  expenditure. 

151.  Him  to  whom  her  father  may  give  her,  or 
her  brother  with  the  fathers  permission,  she  shall 
obey  as  long  as  he  lives,  and  when  he  is  dead,  she 
must  not  insult  (his  memory). 

152.  For  the  sake  of  procuring  good  fortune 
to  (brides),  the  recitation  of  benedictory  texts 
(svastyayana),  and  the  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  of 
creatures  (Pra^apati)  are  used  at  weddings ;  (but) 
the  betrothal  (by  the  father  or  guardian)  is  the  cause 
of  (the  husbands)  dominion  (over  his  wife). 

147-149.  See  below,  IX,  2-3;  Vi. XXVI,  12-13;  Y^w.1,85-86. 

150.  Vi.  XXVI,  4-6  ;  Ya^l.  I,  83. 

151.  Vi.  XXVI,  14;  Y&gn.l,  63. 

152.  Svastyayanam,  'the  recitation  of  benedictory  texts/  i.e.  'of 
those  intended  for  averting  evil  omens'  (Gov.,  Kull.) ;  or  'the 
Puwyahava^ana  and  the  rest'  (Nar.) ;  or  '  the  recitation  of  the 
texts  which  precede  the  nuptial  burnt-oblation'  (Ragb.,  Nand.). 
Medh.  connects  the  word  with  yagiia/i,  and  explains  it  by  'that 
whereby  welfare  is  obtained.'  Medh.  explains  the  expression  '  the 
sacrifice  to  Pia^apati '  by  stating  that '  some'  prescribe  at  a  wedding 
an  oblation  with  the  verse  Pra^apate  na  tvad  evanya^  (?  tvadetany, 
Rig-veda  X,  121,  10),  and  that  the  offerings  to  the  other  gods  are 

O    2 


19^  LAWS    OF   MANU.  V,  153. 

153.  The  husband  who  wedded  her  with  sacred 
texts,  always  gives  happiness  to  his  wife,  both  in 
season  and  out  of  season,  in  this  world  and  in  the 
next. 

154.  Though  destitute  of  virtue,  or  seeking 
pleasure  (elsewhere),  or  devoid  of  good  qualities, 
(yet)  a  husband  must  be  constantly  worshipped  as 
a  god  by  a  faithful  wife. 

155.  No  sacrifice,  no  vow,  no  fast  must  be  per- 
formed by  women  apart  (from  their  husbands);  if 
a  wife  obeys  her  husband,  she  will  for  that  (reason 
alone)  be  exalted  in  heaven. 

156.  A  faithful  wife,  who  desires  to  dwell  (after 
death)  with  her  husband,  must  never  do  anything 
that  might  displease  him  who  took  her  hand,  whether 
he  be  alive  or  dead. 

157.  At  her  pleasure  let  her  emaciate  her  body 
by  (living  on)  pure  flowers,  roots,  and  fruit ;  but  she 
must  never  even  mention  the  name  of  another  man 
after  her  husband  has  died. 

158.  Until  death  let  her  be  patient  (of  hardships), 
self-controlled,  and  chaste,  and  strive  (to  fulfil)  that 
most  excellent  duty  which  (is  prescribed)  for  wives 
who  have  one  husband  only. 

159.  Many  thousands  of  Brahma/zas  who  were 
chaste  from  their  youth,  have  gone  to  heaven  with- 
out continuing  their  race. 

implied  by  this  expression.  Nar.  thinks  that  the  Pra^apati  called 
Manu  is  the  guardian  deity  of  the  bride,  and  hence  the  nuptial 
oblations  are  called  '  the  sacrifice  to  Pra^apati.' 

155.  Vi.  XXVI,  15;  Yfyn.  I,  77- 

156-166.  See  below,  IX,  64-68  ;  Yagn.  I,  75,  87. 

157.  Medh.  takes  this  opportunity  to  strongly  object  to  the  prac- 
tice of  widows  burning  themselves  with  their  husbands'  corpses. 

159.  Gov.  and  Kull.  think  that  the  verse  refers  to  the  Valakhilya 
^?/shis. 


V,  166.  WOMEN.  I97 

160.  A  virtuous  wife  who  after  the  death  of  her 
husband  constantly  remains  chaste,  reaches  heaven, 
though  she  have  no  son,  just  like  those  chaste 
men. 

161.  But  a  woman  who  from  a  desire  to  have 
offspring  violates  her  duty  towards  her  (deceased) 
husband,  brings  on  herself  disgrace  in  this  world,  and 
loses  her  place  with  her  husband  (in  heaven). 

162.  Offspring  begotten  by  another  man  is  here 
not  (considered  lawful),  nor  (does  offspring  begotten) 
on  another  man's  wife  (belong  to  the  begetter),  nor 
is  a  second  husband  anywhere  prescribed  for  vir- 
tuous women. 

163.  She  who  cohabits  with  a  man  of  higher 
caste,  forsaking  her  own  husband  who  belongs  to 
a  lower  one,  will  become  contemptible  in  this  world, 
and  is  called  a  remarried  woman  (parapurva). 

164.  By  violating  her  duty  towards  her  husband, 
a  wife  is  disgraced  in  this  world,  (after  death)  she 
enters  the  womb  of  a  jackal,  and  is  tormented  by 
diseases  (the  punishment  of)  her  sin. 

165.  She  who,  controlling  her  thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds,  never  slights  her  lord,  resides  (after 
death)  with  her  husband  (in  heaven),  and  is  called 
a  virtuous  (wife). 

166.  In  reward  of  such  conduct,  a  female  who 
controls  her  thoughts,  speech,  and  actions,  gains  in 
this  (life)  highest  renown,  and  in  the  next  (world) 
a  place  near  her  husband. 


160.  Vi.  XXVI,  17. 

162.  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  take  the  first  part  of  the  verse  dif- 
ferently :  '  Offspring  begotten  by  another  man  does  not  belong  (to 
the  mother)/     The  other  explanation  is  given  by  Gov.  and  KulL 

165.  Medh.  omits  verses  165-166. 


I98  LAWS    OF    MANU.  V,  167 

167.  A  twice-born  man,  versed  in  the  sacred  law, 
shall  burn  a  wife  of  equal  caste  who  conducts  herself 
thus  and  dies  before  him,  with  (the  sacred  fires  used 
for)  the  Agnihotra,  and  with  the  sacrificial  imple- 
ments. 

168.  Having  thus,  at  the  funeral,  given  the  sacred 
fires  to  his  wife  who  dies  before  him,  he  may  marry 
again,  and  again  kindle  (the  fires). 

169.  (Living)  according  to  the  (preceding)  rules, 
he  must  never  neglect  the  five  (great)  sacrifices, 
and,  having  taken  a  wife,  he  must  dwell  in  (his 
own)  house  during  the  second  period  of  his  life 


[67. 


Chapter  VI. 

1.  A  twice-born  Snataka,  who  has  thus  lived 
according  to  the  law  in  the  order  of  householders, 
may,  taking  a  firm  resolution  and  keeping  his  organs 
in  subjection,  dwell  in  the  forest,  duly  (observing 
the  rules  given  below). 

2.  When  a  householder  sees  his  (skin)  wrinkled, 
and  (his  hair)  white,  and  the  sons  of  his  sons,  then 
he  may  resort  to  the  forest. 

167-168.  Yagn.  I,  88. 

VI.  1-32.  Ap.  II,  21,  18-23,  2;  Gaut.  Ill,  26-35;  Vas.  VI, 
19-20;  IX;  Baudh.  II,  11,  14-15;  HI,  18-4,  22;  Vi.  XCIV- 
XCV;  Ya^.  Ill,  45-55. 

1.  Niyata^,  'taking  a  firm  resolution'  (Gov.,Kull.),  means  accord- 
ing to  Nar.  '  devoted  to  the  restrictive  duties,  austerities,  reciting 
the  Veda,  and  so  forth.'  Kull.  connects  yathavad, '  duly  observing,' 
&c.  (Gov.,  Nar.),  with  '  keeping  his  organs  in  subjection.' 

2.  Medh.  notes  particularly  that  the  -Sish/as  insist  on  the  neces- 
sity that  he  who  takes  to  forest-life  must  have  sons  and  sons'  sons, 
and  that  hence  apatya,  *  offspring,'  is  to  be  taken  in  this  restricted 
sense.  Nar.  holds  that  the  verse  gives  three  separate  grounds  for 
entering  the  third  order,  each  of  which  is  sufficient  by  itself,  while 


VI,  8.  THE    HERMIT    IN    THE  FOREST.  1 99 

3.  Abandoning  all  food  raised  by  cultivation,  and 
all  his  belongings,  he  may  depart  into  the  forest, 
either  committing  his  wife  to  his  sons,  or  accom- 
panied by  her. 

4.  Taking  with  him  the  sacred  fire  and  the 
implements  required  for  domestic  (sacrifices),  he 
may  go  forth  from  the  village  into  the  forest  and 
reside  there,  duly  controlling  his  senses. 

5.  Let  him  offer  those  five  great  sacrifices  accord- 
ing to  the  rule,  with  various  kinds  of  pure  food  fit 
for  ascetics,  or  with  herbs,  roots,  and  fruit.  ^ 

6.  Let  him  wear  a  skin  or  a  tattered  garment ,; 
let  him  bathe  in  the  evening  or  in  the  morning; 
and  let  him  always  wear  (his  hair  in)  braids,  the: 
hair  on  his  body,  his  beard,  and  his  nails  (being^ 
undipped). 

7.  Let  him  perform  the  Bali-offering  with  such 
food  as  he  eats,  and  give  alms  according  to  his 
ability;  let  him  honour  those  who  come  to  his 
hermitage  with  alms  consisting  of  water,  roots,  and 
fruit. 

8.  Let  him  be  always  industrious  in  privately 
reciting  the  Veda ;  let  him  be  patient  of  hardships, 
friendly  (towards  all),  of  collected  mind,  ever  liberal 

Medh.  thinks  that  the  three  conditions  must  exist  together.  Others, 
however,  mentioned  by  Medh.,  took  the  verse  to  give  a  description 
of  the  approach  of  old  age,  which  entitles  the  householder  to  turn 
hermit. 

3.  '  If  his  wife  desires  to  accompany  him,  she  may  do  so.  But 
others  say  that  he  is  to  leave  his  wife  behind  if  she  is  young,  but 
shall  take  her  with  him  if  she  is  aged '  (Medh.). 

6.  .fflram,  'a  tattered  garment'  (vastrakhawdam,  Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.),  may  also  mean  « a  dress  made  of  bark,  Kuja  grass,  or  the 
like'  (Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

8.  Danta^, '  patient  of  hardships,'  means  according  to  Medh.  and 
Nar.  '  free  from  pride/    Gov.  reads  in  the  beginning  of  the  second 


200  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VI,  9. 

anc*  2S^H«AreS?iXH. SL J*i£s>  an(*  compassionate 
towards  all  living  creatures. 

9.  Let  him  offer,  according  to  the  law,  the  Agni- 
hotra  with  three  sacred  fires,  never  omitting  the 
new-moon  and  full-moon  sacrifices  at  the  proper 
time. 

10.  Let  him  also  offer  the  Nakshatresh/i,  the 
Agraya/za,  and  the  A!aturmasya  (sacrifices),  as  well 
as  the  Turaya^a  and  likewise  the  D&kshaya/za,  in 
due  order. 

1 1 .  With  pure  grains,  fit  for  ascetics,  which  grow 
in  spring  and  in  autumn,  and  which  he  himself  has 
collected,  let  him  severally  prepare  the  sacrificial 
cakes  (puroafasa)  and  the  boiled  messes  (y£aru),  as 
the  law  directs. 

12.  Having  offered  those  most  pure  sacrificial 
viands,  consisting  of  the  produce  of  the  forest,  he 
may  use  the  remainder  for  himself,  (mixed  with) 
salt  prepared  by  himself. 

half- verse,  tyaktadvandvo  'nisam  data,  'let  him  not  care  for  the  pairs 
of  opposites,  let  him  be  ever  liberal  and  compassionate  towards  all 
creatures/ 

9.  Yogata^, '  at  the  proper  time'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according 
to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  as  required  by  law ; '  according  to  Nar.  *  dili- 
gently/ 

10.  Medh.  reads  Dawesh/i  for  ifrkshesh/i,  « the  Nakshatresh/i/ 
I  read  with  Medh.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.,  Turayawa  (see  -Sankh. 
Srauta-sutra  IV,  11)  instead  of  Uttarayaraa,  'the  sacrifice  at  the 
winter-solstice/  which  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  K.  give.  The  first  reads  also 
more  consistently  than  Kull.  and  K. :  Dakshi#aya«a#z, '  the  sacrifice 
at  the  summer-solstice/ for  Dakshasyaya«am, '  the  Dakshayawa/  The 
Nakshatresh/i  is  a  .SYauta  sacrifice  offered  to  the  lunar  mansions. 
Regarding  the  variety  of  the  Darcapaurwamasa,  called  Dakshayawa, 
see  Asv.  -Srauta-sutra  II,  14. 

12.  According  to  Kull.,  the  hermit  is  to  collect  the  salt  from 
usharas,  i.e.  salt-marshes ;  according  to  Ndr.,  he  is  to  prepare  it 
from  the  kshara,  'salt  or  alcaline  elements'  of  trees  and  the  like. 


VI,  18.  THE    HERMIT    IN    THE    FOREST.  201 

13.  Let  him  eat  vegetables  that  grow  on  dry  land 
or  in  water,  flowers,  roots,  and  fruits,  the  productions 
of  pure  trees,  and  oils  extracted  from  forest-fruits. 

14.  Let  him  avoid  honey,  flesh,  and  mushrooms 
growing  on  the  ground  (or  elsewhere,  the  vegetables 
called)  Bhustri^a,  and  ^igruka,  and  the  KSleshman- 
taka  fruit. 

15.  Let  him  throw  away  in  the  month  of  Asvina 
the  food  of  ascetics,  which  he  formerly  collected, 
likewise  his  worn-out  clothes  and  his  vegetables, 
roots,  and  fruit.  **\ 

1 6.  Let  him  not  eat  anything  (grown  on)  ploughed  I 
(land),  though  it  may  have  been  thrown  away  byj 
somebody,  nor  roots  and  fruit  grown  in  a  village,  I 
though  (he  may  be)  tormented  (by  hunger). 

17.  He  may  eat  either  what  has  been  cooked 
with  fire,  or  what  has  been  ripened  by  time ;  he 
either  may  use  a  stone  for  grinding,  or  his  teeth 
may  be  his  mortar. 

18.  He  may  either  at  once  (after  his  daily  meal) 
cleanse  (his  vessel  for  collecting  food),  or  lay  up  a 

14.  Bhustrma,  i.e.  Andropogon  Schoenanthus, Sigruka,  according 
to  Nar.,  the  same  as  the  Sobhanan^ana,  i.e.  Moringa  Pterygosperma, 
the  horse-radish  tree,  the  leaves  of  which  are  said  to  be  used  as  a 
vegetable.  According  to  Medh.,  these  two  vegetables  are  known 
among  the  Bahikas,  in  the  Panjab  ;  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh., 
the  former  is  found  in  Malva.  Sleshmantaka,  i.e.  Cordia  Myxa. 
According  to  Medh.,  bhaumani, '  those  which  grow  on  or  come  from 
the  ground/  has  to  be  taken  as  a  separate  word,  and  denotes  a 
plant,  known  to  the  woodmen,  named  Gqgihvika,  Phlomnis  or 
Premna  Esculenta.  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Kull.  give  the  construction 
adopted  above,  and  the  latter  two  declare  that  mushrooms  growing 
on  trees  are  likewise  forbidden. 

16.  '  Though  he  may  be  in  distress/  i.e.  'tormented  by  hunger* 
(Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  sick'  (Nar.). 

18.  'He  may  either  at  once  (after  his  daily  meal)  cleanse  (his 


202  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VI, 

store  sufficient  for  a  month,  or  gather  what  suffices 
for  six  months  or  for  a  year. 

19.  Having  collected  food  according  to  his  ability, 
he  may  either  eat  at  night  (only),  or  in  the  day-time 
(only),  or  at  every  fourth  meal-time,  or  at  every 
eighth. 

20.  Or  he  may  live  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
lunar  penance  (Aandraya^a,  daily  diminishing  the 
quantity  of  his  food)  in  the  bright  (half  of  the  month) 
and  (increasing  it)  in  the  dark  (half) ;  or  he  may  eat 
on  the  last  days  of  each  fortnight,  once  (a  day  only), 
boiled  barley-gruel. 

2i.  Or  he  may  constantly  subsist  on  flowers, 
roots,  and  fruit  alone,  which  have  been  ripened  by 
time  and  have  fallen  spontaneously,  following  the 
rule  of  the  (Institutes)  of  Vikhanas. 

22.  Let  him  either  roll  about  on  the  ground,  or 
stand  during  the  day  on  tiptoe,  (or)  let  him  alter- 
nately stand  and  sit  down  ;  going  at  the  Savanas  (at 
sunrise,  at  midday,  and  at  sunset)  to  water  in  the 
forest  (in  order  to  bathe). 

%  23.  In  summer  let  him  expose  himself  to  the 
heat  of  five  fires,  during  the  rainy  season  live  under 
the  open  sky,  and  in  winter  be  dressed  in  wet 
clothes,  (thus)  gradually  increasing  (the  rigour  of) 
his  austerities. 

vessel  for  collecting  food),'  (Nar.),  means  'he  may  either  gather 
only  as  much  as  suffices  for  one  day.'  This  mode  of  subsistence 
is  apparently  the  same  as  that  called  Samprakshalani  vr/tti  by 
Baudhayana,  III,  2,  11. 

21.  All  the  commentators  except  Nar.  expressly  state  that  the 
text  refers  to  a  particular  set  of  Sutras,  ascribed  to  the  jfr'shi 
Vikhanas,  which  contained  rules  for  hermits.  Medh.  adds  that  the 
hermit  is  to  learn  other  practices  also  from  that  work. 

23.  'Five  fires,'  i.e.  'four  fires  and  the  sun  from  above.' 


VT,  29.  THE    HERMIT    IN    THE   FOREST.  203 

~ — ~  - — >  ■■-) 

24.  When  he  bathes  at  the  three  Savanas  (sunrise, 
midday,  and  sunset),  let  him  offer  libations  of  water  to 
the  manes  and  the  gods,  and  practising  harsher  and 
harsher  austerities,  let  him  dry  up  his  bodily  frame.^J 

25.  Having  reposited  the  three  sacred  fires  in 
himself,  according  to  the  prescribed  rule,  let  him 
live  without  a  fire,  without  a  house,  wholly  silent, 
subsisting  on  roots  and  fruit, 

26.  Making  no  effort  (to  procure)  things  that  give 
pleasure,  chaste,  sleeping  on  the  bare  ground,  not 
caring  for  any  shelter,  dwelling  at  the  roots  of  trees.     / 

27.  From  Brahma^as  (who  live  as)  ascetics,  let 
him  receive  alms,  (barely  sufficient)  to  support  life, 
or  from  other  householders  of  the  twice-born  (castes) 
who  reside  in  the  forest. 

28.  Or  (the  hermit)  who  dwells  in  the  forest  may 
bring  (food)  from  a  village,  receiving  it  either  in  a 
hollow  dish  (of  leaves),  in  (his  naked)  hand,  or  in  a 
broken  earthen  dish,  and  may  eat  eight  mouthfuls 

29.  These  and  other  observances  must  a  Brah- 
ma/za  who  dwells  in  the  forest  diligently  practise, 
and  in  order  to  attain  complete  (union  with)  the 
(supreme)  Soul,  (he  must  study)  the  various  sacred 
texts  contained  in  the  Upanishads,  — 

24.  Gov.  says  that  these  harsher  austerities  are  those  prescribed 
in  the  Vaikhanasa  ^astra.  Medh.  gives  as  instances,  standing  with 
uplifted  arms,  fasting  for  a  month,  and  the  Dvada^aratra. 

25.  'According  to  the  rule,'  i.e.  'by  swallowing  ashes  and  so  forth' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  which  mode  has  to  be  learned  from  the  aShi- 
vawaka  [-Srama^aka  Sutra]  (Medh.),  or  by  reciting  the  text  '  Ya  te 
agne  ya^iya,'  Taitt.  Sa/rch.  II,  5,  8,  8  (Nar.). 

29.  Atmasawsiddhaye,  'in  order  to  attain  complete  (union  with 
the  (supreme)  Soul/  may  also  mean  '  in  order  to  make  himself  or 
his  soul  perfect.'  Nar.  gives  the  correct  etymology  of  Upanishad, 
explaining  upanisha««a  yo/£yata  ity  upanishat,  'Upanishad  means  (a 
text)  which  is  recited  (while  the  pupils  are)  seated  near  (the  teacher).' 


I 


204  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VI,  30. 

30.  (As  well  as  those  rites  and  texts)  which  have 
been  practised  and  studied  by  the  sages  (jRzshis), 
and  by  Brahma/za  householders,  in  order  to  increase 
their  knowledge  (of  Brahman),  and  their  austerity, 
and  in  order  to  sanctify  their  bodies  ; 

31.  Or  let  him  walk,  fully  determined  and  going 
straight  on,  in  a  north-easterly  direction,  subsisting 

<   on  water  and  air,  until  his  body  sinks  to  rest. 

32.  A  Brahma;za,  having  got  rid  of  his  body  by 
one  of  those  modes  practised  by  the  great  sages,  is 
exalted  in  the  world  of  Brahman,  free  from  sorrow 
and  fear. 

33.  But  having  thus  passed  the  third  part  of  (a 

30.  Gov.  and  Kull.  separate  the  two  words  '  Brahmawa  house- 
holders/ The  former  explains  Brahma/za  by  'hermit,'  and  the 
latter  by  '  acquainted  with  the  Brahman,  i.  e.  ascetic.'  By  '  house- 
holders'  Kull.  understands  '  hermits  in  the  forest.'  Ragh.  explains 
Brahmawa  by  '  those  who  know  Brahman.' 

31.  Gov.  and  Kull.  take  yukta, '  firmly  resolved'  (Nar.,  Ragh.), 
in  the  sense  of  '  intent  on  the  practice  of  Yoga.'  Gov.  and  Kull. 
(see  also  Medh.  on  the  next  verse)  say  that  a  man  may  undertake 
the  Mahaprasthana,  or  '  Great  Departure/  on  a  journey  which  ends 
in  death,  when  he  is  incurably  diseased  or  meets  with  a  great  mis- 
fortune, and  that,  because  it  is  taught  in  the  .Sastras,  it  is  not 
opposed  to  the  Vedic  rules  which  forbid  suicide.  From  the  parallel 
passage  of  Ap.  II,  23,  2,  it  is,  however,  evident  that  a  voluntary 
death  by  starvation  was  considered  the  befitting  conclusion  of  a 
hermit's  life.  The  antiquity  and  general  prevalence  of  the  practice 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  Gaina  ascetics,  too,  consider 
it  particularly  meritorious. 

32.  'By  one  of  those  modes,'  i.e. 'drowning  oneself  in  a  river, 
precipitating  oneself  from  a  mount,  burning  oneself  or  starving 
oneself  to  death'  (Medh.) ;  or  'by  one  of  those  modes  of  practising 
austerities,  mentioned  above,  verse  23'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 
Medh.  adds  a  long  discussion,  trying  to  prove  that  '  the  world  of 
Brahman,'  which  the  ascetic  thus  gains,  is  not  the  real  complete 
liberation. 

33-85.  Ap.  II,  21,  2-17;  Gaut.  Ill,  1 1-25;  Vas.VI,  19-20;  X; 


/ 


VI,  39-  HERMIT  IN  THE  FOREST;   THE  ASCETIC.  205 

mans  natural  term  of)  life  in  the  forest,  he  may  live 
as  an  ascetic  during  the  fourth  part  of  his  existence, 
after  abandoning  all  attachment  to  worldly  objects. 

34.  He  who  after  passing  from  order  to  order, 
after  offering  sacrifices  and  subduing  his  senses, 
becomes,  tired  with  (giving)  alms  and  offerings  of 
food,  an  ascetic,  gains  bliss  after  death. 

35.  When  he  has  paid  the  three  debts,  let  him 
apply  his  mind  to  (the  attainment  of)  final  libera- 
tion ;  he  who  seeks  it  without  having  paid  (his  debts) 
sinks  downwards. 

36.  Having  studied  the  Vedas  in  accordance  with 
the  rule,  having  begat  sons  according  to  the  sacred 
law,  and  having  offered  sacrifices  according  to  his 
ability,  he  may  direct  his  mind  to  (the  attainment 
of)  final  liberation. 

37.  A  twice-born  man  who  seeks  final  liberation, 
without  having  studied  the  Vedas,  without  having 
begotten  sons,  and  without  having  offered  sacrifices, 
sinks  downwards. 

38.  Having  performed  the  Ish/i,  sacred  to  the 
Lord  of  creatures  (Pra^apati),  where  (he  gives)  all 
his  property  as  the  sacrificial  fee,  having  reposited 
the  sacred  fires  in  himself,  a  Brahma/za  may  depart 
from  his  house  (as  an  ascetic). 

39.  Worlds,  radiant  in  brilliancy,  become  (the  por- 
tion) of  him  who  recites  (the  texts  regarding)  Brah- 
man and  departs  from  his  house  (as  an  ascetic),  after 
giving  a  promise  of  safety  to  all  created^  beings. 

Baudh.  II,  11,  16-26;  17,  1-18,  27;  Vi.  XCVI-XCVII;  Yagri. 
Ill,  56-65. 

33.  Nar.  takes  asariga,  'attachment'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  in  the  sense 
of  '  possessions.' 

38.  The  description  of  the  rites  to  be  performed  on  entering  the 
order  of  ascetics  is  given  in  detail  in  Baudh.  II,  17. 


206  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VI,  40. 


,  40. 


40.  For  that  twice-born  man,  by  whom  not  the 
smallest  danger  even  is  caused  to  created  beings, 
there  will  be  no  danger  from  any  (quarter),  after  he 
is  freed  from  his  body. 

41.  Departing  from  his  house  fully  provided  with 
the  means  of  purification  (Pavitra),  let  him  wander 
about  absolutely  silent,  and  caring  nothing  for  enjoy- 
ments that  may  be  offered  (to  him). 

p*    42.   Let  him   always  wander  alone,  without  any 
companion,  in  order  to  attain  (final  liberation),  fully 
I  understanding  that  the  solitary  (man,  who)  neither 
/forsakes  nor  is  forsaken,  gains  his  end. 

[43.  He  shall  neither  possess  a  fire,  nor  a  dwelling, 
he  may  go  to  a  village  for  his  food,  (he  shall  be) 
indifferent  to  everything,  firm  of  purpose,  meditating 
(and)  concentrating  his  mind  on  Brahman. 

44.  A  potsherd  (instead  of  an  alms-bowl),  the  roots 
of  trees  (for  a  dwelling),  coarse  worn-out  garments, 

41.  Pavitropa&ta^,  '  provided  with  the  means  of  purification/ 
i.  e.  '  his  staff,  his  water-pot,  and  so  forth '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.), 
means  according  to  Medh.  either  '  applying  himself  to  the  recitation 
of  purificatory  texts  and  provided  with  the  means  of  purifications, 
i.e.  a  staff,  &c./  or  '  performing  penances  which  purify.'  Nar.  takes 
it  to  mean,  '  having  been  made  most  eminent  during  his  life  as 
a  householder  by  acts  which  purify,  i.e.  austerities  and  recitals  of 
the  Veda  and  so  forth ;'  and  Ragh.,  *  possessing  a  rich  store  of  sanc- 
tifying knowledge  taught  in  the  Upanishads.'  Nar.  takes  muni^, 
1  wholly  silent'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  in  the  sense  of  '  intent  on  meditation.' 
Nand.  explains  samupo^eshu,  '.  which  may  be  offered  to  him' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  by  'which  he  collected  in  his  house;'  and  Nar. 
by  { which  he  has  duly  enjoyed.' 

43.  Medh.  explains  munL£,  'meditating'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  by  ' wholly 
silent.'  Instead  of  asawkasuka^  or  ajawkasuka^,  '  firm  of  purpose' 
(Gov.,  Kull.),  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  prima  manu  read  asa^/('ayika^, 
1  destitute  of  any  store  of  provisions,'  and  Ragh.  ajankasuka^,  *  free 
from  doubts.'  Medh.,  whose  text  now  reads  asawkasuka^,  gives 
this  word  as  the  var.  lect.  of  others,  and  probably  originally  read, 
like  Nar.  and  Nand.,  asaw&iyika^. 


YT,  49.  THE    ASCETIC.  207 

life  in  solitude  and  indifference  towards  everything, 
are  the  marks  of  one  who  has  attained  liberation. 

45.  Let  him  not  desire  to  die,  let  him  not  desire 
to  live ;  let  him  wait  for  (his  appointed)  time,  as  a 


servant  (waits)  for  the  payment  of  his  wages. 

46.  Let  him  put  down  his  foot  purified  by  his 
sight,  let  him  drink  water  purified  by  (straining 
with)  a  cloth,  let  him  utter  speech  purified  by  truth, 
let  him  keep  his  heart  pure. 

47.  Let  him  patiently  bear  hard  words,  let  him 
not  insult  anybody,  and  let  him  not  become  any-  / 
body's  enemy  for  the  sake  of  this  (perishable)  body. 

48.  Against  an  angry  man  let  him  not  in  return 
show  anger,  let  him  bless  when  he  is  cursed,  and  let 
him  not  utter  speech,  devoid  of  truth,  scattered  at 
the  seven  gates. 

49.  Delighting  in  what  refers  to  the  Soul,  sitting 
(in  the  postures  prescribed  by  the  Yoga),  indepen- 
dent (of  external  help),  entirely  abstaining  from 
sensual  enjoyments,  with  himself  for  his  only  com- 
panion, he  shall  live  in  this  world,  desiring  the  bliss 
(of  final  liberation). 

45.  The  correct  reading  is  nirvcram  (Medh.,  Nar.,  var.  lect.,  Nand.) 
instead  of  nirdejam  (Gov.,  K.)  or  nidcraffz  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  The 
latter  reading  can,  as  Nar.  remarks,  only  mean  '  command.' 

46.  I.  e.  '  let  him  look  before  he  puts  down  his  foot,  lest  he 
injure  any  small  animal,  see  ver.  68'  (Gov.,  Medh.,  Ragh.),  or  'lest 
he  step  on  something  impure' (Kull.). 

48.  'The  seven  gates'  are,  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov., 
*  Dharma,  Artha,  and  Kama  separately,  Dharma  and  Artha,  Dharma 
and  Kama,  Artha  and  Kama,  and  finally  Dharmarthakama  con- 
jointly ;  according  to  Kull.  and  Medh., '  mind,  intellect,  and  the  five 
senses ;'  and  according  to  Nar.,  '  the  five  senses,  mind,  and  Aha.m- 
kara,  or  egoism.'  Kull.  mentions  another  explanation,  '  the  seven 
worlds,'  and  Medh.  gives  as  a  third  meaning,  '  the  seven  vital  airs 
located  in  the  head.'  The  general  sense,  '  what  refers  to  worldly 
matters,'  remains  always  the  same. 


208  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VI,  50. 

50.  Neither  by  (explaining)  prodigies  and  omens, 
nor  by  skill  in  astrology  and  palmistry,  nor  by 
giving  advice  and  by  the  exposition  (of  the  .Sastras), 
let  him  ever  seek  to  obtain  alms. 

51.  Let  him  not  (in  order  to  beg)  go  near  a 
house  filled  with  hermits,  Brahma/zas,  birds,  dogs, 
or  other  mendicants. 

1 —  52.  His  hair,  nails,  and  beard  being  clipped, 
carrying  an  alms-bowl,  a  staff,  and  a  water-pot,  let 
him   continually  wander  about,  controlling   himself 

[    and  not  hurting  any  creature. 

53.  His  vessels  shall  not  be  made  of  metal,  they 
shall  be  free  from  fractures ;  it  is  ordained  that  they 
shall  be  cleansed  with  water,  like  (the  cups,  called) 
isfamasa,  at  a  sacrifice. 

54.  A  gourd,  a  wooden  bowl,  an  earthen  (dish),  or 
one  made  of  split  cane,  Manu,  the  son  of  Sva- 
yambhu,  has  declared  (to  be)  vessels  (suitable)  for 
an  ascetic. 

55.  Let  him  go  to  beg  once  (a  day),  let  him  not 
be  eager  to  obtain  a  large  quantity  (of  alms) ;  for 
an  ascetic  who  eagerly  seeks  alms,  attaches  himself 
also  to  sensual  enjoyments. 

50.  According  to  Nar.  and  Ragh.,  angavidyd, '  palmistry'  (Medh., 
Kull.,  Nand.),  means  '  the  science  of  grammar  and  the  other  five 
Angas  of  the  Veda.'  Gov.  takes  nakshatrarigavidya  as  a  determi- 
native compound,  meaning  '  astrology.'  Aniwasana, '  giving  advice ' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand. 
1  teaching  the  Veda/  Vada, '  the  exposition  (of  the  .Sastras),'  (Gov., 
Kull.),  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Nar. '  disputations;'  accord- 
ing to  Nand.  and  Ragh.  'the  science  of  dialectics.'  This  verse, 
which  occurs  also  in  Vas.  X,  21,  is  historically  important,  as  it 
shows  that  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times,  ascetics  followed  worldly 
pursuits  and  were  the  teachers  or  advisers  of  the  people. 

55.  '  Let  him  not  go  oftener  to  beg'  is  Gov.'s  explanation,  instead 
of  '  let  him  not  be  eager  to  obtain  a  large  quantity  of  alms/ 


VI,  63.  THE   ASCETIC.  209 

56.  When  no  smoke  ascends  from  (the  kitchen), 
when  the  pestle  lies  motionless,  when  the  embers 
have  been  extinguished,  when  the  people  have  j 
finished  their  meal,  when  the  remnants  in  the  dishes 
have  been  removed,  let  the  ascetic  always  go  to 
beg. 

5  7.  Let  him  not  be  sorry  when  he  obtains  nothing, 
nor  rejoice  when  he  obtains  (something),  let  him 
(accept)  so  much  only  as  will  sustain  life,  let  him 
not  care  about  the  (quality  of  his)  utensils. 

58.  Let  him  disdain  all  (food)  obtained  in  conse- 
quence of  humble  salutations,  (for)  even  an  ascetic 
who  has  attained  final  liberation,  is  bound  (with  the 
fetters  of  the  Sawsara)  by  accepting  (food  given)  in 
consequence  of  humble  salutations.  ~-~ \ 

59.  By  eating  little,  and  by  standing  and  sitting 
in  solitude,  let  him  restrain  his  senses,  if  they  are 
attracted  by  sensual  objects. 

60.  By  the  restraint  of  his  senses,  by  the  destruc- 
tioji^o£ love  and  hatred,  and  by  the  abstention  from 
injuring  the  creatures,  he  becomes  fit  for  immor- 
tality. 

61.  Let  him  reflect  on  the  transmigrations  of  men,  i 
caused  by  their  sinful  deeds,  on  their  falling  into  / 
hell,  and  on  the  torments  in  the  world  of  Yama, 

62.  On  the  separation  from  their  dear  ones,  on 
their  union  with  hated  men,,  on  their  being  over- 
powered by  age  and  being  tormented  with  diseases, 

63.  On  the  departure  of  the  individual  soul  from 
this  body  and  its  new  birth  in  (another)  womb,  and 

57.  Matra,  'utensils,'  i.e.  his  staff,  water-pot,  &c.  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  NaT.  and  Nand.  '  a  portion, 
e.g.  a  mouthful'  (kavaladi^,  Nar.),  or  'a  portion,  i.e.  enough  to  fill 
his  stomach'  (udarapurawavadhir  matra). 

[=5]  P 


210 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


VI,  64, 


if 


r 


on  its  wanderings  through  ten  thousand  millions  of 
existences, 

64.  On  the  infliction  of  pain  on  embodied  (spirits), 
which  is  caused  by  demerit,  and  the  gain  of  eternal 
bliss,  which  is  caused  by  the  attainment  of  their 
highest  aim,  (gained  through)  spiritual  merit. 

65.  By  deep  meditation  let  him  recognise  the 
subtile  nature  of  the  supreme  Soul,  and  its  presence 
in  all  organisms,  both  the  highest  and  the  lowest. 

66.  To  whatever  order  he  may  be  attached,  let 
him,  though  blemished  (by  a  want  of  the  external 
marks),  fulfil  his  duty,  equal-minded  towards  all 
creatures ;  (for)  the  external  mark  (of  the  order)  is 
not  the  cause  of  (the  acquisition  of)  merit. 

67.  Though  the  fruit  of  the  Kataka  tree  (the 
clearing-nut)  makes  water  clear,  yet  the  (latter)  does 
not  become  limpid  in  consequence  of  the  mention  of 
the  (fruit's)  name. 

68.  In  order  to  preserve  living  creatures,  let  him 
always  by  day  and  by  night,  even  with  pain  to  his 
body,  walk,  carefully  scanning  the  ground. 

69.  In  order  to  expiate  (the  death)  of  those 
creatures  which  he  unintentionally  injures  by  day 
or  by  night,  an  ascetic  shall  bathe  and  perform  six 
suppressions  of  the  breath. 


65.  Nand.  omits  this  verse.  '  The  highest  aim'  is  'the  recogni- 
tion of  the  Brahman'  (Kull.),  and  the  good  fortune  of  attaining  that 
falls  only  to  the  lot  of  those  who  have  accumulated  a  rich  store 
of  merit. 

66.  Instead  of  dushito  'pi, '  though  blemished  (by  a  want  of  the 
external  marks  of  the  order)/  (Kull.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  Medh.,  Gov., 
Nar.,  and  K.  read  bhushito  'pi,  *  though  adorned  (with  garlands  and 
the  like)/ 

69.  Regarding  the  term  ?  suppression  of  the  breath/  see  Vas. 
XXV,  13,  and  Wilson,  Vishmipura«a,V,  p.  231  (ed.  Hall). 


VI,  74- 


THE   ASCETIC. 


211 


70.  Three  suppressions  of  the  breath  even,  per-  \ 
formed  according  to  the  rule,  and  accompanied  with  ; 
the  (recitation  of  the)  Vyahmis  and  of  the  syllable 
Om,   one  must  know  to  be  the  highest  (form  of) 
austerity  for  every  Brahma^a. 

71.  For  as  the  impurities  of  metallic  ores,  melted 
in  the  blast  (of  a  furnace),  are  consumed,  even  so? 
the  taints  of  the  organs  are  destroyed  through  the^ 
suppression  of  the  breath. 

72.  Let  him  destroy  the  taints  through  suppres- 
sions of  the  breath,  (the  production  of)  sin  by  fixed 
attention,  all  sensual  attachments  by  restraining  (his 
senses  and  organs),  and  all  qualities  that  are  not 
lordly  by  meditation. 

73.  Let  him  recognise  by  the  practice  of  medita- 
tion the  progress  of  the  individual  soul  through 
beings  of  various  kinds,  (a  progress)  hard  to  under- 
stand for  unregenerate  men.  • — 1 

74.  He  who  possesses  the  true  insight  (into  the    f 

71.  Vas.  XXV,  6;  Baudh.  IV,  1,  24. 

72.  Regarding  the  term  dharawa, ' fixed  attention/  see  Wilson, 
Vishtfupurawa,  V,  p.  237  (ed.  Hall),  and  Jacob,  Vedantasara,  p.  109. 

Anfavaran  gurcan, '  all  qualities  that  are  not  lordly/  Medh.  ex- 
plains the  qualities  by  l  goodness,  passion,  and  darkness,'  and  the 
epithet  'not  lordly' by  'depending  upon  another/  and  adds  that 
1  the  conceit  (abhimana)  of  the  soul  (purusha)  that  it  possesses  quali- 
ties and  is  affected  by  pleasure  or  pain  and  the  like  must  be 
destroyed/  Gov.  and  K.  assert  that  the  qualities  opposed  to  '  virtue, 
knowledge,  absence  of  passion  and  power'  (Davies,  Sawkhya,  p.  81) 
are  to  be  destroyed  by  '  meditation/  as  defined  in  the  Yogajastra. 
Similarly  Nar.,  who  (as  also  Nand.)  reads  anauvaran,  says  that  the 
qualities  that  are  opposed  to  true  knowledge  and  power,  and  are 
modifications  of  passion  and  darkness,  must  be  destroyed  by  medi- 
tating on  the  formless.  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  on  the  other  hand,  interpret 
the  passage  on  Vedanta  principles,  and  explain  the  qualities  as 
'  such  which  do  not  belong  to  the  lord,  Brahman,  i.e.  anger,  greed, 
envy,  and  so  forth/ 

P  2 


(Utfjrl 


* 


. 


2  I  2  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VI,  75 

nature  of  the  world),  is  not  fettered  by  his  deeds  ; 
but  he  who  is  destitute  of  that  insight,  is  drawn  into 
the  circle  of  births >  and  deaths. 

75.  By  not  injuring  any  creatures,  by  detaching 
the  senses  (from  objects  of  enjoyment),  by  the  rites 
prescribed  in  the  Veda,  and  by  rigorouslypra  ctising 
austerities,  (men)  gain  that  state  (even)  in  this 
(world). 

76-77.  Let  him  quit  this  dwelling,  composed  of 
the  "five  elements,  where  the  bones  are  the  beams, 
which  is  held  together  by  tendons  (instead  of  cords), 
where  the  flesh  and  the  blood  are  the  mortar,  which 
is  thatched  with  the  skin,  which  is  foul-smelling,  filled 
with  urine  and  ordure,  infested  by  old  age  and 
sorrow,  the  seat  of  disease,  harassed  by  pain,  gloomy 
with  passion,  and  perishable. 

78.  He  who  leaves  this  body,  (be  it  by  necessity) 
as  a  tree  (that  is  torn  from)  the  river- banRTbr  (freely) 
like  a  bird  (that)  quits  a  tree,  is  freed  from  the 
misery  (of  this  world,  dreadful  like)  a  shark. 

79.  Making  over  (the  merit  of  his  own)  good  actions 
to  his  friends  and  (the  guilt  of)  his  evil  deeds  to  his 
enemies,  he  attains  the  eternal  Brahman  by  the  prac- 
tice of  meditation. 

80.  When  by  the    disposition   (of  his    heart)  he 

75.  'By  the  rites  prescribed  in  the  Veda/  i.  e.  the  daily  rites 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  the  daily  rites  and  those  prescribed  for 
certain  occasions'  (Nar.,  Nand.).  '  That  state/  i.e.  'the  union  with 
Brahman'  (Gov.,  Kull,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  'that 
place,  i.e.  the  world  of  Brahman.'  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  tatparam, 
'  that  highest  (Brahman)/ 

76-77.  Maitr.  Up.  Ill,  4. 

79.  '  Making  over  (the  merit  of  his  own)  good  actions'  means 
according  to  Gov.  and  Medh.  '(the  merit  of  anybody's)  good  actions.' 

80.  '  In  this  world/  i.e.  he  becomes  a  (rivanmukta,  one  liberated 
during  this  life  (Nar.). 


VI,  84.  THE   ASCETIC.  213 

■v- 

becomes  indifferent  to  all  objects,  he  obtains  eternal 
happiness  both  in  this  world  and  after  death. 

81.  He  who  has  in  this  manner  gradually  given 
up  all  attachments  and  is  freed  from  all  the  pairs  (of 
opposites),  reposes  in  Brahman  alone. 

82.  All  that  has  been  declared  (above)  depends 
on  meditation ;  for  he  who  is  not  proficient  in  the 
knowledge  of  that  which  refers  to  the  Soul  reaps  not 
the  full  reward  of  the  performance  of  rites. 

83.  Let  him  constantly  recite  (those  texts  of)  the 
Veda  which  refer  to  the  sacrifice,  (those)  referring 
to  the  deities,  and  (those)  which  treat  of  the  Soul 
and  are  contained  in  the  concluding  portions  of  the 
Veda  (Vedanta). 

84.  That  is  the  refuge  of  the  ignorant,  and  even 

81.  '  The  pairs  of  opposites/  i.e.  hunger  and  satiety  and  so  forth 
(Gov.),  or  honour  and  dishonour  (Kull.). 

82.  I  follow  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.,  who  explain  the  verse  to 
mean  that  all  the  teaching  of  the  preceding  chapters  with  respect 
to  the  four  orders  depends,  as  far  as  its  ultimate  result  is  concerned, 
on  meditation,  because,  however  well  a  man  may  fulfil  the  pre- 
scribed rites,  he  cannot  reap  the  full  reward  without  knowing  and 
meditating  on  the  Brahman.  Kull.  refers  the  phrase  '  All  that  has 
been  declared*  to  the  contents  of  the  last  verse,  and  says  that  '  the 
complete  freedom  from  all  attachments  and  the  repose  in  Brah- 
man' depend  on  the  recognition  of  the  unity  of  the  individual  soul 
and  of  Brahman.  He  understands  by  kriyaphalam, '  the  reward  for 
the  act  of  meditating.'  Medh.  begins  with  an  explanation  similar 
to  that  of  Kull.,  but  he  takes  finally  kriyaphalam  in  the  same  sense 
as  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  Ragh.  explains  yad  etad  abhuabditam 
by  '  what  can  be  expressed  by  words.' 

83.  'Which  refer  to  the  sacrifice,'  i.e.  'the  Brahmawas'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Nand.),  or  '  the  Brahmaveda'  (Kull.,  Nar.),  or  '  the  Karma- 
kaWa/  e.g.  ishe  tva  ur^e  tva  (Va§\  Saz/zh.  I,  1),  Ragh.  'Those 
referring  to  the  deities/  i.e.  'Mantras  describing  the  various  deities' 
(Medh.,  Gov.),  e.  g.  Rig-veda  VIII,  44,  16  (Gov.).  The  third  class  of 
texts  mentioned  is  that  of  the  Upanishads ;  but  see  also  Goldstticker, 
Sansk.  Diet,  s.  v.  adhyatma. 


214 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


VI,  85. 


that  (the  refuge)  of  those  who  know  (the  meaning 
I  of  the  Veda);  that  is  (the  protection)  of  those  who 
seek  (bliss  in)  heaven  and  of  those  who  seek  endless 
(beatitude). 

85.  A  twice-born  man  who  becomes  an  ascetic, 
after  the  successive  performance  of  the  above-men- 
tioned acts,  shakes  off  sin  here  below  and  reaches 
the  highest  Brahman. 

86.  Thus  the  law  (valid)  for  self-restrained  ascetics 
has  been  explained  to  you ;  now  listen  to  the  (par- 
ticular) duties  of  those  who  give  up  (the  rites  pre- 
scribed by)  the  Veda. 

87.  The  student,  the  householder,  the  hermit,  and 
the  ascetic,  these  (constitute)  four  separate  orders, 
which  all  spring  from  (the  order  of)  householders. 

88.  But  all  (or)  even  (any  of)  these  orders,  assumed 
successively  in  accordance  with  the  Institutes  (of  the 
sacred  law),  lead  the  Brahma^a  who  acts  by  the 
preceding  (rules)  to  the  highest  state. 

89.  And  in  accordance  with  the  precepts  of  the 
Veda  and  of  the  Smrzti,  the  housekeeper  is  declared 


86.  Gov.  is  of  opinion  that  the  persons  named  above,  IV,  22, 
are  here  intended.  But  from  what  follows,  verses  94,  95,  it  appears 
that  those  Brahmawas  are  meant  who,  though  solely  intent  on  the 
acquisition  of  supreme  knowledge,  and  retired  from  all  worldly 
affairs,  continue  to  reside  in  their  houses;  see  also  IV,  257.  Gov. 
and  Nar.  assume  that  they  remain  householders,  while  Kull.  counts 
them  among  the  ascetics. 

87-93.  Ap.  II,  23-24;  Gaut.  Ill,  36;  Vas.VIII,  14-16 ;  X,  30; 
Baudh.  II,  n,  9-34  ;  Vi.  LIX,  27-29. 

According  to  the  commentators,  the  following  discussion  is  intro- 
duced in  order  to  show,  (1)  that  there  are  four  orders  only,  and 
that  the  Vedasawnyasika  belongs  to  these,  and  does  not  form  a 
fifth  order,  or  stand  outside  the  orders ;  (2)  that  as  the  order  of 
the  householders  is  the  most  distinguished,  it  is  proper  that  a  man 
may  continue  to  live  in  his  house  under  the  protection  of  his  son. 


VI,  95- 


THE    ASCETIC. 


215 


1) 


to  be  superior  to  all  of  them ;  for  he  supports  the 
other  three.  ^ 

90.  As  all  rivers,  both  great  and  small,  find  a 
resting-place  in  the  ocean,  even  so  men  of  all  orders 
find  protection  with  householders. 

91.  By  twice-born  men  belonging  to  (any  of)  these 
four  orders,  the  tenfold  law  must  be  ever  carefully 
obeyed. 

92.  Contentment,  forgiveness,  self-control,  absten- 
tion from  unrighteously  appropriating  anything,  (obe- 
dience to  the  rules  of)  purification,  coercion  of  the    , 
organs,  wisdom,  knowledge  (of  the  supreme  Soul), 
truthfulness,  and  abstention  from  anger,  (form)  the  ' 
tenfold  law. 

93.  Those  Brahma^as  who  thoroughly  study  the 
tenfold  law,  and  after  studying  obey  it,  enter  the 
highest  state. 

94.  A  twice-born  man  who,  with  collected  mind, 
follows  the  tenfold  law  and  has  paid  his  (three) 
debts,  may,  after  learning  the  Vedanta  according  to 
the  prescribed  rule,  become  an  ascetic. 

95.  Having  given  up  (the  performance  of)  all 
rites,  throwing  off  the  guilt  of  his  (sinful)  acts,  sub- 
duing his  organs  and  having  studied  the  Veda,  he 
may  live  at  his  ease  under  the  protection  of  his  son. 

92.  Tthritih, '  contentment,' means  according  to  Nar.,  Nand.,  and 
Ragh. '  firmness  of  purpose  or  in  the  discharge  of  duties/  Dama/£, 
'self-control,'  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Nand.  'humility;' 
according  to  Gov.  and  Nar. '  patience  under  sufferings ; '  according 
to  Kull.  and  Ragh. '  the  subjugation  of  the  internal  organ.'  Dhi/$, 
'wisdom/  means  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  'freedom  from 
doubts  and  errors;'  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  'knowledge  of 
the  true  meaning  of  the  .Sastras/  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  hvi/i, 
'  modesty  or  shame/ 

94.  Vas.  X,  26. 

95.  '  Having  studied  the  Veda/  i.  e.  '  the  Upanishads'  (Kull.). 


2l6 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


VI,  96. 


96.  He  who  has  thus  given  up  (the  performance 
of)  all  rites,  who  is  solely  intent  on  his  own  (parti- 
cular) object,  (and)  free  from  desires,  destroys  his 
guilt  by  his  renunciation  and  obtains  the  highest 
state. 

97.  Thus  the  fourfold  holy  law  of  Brahma^as, 
which  after  death  (yields)  imperishable  rewards,  has 
been  declared  to  you  ;  now  learn  the  duty  of  kings 


Chapter  VII. 


1.  I  will  declare  the  duties  of  kings,  (and)  show 
how  a  king  should  conduct  himself,  how  he  was 
created,  and  how  (he  can  obtain)  highest  success. 

2.  A  Kshatriya,  who  has  received  according  to 
the  rule  the  sacrament  prescribed  by  the  Veda, 
must  duly  protect  this  whole  (world). 

3.  For,  when  these  creatures,  being  without  a 
king,  through  fear  dispersed  in  all  directions,  the 
Lord  created  a  king  for  the  protection  of  this  whole 
(creation), 

4.  Taking  (for  that  purpose)  eternal  particles  of 
Indra,  of  the  Wind,  of  Yama,  of  the  Sun,  of  Fire, 
of  Varu/za,  of  the  Moon,  and  of  the  Lord  of  wealth 
(Kubera). 

Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  read  abhyasyan, '  studying  the 
Veda/  and  the  same  reading  is  mentioned  by  Medh.  as  a  var.  lect. 

96.  '  His  own  object/  i.  e.  '  final  liberation.' 

97.  According  to  Medh.  the  word  'Brahma/za'  is  not  intended 
to  exclude  other  Aryans ;  but  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.  it 
is  meant  to  prescribe  that  asceticism  is  permissible  for  Brahma^as 
alone. 

VII.  2.  '  The  sacrament/  i.  e. '  the  initiation'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar., 
Kull.),  or  'the  initiation  and  the  rest'  (Ragh.),  or  'the  sacrament  of 
the  coronation'  (Nand.).    The  last  opinion  seems  the  correct  one. 


VII,  12.  THE   KING.  2  I  J 

5.  Because  a  king  has  been  formed  of  particles 
of  those  lords  of  the  gods,  he  therefore  surpasses 
all  created  beings  in  lustre  ; 

6.  And,  like  the  sun,  he  burns  eyes  and  hearts  ; 
nor  can  anybody  on  earth  even  gaze  on  him. 

7.  Through  his  (supernatural)  power  he  is  Fire  and 
Wind,  he  Sun  and  Moon,  he  the  Lord  of  justice 
(Yama),  he  Kubera,  he  Varu/za,  he  great  Indra. 

8.  Even  an  infant  king  must  not  be  despised, 
(from  an  idea)  that  he  is  a  (mere)  mortal ;  for  he 
is  a  great  deity  in  human  form. 

9.  Fire  burns  one  man  only,  if  he  carelessly 
approaches  it,  the  fire  of  a  king's  (anger)  consumes 
the_(whole)  family,  together  with  its  cattle  and  its 
hoard  of  property. 

10.  Having  fully  considered  the  purpose,  (his) 
power,  and  the  place  and  the  time,  he  assumes  by 
turns  many  (different)  shapes  for  the  complete 
attainment  of  justice. 

11.  He,  in  whose  favour  resides  Padma,  the 
goddess  of  fortune,  in  whose  valour  dwells  victory, 
in  whose  anger  abides  death,  is  formed  of  the  lustre 
of  all  (gods). 

12.  The  (man),  who  in  his  exceeding  folly  hates 
him,  will  doubtlessly  perish  ;  for  the  king  quickly 
makes  up  his  mind  to  destroy  such  (a  man). 

5.  The  commentators  explain  teg-as,  'lustre,'  by  'prowess  or 
valour'  (virya).  The  next  verse,  however,  shows  that  at  least  a 
play  on  the  word  is  intended. 

10.  According  to  the  commentators,  the  verse  is  meant  as  a 
warning  to  those  who  are  too  confident  of  possessing  a  king's  favour. 

11.'  Padma,  the  goddess  of  fortune/  must  be  taken  according  to 
Nar.  and  Nand.  as  '  who  carries  a  lotus  in  her  hand,'  and  according  to 
Ragh.  'whose  dwelling  is  the  lotus.'  According  to  Medh.,Gov.,  and 
Kull.,  the  epithet  is  added  in  order  to  give  the  idea  of  greatness. 


2l8 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


VII,  ij 


I 


13.  Let  no  (man),  therefore,  transgress  that  law 
which  the  king  decrees  with  respect  to  his  favourites, 
nor  (his  orders)  which  inflict  pain  on  those  in  disfavour. 

14.  For  the  (king's)  sake  the  Lord  formerly  cre- 
ated his  own  son,  Punishment,  the  protector  of  all 
creatures,  (an  incarnation  of)  the  law,  formed  of 
Brahman's  glory. 

15.  Through  fear  of  him  all  created  beings,  both 
the  immovable  and  the  movable,  allow  themselves 
to  be  enjoyed  and  swerve  not  from  their  duties. 

16.  Having  fully  considered  the  time  and  the 
place  (of  the  offence),  the  strength  and  the  know- 
ledge (of  the  offender),  let  him  justly  inflict  that 
(punishment)  on  men  who  act  unjustly. 


1 


13.  Medh.  gives  the  following  instances.  If  a  king  orders  that 
during  the  celebration  of  a  wedding  in  the  house  of  a  minister  or 
other  favourite,  a  public  festival  is  to  be  held  in  the  town,  that 
everybody  is  to  appear  on  the  occasion,  or  that  during  so  and  so 
many  days  no  animals  are  to  be  killed,  no  birds  to  be  snared,  and 
no  debtors  to  be  imprisoned  by  their  creditors,  everybody  must 
obey.  The  same  shall  be  the  case  if  the  king  orders  with  respect 
to  persons  in  disfavour  that  they  are  to  be  shunned  by  everybody, 
that  nobody  is  to  enter  their  houses.  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  give 
the  same  explanation,  and  they  as  well  as  Medh.  add,  that  this  rule 
refers  to  lawful  orders  in  worldly  matters  only.  Nar.  seems  to  have 
taken  the  verse  differently,  in  a  sense  similar  to  that  contained  in  Sir 
W.  Jones'  translation. 

14.  YSgn.  I,  353. 

15.  Bhogaya  kalpante, '  allow  themselves  to  be  enjoyed'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Kull.  '  are  able  to 
enjoy  their  own.'  Gov.  says,  ^edanadibhayena  vrzkshadisthavara/zy 
api  phalapushpadidvarewopabhogarthaw  sawpadyante  niyatakalam 
pushpadidanavyavasthaw  natikramanti, '  through  fear  of  being  cut 
down  and  the  like  immovable  things  such  as  trees  become  fit  to 
be  enjoyed  by  means  of  their  fruit,  flowers,  and  so  forth,  (i.  e.)  they 
transgress  not  the  law  according  to  which  they  must  give  flowers,  &c. 
at  the  appointed  time;'  see  also  below,  verse  23. 

16.  Gaut.  XII,  51;  Vas.  XIX,  9;  Vi.  Ill,  91;  Ya^.  I,  367. 


' 


VII,  24.  THE   KING.  219 

17.  Punishment  is  (in  reality)  the  king  (and)  the 
male,  that  the  manager  of  affairs,  that  the  ruler,  and 
that  is  called  the  surety  for  the  four  orders'  obe- 
dience to  the  law. 

18.  Punishment  alone  governs  all  created  beings,  J. 
punishment  alone  protects  them,  punishment  watches    i 
over  them  while  they  sleep  ;  the  wise  declare  punish- 
ment (to  be  identical  with)  the  law. 

19.  If  (punishment)  is  properly  inflicted  after  (due) 
consideration,  it  makes  all  people  happy;  but  inflicted 
without  consideration,  it  destroys  everything. 

20.  If  the  king  did  not,  without  tiring,  inflict 
punishment  on  those  worthy  to  be  punished,  the 
stronger  would  roast  the  weaker,  like  fish  on  a  spit ;    q 

21.  The  crow  would  eat  the  sacrificial  cake  and 
the  dog  would  lick  the  sacrificial  viands,  and  owner- 
ship would  not  remain  with  any  one,  the  lower  ones/£fc^ Xi^ 
would  (usurp  the  place  of)  the  higher  ones. 

22.  The  whole  world  is  kept  in  order  by  punish-^ 
ment,  for  a  guiltless  man  is  hard  to  find ;  through  \ 
fear  of  punishment  the  whole  world  yields  the  enjoy-  I 
ments  (which  it  owes). 

23.  The  gods,  the  Danavas,  the  Gandharvas,  the 
Rakshasas,  the  bird  and  snake  deities  even  give 
the  enjoyments  (due  from  them)  only,  if  they  are 
tormented  by  (the  fear  of)  punishment. 

24.  All  castes  (var^a)  would  be  corrupted  (by 
intermixture),  all  barriers  would  be  broken  through, 

17.  'That  is  the  male,'  i.e.  'compared  with  him  all  others  are 
(weak)  women'  (Kull.). 

19.  Yagri.  I,  355. 

23.  The  commentators  quote  in  explanation  of  this  verse  a  pas- 
sage from  the  Ya^iir-veda, '  Through  fear  the  fire  warms,  through 
fear  the  sun  shines,  through  fear  move  Indra,  the  Wind,  and  Death, 
as  the  fifth/ 


2  20  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII, 

and  all  men  would  rage  (against  each  other)  in  con- 
sequence of  mistakes  with  respect  to  punishment. 

25.  But  where  Punishment  with  a  black  hue  and 
red  eyes  stalks  about,  destroying  sinners,  there  the 
subjects  are  not  disturbed,  provided  that  he  who 
inflicts  it  discerns  well. 

26.  They  declare  that  king  to  be  a  just  inflicter 
of  punishment,  who  is  truthful,  who  acts  after  due 
consideration,  who  is  wise,  and  who  knows  (the  re- 
spective value  of)  virtue,  pleasure,  and  wealth. 

27.  A  king  who  properly  inflicts  (punishment), 
prospers  with  respect  to  (those)  three  (means  of 
happiness) ;  but  he  who  is  voluptuous,  partial,  and 
deceitful  will  be  destroyed,  even  through  the  (un- 
just) punishment  (which  he  inflicts). 

28.  Punishment  (possesses)  a  very  bright  lustre, 
and  is  hard  to  be  administered  by  men  with  unim- 
proved minds  ;  it  strikes  down  the  king  who  swerves 
from  his  duty,  together  with  his  relatives. 

29.  Next  it  will  afflict  his  castles,  his  territories, 
the  whole  world  together  with  the  movable  and 
immovable  (creation),  likewise  the  sages  and  the 
gods,  who  (on  the  failure  of  offerings)  ascend  to 
the  sky. 

30.  (Punishment)  cannot  be  inflicted  justly  by 
one  who  has  no  assistant,  (nor)  by  a  fool,  (nor) 
by  a  covetous  man,  (nor)  by  one  whose  mind  is 
unimproved,  (nor)  by  one  addicted  to  sensual 
pleasures. 

25.  Vi.  Ill,  96.  26.  Gaut.  XI,  2. 

27.  Vishama/^, '  partial'  (Nar.),  means  according  to  Gov.,  Kull., 
and  Ragh. '  wrathful.' 

28  'By  men  with  unimproved  minds,'  i.  e. '  who  have  not  learnt 
the  Sastras'  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

30-31.  Gaut.  XI,  4;  Yagn.  I,  308-309,  354. 


VII,  38.  THE   KING.  221 

31.  By  him  who  is  pure  (and)  faithful  to  his 
promise,  who  acts  according  to  the  Institutes  (of  the 
sacred  law),  who  has  good  assistants  and  is  wise, 
punishment  can  be  (justly)  inflicted. 

32.  Let  him  act  with  justice  in  his  own  domain, 
with  rigour  chastise  his  enemies,  behave  without 
duplicity  towards  his  friends,  and  be  lenient  towards 
Brahma;zas. 

33.  The  fame  of  a  king  who  behaves  thus,  even 
though  he  subsist  by  gleaning,  is  spread  in  the  world, 
like  a  drop  of  oil  on  water. 

34.  But  the  fame  of  a  king  who  acts  in  a  contrary 
manner  and  who  does  not  subdue  himself,  diminishes 
in  extent  among  men  like  a  drop  of  clarified  butter 
in  water. 

35.  The  king  has  been  created  (to  be)  the  protector 
of  the  castes  (var^a)  and  orders,  who,  all  according 
to  their  rank,  discharge  their  several  duties. 

36.  Whatever  must  be  done  by  him  and  by  his 
servants  for  the  protection  of  his  people,  that  I  will 
fully  declare  to  you  in  due  order. 

37.  Let  the  king,  after  rising  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, worship  Brahma/zas  who  are  well  versed  in  the 
threefold  sacred  science  and  learned  (in  polity),  and 
follow  their  advice.  —-*' 

38.  Let  him  daily  worship  aged  Brahma;zas  who 
know  the  Veda  and  are  pure ;  for  he  who  always 
worships  aged  men,  is  honoured  even  by  Rakshasas. 

31.  Pure,  i.  e. '  with  respect  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth/  or  '  not 
covetous'  (Medh.,Gov.,Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  Satyasawdha/  faithful  to 
his  promise'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh. '  who 
cares  for  truth  alone.' 

32.  Vi.  Ill,  96;  Yagn,  I,  333.  33.  Vi.  Ill,  97. 
37-38.  Vi.  Ill,  76-77. 


222 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


VII,  39- 


39.  Let  him,  though  he  may  already  be  modest, 
constantly  learn  modesty  from  them;  for  a  king 
who  is  modest  never  perishes. 

40.  Through  a  want  of  modesty  many  kings  have 
perished,  together  with  their  belongings ;  through 
modesty  even  hermits  in  the  forest  have  gained 
kingdoms. 

41.  Through  a  want  of  humility  Vena  perished, 
likewise  king  Nahusha,  Sudas,  the  son  of  Pi^avana, 
Sumukha,  and  Nemi. 

42.  But  by  humility  Frithu  and  Manu  gained  sove- 
reignty, Kubera  the  position  of  the  Lord  of  wealth, 
and  the  son  of  Gadhi  the  rank  of  a  Brahma^a. 

43.  From  those  versed  in  the  three  Vedas  let  him 
learn  the  threefold  (sacred  science),  the  primeval 
science  of  government,  the  science  of  dialectics,  and 
the  knowledge  of  the  (supreme)  Soul;  from  the 
people  (the  theory  of)  the  (various)  trades  and 
professions. 

44.  Day  and  night  he  must  strenuously  exert  him- 
self to  conquer  his  senses ;  for  he  (alone)  who  has 
conquered  his  own  senses,  can  keep  his  subjects  in 
obedience. 

45.  Let  him  carefully  shun  the  ten  vices,  springing 

41.  I  read  with  Meuh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  K.,  Suda/£  pai^a- 
vanaj  &uva,  instead  of  Sudaso  yavana-r  £aiva  (Kull.).  Nand.  has 
Vai^avana,  a  mere  clerical  mistake.  As  Medh.  remarks,  the  legends 
regarding  the  worthies  mentioned  here  occur  in  the  Mahabharata. 

42.  The  son  of  Gadhi,  i.e.  Vijvamitra;  see  Muir,  Original 
Sanskrit  Texts,  I,  p.  83  seqq. 

43.  Gaut.  XI,  3;  Yagfi.  I,  310.  Nar.  takes  anvikshikiw  kit- 
mavidyam  to  mean  '  and  the  science  of  dialectics,  i.  e.  the  Nyaya, 
Sa/rckhya,  and  so  forth,  which  is  useful  for  obtaining  final  libera- 
tion.' Medh.  too  is  not  certain  if  anvikshiki  is  to  be  taken  by  itself, 
but  proposes ' the  science  of  dialectics  which  will  be  useful  to  him.' 

45-48.  Vi.  Ill,  50-51. 


VII,  52.  THE   KING.  2  23 

from  love  of  pleasure,  and  the  eight,  proceeding  from 
wrath,  which  (all)  end  in  misery. 

46.  For  a  king  who  is  attached  to  the  vices 
springing  from  love  of  pleasure,  loses  his  wealth 
and  his  virtue,  but  (he  who  is  given)  to  those 
arising  from  anger,  (loses)  even  his  life. 

47.  Hunting,  gambling,  sleeping  by  day,  censor i- 
ousness,  (excess  with)  women,  drunkenness,  (an 
inordinate  love  for)  dancing,  singing,  and  music, 
and  useless  travel  are  the  tenfold  set  (of  vices) 
springing  from  love  of  pleasure. 

48.  Tale-bearing,  violence,  treachery,  envy,  slan- 
dering, (unjust)  seizure  of  property,  reviling,  and 
assault  are  the  eightfold  set  (of  vices)  produced  by 
wrath. 

49.  That  greediness  which  all  wise  men  declare 
to  be  the  root  even  of  both  these  (sets),  let  him 
carefully  conquer ;  both  sets  (of  vices)  are  produced 
by  that. 

50.  Drinking\dicer  women,  and  hunting,  these 
four  (which  have  been  enumerated)  in  succession, 
he  must  know  to  be  the  most  pernicious  in  the 
set  that  springs  from  love  of  pleasure,, 

51.  Doing  bodily  injury,  reviling-,  and  the  seizure 
of  property,  these  three  he  must  know  to  be  the 
most  pernicious  in  the  set  produced  by  .wrath. 

52.  A  self-controlled  (king)  should  know  that  in 
this  set  of  seven,  which  prevails  everywhere,  each 


49.  '  Greediness  (lobha)  is  the  root  of  all  (these  vices),  because 
(the  king)  acts  in  some  (of  these  cases)  from  a  desire  for  money, 
and  in  others  from  a  greediness  of  sensual  pleasures'  (Gov.). 

52.  Medh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  atmana^  instead  of  atmavan,  and 
in  that  case  the  translation  must  be, ■  Let  him  know  that  in  this  set 
.  .  .  each  earlier-named  vice  is  more  pernicious  for  him  (than  .  .  .).' 


224 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


VII,  53- 


earlier-named  vice  is  more  abominable  (than  those 
named  later). 

53.  (On  a  comparison)  between  vice  and  death, 
vice  is  declared  to  be  more  pernicious ;  a  vicious 
man  sinks  to  the  nethermost  (hell),  he  who  dies, 
free  from  vice,  ascends  to  heaven. 

54.  Let  him  appoint  seven  or  eight  ministers 
whose  ancestors  have  been  royal  servants,  who  are 
versed  in  the  sciences,  heroes  skilled  in  the  use  of 
weapons  and  descended  from  (noble)  families  and 
who  have  been  tried. 

55.  Even  an  undertaking  easy  (in  itself)  is  (some- 
times) hard  to  be  accomplished  by  a  single  man ; 
how  much  (harder  is  it  for  a  king),  especially  (if  he 
has)  no  assistant,  (to  govern)  a  kingdom  which  yields 
great  revenues. 

56.  Let  him  daily  consider  with  them  the  ordinary 
(business,  referring  to)  peace  and  war,  (the  four  sub- 
jects called)  sthana,  the  revenue,  the  (manner  of) 
protecting  (himself  and  his  kingdom),  and  the  sanc- 
tification  of  his  gains  (by  pious  gifts). 

54.  Vi.  Ill,  71 ;  Ya§™.  I,  311.  Labdhalakshan,  'skilled  in  the 
use  of  weapons'  (Kull.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov., 
Nand.,  and  Ragh.  '*tfio  fail  not  in  their  undertakings.'  Pari- 
kshitan  (Gov.,  Kull.,  and  K.),  or  suparikshitan  (Medh.,  Nar.), '  who 
have  been  tried,'  i.  e.  by  tempting  them  in  various  ways  (Medh.), 
or  'if  they  are  incorruptible'  (Nar.),  or  'who  have  been  examined 
by  spies'  (Gov.),  or  'who  have  been  bound  to  fidelity  by  touching 
images  of  the  gods,  &c.'  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nand.  reads  parikshakan, 
'  who  examine  (the  state-affairs).' 

55.  The  correct  reading  is  kimu,  'how  much  harder'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
sec,  manu,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  K.),  instead  of  the  kiw  tu, '  but,'  of 
the  editions. 

56.  Yagn.  I,  31 1.  Sthana  means  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  N,ar., 
Ragh. '  the  army,  the  treasury,  the  town,  and  the  kingdom ;'  accord- 
ing to  Medh.  either  that  or  'the  loss  of  his  kingdom  ;'  according  to 
>Jand. '  halting'  (asana). 


VII,  63.  THE   KING.  225 

57.  Having  (first)  ascertained  the  opinion  of  each 
(minister)  separately  and  (then  the  views)  of  all 
together,  let  him  do  what  is  (most)  beneficial  for 
him  in  his  affairs. 

58.  But  with  the  most  distinguished  among  them 
all,  a  learned  Brahma^a,  let  the  king  deliberate  on 
the  most  important  affairs  which  relate  to  the  six 
measures  of  royal  policy. 

59.  Let  him,  full  of  confidence,  always  entrust  to 
that  (official)  all  business  ;  having  taken  his  final 
resolution  with  him,  let  him  afterwards  begin  to  act. 

60.  He  must  also  appoint  other  officials,  (men) 
of  integrity,  (who  are)  wise,  firm,  well  able  to  collect 
money,  and  well  tried. 

61.  As  many  persons  as  the  due  performance  of 
his  business  requires,  so  many  skilful  and  clever 
(men),  free  from  sloth,  let  him  appoint. 

62.  Among  them  let  him  employ  the  brave,  the 
skilful,  the  high-born,  and  the  honest  in  (offices  for 
the  collection  of)  revenue,  (e.g.)  in  mines,  manufac- 
tures, and  storehouses,  (but)  the  timid  in  the  interior 
of  his  palace. 

63.  Let  him  also  appoint  an  ambassador  who  is 
versed  in  all  sciences,  who  understands  hints,  ex- 
pressions of  the  face  and  gestures,  who  is  honest, 
skilful,  and  of  (noble)  family. 

58.  Ya^n.  I,  311. 

60.  Nar.  mentions  kulodgatan,  *  of  noble  families/  as  a  var.  lect. 
for  avasthitan, '  firm/ 

62.  Vi.  Ill,  18,  21.  Medh.  refers  karmanta,  literally  'manage- 
ment/ to  'sugar-mills,  distilleries,  and  so  forth ;'  Gov.  and  Kull.  add 
*  storehouses  of  grain;'  Nar.  explains  it  by  Cv manufactories  of  orna- 
ments and  weapons  and  so  forth/  It  is,  however,  not  impossible  that 
the  compound  akarakarmante  may  mean  'for  superintending  mines 
and  manufactories/  Akara  has  very  frequently  that  double  meaning. 

[25]  Q 


226  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VII,  64. 

64.  (Such)  an  ambassador  is  commended  to  a 
king  (who  is)  loyal,  honest,  skilful,  possessing  a  good 
memory,  who  knows  the  (proper)  place  and  time  (for 
action,  who  is)  handsome,  fearless,  and  eloquent. 

65.  The  army  depends  on  the  official  (placed  in 
charge  of  it),  the  due  control  (of  the  subjects)  on  the 
army,  the  treasury  and  the  (government  of)  the  realm 
on  the  king,  peace  and  its  opposite  (war)  on  the 
ambassador. 

66.  For  the  ambassador  alone  makes  (kings')  allies 
and  separates  allies ;  the  ambassador  transacts  that 
business  by  which  (kings)  are  disunited  or  not. 

67.  With  respect  to  the  affairs  let  the  (ambassador) 
explore  the  expression  of  the  countenance,  the  ges- 
tures and  actions  of  the  (foreign  king)  through  the 
gestures  and  actions  of  his  confidential  (advisers), 
and  (discover)  his  designs  among  his  servants. 

68.  Having  learnt  exactly  (from  his  ambassador) 
the  designs  of  the  foreign  king,  let  (the  king)  take 
such  measures  that  he  does  not  bring  evil  on  himself. 

64.  Anurakta^,  'loyal'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to 
Kull.  '  who  is  beloved  among  the  people/ 

66.  Instead  of  bhifyante  yena  va  na  va\  'by  which  (kings)  are 
disunited  or  not'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  Medh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  bhid- 
yante  yena  manava^,  and  Gov.  bhidyante  yena  bandhava^,  'by 
which  men  or  relatives  are  disunited/ 

67.  Nigu^engitaiesh/itai^, '  through  the  gestures  and  actions  of 
his  confidential  (advisers),'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh. 
and  Gov.  'by  his  own  hidden  gestures  and  actions/  or  perhaps 
'  while  suppressing  all  significant  gestures  and  actions  on  his  own 
part ; '  according  to  Nand.  '  through  men  who  hide  their  own  ges- 
tures and  actions/ 

68.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  take  the  verse  differently. 
'  Having  learnt  exactly  the  designs  of  the  foreign  king,  (the  ambas- 
sador) shall  take  such  measures  that  he  does  not  bring  evil  on 
himself  (and  his  master).' 


VII,  74-  THE   KING.  22  7 

69.  Let  him  settle  in  a  country  which  is  open  and 
has  a  dry  climate,  where  grain  is  abundant,  which  is 
chiefly  (inhabited)  by  Aryans,  not  subject  to  epi- 
demic diseases  (or  similar  troubles),  and  pleasant, 
where  the  vassals  are  obedient  and  his  own  (people 
easily)  find  their  livelihood. 

70.  Let  him  build  (there)  a  town,  making  for  his 
safety  a  fortress,  protected  by  a  desert,  or  a  fortress 
built  of  (stone  and)  earth,  or  one  protected  by  water 
or  trees,  or  one  (formed  by  an  encampment  of  armed) 
men  or  a  hill-fort. 

71.  Let  him  make  every  effort  to  secure  a  hill- 
fort,  for  amongst  all  those  (fortresses  mentioned)  a 
hill-fort  is  distinguished  by  many  superior  qualities. 

72.  The  first  three  of  those  (various  kinds  of  for- 
tresses) are  inhabited  by  wild  beasts,  animals  living 
in  holes  and  aquatic  animals,  the  last  three  by 
monkeys,  men,  and  gods  respectively. 

*]$.  As  enemies  do  not  hurt  these  (beings,  when 
they  are)  sheltered  by  (their)  fortresses,  even  so  foes 
(can)not  injure  a  king  who  has  taken  refuge  in 
his  fort. 

74.  One  bowman,  placed  on  a  rampart,  is  a  match 
in  battle  for  one  hundred  (foes),  one  hundred  for  ten 


69.  Vi.  111,4-5;  Ya^T.  I,  320.  The  full  definition  of^-ahgala^, 
•  which  is  open  and  has  a  dry  climate,'  is,  according  to  a  verse 
quoted  by  Gov.,  Ragh.,  and  Kull./That  country  is  called  ^ahgala, 
which  has  little  water  and  grass,  where  strong  breezes  prevail,  the 
heat  is  great,  where  grain  and  the  like  are  abundant/  Anavila, '  not 
subject  to  epidemic  diseases  (or  similar  troubles),'  (Kull.  and  Ragh.), 
means  according  to  Medh.  'where  the  people  are  not  quarrelsome;' 
according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  '  free  from  defilement  such  as  a  mix- 
ture of  the  castes.' 

70.  Vi.  Ill,  6. 

Q   2 


228  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VII,  75. 

thousand ;  hence  it  is  prescribed  (in  the  .Sastras  that 
a  king  shall  possess)  a  fortress. 

75.  Let  that  (fort)  be  well  supplied  with  weapons, 
money,  grain  and  beasts  of  burden,  with  Brahma^as, 
with  artisans,  with  engines,  with  fodder,  and  with 
water. 

76.  Let  him  cause  to  be  built  for  himself,  in  the 
centre  of  it,  a  spacious  palace,  (well)  protected, 
habitable  in  every  season,  resplendent  (with  white- 
wash), supplied  with  water  and  trees. 

"j "j.  Inhabiting  that,  let  him  wed  a  consort  of 
equal  caste  (vama),  who  possesses  auspicious  marks 
(on  her  body),  and  is  born  in  a  great  family,  who 
is  charming  and  possesses  beauty  and  excellent 
qualities. 

78.  Let  him  appoint  a  domestic  priest  (purohita) 
and  choose  officiating  priests  (ritvig) ;  they  shall 
perform  his  domestic  rites  and  the  (sacrifices)  for 
which  three  fires  are  required. 

79.  A  king  shall  offer  various  (.Srauta)  sacrifices 
at  which  liberal  fees  (are  distributed),  and  in  order 


75.  Yantrai^, '  with  engines/  i.e.  'with  catapults  and  so  forth' 
(kshepyadibhi/^,  Nar.),  "br  '  made  of  iron  and  so  forth'  (Ragh.). 

76.  Ap.  II,  25,  2-3.  Sarvartukam,  'habitable  in  every  season' 
(N&r.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. 
'  supplied  with  the  produce  of  every  season.' 

78.  Gaut.  XI,  12-18;  Vas.  XIX,  3-6;  Baudh.  I,  18,  7-8;  Vi. 
Ill,  70;  Y&gn.  I,  312-313.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  read,  as 
the  sense  requires,  ritrngzh, '  officiating  priests,'  while  Kull.  alone 
gives  the  singular. 

79.  Ap.  II,  26,  1 ;  Vi.  Ill,  81,  84  ;  Y^gro.  I,  314.  '  Enjoyments,' 
i.  e.' garlands,  perfumes,  unguents,  and  so  forth'  (Medh.),  or  '  houses, 
couches,  and  so  forth'  (Gov.,  Ragh.),  or  '  gold,  clothes,  &c.'  (Kull.), 
or  '  wives,  houses,  clothes,  and  so  forth'  (Nar.),  or  *  cows  and 
buffalos'  (Nand.). 


VII,  85.  THE   KING.  229 

to  acquire  merit,  he  shall  give  to  Brahma^as  enjoy- 
ments and  wealth. 

80.  Let  him  cause  the  annual  revenue  in  his 
kingdom  to  be  collected  by  trusty  (officials),  let  him 
obey  the  sacred  law  in  (his  transactions  with)  the 
people,  and  behave  like  a  father  towards  all  men. 

81.  For  the  various  (branches  of  business)  let  him 
appoint  intelligent  supervisors ;  they  shall  inspect  all 
(the  acts)  of  those  men  who  transact  his  business. 

82.  Let  him  honour  those  Brahma/zas  who  have 
returned  from  their  teacher's  house  (after  studying 
the  Veda) ;  for  that  (money  which  is  given)  to 
Brahma^as  is  declared  to  be  an  imperishable  trea- 
sure for  kings. 

83.  Neither  thieves  nor  foes  can  take  it,  nor  can 
it  be  lost ;  hence  an  imperishable  store  must  be 
deposited  by  kings  with  Brahma^as. 

84.  The  offering  made  through  the  mouth  of 
a  Brahma/za,  which  is  neither  spilt,  nor  falls  (on  the 
ground),  nor  ever  perishes,  is  far  more  excellent  than 
Agnihotras. 

85.  A  gift  to  one  who  is  not  a  Brahma/za  (yields) 
the  ordinary  (reward;  a  gift)  to  one  who  calls  him- 
self a  Brahma^a,  a  double  (reward)  ;  a  gift  to  a  well- 

80.  Y&gri.  I,  321.  '  Let  him  obey  the  sacred  law  in  (his  trans- 
actions with  his)  people,'  i.  e.  '  let  him  not  take  higher  taxes  and 
duties  than  the  law  permits.' 

83.  Yagfi.  I,  314. 

84.  Vas.  XXX,  7 ;  Yagn.  I,  315.  Na  vyathate, '  nor  falls  (on  the 
ground),'  (Gov.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Kull. '  nor  is  dried  up.' 
Medh.  reads  /tyavate, '  falls  (on  the  ground),'  and  Nar.  prefers  that 
reading.  Nand.  explains  na  vyadhate  (sic)  by  '  is  not  spoilt  by  hairs 
or  insects  falling  into  it.'  Ragh.  takes  it,  like  Krzsh«apa«</ita  in  his 
comm.  on  Vas.  XXX,  7,  in  the  sense  of '  nor  causes  pain.' 

85.  Gaut.  V,  20  ;  Vi.  XCIII,  1-4.    Samam  phalam, '  the  ordinary 


23O  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII,  86. 

read  Brahma/za,  a  hundred-thousandfold  (reward) ; 
(a  gift)  to  one  who  knows  the  Veda  and  the  Angas 
(Vedaparaga,  a  reward)  without  end. 

86.  For  according  to  the  particular  qualities  of  the 
recipient  and  according  to  the  faith  (of  the  giver) 
a  small  or  a  great  reward  will  be  obtained  for  a  gift 
in  the  next  world. 

87.  A  king  who,  while  he  protects  his  people, 
is  defied  by  (foes),  be  they  equal  in  strength,  or 
stronger,  or  weaker,  must  not  shrink  from  battle, 
remembering  the  duty  of  Kshatriyas. 

88.  Not  to  turn  back  in  battle,  to  protect  the 
people,  to  honour  the  Bralima/zas,  is  the  best  means 
for  a  king  to  secure  happiness. 

89.  Those  kings  who,  seeking  to  slay  each  other 
in  battle,  fight  with  the  utmost  exertion  and  do  not 
turn  back,  go  to  heaven. 

90.  When  he  fights  with  his  foes  in  battle,  let  him 
not  strike  with  weapons  concealed  (in  wood),  nor 
with  (such  as  are.)  barbed,  poisoned,  or  the  points 
of  which  are  blazing  with  fire. 

91.  Let  him  not  strike  one  who  (in  flight)  has 


reward,'  i.e.  'just  as  mu^h  as  the  Veda  promises  for  the  object 
given' (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  takes  samam  in  the  sense  of 
1  middling,'  and  Nar.  explains  it  by '  a  reward  equal  to  the  kindness 
shown.'  Instead  of  pradhite,  ■  to  a  well-read  Brahmarca,'  Medh., 
Gov.,  Nar.,  and  K.  read  a&irye, '  to  the  teacher/  and  Nand.  jrotriye, 
'to  a  -Srotriya/  Moreover,  Gov.,  K.,  and  Nand.  have  sahasra- 
gunam  or  sahasraw  . .  danam, '  a  thousandfold  reward.' 

87-89.   Ap.  II,  26,  2;    Gaut.  X,  16;   Baudh.  I,  18,  9;  Vi.  Ill, 
43-45  5  Ya§™.  I,  322-323. 

90.  Baudh.  I,  18,  10.     Ku7ai>5,  'concealed  (in  wood)/  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nand.  '  treacherous.' 

91-93.  Ap.  II,  10, 11;  Gaut.  X,  18;  Baudh.  1, 18, 11;  Ya^.1,325. 

91.  Sthalaru^am,  'one  who  (in  flight)  has  climbed  on  an  emi- 
nence' (Nar.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  'one 


VII,  97-  THE   KING.  23 1 

climbed  on  an  eminence,  nor  a  eunuch,  nor  one  who 
joins  the  palms  of  his  hands  (in  supplication),  nor 
one  who  (flees)  with  flying  hair,  nor  one  who  sits 
down,  nor  one  who  says  •  I  am  thine ;' 

92.  Nor  one  who  sleeps,  nor  one  who  has  lost  his 
coat  of  mail,  nor  one  who  is  naked,  nor  one  who  is 
disarmed,  nor  one  who  looks  on  without  taking  part 
in  the  fight,  nor  one  who  is  fighting  with  another  (foe) ; 

93.  Nor  one  whose  weapons  are  broken,  nor  one 
afflicted  (with  sorrow),  nor  one  who  has  been  griev- 
ously wounded,  nor  one  who  is  in  fear,  nor  one  who 
has  turned  to  flight ;  (but  in  all  these  cases  let  him) 
remember  the  duty  (of  honourable  warriors). 

94.  But  the  (Kshatriya)  who  is  slain  in  battle, 
while  he  turns  back  in  fear,  takes  upon  himself  all 
the  sin  of  his  master,  whatever  (it  may  be) ; 

95.  And  whatever  merit  (a  man)  who  is  slain  in 
flight  may  have  gained  for  the  next  (world),  all  that 
his  master  takes.  . 

96.  Chariots  and  horses,  elephants,  parasols, 
money,  grain,  cattle,  women,  all  sorts  of  (market- 
able) goods  and  valueless  metals  belong  to  him  who 
takes  them  (singly)  conquering  (the  possessor). 

97.  A  text  of  the  Veda  (declares)  that  (the 
soldiers)  shall  present  a  choice  portion  (of  the  booty) 
to  the  king ;  what  has  not  been  taken  singly,  must 
be  distributed  by  the  king  among  all  the  soldiers. 

who  has  alighted  on  the  ground/  i.  e. '  while  the  assailant  stands  on 
his  chariot.' 

92.  Medh.  mentions  a  var.  lect.  bhagnam,  '  who  is  broken'  (?), 
for  nagnam, ( who  is  naked.' 

94-95.  Yagri.  I,  324.  96-97.  Gaut.  X,  20-23. 

97.  According  to  the  commentators  the  Vedic  text  alluded  to 
is  Aitareya-brahmawa  III,  21. 


232  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VII,  98. 

98.  Thus  has  been  declared  the  blameless,  primeval 
law  for  warriors  ;  from  this  law  a  Kshatriya  must  not 
depart,  when  he  strikes  his  foes  in  battle. 

99.  Let  him  strive  to  gain  what  he  has  not  yet 
gained ;  what  he  has  gained  let  him  carefully  pre- 
serve ;  let  him  augment  what  he  preserves,  and 
what  he  has  augmented  let  him  bestow  on  worthy 
men. 

100.  Let  him  know  that  these  are  the  four  means 
for  securing  the  aims  of  human  (existence) ;  let  him, 
without  ever  tiring,  properly  employ  them. 

101.  What  he  has  not  (yet)  gained,  let  him  seek 
(to  gain)  by  (his)  army  ;  what  he  has  gained,  let  him 
protect  by  careful  attention ;  what  he  has  protected, 
let  him  augment  by  (various  modes  of)  increasing 
it ;  and  what  he  has  augmented,  let  him  liberally 
bestow  (on  worthy  men). 

102.  Let  him  be  ever  ready  to  strike,  his  prowess 
constantly  displayed,  and  his  secrets  constantly  con- 
cealed, and  let  him  constantly  explore  the  weaknesses 
of  his  foe. 

103.  Of  him  who  is  always  ready  to  strike,  the 
whole  world  stands  in  awe ;  let  him  therefore  make 
all  creatures  subject  to  himself  even  by  the  employ- 
ment of  force. 

104.  Let  him  ever  act  without  guile,  and  on  no 

99.  Y&gfi.  I,  316 ;  Vas.  XVI,  6. 

101.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  at  the  end  of  the 
verse  patreshu  nikshipet, '  let  him  bestow  on  worthy  recipients,'  and 
this  may  have  been  Kull.'s  reading  too. 

102.  Nityam  udyatada^da^  syat,  'let  him  be  always  ready  to 
strike '  (N&r.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull. 
1  let  him  keep  his  army  always  ready  or  exercised.' 

104.  I  read  with  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  and  K.,  susa/rcvma^, 
1  carefully  guarding  himself.'     Medh.  reads  atandrita^, '  untired.' 


VII,  H2.  THE    KING.  233 

account  treacherously ;  carefully  guarding  himself, 
let  him  always  fathom  the  treachery  which  his  foes 
employ. 

105.  His  enemy  must  not  know  his  weaknesses, 
but  he  must  know  the  weaknesses  of  his  enemy ;  as 
the  tortoise  (hides  its  limbs),  even  so  let  him  secure 
the  members  (of  his  government  against  treachery), 
let  him  protect  his  own  weak  points. 

106.  Let  him  plan  his  undertakings  (patiently 
meditating)  like  a  heron ;  like  a  lion,  let  him  put 
forth  his  strength ;  like  a  wolf,  let  him  snatch  (his 
prey) ;  like  a  hare,  let  him  double  in  retreat. 

107.  When  he  is  thus  engaged  in  conquest,  let 
him  subdue  all  the  opponents  whom  he  may  find, 
by  the  (four)  expedients,  conciliation  and  the  rest. 

108.  If  they  cannot  be  stopped  by  the  three  first 
expedients,  then  let  him,  overcoming  them  by  force 
alone,  gradually  bring  them  to  subjection. 

109.  Among  the  four  expedients,  conciliation  and 
the  rest,  the  learned  always  recommend  conciliation 
and  (the  employment  of)  force  for  the  prosperity  of 
kingdoms. 

no.  As  the  weeder  plucks  up  the  weeds  and 
preserves  the  corn,  even  so  let  the  king  protect 
his  kingdom  and  destroy  his  opponents. 

in.  That  king  who  through  folly  rashly  oppresses 
his  kingdom,  (will),  together  with  his  relatives,  ere 
long  be  deprived  of  his  life  and  of  his  kingdom. 

112.  As  the  lives  of  living  creatures  are  destroyed 
by  tormenting  their  bodies,  even  so  the  lives  of  kings 
are  destroyed  by  their  oppressing  their  kingdoms. 


106.  The  position  of  the  second  and  fourth  clauses  is  interchanged 
according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand. 


2  34  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VII,  IT3. 

113.  In  governing  his  kingdom  let  him  always 
observe  the  (following)  rules ;  for  a  king  who  governs 
his  kingdom  well,  easily  prospers. 

114.  Let  him  place  a  company  of  soldiers,  com- 
manded (by  a  trusty  officer),  in  the  midst  of  two, 
three,  five  or  hundreds  of  villages,  (to  be)  a  protec- 
tion of  the  kingdom. 

115.  Let  him  appoint  a  lord  over  (each)  village, 
as  well  as  lords  of  ten  villages,  lords  of  twenty,  lords 
of  a  hundred,  and  lords  of  a  thousand. 

116.  The  lord  of  one  village  himself  shall  inform 
the  lord  of  ten  villages  of  the  crimes  committed  in 
his  village,  and  the  ruler  of  ten  (shall  make  his  re- 
port) to  the  ruler  of  twenty. 

1 1 7.  But  the  ruler  of  twenty  shall  report  all  such 
(matters)  to  the  lord  of  a  hundred,  and  the  lord  of 
a  hundred  shall  himself  give  information  to  the  lord 
of  a  thousand. 

118.  Those  (articles)  which  the  villagers  ought 
to  furnish  daily  to  the  king,  such  as  food,  drink,  and 
fuel,  the  lord  of  one  village  shall  obtain. 


114.  Kull.  says,  'in  the  midst  of  two,  three,  or  five  hundred  vil- 
lages.' Nar.  remarks  that  the  plural  'hundreds'  is  used  in  order 
to  leave  the  number  doubtful.  It  is,  however,  not  impossible  that 
here,  as  elsewhere  in  ancient  Sanskrit,  jatanam  means  'a  hundred.' 
Medh.  explains  sawgraha, '  protection/  by  '  an  official,'  or  '  a  royal 
granary/  Gov.  states  correctly  that  the  pickets  mentioned  are  the 
so-called  Sthanakas,  the  7%a/zas  of  modern  India. 

115-124.  ip.  II,  26,  4-5;  Vi.  Ill,  7-15;  YS^ro.  I,  337. 

116.  The  rule  refers,  as  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  remark, 
to  offences  with  which  the  persons  who  report  them,  are  unable  to 
deal.  Nar.  thinks  that  chiefly  refusals  to  pay  the  revenue  or  dis- 
putes on  such  matters  are  meant. 

118.  The  lord  of  one  village  is  apparently  the  modern  Pa/il,  the 
Pa//akila  or  Gramaku/a  of  the  inscriptions,  and  the  articles  to  be 
furnished  to  him  the  so-called  'haks.'    The  other  officials  correspond 


Til,  124.  THE    KING.  235 

119.  The  ruler  of  ten  (villages)  shall  enjoy  one 
kula  (as  much  land  as  suffices  for  one  family),  the 
ruler  of  twenty  five  kulas,  the  superintendent  of 
a  hundred  villages  (the  revenues  of)  one  village, 
the  lord  of  a  thousand  (the  revenues  of)  a  town. 

120.  The  affairs  of  these  (officials),  which  are 
connected  with  (their)  villages  and  their  separate 
business,  another  minister  of  the  king  shall  inspect, 
(who  must  be)  loyal  and  never  remiss ; 

121.  And  in  each  town  let  him  appoint  one  super- 
intendent of  all  affairs,  elevated  in  rank,  formidable, 
(resembling)  a  planet  among  the  stars. 

122.  Let  that  (man)  always  personally  visit  by 
turns  all  those  (other  officials) ;  let  him  properly 
explore  their  behaviour  in  their  districts  through 
spies  (appointed  to)  each. 

123.  For  the  servants  of  the  king,  who  are 
appointed  to  protect  (the  people),  generally  become 
knaves  who  seize  the  property  of  others ;  let  him 
protect  his  subjects  against  such  (men). 

1 24.  Let  the  king  confiscate  the  whole  property  of 

to  the  modern  Naib-subas,  Subas,  or  Mahalkaris,  Mamlatdars,  and 
so  forth,  and  to  the  Vishayapatis,  Rash/rapatis,  Ra^asthaniyas,  &c.  of 
the  inscriptions. 

119.  Kulam,  '(as  much  land  as  suffices  for  one)  family/  is  really 
a  technical  term  which  Medh.  explains  by  gha»/a,  a  term  known 
'  in  some  districts.'  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  state  that  it  is  the 
double  of  a  '  middling  plough,'  i.  e.  as  much  as  can  be  cultivated 
with  twelve  oxen,  while  Nand.  interprets  it  by  '  the  share  of  one 
cultivator.' 

120.  Nar.  explains  pr/thakkaryam,  'separate  affairs/  by  '  quarrels 
among  each  other;'  Nand.  by '  the  separate  affairs  of  the  villagers.' 
Snigdha^,  '  loyal'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  '  im- 
partial.' 

121.  Graham,  'a  planet'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'the  planet  Mars' 
(Medh.),  or  'the  sun'  (Gov.),  or  'the  moon'  (Nar.). 


T^r-. 


236  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VII,  125. 

those  (officials)  who,  evil-minded,  may  take  money 
from  suitors,  and  banish  them. 

125.  For  women  employed  in  the  royal  service 
and  for  menial  servants,  let  him  fix  a  daily  main- 
tenance, in  proportion  to  their  position  and  to  their 
work. 

126.  One  pa^a  must  be  given  (daily)  as  wages 
to  the  lowest,  six  to  the  highest,  likewise  clothing 
every  six  months  and  one  dro^a  of  grain  every 
month. 

127.  Having  well  considered  (the  rates  of)  pur- 
chase and  (of)  sale,  (the  length  of)  the  road,  (the 
expense  for)  food  and  condiments,  the  charges  of 
securing  the  goods,  let  the  king  make  the  traders 
pay  duty. 

128.  After  (due)  consideration  the  king  shall 
always  fix  in  his  realm  the  duties  and  taxes  in 
such  a  manner  that  both  he  himself  and  the  man 
who  does  the  work  receive  (their  due)  reward. 

129.  As  the  leech,  the  calf,  and  the  bee  take 
their  food  little  by  little,  even  so  must  the  king 
draw  from  his  realm  moderate  annual  taxes. 

130.  A  fiftieth  pa*>t  of  (the  increments  on)  cattle 

126.  'One  pa«a;'  see  below,  VIII,  136.  'A  dro^a,'  i.e.  'four 
a^akas'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  512  palas'  (Gov.)  ;  see  below, 
VIII,  135.  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  state  that  the  highest  ser- 
vants shall  receive  six  times  as  much  grain  and  clothes  as  the 
lowest,  and  they  add  that  the  middle-class  servants,  of  course, 
receive  three  times  as  much  as  the  lowest. 

127.  *  The  food  and  condiments,'  i.e.  'what  is  consumed  by  the 
people  employed  by  the  merchants.'  According  to  Kull.  and  Nar., 
yoga  means  '  the  net  profits,'  and  kshema  '  the  charges  for  securing 
the  goods  against  robbers  and  so  forth.'  According  to  Medh.,  Gov., 
and  Ragh.,  the  whole  compound  denotes  the  latter  charges  alone. 

130-132.  Ap.  II,  26,9;  Gaut.  X,  24-27;  Vas.  XIX,  26-27; 
Baudh.  I,  18,  1,  13,  15;  Vi.  Ill,  22-25,  29"3°« 


VII,  137.  THE   KING.  237 

and  gold  may  be  taken  by  the  king,  and  the  eighth, 
sixth,  or  twelfth  part  of  the  crops. 

131.  He  may  also  take  the  sixth  part  of  trees, 
meat,  honey,  clarified  butter,  perfumes,  (medical) 
herbs,  substances  used  for  flavouring  food,  flowers, 
roots,  and  fruit ; 

132.  Of  leaves,  pot-herbs,  grass,  (objects)  made 
of  cane,  skins,  of  earthen  vessels,  and  all  (articles) 
made  of  stone. 

133.  Though  dying  (with  want),  a  king  must  not 
levy  a  tax  on  .Srotriyas,  and  no  .Srotriya,  residing 
in  his  kingdom,  must  perish  from  hunger. 

134.  The  kingdom  of  that  king,  in  whose  domi- 
nions a  6Yotriya  pines  with  hunger,  will  even,  ere 
long,  be  afflicted  by  famine. 

135.  Having  ascertained  his  learning  in  the  Veda 
and  (the  purity  of)  his  conduct,  the  king  shall  pro- 
vide for  him  means  of  subsistence  in  accordance  with 
the  sacred  law,  and  shall  protect  him  in  every  way, 
as  a  father  (protects)  the  lawful  son  of  his  body. 

136.  Whatever  meritorious  acts  (such  a  Brah- 
ma^a)  performs  under  the  full  protection  of  the 
king,  thereby  the  king  s  length  of  life,  wealth,  and 
kingdom  increase. 

137.  Let  the  king  make  the  common  inhabitants 
of  his  realm  who  live  by  traffic,  pay  annually  some 
trifle,  which  is  called  a  tax. 


132.  Medh.  and  Kull.  add  '  from  the  profits  (made  on  the  seven- 
teen articles  enumerated).* 

133.  Ap.  II,  26,  10  ;  25,  n ;    Gaut.  X,  9  ;  Vas.  XIX,  23  ;  Vi. 
Ill,  26,  79. 

135-136.  Yzgn.  Ill,  44. 

137.  Przthagg-ana7#, '  the  common  inhabitants,*  i.  e.  small  dealers 
in  vegetables,  leaves,  and  so  forth  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  in  cakes  (Gov.). 


238  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VII,  138. 

138.  Mechanics  and  artisans,  as  well  as  .Sudras 
who  subsist  by  manual  labour,  he  may  cause  to 
work  (for  himself)  one  (day)  in  each  month. 

1 39.  Let  him  not  cut  up  his  own  root  (by  levying 
no  taxes),  nor  the  root  of  other  (men)  by  excessive 
greed;  for  by  cutting  up  his  own  root  (or  theirs), 
he  makes  himself  or  them  wretched. 

140.  Let  the  king,  having  carefully  considered 
(each)  affair,  be  both  sharp  and  gentle ;  for  a  king 
who  is  both  sharp  and  gentle  is  highly  respected. 

141.  When  he  is  tired  with  the  inspection  of  the 
business  of  men,  let  him  place  on  that  seat  (of 
justice)  his  chief  minister,  (who  must  be)  acquainted 
with  the  law,  wise,  self-controlled,  and  descended 
from  a  (noble)  family. 

142.  Having  thus  arranged  all  the  affairs  (of) 
his  (government),  he  shall  zealously  and  carefully 
protect  his  subjects. 

143.  That  (monarch)  whose  subjects  are  carried 
off  by  robbers  (Dasyu)  from  his  kingdom,  while 
they  loudly  call  (for  help),  and  he  and  his  ser- 
vants are  (quietly)  looking  on,  is  a  dead  and  not 
a  living  (king). 

144.  The  highest  duty  of  a  Kshatriya  is  to  pro- 
tect his  subjects,  for  the  king  who  enjoys  the 
rewards,  just  mentioned,  is  bound  to  (discharge 
that)  duty. 

145.  Having  risen  in  the  last  watch  of  the  night, 
having  performed  (the  rite  of)  personal  purification, 


138.  Gaut.  X,  31 ;  Vas.  XIX,  28;  Vi.  Ill,  32. 

141.  Vi.  Ill,  73-74;  Yagri.  II,  1-3.  Medh.  reads  bantam,  {o 
a  tranquil  disposition,'  for  pra^wam, '  wise.' 

142-144. ;  Ap.  II,  10,  6  ;  Gaut.  X,  7-8  ;  Vas.  XIX,  1 ;  Baudh.  I, 
18,  1;  Vi.  Ill,  1;  Ya^.  I,  334-335- 


■ 


VII,  152.  THE   KING.  239 

having,  with  a  collected  mind,  offered  oblations  in  the 
fire,  and  having  worshipped  Brahma^as,  he  shall  enter 
the  hall  of  audience  which  must  possess  the  marks 
(considered)  auspicious  (for  a  dwelling). 

146.  Tarrying  there,  he  shall  gratify  all  subjects 
(who  come  to  see  him  by  a  kind  reception)  and 
afterwards  dismiss  them ;  having  dismissed  his 
subjects,  he  shall  take  counsel  with  his  ministers. 

147.  Ascending  the  back  of  a  hill  or  a  terrace, 
(and)  retiring  (there)  in  a  lonely  place,  or  in  a  solitary 
forest,  let  him  consult  with  them  unobserved. 

148.  That  king  whose  secret  plans  other  people, 
(though)  assembled  (for  the  purpose),  do  not  dis- 
cover, (will)  enjoy  the  whole  earth,  though  he  be 
poor  in  treasure. 

149.  At  the  time  of  consultation  let  him  cause  to 

be   removed  idiots,  the  dumb,  the  blind,  and  the         ^/ 
deaf,  animals,  very  aged  men,  women,  barbarians, 
the  sick,  and  those  deficient  in  limbs. 

1 50.  (Such)  despicable  (persons),  likewise  animals, 
and  particularly  women  betray  secret  council ;  for 
that  reason  he  must  be  careful  with  respect  to 
them. 

151.  At  midday  or  at  midnight,  when  his  mental 
and  bodily  fatigues  are  over,  let  him  deliberate, 
either  with  himself  alone  or  with  his  (ministers),  on 
virtue,  pleasure,  and  wealth, 

152.  On    (reconciling)   the    attainment   of  these 


147-148.  Y&gii.  I,  343- 

147.  Ni/zsalake,  'solitary'  (Nar.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according 
to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nand. '  free  from  grass  and  so  forth.' 

149.  'Animals,'  i.e.  'parrots,  starlings,  and  other  talking  birds! 
(Kull.,  Gov.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  'for  such  creatures  divulge  secret 
plans'  (Medh.). 


Ifct. 


240  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VII,  153 

(aims)  which  are  opposed  to  each  other,  on  be- 
stowing his  daughters  in  marriage,  and  on  keeping 
his  sons  (from  harm), 

153.  On  sending  ambassadors,  on  the  completion 
of  undertakings  (already  begun),  on  the  behaviour 
of  (the  women  in)  his  harem,  and  on  the  doings  of 
his  spies. 

154.  On  the  whole  eightfold  business  and  the 
five  classes  (of  spies),  on  the  goodwill  or  enmity 
and  the  conduct  of  the  circle  (of  neighbours  he 
must)  carefully  (reflect). 

155.  On  the  conduct  of  the  middlemost  (prince), 
on  the  doings  of  him  who  seeks  conquest,  on  the 
behaviour  of  the  neutral  (king),  and  (on  that)  of  the 
foe  (let  him)  sedulously  (meditate). 


154.  '  The  eightfold  business'  consists  according  to  Medh.  either 
of '  conciliation,  division,  employment  of  force,  gifts,'  or  '  of  agri- 
culture, trade,  building  bridges  and  embankments,  building  fort- 
resses or  repairing  them,  catching  elephants,  digging  mines,  settling 
desert  districts,  cutting  down  forests/  or  '  of  collecting  revenue,  ex- 
penditure, dismissing  bad  servants,  prohibiting  bad  conduct  on  the 
part  of  the  castes  and  orders,  deciding  difficult  points  in  one's  own 
affairs,  deciding  legal  cases,  punishing,  and  imposing  penances.' 
The  second  explanation,  which  is  said  to  belong  to  Antaka  (Yama), 
is  adopted  by  Nand.;  the  third,  which  is  taken  from  the  NitLrastra 
of  U?anas,  by  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  '  The  five  classes  (of 
spies),'  i.  e. '  karpa/ika,  a  pilgrim  or  a  rogue,  an  ascetic  who  has 
violated  his  vows,  a  distressed  agriculturist,  a  decayed  merchant, 
and  a  fictitious  devotee'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nar.  and 
Nand.  explain  pan^avarga  by  '  the  collection  of  the  five  (requisites 
for  an  undertaking)/  Regarding  'the  circle/  see  the  following 
verses. 

iSS"1^-  Vi-  m>  38;  Ya§™.  I,  344. 

155.  *  The  middlemost  prince'  is  he  whose  territory  lies  between 
that  of  the  king  seeking  conquest  and  that  of  his  foe,  and  who, 
though  unable  to  resist  both,  may  become  dangerous  to  them  when 
they  are  at  war  with  each  other  ;  see  Kamandaki,  Nitisara  VIII,  1 8, 
which  passage  the  commentators  quote.    '  The  foe'  may  be  of  three 


VII,  161.  THE   KING.  24 1 

156.  These  (four)  constituents  (prakmi,  form), 
briefly  (speaking),  the  foundation  of  the  circle  (of 
neighbours) ;  besides,  eight  others  are  enumerated 
(in  the  Institutes  of  Polity)  and  (thus)  the  (total)  is 
declared  to  be  twelve. 

157.  The  minister,  the  kingdom,  the  fortress,  the 
treasury,  and  the  army  are  five  other  (constituent 
elements  of  the  circle) ;  for,  these  are  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  each  (of  the  first  twelve ;  thus  the 
whole  circle  consists),  briefly  (speaking,  of)  seventy- 
two  (constituent  parts). 

158.  Let  (the  king)  consider  as  hostile  his  imme- 
diate neighbour  and  the  partisan  of  (such  a)  foe,  as 
friendly  the  immediate  neighbour  of  his  foe,  and  as 
neutral  (the  king)  beyond  those  two. 

159.  Let  him  overcome  all  of  them  by  means  of 
the  (four)  expedients,  conciliation  and  the  rest,  (em- 
ployed) either  singly  or  conjointly,  (or)  by  bravery 
and  policy  (alone). 

160.  Let  him  constantly  think  of  the  six  measures 
of  royal  policy  (gu^a,  viz.)  alliance,  war,  marching, 
halting,  dividing  the  army,  and  seeking  protection. 

161.  Having  carefully  considered  the  business  (in 
hand),  let  him  resort  to  sitting  quiet  or  marching, 

kinds, '  natural,'  *  artificial'  (i.  e.  one  who  has  a  particular  reason  for 
his  enmity),  and  'an  immediate  neighbour'  (see  below,  verse  158). 
156.  '  The  eight  other  constituents'  are  according  to  Kamandaki 

VIII,  16-17,  (a)  in  front  beyond  the  foe's  territory,  1.  a  friend, 
2.  the  foe's  friend,  3.  the  friend's  friend,  4.  the  foe's  friend's  friend; 
(b)  in  the  rear,  1.  he  who  attacks  in  the  rear  (parsrmigraha),  2.  he 
who  restrains  the  latter  (akranda),  3,  4.  the  supporters  of  these  two. 
All  the  commentators  except  Medh.  quote  Kamandaki  more  or  less 
correctly.  Kamandaki  VIII,  24  states  that  this  doctrine,  with  respect 
to  the  constituent  parts  of  the  system  of  states  which  requires  the 
attention  of  each  king,  is  peculiar  to  the  Manavas. 

160-161.  Vi.  Ill,  39 ;  Ya^w.  I,  345-346. 
[25]  R 


242  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII,  162. 

alliance  or  war,  dividing  his  forces  or  seeking  pro- 
tection (as  the  case  may  require). 

162.  But  the  king  must  know  that  there  are  two 
kinds  of  alliances  and  of  wars,  (likewise  two)  of  both 
marching  and  sitting  quiet,  and  two  (occasions  for) 
seeking  protection. 

163.  An  alliance  which  yields  present  and  future 
advantages,  one  must  know  to  be  of  two  descriptions, 
(viz.)  that  when  one  marches  together  (with  an  ally) 
and  the  contrary  (when  the  allies  act  separately). 

164.  War  is  declared  to  be  of  two  kinds,  (viz.) 
that  which  is  undertaken  in  season  or  out  of  season, 
by  oneself  and  for  one's  own  purposes,  and  (that 
waged  to  avenge)  an  injury  done  to  a  friend. 

165.  Marching  (to  attack)  is  said  to  be  twofold, 
(viz.  that  undertaken)  by  one  alone  when  an  urgent 
matter  has  suddenly  arisen,  and  (that  undertaken) 
by  one  allied  with  a  friend. 

163.  Medh.  proposes  besides  the  explanation  given  above 
another, '  An  alliance  one  must  know  to  be  of  two  kinds,  (viz.)  that 
where  (the  allies)  share  the  danger  and  the  fruits  of  the  expedition 
and  the  contrary'  (yanaphalasahitau  gakkkkvak  samanaphalabha- 
gitaya  na  ka.  tvayaham  uttambhaniyo  yatnato  lipsite  tatas  tava 
bhago  bhavishyati).  Nar.  thinks  that  the  adjective  tadatvayatisaw- 
yukta^,  too,  refers  to  two  different  cases,  and  means  '  which  yields 
either  immediate  or  future  advantages.'  Nand.  adopts  the  latter 
view  as  well  as  Medh.'s  second  explanation  of  the  first  part  of 
the  verse. 

164.  Regarding  the  expression  'in  season,'  see  below,  verse  182. 
Medh.  takes  ■  out  of  season'  with  the  second  clause,  '  and  (that 
waged)  out  of  season  (in  order  to  avenge)  an  injury  done  to  a  friend.' 
He  also  mentions  a  var.  lect.  mitre^apakrz'te  (which  Gov.  has 
adopted),  with  the  following  explanation, '  and  that  waged  out  of 
season  when  the  enemy  has  been  weakened  by  an  ally.'  Gov. 
agrees  with  this  latter  view  except  that  he  takes  akale  with  the  first 
clause.  The  other  commentators  give  the  explanation  adopted  in 
the  translation. 


VII,  170.  THE   KING.  243 

166.  Sitting  quiet  is  stated  to  be  of  two  kinds, 
(viz.  that  incumbent)  on  one  who  has  gradually  been 
weakened  by  fate  or  in  consequence  of  former  acts, 
and  (that)  in  favour  of  a  friend. 

167.  If  the  army  stops  (in  one  place)  and  its 
master  (in  another)  in  order  to  effect  some  purpose, 
that  is  called  by  those  acquainted  with  the  virtues 
of  the  measures  of  royal  policy,  the  twofold  division 
of  the  forces. 

168.  Seeking  refuge  is  declared  to  be  of  two 
kinds,  (first)  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  an  ad- 
vantage when  one  is  harassed  by  enemies,  (secondly) 
in  order  to  become  known  among  the  virtuous  (as 
the  protege  of  a  powerful  king). 

1 69.  When  (the  king)  knows  (that)  at  some  future 
time  his  superiority  (is)  certain,  and  (that)  at  the 
time  present  (he  will  suffer)  little  injury,  then  let 
him  have  recourse  to  peaceful  measures. 

170.  But  when  he  thinks  all  his  subjects  to  be 

166.  Purvakrz'tena, '  in  consequence  of  former  acts,'  i.  e.  'in  con- 
sequence of  acts  committed  in  a  former  existence,  or  in  consequence 
of  former  imprudence'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.).  Nand.  and  Ragh.  give 
only  the  second  explanation ;  Nar.  says  *  by  an  enemy  whom  he 
formerly  made.' 

167.  The  text  really  mentions  only  one  method  of  'division.' 
Hence  Medh.  thinks  that,  in  order  to  obtain  the  two  kinds  required, 
it  must  be  understood  that  the  measure  may  be  resorted  to  either  for 
one's  own  sake  or  for  the  sake  of  somebody  else.  Nar.  makes  the 
two  methods  out  by  supposing  that  in  the  one  case  the  army  stops 
in  front  of  the  enemy  under  the  command  of  a  general,  while  the 
king  marches  with  a  portion  of  his  forces,  and  that  in  the  other 
case  the  contrary  takes  place.  Gov.,  after  giving  the  explanation 
adopted  in  the  translation,  quotes  K&mandaki,  Nitisara  XI,  24, 
where  a  different  meaning,  'duplicity,'  is  attributed  to  the  term  dvai- 
dhibhava.     Nand.'s  whole  explanation  consists  of  this  quotation. 

170.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  and  K.,  prahnsh/a  instead 
of  prakrzsh/a  (editions). 

R   2 


244  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII,  171. 

exceedingly  contented,    and   (that   he)  himself  (is) 
most  exalted  (in  power),  then  let  him  make  war. 

171.  When  he  knows  his  own  army  to  be  cheerful 
in  disposition  and  strong,  and  (that)  of  his  enemy  the 
reverse,  then  let  him  march  against  his  foe. 

172.  But  if  he  is  very  weak  in  chariots  and  beasts 
of  burden  and  in  troops,  then  let  him  carefully  sit 
quiet,  gradually  conciliating  his  foes. 

173.  When  the  king  knows  the  enemy  to  be 
stronger  in  every  respect,  then  let  him  divide  his 
army  and  thus  achieve  his  purpose. 

1 74.  But  when  he  is  very  easily  assailable  by  the 
forces  of  the  enemy,  then  let  him  quickly  seek  refuge 
with  a  righteous,  powerful  king. 

175.  That  (prince)  who  will  coerce  both  his  (dis- 
loyal) subjects  and  the  army  of  the  foe,  let  him  ever 
serve  with  every  effort  like  a  Guru. 

176.  When,  even  in  that  (condition),  he  sees  (that) 
evil  is  caused  by  (such)  protection,  let  him  without 
hesitation  have  recourse  to  war. 

177.  By  all  (the  four)  expedients  a  politic  prince 
must  arrange  (matters  so)  that  neither  friends,  nor 
neutrals,  nor  foes  are  superior  to  himself. 

178.  Let  him  fully  consider  the  future  and  the 
immediate  results  of  all  undertakings,  and  the  good 
and  bad  sides  of  all  past  (actions). 

179.  He  who  knows  the  good  and  the  evil  (which 
will  result  from  his  acts)  in  the  future,  is  quick  in 
forming  resolutions  for  the  present,  and  under- 
stands the  consequences  of  past  (actions),  will  not 
be  conquered. 


176.  I  read  with  Gov.  and  K.  sa  yuddham  instead  of  suyuddham 
(Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  ■  let  him  fight  bravely.' 


VII,  185.  THE   KING.  245 

180.  Let  him  arrange  everything  in  such  a  manner 
that  no  ally,  no  neutral  or  foe  may  injure  him ;  that 
is  the  sum  of  political  wisdom. 

181.  But  if  the  king  undertakes  an  expedition 
against  a  hostile  kingdom,  then  let  him  gradually 
advance,  in  the  following  manner,  against  his  foe's 
capital. 

182.  Let  the  king  undertake  his  march  in  the 
fine  month  Marga^irsha,  or  towards  the  months  of 
Phalguna  and  A'aitra,  according  to  the  (condition 
of  his)  army. 

183.  Even  at  other  times,  when  he  has  a  certain 
prospect  of  victory,  or  when  a  disaster  has  befallen 
his  foe,  he  may  advance  to  attack  him. 

184.  But  having  duly  arranged  (all  affairs)  in  his 
original  (kingdom)  and  what  relates  to  the  expedi- 
tion, having  secured  a  basis  (for  his  operations)  and 
having  duly  dispatched  his  spies ; 

185.  Having  cleared  the  three  kinds  of  roads,  and 
(having  made)  his  sixfold  army  (efficient),  let  him 
leisurely  proceed  in  the  manner  prescribed  for  war- 
fare against  the  enemy's  capital. 

182.  Vi.  Ill,  40;  Y&gri.  I,  347.  'Fine/  i.e. 'when  fodder  and 
grain  are  abundant  and  the  roads  dry'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 
Marga^irsha,  i.  e.  November-December ;  Phalguna,  i.  e.  February- 
March  ;  .ATaitra,  i.  e.  March- April. 

184.  'Having  secured  a  basis  (for  his  operations)/  i.e.  'having 
won  over  the  servants  of  his  foe  who  may  be  at  enmity  with  their 
master'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'having  established  a  camp 
in  the  country  which  he  intends  to  attack'  (Nar.). 

185.  '  The  three  kinds  of  roads/  i.  e.  '  through  the  open  country, 
through  marshy  ground  or  such  as  is  cut  by  watercourses,  and 
through  forests'  (^ahgalanupa/avika),  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh., 
Nand.).  Nar.  gives  the  same  explanation,  but  adds  that  the  proper 
interpretation  is  '  through  villages,  forests,  and  hills.'  '  The  sixfold 
army/  i.  e.  consisting  of  '  elephants,  horses,  chariots,  infantry,  the 


246  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII,  186. 

186.  Let  him  be  very  much  on  his  guard  against 
a  friend  who  secretly  serves  the  enemy  and  against 
(deserters)  who  return  (from  the  enemy's  camp) ;  for 
such  (men  are)  the  most  dangerous  foes. 

187.  Let  him  march  on  his  road,  arraying  (his 
troops)  like  a  staff  (i.e.  in  an  oblong),  or  like  a  waggon 
(i.e.  in  a  wedge),  or  like  a  boar  (i.e.  in  a  rhombus), 
or  like  a  Makara  (i.e.  in  two  triangles,  with  the  apices 
joined),  or  like  a  pin  (i.  e.  in  a  long  line),  or  like  a 
Garu^a  (i.  e.  in  a  rhomboid  with  far-extended  wings). 

188.  From  whatever  (side)  he  apprehends  danger, 
in  that  (direction)  let  him  extend  his  troops,  and  let 
him  always  himself  encamp  in  an  array,  shaped  like 
a  lotus. 

189.  Let  him  allot  to  the  commander-in-chief,  to 
the  (subordinate)  general,  (and  to  the  superior  officers) 
places  in  all  directions,  and  let  him  turn  his  front 
in  that  direction  whence  he  fears  danger. 


general,  and  workmen'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  adds 
that  some  name  as  the  fifth  component  'the  treasury,'  and  that 
others  explain  the  term  by  'the  sixfold  division,  mentioned  by 
Kamandi,'  Nitisara  XVI,  6.  The  latter  view  is  adopted  by  Nand. 
Nar.  enumerates  besides  elephants,  horses,  chariots,  and  infantry, 
the  riders  on  elephants  and  sastropanayakas  (?). 

187.  The  details  regarding  the  various  ways  of  arranging  the 
troops  are  found  in  the  Kamandaki,  Nitisara  XIX. 

188.  My  translation  of  the  last  clause  follows  Gov.,  Nar.,  and 
Ragh.  Medh.  says  that  the  king  shall  leave  the  town  with  his  army 
in  the  lotus-array,  and  Kull.  speaks  of  a  '  feigned  encampment' 
(kapa/anivej-anaw  kuryat).  The  lotus-array  is  stated  to  be  '  equally 
extended  on  all  sides  and  perfectly  circular,  the  centre  being 
occupied  by  the  king.' 

189.  Medh.  remarks  that,  as  the  subordinate  general  and  the 
commander-in-chief  are  only  two  persons,  they  cannot  possibly  be 
stationed  '  in  all  directions,'  as  the  text  prescribes,  and  that  hence 
their  servants  (i.  e.  the  superior  officers)  must  also  be  intended. 


VII,  195-  THE   KING.  247 

190.  On  all  sides  let  him  place  troops  of  soldiers, 
on  whom  he  can  rely,  with  whom  signals  have  been 
arranged,  who  are  expert  both  in  sustaining  a  charge 
and  in  charging,  fearless  and  loyal. 

191.  Let  him  make  a  small  number  of  soldiers 
fight  in  close  order,  at  his  pleasure  let  him  extend 
a  large  number  in  loose  ranks ;  or  let  him  make 
them  fight,  arranging  (a  small  number)  in  the  needle- 
array,  (and  a  large  number)  in  the  thunderbolt-array. 

192.  On  even  ground  let  him  fight  with  chariots 
and  horses,  in  water-bound  places  with  boats  and 
elephants,  on  (ground)  covered  with  trees  and  shrubs 
with  bows,  on  hilly  ground  with  swords,  targets,  (and 
other)  weapons. 

193.  (Men  born  in)  Kurukshetra,  Matsyas,  Pa#- 
>§alas,  and  those  born  in  6urasena,  let  him  cause  to 
fight  in  the  van  of  the  battle,  as  well  as  (others  who 
are)  tall  and  light. 

194.  After  arranging  his  troops,  he  should  en- 
courage them  (by  an  address)  and  carefully  inspect 
them ;  he  should  also  mark  the  behaviour  (of  the 
soldiers)  when  they  engage  the  enemy. 

195.  When  he  has  shut  up  his  foe  (in  a  town), 
let  him  sit  encamped,  harass  his  kingdom,  and  con- 
tinually spoil  his  grass,  food,  fuel,  and  water. 

190.  Nar.  explains  gulman,  'troops  of  soldiers/  by  gulmade- 
jasthan,  '(soldiers)  standing  in  thickets'  (?). 

192.  Sthale,  'on  hilly  ground'  (nimnonnate,  Ragh.),  means 
according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull. '  on  ground  free  from  stones, 
trees,  creepers,  thorns,  pits,  and  the  like.' 

193.  Kurukshetra,  i.e.  the  neighbourhood  of  Delhi;  Matsyas, 
i.  e.  the  inhabitants  of  Baira/a  or  Vaira/a,  north  of  Jepur  (Bhoga- 
pure,  Medh.) ;  Pa^alas,  i.  e.  the  inhabitants  of  Kanyakub^a  (Ka- 
nog) ;  -Surasenas,  i.  e.  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  near  Mathura 
(Ahi^atra,  Gov.). 


248  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VII,  196. 

196.  Likewise  let  him  destroy  the  tanks,  ramparts, 
and  ditches,  and  let  him  assail  the  (foe  unawares) 
and  alarm  him  at  night. 

197.  Let  him  instigate  to  rebellion  those  who  are 
open  to  such  instigations,  let  him  be  informed  of 
his  (foe's)  doings,  and,  when  fate  is  propitious,  let 
him  fight  without  fear,  trying  to  conquer. 

198.  He  should  (however)  try  to  conquer  his 
foes  by  conciliation,  by  (well-applied)  gifts,  and  by 
creating  dissension,  used  either  separately  or  con- 
jointly, never  by  fighting,  (if  it  can  be  avoided.) 

199.  For  when  two  (princes)  fight,  victory  and 
defeat  in  the  battle  are,  as  experience  teaches, 
uncertain ;  let  him  therefore  avoid  an  engagement. 

200.  (But)  if  even  those  three  before-mentioned 
expedients  fail,  then  let  him,  duly  exerting  himself, 
fight  in  such  a  manner  that  he  may  completely 
conquer  his  enemies. 

201.  When  he  has  gained  victory,  let  him  duly 
worship  the  gods  and  honour  righteous  Brahma/^as, 
let  him  grant  exemptions,  and  let  him  cause  promises 
of  safety  to  be  proclaimed. 

201-205.  Vi.  Ill,  47-49;  Y&gn.  I,  342,  348-351- 
201.  'The  gods/  i.e.  of  the  conquered  country.  Pariharan, 
'  exemptions/  i.  e. '  from  taxes  and  dues  for  a  year  or  two'  (Medh., 
Nand.),  means  according  to  Gov.  'gifts  to  *Srotriyas  and  others' 
(jTOtriyadigatavajyadaneshu  mayaitad  anu^atam  ity  evam);  ac- 
cording to  Kull.  'gifts  to  gods  and  Brahmawas;'  according  to  Nar. 
'Agraharas  or  villages  presented  to  Brahmarcas;'  according  to 
Ragh.  'gifts  of  clothes  and  ornaments  to  the  inhabitants.'  The 
term  parihara  occurs  very  frequently  in  the  inscriptions  (see  e.  g. 
Arch.  Reports  of  Western  India,  vol.  iv,  p.  104  seq.),  and  means, 
as  the  details  adduced  there  show, '  exemption  from  taxes  and  pay- 
ments as  well  as  other  immunities.'  These  pariharas  were  regularly 
attached  to  all  grants  to  Bnihma«as  or  temples.  In  our  passage  a 
general  temporary  remission  of  the  taxes  is  probably  intended. 


VII,  207.  THE  KING.  249 

202.  But  having  fully  ascertained  the  wishes  of 
all  the  (conquered),  let  him  place  rhprp  a  reUuvp 
of  the  (vanquished  ruler  on  thp  throne\  and  let  him 
impose  his  conditions. 

203.  Let  him  make  authoritative  the  lawful  (cus- 
toms) of  the  (inhabitants),  just  as  they  are  stated  (to 
be),  and  let  him  honour  the  (new  king)  and  his  chief 
servants  with  precious  gifts. 

204.  The  seizure  of  desirable  property  which 
causes  displeasure,  and  its  distribution  which  causes 
pleasure,  are  both  recommendable,  (if  they  are)  re- 
sorted to  at  the  proper  time. 

205.  All  undertakings  (in)  this  (world)  depend 
both  on  the  ordering  of  fate  and  on  human  exertion ; 
but  among  these  two  (the  ways  of)  fate  are  unfathom- 
able ;  in  the  case  of  man's  work  action  is  possible. 

206.  Or  (the  king,  bent  on  conquest),  considering 
a  friend,  gold,  and  land  (to  be)  the  triple  result  (of 
an  expedition),  may,  using  diligent  care,  make  peace 
with  (his  foe)  and  return  (to  his  realm). 

207.  Having  paid  due  attention  to  any  king  in 
the  circle  (of  neighbouring  states)  who  might  attack 
him  in  the  rear,  and  to  his  supporter  who  opposes 

205.  Yagri.  I,  348.  'Action/  i.e.  'careful  investigation/  hence 
one  should  strive  to  attain  one's  ends  by  exertion  (Gov.,  Kull.),  or 
'remedial  action*  (pratikriya,  Nar.)  or  'an  effort'  (purushakara, 
Ragh.).  Nand.  takes  the  last  clause  differently,  'if  there  is  a 
human  effort,  the  action  of  fate  takes  place'  (manushe  purushakare 
sati  daivasya  kriya  vidyate). 

206.  According  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.  the  meaning  is  that,  if 
the  foe  is  willing  to  make  an  alliance,  to  pay  tribute,  and  to  cede  some 
territory,  the  king,  bent  on  conquest,  may  also  make  peace  with  him 
without  actually  fighting  and  return  home.  In  the  MSS.  of  Medh. 
this  and  the  next  verses  down  to  verse  211  are  wanting,  and  the 
commentary  on  verse  2 1 1  is  partly  given. 

207.  The  meaning  of  the  verse  is  according  to  Gov.,  Kull,  and 


250  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VII,  208. 

the  latter,  let  (the  conqueror)  secure  the  fruit  of  the 
expedition  from  (the  prince  whom  he  attacks),  whether 
(he  may  have  become)  friendly  or  (remained)  hostile. 

208.  By  gaining  gold  and  land  a  king  grows  not 
so  much  in  strength  as  by  obtaining  a  firm  friend, 
(who),  though  weak,  (may  become)  powerful  in  the 
future. 

209.  A  weak  friend  (even)  is  greatly  commended, 
who  is  righteous  (and)  grateful,  whose  people  are 
contented,  who  is  attached  and  persevering  in  his 
undertakings. 

210.  The  wise  declare  him  (to  be)  a  most  dangerous 
jjoe,  who  is  wise,  of  noble  race,  brave,  clever,  liberal, 
grateful,  and  firm. 

211.  Behaviour  worthy  of  an  Aryan,  knowledge 
of  men,  bravery,  a  compassionate  disposition,  and 
great  liberality  are  the  virtues  of  a  neutral_Jwho 
may  be  courted). 

212.  Let  the  king,  without  hesitation,  quit  for  his 
own  sake  even  a  country  (which  is)  salubrious,  fertile, 
and  causing  an  increase  of  cattle. 

Ragh.  that  the  king,  bent  on  conquest,  shall  secure  his  back  before 
he  undertakes  an  expedition.  The  prince  immediately  in  his  rear, 
who  in  the  terms  of  the  Niti  is  called  the  parshmgraha,  *  the  heel- 
catcher,'  may  be  supposed  to  be  hostile  to  him  and  may  be  expected 
to  invade  his  territory  during  his  absence.  It  is,  therefore,  essential 
for  the  conqueror  either  to  settle  matters  with  him  beforehand,  or 
to  secure  the  support  of  the  next  neighbour  of  the  parshwigraha, 
who  is  technically  called  the  akranda  and  may  be  supposed  to  be 
inclined  to  check  the  parshmgraha. 

208.  Y&gri.  I,  351. 

211.  Sthaulalakshyam/ great  liberality '  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.), 
is  explained,  as  Kull.  asserts,  by  Medh.  and  Gov.  'being  not  sharp- 
sighted.'  The  Government  copy  of  Gov.  has,  however,  just  the 
contrary,  sukshmadamtvam.  Medh.'s  explanation  is  not  deci- 
pherable. 


VII,  218.  THE   KING.  251 

213.  For  times  of  need  let  him  preserve  his  wealth ; 
at  the  expense  of  his  wealth  let  him  preserve  his 
wife  ;  let  him  at  all  events  preserve  himself  even  by 
(giving  up)  his  wife  and  his  wealth. 

214.  A  wise  (king),  seeing  that  all  kinds  of  mis- 
fortunes violently  assail  him  at  the  same  time, 
should  try  all  (the  four)  expedients,  be  it  together  or 
separately,  (in  order  to  save  himself.) 

215.  On  the  person  who  employs  the  expedients, 
on  the  business  to  be  accomplished,  and  on  all  the 
expedients  collectively,  on  these  three  let  him  ponder 
and  strive  to  accomplish  his  ends. 

216.  Having  thus  consulted  with  his  ministers 
on  all  these  (matters),  having  taken  exercise,  and 
having  bathed  afterwards,  the  king  may  enter  the 
harem  at  midday  in  order  to  dine. 

217.  There   he   may   eat  food,  (which  has  been 
prepared)  by  faithful,  incorruptible   (servants)  who 
know  the  (proper)  time  (for  dining),  which  has  been 
well  examined  (and  hallowed)  by  sacred  texts  that . 
destroy  poison. 

218.  Let  him  mix  all  his  food  with  medicines 
(that  are)  antidotes  against  poison,  and  let  him 
always  be  careful  to  wear  gems  which  destroy 
poison. 

215.  'The  person  who  employs  the  expedients/  i. e.  'himself 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.);  'his  minister  or  the  like'  (Nand.). 
A^ritya,  '  let  him  ponder  on'  (manasa  balabaladidvara  ni^itya, 
Nar.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.  'let  him 
depend  on/ 

217-220.  Vi.  Ill,  85,87-88;  Yagfi.  I,  326. 

218.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  read  ne^ayet,  and  Ragh.  so- 
dhayet,  *  let  him  purify/  instead  of  yo^ayet  (Kull.,  K.), '  let  him  mix.' 
Nar.  explains  niyata^  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.)  or  prayata^,  'careful' 
(yatnavan,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  by  '  being  pure/ 


252  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VII,  219. 

219.  Well-tried  females  whose  toilet  and  orna- 
ments have  been  examined,  shall  attentively  serve 
him  with  fans,  water,  and  perfumes. 

220.  In  like  manner  let  him  be  careful  about 
his  carriages,  bed,  seat,  bath,  toilet,  and  all  his 
ornaments. 

221.  When  he  has  dined,  he  may  divert  himself 
with  his  wives  in  the  harem ;  but  when  he  has 
diverted  himself,  he  must,  in  due  time,  again  think 
of  the  affairs  of  state. 

222.  Adorned  (with  his  robes  of  state),  let  him 
again  inspect  his  fighting  men,  all  his  chariots  and 
beasts  of  burden,  the  weapons  and  accoutrements. 

223.  Having  performed  his  twilight-devotions,  let 
him,  well  armed,  hear  in  an  inner  apartment  the 
doings  of  those  who  make  secret  reports  and  of 
his  spies. 

224.  But  going  to  another  secret  apartment  and 
dismissing  those  people,  he  may  enter  the  harem, 
surrounded  by  female  (servants),  in  order  to  dine 
again. 

225.  Having  eaten  there  something  for  the  second 
time,  and  having  been  recreated  by  the  sound  of 
music,  let  him  go  to  rest  and  rise  at  the  proper  time 
free  from  fatigue. 

226.  A  king  who  is  in  good  health  must  observe 
these  rules ;  but,  if  he  is  indisposed,  he  may  entrust 
all  this  (business)  to  his  servants. 

223.  Yagri.  I,  329.  *  Of  those  who  make  secret  reports,' i.  e. 
'  of  the  ministers  and  the  rest'  (Nar.),  or  '  of  citizens  who  may  have 
come'  (Medh.). 

225.  Yagfi.  I,  330.     '  Something,'  i.  e. '  not  too  much.' 


VIII,  6.  CIVIL   AND   CEREMONIAL   LAW.  253 


Chapter  VIII. 

1.  A  king,  desirous  of  investigating  law  cases, 
must  enter  his  court  of  justice,  preserving  a  digni- 
fied demeanour,  together  with  Brahma^as  and  with 
experienced  councillors. 

2.  There,  either  seated  or  standing,  raising  his 
right  arm,  without  ostentation  in  his  dress  and 
ornaments,  let  him  examine  the  business  of  suitors, 

3.  Daily  (deciding)  one  after  another  (all  cases) 
which  fall  under  the  eighteen  titles  (of  the  law) 
according  to  principles  drawn  from  local  usages  and 
from  the  Institutes  of  the  sacred  law. 

4.  Of  those  (titles)  the  first  is  the  non-payment  of 
debts,  (then  follow),  (2)  deposit  and  pledge,  (3)  sale 
without  ownership,  (4)  concerns  among  partners,  and 
(5)  resumption  of  gifts, 

5.  (6)  Non-payment  of  wages,  (7)  non-performance 
of  agreements,  (8)  rescission  of  sale  and  purchase, 
(9)  disputes  between  the  owner  (of  cattle)  and  his 
servants, 

6.  (10)  Disputes  regarding  boundaries,  (11)  assault 
I  and  ( 1 2)  defamation,  (13)  theft,  (14)  robbery  and  vio- 
lence, (15)  adultery, 

VIII.  1.  Vi.  Ill,  72;  Yign.  I,  359;  II,  1;  Gaut.  XIII,  26; 
Vas.  XVI,  2. 

2.  'Standing,5  i.e.  'in  important  cases'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.).  '  Raising  his  right  arm/  i.  e. '  keeping  it  uncovered'  (Nar., 
Nand.,  Ragh.,  Gov.).  Regarding  the  meaning  of  the  action,  see 
above,  IV,  58. 

3.  Gaut.  XI,  19-24;  Vas.  XVI,  4-5.  '  Local  usages,'  i.  e.  '  the 
law  of  custom  which  is  not  opposed  to  the  .Sastras'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Mr.). 

4.  «  Non-payment  of  debts'  (rzVzasya  adanam,  Nar.,  Nand.)  may 
also  be  translated  'recovery  of  debts'  (nVzasya  adanam). 


254  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  7. 

7.  (16)  Duties  of  man  and  wife,  (17)  partition  (of 
inheritance),  (18)  gambling  and  betting;  these  are 
in  this  world  the  eighteen  topics  which  give  rise  to 
lawsuits. 

8.  Depending  on  the  eternal  law,  let  him  decide 
the  suits  of  men  who  mostly  contend  on  the  titles 
just  mentioned. 

9.  But  if  the  king  does  not  personally  investigate 
the  suits,  then  let  him  appoint  a  learned  Brahma/za 
to  try  them. 

10.  That  (man)  shall  enter  that  most  excellent 
court,  accompanied  by  three  assessors,  and  fully 
consider  (all)  causes  (brought)  before  the  (king), 
either  sitting  down  or  standing. 

11.  Where  three  Brahma^as  versed  in  the  Vedas 
and  the  learned  (judge)  appointed  by  the  king 
sit  down,  they  call  that  the  court  of  (four-faced) 
Brahman. 

12.  But  where  justice,  wounded  by  injustice,  ap- 
proaches and  the  judges  do  not  extract  the  dart, 
there  (they  also)  are  wounded  (by  that  dart  of 
injustice). 

13.  Either  the  court  must  not  be  entered,  or  the 
truth  must  be  spoken ;  a  man  who  either  says  nothing 
or  speaks  falsely,  becomes  sinful. 

7.  Vyavaharasthitau, ' which  give  rise  to  lawsuits' (Gov.),  means 
according  to  Nar. '  in  deciding  lawsuits/ 

8.  The  word  '  mostly'  is  intended  to  show  that  there  are  other 
titles  besides,  as  Narada  declared  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 
Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

9.  Vi.  Ill,  73 ;  Y^*.  II,  3 ;  Gaut.  XIII,  26 ;  Vas.  XVI,  2. 

10.  Medh.  says  'by  (at  least)  three  assessors.' 

13.  'Must  not  be  entered,'  i.e.  'for  the  purpose  of  deciding 
causes'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  But  the  further  details  show  that  the 
verse  is  intended  as  a  general  maxim,  applicable  to  witnesses  also. 


VIII,  20.  CIVIL   AND   CEREMONIAL   LAW.  255 

14.  Where  justice  is  destroyed  by  injustice,  or 
truth  by  falsehood,  while  the  judges  look  on,  there 
they  shall  also  be  destroyed. 

15.  'Justice,  being  violated,  destroys;  justice, 
being  preserved,  preserves  :  therefore  justice  must 
not  be  violated,  lest  violated  justice  destroy  us.' 

16.  For  t  divine  justice  (is  said  to  be)  a  bull 
(vWsha) ;  that  (man)  who  violates  it  (kurute  'lam) 
the  gods  consider  to  be  (a  man  despicable  like)  a 
^udra  (wzshala) ;  let  him,  therefore,  beware  of  vio- 
lating justice. 

17.  The  only  friend  who  follows  men  even  after 
death  is  justice ;  for  everything  else  is  lost  at  the 
same  time  when  the  body  (perishes). 

18.  One  quarter  of  (the  guilt  of)  an  unjust  (deci- 
sion) falls  on  him  who  committed  (the  crime),  one 
quarter  on  the  (false)  witness,  one  quarter  on  all  the 
judges,  one  quarter  on  the  king. 

19.  But  where  he  who  is  worthy  of  condemnation 
is  condemned,  the  king  is  free  from  guilt,  and  the 
judges  are  saved  (from  sin)  ;  the  guilt  falls  on  the 
perpetrator  (of  the  crime  alone). 

20.  A  Brahma^a  who  subsists  only  by  the  name 
of  his  caste  (^ati),  or  one  who  merely  calls  himself 
a  Brahma^a  (though  his  origin  be  uncertain),  may, 
at  the  king's  pleasure,  interpret  the  law  to  him,  but 
never  a  6udra. 

15.  This  admonition  must  be  addressed  by  the  assessors  to  a 
judge  who  acts  against  the  law  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nand.  reads 
v&h, '  you,'  instead  of  na^, '  us.' 

18.  Gaut.  XIII,  n  ;  Baudh.  1,19,  8.  Sabhasada^, '  the  judges,' 
means  according  to  Gov.  '  all  those  in  court  who  look  on.'  The 
judge  and  his  assessors  are,  however,  the  persons  really  intended. 

20.  'One  who  subsists  only  by  the  name  of  his  caste/  i.e.  'a  man 
of  Brahmawa  descent,  who  neither  studies  nor  performs  any  other 


K 


:,  2i. 


256  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII 

21.  The  kingdom  of  that  monarch,  who  looks  on 
while  a  .Sudra  settles  the  law,  will  sink  (low),  like 
a  cow  in  a  morass. 

22.  That  kingdom  where  .Sudras  are  very  nume- 
rous, which  is  infested  by  atheists  and  destitute  of 
twice-born  (inhabitants),  soon  entirely  perishes, 
afflicted  by  famine  and  disease. 

23.  Having  occupied  the  seat  of  justice,  having 
covered  his  body,  and  having  worshipped  the 
guardian  deities  of  the  world,  let  him,  with  a  col- 
lected mind,  begin  the  trial  of  causes. 

24.  Knowing  what  is  expedient  or  inexpedient, 
what  is  pure  justice  or  injustice,  let  him  examine 
the  causes  of  suitors  according  to  the  order  of  the 
castes  (vama). 


act  required  by  the  sacred  law'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  *  one  who  has  not 
been  initiated'  (Nar.).  Brahmawabruva^,  'one  who  merely  calls 
himself  a  Brahmawa  (though  his  origin  be  doubtful,'  Kull.,  Ragh.), 
means  according  to  Nar.  'an  initiated  Brahmawa  who  does  not 
study  the  Veda.'  Medh.  and  Gov.  take  the  two  terms  as  referring 
to  one  person  only,  'Even  a  despicable  Brahma/za,  who  subsists 
merely  by  the  name  of  his  race/  i.  e.  neither  studies  the  Veda,  nor 
performs  the  rites,  &c.  The  commentators  point  out  that,  as  the 
employment  of  a  £udra  is  emphatically  forbidden,  Kshatriyas  and 
Vauyas  may  be  employed  in  cases  of  necessity. 

22.  -SudrabhuyishMam,  'where  -Sudras  are  very  numerous'  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  'where  *Sudras  mostly 
decide  the  law -cases/  according  to  Nand.  'where  -Sudras  are 
mostly  employed  in  high  offices.'  Nar.  adds  that  each  of  the 
blemishes  enumerated  is  sufficient  to  cause  destruction. 

24.  Medh.  and  Ragh.  give  another  optional  explanation  of  the 
participial  clause, '  Understanding  that  pure  justice  secures  advan- 
tages and  mere  injustice  disadvantages.'  According  to  Kull.  it 
means  'Knowing  what  is  expedient  and  what  inexpedient,  but 
paying  attention  to  justice  and  injustice  alone/  Nar.  and  Nand. 
give  still  more  unacceptable  interpretations.  Gov.,  who  considers 
the  explanation  adopted  above  the  only  correct  one,  explains  '  what 
is  expedient'  by  'what  will  please  the  people/  and  'what  is  inex- 


VIII,  28.  CIVIL   AND    CRIMINAL   LAW.  257 

25.  By  external  signs  let  him  discover  the  in- 
ternal disposition  of  men,  by  their  voice,  their  colour, 
their  motions,  their  aspect,  their  eyes,  and  their 
gestures. 

26.  The  internal  (working  of  the)  mind  is  per- 
ceived through  the  aspect,  the  motions,  the  gait, 
the  gestures,  the  speech,  and  the  changes  in  the  eye 
and  of  the  face. 

27.  The  king  shall  protect  the  inherited  (and 
other)  property  of  a  minor,  until  he  has  returned 
(from  his  teachers  house)  or  until  he  has  passed 
his  minority. 

28.  In  like  manner  care  must  be  taken  of  barren^ 
women,  of  those  who  have  no  sons,  of  those  whose 
family  is  extinct,  of  wives  and  widows  faithful  to 
their  lords,  and  of  women  afflicted  with  diseases. 

pedient'  by  'what  will  make  them  angry;'  Kull.  and  Ragh.  by 
'what  will  protect  the  people'  and  'what  will  destroy  them.' 

25-26.  Y&gri.  II,  15. 

25.  Gov.  omits  svara, '  voice,'  and  writes  mukha,  'by  the  colour 
of  the  face.'  Ihgita, '  motions,'  i.  e.  '  trembling,  horripilation,  &c.' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.),  or  'looking  down,  &c.'  (Kull.),  or 'unin- 
tentionally moving  the  arms,  &c.'  (N&r.).  Akara,  'aspect,'  i.e. 
'  pallor,  &c.'  (Gov.),  or  '  sweating,  horripilation,  &c.'  (Kull.,  Nar.). 
Medh.  and  Ragh.  take  akara  to  mean  'the  manner'  of  the  voice,  &c, 
not  as  a  separate  class  of  signs.  -Sesh/ita,  '  gestures,'  i.  e. '  moving, 
wringing  the  hands,  &c.'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or '  intentional  move- 
ments' (Nar.). 

27-29.  Gaut.  X,  48;  Vas.  XVI,  8;  Vi.  Ill,  65. 

27.  'The  minority  ends  with  the  sixteenth  year'  (Kull.,  Nar.); 
see  Narada  III,  37.  The  second  term  is  intended  to  provide  for 
the  case  of  those  who  finish  their  Veda-study  before  the  sixteenth 
year  (Medh.,  Kull.),  or  of  Sudras  (Medh.). 

28.  'Those  whose  family  is  extinct/  i.e.  'maidens  in  that  con- 
dition' (Gov.),  or  '  those  who  have  quitted  their  families  and  become 
harlots'  (Medh. '  others').  '  Wives  faithful  to  their  lords,'  i.  e.  'those 
whose   husbands   are    absent'  (Gov.,   Ragh.).      The    conditions 

[25]  S 


258  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  29. 

29.  A  righteous  king  must  punish  like  thieves 
those  relatives  who  appropriate  the  property  of  such 
females  during  their  lifetime. 

30.  Property,  the  owner  of  which  has  disappeared, 
the  king  shall  cause  to  be  kept  as  a  deposit  during 
three  years ;  within  the  period  of  three  years  the 
owner  may  claim  it,  after  (that  term)  the  king  may 
take  it. 

31.  He  who  says, '  This  belongs  to  me/  must  be 
examined  according  to  the  rule ;  if  he  accurately 
describes  the  shape,  and  the  number  (of  the  articles 
found)  and  so  forth,  (he  is)  the  owner,  (and)  ought  (to 
receive)  that  property. 

32.  But  if  he  does  not  really  know  the  time  and 
the  place  (where  it  was)  lost,  its  colour,  shape,  and 
size,  he  is  worthy  of  a  fine  equal  (in  value)  to  the 
(object  claimed). 

33.  Now  the  king,  remembering  the  duty  of 
good  men,  may  take  one-sixth  part  of  property 
lost  and  afterwards  found,  or  one-tenth,  or  at  least 
one-twelfth. 


of  the  king's  protection  are  in  every  case  that  the  relatives  are 
either  dead  or  unable  to  provide  for  the  females  or  try  to  oppress 
them. 

30-34.  Ap.  II,  28,  7-9;  Gaut.  X,  36-38;  Vas.  XVI,  20;  Yagri. 

II,  S3- 

30.  'Property  the  owner  of  which  has  disappeared'  means  ac- 
cording to  the  commentators, '  property,  found  by  the  royal  servants 
(in  a  forest  or  elsewhere,  Medh.),  the  owner  of  which  is  not  known.' 
Such  property  shall  be  proclaimed  by  beat  of  drum  (Gov.,  KulL). 
'  Others,'  quoted  by  Medh.,  think  that  after  three  years  the  king 
may  use  it  as  his  own,  but  has  still  to  restore  it,  if  the  owner 
appears.  Nand.  points  out  that  the  rule  does  not  refer  to  Brah- 
mamcal  property  (see  Gaut.  loc.  cit.). 

33.  The  amount  to  be  taken  by  the  king  depends  according  to 
Medh.  on  the  length  of  time  for  which  it  has  been  kept  (so  also 


VIII,  39-  CIVIL   AND    CRIMINAL    LAW.  259 

34.  Property  lost  and  afterwards  found  (by  the 
king's  servants)  shall  remain  in  the  keeping  of 
(special)  officials;  those  whom  the  king  may  con- 
vict of  stealing  it,  he  shall  cause  to  be  slain  by  an 
elephant. 

35.  From  that  man  who  shall  truly  say  with 
respect  to  treasure-trove,  !  This  belongs  to  me/  the 
king  may  take  one-sixth  or  one-twelfth  part. 

36.  But  he  who  falsely  says  (so),  shall  be  fined 
in  one-eighth  of  his  property,  or,  a  calculation  of 
(the  value  of)  the  treasure  having  been  made,  in 
some  smaller  portion  (of  that). 

3  7.  When  a  learned  Brahrna/za  has  found  treasure, 
deposited  in  former  (times),  he  may  take  even  the 
whole  (of  it) ;  for  he  is  master  of  everything. 

38.  When  the  king  finds  treasure  of  old  concealed 
in  the  ground,  let  him  give  one  half  to  Brahma/zas    jj 
and  place  the  (other)  half  in  his  treasury.  —4* 

39.  The  king  obtains  one  half  of  ancient  hoards 
and  metals   (found)  in   the   ground,  by   reason   of 

Ragh.),  or  on  the  trouble  which  it  gave  (so  also  Gov.)  and  the 
king's  compassion ;  according  to  Kull.  and  Nar.,  on  the  virtues  of 
the  owner.     Medh.  places  this  verse  after  verse  34. 

35-39-  Gaut.  X,  43-45  5  vas.  Ill,  13-14;  Vi.  Ill,  56-64; 
Yagn.  II,  34-35- 

35.  '  Treasure-trove,'  i.e. 'valuables  secretly  buried  in  the  ground' 
(Medh.).  The  amount  to  be  taken  depends  on  the  'virtues'  of  the 
finder  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  on  his  caste  (Nar.),  or  on  the 
place  and  time,  the  caste,  &c.  (Gov.). 

36.  The  amount  of  the  fine  depends  on  the  circumstances  of 
the  case  or  the  '  virtues'  of  the  offender  (Medh.),  or  on  the '  virtues ' 
of  the  offender  alone  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

37.  Medh.,  Gov.,  N&r.  take,  as  Kull.  points  out,  most  improperly 
purvopanihitam,  *  deposited  in  former  times,'  to  mean  '  deposited  by 
his  ancestors.'  The  parallel  passages  of  Visrmu  and  others  are 
perfectly  clear  on  the  point. 

39.  I  take  the  last  clause,  which  might  also  be  translated  '  (and) 

S  2 


260  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  40. 

(his  giving)  protection,  (and)  because  he  is  the  lord 
of  the  soil. 

40.  Property  stolen  by  thieves  must  be  restored 
by  the  king  to  (men  of)  all  castes  (vama) ;  a  king 
who  uses  such  (property)  for  himself  incurs  the 
oaiilt  of  a  thief. 

41.  (A  king)  who  knows  the  sacred  law,  must 
inquire  into  the  laws  of  castes  (^ati),  of  districts, 
of  guilds,  and  of  families,  and  (thus)  settle  the 
peculiar  law  of  each. 

42.  For  men  who  follow  their  particular  occupa- 
tions and  abide  by  their  particular  duty,  become 
dear  to  people,  though  they  may  live  at  a  distance. 

43.  Neither  the  king  nor  any  servant  of  his  shall 

because  he  is  the  lord  of  the  earth/  as  a  distinct  recognition  of  the 
principle  that  the  ownership  of  all  land  is  vested  in  the  king.  Medh. 
says, '  he  is  the  lord  of  the  soil  (bhumi) ;  it  is  just  that  a  share  should 
be  given  to  him  of  that  which  is  found  in  the  soil  belonging  to  him 
(tadiyaya  bhuvo  yallabdham).' 

40.  Ap.  II,  26,  8 ;  Gaut.  X,  46-47  ;  Vi.  Ill,  66-67  ;  Y^n.  II, 
36.  I.e.  'if  he  recovers  it'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh., 
Nand.).  Medh.  reads  iaurih/Ytam,  and  mentions  another  reading, 
/fcaurahn'tam,  which  Ragh.  has,  and  thinks  that  it  may  mean  that  the 
king  must  make  good  stolen  property  which  is  not  recovered. 

41.  Ap.  II,  15,  1 ;  Gaut.  XI,  20;  Vas.  XIX,  7;  Baudh.  I,  2,  1-8; 
Vi.  Ill,  3  ;  Yagn.  I,  360.  (rati,  '  castes,'  i.  e.  '  Brahma^as  and  so 
forth'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  Ganapada, '  the  laws  of  districts, 
e.  g.  of  the  Kuru,  Klri  or  KsLrmira  countries'  (Medh.),  or  'of  certain 
districts'  (deja,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  of  the  inhabitants  of  one 
and  the  same  village'  (Nar.).  Medh.  gives  also  other  explanations 
of  the  compound  ^ati^anapadan, '  of  local  castes '  or  '  natives  of 
different  countries.'  Sreni,'  guilds,'  i.  e.  '  of  merchants,  &c.'  (Medh. 
Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  '  of  merchants  and  husbandmen,  &c.'  (Gov.), 
or  'of  merchants  and  actors,  &c.'  (Nand.).  Ragh.  reads  paripalayet, 
'  and  protect  the  peculiar  law  of  each.'  It  must,  of  course,  be  under- 
stood that  the  customs  are  not  opposed  to  the  sacred  law  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

43.  Gaut.  XIII,  27.    '(Some)  other  (man),'  i.e.  'the  plaintiff' 


VIII,  46.  CIVIL    AND    CRIMINAL    LAW.  26 1 

themselves  cause  a  lawsuit  to  be  begun,  or  hush  up 
one  that  has  been  brought  (before  them)  by  (some) 
other  (man). 

44.  As  a  hunter  traces  the  lair  of  a  (wounded) 
deer  by  the  drops  of  blood,  even  so  the  king  shall 
discover  on  which  side  the  right  lies,  by  inferences 
(from  the  facts). 

45.  When  engaged  in  judicial  proceedings  he 
must  pay  full  attention  to  the  truth,  to  the  object 
(of  the  dispute),  (and)  to  himself,  next  to  the  wit- 
nesses, to  the  place,  to  the  time,  and  to  the  aspect. 

46.  What  may  have  been  practised  by  the  vir- 
tuous, by  such  twice-born  men  as  are  devoted  to 
the  law,  that  he  shall  establish  as  law,  if  it  be  not 

(Medh.),  or  'the  plaintiff  or  the  defendant'  (KulL),  or 'any  suitor/ 
'Others'  explain  the  second  half  of  the  verse  according  to  Medh., 
as  follows,  '  and  let  him  not  appropriate  money  brought  to  him 
in  any  other  manner  than  for  the  suit.' 

44.  Thus  Kull.  and  Ragh.  But  Medh.  and  Gov.  take  the  verse 
a  little  differently, '  As  the  hunter  tracks  the  steps  of  (a  wounded) 
deer/  &c. 

45.  '  The  truth,'  i.  e. '  removing  all  fraud'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  what 
portion  (of  this  suit)  is  based  on  truth'  (Nar.,  Nand.).  Artham, 
1  the  object  of  the  dispute,'  i.  e.  *  if  it  be  not  too  insignificant,  in 
which  case  the  plaint  must  not  be  accepted'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.).  Nar.  explains  artha  by  '  the  money  realised  by  a  fine  and 
the  like/  Nand.  by  '  the  aim.'  '  Himself/  i.  e.  '  that  he  will  obtain 
heaven  by  a  just  decision'  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  '  The  place  and  the  time/ 
i.  e. '  what  is  befitting  the  place  and  the  time'  (Kull.),  or  '  the  place, 
e.  g.  Banaras,  and  the  time  (e.  g.  of  a  famine)  where  and  when  the 
offence  has  been  committed,  and  which  may  make  the  case  lighter 
or  heavier'  (Medh.,  Ragh.),  or  '  the  customs  of  the  country  and 
what  is  befitting  the  time '  (Nar.),  or  '  the  place  where  the  offence  was 
committed  and  the  age  of  the  offender'  (Gov.).  Rupam, '  the  aspect/ 
i.  e. '  the  nature  of  the  object'  (Medh.,  Nand.),  or  '  the  nature  of  the 
case'  (Kull.),  or  'the  looks  of  the  parties' (Medh.  'others/  Gov., 
Nar.,  Ragh.). 

46.  Thus  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.  But  Medh.  takes  the 
verse  differently, '  What  has  been  practised  by  the  virtuous  and  by 


262  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  47. 

opposed  to  the  (customs  of)  countries,  families,  and 
castes  (^ati). 

47.  When  a  creditor  sues  (before  the  king)  for 
the  recovery  of  money  from  a  debtor,  let  him  make 
the  debtor  pay  the  sum  which  the  creditor  proves 
(to  be  due). 

48.  By  whatever  means  a  creditor  may  be  able 
to  obtain  possession  of  his  property,  even  by  those 
means  may  he  force  the  debtor  and  make  him  pay. 

49.  By  moral  suasion,  by  suit  of  law,  by  artful 
management,  or  by  the  customary  proceeding,  a 
creditor  may  recover  property  lent;  and  fifthly,  by 
force. 

50.  A  creditor  who  himself  recovers  his  property 
from  his  debtor,  must  not  be  blamed  by  the  king  for 
retaking  what  is  his  own. 

51.  But  him  who  denies  a  debt  which  is  proved 
by  good  evidence,  he  shall  order  to  pay  that  debt 

twice-born  men  ....  that  he  shall  establish  as  law  for  countries, 
families,  and .  castes,  if  it  is  not  opposed  (to  texts  of  the  -Sruti  and 
Smrz'ti).'  Gov.  reads  anurupam, '  conform  with/  instead  of  avirud- 
dham,  '  not  opposed,'  and  seems  to  agree  with  Medh.  He  says, 
'  And  thus  let  him  punish  in  lawsuits  the  litigant  who  acts  in  a  con- 
trary manner ;  and  as  here  the  phrase  "  what  is  practised  by  the 
virtuous"  is  used,  this  (rule)  must  refer  to  good  conduct/  But  the 
rule,  given  in  verse  41,  must  refer  to  laws  other  than  '(those  re- 
lating to)  good  conduct/ 

49.  Vyavahare^a,  'by  suit  of  law'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.),  or  'by 
threatening  a  lawsuit'  (Nand.),  or  '  by  forced  labour'  (Medh.),  or  '  by 
a  forcible  sale  of  property'  (Ragh.).  A/£arita,  '  the  customary  pro- 
ceeding/ i.  e. '  by  killing  one's  wife,  children,  and  cattle,  and  sitting 
at  the  debtor's  door.'  Brz'haspati,  quoted  by  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  or  'by 
fasting'  (Gov.),  or  'by  the  creditor's  starving  himself  to  death' 
(Nar.).  This  custom  corresponds  to  the  so-called  prayopave«rana, 
or  Dharwa,  and  to  the  Traga  of  the  bards. 

50.  Vi.  VI,  19  ;  Yagn.  II,  40. 

51.  'In  this  case  self-help  must  not  be  used'  (Medh.).  Regard- 
ing the  amount  of  the  fine,  see  below,  verse  139. 


VIII,  57-  CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;    DEBTS.  2-63 

to  the  creditor  and  a  small  fine  according  to  his 
circumstances. 

52.  On  the  denial  (of  a  debt)  by  a  debtor  who 
has  been  required  in  court  to  pay  it,  the  complainant 
must  call  (a  witness)  who  was  present  (when  the  loan 
was  made),  or  adduce  other  evidence. 

53.  (The  plaintiff)  who  calls  a  witness  not  present 
at  the  transaction,  who  retracts  his  statements,  or 
does  not  perceive  that  his  statements  (are)  confused 
or  contradictory ; 

54.  Or  who  having  stated  what  he  means  to  prove 
afterwards  varies  (his  case),  or  who  being  questioned 
on  a  fact  duly  stated  by  himself  does  not  abide  by  it ; 

55.  Or  who  converses  with  the  witnesses  in  a  place 
improper  for  such  conversation ;  or  who  declines  to 
answer  a  question,  properly  put,  or  leaves  (the  court) ; 

56.  Or  who,  being  ordered  to  speak,  does  not 
answer,  or  does  not  prove  what  he  has  alleged  ;  or 
who  does  not  know  what  is  the  first  (point),  and 
what  the  second,  fails  in  his  suit. 

57.  Him  also  who  says  ( I  have  witnesses/  and, 

52.  Instead  of  dcsyam, '(a  witness)  who  was  present  (when  the 
loan  was  made,'  K.,  Ragh.,  Kull.),  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand. 
read  de^am, '  (must  point  out)  the  place/ 

53-56.  Yagn.  II,  16. 

53.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  read  apadcram, '  a  wrong  or 
impossible  place,'  instead  of  adcryam,  'a  witness  not  present.' 
Kull.  reads  according  to  the  editions, '  adejyam/  but  his  explanation 
agrees  with  the  other  reading. 

54.  Pramhitam, '  duly  stated  (by  himself)/  (Kull.,  Nand.),  i.  e.  '  in 
the  plaint'  (Gov.),  means  according  to  Ragh.  and  Nar.  'duly 
ascertained.' 

56.  { Who  does  not  know  what  is  the  first  (point)  and  what  is  the 
second/  i.  e. '  what  is  the  proof  and  what  the  matter  to  be  proved' 
(Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'what  ought  to  be  said  first  and  what  later' 
(Nar.,  Nand.). 


264 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


VIII,  58. 


being  ordered  to  produce  them,  produces  them  not, 
the  judge  must  on  these  (same)  grounds  declare  to 
be  non-suited. 

58.  If  a  plaintiff  does  not  speak,  he  may  be 
punished  corporally  or  fined  according  to  the  law ; 
if  (a  defendant)  does  not  plead  within  three  fort- 
nights, he  has  lost  his  cause. 

59.  In  the  double  of  that  sum  which  (a  defendant) 
falsely  denies  or  on  which  (the  plaintiff)  falsely  de- 
clares, shall  those  two  (men)  offending  against 
justice  be  fined  by  the  king. 

60.  (A  defendant)  who,  being  brought  (into  court) 
by  the  creditor,  (and)  being  questioned,  denies  (the 
debt),  shall  be  convicted  (of  his  falsehood)  by  at 
least  three  witnesses  (who  must  depose)  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Brahma^a  (appointed  by)  the  king. 

61.  I  will  fully  declare  what  kind  of  men  may  be 
made  witnesses  in  suits  by  creditors,  and  in  what 
manner  those  (witnesses)  must  give  true  (evidence). 

62.  Householders,  men  with  male  issue,  and  indi- 
genous (inhabitants  of  the  country,  be  they)  Ksha- 
triyas,  Vaiiyas,  or  .5udras,  are  competent,  when 
called  by  a  suitor,  to  give  evidence,  not  any  persons 
whatever  (their  condition  may  be)  except  in  cases 
of  urgency. 

58.  '  If  a  plaintiff  does  not  speak,'  i.  e. '  after  bringing  a  suit ' 
(Kull.).     Corporal  punishment  is  for  heavy  cases  (Kull.). 

59.  Ya^n.  II,  59. 

60.  Thus  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  but  the  last  words  may  also  mean 
1  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  of  the  Brahmawas.' 

61-72.  Ap.II,  29,  7;  Gaut.  XIII,  1-4;  Vas.  XVI,  28-30;  Baudh. 
1, 19,  13;  Vi.  VIII,  7-9  ;  Y&gn.  II,  68-72. 

62.  Medh.  and  Nar.  refer  the  expression  '  not  any  person  what- 
ever (their  condition  may  be),'  to  such  as  volunteer  to  give  evidence 
without  being  summoned.  The  '  cases  of  urgency'  are  those  men- 
tioned below,  verse  69. 


VIII,  66.         CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;    DEBTS.  265 

63.  Trustworthy  men  of  all  the  (four)  castes 
(var/za)  may  be  made  witnesses  in  lawsuits,  (men) 
who  know  (their)  whole  duty,  and  are  free  from 
covetousness ;  but  let  him  reject  those  (of  an) 
opposite  (character). 

64.  Those  must  not  be  made  (witnesses)  who 
have  an  interest  in  the  suit,  nor  familiar  (friends), 
companions,  and  enemies  (of  the  parties),  nor  (men) 
formerly  convicted  (of  perjury),  nor  (persons)  suffer- 
ing under  (severe)  illness,  nor  (those)  tainted  (by 
mortal  sin). 

65.  The  king  cannot  be  made  a  witness,  nor 
mechanics  and  actors,  nor  a  6Votriya,  nor  a  student 
of  the  Veda,  nor  (an  ascetic)  who  has  given  up  (all) 
connexion  (with  the  world), 

66.  Nor  one  wholly  dependent,  nor  one  of  bad 
fame,  nor  a  Dasyu,  nor  one  who  follows  forbidden 

64.  ■  Who  have  an  interest  in  the  suit'  (Nar.)  means  according 
to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. '  connected  by  money,  i.  e.  credi- 
tors or  debtors  of  the  parties/  or  according  to  Nand. '  men  who 
have  received  benefits  from  one  of  the  parties.'  Sahaya,  ■  compa- 
nions,' i.e. '  sureties  and  the  like'  (Medh.),  or  'servants '(Kull.,  Nar.). 
Dn'sh/adosha, '  men  formerly  convicted  (of  perjury),'  (Medh.,  Gov.., 
Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  may  according  to  Medh.  also  mean  ■  men 
who  have  been  convicted  (of  any  serious  offence).'  Men  afflicted 
with  serious  illnesses  must  not  be  made  witnesses,  because  such 
men  are  liable  to  become  angry  or  to  forget  and  thus  to  give  false 
evidence  (Medh.).  Dushita,  'tainted/  i.e.  by  mortal  crimes  or 
numerous  smaller  offences  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according 
to  Nar.  and  Nand.  AbhLrastas,  ■  those  accused  of  such  crimes.' 

65.  Kuj-ilava, '  actors'  (Nar.),  or  '  dancers,  musicians,  and  singers' 
(Medh.),  or  '  actors  and  so  forth'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  singers'  (Nand.). 
A  .Srotriya,  or  Brahmawa  learned  in  the  Vedas,  cannot  be  made 
a  witness,  because  he  has  to  attend  to  his  studies  and  to  the  Agni- 
hotra  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Gov.,  Nand.).  The  same  remark 
applies  to  the  last  two  classes.  Lihgastha,  '  a  student/  includes 
according  to  Nar.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  Medh.  also  '  ascetics.' 

66.  •  One  wholly  dependent/  i.  e.'  a  slave  by  birth'  (Medh.,  Gov., 


266  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  67. 

occupations,  nor  an  aged  (man),  nor  an  infant,  nor 
one  (man  alone),  nor  a  man  of  the  lowest  castes,  nor 
one  deficient  in  organs  of  sense, 

67.  Nor  one  extremely  grieved,  nor  one  intoxi- 
cated, nor  a  madman,  nor  one  tormented  by  hunger 
or  thirst,  nor  one  oppressed  by  fatigue,  nor  one 
tormented  by  desire,  nor  a  wrathful  man,  nor  a 
thief. 

68.  Women  should  give  evidence  for  women,  and 
for  twice-born  men  twice-born  men  (of  the)  same 
(kind),  virtuous  ^udras  for  ,5udras,  and  men  of  the 
lowest   castes  for  the  lowest. 

69.  But  any  person  whatsoever,  who  has  personal 
knowledge  (of  an  act  committed)  in  the  interior 
apartments  (of  a  house),  or  in  a  forest,  or  of  (a  crime 
causing)  loss  of  life,  may  give  evidence  between  the 
parties. 

70.  On  failure  (of  qualified  witnesses,  evidence) 

Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  Vaktavya, '  one  of  bad  fame/  may  according 
to  Medh.  also  mean  'one  afflicted  with  leprosy  or  some  other  bad 
disease.'  Dasyu,  i.  e.  'a  servant  for  wages'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.), 
or  'a  hard-hearted  man'  (Medh.),  or  'an  angry  man'  (Kull.),  or  'a 
murderer'  (Ragh.),  or  '  a  low-caste  man'  (Nand.).  The  term  denotes, 
however,  properly  the  aboriginal  robber-tribes,  and  probably  includes 
all  those  resembling  them.  '  One  who  follows  forbidden  occupa- 
tions,' i.  e. '  a  Brahmawa  who  has  become  a  warrior  or  a  trader  and 
the  like'  (Medh.),  or  '  a  butcher  and  the  like'  (Nar.). 

68.  Vas.  XVI,  30.  ■  Women  should  give  evidence  for  women  only 
in  cases  between  women  or  in  matters  concerning  the  female  sex, 
which  they  alone  may  be  supposed  to  know'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 
1  Twice-born  men  of  the  same  kind,'  i.  e. '  of  the  same  caste'  (Kull., 
Nar.,  Nand.),  or  'of  the  same  caste  and  equally  virtuous'  (Gov.),  or 
'  of  the  same  place,'  or  '  of  the  same  caste,  occupations,  &c.'  (Medh.). 

69.  'Of  (a  crime  causing)  loss  of  life,'  i.e. '  of  robberies,  murders, 
and  the  like'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

70.  The  rule  refers  to  the  cases  mentioned  in  verse  69  (Gov., 
Kull.),  or  to  the  last  only  (Nar.). 


VIII,  75-      CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;   PROCEDURE.       267 

may  be  given  (in  such  cases)  by  a  woman,  by  an 
infant,  by  an  aged  man,  by  a  pupil,  by  a  relative,  by 
a  slave,  or  by  a  hired  servant. 

71.  But  the  (judge)  should  consider  the  evidence 
of  infants,  aged  and  diseased  men,  who  (are  apt  to) 
speak  untruly,  as  untrustworthy,  likewise  that  of 
men  with  disordered  minds. 

72.  In  all  cases  of  violence,  of  theft  and  adultery, 
of  defamation  and  assault,  he  must  not  examine  the 
(competence  of)  witnesses  (too  strictly). 

73.  On  a  conflict  of  the  witnesses  the  king  shall 
accept  (as  true)  the  (evidence  of  the)  majority;  if 
(the  conflicting  parties  are)  equal  in  number,  (that 
of)  those  distinguished  by  good  qualities ;  on  a  dif- 
ference between  (equally)  distinguished  (witnesses, 
that  of)  the  best  among  the  twice-born. 

74.  Evidence  in  accordance  with  what  has  actually 
been  seen  or  heard,  is  admissible ;  a  witness  who 
speaks  truth  in  those  (cases),  neither  loses  spiritual 

merit  nor  wealth.  ^-\     *     u. 

75.  A  witness  who  deposes   in   an  assembly  of   !  f. 
honourable  men  (Arya)  anything  else  but  what  he 
has  seen  or  heard,  falls  after  death  headlong  into   | 
hell  and  loses  heaven. 


73.  Vi.  VIII,  39;  Yagn.  II,  78,  80.  'The  best  of  the  twice- 
born/  i.  e. '  Brahmaraas'  (Gov.,  Nar.),  or  '  particularly  distinguished 
Brahmawas,  who  fulfil  their  sacred  duties'  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

74-75.  Ap.  II,  29,  9-10;  Gaut  XIII,  7;  Baudh.  I,  19,  14-15; 
Vas.  XVI,  36;  Vi.  VIII,  13-14. 

74.  'Nor  wealth/  i.e.  'he  will  not  be  fined.' 

75.  'In  an  assembly  of  honourable  men/ i.e.  in  court  (Medh.), 
or  '  in  an  assembly  of  Brahmawas'  (Gov.).  'And  loses  heaven/  i.  e. 
which  he  may  have  earned  by  good  works  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Nand.),  or  '  even  after  passing  through  hell,  he  cannot  get  into 
heaven,  because  his  merit  is  extinct'  (Nar.). 


i 


268  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII,  76. 

76.  When  a  man  (originally)  not  appointed  to  be 
a  witness  sees  or  hears  anything  and  is  (afterwards) 
examined  regarding  it,  he  must  declare  it  (exactly) 
as  he  saw  or  heard  it. 

J  J.  One  man  who  is  free  from  covetousness  may 
J_    be  (accepted  as)  witness ;   but  not  even  many  pure 
^PJ     women,  because   the   understanding   of  females  ^js^ 
apt  to  waver,  nor  even  many  other  men,  who  are 
tainted  with  sin. 

j8.  What  witnesses  declare  quite  naturally,  that 
must  be  received  on  trials ;  (depositions)  differing 
from  that,  which  they  make  improperly,  are  worth- 
less for  (the  purposes  of)  justice. 

79.  The  witnesses  being  assembled  in  the  court 
in  the  presence  of  the  plaintiff  and  of  the  defendant, 
let  the  judge  examine  them,  kindly  exhorting  them 
in  the  following  manner : 

80.  '  What  ye  know  to  have  been  mutually  trans- 
acted in  this  matter  between  the  two  men  before  us, 
declare  all  that  in  accordance  with  the  truth ;  for 
ye  are  witnesses  in  this  (cause). 

81.  'A  witness  who  speaks  the  truth  in  his  evi- 
dence, gains  (after  death)  the  most  excellent  regions 
(of  bliss)  and  here  (below)  unsurpassable  fame;  such 
testimony  is  revered  by  Brahman  (himself). 

76.  '(Originally)  not  appointed  (to  be  a  witness)/  i.e.  'not  entered 
as  a  witness  in  the  document'  (Medh.), '  but  accidentally  present  at 
the  transaction'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

78.  'Quite  naturally,'  i.e.  'not  out  of  compassion,  in  the  belief  of 
gaining  merit,  or  depending  on  women'  (Medh.),  or  '  not  out  of  fear 
and  the  like'  (Kull.),  or  '  without  hesitation,  quickly'  (Nar.).  Gov. 
and  Nand.  explain  it '  in  accordance  with  the  truth/ 

79.  Gaut.  XIII,  5. 
80-101.  Ap.  II,  29,  9-10 ;  Gaut.  XIII,  14-22  ;  Vas.  XVI,  32-34 ; 

Baudh.  I,  19,  9-12  ;  Vi.  VIII,  19-37 ;  Yigii.  II,  73-75. 


VIII,  88.       CIVIL  AND 


jminal  law;  procedure.      269 


)vfr 


— 1 

82.  '  He  who  gfives  false  evidence  is  firmly  bound 

by  Varima's   fetters,  helpless  during   one  hundred 
existences  ;  let  (men  therefore)  give  true  evidence. 

83.  'By  truthfulness  a  witness  is  purified,  through 
truthfulness  his  merit  grows ;  truth  must,  therefore, 
be  spoken  by  witnesses  of  all  castes  (var/za). 

84.  '  The  Soul  itself  is  the  witness  of  the  Soul,  and 
the  Soul  is  the  refuge  of  the  Soul ;  despise  not  thy 
own  Soul,  the  supreme  witness  of  men. 

85.  '  The  wicked,  indeed,  say  in  their  hearts,  "  No- 
body sees  us;"  but  the  gods  distinctly  see  them  and 
the  male  within  their  own  breasts. 

86.  '  The  sky,  the  earth,  the  waters,  (the  male  in) 
the  heart,  the  moon,  the  sun,  the  fire,  Yama  and  the 
wind,  the  night,  the  two  twilights,  and  justice  know 
the  conduct  of  all  corporeal  beings/ 

8  J.  The  (judge),  being  purified,  shall  ask  in  the 
forenoon  the  twice-born  (witnesses)  who  (also  have 
been)  purified,  (and  stand)  facing  the  north  or  the 
east,  to  give  true  evidence  in  the  presence  of 
(images  of)  the  gods  and  of  Brahma/zas. 

88.  Let   him   examine   a    Brahma^a    (beginning  i 
with)  '  Speak,'  a  Kshatriya  (beginning  with)  '  Speak 
the  truth,'  a  Vaisya  (admonishing  him)  by  (mention- 
ing) his  kine,  grain,  and  gold,  a  .Sudra  (threatening 

82.  'Varurca's  fetters/  i.  e.  'terrible  snake -bonds  or  dropsy* 
(Medh.,  Kull.).  Gov.  mentions  the  snake-bonds  alone,  and  Ragh. 
says  that  the  verse  threatens  the  punishment  of  hell.  Dropsy  is  a 
disease  specially  attributed  to  Varuwa,  see  Rig-vedaVII,  89,  1,  and 
the  story  of  *Suna/$sepha,  Ait.  Brahm.  VII,  15.  The  fetters  of  Varu/za 
are  mentioned  as  the  punishment  of  liars,  Atharva-veda  IV,  16,  6. 

86.  l  (The  male  in)  the  heart/  i.  e. '  the  male  or  spirit  (purusha) 
who  resides  in  the  human  heart,  clothed  with  a  rudimentary  body ' 
(Medh.),  and  similarly  the  other  commentators. 

88.  '(Admonishing  him)  by  (mentioning)  his  kine,  grain,  or  gold/ 
i.  e. '  threatening  him  with  the  guilt  of  all  offences  committed  against 


270 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


VIII,  89. 


pn 


* 


1 


him)  with  (the  guilt  of)  every  crime  that  causes  loss 
of  caste ; 

89.  (Saying),  'Whatever  places  (of  torment)  are 
assigned  (by  the  sages)  to  the  slayer  of  a  Brahma^a, 
to  the  murderer  of  women  and  children,  to  him  who 
betrays  a  friend,  and  to  an  ungrateful  man,  those 
shall  be  thy  (portion),  if  thou  speakest  falsely. 

90.  '  (The  reward)  of  all  meritorious  deeds  which 
thou,  good  man,  hast  done  since  thy  birth,  shall  be- 
come the  share  of  the  dogs,  if  in  thy  speech  thou 
departest  from  the  truth. 

91.  'If  thou  thinkest,  O  friend  of  virtue,  with  re- 
spect to  thyself,  "  I  am  alone,"  (know  that)  that  sage 
who  witnesses  all  virtuous  acts  and  all  crimes,  ever 
resides  in  thy  heart. 

92.  'If  thou  art  not  at  variance  with  that  divine 
Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasvat,  who  dwells  in  thy  heart, 
thou  needest  neither  visit  the  Ganges  nor  the  (land 
of  the)  Kurus. 

\\\^        P      93-  '  Naked   and  shorn,  tormented  with  hunger 
\WJr       and  thirst,  and  deprived  of  sight,  shall  the  man  who 
J   gives  false  evidence,  go  with  a  potsherd  to  beg  food 
at  the  door  of  his  enemy. 

94.  '  Headlong,  in  utter  darkness  shall  the  sinful 
man  tumble  into  hell,  who  being  interrogated  in  a 
judicial  inquiry  answers  one  question  falsely. 

95.  '  That  man  who  in  a  court  (of  justice)  gives 
an  untrue  account  of  a  transaction  (or  asserts  a  fact) 
of  which  he  was  not  an  eye-witness,  resembles  a 
blind  man  who  swallows  fish  with  the  bones. 

96.  '  The  gods  are  acquainted  with  no  better  man 

kine,  &c.'  (Medh.),  or  '  with  the  guilt  of  the  theft  of  kine,  &c.'  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'with  the  loss  of  his  kine,  &c/  (Nar.),  or '  by  making 
him  touch  a  cow,  &c.'  (Nand.). 


/ 


VIII,  ioi.      CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;  PROCEDURE.       271 

in  this  world  than  him,  of  whom  his  conscious  Soul 
has  no  distrust,  when  he  gives  evidence. 

97.  *  Learn  now,  O  friend,  from  an  enumeration 
in  due  order,  how  many  relatives  he  destroys  who 
gives  false  evidence  in  several  particular  cases. 

98.  'He  kills  five  by  false  testimony  regarding 
(small)  cattle,  he  kills  ten  by  false  testimony  re- 
garding kine,  he  kills  a  hundred  by  false  evidence 
concerning  horses,  and  a  thousand  by  false  evidence 
concerning  men. 

99.  '  By  speaking  falsely  in  a  cause  regarding 
gold,  he  kills  the  born  and  the  unborn;  by  false 
evidence  concerning  land,  he  kills  everything ;  be- 
ware, therefore,  of  false  evidence  concerning  land. 

100.  'They  declare  (false  evidence)  concerning 
water,  concerning  the  carnal  enjoyment  of  women, 
and  concerning  all  gems,  produced  in  water,  or  con- 
sisting of  stones  (to  be)  equally  (wicked)  as  a  lie 
concerning  land. 

101.  'Marking  well  all  the  evils  (which  are  pro- 

97.  Hanti,  'destroys  or  kills,'  i.  e. ' causes  to  fall  into  hell'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.),  or  '  causes  to  fall  from  heaven  and  to  be  reborn 
in  the  wombs  of  animals'  (Ragh.).  Medh.  and  Kull.  (verse  99)  give 
another  explanation  of  this  expression,  viz. '  incurs  a  guilt  as  great 
as  if  he  had  killed  them.' 

98.  '  Men,'  i.  e. '  slaves.' 

99.  'Everything/  i.e.  'everything  animated'  (Gov.,  Kull),  or 
'even  more  than  a  thousand'  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 

100.  '  Water,'  i.  e. '  wells,  tanks,  &c.'  '  Gems  produced  in  water,' 
i.  e. '  pearls,  coral,  &c.' 

Verse  99  is  placed  by  Nand.  before  verse  100,  and  some 
others  are  inserted  between  and  after  them,  but  the  confusion 
is  probably  owing  merely  to  clerical  errors,  as  no  commentary 
is  given. 

101.  Aflgasa,  'openly,'  means  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.  'truly,' 
according  to  Nar. '  quickly/ 


r 


272  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  102. 

duced)  by  perjury,  declare  thou  openly  everything 
as  (thou  hast)  heard  or  seen  (it).' 

102.  Brahma^as  who  tend  cattle,  who  trade,  who 
are  mechanics,  actors  (or  singers),  menial  servants 
or  usurers,  the  (judge)  shall  treat  like  6udras. 

103.  In  (some)  cases  a  man  who,  though  knowing 
(the  facts  to  be)  different,  gives  such  (false  evidence) 
from  a  pious  motive,  does  not  lose  heaven ;  such 
(evidence)  they  call  the  speech  of  the  gods. 

104.  Whenever  the  death  of  a  6udra,  of  a  Vaisya, 
of  a  Kshatriya,  or  of  a  Brahma^a  would  be  (caused) 
by  a  declaration  of  the  truth,  a  falsehood  may  be 
spoken ;  for  such  (falsehood)  is  preferable  to  the 
truth. 

105.  Such  (witnesses)  must  offer  to  Sarasvati  obla- 
tions of  boiled  rice  (/&aru)  which  are  sacred  to  the  god- 
dess of  speech,  (thus)  performing  the  best  penance 
in  order  to  expiate  the  guilt  of  that  falsehood. 

106.  Or  such  (a  witness)  may  offer  according  to 
the  rule  clarified  butter  in  the  fire,  reciting  the 
Kushma^a  texts,  or  the  Rik,  sacred  to  Vanma, 
'  Untie,  O  Varu/za,  the  uppermost  fetter,'  or  the 
three  verses  addressed  to  the  Waters. 

107.  A  man  who,  without  being  ill,  does  not  give 
evidence  in  (cases  of)  loans  and  the  like  within  three 
fortnights  (after  the  summons),  shall  become  respon- 

102.  Vas.  Ill,  1. 

103-104.  Gaut.  XIII,  24-25 ;  Vas.  XVI,  36 ;  Vi.  VIII,  15 ;  Y&gn. 
II,  83. 

103.  Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

105-106.  Baudh.  1, 19, 16 ;  Vi.  VIII,  16  ;  Y%n;  II,  83. 

106.  The  Kushmarc^a  texts  are  found  Taitt.  Ar.  X,  3-5 ;  the 
verse  addressed  to  Varu/za,  Rig-vedal,  24,  15;  and  the  three  verses 
addressed  to  the  Waters,  Rig-veda  X,  9, 1-3. 

107.  Yag-w.  II,  76. 


VIII,  H2.       CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;  PROCEDURE.       273 

sible  for  the  whole  debt  and  (pay)  a  tenth  part  of 
the  whole  (as  a  fine  to  the  king). 

108.  The  witness  to  whom,  within  seven  days 
after  he  has  given  evidence,  happens  (a  misfortune 
through)  sickness,  a  fire,  or  the  death  of  a  relative, 
shall  be  made  to  pay  the  debt  and  a  fine. 

109.  If  two  (parties)  dispute  about  matters  for 
which  no  witnesses  are  available,  and  the  (judge) 
is  unable  to  really  ascertain  the  truth,  he  may  cause 
it  to  be  discovered  even  by  an  oath. 

no.  Both  by  the  great  sages  and  the  gods  oaths 
have  been  taken  for  the  purpose  of  (deciding 
doubtful)  matters ;  and  Vasish^a  even  swore  an 
oath  before  king  (Sudas),  the  son  of  Pi^avana. 

in.  Let  no  wise  man  swear  an  oath  falsely, 
even  in  a  trifling  matter ;  for  he  who  swears  an  oath 
falsely  is  lost  in  this  (world)  and  after  death. 

112.  No  crime,  causing  loss  of  caste,  is  committed 
by  swearing  (falsely)  to  women,  the  objects  of  one's 
desire,  at  marriages,  for  the  sake  of  fodder  for  a 
cow,  or  of  fuel,  and  in  (order  to  show)  favour  to  a 
Brahma^a. 

108.  Y&gfi.  II,  113. 

109.  Gaut.  XIII,  12-13;  Vi.  IX,  2-9.     According  to  Medh. 

japatha, '  oath,'  is  used  for  the  whole  daiva  anumana, '  divine  proof/ 
and  thus  includes  the  ordeals. 

1 10.  Medh.  and  Gov.  point  out  that  the  seven  sages  purified  them- 
selves by  oaths  when  they  mutually  accused  each  other  of  a  theft  of 
lotus-fibres  (Mah.  XIII,  93, 13  seqq.),  and  that  Indra  swore  an  oath 
when  he  was  accused  of  an  intrigue  with  Ahalya,  the  wife  of  Gau- 
tama. Vasish//$a  finally  cleared  himself  of  the  accusation  which 
Vii-vamitra  brought  against  him  before  king  Sudas,  that  he  was  a 
Rakshasa  and  had  devoured  his  hundred  sons  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  See  Sayawa  on  Rig-veda  VII,  104,  and  espe- 
cially on  verse  15,  which  is  considered  to  contain  the  oath  sworn. 

112.  Gaut.  XXIII,  29 ;  Vas.  XVI,  35.    <  Fuel/  i.  e. '  for  a  burnt- 

[25]  T 


#4 


ti 


t 


274  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  113. 

113.  Let  the  (judge)  cause  a  Brahma^a  to  swear 
by  his  veracity,  a  Kshatriya  by  his  chariot  or  the 
animal  he  rides  on  and  by  his  weapons,  a  Vaisya  by 
his  kine,  grain,  and  gold,  and  a  .Sudra  by  (impre- 
cating on  his  own  head  the  guilt)  of  all  grievous 
offences  (pataka). 

114.  Or  the  (judge)  may  cause  the  (party)  to 
carry  fire  or  to  dive  under  water,  or  severally  to 
touch  the  heads  of  his  wives  and  children. 

115.  He  whom  the  blazing  fire  burns  not,  whom 
the  water  forces  not  to  come  (quickly)  up,  who  meets 
with  no  speedy  misfortune,  must  be  held  innocent  on 
(the'strength  of)  his  oath. 

116.  For  formerly  when  Vatsa  was  accused  by  his 
younger  brother,  the  fire,  the  spy  of  the  world, 
burned  not  even  a  hair  (of  his)  by  reason  of  his 
veracity. 

1 1 7.  Whenever  false  evidence  has  been  given  in 
any  suit,  let  the  (judge)  reverse  the  judgment,  and 
whatever  has  been  done  must  be  (considered  as) 
undone. 

oblation'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.).    In  the  last  cases  the  sacredness 
of  the  purpose  excuses  the  crime. 

113.  The  Kshatriya  and  VaLsya  must  touch  the  things  men- 
tioned, and  say,  'May  they  become  useless  to  me!'  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.) 

114.  This  verse  refers,  as  the  commentators  assert,  to  the  two 
ordeals  described  by  Vi.  XI-XII,  and  Yagn.  II,  103-109.  Medh., 
Gov.,  and  Kull.  assert  that  ordeals  are  to  be  used  in  particularly 
important  cases  only;  see  also  Vi.  IX,  10-14. 

116.  Maitreya,  the  step-brother  of  Vatsa,  accused  the  latter  of 
being  the  offspring  of  a  *Sudra  woman.  In  order  to  prove  the 
falseness  of  this  allegation,  Vatsa  passed  through  a  fire  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).     I  read  spa^a^  instead  of  sprwa^. 

117.  Vi.  VIII,  40.  'Fines  imposed  must  be  remitted'  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Nar.). 


VIII,  124.      CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;  PROCEDURE.       275 

118.  Evidence  (given)  from  covetousness,  distrac- 
tion, terror,  friendship,  lust,  wrath,  ignorance,  and 
childishness  is  declared  (to  be)  invalid. 

119.  I  will  propound  in  (due)  order  the  particular 
punishments  for  him  who  gives  false  evidence  from 
any  one  of  these  motives. 

120.  (He  who  commits  perjury)  through  covetous- 
ness shall  be  fined  one  thousand  (pa/zas),  (he  who 
does  it)  through  distraction,  in  the  lowest  amerce- 
ment ;  (if  a  man  does  it)  through  fear,  two  middling 
amercements  shall  be  paid  as  a  fine,  (if  he  does  it) 
through  friendship,  four  times  the  amount  of  the 
lowest  (amercement). 

121.  (He  who  does  it)  through  lust,  (shall  pay) 
ten  times  the  lowest  amercement,  but  (he  who  does 
it)  through  wrath,  three  times  the  next  (or  second 
amercement);  (he  who  does  it)  through  ignorance, 
two  full  hundreds,  but  (he  who  does  it)  through 
childishness,  one  hundred  (pa^as). 

122.  They  declare  that  the  wise  have  prescribed 
these  fines  for  perjury,  in  order  to  prevent  a  failure 
of  justice,  and  in  order  to  restrain  injustice. 

123.  But  a  just  king  shall  fine  and  banish  (men 
of)  the  three  (lower)  castes  (vama)  who  have  given 
false  evidence,  but  a  Brahma^a  he  shall  (only) 
banish. 

124.  Manu,  the  son  of  the  Self-existent  (Svayam- 
bhu),  has  named  ten  places   on  which  punishment 

1 19-123.  Yagn.  II,  81. 

120.  Regarding  the  three  amercements,  see  below,  verse  138. 

123.  Vivasayet,  'he  shall  (only)  banish'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh., 
Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh.  •  he  shall  deprive  him  of  his 
clothes  or  of  his  house.'    Gov.  gives  Medh/s  first  explanation  only. 

124.  Ap.  II,  27;  8,  17-19  ;  Gaut.  XII,  46-47;  Vi.  V,  2-8. 

T  2 


276 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


VIII,  125. 


may  be  (made  to  fall)  in  the  cases  of  the  three 
(lower)  castes  (var/za) ;  but  a  Brahma^a  shall  depart 
unhurt  (from  the  country). 

125.  (These  are)  the  organ,  the  belly,  the  tongue, 
the  two  hands,  and  fifthly  the  two  feet,  the  eye,  the 
nose,  the  two  ears,  likewise  the  (whole)  body. 

126.  Let  the  (king),  having  fully  ascertained  the 
motive,  the  time  and  place  (of  the  offence),  and 
having  considered  the  ability  (of  the  criminal  to 
suffer)  and  the  (nature  of  the)  crime,  cause  punish- 
ment to  fall  on  those  who  deserve  it. 

127.  Unjust  punishment  destroys  reputation 
among  men,  and  fame  (after  death),  and  causes 
even  in  the  next  world  the  loss  of  heaven ;  let  him, 
therefore,  beware  of  (inflicting)  it. 

128.  A  king  who  punishes  those  who  do  not 
deserve  it,  and  punishes  not  those  who  deserve  it, 
brings  great  infamy  on  himself  and  (after  death) 
sinks  into  hell. 

129.  Let  him  punish  first  by  (gentle)  admonition, 
afterwards  by  (harsh)  reproof,  thirdly  by  a  fine,  after 
that  by  corporal  chastisement. 

1 30.  But  when  he  cannot  restrain  such  (offenders) 
even  by  corporal  punishment,  then  let  him  apply  to 
them  even  all  the  four  (modes  conjointly). 

131.  Those  technical  names  of  (certain  quantities 
of)  copper,  silver,  and  gold,  which  are  generally  used 

126.  Gaut.  XII,  51 ;  Yagii.  I,  367.  Anubandham,  'the  motive,' 
includes  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.  also  '  the  frequency  of  the 
offence.'  Nar.  gives  the  latter  meaning  alone.  Nand.  reads 
aparadham,  'the  offence.'  Instead  of  saraparadhau  Nand.  reads 
sarasaram,  '  the  strength  or  weakness  (of  the  offender).' 

127-128.  Yagn.  I,  356;  Vi.  XIX,  43. 

129-130.  Yagn.  I,  366. 

1 31-138.  Vi.  IV,  1-14  ;  Y&gn.  I,  361-365. 


VIII,  139.      CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;  PROCEDURE.       2;  J 

on  earth  for  the  purpose  of  business  transactions 
among  men,  I  will  fully  declare. 

132.  The  very  small  mote  which  is  seen  when 
the  sun  shines  through  a  lattice,  they  declare  (to  be) 
the  least  of  (all)  quantities  and  (to  be  called)  a  tra- 
sare^u  (a  floating  particle  of  dust). 

133.  Know  (that)  eight  trasare/ms  (are  equal)  in 
bulk  (to)  a  liksha  (the  egg  of  a  louse) ,  three  of  those 
to  one  grain  of  black  mustard  (ra^asarshapa),  and 
three  of  the  latter  to  a  white  mustard-seed. 

1 34.  Six  grains  of  white  mustard  are  one  middle- 
sized  barley-corn,  and  three  barley-corns  one  kri- 
sh^ala  (raktika,  or  gu%"a-berry) ;  five  krzsh^alas 
are  one  masha  (bean),  and  sixteen  of  those  one 
suvar^a. 

135.  Four  suvar^as  are  one  pala,  and  ten  palas 
one  dhara^a ;  two  krzsh#alas  (of  silver),  weighed  to- 
gether, must  be  considered  one  mashaka  of  silver. 

136.  Sixteen  of  those  make  a  silver  dhara/za,  or 
pura/za ;  but  know  (that)  a  karsha  of  copper  is  a 
karshapa/za,  or  pa^a. 

137.  Know  (that)  ten  dhara^as  of  silver  make  one 
i-atamana ;  four  suvar/zas  must  be  considered  (equal) 
in  weight  to  a  nishka. 

138.  Two  hundred  and  fifty  pa/zas  are  declared 
(to  be)  the  first  (or  lowest)  amercement,  five  (hun- 
dred) are  considered  as  the  mean  (or  middlemost), 
but  one  thousand  as  the  highest. 

139.  A  debt  being  admitted  as  due,  (the  defendant) 

134.  The  ktt'sh«ala  or  raktika  (ratti)  is  still  used  by  jewellers  and 
goldsmiths.    It  corresponds  to  0.122  grammes,  or  1.875  grains. 

136.  A  karsha  =  i6  mashas=8o  krzshwalas. 

139.  Vi.  VI,  20-21;  Yagii.  II,  42.  According  to  Nar. 'some' 
only  have  this  verse. 


278  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VIII, 

shall  pay  five  in  the  hundred  (as  a  fine),  if  it  be 
denied  (and  proved)  twice  as  much ;  that  is  the 
teaching  of  Manu. 

140.  A  money-lender  may  stipulate  as  an  increase 
of  his  capital,  for  the  interest,  allowed  by  Vasish/^a, 
and  take  monthly  the  eightieth  part  of  a  hundred. 

141.  Or,  remembering  the  duty  of  good  men,  he 
may  take  two  in  the  hundred  (by  the  month),  for 
he  who  takes  two  in  the  hundred  becomes  not  a 
sinner  for  gain. 

142.  Just  two  in  the  hundred,  three,  four,  and 
five  (and  not  more),  he  may  take  as  monthly  interest 
according  to  the  order  of  the  castes  (varaa). 

143.  But  if  a  beneficial  pledge  (i.e.  one  from 
which  profit  accrues,  has  been  given),  he  shall 
receive  no  interest  on  the  loan  ;  nor  can  he,  after 
keeping  (such)  a  pledge  for  a  very  long  time,  give 
or  sell  it. 


140.  Gaut.  XII,  29;  Y&gri.  II,  37.  The  rule  occurs  in  our 
Vasish^a  Dharnmastra  II,  51.  The  amount  is  fifteen  per  cent 
per  annum.  According  to  Kull.  (on  verse  141),  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and 
Nand.  this  rule  refers  to  a  debt  secured  by  a  pledge,  and  the  cor- 
rectness of  this  view  is  proved  by  the  parallel  passage  of  Y&gn. 

141-142.  Vas.  II,  48;  Vi.  VI,  2  ;  Yign.  II,  37.  This  rule  refers, 
according  to  the  same  commentators,  to  unsecured  loans.  A 
Brahma^a  is  to  pay  two  per  cent  per  month,  a  Kshatriya  three, 
a  Vawya  four,  and  a  -Sudra  five.  Med.  and  Gov.  think  that  the  rule 
refers  to  cases  where  the  creditor  is  unable  to  live  on  the  smaller 
interest. 

143.  Gaut.  XII,  32  ;  Vi.  VI,  5.  '  A  beneficial  pledge,'  i.e. '  land, 
cattle,  slaves,  &c.'  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.,  the  last 
clause  refers  to  pledges  which  are  not  used.  But  Kull.  objects 
that  this  is  contrary  to  the  common  practice  of  the  -Sish/as,  and 
Ragh.  refers  to  Yagn.  II,  58,  where  it  is  clearly  stated  that  beneficial 
pledges  only  are  never  lost,  while  those  which  are  merely  kept  are 
lost  when  the  original  debt  is  doubled  by  unpaid  interest. 


VIII,  149-        CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;  DEBTS.  279 

144.  A  pledge  (to  be  kept  only)  must  not  be  used 
by  force,  (the  creditor),  so  using  it,  shall  give  up  his 
(whole)  interest,  or,  (if  it  has  been  spoilt  by  use)  he 
shall  satisfy  the  (owner)  by  (paying  its)  original 
price ;    else  he  commits  a  theft  of  the  pledge. 

145.  Neither  a  pledge  nor  a  deposit  can  be  lost 
by  lapse  of  time  ;  they  are  both  recoverable,  though 
they  have  remained  long  (with  the  bailee). 

146.  Things  used  with  friendly  assent,  a  cow,  a 
camel,  a  riding-horse,  and  (a  beast)  made  over  for 
breaking  in,  are  never  lost  (to  the  owner). 

147.  (But  in  general)  whatever  (chattel)  an  owner 
sees  enjoyed  by  others  during  ten  years,  while, 
though  present,  he  says  nothing,  that  (chattel)  he 
shall  not  recover. 

148.  If  (the  owner  is)  neither  an  idiot  nor  a  minor 
and  if  (his  chattel)  is  enjoyed  (by  another)  before  his 
eyes,  it  is  lost  to  him  by  law ;  the  adverse  possessor 
shall  retain  that  property. 

149.  A  pledge,  a  boundary,  the  property  of  in- 
fants, an  (open)  deposit,  a  sealed  deposit,  women, 
the  property  of  the  king  and  the  wealth  of  a  ^rotriya 
are  not  lost  in  consequence  of  (adverse)  enjoyment. 

144.  Vi.  VI,  5  ;  Y&gii.  II,  59.  According  to  Medh.  clothes,  &c, 
are  meant ;  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  clothes,  ornaments,  &c. ; 
according  to  Nar.  beds  and  so  forth.  Nar.  thinks  that  the  expression 
1  the  value '  refers  to  the  profit  made  by  the  use  of  the  pledge. 

145.  Vi.VI,  7-8;  Y&gn.  II,  58.  According  to  Medh.  the  pledge 
spoken  of  here  is  '  a  pledge  for  keeping  which  is  forcibly  used.' 
Upanidhi,  'a  deposit,'  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.  (who 
however  refers  the  term  also  to  deposits),  Ragh.,  and  Nand.  '  any- 
thing lent  to  another  out  of  friendship;'  according  to  Nar.  'an 
additional  pledge,  given  subsequently,  in  order  to  complete  the 
security  for  the  loan/ 

147-148.  Gaut.  XII,  37;  Vas.  XVI,  16-17;  Yag^.  II,  24. 

149.  Vas.  XVI,  18 ;  Gaut.  XII,  38-39  ;  Yzgn.  II,  25.    « Women/ 


2  SO  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  150. 


150.  The  fool  who  uses  a  pledge  without  the  per- 
mission of  the  owner,  shall  remit  half  of  his  interest, 
as  a  compensation  for  (such)  use. 

151.  In  money  transactions  interest  paid  at  one 
time  (not  by  instalments)  shall  never  exceed  the 
double  (of  the  principal) ;  on  grain,  fruit,  wool  or 
hair,  (and)  beasts  of  burden  it  must  not  be  more  than 
five  times  (the  original  amount). 

152.  Stipulated  interest  beyond  the  legal  rate, 
being  against  (the  law),  cannot  be  recovered  ;  they 
call  that  a  usurious  way  (of  lending) ;  (the  lender) 
is  (in  no  case)  entitled  to  (more  than)  five  in  the 
hundred. 

153.  Let  him  not  take  interest  beyond  the  year, 
nor  such  as  is  unapproved,  nor  compound  interest, 
periodical  interest,  stipulated  interest,  and  corporal 
interest. 

i.e.  'female  slaves  and  the  like.'  Ragh.  adds  that  their  offspring  is 
not  lost  to  the  owner.  Upanidhi^,  '  a  sealed  deposit'  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.,  and  Ragh.). 

150.  According  to  the  commentators  this  is  the  consequence, 
resulting  from  the  secret  unpermitted  use  of  a  pledge  in  ordinary 
cases,  while  the  loss  of  the  whole  interest  ensues  in  the  case  of  a 
forcible  use  in  contravention  of  a  special  prohibition. 

151.  Gaut.  XII,  31,  36;  Vi.  VI,  11-15;  Y&gri.  II,  39.  The 
interest  here  intended  is  such  which  is  not  paid  by  instalments, 
but  becomes  due  together  with  the  principal.  According  to  the 
commentators,  the  whole  sum  payable,  i.e.  the  interest  together 
with  the  principal,  shall  not  exceed  the  double  of  the  sum  lent,  or, 
in  the  special  cases  mentioned,  five  times  that  amount. 

152.  According  to  Gov.  and  Nar.  this  verse  entitles  the  money- 
lender to  take  five  per  cent  from  Aryans,  not  from  *Sudras  only. 

153.  Gaut.  XII,  30,  34-35.  'A  creditor  may  take  for  the  term 
of  a  year  interest  which  has  been  settled  by  the  following  agree- 
ment, "  When  one,  two,  or  three  months  have  passed,  the  interest 
on  the  (capital)  shall  be  calculated  and  be  paid  to  me  at  one  time ;" 
but  he  shall  not  take  the  interest  according  to  the  agreement  after 


VIII,  156.        CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW ;    DEBTS.  28 1 

154.  He  who,  unable  to  pay  a  debt  (at  the  fixed 
time),  wishes  to  make  a  new  contract,  may  renew  the 
agreement,  after  paying  the  interest  which  is  due. 

155.  If  he  cannot  pay  the  money  (due  as  interest), 
he  may  insert  it  in  the  renewed  (agreement)  ;  he 
must  pay  as  much  interest  as  may  be  due. 

156.  He  who  has  made  a  contract  to  carry  goods 
by  a  wheeled  carriage  for  money  and  has  agreed  to  a 
certain  place  or  time,  shall  not  reap  that  reward,  if  he 
does  not  keep  to  the  place  and  the  time  (stipulated). 

a  year  has  passed'  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  According  to  Gov.  this  clause 
means,  *  If  (the  creditor)  does  not  take  the  money  (due)  for  two  or 
three  years  and  (the  debtor)  pays  then,  (the  creditor)  shall  not  take 
more  interest  than  for  one  year.'  Nar.  says,  '  atisawvatsarim  ("  be- 
yond the  year  ")  means  that  (interest)  which  after  the  lapse  of  one 
year  only  is  redundant,'  i.e. 'exceeds  that  which  has  been  doubled' 
(see  verse  151).  Adrzsh/am,  'unapproved,'  i.e. ' in  the  law-books' 
(Kull.,  Ragh),  or  'in  the  law-books  and  in  daily  life'  (Nand.), 
means  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  anupa&tam, '  which  has  not 
accumulated,'  i.  e.  '  which  is  taken  for  one,  two,  or  three  days.'  Nar. 
agrees  with  the  latter  view.  Kalavrz'ddhi^,  'periodical  interest,' i.  e. 
'monthly  interest'  (Gov.,  Nar.),  or  'interest  in  contravention  of 
verse  151 '  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  Karita, '  stipulated  interest/  i.e.  'an  illegal 
rate  of  interest,  or  interest  which  runs  on  after  the  principal  has 
been  doubled,  agreed  to  by  the  debtor  on  account  of  distress' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Kayika, '  corporal  interest,'  i.  e. 
'  to  be  paid  by  bodily  labour  or  by  the  use  of  the  body  of  a  pledged 
animal  or  slave'  (Medh.).  Kull.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.  give  the 
second  explanation.  According  to  '  some,'  quoted  by  Medh.  and 
Nar.,  the  last  four  kinds  of  interest  are  not  forbidden.  Medh.  and 
Gov.  think  all  or  some  of  them  are  permissible  for  merchants.  See 
also  for  the  explanation  of  the  terms,  Gaut.  XII,  34-35,  notes  ;  and 
Colebrooke  I,  Digest  35-45. 

154.  Kara^a,  'the  agreement,'  i.e.  'the  written  bond'  (Kull., 
Ragh.),  or  '  the  written  bond  and  so  forth '  (Gov.,  Nar.).  According 
to  the  latter  two,  with  whom  Medh.  seems  to  agree,  kara^a  may 
also  refer  to  a  verbal  agreement  before  witnesses. 

155.  '  Pay,'  i.  e.  promise  to  pay  in  the  new  agreement. 

156.  Thus  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.     But  Nar.  and  Nand. 


282  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  157. 

157.  Whatever  rate  men  fix,  who  are  expert  in 
sea-voyages  and  able  to  calculate  (the  profit)  accord- 
ing to  the  place,  the  time,  and  the  objects  (carried), 
that  (has  legal  force)  in  such  cases  with  respect  to 
the  payment  (to  be  made). 

158.  The  man  who  becomes  a  surety  in  this 
(world)  for  the  appearance  of  a  (debtor),  and  pro- 
duces him  not,  shall  pay  the  debt  out  of  his  own 
property. 

159.  But  money  due  by  a  surety,  or  idly  pro- 
mised, or  lost  at  play,  or  due  for  spirituous  liquor, 
or  what  remains  unpaid  of  a  fine  and  a  tax  or 
duty,  the  son  (of  the  party  owing  it)  shall  not  be 
obliged  to  pay. 

160.  This  just  mentioned  rule  shall  apply  to 
the  case  of  a  surety  for  appearance  (only) ;  if  a 
surety  for  payment  should  die,  the  (judge)  may 
compel  even  his  heirs  to  discharge  the  debt. 

161.  On  what  account  then  is  it  that  after  the 
death  of  a  surety  other  than  for  payment,  whose 


explain  £akravr*'ddhi, '  a  contract  to  carry  goods  by  a  wheeled  car- 
riage,' by  '  compound  interest;'  and  Medh.  on  verse  157  mentions 
this  opinion  too. 

157.  The  expression  'in  sea-voyages'  includes  voyages  by  land 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  all  voyages  (Nar.).  The  commen- 
tators, who  explain  the  preceding  verse  as  referring  to  compound 
interest,  explain  this  to  mean  that  merchants  trading  by  sea  must 
pay  any  rate  of  interest  for  money  borrowed  which  experts  may  fix 
(see  Y&gn.  II,  38).  The  others,  of  course,  understand  by  '  the  rate' 
(vrz'ddhi)  the  carrier's  or  shipowner's  wages. 

158-160.  Gaut.  XII,  42;  Vi.  VI,  41 ;  Yagn.  II,  47,  53-54. 

159.  'Idly  promised,'  i.e.  'to  clowns  and  so  forth'  (Kull.),  or 
'to  bards  and  the  like'  (Nar.),  or  'not  for  a  religious  purpose,  but 
to  singers  and  the  like'  (Nand.),  or  'in  jest,  to  bards  and  the  like' 
(R&gh.),  or  '  a  pour-boire  and  the  like'  (Gov.). 

161.  'Whose  affairs  are  fully  known,' i.  e.  '  the  cause  for  which 


VIII,  i66.       CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;    DEBTS.  283 

affairs  are  fully  known,  the  creditor  may  (in  some 
cases)  afterwards  demand  the  debt  (of  the  heirs)  ? 

162.  If  the  surety  had  received  money  (from  him 
for  whom  he  stood  bail)  and  had  money  enough  (to 
pay),  then  (the  heir  of  him)  who  received  it,  shall 
pay  (the  debt)  out  of  his  property ;  that  is  the 
settled  rule. 

163.  A  contract  made  by  a  person  intoxicated,  or 
insane,  or  grievously  disordered  (by  disease  and  so 
forth),  or  wholly  dependent,  by  an  infant  or  very 
aged  man,  or  by  an  unauthorised  (party)  is  invalid. 

164.  That  agreement  which  has  been  made  con- 
trary to  the  law  or  to  the  settled  usage  (of  the 
virtuous),  can  have  no  legal  force,  though  it  be 
established  (by  proofs). 

165.  A  fraudulent  mortgage  or  sale,  a  fraudulent 
gift  or  acceptance,  and  (any  transaction)  where  he 
detects  fraud,  the  (judge)  shall  declare  null  and 
void. 

166.  If  the  debtor  be  dead  and  (the  money  bor- 
rowed) was  expended  for  the  family,  it  must  be  paid 
by  the  relatives  out  of  their  own  estate  even  if 
they  are  divided. 

he  became  a  surety  (e.  g.  for  appearance  or  good  behaviour)  being 
fully  known '  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 

162.  Ala^zdhana^, '  had  money  enough  (to  pay),'  i.e.  'had  received 
a  sum  equal  to  the  loan  contracted  by  him  for  whose  appearance 
he  stood  surety'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.).  According  to  Ragh. 
the  adjective  refers  to  the  heir,  and  means  '  if  he  has  money  enough 
to  pay.'  Nand.  reads  alakshita^,  'if  a  surety  who  received  money 
be  not  found'  (i.  e.  has  died  or  disappeared,  &c). 

163.  Y%n.  II,  32. 

164.  'The  sale  of  wife  and  children,  giving  away  one's  whole 
property,  though  one  may  have  issue'  (Medh.). 

166.  Vi.  VI,  39 ;  Yagii.  II,  45.  The  meaning  is,  as  Nand.  points 
out,  that  if  a  debt  was  contracted  for  the  benefit  of  a  united  family, 


284  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  167. 

167.  Should  even  a  person  wholly  dependent 
make  a  contract  for  the  behoof  of  the  family,  the 
master  (of  the  house),  whether  (living)  in  his  own 
country  or  abroad,  shall  not  rescind  it. 

168.  What  is  given  by  force,  what  is  enjoyed  by 
force,  also  what  has  been  caused  to  be  written  by 
force,  and  all  other  transactions  done  by  force,  Man 
has  declared  void. 

169.  Three  suffer  for  the  sake  of  others,  witnesses, 
a  surety,  and  judges ;  but  four  enrich  themselves 
(through  others),  a  Brahma^a,  a  money-lender,  a 
merchant,  and  a  king. 

170.  No  king,  however  indigent,  shall  take  any- 
thing  that  ought   not   to  be   taken,  nor   shall  he, 


" 


1 


it  must  be  repaid  by  the  members  of  the  family,  though  they  may 
have  separated  afterwards. 

167.  Adhyadhina^, '  a  person  wholly  dependent,'  i.  e. '  a  servant 
(Nar.),  or  '  a  slave'  (Kull),  or  '  the  youngest  (brother)  or  one  in  a 
similar  position'  (Ragh.).  Gov.  reads  va  instead  of  api,  and  for 
vi/fcalayet  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.)  or  vi£arayet  (Nand.),  vilambayet  ; 
and  with  this  reading  the  translation  must  be,  'or  one  wholly 
dependent,  who  makes  a  contract  for  the  sake  of  the  family,  must 
wait  for  (the  arrival  of)  the  master  of  the  house,  whether  he  be  at 
home  or  abroad/ 

168.  Vi.VII,6;Ya^.II,89. 

169.  Kulam,  'the  judges'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  has,  according  to 
Nar.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.,  its  usual  meaning, '  the  family.'  Nar.  and 
Nand.  say  that  the  undivided  relatives  have  to  suffer  by  paying  the 
debts  of  a  deceased  coparcener ;  and  Ragh.  explains  the  sufferings 
of  a  family  by  the  ruin  caused  through  a  bad  son.  Medh.,  Gov., 
and  Kull.  state  that  the  object  of  the  verse  is  to  inculcate  that  men 
must  not  be  forced  to  become  witnesses  and  so  forth  against  their 
will,  and  that  Brahmawas,  &c,  must  not  force  others  to  those  trans- 
actions from  which  they  gain  advantages,  e.  g.  to  lawsuits.  (Ragh. 
similarly.)  Nar.  takes  the  first  half  as  a  warning  not  to  become  a 
witness  or  surety  or  to  remain  undivided. 

170.  Vas.  XIX,  14-15. 


VIII,  177-         CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW;    DEBTS.  285 

however  wealthy,  decline  taking  that  which  he  ought 
to  take,  be  it  ever  so  small. 

171.  In  consequence  of  his  taking  what  ought  not 
to  be  taken,  or  of  his  refusing  what  ought  to  be 
received,  a  king  will  be  accused  of  weakness  and 
perish  in  this  (world)  and  after  death. 

172.  By  taking  his  due,  by  preventing  the  con- 
fusion of  the  castes  (var^a),  and  by  protecting  the 
weak,  the  power  of  the  king  grows,  and  he  prospers 
in  this  (world)  and  after  death. 

173.  Let  the  prince,  therefore,  like  Yama,  not 
heeding  his  own  likings  and  dislikings,  behave 
exactly  like  Yama,  suppressing  his  anger  and  con- 
trolling himself. 

174.  But  that  evil-minded  king  who  in  his  folly 
decides  causes  unjustly,  his  enemies  soon  subjugate. 

175.  If,  subduing  love  and  hatred,  he  decides 
the  causes  according  to  the  law,  (the  hearts  of)  his 
subjects  turn  towards  him  as  the  rivers  (run)  towards 
the  ocean. 

176.  (The  debtor)  who  complains  to  the  king 
that  his  creditor  recovers  (the  debt)  independently 
(of  the  court),  shall  be  compelled  by  the  king  to 
pay  (as  a  fine)  one  quarter  (of  the  sum)  and  to  his 
(creditor)  the  money  (due). 

177.  Even  by  (personal)  labour  shall  the  debtor 
make  good  (what  he  owes)  to  his  creditor,  if 
he  be  of  the  same  caste  or  of  a   lower  one ;   but 


171.  'For  if  a  king  takes  from  his  subjects  what  he  ought  not 
to  take,  they  will  say, "  He  fines  us,  because  he  is  unable  to  over- 
come the  vassals,  neighbours,  and  the  forest  tribes  (and  to  obtain 
money  from  them),"'  Medh. 

176.  Vi.  VI,  19.    See  above,  verses  49-50. 

177.  The  last  clause  refers  to  Brahmawas  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 


286  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  178 


a  (debtor)  of  a  higher  caste  shall  pay  it  gradually 
(when  he  earns  something). 

178.  According  to  these  rules  let  the  king  equit- 
ably decide  between  men,  who  dispute  with  each 
other  the  matters,  which  are  proved  by  witnesses 
and  (other)  evidence. 

179.  A  sensible  man  should  make  a  deposit 
(only)  with  a  person  of  (good)  family,  of  good  con- 
duct, well  acquainted  with  the  law,  veracious,  having 
many  relatives,  wealthy,  and  honourable  (arya). 

180.  In  whatever  manner  a  person  shall  deposit 
anything  in  the  hands  of  another,  in  the  same 
manner  ought  the  same  thing  to  be  received  back 
(by  the  owner) ;  as  the  delivery  (was,  so  must  be) 
the  re-delivery. 

181.  He  who  restores  not  his  deposit  to  the 
depositor  at  his  request,  may  be  tried  by  the  judge 
in  the  depositor's  absence. 

182.  On  failure  of  witnesses  let  the  (judge)  actu- 
ally deposit  gold  with  that  (defendant)  under  some 
pretext  or  other  through  spies  of  suitable  age  and 
appearance  (and  afterwards  demand  it  back). 

183.  If  the  (defendant)  restores  it  in  the  manner 
and  shape  in  which  it  was  bailed,  there  is  nothing 


178.  Pratyaya,  '(other)  evidence/  i.e.  'by  inference  and  divine 
proof  (Medh.),  or  'by  inference,  oaths,  and  so  forth'  (Gov.),  or 
'  by  oaths'  (Nar.,  Nand.). 

180.  Ya^n.  II,  65.     See  also  below,  verse  195.     Nand.  omits 

184,  and   places   the    other  verses  as   follows:   180,  195,   188  b, 

185,  186,   189,  194,  187,   188  a,   181,   182,   183,  196,  190,   191, 
192,   193. 

181.  The  order  of  the  verses  referring  to  the  trial  of  the  bailee,  is 
according  to  Gov.  181,  183,  184,  182,  and  according  to  Nar.  181, 
183,  182,  184. 


1 


VIII,  189.       CIVIL  AND  CRIMINAL  LAW  ;    DEPOSITS.  287 

(of  that  description)  in  his  hands,  for  which  others 
accuse  him. 

184.  But  if  he  restores  not  that  gold,  as  he  ought, 
to  those  (spies),  then  he  shall  be  compelled  by  force  to 
restore  both  (deposits)  ;  that  is  a  settled  rule  of  law. 

185.  An  open  or  a  sealed  deposit  must  never  be 
returned  to  a  near  relative  (of  the  depositor  during 
the  latter's  lifetime) ;  for  if  (the  recipient)  dies  (with- 
out delivering  them),  they  are  lost,  but  if  he  does  not 
die,  they  are  not  lost. 

186.  But  (a  depositary)  who  of  his  own  accord 
returns  them  to  a  near  relative  of  a  deceased 
(depositor),  must  not  be  harassed  (about  them)  by 
the  king  or  by  the  depositors  relatives. 

187.  And  (in  doubtful  cases)  he  should  try  to 
obtain  that  object  by  friendly  means,  without  (having 
recourse  to)  artifice,  or  having  inquired  into  the 
(depositary's)  conduct,  he  should  settle  (the  matter) 
with  gentle  means. 

188.  Such  is  the  rule  for  obtaining  back  all  those 
open  deposits ;  in  the  case  of  a  sealed  deposit  (the 
depositary)  shall  incur  no  (censure),  unless  he  has 
taken  out  something. 

189.  (A  deposit)  which  has  been  stolen  by  thieves 

185.  Pratyanantare,  'to  a  near  relative,' i.  e.  'to  his  son,  brother, 
or  wife'  (Medh.). 

187.  According  to  Nar.,  this  verse  refers  to  cases  when  one 
believes  a  deposit  to  be  with  another,  but  has  not  made  it  over 
oneself;  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.,  to  cases  where  there  may  be 
an  error.  Gov.  and  Kull.  think  that  the  person  who  should  act  in 
the  manner  described  is  the  king,  and  they  explain  anvikk/iet, '  one 
should  try  to  obtain,'  by  { he  should  decide.'  Nar.  and  Ragh.,  on 
the  other  hand,  think  that  the  depositor  should  act  thus.  The  former 
explanation  is  perhaps  preferable. 

189.  Y&gn.  II,  66, 


i9o. 


288  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII, 

or  washed  away  by  water  or  burned  by  fire,  (the 
bailee)  shall  not  make  it  good,  unless  he  took  part  of 
it  (for  himself). 

190.  Him  who  appropriates  a  deposit  and  him 
(who  asks  for  it)  without  having  made  it,  (the  judge) 
shall  try  by  all  (sorts  of)  means,  and  by  the  oaths 
prescribed  in  the  Veda. 

191.  He  who  does  not  return  a  deposit  and  he 
who  demands  what  he  never  bailed  shall  both  be 
punished  like  thieves,  or  be  compelled  to  pay  a  fine 
equal  (to  the  value  of  the  object  retained  or  claimed). 

192.  The  king  should  compel  him  who  does  not 
restore  an  open  deposit,  and  in  like  manner  him  who 
retains  a  sealed  deposit,  to  pay  a  fine  equal  (to  its 
value). 

193.  That  man  who  by  false  pretences  may 
possess  himself  of  another's  property,  shall  be  pub- 
licly punished  by  various  (modes  of)  corporal  (or 
capital)  chastisement,  together  with  his  accomplices. 

190.  ' By  all  (sorts  of)  means/  i.  e. '  by  the  four  expedients,  kind- 
ness and  so  forth'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'by  spies  and  so  forth' 
(Nar.),  or  'by  blows,  imprisonment,  and  so  forth'  (Medh.).  'By 
the  oaths  prescribed  in  the  Veda,'  i.  e.  '  by  the  ordeals,  such  as 
carrying  fire'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.).  Nar.  quotes  a  passage  of  the 
Veda,  in  which  it  is  prescribed  that  the  accused  shall  take  hold  of 
a  hot  axe. 

191.  Vi.V,  1 69- 1 7 1.  The  former  punishment,  which  consists 
of  mutilation  and  other  corporal  punishments  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.), 
or  the  highest  amercement  and  the  like  (Gov.),  shall  be  inflicted  on 
others  than  Brahmawas  in  particularly  bad  cases  and  for  a  repetition 
of  the  offence  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

192.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  refer  this  rule  to  first  offences.  Nar. 
takes  avweshewa, '  in  like  manner,'  to  mean  '  without  making  a  dis- 
tinction on  account  of  the  caste  of  the  offender.'  Medh.  explains 
upanidhi,  '  a  sealed  deposit,'  by  '  an  object  lent  in  a  friendly 
manner.' 

193.  'By  false  pretences,' i. e.  'by  frightening  others  with  the 


VIII,  198.       DEPOSITS  J    SALE  WITHOUT  OWNERSHIP.       289 

194.  If  a  deposit  of  a  particular  description  or 
quantity  is  bailed  by  anybody  in  the  presence  of  a 
number  (of  witnesses),  it  must  be  known  to  be  of 
that  particular  (description  and  quantity ;  the  de- 
positary) who  makes  a  false  statement  (regarding 
it)  is  liable  to  a  fine. 

195.  But  if  anything  is  delivered  or  received 
privately,  it  must  be  privately  returned ;  as  the 
bailment  (was,  so  should  be)  the  re-delivery. 

196.  Thus  let  the  king  decide  (causes)  concern- 
ing a  deposit  and  a  friendly  loan  (for  use)  without 
showing  (undue)  rigour  to  the  depositary. 

197.  If  anybody  sells  the  property  of  another 
man,  without  being  the  owner  and  without  the 
assent  of  the  owner,  the  (judge)  shall  not  admit  him 
who  is  a  thief,  though  he  may  not  consider  himself 
as  a  thief,  as  a  witness  (in  any  case). 

198.  If  the  (offender)  is  a  kinsman  (of  the  owner),  he 
shall  be  fined  six  hundred  pa^as  ;  if  he  is  not  a  kins- 
man, nor  has  any  excuse,  he  shall  be  guilty  of  theft. 


king's  anger,  by  promising  to  obtain  for  them  favours  from  the 
king,  or  the  love  of  a  maiden,  and  so  forth'  (Medh.).  'By  (various) 
modes  of  corporal  chastisement,'  i.  e. '  by  cutting  off  his  hands,  feet, 
or  his  head,  &c.'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or '  by  decapitating  or  impaling 
the  offender,  or  having  him  trampled  to  death  by  elephants,  and  so 
forth'  (Medh.). 

194.  I.  e.  the  witnesses  must- be  examined  regarding  it,  and  their 
evidence  is  conclusive. 

196.  This  conclusion  makes  it  somewhat  doubtful  if  the  term 
upanidhi,  which  occurs  verses  185  and  191,  and  has  been  translated 
by  'a  sealed  deposit'  in  accordance  with  the  opinion  of  most 
commentators,  has  really  that  meaning. 

198.  'Any  excuse/ e.g.  'that  he  received  it  as  a  present,  or 
bought  it  from  the  son  or  other  relative  of  the  owner,  and  so  forth ' 
(Gov.,  Kull.).  Nar.  reads  anavasare,  '  and  buys  at  an  improper 
(time  or  place)/ 

D»6]  u 


290  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  199. 

199.  A  gift  or  sale,  made  by  anybody  else  but 
the  owner,  must  be  considered  as  null  and  void, 
according  to  the  rule  in  judicial  proceedings. 

200.  Where  possession  is  evident,  but  no  title 
is  perceived,  there  the  title  (shall  be)  a  proof  (of 
ownership),  not  possession ;  such  is  the  settled  rule. 

201.  He  who  obtains  a  chattel  in  the  market 
before  a  number  (of  witnesses),  acquires  that  chattel 
with  a  clear  legal  title  by  purchase. 

202.  If  the  original  (seller)  be  not  producible, 
(the  buyer)  being  exculpated  by  a  public  sale, 
must  be  dismissed  by  the  king  without  punish- 
ment, but  (the  former  owner)  who  lost  the  chattel 
shall  receive  it  (back  from  the  buyer). 

203.  One  commodity  mixed  with  another  must 
not  be  sold  (as  pure),  nor  a  bad  one  (as  good),  nor 
less  (than  the  proper  quantity  or  weight),  nor  any- 
thing that  is  not  at  hand  or  that  is  concealed. 

199.  Nand.  omits  this  verse,  and  inserts  instead, '  He  who  igno- 
rantly  makes  a  sale  without  ownership  shall  be  punished  according 
to  the  above  rule  (i.  e.  be  fined) ;  but  he  who  does  it  knowingly 
shall  be  punished  like  a  thief.'  Nar.  has  no  trace  of  verse  199,  but 
quotes  the  beginning  of  the  verse  just  translated  (anena  vidhineti). 

200.  Nand.  places  this  verse  after  202. 
201-202.  Vi.  V,  164-166;  YSgfi.  II,  168-170. 

202.  Thus  Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  (Kull.,  however, taking 
.rodhita,  'exculpated/  in  the  sense  of  ni^ita,' determined.')  But  Gov. 
takes  the  first  part  differently.  'If  the  price  cannot  be  produced  by 
him  (the  seller) — because  he  has  gone  to  another  country — then  the 
buyer  must  not  be  punished  by  the  king,  being  held  to  be  guiltless 
on  account  of  the  open  sale,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  the  pre- 
ceding verse ; '  similarly  Nand.  The  difference  is  caused  thereby  that 
Gov.  apparently  objects  to  the  explanation  of  mulam  (mulyam, 
Nand.)  by  'the  original  (seller).'  According  to  Kull.  the  buyer 
receives  half  the  value  from  the  original  owner. 

203.  Yagn.  II,  245.  '  Concealed,'  i.e. 'in  a  cloth'  (Medh.,  Nar.),  or 
'in  the  earth '(Nand.),  or  'covered  with  paint'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 


VIII,  209.  CONCERNING  PARTNERS.  29 1 

204.  If,  after  one  damsel  has  been  shown,  another 
be  given  to  the  bridegroom,  he  may  marry  them  both 
for  the  same  price ;  that  Manu  ordained. 

205.  He  who  gives  (a  damsel  in  marriage),  having 
first  openly  declared  her  blemishes,  whether  she  be 
insane,  or  afflicted  with  leprosy,  or  have  lost  her 
virginity,  is  not  liable  to  punishment. 

206.  If  an  officiating  priest,  chosen  to  perform  a 
sacrifice,  abandons  his  work,  a  share  only  (of  the 
fee)  in  proportion  to  the  work  (done)  shall  be  given 
to  him  by  those  who  work  with  him. 

207.  But  he  who  abandons  his  work  after  the 
sacrificial  fees  have  been  given,  shall  obtain  his  full 
share  and  cause  to  be  performed  (what  remains)  by 
another  (priest). 

208.  But  if  (specific)  fees  are  ordained  for  the 
several  parts  of  a  rite,  shall  he  (who  performs  the 
part)  receive  them,  or  shall  they  all  share  them  ? 

209.  The  Adhvaryu  priest  shall  take  the  chariot, 
and  the  Brahman  at  the  kindling  of  the  fires  (Agnya- 
dhana)  a  horse,  the  Hotri  priest  shall  also  take  a 
horse,  and  the  Udgatrz  the  cart,  (used)  when  (the 
Soma)  is  purchased. 

204.  This  rule  is  rather  astonishing  after  what  has  been  said,  III, 
51-54,  regarding  the  sale  of  daughters,  and  it  proves  that,  in  spite 
of  all  directions  to  the  contrary,  wives  were  purchased  in  ancient 
India  as  frequently  as  in  our  days. 

207.  Y&gii.  II,  265.  'After  the  sacrificial  fees  have  been  given,' 
i.e.  'at  the  midday  oblation  and  so  forth'  (Medh.,  KulL,  Gov.). 
According  to  Medh.  the  sacrificer  is  to  pay  the  substitute,  according 
to  the  other  commentators  the  priest  who  receives  the  fee. 

208.  Medh.  mentions  that  specific  fees  are  prescribed  at  the  Rag-a- 
suya  and  similar  sacrifices;  see  Ajv.-Srauta-sutralX,  3, 14-15;  4, 7-20. 

209.  According  to  Medh.  and  Kull.  all  the  three  first-mentioned 
gifts  are  given  according  to  the  precepts  of  some  -Sakh&s  at  the 
Agnyadhana,  the  kindling  of  the  fires.     But  Gov.  says  that  the 

U    2 


292  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII, 


210. 


210.  The  (four)  chief  priests  among  all  (the  six- 
teen), who  are  entitled  to  one  half,  shall  receive  a 
moiety  (of  the  fee),  the  next  (four)  one  half  of  that, 
the  set  entitled  to  a  third  share,  one  third,  and  those 
entitled  to  a  fourth  a  quarter. 

2i i.  By  the  application  of  these  principles  the 
allotment  of  shares  must  be  made  among  those  men 
who  here  (below)  perform  their  work  conjointly. 

212.  Should  money  be  given  (or  promised)  for  a 
pious  purpose  by  one  man  to  another  who  asks  for 
it,  the  gift  shall  be  void,  if  the  (money  is)  afterwards 
not  (used)  in  the  manner  (stated). 

213.  But  if  the  (recipient)  through  pride  or  greed 
tries  to  enforce  (the  fulfilment  of  the  promise),  he 
shall  be  compelled  by  the  king  to  pay  one  suvar^a 
as  an  expiation  for  his  theft. 

214.  Thus  the  lawful  subtraction   of  a  gift  has 

Brahman  priest   receives  a  swift  horse  at  the  Agnyadhana,  and 
Nar.  adds  that  the  Hotrz'  receives  a  horse  at  the  £yotish/oma. 

210.  The  four  classes  of  priests,  regarding  whose  functions  see 
Max  Miiller,  History  Anc.  Sansk.  Lit.,  p.  468  seqq.,  are :  1.  Hotrz', 
Adhvaryu,  Brahman,  Udgatrz;  2.  Maitravaruraa,  Pratiprasthatrz', 
Brahma«a/^awsin,  Prastotn';  3.  A/£/£Mvaka,  Nesh/rz',  Agnidhra, 
Pratihartrz';  4.  Potrz',  Subrahma^yd,  Gravash/ut,  Netrz.  Medh.  gives 
the  total  as  112,  and  the  shares  as  56,  28,  16,  12  ;  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar., 
and  Ragh.  the  total  as  100,  and  the  shares  as  48,  24,  16,  8.  But 
Nand.  says  that  the  total  of  the  fee,  whatever  it  may  be,  shall  be 
divided  into  25  shares,  and  the  several  classes  shall  receive  12,  6, 
4,  and  3  such  shares  respectively.  See  also  Asv.  £rauta-sutra  IX, 
4>  3~5-    The  rule,  given  in  this  verse,  applies  to  all  ordinary  cases. 

211.  Yagri.  II,  259,  265.  I.e.  each  is  to  be  paid  according  to 
the  amount  of  work  which  he  performs. 

212.  'For  a  pious  purpose,'  i.e.  'for  a  sacrifice  or  a  wedding' 
(Medh.). 

213.  Sawsadhayet, '  tries  to  enforce  (the  fulfilment  of  the  promise),' 
i.  e. '  by  a  complaint  before  the  king'  (Medh.),  or  '  tries  to  obtain  the 
money  forcibly  or  refuses  to  return  it' (Kull.,  Ragh.,  Gov.). 


I 


VIII,  220.  NON-PAYMENT    OF    WAGES.  293 

been  fully  explained ;  I  will  next  propound  (the  law 
for)  the  non-payment  of  wages. 

215.  A  hired  (servant  or  workman)  who,  without 
being  ill,  out  of  pride  fails  to  perform  his  work 
according  to  the  agreement,  shall  be  fined  eight 
krzsb/zalas  and  no  wages  shall  be  paid  to  him. 

216.  But  (if  he  is  really)  ill,  (and)  after  recovery 
performs  (his  work)  according  to  the  original  agree- 
ment, he  shall  receive  his  wages  even  after  (the 
lapse  of)  a  very  long  time. 

217.  But  if  he,  whether  sick  or  well,  does  not 
(perform  or)  cause  to  be  performed  (by  others)  his 
work  according  to  his  agreement,  the  wages  for  that 
work  shall  not  be  given  to  him,  even  (if  it  be  only) 
slightly  incomplete. 

218.  Thus  the  law  for  the  non-payment  of  wages 
has  been  completely  stated ;  I  will  next  explain  the 
law  concerning  men  who  break  an  agreement. 

219.  If  a  man  belonging  to  a  corporation  inha- 
biting a  village  or  a  district,  after  swearing  to  an 
agreement,  breaks  it  through  avarice,  (the  king) 
shall  banish  him  from  his  realm, 

220.  And  having  imprisoned  such  a  breaker  of 
an    agreement,    he    shall    compel    him    to    pay   six 

215.  Ap.  II,  28,  2-3;  Vi. V,  153-154;  Ya^.  II,  193.  'Eight 
krzsrmalas,'  i.e.  'of  gold,  silver  or  copper,  according  to  the  case' 
(Medh.,  Gov.),  or  'of  gold'  (Kull.). 

216.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  sudirghasya 
for  sa  dirghasya  (Kull.,  Nand.). 

219.  Vi.  V,  168;  Yagn.  II,  192.  By  'corporations  inhabiting 
a  village  or  district'  are  meant  according  to  Medh.,  village  com- 
munities and  corporations  of  merchants,  mendicants  or  monks, 
Aaturvedis  and  so  forth,  and  he  mentions  regulations  regarding 
the  grazing  of  the  cattle  on  a  common  as  one  of  the  agreements 
which  all  must  observe. 

220.  According  to  others  mentioned  by  Medh.  the  translation 


294  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII,  22 r. 

nishkas,  (each  of)  four  suvar/zas,  and  one  jatamana 
of  silver. 

221.  A  righteous  king  shall  apply  this  law  of 
fines  in  villages  and  castes  (^"ati)  to  those  who  break 
an  agreement. 

222.  If  anybody  in  this  (world),  after  buying  or 
selling  anything,  repent  (of  his  bargain),  he  may 
return  or  take  (hack)  that  chattel  within  ten  days. 

223.  But  after  (the  lapse  of)  ten  days  he  may 
neither  give  nor  cause  it  to  be  given  (back) ;  both 
he  who  takes  it  (back)  and  he  who  gives  it  (back, 
except  by  consent)  shall  be  fined  by  the  king  six 
hundred  (pa^as). 

224.  But  the  king  himself  shall  impose  a  fine  of 
ninety-six  pa^as  on  him  who  gives  a  blemished 
damsel  (to  a  suitor)  without  informing  (him  of  the 
blemish). 

225.  But  that  man  who,  out  of  malice,  says  of  a 
maiden,  (  She  is  not  a  maiden/  shall  be  fined  one 
hundred  (pa^as),  if  he  cannot  prove  her  blemish. 

226.  The  nuptial  texts  are  applied  solely  to  vir- 
gins, (and)  nowhere  among  men  to  females  who 
have  lost  their  virginity,  for  such  (females)  are 
excluded  from  religious  ceremonies. 


should  be  'four  suvarwas  or  six  nishkas  or  one  jatamana/  Kull.  and 
Ragh.  also  think  it  possible  that  three  separate  fines  may  be  inflicted 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

222.  Y&gn.  II,  177.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  the  rule 
refers  to  things  which  are  not  easily  spoilt,  such  as  land,  copper, 
&c,  not  to  flowers,  fruit,  and  the  like ;  according  to  Nar.,  to  grain 
and  seeds, '  because  in  other  Smr/tis  different  periods  are  mentioned 
for  other  objects '  (see  Yagri.  loc.  cit.). 

224-225.  Y&gri.  I,  66. 

224.  Regarding  the  blemishes,  see  above,  verse  205. 

•226.  K.  omits  this  verse. 


VIII,  232.        RESCISSION  OF  SALE  AND  PURCHASE.  295 

227.  The  nuptial  texts  are  a  certain  proof  (that  a 
maiden  has  been  made  a  lawful)  wife ;  but  the 
learned  should  know  that  they  (and  the  marriage- 
ceremony)  are  complete  with  the  seventh  step  (of 
the  bride  around  the  sacred  fire). 

228.  If  anybody  in  this  (world)  repent  of  any 
completed  transaction,  (the  king)  shall  keep  him  on 
the  road  of  rectitude  in  accordance  with  the  rules 
given  above. 

229.  I  will  fully  declare  in  accordance  with  the  true 
law  (the  rules  concerning)  the  disputes,  (arising)  from 
the  transgressions  of  owners  of  cattle  and  of  herdsmen. 

230.  During  the  day  the  responsibility  for  the 
safety  (of  the  cattle  rests)  on  the  herdsman,  during 
the  night  on  the  owner,  (provided  they  are)  in  his 
house  ;  (if  it  be)  otherwise,  the  herdsman  will  be 
responsible  (for  them  also  during  the  night). 

231.  A  hired  herdsman  who  is  paid  with  milk, 
may  milk  with  the  consent  of  the  owner  the  best 
(cow)  out  of  ten ;  such  shall  be  his  hire  if  no  (other) 
wages  (are  paid). 

232.  The  herdsman  alone  shall  make  good  (the 
loss  of  a  beast)  strayed,  destroyed  by  worms,  killed 
by  dogs  or  (by  falling)  into  a  pit,  if  he  did  not  duly 
exert  himself  (to  prevent  it). 

227.  Nand.  omits  this  verse  and  the  next.  After  the  seventh 
step  has  been  made  the  marriage  cannot  be  rescinded  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Nar.). 

228.  I.e.  he  maybe  allowed  to  rescind  a  contract  for  wages  and 
the  like  within  ten  days,  but  not  later  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

231.  Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

232.  Vi.  V,  137-138;  Yagfi.  I,  164-165.  'By  worms/  i.  e. 
according  to  Medh.  by  a  kind  called  Arohakas,  who  enter  the 
sexual  parts  of  the  cows  and  destroy  them ;  Ragh.  says, '  by  snakes 
and  the  like.'  'By  dogs/  the  word  is  according  to  Medh.  merely 
intended  as  an  instance  for  any  wild  animal. 


296  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  233. 

233.  But  for  (an  animal)  stolen  by  thieves,  though 
he  raised  an  alarm,  the  herdsman  shall  not  pay, 
provided  he  gives  notice  to  his  master  at  the  proper 
place  and  time. 

234.  If  cattle  die,  let  him  carry  to  his  master 
their  ears,  skin,  tails,  bladders,  tendons,  and  the 
yellow  concrete  bile,  and  let  him  point  out  their 
particular  marks. 

235.  But  if  goats  or  sheep  are  surrounded  by 
wolves  and  the  herdsman  does  not  hasten  (to  their 
assistance),  he  shall  be  responsible  for  any  (animal) 
which  a  wolf  may  attack  and  kill. 

236.  But  if  they,  kept  in  (proper)  order,  graze 
together  in  the  forest,  and  a  wolf,  suddenly  jumping 
on  one  of  them,  kills  it,  the  herdsman  shall  bear  in 
that  case  no  responsibility. 

237.  On  all  sides  of  a  village  a  space,  one  hun- 
dred dhanus  or  three  samya-throws  (in  breadth), 
shall  be  reserved  (for  pasture),  and  thrice  (that 
space)  round  a  town. 

238.  If  the  cattle  do  damage  to  unfenced  crops 
on  that  (common),  the  king  shall  in  that  case  not 
punish  the  herdsmen. 

239.  (The  owner  of  the  field)  shall  make  there  a 
hedge  over  which  a  camel  cannot  look,  and  stop 


234.  I  read  with  Medh.  and  Gov.  anka^^  ka,  'their  particular 
marks,'  instead  of  arigani,  '  their  (other)  limbs'  (Ragh.,  Nand.,  K., 
and  the  editions).  To  judge  from  the  commentary,  Kull.  must 
have  had  the  same  reading  as  Medh.  and  Gov. 

235.  Vi.V,  137. 

237.  Ya^riL  II,  167.  Dhanus,  literally  '  a  bow's  length '=4  hastas 
or  about  6  feet.  The  jamya  is  a  short,  thick  piece  of  wood,  used 
at  sacrifices.  A  jamya-throw  is  mentioned  as  a  measure  also  by 
Ap.  I,  9,  6. 


VIII,  243-        DISPUTES — MASTER  AND  SERVANTS.  297 

every  gap  through  which  a  dog  or  a  boar  can  thrust 
his  head. 

240.  (If  cattle  do  mischief)  in  an  enclosed  field 
near  a  highway  or  near  a  village,  the  herdsman 
shall  be  fined  one  hundred  (pa/zas);  (but  cattle), 
unattended  by  a  herdsman,  (the  watchman  in  the 
field)  shall  drive  away. 

241.  (For  damage)  in  other  fields  (each  head  of) 
cattle  shall  (pay  a  fine  of)  one  (pa/za)  and  a  quarter, 
and  in  all  (cases  the  value  of)  the  crop  (destroyed) 
shall  be  made  good  to  the  owner  of  the  field ;  that 
is  the  settled  rule. 

242.  But  Manu  has  declared  that  no  fine  shall  be 
paid  for  (damage  done  by)  a  cow  within  ten  days 
after  her  calving,  by  bulls  and  by  cattle  sacred  to 
the  gods,  whether  they  are  attended  by  a  herdsman 
or  not. 

243.  If  (the  crops  are  destroyed  by)  the  husband- 
man's (own)  fault,  the  fine  shall  amount  to  ten 
times  as  much  as  (the  king's)  share;  but  the  fine 
(shall  be)  only  half  that  amount  if  (the  fault  lay) 
with  the  servants  and  the  farmer  had  no  knowledge 
of  it. 

240-242.  Ap.  II,  28,  5;  Gaut.  XII,  19-26;  Vi.  V,  140-150; 
Yagn.  II,  1 61-163. 

241.  'The  cattle/  i.e.  'the  herdsman  shall  pay  for  the  cattle.' 
'  In  all  cases/  i.  e. '  whether  the  cattle  were  attended  by  a  herdsman 
or  not'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

242.  A  cow  is,  according  to  Nar.,  during  the  first  days  after 
calving  utterly  unmanageable.  '  Bulls/  i.  e.  '  those  set  at  liberty 
(see  Vi.  LXXXVI)  are  meant'  (Nar.,  Kull.),  which  may  be  met  with 
near  many  Indian  villages  and  in  many  towns.  '  Cattle  sacred  to 
the  gods/  i.  e.  either  '  such  as  are  set  apart  for  sacrifices,'  or  '  such 
as  are  dedicated  to  temples'  (Medh.).  The  other  commentators 
prefer  the  second  explanation. 

243.  Ap.  II,  28,  1.    'The  husbandman's  (own)  fault/ i.e.  'if  he 


298  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  244. 

244.  To  these  rules  a  righteous  king  shall  keep 
in  (all  cases  of)  transgressions  by  masters,  their 
cattle,  and  herdsmen. 

245.  If  a  dispute  has  arisen  between  two  villages 
concerning  a  boundary,  the  king  shall  settle  the 
limits  in  the  month  of  Gyaish/^a,  when  the  land- 
marks are  most  distinctly  visible. 

246.  Let  him  mark  the  boundaries  (by)  trees,  (e.g.) 
Nyagrodhas,  Asvatthas,  Ki^i-ukas,  cotton  -  trees, 
.Salas,  Palmyra  palms,  and  trees  with  milky  juice, 

247.  By  clustering  shrubs,  bamboos  of  different 
kinds,  6amis,  creepers  and  raised  mounds,  reeds, 
thickets  of  Kub^aka ;  thus  the  boundary  will  not  be 
forgotten. 

248.  Tanks,  wells,,  cisterns,  and  fountains  should 
be  built  where  boundaries  meet,  as  well  as 
temples, 

249.  And  as  he  will  see  that  through  mens  igno- 
rance of  the  boundaries  trespasses  constantly  occur 
in  the  world,  let  him  cause  to  be  made  other  hidden 
marks  for  boundaries, 

250.  Stones,  bones,  cow's  hair,  chaff,  ashes,  pot- 
sherds, dry  cowdung,  bricks,  cinders,  pebbles,  and 
sand, 


has  allowed  his  crops  to  be  eaten  by  cattle,  or  has  not  sown  the 
field  in  proper  time,  &c/  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

245.  (ryaish/^a,  i.  e.  May-June, '  when  the  grass  has  been  dried 
up  by  the  heat'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

246.  Ya§™.  II,  151.  Nyagrodha,  Ficus  Indica;  A^vattha,  Ficus 
Religiosa;  Ki^zxuka,  ButeaFrondosa;  -Sala,  ShoreaRobusta.  'Trees 
with  milky  juice,' i.e.  'Arka  (Calatropis  Gigantea),  Udumbara  (Ficus 
Glomerata),  &c.' 

247.  »Sami,  Acacia  Suma;  '  mounds/  i.  e.  the  heaps  of  earth  are 
meant  which  now  are  used  generally  as  landmarks  in  British 
districts.     Instead  of  Kub^aka  Nand.  reads  Kulyaka. 


VIII,  257»  BOUNDARY  DISPUTES.  299 

251.  And  whatever  other  things  of  a  similar  kind 
the  earth  does  not  corrode  even  after  a  long  time, 
those  he  should  cause  to  be  buried  where  one 
boundary  joins  (the  other). 

252.  By  these  signs,  by  long  continued  posses- 
sion, and  by  constantly  flowing  streams  of  water 
the  king  shall  ascertain  the  boundary  (of  the  land) 
of  two  disputing  parties. 

253.  If  there  be  a  doubt  even  on  inspection  of 
the  marks,  the  settlement  of  a  dispute  regarding 
boundaries  shall  depend  on  witnesses. 

254.  The  witnesses,  (giving  evidence)  regarding 
a  boundary,  shall  be  examined  concerning  the  land- 
marks in  the  presence  of  the  crowd  of  the  villagers 
and  also  of  the  two  litigants. 

255.  As  they,  being  questioned,  unanimously 
decide,  even  so  he  shall  record  the  boundary  (in 
writing),  together  with  their  names. 

256.  Let  them,  putting  earth  on  their  heads, 
wearing  chaplets  (of  red  flowers)  and  red  dresses, 
being  sworn  each  by  (the  rewards  for)  his  meritorious 
deeds,  settle  (the  boundary)  in  accordance  with  the 
truth. 

257.  If  they  determine   (the    boundary)    in    the 


251.  According  to  Kull.,  who  relies  on  a  passage  of  Br/haspati, 
these  objects  are  to  be  placed  in  jars. 

254.  According  to  the  commentators  the  verse  refers  to  a  dis- 
pute between  two  villages,  and  the  two  litigants  are  persons  deputed 
by  each  village  to  conduct  the  case  (see  also  below,  verse  261). 

255.  All  the  commentators  explain  nibadhniyat  by  'he  shall 
record  in  writing,'  and  as  it  is  specially  mentioned  that  the  names 
of  the  witnesses  shall  be  given,  it  seems  impossible  to  take  the 
word  in  any  other  sense.  Medh.  says  that,  if  the  witnesses  dis- 
agree, the  opinion  of  the  majority  shall  be  taken. 

256-260.  Yagfi.  II,  150-152. 


300  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII,  258. 

manner  stated,  they  are  guiltless  (being)  veracious 
witnesses ;  but  if  they  determine  it  unjustly,  they 
shall  be  compelled  to  pay  a  fine  of  two  hundred 
(pa/zas). 

258.  On  failure  of  witnesses  (from  the  two  vil- 
lages, men  of)  the  four  neighbouring  villages,  who 
are  pure,  shall  make  (as  witnesses)  a  decision  con- 
cerning the  boundary  in  the  presence  of  the  king. 

259.  On  failure  of  neighbours  (who  are)  original 
inhabitants  (of  the  country  and  can  be)  witnesses 
with  respect  to  the  boundary,  (the  king)  may  hear 
the  evidence  even  of  the  following  inhabitants  of 
the  forest, 

260.  (Viz.)  hunters,  fowlers,  herdsmen,  fishermen, 
root-diggers,  snake-catchers,  gleaners,  and  other 
foresters. 

261.  As  they,  being  examined,  declare  the  marks 
for  the  meeting  of  the  boundaries  (to  be),  even  so  the 
king  shall  justly  cause  them  to  be  fixed  between  the 
two  villages. 

262.  The  decision  concerning  the  boundary-marks 
of  fields,  wells,  tanks,  of  gardens  and  houses  depends 
upon  (the  evidence  of)  the  neighbours. 

263.  Should  the  neighbours  give  false  evidence, 

258.  Men  from  the  four  surrounding  villages  are  meant,  as 
Kull.  suggests.  The  correctness  of  this  opinion  is  proved  by  the 
fact  that  the  land-grants  usually  mention  'the  four  boundaries' 
(^aturagha/anani)  of  the  villages  given  away.  Medh.  and  Nand.  read 
gramasamantavasina^, '  four  men  living  in,  &c.' 

259.  Maulanam,  'original  inhabitants,'  i.e.  'whose  ancestors  have 
lived  there  since  the  settlement  of  the  village'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.). 

260.  'Other  foresters/  i.e.  'those  who  collect  flowers,  fruit,  and 
fuel'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  'Sabaras  and  the  rest'  (Nar.). 

262.  Vas.  XVI,  13-15  ;  Y&gri.  II,  154. 

263.  Yagri.I,  153. 


VIII,  270.        BOUNDARY  DISPUTES  ;    DEFAMATION.  3OI 

when  men  dispute  about  a  boundary-mark,  the 
king  shall  make  each  of  them  pay  the  middlemost 
amercement  as  a  fine. 

264.  He  who  by  intimidation  possesses  himself 
of  a  house,  a  tank,  a  garden,  or  a  field,  shall  be 
fined  five  hundred  (pa^as) ;  (if  he  trespassed)  through 
ignorance,  the  fine  (shall  be)  two  hundred  (pa/zas). 

265.  If  the  boundary  cannot  be  ascertained  (by 
any  evidence),  let  a  righteous  king  with  (the  inten- 
tion of)  benefiting  them  (all),  himself  assign  (his) 
land  (to  each) ;  that  is  the  settled  rule. 

266.  Thus  the  law  for  deciding  boundary  (dis- 
putes) has  been  fully  declared,  I  will  next  propound 
the  (manner  of)  deciding  (cases  of)  defamation. 

267.  A  Kshatriya,  having  defamed  a  Brahma^a, 
shall  be  fined  one  hundred  (pa/zas) ;  a  VaLsya  one 
hundred  and  fifty  or  two  hundred ;  a  *Stidra  shall 
suffer  corporal  punishment. 

268.  A  Brahma/za  shall  be  fined  fifty  (pa/zas)  for 
defaming  a  Kshatriya ;  in  (the  case  of)  a  VaLyya  the 
fine  shall  be  twenty-five  (pa^as) ;  in  (the  case  of) 
a  6ildra  twelve. 

269.  For  offences  of  twice-born  men  against  those 
of  equal  caste  (var^a,  the  fine  shall  be)  also  twelve 
(pa/zas)  ;  for  speeches  which  ought  not  to  be  uttered, 
that  (and  every  fine  shall  be)  double. 

270.  A  once-born  man  (a  ^udra),  who  insults  a 

265.  Yagfi.II,  153. 

267-277.  Ap.  II,  27,  14;  Gaut.  XII,  1,  8-14 ;  Vas.  IX,  9;  Vi. 
V,  23-39;  Yagri.  II,  204-211. 

269.  'Speeches  that  ought  not  to  be  uttered,' i. e.  'insinuations 
against  the  honour  of  another's  female  relatives,  especially  mothers 
and  sisters'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  with  which  the  Hindus,  like 
other  Orientals,  are  very  ready. 

270.  The  last  clause  refers,  according  to  the  commentators,  to  the 


a 


X 


I 


302  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VIII,  271. 

twice-born  man  with  gross  invective,  shall  have  his 
tongue  cut  out ;  for  he  is  of  low  origin. 

271.  If  he  mentions  the  names  and  castes  (^ati) 
of  the  (twice-born)  with  contumely,  an  iron  nail,  ten 
fingers  long,  shall  be  thrust  red-hot  into  his  mouth. 

272.  If  he  arrogantly  teaches  Brahma/zas  their 
duty,  the  king  shall  cause  hot  oil  to  be  poured  into 
his  mouth  and  into  his  ears. 

273.  He  who  through  arrogance  makes  false 
statements  regarding  the  learning  (of  a  caste-fellow), 
his  country,  his  caste  (^ati),  or  the  rites  by  which  his 
body  was  sanctified,  shall  be  compelled  to  pay  a  fine 
of  two  hundred  (pa^as). 

274.  He  who  even  in  accordance  with  the  true 
facts  (contemptuously)  calls  another  man  one-eyed, 
lame,  or  the  like  (names),  shall  be  fined  at  least  one 
karshapa;za. 

275.  He  who  defames  his  mother,  his  father,  his 
wife,  his  brother,  his  son,  or  his  teacher,  and  he  who 
gives  not  the  way  to  his  preceptor,  shall  be  com- 
pelled to  pay  one  hundred  (pa^as). 

276.  (For  mutual  abuse)  by  a  Brahma/za  and  a 

origin  of  the  -Sudra  from  Brahman's  feet;  see  above,  I,  31.  Accord- 
ing to  Medh.  the  expression  '  once-born'  includes  men  born  from 
high-caste  fathers  and  low-caste  mothers. 

271.  I.e.  if  he  says  're  Ya^wadatta/  or  'thou  scum  of  the 
Brahma/zas.' 

273.  '  (Of  a  caste-fellow)/  (Kull.,  R&gh.),  Gov.  too  states  that 
the  rule  cannot  refer  to  £udras,  because  the  punishment  is  too  light. 
Medh.  explains  karma  by  '  occupation/  and  jariram  by  '  bodily  (de- 
ficiencies)/ while  the  others  refer  karma  jariram  to  a  denial  of  the 
initiation. 

275.  Aksharayati,  'defames/  i.e.  'accuses  them  of  a  mortal 
sin'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'of  incest*  (Nar.),  or  'causes  dissen- 
sions between  them  and  others'  (Medh.),  or  'makes  them  angry' 
(Nand.). 


VIII,  282.  ASSAULT    AND    HURT.  303 

Kshatriya  a  fine  must  be  imposed  by  a  discerning 
(king),  on  the  Brahma/za  the  lowest  amercement,  but 
on  the  Kshatriya  the  middlemost. 

277.  A  VaLsya  and  a  6udra  must  be  punished 
exactly  in  the  same  manner  according  to  their  re- 
spective castes,  but  the  tongue  (of  the  6udra)  shall 
not  be  cut  out ;  that  is  the  decision. 

278.  Thus  the  rules  for  punishments  (applicable  to 
cases)  of  defamation  have  been  truly  declared  ;  I  will 
next  propound  the  decision  (of  cases)  of  assault. 

279.  With  whatever  limb  a  man  of  a  low  caste 
does  hurt  to  (a  man  of  the  three)  highest  (castes), 
even  that  limb  shall  be  cut  off;  that  is  the  teaching 
of  Manu. 

280.  He  who  raises  his  hand  or  a  stick,  shall  have 
his  hand  cut  off;  he  who  in  anger  kicks  with  his  foot, 
shall  have  his  foot  cut  off.  ^j 

281.  A  low-caste  man  who  tries  to  place  himself 
on  the  same  seat  with  a  man  of  a  high  caste,  shall  jK 
be  branded  on  his  hip  and  be  banished,  or  (the  king) 
shall  cause  his  buttock  to  be  gashed. 

282.  If  out  of  arrogance  he  spits  (on  a  superior), 
the  king  shall  cause  both  his  lips  to  be  cut  off;  if 
he  urines  (on  him),  the  penis ;  if  he  breaks  wind 
(against  him),  the  anus. 

277.  I.e.  if  a  -Sudra  defames  a  Vawya  his  tongue  is  not  cut  out, 
but  he  pays  the  middlemost  amercement. 
279-280.  Vi.  V,  19;  Y&gn.  II,  215. 

280.  Praharet, '  kicks,'  i.  e.  '  lifts  his  foot  in  order  to  kick'  (Medh., 
Nar.,  Nand.). 

281.  Ap.  II,  27,  15;  Gaut.  XII,  7;  Vi.  V,  20.  According  to 
Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  the  rule  refers  to  a  Brahmarca  and  a  -Sudra ; 
according  to  Ragh.,  to  the  latter  and  an  Aryan  ;  according  to  Nar., 
to  a  Kshatriya,  Vai^ya,  or  .Sudra  offending  against  a  Brahmawa. 

282.  Vi.  V,  21-22. 


304  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  283. 

283.  If  he  lays  hold  of  the  hair  (of  a  superior), 
a/  let  the  (king)  unhesitatingly  cut  off  his  hands,  like- 
^  wise  (if  he  takes  him)  by  the  feet,  the  beard,  the 
I   neck,  or  the  scrotum. 

284.  He  who  breaks  the  skin  (of  an  equal)  or 
fetches  blood  (from  him)  shall  be  fined  one  hundred 
(pa/zas),  he  who  cuts  a  muscle  six  nishkas,  he  who 
breaks  a  bone  shall  be  banished. 

285.  According  to  the  usefulness  of  the  several 
(kinds  of)  trees  a  fine  must  be  inflicted  for  injuring 
them ;  that  is  the  settled  rule. 

286.  If  a  blow  is  struck  against  men  or  animals 
in  order  to  (give  them)  pain,  (the  judge)  shall  inflict 
a  fine  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  pain  (caused). 

287.  If  a  limb  is  injured,  a  wound  (is  caused),  or 
blood  (flows,  the  assailant)  shall  be  made  to  pay  (to 
the  sufferer)  the  expenses  of  the  cure,  or  the  whole 
(both  the  usual  amercement  and  the  expenses  of  the 
cure  as  a)  fine  (to  the  king). 

284.  Vi.V,  66-70;  Yagn.  II,  218.  '(Ofanequal),'(Medh.,Kull., 
Nand.)  According  to  Ragh.,  the  rule  refers  to  *Sudras  assaulting 
-Sudras.  According  to  Nar.,  the  last  offender's  property  shall  be 
confiscated. 

285.  Vi.  V,  55-59  ;  Yagfi.  II,  227-228.  The  expression  '  trees ' 
includes  all  plants  (Medh.,  Kull.).  According  to  Gov.,  the  fine  for 
injuring  trees  which  give  shade  only  is  to  be  very  small ;  in  the  case 
of  flower-bearing  trees,  middling ;  in  the  case  of  fruit-trees,  high  (see 
Vi.  loc.  cit.).  Medh.  remarks  that  the  position  of  the  trees,  e.  g.  whether 
they  are  boundary-marks,  or  stand  on  a  cross-road,  in  a  hermitage, 
&c,  has  to  be  taken  into  account  (see  Yagfi.  loc.  cit.). 

286-287.  Vi.V,  75-76;  Yagri.  II,  219,  222. 

287.  Instead  of  vrawa, 'a  wound'  (Kull.,  Nar.),  Medh.,  Gov., 
Ragh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  prawa.  Medh.  explains  the  latter  reading 
by  '  if  the  vital  strength  is  injured/  and  Gov.  and  Ragh.  by  '  if  the 
breathing  power  is  injured  by  gagging.'  '  Or  the  whole  (as  a)  fine,' 
i.  e.  if  the  person  injured  refuses  the  compensation.  Nar.  says, ' and 
shall  pay  the  whole  fine,  mentioned  above.' 


VIII,  295.  ASSAULT    AND    HURT.  305 

288.  He  who  damages  the  goods  of  another,  be 
it  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  shall  give  satis- 
faction to  the  (owner)  and  pay  to  the  king  a  fine 
equal  to  the  (damage). 

289.  In  the  case  of  (damage  done  to)  leather,  or 
to  utensils  of  leather,  of  wood,  or  of  clay,  the  fine 
(shall  be)  five  times  their  value  ;  likewise  in  the  case 
of  (damage  to)  flowers,  roots,  and  fruit. 

290.  They  declare  with  respect  to  a  carriage,  its 
driver  and  its  owner,  (that  there  are)  ten  cases  in 
which  no  punishment  (for  damage  done)  can  be 
inflicted ;  in  other  cases  a  fine  is  prescribed. 

291.  When  the  nose-string  is  snapped,  when  the 
yoke  is  broken,  when  the  carriage  turns  sideways  or 
back,  when  the  axle  or  a  wheel  is  broken, 

292.  When  the  leather-thongs,  the  rope  around 
the  neck  or  the  bridle  are  broken,  and  when  (the 
driver)  has  loudly  called  out,  '  Make  way,'  Manu 
has  declared  (that  in  all  these  cases)  no  punishment 
(shall  be  inflicted). 

293.  But  if  the  cart  turns  off  (the  road)  through 
the  driver's  want  of  skill,  the  owner  shall  be  fined,  if 
damage  (is  done),  two  hundred  (pa/zas). 

294.  If  the  driver  is  skilful  (but  negligent),  he 
alone  shall  be  fined ;  if  the  driver  is  unskilful,  the 
occupants  of  the  carriage  (also)  shall  be  each  fined 
one  hundred  (pa^as). 

295.  But  if  he  is  stopped  on  his  way  by  cattle  or 

288.  'The  goods,' i.e.  'such  objects  as  are  not  mentioned  spe- 
cially' (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

291-295.  Yagn.  II,  298-299. 

291.  'When  the  carriage  turns  sideways  or  backwards,'  i.e.  'off 
the  road  owing  to  its  badness,  to  the  animals  taking  fright,  &c.' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

295.  There  are  two  readings,  avi^arita^, '  without  doubt'  (lit. '  not 

[25]  x 


306  LAWS   OF   MANU.  VITI,  296. 

by  (another)  carriage,  and  he  causes  the  death  of 
any  living  being,  a  fine  shall  without  doubt  be 
imposed. 

296.  If  a  man  is  killed,  his  guilt  will  be  at  once 
the  same  as  (that  of)  a  thief ;  for  large  animals  such 
as  cows,  elephants,  camels  or  horses,  half  of  that. 

297.  For  injuring  small  cattle  the  fine  (shall  be) 
two  hundred  (pa^as) ;  the  fine  for  beautiful  wild 
quadrupeds  and  birds  shall  amount  to  fifty  (pa/zas). 

298.  For  donkeys,  sheep,  and  goats  the  fine  shall 
be  five  m&shas ;  but  the  punishment  for  killing  a 
dog  or  a  pig  shall  be  one  masha. 

299.  A  wife,  a  son,  a  slave,  a  pupil,  and  a 
(younger)  brother  of  the  full  blood,  who  have  com- 
mitted faults,  may  be  beaten  with  a  rope  or  a  split 
bamboo, 

300.  But  on  the  back  part  of  the  body  (only), 
never  on  a  noble  part ;  he  who  strikes  them  other- 
wise will  incur  the  same  guilt  as  a  thief. 

301.  Thus  the  whole  law  of  assault  (and  hurt) 
has  been  declared  completely;  I  will  now  explain 
the  rules  for  the  decision  (in  cases)  of  theft. 

302.  Let  the  king  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  to 


considered'),  and  vi^arita^,  '  is  considered  (to  be  just).'  Medh. 
gives  besides  the  explanation,  adopted  in  the  translation  according 
to  Kull.,  another  one, '  is  not  considered  (just)/  He  mentions  also 
the  second  reading,  which  Gov.,  Ragh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  have,  and 
explains  it  with  them  by  '  is  considered  (to  be  just).' 

296.  '  The  same  as  that  of  a  thief/  i.  e. '  he  must  pay  the  highest 
amercement,  or  1000  pa«as'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Kull.,  Ragh., 
Nand.). 

297-298.  Vi.V,  50-54. 

299-300.  Ap.  I,  8,  31 ;  Gaut.  II,  43-44- 

300.  '  Not  on  a  noble  part,'  i.  e.  '  not  on  the  chest  or  the  head, 
&c.'  (Medh.,  Kull.). 


VIII,  307.  THEFT.  307 

punish  thieves ;  for,  if  he  punishes  thieves,  his  fame 
grows  and  his  kingdom  prospers. 

303.  That  king,  indeed,  is  ever  worthy  of  honour 
who  ensures  the  safety  (of  his  subjects);  for  the 
sacrificial  session  (sattra,  which  he,  as  it  were,  per- 
forms thereby)  ever  grows  in  length,  the  safety  (of 
his  subjects  representing)  the  sacrificial  fee. 

304.  A  king  who  (duly)  protects  (his  subjects)  re- 
ceives from  each  and  all  the  sixth  part  of  their 
spiritual  merit ;  if  he  does  not  protect  them,  the 
sixth  part  of  their  demerit  also  (will  fall  on  him). 

305.  Whatever  (merit  a  man  gains  by)  reading  the 
Veda,  by  sacrificing,  by  charitable  gifts,  (or  by)  wor- 
shipping (Gurus  and  gods),  the  king  obtains  a  sixth 
part  of  that  in  consequence  of  his  duly  protecting 
(his  kingdom). 

306.  A  king  who  protects  the  created  beings  in 
accordance  with  the  sacred  law  and  smites  those 
worthy  of  corporal  punishment,  daily  offers  (as  it 
were)  sacrifices  at  which  hundred  thousands  (are 
given  as)  fees. 

307.  A  king  who  does  not  afford  protection,  (yet) 
takes  his  share  in  kind,  his  taxes,  tolls  and  duties, 
daily  presents  and  fines,  will  (after  death)  soon  sink 
into  hell. 


303-311.  Ap.  II,  25,  15;  Vas.  I,  42-44;  Vi.V,  196;  Ybgii.  I, 
335~336>  358;  see  also  below,  IX,  252  seqq. 

307.  '  The  share  in  kind/  i.  e.  *  the  sixth  part  of  the  harvest' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  '  the  choice  portions  of  fruit, 
grain,  &c.  to  be  given  to  the  king.'  'Taxes,'  i.e.  ^anghadana 
(Medh.),  or  the  land-tax  paid  in  money  (Nar.),  *  monthly  taxes,  or 
taxes  payable  in  certain  months  by  the  villagers'  (Gov.,  Kull., Ragh.). 
«Sulka,  i.  e. £  the  tolls  and  duties  payable  by  merchants  and  traders ' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  For  pratibhagam,  i.  e. '  the  daily 
presents  of  fruit,  vegetables,  &c.,'  the  so-called  Z>alis  (Medh.,  Kull.), 

X    2 


3o8 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


VIII,  308. 


308.  They  declare  that  a  king  who  affords  no 
protection,  (yet)  receives  the  sixth  part  of  the  pro- 
duce, takes  upon  himself  all  the  foulness  of  his 
whole  people. 

309.  Know  that  a  king  who  heeds  not  the  rules 
(of  the'  law),  who  is  an  atheist,  and  rapacious,  who 
does  not  protect  (his  subjects,  but)  devours  them, 
will  sink  low  (after  death). 

310.  Let  him  carefully  restrain  the  wicked  by 
three  methods, — by  imprisonment,  by  putting  them 
in  fetters,  and  by  various  (kinds  of)  corporal 
punishments. 

311.  For  by  punishing  the  wicked  and  by 
favouring  the  virtuous,  kings  are  constantly  sancti- 
fied, just  as  twice-born  men  by  sacrifices. 

312.  A  king  who  desires  his  own  welfare  must 
always  forgive  litigants,  infants,  aged  and  sick  men, 
who  inveigh  against  him. 

313.  He  who,  being  abused  by  men  in  pain,  par- 
dons (them),  will  in  reward  of  that  (act)  be  exalted 
in  heaven ;  but  he  who,  (proud)  of  his  kingly  state, 


Nar.  and  Ragh.  read  pratibhogam,  Gov.  bhutibhogam,  and  Nand. 
pritibhogam,  but  the  explanation  of  the  first  two  var.  lect.  is  the 
same.  Pritibhoga  would  however  denote  all '  benevolences,'  which 
usually  are  called  pritidana  and  are  levied  on  particular  occasions. 

308.  Medh.  and  Nar.  read  arakshitaram  attaram,  '(a  king)  who 
affords  no  protection,  (yet)  devours  (his  subjects  and)  takes,  &c.' 

309.  Nand.  reads  at  the  end  of  the  verse  asatyawz  ka.  nripam 
tya^-et,  '  Let  him  forsake  a  king  who  heeds  not  the  rules  ....  and 
is  untruthful.'  This  var.  lect.  is  mentioned  by  Medh.  Vipralumpa- 
kam  (or  clopakam),  '  rapacious,'  means  according  to  Nar.,  Nand., 
and  Ragh.  '  who  takes  the  goods  of  Brahmawas  or  injures  them.' 

310.  'The  wicked,'  i.e.  'thieves,  because  the  topic  (is  theft),' 
(Medh.). 

311.  '  Twice-born  men/  i.  e.  '  Brahmawas'  (Medh.,  Nar.). 


VIII,  319-  THEFT.  309 

forgives  them  not,  will  for  that  (reason)  sink  into 
hell. 

314.  A  thief  shall,  running,  approach  the  king, 
with  flying  hair,  confessing  that  theft  (and  saying), 
'Thus  have  I  done,  punish  me;' 

315.  (And  he  must)  carry  on  his  shoulder  a  pestle, 
or  a  club  of  Khadira  wood,  or  a  spear  sharp  at  both 
ends,  or  an  iron  staff. 

316.  Whether  he  be  punished  or  pardoned,  the 
thief  is  freed  from  the  (guilt  of)  theft ;  but  the  king, 
if  he  punishes  not,  takes  upon  himself  the  guilt  of 
the  thief.  ^jt 

317.  The  killer  of  a  learned  Brahma^a  throws 
his  guilt  on  him  who  eats  his  food,  an  adulterous   h 
wife  on  her  (negligent)  husband,  a  (sinning)  pupil  or  .  < 
sacrificer  on  (their  negligent)  teacher  (or  priest),  a  J 
thief  on  the  king  (who  pardons  him). 

318.  But  men  who  have  committed  crimes  and 
have  been  punished  by  the  king,  go  to  heaven, 
being  pure  like  those  who  performed  meritorious 
deeds. 

319.  He  who  steals  the  rope  or  the  water-pot 
from  a  well,  or  damages  a  hut  where  water  is  distri- 

314-316.  Ap.  I,  25,  4-5;  Gaut.  XII,  43-45;  Vas.  XX,  41; 
Baudh.  II,  1,  16-17  ;  Vi-  LII>  x~2  J  Ya^n.  Ill,  257. 

314.  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  instead  of  dhavata,  'running,' 
dhimata,  (shall  approach  the  king)  '  with  firm  determination/  But 
Medh.  mentions  the  other  reading  too,  the  correctness  of  which  is 
attested  by  Vas.  loc.  cit.  According  to  the  commentators  and  the 
parallel  passages,  a  repentant  thief  is  meant  who  has  stolen  gold 
belonging  to  a  Brahmawa;  see  also  below,  XI,  199-201. 

317.  Vas,  XIX,  44.  Medh.  gives  verse  317  after  318,  but  remarks 
that  the  order  ought  to  be  inverted.  He  says  that  a  priest  must 
leave  a  disobedient  sacrificer;  else  the  guilt  of  irregularities  com- 
mitted by  the  latter  will  fall  upon  the  priest. 

319.  '  Damages,'  i.e. '  takes  away  the  wood  belonging  to  it'  (Nar.). 


3IO  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VIII,  320. 

buted,  shall  pay  one  masha  as  a  fine  and  restore  the 
(article  abstracted  or  damaged)  in  its  (proper  place). 

320.  On  him  who  steals  more  than  ten  kumbhas 
of  grain  corporal  punishment  (shall  be  inflicted) ;  in 
other  cases  he  shall  be  fined  eleven  times  as  much,  and 
shall  pay  to  the  (owner  the  value  of  his)  property. 

321.  So  shall  corporal  punishment  be  inflicted  for 
stealing  more  than  a  hundred  (palas)  of  articles  sold 
by  the  weight,  (i.  e.)  of  gold,  silver,  and  so  forth,  and 
of  most  excellent  clothes. 

322.  For  (stealing)  more  than  fifty  (palas)  it  is 
enacted  that  the  hands  (of  the  offender)  shall  be  cut 
off;  but  in  other  cases,  let  him  inflict  a  fine  of  eleven 
times  the  value. 

323.  For  stealing  men  of  noble  family  and  especially 
women  and  the  most  precious  gems,  (the  offender) 
deserves  corporal  (or  capital)  punishment. 

324.  For  stealing  large  animals,  weapons,  or 
medicines,  let  the  king  fix  a  punishment,  after  con- 
sidering the  time  and  the  purpose  (for  which  they 
were  destined). 

'One  masha/  i.e.  'of  copper'  (Medh.),  'of  gold'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar., 
Ragh.). 

320.  Vi.  V,  12.  'Akumbha  is  equal  to  20  or  22  prasthas  of  32 
palas  each'  (Medh.),  or  'to  20  dro/zas  of  200  palas  each'  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  to  200  palas'  (Nar.).  Vadha^,  '  corporal  punish- 
ment,' i.e. '  flogging,  mutilation,  or  even  capital  punishment,  accord- 
ing to  the  quality  of  the  person  robbed'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

321.  Vi.  V,  13.  According  to  Nar.  and  Ragh.,  other  things  than 
gold  and  silver  are  to  be  understood  by  dharima, '  sold  by  the  weight.' 
But  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  explain  as  above. 

322.  Vi.  V,  81-82.  Nar.  thinks  that  this  rule  refers  to  copper 
and  the  like  metals  of  small  value.  But  it  is  also  possible  to  remove 
the  seeming  inconsistency,  by  explaining  the  term  vadha^  in  the 
preceding  verse  by  '  capital  punishment.' 

324-325.  Vi.V,  77-78. 

324.  'The  purpose  for  which  the  object  was  destined,'  i.e.' whether 


VIII,  330-  THEFT.  311 

325.  For  (stealing)  cows  belonging  to  Brahma/zas,  W 
for  piercing  (the  nostrils  of)  a  barren  cow,  and  for  V 
stealing  (other)  cattle  (belonging  to  Brahma^as,  the  \\ 
offender)  shall  forthwith  lose  half  his  feet. 

326.  (For  stealing)  thread,  cotton,  drugs  causing 
fermentation,  cowdung,  molasses,  sour  milk,  sweet 
milk,  butter-milk,  water,  or  grass, 

327.  Vessels  made  of  bamboo  or  other  cane,  salt 
of  various  kinds,  earthen  (vessels),  earth  and  ashes, 

328.  Fish,  birds,  oil,  clarified  butter,  meat,  honey, 
and  other  things  that  come  from  beasts, 

329.  Or  other  things  of  a  similar  kind,  spirituous 
liquor,  boiled  rice,  and  every  kind  of  cooked  food, 
the  fine  (shall  be)  twice  the  value  (of  the  stolen 
article). 

330.  For  flowers,  green  corn,  shrubs,  creepers, 
trees,  and  other  unhusked  (grain)  the  fine  (shall  be) 
five  krzsh/zalas. 

weapons  were  stolen  during  a  combat,  or  medicines  from  a  very 
sick  man'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh.). 

325.  Instead  of  the  reading  of  the  editions, '  kkiirik&yas  ka.  bhe- 
dane,' Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  have  '  sthurikaya\r  £a 
bhedane,'  which  is  no  doubt  the  correct  version,  the  vulgata  being 
caused  by  a  mislecture  of  the  old  form  of  the  letter  '  tha.'  Kull. 
and  Ragh.  explain  the  phrase  in  the  manner  given  above,  and  Gov., 
who  reads  '  nasa[si]kayaj  £a  bhedane,'  agrees  with  them.  Medh., 
on  the  other  hand,  says  that  sthurika  means  'an  ox '  (balivarda^), 
and  the  phrase  must  be  taken  '  for  pricking  with  a  goad  (and  using 
for  one's  purpose)  the  ox  (of  another  man).'  Nar.  finally  asserts 
that  sthurika  means  '  a  load  placed  on  an  ox,'  and  interprets  the 
words  by '  for  cutting  open  a  sack  carried  by  an  ox  and  abstracting 
its  contents.' 

326-331.  Vi.V,  83-86. 

328.  'Other  things  that  come  from  beasts,'  i.  e.  'skins,  horns, 
goro^ana,  &c.'  (Gov.,  Nar.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

329.  '  Other  things  of  a  similar  kind,'  i.  e. '  red  arsenic,  red  lead, 
&c.'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  other  eatables'  (Nand.). 

330.  Gaut.  XII,  18.     Gov.  reads  alpeshu,  'for  a  little  unhusked 


LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  331, 


331.  For  husked  grain,  vegetables,  roots,  and 
fruit  the  fine  (shall  be)  one  hundred  (pa^as)  if  there 
is  no  connexion  (between  the  owner  and  the  thief), 
fifty  (pa^as)  if  such  a  connexion  exists. 

332.  An  offence  (of  this  description),  which  is 
committed  in  the  presence  (of  the  owner)  and  with 
violence,  will  be  robbery ;  if  (it  is  committed)  in  his 
absence,  it  will  be  theft ;  likewise  if  (the  possession 
of)  anything  is  denied  after  it  has  been  taken. 

333.  On  that  man  who  may  steal  (any  of)  the 
above-mentioned  articles,  when  they  are  prepared 
for  (use),  let  the  king  inflict  the  first  (or  lowest) 
amercement ;  likewise  on  him  who  may  steal  (a 
sacred)  fire  out  of  the  room  (in  which  it  is  kept). 

334.  With  whatever  limb  a  thief  in  any  way 
commits  (an  offence)  against  men,  even  of  that 
(the  king)  shall  deprive  him  in  order  to  prevent 
(a  repetition  of  the  crime). 

(grain),'  instead  of  anyeshu, '  other.'   '  Five  knsrmalas/  i.  e.  *  of  gold' 
(Medh.), '  of  gold  or  silver'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

331.  Niranvaye,  'if  there  be  no  connexion  (between  the  owner 
and  the  thief)/  means  according  to  Medh.  either  'if  there  be  no 
connexion  by  friendly  mutual  leading,'  or  '  if  there  be  no  connexion 
such  as  residence  in  the  same  village,'  or  'if  there  was  no  watch- 
man in  the  field.'  Gov.  and  N&r.  agree  with  the  first  explanation, 
Kull.  and  Ragh.  with  the  second;  but  see  above,  verse  198. 

332.  Y&gri.  II,  230.  Medh.  and  Nar.  place  this  verse  after  the 
next. 

333.  '  Prepared  for  use,'  i.e. '  for  eating'  (Medh.,  Nar.),  or '  thread 
worked  into  cloth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  'Fire/  i.e.  either 
the  sacred  fire  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  also  the  common  fire 
(Gov.).  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  jatam, '  one  hundred  pawas/  instead 
of  adyam,  'the  lowest  amercement/  which  latter  reading  Medh. 
mentions  too. 

334.  Pratyadcraya,  'in  order  to  prevent  (a  repetition  of  the 
offence),'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Medh. 
and  Nar.  '  in  order  to  deter  (others).' 


VIII,  34*.  THEFT.  313 

335.  Neither  a  father,  nor  a  teacher,  nor  a  friend, 
nor  a  mother,  nor  a  wife,  nor  a  son,  nor  a  domestic 
priest  must  be  left  unpunished  by  a  king,  if  they  do 
not  keep  within  their  duty. 

336.  Where  another  common  man  would  be  fined 
one  karshapa/za,  the  king  shall  be  fined  one  thou- 
sand ;  that  is  the  settled  rule. 

337.  In  (a  case  of)  theft  the  guilt  of  a  6udra 
shall  be  eightfold,  that  of  a  VaLsya  sixteenfold,  that 
of  a  Kshatriya  two-and- thirty  fold, 

338.  That  of  a  Brahma^a  sixty-fourfold,  or  quite 
a  hundredfold,  or  (even)  twice  four-and-sixtyfold ; 
(each  of  them)  knowing  the  nature  of  the  offence. 

339.  (The  taking  of)  roots  and  of  fruit  from  trees, 
of  wood  for  a  (sacrificial)  fire,  and  of  grass  for  feed- 
ing cows,  Manu  has  declared  (to  be)  no  theft. 

340.  A  Brahma^a,  seeking  to  obtain  property 
from  a  man  who  took  what  was  not  given  to  him, 
either  by  sacrificing  for  him  or  by  teaching  him,  is 
even  like  a  thief. 

341.  A  twice-born  man,  who  is  travelling  and 
whose  provisions  are  exhausted,  shall  not  be  fined, 
if  he  takes  two  stalks  of  sugar-cane  or  two  (esculent) 
roots  from  the  field  of  another  man. 


335.  Y&gn.  I,  357. 

336.  The  king  shall  throw  the  money,  due  as  a  fine  for  an 
offence  he  may  have  committed,  into  the  water  or  give  it  to  Brah- 
ma^as  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  in  accordance  with  IX,  245. 

337-338.  Gaut.  XII,  15-17. 

337.  '  The  guilt'  means  of  course  that  the  offender  has  to  pay 
a  fine  in  proportion. 

339.  Ap.  I,  28,  3  ;  Gaut.  XII,  28;  Y&gri.  II,  166.  According  to 
Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.,  the  condition  is  that  the  things 
taken  were  unenclosed. 

341.  Gaut.  XII,  49-50;  see  also  below,  IX,  239,  241. 


314  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII,  342. 

342.  He  who  ties  up  unbound  or  sets  free  tied 
up  (cattle  of  other  men),  he  who  takes  a  slave, 
a  horse,  or  a  carriage  will  have  incurred  the  guilt 
of  a  thief. 

343.  A  king  who  punishes  thieves  according  to 
these  rules,  will  gain  fame  in  this  world  and  after 
death  unsurpassable  bliss. 

344.  A  king  who  desires  to  gain  the  throne  of 
Indra  and  imperishable  eternal  fame,  shall  not,  even 
for  a  moment,  neglect  (to  punish)  the  man  who 
commits  violence. 

345.  He  who  commits  violence  must  be  con- 
sidered as  the  worst  offender,  (more  wicked)  than 
a  defamer,  than  a  thief,  and  than  he  who  injures 
(another)  with  a  staff. 

346.  But  that  king  who  pardons  the  perpetrator 
of  violence  quickly  perishes  and  incurs  hatred. 

347.  Neither  for  friendships  sake,  nor  for  the 
sake  of  great  lucre,  must  a  king  let  go  perpetrators 
of  violence,  who  cause  terror  to  all  creatures. 

348.  Twice-born  men  may  take  up  arms  when 
(they  are)  hindered  (in  the  fulfilment  of)  their 
duties,  when  destruction  (threatens)  the  twice-born 
castes  (vama)  in  (evil)  times, 

342.  '  Takes  a  slave,  &c.,'  i.  e. '  makes  them  do  his  work'  (Nar.). 
The  other  commentators  think  of  actual  theft. 

344.  Sahasa,  'violence,'  comprises  according  to  Medh.  robbery 
(see  also  above,  verse  332),  rape,  arson,  cutting  clothes,  or  forcibly 
destroying  property. 

348-351.  Gaut.  VII,  25 ;  Vas.  Ill,  15-18,  24  ;  Baudh.  1, 18-23 ; 
Vi.V,  189-192. 

348.  I.  e.  when  robbers  and  so  forth  do  not  allow  the  twice-born 
to  offer  sacrifices  or  to  fulfil  other  sacred  duties  (Medh.),  or  when 
in  times  of  a  foreign  invasion  (Gov.,  KulL,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  of  a 
famine  (Nar.),  the  twice-born  castes  are  threatened  by  an  improper 
intermixture  (sa#zkara). 


VITI,35g.  ADULTERY.  315 

349.  In  their  own  defence,  in  a  strife  for  the  fees 
of  officiating  priests,  and  in  order  to  protect  women 
and  Brahma^as ;  he  who  (under  such  circumstances) 
kills  in  the  cause  of  right,  commits  no  sin. 

350.  One  may  slay  without  hesitation  an  assassin 
who  approaches  (with  murderous  intent),  whether  (he 
be  one's)  teacher,  a  child  or  an  aged  man,  or  a  Brah- 
ma/za  deeply  versed  in  the  Vedas. 

351.  By  killing  an  assassin  the  slayer  incurs  no 
guilt,  whether  (he  does  it)  publicly  or  secretly ;  in 

that  case  fury  recoils  upon  fury.  »    «j\  >.  ni 

352.  Men  who  commit  adultery  with  the  wives  of    I'    I'' 
others,  the  king  shall  cause  to  be  marked  by  punish- 
ments which  cause  terror,  and  afterwards  banish.         ^K  f    JL/ 

353.  For  by  (adultery)  is  caused  a  mixture  of  the  I     ' 
castes   (vanza)    among   men ;    thence  (follows)  sin,    1, 
which  cuts  up  even  the  roots  and  causes  the  destruc- 
tion of  everything. 

354.  A  man  formerly  accused  of  (such)  offences, 
who  secretly  converses  with  another  man's  wife, 
shall  pay  the  first  (or  lowest)  amercement. 

355.  But  a  man,  not  before  accused,  who  (thus) 
speaks  with  (a  woman)  for  some  (reasonable)  cause, 
shall  not  incur  any  guilt,  since  in  him  there  is  no 
transgression. 

350.  According  to  Kull.  the  condition  is  that  one  must  be  unable 
to  save  oneself  by  flight,  according  to  N&r.  one  must  not  wound 
such  a  man  '  excessively/ 

351.  'Secretly,'  i.e.  'by  incantations  or  spells'  (Gov.,  Nar., 
Nand.). 

353.  I.  e.  if  a  mixture  of  the  castes  takes  place,  the  sacrifices 
cannot  be  offered  properly,  because  duly  qualified  sacrificers  are 
wanting.  If  sacrifices  are  not  duly  offered,  no  rain  will  fall  (see 
above,  III,  76),  and  everything  will  perish  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
R*gh.). 

354-358.  Ap.  II,  26,  18-19 ;  Y%».  II,  284. 


r 

■A 


3  1 6  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  356. 

356.  He  who  addresses  the  wife  of  another  man 
at  a  Tirtha,  outside  the  village,  in  a  forest,  or  at 
the  confluence  of  rivers,  shall  suffer  (the  punishment 
for)  adulterous  acts  (sawgraha^a). 

357.  Offering  presents  (to  a  woman),  romping 
(with  her),  touching  her  ornaments  and  dress,  sitting 
with  her  on  a  bed,  all  (these  acts)  are  considered 
adulterous  acts  (sawgraha^a). 

358.  If  one  touches  a  woman  in  a  place  (which 
ought)  not  (to  be  touched)  or  allows  (oneself  to  be 
touched  in  such  a  spot),  all  (such  acts  done)  with 
mutual  consent  are  declared  (to  be)  adulterous  (sa//z- 
graha/za). 

359.  A  man  who  is  not  a  Brahma^a  ought  to 
suffer  death  for  adultery  (sawgraha^a) ;  for  the 
wives  of  all  the  four  castes  even  must  always  be 

(|_     carefully  guarded. 

360.  Mendicants,  bards,  men  who  have  performed 
the  initiatory  ceremony  of  a  Vedic  sacrifice,  and  arti- 
sans are  not  prohibited  from  speaking  to  married 
women. 


356.  'A  Tirtha/  i.  e. '  a  place  on  the  river-bank  where  the  women 
fetch  water'  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  The  punishment  is  the  highest 
amercement  (Kull.).     Nand.  places  this  verse  after  357. 

358.  Nand.  says, '  If  one  touches  a  woman  in  a  lonely  place.' 
Gov.  also  mentions  this  explanation. 

359.  According  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.  this  rule  refers  to  adultery 
committed  by  a  -Sudra  with  a  Brahmarai  (Ragh.)  or  to  the  violation 
of  a  Brahmarci  by  a  Sudra  (Gov.,  Kull.).  Medh.,  too,  thinks  that 
a  -Sudra  alone  is  to  suffer  capital  punishment  for  adultery  with  an 
Aryan  woman.  Nand.,  finally,  says  that  Kshatriyas,  Vauyas,  and 
-Sudras  are  meant,  who  offend  with  a  female  of  a  higher  caste. 
Possibly  the  correct  explanation  of  prawantaw  dawdam,'  death/  may, 
however,  be  ■  a  punishment,  even  death.'  This  rendering  at  least 
removes  all  the  difficulties  created  by  the  parallel  passages  and 
the  following  verses. 


VIII,  365-  ADULTERY.  3 1 J 

361.  Let  no  man  converse  with  the  wives  of 
others  after  he  has  been  forbidden  (to  do  so) ;  but 
he  who  converses  (with  them),  in  spite  of  a  prohi- 
bition, shall  be  fined  one  suvama. 

362.  This  rule  does  not  apply  to  the  wives  of 
actors  and  singers,  nor  (of)  those  who  live  on  (the 
intrigues  of)  their  own  (wives) ;  for  such  men  send 
their  wives  (to  others)  or,  concealing  themselves, 
allow  them  to  hold  criminal  intercourse. 

363.  Yet  he  who  secretly  converses  with  such 
women,  or  with  female  slaves  kept  by  one  (master), 
and  with  female  ascetics,  shall  be  compelled  to  pay 
a  small  fine. 

364.  He  who  violates  an  unwilling  maiden  shall 
instantly  suffer  corporal  punishment ;  but  a  man  who 
enjoys  a  willing  maiden  shall  not  suffer  corporal 
punishment,  if  (his  caste  be)  the  same  (as  hers). 

365.  From  a  maiden  who  makes  advances  to  a 
(man  of)  high  (caste),  he  shall  not  take  any  fine ; 
but  her,  who  courts  a  (man  of)  low  (caste),  let  him 
force  to  live  confined  in  her  house. 

361.  Y&gn.  II,  285. 

362.  Baudh.  II,  4,  3.  I  translate  Tarawa  according  to  the  com- 
mentators by  '  actors  and  singers/  but  it  may  also  be  the  name  of 
a  caste  which  is  well  known  in  Western  India. 

363.  '  Female  ascetics/  i.  e.  '  Rakshakas  (?),  -Silamitras  (?),  and  so 
forth '  (Medh.),  or  '  Buddhist  nuns'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nar.  says 
'  female  mendicants.'  It  deserves  to  be  noted  that  according  to  a 
passage  attributed  by  Gov.  and  Nar.  to  Baudhayana,  but  not  found 
in  our  text,  '  some'  permitted  even  orthodox  females  to  become 
ascetics.  Female  ascetics  were  probably  in  ancient  India  as  common 
as  they  are  now,  and  were  considered  equally  disreputable. 

364-368.  Yagn.  II,  288. 

365.  'From  a  maiden/  i.e.  'from  her  relatives  or  guardians' 
(Medh.).  According  to  Kull.  and  Nar.  the  girl  is  to  be  fettered, 
according  to  Medh.  to  be  guarded  by  her  relatives.  The  confine- 
ment is  to  last  until  she  is  cured  of  her  attachment. 


r 


i 


3  1 8  LAWS   OF    MANU.  VIII,  366. 

366.  A  (man  of)  low  (caste)  who  makes  love  to 
a  maiden  (of)  the  highest  (caste)  shall  suffer  corporal 
punishment ;  he  who  addresses  a  maiden  (of)  equal 
(caste)  shall  pay  the  nuptial  fee,  if  her  father 
desires  it. 

367.  But  if  any  man  through  insolence  forcibly 
contaminates  a  maiden,  two  of  his  fingers  shall  be 
instantly  cut  off,  and  he  shall  pay  a  fine  of  six 
hundred  (pa/zas). 

368.  A  man  (of)  equal  (caste)  who  defiles  a 
willing  maiden  shall  not  suffer  the  amputation  of 
his  fingers,  but  shall  pay  a  fine  of  two  hundred 
(pa/zas)  in  order  to  deter  him  from  a  repetition  (of 
the  offence). 

369.  A  damsel  who  pollutes  (another)  damsel 
must  be  fined  two  hundred  (pa/zas),  pay  the  double 
of  her  (nuptial)  fee,  and  receive  ten  (lashes  with 
a)  rod. 

370.  But  a  woman  who  pollutes  a  damsel  shall 
instantly  have  (her  head)  shaved  or  two  fingers  cut 
off,  and  be  made  to  ride  (through  the  town)  on 
a  donkey. 

371.  If  a  wife,  proud  of  the  greatness  of  her 
relatives  or  (her  own)  excellence,  violates  the  duty 
which  she  owes  to  her  lord,  the  king  shall  cause 

366.  The  meaning  of  the  second  clause  is  that  if  the  father 
wishes  it,  the  offender  is  to  marry  the  girl,  after  paying  the  nuptial 
fee  (Kull.,  Nar.).  If  the  father  does  not  wish  to  receive  the  fee, 
the  offender  is  to  pay  an  equal  sum  as  a  fine  to  the  king  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Ragh.). 

370.  According  to  Medh.  and  Nar.  the  verse  prescribes  three 
different  punishments,  and  a  Brahmam  offender  is  to  be  shaved,  a 
Kshatriya  to  be  led  through  the  streets  on  a  donkey,  while  women 
of  other  castes  are  to  lose  two  fingers.  According  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.  the  punishment  is  to  be  regulated  by  the  circumstances. 

371-372.  Gaut.  XXIII,  14-15;  Vi.  V,  18. 


¥111)377-  ADULTERY.  319 

her  to  be  devoured  by  dogs  in  a  place  frequented  li 
by  many.  * 

372.  Let  him  cause  the  male  offender  to  be  burnt  o4 
on  a  red-hot  iron  bed ;  they  shall  put  logs  under  it,  .j 
(until)  the  sinner  is  burned  (to  death). 

3  j 3.  On  a  man  (once)  convicted,  who  is  (again) 
accused  within  a  year,  a  double  fine  (must  be  in- 
flicted) ;  even  thus  (must  the  fine  be  doubled)  for 
(repeated)  intercourse  with  a  Vratya  and  a  K&ndaM. 

374.  A  6Yidra  who  has  intercourse  with  a  woman  | 
of  a  twice-born  caste  (vanza),  guarded  or  unguarded, 
(shall  be  punished  in  the  following  manner) :  if  she  jA 
was  unguarded,  he  loses  the  part  (offending)  and  all 
his  property ;  if  she  was  guarded,  everything  (even 
his  life). 

375.  (For  intercourse  with  a  guarded  Brahmam) 
a  VaLrya  shall  forfeit  all  his  property  after  imprison- 
ment for  a  year ;  a  Kshatriya  shall  be  fined  one 
thousand  (pa/zas)  and  be  shaved  with  the  urine  (of 
an  ass). 

376.  If  a  Vai^ya  or  a  Kshatriya  has  connexion 
with  an  unguarded  Brahma/d,  let  him  fine  the 
Vaisya  five  hundred  (pa^as)  and  the  Kshatriya  one 
thousand. 

377.  But  even  these  two,  if  they  offend  with  a 

373.  'A  Vratya,'  i.e. '  the  wife  of  an  Aryan  who  has  not  been  ini- 
tiated' (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.) ;  see  above,  II,  39 ;  or  '  one  not  married 
in  proper  time'  (Nar.  and  Medh.),  which  latter  attempts  also  another 
explanation,  'a  public  woman'  or  'one  common  to  several  men/ 
The  fine  intended  is  two  thousand  pa^as  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

374.  Ap.  II,  26,  20;  27,  9;  Gaut.  XII,  2-3;  Vas.  XXI,  5,  5; 
Baudh.  II,  3,  52;  Yagfi.  II,  286,  294.  'Guarded,'  i.e.  'by  her 
husband  or  relatives'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

377.  Ap.  II,  26,  20;  Vas.  XXI,  2-3;  Yag-w.  II,  286.  'Like  a 
-Sudra,'  see  verse  374. 


320  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  378. 

Brahma/zi  (not  only)  guarded  (but  the  wife  of  an 
eminent  man),  shall  be  punished  like  a  6udra  or 
be  burnt  in  a  fire  of  dry  grass. 

378.  A  Brahma^a  who  carnally  knows  a  guarded 
Brahma^i  against  her  will,  shall  be  fined  one  thou- 
sand (pa^as) ;  but  he  shall  be  made  to  pay  five 
hundred,  if  he  had  connexion  with  a  willing  one. 

379.  Tonsure  (of  the  head)  is  ordained  for  a 
Brahma^a  (instead  of)  capital  punishment ;  but  (men 
of)  other  castes  shall  suffer  capital  punishment. 

380.  Let  him  never  slay  a  Brahma^a,  though  he 
have  committed  all  (possible)  crimes  ;  let  him  banish 
such  an  (offender),  leaving  all  his  property  (to  him) 
and  (his  body)  unhurt. 

381.  No  greater  crime  is  known  on  earth  than 
slaying  a  Brahma/za ;  a  king,  therefore,  must  not 
even  conceive  in  his  mind  the  thought  of  killing 
a  Brahma/za. 

382.  If  a  VaLsya  approaches  a  guarded  female 
of  the  Kshatriya  caste,  or  a  Kshatriya  a  (guarded) 
Vaiiya  woman,  they  both  deserve  the  same  punish- 
ment as  in  the  case  of  an  unguarded  Brahma/za 
female. 

383.  A  Brahma/za  shall  be  compelled  to  pay  a 
fine  of  one  thousand  (pa/zas)  if  he  has  intercourse 
with  guarded  (females  of)  those  two  (castes) ;  for 
(offending  with)  a  (guarded)  .Sudra  female  a  fine  of 
one  thousand  (pa/zas  shall  be  inflicted)  on  a  Ksha- 
triya or  a  Vai^ya. 

384.  For  (intercourse  with)  an  unguarded  Ksha- 
triya a  fine  of  fivQ  hundred  (pa/zas  shall  fall)  on  a 


382.  According  to   the   commentators   the  rule  of  verse   376 
applies. 


VIII,  390.  MISCELLANEOUS    RULES.  32 1 

Vaisya ;  but  (for  the  same  offence)  a  Kshatriya  shall 
be  shaved  with  the  urine  (of  a  donkey)  or  (pay)  the 
same  fine. 

385.  A  Brahma/za  who  approaches  unguarded 
females  (of  the)  Kshatriya  or  VaLsya  (castes),  or 
a  6udra  female,  shall  be  fined  five  hundred  (pa/zas) ; 
but  (for  intercourse  with)  a  female  (of  the)  lowest 
(castes),  one  thousand. 

386.  That  king  in  whose  town  lives  no  thief,  no 
adulterer,  no  defamer,  no  man  guilty  of  violence, 
and  no  committer  of  assaults,  attains  the  world  of 
.Sakra  (Indra). 

387.  The  suppression  of  those  five  in  his  domi- 
nions secures  to  a  king  paramount  sovereignty 
among  his  peers  and  fame  in  the  world. 

388.  A  sacrificer  who  forsakes  an  officiating 
priest,  and  an  officiating  priest  who  forsakes  a 
sacrificer,  (each  being)  able  to  perform  his  work 
and  not  contaminated  (by  grievous  crimes),  must 
each  be  fined  one  hundred  (pa^as). 

389.  Neither  a  mother,  nor  a  father,  nor  a  wife, 
nor  a  son  shall  be  cast  off;  he  who  casts  them  off, 
unless  guilty  of  a  crime  causing  loss  of  caste,  shall 
be  fined  by  the  king  six  hundred  (pa;/as). 

390.  If  twice-born  men  dispute  among  each  other 

385.  'A  female  of  the  lowest  castes,' i.e.  *  a  iEaW&li '  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.),  or  '  belonging  to  the  castes  of  washermen,  leather-workers, 
actors,  basket-makers,  fishermen,  Medas,  or  Bhillas '  (Nar.). 

386.  Vi.V,  196. 

388.  'An  officiating  priest,'  i.  e. '  one  who  has  sacrificed  for  his 
family  since  many  generations'  (Gov.,  Nar.). 

389.  Vi.V,  163;  Yagri.  II,  237.  *  Shall  not  be  cast  off,'  i.e.  'shall 
not  be  refused  maintenance  or  the  due  respect'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

390.  'Of  the  orders,'  i.e.  'of  the  four  orders'  (Nar.,  Ragh.),  or 
'of  the  householders'  (Gov.,  Kull.).    Medh.  and  Nand.  take  a^rama 

05]  v 


322 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


VIIT,  391. 


concerning  the  duty  of  the  orders,  a  king  who  desires 
his  own  welfare  should  not  (hastily)  decide  (what  is) 
the  law. 

391.  Having  shown  them  due  honour,  he  should, 
with  (the  assistance  of)  Brahma/zas,  first  soothe 
them  by  gentle  (speech)  and  afterwards  teach  them 
their  duty. 

392.  A  Brahma^a  who  does  not  invite  his  next 
neighbour  and  his  neighbour  next  but  one,  (though) 
both  (be)  worthy  (of  the  honour),  to  a  festival  at 
which  twenty  Brahma^as  are  entertained,  is  liable 
to  a  fine  of  one  masha. 

393.  A  .SVotriya  who  does  not  entertain  a  virtuous 
6rotriya  at  auspicious  festive  rites,  shall  be  made  to 
pay  him  twice  (the  value  of)  the  meal  and  a  masha 
of  gold  (as  a  fine  to  the  king). 

394.  A  blind  man,  an  idiot,  (a  cripple)  who  moves 
with  the  help  of  a  board,  a  man  full  seventy  years 
old,  and  he  who  confers  benefits  on  .SVotriyas,  shall 
not  be  compelled  by  any  (king)  to  pay  a  tax. 

not  in  the  sense  of '  order,'  but  of '  hermitage,'  and  '  twice-born  men' 
in  the  sense  of  'hermits.'  Nar.  explains  na  vibruyat,  'shall  not 
(hastily)  decide,'  by  '  shall  not  wrongly  decide  by  himself.' 

392.  Vi.  V,  94;  Y&gn.  II,  263.  'A  festival/  i.  e.  '  a  wedding 
and  so  forth'  (Medh.),  or  'at  which  a  dinner  is  given'  (Nand.). 
Anuvejya,  'his  next  neighbour  but  one'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  means 
according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nand.  '  he  who  lives  at  the  back  of 
his  house,'  while  the  neighbour  living  opposite  is  the  prativcsya. 
'  Twenty,'  i.e. '  twenty  or  more  other  Brahmawas'  (Gov.).  'A  masha,' 
i.  e. '  of  silver'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  of  gold'  (Medh.,  Nar.). 

393.  'A  virtuous  Srotriya,'  i.  e. '  a  neighbour'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.), 
or  '  living  in  the  same  village'  (Nar.).  Medh.  says, '  one  who  is  not 
a  neighbour.' 

394.  Ap.  II,  26,  10-15;  Vas.  XIX,  23-24.  '(A  cripple)  who 
moves  with  the  help  of  a  board'  is  not  an  uncommon  sight  in  the 
streets  of  Indian  towns.  'By  any  (king),'  i.e.  'even  by  one  whose 
treasury  is  empty.' 


VIII,  399-  MISCELLANEOUS    RULES.  323 

395.  Let  the  king  always  treat  kindly  a  6rotriya, 
a  sick  or  distressed  man,  an  infant  and  an  aged  or 
an  indigent  man,  a  man  of  high  birth,  and  an  honour- 
able man  (Arya). 

396.  A  washerman  shall  wash  (the  clothes  of  his 
employers)  gently  on  a  smooth  board  of  .5almali- 
wood ;  he  shall  not  return  the  clothes  (of  one  person) 
for  those  (of  another),  nor  allow  anybody  (but  the 
owner)  to  wear  them. 

397.  A  weaver  (who  has  received)  ten  palas  (of 
thread),  shall  return  (cloth  weighing)  one  pala  more ; 
he  who  acts  differently  shall  be  compelled  to  pay 
a  fine  of  twelve  (pa;zas). 

398.  Let  the  king  take  one-twentieth  of  that 
(amount)  which  men,  well  acquainted  with  the  settle- 
ment of  tolls  and  duties  (and)  skilful  in  (estimating 
the  value  of)  all  kinds  of  merchandise,  may  fix  as 
the  value  for  each  saleable  commodity. 

399.  Let  the  king  confiscate  the  whole  property  of 
(a  trader)  who  out  of  greed  exports  goods  of  which 
the  king  has  a  monopoly  or  (the  export  of  which  is) 
forbidden. 

396.  Yagri.  II,  238.  -Salmali,  or  cotton-tree  wood,  is  naturally 
soft  (Medh.). 

397.  Yagn.  II,  179.  Instead  of 'twelve  (pawas),'  (Kull.,  Ragh.), 
Medh.  proposes  '  twelve  (palas),'  Gov.  '  twelve  (times  the  value  of 
the  thread),'  and  Nar.  '  one-twelfth  (of  the  value  of  the  thread).' 
Nand.  reads  da.raphalam  and  ekaphaladhikam,  and  says  that  the 
weaver  is  to  pay  to  the  king  the  profit  of  each  eleventh  piece  of 
work  which  he  performs. 

398.  Yagn.  II,  261.  Instead  of « of  that  (amount),'  (Medh.,  Nar.), 
Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  say  '  of  the  profit  on  that.' 

399.  Yagn.  II,  261.  Medh.  gives  as  instances  of  monopolies, 
elephants ;  in  Karaiir,  saffron ;  in  the  east,  fine  cloth  and  wool ;  in 
the  west,  horses ;  in  the  south,  precious  stones  and  pearls.  Saffron 
is  still  a  royal  monopoly  in  Ka^mir. 

Y  2 


324  LAWS    OF   MANU.  VIII,  400. 

400.  He  who  avoids  a  custom-house  (or  a  toll),  he 
who  buys  or  sells  at  an  improper  time,  or  he  who 
makes  a  false  statement  in  enumerating  (his  goods), 
shall  be  fined  eight  times  (the  amount  of  duty)  which 
he  tried  to  evade. 

401.  Let  (the  king)  fix  (the  rates  for)  the  purchase 
and  sale  of  all  marketable  goods,  having  (duly)  con- 
sidered whence  they  come,  whither  they  go,  how  long 
they  have  been  kept,  the  (probable)  profit  and  the 
(probable)  outlay. 

402.  Once  in  Hyg  nights,  or  at  the  close  of  each 
fortnight,  let  the  king  publicly  settle  the  prices  for 
the  (merchants). 

403.  All  weights  and  measures  must  be  duly 
marked,  and  once  in  six  months  let  him  re-examine 
them. 

404.  At  a  ferry  an  (empty)  cart  shall  be  made  to  pay 
one  pa^a,  a  mans  (load)  half  a  pa^a,  an  animal  and 
a  woman  one  quarter  of  a  (pa^a),  an  unloaded  man 
one-half  of  a  quarter. 

405.  Carts  (laden)  with  vessels  full  (of  merchan- 
dise) shall  be  made  to  pay  toll  at  a  ferry  according 
to  the  value  (of  the  goods),  empty  vessels  and  men 
without  luggage  some  trifle. 

400.  Y&gn.  II,  262.  'At  an  improper  time,'  i.e.  'at  night  and 
so  forth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Kull,  Ragh.). 

402.  Yagn.  II,  251.  Gov.  and  Kull.  say,  'let  the  king  settle  the 
price  in  the  presence  of  those  (experts,'  see  verse  398).  The  trans- 
lation follows  Ragh.  The  length  of  the  periods  depends  thereon, 
whether  the  goods  vary  much  in  price.  Medh.  omits  this  and  the 
next  four  verses. 

403.  Vas.  XIX,  13. 

405.  'Empty  vessels,'  i.e.  such  as  serve  for  the  transport  of 
merchandise,  jars,  leather-bags,  baskets,  &c.  Apari^/^ada^,  '  men 
without  luggage,'  may  also  be  translated  '  men  without  attendants.' 
Kull.  and  Ragh.  say,  '  poor  men.' 


VIII,  412.  MISCELLANEOUS    RULES.  325 

406.  For  a  long  passage  the  boat-hire  must  be 
proportioned  to  the  places  and  times ;  know  that 
this  (rule  refers)  to  (passages  along)  the  banks  of 
rivers ;  at  sea  there  is  no  settled  (freight). 

407.  But  a  woman  who  has  been  pregnant  two 
months  or  more,  an  ascetic,  a  hermit  in  the  forest, 
and  Brahma/zas  who  are  students  of  the  Veda, 
shall  not  be  made  to  pay  toll  at  a  ferry. 

408.  Whatever  may  be  damaged  in  a  boat  by  the 
fault  of  the  boatmen,  that  shall  be  made  good  by  the 
boatmen  collectively,  (each  paying)  his  share. 

409.  This  decision  in  suits  (brought)  by  passen- 
gers (holds  good  only)  in  case  the  boatmen  are 
culpably  negligent  on  the  water;  in  the  case  of 
(an  accident)  caused  by  (the  will  of)  the  gods,  no 
fine  can  be  (inflicted  on  them). 

410.  (The  king)  should  order  a  Vai^ya  to  trade, 
to  lend  money,  to  cultivate  the  land,  or  to  tend 
cattle,  and  a  6udra  to  serve  the  twice-born  castes. 

411.  (Some  wealthy)  Brahma^a  shall  compassion- 
ately support  both  a  Kshatriya  and  a  Vaisya,  if  they 
are  distressed  for  a  livelihood,  employing  them  on 
work  (which  is  suitable  for)  their  (castes). 

412.  But  a  Brahma^a  who,  because  he  is  powerful, 
out  of  greed  makes  initiated  (men  of  the)  twice-born 
(castes)  against  their  will  do  the  work  of  slaves,  shall 
be  fined  by  the  king  six  hundred  (pa^as). 

407.  Vi.  V,  132.  According  to  Medh.,  heterodox  monks  must 
pay,  because  the  word  Brahma^a  (taken  above  with  students)  refers 
to  all  the  persons  mentioned. 

408.  'Whatever,'  i.e. 'merchandise'  (Medh.,  Nar.),  or  'luggage' 
(Gov.,  Kull,  Ragh.). 

411.  I.e.  he  shall  employ  a  poor  Kshatriya  as  watchman,  and 
aVaisya  as  herdsman  (Medh.).  If  he  employs  them  in  this  way, 
he  is  not  punishable  (Gov.,  Kull.). 


yt 


i 


326  LAWS    OF    MANU.  VIII,  413. 

413.  But  a  .Sudra,  whether  bought  or  unbought, 
he  may  compel  to  do  servile  work ;  for  he  was 
created  by  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhu)  to  be  the 
slave  of  a  Brahma^a. 

414.  A  .Sudra,  though  emancipated  by  his  master, 
is  not  released  from  servitude ;  since  that  is  innate 
in  him,  who  can  set  him  free  from  it  ? 

415.  There  are  slaves  of  seven  kinds,  (viz.)  he 
who  is  made  a  captive  under  a  standard,  he  who 
serves  for  his  daily  food,  he  who  is  born  in  the 
house,  he  who  is  bought  and  he  who  is  given,  he 
who  is  inherited  from  ancestors,  and  he  who  is 
enslaved  by  way  of  punishment. 

416.  A  wife,  a  son,  and  a  slave,  these  three  are 
declared  to  have  no  property  ;  the  wealth  which  they 
earn  is  (acquired)  for  him  to  whom  they  belong. 

413.'  Whether  bought  or  unbought,'  i.  e. '  whether  maintained  in 
consideration  of  service  or  not'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'whether 
bought  or  hired'  (Nar.). 

414.  Medh.  says  that  the  last  clause  is  'an  arthavada,  because 
further  on  it  will  be  shown  that  a  slave  can  be  emancipated/  Kull. 
thinks  that  an  emancipated  -Sudra  must  still  serve  Brahma^as  or 
other  Aryans  in  order  to  gain  spiritual  merit. 

415.  Medh.  rejects  the  notion  that  a  captive  Kshatriya  can  be 
made  a  slave,  and  thinks  that  a  captured  -Sudra  must  be  meant ;  but 
see  Yfign,  II,  183,  where  it  is  laid  down  that  Kshatriyas  may  become 
the  slaves  of  Brahmawas  and  Vaijyas  of  Brahmawas  and  Kshatriyas. 
Nar.  explains  dhva^ahntaA, '  one  made  a  captive  under  a  standard,' 
by  '  one  who  has  become  a  slave  by  marrying  a  female  slave.'  '  En- 
slaved by  way  of  punishment,'  i.  e. '  because  he  cannot  pay  a  debt 
or  a  fine'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  also  because  he  left  a 
religious  order'  (see  Vi.  V,  152),  (Nar.,  Nand.) 

416.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  the  verse  means 
only  that  these  persons  are  unable  to  dispose  of  their  property 
independently.  Nar.'s  short  note  (adhiga^/^awti  parakarmakara- 
fzadina)  seems  to  indicate  that  he  took  it  to  refer  to  their  incapacity 
to  earn  money  by  working  for  others. 


IX,  2.  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  327 

417.  A  Brahma;2a  may  confidently  seize  the  goods 
of  (his)  6udra  (slave) ;  for,  as  that  (slave)  can  have 
no  property,  his  master  may  take  his  possessions.      — 

418.  (The  king)  should  carefully  compel  VaLsyas 
and  £udras  to  perform  the  work  (prescribed)  for 
them ;  for  if  these  two  (castes)  swerved  from  their 
duties,  they  would  throw  this  (whole)  world  into 
confusion. 

419.  Let  him  daily  look  after  the  completion  of 
his  undertakings,  his  beasts  of  burden,  and  car- 
riages, (the  collection  of)  his  revenues  and  the  dis- 
bursements, his  mines  and  his  treasury. 

420.  A  king  who  thus  brings  to  a  conclusion  all 
the  legal  business  enumerated  above,  and  removes 
all  sin,  reaches  the  highest  state  (of  bliss). 

Chapter  IX. 

1.  I  will  now  propound  the  eternal  laws  for  a 
husband  and  his  wife  who  keep  to  the  path  of 
duty,  whether  they  be  united  or  separated. 

2.  Day  and  night  women  must  be  kept  in  depend- 

417.  'Confidently'  means  according  to  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand. 
'  without  fearing  that  he  commits  the  sin  of  accepting  a  present 
from  a  -Sudra.' 

419.  Karmantan,  'the  completion  of  his  undertakings'  (Kull., 
Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nand. '  the  works/ 
i.e.  'agriculture,  offices  for  collecting  tolls  and  duties,  and  so  forth' 
(Medh.,  Gov.),  according  to  Nar.  '  the  workshops,  e.  g.  for  making 
arms.'     The  last  explanation  is  perhaps  the  best. 

IX.  1.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  the  duties  of  husband 
and  wife  are  placed  in  the  section  on  civil  and  criminal  law,  because 
the  king  can  and  even  is  bound  to  enforce  their  observance  by 
punishments,  if  either  of  the  two  raises  a  complaint.  '  Separated,' 
i.  e. '  when  the  husband  is  absent  or  dead'  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 

2-3.  Gaut.  XVIII,  1 ;  Vas.  V,  1-2  ;  Baudh.  II,  3,  44-45  ;  Vi.  V, 
1-2  ;  Ya^l.  I,  85. 


r 


r 


328  LAWS    OF   MANU.  IX,  3. 

ence  by  the  males  (of)  their  (families),  and,  if  they 

attach  themselves  to  sensual  enjoyments,  they  must 

be  kept  under  one's  control. 

.3.   Her   father   protects    (her)  in   childhood,  her 

husband  protects  (her)  in  youth,  and  her  sons  pro- 
/  tect  (her)  in  old  age ;  a  woman  is  never  fit  for 
1     independence. 

4.  Reprehensible  is  the  father  who  gives  not  (his 
daughter  in  marriage)  at  the  proper  time  ;  reprehen- 
sible is  the  husband  who  approaches  not  (his  wife  in 
due  season),  and  reprehensible  is  the  son  who  does 
not  protect  his  mother  after  her  husband  has  died. 

5.  Women  must  particularly  be  guarded  against 
evil. inclinations,  however  trifling  (they  may  appear); 

^  for,  if  they  are  not  guarded,  they  will  bring  sorrow 
on  two  families. 

6.  Considering  that  the  highest  duty  of  all  castes, 
even  weak  husbands  (must)  strive  to  guard  their 
wives. 

7.  He  who  carefully  guards  his  wife,  preserves  (the 
purity  of)  his  offspring,  virtuous  conduct,  his  family, 
himself,  and  his  (means  of  acquiring)  merit. 

2.  '  Must  be  kept  under  one's  control,'  i.  e. '  they  must  be  restrained 
from  their  vicious  attachment'  (atmano  vaje  sthapya  yatha  na  sa- 
^■yante),  (Nar.) 

4.  Yagn.  I,  64.  c  At  the  proper  time,'  i.  e.  before  she  is  marriage- 
able; see  Gaut.  XVIII,  21;  Vas.  XVII,  67-71.  'The  husband,' 
see  Baudh.  IV,  1,  17-19,  and  above,  III,  45.  After  this  verse  K. 
inserts  another,  not  mentioned  by  the  commentators, '  If  the  wife  is 
guarded,  the  (purity  of  the)  offspring  is  secured  thereby;  if  the 
(purity  of  the)  offspring  is  secured,  oneself  is  secure.' 

6.  Yagn.  I,  81.  'Weak  husbands/  i.e.  'blind,  lame,  or  poor 
ones,  &c.'  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

7.  '  His  family,'  i.  e. '  his  ancestors,'  because  legitimate  sons  alone 
can  offer  the  -Sraddhas  (Medh., Gov., Kull.),  or  'his  relatives,'  because 
adultery  brings  dishonour  (Medh.,  Ragh.),  or  '  the  position  of  the 


TX,  13.  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND   AND    WIFE.  329 

8.  The  husband,  after  conception  by  his  wife,  be-  Jv 
comes  an  embryo  and  is  born  again  of  her ;  for  that  ]g 
is  the  wifehood  of  a  wife  (^aya),  that  he  is  born  ** 
(^ayate)  again  by  her. 

9.  As  the  male  is  to  whom  a  wife  cleaves,  even 
so  is  the  son  whom  she  brings  forth ;  let  him  there- 
fore carefully  guard  his  wife,  in  order  to  keep  his 
offspring  pure. 

10.  No  man  can  completely  guard  women  by 
force ;  but  they  can  be  guarded  by  the  employment 
of  the  (following)  expedients  : 

11.  Let  the  (husband)  employ  his  (wife)  in  the 
collection  and  expenditure  of  his  wealth,  in  keeping 
(everything)  clean,  in  (the  fulfilment  of)  religious 
duties,  in  the  preparation  of  his  food,  and  in  looking 
after  the  household  utensils. 

12.  Women,  confined  in  the  house  under  trust- 
worthy and  obedient  servants,  are  not  (well)  guarded  ; 
but  those  who  of  their  own  accord  keep  guard  over 
themselves,  are  well  guarded. 

13.  Drinking  (spirituous  liquor),  associating  with 
wicked  people,  separation  from  the  husband,  ram- 
bling abroad,  sleeping  (at  unseasonable  hours),  and 
dwelling  in  other  men's  houses,  are  the  six  causes 
of  the  ruin  of  women. 

family'  (Nar.),  or  'his  property'  (Ragh.).  '  Himself,'  i.  e. ' because 
legitimate  children  alone  can  offer  the  -Sraddhas'  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.),  or  '  because  an  adulteress  and  her  paramour  are  likely  to 
attempt  his  life'  (Medh.).  '  His  (means  of  acquiring)  merit,'  i.  e. 
1  because  the  husband  of  an  adulteress  is  not  entitled  to  kindle  the 
sacred  fire'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  N£r.  says, '  his  duty  (as  a  house- 
holder).' 

8.  Ya§™.  I,  56.  The  idea  is  taken  from  the  Veda ;  see  e.g.  Aita- 
reya-brahma/za  VII,  13,  to  which  Kull.  refers. 

13.  'Associating  with  wicked  people,'  i.  e.  'with  other  unfaithful 
wives'  (Nar.),  or  'with  adulterers'  (Ragh.).       > 


330 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IX,  T4. 


r 


f- 


r 


lU 


14.  Women  do  not  care  for  beauty,  nor  is  their 
attention  fixed  on  age;  (thinking),  '(It  is  enough 
that)  he  is  a  man/  they  give  themselves  to  the  hand- 
some and  to  the  ugly. 

15.  Through  their  passion  for  men,  through  their 
mutable  temper,  through  their  natural  heartlessness, 
they  become  disloyal  towards  their  husbands,  how- 
ever carefully  they  may  be  guarded  in  this  (world). 

16.  Knowing  their  disposition,  which  the  Lord  of 
creatures  laid  in  them  at  the  creation,  to  be  such, 
(every)  man  should  most  strenuously  exert  him- 
self to  guard  them. 

17.  (When  creating  them)  Manu  allotted  to 
women  (a  love  of  their)  bed,  (of  their)  seat  and 
(of)  ornament,  impure  desires,  wrath,  dishonesty, 
malice,  and  bad  conduct. 

18.  For  women  no  (sacramental)  rite  (is  per- 
formed) with  sacred  texts,  thus  the  law  is  settled ; 
women  (who  are)  destitute  of  strength  and  destitute 
of  (the  knowledge  of)  Vedic  texts,  (are  as  impure 
as)  falsehood  (itself),  that  is  a  fixed  rule.  m 

19.  And  to  this  effect  many  sacred  texts  are  sung 
also  in  the  Vedas,  in  order  to  (make)  fully  knowi 
the  true   disposition  (of  women) ;   hear  (now  those 
texts  which  refer  to)  the  expiation  of  their  (sins). 

20.  'If  my  mother,  going  astray  and  unfaithful, 
conceived  illicit  desires,  may  my  father  keep  that 
seed  from  me,'  that  is  the  scriptural  text. 


L6 


18.  The  sacramental  rites  meant  are  the  birth-ceremony  and  so 
forth;  see  also  above,  II,  66.  'Destitute  of  strength '  (Gov.),  i.e. 
4  of  firmness,  intelligence,  bodily  strength,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Nand.). 
The  second  half  verse  is  closely  allied  to  that  quoted  Baudh.  II, 
3,  46,  and,  like  the  latter,  probably  a  modification  of  a  Vedic 
passage. 

20.  The  verse  is  a  slightly  altered  Mantra  which  occurs  in  the 


IX,  24.  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND   AND    WIFE.  331 

21.  If  a  woman  thinks  in  her  heart  of  anything 
that  would  pain  her  husband,  the  (above-mentioned 
text)  is  declared  (to  be  a  means  for)  completely  re- 
moving such  infidelity. 

22.  Whatever  be  the  qualities  of  the  man  with 
whom  a  woman  is  united  according  to  the  law,  such 
qualities  even  she  assumes,  like  a  river  (united)  with 
the  ocean. 

23.  Akshamala,  a  woman  of  the  lowest  birth, 
being  united  to  VasishMa  and  Sarangi,  (being 
united)  to  Mandapala,  became  worthy  of  honour. 

24.  These  and  other  females  of  low  birth  have 


Sahkhayana  Grzhya-sutra  III,  13,  and  in  the  Aaturmasya  portion  of 
the  Kanaka  recension  of  the  Black  Ya^ur-veda.  According  to  the 
former  work  it  is  to  be  recited  by  an  Anyatrakarawa, '  the  son  of  a 
paramour.'  But  the  Ka/^as  prescribe  its  use  by  every  sacrificer  who 
offers  a  A^aturmasya  sacrifice.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  probably 
allude  to  the  custom  of  the  latter  school  when  they  say  that  the 
Mantra  must  be  recited  by  every  sacrificer,  and  that  its  viniyoga  or 
destination  is  to  be  repeated  at  the  A^aturmasya  and  at  the  Anvash- 
/aka-jraddha.  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  explain  reta^, 
1  seed,'  by  matnra^orupaw  skannam,  and  vrmktam, '  may  he  keep 
away/  either  by  bha^atam  (svikarotu,  Nar.,  Nand.), '  may  he  take  for 
himself/  or  by  jodhayatu,  'may  he  purify'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 
Medh.  likewise  knows  the  last  explanation.  But  he  gives  also 
another,  reta^  pitu^  sambandhi  yad  reta^  ^ukram,  and  vrmktam, 
apanudatu,  which  comes  nearer  to  that  given  above.  Nidarjanam, 
'a  scriptural  text/  means  according  to  Medh.,  dr/sh/anta^,  'an 
example/  and  the  other  commentators  explain  it  similarly. 

22.  I.e.  as  a  river  becomes  salt  after  uniting  with  the  ocean.  It 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  according  to  the  Indian  poets,  the 
rivers  are  the  wives  of  the  ocean. 

23.  Akshamala  or  Arundhati  was  a  A^aWali  (Gov.,  Ragh.),  and 
became,  as  the  -SYuti  states  (Ragh.),  with  the  permission  of  the 
i\?zshis,  the  wife  of  the  sage  Vasish//$a.  The  story  of  Mandapala  is 
told  in  the  Mahabharata  I,  8335  seq.  (Adhy.  229).  Medh.,  Gov., 
and  K.  read  Sarngi  instead  of  -Sarangi  or  Sarangi. 


332 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


IX,  25. 


r 


F 


,\-v9 


ty 


attained  eminence   in  this  world  by  the  respective 
good  qualities  of  their  husbands. 

25.  Thus  has  been  declared  the  ever  pure 
popular  usage  (which  regulates  the  relations)  be- 
tween husband  and  wife ;  hear  (next)  the  laws  con- 
cerning children  which  are  the  cause  of  happiness  in 
this  world  and  after  death. 

26.  Between  wives  (striya^)  who  (are  destined) 
to  bear  children,  who  secure  many  blessings,  who 
are  worthy  of  worship  and  irradiate  (their)  dwel- 
lings, and  between  the  goddesses  of  fortune  (mya/£, 
who  reside)  in  the  houses  (of  men),  there  is  no 
difference  whatsoever. 

27.  The  production  of  children,  the  nurture  of 
those  born,  and  the  daily  life  of  men,  (of  these 
matters)  woman  is  visibly  the  cause. 

28.  Offspring,  (the  due  performance  of)  religious 
rites,  faithful  service,  highest  conjugal  happiness 
and  heavenly  bliss  for  the  ancestors  and  oneself, 
depend  on  one's  wife  alone. 

29.  She  who,  controlling  her  thoughts,  speech,  and 
acts,  violates  not  her  duty  towards  her  lord,  dwells 
with  him  (after  death)  in  heaven,  and  in  this  world 
is  called  by  the  virtuous  a  faithful  (wife,  sadhvl). 

30.  But  for  disloyalty  to  her  husband  a  wife  is 
censured  among  men,  and  (in  her  next  life)  she  is 
born  in  the  womb  of  a  jackal  and  tormented  by 
diseases,  the  punishment  of  her  sin. 

27.  Instead  of  pratyaham, '  the  daily  (life  of  men),'  Medh.  and 
Nar.  read  pratyartham,  '(the  life  of  men)  in  all  its  details,' and  Gov. 
prityartham,  '  the  friendly  intercourse  of  men,'  because  he  who  has 
no  wife  cannot  entertain  others  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  mentions 
also  another  reading,  pratyardham. 

29.  Identical  with  V,  165. 

30.  Vas.  XXI,  14  ;  see  also  above,  V,  164. 


IX,  36.  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  ^^ 

31.  Listen  (now)  to  the  following  holy  discussion, 
salutary  to  all  men,  which  the  virtuous  (of  the  pre- 
sent day)  and  the  ancient  great  sages  have  held 
concerning  male  offspring. 

32.  They  (all)  say  that  the  male  issue  (of  a 
woman)  belongs  to  the  lord,  but  with  respect  to  the 
(meaning  of  the  term)  lord  the  revealed  texts  differ  ; 
some  call  the  begetter  (of  the  child  the  lord),  others 
declare  (that  it  is)  the  owner  of  the  soil. 

33.  By  the  sacred  tradition  the  woman  is  declared  | 
to  be  the  soil,  the  man  is  declared  to  be  the  seed ; 


the  production  of  all  corporeal  beings  (takes  place) 
through  the  union  of  the  soil  with  the  seed.  J 

34.  In  some  cases  the  seed  is  more  distinguished, 
and  in  some  the  womb  of  the  female ;  but  when 
both  are  equal,  the  offspring  is  most  highly 
esteemed. 

35.  On  comparing   the  seed  and  the  receptacle 
(of  the  seed),  the  seed  is  declared  to  be  more  im-<A 
portant ;  for  the  offspring  of  all  created  beings  is 
marked  by  the  characteristics  of  the  seed. 

36.  Whatever  (kind  of)  seed  is  sown  in  a  field, 
prepared  in  due  season,  (a  plant)  of  that  same  kind, 

32.  Ap.  II,  13,  6-7  ;  Gaut.  XVIII,  9-14  ;  Vas.  XVII,  6-9,  63-64. 
Thus  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.  But  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  K. 
(prima  manu)  read  kartari  instead  of  bhartari,  and  with  this  reading 
the  verse  has  to  be  translated  as  follows  :  '  They  (all)  declare  that  a 
(lawfully  begotten)  son  belongs  to  the  husband,  but  with  respect  to 
the  begetter  (of  a  child  on  another's  wife)  there  is  a  conflict  between 
the  revealed  texts ;  some  declare  the  begetter  (to  be  the  owner  of 
the  son),  others  that  (he  belongs  to  the)  owner  of  the  soil.' 

34.  The  commentators  point  out  the  cases  of  Vyasa  and  i?/shya- 
jrihga  as  instances  of  the  truth  of  the  first  proposition,  and  of 
Dhn'tarash/ra  and  other  Kshetra^-as  as  instances  of  the  second. 
1  Equal,'  i.  e. '  belonging  to  the  same  owner  and  to  the  same  class' 
(Medh.). 


334 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IX,  37- 


marked   with    the    peculiar   qualities    of  the    seed, 
springs  up  in  it. 

3  j.  This  earth,  indeed,  is  called  the  primeval 
womb  of  created  beings  ;  but  the  seed  develops  not 
in  its  development  any  properties  of  the  womb. 

38.  In  this  world  seeds  of  different  kinds,  sown 
at  the  proper  time  in  the  land,  even  in  one  field, 
come  forth  (each)  according  to  its  kind. 

39.  The  rice  (called)  vrlhi  and  (that  called)  sail, 
mudga-beans,  sesamum,  masha-beans,  barley,  leeks, 
and  sugar-cane,  (all)  spring  up  according  to  their 
seed. 

40.  That  one  (plant)  should  be  sown  and  another 
be  produced  cannot  happen ;  whatever  seed  is  sown, 
(a  plant  of)  that  kind  even  comes  forth. 

41.  Never  therefore  must  a  prudent  well- trained 
man,  who  knows  the  Veda  and  its  Angas  and  desires 
long  life,  cohabit  with  another's  wife. 

42.  With  respect  to  this  (matter),  those  acquainted 
with  the  past  recite  some  stanzas,  sung  by  Vayu 
(the  Wind,  to  show)  that  seed  must  not  be  sown 
by  (any)  man  on  that  which  belongs  to  another. 

43.  As  the  arrow,  shot  by  (a  hunter)  who  after- 
wards hits  a  wounded  (deer)  in  the  wound  (made  by 

37.  'Develops  not  any  properties  of  the  womb,' i.  e.  'shows  no 
properties  such  as  being  composed  of  earth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

39.  Vrihi,  i.e.  such  rice  as  ripens  in  sixty  days  (shash/ika);  .rali, 
i.e. '  red  rice,  which  ripens  in  the  cold  season'  (Gov.,  Nar.).  Mudga, 
i.  e.  Phaseolus  Mungo  (mug) ;  masha,  i.  e.  Phaseolus  Radiatus. 

41.  Vi^wana,  'the  knowledge  of  the  Ahgas'  (Kull.),  means 
according  to  Medh.  and  Nar., '  profane  knowledge  ; '  according  to 
Ragh.,  '  the  tradition.'  Nand.  inverts  the  order,  and  says,  'profane 
and  sacred  learning.' 

43.  Or,  according  to  a  second  explanation  offered  by  Medh.,  'As 
the  arrow  of  the  hunter  who  hits  a  wounded  deer  is  shot  into  the 
air  (as  it  were)  and  becomes  useless.' 


IX,  47*  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  335 

another),  is  shot  in  vain,  even  so  the  seed,  sown  on 
what  belongs  to  another,  is  quickly  lost  (to  the 
sower). 

44.  (Sages)  who  know  the  past  call  this  earth 
(przthivi)  even  the  wife  of  Frzthu ;  they  declare  a 
field  to  belong  to  him  who  cleared  away  the  timber, 
and  a  deer  to  him  who  (first)  wounded  it. 

45.  He  only  is  a  perfect  man  who  consists  (of 
three  persons  united),  his  wife,  himself,  and  his  off- 
spring ;  thus  (says  the  Veda),  and  (learned)  Brah- 
ma^as  propound  this  (maxim)  likewise,  '  The  hus- 
band is  declared  to  be  one  with  the  wife/ 

46.  Neither  by  sale  nor  by  repudiation  is  a  wife 
released  from  her  husband ;  such  we  know  the  law 
to  be,  which  the  Lord  of  creatures  (Pra^apati)  made 
of  old. 

47.  Once  is  the  partition  (of  the  inheritance) 
made,  (once  is)  a  maiden  given  in  marriage,  (and) 
once  does  (a  man)  say,  '  I  will  give ;'  each  of  those 
three  (acts  is  done)  once  only. 


44.  '  Though  the  earth,  after  she  belonged  to  Prz'thu,  was 
possessed  by  many  kings,  yet  she  is  called  Prz"thivi,  or  Prz'thvi, 
after  her  first  owner  Pn'thu'  (Medh.,  Nar.). 

45.  In  confirmation  of  the  first  maxim  the  commentators  adduce 
a  passage  of  the  Va^asaneyi-brahmawa ;  see  also  Ap.  II,  14, 16. 

46.  The  meaning  is  that  a  wife,  sold  or  repudiated  by  her  hus- 
hand,  can  never  become  the  legitimate  wife  of  another  who  may 
have  bought  or  received  her  after  she  was  repudiated  (Medh.). 

47.  Yagfi.  I,  65.  'A  partition  (of  the  inheritance),'  i.  e.  '  one 
which  has  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  law,  not  one  made 
unjustly'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  mentions  two  other  ex- 
planations: 1.  *  if  one  of  the  coparceners  complains  afterwards  that 
he  has  received  too  little,  he  is  entitled  only  to  have  the  particular 
point  readjusted,  not  to  annul  the  whole  division;'  2.  'if  after  the 
division  it  appears  that  one  of  the  coparceners  was  disqualified  by 
bodily  defects  and  ought  not  to  have  received  a  share,  the  portion 


336 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IX,  48. 


r 
t 


r 


■^ 


48.  As  with  cows,  mares,  female  camels,  slave- 
girls,  buffalo-cows,  she-goats,  and  ewes,  it  is  not  the 
begetter  (or  his  owner)  who  obtains  the  offspring, 
even  thus  (it  is)  with  the  wives  of  others. 

49.  Those  who,  having  no  property  in  a  field,  but 
possessing  seed-corn,  sow  it  in  another's  soil,  do 
indeed  not  receive  the  grain  of  the  crop  which  may 
spring  up. 

50.  If  (one  man's)  bull  were  to  beget  a  hundred 
calves  on  another  man's  cows,  they  would  belong  to 
the  owner  of  the  cows  ;  in  vain  would  the  bull  have 
spent  his  strength. 

51.  Thus  men  who  have  no  marital  property  in 
women,  but  sow  their  seed  in  the  soil  of  others, 
benefit  the  owner  of  the  woman ;  but  the  giver  of 
the  seed  reaps  no  advantage. 

52.  If  no  agreement  with  respect  to  the  crop  has 
been  made  between  the  owner  of  the  field  and  the 
owner  of  the  seed,  the  benefit  clearly  belongs  to  the 
owner  of  the  field ;  the  receptacle  is  more  important 
than  the .sged.    ^    35  jfr  bv\t^d«^i^ 

53.  But  if  by  a  special  contract  (a  field)  is  made 
over  (to  another)  for  sowing,  then  the  owner  of  the 
seed  and  the  owner  of  the  soil  are  both  considered 
in  this  world  as  sharers  of  the  (crop). 

54.  If  seed   be   carried   by  water   or  wind  into 


made  over  to  him  cannot  be  resumed  by  the  others.'  Nar.  refers 
the  phrase  'I  will  give'  to  a  verbal  promise  to  give  a  girl,  made 
without  a  libation  of  water.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Ragh., 
Nand.,  and  K.  sakrzt  sakn't,  instead  of  satazrc  sakrz't,  '  those  three 
(acts  are  done)  once  among  good  men.'  The  object  of  the  verse 
is  to  show  that  a  marriage  is  indissoluble,  because  a  girl  can  be 
given  once  only  (Kull.,  Nand.). 

50.  Vas.  XVII,  8. 

54.    I  read  with  Gov.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  bigi,  '  the  owner  of  the 


IX,  59-  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND   WIFE.  337 

somebody's  field  and  germinates  (there),  the  (plant 
sprung  from  that)  seed  belongs  even  to  the  owner 
of  the  field,  the  owner  of  the  seed  does  not  receive 
the  crop. 

55.  Know  that  such  is  the  law  concerning  the 
offspring  of  cows,  mares,  slave-girls,  female  camels, 
she-goats,  and  ewes,  as  well  as  of  females  of  birds 
and  buffalo-cows.  __ 

56.  Thus  the  comparative  importance  of  the  seed 
and  of  the  womb  has  been  declared  to  you ;  I  will 
next  propound  the  law  (applicable)  to  women  in 
times  of  misfortune. 

57.  The   wife    of  an    elder    brother   is   for    his  j 
younger  (brother)  the  wife  of  a  Guru  ;  but  the  wife 
of  the  younger  is  declared  (to  be)  the  daughter-in-  j 
law  of  the  elder. 

58.  An  elder  (brother)  who  approaches  the  wife   | 
of  the  younger,  and  a   younger  (brother  who  ap-  ^ 
proaches)  the  wife   of  the   elder,  except   in  times 
of  misfortune,  both  become  outcasts,  even  though  j 
(they  were  duly)  authorised. 

59.  On  failure  of  issue  (by  her  husband)  a  woman 
who  has  been  authorised,  may  obtain,  (in  the)  proper 
(manner  prescribed),  the  desired  offspring  by  (coha- 
bitation with)  a  brother-in-law  or  (with  some  other) 
Sapinda.  (of  the  husband). 

seed/  instead   of  vapta,  '  the   sower  of  the   seed'  (Medh.,  Kull., 
Nand.). 

55.  '  Such  is  the  law/  i.e.  what  has  been  stated  in  verses  48-54. 
,  56.  '  In  times  of  misfortune/  i.e.  'when  there  is  no  male  offspring.' 

57.  Guru  means  here,  according  to  Ragh.,  'the  father.'  As  the 
younger  brother's  wife  is  called  'the  daughter-in-law'  of  the  elder, 
tl)e  explanation  is  probably  correct. 

58-63.  Gaut.  XVIII,  4-8;  Vas.  XVII,  56-61;  Baudh.  II,  4, 
9-10;  Y&gfi.  I,  68-69. 

59.  A  woman  can  be  authorised  by  her  husband,  or  after  his 
[25]  z 


338  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  60 


60.  He  (who  is)  appointed  to  (cohabit  with)  the 
widow  shall  (approach  her)  at  night  anointed  with 
clarified  butter  and  silent,  (and)  beget  one  son,  by  no 
means  a  second. 

61.  Some  (sages),  versed  in  the  law,  considering 
the  purpose  of  the  appointment  not  to  have  been 
attained  by  those  two  (on  the  birth  of  the  first), 
think  that  a  second  (son)  may  be  lawfully  procreated 
on  (such)  women. 

62.  But  when  the  purpose  of  the  appointment 
to  (cohabit  with)  the  widow  has  been  attained  in 
accordance  with  the  law,  those  two  shall  behave 
towards  each  other  like  a  father  and  a  daughter- 
in-law. 

63.  If  those  two  (being  thus)  appointed  deviate 
from  the  rule  and  act  from  carnal  desire,  they  will 
both  become  outcasts,  (as  men)  who  defile  the  bed 
of  a  daughter-in-law  or  of  a  Guru. 

64.  By  twice-born  men  a  widow  must  not  be 
appointed  to  (cohabit  with)  any  other  (than  her  hus- 
band) ;  for  they  who  appoint  (her)  to  another  (man), 
will  violate  the  eternal  law. 

death  by  his  relatives.  '  On  failure  of  issue,'  i.  e. '  of  sons'  (Gov., 
Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  '  of  sons  and  of  an  appointed  daughter'  (Medh.). 
If  the  son  born  is  not  fit  to  offer  the  -S'raddhas,  a  second  may  be 
begot  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

60.  According  to  the  commentators,  the  expression  '  the  widow' 
is  not  intended  to  prohibit  an  appointment  by  a  diseased  or 
impotent  husband. 

61.  ■  Because  the  Sish/as  say,  "  He  who  has  one  son  only,  has  no 
son'"  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

62.  ' Those  two,'  i.e. '  the  elder  brother  and  the  female  appointed.' 

63.  '  Those  two,'  i.  e.  '  an  elder  or  younger  brother/  '  The  rule,' 
see  verse  60.     For  the  las'-  ~*ause,  compare  verse  57. 

64-68.  These  verses  flatly  contradict  the  rules  given  in  the  pre- 
ceding ones.     But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  they  are  a  modern 


IX,  70-  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  339 

65.  In  the  sacred  texts  which  refer  to  marriage 
the  appointment  (of  widows)  is  nowhere  mentioned, 
nor  is  the  re-marriage  of  widows  prescribed  in  the 
rules  concerning  marriage. 

66.  This  practice  which  is  reprehended  by  the 
learned  of  the  twice-born  castes  as  fit  for  cattle  is 
said  (to  have  occurred)  even  among  men,  while 
Vena  ruled. 

67.  That  chief  of  royal  sages  who  formerly 
possessed  the  whole  world,  caused  a  confusion  of 
the  castes  (vanza),  his  intellect  being  destroyed 
by  lust. 

68.  Since  that  (time)  the  virtuous  censure  that 
(man)  who  in  his  folly  appoints  a  woman,  whose 
husband  died,  to  (bear)  children  (to  another  man). 

69.  If  the  (future)  husband  of  a  maiden  dies  after 
troth  verbally  plighted,  her  brother-in-law  shall  wed 
her  according  to  the  following  rule. 

70.  Having,  according  to  the  rule,  espoused  her 
(who  must  be)  clad  in  white  garments  and  be  intent 

addition.  For  the  same  view  is  expressed  by  Ap.  II,  27,  2-6,  and 
was  held,  according  to  Baudh.  II,  3,  34,  by  Aupa^andhani.  More- 
over the  Brzhaspati  Smrz'ti  states  expressly  (Colebrooke  IV,  Dig. 
CLVII)  that  the  contradictory  statement  occurred  in  the  Manava 
Dharmajastra,  known  to  its  author. 

65.  In  his  commentary  on  verse  66  Medh.  points  out  that  in 
other  sacred  texts,  Rig-veda  X,  40,  2,  the  Niyoga  is  mentioned. 

66.  According  to  the  epic  and  Pauramc  tradition  Vena  was-  the 
father  of  Pnthu,  and  a  godless  king,  who  demanded  that  the  sacri- 
fices should  be  offered  to  himself,  not  to  the  gods.  He  was,  there- 
fore, cut  to  pieces  by  the  Brahmawas  with  blades  of  Kma  grass. 
But  hitherto  no  other  passage  has  been  found  where  it  is  stated 
that  he  introduced  the  practice  of  Niyoga.  Possibly  the  assertion 
of  the  Manava  may  have  grown  out  of  the  etymological  import  of 
the  word  vena, '  full  of  desire  or  lust/ 

70.  The  child  born  by  a  female  thus  married  belongs,  as  the 
commentators  point  out,  to  her  deceased  betrothed. 

Z    2 


.. 


r 


i 


34O  LAWS   OF    MANU.  TX,  71 

on  purity,  he  shall  approach  her  once  in  each  proper 
season  until  issue  (be  had). 

71.  Let  no  prudent  man,  after  giving  his  daughter 
to  one  (man),  give  her  again  to  another ;  for  he  who 
gives  (his  daughter)  whom  he  had  before  given, 
incurs  (the  guilt  of)  speaking  falsely  regarding  a 
human  being. 

J2.  Though  (a  man)  may  have  accepted  a  damsel 
in  due  form,  he  may  abandon  (her  if  she  be) 
blemished,  diseased,  or  deflowered,  and  (if  she  have 
^K     been)  given  with  fraud. 

73.  If  anybody  gives  away  a  maiden  possessing 
blemishes  without  declaring  them,  (the  bridegroom) 
may  annul  that  (contract)  with  the  evil-minded  giver. 

74.  A  man  who  has  business  (abroad)  may  de- 
part after  securing  a  maintenance  for  his  wife  ;  for  a 
wife,  even  though  virtuous,  may  be  corrupted  if  she 
be  distressed  by  want  of  subsistence. 

75.  If  (the  husband)  went  on  a  journey  after  pro- 
viding (for  her),  the  wife  shall  subject  herself  to 
restraints  in  her  daily  life ;  but  if  he  departed  with- 
out providing  (for  her),  she  may  subsist  by  blame- 
less manual  work. 

71.  Yagri.  I,  65  ;  Vi.  XXV,  9-10.  Regarding  the  guilt  incurred, 
see  above,  VIII,  98.  Medh.  and  Nand.  say  that  the  verse  is  meant 
to  forbid  the  marriage  of  a  girl  whose  betrothed  died.  But  Kull. 
thinks  that  it  refers  to  all  cases  where  a  betrothal  has  taken  place, 
and  that  it  removes  a  doubt  which  might  arise  through  a  too  strict 
interpretation  of  VIII,  227. 

72.  'In  due  form/  i.e.  'with  a  libation  of  water  and  in  the 
presence  of  Brahma^as'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  '  Blemished/  i.  e. 
'by  evil  bodily  marks'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  'by  being 
of  a  base  family'  (Nar.). 

73.  See  above,  VIII,  205,  224. 

74.  Nand.  inserts  verses  95-96  after  this. 

75.  Yagri.  I,  84.    'Shall  subject  herself  to  restraints  in  her  daily 


IX,  8o.  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  341 

j6.  If  the  husband  went  abroad  for  some  sacred 
duty,  (she)  must  wait  for  him  eight  years,  if  (he 
went)  to  (acquire)  learning  or  fame  six  (years),  if  (he 
went)  for  pleasure  three  years. 

j  j.  For  one  year  let  a  husband  bear  with  a  wife 
who  hates  him  ;  but  after  (the  lapse  of)  a  year  let 
him  deprive  her  of  her  property  and  cease  to  cohabit 
with  her. 

78.  She  who  shows  disrespect  to  (a  husband)  who 
is  addicted  to  (some  evil)  passion,  is  a  drunkard,  or 
diseased,  shall  be  deserted  for  three  months  (and  be) 
deprived  of  her  ornaments  and  furniture. 

79.  But  she  who  shows  aversion  towards  a  mad 
or  outcast  (husband),  a  eunuch,  one  destitute  of 
manly  strength,  or  one  afflicted  with  such  diseases  as 
punish  crimes,  shall  neither  be  cast  off  nor  be  de- 
prived of  her  property. 

80.  She  who   drinks  spirituous  liquor,  is  of  bad 

life/ i.e.  'shall  not  adorn  herself,  nor  visit  the  houses  of  strangers, 
or  go  to  festivals'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

76.  Gaut.  XVIII,  15,  17;  Vas.XVII,  75-80.  Kull,  Nar.,  and 
Ragh.  declare  that  after  the  expiration  of  the  terms  mentioned  the 
wife  shall  go  to  seek  her  husband.  Nand.  says, '  the  meaning  is 
that  no  sin  is  committed  if  she  afterwards  takes  another  husband.' 
Medh.  holds  that  she  shall  support  herself,  as  before,  by  blameless 
occupations  and  remain  chaste.  He  mentions  the  opinion  of 
others,  according  to  which  she  may  take  another  husband  in 
accordance  with  Narada's  and  Parajara's  precepts,  but  rejects  it. 
'  For  pleasure,'  i.  e. '  in  order  to  gain  the  favours  of  another  woman 
whom  he  prefers'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

77.  '  Her  property,'  i.e. '  the  ornaments  and  other  wealth  given  to 
her  by  himself  (Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  '  her  separate  property, 
which  he  may  have  given  to  her'  (stridhana,  Nar.).  The  com- 
mentators add  that  she  must,  however,  be  maintained. 

78.  'Addicted  to  (some  evil)  passion,' i.e. 'to  gambling  and  so 
forth'  (Kull.,  Nar.),  or  '  to  avarice'  (Ragh.). 

80-81.  Baudh.  II,  4,  6;  Y&gfi.  I,  73. 

80.  'Diseased,'  i.e.  'afflicted  with  leprosy  or  the  like'  (Kull.); 


342  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  81. 

conduct,  rebellious,  diseased,  mischievous,  or  waste- 
ful, may  at  any  time  be  superseded  (by  another 
wife). 

8 1.  A  barren  wife  may  be  superseded  in  the 
eighth  year,  she  whose  children  (all)  die  in  the  tenth, 
she  who  bears  only  daughters  in  the  eleventh,  but 
she  who  is  quarrelsome  without  delay. 

82.  But  a  sick  wife  who  is  kind  (to  her  husband) 
and  virtuous  in  her  conduct,  may  be  superseded 
(only)  with  her  own  consent  and  must  never  be 
disgraced. 

83.  A  wife  who,  being  superseded,  in  anger  de- 
parts from  (her  husband's)  house,  must  either  be 
instantly  confined  or  cast  off  in  the  presence  of  the 
family. 

84.  But  she  who,  though  having  been  forbidden, 
drinks  spirituous  liquor  even  at  festivals,  or  goes  to 
public  spectacles  or  assemblies,  shall  be  fined  six 
krzsh/zalas. 

85.  If  twice-born  men  wed  women  of  their  own 
and  of  other  (lower  castes),  the  seniority,  honour, 
and  habitation  of  those  (wives)  must  be  (settled) 
according  to  the  order  of  the  castes  (vama). 

86.  Among  all  (twice-born  men)  the  wife  of  equal 
caste  alone,  not  a  wife  of  a  different  caste  by  any 
means,  shall  personally  attend  her  husband  and 
assist  him  in  his  daily  sacred  rites. 

8  J.  But  he  who  foolishly  causes  that  (duty)  to  be 

1  mischievous,'  i.e. '  who  beats  or  ill-treats  her  children,  servants,  &c.' 
(Medh.,  Nar.,  Kull.). 

83.  'Of  the  family,'  i. e. ' of  her  own  and  the  husband's  family' 
(Medh.),  or  •  of  her  own  family'  (Kull.,  Nar.). 

86.  Vi.  XXVI,  i ;  YSgn.  I,  88.  <  Personally  attend,'  i.  e. '  prepare 
and  bring  his  food,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

87.  Vi.  XXVI,  2.     Instead  of 'by  the  ancients '  (Kull.,  Ragh., 


IX,  93'  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  343 

performed  by  another,  while  his  wife  of  equal  caste 
is  alive,  is  declared  by  the  ancients  (to  be)  as  (despi- 
cable) as  a  Aa/zdala  (sprung  from  the)  Brahma^a 
(caste). 

88.  To  a  distinguished,  handsome  suitor  (of)  equal 
(caste)  should  (a  father)  give  his  daughter  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  prescribed  rule,  though  she  have 
not  attained  (the  proper  age). 

89.  (But)  the  maiden,  though  marriageable,  should 
rather  stop  in  (the  father's)  house  until  death,  than 
that  he  should  ever  give  her  to  a  man  destitute  of 
good  qualities. 

90.  Three  years  let  a  damsel  wait,  though  she  be 
marriageable ;  but  after  that  time  let  her  choose  for 
herself  a  bridegroom  (of)  equal  (caste  and  rank). 

91.  If,  being  not  given  in  marriage,  she  herself 
seeks  a  husband,  she  incurs  no  guilt,  nor  (does)  he 
whom  she  weds. 

92.  A  maiden  who  choses  for  herself,  shall  not 
take  with  her  any  ornaments,  given  by  her  father  or 
her  mother,  or  her  brothers ;  if  she  carries  them 
away,  it  will  be  theft. 

93.  But  he  who  takes  (to  wife)  a  marriageable 

Nand.),  Medh.  says,  '  since  olden  times,'  Nar.  '  in  the  Pura//a.' 
Regarding  the  origin  of  the  ^aw^/alas,  see  below,  X,  12. 

88-92.  Gaut.  XVIII,  20-23;  Vas.  XVII,  69-71;  Baudh.  IV,  1, 
n-14;  Vi.  XXIV,  40-41;  Y&gn.  I,  64. 

88.  'Though  she  have  not  attained  (the  proper  age)/  i.e. 'the  age 
of  eight  years' (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  'before  she  is  bodily  fit  for 
marriage '(Medh.,  Nand.).  Medh.  specially  objects  to  the  first  opinion, 
'  because  men  greedy  of  money  give  even  an  infant  in  marriage.' 

92.  I  read  with  Medh.  and  Nand.,  steyaw  syat,  instead  of  stena 
syat,  'she  will  be  a  thief  (Kull.,  Ragh.,  K.).  Medh.  mentions 
another  reading,  stena^  syat, '  he,  i.e.  the  bridegroom,  will  be  a  thief.' 

93.  Medh.  says  that  this  verse,  according  to  '  some,'  does  not 
belong  to  Manu  (ke/l'id  ahu-6  amanavo  'yam  slokak). 


344  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  94. 


4 


i 


damsel,  shall  not  pay  any  nuptial  fee  to  her  father ; 
for  the  (latter)  will  lose  his  dominion  over  her  in 
consequence  of  his  preventing  (the  legitimate  result 
of  the  appearance  of)  her  menses. 

94.  A  man,  aged  thirty  years,  shall  marry  a 
maiden  of  twelve  who  pleases  him,  or  a  man  of 
twenty-four  a  girl  eight  years  of  age ;  if  (the  per- 
formance of)  his  duties  would  (otherwise)  be  im- 
peded, (he  must  marry)  sooner. 

95.  The  husband  receives  his  wife  from  the  gods, 
(he  does  not  wed  her)  according  to  his  own  will ; 
doing  what  is  agreeable  to  the  gods,  he  must  always 
support  her  (while  she  is)  faithful. 

96.  To  be  mothers  were  women  created,  and  to 
be  fathers  men ;  religious  rites,  therefore,  are  or- 
dained in  the  Veda  to  be  performed  (by  the  hus- 
band) together  with  the  wife. 

97.  If,  after  the  nuptial  fee  has  been  paid  for  a 
maiden,  the  giver  of  the  fee  dies,  she  shall  be  given 
in  marriage  to  his  brother,  in  case  she  consents. 


94.  Medh.  and  Kull.  point  out  that  this  verse  is  not  intended  to 
lay  down  a  hard  and  fast  rule,  but  merely  to  give  instances  of  suit- 
able ages.  '  If  (the  performance  of)  his  duties  would  be  impeded, 
&c.,'  i.  e.  '  if  he  has  finished  his  studentship  earlier,  he  must  marry 
at  once  in  order  to  be  able  to  fulfil  his  duties  as  a  householder' 
(Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

95.  'From  the  gods,'  i.e. 'from  those  mentioned  in  the  Mantras 
recited  at  the  wedding,  e.  g.  from  Bhaga,  Aryaman,  Savitrz',  &c/ 
(Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'from  Agni'  (Nar.),  or  'from  Soma,  the  Gan- 
dharva,  and  Agni'  (Medh.,  Nand.).  Medh.  reads  vindetaniffiaya, 
'shall  wed  without  a  wish  on  his  part,'  but  mentions  the  other 
reading,  vindate  nekkkaya,  too.  According  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.,  a  faithful  wife  must  be  supported,  even  if  she  does  not  love 
her  husband. 

97.  'His  brother,'  i.e. 'his  full  brother,  who  is  even  (as)  the 
deceased  himself  (Nar.).     Regarding   the   nuptial  fee,  and  the 


IX,  104-  DUTIES    OF    HUSBAND    AND    WIFE.  345 

98.  Even  a  6udra  ought  not  to  take  a  nuptial  fee, 
when  he  gives  away  his  daughter  ;  for  he  who  takes 
a  fee  sells  his  daughter,  covering  (the  transaction  by 
another  name). 

99.  Neither  ancients  nor  moderns  who  were  good 
men  have  done  such  (a  deed)  that,  after  promising 
(a  daughter)  to  one  man,  they  gave  her  to  another ; 

100.  Nor,  indeed,  have  we  heard,  even  in  former 
creations,  of  such  (a  thing  as)  the  covert  sale  of  a 
daughter  for  a  fixed  price,  called  a  nuptial  fee. 

1 01.  '  Let  mutual  fidelity  continue  until  death/ 
this  may  be  considered  as  the  summary  of  the 
highest  law  for  husband  and  wife. 

102.  Let  man  and  woman,  united  in  marriage, 
constantly  exert  themselves,  that  (they  may  not  be) 
disunited  (and)  may  not  violate  their  mutual  fidelity. 

103.  Thus  has  been  declared  to  you  the  law  for  a 
husband  and  his  wife,  which  is  intimately  connected 
with  conjugal  happiness,  and  the  manner  of  raising 
offspring  in  times  of  calamity ;  learn  (now  the  law 
concerning)  the  division  of  the  inheritance. 

104.  After  the  death  of  the  father  and  of  the 
mother,  the  brothers,  being  assembled,  may  divide 
among  themselves  in  equal  shares  the  paternal  (and 
the  maternal)  estate ;  for,  they  have  no  power  (over 
it)  while  the  parents  live. 

contradiction  between  this  and  the  next  verses,  see  note  on 
VIII,  204. 

99.  Nand.  places  this  verse  after  the  next. 

104.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  1;  Baudh.  II,  3,  8;  Y&gn.  II,  117.  The 
father's  estate  is  to  be  divided  after  the  father's  death,  and  the 
mother's  estate  after  the  mother's  death  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh., 
Nand.).  The  mother's  estate  devolves  on  the  sons  only  on  failure 
of  daughters  (Nar.).  The  word  urdhvam,  'after/  indicates  by 
implication  that  the  rule  holds  good  in  the  case  of  the  (father's) 


r 


4 


346  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  105. 

105.  (Or)  the  eldest  alone  may  take  the  whole 
paternal  estate,  the  others  shall  live  under  him  just 
as  (they  lived)  under  their  father. 

106.  Immediately  on  the  birth  of  his  first-born  a 
man  is  (called)  the  father  of  a  son  and  is  freed  from 
the  debt  to  the  manes ;  that  (son),  therefore,  is 
worthy  (to  receive)  the  whole  estate. 

107.  That  son  alone  on  whom  he  throws  his  debt 
and  through  whom  he  obtains  immortality,  is  be- 
gotten for  (the  fulfilment  of)  the  law;  all  the  rest 
they  consider  the  offspring  of  desire. 

108.  As  a  father  (supports)  his  sons,  so  let  the 
eldest  support  his  younger  brothers,  and  let  them 
also  in  accordance  with  the  law  behave  towards  their 
eldest  brother  as  sons  (behave  towards  their  father). 

109.  The  eldest  (son)  makes  the  family  prosperous 
or,  on  the  contrary,  brings  it  to  ruin  ;  the  eldest  (is 
considered)  among  men  most  worthy  of  honour,  the 
eldest  is  not  treated  with  disrespect  by  the  virtuous. 

no.  If  the  eldest  brother  behaves  as  an  eldest 
brother  (ought  to  do),  he  (must  be  treated)  like  a 

turning  ascetic  (Ragh.).  The  equal  division  takes  place  if  the 
eldest  does  not  desire  to  receive  an  additional  share  (Kull.).  The 
last  clause  shows  that  a  division  of  the  property  may  take  place 
with   the   parents'  permission  during  their   lifetime  (Kull.,   Nar., 

Ragh.). 

105.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  3 ;  Baudh.  II,  3,  13.  I.e.  if  the  eldest  son 
is  virtuous  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  possesses  particularly  eminent  qualities, 
while  the  others  are  less  distinguished  (Nar.). 

106.  Regarding  the  debt,  see  Vas.  XI,  48. 

107.  This  verse  alludes  to  the  Vedic  text  quoted,  Vas.  XVII,  1 ; 

Vi.XV,45. 

108.  I.e.  if  they  make  no  division  and  the  eldest  takes  the  whole 
estate  (Kull.).     Nand.  places  this  verse  after  the  next. 

no.  'Behaves  as  an  eldest  brother  (ought  to  do),' i.  e.  'duly 
protects  and  educates  the  younger  ones '  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 


IX,  ii4.  INHERITANCE.  347 

mother  and  like  a  father ;  but  if  he  behaves  in  a 
manner  unworthy  of  an  eldest  brother,  he  should 
yet  be  honoured  like  a  kinsman. 

in.  Either  let  them  thus  live  together,  or  apart, 
if  (each)  desires  (to  gain)  spiritual  merit ;  for  (by 
their  living)  separate  (their)  merit  increases,  hence 
separation  is  meritorious. 

112.  The  additional  share  (deducted)  for  the 
eldest  shall  be  one-twentieth  (of  the  estate)  and 
the  best  of  all  chattels,  for  the  middlemost  half  of 
that,  but  for  the  youngest  one-fourth. 

113.  Both  the  eldest  and  the  youngest  shall  take 
(their  shares)  according  to  (the  rule  just)  stated ; 
(each  of)  those  who  are  between  the  eldest  and  the 
youngest,  shall  have  the  share  (prescribed  for  the) 
middlemost. 

114.  Among  the  goods  of  every  kind  the  eldest 
shall  take  the  best  (article),  and  (even  a  single 
chattel)  which  is  particularly  good,  as  well  as  the 
best  of  ten  (animals). 

'Like  a  kinsman/ i.e.  Mike  a  maternal  or  paternal  uncle'  (Medh., 
Kull.,  Ragh.);  see  also  below,  verse  213. 

in.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  4.  '(Their)  merit  increases,'  i.e.  'each  of 
them  has  to  kindle  the  sacred  fire,  to  offer  separately  the  Agni- 
hotra,  the  five  great  sacrifices  and  so  forth,  and  hence  each  gains 
separately  merit'  (Medh.,  Kull.). 

112.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  5-7;  Baudh.  II,  3,  9;  Vi.  XVIII,  37; 
Y&gfi.  II,  114.  '  The  remainder  shall  be  divided  equally,'  see  verse 
116  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  says  that  '  some'  declare 
that  the  rules  on  the  unequal  partition  refer  to  past  times,  and 
have  no  authority  for  the  Kaliyuga.     But  he  rejects  this  view. 

113.  The  object  of  the  verse  is  to  show  that  no  difference  shall 
be  made  between  sons  intervening  between  the  eldest  and  the 
youngest,  however  great  their  number  may  be  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

114.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  11-13;  Baudh.  II,  3,  6.  '(Even  a  single 
chattel)  which  is  particularly  good,'  i.e.  'a  dress  or  an  orna- 
ment' (Medh.),  or  '  something    impartible  like  an  idol '  (Nand.). 


348  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


115.  But  among  (brothers)  equally  skilled  in  their 
occupations,  there  is  no  additional  share,  (consisting 
of  the  best  animal)  among  ten  ;  some  trifle  only  shall 
be  given  to  the  eldest  as  a  token  of  respect. 

116.  If  additional  shares  are  thus  deducted,  one 
must  allot  equal  shares  (out  of  the  residue  to  each) ; 
but  if  no  deduction  is  made,  the  allotment  of  the 
shares  among  them  shall  be  (made)  in  the  following 
manner. 

117.  Let  the  eldest  son  take  one  share  in  excess, 
the  (brother)  born  next  after  him  one  (share)  and  a 
half,  the  younger  ones  one  share  each ;  thus  the  law 
is  settled. 

118.  But  to  the  maiden  (sisters)  the  brothers  shall 
severally  give  (portions)  out  of  their  shares,  each  out 
of  his  share  one-fourth  part ;  those  who  refuse  to 
give  (it),  will  become  outcasts. 

'  The  best  of  ten  animals/  thus  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  according 
to  Gaut.  XXVIII,  12,  where  they  read  da^ata^  pa^unam,  instead 
of  da^atam.  Medh.  gives  the  same  explanation,  but  applies  the 
rule  also  to  clothes  and  ornaments.  He  adds,  that  'others' 
explain  the  text  in  accordance  with  Vas.  XVII,  43,  'And  a  tithe  (of 
the  cattle  and  horses).'  Nand.  nearly  agrees  with  Medh.'s  opinion, 
as  he  says  that  everything  shall  be  divided  into  ten  shares,  and  the 
eldest  shall  take  one  in  excess.  All  the  commentators  agree  that 
this  additional  share  belongs  to  an  eldest  brother  only,  if  he  is  endowed 
with  particularly  good  qualities  and  the  rest  are  inferior  to  him. 

115.  Ap.  II,  13,  13.  '  Their  occupations,'  i.  e. '  reciting  the  Veda 
and  so  forth'  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  According  to  Nar.,  the  phrase  'no 
additional  share  (consisting  of  the  best  animals)  among  ten '  indi- 
cates that  none  of  the  other  additions,  mentioned  in  verse  114,  shall 
be  given.     Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

116.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  8. 

117.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  9-10;  Vas.  XVII,  42.  'One  share  in 
excess,'  i.  e.  'two  shares'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  The 
latter  four  point  out  that  this  division  is  to  be  made  when  the  eldest 
and  the  second  brothers  are  more  eminent  than  the  rest. 

118.  Vi.  XVIII,  35  ;  Yagfi.  II,  124.     According  to  all  the  com- 


IX,  120.  INHERITANCE.  349 

119.  Let  him  never  divide  (the  value  of)  a 
single  goat  or  sheep,  or  a  (single  beast)  with  un- 
cloven  hoofs ;  it  is  prescribed  (that)  a  single  goat  or 
sheep  (remaining  after  an  equal  division,  belongs)  to 
the  eldest  alone. 

120.  If  a  younger  brother  begets  a  son  on  the 
wife  of  the  elder,  the  division  must  then  be  made 
equally ;  thus  the  law  is  settled. 


mentators  the  meaning  is  that,  if  a  man  leaves  children  by  wives  of 
different  castes,  the  brothers  are  to  provide  for  the  dowry  of  the 
unmarried  sisters  of  the  same  caste,  i.  e.  a  Brahmawa's  sons  by 
a  Brahmawa  wife  for  the  daughters  of  the  latter,  the  sons  by  a 
Kshatriya  wife  for  the  daughters  of  the  latter,  &c.  This  meaning 
is  more  clearly  expressed  by  Medh.'s  reading,  svabhya^  svabhyas 
tu  kanyabha^, '  But  the  brothers  shall  give  (portions)  to  the  maiden 
(sisters),  each  to  those  of  his  own  (caste).'  Kull.  adds,  that  the 
duty  of  providing  for  sisters  devolves  in  the  first  instance  on 
brothers  of  the  full  blood,  and  in  default  of  such  on  half-brothers. 

As  regards  the  expression  '  a  fourth  share,'  Medh.  says  that 
a  brother  shall  receive  three-fourths  and  the  sister  one-fourth,  and 
that,  if  there  are  many  sisters,  they  shall  receive  one- fourth  of  the 
share  of  a  brother  of  equal  caste.  Kull.  agrees  with  the  first  part 
of  the  explanation,  but  adds, '  Hence  it  must  be  understood  that 
even  if  there  are  many  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  same  caste,  but 
born  of  different  mothers,  one-fourth  part  must  be  given  to  the 
sisters  of  the  full  blood '  (i.  e.  by  their  full  brothers).  Nar.  says, 
'  They  shall  give  each  one-fourth  part  of  their  share,  and  take  three 
parts ;  and  the  same  division  must  be  made  if  there  are  many 
daughters.  But  if  there  are  many  sons  and  one  daughter,  they 
must  deduct  from  their  several  shares  as  much  money  as  will  be 
equal  to  a  fourth  part  of  one  brother's  share  and  give  that.'  Medh. 
censures  those  commentators  who  think  that  one-fourth  share  need 
not  be  actually  given,  but  only  as  much  as  will  suffice  to  defray  the 
marriage  expenses. 

119.  I.e.  such  an  animal  is  not  to  be  sold  and  the  proceeds  to 
be  divided ;  nor  shall  its  value  be  made  good  to  the  other  brothers 
by  giving  them  other  objects  (Medh..  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.). 

120.  I.e.  the  Kshetra^a  receives  no  preferential  share,  as  his 
father  would  have  done.     Kull.  infers  from  this  verse  that,  though 


350  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  121. 

121.  The  representative  (the  son  begotten  on  the 
wife)  is  not  invested  with  the  right  of  the  principal 
(the  eldest  brother  to  an  additional  share) ;  the 
principal  (became)  a  father  on  the  procreation  (of 
a  son  by  his  younger  brother) ;  hence  one  should 
give  a  share  to  the  (son  begotten  on  the  wife  of 
the  elder  brother)  according  to  the  rule  (stated 
above). 

122.  If  there  be  a  doubt,  how  the  division  shall 
be  made,  in  case  the  younger  son  is  born  of  the 
elder  wife  and  the  elder  son  of  the  younger  wife, 

123.  (Then  the  son)  born  of  the  first  wife  shall 

above,  verse  104,  brothers  (i.e.  sons  of  the  deceased)  only  are 
named,  grandsons  inherit,  also  according  to  Manu,  just  like  sons 
and  with  sons;  see  also  below,  verse  186. 

111.  Thus  Kull. ;  Nand.  agrees  with  respect  to  the  first  half- 
verse,  but  explains  the  second  as  follows,  'The  father  is  the 
principal  in  the  procreation  of  children;  hence  one  must  give  a 
share  to  the  (son  begotten  on  the  wife  of  the  eldest)  according  to 
the  law  (declared  above).'  Nar.  also  differs,  '  The  subsidiary  (son) 
does  not  by  law  take  the  place  of  the  principal,  (and  cannot  for  that 
reason  receive  an  additional  share);  his  father  (the  eldest  was)  the 
principal  for  continuing  the  line ;  hence  one  should  give  a  share  (to 
his  subsidiary  son)  in  accordance  with  the  law/  Ragh.  goes  off  still 
further,  '  The  principal  (the  eldest)  must  according  to  the  law  not 
be  treated  like  the  substitute  (i.  e.  not  be  deprived  of  an  additional 
share,  yet  as)  the  father  is  the  chief  person  in  the  procreation  (of 
children),  one  should  give  a  share  to  the  (son  of  the  wife)  in  accord- 
ance with  the  law  (applicable  to  his  real  father)/  Medh.  has  a 
similar  explanation,  '(To  say)  that  the  substitute  (i.e.  the  Kshetra^a) 
is  equal  to  the  principal  is  not  proper  according  to  the  sacred  law ; 
the  father  (i.  e.  the  begetter)  is  the  principal  in  the  procreation  of 
children,  hence  one  must  give  a  share  (to  the  Kshetrag-a)  in  accord- 
ance (with  the  law  declared  above)/ 

122.  The  point  to  be  decided  is,  if  the  seniority  is  to  be  accord- 
ing to  the  mothers  or  according  to  actual  birth.  The  eldest  wife  is, 
of  course,  the  one  married  first. 

123.  Gaut  XXVIII,  14. 


IX,  126.  INHERITANCE.  351 

take  as  his  additional  share  one  (most  excellent) 
bull ;  the  next  best  bulls  (shall  belong)  to  those 
(who  are)  inferior  on  account  of  their  mothers. 

124.  But  the  eldest  (son,  being)  born  of  the  eldest 
wife,  shall  receive  fifteen  cows  and  a  bull,  the  other 
sons  may  then  take  shares  according  to  (the  seniority 
of)  their  mothers ;  that  is  a  settled  rule. 

125.  Between  sons  born  of  wives  equal  (in  caste) 
(and)  without  (any  other)  distinction  no  seniority  in 
right  of  the  mother  exists  ;  seniority  is  declared  (to 
be)  according  to  birth. 

126.  And  with  respect  to  the  Subrahma^ya.  (texts) 
also  it  is  recorded  that  the  invocation  (of  Indra  shall 
be  made)  by  the  first-born,  of  twins  likewise,  (con- 
ceived at  one  time)  in  the  wombs  (of  their  mothers) 
the  seniority  is  declared  (to  depend)  on  (actual)  birth. 

124.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  15.  '  May  take  shares,'  i.  e.  'may  divide  the 
(other)  cows'  (Medh.,  KulL),  or  'shall  each  receive  one  bull,  a  very 
good  one,  a  less  excellent  one,  in  due  order,  according  to  the 
seniority  of  their  mothers'  (Nar.). 

125.  As  this  verse  and  the  following  one  contradict  the  rules 
given  in  verses  123-124,  the  commentators  try  to  reconcile  them 
in  various  ways.  Medh.  thinks  that  verses  123-124  are  an  artha- 
vada  and  have  no  legal  force,  and  Ragh.  inclines  to  the  same 
opinion.  Nar.  and  Nand.  hold  that  the  seniority  according  to  the 
mother's  marriage  is  of  importance  for  the  law  of  inheritance  (verses 
123-124),  but  that  it  has  no  value  with  respect  to  salutations  and 
the  like  or  to  prerogatives  at  sacrifices  (verses  125-126).  Kull., 
finally  relying  on  Gov.'s  opinion,  thinks  that  the  rules  leave  an 
option,  and  that  their  application  depends  on  the  existence  of  good 
qualities  and  the  want  of  such.  It  is,  however,  probable  that, 
according  to  the  custom  of  Hindu  writers,  the  two  conflicting 
opinions  are  placed  side  by  side,  and  that  it  is  intended  that  the 
learned  should  find  their  way  out  of  the  difficulty  as  they  can. 

126.  The  Subrahmaflya  texts  contain  an  invitation,  addressed 
to  Indra,  to  partake  of  the  Soma ;  see  Aitareya-brahmawa  VI,  3. 
Nand.  reads  yamayoj-  ^aikagarbhe  'pi. 


352  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  127. 

127.  He  who  has  no  son  may  make  his  daughter 
in  the  following  manner  an  appointed  daughter 
(putrika,  saying  to  her  husband),  'The  (male)  child, 
born  of  her,  shall  perform  my  funeral  rites.' 

128.  According  to  this  rule  Daksha,  himself,  lord 
of  created  beings,  formerly  made  (all  his  female 
offspring)  appointed  daughters  in  order  to  multiply 
his  race. 

129.  He  gave  ten  to  Dharma,  thirteen  to  Kas- 
yapa,  twenty-seven  to  King  Soma,  honouring  (them) 
with  an  affectionate  heart. 

130.  A  son  is  even  (as)  oneself,  (such)  a  daughter 
is  equal  to  a  son ;  how  can  another  (heir)  take  the 
estate,  while  such  (an  appointed  daughter  who  is 
even)  oneself,  lives  ? 

131.  But  whatever  may  be  the  separate  property 
of  the  mother,  that  is  the  share  of  the  unmarried 
daughter  alone ;  and  the  son  of  an  (appointed) 
daughter  shall  take  the  whole  estate  of  (his  ma- 
ternal grandfather)  who  leaves  no  son. 

127.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  18;  Vas.  XVII,  17;  Baudh.  II,  3,  15;  Vi. 
XV,  5. 

1 28.  The  story  of  Daksha's  fifty,  sixty,  or  twenty-four  daughters 
occurs  in  the  Mahabharata  and  the  Pura«as.  The  twenty-seven 
given  to  King  Soma,  the  moon,  are  the  lunar  mansions  or 
Nakshatras. 

130.  'A  son  is  even  (as)  oneself;'  see  the  verse  quoted,  Baudh. 
II,  3, 14.  The  commentators  state  that  the  word  duhit&, '  daughter,' 
means  here  putrika,  *  an  appointed  daughter.'  Medh.  adds  that  in 
accordance  with  this  verse,  an  appointed  daughter  who  has  no  son, 
when  her  father  dies,  does  not  inherit  his  property  (?). 

131.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  24;  Vi.XVII,2i.  The  correctness  of  the  trans- 
lation of  the  term  yautakam  by ■  separate  property'  (Medh.),  follows 
from  its  being  used  below,  verse  214,  to  denote  the  separate  hoard 
made  by  an  elder  brother.  According  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.  all 
stridhana  is  meant;  according  to  'others'  mentioned  by  Medh.,Nand., 
and  Ragh.,  the  so-called  saudayikam  or  property  derived  from  the 


IX,  135-  INHERITANCE.  353 

132.  The  son  of  an  (appointed)  daughter,  indeed, 
shall  (also)  take  the  estate  of  his  (own)  father,  who 
leaves  no  (other)  son;  he  shall  (then)  present  two 
funeral  cakes  to  his  own  father  and  to  his  maternal 
grandfather. 

133.  Between  a  son's  son  and  the  son  of  an 
(appointed)  daughter  there  is  no  difference,  neither 
with  respect  to  worldly  matters  nor  to  sacred  duties ; 
for  their  father  and  mother  both  sprang  from  the 
body  of  the  same  (man). 

134.  But  if,  after  a  daughter  has  been  appointed, 
a  son  be  born  (to  her  father),  the  division  (of  the 
inheritance)  must  in  that  (case)  be  equal ;  for  there 
is  no  right  of  primogeniture  for  a  woman. 

1 35.  But  if  an  appointed  daughter  by  accident  dies 
without  (leaving)  a  son,  the  husband  of  the  appointed 
daughter  may,  without  hesitation,  take  that  estate. 

father's  family.  Kumari,  '  an  unmarried  daughter'  (Medh.,  Kull.), 
means  according  to  Nar. '  a  daughter  who  has  no  sons.'  Dauhitra^, 
literally  'the  son  of  a  daughter,'  means  according  to  the  com- 
mentators '  the  son  of  an  appointed  daughter,'  putrikaputra^.  The 
first  rule  is,  according  to  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.,  a  general  maxim, 
which  refers  not  merely  to  the  case  of  a  putrika.  The  second  rule 
shows,  according  to  Nand.,  that  the  appointed  daughter  herself  does 
not  inherit  her  father's  estate,  if  she  has  a  son. 

132.  Medh.  mentions  a  var.  leet,  aputrasya  hared  yadi,  'If  the 
son  of  an  (appointed)  daughter  takes  the  entire  estate  of  (his 
maternal  grandfather),  &c.,'  which  is  also  found  in  Gov.'s  text,  but 
considers  it  to  be  wrong. 

133.  Yagii.  II,  128.  Loke  dharmata^,  'neither  with  respect  to 
worldly  affairs  nor  to  sacred  duties'(Kull.),  means  according  toR&gh. 
and  Nand.  'with  respect  to  sacred  duties,  according  to  the  law.' 

135.  'That  estate,'  i.e.  'what  the  appointed  daughter  received  from 
her  father  either  during  his  lifetime  or  after  his  death'  (Nar.).  Kull. 
adds  that  the  verse  is  intended  to  forbid  the  father's  inheriting  his 
pre-deceased  daughter's  property,  on  the  plea  that  she  was  like  a 
son  (see  verse  185).  Nand.  says  that  the  paternal  uncles  &c.  shall 
not  take  the  putrika's  estate. 

[25]  A  a 


354  LAWS    OF   MANU.  IX,  136. 

136.  Through  that  son  whom  (a  daughter),  either 
not  appointed  or  appointed,  may  bear  to  (a  hus- 
band) of  equal  (caste),  his  maternal  grandfather  (has) 
a  son's  son ;  he  shall  present  the  funeral  cake  and 
take  the  estate. 

137.  Through  a  son  he  conquers  the  worlds, 
through  a  son's  son  he  obtains  immortality,  but 
through  his  son's  grandson  he  gains  the  world  of 
the  sun. 

138.  Because  a  son  delivers  (trayate)  his  father 
from  the  hell  called  Put,  he  was  therefore  called 
put-tra  (a  deliverer  from  Put)  by  the  Self-existent 
(Svayambhu)  himself. 

139.  Between  a  son's  son  and  the  son  of  a 
daughter  there  exists  in  this  world  no  difference ; 
for  even  the  son  of  a  daughter  saves  him  (who  has 
no  sons)  in  the  next  world,  like  the  son's  son. 

136.  Kull.  explains  akrz'ta  va  knta  vapi  by  '(a  daughter)  either 
appointed  not  (explicitly  but  by  a  mental  reservation),  or  appointed 
(explicitly,  at  the  betrothal,  according  to  verse  127)/  He  adds  that 
Gov.  takes  the  word  akrz'ta  in  its  usual  sense,  and  asserts  that  the 
verse  allows  the  son  of  a  daughter  not  appointed  to  inherit  his 
maternal  grandfather's  estate.  The  latter  opinion  is  held  also  by 
Nar.,  who  remarks  that  the  son  of  a  daughter  not  appointed  inherits 
on  failure  of  a  wife  or  of  daughters  of  his  grandfather;  and  by 
Nand.  Ragh.  and  Medh.  side  with  Kull.,  whose  explanation  is 
supported  by  Gaut.  XXVIII,  20,  and  still  more  by  Vi.  XV,  6.  The 
latter  passage  clearly  prescribes  that  the  daughter  of  a  man  who 
has  no  sons  is  in  every  case  '  an  appointed  daughter.' 

137.  Vas.  XVII,  5;  Vi.  XV,  46;  Y^w.  I,  78.  'The  worlds,' 
i.  e.  *  the  ten,  called  vi^oka  (free  from  sorrow),  the  first  of  which  is 
svarga'  (Medh.).  '  Immortality,  i.  e.  a  very  long  residence  in  those 
same  (worlds),'  (Medh.,  Kull.)  '  The  sun,'  i.  e.  '  Hirawyagarbha ' 
(Nar.).  The  verse  shows  that  sons  and  grandsons  inherit,  though 
a  wife  and  the  rest  may  be  living  (Kull.). 

138.  Vi.  XV,  44. 

139.  Vi.  XV,  47.   According  to  Medh.  and  Kull.,  dauhitra^, '  the 


IX,  142.  INHERITANCE.  355 

140.  Let  the  son  of  an  appointed  daughter  first 
present  a  funeral  cake  to  his  mother,  the  second  to 
her  father,  the  third  to  his  father's  father. 

141.  Of  the  man  who  has  an  adopted  (Datrima) 
son  possessing  all  good  qualities,  that  same  (son) 
shall  take  the  inheritance,  though  brought  from 
another  family. 

142.  An  adopted  son  shall  never  take  the  family 
(name)  and  the  estate  of  his  natural  father ;  the 
funeral  cake  follows  the  family  (name)  and  the 
estate,  the  funeral  offerings  of  him  who  gives  (his 
son  in  adoption)  cease  (as  far  as  that  son  is  con- 
cerned). 

son  of  a  daughter,'  means  here  also  'the  son  of  an  appointed 
daughter.'  Nand.  reads  putravat,  Mike  a  son;'  Gov.  purva^an, 
'(and)  the  ancestors.' 

140.  Baudh.  II,  3,  16.  Medh.  mentions  a  var.  lect.,  pitus  tasya, 
'  the  second  to  his  father,'  which  he,  however,  justly  considers  to 
be  bad. 

141.  Vas.  XV,  9-10;  Baudh.  Parmsh/a  16.  Medh.,  Kull,  and 
Ragh.  refer  this  rule  to  the  case  where  a  man  has  a  legitimate  son 
and  an  adopted  son,  and  think  that  in  such  a  case  the  latter,  being 
eminently  virtuous,  shall  receive,  like  a  Kshetra^a  (see  verse  146), 
a  fifth  or  sixth  part  of  the  estate.  Medh.  remarks  that  some  think 
he  is  to  have  half,  but  that  their  opinion  is  improper,  and  finally  that 
Upadhyaya,  i.e.  his  teacher,  allots  to  the  adopted  son  less  than  to  the 
Kshetra^a.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  state  that  Gov.  took  the  verse  to  mean 
that  an  eminently  virtuous  adopted  son  shall  inherit  on  failure  of  a 
legitimate  son  and  of  the  son  of  the  wife,  but  that  this  explanation 
is  inadmissible  on  account  of  verse  165.  Nevertheless  Ragh.  repro- 
duces Gov.'s  opinion.  Nar.  says,  '  It  has  been  declared  that  an 
adopted  son  receives  a  share  like  the  chief  son,  when  he  is  emi- 
nently virtuous.'  Nand.  reads  at  the  end  of  the  second  line,  sam- 
prapto  'sya  na  putraka^,  '  shall  take  the  inheritance,  (provided)  the 
(adoptive  father)  has  no  son.' 

142.  Medh.  mentions  another  'improper'  explanation,  according 
to  which  haret,  '  shall  take,'  is  to  mean  harayet, '  shall  allow  to  be 
taken,'  and  the  purport  of  the  verse  is  that '  he  is  to  benefit  both 
(fathers)  like  a  Dvyamushyayawa.' 

a  a  2 


356  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  143. 

143.  The  son  of  a  wife,  not  appointed  (to  have 
issue  by  another),  and  he  whom  (an  appointed 
female,  already)  the  mother  of  a  son,  bears  to  her 
brother-in-law,  are  both  unworthy  of  a  share,  (one 
being)  the  son  of  an  adulterer  and  (the  other)  pro- 
duced through  (mere)  lust. 

144.  Even  the  male  (child)  of  a  female  (duly) 
appointed,  not  begotten  according  to  the  rule  (given 
above),  is  unworthy  of  the  paternal  estate ;  for  he 
was  procreated  by  an  outcast. 

145.  A  son  (legally)  begotten  on  such  an  ap- 
pointed female  shall  inherit  like  a  legitimate  son  of 
the  body ;  for  that  seed  and  the  produce  belong, 
according  to  the  law,  to  the  owner  of  the  soil. 

146.  He  who  takes  care  of  his  deceased  brother's 
estate  and  of  his  widow,  shall,  after  raising  up  a  son 
for  his  brother,  give  that  property  even  to  that  (son). 

147.  If  a  woman  (duly)  appointed  bears  a  son 
to  her  brother-in-law  or  to  another  (Sapi^a),  that 
(son,  if  he  is)  begotten  through  desire,  they  declare 
(to  be)  incapable  of  inheriting  and  to  be  produced 
in  vain. 

148.  The  rules  (given  above)  must  be  understood 
(to  apply)  to  a  distribution  among  sons  of  women  of 
the  same  (caste) ;    hear  (now  the    law)  concerning 

144.  'The  rule  (given  above),'  i.e.  that  given  above,  verse  60. 
Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

145.  Medh.  and  Kull.  state  that  the  object  of  this  verse  is  to 
teach  that  a  Kshetra^a,  if  endowed  with  good  qualities,  may  even  re- 
ceive (against  verse  130)  the  additional  share  of  an  eldest  son,  because 
it  is  said  that  he  inherits  '  like  a  legitimate  son.'  Nar.  says, ' (the 
expression)  like  a  legitimate  son  (is  used)  in  order  to  establish 
(the  title  to)  an  equal  share.'    Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

146.  'This  rule  refers  to  the  case  where  the  two  brothers  are 
divided,  while  verse  120  refers  to  those  who  live  in  union'  (Medh., 
Kull.,  Ragh.).     Nand.  places  this  verse  after  147. 


IX,  152.  INHERITANCE.  357 

those    begotten   by   one   man   on   many   wives   of 
different  (castes). 

149.  If  there  be  four  wives  of  a  Brahma^a  in  the 
direct  order  of  the  castes,  the  rule  for  the  division 
(of  the  estate)  among  the  sons  born  of  them  is  as 
follows  : 

1 50.  The  (slave)  who  tills  (the  field),  the  bull  kept 
for  impregnating  cows,  the  vehicle,  the  ornaments, 
and  the  house  shall  be  given  as  an  additional  por- 
tion to  the  Brahma/za  (son),  and  one  most  excellent 
share. 

151.  Let  the  son  of  the  Brahma^i  (wife)  take 
three  shares  of  the  (remainder  of  the)  estate,  the  son 
of  the  Kshatriya  two,  the  son  of  the  Vai^ya  a  share 
and  a  half,  and  the  son  of  the  \5udra  may  take  one 
share. 

152.  Or  let  him  who  knows  the  law  make,  ten 
shares  of  the  whole  estate,  and  justly  distribute  them 
according  to  the  following  rule  : 

149-156.  Gaut  XXVIII,  35-39  ;  Vas.  XVII,  48-50 ;  Baudh.  II, 
3,  10;  Vi.  XVIII,  1-33,  38-40;  Ya^i.  II,  125. 

150.  'The  ornaments/  i.  e. '  the  ring  which  the  father  used  to 
wear,  and  the  like'  (Medh.,  Kull.).  '  The  house,'  i.  e.  'the  principal 
mansion'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  'Ek&msa.s  fa  pradhanata^,  '  one 
most  excellent  share'  (Medh.,  Kull.),  means  according  to  Nar.,  with 
whom  Nand.  agrees,  '  and  one  share  consisting  of  the  chief,  i.  e. 
best  property '  (pradhanato  mukhyadhanad  utkrzsh/ad  ity  artha^), 
and  according  to  Ragh.  '  and  one  share,  because  he  is  the  chief 
person.'  According  to  Nar.  this  'one  share'  must  be  equal  in 
value  to  one  of  the  three  shares  mentioned  in  the  next  verse. 

151.  Medh.  and  Kull.  remark  that  the  rule  holds  good  also  if 
there  are  more  sons  than  one  in  each  class. 

152.  According  to  Nar.  this  rule  refers  to  the  case  when  each  of 
the  wives  has  several  sons,  while  the  preceding  one  is  applicable 
when  each  wife  has  one  son  only.  Ragh.  thinks  that  the  first  rule 
shall  be  followed  when  the  son  of  the  Brahma^r  possesses  good 
qualities,  the  second  when  he  is  destitute  of  them. 


35^  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  153. 

153.  The  Brahma/za  (son)  shall  take  four  shares, 
the  son  of  the  Kshatriya  (wife)  three,  the  son  of  the 
VaLsya.  shall  have  two  parts,  the  son  of  the  .SMra 
may  take  one  share. 

154.  Whether  (a  Brahma/za)  have  sons  or  have 
no  sons  (by  wives  of  the  twice-born  castes),  the  (heir) 
must,  according  to  the  law,  give  to  the  son  of  a  .5udra 
(wife)  no  more  than  a  tenth  (part  of  his  estate). 

155.  The  son  of  a  Brahma^a,  a  Kshatriya,  and  a 
Vaisya  by  a  .Sudra  (wife)  receives  no  share  of  the 
inheritance  ;  whatever  his  father  may  give  to  him, 
that  shall  be  his  property. 

156.  All  the  sons  of  twice-born  men,  born  of 
wives  of  the  same  caste,  shall  equally  divide  the 
estate,  after  the  others  have  given  to  the  eldest  an 
additional  share. 

157.  For  a  ^udra  is  ordained  a  wife  of  his  own 
caste  only  (and)  no  other  ;  those  born  of  her  shall 
have  equal  shares,  even  if  there  be  a  hundred  sons. 

153.  Medh.  points  out  that  according  to  other  Smrz'tis  the  Brah- 
ma«a  son  alone  receives  land,  given  to  his  father,  and  that  the 
-Sudra  son  receives  no  share  in  land,  if  there  is  other  property. 

154.  Hence  on  failure  of  other  sons  the  other  heirs,  the  Sapira</as 
(Medh.),  or  the  widow  and  the  rest  (Nar.),  shall  take  the  rest  of  the 
estate.  Nar.  adds  that  he  may  obtain  more  than  a  tenth,  if  his 
father  give  it  to  him. 

155.  The  son  of  a  »Sudra  wife  receives  no  share  of  his  father's 
estate  in  case  the  mother  was  not  legally  married  (Medh.  '  others/ 
Kull.),  or  in  case  he  is  destitute  of  good  qualities  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 
According  to  Medh.  and  Nar.,  na  rikthabhak, '  receives  no  share  of 
the  inheritance/  means  '  receives  no  (larger)  share  (than  one-tenth, 
except  if  the  father  himself  has  given  more  to  him).'  But  it  seems 
more  probable,  that  the  verse  is  intended  to  inculcate  the  maxim 
that  a  son  by  a  *Sudra  wife  cannot  claim  any  fixed  portion  of  the 
inheritance  from  his  father  who  divides  his  estate. 

156.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  K.  read  va,  'or/  instead  of  ye  (gsita/i), 
but  this  gives  no  good  sense,  as  Medh.  remarks. 


IX,  162.  INHERITANCE.  359 

158.  Among  the  twelve  sons  of  men  whom  Manu, 
sprung  from  the  Self-existent  (Svayambhu),  enu- 
merates, six  are  kinsmen  and  heirs,  and  six  not 
heirs,  (but)  kinsmen. 

159.  The  legitimate  son  of  the  body,  the  son 
begotten  on  a  wife,  the  son  adopted,  the  son  made, 
the  son  secretly  born,  and  the  son  cast  off,  (are)  the 
six  heirs  and  kinsmen. 

160.  The  son  of  an  unmarried  damsel,  the  son 
received  with  the  wife,  the  son  bought,  the  son 
begotten  on  a  re-married  woman,  the  son  self-given, 
and  the  son  of  a  6udra  female,  (are)  the  six  (who 
are)  not  heirs,  (but)  kinsmen. 

161.  Whatever  result  a  man  obtains  who  (tries  to) 
cross  a  (sheet  of)  water  in  an  unsafe  boat,  even  that 
result  obtains  he  who  (tries  to)  pass  the  gloom  (of 
the  next  world)  with  (the  help  of)  bad  (substitutes 
for  a  real)  son. 

162.  If  the  two  heirs  of  one  man  be  a  legitimate 

158-159.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  31-33;  Vas.  XVII,  25,  38;  Baudh. 

H,  3>  3*-32- 

158.  I.  e.  the  first  six  inherit  the  family  estate  and  offer  the 
funeral  oblations,  the  last  six  do  not  inherit,  but  offer  libations  of 
water  and  so  forth  as  remoter  kinsmen  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand. 
*  some ').  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  take  adayadabandhavsU  to 
mean  'not  heirs  nor  kinsmen/  But  Kull.  rightly  objects  that  the 
parallel  passage  of  Baudh.  proves  this  explanation  to  be  wrong. 
Nar.  finally  interprets  bandhudayada^, '  heirs  and  kinsmen/  as '  heirs 
to  the  kinsmen,'  i.e.  'inheritors  of  the  estate  of  kinsmen,  such  as 
paternal  uncles,  on  failure  of  sons,  wives,  and  so  forth.'  Nar.  and 
Nand.,  as  well  as  Medh.  in  his  commentary  on  verse  166,  add 
that  the  son  of  an  appointed  daughter  is  not  mentioned,  because  he 
has  been  declared  above  to  be  equal  to  a  legitimate  son. 

161.  Medh.  mentions  another  explanation  of  the  expression 
kuputrai^, '  by  bad  (substitutes  for  a  real)  son,'  according  to  which 
'  sons  of  a  wife  or  widow  not  duly  appointed'  are  meant. 

162.  According  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  (quoted  by  Kull.  and  Ragh.), 


360  LAWS    OF   MANU.  IX,  163. 


son  of  his  body  and  a  son  begotten  on  his  wife,  each 
(of  the  two  sons),  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other, 
shall  take  the  estate  of  his  (natural)  father, 

163.  The  legitimate  son  of  the  body  alone  (shall 
be)  the  owner  of  the  paternal  estate ;  but,  in  order 
to  avoid  harshness,  let  him  allow  a  maintenance  to 
the  rest. 

164.  But  when  the  legitimate  son  of  the  body 
divides  the  paternal  estate,  he  shall  give  one-sixth 
or  one-fifth  part  of  his  fathers  property  to  the  son 
begotten  on  the  wife. 

the  rule  refers  to  the  case  where  a  legitimate  son  and  the  son 
of  a  wife  not  appointed  both  claim  the  inheritance.  But '  others,' 
quoted  by  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  think  that  it  applies  to  the  case 
where  a  wife  first  was  appointed  by  her  husband  to  procreate  a  son 
with  his  brother,  and  afterwards  a  legitimate  son  was  born.  The 
difficulty  which  under  this  explanation  arises  with  respect  to  verse 
164,  is  removed  by  assuming  that  the  latter  applies  to  the  case 
where  the  natural  father  of  the  Kshetra^a  has  likewise  sons,  while 
verse  162  presupposes  that  he  has  none.  Nar.  and  Nand.  say  that 
the  case  which  the  rule  contemplates,  is  that  two  brothers  were 
undivided,  and  when  the  one  died,  the  other,  who  himself  had  sons, 
begat  with  the  widow  a  Kshetra^a  son.  On  the  death  of  the  second 
brother,  the  Kshetra^a  is  entitled  to  receive  only  the  share  of  the 
husband  of  his  mother,  not  to  claim  a  portion  of  the  estate  of  his 
natural  father.  Under  this  supposition  the  translation  would  be, 
'  If  a  legitimate  son  (of  one  brother)  and  the  son  of  the  wife  (of 
another)  have  a  claim  to  one  (undivided)  estate,  each  shall  receive 
the  share  of  his  father.' 

163-165.  Vi.  XV,  28-30;  Yagii.  II,  132. 

163.  This  rule  refers  to  the  case  where  one  man  leaves  several 
substitutes  for  sons  and  a  legitimate  son  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar., 
Ragh.).  'To  the  rest,' i.e. 'to  all  except  the  son  begotten  on  the 
wife'  (which  latter  is  exempted  by  verses  164-165;  Medh.,  Kull., 
Ragh.,  Nand.).  '  He  who  does  not  maintain  them,  commits  sin' 
(Medh.,  Kull.);  but  not,  if  they  have  other  means  of  subsistence  (Nand.). 

164.  This  rule  refers  to  the  case  where  a  Kshetra^a  was  begotten 
before  the  legitimate  son,  and  received  no  property  from  his  natural 
father  (Rdgh.) ;  see  also  Kull/s  notes  on  verses  1 62-163.  According 


IX,  168.  INHERITANCE.  36 1 

165.  The  legitimate  son  and  the  son  of  the  wife 
(thus)  share  the  father's  estate  ;  but  the  other  ten 
become  members  of  the  family,  and  inherit  according 
to  their  order  (each  later  named  on  failure  of  those 
named  earlier). 

166.  Him  whom  a  man  begets  on  his  own  wedded 
wife,  let  him  know  to  be  a  legitimate  son  of  the 
body  (Aurasa),  the  first  in  rank. 

167.  He  who  was  begotten  according  to  the  pecu- 
liar law  (of  the  Niyoga)  on  the  appointed  wife  of  a 
dead  man,  of  a  eunuch,  or  of  one  diseased,  is  called 
a  son  begotten  on  a  wife  (Kshetra^a). 

168.  That  (boy)  equal  (by  caste)  whom  his  mother 
or  his  father  affectionately  give,  (confirming  the  gift) 

to  Nar.  it  refers,  however,  to  the  case  where  a  man  died,  leaving 
several  widows,  and  one  was  appointed  to  bear  a  son  by  her  brother- 
in-law,  while  another  afterwards  proved  to  be  pregnant  and  bore  a 
legitimate  son.  'The  Kshetra^a  receives  one-fifth,  if  he  is  endowed 
with  good  qualities,  else  one-sixth'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh., 
Nand.). 

165.  Vas.  XVII,  39.  Gotrarikthamabhagina^,  'become  mem- 
bers of  the  family  (i.  e.  succeed  to  the  family  rights  and  duties)  and 
inherit'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  may  also  be  translated,  '  share  the 
family  estate,'  as  Nar.  proposes.  But  his  suggestion  that  the  family 
estate  is  here  mentioned  in  order  to  exclude  them  from  their  father's 
self-acquired  property  is  doubtlessly  wrong.  Equally  inadmissible 
seems  another  explanation,  mentioned  by  Nar.  and  Nand.,  accord- 
ing to  which  a#z.?abhagina^, '  they  share,'  is  to  mean  '  they  obtain 
(such)  a  share  (as  will  suffice  for  their  maintenance).' 

166.  Ap.  II,  18,  1;  Vas.  XVII,  13;  Baudh.  II,  3, 14  ;  Vi.  XV,  2  ; 
Y&gii.  II,  128.  I  read  prathamakalpikam  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar., 
and  K.  Ragh.  gives  prathamakalpikam.  Kull.  and  Nar.  think 
that  the  wife  must  be  of  equal  caste,  while  Medh.  says  that  sva 
means  'his  own,'  not  'of  his  own  caste.'  Medh.  mentions  Kull.'s 
opinion  as  that  of  '  others.' 

167.  Vas.  XVII,  14  ;  Baudh.  II,  3, 18 ;  Vi.  XV,  3 ;  Yzgii.  I,  69, 
II,  127-128. 

168.  Vas.  XVII,  29;  Baudh.  II,  3,  20;  Vi.  XV,  18-19;  Ya#w. 


362  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  169. 

with  (a  libation  of)  water,  in  times  of  distress  (to  a 
man)  as  his  son,  must  be  considered  as  an  adopted 
son  (Datrima). 

169.  But  he  is  considered  a  son  made  (KWtrima) 
whom  (a  man)  makes  his  son,  (he  being)  equal  (by 
caste),  acquainted  with  (the  distinctions  between) 
right  and  wrong,  (and)  endowed  with  filial  virtues. 

1 70.  If  (a  child)  be  born  in  a  man's  house  and  his 
father  be  not  known,  he  is  a  son  born  secretly  in  the 
house  (Gudhotpanna),  and  shall  belong  to  him  of 
whose  wife  he  was  born. 

171.  He  whom  (a  man)  receives  as  his  son,  (after 
he  has  been)  deserted  by  his  parents  or  by  either  of 
them,  is  called  a  son  cast  off  (Apaviddha). 

II,  130.  Sadmam, '  equal  (by  caste),'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.), 
means  according  to  Medh.  '  equal  by  virtues,  not  by  caste/  '  His 
mother  or  his  father,' i.e.  'after  mutually  agreeing'  (Kull.),  'the 
mother,  if  there  is  no  father'  (Ragh.).  Medh.  and  Nand.  read 
mata  pita  £a,  '  his  mother  and  his  father,'  but  Medh.  adds  that  va 
is  the  proper  reading.  'Affectionately,'  i.e. 'not  out  of  avarice* 
(Medh.),  or  'not  out  of  fear  and  so  forth'  (Kull.,  Nand.),  or  'not 
by  force  or  fraud'  (Ragh.).  '  In  times  of  distress,'  i.  e. '  if  the  adopter 
has  no  son'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'if  the  adoptee's  parents  are  in 
distress'  (Nar.). 

169.  Baudh.  II,  3,  21;  Yagn.  II,  131.  Medh.  again  says,  'equal 
by  qualities.'  '  Acquainted  with  (the  distinctions  between)  right 
and  wrong/  i.  e. '  by  performing  or  not  performing  -Sraddhas  and 
other  sacred  rites  merit  or  sin  will  follow'  (Kull.),  or  'I  am  now 
the  son  of  so  and  so,  and  if  I  do  not  serve  him  I  shall  become  an 
outcast'  (Ragh.),  or  'not  an  infant'  (Medh.  'some,'  Nar.).  Nar. 
adds  that  some  read  gu#adoshavi/£aksha»a/$,  and  refer  the  adjective 
to  the  adopter,  who  is  thereby  warned  not  to  take  an  outcast  or 
the  like. 

170.  Vas.  XVII,  24;  Baudh.  II,  3,  22;  Vi.  XV,  13-14;  Yagn. 
II,  129.  According  to  the  commentators  the  condition  is  that 
there  is  no  suspicion  that  the  wife  had  intercourse  with  a  man  of 
lower  caste.  Nar.  says  that  the  case  contemplated  is,  that  a  wife 
had  intercourse  with  several  men  of  equal  caste. 

171.  Vas.  XVII,  37;  Baudh.  II,  3,  23;  Vi.  XV,  24-25;  Yagn. 


IX,  176.  INHERITANCE.  363 

i  72.  A  son  whom  a  damsel  secretly  bears  in  the 
house  of  her  father,  one  shall  name  the  son  of  an 
unmarried  damsel  (Kanina,  and  declare)  such  off- 
spring of  an  unmarried  girl  (to  belong)  to  him  who 
weds  her  (afterwards). 

173.  If  one  marries,  either  knowingly  or  un- 
knowingly, a  pregnant  (bride),  the  child  in  her  womb 
belongs  to  him  who  weds  her,  and  is  called  (a  son) 
received  with  the  bride  (Sahod7/a). 

174.  If  a  man  buys  a  (boy),  whether  equal  or 
unequal  (in  good  qualities),  from  his  father  and 
mother  for  the  sake  of  having  a  son,  that  (child) 
is  called  a  (son)  bought  (Krttaka). 

175.  If  a  woman  abandoned  by  her  husband,  or  a 
widow,  of  her  own  accord  contracts  a  second  mar- 
riage and  bears  (a  son),  he  is  called  the  son  of  a 
re-married  woman  (Paunarbhava). 

176.  If  she  be  (still)  a  virgin,  or  one  who  returned 
(to  her  first  husband)  after  leaving  him,  she  is 
worthy  to  again  perform  with  her  second  (or  first 
deserted)  husband  the  (nuptial)  ceremony. 

II,  132.  The  reason  of  the  desertion  maybe  either  extreme  dis- 
tress of  the  parents,  or  the  commission  of  some  fault  on  the  part  of 
the  boy  (Medh.).  '  Provided  the  father  of  the  child  was  of  equal 
caste' (Nar.,  Nand.). 

172.  Vas.  XVII,  22-23  5  Baudh.II,  3,  24  ;  Vi.  XV,  10-n  ;  Yagn. 
II,  129.    'Provided  the  lover  was  of  equal  or  higher  caste '  (Nar.). 

173.  Vas. XVII,  26-27;  Baudh.II,  3,  25  ;  Vi.  XV,  15-16;  Ysign. 
II,  131.     Medh.'s  commentary  on  verses  173-178  is  missing  in  the 

I.  O.  copies. 

174.  Vas.  XVII,  30-32  ;  Baudh.  II,  3,  26;  Vi.  XV,  20-21 ;  Yagri. 

II,  131.  '  Equal  or  unequal,'  i.  e.  'by  good  qualities,  not  by  caste' 
(Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar. '  whether  of  equal  or  of 
lower  caste.' 

175.  Vas.  XVII,  18;  Baudh.  II,  3,  27;  Vi.  XV,  7-9;  Yagn. 
II,  130. 

176.  Vas.  XVII,  74.    '  Hence  a  re-married  woman,  who  is  not  a 


t 


364  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  177. 

177.  He  who,  having  lost  his  parents  or  being 
abandoned  (by  them)  without  (just)  cause,  gives 
himself  to  a  (man),  is  called  a  son  self-given  (Sva- 
yawdatta). 

178.  The  son  whom  a  Brahma/za  begets  through  lust 
j\      on  a  6"udra  female  is,  (though)  alive  (parayan),  a  corpse 

(5a va),  and  hence  called  a  Parasava  (a  living  corpse). 

179.  A  son  who  is  (begotten)  by  a  .Sudra  on  a 
female  slave,  or  on  the  female  slave  of  his  slave, 
may,  if  permitted  (by  his  father),  take  a  share  (of 
the  inheritance)  ;    thus  the  law  is  settled. 

180.  These  eleven,  the  son  begotten  on  the  wife 
and  the  rest  as  enumerated  (above),  the  wise  call 
substitutes  for  a  son,  (taken)  in  order  (to  prevent)  a 
failure  of  the  (funeral)  ceremonies. 

181.  Those  sons,  who  have  been  mentioned  in 
connection  with   (the  legitimate  son  of  the  body), 

virgin,  is  unworthy  of  the  sacrament'  (Nar.).  Ragh.,  relying  on 
Y§gn.  II,  130,  expresses  the  contrary  view,  and  thinks  that  the  word 
vei,  '  or/  at  the  end  of  the  first  half- verse,  permits  the  insertion  of 
'  or  not  a  virgin.' 

177.  Vas.  XVII,  33-35 ;  Baudh.  II,  3,  28 ;  Vi.  XV,  22-23  5  Y^gil. 
II,  131. 

178.  Vas.  XVII,  38;  Baudh.  II,  3,  30;  Vi.  XV,  27.  '  On  a 
-Sudra-female '  i.  e.  'one  married  to  him'  (Kull).  The  designation 
'  a  corpse '  indicates  that  his  father  derives  imperfect  benefits  from 
his  offerings  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  that  he  is  blameable  (Ragh.). 
The  term  Brahmawa  includes  Kshatriyas  by  implication  (Nar.). 

179.  Y&gn.  II,  133.  'A  share/  i.e.  'a  share  equal  to  that  of  a 
legitimate  son'  (Kull.),  in  case  the  division  is  made  in  the  father's 
lifetime,  else  half  a  share  according  to  Yagii.  (Medh.). 

180.  Kriyalopat,  'in  (order  to  prevent)  a  failure  of  the  (funeral) 
ceremonies/  means  according  to  Medh.  'in  (order  to  prevent)  a 
failure  of  the  duty  (to  beget  offspring).'  Kull.  mentions  this 
explanation  also.  Nand.  says, '  when  there  is  no  legitimateness  in 
consequence  of  the  absence  of  the  action  of  begetting  one.' 

181.  Ap.  II,  13,  7;  Baudh.  II,  3,  34—35.    Hence  they  should  not 


IX,  185.  INHERITANCE.  365 

being  begotten  by  strangers,  belong  (in  reality)  to 
him  from  whose  seed  they  sprang,  but  not  to  the 
other  (man  who  took  them). 

182.  If  among  brothers,  sprung  from  one  (father), 
one  have  a  son,  Manu  has  declared  them  all  to  have 
male  offspring  through  that  son. 

183.  If  among  all  the  wives  of  one  husband  one 
have  a  son,  Manu  declares  them  all  (to  be)  mothers 
of  male  children  through  that  son. 

184.  On  failure  of  each- better  (son),  each  next 
inferior  (one)  is  worthy  of  the  inheritance ;  but  if 
there  be  many  (of)  equal  (rank),  they  shall  all  share 
the  estate. 

185.  Not  brothers,  nor  fathers,  (but)  sons  take  the 
paternal  estate ;  but  the  father  shall  take  the  in- 
heritance of  (a  son)  who  leaves  no  male  issue,  and 
his  brothers. 

be  taken,  if  there  is  a  legitimate  son  (Medh.),  or  an  appointed 
daughter  (Kull.). 

182.  Vas.  XVII,  10 ;  Vi.  XV,  42.  Hence  no  subsidiary  sons 
(Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  no  Kshetra^-as  (Nar.),  are  necessary  in  such  a  case. 
Kull.  and  Ragh.  add  that  the  brother  will  take  estate  and  give  the 
funeral  offerings  on  failure  of  a  wife,  daughters,  and  so  forth  ( Yagn. 

n,  135). 

183.  Vas.  XVII,  11  j  Vi.  XV,  41.  Hence  no  adoption  or  other 
substitution  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  no  appointment  (Nar.),  shall  be  made 
in  such  a  case. 

184.  'Each  better  (son)/  i.e. 'each  earlier  named  among  the 
twelve'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  Kull.  and  Ragh.  add  that,  as  the 
son  of  a  -Sudra  wife  is  enumerated  among  the  twelve,  and  not  con- 
sidered like  the  son  of  Kshatriya  and  Vaiyya  wives  a  legitimate  son, 
he  inherits  only  on  failure  of  all  other  subsidiary  sons.  '  Many  (of) 
equal  rank/ i.e.  'many  Paunarbhavas  and  so  forth'  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

185.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  insert  after  'who  leaves  no  son/  'nor 
widow  and  daughters/  and  before  'brothers/  'who  leaves  no 
parents.'  Nar.,  who  (as  also  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  K.)  reads  eva  va, 
'or  brothers/  says  that  the  father  inherits  the  estate  of  an  undivided 


366  LAWS   OF   MANU.  IX,  186. 

1 86.  To  three  (ancestors)  water  must  be  offered, 
to  three  the  funeral  cake  is  given,  the  fourth 
(descendant  is)  the  giver  of  these  (oblations),  the 
fifth  has  no  connection  (with  them). 

187.  Always  to  that  (relative  within  three  de- 
grees) who  is  nearest  to  the  (deceased)  Sapi/zda  the 

son,  leaving  no  male  issue,  or  the  brothers  with  his  permission, 
and  that  the  estate  of  a  divided  son  descends  to  his  wife,  and  other 
heirs  mentioned  by  Yagri.  II,  135-136.  All  these  interpolations 
are  most  probably  improper,  as  Manu  nowhere  mentions  the  right 
of  a  wife  or  a  daughter,  not  appointed,  to  the  estate.  The  verse  can 
only  refer  to  a  divided  coparcener  or  to  the  separate  property  of  an 
undivided  one,  and  Manu's  opinion  seems  to  be  that  on  failure  of 
sons,  grandsons,  and  great-grandsons,  whose  rights  are  indicated 
by  verse  137,  the  father  shall  inherit,  and  after  him  the  brothers. 

186.  '  To  three/  i.  e. '  to  the  father,  the  grandfather,  and  the  great- 
grandfather' (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.).  To  these  same  three  the 
cakes  are  offered  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  Kull.  and  Ragh.  state  that  the  object 
of  the  verse  is  to  indicate  the  right  of  Kshetra^as  and  other  sub- 
sidiary sons  to  inherit  the  estate  of  a  grandfather  and  so  forth 
deceased  without  leaving  issue.  Kull.  adds  that  the  right  of  sons  and 
grandsons  of  a  legitimate  son  is  indicated  by  verse  137.  Nand., 
however,  thinks  that  the  verse  serves  to  prove  the  right  of  grand- 
sons and  great-grandsons  to  inherit  before  '  brothers  and  the  rest.' 

187.  Vas.  XVII,  81-82;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  33;  Ap.  II,  14,  2-3. 
The  above  translation  does  not  fully  agree  with  any  of  the  explan- 
ations given  by  the  four  commentators.  On  philological  grounds 
it  seems  to  me  improbable  that  anantara^  sapi/z<?at  can  mean  any- 
thing else  than '  nearest  to  the  Sapi^a,'  and  that  this  Sapiw^a  can  be 
anybody  else  than  the  deceased.  Further,  as  verse  186  apparently 
contains  a  definition  of  the  term,  limiting  Sapi#da-relationship 
to  three  degrees,  and  as  in  the  second  half  of  verse  187  the 
Sakulyas,  '  those  belonging  to  the  same  family,'  are  mentioned  as 
the  next  heirs,  it  seems  certain  that  '  the  nearest'  here  meant  is 
'  the  nearest  Sapiw^a  or  relative  within  three  degrees.'  Practically 
the  proposed  translation  is  not  much  different  from  that  extracted 
by  Kull.  and  others  by  the  grammatically  inadmissible  expedient  of 
taking  sapi#</at  for  sapifldamadhyat,  '  among  the  Sapiw^as.'  The 
correctness  of  the  above  explanation  is  also  attested  by  the  closely 
allied  parallel  passage  of  Baudhayana  I,  n,  9-13,  the  first  Sutra  of 


IX,  187.  INHERITANCE.  367 

estate  shall  belong;  afterwards  a  Sakulya  shall  be 
(the  heir,  then)  the  spiritual  teacher  or  the  pupil. 

which  corresponds  to  verse  186,  while  the  other  four  express  the 
same  sense  as  verse  187.  There  too  the  term  Sakulya  occurs, 
which  £imutavahana  takes  to  denote  the  three  descendants  beyond 
the  great-grandson  and  the  three  ascendants  beyond  the  great- 
grandfather, while  others  explain  it  as  a  general  term, '  members  of 
one  family.'  What  Manu's  precise  acceptation  of  the  word  was 
cannot  be  said  with  certainty.  But,  as  no  technical  definition  is 
given  by  him,  it  will  be  safest  to  take  it  in  its  etymological  and 
widest  sense,  'the  (remoter)  members  of  the  family,'  and  to 
assume  that  the  principle  of  nearness  to  the  deceased  regulated 
the  succession. 

As  regards  the  explanations  of  the  commentators,  Kull.  says, 
'  As  this  general  rule  would  be  meaningless,  if  it  were  referred  to 
the  legitimate  son  and  those  other  Sapiwdas  alone,  who  have  already 
been  mentioned,  its  object  must  therefore  be  (to  teach)  that  the 
wife  and  the  rest,  who  have  not  been  mentioned,  shall  inherit.  To 
that  SapMa  who  is  the  nearest  among  the  Sapi/z^as,  be  he  a  male 
or  a  female,  the  estate  of  the  deceased  shall  belong.'  He  then  goes 
on  to  enumerate  the  heirs  in  the  following  order:  1.  the  legitimate 
son,  sharing  with  a  Kshetra^a  (verse  164),  and  a  virtuous  adoptive 
son  (verse  141)  ;  2.  the  appointed  daughter  and  her  son;  3.  the 
Kshetrag-a  and  the  other  ten  subsidiary  sons,  each  on  failure  of  the 
earlier  named,  with  the  proviso  that  the  son  of  a  ^udra  wife  receives 
one-tenth  of  the  estate  only  (verse  154);  4.  the  widow  (on  this  point 
a  great  many  passages  are  quoted,  and  Medh.  is  censured,  because 
in  his  commentary,  which  is  missing  in  the  I.  O.  MSS.,  like  the 
whole  passage  182-201,  he  denied  her  right  to  inherit);  5.  the 
daughter,  not  appointed;  6.  the  father  and  the  mother;  7.  full 
brothers ;  8.  sons  of  full  brothers ;  9.  the  paternal  grandmother 
(verse  227);  10.  any  other  near  SapiWa,  (a)  of  the  grandfather's 
line,  (b)  of  the  great-grandfather's  line,  and  so  forth ;  1 1 .  the 
Samanodakas,  or  relatives  allied  by  libations  of  water  (Kull.  con- 
sidering Sakulya  as  equivalent  to  Samanodaka);  12.  the  teacher; 
13.  the  pupil.  According  to  Kull.  the  translation  should  be,  'To 
the  nearest  among  the  Sapiw^as  (male  or  female)  the  estate  shall 
belong;  afterwards  (on  failure  of  Sapi^as)  a  Samanodaka  shall  be 
(the  heir),  next  the  teacher,  and  (then)  the  pupil.'  Ragh.  in  sub- 
stance agrees  with  this  explanation,  but  in  order  to  make  the  rule 
still  more  fully  agree  with  Yagft.  II,  135-136,  he  asserts  that  the 


368  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


1 88.  But  on  failure  of  all  (heirs)  Brahma^as  (shall) 
share  the  estate,  (who  are)  versed  in  the  three 
Vedas1pure  and  self-controlled :  thus  the  law  is  not 
violated. 

Bandhus  or  cognates  are  also  implied  by  the  term  Sakulya.  His 
explanation  of  the  first  words  also  differs  from  Kull.'s,  and  is  more 
in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  grammar, '  He  who  is  the  nearest  to 
the  Sapi«fi?a,  i.e.  to  the  legitimate  son  and  the  son  of  the  daughter 
— (viz.)  the  five,  the  wife  and  the  rest  (mentioned  by  YSgn.  II, 
135-136).'  Ragh.  and  Kull.  are  clearly  under  the  spell  of  Y&gw., 
and  most  improperly  transfer  into  Manu's  text  the  ideas  of  the 
latter.  Nar.'s  short  disjointed  remarks  are  not  very  clear.  He 
explains  the  first  words  by  eshazrc  madhye  sapManam  ato 
tho[yo]nantaro  yatha  putrasya  pita  tasya  tatpitetyadi  tasya  tasya 
taddhanam,  'Among  those  Sapiwdas  the  nearest  to  him,  i.e.  the 
father  to  his  son,  his  father  to  him,  and  so  forth ;  always  to  him  that 
estate  (shall  belong).'  He  then  enumerates,  on  failure  of  the  father, 
the  brother  and  his  son,  the  grandfather,  the  Samanodaka,  the 
Sagotra,  and  the  'Bandhu,  i.e.  the  maternal  uncle  and  the  rest/  as 
successive  heirs,  and  explains  Sakulya  by  Bandhu. 

Nand.,  whose  text  has  a  faulty  reading  sapi^arha^,  asserts 
that  pmda  (sapi«dfo  ?)  means  '  the  deceased,'  and  explains  the  first 
line  by  saying,  '  Always  to  him  who  is  the  Sapi«</a  nearest  to  the 
deceased  the  wealth,  the  estate,  shall  belong — the  repetition  (of  the 
word  tasya)  shows  the  successive  order.'  The  Sakulyas  are,  accord- 
ing to  him,  the  Samanodakas.  He  reads  sakulya^  syu^, '  Sakulyas 
shall  be  the  heirs/ 

188.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  41 ;  Vas.  XVII,  84-86  ;  Baudh.  I,  13, 14;  Vi. 
XVII,  13-14.  The  phrase 'on  failure  of  all  (heirs),' i.e. 'of  those 
mentioned'  (Ragh.),  or '  of  all  males  and  females,  related  in  any  way 
(to  the  deceased),'  (Nand.),  indicates  according  to  Kull.  that  other 
unnamed  persons,  such  as  fellow-students,  are  also  entitled  to 
inherit.  'Brahma^as,'  i.e.  '  such  as  live  in  the  same  village'  (Nar.). 
'Pure,'  i.e.  'careful  of  external  and  internal  purity'  (Kull.),  or 
better  'who  are  of  good  conduct'  (N&r.).  According  to  Kull.  and 
Ragh.,  the  meaning  of  the  last  clause  is  that  the  Brahmawas  who 
inherit  the  estate  will  offer  the  funeral  sacrifices,  and  thus  no 
violation  of  the  law  regarding  the  -Sraddhas  will  occur.  Nar.  points 
out  that  this  rule,  as  the  following  verse  shows,  refers  solely  to  the 
property  of  a  Brahma/za. 


IX,  191.  INHERITANCE.  369 

189.  The  property  of  a  Brahma/za  must  never  be 
taken  by  the  king,  that  is  a  settled  rule ;  but  (the 
property  of  men)  of  other  castes  the  king  may  take 
on  failure  of  all  (heirs). 

190.  (If  the  widow)  of  (a  man)  who  died  without 
leaving  issue,  raises  up  to  him  a  son  by  a  member 
of  the  family  (Sagotra),  she  shall  deliver  to  that 
(son)  the  whole  property  which  belonged  to  the 
(deceased). 

191.  But  if  two  (sons),  begotten  by  two  (different 
men),  contend  for  the  property  (in  the  hands)  of 
their  mother,  each  shall  take,  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
other,  what  belonged  to  his  father. 

189.  Ap.  II,  14,  5  ;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  42  ;  Vas.  XVII,  83;  Baudh. 
I,  13,  15-16.  According  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  the  repetition  of  the 
prohibition  to  take  the  property  of  a  Brahmawa  shows  that,  if  no 
learned  and  virtuous  Brahma«as  are  to  be  found,  the  king  shall 
give  the  estate  of  a  Brahmawa  deceased  without  heirs,  even  to  men 
who  have  nothing  but  the  name  of  the  Brahmawa  caste. 

190.  According  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  this  verse  refers  to  the  case 
in  which  a  duly  authorised  widow  bears  a  son  to  a  relative  of  her 
husband,  and  repeats  the  rule  given  above,  verse  146,  which  here 
however  is  made  imperative  on  the  widow.  Kull.  adds  that  the 
object  of  the  repetition  is  to  show  that  not  only  a  brother-in-law  or 
a  Sapiw^a,  as  stated  above,  verse  59,  but  also  a  remoter  relative,  a 
Sagotra,  may  beget  a  son  for  a  man  deceased  without  issue.  Nar., 
on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  in  accordance  with  this  verse  a  child 
which  a  widow  bears,  even  without  authorisation,  to  a  Sagotra  shall 
inherit  the  estate  of  the  widow's  deceased  husband  (sagotrad  yadi 
tantu/rc  sa/Tztanam  ahared  aniyuktapi  stri  tada  golakatve  'pi  tasya 
gwatyantarabhave  kshetrapatidhanaharitvam  ity  artha^).  He  adds 
that  some  apply  this  rule  to  -Sudra  females  only,  and  that  in  the 
opinion  of  these  persons  Gu^a^as,  Kaninas,  and  Saho^as  also 
are  considered  as  sons  in  the  case  of  -Sudras  only,  not  in  the  case 
of  Aryans. 

191.  Kull.  and  Nand.  think  that  the  verse  refers  to  the  case  in 
which  a  woman  married  successively  two  husbands  and  bore  a  son 
to  either.    If  the  two  husbands  died  and  their  property  remained  in 

[25]  B  b 


370  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  192 

192.  But  when  the  mother  has  died,  all  the 
uterine  brothers  and  the  uterine  sisters  shall  equally 
divide  the  mother's  estate. 

193.  Even  to  the  daughters  of  those  (daughters) 
something  should  be  given,  as  is  seemly,  out  of  the 
estate  of  their  maternal  grandmother,  on  the  score 
of  affection. 

194.  What  (was  given)  before  the  (nuptial)  fire, 
what  (was  given)  on  the  bridal  procession,  what  was 

the  hands  of  the  wife,  she  is  to  make  over  the  entire  property  of 
her  first  husband  to  his  son,  and  the  property  of  the  second  hus- 
band to  the  son  of  the  latter.  Ragh.  gives  the  same  explanation, 
but  proposes  as  an  alternative,  '  If  two  (sons),  begotten  by  two 
(different  men),  contend  for  the  separate  property  of  their  mother, 
&c.'  For  a  twice-married  woman  will  have  received  nuptial  and 
other  presents  from  both  husbands.  After  her  death  her  sons  shall 
each  receive  what  came  to  her  from  his  father.  Nar.  finally  holds 
that  the  verse  refers  to  a  contention  between  a  legitimate  son  and 
a  Golaka  or  a  Paunarbhava  for  the  estates  of  their  respective  fathers 
which  their  mother  holds.  He  construes  striya/$  with  g-atau,  '  be- 
gotten by  two  (different  men)  on  one  woman.' 

192.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  restrict  this  rule,  in  accordance  with  a 
passage  of  Brzhaspati,  to  unmarried  daughters,  and  hold  that  mar- 
ried daughters  receive  merely  'a  token  of  respect/  The  latter 
amounts  according  to  Kull.  to  '  one-fourth  of  a  share  ; '  see  above, 
verse  118.  Nar.  says  that  the  term  'the  mother's  estate'  refers  to 
'  other  property  than  stridhana  or  separate  property/  and  adds  to 
the  expression  '  the  sisters '  aputra/^,  '  those  who  have  no  sons.' 
He,  however,  gives  the  opinion,  held  by  Kull.  and  Ragh.  also, 
stating  that  it  belongs  to  'some.' 

193.  Kull.  holds  that  the  granddaughters  should  be  unmarried. 
Nar.  says, '  When  the  married  daughters  are  dead,  their  daughters 
shall  be  presented  at  will  by  their  maternal  uncles  with  the  share 
which  their  mothers  would  have  received  as  a  token  of  respect.' 
Ragh.,  too,  thinks  that  'on  the  score  of  affection'  means  'at  the 
pleasure  (of  the  heirs).'  But  Nand.  deduces  from  the  same  term 
the  absolute  necessity  of  the  gift. 

194.  Vi.  XVII,  17;  Y&gn.  II,  143.  'What  was  given  in  token 
of  love,'  i.e.  '  by  the  husband'  (ratikale,  Nar.). 


IX,  198.  INHERITANCE.  37 1 

given  in  token  of  love,  and  what  was  received  from 
her  brother,  mother,  or  father,  that  is  called  the  six- 
fold property  of  a  woman. 

195.  (Such  property),  as  well  as  a  gift  subsequent 
and  what  was  given  (to  her)  by  her  affectionate  hus- 
band, shall  go  to  her  offspring,  (even)  if  she  dies  in 
the  lifetime  of  her  husband. 

196.  It  is  ordained  that  the  property  (of  a  woman 
married)  according  to  the  Brahma,  the  Daiva,  the 
Arsha,  the  Gandharva,  or  the  Pra^apatya  rite  (shall 
belong)  to  her  husband  alone,  if  she  dies  without  issue. 

197.  But  it  is  prescribed  that  the  property  which 
may  have  been  given  to  a  (wife)  on  an  Asura  mar- 
riage or  (one  of  the)  other  (blamable  marriages, 
shall  go)  to  her  mother  and  to  her  father,  if  she  dies 
without  issue. 

198.  Whatever  property  may  have  been  given  by 
her  father  to  a  wife  (who  has  co-wives  of  different 
castes),  that  the  daughter  (of  the)  Brahma^i  (wife) 
shall  take,  or  that  (daughter's)  issue. 

195.  Yagn.  II,  144.  Kull.  and  Nar.  state  that  both  the  separate 
property  of  a  woman,  enumerated  in  verse  194,  and  that  named  in 
verse  195,  descend  to  her  children,  i.e.  'to  her  sons  and  the  rest' 
(Ragh.),  or  'to  her  sons  or  daughters'  (Nand.).  Nar.  remarks 
that  'a  gift  subsequent'  and  'the  husband's  affectionate  gift'  are 
not  stridhana,  or  separate  property,  and  that  hence  the  wife  has  no 
right  of  free  disposal  with  respect  to  these  two. 

196-197.  Vi.  XVII,  19-20;  Ya£w.  II,  145. 

196.  Nar.  adds  to  the  term  'property,'  stridhanastridhanarupam, 
1  whether  separate  property  or  not.' 

198.  I.  e.  if  a  Brahma/za  has  wives  of  the  Brahma^a  and  Ksha- 
triya  castes,  property  given  in  any  way  to  the  Kshatriya  wife  by 
her  own  family,  goes  to  the  daughter  of  the  Brahmarca  wife,  or  if 
that  daughter  of  the  Brahmawa  wife  is  dead  and  has  left  issue,  to 
the  latter.  '  Thus  the  sons  of  the  Brahmawa  wife  are  excluded' 
(Kull.,  Nar.).  Nar.  states  expressly  that  the  term  *  issue'  refers  to 
daughters  alone. 

B  b  2 


372  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  199. 

199.  Women  should  never  make  a  hoard  from 
(the  property  of)  their  families  which  is  common  to 
many,  nor  from  their  own  (husbands'  particular) 
property  without  permission. 

200.  The  ornaments  which  may  have  been  worn 
by  women  during  their  husbands'  lifetime,  his  heirs 
shall  not  divide;  those  who  divide  them  become 
outcasts. 

201.  Eunuchs  and  outcasts,  (persons)  born  blind 
or  deaf,  the  insane,  idiots  and  the  dumb,  as  well  as 
those  deficient  in  any  organ  (of  action  or  sensation), 
receive  no  share. 

199.  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  whose  explanation  the  translation  given 
above  follows,  take  the  first  clause  to  refer  to  the  property  of  a 
united  family,  and  the  second  to  the  separate  property  of  the  hus- 
bands. But  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  the  translation  should 
be  as  follows, '  Wives  should  never  take  anything  (for  their  private 
expenses)  from  (their  husbands'  property,  destined  for  the  support 
of)  their  families,  on  which  many  have  a  claim,  nor  from  their  own 
property  (which  is  not  stridhana),  without  the  consent  of  their  hus- 
bands/ Nar.'s  explanation  of  nirharaw  kuryu^,  *  should  (never) 
take  anything/  seems  preferable  to  that  given  by  Kull.  and  Ragh. 

200.  Vi.  XVII,  22.  'His  heirs/  i.  e.  '  the  sons  and  the  rest' 
(Kull.,  Nar.).  Nand.,  who  differs  from  the  above  explanation, 
says, '  Since  the  ornaments  are  the  husband's  property,  because 
they  have  not  been  mentioned  as  stridhana,  the  object  of  this 
utterance  is  to  forbid  their  going  to  the  heirs,  while  the  husband 
lives'  (alawkarasya  stridhane  'nudish/atvad  bhartrz'dhanatvena  bhar- 
tnbhave  dayadandm  praptyapavadartho  'yam  arambha^).  Nand. 
appears,  therefore,  to  construe  patyau  ^ivati  with  bha^eran,  just  as 
NandapawJita  does  in  the  parallel  passage  of  Vishwu  (see  Professor 
Jolly's  note). 

201-203.  Ap.  II,  14, 1, 15  ;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  23,  40,  43;  Vas.  XVII, 
52-53  ;  Baudh.  II,  3,  37-40 ;  Vi.  XV,  32-37  ;  Ya^w.  II,  140-141. 

2ci.  ' Eunuchs/  i.  e.  'those  who  are  incurable;'  ' outcasts/  i.  e. 
'  those  guilty  of  a  mortal  sin  (mahapataka)  before  they  perform  a 
penance;'  'the  insane,'  i.e.  'those  who  are  incurable'  (Nar.). 
'  Those  deficient  in  any  organ,  i.  e.  of  action'  (Nand.),  such  as 
lame  men  (Kull.,  Nand.),  such  as  men  without  hands  (Ragh.),  or 


IX,  204-  INHERITANCE.  373 

.      .      .  *, 

202.  But  it  is  just  that  (a  man)  who  knows  (the 
law)  should  give  even  to  all  of  them  food  and  rai-  $ 
ment  without  stint,  according  to  his  ability ;  he  who 
gives  it  not  will  become  an  outcast. 

203.  If  the  eunuch  and  the  rest  should  somehow 
or  other  desire  to  (take)  wives,  the  offspring  of  such 
among  them  as  have  children  is  worthy  of  a  share. 

204.  Whatever  property  the  eldest  (son)  acquires 
(by  his  own  exertion)  after  the  father's  death,  a 
share  of  that  (shall  belong)  to  his  younger  (brothers), 
provided  they  have  made  a  due  progress  in 
learning. 

also  '  of  sensation,'  such  as  men  who  have  lost  the  faculty  of  touch 
(Nar.). 

202.  Medh.  and  Kull.  take  atyantam,  'without  stint,'  in  the  sense 
of '  for  life.'  Nar.  construes  the  word  with  adadat,  and  explains 
'  he  who  does  not  give  it  at  all.'  Nand.  reads  abhyahgam,  '  oint- 
ments/ for  atyantam, '  without  stint.' 

203.  Medh.  is  of  opinion  that  some  of  the  persons  disqualified 
from  inheriting,  the  vataretas  kliba,  those  born  blind  and  the  lame, 
may  marry,  while  outcasts,  madmen,  and  the  rest  cannot  do  so. 
Hence  the  conditional  clause  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  adopted 
above  in  the  translation.  He,  however,  adds  that  the  rule  may 
also  refer  to  cases  in  which  the  cause  of  the  disqualification 
arose  after  marriage.  Nar.'s  explanation  is  substantially  the  same. 
But  he  considers  that  a  eunuch  and  an  outcast  cannot  contract 
a  legal  marriage,  and  that  the  expression  klibadaya^,  literally  '  those 
among  whom  the  eunuch  is  the  first,'  refers  to  '  men  born  blind  and 
the  rest.'  He  admits  also  the  rights  of  the  Kshetra^a  sons  of 
eunuchs  and  outcasts  who  contracted  a  marriage  before  their  dis- 
qualification arose.  Kull.  says,  '  By  the  employment  of  the  term 
"  somehow  or  other"  it  is  indicated  that  a  eunuch  and  the  rest  are 
not  worthy  to  marry.'  In  the  sequel  he  explains  the  word  '  off- 
spring' by  Kshetrag-a.  Ragh.  and  Nand.  follow  him  with  respect  to 
the  latter  point. 

204.  The  rule  refers  of  course  to  a  united  family  only  (Kull.). 
Medh.  infers  from  the  expression  vidyanupalina^,  'provided  they 
have  made  a  due  progress  in  learning/  that  '  persons  subsisting  by 
learning,  mechanics  and  artisans,  such  as  physicians,  actors,  singers/ 


374  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  205. 

205.  But  if  all  of  them,  being  unlearned,  acquire 
property  by  their  labour,  the  division  of  that  shall 
be  equal,  (as  it  is)  not  property  acquired  by  the 
father;   that  is  a  settled  rule. 

206.  Property  (acquired)  by  learning  belongs 
solely  to  him  to  whom  (it  was  given),  likewise  the 
gift  of  a  friend,  a  present  received  on  marriage  or 
with  the  honey-mixture. 

are  meant.  Nar.  and  Nand.  hold  that  no  part  of  an  acquisition, 
made  under  the  same  circumstances  by  the  youngest  brother,  can 
be  claimed  by  the  eldest,  because  this  verse  specifies  the  eldest 
alone,  and  because  the  next  verse  declares  that  the  acquisitions 
only  made  by  any  member  of  an  unlearned  family,  shall  be 
partible. 

205.  Gaut.  XXXVIII,  31.  This  rule  refers  to  acquisitions  by 
trade  (Medh.,  Kull.,  N&r.),  by  agriculture  (Medh.,  Kull.  Nand.),  or 
by  royal  service  (Medh.).  '  As  the  division  is  to  be  equal,  the 
eldest  receives  no  preferential  share'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nand.).  Medh. 
adds  that,  since  the  expression  '  as  it  is  not  property  acquired  by 
the  father,'  gives  the  reason  for  the  equal  division,  the  same  rule 
holds  good  for  the  division  of  the  estate  of  any  other  person  de- 
ceased without  issue.  Nand.  takes  apitrya  iti  for  apitrya^  iti  and 
explains  it  by  'since  (the  division)  has  not  been  made  by  the  father.' 

206.  Y&gri.  II,  1 1 8-1 1 9.  'Property  acquired  by  learning,'  i.e. 
'  a  fee  for  teaching  or  money  received  for  proficiency  in  an  art' 
(Medh.,  Nand.),  includes  according  to  a  text  of  Katyayana,  quoted 
by  Kull.  and  Ragh.  (see  Colebrooke  V,  Digest  CCCXLVII),  gifts 
from  pupils,  gratuities  for  performing  a  sacrifice,  a  fee  for  answer- 
ing a  difficult  question  in  casuistry,  or  for  ascertaining  a  doubtful 
point  in  law,  rewards  for  displaying  knowledge  or  for  victory  in  a 
learned  contest,  or  for  reciting  the  Veda  with  transcendent  ability. 
Instances  in  which  land  was  given  as  vidyadhana  occur  in  the 
inscriptions,  see  e.  g.  Indian  Antiquary,  XII,  p.  195  b,  1.  6.  'A 
present  received  on  marriage,'  i.  e.  'what  (the  bridegroom)  receives 
from  the  relatives  of  his  wife'  (Medh.,  Nar.),  or  'from  any  other 
person' (Medh. 'others'),  means  according  to  Nand.,  ' stridhana 
received  at  the  time  of  marriage'  (?).  '  A  present  received  with  the 
honey-mixture'  is  explained  by  Medh.  and,  as  Kull.  asserts,  by 
Gov.  also,  by  '  the  fee  given  for  the  performance  of  a  sacrifice.' 
But  the  explanation  given  by  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand., '  any 


IX,  209.  INHERITANCE.  375 

207.  But  if  one  of  the  brothers,  being  able  (to 
maintain  himself)  by  his  own  occupation,  does  not 
desire  (a  share  of  the  family)  property,  he  may  be 
made  separate  (by  the  others)  receiving  a  trifle  out 
of  his  share  to  live  upon. 

208.  What  one  (brother)  may  acquire  by  his 
labour  without  using  the  patrimony,  that  acqui- 
sition, (made  solely)  by  his  own  effort,  he  shall  not 
share  unless  by  his  own  will  (with  his  brothers). 

209.  But  if  a  father  recovers  lost  ancestral  pro- 
present  received,  in  token  of  respect,  with  the  honey-mixture,'  e.  g. 
a  silver  vase  (Ragh.),  is  preferable.  Regarding  the  persons  worthy 
of  the  honey-mixture,  see  above,  III,  1 19-120.  Kull.  points  out 
that  this  rule  is  a  restriction  of  that  given  above,  verse  204.  Ragh. 
adds  that,  as  the  parallel  passage  of  Yagri.  shows,  such  acquisi- 
tions become  the  private  property  of  the  donee,  only  if  they  were 
obtained  'without  detriment  to  the  paternal  estate  ;'  see  also  below, 
verse  208. 

207.  Yagn.  II,  116.  The  translation  given  above  follows  the 
second  explanation  offered  by  Medh.,  and  the  glosses  of  Kull. 
and  Nar.  According  to  Medh.'s  first  explanation,  with  which 
Nand.  agrees,  the  translation  would  agree  with  Sir  W.  Jones's, '  he 
may  debar  himself  from  his  share.'  The  reason  why  a  trifle  should 
be  given  is,  according  to  all  commentators,  that  future  disputes 
may  be  prevented. 

208.  Yagn.  II,  118;  Vi.  XVIII,  42.  'By  his  labour,'  i.e.  'by 
agriculture  and  the  like'  (Medh.,  Kull,  Nand.),  or  'by  any  occupa- 
tion entailing  trouble'  (jrama^anyakarmawa,  Nar.).  Anupaghnan, 
'without  using'  (Nand.),  or  'without  living  upon'  (Ragh.),  is  ex- 
plained by  Kull.  '  without  detriment  to,'  and  Nand.  mentions  this 
interpretation  also.  Nar.  remarks  that  acquisitions  made  without 
labour  or  trouble  are  liable  to  partition.  Nand.  says  that  the  rule, 
given  in  this  verse,  may  be  reconciled  with  that  contained  in  verse 
205,  by  assuming  that  the  latter  presupposes  that  all  brothers  exert 
themselves  according  to  their  ability  (purvaw  sarveshu  vathasa- 
marthyam  ihamaneshu  bhratrzshu  labdhasya  samavibhaga  ukti  ity 
avirodho  'nusawzdheya^). 

209.  Yagfi.  II,  119;  Vi.  XVIII,  43.  The  translation  of  paitrz- 
kam,  lit. '  paternal,'  by  '  ancestral,'  is  based  on  Nar.'s  gloss  svapitr*'- 


37^  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  210. 

perty,  he  shall  not  divide  it,  unless  by  his  own  will, 
with  his  sons,  (for  it  is)  self-acquired  (property). 

210.  If  brothers,  (once)  divided  and  living  (again) 
together  (as  coparceners),  make  a  second  partition, 
the  division  shall  in  that  case  be  equal ;  in  such  a 
case  there  is  no  right  of  primogeniture. 

31 X.  If  the  eldest  or  the  youngest  (brother)  is 
deprived  of  his  share,  or  if  either  of  them  dies,  his 
share  is  not  lost  (to  his  immediate  heirs). 

212.  His  uterine  brothers,  having  assembled  to- 
gether, shall  equally  divide  it,  and  those  brothers 
who  were  reunited  (with  him)  and  the  uterine  sisters. 

sambandhi  and  on  Ragh.'s  pitrzpitamahadisambandhi.  The  latter 
refers  also  to  the  parallel  passage  of  Ya^n.  Anavaptam,  '  lost,' 
means  literally  '  not  obtained  (by  his  father).'  The  translation  of 
svayamargitam  by  'for  it  is  self-acquired'  agrees  with  Nand.'s 
remark,  svayamargitatvad  ity  artha^.  Nar.  adds,  '  And  thus  it  has 
been  declared  that  property  of  the  father  which  has  not  been 
acquired  by  him  with  exceedingly  great  trouble  must  be  divided  at 
the  will  of  the  sons,  and  to  this  refers  the  passage  of  Ya^w.  II,  121, 
"  Over  land  acquired  by  the  grandfather,  &c." '  Medh.,  whose  com- 
mentary on  this  verse  is  very  corrupt,  seems  likewise  to  have 
inferred  from  it  that  Manu  admitted  the  equal  ownership  of  a 
father  and  his  sons  in  ancestral  property  (see  also  Colebrooke  V, 
Digest  XCI).  But  he  combats  the  theory  that  sons  may  without 
a  violation  of  their  duty  force  the  father  to  divide  the  ancestral 
property. 

210.  Vi.  XVIII,  41. 

211.  'Be  deprived  of  his  share/  i.  e.  'because  he  has  become  an 
outcast  or  the  like'  (Medh.),  or  'because  he  has  become  an  ascetic' 
(Kull.,  Nand.),  or  'because  he  has  emigrated'  (Nand.),  or  'because 
he  has  become  a  eunuch  after  the  (first)  partition'  (Nar.).  Na 
lupyate,  '  is  not  lost  (to  his  immediate  heirs),'  is  explained  by  Nar. 
as  follows, '  His  share,  being  formerly  determined,  is  not  lost,  i.  e. 
must  not  be  divided  by  all  the  reunited  coparceners  and  thus  be 
made  to  disappear '  (see  also  the  text  of  Brzhaspati,  Colebrooke 
V,  Digest  CCCCVII,  2).  '  What  is  to  be  done  with  the  share  is 
shown  in  the  next  verse'  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.). 

212.  Vi.  XVII,  17;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  21;   Yagn.  II,  138.     The 


IX,  214.  INHERITANCE.  377 

213.  An  eldest  brother  who  through  avarice  may 
defraud  the  younger  ones,  shall  no  (longer  hold  the 
position  of)  the  eldest,  shall  not  receive  an  (eldest 
son's  additional)  share,  and  shall  be  punished  by 
the  king. 

214.  All  brothers  who  habitually  commit  for- 
bidden acts,  are  unworthy  of  (a  share  of)  the  pro- 
perty, and  the  eldest  shall  not  make  (anything  his) 
separate  property  without  giving  (an  equivalent)  to 
his  younger  brothers. 

meaning  of  the  verse  is:  1.  according  to  Medh.,  with  whose  opinion 
the  not  very  clear  glosses  of  Kull.  and  Ragh.  seem  to  agree,  '  the 
share  of  a  deceased  reunited  brother  goes  first  to  the  reunited 
brothers  of  the  full  blood  and  to  such  sisters  of  the  full  blood  who 
are  not  married  (aputra^,  MSS.  for  apratta^) — married  sisters 
(pravr/tta/^,  MSS.  for  pradatta/^)  being  excluded,  because  they 
belong  to  another  family — next  to  not  reunited  brothers  of  the  full 
blood,  finally  to  reunited  half-brothers ; '  2.  according  to  Nar.,  'the 
share  of  a  reunited  brother  devolves  first  on  reunited  brothers  of 
the  whole  blood,  next  on  reunited  half-brothers,  further  on  sisters 
of  the  full  blood,  then  on  the  sons  of  brothers  [of  the  whole 
blood  ?],  and  finally  on  sons  of  half-brothers  [?  tadabhave  tvasoda- 
rady  api].'  Nand.  has  the  same  order  of  heirs  as  Nar.,  but  stops 
with  '  the  sisters  of  the  whole  blood.'  Nar.'s  and  Nand.'s  explana- 
tion, which  strictly  follows  the  order  of  the  enumeration  in  the  text, 
agrees  with  Brz'haspati's  rule  (Colebrooke  V,  Digest  CCCCVII,  3), 
which  likewise  seems  to  be  a  paraphrase  of  Manu's  words.  Kull., 
Ragh.,  and  Nar.  hold  that  the  heirs,  named  in  the  verse,  inherit 
only  on  failure  of  sons,  wives,  daughters,  and  parents.  Nar.  further 
remarks  that  some  refer  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one  to  the 
division  of  the  estate  of  one  who  died  before  partition,  while  others 
believe  that  it  applies  to  the  estate  of  a  reunited  brother  only. 

213.  *  Shall  no  (longer  hold  the  position  of)  the  eldest,'  i.e.  '  shall 
not  receive  the  honours,  e.  g.  in  saluting,  due  to  the  eldest  brother' 
(Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  The  insertion  of  the  words  '  an  eldest 
son's  additional'  before  '  share,'  is  made  on  the  authority  of  Medh. 
and  Kull.  '  Shall  be  punished,'  i.  e. '  by  reprimand  (vagdawdadhig- 
da#</abhyam)  or  by  a  fine  as  the  case  may  require'  (Medh.). 

214.  Ap.  II,  14, 15 ;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  40;  Baudh.  II,  3,  38.    'Who 


2J&  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  215. 

215.  If  undivided  brethren,  (living  with  their 
father,)  together  make  an  exertion  (for  gain),  the 
father  shall  on  no  account  give  to  them  unequal 
shares  (on  a  division  of  the  estate). 

216.  But  a  son,  born  after  partition,  shall  alone 
take  the  property  of  his  father,  or  if  any  (of  the 
other  sons)  be  reunited  with  the  (father),  he  shall 
share  with  them. 

217.  A  mother  shall  obtain  the  inheritance  of  a 
son  (who  dies)  without  leaving  issue,  and,  if  the 
mother  be  dead,  the  paternal  grandmother  shall 
take  the  estate. 


habitually  commit  forbidden  acts/  i.  e.  '  who  are  addicted  to  gam- 
bling, drinking,  and  the  like  vices'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'who,  being 
Brahmawas,  follow  despicable  modes  of  living,  such  as  tending 
cattle,  serving  Sudras  and  the  like'  (Nar.).  Na  .  .  .  .  kurvita 
yautukam, ■  shall  not  make  (anything  his)  separate  property,'  means 
according  to  Nand.  '  shall  not  give  a  marriage-portion  to  his 
daughter  without  having  made  a  division  of  the  estate.'  The  correct 
interpretation  is,  however,  that  given  by  the  other  commentators, 
according  to  which  the  eldest  is  not  to  appropriate  anything  out 
of  the  common  stock  for  himself  'without  giving  an  equivalent  to 
the  others'  (kanish/^ebhyas  tavad  adattva,  Nar.). 

215.  Y&gn.  II,  120.  Medh.  remarks  that  this  rule  is  a  restric- 
tion of  the  general  power  of  the  father  to  make  an  unequal  .division 
(Yagn.ll,  116),  and  thinks  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  all  the  brothers 
should  have  been  associated  in  the  same  kind  of  work.  According 
to  him  it  is  sufficient  that  all  have  exerted  themselves  to  gain 
money.  Nar.  and  Nand.  clearly  express  the  contrary  view  (sahot- 
thana/rc  sambhuyavatfigyadina  vittar^anam,  Nar.). 

216.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  29  ;  Vi.  XVII,  3  ;  Ya§™.  II,  122. 

217.  Vi.  XVII,  7;  Yagfi.  II,  135.  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  all 
three  hold  that  the  mother  inherits  only  on  failure  of  sons  [grand- 
sons and  great-grandsons,  Nand.],  widows,  and  daughters.  But 
they  disagree  with  respect  to  the  sequence  of  the  next  follow- 
ing heirs.  Kull.  holds  that  the  mother  and  the  father,  whose 
right  has  been  mentioned  above,  verse  185,  follow  next,  inherit- 
ing conjointly,  then  brothers,  afterwards  brothers'  sons,  and  after 


IX,  219.  INHERITANCE.  379 

218.  And  if,  after  all  the  debts  and  assets  have 
been  duly  distributed  according  to  the  rule,  any 
(property)  be  afterwards  discovered,  one  must 
divide  it  equally. 

219.  A  dress,  a  vehicle,  ornaments,  cooked  food, 
water,  and  female  (slaves),  property  destined  for 
pious  uses  or  sacrifices,  and  a  pasture-ground,  they 
declare  to  be  indivisible. 

them  the  paternal  grandmother.  Nar.  gives  the  following  order : 
i.  mother,  2.  father,  3.  brothers,  4.  brothers'  sons,  5.  maternal 
grandmother.  Medh.  says  that  this  verse  has  been  explained 
formerly.  The  portion  of  his  commentary  where  the  explanation 
occurred,  has,  however,  been  lost ;  see  note  on  verse  187. 

218.  Ya§™.  II,  126.  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.  point  out  that  on  the 
division  of  property  discovered  after  partition,  the  eldest,  according 
to  this  text,  receives  no  preferential  share.  Nar.  adds  that  this  rule 
applies  also  to  debts,  discovered  after  partition.  Nar.  inserts  this 
verse  after  verse  219. 

219.  Gaut.  XXVIII,  46-47  ;  Vi.  XVIII,  44.  Instead  of  pattram, 
1  a  vehicle/  i.  e.  '  a  horse  or  cart,  used  exclusively  by  one  of  the 
coparceners  during  union'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  Nand. 
reads  patram, '  a  drinking-vessel.'  Striya^,  '  female  (slaves)/  means 
according  to  Nar. '  wives.'  My  translation  of  yogakshemam,  which 
I  take  with  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  as  a  copulative  compound  in 
the  neuter  gender,  by  '  property  destined  for  pious  uses  and  sacri- 
fices/ rests  on  the  explanation  given  by  Vi^wancrvara  (Colebrooke, 
Mit.  I,  4,  23),  and  adopted  by  Haradatta  and  Nandapa/z^ita  on  the 
parallel  passages  of  Gaut.  and  Vi.  I  prefer  it  to  all  others,  chiefly 
on  account  of  the  explicit  passage  of  Laugakshi  which  Vign&nesvara. 
quotes.  In  its  favour  speaks  also  that  numerous  royal  grants  allow 
villages  or  land  to  Brahmawas  and  their  descendants  for  the  per- 
formance of  certain  sacrifices,  or  for  charitable  purposes,  such  as 
the  daily  distribution  of  food  (annasattra  or  sadavrata),  and  that 
the  occurrence  of  a  rule  in  the  Smrz'tis,  declaring  property  given 
under  such  conditions  to  be  impartible,  is  no  more  than  might  be 
expected.  The  commentators  on  Manu,  on  the  other  hand,  give 
the  following  explanations :  1.  'the  means  of  securing  protection, 
i.e.  royal  councillors,  family  priests,  ministers,  old  women  (vr/ddha?), 
a  house,  and  a  £ara,  a  spy(?),  or  a  pasture-ground  (?)  and  the  like' 
(Medh.);  2. '  a  royal  councillor,  a  domestic  priest  and  the  like'  (Kull, 


38o 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


IX,  220. 


h 


^ 


V 


220.  The  division  (of  the  property)  and  the  rules 
for  allotting  (shares)  to  the  (several)  sons,  those  be- 
gotten on  a  wife  and  the  rest,  in  (due)  order,  have 
been  thus  declared  to  you ;  hear  (now)  the  laws 
concerning  gambling. 

221.  Gambling  and  betting  let  the  king  exclude 
from  his  realm ;  those  two  vices  cause  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  kingdoms  of  princes. 

222.  Gambling  and  betting  amount  to  open  theft; 
the  king  shall  always  exert  himself  in  suppressing 
both  (of  them). 

223.  When  inanimate  (things)  are  used  (for 
staking  money  on  them),  that  is  called  among  men 
gambling  (dyuta),  when  animate  beings  are  used 
(for  the  same  purpose),  one  must  know  that  to  be 
betting  (samahvaya). 

224.  Let  the  king  corporally  punish  all  those 
(persons)  who  either  gamble  and  bet  or  afford  (an 

and  Ragh.,  which  latter  reads,  however,  yogakshemapra&iram) ; 
3.  '  means  of  gain,  i.  e.  a  grant  and  the  like,  received  from  a  king 
and  the  like,  and  gained  by  oneself,  and  means  of  protection' 
(prakare  k&  ish/akadi/^  ?  Nar.) ;  4.  '  sources  of  gain,  i.  e.  persons 
for  whom  one  sacrifices  and  the  like,  sources  of  protection,  i.  e. 
doorkeepers  and  the  like,  and  sources  of  gain  and  protection, 
i.e.  lords  of  villages  and  the  like'  (Nand.).  PraMra,  'a  pasture- 
ground,'  means  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  '  a  road  leading  to 
a  field,  a  garden  and  the  like/ 

Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.  state  that  the  first  four  articles  shall  in 
general  be  kept  by  the  coparcener  who  used  them  or  for  whose  use 
they  were  prepared,  but  that  articles  or  quantities  of  exceptional 
value  must  be  sold  or  exchanged  for  other  property.  Wells  and  so 
forth  are  to  be  used  by  all  the  coparceners  (Kull.,  Nand.).  Female 
slaves  are  to  do  work  for  all  coparceners  (Kull.). 

221-229.  Ap.  II,  25,  12-15  5  Gaut.  XXV,  18  ;  Baudh.  II,  2,  16  ; 
Ya§7&.  II,  199-203.  In  the  I.  0.  MSS.  Medh.'s  commentary  on 
verses  221-227  is  missing. 

224.  Y^,gn.  II,  304.    {  The  distinctive  marks  of  twice-born  men/ 


IX,  228.  GAMBLING   AND    BETTING.  38 1 

opportunity  for  it),  likewise  6udras  who  assume  the 
distinctive  marks  of  twice-born  (men). 

225.  Gamblers,  dancers  and  singers,  cruel  men, 
men  belonging  to  an  heretical  sect,  those  following 
forbidden  occupations,  and  sellers  of  spirituous  liquor, 
let  him  instantly  banish  from  his  town. 

226.  If  such  (persons  who  are)  secret  thieves, 
dwell  in  the  realm  of  a  king,  they  constantly  harass 
his  good  subjects  by  their  forbidden  practices. 

227.  In  a  former  Kalpa  this  (vice  of )  gambling 
has  been  seen  to  cause  great  enmity ;  a  wise 
man,  therefore,  should  not  practise  it  even  for 
amusement 

228.  On  every  man  who  addicts  himself  to  that 
(vice)  either  secretly  or  openly,  the  king  may  inflict 
punishment  according  to  his  discretion. 

i.  e.  ■  the  sacrificial  thread  and  the  like'  (Kull.,  Nar.).  '  Shall  punish 
corporally/  i.  e. '  shall  cause  them  to  be  flogged,  &c.'  (Nar.),  or  '  shall 
cause  their  hands  and  feet  to  be  cut  off  and  so  forth  according  to 
the  gravity  of  the  offence'  (Kull.,  Ragh.). 

225.  Instead  of  kruran,  'cruel  men/ i.e.  'those  who  hate  men 
learned  in  the  Veda'  (Kull),  Nar.  and  Ragh.  read  keran,  which  the 
former  explains  by '  men  of  exceedingly  crooked  behaviour/  and 
the  latter  in  accordance  with  Kull.'s  explanation  of  kruran.  Nand. 
reads  kailan,  'given  to  sports'  (kelmlan),  and  K.  £oran,  'thieves.' 
Sau«^ikan,  '  distillers  or  sellers  of  spirituous  liquor'  (Kull.,  Nar.), 
may  also  mean  '  drunkards/  as  Nand.  explains  it. 

226.  Instead  of 'who  are  secret  thieves'  (Kull.),  Nar.  says, 
'  and  secret  thieves.'  Badhante,  '  harass'  (Kull.),  means  according 
to  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand. '  corrupt/ 

227.  Nar.  explains  purakalpe,  'in  a  former  Kalpa/  by  'in  the 
ancient  stories/  and  Ragh.  and  Nand.  point  to  the  adventures  of 
king  Nala  and  Yudhish/^ira,  which,  no  doubt,  are  alluded  to  in 
the  text. 

228.  Ragh.  and  Nand.  point  out  that  not  only  corporal  punish- 
ment (according  to  verse  224),  but  also  a  fine  may  be  inflicted;  see 
also  the  next  verse. 


382  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  229. 

229.  But  a  Kshatriya,  a  VaLsya,  and  a  6udra  who 
are  unable  to  pay  a  fine,  shall  discharge  the  debt  by 
labour ;  a  Brahma^a  shall  pay  it  by  instalments. 

230.  On  women,  infants,  men  of  disordered  mind, 
the  poor  and  the  sick,  the  king  shall  inflict  punish- 
ment with  a  whip,  a  cane,  or  a  rope  and  the  like. 

231.  But  those  appointed  (to  administer  public) 
affairs,  who,  baked  by  the  fire  of  wealth,  mar  the 
business  of  suitors,  the  king  shall  deprive  of  their 
property. 

232.  Forgers  of  royal  edicts,  those  who  corrupt 
his  ministers,  those  who  slay  women,  infants,  or 
Brahma^as,  and  those  who  serve  his  enemies,  the 
king  shall  put  to  death. 

233.  Whenever  any  (legal  transaction)  has  been 
completed  or  (a  punishment)  been  inflicted  according 
to  the  law,  he  shall  sanction  it  and  not  annul  it. 

229.  Yagri.  II,  43.     Compare  the  rule  given  at  VIII,  177. 

230.  iSipha, '  a  whip/  is  explained  by  Ragh.  as  '  a  rod  measuring 
five  fingers/  or  '  the  pendent  root  of  a  fig-tree.'  Nar.  and  Nand. 
give  the  latter  meaning.  Medh.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  read  daridranatha- 
rogi^am, '  the  poor,  the  unprotected,  and  the  sick.' 

231.  See  above,  VII,  124 ;  Vi.  V,  180.  '  Those  appointed,  &c./ 
i.e.  viceroys  and  so  forth  (Medh.),  or  judges  and  so  forth  (Nar.). 
'Baked  by  the  fire  of  wealth'  is  a  simile  taken  from  the  burning  of 
earthen  pots,  and  means  that  such  persons  by  the  influence  of 
wealth  undergo  a  change  for  the  worse,  just  as  a  pot  heated  in  a 
fire  changes  its  colour,  or,  as  the  Vaireshikas  hold;  its  nature.  Ac- 
cording to  Medh.,  'others'  read  ye  'niyuktas  tu,  and  referred  the 
verse  to  non-official  persons  meddling  with  administrative  or 
judicial  business. 

232.  Ya.gn.  II,  240;  Vi.  V,  9, 11. 

233.  Medh.  and  Kull.  refer  this  prohibition  to  cases  which  have 
been  properly  decided  in  the  king's  courts,  while  Nar.  thinks  that 
it  applies  to  orders  passed  by  former  kings.  Nand.  gives  a  different 
explanation  of  the  words  tirita  and  anurish/a.  He  adduces  a  verse 
of  Katyayana,  according  to  which  the  former  means  'a  cause  or 


IX,  237.  MISCELLANEOUS    PUNISHMENTS.  383 

234.  Whatever  matter  his  ministers  or  the  judge 
may  settle  improperly,  that  the  king  himself  shall 
(re-)settle  and  fine  (them)  one  thousand  (pa^as). 

235.  The  slayer  of  a  Brahma/za,  (a  twice-born  I 
man)  who  drinks  (the  spirituous  liquor  called)  Sura, 
he  who  steals  (the  gold  of  a  Brahma^a),  and  he  who 
violates  a  Guru's  bed,  must  each  and  all  be  con- 
sidered as  men  who  committed  mortal  sins  (maha- 
pataka). 

236.  On  those  four  even,  if  they  do  not  perform 
a  penance,  let  him  inflict  corporal  punishment  and      * 
fines  in  accordance  with  the  law.  _. 

23J.  For  violating  a  Guru's  bed,  (the  mark  of )  a    SI 
female    part   shall   be  (impressed  on  the  forehead 
with  a  hot  iron);  for  drinking  (the  spirituous  liquor    r 
called)  Sura,  the  sign  of  a  tavern ;  for  stealing  (the 
gold  of  a  Brahma/za),  a  dog's  foot ;  for  murdering  a 
Brahma^a,  a  headless  corpse.  "^ 

plaint  declared  to  be  just  or  unjust  by  the  assessors/  and  the  latter 
'  a  cause  or  plaint  confirmed  by  witnesses.' 

234.  Yagn.  II,  305.  Medh.  and  Kull.  think  that  this  rule  refers 
to  cases  where  the  cause  of  the  unjust  decision  is  not  a  bribe,  be- 
cause the  punishment  of  corrupt  judges  has  been  prescribed  above, 
verse  231.  But  Nar.  and  Ragh.  think  that  it  applies  to  cases  of 
bribery  also,  and  that  the  fine  shall  vary  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  case,  1000  pawas  being  the  lowest  punishment. 

235-242.  Baudh.  I,  18,  18;  Vi.  V,  3-7. 

235.  Instead  of  '(a  twice-born  man)  who  drinks  the  spirituous 
liquor,  &c/  (Kull.,  Nar.),  Medh.  and  Ragh.  say, '  a  Brahma/za  who, 
&c. ;'  but  see  below,  XI,  94. 

236.  Medh.  remarks  that  'others'  refer  this  rule,  on  account  of 
the  word  api, '  even,  likewise,'  to  the  fifth  Mahapatakin  also,  i.  e.  to 
him  who  associates  with  one  of  the  other  four  (see  below,  XI,  55); 
and  Ragh.,  as  well  as  Nand.,  approves  of  this  explanation. 

237.  '  The  sign  of  a  tavern/  i.  e.  'a  wine-cup/  It  follows  from 
the  rule  given  in  verse  240,  that  the  forehead  is  the  place  where 
they  shall  be  branded. 


t- 


384  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  238. 

238.  Excluded  from  all  fellowship  at  meals,  ex- 
cluded from  all  sacrifices,  excluded  from  instruction 
and  from  matrimonial  alliances,  abject  and  excluded 
from  all  religious  duties,  let  them  wander  over  (this) 
earth. 

239.  Such  (persons)  who  have  been  branded 
with  (indelible)  marks  must  be  cast  off  by  their 
paternal  and  maternal  relations,  and  receive  neither 
compassion  nor  a  salutation  ;  that  is  the  teaching  of 
Manu. 

240.  But  (men  of)  all  castes  who  perform  the 
prescribed  penances,  must  not  be  branded  on  the 
forehead  by  the  king,  but  shall  be  made  to  pay 
the  highest  amercement. 

241.  For  (such)  offences  the  middlemost  amerce- 
ment shall  be  inflicted  on  a  Brahma^a,  or  he  may 
be  banished  from  the  realm,  keeping  his  money  and 
his  chattels. 

242.  But  (men  of)  other  (castes),  who  have  unin- 
tentionally committed  such  crimes,  ought  to  be  -  de- 
prived of  their  whole  property ;  if  (they  committed 
them)  intentionally,  they  shall  be  banished. 

238.  Medh.  reads  asawyo^ya^, '  excluded  from  all  intercourse,' 
instead  of  asa/raya^ya^, '  excluded  from  all  sacrifices.' 

240.  '  All  castes/  i.  e. '  the  three  Aryan  castes/  Nar.  and  Nand. 
read  purve, '  the  before-mentioned  castes/  '  The  highest  amerce- 
ment/ see  above,  VIII,  138. 

241.  According  to  Medh.,  the  meaning  of  the  verse  is  that  a 
Brahmawa,  endowed  with  good  qualities,  who  unintentionally  (verse 
242)  committed  a  mortal  sin,  shall  either  be  fined  in  the  middle- 
most amercement  and  be  made  to  perform  the  prescribed  penance, 
or,  if  he  refuses  to  do  that,  be  banished  without  the  infliction  of  a 
fine.  Kull.  and  Nand.  partly  agree,  but  think  that  the  offender  is 
to  be  banished,  if  he  committed  the  crime  intentionally. 

242.  The  translation  follows  Nar.  and  Nand.,  who  think  that 
persons,  performing  no  penance,  shall  be  deprived  of  their  whole 


IX,  247.  MISCELLANEOUS    PUNISHMENTS.  385 

243.  A  virtuous  king  must  not  take  for  himself 
the  property  of  a  man  guilty  of  mortal  sin ;  but  if 
he  takes  it  out  of  greed,  he  is  tainted  by  that  guilt 
(of  the  offender). 

244.  Having  thrown  such  a  fine  into  the  water, 
let  him  offer  it  to  Varu^a,  or  let  him  bestow  it  on  a 
learned  and  virtuous  Brahma?za. 

245.  Vanma  is  the  lord  of  punishment,  for  he 
holds  the  sceptre  even  over  kings ;  a  Brahma/za 
who  has  learnt  the  whole  Veda  is  the  lord  of  the 
whole  world. 

246.  In  that  (country),  where  the  king  avoids 
taking  the  property  of  (mortal)  sinners,  men  are 
born  in  (due)  time  (and  are)  long-lived, 

247.  And  the  crops  of  the  husbandmen  spring 
up,  each  as  it  was  sown,  and  the  children  die  not, 
and  no  misshaped  (offspring)  is  born. 

property,  if  the  offence  was  committed  unintentionally,  and  be 
banished  after  being  branded,  if  their  crime  was  intentional.  Nar.-, 
moreover,  adds,  '  this  refers  to  light  cases ;  it  has  been  declared 
that  he  shall  slay  the  offender  in  bad  cases.'  Kull.  and  Ragh.  think 
that  confiscation  of  the  whole  property  shall  be  inflicted  in  particu- 
larly bad  cases,  instead  of  the  fine  of  1000  pa^as  prescribed  in 
verse  240;  and  Medh.  says  that  this  is  the  opinion  of  'some/ 
Medh.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  explain  pravasanam,  '  shall  be  banished,' 
by  '  shall  be  punished  corporally.'  Though  it  is  not  absolutely 
impossible  that  pravas  may  mean  '  to  hurt,  or  punish  corporally,'  it 
seems  not  advisable  to  take  the  word  in  the  latter  sense,  on  account 
of  verses  238  and  241;  compare  also  VIII,  284.  Medh.  remarks 
that  a  -Sudra  who  offends  unintentionally,  shall  be  branded  and  be 
deprived  of  his  whole  property,  else  he  shall  be  put  to  death. 

244.  Ydign.  II,  307. 

245.  Varuraa  is  the  supreme  ruler  (adhira^a)  of  kings;  see 
Taittiriya-brahma^a  III,  1,  2,  7.  Regarding  the  position  of  a 
learned  Brahmawa,  see  above,  I,  98-101. 

246.  Instead  of  kalena,  'in  (due)  time,'  i.e.  'after  the  full  period 
of  gestation'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  Nand.  reads  loke  tu,  'but  in  that 
country.' 

[25]  c  c 


386  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  248. 

248.  But  the  king  shall  inflict  on  a  base-born 
(.Sudra),  who  intentionally  gives  pain  to  Brahma^as, 
various  (kinds  of)  corporal  punishment  which  cause 
terror. 

249.  When  a  king  punishes  an  innocent  (man),  his 
guilt  is  considered  as  great  as  when  he  sets  free  a 
guilty  man;  but  (he  acquires)  merit  when  he  punishes 
(justly). 

2  50.  Thus  the  (manner  of)  deciding  suits  (falling) 
under  the  eighteen  titles,  between  two  litigant 
parties,  has  been  declared  at  length. 

251.  A  king  who  thus  duly  fulfils  his  duties  in 
accordance  with  justice,  may  seek  to  gain  countries 
which  he  has  not  yet  gained,  and  shall  duly  protect 
them  when  he  has  gained  them. 

252.  Having  duly  settled  his  country,  and  having 
built  forts  in  accordance  with  the  Institutes,  he  shall 
use  his  utmost  exertions  to  remove  (those  men  who 
are  nocuous  like)  thorns. 

253.  By  protecting  those  who  live  as  (becomes) 
Aryans  and  by  removing  the  thorns,  kings,  solely 
intent  on  guarding  their  subjects,  reach  heaven. 

254.  The  realm  of  that  king  who  takes  his  share 


248.  See  above,  VIII,  279-284.  Though  all  the  commentators 
take  avaragam  in  the  sense  of '  a  base-born  -Sudra, '  the  word  may 
have  its  etymological  meaning,  '  a  man  of  lower  caste/  Medh. 
explains  'who  gives  pain'  by  'who  takes  their  property  or  wives;' 
Nar., '  who  causes  exceedingly  great  misery.' 

249.  See  above,  VIII,  19,  310-311,  317. 

250.  '  This  verse  is  the  conclusion  of  the  section  on  the  eighteen 
titles  of  the  law'  (Medh.),  'and  now  follows  a  supplement  on  the 
duties  of  a  king'  (Nar.). 

252.  See  above,  VII,  69-70. 

253-254.  See  above,  VIII,  307,  386-387. 


IX,  258.  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  387 

in  kind,  though  he  does  not  punish  thieves,  (will  be) 
disturbed  and  he  (will)  lose  heaven. 

255.  But  if  his  kingdom  be  secure,  protected  by 
the  strength  of  his  arm,  it  will  constantly  flourish 
like  a  (well)-watered  tree. 

256.  Let  the  king  who  sees  (everything)  through 
his  spies,  discover  the  two  sorts  of  thieves  who 
deprive  others  of  their  property,   both  those  who 

'(show  themselves)  openly  and  those  who  (lie)  con- 
cealed. 

257.  Among  them,  the  open  rogues Jare  those) 
who  subsist  by  (cheating  in  the  sale  of)  various 
marketable  commodities,  but  the  con  reeled  rogues 
are  burglars,  robbers  in  forests,  and  so__ihr.th . 

258.  Those  who  take  bribes,  cheats  and  rogues, 
gamblers,  those  who  live  by  teaching  (the  per- 
formance of)  auspicious  ceremonies,  sanctimonious 
hypocrites,  and  fortune-tellers, 

258.  Aupadhika^  '  cheats/  means  according  to  Medh. '  persons 
of  crooked  behaviour  who  promise  kindnesses,  but  secretly  do  evil 
to  others,'  or  '  such  as  take  money  under  false  pretences,'  or 
1  such  as  extort  money  by  threats.'  The  last  explanation  is  adopted 
by  Kull.  and  Ragh.,  while  Nar.  and  Nand.  interpret  the  term  to 
mean  'persons  who  cheat  by  using  false  weights  and  measures.' 
VaiUaka^,  '  rogues,'  i.e. '  men  who  promise  to  transact  business  for 
others,  and  do  not  keep  their  word '  (Medh.),  or  '  alchemists  who 
pretend  to  change  base  metals  into  precious  metals '  (rasara  vidya;/z 
[rasavidyaya]  tamradi  ra^atadirupe«a  dar^ayitva  suvarwadikawz 
gnhwanti,  Ragh.,  Kull.),  or  'men  who  take  money  on  false  pre- 
tences '  (Nar.).  Mahgaladejavrz'tta^, '  those  who  live  by  teaching 
the  performance  of,  or  by  performing  for  others,  auspicious  cere- 
monies '  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar.  '  men  who 
live  by  reciting  auspicious  hymns'  (marigalastutipaMo  vrittam 
kzx\\2Jti  yesham),  and  Medh.  proposes  a  similar  alternative  expla- 
nation. Medh.  reads  bhadrapreksha/zikai^  saha,  and  explains  the 
compound  by  'eulogists'  (praja/rcsikapurushalakshawa/z).  Nar. 
explains  ikshamka/^,  '  fortune-tellers,'  by  '  actors  and  jugglers.' 

C  C    2 


388  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  259. 

259.  Officials  of  high  rank  and  physicians  who 
act  improperly,  men  living  by  showing  their  pro- 
ficiency in  arts,  and  clever  harlots, 

260.  These  and  the  like  who  show  themselves 
openly,  as  well  as  others  who  walk  in  disguise  (such 
as)  non-Aryans  who  wear  the  marks  of  Aryans,  he 
should  know  to  be  thorns  (in  the  side  of  his 
people). 

261.  Having  detected  them  by  means  of  trust- 
worthy persons,  who,  disguising  themselves,  (pre- 
tend) to  follow  the  same  occupations  and  by  means 
of  spies,  wearing  various  disguises,  he  must  cause 
them  to  be  instigated  (to  commit  offences),  and 
bring  them  into  his  power. 

259.  Mahamatra, '  officials  of  high  rank/ i.e. 'courtiers  such  as 
councillors  and  domestic  priests'  (Medh.),  or  'ministers'  (Nar.),  is 
taken  by  Kull.  and  Ragh.  in  its  other  sense, '  elephant-breakers.' 
-Silpopa>6arayukta>$,  'men  living  by  showing  their  proficiency  in 
arts,'  i.  e.  '  such  as  cut  figures  out  of  chips  of  cane  and  the  like ' 
(Medh.,  Ragh.),  or  '  painters  and  the  like '  (Kull.).  Nar.  and 
Nand.  read  jilpopakarayukta^,  i.  e.  '  artists  such  as  painters  and 
persons  adorning  (upakara)  people  such  as  hairdressers'  (Nar.), 
or  'umbrella  and  fan  makers'  (Nand.).  Medh.  says  that  asam- 
yakkarma^, '  who  act  improperly,'  must  be  taken  with  all  the  four 
classes  of  persons  enumerated. 

260.  Nar.  and  Nand.  read  vi^atiyan, '  such  and  the  like  open 
(rogues)  of  many  kinds,'  and  connect  the  accusatives  in  this  verse 
with  viditva  in. the  next.  Kull.  takes  vi^amyat,  'let  him  know  (to 
be),'  in  the  sense  of '  let  him  discover  (through  spies).' 

261.  The  translation  follows  Nar.'s  explanation,  who  reads 
protsahya  (likewise  found  in  Gov.,  Ragh.,  and  K.)  instead  of 
protsadya,  found  in  the  editions,  in  Kull.'s  and  probably  also  in 
Medh.'s  version.  The  reading  protsadya, '  having  destroyed  them,' 
is  objectionable  on  account  of  the  following  verse.  Ragh.  ex- 
plains protsahya  differently ;  he  says,  '  having  inspired  them  with 
energy  by  saying,  "you  must  give  up  this  livelihood  and  earn 
money  by  agriculture,  trade,  and  the  like,"  he  shall  induce  to  adopt 
a  honest  mode  of  line  through  desire  for  money.'     Nand.  seems  to 


IT,  268.  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  389 

262.  Then  having  caused  the  crimes,  which  they 
committed  by  their  several  actions,  to  be  proclaimed 
in  accordance  with  the  facts,  the  king  shall  duly 
punish  them  according  to  their  strength  and  their 
crimes. 

263.  For  the  wickedness  of  evil-minded  thieves, 
who  secretly  prowl  over  this  earth,  cannot  Jbe__re- 
strained  except  by  punishment. 

"264.  Assembly-houses,  houses  where  water  is  dis- 
tributed or  cakes  are  sold,  brothels,  taverns  and 
victualler's  shops,  cross-roads,  well-known  trees, 
festive  assemblies,  and  play-houses  and  concert- 
rooms, 

265.  Old  gardens,  forests,  the  shops  of  artisans, 
empty  dwellings,  natural  and  artificial  groves, 

266.  These  and  the  like  places  the  king  shall 
cause  to  be  guarded  by  companies  of  soldiers,  both 
stationary  and  patrolling,  and  by  spies,  in  order  to 
keep  away  thieves. 

267.  By  the  means  of  clever  reformed  thieves, 
who  associate  with  such  (rogues),  follow  them  and 
know  their  various  machinations,  he  must  detect 
and  destroy  them. 

268.  Under  the  pretext  of  (offering  them)  various 
dainties,  of  introducing  them  to  Brahma/zas,  and  on 
the  pretence  of  (showing  them)  feats  of  strength,  the 
(spies)  must  make  them  meet  (the  officers  of  justice). 


read  protsarya  (protsarya,  MS.).  Kull.  explains  anekasawsthanai/^, 
'  wearing  various  disguises '  (Nar.,  Nand.),  by  '  stationed  in  various 
places/  Medh.'s  commentary  on  the  end  of  verse  261  and  on 
verses  262-274  is  missing  in  the  I.  O.  MSS. 

267.  Instead  of  utsadayet,  'he' shall  destroy  them'  (Kull.,  K., 
editions),  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  read  utsahayet,  i.e.  *  he  shall 
incite  them  to  commit  (crimes.'  Nar.,  Ragh.). 


390  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  269. 

269.  Those  among  them  who  do  not  come,  and 
those  who  suspect  the  old  (thieves  employed  by 
the  king),  the  king  shall  attack  by  force  and  slay 
together  with__their  friends,  blood  relations,  and 
connexiojis. 

270.  A  just  king  shall  not  cause  a  thief  to  be 
put  to  death,  (unless  taken)  with  the  stolen  goods 
(in  his  possession) ;  him  who  (is  taken)  with  the 
stolen  goods  and  the  implements  (of  burglary),  he 
may,  without  hesitation,  cause  to  be  slain. 

271.  All  those  also  who  in  villages  give  food  to 
thieves  or  grant  them  room  for  (concealing  their 
implements),  he  shall  cause  to  be  put  to  death. 

272.  Those  who  are  appointed  to  guard  pro- 
vinces and  his  vassals  who  have  been  ordered  (to 
help),  he  shall  speedily  punish  like  thieves,  (if  they 
remain)  inactive  in  attacks  (by  robbers). 

273.  Moreover  if  (a  man),  who  subsists  by  (the 
fulfilment  of)  the  law,  departs  from  the  established 
rule  of  the  law,  the  (king)  shall  severely  punish  him 
by  a  fine,  (because  he)  violated  his  duty. 

269.  Mulapramhita^,  '  who  suspect  the  old  thieves  employed 
by  the  king '  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar.  '  who  have 
been  sent  by  ministers  and  the  like  staying  in  his  kingdom/  and 
according  to  Nand.  '  who  have  discovered  the  root,  i.  e.  the  reasons 
(of  the  proceedings  of  the  spies)/  All  the  three  explanations  are, 
however,  doubtful. 

271.  BhaWavaka\?ada/$,  'who  give  them  room  for  (concealing) 
their  implements'  (Kull.),  means  according  to  Nar.  'who  give 
them  money  (for  buying  arms  and  the  like)  and  shelter/ 

272.  The  commentators  take  samantan,  'his  vassals/  in  its 
etymological  sense  of  'neighbours/  But  it  has  here  no  doubt  the 
usual  technical  meaning. 

273.  According'  to  the  commentators  officiating  priests  and 
other  Brahmawas  are  meant,  who  subsist  by  obtaining  alms  on 
the  strength  of  their  piety. 


IX,  278.  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  39 1 

274.  Those  who  do  not  give  assistance  according 
to  their  ability  when  a  village  is  being  plundered,  a 
dyke  is  being  destroyed,  or  a  highway  robbery  com- 
mitted, shall  be  banished  with  their  goods  and 
chattels. 

275.  On  those  who  rob  thR  kingg  treasury  and 
those  who  persevere  in  opposing  (his  commands), 
he  shall  inflict  various  kinds  of  capital  punishment, 
likewise  on  those  who  conspire  with  his  enemies. 

276.  But  the  king  shall  cut  off  the  hands  of  those 
robbers  who,  breaking  into  houses,  commit  thefts  at 
night,  and  cause  them  to  be  impaled^  on  a  pointed 
stake. 

277.  On  the  first  conviction,  let  him  cause  two, 
fingers  of  a  cut-purse  to  be  amputated;  on  the  second, 
one  hand  and  one  foot ;  on  the  third,  he  shall  suffer 
death. 

278.  Those  who  give  (to  thieves)  fire,  food,  arms, 
or  shelter,  and  receivers  of  stolen  goods,  the  ruler 
shall  punish  like  thieves. 

274.  Vi.V,  74.  Instead  of  hitabhange,  '  when  an  embankment 
is  destroyed '  (Kull.,  editions),  Ragh.  reads  hitabhahge,  and  Gov. 
as  well  as  Nand.  id3.bha.hge  with  the  same  explanation.  Nar.  has 
tad&gabhahge,  probably  a  mistake  for  idabharige,  and  mentions  a 
var.  lect.  hi//abhange,  adding  that  hi//a  is  '  a  dam  thrown  across 
a  river.'     K.  finally  reads  setubhahge. 

276.  Yagri.  II,  273. 

277.  Vi.V,  136  ;  Yagn.  II,  274.  'Two  fingers,'  i.  e.  'the  thumb 
and  the  index '  (Kull,  Ragh.,  Nar.),  or  '  the  index  and  the  middle 
finger '  (Nand.). 

278.  Yag^.  II,  276.  'Those  who  give  (to  thieves)  fire,'  i.e.  'in 
order  that  they  may  warm  themselves,  or  for  similar  purposes' 
(Medh.),  or  '  in  order  that  they  may  put  fire  to  houses '  (Nar.). 
Moshasya  sa/?znidhatrzh,  'receivers  of  stolen  goods'  (Kull.), 
means  according  to  Nar.  '  those  who  conduct  thieves  to  the  place 
where  they  can  commit  their  crime,  or  helpers  and  abettors.'  The 
best  copy  of  Medh.  has  mokshasya,  both  in  the  text  and  in  the 


392  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  279. 

279.  Him  who  breaks  (the  dam  of)  a  tank  he 
shall  slay  (by  drowning  him)  in  water  or  by  (some 
other)  simple  (mode  of)  capital  punishment ;  or  the 
offender  may  repair  the  (damage),  but  shall  be  made 
to  pay  the  highest  amercement. 

280.  Those  who  break  into  a  (royal)  storehouse, 
an  armoury,  or  a  temple,  and  those  who  steal  ele- 
phants, horses,  or  chariots,  he  shall  slay  without 
hesitation. 

281.  But  he  who  shall  take  away  the  water  of  a 
tank,  made  in  ancient  times,  or  shall  cut  off  the 
supply  of  water,  must  be  made  to  pay  the  first  (or 
lowest)  amercement. 

282.  But  he  who,  except  in 'a  case  of  extreme 
necessity,  drops  filth  on  the  king's  high-road,  shall 
pay  two  karshapa/zas  and  immediately  remove  (that) 
filth. 

283.  But  a  person  in  urgent  necessity,  an  aged 
man,  a  pregnant  woman,  or  a  child,  shall  be  repri- 
manded and  clean  the  (place);  that  is  a  settled  rule. 

284.  All  physicians  who  treat  (their  patients) 
wrongly  (shall  pay)  a  fine;  in  the  case  of  animals,  the 

commentary,  and  the  other  gives  it  in  the  text,  while  the  expla- 
nation is  rakshitara^,  '  protectors  or  abettors/  Nand.,  too,  reads 
in  the  text  mokshasya,  and  says,  'mokshasya  moshitadravyasya 
mokshasadhanasyeti  va7  It  would,  therefore,  seem  that  an  ancient 
var.  lect.  mokshasya  really  existed. 

279.  Y&gfi.  II,  278.  'By  (some  other)  simple  (mode  of)  capital 
punishment,'  i.  e. '  by  cutting  off  his  head '  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 

280.  Yagri.  II,  273.  This  verse  and  the  next  are  omitted  in 
the  I.  O.  MSS.  of  Medh. 

281.  Nar.  says  that  the  offender  must  also  make  good  the 
damage  done. 

282.  Vi.V,  106-107.  Medh.  says  that  he  shall  pay  the  JTaw^ala, 
i.e.  the  sweeper,  to  remove  the  filth. 

284.  Vi.V,  175-177;    Ya^n.  II,   242.     Nar.   adds,  'But   this 


IX,  290.  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  393 

first  (or  lowest) ;  in  the  case  of  human  beings,  the 
middlemost  (amercement). 

285.  He  who  destroys  a  bridge,  the  flag  (of  a 
temple  or  royal  palace),  a  pole,  or  images,  shall 
repair  the  whole  (damage)  and  pay  five  hundred 
(pa/zas). 

286.  For  adulterating  unadulterated  commodities, 
and  for  breaking  gems  or  for  improperly  boring 
(them),  the  fine  is  the  first  (or  lowest)  amercement. 

287.  But  that  man  who  behaves  dishonestly  to 
honest  (customers)  or  cheats  in  his  prices,  shall  be 
fined  in  the  first  or  in  the  middlemost  amercement. 

288.  Let  him  place  all  prisons  near  a  high-road, 
where  the  suffering  and  disfigured  offenders  can 
be  seen. 

289.  Him  who  destroys  the  wall  (of  a  town),  or 
fills  up  the  ditch  (round  a  town),  or  breaks  a  (town)- 
gate,  he  shall  instantly  banish. 

290.  For  all  incantations  intended  to  destroy  life, 

refers  to  cases  when  death  is  not  (the  result  of  the  wrong  treat- 
ment) ;  for  if  that  is  the  case  the  punishment  is  greater.' 

285.  Vi.V,  174;  Yagri.  II,  297.  'A  pole,'  i.e.  the  flagstaff  of 
a  village  (Nar.),  or  '  such  as  stand  in  tanks  and  the  like '  (Kull.). 
'Images/  i.e.  'statues  of  men;  but  death  as  the  punishment  for 
destroying  images  of  the  gods,  because  (above,  verse  280)  capital 
punishment  has  been  prescribed  for  breaking  into  temples '  (Nar.). 
Kull.  and  Ragh.  say  '  common  images,  made  of  clay  and  so  forth/ 

286.  Vi.  V,  124  ;  Yagri.  II,  245-246.  Medh.  thinks  that  the  fine 
must  be  proportionate  to  the  value  of  the  spoiled  gem,  and  Kull. 
adds  that  in  every  case  the  owner  of  the  spoilt  article  shall  receive 
compensation. 

287.  Thus  Kull.  and  Nar.  But  Medh.  takes  the  first  clause 
differently :  '  That  man  who  gives  unequal  (quantities)  for  (such 
goods  as  ought  to  be  bartered  for)  equal  (quantities).' 

288.  Nand.  reads  kash/ani,  '  where  the  treatment  is  severe/ 
instead  of  sarvam, '  all/ 

290.  According  to  the  commentators  the  abhi/fcara^  comprise 


194  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  291. 


r 


for  magic  rites  with  roots  (practised  by  persons)  not 
related  (to  him  against  whom  they  are  directed),  and 
for  various  kinds  of  sorcery,  a  fine  of  two  hundred 
(pa^as)  shall  be  inflicted. 

291.  He  who  sells  (for  seed-corn  that  which  is) 
not  seed-corn,  he  who  takes  up  seed  (already  sown), 
and  he  who  destroys  a  boundary(-mark),  shall  be 
punished  by  mutilation. 

292.  But  the  king  shall  cause  a  goldsmith  who 
behaves  dishonestly,  the  most  nocuous  of  all  the 
thorns,  to  be  cut  to  pieces  with  razors. 

293.  For  the  theft  of  agricultural  implements,  of 
arms  and  of  medicines,  let  the  king  award  punish- 
ment, taking  into  account  the  time  (of  the  offence) 
and  the  use  (of  the  object). 


1 


all  incantations  and  sacrifices,  taught  either  in  the  Veda  or  in 
secular  works,  which  are  intended  to  destroy  life.  The  magic 
rites,  performed  with  roots,  are  those  which  are  intended  to  bring  a 
person  into  one's  power.  These  are  permitted,  if  practised  against 
a  husband  or  a  relative  (Nar.).  The  krz'tya^, '  sorcery/  are  such 
spells  as  produce  diseases,  or  cause  the  failure  of  an  adversary's 
undertakings.  If  the  abhi/£aras  are  successful,  the  punishment  is 
that  of  murder  (Medh.,  Kull.). 

291.  Instead  of  bi^otkrzsh/am  (Kull.),  which  is  explained  'who 
sells  seed-corn  placed  (at  the  top  of  a  bag  of  worthless  grain),'  the 
correct  reading  seems  to  be  bi^otkrash/a,  '  he  who  takes  up  seed 
(already  sown).'  Bi^otkrash/a  occurs  in  Nar.'s  commentary  only, 
where  it  is  explained  bi^-akale  maharghatakamotkarshakari,  'he 
who  at  sowing  time  plucks  (the  seed)  out,  desiring  to  raise  the 
price  of  grain/  All  the  other  commentators  give  more  or  less  cor- 
rupt readings,  which,  however,  all  point  to  the  form  bi^-otkrash/a, 
viz.  Medh.,  bi^etkrush/a^  or  big-otkrzptya^,  explained  by  vandhya- 
niti  kshetra  ^natu  [kshetram  kartuw]  bi^am  utkarshati  jobhanaw 
yad  big&m  kshetre  [ta]devoddhrztya  nayati ;  Gov.,  bi^otkrzsh/a// ; 
Nand.,  bigoikn'shtoh  and  bi^-otkrzsh/^,  explained  by  bi^anam  upta- 
nam  uddharta ;  K.,  biryatkrash/a,  marked  as  corrupt. 

293.  Thus  a  theft  of  a  plough  in  the  season  for  ploughing,  or 


IX,  299'  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  395 

294.  The  king  and  his  minister,  his  capital,  his 
realm,  his  treasury,  his  army,  and  his  ally  are  the 
seven  constituent  parts  (of  a  kingdom);  (hence)  a 
kingdom  is  said  to  have  seven  limbs  (ahga). 

295.  But  let  him  know  (that)  among  these  seven 
constituent  parts  of  a  kingdom  (which  have  been 
enumerated)  in  due  order,  each  earlier  (named)  is 
more  important  and  (its  destruction)  the  greater 
calamity. 

296.  Yet  in  a  kingdom,  containing  seven  con- 
stituent parts,  which  is  upheld  like  the  triple  staff 
(of  an  ascetic),  there  is  no  (single  part)  more  im- 
portant (than  the  others),  by  reason  of  the  importance 
of  the  qualities  of  each  for  the  others. 

297.  For  each  part  is  particularly  qualified  for 
(the  accomplishment  of)  certain  objects,  (and  thus) 
each  is  declared  to  be  the  most  important  for  that 
particular  purpose  which  is  effected  by  its  means. 

298.  By  spies,  by  a  (pretended)  display  of  energy, 
and  by  carrying  out  (various)  undertakings,  let  the 
king  constantly  ascertain  his  own  and  his  enemy's 
strength ; 

299.  Moreover,  all  calamities  and  vices ;  after- 
wards, when  he  has  fully  considered  their  relative 
importance,  let  him  begin  his  operations. 

arms  just  before  or  during  a  fight,  should  be  punished  more  heavily 
than  if  it  had  been  committed  at  any  other  time, 
i  294.  See  above,  VII,  257  ;  Y&gfi.  I,  352. 
296.  The  verse  is  meant,  as  the  commentators  remark,  to  show 
that  one  must  not  infer  from  verse  295  that  the  Ahgas,  named  later 
in  the  enumeration,  may  be  neglected.  According  to  Nar.,  the 
simile  is  not  taken  from  the  triple  staff  of  an  ascetic,  but  from 
the  three  beams  of  a  house  and  the  like. 

298.  See  above,  VII.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read 
at  the  end  of  the  line,  paratmano^,  instead  of  mahipati^. 

299.  'All  calamities  and  vices/  i. e. ' those  affecting  his  enemy 


596  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX 


j  .> 


oo. 


300.  (Though  he  be)  ever  so  much  tired  (by 
repeated  failures),  let  him  begin  his  operations  again 
and  again ;  for  fortune  greatly  favours  the  man 
who  (strenuously)  exerts  himself  in  his  under- 
takings. 

301.  The  various  ways  in  which  a  king  behaves 
(resemble)  the  Kf/ta,  Treta,  Dvapara,  and  Kali 
ages ;  hence  the  king  is  identified  with  the  ages  (of 
the  world). 

302.  Sleeping  he  represents  the  Kali  (or  iron 
age),  waking  the  Dvapara  (or  brazen)  age,  ready  to 
act  the  Treta  (or  silver  age),  but  moving  (actively) 
the  Krtta.  (or  golden)  age. 

303.  Let  the  king  emulate  the  energetic  action  of 
Indra,  of  the  Sun,  of  the  Wind,  of  Yama,  of  Varu/za, 
of  the  Moon,  of  the  Fire,  and  of  the  Earth. 

304.  As  Indra  sends  copious  rain  during  the  four 
months  of  the  rainy  season,  even  so  let  the  king, 
taking  upon  himself  the  office  of  Indra,  shower 
benefits  on  his  kingdom. 

305.  As  the  Sun  during  eight,  months  (imper- 
ceptibly) draws  up  the  water  with  his  rays,  even  so 
let  him  gradually  draw  his  taxes  from  his  kingdom; 
for  that  is  the  office  in  which  he  resembles  the  Sun. 

306.  As  the  Wind  moves  (everywhere),  entering 
(in  the  shape  of  the  vital  air)  all  created  beings, 
even  so  let  him  penetrate  (everywhere)  through  his 


and  his  enemy's  party'  (Nar.),  or  'those  affecting  both  his  own 
and  the  enemy's  parties'  (Kull.).  Nand.  reads  the  second  line  as 
follows,  gurulaghavato  ^atva  tata^  karma  sama/£aret. 

302.  This  verse  closely  agrees  with  the  fourth  exhortation, 
addressed  by  Indra  to  Rohita,  Aitareya-brahmawa  VII,  15. 

305.  Instead  of  nityam,  l  gradually,'  Nand.  reads  samyak, 
1  duly.' 


IX,  313-  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  397 

spies ;  that  is  the  office  in  which  he  resembles  the 
Wind. 

307.  As  Yama  at  the  appointed  time  subjects  to 
his  rule  both  friends  and  foes,  even  so  all  subjects 
must  be  controlled  by  the  king ;  that  is  the  office  in 
which  he  resembles  Yama. 

308.  As  (a  sinner)  is  seen  bound  with  ropes  by 
Varu/za,  even  so  let  him.  punish  the  wicked  ;  that  is 
his  office  in  which  he  resembles  Varu^a. 

309.  He  is  a  king,  taking  upon  himself  the  office 
of  the  Moon,  whose  (appearance)  his  subjects  (greet 
with  as  great  joy)  as  men  feel  on  seeing  the  full 
moon. 

310.  (If)  he  is  ardent  in  wrath  against  criminals 
and  endowed  with  brilliant  energy,  and  destroys 
wicked  vassals',  then  his  character  is  said  (to  re- 
semble) that  of  Fire. 

311.  As  the  Earth  supports  all  created  beings 
equally,  thus  (a  king)  who  supports  all  his  subjects, 
(takes  upon  himself)  the  office  of  the  Earth. 

312.  Employing  these  and  other  means,  the  king 
shall,  ever  untired,  restrain  thieves  both  in  his  own 
dominions  and  in  (tho§£-of)  0TrTersT~     Id  •    \\\b\C< 

313.  Let  him-<no1:,  though  fallen  into  the  deepest   j 
distress,  provoke   Brahma^as   to  anger  ;  JoH-they^  ~ft 

308.  Nand.  reads  the  first  line  differently,  Varutfenapi  parais  £a 
badhyate  varimair  naraA,  '  As  men  are  bound  by  Varuwa  with 
VaruTza's  fetters/  The  expression  '  the  fetters  of  Varu/za '  is  a 
common  designation  of  dropsy. 

310.  Nar.  adds,  'As  the  fire  at  an  ordeal  injures  wicked  men, 
even  so  he  should  destroy  wicked  neighbours.' 

312.  'In  (those  of)  others,'  i.e.  'those  thieves  who  live  in  other 
kingdoms,  and  come  to  rob  in  his  own'  (Kull.,  Nar.).  Nand.  omits 
this  and  the  next  two  verses. 

313.  'Let  him  not  provoke  Brahmawas  to  anger/  i.e. 'by  taking  their 


4 


39$  LAWS    OF    MANU-  IX,  314. 

wji^nan^ered^oiilrl   instantly  destroy  him  together 
with  his  army  and  his  vehicles. 

314.  Who  could  escape  destruction,  when  he  pro- 
vokes to  anger  those  (men),  by  whom  the  fire  was 
made  to  consume  all  things,  by  whom  the  (water  of 
the)  ocean  was  made  undrinkable,  and  by  whom  the 
moon  was  made  to  wane  and  to  increase  again  ? 

{315.  Who  could  prosper,  while  he  injures  those 
(men)  who  provoked  to  anger,  could  create  other 
worlds  and  other  guardians  of  the  world,  and  deprive 
the  gods  of  their  divine  station  ? 
316.  What  man,  desirous  of  life,  would  injure  them 
to  whose  support  the  (three)  worlds  and  the  gods  ever 
owe  their  existence,  and  whose  wealth  is  the  Veda  ? 
317.  A  Brahma/za,  be  he  ignorant  or  learned,  is  a 
great  divinity,  just  as  the  fire,  whether  carried  forth 
(for  the  performance  of  a  burnt-oblation)  or  not 
carried  forth,  is  a  great  divinity. 

318.  The  brilliant  fire  is  not  contaminated  even 
in  burial-places,  and,  when  presented  with  oblations 
(of  butter)  at  sacrifices,  it  again  increases  mightily. 

property'  (Medh.,  Nar.),  or  '  treating  them  with  contumely'  (Medh.). 
1  They  could  destroy  him,'  i.  e.  'by  magic  rites  and  curses'  (Kull.). 

314.  This  verse  refers  to  certain  stories,  told,  as  Medh.  and 
Nar.  point  out,  in  the  section  of  the  Mahabharata,  called  Moksha- 
dharmaA  XII,  344,  55,  57-58,  60-61.  There  it  is  said  that  Bhrzgu 
made  the  fire  consume  all  things,  that  the  moon  became  '  con- 
sumptive' in  consequence  of  the  curse  of  Daksha,  and  that  Va</ava- 
mukha  made  the  ocean  salt  in  punishment  for  his  disobedience. 

315.  This  verse  also  contains  allusions  to  the  Mahabharata. 
Vwvamitra  tried  to  create  other  worlds  (Medh.),  the  Valakhilyas 
another  Indra  and  Vayu,  and  others  deprived  the  gods  of  their 
station.  With  respect  to  the  latter  point,  Ragh.  quotes  the  story  of 
MaWavya  cursing  Yama  (Mahabharata  I,  108,  16),  and  causing 
him  to  be  born  as  a  Sudra. 

316.  See  above,  I,  93-95. 


IX,  323-  DUTIES    OF    A    KING.  399 

_ 

319.  Thus,    though     Brahma^as    employ    them- 
selves in  all  (sorts  of)  mean  occupations,  they  must  / 
be  honoured  in  every  way ;  for  (each  of)  them  is  a  li 
very  great  deity.  jfi 

320.  When  the  Kshatriyas  become  in  any  way 
overbearing  towards  the  Brahma^as,  the  Brahma^as 
themselves  shall  duly  restrain  them ;  for  the  Ksha- 
triyas sprang  from  the  Brahma^as. 

321.  Fire  sprang  from  water,  Kshatriyas  from 
Brahma;^as,  iron  from  stone ;  the  all-penetrating 
force  of  those  (three)  has  no  effect  on  that  whence 
they  were  produced. 

322.  Kshatriyas  prosper  not  without  Brahma;/as, 
Brahma^as  prosper  not  without  Kshatriyas ;  Brah- 
ma/zas  and  Kshatriyas,  being  closely  united,  prosper 
in  this  (world)  and  in  the  next. 

323.  But  (a  king  who  feels  his  end  drawing  nigh) 
shall  bestow  all  his  wealth,  accumulated  from  fines, 
on  Brahma^as,  make  over  his  kingdom  to  his  son, 
and  then  seek  death  in  battle. 


321.  'Fire  sprang  from  water,  thus  speak  the  Pauramkas' 
(Nand.);  '(that  origin  is)  visible  in  the  case  of  lightning  and  in  that 
of  the  (submarine)  Va^avagni' (Ragh.).  According  to  Ragh.,  the 
statement  that  the  Kshatriyas  sprang  from  the  Brahmawas  is  based 
on  a  Vedic  passage.  But  Nar.  thinks  that  it  alludes  to  a  Pauramk 
story,  according  to  which  the  Brahmawas  produced  with  the  Ksha- 
triya  females  a  new  Kshatriya  race  after  the  destruction  of  the 
second  varwa  by  Para.mrama. 

322.  Gaut.  XI,  14  ;  Vas.  XIX,  4. 

323.  Medh.  says  that  others  explain  the  expression  'all  his 
wealth,  accumulated  from  fines,'  as  including  '  all  the  king's 
possessions,  excepting  horses  and  chariots,  arms,  land,  and  slaves,' 
but  that  this  is  improper.  He  adds  that,  if  the  king  cannot  die  in 
battle,  he  may  burn  or  drown  himself.  Kull.  says  that  he  may  kill 
himself  by  starvation.  In  later  times  kings  followed  this  rule  ;  see 
e.g.  Vikramanka^arita  IV,  44-68. 


19LS9 


400  LAWS    OF    MANU.  IX,  324. 

324.  Thus  conducting  himself  (and)  ever  intent  on 
(discharging)  his  royal  duties,  a  king  shall  order  all 
his  servants  (to  work)  for  the  good  of  his  people. 

325.  Thus  the  eternal  law  concerning  the  duties 
of  a  king  has  been  fully  declared ;  know  that  the 
following  rules  apply  in  (due)  order  to  the  duties  of 
Vaisyas  and  .Sudras. 

326.  After  a  Vaiiya  has  received  the  sacraments . 
and  has  taken  a  wife,  he  shall  be  always  attentive 
to   the  business   whereby  he  may  subsist    and    to 
(that  of)  tending  cattle. 

327.  For  when  the  Lord  of  creatures  (Pra^apati) 
created  cattle,  he  made  them  over  to  the  Vaiiya  ; 
to  the  Brahma/za,  and  to  the  king  he  entrusted  all 
created  beings. 

328.  A  Vaiiya  must  never  (conceive  this)  wish, 
'  I  will  not  keep  cattle  ;'  and  if  a  Vaiiya  is  willing  (to 
keep  them),  they  must  never  be  kept  by  (men  of) 
other  (castes). 

329.  (A  Vaiiya)  must  know  the  respective  value 
of  gems,  of  pearls,  of  coral,  of  metals,  of  (cloth)  made 
of  thread,  of  perfumes,  and  of  condiments. 

330.  He  must  be  acquainted  with  the  (manner  of) 
sowing  of  seeds,  and  of  the  good  and  bad  qualities 
of  fields,  and  he  must  perfectly  know  all  measures 
and  weights. 

331.  Moreover,  the  excellence  and  defects  of 
commodities,  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of 
(different)  countries,  the  (probable)  profit  and  loss 
on  merchandise,  and  the  means  of  properly  rearing 
cattle. 

332.  He   must  be  acquainted  with  the  (proper) 

326.  Regarding  the  'business  whereby  a  Vauya  may  subsist/ 
see  below,  X,  77-78. 


1 


X,  I.  TIMES    OF    DISTRESS,    MIXED    CASTES.  40 1 

wages  of  servants,  with  the  various  languages  of 
men,  with  the  manner  of  keeping  goods,  and  (the 
rules  of)  purchase  and  sale. 

333.  Let  him  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  in  order 
to  increase  his  property  in  a  righteous  manner,  and 
let  him  zealously  give  food  to  all  created  beings. 
^o  334.  But  to  serve  Brahma^as  (who  are)  learned 
in  the  Vedas,  householders,  and  famous  (for  virtue) 
is  the  highest  duty  of  a  ,5udra,  which  leads  to 
beatitude. 

335.  (A  .Sudra  who  is)  pure,  the  servant  of  his 
betters,  gentle  in  his  speech,  and  free  from  pride, 
and  always  seeks  a  refuge  with  Brahma^as,  attains 
(in  his  next  life)  a  higher  caste. 

336.  The  excellent  law  for  the   conduct  of  thef^ 
(four)  castes  (vanza),  (when  they  are)  not  in  distress, 
has  been  thus  promulgated ;  now  hear  in  order  their 
(several  duties)  in  times  of  distress.  - 


Chapter    X. 

1.  Let  the  three  twice-born  castes  (var/za),  dis- 
charging their  (prescribed)  duties,  study  (the  Veda) ; 
but  among  them  the  Brahma/za  (alone)  shall  teach 
it,  not  the  other  two ;  that  is  an  established  rule. 

333.  '  If  a  rich  VaLsya  is  not  liberal,  he  shall  be  punished  by  the 
king'  (Medh.). 

334-336.  See  below,  X,  1 21-129. 

335.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.,  brahma^apajrayo 
nityam. 

X.  1.  Medh.  has  one  line  more  in  the  beginning,  'Hereafter 

I  will  declare  the  rules  applicable  to  that  which  must  be  studied.' 

According  to  Nar.,  the   expression   svakarmastha^,   'discharging 

their  prescribed   duties/  means  'if  they  follow  their  prescribed 

[25]  D  d 


402  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  2. 

2.  The  Brahma^a  must  know  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence (prescribed)  by  law  for  all,  instruct  the 
others,  and  himself  live  according  to  (the  law). 

3.  On  account  of  his  pre-eminence,  on  account 
of  the  superiority  of  his  origin,  on  account  of  his 
observance  of  (particular)  restrictive  rules,  and  on 
account  of  his  particular  sanctification  the  Brah- 
ma»a  is  the  lord  of  (all)  castes  (var/za). 

4.  The  Brahma;za,  the  Kshatriya,  and  the  Vai-sya 
castes  (var^a)  are  the  twice-born  ones,  but  the  fourth, 
the  .Sttdra,  has  one  birth  only ;  there  is  no  fifth 
(caste). 

5.  In  all  castes  (var/za)  those  (children)  only  which 
are  begotten  in  the  direct  order  on  wedded  wives, 
equal  (in  caste  and  married   as)  virgins,  are  to  be 

occupations,'  and  indicates  that  those  who  follow  forbidden  occupa- 
tions, i.  e.  live  like  -Sudras,  shall  not  study  the  Veda.  The  com- 
mentators entirely  forget  to  mention  that,  according  to  II,  241-  242, 
a  Brahmawa  may  learn  the  Veda  from  a  non-Brahmamcal  teacher, 
and  that  hence  this  rule  is  not  absolute. 

2.  Gaut.  XI,  25  ;  Vas.  I,  39-41.  Medh.  points  out  that  this  rule 
gives  an  exception  to  IV,  80,  where  it  is  said  that  a  Brahmawa 
shall  not  give  spiritual  advice  to  a  -Sudra. 

3.  See  above,  I,  93.  '  On  account  of  his  pre-eminence/  i.  e. 
1  through  his  qualities '  (Medh.),  or  '  by  race '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar., 
Ragh.).  Niyamasya  ka.  dharawat, '  on  account  of  his  observance  of 
(particular)  restrictive  rules,'  i.e.  'of  the  rules  prescribed  for  a 
Snataka '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Kull. 
1  on  account  of  his  possessing  a  particularly  great  knowledge  of 
the  Veda.'  '  On  account  of  his  particular  sanctification,'  i.  e. 
'because  special  observances  are  required  from  him  in  sipping 
water  and  so  forth,  or  because  he  must  be  initiated  earlier  than 
a  Kshatriya'  (Medh.).  The  other  commentators  give  the  second 
explanation  only.     '  The  lord/  i.  e. '  the  adviser  and  instructor.5 

4.  Ap.  1, 1,  3 ;  Vas.  II,  1-2  ;  Baudh.  I,  16, 1;  Ya^-w.  I,  10. 

5.  Ap.  II,  13,  1 ;  Vi.  XVI,  1;  Yagn.  I,  90.  '  In  the  direct  order/ 
i.  e. « by  a  Brahma«a  on  a  Brahmawi,  by  a  Kshatriya  on  a  Kshatriya, 
and  so  forth '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  means  according  to  Nar.,  that 


l 


X,  8.  MIXED    CASTES.  403 

considered  as  belonging  to  the  same  caste  (as  their 
fathers). 

6.  Sons,  begotten  by  twice-born  men  on  wives  of 
the  next  lower  castes,  they  declare  to  be  similar  (to 
their  fathers,  but)  blamed  on  account  of  the  fault 
(inherent)  in  their  mothers. 

7.  Such  is  the  eternal  law  concerning  (children) 
born  of  wives  one  degree  lower  (than  their  hus- 
bands) ;  know  (that)  the  following  rule  (is  applica- 
ble) to  those  born  of  women  two-  or  three  degrees 
lower. 

8.  From  a  Brahma^a  with  th«  daughter  of  a 
VaLsya  is  born  (a  son)  called  an  Ambash^a,  with  the 
daughter  of  a  .5udra  a  Nishada,  who  is  also  called 
a  Para^ava. 

in  each  case  the  bridegroom  must  be  older  than  the  wife.  He  adds, 
1  Hence  it  has  been  declared  that  the  son  of  a  woman  who  is  older 
than  (her  husband)  is  not  a  Brahmawa,  though  she  may  have  been 
legally  married,  and  may  be  of  the  same  caste  (as  her  husband).' 
The  commentators  are  at  great  pains  to  prove  that  subsidiary  sons, 
such  as  Saho^as,  Kaninas,  and  so  forth,  and  all  offspring  of  illicit 
unions  are  outcasts.  Medh.  and  Gov.  even  take  the  trouble  to 
discuss  the  Vedic  story  of  Gabala  Satyakama  (^Oandogya  Up. 
IV,  4),  whose  mother  did  not  know  by  whom  he  was  begotten, 
and  who,  nevertheless,  was  admitted  to  be  a  Brahma^a.  They 
are  of  opinion  that  Gabala  had  been  legally  married,  and  had  for- 
gotten her  husband's  family-name  during  her  troubles. 

6-56.  Gaut.  IV,  16-28;  Vas.  XVIII;  Baudh.  I,  16,  6-17,  15; 
Vi.  XVI,  2-15  ;  Yagn.  I,  91-95. 

6.  '  Blamed,'  i.  e. '  excluded  from  the  fathers'  caste '  (Nar.).  With 
the  expression  '  similar,'  compare  Baudh.'s  term  '  savar«a.'  Nand. 
places  verse  14  immediately  after  this,  and  adds  that  if  the  latter 
is  placed  lower  down,  that  is  owing  to  a  mistake  of  the  copyists. 

7.  Regarding  the  term  Para^ava,  see  above,  IX,  178.  Gov. 
and  Nar.  remark  that  the  second  name  Para^ava  is  added  in  order 
to  distinguish  this  Nishada  from  the  other  Nishada,  who  is  a  Pra- 
tiloma,  and  subsists  by  catching  fish. 

8.  Medh.  does  not  give  this  verse. 

D  d  2 


404  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


9.  From  a  Kshatriya  and  the  daughter  of  a 
6udra  springs  a  being,  called  Ugra,  resembling 
both  a  Kshatriya  and  a  6udra,  ferocious  in  his 
manners,  and  delighting  in  cruelty. 

10.  Children  of  a  Brahma^a  by  (women  of)  the 
three  (lower)  castes,  of  a  Kshatriya  by  (wives  of) 
the  two  (lower)  castes,  and  of  a  Vaiiya  by  (a  wife 
of)  the  one  caste  (below  him)  are  all  six  called 
base-born  (apasada). 

1 1.  From  a  Kshatriya  by  the  daughter  of  a  Brah- 
ma/za  is  born  (a  son  called)  according  to  his  caste 
(^-ati)  a  Suta ;  from  a  Vaisya  by  females  of  the  royal 
and  the  Brahma/za  (castes)  spring  a  Magadha  and  a 
Vaideha. 

12.  From  a  .Sudra  are  born  an  Ayogava,  a 
Kshattrz,  and  a  ATa^ala,  the  lowest  of  men,  by 
Vaisya,  Kshatriya,  and  Brahma^a  females,  (sons 
who  owe  their  origin  to)  a  confusion  of  the  castes. 

13.  As  an  AmbashMa  and  an  Ugra,  (begotten)  in 
the  direct  order  on  (women)  one  degree  lower  (than 
their  husbands)  are  declared  (to  be),  even  so  are  a 
Kshattrz  and  a  Vaidehaka,  though  they  were  born 
in  the  inverse  order  of  the  castes  (from  mothers  one 
degree  higher  than  the  fathers). 

14.  Those  sons  of  the  twice-born,  begotten  on 
wives  of  the  next  lower  castes,  who  have  been 
enumerated   in  due   order,  they  call  by  the  name 

12.  Nar.  and  K.  read  Ayogava.  Medh.  and  Nand.  read  Aaw^ala, 
instead  of  ^Ta^ala  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

13.  The  meaning  is  that  the  Kshattr/  and  the  Vaidehaka,  though 
Pratilomas,  hold  the  same  position  with  respect  to  sacred  rites,  but 
not  with  respect  to  studying  and  so  forth,  and  are  as  fit  to  be 
touched  as  the  two  Anulomas  (Medh.).  Gov.  and  Kull.  mention 
the  second  point  of  equality  only. 

14.  The  meaning  is  that  they  are  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the 


MIXED    CASTES.  405 


Anantaras  (belonging  to  the  next  lower  caste),  on 
account  of  the  blemish  (inherent)  in  their  mothers. 

15.  A  Brahma/za  begets  on  the  daughter  of  an 
Ugra  an  Avrzta,  on  the  daughter  of  an  Ambash/^a 
an  Abhira,  but  on  a  female  of  the  Ayogava  (caste) 
a  Dhigva;za. 

16.  From  a  6udra  spring  in  the  inverse  order 
(by  females  of  the  higher  castes)  three  base-born 
(sons,  apasada),  an  Ayogava,  a  Kshattrz,  and  a 
Kandala,  the  lowest  of  men ; 

1 7.  From  a  Vaiiya  are  born  in  the  inverse  order 
of  the  castes  a  Magadha  and  a  Vaideha,  but  from 
a  Kshatriya  a  Suta  only ;  these  are  three  other  base- 
born  ones  (apasada). 

18.  The  son  of  a  Nishada  by  a  .Sudra  female 
becomes  a  Pukkasa  by  caste  (^ati),  but  the  son  of 
a  .5udra  by  a  Nishada  female  is  declared  to  be  a 
Kukku/aka. 

19.  Moreover,  the  son  of  a  Kshattrz  by  an  Ugra 
female  is  called  a  .Svapaka ;  but  one  begotten  by 
a  Vaidehaka  on  an  Ambash//£a  female  is  named  a 
Vezza. 

20.  Those  (sons)  whom  the  twice-born  beget  on 
wives  of  equal  caste,  but  who,  not   fulfilling  their 

mothers'  caste  and  receive  the  sacraments  according  to  the  law 
prescribed  for  the  mothers'  caste  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.)  ; 
see  also  below,  verse  41. 

15.  The  Abhira  is  the  modern  Ahir. 

16-17.  Kull.  thinks  that  the  Pratilomas  are  enumerated  once 
more,  '  in  order  to  show  that  they  are  unfit  to  fulfil  the  duties  of 
sons.'     Nand.  places  these  two  verses  before  verse  15. 

18.  Nand.  reads  Pulkasa  instead  of  Pukkasa. 

19.  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  K.  read  Vena  instead  of  Ve/za.  Ragh. 
adds  that  the  modern  name  is  Baruda,  the  name  of  caste  of 
basket-makers. 

20.  Gov.  and  Nand.  read  at  the  end  of  the  first  line  sutan  for 


406  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  2f. 

sacred  duties,  are  excluded  from  the  Savitrl,  one 
must  designate  by  the  appellation  Vratyas. 

21.  But  from  a  Vratya  (of  the)  Brahma^a  (caste) 
spring  the  wicked  Bhriggakantaka,  the  Avantya,  the 
Va^adhana,  the  Pushpadha,  and  the  .Saikha. 

22.  From  a  Vratya  (of  the)  Kshatriya  (caste),  the 
Oalla,  the  Malla,  the  Li/£/£/£ivi,the  Na/a,  the  Kara/za, 
the  Khasa,  and  the  Dravi^a. 


tu  yan  (Medh.,  Kull.,  K.), '  not  fulfilling  their  sacred  duties/  i.  e. 
*  not  being  initiated  at  the  proper  time  ;'  see  above,  II.  39.  Medh. 
mentions  a  var.  lect.  avrata^,  '  Those  sons  whom  men  neglecting 
their  sacred  duties,  &c.'     But  he  rejects  it. 

21.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  K.,  BhrzgeakaTz/aka 
instead  of  Bhur^akaw/aka  (editions),  or  Bhutyaka/z/aka  (Nand.);  see 
also  Gaut.  IV,  20,  where  the  form  Bhrz^yakazz/a  occurs.  Regarding 
the  Avantya  (Apa^a,  Nand.),  see  also  Baudh.  I,  2,  13.  Instead  of 
Vazadhana  Nand.  has  VaVaghana,  and  K.  Vazadhana,  marked  as 
corrupt.  Medh.  reads  (one  MS.  Pushpa^aikhara^)  Pushpa^ekhara 
instead  of  pushpadha/z  saikha  eva  k&  (editions).  Gov.  has  in  the  text 
Pushya^z  jaikhakastathd,  in  the  commentary  pushyavasalrakha ;  K. 
pushpa . . .  kharas  tatha;  Nand.  Pushpa^ibaka  eva  -£a.  It  would  seem 
that  according  to  Medh.  and  Nand.  only  four  tribes,  sprung  from  a 
Vratya  Brahmazza,  are  enumerated.  But  the  form  of  the  last  name 
remains  doubtful.  The  commentators  think  all  the  races  named 
are  descended  from  a  Vratya  Brahma/za  and  a  female  of  his  own 
caste.  Gov.  remarks  that  according  to  lianas'  Nitijastra  the 
Bhrz^akazz/as  live  by  sorcery,  the  Avantyas  and  Va/adhanas  serve 
in  war,  and  all  other  Vratyas  are  spies.  It  is  very  probable  that  all 
these  names  originally  denote  nations,  but  the  Avantyas,  the 
inhabitants  of  Western  Malva,  and  the  Va/adhanas,  who  are 
enumerated  among  the  northern  tribes,  are  alone  traceable  in 
other  works. 

22.  I  read  with  Medh.  and  Gov.  lAkkhiwi  instead  of  WikkhWi 
(editions).  K.  has  Li^avi  (kfa  being  marked  as  corrupt),  and 
Nand.  Li^ikhi.  As  '  a '  and  '  i '  in  thesi  are  constantly  exchanged, 
lAkkhWi  may  be  considered  as  a  vicarious  form  for  Li/k£/zavi,  and 
it  may  be  assumed  that  the  Manusaz/zhita  considered  the  famous 
Kshatriya  race  of  Magadha  and  Nepal  as  unorthodox.  Gov.  says 
that,  according  to  U-ranas,  the  Na/as  and  Karazzas  are  spies,  and 


X,  27.  MIXED    CASTES.  407 

23.  From  a  Vratya  (of  the)  Vaisya  (caste)  are 
born  a  Sudhanvan,  an  A/£arya,  a  Karusha,  a  Vi^an- 
man,  a  Maitra,  and  a  Satvata. 

24.  By  adultery  (committed  by  persons)  of  (dif- 
ferent) castes,  by  marriages  with  women  who  ought 
not  to  be  married,  and  by  the  neglect  of  the  duties 
and  occupations  (prescribed)  to  each,  are  produced 
(sons  who  owe  their  origin)  to  a  confusion  of  the 
castes. 

25.  I  will  (now)  fully  enumerate  those  (sons)  of 
mixed  origin,  who  are  born  of  Anulomas  and  of 
Pratilomas,  and  (thus)  are  mutually  connected. 

26.  The  Suta,  the  Vaidehaka,  the  Aa^ala,  that 
lowest  of  mortals,  the  Magadha,  he  of  the  Kshattrz 
caste  (^ati),  and  the  Ayogava, 

27.  These  six  (Pratilomas)  beget  similar  races 
(var^a)  on  women  of  their  own  (caste),  they  (also) 
produce  (the  like)  with  females  of  their  mothers 
caste  (^ati),  and  with  females  (of)  higher  ones. 

the  Khasas  and  Dravu/as  are  water-carriers  and  distributors  of 
waters  at  drinking  fountains. 

23.  K.  reads  Parusha,  and  Nand.  Karu^a,  instead  of  Karusha 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  KulL).  Instead  of  Vi^anman  Nand.  has  Ni^angha. 
Gov.  remarks  that,  according  to  U>anas,  A/£aryas  and  Satvatas 
subsist  by  worshipping  the  gods,  or  serving  as  temple-priests 
(aHryasatvatai^  devapu^anam). 

25.  'Anulomas,'  see  above,  verse  8. 

27.  Thus  Nar.  and  Nand.,  with  whom  Kull.  agrees,  except  that  he 
adds  '  on  higher  and  (on  lower)  castes.'  Medh.  reads  in  the  second 
line  matrz^atya^  prasuyante  pravarasu  ka,  yonishu,  and  explains  as 
follows, '  Those  who  belong  to  the  mother's  caste,  i.e.  the  Anulo- 
mas, called  Anantara  (verse  14),  beget  similar  sons  on  females  of 
their  own  caste,  and  (more  degraded  children)  on  females  of  higher 
castes.'  He  mentions  that  others  read  matr^atau  prasuyante,  and 
says  that  the  meaning  then  is, '  The  Anulomas  beget  sons  of  their 
own  race  on  females  of  their  own  and  of  their  mothers'  castes.' 
Gov.  reads  matrz^atau  svayonyaw  tu  sadmaw  ^anayanti  vai,  and 


408  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  28. 

28.  As  a  (Brahma/za)  begets  on  (females  of)  two 
out  of  the  three  (twice-born  castes  a  son  similar  to) 
himself,  (but  inferior)  on  account  of  the  lower  degree 
(of  the  mother),  and  (one  equal  to  himself)  on  a 
female  of  his  own  race,  even  so  is  the  order  in  the 
case  of  the  excluded  (races,  vahya). 

29.  Those  (six  mentioned  above)  also  beget,  the 
one  on  the  females  of  the  other,  a  great  many 
(kinds  of)  despicable  (sons),  even  more  sinful  than 
their  (fathers),  and  excluded  (from  the  Aryan  com- 
munity, vahya). 

30.  Just  as  a  .Sftdra  begets  on  a  Brahma^a 
female  a  being  excluded  (from  the  Aryan  com- 
munity), even  so  (a  person  himself)  excluded  pro- 


likewise  refers  the  line  to  the  Anulomas.  'But  (the  Anulomas) 
beget  similar  sons  on  females  of  their  mothers'  and  of  their  own 
castes/     Ragh.  likewise  differs. 

28.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  and  K.,  krama^  instead 
of  kramat  (editions).  'Even  so  is  the  order  in  the  case  of  the 
excluded  (races),'  means  according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.,  that  there  is 
a  difference  in  rank  between  Pratilomas,  similar  to  that  existing 
between  Anulomas,  and  that  Pratilomas  sprung  from  Aryan  fathers 
are  more  respectable  than  those  begotten  by  Sudra  fathers,  accord- 
ing to  Medh.,  whose  opinion  is  controverted  by  Gov.,  Kull.,  and 
Ragh.,  that  Pratilomas,  sprung  from  Aryan  fathers  and  mothers, 
are  to  be  considered  Aryans,  and  worthy  of  being  initiated  just  as 
Anulomas.  According  to  Nar.  and  Nand.,  the  translation  should 
be  as  follows  :  '  As  among  the  three  castes  a  (man)  produces  (a  son 
similar  to)  himself  on  two  wives,  (i.  e.)  on  her  who  belongs  to  his 
own  caste  and  on  her  who  belongs  to  the  next  lower  one,  even  so 
is  the  order  with  those  excluded  (from  the  four  chief  castes),'  i.  e. 
even  so  is  it  with  Anulomas,  e.  g.  with  a  Murdhavasikta,  who  begets 
a  Murdhavasikta  on  a  Murdhavasikta  female  and  on  an  Avantya 
female  (Nar.),  and  with  Pratilomas,  e.  g.  with  a  Kshattrz'who  begets 
a  Kshattr*  both  on  a  female  of  his  own  caste  and  on  a  Jfandali 
(Nand.).  It  must  be  added  that  Nand.  reads  anantaryam  instead  of 
anantaryat. 


X,  31-  MIXED    CASTES.  409 

creates  with  (females  of)  the  four  castes  (var/za,  sons) 
more  (worthy  of  being)  excluded  (than  he  himself). 

31.  But  men  excluded  (by  the  Aryans,  vahya), 
who  approach  females  of  higher  rank,  beget  races 
(var/za)  still  more  worthy  to  be  excluded,  low  men 
(hina)  still  lower  races,  even  fifteen  (in  number). 

31.  In  order  to  show  that  fifteen  lower  castes  are  produced,  the 
commentators  propose  various  interpretations  of  the  verse,  among 
which  those  of  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Raglu  alone  deserve  to  be  men- 
tioned. Kull.  thinks  that  the  terms  vahya  and  hina  may  either  refer 
to  two  sets  of  men  or  to  one  only.  Under  the  former  supposition, 
the  Vahyas  must  be  understood  to  be  the  Pratiloma  offspring  of  a 
*Sudra,  i.  e.  Ayogavas,  Kshattr/s,  and  ^Taw^alas ;  and  the  Hinas, 
the  Pratiloma  offspring  of  Kshatriyas  and  Vaijyas,  i.  e.  Sutas, 
Magadhas,  and  Vaidehas.  Each  of  these  two  sets  produce  fifteen 
lower  races  by  unions  with  women  of  the  four  chief  castes  and  of 
their  own  (verse  27),  i.e.  Ayogavas  beget  five,  with  Brahmaaa, 
Kshatriya,  VaLrya,  -Sudra,  and  Ayogava  women  ;  Kshattn's  like- 
wise five,  with  Brahmawa,  Kshatriya,  VaLyya,  -Sudra,  and  Kshattrz' 
women,  and  so  forth.  But  if  the  two  terms  vahya  and  hina  are 
referred  to  one  set  of  males  only,  they  must  be  understood  to 
denote  the  six  Pratilomas,  Kandalas,  Kshattrzs,  Ayogavas,  Vaidehas, 
Magadhas,  and  Sutas ;  and  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  verse  refers 
to  unions  between  these  six  Pratiloma  races  alone.  Then  the 
lowest  among  them,  the  Kandifa,  may  produce  with  females  of  the 
five  higher  Pratiloma  tribes  five  more  degraded  races ;  the  Kshattr/, 
with  the  four  above  him,  four  ;  the  Ayogava,  the  three  above  him, 
three  ;  the  Vaideha,  two  ;  and  the  Magadha,  one.  The  total  of 
5  +  4+3  +  2  +  1  is  thus  15.  Ragh.  agrees  with  this  interpreta- 
tion. Nar.,  on  the  other  hand,  refers  the  terms  vahya  and  hina  to 
one  set  of  males,  the  three  Pratilomas  sprung  from  the  -Sudra,  and 
assumes  that  the  verse  refers  to  unions  of  these  three  with  females 
of  the  four  principal  castes  and  of  their  own.  According  to  the 
calculation  given  under  Kull.'s  first  explanation,  the  total  of  more 
degraded  races  which  may  be  thus  produced,  is  thirty.  It  seems 
to  me  that  Kull/s  second  explanation  is  the  best,  though  I  am  not 
prepared  to  deny  that  his  first  explanation,  and  even  Nar.'s  version, 
may  be  defended.  The  commentators  point  out  that  varea  is  used 
here  in  a  figurative  sense,  because  it  has  been  declared  above, 
verse  4,  that  there  are  only  four  real  var/zas. 


4-IO  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  32. 

32.  A  Dasyu  begets  on  an  Ayogava  (woman)  a 
Sairandhra,  who  is  skilled  in  adorning  and  attending 
(his  master),  who,  (though)  not  a  slave,  lives  like  a 
slave,  (or)  subsists  by  snaring  (animals). 

33.  A  Vaideha  produces  (with  the  same)  a  sweet- 
voiced  Maitreyaka,  who,  ringing  a  bell  at  the 
appearance  of  dawn,  continually  praises  (great) 
men. 

34.  A  Nishada  begets  (on  the  same)  a  Margava 
(or)  Da^a,  who  subsists  by  working  as  a  boatman, 
(and)  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Aryavarta  call  a 
Kaivarta. 

35.  Those  three  base-born  ones  are  severally 
begot  on  Ayogava  women,  who  wear  the  clothes  of 
the  dead,  are  wicked,  and  eat  reprehensible  food. 

32.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  Sairandhra 
instead  of  Sairandhri  (editions).  '  A  Dasyu/  i.e. '  one  of  those  tribes 
described  below,  verse  45 '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  one  of  the 
afore-mentioned  fifteen  Pratiloma  races'  (Nar.,  Nand.).  Prasa- 
dhanopa/fcara^am, '  skilled  in  adorning  and  attending  (his  master)/ 
i.  e. '  in  dressing  hair,  anointing  him  with  oil  and  so  forth,  and  in 
shampooing'  (Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Kull.,  who 
takes  prasadhanopa/C'ara,  not  as  a  copulative,  but  as  a  tatpurusha 
compound, '  skilled  in  serving  (his  master)  at  his  toilet'  Medh.'s 
explanation  is  ambiguous.  With  respect  to  his  second  occupation, 
1  snaring  animals,'  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  say  that  the  Sairandhra 
resorts  to  it  in  order  to  support  himself  in  times  of  distress,  or  in 
order  to  obtain  meat  for  the  worship  of  the  gods  and  manes,  or  at 
the  order  of  the  king.  Nand.  remarks,  '  As  the  Dasyus  are  many, 
there  are  also  many  Sairandhras,  and  that  is  indicated  by  the  addi- 
tion of  a  different  mode  of  subsistence.' 

34.  Gov.  and  K.  read  Magadha  instead  of  Margava.  Gov.  thinks 
that,  as  the  section  treats  of  Pratilomas,  the  Nishada  mentioned  here 
is  the  Pratiloma  Nishada  enumerated  by  Vyasa. 

35.  I  follow  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  who  read  mriti 
vastrabhrz'tsvanaryasu,  c  who  wear  the  clothes  of  the  dead,  ai 
wicked,'  instead  of  mn'tavastrabhrz'tsu  narishu,  '  women  who  wes 
the  clothes  of  the  dead' (editions).  Kull.  also  seems  to  have  had  the 


X,  40.  MIXED    CASTES.  411 

36.  From  a  Nishada  springs  (by  a  woman  of  the 
Vaideha  caste)  a  Karavara,  who  works  in  leather  ; 
and  from  a  Vaidehaka  (by  women  of  the  Karavara 
and  Nishada  castes),  an  Andhra  and  a  Meda,  who 
dwell  outside  the  village. 

37.  From  a  Afa/zdala  by  a  Vaideha  woman  is  born 
a  Pa^usopaka,  who  deals  in  cane;  from  a  Nishada 
(by  the  same)  an  Ahi^ika. 

38.  But  from  a  ATa^ala  by  a  Pukkasa  woman  is 
born  the  sinful  Sopaka,  who  lives  by  the  occupations 
of  his  sire,  and  is  ever  despised  by  good  men.  y\ 

39.  A  Nishada  woman  bears  to  a  Aa^ala  a  son 
(called)  Antyavasayin,  employed  in  burial-grounds,    | 
and    despised    even    by  those  excluded  (from   the 
Aryan  community). 

40.  These  races,  (which  originate)  in  a  confusion 
(of  the  castes  and)  have  been  described  according 
to  their  fathers  and  mothers,  may  be  known  by 
their  occupations,  whether  they  conceal  or  openly 
show  themselves. 

former  reading,  as  he  copies  the  explanation  sukrurasu, '  very  cruel,' 
which  Gov.  gives.  Medh.  explains  anaryasu  by  •  not  to  be  touched 
by  Aryans.' 

36.  Thus  according  to  Medh.  and  Kull.  But  Gov.  and  Ragh. 
understand  in  the  second  line  with  '  from  a  Vaidehaka,'  the  words 
1  by  women  of  the  Vaideha  caste.'  Nar.,  who  in  the  preceding  verse 
takes  the  words  ete  traya^,  'those  three,'  in  the  sense  of 'the  following 
three  other  races/ assumes  of  course  that  the  mothers  ofKaravaras, 
Medas,  and  Andhras  are  Ayogava  females.  The  latter  two  '  castes ' 
are  the  well-known  nations  inhabiting  Meva</  (Medapa/a)  in  south- 
eastern Ra^putana,  and  the  eastern  Dekkan. 

38.  Ragh.  and  Nand.  read  Paulkasa  instead  of  Pukkasa.  Mula- 
vyasanavrz'ttiman  means  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. '  who 
lives  by  executing  criminals,'  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  '  who 
lives  by  digging  roots,'  i.  e.  '  in  order  to  sell  them  as  medicine/  or  '  by 
curing  hemorrhoids '  (Nand.).  Medh.  gives  both  explanations.  The 
translation,  given  above,  follows  the  Petersburg  Diet.,  sub  voce. 


412  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  41. 

41.  Six  sons,  begotten  (by  Aryans)  on  women  of 
equal  and  the  next  lower  castes  ( Anantara),  have  the 
duties  of  twice-born  men  ;  but  all  those  born  in  con- 
sequence of  a  violation  (of  the  law)  are,  as  regards 
their  duties,  equal  to  .Sudras. 

42.  By  the  power  of  austerities  and  of  the  seed 
(from  which  they  sprang),  these  (races)  obtain  here 
among  men  more  exalted  or  lower  rank  in  successive 
births. 

43.  But  in  consequence  of  the  omission  ofL_the 
sacred  rites^  and  of  their  not  consulting  Brahma/zas, 
the  following  tribes  of  Kshatriyas  have  gradually 
sunk  in  this  world  to  the  condition  of  .Sudras  ; 

44.  (Viz.)  the  Pau^rakaj^Jthe  Kod'ds,  the  Dra- 
vidas,  the  Kambq^as,  the ^Yavanas,  the  .Sakas,  the 
Paradas,  the  Pahlavas.  the  iClnas,  the  Kiratas,  and 
the  Daradas. 

41.  Medh.  adds,  'The  mention  of  the  Anantaras  is  intended  to 
include  all  Anulomas.' 

42.  'These/  i.e.  'those  born  of  wives  of  equal  castes  and 
Anantaras'  (Gov.,  Kull.).  Medh.  and  Nar.  include  all  Anulomas,  and 
Ragh.  even  Pratilomas,  sprung  from  Aryan  fathers.  Yuge  yuge, 
'in  successive  births'  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according  to 
Kull.  '  in  each  of  the  ages  of  the  world.'  Kull.  refers  to  the  stories 
regarding  Vkvamitra  and  JRtshya.srmga.,  while  Medh.  points  to  the 
discussion,  given  below,  verse  64  seq. 

43.  Medh.  and  Gov.  read  brahmarcatikrame^a,  'by  disrespect 
towards  Brahma^as,'  instead  of  brahmawadan-anena, '  by  not  con- 
sulting Brahmawas'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  K.). 

44.  Instead  of  Pau«^rakas  (Kull.),  Medh.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K. 
read  Pu#</rakas,  and  Gov.  Pauw^rakas.  My  reading  J£oda.s  is  a 
correction  of  Komdia,  which  is  found  in  some  MSS.  of  Medh.  and 
in  K.  We  have  plainly  ^Tola  in  Nand.,  while  some  MSS.  of  Medh. 
and  Gov.  read  Jfamdm  or  Kamdva,  and  the  editions  give  JZaudra. 
Sir  W.  Jones'  opinion  that  kaudra  stands  for  kd.  Odra  is  improbable, 
because  the  particle  'and'  is  clearly  not  wanted  after  the  first 
word.    Instead  of  Pahlava,  some  MSS.  of  Medh.  and  some  editions 


X,  48.  MIXED    CASTES.  413 

45.  All  those  tribes  in  this  world,  which  are  ex- 
cluded from  (the  community  of)  those  born  from  the 
mouth,  the  arms,  the  thighs,  and  the  feet  (of  Brah- 
man), are  called  Dasyus.  whethex^thgy  speak_the 
langu^ge_^^he_  Mle^/^as  (barbarians)  or  that  of 
the  Aryans. 

46.  Those  who  have  been  mentioned  as  the  base- 
born  (offspring,  apasada)  of  Aryans,  or  as  produced 
in  consequence  of  a  violation  (of  the  law,  apadhvaw- 
sa^*a),  shall  subsist  by  occupations  reprehended  by 
the  twice-born. 

47.  To  Sutas  (belongs)  the  management  of 
horses  and  of  chariots  ;  to  Ambash//£as,  the  art  of 
healing ;  to  Vaidehakas,  the  service  of  women ;  to 
Magadhas,  trade  ; 

48.  Killing  fish  to  Nishadas;  carpenters'  work  to 
the  Ayogava ;  to  Medas,  Andhras,  Kun&us,  and 
Madgus,  the  slaughter  of  wild  animals ; 

read  Pahnava.  Gov.  gives  Pallava.  The  editions  give  the  Khasas 
after  the  Daradas.  But  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  K.  have  tatha  at 
the  end  of  the  verse.  The  commentators  state  that  the  names 
enumerated  in  the  first  instance  denote  countries,  and  next, 
particular  races  living  in  them. 

45.  '  Those  born  from  the  mouth,  &c./  i.  e.  the  four  Vargas ;  see 
above,  I,  87. 

46.  'Base-born  offspring  of  Aryans;'  see  above,  verses  17 
and  41. 

47.  'The  service  of  women,'  i.e.  'the  office  of  guardians  in  the 
harem/ 

48.  Instead  of  Kunku  (editions,  Ragh.),  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar. 
seem  to  have  read  ^u/^u.  Nand.  reads  Mamu  for  Madgu.  Nar. 
says  that  these  two  words  are  synonyms  of  Ghalfa  and  Malla ;  see 
above,  verse  22.  But  Gov.  quotes  a  verse  of  Yama,  according  to 
which  the  i£u>£uka  is  the  son  of  a  Vauya  by  a  Kshatriya  female, 
and  the  Madgu  the  offspring  of  a  -Sudra  and  a  Kshatriya.  Kull.'s 
and  Ragh.'s  reference  to  Baudh.  is,  according  to  the  MSS.  of  the 
Baudh.  Dharmasutra,  erroneous. 


414  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  49. 

49.  To  Kshattrzs,  Ugras,  and  Pukkasas,  catching 
and  killing  (animals)  living  in  holes ;  to  Dhigva^as, 
working  in  leather ;  to  Venas,  playing  drums. 

50.  Near  well-known  trees  and  burial-grounds,  on 
mountains  and  in  groves,  let  these  (tribes)  dwell, 
known  (by  certain  marks),  and  subsisting  by  their 

i|    peculiar  occupations. 

^-  51.  But  the  dwellings  of  A'a^alas  and  .5Vapa/£as 
shall  be  outside  the  village,  they  must  be  made 
Apapatras,  and  their  wealth  (shall  be)  dogs  and 
donkeys. 

52.  Their  dress  (shall  be)  the  garments  of  the 
dead,  (they  shall  eat)  their  food  from  broken  dishes, 

I      black  iron  (shall  be)  their  ornaments,  and  they  must 
L  always  wander  from  place  to  place. 

53.  A  man  who  fulfils  a  religious  duty,  shall  not 
seek  intercourse  with  them  ;  their  transactions  (shall 
be)  among  themselves,  and  their  marriages  with 
their  equals. 

54.  Their  food  shall  be  given  to  them  by  others 
1  (than  an  Aryan  giver)  in  a  broken  dish ;  at  night 
1   they  shall  not  walk  about  in  villages  and  in  towns. 

*  49.  Nand.  omits  this  verse. 

50.  Nand.  places  verse  50  after  verse  52. 

51.  Medh.  and  Nar.  read  avapatra#  instead  of  apapatnU  (Kull., 
Ragh.,  K.,  and  Gov.  ?),  and  Medh.  gives  three  explanations  of  the 
term  :  1.  vessels  used  by  them  must  be  thrown  away;  2.  if  food  is 
given  to  them,  it  must  not  be  placed  in  vessels  which  they  hold  in 
their  hands,  but  in  such  as  stand  on  the  ground  or  are  held  by 
others ;  3.  they  shall  use  bad,  i.  e.  broken  vessels,  as  is  stated  in 
the  next  verse.  The  other  commentators  adopt  the  first  explana- 
tion, which  is  no  doubt  the  correct  one. 

53.  Gov.  and  Nand.  say,  \ A  righteous  man,'  instead  of'Amj 
who  fulfils  a  religious  duty/ 

54.  Gov.  and  Nar.  take  the  beginning  of  the  verse  difFerentlj 


X,  6i.  MIXED    CASTES.  415 

-7 

55.  By  day  they  may  go  about  for  the  purpose  of 
their  work,  distinguished  by  marks  at  the  king's 
command,  and  they  shall  carry  out  the  corpses  (of 
persons)  who  have  no  relatives;  that  is  a  settled 
rule.  <-~7 

56.  By  the  king's  order  they  shall  always  execute 
the  criminals,  in  accordance  with  the  law,  and  they   / 
shall  take  for  themselves  the  clothes,  the  beds,  and_J 
the  ornaments  of  (such)  criminals. 

57.  A  man  of  impure  origin,  who  belongs  not  to 
any  caste,  (var/za,  but  whose  character  is)  not  known, 
who,  (though)  not  an  Aryan,  has  the  appearance 
of  an  Aryan,  one  may  discover  by  his  acts.  _^n 

58.  BeJiaviojiir_unworthy  of  an  Aryan,  harshness, 
cruel.ty^and  habitual  neglect  of  the  prescribed  duties 
betray  in  this  world  a  man  of  impure  origin.  _J 

59.  A  base-born  man  either  resembles  in  character 
his  father,  or  his  mother,  or  both  ;  he  can  never 
conceal  his  real  nature. 

60.  Even  if  a  man,  born  in  a  great  family,  sprang 
from  criminal  intercourse,  he  will  certainly  possess 
the  faults  of  his  (father),  be  they  small  or  great. 

61.  But  that  kingdom  in  which  such  bastards,  I 
sullying  (the  purity  of)  the  castes,  are  born,  perishes  j 
quickly  together  with  its  inhabitants. 

'  Their  food  shall  be  given  to  them  by  others  in  a  broken  vessel,' 
i.  e.  '  they  shall  not  cook  for  themselves  in  their  houses.' 

55.  'Distinguished  by  marks,'  i.  e. '  by  a  thunderbolt  and  the  like, 
or  by  axes,  adzes,  and  so  forth,  used  for  executing  criminals,  and 
carried  on  the  shoulder '  (Medh.),  or  '  by  sticks  and  so  forth '  (Gov.), 
or  '  by  iron  ornaments  and  peacock's  feathers  and  the  like '  (Nar.). 
Ragh.  thinks  that  they  are  to  be  branded  on  the  forehead  and  on 
other  parts  of  the  body.  In  olden  times  the  depressed  races  of 
Gujarat  used  to  wear  a  horn  as  their  distinguishing  mark. 

57-59-  Vas.  XVIII,  7 ;  Vi.  XVI,  17. 


r 


t 


416  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  62. 

62.  Dying,  without  the  expectation  of  a  reward, 
for  the  sake  of  Brahma/zas  and  of  cows,  or  in  the 
defence  of  women  and  children,  secures  beatitude  to 
those  excluded  (from  the  Aryan  community,  vahya). 

63.  Abstention  from  injuring  (creatures),  veracity, 
abstention  from  unlawfully  appropriating  (the  goods 

4k  of  others),  purity,  and  control  of  the  organs,  Manu 
has  declared  to  be  the  summary  of  the  law  for  the 
four  castes. 

64.  If  (a  female  of  the  caste),  sprung  from  a 
Brahma^a  and  a  6udra  female,  bear  (children)  to 
one  of  the  highest  caste,  the  inferior  (tribe)  attains 
the  highest  caste  within  the  seventh  generation. 

62.  Vi.  XVI,  18. 

63.  Gaut.  VIII,  23;  Yagfi.  I,  122;  and  above,  IV,  246,  V,  107. 

Nand.  reads  sarvavanze, '  for  all  castes/  instead  of  Mturvan/ye, '  for 
the  four  castes.' 

64.  Ap.  II,  10-11;  Gaut.  IV,  22  ;  Y&gn.  I,  96.  According  to 
Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  the  meaning  is  that,  if  the  daughter 
of  a  Brahmawa  and  of  a  -Sudra  female  and  her  descendants  all  marry 
Brahmawas,  the  offspring  of  the  sixth  female  descendant  of  the 
original  couple  will  be  a  Brahmawa.  While  this  explanation  agrees 
with  Haradatta's  comment  on  the  parallel  passage  of  Gautama, 
Nar.  and  Nand.  take  the  verse  very  differently.  They  say  that  if  a 
Parajava,  the  son  of  a  Brahmawa  and  of  a  -Sudra  female,  marries 
a  most  excellent  Para^ava  female,  who  possesses  a  good  moral 
character  and  other  virtues,  and  if  his  descendants  do  the  same, 
the  child  born  in  the  sixth  generation  will  be  a  Brahmaraa.  Nand. 
quotes  in  support  of  his  view  Baudhayana  I,  16,  13-14  (left  out  in 
my  translation  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  II,  p.  197),  nishadem 
nishadyam  a  paw/fcama^ater  apahanti  f^ato  'pahanti]  judratam  1  tam 
upanayet  shash//5aw  y&g-ayet,  '  (Offspring),  begotten  by  a  Nishada 
on  a  Nishadi,  removes  within  five  generations  the  -Sudra-hood ; 
one  may  initiate  him  (the  fifth  descendant),  one  may  sacrifice  for 
the  sixth/  This  passage  of  Baudhayana,  the  reading  of  whicl 
is  supported  by  a  new  MS.  from  Madras,  clearly  shows  that 
Baudhayana  allowed  the  male  offspring  of  Brahma«as  and  -Sudn 
females  to  be  raised  to  the  level  of  Aryans.    It  is  also  not  impossible 


X,  67.  MIXED    CASTES.  417 

65.  (Thus)  a  6udra  attains  the  rank  of  a  Brah- 
ma//a,  and  (in  a  similar  manner)  a  Brahma^a  sinks  tol 
the  level  of  a  .Sudra ;  but  know  that  it  is  the  samel 
with  the  offspring  of  a  Kshatriya  or  of  a  VaLsya. 

66.  If  (a  doubt)  should  arise,  with  whom  the  pre- 
eminence (is,  whether)  with  him  whom  an  Aryan  by 
chance  begot  on  a  non-Aryan  female,  or  (with  the 
son)  of  a  Brahma;za  woman  by  a  non-Aryan, 

6 j.  The  decision  is  as  follows  :  'He  who  was 
begotten  by  an  Aryan  on  a  non-Aryan  female,  may 
become  (like  to)  an  Aryan  by  his  virtues ;  he  whom 
an  Aryan  (mother)  bore  to  a  non-Aryan  father  (is 
and  remains)  unlike  to  an  Aryan/ 

that  the  meaning  of  Manu's  verse  may  be  the  same,  and  that  the 
translation  should  be, '  If  the  offspring  of  a  Brahmazza  and  of  a 
.Sudra  female  begets  children  with  a  most  excellent  (male  of  the 
Brahmazza  caste  or  female  of  the  Para^ava  tribe),  the  inferior  (tribe) 
attains  the  highest  caste  in  the  seventh  generation.'  The  chief 
objection  to  this  version,  which  consists  in  the  fact  that  sregasa., 
'with  a  most  excellent,'  stands  in  the  masculine,  may  be  met  by 
Manu's  peculiar  use  of  the  masculine  instead  of  the  feminine  above 
in  verse  32,  where  ayogave  is  used  for  ayogavyam. 

65.  The  manner  in  which  a  Brahmazza  sinks  to  the  level  of  a 
.Sudra  is,  according  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.,  the  following.  If 
the  son  of  a  Brahmazza  and  of  a  Sudra  female  and  his  descendants 
marry  Sudra  wives,  the  seventh  descendant  will  be  a  pure  Sudra. 
Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Kull.  hold  that  the  offspring  of  a  Brahma/za  and 
of  a  Kshatriya  female  obtains  the  higher  or  lower  rank  in  the  third 
generation,  and  the  offspring  of  a  Brahmazza  and  of  a  Vaijya  female 
in  the  fifth.  Medh.  and  Gov.  expressly  state  that '  they/  i.  e.  the  older 
commentators,  give  this  explanation. 

66.  'Anon- Aryan  female/  i.  e. '  a  Sudra  female '  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  'the  daughter  of  a  Vratya  and  the  like ' 
(Nar.).  '  By  chance/  i.  e.  even  on  an  unmarried  one  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull,  Ragh.,  Nand.),  or  '  unknowingly '  (Nar.).  'An  Aryan  female/ 
i.  e.  'a  Brahmazzi '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  Nar.,  Nand.). 

67.  'May  become  (like  to)  an  Aryan  by  his  virtues/  i.  e.  'may 
become  most  excellent  or  praiseworthy  by  offering  the  Pakaya^ilas 

[25]  e  e 


41 8  LAWS   OF    MANU.  X,68. 

68.  The  law  prescribes  that  neither  of  the  two 
shall  receive  the  sacraments,  the  first  (being  ex- 
cluded) on  account  of  the  lowness  of  his  origin,  the 
second  (because  the  union  of  his  parents  was) 
against  the  order  of  the  castes. 

69.  As  good  seed,  springing  up  in  good  soil, 
turns  out  perfectly  well,  even  so  the  son  of  an 
Aryan  by  an  Aryan  woman  is  worthy  of  all  the 
sacraments. 

70.  Some  sages  declare  the  seed  to  be  more 
important,  and  others  the  field ;  again  others  (assert 
that)  the  seed  and  the  field  (are  equally  important); 
but  the  legal  decision  on  this  point  is  as  follows  : 

71.  Seed,  sown  on  barren  ground,  perishes  in  it; 
a  (fertile)  field  also,  in  which  no  (good)  seed  (is 
sown),  will  remain  barren. 

72.  As  through  the  power  of  the  seed  (sons) 
born  of  animals  became  sages  who  are  honoured 
and  praised,  hence  the  seed  is  declared  to  be  more 
important. 

73.  Having  considered  (the  case  of)  a  non- Aryan 
who  acts  like  an  Aryan,  and  (that  of)  an  Aryan  who 
acts  like  a  non-Aryan,  the  creator  declared, '  Those 
two  are  neither  equal  nor  unequal.' 

and  the  like,  which  according  to  other  Smmis  are  permitted  to 
him '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.).  '  Unlike  to  an  Aryan,'  i.  e. '  un- 
worthy of  praise  or  respect '  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

69-72.  See  also  the  discussion  which  occurs  above,  IX,  33-41. 

71.  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nand.  say 'a  field  in  which  no  seed  (is 
sown)  remains  barren.'  The  translation  follows  Medh.  The 
commentators  refer  to  the  stories  of  Mandapala  and  Jtishyasrihga, 
see  above,  IX,  23. 

72.  'Not  equal,' i.e.  because  they  differ  in  caste;  'not  unequal,' 
i.  e.  because  both  do  what  is  forbidden  to  them.  Hence  nobody 
should  do  acts  which  are  not  permitted  to  him  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 


X,  79-       OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  CASTES.        419 

74.  Brahma^as  who  are  intent  on  the  means  (of 
gaining  union  with)  Brahman  and  firm  in  (discharg- 
ing) their  duties,  shall  live  by  duly  performing  the 
following  six  acts,  (which  are  enumerated)  in  their 
(proper)  order. 

75.  Teaching,    studying,    sacrificing    for   himself,    \ 
sacrificing   for  others,   making   gifts    and  receiving     \ 
them  are  the  six  acts  (prescribed)  for  a  Brahma^a. 

76.  But  among  the  six  acts  (ordained)  for  him 
three  are  his  means  of  subsistence,  (viz.)  sacrificing 
for  others,  teaching,  and  accepting  gifts  from  pure 
men. 

77.  (Passing)  from  the  Brahma^a  to  the  Ksha- 
triya,  three  acts  (incumbent  on  the  former)  are 
forbidden,  (viz.)  teaching,  sacrificing  for  others,  and, 
thirdly,  the  acceptance  of  gifts. 

78.  The  same  are  likewise  forbidden  to  a  Varsya, 
that  is  a  settled  rule  ;  for  Manu,  the  lord  of  creatures 
(Pra^apati),  has  not  prescribed  them  for  (men  of) 
those  two  (castes). 

79.  To  carry  arms  for  striking  and  for  throwing  \ 
(is  prescribed)  for  Kshatriyas  as  a  means  of  sub-  1 
sistence ;  to  trade,  (to  rear)  cattle,  and  agriculture  \ 


74-80.  Ap.  II,  10,  4-7;  Gaut.  X,  1-7,  49;  Vas.  II,  13-19; 
Baudh.  1, 18,  1-4  ;  Vi.  II,  1-7  ;  Y&gn,  1, 11 8-1 19 ;  see  also  above, 
I,  88-90. 

74.  Brahmayonistha^, '  who  are  intent  on  the  means  of  gaining 
union  with  Brahman'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  means  according  to 
Nar.  and  Ragh. '  who  are  of  pure  Brahmamcal  race,'  according  to 
Nand.  '  who  abide  by  that  which  springs  from  the  Veda,  i.  e.  the 
sacred  law,'  or  '  who  are  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Veda.' 

77.  Nar.  reads  brahmawa^  kshatriyaw  prati,  'To  a  Kshatriya 
three  acts  incumbent  on  a  Brahmawa'  are  forbidden,'  instead  of 
brahmawat  kshatriyas  prati.  Nand.,  whose  text  is  corrupt,  seems 
to  have  had  the  same  reading  as  Nar. 

e  e  2 


420  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  80. 

/    for  Vaisyas  ;  but  their  duties  are  liberality,  the  study 
/     of  the  Veda,  and  the  performance  of  sacrifices. 

80.  Among  the  several  occupations  the  most 
/  commendable  are,  teaching  the  Veda  for  a  Brah- 
\  ma^a,  protecting  (the  people)  for  a  Kshatriya,  and 
1      trade  for  a  VaLsya. 

81.  But  a  Brahma^a,  unable  to  subsist  by  his 
peculiar  occupations  just  mentioned,  may  live  ac- 
cording to  the  law  applicable  to  Kshatriyas ;  for 
the  latter  is  next  to  him  in  rank. 

82.  If  it  be  asked,  '  How  shall  it  be,  if  he  cannot 
maintain  himself  by  either  (of  these  occupations?' 
the  answer  is),  he  may  adopt  a  Vai^ya's  mode  of  life, 
employing  himself  in  agriculture  and  rearing  cattle. 

83.  But  a  Brahma/za,  or  a  Kshatriya,  living  by 
a  Vai-sya's  mode  of  subsistence,  shall  carefully  avoid 
(the  pursuit  of)  agriculture,  (which  causes)  injury  to 
many  beings  and  depends  on  others. 

T^84.  (Some)  "declare  that  agriculture  is  something 
I  excellent,  (but)  that  means  of  subsistence  is  blamed 

80.  Vartta, '  trade '  (Nand.),  means  according  to  Kull. '  trade  and 
rearing  cattle/  and  according  to  Gov.  '  trade,  rearing  cattle,  and 
agriculture.'  But  the  context  makes  it  probable  that  one  occu- 
pation only  is  intended. 

81-98.  Ap.  I,  20,10-21,  4;  Gaut.  VII,  1-26;  Vas.  II,  22-39; 
Baudh.  II,  4,  16-21 ;  Vi.  II,  15  ;  LIV,  18-21 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  35-40. 

82.  Nar.  thinks  that  kr/shi, '  agriculture/  means  here  asvayaw- 
krna,  'at  which  the  Brahmawa  does  not  work  personally/  while 
Gov.  and  Kull.  hold  the  contrary  opinion.  For  according  to  them 
the  asvayazrckr/ta  kn'shi^  has  been  permitted  even  for  ordinary 
times,  above,  IV,  4-5. 

83.  '  Depends  on  others/  i.  e.  *  on  bullocks  and  so  forth '  (Gov., 
Kull.).  It  has  been  taught  above,  IV,  159-160,  that  a  Snataka  is 
to  avoid  all  that  depends  upon  others. 

84.  Medh.  points  out  that  this  verse  is  directed  against  the 
teaching  of  Vas.  II,  32-36.    . 


X,  9©       OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  CASTES.         421 

by  the  virtuous ;  (for)  the  wooden  (implement)  with 
iron  point  injures  the  earth  and  (the  beings)  living 
in  the  earth. 

85.  But  he  who,  through  a  want  of  means  of  sub- 
sistence, gives  up  the  strictness  with  respect  to  his 
duties,  may  sell,  in  order  to  increase  his  wealth,  the 
commodities  sold  by  Vaisyas,  making  (however)  the 
(following)  exceptions. 

86.  He  must  avoid  (selling)  condiments  of  all 
sorts,  cooked  food  and  sesamum,  stones,  salt,  cattle, 
and  human  (beings), 

8j.  All  dyed  cloth,  as  well  as  cloth  made  of  hemp, 
or  flax,  or  wool,  even  though  they  be  not  dyed,  fruit, 
roots,  and  (medical)  herbs  ; 

88.  Water,  weapons,  poison,  meat,  Soma,  and  per- 
fumes of  all  kinds,  fresh  milk,  honey,  sour  milk, 
clarified  butter,  oil,  wax,  sugar,  Kiua-grass  ; 

89.  All  beasts  of  the  forest,  animals  with  fangs 
or  tusks,  birds,  spirituous  liquor,  indigo,  lac,  and 
all  one-hoofed  beasts. 

90.  But  he  who  subsists  by  agriculture,  may  at 
pleasure  sell  unmixed  sesamum  grains  for  sacred 

86.  Medh.  says,  'and  cooked  food,  mixed  with  sesamum  grains/ 
The  same  commentator  thinks  that,  as  salt  which  is  also  a  condi- 
ment is  specially  forbidden,  other  condiments  may  be  sold  optionally. 
But  Gov.  and  Kull.  point  out  that  it  is  specially  named,  because 
the  penance  is  heavier.  Nar.  explains  rasan,  'condiments,'  by 
'  exudations  of  leaves,  wood,  and  so  forth.' 

88.  Nar.  reads  ksharam, c  alcaline  substances,'  instead  of  kshiram, 
'  fresh  milk,'  but  mentions  the  latter  reading,  and  Nand.  ksharam 
for  kshaudram. 

89.  Nar.  reads  ma^a,  l marrow/  instead  of  madyam,  '  spirituous 
liquor.'  Medh.  says  that  some  read  ekajaphan  bahun, '  many  one- 
hoofed  beasts/  and  permit  the  sale  of  a  single  one.  Nand.  reads 
pa^un, '  animals.' 

90.  -Suddhan,  'unmixed'  (Medh.,  Gov.,   Kull.,    Ragh.),  means 


y 


42  2  LAWS    OF   MANU.  X,  91. 

purposes,  provided  he  himself  has  grown  them  and 
has  not  kept  them  long. 

91.  If  he  applies  sesamum  to  any  other  purpose 
but  food,  anointing,  and  charitable  gifts,  he  will  be 
born  (again)  as  a  worm  and,  together  with  his 
ancestors,  be  plunged  into  the  ordure  of  dogs. 

92.  By  (selling)  flesh,  salt,  and  lac  a  Brahma^a 
at  once  becomes  an  outcast;  by  selling  milk  he 
becomes  (equal  to)  a  .Sudra  in  three  days. 

93.  But  by  willingly  selling  in  this  world  other 
(forbidden)  commodities,  a  Brahma/za  assumes  after 
seven  nights  the  character  of  a  Vakya. 

94.  Condiments  may  be  bartered  for  condiments, 
but  by  no  means  salt  for  (other)  condiments ; 
cooked  food  (may  be  exchanged)  for  (other  kinds 
of)  cooked  food,  and  sesamum  seeds  for  grain  in 
equal  quantities. 

95.  A  Kshatriya  who  has  fallen  into  distress,  may 
subsist  by  all  these  (means) ;  but  he  must  never 
arrogantly  adopt  the  mode  of  life  (prescribed  for 
his)  betters. 

according  to  Nand.  '  white/  according  to  Nar.  '  of  good  quality/ 
'  Provided  he  has  not  kept  them  long,'  i.  e. '  if  he  has  not  kept  them 
long  after  the  harvest,  in  order  to  increase  his  profit '  (Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  Nar.). 

91.  K.  reads  krzmir  bhutva  sa  vishMayam,  'he  will  be  plunged 
into  ordure ;'  and  Medh.  seems  likewise  to  have  read  sa, '  he/  for 
svsl,  'dog.' 

93.  Kamata^, '  willingly/ means  according  to  Medh..  and  Nand. 
'  not  in  times  of  distress,  but  in  ordinary  times.' 

94..  I  read  with  Medh.  and  Nand.,  krz'tannaw  ka.  kr/tannena 
instead  of  /£akr*'tannena  (Gov.,  Kull,  Nar.), '  for  undressed  grain/ 
because  all  the  other  Smn'tis  have  the  former  rule.  K.  reads  va 
krz'tannena,  and  thus  shows  how  the  misreading  kk°  arose.  Nand. 
reads  na  tveva  lava^aw  tilai^, '  but  not  salt  for  sesamum  grains, 
and  Medh.  mentions  the  reading  as  a  var.  lect. 


X,  ioi.  OCCUPATIONS    OF    THE    CASTES.  423 

96.  A  man  of  low  caste  who  through  covetous- 
ness  lives  by  the  occupations  of  a  higher  one,  the 
king  shall  deprive  of  his  property  and  banish. 

97.  It  is  better  (to  discharge)  one's  own  (ap-  \XjM  "^ 
pointed)  duty  incompletely  than  to  perform  com-^y  HLtrX' 
pletely  that  of  another ;  for  he  who  lives  according 

to  the  law  of  another  (caste)  is  instantly  excluded 
from  his  own. 

98.  A  VaLsya  who  is  unable  to  subsist  by  his 
own  duties,  may  even  maintain  himself  by  a  .Sudra's 
mode  of  life,  avoiding  (however)  acts  forbidden 
(to  him),  and  he  should  give  it  up,  when  he  is  able 
(to  do  so). 

99.  But  a  .Sudra,  being  unable  to  find  service 
with  the  twice-born  and  threatened  with  the  loss 
of  his  sons  and  wife  (through  hunger),  may  main- 
tain himself  by  handicrafts. 

100.  (Let  him  follow)  those  mechanical  occupa- 
tions and  those  various  practical  arts  by  following 
which  the  twice-born  are  (best)  served. 

101.  A  Brahma/za  who  is  distressed  through  a 
want  of  means  of  subsistence  and  pines  (with  hunger), 
(but)  unwilling  to  adopt  a  Vaisya's  mode  of  life  and 
resolved  to  follow  his  own  (prescribed)  path,  may  act 
in  the  following  manner. 

97.  Nar.  gives  as  an. instance  of  an  ill  or  incomplete  performance 
of  a  Brahma/za's  duty,  which  is  better  than  completely  discharging 
the  duties  of  another  caste,  the  acceptance  of  alms  from  an  impure 
person.  Nand.  omits  this  verse,  which,  indeed,  is  here  out  of  place 
and  ought  to  stand  in  the  discussion  beginning  verse  101. 

98.  'Acts  forbidden  to  him,'  i.  e.  '  eating  the  leavings  of  the  others 
and  so  forth '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.),  or  '  eating  forbidden  food  and 
the  like '  (Nand.). 

99-100.  Vi.  Ill,  14;  Gaut.  X,  60. 

101-114.  Gaut.  VII,  4-5,  23;  Ap.  1, 18,  5-8,  14-15- 


424  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


L 


1 02.  A  Brahma^a  who  has  fallen  into  distress 
may  accept  (gifts)  from  anybody;  for  according  to 
the  law  it  is  not  possible  (to  assert)  that  anything 

jL    pure  can  be  sullied. 

103.  By  teaching,  by  sacrificing  for,  and  by  ac- 
cepting gifts  from  despicable  (men)  Brahma/zas  (in 
distress)  commit  not  sin  ;  for  they  (are  as  pure)  as 
fire  and  water. 

104.  He  who,  when  in  danger  of  losing  his  life, 
accepts  food  from  any  person  whatsoever,  is  no  more 
tainted  by  sin  than  the  sky  by  mud. 

105.  A^igarta,  who  suffered  hunger,  approached 
in  order  to  slay  (his  own)  son,  and  was  not  tainted 
by  sin,  since  he  (only)  sought  a  remedy  against 
famishing. 

106.  Vamadeva,  who  well  knew  right  and  wrong, 
did  not  sully  himself  when,  tormented  (by  hunger), 
he  desired  to  eat  the  flesh  of  a  dog  in  order  to  save 
his  life. 

107.  Bharadva^a,  a  performer  of  great  austeri- 
ties, accepted  many  cows  from  the  carpenter  Brz'bu, 
when  he  was  starving  together  with  his  sons  in  a 
lonely  forest. 


102.  'Anything  pure,'  i.  e. '  the  Ganges  and  the  like'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.),  or  '  fire  and  the  like '  (Nar.,  Ragh.). 

103.  Vas.  XXVII,  9. 

105.  Regarding  the  story  of  A^igarta,  see  Aitareya-brahmawa 
VII,  13-16. 

107.  I  read  with  Gov.  and  Saya^a  on  Rig-veda  VI,  45,  31, 
Rribu  instead  of  Vridhu  (Kull.,  Ragh.,  K.),  and  Bnhat  (Nar.,  Nand.). 
The  corrected  copies  of  Medh.  have  Vrzdhu,  but  the  oldest  reads 
vrz'ddha  in  the  text,  and  in  the  commentary  drzb>u,  i.  e.  brzbu.  It 
is  not  doubtful  that  Bribu  is  the  correct  reading.  For  in  the  hymn 
quoted  that  personage  is  described  as  the  carpenter  of  the  Pams, 
and  his  liberality  is  highly  praised.     Moreover  the  »Sarikhayana 


X,  113.      OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  CASTES.         425 

108.  Visvamitra,  who  well  knew  what  is  right 
or  wrong,  approached,  when  he  was  tormented  by 
hunger,  (to  eat)  the  haunch  of  a  dog,  receiving  it 
from  the  hands  of  a  TTa^^ala. 

109.  On  (comparing)  the  acceptance  (of  gifts  from 
low  men),  sacrificing  (for  them),  and  teaching  (them), 
the  acceptance  of  gifts  is  the  meanest  (of  those  acts) 
and  (most)  reprehensible  for  a  Brahma^a  (on  account 
of  its  results)  in  the  next  life. 

no.  (For)  assisting  in  sacrifices  and  teaching 
are  (two  acts)  always  performed  for  men  who  have 
received  the  sacraments  ;  but  the  acceptance  of  gifts 
takes  place  even  in  (case  the  giver  is)  a  .5udra  of 
the  lowest  class. 

in.  The  guilt  incurred  by  offering  sacrifices  for 
teaching  (unworthy  men)  is  removed  by  muttering 
(sacred  texts)  and  by  burnt  offerings,  but  that  in- 
curred by  accepting  gifts  (from  them)  by  throwing 
(the  gifts)  away  and  by  austerities. 

112.  A  Brahma;za  who  is  unable  to  maintain 
himself,  should  (rather)  glean  ears  or  grains  from 
(the  field  of)  any  (man);  gleaning  ears  is  better  than 
accepting  gifts,  picking  up  single  grains  is  declared 
to  be  still  more  laudable. 

113.  If  Brahma?/as,  who  are  Snatakas,  are  pining 
with  hunger,  or  in  want  of  (utensils  made  of)  com- 
mon metals,  or  of  other  property,  they  may  ask  the 

.SYauta-sutra  (see  the  Petersburg  Dictionary,  sub  voce  Brzbu) 
alludes  to  the  legend  mentioned  by  Manu. 

108.  Regarding  the  legend  of  Vijvamitra,  see  Mahabh.  XII,  141, 
28  seqq. 

no.  Nar.  says/a£udra(or)one  of  the  lowest  class,  i.e. a  A'a^ala.' 

in.  ip.  I,  28,  11;  Vas.  XX,  45  ;  Vi.  LIV,  28.  'By  austerities,' 
i.  e.  'by  penances/  see  below,  XI,  194. 

113.  Kupyam,  '  (utensils   made  of)  common   metals,'  includes 


426  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  114. 

king  for  them  ;  if  he  is  not  disposed  to  be  liberal,  he 
must  be  left. 

114.  (The  acceptance  of)  an  untilled  field  is  less 
blamable  than  (that  of )  a  tilled  one ;  (with  respect 
to)  cows,  goats,  sheep,  gold,  grain,  and  cooked  food, 
(the  acceptance  of)  each  earlier-named  (article  is  less 
blamable  than  of  the  following  ones). 

115.  There  are  seven  lawful  modes  of  acquiring 
property,  (viz.)  inheritance,  finding  or  friendly  dona- 
tion, purchase,  conquest,  lending  at  interest,  the 
performance  of  work,  and  the  acceptance  of  gifts 
from  virtuous  men. 

according  to  Medh.  ■  pots,  kettles,  wooden  stools,  and  the  like ; 
according  to  Gov. '  all  property  of  small  value  such  as  beds,  seats ;' 
according  to  Kull.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.  'also  grain  and  clothes/ 
But  Nar.  takes  it  in  its  usual  sense, '  common  metals  such  as  brass 
and  copper/  I  translate  the  last  clause  according  to  the  first  expla- 
nation of  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.,  who  think  that  all  Brah- 
ma«as  should  leave  the  realm  of  a  king  who  does  not  support 
famishing  Snatakas.  Nand»,  however,  says  that  such  a  king  is  to 
be  excluded  from  instruction  and  admission  to  sacrifices.  Medh/s 
second  interpretation,  according  to  which  tyaga^  means  dharma- 
hani^, ■  a  loss  of  spiritual  merit/  agrees  with  Nand/s  view.  Kull. 
finally  takes  the  phrase  very  differently, '  but  he  who  does  not  wish 
to  give  anything,  being  known  for  his  avarice,  must  be  left  to  him- 
self, i.e.  must  not  be  asked/  Kull.  and  Gov.  hold  that  'the 
prince '  meant  here  is  a  Kshatriya  king  who  does  not  follow  the 
-Sastras,  or  a  -Sudra  king  (see  note  on  IV,  33),  and  that  the  verse 
thus  rescinds  the  prohibition  given  above,  IV,  84  seq. 

114.  Vas.  XII,  3. 

115.  Gaut.X,  39-42.  Labha,' finding  or  friendly  donation  '(Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.),  refers  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  to  the  acquisition  of 
treasure-trove  alone,  not  to  the  acceptance  of  presents  from  friends, 
from  a  father-in-law,  &c.  Gaya,  '  conquest/  means  according  to 
Nand. '  gaining  lawsuits.'  The  same  commentator  takes  prayoga, 
'  lending  money  at  interest/  in  the  sense  of '  teaching/  and  karma- 
yoga,  '  performance  of  labour,'  in  the  sense  of '  sacrificing  for  others/ 
All  the  commentators,  except  Nand.,  point  out  that  the  first  three 
modes  of  acquisition  are  lawful  for  all  castes,  the  fourth  for  Ksha- 


X,  120.  TIMES    OF    DISTRESS;    THE    KING.  427 

ti6.  Learning,  mechanical  arts,  work  for  wages, 
service,  rearing  cattle,  traffic,  agriculture,  content- 
ment (with  little),  alms,  and  receiving  interest  on 
money,  are  the  ten  modes  of  subsistence  (permitted 
to  all  men  in  times  of  distress).  — , 

117.  Neither  a  Brahma^a,  nor  a  Kshatriya  must 
lend  (money  at)  interest ;  but  at  his  pleasure  (either  1 
of  them)  may,  in  times  of  distress  (when  he  requires 
money)  for  sacred  purposes,  lend  to  a  very  sinful 
man  at  a  small  interest.  - — I 

1 1 8.  A  Kshatriya  (king)  who,  in  times  of  distress, 
takes  even  the  fourth  part  (of  the  crops),  is  free 
from  guilt,  if  he  protects  his  subjects  to  the  best  of 
his  ability. 

119.  His  peculiar  duty  is  conquest,  and  he  must 
not  turn  back  in  danger ;  having  protected  the 
Vaiiyas  by  his  weapons,  he  may  cause  the  legal 
tax  to  be  collected  ; 

1 20.  (Viz.)  from  Vaiiyas  one-eighth  as  the  tax  on 

triyas,  the  fifth  and  sixth  for  Vaijyas  (or  the  fifth  for  Vaiiyas,  the 
sixth  for  -Sudras,  Nar.),  and  the  seventh  for  Brahmawas. 

116.  ' Learning,'  i.  e.  (teaching)  other  than  Vedic  sciences,  e.g. 
logic,  exorcising  evil  spirits,  or  charms  against  poison  (Medh..  Kull, 
Nar.,  Ragh.).  Gov.  thinks  that  '  teaching  for  a  stipulated  fee '  is 
also  permissible  under  this  rule. 

117.  Vas.  II,  40-43.  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  K.  read  alpakam  instead 
of  alpikam,  and  with  this  var.  lect.  the  last  clause  might  be  trans- 
lated with  Nar.  by  ' .  .  .  (either  of  them) .  .  .  may  lend  a  small  (sum) 
to  a.  very  sinful  man.' 

119.  I  read  with  Gov.  and  K.  na  bhaye  instead  of  nahave 
(editions).  Medh.'s  text  has  the  latter  reading,  but  the  com- 
mentary bhaye  upasthite  parahmukho  yuddhe  na  syat,  '  when 
danger  threatens  he  shall  not  turn  back  in  battle,'  indicates  that 
his  reading  was  bhaye.  The  same  inference  may  be  drawn  from 
Kull.'s  commentary.  ^Nand.  gives  na  bhave,  probably  a  mistake 
for  na  bhaye. 

120.  According  to  Medh.,  the  first  line  refers  to  the  profits  of 


428  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  121. 

grain,  one-twentieth  (on  the  profits  on  gold  and 
cattle),  which  amount  at  least  to  one  Karshapa^a ; 
.Sudras,  artisans,  and  mechanics  (shall)  benefit  (the 
king)  by  (doing)  work  (for  him). 

121.  If  a  6udra,  (unable  to  subsist  by  serving 
Brahma/zas,)  seeks  a  livelihood,  he  may  serve  Ksha- 
triyas,  or  he  may  also  seek  to  maintain  himself  by 
attending  on  a  wealthy  VaLsya. 

122.  But  let  a  (.5udra)  serve   Brahma/zas,  either 

subjects  dealing  in  corn  or  in  gold.  From  the  former  the  king 
may  take  in  times  of  distress  one-eighth,  and  from  the  latter  one- 
twentieth.  The  second  line  indicates  that  artisans  who,  according 
to  VII,  138,  in  ordinary  times  furnish  one  piece  of  work  in  each 
month,  may  be  made  to  work  more  for  the  king.  According  to 
Gov.  and  Kull.,  husbandmen  (krzshi^-ivinam,  Gov,)  shall  give  from 
the  increments  on  grain  (upa^aya)  one-eighth  (instead  of  one- 
twelfth,  and  in  the  direst  distress  one-fourth,  according  to  verse  118, 
Kull.),  from  all  increments  on  gold  and  so  forth  amounting  to  more 
than  a  Karshapawa  one-twentieth  instead  of  one-fiftieth,  as  prescribed 
above,  VII,  130.  Ragh.  in  substance  agrees  with  this  explanation. 
Nar.  and  Nand.  read,  as  it  would  seem,  vimatkarshapa/zavaraw 
(zzaparazzz,  Nand.),  and  take  the  verse  differently.  Nar.  says  that 
the  tax  on  grain  is  to  be  one-fourth  in  the  case  of  -Sudras,  and  one- 
eighth  in  the  case  of  Vaiyyas,  that  the  tax  on  everything  else  is  to 
be  at  least  one  Karshapazza  in  twenty,  and  that  artisans  who  work 
for  wages  shall  pay  the  same  rate  (viw^atkarshapanam  iti  1  dhanyad 
anyeshu  vimsad  vizzz^atikarshapazzamulya/zz  tadmalabhe  karsha- 
pazza  eko  ra^wa  grahya  ity  avara^  paksha^  l  sambhave  tv  adhikam 
api  grahyam  ity  artha/^  1  dharmopakarawa^  [karmo°]  dharmibhir 
[karmabhir]  virvam  upakurvantas  tantuvayadaya^  I  sudr&h  karavo 
varzzavahya  na/a&trakaradya^  I  .rilpinaj  ka.  rathakaradyas  te  'pi 
karma  krz'tva  bhrz'titve  'pi  vizzzsatikarshapazzalabhe  karshapazzavarazzz 
julka/zz  dadyur  iti  .resha^).  According  to  Nar.  the  translation  would 
be:  '(Viz.)  one-eighth  as  the  tax  (payable)  by  Vauyas  on  grain, 
(and  on  everything  else)  at  least  one  Karshapa/za  out  of  twenty; 
-Sudra  artisans  and  mechanics  who  benefit  (men)  by  their  work 
(shall  pay  the  same  rate).'  Nar.  adds  that  some  read  tri/zwatkarsha- 
pazzavaram, '  at  least  one  Karshapazza  out  of  thirty.' 
1 21-129.  Gaut.  X,  50-65;  Yagii,  I,  1 20-1 21. 


4 


X,  128.  TIMES    OF    DISTRESS  J    SUDRAS.  429 

for  the  sake  of  heaven,  or  with  a  view  to  both  (this 
life  and  the  next) ;  for  he  who  is  called  the  servant 
of  a  Brahma;za  thereby  gains  all  his  ends.  ,  ^j 

123.  The  service  of  Brahma^as  alone  is  declared 
(to  be)  an  excellent  occupation  for  a    .Sudra  ;    for  7k 
whatever  else  besides  this  he  may  perform  will  bear 
him  no  fruit. 

124.  They  must  allot  to  him  out  of  their  own 
family  (-property)  a  suitable  maintenance,  after  con- 
sidering his  ability,  his  industry,  and  the  number  of 
those  whom  he  is  bound  to  support. 

125.  The  remnants  of  their  food  must  be  given 
to  him,  as  well  as  their  old  clothes,  the  refuse  of 
their  grain,  and  their  old  household  furniture. 

126.  A  .Sudra  cannot  commit  an  offence,  causing 
loss  of  caste  (pataka),  and  he  is  not  worthy  to  re- 
ceive the  sacraments ;  he  has  no  right  to  (fulfil) 
the  sacred  law  (of  the  Aryans,  yet)  there  is  no  pro- 
hibition against  (his  fulfilling  certain  portions  of) 
the  law. 

127.  (6udras)  who  are  desirous  to  gain  merit,  and 
know  (their)  duty,  commit  no  sin,  but  gain  praise,  if 
they  imitate  the  practice  of  virtuous  men  without 
reciting  sacred  texts. 

128.  The  more  a  (6udra),  keeping  himself  free 
from  envy,  imitates  the  behaviour  of  the  virtuous, 
the  more  he  gains,  without  being  censured,  (exalta- 
tion in)  this  world  and  the  next. 

126.  'Cannot  commit  an  offence  causing  loss  of  caste,'  i.e.  'by 
eating  garlic  and  the  like  forbidden  fruit'  (Gov.,  KulL),  or  '  by  (keep- 
ing) a  slaughter-house'  (Ragh.). 

127.  In  what  particulars  the  practice  of  the  Aryans  may  be  imi- 
tated by  Sudras,  may  be  learnt  from  the  parallel  passages  quoted 
above. 


430  LAWS    OF    MANU.  X,  129. 

129.  No  collection  of  wealth  must  be  made 
by  a  .Suclra,   even   though   he  be  able   (to   do  it) ; 

^  for  a  .Sudra  who    has  acquired  wealth,  gives  pain 
|^to  Brahma/zas. 

130.  The  duties  of  the  four  castes  (var/za)  in 
times  of  distress  have  thus  been  declared,  and  if 
they  perform  them  well,  they  will  reach  the  most 
blessed  state. 

131.  Thus  all  the  legal  rules  for  the  four  castes 
have  been  proclaimed ;  I  next  will  promulgate  the 
auspicious  rules  for  penances. 


Chapter   XL 

1.  Him  who  wishes  (to  marry  for  the  sake  of 
having)  offspring,  him  who  wishes  to  perform  a  sa- 
crifice, a  traveller,  him  who  has  given  away  all  his 
property,  him  who  begs  for  the  sake  of  his  teacher, 
his  father,  or  his  mother,  a  student  of  the  Veda,  and 
a  sick  man, 

2.  These  nine  Brahma/zas  one  should  consider  as 

129.  'Gives  pain  to  Biahma/*as,'  i.e.  'by  becoming  proud  and 
not  serving  them'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

XI.  1.  Ap.  II,  10,  1-2;  Gaut.  V,  21;  Baudh.  II,  5,  19.  'He 
who  has  given  away  all  his  property/  i.  e. '  on  performing  a  Vis-va^it 
sacrifice'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'other  Kratus'  (Nar.). 
'  For  the  sake  of  his  teacher,  his  father,  or  his  mother,'  i.  e.  '  in 
order  to  maintain  them' (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'in  order  to  pro- 
cure the  fee  for  the  teacher' (Ragh.,  Nar.).  The  commentators  try 
to  excuse  the  introduction  of  the  miscellaneous  rules,  contained  in 
verses  1-43,  before  the  discussion  of  the  penances,  which  according 
to  X,  131  ought  to  follow  at  once,  either  by  assuming  that  the 
object  is  to  show  the  necessity  of  performing  penances  in  case  these 
rules  are  violated,  or  by  pointing  out  that,  as  gifts  are  the  means 
for  removing  sin,  the  enumeration  of  the  Patras  or  worthy  recipients 
is  required. 


XI,  6.  PENANCES  ;    GIFTS  AND    SACRIFICES.  43  I 

Snatakas,  begging  in  order  to  fulfil  the  sacred  law ; 
to  such  poor  men  gifts  must  be  given  in  proportion 
to  their  learning. 

3.  To  these  most  excellent  among  the  twice-born, 
food  and  presents  (of  money)  must  be  given ;  it  is 
declared  that  food  must  be  given  to  others  outside 
the  sacrificial  enclosure.  ^ 

4.  But  a  king  shall  bestow,  as  is  proper,  jewels  of 
all  sorts,  and  presents  for  the  sake  of  sacrifices  on 
Brahma^as  learned  in  the  Vedas. 

5.  If  a  man  who  has  a  wife  weds  a  second  wife^ 
having  begged  money  (to  defray  the  marriage  ex- 
penses, he  obtains)  no  advantage  but  sensual  enjoy-' 
ment;  but  the  issue  (of  his  second  marriage  belongs) 
to  the  giver  of  the  money. 

6.  One  should  give,  according  to  one's  ability, 
wealth  to  Brahma/zas  learned  in  the  Veda  and  living 
alone.;  (thus)  one  obtains  after  death  heavenly  bliss^ 

3.  Gaut.  V,  22;  Baudh.  II,  5,  20.  The  translation  follows 
Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  The  interpretation  adopted  by  Kull.  is, '  To 
these  most  excellent  Brahmawas  food  together  with  presents  must 
be  given  (inside  the  sacrificial  enclosure).'  Nand.  reads  etebhyo 
'pi  instead  of  etebhyo  hi,  and  thinks  that  bahirvede  is  to  be  con- 
strued with  api,  '  To  these  most  excellent  among  the  twice-born 
food  ....  must  be  given  even  outside  the  sacrificial  enclosure.' 
The  correct  explanation  of  the  force  of  the  word  bahirvedi,  '  out- 
side the  sacrificial  enclosure,'  is  given  by  Nar.,  who  adds,  vedyaw 
tu  ya^itaw  sarvam  eva  deyam,  '  but  near  the  fire-altar  everything 
asked  for  must  be  given  -to  them/  The  meaning  of  the  verse, 
therefore,  is  that  the  nine  mendicants,  mentioned  in  verses  1-2, 
shall  always  receive  what  they  ask  for,  and  other  mendicants  ordi- 
nary food  only,  but  that  if  they  beg  at  the  performance  of  a  sacri- 
fice, other  property  also  must  be  given  to  them. 

5.  Ap.  II,  1  o,  3.  The  object  of  the  verse  is  to  forbid  that  alms  shall 
be  asked  or  given  for  such  a  purpose  (Gov.,  Kull.).  Medh.,  Gov., 
Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  K.  omit  this  verse.  It  looks  very  much  like  an 
interpolation,  intended  to  explain  the  preceding  rule. 


432  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  7. 

fN  7.  He  who  may  possess  (a  supply  of)  food  suffi- 
cient to  maintain  those  dependant  on  him  during 
three  years  or  more  than  that,  is  worthy  to  drink 

)       the  Soma-juice. 

8.  But  a  twice-born  man,  who,  though  possessing 
less  than  that  amount  of  property,  nevertheless 
drinks  the  Soma-juice,  does  not  derive  any  benefit 
from  that  (act),  though  he  may  have  formerly  drunk 
the  Soma-juice. 

9.  (If)  an  opulent  man  (is)  liberal  towards 
strangers,  while  his  family  lives  in  distress,  that 
counterfeit  virtue  will  first  make  him  taste  the 
sweets  (of  fame,  but  afterwards)  make  him  swallow 
the  poison  (of  punishment  in  hell). 

10.  If  (a  man)  does  anything  for  the  sake  of  his 
happiness  in  another  world,  to  the  detriment  of  those 
whom  he  is  bound  to  maintain,  that  produces  evil  re- 
sults for  him,  both  while  he  lives. and  when  he  is  dead. 

11.  If  a  sacrifice,  (offered)  by  (any  twice-born) 
sacrificer,  (and)  especially  by  a  Brahma^a,  must 
remain  incomplete  through  (the  want  of)  one  requi- 
site, while  a  righteous  king  rules, 

7.  Vas.  VIII,  10  ;  Vi.  LIX,  8  ;  YSgii.  I,  124.  '  Drink  the  Soma- 
juice/ i.e. 'perform  a  Soma- sacrifice,  in  order  to  obtain  the  fulfil- 
ment of  some  wish '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

8.  ' Though  he  formerly  may  have  drunk  the  Soma,'  i.e.  'at  the 
nitya  (i.e.  the  annual,  see  above, IV,  2 6, VI,  10)  Soma-sacrifice'(Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.).  The  same  commentators  and  Medh.  point  out  that 
this  and  the  preceding  verses  do  not  forbid  the  performance  of  the 
nitya  Soma-sacrifices,  but  only  of  those  called  kamya.  He  who 
performs  the  latter  without  possessing  the  requisite  property,  loses 
also  the  rewards  for  the  former. 

11-15.  Gaut.  XVIII,  24-27. 

11.  'While  a  righteous  king  rules,'  i.  e.  'because  such  a  king 
will  not  punish  a  man  who  acts  in  accordance  with  the  -Sastras' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 


XI,  16.  PENANCES  J     GIFTS   AND   SACRIFICES.  433 

12.  That  article  (required)  for  the  completion  of 
the  sacrifice,  may  be  taken  (forcibly)  from  the 
house  of  any  VaLsya,  who  possesses  a  large  number 
of  cattle,  (but)  neither  performs  the  (minor)  sacri- 
fices nor  drinks  the  Soma-juice  ; 

1 3.  (Or)  the  (sacrificer)  may  take  at  his  pleasure 
two  or  three  (articles  required  for  a  sacrifice)  from 
the  house  of  a  .Sudra  ;  for  a  .Sudra  has  no  business 
with  sacrifices. 

14.  If  (a  man)  possessing  one  hundred  cows, 
kindles  not  the  sacred  fire,  or  one  possessing  a 
thousand  cows,  drinks  not  the  Soma-juice,  a  (sacri- 
ficer) may  unhesitatingly  take  (what  he  requires) 
from  the  houses  of  those  two,  even  (though  they  be 
Brahma^as  or  Kshatriyas) ; 

15.  (Or)  he  may  take  (it  by  force  or  fraud)  from 
one  who  always  takes  and  never  gives,  and  who 
refuses  to  give  it ;  thus  the  fame  (of  the  taker)  will 
spread  and  his  merit  increase. 

16.  Likewise  he  who  has  not  eaten  at  (the  time 
of)  six  meals,  may  take  at  (the  time  of)  the  seventh 
meal  (food)  from  a  man   who    neglects  his  sacred 

12.  Nar.  and  Nand.  think  that  'the  king'  is  the  agent  to  be 
understood  with  the  verb  '  may  be  taken.'  The  latter  relies  on  the 
parallel  passage  of  the  Mahabharata,  where  the  last  Pada  of  the 
verse  is  ya^wartham  parthivo  haret.  'The  (minor)  sacrifices/  i.e. '  the 
Pakaya^-fias  and  so  forth'  (Kull.),  or '  the  five  great  sacrifices'  (Nar.). 

14.  Gov.  thinks  that  this  verse  refers  to  a  Kshatriya  alone,  while 
Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.  refer  it  to  Brahma/zas  also. 

15.  Gov., Kull.,  and  Ragh.  explain  adananitya,  'one  who  always 
takes/  by  '  a  Brahmaraa  who  always  accepts  presents/  while  Medh. 
and  Nar.  refer  the  word  to  men  of  all  castes  who  constantly  amass 
wealth. 

16-23.  Gaut.  XVIII,  28-32  ;  Ya#».  Ill,  43-44. 

16.  'At  the  seventh  meal-time/  i.e.  'on  the  fourth  day  of  his 
starving.' 

M  F  f 


434  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  17. 

duties,  without  (however)  making  a  provision  for  the 
morrow, 

17.  Either  from  the  threshing-floor,  or  from  a 
field,  or  out  of  the  house,  or  wherever  he  finds  it ; 
but  if  (the  owner)  asks  him,  he  must  confess  to  him 
that  (deed  and  its  cause). 

18.  (On  such  occasions)  a  Kshatriya  must  never 
take  the  property  of  a  (virtuous)  Brahma^a ;  but  he 
who  is  starving  may  appropriate  the  possessions  of 
a  Dasyu,  or  of  one  who  neglects  his  sacred  duties. 

19.  He  who  takes  property  from  the  wicked  and 
bestows  it  on  the  virtuous,  transforms  himself  into  a 
boat,  and  carries  both  (over  the  sea  of  misfortune). 

20.  The  property  of  those  who  zealously  offer 
sacrifices,  the  wise  call  the  property  of  the  gods ; 
but  the  wealth  of  those  who  perform  no  sacrifices  is 
called  the  property  of  the  Asuras. 

21.  On  him  (who,  for  the  reasons  stated,  appro- 
priates another's  possessions),  a  righteous  king  shall 
not  inflict  punishment ;  for  (in  that  case)  a  Brah- 
ma^a  pines  with  hunger  through  the  Kshatriya's 
want  of  care. 

22.  Having  ascertained  the  number  of  those  de- 
pendent on  such  a  man,  and  having  fully  considered 
his  learning  and  his  conduct,  the  king  shall  allow 
him,  out  of  his  own  property,  a  maintenance  whereon 
he  may  live  according  to  the  law ; 

23.  And  after  allotting  to  him  a  maintenance,  the  | 

18.  'A  Dasyu,'  see  above,  X,  45.  According  to  Nar.,  this  verse 
too  refers  to  the  king. 

19.  '  Both/  i.  e. '  him  from  whom  he  takes  it  by  saving  him  frc 
sin  (or,  from  the  trouble  of  protecting  his  property,  Gov.),  and  tl 
recipient'  (Kull.,  Gov.).     Nand.  omits  verses  19-21. 

21-22.  See  above,  VII,  134-135. 
23.  See  above,  VIII,  304. 


XI,  29.  PENANCES;    GIFTS   AND    SACRIFICES.  435 

king  must  protect  him  in  every  way ;  for  he  obtains 
from  such  (a  man)  whom  he  protects,  the  sixth  part 
of  his  spiritual  merit. 

24.  A  Brahma/za  shall  never  beg  from  a  .5udra 
property  for  a  sacrifice ;  for  a  sacrificer,  having 
begged  (it  from  such  a  man),  after  death  is  born 
(again)  as  a  Kandala.. 

25.  A  Brahma;za  who,  having  begged  any  pro- 
perty for  a  sacrifice,  does  not  use  the  whole  (for  that 
purpose),  becomes  for  a  hundred  years  a  (vulture  of 
the  kind  called)  Bhasa,  or  a  crow. 

26.  That  sinful  man,  who,  through  covetousness, 
seizes  the  property  of  the  gods,  or  the  property  of 
Brahma/zas,  feeds  in  another  world  on  the  leavings  of 
vultures. 

27.  In  case  the  prescribed  animal  and  Soma- 
sacrifices  cannot  be  performed,  let  him  always  offer 
at  the  change  of  the  year  a  Vaisvanarl  Ish^i  as  a 
penance  (for  the  omission). 

28.  But  a  twice-born,  who,  without  being  in  dis- 
tress, performs  his  duties  according  to  the  law  for 
times  of  distress,  obtains  no  reward  for  them  in  the 
next  world  ;  that  is  the  opinion  (of  the  sages). 

29.  By  the  Visve-devas,  by  the  Sadhyas,  and  by 
the  great  sages  (of  the)  Brahma^a  (caste),  who  were 
afraid  of  perishing  in  times  of  distress,  a  substitute 
was  made  for  the  (principal)  rule. 

24.  Vi.  LIX,  11  ;    Y&gii.  I,  127. 

25.  Y%n.  I,  127.  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.  say,  'A  Brahma/za 
who  ....  does  not  give  the  whole  of  it  (to  Brahmawas).' 

26.  Pare  loke,  'in  another  world/  means  according  to  Gov.  and 
Kull.,  '  in  his  next  birth.' 

27.  Vi.  LIX,  10 ;  Yagn.  I,  126.  The  Vairvanari  Ish/i  is  accord- 
ing to  Medh.,  a  rite  described  in  the  Grzhya-sutras.  Regarding  the 
prescribed  *Srauta  sacrifices,  see  above,  IV,  25-26. 

F  f   2 


436  LAWS   OF    MANU.  XI,  30. 

30.  That  evil-minded  man,  who,  being  able  (to 
fulfil)  the  original  law,  lives  according  to  the 
secondary  rule,  reaps  no  reward  for  that  after 
death. 

31.  A  Brahma;za  who  knows  the  law  need  not 
bring  any  (offence)  to  the  notice  of  the  king  ;  by  his 
own  power  alone  he  can  punish  those  men  who 
injure  him. 

32.  His  own  power  is  greater  than  the  power  of 
the  king ;  the  Brahma^a,  therefore,  may  punish  his 

I   foes  by  his  own  power  alone. 

2,3.  Let  him  use  without  hesitation  the  sacred 
texts,  revealed  by  Atharvan  and  by  Angiras  ;  speech, 
indeed,  is  the  weapon  of  the  Brahma/za,  with  that 
he  may  slay  his  enemies. 

34.  A  Kshatriya  shall  pass  through  misfortunes 
which  have  befallen  him  by  the  strength  of  his 
arms,  a  VaLsya  and  a  ^Sudra  by  their  wealth,  the 
chief  of  the  twice-born  by  muttered  prayers  and 
burnt-oblations. 

35.  The  Brahma/za  is  declared  (to  be)  the  creator 
(of  the  world),  the  punisher,  the  teacher,  (and  hence) 
a  benefactor  (of  all  created  beings) ;  to  him  let  no 
man  say  anything  unpropitious,  nor  use  any  harsh 
words. 

31.  This  and  the  following  verses  rescind  the  rules  given  above, 
IX,  290. 

32.  See  above,  IX,  313—321. 

33.  'The  sacred  texts,  revealed  by  Atharvan  and  Angiras,'  i.e. 
the  charms  and  incantations  contained  in  the  Atharva-veda.  Nar. 
reads  abhi/£arayan,  'using  magic,'  instead  of  aviHrayan  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  K.).  Nand.  reads,  jrutir  atharvangirasU  kuryad  it) 
abhi/£aritam. 

34.  Vas.  XXVI,  16. 
35.I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  maitro  for 

maitrt,  and  mktam  for  jushkam  (editions).  The  commentators  differ 


XI,  37-  penances;  sacrifices.  437 

2,6.  Neither  a  girl,  nor  a  (married)  young  woman, 
nor  a  man  of  little  learning,  nor  a  fool,  nor  a  man 
in  great  suffering,  nor  one  uninitiated,  shall  offer 
an  Agnihotra. 

37.  For  such  (persons)  offering  a  burnt-oblation 
sink  into  hell,  as  well  as  he  to  whom  that  (Agni- 
hotra) belongs  ;  hence  the  person  who  sacrifices  (for 
another)  must  be  skilled  in  (the  performance  of) 
Vaitana  (rites),  and  know  the  whole  Veda. 

much  with  respect  to  the  explanation  of  the  first  line.  Vidhata, '  the 
creator  (of  the  world,'  Medh.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Gov.  and 
Kull. 'the  performer  of  the  prescribed  rites;'  according  to  Ragh.  'able 
to  do,  to  undo,  and  to  change ;'  according  to  Nand.  'the  performer 
of  magic  rites  and  so  forth.'  -Sasita,  'the  punisher'  (Medh.  Kull., 
Ragh.),  i.  e. '  of  others,  of  the  king'  (Medh.),  or  '  of  his  sons,  pupils, 
and  so  forth'  (Kull.),  is  interpreted  by  Nar.  to  mean  '  the  instructor 
in  the  sacred  law,'  by  Nand.  'the  instigator  (of  incantations).' 
Vakta,  'the  teacher'  (Gov.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Medh. 'the 
giver  of  good  advice,'  according  to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  '  the  expounder 
of  the  sacred  law.'  The  explanations  of  Gov.  and  Kull.  allow  also 
the  translation  adopted  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  '  He  who  performs  his 

duties is  truly  called  a  Brahmawa/    As  regards  the  second  line 

Medh.  offers  two  explanations.  First  he  interprets  it  '  to  him,  i.  e. 
when  he  uses  magic,  let  no  man  say  anything  unpropitious,  i.  e.  he 
must  not  punish  him,  nor  use  any  harsh  words,  i.  e.  admonish  or 
sharply  reprimand  him.'  Gov.  and  Kull.  agree  with  this  explana- 
tion, but  omit  the  specification  '  when  he  uses  magic.'  According 
to  Medh.'s  second  rendering  the  line  contains  an  advice,  addressed 
to  men  of  all  castes,  not  to  anger  or  disquiet  a  Brahmawa  ;  and  this 
view  is  adopted  by  Ragh.  and  Nand.,  who  explain  akuralam, 
'  unpropitious,'  by  anish/am,  '  anything  disagreeable/  Nar.'s  read- 
ings seem  to  have  differed.  He  has  kuryat  instead  of  bmyat,  and 
explains  the  first  phrase,  '  to  him  let  no  man  do  anything  unpro- 
pitious/ i.  e.  anything  unbecoming,  such  as  a  bodily  injury.  In  the 
second  clause  he  reads  juktam  (suktam,  MS.),  which  he  explains  by 
paryushitam, '  stale,'  but  he  does  not  give  the  remainder  of  his  text. 
36-37.  Ap.  II,  15,18-19;  Gaut.  II,  4;  Vas.  II,  6:  see  also 
above,  II,  172  ;  V,  155  ;  IX,  18.  The  Vaitana  rites  are  those  per- 
formed in  the  vitana,  the  three  sacred  fires.  Hence  it  follows  that 
the  Agnihotra  meant  here  is  the  -Srauta  Agnihotra. 


438  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  38. 

38.  A  Brahma;za  who,  though  wealthy,  does  not 
give,  as  fee  for  the  performance  of  an  Agnyadheya, 
a  horse  sacred  to  Pra^apati,  becomes  (equal  to  one) 
who  has  not  kindled  the  sacred  fires. 

39.  Let  him  who  has  faith  and  controls  his 
senses  perform  other  meritorious  acts,  but  let  him 
on  no  account  offer  sacrifices  at  which  he  gives 
smaller  fees  (than  those  prescribed). 

40.  The  organs  (of  sense  and  action),  honour, 
(bliss  in)  heaven,  longevity,  fame,  offspring,  and 
cattle  are  destroyed  by  a  sacrifice  at  which  (too) 
small  sacrificial  fees  are  given ;  hence  a  man  of 
small  means  should  not  offer  a  (6rauta)  sacrifice. 

41.  A  Brahma/za  who,  being  an  Agnihotrin, 
voluntarily  neglects  the  sacred  fires,  shall  perform 
a  lunar  penance  during  one  month ;  for  that 
(offence)  is  equal  to  the  slaughter  of  a  son. 

42.  Those  who,  obtaining  wealth  from  .Stidras, 
(and  using  that)  offer  an  Agnihotra,  are  priests 
officiating  for  6udras,  (and  hence)  censured  among 
those  who  recite  the  Veda. 


38.  The  translation  of  prag-apatya, '  sacred  to  Pra^apati,'  follows 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  Medh.  says  that  the  epithet  may  be 
used  merely  by  way  of  laudation,  or  may  mean  that  the  animal  is 
to  be  neither  very  good  nor  very  bad,  or  that  it  may  be  derived 
from  a  phrase  current  among  the  people.  Nand.  explains  it  by 
1  to  be  given  to  the  Brahman  priest.' 

40.  Gov.  and  Kull.  explain,  here  and  above,  IV,  94,  yara^, 
'  honour/  by  '  a  good  name  during  one's  life,'  and  kirtim,  *  fame,' 
by  <  fame  after  death.'  Nar.  takes  the  former  as '  being  known  to 
others  for  one's  virtues,'  and  the  latter  as  '  being  praised  by  others/ 

41.  Gaut.  XXII,  34  ;  Vas.  I,  18  ;  XXI,  27  ;  Vi.  LIV,  13.  Nand. 
explains  vira,  '  son'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  by  a  Kshatriya,  and 
Ragh.  says  that  it  may  also  mean  '  a  deity.' 

42.  See  above,  XI,  24. 


xi,  48.       penances;  gifts  and  sacrifices.  439 

43.  Treading  with  his  foot  on  the  heads  of  those 
fools  who  worship  a  fire  (kindled  at  the  expense)  of  a 
£udra,  the  giver  (of  the  wealth)  shall  always  pass 
over  his  miseries  (in  the  next  world). 

44.  A  man  who  omits  a  prescribed  act,  or  per- 
forms a  blamable  act,  or  cleaves  to  sensual  enjoy- 
ments, must  perform  a  penance. 

45.  (All)  sages  prescribe  a  penance  for  a  sin 
unintentionally  committed ;  some  declare,  on  the 
evidence  of  the  revealed  texts,  (that  it  may  be 
performed)  even  for  an  intentional  (offence). 

46.  A  sin  unintentionally  committed  is  expiated 
by  the  recitation  of  Vedic  texts,  but  that  which 
(men)  in  their  folly  commit  intentionally,  by  various 
(special)  penances. 

47.  A  twice-born  man,  having  become  liable  to 
perform  a  penance,  be  it  by  (the  decree  of)  fate  or 
by  (an  act)  committed  in  a  former  life,  must  not, 
before  the  penance  has  been  performed,  have  inter- 
course with  virtuous  men. 

48.  Some  wicked  men  suffer  a  change  of  their 

43.  Nand.  reads  the  first  line  differently,  papana»z  satataw  teshara 
agnim  judrasya  ^uhvatam,  but  the  general  sense  remains  the  same. 

44-46.  Gaut.  XIX ;  Vas.  XX,  1-3  ;  XXII ;  Baudh.  Ill,  10 ;  Y&gii. 
Ill,  219,  226. 

45.  Vedic  texts  which  prescribe  penances  for  offences  committed 
intentionally,  are  quoted  Gaut.  XIX,  7-10.  The  commentators 
adduce  also  Aitareya-brahmawa  VII,  28. 

47.  Daivat,  'by  (the  decree  of)  fate/  i.e.  'through  carelessness' 
(Medh.,  Nar.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.  mentions  a  var.  lect.  mohat, 
'  through  delusion  of  mind/  '  By  (an  act)  committed  in  a  former 
life,'  i.  e. '  if  he  has  black  teeth  or  some  other  bodily  defect  from 
which  his  having  committed  a  crime  in  a  former  birth  may  be 
inferred.' 

48-54.  Vas.  I,  18 ;  XX,  6  ;  XXI,  43"44  )  Vi.  XLV  ;  Yagn.  Ill, 
207-215. 


440 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


XI,  49- 


(natural)  appearance  in  consequence  of  crimes  com- 
mitted in  this  life,  and  some  in  consequence  of  those 
committed  in  a  former  (existence). 

49.  He  who  steals  the  gold  (of  a  Brahma^a)  has 
diseased  nails ;  a  drinker  of  (the  spirituous  liquor 
called)  Sura,  black  teeth  ;  the  slayer  of  a  Brahma^a, 
consumption ;  the  violator  of  a  Gurus  bed,  a  dis- 
eased skin  ; 

'50.  An  informer,  a  foul-smelling  nose;  a  calum- 
niator, a  stinking  breath ;  a  stealer  of  grain,  defi- 
ciency in  limbs;  he  who  adulterates  (grain),  redundant 
limbs ; 

51.  A  stealer  of  (cooked)  food,  dyspepsia ;  a 
stealer  of  the  words  (of  the  Veda),  dumbness ;  a 
stealer  of  clothes,  white  leprosy;  a  horse-stealer, 
lameness. 

52.  The  stealer  of  a  lamp  will  become  blind;  he 
who  extinguishes  it  will  become  one-eyed ;  injury 
(to  sentient  beings)  is  punished  by  general  sickli- 
ness ;  an  adulterer  (will  have)  swellings  (in  his 
limbs). 

53.  Thus  in  consequence  of  a  remnant  of  (the 
guilt  of  former)  crimes,  are  born  idiots,  dumb,  blind, 
deaf,  and  deformed  men,  who  are  (all)  despised  by 
the  virtuous. 

54.  Penances,  therefore,  must  always  be  per- 
formed for  the  sake  of  purification,  because  those 

51.  '  A  stealer  of  the  words  (of  the  Veda),'  i.  e. '  one  who  learns 
the  Veda  without  permission,  by  hearing  another  man  recite  it ' 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar. '  a  plagiator.' 

52.  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.  omit  this  verse,  and  Ragh.  says 
that  it  is  found  kvapi,  in  some  MSS. 

53.  I  read  with  Nar.,  Nand.,  and  K.,  karmavaj-eshewa  instead  of 
karmavlreshewa  (editions).  The  explanations  of  Medh.,  Gov.,  and 
Kull.  likewise  point  to  the  former  reading. 


XI,  59*  RETRIBUTION    FOR    OFFENCES.  44 1 

whose  sins  have  not  been  expiated,  are  born  (again) 
with  disgraceful  marks. 

55.  Killing  a  Brahma^a,  drinking  (the  spirituous 
liquor  called)  Sura,  stealing  (the  gold  of  a  Brah- 
ma/^a),  adultery  with  a  Guru's  wife,  and  associating 
with  such  (offenders),  they  declare  (to  be)  mortal 
sins  (mahapataka). 

56.  Falsely  attributing  to  oneself  high  birth, 
giving  information  to  the  king  (regarding  a  crime), 
and  falsely  accusing  one's  teacher,  (are  offences) 
equal  to  slaying  a  Brahma/za. 

57.  Forgetting  the  Veda,  reviling  the  Vedas, 
giving  false  evidence,  slaying  a  friend,  eating  for- 
bidden food,  or  (swallowing  substances)  unfit  for 
food,  are  six  (offences)  equal  to  drinking  Sura. 

58.  Stealing  a  deposit,  or  men,  a  horse,  and 
silver,  land,  diamonds  and  (other)  gems,  is  declared 
to  be  equal  to  stealing  the  gold  (of  a  Brahma/za). 

59.  Carnal  intercourse  with  sisters  by  the  same  ( 
mother,  with  (unmarried)  maidens,  with  females  of  \ 

55-71.  Ap.  I,  21,  7-19;  Gaut.  XXI,  1-12;  Vas.  I,  19-23; 
Baudh.  II,  2,  1-8;  12-13;  15-16;  Vi.  XXXIV,  1;  XXXV- 
XXXVIII,  6;  XXXIX-XLII;  Ya^.  Ill,  227-242. 

55.  See  above,  IX,  235. 

56.  Guroj  ^alikanirbandha^,  'falsely  accusing  one's  teacher' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  may  also  mean  according  to  Medh.  '  wrong- 
fully going  to  law  with  the  teacher/  Nar.  and  Nand.  explain  it 
by  '  persevering  in  doing  what  is  disagreeable  to  the  teacher.' 

57.  Garhitanadya,  'forbidden  food  and  (substances)  unfit  for  food ' 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  means  according  to  Medh.  'forbidden  food 
and  such  which  one  has  resolved  not  to  eat ;'  according  to  Nar. 
and  Nand.  '  food  blemished  by  the  contact  with  impure  men  or 
things,  and  such  as  is  by  its  nature  unfit  for  eating,  e.  g.  garlic/ 

59.  The  commentators  point  out  that,  though  the  crimes 
enumerated  in  verses  56-59  are  stated  to  be  equal  to  mortal  sins, 
the  penances  are  not  always  the  same,  but  frequently  less  heavy. 


44 2  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


the  lowest  castes,  with  the  wives  of  a  friend,  or  of  a 
son,  they  declare  to  be  equal  to  the  violation  of 
a  Guru's  bed. 

60.  Slaying  kine,  sacrificing  for  those  who  are  un- 
worthy to  sacrifice,  adultery,  selling  oneself,  casting 
off  one's  teacher,  mother,  father,  or  son,  giving  up 
the  (daily)  study  of  the  Veda,  and  neglecting  the 
(sacred  domestic)  fire, 

61.  Allowing  one's  younger  brother  to  marry 
first,  marrying  before  one's  elder  brother,  giving  a 
daughter  to,  or  sacrificing  for,  (either  brother), 

62.  Defiling  a  damsel,  usury,  breaking  a  vow, 
selling  a  tank,  a  garden,  one's  wife,  or  child, 

63.  Living  as  a  Vratya,  casting  off  a  relative, 
teaching  (the  Veda)  for  wages,  learning  (the  Veda) 
from  a  paid  teacher,  and  selling  goods  which  one 
ought  not  to  sell, 

64.  Superintending   mines  (or   factories)   of  any 

60.  '  Selling  oneself,'  i.  e.  '  for  money  into  slavery '  (Medh.), 
'refers  to  Aryans  only'  (Nar.).  Medh.  mentions  another  reading, 
paradaryam  avikraya^,  '  adultery  and  the  sale  of  forbidden  mer- 
chandise.' Medh.  and  Nar.  say,  'forgetting  the  sacred  texts 
required  for  the  daily  private  recitation ; '  and  Medh.  adds  that, 
as  the  same  offence  has  been  mentioned  above,  verse  57,  'for- 
getting the  Veda,'  may  be  either  reckoned  as  equal  to  a  Maha- 
pataka  or  as  an  Upapataka  crime.  Nar.  refers  the  term  '  the  fire ' 
to  the  three  sacred  -Srauta  fires. 

62.  'Breaking  a  vow/  i.e.  'any  vow  voluntarily  undertaken 
(Medh.,  Nar.),  means  according  to  Gov.,  KulL,  and  Ragh.  '  break- 
ing the  vow  of  studentship.' 

63.  'Living  as  a  Vratya/  see  above,  X,  20.  'Casting  off  a 
relative/  i.  e. '  not  supporting  him  in  distress,  though  one  possesses 
money  enough  to  do  so '  (Medh.).  Medh.  takes  bandhava  in  the 
sense  of '  maternal  relatives/  and  understands  that  it  includes  the 
mother,  sisters,  maternal  uncles,  &c,  while  the  other  commentators 
take  it  in  a  wider  sense. 

64.  Mahayantrapravartana, '  executing  great  mechanical  works/ 


Ml 


XT,  67.  CLASSIFICATION   OF    OFFENCES.  443 

sort,  executing  great  mechanical  works,  injuring 
(living)  plants,  subsisting  on  (the  earnings  of)  one's 
wife,  sorcery  (by  means  of  sacrifices),  and  working 
(magic  by  means  of)  roots,  (and  so  forth), 

65.  Cutting  down  green  trees  for  firewood,  doing 
acts  for  one's  own  advantage  only,  eating  prohi- 
bited food, 

66.  Neglecting  to  kindle  the  sacred  fires,  theft, 
non-payment  of  (the  three)  debts,  studying  bad 
books,  and  practising  (the  arts  of)  dancing  and 
singing, 

67.  Stealing  grain,  base  metals,  or  cattle,  inter- 

e.  g. '  constructing  dams  across  rivers  in  order  to  stop  the  water ' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  K.),  means  according  to  Nar.  'making 
machines  for  killing  great  animals  such  as  boars,'  according  to 
Nand.  '(making)  great  machines  such  as  sugar-mills.'  Stryagiva, 
'  subsisting  on  (the  earnings  of)  one's  wife,  i.  e.  by  making  her  go 
into  service  (Nar.,  Nand.),  or  by  forcing  her  to  become  a  harlot ' 
(Kull.),  means  according  to  Medh.  '  subsisting  on  (the  separate 
property  of)  one's  wife,'  according  to  Ragh.  '  living  on  (the  money 
obtained  by  selling  one's  wife/  Nand.  reads  hi/wsraushadhistry- 
umgiva/i, '  subsisting  on  (money  earned  by  the  sale  of)  noxious 
herbs  or  on  (the  earnings  of)  one's  wife.' 

65.  '  Doing  acts  for  one's  own  advantage  only/  i.  e.  '  cooking 
only  for  oneself,  and  so  forth '  (Medh.,  Nar.,  Kull,  Nand.,  Ragh.) ; 
see  above,  III,  118.  By  ninditanna, '  forbidden  food/  Medh.  under- 
stands the  same  kinds,  mentioned  above,  verse  57;  Kull., 'for- 
bidden food  such  as  garlic ;'  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.,  '  food  given 
by  persons  from  whom  it  must  not  be  accepted,  e.  g.  by  a  king,  a 
gambler,  &c/  Medh.  and  Kull.  state  expressly  that,  if  such  food 
be  eaten  once  and  unintentionally,  the  offence  is  an  Upapataka, 
but  in  worse  cases  equal  to  a  Mahapataka. 

66.  '  Theft/ i.  e.  '  of  valuable  objects '  (Kull.),  '  excepting  gold 
and  the  other  articles  specially  mentioned '  (Medh.,  Ragh.),  e.  g. 
'of  clothes '  (Nar.).  Regarding  the  three  debts,  see  Vas.  XI,  45. 
1  Bad  books/  i.  e. '  those  of  the  A'arvakas,  Nirgranthas  (Crainas/ 
Medh.),  or  '  of  heretics  in  general '  (Nar.). 

67.  'Cattle/  i.  e.  other  than  cows;  see  above,  verse  60. 


444  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  68. 

course  with  women  who  drink  spirituous  liquor, 
slaying  women,  .5udras,  VaLsyas,  or  Kshatriyas,  and 
atheism,  (are  all)  minor  offences,  causing  loss  of 
caste  (Upapataka). 

68.  Giving  pain  to  a  Brahman  (by  a  blow), 
smelling  at  things  which  ought  not  to  be  smelt  at, 
or  at  spirituous  liquor,  cheating,  and  an  unnatural 
offence  with  a  man,  are  declared  to  cause  the  loss 
of  caste  (^atibhra^^a). 

69.  Killing  a  donkey,  a  horse,  a  camel,  a  deer, 
an  elephant,  a  goat,  a  sheep,  a  fish,  a  snake,  or  a 
buffalo,  must  be  known  to  degrade  (the  offender)  to 
a  mixed  caste  (Sawkarikara/za). 

70.  Accepting  presents  from  blamed  men,  trading, 
serving  6udras,  and  speaking  a  falsehood,  make  (the 
offender)  unworthy  to  receive  gifts  (Apatra). 

71.  Killing  insects,  small  or  large,  or  birds,  eating 
anything  kept  close  to  spirituous  liquors,  stealing 
fruit,  firewood,  or  flowers,  (are  offences)  which  make 
impure  (Malavaha). 

72.  Learn  (now)  completely  those  penances,  by 
means  of  which  all  the  several  offences  mentioned 
(can)  be  expiated. 

73.  For  his  purification  the  slayer  of  a  Brahma/za 
shall  make  a  hut  in  the  forest  and   dwell  (in  it) 


68.  *  Things  which  ought  not  to  be  smelt  at,'  e.  g. '  garlic,  onions, 
ordure,  &c.'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

70.  '  Blamed  men,'  i.  e.  those  from  whom  no  gifts  must  be 
accepted ;  see  above,  IV,  84  seq. 

73-87.  Ap.  I,  24,  10-25;  25,  11-12;  28,  21-29,  T)  Gaut. 
XXII,  2-10;  Vas.  XX,  25-28;  Baudh.  II,  1,  2-6;  Vi.  XXV,  6; 
L,  1-6,  15;  Y%™.  Ill,  243-250. 

73.  According  to  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.  this  penance  is  to  be 
performed  in  case  the  homicide  was  committed  unintentionally. 


XI,  77-  PENANCES    FOR    MURDER.  445 

during  twelve  years,  subsisting  on  alms  and  making 
the  skull  of  a  dead  man  his  flag ; 

74.  Or  let  him,  of  his  own  free  will,  become  (in  a 
battle)  the  target  of  archers  who  know  (his  pur- 
pose); or  he  may  thrice  throw  himself  headlong  into 
a  blazing  fire ; 

75.  Or  he  may  offer  a  horse-sacrifice,  a  Svar^it,  a 
Gosava,  an  Abhi^it,  a  Visva^it,  a  Trivr/t,  or  an 
Agnish/ut  ; 

76.  Or,  in  order  to  remove  (the  guilt  of)  slaying 
a  Brahma^a,  he  may  walk  one  hundred  yo^anas, 
reciting  one  of  the  Vedas,  eating  little,  and  con- 
trolling his  organs ; 

7 7.  Or  he  may  present  to  a  Brahma^a,  learned  in 

74.  Vidusham,  'who  know  (his  purpose), '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.), 
may  also  mean  according  to  Medh.  '  who  are  expert  in  archery,' 
and  Nand.  adopts  this  explanation.  Nar.  thinks  that  this  penance 
must  be  performed  by  one  who  intentionally  murdered  a  Brahmawa, 
and  that  it  must  end  in  his  death.  According  to  the  Bhavishya- 
purazza  which  Kull.  and  Ragh.  quote,  these  two  penances  and  that 
mentioned  in  the  next  verse  are  to  be  performed  by  a  Kshatriya 
who  slew  a  Brahmazza,  those  ending  in  death  by  an  offender  who 
himself,  destitute  of  good  qualities,  killed  a  learned  *Srotriya,  and 
the  lighter  ones  by  an  eminent  king  who  unintentionally  caused 
the  death  of  a  worthless  Br&hmazza. 

75.  According  to  the  Bhavishyapurazza,  Nar.  and  Kull.,  Svar§it 
is  the  name  of  a  sacrifice,  but  Medh.  (on  verse  78)  and  Ragh.  take 
the  word  as  an  adjective  qualifying  Gosava.  Regarding  the  Gosava, 
see  Katyayana  St.  Sutras  XXII,  11,3;  regarding  the  Abhi^it,  Asv. 
St.  Sutras  VIII,  5,  13.  According  to  Gov.  and  Nar.,  Trivrz't  is 
equivalent  to  Trivrz'tstoma,  and  to  be  taken  separately;  but  accord- 
ing to  Medh.  and  Ragh.,  trivrzta  qualifies  Agnish/ut.  Regarding 
the  Agnish/ut,  see  Asv.  St.  Sutras  IX,  7,  22-25. 

76.  According  to  Nar.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  (the  latter  two  quoting 
the  Bhavishyapurazza  as  their  authority),  this  penance  suffices  to 
expiate  the  unintentional  slaughter  of  one  who  has  nothing  but  the 
name  of  a  Brahmazza. 

77.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  K.,  dhanazzz  hi  instead  of 


446  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  78. 

the  Vedas,  his  whole  property,  as  much  wealth  as 
suffices  for  the  maintenance  (of  the  recipient),  or  a 
house  together  with  the  furniture ; 

yS.  Or,  subsisting  on  sacrificial  food,  he  may 
walk  against  the  stream  along  (the  whole  course 
of  the  river)  Sarasvati;  or,  restricting  his  food 
(very  much),  he  may  mutter  thrice  the  Sa^hita  of 
a  Veda. 

79.  Having  shaved  off  (all  his  hair),  he  may 
dwell  at  the  extremity  of  the  village,  or  in  a  cow-pen, 
or  in  a  hermitage,  or  at  the  root  of  a  tree,  taking 
pleasure  in  doing  good  to  cows  and  Brahma;zas. 

— 

dhanaw  va  (Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  editions),  'or  as  much  wealth  as.' 
Kull.'s  explanation,  too,  points  to  the  former  reading,  the  meaning 
of  which  is  that '  the  whole  property'  must  be  sufficient  to  maintain 
the  recipient.  According  to  the  Bhavishyapurawa,  quoted  by  Kull. 
and  Ragh.,  the  penance  is  prescribed  for  the  case  that  a  rich,  un- 
learned Brahma^a  who  keeps  no  sacred  fire,  unintentionally  slew 
an  utterly  worthless  Brahmawa. 

78.  According  to  the  BhavishyapunUa,  quoted  by  Kull.  and 
Ragh.,  the  first  penance  is  to  be  performed  by  an  unlearned 
Brahma/za  who  intentionally  killed  an  utterly  worthless  caste- 
fellow,  the  second  by  an  exceedingly  distinguished  -Srotriya  who 
unintentionally  caused  the  death  of  a  man  merely  a  Brahmawa  in 
name.  Medh.  and  Gov.  attach  their  views  regarding  the  particular 
cases  to  their  explanations  of  this  Sutra.  Gov.  does  not  go  beyond 
generalities.  But  Medh.  says  that  the  penance  mentioned  in  verse  73 
and  the  first  described  in  verse  74  may  be  optionally  performed  for 
intentionally  slaying  an  ordinary  Brahmawa.  If  a  -Srotriya  or  one 
who  is  performing  a  *Srauta  sacrifice  has  been  killed,  the  offender 
is  to  burn  himself.  The  sacrifices  will  atone  for  the  guilt  of  a 
homicide  committed  unintentionally,  by  a  most  distinguished 
member  of  the  Aryan  castes,  provided  that  the  person  slain  was 
a  Brahmawa  in  name  only. 

79.  Medh.,  Kull,  and  Gov.  think  that  the  rule  allows  an  option 
with  respect  to  the  residence  during  the  penance  of  twelve  years 
(verse  73).  Nar.  says  that  the  verse  contains  a  general  rule  for  all 
penances. 


XI,  85.  PENANCES    FOR    MURDER.  447 


80.  He  who  unhesitatingly  abandons  life  for  the 
sake  of  Brahma/zas  or  of  cows,  is  freed  from  (the 
guilt  of)  the  murder  of  a  Brahma^a,  and  (so  is  he) 
who  saves  (the  life  of)  a  cow,  or  of  a  Brahma/za. 

8 1.  If  either  he  fights  at  least  three  times  (against 
robbers  in  defence  of)  a  Brahma/za's  (property),  or 
reconquers  the  whole  property  of  a  Brahma/za,  or  if 
he  loses  his  life  for  such  a  cause,  he  is  freed  (from 
his  guilt). 

82.  He  who  thus  (remains)  always  firm  in  his 
vow,  chaste,  and  of  concentrated  mind,  removes  after 
the  lapse  of  twelve  years  (the  guilt  of)  slaying  a 
Brahmazza. 

83.  Or  he  who,  after  confessing  his  crime  in  an 
assembly  of  the  gods  of  the  earth,  (Brahmazzas),  and 
the  gods  of  men  (Kshatriyas),  bathes  (with  the 
priests)  at  the  close  of  a  horse-sacrifice,  is  (also) 
freed  (from  guilt). 

84.  The  Brahmazza  is  declared  (to  be)  the  root 
of  the  sacred  law  and  the  Kshatriya  its  top ;  hence 
he  who  has  confessed  his  sin  before  an  assembly  of 
such  men,  becomes  pure.  ^ 

85.  By  his  origin  alone  a  Brahmazza  is  a  deity  even 
for  the  gods,  and  (his  teaching  is)  authoritative  for 
men,  because  the  Veda  is  the  foundation  for  that.   \ 

80.  This  holds  good  also  before  the  twelve  years'  penance  is 
finished  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

83.  Gov.  holds  that  this  penance  is  efficacious  only  if  the 
offender  is  engaged  in  the  performance  of  the  twelve  years'  pen- 
ance. Kull.  and  Ragh.  think  that  it  is  a  separate  penance,  because 
the  subject  of  the  twelve  years'  penance  has  been  finished  in  the 
preceding  verse,  and  because  the  Bhavishyapuraraa  specially  pre- 
scribes it  for  an  eminent  Brahmawa  who  unintentionally  causes  the 
death  of  a  worthless  caste-fellow.  Medh.  mentions  both  opinions, 
and  states  that  he  believes  the  penance  to  be  efficacious  in  any 
case. 


44^  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  86. 

86.  (If)  only  three  of  them  who  are  learned  in 
the  Veda  proclaim  the  expiation  for  offences,  that 
shall  purify  the  (sinners) ;  for  the  words  of  learned 
men  are  a  means  of  purification. 

87.  A  Brahma^a  who,  with  a  concentrated  mind, 
follows  any  of  the  (above-mentioned)  rules,  removes 
the  sin  committed  by  slaying  a  Brahma^a  through 
his  self-control. 

88.  For  destroying  the  embryo  (of  a  Brahma^a, 
the  sex  of  which  was)  unknown,  for  slaying  a  Ksha- 
triya  or  a  Vai^ya  who  are  (engaged  in  or)  have  offered 
a  (Vedic)  sacrifice,  or  a  (Brahma^a)  woman  who  has 
bathed  after  temporary  uncleanness  (Atreyi),  he  must 
perform  the  same  penance, 

89.  Likewise  for  giving  false  evidence  (in  an 
important  cause),  for  passionately  abusing  the 
teacher,  for  stealing  a  deposit,  and  for  killing  (his) 
wife  or  his  friend. 

90.  This  expiation  has  been  prescribed  for  unin- 


88-89.  Ap.  I,  24,  6-9,  23  ;  Gaut.  XXII,  11-14  ;  Vas.  XX,  34-36 
Baudh.  II,  1, 12  ;  Vi.  L,  7-10  ;  LII,  4  ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  251. 

88.  Medh.  and  several  other  commentators  propose,  in  explana- 
tion of  the  term  Atreyi,  besides  the  interpretation  given  above,  also 
the  erroneous  one,  '  a  female  of  the  tribe  of  Atri.' 

89.  'Giving  false  evidence,'  i.e.  'in  a  case  where  the  life  of  th« 
accused  is  involved'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.),  or  'where  gold,  lane 
and  the  like  is  at  stake'  (Kull.,  Ragh.).  'Abusing  the  teacher,' 
see  above,  verse  56.  'Stealing  a  deposit,'  i.e.  'gold  belonging  t( 
a  Kshatriya  or  Vaijya,  or  silver  and  other  property  belonging  to 
Brahmawa'  (Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  property  belonging  to  a  poor 
Brahmawa  (Medh.).  Stri, '  his  wife'  (Nar.,  Nand.),  means  according 
to  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.  '  the  virtuous  wife  of  a  distinguishec 
Brahmawa  who  keeps  sacred  fires.'  Medh.  (on  verse  88)  seems  tc 
agree  to  a  similar  explanation.  'His  friend,'  i.e.  'though  he  ma} 
not  be  a  Brahmawa'  (N&r.). 

90.  The  verse  is  identical  with  Baudh.  II,  1,  6.     The  correct 


XI,  93-  PENANCES    FOR    DRINKING    SPIRITS.  449 

tentionally  killing  a  Brahma/za  ;  but  for  intentionally 
slaying  a  Brahma^a  no  atonement  is  ordained. 

91.  A  twice-born  man  who  has  (intentionally) 
drunk,  through  delusion  of  mind,  (the  spirituous 
liquor  called)  Sura  shall  drink  that  liquor  boiling- 
hot  ;  when  his  body  has  been  completely  scalded 
by  that,  he  is  freed  from  his  guilt ; 

92.  Or  he  may  drink  cow's  urine,  water,  milk, 
clarified  butter  or  (liquid)  cowdung  boiling-hot,  until 
he  dies ; 

93.  Or,  in  order  to  remove  (the  guilt  of)  drinking 
Sura,  he  may  eat  during  a  year  once  (a  day)  at 
night  grains  (of  rice)  or  oilcake,  wearing  clothes 
made  of  cowhair  and  his  own  hair  in  braids  and 
carrying  (a  wine  cup  as)  a  flag. 

interpretation  of  this  verse  is  that  Manu,  just  as  Ap.  I,  24,  24,  held 
the  intentional  murder  of  a  true  Brahmawa  to  be  inexpiable  during 
the  criminal's  life,  and  meant  to  teach  that  the  murderer  had  either 
to  perform  a  penance  which  caused  his  death  or  to  live  according 
to  the  twelve  years'  rule  during  the  term  of  his  natural  life.  This  is 
the  doctrine  attributed  to  Manu  by  Gaut.  XXI,  7.  While  Gov.  and 
Nar.  agree  with  this  explanation,  Medh.,  '  others '  quoted  by  Gov., 
Kull.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.  refer  iya#z,  'this,'  to  verse  73,  and  hold 
that  in  the  case  of  wilful  murder  the  penance  has  only  to  be  made 
severer  by  doubling  or  trebling  the  term  of  twelve  years. 

91-98.  Ap.  I,  25,  3,  10  ;  27,  10 ;  Gaut.  XXIII,  10-12  ;  Vas.  XX, 
19,  22  ;  Baudh.  II,  1,  18-22  ;  Vi.  LI,  1-4  ;  Yagn.  Ill,  253-254. 

91.  This  and  the  next  penances  are  prescribed  for  an  inten- 
tional offence;  see  below,  verse  147.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov., 
Kull.,  and  Ragh.  (the  latter  two  quoting  the  Bhavishyapurawa),  the 
spirituous  liquor  here  intended  is  the  paish/iki  sura,  that  distilled 
from  ground  rice.  According  to  Nar.  the  penance  ending  in  death 
must  be  performed  by  all  Aryans  who  have  drunk  paish/iki  sura, 
and  by  Brahmawas  who  have  drunk  any  of  the  three  kinds  of  sura 
mentioned  in  verse  95.  Nand.  reads  amohat,  and  explains  it  by 
matipurvakam,  '  intentionally.' 

93.  According  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.,  and  Ragh.,  this  penance  is 
prescribed  for  drinking  unintentionally  paish/iki  sura ;  according 

[25]  G  g 


\ 


45O  LAWS   OF    MANU.  XI,  94. 

94.  Sura,  indeed,  is  the  dirty  refuse  (mala)  of 
grain,  .sin  _also_J J_jcalled_  dirt  Jmala) ;  hence  a 
Brahma/za,  a  Kshatriya,  and  a  VaLsya  shall  not 
drink  Sura. 

95.  Sura  one  must  know  to  be  of  three  kinds, 
that  distilled  from  molasses  (gauaft),  that  distilled 
from  ground  rice,  and  that  distilled  from  Madhuka- 
flowers  (madhvi) ;  as  the  one  (named  above)  even 
so  are  all  (three  sorts)  forbidden  to  the  chief  of 
the  twice-born. 

96.  Sura,  (all  other)  intoxicating  drinks  and  de- 
coctions and  flesh  are  the  food  of  the  Yakshas, 
Rakshasas,  and  Pi^a^as ;  a  Brahma^a  who  eats  (the 
remnants  of)  the  offerings  consecrated  to  the  gods, 
must  not  partake  of  such  (substances). 

97.  A  Brahma/za,  stupefied  by  drunkenness,  might 
fall  on  something  impure,  or  (improperly)  pronounce 
Vedic  (texts),  or  commit  some  other  act  which  ought 
not  to  be  committed. 

98.  When  the  Brahman  (the  Veda)  which  dwells 
in    his   body   is    (even)    once    (only)    deluged   with 
spirituous  liquor,   his   Brahmanhood    forsakes    hi 
and  he  becomes  a  ,5udra. 


: 


to 'others'  quoted  by  Medh.  and  Ragh.,  for  drinking  gauatt  or 
madhvi  sura ;  according  to  Nar.,  for  intentionally  drinking  water 
mixed  with  madhusura.  Medh.  himself  says  id  am  prawatyaya 
aushadhartham,  '  this  (is  intended)  as  a  medicine  for  death.' 

94.  This  verse  shows,  as  the  commentators  point  out,  the  d 
tinction  between   spirituous  liquor   distilled   from  ground  grai 
paish/iki  sura,  and  the  other  two  sorts  mentioned  in  the  next  verse. 
The  first  alone  is  forbidden  to  all  Aryans,  the  other  two  sorts  t 
Brahmawas;  see  also  Gaut.  II,  20. 

95.  Madhvi,  'distilled  from  Madhuka  (Maua)  flowers'  (Kull 
means  according  to  Medh.  'distilled  from  honey,'  according  to 
Nar.  '  distilled  either  from  grapes  or  from  Madhuka  flowers  or 
from  honey.' 


lya 

s 

:se. 


XI,  104-         PENANCES    FOR    DRINKING    SPIRITS.  45 1 

99.  The  various  expiations  for  drinking  (the 
spirituous  liquors  called)  Sura  have  thus  been  ex- 
plained; I  will  next  proclaim  the  atonement  for 
stealing  the  gold  (of  a  Brahma/za). 

100.  A  Brahma^a  who  has  stolen  the  gold  (of  a 
Brahma^a)  shall  go  to  the  king  and,  confessing  his 
deed,  say,  (  Lord,  punish  me  F 

10 1.  Taking  (from  him)  the  club  (which  he  must 
carry),  the  king  himself  shall  strike  him  once,  by  his 
death  the  thief  becomes  pure ;  or  a  Brahma/za  (may 
purify  himself)  by  austerities. 

102.  He  who  desires  to  remove  by  austerities  the 
guilt  of  stealing  the  gold  (of  a  Brahma^a),  shall  per- 
form the  penance  (prescribed)  for  the  slayer  of  a 
Brahma/za,  (living)  in  a  forest  and  dressed  in  (gar- 
ments made  of)  bark. 

103.  By  these  penances  a  twice-born  man  may 
remove  the  guilt  incurred  by  a  theft  (of  gold) ;  but 
he  may  atone  for  connexion  with  a  Guru's  wife  by 
the  following  penances. 

104.  He  who  has  violated  his  Guru's  bed,  shall 


n 


100-101.  See  above,  VIII,  314-316. 

10 1.  At  the  end  of  the  verse  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand., 
and  K.  read  va  instead  of  tu  (Medh.(?)  editions),  which  is 
variously  explained.  According  to  Nar.  and  Nand.,  it  means 
'but.'  Kull.  thinks  that  it  indicates  that,  while  a  Brahmawa  must 
never  be  slain  by  the  king,  other  Aryans  also  may  perform  aus- 
terities. According  to  Ragh.,  it  refers  to  the  optional  recitation 
of  the  Gayatri,  repeated  700,000  times;  according  to  Nar.,  to  other 
penances,  even  such  as  end  in  death.  But  Gov.  is  probably  right 
in  assuming  that  'the  austerities' -meant  are  those  prescribed  in 
the  next  verse. 

102.  Ap.  I,  25,  10;  Y&g-w.  Ill,  258  ;  Vi.  LII,  3.  According  to 
Nar.,  this  verse  refers  to  an  'unintentional'  offence;  according  to 
Kull.  and  Ragh.,  to  the  theft  of  a  small  sum. 

104-107.  Ap.  I,  25,  1-2,  10;  28,  15-18;  Gaut.  XXIII,  8-12  ; 
Gg  2 


452  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  105. 

after  confessing  his  crime,  extend  himself  on  a  heated 
iron  bed,  or  embrace  the  red-hot  image  (of  a  woman) ; 
by  dying  he  becomes  pure  ; 

105.  Or,  having  himself  cut  off  his  organ  and  his 
testicles  and  having  taken  them  in  his  joined  hands, 
he  may  walk  straight  towards  the  region  of  Nirrzti 
(the  south-west),  until  he  falls  down  (dead)  ; 

106.  Or,  carrying  the  foot  of  a  bedstead,  dressed 
in  (garments  of)  bark  and  allowing  his  beard  to 
grow,  he  may,  with  a  concentrated  mind,  perform 
during  a  whole  year  the  Krz&Mra.  (or  hard,  penance), 
revealed  by  Pra^apati,  in  a  lonely  forest ; 

107.  Or,  controlling  his  organs,  he  may  during 
three  months  continuously  perform  the  lunar  penance, 
(subsisting)  on  sacrificial  food  or  barley-gruel,  in  order 
to  remove  (the  guilt  of)  violating  a  Guru's  bed. 

108.  By  means  of  these  penances  men  who  have 
committed  mortal  sins  (Mahapataka)  may  remove 
their  guilt,  but  those  who  committed  minor  offences, 
causing  loss  of  caste,  (Upapataka,  can  do  it)  by  the 
various  following  penances. 

Vas.  XX,  13-14;  Baudh.  II,  1,  13-15;  Vi.  XXXIV,  2  ;  LIII,  1; 
Yagii.  Ill,  259-260. 

104.  According  to  Medh.,  the  term  'Guru'  denotes  here  'the 
teacher  or  the  father;'  according  to  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.,  'the 
father;'  and  Nar.  particularly  excludes  an  offence  with  a  step- 
mother. 

106.  According  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  this  penance  expiates 
incest  committed  by  mistake  ;  according  to  Nar.,  the  rule  applies  to 
the  case  when  the  offence  was  committed  with  a  stepmother.  Re- 
garding the  YLrikkhva,  penance,  see  below,  verse  212. 

107.  According  to  Medh.  and  Ragh.,  the  rule  refers  to  an  offence 
committed  with  the  wife  of  a  paternal  or  of  a  maternal  uncle,  or  of 
other  minor  Gurus ;  according  to  Kull.,  to  an  offence  with  an  un- 
faithful or  low-caste  wife  of  a  Guru.  Regarding  the  lunar  penance 
or  A^andrayawa,  see  below,  verse  217. 

108.  Nar.  takes  mahapataldna^,  'those  who   committed  mortal 


XI,ii6.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  453 

109.  He  who  has  committed  a  minor  offence  by 
slaying  a  cow  (or  bull)  shall  drink  during  (the  first) 
month  (a  decoction  of)  barley-grains  ;  having  shaved 
all  his  hair,  and  covering  himself  with  the  hide  (of 
the  slain  cow),  he  must  live  in  a  cow-house. 

no.  During  the  two  (following)  months  he  shall 
eat  a  small  (quantity  of  food)  without  any  factitious 
salt  at  every  fourth  meal-time,  and  shall  bathe  in  the 
urine  of  cows,  keeping  his  organs  under  control. 

1 1  t.  During  the  day  he  shall  follow  the  cows  and, 
standing  upright,  inhale  the  dust  (raised  by  their 
hoofs) ;  at  night,  after  serving  and  worshipping  them, 
he  shall  remain  in  the  (posture,  called)  virasana. 

112.  Controlling  himself  and  free  from  anger,  he 
Lust  stand  when  they  stand,  follow  them  when  they 

walk,  and  seat  himself  when  they  lie  down. 

113.  (When  a  cow  is)  sick,  or  is  threatened  by 
langer  from  thieves,  tigers,  and  the  like,  or  falls,  or 
>ticks  in  a  morass,  he  must  relieve  her  by  all  pos- 
;ible  means : 

114.  In  heat,  in  rain,  or  in  cold,  or  when  the  wind 
>lows  violently,  he  must  not  seek  to  shelter  himself, 

without  (first)  sheltering  the  cows  according  to  his 
ability. 

115.  Let  him  not  say  (a  word),  if  a  cow  eats 
(anything)  in  his  own  or  another's  house  or  field  or 
on  the  threshing-floor,  or  if  a  calf  drinks  (milk). 

116.  The  slayer  of  a  cow  who  serves  cows  in  this 


sins/  in  the  sense  of  '  those  equal  to  mortal  sinners/  i.  e.  those 
offenders  who  have  been  enumerated  above,  verse  56  seq. 

1 09-1 17.  Ap.  I,  26,  1 ;  Gaut.  XXII,  18  ;  Vi.  L,  16-24 ;  Ya§7£.  Ill, 
263-264. 

in.  'In  the  (posture,  called)  virasana,'  i.e.  'seated  without 
leaning  against  a  wall  or  the  like'  (Kull.,  Nand.). 


454  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  117. 

manner,  removes  after  three  months  the  guilt  which 
he  incurred  by  killing  a  cow. 

1 1 7.  But  after  he  has  fully  performed  the  pen- 
ance, he  must  give  to  (Brahma/zas)  learned  in  the 
Veda  ten  cows  and  a  bull,  (or)  if  he  does  not 
possess  (so  much  property)  he  must  offer  to  them 
all  he  has. 

1 1 8.  Twice-born  men  who  have  committed  (other) 
minor  offences  (Upapataka),  except  a  student  who 
has  broken  his  vow  (Avakirmn),  may  perform,  in 
order  to  purify  themselves,  the  same  penance  or 
also  a  lunar  penance. 

119.  But  a  student  who  has  broken  his  vow  shall 
offer  at  night  on  a  crossway  to  Nirmi  a  one-eyed 
ass,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  Pakaya^as. 

120.  Having  offered  according  to  the  rule  obla- 
tions in  the  fire,  he  shall  finally  offer  (four)  oblations 
of  clarified  butter  to  Vata,  to  Indra,  to  the  teacher 
(of  the  gods,  Brzhaspati)  and  to  Agni,  reciting  the 
Rik  verse  '  May  the  Maruts  grant  me,'  &c. 

121.  Those  who  know  the  Veda  declare  that  a 
voluntary  effusion  of  semen  by  a  twice-born  (youth} 
who  fulfils  the  vow  (of  studentship  constitutes) 
breach  of  that  vow. 

122.  The  divine  light  which  the  Veda  imparts  t< 

117.  Ya§-fi.  Ill,  265. 
1 18-124.  Ap.  I,  26,  8;   Gaut.  XXV,  1-4;  Vas.  XXIII,  1-4 

Baudh.  II,  1,  30-35  ;  Vi.  XXVIII,  49-50 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  280. 

118.  According  to  Nar.  and  Nand.,  the  lunar  penance  is  to 
performed  if  the  offence  was  committed  unintentionally. 

119.  'According  to  the  rule  of  the  Pakaya^as,'  i.e.  'according 
to  the  Pa«mkalpa,  found  in  Arvalayana's  and  other  Grzhya  Sutras,' 
Asv.  Gri.  Sutras  I,  1 1  (Nar.). 

120.  The  verse  is  found  Taittiriya  Arawyaka  II,  18,  4. 
122.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  K.,  maruta^,  instead  of  maru- 

taw  (Nand.,  editions). 


XI,  127.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  4^5 

the  student,  enters,  if  he  breaks  his  vow,  the  Maruts, 
Puruhuta  (Indra),  the  teacher  (of  the  gods,  EWhas- 
pati)  and  Pavaka  (Fire). 

123.  When  this  sin  has  been  committed,  he  shall 
go  begging  to  seven  houses,  dressed  in  the  hide  of 
the  (sacrificed)  ass,  proclaiming  his  deed. 

124.  Subsisting  on  a  single  (daily  meal  that 
consists)  of  the  alms  obtained  there  and  bathing  at 
(the  time  of)  the  three  savanas  (morning,  noon,  and 
evening),  he  becomes  pure  after  (the  lapse  of)  one 
year. 

125.  For  committing  with  intent  any  of  the 
deeds  which  cause  loss  of  caste  ((^atibhra^wakara), 
(the  offender)  shall  perform  a  Sa^tapana  Krt&Mra. ; 
(for  doing  it)  unintentionally,  (the  Krz&Mra)  revealed 
by  Pra^apati. 

126.  As  atonement  for  deeds  which  degrade  to  a 
mixed  caste  (Sa^kara),  and  for  those  which  make  a 
man  unworthy  to  receive  gifts  (Apatra),  (he  shall 
perform)  the  lunar  (penance)  during  a  month  ;  for 
(acts)  which  render  impure  (Malinikara/2iya)  he  shall 
scald  himself  during  three  days  with  (hot)  barley- 
gruel. 

127.  One-fourth  (of  the  penance)  for  the  murder 
of  a  Brahma/za  is  prescribed  (as  expiation)  for 
(intentionally)   killing   a    Kshatriya,  one-eighth    for 

125.  Regarding  the  offences  called  Gatibhraw^akara,  see  above, 
verse  68.  The  Sa/^tapana  Kri/ckhm  is  described  below,  verse  213. 

126.  Regarding  the  three  classes  of  offences,  see  above,  69-71. 
The  penance  of  subsisting  on  barley-gruel  is  described  Vi.  XLVIII; 
Baudh.  Ill,  6^ 

127-131.  Ap.  I,  24, 1-4 ;  Gaut.  XXII,  14-16  ;  Vas.  XX,  31-33  ; 
Baudh.  I,  19,  1-2  ;  II,  8-10;  Vi.  L,  12-14;  Ya^w.  Ill,  266-267. 

127.  The  word  'virtuous'  is,  according  to  the  commentators,  to 
be  understood  with  '  a  Kshatriya '  and  '  a  Vauya/  and  the  rule 


456  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XT,  128. 

killing  a  Vaisya ;  know  that  it  is  one-sixteenth  for 
killing  a  virtuous  6udra. 

128.  But  if  a  Brahma^a  unintentionally  kills  a 
Kshatriya,  he  shall  give,  in  order  to  purify  himself, 
one  thousand  cows  and  a  bull ; 

129.  Or  he  may  perform  the  penance  prescribed 
for  the  murderer  of  a  Brahma^a  during  three  years, 
controlling  himself,  wearing  his  hair  in  braids, 
staying  far  away  from  the  village,  and  dwelling  at 
the  root  of  a  tree. 

130.  A  Brahma/za  who  has  slain  a  virtuous 
Vaisya,  shall  perform  the  same  penance  during  one 
year,  or  he  may  give  one  hundred  cows  and  one 
(bull). 


(verse  66),  according  to  which  the  murder  of  a  -Sudra,  a  Vawya, 
and  a  Kshatriya  is  an  Upapataka,  to  be  expiated  by  a  three  months' 
Govrata  or  a  lunar  penance,  refers  to  the  cases  of  persons  who  do 
not  live  in  accordance  with  the  sacred  law. 

128.  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.  (commentary),  Nand.,  K 
juddhyartham  atmana^,  instead  of  su^aritavrata^  (editions),  whic 
latter  reading  is  evidently  wrong. 

129.  According  to  Medh.  and  Ragh.,  this  verse  is  merely  a  repe 
tition  of  the  rule  given  in  verse  127.  But  others,  mentioned  by 
him,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Nar.,  think  that  the  special  observances  pre 
scribed  during  the  twelve  years'  penance,  e.  g.  carrying  a  sku 
instead  of  a  flag,  which  this  verse  does  not  expressly  mention 
need  not  be  kept.  Nand.  reads  dvyabdam, '  two  years,'  instead 
tryabdam. 

130.  I  read  with  Gov.,  Kull,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  Nand.,  and  K.  dadya 
vaika^atam,  instead  of  dadya^aikajatam  (Medh.,  editions,  and  pr 
bably  mentioned  by  Nar.).  According  to  Gov.  and  Kull.  the  tw 
penances  are  to  be  performed  optionally,  in  case  a  virtuous  VaLry 
has  been  killed  unintentionally.  Ragh.  seems  to  hold  the  sam 
opinion.  But  Medh.  says  that  the  first  penance  is  to  be  performe 
for  the  murder  of  a  VaLsya  who  was  less  distinguished  than  the  o 
referred  to  in  verse  127.     Nar.  finally  thinks  that  the  verse  refers 

a  Vabya  engaged  in  the  performance  of  a  sacrifice,  and  that  th 


XI,  134-  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  457 

131.  He  who  has  slain  a  .Sudra,  shall  perform 
that  whole  penance  during  six  months,  or  he  may 
also  give  ten  white  cows  and  one  bull  to  a  Brah- 
ma;za. 

132.  Having  killed  a  cat,  an  ichneumon,  a  blue  jay, 
a  frog,  a  dog,  an  iguana,  an  owl,  or  a  crow,  he  shall 
perform  the  penance  for  the  murder  of  a  .Sudra ; 

133.  Or  he  may  drink  milk  during  three  days,  or 
walk  one  hundred  yo^anas,  or  bathe  in  a  river,  or 
mutter  the  hymn  addressed  to  the  Waters. 

134.  For  killing  a  snake,  a  Brahma/za  shall  give 
a  spade  of  black  iron,  for  a  eunuch  a  load  of  straw 
and  a  masha  of  lead  ; 

particle  va,'or,'  takes  the  place  of  the  copula,  and  thus  one  penance 
only  is  prescribed. 

131.  Gov.  and  Kull.  hold  that  these  penances,  too,  are  to  be 
performed  in  the  case  of  an  unintentional  homicide.  Medh.  explains 
sita^,  'white,'  to  mean  'not  white  in  colour,  but  (called  so)  because 
they  resemble  in  purity  (white  substances),  and  give  much  milk  and 
are  accompanied  by  their  calves.' 

132.  Ap.  I,  2  5, 1 3  ;  Gaut.  XXII,  1 9 ;  Vas.  XXI,  2 4  ;  Vi.  L,  30-3 2 ; 
Y&gn.  Ill,  270.  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.  expressly  state  that  the  penance 
for  the  murder  of  a  .Sudra  is  to  be  performed  for  intentionally  (thus 
also  Nar.)  killing  any  single  one  of  these  animals,  while  Medh.  thinks 
that  the  rule  holds  good  only  if  one  has  killed  all  of  them.  The 
penance  intended  is,  according  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  and  Ragh.,  not 
that  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse,  but  the  lunar  penance  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  the  Govrata  (Gov.,  Kull.),  or  the  Tapta  Krz'^ra 
(Nar.). 

133.  According  to  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  these  penances  are 
to  be  performed  if  the  animal  has  been  killed  unintentionally; 
according  to  Medh.  they  serve  to  expiate  the  slaughter  of  a  single 
animal.  The  choice  among  the  four  penances  depends  according 
to  Kull.  and  Ragh.  on  the  strength  of  the  offender,  according  to 
Gov.  and  Nar.  on  his  caste  and  other  circumstances.  'A  yo^ana,' 
i.  e.  2I-9  miles.    The  hymn  mentioned  is  found  Rig-veda  X,  9. 

134.  Gaut.  XXII,  23,  25;  Vi.  L,  34-35  ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  273.  'A 
Brahmaraa/  i.e.  'even  a  Brahmawa'  (Nar.).  The  recipient  of  the 
gift  is  in  every  case  a  Brahma#a. 


I! 


458  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  135. 

135.  For  a  boar  a  pot  of  clarified  butter,  for  a 
partridge  a  dro^a  of  sesamum-grains,  for  a  parrot 
a  calf  two  years  old,  for  a  crane  (a  calf)  three 
years  old. 

136.  If  he  has  killed  a  Hawsa,  a  Balaka,  a  heron, 
a  peacock,  a  monkey,  a  falcon,  or  a  Bhasa,  he  shall 
give  a  cow  to  a  Brahma^a. 

137.  For  killing  a  horse,  he  shall  give  a  garment, 
for  (killing)  an  elephant,  five  black  bulls,  for  (killing) 
a  goat,  or  a  sheep,  a  draught-ox,  for  killing  a  donkey, 
(a  calf)  one  year  old ; 

138.  But  for  killing  carnivorous  wild  beasts,  he 
shall  give  a  milch-cow,  for  (killing)  wild  beasts  that 
are  not  carnivorous,  a  heifer,  for  killing  a  camel,  one 
krishnahi. 

139.  For  killing  adulterous  women  of  the  four 
castes,  he  must  give,  in  order  to  purify  himself, 
respectively  a  leathern  bag,  a  bow,  a  goat,  or  a 
sheep. 

140.  A  twice-born  man,  who  is  unable  to  atone 
by  gifts  for  the  slaughter  of  a  serpent  and  the  other 
(creatures  mentioned),  shall  perform  for  each  of 
them,  a  Kri&Mra  (penance)  in  order  to  remove  his 
guilt. 

141.  But   for   destroying    one    thousand    (small) 

135.  Gaut.  XXII,  24;  Vi.  L,  36-39;  YSgn.  Ill,  271,  273-274. 
Kumbha,  '  a  pot,'  i.  e.  '  of  200  palas'  (Nar.).  A  drowa,  i.  e.  four 
aa%akas  (Medh.),  or  128  palas  (Nar.). 

136.  Vi.  L,  33;  Yagn.  Ill,  272. 

137.  Vi.  L,  25-28;  Y&gri.  Ill,  271,  274. 

138.  Vi.  L,  29,  40-41;  Y&gn.  Ill,  272-273.  'A  knshwala,' 
i.e.  'of  gold'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.). 

139.  Gaut.  XXII,  26;  Y&gn.  Ill,  268.  'Respectively,'  i.  e. 
according  to  the  order  of  the  castes.    Ragh.  adds  '  unintentionally.' 

140.  YSgn.  Ill,  274;  Vas.  XXI,  26. 

141.  Gaut.  XXII,  20-21;  Ap.  I,  26,  2;  Vas.XXI,  25;  Vi.  L,  46; 


XI,  146.  PENANCES   FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  459 

animals  that  have  bones,  or  a  whole  cart-load  of 
boneless  (animals),  he  shall  perform  the  penance 
(prescribed)  for  the  murder  of  a  6udra. 

142.  But  for  killing  (small)  animals  which  have 
bones,  he  should  give  some  trifle  to  a  Brahma^a  ; 
if  he  injures  boneless  (animals),  he  becomes  pure  by 
suppressing  his  breath  (pra/zayama). 

143.  For  cutting  fruit-trees,  shrubs,  creepers, 
lianas,  or  flowering  plants,  one  hundred  Rikas  must 
be  muttered. 

144.  (For  destroying)  any  kind  of  creature,  bred 
in  food,  in  condiments,  in  fruit,  or  in  flowers,  the 
expiation  is  to  eat  clarified  butter. 

145.  If  a  man  destroys  for  no  good  purpose 
plants  produced  by  cultivation,  or  such  as  spon- 
taneously spring  up  in  the  forest,  he  shall  attend  a 
cow  during  one  day,  subsisting  on  milk  alone. 

146.  The  guilt  incurred  intentionally  or  uninten- 
tionally by  injuring  (created  beings)  can  be  removed 
by  means  of  these  penances ;   hear  (now,  how)  all 

YSgii.  Ill,  269.  '(Small)  animals  that  have  bones/  i.e.  'lizards 
and  the  like'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

142.  Vi.  L,  47;  Yagri.  Ill,  275;  Gaut.  XXII,  22.  The  rule 
refers  in  each  case  to  the  destruction  of  a  single  animal  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  of  a  number  less  than  that  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  verse  (Nar.).  '  Something/  i.  e.  one  pawa  (Nar.)  or 
'eight  handfuls  of  grain*  (Nand.). 

143.  Vi.  L,  48;  Yagn.  Ill,  276.  According  to  Kull.  this 
penance  must  be  performed  for  an  offence  committed  once  and 
unintentionally,  because  'the  cutting  of  green  trees'  has  been  de- 
clared above,  verse  65,  to  be  an  Upapataka  for  which  at  least  a 
lunar  penance  has  to  be  performed.  '  One  hundred  RikdcsJ  '  the 
Gayatri  and  the  like '  (Kull.),  or  '  the  Gayatri  one  hundred  times ' 
(Nar.). 

144.  Vi.  L,  49;  Y&gri.  Ill,  275.  Rasa,  'condiments/  i.e.  'mo- 
lasses, butter-milk  and  the  like '  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.). 

145.  Vi.  L,  50;  Yagn.  Ill,  144. 


460  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  147. 

(sins)  committed  by  partaking  of  forbidden  food  (or 
drink,  can  be  expiated). 

147.  He  who  drinks  unintentionally  (the  spiri- 
tuous liquor,  called)  Varu^l,  becomes  pure  by  being 
initiated  (again);  (even  for  drinking  it)  inten- 
tionally (a  penance)  destructive  to  life  must  not 
be  imposed ;  that  is  a  settled  rule. 

148.  He  who  has  drunk  water  which  has  stood 
in  a  vessel  used  for  keeping  (the  spirituous  liquor, 
called)  Sura,  or  other  intoxicating  drinks,  shall 
drink  during  five  (days  and)  nights  (nothing  but) 
milk  in  which  the"  .Sankhapushpi  (plant)  has  been 
boiled. 

147.  Ap.  I,  25,  10;  Gaut.  XXIII,  2  ;  Vas.  XX,  19;  Baudh.  IT, 
1, 19  ;  Vi.  LI,  1,  4 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  255.  '  Varum/  i.  e. '  liquor  distilled 
from  molasses  or  Maua  flowers  (gau^i  madhvi  ka),  not  that 
distilled  from  ground  grain,  because  another  penance  has  been 
prescribed  above,  verse  93 '  (Medh.,  Gov.).  The  other  com- 
mentators agree  with  this  explanation,  as  well  as  with  the  additional 
rule  that  a  Tapta  KrikkAra.  must  be  performed  before  the  second 
initiation.  Ragh.  and  Kull.  quote  also  the  Bhavishyapura/za,  which 
gives  the  same  interpretation.  The  explanation  of  the  second  part  of 
the  verse  is  everywhere  that  which  the  translation  follows  except  in 
Medh.'s  and  Nand.'s  commentaries,where  it  is  rendered '(for  drinking 
even  these  two  kinds  of  Sura)  intentionally  (this  penance)  must  not 
be  prescribed,  (but)  one  whereby  death  ensues/  In  my  opinion  the 
commentators  are  totally  wrong.  I  think  that  Varum  means  here, 
as  elsewhere,  Sura,  and  that  the  first  half  of  the  verse  prescribes  the 
performance  of  a  second  initiation  after  the  penance,  mentioned 
in  verse  93,  has  been  performed,  while  the  second  line  teaches  that 
the  intentional  drinking  of  Sura  can  be  expiated  by  death  alone. 
I  would  therefore  propose,  *  If  a  man  unintentionally  drinks  Sura, 
he  becomes  pure  only  by  being  initiated  again;  but  (the  guilt  of 
him  who  drinks  it)  intentionally,  cannot  be  expiated,  it  remains  as 
long  as  he  lives,  that  is  a  settled  rule.'  The  correctness  of  my 
interpretation  of  the  words  anirdcryam  prawantikam  follows  from 
Gaut.  XXI,  7. 

148.  Vas.  XX,  21 ;  Vi.  LI,  23-24 ;  Baudh.  II,  i,  22. 


XT,  153.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  46 1 

149.  He  who  has  touched  spirituous  liquor,  has 
given  it  away,  or  received  it  in  accordance  with  the 
rule,  or  has  drunk  water  left  by  a  6udra,  shall  drink 
during  three  days  water  in  which  Ku^a-grass  has 
been  boiled. 

150.  But  when  a  Brahma^a  who  has  partaken  of 
Soma-juice,  has  smelt  the  odour  exhaled  by  a 
drinker  of  Sura,  he  becomes  pure  by  thrice  sup- 
pressing his  breath  in  water,  and  eating  clarified 
butter. 

151.  (Men  of)  the  three  twice-born  castes  who 
have  unintentionally  swallowed  ordure  or  urine,  or 
anything  that  has  touched  Sura,  must  be  initiated 
again. 

152.  The  tonsure,  (wearing)  the  sacred  girdle, 
(carrying)  a  staff,  going  to  beg,  and  the  vows  (in- 
cumbent on  a  student),  are  omitted  on  the  second 
initiation  of  twice-born  men. 

153.  But  he  who  has  eaten  the  food  of  men, 
whose  food  must  not  be  eaten,  or  the  leavings  of 
women  and  6udras,  or  forbidden  flesh,  shall  drink 
barley(-gruel)  during  seven  (days  and)  nights. 

149.  'According  to  the  rule,'  i.e.  'pronouncing  a  benediction 
(on  the  giver)/  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.),  or  '  at  a  Sautramam  sacri- 
fice' (Nand.). 

150.  Gaut.  XXIII,  6;  Vi.  LI,  25. 

151.  Gaut.  XXIII,  3  ;  Vas.  XX,  20 ;  Vi.  LI,  2  ;  Yagn.  Ill,  235. 

152.  Vas.  XX,  18  ;  Baudh.  II,  1,  20;  Vi.  LI,  5.  'The  vows,' 
i.  e.  '  serving  the  fire,  avoiding  meat,  honey  and  so  forth '  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.),  and  'the  Veda-vows'  (Nar.). 

153.  Vas.  XIV,  33;  Vi.  LI,  50,  54,  56.  See  above,  IV,  222, 
where  another  penance  is  prescribed  for  unknowingly  eating  food 
given  by  persons  whose  food  must  not  be  eaten.  According  to 
Kull.  the  two  penances  may  be  performed  optionally,  but  accord- 
ing to  Medh.  and  Nar.  this  rule  refers  to  an  offence  committed 
intentionally. 


462  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  154. 

154.  A  twice-born  man  who  has  drunk  (fluids 
that  have  turned)  sour,  or  astringent  decoctions, 
becomes,  though  (these  substances  may)  not  (be 
specially)  forbidden,  impure  until  they  have  been 
digested. 

155.  A  twice-born  man,  who  has  swallowed  the 
urine  or  ordure  of  a  village  pig,  of  a  donkey,  of  a 
camel,  of  a  jackal,  of  a  monkey,  or  of  a  crow,  shall 
perform  a  lunar  penance. 

156.  He  who  has  eaten  dried  meat,  mushrooms 
growing  on  the  ground,  or  (meat,  the  nature  of) 
which  is  unknown,  (or)  such  as  had  been  kept  in  a 
slaughter-house,  shall  perform  the  same  penance. 

157.  The  atonement  for  partaking  of  (the  meat 
of)  carnivorous  animals,  of  pigs,  of  camels,  of  cocks, 
of  crows,  of  donkeys,  and  of  human  flesh,  is  a 
Tapta  Y^rikkhxz.  (penance). 

158.  If  a  twice-born  man,  who  has  not  returned 

154.  'Astringent  decoctions,'  i.e.  'those  known  to  physiciai 
are   prepared    from   various   herbs '  (Medh.).     Ragh.   and   Nam 
think  that  pitvamedhyanyapi  stands  for  pitva  amedhyani  api,  anc 
explain  amedhya  by  ■  garlic  and  the  like.' 

156.  Vi.  LI,  27,  34.  Gov.  and  Ragh.  take  a^-natam,  '  the  nature 
of  which  is  unknown/  to  mean  '  unintentionally.'  Ragh.  takes 
bhaumani, '  growing  on  the  ground,'  separately,  and  interprets  kava- 
kani,  '  mushrooms,'  by  ;  mushrooms  growing  on  trees.'  But  Medl 
says  '  the  word  bhaumani  is  used  in  order  to  exclude  those  growing 
in  the  holes  (of  trees)  from  the  prohibition,'  while  Nar.  thinks  that 
according  to  another  Smrz'ti  another  penance,  the  Prasrz'tiyavakE 
shall  be  performed  for  eating  the  latter. 

157.  Gaut.  XXIII,  4-5;  Vas.  XXIII,  30;  Vi.  LI,  3-4.     Witl 
respect  to  this  verse  and  the  preceding  one,  see  also  above,  V, 
19-21,  where  other  penances  are  prescribed.     Kull.  and  Ragl 
think  that  this  rule  refers  to  an  offence  committed  once,  while  those 
given  in  the  fifth  chapter  apply  to  a  relapse.    Regarding  the  Tapt 
Kri&k/im,  see  below,  verse  215. 

158.  Vi.  LI,  43-44.     The  commentators   state  that  the  ten 


XI,  i62.  PENANCES   FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  463 

(home  from  his  teacher's  house),  eats  food,  given  at 
a  monthly  (6raddha),  he  shall  fast  during  three  days 
and  pass  one  day  (standing)  in  water. 

159.  But  a  student  who  on  any  occasion  eats 
honey  or  meat,  shall  perform  an  ordinary  Kri&Mra. 
(penance),  and  afterwards  complete  his  vow  (of 
studentship). 

160.  He  who  eats  what  is  left  by  a  cat,  by  a 
crow,  by  a  mouse  (or  rat),  by  a  dog,  or  by  an  ich- 
neumon, or  (food)  into  which  a  hair  or  an  insect  has 
fallen,  shall  drink  (a  decoction  of)  the  Brahmasu- 
var/£ala  (plant). 

161.  He  who  desires  to  be  pure,  must  not  eat  for- 
bidden food,  and  must  vomit  up  such  as  he  has 
eaten  unintentionally,  or  quickly  atone  for  it  by 
(various)  means  of  purification. 

162.  The  various  rules  respecting  penances  for 
eating  forbidden  food  have  been  thus  declared  ; 
hear  now  the  law  of  those  penances  which  remove 
the  guilt  of  theft. 

masika,  'a  monthly  (-SYaddha)/  refers  to  a  so-called  Ekoddish/a 
-SYaddha.  According  to  Medh.,  'others'  thought  that,  because  a 
student  is  allowed  to  partake  of  a  -Sraddha  by  II,  189,  the  inviter 
should  perform  the  penance.  According  to  Medh.,  the  student 
shall  on  the  fourth  day  stand  in  water  ;  but  according  to  Gov.,  Kull., 
on  one  of  the  three  fast  days  ;  according  to  Nar.,  on  the  first. 

159.  Vi.  LI,  45;  Vas.  XXIII,  12;  Yagn.  Ill,  282.  Instead  of 
brahma^arr,  'a  student,'  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  read  vrata- 
£ari, '  a  man  performing  a  vow,'  and  Nar.  explains  it  by  '  a  student, 
a  hermit,  a  widow,  an  ascetic  and  so  forth/  while  the  other  com- 
mentators refer  the  term  to  a  student  alone. 

160.  Vi.  LI,  46;  Vas.  XXIII,  11.  'Food  into  which  an  insect 
or  a  hair  has  fallen,'  i.  e.  c  without  scattering  earth  on  it '  (Gov., 
Kull.,  Ragh.).     Nar.  adds  during  one  day. 

161.  Gaut.  XXIII,  26.  '  Means  of  purification/  i.  e. '  penances ' 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'purgative  decoctions'  ('others/ 
Medh.,  Nar.,  Nand.).  < 


464  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  163. 

163.  The  chief  of  the  twice-born,  having  volun- 
tarily stolen  (valuable)  property,  grain,  or  cooked 
food,  from  the  house  of  a  caste-fellow,  is  purified  by 
performing  YLrikkhxz.  (penances)  during  a  whole 
year. 

164.  The  lunar  penance  has  been  declared  to  be 
the  expiation  for  stealing  men  and  women,  and  (for 
wrongfully  appropriating)  a  field,  a  house,  or  the 
water  of  wells  and  cisterns. 

165.  He  who  has  stolen  objects  of  small  value 
from  the  house  of  another  man,  shall,  after  restoring 
the  (stolen  article),  perform  a  Sawtapana  KrzMAra. 
for  his  purification. 

166.  (To  swallow)  the  five  products  of  the  cow 
(pa^agavya)  is  the  atonement  for  stealing  eatables 
of  various  kinds,  a  vehicle,  a  bed,  a  seat,  flowers, 
roots,  or  fruit. 

163.  Vi.  LII,  5.     According  to  Medh.  and  Nar.  it  is  meant  thj 
others  stealing  the  same  articles  from  caste-fellows  must  perfon 
the  same  penance.    Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.,  and  Nar.  think  that 
the  verse  gives  the  extreme  limit  of  the  penance,  and  that  under 
special  circumstances  it  may  be  reduced. 

164.  Vi.  LII,  6.     'Men   and   women/  i.e.  'slaves'  (Medh. 
Ragh.  mentions  a  var.  lect.  taJaganam,  'or  a  tank,'  instead  of 
g-alanam,  '  of  the  water.'     Nar.  and  Ragh.  think  that  the  penance  is 
intended  for  an  offence  committed  unintentionally. 

165.  Vi.  LII,  7.  'Objects  of  small  value,'  i.  e.  'earthen  vessels 
wooden  ones,  e.g.  a  trough,  or  iron  utensils,  e.  g.  a  hoe'  (Medh.) 
or  'tin,  lead  and  the  like'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  'straw  and  th( 
like'  (Nar.).  K.  omits '  after  restoring,'  and  reads  tatpapasya  visud- 
dhaye, '  for  the  expiation  of  that  sin.' 

166.  Vi.  LII,  8.  Medh.  says  that  the  penance  is  to  last  one 
day  only.  Nar.  thinks  that  the  Mahasa;?ztapana  penance  is  indicatec 
by  the  mention  of  the  paw^agavya,  and  that  this  holds  good  in  the 
case  of  an  unintentional  offence  only.  Nand.  adds, '  With  this  an< 
the  following  rules  the  words  "after  restoring  the  property"  have 
still  their  force;'  so  also  Kull.  on  verse  165. 


XI,  171.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  465 

167.  Fasting  during  three  (days  and)  nights  shall 
be  (the  penance  for  stealing)  grass,  wood,  trees,  dry 
food,  molasses,  clothes,  leather,  and  meat. 

168.  To  subsist  during  twelve  days  on  (uncooked) 
grains  (is  the  penance  for  stealing)  gems,  pearls, 
coral,  copper,  silver,  iron,  brass,  or  stone. 

169.  (For  stealing)  cotton,  silk,  wool,  an  animal 
with  cloven  hoofs,  or  one  with  uncloven  hoofs,  a 
bird,  perfumes,  medicinal  herbs,  or  a  rope  (the 
penance  is  to  subsist)  during  three  days  (on)  milk. 

170.  By  means  of  these  penances,  a  twice-born 
man  may  remove  the  guilt  of  theft ;  but  the  guilt  of 
approaching  women  who  ought  not  to  be  approached 
(agamya),he  may  expiate  by  (the  following)  penances. 

171.  He  who  has  had  sexual  intercourse  with 
sisters  by  the  same  mother,  with  the  wives  of  a 
friend,  or  of  a  son,  with  unmarried  maidens,  and 
with  females  of  the  lowest  castes,  shall  perform  the 
penance,  prescribed  for  the  violation  of  a  Guru's  bed.^ 

167.  Vi.  LII,  9.  According  to  Nar.  the  rule  refers  to  an  unin- 
tentional offence. 

168.  Vi.LII,  10.  According  to  Medh.  the  penance  maybe  shortened 
according  to  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case.  Nar.  says, 'This 
refers  to  cases  when  the  theft  is  not  committed  in  times  of  distress.' 

169.  Vi.  LII,  n.  According  to  Nar.  this  rule  holds  good  if  the 
theft  is  committed  in  times  of  distress  and  very  small  quantities  are 
taken.  Gov.  and  Kull.  observe  on  this  verse  and  the  preceding 
ones,  that  the  apparent  inequality  of  the  penances,  which  are  pre- 
scribed equally  for  great  and  small  things,  will  disappear  if  special 
circumstances,  such  as  the  frequency  of  the  offence,  time  and  place, 
the  character  of  the  owner  and  so  forth,  are  taken  into  account. 

171.  Gaut.  XXIII,  12-13,32;  Vas.  XX,  15-16;  Baudh.11,1,13; 
Vi.  XXXIV,  2;  XXXVI,  7;  LIII,  1;  Y&gfi.  Ill,  233.  See  also 
above,  verse  59.  According  to  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh.,  the 
penance  to  be  performed  is  that  mentioned  above  in  verse  106,  while 
self-immolation  is  prescribed  for  repeated  intentional  offences  only. 
Nar.  speaks  of  a  twelve  years'  penance. 
[25]  H  h 


466  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  172. 

172.  He  who  has  approached  the  daughter  of  his 
father's  sister,  (who  is  almost  equal  to)  a  sister,  (the 
daughter)  of  his  mother's  sister,  or  of  his  mother's 
full  brother,  shall  perform  a  lunar  penance. 

173.  A  wise  man  should  not  take  as  his  wife  any 
of  these  three ;  they  must  not  be  wedded  because 
they  are  (Sapi^a-)relatives,  he  who  marries  (one  of 
them),  sinks  low. 

1 74.  A  man  who  has  committed  a  bestial  crime, 
or  an  unnatural  crime  with  a  female,  or  has  had 
intercourse  in  water,  or  with  a  menstruating  woman, 
shall  perform  a  Sawtapana  Krz&Mra. 

175.  A  twice-born  man  who  commits  an  unnatural 
offence  with  a  male,  or  has  intercourse  with  a  female 
in  a  cart  drawn  by  oxen,  in  water,  or  in  the  day-time, 
shall  bathe,  dressed  in  his  clothes. 

1 76.  A  Brahma/za  who  unintentionally  approaches 
a  woman  of  the  Kand&la  or  of  (any  other)  very  low 
caste,  who  eats  (the  food  of  such  persons)  and  accepts 

172.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  and  K.  in  the  second  line 
matu,?  ia  bhratur  aptasya  (apta#z  £a,  Nand.)  instead  of  matiw  ka  bhratus 
tanayam  (editions).  According  to  Kull.  and  Nar.  the  rule  refers  to  an 
offence  committed  by  mistake  and,  as  the  former  says,  once  only. 

173.  This  verse  is  directed  against  the  custom  of  the  southerners, 
mentioned  by  Baudh.  I,  2,  3.  '  Sinks  low/  i.  e.  '  falls  into  hell  or 
begets  base-born  offspring'  (Medh.).  Gov.  and  Kull.  adopt  the  former 
explanation,  while  Nar.  says  ■  he  becomes  an  outcast.' 

174.  Gaut.  XXII,  36;  XXIII,  34;  Vi.  LIII,  4,  7;  Yagfi.  Ill, 
288.     A  bestial  crime  with  a  cow  is  excepted,  see  Vi.  LIII, 
Medh.  mentions  a  var.  lect,  ^ale  khe  /£a,  instead  of  gale  £aiva,  whi< 
agrees  with  Vish/m's  text. 

175.  Vi.  LIII,  4  ;  Yagn.  Ill,  291.     Nar.  says  that  the  vei 
refers  to  an  unintentional  offence. 

176.  Vas.  XXIII,  41;  Baudh.  II,  4, 13-14;  Vi.  LIII,  5-6.  <Vei 
low  caste,'  i.  e.  '  Mle^/^as  or  barbarians,  -Sabaras  and  so  fortl 
(Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  <  Sutas  and  the  like '  (Nar.),  or  '  Gavam 


XI,  t8i.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  467 

(presents  from  them)  becomes  an  outcast ;  but  (if  he 
does  it)  intentionally,  he  becomes  their  equal. 

177.  An  exceedingly  corrupt  wife  let  her  husband 
confine  to  one  apartment,  and  compel  her  to  perform 
the  penance  which  is  prescribed  for  males  in  cases 
of  adultery. 

178.  If,  being  solicited  by  a  man  (of)  equal 
(caste),  she  (afterwards)  is  again  unfaithful,  then  a 
YLrikkkra.  and  a  lunar  penance  are  prescribed  as 
the  means  of  purifying  her. 

179.  The  sin  which  a  twice-born  man  commits 
by  dallying  one  night  with  a  VWshali,  he  removes 
in  three  years,  by  subsisting  on  alms  and  daily 
muttering  (sacred  texts). 

180.  The  atonement  (to  be  performed)  by  sinners 
(of)  four  (kinds)  even,  has  been  thus  declared ;  hear 
now  the  penances  for  those  who  have  intercourse  with 
outcasts. 

181.  He  who  associates  with  an  outcast,  himself 
becomes  an  outcast  after  a  year,  not  by  sacrificing 

(i.  e.  Mahommedans)  and  the  like '  (Ragh.).  In  the  first  case  the 
penance  for  a  Patita  must  be  performed ;  in  the  second,  no  penance 
can  be  prescribed. 

177.  Vas.  XXI,  8,  12-13;  Vi.  LIII,  8.  Adultery  is  an  Upapa- 
taka  according  to  verse  60,  and  to  be  expiated,  according  to  verse 
118,  by  a  Govrata  or  a  ^andrayawa,  which  latter  seems  to  be  here 
intended.  The  commentators  add  that  the  penance  must  be  lighter 
or  heavier,  according  to  the  caste  of  the  male  offender. 

178.  I  read  with  Gov.,  Nar.  upamantrita  instead  of  upayantrita 
(editions,  K.,  Nand.).     Medh.  seems  to  have  read  anumantrita. 

179.  Ap.  I,  27,  11 ;  Baudh.  II,  2,  11  ;  Vi.  LIII,  9.  '  A  Wzshali,' 
i.  e.  a  Kandili  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  But  others,  mentioned  by 
Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Nar.,  think  that  a  -Sudra  female  is  meant.  Nand. 
places  this  verse  before  verse  178. 

181.  Gaut.  XXI,  3  ;  Vas.  I,  22  ;  Baudh.  II,  2,  35 ;  Ys^ra.  Ill,  261 ; 
Vi.  XXXV,  3-5.  Gov.  and  Nar.  explain  the  verse  differently,  '  He 
who  associates  with  an  outcast  by  sacrificing  for  him  or  by  forming 

H  h  2 


468  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  182. 

for  him,  teaching  him,  or  forming  a  matrimonial 
alliance  with  him,  but  by  using  the  same  carriage 
or  seat,  or  by  eating  with  him. 

182.  He  who  associates  with  any  one  of  those 
outcasts,  must  perform,  in  order  to  atone  for  (such) 
intercourse,  the  penance  prescribed  for  that  (sinner). 

183.  The  Sapi^as  and  Samanodakas  of  an  out- 
cast must  offer  (a  libation  of)  water  (to  him,  as  if  he 
were  dead),  outside  (the  village),  on  an  inauspicious 
day,  in  the  evening  and  in  the  presence  of  the  rela- 
tives, officiating  priests,  and  teachers. 

184.  A  female  slave  shall  upset  with  her  foot 
a  pot  filled  with  water,  as  if  it  were  for  a  dead 
person ;  (his  Sapi^as)  as  well  as  the  Samanodakas 
shall  be  impure  for  a  day  and  a  night  ; 

185.  But  thenceforward  it  shall  be  forbidden  to 
converse  with  him,  to  sit  with  him,  to  give  him 
a  share  of  the  inheritance,  and  to  hold  with  him  such 
intercourse  as  is  usual  among  men ; 

186.  And  (if  he  be  the  eldest)  his  right  of  primo- 
geniture shall  be  withheld  and  the  additional  share, 

a  matrimonial  alliance  with  him,  himself  becomes  an  outcast  after  a 
year,  but  not  by  using  the  same  carriage  or  seat  or  eating  with 
him/  In  the  latter  case  four  years  are  required.  The  parallel 
passage  of  Vishmi  shows,  however,  clearly  what  is  meant. 

182.  Vi.LIV,  1. 

183-186.  Gaut.  XX,  4-7;  Vas.  XV,  12-16  ;  Baudh.  II,  1,  36 
Yagri.  Ill,  295. 

183.  'In  the  presence  of  the  relatives,  &c./  i.e.  'of  those  whc 
perform  the  ceremony,  not  of  those  of  the  outcast'  (Medh.). 

184.  'As  if  it  were  for  a  dead  person,'  i.e. ' saying, " This  is  fc 
N.  N."'  (Medh.),  'turning  to  the  south'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Nanc 
R£gh.). 

185.  I  prefer  K.'s  reading  nivarteraws  tatas  tasmat.     According 
to  Medh.  'others'  explained  dayadya,  'a  share  of  the  inheritance 
by '  money/  and  thought  that  all  sums  due  to  him  were  to  be  give 
to  his  heirs. 


XI,  192.        EXCOMMUNICATION  AND  RE-ADMISSION.         469 

due  to  the  eldest  son ;  and  in  his  stead  a  younger 
brother,  excelling  in  virtue,  shall  obtain  the  share 
of  the  eldest. 

187.  But  when  he  has  performed  his  penance, 
they  shall  bathe  with  him  in  a  holy  pool  and  throw 
down  a  new  pot,  filled  with  water. 

188.  But  he  shall  throw  that  pot  into  water,  enter 
his  house  and  perform,  as  before,  all  the  duties  in- 
cumbent on  a  relative. 

189.  Let  him  follow  the  same  rule  in  the  case  of 
female  outcasts ;  but  clothes,  food,  and  drink  shall 
be  given  to  them,  and  they  shall  live  close  to  the 
(family-)house. 

190.  Let  him  not  transact  any  business  with  un- 
purified  sinners ;  but  let  him  in  no  way  reproach 
those  who  have  made  atonement. 

191.  Let  him  not  dwell  together  with  the  mur- 
derers of  children,  with  those  who  have  returned 
evil  for  good,  and  with  the  slayers  of  suppliants 
for  protection  or  of  women,  though  they  may  have 
been  purified  according  to  the  sacred  law. 

192.  Those  twice-born  men  who  may  not  have 
been  taught  the  Savitrt  (at  the  time)  prescribed  by 
the  rule,  he  shall  cause  to  perform  three  Kri&Mra, 
(penances)  and  afterwards  initiate  them  in  accord- 
ance with  the  law. 

187-188.  Gaut  XX,  10-14  ;  Vas.  XV,  17-21  ;  Baudh.  II,  1,  36  ; 
Yagn.  Ill,  296. 

188.  Thus  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.,  and  others  quoted  by  Medh.  But 
the  latter  commentator  himself  refers  sa  tu,  *  but  he,'  to  one  of  the 
relatives,  and  Nar.  seems  to  agree  with  him. 

189.  Yagn.  Ill,  297. 

190-191.  Vi.  LIV,  32-33;  Yagn.  Ill,  299. 
192.  Ap.  I,  1,  23-2,  10;  Vas.  XI,  76-79;  Vi.  LIV,  26.    Regard- 
ing the  times  of  the  initiation,  see  above,  II,  38. 


470  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  193. 

193.  Let  him  prescribe  the  same  (expiation)  when 
twice-born  men,  who  follow  forbidden  occupations  or 
have  neglected  (to  learn)  the  Veda,  desire  to  perform 
a  penance. 

194.  If  Brahma/zas  acquire  property  by  a  repre- 
hensible action,  they  become  pure  by  relinquishing 
it,  muttering  prayers,  and  (performing)  austerities. 

195.  By  muttering  with  a  concentrated  mind  the 
Savitri  three  thousand  times,  (dwelling)  for  a  month 
in  a  cow-house,  (and)  subsisting  on  milk,  (a  man)  is 
freed  from  (the  guilt  of)  accepting  presents  from 
a  wicked  man. 

196.  But  when  he  returns  from  the  cow-house, 
emaciated  with  his  fast,  and  reverently  salutes, 
(the  Brahma^as)  shall  ask  him,  '  Friend,  dost  thou 
desire  to  become  our  equal  ?' 

197.  If  he  answers  to  the  Brahma^as,  '  Forsooth, 
(I  will  not  offend  again),'  he  shall  scatter  (some)  grass 
for  the  cows  ;  if  the  cows  hallow  that  place  (by  eating 
the  grass)  the  (Brahma^a)  shall  re-admit  him  (into 
their  community). 


193.  Vi.  LIV,  27. 

194.  Vi.  LIV,  24,  28;  Y&gn.  Ill,  290.  'By  a  reprehensible 
action/  i.e.  '  by  receiving  presents  from  wicked  men  or,  according  t( 
others,  by  acquiring  money  in  any  manner  forbidden  to  him.  The 
latter  extend  the  rule  to  other  Aryans'  (Medh.).  Gov.,  Kull.,  anc 
Nar.  refer  the  verse  to  Brahma^as  and  to  their  accepting  present 
from  wicked  men  and  similar  acts. 

195.  Medh.  remarks  that  according  to  some  the  offender  shal 
daily  recite  the  Gayatri  three  thousand  times,  according  to  other 
three  thousand  times  in  the  whole  month. 

196-197.  Y&gn.  Ill,  300. 

197.  The  beginning  of  the  verse  is  explained  differently  by  Nar 
and  Nand. :  '  If  he  tells  the  truth  to  the  Brahma^as,  i.e.  with  respec 
to  his  offence  and  his  penance.'  Medh.  takes  tirtha  in  its  usue 
sense,  '  a  bathing-place,'  and  connects  it  with  pratigrahaw  kuryid 


XI,  201.  PENANCES    FOR    MINOR    OFFENCES.  47 1 

198.  He  who  has  sacrificed  for  Vratyas,  or  has  per- 
formed the  obsequies  of  strangers,  or  a  magic  sacri- 
fice (intended  to  destroy  life)  or  an  Ahina  sacrifice, 
removes  (his  guilt)  by  three  KrzkMra.  (penances). 

199.  A  twice-born  man  who  has  cast  off  a  sup- 
pliant for  protection,  or  has  (improperly)  divulged 
the  Veda,  atones  for  his  offence,  if  he  subsists 
during  a  year  on  barley. 

200.  He  who  has  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  a  jackal, 
or  a  donkey,  by  a  tame  carnivorous  animal,  by  a  man, 
a  horse,  a  camel,  or  a  (village-)pig,  becomes  pure  by 
suppressing  his  breath  (Pra^ayama). 

201.  To  eat  during  a  month  at  each  sixth  meal- 
time (only),  to  recite  the  Sawhita  (of  a  Veda),  and  (to 
perform)  daily  the  6akala  oblations,  are  the  means 
of  purifying  those  excluded  from  society  at  repasts 
(Apahktya). 

•  they  shall  re-admit  at  the  bathing-place.'    Nar.  says  it  means  vya- 
vaharavartman.     The  translation  follows  Gov.,  Kull.,  and  Ragh. 

198.  Ap.  I,  26,  7  ;  Vi.  LIV,  25 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  289.  Vratyas,  see 
above,  X,  20.  'A  magic  rite  (intended  to  destroy  life),'  i. e.  'a 
-Syena  sacrifice  and  the  like.'  The  Ahina  sacrifices  are  those  last- 
ing between  two  and  twelve  days ;  see  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  X,  355. 
Medh.  thinks  that  the  rule  refers  to  the  person  who  offers  the  sacri- 
fices (ya^amana),  while  others  mentioned  by  him  hold  that  it  applies 
to  the  officiating  priests. 

199.  Y&gn.  Ill,  289.  Vedaw  viplavya,  'having  (improperly) 
divulged  the  Veda/  i.  e.  '  having  taught  people  who  ought  not  to 
be  taught'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  means  according  to  Nar. 
( having  improperly  interpreted  the  Veda  or  perverted  its  sense  by 
omitting  Anusvaras,  Visargas,  and  the  like,'  according  to  Ragh. 
'  having  intentionally  forgotten  it.' 

200.  Gaut.  XXIII,  7 ;  Vas.  XXIII,  31 ;  Vi.  LIV,  12  ;  Yagii.  Ill, 
277.  'A  tame  carnivorous  animal,'  i.e. 'a  cat,  an  ichneumon, 
and  so  forth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Nar.  reads  agramyai^ 
fgr&myaiA)  kravyadbhi//,  and  gives  as  an  instance  '  a  wolf.' 

201.  Regarding  the  Apanktyas,  elsewhere  called  Pahktidusha#as, 


472  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  202. 

202.  A  Brahma/ea  who  voluntarily  rode  in  a 
carriage  drawn  by  camels  or  by  asses,  and  he 
who  bathed  naked,  become  pure  by  suppressing 
his  breath  (Pra/zayama). 

203.  He  who  has  relieved  the  necessities  of 
nature,  being  greatly  pressed,  either  without  (using) 
water  or  in  water,  becomes  pure  by  bathing  outside 
(the  village)  in  his  clothes  and  by  touching  a  cow. 

204.  Fasting  is  the  penance  for  omitting  the  daily 
rites  prescribed  by  the  Veda  and  for  neglecting  the 
special  duties  of  a  Snataka. 

205.  He  who  has  said  '  Hum'  to  a  Brahma^a,  or 
has  addressed  one  of  his  betters  with  '  Thou,'  shall 
bathe,  fast  during  the  remaining  part  of  the  day, 
and  appease  (the  person  offended)  by  a  reverential 
salutation. 

206.  He  who  has  struck  (a  Brahma/za)  even  with 
a  blade  of  grass,  tied  him  by  the  neck  with  a  cloth, 
or  conquered  him  in  an  altercation,  shall  appease 
him  by  a  prostration. 

1  defilers  of  the  company/  see  above,  III,  151  seq.     Nar.  remarks 
that  this  penance  is  to  be  performed  by  those  only  for  whoi 
no  other   expiation   is   specially  prescribed.     The   *Sakala-homas 
are    oblations    offered   with   the   eight  verses  Vag-asaneyi-sazrchita 
VIII,  13. 

202.  Vi.  LIV,  23;  Y&gri.  Ill,  291.  Medh.  and  Kull.  remark 
that  he  who  rides  on  the  back  of  camels  or  donkeys  has  to  perform 
more  than  one  Pra«ayama. 

203.  Vi.  LIV,  10.  'Outside  the  village/  i.e.  'in  a  river  or  the 
like'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.). 

204.  Vi.  LIV,  29;  The  rules  for  a  Snataka  are  those  given  in 
the  fourth  chapter.  The  daily  rites  are  the  Agnihotra  and  so  forth. 
The  fasting  is  to  last  one  day  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

205.  Yagn.  Ill,  292.  '  One's  betters  ought  to  be  addressed  witl 
"You"' (Medh.). 

206.  Y&gn.  Ill,  292.  See  above,  IV,  166.  Gov.  and  Nar.  say, 
'  a  Brahmawa  more  venerable  than  himself.' 


XI,  212.  DESCRIPTION    OF    PENANCES.  473 

207.  But  he  who,  intending  to  hurt  a  Brahma^a, 
has  threatened  (him  with  a  stick  and  the  like)  shall 
remain  in  hell  during  a  hundred  years ;  he  who 
(actually)  struck  him,  during  one  thousand  years. 

208.  As  many  particles  of  dust  as  the  blood  of 
a  Brahma/za  causes  to  coagulate,  for  so  many  thou- 
sand years  shall  the  shedder  of  that  (blood)  remain 
in  hell. 

209.  For  threatening  a  Brahma/za,  (the  offender) 
shall  perform  a  Krz&Mra,  for  striking  him  an  Ati- 
krz&Mra.,  for  shedding  his  blood  a  Krz&Mra.  and  an 
AtikrtteAraL 

210.  For  the  expiation  of  offences  for  which  no 
atonement  has  been  prescribed,  let  him  fix  a  pen- 
ance after  considering  (the  offender's)  strength  and 
the  (nature  of  the)  offence. 

211.  I  will  (now)  describe  to  you  those  means, 
adopted  by  the  gods,  the  sages,  and  the  manes, 
through  which  a  man  may  remove  his  sins. 

212.  A  twice-born  man  who  performs  (the  Y^rik- 
khx2.  penance),  revealed  by  Pra^apati,  shall  eat 
during  three  days  in  the  morning  (only),  during 
(the  next)  three  days  in  the  evening  (only),  during 
the  (following)  three  days  (food  given)  unasked,  and 
shall  fast  during  another  period  of  three  days. 

207-208.  See  above,  IV,  165,  167-169,  where  slightly  different 
versions  of  these  verses  occur.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators 
and  K.  dvi^anmana^,  'of  a  Brahma^a,'  instead  of  mahitale,  'on 
the  ground'  (editions). 

209.  Vi.  LIV,  30  ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  293.  Medh.  points  out  that  these 
offences  have  already  been  dealt  with  above  in  verses  67  and  125, 
and  thinks  that  the  penance  prescribed  in  the  latter  verse  may  be 
performed  optionally  instead  of  those  mentioned  here. 

210.  Vi.  LIV,  34;  Y&gri.  Ill,  294. 

212.  Ap.I,  27,  7;  Gaut.  XXVI,  2-5;  Vas.  XXI,  20;  Baudh.  II, 


474  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  213. 

213.  (Subsisting  on)  the  urine  of  cows,  cowdung, 
milk,  sour  milk,  clarified  butter,  and  a  decoction  of 
Ku^a-grass,  and  fasting  during  one  (day  and)  night, 
(that  is)  called  a  Sa^tapana  Krz&Mrd,. 

214.  A  twice-born  man  who  performs  an  Ktikrik- 
Mra.  (penance),  must  take  his  food  during  three 
periods  of  three  days  in  the  manner  described  above, 
(but)  one  mouthful  only  at  each  meal,  and  fast 
during  the  last  three  days. 

215.  A  Brahma^a  who  performs  a  Taptakr//£/Mra 
(penance)  must  drink  hot  water,  hot  milk,  hot  clari- 
fied butter  and  (inhale)  hot  air,  each  during  three 
days,  and  bathe  once  with  a  concentrated  mind. 

216.  A  fast  for  twelve  days  by  a  man  who  controls 
himself  and  commits  no  mistakes,  is  called  a  Paraka 
KriMkra,  which  removes  all  guilt. 

217.  If  one  diminishes  (one's  food  daily  by)  one 

2,  38  ;  IV,  5,  6-7  ;  Vi.  XLVI,  10;  Ya#».  Ill,  320.  According  to 
Medh.,  food  which  a  wife  brings  unasked  is  also  '  food  given  un- 
asked/ 

213.  Baudh.  IV,  5,  13  ;  Vi.  XLVI,  19 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  313.  There 
are  two  ways  of  performing  this  penance  :  Either  the  penitent  may 
eat  the  six  substances  during  one  day  and  fast  on  the  next,  or  he 
may  subsist  one  day  on  each  of  the  six  and  fast  on  the  seventh  day 
(Medh.,  Gov.).  The  other  commentators  give  the  first  explanation 
only. 

214.  Gaut.  XXV,  18-19;  Vas.  XXIV,  1-2;  Baudh.  II,  2,40 
IV,  5,  8 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  320.     'Above,'  i.e.  in  verse  213. 

215.  Vas.  XXI,  18 ;  Baudh.  II,  2,  37  ;  IV,  5, 10  \  Vi.  XLVI,  1 
Y%w.  Ill,  318. 

216.  Baudh.  IV,  5,  15  ;  Vi.  XLVI,  18  ;  Y&gh.  Ill,  221.    'Com- 
mits no  mistakes,'  i.  e.  '  with  respect  to  the    general  rules  to 
followed  during  the  performance  of  a  KrikkArs.,'  see  Vas.  XXIV, 
(Medh.,  Nar.). 

217-226.   Gaut.  XXVII;   Vas.  XXIV,    45~47;    XXVII,   21 
Baudh.  Ill,  8;  IV,  5,  17-21;  Vi.  XLVII;  Y&gn.  Ill,  324-327- 

217.  The  form  of  the  lunar  penance  described  in  this  verse 


XT,  223.  DESCRIPTION    OF    PENANCES.  475 

mouthful  during  the  dark  (half  of  the  month)  and 
increases  (it  in  the  same  manner)  during  the  bright 
half,  and  bathes  (daily)  at  the  time  of  three  libations 
(morning,  noon,  and  evening),  that  is  called  a  lunar 
penance  (A"andraya;za). 

218.  Let  him  follow  throughout  the  same  rule  at 
the  (iTandraya^a,  called)  yavamadhyama  (shaped 
like  a  barley-corn),  (but)  let  him  (in  that  case)  begin 
the  lunar  penance,  (with  a)  controlled  (mind),  on  the 
first  day  of  the  bright  half  (of  the  month). 

219.  He  who  performs  the  lunar  penance  of  as- 
cetics, shall  eat  (during  a  month)  daily  at  midday 
eight  mouthfuls,  controlling  himself  and  consuming 
sacrificial  food  (only). 

220.  If  a  Brahma^a,  with  concentrated  mind,  eats 
(during  a  month  daily)  four  mouthfuls  in  a  morning 
and  four  after  sunset,  (that  is)  called  the  lunar 
penance  of  children. 

221.  He  who,  concentrating  his  mind,  eats  during 
a  month  in  any  way  thrice  eighty  mouthfuls  of 
sacrificial  food,  dwells  (after  death)  in  the  world  of 
the  moon. 

222.  The  Rudras,  likewise  the  Adityas,  the  Vasus 
and  the  Maruts,  together  with  the  great  sages,  prac- 
tised this  (rite)  in  order  to  remove  all  evil. 

223.  Burnt  oblations,  accompanied  by  (the  recita- 
tion of)  the  Mahavyahrztis,  must  daily  be  made  (by 

the  so-called  pipilikamadhya  or  ant-shaped  one,  where  the  fast  or 
lean  days  lie  in  the  middle. 

218.  It  will  be  advisable  to  read  with  Medh.  and  Gov.,  in  the 
second  line,  Saret  instead  of  Saran.  Gov.  has  Saran  in  the  first 
line.  Nand.  reads  the  last  words  quite  differently,  (niyataj)  Sandra- 
yam  .m  athaparam. 

2:1.  'In  any  way/  i.  e. '  without  observing  any  particular  limit  as 
to  the  number  of  mouthfuls  to  be  eaten  on  each  day '  (Nar.). 


47^  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  224. 

the  penitent)  himself,  and  he  must  abstain  from  in- 
juring (sentient  creatures),  speak  the  truth,  and  keep 
himself  free  from  anger  and  from  dishonesty. 

224.  Let  him  bathe  three  times  each  day  and 
thrice  each  night,  dressed  in  his  clothes ;  let  him  on 
no  account  talk  to  women,  vSudras,  and  outcasts. 

225.  Let  him  pass  the  time  standing  (during  the 
day)  and  sitting  (during  the  night),  or  if  he  is  unable 
(to  do  that)  let  him  lie  on  the  (bare)  ground ;  let  him 
be  chaste  and  observe  the  vows  (of  a  student)  and 
worship  his  Gurus,  the  gods,  and  Brahma/zas. 

226.  Let  him  constantly  mutter  the  Savitrl  and 
(other)  purificatory  texts  according  to  his  ability  ;  (let 
him)  carefully  (act  thus)  on  (the  occasion  of)  all 
(other)  vows  (performed)  by  way  of  penance. 

227.  By  these  expiations  twice-born  men  must  be 
purified  whose  sins  are  known,  but  let  him  purify 
those  whose  sins  are  not  known  by  (the  recitation 
of)  sacred  texts  and  by  (the  performance  of)  burnt 
oblations. 


224.  Medh.  remarks  that  the  penitent  may  however  talk  to  the 
female  members  of  his  household,  if  an  occasion  requires  it. 

225.  Vratr  syat,  'observe  the  vows  (of  a  student),'  i.e.  'wear 
the  girdle  of  Mun^a-grass,  a  staff  and  so  forth'  (Gov.,  Kull.  Nar.), 
means  according  to  Medh.  '  let  him  resolve  to  abstain  from  thi 
which  is  not  forbidden  by  good  men.' 

226.  '  Purificatory  texts,'  i.  e. '  the  Aghamarsha^a,  the  Pavamanis 
and  so  forth  ; '  see  Vi.  LVI.    '  (Other)  vows/  i.  e.  '  the  KrikMras.' 

227.  Vas.  XXV,  3.  Penances  are  usually  imposed  by  a  parishac 
an  assembly  of  learned  Brahma^as.  In  the  case  of  secret  sins  the 
penances  shall  be  settled  by  the  learned  in  a  general  way,  no"  witl 
reference  to  a  special  case.  By  this  interpretation  the  commen  atoi 
get  over  the  difficulty  which  the  reading  jodhayet,  '  let  him  purify, 
offers.  But  Nar.  reads  anavishkn'tapapar  tu  mantrair  homaxj- 
jodhanai^,  '  but  those  whose  sins  are  not  known,  by  sacred  text 
and  burnt  oblations,  (declared  to  be)  means  of  purification.' 


XI,  235.       PENANCES  ;  THE  POWER  OF  AUSTERITIES.       477 

228.  By  confession,  by  repentance,  by  austerity, 
and  by  reciting  (the  Veda)  a  sinner  is  freed  from  guilt, 
and  in  case  no  other  course  is  possible,  by  liberality. 

229.  In  proportion  as  a  man  who  has  done  wrong, 
himself  confesses  it,  even  so  far  he  is  freed  from  guilt, 
as  a  snake  from  its  slough. 

230.  In  proportion  as  his  heart  loathes  his  evil 
deed,  even  so  far  is  his  body  freed  from  that  guilt. 

231.  He  who  has  committed  a  sin  and  has  re- 
pented, is  freed  from  that  sin,  but  he  is  purified  only 
by  (the  resolution  of)  ceasing  (to  sin  and  thinking) 
1 1  will  do  so  no  more.' 

232.  Having  thus  considered  in  his  mind  what 
results  will  arise  from  his  deeds  after  death,  let  him 
always  be  good  in  thoughts,  speech,  and  actions. 

233.  He  who,  having  either  unintentionally  or  in- 
tentionally committed  a  reprehensible  deed,  desires 
to  be  freed  from  (the  guilt  of)  it,  must  not  commit 
it  a  second  time. 

234.  If  his  mind  be  uneasy  with  respect  to  any 
act,  let  him  repeat  the  austerities  (prescribed  as  a 
penance)  for  it  until  they  fully  satisfy  (his  con- 
science). 

235.  All  the  bliss  of  gods  and  men  is  declared  by 
the  sages  to  whom  the  Veda  was  revealed,  to  have 

228.  Apadi,  'in  case  no  other  course  is  possible/  i.e.  'if  the 
offender  is  unable  to  perform  penances  or  to  recite  Vedic  texts.' 

230.  '  His  body/  i.  e.  'the  soul  in  his  body'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Nand.),  or  'the  subtle  body'  (Nar.). 

231.  Instead  of  naivaw,  'so  no  (more)/  Nar.  reads  nainaA  ('I 
will)  not  sin  (any  more)/  and  K/s  reading  na.ina.tn  points  to  the 
same  var.  lect.  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  the  best  MS.  of  Medh.  read  naitat 
kuryat  punar  iti,  and  the  translation  would  then  be  '  but  he  is  puri- 
fied (only)  by  ceasing  (to  sin),  thereby  that  he  does  so  no  more.' 

235.  'To  have  austerity  for  its  root,  austerity  for  its  middle,  and 


478  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  236. 

r  austerity  for  its  root,  austerity  for  its  middle,  and 
austerity  for  its  end. 

236.  (The  pursuit  of  sacred)  knowledge  is  the 
austerity  of  a  Brahma^a,  protecting  (the  people)  is 
the  austerity  of  a  Kshatriya,  (the  pursuit  of)  his 
daily  business  is  the  austerity  of  a  VaLsya,  and 
service  the  austerity  of  a  vSudra. 

237.  The  sages  who  control  themselves  and  sub- 
sist on  fruit,  roots,  and  air,  survey  the  three  worlds 
together  with  their  moving  and  immovable  (crea- 
tures) through  their  austerities  alone. 

238.  Medicines,  good  health,  learning,  and  the 
various  divine  stations  are  attained  by  austerities 
alone ;  for  austerity  is  the  means  of  gaining  them. 

239.  Whatever  is  hard  to  be  traversed,  whatever  is 
hard  to  be  attained,  whatever  is  hard  to  be  reached, 
whatever  is  hard  to  be  performed,  all  (this)  may  be 
accomplished  by  austerities  ;  for  austerity  (possesses 
a  power)  which  it  is  difficult  to  surpass. 

240.  Both  those  who  have  committed  mortal  sin 
(Mahapataka)  and  all  other  offenders  are  severally 
freed  from  their  guilt  by  means  of  well-perform e< 
austerities. 

241.  Insects,  snakes,  moths,  bees,  birds  and  beings, 
bereft  of  motion,  reach  heaven  by  the  power  oi 
austerities. 

austerity  for  its  end/  i.  e. '  to  be  produced,  to  continue,  and  to  enc 
in  consequence  of  austerities  performed'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

238.  Medh.  explains  aushadhani, 'medicines/ by 'elixirs.'  Insteac 
of  agado  (Kull.,  K.,  Ragh.)  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  reac 
agada^,  and  explain  it  by  '  medicines'  (Medh.,  Nand.),  '  remedies  or 
charms  against  poison'  (Gov.,  Nar.). 

241.  Instead  of  ki/a\f  ka,  'insects/  Nar.  reads  .rvanaj  £a,  'dogs. 
Gov.  and  Nand.  say  that  the  verse  refers  to  the  Ki/opakhyana  anc 
the  Kapotakhyana,  told  in  the  Itihasas  (Mahabharata  XII). 


XI,  249-         PENANCES  ;    AUSTERITY  J    SECRET  SINS.  4  79 

242.  Whatever  sin  men  commit  by  thoughts, 
words,  or  deeds,  that  they  speedily  burn  away  by 
penance,  if  they  keep  penance  as  their  only  riches. 

243.  The  gods  accept  the  offerings  of  that  Brah- 
ma/u  alone  who  has  purified  himself  by  austerities, 
and  grant  to  him  all  he  desires.  — 

244.  The  lord,  Pra^apati,  created  these  Institutes 
(of  the  sacred  law)  by  his  austerities  alone ;  the 
sages  likewise  obtained  (the  revelation  of)  the  Vedas 
through  their  austerities. 

245.  The  gods,  discerning  that  the  holy  origin  of 
this  whole  (world)  is  from  austerity,  have  thus  pro- 
claimed the  incomparable  power  of  austerity. 

246.  The  daily  study  of  the  Veda,  the  performance 
of  the  great  sacrifices  according  to  one's  ability,  (and) 
patience  (in  suffering)  quickly  destroy  all  guilt,  even 
that  caused  by  mortal  sins. 

247.  As  a  fire  in  one  moment  consumes  with  its 
bright  flame  the  fuel  that  has  been  placed  on  it, 
even  so  he  who  knows  the  Veda  destroys  all  guilt 
by  the  fire  of  knowledge. 

248.  The  penances  for  sins  (made  public)  have 
been  thus  declared  according  to  the  law ;  learn  next 
the  penances  for  secret  (sins). 

249.  Sixteen  suppressions  of  the  breath  (PraMya- 
ma)  accompanied  by  (the  recitation  of)  the  Vyahmis 

245.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  and  K.  at  the  end  of  the 
verse,  udbhavam,  instead  of  uttamam  (editions). 

246.  Vas.  XXVII,  7  ;  YSgn.  Ill,  311. 

247.  Vas.  XXVII,  1-2. 

248.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  state  that  Gov.  omits  this  verse,  while 
Medh.  gives  it.  The  accessible  MS.  of  Gov.,  however,  shows  it, 
but  without  a  commentary.  Medh.  says  only  that  '  some'  read  it. 
Nar.  and  Nand.  omit  it. 

249.  Vas.  XXVI,  4;  Vi.  LV,  5;  Baudh.  IV,  i,  29.     The  best 


il 


480  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  250. 

and  of  the  syllable  Om,  purify,  if  they  are  repeated 
daily,  after  a  month  even  the  murderer  of  a  learned 
Brahma^a. 

250.  Even  a  drinker  of  (the  spirituous  liquor 
called)  Sura  becomes  pure,  if  he  mutters  the  hymn 
(seen)  by  Kutsa,  '  Removing  by  thy  splendour  our 
guilt,  O  Agni,'  &c,  (that  seen)  by  Vasish^a, '  With 
their  hymns  the  Vasish/^as  woke  the  Dawn,'  &c,  the 
Mahitra  (hymn)  and  (the  verses  called)  6uddhavatis. 

251.  Even  he  who  has  stolen  gold,  instantly  be- 
comes free  from  guilt,  if  he  once  mutters  (the  hymn 
beginning  with  the  words)  '  The  middlemost  brother 
of  this  beautiful,  ancient  Hotrz-priest'  and  the  .Siva- 
sawkalpa. 

252.  The  violator  of  a  Gurus  bed  is  freed  (from 
sin),  if  he  repeatedly  recites  the  Havishpantiya 
(hymn),  (that  beginning)  '  Neither  anxiety  nor  mis- 
fortune,' (and  that  beginning)  '  Thus,  verily,  thus,' 
and  mutters  the  hymn  addressed  to  Purusha. 

253.  He  who  desires  to   expiate   sins   great 

explanation  of  the  words  '  accompanied  by  (the  recitation  of)  tl 
Vyahrz'tis  and  (of)  the  syllable  Om/  is  Nar.'s,  who  asserts  that  the 
indicate  the  necessity  of  reciting  the  G&yatri  with  the  Siras  tej 
during  the  performance  of  each  Pra^ayama;  see  Vas.  XXV,  13. 

250.  Vas.  XXVI,  5.  The  hymn  seen  by  Kutsa,  i.  e.  Rig-veda 
97;  that  seen  by  Vasish/^a,  i.e.  Rig-veda  VII,  80.  The  Mahit 
hymn,  i.  e.  Rig-veda  X,  185.  The  -Suddhavatis,  i.  e.  Rig-veda  VII] 
84,  7-9.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  K.  read  mahendram  for  mahi- 
tram,  and  Nar.  adds  that  some  give  the  latter  reading.  The  hymi 
are  to  be  recited  during  a  month  sixteen  times  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.) 
or  108  times  a  day  (Nar.). 

251.  Vas.  XXVI,  6.     The  hymn  is  found  Rig-veda  I,  164;  tl 
Sivasawkalpa,  Vag.  Samh.  XXXIV,  1.      'Once,'  i.e.  'once  dailj 
during  a  month '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.). 

252.  Vas.  XXVI,  7 ;  Yagfi.  Ill,  305.     The  four  hymns  are  Ri| 
veda  X,  88;  X,  126  ;  X,  119  ;  and  X,  90. 

253.  The  two  verses  are  found  Rig-veda  I,  24, 14,  and  VII,  89, 


XI,  258.  PENANCES    FOR    SECRET    SINS.  48  I 

small,  must  mutter  during  a  year  the  Rife-verse 
'  May  we  remove  thy  anger,  O  Varu^a,'  &c,  or 
1  Whatever  offence  here,  O  Varu/za,'  &c. 

254.  That  man  who,  having  accepted  presents 
which  ought  not  to  be  accepted,  or  having  eaten 
forbidden  food,  mutters  the  Taratsamandiya  (Rz'&as), 
becomes  pure  after  three  days. 

255.  But  he  who  has  committed  many  sins,  be- 
comes pure,  if  he  recites  during  a  month  the  (four 
verses)  addressed  to  Soma  and  Rudra,  and  the  three 
verses  (beginning)  '  Aryaman,  Varu;za,  and  Mitra,' 
while  he  bathes  in  a  river. 

256.  A  grievous  offender  shall  mutter  the  seven 
verses  (beginning  with)  '  Indra,'  for  half  a  year ;  but 
he  who  has  committed  any  blamable  act  in  water, 
shall  subsist  during  a  month  on  food  obtained  by 
begging. 

257.  A  twice-born  man  removes  even  very  great 
guilt  by  offering  clarified  butter  with  the  sacred  texts 
belonging  to  the  .Sakala-homas,  or  by  muttering  the 
Rik9  (beginning)  '  Adoration.' 

258.  He  who  is  stained  by  mortal  sin,  becomes 
pure,  if,  with  a  concentrated  mind,  he  attends  cows 
for  a  year,  reciting  the  Pavamani  (hymns)  and  sub- 
sisting on  alms. 

254.  Gaut.  XXIV,  2-3  ;  Baudh.  IV,  2,  4-5.  The  verses  are 
found  Rig-veda  IX,  58,  1-4. 

255.  The  verses  are  found  Rig-veda  VI,  74,  1-4,  and  IV,  2, 
4-6. 

256.  The  verses  are  found  Rig-veda  I,  106,  1-7. 

257.  The  Mantras  for  the  -Sakala-homas,  i.  e.  Va§\  Sawh.  VIII, 
13.  The  verse  is  found  Rig-veda  VI,  51,8.  According  to  Nar. 
the  Mantras  must  be  muttered  108  times. 

258.  The  Pavamani  hymns,  i.e.  the  ninth  Ma«^/ala  of  the  Rig- 
veda. 

[25]  1  i 


., 


482  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XI,  259. 

259.  Or  if,  pure  (in  mind  and  in  body),  he  thrice 
repeats  the  Sawhita  of  the  Veda  in  a  forest,  sancti- 
fied by  three  Paraka  (penances),  he  is  freed  from  all 
crimes  causing  loss  of  caste  (pataka). 

260.  But  if  (a  man)  fasts  during  three  days,  bath- 
ing thrice  a  day,  and  muttering  (in  the  water  the 
hymn  seen  by)  Aghamarsha^a,  he  is  (likewise)  freed 
from  all  sins  causing  loss  of  caste. 

261.  As  the  horse-sacrifice,  the  king  of  sacrifices, 
removes  all  sin,  even  so  the  Aghamarsha/za  hymn 
effaces  all  guilt. 

262.  A  Brahma/za  who  retains  in  his  memory  the 
iv?/g-veda  is  not  stained  by  guilt,  though  he  may  have 
destroyed  these  three  worlds,  though  he  may  eat  the 
food  of  anybody. 

263.  He  who,  with  a  concentrated  mind,  thrice 
recites  the  i?z/£sawhita,  or  (that  of  the)  Ya^ur-veda,  or 
(that  of  the)  Sama-veda  together  with  the  secret  (texts, 
the  Upanishads),  is  completely  freed  from  all  sins. 

264.  As  a  clod  of  earth,  falling  into  a  great  lake, 
is  quickly  dissolved,  even  so  every  sinful  act  is  en- 
gulfed in  the  threefold  Veda. 

265.  The  RikdiS,  the  Ya^us(-formulas)  which  differ 
(from  the  former),  the  manifold  Saman(-songs),  must 

259.  'The  Sa/rchita,'  i.  e.  the  Mantras  and  Brahmawas  (Kull., 
Ragh.),  the  former  alone  (Nar.).  'Paraka  penances,'  see  above, 
verse  216.  The  verse  seems  to  refer  to  the  Anajnatparayazza,  fully 
described  by  Baudh.  Ill,  9. 

260-261.  Gaut.  XXIV,  10-12;  Vas.XXVI,  8;  Baudh.  Ill,  5; 
IV,  2, 15  ;  Vi.  LV,  7 ;  Y&gn.  Ill,  302.  The  Aghamarsharca  is  found 
Rig-veda  X,  190. 

262.  Vas.  XXVII,  3.  263.  Baudh.  IV,  5,  29. 

264.  I  read  with  Gov.,  Nand.,  and  K.  pr.  manu  'kshipram'  instead 
of '  kshiptam '  (Medh.,  K.  sec.  manu,  editions). 

265.  Medh.  and   Gov.  read  adyani,  'chief,'  instead  of  anySi 
'  which  differ .'    Medh.  explains  it  as  '  either  those  found  in  tl 


XII,  4-  TRANSMIGRATION.  483 

be  known  (to  form)  the  triple  Veda ;  he  who  knows 
them,  (is  called)  learned  in  the  Veda. 

266.  The  initial  triliteral  Brahman  on  which  the 
threefold  (sacred  science)  is  based,  is  another  triple 
Veda  which  must  be  kept  secret ;  he  who  knows  that, 
(is  called)  learned  in  the  Veda. 

Chapter    XII. 

1.  'O  sinless  One,  the  whole  sacred  law,  (appli- 
cable) to  the  four  castes,  has  been  declared  by  thee  ; 
communicate  to  us  (now),  according  to  the  truth,  the 
ultimate  retribution  for  (their)  deeds.' 

2.  To  the  great  sages  (who  addressed  him  thus) 
righteous  Bhrzgu,  sprung  from  Manu,  answered, 
•  Hear  the  decision  concerning  this  whole  connexion 
with  actions.' 

3.  Action,  which  springs  from  the  mind,  from 
speech,  and  from  the  body,  produces  either  good  or 
evil  results ;  by  action  are  caused  the  (various)  con- 
ditions of  men,  the  highest,  the  middling,  and  the 
lowest. 

4.  Know   that  the   mind    is  the   instigator  here 

Sawhita,  not  those  read  in  the  Brahmawa  or  those  recited  according 
to  the  Samhitapa/^a,  not  those  recited  according  to  the  Pada  or 
KramapaMas.'     Gov.  gives  the  first  explanation  only. 

266.  K.  omits  this  verse,  and  inserts  in  its  stead  the  following  lines: 
esha  vo  vadita['bhihita]s  sarva^  prayaj&ttavimnzaya^  1 
nai/^reyasaw  karmavidhim  viprasyaitam  nibodhata  n 
ata^  param  pravakshyami  sa^saravidhim  uttamami 
Nand.  gives  the  first  two  lines  after  verse  266,  reading,  however, 
ityesha(?)bhihita^. 

XII.  1.  Ragh.  takes  tattvata^  param  separately  and  explains  the 
second  line  as  follows :  '  communicate  to  us  (now)  the  retribution 
for  (their)  deeds  (and)  supreme  (liberation,  which  springs)  from 
(the  recognition  of)  truth.' 

4.  '  Of  three  kinds/  i.  e. '  good,  middling,  or  bad.'    '  Has  three 

I  i  2 


484  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  5. 

below,  even  to  that  (action)  which  is  connected  with 
the  body,  (and)  which  is  of  three  kinds,  has  three 
locations,  and  falls  under  ten  heads. 

5.  Coveting  the  property  of  others,  thinking  in 
one's  heart  of  what  is  undesirable,  and  adherence 
to  false  (doctrines),  are  the  three  kinds  of  (sinful) 
mental  action. 

6.  Abusing  (others,  speaking)  untruth,  detracting 
from  the  merits  of  all  men,  and  talking  idly,  shall 
be  the  four  kinds  of  (evil)  verbal  action. 

7.  Taking  what  has  not  been  given,  injuring 
(creatures)  without  the  sanction  of  the  law,  and 
holding  criminal  intercourse  with  another  man's 
wife,  are  declared  to  be  the  three  kinds  of  (wicked) 
bodily  action. 

8.  (A  man)  obtains  (the  result  of)  a  good  or  evil 
mental  (act)  in  his  mind,  (that  of)  a  verbal  (act)  in 
his  speech,  (that  of)  a  bodily  (act)  in  his  body. 

9.  In  consequence  of  (many)  sinful  acts  committed 
with  his  body,  a  man  becomes  (in  the  next  birth] 
something  inanimate,  in  consequence  (of  sins)  corn- 
locations,'  i.  e. '  the  mind,  speech,  and  the  body.'  '  Falls  under  tei 
heads,'  i.e.  'those  mentioned  in  verses  5-7.'  The  mind,  which 
here  called  the  instigator,  is  the  internal  organ,  which  has  the  faculty 
of  sawkalpa, '  volition.' 

5.  '  Thinking  in  one's  heart  what  is  undesirable,'  means  accord- 
ing to  Medh.  either  '  thinking  of  or  wishing  anything  that  may 
injurious  to  others  or  what  is  forbidden.'     Gov.  and  Nar.  give  th< 
first  explanation,  the  other  commentators   the    second.      Othei 
mentioned  by  Medh.  explained  vitathabhinivejam,  'adherence  t( 
false  doctrines'  (i.  e.  the  denial  of  a  future  state,  of  the  authority 
the  Vedas  and  so  Lrth),  by  '  a  constant  deep  hatred/     In  thei 
remarks  on  this  verse  and  the  next  two,  the  commentators  poii 
out  that  the  opposites  of  the  acts  mentioned  are  the  different  kinc 
of  good  actions. 

5-9.  Y%#.  Ill,  131,  134-136. 


XII,  13-  TRANSMIGRATION.  485 

mitted  by  speech,  a  bird,  or  a  beast,  and  in  conse- 
quence of  mental  (sins  he  is  re-born  in)  a  low  caste. 

10.  That  man  is  called  a  (true)  trida/^in  in  whose  \   r 
mind  these  three,  the  control  over  his  speech  (vag- 
da/^a),  the  control  over  his  thoughts  (manoda^^a), 
and  the  control  over  his  body  (kayada^da),  are  firmly^} 
fixed.  / 

11.  That  man  who  keeps  this  threefold  control/ 
(over  himself)  with  respect  to  all  created  beings  and\ 
wholly  subdues  desire  and  wrath,  thereby  assuredly  I 
gains  complete  success. 

12.  Him  who  impels  this  (corporeal)  Self  to  action, 
they  call  the  Kshetra^a  (the  knower  of  the  field) ; 
but  him  who  does  the  acts,  the  wise  name  the 
Bhutatman  (the  Self  consisting  of  the  elements). 

13.  Another  internal  Self  that  is  generated  with 
all  embodied  (Kshetra^7/as)  is  called  6iva,  through 
which  (the  Kshetra^a)  becomes  sensible  of  all 
pleasure  and  pain  in  (successive)  births. 

10.  Usually  an  ascetic  who  wears  three  staves  (da^a)  tied  to- 
gether, is  called  a  trida^in.  According  to  our  verse  this  outward 
sign  avails  nothing.  That  man  only  deserves  the  name  tridaw^in 
who  keeps  a  threefold  control  (da#f/a)  over  himself. 

ii.'  Complete  success/  i.  e. '  final  liberation.' 

12.  'This  (corporeal)  Self,' i.  e.  <  the  body'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.), 
or  'the  gross  visible  body  which  includes  the  three  sheaths'  (Ragh., 
Nar.).  '  The  Kshetra^wa  (the  knower  of  the  field),'  i.  e.  'the  indivi- 
dual Soul  (Giva)/  (Medh.  on  verse  13,  Nar.),  the  Paramatman 
(Nand.);  Ragh.  quotes,  in  explanation  of  the  term  'the  field,' 
Bhagavadgita  XIII,  5-6.  '  The  Bhutatman  (the  Self  consisting  of 
the  elements)/  i.  e. '  the  body  which  is  composed  of  or  a  modifica- 
tion of  the  elements,  i.  e.  of  earth  and  so  forth'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.), '  the  Self  which  has  the  form  of  the  non-sentient,  the  ele- 
ments and  so  forth'  (Nar.),  or  'the  G^iva'  (Nand.). 

13.  According  to  Medh.  'some'  understand  by  the  term  £iva 
'the  subtile  body  (linga  .rarira)  which  is  overspread  by  Mahat,  the 
Great  One/  because  the  individual  soul,  which  is  usually  called 


486  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  14. 

14.  These  two,  the  Great  One  and  the  Kshetra^a, 
who  are  closely  united  with  the  elements,  pervade 
him  who  resides  in  the  multiform  created  beings. 


Giva,  has  been  mentioned  in  verse  1 2  under  the  appellation  Kshe- 
tra^a.  He  adds  that  '  others'  explain  Giva  by  '  the  internal  organ, 
which  has  the  form  of  mind,  intelligence,  and  egoism.'  The  former 
view  is  adopted  by  Ragh.,  while  Gov.,  who  paraphrases  (riva  by 
mana/2, '  the  mind,'  and  Kull.  as  well  as  Nar.,  who  render  it  by 
'  Mahat,' '  the  Great  One  or  intelligence,'  lean  towards  the  second. 
Nand.  says,  '  givasMngnak  means  "  he  who  fully  knows  the  6rivas," 
i.e.  the  omniscient.'  Saha^-a^,  'that  is  generated  with,'  means 
according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.  '  that  is  associated  with  until  the 
period  of  destruction  (pralaya)  or  until  final  liberation  is  obtained.' 

14.  The  term  mahan,  'the  Great  One,'  is  referred  by  Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.  to  the  Giva  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
verse,  and  hence  is  explained  by  each  in  accordance  with  the  view 
expressed  on  verse  13.  Bhutasawprz'ktau,  'closely  united  with  the 
elements'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.),  or  'enveloped  by  the  elements' 
(Ragh.),  means  according  to  Nar.  'united  with  the  Bhutatman.' 
Sthita/rc  taw  vyapya  tish//^ata^,  'pervade  him  who  resides,'  i.  e.  'per- 
vade '  (Gov.),  or  '  rest  on '  (Kull.),  or  '  conceal  through  illusion ' 
(Nar.)  him,  i.  e. '  the  Paramatman,  the  Supreme  Soul '  (Gov.,  Kull., 
Nar.),  'who  resides  in  all  created  beings'  (Gov.,  Nar.)  'as  the  wit- 
ness' (Kull.,  Nar.).  Gov.  adds  'or  (the  expression  vyapya  tisht/iatah) 
"  they  pervade  "  is  used  because  the  Supreme  Soul  pervades  every- 
thing.' This  latter  explanation  probably  refers  to  Medh.'s  render- 
ing, according  to  which  the  verse  must  be  translated  '  Those  two, 
the  Great  One  and  the  Knower  of  the  Field,  who  are  closely  united, 
rest  on  him  who  resides  in  the  multiform  created  beings,  pervad- 
ing (them).'  Medh.  expressly  declares  that  tish^ata^  is  to  be  taken 
as  a  transitive  verb  (sarvakarmatvaw  [sakarmatvaw]  tish/^ater  ane- 
karthatvat).  He  explains  'him'  by  'the  Supreme  Soul,'  and  adds 
that  the  expression  '  rest  on'  is  justified,  because  the  Paramatman  is 
the  cause  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  product  rests  on  its  cause. 
Ragh.  differs  very  much,  and  says,  '  Those  two,  the  Great  One 
(i.  e.  the  Intelligence  and  by  implication  the  subtile  body)  and  the 
Knower  of  the  Field,  i.  e.  the  individual  soul  enveloped  by  the  five 
elements  (and)  pervading  him  who  is  found  in  the  manifold  createe 
beings,  i.  e.  the  gross  bodies,  and  reside,  i.  e.  there,  as  the  enjoyers. 
Nand.  finally  has  the  following  explanation :  '  Those  two,  i.  e.  the 


XII,  17.  TRANSMIGRATION.  487 

15.  From  his  body  innumerable  forms  go  forth, 
which  constantly  impel  the  multiform  creatures  to 
action. 

1 6.  Another  strong  body,  formed  of  particles  (of 
the)  five  (elements  and)  destined  to  suffer  the  tor- 
ments (in  hell),  is  produced  after  death  (in  the  case) 
of  wicked  men. 

1 7.  When  (the  evil-doers)  by  means  of  that  body 
have  suffered  there  the  torments  imposed  by  Yama, 
(its  constituent  parts)  are  united,  each  according  to 
its  class,  with  those  very  elements  (from  which  they 
were  taken). 

individual  and  the  Supreme  Soul ;  united  with  the  elements,  i.  e. 
residing  in  the  body ;  the  Great  One,  i.  e.  the  Supreme  Soul  and 
the  Knower  of  the  Field ;  in  the  manifold,  i.  e.  in  the  gross  and  in 
the  subtile ;  him  who  is  found,  i.  e.  the  field  (kshetra),  pervading 
they  reside.  The  meaning  is  that  the  individual  soul  pervades  the 
body  and  the  Supreme  Soul  pervades  the  individual  soul/ 

15.  '  From  his  body/  i.  e.  '  from  nature  or  the  form  of  the  Supreme 
Soul  (Paramatman,  Medh.,  Nar.)  or  from  the  body  of  Brahman 
which  is  endowed  with  the  qualities'  (Ragh.), '  like  waves  from  the 
ocean  or  sparks  from  fire,  in  the  manner  mentioned  in  the  Vedanta 
philosophy'  (Gov.,  Kull.).  'Others/  mentioned  by  Medh.,  and 
Nand.  explain  the  expression  by  •  from  the  root-evolvent  or  matter 
(prakrz'ti)  which  is  the  body  of  the  Supreme  Soul.'  Murtaya^, 
'  forms,'  i.  e. '  Kshetra^£as '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.),  or  ■  souls  limited  by 
subtile  bodies'  (Ragh.),  or  'portions  which  are  the  causes  of  the 
production  of  forms'  (Nand.). 

16.  Dhruvam,  'strong,'  i.e.  'able  to  withstand  the  supernatural 
torments'  (Medh.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).     Gov.  and  Nand.  read  dridkam. 

17.  The  translation  follows  Medh.,  Gov.,  and  Ragh.,  with  whom 
Nar.  seems  to  agree,  and  it  presupposes  that  the  construction  of  the 
verse  is  ungrammatical.  Kull.  and  Nand.,  who  wish  to  show  that 
Manu's  text  does  not  depart  from  the  ordinary  rules  of  grammar, 
assume  that  the  subject  of  both  clauses  is  dushkrz'tino  £ivaA,  '  the 
evil-doing  souls.'  The  former  says,  '  The  evil-doing  souls  that  are 
subtile,  having  suffered  by  means  of  that  produced  body  those  tor- 
ments imposed  by  Yama,  are  individually  dissolved  on  the  disap- 
pearance of  the  gross  body,  in  those  very  constituent  portions  of 


488  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  18. 

18.  He,  having  suffered  for  his  faults,  which  are 
produced  by  attachment  to  sensual  objects,  and 
which  result  in  misery,  approaches,  free  from  stains, 
those  two  mighty  ones. 

the  elements;'  the  meaning  is,  'they  remain  being  united  with 
them/  Nand.'s  explanation  is  more  intelligible.  According  to 
him  the  translation  must  be  as  follows :  '  (The  individual  souls) 
having  suffered  by  means  of  that  body  the  torments  of  Yama,  are 
dissolved  (on  the  termination  of  their  sufferings,  as  far  as  that  body 
is  concerned),  in  those  very  (five)  elements  according  to  the  pro- 
portion of  their  works'  (vibhaga^as  tatkarmavibhaganurupam).  But 
it  seems  to  me  that  these  attempts  to  save  the  grammatical  reputa- 
tion of  the  author  are  useless. 

18.  The  translation  follows  the  reading  of  Gov.  (comm.),  Kull.? 
Nand.,  and  Ragh.,  anubhuyasukhod^rkan.    Medh.,  Gov.  (text),  and 
K.  read  anubhuya  sukhodarkan, '  (after  the  expiation)  of  which  hap- 
piness is  the  result'  (Medh.).    '  He,'  i.  e.  '  the  individual  soul'  (kshe- 
tra^wa,  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nand.),  or 'the  individual  soul  limited  by 'the 
subtile  body'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  refers  according  to  Nar.  to  'the  Great 
One'  (Mahan).    '  Those  two  mighty  ones,'  i.e.  'the  Great  One  and 
the  Supreme  Soul' (Medh.  'others,'  Gov.,  Kull.),  are  according  to 
Medh.  and  Ragh.  '  the  Great  One  and  the  Kshetra^na'  (mentioned 
verse  14),  according  to  Nar.  and  Nand.  (on  verse  19)  'the  Giva. 
and  the  Paramatman  or  Supreme  Soul.'     Medh.  adds  that  undei 
his  explanation  the  verse  looks  as  if  it  were  self-contradictory,  be- 
cause the  end  to  be  attained  and  the  attainer  are  the  same,  bi 
that  the  distinction  is  merely  figurative.     For  the  expression  '  ht 
approaches'  means  'he  becomes  nothing  else  but  that'  [i.e.  aftei 
the  dissolution  of  the  body,  assumed  in  order  to  suffer  the  punish- 
ments, he  remains  purely  Kshetra^na  and  Mahan].     His  words 
are,  ata^  kshetra^lam  abhyetiti  praptaw  ta/£  &a.  viruddhaw  sa  evi 
prapya[/$]    prapaka^   ka.  1  satyam  aupa^ariko    bhedo   'bhipreta^ 
abhyetity  ayam  artha/^  I  etavanmatra^esho   bhavati  yad  uta  ksh( 
tra^ataya  praptadisawghatmakena  mahan  iti  vyapadish/ena  pha- 
leshu  tavanmatra^  parlrishyate  I  lihga^ivaj  ka  kshetra^a^  11    Ragh. 
the  only  other  commentator,  who  occupies  himself  with  the  ulteric 
meaning  of  the  verse,  renders   abhyeti, '  he  approaches,'  by  anu- 
ga£/£/#ati,  '  he  follows,'  and  adds  '  in  order  to  produce  a  new  bod} 
(^arirantararambhaya).  He  further  quotes -S'atapatha-brahmawa  XP 
7,  2,5,  in  order  to  show  that  according  to  the  Veda  the  individus 
soul,  united  with  the  subtile  body,  makes  for  itself  another  body. 


XII,  24-  TRANSMIGRATION.  489 

19.  Those  two  together  examine  without  tiring 
the  merit  and  the  guilt  of  that  (individual  soul), 
united  with  which  it  obtains  bliss  or  misery  both 
in  this  world  and  the  next. 

20.  If  (the  soul)  chiefly  practises  virtue  and  vice 
to  a  small  degree,  it  obtains  bliss  in  heaven,  clothed 
with  those  very  elements. 

21.  But  if  it  chiefly  cleaves  to  vice  and  to  virtue 
in  a  small  degree,  it  suffers,  deserted  by  the  elements, 
the  torments  inflicted  by  Yama. 

22.  The  individual  soul,  having  endured  those 
torments  of  Yama,  again  enters,  free  from  taint, 
those  very  five  elements,  each  in  due  proportion. 

23.  Let  (man),  having  recognised  even  by  means 
of  his  intellect  these  transitions  of  the  individual  soul 
(which  depend)  on  merit  and  demerit,  always  fix  his 
heart  on  (the  acquisition  of)  merit. 

24.  Know  Goodness  (sattva),  Activity  (ra^as),  and 
Darkness  (tamas)  to  be  the  three   qualities  of  thei 


19.  'Those  two,'  i.  e.  '  the  Great  One  and  the  Supreme  Soul' 
(mahatparamatmanau,  Gov.,  Kull.),  are  according  to  Medh.,  who 
modifies  the  explanation  given  on  the  preceding  verse,  the 
Mahan  and  the  Paramatman;  according  to  Ragh.,  the  Mahan 
and  the  Kshetrag-^a.  Pa^yata^,  -  examine/  means  according  to 
Ragh.  '  by  their  presence  cause  to  be  performed.'  '  The  guilt/ 
i.e.  'which  remains  after  the  sufferings  (in  hell/  Kull.).  Nand. 
explains  the  first  line  very  differently:  'Those  two  (merit  and 
demerit)  watchfully  attend  him  (the  Kshetra^a)  who  is  bent  on 
performing  good  and  evil.'  '  United  with  which/  i.  e. '  with  merit 
and  guilt'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  refers  in  Ragh.'s  opinion  to 
the  Mahan  and  the  Kshetra^la. 

20.  '  With  those  very  elements/  i.  e. '  with  a  gross  body  consisting 
of  the  before-mentioned  five  elements/ 

21.  '  Deserted  by  the  elements/  i.  e. '  after  death'  (Kull,  Nar.). 

22.  Medh.  and  K.  read  abhyeti  for  apyeti. 

24.  YSgii.  Ill,  182.     'Of  the  Self/  i.e.  'of  the  Mahat'  (Kull., 


490  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  25. 

Self,  with  which  the  Great  One  always  completely 
pervades  all  existences. 

25.  When  one  of  these  qualities  wholly  predomi- 
nates in  a  body,  then  it  makes  the  embodied  (soul) 
eminently  distinguished  for  that  quality. 

26.  Goodness  is  declared  (to  have  the  form  of) 
knowledge,  Darkness  (of)  ignorance,  Activity  (of) 
love  and  hatred ;  such  is  the  nature  of  these 
(three)  which  is  (all-)pervading  and  clings  to  every- 
thing created. 

2  7.  When  (man)  experiences  in  his  soul  a  (feeling) 
full  of  bliss,  a  deep  calm,  as  it  were,  and  a  pure  light, 
then  let  him  know  (that  it  is)  among  those  three 
(the  quality  called)  Goodness. 

28.  What  is  mixed  with  pain  and  does  not  give 
satisfaction  to  the  soul  one  may  know  (to  be  the 
quality  of)  Activity,  which  is  difficult  to  conquer, 
and  which  ever  draws  embodied  (souls  towards 
sensual  objects). 


Ragh.,  Nar.,  NancL),  the  latter  two  saying  mahattattvasya,  '  of  the 
(Sawkhya)  principle,  called  Mahat/  Medh.'s  somewhat  longer 
discussion  arrives  at  the  same  result. 

25.  'In  a  body,'  i.e.  'in  a  subtile  body'  (Ragh.).  Medh.  and 
Gov.  add  to  the  first  clause  '  in  consequence  of  acts  done  in  a 
former  life.' 

26.  Kull.  takes  etat,  'such,'  in  the  sense  of 'as  follows.'  Nar. 
and  Nand.  take  the  last  line  somewhat  differently :  '  The  nature  of 
these  three  is  pervaded  by  the  (three  characteristics  just  mentioned 
and)  clings  to  all  created  beings.' 

27.  'A  (feeling)  full  of  bliss,'  i.  e.'  without  any  particular  cause  for 
such  a  sensation'  (Gov.).  I  take  tatra,  which  Gov.  and  Kull.  explain 
by  tasmin  and  construe  with  atmani,  in  the  sense  of  teshu, '  among 
those  three.'     Ragh.  says  tatreti  tribhi/^. 

28.  Medh.  has  apratipam,  which  he  explains  by  apratyaksham, 
'  not  perceptible  by  the  senses,'  instead  of  apratigham,  '  difficult  to 
conquer.' 


XII,  33-  TRANSMIGRATION.  49 1 

29.  What  is  coupled  with  delusion,  what  has  the 
character  of  an  undiscernible  mass,  what  cannot  be 
fathomed  by  reasoning,  what  cannot  be  fully  known, 
one  must  consider  (as  the  quality  of)  Darkness. 

30.  I  will,  moreover,  fully  describe  the  results 
which  arise  from  these  three  qualities,  the  excellent 
ones,  the  middling  ones,  and  the  lowest. 

31.  The  study  of  the  Vedas,  austerity,  (the  pur- 
suit of)  knowledge,  purity,  control  over  the  organs, 
the  performance  of  meritorious  acts  and  meditation 
on  the  Soul,  (are)  the  marks  of  the  quality  of 
Goodness. 

32.  Delighting  in  undertakings,  want  of  firmness, 
commission  of  sinful  acts,  and  continual  indulgence 
in  sensual  pleasures,  (are)  the  marks  of  the  quality 
of  Activity. 

33.  Covetousness,  sleepiness,  pusillanimity,  cruelty, 
atheism,  leading  an  evil  life,  a  habit  of  soliciting 
favours,  and  inattentiveness,  are  the  marks  of  the 
quality  of  Darkness. 

29.  I  follow  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  K.,  who  read  avyakta- 
vishayatmakam  instead  of  avyakta#z  vishayatmakam  (Nand.,  edi- 
tions). Medh.'s  reading  is  doubtful.  '  What  is  coupled  with 
delusion/  i.  e. '  where  it  is  impossible  to  decide  if  the  (thing)  is  real 
or  unreal'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Avyaktavishayatmakam,  '  what  has 
the  character  of  an  undiscernible  mass'  (asphu/avishayakarasva- 
bhavam,  Kull.,  Ragh.),  or  '  what  has  the  form  of  an  undiscernible 
mass  and  the  nature  of  which  is  unreal'  (aspash/avishayakarasatsva- 
bhavam,  Gov.),  means  according  to  Nar.  '  where  the  mass  and  the 
soul  are  not  luminous'  (apraka^o  vishaya  atma  £a  yatra). 

31.  The  last  words  of  the  verse,  which  have  been  translated 
according  to  Medh.,  mean  according  to  Nar.  literally  '(are  the 
result)  of  Goodness  (and)  the  marks  of  (that)  quality'  (sattvikazrc 
sattva^anyaw  guraasya  tasyaiva  lakshawaw  £ihnam). 

32.  Adhairyam,  'want  of  firmness,'  means  according  to  Nar. 
'  want  of  a  contented  disposition.' 

33.  Bhinnavmtita,  'leading  an  evil  life,'  i.e.  'omitting  to  live 


49 2  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  34. 

34.  Know,  moreover,  the  following  to  be  a  brief 
description  of  the  three  qualities,  each  in  its  order, 
as  they  appear  in  the  three  (times,  the  present,  past, 
and  future). 

35.  When  a  (man),  having  done,  doing,  or  being 
about  to  do  any  act,  feels  ashamed,  the  learned  may 
know  that  all  (such  acts  bear)  the  mark  of  the  quality 
of  Darkness. 

36.  But,  when  (a  man)  desires  (to  gain)  by  an  act 
much  fame  in  this  world  and  feels  no  sorrow  on  fail- 
ing, know  that  it  (bears  the  mark  of  the  quality  of) 
Activity. 

37.  But  that  (bears)  the  mark  of  the  quality  of 
Goodness  which  with  his  whole  (heart)  he  desires 
to  know,  which  he  is  not  ashamed  to  perform,  and 
at  which  his  soul  rejoices. 

38.  The  craving  after  sensual  pleasures  is  declared 
to  be  the  mark  of  Darkness,  (the  pursuit  of)  wealth 
(the  mark)  of  Activity,  (the  desire  to  gain)  spiritual 

according  to   the  rule   of  conduct;'  pramada/z,  '  inattentiveness/ 
i.  e.  '  to  duty.' 

34.  Instead  of  trishu,  'in  the  three  (times/  Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull., 
Ragh.),  Nand.  reads  nrzshu,  '  in  men.'  Nar.,  who  reads  trishu, 
explains  the  words  traya#a#z  guzzanam,  trishu  as  follows :  '  of  the 
three,'  i.  e. '  of  the  study  of  the  Veda  and  so  forth ;'  '  of  the  gu?zas, 
i.  e. ' of  the  three  classes  of  virtues ; '  'in  the  three,'  i. e. ' in  the  three 
original  qualities.' 

36.  Nand.  has  rikMati  instead  of  iMati.  I  read  with  Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.,  na  ka.  sokaXi  instead  of  sa  ka. 
jo&iti  (editions).  K.  reads  naiva.  '  And  feels  no  sorrow  on  failing, 
i.  e.  '  if  on  failing  to  accomplish  his  undertaking  he  begins  anothe 
but  does  not  desist  from  it  out  of  sorrow,  that  is  the  meanin 
(Ragh.). 

37.  Instead  of  yat  sarve/za  (Gov.,  Kull.),  Medh.  and  K.  read  ya 
sarvewa,  and  Nand.  sarvazzz  yene°.     '  Which  with  his  whole  (heart 
he  desires  to  know,'  i.  e.  '  the  meaning  of  the  Veda  and  so  fort 
(Kull.,  Ragh.). 


a// 


XII,  44-  TRANSMIGRATION.  493 

merit  the   mark  of  Goodness ;    each    later  (named 
quality  is)  better  than  the  preceding  one. 

39.  I  will  briefly  declare  in  due  order  what  trans- 
migrations in  this  whole  (world  a  man)  obtains 
through  each  of  these  qualities. 

40.  Those  endowed  with  Goodness  reach  the  state 
of  gods,  those  endowed  with  Activity  the  state  of 
men,  and  those  endowed  with  Darkness  ever  sink 
to  the  condition  of  beasts ;  that  is  the  threefold 
course  of  transmigrations. 

41.  But  know  this  threefold  course  of  transmigra- 
tions that  depends  on  the  (three)  qualities  (to  be 
again)  threefold,  low,  middling,  and  high,  according 
to  the  particular  nature  of  the  acts  and  of  the  know- 
ledge (of  each  man). 

42.  Immovable  (beings),  insects,  both  small  and 
great,  fishes,  snakes,  and  tortoises,  cattle  and  wild 
animals,  are  the  lowest  conditions  to  which  (the 
quality  of)  Darkness  leads. 

43.  Elephants,  horses,  6udras,  and  despicable  bar- 
barians, lions,  tigers,  and  boars  (are)  the  middling 
states,  caused  by  (the  quality  of)  Darkness. 

44.  A'ara/zas,  Supar/zas  and  hypocrites,  Rakshasas 

40.  Yagri.  Ill,  137-139. 

41.  'Of  the  knowledge  (of  each  man)/  i.  e.  'if  the  acts  were 
committed  intentionally  or  not'  (Medh.). 

42.  'Immovable  (beings)/ i.  e.  'trees  and  so  forth.'  Pajava/$, 
'cattle/  i.  e. '  cows  and  so  forth' (Nar.),  or  'dogs  and  so  forth'  (Ragh.). 
Instead  of  saka^AapaA  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.), '  and  tortoises/  Medh., 
Nar.,  and  Nand.  read  sarisrz'pa/j,  '  creeping  things/  i.  e.  '  scorpions 
and  the  like'  (Nar.).  Instead  of  mr/ga-y  /feiva  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.), 
'  and  wild  animals  (or  deer)/  Medh.  and  Nand.  have  jrig&la\r  £a, 
'  and  jackals.' 

43.  MleWiak,  'barbarians,'  i.  e.  '  -Sabaras  and  so  forth'  (Nar.). 

44.  JTarawa  may  denote  a  caste  of  men,  i.  e.  '  bards,  singers, 
panders,  and  the  like'  (Medh.),  or '  rope-dancers'  (Nar.),  or '  Na/as' 


494  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  45. 

and  Pisa/£as  (belong  to)  the  highest  (rank  of)  condi- 
tions among  those  produced  by  Darkness. 
~~45.  Dallas,  Mallas,  Na/as,  men  who  subsist  by 
despicable  occupations  and  those  addicted  to 
gambling  and  drinking  (form)  the  lowest  (order  of) 
conditions  caused  by  Activity. 

46.  Kings  and  Kshatriyas,  the  domestic  priests  of 
kings,  and  those  who  delight  in  the  warfare  of  dispu- 
tations (constitute)  the  middling  (rank  of  the)  states 
caused  by  Activity. 

47.  The  Gandharvas,  the  Guhyakas,  and  the  ser- 
vants of  the  gods,  likewise  the  Apsarases,  (belong 
all  to)  the  highest  (rank  of)  conditions  produced  by 
Activity. 

48.  Hermits,  ascetics,  Brahma^as,  the  crowds  of 
the  Vaimanika  deities,  the  lunar  mansions,  and  the 
Daityas  (form)  the  first  (and  lowest  rank  of  the) 
existences  caused  by  Goodness. 

(Gov.,  Kull.) ;  but  it  may  also,  with  Ragh.,  be  referred  to  a  class  of 
mythological  beings.  Supanzas  are  the  bird-deities,  mentioned 
above,  I,  37. 

45.  Dallas,  Mallas,  i.e.  'those  mentioned  above,  X,  22  (Kull., 
Nar.),  who  are  fencers  with  sticks  or  wrestlers  and  jesters'  (Medh., 
Kull.).  Na/as,  i.  e.  '  those  exhibiting  themselves  on  the  stage ' 
(rahgavataraka^,  Medh.,  Kull.).  I  read  with  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  and 
Nand.  purushaj  ka.  kuvn'ttaya^,  'men  who  subsist  by  despicable 
occupations/  instead  of  purusha^  jastravrz'ttaya^,  '  men  living  by 
the  trade  of  arms'  (Kull.,  editions). 

46.  With  respect  to  the  low  estimation  in  which  domestic  priests 
are  held,  see  the  verse  quoted  PaiUatantra  II,  63  (Bombay  edition). 
Nand.  reads  danayuddhapradhanaj  ka.,  'very  liberal  men,  and  those 
delighting  in  strife.' 

47.  Guhyakas,  i.e.  'evil  spirits  who  hurt  children;'  Yakshas, 
i.e.  'the  guardians  of  treasures'  (Nar.).  Both  are  demigods,  ser- 
vants of  Kubera.  '  The  servants  of  the  gods,'  i.  e. '  Vidyadharas 
and  so  forth.' 

48.  Medh.  mentions  an  opinion,  held  by  '  others,'  according  to 


XII,  5i.  TRANSMIGRATION.  495 

49.  Sacrificers,  the  sages,  the  gods,  the  Vedas,  the 
heavenly  lights,  the  years,  the  manes,  and  the  Sa- 
dhyas  (constitute)  the  second  order  of  existences, 
caused  by  Goodness. 

50.  The  sages  declare  Brahma,  the  creators  of 
the  universe,  the  law,  the  Great  One,  and  the  Un- 
discernible  One  (to  constitute)  the  highest  order  of 

\     beings  produced  by  Goodness. 

51.  Thus  (the  result)  of  the  threefold  action,  the 
whole  system  of  transmigrations  which  (consists)  of 
three  classes,  (each)  with  three  subdivisions,  and 
which  includes  all  created  beings,  has  been  fully 
pointed  out. 

which  the  Yatis,  '  ascetics/  are  a  people  living  on  mount  Meru. 
'  The  Vaimanika  deities/  i.  e.  '  those  who  move  in  mid-air  with 
their  palatial  chariots,  called  vimanas.'  Instead  of  Daitya^,  Nar. 
mentions  as  a  var.  lect.  Siddha^. 

49.  'The  Vedas/  i.e.  'sounds  placed  in  a  certain  sequence' 
(Medh.),  or  '  the  guardian  deities  or  personifications  of  the  Vedas, 
such  as  are  described  in  the  Itihasas  as  belonging  to  the  court  of 
Brahman'  (Medh.  '  others/  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nar.,  Ragh.).  With  respect 
to  the  next  two  terms  the  commentators  vacillate  whether  the  things 
mentioned  or  their  regents  (adhish/Mtri  devata)  are  intended. 

50.  Brahma,  i.  e.  '  Hirawyagarbha '  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  '  The 
creators  of  the  universe/  i.e. '  MarUi  and  the  rest;'  see  above,  I, 
35 ;  '  the  law/  i.  e. '  either  the  meaning  of  the  Veda  or  the  incarnate 
law'  (Medh.);  according  to  the  other  commentators,  the  latter 
only.  '  The  Great  One/  i.  e. '  the  deity  presiding  over  the  principle 
(of  the  Sawkhya  philosophy)  called  the  Great  One  (or  Intellect/ 
Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.) ; '  the  Undiscernible  One,'  i.  e. '  the  deity  presiding 
over  the  root- evolvent  or  chief  cause  of  the  Sawkhya  philosophy' 
(Gov.,  Kull.,  Ragh.).  Medh.,  who  discusses  and  rejects  these  explana- 
tions of  the  last  two  terms,  holds  that  they  refer  to  the  Supreme  Soul 
(paramatman).  Nar.  explains '  the  Undiscernible '  by '  egoism.'  Medh., 
Gov.,  and  K.  read  avyakta  eva  kz.  instead  of  avyaktam  eva  kz.. 

51.  Medh.  and  K.  read  esha  dharma^,  'Thus  the  law  with 
respect  to  the  threefold  action,  &c.'  Nand.  places  verse  81  imme- 
diately after  this. 


496  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  52. 

52.  In  consequence  of  attachment  to  (the  objects 
of)  the  senses,  and  in  consequence  of  the  non-per- 
formance of  their  duties,  fools,  the  lowest  of  men, 
reach  the  vilest  births. 

53.  What  wombs  this  individual  soul  enters  in 
this  world  and  in  consequence  of  what  actions,  learn 
the  particulars  of  that  at  large  and  in  due  order. 

54.  Those  who  committed  mortal  sins  (mahapa- 
taka),  having  passed  during  large  numbers  of  years 
through  dreadful  hells,  obtain,  after  the  expiration 
of  (that  term  of  punishment),  the  following  births. 

55.  The  slayer  of  a  Brahma^a  enters  the  womb  of 
a  dog,  a  pig,  an  ass,  a  camel,  a  cow,  a  goat,  a  sheep, 
a  deer,  a  bird,  a  Aa^ala,  and  a  Pukkasa. 

56.  A  Brahma^a  who  drinks  (the  spirituous  liquor 
called)  Sura  shall  enter  (the  bodies)  of  small  and 
large  insects,  of  moths,  of  birds,  feeding  on  ordure, 
and  of  destructive  beasts. 

57.  A  Brahma/za  who  steals  (the  gold  of  a  Brah- 
ma/za  shall  pass)  a  thousand  times  (through  the 
bodies)  of  spiders,  snakes  and  lizards,  of  aquatic 
animals  and  of  destructive  Pii-a^as. 

58.  The  violator  of  a  Gurus  bed  (enters)  a  hun- 
dred times  (the  forms)  of  grasses,  shrubs,  and  creepers, 
likewise  of  carnivorous  (animals)  and  of  (beasts)  with 
fangs  and  of  those  doing  cruel  deeds. 

52.  Y^gn.  Ill,  219.  'Fools,' i.e.  'those  who  do  not  perform 
penances'  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

55.  Y&gn.  Ill,  207.  Nand.  reads  Pulkasa,  Medh.  and  Go) 
PuMkasa  with  a  (jrihvamuliya  which  looks  like  sh. 

56.  Y&gn.  Ill,  207. 

57.  Ybgn.  Ill,  208.  'Aquatic  animals,'  i.e.  'crocodiles  and  sc 
forth'  (Gov.).  Gov.  explains  luta,  '  spider,'  by  'scorpion.'  K.  omit 
this  verse. 

58.  Y&gri.  Ill,  208.      The  commentators  explain  '  carnivorous 


XII,  63.  TRANSMIGRATION.  497 

59.  Men  who  delight  in  doing  hurt  (become)  car- 
nivorous  (animals) ;   those  who  eat  forbidden  food, 
worms  ;  thieves,  creatures  consuming  their  own  kind  ; 
those  who  have  intercourse  with  women  of  the  lowest/ 
castes,  Pretas. 

60.  He  who  has  associated  with  outcasts,  he  who 
has  approached  the  wives  of  other  men,  and  he  who 
has  stolen  the  property  of  a  Brahma/za  become 
Brahmarakshasas. 

61.  A  man  who  out  of  greed  has  stolen  gems, 
pearls  or  coral,  or  any  of  the  many  other  kinds  of 
precious  things,  is  born  among  the  goldsmiths. 

62.  For  stealing  grain  (a  man)  becomes  a  rat,  for 
stealing  yellow  metal  a  Hawsa,  for  stealing  water 
a  Plava,  for  stealing  honey  a  stinging  insect,  for 
stealing  milk  a  crow,  for  stealing  condiments  a  dog, 
for  stealing  clarified  butter  an  ichneumon ; 

63.  For  stealing  meat  a  vulture,  for  stealing  fat  a 
cormorant,  for  stealing  oil  a  winged  animal  (of  the 


(animals)'  by  '  vultures  and  the  like/  '(beasts)  with  fangs'  by  'lions 
or  tigers  and  the  like.'  'Those  doing  cruel  deeds'  are,  according 
to  Gov.,  'men  such  as  -Sabaras;'  according  to  Kull.,'  animals  such 
as  tigers/ 

59.  '  Creatures  consuming  their  own  kind,'  i.  e.  '  fish  and  the 
like.'     Nand.  places  verse  60  before  verse  59. 

60.  Ya^Ta.  Ill,  212.  'A  Brahmarakshasa,'  lit.  'a  Biahmawical 
Rakshasa,'  is  an  evil  spirit.     K.  omits  this  verse. 

61.  Y&gfi.  III,  213.  According  to  another  explanation,  which 
Medh.  considers  the  only  admissible  one,  and  which  the  other 
commentators  mention  as  an  alternative,  hemakartrz', '  a  goldsmith,' 
is  the  name  of  a  bird. 

62.  Y&gn.  Ill,  214,  215;  Vi.  XLIV,  15-20.  Rasam,  'condi- 
ments,' i.  e.  the  juice  of  sugar-cane,  &c.  (Kull.),  means  according 
to  Nar. '  quicksilver.' 

63.  Yagri.  Ill,  211,  215  ;  Vi.  XLIV,  21-25.  I  rea^  with  Medh  , 
Gov.,  and  Nand.,  vasam,  '  fat,'  instead  of  vapam  (Kull.,  editions) ; 

[25]  K  k 


498  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  64. 

kind  called)  Tailapaka,  for  stealing  salt  a  cricket,  for 
stealing  sour  milk  a  bird  (of  the  kind  called)  Balaka. 

64.  For  stealing  silk  a  partridge,  for  stealing  linen 
a  frog,  for  stealing  cotton-cloth  a  crane,  for  stealing 
a  cow  an  iguana,  for  stealing  molasses  a  flying-fox ; 

65.  For  stealing  fine  perfumes  a  musk-rat,  for 
stealing  vegetables  consisting  of  leaves  a  peacock, 
for  stealing  cooked  food  of  various  kinds  a  porcu- 
pine, for  stealing  uncooked  food  a  hedgehog. 

66.  For  stealing  fire  he  becomes  a  heron,  for 
stealing  householdmtensils  a  mason-wasp,  for  steal- 
ing dyed  clothes  a  francolin-partridge ; 

67.  For  stealing  a  deer  or  an  elephant  a  wolf,  for 
stealing  a  horse  a  tiger,  for  stealing  fruit  and  roots 
a  monkey,  for  stealing  a  woman  a  bear,  for  stealing 
water  a  black-white  cuckoo,  for  stealing  vehicles  a 
camel,  for  stealing  cattle  a  he-goat. 

68.  That  man  who  has  forcibly  taken  away  any 
kind  of  property  belonging  to  another,  or  who  has 
eaten  sacrificial  food  (of)  which  (no  portion)  had  been 
offered,  inevitably  becomes  an  animal. 


which  latter  word  Nar.  also  gives,  but  explains  by  meda^.  The 
Tailapaka  is  probably  the  cockroach.  .Sfirivaka,  '  a  cricket/  may 
also  mean  '  a  cicada.'  Nand.  reads  iTakravaka,  '  a  Brahmam 
duck.' 

64.  Y&gri.  Ill,  215;  Vi.  XLIV,  25-30.  Regarding  Vaggud 
'the  flying-fox,'  see  note  on  Gaut.  XVII,  34.  Ragh.  confirms  th 
explanation  given  there,  as  he  says  that  it  is  a  bird  flying  at  nigh 
Medh.  and  Nand.  seem  to  have  had  a  different  reading  at  th 
end  of  the  verse.  The  MSS.  of  the  former  have  kraim/£o  godh 
mawsashu  valguti^  (?),  and  that  of  the  latter  godha  gavyaw  dad 
jallam  (?). 

65.  Y%™.  Ill,  213;  Vi.  XLIV,  31-34. 

66.  Y$g*L  III,  214-215  ;  Vi.  XLIV,  35-37. 

67.  Ytyft.  Ill,  214;  Vi.  XLIV,  38-43. 

68.  Yagtf.IIJ,  217;  Vi.  XLIV,  44. 


1 


XII,  72.  TRANSMIGRATION.  499 

69.  Women,  also,  who  in  like  manner  have  com- 
mitted a  theft,  shall  incur  guilt ;  they  will  become  the 
females  of  those  same  creatures  (which  have  been 
enumerated  above). 

70.  But  (men  of  the  four)  castes  who  have  relin- 
quished without  the  pressure  of  necessity  their  proper 
occupations,  will  become  the  servants  of  Dasyus, 
after  migrating  into  despicable  bodies. 

71.  A  Brahma^a  who  has  fallen  off  from  his 
duty  (becomes)  an  Ulkamukha  Preta,  who  feeds 
on  what  has  been  vomited ;  and  a  Kshatriya,  a 
Ka/aputana  (Preta),  who  eats  impure  substances 
and  corpses. 

72.  A  VaLrya  who  has  fallen  off  from  his  duty 
becomes  a  Maitraksha^yotika  Preta,  who  feeds  on- 
pus ;  and  a  6udra,  a  A^ailcLsaka  (Preta,  who  feeds  on\ 
moths).  ) 

69.  Vi.  XLIV,  45.  'In  like  manner,'  i.e.  'intentionally'  (Gov., 
Kull.). 

70.  I  follow  Medh.,  Gov.,  Nar.,  Nand.,  Ragh.,  and  K.,  who  read 
dasyushu  instead  of  ^atrushu,  '  of  their  enemies '  (editions).  Gov. 
explains  dasyushu  by  .ratrushu,  and  the  same  explanation  is  given  by 
Kull.;  while  according  to  Medh.,  'thieves  and  robbers'  are  meant; 
and  according  to  Nar.,  'forest-tribes,  such  as  -Sabaras/  Nand.  reads 
pretatam  (MS.  prenatam)  for  preshyatam,  and  explains  it  by  'will 
become  PLslUas  among  the  Dasyus.'  His  reading  looks  like  a 
correction  made  on  account  of  the  next  verses. 

71.  Ulkamukha,  i.  e.  '  with  flaming  mouth'  (Medh.).  Medh.  pre- 
fers Ku/aputana, '  with  a  stinking. nose,'  to  Ka/aputana  (Kull.,  Nar., 
Ragh.,  Nand.,  K.).     Gov.  reads  Ka/^aputana. 

72.  Maitraksha^yotika  is,  according  to  Medh.,  Kull.,  and  R&gh., 
to  be  explained  as  a  kind  of  Preta  who  has  a  light  in  or  sees  with  the 
anus.  Medh.  gives  another  explanation,  according  to  which  it 
simply  means  '  a  Preta,'  and  adds  that  '  others '  explain  it  by  '  an 
owl.'  ^aila^aka,  '  a  (Preta)  who  feeds  on  moths '  (Gov.),  means 
according  to  Kull.,  'who  feeds  on  body-lice.'  ^elaj-aka  is  the 
reading  of  Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand. 

K  k    2 


500 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


XII,  73- 


rf 


73.  In  proportion  as  sensual  men  indulge  in 
sensual  pleasures,  in  that  same  proportion  their 
taste  for  them  grows. 

74.  By  repeating  their  sinful  acts  those  men  of 
small  understanding  suffer  pain  here  (below)  in 
various  births  ; 

75.  (The  torture  of)  being  tossed  about  in  dreadful 
hells,  Tamisra  and  the  rest,  (that  of)  the  Forest  with 
sword-leaved  trees  and  the  like,  and  (that  of)  being 
bound  and  mangled ; 

76.  And  various  torments,  the  (pain  of)  being 
devoured  by  ravens  and  owls,  the  heat  of  scorching 
sand,  and  the  (torture  of)  being  boiled  in  jars,  which 
is  hard  to  bear ; 

J  7.  And  births  in  the  wombs  (of)  despicable 
(beings)  which  cause  constant  misery,  and  afflictions 
from  cold  and  heat  and  terrors  of  various  kinds, 

78.  The    (pain    of)    repeatedly  lying    in  various 
wombs  and  agonizing  births,  imprisonment  in  fetter 
hard  to  bear,  and  the  misery  of  being  enslaved  b 
others, 

79.  And  separations  from  their  relatives  and  dear 
ones,  and  the  (pain  of)  dwelling  together  with  the 
wicked,  (labour  in)  gaining  wealth  and  its  loss, 
(trouble  in)  making  friends  and  (the  appearance  of 
enemies, 

80.  Old  age  against  which  there  is  no  remedy,  th 


-; 


73.  I  follow  Medh.  and  Gov.,  who  explain  ku^alata,  literally 
1  cleverness'  (Kull.,  Ragh.),  by  ekarasibhava/^. 

75-76.  See  above,  IV,  88-89  ;  Yagfi.  Ill,  206,  221-225. 

76.  Medh.  reads  karambhavalukas  tapta^,  and  explains  karai 
bha^  by  karmada^  (kardama^  ?),  '  heated  mud  and  sand  (?) '.  Tl 
translation  follows  Kull.'s  and  Ragh.'s  notes.  Medh.,  Gov.,  Rag! 
Nand.,  and  K.  read  sudu^sahan,  'very  hard  to  bear,'  which  hi 
been  given  above,  instead  of  daruwan,  'terrible'  (Kull.,  editions). 


XII,  86.  SUPREME   BLISS.  5OI 

pangs  of  diseases,  afflictions  of  many  various  kinds, 
and  (finally)  unconquerable  death.  U 

Si.  But  with  whatever  disposition  of  mind  (a  man) 
performs  any  act,  he  reaps  its  result  in  a  (future) 
body  endowed  with  the  same  quality. 

82.  All  the  results,  proceeding  from  actions,  have 
been  thus  pointed  out ;  learn  (next)  those  acts  which 
secure  supreme  bliss  to  a  Brahma^a.  fo* 

83.  Studying  the  Veda,  (practising)  austerities,  (the   V\ 
acquisition  of  true)  knowledge,  the  subjugation  of 
the  organs,  abstention  from  doing  injury,  and  serving 
the  Guru  are  the  best  means  for  attaining  supreme 

bliss.  tsT 

84.  (If  you  ask)  whether  among  all  these  virtuous     / 
actions,  (performed)  here  below,  (there  be)  one  which    / 
has  been  declared  more  efficacious  (than  the  rest)  for 
securing  supreme  happiness  to  man, 

85.  (The  answer  is  that)  the  knowledge  of  the 
Soul  is  stated  to  be  the  jr>pst  exrHl^nt  arn^ng  nil  ^f 
them ;  for  that  is  the  first  of  all  sciences,  because 
immortality  is  gained  through  that. 

86.  Among  those  six  (kinds  of)  actions  (enumer- 

81.  E.g.  if  while  a  man  performs  an  act  his  disposition  is 
sattvika,  or  '  chiefly  penetrated  by  the  quality  of  Goodness/  he  will 
reap  its  reward  in  a  body  produced  chiefly  by  that  quality,  e.  g.  that 
of  a  god. 

83.  Yagn.  Ill,  190. 

84.  Medh.  omits  this  verse. 

85.  Y&gn.  I,  199.  '  The  knowledge  of  the  Soul/  i.  e.  not  that  of 
the  Kshetra^a,  but  that  of  the  Supreme  Soul,  which  is  taught  in 
the  Upanishads  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.),  means  according  to 
Nar.,  'meditation'  (dhyanam).  Nand.  asserts  that  the  genitive 
sarvesham,  'among  all/  stands  in  the  sense  of  the  ablative.  Ac- 
cording to  him  the  translation  should  be,  '  is  more  excellent  than 
all  those.' 

86.  Medh.  takes  the  genitive  sha«/zam,  'among  those  six/  in  the 


11 


502  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  87. 

\  ated  above,  the  performance  of)  the  acts  taught  in 
the  Veda  must  ever  be  held  to  be  most  efficacious 
for  ensuring  happiness  in  this  world  and  the  next. 

&j.  For  in  the  performance  of  the  acts  prescribed 
by  the  Veda  all  those  (others)  are  fully  comprised, 
(each)  in  its  turn  in  the  several  rules  for  the  rites. 

88.  The  acts  prescribed  by  the  Veda  are  of  two 
kinds,  such  as  procure  an  increase  of  happiness  and 


\/ 


sense  of  an  ablative,  and  according  to  him  the  translation  would 
be,  '  The  acts  taught  in  the  Veda  must  ever  be  held  to  be  more 
efficacious  for  ensuring  happiness  in  this  world  and  in  the  next 
than  all  those  six  (kinds  of)  actions  (enumerated  above).'  He 
proposes  two  explanations  for  karma  vaidikam.  '  The  acts  taught 
in  the  Veda'  may  either  be  'the  *Srauta  rites,  such  as  the  Gyo- 
tish/oma,'  or  '  those  called  further  on,  in  verses  88-89,  nivritta,'  i.  e. 
■  rites  performed  as  a  matter  of  duty,  without  a  desire  for  rewards.' 
Nand.  accepts  the  first  explanation,  and  so  does  Gov.,  who,  how- 
ever, takes  the  genitive  in  its  usual  sense, '  among  those  six/  Nar. 
adopts  Medh.'s  second  explanation,  and  says,  '  acts,  taught  in  th( 
Veda,'  i.  e.  '  sacrifices  and  so  forth,  performed  without  the  intentioi 
of  (gaining)  rewards,'  and  construes  the  genitives  like  Gov.  The 
same  construction  is  adopted  by  Kull.,  who  explains  karma  vaidi- 
kam by  '  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Soul.'  Medh.'s  secom 
explanation  seems  to  be  the  best,  on  account  of  verses  89  and  9c 
where  '  knowledge,'  i.  e.  '  the  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Soul'  (set 
verse  85)  and  the  performance  of  the  nivrz'ttam  karma  are  said  t< 
effect  final  liberation.  The  explanation  of  the  genitives  shaw^ai 
etesham  by  '  among  those  six'  may  perhaps  be  defended,  ii 
vaidikaw  karma  is  taken  to  correspond  to  vedabhyasa/^,  '  studying 
the  Veda  (and  obeying  its  rules)/  in  verse  83.  But  Medh.'s  ex- 
planation of  the  construction  is  quite  possible. 

87.  Kull.  alters  his  explanation  of  vaidikam  karma  slightly,  ant 
interprets  it  by  'the  worship  of  the  Supreme  Soul' (paramatmopa- 
sana),  and  quotes  Brz'hadara^yaka-upanishad  IV,  4,  22  in  suppoi 
of  his  view.  The  other  commentators  find  no  difficulty  in  showing 
that  both  '  the  -Srauta  sacrifices '  and  '  the  nivn'ttakhyaw  karrra 
include  all  the  six  points  mentioned  above,  verse  83.  I  read  in  tl 
first  line  with  K.  hi  instead  of  tu  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.). 

88.  Kull.  again  changes  his  explanation  of  the  expression  '  act 


XIT,  91.  SUPREME    BLISS.  503 

. . . 

cause  a  continuation  (of  mundane  existence,  pra- 
vn'tta),  and  such  as  ensure  supreme  bliss  and  cause 
a  cessation  (of  mundane  existence,  nivrztta). 

89.  Acts  which  secure  (the  fulfilment  of)  wishes  in 
this  world  or  in  the  next  are  called  pravrztta  (such 
as  cause  a  continuation  of  mundane  existence) ;  but 
acts  performed  without  any  desire  (for  a  reward), 
preceded  by  (the  acquisition)  of  (true)  knowledge,  are 
declared  to  be  nivrz'tta  (such  as  cause  the  cessation 
of  mundane  existence).  ^ 

90.  He  who  sedulously  performs  acts  leading  to  | 
future  births  (pravrztta)  becomes  equal  to  the  gods  ; 
but  he  who  is  intent  on  the  performance  of  those 
causing  the  cessation  (of  existence,  nivrztta)  indeed, 
passes  beyond  (the  reach  of)  the  five  elements. 

91.  He  who  sacrifices  to  the  Self  (alone),  equally 
recognising  the  Self  in  all  created  beings  and  all 
created  beings  in  the  Self,  becomes  (independent  like) 
an  autocrat  and  self-luminous. 

taught  in  the  Veda,'  and  takes  it  to  mean  '  sacrifices  like  the  Gyo- 
tish/oma  and  the  worship  of  images.' 

89.  Medh.  explains  ^anapurvam,  '  preceded  by  (the  acquisition 
of  true)  knowledge,'  to  mean '  whereof  knowledge  is  the  chief  (part,' 
^anam  adyaw  mukhyazra  yasya). 

90.  Kull.  remarks  that  the  expression  'becomes  equal  to  the 
gods'  gives  only  an  instance  of  the  rewards  attainable  by  kamyani 
karmam.  '  Passes  beyond  (the  reach  of)  the  five  elements,'  i.  e. '  casts 
off  the  subtile  body'  (Nar.),  or  'obtains  final  liberation'  (Medh., 
Gov.,  Kull.). 

91.  lya-upanishad,  6.  'He  who  sacrifices  to  the  Self  (alone),' 
i.  e.  '  who  connects  himself  with  the  nature  of  one  who  consists  of 
all  deities,  i.  e.  thinks,  "  Not  Agni,  nor  Aditya  is  the  deity,  I  am  here 
the  deity"'  (atmanam  eva  sarvadevatamayatvena  yo^ayate  1  manyate 
nastir  [nagnir]  adityo  va  devata  1  aham  iha  -£a  devata  mati  [ihaiva 
devata  iti?],  Medh.,  similarly  Gov.  and  Nar.),  means  according  to 
Kull.,  Ragh.,  and  Nand.,  '  he  who  performs  the  (ryotish/oma  and 
the  like  (sacrifices)  in  the  manner  of  the  Brahmarpa;za,'  i.  e.  in  such 


504  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  92. 

92.  After  giving  up  even  the  above-mentioned 
sacrificial  rites,  a  Brahma/za  should  exert  himself  in 
(acquiring)  the  knowledge  of  the  Soul,  in  extinguish- 
ing his  passions,  and  in  studying  the  Veda. 

93.  For  that  secures  the  attainment  of  the  object 
of  existence,  especially  in  the  case  of  a  Brahma;za, 
because  by  attaining  that,  not  otherwise,  a  twice- 
born  man  has  gained  all  his  ends. 

94.  The  Veda  is  the  eternal  eye  of  the  manes, 
gods,  and  men  ;  the  Veda-ordinance  (is)  both  beyond 
the  sphere  of  (human)  power,  and  beyond  the  sphere 
of  (human)  comprehension  ;  that  is  a  certain  fact. 

a  manner  that  he  understands  Brahman  to  be  the  object  of  the 
worship,  and  makes  over  the  merit  to  Brahman.  The  participial 
clause  means,  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.,  thinking  '  I  am  con- 
tained in  the  whole  creation,  both  the  movable  and  the  immovable ' 
(vyavasthita^,  Gov.),  or  '  I  am,  as  it  were,  the  whole  world '  (aham 
ivaita^g-agat,  Medh.)  and  'all  created  beings  are  contained  in  me' 
(mayy  avasthitani,  Gov.,  mayi  sthitani,  Medh.).  Kull,  Ragh.,  and 
Nand.  (who  reads  sampa^yan)  explain  it  on  pure  Vedanta  prin- 
ciples. The  sacrificer  is  to  recognise  his  identity  with  the  Supreme 
Soul,  and  that  through  this  identity  he  is  one  with  all  created 
beings,  and  that  all  created  beings  are  one  with  him.  The  double 
rendering  of  the  term  svaragyam  is  based  on  the  double  meaning 
of  the  verb  rag,  '  to  rule '  and  '  to  shine.'  Medh.  alone  points  it 
out.  Kull.  gives  the  second  meaning  alone,  and  takes  the  phrase 
a  little  differently :  '  attains  the  state  of  the  self-luminous  (Brah- 
man)/    Gov.,  Nar.,  and  Nand.  give  Medh.'s  first  meaning  only. 

92.  •  Above-mentioned/  i.e. '  as  securing  supreme  bliss'  (Nand.), 
or  'the  Agnihotra  and  the  rest'  (Medh.,  Gov.,  Kull.).  The  last 
three  commentators  point  out  that  this  verse  is  not  intended  to 
authorise  an  irregular  discontinuance  of  the  daily  rites. 

93.  Nand.  omits  this  verse.  Kritakrz'tya^,  '  has  gained  all  his 
ends'  (Medh.),  is  taken  by  Gov.  in  its  other  sense,  'has  done  all  he 
ought  to  do '  (kr/takaramya^). 

94.  Instead  of  ajakyam, '  beyond  (the  sphere  of  human)  power,' 
i.  e. '  which  cannot  have  been  produced  by  men'  (Gov.,  Kull.),  Nar. 
and  Nand.  read  atarkyam,  '  beyond  (the  sphere  of  human)  reason- 
ing' (tarkewanyatMsambhavam,  Nar. ;   idrz'sam  ity   adhyavasatum 


XII,  98.  SUPREME    BLISS.  505 

95.  All  those  traditions  (smrzti)  and  all  those 
despicable  systems  of  philosophy,  which  are  not 
based  on  the  Veda,  produce  no  reward  after  death  ; 
for  they  are  declared  to  be  founded  on  Darkness. 

96.  All  those  (doctrines),  differing  from  the  (Veda), 
which  spring  up  and  (soon)  perish,  are  worthless  and 
false,  because  they  are  of  modern  date. 

97.  The  four  castes,  the  three  worlds,  the  four 
orders,  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future  are  all 
severally  known  by  means  of  the  Veda. 

98.  Sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  and  fifthly  smell 
are  known  through  the  Veda  alone,  (their)  production 
(is)  through  the  (Vedic  rites,  which  in  this  respect 
are)  secondary  acts. 

a^akyam  apaurusheyatvat,  Nand.).  Aprameyam,  'beyond  (the 
sphere  of  human)  comprehension/  may,  according  to  the  com- 
mentators, mean  either  that  the  Veda  can  never  be  fully  known,  on 
account  of  the  number  of  its  branches  and  of  the  depth  of  its 
meaning,  or  that  it  cannot  be  understood  by  human  reasoning  alone, 
but  requires  the  help  of  grammar  of  the  Mimawsa  and  so  forth. 

95.  As  an  example  of  false  traditions  Medh.  names  'rules  such 
as  "  Heavenly  bliss  is  attained  by  worshipping  ATaityas,"  which 
occur  in  the  *Sbbha  and  other  Siddhantas  of  the  Nirgranthas 
(Digambara  Gainas).'  '  Despicable  systems  of  philosophy/  e.  g. 
•  that  of  the  Aarvakas '  (KulL).  Pretya, '  after  death '  (paraloke,  Gov., 
Kull.),  means  according  to  Medh.  prakarsham  prapya, '  after  attaining 
eminence.'  Medh.  mentions  the  explanation  adopted  above  as  that 
of '  others/  and  adds  that  it  requires  the  reading  prete. 

97.  Nar.  and  Ragh.  explain  prasidhyati,  'are  made  known/  by 
^■ayate,  'are  produced.'     Gov.  and  Kull.  point  to  III,  76. 

98.  I  read  with  all  the  commentators  prasidhyanti  instead  of  prasu- 
yante  (Indian  editions).  The  last  words  of  the  verse  are  extremely 
doubtful.  Medh.  reads  prasutir  guraakarmata^,  and  Gov.  seems  to 
have  adopted  the  same  version,  though  the  text  of  the  Puwa  MS.  has 
prabhutagu/zakarmata/*.  Kull.  and  Ragh.  give  prasutiguwakarmata^  ; 
Nand.  prasutiguwakarmabhi^,  and  Nar.  prasutigu;/adharmata/$,  with 
which  reading  a  var.  lect ,  mentioned  by  Medh.,  prasuteguwadhar- 
mata^  may  have  originally  agreed.     In  concluding  his  note  on  the 


506  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  99. 

99.  The   eternal    lore   of  the   Veda    upholds    all 
created  beings ;   hence  I  hold  that  to  be  supreme, 


verse  Medh.  remarks  that  many  other  varr.  lectt.  exist  which  he 
omits,  because  they  are  useless  (vai&tryapa/Mntaram  nishprayo^a- 
natvan  na  likhyante).  The  explanations  differ  still  more  than  the 
readings.  The  translation  follows  Medh.'s  interpretation.  Accord- 
ing to  him  the  verse  means  that  '  sound  and  the  rest  are  known  to 
be  enjoyable  and  means  of  obtaining  pleasure  through  the  Veda,  as 
they  are  perceived  in  the  form  of  melodies  and  so  forth  at  the  per- 
formance of  Vedic  rites,'  but  that '  the  Veda  is  not  their  material 
cause,  the  Vedic  rites  being  secondary  actions  only  with  respect 
to  their  production'  (^abdadinam  bhogyatvena  sukhasadhananaw 
vedad  eva  prasiddhi/2  l  vaidikakarmanush/^anad  gitaduabdopa- 
patti/^  .  .  .  .  na  punar  veda  upadanakara/zam  ....  etad  aha  prasutir 
gUTzakarmata^  l  prasuti^  jabdadinam  utpatti^  l  tadarthara  guwa- 
karma  phalarthatvat  pradhanakarme  [ma]  ka.  /£itradishu  gwzadharma 
[karme]  ty  uktam).  Gov.'s  short  note  in  substance  agrees  with 
this  view  (ye  svargadiviprata  [shaya]  upabhogyatvenabhimata^  jab- 
dadayo  vishayas  te  'bhimatavishayopabhogotpattyarthaw  yad  upa- 
karakatfz  karmagnihotradikaw  tadanush/Mnadvare^a  vedad  eva 
prasidhyanti).  According  to  Kull.  the  meaning  of  the  compound 
is,  '  through  the  Vedic  rites,  (originating  from)  the  (three)  qualities 
(Goodness  and  so  forth,  which  are)  the  sources  (of  sound  and  so 
forth).'  Ragh.  gives  two  explanations  :  '(The  elements  which  are  the 
substrata  of)  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  and  fifthly  (of)  smell,  are 
known  through  the  Veda  according  to  their  origin,  their  qualities,  and 
their  actions.'  Afterwards  he  gives  for  the  last  word  an  alternative 
version  which  closely  agrees  with  Kull.'s  view.  Nand.  says, '  Sound 
and  so  forth,  together  with  their  sources,  i.  e.  ether  and  so  forth, 
with  their  qualities,  i.  e.  their  manifold  subdivisions,  e.  g.  the  sha^a 
(note),  and  so  forth,  and  with  their  actions,  i.  e.  attracting  the  organs 
of  sensation  and  so  forth,  are  known  from  the  Veda  alone.'  Nar. 
finally  interprets  his  reading  as  follows :  '  (Sound  and  so  forth)  are 
produced  from  the  Veda  alone,  which  is  characterised — the  affix 
tasi  has  the  meaning  of  the  third  and  other  cases — by  the  following, 
(viz.)  the  origin,  i.  e.  the  cause  of  production,  quality,  i.  e.  excessive- 
ness  and  so  forth,  property,  i.  e.  fragrance  and  so  forth '  (prasuti/ 
g-anmahetu/;  I  gu#a  utka/atvadi  1  dharma^  surabhitvadi/2  J  tr/tiyadi 
tasiA  1  etair  upalakshitad  vedat  prasidhyanti  ^ayante). 

99.  In  explanation  of  the  first  line  the  commentators  point  to 


XII,  103.  SUPREME    BLISS.  507 



which  is  the  means  of  (securing  happiness  to)  these 
creatures. 

100.  Command  of  armies,  royal  authority,  the 
office  of  a  judge,  and  sovereignty  over  the  whole 
world  he  (only)  deserves  who  knows  the  Veda- 
science. 

10 1.  As  a  fire  that  has  gained  strength  consumes 
even  trees  full  of  sap,  even  so  he  who  knows  the 
Veda  burns  out  the  taint  of  his  soul  which  arises 
from  (evil)  acts. 

102.  In  whatever  order  (a  man)  who  knows  the 
true  meaning  of  the  Veda-science  may  dwell,  he 
becomes  even  while  abiding  in  this  world,  fit  for 
the  union  with  Brahman. 

103.  (Even  forgetful)  students  of  the  (sacred) 
books  are  more  distinguished  than  the  ignorant, 
those  who  remember  them  surpass  the  (forgetful) 
students,  those  who  possess  a  knowledge  (of  the 
meaning)   are    more    distinguished   than  those  who 


III,  76,  and  the  corresponding  Vedic  passages.  Gov.  and  Kull. 
explain  asya  ^anto^,  '  of  these  creatures,'  by  '  of  men  entitled  to 
perform  Vedic  rites.'  Nar.  takes  the  second  line  differently : 
'  Through  that,  i.  e.  the  Veda  alone,  I  know  that  highest,  i.  e. 
meditation,  which  is  the  means,  i.  e.  the  means  of  securing  final 
liberation  to  these  creatures'  (yad  asya^anto^  sadhanam  apavarga- 
sadhanam  I  paraw  dhyanaw  dhyeyadi  I  tad  etasmad  vedad  eva 
manye  g&ne). 

100.  Medh.  places  this  verse  later.  The  order  in  which  the 
remaining  verses  of  the  Sa#zhita  are  read  in  the  MSS.  differs  very 
much  from  that  adopted  by  the  other  commentators.  They  stand 
as  follows:  106,  107,  108,  100,  101, 102,  103,  104,  105,  109,  no, 
in,  112,  113,  114,  115,  116,  117,  118,  119,  120,  121,  122;  next 
both  the  text  and  the  commentary  of  91,  92,  93  are  repeated,  and 
then  comes  the  last  verse,  126. 

1 01.  Vas.  XXVII,  2. 

103.    Agfiebhyak,  '  than  the   ignorant,'  i.  e.  'entirely  ignorant' 


1 


508  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  104. 

(only)  remember  (the  words),  men  who  follow  (the 
teaching  of  the  texts)  surpass  those  who  (merely) 
know  (their  meaning). 

104.  Austerity  and  sacred  learning  are  the  best 
means  by  which  a  Brahma/za  secures  supreme  bliss  ; 
fyy  austerities  he  destroys  guilt,  by  sacred  learning 
he  obtains  the  cessation  of  (births  and)  deaths. 

105.  The  three  (kinds  of  evidence),  perception, 
inference,  and  the  (sacred)  Institutes  which  comprise 
the  tradition  (of)  many  (schools),  must  be  fully  un- 
derstood by  him  who  desires  perfect  correctness 
with  respect  to  the  sacred  law. 

106.  He  alone,  and  no  other  man,  knows  the 
sacred  law,  who  explores  the  (utterances)  of  the 
sages  and  the  body  of  the  laws,  by  (modes  of)  rea- 
soning, not  repugnant  to  the  Veda-lore. 


(Medh.,  Nar.),  '  who  have  not  studied  the  Veda'  (Nand.),  means 
according  to  Gov.  and  Kull.,  'those  who  have  learned  a  little.' 
Granthina^,  '(forgetful)  students'  (Kull.,  Nand.),  means  according 
to  Medh.  and  Gov.,  '  students  who  learn  the  texts  alone,  but  do 
not  take  very  great  trouble  with  them ; '  according  to  Nar., '  men  who 
know  the  text  only.'  Dhari«a^,  'those  who  remember  (the  texts)' 
(Kull.,  Nand.),  are  according  to  Medh.  and  Gov.,  '  men  who  are 
very  persevering  in  studying;'  according  to  Nar.,  'those  who  know 
the  meaning  of  the  texts.'  Nar.  takes  £?1anin,  '  he  who  knows  (the 
meaning  of  the  texts),'  in  the  sense  of '  he  who  knows  the  Soul  or 
Self.' 

104.  Yagn.  I,  200. 

105.  -Sastram, '  the  (sacred)  Institutes,'  i.  e. '  the  Veda,  which  has 
many  -Sakhas'  (Gov.,  Nar.),  or  '  the  Veda  and  the  Smrz'ti'  (Medh.), 
or  '  the  Smmi'  (Kull.).  Nand.  reads  siddhim,  '  a  complete  know- 
ledge or  accurate  performance,'  instead  of  juddhim.  The  Pu«a 
copy  of  Nar.  stops  wkh  this  verse,  the  remaining  leaves  being  lost. 

106.  '  The  utterances  of  the  sages,'  i.  e.  '  the  Veda.'  '  The  body 
of  the  laws,'  i.  e.  'the  Smmi.'  '  The  modes  of  reasoning'  are,  accord- 
ing to  Medh.  and  Kull.,  the  Mimarasa  of  Gaimini ;  according  to 
'others'  quoted  by  Medh.,  all  the  philosophical  schools,  excepting 


XII,  log.  DOUBTFUL    POINTS    OF    LAW.  509 


107.  Thus  the  acts  which  secure  supreme  bliss 
have  been  exactly  and  fully  described ;  (now)  the 
secret  portion  of  these  Institutes,  proclaimed  by 
Manu,  will  be  taught. 

108.  If  it  be  asked  how  it  should  be  with  respect 
to  (points  of)  the  law  which  have  not  been  (specially) 
mentioned,  (the  answer  is), 'that  which  Brahma^as 
(who  are)  6*ish/as  propound,  shall  doubtlessly  have 
legal  (force)/ 

109.  Those  Brahma/zas  must  be  considered  as 
vSish/as  who,  in  accordance  with  the  sacred  law,  have 
studied  the  Veda  together  with  its  appendages,  and 
are  able  to  adduce  proofs  perceptible  by  the  senses 
from  the  revealed  texts. 

those  which,  like  the  Bauddhas,  Nirgranthas,  and  Lokayatikas,  deny 
the  authority  of  the  Vedas. 

108-115.  Ap.  II,  29,  13-14;  Gaut.  XXVIII,  48-51  ;  Vas.  Ill, 
20;  Baudh.  I,  1,  5-13,  16  ;  Yagn.  I,  9-10. 

109.  'In  accordance  with  the  sacred  law,'  i.  e. '  while  observing 
the  rules  prescribed  for  a  student.'  The  expression  jrutipratya- 
kshahetava/^,  'who  are  able  to  adduce  proofs  perceptible  by 
the  senses  from  the  revealed  texts,'  is  variously  interpreted. 
According  to  Medh.  it  means  either  'those  who  possess  the  re- 
vealed texts,  (proof  through)  perception  and  argument'  (.miti- 
pratyakshe  hetuj  ka,  jrutipratyakshahetava^),  or  '  those  for  whom 
the  revealed  texts  which  are  perceptible  by  the  senses,  are 
the  reason  for  distinguishing  between  virtue  and  sin'  (athava 
sruteh  pratyakshamite^  I  pratyaksha^abda^  jraute  pratyaye  pratya- 
kshatulyatvat  prayukta^  I  sa  ka  hetur  dharmadharmapari^wane 
kavanam  yeshaw  ta  evam  u^yante) ;  according  to  Gov., '  who  are 
the  cause  of  the  teaching  of  the  subjects  perceptible  in  the  Veda* 
(vedago^arapadarthopadejakarawabhuta^) ;  according  to  Kull.,  'who 
are  the  causes  of  making  the  revealed  texts  perceptible,  by  reciting 
the  revealed  texts;'  and  according  to  Nand.,  'those  for  whose 
knowledge  and  exposition  of  the  law  hearing  and  perception  by 
means  of  the  senses  are  the  causes'  (yesha#z  ^ravawam  pratyaksha^ 
ka  dharma^anava^anayor  hetus  te).  '  The  appendages/  i.  e. '  the 
Itihasas   and    Pura/zas'   (Medh.   according   to   the    Mahabharata, 


5IO  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  no. 

no.  Whatever  an  assembly,  consisting  either  of 
at  least  ten,  or  of  at  least  three  persons  who  follow 
their  prescribed  occupations,  declares  to  be  law,  the 
legal  (force  of)  that  one  must  not  dispute. 

in.  Three  persons  who  each  know  one  of  the 
three  principal  Vedas,  a  logician,  a  Mima^saka,  one 
who  knows  the  Nirukta,  one  who  recites  (the  Insti- 
tutes of)  the  sacred  law,  and  three  men  belonging 
to  the  first  three  orders  shall  constitute  a  (legal) 
assembly,  consisting  of  at  least  ten  members. 

112.  One  who  knows  the  ^zg-veda,  one  who  knows 
the  Ya^ur-veda,  and  one  who  knows  the  Sama-veda, 
shall  be  known  (to  form)  an  assembly  consisting  of 
at  least  three  members  (and  competent)  to  decide 
doubtful  points  of  law. 

113.  Even  that  which  one  Brahma/za  versed  in 
the  Veda  declares  to  be  law,  must  be  considered  (to 
have)  supreme  legal  (force,  but)  not  that  which  is 
proclaimed  by  myriads  of  ignorant  men. 

114.  Even  if  thousands  of  Brahma/zas,  who  have 

Nand.),  or  '  the  Ahgas,  Mimawsa,  the  law-books,  the  Purawas,  and 
so  forth'  (Gov.,  Kull.). 

no.  Medh.  and  Gov.  read  viiarayet  instead  of  vi/fcalayet  (Kull., 
Nand.). 

in.  '  Three  men  belonging  to  the  first  three  orders,'  i.  e. '  a  stu- 
dent, a  householder,  and  a  hermit'  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.).  Medh. 
says  that  some  think  'a  student,  a  householder,  and  an  ascetic'  to 
be  meant,  because  the  hermit  must  not  enter  a  village,  and  because 
Gautama,  in  the  enumeration  of  the  castes,  places  the  ascetic  before 
the  hermit,  while  others  refer  the  words  to  Manu's  first  three  orders. 
The  reading  traividyo,  which  all  the  commentaries  give,  is  probably 
incorrect.  It  ought  to  be  traividyam,  tisrinam  vidyanaw  samahara/5 ; 
see  Yagfi.  I,  9,  and  compare  ^aturvidyam,  &iturvaidyam,  Baudh. 
I,  1,  1,  8,  and  Vas.  Ill,  20. 

114.  Avratanam, '  who  have  not  fulfilled  their  sacred  duties,'  i.  e. 
'  who  have  not  fulfilled  the  vows  incumbent  on  a  student '  (Gov., 
Kull.). 


XIT,  n8.   THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ATMAN.      5 1  I 

not  fulfilled  their  sacred  duties,  are  unacquainted 
with  the  Veda,  and  subsist  only  by  the  name  of  their 
caste,  meet,  they  cannot  (form)  an  assembly  (for  set- 
tling the  sacred  law). 

115.  The  sin  of  him  whom  dunces,  incarnations 
of  Darkness,  and  unacquainted  with  the  law,  instruct 
(in  his  duty),  falls,  increased  a  hundredfold,  on  those 
who  propound  it. 

116.  All  that  which  is  most  efficacious  for  secur- 
ing supreme  bliss  has  been  thus  declared  to  you ;  a 
Brahma^a  who  does  not  fall  off  from  that  obtains 
the  most  excellent  state. 

1 1 7.  Thus  did  that  worshipful  deity  disclose  to 
me,  through  a  desire  of  benefiting  mankind,  this 
whole  most  excellent  secret  of  the  sacred  law. 

1 1 8.  Let  (every  Brahma^a),  concentrating  his  mind,  ) 
fully  recognise  in  the  Self  all  things,  both  the  real/ 
and  the  unreal,  for  he  who  recognises  the  universe 
in  the  Self,  does  not  give  his  heart  to  unrighteous- 
ness. 


115.  Nand.  gives  yad  for  yam,  instead  of  tamobhuta^,  'incarna- 
tions of  Darkness/  the  reading  of  the  Dharma-sutras,  tamomu^a^, 
1  perplexed  by  Darkness  or  ignorance/ 

118.  Sampa.?yet,  '  let  (every  Brahma^a)  fully  recognise,'  i.  e. '  let 
him  clearly  realise  in  his  mind'  (sakshatkuryat,  Medh.,  Kull.), 
through  devotional  exercises  (upasana,  Medh.),  or  through  deep 
meditation  (Kull.),  or  '  let  him  vow  to  be  solely  intent  on  that  one 
object  of  knowledge,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  knowledge  of  all  other 
knowable  objects' (g^eyantaravishayanirakarawena  tadeka^weyanish- 
/Mm  anubruyat,  Medh.).  Atmani, '  in  the  Self/  i.  e.  '  in  the  Supreme 
Self  (Kull.,  Nand.),  or  '  in  his  own  individual  Self  (Gov.).  Medh. 
remarks  that  'the  learned  dispute  regarding  the  meaning  of  the 
term  atman,  and  that  besides  the  two  explanations  already  given  a 
third  was  proposed  by  some,  according  to  which  it  meant  'the 
corporeal  Self.'  Medh.  himself  considers  the  first  explanation  to  be 
the  correct  one.     Sadasat,  '  the  real  and  the  unreal,'  i.  e.  either  '  the 


I. 


512  LAWS    OF    MANU.  XII,  119.    ■ 

119.  The  Self  alone  is  the  multitude  of  the  gods, 
the  universe  rests  on  the  Self;  for  the  Self  pro- 
duces the  connexion  of  these .  embodied  (spirits) 
with  actions. 

120.  Let  him  meditate  on  the  ether  as  identical 
with  the  cavities  (of  the  body),  on  the  wind  as  iden- 

;  tical  with  the  organs  of  motions  and  of  touch,  on  the 
most  excellent  light  as  the  same  with  his  digestive 
organs  and  his  sight,  on  water  as  the  same  with  the 
(corporeal)  fluids,  on  the  earth  as  the  same  with 
the  solid  parts  (of  his  body) ; 

121.  On  the  moon  as  one  with  the  internal  organ, 
on  the  quarters  of  the  horizon  as  one  with  his  sense 
of  hearing,  on  Vishnu  as  one  with  his  (power  of) 

1  motion,  on  Hara  as  the  same  with  his  strength,  on 
Agni  (Fire)  as  identical  with  his  speech,  on  Mitra- — 
as  identical  with  his  excretions,  and  on  Pra^apati  as 
one  with  his  organ  of  generation. 

122.  Let  him  know  the  supreme  Male  (Purusha,  to 
be)  the  sovereign  ruler  of  them  all,  smaller  even  than 
small,  bright  like  gold,  and  perceptible  by  the  intellect 
(only  when)  in  (a  state  of)  sleep(-like  abstraction). 

123.  Some  call  him  Agni  (Fire),  others  Manu,  th< 

products  and  the  causes,'  or  '  the  intelligent  and  the  non-intelligent ' 
(Nand.),  means  according  to  Gov., '  that  which  possesses  a  shape  oi 
certain  proportions  and  its  opposite '  (murtam  pr/thivyadi  ya/£M- 
murtam  aka^adi).  Medh.  proposes  two  other  explanations,  1.  'that 
which  is  both  existent  and  non-existent,  i.  e.  comes  into  existence 
and  perishes;'  2.  'that  which  like  the  hare's  horn  is  non-existent, 
and  that  which  like  ether  is  eternal.'  The  word  samahita^,  '  concen- 
trating himself,'  may  have,  as  Medh.  thinks,  a  technical  meaning,  an( 
refer  to  the  Samadhi,  mentioned  in  the  Yoga  and  Vedanta  systems. 

119.  In  this  verse  Gov.,  too,  explains  atma  by  paramatma. 

120.  Medh.  explains  snehe,  'on  the  (corporeal)  fluids,'  by  ' 01 
the  viscous  substances,'  e.  g.  '  the  brain  and  so  forth.' 


I 


[25]  L  1 


XII,  126.   THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  ATMAN.       5 13 

Lord  of  creatures,  others  Indra,  others  the  vital  air, 
and  again  others  eternal  Brahman.  . —  v 

124.  He  pervades  all  created  beings  in  the  five 
forms,  and  constantly  makes  them,  by  means  of  birth, 
growth   and  decay,  revolve  like   the  wheels  (of  a  / 
chariot). 

125.  He  who  thus  recognises  the  Self  through  the 
Self  in  all  created  beings,  becomes  equal(-minded)  j 
towards  all,  and  enters  the  highest  state,  Brahman. 

126.  A  twice-born  man  who  recites  these  Insti- 
tutes, revealed  by  Manu,  will  be  always  virtuous 
in  conduct,  and  will  reach  whatever  condition  he 
desires. 


124.  The  five  forms  are  the  five  great  elements,  which  produce 
all  bodies  (Gov.,  Kull.,  Nand.). 

125.  Instead  of  param  padam,  'the  highest  state,'  Nand.  reads 
sanatanam,  'the  eternal  (Brahman)/ 


APPENDIX. 

Quotations  from  the  Institutes  of  Manu,  in 
the  translated  Hindu  Law-books  \ 

I,  iot.    Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  42. 

II,  96.    Mit.  II,  1,  22. 

140.  Sar.  Vi.  421,  426,  436-7. 

145.  Col.  Dig.  V,  424;  Viram.  Ill,  4,  7. 

146.  Day.  XI,  4,  3. 
172.  Col.  Dig.  V,  123. 

111,4-n.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  185. 

5.  Datt.  Mi.  VI,  27. 

12.  Col.  Dig.  V,  144;  Day.  IX,  2 ;  Mit.  I,  8,  7. 

14.  Col.  Dig.  V,  147. 

15-7.  Col.  Dig.  V,  145  ;  Day.  IX,  9  ;  Viram.  II,  1,  25. 

18.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  52. 

20-1.  Day.  IV,  3,  4. 

42.  Viram.  Ill,  1,  2. 

49.  Smn.  K.  XI,  2,  4;  Sar.  Vi.  138,  332,  336, 
Varad.  p.  41. 

51.  Day.  IV,  3,  24. 

55.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  42. 

56-9.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  39. 

60.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  40,  189,  1  ;  May.  IV,  8,  21. 

61-2.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  189,  2-3. 

81.  Day.  XI,  6,  17.   ' 

1  Colebrooke's  Digest  (Col.  Dig.) ;  Vyavahaxamayukha,  by  Borradaile  ( Vyav.) ; 
Dayabhaga  and  Mitakshara  on  Inheritance,  by  Colebrooke  (Day. ;  Mit.) ;  Mita- 
kshara  on  Vyavahara,  by  Macnaghten  (M.  Mit.)  ;  Dayakramasamgraha,  by 
Wynch  (Dayakr.) ;  Dattakamimamsa  and  Dattaka^andrika,  by  Sutherland  (Datt. 
Mi. ;  Datt.  .Kand.) ;  Vivada&intamani,  by  Prosonno  Koomar  Tagore  (Viv.  isTint.) ; 
Viramitrodaya  on  Inheritance,  by  Golapchand  Sarkar  (Viram.) ;  Smntifoindrika, 
by  T.  Kristnaswamy  Jyer  (Smr/.  K.) ;  Sarasvativilasa,  by  Foulkes  (Sar.  Vi.) ; 
Vyavaharamadhava  and  Varadara^iya  on  Inheritance,  by  Burnell  (Madh. ; 
Varad.). 

l!  2 


5i6 


APPENDIX. 


IV,  162. 

M.  Mit.  II,  8,  21. 

V,  60. 

Day.  XI,  1,  42  ;  XI,  6,  17  ;  Datt.  Ml.  VI,  27. 

127. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  321. 

147-9. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  86. 

150. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  89. 

*53~6- 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  103. 

i57- 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  139;  Mit.  I,  10,  9;  Viram.  II, 

2,  4  ;  Sar.  Vi.  345. 

158. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  139 ;  Mit.  I,  10,  9 ;  Viram.  II, 

2,4- 

i59- 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  140 ;  Mit.  I,  10,  9 ;  Viram.  II, 

2,4-  . 

160. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,   141  ;  Mit.  I,  10,  9 ;  Datt.  Mi. 

I,  29 ;  Viram.  II,  2,  4. 

161. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  142  ;  Mit.  1, 10,  9  ;  Viram.  II,  2, 

4  ;  Sar.  Vi.  345- 

162. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  143. 

163. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  161. 

165. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  105. 

VII,  14-28. 

Viv.  K'mt.  pp.  320-2. 

82. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  163  ;  Day.  IX,  20. 

»5- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4s  63. 

127-40. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  14,  1-13. 

VIII,  1-2. 

May.  I,  1,  5. 

4. 

Col.  Dig.  II,   1,  2;  May.  I,  1,  3;  Viv.  K'mt 

p.  4. 

5-7- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  2;  May.  I,  1,  3;  M.  Mit.  I, 

2,5- 

11. 

M.  Mit.  I,  1,  12. 

*3- 

M.  Mit.  I,  1,  15;  VI,  i,59- 

27. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  449  ;  Viv.  K'mt  p.  300. 

28. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  480,  1. 

29. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  480,  2  ;  May.  IV,  10,  10 ;  Smrz. 

K.  IX,  2,  27. 

3°- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  6~o,  1  ;  May.  VII,  8 ;  M.  Mit. 

V,4. 

31-2. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  60,  2-3. 

33- 

May.  VII,  8  ;  M.  Mit!  V,  5. 

34. 

Viv.  A^int.  p.  180. 

QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  5  1  7 


(VIII),  35- 

May.  VII,  10;  M.  Mit.  V,  1 1. 

37-8. 

M.  Mit.  V,  9. 

40. 

May.  VII,  11;  M.  Mit.  V,  12. 

43- 

M.  Mit.  I,  2,  7. 

45- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  68. 

46. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  50,  233. 

47- 

Col.  Dig.  I,  233. 

48. 

Col   Dig.  I,  234 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  43. 

49- 

Col.  Dig.  I,  235 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  43- 

5o. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  254. 

5i. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  264. 

59- 

Col.  Dig.  I,  265  ;  Viv.  A^int.  p.  47. 

68. 

M.  Mit.  VI,  i,  6. 

70. 

May.  II,  3,  8. 

74. 

M.  Mit.  VI,  i?  1. 

79-80. 

May.  II,  3,  14. 

87. 

May.  II,  3,  4. 

102.  May.  II,  3,  17;  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  22. 

107.  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  29. 

108.  May.  II,  3,  20;  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  45. 

113.  May.  II,  3,   17;  III,  3;    M.  Mit.  VI,   1,   23; 

VIII,  20,  T. 

115.  M.  Mit.  VIII,  10,  2. 

117.  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  31. 

120.  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  49  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  221. 

121.  M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  49  ;  Viv.  ATint  p.  222. 

122.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  221. 

123.  M.  Mit.  Ill,  4,  9;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  222. 
124-5.  M-  Mit-  HI,  4,  4- 

128.  M.  Mit.  I,  1,  6. 

129.  M.  Mit.  Ill,  4,3. 
132-4.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  77,  1-3. 

138.  Viv.  K'mt  p.  222. 

139.  Col.  Dig.  I,  273  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  pp.  48,  221. 

140.  Col.  Dig.  I,  23,  29,  1. 

141.  Col.  Dig.  I,  29,  2  ;  Viv.  K'mt  p.  7. 

143.  Col.  Dig.  I,  91,  117;  II,  2,  7  ;  Viv.  K'mt  pp. 

21,  25. 

144.  Col.  Dig.  I,  87  ;  May.  V,  2,  3. 


5i8 


APPENDIX. 


(VIII),  146.    May.  II,  2,  7. 

147.    M.  Mit.  Ill,  2,  6. 
150.    Col.  Dig.  I,  78. 

15.1.   Col.  Dig.  I,  43,  61  ;  May.  V,  1,  7  ;  Viv.  Kmt 
p.  17. 

152.  Col.  Dig.  I,  42. 

153.  Col.  Dig.  I,  41. 

154.  Col.  Dig.  I,  48,  257,  1. 

155.  Col.  Dig.  I,  257,  2. 

156.  Col.  Dig.  I,  258. 

157.  Col.  Dig.  I,  ^ ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  19. 
159-60.   Col.  Dig.  I,  151,  1-2. 

161.  Col.  Dig.  I,  154. 

162.  Col.  Dig.  I,  155. 

163.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  11;  11,4,57- 

165.  May.  IX,  10  ;  Viram.  V,  1,2. 

166.  Col.  Dig.  I,  186. 

167.  Col.  Dig.  I,  190;    Dayakr.  XII,   1,    I;  Viv. 

Kint.  p.  39. 

168.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  10. 

177.    Col.  Dig.  I,  245;  May.  V,  4,  6. 

179.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  13  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  49. 

180.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  16. 

1 8 1-4.    Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  47,  1-4. 

185.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  20. 

186.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  21  ;  Viv.  Kint  p.  51. 

187.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  46". 

188.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  49. 

189.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  26;  Viv.  Kint.  p.  51. 

191.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  37  ;  May.  VI,  2. 

192.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  38;    May.  VI,  5;  Viv.  Kin\ 

P-54- 

193.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  39  ;  Viv.  Kmt.  p.  5^. 

194.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  48. 
195-   Col.  Dig.  II,  1,17. 

196.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  50. 

197.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  5  ;  Viv.  Kint  p.  56. 

198.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  40;  Viv.  Kint  pp.  56,  222. 
199-  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  27. 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  519 

(VIII),  201.    Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  36. 

202.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  50 ;  May.  VII,  5  ;  Viv.  Kmt 

p.  58. 

203.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  61  ;  Viv.  K'mt  p.  119. 

206.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  32  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  65. 

207.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  33. 

208.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  35,  1. 

209.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  35,  2 ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  67. 

210.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  35,  3;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  o"6. 

212.  Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  48,  1 ;  Viv.  Kmt  pp.  84,  223. 

213.  Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  48,  2. 

215.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  76  ;  May.  XI,  4  ;  Viv.  K int. 

p.  98. 

216.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  81  ;  May.  XI,  4;  Viv.  Kmt 

p.  99. 

217.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  78  ;  May.  XI,  4;  Viv.  Kmt 

p.  99. 

218.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  2,  1. 

219-20.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  2,  15 ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  no. 

222.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  3,  j  ;  23,  1  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  113. 

223.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  3,  23,  2 ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  113. 
224-7.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  166-9. 

228.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  3,  24;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  113. 

229.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  1. 

230.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  9  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  105. 

231.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  2;  Viv.  A^int.  p.  105. 

232.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  12  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  106. 

233.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  7  ;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  106. 

234.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  18. 
235-6.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4)  16". 

237.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  19  ;  May.  XV,  3  ;  Viv.  ATint. 

p.  132. 

238.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  25  ;  Viv.  Amt.  p.  132. 

239.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  32. 

240.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  29  ;  May.  XVII,  9. 

241.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  36;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  133. 

242.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  54;  Viv.  Kmt  p.  136. 
244.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  4,  59. 

245-52-   Viv.  Kmt  p.  120. 


520  APPENDIX. 


(VIII),  253.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  121. 
257.    May.  XV,  4. 
259-61.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  121. 
262.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  124. 
264.    May.  XV,  11 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  126. 

267.  May.  XVI,  1,  3  ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  140. 

268.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  140. 
273.  Viv.  K'mt.  p*  142. 
275.   May.  XVI,  1,  4. 

276-7.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  141. 

279.    May.  XVI,  2,  4 ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  150. 
280-1.    May.  XVI,  2,  4;  Viv.  ATint.  pp.  146,  150. 
281-2.   Viv.  ATint.  pp.  146,  150. 

283.  Viv.  ATint.  pp.  147,  150. 

284.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  148. 

285.  May.  XVI,  2,  8  •  Viv.  ATint.  p.  155. 

286.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  149. 
288-9.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  183. 
296-8.   May.  XXII  (CCXLII). 

299.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  i,  11,  1  ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  151. 

300.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  11,   2;    M.  Mit.  IV,   1,  9 

Viv.  ATint.  p.  151. 

302.  Col.  Dig.  II,  1,  59 ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  157. 

303.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  157. 

304.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  19 ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  322. 
305-6.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  322. 

308.    Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  58. 

319.  Viv.  A"int.  p.  173. 

320.  May.  XVII,  8. 

321.  May.  XVII,  8;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  170. 

322.  May.  XVII,  8;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  171. 

323.  May.  XVII,  8 ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  166. 
324-5.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  167. 

326-30.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  172. 

331.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  171. 

333'  Viv.  ATint.  p.  172. 
335-6.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  221. 
337-8.   Viv.  ATint.  p.  176. 

339.  Viv.  ATint.  p.  179. 


I 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  52 1 

(VIII),  340.  Mit.  I,  i,  8  ;  Viram.  I,  14;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  177  ; 
Madh.  p.  4. 

341.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  179. 

343.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  168. 

348-9.  M.  Mit.  II,  8,  20. 

350.  May.  XVIII,  8  ;  M.  Mit.  II,  8,  19,  20. 

352.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  203. 

354.  May.  XIX,  3  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  202. 

355-6-  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  202. 

359.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  203. 

360.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  200. 

361.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  202. 

362.  Viv.  K'mt.  pp.  203-4. 

363.  Viv.  /Tint.  p.  203. 

364.  Viv.  Afint.  p.  205. 

365.  May.  XV,  5- 

366.  Viv.  A^int.  p.  205. 
367-70.  Viv.  Afint.  p.  206. 

371-2.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  207. 

373.  Viv.  Afint.  pp.  207-8. 

374.  May.  XIX,  6 ;  Viv.  K int.  p.  209. 

375.  Viv.  Afint.  p.  209. 

376.  May.  XIX,  7  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  209. 

377.  May.  XIX,  7  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  210. 

378.  May.  XVIII,  14;  XIX,  6 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  210. 

379.  Viv.  Afint.  p.  210. 

380-1.   M.  Mit.  VI,  1,  S3  ;  Viv.  Afint.  p.  211. 

382.    May.  XIX,  7  ;  Viv.  Afint.  p.  211. 
383-4.   Viv.  Afint  p.  211. 

385.   Viv.  Afint.  pp.  207,  211. 
386-7.   Viv.  A^int.  p.  322. 

388.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  42 ;  Viv.  A^int.  pp.  69,  212. 

389.  Viv.  A^int.  pp.  185,  212. 

390.  May.  I,  i,  14. 
398.   Viv.  Afint.  p.  161. 
402.    Col.  Dig.  Ill,  3,  48. 

410.  Col.  Dig.  I,  5. 

411.  Col.  Dig.  Ill,    1,    37,    I;    May.    X,   3;    Viv. 
K'mt.  p.  95. 


522 


APPENDIX* 


(VIII),  412. 

413- 
414. 

415- 
416. 

417. 
IX,  1-2. 

3- 

4- 

5-7- 
8-9. 

10-1. 

12. 

13- 

14-5- 
16. 

17. 
18-9. 

22-4. 

25. 
26-8. 

3°- 

3^-4. 
35. 

38-40. 
42-6. 

47- 

48. 
49- 

50-1. 
53- 


Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  3%  2  ;  Viv.  iTint.  p.  95. 
Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  38  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  95. 
Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  36 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  95. 
Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  33. 
Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  56;  HI,  i,  5*,  1  ;  May.  IV, 

10,  7;  Viram.  I,  12;  V,  1,  2;  Varad.  p.  6. 
Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  52,  2. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  2-3. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  5. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  14. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  9,  1-3. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  19-20. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  30,  1-2. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  32. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  99. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  22,  1-2. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  23. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  24 ;  Viv.  K'mt  p.  220. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  25-6. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  33,  1-3. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  34. 
Col.  Dig.  IV,  35,  1-3. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  109. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  253,  1-3. 

Col.  Dig.  V,  254 ;  Day.  XI,  3,  3 ;  Dayakr.  I, 

5,2- 
Col.  Dig.  V,  255-6. 
Col.  Dig.  V,  257,  1-3. 
Col.  Dig.  V,  252,  1-5. 
Col.  Dig.  V,  252,  6  ;  Day.  XIII,  5  ;  Dayakr. 

VIII,  5;  Smri.  K.  XVI,  20 ;   Madh.  p.  57. 
Col.  Dig.  V,  214,  1  ;  252,  7. 
Col.   Dig.  V,    214,    2 ;    252,    8 ;    Viv.    Alnt. 

p.  131. 
Col.  Dig.  V,  214,  3-4- 
Col.  Dig.  V,  214,  5  ;  Mit.  I,  10,  6  ;  Viram. 

11,  2,  4 ;  Madh.  p.  23. 
Col.  Dig.V,  244;  Mit.  I,  10,  4;  Datt.  K and. 

II,  35  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  4 ;  Madh.  p.  53. 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  523 

(IX),  54.    Col.  Dig.  V,  236 ;  Dayakr.  XII,  2,  15  ;  Viv. 
Afint.  p.  131. 
55.    Dayakr.  XII,  2,  15. 

59.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  146;  V,  229;    Mit.  I,  10,  8; 

Datt.  Mi.  VII,  21  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  4;  Sar. 
Vi.  342. 

60.  Col.  Dig.  V,  228  ;  Mit.  I,  10,  8  ;  Viram.  II, 

2,  4 ;  Sar.  VL  342  ;  Madh.  p.  23. 

62.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  150. 

63.  Col.  Dig.  V,  227. 

64-8.    Col.  Dig.  IV,  156,  1-5  ;  Mit.  I,  10,  8  ;  Viram. 
II,  2,  4 ;  Sar.  Vi.  343  ;  Madh.  p.  23. 

69.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  170,  1  ;  Mit.  I,  10,  10;   Viram. 

II,  2,  4;  Madh.  p.  24. 

70.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  170,  2;  Day.  IX,  28;  Mit.  I, 

10,  10 ;  Viram.  II,  2,  4 ;  Madh.  p.  24. 

71.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  171. 
72-3.    Col.  Dig.  IV,  174,  1-2. 

74.    Col.  Dig.  IV,  45,  1. 

75-  Col.  Dig.  IV,  45,2 ;  n6. 

76.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  154. 

77.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  56. 
78-9.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  57,  1-2. 

80.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  67. 

81.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  70. 

82.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  73. 

83.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  75- 

84.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  112. 

85.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  46.  >v  ^A       VT 

86.  CoLDi|.IV;laDtnX/,Io,47j 

S7.  Col.  Dig.  V,  414.  > 

89.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  179. 

94.  Viram.  II,  1,  2. 

95-6.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  1 88,  1-2. 

97.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  172. 

98-100.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  173,  1-3. 

101-2.  Col.  Dig.  IV,  190,  1-2. 

103.  Col.  Dig.  V,  2 ;    Day.    I,  3  ;    Viram.   I,    2  ; 
Smn.  K.  I,  1 ;  Sar.  Vi.  37. 


524  APPENDIX. 


(IX),  104.    Col.  Dig.  V,  4;  Day.  I,  14;   II,  8;  III,  1  ; 
Mit.  I,  3,  3  ;  5,  7  ;  May.  IV,  4,  I ;  Dayakr. 

I,  1,  1 ;  VII,  1  ;  Viram.  I,  10-21,  22,  27,  51  ; 

II,  1, 1-2  ;  Viv.  ATint.  p.  224;  Smn.  K.  I,  12, 
18  ;  Sar.  Vi.  49  ;   Madh.  p.  1  ;  Varad.  p.  6. 

105.  Col.  Dig.  V,  9  ;  Day.  I,  36  ;  III,  15 ;  Mit.  I, 

3,  3  ;  Viram.  II,  1,  7,  1 1  ;  Viv.  Kint  p.  226 ; 
Smr*.  K.  II,  2,  10  ;  Madh.  p.  8. 

106.  Col.  Dig.  V,   10,  1  ;   Day.  I,  36  ;  XI,  1,  32  ; 

Mit.  I,  n,  12  ;  Datt.  A^and.  I,  5  ;  Viram.  II, 

1,  7  ;  Sar.  Vi.  369  ;  Madh.  p.  44. 

107.  Col.  Dig.  V,  10,  2 ;  Day.  I,  36  ;  Viram.  II,  1, 

7  ;  Madh.  p.  8. 

108.  Col.  Dig.  V,  12;  Day.  VI,  1,  54;  Viram.  II,  1,7. 

109.  Col.  Dig.  V,  13  ;  Viram.  II,  I,  7. 
no.    Col.  Dig.  V,  14;  Viram.  II,  1,  7. 

in.   Col.  Dig.  V,  18;  Day.  I,  27,  3y  ;  Viram.  I, 
21 ;  II,  1,  7  ;  Viv.  A"int.  p.  227  ;  Smri.  K.  II, 

2,  io-n. 

112.  Col.  Dig.  V,  34;    Day.  II,  3y;    Mit.  I,  2,  4; 

I>  3>  3  5  May-  IV,  4,  9  ;  Viram.  II,  i,  9,  11  ; 
Viv.  K'mt.  p.  234  ;  Smn.  K.  II,  1,  25 ;  III, 

8  ;  Madh.  p.  8  ;  Varad.  p.  2. 

113.  Col.  Dig.  V,  36. 

114.  Col.  Dig.  V,  3J  ;  Viv.  Afint.  p.  234. 

1 15.  Col.  Dig.  V,  38  ;  Day.  II,  45  ;  Sma  ^.  III,  5. 

116.  Col.  Dig.  V,  39,  1  ;  Day.  II,  3y  ;  Mit.  I,  3,  3  ; 

May.  IV,  4,  9  ;  Viram.  II,  1,  10 ;  Smn.  AT. 

III,  10,  12  ;  Madh.  p.  8. 

117.  Col.  Dig.  V,  39,  2;  Day.  II,  37  ;  Mit.  I,  3,  3  ; 

May.  IV,  4,  9;  Dayakr.  VII,  18;  Viram. 
II,  1,  10;  Smrz*.  K.  Ill,  12;  Madh.  p.  8. 

118.  Col.  Dig.  V,  120;  Day.  Ill,  36 ;  Mit.  I,  7,  9  ; 

Viram.  II,  1,  21 ;  V,  2,  1 ;  Viv.  A'int.  p.  248 ; 
Smri.  K.  IV,  32;  Sar.  Vi.  126,  133,  287; 
Varad.  p.  10. 

1 19.  Col.  Dig.  V,  70 ;  Mit.  I,  4,  18  ;  May.  IV,  7, 17. 

120.  Col.  Dig.  V,  J6,  1 ;   Mit.  II,  1,  10 ;  Viram.  II, 

2,  18;  III,  1,  6. 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  525 

(IX),  121.  Col.  Dig.  V,  76,  2  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  18. 

122-3.  Col.  Di£-  V,55,  1-2. 

124.  Col.  Dig.  V,  56. 

125.  Col.    Dig.  V,  5J;    Dayakr.   VII,    14;    Viv. 

ATint.  p.  233. 

126.  Col.  Dig.  V,  64. 

127.  Col.  Dig.  V,  212  ;  Day.  X,  2  ;  Datt.  Mi.  I,  9; 

Viram.  II,  2,  3  ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

128.  Col.  Dig.  V,  222,  1;  Viram.  II,  2,  3  ;  Varad. 

P-  23- 

129.  Col.  Dig.  V,  222,  2  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  3. 

130.  Col.  Dig.  V,  210  ;   Day.  XI,  2,  1  ; *  May.  IV, 

8,  10 ;  Viram.  Ill,  2,  1  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  292  ; 
Smrz.  K.  XI,  2,  7 ;  Sar.  Vi.  543,  552  ; 
Varad.  pp.  3$-6. 

131.  Col.  Dig.  V,  209,491  ;   Day.  IV,  2,  13  ;  May. 

IV,  10,  17  ;  Viram.  V,  2,  2,  4;  Viv.  ATint. 
p.  267  ;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  3,  12  ;  Sar.  Vi.  288  ; 
Madh.  p.  44 ;  Varad.  p.  44. 

132.  Col.  Dig.  V,  220,  3  ;  Day.  XI,  2,  19  ;  Dayakr. 

I,  4,  1  ;  Viram.  Ill,  3,  2  ;  Viv.  iTint.  p.  294. 

133.  Col.  Dig.  V,  220,  1  ;  Day.  XI,  2,  19  ;  Varad. 

PP-  35-6- 

134.  Col.  Dig.V,  206;  Day.  11,39  ;  X,  2  ;  Mit.  I, 

II,  23;  Day.  VII,  16;  Viram.  II,  2,  17; 
Viv.  K'mt.  p.  286 ;  Sar.  Vi.  376,  558  ;  Madh. 
p.  20  ;  Varad.  p.  26. 

135.  Day.  XI,  2,  16;  Madh.  p.  45  ;  Varad.  p.  48. 

136.  Col.  Dig.  V,  207  ;  220,  2  ;  Day.  X,  3  ;  XI,  2, 

20;  Mit.  II,  2,  6;  Datt.  A^and.  I,  22; 
Viram.  II,  2, 17  ;  III,  3,  1 ;  Sar.  Vi.  564,  660, 
667  ;  Madh.  p.  26  ;  Varad.  p.  35. 

137.  Col.    Dig.  V,  11  ;    Day.  XI,  1,   31  ;   Viram. 

III,  1,  11. 

138.  Col.   Dig.  V,   302;    Day.  V,  6;   XI,   1,  31  ; 

Viram.  Ill,  1,  11. 

139.  Day.  IV,  2,  10;  XI,  6,  9,  31 ;  Dayakr.  II,  4, 

7  ;  Datt.  Mi.  VII,  17  ;  Varad.  p.  36. 

140.  Col.  Dig.  V,  208  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  3. 


526  APPENDIX. 


(IX),  141.    Col.  Dig.  V,  278;  Datt.  iTand.  V,  20  ;  Viram. 
II,  2,  18  ;  Smri.  K.  X,  13  ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

142.  Col.  Dig.  V,  181  ;  Mit.  I,  ii,  32;  May.  IV, 

5,  21  ;  Datt.  Mi.  II,  8  ;  VI,  6,  47  ;  VIII, 
1  ;  Datt.  ATand.  II,  18  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  18  ; 
Smn.  K.  X,  15  ;  Sar.  Vi.  388  ;  Madh.  p.  24 ; 
Varad.  p.  23. 

143.  Col.  Dig.  V,  234;  Smrz.  K.  V,  12. 

144.  Col.  Dig.  V,  226. 

145.  Col.  Dig.  V,  235. 

146.  Col.  Dig.  V,  232  ;    Mit.  II,  1,  10  ;  Datt.  Mi. 

V,  51 ;  Viram.  II,  1,  18  ;  III,  1,  6  ;  Madh. 

P-  31- 

147.  Col.  Dig.  V,  233  ;  Madh.  p.  40. 

148.  Col.  Dig.  V,  139,  1. 

149.  Col.  Dig.  V,  60,  1  ;   139,  2  ;  Madh.  p.  16. 

150.  Col.  Dig.  V,  60,  2  ;  139,  3- 

151.  Col.  Dig.  V,  60,  3;    139,  4;   Day.  IX,  12; 

Viram.  II,  1,  25. 

152.  Col.  Dig.  V,  140,  1  ;  Day.  IX,  12  ;  Viram.  II, 

1,  25  ;  Madh.  p.  16  ;  Varad.  p.  18. 

153.  Col.  Dig.  V,  140,  2  ;  Day.  IX,  12  ;  Viram.  II, 

1,  25  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  271  ;  Varad.  p.  18. 

154.  Col.  Dig.  V,  166;    Day.  IX,  27;  Mit.  I,  11, 

41;  Dayakr.  VII,  19;  Viram.  II,  1,  25; 
II,  2,  21  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  273  ;  Sar.  Vi.  394; 
Madh.  p.  17  ;  Varad.  p.  20. 

155.  Col.  Dig.  V,  167;    Day.  IX,  27;    Mit.  I,  8, 

10;  May.  IV,  4,  29  ;  Viram.  II,  1,  25;  II, 

2,  21  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  273  ;  Smri.  K.  II,  2, 
7  ;  Madh.  p.  17  ;  Varad.  p.  20. 

156.  Col.  Dig.  V,  53- 

157.  Col.  Dig.  V,  66 ;    Dayakr.  VII,    22  ;    Datt. 

Kand.  V,  32  ;  Varad.  p.  19. 

158.  Col.  Dig.  V,  188,  1  ;  Datt.  Mi.  II,  56 ;  Datt. 

K and.  V,  1 1 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  279  ;  Varad.  p.  25. 

159.  Col.  Dig.  V,  1 88,  2;   Mit.  I,  11,  30;    Datt. 

Kand.  V,  11  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  19 ;  Viv.  K'mt, 
p.  279 ;  Sar.  Vi.  386 ;  Madh.  p.  22. 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  527 

(IX),  160.  Col.  Dig.  V,  188,  3;  Mit.  I,  ii,  30;  Datt. 
ATand.  V,  11  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  19 ;  Viv.  Afint. 
p.  279  ;  Sar.  Vi.  386 ;  Madh.  p.  22 ;  Varad. 
p.  26. 

162.  Day.  X,  15;  Viram.  II,  2,  18. 

163.  Day.  X,  13  ;  Mit.  I,  11,  28  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  18; 

Viv.  K'mt.  p.  286  ;  Smn.  K.  X,  2  ;  Sar.  Vi. 
380,  383  ;  Madh.  p.  21. 

164.  Day.  X,  11  ;  Mit.  I,  11,  29  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  18; 

Sar.  Vi.  385 ;  Madh.  p.  2  ;  Varad.  p.  25. 

165.  Datt.  Mi.  II,  S7  ;  Datt.  ATand.  V,  10. 

166.  Col.  Dig.  V,  194  ;  Datt.  Mi.  I,  68  ;  Viram.  II, 

2,  2. 

167.  Col.  Dig.  V,  231  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  4;  Smn.  K. 

X,* 

168.  Col.  Dig.  V,  275  ;  Mit.  I,  11,  9  ;  May.  IV,  5,  1 ; 

Datt.  Mi.  I,  7  ;  II,  23  ;  Datt.  ATand.  I,  12 ; 
Viram.  II,  2,  8 ;  Sinn.  K.  X,  4 ;  Sar.  Vi. 
366  ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

169.  Col.  Dig.  V,  285  ;  Viram.  II,  2, 10  ;  Smri.  K. 

X,  4  ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

170.  Col.  Dig.  V,  250  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  5  ;  Smn.  K. 

X,  4 ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

171.  Col.  Dig.  V,  291;  Smn.  K.  X,4;  Varad.  p.  23. 

172.  Col.  Dig.  V,  263  ;  Mit.  I,  11,  7  ;  Viram.  II,  2, 

6;  Smri.  A".  X,  4;  Varad.  p.  23* 

173.  Col.  Dig.  V,  288;  Viram.  II,  2,  12;   Smri. 

K.  X,  4 ;  Varad.  p.  23. 

174.  Col.  Dig.  V,  282;  Mit.  I,  11,  16;  Datt.  Mi. 

II,  24;  Viram.  II,  2,  9  ;  Smn.  K.  X,  4 ;  Sar. 
Vi.  372  ;  Varad.  p.  23.    * 

175.  Col.  Dig.  V,  269 ;  Viram.  II,  2,  7  ;    Smn.  K. 

X,  4 ;  Varad.  p.  25. 

177.  Col.  Dig.  V,  287  j  Viram.  II,  2,  11  ;  Smri.K. 

X,  4;  Varad.  p.  23. 

178.  Ccl.  Dig.  V,  187  ;  Day.  IX,  28  ;  Viram.  II,  2, 

14  ;  Smn.  K.  X,  4;  Varad.  p.  25. 

179.  Col.  Dig.  V,  186;  Day.  IX,  29  ;  Datt.  iTand. 

V,  30  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  274;  Varad.  p.  21. 


528  APPENDIX. 


(IX),  180.    Col.  Dig.  V,  301;  Datt.  Mi.  I,  33,  42,  56; 
Datt.  iTand.  I,  8;  Viram.  II,  2,  15  ;  Varad. 

181.  Col.  Dig.  V,  271 ;  Datt.  Mi.  VI,  12. 

182.  Col.  Dig.  V,  276;   Day.  XI,  5,  7;  Mit.  I,  ti, 

36 ;  May.  IV,  5,  19  ;  Datt.  Mi.  II,  29,  65  ; 
Datt.  Kand.  I,  20  ;  Viram.  II,  2,  8  ;  Sm/i 
K.  X,  8  ;  Sar.  Vi.  390 ;  Varad.  p.  27. 

183.  Col.  Dig.  V,  506;  Day.  IV,  3,  32;  Datt.  Mi. 

II,  69  ;  Datt.  ATand.  I,  23 ;  Viram.  II,  2,  8 ; 
V,  2,  14. 

184.  Col.  Dig.  V,  298  ;  Datt.  A'and.  V,  8  ;  Viram. 

2,  2,  19. 

185.  Col.  Dig.  V,  223  ;   Day.  XI,  1,  40 ;  XI,  5,  5  ; 

Mit.  I,  11,  33;  II,  1,  7,  9,  35;  II,  4,  1; 
Datt.  A'and.  V,  8;  Viram.  Ill,  1,  6;  III, 
2,  3;  III,  4,  7;  III,  5,  1;  Viv.  ATint.  p. 
295  ;  Smn.  AT.  X,  1  ;  XI,  1,  1  ;  XI,  3,  6  ; 
XI,  4,  10;  Sar.  Vi.  4^5,  488,  491,  575; 
Madh.  pp.  22,  27,  30  ;  Varad.  pp.  38-9. 

186.  Col.  Dig.  V,  370  ;  Day.  IV,  3,  36  ;  XI,  1,  40  ; 

XI,  6,  7,  10,  14,  17;  Dayakr.  I,  10,  5;  II, 
6,  2 ;  Viram.  Ill,  1,  11. 

187.  Col.  Dig.  V,  434;  Day.  XI,  6,  10,  14,  17,  21, 

24 ;  Mit.  II,  3,  3  ;  II,  4,  5 ;  May.  IV,  8,  19 ; 
IV,  10,  28  ;  Dayakr.  I,  10,  15,  21,  28  ;  II,  6, 
2 ;  III,  4,  2 ;  III,  4,  1 1  ;  III,  5,  2  ;  III,  7, 
5;  Viv.  TTint.  p.  295;  Smn.  K.  XI,  5, 
9  ;  Sar.  Vi.  569 ;  Madh.  p.  27 ;  Varad. 
P-34- 

188.  Col.  Dig.  V,  442;  Day.  XI,  6,  26;  Mit.  II,  7, 

4;  Viram.  Ill,  7,  8;  Smn.  K.  XI,  6,  5; 
Sar.  Vi.  609 ;  Madh.  p.  29. 

189.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  23,  1  ;  V,  443  5   Day.  XI,  6, 

34;  Mit.  II,  4,  4;  H,  7,  5-6;  Viram.  Ill, 
7-8  ;  Viv.  innt.  p.  298;  Smn.  AT.  XI,  6,  6 
Sar.  Vi.  610,  612. 

190.  Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  23,  2  ;  May.  IV,  10,  8. 

191.  Col.  Dig.  V,  344;  Day.  X,  16. 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  529 

(IX),  192.  Col.  Dig.  V,  485 ;  Day.  IV,  2,  1  ;  Mit.  II,  11, 
19  ;  Viram.  II,  1,  18  ;  V,  2,  1,  5 ;  Viv.  K'mt, 
pp.  226,  266  ;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  3,  6 ;  Sar.  Vi. 
309  ;  Madh.  p.  43  ;  Varad.  p.  43. 

193.  Col.  Dig,  V,  498;  Mit.  II,  11,  17;  May.  IV, 

10,  16  ;  Viram.  V,  2,  1  ;  Smn.  K.  IX,  3,  10  ; 
Sar.  Vi.  285  ;  Madh.  p.  43  ;  Varad.  p.  43. 

194.  Col.  Dig.  V,  462  ;  Day.  IV,  1,  4  ;   Mit.  II,  11, 

4;  May.  IV,  10,  1 ;  Viram.  V,  1,  1  ;  Viv. 
K'mt.  p.  256;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  1,  1,  3;  Sar. 
Vi.  260  ;  Madh.  p.  44 ;  Varad.  p.  45. 

195.  May.  IV,  10,  13;  Viram.  V,  2,  1  ;  Smrz.  K. 

IX,  3,  1  ;  Varad.  p.  46. 

196.  Col.  Dig.  V,  502  ;   Day.  IV,  2,  27  ;   May.  IV, 

10,  29  ;  Dayakr.  II,  3,  14  ;  II,  4,  10  ;  Viram. 
V,  2,  9  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  269  ;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  3, 
28  ;  Sar.  Vi.  3 19 ;  Madh.  p.  44  ;  Varad.  p.  46. 

197.  Col.  Dig.  V,  503  ;  Day.  IV,  2,  27  ;   May.  IV, 

10,  29  ;  Dayakr.  II,  3,  19 ;  Viram.  V,  2,  9  ; 
Viv.  Kint.  p.  269 ;  Madh.  p.  44 ;  Varad. 
P-47- 

198.  Col.  Dig.  V,  495  ;   Day.  IV,  2,  16 ;  IV,  3,  3  ; 

Mit.  II,  11,22;  May.  IV,  10,  19  ;  Dayakr.  II, 
5,  3  ;  Viram.  V,  2,  5  ;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  3,  40 ; 
Sar.  Vi.  307  ;  Madh.  p.  44 ;  Varad.  p.  45. 

199.  Col.  Dig.  V,  474;  Viram.  V,  1,  5;  Smrz.  K. 

IX,  1,  14. 

200.  Col.  Dig.  V,  473;  Mit.  I,  4,  19;  II,  ii,  34; 

Viv.  Kint.  p.  260  ;  Smrz.  K.  IX,  2,  27;  Sar. 
Vi.  201  ;  Madh.  p.  50  ;  Varad.  p.  49. 

201.  Col.  Dig.  V,  329,  1  ;  Day.  V,  7  ;  Mit.  II,  10, 

5 ;  May.  IV,  11,  3  ;  Dayakr.  Ill,  1  ;  Viram. 
VIII,  1  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  243  ;  Smrz.  K.  V,  4 ; 
Sar.  Vi.  148  ;  Madh.  p.  39 ;  Varad.  p.  13. 

202.  Col.  Dig.  V,  329,  2  ;    Mit.  II,  10,  5  ;  Viram. 

VIII,  2;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  243;  Smrz.  K.  V, 
22  ;  Sar.  Vi.  159  ;  Varad.  p.  13. 

203.  Col.  Dig.  V,  329,  3  ;   Viram.  VIII,  9  ;   Viv. 

K'mt.  p.  243  ;  Varad.  p.  13. 
[25]  m  m 


530  APPENDIX. 


(IX),  204.    Col.  Dig.  V,  341 ;  Day.  VI,  1,  54;  Mit.  I,  4, 
13  ;  Varad.  p.  30. 

205.  Col.  Dig.  V,  7$\  May.  IV,  7,  14;  Viv.  K'mt. 

p.  254  ;  Varad.  p.  30. 

206.  Col.  Dig.  V,  345  J  Day.  VI,  1,  9,  31,  51;  May. 

IV,  7,  1  ;  Dayakr.  IV,  2,  2  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p. 
249  ;  Smn"  K.  VII,  26  ;  Varad.  p.  28. 

207.  Col.  Dig.  V,  107  ;  Day.  Ill,  28  ;  Viram.  II,  1, 

15  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  237  ;  Smri.  K.  II,  2,  26  ; 
Varad.  p.  12. 

208.  Col.  Dig.  V,  348  ;  Day.  VI,  1,  3,  31 ;  Mit.  I, 

4,  10;  May.  IV,  7,  4;  Dayakr.  IV,  2,  5; 
Viram.  VII,  1 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  250 ;  Smn*. 
K.  VII,  27 ;  Sar.  Vi.  173;  Varad.  p.  29. 

209.  Col.  Dig.  V,  91 ;   Day.  II,  21;  VI,  2,  32; 

Mit.  I,  5,  11  ;  May.  IV,  4,  5 ;  Viram.  II,  1, 
17  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  229  ;  Sar.  Vi.  223 ;  Madh. 

P-  13- 

210.  Col.  Dig.  V,  35,  406,  1 ;  Day.  XII,  1  ;  Mit.  II, 

9,  12;  May.  IV,  9,  2;  Viram.  IV,  1,  4; 
Smri.  K.  XII,  3;  Madh.  p.  34;  Varad. 
p.  52. 

211.  Col.  Dig.  V,  406,  2  ;  Mit.  II,  9,  12 ;  May.  V 

9,  13 ;  Viram.  IV,  4;  Smri.  K.  XI,  1,  51 
XII,  17;  Sar.  Vi.  767;  Madh.  pp.  35-6 
Varad.  p.  52. 

212.  Col.  Dig.  V,  406,  3  ;  Day.  XI,  6,  32 ;  Mit.  IJ 

9,  12 ;   May.  IV,  9,  13  ;  Viram.  IV,  4,  6 
Smri.  K.  XI,   1,  51;   XII,   17;    Sar.  Vi. 
767  ;  Madh.  pp.  35-6  ;  Varad.  p.  52. 

213.  Col.  Dig.  V,  52  ;  Mit.  I,  9,  5  ;  May.  IV,  7,  24 ; 

Viram.  II,  1,  7  ;  VI,  2 ;  Viv.  A"int.  p.  234; 
Sar.  Vi.  781  ;  Madh.  p.  52. 

214.  Col.  Dig.  V,  317;    Day.  V,  6;   May.  IV,  1 

9;  Viram.  VIII,  it  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  242 
Smrz.  K.V,  19 ;  Varad.  p.  12. 

215.  Col.  Dig.  V,  29;  Day.  II,  86;  Viram.  II, 

io ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  235. 

216.  Col.  Dig.  V,  10 1  ;  Day.  I,  46 ;  II,  2  ;  VII,  1 ; 


QUOTATIONS    FROM    MANU.  53 1 

Mit.  I,  6,4,7;  May.  IV,  34 ;  Day.  V,  14 ; 
Viram.  II,  1,  24 ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  276,  305 ; 
Smri.  K.  XIII,  15;  Sar.  Vi.  231,  234; 
Madh.  p.  14. 
(IX),  217.  Col.  Dig.  V,  424;  Day.  XI,  3,  2 ;  Mit.  II,  1, 
7;  II,  4,  4;  II,  5,  1;  May.  IV,  8,  18; 
Dayakr.  I,  10,  4;  Viram.  Ill,  4,  7  ;  III,  5, 
1  ;  III,  7,  1  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  294 ;  Smn.  A\ 
XI,  4,  10  ;  XI,  5,  6  ;  Sar.  Vi.  576,  583,  584, 
765  ;  Varad.  pp.  36,  40. 

218.  Col.  Dig.  V,  375;    Day.   XIII,   1;    Dayakr. 

VIII,  2  ;  Viram.  VI,  1 ;  Smri.  K.  XIV,  1 ; 
Sar.  Vi.  775  ;  Madh.  p.  S3. 

219.  Col.  Dig.  V,  343  ;  Day.  VI,  2,  23;  May.  IV, 

7,  15;   Dayakr.  IV,  2,  13;  Viram.  VII,  2; 
Smri.  K.  VII,  39  ;   Sar.  Vi.  197  ;  Madh.  p. 
50 ;  Varad.  p.  30. 
222-3.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  317. 

224.    May.  XXI,  2  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  317. 
229.    Col.  Dig.  Ill,  1,  34. 
231-2.   Viv.  K'mt.  pp.  1 90-1. 
237.   Viv.  A'int.  p.  213. 
254.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  157. 
262.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  157. 
272-4.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  178. 

275.  May.  XXII,  (CCXLIII) ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  189. 

276.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  166. 

277.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  169. 

278.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  177. 

282.  May.  XV,  9  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  125. 

283.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  126. 
285-6.   Viv.  K'mt.  p.  188. 

287.  Viv.  Kint.  p.  159. 

289.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  189. 

290.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  187. 

291.  Viv.  K'mt.  pp.  131,  157. 

292.  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  163. 
317.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  22. 
327.  Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  24. 

M  m  2 


532  APPENDIX. 


X,43- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  22,  3. 

75- 

Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  21. 

76. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  7,  3. 

83. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  22. 

96. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  3,  22  ;  Viv.  K'mt.  p.  188. 

97. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  74. 

115. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  20;  Mit.  I,  1,  16;  Viv.  K'mt 

p.  76  ;  Sar.  Vi.  472  ;  Madh.  p.  5. 

116. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  21. 

117. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  35 ;  II,  4,  23. 

118. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  2,  23. 

130. 

Col.  Dig.  II,  4,  26. 

XI,   16. 

Viram.  I,  46. 

90. 

M.  Mit.  II,  8,  19. 

1 1 1-5. 

Viram.  I,  44. 

177. 

Col.  Dig.  IV,  82. 

189. 

Viram.  Ill,  1,  10 ;  Smn.  K.  XI,  1,  49. 

228. 

Col.  Dig.  I,  206. 

A. 
SYNOPSIS 


OF 


PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


By  the  advice  of  the  editor  I  add  a  detailed  synopsis  of  the  parallel 
passages  from  the  six  Dharma-sutras  and  Smrztis,  as  well  as  of  the 
wholly  or  partly  identical  verses  from  the  Mahabharata,  Panwara, 
Manava  -Sraddhakalpa,  the  Upanishads,  and  some  other  works. 
I  trust  that,  though  references  to  the  Smrz'tis  have  already  been 
given  in  the  notes  to  the  translation,  this  addition  will  not  be  found 
useless.  The  principle  on  which  I  have  worked  is  a  different 
one,  and  this  synopsis  shows  much  more  clearly  which  rules  of 
Manu's  work  are  represented  in  the  older  books  and  which  are  not. 
It  also  shows  at  a  glance  which  verses  I  have  been  able  to  trace 
elsewhere.  According  to  what  has  been  said  in  the  Introduction, 
both  points  are  of  some  importance.  I  have  used  this  opportunity 
to  supply  some  omissions,  and  to  correct  the  misprints  occurring 
in  the  figures  of  the  quotations  given  in  the  notes.  Wherever  the 
notes  and  the  synopsis  differ,  the  latter  alone  is  to  be  relied  on.  The 
addition  of  an  asterisk  (*)  to  a  quotation  means  that  the  passage  is 
in  verse,  and  that  it  is  thus  intimately  connected  with  Manu's  -Sloka. 
The  passages  quoted  from  the  Mahabharata  are  all  cognate  verses. 
Hence  no  asterisks  have  been  added. 

Abbreviations:  Ga.  =  Gautamiya  Dharmaj-astra;  Ba.=Baudhayaniya 
Dharma^astra ;  Ap.  =  Apastambiya  Dharma-sutra ;  Va.=VasishMa 
Dharmajastra ;  Vi.= Vishmi  Smrz'ti;  Ya.  =  Ya^Tzavalkiya  Dharma- 
jastra;  Par.  =  Parlrara  Smrz'ti  (Calc.  ed.) ;  Ma.  *Sr.  =  Manava-»$raddha- 
kalpa  (Introduction,  pp.  xl-xliii);  A.  Grz'.  =  Arvalayana  Grzliya-sutra 
(Calc.  ed.);  »Sa.  Grz'.  =  -Sahkhayana  Grz'hya-sutra;  Pa.  Grz'.=Paraskara 
Grz"hya-sutra ;  Go.  Grz'.=Gobhiliya  Grzliya-sutra  (Calc.  ed.);  Mai. 
Up.  =  Maitrayamyabrahma«opanishad;  Ira.  Up.  =  Lravasyopanishad  ; 
Sa.  Up.  =  Sa#zhitopanishad  ;  Nir.  =  Nirukta ;  Mah.  =  Mahabharata ; 
V.  P.=Vish/zu-pura7za,  Wilson's  translation,  edited  by  Dr.  F.  E.  Hall. 


534 

LAWS    OF  MANU 

Manu    I. 

i 

39-     *       ...       . 

2. 

40. 

. 

3-      • 

41. 

• 

4- 

42.     . 

5-     • 

43- 

•    •    • 

6. 

44. 

•    • 

7-     • 

*£ 

•    • 

8. 

46. 

•    • 

9- 

47. 

.    i 

io.  V 

P. 

t  P 

56 

;   Mah 

Xn, 

48. 

. 

342 

,40. 

49. 

ii. 

. 

50. 

i 

12. 

i 

51. 

i 

13-      ■ 

. 

52. 

. 

14. 

. 

53- 

i 

15. 

. 

54- 

.    .   . 

16. 

.     . 

55. 

.    .    . 

17- 

.      . 

56. 

•    • 

18.  Mah.  XII,  233 

,  %A 

57- 

19.     .      .      . 

. 

58. 

. 

20.  Mah.  XII,  233 

,8. 

59- 

31.  Mah.  XII,  233 

,26. 

60. 

22.     . 

61. 

23- 

62. 

►      *      • 

24. 

63. 

. 

25. 

64.  Mah.  XII,  232,  12 

**£ 

26. 

65.  Mah.  XII,  232,  15 

27. 

66.  Mah.  XII,  232,  16. 

28.  Mah.  XII,  233 

,16. 

67.  Mah.  XII,  232, 17* 

29.  Mah.  XII,  233 

,17- 

68.  Mah.  XII,  232,  18-19. 

30.     .      .      . 

69.  Mah.  XII,  232,  20. 

3i. 

70.  Mah.  XII;  232,  21. 

32. 

ft.  Mah.  XII,  232,  29. 

33- 

72.  Mah.  XII,  232,  30. 

34- 

73.  Mah.  XII,  232,  31. 

35. 

74 

36. 

75.  Mah.  XII,  233,  4. 

37. 

76.  Mah.  XII,  233,  5. 

38. 

77.  M 

[ah. 

XII, 

233>  6- 

SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


535 


78.  Mah.  XII,  233,  7. 

79 

80 


98.  .       . 

99.  Ya.  I,  198. 
100.     . 


81.  Mah.  XII,  232,  23. 

82.  Mah.  XII,  232,  24. 

83.  Mah.  XII,  232,  25. 

84.  Mah.   XII,    232,    26 ;    III, 
200,  16. 

85.  Mah.  XII,  232,  27. 

86.  Mah.  XII,  232,  28  j    Par.  I, 
23*. 

87 

88 


101 

102.  * 

103.  .... 
104 

10S 

106.     . 

107 

108.  Va.VI,  l»*. 

109.  Va.  VI,  2  *,  3-5 
no 


89.  .  .  . 

90.  .  .  . 

91.  .  .  . 

92.  .  .  . 

93.  .  .  . 

94.  Ya.  I,  198-99. 

95.  .  .  . 

96.  .  .  . 

97.  .  .  . 


in, 


112. 


1*3- 
114. 
115. 
116. 


117. 
118. 


119. 


Manu  II. 


I 

17 

2 

18 

3 

19 

4-      •       ■ 

20 

5 

21 

6.  Ba.  I,  1,  1-6;    Ga.  I,  1-3; 

22.  Ba.  I,  2,  9-10;  Va.  I,  8-9. 

Ap.  I,  1,  1-3 ;  Va.  I,  4-6. 

23.  Ba.  I,  2,  12;  Va.  I,  13-15; 

7 

Ya.  I,  2. 

8 

24.  Ba.  I,  2,  13-15;  Ap.  I,  32, 

9 

18;  Vi.  LXXXIV,  2,4. 

10 

25 

n 

26.  Ga.  VIII,  14;  Ya.  I,  10. 

12.  Ya.I,  7*. 

27.  Ya.  I,  13a 

13 

28 

14.  Ga.  I,  4;  Ap.  I,  30,  9. 

29.  Mah.    Ill,    180,    34* ;     Vi. 

15 

XXVII,  4;  Ya.I,  ii;A»Gr£ 

16 

I?  J5>  1-3 i  *SS-  G/7'-  !>  243  1- 

536 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


3;  Pa.  Grz'.  I,  16,  3-4;  Go. 
Gri.  II,  7,  21. 
30.^  Vi.  XXVII,  5;  Ya.  I,  12; 
A.  Gri.  I,  15,  4;  SL  Gri.  I, 
24,4-5;  Pa.Grz'.1, 17, 1;  Go. 
Grz'.  II,  8>  8. 

31.  Vi.  XXVII,  6-9. 

32.  Pa.  Gn'.  I,  17,  4. 

33 

34.  Vi.^XXVII,  10-11;  Yl  I, 
12 ;  A.  Gri.  I,  16,  1;  SL  Gri. 
1,27,  1;  Pa.  Grz*.  I,  17,  5;  I, 
19,  1. 

35.  Vi.  XXVII,  12;  Ya.  I,  12; 
A.  Gri.  I,  17,  1;  S&.  Gri.  I, 
28,  1-2 ;  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  1,  1-2  ; 
Go.  Grz'.  II,  9,  1. 

36.  Ga.  I,  5,  7,11;  Ba.I,  3,  7-9; 
Ap.  I,  1,  18;  Va.  XI,  49-5i; 
yi.  XXVII,  15-17;  Y1I,  14; 
A.  Gri.  I,  19,  1-4;  *Sa.  Grz'. 
II,  1,  1,  4-5;  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  2, 
1-3;  Go.  G/7.  II,  10,  1-3. 

37.  Ga.  I,  6;  Ap.  I,  1,  19-20. 

38.  Vi.  XXVII,  26*;  Ga.  I,  12- 
14;  Ba.  I,  3,  12;  Ap.  I,  1, 
21;  Va.  XI,  71-73;  A.  Gri. 

I,  19,  5-6;  S&.  Gri.  II,  1,  6-8; 
Pa.  Gri.  II,  5,  36-38;  Go. 
Gri.  II,  10,  4. 

39.  Vi.  XXVII,  27*;  Ga.  XXI, 
1 1 ;  Va.  XI,  74 ;  A.  Gri.  I,  19, 
6;  «Sa.  Grz'.  II,  1,  9-13;  Pa. 
Gri.  II,  5,  39 ;  Go.  Gri.  II, 
10,  5- 

40.  Ap^I,  1,  28;  2,  6;  Va.  XI, 
75;  A.  Gri.  1, 19,  7;  Pa.  Grz'. 

II,  5,  40 ;  Go.  Grz*.  II,  10,  6. 

41.  Ga.  I,  16-21;  Ba.  I,  3,  14; 
Ap.I,  2,39-3,  9;  Va.XI,  61- 
67;  Vi.  XXVII,  19-20;  Y1I, 
29;A.  Grz.  1,19,8;^.  Grz.  II, 


1,  2,  4-5;  Pa.  Grz".  II,  5,16- 
19;  Go.  Grz'.  II,  10,  8-9. 

42.  Ga.  1,15;  Ba.  I,  3,  13;  Ap. 

I,  2,  33-37;  Va.  XI,  58-60; 
Vi.  XXVII,  18;  Ya.  I,  29;  A. 
Grz'.  I,  19,  10-1 1 ;  SL  Gri.  II, 
1, 15-17;  Pa. Grz'.II,  5,21-23; 
Go.  Grz'.  II,  10,  10. 

43.  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  5,  24. 

44.  Ba.  I,  8,  5;  Vi.  XXVII,  19; 
Ya.  I,  29;  Go.  Grz'.  II,  10, 
12. 

45.  Ga.  I,  22-24;  Ba.  I,  3,  15; 
Ap.  I,  2,  38;  Va.  XI,  52-54; 
Vi.  XXVII,  21,23;  Ya.1,29; 
A.  Grz',  I,  19,  12-13;  *$&• 
Grz'.  II,   1,   18-20;    Pa.  Grz'. 

II,  5,  25-28  ;  Go.  Grz'.  U,  10, 
11. 

46.  Ga.  I,  26;  Ba.  I,  3,  15; 
Va.  XI,  55-57  ;  Vi.  XXVII, 
22;  A.  Grz'.  I,  19,  13  ;  SL 
Gri.  II,  1,  21-24. 

47.  Ga.  I,  25;  Vi.  XXVII,  24. 
48.^  Ga.  II,  8,  35;  Ap.  I,  3,  25; 

A.  Grz'.  I,  22,  5-6;  SL  Gri. 
II,   6,   4;  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  5,  1 
Go.  Grz".  II,  10,  41-42. 
49^Ga.  II,  36;  Ba.  I,  3,  16-17 
Ap.  I,  3,  28-30;  Va.  XI,  68- 
70;  Vi.   XXVII,  25;   Ya.  I. 
30;    A.  Grz'.  I,  22,    8;    Pa. 
Grz'.  II,  5,  2-4. 

50.  A.  Grz'.  I,  22,  7  ;  SL  Gri.  II, 
6,  5-6;  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  5,  5-7; 
Go.  Grz'.  II,  10,  43. 

51.  Ga.  II,  39,   40;    Ap.  I 
31-42;   Vi.  LXVIII,  40-4  j 
Ya.  I,  31;  A.  Grz'.  I,  22,  9  ; 
Grz'.  II,  6,  7  ;  Pa.  Grz'.  II,  5 
Go.  Grz'.  II,  10,  44. 

52.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  57. 


; 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


537 


53.  Ga.  II,  41;  IX,  59;  Ba.  II, 
5,21;  II,  12,  7;  Vi.LXVIII, 

34-35- 

54.  Va.  Ill,  69;  Ba.  II,  12,  7; 
Vi.LXVIII,  42-43;  Ya. I,  31. 

55 • 

56.  Ba.  II,  12,9;  II,  1 3, 1 1 ;  Ya. 

I,  112;  Ap.   II,  1,  2-3;  Vi. 

LXVIII,  48. 

57 

58.  Ba.  I,  8,  14;  Va.  Ill,  26; 
Vi.  LXII,  6;  Y£.  I,  18. 

59.  Ba.  I,  8, 15-16;  Va.III,  26; 
Vi.  LXII5l-4;  Ya.  I,  19. 

60.  Ba.  I,  8,  19-21  ;  Ga.  I,  36  ; 
Ap.1, 16, 2-10;  Va.III,  27-29; 
Vi.  LXII,  6-8;  Ya.1,20;  Go. 
Gri.  I,  2,  5-9.  ^ 

61.  Ba.I,  8, 17;  Ap.  I,  15,4-7; 
Va.III,  31 ;  Vi.LXII,  5;  Ya. 
I,  18,20;  Go.  Gri.  I,  2,  5, 

2  2 2  3 

62.  Ba.  I,  8,  23*;  Vi.  LXII, 
9*;  Ga.  I,  36;  Va.  Ill,  31- 
34;  Ya.I,2i;  Go.Grz'.I, 2,29. 

63.  Ba.  I,  8,  5-10;  Ap.  I,  6, 
18-19  ;  Go.  Gri.  II,  2,  1-3. 

64.  Vi.  XXVII,  29*;  Ba.I,  6, 
6-9. 

65.  Ya.  I,  36  ;  Ga.  II,  9  ;  A. 
Gri.  I,  18,  2;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  1, 

3  ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,1. 
66.V1.  XXVII,  13;  YLI,  13; 

A.  Gri.  I,  15,12;  16,6;  17, 18. 
67.  Vi.  XXII,  32;  XXVII,  14; 

Ya.  I,  13. 
68 


1,26;  SL  Gri.  II,  7,  4-6  ;  IV, 
8,  15. 

72.  Ga.  I,  46  ;  Ap.  I,  15,  22. 

73.  Ga.  I,  46;  *Sa.  Gri.  IV,  8, 
12,  16—17. 

74.  Ga.  I,  57;  Ap.  I,  13,  6-7; 
Vi.  XXX,  33  ;  Si.  Gri.  IV, 
8,12-13. 

75.  Ga.  1, 48-50;  Ba.  II,  7,5-7. 

76.  Vi.  LV,  10*. 

77.  Vi.  LV,  n*. 

78.  Vi.  LV,  12*;  Ba.  II,  11,  6. 

79.  Vi.LV,i3*;  Ba.  IV,  1,  29; 
Va.  XXVI,  4. 

80.  Vi.  LV,  14*;  Ba.  11,7,  *5- 

81.  Vi.  LV,  15*. 

82.  Vi.  LV,  16*  ;  Ba.  II,  7, 
22. 

83.  Va.X,  5*;  Vi.LV,i7*. 

84.  Vi.LV,  18*;  Ba.  IV,  1,26; 
Va.  XXV,  11. 

85.  Vi.  LV,  19*;  Va.XXVI,  9*. 

86.  Vi.  LV,  20* ;  Va.  XXVI, 
10*. 

87.  Vi.  LV,  21*;  Va.  XXVI, 
11*. 


89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 

93- 
94. 

95- 
96. 

97- 


98 

99 

100 

101.  Ga.  II,  10-11;  Ba.  II,  7, 
13-14;  Ap.  I,  30,  8;  Va. 
VII,  16;  Vi.  XXVIII,  2-3; 


69.  Ga.  II,  6,  8,  10 ;  Ya.  I,  15  ; 

A.  Gri.  I,  22,  1-2. 

7o ;      •      • 

71.  Ba.  I,  3,  25-28;  Ap.  I,  5, 

i9j  23;   Vi.  XXX,  32;    Ya. 


538 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


Ya.  I,  23-25  ;  SL  Gri.  II,  9, 

*-3- 

102.  Ba.  II,  7, 18,  20;  Va.  XXVI, 
2-3. 

103.  Ba.  II,  7,  15. 

104.  Ba.  II,  11,  6. 

105.  Ap.  I,  12,  9  ;  Va.  XIII,  7. 

106.  Ap.  I,  12,  3-5. 

107.  Vi.  XXX,  34-38;  Ya.1,41- 
46  ;  A.  Gri  Ill,  3,  2-3. 

108.  Ga.  II,  8,  30,  ^5  ;  Ba.  I,  3, 
16;  4,  4-8;  Ap.  I,  4,  16, 
23;  5,  25;  Va.VII,  9,  15; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  4,  7,  9,  12;  Ya. 
I,  25. 

109.  Yd.  I,  28. 

no.  Ba.  I,  4,  2  ;  Ap.  I,  32,  22- 

24;  Va.  II,  12. 
in.  Vi.  XXIX,  7*. 

112.  Sa.  Up.  Ill*  (p.  30,  Bur.); 
Ba.  I,  4,  1  a*;  Vi.  XXIX,  8*. 

113.  Ba.  I,  4,  ib*. 

114.  Nir.  II,  4*;  Sa.  Up.  Ill* 
(pp.  29-30,  Bun);  Va.  11,8*; 
Vi.  XXIX,  9*. 

115.  Nir.  II,  4*;  Va.  II,  9* ;  Vi. 
XXIX,  10*. 

116.  Vi.  XXX,  41-42. 

117.  Vi.XXX,43*;  Ga.VI,i-3, 
5;  Ba.  I,  3,  25-28;  Ap.  1,5, 
19-20;  14,  7-9;  Va.  XIII, 
41-43;  Vi.  XXVIII,  14-17; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  27. 

118 

119.  Ga.  II,  21,  25;  Ap.  1,8,  ii. 

120.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  64^-65  a. 

121.  Ap.  I,  5,15;  Ba.  I,  3,  23. 

122.  Ga.VI,5;  Ba.  I,  3,  27;  Ap. 
I,  5,  12;  Va.  XIII,  44;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  17;  Ya.  I,  26;  Sa. 
Gri.  IV,  12,  5. 

123.  Va.  XIII,  45. 


124.  Vi.  XXVIII,  17. 

125.  Ap.  I,  5,  18;  Va.  XIII,  46. 
126 

127.  Ga.V,  41;  Ap.  I,  14,  26-29. 

128.  Ga.VI,  19. 

129.  Vi.  XXXII,  7. 

130.  Ga.VI, 9;  Ba.1,3,45;  Ap. 
1,14,11;  Va.  XIII,  41;  Vi. 
XXXII,  4;  Si.  Gri.  IV,  12, 

131.  Ga.VI,  7;  Ap.  I,  14,  6-9; 
Vi.  XXXII,  2. 

132.  Ga.VI,7-8;  Vi.  XXXII,  2. 

133.  Vi.  XXXII,  3. 

134.  Ap.1, 14,13*;  Ga.VI,  14-17. 

135.  Mah.  XIII,  8,  21;  Ap.1, 14, 
25*;  Vi.  XXXII,  17*. 

136.  Vi.XXXII,i6*;Ga.VI,2o; 
Va.XIII,  56-57;  Y1I,  116. 

137.  Ga.VI,io;  Ya.  1, 116. 

138.  Ga.VI,  24;  Ba.  II,  6,  30; 
Ap.  II,n,7;  Va.  XIII,  £8,60; 
Vi.  LXIII,  5i;Ya.  I,  117. 

139.  Ga.VI,  25;  Ap.  II,  11,5-6; 
Va.XIII,  59;  Yl  1,117. 

140.  Ga.  I,  9-10;  Ap.  I,  1,  13; 
Va.  Ill,  21;  Vi.  XXIX,  1; 
Ya.  I,  34. 

141.  Va.  Ill,  22-23;  Vi.  XXIX, 
2  ;  Ya.  I,  35. 

142.  Ya.  I,  34. 

143.  Vi.XXIX,  3;  Ya.I,  35. 

144.  Sa.  Up.  Ill*  (p.  32,  Bur.); 
Nir.  II,  4*;  Va.  II,  10*;  Vi. 

XXX,  47*;  Ap.1,1,14. 

145.  Va.XIII,  48*;  Ga.VI,  51; 
Ya.  I,  35. 

146.  Vi.  XXX,  44*;  Ga.VI,  5 
Va.  II,  3-5- 

147.  Vi.XXX,45*;  Ap.I,  1,1 
i48.AVi.  XXX,  46*;    Ga.  I, 

Ap.  I,  1,  16. 


8; 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL  PASSAGES. 


539 


149.  .        .        . 

150.  . 

151.  Ba.  I,  3,  47. 

I£2.        . 


153.  •       • 

154.  Mah.  Ill,  133,  12. 

155.  Vi.  XXXII,  18*. 
i£6.  Ga.  VI,  21-23. 

157.  Mah.  XII,  36,  46 ;  Va>  III, 
11*;  Ba.  I,i,  10*;  Par.  VIII, 
23*. 

i§8.  Mah.  XII,  36,  47;  Par.  VIII, 
24*. 

159.  Ga.  II,  42  ;  Ap.  I,  8,  25-30. 

160.  .       .       .       . 


161.  ...» 

162.  * 

163 

164 

165.  .       .       .       . 

166.  Ap.  I,  12, 1-2 ;  Ya.  I,  40. 

167.  Ba.  II,  11,  8. 

168.  Va.  Ill,  2*;  Vi. XXVIII, 36. 

169.  Va.II,3*;  Vi.  XXVIII,  37; 
Ya.1,39. 

170.  Mah.  Ill,  180,  34b;  Va.  II, 
3*;  Vi.  XXVIII,  38. 

171.  Va.  II,  6a*;  Ga.I,  10J  Va. 

II,  4-5;  Ba.  I,  3,  6a;  Ap.Lt, 

i5>!9- 

172.  Mah.  Ill,  180,  35 a;  Va.  II, 
6*>*;  Ba.  I,  3,  6**;  Ga.  II, 
4-5. 

173 

174.  Vi.  XXVII,  28*. 

175 

176.  Ga.  II,  8;  Va.VII,  17;  Vi. 

XXVIII,  4-5;  Ya.  I,  22. 
177.^  Ga.  II,  13 ;  Ba.  I,  3,  23-24 ; 

Ap.I,  2,  23,  25-26;  Ya.  I,  33  ; 

Pa.  Gri.  II,  5,  12  ;   Go.  Gri. 

III,  1,  17,  19,  23. 


178.  Ga.II,  13;  Ba.1,3,  24;  Ap. 
I,  3,  11,  17-24;  7,  5;  Va. 
VII,  15;  Vi.  XXVIII,  11;  Ya. 

I,  33;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  16,  19, 
25-26. 

179.  Ga.^II,  13,  16,17;  Ba.I,  3, 
20;  Ap.I,  3,12-13;  7,3,  8- 
10;  Vi.  XXVIII,  11;  Yl  I, 
33;  PI  Qri.  II,  5,  12;  Go. 
Gri.  Ill,  1,  16. 

180.  Vi.  XXVIII,  48. 

181.  Vi.  XXVIII,  51*. 

182^  Ba.1,3, 19;  Ap.I,  4, 13-14; 
A.  Gri.  I,   22,   g;   SL   Gri. 

II,  6,  8 ;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  5,  11; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  27. 

183.  Ga.  II,  35;  Ba.  I,  3,  18; 
Ap.I,  3,  25;  Vi.  XXVIII,  9; 
Ya.  I,  29. 

184.  Ga.  II,  37-38. 

185 .       • 

186.  Ba.  I,  3,  19;  Ap.  I,  4,  16; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  4;  A.  Gri.  I,  22, 
6  ;SLGri.  II, 6, 8;  Pa. Gri.  II, 
5,  9,  11  ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  27. 

187.  Vi.  XXVIII,  52*;  Yl  III, 
281. 

188.  Ya.  I,  32. 

189.  YL  I,  32. 

190.  Ya.  I,  32. 

191.  Ga.  II,  29-30;  Ap.  I,  5, 
24-27;  Va.  VH,  13;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  6-7;  Ya.I,  27;  SL 
Gri.  II,  6,  8 ;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  5, 
11 ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  15. 

192.  Ga.  II,  22  ;  Ap.  I,  5,  17. 

193.  Ap.  I,  6,  18-20. 

194.  Ga.  II,  21;  Ba.  I,  3,  21  ; 
Ap.I,  4,22,28;  Vi.  XXVIII, 

195.  Ga.  II,  25;  Ap.I,  6,  5;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  18. 


540 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


196.  Vi.  XXVIII,  19*;  Ga.II,28; 
Ba.I,  3,  38;Va.VII,i2;Ap. 
I,  6,"  6-9  ;  PI  Gri.  II,  5,  30. 

197.  Vi.  XXVIII,  2o-22.a 

198.  Ga.  II,  14-15,  21 ;  Ap.  I,  2, 
21;  3>!5;  6,  13-17;  8,8-10; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  23;  SL  Gri.  IV, 
8,5,7-11. 

199.  Ga.  II,  18,  23  ;  Ap.  I,  8,  15  ; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  24-25. 

200.  Vi.  XXVIII,  26. 

201 


220.  Vi.  XXVIII,  53*;  Ga. 
XXIII,  21;  Ba.  II,  7,  16;  Ap. 
II,  12,  13-14;  Va.  XX,  4. 

221.  Va.  I,  18 ;  Ap.  II,  12,  22. 

222.  Ga.  II,  11 ;  Ba.  II,  7,  2  ;  Vi. 
XXVIII,  2. 

223.  Mah.  XIII,  105,  13;  Ap.II, 
29,11. 

224 

225.  Ga.  XXI,  15;   Ap.  I,  14,  6; 

Vi.  XXXI,  1-3. 
226 


202 

203.  Ap.  I,  6,  15,  23. 

204.  Ba.  I,  3,  34;  Ap.  I,  8,  12- 
13;  Vi.  XXVIII,  27-28. 

205.  Va.  XIII,  54a*;  Ga.  VI, 
3-4;  Ap.  I,  6,  29-30;  8,19- 
20J  Vi.  XXVIII,  29-30. 

206.  Ap.  I,  7,  28-29. 
207^Ga.  II,  31;  Ba.  I,  3,  44; 

Ap.  I,  7,  29-30;  Va.  XIII, 
54;  Vi.  XXXII,  1. 

208.  Vi.  XXVIII,  31. 

209.  Ga.  II,  32  ;  Ba.  I,  3,  36 ;  Ap. 
1,7,30;  Vi.  XXVIII,  32-33. 

2io^Ga.  II,  31;  Ba.  I,  3,  37; 
Ap.1,7,27;  Vi.  XXXII,  2,  5. 

211.  Ga.  11,32;  Ba.I,  3,  37;  Ap. 
1,7,  27;  Vi.  XXXII,  6. 

212.  Vi.  XXXII,  13*;  Ga.  II, 
34;  Ba.I,  3,  33. 

213.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  38. 

214.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  37. 

215 

216.  Vi.  XXXII,  14*. 

2i7u  Vi.  XXXII,  15  *  ;  Ga.VI,  2  ; 

Ap.  I,  14,  8. 

218 

219.  Ga.  I,  27;  II,  10;  Ap.  I,  2, 

31-32;  3°>  8;  Va.  VII,  11; 

Vi.  XXVIII,  41. 


227 

228.  Vi.  XXXI,  5. 

229.  Mah.  XII,  108,  5b. 

230.  Mah.     XII,     108,    6;     Vi. 
XXXI,  7  *. 

231.  Mah.  XII,  108,  7;  Vi.  XXXI, 
8;  Ap.  I,  3,44. 

232.  Mah.  XII,  108,  8a. 

233.  Mah.  XII,   108,   8^-9;    Vi. 
XXXI,  10  *. 

234.  Mah.    XII,    108,    12;    Vi. 
XXXI,  9  *. 

235.  Vi.  XXXI,  6. 
236 , 

237 

238.  Mah.  XII,  165,  31%  32a 
Ap.  II,  29, 11. 

239.  Mah.  XII,  165,  31^,  32a. 

240 

24i.AGa.VII,i-3;  Ba.I,  3,41-43: 

Ap.II,  4,25. 
242 

243.  Ga.  Ill,  5,  6;  Ba.II,n,  13 
Ap.II,  21,  6;  Va.VII,  4;  Vi 
XXVIII,  43  ;  Ya.  I,  49. 

244.  Ga.  Ill,  9 ;  Ya.  I,  50. 

245.  Ga.  II,   48-49;    Ap.  I, 
19;  Vi.  XXVIII,  42;    Ya. 
51 ;  A.  Gri.  Ill,  9,  4 ;  Go.Gr/. 
Ill,  4,  1-2. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


541 


246.  SL  Gri.  Ill,  i,  18. 

247.  Ga.  Ill,  7  ;    Vi.    XXVIII, 
44-45  ;  Ya.  I,  49. 


248.  Ga.  Ill,  8;  Va.  VII,   5-6; 
Vi.  XXVIII,  46 ;  Ya.  I,  49. 

249.  Vi.  XXVIII,  47*. 


Manu   III, 


i.^Ga.  II,  45-47  ;  Ba.  I,  3, 1-4  ; 
Ap.  I,  2,  12-16 ;  Ya.  I,  36  ;  A. 
Gri.  I,  22,  3-4;  Pa\  Gri.  II, 
5>  i3-x5;  H,  6,  2-3. 

2.  Va.  VIII,  1 ;  Ya.  I,  52. 

3.  S&.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  5,  17;  Go. 
Gri.  Ill,  4,  30-34. 

4.  Ga.  IV,  1 ;  Va.  VIII,  1 ;  Ya. 
I,  52 ;  A.  Gri.  I,  5,  3-6 ;  III, 
9,  4  ;  -Sa.  Gri.  I,  5,  6-10 ;  Pa\ 
G/Y.  II,  6,  1,  4;  Go.  Grz'.  II, 
1,2. 

5.  Ga.IV,  2-5;  Va.  VIII,  1-2; 
Ba.  II,  1,  37-38;  Vi.  XXIV, 
9-10;  Ya.  I,  53;  Go.  Gri. 
Ill,  4,  4-5. 

6.  A.  Grz'.  I,  5,  1. 

7.  Ya.  I,  54. 

8.  Vi.XXIV,  12-16;  Y1L  53. 

9 

10 

11.  Ya.  I,  53. 

12 

13.  Ba.1, 16,  2-5;  Va.I,  24-25; 
Vi.XXIV,  1-4;  Ya.  I,  57; 
PI  Gri.  I,  4,  8-1 1. 

14.  Va.I,  26;  Yl  I,  56. 

15.  Vi.  XXVI,  6*;  Va.  I,  27. 

16.  Ba.  II,  2,7. 

17.  Va.  I,  27. 

18.  Vi.XXVI,7*;  Va.XIV,  11. 

19 

20.  Mah.  I,  73,  8. 


21.  Mah.  I,  73,  8-9;  Ba.  I,  20, 
1 ;  Va.I,  29;  Vi.XXIV,  18. 
22 

23.  Mah.  I,  73>i°;  Ga.IV,  15. 

24.  Mah.  I,  73, 10-iij  Ga.  IV, 
14 ;  Ba.  I,  20, 10 ;  Ap.  II,  12, 
3;  Vi.  XXIV,  27-28. 

25.  Mah.  I,  73,  11-12. 

26.  Mah.  I,  73,  13;  Ba.  I,  20, 
12. 

27.  Ga.  IV,  6;  Ba.  I,  20,  2; 
Ap.  II,  11,17;  Va.I,  30;  Vi. 
XXIV,  19;  Y1I,58;  A.  Gri. 
1,6. 

28.^  Ga.  IV,  9;  Ba.  I,  20,  5; 
Ap.  II,  11,  19  ;  Va.  I,  31;  Vi. 
XXIV,  20;  Ya.  I,  59;  A.  Gri. 
1,6. 

29.  Ga.  IV,  8 ;  Ba.  I,  20,  4 ;  Ap. 
II,  11,  18;  Va.  I,  32  ;  Vi. 
XXIV,  21;  Ya.  I,  59;A.Gr/. 
1,6. 

30.  Ga.  IV,  7 ;  Ba.  I,  20,  3 ;  Vi. 
XXIV,  22;  Ya.I,6o;  A.  Gri. 
1,6. 

31.  Ga.  IV,  11;  Ba.  I,  20,  61; 
Ap.  II,  12,  1 ;  Va.  I,  35;  Vi. 
XXIV,  24;  Ya.  I,  61;  A.  Gri. 
1,6. 

32.  Ga.  IV,  10;  Ba.  I,  20,  71; 
Ap.  II,  11,  20;  Va.  1,33;  Vi. 
XXIV,  23;  Ya.  I,  61;  A.  Gri. 
1,6. 


1  The  order  of  the  Sutras  followed  here  is  that  adopted  by  Dr.  Hultzsch  in  his 
edition  of  the  text. 


542 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


33.  Ga.  IV,  12;  Ba.1,20,  8;  Ap. 
11,12,2;  Va.  1,34;  Vi.  XXIV, 
25  ;  Ya.  I,  61 ;  A.  Gri.  I,  6. 

34.  Ga.  IV,  13;  Ba.  I,  20.  9; 
Vi.  XXIV,  26;  Yd.  I,  61; 
A.  Gri.  I,  6. 

35 .       . 

36 

37-  Ga.  IV,  33;  Vi.  XXIV,  29; 

Ya.  I,  58 ;  A.  Gri.  I,  6. 
38.  Ga.  IV,  29-32 ;  Vi.  XXIV, 

30-32  ;  Ya.  I,  59-60 ;  A.  Gri. 

1,6. 


39- 
40. 
41. 


42.  Ba.  I,  21,  1 ;  Ap.  II,  12,  4. 

43.  Vi.  XXIV,  5  ;  Ya.  I,  62. 

44.  Vi.  XXIV,  6-8;  Ya.  I,  62. 

45.  Ga,V,  1-2  ;Ba.  IV,  1,18-19; 
Ap.  II,  1,  17-18;  Va.  XII, 
21-24;  Vi.  LXIX,  1;  Ya.  I, 
79-81 ;  *Sa.  Gri.  IV,  11,  16; 
Pa.  Gri.  I,  11,  7-8. 

46.  Yd.  I,  79. 

47.  Ya.  I,  79. 

48.  Ya.  I,  79.    . 

49 

50.  Ya.  I,  79. 

51.  Ba.  I,  21,2-3;  II,  2,27;  Ap. 
II,  13,11;  Va.  I,  37-38, 

52 A-       • 

53.  Mah.  XIII,  45,  20;  Ap.  II, 

13,12;  Va.  I,  36. 

54.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  ifc-2» 

55.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  3  ;  Ya.  I,  82. 

56.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  5*>-6a. 

57.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  6>. 

58.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  7. 

59 

60 


61.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  4. 


62 

63.  Ba.  I,  10,  26*. 

64.  Ba.  I,  10,28a*. 

65.  Ba.  I,  10,  28b*. 

66.  Ba,  I,  10,  29. 

67.  Ga.V,  7-8;  Ba.  II,  4,  22; 
Vi.  L1X,  1-2  ;  Ya.  I,  97. 

68.  Par.  II,  11*;  Vi.  LIX,  19. 

69.  Vi.  LIX,  20. 

70.  Ga.  V,  3-4,  9 ;  Ba.  II,  5,11; 
II,  11, 1;  Vi.  LIX,  20-25;  Ya. 
1, 102  ;  A.  Gri.  Ill,  1,  1-4. 

7i 

72.  Vi.  LIX,  26*. 

73.  SL  Gri.  I,  5,  1 ;  Pa.  Gri.  I, 
4,1, 

74.  A.  Gri.  I,  j,  3 ;  SL  Gri.  I, 
10,  6. 

75.  A.  Gri.  Ill,  2,  2. 

76.  Mah.  XII,  264, 1 1 ;  Mai.  Up. 
VI,  37;  Va.XI,i3. 

77 

78.  Va.  VIII,  14-16;    Vi.  LIX, 


27-28. 


79 

80.  Vi.LIX,29*;  -Sa.Grz'.II,i6,6. 

81.  Yd.  I,  23, 104. 

82.  Mah.  XIII,  97,  8k-9a;  Mi 
Sr.IV*;  Vi.  LXVII,  23-25. 

/Ga.  V,  10;  Ba.  II,  5,  11 

83.  Ap.  11,3,  12,  16-17;  V; 

84.  I    XI,  3;  Vi.  LXVII,  1-3 

85.  I    A.  Gri.  I,  2, 1-2 ;  *Sa.  Gri. 

86.  II,  14,  1-4;  Pa.  Gri. 
i  9>i-i2. 
/Ga.  V,  11-17;  Ap.  II,  3, 

12,15,  18-23;  11,4,1-8; 
Va.X.1,4;  Vi.  LXVII,  4- 
J  22;  A.  Gri.  I,  2,  3-10; 
SL  Gri.  II,  14,  5-17;  Pa. 
Gri.   II,    9,    3-10; 


87 

88 

89 
90 
9i 


Gri.  I,  4,  8-12. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


543 


92.  Ap.  II,  9,  5-6 ;  Vi.  LXVII, 
26;  Ya.  I,  103;  Sa.  Gri.  II, 
14,22. 

93.  Ap.II,  4,  9;  Vi.  LXVII,  28, 
32,  44,  46. 

94.  Ba.  II,  5,  15  ;  Ap.  II,  4,  10- 
11;  Va.  XI,  5;  Vi.LIX,  14; 
LXVII,  27;  Y1I,  108;  Sa. 
Gri.  II,  14,  20;  Pa.  Gri.  II, 
9, 11-12. 

95 

96.  Ga.  V,  18;  Ya.  1, 108;  Sa. 
Gri.  II,  14,  19. 

97.  Va.  Ill,  8. 

98 

99.  Ga.  V,  31-34;  Va.  VIII, 
12;  Ap.  II,  4,  13,  16;  II,  6, 
7-14;  Vi.  LXVII,  45;  Ya.  I, 
107. 

100.  -Sa.  Gri.  II,  17,  1*;  Vi. 
LXVII,  33. 

101.  Ap.  II,  4>i4*;  Ga.  V,  35- 
36;  Ya.  I,  107. 

102.  Va.  VIII,  7*;  Vi.  LXVII, 
34*;  Ga.V,  40. 

103.  Va.  VIII,  8^*;  Vi.  LXVII, 
35*;  Par.  I,  43*;  SLGri. 
II,i6,3*;  Ga.V,4o;  Ap.  II, 
6,  5- 

104.  Ya.  I,  112. 

105.  Va.VIII,  8*>*;  Ga.V,  40; 
Va.  VIII,  4-5 ;  Vi.  LXVII, 
29-30;  Ya.  107. 

106.  Ga.  V,  38-39;  Ap.  II,  8, 
2-4;  Ya.  1, 104. 

107.  Ya.  I,  107. 

108.  Ap.  II,  6,  16-17;  Va.  XI, 
12. 

109 

no.  Ga.V,  43. 

in.  Vi.  LXVII,  36*;  Ga.V, 44. 

112.  Vi.   LXVII,    37*;   Ga.  V, 


45;  Ba.  II,  5,14;  Ap.II,  4, 
18-20. 

113.  Vi.LXVII,38*;  Y1I,  108. 

114.  Vi.  LXVII,  39*;  Ga.V,  25  ; 
Ba.II,i3,5a-b;  Ap.II,  4, 12; 
Yd.  I,  105 ;  SL  Gri.  II,  14, 
21;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  9, 13. 

115.  Ba.  II,  i3,5c-d*;  Vi.  LXVII, 
40*;  Ba.  II,  5,  18. 

116.  Vi.  LXVII,  41*;  Ap.II,  8, 
2;  Ya.  I,  105;  PI  Gri.  II, 
9>  14. 

117.  Vi.  LXVII,  42*;  Ba.  II, 
i3>6. 

118.  Vi.  LXVII,  43*;  Ba.  II, 
13*2. 

119.  Ga.V,  27-28;  Ba.11,6,36- 
38;  Ap.II,  8,  5-9;AVa.  XI, 
1-2 ;  Ya.  1, 109-10;  A.  Gri.  I, 
24,  1-4 ;  Sa.  Gri.  II,  15,  1-9  ; 
Pa.  Gri.  I,  3,  1-3;  Go.  Gri. 
IV,  10,  24-26. 

120.  Ga.  V,  29-30;  Ba.  II,  6, 
37;  Ya.  I,  no;  Si.  Gri.  II, 
15,  10. 

121.  Go.  Gri.  I,  4,  19. 

122.  Ga.  XV,  2;  Y1I,  217. 

123 

124 

125.  Ba.  II,  15, 10*;  Va.XI,  27*; 
Ma.*Sr.IV*;Ga.XV,  21;  Vi. 
LXXIII,  3-4;  Ya.  I,  228; 
A.  Gri.  IV,  7,2;  SL  Gri. 
IV,  1,  2. 

126.  Ba.  11,15,11*;  Va.XI,28*; 
ML  St.  IV*. 

127 

128.  Va.  Ill,  8a*;  A.  Gri.  IV, 

7>2. 

129.  Ga.  XV,  21 ;  Va.  XI,  29. 

130.  Vi.LXXXII,  2. 

131 


544 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


132.       ....... 

133 

134.  Mah.XIII,  90,  50;  Va.  VI, 
26;  Vi.  LXXXIII,  9-13;  Ya. 
I,  221. 

135.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  5ia. 

136.  ....... 

137 

138.  Ga.  XV,  12;  Ba.  II,  14,  6; 

Ag.  II,  17,4;  Va.  XI,  17. 

139.  Ap.  II,  17,  9. 

140.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  42. 

141.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  46;  Ap.  II, 
17,8*. 

142.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  44. 

143 •*>■•• 

144.  Ba.  II,  14,  4;    Ap.  II,  17, 

5-6;  Va.  XI,  18. 

145.  ML  St.  TV*;  Ba.  II,  14,  4- 
146 

M7 

148.  Ma.  St.  IV*;  Ga.  XV,  20; 
Vi.  LXXXIII,  17-18;  Ya.  I, 
220. 

149.  Vi.  LXXXII,  1-2. 

150.  Ga.  XV,  16;  Va.  XI,  19; 
Ya.  I,  223-224. 

151.  Ga.XV,  16, 18;  Vi. LXXXII, 

13- 

152.  Ga.  XV,  18;  Vi.  LXXXII, 

8-9. 

153.  Ga.  XV,  16,  18;  Va.  XI, 
19;  Vi.  LXXXII,  26;  Ya.  I, 
222. 

154.  Ga.XV,  16,18;  Va.XI,  19; 
Ya.  I,  223. 

155.  Ga.  XV,  17-18;  Ya.  I, 
222. 

156.  Vi.  LXXXII,  20-21;  Ya.I, 
222,  223. 

157.  Vi.  LXXXII,  23,  29;  Y1I, 
224. 


158.  Mah.XIII,  90,  7;  Ga.  XV, 
18;  Ya.  I,  223-224. 

159.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  8  ;  Ga.  XV, 
19;  Vi.  LXXXII,  5,  28;  Ya. 
I,  222,  223. 

1 60.  Ga.  XV,  18;  Vi.  LXXXII, 
18  ;  Ya.  I,  223. 

161.  Ga.XV,  18;  Ap.  II,  17,21  ; 
Va.XI,  19;  Vi. LXXXII,  19; 
Ya.  I,  222. 

162.  Ap.11,17,  21 ;  Vi.  LXXXII, 

7- 
163 

164.  Ga.  XV,  18;  Vi.  LXXXII, 
22  ;  Ya.  I,  223. 

165.  Ya.  I,  223. 

166.  Ga.  XV,  16;  Ya.I,  224. 

167 

168 

169 


170.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  nb-i2a. 

171.  Par.  IV,  20. 

172.  Mah.  XII,  165,  68 a;  Ba.II, 
1,  39  * ;  Par.  IV,  19*. 

J73-      •  

174.  Par.  IV,  17  *. 

175 .       . 

176 

177 

178.      ........ 

179 


180.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  I3b-i4a. 

181.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  I4b-i5a 
182 

183 

184.  Mah.   XIII,    90,    36;    Ga. 
XV,    9,    28;     Ap.    II,    17 
22;  Vi.  LXXXIII,  5;  Ya. 
219. 

185.  Mah.  XIII,   90,    26^-27 
Ma.Sr.IV*;  Ga.XV,  28;  B 
II,  14,  2  ;  Ap.  II,  17,  22  ;  Vi 


7> 

; 


SYNOPSIS   OF   PARALLEL   PASSAGES. 


545 


LXXXIII,2-4,  15,16;  Yd.  I, 
219-221. 

186.  Ma.  St.  IV*;  Ya.I,  219. 

187.  Ba.  II,  14,  6;  Ap.  II,  17, 
11-15;  Va.  XI,  17;  Vi. 
LXXIII,  2;  Yd.  I,  225. 

188.  Ga.  XV,  23;  Ya.  I,  225. 

189.  Ma.  St.  IV. 

190 

191.  Ga.  XV,  22. 

192 

193-      •  ' 

194 

195 

196 

197 

198 

199 .*       • 

200.  .  .  .:  .  ... 


201. 


202.  Ma.  St.  II;  Ap.  II,  19,  3-5 
Vi.LXXIX,  24;  Yd.  I,  236. 

203 

204 


205.  Vi.  LXXIII,  27;  Ya.  I 
244. 

206.  Ga.  XV,  25  ;  Ap.  II,  18,  6 
Ya.I,  227;  Vi.  LXXXV,  62 

207.  Vi.  LXXXV,  54-61. 

208.  Vi.  LXXIII,  2  ;  Ya.  I,  226 
A.  Gri.  IV,  7,  2. 

209.  Ba.  II,  14,7;  Vi.  LXXIII 
12;  Ya.I,  231;  A.Gn.  IV,  8 
1  ;  SL  Gri.  IV,  1,  5.  * 

210.  Ba.  II,  14,  7;  Ap.  II,  17; 
17-19;  Vi.  LXXIII,  12;.  Yd 
I,  235;  A.  Gri.  IV,  7,5-7 
SL  Gri.  IV,  1,  2-3. 

211.  Ba.  II,i4,7;  A.  Gri.  IV,  8, 
4;  SLGri.  IV,  1,6. 

212.  A.  Gri.  IV,  8,  5-6. 

213 

[25]  * 


214.  A.  Gri.  IV,  7,  9. 

215.  Vi.  LXXIII,  17-19;  Ya.  I, 
241;  SL  Gri.  IV,  1, 10. 

216.  Vi.  LXXIII,  22. 

217 , 

218.  Vi.  LXXIII,  23. 

219. . 

220.  Vi.  LXXV,  1. 

221.  Vi.  LXXV,  4. 

222 

223.  .       .       .       .  .       . 

224.  Ap.  II,  19,  9;  Va.  XI,  26. 

225.  Ba.II,  15,3*;  Va.  XI,  25*. 

>>>>«  f^P-  n>  l6>  23-24;  n,  19, 

{    19-22;  Vi.  LXXIII,  21, 

227.  I 

'    v^  23-24. 

228.  Ap.  II,  17,  4. 

229.  Ap.  II,  18,  3;  Vi.  LXXIX, 
19-21;  LXXXI,  2. 

230 

231.  Ba.  II,  14,  5;  Vi.LXXIX, 
5-15;  Yd.  I,  239. 

232.  Vi.  LXXIII,  16 ;  A.  Gri.  IV, 
8,  10;  SLGri.  IV,  1,8. 

233 

234.  Vi.LXXIX,  16;  LXXXIII, 

18. 

235.  Va.   XI,  35*,    36;    Yd.   I, 
235. 

236.  Vi.  LXXXI,  n,  19. 

237.  Va.  XI,  32*;   Vi.  LXXXI, 
20*. 

238.  Mah.    XIII,    90,    19;    Vi. 
LXXXI,  1 2-1  3-a 

239.  Ga.  XV,  24;  Ap.  II,  17,20; 
Vi.  LXXXI,  6-9. 

240 « .  ..- 

241 

242.  Vi.  LXXXI,  15. 

243.  Vi.  LXXXI,  18. 

244.  Vi.   LXXXI,   21*;    Yd.  I, 
240;  A.  Gri.  IV,  8,  14. 

n 


546 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


245.  Vi.  LXXXI,  22*;  Va.  XI, 
23*. 

246.  Vi.  LXXXI,  23*;  Va.  XI, 
24*. 

247.  Vi.XXI,  2-3;  Yd.  II,  250; 
St  Gri.  IV,  2,  1-4. 

248.  .       .      .      . 

249 

250.  Mah.  XIII,  90,  I2b-i3a; 
Va.XI,37*. 

251.  Vi.  LXXIII,  26  ;  Yd.  I,  240; 
A.  Gri  IV,  8,11;  &t.  Gri. 
IV,  2,  5-7. 

252.  Yd.  I,  243;  A.  Gri.  IV,  8, 

15; 

253.  A.  Gri.  IV,  8,  11;  SL  Gri. 
IV,  1,  12;  Yd.  I,  240. 

254.  Va.  Ill,  69-71 ;  SL  Gri.  IV, 
2,  5;  IV,  4,  14. 

255 

256 

257 :    .    . 

258.  Vi.  LXXIII,  27. 

259.  Vi.   LXXIII,  28*;   Yd.  I, 

245*. 

260.  Yd.  I,  256;  Go.  Gri.  IV,  3, 
31-34- 

261.  Ba.  II,  14,  9;  A.  Gri.  IV, 
8,12-13;  SL  Gri.  IV,  1,  9. 

262.  Go.  Gri.  IV,  3,  27. 

263 

264 

265.  Va.  XI,  21-22  ;  Ya.  I,  256 

266 

267.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  3 ;  Ga.  XV 

15;    Vi.  LXXX,    1;   Yd.    I 
257. 


268.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  5;  Ga.  XV, 
15;  Vi.  LXXX,  2-5;  Yd.  I, 

257- 

269.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  7 ;  Ga.  XV, 
15;  Vi.  LXXX,  6-9;  Yd.  I, 
257-258. 

270.  Ga.XV,  15;  Ap.II,  16,  27; 
Vi.  LXXX,  10;  Yd,  I,  258. 

271.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  9b;  Ga.  XV, 
i5;Ap.II,i6,26;Vi.LXXX, 
11-12;  Yd.  I,  257. 

272.  Ga.XV,  15;  Ap.II,  17,1-3; 
Vi.  LXXX,  14;  Yd.  1,259. 

273.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  15;  Ap.  II, 
19,  22;  Yd.  I,  260. 

274.  Mah.  XIII,  88,  12  a;  MLSr. 
II ;  Va.  XI,  40  * ;  Vi.  LXXVIII, 

52-53- 

275.  .      .      .     a.      .      .       . 

276.  Ga.  XV,  3;  Ap.  II,  16,  6; 
Va.  XI,  16. 

277.  Ga.XV,  4;  Ap.II,  1 6,  8-22 
Vi.  LXXVIII,  8-49;  Yd. 
261-267. 

278.  Ap.II,  16,5;  Va.  XI,  36; 
Vi.  LXXIII,  2. 

279.  Yd.  I,  232. 

280.  Ap.  II,  17,  23 ;  Vi.  LXXVII, 


6    y 

: 


281. 
282. 


283.  Ma.Sr.II;  Ba.  II,  11,3; 

I,  i35  i- 

284.  Yd.  I,  268. 

285.  Mah.  Ill,  2,  60;  XII,  2. 
I2a_j2b 

286 


SYNOPSIS .  OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


547 


Manu  IV. 


i.  Mah.  XII,  244, 1. 
2.  Mah.  XII,  263,  6. 
3 


5.  SL  Gri.  IV,  11, 13. 

6.  St  Gri.  IV,  11,  15. 

7.  Ya.  1,128. 

8.  Ya.  I,  128. 

9.  Mah.  XII,  244,  4. 

10 

11 

12.  Ya.  I,  129. 

*3 

14.  Va.  XXVII,  8*;  SL  Gri. 
IV,  11,  16. 

15.  Ya.  I,  129. 

16 

17.  Ba.  I,  10,30;  Vi.  LXXI,  4; 
Ya.  I,  129. 

18.  Vi.  LXXI,  5-6;  Yd.  I,  123. 

19.  Vi.  LXXI,  8;  Yl  I,  99. 

20 

21.  Ga.  V,  3. 

22 

23 

24 

25.  Ba.  II,  4,  23;  Va.  XI,  46; 
Vi.  LIX,  4;  Ya.I,  124. 

26.  Ba.  II,  4,  23;  Va.  XI,  46; 
Vi.  LIX,  5-7,  9;  Ya.  I,  125; 
SL  Gri.  Ill,  8, 1. 

27 

28 

29- .       . 

30.  Ya.  I,  130. 

31.  SL  Gri.  I,  2. 
32.^Ga.V,  22  ;  Ba.  II,  5, 19-20  ; 

Ap.  II,  4,  13. 


33.  Ga.  IX,  63-64 ;  Va.  XII,  2  ; 
Vi.  LXIII,  1 ;  Ya.  I,  130. 

34.  Ga.  IX,  3;  Ap.  I,  30,  13; 
Va.  XII,  4 ;  Vi.  LXXI,  9. 

35.  Ga.IX,4,6,  7,  71-72;  Ba.I, 
5,7;  Ap.  I,  30,10-12;  Ya.I, 
131. 

36.  Ba.I,  5,  3-5;  I,  6,1;  11^6, 
7;  Va.  XII,  14,  37-38;  Ap. 
1,8,  2;  Vi.  LXXI,  13-16;  Ya. 
1, 133  ;  S&.Gri.  IV,  11,  21-22; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  4,  25-27. 

37.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  i7b-i8a; 
Ba.  II,  6,  10;  Ap.  I,  31,  20; 
Va.  XII,  10;  Vi.  LXXI,  17- 
21;  Ya.I,  135;  SLGri.  IV, 

11,  2  ;  Pa\  Gri.  II,  7,  6. 

38.^  Ga.  IX,  52;  Ba.  II,  6,  15; 
Ap.I,  31,  15;  Va.  XII,  9;  Vi. 
LXXI,  23  ;  LXIII,  42-43  ; 
A.  Gri.  Ill,  9,  6  ;  Pa.  Gri.  II, 
7,8;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  5,  11. 

39.  Ga.  IX,  66 ;  Vi.  LXIII,  26- 
30;  Yl  I,  133;  SLGri.  IV, 

12,  15. 

40.  Ga.  IX,  29-30  ;  Va.  XII,  6; 
Vi.  LXIX,  11;  Go.  Gri.  Ill, 
5,  5- 

41 

42 • 

43.  Vi.  LXVIII,  46*;  Ga.  IX, 
32;  Va.  XII,  31;  Vi.  LXXI, 
25;  Ya.  I,  131;  SL  Gri.  IV, 
11,  10. 

44.  Ga.  IX,  32,  48;  Vi.  LXXI, 
26;  Ya.  I,  135. 

45.  Ga.  IX,  40,  61 ;  Va.  VI, 
12  ;  XII,  11 ;  Ba.  II,  6,   24  ; 


N   n    2 


548 


LAWS    OF    MANU 


Ap.  I,  30,  18  ;  Vi.  LX,  11,  16, 
19;  LXIV,  5;  LXVIII,  14; 
Ya.  I,  131,  134;  A.  Gri.  Ill, 

9,  6  ;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  7.  6. 

46.  Va.VI,i2*;  Ga.IX,4o;  Ap. 
I,  30,  18;  Vi.  LX,  4,  10,  21  ; 
Y1I,  134;  H,Gri.  II,75i5- 

47.  Vi.  LX,  8-9,  y  ;  Ya.  1, 134. 

48.  Ga.  IX,  12  ;  Ap.  I,  30,  20  ; 
Vi.  LX,  22  ;  Ya.  I,  134  ;  Sa. 
Gri.  IV,  12,  23. 

49.  Ga.  1X^37-38, 41-43;  Ba.I, 

10,  10;  Ap.I,  30,  14-15;  Va. 
XII,  13;  Vi.LX,  1,3,  23;  Ya. 
I,  16;  PI  Grt.  II,  7,  15;  SL 
Gri.  IV,  12,  20-22. 

50.  Va.  VI,  10*;  Ba.  I,  10,  10; 
Ap.  1,31,1;  Vi.LX,2;  Yd.  I, 
16;  SLGri.  IV,  12,  25. 

51.  Va.VI,i3*. 

52.  Va.VI,  11*. 

53.  Ga.  IX,  32;  Ap.  I,  15,  20; 
I,  30,  22;  Va.  XII,  27;  Vi. 
LXXI,  26,  32-34,  37  ;  Ya.  I, 
135,  137;  A.  Gri.  Ill,  9,  6; 
Si.  Gri.  IV,  11, 1. 

54.  Ga.  IX,  73;  Ap.  I,  15,  21; 
II,i2,6;  Vi.  LXXI,  36;  Ya. 

I,  137. 

55.  Vi.  LXIII,  8;  LXVIII,  12; 
LXXI,  41,  55  ;  see  above,  II, 
IV,  220-221. 

56.  Ap.  I,  30,  19;  Vi.  LXXI, 
32-35;  Ya.  I,  137;  SL  Gri. 
IV,  12,26. 

57.  Ga.  IX,  54-55  ;Va.  XII,  42; 
Vi.  LXX,  13;  LXXI,  56,  58; 
Ya.I,  138;  Sa.Gr/.  IV,  1 1,  6; 
IV,  12,  7. 

58.  Mah.  XII,  193,  20;  XIII, 
163,  50a;  Ba.  II,  6,38*;  Vi. 
LXXI,  60 ;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  48. 


59.  Ga.  IX,  22-23;  Ba.  II,  6, 
11,17;  Ap.I,  31,  10,  18;  Va. 
XII,  32-33;  Vi.  LXXI,  62; 
Ya\  I,  140. 

/Ga.  IX,  65;  Ba.  II,  6,  21, 

60.  \    31;  Ap.  I,  15,  22;  I,  32, 

61.  j    18;  Vi.  LXIII,  2;  LXXI, 
I    64-68. 

62.  Ga.  IX,  58 ;  Vi.  LXVIII, 
27  ;  see  above,  II,  56-57  ;  SL 
Gri.  IV,  11,  8. 

63.  Ga.  IX,  9,  50,  56 ;  Ba.  II, 
6,5;  Vi.  LXVIII,  21;  LXXI, 
69. 

64.  Ga.  IX,  51 ;  Ap.  II,  20,  13  ; 
Vi.  LXXI,   70-71;    Pa.  Gri. 

n,  7, 3-4. 

65.  Vi.  LXVIII,  20;  LXXI,  39. 

66.  Ga.  IX,  4  ;  Vi.  LXXI,  47  ; 
SLGri.  IV,  11,  9. 

67.  Vi.  LXIII,  13-15,  17. 

68 

69.  Vi.  LXXI, 44, 46;  Ya.1,139. 

70.  Ga.  IX,  51;  Ap.  I,  32,  28; 
Vi.  LXXI,  42-43. 

71.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  15  s. 

72.  Ga.  IX,  32;  Ba.  II,  6,  9; 
Ap.  I,  32,  5;  Vi.  LXIII,  16; 
SL  Gri.  IV,  12,  11. 

73^Ga.  IX,  32;  Ba.  II,  6,13; 
Ap.I,  31,  23;  Ya.  1,140;    Pa. 

Gn.II,7,6;Go.Gn.III,5,35- 

74.  Ga.  IX,  32  ;  Ba.  II,  6,  6  ; 
Va.XII,  36;  Vi.  LXVIII,  19, 
23;  LXXI,  45;  Ya.  I,  138; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  5,12. 

75.  Ga.  IX,  60;  Vi.  LXVIII, 
29;  LXX,  3;  A.  Gri.  Ill, 
9,6. 

76.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  6it>-62"; 
Vi.  LXVIII,  34;  LXX,  1. 

77.  Ga.  IX,  32;  Ba.  II,  6,  26; 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


549 


Va.  XII,  45  i  Vi.  LXIII,  46  ; 
Ya.  I,  135;  A.  Gr/'.m,  9,  7; 
*Sa.  Gri.  IV,  12,  19  ;  Pa.  Gri. 
II,  7,  6. 
78.  Ga.  IX,  15;  Ba.  II,  6,  16; 
Ap.  II,  20,  11;  Vi.  LXIII, 
24-25;  Ya.  I,  139. 

79 A       '       ' 

80.  Va.  XVIII,  14*;  Ap.  I,  31, 
24  ;  Vi.  LXXI,  48-52. 

81.  Va.  XVIII,  15*. 

82.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  69;  Vi. 
LXVLU,38;  LXXI,  53. 

83.  Vi.  LXIV,  12. 

84.  Ya.  I,  140. 

85.  Y1I,  141. 

86 

87 . 

88.  Vi.  XLIII,  2-7. 

89.  Vi.  XLIII,  8-15. 

90.  Vi.  XLIII,  16-22. 

91 

92.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  i6a;  Va. 
XII,  47  ;  Vi.  LX,  1 ;  SL  Grt. 
IV,  11,  19. 

93.  Vi.  LXXI,  77. 

94.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  1 8b 

95.  Ga.  XVI,  1-2;  Ba.  I,  12, 
16;  Ap.  I,  9,  1,  3;  Va.  XIII, 
1-5;  Vi.  XXX,  1;  Ya.  I, 
142;  A.  Grt.  Ill,  5,  2-3,  14; 
Si.  Gri.  IV,  5,  1-2  ;  Pa.  Gri. 

11,  10,  1-2 ;    II,    11,  io-ii  ; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  1^  13. 

96.  Ba.  I,  12,  16  ;  Ap.  I,  9,  2  ; 
Vi.  XXX,  2  j  YL  I,  143  J  £a. 
Gri.  IV,  6,  1 ;    Pa.  Gri.  II, 

12,  1 ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  14- 

97.  Ga.  XVI,  40  ;  Vi.  XXX,  4  ; 
SL  Gri.  IV,  6,  9. 

98.  Va.  XIII,  6-7 ;  Vi.  XXX,  3. 

99.  Ga.  XVI,  19  ;  Ba.  I,  21, 15 ; 


Ap.  I,  9,  9-1 1 ;   Va.  XVIII, 
12-13;  VLXXX,  14,  27;  Ya. 
I,  148;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  20. 
100 

10 1.  Va.  XIII,  8. 

102.  Ga.  XVI,  s-6- 

103.  Ga.  XVI,  22;  Ba.  I,  21,  6; 
Va.  XIII,  36-37 ;  Vi.  XXX, 
8,  9;  Ya.  I,  145,  149;  SL 
Gri.  IV,  7,  4;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  11, 
2  ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  17, 19. 

104.  Ga.  XVI,  10,  23;  Ap.  I,  11, 
8,  27-28,  31. 

105.  Ga.  XVI,  15-16,  22 ;  Ba.  I, 
21,  4;  Ap.  I,  11,30-31;  Va. 
XIII,  32-33,  35j  Vi.  XXX, 
9  ;  Ya.  I,  145;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  11, 
2-3 ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  18-19. 

106.  Ba.  I,  21,  7  ;  Ap.  I,  9,  20- 
24;  I,  11,  29;  Va.  XIII,  9  ; 
Ya.  145. 

107.  Ga.  XVI,  19,  45  ;^Ba.  I,  21, 
4;  n,  6,  33-34;  Ap.  I,  10, 
22  ;  I,  11,  31 ;  Va.  XIII,  17; 
Ya.I,  150;  SLGri.IV,>],  27. 

108.  Ga.  XVI,  7,  19;  Ba.  I,  21, 
5;  Ap.  I,  9,  14;  I,  10,  17; 
Va.  XIII,  11;  Vi.  XXX,  10; 
Ya.  I,  148;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7, 
24,  37;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  11,  4,  6; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  28. 

109.  Ga.  XVI,  11,  12,  1 8,  34,  46; 
Ba.  I,  21,  8,  21 ;  Ap.  I,  10, 
25-26;  I,  11,  17,  25-26;  I, 
32,  12;  Vi.  XXX,  16;  Ya.I, 
149;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  5,  36; 
Pa.  Gri.  II,  11,  2,  4. 

no.  Ga.  XVI,  22;  Ap.  I,  11,30; 

Va.  XIII,  34 ;  Vi.  XXX,  5  ; 

Ya.I,  146;  Go.  Gri. Ill,  3,25. 
in.  Ap.  I,  10,  26;  I,  n,  25;  Ya. 

I,  146. 


55° 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


ii2.  Ga.  XVI,  17,34;  Va.  XIII, 
14,  23;  Vi.  XXX.  17;  51 
Gri.  IV,  7,  45. 

113.  Ga.  XVI,  7,  12,  35;  Ba.  I, 
21,  4,  5,  17,22;  Ap.I,  9,28; 

I,  ii,  15,25,31;  Va.  XIII,  10, 
21-22;  Vi.  XXX,  4;  Yd.  I, 
146,  148,  150;  SL  Gri.  IV, 
7,  7-8,  17,  3i;  Pa.  Gri.  II, 

II,  1,  4,  6;  Go.  Gr*'.  Ill,  3, 
20-21. 

114.  Ba.  I,  21,  22  *. 

ii5uGa.  XVI,  8;  Ba.  I,  21,  16; 
Ap.  I,  10,  17;  I,  11,  33;  Va. 
XIII,  35;  Vi.  XXX,  9,  12; 
Yd.  I,  148,  150;  Pa.  Gri.  II, 
11,  6. 

116.  Ga.  I,  61;  XVI,  18;  Ba.  I, 
21,  8;  Ap.I,  9,  6;  I,  11,  9; 
Va.  XIII,  13, 26-27;  Vi.XXX, 
15  ;  Ya.  I,  146, 148  ;  *Sa.  Gri. 
IV,  7, 12,  22,  50;  Pa.  Gri.II, 
11,  6. 

117.  Ga.XVI,48;  Va.XIII,  16*; 
Sd.Gr/.  IV,  7,  55*;  Ba.I,  21, 

IO-II. 

118.  Ga.  XVI,  34;  Ba.I,  21,  20; 
SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  2-3  ;  Pa.  Gri. 
11,11,2,5. 

119.  SL  Gri.  IV,  5,  17*;  Ap.  I, 
10, 1-2 ;  Ga.  XVI,  36,  38;  Vi. 
XXX,  5,  24-25;  Ya.  I,  144, 
146;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  10,  23; 
II,  11,  2;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3, 
22. 

120.  Ga.  XVI,  17;  Ap.I,  9,  27;  I, 
11,16;  Va.XIII,  17-19;  Vi. 
XXX,  18-21;  Ya.I,  151;  SL 
Gri.  IV,  7,  23,  32,  34. 

121.  Ga.  XVI,  20,34;  Ap.  I,  10, 
20;  Va.XIII,  20,  28,  31;  Vi. 
XXX,  11,  19-21 ;  Ya.I,  149; 


-Sa.  Gri.  IV,  7,  40,  48  ;  Pa. 
Gri.  II,  11,  4. 

122.  Ap.  I,  11,  8;  Vi.  XXX,  7; 
Ya.  I,  149 ;  Si.  Gri.  IV,  7,  28, 
38;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  11,  1;  Go. 
Gri.  Ill,  3,  28. 

123.  Ga.  XVI,  21 ;  Ba.  I,  21,  5  ; 
Ap.  1,  10,  17-18;  Va.  XIII, 

30;  Vi.XXX,  26;  Ya.  I,  145, 
148;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  21  ;  Pa 
Gri.  II,  11,  6. 

124 

125 

126.  Ga.  I,  59;  Vi.  XXX,  2 
Ya.  1, 147  ;  SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  33. 

127.  Ya.I,  149;  A.  Gri.  Ill,  4,  7 ; 
SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  6,  9-1 1,  13- 
14  ;  Pa.  Gri.  II,  1 1,  7-9  ;  Go. 
Gri.  Ill,  3,  24-27. 

128.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  29;  Ba.  I, 
21,  18;  Ap.  I,  31,  21 ;  Va. 
XII,  21;  Vi.LXIX,  1;  Yd.  I, 

129.  Ba.  II,  6,  25;  Ap.  I,  32,  8; 
Vi.  LXIV,  3-4,  6  ;  A.  Gri. 
Ill,  9,  6. 

130.  Vi.  LXIII,  40;  Yd.  1,152 

131.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  27b-28" 
Vi.  LXIII,  19. 

132.  Vi.  LXIII,  41;  Yd.  I,  152 

J33 

134.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  21. 

135.  Yd.  I,  153. 

136.  ...... 

137.  Vi.  LXXI,  76;  Ya.  I,  15 

138.  Ga.  IX,  68;  Vi.  LXXI,  7 
74  ;  Yd.  1, 132. 

139.  Ga.  IX,  20,  32  ;  Ap.  I,  3 
13-14;  Vi.  LXXI,  57;  Ya. 
132  ;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  5,  19-2 

140.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  24^-25 
Ba.  II,   6,   21-23;  Va.  XI] 


a. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


551 


43  ;  Vi.  LXIII,  4,  6-7,  9 ;  SL 
Gri.  IV,  12,  12 ;  Go.  Gr*'.  Ill, 
5,  32-34. 

141.  Mah.    XIII,    104,    35;    Vi. 
LXXI,  2. 

142.  Ap.  I,  15,  18;  Ya.  I,  155. 

143.  Ap.  I,  16,  14. 

144.  Vi.  LXXI,  79. 

145 


171. 
172. 
173- 


174.  Mah.  Ill,  94,  4. 

175.  Ga.  IX,  50,  68-70. 

176.  Ga.  IX,  47,  73;  Vi.  LXXL 
84-85;  Y1I,I56, 

177.  Va.VI,  42*. 
178 


146.  Va.  XXVI,  14 

147.  .       .      . 

148.  .       . 
149-      •       •       • 


150.  Vi.  LXXI,  86;  LXXVI,  1; 
Ya.  I,  217. 

151.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  82;  Ga.IX, 
39;  Ap.  I,  31,  2;  Ya.  I,  154. 

152.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  23. 

153.  Ap.  I,  31,  21-22. 

154.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  65b-66a; 
Ba.II,  6,  35;  Ap.II,  7,  7-1 1. 

155.  Vi.  LXXI,  90*;  Ya.1,154. 

156.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  6;  Vi. 
LXXI,  91*;  Va.VI,  7*. 

157.  Va.VI,  6*. 

158.  Mah.XIII,  104,  13;  Va.VI, 
8*;  Vi.  LXXI,  92*. 

J59 

160 

161.  ^ 

162.  Ap.  I,  1,  14;  Ga.  XXI,  15. 

163.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  36 ;  Ap.  I, 
31,  25;  Va.  XII,  41;  Vi. 
LXXI,  83. 

164.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  37 ;  Vi. 
LXXI,  80-82. 

165.  Ga.  XXI,  20. 

166.  Ga.  XXI,  21. 


168.  / 


XXI,  22. 


169. 
I70. 


179.  Mah.   XII,    244,   I4b-i5a 
Ya.  I,  157. 

180.  Mah.   XII,    244,   i5^-i6a; 
Yl  I,  158. 

181.  Mah.  XII,  244,  i6k-i7a. 

182.  Mah.  XII,  244, 17^-18 «. 

183.  Mah.  XII,  244,  i8b-i9a. 

184.  Mah.  XII,  244,  i9b-20a. 

185.  Mah.  XII,  244,  20b-2ia. 

186.  Vi.  LVII,  6-7. 

187.  Vi.  LVII,  8. 

188.  Va.  VI,   32*;  Ya.  I,  201- 
202. 


190 

191.  Ya.  I,  202. 

192.  Vi.  XCIII,  7*. 

193 

194 

195.  Vi.  XCIII,  8*. 

196.  Vi.  XCIII,  9  *. 

197.  Vi.  XCIII,  10  *. 

198.  Vi.  XCIII,  1 1*. 

199.  Vi.  XCIII,  12*. 

200.  Vi.  XCIII,  13  *. 

201.  Ba.  II,  5,  6;  Vi.  LXIV,  1  ; 
Ya.  I,  159. 

202.  Ba.  II,  6,  29 ;  Ya.  I,  160. 

203.  Vi.  LXIV,  16;  Ya.  I,  159. 

204.  Ya.  Ill,  S^-SM- 

205.  Ga.XVII,  18;  Ap.I,  18,  27. 

206. 

207.  Ga.  XVII,  9-10;  Ap.  I,  16, 


552 


LAWS    OF 


MANU. 

219.  ....... 

220.  Mah.  XII,  36,  2  8a. 

221 

222.  Ga.  XXIII,  23-24. 

223.  Ap.  I,  18,  3-8,  14. 

224.  Mah.  XII,  265,  nb-i2a; 
Ba.  1,10,5*;  Va.  XIV,  17. 

225.  Mah.  XII,  265,  I2b-i3a; 
Ba.  I,  10,5*;  Va.  XIV,  17. 

226. 

227.  Vi.  XCII,  32;  Ya.  I,  201. 

228.  Ya.  I,  203. 

229.  Va.  XXIX,  8;  Vi.  XCI,  3, 
15,  16;  XCII,  21,  23;  Ya. 
I,  210. 

230.  Vi.  XCII,  13,  14;  Ya.  I, 
210. 

231.  Vi.  XCII,  5,  ii,  12;  Ya.  I, 
204-206,  210. 

232.  Va.  XXIX,  12;  Vi.  XCII, 
22,  27  ;  Ya.  I,  211. 

233.  Va.  XXIX,  19;  Ya.1,212. 

234 

235.      ...... 

236 

237.  .       .  ■    .       .      .       . 

238.  ....... 

239 

240.  Mah.  XIII,  in,  nb-i2». 

241.  Mah.  XIII,  in,  iob,  13 
14. 

242.  Mah.  XIII,  in,  i5a. 

243 

244 

245.  .       .       .       . 

246.  ...... 

247.  Ga.  XVII,  3 ;  Ap.  I,  18,  1 
Va.  XIV,  12  ;  Vi.  LVII,  u 
Ya.  I,  214. 

248.  Va.  XIV,  16*;  Ap.  I,  i« 
14*;  Vi.  LVII,  11*;  Ya. 
215. 


23-27;  1,19,1;  Va.  XIV,  3, 
22-23  ;  Vi.  LI,  19 ;  Ya.  1, 162, 
167,168. 

208.  Ga.XVII,  10-11;  Ap.  I,  16, 
29;  Vi.  LI,  17-18;  Ya.  I, 
167,  168. 

209.  Ga.  XVII,  12,17;  Ap.  1, 1 8, 
16-17;  Va.  XIV,  9-10;  Vi. 
LI,  7,  9,  17;  Ya.  1, 161, 168. 

210.  Mah.  XII,  36,  29 a;  Ga. 
XVII,  17-18;  Ap.  I,  18,  18, 
22-26;  I,  19,  1;  Va.  XIV, 
2-3;  Vi.  LI,  7-9;  Ya.  I, 
161. 

211.  Ga.  XVII,  14, 16,  17  ;  Ap.I, 
17,  17-20;  I,  18,  13;  I,  19, 
15  ;  Va.  XIV,  2,  4,  20,  28-29; 
Vi.  LI,  9,  10  ;  Ya.  I,  1 61-162, 
167;  SL  Gri.  IV,  11,  11;  Go. 
Gri.  Ill,  5,  9. 

212.  Ap.  I,  19,  15a*;  Va.  XIV, 
i9a*;  Ga.XVII,  17,  19;  Ap. 
I,  16,  19;  I,  17,3;  1,18,21  ; 
Va.  XIV,  2;  Vi.  LI,  10;  Ya. 
I,  162. 

213.  Ga.  XVII,  17-19,  20;  Ap. 
I,  i7>  4;  II,  6,  19-20;  Va. 
XIV,  2;  Vi.  LI,  11,  18,  20; 
Ya.  I,  162-164,  167. 

214.  Ga.  XVII,  18;  Ap.  I,  18, 
30;  Va.XIV,3;  Vi.LI,i2; 
Ya.  I,  161,  164,  165. 

215.  Ap.I,  18,  19;  Va.  XIV,  5; 
Vi.  LI,  14;  Ya.  I,  161,  163. 

216.  Ga.  XVII,  18;  Va.  XIV,  3, 
11;  Vi.  LI,  15-16;  Ya.  1, 163, 
164. 

217.  Mah.  XII,  36,  28b;  Ga. 
XVII,  18;  Ap.I,  16,  18;  Va. 
XIV,  6,11;  Ya.  I,  163. 

218.  Mah.  XII,  36,  27;  Va.XIV, 
2  ;  Vi.  LI,  8. 


SYNOPSIS   OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


553 


249.  Va.  XIV,  18*;  Ap.  I,  19, 
14*;  Vi.  LVII,  12*. 

250.  Ga.  XVII,  3  ;  Ba.  I,  9,  8  ; 
Ap.  I,  18,1;  Va.  XIV,  12; 
Vi.  LVII,  10;  Ya.  I,  214. 

251.  Va.  XIV,  13*;  Vi.  LVII, 
13*;  Ga.XVII,  4;  Ap.I,  7, 
20;  Ya.  I,  216. 

252.  Vi.  LVII,  15*. 

253.  Vi.  LVII,  16*;  Ga.  XVII, 


5-6;   Ap.  I,  17,  14;  Ya.  I, 

166. 

254 • 

255 

256 

257 

258.      ........ 

259 

260.  Ga.  IX,  74  ;    Ba.  II,  3,  1  ; 
Va.  VIII,  17. 


Manu  V. 


5.  Ga.  XVII,  32;  Ap.  I,  17, 
26,  28  ;  Va.  XIV,  33  ;  Vi.  LI, 
3,  34,  36;  Ya.  I,  171. 

6.  Ga.XVII,  32,33;  Va. XIV, 
33;  Vi.LI,  36;  Ya.  1,171. 

7.  Ga.  XVII,  31;  Vi.LI,  37; 
Y1I,  171,  173. 

8.  Ga.  XVII,  22-26;  Ba.  I, 
12,  9-11;  Ap.  I,  17,  22-24; 
Va.  XIV,  34-35  ;  Vi.  LI,  38- 
40;  Ya.  I,  170. 

9.  Ga.XVII,  14;  Ba.1, 12,  15; 
Ap.  I,  17,  18;  Va.  XIV,  37- 
38 ;  Vi.  LI,  38,  42  ;  Ya.  I, 
167,  170. 

10.  Ga.XVII,  14;  Ba. 1, 12,14; 

Ap.  I,  17,  19;  Vi.  LI,  42  ;  Ya. 

I,  169. 
ii.  Ga.  XVII,  28-29;    Ba.   I, 

12,  1-2;  Ap.  I,  17,  29,  34; 

Va.  XIV,  48  ;  Vi.  LI,  28,  29, 

30;  Ya.  I,  172. 
12.  Ga.  XVII,  28-29  ;  Ba.  I,  12, 

3;  Ap.I,  17,  32-33,  35;  Va. 


XIV,  48 ;  Vi.  LI,  3,  29 ;  YL 
I,  172,  173,  174. 

13.  Ga.XVII,35;Va.XIV,48; 
Vi.LI,  27;  Ya.  1, 172, 174, 175. 

14.  Ga.  XVII,  29,  34  ;  Ba.  1, 12, 
3,8;  Va.  XIV,  48;  Vi.  LI, 
21,  29;  Ya.  I,  173, 174, 175. 

15 -      • 

16.  Ga.XVII,  36-37;  Ba.  1, 12, 

8;  Vi.LI,  21;  Ya.  1, 177-178. 

17.^  Ga.XVII,  27;  Ba.  1,12,5; 

Ap.  I,  17,  37;  Va.  XIV,  39, 

44;  Vi.  LI,  6,  27;  Ya.  I,  174. 

18.  Ga.XVII,  27;  Ba.  I,  12,4- 
5;  Ap.  I,i7,37;  Va.  XIV, 
39,  40,  47 ;  Vi.  LI,  6,  26  ; 
Yd.  I,  177. 

19.  Ga.  XXIII,  5;  Vi.LI,  3-4; 
Ya.  I,  176. 

20.  Ya.  I,  176. 

21 

22.  Va.XIV,  15. 

24'  Vi'.  LI,  35;  Y1I,  169. 

25.  Vi.  LI,  35;  Ya.  I,  169. 

26.  Ya.  I,  178. 

27.  Ya.  I,  179. 

28.  Mah.  XII,  10,  6. 


554 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


29.  Mah.  XII,  99, 15. 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34.  Vi.  LI,  62*. 

35.  Va.XI,34*. 

36.  Vi.  LI,  59*. 

37 

38.  Vi.  LI,  60*;  Ya.  I,i8o. 

39.  Vi.  LI,  61*. 

40.  Vi.  LI,  63*. 

41.  Va.  IV,  6*;  Vi.  LI,  64*; 
*Sa.  Gri".  II,  16,  1*. 

42.  Vi.  LI,  65*. 

43.  Vi.  LI,  66  *. 

44.  Vi.LI,67*. 

45.  Vi.  LI,  68*. 

46.  Vi.  LI,  69  *. 

47.  Vi.  LI,  70*;  Y1I,  181. 

48.  Vi.  LI,  71*;  Va.  IV,  7*. 

49.  Vi.  LI,  72*. 

50.  Vi.  LI,  73*. 

51.  Vi.  LI,  74*. 

52.  Mah.  XIII,  115,  14*,  36a; 
116,  na;  Vi.  LI,  75*. 

53.  Mah.  XIII,  115,  10,16;  Vi. 
LI,  76*;  Ya.  I,  181. 

54.  Vi.LI,77*. 

55.  Vi.  LI,  78*. 

56 

57 

58.  Par. III,2i*;  Ap.  11,15,4-5; 
Vi.  XXII,  26-27;  Vi  HI, 
18,  23. 

59.  Ga.  XIV,  1;  Ba.  I,  11,  1; 
Va.  IV,  16  ;  Vi.  XXII,  1 ;  Ya. 
Ill,  18;  A.  Gri.  IV,  4,  18; 
SL  Gri.  IV,  7,  6. 

6o.Ga.  XIV,  13;  Ba.  I,  11,  2; 
Ap.  II,  15,  2-3;  Va.  IV,  17- 
18;  Vi.  XXII,  5. 


61.  Va.  XIV,  20*;  Ga.  XIV, 
14  ;  Ba.  I,  11,  1. 

62.  Par.  Ill,  31*;  Ga.  XIV,  15- 
16;  Ba.  I,  11,  19-23;  Va. 
IV,  21-22  ;  Ya.  Ill,  19. 

63 '     •       • 

64.  Ga.  XIV,  23,  25,  27. 

65.  Vi.  XXII,  85*;  A.  Gri,  IV, 
4,  19. 

66.  Ga.  XIV,  17;  Ba.  I,  11,31; 
Vi.XXII,  72;  Ya.  Ill,  20. 

67.  Vi.  XXII,  29-30 ;  Ya.  Ill, 

23- 

68.  Ba.  1,11,4;  Ya.  Ill,  1. 

69.  Ba.I,  11,4;  Ap.  II,  15,6-7; 
Va.  IV,  34  ;  Vi.  XXII,  28 ; 
Ya.III,  1;  A.  Gri.  IV,  4,24; 
Pd.  Gri.  Ill,  10,  4-7. 


7o 

71.  Ga.  XIV,  20;  Ba.  1, 11,30 
A.  Gri.  IV,  4,  26;  £a.  Gri 
IV,  7,13;  PI  Gri.  II,  ii5  8; 
Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  24. 

72.  Ba.I,  11,8*;  A.  G//.IV,  4, 

23- 

73.  Ga.  XIV,  37-39;  Ba.  I,  11, 
24;   Ap.  II,   15,  9-10;   Y 
III,i6;  A.  Gri.  IV,  4,  16 

74 

75.  Vi.XXII,  39;  Ya.HI,  21 
PI  Gri.  Ill,  10,  44. 

76.  Ga.  XIV,  44 ;  Va.  IV,  3 
Vi.XXII,  40-41;  Ya.HI,  21 
Pa.  Gri.  Ill,  10,  45. 

77.  Ya.  Ill,  21. 

78.  Ga.  XIV,  19,  44. 

79.  Ga.  XIV,  6;  Ba.  I,  11,  1 
18 ;  Va.  IV,   24  ;  Vi.  XXI 
35  ;  Yl  III,  20. 

80.  Ga.  XIV,  28;  Ba.I,  11,2 
Vi.  XXII,  42-44;  Ya.  I 
24;   A.  Gri.  IV,  4,  21 ; 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


555 


Gri.  IV,  7,  9-10;  Pa.  Gri. 
II,  ii,  7;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3, 
26. 

81.  Ga.  XIV,  20,  22;  Ba.I,  11, 
29-30;  Vi.  XXII,  44;  Yl  III, 
24. 

82.  Vi.  XXII,  45-46;  Ya.  Ill, 
24-25;  Go.  Gri.  Ill,  3,  25. 

83.  Ga.  XIV,  2-5;  Va.IV,2  7- 
30;  Vi.  XXII,  1-4;  Yd.  Ill, 
22. 

84 

85.  Ga.  XIV,  30;  Ba.  I,  9,  5 ; 
I,  11,  36;  Va.  IV,  38;  Vi. 
XXII,  69;  Ya.  Ill,  30. 

86.  Ba.  I,  15,  31. 

87 

88.  Vi.   XXII,    87*;    Ya.   Ill, 

5- 

89.  Vi.  XXII,  56 ;  Ya.  Ill,  6. 

90.  Ya.  Ill,  6. 

91.  Vi.   XXII,   86*;    Ya.   Ill, 

i5- 
92 

93.  Va.  XIX,  48*;  Ga.XIV,  1, 
45-46;  Ba.  I,  11,  1  ;  Vi. 
XXII,  48-50;  Ya.  Ill,  27, 
28. 

94.  Va.  XIX,  47  *. 

95.  Ga.  XIV,  9-1 1 ;  Vi.  XXII, 
47,  52;  Ya.  Ill,  21,27. 

96 

97- 

98.  Ya.  Ill,  29. 

99 

100. 

101.  Ba.  I,  11,  33, 

102.  Vi.  XXII,  8;  Ya.  Ill,  15. 

103.  Par.  Ill,  48*;  Ga.  XIV, 
31;  Vi.  XXII,  64;  Yl  III, 
26. 

104. 


105.  Vi.  XXII,  88*;  Ba.  I,  8, 
52;  Ya.  I,  194;  III,  31. 

106.  Vi.  XXII,  89  *. 

107.  Vi.  XXII,  90*;  YlHI,  32, 
33. 

108.  Va.  Ill,  58*;  Vi.  XXII, 
91*;   Par.  VII,  4*;  Ya.  Ill, 

32. 

109.  Ba.  I,  8,  2*;  III,  1,  27  *; 
Va.III,6o*;  Vi.  XXII,  92*; 
Ya.  Ill,  33-34- 

no.  Vi.  XXII,  93*. 

in.  Ga.  I,  29-30;  Ba.  I,  8,  32, 

46-47;  I,  14,  4;  Ap.  I,  17, 

11;  Va.  Ill,  49,  50. 
112.  Ba.  I,  8,  33,  46-47 ;  Va.III, 

61-62;  Vi.  XXIII,  7;  Ya.  I, 

182. 

«3 

114.  Ba.  I,  8,  33;  Va.  Ill,  58, 
63 ;  Vi.  XXIII,  25,  26 ;  Ya. 
I,  190. 

115.  Ga.  I,  29;  Ba.  I,  8,  35;  I, 
13,  27;  I,  14,  16-17;  Ap.  I, 
17,  12;  Va.  Ill,  49;  Vi- 
XXIII,  27,  29-30;  Ya.  I, 
190. 

116.  Par. VII,  2*;  Ba.  I,  8,50- 
51;  I,  13,  26,  29-32;  Ap.  I, 
17,  13;  Vi.  XXIII,  8,10;  Ya. 
I,  182-183. 

117.  Par.  VII,  3 a*;  Vi.  XXIII, 
9,11;  Yl  1, 183-184. 

118.  Par.  VII,  28b_29a*;  Ga.  I, 
29;  Ba.  I,  8,  42  ;  I,  13,  11  ; 
I,  14,  n-12;  Va.  Ill,  49 ; 
Vi.  XXIII,  13-14,18;  Ya.  I, 
184. 

119.  Ga.I,  33;  Ba.I,  8,  36,  38, 
43;  I,  13,  13;  Va.  Ill,  53; 
Vi.  XXIII,  14-15,  18;  Ya.  I, 
182. 


556 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


120.  Ba.  I,  8,  39-42;  Va.  Ill, 
55;  Vi.  XXIII,  19-22;  Ya.I, 
186-187. 

121.  Ga.  I,  30-31 ;  Ba.  I,  8,  45- 
47;  Va.  Ill,  51-52;  Vi. 
XXIII,  23;  Ya.  I,  185. 

122.  Vi.  XXIII,  56*;  Ga.  I,  29; 
Ba.  I,  8,  34;  I,  13,21-25;  I, 
14,  2  ;  Ap.  I,  17, 10;  Va.  Ill, 
49,  58;  Vi.  XXIII,  16,  18, 
33;  Ya.  1, 187-188. 

123.  Va.  Ill,  59*;  Ga.  I,  34; 
Ba.  I,  8,  49;  I,  14,  3;  Vi. 
XXIII,  5. 

124.  Va.  Ill,  57*;  Ga.I,  31-32  ; 
Ba.  I,  9,  11  ;  I,  13,  16-20; 
Va.  Ill,  56;  Ya.  I,  188. 

125.  Vi.  XXIII,  38*;  Va.  XIV, 
23;  Ya.I,  189. 

126.  Ga.I,  42;  Va.  Ill,  48;  Ya. 
I,  191. 

127.  Mah.  XIII,  104,  40;  Ba.  I, 
9,  9*;  Va.  XIV,  24*;  Vi. 
XXIII,  47*;  Ya.I,  191. 

128.  Ba.  I,  9,  10*;  Va.  Ill,  35- 
36,47*;  Vi.  XXIII,  43;  Ya. 
I,  192. 

129.  Ba.  I,  9,  1*;  Vi.  XXIII, 
48*;  Va.  Ill,  46;  Yt  I, 
187. 

130.  Ba.  I,  9,  2*;  Va.  XXVIII, 
8*;  Vi.  XXIII,  49  * ;  Va.III, 
45-46;  Ya.I,  187,  193. 

131.  Vi.  XXIII,  50*;  Va.  Ill, 
45;  Ya.I,  192. 

132.  Vi.  XXIII,  51*;  Yl  I, 
194. 

133-  Vi.  XXIII,  52*;  Ya.1,193. 

134.  Ga.  I,  43;  Ba.  I,  10,  11- 
15;  Ap.  I,  16,  15;  Va.  VI, 
14;  Vi.  LX,  24;  Ya.  1, 17. 

135.  Vi.  XXII,  81*. 


136.  Va.  VI,  18*;  Vi.  LX,  23; 
Ba.  I,  10,  12-14. 

137.  Va.VI,  19*;  Vi.  LX,  26*. 

138.  Ga.I,  36,  44-45;  Ba.  I,  8, 
26;  Ap.  I,  16,7;  Va.III,  28; 
Vi.  XXII,  75  ;  LXII,  8. 

139.  Ga.  I,  36  ;  Ba.  I,  8,  19-22  ; 
Ap.  I,  16,  2-6;  Va.  Ill,  26- 
27;  Vi.  LXII,  6-7;  Ya.  I, 
20 ;  see  also  above,  II,  60. 

140.  Ap.  II,  3,  4-8. 

141.  Vi.  XXIII,  53*;  Ga.I,  38- 
41;  Ba.  I,  8,  24-25;  Ap.  I, 
16,  n-13;  Va.  Ill,  37;  Ya. 

I,  195. 

142.  Ba.  I,  10,  34*;  Va.  Ill, 
42*;  Vi.  XXIII,   54*;    Ya. 

I>  195- 

143.  Vi.  XXIII,  55*;  Ga.  I,  28; 
Ba.  I,  8,  27-29 ;  Va.  Ill,  43. 

144.  Ap.  II,  1,  23j  Vi.XXII,  67. 

145.  Ga.  I,  37;  Ap.  I,  16,  14; 
Va.  Ill,  38;  Vi.  XXII,  75; 
Ya.  I,  196;  Go.  Gri.  I,  2,  32. 

146 

147.  Ga.  XVIII,  1 ;  Ba.  II,  3, 
44;  Va.  V,  1;  Vi.  XXV,  12; 
see  also  below,  IX,  2. 

148.  Ba.  II,  3,  45;  Va.  V,  3; 
Vi.  XXV,  13;  Ya.I,  85;  see 
also  below,  IX,  3. 

149.  Ya.  I,  86. 

150.  Vi.  XXV,  4-6;  Ya.I,  83. 

151.  Vi.  XXV,  13-14;  Ya.I,  75, 
83. 

152 

153 

154.  Ya.  I,  77. 

155.  Vi.  XXV,  15*;  Ya.I,  77- 

158. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


159.  Ap.  II,  23,  5. 

160.  Vi.    XXV,    17*;    Par.  IV, 
26*;  Yd.  I,  75. 

161 

162 

163 


164.  Va.  XXI,  14b 

165.  .       .       . 

166.  Ya.  I,  87. 

169. 


557 


Manu  VI. 


/Ga.  Ill,  1;  Ba.  II,  17,  2- 
1.  J  5;  Ap.II,  21,1-5,19;  II, 

x4-  A 

15.  Ap.  II,  22,  24;  Vi.  XCIV, 

2.  )    22,  6-7;  Vi.  XCIV,  1-2; 

12  ;  Ya.  Ill,  47. 

V  Yd.  Ill,  45. 

16.  Va.  IX,  4;  Yd.  Ill,  46. 

3.  Ga.  Ill,  28;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

17.  Ba.  Ill,  3,  2,  9-12;  Vi. 

Ap.  II,  21,  8-9;  Vi.  XCIV, 

XCV,  14-15;  Yd.  Ill,  49. 

3;  Ya.III,  45- 

18.  Ga.  Ill,  35;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

4.  Ga.  Ill,  27  ;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

III,  2,  11;  Ap.II,  23,  1;  Vi. 

Va.  IX,  9  ;  Vi.  XC,  4 ;  Yd. 

XCIV,  11;  Ya.  Ill,  47. 

HI,  45- 

19.  Vi.  XCV,  5-6;  Yd.  Ill,  50. 

5.  Ga.  Ill,  29;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

20.  Vi.  XCV,  12-13;  Ya.  Ill, 

Va.  IX,  12;  Vi.  XCIV,  5; 

50. 

Ya.  Ill,  46. 

21.  Ba.  Ill,  2,  9,  11  j  Ap.  II, 

6.  Ga.  Ill,  34;ABa.  II,  11,15; 

23,2. 

HI,  3,  19;  Ap.  II,  22,  1, 

22.  Ga.  Ill,  26  ;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

13-14,  17;  Va.  IX,  1;  Vi. 

Va.  IX,  9;  Vi.  XCIV,  10; 

XCIV,  8-10;  Ya.III,  46. 

Ya.  Ill,  48,  51. 

7.  Ga.  Ill,  29,  30;  Ba.  II,  11, 

23.  Vi.  XCV,  1-4;  Ya.  Ill,  52. 

15;  HI,  3,  5-7,  20;  Ap.  II, 

24- 

22,  7;  Va.  IX,  7.a 

25.  Ap.  II,  21,  21 ;  Va.  IX,  11 ; 

8.  Ba.  Ill,  3,  19  ;  Ap.  II,  21, 

Yd.  Ill,  54. 

21;  II,  22,  11;  Va.  IX,  8; 

26.  Va.  IX,  5,  11;  Vi.  XCIV, 

Vi.  XCIV,  6 ;  Ya.  Ill,  48. 

7;  Ya.III,  45,  51,  54. 

9.  Ba.  Ill,  3,  5-7,  20;  Ap.II, 

27.  Yd.  Ill,  54. 

22,  12  ;  Va.  IX,  10. 

28.  Vi.  XCIV,  13*;  Ya.III,  55. 

10 

29 

11.  Ap.  II,  22,  17-18. 

30 A  • 

12 

31.  Ba.  Ill,  3,  9,  13-14;  Ap. 

13.  Ga.  Ill,  26;  Ba.  II,  11,  15; 

II,  23,  4;  II,  23,  2;  Ya. 

Ap.  II,  22,  2,  17;  II,  23,  2  ; 

HI,  55. 

Va.  IX,  4;  Vi.  XCV,  7-1 1  ; 

32 

Ya.  Ill,  49. 

33.  Ba.  II,  17, 1-6;  Vi.XCVI,i. 

558 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


34.  Ba.  II,  17,16*;  11,17,15. 

^")Ba.  II,  11,34;   Ap.  II,  24, 
JJj    8;  Ya.  Ill,  57. 

38.  Ba.II,  17,18-28;  Vi.XCVI, 
1-2  ;  Ya.  Ill,  56. 

39.  Mah.  XII,  245,  28;  279,  22  ; 
Ba.  II,  17,  29;  Va.  X,  1. 

40.  Ba.  II,  17,  30 ;  Va.  X,  2-3. 

41.  Ga.  Ill,  16;  Ba.  II,  n,  24; 
II,  17,  31;  Va.  X,  12,  28. 

42.  Mah.  XII,  246,  4b-5a. 

43.  Mah.  XII,  246,  5k;  Ga.  Ill, 
11,  14  ;  Ba.  II,  11,  16 ;  Ap. 
II,  21,  10;  Va.  X,  6;  Vi. 
XCVI,  2. 

44.  Mah.  XII,  246,  7 ;  Ga.  Ill, 
18-19,  25;  Ba.  II,  11,19,21; 
II,  17/44;  Ap.  II,  21,  11; 
Va.  X,  9-10,  13,  27;  Vi. 
XCVI,  10-11. 

45.  Mah.  XII,  246,  15;  Vi. 
XCVI,  18. 

46.  Ba.  II,  11,  25;  II,  17,  43; 
II,  18,  2;  Vi.XCVI,  14-17. 

47.  Mah.  XII,  279,6a;  Ga.III, 
24;  Ba.  II,  11,  23  ;  Va.  X, 
29;  Vi.  XCVI,  19-20,  23. 

48.  Mah.  XII,  279,6b;  Ba.  II, 

18,3. 

49.  Mah.  XII,  331,  30;  Ap.  II, 
21,  13;  Va.  X,  17,  20. 

50.  Va.  X,  21*. 

51.  Vi.  XCVI,  5;  Ya.111,59. 

52.  Ga.  Ill,  22;  Ba.  II,  11,  18; 
II,i7,  io-ii  ;  Va.  X,  6;  Ya. 
HI,  58. 

53.  Vi.  XCVI,  8  ;  Yd.  III,  60. 

54.  Vi.XCVI,  7;  Ya.  Ill,  60. 

55.  Ba.  II,  18,  12  ;  Va.  X,  24- 
25;  Vi.XCVI,3;  Ya.111,59. 

56.  Ga.  Ill,  15  ;  Ba.  II,  11,  22  ; 


II,  18,  4-6;  Va.  X,  7-8;  Vi. 
XCVI,  6  ;  Ya.  Ill,  59. 

57.  Mah.  XII,  279,  10;  Va.  X, 
22*;  Vi.  XCVI,  4. 

58.  Mah.   XII,   279,  11b;    Vi. 
XCVI,  9. 

59.  Ba.  II,  18,  10-13;    Va.  X, 

25. 

60.  Ba.  II,  18,  2-3;  Ya.  Ill,  61. 

61.  Vi.XCVI,  36,  38;  Ya.  Ill, 
63-64. 

62.  Vi.  XCVI,  27-29,  37;  Yd. 

III,  63-64. 

63.  Vi.XCVI,  39;  Yd.  Ill,  63- 
64. 

64.  Vi.  XCVI,  40-42 ;  Yd.  Ill, 
63-64. 

65.  Va.  X,  14;  Yd.  Ill,  63-64. 

66.  Va.  X,  18;  Yd.  Ill,  65. 

67 

68 

69 

70.  Va.X,5. 

71.  Va.  XXV,  6;  Ba.IV,  1,2. 

72.  Vi.  XCVI,  24. 

73.  Vi.  XCVI,  25. 

74-  A 

75.  Ap.  II,  21,  14-16. 

76.  Mah.  XII,  330,  42  ;  Mai.  Up. 

111,4;  vi.  xcvi,  43-53. 

77.  Mah.  XII,  330,  43 ;  Mai 
Up.  Ill,  4 ;  Vi.  XCVI,  43- 
53- 

78 


80.         . 

8l.         . 

82.         . 

83.  Ba. 

II,  ] 

[8, 

20- 

-27; 

Ap. 

II, 

21,  4 

;  Va 

X, 

4. 

84.      . 

^ 

85.      . 

SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


559 


86 

87.  Ga.  Ill,  2-3;  Ba.  II,  11,  12; 
Ap.  II,  2.1, 1. 

88.  Ga.  III,i  ;  Ap.  II,  21,  2. 

89.  Ga.  Ill,  36;  Va.  VIII,  14; 
Vi.  LIX,  27-29. 

90.  Va.VIII,  15*;  VIII,  16. 


92.  Va.  X,  30;  Ya.  111,66. 

93 

94 

95.  Va.  X,  26. 

96 

97 


Manu  VII. 


29. 


3°. 


31.  Ga.  XI,  4. 

32.  Vi.IV,  96*;  Yd.  I,  333. 

33.  Vi.IV,97*. 

34 


35- 


36. 


9- 
10. 


11. 
12. 
13. 


37.  Vi.  Ill,  76. 

38.  Vi.  Ill,  77. 

39.  .       .       . 


40. 


41. 


14.  Ya.  I,  353. 

i5 

16.  Ga.  XII,  51;  Va.  XIX,  9; 
Vi.III,9i;  Y1I,  367. 

17 

18.  Mah.  XII,  15,  2. 

19.  Ya.  I,  355. 

20 


42. 


43.  Ga.  XI,  3;  Ya.  I,  310. 


44. 


45-      •       •       • 
£}vi.III,5o. 
48.  Vi.  Ill,  51-52. 


49. 


21 

22.  Mah.  XII,  15,  34. 
23 


5o. 

£2. 


24 

25.  Mah.  XII,  15,  11;  Vi.  IV, 

95*. 

26.  Ga.   XI,    2 ;    Yd.   I,   308- 

3°9- 

27 

28 


53- 


54.  Vi.  Ill,  71;  Ya.  I,  311. 
55 

56.  Y1I,  311. 

57.  ....      . 

58.  YaM,3n. 

59 


560 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


60 
61. 
62 
63. 
64. 

65. 
66. 

67. 
68. 


:) 


Vi.  Ill,  16-21. 


9<> 


: 


Ga.  X,  20-23. 


97 

98.  .       .       . 

99.  Va.XVI,  6;  Yd.  I,  316. 

TOO 


IOI 

102.  Mah.  XII,  140,  7. 

103.  Mah.  XII,  140,  8. 
104 


69.  Vi.  Ill,  4-5  ;  Ya.  I,  320. 

70.  Mah.  XII,  86,  5;  Vi.  111,6. 


105.  Mah.  XII,  83,  49  ;  140,  24. 

106.  Mah.  XII,  140,  25. 

107 


72. 
73- 
74- 
75- 


io8. 
109. 


no. 


in, 
112. 
n 


76.  Ap.  II,  25,  2-3. 

77- 


3 

114 A  • 

115.  Mah.  XII,  87,   3;  Ap.   II, 

26,  4-5 ;  Vi.  nI>  7"10- 

116.  Mah.  XII,  87,  4;  Vi.  Ill, 
11-12. 

117.  Mah.  XII,  87,   5;  Vi.  Ill, 

I3-I5- 

118.  Mah.  XII,  87,  6\ 

119.  Mah.  XII,  87,  6^-8* 

120.  Mah.  XII,  87,  9b-ioa. 

121.  Mah.  XII,  87,10^-1 1 a;  Ap. 
II,  26,  4. 

122.  Mah. XII,  87,  nb-i2a;  Ya. 

I>  337- 

123.  Mah.XII,87,i2b-i3a;  Ya. 

I,  337- 

124.  Yl  I,  337. 

125 

126 


78.  Ga.  XI,  12-18;  Ba.  I,  18, 
7-8;  Va.  XIX,  3-6;  Vi.  Ill, 
70;  Yl  I,  312-313. 

79.  Ap.II,  26,  1;  Vi.  Ill,  78, 81, 
84;  Ya.  I,  313. 

80.  Ya.  I,  321. 

81 

H) YL  1, 3x4. 

84.  Va.     XXX.    7*;     Ya.    I, 

3i5. 

85.  Ga.V,  20;  Vi.  XCIII,  1-4. 

86 

87.  Ga.  X,  16  ;  Ba.  I,  18,  9  ;  Vi. 
HI,  43- 

88.  Vi.HI,  44;  Ya.  I,  322. 

89.  Ap.  II,  26,  2-3  ;  Vi.  Ill,  45  ; 
Ya.  I,  323. 

90.  Ba.  I,  18,  10;  Ya.  I,  323. 

9I,|  Ga.  X,  18;  Ba.  I,  18,  11; 
92'h   Ap.II,  10, 11;  Ya.I,  325. 
93- JA 

94.  Ap.  II,  26,  3 ;  Ya.  I,  324. 

95.  Ya.  I,  324. 


127.  Mah.  XII,  87,^13^-14". 

128.  Ba.  1, 18,  15;  Ap.  II,  26,  9. 

129 

130.  Ga.  X,  24-25;  Ba.  1, 18,  1; 

Va.  I,  42;  Vi.  Ill,  22,  24. 


SYNOPSIS    OF   PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


56r 


131.  Ga.  X,  27  ;  Va.  I,  42  ;  Vi. 
HI,  25. 

132.  Ga.   X,    27;    Vi.   Ill,    23, 
25. 

133.  Ga.  X,  11;  Ap.  II,  26,10; 
Va.I,  43;  XIX,  23;  Vi.HI, 

26. 

134.  Mah.  XIII,  61,  30;  Ga.  X, 
9;    Ap.  II,  25,  11  ;  Vi.  Ill, 

79- 

135.  Yl  III,  44- 

136.  Va.  I,  44  ;  Vi.  Ill,  27. 

137.  Va.  XIX,  26-27. 

138.  Ga.X,  31-32;  Va.XIX,28; 
Vi.  Ill,  32. 

139.  Mah.  XII,  87,  i8*>. 

140 


164. 

165.  .       .       . 

166.  .       .       . 
167. 

168.      .       .       . 

169. 

170. 

171.  Ya.  I,  347. 

172. 

i73-      •       • 
174.      .       . 

i75-  •  • 
176. 

177.  .  . 

178.  .  . 

179.  .  . 

180.  . 


i4i.  vi.m,  73;  Ya.11, 3. 

142.  Ga.  X,  7-8;  Ba.  I,  18,  1  ; 
Ap.  II,  10,  6;  Va.  XIX,  1; 
Vi.  Ill,  2  ;  Ya.  I,  334- 

143.  Mah.  XIII,  61,  31. 

144 

145 


181 

182.  Vi.  Ill,  40;  Ya.  I,  347. 

183.  Vi.  Ill,  41. 

184 

185 

186 


187. 


146. 

us.  / 


48 
149. 
150. 
151. 
152. 
153. 
154- 


343- 


189 

190 

191.  Mah.  XII,  100,  47. 

IQ2 


193- 
194. 


i95- 
196. 


f-Vi.III,  38;  Yd.  I,  344. 


156. 

i57- 

158. 

159.  Vi.  Ill,  38;  Y1I,  345. 

160.  Vi.  111,39;  Ya.  I,  346. 

161.  ...... 

162.  .       .... 
163 


197 • 

198 

199 

200 

201.  .       .       . 

202.  Vi.  Ill,  47. 

203.  Win,  42;  Ya.  I,  342. 
204. 


[25] 


.  !   205.  Ya.  I,  348. 

o  o 


562 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


351 


206. 

207. 

208.  Ya.  I, 

209. 

210. 

six. 

212. 

213. 

214. 


216.  Ya.  I,  326. 


217.  .       . 

218.  Vi.  111,87 

219.  Vi.  Ill,  88 

220.  Vi.  Ill,  85 

221.  Ya.  I,  328 

222.  Yl  I,  328 

223}y1I,  329 

224.  J  '  °  y 

225.  Yl  I,  330. 
226. 


Manu  VIII. 


1.  Ga.  XIII,  26;  Va.  XVI,  2 
Vi.111,72;  Ya.1,359;  II,  1 


Ga.  XI,  19-24;  Va.  I,  17 
XVI,  4-5. 


24. 


2J;}yih,  13-15. 

27.  Ga.  X,  48;  Va.  XVI,  8-9 ; 
Vi.  Ill,  65. 

28.  Vi.  Ill,  65. 


29 

30.  Ga.X,  36-38-;  Va.XVI,  19- 

20  ;  Ya.  II,  33. 

3i-  Ya.  11,33- 
32.  Ya.  II,  33. 

33-      •       • 


Ga.  XIII,  26;  Va.XVI,  2 
Vi.  111,73;  Yd.  II,  3. 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 

16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 

22 

23 


34.  •       • 

35.  Vi.  Ill,  63 

36.  Vi.III,64; 


Ya.  II,  35- 
Ya.  II,  35- 


Mah.  Ill,  313,28;  XII,  90, 
i5b-c. 


Ba.  1, 19,  8*;  Ga.  XIII,  11. 
Ba.  1,10,8*. 


37.  Ga.  X,  44;  Va.  Ill,  14; 
III,  58  ;  Yl  II,  34. 

38.  Ga.  X,  43  ;  Vi.  Ill,  56-57 
Yd.  II,  34. 

39.  Ga.X,  45;  Va.  Ill,  13; 
III,  58-62  ;  Yl  II,  35. 

40.  Ga.  X,  46-47  ;  Ap.  II,  26, 
Vi.  Ill,  66-67;  Ya.  11,36. 

41.  Ga.  XI,  11,  20;  Ba.  I,  2,  i- 
Ap.  II,i5,  1 5  Ya.  I,  17;  xi: 
7  ;  Vi.  Ill,  3  ;  YlI,36o. 

42 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


56, 


43.  Ga.  XIII,  27. 

44.  Ga.  XI,  23-24;  Ap.  II,  29,  6; 
Va.  XVI,  4-5- 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 


75.  Ga.^XIII,  7;  Ba.  I,  19,  14- 
15;  Ap.  II,  29,  9-10. 

76.  Vi.VIII,  12. 

77.  Ya.  II,  72. 

78 


79.  Ga.  XIII,  5  ;  Ap.  II,  29,  7  ; 

Vi.VIII,  24;  Ya.  II,  73. 
80 


50.  Vi.VI,i8;  Yd.  11,40. 


81. 

82. 


83. 


84. 

85. 
86. 


87.  Ap.  II,  29,7;  Vi.VIII,  19. 

88.  Vi.  VIII,  20-23. 

89.  Vi.VIII,  25;  Ya.  II,  73-74. 

90.  Ba.  I,  19,  10  ;  Vi.VIII,  26; 

Ya.  II,  75. 


61.  Ga.  XIII,  1. 

62.  Ba.  I,  19,  13;  Vi.  VIII,  8; 
Ya.  II,  68. 

63.  Ga.  XIII,  2  ;  Ap.  II,  29,  7  ; 
Va.XVI,  28;  Vi.VIII,  8;  Yd. 
II,  68. 

64.  Ga.  XIII,  2  ;  Vi.  VIII,  3 ; 
Yd.  II,  70-71. 

65.  Ba.  I,  19,  13;  Vi.  VIII,  2; 
Ya.  II,  70. 

66.  Ba.I,  19,  13;  Vi.VIII,  2,3; 

yin,  70-71. 

67.  Ba.  I,  19,  13;  Vi.  VIII,  2; 
Ya.  II,  70. 

68.  Va.XVI,  30*. 

69.  Va.  XVI,  29  ;  Ya.  II,  69. 

70 

7i 

72.  Ga.  XIII,  9;  Vi.  VIII,  6; 

Ya.  II,  72. 

73.  Vi.VIII,  39*;  Ya.  II,  78, 
80. 

74.  Ba.I,  19,7;  Vi.VIII,  13-14. 

0   o 


92.  .       .       . 

93.  Va.XVI,  33*. 

94.  .       .       . 

95.  .       .       . 

96.  .       .       . 

97.  .       .       . 


98.  Ba.  I,  i9,i2b-c*;  Va.  XVI, 

34*;  Ga.  XIII,  14-15. 

99.  Ba.  I,  19,  i2<**;  Ga.  XIII, 
16. 

100.  Ga.  XIII,  18-19. 

101 

102.  Ba.  1, 10,  24*. 

103 

104.  Ga.  XIII,  24-25  ;  Va.  XVI, 
36;  Vi.VIII,  15;  Yd.  II,  83. 

105.  Ya.  II,  83. 

106.  Ba.I,  19,  16;  Vi.VIII,  16. 

107.  Ga.  XIII,  6  ;  Yd.  II,  76. 

108.  Yd.  II,  113. 

109.  Ga.  XIII,  12-13;  Vi.VIII, 
19. 

2 


5^4 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


no. 
in. 


112.  Va.  XVI,  36*;  Ga.  XXIII, 
29. 

113.  Vi.  VIII,  22-23. 
Vi.  XI-XII;  Yd.  II,  103- 

109. 


114. ) 
"5-/ 


116.  .      .      . 

117.  Vi.  VIII,  40*. 

118.  .       .       . 


149.  Va.XVI,i8*;  Ga.XII,  38- 
39  j  Yd.  II,  25. 

15° 

151.  Ga.  XII,  31,  36;  Vi.VI,  11- 
14,  16-17;  Ya.  II,  39. 

152 

153.  Ga.  XII,  30,  34-35- 

154 '     ■ 


155. 

156. 


119.^ 

120. 

121. 

122. 

123. 


LY1II,8i. 


124.  Ga.  XII,  46-47  ;  Vi.  V,  2-8. 
125 


157 

158.  Vi.VI,  41;  Yl  11,53- 

159.  Va.   XVI,   31*;    Ga.   XII, 
41;  Vi.  VI,  41;  Yd.  II,  41, 

53- 

160.  Vi.VI,  41;  Ya.  II,  54. 
161 


Vi.  IV,  1-13;  Ya.  1,361- 
364. 


126.  Ga.  XII,  51 ;  Ya.  I,  367. 
^;}va.XIX,43;Ya,I,356. 

132. 
133. 
134- 
135. 
136. 

137. ' 

138.  Vi.IV,  14*;  yi  1,365. 

139.  Vi.VI,  20-21  ;  Ya.  II,  42. 

140.  Ga.  XII,  29;   Va.  II,  51; 
Ya.  II,  37. 

141.  Yd.  II,  37. 

142.  Va.  II,  48*;  Vi.VI,  2;  Yd. 
n,  37- 

143.  Ga.XII,  32;  Vi.VI,  5. 

144.  Vi.VI,  6;  Yd.  II,  59. 

145.  Vi.VI,  7-8;  Yl  II,  58. 

146 

147-  \  Ga.XII,  37;  Va.XVI,  16- 
148.  J      17;  Ya.  II,  24. 


162 

163.  Yd.  II,  32. 

164.  Vi.  VII,  11. 

165.  Vi.VII,  7;  Ya.  II,  89. 

166.  Vi.VI,  39;  Y!  11,45- 

167 

168.  Vi.VII,  6;  Yd.  II,  89. 

169 

170.  Va.  XIX,  14-15. 

171 

172 

173 

174 

175 

176.  Vi.VI,  19;  Ya.  II,  40. 

177 


178.  .       . 

179.  .       . 

180.  Yd.  II,  65. 


182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


565 


187. 
188. 


228. 


189.  Ya.  II,  66. 

190 

191.  Vi.  V,  169-171, 

192 

193.      ...... 

194 

195 

196 

!97 


230.  Vi.  V,  137;  Yl  II,  164. 

231.  Vi.V,  139. 

232.  Vi.  V,  138;  Ya.  II,  164. 

233 

234 s 

235-  Vi.V,  137-138. 

236 


237.  Ya.  II,  167. 

238.  .       .       . 

239.  .       .       . 


198.  . 

199.  Yl  II,  168. 
200. 


201 

202.  Vi.   V,    164-165;   Ya.    II, 
169-170. 

203.  Ya.  II,  245. 

204.  Yl  I,  66. 


205.      . 
206. 

207.  Ya.  II,  265. 

208.  . 


240.  Ga.  XII,  19-20  ;  Ap.  II,  28, 
5;  Vi.  V,  140-146;  Yl  II, 
162. 

241.  Ga.  XII,  21-26;  Vi.  V, 
147-149;  Ya.  II,  161. 

242.  Vi.V,  150;  Ya.  II,  163. 

243.  Ap.  II,  28,  1. 

244 


245. 
246. 
247. 
248. 


}  Ya.  II, 


151, 


209 

210. 

211.  Yd.  II,  259. 

212. 


249. 
250. 

2tfl. 


Ya.  II,  151. 


213 

214 

HI'}  Ap.    II,    28,    2-3;  Vi. 
2I7J     153-154;  Ya.  II,  193. 

218 

219.  Vi.V,  168;  Ya.  II,  192. 
220 


252 
253 
254 
255 
256 

257. 
258. 
259. 


.  Ya.  II,  152. 
Yl  II,  153- 


221. 

222.  Ya.  II,  177. 

223. 

22, 

221 

226. 

227. 


260 
261 
262 


«4.1 

'5- J 


Yl  I,  66. 


.  Va.    XVI,   13-15;  Ya.   U, 

154- 

.  Yl  II,  153. 


263 
264. 
265.  Yl  II,  153. 


566 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


266 

267.  Ga.  XII,  1,  8,  10;  Yl  II, 
207. 

268.  Ga.XII,  11-13;  Ya.II,  207. 

269.  Vi.  V,  33-35,   37-38;  Ya. 
II,  205-206. 

270.  Ga.  XII,  1 ;  Ap.  II,  27, 14; 
Vi.V,  23. 

271.  Vi.V,  25. 

272.  Vi.V,  24. 

273.  Vi.  V,  26. 

274.  Vi.  V,  27  ;  Ya.  II,  204. 

275.  Vi.V,  28. 

276 

277 

278 

279.  Ga.  XII,  1;  Vi.  V,  19;  Ya. 
II,  215. 

280.  Ya.  II,  215. 

281.  Ga.  XII,  7;  Ap.  II,  27,  15; 
Vi.  V,  20. 

282.  Vi.V,  21-22. 

283.  Vi.V,  65. 

284.  Vi.V,  66-72;  Yl  II,  218- 
220. 

285.  Vi.V,  55-59. 

286.  Vi.V,  75-76. 

287.  Vi.V,  75-76;  Ya.II,  222. 

288. . 

289 

290 

291.  Ya\  II,  299. 

292.  Ya.  II,  298-299. 

293 

294 

295 

296 

:j}vi.v)5o-54. 

299. 1  Ga.  II,  43-44;    Ap.  I,  8, 

300.  J       30. 

301. 


302.  Ap.  II,  25,  15;  Vi.V,  196; 
Ya.  I,  335. 

3°3 

304.  Ya.  I,  334. 

305.  Mah.  XII,  75,  7 ;  Va.  I,  44- 

306.  Ya.  I,  334. 

307 

308.  Ya.  I,  336. 

309 


3«- 

312. 

3*3- 


314.  Ga.  XII,  43;  Ba.  II,  1,  16; 
Ap.  I,  25,  4  ;  Va.  XX,  41 ;  Vi. 
LII,  1 ;  YL  III,  257. 

315.  Ba.  II,  1,17;  Va.  XX,  41. 

316.  Ba.H,  1,17*;  Ga.  XII,  44- 
45;  Ap.  I,  25,  4-5;  Va.  XX, 
41;  Vi.LII,  2;  YLIll,  257. 

317.  Va.  XIX,  44*;  Ap.  I,  19, 
16*. 

318.  Va.XIX,45*. 


3i9- 
320. 
321. 
322. 
323- 
324 
325 
326 

327 
328 

329 
330 
331 
332 
333 
334 
335 

336- 


Vi.V,  12. 
Vi.V,i3. 
Vi.V,  81-82. 

}vi.V,  77-78. 


I  Vi.V,  83-86. 


Ya.  II,  230. 


.  Mah.  XII,  121,  60;  Ya.  I, 
357*- 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


567 


f  Ga.  XII,  15-17. 

Ga.  XII,  28;  Ap.  I,  28,  3; 
Ya.  II,  166. 
Ga.  XII,  49-50. 


337 
338 
339 

340 
34i 
342 
343 
344 
345 
346 

347 

348.  Ba.  II,  4,  18;  Va.  Ill,  24. 

349.  Ga.VII,  25;  Ba.  II,  4,  18; 
Va.  Ill,  24. 

350.  Va.  Ill,  17*;  Ba.  I,  18,12- 
13;  Va.  Ill,  15-16;  Vi.  V, 
191-192 ;  V,  189*. 

351.  Va.  Ill,  18*;  Ba.1, 18, 13; 
Va.  III,i7;  Vi.V,  190*. 

2.      .       . 


372.  Mah,  XII,  165,  65;  Ga. 
XXIII,  15;  Va.  XXI,  1-3. 

373.  Mah.  XII,  165,  66b. 

374.  Ga.  XII,  2;  Ba.  II,  3,  52; 
Ap.  II,  27,9;  Va.XXI,i,5; 
Ya.  II,  286,  294. 

375 


376. 


35 

353-   A 

354.  Ap.  II,  26,  19;  Ya.  II,  285. 

355.  Ap.  II,  26,  18. 

356 

357 
358 


377.  Ap.  II,   26,   20;  Va.  XXI, 
2-3 ;  Ya.  II,  286. 

378.  Vi.V,  40;  Ya.  II,  286. 

379 

380.  Ga.VIII,  13;  Ba.  I,  18,  17; 
Vi.V,  2. 

381 

382 

383 

384 

385- 
386. 

387. 


Vi.V,  41,43;  Ya.  II,  294. 
Vi.V,  196*. 


388 

389.  Vi.V,  163;  Ya.II,  237. 

390 

39i 


' }  Yd.  II, 


284, 


359.  Ba.  II,  4,  2*;  II,  4,  1 ;  Ap. 

II,  26,  20. 
360 

361.  Ya.  11,285. 

362.  Ba.  11,4,3*- 

363.  Ya.  II,  293. 

364.' 

365-  I  Ya.  II,  288. 
366.  f 

367- , 

368 

369.  •       • 

370. 


392. 
393- 
394- 
395- 
396. 
397- 
398. 

399- 
400. 
401. 
402. 

403- 
404. 


Vi.V,  94;  Ya.  II,  263. 

Ap.  II,  26,  16-17. 

Ya.  II,  238. 

Yd.  II,  179. 

Ya.II,  261. 

Vi.V,  130;  Ya.II,  261, 

Ya.  II,  262. 

Ya.  II,  252. 

Ya.II,  251. 

Va.  XIX,  13. 


405. 
406. 
407. 
408. 


371.  Mah.    XII,   165,   64;     Ga. 
XXIII,  14;  Vi.V,  18. 


Vi.V,  132-133. 


568 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


409. 
4IO. 
411. 
412. 

413- 
414. 


4I5- 
4l6. 


417. 
4l8. 
419. 
420. 


Manu  IX. 


2.  Ga.  XVIII,  1;  Ba.  II,  3,44; 
Va.  V,  1;  Vi.  XXV,  12-13; 
Ya.  I,  85  ;  see  also  above,  V, 
147-148. 

3.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  14 ;  Ba.  II, 
3,45*;  Va.V,3*. 

4.  Ga.  XVIII,  22;  Ba.  IV,  1, 
12,  17-19;  Va.  XVII,  69- 
70;  Ya.I,  64. 

5 

6.  Mah.  Ill,  12,  68. 


8.  Yd.  I,  56. 

9.  Ya.  I,  81. 


11. 
12. 

i3- 
14. 

16. 


25 

26 

27.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  11. 
28 

29.  See  above,  V,  165. 

30.  Va.  XXI,  14  ;  see  above,  V, 
164. 

31 A  •       • 

32.  Ga.  XVIII,  9-14;  Ap.  II, 

13,  6-7;  Va.  XVII,  6-9,63- 

64. 

33 

34 


35- 
36. 
37- 


38. 


39- 


40. 


41. 

42. 


17.  Mah.  XIII,  40,  I2b-i3a. 

18.  Mah.XIII,40,  nb-i2a;  Ba. 
I,  1 1,  7  ;  see  also  above,  II,  66. 

J9 A  •       • 

20.  Si.  Gri.  Ill,  13,  5  ;  Ap.  *Sr. 

I,  9,  9- 

21 . 

22 


23- 
24. 


43 

44-    A 

45.  Ap.  II,  14,  16. 

46 

47.  Vi.V,i6o;  Ya.I,  65. 
48 

49 

50.  Va.  XVII,  8  *. 

Si 


52. 
53- 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


569 


54.  Par.  IV,  16*. 

55-       •       •       • 
56.       .       .       . 


57.      ......       . 

58 

59.  Ga.  XVIII,  4-5;  Ba.  II,  4,  9- 
10;  Va.  XVII,  56;  Ya.  I, 
68. 

60.  Va.  XVII,  61 ;  Ya.  I,  68. 

61.  Ga.  XVIII,  8. 

62;}Ya.I,69. 


1,  i4a-b*;  Ga.  XVIII,  20; 
Va.  XVII,  67-68  ;  Vi.  XXIV, 
40  ;  Yd.  I,  64. 


91 


92.  Ga.  XVIII,  20. 

93.  Vi.  XXIV,  41. 

94.  Mah.  XIII,  44,  14  a. 

95.  Mah.  XIII,  44,  27  a. 
96 


63 
64. 

65. 
66. 

67. 
68. 
69. 
7o. 


97- 

98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 


Ap.  II,  13,  11, 


102. 


103. 


71.  Vi.V,  160-161;  Ya.  I,  65. 
*2'1  Vi.V,  162;  Ya.  I,  66. 

74 

75.  Vi.  XXV,  9-10;  Ya.  I,  84. 

76.  Ga.    XVIII,    15,    17;    Va. 
XVII,  75-80. 

77 

78 

79 

80.  Ya\  I,  73. 

81.  Ba.  II,  4,  6*. 

82 

83 


84 

85.  •■ 

86.  Vi.  XXVI,  1 ;  Ya.  I,  88. 

87.  Mah.    XIII,    46,  36b;     Vi. 
XXVI,  2-3. 

88.  Ga.  XVIII,  21;  Va.  XVII, 
70;  Ba.  IV,  1,  11. 

89 

90.  Mah.  XIII,  44,  16;  Ba.  IV, 


104.  Ga.  XXVIII,  1 ;  Ba.  II,  3,  3, 
8;  Vi.  XVIII,  36;  Yl  II, 
117. 

105.  Ga.A  XXVIII,  3;  Ba.  II,  3, 
13;  Ap.  11,14,  6. 

106. 

107.  Va.  XVII,  1 ;  Vi.  XV,  45. 

108 

109.  Mah.  XIII,  105,  6  a. 

no 

in.  Ga.  XXVIII,  4. 

112.  Ga.  XXVIII,  5-7;  Ba.  II, 

3,4;  Vi.  XVIII,  37;  Yl  II, 

114. 

«3 

114.  Ga.XXVIII,ii-i3;  Ba.II, 

3,  6;  Va.  XVII,  43;  Ya.  II, 
114. 

115.  Ap.  11,13,  *3« 

116.  Ga.  XXVIII,  8. 

117.  Ga.  XXVIII,  9-10;  Va. 
XVII,  42. 

118.  Vi.  XVIII,  35;  Ya.  II, 
124. 

119.  Ba.  II,  3,  9. 

120 


57o 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


121 

122.  .  * 

123.  Ga.  XXVIII,  14. 

124.  Ga.  XXVIII,  15. 

125.  Ga.  XXVIII,  16. 

126 

127.  Ga.  XXVIII,  18;  Ba.  II,  3, 

15;    Va.  XVII,  15-17;    Vi. 

XV,  5. 

128 

129 .    . 

130.  Mah.  XIII,  45,  11;  Ba.  II, 

3,i4- 

131.  Mah.  XIII,  45,  12;  Ga. 
XXVIII,  24;  Ba.  II,  3,  43; 
Va.  XVII,  46;  Vi.  XVII,  21. 

132 

133.  Mah.  XIII,  45,  13b;  Ya.II, 

128. 
134-      ....... 

135 

136.  Ga.  XXVIII,  19. 

137.  Ba.  II,  16,  6*;  Va.  XVII, 
5*;Vi.XV,46*;  Ya.  I,  78. 

138.  Vi.  XV,  44*. 

139.  Vi.  XV,  47*. 

140.  Ba.  11,3,  16*. 

141.  Va.  XV,  9-10;  Ba.  Par.  16. 
142 

;«;}Ga.  XXVIII,  23. 

145 

146 

147 

148 

149.  Va.  XVII,  47. 

150.  Mah.  XIII,  47,  11. 

151 

152.  Vi.  XVIII,  1. 

153.  Ba.II,  3,  10;  Va.XVII,  48- 
50;  Vi.  XVIII,  2-5;  Ya.  II, 
125. 


154.  Vi.  XVIII,  32. 

155.  Ga.  XXVIII,  39. 

156.  Vi.  XVIII,  28-30,  36-37. 

157.  Mah.    XIII,    47,    56;    Vi. 
XVIII,  31. 

158.  Vi.  XV,  1. 

159.  Ba.II,3,3i*;Ga.XXVIII} 
32  ;  Va.  XVII,  25. 

160.  Ba.II,  3,  32*;  Ga.  XXVIII, 
33;  Va.  XVII,  38. 

161 


162.  Vi.  XVII,  23*. 

163.  Vi.  XV,  28-30. 

164.  Ba.  11,3,  "• 

165.  Ga.  XXVIII,  34;  Yd. II,  132. 

166.  Ba.  II,  3,  14 ;  Ap.  II,  13,  1 ; 
Va.XVII,  13;  Vi.XV,  2;  Ya. 
II,i28. 

167.  Ba.  11,3, 17-18;  Va.  XVII, 
14;  Vi.XV,  3;  Ya.  1,69;  II 


I 


127-128. 

168.  Ba.  II,  3,  20 ;  Va.  XVII,  29 
Vi.XV,  18-19;  Ya.II,  130. 

169.  Ba.  II,  3,  21 ;  Ya.  II,  131. 

170.  Ba.  II,  3,  22  ;  Va.  XVII,  24  ; 
Vi.XV,  13-14;  Ya.II,  129. 

171.  Ba.  II,  3,23;  Va.  XVII,  37; 
Vi.XV,  24-25;  Yl  11,132. 

172!  Ba.II,  3,  24;  Va.XVII,  22- 
23;  Vi.  XV,  10-11;  Ya.  II, 
129. 

173.  Ba.  II,  3,25;  Va.  XVII,  26- 
27;  Vi.  XV,  15-16;  Ya.  II, 

174.  Ba.II,  3,  26;  Va.XVII,  30- 
32;  Vi.  XV,  20-21;  Yl  II, 

131- 

175.  Ba.II,  3,  27;  Va.XVII,  18- 
19;  Vi.  XV,  7-9;  Ya.  II, 
130. 

176.  Ba.IV,  1,16 b-c*;Va. XVII, 
74  ;  Vi.  XV,  8. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


571 


1 77.  Ba.  II,  3,  28;  Va.XVII,  33- 
35;  Vi.  XV,  22-23;  Ya.  II, 

131- 

178.  Ba.II,3,3o;Va.XVII,38; 
Vi.  XV,  27. 

179.  Ya.  II,  133. 

180 

181.  Ba.  II,  3,  33-35  ;  Ap.II,  13, 
6-10. 

182.  Va.XVII,  10*;  Vi.XV,42. 

183.  Va.XVII,  11*;  Vi.  XV,  41. 

184.  Va.XVII,  39,  81;  Vi.  XV, 
28-29. 

185.  Vi.  XVII,  6,  8;  Ya.  II, 
135- 

186.  MlSr.III*;  Ba.  1, 11,9. 

187.  Ga.  XXVIII,  21;  Ba.I,  11, 
10-13;  Ap.  II,  14,  2-3;  Va. 
XVII,  81-82;  Vi.  XVII,  11; 

Yin,  135. 

188.  Ga.  XXVIII,  41;  Ba.I,  11, 
14;  Va.  XVII,  84-86;  Vi. 
XVII,  14. 

189.  Ga.  XXyiII,42;  Ba.I,  11, 
15-16;  Ap.  II,  14,  5;  Va. 
XVII,  83;  Vi.  XVII,  13. 

190 

IQI 


&}"■"■ 


117. 


194.  Vi.  XVII,  18;  Ya.  II,  143. 
J95 


37-40;  Va.  XVII,  54  ;Vi.  XV, 

33;  Yd.  II,  140. 
203.  Ga.  XXVIII,  44 ;  Vi.  XV, 

34-36;  Ya.  II,  141. 
204 

205.  Ga.  XXVIII,  31. 

206.  Ga.  XXVIII,  30;  Ya.  II, 
118-119. 

207.  Yd.  II,  116. 

208.  Mah.  XIII,  105,  11;  Vi. 
XVIII,  42*. 

209.  Vi.  XVIII,  43*;  Yd.  II, 
119. 

210.  Vi.  XVIII,  41*;  Yd.  II,  120. 
211 

212.  Vi.  XVII,  17;  Yl  II,  138. 

213.  Mah.  XIII,  105,7. 

214.  Mah.  XIII,  105,  10;  Ga. 
XXVIII,  40;  Ba.  II,  3,  38; 
Ap.  II,  14,  15. 

215.  Mah.  XIII,  105,  12;  Ya.  II, 
120. 

216.  Ga.  XXVIII,  29;  Vi.XVII, 
3  ;  Ya.  II,  122. 

217.  Vi.  XVII,  7;  Ya.  11,135. 

218.  Ya.  II,  126. 

219.  Vi.XVIII,44*;Ga.XXVIII, 

46-47- 

220 

221 

222 


223 

224.  Ya.  II,  304. 

225 • 

226 

227 

228 

229.  Ya.  11,43. 

23° 

231.  Vi.  V,  180. 

232.  Vi.  V,  9,  1 1 ;  Ya.  II,  240. 

233 


196.  Vi.XVII,  19;  Y1II,  145. 

197.  Vi.XVII,  20;  Y1II,  145. 

198.  Mah.  XIII,  47,  25. 

199.  Mah.  XIII,  47,  24b. 

200.  Vi.XVII,  22*. 

201.  Ga.  XXVIII,  43;  Ba.  II,  3, 
37-40;  Ap.  II,  14,  1 ;  Va. 
XVII,  52-53 ;  Vi.  XV,  32 ; 
Yd.  II,  140. 

202.  Ga.  XXVIII,  43  ;  Ba.  II,  3, 


572 


LAWS  OF  MANU. 


234.  Ya.  II,  305. 

235 

236 

237.  Ba.I,i8,i8;Vi.V,3-7. 
238 • 

239 

240.  . 

241.  .   .   .   .   .   . 

242 

243 

244 

245 

246 

247.   .   .   .   . 

248 . 

249.   ...... 

25° 

251 ,   • 

252 

253 

254 

255 

256 

257 

258 

259 

260 

261 

262 

263 

264 

265 

266 

267 

268 

269 

270 

271 

272 

273 

274.  Vi.V,  74. 

275 


276. 

277. 
278. 
279. 
280. 
281. 


Ya.  II,  273. 
Vi.V,  136. 
Ya.  II,  276. 
Ya.  II,  279. 
Ya.  II,  273. 


282. 
283. 
284. 
285. 
286. 


Vi.  V,  106-107. 


Vi.V,  175-177. 

Vi.V,  174. 

Vi.  V,  124;  Ya.  II,  245- 

46. 


287. 
288. 


289. 
290. 
201. 


292. 
293. 
294. 
295. 


Ya.  II,  297. 
Ya.  I,  352. 


296. 
297. 
298. 


299. 
300. 
301. 


302. 
3°3- 


3°4- 


305- 
306. 


307- 


308. 

3°9- 
310. 

311. 


312. 

3!3- 
3M. 

3*5- 

316. 


Mah.  XIII,  152,  16. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


573 


317.  Mah.  XIII,  152,  21. 

318.  Mah.  XIII,  152,  22. 

319.  Mah.  XIII,  152,  23. 

320.  Mah.  XII,  78,  ax. 

321.  Mah.  XII,  56,  24;  78,  22. 

322.  Ga.  XI,  14;  Va.  XIX,  4. 

323 

324 

325 

326 


327- 

328. 

329- 
33°- 
331. 

332. 
333- 


Mah.  XII,  60,  23b-24a. 
Mah.  XII,  60,  26b-2  7a. 


334- 
335- 
336. 


Manu  X, 


4.  Mah.  XIII,  46,  18  a;  Ap.  I 
1,  3-5;  Ba.  I,  16,  1;  Va.  II 
1-2  ;  Yd.  I,  10. 

5.  Ap.  I,  13,  1  ;  Vi.  XVI,  1 
Yd.  I,  90. 

6.  Ba.  I,  16,  6  ;  Ap.  II,  13,  4-5 

7.  Ga.  IV,  16;  Ba.  I,  16,  7 
Va.  XVIII,  8. 

8.  Ga.  IV,  16;  Ba.  I,  16,  7;  I 
17,    3;    Va.  XVIII,   8;    Yd 

9.  Ga.  IV,  16;  Ba.  I,  16,  7;  I, 
17,  4;  Va.  XVIII,  8;  Yd. 
I,  92. 

10 

11.  Ga.  IV,  17;  Ba.  I,  16,  8;  I, 
17,  7-8;  Va.  XVIII,  6;  Vi. 
XVI,  5-6;  Y£.  I,  93-94. 

12.  Ga.  IV,  17;  Ba.  I,  16,  8; 
Vi.  XVI,  4,  6 ;  Ya.  I,  93- 
94. 

13.  .       .       .       .       .       .       . 

*4.      «■ 

15.  ......       . 

16.  Ba.  I,   17,   7;    Va.  XVIII, 


1-3;    Vi.   XVI,    4;     Yd.   I, 
93-94- 

17.  Ba.  I,  17,  8;  Vi.  XVI,  5-6; 
Yd.  I,  93-94. 

18.  Ga.IV,  19;  Ba.  1, 16,  8,  11- 
12;  1,17,13-14;  Va. XVIII, 
5;  Vi.XVI,  5. 

19.  Ba.  I,  16,  8,  9-10;  I,  17, 
11-12;  Va.  XVIII,  2. 

20.  Ba.  I,  16,  16  *. 

21.  Ga.  IV,  20. 

22.  Ga.  IV,  a  1. 

23 


24. 
25. 
26. 


Yd.  I,  96. 


27.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  14. 

28.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  15. 

29.  Mah.XIII,48,i6;Vi.XVI,7. 

30.  Mah.  XIII,  48,17. 

31.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  18. 

32.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  190-30* 

33.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  20b. 

34.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  2 1  a. 

35.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  24b-25«. 

36.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  25^-26*. 

37.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  26b-2  7a. 

38.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  27  b 


574 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


39.  Mah.   XIII,    48,    28  k;  Va. 
XVIII,  3. 

40.  Mah.    XIII,    48,     29;    Vi. 
XVI,  17*. 

4i 

42 

43.  Mah.  XIII,  33,  21;  35,  17- 

44.  Mah.  XIII,  33,  22;  35,  18. 

45 


46 

47.  Vi.  XVI,  10, 12-13. 

48.  Vi.  XVI,  8. 

49.  Vi.  XVI,  9. 

50.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  32s,  33a 

51.  Vi.  XVI,  14. 

52.  Mah.   XIII,    48,   32  *>;    Vi. 
XVI,  14. 

53 

54 

55 

56.  Vi.  XVI,  11. 

57.  Va.    XVIII,   7 ;    Vi.    XVI, 

58.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  41. 

59.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  42. 

60.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  44. 

61. 

62.  Mah.  XIII,  48,  34^,   35  a ; 
Vi.  XVI,  18*. 

63.  Ya.^  I,    122*;     Ga.  VIII, 
23;  Ap.  I,  23,  6;  Vi.  II,  16- 

i7- 

64.  Ga.  IV,  22;  Ya.  I,  96. 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

7° •      • 

7i ■      .      . 

72 

73 


74.  Va.  II,  13. 

75.^  Ga.  X,  1-2  ;  Ba.  I,  18,  2  ; 

Ap.  II,  10,  4;  Va.  II,  13-14; 

Vi.  11,5,9,  11  ;  Ya.  I,  118. 

76.  Vi.  II,  11. 

77.  Ga.  X,  1 ;  Ba.  I,  18,  3  j  Ap. 
II,  10,  6  ;  Va.  II,  15-16  ;  Vi. 
11,9;  Ya.  I,  118. 

78.  Ga.  X,  1;  Ba.  I,  18,  4;  Ap. 
II,  10,  7!;  Va.II,  18;  Vi.  II,  9. 

79.  Ga.  X,  7,  15,  49;  Ba.  1, 18, 
3-4  ;  Ap.  II,  10,  6-7  ;  Va.  II, 
17,  19;  Vi.  II,  6-7,  12-13; 
YLI,  119. 

80 

81.  Ga.VII,  6;  Ba.  II,  4,16; 
Va.  II,  22;   Vi.  II,  15;  Ya. 

111,35. 

82.  Ga.VII,  7;  Ba.  II,  4,  19- 
21  ;  Va.  II,  24,  32-36;  Ya. 
111,35;  S&.  Gri.  IV,  11,  15. 

83 

84.  Mah.  Ill,  208,  23;  XII,  263, 
45b-46a;  Ba.  II,  4,  20-21; 
Va.  II,  32-36. 

85.  Ga.VII,  8;  Ap.  I,  20,10-11; 
Ya.  Ill,  39. 

86.  Ga.VII,  9,  14-15;  Ba.  II, 
2,  27 ;  Ap.  I,  20,  12-13  ;  Va. 
II,  24,  26,  29;  Vi.  LIV,  18, 
21;  Ya.  Ill,  36,  38. 

87.  Ga.VII,  9,  10;  Va.  II,  24 
26;  Vi.LIV,  18,  20;  Ya.I 
36-38. 

88.  Ga.VII,  9,  11-12;    Ap. 
20,   12-13 ;    Va.  II,  26  ;  Vi 
LIV,  18-19,  21;  Ya.  Ill,  3 

38- 

89.  Ga.VII,  13-15;  Ap.  I, 

12;  Va.II,  28;  Vi.LIV,  2 
Ya.  Ill,  37-38. 

90.  Va.  II,  31 ;  Ya.  Ill,  39. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


575 


91.  Ba.  II,  2,  26*;  Va.  11,30*. 

92.  Va.  11,27*;  Y1III,  40. 

93.  Ya.  Ill,  40. 

94.  Ga.  VII,  16-17,  2Ii  Ap.  I, 
20,  15;  Va.  II,  37-39. 

95.  Ga.VII,  26;  Vi.  II,  15. 

96.  Va.  II,  23. 

97 


98.  Va.  II,  23  ;  Vi.  II,  15. 

99- 1  Ga.  X,  57,  60;  Vi.  II,  14; 
100.  J       Ya.  I,  120. 
101 

102.  Ga.VII,  4;  Ap.  I,  18,  5-8, 
14-15. 

103.  Va.  XXVII,  9. 

104.  Ya.  Ill,  41. 

105.  .       . 

106 

107 

108 

109 

no 

in.  Ap.  I,  28,  n  ;  Va.  XX,  45- 


46;  Vi.  LIV,  28  ;  see  below, 
XI,  194. 
112 

n3 -       . 

114.  Va.XII,3. 

115.  Ga.  X,  39-42. 

116.  Ya.  111,42. 

117.  Va.  II,  40-43. 

118 '  . 


119.  Ga.  X,   16,   41  ;    see    also 
above,  VII,  88. 

120.  Va.  XIX,  37. 

121.  Ga.  X,  56 ;  Ya.  I,  120. 

122 

123 

124.  Ga.  X,  61. 

125.  Ga.  X,  58-59. 

126. )  Ga.  X,  64-65  ;  Ya.  I,  121, 

127.  J       262. 

128 


129.  Ga.  X,  63. 

130.  .       . 

131.  .       . 


Manu  XI. 


1.  Mah.  XII,  165,  1;  Ga.  V, 
21;  Ba.  II,  5,  19;  Ap.  II, 
10,  1-2. 

2.  Mah.  XII,  165,  2\ 

3.  Mah.  XII,  165,3b;  Ga.V, 
22  ;  Ba.  II,  5,  20. 

4.  Mah.  XII,  165,  4. 

5.  Ap.  II,  10,  3. 

6 

7.  Mah.  XII,  165,  5^-c;  Va. 
VIII,  10;  Vi.  LIX,  8-9;  YL 
I,  124. 

8.  .       .       .       


12.  Mah.    XII,    165,    7 ;     Ga. 
XVIII,  25. 

13.  Mah.    XII,    165,    8;     Ga. 
XVIII,  24. 

14.  Mah.    XII,    165,    9;    Ga. 
XVIII,  26-27. 

15.  Mah.  XII,  165,  10. 

16.  Mah.    XII,    165,    11  ;    Ga. 
XVIII,  28-29;  Ya.  Ill,  43. 

17.  Mah.    XII,    165,    12  ;    Ga. 
XVIII,  30 ;  Ya.  Ill,  43. 

18 

19 

20 


10. 


11.  Mah.  XII,  165,6. 


21.  Mah.    XII,    165,    13;    Ga. 
XVIII,  32. 


576 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


22.  Mah.   XII,  165,   i4a;   Ga. 

xvm,  3i;  Ya.111,44. 

23.  Mah.  XII,  165,  14b. 

24.  Vi.  LIX,  11;  Yd.  I,  127. 

25.  Yd.  I,  127. 

26 

27.  Mah.  XII,  165,  15 a;  Vi. 
LIX,  10;  Yd.  I,  126. 

28.  Mah.  XII,  165,  15  b. 

29.  Mah.  XII,  165,  16. 

30.  Mah.  XII,  165,  17. 

31.  Mah.  XII,  165,  18. 

32 

33 ■   •       • 

34.  Mah.  XII,  165,  20b-2ia; 
Va.  XXVI,  16. 

35.  Mah.  XII,  165,  i9b-20a. 

36.  Mah.  XII,  165,  2ib-22a; 
Ga.  II,  4 ;  Ap.  II,  15,  18-19  5 
Va.  II,  6. 

37.  Mah.  XII,  165,  22b-22c. 

38.  Mah.  XII,  165,  23. 

39.  Mah.  XII,  165,  24. 

40.  Mah.  XII,  165,  25. 

41.  Ga.  XXII,  34;  Va.  I,  18 
XXI,  27;  Vi.  LIV,  13. 


42 

43 . 

44.  Mah.  XII,  34,  2  j  Ga.  XIX 
2;  Ba.  III,io,  2;  Va.  XXII 
1  ;  Ya.  Ill,  219-220. 

45.  Ga.  XIX,  3-6 ;  Va.  XX 
1-2 ;  Ba.  Ill,  10,  3-5  ;  Va 
XXII,  3-5  ;  Ya.  Ill,  226. 

46.  Ya.  Ill,  226. 

47 

48.  Va.  XX,  43;  Vi.  XLV,  1. 

49.  Va.I,  18;  XX,  6;  XX,  44  ; 
Vi.  XLV,  3-6  ;  Ya.  Ill,  209. 

50.  Vi.XLV,  7-10;  Ya.  Ill,  211. 

51.  Vi.  XLV,  11-14;  Yd.  Ill, 
210. 


52.  Vi.  XLV,  20-21,  31. 

53.  Vi.XLV,32*. 

54.  Ya.  Ill,  220. 

55.  Ga.  XXI,  1;  Ap.  I,  21,  8; 
Va.  I,  19-21;  Vi.  XXXV, 
1-2;  Ya.  Ill,  227. 

56.  Ga.  XXI,  10;  Vi.  XXXVI, 
1  ;  XXXVII,  1-3 ;  Ya.  Ill, 
228. 

57.  Ga.  XXI,  1;  Ap.  I,  21,  8; 
Vi.  XXXVI,  2;  XXXVII, 
4-5;  Ya.  Ill,  228-229. 

58.  Ba.  II,  2,  3-4 ;  Vi.  XXXVI, 
3  ;  Ya.  Ill,  230. 

59AGa.  XXI,  1;  Ba.  II,  2,  13; 
Ap.  I,  21,  8-9,  17-18;  Vi. 
XXXVI,  4-7;  Yd.  Ill, 
231. 

60.  Ga.  XXI,  1, 11;  Ap.  I,  21,  9- 
10;  Va.  I,  23;  Vi.  XXXVII, 
6,9-10,13;  Yd.  Ill,  234,235, 
237,  239-240. 

61.  Ga.  XXI,  11;  Vi.  XXXVIJ 
15-18;  Yd.  Ill,  234-231 
238. 

62.  Ga.XXI,  11;  Ba.  II,  2,  13 
Yd.  Ill,  236-238. 

63.  Ga.XXI,  n;   Ba.  II,  2,  j 
Vi.  XXXVII,  14,19-21;  Y2 
III,  234-235. 

64.  Ga.  XXI,  11;  Vi.  XXXVIJ 
22-26  ;  Yd.  Ill,  240,  242. 

65.  Ga.  XXI,  11  ;  Ap.  I,  2: 
14-15;  Vi.  XXXVII,  7,  2- 
27  ;  Yd.  Ill,  239-240. 

66.  Ga.XXI,  11;  Ba.II,  2,  1; 
Vi.  XXXVII,  28-30,  32;  Y? 
Ill,  234,  242. 

67.  Ga.  XXI,  1,  11;  Va.  I,  2 
Vi.  XXXVII,  13,  31,  33; 
III,  236-237,  239. 

68.  Vi.  XXXVIII,  1-6. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


577 


69.  Vi.  XXXIX,  1. 

70.  Ba.  II,  2,6;  Vi.  XL,  1. 

71.  Ba.  II,  2,  15-16  ;  Ap.  I,  21, 
12-17;  Vi.  XLI,  1-4. 

72.  Ga.  XXII,  1 ;  Ba.  II,  1,  1. 

73.  Ga.  XXII,  4-6  ;  Ba.  II,  1, 
2-3;  Ap.  I,  24,  1 1-20;  1,28, 
21-29,  1;  Vi.  L,  i-6}  15;  Ya\ 

111,243.' 

74.  MakXII,  35,  4  ;  Ga.  XXII, 
2-3;  Ap.  I,  25,  11;  Ya.  Ill, 
248. 

75.  Ga.  XXII,  10;  Ba.  II,  1,  4. 

76.  Mah.XII,35,  5  a. 

77.  Mah.  XII,  35,  5b-6a;  Yl 
III,  250. 

78.  Ya.  Ill,  249. 

79.  Ap.  I,  24,  18. 

80.  Par.  VIII,  42  * ;  Ga.  XXII,  7 ; 
Va.XX,  27 ;  Ya.III,  244-245. 

81.  Ga.  XXII,  8;  Ap.  I,  24,21; 
Va.XX,  28;  Ya.III,  246. 

82 

83.  Ga.  XXII,  9;  Ba.  II,  1,  5; 

Ap.  I,  24,  22;  Vi.  XXXV,  6; 

Ya.  Ill,  244. 

84 

85.  Seeabove,IX, 317;  1,93-95. 

86.  See  below,  XII,  112. 

87 

88.  Ga.  XXII,  12-13;  Ba.  II, 
1,  12;  Ap.  I,  24,  6-9 ;  Va. 
XX,  23-24,34-36;  Vi.  L,  7- 
9  ;  Ya.  Ill,  251. 

89.  Vi.  L,  10. 

90.  Ga.  XXI,  7;  Ba.  II,  1,  6. 

91.  Mah.  XII,  165,  48  a;  Ga. 
XXIII,  1  ;  Ba.  II,  1,  18;  Ap. 
I,  25,  3;  Va.  XX,  22;  Ya. 
HI,  253. 

92.  Ya.  Ill,  253. 

93.  Vi.  LI,  1  ;  Ya.  Ill,  254. 

I>5"J  p 


94-      • 

95.  Vi.  XXII,  82  *. 

96 

97 

98. 

99 

100. ) 

ioi  J  See  above,  VIII,  314-316. 

102.  Ap.  I,  25,  10;  Vi.  LII,  3; 

Ya.  Ill,  258. 
103 

104.  Ga.  XXIII,  8-9;  Ba.  II,  1, 
13-14;  Ap.  I,  25,  2;  Va. 
XX,  14;  Vi.  XXXIV,  2;  Ya. 
Ill,  259. 

105.  Mah.  XII,  165, 50^-51  a ;  Ga. 
XXIII,  10-11;  Ba.  II,  1,  15; 
Ap.  I,  25,  1;  Va.  XX,  13; 
Ya.  Ill,  259. 

106.  Vi.  LILT,  1 ;  Ya.  Ill,  260. 

107.  Vi.  LILT,  6;  Ya.III,  260. 

108 

109.  Ga.  XXII,  18;  Ap.  I,  26,  1; 

Va.  XXI,  18;  Vi.  L,  16;  Ya. 

Ill,  263. 
no.  Vi.  L,  22. 
in.  Vi.  L,  16;  Ya.III,  263. 

112.  Vi.  L,  17-18. 

113.  Par. VIII,  41  *;  Vi.  L,  19-20. 

114.  Par.  VIII,  39*;  Vi.  L,  21. 

115.  Par.  VIII,  40*. 

116.  Vi.  L,  24. 

117.  Ya.  Ill,  263. 

118.  Vi.  XXXVII,  35. 

119.  Ga.  XXIII,  17;  Ba.  II,  1, 
31-33;  Ap.  I,  26,  8-9;  Va. 
XXIII,  1-3  ;  Ya.  Ill,  280  ;  Pa. 
Gri.  Ill,  12,  1-3. 

120.  Ga.  XXV,  4;  Ba.  II,  1,  35. 

121.  Vi.  XXVIII,  48*;  Ba.  II, 
1,  30  ;  Va.  XXIII,  4. 

122.  Ga.  XXV,  1-2. 

P 


578 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


123.  Vi.  XXVIII, 49*;  Ga.XXIII, 
18;  Pa.  Gri.  Ill,  12,  6-8. 

124.  Vi.  XXVIII, 50*;  Ga.XXIII, 
19;  VLGri.  III,i2,  8. 

125.  Vi.  XXXVIII,  7*. 

126.  Vi.  XXXIX,  2;  XL,  2; 
XLI,  5. 

127.  Ga.  XXII,  14-16;  Ba.II,  1, 
8-10;  Va.  XX,  31-33;  Vi. 
L,  12-15;  Yd.  III,  266-267. 

i28.^Ga.  XXII,  14 ;  Ba.  I,  19,  1  ; 
Ap.  I,  24,  1,4;  Yd.  Ill,  266. 

129.  Ya.  Ill,  266. 

130.  Ga.  XXII,  15  ;  Ba.  I, '19,  2  ; 
Ap.  I,  24,  2,  4  ;  Ya.  Ill,  267. 

13L  Ga.  XXII,  16;  Ba.  I,  19,  2; 
Ap.  I,  24,  3-4;  Yd.  Ill,  267. 

132.  Ga.  XXII,  19  ;  Ba.  I,  19,  6  ; 
Ap.  I,  25,13;  Va.  XXI,  24; 
Vi.  L,  30-32;  Yd.  III,  270. 

133.  Yd.  Ill,  270. 

134-  Ga.  XXII,  23,  25;  Vi.  L, 
34-35;  Ya.III,  273. 

135.  Ga.  XXII,  24;  Vi.  L,  36- 
39;  Ya.III,  271,  273-274. 

136.  Ba.  I,  19,6;  Vi.L/33;  Ya. 
Ill,  272. 

137.  Ba.  I,  19,  4;  Vi.  L,  25-28; 
Ya.III,  271. 

138.  Vi.  L,  29,  40-41 ;  Ya.  Ill, 
272-273. 

139.  Ga.  XXII,  26;  Yd.  Ill,  268. 

140.  Va.  XXI,  26;  Ya.  Ill,  274. 

141.  Vi.  L,  46*;  Ga.  XXII,  20- 
21;  Ap.  I,  26,  2;  Va.  XXI, 
25  ;  Ya.  Ill,  269. 

142.  Vi.  L,  47*;  Ga.  XXII,  22; 
Ya.  Ill,  275. 

143.  Vi.  L,  48*;  Yd.  Ill,  276. 

144.  Vi.  L,  49*;  Ya.  Ill,  275. 
145-  Vi.  L,  50*;  Yd.  Ill,  276. 
146 


147.  Ga.  XXIII,  2;  Ba.II,  1, 19, 
21;  Va.  XX,  19;  Vi.  LI,  4; 
Yd.  Ill,  255. 

148.  Ba.  II,  1,  22*;  Va.  XX,  21  ; 
Vi.  LI,  23-24. 

i49 

150.  Mah.  XII,  165,  76  b;  Ga. 
XXIII,  6  ;  Vi.  LI,  25. 

151.  Ga.  XXIII,  3  ;  Va.  XX,  20; 
Vi.  LI,  2 ;  Yd.  Ill,  255. 

152.  Va.XX,  18*;  Par.  XII,  3*; 
Ba.  II,  1,20;  Vi.  LI,  5. 

153.  Va.  XIV,  33;  Vi.  LI,  50, 
54,  56 ;  see  above,  IV,  222. 

J55 

156.  Vi.  LI,  27,  34. 

157.  Ga.  XXIII,  4-5 ;  Va.  XXIII, 
30;  Vi.LI,  3-4. 

158.  Va.XXIII,i2;Vi.LI,43-44. 

159.  Va.  XXIII,  11;  Vi.LI,  45; 
Yd.  Ill,  282. 

160.  Va.XXIII,n;  Vi.LI,46-4> 

161.  Ga.  XXIII,  26. 

l62.  : 

163.  Ap.  I,  25,  10;  Vi.  LII,  5. 

164.  Vi.  LII,  6. 

165.  Vi.  LII,  7. 

166.  Vi.  LII,  8. 

167.  Vi.  LII,  9. 

168.  Vi.  LII,  10. 

169.  Vi.  LII,  11,  13. 

170 

171.  Ga.  XXIII,  12-13,  32> 

11,2,  13-14;  Va.XX,  15-n 

Vi.  XXXIV,  2 ;  LIII,  1  ; 

HI,  233. 

172 

173.  Ba.  II,  1,  37-38- 
i74.AGa.  XXII,  36;  XXIII,  3. 

Ap.  I,  26,  7 ;  Vi.  LIII,  4, 

Yd.  Ill,  288. 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL    PASSAGES. 


579 


175.  Vi.  LIII,  4;  Ya.III,  291. 

176.  Ba.  II,  4,  14*;  II,  4,  13; 
Va.  XXIII,  41;  Vi.  LIII,  5-6. 

177.  Mah.  XII,  165,  63  b;  Vi. 
LIII,  8. 

178 a.       •       • 

179.  Vi.   LIII,    9*;    Ap.   I,  27, 

n*;  Ba.II,2,  11*;  Par.  VII, 

10*. 
180 

181.  Mah.  XII,  165,  37;  Ba.  II, 
2,35*;  Va.1,22*;  Ga.  XXI, 
3;  Vi.  XXXV,  3-5;  Y1III, 
261. 

182.  Vi.  LIV,  1. 

183.  Ga.  XX,  4-6 ;  Ba.  II,  1,  36  ; 
Va.  XV,  12-13;  Ya.III,  295. 

184.  Ga.  XX,  4,  7;  Va.  XV.  12, 
14;  Vi.  XXII,  57. 

185.  Ga.  XX,  8-9  ;  Va.  XV,  15- 
16;  Ya.  Ill,  295;  see  above, 
IX,  201. 

186.  See  above,  IX,  201. 

187.  Ga.  XX,  10;  Ba.  II,  1,  36; 
Va.  XV,  17-21;  Ya.III,  296. 

188.  Ga.  XX,  11-14;  Ba.  II,  1, 
36  ;  Ya.  Ill,  296. 

189.  Ya.  Ill,  297. 

190.  Vi.  LIV,  31  *. 

191.  Vi.LIV,  32*;  Yl  III,  299. 

192.  Vi.  LIV,  26  *  ;  Ap.  I,  1,  23- 
2, 10  ;  Va.  XI,  76-79. 

193.  Vi.  LIV,  27*. 

194.  Vi.  LIV,  28*. 

195-  Vi.LIV,  24*;  Yd.  Ill,  290. 

*9<H  Ba.II,  1,36;  Ya.III,  300. 

198.  Vi.LIV,  25*;  Ap.I,  26,7; 
Ya.  Ill,  289. 

199.  Ya.  Ill,  289. 

200.  Ga.  XXIII,  7  ;  Va.  XXIII, 
31;  Vi.LIV,  12;  Ya.111,277. 


201. 

202.  Ya.  Ill,  291. 

203.  . 


204.  Vi.  LIV,  29  *. 

205.  Par.  XI,  49*;  Ya.III,  292. 

206.  Par.  XI,  50*;  Ya.  Ill,  292. 
207 * 

208.  Mah.  XII,  165,  45^-46^. 

209.  Ba.II,  1,7*;  Vi.  LIV,  30*; 
Par.  XI,  51*;  Yd.  Ill,  293. 

210.  Vi.LIV,  34*;  Y1III,  294. 
211 

212.  Ga.  XXVI,  2-5;  Ba.II,  2, 
38;  IV,  5,  6-7;  Ap.I,  27,  7; 
Va.  XXI,  20;  Vi.XLVI,  10; 
Ya.  Ill,  320. 

213.  Ba.IV,  5,  11*;  Va.  XXVII, 
13*;  Par.  X,  29*;  Vi.  LIV, 
19;  Ya.  Ill,  315. 

214.  Ba.  IV,  5,  8*;  Ga.  XXVI, 
18-19;  Ba.  II,  2,  40;  Va. 
XXIV,  1-2  ;  Ya.  IH,  320. 

215.  Ba.  11,2,  37;  IV,  5,  10;  Va. 
XXI,  21;  Vi.XLVI,  11;  Ya. 
Ill,  318. 

216.  Ba.  IV,  5,  15*;  Vi.  XLVI, 
18;  Ya.  III,32i. 

217.  Va.  XXVII,  21*;  Par.  X, 
2*;  Ga.  XXVII,  12-13;  Ba. 
111,8,  10,19-23;  Va.  XXIII, 
45  ;  Vi.  XL VII,  4-5 ;  Ya.  Ill, 

218.  Ga.  XXVII,  14;  Ba.  Ill,  8, 
26;  IV,  5,  17;  Va.  XXVII, 
21;  Vi.  XLVII,  3,  6. 

219.  Ba.  IV,  5,19*;  Vi.  XLVII,  7. 

220.  Ba.IV,5,i8*;  Vi.  XLVII, 8. 

221.  Ba.  IV,  5,  20*  ;  Ga.  XXVII, 
i8;Ba.III,  8,31;  Vi.  XLVII, 
9;  Ya.  Ill,  325,  327. 

222.  Ba.  Ill,  8,  30;  Vi.  XLVII, 
10. 


$So 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


223.  Ga.  XXVI,  1-6;  XXV1I,2; 
Ba.  Ill,  8,3,  7-9,  12-13. 

224.  Ba.  Ill,  8, 17  ;  Ya.  Ill,  326. 

225.  Ba.  Ill,  8,  14-16. 

226.  Va.  XXIV,  46;  Yd.  Ill,  309. 

227.  Va.  XXV,  3. 
^28.  . 
229. 

230.  Mah.  XIII,  112 

231.  . 

232.  . 

233-  •       • 

234.  .       . 

235-  •       • 

236.  . 

237-  •       • 


238.  .       . 

239.  Vi.  xcv, 


240. 
241. 
242. 

243- 
244. 
245. 


246.  Va.  XXVII,  7*;    YL  III, 
3ii- 


247.  Va.  XXVII,  1-2. 

248 

249.  Ba.  IV,  1,  29*;  Va.  XXVI, 
4*;  Vi.  LV,  2. 

250.  Va.  XXVI,  5*;  Vi.  LV,  4; 
Ya.  Ill,  304. 

251.  Va.  XXVI,  6* ;  YL  III,  304. 

252.  Va.  XXVI,  7*;  Vi.  LV,  6; 
Ya.  Ill,  305. 

253-      •       • 


254.  Ga.  XXIV 


4-5- 


255- 


2-3  ;  Ba.  IV,  2, 


256.  . 

257.  . 

258.  . 

259.  . 

260.  Ga.  XXIV,  10,  12  ;  Ba.  Ill, 
5,  2-5;  Va.  XXVI,  8;  Ya. 
Ill,  302. 

261.  Vi.LV,  7*;  Ba.lV,2,  15. 

262.  Va.  XXVII,  3*. 

263.  Ba.  Ill,  9,  1-2 1 ;  IV,  5,  29 
264. 

265.  . 

266.  . 


Manu  XII. 


14. 


3-       •       •       • 

4.  .       *       ♦ 

5.  Ya.  Ill,  134. 

6.  Ya.  Ill,  135. 

7.  Ya.  Ill,  136. 

8.  .       .       , 


16. 


i7- 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 


9.  Ya.  Ill,  131,  134-136. 

10 

11 

12.  Maitr.  Up.  Ill,  3. 
13 


22. 


23.  .       .       . 

24.  Ya.  Ill,  182. 

25.  .       .       . 

26.  .       .       . 


SYNOPSIS    OF    PARALLEL  PASSAGES. 


581 


27.  Mah.  XII,  194,  31 ;  219,  29. 

28.  Mah.  XII,  194,  32  ;  219,  30. 

29.  Mah.  XII,  194,  33;  219,  31. 

30 

31.  Ya.  Ill,  137. 

32.  Maitr.Up.III,5;Ya.III,i38. 

33.  Ya.  Ill,  139. 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 


66.  Vi.  XLIV,  35-37  ;  Ya.  Ill, 
214-215. 

67.  Vi.  XLIV,  38-43  ;  Ya.  Ill, 
214. 

68.  Vi.XLIV,44*;Ya.III,2i7. 

69.  Mah.   XIII,  in,  130;   Vi. 

XLIV,  45*. 
7o 


7i. 

72. 


40.  Ya.  Ill,  137-139. 

41 

42 


43- 
44. 

45- 
46. 

47- 
48. 
49. 
5o. 
5i- 


73- 


74.  •       .       • 

75.  )  Ya.  Ill,  206 

76.  J       IV,  88-89. 

77.  .       .       . 


see  above. 


78. 

79- 

80. 


81. 
82. 

83- 

84. 


Ya.  Ill,  190. 


85. 
86. 


87. 


52.  Ya.  Ill,  219. 

53-  •       •       • 

54-  .       •       • 


88. 
89. 
90. 


55.  Ya.  Ill,  207. 

56.  Ya.  Ill,  207. 

57.  Ya.  Ill,  208. 

58.  Ya.  Ill,  208. 

59.  .       .       . 


91. 

92. 

93- 
94. 

95- 


Ira.  Up.  6  ;  Ap.  I,  23,  r. 


60.  Ya.  Ill,  212. 

61.  Ya.  Ill,  213. 

62.  Vi.  XLIV,  14-20;  Ya.  Ill, 
214-215. 

63.  Vi.  XLIV,  21-25;  ya-  HI, 
211,  215. 

64.  Vi. XLIV,  26-30;  Ya.III,2 1 5. 

65.  Vi.  XLIV,  31-34;  Y1III, 
213, 


96 

97 

98 

99 

100 

101.  Va.  XXVII,  2*. 


102. 
103. 
104. 


5§2 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


105. 
106. 


107.  ....... 

108.  Ga.  XXVIII,  48. 

109.  Va.  VI,  43*  ;  Ba.  I,  1,  5-6 ; 
Ap.  II,  29, 13-14  >  Va.  I,  6-7. 

1 10.  Ga.  XXVIII,  49;  Ba.1, 1, 7, 9. 
in.  Ba.  I,  i,  8*;   Va.  Ill,  20*; 

Par.  VIII,  34*. 

112.  Ya.  I,  9. 

113.  Ga.  XXVIII,  50. 

114.  Ba.  I,  1,  16*;  Va.  Ill,  5*; 
Par.  VIII,  12*. 


115.  Ba.I,  1,  n  *;  Va.  Ill,  6 


Par.  VIII,  13 


116. 


117. 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126, 


INDEX. 


INDEX. 


Abhi^-it  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 

Abhira  caste,  x,  15. 

Abhuasta,  one  accused  of  mortal  sin, 

11,  185;  in,  159;  iv,  211. 
Abortion,  v,  90.     See  Penance  for 

destroying  embryo. 
Actions,  classification  of,  xn,  1-11. 
Activity,  quality  of  nature  or  of  Self, 

xii,  24,  26,  28,  32,  36,  38. 

—  conditions  caused    by,    xn,   40, 

45-47. 
Actor,  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in, 

,155. 

—  food  of,  forbidden,  iv,  214,  215. 

—  not  qualified  to  be  witness,  vin, 

—  punishment    for    adultery    with 

wife  of,  vin,  362-363. 
Adhvaryu  priest,  receives  a  chariot, 

vin,  209. 
Adityas,  ill,  284;  xi,  222. 
Adoption.     See  Son,  adopted. 
Adulteration  of  merchandise,  vin, 

203;  ix,  286;  xi,  50. 
Adulteress,  son    of,  excluded  from 

Sraddha,  in,  156,  174-175. 

—  food  of,  forbidden,  in,  158;  iv, 

217. 

—  husband  of,  III,  155. 
Adultery,  a  great  crime,  iv,  133-134; 

vin,  352-353. 

—  an  Upapataka,  xi,  60. 

—  definition  of,  vin,  356-358. 

—  penance  for,  xi,  177-179. 

—  punishments  of  females  for,  vin, 

371;  in  next  life,  v,  164;  ix,  30; 
of  males,  vin,  359,  363,  372-379? 
382-385;  in  next  life,  xi,  52; 
xii,  60. 

—  witnesses  in  cases  of,  vin,    72. 

See  Guru,  Wife. 
Agastya,  a  sage,  v,  22. 
Ages  of  the  world,  1,  68-73,  81-86; 

ix,  301-302. 
Aghamarsha«a  hymn,  xi,  260-261. 
A^igarta,  a  sage,  x,  105. 


Agni,  in,  85,  86,  211 ;  xi,  120,  122  ; 

xii,  121,  123;  king  to  behave 

like,  ix,  303,  310.     See  Fire. 
Agnidagdha  manes,  in,  199. 
Agnihotra  sacrifice,  n,   15;   iv,  10, 

25;  v,  167;  vi,  9;  xi,  42;  Add. 

and  Corr.  p.  613. 
Agnish/oma  sacrifice,  11,  143. 
Agnishfut  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 
Agnishvatta  manes,  in,  195,  199. 
Agnyadheya  sacrifice,  n,  143  ;  vin, 

209;  xi,  38. 
Agrayawa  sacrifice,  iv,  26-28  ;  vi,  10. 
Agreements.    See  Non-performance 

of. 
Agriculture,    called    Pramnta,    iv, 

4-5. 

—  excludes  from  Sraddhas,  in,  165. 

—  forbidden  to  Brahmawa,  in,  64, 

x,  83-84. 

—  obligatory  on  Vaijya,  1,  90 ;  x,  79. 

—  one  of  the  ten  modes  of  subsist- 

ence, x,  116.     See  Cultivator, 

Seed-corn. 
A§7aPa  nianes,  in,  197. 
Ahina  sacrifices,  xi,  198. 
Ahindika.  caste,  x,  37. 
A^amana.     See  Sipping-water. 
A^arya.     See  Teacher. 
AHrya  caste,  x,  23. 
Akshamala,  wife  of  Vasish/>6a,  ix,  23. 
Ambash/£a  caste,  x,  8,  13,  15,  19, 

48. 
Ambassador,  vn,  63-68. 
Anagnidagdba  manes,  in,  199. 
Anantara  sons,  x,  6,  14,  41. 
Andhatamisra  hell,  iv,  88,  197. 
Andhra  caste,  x,  36,  48. 
Angas  of  the  Veda,  p.  xxvi;  n,  141, 

242;  in,  184,  185;  iv,  98. 
Ahgiras,  1,  35 ;  II,  151 ;  in,  198. 

—  sacred  texts  of,  xi,  33. 
Animals,  classes  of,  1,  43-45. 

—  eatable  and  forbidden.  See  Food. 

—  slaying  of,  xi,  60,  69,  71.     See 

Meat,  Penance  for  killing. 


586 


LAWS   OF    MANU. 


Annapnuana  rite,  n,  34. 

Antyavasayin  caste,  iv,  79 ;  x,  39. 

Antyesh/i  rite,  11,  16. 

Anulomas.     See  Castes,  mixed. 

Anvashtaka  days,  iv,  150. 

Apapatra  races,  x,  51. 

Apastambiya  Dharma-sutra,  pp.  xi, 
xviii,  xlix,  li,  lix,  lxv,  lxix,  lxxi, 
xciii,  xcix,  ci,  cxix. 

Apatrikarawa  sins,  xi,  70.  See  Pen- 
ance for. 

Apaviddha.     See  Son,  cast  off. 

Appointment  of  daughters.  See 
Daughter  appointed. 

—  of  widows  and  wives,  pp.  xciv, 

cix;  in,  160,  173. 

—  forbidden,  ix,  64-68. 

—  permitted,    ix,   57-63,    120-121, 

145-146, 159, 162-165, 167,  190- 

191. 
Apsarases,  1,  37;  xu,  47. 
Architect,  excluded  from  Sraddha, 

in,  163. 
Arms,  trade  of,  excludes  from  Srad- 

dha,  in,  162.     See  King,  Ksha- 

triya,  duties  of. 
Arsha  marriage,  111,  21,  53. 

—  affects    succession    to    woman's 

property,  ix,  196. 

—  description  of,  III,  29. 

—  permitted  to  whom,  in,  23-24. 

—  results  of,  in,  38-40,  42. 
Arson.     See  Incendiary. 
Artisan,  disqualified  to  be  witness, 

viii,  65. 

—  food  of,  forbidden,  iv,  219. 

—  hand  of,  always  pure,  v,  129. 

—  may  speak  to   married   women, 

viii,  360. 

—  to  do  work  for  king,  vn,  138  ;  x, 

120. 
Aryan,  acting  like  non-Aryan,  and 
non-Aryan  like  Aryan,  x,  73. 

—  has  three  births,  11,  169. 

—  lawful  residence  of,  11,  24. 

—  may  take  roots  &c.  on  a  journey, 

viii,  341. 

—  may  take  up  arms,  viii,  348-351. 

—  offspring    of  Aryan   father    and 

non-Aryan  mother  preferable 
to  offspring  of  non-Aryan  father 
and  Aryan  mother,  x,  66-72. 

—  to  be  witness  for  Aryan  of  the 

same  kind,  viii,  68. 
Aryavarta,  x,  34 ;  boundaries  of,  11, 
22-23. 


Asahaya,  commentator  of  Narada, 

pp.  xvii,  cvii. 
Asarnvrita,  hell,  iv,  81. 
Ascetic,  dress  and  utensils,  vi,  41, 

44,  52-54- 

—  duty   of  meditation   and   Veda- 

study,  vi,  49,  61-84. 

—  dwelling  and  manner  of  life,  vi, 

41-43. 

—  entrance  into  order,  vi,  33-40. 

—  food    and    manner    of  begging, 

VI,  43,  50-51,  55-59- 

—  general  disposition,  vi,  41,  44-49, 

60. 

—  not  to  be  made  a  witness,  viii,  65.     , 

—  pays  no  toll  at  ferry,  VIII,  407. 

—  personal  purification,  v,  137. 

—  produced  by  Goodness,  xu,  48. 

—  receives  alms  atVaLrvadeva,  in,  94. 

—  informal,   iv,   257-258;    vi,  86, 

94-96. 

—  punishment  for  intercourse  with 

female,  viii,  363. 
Ash/aka  days,  manes  worshipped  on, 
iv,  150. 

—  Veda-study  interrupted   on,  iv, 

119. 
Asipatravana  hell,  iv,  90;  xu,  75. 
Assassin.     See  Self-defence. 
Assault,  results  of,  on  a  Brahmawa, 

iv,  165-169;  xi,  207-208. 

—  to  be  avoided  by  Snataka,  iv,  83, 

164. 

—  a  title  of  the  law,  viii,  6,  279-301 

—  witnesses  in   cases  of,  viii,  72 

See  Homicide,  Hurt,  Mischief. 
Assembly  legal.     See  Parishad. 
Assessors  in  a  law-court,  viii,  1,  1 

19. 
Astrologer  excluded  from  Sraddha, 

in,  162. 
Astrology,  practice  of,  forbidden  t 

ascetics,  vi,  50. 
Astronomy,  science  of,  p.  li. 
Asura  marriage,  III,  21. 

—  affects    succession    to    woman's 

property,  ix,  197. 

—  description  of,  in,  31. 

—  permitted  to  whom,  pp.  lxxvii- 

lxxviii;  in,  23-25. 

—  results  of,  in,  4 1  -4  2 .   See  Daugh 

ter,  sale  of. 
Asuras,  1,  37 ;  in,  225  ;  xi,  20. 
Ajvalayana-smWti,  p.  xxii. 
Ajvamedha.     See  Horse-sacrifice. 
Atharvan,  sacred  texts  of,  xi,  33. 


INDEX. 


587 


Atheism,  -ist,  11, 11;  111,150;  iv,  163; 
viii,  22  ;  xi,  67. 

Atikr/^^ra  penance,  xi,  209 ;  de- 
scription, xi,  214. 

Atri,  a  sage,  1,  35  ;  in,  196  ;  quoted, 
p.  xxvii ;  in,  16. 

Aurasa.     See  Son,  legitimate. 

Austerity,  best  form  of,  n,  166;  IV, 
148. 

—  leads  to  final  liberation,  xn,  83. 

—  power   of  destroying   guilt    and 

producing  other  effects,  iv,  148 ; 
xi,  228,  234-235. 
■ —  sole  duty  in  Kr/'ta  age,  I,  86. 

—  to  be  performed  by  ascetic,  VI, 

75  ;  by  hermit,  vi,  8,  22-23,  30. 
Auttami  Manu,  1,  62. 
Avakirwin.    See  Penance  for  breach 

of  student's  vow,  Student. 
Avantya  caste,  x,  21. 
Avr/ta  caste,  x,  15. 
Ayogava   caste,  descendants  of,  x, 

15,  26,  32,  35. 

—  occupation,  x,  48. 

—  origin  of,  x,  12,  16. 

Bali  offering,  in,  70,  74,  108,  265. 

—  description  of,  in,  87-94,  I2I« 

—  duty  of  performing  for   house- 

holder, in,  80-81;  for  hermit, 

vi,  7. 
Barber,  food  of,  permitted  to  Brah- 

ma«a,  iv,  253. 
Bard,  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in, 

158 ;    may  speak    to    married 

woman,  viii,  360.     See  Singer. 
Barhishad  manes,  in,  196,  199. 
Basket-maker,  food   of,  forbidden, 

iv,  215. 
Bathing,  rules  of,  iv,  45,  129,  152, 

201-203  ;  a  penance,  vi,  69. 
Baudhayaniya  Dharma^astra,  pp.  xx, 

xlix,  li-liii,  lxv,  xciii,  xcix,  cii, 

civ,  cxix. 
Begging,  a  mode  of  subsistence,  iv, 

4-5  ;  x,  116. 

—  rule  of,  for  ascetic,  vi,  43,  50-51, 

55-58;  forhermit,vi,2  7-2  8;  for 
student,  11,  48-50, 108, 182-185, 
187;  when  permitted  to  Sna- 
taka,  iv,  33;  xi,  1-6. 

Bestial  crime,  xi,  174. 

Betrothal,  manner  of,  III,  35. 

—  once  made  binding,  ix,  47,  71 ; 

except  when  bride  is  blemished, 
IX,  72-73. 


Betrothal,  source  of  husband's  power, 
v,  1 5  2 .    See  Bride,  Bridegroom . 

Betting,  ix,  221-228. 

Bhadrakali,  in,  89. 

Bharadva^a,  a  sage,  x,  107. 

Bhavishya-punbza,  pp.  cx-cxi. 

Bhrigu,  expounds  Manu's  laws,  pp. 
xii-xiii,  xvii;  1,  59-60;  v,  1-3  ; 
xn,  2,  126. 

—  origin  of,  1,  35. 

—  opinion  of,  quoted,  p.  xxvi ;  in, 

16. 

Bhutas,  in,  70,  74,  80-81,  90. 

Bhfitatman,  xn,  12. 

Birth.  See  Impurity,  Transmigra- 
tion, 

Blacksmith,  food  of,  forbidden  to 
Brahmawa,  iv,  215. 

Blind  man,  excluded  from  inherit- 
ance, ix,  201 ;  from  Sraddha, 
in,  161,  177. 

Boatmen,  hire  of,  vni,  406  ;  liability 
for  damage,  vin,  408-409. 

Bond,  renewal  of,  viii,  154-155. 

Booty,  distribution  of,  vn,  96-97. 

Boundary,  disputes,  a  title  of  the 
law,  viii,  6,  245-266. 

—  not  lost  by  lapse  of  time,  viii, 

149. 

—  punishment  for  destroying  mark 

of,  ix,  291. 
Brahma  marriage,  in,  21. 

—  affects    succession    to    woman's 

property,  ix,  196. 

—  description  of,  in,  27. 

—  permitted  to  whom,  in,  23-24. 

—  results  of,  in,  37,  39-40,  42,  184. 
Brahman,  1,  50  ;  n,  82-84  ;   in,  70, 

89;  iv,  182,  260;  vi,  32,  79, 
81,  85;  vn,  14;  viii,  81;  xn, 
102,  123,  125. 

—  composed  Manu-smr/ti,  p.  xii ;  1, 

58. 

—  court  of,  viii,  11. 

—  day  and  night  of,  1,  68-73. 

—  muhurta  of,  iv,  92. 

—  origin  of,  1,  1 1 ;  xn,  50. 

—  tirtha  of,  11,  58-59.   See  Purusha, 

Svayambhu,  Soul. 
Brahman  priest,  receives  a  horse, 

viii,  209. 
Brahmawa,  a  class  of  works,  iv,  100. 
Brahmawa   (caste),   definition   of  a 

true,  11,  87. 

—  duties,  livelihood,   and   occupa- 

tions of,  1,  88,  102-110;   iv,  2- 


588 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


13;  x,  1-2,  74-76;  in  times  of 
distress,  viii,  339;  xi,  11-23; 
x,  81-94,  101-114,  116-117  ; 
following  forbidden  occupa- 
tions, in,  64-65,  150-166;  VIII, 
102  ;  or  neglecting  duty,  xn, 
71.  See  Penance  for  following 
forbidden  occupations. 
Brahmawa,  feeding  of,  in,  96-109,1 25- 
129;  iv,  29-30,  192-197. 

—  gifts  to.  See  Gift,  King,  duties  of. 

—  inherits  property  of  Brahmawa, 

ix,  188-189. 

—  judicial  functions  of,  to  be   as- 

sessors in  court,  viii,  1,  10-11, 
391;  judges,vin,9,  20  ;  present 
at  examination  of  witnesses, 
viii,  87;  to  impose  penances, 
xi,  86  ;  to  settle  doubtful  points 
of  law,  xii,  1 08- 1 16. 

—  manes  of,  III,  197,  199. 

—  marriage-rites  lawful  for,  III,  23- 

24. 
— may  forcibly  appropriate  property, 
viii,  339;  xi,  11-21. 

—  offences  against:  (1)  killing  a,  a 

mortal  sin,  ix,  235;  xi,  55; 
also  execution,  viii,  380-381  ; 
see  Penances  for ;  punishment, 
criminal,  for,  ix,  237;  in  an- 
other life,  xi,  49 ;  xii,  55. 
(2)  other  offences,  assaulting 
and  threatening,  iv,  165-169; 
xi,  68  ;  see  Penance  for  threat- 
ening, &c. ;  defaming,  viii, 
267;  seizing  property  of,  XI, 
26. 

—  offences  by,  acceptance  of  pro- 

perty from  thieves  makes  Brah- 
ma«a  a  thief,  viii,  340 ;  adultery 
and  rape,  viii,  378-379,  383- 
385;  defamation  of  equal  caste, 
viii,  269 ;  of  lower,  viii,  268, 
276  ;  not  inviting  virtuous 
neighbours  to  a  festival,  viii, 
392;  perjury,  viii,  123-124; 
theft,  greatness  of  guilt,  viii, 
338. 

—  origin  of,  1,  31,  87,  93;  xii,  48. 

—  power  and  rank  of,  1,  93-101; 

11,135;  ix,  245,  313-322;  x,  3; 
xi,  3i-35. 

—  reverence  due  to,  iv,  39,  52,  58, 

135-136,  142,  162;  see  King, 
duties  of ;  irreverence  towards, 
degrades,  x,  43. 


Brahma«as,    seniority    among,    11, 

155. 

—  shall  employ  indigent  Kshatriya 

and  VaLrya,  viii,  411-412. 

—  special  rules  for,  of  administration 

of  oath,  viii,  113;  betrothal, 
III,  35  ;  burial,  v,  92  ;  of  ex- 
amination as  witness,  viii,  88  ; 
of  impurity,  v,  83,  99  ;  of 
initiation,  II,  36-38,  41-42,  44- 
46 ;  of  Kejanta,  11,  65 ;  of 
naming,  11,  31-32;  of  payment 
of  fine,  ix,  229  ;  of  purification, 
II,  58,  62  ;  of  saluting,  11,  122- 
127;  of  studentship,  11,  49, 
190. 

—  why  subject  to  death,  v,  4. 

—  wives  permitted  to,   in,  13-19. 

See  Snataka,  Srotriya,  Sons  by 
wives  of  several  castes. 

Brahma%ali,  ceremony,  11,  70-71. 

Brahmam,  daughter  of,  inherits  from 
co-wives,  ix,  198. 

—  prerogatives  of,   wife,   p.  lxxiv ; 

ix,  85-87. 

—  punishment  of  adultery  with,vin, 

374~A378. 
Brahmarakshasa,  xn,  60. 
Brahmarshis,    country  of,    n,    19; 

customs,  11,  20. 
Brahmasattra,  11,  106;  iv,  9. 
Brahmavarta,    boundaries,    n,    17; 

customs,  II,  18. 
Bride,  defamation  of,  viii,  225. 

—  given  away  by  whom,  v,  151. 

—  open    declaration    of   blemishes 

required,  viii,  205  ;  fine  for 
concealment  of  blemishes,  viii, 
224.  See  Betrothal,  Marriage, 
Wife. 

Bridegroom,  receives  honey-mix- 
ture, hi,  119;  way  to  be  made 
for,  n,  138. 

Br/haspati,  xi,  120,  122. 

Brihaspati-smriti,  pp.  xvi-xvii,  xciv, 
xcvi,  cviii-cx. 

Brihat  Manu,  pp.  xcii,  xcvi-xcvii. 

Br/'hat  Sahkha-smn'ti,  pp.  xxi-xxii. 

Brother,  begetting  son  with  pre- 
deceased brother's  bride  or 
widow,  in,  160,  173;  ix,  57- 
68,  120-121,  143-147. 

—  gives  sister  in  marriage,  v,  151. 

—  must  give   one-fourth   share   to 

unmarried  sister,  IX,  118. 

—  elder,  honour  shown  to,  11,  225- 


INDEX. 


5«9 


226  ;  IV,  180,  184  ;  IX,  no; 
marrying  or  sacrificing  after 
younger,  ill,  154,  170-172  ;  xi, 
61  ;  punished  for  cheating  his 
younger  brother,  ix,  213; 
punishment  for  defaming,  vin, 
275. 

Brother,  younger,  marrying  or  sa- 
crificing before  elder,  ill,  154, 
170-172  ;  XI,  61. 

Brothers  have  all  male  offspring 
through  one  son,  ix,  182. 

Brother's  wife,  manner  of  saluting, 
11,  132.  See  Inheritance,  Par- 
tition, Sons,  eldest,  second, 
younger,  youngest. 

Burglary.     See  Robbery. 

Burial.  See  Infants;  Brahma«a, 
Kshatriya,  VaLrya,  Sfidra,  special 
rules  for. 

Carpenter,  food  of,  forbidden,  iv, 

210. 
Caste,  change  of,  vn,  42 ;  x,  42-43, 

64-65. 

—  exclusion  from,  xi,  183-186. 

«—  readmission  to,  xi,  187-191,  196- 

197. 
Castes,   four  original,   x,  4 ;    their 

origin,  1,  31,  87;  x,  45. 

—  mixed,  enumeration,  origin  and 

occupation  of,  x,  6-56  ;  signs 
for  detecting  them,  x,  57-61. 

—  duties  of  all,  X,  63. 

—  law  of  castes,  vin,  41-42,  46.  See 

Aryan,    Brahmawa,    Kshatriya, 
Vauya,  5Qdra,  Occupations. 
Cattle,  rearing  or  tending,  duty  of 
Vaijya,  1,  90 ;  Vin,  1 14  ;  ix,  326- 
328;  x,  79. 

—  forbidden  to  Brahma«a,  in,  154, 

166;  vni,  102  ;  except  in  times 

of  distress,  x,  82.    See  Damage, 

Herdsman. 
Coins.     See  Weights  of  copper,  &c. 
Concerns  among  partners,  a  title  of 

the  law,  vin,  4,  206-211. 
Conduct,  rule  of,  most  important,  I, 

107-no;  iv,  i45-H6>  156-158, 

175. 

—  of  those  who  know  Veda  authori- 

tative, 11,  6,  18  ;  iv,  145. 
Confession  destroys  guilt,  xi,  228- 

229. 
Connubial  intercourse,  duty  of,  in, 

45-50 ;  ix,  4. 


Connubial  intercourse,  when  for- 
bidden, in,  45-47;  iv,  40-42, 
128. 

Conquest,  duty  of  king  and  Ksha- 
triya, vii, ,94-110;  ix,  251;  x, 
119;  duties  after  —  has  been 
made,  vii,  201-203. 

—  one  of  the  modes  of  acquiring 

property,  x,  115. 
Contract,  for  carriage,  vin,  156-157. 

—  regarding  crops,  ix,  52-53. 

—  when  null  and  void,  vin,  163-168. 

See  Bond,  Debt. 
Coparcener.     See  Partition. 
Cow,  food  smelt  at  by,  impure,  iv, 

209. 

—  killing  an  Upapataka,  xi,  60.    See  / 

Penance  for. 

—  reverence  towards,  iv,  38,  45,  48,* 

52,  58-59>  72,  142,  162. 
Creation,  account  of,  pp.  lxxxiii-xc  ; 

by  Manu,  1,  1-59;   by  Bhrigu, 

1,  60-110. 
Cultivator,  food  of  Sudra,  lawful  for 

Brahmawa,  iv,  253. 

—  negligent,   punished  for  loss  of 

crop,  vin,  243.  See  Agricul- 
ture, Boundary,  Damage  by 
cattle. 

—  shares  crop,  ix,  53. 

Custom,  source  of  the  law,  11,  6,  12, 
18  ;  vin,  41-42,  46. 

—  of  conquered  country,  to  be  up- 

held, vii,  203. 

Daityas,  xn,  48  ;  manes  of,  in,  196. 
Daiva  marriage,  411,  21. 

—  affects    succession    to    woman's 

property,  ix,  196. 

—  description  of,  in,  28. 

—  permitted  to  whom,  in,  23-24, 

—  results  of,  in,  38-40,  42. 
Daksha,  a  Pra^apati,  ix,  128-129. 
Dakshayawa  sacrifice,  vi,  10. 
Dakshiwa.     See  Sacrificial  fee. 
Damage    done    by  boatmen,   vin, 

408-409  ;   by  cattle,  vin,  240- 

242.    See  Hurt,  Mischief. 
Damages  for  injury  to  person,  vin, 

287. 
Dancers,  to  be  banished,  ix,  225. 
Darada  race,  x,  44. 
Darkness,  quality  of  nature  or  of 

Self,  1,  5;  xn,  24,  29,  33,  35,  38. 

—  conditions  produced  by,  1,  49 ; 

xn,  40,  42-44. 


590 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Darjapurwamasa  sacrifices,  iv,  25  ; 

vi,  9. 
Daja  caste,  x,  34. 
Dasyu  race,  v,  131 ;  viii,  66  ;  x,  32  ; 

xi,  18  ;  xii,  70. 

—  definition  of  term,  x,  45. 
Dattaka.     See  Son,  adopted. 
Daughter,  inherits  from  mother,  ix, 

192,  195;  of  Brahmam  wife 
inherits  from  co-wives,  ix,  198  ; 
unmarried,  inherits  fourth- 
share  from  father,  ix,  118; 
separate  property  of  mother, 
ix,  131. 

—  position   and  treatment  of,   iv, 

180,  185 ;  ix,  130. 

—  sale    of,  forbidden,   111,   51-54; 

ix,  98-100;  rule  regarding, 
viii,  204.  See  Asura  marriage, 
Nuptial  fee. 

—  to  be   married  at  proper  time, 

ix,  4,  88-89,  94  5  or  to  choose 
husband,  ix,  90-93. 

—  appointed,  p.  cix ;    in,  n;    ix, 

127  ;  inherits,  ix,  130 ;  husband 
of,  inherits,  ix,  135;  son  of, 
inherits  from  maternal  grand- 
father, ix,  131-134,  136;  offers 
funeral  sacrifice,  ix,  140. 
Daughter's  daughter  inherits  from 
maternal  grandmother,  ix, 
193. 

—  son,  entertained  at  Sraddha,  in, 

148,  234-235;  inherits  from 
maternal  grandfather,  ix,  136, 
139. 

Dealer  in  weapons,  excluded  from 
.Sraddha,  in,  160  ;  food  of,  for- 
bidden to  Brahma»a,  iv,  215, 
260. 

Debt,  non-payment  of  or  recovery 
of,  viii,  4,  47-60,  139-143, 151- 
155,  158-167,  176-177. 

Debts,  three,  to  gods,  &c,  iv,  257  ; 
vi,  35-37;  non-payment  of,  xi, 
66. 

Defamation,  viii,  6,  225,  267- 
278. 

—  anybody  may  be  witness  in  cases 

of,  viii,  72. 

Defiling  a  maiden,  xi,  62 ;  punish- 
ments for,  viii,  367-370. 

Deposits,  viii,  4,  149,  1 79-1  96. 

Dhanvantari,  in,  85. 

Dharawa,  value  of,  viii,  135-137. 

Dharma,  duty,  law  or  justice  per- 


sonified, 1,  81-82  ;  VIII,  15-16  ; 

ix,  129;  xn,  50. 
Dharmajastra,  pp.  xxv,  li-liv  ;  n,  10 ; 

in,  232;  XII,  III. 
Dharma-sutras,  pp.  xi-xii,  xviii-xix, 

xxiv,  xxvi,  lii-liii,  lxii,  xciv,  cxix. 
Dhigva^a  caste,  x,  15,  49. 
Dialectics, institutes of,n,r  1 ;  science 

of,  vn,  43.     See  Logician. 
Dikshita.      See    Sacrifices,   Srauta, 

one  initiated  for. 
Dinaras,  pp.  xvii,  cv,  cvii. 
Diseases,  punishments  of  crimes,  xi, 

49-53  ;  exclude  from  Sraddhas, 

in,  151,  153-155,  159,  i65,  177. 
Disputes  between  owners  of  cattle 

and  herdsman.    See  Herdsman. 

—  regarding  boundaries.   See  Boun- 

daries. 
Documents,   written,    pp.   xcix-ci; 
viii,    154-155,    168,    255;    ix, 

Domestic  priest,  iv,  179;   vn,  78; 

XII,  46. 

DravWa  caste,  x,  22,  44. 

Dress,  indivisible  property,  ix,  219. 

—  of  ascetic,  vi,  44,  52,. 

—  of  hermit,  vi,  6,  15. 

—  of  Snataka,  iv,  34-36,  66. 

—  of  student,  n,  41,  64,  174. 
Drinking  spirituous  liquor,  a  morta 

sin,  ix,  235;  xi,  55. 

—  punishment    for,    ix,    237;     n 

another  life,  xi,  49  ;  xn,  56 
other  consequences,  in,  159: 
iv,  207. 

—  women  addicted  to,  v,  90 ;   ix, 

13,  80. 

—  sins  equal  to,  xi,  57.  See  Penance 

for  drinking  spirituous  liquor. 
Dr/'shadvatl  river,  p.  xlv;  n,  17. 
Duties,  on  traders,  viii,  398,  400. 

See  Taxes,  Tolls. 
Dvapara  age,  1,  85-86 ;  ix,  301-302. 

Earth,  creation  of,  1,  13;  king  be- 
having like,  ix,  303,  311. 

Eating,  rules  of,  n,  51-57;  in,  116- 
117;  for  Snataka,  iv,  43,  45, 
55,  58,  62-63,  65,  74-76. 

—  purification  after,  v,  145. 
Edicts,  royal,  ix,  232^ 
Egg,  mundane,  1,  9-13. 
Ekoddish/a  .Sraddha,  in,  247 ;   iv, 

IIO-III. 

Elements,  1,  6,  75-78. 


INDEX. 


591 


Emigrant,  wife  of,  ix,  74-76. 

Eunuch,  excluded  from  inheritance, 
ix,  201;  from  sacrificing,  iv, 
205-206;  from  Sraddhas,  in, 
150. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahmawa, 

iv,  205. 

—  son  of,  inherits,  ix,  203. 
Evidence,  punishment  for  refusal  of, 

vin,  107;  what  is  admissible 
as,  vin,  74.  See  Penance  for 
giving  false  evidence,  Perjury, 
Witness. 
Exclusion  from  caste,  see  Caste ; — 
from  inheritance,  see  Inherit- 
ance. 

Families,  law  of,  authoritative,  vin, 

41. 
Fasting,  v,  155 ;  a  penance,  xi,  167, 

204.     See  Paraka. 
Father,  gives  daughter  in  marriage, 

v,  151;  must  do  so  at  proper 

time,  ix,  4,  88-89;  loses  power 

over  daughter,  ix,  93. 

—  impure  on  birth  of  child,  v,  62- 

63. 

—  inherits  from   childless  son,  ix, 

185  ;  from  childless  daughter, 
ix,  197. 

—  offences  against,   in,    157,   159; 

xi,  60 ;  punishment  for  defam- 
ing, vin,  275;  for  forsaking, 
vin,  389.     See  Daughter,  Son. 

—  keeps    recovered    property,    ix, 

209. 

—  partition  by,  ix,  215. 

—  reverence   towards,   and  vener- 

ability  of,  11,  145-148,  225-237  ; 
iv,    162,    179-180,    182.     See 
Guru,  Sale,  Son. 
Father-in-law,  entertained  at  Srad- 
dha,  in,  148. 

—  how  saluted,  11,  130. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  in, 

119. 
Fellow-student,  impurity  on  death 

of,  v,  71. 
Field,  acceptance  of,  x,  114. 

—  settlement  of  boundaries  of,  vni, 

262. 
Fines,  amounts  of  three  degrees  of, 
vni,  138. 

—  how  to  be  paid,  ix,  229. 

—  son  not  liable  for  unpaid,  vin, 

159- 


Fire,  reverence  to  be  shown  towards, 

iv,   48,   53-54,    58,   142.     See 

Agni,  Sacred  fire. 
Flag,  punishment  for  destroying,  ix, 

285. 
Food,  forbidden  and  lawful,  iv,  205- 

225,   247-250,   253;    v,   5-56; 

in  times  of  distress,  x,  104,  106- 

108. 

—  eating  forbidden,  an  Upapataka, 

xi,  65  ;  punishment  for,  in  next 
life,  xn,  59.  See  Penance  for 
eating  forbidden  food. 

—  indivisible  property,  IX,  219. 

—  lawful  for  hermits,  vi,  3,  12-21, 

27-28. 

—  obtained  by  begging,  always  pure, 

v,  129. 
Force,  vitiates  all  transactions,  vin, 

168. 
Forgery,  ix,  232. 
Fornication,  xi,  59. 

—  excludes  from  Sraddhas,  in,  164. 

—  penance  for,  xi,  171. 

—  punishments  for,  vni,  364-366. 
Fortress,  royal,  vn,  70-76  ;  ix,  252. 
Fortune-tellers,  to  be  punished,  ix, 

258. 
Fraud,   vitiates    every    transaction, 

vin,  165  ;  punishment  of,  vni, 

193.       See     Brother,    eldest; 

Trader. 
Friend,  betrayer  of,  excluded  from 

Sraddha,  in,  160. 

—  disqualified  to  be  witness,  vin, 

64. 

—  impurity  on  the  death  of,  v,  82. 

—  killing,  xi,  57. 

—  not  to  be  fed  at  Sraddha,  in,  138- 

141. 

—  wife  of,  adultery  with,  xi,  171. 
Funeral  ceremonies.  See  Antyesh/i ; 

Impurity,  behaviour  of  mourn- 
ers. 
Funeral  sacrifices.     See  Sraddhas. 

Gadhi,  son  of,  vn,  42. 
Gambling,    pp.   lxx-lxxi ;     excludes 
from  Sraddha,  in,  151,  159,  160. 

—  forbidden  to   Snatakas,  iv,  74 ; 

to  kings,  vn,  47,  50. 

—  punishable,  ix,  226-228,  258. 
Gandharva  marriage,  in,  2 1 ;  affects 

succession  to  woman's  property, 
ix,  196  ;  description  of,  in,  32  ; 
permitted  to  whom,  p.  lxxvii; 


592 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


in,  23-24,  26;  results  of,  in,  41- 
42. 

Gandharvas,  vn,  23  ;  origin  of,  1,  37; 
xii,  47  ;  manes  of,  in,  196. 

Garbhadhana,  rite  of  conception,  n, 
16,  26,  142. 

Garden,  boundaries  of,  vin,  262 ; 
selling,  a  crime,  xi,  62. 

Gautama,  a  lawgiver,  quoted,  p.  xxvi ; 
in,  16. 

Gautamiya  Dharmajastra,  pp.  xviii, 
xx,  xxiv,  xxxiv,  lxv,  lxix-lxx, 
lxxii,  xcviii,  xcix,  cii,  civ,  cxix. 

Gayatri.     See  Savitri. 

Gift,  acceptance  of,  lawful  for  Brah- 
ma«a,  1,  88;  x,  75-76,  115;  but 
dangerous,  iv,  1 86-191;  from 
wicked  or  low  men  forbidden, 
in,  179;  iv,  84-91;  xi,  24-25, 
42,  70;  except  when  offered 
unasked  or  in  times  of  distress, 
iv,  247-250,  251-252;  x,  102- 
114. 

—  made  once  only,  ix,  47. 

—  obligatory,   iv,   31-32,  226-228; 

vn,  82  ;  xi,  1-6. 

—  of  friends,  on  marriage  and  with 

honey-mixture  is  separate  pro- 
perty, ix,  206. 

—  rewards  for  making,  in,  95 ;  iv, 

229-235;  vn,  83-86;  xi,  23. 

—  void,  vin,  159,   165,  168.      See 

Resumption  of  gift. 

—  worthy  recipients  of,  III,  96-97, 

128-137,  I42-i43)  149)  J68;  IV. 

31.     See  Liberality. 
Girdle,  sacred  of  student,  11,  42-43, 

64,  174. 
Goblins,  in,  90.     See  Bhutas. 
Gods,  age  of  the,  1,  7 1 ;  creation  or 

origin  of,  1,  36;  in,  201;  xn, 

40,  49. 

—  daily  offerings  and  worship,  in, 

70-90;  iv,  152;  vi,  24. 

—  debt  due  to.     See  Debts,  three. 

—  images  of,  iv,  39,  130;  vin,  87. 

See  Temple. 

—  property  of,  xi,  20 ;  punishment 

for  seizing,  xi,  26. 

—  tirtha  of,  11,  59. 

Goldsmith,  impure,  iv,  215,  218; 
xn,  61. 

—  punishment  of  fraudulent,  ix,  292 ; 

of  negligent,  ix,  286. 
Goodness,  quality  of  nature  or  of 
Self,  xn,  24-26,  37-38. 


Goodness,  conditions  produced  by 

xn,  40,  48-50. 
Gosava  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 
Gosh/M-jraddha,  in,  254. 
Government.     See  King,  Ministers, 

Officials,  Police,  Policy. 
Govindara^a,    a    commentator    of 

Manu,  pp.  xiii-xiv,  cxxvi-cxxviii. 
Grammar,  science  of,  pp.  1-li. 
Great  one,  the,  1,  15  ;  xn,  14,  24,  50. 
Guardian.     See  Minor,  Woman. 
Guest,   definition  of,  in,  102,   103, 

no, 

—  duty  of  feeding  for  householder, 

in,  70,  72-74,  80,  94,  100,  115, 
118;  iv,  29;  by  hermit,  vi,  7-8. 

—  manner  of  reception,  in,  99-113. 

—  persons  not  to  be  received  as,  iv, 

30. 

—  quarrels  with,  forbidden,  iv,  179, 

182.     See  Honey-mixture. 
Guhyakas,  xn,  47. 
Guilds,  law  of,  authoritative,  vin,  41. 
Guru,  definition  of  term,  n,  142, 149. 

—  duty  of  maintaining,  iv,  251-252  ; 

xi,  1. 

—  impurity  on  death  of  learned,  v, 

82. 

—  manner  of  saluting,  n,  130. 

—  reverence  towards,  iv,  130,  162  ; 

xn,  83.  See  Father,  Mother, 
Teacher,  &c. 

—  adultery  with  wife  of,  a  mortal 

sin,  ix,  235;  xi,  55;  punish- 
ment for,  ix,  2 3  7 ;  in  next  birth, 
xi,  49;  xn,  58.  See  Penance 
for  adultery  with  wife  of  Guru. 

Gatakarman,  birth-rite,  n,  27,  29. 
Gatibhrawja  sins,  xi,  68.     See  Pen- 
ance for  Gatibhraw^akara. 
G£alla  caste,  x,  22  ;  xn,  45. 
Giva,  xn,  13. 

Gyaish^a,  month,  vin,  245. 
Gyesh/£a-saman,  in,  185. 

Hara,  xn,  121. 
Havirbhu^  manes,  in,  197. 
Havishmat  manes,  in,  198. 
Havishpantiya  hymn,  xi,  252. 
Hells,  in,  249  ;  iv,  81,  165,  197  ;  ix, 
138;  xn,  16-22,  54. 

—  enumeration  of,  iv,  88-90. 
Herdsman,   food   of  Sudra,   lawful 

for  Brahmawa,  iv,  253. 

—  disputes  from  transgressions  of 


I 


INDEX. 


593 


owners  of  cattle  and,  viii,  5, 
229-243. 
Heretics,  iv,  61 ;  no  libations  offered 
to  dead,  v,  89-90;  not  to  be 
fed,  iv,  30 ;  to  be  banished,  ix, 
225. 

—  doctrines  and  books  of,  xi,  66 ; 

xii,  95-96. 
Hermit,  dress  of,  vi,  6,  1 5  ;  duties : 
must  not  accept  anything,  vi, 
8;  may  beg,  vi,  27-28;  may 
keep  sacred  fire  and  offer  sacri- 
fices, vi,  4-5,  7,  9-12  ;  may  give 
up  both,  vi,  25 ;  must  be  hos- 
pitable, vi,  7-8  ;  must  perform 
austerities,  vi,  8,  22-24;  must 
recite  Veda  and  study  Upani- 
shads,  vi,  8,  29-30. 

—  food  of,  vi,  3, 12-21,  27-28. 

—  may  starve  himself  to  death,  vi, 

31. 

—  mode  of  personal  purification,  v, 

i37. 

—  pays  no    toll   at  a  ferry,   vm, 

407. 

—  produced  by  the  quality  of  Good- 

ness, XII,  48. 
High-treason,   punishment    of,  Ix. 

275. 
Himalaya,  11,  21. 
Hirawyakeji  Dharma-sutra,  pp.  xx, 

xl,  li. 
Homicide,  xi,  55,  57,  67. 

—  punishment  of,  vm,  296 ;  ix,  235. 

See  Penance  for  killing,  Self- 
defence. 
Honey-mixture,  in,  3,  1 19-120;  v, 
41. 

—  present  received  with,  is  separate 

property,  ix,  206. 

Horse-sacrifice,  xi,  75,  83. 

Hospitality.     See  Guests. 

Hotri-priest,  receives  a  horse,  vm, 
209. 

House,  decision  concerning  bound- 
aries of,  viii,  262. 

Householder,  duties  of:  marriage, 
111,5-44;  connubial  intercourse, 
in,  45-50 ;  treatment  of  female 
relatives,  in,  51-62;  perform- 
ance of  daily  and  domestic  rites, 
in,  67-121;  of  Sraddhas,  in, 
122-286. 

—  entrance  into  order,  in,  2  ;  iv,  1. 

—  excellence  of  order  of,  in,  77-78  ; 

iv,  89-90. 

[*5]  Q 


Householder,  livelihood  of,  iv,  1-12. 

—  mode   of  personal    purification, 

v,  136-137.     See  Occupations, 

Snataka. 
Hunter,  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brah- 

ma«a,  iv,  212. 
Hurt,  done  by  carriage,  viii,  290- 

298.     See  Assault. 
Husband,  duties  of,  ix,  2,  5-16,  74, 

101-102. 

—  one  with  wife,  ix,  45-46. 

—  inherits  from  childless  wife,  ix, 

196.  See  Connubial  intercourse, 
Marriage,  Son  of  wife,  "Wife; 
Woman,  treatment  of. 

—  power  over  wife,  v,  147-154 ;  ix, 

3  ;  source  of  that  power,  v,  152. 
Hypocrite,  excluded  from  hospitality, 
iv,  30,  192-197  ;  from  Sraddha, 
in,  159. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahma«a, 

iv,  211. 

—  produced  by  Darkness,  xn,  44. 

—  sanctimonious,  to  be  punished, 

ix,  258,  273. 

Idiot,  excluded  from  inheritance,  ix, 
201. 

—  property  of,  not  lost  by  lapse  of 

time,  viii,  148. 
Images,  punishment  for  destroying, 

ix,  285.     See  Gods,  images  of. 
Impurity  (Sutaka),  on  birth,  v,  58, 

61-63,  71,  77,  79. 

—  on  carrying  out  corpse,  v,  64-65, 

85. 

—  on  death  of  SapiWa,  v,  58,  60, 

75-77,  83-84;  of  teacher,  v,  65, 
80;  of  teacher's  son  or  wife, 
v,  80;  of  infants,  v,  67,  69; 
of  fellow-student,  v,  71 ;  of  un- 
married females,  v,  72 ;  of  re- 
mote relative, V,  78;  of  Srotriya, 
v,  81 ;  of  pupil,  v,  81 ;  of  ma- 
ternal uncle,  v,  8 1 ;  of  officiating 
priest,  v,  81;  of  maternal  rela- 
tive, v,  81 ;  of  king,  v,  82 ;  of 
friend,  v,  82  ;  of  learned  Guru, 
v,  82. 

—  on  following  corpse,  v,  103. 

—  on  miscarriage,  v,  66. 

—  on  touching  corpse,  v,  64,  85. 

—  on  two  deaths  or  births  following 

each  other,  v,  79. 

—  behaviour  of  mourners  during, 

v,  73. 


594 


LAWS    OF    MANU, 


Impurity,  exceptions  to  rules  of,  v, 
89-90,  93-98. 

—  rite  at  end  of  period  of,  v,  99. 

—  causes    interruption    of    Veda- 

study,  iv,  109-110,  127. 

—  makes  food  of  giver  unaccept- 

able, iv,  212. 
Impurities  of  the  body,  v,  1 35.     See 

Purification. 
Incantations.     See  Magic. 
Incest,    xi,    59,   171.     See    Guru, 

adultery  with  wife  of. 
Indivisible  property.    See  Property. 
Indra,  in,  87 ;  iv,  182  ;  v,  96  ;  vn, 

4,7;  viii,  344;  xi,  120,  122; 

xii,  123. 
Infant,  burial  of,  v,  68-69. 

—  committing  nuisance,  ix,  283. 

—  disqualified  to  be  witness,  vin, 

66  ;  exceptions,  vin,  70-71 ;  to 
sacrifice  or  recite  Veda,  n,  171- 
172  ;  xi,  36-37. 

—  no  libations  offered  to,  v,  70. 

—  special  punishment  for,  ix,  230. 

—  treatment  of,  in,  114;   iv,  179; 

vin,  312.  See  Impurity,  Minor. 

I  nformer,  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in, 
161;  food  of  forbidden,  1 V,  2 1 2  ; 
punishment  in  next  life,  xi,  50. 
See  Spy. 

Inheritance,  a  mode  of  acquiring 
property,  x,  115.  (1)  Succes- 
sion to  male :  sons,  ix,  104, 156- 
157,  185  ;  eldest  son  alone,  ix, 
105,  108  ;  unmarried  daughter 
inherits  one-fourth  share,  ix, 
118;  appointed  daughter,  ix, 
130;  son  of  appointed  daughter, 
ix,  131-134, 136;  husband  of  ap- 
pointed daughter,  ix,  135;  son 
of  daughter  not  appointed,  ix, 
IZ^>  139;  adopted  son,  ix,  141- 
142;  son  of  appointed  widow 
or  wife,  ix,  120-121,  145-146, 
1 90-191 ;  six  kinds  of  subsidiary 
sons,  ix,  158  ;  among  subsidiary 
sons  each  better  one  inherits 
before  the  rest,  ix,  165,  184  ; 
illegitimate  son  of  Sudra,  ix, 
179;  father  and  brothers,  ix, 
185;  Sapi#</as,Sakulyas, teacher 
and  pupil,  ix,  187;  learned 
Brahmawas,  ix,  188-189;  the 
king,  ix,  189 ;  children  of 
eunuch,  &c,  ix,  203 ;  son  born 
after  partition,  ix,  216  ;  mother 


and  paternal  grandmother,  ix, 
217.  (2)  Succession  to  fe- 
male: son,  ix,  104,  192,  195; 
daughter,  ix,  192,  195 ;  un- 
married daughter,  ix,  131; 
daughter  of  Brahma/zi  wife,  ix, 
198  ;  daughter's  daughter,  ix, 
193  ;  husband,  ix,  196;  mother 
and  father,  ix,  197.  (3)  Suc- 
cession to  reunited  coparcener, 
ix,  210-212.  (4)  Exclusion  from 
inheritance,  ix,  143-144,  147, 
201,  213  (?),  214;  xi,  185-186. 
Initiation,  a  second  birth,  11,  148, 
169-170. 

—  description  of,  11,  36-47. 

—  neglect    of.      See   Penance   fo 

neglect;  Vratya. 

—  second,  xi,  147,  151-152. 
Injury  to    living    beings,    excludes 

from  Sraddlia,  in,  164. 

—  forbidden,  iv,  148,  170,  &c;  par- 

ticularly to  ascetics,  vi,  39,  46, 
52,  68-69,  75.     See  Animals. 
Institutes  of  dialectics.     See  Dia- 
lectics. 

—  of  the  sacred  law.    See  Dharma 

jastra. 

—  of  science,  iv,  19-20. 
Interest,  kinds  and  rate  of,  p.  xxix 

vin,     140-143,    150-155,     15 
note,  157. 

Judge,  takes  king's  place  on  th< 
bench,  vin,  9,  11;  must  be 
Brahmawa,  never  a  Sudra,  vin, 
9,  20-21 ;  must  be  just,  vin 
12-19;  if  unjust,  to  be  finec 
ix,  234;  behaviour  in  court 
vin,  23. 

Judicial  procedure,   pp.  xcix,  ciii 
constitution  of  the  court,  vin, 
1-2,  9-12,  20-23;  eighteen  titles 
of  the  law,  vin,  3-7  ;  decisions 
to  be  just,  vin,  12-19  ;  suits  t( 
be  heard  according  to  the  order 
of  plaintiff's  caste,  vin,  24;  la\ 
of  castes,  families,  &c,  authori- 
tative, vin,  41-42,  46;  lawsuit 
not  to  be  begun  or  hushed  uf 
by  king  or  his  servants,  vin,  43 
causes  of  failure  of  suits,  vin, 
53-58;    method  of  judicial  in- 
vestigation :     inferences    fror 
facts,  vin,  25-26,  44-46,  wit- 
nesses, vin,  45,  52-55,  61-108, 


I 


INDEX. 


595 


117-123,  oaths,  viii,  109-113, 
ordeals,  viii,  11 4- 116,  special 
trial  in  disputes  regarding  de- 
posits, viii,  182-184;  punish- 
ments, degrees  of,  viii,  124- 
130;  technical  names  of  metal- 
weights  or  coins,  viii,  1 31-137  ; 
three  degrees  of  fines,  viii,  138  ; 
void  legal  transactions,  viii, 
163-168;  fines,  how  paid,  ix, 
229;  reversal  of  unjust  decisions 
by  king,  IX,  234  ;  thief  to  be 
executed  only,  if  taken  ( in  fla- 
granti,' ix,  270.    See  Parishad. 

Kaivarta  caste,  x,  34. 

Kalasutra  hell,  in,  249  ;  iv,  88. 

Kali  age,  1,  85-86  ;  ix,  301-302. 

Kalpa,  a  vedanga,  p.  xxvi ;  n,  140. 

Kamadhenudipika  of  Naraya«a,  p. 
cxxx. 

KamandakiyaNitisara,  quotes  Manu, 
pp.  xxxvi-xxxvii. 

Kambo^a  caste,  pp.  cxiv,  cxvii ;  X, 
44. 

Kanina.  See  Son  of  unmarried 
daughter. 

Karawa  caste,  x,  22. 

Karavara  caste,  x,  36. 

Karshapa/za,  value  of,  vni,  136. 

Karusha  caste,  x,  23. 

Kajyapa,  ix,  129. 

Kanaka  Dharma-sutra,  pp.  xxi,xxiii ; 
quotation  from  p.  xxi,  note. 

Kanaka  school,  pp.  xv,  cxxiv. 

Katyayana-smr/ti,  p.  ex. 

Katyayaniya  Dharma-sutra,  p.  cxix. 

Kavi,  father  of  manes,  in,  198;  son 
of  Ahgiras,  11,  151-154. 

Kejanta  rite,  clipping  the  hair,  n,  65. 

Khasa  caste,  x,  22. 

Khila  texts,  in,  232. 

King,  cannot  be  made  a  witness, 
vni,  65. 

—  duties  of :  to  protect  and  not  to 
oppress  subjects,  vn,  2-3,  35, 
80,  88,  111-112,  142-144;  viii, 
172,  303-309;  ix,  253;  x,  80, 
119;  to  punish  the  wicked,  vn, 
14-34;  viii,  302-303,  310-311, 
335, 343-347; ix, 252-293,  312  ; 
to  honour,  support,  and  make 
gifts  to  learned  Brahmawas, 
vn,  37-38,  79,  82-86,  88,  134- 
136,  145;  viii,  395;  ix,  313- 
323;  xi,  4, 2 1-23;  to  be  humble, 


p.  cxiii;  vn,  39-42  ;  to  study  the 
Veda  and  sciences,  vn,  43  ;  to 
shun  the  eighteen  vices,  vn,  44- 
53  ;  to  appoint  ministers,  vn, 
54-58  ;  and  other  officials,  vn, 
59-68,  80-81,  114-126 ;  to  select 
a  residence  and  to  build  fortress, 
vn,  69-76 ;  to  wed  a  queen, 
vn,  77  ;  to  appoint  a  domestic 
and  officiating  priests,  vn,  78- 
79 ;  to  fight  bravely  and  honour- 
ably, vn,  87-95,  184-200;  x, 
119  ;  distribution  of  booty,  vn, 
96-97  ;  to  make  conquests,  vn, 
99-100,  201-203  ;  ix,  251  ;  x, 
115,  119;  to  settle  taxes  and 
duties,  vn,  127-133,  137-140; 
x,  118,  120;  to  sacrifice,  vn, 
79,  145  ;  to  give  audience,  vn, 
145-146,  223  ;  to  consult  re- 
garding state  affairs  and  to 
follow  the  principles  of  Niti, 
vn,  146-183,  205-216;  ix,  294- 
299  ;  to  inspect  army,  vn,  222  ; 
to  decide  lawsuits  either  per- 
sonally, vni,  1-8 ;  ix,  233-234, 
or  through  judge,  vni,  9-10 ;  to 
be  just,  vni,  18-19, 126-129,170- 
175;  ix,  249;  to  protect  minors 
and  women,  vni,  27-29 ;  to 
deal  with  found  property,  vni, 
30-34;  and  with  treasure-trove, 
vni,  35-39  ;  to  restore  or  make 
good  stolen  property,  vni,  40- 
44;  to  uphold  law  of  castes,  &c, 
vn,  203;  vni,  41-42,  46;  not 
to  begin  or  hush  up  lawsuits, 
vni,  43  ;  to  settle  rates  of  sale, 
vni,  401-402  ;  to  have  weights 
and  measures  examined,  vni, 
403  ;  to  avoid  taking  property 
of  men  guilty  of  mortal  sins, 
ix,  243-247;  to  be  active  and 
energetic,  ix,  301-3 11 ;  to  seek 
death  in  battle,  ix,  323. 
King,  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brah- 
ma«a,  iv,  218. 

—  gifts   of  wicked,  not  to  be  ac- 

cepted, iv,  84-91. 

—  impurity  of,  causes  interruption 

of  Veda-study,  iv,  no. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  82. 

—  incarnation  of  eight  deities,  v,  96  ; 

vn,  4-7. 

—  majesty  of,  vn,  8-13. 

—  never  impure,  v,  93-94,  97. 


I 

S 


Q  q   2 


596 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


King,  offences  by,  vm,  336. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  in, 

119-120. 

—  receives  sixth  part  of  subject's 

demerit  or  merit,  vm,  304-305  ; 
of  Brahmawa's  merit,  xi,  23. 

—  recreations  allowed  to,  vn,  216- 

217,  224-225. 
• —  service  under,  forbidden  to  Brah- 
ma»a,  in,  64, 153. 

—  shadow  of,  not  to  be  trod  on,  iv, 

130. 

—  Sudra,  iv,  61.     See  Edicts,  High- 

treason,  Kshatriya,  Vassals. 
Kirata  race,  x,  44. 
Kratu,  a  Pra^-apati,  1,  35. 
Krikkhra,  or  hard  penance,  v,  2 1  ; 

xi,  106, 125,  140, 159,  163,  178, 

192,  198,  209. 

—  description  of,  xi,  212. 
Kr/sh«ala,  value  of,  vm,  134-135. 
Krita  age,  I,  81,  83,  85-86;  ix,  301- 

302. 
Krita.     See  Son,  bought. 
Kr/trima.     See  Son,  made. 
Kshatriya  caste,  and  Brahmawa,  II, 

135;  iv,  135-136;  ix,  313-322. 

—  causes  of  degradation  of,  x,  43- 

45- 

—  duties  and  occupations,  1,  89 ;  x, 

77-79,  115;  in  battle,  vii,  87- 
95,  144  ;  in  times  of  distress, 
vm,  411-412;  x,  83,  95,  117; 
punishment  of  neglect  of,  in 
next  life,  xn,  71. 

—  guilt  of,  in  case  of  theft,  vm,  337. 

—  killing    man    of,    xi,    67.     See 

Penance  for  killing. 

—  manes  of,  in,  197. 

—  not  a  guest,  but  to  be  fed,  in, 

iio-iii. 

—  origin  of,  I,  31,  87  ;  xn,  46. 

—  punishment    for    adultery,   vm, 

375-377,  382  ;  for  defamation, 
vm,  267,  269,  276. 

—  special  rules,  of  administration  of 

oath,  vm,  113;  of  burial,  v,  92  ; 
of  examination  as  witness,  vm, 
88  ;  of  impurity,  v,  83,  99  ;  of 
initiation,  11,  36-38,  41-42,  44- 
46  ;  of  Ke^anta,  11,  65  ;  of  mar- 
riage, in,  44  ;  of  naming,  11,  31- 
32 ;  of  purification,  11,  62  ;  of 
saluting,  11, 127  ;  of  studentship, 
11,  49, 190. 

—  wives  permitted  to,  in,  13-14. 


See  King,   Sons  by  wives   of 

several  castes. 
Kshatriyas,  seniority  among,  n,  155. 
Kshatriya,  female,  punishment  for 

adultery  with,  vm,  382-385. 
Kshattn  caste,  x,  13,  19,  26. 

—  occupations  of,  x,  49. 

—  origin  of,  x,  12, 16. 
Kshetra^a.     See  Son,  begotten  on 

widow  of  wife. 
Kshetra^a,  xn,  13-14. 
Kubera,  v,  96  ;  vn,  4,  7,  42. 
Ku^/mala  hell,  iv,  89. 
Kuhu,  goddess,  in,  86, 
Kukkutaka  caste,  x,  1 8. 
Kullukabhatfa,   a   commentator    of 

Manu,  pp.  xiv-xvii,  xxv,  c,  ex, 

cxi,  exxi,  exxxi-exxxii. 
Kumarilabha/ta,  pp.  exxi-exxii ;  Add. 

and  Gorr.  p.  613. 
Kurus,  plain  of,  n,  19;  vn,  193 
KushmaWa  texts,  vm,  106. 
Kutsa,  hymn  of,  xi,  250. 


.Kaitra,  month,  vn,  182. 
£akshusha  Manu,  1,  62. 
KandaXa  caste,  in,  92,  239;  iv,  79; 
V,  131;  ix,  87;  x,  108;  xn,55. 

—  castes  descended  from,  x,  26-31. 

,  37-39- 

—  intercourse  with  female  of,  pen- 

ance, xi,  176;  punishment,  v in, 

373- 

—  origin  of,  x,  12,  16. 

—  position  and  occupations  of,  x 

51-56. 

—  purification  on  touching,  v,  85. 
Zandrayawa,   or  lunar  penance,  v, 

20;  vi,  20;  Xi,  41,  107,  155- 
156,  164,  172,  178. 

—  description  of,  xi,  217-226. 
ifara/za,  demigods,  xn,  44. 
jfiTaturmasya-sacrifices,  iv,  26  ;  vi,  ic 
jOandogya-upanishad,  pp.  lx-lxi. 
Kma.  race,  x,  44. 
Koda.  race,  x,  44. 
£uWakarman,  tonsure,  n,  27,  35  ;  v 

58,  67. 
Kunkxi  caste,  x,  48. 

Land,    false    evidence    concerning 
vm,  99,  263. 

—  wrongful  appropriation  of,  XI,  58. 
Languages,  of  Mle^as  and  Aryan? 

x,  45  ;  various,  of  men,  ix,  332. 
Law,  eighteen  titles  of,  vm,  3-7- 


INDEX. 


597 


Law,  institutes  of.  See  Dharma- 
jastra. 

—  manner  of  investigation  of,  xu, 

105-106. 

—  of  castes,  families,  &c.,  viii,  41- 

42,  46. 

—  settlement  of  doubtful  points,  xu, 

108-115. 

—  sources  of,  11,  6-25. 

—  special  schools  of,  pp.  xlix,  li-lvii. 

—  the    tenfold,    vi,     91-93.      See 

Dharma. 
Lawsuits.     See  Judicial  procedure. 
Learning,  property  acquired  by,  ix, 

206. 
Leather-cutter,  impure,  iv,  218. 
Lending  money,  occupation  of  Vai- 

jya,  1,90;  ix,  326;  x,  115. 

—  permitted  to  Brahmawa  and  Ksha- 

triya  in  times  of  distress,  x,  117. 

See  Debt,  Interest,  Usury. 
Libations  to  the  dead,  v,  69-70,  88- 

90  ;  to  the  manes,  11,  176  ;  in, 

70,  74,  81-82,  283;  vi,  24. 
Liberality,  duty  of,  1,  86  ;   ix,  333  ; 

x,  79. 

—  destroys  guilt,  xi,  228.    See  Gift. 
Liberation,  final,  vi,  36-37,  42,  44, 

74,75,78-81,85;  xu,  83-104. 

Likihm  race,  x,  22. 

Limitation,  law  of,  viii,  145-149. 

Livelihood,  various  means  of,  p. 
lxviii;  iv,  2-13.  See  Occupa- 
tions. 

Logician,  member  of  Parishad,  xn, 
in;  not  to  be  entertained  as 
guest,  iv,  30. 

Loha^araka  hell,  iv,  90. 

Lohajahku  hell,  iv,  90. 

Lunar  penance.     See  ATandraya/za. 

Madanapala,  prince  of  Kash/^a,  pp. 

cxxiv-cxxv. 
Madgu  caste,  x,  48. 
Madhuparka.     See  Honey-mixture. 
Madhyadeja,  boundaries  of,  n,  21. 
Madman,  excluded  from  inheritance, 

ix,  201,  from  Sraddha,  in,  161. 

—  special  punishment  for,  ix,  230. 
Magadha  caste,  x,  26. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  47. 

—  origin  of,  x,  n,  17. 

Magic,  practice  of,  an  Upapataka, 
xi,  64  ;  punishable,  ix,  258,  290; 
permitted  to  Brahmawa,  xi,  31- 
34* 


Mahabharata  and  Manu's  laws,  pp. 
xiv,  xvi,  xxxviii,  lx,  lxii-lxiii, 
lxxiv-xcii,  xcvii-xcviii,  cvii. 

Mahanaraka  hell,  iv,  88. 

Mahapataka,  mortal  sin,  enumera- 
tion of,  ix,  235  ;  xi,  55  ;  punish- 
ments for,  ix,  236-242.  See 
Brahma«a,  offences  against ; 
Drinking  spirituous  liquor ; 
Guru,  adultery  with  wife  of; 
Theft  of  gold. 

Maharaurava  hell,  iv,  88. 

MahavUi  hell,  iv,  89. 

Mahitra  hymn,  xi,  250. 

Maintenance,  allowed  to  outcast 
women,  xi,  189;  to  subsidiary 
sons,  ix,  163  ;  to  those  excluded 
from  inheritance,  ix,  202. 

Maitraya«a-brahma«opanishad,  pp. 
xliv-xlv. 

Maitrayamya  school.  See  Manava 
school. 

Maitreyaka  caste,  x,  33. 

Malavaha  sins,  xi,  71.  See  Penance 
for. 

Malla  caste,  x,  22  ;  xn,  45. 

Manava  Dharmajastra,  traditional 
account  of  origin  of,  pp.  xii- 
xviii;  1,  58-60,  102,  119;  xi, 
244. 

—  recast    of  a  Dharma-sutra,  pp. 

xviii-xlv. 

—  composed  by  a  special  law-school, 

pp.  xlvi-lvi. 

—  causes   of  sanctity  of,  pp.  lvi- 

lxv. 

—  old  and  modern  parts  of,  pp.  Ixvi- 

Ixxiii. 

—  sources    of   modern    parts,  pp. 

lxxiv-xcii. 

—  successive  recasts  of,  pp.  xcii- 

xcviii. 

—  antiquity  and  date  of,  pp.  xcix- 

cxviii. 

—  commentaries  on,  pp.  cix-cxxxvi. 

—  by  whom  to  be  studied,  1,  103 ; 

11,  16  ;  to  be  taught,  I,  103. 

—  rewards  for  studying,  1,  104-106. 

—  contents  of,   1,    111-118,   agree 

with  Veda,  11,  7. 

—  secret  portion  of,  xn,  107. 
Manava-sawhita,astrological,p  xcvii. 
Manava  Dharma-sutra,  quoted,  pp. 

xv-xxiii,  xxx-xxxii,  xxxv,  xxxvii. 
Manava  Gn'hya-sutra,  pp.  xxxix-xl, 
xciii. 


598 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Manava  school,  pp.  xviii,  xxxvii,  xlv ; 

works  of,  p.  xli. 
Manava  Sraddhakalpa,  pp.  xl-xliv. 
Manava^arya,  p.  lxiii. 
Mandapala,  a  sage,  ix,  23. 
Manes,  Bali-offering  for,  in,  91. 

—  classes  and  origin  of,  1,  37;   III, 

194-201,284;  xn,  49. 

—  day  and  night  of,  I,  66. 

—  debt  due  to,  IV,  257. 

—  libations  to.     See  Libations. 

—  sacrifices  to.     See  Sraddha. 

—  tirtha  of,  n,  59. 
Mantrasawhita,  iv,  100.     See  Saw- 

hita. 
Manu,   descended    from   Brahman, 
pp.  xii,  Ivii;  1,  33,  63;  vi,  54. 

—  etymology  of  the  name,  p.  xiv. 

—  identified  with  Brahman,  pp.  xiii, 

lvii;  xn,  123. 

—  king,  pp.  xiii,  lviii-lix  ;  vn,  42. 

—  lawgiver,   pp.  xiii-xviii,   lxi-lxii ; 

1,  1-4,  58,  102,  119;  11,  7. 

—  Pra^apati,  p.  lvii;  1,  34;  ix,  17. 

—  other  myths  regarding,  pp.  lvii- 

lxiii. 

—  quoted  in  the  Manava  Dharma- 

jastra,  in,  222  ;  iv,  103 ;  v,  41, 
131;  vi,  54;  viii,  124, 139,  168, 
204,  242,  279,  292,  339  ;  ix,  158, 
182-183,239;  x,  63,  78. 

Manus,  seven,  1,  36,  61-63. 

Manva^arya,  p.  lxiii. 

Manvantara,  period  of  a  Manu,  I, 
79;8o. 

Margajirsha,  month,  vn,  182. 

Margava  caste,  x,  34. 

MarUi,  a  Pra^apati,  1,  35,  58;  III, 

195. 
Marka^eya,  author  of  a  recast  of 

Manu's  laws,  pp.  xvii,  xcv. 
Marriage,  expenses  of  first,  may  be 

obtained  by  begging,  xi,  1,  5. 

—  forbidden   degrees  and   impedi- 

ments, in,  5-9,  1 1 ;  xi,  172-173. 
See  Outcasts. 

—  intermarriage  between  different 

castes,  in,  12-19,43-44,  64.  See 
Sons  by  wives  of  several  castes ; 
Wives  of  several  castes. 

—  present  received  on,  is  separate 

property,  ix,  206. 
« —  punishment    for   substitution   of 

another  bride,  viii,  204. 
- —  results  of  low,  111,  63. 
* —  rites,  pp.  xxxix  note,  lxxvii-lxxviii ; 


I 


description,  ill,  20-42,  51-54, 
affect  succession,  ix,  196-197. 
Marriage,  second,  of  widows,  forbid- 
den, v,  161-164 ;  ix,  65  ;  of  vir- 
gin widows  permitted,  ix,  69-70, 
176.     See  Woman,  re-married. 

—  suitable  ages  of  men  for,  ix,  94 ; 

of  women,  ix,  4,  88,  90-94. 

—  when  complete,  viii,  227. 

—  with  sacred  texts  for  virgins,  viii, 

226. 

—  the  Vedic  sacrament  of  women, 

11,67.  See  Betrothal,  Husband  ; 
Wife,  repudiation  and  super- 
session. 

Maruts,  in,  88;  xi,  120, 122,  222. 

Masha,  value  of,  vin,  134. 

Maternal  aunt,  n,  50, 131. 

Maternal  grandfather,  entertained  at 
6"raddha,in,i48.  See  Daughter's 
son. 

Maternal  uncle,  entertained  at  Srad- 
dha,  in,  148. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  81. 

—  manner  of  saluting,  n,  130. 

—  quarrels  with,  forbidden,  iv,  179, 

183. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  in, 

119. 
Maternal  uncle's  wife,  n,  131, 
Matsya-pura«a,  p.  cxi. 
Matsyas,  a  tribe,  II,  19  J  vn,  193. 
Measures,   examined  by  the  king, 

vin,  403. 
Meat,  allowed  to  be  eaten,  v,  16,  18, 

22-23,  27-33,36,  39-42. 

—  forbidden  to  be  eaten,  iv,  213  ;  v, 

7,11-15,17-18,34,36-38,43-56. 

—  sale  of,  disqualifies  for  Sraddha, 

111,152;  forbidden  to Brahmawa, 

x,  88.  ■ 

Medhatithi,  a  commentator  of  Manu, 

pp.   xiii -xvii,    xcv,    cvii-cviii, 

cxviii-cxxvi. 
Merchants.     See  Traders. 
Mimawsa,  pp.  xlvii,  lii,  cxix. 
Mimawsaka,  member  of  Parishad, 

XII,  III. 

Ministers,  royal,  ix,  294. 
—  chief  of,  tobeaBrahma«a,vn,58; 
takes  king's  place,  vn,  141,  226. 


with,   vn,    56-59, 


consultations 
146-216. 

number  of,  p.  xxxvii ;  vn,  54. 

punishment  of,  for  unjust  deci- 
sions, ix,  234.     See  Officials. 


INDEX. 


599 


Minor,  cannot  make  a  contract,  vin, 
163. 

—  property  of,  not  lost  by  lapse  of 

time,  vin,   148-149  ;  protected 

by  king,  vin,  27.     See  Infants. 
Mischief,  punishment  of,  vin,  285, 

288-289  I  IX>  279,  28ij  285,  289, 

291. 
Miser,  tood  of,  forbidden  to  Brah- 

mana,  iv,  210. 
Mitra,  deity,  xn,  121. 
Mle^££as,  barbarians,  11,  23  ;  x,  45. 
Monopoly,  royal,  vin,  399. 
Mortal  sin.     See  Mahapataka. 
Mortgage,  vin,  165. 
Mother,  begging  from,  11,  50. 

—  forsaking,  a  crime,  III,  157;  xi, 

60;  punishment  for,  vin,  389. 

—  impurity  of,  on  birth,  v,  62. 

—  inherits  from  daughter,  ix,  197  ; 

from  son,  ix,  217. 

—  punishment  for  defaming,  vin, 

275- 

—  reverence  towards  and  venerabi- 

lityof,  11, 145,  225-237;  iv,  162, 

180, 183.     See  Daughter,  Son. 
Mother's  sister,  11,  133. 
Mother-in-law,  11,  131. 
Mr/'ta,  alms,  iv,  4-5. 
Murder.     See   Homicide,  Penance 

for  killing. 
Musician,  food   of,   forbidden,  iv, 

210. 
Muttered  prayers,  efficacy  of,  11,  85- 

87.     See  Veda-study,  private. 

Nagas,  snake-deities,  1,  37 ;  in,  196  ; 

vii,  23. 
Nahusha,  a  king,  vn,  41. 
Nairukta,  pp.  xxvi,  lvii;  xn,  11 1. 
Nakshatresh/i  sacrifice,  vi,  10. 
Namadheya,  rite  of  naming  child,  11, 

30-33J  v,  7o. 
NandanaHrya,    a   commentator  of 

Manu,  pp.  cxxxiii-cxxxv. 
Narada,  a  Pra^apati,  1,  35. 
Narada-smriti,  pp.  xv,  xvii,  xcii,  xcv- 

xcvi,  ci-cii,  civ,  cvii,  cxii,  cxxii. 
Naraya«a,  commentator.     See  Sar- 

va^-«a-Naraya«a. 
Naraya«a,  deity,  1,  10. 
Nate  caste,  x,  22  ;  xn,  45. 
Nemi,  a  king,  vn,  41. 
Nigama,  iv,  19. 
Nirr/ti,  deity,  xi,  105,  119. 
Nirukta,  pp.  xxvi,  1;  xn,  in. 


Nishada  caste,  descendants  of,  x,  1 8, 
34,  36-37,  39- 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahmawa, 

iv,  215. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  48. 

—  origin  of,  x,  8. 
Nishka,  value  of,  vin,  137. 
Nishkramarca,  first  leaving  the  house, 

11,  34. 

Niti.     See  Policy,  royal. 

Niyoga.  See  Appointment  of 
widows;  Son  begotten  on 
widow  or  wife. 

Non-payment  of  wages.  See  Wages. 

Non-performance  of  agreements, 
vin,  5,  218-221. 

Nuisance,  punishment  for  commit- 
ting, ix,  282-283. 

Nuptial  fee,  julka,  vin,  204 ;  ix,  100. 
See  Daughter,  sale  of. 

Oath,  administered  in  doubtful  cases, 
vin,  109  ;  in  boundary  disputes, 
vin,  256. 

—  formerly  sworn  by  gods  and  sages, 

VIII,  no. 

—  manner  of  swearing,  vin,  113- 

114. 

—  sanctity  of,  vin,  in.     See  Per- 

jury. 
Occupations,  of  four  castes,  1,  88-9 1 ; 
x,  74-80;  in  times  of  distress, 
x,    8 1 -1 17.       See    Brahmawa, 
Kshatriya,  Sudra,  Vauya. 

—  of  higher  caste  never  to  be  adopted 

by  lower,  x,  95-96. 

—  of  mixed  castes,  x,  32-39,  47- 

52- 

—  pursuit  of  forbidden,  punishable, 

ix,  225  ;  results  of,  iv,  30.  See 
Penance  for  forbidden  occupa- 
tions. 
Officials,  royal,  appointment  and 
classes  of,  vii,  60-68,  80-81, 
114*121. 

—  punishment  of  corrupt,  vii,  123- 

124;  vin,  34;   ix,  231,  259;  of 
negligent,  ix,  272. 

—  supervised  by  spies,  vii,  122. 
Officiating  priest,  definition  of  term, 

11,  143- 

—  entertained  at  Sraddha,  in,  148. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  81. 

—  manner  of  saluting,  n,  130. 

—  payment  of  fees  to,  VIII,  206-210; 

XI,  38-39. 


6oo 


LAWS   OF   MANU. 


Officiating  priest,  punishment  of,  for 
forsaking  sacrificer,  viii,  388. 

—  punishment  of  sacrificer  for  for- 

saking, viii,  388. 

—  quarrels  with,  forbidden,  iv,  179, 

182. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  in, 

119. 

—  to  be  chosen  by  king,  vn,  78. 
Oilman,  impure,  in,  158  ;  iv,  84-85. 
Om,  syllable,  vi,  70;  xi,  249. 

—  is  a  secret  Veda,  xi,  266. 

—  origin  of,  11,  76. 

—  pronounced  in  beginning  recita- 

tion of  Veda,  n,  74-75. 

—  sanctity  of,  11,  83-84. 
Ordeals,  pp.  ci-cii. 

—  by  fire  and  water,  viii,  114-116. 
Orders,  four,  vi,  87-88. 

—  comparison  of,  in,  77-78  ;  vi,  89- 

90. 

—  disputes  regarding  duties,   how 

settled,  viii,  390-391. 

—  duties   of  all,    vi,   91-93.     See 

Ascetic,  Hermit,  Householder, 
Student. 
Organs,  enumeration  of,  11,  90-92. 

—  deficiency    in,     disqualifies     for 

Sraddhas,  in,  161, 177-178,  242  ; 
excludes  from  inheritance,  ix, 
201. 

—  duty  of  restraining,  n,  88,   92- 

100;  iv,  246;  v,  105;  vi,  4, 52, 
60,  72,  92  ;  x,  63,  &c. 
Outcast,  associating  with,  forbidden, 
in,  150,  157;  iv,  79,  213;  ix, 
238-239;  xi,  185, 190;  a  mortal 
sin,  xi,  55  ;  punishment  for,  in 
next  life,  xn,  60.  See  Penance 
for  associating  with  outcast. 

—  food  laid  on  the  ground  for,  in, 

92. 

—  marriage  with  daughter  of,  n, 

238,  240  note. 

—  purification  on  touching,  v,  85. 

—  treatment    of   female,   xi,    189. 

See  Abhbasta ;  Caste,  exclusion 
from,  readmission  into. 

Pahlava  race,  pp.  cxiv-cxvii ;  x,  44. 
Paua^a  marriage,  in,  21. 

—  description  of,  in,  34. 

—  forbidden,  pp.  lxxvii-lxxviii ;  ill, 

23,  25. 

—  results  of,  in,  41-42. 
Pakaya^as,  11,  86,  143  ;  xi,  119. 


Pala,  value  of,  viii,  135. 
Pa«a,  value  of,  viii,  136. 
PaWusopaka  caste,  x,  37. 
Pa«£agavya,  the  five  products  of  the 

cow,  xi,  166. 
Pa«£alas,  a  tribe,  II,  19  ;  vn,  193. 
Pariktidusha«a,  defiler  of  a  company, 

in,  150-182. 

—  penance  for,  xi,  201. 
Panktipavana,  sanctifier  of  a  com- 
pany, in,  183-186. 

Parada  race,  x,  44. 

Parana va  caste,  x,  8  ;  son,  ix,  178. 

Parents.     See  Father,  Mother. 

Parishad,  legal  assembly,  p.  lii ;  xn, 
108-115. 

Parivettr/.  See  Brother,  younger, 
marrying,  &c. 

Parivitta.  See  Brother,  elder,  mar- 
rying, &c. 

Partition,  made  after  parents'  death, 
ix,  104,  or  by  father,  ix,  215; 
meritorious,  ix,  in. 

—  once  made  final,  ix,  47. 

—  between  brothers  legitimate,  of 

equal  caste,  ix,  104,  156-157; 
shares,  ix,  112-119,  213. 

—  between  younger  brother  and  son 

begotten  on  widow  of  elder,  ix, 

T20. 

—  between  sons  of  elder  and  younger 

wives,  ix,  122-126. 

—  between  twins,  ix,  126. 

—  between     son     and     appointed 

daughter,  ix,  134. 

—  between  sons  of  wives  of  different 

castes,  ix,  148-155. 

—  between  legitimate  and  subsidiary 

sons,  ix,  162-165. 

—  between  sons  by  different  fathers, 

ix,  191. 

—  of  acquisitions  by  brothers,  ix, 

204-208,  215. 

—  of  property  of  reunited  copar- 

ceners, ix,  210-212. 

—  of    property    afterwards    disco- 

vered, ix,  218.  See  Inherit- 
ance; Property,  indivisible,  self- 
acquired  of  father ;  separate  of 
sons. 

Partners.     See  Concerns  among. 

Parva-days,  in,  45;  iv,  150,  153. 

Pasture-ground,  around  villages  and 
towns,  viii,  237. 

—  indivisible,  ix,  219. 
Pata%ali,  pp.  li— lii,  cxii. 


II 


INDEX. 


60 1 


Paternal  aunt,  manner  of  saluting, 

n,  131,133. 

—  grandmother,  inherits,  ix,  217. 

—  uncle,  manner  of  saluting,  11, 130. 
Pathin  hell,  iv,  90. 

Pauw^raka  race,  x,  44. 

Pavamani  texts,  v,  86  ;  xi,  258. 

Pavitra,  means  of  purification,  vi,  41. 

Penance,  for  adultery  with  Guru's 
wife,  xi,  104-107  ;  with  other 
women  and  for  other  carnal 
offences,  xi,  171- 179. 

—  for  Apatrikara«a  sins,  xi,  126. 

—  for  associating  with  outcasts,  XT, 

180-182. 

—  for  bite  of  impure  animals  and 

men,  xi,  200. 

—  for  breach  of  student's  vows,  11. 

181,187,220-221;  xi,  119-124, 

158-159. 

—  for  casting  of  supplicant,  xi,  199. 

—  for  cutting  or  destroying  plants, 

xi,  143,  145. 

—  destroying  embryo  of  Brahmawa, 

xi,  88. 

—  for  drinking  spirituous  liquor,  xi, 

91-99,  147-152. 

—  for  eating    forbidden    food,   iv, 

222  ;  v,  20-21  ;  xi,  153-162. 

—  for  false  evidence,  vm,  105-106  ; 

xi,  89. 

—  for  following  forbidden  occupa- 

tions, xi,  193. 

—  for  Gatibhraw-rakara  sins,  xi,  125. 

—  for  improperly  divulging  Veda, 

xi,  199. 

—  for    injuring    living   beings,   vi, 

69. 

—  for  killing  Brahmawa,  xi,  73-87, 

90;  menstruating  Brahmawi,  xi, 
88 ;  friend,  xi,  89 ;  Kshatriya 
or  Vaijya  engaged  in  sacrifice, 
xi,  88;  wife,  xi,  89;  cow,  xi, 
109-117;  Kshatriya,  xi,  127- 
129;  Vaijya,  xi,  127,  130; 
Sudra,  xi,  127,  131;  various 
animals,  xi,  132-134,  135-138, 
140-142,  144;  eunuch,  xi,  134; 
adulterous  women,  xi,  139. 

—  for  Malavaha  sins,  xi,  126. 

—  for  neglecting  duties  of  Snataka, 

XI,  202-204;  initiation,  xi,  192; 
sacred  fire,  xi,  41 ;  twilight  de- 
votions, 11,  220-221. 

—  for  offences  against  teacher,  xi, 

89. 


Penance,  for  performing  forbidden 
sacrifices,  xi,  198. 

—  for  performing  obsequies  of  a 

stranger,  xi,  198. 

—  for  Sawkarikarawa  sins,  xi,  126. 

—  for  secret  sins,  xi,  248-266. 

—  for  swallowing  ordure,  &c,  XI, 

151. 

—  for  teaching  and  sacrificing  for 

wicked  men,  x,  in  ;  xi,  194, 
198-199. 

—  for  theft  of  deposit,  xi,  89  ;  of 

gold,  xi,  100-103 ;  of  other 
property,  XI,  163-170. 

—  for  those  excluded  from  social 

repasts,  xi,  201. 

—  for  threatening,  striking,  or  hurt- 

ing a  Brahma^a,  xi,  205-209. 

—  for  unlawfully  accepting  gifts,  x, 

in;  XL  194-195,  198. 

—  for  Upapataka  sins,  xi,  118. 
Penances,  description  of  various,  xi, 

212-247. 

—  how  imposed,  XI,  86,  210. 

—  necessity  of  and  reasons  for  per- 

forming, xi,  44-47,  54- 

—  not  to  be  performed  under  the 

pretence  of  vows,  iv,  198. 

—  vicarious    for   punishments,   ix, 

235,  240-242. 
Perjury,  equal  to  drinking  spirituous 
liquor,  xi,  57. 

—  permissible  in  certain  cases,  viu, 

103-105,  112. 

—  punishments  for,  viu,  119-123, 

257,  263. 

—  suborner  to,  excluded  from  Srad- 

dha,  in,  158.  See  Oath,  Pen- 
ance for  perjury,  Witness. 

Phalguna,  month,  vn,  182. 

Physician,  impure,  in,  152,  180;  iv, 
212,  220. 

—  unskilful,     punished,     ix,     259, 

284. 
Pija^as,  in,  141 ;  v,  50 ;  xi,  96  ;  xn, 

57. 

—  origin  of,  1,  37,  43 ;  xn,  44. 
Pitr/'medha,  v,  65. 

Pledge,  vm,  H3-I45,  149,  150. 
Pole,  punishment  for  destroying,  ix, 

285. 
Police,  patrols  and  stations,  where 

to  be  placed,  vn,  114;  ix,  264- 

266. 
Policy,   royal,   four  expedients    of, 

vn,  159. 


602 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Policy,  royal,  six  measures  of,  vn, 
160-215. 

—  theory  of,  ix,  294-300. 
Possession   without  title  no   proof 

of  ownership,  viii,  200.  See 
Limitation,  law  of. 
Pra^-apati,  the  lord  of  creatures,  11, 
76-77,  84,  226;  iv,  225,  248; 
v,  28;  ix,  46,  327;  xi,  244; 
xii,  121. 

—  horse  sacred  to,  xi,  38. 

—  ishri  sacred  to,  vi,  38. 

—  oblation  to,  in,  86. 

—  penance  revealed  by.    See  YLrik- 

khr?L  penance. 

—  sacrifice  of,  v,  152. 

—  world  of,  iv,  182. 
Pra^apatis,  I,  35;  xn,  50. 
Prag-apatya  marriage,  III,  21. 

—  affects    succession    to    women's 

property,  ix,  196. 

—  description  of,  in,  30. 

—  permissibility  of,  in,  23-24. 

—  results  of,  in,  38-40,  42. 
Pra/fcetas,  a  Prag-apati,  1,  35. 
Pramrita,  agriculture,  iv,  4-5. 
Prawayama,  suppression  of  breath,  11, 

75;  vi,  69-71;  xi,2oo,  202,  249. 
Pratilomas.     See  Castes,  mixed. 
Prausb/^apada,  month,  iv,  95. 
Prayaga  (Allahabad),  11,  21. 
Pretas,  in,  230;  xn,  59,  71-72. 
Prices    of    merchandize,    fixed  by 

king,  viii,  401-402. 
Priests.     See  Adhvaryu,  Brahman, 

Domestic     priest,      Officiating 

priests,  Udgatr/. 
Primogeniture.     See  Son,  eldest. 
Prisoner,   excluded  from   5raddha, 

in,  158. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahma«a, 

iv,  210. 
Prisons,  where  to  be  placed,  ix,  288. 
Pr/'thu,  a  king,  VII,  42  ;  ix,  44. 
Property,    acquisition    of,   ix,    44; 

seven  modes  of,  x,  115. 

—  indivisible,  ix,  200,  219. 

—  lost  and  found,  vin,  30-34. 

—  self-acquired,  of  father,  ix,  209. 

—  separate,  of  sons,  ix,  206. 

—  stolen,  to  be  restored  or  made 

good   by  king,  viii,  40.      See 
Limitation;     Minor,    Woman, 
property  of. 
Prostitute,  food  of,   forbidden    to 
Brahmawa,  iv,  209,  219. 


Prostitute,  to  be  punished,  ix,  259. 
Publican,    food    of,    forbidden    to 
Brahma«a,  iv,  216. 

—  to  be  banished,  ix,  225. 
Pukkasa  caste,  iv,  79 ;  x,  38  ;  xn,  55. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  49. 

—  origin  of,  x,  18. 
Pulaha,  a  Pra^apati,  1,  35. 
Pulastya,  1,  35;  in,  198. 
Pulkasa,  varia  lectio  for  Pukkasa. 
Punarbhu.     See  Woman  remarried. 
Punishment,  degrees  of,  vin,  129- 

130,  310. 

—  places  for  inflicting,  vin,    124- 

125. 

—  purifies  offender,  v  in,  318.     See 

King,  duties  of. 
Pupil,  impurity  on  death  of,  V,  81. 

—  inherits,  ix,  187. 

—  may  be  asked  for  money,  iv,  33. 

—  may  be  beaten,  iv,  164 ;    VIII, 

299-300. 

—  who   may  become,   n,   109-115. 

See  Student,  Teacher. 

Purawa,  value  of,  vin,  136. 

Pura«as,  pp.  xvi,  Ixv,  xci ;  in,  232. 

Purchase,  one  of  the  modes  of  ac- 
quiring property,  x,  115.  See 
Rescission  of  sale  and  purchase, 
Sale. 

Purification,  of  persons,  II,  53;  v, 
85-87,  134-145.  See  Sipping 
water. 

■ — means  of,  v,  105-109,  127-128; 
of  ascetic,  vi,  41. 

—  of  things,  v,  1 1 1- 1 2 6. 
Purohita.     See  Domestic  priest. 
Purusha,  the  Male,  1,  11,  19;    vn, 

17;  xn,  122. 

—  hymn,  addressed  to,  xi,  252. 
Pushpadha  caste,  x,  21. 
Pushya-day,  iv,  96. 

Put  hell,  ix,  138. 
Pfitimr/'ttika  hell,  iv,  89. 

Qualities,  three,  of  nature  or  of  self, 

I,  15;  xn,  24-50. 

Ra^-as.     See  Activity. 
Raghavananda,     commentator      of 
Manu,  pp.  xiii,  c,  cxxxii-cxxxiii. 
Rahasya,  secret  portion  of  the  Veda, 

II,  140,  165.     See  Upanishad. 
Raivata  Manu,  1,  62. 

Rakshasa  marriage,  in,  21. 

—  description  of,  in,  33. 


I 


INDEX. 


603 


Rakshasa,  permissibility  of,  pp.  lxxvii- 
lxxviii;  ill,  23-24,  26. 

—  results  of,  in,  41-42. 
Rakshasas,  in,  170,  204,  230,  280; 

iv,  199;  vii,  23,  38;  xi,  96. 

—  manes  of,  in,  196. 

—  origin  of,  1,  37,  43  ;  XII,  44. 
Rape,  punishment  of,  vin,  364,  378* 
Raurava  hell,  iv,  88. 

Receivers  of  stolen  goods,  ix,  278. 
Repentance,  removes  guilt,  xi,  228, 

230-232. 
Repudiation.     See  "Wife. 
Rescission  of  sale  and  purchase,  vin, 

5,  222-228. 
Resumption  of  gifts,  vin,  4,  212-214. 
Reunited  coparceners,  ix,  210-212. 
Rig-veda,  n,  158  ;  in,  131, 142,  145  ; 

iv,  124;  xi,  262-265;  xn,  112. 

—  origin  of,  1,  23. 

—  passages  quoted  from,  11,  181; 

v,  86;  viii,  106;  xi,  250-258, 

260-261. 
i?/g-isha  hell,  iv,  90. 
.Rishis.     See  Sages. 
J?ita,  gleaning  corn,  IV,  5. 
Robbers,  manner  of  discovering,  ix, 

261-269. 
Robbery,  vin,  6.     See  Violence. 

—  definition  of,  vm,  332. 

—  punishment  of,  ix,  275-276,  280  ; 

of  those  who  give  no  assistance 
in  cases  of,  ix,  274. 
Rogues,  classes  of,  ix,  257-260. 

—  duty  and  manner  of  discovering 

and  punishing,  ix,  252-255,  261- 

293. 
Rudra,  hymn  to,  xi,  255. 
Rudras,  in,  284;  xi,  222. 

Sacraments,  for  males,   n,   26-47 ; 
for  females,  11,  66-67. 

—  not  allowed  to  mixed  castes,  x, 

68 ;  nor  to  Rudras,  x,  126. 
Sacred  fire,  kindling,  rule  for,  ill, 
67;  neglect  of,  xi,  66. 

—  neglecting  or  extinguishing,  in, 

153  ;  xi,  60.     See  Penance  for. 

—  offerings  to,  n,  108, 176, 186-187; 

iv,    145-146;    vn,    145.      See 
Agnihotra. 

—  repositing  in  oneself,  VI,  25,  38. 

—  reverence  shown  towards,  iv,  58. 

See  Fire,  reverence  to. 
Sacred  fires,  keeper  of  five,  sanctifies 
company,  in,  185. 


Sacrifices,  not  to  be  performed  by 
fools,  infants,  women,  &c,  n, 
171-172;  iv,  205-206;  xi,  36- 
37- 

Sacrifices,  great  daily,  enumeration 
of,  in,  70-74- 

—  description  of,  in,  81-121. 

—  duty  of  performing,  for  house- 

holders, in,  75-80,  93;  iv,  21- 
24;  for  hermits,  vi,  5. 

—  reason  for  performing,  in,  68-69. 

—  remove  guilt,  xi,  246. 
Sacrifices,  forbidden,  ill,  151,  164; 

ix,  290;  xi,  64.     See  Penance 
for  performing  forbidden  sacri- 
fices. 
Sacrifices,  Srauta,  11,  28.  See  Sattra, 
Soma-sacrifices. 

—  duty  of  performing,  iv,  25-28; 

by  a  king,  vn,  78-79. 

—  forbidden   to    eunuchs,   women, 

&c,  iv,  205-206 ;  to  poor  men, 
xi,  38-40. 

—  initiation  to,  a  third  birth,  n,  169. 

—  materials  for,  may  be  taken  by 

force,   xi,    11-15;    not   to   be 
begged  from  SGdras,  xi,  24. 

—  property  destined  for,   is    indi- 

visible, ix,   219;   seizing  such 
property,  xi,  26. 

—  person  initiated  for,  n,  128  ;  iv, 

130,  210;  vin,  360.     See  Pen- 
ance for  killing. 

—  substitute  for,  xi,  27-30. 
Sacrificer,  produced  by  Goodness, 

xn,  49. 

—  punishment   for   forsaking,"  vin, 

388. 
Sacrificial  fee,  due,  must  be  given, 
xi,  38-40. 

—  payment  and  distribution  of,  vin, 

206-210. 
Sacrificial  string  (thread),  II,  44,63- 

64,  174;  iv,  36. 
Sacrificing  for  oneself,  duty  of,  1, 

88-90;  x,  75,77-78. 
Sacrificing  for  others,  occupation  of 

Brahma«a,  1,  88  ;  x,  75-76. 

—  for  unworthy  men,  forbidden,  in, 

65  ;  xi,  60  ;  permitted  in  times 
of  distress,  x,  103,  J09-111. 
See  Penance  for  teaching  and 
sacrificing  for  wicked  men ; 
Sudra,  sacrificing  for. 
Sadhya,  deities,  1,  22;  in,  195;  xi, 
29 ;  xn,  49. 


604 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


Sages,  or  great  sages,  address  Manu, 
I,  1-4;  Bhrigu,  v,  1-2;    xil,  1. 

—  debt  due  to.     See  Debts,   the 

three. 

—  fathers  of  the  manes,  in,  201. 

—  origin  of,  I,  34-36  ;  xil,  49. 

—  worship  of,  11,  176. 
Sagotra  relative,  ix,  190. 
Sahasa.     See  Violence. 
Sahodba..  See  Son  of  pregnant  bride. 
Sairandhra  caste,  x,  32. 
Sakakola  hell,  iv,  89. 

Sakulya  relative,  ix,  187. 

Sale,  forbidden  of  adulterated  goods, 
viii,  203  ;  of  children,  xi,  62  ;  of 
daughter,  see  Daughter ;  of  gar- 
den, tank,  &c,  xi,  62  ;  of  wife, 
ix,  46;  xi,  62. 

—  forbidden  to  Brahma«a,  various 

goods,  in,  152,  159;  x,  86-94; 
xi,  63. 

—  fraudulent,  forbidden,  viii,  203  ; 

void,  viii,  165.     See  Trader. 
Sale  without  ownership,  viii,  4,  197- 

202. 
Saluting,  duty  of,  11,  117,  1 20-121; 

iv,  154. 

—  various  modes  of,  11,  122-137. 
Saman,  xi,  265.     See  Gyesh^asa- 

man,  Sama-veda. 
Samanodaka  relative,  xi,  183. 

—  definition  of  term,  v,  60. 

—  impurity  on  birth  or  death  of, 

v,  64,  71,  74,  78. 
Samavartana,  student's  rite  on  re- 
turning home,  11,  108  ;  in,  4. 
Sama-veda,  1,  23;  in,  145;  iv,  123- 

124  ;  xr,  263  ;  xil,  112. 
Sawdhya  worship.      See   Twilight 

devotions. 
Sawzghata  hell,  iv,  89. 
Saw^-ivana  hell,  iv,  89. 
Sawhita  of  Veda,  xi,  78,  201,  259. 

See  Mantrasawhita. 
Sawkarikara^a   sins,   xi,   69.      See 

Penance  for. 
Sampratapana  hell,  IV,  89. 
Sawskaras.     See  Sacraments. 
Sawtapana  Krikkhra.  penance,  v,  20  ; 

xi,  125,  165,  174. 

—  description  of,  xi,  213. 
SapWa  relative,  11,  247  ;  xi,  183. 

—  begetting    son    with    widow    of 

SapWa,  ix,  59,  147. 

—  definition  of  term,  v,  60  ;  another 

definition,  ix,  186. 


SapiWa,  impurity  on  birth  or  death 
of,  v,  58-59,  61-64,  67-70, 72-79, 
83-84. 

—  inherits,  ix,  187. 

—  marriage  with  female,  forbidden, 

in,  5;  xi,  172-173. 
SapWikara«a,  III,  247-248. 
Sarahgi,  wife  of  Mandapala,  ix,  23. 
Sarasvati,  goddess,  oblation  to,  viii, 

105. 

—  river,  p.  xlv;  II,  17  ;  xi,  78. 
Sarpas,  snake-deities,  1,  37. 
Sarva^a-Narayawa,    commentator 

of  Manu,  p.  xiii,  xxxvii,  c,  cxi, 

cxxviii-cxxx. 
Sarvatmabhuti,  deity,  in,  91. 
Sattra,  performer  of,  sacrifice  never 

impure,  v,  93. 
Sattva.     See  Goodness. 
Satvata  caste,  x,  23. 
Satyanr/ta  trade,  IV,  4,  6. 
Saumya  manes,  in,  199. 
Savitri  rite.     See  Initiation,  Vratya. 
Savitri  verse,  n,  148  ;  xi,  195,  226. 

—  efficacy  of  recitation,  n,  78-82, 

102,  118. 

—  manner  of  recitation,  n,  101,  104. 

—  mother  of  the  student,  n,  170. 
Sayarca-Madhava,  p.  xlix. 

Sea,  trade  by,  viii,  157,  406. 

—  voyages  by,  forbidden,  III,  158. 
Seed-corn,  offences  with  respect  to, 

ix,  291. 
Self.     See  Soul. 
Self-defence   permitted,  viii,   348- 

.351. 
Seniority.      See  Brahma«a,   Ksha- 

triya,    Srotriya,  Sudra,  Vaijya, 

Wife. 
Service,   excludes   from    Sraddhas, 

ni,  153. 

—  forbidden  to  Brahmawa,  iv,  4,  6. 

—  with  Sudras,  a  sin,  xi,  70.     See 

King,  service  of;  Sudra,  duties 
of. 
Singer,  adultery  with  wife  of,  vin, 
362-363. 

—  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in,  155. 

—  following  profession  of,  an  Upa- 

pataka,  xi,  66. 

—  to   be   banished,  ix,  225.      See 

Bard. 
Sins,  classification  of,  xi,  55-71.    See 

Penance. 
Sipping  water,  n,  222  ;  v,  86-87, 138, 

142-145- 


INDEX. 


605 


Sipping  water,  manner  of,  II,  58-62  ; 

v,  139. 
Sister,  II,  50,   133.     See  Brother, 

Incest. 
Skanda-pura«a,  pp.  xcvi,  cvi. 
Slave,  classes  of,  iv,  253-256  ;   Vin, 

415. 

—  disqualified  to  earn  property,  viii, 

416-417;    to  be  witness,  viii, 
66  ;  exception,  viii,  70. 

—  food  of  Sudra,  eatable,  iv,  253. 

—  quarrels  with,  forbidden,  iv,  180, 

185. 

—  offspring  of  female,  ix,  55.     See 

Son,  illegitimate,  of  Sudra. 

—  sexual  intercourse  with  female, 

viii,  363. 
Sleeping,  purification  after,  v,  145. 

—  rules  regarding,  for  student,  II, 

108;  for  Snataka,  iv,  57,  75,  92. 

—  at  sunset  and  sunrise  forbidden, 

II,  219-221;  IV,  55. 

Smr/'ti.     See  Tradition. 

SmWtima^ari,  of  Govindara^a,  pp. 
xxi,  cxxvii. 

Smritiviveka,  of  Medhatithi,  p.  cxxiii. 

Snataka  (Brahmawa  who  has  com- 
pleted his  studentship). 

—  definition  of  term,  IV,  31. 

—  duties  of:    acceptance   of  food, 

iv,  205-225,  250,  253  ;  of  gifts 
and  begging,  iv,  33-34,  84- 
91,  186-191,  247-252  ;  x,  113- 
114;  xi,  1-6;  bathing,  iv,  45, 
129,  152,  201-203;  dress,  iv, 
18,  34-36,  66;  eating,  rules 
for,  IV,  43,  45,  55,  58,  62-63, 
65,  74-76  ;  general  behaviour, 
righteousness,  truthfulness,  &c, 
iv,  15-16,  18,  72,  145-H6,  155- 
185,  204,  236-246;  hospitality, 
iv,  29-32  ;  liberality,  iv,  192- 
197,  227-235;  interruptions  of 
Veda-study,  iv,  101-127;  per- 
formance of  daily  rites,  iv,  14, 
21-24,  92_94,  x52  >  °f  Srauta- 
sacrifices,  iv,  25-28,  226;  resi- 
dence, iv,  60-61 ;  sleeping,  rv,57, 
75, 92 ;  studying  the  Veda,  &c, 
iv,  17-20,  95-100,  146-149; 
voiding  excrements,  IV,  45-52, 
152;  miscellaneous  rules,  iv, 
37-42,  44,  53-59,  63-83,  128, 
130-144,  150-154- 
• —  may  retire  from  the  world,  IV, 
257-258. 


Snataka,   receives  the   honey-mix- 
ture, in,  119. 

—  way  to  be  made  for,  11, 138-139. 
Soma,  deity,  111,  87,  211 ;   ix,  129  ; 

xi,  255. 

—  plant,  sale  of,  forbidden,  in,  158, 

180;  x,  80. 
Somapa  manes,  in,  197-198. 
Soma-sacrifices,  iv,  26;  xi,  7-10. 
Somasad  manes,  in,  195. 
Son,    duties    towards    parents,    11, 

145-148,  225-227.    See  Father, 

Mother. 

—  duty  of  begetting  a,  11,  28;  re- 

ward for  fulfilment  of,  ix,  137- 
138.     See  Debts,  the  three. 

—  forsaking,  an  Upapataka,  xi,  60 ; 

punishment  for,  viii,  389. 

—  has  no  property,  viii,  416  ;   ex- 

ceptions, ix,  206. 

—  has  no  right  to  parents'  estate 

during  their  lifetime,  ix,  104. 

—  inherits  from  father,  ix,  104, 156- 

157,  185;  from  mother,  viii, 
104,  192,  195. 

—  liable  for  father's  debts  and  ex- 

ceptions, viii,  159,  166. 

—  may  be  beaten,   iv,   164 ;   viii, 

299-300. 

—  offences  against  parents,  in,  157, 

159.     See  Father,  Mother. 

—  punishment  fordefaming,vin,275. 

—  quarrels  with,  forbidden,  iv,  180, 

184. 

—  adopted,  ix,  141-142,  159, 168. 

—  begot  on  wife  or  widow,  ix,  31- 

56;  ix,  143-147,  i59,  162-165, 
167,  190-191.  See  Appoint- 
ment of  widows. 

—  born  after  partition,  ix,  216. 

—  born  secretly,  ix,  159, 170. 

—  bought,  ix,  160,  174. 

—  cast  off,  ix,  159,  171. 

—  eldest,  excellence  of,  ix,  106-107, 

109 ;  inherits  alone,  ix,  105, 108- 
109;  share  of,  ix,  1 1 2-1 14,  115, 
117,  119.     See  Brother,  eldest. 

—  illegitimate,  of  Sudra,  ix,  179. 

—  legitimate,  ix,  159,  162-166. 

—  made,  ix,  159,  169. 

—  middlemost,  share  of,  ix,  1 1 2-1 13. 

—  of    appointed     daughter.      See 

Daughter,  appointed. 

—  of  pregnant  bride,  ix,  160,  173. 

—  of  remarried  woman,  in,  155,181; 

IX,  160,  175-176. 


6o6 


LAWS    OF   MANU. 


Son,  of  Sudra  wife,  ix,  151,  153-155, 
160,  178. 

—  of  unmarried  daughter,  IX,  160, 

172. 

—  second,  share  of,  ix,  117. 

—  self-given,  ix,  160,  177. 

—  youngest,  share  of,  ix,  112-113. 
Sons,  by  wives  of  different  castes, 

share  of,  ix,  148-155. 

—  seniority    among,  by    wives    of 

equal  caste,  ix,  122-126,  156- 

i57. 

—  subsidiary,  enumeration,  ix,  159- 

160  ;  character  of,  ix,  161,  181 ; 

right   to    inherit   or   share,    1, 

165,  180. 
Son-in-law,  entertained  at  Sraddha, 

in,  148.     See  Bridegroom. 
Sopaka  caste,  x,  38. 
Sorcery.     See  Magic. 
Soul,  xii,  12-14. 

—  knowledge  of  supreme,  leads  to 

final  liberation,  vi,  29,  49,  82- 
84;  xii,  83,  85,91-93,  118-125. 

Spiritual  guide.     See  Teacher. 

Spirituous  liquor,  kinds  of,  xi,  94- 

95- 

—  debt  for,  not  recoverable,  viii, 

159.  See  Drinking  spirituous 
liquor ;  Publican ;  Woman,  fine 
for  drinking  spirituous  liquor. 

Spy,  employed  by  king,  vii,  122,153- 
154,223;  ix,  256,261,298. 

Staff,  of  Snataka,  iv,  36. 

—  of  student,  11,  45-47,  64,  174. 
Stridhana.     See  Woman,  property 

of. 
Student,  breach  of  vow  of,  III,  155. 
See  Penance  for. 

—  cannot  be  made  a  witness,  viii,  65. 

—  does  not  become  impure  by  births 

and  deaths,  v,  93. 

—  duration  of  residence  with  teacher, 

in,  1. 

—  duties  of  and  restrictions  imposed 

on,  11,  41-75, 108,  1 17-139,  144- 
150,161-162,173-212,  216-240. 

—  entertained  at  Sraddha,  11,  189- 

190;  in,  186;  not  to  be  enter- 
tained, in,  151. 

—  may  perform  obsequies  of  teacher, 

parents,  &c,  v,  65,  91,  but  must 
not  offer  libations  to  other  rela- 
tives, v,  88. 

—  mode  of  personal  purification,  v, 

137. 


Student,  must  not  pay  stipulated  fee, 
11,  245;  in,  156. 

—  pays  no  toll  at  ferry,  viii,  407. 

—  personating  a  student,  an  offence, 

iv,  200. 

—  receives  alms  at  Vaijvadeva,  in, 

94. 

—  perpetual  or  professed,  n,  242- 

244,  247-249. 

—  returned  home,  n,  245-246;  in, 

2-4.     See  Pupil,  Teacher. 

Subrahmawya  texts,  ix,  126. 

Sub-teacher.     See  Upadhyaya. 

Subtraction  of  gifts.  See  Resump- 
tion. 

Sudas,  a  king,  vn,  41 ;  viii,  no. 

Sudhanvan  caste,  x,  23. 

Suicide,  no  libations  offered  to,  v,  89. 

Sukalin  manes,  III,  197. 

Sumati  Bhargava,  recast  of  Manu's 
laws  by,  pp.  xvii,  xcv. 

Sumukha,  a  king,  vn,  41. 

Suparwas,  bird-deities,  vn,  23. 

— -  manes  of,  III,  196. 

—  origin  of,  I,  37 ;  XII,  44. 
Supersession.     See  Wife. 
Suppression  of  breath.     See  Pra«a- 

yama. 
Sura.     See  Spirituous  liquor. 
Surety,  VIII,  158-162,  169. 
Suta  caste,  x,  26. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  47. 

—  origin  of,  X,  11,  17. 
Suvar«a,  value  of,  viii,  134,  137. 
Svarg-it  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 
Svaro&sha  Manu,  1,  62. 
Svayambhu,  1,  3,  6,  92,  94 ;  v,  39 ; 

ix,  138.     See  Brahman. 
Svayawdatta.     See  Son,  self-given. 

Sabara-bhashya,  p.  cxii. 

Saikha  caste,  x,  21. 

•Saka  race,  pp.  cxiv,  cxvii ;  x,  44. 

iSakala  oblations,  XI,  201,  257. 

•Salmala  hell,  iv,  90. 

Sivasawkalpa  text,  xi,  251. 

•Sraddha,  funeral  sacrifice,  causes 
interruption  of  Veda-study,  III, 
188;  iv,  iio-iii,  117. 

—  offered    by    son     of    appointed 

daughter,  ix,  127,  132,  140;  by 
adopted  son,  ix,  142  ;  to  three 
ancestors,  ix,  186. 

—  daily,  III,  70,  72,  74,  80-83,  283. 

—  for  lately  deceased  person.     See 

Ekoddish/a. 


INDEX. 


607 


.Sraddha,  monthly,  description  of,  nr, 
187,  203-253,  256-265,  279,  282. 

materials  for,  111,123,  267-272. 

number  of  guests  at,  III,  125- 

126,  129. 

persons  not  to  be  fed  at,  III, 

150-167. 
persons  to  be  fed  at,  II,  189- 

190;  111,128-149,183-186. 
results   of  feeding   unworthy 

guests  at,  III,  133,  168-182. 
rewards  for  performing,  in, 

127,  277,  282. 

times  for  performing,  in,  122, 

273-282. 

—  special  kinds  of,  in,  254. 
Srauta-sacrifices.     See  Sacrifices. 
Srava#a,  month,  iv,  95. 

Sri,  deity,  III,  89. 

Srotriya,  a  learned  Brahmawa,  pp. 
xlviii-xlix;  iv,  205;  vin,  394. 

—  cannot  be  made  a  witness,  viii,  65. 
> —  descendant    of,   sanctifies    com- 
pany, in,  184. 

—  fine  for  not  entertaining  virtuous, 

vin,  393. 

—  free  from  taxes,  vn,  133. 

—  gift  of  food  to,  iv,  31. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  81. 

—  niggardly,  and  liberal  usurer,  iv, 

224-225. 

—  property  of,  not  lost  by  law  of 

limitation,  vin,  149. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  hi, 

120. 

—  to  be  honoured  and  supported  by 

king,  vn,  134-136;  viii,  395- 

•Srotriyas,  seniority  among,  II,  134. 

£ruti.     See  Veda. 

Suddhidipika,  of  Narayarca,  p.  cxxx. 

Sudra,  caste,  cannot  commit  an  of- 
fence causing  loss  of  caste,  x,  1 2  6. 

—  disabilities,  not    allowed    to    be 

initiated,  x,  4 ;  to  be  judge, 
vin,  20-21  ;  to  carry  out  dead 
Brahmawa,  v,  104;  to  fulfil 
the  sacred  law  except  certain 
portions,  iv,  223  ;  x,  126- 
127;  to  hear,  learn,  recite,  or 
teach  Veda,  in,  156;  iv,  99; 
x,  127;  to  receive  leavings  at 
.Sraddha,  in,  249 ;  to  receive 
spiritual  advice  from  Brahma/za, 
iv,  80-81  ;  exception,  x,  2 ; 
to  sacrifice,  III,  178;  to  travel 
with  Snataka,  iv,  140. 


Sudra,  duties  and  occupations,  1,  9 1 ; 
Vin,  410,  418  ;  ix,  334-335  5  in 
times  of  distress,  x,  99-100, 
121-129. 

—  food   and  gifts  of,  unlawful  for 

Brahma«a,  in,  164;  iv,  211,218, 
223;  xi,  24-25;  exception,  iv, 

253- 

—  forcible  appropriation  of  Sudra's 

property  by  Brahmawa,  VIII, 
417;  xi,  13. 

—  guilt  of,  in  cases  of  theft,  vin,  337. 

—  killing  a,  an  Upapataka,  xi,  67. 

See  Penance  for  killing. 

—  kings,  iv,  61. 

—  labourers  to  work  for  king,  vn,  138. 

—  manes  of,  III,  197. 

—  origin  of,  I,  31,  87 ;  xn,  43. 

—  position  of,  naturally  a  slave,  viii, 

413-414. 

—  presence    of   many,   destroys   a 

country,  viii,  22. 

—  punishment    for    adultery    with 

Aryan  woman,  viii,  374 ;  for 
assaulting  men  of  higher  caste, 
viii,  279-283  ;  ix,  248  ;  for  de- 
faming men  of  higher  caste, 
viii,  267,  270-277  ;  for  neglect 
of  duty  in  next  birth,  xn,  72. 

—  residence  of,  II,  24. 

—  rules  of  inheritance,  ix,  157, 179. 

—  special  rules  of  administration  of 

oath,  viii,  113;  of  burial,  v,  92  ; 
of  examination  as  witness,  viii, 
88;  of  impurity,  v,  83,  99;  of 
marriage,  in,  44 ;  of  naming, 
II,  31-32  ;  of  purification,  II,  62  ; 
of  saluting,  II,  127,  137;  of 
shaving,  v,  140 ;  of  sipping  water, 
v,  139-140. 

—  visitor  not  a  guest,  but  fed,  in, 

no,  112. 

—  witness  for  Sudras,  viii,  68. 

—  wives  permitted  to,  in,  13;  ix,  157. 
Sudras,  seniority  among,  11,  155. 
Sudra,  female,  marriage  and  sexual 

intercourse  of  Aryans  with,  p. 
xxvii;  in,  13-19,  44,  64,  155, 
191,  250;  viii,  383-385;  xi, 
179.     See  Son  of  Sudra  wife. 

Sulka.     See  Nuptial  fee. 

Surasenakas,  a  tribe,  n,  19  ;  vn,  193. 

Svapaka  caste,  III,  92. 

—  origin  of,  x,  19. 

—  position  and  occupation  of,  x,  51- 

56. 


6o8 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Svavritti,  service,  iv,  4,  6. 

Tailor,  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brah- 

ma«a,  iv,  214. 
Tamas.     See  Darkness. 
Tamasa,  Manu,  1,  62. 
Tamisra  hell,  iv,  88,  165 ;  xn,  75. 
Tank,  punishment  for  destroying, 

ix,  279. 

—  sale  of,  a  crime,  xi,  62. 

—  settlement  of  boundary  of,  VIII, 

262.     See  Water. 
Tapana  hell,  iv,  89. 
Taptakri&kbra.  penance,  XI,  157,  215. 
Taratsamandiya  hymn,  xi,  254. 
Tarpawa.  See  Libation  to  the  manes. 
Taxes,  vii,  118,  127-132,  137-139; 

x,  118,  120. 

—  exemptions  from,  vn,  133-136; 

viii,  394. 

—  son  not  liable  for  unpaid,  viii,  159. 
Teacher,  a^arya,  definition  of  term, 

11, 140. 

—  duties  of,  11,  69,  73, 159-161 ;  iv, 

164. 

—  duties  towards.     See  Student. 

—  entertained  at  Sraddha,  in,  148. 

—  fee  of,  11,  245-246  ;  111,  95  ;  stipu- 

lated fee  forbidden,  m,  156  ; 
xi,  63. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  V,  80. 

—  inherits  from  pupil,  ix,  187. 

—  non-Brahmanical,  11, 2  3  8, 24 1-242. 

—  not  a  guest,  in,  no. 

—  offences  against,  in,  153  ;  xi,  56, 

60 ;  punishment  for  offences, 
viii,  275.  See  Penance  for 
adultery  with  Guru's  wife. 

—  presents  a  cow  and  the  honey- 

mixture  to  student,  111,  3. 

—  receives  the  honey-mixture,  111, 

119. 

—  reverence  towards  and   venera- 

bility  of,  11,  144-154,  170-171, 
225-235  ;  iv,  130,  162,179,  l82« 

—  selection  of  pupils  by.    See  Pupil. 

—  Sudra,  III,  156. 

Teacher's  son,  behaviour  towards, 
II,  208-209,  247« 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  80. 
Teacher's  teacher,  11,  205. 
Teacher's  wives,  behaviour  towards, 

11,  210-212,  216-217,  247. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  v,  80. 
Teaching,  duty  of  the  Brahmawa,  I, 

88;  x,  1-2,75-76,80. 


Teaching,  unworthy  men  permitted, 

x,  103, 109-111. 
Temple,  punishment  for  violation 

of,  ix,  280,  285. 
Temple-priest,  excluded  from  Srad- 

dha,  in,  152,  180. 
Theft,  viii,  6. 

—  anybody  may  be  witness  in  cases 

of,  viii,  72. 

—  definition  of,  viii,   332 ;  excep- 

tions, viii,  339,  341 ;  xi,  11-23. 

—  guilt  of  men  of  various  castes  in 

cases  of,  viii,  336-337. 

—  punishments  for,  criminal,  viii, 

314-315,  319-331,333-334;  ix, 
277,  280,  293  ;  in  next  life,  xi, 
50-52;  xii,  60-68.  See  Pro- 
perty, stolen. 
Theft  of  gold,  a  mortal  sin,  ix,  235 ; 
xi,  55. 

—  penance  for.     See  Penance. 

—  punishment  for,  criminal,  ix,  237 ; 

in  next  life,  xi,  49 ;  xn,  57. 

—  sins  equal  to,  xi,  58. 

Thief,  disqualified  to  be  a  witness, 
viii,  67. 

—  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in,  150. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahmawa, 

iv,  210. 

—  to  be  executed  only,  if  taken  with 

stolen  goods,  &c,  ix,  270. 
Thieves,  abettors  of,  to  be  punished, 
ix,  271,  278. 

—  manner  of  discovering,  ix,  261- 

269.     See  Rogues. 
Time,  divisions  of,  1,  24,  64-73. 

—  origin  of,  I,  24. 

Times  of  distress.  See  Castes  mixed, 
Occupations ;  Teacher,  non- 
Brahmanical. 

Tirthas,  parts  of  the  hand,  n,  58- 

59- 
Tolls,  at  a  ferry,  viii,  404-405,  407. 
Town,  pasture-ground  around,  viii, 

237. 

—  punishment  for  destroying,  wall, 

gate,  &c.  of,  ix,  289. 

—  to  be  built  by  king,  vn,  70. 
Trade,  degrades  Brahma«a,  in,  64, 

152, 181 ;  viii,  102. 

—  obligatory  on  Vauya,  1,  90 ;  VIII, 

410,   418;    ix,    326,    329-333; 
X,  79. 

—  permitted  to  Brahma«a,  iv,  4,  6  ; 

in  times  of  distress,  x,  85 ;  re- 
strictions, x,  86-94. 


INDEX. 


609 


Trade,  permitted  to  Kshatriya  in 
time  of  distress,  x,  95. 

—  regulated  by  king,  vni,  401-402. 

See     Contract,    Duties,     Sea, 

Taxes. 
Trader,  punishments  of  dishonest, 

viii,  399;  ix,  257,  286-287,  291. 
Trades,  theory  of,  vn,  43. 
Tradition,  sacred,  definition  of,  11, 10. 

—  source  of  the  sacred  law,  11,  6, 

9-12. 
Trainer  of  dogs,  elephants,  &c,  ex- 
cluded from  Sraddha,  in,  162, 
164. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahmawa, 

iv,  216. 
Transmigration,  1,  28-29,  55~56;  v> 

164;  vi,  61-65;  ix,  30;  xi,  25; 

xn,  15-22,  41-81. 
Treasure -trove,  viii,  35-39. 
Treta  age,  1,  83,  85,  86  ;  ix,  301-302. 
Tridaw^in,  definition  of,  xn,  10. 
Trzwa&keta,  in,  185. 
Trisuparwa,  in,  185. 
Trivr/'t  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 
Truthfulness,  duty  of,  II,  179;  iv, 

I38-i39,  170-178,  &c 
Turayawa  sacrifice,  vi,  10. 
Twice-born  man.    See  Aryan. 
Twilight-devotions,  n,  1 01-104,  222  ; 

iv,   93-94.     See  Penance  for 

neglect  of. 

Udgatri  priest,  receives  a  cart,  vin, 

209. 
Ugra  caste,  x,  13, 15, 19. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahmawa, 

iv,  212. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  49. 

—  origin  of,  x,  9. 
Unnatural  crime,  xi,  174-175. 
Upadhyaya,  sub-teacher,  definition 

of,  11,  141. 

—  may  be  buried  by  student,  v,  91. 

—  venerability  of,  11,  145. 
Upakarman,  opening  of  school-term, 

iv,  95,  119. 
Upanishads,  vi,  29;   xi,  263.     See 

Rahasya. 
Upapataka  sins,  enumeration  of,  xi, 

60-67.     See  Penance  for. 
Ujanas-smriti,  pp.  xxvii,  xxxv,  lxii. 
Usurer,  excluded  from  Sraddha,  in, 

i53>  180. 

—  food  of,  forbidden  to  Brahma«a, 

IV,  210,  220. 

[*5]  R 


Usurer,  liberal  and  niggardly  Svo- 

triya,  iv,  224-225. 
Usury,  an  Upapataka,  xi,  62.     See 

Interest,  Lending  money. 
Utathya,  son  of,  p.  xxvi ;  in,  16. 

Vaideha  caste,  x,  19. 

—  descendants  of,  x,  26,  31,  33,  36- 

37. 

—  occupation  of,  x,  47. 

—  origin  of,  x,  11,  17. 

—  position  of,  X,  13. 
Vaidiks,  pp.  xlvii-xlviii. 
Vaikhanasa.     See  Hermit. 

—  Sutra,  pp.  xxvii-xxix;  vi,  21. 
Vaimanika  deities,  xn,  48. 
Vaijvadeva  offering,  in,  83, 108, 121. 

—  description  of,  in,  84-86. 
Vaijvanari  ishri,  xi,  27. 

Vai-rya,  caste,  duties  and  occupations 
of,  1,  90;  vin,  410,  418;  IX, 
326-333;  x,  78-80;  in  times  of 
distress,  x,  98. 

—  forcible  appropriation  of  Vai-rya's 

property  by  Brahmawa,  xi,  12. 

—  guilt  in  cases  of  theft,  vin,  337. 

—  indigent,    to    be    employed    by 

Brahmawa,  vin,  411-412. 

—  killing  a,  an  Upapataka,  xi,  67. 

See  Penance  for  killing. 

—  manes  of,  in,  197. 

—  origin  of,  1,  31,  87. 

—  punishment  of  Vaijya  for  adultery, 

vni,  375-377,  382,  384;  for 
defamation,  vin,  267,  269,  277  ; 
for  neglect  of  duty,  in  next  life, 
xn,  72. 

—  special   rules   of  administration 

of  oath,  vin,  113;  of  burial, 
V,  92 ;  of  examination  as  wit- 
ness, vin,  88 ;  of  impurity,  v, 
83,  99  ;  of  Kcranta,  n,  65  ;  of 
naming,  n,  31-32;  of  purifica- 
tion, 11,  62  ;  of  saluting,  n,  127  ; 
of  studentship,  n,  41,  42,  44,  45, 
46,  49,  190. 

—  visitor  not  a  guest,  but  fed,  in, 

no,  112. 

—  wives  permitted  to,  in,  13. 
Vaijya  female,  punishment  for  adul- 
tery with,  vin,  382-383,  385. 

Vaijyas,  seniority  among,   n,  155. 

See  Sons,  by  wives  of  several 

castes. 
Vaivasvata  Manu,  1,  62. 
Vamadeva,  a  sage,  x,  106. 

r 


6io 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Varahamihira,  p.  xcvii. 

Varuwa,  in,  87;  v,  96;  vn,  4,  7; 

vni,  82,  106;  ix,  244-245,  303, 

308;  xi,  253,  255. 
Vasish/^a,  lawgiver,  quoted,  pp.  xxix- 

xxx ;  vni,  140. 

—  Pra^apati,  1,  35  ;  in,  198. 

—  sage,  vni,  no;  ix,  23. 

—  hymn  of,  XI,  250. 

Vasish^a  Dharmajastra,  pp.  xviii-xx, 
xxii,  xxx-xxxiv,  lii,  lxviii,  lxix, 
xcix,  cii,  cxix. 

Vassals  of  king,  punishment  of  neg- 
ligent, ix,  272. 

Vastoshpati,  deity,  in,  89. 

Vasus,  in,  284;  xi,  222. 

Vatedhana  caste,  x,  21. 

Vatsa,  sage,  vni,  116. 

Vayu,  deity,  v,  96  ;  vn,  4,  7 ;  IX,  42, 

303, 306;  xr,  120. 
Veda,   conflicting    passages    of,   all 
authoritative,  n,  14-15. 

—  definition  of  the  term,  11,  10. 

—  first  source  of  the  law,  11,  6-15. 

—  greatness  and  power  of,  1,  2 1 ; 

xii,  94-104. 

—  offences  against,  cavilling  at,  in, 

161 ;  iv,  163  ;  xi,  57 ;  divulging, 
see  Penance  for;  Sudra,  dis- 
abilities; forgetting,  xi,  57; 
scorning,  II,  11. 

—  origin  of,  1,  23  ;  xii,  49. 

—  purifying  power  of,  xi,  264.    See 

Veda-study. 

—  recitation  of.     See  Veda-study. 

—  riddles  from,  in,  231. 

—  stealing  the,  11, 116 ;  xi,  51.   See 

Atharvan;  Brahmawa,  Mantra- 
sawhita,  Rahasya,  Rig-veda, 
Sawhita,  Saman,  Sama-veda, 
Upanishads,  Ya^ur-veda. 

Vedanta,  11,  160;  vi,  83,  94. 

Vedasawnyasika.  See  Ascetic,  in- 
formal. 

Veda-study,  ceremonies  on  begin- 
ning, 11,  70-74 ;  v,  145. 

—  destroys  guilt,  xi,  246-247.     See 

Veda,  purifying  power. 

—  duration  of  annual  term,  pp.  xlvi- 

xlvii ;  iv,  95-96. 

—  duty  of,  11,  28,  156-158,  164-168  ; 

iv,  17-20,  35;  VI,  36-37,  83; 
vii,  43;  x,  1,  75-78;  xii,  83. 

—  general  rule  of,  iv,  99-100. 

—  interruptions  of,  in,  188  ;  iv,  101- 

127  ;  exceptions,  n,  105-106. 


n- 

: 


Veda-study,  neglect  of,  in,  151.  See 
Penance  for  neglecting. 

—  private  daily,  duty  of,  n,  106, 166- 

167;  in,  70,74,81;  iv,  58,  145- 
149;  vi,  8. 

neglect  of,  an  Upapataka,  xi, 

60;  results  of,  in,  63.  See 
Penance. 

rewards  for,  n,  107;   in,  66. 

See  Muttered  prayer,  Vows. 

Vedic  schools,  development  and  dis- 
ruption of,  pp.  xlvi-liii. 

Vedotsarga,  iv,  96-97,  119. 

Vena,  king,  vn,  41 ;  ix,  66-67. 

Vena,  caste,  x,  19,  49. 

Vice,  the  eighteen  vices  of  a  king, 
vn,  45-53. 

Vi^anman  caste,  X,  23. 

Vikhanas,  institutes  of.  See  Vai- 
khanasa-sutra. 

Village,  boundaries  of.  See  Boun- 
daries. 

—  pasture-ground  around,  vni,  237. 
Vinajana,  a  place,  n,  21. 
Vindhya  mountains,  11,  21. 
Violence,  anybody  may  be  witnes 

in  cases  of,  vni,  72. 

—  a  title  of  the  law,  vni,  6,  344- 

351. 
Vh%  deity,  p.  lxiv;  1,  32-33;  m> 

.  ^95. 
Virasana,  a  posture,  xi,  1 1 1. 
Vish/zu,  xn,  121. 
Vish»u-smr/ti,  pp.  xxi-xxiii,  xliv,  h 

lxvi,  lxx-lxxi,  Ixxiii,  cxxii. 
Vuva^it  sacrifice,  xi,  75. 
Vijvamitra,  sage,  vn,  42  ;  x,  108. 
Vijvejvara-bha^a,  p.  cxxv. 
Vows,  for  the  Veda-study,  11,  28, 

^  165,  173-174. 
Vratya,  n,  39;  x,  20;  xi,  63. 

—  descendants  of,  x,  21-23. 

—  intercourse  with, forbidden,  n,  40. 

—  sacrificing  for,  xi,  198. 

—  sexual  intercourse   with  female 

vni,  373.  See  Initiation  ;  Pen- 
ance for  neglect  of  initiation. 

Vr/ddha  Manu,  pp.  xcii,  xevi-xevii. 

Vr/'ddhi-jraddha,  in,  254. 

Vyahr/tis,  II,  76,  78,  81 ;  VI,  70;  XJ 
223,  249. 

Wages,  non-payment  of,  vni,  5, 
215-218. 

—  of  herdsmen,  vni,  231. 

—  of  royal  servants,  vn,  125-126. 


INDEX. 


611 


Warfare,  rules  of,  vii,  87-94,  164- 

167,  170-171,  181-199. 
Washerman,  food  of,  forbidden  to 

Brahmawa,  iv,  219. 

—  rules  for  washing,  vni,  396. 
Water,    indivisible    property,    ix, 

219. 

—  penance  for  stealing,  xi,  164. 

—  prohibition  against  defilement  of, 

iv,  46,  48,56;  xi,  174- 

—  punishment  for  diverting  or  steal- 

ing, in,  163;  ix,  274,  281. 
Water-pot,  duty  of  carrying,  iv,  36. 

—  how  replaced,  11,  64. 
Way,  right  of,  11,  138-139. 
Weaver,  amount  of  cloth  to  be  re- 
turned by,  vni,  397. 

Weights,  enumeration  of,  of  copper, 
silver,  and  gold,  vni,  1 31-137. 

—  to  be  examined  by  king,   vni, 

403. 
Well,  boundaries  of,  vni,  262. 
Widow,  duties  of  faithful,  v,  156- 

160,  165-166.   » 

—  keeps    ornaments,   worn   during 

husband's  lifetime,  ix,  200. 

—  son  of,  excluded  from  Sraddha, 

in,  156,174-175.  See  Appoint- 
ment of  widow;  Marriage,  se- 
cond ;  Son  begotten  on  widow ; 
Son  of  remarried  woman. 
Wife,  acquires  qualities  of  husband, 
ix,  22-24. 

—  and  husband  indissolubly  united, 

ix,  45-46. 

—  dines  separately,  iv,  43.  • 

—  duties  and  position  of,  v,  148-15 1, 

153-156;  ix,  2-7,  io-ii,  26-30, 
96,  101-102 ;  of  wife  of  emi- 
grant, ix,  74-76.  • 

—  explanation  of  term,  ix,  8. 

—  fine  for  drinking  spirituous  liquor, 

&c,  IX,  84. 

—  has  no  property,  vni,  416;  ex- 

ceptions. See  Woman,  pro- 
perty of. 

—  inherits,  ix,  187  note. 

—  manner  of  burning  dead,  V,  167- 

168. 

—  may  be  beaten,  vni,  299-300.  » 

—  not  to  make  hoard  from  husband's 

property,  ix,  199. 

—  penance  for  unfaithful,  xi,  177- 

178. 

—  punishment  for   defaming,  vni, 

275;  for  forsaking,  vni,  389. 

r  r 


Wife,  qualifications  required  for,  in, 
4-1 1 ;  exceptions,  11,  238-240. 

—  repudiation  and  supersession,  ix, 

46,  77-85,  95- 

—  sale  of,  ix,  46 ;    an  Upapataka, 

xi,  62. 
Wind.     See  Vayu. 
Witnesses,  conflict  of,  vni,  73. 

—  duty  of  speaking  the  truth,  VIII, 

74,  76. 

—  exhortation  of,  vni,  79-86,  89- 

101. 

—  manner  of  examination,  vni,  87- 

88. 

—  moral  guilt  of  perjured,  vni,  75, 

82, 89, 93-101 ;  exceptions,  vni, 
103-106,  112. 

—  number  of,  required,  vni,  60,  66, 

77. 

—  persons  disqualified  to  be,  vni, 

64-67. 

—  persons  qualified  to  be,  vni,  62- 

63;  in  special  cases,  vin,  68-72, 
254,  256,  258-262. 

—  punishment  of,  for  refusal  of  evi- 

dence, vni,  107;  for  perjury, 
see  Perjury. 

—  suffer  for  others,  vni,  169. 

—  to  whom  misfortune  happen,  pay 

debt,  vni,  108.     See  Evidence. 
Wives,  all  mothers  through  one  son, 
ix,  183. 

—  of  several  castes,  111,  12-13;  ix, 

85-87. 

—  seniority  among,  of  equal  caste, 

ix,  124-125.  See  Adultery, 
Connubial  intercourse,  Hus- 
band, Marriage,  Son  begotten 
on  widow  or  wife. 
Woman,  adhering  to  heretical  sect, 
receives  no  libation,  v,  90. 

—  always   dependent,  v,  147-149; 

ix,  2-3. 

—  causing  abortion,  receives  no  liba- 

tion, v,  90. 

—  impure  on  birth  of  child,  iv,  2 1 2  ; 

v,  85. 

—  impurity  on  death  of,  V,  72. 

—  killing  a,  an  Upapataka,  xi,  67 ; 

disqualifies  for  readmission  into 
caste,  xi,  191.  See  Penance 
for  killing. 

—  killing  husband,  receives  no  liba- 

tion, v,  90. 

—  menstruating,  111,45-46;  iv,  40-41, 

57, 208  ;v,  66,  85,108;  xi,  174. 


6l2 


LAWS    OF    MANU. 


Woman,  mouth  of  a,  always  pure,  v, 
130. 

—  naked,  not  to  be  looked  at,  iv, 

53- 

—  names  of,  11,  33  ;  in,  9. 

—  naturally  wicked  nature  of,  11, 

213-215 ;  ix,  17-20. 

—  not  allowed  to  recite  Veda,  ix, 

18;  nor  to  sacrifice,  IV,  205- 
206 ;  xi,  36-37. 

—  pregnant,  committing  a  nuisance, 

ix,  283;  pays  no  toll  at  a  ferry, 
viii,  407. 
~4  property  of,  appropriation  by 
males  punishable,  viii,  29;  de- 
finition of,  ix,  194;  succession 
to,  ix,  104,  131,  192-193,  195- 
198. 

—  punishment  of  wicked,  in  next 

life,  xii,  69. 

—  remarried,  husband  of,  excluded 

from   Sraddha,   in,    166.     See 
Marriage,  second;   Son  of  re- 
married woman. 
~\-  rights  to,  not  lost  by  law  of  limi- 
tation, vin,  149. 

—  rule  of  sipping  water  for,  v,  139. 
-f-  sacraments  for,  performed  with- 
out Mantras,  n,  66. 


Woman,  six  causes  of  the  ruin  of,  ix, 

13. 
-4-  special  punishment  for  a,  ix,  230. 

—  unchaste,  food  of,  forbidden  to 

Brahma«a,  iv,2ii,  220;  receives 
no  libation,  v,  90. 

—  without  guardian,  protected  by 

king,  vin,  28. 

-4-  without  male  relative,  food  of, 
forbidden,  iv,  213. 

^WojnjBft,  treatment  of,  in,  55-62  ; 
witnesses  for  women,  vin,  68. 
See  Betrothal,  Bride,  Daughter, 
Marriage,  Mother,  Sister,  Wi- 
dow, Wife. 

Writing,  pp.  xcix-ci ;  viii,  154  note, 
168.    See  Documents,  Edicts. 

Ya^avalkya-smrc'ti,  pp.  xlviii,  xlix, 
lv,  lxxiii,  xcix,  ci-civ,  cvii,  cxxii. 

Ya^-mkas,  pp.  xlviii,  1. 

Ya^ur-veda,  pp.  xvi,  lx;  1,  23;  iv, 
124;  xi,  263,  265;  xii,  112. 

—  quoted,  viii,  106;  xi,  251,  257, 
Yakshas,  1,  37 ;  in,  196;  xi,  96. 
Yama,  in,  87,  211;  v,  96;  vi,  61; 

vn,  4,  7;  vin,  86,92;  ix,  303, 
307  ;  xn,  17,  21-22. 
Yavana  race,  pp.  cxiv,  cxvii;  x,  44, 


ADDITIONS   AND   CORRECTIONS. 

Page  xx,  11.  26-33.  The  tradition  which  asserts  that  the  Gautamiya  and 
Vasish/y&a  Dharmajastras  originally  were  the  property  of  Vedic 
schools,  studying  the  Sama-veda  and  the  Rig-veda,  has  already  been 
mentioned  by  Golebrooke  in  his  Essay  on  the  Mimawsa.  It  goes 
back  to  Kumarila,  who  adduces  it  in  his  Varttika  on  Mimawzsa-sutra, 
1,  3, 11  (Tantra- varttika,  p.  179,  Benares  Sanskrit  Series).  The  same 
author  states  there  that  the  Dharmajastra  of  Sankha  and  Likhita 
belonged  to  the  Va^asaneyins. 

P.  xxxix,  add  at  the  end  of  note  3  :  'It  is,  however,  found  in  some 
other  G/v'hya-sutras.' 

P.  lvii,  add  at  the  end  of  note  4:  'The  copy  of  the  Munich  MS. 
No.  83  has  Jnr:.' 

P.  cxii,  1.  1.  More  important  is  the  fact  that  Kumarila,  who,  as  I  hold 
with  Professor  Max  Mtiiler,  cannot  be  placed  later  than  700  a.d., 
knew  our  Manu-smriti.  In  the  portions  of  the  Tantra-varttika,  pub- 
lished in  the  Benares  Sanskrit  Series,  I  find  the  following  verses 
quoted,  i,  2ib  (p.  203,  1.  14);  ii,  140  (p.  178,  1.  8);  iv,  178  (p.  138, 
1.  17);  v,  56  (p.  in,  1.  11);  viii,  57  (p.  199,  1-  23);  ix,  182  (p.  135, 
1.  2);  xi,  30  (p.  no,  1.  19);  xi,93  (p.  136,1.  19);  xi,  94  (p.  136, 1.24); 
xi,  96*  (p.  137,  1.  7);  xii,  95  (p.  117,  1.  20);  xii,  105,  106  b  (p.  80, 
1.  18).  Most  of  these  quotations  show  some  variae  lectiones, 
which,  however,  are  not  very  important,  and  possibly,  nay  probably, 
are  due  to  inaccuracy  on  Kumarila's  part.     One  verse,  quoted  p.  241, 

I.  22,  is  not  traceable  in  our  Manu.  Kumarila  names  Manu  through- 
out as  the  first  and  most  venerable  authority  on  the  sacred  law.  His 
predecessor,  the  author  of  the  metrical  Tika,  on  the  Mimawsa-sutra, 
which  he  quotes  at  great  length,  holds  the  same  opinion,  and  clearly 
and  frequently  alludes  to  our  Manu-smrc'ti. 

P.  n,  ch.  i,ver.  19,  add  at  the  end  of  the  note:  'The  idea  that  seven 
Purushas  make  up  man,  occurs  Satapatha-brahmawa  vi,  1,  1,  3, 
and  6.' 

P.  32,  ch.  II,  v.  15,  add  at  the  end  of  the  note :  'The  passages  referred 
to  in  the  text  are  quoted  in  the  Sabarabhashya  on  Mimawsa-sutra, 

II,  4,  8.' 

P.  33,  ch.  11,  v.  21,  for  'to  the  east  of  Prayaga  and  to  the  west  of 
Vinajana'  read ''to  the  west  of  Prayaga  and  to  the  east  ofVinajana.' 

P.  39,  ch.  11,  v.  52,  for  'truthfulness,  if  he  faces  the  east'  read  'truth- 
fulness, if  he  faces  the  north.' 

P.  58,  ch.  11,  v.  15 1,  for  'old  enough  to  be)  fathers'  read  'old  enough 
to  be  his)  fathers.' 


6 14  LAWS    OF    MANU. 


P.  94,  ch.  in,  v.  103  note,  read  at  the  end :  'agatam  apy  atithim  na 
vidyat.' 

P.  101,  ch.  in,  v.  141  note,  for  'paisa^i'  read  '  Paija^i.' 

P.  105,  ch.  in,  v.  159,  for  'substances  used  for  flavouring'  read  'con- 
diments.' 

P.  112,  ch.  in,  v.  202  note,/or  '  akshayayakalpate '  read '  akshayayopak.' 

P.  121,  ch.  in,  v.  251, for  'Rest  either  (here  or  at  home)'  read  'Take 
rest.' 

P.  126,  ch.  in,  v.  274  note.  The  passage  quoted  by  Vi^anejvara  on 
Yzgu.  1,  217,  is  to  the  following  effect :  '  When  the  moon  stands  in 
the  (asterism)  sacred  to  the  manes  (Magha7>)  and  the  sun  in  the 
(asterism)  Hasta,  that  lunar  day  is  sacred  to  Yama ;  it  is  called  the 
elephant's  shadow.'  Another  explanation  of  the  same  term  from 
the  Malamasatattva,  quoted  in  the  Petersburg  Dictionary,  asserts  that 
it  means  an  eclipse  of  the  sun. 

P.  137,  ch.  iv,  v.  55,  after  'let  him  not  take  off  his  garland'  add  '  (with 
his  own  hands).' 

P.  141,  ch.  iv,  v.  80  note,  add1  Regarding  the  consequences  of  giving 
spiritual  advice  to  a  Sudra,  see  also  Mah.  xiii,  10,  55.' 

P.  144,  ch.  iv,  note  to  vv.  95-97,  for  '  The  Pushya-day  is  the  sixth  lunar 
day  of  each  month '  read  ' The  Pushya-day  of  the  month  of  Pausha 
is  the  day  of  the  full  moon ;  see  Bapudeva  Sastri,  note  on  Suryasid- 
dhanta,  p.  94,  s.  16.' 

P.  147,  ch.  iv,  v.  113  note,  add  '  Some  parallel  passages  make  the  latter 
meaning  more  probable.' 

P.  172,  ch.  v,  v.  16  note,  add  '  For  Sajalkas  on  all  (occasions,'  Medh., 
Gov.)  Ku.  proposes  '  Sajalkas  of  all  (kinds).' 

P.  182,  ch.  v,  v.  82  note,  for  'such  a  one  who  is  mentioned'  read  'such 
a  one  as  is  mentioned.' 

P.  189,  ch.  V,  v.  us,  for  'for  solid  things'  read  'for  things  piled  up.' 
The  commentators  give  as  examples  '  couches,  beds,  and  the  like,' 
and  apparently  refer  to  the  cushions  and  mattresses  used  for  such 
purposes. 

P.  199,  ch.  vi,  v.  6.  The  translation  'a  dress  made  of  bark  or  grass' 
ought  to  be  placed  in  the  text,  instead  of '  a  tattered  garment.' 

P.  206,  ch.  vi,  v.  43  note,  for  the  first  '  asawkasuka£ '  read  'asaw- 
kusuka£.' 

P.  222,  ch.  vii,  v.  43.     In  accordance  with  the  explanation  of  Medh., 

'  the  science  of  dialectics,  (which  gives)  self-knowledge  '  ought  to  be 

inserted  in  the  text,  instead  of  'the  science  of  dialectics  and  the 

knowledge  of  the  (supreme)  Soul ; '  see  Introduction,  p.  xxxvii. 

P.  234,  ch.  vii,  v.  118  note,  insert  'or  Mahattara'  after  'Gramaku/a,' 

and  '  are '  before  '  the  so-called  haks.' 
P.  241,  ch.  vii,  v.  157,  for  'consists) '  read  '  (consists).* 
Pages  253,  255,  superscription,  for  'ceremonial'  read  '  criminal.' 
P.  253,  ch.  VIII,  v.  4  note,  insert  at  beginning  '  itozasyadanam.' 
P.  257,  ch.  viii,  v.  25  note,  for  '  akara '  read  '  aiara '  (twice). 


ADDITIONS    AND    CORRECTIONS.  615 

P.  263,  ch.  viii,  v.  53  note,  for  '  apadcram  '  read  '  ade^am.' 

P.  265,  ch.  viii,  v.  65  note,  for  l  includes   according  to  Nar.,  Gov., 

Nand.,  Medh.  also  ascetics,'  read  '  includes  according  to  Nar.,  Gov., 

Medh.  also  ascetics,  or,  refers  to  the  latter  alone,  Nand.J 
P.  288,  ch.  viii,  v.  192  note,  for  '  Nar.  takes '  read  '  Nar.  and  Nand.  take.' 
P.  292,  ch.  viii,  v.  210  note.      Add  after   the   quotation  from  Asv. 

Srauta-sutra,  '  Ap.  Srauta-sutra  xiii,  5,  12/ 
P.  295,  ch.  viii,  v.  227  note,  dele  'Nand.  omits  this  verse  and  the  next.' 
P.  295,  ch.  viii,  v.  228  note,  add  'Nand.  omits  this  verse.' 
P.  296,  ch.  viii,  v.  237  note,  add  after  'The  jamya  is,'  'either   the 

wedge  at  the  yoke,  or.' 
P.  308,  ch.  viii,  v.  309  note,  for  'who  takes  the  goods  of  Brahma«as  or 

injures  them'  read  'who  takes  the  goods  of  Brahma«as,  injures,  or 

abandons  them.' 
P.  331,  ch.  ix,  v.  20  note,  add  '  The  Pratika  of  this  verse  is  quoted  by 

Vi.  lxxiii,  12  ;  see  also  Ap.  Srauta-sutra  1,  9,  9,  where  a  somewhat 

different  version  occurs.' 
P.  339,  ch.  ix,  vv.  64-68  note,  for  '  Aupa^andhani '  read  '  Aupa^anghani,' 

which  latter  is  the  correct  form  of  the  name. 
P.  352,  ch.  ix,  v.  128  note,  add  '  The  story  agrees  exactly  with  Mah. 

xii,  343,  57  ;  see  also  Vish«u-pura«a,  vol.  ii,  p.  10  (ed.  Hall).' 
P.  362,  ch.  ix,  v.  170,  for  '  Gudhotpanna'  read  '  GuJ/fo>tpanna.' 
P.  398,  ch.  ix,  v.  315  note,  add  at  end,  'see  also  Mah.  xiii,  33,  17.' 
P.  399,  ch.  ix,  v.  323.     Mah.  xn,  65,  1  seq.  recommend  ahave  deha- 

tyagam,  '  death  in  battle,'  for  a  king. 
P.  405,  ch.  x,  v.  19  note,  for  '  the  name  of  caste '  read  '  the  name  of  the 

caste.' 
P.  406,  ch.  x,  v.  22.     The  form  Li&££ivi  for  Li^/^avi  actually  occurs. 
P.  407,  ibid.,  for  '  waters  '  read  '  water.' 
P.  416,  ch.  x,  v.  64  note,  for  '  Sacred  Books   of  the  East,  11/  read 

1  S.  B.  E.  xiv.' 
P.  425,  ch.  x,  v.  in,  for  'offering  sacrifices  for  teaching'  read  'offering 

sacrifices  for,  or,  teaching.' 
P.  443,  ch.  xi,  v.  64  note,  add  '  Ya.  in,  240  favours  Nar.'s  explanation 

of  mahayantrapravartana.' 
P.  457,  ch.  xi,  v.  1 14,  for  '  a  spade  of  black  iron  '  read  '  a  mattock  of  black 

iron.' 
P.  479,  ch.  xi,  v.  242,  for  'penance'  read  ' austerity '  (twice). 
P.  480,  ch.  xi,  v.  2 50,  for  '  (that  seen)  by  Vasish/£a '  read '  the  three  verses 

(seen)  by  Vasish^a.'     Make  the  same  correction  in  the  note,  and  add, 

'  the  correct  reading  in  the  text  is  prati  tryr/'^am.' 
P.  481,  ch.  xi,  v.  253,  add  at  the  end,  or,  '  Thus,  verily  thus.' 
P.  512,  ch.  xii,  v.  120  note,  add  '  Compare  for  this  verse  and  the  next, 

Rig-veda  X,  90,  13-14.' 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


617 


Chinese. 

^  ^  :  :  : 

•       ■>•••••                              ••• 

.a ... 

<u 
J? 
X 

/^  n  ^  «-*  n- 

J    t%c^c    " 

1 

D      •     •     "  '0 

'      -    -    lJoJ-U   ' 

•         id    ^        * 

c 
0 

D      i\)     i  »o 

-    -    L)oJ-U    •                ti) 

1    U-Oo   • 

> 

«\  3    *>Oj    • 

;?    • 

:  :  :         J 

1; ; 

1 

»-,               ,     .    'bo    55    'jr      . 

<2s 

**  :  : 

is 

1 

|9  R?  R*  P     ■     K>     iw    . 

isr  ter  it  »^  iar 

(-■ 

H 
i 

•< 
X 

B. 
►J 
< 

< 

2 
O 

55 

a 

G 

i 

u 

5*   J*                  "X    5     «»  H>  J8 

1 

n 

'bo                                         *     • 
^^bo-gjO-^^-^-c.. 

*3                                           •       • 

pf 

H 
S 

O 

£ 

0 
0 

!•••:•    ' 

g     "    •>      •    J   .8 

H            .        -4-3                         ™        f— < 

i  •  -fi.  •  .S  £     • 
©   •  *   •  a  0     • 

03              _»              2         •— 1 

S     a     &   £ 

h   n  w  n<   10      to 

::::::  3 

"8 

•          OT          ,«          2          r/>             .2    '""•' 

:  1  =3  1 1  11 

«2    S   eft   '2      d  00 

.  ^  eg  ^  eft    a  © 

S       03       3       03       3        M                  ^ 

°<  '3    P"  "S    ^  '3      25  S 

09                                                                          Sj      flj 
•In                                                                 «           +3 ^       3 

.£       £      S       £      ~       ~       +a             C 

N     00     05     O     h     (M                         CO 
rH      i-H      rH                              r- 1 

I 

r- 

'£ 

a 

<* 

r— 1 

.5  g 

3 

IO     CD     ts. 

r-1      rH      1— » 

6l8  TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS 


r&  .  . 


G  c;    •  r  r    .  o~tn 


,B  O  —  P\ 


- 


■b 


<3    o       •  -o     D-O 


*> 


*b«-»       0 


0    -      •  •->     Do 


Sj>  tU         %, 


?  -8       e->s 


1 


«r 


^n 


|cp-    .  urtr     •  fr  |£  [g    .  & 


"Sri'S^      «0        t» 


s 


t  \ 

O  £ 

W  8 

u 


S   .2 

&.  a 


Oh 

GO 


1     I 

rS    2 


Oh      C 


•S  rS 

Oh  '55 

CO  03 

03  03 


.5    -a 

Oh    *S3 


55   CO 


o    'o    «  N 

S     S     S3  §3  .» 

a  £<  c 

co  og  ca 

03  03  i— I 

«   .  a 


a* 
02 


3      3 

S    £ 


C5      O      t-H      (M 
i-i     <N     CM     <M 


«r)(lO(ONOOaiOH(MMr)<«3 
NNNNNNNMCOWCOWn 


FOR    THE   SACRED    BOOKS    OF    THE    EAST. 


619 


.     u 

•         GO 

'             °*  *§,    •     • 

S    £ 

=+.,... 

£)    •    '    !    !  r    '• 

ja  m  m  n 

£>     " 

•     r—        .         . 

jk  *     ."  •%,    •'   ->   .' 

:■:>:: 

<-    • 

.  1  ^  :  : 

~a  .*     •    .    •   ->    • 

D,  :  >  :  . 

<__    . 

•  •]  ^  :  : 

.  .     .  .  ^  . 

? 

•  ':!':  : 

>j>     . 

3)  <w  '.  : 

;  :  sir  :  5/  ^  ; 

:3- 

:     *  :T: 

».* 

?o3 

k>  h>  l»  hs>  &  w    • 

.    tr 

C  P  ftr  a: 

ST       1 

■     '    V-$   ff 

c 

.... 

**   5   "*3   *§    e     »    *« 

.     .     .     .    s 

•     g    -a 

P. 


S     £     ^ 


«w     > 


I1 

09    d 


*a  T3 


co     a 


9-  'e 


|3 

P 

c 

« 

.2 

CO 

.05 
'03 

»n       CO 

»     03 

O 

> 

a 

8 

CO 

"E, 

s 

co 

'B 
c 

5 

c3 

OJ 

3 

5 

CO 

CO 

'5 

■ 

CO 

1 

O 

1 

cu 

3 
-4-3 

'3 

a. 

? 

> 

CO 

S 

<; 

f 

> 

00 

C5 

0 

r-H      <M 

CO 

rH 

iO    to 

t^. 

00 

cr- 

0 

r-H 

(M 

CO 

^ 

O 

CO 

1^ 

00 

03 

CO 

CO 

"* 

Ttf        ^ 

r^ 

^ 

T*      T* 

"* 

T* 

•^ 

«5 

10 

O 

10 

to 

O 

0 

10 

0 

»o 

620 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


3    <3      <u    <v 


11  |,   lj, 


-^ 


•»'b 


•1  ^j  h  i 


'*> 


X   i 


c§  .a  * 
—  3 


—      .    o 


s  3  i  n. 


-N      ^ 


O^r 


U) 


2/ 


,-5>^ 


1 


£  $  to-***- $  1^  RP  tf  h>  05     •  iv  ^tv 


ft 


>    I 


1 


O    w    JO      e3 


»    58    T    t     5    <3 


3     3 


1  *a 


I 

O 

bo 
a 

|  s 

<M    CO 


bo    > 


cj     >     bo    2 

bo   g>    c    > 


•°       ~       £       ,2 

3  3  3 


^       ^ 


bo      £  -g 


to    CO 


,0     p^ 

'       s 

o 
c 

3 

-1-3 

1 

o 


3 
bo 

c 
o 

rC3 


>  bD    £ 

P  fl      3 

£  .2  I 

.5  <» 

eJ  bO 

I  'J 


a. 
(5 


4- 

4§  it 

o     tf    j  w: 

g    "8    *    «< 

*  2  §  i 
.2  «C  <&  -- 
'eS    .2    «  "<: 

1131 

■s  -3  ■§  ? 


N00ffiOHNM'* 


tO<OtvOOCiO»-i<MeOTH'OOt- 

^-trHr~trHi-H(MCaCM<M<M<M<NC<J 


Gtlatentron   IPtess,   ©xfotlr* 

A  SELECTION  OF 

BOOKS 

PUBLISHED   FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY  BY 

HENRY    FROWDE, 

AT    THE    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE, 
AMEN    CORNER,    LONDON. 

ALSO  TO   BE  HAD   AT  THE 

CLARENDON    PRESS    DEPOSITORY,    OXFORD. 
[Every  book  is  bound  in  doth,   unless  otherwise  described. ~\ 


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  ORIENTAL  WORKS,  &c. 

Anglo-Saxon. — An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  Collections  of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon, 
Oxford.  Edited  and  enlarged  by  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.  (To  be  completed 
in  four  parts.)    Parts  I-III.    A — SAR.     4to.   15J.  each. 

Arabic. — A  Practical  Arabic  Grammar.     Part  I.     Compiled 

by  A.  O.  Green,  Brigade  Major,  Royal  Engineers,  Author  of '  Modern  Arabic 
Stories.'     Second  Edition,  Enlarged  and  Revised.     Crown  8vo.  *js.  6d. 

Chinese.—  A  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.    By  James 

Summers.     1863.   8vo.  half  bound,  \l.  8s. 

A  Record  of  Buddhistic  Kingdoms,  by  the  Chinese  Monk 

FA-hien.  Translated  and  annotated  by  James  Legge,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown 
4to.  cloth  back,  \os.  6d. 

ENGLISH. — A  New  English  Dictionary,  on  Historical  Prin- 
ciples: founded  mainly  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological  Society. 
Edited  by  James  A.  H.  Murray,  LL.D.,  with  the  assistance  of  many  Scholars 
and  men  of  Science.  Vol.  I.  A  and  B.  Imperial  4to.  half  Morocco, 
2/.  12s.  6d. 

Part  IV,  Section  II,  C— CASS.     Beginning  of  Vol.  II,  $*. 
B 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


ENGLISH. — An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Lan- 
guage.   By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.    Second  Edition.    1884.  4to.  2/.  4*. 

Supplement  to  the  First  Edition  of  the  above.  4to.  2s.6d. 

A  Concise  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Lan- 
guage.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.   Third  Edition.  1887.  Crown  8vo.  5*.  6d. 

Greek. — A     Greek-English    Lexicon,    by    Henry     George 

Liddell,  D.D.,  and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.    Seventh  Edition,  Revised  and  Aug- 
mented throughout.     1883.    4to.  il.  16s. 

A   Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and 

Scott's  4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.     Twenty-first  Edition. 
1884.     Square  1 2 mo.  ^s.6d. 


A    copious  Greek-English    Vocabulary,   compiled  from 

the  best  authorities.     1850.    24mo.  $s. 

A  Practical  Introduction  to  Greek  Accentuation,  by  H. 

W.  Chandler,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    1881.   8vo.    10s.  6d. 

Hebrew. — The  Book  of  Hebrew   Roots,  by  Abu  '1-Walid 

Marwan  ibn  Janah,  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Yonah.  Now  first  edited,  with  an 
Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.    4to.  2l.7s.6d. 

A   Treatise  on  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebrew.    By 

S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.    Second  Edition.   1 881.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.   p.  6d. 

Hebrew  Accentuation   of  Psalms,  Proverbs,   and  Job. 

By  William  Wickes,  D.D.     1881.    Demy  8vo.  5*. 

A  Treatise  on  the  Accentuation  of  the  twenty -one  so-called 

Prose  Books  of  the  Old  Testament.  By  William  Wickes,  D.D.  1887.  Demy 
8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Icelandic. — An  Icelandic- English  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  collections  of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfusson,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby,  by 
G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.    1874.  410.  3/.  p. 

A  List  of  English  Words  the  Etymology  of  which  is 

illustrated  by  comparison  with  Icelandic.  Prepared  in  the  form  of  an 
Appendix  to  the  above.    By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.    1876.  stitched,  2s. 

An    Icelandic    Primer,    with     Grammar,   Notes,    and 

Glossary.    By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  $s.  6d. 

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Grammar  and 

Glossary,  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.  1879. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Latin. — A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition 

of  Freund's  Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten 
by  Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.   1879.  4to.  1/.  5*. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


MELANESIAN. — The    Melanesian    Languages.       By    R.    H. 

Codrington,  D.D.,  of  the  Melanesian  Mission.     8vo.  i8j. 

Sanskrit. — A  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language, 

arranged  with  reference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for  the  use  of 
English  Students,  by  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition.  8vo. 
15*. 


—  A    Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,    Etymologically    and 

Philologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German,  Anglo- 
Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.  By  Sir  M. 
Monier-Williams,  M.A.     1888.  4*0.  4/.  14J.  6d. 

Nalopdkhydnam.       Story    of    Nala,    an    Episode     of 


the  Maha-Bharata :  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,  and  an 
improved  version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams, 
M.A.     Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Improved.     1879.  8vo.  15*. 

Sakuntala.    A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  Seven  Acts.    Edited 

by  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  1876.    8vo.  21s. 

SYRIAC. — Thesaurus  Syriacus :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bern- 
stein, Lorsbach,  Arnoldi,  Agrell,  Field,  Roediger:    edidit  R.  Payne  Smith, 
S.T.P.   Fasc.  I-VI.   1868-83.  sm.  fol.  each,  il.  is.   Fasc.  VII.  1l.us.6d. 
Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V,  sm.  fol.  5/.  5*. 

The  Book  of  Kalilah  and  Dimnah.  Translated  from  Arabic 

into  Syriac.     Edited  by  W.  Wright,  LL.D.     1884.  8vo.  21s. 


GREEK  CLASSICS,  &c. 

Aristophanes:    A   Complete  Concordance   to   the  Comedies 

and  Fragments.     By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.     4to.  1/.  is. 

Aristotle:    The  Politics,  with  Introductions,  Notes,  etc.,  by 

W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford.    Vols.  I.  and  II. 
Medium  8vo.  28^. 

Aristotle:  The  Politics,  translated  into  English,  with  Intro- 
duction, Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.  Medium 
8vo.     2  vols.  2 1  j. 

Catalogus    Codicum    Graecorum    Sinaiticorum.      Scripsit   V. 

Gardthausen  Lipsiensis.     With  six  pages  of  Facsimiles.     8vo.  linen,  2  §s. 

Heracliti  Ephesii  Reliquiae.     Recensuit    I.    By  water,   M.A. 

Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita  Heracliti,  Particulae  Hip- 
pocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Epistolae  Heracliteae.  1877.  8vo.  6s. 

Herculanensium  Voluminum  Partes  II.  1824.  8vo.  ioj. 

B  2 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Fragmenta  Herculanensia.     A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the 

Oxford  copies  of  the  Herculanean  Rolls,  together  with  the  texts  of  several 
papyri,  accompanied  by  facsimiles.  Edited  by  Walter  Scott,  M.A.,  Fellow 
of  Merton  College,  Oxford.     Royal  8vo.  cloth,  21s. 

Homer:    A    Complete   Concordance    to    the   Odyssey    and 

Hymns  of  Homer  ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to  the  Parallel  Passages 
in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.    1880.   4to.  i/.  is. 

Scholia    Graeca  in  Iliadem.     Edited   by   Professor   W. 

Dindorf,  after  a  new  collation  of  the  Venetian  MSS.  by  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A., 
Provost  of  Oriel  College.   4  vols.  8vo.  2/.  10s.    Vols.  V  and  VI.    In  the  Press. 


Scholia  Graeca  in  Odysseam.     Edidit  Guil.  Dindorfius. 

Tomi  II.     1855.  8vo.    15s.  6d. 

Plato :  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  and 

a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,  M.A.    1878.  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Philebus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 

Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.    8vo.  7*.  6d. 

Sopliistes  and  Politicus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English 

Notes,  by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.     1867.    Svo.  18*. 

Theaetetus,  with  a  revised  Text  and   English   Notes, 


by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.    Second  Edition.   8vo.  10s.  6d. 


-   The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,  with  Analyses 

and  Introductions,  by  B.  Jowcit,  M.A.    A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium 
8vo.    1875.    3/.  \os. 

The  Republic,  translated  into  English,  with  an  Analysis 


and  Introduction,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    Medium  Svo.    \2s.  6d. 

Thucydides :    Translated    into    English,   with    Introduction, 

Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices.    By  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    2  vols.    1881. 
Medium  Svo.    1/.  12s. 


THE    HOLY  SCRIPTURES,  &c. 

Studia  Biblica. — Essays  in  Biblical  Archaeology  and  Criti- 
cism, and  kindred  subjects.  By  Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford.  8vo. 
10 s.  6d. 

ENGLISH. — The  Holy  Bible  in  the  earliest  English  Versions, 

made  from  the  Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers  :  edited  by 
the  Rev.  J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.  4  vols.  1850.  Royal  4to.  3/.  3J. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


[Also  reprinted  from  the  above,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary 
by  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.  D. 

ENGLISH. — The  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes, 

and  the  Song  of  Solomon:  according  to  the  Wycliffite  Version  made  by  Nicholas 
de  Hereford,  about  a.d.  1381,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  A.D.  1388. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.     3s.  6d. 

The  New  Testament  in  English,  according  to  the  Version 

by  John  Wycliffe,  about  A.D.  1380,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  a.d. 
1388.    Extra  fcap.   8vo.    6*.] 


The   Holy  Bible:    an    exact    reprint,    page    for   page, 

of  the  Authorised  Version  published  in  the  year  161 1.  Demy  4to.  half  bound, 
\l.  is. 

The  Psalter,  or  Psalms  of  David,  and  certain  Canticles, 

with  a  Translation  and  Exposition  in  English,  by  Richard  Rolle  of  Hampole. 
Edited  by  H.  R.  Bramley,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  S.  M.  Magdalen  College,  Oxford. 
With  an  Introduction  and  Glossary.     Demy  8vo.    1/.  IS, 

Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Job.     Delivered  in  Westminster 

Abbey  by  the  Very  Rev.  George  Granville  Bradley,  D.D.,  Dean  of  West- 
minster.    Crown  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

Lectures  on  Ecclesiastes.     By  the  same  Author.     Crown 

8vo.  4J.  6d. 

Gothic. — The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark  in   Gothic ■,  according  to 

the  translation  made  by  Wulfila  in  the  Fourth  Century.  Edited  with  a 
Grammatical  Introduction  and  Glossarial  Index  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.  D. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J. 

GREEK. —  Vetus  Testamentum  ex  Versione  Septuaginta  Inter- 

pretum  secundum  exemplar  Vaticanum  Romae  editum.  Accedit  potior  varietas 
Codicis  Alexandrini.  Tomi  III.  Editio  Altera.  i8mo.  18s.  The  volumes 
may  be  had  separately,  price  6s.  each. 

Origenis  Hexaplorum  quae   supersunt ;    sive,  Veternm 

Interpretum  Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum  Fragmenta.  Edidit 
Fridericus  Field,  A.M.     2  vols.     1875.    4to-   5^-  5J* 

The   Book  of   Wisdom:    the   Greek  Text,   the   Latin 

Vulgate,  and  the  Authorised  English  Version ;  with  an  Introduction,  Critical 
Apparatus,  and  a  Commentary.  By  William  J.  Deane.M.A.  Small 4to.  \zs.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum  Codicum 

Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collatio  Codicis  Sinaitici.  Edidit 
E.  H.  Hansell,  S.T.B.   Tomi  III.   1864.    8vo.  24J. 


Novum  Testamentum  Graece.     Accedunt  parallela 


Scripturae  loca,  etc.     Edidit  Carolus  Lloyd,  S.T.P.R.    i8mo.  3^. 
On  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  ioj. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Greek. — Novum  Testamentum  Graece  juxta  Exemplar  Millia- 

num.     i8mo.   is.  6d.     On  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  gs. 

Evangelia  Sacra  Graece.     Fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

The  Greek  Testament,  with  the  Readings  adopted  by 

the  Revisers  of  the  Authorised  Version : — 

(i)  Pica  type,  with  Marginal  Reference?.    Demy  8vo.  ioj.  6d. 

(2)  Long  Primer  type.    Fcap.  8vo.   4s.  6d. 

(3)  The  same,  on  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  15s. 

The  Parallel  New  Testament,  Greek  and  English  ;  being 

the  Authorised  Version,  161 1;  the  Revised  Version,  1881;  and  the  Greek 
Text  followed  in  the  Revised  Version.    8vo.    12s.  6d. 

The  Revised  Version  is  the  joint  property  of  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge. 

Canon   Muratorianns :    the   earliest   Catalogue   of  the 

Books  of  the  New  Testament.  Edited  with  Notes  and  a  Facsimile  of  the 
MS.  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.  P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.  1867. 
4to.  10s.  6d. 


Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  applied  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    By  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3.?.  6d. 

Hebrew,  etc. — Notes  on   the  Hebrew  Text  of  the  Book  of 

Genesis.  With  Two  Appendices.  By  G.  J.  Spurrell,  M.A.  Crown  8vo. 
ioj-.  6d. 

The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  without  points.     1879.     Crown 

8vo.  Price  reduced  to  2s.,  in  stiff  cover. 

A  Commentary  on   the  Book  of  Proverbs.    Attributed 

to  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra.  Edited  from  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library  by 
S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.    paper  covers,  $s.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Tobit.    A  Chaldee  Text,  from  a  unique 

MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library ;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,  English  Transla- 
tions, and  the  Itala.    Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M.A.   1878.   Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Horae  Hebraic ae  et  Talmudicae,  a  J.  Lightfoot.    A  new 

Edition,  by  R.  Gandell,  M.A.    4  vols.    1859.  8vo.  \l.  is. 

Latin. — Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum  Para- 

phrasi  Anglo-Saxonica.    Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.     1835.    8vo.  io.r.  6aT. 

Old-Latin  Biblical  Texts:  No.  I.  The  Gospel  according 

to  St.  Matthew  from  the  St.  Germain  MS.  (g,).  Edited  with  Introduction 
and  Appendices  by  John  Wordsworth,  D.D.     Small  4to.,  stiff  covers,  6s. 

Old-Latin  Biblical  Texts:  No.  IL.  Portions  of  the  Gospels 

according  to  St.  Mark  and  St.  Matthew,  from  the  Bobbio  MS.  (k),  &c. 
Edited  by  John  Wordsworth,  D.D.,  W.  Sanday,  M.A.,  D.D.,  and  H.  J.  White, 
M.A.     Small  4to.,  stiff  covers,  21s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Latin.— Old-Latin    Biblical    Texts:    No.  ILL      The    Four 

Gospels,  from  the  Munich  MS.  (q),  now  numbered  Lat.  6224  in  the  Royal 
Library  at  Munich.  With  a  Fragment  from  St.  John  in  the  Hof-Bibliothek  at 
Vienna  (Cod.  Lat.  502).  Edited,  with  the  aid  of  Tischendorfs  transcript 
(under  the  direction  of  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury),  by  H.  J.  White,  M.A.  Small 
4to.  stiff  covers,  1 2 s.  6d. 

Old-French. — Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e 

Cod.  MS.  in  Bibl.  Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione  Metrica  aiiisque 
Monumentis  pervetustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsit  et  edidit  Franciscus  Michel, 
Phil.  Doc.     i860.  8vo.   \os.  6d. 


FATHERS  OP  THE  CHURCH,  &c. 

St.  Athanasius :  Historical  Writings,  according  to  the  Bene- 
dictine Text.  With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1881.  Crown 
8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Orations  against  the  Arians*    With  an  Account  of  his 

Life  by  William  Bright,  D.D.     1873.  Crown  8vo.  9*. 

St.  Augustine:  Select  Anti- Pelagian  Treatises,  and  the  Acts 

of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.    With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright, 
D.D.    Crown  8vo.  gs. 

Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils  of  Nicaea,  Con- 
stantinople, Ephesus, and  Chalcedon.   1877.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Notes  on  the  Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils. 

By  William  Bright,  D.D.    1882.    Crown  8vo.  5*.  6d. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XIL  Prophetas.     Edidit 

P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  II.     1868.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  is. 

in  D.  jfoannis  Evangelium.    Accedunt  Fragmenta  varia 

necnon    Tractatus   ad  Tiberium   Diaconum   duo.      Edidit  post  Aubertum 
P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  III.     1872.  8vo.  2/.  5*. 


Commentarii   in    Lucae   Evangelium    quae    supersunt 

Syriace.    E  MSS.  apud  Mus.  Britan.  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  A.M.     1858. 
4to.   1/.  IS. 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.     %  vols.     1859. 

8vo.  14J. 

Ephraemi  Syri,  Rabulae  Episcopi  Edesseni,  Balaei,  aliorum- 

que  Opera  Selecta.    E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in  Museo  Britannico  et  Bibliotheca 
Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit  J.  J.  Overbeck.     1865.  8vo.   1/.  is. 


8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Eusebius'   Ecclesiastical  History,  according  to    the  text   of 

Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1881.  Crown  8vo. 
8j.  6d. 

Irenaens:  The  Third  Book  of  St.Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons, 

against  Heresies.  With  short  Notes  and  a  Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D. 
1874.  Crown  8vo.   5-y.  6d. 

Patmm   Apostolicorum,    S.   Clementis    Romani,    S.  Ignatii, 

S.  Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.  Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,  S.T.P.R.  Tomi  II. 
Fourth  Edition,  1863.  8vo.   \l.  is. 

Socrates1  Ecclesiastical  History,  according  to   the   Text   of 

Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1878.  Crown  8 vo. 
7j.  6/f. 

ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  according  to  the 

uses  of  Sarum,  York,  Hereford,  and  Bangor,  and  the  Roman  Liturgy  arranged 
in  parallel  columns,  with  preface  and  notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A. 
Third  Edition.     1882.   8vo.  15*. 

Baedae  Historia  Ecclesiastica.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.  1881.  Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Bright  (W.).     Chapters  of  Early  English    Church  History. 

1878.    8vO.    I2J. 

Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Church  of  England. 

A  new  Edition.  Carefully  revised,  and  the  Records  collated  with  the  originals, 
by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.     7  vols.  1865.   8vo.  Price  redticedto  it.  \os. 

Councils  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  relating  to  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,  by  A.  W.  Haddan,  B.D., 
and  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.  Vols.  I.  and  III.   1869-71.  Medium  8vo.  each  1/.  is. 

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  8vo.    iar.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  Part  II.   1878.  Church  of  Ireland;  Memorials  of  St.  Patrick. 
Stiff  covers,  ^s.  6d. 

Hamilton  {John,  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrews),  The  Catechism 

of.  Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary,  by  Thomas  Graves  Law.  With 
a  Preface  by  the  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone.    8vo.  1 2s.  6d. 

Hammond  (C.  E.).    Liturgies,  Eastern  and  Western.    Edited, 

with  Introduction, Notes,  and  Liturgical  Glossary.  1878.  Crown  8vo.  ioj.  6d. 
An  Appendix  to  the  above.    1879.  Crown  8vo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

John,  Bishop  of  Ephesus.  The  Third  Part  of  his  Eccle- 
siastical History.  [In  Syriac]  Now  first  edited  by  William  Cureton,  M.A. 
1853.  4to.  1/.  I2J. 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.     i860.  8vo.  \os. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Leofric  Missal,   The,  as  used   in   the   Cathedral  of  Exeter 

during  the  Episcopate  of  its  first  Bishop,  a.d.  1050-1072 ;  together  with  some 
Account  of  the  Red  Book  of  Derby,  the  Missal  of  Robert  of  Jumieges,  and  a 
few  other  early  MS.  Service  Books  of  the  English  Church.  Edited,  with  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  F.  E.  Warren,  B.D.    4to.  half  morocco,  35^-. 

Monnmenta  Ritualia  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.     The   occasional 

Offices  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  the  old  use  of  Salisbury,  the 
Prymer  in  English,  and  other  prayers  and  forms,  with  dissertations  and  notes. 
By  William  Maskell,  M.A.    Second  Edition.     1882.  3  vols.  8vo.  2/.  \os. 

Records  of  the  Reformation.  The  Divorce,  1527-1533.  Mostly 

now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum  and  other 
libraries.  Collected  and  arranged  by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.  1870.  2  vols.  8vo. 
U.  1 6  j. 

Shirley  (  W.  W.).   Some  Account  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic 

Age.     Second  Edition,  1874.  Fcap.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Stubbs  (  W.).    Registrum  Sacrum  Anglicanum.     An  attempt 

to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  England.  1858.  Small  4to. 
8s.  6d. 

Warren  (F.  E.).    Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church. 

1 88 1.  8vo.  14J. 

ENGLISH    THEOLOGY. 

Bampton  Lectures,  1886.     The  Christian  Platonists  of  Alex- 
andria.    By  Charles  Bigg,  D.D.    Svo.  ioj.  6d. 

Butler's  Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.    2  vols.  1874. 

8vo.  us. 

Also  separately, 

Sermons,  $s.  6d.  Analogy  of  Religion,  $s.  6d. 

Greswetts  Harmonia  Evangelic  a.    Fifth  Edition.  8vo.  9^.  6d. 
Heurtlefs  Harmonia   Symbolical    Creeds    of    the   Western 

Church.    1858.    8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Homilies   appointed    to    be    read   in    Churches,     Edited    by 

J.  Griffiths,  M.A.    1859.  8vo.  7-r.  6d. 

Hooker's  Works,  with  his  life  by  Walton,  arranged  by  John 

Keble,  M.A.  Seventh  Edition.  Revised  by  R.  W.  Church,  M.A.,  D.C.L., 
Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  and  F.  Paget,  D.D.     3  vols,  medium  8vo.  36*. 

Hookers  Works,  the  text  as  arranged  by  John  Keble,  M.A. 

2  vols.  1875.  8vo.   lis. 

Jewel's  Works.     Edited  by  R.  W.  Jelf,  D.D.     8  vols.    1848. 

8vo.  1/.  10  s. 


io  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Pearson's  Exposition  of  the  Creed.    Revised  and  corrected  by 

E.  Burton,  D.D.   Sixth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.   10s.  6d. 

Waterland's  Review  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  with 

a  Preface  by  the  late  Bishop  of  London.    Crown  8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Works,  with  Life,  by  Bp.  Van  Mildert.    A  new  Edition, 


with  copious  Indexes.    6  vols.     1856.    8vo.    2I.  11s. 

Wheatlys  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.    A  new 

Edition,  1846.  8vo.  fj. 

Wyclif.    A  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif 

by  W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  8vo.  p.  6d. 

Select  English    Works.     By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.   3  vols, 

1869-1871.  8vo.      i/.  is. 

Trialogus.    With    the  Supplement    now  first  edited. 


By  Gotthard  Lechler.   1869.   8vo.    js. 


HISTORICAL   AND   DOCUMENTARY   WORKS. 

British  Barrows,  a  Record  of  the  Examination  of  Sepulchral 

Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William  Greenwell,  M.A.,  F.S.A. 
Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of  Skulls,  General  Remarks  on  Pre- 
historic Crania,  and  an  Appendix  by  George  Rolleston,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  1877. 
Medium  8vo.  25*. 

Clarendon's   History  of    the   Rebellion    and    Civil  Wars    in 

England.  Re-edited  from  a  fresh  Collation  of  the  Original  MS.  in  the 
Bodleian  Library,  with  Marginal  Dates,  and  Occasional  Notes,  by  W.  Dunn 
Macray,  M.A.,  F.S.A.     In  six  volumes,  crown  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  5*. 

Clarendon's  History   of   the  Rebellion    and    Civil   Wars    in 

England.  Also  his  Life,  written  by  himself,  in  which  is  included  a  Con- 
tinuation of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Rebellion.  With  copious  Indexes. 
In  one  volume,  royal  8vo.  1842.  il.is. 

Clinto7is  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Hellcnici.      1 85 1 .     8vo.   6s.  6d. 
Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.     1854.     8vo.  Js. 


Corpvs  Poeticvm  Boreale.    The  Poetry  of  the  Old  Northern 

Tongue,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Thirteenth  Century.  Edited,  clas- 
sified, and  translated,  with  Introduction,  Excursus,  and  Notes,  by  Gudbrand 
Vigfusson,  M.A.,  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.     2  vols.     1883.  8vo.  42 s. 

Earle  {jf.,  M.A.).     A  Handbook  to  the  Land- Charters,  and 

other  Saxonic  Documents.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,  16s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  n 

Freeman  (E.  A.).    History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  Eng- 
land; its  Causes  and  Results.    In  Six  Volumes.  8vo.  5/.  gs.  6d. 

The  Reign  of   William  Rufus  and  the  Accession   of 


Henry  the  First.     2  vols.  8vo.  il.i6s. 

Gascoigne's     Theological    Dictionary    ("Liber    Veritatum"): 

Selected  Passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of  Church  and  State,  1403-1458. 
With  an  Introduction  by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.  Small  4to. 
ioj\  6d. 

Johnson    (Samuel,   JLL.D.),    BosweWs    Life    of;     including 

Boswell's  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  and  Johnson's  Diary  of  a 
Journey  into  North  Wales.  Edited  by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.  In  six 
volumes,  medium  8vo.  With  Portraits  and  Facsimiles  of  Handwriting. 
Half  bound,  3/.  3s.     (See  p.  21.) 

Magna  Carta,  a  careful  Reprint.    Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D. 

1879.   4to-  stitched,  1  j. 

Passio  et  Miracula  Beati  Olaui.  Edited  from  a  Twelfth- 
Century  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  by 
Frederick  Metcalfe,  M.A.     Small  4to.  stiff  covers,  6s. 

Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  which  have  been  ex- 
punged, from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Introductions.  Edited  by  James 
E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.   1875.   3  vols.  8vo.  2/.  2s. 

Rogers  (J.  E.  T).     History  of  Agriculture  and  Prices  in 

England,  AD.  1 259-1 793. 

Vols.  I — VI  (1 259-1 702).  8vo.  7/.  2s. 

The  First  Nine  Years  of  the  Bank  of  England.  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Stubbs   (W.,  D.D.).      Seventeen   Lectures   on   the  Study  of 

Medieval  and  Modern  History,  &c,  delivered  at  Oxford  186 7-1 884.  Crown 
8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Sturlunga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga  of  Lawman 

Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.  Edited  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson. 
In  2  vols.     1878.  8vo.   2/.  is. 

York  Plays.    The  Plays  performed  by  the  Crafts  or  Mysteries 

of  York  on  the  day  of  Corpus  Christi  in  the  14th,  15th,  and  16th  centuries. 
Now  first  printed  from  the  unique  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Lord  Ashburnham. 
Edited  with  Introduction  and  Glossary  by  LucyToulmin  Smith.     8vo.  21s. 


Manuscript  Materials    relating    to    the    History    of  Oxford. 

Arranged  by  F.  Madan,  M.A.     8vo.  'js.  6d. 

Statutes  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  codified  in  the  year  1636 

under  the  authority  of  Archbishop  Laud.  Edited  by  the  late  J.  Griffiths, 
D.D.,  with  an  Introduction  on  the  History  of  the  Laudian  Code,  by  C.  L. 
Shadwell,  M.A.,  B.C.L.    4to.  il.  is. 


12  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Statutes  made  for  the  University  of  Oxford,  and  for  the  Colleges 

and  Halls  therein,  by  the  University  of  Oxford  Commissioners.     1882.    8vo. 
12s.  6d. 

Statutes  supplementary  to  the  above,  approved  by  the  Queen  in 

Council,  1 882-1 888.     8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Statu ta  Universitatis  Oxoniensis.     1888.     8vo.  $s. 

The  Oxford  University  Calendar  for  the  year  1888.     Crown 

8vo.  4  j.  6d. 

The  present  Edition  includes  all  Class  Lists  and  other  University  distinctions 
for  the  eight  years  ending  with  1887. 

Also,  supplementary  to  the  above,  price  5s.  (pp.  606), 

The  Honours  Register  of  the  University  of  Oxford.  A  complete 

Record  of  University  Honours,  Officers,  Distinctions,  and  Class  Lists;  of  the 
Heads  of  Colleges,  &c.,  &c,  from  the  Thirteenth  Century  to  1883. 

The  Examination  Statutes  for  the  Degrees  of  B.A.,  B.  Mus., 

B.C.L.,  and  B.M.     Revised  to  the  end  of  Michaelmas  Term,  1887.     8vo. 
sewed,  is. 

The  Students  Handbook  to  the  University  and  Colleges  of 

Oxford.     Ninth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d. 


MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  &e. 

Acland(H.  W.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).     Synopsis  of  the  Pathological 

Series  in  the  Oxford  Museum.     1867.    8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Annals  of  Botany.     Edited  by  Isaac   Bayley  Balfour,  M.A., 

M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Sydney  H.  Vines,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.,  and  William  Gilson  Farlow, 
M.D.,  Professor  of  Cryptogamic  Botany  in  Harvard  University,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  U.S.A.,  and  other  Botanists.    Royal  8vo.    Vol.  L,  half  morocco,  1/.  i6j. 
Vol.  II.  No.  1.    Just  Published. 

Bur  don- Sander  son  (J.,  M.D.,  F.R.SS.  L.  and  E.).  Transla- 
tions of  Foreign  Biological  Memoirs.  I.  Memoirs  on  the  Physiology  of  Nerve, 
of  Muscle,  and  of  the  Electrical  Organ.     Medium  8vo.  2  is. 

De  Bary  (Dr.  A.).     Comparative  Anatomy  of  the   Vegetative 

Organs  of  the  Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  Translated  and  Annotated  by  F.  O. 
Bower,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  and  D.  H.  Scott,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  F.L.S.  With  241 
woodcuts  and  an  Index.    Royal  8vo.,  half  morocco,  1/.  2s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  13 

De  Bary  [Dr.  A.)    Comparative  Morphology  and  Biology  of  the 

Fungi  Mycetozoa  and  Bacteria.  Authorised  English  Translation  by  Henry 
E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.A.  Revised  by  Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
With  198  Woodcuts.     Royal  8vo.,  half  morocco,  i/.  2s.  6d. 

Lectures  on  Bacteria.  Second  improved  edition.  Au- 
thorised translation  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.A.  Revised  by  Isaac  Bayley 
Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.     With  20  Woodcuts.     Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Goebel  {Dr.  K.).  Outlines  of  Classification  and  Special  Mor- 
phology of  Plants.  A  New  Edition  of  Sachs'  Text  Book  of  Botany,  Book  II. 
English  Translation  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.A.  Revised  by  I.  Bayley  Balfour, 
M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.     With  407  Woodcuts.     Royal  8vo.  half  morocco,  21s. 

M idler  (J.).     On  certain  Variations  in  the  Vocal  Organs  of 

the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.  Translated  by  F.  J.  Bell,  B.A., 
and  edited,  with  an  Appendix,  by  A.  H.  Garrod,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  WithPlates. 
1878.    4to.  paper  covers,  *js.  6d. 

Price  [Bartholomew,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).     Treatise  on  Infinitesimal 

Calculus. 

Vol.  I.  Differential  Calculus.    Second  Edition.    8vo.  14J.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  Integral  Calculus,  Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential  Equations. 
Second  Edition,  1865.     8vo.  18s. 

Vol. III.  Statics,  including  Attractions;   Dynamics  of  a  Material  Particle. 
Second  Edition,  1868.    8vo.  16s. 

Vol.  IV.  Dynamics  of  Material  Systems;  together  with  a  chapter  on  Theo- 
retical Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     1862.    8vo.  16s. 

Pritchard  (C,  D.D.,  F.R.S.).     Uranometria  Nova  Oxoniensis. 

A  Photometric  determination  of  the  magnitudes  of  all  Stars  visible  to  the  naked 
eye,  from  the  Pole  to  ten  degrees  south  of  the  Equator.     1885.     Royal  8vo. 
s.6d. 

Astronomical    Observatiotts    made    at    the    University 

Observatory,  Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,  D.D.  No.  1. 
1878.     Royal  8vo.  paper  covers,  3-r.  6d. 

Rigaud's  Correspondence  of  Scientific  Men  of  the  lyth  Century, 

with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and  Index  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rigaud, 
M.A.     2  vols.     1841-1862.    8vo.  18s.  6d. 

Rollestoti  (George y  M.D.,  F.R.S.).     Forms  of  Animal  Life. 

A  Manual  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  with  descriptions  of  selected  types. 
Second  Edition.  Revised  and  enlarged  by  W.  Ilatchett  Jackson,  M.A. 
Medium,  8vo.  cloth  extra,  1/.  16s. 

Scientific  Papers  and  Addresses.     Arranged  and  Edited 


by  William  Turner,  M.B.,  F.R.S.     With  a  Biographical  Sketch  by  Edward 
Tylor,  F.R.S.     With  Portrait,  Plates,  and  Woodcuts.     2  vols.  8vo.   1/.  \s. 

Sachs  {Julius  von).     Lectures  on  the  Physiology  of  Plants. 

Translated  by  H.  Marshall  Ward,  M.A.     With  445  Woodcuts.     Royal  8vo. 
half  morocco,  1/.  1  is.  6d. 


t  4  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Westwood  (J.  O.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).      Thesaurus  Entomologicus 

Hopeianus,  or  a  Description  of  the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to 
the  University  by  the  Rev.  William  Hope.  With  40  Plates.  1874.  Small 
folio,  half  morocco,  7/.  \os. 


Wbt  &acrefc  23oofc8  of  tij*  lEast. 

Translated  by  various  Oriental  Scholars,  and  edited  by 
F.  Max  Muller. 

[Demy  8vo.  cloth.] 

Vol.   I.    The   Upanishads.    Translated  by  F.  Max   Muller. 

Part  I.  The  A7zandogya-upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya- 
arawyaka,  The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad,  and  The  Va^asaneyi-sawhita- 
upanishad.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in   the 

Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  VasishMa,  and  BaudMyana.  Translated  by 
Prof.  Georg  Biihler.    Part  I.  Apastamba  and  Gautama.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  III.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism. Translated  by  James  Legge.  Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Reli- 
gious portions  of  the  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  IV.  The  Zend-Avesta.     Translated  by  James  Darme- 

steter.    Parti.    TheVendidad.     10s. 6d. 

Vol.  V.  The  Pahlavi  Texts.     Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  I.  The  Bundahij,  Bahman  Yaxt,  and  Shayast  la-shayast.    12s.  6d. 

Vols.  VI  and  IX.  The  Qur'an.     Parts  I  and  II.    Translated 

by  E.  H.  Palmer.     21s. 

Vol.  VII.    The  Institutes  of  Vishnu.    Translated  by  Julius 

Jolly.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  VIII.  The  Bhagavadgita,  with  The  Sanatsu^-atiya,  and 

The  Anugita.    Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  X.  The  Dhammapada,  translated  from  Pali  by  F.  Max 

Muller;  and  The  Sutta-Nipata,  translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll;  being 
Canonical  Books  of  the  Buddhists.    10s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  15 

Vol.  XL  Buddhist  Suttas.     Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W. 

Rhys  Davids.  I.  The  Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta  ;  2.  The  Dhamma-£akka- 
ppavattana  Sutta  ;  3.  The  Tevi^a  Suttanta ;  4.  The  Akahkheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  The  A"etokhila  Sutta ;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta ;  7.  The  Sabbasava 
Sutta.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  XII.  The  vSatapatha-Brahma/za,  according  to  the  Text 

of  the  Madhyandina  School.  Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  I. 
Books  I  and  II.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIII.  Vinaya  Texts.      Translated    from    the   Pali   by 

T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  I.  The  Patimokkha. 
The  Mahavagga,  I -IV.     ics.  6d. 

Vol.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the 

Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  VasishMa  and  Baudhayana.  Translated 
by  Georg  Buhler.     Part  II.     VasishMa  and  Baudhayana.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  XV.     The  Upanishads.     Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller. 

Part  II.  The  Ka^a-upanishad,  The  Muw^aka-upanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka- 
upanishad,  The  Brzhadarawyaka-upanishad,  The  6"vetajvatara-upanishad,  The 
Praj«a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitrayawa-Brahma/za-upanishad.     ioj.  6d. 

Vol.  XVI.    The   Sacred   Books   of  China.     The   Texts   of 

Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Part  II.  The  Yi  King. 
ioj.  6d. 

Vol.  XVII.   Vinaya  Texts.     Translated   from   the   Pali   by 

T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mahavagga, 
V-X.     The  A-ullavagga,  I-III.     ios.6d. 

Vol.  XVIII.   Pahlayi    Texts.      Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  II.     The  Daafistan-i  Dinik  and  The  Epistles  of  Manu^ihar.     12s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIX.  The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.    A  Life  of  Buddha 

by  A^vaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from  Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by 
Dharmaraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from  Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal. 
ioj.  6d. 

Vol.  XX.  Vinaya  Texts.    Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W. 

Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  III.  The  Aullavagga,  IV-XII. 
10s.  6d, 

Vol.  XXI.     The  Saddharma-pu?/^/arika ;   or,  the  Lotus  of  the 

True  Law.    Translated  by  H.  Kern.     12s.  6d. 

Vol.  XXII.    G^aina-Sutras;    Translated  from  Prakrit  by  Her- 
mann Jacobi.    Part  I.    The  AHranga-Sutra.    The  Kalpa-Sutra.    10s.  6d. 


1 6  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD, 

Vol.  XXIII.     The  Zend-Avesta.    Translated  by  James  Dar- 

mesteter.    Part  II.    The  Sirozahs,  Ya^ts,  and  Nyayij.     ios.  6d. 

Vol.  XXIV.   Pahlavi   Texts.      Translated    by  E.  W.  West. 

Part    III.     Dina-i    Mainog-i     Khirad,    iSikand-gumanik,    and     Sad-Dar. 
10s .  6d. 


Second  Series. 

Vol.  XXV.     Manu.     Translated  by  Georg  Biihler.    21  s. 
Vol.  XXVI.      The   Satapatha-Brahma^a.      Translated    by 

Julius  Eggeling.    Part  II.     12s.  6d. 

Vols.  XXVII  and  XXVIII.    The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Parts  III  and  IV. 
The  Li  A%  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on  the  Rules  of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial 
Usages.     2  5  j. 

Vols.  XXIX  and  XXX.     The  Grzhya-Sutras,  Rules  of  Vedic 

Domestic  Ceremonies.    Translated  by  Hermann  Oldenberg. 

Part  I  (Vol.  XXIX),  12s.  6d.    Just  Published. 
Part  II  (Vol.  XXX).     In  the  Press. 

Vol.   XXXI.     The   Zend-Avesta.     Part   III.     The   Yasna, 

Visparad,  Afrinagan,  and  Gahs.     Translated  by  L.  H.  Mills.     12^.  6d. 


The  following  Volumes  are  in  the  Press :— 

Vol.  XXXII.    Vedic  Hymns.    Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller. 

Part  I. 

Vol.    XXXIII.       Narada,    and    some    Minor     Law-books. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.     \_Preparing7\ 

Vol.  XXXIV.     The  Vedanta-Sutras,  with   Ankara's  Com- 
mentary.   Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.     [Preparing.] 

***  The  Second  Series  will  consist  of  Twenty-Four  Volumes. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  17 


Clamtkm;  j)r*ss  §&mt». 


I.    ENGLISH,  &e. 


An  Elementary  English  Grammar  and  Exercise  Book*     By 

O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

An  English  Grammar  and  Reading  Book,  for  Lower  Forms 

in  Classical  Schools.    By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.    Fourth  Edition.     Extra 
fcap.  8vo.   3 s.  6d. 

Typical  Selections  from  the  best  English  Writers,  with  Intro- 
ductory Notices.  Second  Edition.    In  2  vols.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each. 
Vol.  I.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.  Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay. 

Shairp  (J.  C,  LL.D).    Aspects  of  Poetry ;   being  Lectures 

delivered  at  Oxford.    Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 


A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.     By  John  Earle, 

M.A.    Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.  In  Prose  and  Verse.  With  Gram- 
matical Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.  Fourth 
Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

A  Second  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.    By  the  same  Author.  Extra 

fcap.  8vo.     4J-.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Primer,  with  Grammar,  Notes,  and  Glossary. 

By  the  same  Author.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Old  English  Reading  Primers  ;  edited  by  Henry  Sweet,  M.A. 

I.  Selected  Homilies  of  yElfric.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.,  stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

II.  Extracts  from  Alfred's  Orosius.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.,  stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

First  Middle  English  Primer,  zvith  Grammar  and  Glossary. 

By  the  same  Author.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Second  Middle  English   Primer.      Extracts   from    Chaucer, 

with  Grammar  and  Glossary.     By  the  same  Author.     Extra  leap.  8vo.  2s. 

A  Concise  Dictionary  of  Middle  English,  from  A.D.   1150  to 

1580.      By  A.  L.  Mayhew,  M.A.,  and  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.      Crown  8vo. 
half  roan,  *js.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular  Exposition  of 

the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.  By  H.  Sweet,  M.A.  Ext.  fcap.  SV0.4J.  td. 

C 


i8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Elementarbuch    des     Gesprochenen    Englisch.       Grammatik, 

Texte  und  Glossar.  Von  Henry  Sweet.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo., 
stiff  covers,  2s.  6d. 

History  of  English  Sounds  from    the  earliest  Period.     With 

full  Word-Lists.     By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  14s. 

Principles  of  English  Etymology.     First  Series.     The  Native 

Element.     By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.     Crown  8vo.  9J. 

The  Philology  of  the  English  Tongue.    By  J.  Earle,  M.A. 

Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  p.  6d. 

An  Icelandic  Primer,  with  Grammar,  Notes,  and  Glossary. 

By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  %s.  6d. 

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with  Notes,  Grammar,  and  Glossary. 

By  G.  Vigfusson,  M.A.,  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.     Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

The  Ormulum;    with  the  Notes  and  Glossary  of  Dr.  R.  M. 

White.    Edited  by  R.  Holt,  M.A.   1878.    2  vols.    Extra  fcap.  8 vo.  21  s. 

Specimens  of  Early  English.     A  New  and  Revised  Edition. 

With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index. 

Part  I.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D.  From  Old  English  Homilies  to  King  Horn 
(a.d.  1150  to  A.D.  1300).     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  gs. 

Part  II.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D.,  and  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.  From  Robert 
of  Gloucester  to  Gower  (a.d.  1298  to  a.d.  1393).  Third  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

Specimens   of  English    Literature,   from    the    *  Ploughmans 

Crede'  to  the  '  Shepheardes  Calender'  (a.d.  1394  to  a.d.  1579).  With  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.  Fourth 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d. 


The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers  the  Plowman,  in  three 

Parallel  Texts ;  together  with  Richard  the  Redeless.  By  William  Langland 
(about  1362-1399  a.d.).  Edited  from  numerous  Manuscripts,  with  Preface, 
Notes,  and  a  Glossary,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.     2  vols.  8vo.  31  j.  6d. 

The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers   the  Plowman,   by 

William  Langland.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.  Fourth 
Edition      Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Chaucer.     I.   The  Prologue    to    the    Canterbury    Tales;    the 

Knightes  Tale;  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.  Edited  by  R.  Morris,  LL.D. 
Sixty-sixth  thousand.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

■  II.  The   Prioresses    Tale ;    Sir   Thopas ;    The    Monkes 

Tale  ;  The  Clerkes  Tale  ;  The  Squieres  Tale,  &c.  Edited  by  W.  W.  Skeat, 
Litt.D.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Chaucer.    III.  The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Lawe  ;  The  Pardoneres 

Tale ;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale ;  The  Chanouns  Yemannes  Tale.  By  the 
same  Editor.    New  Edition,  Revised.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

IV.  Minor  Poems.     By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap. 

8vo.    Just  ready. 

Gamelyn,  The  Tale  of.     Edited  with  Notes,  Glossary,  &c.,  by 

W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.    Stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

Minot  {Laurence).     Poems.      Edited,  with  Introduction  and 

Notes,  by  Joseph  Hall,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  the  Hulme  Grammar  School, 
Manchester.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Spenser's  Faery  Queene.     Books  I  and  II.     Designed  chiefly 

for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D., 
and  Glossary  by  A.  L.  Mayhew,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  each. 

Hooker.     Ecclesiastical  Polity^  Book    L.     Edited   by   R.  W. 

Church,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8 vo.  2s. 

OLD  ENGLISH  DRAMA. 
The  Pilgrimage  to  Parnassus  with  The   Two  Parts  of  the 

Return  from  Parnassus.  Three  Comedies  performed  in  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge,  A.D.  mdxcvii-mdci.  Edited  from  MSS.  by  the  Rev.  W.  D. 
Macray,  M.A.,  F.S.A.     Medium  8vo.     Bevelled  Boards,  Gilt  top,  Ss.  6d. 

Marlowe  and  Greene.     Marlowe's   Tragical  History  of  Dr* 

Faustus,  and  Greene" 's  Honourable  History  of  Friar  Bacon  and  Friar  Bungay- 
Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  M.A.  New  and  Enlarged  Edition.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Marlowe.     Edward  II.     With  Introduction,  Notes,  &c.     By 

O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.    Paper  covers,  2s.     Cloth  3^. 

SHAKESPEARE. 
Shakespeare.     Select  Plays.     Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A., 

and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 
The  Merchant  of  Venice,     ijr.  Macbeth.     is.6d. 

Richard  the  Second,     I*.  6d.  Hamlet.     2j. 

Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A. 

The  Tempest,     is,  6d.  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,   is,  6d. 

As  You  Like  It.     is,  6d.  Coriolanus.    2s.  6d. 

Julius  Caesar.     2s.  Henry  the  Fifth.     2s. 

Richard  the  Third.     2s.  6d,  Twelfth  Night,     is.  6d, 

King  Lear.     is.  6d.  King  John,     is,  6d. 

Shakespeare  as  a  Dramatic  Artist ;    a  popular  Illustration  of 
the  Principles  of  Scientific  Criticism.  By  R.  G.  Moulton,  M.A.  Crown  8vo.  is. 

C  2 


20  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Bacon.     I.  Advancement  of  Learning.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis 

Wright,  M.A.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

II.  The  Essays.     With  Introduction   and  Notes.     By 

S.  H.  Reynolds,  M. A.,  late  Fellow  of  Brasenose  College.     In  Preparation. 

Milton.     I.  Areopagitica.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By 

John  W.  Hales,  M.A.    Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3-r. 

II.  Poems.     Edited  by  R.  C,  Browne,   M.A.     2  vols. 

Fifth  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s.  6d.   Sold  separately,  Vol.  1. 4s. ;  Vol.  II.  is. 

In  paper  covers  : — 
Lycidas,  id.        L'Allegro,  id.        II  Penseroso,  4^.        Comus,  6d. 

III.  Paradise  Lost.    Book  I.    Edited  by  II.  C.  Beeching. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  cover,  is.  6d. ;  in  white  Parchment,  3-r.  6d. 

IV.  Samson  Agonistes.     Edited  with  Introduction  and 


Notes  by  John  Churton  Collins.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  is. 

Bunyan.  I.  The  Pilgrim  s  Progress,  Grace  Abounding,  Rela- 
tion of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bunyan.  Edited,  with  Biographical 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.  1879.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5^. 
In  ornamental  Parchment,  6s. 

II.   Holy  War,  &*c     Edited    by    E.   Venables,    M.A. 

In  the  Press. 

Clarendon.      History  of  the   Rebellion.      Book    VI.      Edited 

by  T.  Arnold,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Dryden.     Select  Poems.     Stanzas   on   the    Death   of  Oliver 

Cromwell;  Astroea  Redux;  Annus  Mirabilis ;  Absalom  and  Achitophel ; 
Religio  Laici ;  The  Hind  and  the  Panther.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  %s.  6d. 

Locke's  Condtict  of  the  Understanding.  Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  &c,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.    Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Addison.   Selections  from  Papers  in  the  Spectator.  With  Notes. 

By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d.     In  ornamental  Parchment,  6s. 

Steele.     Selections  from  the  Tatler,  Spectator,  and  Guardian. 

Edited  by  Austin  Dobson.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d.   In  white  Parchment,  7*.  6d. 

Pope.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.   By  Mark  Pattison,  B.D. 

I.    Essay  on  Man.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

II.  Satires  and  Epistles.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Parnell.     The  Hermit.     Paper  covers,  2d. 

Gray.     Selected  Poems.     Edited  by  Edmund  Gosse.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.     Stiff  covers,  is.  6d.     In  white  Parchment,  3s. 

Elegy  and  Ode  on  Eton  College.     Paper  covers,  %d% 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  21 

Goldsmith.     Selected  Poems.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and 

Notes,  by  Austin  Dobson.      Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3/.  6d.     In  white  Parchment, 
4s.  6d. 

The  Traveller.    With  Notes  by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.     Paper  covers,  is. 

The  Deserted  Village.     Paper  covers,  id. 


Johnson.     I.  Rasselas.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     Bevelled  boards,  3s.  6d.     In 
white  Parchment,  4-r.  6d. 

II.  Rasselas ;  Lives  of  Dry  den  and  Pope.     Edited  by 

Alfred  Milnes,  M.A.  (London).     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 
Lives  of  Dryden  and  Pope.     Stiff  covers,  2s.  6d. 

III.  Life  of  Milton.     Edited,  with  Notes,  etc.,  by  C.  H. 

Firth,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.  6d.     Stiff  cover,  is.  6d. 

IV.    Vanity  of  Human  Wishes.     With  Notes,  by  E.  J. 

Payne,  M.A.     Paper  covers,  ^d. 

V.    Wit  and  Wisdom  of  Samuel  Johnson.     Edited   by 

G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.     Crown  8vo.   js.  6d. 

VI.  Boszvells  Life  of  Johnson.     With  the  Journal  of  a 


Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  Edited,  with  copious  Notes,  Appendices,  and  Index,  by 
G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C.L.,  Pembroke  College.  With  Portraits  and  Facsimiles. 
6  vols.     Medium  8vo.     Half  bound,  3/.  $s. 

Cowper.     Edited,  with   Life,   Introductions,  and   Notes,   by 
H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A. 

I.  The  Didactic  Poems  of  1782,  with  Selections  from  the 

Minor  Pieces,  a, d.  1779-1783.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3-r. 

II.   The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the 


Minor  Poems.  A.D.  1 784-1 799.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8 vo.  3 s. 

Burke.     Select  Works.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A. 

■  I.   Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents  ;  the  two  Speeches 

on  America.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  td. 

II.  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.    Second  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5*. 

III.  Four  Letters  071  the  Proposals  for  Peace  zvith  the 

Regicide  Directory  of  France.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  $s. 

Keats.  Hyperion,  Book  I.  With  Notes  by  W.  T.  Arnold,  B.A. 

Paper  covers,  4 d. 

Byron.     Childe  Harold.    Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.    Extra'fcap.  8vo.    $s.  6d.     In  white  Parchment,  5*. 


22  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Scott.     Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.     Edited  with  Preface  and 

Notes  by  W.  Minto,  M.A.     With  Map.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     Stiff  covers,  2s. 
Ornamental  Parchment,  3-r.  6d. 

Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.     Introduction  and  Canto  I, 

with  Preface  and  Notes,  by  the  same  Editor.     6d. 


II.    LATIN. 

Rudimenta  Latina.     Comprising  Accidence,  and  Exercises  of 

a  very  Elementary  Character,  for  the  use  of  Beginners.     By  John  Barrow 
Allen,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

An  Elementary  Latin   Grammar.      By   the    same  Author. 

Fifty-Seventh  Thousand.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2S.6d. 

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the  same  Author.     Fourth 

Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

A  Second  Latin  Exercise  Book.    By  the  same  Author.    Extra 

fcap.  8vo.   is.  6d. 

A  Key  to  First  and  Second  Latin  Exercise  Books,  in  one  volume,  price  gx. 
Supplied  to  Teachers  only  on  application  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Clarendon  Press. 

Reddenda  Minora,  or  Easy  Passages,  Latin  and  Greek,  for 

Unseen  Translation.     For  the  use  of  Lower  Forms.     Composed  and  selected 
by  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Anglice     Reddenda,    or    Extracts,    Latin    and     Greek,    for 

Unseen  Translation.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    Third  Edition,  Revised  and 
Enlarged.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Anglice   Reddenda.     Second  Series.     By  the   same   Author. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  &. 

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin.     For  the  use  of  Passmen 

and  others.    Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.     Seventh  Edition.    Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Exercises  in   Latin  Prose  Composition;    with  Introduction, 

Notes,  and  Passages  of  Graduated  Difficulty  for  Translation  into  Latin.     By 
G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Hints  and  Helps  for  Latin  Elegiacs.    By  H.  Lee-Warner,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J.  6d. 

First  Latin  Reader.     By  T.  J.  Nunns,  M.A.     Third  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Caesar.     The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and 

Maps.    By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A. 

The  Gallic  War.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4*.  6d. 

The  Gallic  War.     Books  I,  II.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     is. 

The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

The  Civil  War.    Book  I.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  23 

Cicero.      Speeches  against  Catilina.     By  E.  A.  Upcott,  M.A., 

Assistant  Master  in  Wellington  College.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.   2s.  6d. 

Selection  of  interesting  and  descriptive  passages.    With 

Notes.    By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.    In  three  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8VO.4J.  6d. 

Each  Part  separately,  limp,  is.  6d. 
Part  I.      Anecdotes  from  Grecian  and  Roman  History.    Third  Edition. 
Part  II.    Omens  and  Dreams:  Beauties  of  Nature.    Third  Edition. 
Part  III.  Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces.    Third  Edition. 

■  De   Senecttite.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  L.  Huxley,  M.A.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

■ Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).     With  Notes.     By  the 

late  C.  E.  Prichard,   M.A.,  and   E.  R.    Bernard,    M.A.      Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J. 

Select    Orations    (for    Schools).      In  Verrem   I.      De 

Imperio  Gn.  Pompeii.    Pro  Archia.    Philippica  IX.    With  Introduction  and 
Notes  by  J.  R.  King,  M.A.     Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Ln    Q.   Caecilium   Divinatio,   and  In   C.  Verrem   Actio 

Prima.     With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  J.  R.  King,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
limp,  is.  6d. 

Speeches    against    Catilina.      With    Introduction    and 

Notes,  by  E.  A.  Upcott,  M.A.      In  one  or  two  Parts.      Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
2S.  td. 

Cornelius  Nepos.    With  English  Notes.     By  Oscar  Browning, 

M.A.     Third  Edition.    Revised  by  W.  R.  Inge,  M.A.     (In  one  or  two  Parts.) 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Horace.     Selected  Odes.     With  Notes  for  the  use  of  a  Fifth 

Form.    By  E.  C.  Wickham,  M.A.    In  one  or  two  Parts.    Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  2S. 

Livy.     Selections  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and  Maps.     By 

H.  Lee- Warner,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    In  Parts, limp,  each  is.  6d. 
Part  I.  The  Caudine  Disaster.    Part  II.  Hannibal's  Campaign 
in  Italy.     Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War. 

Books   V-VII.     With    Introduction    and    Notes.     By 

A.  R.  Cluer,  B.A.      Second  Edition.      Revised  by  P.  E.  Matheson,   M.A. 
(In  one  or  two  Parts.)     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  e,s. 

Books   XXI,  XXII,.  and   XXIII.     With    Introduction 

and  Notes.    By  M.  T.  Tatham,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4*.  6d. 

Book  XXII.     By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 


2s.  6d. 

Ovid.    Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.    With  Introductions 

and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.    By  W.  Ramsay,  M.A. 
Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.     Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5*.  6d. 


24  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Ovid.  Tristia.  Book  I.  The  Text  revised,  with  an  Intro- 
duction and  Notes.     By  S.  G.  Owen,  B.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Plautus.     Captivi.     Edited  by  W.  M.  Lindsay,  M.A.     Extra 

fcap.  8vo.     (In  one  or  two  Parts.)  2s.  6d. 

The  Trinummus.  With  Notes  and  Introductions.  (In- 
tended for  the  Higher  Forms  of  Public  Schools.)  By  C.  E.  Freeman,  M.A., 
and  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J. 

Pliny.     Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).    With  Notes.     By  the 

late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Sallust.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  W.  W.  Capes, 

M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.    \s.  6d. 

Tacitus.  The  Annals.  Books  I-IV.  Edited,  with  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes  (for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Junior  Students),  by  H.  Furneaux, 
M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.   5s. 

The  Annals.     Book  I.     With  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  2s. 

Terence.     Andria.     With  Notes  and  Introductions.     By  C. 

E.  Freeman,  M.A.,  and  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Adelphi.     With  Notes  and  Introductions.    (Intended  for 

the  Higher  Forms  of  Public  Schools.)     By  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  3J. 

Phormio.      With    Notes    and   Introductions.      By  A. 

Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Tibullus  and  Proper  tins.    Selections.    Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay, 

M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    (In  one  or  two  vols.)  6s. 

Virgil.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  T.  L.  Papillon, 

M.A.    Two  vols.   Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d.    The  Text  separately,  4s.  6d. 

Bucolics.     Edited  by  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.      In  one  or 

two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Aeneid  I.      With    Introduction   and   Notes,   by  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Aeneid  IX.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

A.  E.  Haigh,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Hertford  College,  Oxford.     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  limp,  is.  6d.     In  two  Parts,  2S, 


Avianus,  The  Fables  of.     Edited,  with  Prolegomena,  Critical 

Apparatus,  Commentary,  etc.     By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A.,  LL.D.     Demy  8vo. 
8j.  6d. 

Catulli  Veronensis  Liber.     Iterum  recognovit,  apparatum  cri- 

ticum  prolegomena  appendices  addidit,  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     1878.    Demy 
8vo.  16s. 

A  Commentary  on  Catullus.     By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A. 

1876.    Demy  8vo.  i6j. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  25 

Catnlli  Veronensis  Carmina  Selecta,  secundum  recognitionem 

Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

Cicero  de  Oratore.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.    By  A.  S. 

Wilkins,  Litt.  D. 

Bookl.  Second  Edition.  1888.  8vo.  p.  6d.         Book  II.  1881.  8vo.  5*. 

Philippic  Orations.     With  Notes.     By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     1879.     8vo.  \os.  6d. 

Select  Letters.    With  English  Introductions,  Notes,  and 

Appendices.     By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Demy  8vo.  18s. 

Select  Letters.     Text.     By  the  same  Editor.     Second 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s. 

pro  Cluentio.     With  Introduction   and   Notes.     By  W. 


Ramsay, M.A.  Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.   2nd  Ed.  Ext.  fcap.  8vo.  y.  6d. 

Horace.  With  a  Commentary.  Volume  I.   The  Odes,  Carmen 

Seculare,  and  Epodes.      By  Edward  C.  Wickham,  M.A.     Second  Edition. 
1877.     Demy  8vo.  I2.r. 

A  reprint  of  the  above,  in  a  size  suitable  for  the  use 

of  Schools.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

Livy,  Book  I.     With   Introduction,  Historical  Examination, 
and  Notes.     By  J.  R.  Seeley,  M.A.    Second  Edition.     1881.    8vo.  6s. 

Ovid.     P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Ibis.     Ex  Novis  Codicibus  edidit, 

Scholia  Vetera  Commentarium  cum  Prolegomenis  Appendice  Indice  addidit, 
R.  Ellis,  A.M.    8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Persius.     The  Satires.   With  a  Translation  and  Commentary. 

By  John  Conington,  M.A.      Edited  by  Henry  Nettleship,  M.A.     Second 
Edition.     1874.     8vo.  Js.  6d. 

Juvenal.     XIII  Satires.      Edited,    with    Introduction    and 

Notes,  byC.  H.  Pearson,  M.A.,  and  Herbert  A.  Strong,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Professor 
of  Latin  in  Liverpool  University  College,  Victoria  University.     In  two  Parts. 
Crown  8vo.     Complete,  6s. 
Also  separately,  Part  I.  Introduction,  Text,  etc.,  ?>s.        Part  II.  Notes,  $s.  6d. 

Tacitus.     The  Annals.     Books  I- VI.     Edited,  with    Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  H.  Furneaux,  M.A.    8vo.  i8j. 


King  {j.  E.,  M.A)  and  C.  Cookson,  M.A.     The  Principles  of 

Sound  and  Inflexion,  as  illustrated  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  Languages.    1888. 
8vo.  1 8  s. 

Nettleship  (H.,  M.A.).    Lectures  and  Essays  on  Subjects  con- 
nected with  Latin  Scholarship  and  Literature.     Crown  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

The  Roman  Satura.     8vo.  sewed,  is. 

Ancient  Lives  of  Vergil.     8vo.  sewed,  2 s. 


26  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Papillon  (T.  L.,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology. 

Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     1882.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Pinder  {North,  M.A.),     Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin 

Poets.     1869.     8vo.  15J. 

Sellar  ( W.  Y.,  M.A.).     Roman  Poets  of  the  Augustan  Age. 

Virgil.     New  Edition.    1883.    Crown  8vo.  9s. 

*  Roman  Poets  of  the  Republic.     New  Edition,  Revised 

and  Enlarged.     1881.     8vo.  14J. 

Wordsworth  {J.,  M.A.).     Fragments  and  Specimens  of  Early 

Latin.     With  Introductions  and  Notes.    1874.     8vo.   i8j. 

III.    GREEK. 

A  Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in  that  Language. 

By  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.  Seventh  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

A  Greek  Testament  Primer.  An  Easy  Grammar  and  Read- 
ing Book  for  the  use  of  Students  beginning  Greek.  By  the  Rev.  E.  Miller, 
M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J.  6d. 

Easy  Greek  Reader.     By  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.     In  one  or 

two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Graecae  Grammaticae  Rudimenta  in  usum  Scholarum.    Auc- 

tore  Carolo  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.    Nineteenth  Edition,  1882.     i2mo.  4J. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's 

4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.    Twenty-first  Edition.    1886. 
Square  i2mo.  fs.  6d. 

Greek  Verbs,  Irregular  and  Defective.    By  W.  Veitch.    Fourth 

Edition.     Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Greek  Accentuation  (for  Schools)  :    abridged 

from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.6d. 

A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers: — 

First  Greek  Reader.    By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke,  M.L.    Second 

Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Second  Greek  Reader.     By  A.  M.  Bell,  M.A.     Extra  fcap. 

8vo.  3J.  6d. 

Fourth  Greek  Reader ;  being  Specimens  of  Greek  Dialects. 

With  Introductions,  etc.    By  W.  W.  Merry,  D.D.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  6d. 

Fifth   Greek  Reader.     Selections  from    Greek    Epic    and 

Dramatic  Poetry,  with  Introductions  and  Notes.    By  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  6d. 

The  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry :  being  a  Col- 
lection of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Poets,  with  Introductory 
Notices  and  Notes.    By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  8s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD,  27 

A  Golden  Treasury  of  Greek  Prose,  being  a  Collection  of  the 

finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose  Writers,  with  Introductory  Notices 
and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  and  J.  E.L.  Shadwell,  M.A.  Extrafcap. 
8vo.  \s.  6d. 

Aeschylus.    Prometheus  Bound  (for  Schools).     With  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes,  by  A.  O.  Prickard,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2S. 

Agamemnon.    With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Arthur 

Sidgwick,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     In  one  or  two  parts.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Choephoroi.    With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  the  same 

Editor.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.   3J. 

Eumenides.     With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  the  same 


Editor.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Aristophanes.     In  Single  Plays.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

Introductions,  &c,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  D.D.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
I.  The  Clouds,  Second  Edition,  2s. 
II.  The  Acharnians,  Third  Edition.,    In  one  or  two  parts,  3s. 

III.  The  Frogs,  Second  Edition.     In  one  or  two  parts,  3^. 

IV.  The  Knights.     In  one  or  two  parts,  3.?. 

Cedes.     Tabula.     With   Introduction  and   Notes.     By  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  zs.  6d. 

Demosthenes.      Orations  against  Philip.     With  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.,  and  P.  E.  Matheson,  M.A.      Vol.  I. 
Philippic  I.     Olynthiacs  I-III.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3-r. 

Euripides.    Alcestis  (for  Schools).    By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Hecuba.     With  Notes  by  C.  H.  Russell.     In  the  Press. 

Helena.     Edited,   with    Introduction,   Notes,  etc.,    for 

Upper  and  Middle  Forms.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  %s. 

Heracleidae.     Edited  with   Introduction  and  Notes  by 


C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3*. 

Iphigenia  in  Tauris.    Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 

etc.,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
cloth,  3J. 

Medea.     By  C.  B.  Heberden,  M.A.     In  one  or  two  Parts. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Herodotus,  Book  IX.     Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Evelyn  Abbott, 

M.A.     In  one  or  two  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3s. 

Herodotus ■,  Selections  from.    Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 

and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  D.D.     Extrafcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 


28  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Homer.     Odyssey,   Books   I-XII   (for   Schools).     By  W.  W. 

Merry,  D.D.   Fortieth  Thousand.   (In  one  or  two  Parts.)   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  gJ. 
Books  I,  and  II,  separately,  each  is.  6d. 

■ Odyssey,  Books   XIII-XXIV    (for    Schools).     By   the 

same  Editor.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  $s. 

Iliad,  Book  I  (for  Schools).     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Iliad,  Books  I-XII  (for  Schools).  With  an  Introduction, 

a   brief  Homeric  Grammar,   and  Notes.     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A.     Second 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

■ ■  Iliad.  Books  VI   and  XXI.      With    Introduction    and 


Notes.  By  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d.  each. 

Lucian.      Vera   Historia   (for   Schools).     By    C.   S.   Jerram, 

M.A.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Lysias.     Epitaphios.     Edited,  with   Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  F.  J.  Snell,  B.A.     (In  one  or  two  Parts.)     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Plato.   Metro.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  St.  George 

Stock,  M.A.,  Pembroke  College.     (In  one  or  two  Parts.)      Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
2s.  6d. 

Plato.     The  Apology.     With    Introduction    and    Notes.     By 

St.  George  Stock,  M.A.     (In  one  or  two  Parts.)     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Sophocles.      For   the   use   of  Schools.      Edited   with    Intro- 
ductions and  English  Notes     By  Lewis  Campbell,  M.  A.,  and  Evelyn  Abbott, 
M.A.     New  and  Revised  Edition.     2  Vols.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     10s.  6d. 
Sold  separately,  Vol.  I,  Text,  4s.  6d. ;  Vol.  II,  Explanatory  Notes,  6s. 

Sophocles.     In    Single  Plays,  with  English   Notes,  &c.     By 

Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp. 
Oedipus  Tyrannus,  Philoctetes.  New  and  Revised  Edition,  2s.  each. 
Oedipus  Coloneus,  Antigone,  is.  gd.  each. 

Ajax,        Electra,        Trachiniae,  2s.  each. 

Oedipus   Rex:    Dindorfs    Text,    with    Notes    by    the 

present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Theocritus  (for   Schools).     With   Notes.     By  H.  Kynaston, 

D.D.  (late  Snow).    Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Xenophon.     Easy  Selections  (for  Junior   Classes).     With  a 

Vocabulary,  Notes,  and  Map.     By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C. L.,  and  C.  S.  Jerram, 
M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Selections  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and  Maps.     By 

J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.    Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Anabasis,  Book  I.     Edited  for  the  use  of  Junior  Classes 

and  Private  Students.   With  Introduction,  Notes,  etc.    By  J.  Marshall,  M.A., 
Rector  of  the  Royal  High  School,  Edinburgh.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  29 

Xenophon.    Anabasis,  Book  II.     With  Notes  and  Map.     By 

C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    2s. 

Anabasis,  Book  III.    Edited  with  Introduction,  Analysis, 

Notes,  etc.,  by  J.  Marshall,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Cyropaedia,  Book  I.     With  Introduction  and  Notes  by 

C.  Bigg,  D.D.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Cyropaedia,  Books  IV  and  V.     With  Introduction  and 


Notes  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Hellenica,  Books  I,  II.     With  Introductions  and  Notes 

by  G.  E.  Underbill,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Magdalen  College.     Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  3s. 

Aristotle  s  Politics.  With  an  Introduction,  Essays,  and  Notes. 

By   W.  L.  Newman,   M.A.,  Fellow   of  Balliol   College.     Vols.   I   and   II. 
Medium  Svo.  28J. 

Aristotle.  On  the  History  of  the  Process  by  which  the  Aristo- 
telian Writings  arrived  at  their  present  form.  An  Essay  by  Richard  Shute, 
M.A.,  late  Student  of  Christ  Church;  with  a  Brief  Memoir  of  the  Author. 
8vo.  *js.  6d. 

Aristotelian  Studies.     I.  On   the   Structure  of  the   Seventh 

Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.   By  J.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.    8vo.  stiff,  5/. 

Aristotelis    Ethica  Nicomacliea,   ex    recensione   Immanuelis 

Bekkeri.    Crown  8vo.  5*. 

Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.     The  Orations  of  Demosthenes 

and  ^Eschines  on  the  Crown.     With   Introductory  Essays  and  Notes.    By 
G.  A.  Simcox,  M.A.,  and  W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.     1872.  8vo.  12s. 

Head  [Barclay  V.).    Historia  Numorum:  A  Manual  of  Greek 

Numismatics.     Royal  8vo.  half-bound.     2/.  2s. 

Hicks  (E.  L.,M.A.).  A  Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscrip- 
tions.   Demy  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Homer.     Odyssey,  Books  I-XII.     Edited  with  English  Notes, 

Appendices,  etc.     By  W.  W.  Merry,  D.D.,  and  the  late  James  Riddell,  M.A. 
1886.    Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.  16s. 

Homer.  A  Grammar  of  the  Homeric  Dialect.   By  D.  B.  Monro, 

M.A.     Demy  8vo.  ios..6d. 

Polybius.    Selections  from  Polybius.    Edited  by  J.  L.  Strachan- 

Davidson,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Balliol  College.     With  three  Maps. 
Medium  8vo.  buckram,  2\s. 

Sophocles.     The  Plays  and  Fragments.     With  English  Notes 

and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.    2  vols. 

Vol.1.    Oedipus  Tyrannus.    Oedipus  Coloneus.    Antigone.     8vo.  16s 
Vol.  II.  Ajax.    Electra.  Trachiniae.  Philoctetes.  Fragments.     Svo.  i6j. 


3o  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

IV.   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN. 

Br  ache?  s  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French  Language 

Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.    Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

Historical  Grammar  of  the  French  Language.    Trans- 
lated by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.    Fourth  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Works  by  GEORGE  SAINTSBURY,  M.A. 

Primer  of  French  Literature.    Extra  fcap.  8 vo.  is. 
Short  History  of  French  Literature.     Crown  8 vo.  ios.6d. 
Specimens  of  French  Literature \  from  Villon  to  Hugo.    Crown 

8vo.  9-r.  


MASTERPIECES  OF  THE  FRENCH  DRAMA. 
Cornellfe's  Horace.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Precieuses  Ridicules.     Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  If.  6d. 

Racine's  Esther.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Beaumarchais>  LeBarbier  de  Seville.   Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Austin  Dobson.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Voltaire's  Mc'rope.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s. 

Mussefs  On  ne  badine pas  avec  V Amour,  and  Fantasio.  Edited, 

with   Prolegomena,  Notes,  etc.,  by  Walter   Hemes   Pollock.    Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  2S. 

The  above  six  Plays  may  be  had  in  ornamental  case,  and  bound 
in  Imitation  Parchment,  price  \zs.  6d. 


■ 


Perraulfs  Popidar  Tales.     Edited  from  the  Original  Editions, 

with  Introduction,  etc.,  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.      Extra  fcap.  8vo.,  paper 
boards,  5s.  6d. 

Sainte-Beuve.   Selections  from  the  Causeries  du  Lundi.   Edited 

by  George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Quinefs  Lettres  a  sa  Mere.     Selected  and  edited  by  George 

Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Gautier,  Theophile.     Scenes  of  Travel.     Selected  and  Edited 

by  George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

&  Eloquence  de  la  Chaire  et  de  la  Tribune  Frangaises.     Edited 
by  Paul  Blouet,  B.A.     Vol.  I.   Sacred  Oratory.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,   OXFORD.  31 


Edited  by  GUSTAVE  MASSON,  B.A. 

Corneilles  Cinna.    With  Notes,  Glossary,  etc.   Extra  fcap.  8vo. 

cloth,  2s.     Stiff  covers,  is.  6d. 

Louis  XIV  and  his  Contemporaries  ;  as  described  in  Extracts 

from  the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.  With  English  Notes, 
Genealogical  Tables,  &c.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Maistre,  Xavier  de.     Voyage  autotir  de  ma  Chambre.     Ourika, 

by  Madame  de  Duras;  Le  Vieux  Tailleur,  by  MM.  Erckmann-Chatrian ; 
La  Veillee  de  Vincennes,  by  Alfred  de  Vigny ;  Les  Jumeaux  de  l'Hotel 
Corneille,by  Edmond  About ;  Mesaventures  d'un  Ecolier,  by  Rodolphe  Topffer. 
Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

■    Voyage  autour  de  ma  Chambre.     Limp,  is,  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Fonrberies   de    Scapin,   and   Racine s  Athalie. 

With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Fonrberies  de  Scapin.    With  Voltaire's  Life  of 

Moliere.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers,  is,  6d. 

Moliere's  Les  Femmes  Sav antes.     With  Notes,  Glossary,  etc. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  cloth,  2s.     Stiff  covers,  is,  6d. 

Racine's  Andromaque,  and    Corneilles  Le  Menteur,      With 

Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Regnard's  Le  Joueur,  and  Brueys  and  Palaprafs  Le  Grondeur, 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Sevigne",  Madame  de,  and  her  chief  Contemporaries,  Selections 

from  the  Correspondence  of.  Intended  more  especially  for  Girls'  Schools. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  ^s. 

Dante.     Selections  from  the  Inferno.     With  Introduction  and 

Notes.    By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Tasso.     La  Gerusalemme  Liberata.     Cantos  i,  ii.     With  In- 
troduction and  Notes.    By  the  same  Editor.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is.  6d. 

V.    GERMAN. 

Scherer  (  W.).     A  History  of  German  Literature.    Translated 

from  the  Third  German  Edition  by  Mrs.  F.  Conybeare.  Edited  by  F.  Max 
Muller.     2  vols.  8vo.  2U. 

Max  Miiller.     The  German  Classics,  from  the  Fourth  to  the 

Nineteenth  Century.  With  Biographical  Notices,  Translations  into  Modern 
German,  and  Notes.  By  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.  A  New  Edition,  Revised, 
Enlarged,  and  Adapted  to  Wilhelm  Scherer's  '  History  of  German  Literature,' 
by  F.  Lichtenstein.  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  21s. 


32  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


GERMAN  COURSE.     By  HEKMANBT  LANGE. 

The  Germans  at  Home ;  a  Practical  Introduction  to  German 

Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the  Essentials  of  German  Grammar. 
Third  Edition.     8vo.  2s.  6d. 

The  German  Manual ;  a  German  Grammar,  Reading  Book, 

and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.    8vo.  "js.  6d. 

Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo.  $s.  6d. 

German  Composition ;  A  Theoretical  and  Practical  Guide  to 

the  Art  of  Translating  English  Prose  into  German.    Ed.  2.     8vo.  4s.  6d. 

German  Spelling ;   A  Synopsis  of  the  Changes  which  it  has 

undergone  through  the  Government  Regulations  of  1880.     Paper  covers,  6d. 


Lessing's  Laokoon.    With  Introduction,  English  Notes,  etc. 

By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc,  M.  A.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4.?.  6d. 

Schiller  s  Wilhelm  Tell.    Translated  into  English  Verse  by 

E.  Massie,  MA.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5s. 

GERMAN  CLASSICS. 

With  Biographical,  Historical,  and  Critical  Introductions,  Argu?nents 
{to  the  Dramas),  and  Complete  Commentaries. 

Edited  by  C.  A.  BUCHHEIM,  Phil.  Doc.  Professor  in  King's 
College,  London. 

Lessing: 

(a)  Nathan  der  Weise.     A  Dramatic  Poem.    4s.  6d. 

(b)  Minna  von  Barnhelm.     A  Comedy.    $s.  6d. 

Goethe  : 

(a)  Egmont.     A  Tragedy.    3s. 

(b)  Iphige?iie  auf  Tauris.     A  Drama.    3^. 

Schiller : 

(a)  Wilhelm  Tell.    A  Drama.    Large  Edition.    With  a  Map.    35.  Cd. 

(b)  Wilhelm  Tell.     School  Edition.    With  a  Map.    2s. 

(c)  Historische  Skizzen.    With  a  Map.    is.  6d. 

Heine : 

(a)  Prosa :  being  Selections  from  his  Prose  Writings.   4^.  6d. 

(b)  Harzreise.    Cloth,  is.  6d. ;  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

Modern  German  Reader.     A  Graduated   Collection  of  Ex- 
tracts from  Modern  German  Authors  : — 
Part  I.     Prose  Extracts.     With  English  Notes,  a  Grammatical  Appendix,  and 

a  Complete  Vocabulary.   Fourth  Edition.  2s.6d. 
Part  II.    Extracts  in  Prose  and  Poetry.     With  English  Notes  and  an  Index. 
Second  Edition.  2s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  33 

Becker  (the  Historian) : 

Friedrich  der  Grosse.  Edited,  with  Notes,  an  Historical  Introduc- 
tion, and  a  Map.  %s.  6d. 

Niebuhr : 

Griechische  Heroen-Geschichten  (Tales  of  Greek  Heroes).  Edited, 
with  English  Notes  and  a  Vocabulary,  by  Emma  S.  Buchheim.  Second, 
Revised  Edition,  cloth,  2s. 

An  Old  High  German  Primer.     With  Grammar,  Notes,  and 

Glossary.     By  Joseph  Wright,  Ph.D.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3*.  6d. 

A  Middle   High   German  Primer.      With  Grammar,  Notes, 

and  Glossary.     By  Joseph  Wright,  Ph.D.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  $s.  6d. 

VI.  MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL   SCIENCE,  &c. 

By  LEWIS  HENSLEY,  M.A. 

Figures  made  Easy  ;  a  first  Arithmetic  Book.  Crown  8vo.  6d. 
Answers   to   the  Examples  in  Figures  made  Easy,  together 

with  two  thousand  additional  Examples,  with  Answers.    Crown  8vo.    is. 

The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.     Crown  8vo.     is.  6d. 

Answers  to  the  Examples  in  the  Scholar  s  Arithmetic,     is,  6d. 

The  Scholar  s  Algebra.     Crown  8vo.     is.  6d. 


Aldis  (W,  S.,  M.A).     A  Text-Book  of  Algebra:  with  Answers 

to  the  Examples.     Crown  8vo.  *js.  6d. 

Baynes  (R.  E.,  M.A.).    Lessons  on  Thermodynamics.     1878. 

Crown  8vo.  js.  6d. 

Chambers   (G.   F.,  F.R.A.S.).     A    Handbook   of  Descriptive 

Astronomy.    Third  Edition.     1877.    Demy  8vo.  28J. 

Clarke  (Col.  A.  R.,C.B.,R.E.).    Geodesy.    1880.    8vo.  12s.  6d. 

Cremona  (Luigi).     Elements  of  Projective  Geometry.     Trans- 
lated by  C.  Leudesdorf,  M.A.     8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Donkin.    Acoustics.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     Js.  6d. 

Etheridge  (R.).     Fossils  of  the  British  Islands,  Stratigraphi- 
cally  arranged.    Part  I.  Palaeozoic.     4to.  1/.  \os.    Jnst  ready. 

Euclid  Revised.      Containing  the  Essentials  of  the  Elements 

of  Plane  Geometry  as  given  by  Euclid   in  his  first  Six  Books.     Edited  by 
R.  C.  J.  Nixon,  M.A.     Crown  8vo. 

Sold  separately  as  follows, 
Book  I.    is.  Books  I,  II.    is,  6d. 

Books  I-IV.    3/.  6d.  Books  V,  VI.  3-r. 

D 


34  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Euclid. — Geometry  in   Space.     Containing   parts  of   Euclid's 

Eleventh  and  Twelfth  Books.     By  the  same  Editor.     Crown  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

Galton  {Douglas,  C.B.,  F.R.S.).     The  Construction  of  Healthy 

Dwellings.    Demy  8vo.     \os,  6d. 

Hamilton  {Sir  R.  G.  C),  and  J.  Ball.     Book-keeping.     New 

and  enlarged  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp  cloth,  2s. 

Ruled  Exercise  books  adapted  to  the  above  may  be  had,  price  2s. 

Har court  (A.  G.   Vernon,  M.A.),  and  H.  G.  Madan,  M.A. 

Exercises  in  Practical  Chemistry.  Vol.  I.  Elementary  Exercises.  Fourth 
Edition.    Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Maclaren  {Archibald).     A    System  of  Physical  Education  : 

Theoretical  and  Practical.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  p.  6d. 

Madan   {H   G.,   M.A.).      Tables    of   Qualitative    Analysis. 

Large  4to.  paper,  4^.  6d. 

Maxwell  {J.  Clerk,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).    A  Treatise  on  Electricity 

and  Magnetism.    Second  Edition.     2  vols.  Demy  8vo.  \l.  lis.  6d. 

An  Elementary    Treatise    on   Electricity.     Edited    by 

William  Garnett,  M.A.    Demy  8vo.  *js.  6d. 

Minchin  {G.  M.,  M.A.).  A  Treatise  on  Statics  with  Applica- 
tions to  Physics.  Third  Edition,  Corrected  and  Enlarged.  Vol.  I.  Equili- 
brium of  Coplanar  Forces.  8vo.  gs.   VoL  II.  Statics.  8vo.  16s. 

Uniplanar  Kinematics  of  Solids  and  Fluids.     Crown 

8vo.    Js.  6d. 

Phillips  {John,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).     Geology  of  Oxford  and  the 

Valley  of  the  Thames.     1871.   8vo.  21.?. 

Vesuvius.    1869.    Crown  8vo.    \as.  6d. 

Prestwich {Joseph, M.A., F.R.S.).    Geology,  Chemical, Physical, 

and  Stratigraphical.     In  two  Volumes. 
Vol.  I.     Chemical  and  Physical.     Royal  8vo.     25J. 

Vol.  II.    Stratigraphical  and  Physical.     With  a  new  Geographical  Map  of 
Europe.    Royal  8vo.  36.?. 

Rolleston  {George,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).      Forms  of  Animal  Life. 

A  Manual  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  with  descriptions  of  selected  types. 
Second  Edition.  Revised  and  enlarged  by  W.  Hatchett  Jackson,  M.A. 
Medium,  8vo.  cloth  extra,  1/.  ids. 

Smyth.    A  Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.      Observed,  Reduced, 

and  Discussed  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.N.  Revised,  condensed,  and 
greatly  enlarged  by  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.     1881.  8vo.    I2J. 

Stewart  {Balfour,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.).     An  Elementary  Treatise 

on  Heat,  with  numerous  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams.  Fifth  Edition.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  js.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  35 

Vernon-Harcourt  {L.  F.,  M.A.).     A   Treatise  on  Rivers  and 

Canals,  relating  to  the  Control  and  Improvement  of  Rivers,  and  the  Design, 
Construction,  and  Development  of  Canals.  2  vols.  (Vol.  I,  Text.  Vol.  II, 
Plates.)    8vo.  i\s, 

Harbours  and  Docks ;  their  Physical  Features,  History, 

Construction,  Equipment,  and  Maintenance ;  with  Statistics  as  to  their  Com- 
mercial Development.     2  vols.  8vo.  25J. 

Walker  (James,  M.A.).     The  Theory  of  a  Physical  Balance. 

8vo.  stiff  cover,  ^s.  6d. 

Watson  (H.  W.,  M.A.).    A  Treatise  on  the  Kinetic  Theory 

of  Gases.     1876.  8vo.  2,s.6d. 

Watson  (H.  W.,  D.  Sc,  F.R.S.),  and  S.  H.  Burbury,  M.A. 

I.  A  Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Generalised  Coordinates  to  the  Kinetics  of 

a  Material  System.     1879.  8vo.  6s. 

II.  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Electricity  and  Magnetism.     Vol.  I.  Electro- 
statics.    8vo.  iar.  bd. 

Williamson  (A.    W.,  Phil.  Doc,  F.R.S.).      Chemistry  for 

Students.    A  new  Edition,  with  Solutions.    1873.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  Ss.  6d. 


VII.  HISTORY. 

Bluntschli  (J,  K.).     The  Theory  of  the   State.      By  J.  K. 

Bluntschli,  late  Professor  of  Political  Sciences  in  the  University  of  Heidel- 
berg. Authorised  English  Translation  from  the  Sixth  German  Edition. 
Demy  8vo.  half  bound,  12s.  6d. 

Finlay  (George,  LL.D.).  A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Con- 
quest by  the  Romans  to  the  present  time,  B.C.  146  to  A.D.  1864.  A  new 
Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  considerable  ad- 
ditions, by  the  Author,  and  edited  by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.  7  vols.  8vo.  3/.  ioj. 

Fortescue   (Sir  John,  Kt.).      The   Governance  of  England: 

otherwise  called  The  Difference  between  an  Absolute  and  a  Limited  Mon- 
archy. A  Revised  Text.  Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Appendices, 
by  Charles  Plummer,  M.A.     8vo.  half  bound,  \2S.  6d. 

Freeman  (E.A.,  D.C.L.).    A  Short  History  of  the  Norman 

Conqtust  of  England.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8  vo.  2s.  6d. 

George  (H.  B.,M.A.).  Genealogical  Tables  illustrative  of  Modern 

History.    Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.    Small  4to.  \2s. 

Hodgkin  (T.).     Italy  and  her   Invaders.     Illustrated    with 

Plates  and  Maps.     Vols.  I — IV,  A.D.  376-553.  8vo.  3/.  8j. 

D  2 


36  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Hughes  [Alfred).     Geography  for  Schools.     With   Diagrams. 

Part  I.     Practical  Geography.     Crown  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
Part  II.  General  Geography.     In  preparation. 

Kitchin  (G.  W.,D.D.).   A  History  of  France.  With  numerous 

Maps,  Plans,  and  Tables.  In  Three  Volumes.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
each  ioj.  6d. 

Vol.  I.  Down  to  the  Year  1453. 
Vol.11.  From  1453-1624.  Vol.  III.  From  1624-1793. 

Lucas  (C.  P.).     Introduction  to  a  Historical  Geography  of  the 

British  Colonies.  •  With  Eight  Maps.     Crown  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Payne  (E.  f:%  M.A.).     A   History  of  the    United  States  of 

America.    In  the  Press. 

Ranke  (L.  von).     A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the 

Seventeenth  Century.  Translated  by  Resident  Members  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  under  the  superintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.,  and  C.  W.  Boase, 
M.A.     1875.  6  vols.  8vo.  3/.  3j. 

Rawlinson  {George,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Ancient  History, 

Second  Edition.   Demy  8vo.  14J. 

Ricardo.     Letters  of  David  Ricardo  to  Thomas  Robert  Malthus 

(1810-1823).     Edited  by  James  Bonar,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  \os.  6d. 

Rogers  (J.  E.  Thorold,  M.A.).     The  First  Nine  Years  of  the 

Bank  of  England.     8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitutional 

History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I.  Arranged  and 
edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D.    Fifth  Edition.     1883.    Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Stubbs  (  W.,  D.D.).     The  Constitutional  History  of  England, 

in  its  Origin  and  Development.    Library  Edition.    3  vols,  demy  8vo.  2/.  8s. 
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  8vo.  price  12s.  each. 

Seventeen    Lectures    on    the    Study   of  Medieval  and 

Modern  History,  &c,  delivered  at  Oxford  186 7- 1884.     Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Wellesley.    A  Selection  from    the  Despatches,    Treaties,   and 

other  Papers  of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his  Government 
of  India.    Edited  by  S.J.  Owen,  M.A.     1877.     8vo.  il.  4J. 

Wellington.    A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and 

other  Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  K.G. 
Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.     1880.  8vo.  24J. 

A  History  of  British  India.     By  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.,  Reader 

in  Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     In  preparation. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  37 


VIII.  LAW. 

Alberici   Gentilis,    I. CD.,   I.C.,    De    lure   Belli   Libri   Tres. 

EdiditT.  E.  Holland,  LCD.     1877.     Small  4to.  half  morocco,  21J. 

Anson  {Sir  William  R.,  Bart.,  D.C.L.).     Principles  of  the 

English  Latu  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency  in  its  Relation  to  Contract.     Fifth 
Edition.    Demy  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Law  and  Custom  of  the  Constitution.  Part  I.  Parlia- 
ment.    Demy  8vo.  iar.  6d. 

Bentham  (Jeremy).      An  Lntroduction   to  the  Principles  of 

Morals  and  Legislation.    Crown  8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Digby  (Kenelm  E.,  M.A.).    An  Lntroduction  to  the  History  of 

the  Law  of  Real  Property.    Third  Edition.    Demy  8vo.    10s.  6d. 

Gaii  Lnstitutionum  Juris  Civilis  Commentarii  Quattuor ;  or, 

Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius.     With  a  Translation  and  Commentary 
by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1875.     8vo.  i8j. 

Hall  (  W.  E.,  M.A.).  International  Law.    Second  Ed.  8vo.  21s. 
Holland  (T.  E.,  D.C.L.).     The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence. 

Fourth  Edition.     Demy  8vo.  \os.  6d. 

The  European  Concert  in  the  Eastern  Question,  a.  Col- 
lection of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts.  Edited,  with  Introductions  and 
Notes,  by  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,  D.C.L.     8vo.  12s.  6d. 

Imperatoris  Iustiniani  lnstitutionum  Libri  Qttattuor ;    with 

Introductions ,  Commen  tary .  Excursus  and  Translation .  By  J .  E.  Moyle,  B.C .  L. , 
M.A.     2  vols.     Demy  8vo.  21s. 

Justinian,  The  Institutes  of,  edited   as   a  recension  of  the 

Institutes  of  Gaius,  by  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,  D.C.L.  Second  Edition, 
1881.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  $s. 

Justinian,  Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of.   By  T.  E.  Holland, 

D.C.L.,  and  C.  L.  Shadwell,  B.C.L.    8vo.  14J. 

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,  as  follows : — 

Part  I.  Introductory  Titles.     2s.  6d.  Part  II.  Family  Law.     15. 

Part  III.  Property  Law.     2s.  6d.      Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  1).    3s.  6d. 

Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  2).     4s.  6d. 

Lex  Aquilia.      The  Roman  Law   of  Damage  to   Property : 

being  a  Commentary  on  the  Title  of  the  Digest  '  Ad  Legem  Aquiliam  '  (ix.  2). 
With  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Corpus  Iuris  Civilis.  By  Erwin 
Grueber,  Dr.  Jur.,  M.A.    Demy  8vo.  \os.  6d. 


38  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Markby{  W.,D.C.L.).  Elements  of  Law  considered  with  refer- 
ence to  Principles  of  General  Jurisprudence.  Third  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  I2s.6d. 

Stokes  (  Whitley,  D.C.L.).     The  Anglo-Indian  Codes. 

Vol.    I.     Substantive  Law.     8vo.  3ar. 
Vol.  II.     Adjective  Law.     In  the  Press. 

Twiss  (Sir  Tr avers,  D.C.L .).    The  Law  of  Nations  considered 

as  Independent  Political  Communities. 

Part  I.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties  of  Nations  in  time  of  Peace.    A  new 

Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  1884.  Demy  8vo.  15s. 
Part  II.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties  of  Nations  in  Time  of  War.    Second 

Edition,  Revised.    1875.  Demy  8vo.  2ij. 


IX.    MENTAL    AND    MORAL    PHILOSOPHY,  &c. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.     Edited,  with  English  Notes,  by 

G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.     1855.     8vo.  9*.  dd. 

Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.    1855.  8vo.  9*.  6d. 

Berkeley.     The    Works  of  George  Berkeley,  D.D.,   formerly 

Bishop  of  Cloyne ;    including   many  of  his  writings  hitherto  unpublished. 
With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy, 
by  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser,  M.A.    4  vols.     1871.     8vo.  2/.  i8j. 
The  Life,  Letters,  &c.     1  vol.  16s. 


Selections  from.      With   an   Introduction   and   Notes. 

For  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.     By  Alexander  Campbell  Fraser, 
LL.D.     Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  p,  6d. 

Fowler  ( T.,  D.D.).    The  Elements  of  Deductive  Logic,  designed 

mainly  for  the  use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.     Ninth  Edition, 
with  a  Collection  of  Examples.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3.?.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Lnductive  Logic,  designed  mainly  for 

the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  Fourth  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

and  Wilson  (J.  M.,  B.D.).     The  Principles  of  Morals 

(Introductory  Chapters).     8vo.  boards,  3^.  6d. 

The  Principles  of  Morals.     Part  II.     (Being  the  Body 

of  the  Work.)     8vo.     \os.  6d. 

Edited  by  T.  FOWLER,  D.D. 

Bacon.    Novum  Organum.     With   Introduction,  Notes,  &c. 

1878.    8vo.  14J. 

Locke's    Conduct   of  the    Understanding.     Second    Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  39 

Danson  {J.  T).     The  Wealth  of  Households.     Crown  8vo.  5j. 
Green  (T.  H,  M.A.).     Prolegomena  to  Ethics.     Edited  by 

A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.    Demy  8vo.  1 2s.  6d. 

Hegel.  The  Logic  of  Hegel ;  translated  from  the  Encyclo- 
paedia of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With  Prolegomena  by  William 
Wallace,  M.A.     1874.    8vo-  I4J- 

Hume's    Treatise   of  Human    Nature ;    reprinted    from    the 

Original  Edition,  and  edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.,  Fellow  and1 
Lecturer  of  University  College.     Crown  8vo.  gs. 

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books ;  of  Thought,  of  Investigation, 

and  of  Knowledge.  English  Translation;  Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Crown 
8vo.  \2S.  ..-J 

Metaphysic,   in   Three   Books;    Ontology,   Cosmology, 

and  Psychology.  English  Translation ;  Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     2  vols.    Crown  8 vo.  \2s. 

Martineau  {James,  D.D.).    Types  of  Ethical  Theory.    Second 

Edition.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo.  15 J. 

A  Study  of  Religion :  its  Sources  and  Contents.     2  vols. 

8vo.  24J. 

Rogers  {J.  E.  Thorold,  M.A .).  A  Manual  of  Political  Economy, 

for  the  use  of  Schools.    Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations.    A  new  Edition,  with  Notes,  by 

J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     2  vols.  8vo.     1880.  21s. 


X.    FINE  ART. 

Butler  (A.  J.,  M.A.,  F.S.A.)     The  Ancient  Coptic  Churches  of 

Egypt.     2  vols.  8vo.  30?. 

Head  {Barclay  V.).    Historia  Numorum.    A  Manual  of  Greek 

Numismatics.    Royal  8vo.  half  morocco,  42  j, 

Hullah  {John).      The   Cultivation    of  the    Speaking    Voice. 

Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Jackson  {T.  G.,  M.A).     Dalmaiia,  the  Quarnero  and  I  stria  ; 

with  Cettigne  in  Montenegro  and  the  Island  of  Grado.  By  T.  G.  Jackson, 
M.A.,  Author  of  '  Modern  Gothic  Architecture.'  In  3  vols.  8vo.  With  many 
Plates  and  Illustrations.     Half  bound,  42 s. 


4o  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Ouseley  {Sir  F.  A.  Gore,  Bart.).     A    Treatise  on  Harmony. 

Third  Edition.    4to.  \os, 

A  Treatise  on  Counterpoint \  Canon,  and  Fugue,  based 


upon  that  of  Cherubini.     Second  Edition.    4to.  \bs. 

A   Treatise  on  Musical  Form  and  General  Composition. 

Second  Edition.  4to.  ios. 

Robinson  (J.  C,  F.S.A.).   A  Critical  Account  of  the  Drawings 

f      by  Michel  Angelo  and  Rajfaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     1870. 
Crown  8vo.  4^. 

Troutbeck  {J.,  M.A.)  andR.  F.  Dale,  M.A.     A  Music  Primer 

(for  Schools).     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  is.  6d. 

Tyrivhitt  (R.  St.  ?.,  M.A.).     A   Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art. 

With  coloured  Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter  on  Perspective  by 
A.  Macdonald.    Second  Edition.     1875.     8 vo.  half  morocco,  i8j. 

Upcott  (L.  E.,  M.A.).      An  Introduction  to  Greek  Sculpture. 

Crown  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Vaux(W.  S.  W.,  M.A).     Catalogue  of  the  Castellani  Collec- 
tion of  Antiqtdties  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     Crown  8vo.  is. 


The   Oxford  Bible  for    Teachers,  containing  Supplementary 

Helps  to  the  Study  of  the  Bible,  including  Summaries  of  the  several 
Books,  with  copious  Explanatory  Notes  and  Tables  illustrative  of  Scripture 
History  and  the  characteristics  of  Bible  Lands ;  with  a  complete  Index  of 
Subjects,  a  Concordance,  a  Dictionary  of  Proper  Names,  and  a  series  of  Maps. 
Prices  in  various  sizes  and  bindings  from  3s.  to  2/.  5^. 

Helps  to  the  Study  of  the  Bible,  taken  from  the  Oxford 
Bible  for  Teachers,  comprising  Summaries  of  the  several  Books,  with 
copious  Explanatory  Notes  and  Tables  illustrative  of  Scripture  History  and 
the  Characteristics  of  Bible  Lands ;  with  a  complete  Index  of  Subjects,  a  Con- 
cordance, a  Dictionary  of  Proper  Names,  and  a  series  of  Maps.  Crown  8vo. 
cloth,  3s.  6d. ;  i6mo.  cloth,  is. 


LONDON:   HENRY  FROWDE, 
Oxford   University   Press  Warehouse,   Amen   Corner, 

OXFORD:  CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY, 
116  High  Street. 


80T  The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from  all  persons 
interested  in  education;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  &c.  addressed  to  the 
Secretary  to  the  Delegates,  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


BINDING  SECT.      IAN  8     1981 


£S^ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


K 

Manu 

M29^ 

M353 

1886 

The  laws  of  Manu 

• 

