106920 








BIBLIOTHECA INDICA 


A 

COLLECTION OP ORIENTAL WORKS, 

PUBLISHED BY 

THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BENGAL. 

New Serise, Nos. 700, 70G, 810, 872, 890, 947, .1058, 1076 
& 1104. 


THE 

•MARKAOTEYA PUEANA 

TRANSLATED WITH NOTES. 

BY , 

F. EDEN PARGITER, B.A. ? 

Indian Givil Service; ^ 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature^ Calcutta ; 
Late Boden Sanskrit Scholar, Oxford* 



PRINTED AT THE BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, 
AND PUBLISHED BY 

THE ASIATIC SOCIETY, 57, PARK STREET. 

1904, 




Pmented by 

#r. R- C Maiumdai. 




PREFACE. 


This translation of the Markandeya Purana was under- 
taken by mo for the Asiatic Society of Bengal many years 
ago, when I hoped to be able to carry it through in no long 
period ; but onerous official duties left little leisure, and for 
years removed me to a distance from the Society's Library 
and other means of reference. The Society was reluctant 
that the translation should be dropped, and it has therefore 
been continued as well as leisure permitted. It is hoped 
that in spite of these difficulties the translation may be of 
service to scholars; and the notes with all their short- 
comings not unwelcome. 


Calcutta : 

3rd December, 1904. 


F. B. P. 




I INTRODUCTION. 

This translation of the Markandeja Pnrana being made for the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal naturally follows the edition of this work 
])r('parcdby the Rev. Dr. K. M. Banorjea, and published in the Biblio- 
theca Indica in 1862; yet other editions and some MSS. have been 
(‘onsulted and are referred to. The translation has been kept as close 
to the original as possible, consistently with English sense and idiom ; 
for a translation loses some of its interest and much of its trnst- 
worthiness, when the reader can never know whether it reproduces the 
original accurately or only the purport of the original. The time 
during which the work has been in hand has rendered it diflieult to 
maintain one system of transliteration throughout ; but, in order to 
place the whole in a consistent state, the system established by the 
Royal Asiatic Society and approved by the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
has been adopted in the Index and in this Introduction. 

Tlie general character of this Puraiia has been well summed up by 
Prof. Wilson in his preface to Ids Translation of the Vieuu Purana, 
exce])t that his description hardly applies to the Devi-mahatmya. 
“This Purana has a character different from tliat of all the others. 

' It has nothing of a sectarial spirit, little of a religious tone ; rarely 
inserting [)rayers and invocations to any deity ; and such as are in- 
serted arc brief and moderate. It deals little in ])reccpts, ceremonial 
or moral. Its leading feature is narrative; and it presents an 
uninterrupted succession of legends, most of which wlien ancient are 
, embellished with new circumstances, and when new partake so far 
I of the spirit of the old, that they are disinterested creations of the 
j imagination, having no partic ilar motive, being designed to re- 
I commend no special doctrine or observance. Whether they are 
derived from any other source, or whether they are original inven- 
tions, it is not possible to ascertain. They are most probably, for 
the greater part at least, original ; and the whole has been narrated 
in the compiler’s own manner; a manner superior to that of the 
Puranas in general, with exception of the Bhagavata.” 



Oompositton, 

The Parana is clearly divisible (as Dr. Banerjea noticed) into five 
distinct parts, namely ; — 

1. Cantos 1-9, in which Jaimini is referred byMarkandeya to 
the wise Birds, and they directly explain to him the four questions 
tliat perplexed liim and some connected matters. 

2 . Cantos 10-44', where, though Jaimini propounds further ques- 
tions to the Birds and they nominally expound them, yet the real 
speakers are Sumati, nicknamed Jada, and his father. 

3. Cantos 45-81 : here, though Jaimini and the Birds are the 
nominal speakers, yet the real speakers are Markandeya and his dis- 
ciple Krau^tuki. 

4. Cantos 82-92, the Devi-mahatmya, a pure interpolation, in 
wliich the real speaker is a r^i named Medhas, and which is only 
repeated by Markandeya. 

5. Cantos 93-136, where Markandeya and Kraustuki carry on 
their discourse from canto 81. 

The 137th canto concludes the work; it is a necessary corollary 
to the first part. 

There can be no doubt that only the third and fifth of these parts 
constituted the Purana in its original shape as Markai^d^y^^’s 
Purai^ia. The name would imply that originally Markandeya was the 
cliief figure, and it is only in the third part that he appears as the 
real teacher. There is, however, clearer evidence that the Purana 
began with the third part originally, for this is asserted almost 
positively in canto 45, verses 16 to 25. There Markandeya, after 
declaring that this Purana, equally with the Vedas, issued from 

Brahma’s mouth, says — “ I will now tell it to thee Hear all 

this from me as I formerly heard it when Dak 9 a related it.’* 

These words plainly mean that the true Purana began here ; or, if the 
necessary words of introduction be prefixed, that it began at verse 16 
or 17, which verses have been slightly modified since in order to 
dovetail them into the preceding portion. 

The first and second parts were composed afterwards and then 
prefixed to the Purana proper. That they were later composition's 
is implied by the fact that the Birds recite the Puraiia proper as an 



authority, and is indeed indicated by the origin attributed to them. 
While the original Purana was proclaimed to be a revelation from 
Brahma himself, no higher authority is claimed for the first and 
second parts than Markandeya and the unknown brahman Sumati 
Jada. Further, mention is made in canto 20, verse 33, of Puranas 
which narrate Vianu’s manifestations. This expression is vague. 
If it means lengthy descriptions of some of tlie incarnations, such 
Puranas might be the Visnu, Brahma-vaivarta, Brahma and 
Bhagavata ; but the last two were pronounced by Prof. Wilson to 
be late compositions, and the reference here may be to the former 
two only, to which he assigned about an equal date with this Purana. 
There is nothing definite to show whether the first and second 
parts had been united before they were prefixed to the Purana proper, 
or whether the second part was inserted after the first had been pre- 
fixed ; yet it would seem more probable that they had been united 
before they were prefixed. There is a marked similarity between 
them. 

The prefixing of the discourses delivered by the Birds to the 
Purana proper raised the Birds to the primary and chief position and 
tended to derogate from Markandeya’s pre-eminence ; but clashing 
was avoided and Markandeya’s supremacy was preserved by two expe- 
dients ; firsts he was introduced at the very beginning in order that he 
might expressly declare the wisdom and authority of the Birds ; and 
secondly, the original Purana was interfered with as little as possible 
by making the Birds repeat it in its entirety as Markandeya’s teaching, 
conclusive upon the subjects dealt with in it. The Birds on begin- 
ning it retire from further notice, but reappear with Jairaini in the 
final canto to conclude their discourse and give consistency to the com- 
bined instruction. This was a termination rendered necessary by the 
prefixing of the first two parts to the original Purana. 

The second part appears to have been amplified beyond its primary 
scope. It discourses about birth and death, about the hells, about 
sins and their punishments and about yoga or religious devotion. 
All these subjects are briefly dealt with, though the description of 
the different hells is ampler than in other Puranas, but the last 
subject leads to a discursive exposition. If dealt with like the other 
subjects, the exposition would pass from canto 16, verse 12 



immediately to canto 37, 'l^dlere king Alarka is driven by adversity to 
seek Dattatroya’s advice and that rsi ex]X)unds the doctrines of yoga 
to liim in eantos ‘.iS to 43, and the story naturally closes with 
canto 4 k Ihifc the reference to that king and that r§i was con- 
sidered to rerjn ire some elucidation at canto 10, verse 13, hence the 
stoj'v of Thittatreja and tlie story of Alarka’s parents Rtadhvaja 
and Madalasa are made the introduction to the direct exposition of 
j oga, witli the result that the digression is so long that, when the 
su])j('et of yog:v is reached, its connexion with Jaimini’s questions 
lias been lost to sight; and even the passage from the story of Datta- 
treya to that of Alarka at the end of canto 19 is inapt and abrupt. 

Both these stoih's moreover appear in their turn to have been ex- 
jianded beyond their natural course. The story of the brahman and 
his devott'd wife in canto 1(>, which furnishes an unnecessary 
explanation of the birth of Dattatreya, is a story of common town 
life, an absurd anachronism compared with what it explains ; and 
it seems with its reference to a temple dedicated to Anasuya during 
her life-time to he an interpolation intended for her gloritication. 
The story of Rtadhvaja and Madiilasa is a charming one of simjde 
marvel and runs its natural course in cantos 20 to 27 as far as Mada- 
lasa’s instruction of her son Alarka in kingly duties ; but the follow- 
ing cantos 28 to 35, in which she expounds the laws regarding brah- 
mans, sraddhas, custom, &c , hardly accord with the story or with 
hc^' position and knowledge, and seem to he an interpolation. Some 
teaching on such matters being deemed desirable, here was the only 
place where the addition was possible. 

4'he Devi-inahatmya stands entirely by itself as a later interpola- 
tion. It is a poem complete in itself. Its subject and the character 
attributed to tlie goddess shew that it is the jiroduct of a later age 
which developed and took pleasure in the sanguinary features of 
po[)iilar religion, 'rin* jwai.se of the goddess Maha-maya in canto 81 
is in the ordinary style. Her special gloritication begins in canto 82, 
and is elaboratinl wit!) the most extravagant laudation and the most 
miraculous imagination. Some of the hymns breathe deep religious 
feeling, express enthusiastic adoration, and evince fervent spiritual 
meditation. On the other hand, the descriptions of the battles abouhd 
with wild and repulsive incidents, and revel in gross and amazing 



vli 

fancies. The Devi-mahatinya is a compound of the most opposite 
characters. The religious out-pourings are at times pure and eleva- 
ted : the material descriptions are absurd and debased. 

The ending of the Purana deserves notice. It closes with the 
exploits of king Dama. According to the Gaudiya or Bengal MSS , 
which Dr. Bancrjea followed, the Purana ends abruptly in canto 1.S6, 
leaving Dama acquiescing tamely in the flight of his father’s murderer 
Vapu^mat. The up-country version (the ending of which he placed 
in an appendix) is found in the Bombay and Poona editions and 
carries the story on till Dama takes vengeance on Vapusmat. Dr. 
Banerjea considered the abruptness and incompleteness were strong 
evidence of the genuineness of the Bengal ending ; and no doubt that 
is a fair argument, but it overlooks the character of the two endings. 
The pusillanimity which that ending ascribes to Dama jars with the 
whole tone of his threat in canto 135 which both versions account 
genuine. On the other hand the up-country ending narrates the ful- 
lllment of that throat, and the savage and even inhuman incidents 
which it mentions are hardly explicable if it is spurious, for Dama after 
killing Vapnamat used Vapusmat’s blood and flesh for the oblations 
due to his murdered father, and also (it is implied) gave certain 
degraded brahmans a cannibal feast. A forger would not wish nor 
dare to invent in his eulogy of one of the kings such repulsive inci- 
dents, desecrating the mo.st sacred rites and tenets of his religion, 
nor if we can imagine such a forgery did occur, could it have ever 
obtained even tolerance. It is impossible, therefore, to think that the 
up-country ending is a forgery ; and if it be the true original, one 
can easily understand why such an ending should have been struck 
out, and how the reviser, unable to invent or palm off a new ending, 
had to bring the story to the abrupt and jejune conclusion of the 
Bengal version. 'J’he up-coun+ry ending has, therefore, been adopted 
as the true version in this translation, and the Bengal ending has 
been noticed separately. The former discloses, like stray passages 
elsewhere, that savagery was not absent from the earliest memories of 
the Aryans in India. 

For the purpose of discussing the Purana further, it will be 
convenient to consider the first and second parts as composing one 
Section, and the third and fifth parts as composing another Section ; 


I 



viii 


and this division will bo observed in what follows. The Devi-mShat- 
mya constitutes a Section by itself. 

Place of Origin, 

With re'^ai'd to the question of the place of its origin, the 
Jhirana in both its Sections professes to have emanated from Western 
India. 

The second Section as the oldest may be considered first. In 
canto 45, vs. 24 and 25, Markandeya says positively that Cyavana was 
the xRi who first declared it : Cyavana obtained it from Bhrgu and 
declared it to the rsis, th(\y ro[)eated it to Baksa and Markandeya 
learnt it from Daksa. Now Cyavana is intimately associated with the 
west of India, especially with the region about the mouths of the 
rivers Narmada and Tapti. llis father Bhrgu and their descendants 
Uclka, Jamadagni and Para.4u Kama are connected in many a 
h'gend with all the country north, east and south of that region. 
That was the territory of the Bhargava race (see pp. 310 and 308). 
As Cyavana settled near the mouths of those rivers, the Parana itself 
claims to have been first declared by him in that region. 

Markandeya himself was a Bhargava. This is stated in canto 45, v. 
18 and canto 52 vs, 14-J7 ; and also in the Maha-bharata, Vana-p. 
eexvi. 14104-5, The Bhargavas spread from Cyavana’s region, es- 
pecually eastward along the valleys of the Narmada and I’apti, as 
those valleys wore gradually wrested from the hill races by the Yada- 
vas and Haihaya.s, the most famous conquerors of which race were 
Arjuna Kartavirya and Jyamagha. The former reigned in Mahi?- 
mati on the Narmada ; and the latter apparently conquered further 
eastward (see M. Bh., Vana-p. cxvi., Sbinti-p. xlix ; Hari-V., xxxiii. 
1850-90, and xxxvii. 19S0-87 ; Viwsnu P., cli-clxxiv ; and Matsya P. 
xliii.-J3-5l and xliv. 28-30). Markandeya is said to have paid visits 
to the Pandavas and to have had a tirtha at the junction of the Gan- 
ges and Gomati (M. Bh., Vana-p. Ixxxiv. 8058-9), but his special 
abode appears to have been on the river Payo§ni (the modern Puma 
and its continuation in the Tapti, see p. 299) {id. Ixxxviii. 8330). 
Both by lineage and by residence therefore he belonged to that wes- 
tern country, and the original Parana must have been composed 
there. Bhargavas are continually alluded to throughout the Purgi^a. 



IX 


As regards tlie first Section, it is said the Birds, to whom Jaimini 
was referred, were living in the Vindhya mountains, and it was there 
that they delivered the 'Parana to him. They are explained of course 
to bo four brahman brothers in a state of transmigration, and it ap- 
pears to be implied in canto 3, vs. 22-24, that their father, the muni 
Sukrsa, dwelt on or near the Vindhyas, He had a brother named 
Tumburu, There were other persons of this name, such as Tumburu 
who was a guru among the Gandharvas (see pp. 571, 647, 648, and 118 
as corrected; and M. Bh., Sablia-p. li. 1881.) ; but it seems permissible 
to connect this brother Tumburu with the tribes of the names Tum- 
bura and Tumbula who dwelt on the slopes of the Vindhyas (p. 343). 

'Phe Birds are said to liave dwelt in the Vindhyas in a cave, where 
the water was very sacred (p. J7), and which was sprinkled with 
drops of water from the river Narmada (p. 19) ; and it is no doubt 
allowable to infer the situation from these indications, namely, some 
cliffs of the Vindhya hills where those hills abut on the river 
Narmada at a very sacred tirtha. Such a spot cannot be sought 
above the modern Hoshangabad, for the river above that was encom- 
passed in early times by hills, dense forest and wild tribes. Among 
the very sacred places where the Vindhya hills on the north approach 
close to the river, none satisfies the conditions better that the rocky 
island and town of Mandhata, which is to be identified with Mahi§- 
mati, the ancient and famous Haihaya capital. The modern town 
of Mahesar, some fifty miles lower down tlie river, claims to be the 
ancient Mahi^mati, but does not satisfy the allusions. Mahi^mati 
was situated on an island in the river and the palace looked out on the 
rushing stream (Kaghu-V., vi. 43). This description agrees only 
with Mandhata. Mahismatl was sacred to Agni in the earliest times 
(M. Bh., Sabha-p. 1125-63). Mandhata has special claims to sanc- 
tity ; it has very ancient remains ; it has become sacred to Siva, 
and the famous shrine of Orhkara and other temples dedicated to him 
are here (Hunter, Impl. Gaz., “ Mandhata. ”). The hills close in on 
the river here, and on the north bank are Jain temples. In these hills 
on the north bank overlooking the river at Mandhata we may place 
the alleged cave where the first part of the Burana professes that it 
wa« delivered ; and this identification will be found to explain many 
further features of the Parana 



Witlijregard to the f«ccond part it may be noticed that Sumati Jada, 
whose words the Birds repe.at, belonged also to the family of Bhrgu 
(p. 63). Hence this part belonged to the same region where the 
Bhargavas predominated. With this view agrees the statement that 
the rainy season lasts four months and the dry season eight months 
(p. 117), as I understand is the rule in this region. It is further 
worthy of note that eyes of blue colour, like the blue water-lily 
(nilotpala) are given to Lak^mi (p. 101) and to Madalasa (p. 114) ; 
and such a comparison is rare, I believe, in Sanskrit. It was (may 
it be inferred?) in Western India that people with blue eyes could 
have been seen as visitors in circumstances of such appreciation that 
their features became a model of beauty. 

There are some other matters that might have been expected to 
yield information of a local character, such as the lists of various trees, 
plants, birds and animals (pp. 24-31, 164-6 and 244-5 ) and the 
peculiar exposition of the construction and nomenclature of fortresses 
( pp. 240-2 ). I have, however, been unable to deduce any definite 
conclusion from the latter, and the lists betray no special local charac- 
ter, but rather aim at being as comprehensive in their way as the 
geographical cantos (57 and 58). 

Both the first and second Sections, therefore, plainly emanated from 
Western India, and indicate the middle portion of the Narbada and 
^ Tapti valleys as their place of origin. It remains to consider the 
Devi-raahatmya, and the following considerations point to the same 
place of origin, especially to Mandhata. 

The Devi-mahatmya must have originated in some place dedi- 
cated to the goddess in her terrible form, The poem has now become 
a text-book of the worshippers of Kali throughout Northern India 
and in Bengal, especially at the great Dnrga-puja festival, but it did 
not originate in Bengal. The goddess whom the poem glorifies is a 
goddess formed by the union of the vigours or energies ( tejas^ not 
iahti) of all the gods (p. 473), and she is called Maha-maya, 
Candika, Ambika, Bhadra-kali and Maha-kali (pp. 469, 476, &c. 
and 521). Though identified with S^ri once (p. 484), yet she is 
generally identified in the hymns with S'iva’s consort as Durga, 
Gauri, 8'iva-dfiti and Maha-kall ( pp. 484-5,494-6, and 521). The 
goddess Kali, however, who is also called L'amuiuja ( p. 500), is made 



a separate goddess who issued from Canijika’s forehead ( p. 499) ; 
and Cai;i(Jika gave her the name Camunda, because (as it is expressed 
in a 'bon mot) she had killed two great demons Can(Ja and MuijKjfi 
(p. 600). Whether this derivation has any imaginary truth or not 
must be very doubtful, because fanciful derivations are common in 
this Purana and elsewhere. The S'aktis of the gods are made separate 
emanations from the gods, and are called the Mothers, mt\tr-gana 
( pp. 502, 504). The poem is therefore a glorification of Durga in 
her terrible aspect, with Kali as an emanation from her. 

One would therefore look among the strongholds of S'iva worship 
for the birth-place of this poem. Now it is remarkable that of the 
great lihga shrines (which are reckoned to bo twelve), no less than 
six are situated in or near the very region of Western India where 
the Purana originated; viz, Omkara at Mandhata, Mahakala at 
Ujjain, Tryambak at Nasik, Ghr^esvara at Ellora, Naganath east of 
Ahmadnagar, and Bhima-^ahkar at the sources of the river Bhima. 
Mandhata was doubly distinguished, for another famous linga was 
Amre4vara on the south bank of the river there. At none of them 
however, except at Omkara, was S'iva or Durga worshipped with 
sanguinary rites, as far as I can find. 

In the Maha-bharata Durga has the names Mahakali, Bhadrakali, 
Oanda and Candi ; and she is also called Kali, no distinction being 
made (Virata-p, vi. 195; Bhi^ma-p. xxiii. 796-7). The name Ca- 
munda does not apparently occur there. Camuinja was worshipped 
with human sacrifices, for she is mentioned in the fifth Act of the 
Malati-madhava, where her temple is introduced aud her votaries 
tried to offer a human sacrifice at the city Padmavati. Padmavati 
was a name of Ujjain ; but some scholars would identify it with 
Narwar which is on the R. Sindh, though that town seems to be too 
distant to suit the description •'t the beginning of the ninth Act. 
Whether Padmavati was Ujjain or not, there can bo no doubt from 
that description that it was situated in the region north of the 
Vindhyas between the upper portions of the rivers Chambal and 
Parbati, that is, in the region immediatel}" north of Mandhata. 

The only local allusion in the poem is that the goddess is MahS- 
kdli at Mahakala (p. 521), which is a shrine of S'iva at Ujjain ; and 
it is possible the poem may have been composed to proclaim the 



Xll 

mahatmya or glory of that place. But this is hardly probable, be- 
cause the allusion is very brief, and the worship there was not ap- 
parently of the kind to originate this poem. Moreover, if Padmavati 
was Ujjain, the Mahiti-madhava distinguishes between the temple of 
Caiuunda and the shrine of Mahakala, for the temple is described as 
being adjacent to a field which was used as a burning- ground for 
corpses and v/hich must have lain outside the city ; and if Padmavati 
was some other town, the allusion here to Mahakala has no con- 
nexion with Camtipda or Candika at Padmavati. It is hardly pro- 
bable that, if this poem originated at Ujjain, the goddess at the 
shrine of Mahakala would have been referred to in this manner. 
Hence this passage more probably conveys only a commendatory 
allusion ; and it seems more natural and appropriate to connect the 
poem with Mandhata, where this phase of sanguinary worship was 
particularly strong. 

The worship of Camunda points to the same conclusion. Human 
sacrifices had long been abolished in the civilized countries of India, 
and the offering of such^ sacrifices at Padmavati could hardly have 
been a survival but must have been introduced from elsewhere. 
Such a practice would naturally bo clandestine. Human sacrifices 
were offered in those times only among the rude tribes of Central 
India, among whom such sacrifices survived till the last century ; 
hei\ce it may be inferred that such offerings to Camunda at Padma- 
vati must have been introduced from places which bordered on those 
tribes and were affected by their rites. The middle portion of the 
Narbada valley was eminently such a place. Pointing in the same 
direction is the statement in the Maha-bharata that Durga had her 
eternal abode on the Vindhyas and was fond of intoxicating liquor, 
fiesh and cattle (Vira^-p. vi. 195). It seems reasonable then to 
conclude that the Devi-mahatmya is earlier than the Malati- 
madhava ; and if so, the name Camunda and the form Candika occm* 
apparently the first time in this poem. 

Mandhata was a famous ancient tirtha and appears to have fallen 
into neglect and been almost deserted in the 11th and 12th centuries 
A.D., but its glory was revived. About the year 1165 “a Gosain, 
named Uaryao Nath, was the only worshipper of Omkar on the island, 
which pilgrims could not visit for fear of a terrible god called Kal 



xiii 

Bhairava and his consort Kali Devi, who fed on human flesh. At 
last Daryio Nath by his austerities shut up Kdli Devi in a cave, tho 
mouth of which may yet be seen, appeasing her by erecting an image 
outside to receive worship ; while he arranged that Kal Bhaii’ava 
should, in future, receive human sacrifices at regular intervals. From 
tliat time devotees have dashed themselves over the Birkhala cliffs 
at the eastern end of tho island on to tho rocks by the river brink, 
where the terrible god resided ; till in 1821* the British officer in charge 
of Nimar witnessed the last such offering to K/il Bhairava.” (Hun- 
ter, Impl. Gaz., “Maudhata”). There does not appear to be any 
information, what kind of worship was offered there before tho 11th 
century, yet the facts suggest strongly that such sanguinary rites were 
not a new ordinance but had prevailed there before. 

Both S'iva and his consort in their most terrible forms were thus 
worshipped at Mandhata, which was almost exclusively devoted to their 
.service ; and it is easy to understand how such a sanguinary form of 
religion could take shape here. This region of tho Narbada valley was 
specially connected with demon legends, such as the demon stronghold 
of Tripura and tho demon Mahisa, after which the towns Tewar and 
Mahesar are said to be named. It also bordered on the Naga coun- 
try. Mandhata, with such associations, would be the most probable 
birth-place of this poem, and the brief allusion to Mahakala would then 
be only a collateral one; yet, even if the poem was composed at Ujjain, 
the conclusion would still remain good that the po(‘m originated in 
this region of Western India. 

Date of the Pnrana. 

The question of tho date of the Purana is more difficult, since all 
questions of chronology in Sanskrit writings are most uncertain. One 
definite and important date may be fin.t noticed. JVraliamahopadhyaya 
Haraprasad S'astri found a copy of tho Devi-mahatmya in old 
Newari characters in tho Royal Library in Nepal, and it is dated 
99S A.D. (See his Catalogue)* It may be safely inferred therefrom, 
that this poem must have been composed before the beginning of the 
10th century at the latest. The Devl-mahatraya cannot therefore be 
later than the 9th century and may be considerably earlier. Since it is 
the latest part of the Parana, the other parts must have been 



xiv 

composed earlier, and the question for consideration is, how much 
earlier ? 

Prof. Wilson in his preface to his Translation of the Visnu Purana 
pointed out that this Purana is later than the Maha-hharata hut 
anterior to the Brahma, Padma, Naradiya and Bhagavata Puranas, 
and conjectured that it may be placed in the ninth or tenth century 
A-.l). This, as already noticed, is too recent, moreover it has been 
discovered since that his estimates of the composition of the several 
Puranas under-reckon their age, and that the periods assigned by him 
should be moved some centuries earlier. For instance, he conjectured 
the collective writings known as the Skanda Purana to be modern and 
“ the greater part of the contents of the Ka4i Khanda anterior to the 
first attack upon Benares by Mahmud of Ghizni ” (Preface, p. Ixxii)— 
which must mean that the Ka4l Khanda is earlier than the 11th century 
A.D. But Mahamahopadliyaya Haraprasad S'astri found in the 
Royal Library in Nepal a copy of the “ Skanda Purana ” written in 
the later Gupta characters of the 6th or 7th century A.D. From that 
it is obvious that the composition of the Skanda Purana must have 
taken place four or five centuries earlier than Prof. Wilson’s estimate. 
Hence it is possible that a corresponding modification of his estimate 
regarding the Markandeya Purana should be made, and that would 
place it about the 4th century A.D. 

"Further evidence is obtained from Jain writings that the Puia- 
nas are much earlier than Prof. Wilson estimated. Thus the Padma 
Purana of the Jains, which was written by Ravisena in imitation of 
the Hindu Padma Purana, contains, I understand, a couplet showing 
that it was composed in the year 678 A.D ; and that Purana men- 
tions all the Puranas. All are mentioned again in the Jain Adi 
I’urana of Jinasena who lived about a century later. This evidence 
would demonstrate that all the Hindu Puranas had been composed 
before tlio end of the sixth and probably by the end of the fifth 
century A.D, ; though of course it leaves room open for subsequent 
additions and interpolations in them, 

i A common method of estimating the age of a Sanskrit composition 
is to consider the religious and philosophical ideas embodied in it ; 
yet to discuss questions of chronology on the basis of such ideas seems 
to be more interesting than convincing. Such ideas have passed 



XV 


alon^ a course of development in India, but it is doubtful how far 
general inferences therefrom can be safely applied to fix the date of 
a particular work. Where siieh ideas are founded on sacred composi- 
tions, which are the subject of reverent study, tliero must be flows, 
eddies and intervals of stagnation, and even rapids and back currents, 
in the stream of such ideas. Their course may be compared witli 
similar speculations, not in a single European country, but in the 
whole of Europe, for India has always comprised many countries ; and 
the history of Europe during the last four hundred years shews, 
whether it would be easy to determine the date of a writing on such 
subjects in Latin solely from its contents, for the progress of thought 
in the ditferent countries has been neither simultaneous nor uniform. 
Similarly in India, there can bo no doubt that, while religion and philo- 
sophy have had their general course of development, the course has 
been very unequal in the different countries, so that it would not bo 
unreasonable to suspect that at the same time one country was ad- 
vancing, another was stationary, and a third was oven degenerating 
under political adversity. The development of religion and philoso- 
phy in India then is not so clear that one can do more than venture 
to conjecture upon such grounds, at what period or periods this Pura- 
na, which was written in We.stcrn India, was composed. And, as already 
mentioned, it has so little of a sectarian spirit or of special doctrines 
that the basis for conjecture is meagre. Subject to this caution the 
following features may be noticed. 

Among the deities, Indra and Prahma are mentioned oftenest ; next 
stand Yisnu and g'iva ; then the Sun and Agni ; and lastly Dharraa 
and others. Indra is mentioned most often in the first and fifth 
parts, and Brahma in the third and fifth parts ; while Yisnu and Shva 
do not show any particular preponderance. If the Dcvi-mahatmya 
is put aside, the Sun is the deity that receives the most special ado- 
ration, and his story is related twice, first, briefly in cantos 77 and 78, 
and afterwards with fullness in cantos 102-110. To this may be 
added the cognate worship of Agni in cantos 99 and 100. Such 
marked reverence for Agni and the Sun would bo natural in such a 
place as Mahi^mati, which (as already mentioned) was specially sacred 
to Agni before the worship of S'iva obtained supremacy there. Kama, 
ropa, the modern Gauhatr in Assam, is mentioned as specially 



XVI 


appropriate for the worship of the Sun (p. 581), and why it should 
have been so characterized seems unintelligible unless it was eonsi- 
dered to bo an tidayn-giri. ♦ 

The prominent notice of the great Vedie god Indra, and of Brahma the 
earliest of the j)ost- Vedie gods, would indicate a fairly high an- 
tiquity for the Parana, especially for the second Section, which 
boldly claims to have issued from Brahma’s mouth equally with the 
Vedas (p. 219) and thus to stand almost on an equality with them — 
an honour which none of the other Puranas ventures to arrogate for 
itself. Such an antiquity would also explain the high position as- 
signed to the Sun and Agni, who are also among the chief Vedie gods ; 
yet the special praise offered to the Sun may, as Dr. Banerjea hinted, 
be perhaps attributable in part to Persian influences. 

The first Section of the Parana is certainly later than the Maha- 
bharata, for the four questions that Jaimini propounds to the Birds 
arose expressly out of that work. These questions are, first ^ a reli- 
gious enigma, Why did Vasudeva (Visnu) though devoid of qualities 
assume human shape with its qualities of goodness, passion and 
ignorance? secondly^ a social perplexity. Why was Draupadi the 
common wife of the five Pandava brothers ? thirdly^ a moral incon- 
gruity, Why did Baladcva expiate the sin of brahmanicide by pilgri- 
mage ? mdi fourthly^ a violation of natural justice, Why did Drau- 
padi’s five sons all perish in their youth ? The obtrusion of these 
questions implies that the Maha-bharata was firmly established as an 
unimpeachable authority, so that difficulties involved in it could not 
be disputed and must admit of reconciliation with the laws of 
Righteousness. 

The explanations offered by the Birds appear to be these, Vasu- 
deva (Visnu) existed in quadruple form ; the first form was devoid of 
qualities, but each of the others was characterized by one of the 
three qualities, so that in his assuming human and other shapes with 
all the qualities no violation occurred to his nature. The second 
question is solved by the assertion, that because of Indra’s trans- 
gressions five portions of his essence became incarnate in the 
Pandavas, and his wife became incarnate as Draupadi, so that she was 
still the wife of only one person. The third question seems to turn 
on the ideas, that brahmanicide was a heinous sin expiable by death 



xvii 


and that pilgrimage was a pious undertaking ; how therefore could 
such a sin be expiated by such action ? The answer seems to be that 
the sin was unintentional, being due to overpowering sensual in- 
fluences, and did not call for the full rigour of punishment, while 
the real penance consisted in confession. The fourth question is 
solved by a story of transmigration ; Draiipadi’s sons were five Vi^ve 
Devfis who were cursed by YiiSvamitra to assume human form for a 
bi’ief period. 

The first two questions and answers call for some notice and throw 
some light on the age of the first Section of the Puraijia. 

With regard to the first question, Dr. Banerjea has remarked in his 
Introduction that tlie description of Vasudeva belongs to the school 
Narada-pancaratra, to which S'afikaracarya has given an elaborate 
reply in his commentary on the Brahma Sutras ; while no trace of 
this doctrine is to be found in the second Section of the Purai^a. As 
S'ahkara lived in the 8th century A.D., that school existed before 
him, The first part of this Puraga was, therefore, probably prior to 
liis time; yet it may possibly have been later. This comparison then 
yields nothing definite. 

The second answer presents some remarkable peculiarities when 
compared with the Maha-bharata. That work gives two explana- 
tions about Draupadi’s wifehood, first, why she was destined to have 
live husbands, and secondly, why the five Panijavas became her 
liusbands. 

The first explanation is given twice in the Adi-parvan, viz., in 
clxix. 6426-3 Ji and in cxcvii. 73 J 9-28. She had been a r^i’s daughter 
and unmarried; in order to obtain a husband she propitiated S'iva 
with austerities, and he offered her a boon. She begged for a 
husband, and in her eagerness made the request five times, hence 
he promised her five husbands, and in spite of her objection adhered 
to his word and promised them to her in another life. Hence she 
was born as Drupada’s daughter. In the latter of these two passages 
and in line 7310 she is made an incarnation of LaksmI, 

The second explanation is given in Adi-parvan cxcvii. 7275-7310. 
Indra went to S'iva on Mount Hima^'at and accosted him rudely, but 
S'iia awed him and pointed to a cave in the mountain wherein were 
four prior Indras. Siva said that Indra and those four prior Indras 
3 



XVlll 


should be bom in human shape in order to reduee the over-popula- 
tion of the world, and that Lak§mi should be born and bo their 
common wife. Accordingly Indra was born as Arjuna and the prior 
Indras as the other Pandavas, and Laksmi was born as Draupadi. 

Now these stories in the Maha-bharata itself furnished some ex- 
planation, and why Jaimini should have felt any perplexity, if he had 
those explanations befoi’o him, is at first sight strange. This suggests 
a doubt whether they were then in the Maha-bharata, or whether they 
were inserted there afterwards to meet this very question. On the 
other hand, it may be noted that these explanations did not really 
solve the difficulty, for the five Indras who became the Pandavas 
were not the same deity, and thus Draupadi ’s husbands were still 
separate persons. On this point, therefore, the difficulty remained, 
and the answer given by the Birds removes it (though at varianee 
with the Maha-bharata) by declaring that the Pandavas were all 
incarnations of portions of the same deity, Indra, and were thus really 
only one person. The Maha-bharata, however, presented a further 
difficulty, tor why should Laksmi have become incarnate to be the 
wife of incarnations of Indra? The Birds alter this by declaring 
(again at variance with the Maha-bharata) that it was Indra’ s own 
wife who became incarnate as Draupadi. Both these contradictions 
ai’O left unnoticed ; yet it is said very truly that there was very great 
perplexity about this matter (p. 19 ). 

This incongruity of Laksmi’s becoming incarnate to be wife to 
incarnations of other deities suggests a further speculation. In the 
Maha-bharata as it now stands, Kr^na is an incarnation of Visiju, 
and it was proper that Laksmi should become incarnate to be his 
queen. Nevertheless that work states that she became the wife of 
five persons all distinct from Vi^iiu. May it be surmised that these 
explanations in the Maha-bharata were fashioned before Kr?na had 
been deified, and before it was perceived that tliey could have any 
bearing on his story ? If so, it is quite intelligible that it was deemed 
necessary, alter Kfsna was deified, to remove the incongruity by as- 
serting that Draupadi was an incarnation, not of Laksmi, but of 
Indrani. This view, that the revised explanations here given regard- 
ing Draupadi and the Pai^davas were necessitated by the deification 
of Krs^a, seems not improbable. If so, the revision and the name 



XIX 


Vasudeva, by which Vi^uu is specially addressed in the first part, 
would indicate that the first part was composed, when the Kr?aa 
legend had become so well established that it was needful to bring 
other stories into harmony with it. 

The Parana contains little reference to the political condition of 
India ; yet it may be pointed out that all the stories narrated in the 
first Section relate to Madliya-desa, the Himalayas and Western 
India, while no mention occurs of Southern, Eastern or North- 
Western India. In the second Scetion, few illustrative stories occur 
apart from the main discourse on the Manus and the royal genealo- 
gies. Only one dynasty is treated of, that in which the chief 
princes were Vatsapri, Khanitra, Karandliama, Aviksit and Marutta. 
These were famous kings, especially Marutta who was a universal 
monarch. I have not been able to find anything which indicates 
where their kingdom was, yet it must have been somewhere in 
the Middle-land or North- We.st, because of Marutta’s relations 
with Vfhaspati and Sariivartta (M. Bh., Asvam -p. iii-vi) ; the 
I\Iiddle-land here comprising the country as far oast as Mithila 
and Magadha. In the second Section the only allusions to otlier parts 
of India are one to the river Vitasta in the Panjab (p. 438), one 
to an unknown town in South India (p. 412), and several to Kama- 
rfipa, the modern Gauhati in Assam; but the autlior’s knowledge of 
Eastern India was so hazy that he treats Kamarupa as being easy of 
access from the Middle-land (p. 581). Is it reasonable to draw any 
inference from the mental horizon here disclosed ? It agrees with 
the state of India in tlie third century A.D. 

The geographical cantos 57 and 68 are no doubt special compi- 
lations and may to a certain degree stand apart. They appear to 
aim at being compreliensive, and to enumerate all the countries, races 
and tribes till then known, whethe*’ ancient or mediieval. This com- 
prehensive character rather prevents the drawing of any large definite 
conclusions from them, yet two points may be noticed. 

The Hunas are placed among the peoples in the north in canto 68, 
though the context is not very precise. The Huns in their migra- 
tions from the confines of China appear to have arrived to the north 
o:^ India about the beginning of the third century A.D., and one 
branch, the White Huns,' established a kingdom afterwards in the 



XX 


Oxus valley. India had no actual experience of them until their first 
invasion, wliich was made through the north-western passes in the 
middle of the fifth century (Mr. V. Smith’s Early History of India^ 
pp. 272, 273). The allusion to the Huns therefore, with the position 
assigned to them in the north, in canto 58, is plainly earlier than 
their invasion, and is what a writer in the third century or the early 
part of the fourth century would have made. 

In these two cantos Pragjyoti^a is placed in the east, and no men- 
tion is made of Kamarfipa. Pragjyoti§a was the ancient kingdom 
that comprised nearly all the north and east of Bengal (p. 328); 
later on it dwindled and seems to have lingered and perished in the 
east of Bengal ; and after that Kamarupa came into prominence in 
its stead. In the Maha-lharata and Kamayana Pragjyoti^a alone is 
named ; Kamarupa is never, I believe, mentioned there, and it occurs 
in later writings only. In the Second Section however Kamarupa is 
mentioned, and no allusion is made to Pragjyotisa. This difference 
tells in favour of the antiquity of these cantos. 

With regard to the Dcvi-mahatmya, if the comparison made above 
between it and the Malati-madhava is reasonable, it would follow that, 
since Bhavabhuti who wrote that play lived about the end of the 
seventh century A.D., this poem must be anterior. It would repre- 
sent the incorporation of barbarous practices borrowed from the rude 
tribes of Central India into brahmanic doctrines, and might be 
assigned to the sixth or perhaps the fifth century. 

From all these considerations it seems fair to draw the following 
conclusions. The Dcvi-mahatmya, the latest part, was certainly 
complete in the 9th century and very probably in the 5th or 6th century 
A.D. The third and fifth parts, which constituted the original Pura^a, 
were very probably in existence in the third century, and perhaps 
even earlier ; and the first and second parts were composed between 
those two periods. 

Other matters of interest. 

Certain other matters may be mentioned, which are of great 
interest in the Purana, 

In the first part Jaimini, thougli a disciple of Vyasa and a famous ffi 
(Maha-bh., S'anti-p, cccli. 13647), is yet made, when perplexed hj 
four difiicult questions in Vyasa’s own work, the Maha-bharata, to 



XXI 


seek instruction, not from Vyisa but from MSrliandeya ; and ibis 
raises a presumption that there was an intention to make Markandeya 
equal with, if not superior to, Vyasa. Further, MSrkandeya does 
not himself explain the questions hut, declining with a transparent 
excuse, refers Jaimini to the Birds. The Birds, though said no doubt 
to he brcahmans undergoing a transmigration, wore inferior in educa- 
tion and fame to Jaimini, yet they were deemed fully capable of 
authoritatively answering the questions that puzzled him. Tt seems 
liard to avoid suspecting again in this construction of the story, that 
there was an intention to exalt the instruction given by the munis of 
the Vindhyas to equality with, if not superiority over, that given in 
Madhya-de^a. It may be mentioned that according to certain le- 
gends Vaiiarapayana’s pupils were transformed into partridges {tittiri) 
in order to pick up the Black Yajus versos disgorged by one of their 
companions ; but it docs not seem reasonable to ascribe the introduc- 
tion of these Birds as dramatis per sense in this Purana to any imitation 
i*f those legends, because the nature of the stories is wholly different. 
Tlie use of the Birds seems rather to be the application of a class of 
ideas common in the animal-tales of folk-lore to religious teaching, 
and to be similar to the machinery employed by Bana in his story of 
Kadambari. 

In the second part it is worthy of note that indulgence in spiritu- 
ous liquor and in sensual enjoyments is viewed with little or no 
disapprobation in the story of Dattatreya ; and meat and strong 
drink are mentioned as most acceptable offerings in the worship of 
Dattatreya (p. 106), as an incarnation of Vi?nu (p. 99). Meat of 
various kinds, including even hog’s flesh, is declared to be most 
gratifying to the pitj-s. Such food was not unknown in ancient 
times, for it is said that during a severe famine king Tri^ahku 
supported Vi^vamitra’s wife with the flesh of deer, wild pigs and 
buffaloes (Hari-V., 721-731). 

A most extraordinary passage may be noticed in conclusion. It is 
related of king Dama that, after taking vengeance on prince Vapu?- 
mat, “ with Vapu?mat’s flesh he offered the cakes to his [murdered] 
father, he feasted the brahmans who were sprung from families of 
U|k§tasas ” (p. 683 with 679). Brahmans at times lost their caste 
and became degraded, but' here the position is reversed and certain 



dcscoTidnnts of Kaksas«as wore reckoned as bmlimans. Such cAnni- 
balisiii is, I believe, unparalleled in Sanskrit, and it is almost incredible 
that there sliould have been brahmans of aii}^ kind whatever who 
would have partieipated in it. Eating human desh was not unknown 
in aiK'ient iinies (p. 127), yet a story is told in the Maha-bharata 
wliere liaksasas and even flesli-eating Dasyus disdained the flesh of a 
true thougli degraded brahman (S'anti-p. clxxii. 0420-20). This 
story of king Dama would seem to imply that it is of real antiquity, 
and that the account of the dynasty in which he occurred, and which 
is the only dynasty described, must be a purana in the full meaning 
of the term. 



Canto. 


CONTENTS. 

Introduction. 


Page, 


1 Jaimini applied to Markaiuleya for instruction on four 1 
questions. Markaiideya referred him to four learned Birds, 
sons of Drona and the Apsaras Vajm who was cursed by the 

2 rsi Durvasas to bo a bird ; and narrated the story of tlnnr 6 

3 birth, and of their education by Samika; and explained 11 
that they were four brahmans, ulio were so born, because 
cursed by their father vSukrsa for not offering their bodies 

as food to a famished bird. 

The Birds' discourse on JaiminVs four questions. 

4 Jaimini visited the Birds at the Vindhya Mts. and they 17 
answered his four questions thus : — Visnu assumed bodily 

6 forms in order to accomplish good; Draupadi became the 2J 
joint wife of the liv(* Fandavas because they were all 

0 emanations of Tndra ; Baladcva committed brahmanicide 23 

7 during intoxication and expiated it by pilgrimage ; and five 32 
Vi^ve Devas, who, on seeing Visvamitra’s brutality to king 
Hariscandra, censured Vi^vamitra, incurred his curse thereby 
and were born as the five sons of Draupadi to die young and 
unmarried, 

8 This story led the Birds at Jaimini’s request to narrate 38 
the whole story of king Tlaiiscandra s sufferings and 

9 ultimate beatitude ; and the terrible fight which resulted 59 
therefrom between Vasistha and Vi^vamitra as gigantic 
birds. 

The Birds' discourse on Jaimini's further questions. 

Discourse on life-, death and action, 

10 Jaimini propounded furtlier (|uestions regarding concep- 62 

, tion, feetal life, birth, growth, death and the consequences 
of action ; and the Birds answered them by reproducing 



xxiv 

Canto. Page. 

the instruction that a brahman Sumati, nick-named Jada, 
once gave to his father (cantos x— xliv). 

Thus the Birds gave in Jada’s words a description of 

11 death, after-existences and certain hells ; of human concep- 69 
- 12 tion and birth, and tlie evils of all existence ; of certain other 71 

13 hells and the various terrible torments inflicted there; and 74 
they narrated the story of king Vipascit’s descent into hell, 

14 with a discourse regarding actions and the specific punish- 76 

16 ments for a long list of various sins, and of his deliverance 83 

from hell together with other persons confined there. 

Stories ilhistrating religions devotion {yoga). 

16 The Birds, continuing Jada’s discourse, broached the sub- 91 
ject of yoga or religious devotion, but prefaced it with a long 
narrative (cantos xvi to xliv). A brahman Mandavya was 
saved from a curse by his devoted wife, who stopped the rising 

17 of the sun and gained a boon from Atri’s wife Anasuya ; the 99 
gods in consequence blessed Anasuya, and Brahma, Visnuand 
S'iva were born as her three sons Soma, Dattatreya and Durva- 

18 sas ; Dattatreya indulged in sensual pleasures; Arjuila Kar- 101 
tavirya, however, being advised by his minister Garga to 
jlropitiate Dattatreya, because Dattatreya ( being an incar- 
nation of Visnii) had once saved the gods from the demons, 

19 did so and by Dattatreya’s blessing reigned gloriously. 106 
This led on to the story of Alarka, which is used to convey 
political, religious and social instruction (cantos xx to xliv). 

Alarha's birth and education. 

20 King Satrujit’s son Rtadhvaja lived in intimate friend- 109 
ship with two Naga princes; they told their father Asva- 
tara — how Rtadhvaja had succoured the brahman Galava 

21 with the help of a wondrous horse named Kuvalaya, and 113 
descending to Patala, had killed the demon Fatala-ketu there, 
and had rescued and married the Gandharva princess Mada- 

22 lasa, and was famed as Kuvalaya^va; and also how •a 1.21 
deigon had caused Madalasa to die on a false report of 



XXT 


Canto. Pagi. 

28 Kuvalayasva’s death. King A^vatara, by propitiating Sa- 126 
rasvati then, gained perfect skill in poetry and music 
(which are described), and by propitiating S'iva received 

24 Madalasa restored to life; he invited Kuvalayasva to 136 

26 Patala and gave Madalasa back to him. Kuvalayai^va had 140 

26 a son by her, and she prattled to the infant ; they had 142 
three other sons and she named tbc younge.st Alarka. 

Political^ religious and social instruction. 

27 Then followed an exposition of political, religious and social 145 
doctrine in the guise of instruction given by Madalasa to 
Alarka. She instructed him in the duties and conduct 

28 of a king; in the duties of the four castes and of a brah- 148 

29 man’s life ; in the general duties of a grhastha and various 151 

30 religious matters ; in the duties of a gj-hastha in detail ; 155 

31 in the sraddha ceremonies ; in the performance of the Par- 157 

32 vana S'raddha and the persons to be excluded ; in the par- 1G4 
ticular foods, periods, sites and ordinances to be observed in 

33 the sraddha ; in the Voluntary sraddhas and their benefits 168 

34 and proper occasions ; in the rules of Virtuous Custom, 170 

36 generally and with much detail ; about diet, purification, 180 

conduct, holy days and various religious ceremonies. 

Eccposiiion of religious devotion {yoga). 

36 Rtadhvaja then resigned his kingdom to Alarka and de- 186 

37 parted to the forest Alarka lived in pleasure, but, being 187 
reduced to great straits by his brother and the king of 

38 Kasi, sought relief from Dattatreya. Dattatreya spoke 191 
about the soul and, on Alarka’s asking about religious devotion 

39 (yoga), expounded the method, conditions and signs of its 193 

40 proper performance ; the attendant ailments and the stages 1 98 

41 which lead to final emancipation from existence ; the way 202 
in which a yogi should live, beg, eat and reach his end ; 

42 the composition, meaning and efficacy of the word “Om ’’ ; 205 

43 ill omens and their signification ; and the seasons for, and 207 
the importance of, ^oga. Alarka then relinquished * the 



xtvi 

ClNTO. 

44 kingdom, but his brother, glad at [Alarka’s conversion, de- 2l3 
dined it and departed. Alarka gave it to bis son and de- 
parted to tlie forest. This ends Jada’s exposition. 

The Birds' discourse on Jaimini's further questions. 

Discourse on Creation. 

46 Jaimini put further (juestions, and the Birds answered 217 
them by repeating what Markandoya had taught Kraustuki. 

This discourse runs on to the end of the Purana. 

Markandeya, after extolling this Purana, described tlie 
course of creation from Brahma through Pradhana, t'te., and 

46 the mundane egg; he discoursed about Brahma, and ex- 221 

47 plained divine and human time and the four ag(*s. He de- 228 

48 scribed the creation of the earth and all it contains ; tin; 232 
gods, demons, pitrs, mankind, &e., and the ])ositions assign- 

49 ed them ; the origin of the ])rimevai human race and its 237 

60 social and moral evolution ; the birth of the nine Sag('s, 21(1 
Rudra, Manu Svayambhuva and his descendants, Daksa and 

his offs])riug; A-dbarma and bis prog(‘ny, especially the 

61 goblin Huhsaba and Ids [)Owers, whose brood of goblins and 257 

62 hags are named with their particular functions ; the erea- 268 
tion of the Rudras ; and the wives and offspring of the 
r?is and pitps. 

Account of the Manus. 

63 Markandeya next discoursed of the Manus and man- 271 
vantaras. He told of the first Manu, Svayambhuva, and 

his descendants v/ho peopled tlie seven Continents, Jambu- 
dvipa was occupied by Agnidhra, and his descendant Bharata 
gave his name to India. This introduced the subject of 
geography. 

Geography. 

64 Markandeya described the earth and its continents, espe- 275 
cially Jambu-dvipa; and also Mount Meru, first briefly, and 

66 then with full mention of neighbouring forests, lakes and 27 8 

56 mountains ; and the course of the Gauges in the sky and on 280 



ttvii 

CAiri^. Pag«. 

67 the earth. He mentioned the nine divisions of Bharata, 283 
and then dealt with India in detail ; naming its seven 284 
mountain ranges and its scattered hills ; and its rivers, dis- 290 
tinguishing them according to their source.s, in the Hima- 
laya, the Paripatra, the Vindhya, the Rksa, the Sahya, 293 
the Malaya, the Mahondra and the S'liktimat ranges. 303 
He named the various peoples inhabiting India and its 307 
confines, according as they dwelt in the Middle Land 
(Mad)iya-de^a), in the north-west, outside nortliwards, 311 
in the north, in the cast, in the south, in tlie west, 324 
around the Vindliya mountains and beneath the Himalayas. 310 

68 Next representing India as resting upon Visnu in tlie form 348 

of a tortoise, Markandeya named tlie various peoples (with 
tlie corresponding lunar constellations) as tliey were dis- 349 
tributed over the middle of the tortoise’s body, over its 358 
face, its right fore-foot, its right Hank, its riglit hind-foot, 370 
its tail, its left hind-foot, its left Hank audits left fore-foot ; 384 
and he added some astrological, religious and political 

69 comments. He then described the countries Bhadras^va, 387 

60 Ketumala, the Northern Kurus, Kimpurusa, Hari-varsa, 390 
Ilavfta, Kamyaka, and Hiranmaya. 

Account of the Manm [remmed). 

61 Markandeya related the birth of the second Manu. A 391 
brahman visited Himavat and met an Apsaras VaruthinI ; 

62 a Gandharva Kali by personating him gained her affection ; 399 

63 iind she bore a son Svarocis. Svarocis delivered a maiden 401 

64 Mauorama from a eurso and married her, and also rescued 40G 

66 her two girl-companions an ' married them ; after living 408 

00 long in heedless pleasure with them, he had three sons 411 

whom he established in separate kingdoms by the know- 
ledge called Padmiin ; and he had by a forest goddess 

67 another son Dyutimat who became the second Manu, 415 

68 Svaroci^a ; and his period is noticed. The allusion to the 415 
, knowledge Padmini introduced a discourse on its supporters, 

the Nidhis. 



Canto. Page. 

69 Contiiiumg, Markandoya related how king Uttaina 419 
banished his queen for bad temper, and helped a brahman 

to find his ill-tempered wife who had been carried ofE ; he 

70 was rebuked by a rsi for his own conduct ; he recovered the 425 
brahman’s wife, whose bad temper a Rak^asa consumed. 

71 A Naga king liad taken the queen to Patala, and she was 429 

72 hidden ; the brahman changed her nature and the Raksasa 432 
restored het to king Uttama ; she bore a son, who became 

73 the third Manu, Auttama, and his period is noticed. 43G 

74 Markandeya related liow king Svarastra when driven 438 
from his kingdom, met his deceased queen, and had a son 
who became the fourth Manu, Tamasa ; his period is noticed. 

76 The rsi Rtavac made tlie constellation Revati fall ; a maiden 443 
was born therefrom ; she married king Durgama and bore 

a son, who became the fifth Manu, Raivata ; his period is 

70 noticed. Caksusa, being changed when an infant by a hag, 449 
became king Vikranta’s son, but turned an ascetic and be- 
came the sixth Manu, Caksusa; his period is noticed. 

77 Continuing the manvautaras, Markandeya said the Sun 455 
married Tva§tr’^ daughter Sanjila and had two sons Vaivas- 
vata and Yaina ; Sanjua (|uittcd him, leaving her Shadow 

.78 behind, because his splendour was excessive ; Tvas^r pared 458 
his splendour down while the gods hymned the Sun ; the Sun 
regained Saujha j he had by the Shadow a son who will bo the 

79 eighth Manu, Savarni. Vaivasvatais Wig seventh and 'present 461 

80 Manu ; his period is noticed. The future period of Savarni 463 
with its rsis, gods, &c., is prophesied. 

The Devx-mahfitmya. 

81 The mention of Savarni introduced the Devi-mahatmya. 465 
Markandeya related that king Suratha, being ousted from 

his kingdom, met a vaisya driven from his family, and both 
consulted a r?i about their longings for home; the fsi as- 
cribed tlieir feelings to the goddess Maba-maj'a (Great 
Illusion), and related how, when she was lauded by Brahma, 
Vi§nu slew the detnons Madhu and Kaitabha. 



xxiz 

Canto. Page. 

82 The rsi then recited her exploits. Here begins the Devi- 47,3 
mahatmya properly. The demons under Mahi§a vanquish- 
ed the gods, and the goddess was formed as Caadika (Ara- 

83 bika) out of tlieir special energies combined ; she began a 478 
great battle and destroyed the demons, all the demon chiefs 

84 and finally Mahisa himselt*. The gods praised her in a 482 
hymn, and she promised to befriend them always. Again 

the gods were vaiupiishcd by the demons S'uinbha and 
Nibumbha, and invoked her; she appeared, and S'umbha 

86 wanted to marry lier but she deedined; ho sent an army 497 
and she destroyed it ; lie sent another with Canda and Miinda; 

87 the goddess Kali destroyed them and Candika gave her the 409 

88 combined name Caraunda ; S'umbha sent all his armies ; 501 

89 Candika killed the chief llaktavija, then Nisumbha in spite 500 

90 of S'umbha’s aid, and many demons, and finally S^umbha 509 

91 himself; whereat the universe was Ulled with joy. The 511 
gods praised her in a hymn and she promised to deliver them 

92 always. She descanted on the merits of this poem. The 519 
gods regained their supremacy ; and she is extolled. Here 
ends the Devi-mahatmya properly. 

93 After hearing this poem king Suratha worshipped Can di- 522 
ka, and she promised he should be the eighth Manu, Savnrni. 


Account of the Manns {resumed) . 

94 Markandeya, continuing, mentioned the other future 524 
Manus, the ninth, tenth, eleve?ith and twelth named Savarna, 

96 and the thirteenth ruimed Uaucya ; and their periods. He 526 
narrated the story of Rauc’^a. A prajapati Ruci was urged * 

96 by the Pitrs to marry; he propitiated Brahma and praised 529 

97 the Pitrs in a hymn ; they appeared and promised him a 534 

98 wife and extolled his hymn ; he married an Apsaras and had 538 
09 a son who will be the thirteenth Manu Raucya. S'anti, the 539 

disciple of an irascible fsi Blmti, finding the sacred fire ex- 
lOd tinguished, offered a hymn to Agni. Agni restored the fire 546 
and promised to Bhuti a son who should be the fourteenth 



Canto. PA^^P* 

Manu, Bhautya. Bhautya’s period is noticed. This account 
of the manvantfU’as is extolled. 

Commencement of the Genealogies. 

101 At Kraustuki’s request Markandeya began the genealo- 650 
gies. Brahma created Daksa, from whom came Martanda, 

the Sun. Then mentioning that Brahma was bom from 
the mundanc' egg, and produced the lokas (worlds), and 
next the four Vedas with their merits — Markandeya di- 
verged into a laudation of the Sun. 

The majesty of the Sun. 

102 The gods and the Vedas arc declared to be manifesta^ 553 
102 tions of the Sun. The Sun’s glory was at first too great, 556 

and Brahma with a hymn induced him to contract it 

104 and then finished the creation. Marici’s son Ka^yapa 558 
begot the gods, demons, mankind, <fec. The demons over- 
came the gods and Aditi sought help of the Sun in a 

105 hymn. He became her son as Martanda and destroy- 563 
100 ed the demons, Tlie story of the Sun and his wife San- 566 

jna (as told in cantos Ixxvii and Ixxviii) is re-told here 
with more detail regarding the Shadow-Safijna, the curse on 

107 Yama, the paring down of the Spin’s splendour, the hymns 572 

108 offered to the Sun, and the Sun’s offspring and the sta- 574 
tions alloted them. 

109 Further Markandeya related that king Bajya-vardhana 577 
when old resolved to resign the kingdom, but his p(3ople in 

110 grief pro])itiatcd the Sun, and the Sun granted him great 583 
length of life ; the king similarly obtained the same boon 

for them. This story is extolled. 

The Genealogies resumed. 

111 Markandeya mentioned Manu Vaivasvata’s seven sons 687 

112 and Ila-Sudyumna, Puruiavas, <fcc. Manu’s son Pu§adhra 590 
killed a brahman’s cow and being cursed became a s^dra. 

113 Kariisa’s descendants were mentioned. 592 

Dicta’s son Nabhaga married a vai^ya maiden wilfully 



XXKl 

Canto. Page. 

114 and became a vaidya ; their son Bhanandana conquered the 597 
earth, but Nabhaga declined to reign. Then Nabbaga’s 
wife explained that she was not really a vai^ya, but that her 
father was a king who became a vai4ya under a rsi’s curse 

116 with a promise of recovery, and that she was a princess and 001 
had become a vaidya under Agastya’s curse. 

116 Bhanandana became king. His son Vatsapri rescued a 604 
princess Sunanda from Patala after killing a demon king 

117 who had a magic club, and married her. His son was 610 
Pramdu, and Prarh^u’s son Prajati. Prajati’s son Khani- 

tra was beneficent ; his brothers’ ministers practised magic 

118 to dethrone him but destroyed therasclvcs ; Khanitra re- 615 

119 signed the kingdom in grief and went to the forest. His 617 
son K^upa performed sacrifices for the harvests. His son 

120 was Vira and grandson Vivim^a. Vivim^a’s son Khanine- 619 
tra while hunting met two deer eager to be sacrificed, and 

121 by Indra’s favour obtained a son Balajjva. Balaeva was called 623 
Karandhama because of a fanciful victory. 

122 His son Aviksit married many princesses and carried ofE 266 

123 princess Vai^alini at her svayamvara: the suitor kings 628 
conquered and captured him, but she refused them all : 

124 Karandhama rescued Aviksit, but Aviksit refused to marry 631 
the princess after his discomfiture ; she turned to austerities 

125 and obtained an assurance from the gods : Avi kbit’s mother 637 
by a ruse obtained a promise from him to beget a son : 

126 while hunting he rescued the princess from a demon and 641 

127 pleased the gods : she proved to bo a Oandliarva maiden and 645 
Aviksit married her in the Gandharva world ; she bore a son 

128 Marutta there. Aviksit retuiaed but refused the kingdom 649 

129 because of his discomfiture. Marutta became king, and was 653 
a universal monarch, a great sacrificcr, and liberal benefactor 

130 to brahmans. The Nagas gave great trouble, and he at- 658 
tacked them, but Aviksit interposed in favour of the Nagas ; 

131 a battle was averted by the j-sis, and the Nagas made repara- 660 
Jbion. Marutta’s wives are named. 

132 His son Narisyanta enriched the brahmans permanently 665 



rail 


Canto. Page. 

183 at a great sacrifice. His son Dama was cliosen by the 668 
Da^arna princess, and defeated the suitor kings, who, invio- 
134 lation of marriage laws, opposed him. Dama became king. 674 
Narisyanta was murdered in tlie forest by Vapu^mat one of 

136 those kings. Dama bewailed, and vowed vengeance against 678 
130 the murderer ; he slew Vapu^mat and celebrated his father’s 680 

obsequies with Vapus mat’s flesh and blood. 

Conclusion. 

137 The Birds closed their long repetition of Markandeya’s 684 
instruction to Krau^tuki, with an encomium on the Puranas 
and this Pura^a in particular. Jaimini thanked them. 



ADDITIONS AND CORKECTIONS. 


P. 2, 1. 23, after sacred add customs. 

P. 20, 1. 19, for Sama read Saman, 

1. 26, for nara read nara. 

P. 25, 1. 6, dele -phd. 

P. 26, 1. 21, for Asolca read A4oka. 

P. 27, 1. 25, for Peninsular read Peninsula. 

P. 29, 1. 18, add unless it is the same as the bird ‘ putra-priya” 
which was so named because its note resembled 
‘ putra iputra.* Ramay., Ayodh.-k. (Ed. Gorr.) 
cv. 11, (Ed, Bom.) xcvi, 12. 

P. 20, 1. 24, for btween read between. 

P, 29, 1. 33, add Sec Raghu-V., vi. 36. 

P. 31, 1. 8, for famalies read families. 

Cantos Vll, VIII & IX/or Hari^-candra read Hari^candra. 

P. 42, 1. 15, for back read bark. 

P. 44, 1. 11, for compassionate read passionate. 

P. 55. 1. 13, for Brahman read Brahman. 

1. 17, for Brahman read the Prajapati. 

P. 65, 1. 29, for the read thee. 

P. 89, 1. 33, for not therefore long read therefore ; dele not. 

P. 93, 1. 15, for etcetera read et cetera. 

P. 99, 1. 6, for Battatreya read Battdtreya. 

P. 100, 1. 12, for yogi read yogi. 

P. 102, 1. 35, for Bala-khilyas rea / V^lakhilyas. 

PP. 100-107, passim for Lakshmi read Lakshmi. 

P. 108, heading, for XX read XIX. 

P. 109, 1. 1-3 read instead And the doctrine of religious devotion 
was indeed declared by Dattatreya to that high- 
Bouled royal rishi Alarka who was faithful to 
^ his father. 

P. 113» 1. 2, for excedingly read exceedingly. 



XXXIV 


P. 118, 1. 5, for him, the large-thighed* hero, the chief of his 
race, read Tumburu*, the spiritual preceptor of 
her family. 

1, 7, for accepted her read arrived. 

note*, cancel the note and snhstitute See canto cxxvii, 
verses 13 and 26. 

P. 122, 1. 16, funeral. 

P. 124, last lin^, for son and daughter read son’s wife. 

P. 125, 1. 33, after anxiety add ” 

P. 133, 1. 30, after inspirer add ” 

P. 136, 1. 12, for atru-jit’s read S'atru-jit’s. 

P. 143, 1. 14, for religion read righteousness. 

P. 169, 1. 34, for begun read begin. 

P. 173, bottom, for Kamatas read Kamatas. 

P. 174, 1. 14, for carry read use. 

1. 16, for are carrying read have used. 

P. 177, 1. 20, read instead the wise man should bathe, keeping his 
clothes on ; and so also after resorting to ‘ a 
place where bodies are burnt. 

P. 179, 1. 34, for guru read gurus. 

P. 181, 1. 2, for holidays read holidays, 

P. 182, 1. 3, for screened by many read concealed within many 
things. 

P. 197, 1. 34, for practice read practise. 

P. 201, L 7, for Gandarvas read Gandharvas. 

P. 236, 1. 8 , for aptor read aptor. 

P. 239, 1. 8, for is read are. 

P.241,1.2], The Bombay edition reads instead “the khar- 
va^aka and the drami.” 

P, 242, 1 . 1 , to varma-vat add note The Bombay edition reads 
“ kharvata ” instead. 

1.21, addThQ Bombay edition reads “jana” instead of 
“jala.” 

i 1. 38, add The Bombay edition reads “ drami ” instead. 

P. 246, 1. 27, for mentloueed read mentioned. 

P. 269, 1. 21, for Dhiiipravati read Dhdmravati. 



ixiv 

P. 288, 1, 23, dele the words from In a list to Ndga-ra^. 

P. 293, 1. 3, for Vritra-ghni read Vyitra-ghni. 

P. 300, 1. 40 for S^ilavati read S'ilavati. 

P. 332, 1. 4, add May this name be identified with the town ■ 
Kodungalny (the modern Cranganore) north of 
Cochin? It is a place of sanetity, and was 
formerly an important town and harbour. 

P. 366, 1. 6, add See p. 445. 

P. 368, 1. 13, for Badav4 read Badava. 

P. 403, 1. 12, for mightly read mighty. ^ 

P. 445, 1. 35, add and p. 365. 

P. 469, 1. 9, for universel read universal. 

P. 486, 1. 26, for my read may. 

P. 581, 1. 27, for ungnents read unguents. 

P. 636, last lino,ybr om read from. 




THE 


MARKANDEYA PUR AN A. 

OM! REVERENCE TO THE ADORABLE VISHNU! 


May Vishnu’s lotus-feet, which power have 

To dissipate the woes wrought by the fear 

Of existence, and which are lauded high 

By ascetics, assiduous, whose minds 

From all things else are rapt — may those same feet, 

Whose steps the earth, the sky, and heaven o’erpassed^ 

To sight appearing, purify your souls I 

May Ho protect you, who is skilled to save 
In every kind of sin impure ; whose form 
Within the bosom of the sea of milk 
Upon the hooded snake reclines ; and at 
Whose touch the sea grows mountainous, its spray 
Up-tossing from its waters by his breath 
Disturbed, and into seeming dancing breaks 1 


Canto I* 

The Oihrse on Vapu^ 

Jaimini applies to Mdrhandeya for instruction regarding ceHcUn^ 
dijfi, cutties in the Mahdhhdrata—MdrJiandeya refers him to four 
leof'ned Birds, the sons of Drona, and narrates their history— Their 

1 



2 


CANTO T. 


mother Vapu, an Apmra.% was condemned hy the Muni Durvdsas to 

become a bird for tempting him. 

Having adored N^rdyana, and Nara the best of men, the goddess 

Sarasvati, and then Vydsa>j let him utter the verse of Victory ! 

1 The illustrious Jaimini, the disciple of Yydsa, interrogated 
the great Muni Markandeya, who was engaged in the per- 
formance of austerities and the study of the Veda. 

2 “ Sir ! the high-souled Vyasa related the story of the Maha- 
bhdrata, which is replete with splendid spotless collections 

3 of various S'^stras, which is characterized by accuracy regard- 
ing the different classes, is embellished with beautiful words, 
and contains complete knowledge of primd facie assertions, and 

4 established conclusions. As Vishnu is chief among the gods, 
as the brahman chief among men, and as the crest- jewel chief 

5 among all decorations, as the axe* is the best among weapons, 
as the mind best among the organs, so in this world is the 

6 Mahabharata the best among all the S'dstras. Here are des- 
cribed both Wealth and Vii-tuo, Love, and Final emancipation 
from transmigration ; these have both reciprocal and peculiar 

7 consequences. It is the best Dharma- it is the most 

eminent Artha-sastra ; it too is the foremost Kama-.4astra, as 

8 well as the noblest Moksha-^astra. It has been declared, Sir, 
by Veda-Vyasa the wise, to be the authority for the sacred 

^ and maxims of the laws of the four periods of a brahman's 

9 life. For this Maha-sastra has been so constmeted, dear 
Sir, by Vyasa the noble in deeds, that although beset with 

10 difficulties it is not overthrown by them. The earth has 
been freed from the dust of passion by the stream of Vydsa’s 
words, which has descended from the mountain of the Veda, 

11 and has swept away the trees of bad reasoning. Therefore 
have I come to thee. Sir, being desirous to know truly the 
story of Vyasa, in which melodious sounds are the geese, the 

12 noble story is the splendid lotus, the words are the expanse 
of water, and the Vedas are the great lake — this precious 

13 and long story of the Mahdbharata. Why was Janardana 


^ Or Indra’s thunderbolt. 



THE CURSE ON VAPU. 


3 


Vasudeva, who is the cause of the creation preservation and 
destruction of the world, although devoid of qualities, endued 

14 with humanity ? And why was Drupada’s daughter Kpshi^4 
the common wife of the five sons of P^i?(Ju ? for on this point 

15 we feel great perplexity. Why did the mighty Baladeva 
HaUyudha expiate his brahmanicide by engaging in a pilgri- 

16 mage ? And how was it that the unmarried heroic high-souled 
sons of Braupadi, whose protector was Pilndu, were slain, as 

17 if they had no protector ? Deign to recount all this to mo here 
at length ; for sages like thee are ever the instructors of the 
ignorant.” 

18 Having thus heard his speech, the great Muni M4rkan(}eya, 
devoid of the eighteen* defects, began to speak. 

Markandeya spoke. 

19 “ The time for my engaging in religious rites has now arrived, 
most virtuous Muni ! and this is not esteemed the season 

20 for a long discourse. But I will now tell thee, 0 Jaimini, 
of those birds who will speak to thee and so resolve thy 

21 doubts. They are Pingaksha and Vibodha, Supatra, and Su- 
mukha, the sons of Drona, the noblest of birds, versed in the 
principles of philosophy, and meditators on the S'dstras. 

22 Their mind is unclouded in the knowledge of the meaning of 
the Veda and S'astras. They dwell in a cave of the Vindhya 
mountains, visit and question them.” 

23 Then, thus addressed by the wise Mirkandeya, replied the 
Muni pre-eminent, his eyes wide open with astonishment. 

Jaimini spoke. 

24 “ Very wonderful is this, 0 brahman ! that those birds have 
gained knowledge most difficult to be acquired, as if birds 

• The 18 defects are said, in a translation begun by the late Rev. K. M. 
Banerjea^ to be these— palpitation, fear, thickness in speech, indistinctness, 
speaking through the nose, discordancy, want of emotion, disconnectedness, 
roughness, hoarseness, high pitch, inawcuraoy in pronunciation, perturbation, 
want of cadence, sing-song, shaking thi' head, weakness of voice, and nn- 
meaningnest. 



4 


CANTO r. 


25 possessed liunian speech. If their birth is of the bmte creation, 
whence have they the knowledge ? And how is it that those 

26 winged ones are called the children of Dro^a ? And who was 
this famous Drona, who had those four sons. Do those virtuous 
high-souled birds possess the knowledge of righteousness ? ” 

Miirkandeya spoke. 

27 “ Listen attentively to what happened of yore in Nandana 
at the meeting of Indra and the Apsarases and Narada. 

28 Narada saw Indra the king of the gods in Nandana, sur- 
rounded by a band of those wanton maidens, with eyes fasten- 

29 ed on their faces. S'ac'i’s lord, immediately he was seen by 
that best of Rishis, rose up, and respectfully gave him his own 

30 seat. Those heavenly maidens, on seeing him, the slayer of 
Bala and Vritra, rise up, prostrated themselves before the 

31 Devarshiand stood reverently bending. He then, worshipped 
by them, duly greeted Indra, when he had seated himself, and 
conversed pleasantly with him. 

32 “ Then in the course of their talk, Indra said to the great 
Muni — ‘ Declare, which of these dancers pleases thee most. Is 

38 it Rambhd, or Karkasa, or Urvasi, Tilottama, Ghritac'i, or 

34 Menaka ? or whichever delights thee.’ Narada, best of dvijas, 
hearing this speech of Indra, pondered and then addressed 

35^ the reverently bending Apsarases : — ‘ She, of you all here 
present, who thinks herself pre-eminent in beauty, nobility 

36 and good qualities, let her dance before me. There is indeed 
no success in dancing for one who is destitute of good qualities 
and beauty. Good dancing implies graceful comportment : 
other dancing is vexation.’ 

Markan(Jeya spoke. 

37 “ And immediately on that speech, each one of those bowing 
ones thus exclaimed — ‘ I excel in good qualities ; not you, nor 

38 you ! ’ The lord Indra seeing their agitation said, ‘ Let the Muni 
be asked, he will say which of you excels in good qualities.’ 

39 What Narada, sought by those followers of Indra’s will, 

40 then said, hear that from me, 0 Jaimini ! ‘ She among you 



THE CURSE ON VAPU. 


5 


who by her power pe^’fcurbs the most noble Muni Durvasas, 
who is pei*forming austerities, dwelling on the mountain, her 
among you I deem pre-eminent in good qualities.’ 

Markan^eya spoke. 

41 “ Having heard that his sentence, they all exclaimed, with 
trembling necks, ‘ this is impossible for us ! ’ 

42 “ Among them an Apsaras named Vapu, confident of perturb- 
ing the Muni, replied, ‘I will follow where the Muni dvv^ells ; 

43 now will I make that tamer of his body, who has yoked 
the horses of his organs, but a poor charioteer whoso reins 

44 drop before the weapons of love. Whether it be Brahma, or 
Janardana or the purple S'iva^ his heart will I now pierce 
with the arrow of love.’ 

45 “ Having thus spoken Vapu departed then to the Snowy 
mountain to the M uni’s hermitage, where the beasts of prey 

46 were quelled by the might of his austerities. Stopping at the 
distance of a call from where the great Muni is seated, 

47 the lovely Apsaras sang the cuckoo’s melody. Hearing 
the strains of her song, the Muni astonished in mind went 

48 to where sits that beauteous-faced maiden. On seeing 
her, beautiful in every limb, the Muni, summoning his 
resolution, was filled with anger and resentment, knowing 

49 that she had come to perturb him. Then the great Rishi, the 
performer of mighty austerities, pronounced this sentence. 

50 ‘ Since thou hast come here, 0 maiden ! intoxicated with pride, 
to cause me pain by obsti'ucting my austerities, which are ac- 

51 complished with difficulty, 0 Apsaras, therefore shalt thou, 
polluted by my wrath, be born in the foolish race of birds 

52 for the space of sixteen years, losing thine own form, and 
taking the form of a bird ; and four sons shall be born to 

53 thee, 0 vilest of Apsarases; and without having gained affection 
among them, absolved from guilt by dying in the field of 
battle, thou shalt regain thy dwelling in the sky. Never 
make any reply.’ 

54 The Brahman, red-eyed with anger, having pronounced this 
grievous sentence on that proud maiden, whose tinkling 



6 


CANTO II. 


bracelets were trembling, abandoned the earth, whose waves 
were very tremulous, and departed to the heavenly Ganges 
whose stream consists of a multitude of renowned qualities.” 


Canto II. 

The Birth of the Sparrows. 

The story of the Birds continued — Kandhara, king of the birds 
killed a Rdkhasa Vidyud-rupa for killing his brother^ and, marrying 
the Rdkhasa' s wife, had a daughter by her named Tdrksht who was the 
Apsaras Vapu — She married Drona — When pregnant by him she was 
killed at the battle of the Kauravas and Pdndavas, and there laid four 
eggs from which the four Birds were born — The Birds were nourished 
by the Muni S'amika. 

Markaiideya spoke. 

1 The king of the birds, Garuda by name, was the son of 

2 Arishtanemi : Garuda’s son was renowned as Sampati : and 
his son was Supar^va, heroic, mighty as Vdyu : 8uparsva’s son 

3 was Kunti ; Kunti’s son was Pralolupa. And he had two sons 
Kanka and Kandhara. 

4 On the top of Kailasa, Kanka saw the Rakshasa famed as 
s Vidyud-rupa, whoso eyes were like a lotus leaf, a follower 

5 of Kuvera, who was busied in a banquet, clad with strings of 
bright garlands, sitting in company with his wife on a beau- 

6 tiful clean rocky seat. Then the Rakshasa, immediately he 
was seen by Kanka, filled with anger, said, “ Wherefore hast 

7 thou come hither, 0 vilest of the egg- born ? Why hast thou 
approached me when I am in company with my wife ? Such 
is not the rule of the wise in matters that must be accom- 
plished in secret.” 

Kanka spoke. 

“ This mountain is common both to you and me and to other 
creatui’es also ; what special ownership then canst thou, Sir, 
have here ? ” 


8 



THE BIRTH OF IHB SPARROWS, 


7 


M^rkan<Jeya spoke. 

9 The Rdkshasa with his sword slew Kanka, while he was thus 
speaking, who fell defiled with the streaming blood, quivering 
and senseless. 

10 Having heard that Kanka was slain, Kandhara the king of 
the birds, bewildered with anger, resolved speedily to slay 

11 Vidyud-rdpa. Having gone to the mountain-top, where Kanka 
lay slain, the king of the birds, his eyes swollen with anger 
and resentment, and sighing like the king of the Kagas 

12 performed the Sankalana for his elder brother. Where sits 
the slayer of his brother, there he went, rocking the lofty 

13 mountains with the mighty wind from his wings. He, with 
blood-red eyes, overtopping the mountains, and forcibly hurl- 
ing down masses of clouds with his wings, used to destroy 

14 his enemies suddenly. There he saw that demon, whose 
thoughts were intent on drinking, whose face and eyes were of 
a copperish colour, and who was seated on a golden couch, 

15 whose crest was covered with strings of garlands, who was 
adorned with yellow sandal, whose face was very horrible 
with teeth that resembled the inside of the Ketaki leaf. 

IG And ho saw, seated on the Rakshasa’s left thigh his long-eyed 
wife, named Madauika, whose voice was soft as the cuckoo’s. 

17 Then Kandhara, whose mind was filled with wrath, addressed 
that inmate of the cave, “ 0 thou of utterly evil soul ! come 

18 forth and fight with me. ’ Since thou hast murdered my 
trustful elder brother, therefore I will bring thee, while en- 

19 grossed in drunkenness, down to Yaraa’s abode. To-day, slain 
by me, shalt thou go to all those hells that are the abodes of 
the murderers of those who trust in them, and of the mup- 
derei’s of women and children.” 

Markandeya spoke. 

20 Addressed even thus by the king of the birds in his wife’s 
presence, the Rakshasa, filled with anger, then answered the 

21 bird. ‘‘ If thy brother has been slain, then have I displayed 
my valour ; thee, too, to-day, will I slay with this sword, O 



8 


OAPJTO ri. 


22 bird. Stay a moment, thou ahalt not move here alive, 0 
vilest of birds.” 

Thus he spoke and seized his bright sword that resembled 

23 a mass of collyrium. Then took place a marvellous battle 
between the king of the birds and Kuvera’s warrior, such 

24 as between Garuda and Indra. Then the Rakshasa, in anger 
swiftly hurling his sword, black as charcoal, flung it against 

25 the king of the birds. And then the king of the birds, slightly 
springing up from the ground, seized it with his beak, as 

26 Garuda seizes a serpent ; and the egg- born one broke it with 
his beak and talons, and shook it. Thereupon, the sword 

27 being broken, they began to fight with their arms. Then the 
Rakshasa, being attacked in the breast by the king of the 
birds, was speedily deprived of arms, feet, hands and head. 

28 When he was killed, his wife besought protection of the 

29 bird: somewhat fearful, she said, “I am thy wife.” That 
noblest of birds, taking her, returned to his abode, having 
obtained a recompense for his brother by the slaughter of 

30 Vidyud-riipa. And she, the daughter of Menaka, with beauti- 
ful eyebrows, capable of assuming forms at pleasure, on reach- 
ing the house of Kandhara, took a form resembling Garu- 

31 da’s. Of her, he then begat a daughter named Tarkshi, 
{namely Vapu the loveliest of the Apsarases, who was consumed 
by the fire of the Muni’s curse). Then the bird gave her the 
name Tai'kshi. 

32 And Mandap:ila had four sons of boundless intellect, Jari- 

33 tciri the eldest and Drona the youngest, best of dvijas. The 
youngest of them, righteous in soul, thoroughly read in the 
Vedas and Vedangas, married her the beauteous Tarkshi, 

34 with the consent of Kandhara. And after a while Ti^rkshi 
conceived ; when she had gone seven foidiiiights in her preg- 

35 nancy, she went to Kurukshotra. The very terrible battle 
between the Kurus and Pandavas was then being fought, and, 
in consequence of her action being predestined, she entered into 

36 the battle. There, then, she beheld the contest between Bha- 
gadatta and Arjuna. The sky was thick filled with an’ows, 

37 as if with locusts. . Discharged from the bow of Arjuna an 



THT3 BIUTII OP THE SPARROWH. 


9 


arrow, black as a serpent, fell with groat force and pierced 

38 the skin of her belly. Her belly being pierced, four moon -like 
eg^s fell on the ground as if on a heap of cotton, from the 

39 fad that their allotted period of life was not ended. At the 
same time that they fell, fell the great bell, the cord of which 
was cut by an arrow, from the noble elephant Supratika. 

40 It reached the ground evenly all around, cutting into the 
surface of the ground, and covering the eggs of the bird which 
lay upon flesh. 

41 And after king Bhagadatta, ruler of men, was slain, the 
fight between the armies of the Kurus and Pandavas went on 

42 many days. At the end of the battle, when Dharma’s son 
Yudhishthira approached the son of S^antanu to hear the high- 

43 soulcd Bhishma proclaiming the entire laws, a sage named 
S'amika came to the spot where, Obest of dvijas, laytho eggs 

It within the bell. There he heard the voice of the little birds 
chirping, whose voices were inarticulate on account of their 

15 infancy, although they had transcendant knowledge. Then the 
Rishi, accompanied by his disciples, lifted up tflo boll and 
saw with surprise the young motherless and fatherless birds. 

to The venerable Muni S^amika, having so scon them on the 
ground there, filled with astonishment, addressed his attendant 
dvijas. 

i7 “ Well was it said by the chief of the dvijas, Usanas himself, 
the regent of the planet Venus, when he saw the army of 

48 the Daityas intent on fleeing, hard-pressed by the gods. ‘ Ye 
must not go, turn ye back ; why run ye away, ye feeble ones f* 
Abandoning valour and glory, where have ye gone ? Ye shall 

49 not perish. Whether one perishes or whether one fights, 
one possesses life as long as God originally created, not as 

50 long as one’s mind desires. Men perish, some in their 
homes, some in flight ; so, too, do they meet their deai.h when 

51 eating food and drinking water. So, too, others, when 
sporting themselves, seated in the chariot of Love, free fi’om 
sickness, their bodies unpierced by arrows, fall into the power 

52 of the King of the departed. Others, when intent on aus- 
terities, are led off by the servants of the King of the departed ; 

2 



10 


CANTO n. 


and others occupied in meditation and study have not gained 

53 immortality. Of yore, Indra hurled his thunderbolt against 
S'ambara, yet that demon, though pierced thereby to the heart, 

54 did not perish. By that very thunderbolt, indeed, ahd by 
the same Indra, when their time was come, the D^na^’as 

55 wore slain, the Daityas forthwith perished. Perceiving 
this, ye should not fear : return yo.’ Then those Daityas, aban- 

56 doning the fear of death, turned back. This speech of 
U^anas is proved true by these most noble birds, which even 
in the superhuman battle did not meet with destruction. 

57 Whence comes the laying of the eggs, 0 brahmans ? Whence 
comes the even fall of the bell ? And how comes it that the 

58 ground is covered with flesh, fat, and blood ? Certainly these 
mud be some brahmans; they are not ordinary birds. The 
favour of destiny shows great good-fortune in the world.’^ 

59 Having spoken thus he looked at them and spoke again, 
“ Return, go to the hermitage, taking the young birds with you. 

60 Where these egg-born may have no fear of cat, or rat, of 

61 hawk or ichneumon, there let the birds be placed. 0 dvijas, 
what is the use of great care ? All creatures are destroyed 
or pi’eserved by their own actions, as have been those young 

62 birds. Nevertheless men must exert themselves in all matters ; 
he who does a manly act gains commendation from us, the 

" good.’^ 

63 Thus urged by that illustrious Muni, those young Munis, 
taking those birds, wont then to their own hermitage, delight- 
ful to ascetics, where clusters of bees settled on the boughs of 

64 the trees. And he, the noblest of dvijas, gathering wild 
roots, flowers, fruits, grasses, such as his mind loved, perform- 

65 ed the various religious ceremonies ordained by the Veda to 
all the deities, to Vishnu, Rudra, and the Creator, to Indra^ 
Yama, and Agni, to Varuna, to Vjihaspati and Kuvera, and 
also to Vayu, to Dhatri and Vidhatfi. 



THE VISIT TO THE VINDHYA MOUNTAIN. 


11 


Canto III. 

The Visit to the Vindhya Mountain. 

The Story of the Birds continued — The Birds ^ when full-grown^ 
were endowed with speech, and explained that wonder to the Muni 
Samika — They were the four sons of a BisM Sukfisha — Indra 
appeared to the Itish/i in the form of an aged bird, and asked for 
human flesh — The ftishi ordered his four sons to sacrifice themselves 
— They refused, and he cursed them to he horn in the brute crea- 
tion, but, moved with compassion at their entreaty, bestowed on 
them perfect knowledge — Hence they were born as birds. 

Mdrkandeya spoke. 

1 Thus ho, the most viiduoas Muni, 0 . princely brahman, 
nourished them day by day with food and water, and in safety. 

2 After a month they resorted to the sun’s chariot-road, being 
gazed at by tlio Munis’ sons, whoso eyes were tremulous 

3 with curiosity. After seeing the earth, with its , cities, and 
with its ocean and noble rivers, which appeared of the size 

4 of a chariot wheel, they returned to the hermitage. The 
spirited birds were wearied in their souls with their toil : and 
their knowledge was developed there through their energy, 

5 They all performed the reverential circumamhulation around 
the Rishi, who was expounding the truths of the law in com- 
passion for his disciples, and respectfully saluted his feet 

6 and said, “ We have been delivered by thee, 0 Muni ! from 
dreadful death ; thou hast given us shelter, food, and water; 

7 thou art our father and spiritual guide. Our mother died, 
when wo were still in the womb ; nor have wo been nourished 
by a father : thou, by whom wo were preserved when young, 

8 hast given us life. Thou, of perfect splendour on the earth, 
lifting high up the elephant’s bell, didst purge away evil 

9 from us who were withering like worms. ‘ How may these 
strength-loss ones grow ? When shall I see them flying 
in the sky ? When shall I see them alighting on a tree of the 

10 earth, settling within the trees ? When shall my natural 
colour be obliterated by the dust which the wind from their 



12 


CANTO TIL 


11 wiiigH i‘aise.s, as they Hit about near me ? ’ Thou, dear Sir, 
thus thinking, didst nourish us ; now we, those very birds, are 
grown up and have become wise, what ought we to do ? ” 

12 Having clearly heard this their perfectly articulated speech, 
the Uishi, surrounded by all his disciples, and accompanied 

13 by his son S'ringin, being full of eager curiosity, and covered 
with horripilation as with a garment, said, “ Tell me truly the 

14 cause of your power of speech. Through whose curse did 
you incur this wondrous transformation both in form and 
speech ? Deign liore to tell me that.” 

The birds spoke. 

15 “ There was of yore a most virtuous Muni named Vipulasvat. 

16 To him were born two sons Sukrisha and Tumburu. Wo are 
the four sons of soul-subdued Sukrisha ; to that Rishi we were 
ever submissive in reverence, religious practices and faith. 

17 As he desired, who was diligent in the performance of 
austerities, and who constantly kept his organs under control, 

18 we at once produced fuel, flowers and everything else, and 
whatever was needed for sustenance. 

19 “ Now while ho and we thus dwelt in the forest, there camo 
the king of the gods in the appearance of a bird, mighty in 
size, with broken wings, stricken with age, with eyes of a 

20 copperish colour, down-cast in soul j desirous to prove that 
venerable Rishi, who practised truth, purity, and patience, 
and who was exceedingly lofty in mind ; and for the coming of 
the curse upon us. 


“ The bird spoke. 

21 “ ‘ 0 exalted dvija, deign here to save me, who am consumed 
with hunger. I seek for food, noble Sir 1 be thou my in- 

22 comparable refuge. As I was standing on a summit of the 
Vindhya Mountains,! fell. Sir, at an exceedingly swift blast sent 

23 by the wings of a bird. So there I lay on the ground, lost 
in unconsciousness, without memory, for seven days ; with the 

24 eighth day I regained consciousness. NoW fully conscious, 
pressed by hunger, I have come for help to thee ; 1 am seek- 



THE VISIT TO THE VINPHYA MOUNTAIN. 


13 


ing for food, deprived of all pleasure, and with a mind in 

25 pain. Therefore turn, pure-minded sage^ thy steadfast mind 
to my rescue ; give me, 0 Brahmarshi, food suitable to 
support my life.’ 

26 “ Ho, thus invoked, answered him, Indra in bird-like shape, 

‘ I will give thee the food thou desirest for the support of thy 

27 life.’ Thus having spoken, that best of dvijas further asked 
him, ‘ What food shall I prepare for thy use ?’ and he replied, 

‘ My chiefcst delight is in human flesh.’ 

“ The Rishi spoke. 

28 “ ‘ Thy childhood is past ; thy youth, too, gone ; thou art as- 

29 surcdly in the decline of life, 0 egg-born. Why art thou 
most malign-hearted even in old age, thou in whom of all 

30 mankind every desire has ceased ? What has thy last stage 
of life to do with human flesh ? Assuredly no one is created 

31 foremost among evil-beings ! Or what need hast thou to ad- 
dress mo, being what I am ? One should always give when 
one has promised — such is our professed opinion.’ 

32 “ Having thus spoken to him, the Brahmarshi resolved that 
it should be so. Calling us quickly and commending us accord- 

33 ing to our good qualities, the Muni, agitated at heart, ad- 
dressed a most severe speech to us, all, who were respectfully 

34 bowing, full of faith, with hands reverently joined. ‘ Ye noble 
dvijas, whose minds are irapi*oved, are bound by obligations 
equally with mo. A glorious progeny has sprung from you, just 

35 as ye, 0 twice-born, have sprung from mo. If a father is 
deemed by you a guru worthy of reverence and most exalted, 
perform ye then my promise with cheerful mind.’ 

36 “ Whilst he so spoke we exclaimed respectfully, ‘ What thou 
slialt say, consider that in trutl’ as already accomplished.* 

“ The Rishi spoke. 

37 “ ‘ Of me has this bird sought protection oppressed with 
hunger and thirst; wherefore let him be straightway satisfied 

38 with your flesh, and let his thirst be quickly assuaged with 
your blood. 



14 


CANTO FIT. 


“ Then we, afflicted, our terror visible in our trembling, ex- 

89 claimed, ‘ Alas, alas ! ’ and said, ' not this deed I How for 
the sake of another’s body can a wise ma^ destroy or injure 

40 his own body ? for a son is even as one’s own self. A son 
pays those debts, indeed, that have been declared due to the 
pityis, the gods, and men ; a son does not offer up his body. 

41 Therefore we will not do this ; we have done as has been 
done by men of old. While alive one receives good things, 

42 and while alive one does holy acts. When one is dead, the 
. body perishes, and there is an end of righteousness, &g. 

Men skilled in holy law have declared that one ought by all 
means to preserve one’s self.’ 

43 “ Having heard us speak thus, the Muni, burning as it were 
with anger, again addressed us, scorching us, as it were, with 

44 his eyes. ‘ Since ye will not perform this my plighted word 
for me, therefore, blasted by my curse, ye shall be born among 
the brute creation !’ 

45 “ Having thus addressed us, he next said to that bird, ‘ When 
I have performed for myself the final sacrifice, and my obsequies, 

46 according to the S'dstras, do thou unhesitatingly eat me 
here, (0 best of dvijas) : this my body I here grant thee for 

47 food. The brahmanhood of a brahman is deemed such, so far 
indeed as he maintains his truthfulness, 0 chief of the feather- 

48 ed race. Hot by sacrifices accompanied with presents, nor by 
any other act, do brahmans acquire such great virtue as by the 

observance of truth.’ 

49 ** Having thus heard the Rishi’s speech, Indra, in bird-like 
form, his soul filled with astonishment, then replied to the 

50 Muni, ‘ Applying thyself to deep meditation, 0 lord of brah- 
mans, quit this thy body ; for living thing I never eat, 0 lord 
of brahmans.’ 

61 “ Having heard this his speech, the Muni concentrated himself 
in deep meditation. Perceiving that his fixed resolution, Indra, 

62 further, resuming his own form said, ‘ Ho ! princely brah- 
man, understand with thy understanding what is to be under- 
stood, 0 man of understanding ! To prove thee have I thus 

53 transgressed, 0 sinless one ! Pardon mo then, 0 pure-minded 



THK VISIT TO THK VINDYA MOUNTAIN. 


IR 

one ; and what wish is there of thino that may be granted ? 
Pleased most highly am I with thee, for maintaining thy true 

54 word. Henceforth, knowledge like Indra’s shall be revealed 
to thee, and no obstacle shall withstand thee in austerities and 
holy law.’ 

55 “ But when Indra after speaking thus had departed, we pros- 
trate on our faces thus implored our father, the renowned 

56 Muni, who was filled with anger. ‘Dear father, high-minded, 
deign to pardon us miserable ones who dread death ; for life 

57 is dear to us. In an aggregate of skin bones and flesh, filled 
with pus and blood, wherein one should take no delight, therein 

58 do wo find this delight. Hoar too. Sir, how people are be- 
guiled when overcome by those powerful enemies, their faults, 

59 love, anger and so forth. Great is the fortress which has 
Wisdom for its rampart, the bones for its pillars, the skin for 

60 its walls and banks, the flesh and blood for its plaster. Nine 
gates it has ; it is capable of great effort ; it is enclosed on all 
sides with sinews ; and there the Sentient Soul* * * § sits firm as 

61 king. Ho has two rival ministers, the Intelligencef and the 
Understanding! ; those two strive to destroy each other as 

62 foes. Pour enemies desire the destruction of that king. Desire, § 

63 Anger, and Covetousness; and Polly || is the other enemy. But 
when that king closes those gates and stands firm, then he 
becomes indeed both happily strong and free from alarm ; 

64 he displays his affections ; he is not overcome by his enemies. 

65 But when he leaves all the gates open, then the enemy named 

66 PassionT assails the gates of the eyes, etc. Gaining an entrance 
by the five gates, he penetrates everywhere and spreads widely : 
then indeed enter, following on his track, the three other 

67 terrible enemies. That very enemy, Passion, having entered 
there, fopms a close union wBh the Understanding, together 

* Purusha. 

t Buddhi, perceptive faculty. 

t Manas, cognitive faculty, 

§ KAma, love, desire, affection. 

II Moha, folly, infatuation. 

IF Kaga, passion, emotion ; used as equiralont to KAma. 



16 


CANTO in. 


68 with the other gates which are known as the organs. He, 
difficult to be approached, having reduced into subjection the 
organs and the Understanding, and having reduced into sub- 

69 jection the gates, then destroys tho rampart. The Intelligence, 
seeing the Understanding the dependent of that enemy, perishes 
forthwith. And there, deprived of his ministers and abandoned 

70 by his subjects, tho king, his stratogotical points gained by 
the enemies, perishes. Even so Passion, Folly, Covetousness and 

71 Anger prevail, evil in their nature, wrecking the memory of 
. mankind. From Passion springs Anger ; from Anger is born 

72 Covetousness ; from Covetousness arises Folly ; from Folly eiTors 
of memory ; from loss of memory loss of the intellect ; through 

73 loss of the intellect man perishes. Shew favour, 0 thou most 
virtuous ! to us who havo thus lost our intellects, who aro 
compliant to Passion and Covetousness, and who covet life. 

74 And lot not this curse take effect, which thou hast pronounced, 
Sir ! Let us not tread the miserable path of darkness, 0 best 
of Munis !’ 

“ The Rishi spoke. 

75 “ ‘ What I have uttered, will never become false ; my voice 

76 has not spoken untruth hitherto, 0 sons ! Fate is here supreme, 
I think. Fie on worthless manhood, whereby I have been 
thoughtlessly forced to do a deed that ought not to bo done ! 

77 And since I am besought reverently by you, therefore, when 
endowed with the natui’e of brutes, yo shall obtain the highest 

78 knowledge. And ye, having your paths illuminated by 
knowledge, with the stains of pain removed, free from doubt, 
shall through my favour gain the highest perfection.’ 

79 “ Thus, Sir, we were cursed of old by our father tlirough tho 
power of destiny ; hence we have descended to a lower grade of 

80 created beings for a long time ; and wo were born on tho 
field of battle ; we were nourished by thee : thus havo wo 
acquired tho nature of birds, 0 brihman. There is no man 
in this world who is not bound by fate.” 

Marka^deya spoke. 

81 Having heard this their speech, the venerable and eminent 



THE INCARNATION OP THE POUR-PORMED OOD. 


17 


Muni S^amika answered those dvijas who stood near him, 

82 “ Even before did I make this remark in your presence, * Those 
are not ordinary birds ; these must be some brahmans, who 
even in the superhuman battle escaped destruction.’ ” 

83 Then they, permitted by that affectionate high-souled Muni^ 
went to the Vindhya, the goodliest of mountains, clad with 

84 trees and creepers. Hitherto have the righteous birds re- 
mained on that mountain, engaged in austerities and the study 

85 of the Vedas, and resolute in meditation. Thus those Muni’s 
sons gained the hospitality of the noble Muni, acquired the 
shape of birds, and are dwelling on the Vindhya range, in a 
cave of the noble mountain, where the water is very sacred, 
with their minds subdued. 


Canto IV. 

The Incarnation of the Four-formed God, 

Jaimini visits the Birds^ and explaining the reason of his visit, puts 
them the four questions that perplexed him — After invoking 
Vishnu, Brahma and S'iva, they explain the first question, why 
Vishnu, though devoid of qualities, is endued with humanity. 

Markandeya spoke. 

1 Thus those birds, the sons of Hroiia, became learned ; and 
they dwell on the Vindhya mountain : visit them and ask 
them. 

2 Jaimini, having heard this speech of the Rishi Markandeya, 
went to the Vindhya mountain, where dwelt those righto- 

1 ous birds. And when Jaimini reached that mountain, he 
heard their voices as they were reading, and having heard 
fc filled with surprise, he reflected. ‘ The brahmans are read- 
ing, observing the beauties of the various passages, regu- 
lating their breath, without any intermission, distinctly and 
) without faults : wondrous is this, methinks, that Sarasvati 
does not forsake these Muni’s sons, although they are born in 
• the brute creation. One’s circle of relatives and a friend and 
whatever else is desired in one’s home — all that forsakes oue 
3 



18 


CANTO TV. 


7 and departs ; Sarasvati does not abandon one/ Thinking even 
thus, he entered the mountain cave ; and entering saw those 

8 dvijas standing on a ledge of the rock. Looking at them as 
they were reading, their faces free from blemish, he then 
addressed them all, with mingled sorrow and joy. 

9 “ Hail to you, 0 brahmans ! Know that I am Jaimini, a 
disciple of Vyasa, who am come to you, being eager for leam- 

10 ing. Verily bo ye not angry ; whereas ye, being cursed by 
your father, who was exceedingly wrathful, have been turned 

11 into birds, that was indeed altogether fate. In a family of 
immense wealth some intelligent members, it is said, wepe born ; 
when their wealth was lost, they were well comforted, 

12 0 brdhmans, by S'abara. Men after giving to others become 
beggars themselves ; and others, after killing men^ have been 
killed themselves ; and others^ after having overthrown men^ have 
been themselves overthrown ; — those very men, through the decay 

13 of austerities. Thus I have very often seen opposites of this 
kind : the world is constantly distressed by the destruction of 

14 existence and non-existence. At such thoughts as these in 
your minds, ye should not give way to sorrow : so much is 
invulnerability to sorrow and joy the fruit of knowledge.” 

16 Then they all did Jaimini honour, by giving him water for 
his feet, and the arghya offering ; and they bowed to him, and 

16 questioned him with deep respect. Then all the birds address- 
ed him, the disciple of Vyasa, rich in austerities, as he sat at 
ease, resting himself, with his fatigue mitigated by the breeze 
from their wings. 

The birds spoke. 

17 “ To-day has our birth become fruitful, and our lives have been 
well-lived, inasmuch as we see thy lotus-feet which are worthy 

18 to be praised by the gods. The blazing fire of our father’s 
anger, which continues in our bodies, has been quenched to- 

19 day by the water of the sight of thee, 0 brahman. We trust 
that all is well in thy hermitage among the deer and birds, 
among the trees too, and the various kinds of creepers, shrubs, 

20 reeds, and grasses. Or perhaps we though respectful have 
not spoken this fittingly ? Whence can evil befall those who 



THE INCARNATION OP THE FOUR-FORMED OOD. • 


19 


21 have met with thee? And here, shew us favour, tell us the 
cause of thy visit ; union with thee, as with the gods, is great 
prosperity ; by whom, powerful for our good fortune, hast thou 
been brought to our view ? ” 

Jaimini spoke. 

22 “ Let the reason be heard, 0 brahmans, why I have come here 
to the Vindhya mountain’s delightful cave, which is sprinkled 

23 with drops of water from the river Narmada. At first I 
questioned the gi'eat Muni Markandeya, a scion of Bhpgu’s 
race; since I found difficulties in connexion with the Maha- 

24 bharata. And he, when asked by me, replied, ‘ Drona’s high- 
souled sons are living on the mighty Vindhya mountain ; 

25 they will declare the fall meaning to thee.’ And I, impelled 
by his speech, have come to this great mountain : therefore 
hear me fully ; having heard, deign to give an explanation.” 

The birds spoke. 

26 “ The matter being one specially known to us, we will declare 
it ; listen then, free from distrust ; why should we not tell 

27 thee that of which our intellects are cognizant ? For even in 
the four Vedas, for in the Dharma-^astras also, and in all 
the Angas and whatever else is conformable to the Vedas — 

28 in these does our intellect range, 0 best of brahmans ; but 

29 nevertheless we are not able to give a promise. Therefore 
declare fearlessly what is doubtful in the Mahabhdrata ; we 
will declare it to thee, 0 thou who art wise in the law ; if not 
there will be bewilderment.” 

Jaimini spoke. 

30 “ Hear, 0 ye pure ones ! the matters in connexion with the 
Mahabhdrata, which are doubtful to me here ; having heard, 

31 deign to explain them. Why is Jandrdana Vdsudeva, who is 
the support of everything and the cause of all causes, al- 

32 though devoid of qualities, endued with humanity ? And why 
was Drupada’s daughter Krishna the common wife of- the five 
sons of Pandu ? On this point there is very great perplexity. 

33 Why did the mighty Baladeva Haldyudha expiate his brah- 

34 fnanicide by engaging in a pilgrimage ? And how was it that 



20 


CANTO IV. 


the unmarried heroic high-souled sons of Draupadi, whose 
protector was Pan^u, were slain, as if they had no protector ? 

36 Let all these doubtful points in connexion with the Mahd- 
bharata be explained to me ; that I having attained my object, 
may return to my hermitage in comfort.” 

The birds spoke. 

3(5 “ Having paid adoration to Vishnu, the lord of the gods, the 
pre-eminent, the universal soul, the immeasurable, the eternal, 

37 and the changeless ; to him who subsists in four forms,- possessed 
of the three qualities, and devoid of qualities, the most choice, 

38 the most venerable, the most excellent, and the immortal ; to 
him than whom there is nothing more minute, than whom there 
is nothing more immense, by whom— the unborn one, the begin- 

39 ning of the worlds- -this universe is permeated, — this universe 
which, characterized by appearance and disappearance, by visi- 
bility and invisibility, has, men say, been created and also been 

40 destroyed in the end : and having paid adoration with 
profound meditation to Brahmd, the creator, who purifies the 
three worlds with his mouths as ho utters the Ric' and Sama 

41 hymns: also having prostrated ourselves before the lord, 
conquered by one of whose arrows the bands of the Asuras do 

42 not interrupt the sficrifices of the sacrificers : wo will declare 
the whole doctrine of Vyasa, who was wonderful in his actions, 

V by whom, in delivering the Mahabharata, justice and the other 
virtues were made manifest. 

43 “ The waters were called Kara by Munis conversant with 
tnith ; they were originally his place of movement* ; hence ho 

44 is called Narayana. The adorable god, the lord Narayana, per- 
vading all things, lives, 0 brahman, in a quadruple form : he 

45 is possessed as well as devoid of attributes. His first form is 
inscrutable ; the wise behold it bright ; it is covered with gar- 

46 lands of flame j it is the acme of perfection to devotees ; it is 
both far and it is near ; it is to be understood as transcending 
attributes ; when called Vasudeva, it is seen devoid of egoism ; 

47 its shape, colour, etc., are not real but imaginary ; it is indeed 

48 always pure ; it is the sole form of pre-eminence. His second 

* Ayaua. ^ 



indra’s transformations. 


ai 

form, called S'esha, supports the earth below with its head ; 
it is described as being characterized by the quality of darkness; 

49 it belongs to the brute creation. His third form is active, and 
devoted to the preservation of creatures ; it is to be considered 
as consisting chiefly of the quality of goodness ; it is the 

60 fashioner of virtue. His fourth form abides in water ; it lies 
on a serpent as its bed ; its attribute is passion ; and it is always 
indeed active. 

61 “ The third form of Vishnu, which is assiduously intent on the 
preservation of creatures, always maintains righteousness on the 

52 earth. It destroys the haughty Asuras, the exterminators of 
righteousness ; it protects the gods, and holy men, who are- 

63 devoted to the preservation of righteousness. Whensoever, 
0 Jaimini, the wane of righteousness occurs and the rise of 

64 iniquity, then it creates itself. Having formerly become exis- 
tent, as a wild boar it repelled the water with its snout, and 

66 lifted out the earth like a lotus with one of its tushes. Having 
taken the form of the man-lion, it slew Hii’anya-ka^ipu, and 

66 destroyed Viprac'itti and other Ddnavas. I cannot now enu- 
merate its other incarnations, those of the dwarf, etc. : his 

67 recent incarnation here was this one in Mathura. Thus that 
form, which is characterized by goodness, becomes incarnate; 
and it is designated Pradyumna ; it is occupied in the work of 

58 preservation. And ever by Vasudeva’s will, it exists in divine 
form, human form, and brute form, and partakes of their several 
natui*es. 

69 “ Thus this has been declared to thee, how that the lord 

Vishnu, though all-successful, assumed human form. Hear, 
again the sequel thereof." 


Canto 

Indr a' 8 Transformations. 

The Birds explain the second question — Draupadi was the wife 
of the Jive Pdndavas, because they were partial incarnatiom of 
Indra^ and she was the incarnation of his wife. 

The birds spoke. 

1 “Of old, 0 brahman ! when the son of Tvash^fi was slain, 





22 


CANTO V. 


Indra’s splendour, oppressed by the brahmanicide, suffered i 

2 grievous decline. Then because of his wrong conduct Indra’ 
splendour entered Dharma; and, his righteousness and splendou 
being gone, Indra became splendourless. 

3 “ Then hearing that his son was slain, the prajapati Tvashti 
enraged, tearing out a single matted lock of hair, uttered thi 

4 speech. ‘ Let the three worlds and the gods thereof see m; 
might this day, and let Indra the perverse brahmanicide see 

6 by whom . my son when engaged in his own business was des 
troyed.’ Thus having spoken, he, his eyes red with angei 
sacrificed that lock of hair in the fire. 

6 “ Then uprose Vritra, the mighty Asura, encircled with flame 
huge in body, with great teeth, resembling a mass of brokei 

7 collyrium. He, the enemy of Indra, of immeasurable soul 
surpassing the might of Tvashtri, mighty in valour, hicreas 

8 ed daily a bow-shot in stature. And Indra, having seen th 
mighty Asura Vritra eager for his slaughter, unnerved b; 

9 fear, sent seven Rishis, desiring peace. Then the affectionate 
minded Rishis, who delighted in benevolence towards all crea 
tures, brought about friendship and treaties between him anc 

10 Vfitr^. When Indra violating the rules of the treaty sle’v 
Vfitra, then his might overwhelmed by the sin of the slaughte: 

11 waned ; and that might which quitted Indra’s body entered thi 
wind, which pervades everything, is imperceptible, and is thi 
supreme deity of power. 

12 “ And when Indra, assuming the form of Gautama, violatec 

13 Ahalyd, then the lord of the gods lost his form. Thereupon hii 
beauty of limb and feature, which was exceedingly captivat 
ing, forsook the wicked lord of the gods and went to th( 
Alvins. 

14 “ Perceiving the lord of the gods to have lost his uprightnesE 
and glory, to be powerless and formless, the Daityas endeavour 

15 cd to conquer him. Daityas of exceeding might, desirous tc 
conquer the lord of the gods, were bom in the families of king* 

16 of surpassing valour, 0 great Muni. Then the Earth, afflicted 
with their weight, once went to the summit of Meru, where ie 

17 the abode of the beaven-dweiling gods. Afflicted with theii 



BALADEVA’S BRAHMANTCIDE. 


23 


excessive weight, she declared that the cause of her distress 

18 arose from the Ddnavas and Daityas. ‘ These A suras, widely 
resplendent, have been slain by you ; they have all been bom in 

19 the world of men in the families of kings ; their armies are 
numerous indeed : oppressed by their weight, I am sinking 
downward ; do ye, 0 ye thirty gods, devise how tranquillity 
may be attained for me.’ 

The birds spoke. 

20 “ Then the gods descended with portions of their glory from 
heaven to earth, to benefit the creatures and to alleviate the 

21 burden of the Earth. Dharma himself relinquished the 
glory which is innate in the body of Indra, then was bom 

22 of Kunti the resplendent raja Yudhishthira ; Vayu relin- 
quished his might, then was bora Bhima ; and from the half 
of Indra’s power was born Dhananjaya, the son of Pfithd ; 

23 Yama’s two sons, resembling Indra in form, of glorious dignity, 
were born of Madri. Thus the adorable Indra became incar- 

24 nate in five forms. His auspicious wife was born as Kyishn^ 

25 from Agni : she, Krishna, is the wife of Indra alone, and of no 
one else. The lords of ascetics can even multiply their bodies. 

26 “ Thus the fact of her being one wife to five men has been 
explained to thee ; be it heard how Baladeva went to the 
Sarasvati.” 


Canto VI. 

Baladeva's hrahmanicide. 

The Birds explain the third question — Baladeva, in order to 
avoid siding with the Pdndavas and Kauravas, went to the Baivata 
forest — Overcome iy intoxication, love, and the mjluences of the 
•place, he hilled Suta f(yr not saluting him — To expiate that sin 
he undertooh the pilgrimage. 

The birds spoke. 

1 The plough-armed Rdma, knowing the perfect affection of 
Kfish^a for Arjuna, deliberated much — “ Can what has been 

2 done be better done ? Without Kfishna, assuredly, I will not 
^ near Duryodhana ; or how, siding with the Pdpdavas, shall 



24 CANTO VI. 

8 I slay king Duryodhana, my royal son-in-law and disciple ? 

Therefore I will go neither to Arjuna nor to king Duryodhana. 
4 I will myself bathe myself at holy bathing places, so long as 
it oondnces *to the ending of the Kurus and P^rt(Javas.” 

6 Having thus taken leave of Krishna, Arjuna and Duryodhana, 
the descendant of lira, surrounded by his army, went to Dva- 

6 raka. Arriving at Dvaravati, which was thronged with glad 
and well-fed citizens, R^ma Halayudha drank a draught at the 

7 holy bathing places, which are to bo visited in future. Having 
drank his draught, he then marched to the flourishing park of 
Raivata,* taking with him the intoxicated Apsaras-like Revati. 

8 Encircled by a bevy of maidens, the hero went on, intoxicated, 
stumbling in his walk. And ho saw a forest, fascinating, beyond 

9 compare, loaded with the fruits and flowers of every season, 
thronged with troops of monkeys, sacred, dotted with clumps of 

10 lotus-flowers, a great forest abounding in pools. Listening to the 
copious, pleasure-inspiring, love-soft, beautiful, car-delighting, 
melodious songs poured forth from the mouths of the birds, he 

11 saw the trees there, loaded with the weight of the fruits of 
every season, bright with the blossoms of every season, ren- 

12 dered resonant by the birds ; — mango trees, hog-plums,! 
kamarangaSjJ cocoanuts, and tindaka trees, § and little bel 

* A mountain near Dvaraka in Gujarat. The woodland scene described 
seems to bo a fanciful one, componndod from tho author’s observations every- 
where. 

t Amrataka, the Hog-plum, Spondias mangifera ; the modern amra. It is 
both wild and cultivated. I give the botanical names, from Hooker’s Flora 
of British India, of all except the most common, as many of the trees have 
no English names, and are bettor known by those names : but there can be 
no doubt that the various species in a genus are not always distinguished, and 
that the Sanskrit names are sometimes as much generic as specific. Tho 
descriptions are taken from Roxburgh’s Flora Indica, Edn. Clarke, 1874, from 
Oliver’s Indian Botany, 1869, and from Pirminger’s Manual of Gardening for 
India. 

J Bhavya, Averrhoa carambola, the modem kdmranga. A garden tree. 

§ I do not find tindaka in Prof. Monier-Williams’ Dictionary : tinduka 
occurs in verse 14. The late Rev. Dr. Banerjea, in a transition he began, 
translates it Ebony, which is Diospyros melanoxylon, the modern tindu. It is 
a large tree, growing in most woody mountainous parts of India. 



BALADEVA’S BRAHMANICIDE. 


25 


13 trees,* cumin, f pomegranates, J citrons, § jack trees, || mon- 
key-jack trees,!^ plantain trees, and very charming ka- 
dam trees,** and par^vata tree8,tt kankola treo8,JJ nalina 

14 trees, §§ docks, |1|1 marking-nut trees, en^iBu^^'inyroba- 

* A'bilvaka. I do not find this in the Dictionary. Bilva, tho Bel or Bengal 
Qnince, JEgle marmelos ; tho modorn heUphnl and s'ri-phal. Both wild and 
cultivated. It boars panicles of large white flowers, which are used in 
worship. 

f Jira, Cumin, Cuminnm cyminum; the modorn glra; tliis is a slender 
cultivated annual. Jira also moans Panicum miliacemn^ Boxb., the modorn 
c/iccaa, which is a cultivated cereal from 2 to 4 feet high. (Roxb., p. 104.) 
Neither sooms appropriate. 

I Da(Jima, tho I’omegranate, Funica granatum ; tho modern ddrim or 
dalim. A cultivated tree in India. 

§ Vija-puraka, Citron, Citrus medica, tho modern nehu. A cultivated tree 
in India. 

II Panasa, tho Jack or Jack-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifoUa ; tho modorn 
hdnlhdl. A cultivated tree. (Roxb., p. C33 : Oliver, p. 272 : not in Hooker). 

*|[ Lakuc/a, tho Monkey-jack, Artocarpus lacucha; tho modorn dephuL A 
garden troo. (Roxb., p. 034 ; Firminger, p. 188 ; not in Hooker). 

** Nipa, Anthocephalus cadamha {Nauclea radamha, Roxb.) ; also kadamba, 
the modern hadam. A garden troo, higlily ornamental with its large, globular, 
beautiful, orange-coloured heads of flowers, and very useful from its extensive 
close shade (see Roxb., p. 172). 

ft Paravata: the Dictionary says this is Diospyros emhryopteris {glutinosa, 
Roxb.), wliich is tbo modern gab : bat this tree is also tinduka, which occurs 
in tho next verse, and tindaka has occurred in verse 12. Paravata moans 
ilso a dove or pigeon, and has been corrupted into the Bengali payrd ; might 
not paravata, tho tree, bo corrupted into the Bengali peyar^, which moans the 
Guava, Psidium guyava ? 

Kaivkola. I do not find this in the Dictionary, Read kan'Ulldn for 
tan-koldn ? Kan'kella is given as the Asok, Saraca indica {Jonesia asoka, 
loxb.), but this occurs in verse 15. 

§§ Nalina. Dr. Banerjea translates this as tho Indigo plant, but Prof. Mo- 
uor-Williams says nalina, neuL, is tho Indigo shrub, Indigofera tinctoria ; while 
lalina, masc. as here, is the Carissa carandas ; but the latter occurs in the 
loxt verse. 

III! Amla-vetasa, tho Dock or Sorrel, as Prof. Monier-Williams - gives it. 
^be Dock is Rumex vesicarius, Roxb. The Sorrel is Oxalis corniculata, Hooker 
ieo Oliver, pp. 181 and 260). 

%% Bhallataka, the Markiug-nut tree, Semecarpus uaacttrdiwm, the Bengali 



26 


CANTO VI. 


Ians,* and gab treesf bearing large fruits, almond trees,! 
karamcha trees, § yellow myrobalan8,|| beleric myrobalans.l[ 
16 He, Yadu’s descendant, saw these and other trees, and also a^o- 
16 kas,** punnagas,tt screw-pines, and vakula8,§§ c'ampakas,l|l| 


Ihela. A tree, growing in all the mountainotis parts of India, with large 
panicles of small greenish yellow flowers. (Roxb., p. 268.) 

* A'malaka, the Emblic Myrobalan, Phyllanthus emhlica, the modern 
amla (Roxb., p. 684 and Oliver, p. 279). I do not find it in Hooker. Emhlica 
officinalis is an earlier name. 

t Tindnka, Diospyros emhryopteris {glutinosa, Roxb.), the modem gdh. It 
is a tree common in Bengal, and among the mountains in the Circars. Its 
fruit is as large as a modium-sizod apple. 

! In'gnda, the Almond tree, Terminalia catappa^ the modem haddm. A 
beautiful large tree, growing everywhere. 

§ Karamarda, Caris^a carandas, the modem Jcaramcha. A common small 
tree, with beautiful, white, jasmine-like flowers. 

j| Haritaka, the Yellow or Chobulio Myrobalan, Terminalia chehula ; a largo 
forest tree. 

^ Yibhitaka, the Beleric Myrobalan, Terminalia helerica^ the modem tabera ; 
a large forest tree. 

** A'soka, the Asok, Saraca indica (Jonesia asoJea, Roxb.). A middling-sizod, 
very handsome, garden tree, with large, globular bunches of rather largo 
flowers. The flowers are of a beautiful orange colour when they first expand, 
^nd gradually change to red, forming a variety of beautiful shades : they are 
fragrant daring the night. (Roxb., p. 312). 

tf Punndga, Rottlera tinctoria^ (Roxb. and Oliver) : it is still called punndg. 
I do not find it in Hooker. A tree, a native of Coromandel. 

!! Ketaki, the Scrow-Pino, Pandanus odoratissimus, (Roxb. and Oliver), the 
modern Jceord. A largo shrub, with panicles of large white, sheath-liko 
leaves, enclosing bundles of closely-packed minute flowers. “ It is the tender 
white leaves of the flowers, chiefly those of tho male, that yield that most 
delightful fragrance, for which they are so universally and deservedly 
esteemed ; for of all the perfumes in the world it must be the richest and most 
powerful.” (Roxb., p. 707. ) 

§§ Vakula, Mimusops elenghi, the modern bakul. A tree, commonly culti- 
vated, with flowers middle-sized drooping, white and fragant ; but Firminger 
says they are small, pale-green. (Roxb., p. 318 j Hooker, p. 458 j Firm., 
p. 490). 

11 11 C'ampaka, Michelia champaca, the modem champah or chdmpd. A garden 
tree with large yellow delightful fragrant flowers. , 



baladeva’s brahmanicide. 


27 


saptaparnas,* kargikaras,! and Spanish jasmines,! 
p^rij^ta trees, § koviddras,|| mandaraSjlf and jujube 
17 trees, ♦♦ delightsome Bignonia treestf in blossom, and 
devddr trees,!! sal trees, §§ palmyra palms, |||| and ta- 

* Sapta-parna, Alstonia scholaris. An ever-green troo growing in the drier 
forests of India. 

t Karnikara, Pterospermum acerifolium, the Bengali Jcanahchampa. A 
Himalayan tree, but also grown in gardens. It has very large, pure white, 
fragrant flowers. 

X Malati, the Catalonian or Spanish Jasmine, Jaaminum grandijlorum, the 
Bengali j at/ or charnel^, Hindustani chambeli. It is a spreading garden shrub 
with graceful pinnate foliage and middling-sized white fragrant flowers, 
which retain their odour when dried and are much used for perfume. (Firm,, 
p. 518). Malati also moans the Clove-scented Bchites, Aganosma caryophyllata 
{Echites caryophyllata^ Roxb,}, now called mdlatiy which is a climbing shrub, 
with bay-like loaves and sprays of middling-sized fragrant white flowers. 
(Roxb., p. 245 j Firm., p. 618.) 

§ Parijata, Erythrina indica. A large tree growing all over India, with 
racemes of numerous large bright scarlet flowers. This tree is generally 
called manddr now. 

II Kovid4ra, Bauhinia variegatay the Bengali rakta-hanchan. A garden tree 
with large reddish-purple flowers. 

f Mandara. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is JPn/thnna /aZgrens, but I do 
act find it in Hooker or Roxburgh. May it be E. stricta, which grows in the 
iVostern Peninsular and much resembles E. indica ? In Bengal E. indica is 
low generally called manddr, 

** Badara, Zizyphus cenoplia {jujuba or acandenSy Roxb.}, the Bengali kuly the 
Hindustani her. A small tree with fruit of the size of a largo cherry. 

ft Pdtala, Bignonia suaveolens, Roxb., the modern pdrul. I do not find it in 
[looker. A tree, with large, exquisitely fragrant, dark dull crimson flowers, 
t blossoms during the hot season. Prof. Monier-Williams calls it the Trumpet- 
lower tree, but I do not find this name in any of the Botanical books I have 
'Ousulted. 

t! Deva-daru, Finns devdara, Roxb , the modern devddr. I do not find it 
n Hooker. A great tree, native of the mountains north of Rohilkhand. No 
pecies of pine is native in the Peninsula (Oliver, p. 294) j this tree therefore 
3 quite out of place in this Gujarat scone. 

§§ Sdla, the Sdl tree, Shorea robustay the modern sdl. An immense timber 
Pee. 

nil Tdla, the Palmyra Palm, Borassus Jiahelliformisy Roxb., the modern tdl. 
[ot i^ Hooker. Fans are made frqm the large fan-like leaves. 



28 CANTO VI. 

18 mdlaa,* kini^ukas,t and fine vanjula treesj : — inhabited by 
chakor8,§ and woodpeckers, shrikes, || and parrots, koils,Tf and 

19 span*ows, green pigeons,** and jivajivaka phea8ants,tf by priya- 

* Tam0a. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is Oarcinia xanthochymus (Xan- 
thochymus pictorius, Roxb,} ; this is a troo, a native of the mountainous districts 
in India. But Roxburgh says tho Tamdla is Diospyros cordifolia, which 
Hooker unites with D. montana ; this is a common tree. 

f Kiins'uka, the Bengali paldsh. Oliver calls this tree the 

Dhak, (p. 195j, but I do not find this name anywhere else. It is a common 
tree, with handsome, irregular, orange-rod flowers in racemes which are 
covered with a soft greenish-purple down. (Roxb., p. 640.) 

J Vanjula, Ougeinia dalbergioides (Dalhergia oojeinensis, Roxb.), A tree 
with racemes of numerous, rather small, very pale rose-coloured flowers, 
somewhat fragrant. 

§ O^akora, Gaccahi^ chukor. The Chakor is said in Prof. Monier-Williams’ 
Dictionary to be tho Greek partridge, Perdix tufa or Tetrao rufus, but tho 
Greek partridge, CaccaUs saxatilisy is a different species, inhabiting Europe, 
from the chakor the Asiatic species. The chakor is found in the Himalayas 
and the other northern ranges. It is always a bird of the hills, and dpes not 
occur in Gujarat, where this scone is laid (Jerdon’s Birds of India, Edu. 
Godwin-Austen, Vol. II, p. 664 ; Hume and Marshall’s Game Birds of India, 
Vol. II, p. 33), Tetrao rufus is the name Linneous gave tho European bird. 
Perdix rufa seems, from the edition of his works in the Bengal Asiatic 
Society’s Library, to be an earlier name. There are other partridges in the 
plains of India, Ortygornis gularia, &o., but I do not think tho reference can 
be to them, for tho writer seems to be mentioning birds inhabiting tho 
Himalayas ; see tho note on tho Jivajivaka pheasant, below. 

II Bhringa-raja. Prof. Monier-Williams translates this, Malabar shrike, 
Lanius malaharicua. This bird stands in Jerdon as Edolius malaharicus, and 
is, I am informed by Dr. J. Scully, a king-crow. Another bird may bo meant, 
the Malabar Wood-shrike, Tephrodornis sylvicola, but, as the writer seems to 
be referring to birds found near the Himalayas, bhjringa-raja may mean 
any kind of shrike, almost every kind of which is common throughout the 
greater part of India. (Jerdon, V'ol. I, p. 400). 

^ Kokila, the Koil, Eudynamys orientalis (Jerdon, Vol. I, p. 342). 

** Harita, the Green Pigeon, probably the Bengal green pigeon, Crocopus 
phccnicopierus, or the Orange- breasted green pigeon, Osmotreron hicincta. The 
Southern green pigeon, Crocopus chlorigaster, and the Green imperial pigeon, 
Carpophaga sylvatica, are not found near the Himalayas. 

ft Jivajivaka. Prof. Monier-Williams gives the synonyms jira-jlva and 
jivanjiva, and explains the word as a kind of bird supposed to be a phea^J'L 



raladeva’s rrahmanicide. 


29 


putras,* and pied-crested cuckoos, f and by various other birds, 
20 warbling pleasingly and very melodiously : — and the lakes, 
beautiful and placid, crowded on all sides with the lotus 
water-lilies,J and lotuses, § and the brilliant blue water- 

or the chakor. As the chakor is mentioned already, it must have the first 
meaning. Taking it to be a kind of pheasant, I would suggest that it is the 
Cheer Pheasant, Phasiams Wallichi. The Sanskrit name looks like an ono- 
matopoBons one, and the cry of this bird is “ something like the words chir 
a pir, chir a pir, chir chir, chirwa chirwa'* Cheer is the native name. The 
bird is found in Garhwal and Kiimaon and the neighbouring country, and 
inhabits the middle slope of the Himalayas (Hume and Marshall, Vol. T, p. 
1(19 : Jerclon, Vol. II, p. 527). If this bird be a pheasant, it is clear the writer 
is mentioning, not the fanna of Gnjarat, but of the country near the Hima- 
layas, for it appears from Hume and Marshall, and Jerdon, that no pheasants 
are found in India except in the Himalayan and Indo-Burmese mountains and 
forests. 

* Priya-putra. I do not know what this bird is. The name affords no 
indication. 

t C'ataka, the Piod-(!rosted Cuckoo. Prof. Monier-Williams says the bird is 
Cuculm melanoleucus, but I find no such name mentioned in Jerdon. It is 
the Coccystes melanolevcos of Jordon (Vol. I, p. 339), which he says is called 
chatak. It is found all over India. 

X Kumud, the Lotus water-lily, Nympheea lotus (Oliver, p. 155). There 
sooms to bo some confusion in distinguishing btween the Sanskrit names for 
the lotus and the water-lilies, and I would attempt a solution in this and the 
following notes. 

Of the water-lilies, Nymphcca, large water-herbs with leaves and flowers 
jloatiny on the surface, there are 2 species common in India, viz., N. lotus, the 
Lotus water-lily, and N. stellata, the Blue water-lily. 

N. lotus has leaves 6 — 12 inches broad, and flowers 2 — 10 inches broad, 
white, rose, or red. This species combines Koxburgh’s N. rubra and N. edulis 
{esculenta). Its Sanskrit name is kumud, and probably amhu-ja; the red 
variety is raktotpala. It closes during the day and opens at night. 

The latter species, N. stellata, has flowers 1 — 10 inches broad, slightly 
odorous. It comprises 3 varieties, (1) cyanea {N. cyanea, Roxb.), flowers me- 
dium-sized, blue ; (2) paruijiora, flowers usually smaller, blue; {^) versicolor 
{N. versicolor, Roxb.), flowers larger, white, blue, purple, or flesh-coloured, 
The blue-flowered N. stellata is called indivara, utpala, kuvalaya and nilotpala. 
[Hooker, Vol. I, p. 114 : Roxburgh, p. 427.) 

§ Pu 9 ()arfka, the Lotus or Sacred Lotus, Nelumbium specioatm. This is the 
only^species of Nelumhiv/m in India. It is a large erect water-herb with its 



30 


CANTO VI. 


21 lilies,* with water-lilies, f and lotuses and thronged with 
kadamba geese, § and ruddy shieldrakes|| and water-fowl,^ 

22 with kdrandava ducks,** pelicans, tf geese, tortoises, and 

leaves and flowers raised high above the water. Its leaves are peltate, cupped, 
2 — 3 feet in diameter. The flowers are 4—10 inches broad, white or rose- 
red. Its Sanskrit names are kamala, nalini, 'padmini, pundardca, sarasi-ja, 
and sahasra-patra. The flower is padma and panJca-ja. The red variety is 
hokanada and tdmarasa. Roxburgh says the white variety is called in Sanskrit 
sitdmhu-jay and 'the red yarioty rahtotpala ; but these names more properly 
designate the white and red varieties of the water-lily {Nymphcea), and Prof. 
Monier-Williaras translates them so. The Lotus opens during the day and 
closes at night (Hooker, Vol. I, p. 116; Oliver’s Indian Botany, p. 166; 
Roxburgh, p. 450.) 

* Nilotpala, the Blue water-lily, Nymphcea see note J on kumud, 

supra p. 29. 

t Kahl^ra. Prof. Monior-Williams says this is the White esculent water- 
lily, Nymphoea lotus, but Roxburgh assigns it to his N. cyanea. Can it mean 
the rose-coloured variety of the W. lotus or stellata f See note X on kumud, 
supra p. 29. 

X Kamala, the Lotus, Nelumhium speciomm ; see note § on Pundarika, supra 
p. 29. But there must be some difference between the two. 

§ Kadamba, a kind of goose with dark-grey wings (kala-hansa), so Prof. 
Monior-Williams. It seems to bo the Grey Lag-Goose, Anser cinerem, which 
is called kar-hdns in Bohar. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. Ill, p. 55 ; Jerdon, 
Vol. II, p. V79.) 

II C'akravaka, the Ruddy Shieldrake or Brahminy Duck, Casarca rutila. 
Anas casarca is the Linnaean name. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. Ill, p. 125 ; 
Jerdon, Vol. II, p. 791.) 

^ Jala-kukkuta. This is probably the Water-hen, Oallinula chloropus, com- 
monly called the jal-murghi, which moans the same. (Jerdon, Vol. II, p. 
718.) 

** Kdrandava, a kind of duck ; also called karanda. I would suggest that 
this is the Common Teal, Querquedula crecca, which is now called kerra in 
the N. W. Provinces, and kardo in Sindh. (Hume and Marshall, Vol. Ill, 
p, 205 ; Jordon, Vol. II, p, 806.) 

ft Plava. Prof. Monier-Williams translates this as pelican, Pelicanus fusu 
collis ; but I do not find any such species in Jerdon. It may be the Grey 
pelican, Pelecanus Philippensis, which is the most abundant species in India. 
(Jerdon, Vol. II, p. 858.) 

Hansa, This is of course general, and means any kind of goose or 
duck. , 



baladeva’s bbahmanicide. 


SI 

divers ;* thronged with these and other birds swimming in the 
water all around. 

23 So gazing on the delightful forest, S^auri accompanied by the 
maidens gradually proceeded onwards to an incomparable 

24 bower of creepers. There he saw brahmans, deeply read in 
the Vedas and Veddngas, belonging to the families of Ku^ika, 

25 and Bhrigu, Bharadvaja, and Gotama, and brahmans sprung 
from various famalies, all eagerly listening to the tales, 

26 seated on large outer garments made of the hide of the black 
antelope, and on the ku4a grass and on kusa-grass scats ; and 

27 Siita (their bard) in the midst, reciting glorious tales of the 
olden times, based on the deeds of the first Surarshis. Seeing 

28 Rdma, whose eyes were red with drinking, all the bnihraans, 
perceiving he was intoxicated, rose up in haste, saluting the 

29 plough-bearer, except that scion of the bards. Then filled with 
rage, the mighty plough-bearer, who caused all the Danavas 
to quake, rolling his eye, smote Siita. 

30 When that bard was slain while repeating the words of the 
Veda, all those brahmans, clad in black antelope skins, depart- 

31 ed from the wood. And the plough-armed hero, perceiving 
himself disregarded, thought, “ This is a very grievous sin 

32 that I have committed ; for since I have come here to a 
brahmans’ abode and have slain Suta, these dvijas perceiving 

33 me have all departed. And my body has a disgusting odour, 
as it were of blood, and I perceive that I am contemned as 

34 a brahmanicide. Fie on my rage, and the wine, my arrogance, 
my cruelty ! Possessed by them, I have committed this most 

15 grievous sin. To expiate it I will perform a twelve-year vow, 
making the confession of my deed the uttermost penance. 

36 This then is the pilgrimage which I have now undertaken ; I 

37 will go to the Pratiloma Sarasvaoi itself.” Hence he, Rama, 
went to the Pratilomi Sarasvati. 

Next listen to this reference to the story of the Pan^avoyas. 

* Madgn, a kind of diving bird. It is probably the Little Grebe, Podiceps 

Philippensis, commonly called duh-dubi from its inveterate diving. (Jerdon, 

i^ol. II, p, 822.) But it may be the Bald Coot, Fulica cUra, which is also a 

read^ diver {id., p. 715.) 



32 


CANTO VII. 


Canto VIL 

Tlie Birth of the Sons of Braupadi, 

The Birds explain the fourth question — King RariS-candra 
incurred VUvamitra' s anger ^ and to appease him gives up to him 
his kingdom and all his wealth — ViSvdmntra ilhtreats the queen, 
and five VUve Devos censure him for his hrutality — Re curset 
them to he horn as men, hut exempts them from marriage— They were 
horn as the five sons of Draupadi, and died young. 

The righteous birds spoke. 

1 There lived formerly in the Trcta Age a most exalted Rajar- 
shi named Haris-c andra, virtuous in soul, a ruler of the earth, 

2 brilliant in fame. No famine, nor sickness, nor untimely death 
occurred among men, nor did the citizens delight in evil, while 

3 he ruled as king ; nor, further, did the people become uproari- 
ous through wealth, valour, austerities or spirituous liquors ; 
nor were any females born who failed to reach womanhood. 

4 And ho, of mighty arm, when once chasing a deer in the 

5 forest, heard women repeatedly crying, “ save us” ! The king, 
giving over the deer, called out “fear not ! who is this per- 

6 verse being that, under my rule, behaves with injustice ?” At 
this interval also the Raudra Vighna-rdj, the opponent of every 

7 undertaking, who was following that cry, deliberated “ This 
Vi^vamitra, full of heroism, undertaking incomparable austeri- 
ties, keeping a vow, is mastering the sciences of S'iva and 
others, which have not been perfected before. Those sciences 

8 being mastered by this man, who governs his mind in patience 
and silence, are verily lamenting, afflicted with dread. How 

9 can I manage this ? Glorious is this noblest of the Kau^ika 
family ; I am much weaker than he : these terrified sciences 
are thus bewailing : it appears to me difficult to be accom- 

10 plished. Now this king has come in my way, calling out 
repeatedly ‘ fear not T ; into him indeed entering, I will speedily 
accomplish my desire.” 

1 1 Then the king possessed by that Raudra Vighna-r4j a, who had 
thus taken counsel with himself, uttered this speech in anger . 

* An allusion to infanticide P 



THE BIRTH OF THE SONS OF DRAUPADI. 


33 


12 “ Who is this wicked man that binds fire in the corner of his 
garment, when I the lord am present, gleaming with the 

13 glowing splendour of my power ? He to-day, pierced in every 
limb by my arrows, which in their flight from my bow illumine 
the other regions of the sky, shall enter upon a long sleep.” 

14 Thereupon Vi^varaitra having heard the king’s speech was 
enraged: and, when that gi-eat Rishi was enraged, those 

15 sciences perished in a moment. The king moreover, seeing 
Vi^vamitra, rich in austerities, being terrified, suddenly trem- 

16 bled exceedingly like the leaf of the peepul tree.* When the 
Muni exclaimed, “ wretch !” and “ stand!”; then the king fall- 

17 ing prostrate in reverence addressed him : — “ 0 adorable lord ! 
this is my duty I I have committed no fault I Deign not 0 
Muni ! to be angry with me, who am engaged in my duty. 

18 A king, conversant with his duties, must give gifts, and 
must afford protection, and lifting his bow must wage war, 
according to the Dharma-^dstras.” 

Vi^vdmitra spoke. 

19 “To whom, 0 king, must thou give gifts, whom must thou 
protect, and with whom must thou wage war ? Speedily 
declare this, if thou fearest unrighteousness.” 

Haris- c'andra spoke. 

30 “ I must always give gifts to brahmans principally, and to 
others who are straitened in their means ; T must protect those 
in fear ; I must make war with enemies.” 

Yisvamitra spoke. 

31 “ If your highness, a king, duly regards the duties of kings — I 
am a brahman desirous of a reward, let the desired fee be 
given me.” 

* Ficus religiosa. The leaf, which varies from 2 ^ to 5 ^ inches in length 
nd almost the same in breadth, is ovate -cordate, and has a long slender apex 
acumen) 1 to 2 inches long. It has a round flexible stalk 2 to 3 inches long, 
^hich is twisted so as to make the inner surface of the leaf face outwards 
com the branch. The leaf hangs downwards by the long stalk, with its 
mer surface, which is slightly concave, facing outwards, and thus catches 
he lii'htest breeze. 

5 



34 


CANTO vir. 


The birds spoke. 

22 The Raja, having heard this speech with gladdened soul, 
deemed himself as it were bom anew, and addressed the sage 

23 of the Kausika race : “ Bo it declared, adorable sir ! what, free 
from doubt, I must give thee ; consider it as already given, 

24 albeit most difficult to be obtained, whether gold or money, 
son, wife, body, life, kingdom, city, good fortune — whatever ig 
the desire of my own soul.” 

VisvAmitra spoke. 

25 “ 0 king ! this present has been accepted, which thou hasl 
given: first, however, bestow the fee appertaining to the 
Raja-suya sacrifice.” 

The Raja spoke. 

26 “ 0 brahman ! T will indeed give your honour that fee. Choose, 
0 chief of the dvijas, whatever present thou desirest.” 

Visvamitra spoke. 

27 “ Give me this earth, with its ocean, and with its mountains, 
villages and towns ; and thy entire kingdom, 0 warrior, with 

28 its multitude of chariots, horses, and elephants ; also thy trea- 
sury and treasure ; and whatever else thou posscssost, excepting 

29 thy wife, and son and body, 0 sinless one ! and excepting thy 
virtue, which, 0 thou that knowest all the virtues, follows its 
possessor when he moves. What need for me to say more ? 
Let all this be granted me.” 

The birds spoke. 

30 With gladdened mind the king, unperturbed in countenance, 
having heard the Rishi’s speech, joining his hands respectfully 
replied, “ So be it ! ” 

Visvamitra spoke. 

31 “ If all thy property is given me, thy kingdom, the earth, thy 
army, thy wealth, — whose is the lordship, 0 Rajarshi ! when I 
the ascetic am seated in the kingdom ? ” 

Hari^-c'andra spoke. 

32 “At what time I have yielded up the earth to thee, 0 brah- 
man ! at that time thou. Sir, art the owner ; how much more 
now the king.” 



THE BIRTH OP THE SONS OF URAUPADI. 


36 


Vi^vamitra spoke. 

33 “ If 0 king ! the whole earth has been given me by thee, 
thou must deign to depart from the realm where I hold sway, 

34 unfastening all thy ornaments, such as thy waist-band and 
every thing else, and clothing thyself with the bark of trees, 
together with thy wife and son.” 

The birds spoke. 

35 Having said “ So be it ! ” and having so done, the king started 
to go, in company with his wife S'aivya and his young son. 

36 Then he addressed the king, having obstructed the road as 
he was moving — “ Where wilt thou go, without giving mo the 
fee appertaining to the Rdja-suya sacrifice P” 

Haris-c'andra spoke. 

37 “ Adorable Sir ! this kingdom has been given thee free from 
adversaries : these our three bodies, 0 Brahman ! are all that 
remain to me this day.” 

Visvdmitra spoke. 

38 Nevertheless thou must assuredly give me the sacrificial fee ; 
a promise unfulfilled, especially to brahmans, proves injurious. 

39 As long as brahmans delight, 0 king ! in the Raja-sdya sacri- 
fice, so long indeed must the fee for the Raja-siiya sacrifice be 

10 given. After making a promise, one must bestow the gift ; 
and one must fight against as.sailants ; so too the afflicted must 
be protected ; thus hast thou already agreed.” 

Ilaris-c'andra spoke. 

11 “ Adorable Sir, I have nought at present ; T will give thee 
the fee after a while : and sliow me favour, 0 Brahmarshi ! 
bearing in mind noble behaviour.” 

Vi^vaniitra epoke. 

12 “ What length of time must I wait for thee, 0 guardian of 
men ! Tell me speedily, or the fire of my curse shall con- 
sume thee.” 

Haris-c'andra spoke. 

13 “ In a month will I give thee the fee-money, 0 Bi’ahmai’shi ! At 
present I have no means ; deign to grant me this permission.” 



36 


CANTO VIT. 


Vi^vamitra spoke. 

44 “ Go, go, 0 noble king ; observe thy duty ; and may thy way 

be auspicious ! May there be no enemies !” 

The birds spoke. 

4> Permitted to go, the king departed; his queen, who was 

43 unused to walk afoot,* followed him. Seeing that most noble 
king departing from the city with his wife and son^ the citizens 
raised a cry and followed the king, exclaiming — 

47 “ Alas, 0 master ! why leavest thou us, who are afflicted 
with continual sufferings ? Thou, 0 king, art devoted to 
righteousness, and thou art the benefactor of the citizens. 

48 Lead us also, 0 Rajarshi ! if thou regardest righteousness. 
Stay a moment, 0 king of monarchs ! Our eyes as bees drinkf 

49 thy lotus-like mouth. When again shall wo behold thee, who, 
when thou gocst forth, art preceded and followed by kings ? 

50 Here is thy wife, holding her young son in her hand, following 
thee, before whom, when thou goest forth, go thy servants seated 

61 on elephants ! Here goes to-day walking afoot the king 
of monarchs, Hari4-c^andra ! Alas, 0 king, what will thy 

52 very youthfdl, beautiful-browed, soft-skinned, fine-nosed face 
become, when injured by the dust on the road? Stay, stay, 

53 0 best of kings, observe thy own duty. Mildness is a very 
noble virtue, especially among kshatriyas ; what need have we 
of wife, what need of children, or of wealth, or of grain, 

64 0 master ? Abandoning all this, we have become mere 
shadows of thee. Alas master ! alas Mahdraja I alas, 0 lord ! 

55 why dost thou abandon us ? Where thou art, there indeed 
will we be. That is joy, where thou indeed art. That is our 
city where thou art. That is Svarga where thou, our king, 
art.” 

56 Having thus heard the citizens’ address the king, overwhelmed 
with grief, stood then in the road through very compassion for 

57 them. Still Vi4vamitra, seeing him distressed by the citi- 
zens’ exclamations, approaching him, with eyes rolling in anger 

* Road padhhydm for pradhhydm. 
t Better pivdma for pihdmo, let us drink ? 



THE BIRTH OF THE SONS OP DRAUPADI, 


37 


58 and impatience, spoke : “ Fie on thee, vile in thy conduct, 
false, crooked in thy speech ! who also, after giving me thy 

59 kingdom, wishest again to withdraw it.” The king thus roughly 
accosted by him replied thus trembling, “ I am going,” and de- 

60 parted hastily drawing his wife in his hand. Thereupon the 
sage of the Kausika family suddenly belaboured with a wooden 
staff the very youthful toil- wearied wife, as the king was 

61 drawing her along. Seeing her thus beaten, the king Haris- 
c'andra, oppressed with pain, exclaimed “ I am going nor did 
he litter aught else. 

62 But then spoke five Vi^ve Devas full of pity, “ This Vi4va- 
mitra is very wicked ; what worlds will he obtain, who has 

63 uprooted this best of sacrificers from his throne ? By whose 
funeral ceremony further shall the soma juice expressed at 
the great sacrifice bo puinficd, by drinking which wo shall 
roach the exhilaration that is preceded by incantations ?” 

The birds spoke. 

64 Having heard this their remark, the sage of the Kausika race, 
exceedingly enraged, cursed them — “ Ye shall |11 assume human 

65 form !” And propitiated by them, the great Muni added, “ Al- ^ 

66 though in human form, ye shall have no offspring. There 
shall be neither marriage of wives for you, nor hostility : freed 

67 from love and anger ye shall become gods again.” Thereupon 
those gods descended to the mansion of the Kurus with their 
own portions ; they were born of the womb of Draupadi as the 

68 five grandchildren of Pandu. Hence the five heroic Panda- 
veyas did not take to themselves wives, through the curse of 
that great Muni. 

69 All this has been declared to thee with reference to the tale 
of the Panijaveyas. Thy four questions have been answered 
in song. What else dost thou wish to hear ? 



38 


CANTO Vlir. 


Canto VIII. 

The Story of HarU-d and/ra (continued). 

Vihamitra not satisfied demands further fees^ and Harii-dand/ra 
in desperation sells his mfe and his son to a brahman and himself 
to a danddla., and gives Viivdmitra all the price — UarU-d andra 
earns his livelihood as the danddlas servant at a burning -ground 
in the most: abject state for a year — Then he sees a vision of his 
future transmigj'ations with a promise of happiness ultimately — 
His son is bitten by a snake, and the queen brings the corpse to the 
burning -ground— They recognise each other and bewail their mis- 
fortunes — Both resolve to immolate themselves on their son's funeral 
pile ; btit the gods interpose and restore his son to life — Dhar7im 
explains that he had personated the danddla — Indra calls the king 
to Sva.rga, but he refuses to go withimt his faithful people — He, 
and his queen and people ascend to Svarga in perfect bliss. 

Jaimini spoko. 

1 Ye have declared tliia in order according to my questions : 
great is my cui’iosity regai’ding the story of Haris-c'andra. 

2 Ah ! passing great was the woe incurred by tliat magnanimous 
king ; I trust he obtained a happiness fully commensurate, 
0 brahmans ! 

The birds spoke. 

3 Hearing Visvamitra’s speech, the king' moved on slowly, full 
of sorrow, followed by his wife S^aivya with her young boy. 

4 The king having reached the divine city* of Benares — the 
choice of S'iva who pronouncsd that it was not to be enjoyed 

b by men. Distressed with sorrow, he travelled afoot with his 
compliant wife. On entering the city, he saw Vi4vamiti*a 

6 present. Seeing he had already arrived, Hari.S"c'andra bowed 
reverently and, joining his hands respectfully, addressed the 

7 great Muni : — “ Here is my life, and this is my son, and this is 
my wife, 0 Muni ! Take that as the choicest arghya offering 

8 with which thou shouldst quickly deal. Whatever else "ftc 
should do, deign to excuse that.” 

* For 'parim read punm. 



THE STORY OF H ARIs'-C'aNDRA. 


39 


Vi^vdmitra spoke. 

9 “ Gone is the month, 0 Rajarshi ! ; let my fee be given me, if 
thy word regarding the Raja-suya sacrifice be remembered.^’ 

Hari^-c'andra spoke. 

10 “ 0 brahman, rich in fadeless austerities ! to-day the month 
will, in truth, be completed : await this half-day which remains, 
hut not long.” 

Yi^vamitra spoke. 

11 “Bo it so, Maharaja ! I will come again : unless to-day thou 
shall make the gift, I will pronounce a curse on thee.” 

The birds spoke. 

12 Thus having spoken the brahman departed : and the Raja 
then took thought — “ Plow shall I give him the fee which has 

13 been promised P Whence can [ find powerful friends ? 
Whence can £ get wealth at this moment ? BlamewoiPhy is 

14 my present : how can I escape going doYmward ? How much 
more am 1 abandoning life ! To what region shall I, who am 
nothing, go, if! perish without having performed my promise ? 

15 I sliall become a robber of brahmans, a worip, a wicked man, 
the vilest of the vile ; or I shall become a slave — better indeed 
let me sell myself.” 

The birds spoke. 

16 Then his wife in words broken with weeping answered the 
king, who was distressed, dejected, anxious, with downcast 

17 face — “ Leave oif care, 0 Maharaja; preserve thy truthfulness ; 
a man destitute of truth should be avoided like a burning- 

18 ground. There is no higher righteousness, they say, for a 
man than this, namely, maintaining his truthfulness, 0 noble 

19 man ! Oblations to consecrated fire, or study, or the whole 
circle of good deeds, such as liberality, &c., are fruitless in 

20 him who speaks at random. Truthfulness is constantly 
declared in the Dharma-sastras to tend to the salvation of men 
of understanding ; and falsehood to the overthrow of 'men of 

21 uneducated minds. A king named Kriti, after offering seven 
horse-sacrifices and a Raja-sfiya sacrifice, fell forthwith from 

22 Bvarga for falsehood. 0 king, I have given birth to a child—’ 



40 


CANTO VTII. 


Thus liaving spoken she wept aloud. The king spoke as fol- 
lows to her whose eyes were bathed in tears. 

Hari^-c'andra spoke. 

23 “ Cease, lady, thy agitation ; here stands thy boy ; pray, speak 
what thou desirest to say, 0 thou who art graceful in thy 
gait !” 

The queen spoke. 

24 “ 0 king, I have given birth to a child : the wives of good 
men bear fruit in their sons. Do thou therefore, being such a 
man, give me in exchange for wealth, and pay the brahman 
the fee.” 

The birds spoke. 

25 Hearing this proposal, the king lost his senses ; and on re- 

26 gaining consciousness lamented, sorely grieved : — “ Dire is this 
grief, 0 lady, that thou thus raentionest to me : is thy joyous 

27 intercourse with me, wretch that I am, forgotten ? Ah ! alas ! 
how couldest thou suggest this, 0 sweet-smiler. Repugnant 

28 is this plan : how can 1 execute it ?” Thus having spoken, 
the king, repeating the word “ Shame ! shame ! ” fell to the 

29 ground overwhelmed by faintness. Seeing the king Hari^- 
c'andra prostrate on the earth, the queen full of sorrow, 
uttered these piteous words : — 

The queen spoke. 

30 “ Alas ! Maharaja ! from whom has come this evil thought, 
that thou, who art accustomed to coverings made of the hair 

31 of the spotted deer, hast fallen on the hare ground ? Here 
sleeps the king, my lord, on the ground, — he, by whom ten 
thousands of choice cattle and wealth were dispensed among 

32 brahmans. Ah ! woe ! what has this king done to thee, 0 
brahman, that he, the equal of Indra and Vishnu, has been 

33 reduced to a state of coma ? ” Having soliloquised thus, she, 
beautiful-hipped, fell swooning, crushed by the intolerable 

34 great weight of her husband’s misfortunes. The child seeing 
his parents lying thus helpless on the ground, being exces- 

35 sively hungry and very unhappy, spoke : — “ Father, dear 
father, give me some food ; mother, mother, give me somethiiiK 



THE STORY OP HARIs'-c'aNDRA. 


41 


to cat. I have become dreadfully hungry, and the tip of my 
tongue is growing parched.” 

The birds spoke. 

36 At this interval arrived Vi^vamitra great in austerities ; 
but, seeing Haris-c'andra lying on the ground in a swoon, 

37 he sprinkled the king with water and addressed him thus : — 
“ Rise up, rise up, 0 supreme king ; give me the fee I desire. 

38 A debtor’s misery increases from day to day.” Then being 

39 refreshed with the snow-cold water, the king, recovering con- 
sciousness, and perceiving Vi4vamitra, again fell into a swoon, 

40 and the Muni gi ew angry. The brahman, making the king 
recover, spoke : — “ Let my fee be given me, if thou regardest 

41 righteousness. By truth the sun sheds w^aimth ; in truth 
the earth stands firm; truth in speech is the highest righto- 

42 ousness : Svarga is based on truth. Also a hundred horse- 
sacrifices and truth are placed in the balance — truth verily 

43 outweighs the hundred horse-sacrifices. Otherwise what 
motive is there for my speaking thus peaceably to thee^ base 

44 one, evil-intentioned, and cruel, false in speech ? Since thou 
art powerful as king, let this my kindly feeling bo heeded. If 

45 0 king, thou shalt not give me the fee to-day, when tho 
sun reaches the Western mountain, then I will assuredly curse 
thee.” 

Having spoken thus the brahman departed ; and tlie king 

46 remained, weak with terror, fugitive, vile, indigent, harassed 
by the malicious and the rich. His wife again spoke thus — 

47 “ Let my proposal bo complied with, lest consumed by the 
fire of his curse thou perish,” But the king, thus urged 

48 by his wife again and again, replied — “ Lady, here without 
pity I proceed to sell thee ; what even the malicious could not 

49 do, that do I, if my voice be able to utter so hard a speech 
as this.” Thereupon having so spoken to his wife, ho went 
unnerved to the city and then, his throat and eyes impeded 
with tears, uttered this speech ; — 

The king spoke. 

50 “ Ho ! ho ! citizens, listen ye all to my word. Why do ye 
agk me, ‘ ho ! who art thou ?’ I am mischievous, inhuman’ 

6 



4^ 


CANTO VIII. 


51 either a very cruel Rikshasa, or even more wicked than that. 

52 I, who will not yield up my life, am come to sell my wife. If 
any of you has need of the desire of my life as a slave-girl, 
let him speak quickly while I survive.” 

The birds spoke. 

53 A certain aged brahman approaching accosted the king— 
“ Deliver the slave-girl to me ; I am a purchaser, paying 

64 ready moUey. I have no little wealth, and my wife is very 
young ; she cannot perform the household duties ; therefore 

55 give me this girl. This wealth is proportionate to the skill, 
age, beauty and disposition of thy wife : take it ; deliver me 

56 the maiden.” When thus addressed by the brahman, king 
Hari4-c'andra’s mind was lacerated with grief ; nor did he 

67 make him any reply. Thereupon the brahman binding up 
the money in cash in the end of the king’s back-cloth dress, 

68 dragged off the queen, seizing her by the hair. But the 
child Rohitasya, who had a boy’s side-locks of hair, and who 
was clutching her dress with his hand, wept on seeing his 
mother dragged away. 

The queen spoke. 

69 “ Loose, loose me, noble Sir ! while I take a look at my boy. 
A future view of him, kind Sir ! will bo difficult to get. 

60 See ! come my child to me thy mother thus sold into slavery. 
Do not touch me, my royal child ! I must not bo touched by 

61 thee now !” Then suddenly the boy seeing his mother dragged 
along, ran to her crying “Mother!” with tear-soiled eyes. 

62 The brahman purchaser, seeing the child had approached, 
kicked him with his foot ; the. latter, however, exclaiming 
“ Mother I” did not leave hold of his mother. 

The queen spoke. 

63 “ Shew me favour, 0 master ! and buy this boy. Although 
purchased, I shall not be a diligent servant to thee. Sir, 

64 when separated from him. Do thou in this yvay beam fa- 
vourably on me unfortunate ; unite me with my child, as a 
cow with her calf.” 



THE STORY OF HABIS'-C'ANDBA. 


.43 


The brahman spoke. 

05 “ Take thou this wealth and give me the boy : the wages 

of a man and woman have been fixed by those conversant with 
the Dharma-^stras at a hundred, a thousand, and a hundred 
thousand pece5, and a price of ten millions by others.” 

The birds spoke. 

66 Accordingly then he bound that money in the king’s upper 
garment, and taking the boy bound him close together 

67 with his mother. Seeing them both, his wife and son, led 
away, the king lamented sorely grieved, sighing deeply again 

68 and again. “ My wife whom neither the wind, nor the sun, 
nor the moon, nor the populace formerly gazed on, here she 

69 is, fallen into bondage. Here is my boy, who is sprung from 
the Solar race, and whose hands and fingers are very young, 

70 disposed of by sale. Shame on mo, sorry fool that I am! Ah, 
my darling ! ah, my child, my pet ! my imprudent conduct, 
base man that I am, has brought mo into thraldom to fate ; 
yet I am not dead, ah shame !” 

The birds spoke. 

71 While the king was thus lamenting, the brahman taking 
them both disappeared hastily among trees, houses and other 

72 high objects. Then Yisvaraitra meeting the king, demanded 
the wealth ; Haris-c'andra delivered that money to him. 

73 Considering those riches, procured by the sale of the wife, 
insufficient, Kau^ika enraged addressed the sorrow-stricken 

74 king. “ 0 kshatriya, if thou deeraest this a fitting sacrificial 
fee for me; then behold thou quickly my supreme might, 

75 ariaing from austerities well performed here, and from stain- 
less brahmanhood, and from my terrible majesty, and from 
ray perfect study.” 

Hari^-c'andra spoke. 

76 “ More will I give thee, adorable one ; be pleased to wait 
some time ; at present I have nought ; my wife has been sold, 
and my young son.” 

Yi^vdmitra spoke. 

77 “ This fourth part that now remains of the day, 0 king, for 
that I must wait ; nought more must I say to thee.” 



44 


CANTO vni. 


The birds spoke. 

78 So, having uttered the harsh pitiless speech to the supremo 
king, the angry Kau^ika took the money and quickly departed. 

79 When Vi^vamitra had gone, the king, encompassed by a sea 
of fear and soitow, after reflecting in every aspect, spoke aloud, , 

80 with downcast face : — “ Whatever man desires mo for a slave, 
bought with money, let him speak quickly, while the sun yet 
shines.” 

81 Then advanced hastily the god Dharma, wearing the form 
of a c'anddla, foul-smelling, disfigured, uncouth, bearded, 

82 with projecting teeth, compassionate, dark in complexion, his 
belly pendulous, his eyes tawny and haggard, his pronuncia- 
tion rude, and carrying a batch of bii'ds, adorned with gar- 

83 lands taken from corpses, a skull in his hand, his face long, 
horrid to look at^ talking much and often, suri'ounded by a 
pack of dogs, dreadful, a staff in his hand, hideous. 

The c'andala spoke. 

84 “ I am an applicant to thee ; tell me quickly thy own hire, 
at which, whether little or much, thou art to be acquired.” 

The birds spoke. 

86 There gazing at him, such as he was, cruel-eyed, very 
coarse, muttering, very bad in disposition, the king asked 
“ Who art thou ?” 

The c'andala spoke. 

86 “ I am a c'anddla, known here in this greatest of cities as 
Pravira, famed as the slayer of those condemned to death, the 
gatherer of blankets from corpses.” 

Hari4-c'andi*a spoke. 

87 “ I should not wish to become the despicable slave of a 
c'andala; better to be consumed by the fire of the curse 
rather than to be thrall to a c'andala.” 

The birds spoke. 

88 While he was so speaking, the great hermit Vi^tdmitra 



THE STORY OP HARIS'-C'ANDRA. 


45 


arrived, his eyes rolling with anger and wrath, and said this 
to the king 

Vi^vamitra spoke. 

89 “ This c'andala is ready to give thee no little wealth ; why 
is not my full sacrificial fee paid me 

Hari4-c'andra spoke. 

90 “Adorable descendant of Ku4ika ! I know myself to ho 
spmng from the Solar race ; how, though desirous of wealth, 
shall I go into bondage to a c'andala ? 

Visvamitra spoke. 

91 “ If thou wilt not give me the c'andala’s wealth, obtained 
in exchange for thyself, at the fixed time, T will assuredly 
curse thee.” 

The birds spoke. 

92 Thereupon the king Haris-c'andra, his life bound up in 
his anxiety, overcome with agitation seized the Rishi’s feet, 

93 exclaiming — “ Be thou gracious ! I am a slave ; I am in suffer- 
ing ; frightened am I ; and I am specially thy votary : shew 
me favour, 0 Brahmarshi! Deplorable is association with 

94 c'andalas. Instead of the balance of the money, I would be 
subject to thee indeed, 0 mighty Muni ! thy agent in every 
matter, thy servant, obedient to thy will.” 

Visvdmitra spoke. 

% “ If your honour is my servant, then, given by me to the 

c'andala for a hundred millions of money, thou hast fallen into 
slavery.” 


The birds spoke. 

96 When ho had so spoken, the low out-caste then, glad in 
mind, giving that pelf to Visvamitra, bound the king and 

97 led him, bewildered by blows of the staff, his senses utterly 
confused, grieved at his separation from his loved kindred, 
to his town. 

98, Then king Hari^-c'andra, dwelling in the c andila’s town. 



46 


CANTO YIII/ 


99 at morning, noon and evening sang this : — “ My downcast 
girl seeing before her my downcast son, filled with grief, 

100 remembers me; hoping ‘the king will free us both, by 
giving, when he has amassed wealth, more wealth than this 
to the brahman/ She, fawn-eyed, does not know that I 

101 have done more wickedly. Loss of kingdom, abandonment 
of friends, sale of wife and son, and this c andala-life that 

102 I have sunk to : — alas ! a succession of misfortunes.” Dwell- 
ing in this condition, he remembered unceasingly his beloved 
son and his soul-engrossing wife ; deprived of all his pro- 
perty, and abject. 

103 Now .for some time king Harii^-c'andra, as a servant to that 
man, became a gatherer of garments from dead bodies at the 

104 burning-ground, and was instructed by the c'anddla, who 
gathered garments from dead bodies — “ Stay hero day and 

105 night on the look out for the arrival of corpses. This pai*t 
is to be given to the king, and a sixth part is for the corpse, 
let three parts be for mo, and two parts for thy wages.” 

106 Thus instructed he went to the mortuary house and to the 
southern quarter, where then stood in Benares the burning- 

107 ground, a place of horrible cries, frequented by hundreds of 
jackals, strewn with the garlands from corpses, foul- smelling, 

^108 reeking with smoke, thronged by Pi^ac'as, Bhutas, Vetalas, 
Pakinis, and Yakshas, crowded with vultures and jackals, 

109 encompassed by packs of dogs, thickly strewn with heaps 
of bones, full of dreadful odours ; pervaded with the cries 
of the friends of the various dead persons and with a terrible 

110 hubbub — “ Ah ! son ! — ^friend ! — ah 1 kinsman ! — brother ! — 
my child, dear to me now ! — ah ! husband ! — sister ! — mother ! 

111 — ah ! maternal uncle ! — paternal grandfather ! — maternal 
grandfather ! — father ! — grandson ! — where art thou gone ! 
— come, my kinsman !” ; where was heard a great din of 

112 persons uttering such cries as these : — a place filled with the 

113 sputtering of burning flesh, marrow and fat. Black half- 
burnt corpses, their rows of teeth just . bursting into view, 
grinned from amidst the fire, as if saying^ ‘ This is the body’s 
final state!’ Here the fire crackled along rows of bones of 



THE STORY OP HARIS'-c'anDRA. 47 

vofl-ious ages ; and there was the sound of the wailing of the 
relations, which was caused by the merriment of the puk- 

115 kasas.* There is heard a very loud and frightful sound, — 
as if at the close of the age, — of Bhiitas, Vetdlas, Pi^ac'as, 

116 Ga^as and Rdkshasas singing. Crowded with groat heaps 
of buffaloes' ordure and cows’ dung; and surrounded with 
high piles of the ashes derived therefrom, mixed with bones ; 

117 darkened by the confusion of the crows among the many 
offerings, garlands and lamps ; filled with many sounds, the 

118 burning-ground resembles Naraka-f The burning-ground 
reverberated with the fire-pregnant, inauspicious yells of the 
she- jackals ; it was impenetrable by reason of the terrific cries ; 
very direj with the close contagion of fear ; and painful by 
reason of the sounds of lamentation. 

119 The king arrived there, unhappy, ready to grieve: “Ah 
servants, ministers, brahmans ! Where has that my kingdom 

120 gone, 0 Creator ? Ah S'aivya ! ah my young son ! forsaking 
mo, luckless one, through Visvamitra’s fault they both, mine 

121 own relatives, have gone elsewhere,” There revolving thus in 
his mind over and over again the words of the c'an^ala, 
dirty, uncouth in every limb, his hair long, mal-odorous, bear- 

122 ing a flag, armed with a club, somewhat resembling Death, and 
running hither and thither, exclaiming “ This price has been 

123 obtained for this corpse, and shall I get it ? This is mine, 
this is for the king, and this for the head c'andAla;” 
the king, while running in all directions, and wliile alive, 

124 entered into another bii*th. Clothed in patched cloth made 
of old rags well fastened together ; his face, arms, belly and 
feet covered with ashes from funeral piles and with dust ; 

125 his hands and fingers smear^'d with various kinds of fat, 
oil and marrow; sighing; intent on satisfying himself by 

126 feeding on various corpses and water ;§ his head dressed with 
* A low caste. 

t Naraka, the general name for hell or the place of torment ; it is distin- 
guished from Pdtdla, the lower regions. 
t Bead hheyam for bhayam ? 

§ The text ndnd-iavodana’kfitdhdra seems to bo incorrect. 



48 


CANTO VIII. 


bands of garlands therefrom ; he sleeps not either by day 

127 or by night, frequently exclaiming “ah! alas I” In this 
manner passed twelve months as if a hundred. 

One day that noble king wearied, separated from his kind- 

128 red, and uncouth in form, being overpowered by slumber, fell 
indeed into a dead sleep ; and there on his pallet beheld a 

129 great wonder : — Through the power of destiny, he had in 
another body by diligent occupation at the burning-ground 

130 given the guru his fee, and there was immunity from the inflic- 
tion of pain for twelve years. Then he saw himself conceived 

131 in the womb of a pukkasa woman. Further the king, when 
in that condition, considered thus — “ Immediately I am 

132 bom, I will verily practice the duty of liberality.’’ There- 
upon he was born. Then as a pukkasa boy he was always 
ready to perform the obsequies of the dead bodies in the 

133 burning-ground. On his reaching his seventh year, a dead 
brahman was brought to the burning ground by the rela- 
tives ; then he perceived that the brahman had been poor and 

134 virtuous. But ho, asking for his wage, despised the brahmans ; 
those brahmans mentioned there what Visvamitra had done, — 

135 “ Do thou a deed most sinful, and vicious, 0 evil-doer ; Haris- 
o'andra the king was formerly turned by Visvamitra into 

>136 a pukkasa for breaking the slumber of a brdhman, by 
the destruction of his merit.” When he did not have patience 

137 with them, they then in anger cursed him — “ Gro forthwith 
thou vilest of men to terrible Naraka.” Immediately upon 

138 these words, the king still in his sleep saw Yama’s mes- 
sengers, bearing nooses, terror-inspiring. Ho saw himself 

139 then seized by them and led off by force. Sorely afflicted, 
exclaiming, “Alas now, 0 mother! 0 father!” he fell 

140 into Naraka into a tub of oil. And he was tom asunder beneath 
by saws and the edges of razors, and suffered pain in dense 

141 darkness, feeding on pus and blood. He saw his dead self, 
seven years old, in the form of a pukkasa. Day by day in 

142 Naraka he is burnt and roasted in one place ; be afflicted 
and shaken in another place ; he is killed and tom asunder 



THE, STORY OF HARIS'-C'anDRA. 


49 


in another place ; in another he is made to melt away and to 

143 blaze ; in another place he is assailed with cold winds, He 
remained in Naraka one day, which was as long as a hnn-^ 
dred years ; so a hundred years there in Naraka are called by 

144 the demons. Thereafter cast upon the earth he was bom as 
a dog, eating filth and vomited matter, and enduring cold 

145 and heat : in a month he died. Next he saw his body horn 
as an ass, an elephant, a monkey, an ox, a goat, a cat, and 
a heron, a bull, a sheep, a bird, a worm, a fish, a tortoise, and 

14G a wild boar, a porcupine, a cock, a parrot, a maina,* and mo- 
tionless living' objects, a snake and other corporeal beings. 
147 Day by day consumed with grief ho saw the birth of one 
living being after another ; a day was as a hundred years. 

• M<8 A full hundred years thus passed with him there horn among 
the lower creation. And the king saw himself born once again 

149 in his own race. While in that state,' ho lost his kingdom 
in dice-playing ; and his wife was carried off, and his son too / 

150 and ho sought the forest alone. There he saw a terrible 
ravenous lion approacliing with open mouth, accompanied by a 

151 young clephantt ; and again he was devoured, while ready 
to bewail his wife, ‘Ah S'aivya! where art thou gone now, 

152 forsaking me hero in misery Again ho saw his wife with 
hei* son imploring him, ‘ Rescue us 0 Haris-c'andra ! What 

153 hast tliou to do with dice-playing, my lord P Thy son has 
fallen to a lamentable condition, and so has thy wife S'aivya.’ 
Then he no longer saw them, though running about again and 

154 again. And again he saw, — he *tho king was seated in 

* S'arika, a main A. There are several kinds of maiuas (or mynas). The 
heat known are the Common maina Acridotheres tristis, which is a brown bird 
Common thronghont India, and the Nepal Hill maina Eulahes interfaedia, 
which is a black bird found along the lower ranges of tho Himalayas. Both 
are commonly caged and learn to talk, but tho latter attains much higher pro- 
ficiency. (Jerdon’s Birds of India, Edn. Godwin* Austen, Vol. IT, pp. 325 and 
330). Prof Monior- Williams says S'arikA is Oracula religiosa or Tiirdus salica . 
Tho former name is an old name of the Southorn Hill maina (E. religiosa) and 
of the Nepal Hill maina {E. intermedia). (Id., Vol. II, pp. 337, 339). I 
do not find the second name in Jordon, 
t ^arahha: or a fabulous animal with eight legs, stronger than a lion. 

7 



50 


CANTO VHI. 


Svai-ga ; slie poor thing was hronght by force, with dishevelled 

155 liair, stript of her garments, exclaiming ‘Ah! alas! rescue 
mo!’ in repeated cries. Then again he saw there through 

166 Yama’s ordainment — the dwellers in the sky are calling out 
‘Come hither 0 king! Yama has been addressed by Vi^va- 

157 mitra, 0 king, regarding thee.’ Yama's servants^ who bore 
nooses of serpents, having tluis spoken, lead away the prince 

158 byforce.^ Yama related Visvamitra’s deed. At that point, how- 
ever, his change which resulted from iniquity came to an end. 
These were all his states of being wliich were revealed in sleep ; 

159 they were all experienced by him during twelve years. When 
the twelve years wore spent, being brought forcibly by tlie 

160 demons, he saw Yama in bodily shape. Yama addressed tli0 
king, ‘ This anger of the high-soulcd Vi^vamitra is difficult 

161 to be resisted. Kausika will inflict even deatli on thy son. 
Go thou to the world of men, and undei-go the remainder of 
thy suffering. When thou art gone there, 0 supreme king! 

162 thou shaft obtain happiness.’ And when the twelve yciirs 
expired, the king, at the end of his misery, fell from the sky, 
being thrust away by Yama’s messengers. 

163 And when fallen from Yama’s w^orld, ho awoke through the 
agitation of fear, exclaimingy “Alas! woe is mo!” thinking 
of the working of the corrosive substance in bis woiuuls. 

164 “ In my sleep I have seen grievous woo, the end of which I 
do not perceive : hut have twelve years, as I have seen in 

166 my sleep, gone with me ?” he inquired with agitation of the 
pukkasas standing there. “ No” replied certain of the by- 
standers ; and others said exactly the same. 

166 Then the king gineved at hearing this, souglit the gods 
for refuge, ejaculating, “May the gods bestow blessings on me, 

167 on S'aivya and on my child. Adoration to great Dliarma ! 
Adoration to Krishna the creator, all-comprising, pure, 

168 ancient, and immutable! Adoration to thee, 0 Vfihasputi' 
and adoration to thee, Indra !” 

169 Having uttered this prayer, the king employed himself in 
the pukkasas’ occupation, in fixing the price of corpses, 

if again dead' in memory. ' Filthy, matted-haired, black, 



THK STORY OF HARIS'-C'aNDRA. 


51 


70 armed with a club, despondent was the king. No son had 
he, noi’ wife indeed, in the track of his memory ; ruined in 
energy was he through the loss of his kingdom; dwelling 
then in the burning- gi-o and. * 

171 To that place came his queen, bewailing, bringing her son 

172 dead, for the boy had been bitten by a snake. “Ah my 
darling! ah my son, iny child I” thus she was oft exclaim- 
ing; emaciated, pallid, insane, her hair covered with dust 

The queen spoke. 

173 “Alas 0 king! dost thou not see to-day on earth this 
thy child, whom thou didst formerly see playing about, now 
bitten by a huge snake and dead P” 

174 The king, listening to that her lamentation, hiii*ried thUher 

175 thinking “ hei'e will be a dead man’s blanket.” But the king 
did not recognise as his wife her, who was weeping sorely, 
who worn witli his long absence was like a woman in another 

17d birth. The princess too seeing him, who formerly had 
beautiful locks, now with matted curls did not recognise the 

177 king, who was like a withered tree. The king .seeing the 
snake-bitten child, who was characterized with the kingly 

178 marks, on the black cloth, fell inio a reverie : — “ Ah ! alas ! 
to wliat a .state has this child born in the family of some king 

179 been bi'ought by malignant Death! hor, since 1 liavc secji 
my child thus lying in his mother’s lap, my child Jlohita.sya 

IHO with his lotus-like eyes recurs to niy memory. 8uch in- 
deed would be my child, of about this age, if dreadful 
Death has not made him his thrall.” 

The queen spoke. 

lyi “Ah my child! through disregard of some sin this great 
and terrible evil has befallen us, the end of wdiich we do not 

182 perceive. Ah, my lord king ! how dost thou remain placidly 
in some place without consoling me who am miserable P 

183 Loss of kingdom, forsaking of friends, sale of wife and 
child — what has thou not done to the Rajarshi Hari^-c andra, 
0 creator ?” 

184 Hearing this her lai^ciit the fallen king, recognising his 



62 


CANTO VITT. 


185 loved wife and his dead son, exclaimed “Alas! this is in- 
deed my very S'aivya, this is my child !” and wept consumed 

186 with sorrow, and fell into a swoon. She too recognising him 
fallen into that state, fainted with affliction and sank motion- 

187 less to the ground. The king and queen both regaining con- 
sciousness together, wailed in deep suffering, oppressed with 
the load of anguish. 


The king spoke. 

188 “ Alas my child ! when 1 look on thy very young face, with 
its beautiful eyes, brows, nose and curls, is not my afflicted 

189 heart torn asunder ? To whom, as he comes to mo of him- 
self sweetly babbling, ‘ Father, dear father,’ shall I affec- 
tionately exclaim with an embrace, ‘ My child, my child’ ? 

190 By whose knees shall the yellow dust be brought that shall 

191 soil my upper garment, my lap and body ? Born of my body 
and limbs, thou wast the delight of mind and heart to me, 
who, bad father that I am, sold thee, 0 my child, like a chattel. 

192 After snatching away my large kingdom entire, with its 
resources and wealth. Fate as a noxious serpent then bit my 

193 child. Just gazing on the lotus-face of my son, who has 
been bitten by the serpent Fate, oven T am now blinded 

. 194 by the dire poison.” Having thus spoken, incoherent through 
tears, he took the boy, and embi’acing him, fell motionless in 
a swoon. 


The queen spoke. 

195 “ This tiger-like man is known truly by his voice ; he has 
the moon-liko mind of a wise man ; it is Hari^-c'andi’a witli- 

196 out doubt. And his nose is prominent in front and goes 
downwards; and like opening buds are the teeth of him, 

197 the renowned, the liigh-souled. Wherefore has this king conic 
to the burning-ground to-day ?” 

Ceasing her grief for her son, she looked at the prostrate 

198 king. Agitated, surprised, afflicted, sorely oppressed on ac- 
count of her husband and sou, gazing earnestly, she tlicH 
saw her husband’s abominable staff fit for a low outcast^' 



53 


THE mjRY OF IIARIS'-C'aNDRA. 

199 Thereupon the long-eyed lady fainted, and gradually regain- 
ing consciousness, spoke falteringly : — 

200 “ Fie on thee, 0 Fate ! most doleful^unruly, abominated, who 
hast reduced this god-like king to the position of a low out- 

201 caste. Though thou didst make him undergo loss of kingdom, 
forsaking of friends and the sale of wife and son, yet hast 
thou turned the king, after he was parted from us, into this 

202 c'andala. Ah! 0 kiiigl why dost thou not now raise me, 
who am thus aUlicted, from the gi’ound and tell me to mount 

203 to thy couch ? I do not see this day thy regal umbrella, nor 
yet thy golden vase, thy chowide or fan ; what is this revolu- 

201 tion P lie, befoi*e whom formerly, when he moved, kings in 
the guise of seiwant’s freed the earth from dust with their 

205 own upper garments, — sucli having been, he tlie supreme 
king now walks 0 {)pressed with grief in the burning-ground, 
which is thickly strewn with jars and pots, with skulls fast 
fixed therein; where the hair of corpses is concealed by the 

200 remains of sacrificial ceremonies and strings ; where the 
cavities of the dry ground are bedecked with oily exudations ; 
which is dreadful by reason of the mixing of the marrow and 
half-burnt bones with the ashes and charcoal ; where the 

207 small birds have been scared away by the cries of the 
vultures and jackals ; which has spread gloom over tho 
regions of the sky with the colour of the trails of smoke from 

208 the funeral piles ; whore tho night-roaming demons are 
joyful through tlie delight of tasting carrion.” 

209 Thus having spoken the princess embraced the king’s neck 
and, bearing hundreds of woes and griefs, lameuted with sor- 
rowful voice, — 


The queen spoke. 

210 “ 0 king, is it sleep or waking truth ? Tell me Sir, this 
that thou art thinking of : my mind is bewildered indeed. 

211 If this be so, 0 thou conversant with righteousness, there is 
no help in righteousness, nor in worship of brahmans, gods 

212 and others, mr in protecting the world ; there is no such thing 
as righteousness. Whence are there truth, and candoui*, and 



54 


CANTO VIII. 


meekness, in that thou, the devotee of righteousness, hast been 
ousted from thj kingdom ?” 

213 Hearing this her speech, sighing deeply he related in 
faltering accents to the slender-limbed lady, how he had 

214 become a low outcaste. She also the timid lady wept very 
long, and sighing deeply, full of grief, told him how her son 
had met his death. 

The king spoke. 

215 “ My darling, I choose not to undergo affliction for a long 
time, nor is my soul docile, 0 slender-limbed lady. Behold 

216 my ill-fortune. If I shall enter the hro, with the permis- 
sion of the c'andala, I shall in another birth go again into 

217 bondage to c^andalas. I shall fall into Naraka, as a worm- 
eating insect ; into Vaitarini’*' which is slimy with much pus, 

218 fat, blood, and sinews. Reaching the Asi-patra wood, I 
shall be frightfully cut to pieces ; or reaching Maha-raurava 

219 and Raurava T shall be burnt. Surrender of life is the shoro 
for one sunk in the ocean of grief. I had just one son, wlio 

220 was this boy, to continue my family. He too has sunk 
through the violence of the watcr.s of my Fate, which ai'e 
very strong. How shall 1 resign my life P I am dependent 

221 on others, and in a strait. Or, doo.s not a man afflicted with 
pain regard evil ? There is no such suifering in the briitr 

222 creation, nor in the Asi-patra forest. Whence is there such 
suffering in Yaitarini as in the bereavement of a son P I will 

223 fall then with my son’s body into the blazing fire, 0 
slender-limbed ! Thou must pardon my ill-deeds ; and do thou 
who hast my permission go to the brahman's house, 0 bright 

224 smiler ! And hearken, 0 slender-limbed ! to my woi^d with 
respectful mind. If one makes gifts, if one offers sacrificos, 

225 if the gurus are satisfied, there may be union for me in an- 
other world with my son and with thee. But whence in this 

226 world will there be this aim for mo F In company with tlu'u 
I shall speed happily on in the search for our son, which 1 
shall make laughingly or somewhat secretly, 0, bright-smilci’- 


* The river of Naraka. 



55 


THE STORY OF HARTS'-c'aNDRA. 

227 Thou must pardon at my request all that I have spoken ill ; 
despise not that brahman through pride that thou art a 
queen ; thou must please him with thy utmost efforts, as if 
he were thy lord and god, 0 beautiful lady /” 

^'ho queen spoke. 

228 “ I also, 0 Rajarshi, unable to endure the burden of grief 
will assuredly enter the blazing fire with thee here this day.” 

The birds spoke. 

229 Thereupon the king heaping up the funeral pile, placed 
his son thereon ; and then associated with his wife ho joined his 

2)10 hands reverently, thinking of the Supreme Soul, S'iva, 
Niirayana Hari Vasudeva, the ruler of the gods, who sits in 
the cave-like recesses of the heart, of Brahman who is without 
beginning or end ; of Krishna, yellow-clad, beautiful. 

2)11 While he was thinking, Indra and all the gods, making 

232 Dharraa their leader, assembled in haste. Approaching spake 
they all — “ Ho ! 0 king ! hearken, 0 lord ! This is Bnih- 

233 man, visible to open sight, and the adorable Dharma himself ; 
and here are all the Suclhyas,* * * § the Mai’uts,t the Lokapalas,J 
with their vehicles, the Nagas,§ the Siddhas|| and the Gand- 

234 harvas,l[ and the Rudras** and the two AWins, — these and 
and others, many in number, and also Vif^vumitra, whom the 

235 three worlds could not formerly make a friend. But Visva- 
mitra desires to proffer thee friendship and good.” 

He mounted, thereon he met Dharma, and Tndra and Visva- 
mitra, 

Dharma spoke. 

236 “ Be not rash, 0 king ! I Dharma have visited thee, gi^atified 
with thy patience, self-command, truth and othei’ virtues.” 

* Class of inferior deities. 

t Wind- gods. 

t Guardian -gods of the world. 

§ Human-faced serpents of Patala. 

II Class of dotni-goda. 

If Demi-gods, Indra’s celestial musicians. 

••^Eleven demi-gods (personilied roaring of the wiml). 



56 


CANTO VIII. 


Indra spoke. 

237 “ 0 virtuous Hari^-c'aridra ! I Indra have approached nig 
thee ; the eternal worlds are won bj thee and thy wife an 

238 son ! Accompanied by thy wife and son, ascend, 0 king ! t 
the third heaven, which to others is very difficult of attain 
ment, hut which has been won by thine own deeds.” 

The birds spoke. 

239 Then Indra, the lord, going to the funeral pile, poure( 
down from tlio sky a shower of nectar that prevents suddei 

240 death, and a very copious shower of flowers, accompaniei 
with the sound of the heavenly drums, here and there ot 

241 that closely- gathered assemblage of gods. Then the high' 
soulcd king’s son arose, very youthful in body, in per 

242 feet health, placid in his organs and mind. And kini; 
Haris-c'andra immediately embraced his son ; and in pos 
sessing his wife regained his own Fortune. He was derkec 

243 with heavenly garlands ; and was happy, completely satisKei 
in heart, and filled with supremo joy. 

244 Indra at once re-addressed him. “ Accompanied by thy wife 
and son, thou shalt gain supreme felicity. Ascend, 0 vir- 
tuous king, by the results of thy own actions !” 

Hari.4-c^andra spoke. 

245 “ 0 king of the gods ! while unpermitted by my master the 
low outcastc, I will not, without having recompensed* him, 
ascend to the abode of the gods.” 

Dharma spoke. 

246 “ Perceiving this thy affliction that was to bo, I myself de- 
scended as the low outcaste through an illusion of myself ; 
and I displayed that inconsiderate conduct.” 

Indra spoke. 

247 Ascend, 0 Haris-c andra, to the supreme abode which is 
desired by all mankind oji the earth, the abode of men holy in 
deed.” 

Haris-c'andra spoke. 

248 “ 0 king of the gods, adoration to thee ! hearken also to this 

* For a-gatvd road a-dattvd ? 



tHE STORt OP HARIS'-C'ANDRA. 


my speech, that, filled with affection, I speak to thee whose 
J49 countenance is beautified through benignity. My subjects iii 

5 the city of Koi^ala* remain with minds sunk in my grief ; 

I how disregarding them shall I now ascend to heaven ? 

; 250 The murder of a brahman, the killing of a guru, the slaugh- 
ter of cattle, and the slaying of women — equal to these haS 
been pronounced the great sin incurred in the abandonment 

251 of one’s adherents. Neither in this world nor in the other 
do I see happiness for one who abandons an obsequious 

252 and innocent adherent, who ought not to be abandoned. If 
they go to Svarga in company with me, 0 lord of the gods I 
then I too will go; or I will go oven to Naraka with them/' 

Indra spoke. 

253 “ Many are their merits and sins, various and diverse. 
How wilt thou again attain to Svarga which will be enjoyed 
by multitudes ?” 

Hari4-c'andra spoke. 

254 “ 0 Tndra, by the influence of the householders a king enjoys 
his kingdom, and sacrifices with great sacrifices, and works 

255 meritorious deeds ; and therefore by their influence have I 
performed everything ; I will not forsake those benefactors 

256 in the desire to gain Svarga. Therefore whatever, 0 lord of 
the gods, I have done well, whatever I have given in alms, 
whatever sacrifices or prayers I have made, lot that be com- 

257 mon to them and us. For whatever fruit of my action must 
be eaten through long time, let that be for me and them to- 
gether just a single day through thy favour !” 

The birds spoke. 

258 “ So shall it be !” thus having spoken Indra, lord of the 
three worlds, and Dharma, and Visvamitra, Gadhi’s son, 

259 became propitious in their minds. Indra went from Svarga 
to the earth, with a company of ten million heavenly 
chariots and addressed the people of Ayodhya thus, “ Ascend 

260 ye to heaven.” And having heard with affection that 
speech of Indra and the king's speech, and having brought 

* 1, e. Ayodhya. 


8 



68 CANTO vni. 

261 Koliitasya, Yi^vamitra himself, great in austerities, with tlic 
gods also, the Munis, and the Siddhas, enthroned the king’s son 
in the charming city of Ayodhyd, after enthroning the king. 

262 Then all the people, his glad and prosperous friends, with their 
children servants and wives, ascended to heaven with the king. 

263 Those people moved step by step from one heavenly chariot to 
another. Then king Harii^-c'andra also grew in gladness, 

264 The kjng, attaining unparalleled dignity with the heavenly 
chariots, sat on the figure of a city which was surrounded 
with ramparts and walls. 

265 Then beholding his prosperity, U4anas, the eminent spiritual 
guide of the Daityas, conversant with the meaning and the 
truth of all the S'astras, sang a verse there. 

S'ukra (Ui^anas) spoke. 

266 “ Like unto Hari^-c'andra there has been no king, nor sliall 
there be. Whoever, when afflicted with his own sufferings 

267 listens to those of others^ may ho obtain gi’eat happiness ! May 
he who longs for Svarga gain Svarga ; may he who longs for a 
son gain a son; may ho who longs for a wife gain a wife ; may 

268 he who longs for a kingdom gain a kingdom ! Ah, the majesty 
of patience ! ah, the gi*cat fruit of liberality ! since Haris-c'an- 
dra has reached his city and has gained his sovereignty.” 

The birds spoke. 

269 This whole story of the deeds of Ilaris-c'andra has been 
declared to thee : heai* the remainder of the discourse next, 

270 0 best of Munis ! the outcome of the itedja-suya saenfioe, 
which was the cause of the decay of the earth, and the cause 
of that outcome, viz. the great battle of the Mainu* and 
Heron.f 

* Adi, also called S'ardli. The dictionaries all say this bird is Turdus gin- 
gmianus, which is the old name. It is Jerdon’s Bank Maina, Acridotheres gin- 
ginianus, which is common throughout Upper India, and burrows in the river 
banks (vol. II, p. 326). Jerdon gives salik (Sarikd.) as tho general Bengali 
name for mainas ; but I do not trace either of these two words in his book. 

t Vaka. Prof. Monier-Williams called this bird Ardea hivida, but I do not 
find this name in Jerdon. Bak, hag, (Bengali) and hagld (Hindi) oro the 
general modern names for various kinds of common herons, egrets^ and 



THE BATTLE OF THE MAIHA AND THE HERON. 


69 


Canto TX. 

The Battle of the Maina and the Heron. 

Vaiiahtha., enraged with VUvamitra for his cruelty to Harii- 
c'andra, cursed him to become a heron., atid Vihdmitra cursed 
Vasishfha to become a maind — Both Munis as gigantic birds 
hare a terrible fight., and are at length pacified by Brahma, 

The birds spoke. 

When Harii^-e'andra had left his kingdom and had gone to 
the abode of the thirty gods, there came out from his resi- 
5 dence in the water the glorious family priest, Vasisldha, 
the Muni, who dwelt at the Ganges, at the end of twelve 
years ; and he heard the whole of the deeds of Vij^viimitra, 
t and also the downfall of the noble-dealing king Harii^- 
e'andra, and his association with the c^ainjala, and his sale 
t of his wife and son. That most illustrious Muni having 
]ieai‘(l the story, being full of affection for the king, gix'W 
Avrathful in his dignity against the Rislii Visvamitra. 

^ V asish^ha spoke. 

5 “ It was Visvamitra who destroyed my hundred sons ; yet on 

G that occasion I was not so wroth as I am this day, on hciir- 
ing that this king, who was high-souled, eminent, worshipful 
towards the gods and brahmans, had been ousted from his 

7 kingdom. Since that king, truthful, tranquil, devoid of envy 
even towards an enemy, faultless also, upright in soul, vigilant, 

8 arelier on me, has been reduced to the last extremity together 
with his wife dependants and son, has been expelled from 
his kingdom by Visvamitra, and has been greatly worsted, 

9 therefore that impious brahman-hater, uprooted from among 

bittems. The Largo Egret Jerdon), the Smaller Egret (if. 

I'ijnttoides), and the Little Egret (H. garzetta) are all white ; the Cattle Egret 
{Biiphus coromandus) and the Pond lloron, generally known as the Paddy- 
hircl, {Ardoola leucoptera), which arc tnost commouly called hag and bagld, 
ha, ve^ white bodies (Jerdon, vol. iP, pp. 744)-761). 



60 


CANTO IX. 


the wise, blasted by my curse, the fool, shall be turned into 
heron.”’*'' 

The birds spoke. 

10 Hearing the curse, the glorious Vii^vdmitra likewis 
Ku^ika’s descendant, inflicted the counter-curse, “ Do thou ah 

11 become a maind.”t Both those most illustrious sages wei 
transformed into birds through their mutual curses, tl 
glorious Va^ishtha and Vi^vamitra, Ku^ika’s descendant. 

12 Both of them, boundless in might, allying themselves wit 
other classes of heingsy fought together, exceedingly exasperal 

13 ed, great in strength and prowess. The Maind increased i 
size to two thousand yojanas ; as the Heron, 0 brdhmar 

14 increased to three thousand and ninety. And then thos 
two, of wide heroism, assailing each other with blows o 

15 their wings, created sore fear among the creatures. Tli 
Heron, his eyes swollen with blood, lifting his wings bea 
the Maina ; and he also, stretching out his neck, struck tin 

16 Heron with his feet. Overthrown by the wind from thei] 
wings, mountains fell down on the earth ; and struck by th( 

17 downfall of the mountains the earth quaked ; and the earth 
as it quaked, caused the waters of the seas to swell up, >anc 
reeled over on one side, turning towards the descent to P^ala 

18 Living beings perished, some by the fall of the mountains, 
others by the waters of the seas, others through the quaking 

19 of the earth. Thus everything being terrified was turned 
into lamentation, bereft of consciousness; the world was 
greatly agitated, and its countries were thrown into confusion, 

20 people exclaiming “ Ah, my child ! ah my beloved child ! come, 
here I am fixed” — “ah my darling wifeT — “my beloved 
husband r — “ this rock is falling, escape quickly.” 

21 Then, when the world was thus distressed and averted in 
terror, surrounded by all the gods, advanced the fore-father, 

22 the lord of the universe, and replied to both those combatants 
who were violently enraged— “ Let this your strife cease, and 


* See ncte f, p. 68, 
t See note *, p. 68. 



the battle of the maina and the heeon. 


61 


let the worlds recover their stability !” Although they heard 
1 the words of Brahra^, whose birth is inscrutable, yet both 
of them, filled with anger and fury still fought, and did not 
desist. 

, Thereupon the fore-father, the god, seeing the destruction 
of the worlds, and desiring the welfare of both of them, dis- 
» sipated their brute-nature ; and the god, the lord of creation, 
addressed them both, clothed in their former bodies, Va^ishtha 
and the no^le descendant of Ku^ika, the state of darkness 
having been dispelled : — 

I “ Stay thou, my beloved Va^ishtha, and thou, most virtuous 
Kau^ika, this contest that, while involved in the state of 
^ darkness, ye desire to carry on. This outcome of the Raja- 
suya sacrifice of king Hari4-c'andra, and this war between 
] you two, are causing the earth to waste away. Nor moreover 
does that best of the Kau^ikas offend against that king, for 
since he has caused him to attain to Svarga, 0 brahman I ho 
) occupies the position of a benefactor. Do ye both, the 
creators of obstacles to your austerities, who have fallen into 
subjection to lust and anger, cease j for worthy are your 
prayers, and ample is your power.” 

10 ■ Thus admonished by him, both then grew ashamed, and 

1 embracing lovingly forgave each other. Thereupon, hymned 
by the gods, Brahma departed to his own world, and Va^ishtha 
to his own place, and Kau^ika also to his own hermitage. 

2 Those mortals, who shall fittingly relate and who shall fit- 
tingly hear this battle of the Maina and the Heron, and tho 

3 story of Han^-c andra, what they hear shall verily dispel 
their sins j nor shall they ever encounter antagonistic 
duties. 



62 


CANTO X. 


Canto X. 

Conversation between a father and son. 

Jaimini asks the Birds for instruction how living beings covic 
into existence and die^ and how the foetus lives and develops — The 
Birds repeat the explanation that a wise young brahman Sumafi^ 
who was nick-named Jada* because of his apparent stupidity^ hut 
who remembered his former existences.^ gave his father — lie ex- 
plains how death occurs.^ and describes the after-existences through 
which a livmg being passes accordmg as it has lived well or ill-- 
He describes hicidentally the hell Raurava. 

Jaimini spoke. 

1 Declare my doubt, when I enquire, 0 powerful brdhmaii8, 
wherein the appearance and disappearance of living beings 

2 consist. How is an animal produced ? How too docs it 
develop ? How, again, is it placed when contained within the 

3 womb, pressed upon by the limbs ? How, again, when it has 
issued from the womb, does it grow ? And how at the moment 

4 of departure is it deprived of the sentient state ? Kvery (lead 
person also experiences the results of both his good and his bad 
deeds, and how then do those deeds bring aboutf their results to 

5 him ? Why doe.s the foetus not become digested there in the 
stomach, as if it were converted into a morsel of food ? In the 
female’s belly, where the various foods consumed are digested 
although highly indigestible, how is it that the little animal 

6 is not digested tliere ? Declare all this to me, fi’ee from 
doubtful terms ; this very matter is a transcendant mystery, 
where men do err. 

The birds spoke. 

7 Unparalleled is this burdensome question that thou has 
propounded to us ; it is difficult to be imagined, touching 
it does the existence and death of all living beings. Listen tc 

8 it. Sir! as a son, most thoroughly lighteous, named Suniati,+ 
once declared it to his father. 

* Soo Canto XIV. 

f For f>ampd(laijanti read sampddayati (neuter, dual, present participle) ’^ 

J For Saniatir road Sumatir. 



CONVERSATION BETWEEN A FATHER AND SON. 63 

A certain highly intelligent brdhman of Bhfigu’a line ad- 
di’esscd his son Sumati who had undergone his initiation, and 
who was tranquil, and in appearance stupid. “ Study the 
Vedas, 0 Sumati, in order from the beginning, be zealous in 
obedience to thy guru, make thy food of victuals collected by 
begging. After that taking upon thee the duties of a house- 
holder, and performing the chiofest sacrifices, beget the 
desired offspring. Next resort to the forest, and then living 
in the forest, my son, be a wandering ascetic,* free from 
family ties. Thus shalt thou attain that highest object of 
religious knowledge, the Supreme Being^ reaching which thou 
shalt not grieve.” 

The birds spoke. 

Thus frequently counselled, he through his stupidity never 
replied : still the father again and again repeatedly admonish- 
ed him affectionately. He thus frequently exhorted by his 
father, through jDaternal love, alluringly and in pleasant 
terms, spoke thus at length with a laugh : — 

^0 “ Father ! I have repeatedly studied this that thou enjoinest 

me to-day, the other S'astras also, and the various mechanical 

IB arts. Ten thousand births and more have passed into my 
memory ; disgusts and gratifications have spoHed in tho 

17 decay and the rise of my mind. I have seen partings and 
meetings among enemies, friends and wives ; I have seen 
mothers of various kinds, and fathers of various kinds also. 

-8 I have tasted joys and sorrows thousands of times. Many 

9 kinsmen have I gained, and fathers of divers kinds. I have 
also dwelt in women’s wombs, slimy with ordure and urine ; 
and thousands of times have the pains of sicknesses also taken 

10 gidevous hold of me. Many sufferings have I endui^ed in 
my stomach in childhood, and youth and old age ; all those do 

d I remember. I have been begotten of brahmans, kshatriyas 
nnd vaisyas, and even ^udras ; and again of cattle and insects, 
of deer and birds. I have been bom moreover in the houses 
of kings’ dependants, and of kings resplendent in battle, and 


* For parivrd(a read parivrdn. 



64 


CANTO X. 


23 in tliy dwelling also. I have been a servant and a slav? 
frequently to men. I have been a master and a lord, and £ 

24 poor man as well. I have given blows, and I have receivec 
blows from others, and my own blows have procured mi 
blows in return. Others have given me gifts, and I have givei 

25 gifts to others many a time. I have been gratified also bi 
the deeds of father, mother, friend, brother, wife and othe: 
ftlatives. And often have I fallen into misery with my faci 

26 washed with tears. Whilst thus wandering, 0 father, ii 
the crowded circle of mundane existence, I have gained this 
knowledge, which procures final emancipation from existence 

27 That being known, all this body of religious rites, called 
Ric' Yajus and Saman, is worthless, and does not appear fit- 

28 tingly to mo. Of what use consequently are the Vedas to 
me, who am mature in wisdom, satiated with the knowledge 

29 of the gurus, void of desires, virtuous in soul ? I will gain, 
0 brahman ! the highest seat, that Supreme Soul, which is 
exempt from the qualities of the sixfold actions, pain, pleasure 

30 joy, and love. Hence, 0 father, I will abandon this well-known 
series of pains which is tainted by love, joy, fear, inquietude, 
anger, resentment and old age, and which is hampered with 

31 hundreds of nooses in close contact ensnaring one’s own self as 
game, and I will depart. Does not the duty enjoined by 
the three Vedas, which abounds in unrighteousness,* resemblr 
the result of sin ?” 

The birds spoke. 

32 Hearing that his declaration, which was interrupted by joj 
and surprise, the eminent father with gladsome mind address 
ed his son. 

The father spoke. 

33 “What is this thou sayest, my son? Whence arose thy 
wisdom ? How came thy stupidity before, and thy awakening 

34 now ? Is this a curse- wrought change inflicted on thee by a- 
Muni or god, since thy wisdom which was obscured has 
become manifest ? ’’ 

* A pun on dha'rma and a-dharma. Prof. Monier- Williams gires W* 

dharma as masc. only. 



COiT^EltSATlON BETWEEN A FATHER AND SON^ 


65 


The 8on spoke. 

5 “Listen, father, how this happened to me, entailing pleasure 
and pain on me, and who I was in another birth, and what 
is beyond myself. 

6 I was formerly a brahman, my soul fixed on the Supreme 
Being ; I attained the highest perfection in the considera- 
tion of the knowledge of the Supreme Being. While con- 

7 iinually occupied in devotion, through constant appllpition 
to study, through association with the good, thi\)ugh my 
own natural disposition, through deliberation, behaviour and 

B purification, while occupying myself in this indeed I ex- 
perienced the sublimest joy at all times, and I gained the 
position of a spiritual guide, the most successful remover of 

D the doubts of disciples. A long while afterwards I attained 
absolute perfection ; and my good disposition warped by 

0 ignorance fell into calamity through carelessness. Begin- 
ning from the time of my departui'e I had no failure of 
memory, until a year had passed and had returned to my 

1 recollection of my births. Being such, 1, keeping my organs 
under control, will strive indeed, 0 father, by means of that 
my former study, so to act that I may not have another 
existence. For this is the result of learning and liberality 
that I remember /orme?^ existences; this indeed is not obtained, 
0 father, by men who apply themselves to the duty enjoined 

i3 by the three Vedas. Being such I, from my former hermitage 
indeed, recurring to the duty of perfection, will attain to 
devotion to one object and will strive for the final emancipa- 

it tion of my soul. Declare thou then, Sir ! what is perplexing 
in thy heart : and to this extent let me, bringing the joy, 
discharge my debt.” 

The birds spoke. 

•> Thereupon the father spoke to his son that speech of a man 
of faith, which relates to the peidection of mundane existence, 
and which we have been asked by thee. Sir, 

The son spoke. 

^ “ Listen, 0 father, how I have often perceived the truth ; the 

circle of mundane existence is ever young, the duration of 
9 



66 


CANTO X. 


47 which \h not known. I then tell theo the whole, with thy 
permission, 0 father, commencing from the period of depar. 
ture, as no one else will tell thee. 

48 “ Hot moisture is excited in the body ; it is set in motion by 
a strong vital air ; blazing without fuel it pierces the sites of 

49 the vital organs. And then the vital air, called Udana, passed 
upwards, impeding the downward course of the water aiK 

||pod ' consumed. 

50 “ Hence he, who has offered presents of water and has givei 

51 food and drink, obtains joy therefrom in adversity. He ahc. 
who has bestowed food with a mind punfied by faith, is tliei 

52 satisfied even without food. He, who has not spoken un 
truth, nor caused a breach of amity, a faithful believoi' 

53 meets a happy death. Men who have been intent on thi 
worship of the gods and brahmans, and who are unspitefiil,^ 

54 fair, charitable, shamefast, die happily. Ho who would no 
forsake righteousness through lust, or anger or hatred, wIk 
acts up to his words and is gentle, meets a happy deatli 

55 Men who do not give away water, nor give away food, endun 
then, on the approach of death, burning thirst and hunofcr 

66 Those who give away fuel overcome cold ; those who giv! 
away sandal overcome heat ; and those who do not inflict dis 

67 tress overcome the woeful life-ending pang. Those who cans 
error and ignorance suffer grievous terror ; base men are op 

68 pressed with intense pains. A false witness, a liar, and h 
who teaches evil, they all and also blasphemers of tb 
Vedas die in delusion. 

59 “ Then Yama’s officers, terrific, foul-smelling, carryin 
hammers and maces, hard-hearted, approach the false raai 

60 When they meet his eyesight, trembling seizes him, and i 
bewails without ceasing his brother, mother, and childi’ci 

61 His voice seems thick, 0 father ! and monotonous ; and hi 
sight wanders through terror ; and his mouth grows dry wit 

62 his breathing ; his breathing grows loud ; his sight fails ; nex 

63 he is pervaded with pains ; then he quits the body. Preceti^^ 
by the vital airs he assumes another body, similar to the 

* For anus^avafy read m-aBwyavah. ,, 



EXPERIENCES OP LIVING REINGS AFTER DEATH. 


67 


fomer, produced by the actions of the former, intended for 
chastisement, born of no mother and father, like the previous 
one, with the periods of life and death conformable thereto. 

I, “ Thereupon Yama’s messenger speedily binds him with 
cruel fetters ; drags him, bewildered as he is with the blows 
) of his staff, to the southern region. And so, to some place 
which is rough with kusa grass, thorns, ant-hills, stakes, 
and stones, where a fire is raging, which abounds in hun^eds 
) of holes, and which is heated by the blazing sun, which is 
scorched by his rays, he is haled by Yama’s emissaries, ternblo 

1 through their ghastly cries. Being dragged about by those 
fearful servants^ being eaten by hundreds of she-jackals, he, 
tlie evil-doer, proceeds by an awful road to Yama’s abode. 

^ Men who give umbrellas and shoes, and who bestow garments, 
those men pass along that road in ease; and so also do thoso’ 
) who give away food. Thus encountering afflictions, the man 
()})pressed with sin is led in twelve days to the city of king 
Tama. 

) “While the body is being burnt, he experiences a great 
burning ; also wliile it is being beaten, and while it is being 
L divided into pieces, terrible agony. While the body is being 
wetted a living being endures a very long pain, even while 
it is inhabiting another body, through the consequences of 

2 its own acts. There the deceased feeds on the water that his 
relatives offer together with the sesaraum seed and the cake 

I that tliey offer. The anointing with oil by relations, and the 
kneading of the limbs that they 'perform ^ — a living being is 
I nourished thereby, and by what his relations* eat. A living 
being does not encounter excessive affliction on the eai’th 
through his deceased relatives , and so when dead he is 
nourished by his relatives who make gifts. 

> “ Being led off he sees his own abode for twelve days and he 
enjoys the water, cake &c. that are offered on the earth. 

> After twelve days, the man who is being carried off, next sees 
Yama’s city, awful, made of in)n, terrible in appearance. 
Immediately ho has gone there ho beholds Yama, with fiery 

, • For sa hwdhavdfy read sva-bdndhacdA i 



68 


CANTO X. 


red eyes, like to a mass of broken collyrium ; in the midst ( 

78 Death, the destroyer Time and others ; his mouth gaping- wit 
projecting teeth, his countenance dreadful with frowns ; a lore 
surrounded by hundreds of deformed, honuble and crooke 

79 diseases ; busy in awarding punishment, with long arms, 
noose in his hand, very fonnidable. Then the living bein 

80 takes the happy or miserable course decreed by him. Bi 
the f^se witness goes to Raurava, and the man who is ui 
tiTithful. Listen while T describe the nature of that Rauravi 

81 “ Raurava* is in truth two thousand yojanas in size. The 
there is a chasm, just knee-deep, very difficult to pass over 

82 in it charcoal is heaped up and made level with the gi’ount 
It burns vehemently with its glowing surface of kindle 

83 charcoal. In its midst Yama’s servitors cast the evil-doej 

84 Ho runs about there, being burnt by the violent flame ; am 
at each step, his foot is wasted and consumed again and again 
day and night he continues on the move, 

85 “ When he lias thus passfed over a thousand yojanas lie ii 
released, and then enters anotlier similar h(M Niraya,t t 

86 purge away his sins. Afterwards when he has passc( 
through all the hells, the sinner entei-s the brute creation 
among worms, insects and birds ; among carnivorous aninials 

87 among mosquitoes and such like. After having been bon 
among elephants, trees and such like, among cattle, anc 
among horses also ; and among other evil and noxious crea 

88 tures ; he attains humanity, and is bom a man, contempt] bl< 
as a hunch-back or a dwarf ; among c'andalas, pukkasas anc 

89 such-like castes ; and then accompanied by the remainder oi 
his sin and merit, ho enters the castes in ascending order 

90 such as siidras, vai^yas, kings and so on ; also the positior 
of brahmans, the gods and Indra. Sometimes in descending 
order, and thus evil-doers fall headlong into the hells. 

91 “ What happens to righteous-doers, listen while I declai’^ 
that. They take the holy course decreed by Yama. Ban4‘< 

92 of Gandharvas singing, bevies of Apsarasos ‘daiicing, brilliau^ 

* Terrible. f Devpid of happiness. 



CONCEPTION AND GESTATION. 


69 


with various celestial garlands, bedecked with strings of pearls 

3 and anklets and gay with music,* and heavenly chariots 
beyond compare go forth quickly to them. And when 
they descend therefrom, they are bom in the family of 

4 kings and other high-souled men : there observing upright 
conduct, they experience vigorousf pleasures, and afterwards 

5 they go upwards ; and otherwise, when they take the down- 
ward path, they become men as before. 

“ This has all been declared to thee, how a living being 
perishes. Next listen, 0 Brahmarshi, how the foetus begins.’* 

Canto XI. 

Conversation between the father and son (continued?). 

Su'inati (Jada) explains how living beings are conceived and 
horn, and mentions the evils of all existence. 

The son spoke. 

“Now human impregnation^: of women is a seed sown in 
darkness ; immediately it is discharged it sots out fi*om 
Naraka or Svarga. Dominated thereby the two seeds attain 
firmness, 0 fatlier ! and next the character of a speck — of a 
globule — of a ball of flesh. As there may bo a minute seed in 
the ball of flesh, so it is called a germ. So the five limbs up- 
grow according to their parts ; and the minor limbs also, the 
fingers, the eyes, the nose, the mouth, and the cars, grow out of 
tlie limbs ; similarly the nails and other features groiv out of 
them. In the skin is developed the hair of the body, and 
afterwards the hair of the head. The womb verily increases 
in size equally with it. Just as the cocoa-nut enlarges together 
with its shell, so it grows in size The womb is situated with 
its mouth downwards. But at the bottom of the ivomb the foetus 
develops, placing its hands on either side of the knees : and 
its thumbs are placed upon the knees, and its finger in 
front of them ; behind the knees are the eyes, and between 

* For -iohhitdni road -iohUtd f 
t Vgra ,* or noble. 

* 4 For nishekam mdnavam road nishel.o mdnavah ? 



70' 


CANTO XI. 


the knees is the nose ; and the buttocks rest on the heels ; the 
aiTUS and legs lie outside. 

9 “In this way gradually grows the human being, when 
contained in a woman’s womb : in the womb of other crea- 

10 tures, the position of the foetus corresponds to its form. The 
gastric fluid* renders it firm. It lives on the food and drink 
taken by its mother. Thus the gestation of a living creature is 

11 meritorious, and constitutes a means of obtaining merit. Also 
the cord, which is called Apyayani, is fixed in its navel, and it 

12 becomes fixed in the belly of women. As women’s food and 
drink penetrate into their womb, the foDtus increases in size, 
its body being nourished thereby. 

13 “ Numerous matters of its transmigrations occur to its 
memory ; hence distressed on this side and on that it becomes 

14 dispirited, toy, ‘ Never again will 1 thus act, when once 
I am delivered from this womb; assuredly I will so strive 

15 that I do not again undergo conception.’ Thus it meditates, 
recollecting the hundreds of pains attending existence, which 
have boon experienced aforetime, and which spnng from 
destiny. 

16 “ Afterwards in the course of time the footiis turns round 
with its face downwards, since it is born in the ninth or tenth 

" 17 month. While it is being expelled, it is pained by the wind 
of the prajapatis, and it is expelled wailing, being pained at 

18 heart by its sufferings. And when expelled from the belly, it 
falls into an intolerable swoon ; and it gains consciousness 

19 when it comes into contact with the air. Thereupon Vishnu’s 
magical power, which effaces consciousness, assails it; its 
soul being stupefied thereby, it loses its knowledge. 

20 “ Thereafter the human being, bereft of knowledge, enters 
on childhood ; and afterwards on boyhood, youth and mature 

21 age ; and again the human being undergoes death, and so 
birth. Hence he revolves in this round of mundane existence, 
like the jar and rope at a well. 

22 “ Sometimes a man reaches Svarga, sometimiBS Niraya ; and 

23 sometimes the dead man goes to Naraka and Svarga. Some* 


* Agni ; or, the digestive faculty, ‘ 



description of the hells mahX-radrava, Ac. 71 

times indeed re-born here, he obtains the consequences of his 
own actions ; and sometimes the man who has consumed the 
consequences of his actions, passes at death with a very small 
remainder. And hence he is sometimes born here with a 
scanty stock of good and evil, having almost consumed them 
in heaven* and in hell,t 0 brahman ! In the hells there is 
this very great suffering that the dwellers in Svarga are 
visible thence, 0 father ; and the denizens of hell rejoice,! 
as they are hurled down. Even in Svarga there is an 
; unparalleled pain in that from the very time of ascension 
there this thought revolves in one’s mind, ‘ I shall fall from 
^ hence' : and from viewing the hells great suffering is felt; 

day and night one is cheerless, thinking ‘ I shall go this 
5 course.’ One who is being born has great suffering in re- 
maining in the womb ; and after birth one has suffering in- 
childhood and old age. The connexion also between desire 
) envy and anger is grievous to bear in youth ; and old age is 
almost all suffering ; the heaviest suffering lies in death. 

) Both for him who is borne oft’ by Yama’s messengers, and 
for him who is hurled down to the hells, there are again 
destined both conception, and birth, death and hell. 

1 “ So in this round of mundane existence creatures revolve 
about, like the jar and rope at the well ; and having been 
bound with the fetters of nature, they are bound repeatedly. 

2 No pleasure is there a whit, 0 father, in this world crowded 
with hundi^eds of pains ; why then should I in striving for 
emancipation from existence observe the three branches of 
religion ?” 

Canto XTI. 

Jada describes the Hells Mahd-raurava, Tamos, Nikfintana, 
Ap'atish^ha, Asi-patra-vana, and Tapta-kumhha to his father. 

The father spoke. 

1 Good, my son ! thou hast declared the deepest obscurity of 
mundane existence, relying o?’’ the great fruit that grows 

2 from the bestowal of knowledge. Therein thou hast verily 
^ * Sv^ar-loka. f Naraka. J For rmdante read s^dante ? 



72 


CANTO xn. 


described the Rauravas as well as all the Narakaa j tell me c 
them at length, 0 mighty in intellect !” 

The son spoke. 

3 “I have described to thee first the hell Raurava, now liste 
to the description of the hell named Maha-raurava,* 0 father 

4 There for seven times five tliousand yojanas all around tL 

6 earth is made of copper; beneath itf is fire. Heated by the he[ 

thereof the whole region shines with a light equal to that ( 
the rising moon, most intensely severe to sight touch and tli 

6 other sensations. There the evil-doer is deposited, bound han 
and foot, by Yaraa’s servants ; he moves rolling about in tli 

7 midst. Preyed upon by ci’ows, hei'ons, wolves, and owl 
scorpions, and mosquitoes, and vultures he is speedily dra^ 

8 ged out into the road. Burnt and confounded, he exclairii 
repeatedly, “ Father ! Mother ! Brother ! Dear one !” Full c 

9 fear ho can get no repose. In this manner therefore emanci 
pation from existence is attained to by violent men, who evi 
minded have committed sin, in ten thousand times te 
thousand years. 

10 “Moreover there is another hell named Tamas it is bitter! 
cold naturally ; it is as long as Maha- raurava, and is envelope 

11 in darkness. There the men, afflicted with the cold, runniu 
about in the awful darkness, encounter one another and see 

12 refuge clasping one another. And their teeth adhere togetlie: 
chattering with pain through the cold ; there are also otlie 

13 plagues the strongest of which are hunger and thirst. A cu 
ting wind, laden with particles of snow, pierces their bones 
pressed with hunger, they feed on the marrow and blood thi 

14 trickle down therefrom. Constantly licking, they whirl aboi] 
in mutual contact. So there in Tamas very great affliction ] 

15 indeed endured by human beings, until, 0 most worth 
brahman ! their sins are completely consumed. 

“ Next there is another notable hell, known as Nikputana. 

16 In it potter’s wheels revolve incessantly, 0 father ! Humai 


* Very terrible, 
t Fur tasya read tasyd ? 


I Darkness. 

§ Cutting off. 



DESCRIPTION OP THE HELL& MAhX-RAURAVA, <!bc. 73 

beings are mounted thereon and are cut by the string of Fate 

7 which is borne on the fingers of Yama’s servant, from the 
sole of the foot to the head ; and these men do not lose their life 

8 thereby^ most virtuous brahman ! and their portions severed 
in hundreds reunite. In this way sinners are cut in sunder 

9 during thousands of^years, until indeed the whole of their 
sins are consumed. 

0 “ Listen also while I speak of the hell A-pratishtha, the 
occupants of which hell undergo intolerable pain. Those 
wheels are there indeed, and jar and well-ropes on the other 

1 side, which have been constituted causes of pain to men who 
engage in sin. Some human beings mounted on the wheels 

2 whirl around there ; for thousands of years no other condi- 
tion is theirs ; and then another man is bound to the jar and 

1 well-rope, as the jar in the water. Human beings whirl 
around, continually spitting out blood, with blood pouring 

{ from their faces, and with eyes streaming with tears. They 
are visited with pains that are beyond endurance by living 
creatures. 

> “ Hear also of another hell called Asi-patra-vana which 
has the ground covered with blazing fire for a thousand 
yojanas, where they are grievously scorched by the very 

> fierce vehement beams of the sun. The living beings that 
inhabit the hell are ever falling down there. In the midst 
thereof appears a charming forest with moist leaves. The 
leaves there are sword-blades, 0 most virtuous brahman ! 
Myriad sf of powerful black dogs also bark there, with long 
muzzles, ^ith largo teeth, formidable as tigers. Then gazing 
at that forest before them, ^yith its cool shades, the living 
beings hasten thither, oppressed w ith raging thirst, crying ‘ Ah 
mother ! ah dear one !’ in deepest woe ; their feet burnt by the 
fire lambent on the ground. When they wend there, a wind 
blows, that hurls down the sword-leaves, and so casts the 
Bwords down upon them. Thereat they fall to the earth into 
a mass of blazing fire, which hat pervaded the entire surface 

Sword-leaf- forest. f For ayuta^iobhitify read ayutdio *8iidh ? 

• 10 



74 


CANTO xm. 


of the ground, and is constantly licking in other directions. 

33 Thereupon the terrific dogs quickly rend many limbs from 
the bodies of those wailing ones. I have described this| 
Asi-patra-vana to thee, dear father ! 

34 “ Next learn of me about the very dreadful Tapta-kumbha.* 
On all sides heated pitchers are surrounded with the flames 

35 of fire, and are filled with oil iron and powder which boil over 
on to Ihe heaps of blazing fire. Into them the workers 

36 iniquity are cast head-long by Yama’s servants.f They are 
boiled, and foul the water with the marrow that oozes froiq 
their bursting limbs. Terrible vultures pulling them ou^ 

37 fracture the eye-bones of their bursting skulls ; again they are 
dropped into the same pitchers by the impetuous birds ; again 

38 they become united with the liquefied heads, limbs, sinews, 
flesh, skin and bones, by means of the oil in the seething vessel 
Then being quickly and vigorously stirred up by Yama s ser- 

39 vants with a spoon, the sinners are churned up in the whirling 
pool of copious oil. Such is the Tapta-kumbha that I have 
fully described to thee, 0 father !” 

Canto XIII. 

Conversation between the father and son (continued). 

Sumati relates an incident in one of the periods he spent it 
hell— King Vipai-dit comes there and ashs why^ in spite of ( 
righteous life, he was condemned there. 

The son spoke. 

1 Now I was bom in a Vai^ya’s family in the seventh lif 
that preceded my present one. Once upon a time I obstructei 

2 the cattle at their drinking. In consequence of that act 
was consigned to a very terrible hell, fearful with flames q 

3 fire, infested with birds with iron beaks, muddy by reason c 
the streams of blood that flowed from limbs crushed h 
machines, pervaded with the sound of blood pouring dow] 
from sinners who are' being cut asunder. When cast dowi 


* Burning-pitcher, 


t For ydmyafy road ydmyai^- 



KING VIPAS'-C'it’s VISIT TO HELL. 


75 


there I spent a hundred years and more, scorched by the 
intense heat, and burning with thirst. 

On a sudden a wind blew on me there, bringing gladness, de- 
liciously cool, issuing from out of a pitcher of meal and sand.* 
Through contact with it all the men were relieved of their 
torments, and I too gained a bliss supreme, such as the celes- 
tial beings enjoy in Svarga. And with eyes fixed in a wide 
gaze of joy, in wonder at what this was, we saw at hand a 
peerless perfect man ; and Yama’s diro servant, staff in hand, 
like Indra’s thunderbolt, was showing the path in front, and 
a voice came saying “ come hither !” Then that man seeing 
the hell filled with hundreds of tortures, moved with com- 
passion, addressed that servant of Yama. 

The man spoke. 

0 “ Ho ! servant of Yama ! say, what sin have I committed, 
for which 1 have incurred this deepest hell, frightful for its 

1 torments ? Known as Vipa4-c'it, I was born in the family of 
the Janakas, in the country of Videha, in very truth a guar- 

2 dian of men. I sacrificed with many sacrifices ; I protected 
the earth with uprightness ; nor did I let fighting rage ; no 

3 guest departed with averted countenance ; nor did I offend 
the pitris, the gods, the rishis or my servants ; nor did I covet 
other men’s wives, or wealth, or aught else belonging to them. 

i At the moon’s changes the pitris, on other lunar days the 

5 gods, voluntarily approached mankindf as cows a pool. The 
two religious duties, both sacrifice and meritorious work, 
perish inasmuch as the performers of domestic sacrifices depart 

5 sighing with averted faces. The merit amassed in seven lives 
is dissipated by the sighing of th pitris ; the sighing assuredly 
destroys the destiny that springs from three lives. Hence 

^ I was ever indeed kindly disposed to what concerned the gods 
and the pitris ; being such, how have I incurred this very 
terrible hell ?” 


* Or, camphor. 


t Purusha. 



Canto XIV. 


Jada^s* narrative (continued) — The conversation with Yama^s officer 
Yama's officer tells king Vipai-cit why he was condemned 
hell — He explains to him the nature and results of good and ei 
deeds generally^ and mentions at great length the punishmer, 
awarded to various special sins. 

The son spoke. 

1 Thus interrogated then by that high-souled king in oi 
hearing, Yama’s officer, though dreadful, with modest gpeec 
replied. 

Yama’s officer spoke. 

2 “ Mahdr^ja ! it is even as thou hast said, undonbtedl 
Nevertheless thou didst commit, Sir ! a very trifling misdeed 

3 I will recall it to thy mind. The wife whom thou hadst, 
princess of Vidarbha, named Pivari, — her season of aptitud 
for sexual intercourse was formerly rendered barren by tliei 

4 who wast enamoured of the resplendent Kaikeyi ; hence fc 
the transgression in the matter of her season thou hast incui 

6 red, Sir ! a dcadful hell such as this. As the Fire expect 
the fall of the liquid butter at the time of the Homa oblatior 
even so does Brahma expect the deposit of seed at th 

6 approved season. A righteous man who disregarding tha 
season., may become absorbed in objects of desire, would sti] 
incur sin by reason of the debt due to his ancestors an 

7 would fall into hell. Such indeed was thy sin ; naugh 
else is found ; come then ! go, 0 king, to the enjoyment of th, 
meritorious acts.” 

The king spoke. 

8 “I will go, 0 servant of the god, where thou shalt lead me 
Something I ask, deign to declare it to me aright. Tlies< 

9 crows with adamant beaks are tearing out men's eyes ; and 
these men are having their eyes renewed again and again. 

10 And what deed have they done ? Explain this abominable 
thing. Likewise they are tearing out the tongue from these 

* The ‘ Stupid one,’ Sumati’e nickname. , 



nature and results op pOOD AND EVI^ DEEDS. 77 

other men as it is being reproduced anew. Why are these 
grievously afflicted men tom with a saw ? Why are these 
other men, immersed in oil, boiled among meal and sand ? 
And these other men are dragged about by iron-beaked 
birds; say, of what kind are they, screaming with loud 
cries through the pain caused by the loosened bodily bands. 
Pained by the wounds in every limb, why are these men, who 
have wrought iniquity, struck by the onslaught of the iron 
beaks day and night. Tell me without reservation, through 
wlmt maturing of their acts are these and other torments 
scon among sinners.” 

Yama’s officer spoke. 

“ Since thou a.skest mo, 0 king, concerning the rise of the 
fruits of sinful actions, I will toll thee that snccinctly and 
correctly. A man verily attains merit and demerit in regular 
order ; and his sin or his merit diminishes as he consumes it. 
But no human action, whether virtuous or sinful, quickly 
cleanses except by consumption. Diminution arises through 
consumption. And he abandons merit and demerit through 
consuming it ; hearken to me ! From famine indeed to famine, 
from affliction to affliction, from fear to fear go needy sin- 
ners, more dead than the dead- A manifold course do 
creatures take through the fetters of their actions. From 
festival to festival, from Svarga to Svarga, from happiness to 
happiness go the faithful, and the peaceful, the rich, and the 
doers of good. But sinners, when slain by sin, encounter 
perils from beasts of prey and elephants, terrors from snakes 
and thieves ; what surpasses this ? Decked with fragrant 
garlands, clad in fine apparel, enjoying beautiful carriages 
dwellings and food, those who are praised ever go to sacred 
groves with their meritorious deeds. 

“ Thus men’s merit and demerit are amassed in the sum of 
many hundreds of thousands of lives : they spring from the 
germs of pleasure and pain. For as the seed, 0 king, awaits 
the water, so do merit and demerit await him who acts 
otherwise than at the right time and place. A trifling sin 
committed by a man, when it reaches the place and time, 



78 


CANTO XIV. 


inflicts the pain produced by a thorn, when the foot is plante 

20 down heedlessly. Then it inflicts the aouter severe pain tha 
is caused by pins and wedges, and likewise scarcely endurahl 

27 headaches and other pains. It causes the pains engenders 
hy eating unwholesome things., by cold, heat, fatigue, inflamma 
tion and such like. Moreover sins have regard to one anothe 

28 amid the confluence of their results. In this way heinou 
sins have regard to the deteriorated state of protracte 
illness, &c ; and they verily te^id to the consequences produce 
by weapons, fire, calamity, pain, imprisonment, and so fortl 

29 A trifling good deed confers at once a pleasing fragrance, o 

30 touch, or sound, taste, or shape ; more marked likewise afto 
a long time, and great when arising at the proper perioc 
And in this way pleasures and pains spring indeed out of gooi 

31 and bad actions. A man stays here consuming the produc 
tions of numerous mundane existences. And the results o 
knowledge or ignorance are checked by race and countr} 

32 and remain there united merely by outward sign to the soui 

“ Kever and nowhere doth the man exist who doeth not i 

33 wicked or holy act in body, mind, or speech. Whatever a mai 
receives, whether pain or pleasure, whether great or insig 

34 nificant, it produces a changed condition of the mind ; by si 
much either his virtue, or on the other hand his sin, gradnall 

35 diminishes by consumption, just like food that is being eater 
In this way these men, dwelling within hell, diminish thev 

36 awful heinous sins by torments day and night. Likewise, C 
king, they consume their virtues in the company of the ira 

37 mortals in Svarga with the songs and otlier joys of thi 
Gandharvas, Siddhas and Apsarases. In the condition of t 
god, and a human being, and a brute creature, one con 

38 sumes good or evil, arising from virtue or sin, a7id characterizec 
by pleasure or pain. 

“ What thou enquirest about of me, 0 king ! namely ‘ OJ 
what pai’ticular sins are the tortures of wicked-doers the 
consequences ?’ that I will declare to thee in full detail. 

39 “ When vile covetous men have gazed on others’ wives and 

40 on others’ goods with evil eye and evil mind, these birds 



PUNISHMENTS FDR VARIOUS SINS. 


79 


with adamant beaks tear out their eyes ; and they have their 
eyes reproduced continually. Moreover during as many twink- 
lings of the eyes as these men have committed the sin, so many 
thousands of years they undergo the eye-torture. 

“ Those men who have given instruction in wicked S'astras, 
and those who have advised such instruction^ for the purpose of 
completely destroying the sight even of their enemies ; those 
who have repeated the S'dstra improperly ; those who have 
given utterance to an evil word ; those who have blasphemed 
the Veda, the gods, the dvijas and their guru; for so 
many yearq these very terrible birds with adamant beaks 
tear out those men’s very tongues as they are continually 
reproduced. 

“ Also base men, who have caused dissension among friends, 
or dissension between a father and his son and relations, 
between a sacrificer and a spiritual preceptor, between 
a mother and her son who is her companion, and between 
wife and husband, — see ! these men who are such are tom with 
a saw, 0 king ! 

“ Also those who cause pain to others ; and those who foihid 
joyousness ; and those who deprive others of fans, breezy places, 
sandal, and u^ir grass and base men who have inflicted 
suffering on innocent men at life’s end, — these participators 
in sin, who are such, are placed within meal and sand. 

“ Moreover the man who eats another’s s'raddha, when 
invited by the other to a ceremony either to the gods or to the 
pitris, he is rent in twain by birds. 

“ But whoever lacerates the vitals of good men with wicked 
words, these bii’ds unchecked continually strike him. 

And whoever indulges in backbiting, dissembling in 
speech, dissembling in mind, his tongue is assuredly torn in 
twain thus by sharp razors. 

f * Andropogon muricatus, Roxburgh ; the modem Jehas-khas. The roots, 
hen dry, and then gently moistened, emit a pleasant fragrance ; they are 
STiiployed to make large fans j and also screens, which are placed before doors 
i windows, and which being kept moist daring the hot winds render the 
nr that pa8ses^ through them cool and fragrant (Roxb. p. 89). 



80 


CANTO XIY. 


62 “ Whoever, puffed up, show contempt towards their parentj 

and gurus — these men^ who are such, are plunged head fore 
most into a pit reeking with pus, ordure and urine. 

53 “ Those who eat, while the gods, guests and living bein^ 

dependants and visitors, and also the pitfis, the fire and bird 

64 are left unfed ; those evil mea feed on carrion and exudation 
and they become Sdc'i-mukha birds,* as large as mountain 
Behold ! these are men of that kind. 

65 “ But those who feed a brdhman or a man of another casi 
in one, company disagi'eeably on earth, — those men, like thes 
persons, feed on ordure. 

66 “ Whoever eat their own food neglecting a man, who hi 
gone forth in company with them, and who being destitui 
seeks wealth, — these men^ who are such, feed on phlegm. 

57 “ Those men who, without washing their hands and mout 

after meals, 0 king ! have touched cattle, brahmans and tlJ 
fire, — these hands of theirs placed in fire-pots are licked! 
repeatedly. 

68 “ But those men who, without washing their hands ard 
mouth after meals, have gazed longingly at the sun, moon 
and stars, — in their eyes Yama’s servants place fii*e and 
augment it. 

69 “ Moreover whatever men have touched cattle, fire, tbeii’ 
mother, a brdhman, their eldest brother, father, sistei’, 

60 daughter-in-law, their gurus and the aged with their feet, 
they stand mid piles of charcoal, with their feet bound witli 
red-hot iron fetters, enduring burning up to the knees. 

61 “Whoever have eaten in an unhallowed manner milk 
khichree, goat’s flesh, and things offered as food to the gods,- 

62 the eyes of those sinners, as they lie hurled to the ground 
gazing with staiiing eyes, are torn out, see ! from theii’ faces 
by Yama’s servants with pincers. 

* The dictionaries do not say what bird this is. I would suggest from th< 

meaning of the word, that it means a Honey-Sacker (the ooramonest species ol 

which is the Purple Honey-Sucker, Araehnechthra asiatica), or it may be th« 

Hoopoe, Upupa epops, which also has a long slender beak (Jerdon, vol. I, PP 

370 & 390 .) 



PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 


81 


“ And base men who have hearkened to blasphemy against 
gurus, the gods, and dvijas, and against the Vedas,— these 
servants of Yama continually drive iron wedges, red as fire, 
into the ears, of such wicked men who rejoice in such things 
though they bewail the while. 

“ Whoever, led by anger 'and covetousness, have broken up 
and destroyed beautiful rest-houses,* the abodes of gods and 
brahmans, and assemblages in the temples of the gods, — 
Yama’s exceedingly cruel servants continually flay the skins 
of those men from their body by moans of those sharp instru- 
ments. 

“Whatever men have made water in the path of cattle, 
brahmans, and the sun, these entrails of theirs aro drawn 
out through the anus by crows. 

“ Where a man after having given his daughter to some 
one, gives her to a second person., truly that man is thus 
divided into many portions, and swept along in a stream of 
burning corrosive. 

“ Whatever man, moreover, engrossed in his own nourish- 
ment abandons his destitute children, dependants, wife and 
other relatives in a famine or in a disturbance, he indeed 
in his hunger thus gets portions of his own flesh, which 
Yama’s servants cut off and put into his mouth. 

“ Whoever through avarice abandons those who have sought 
protection and who aro dependent on him for their livelihood, 
ho indeed is thus tortured by Yama’s servants with tortures 
by means of machines. 

“ Men who check good deeds all their lives long are ground 
with the grinding of rocks, as are these evil-doers. 

“ Men who carry off pledges are bound with bands on all 
their limbs, and are devoured day and night by insects, scor- 
pions, and ravens. 

“ Wicked men who indulge in sexual intercourse by day 
and men who defile others’ wives, are worn away by hunger, 
have their tongues dropping from their palates by reason of 
thirst, and are racked with pangs. 

* tPrayd, road-side sheds for accommodating travellers with water. 

11 



82 CANTO XIV. 

75 “ Moreover, see the “ seemul tree with its long iro, 
thorns ; mounted thereon the bodies of sinners are pierced, 
and they are foul with the streams of blood that pour fortli. 

76 “ See also, 0 tiger-like man ! these defilers of others’ wive^ 
who are being destroyed by Yama’s servants in the “ mouse.”] 

77 “ YHiatever man, deposing his spiritual preceptor, stub 
bomly pursues his learning or art, — he verily, bearing thus i 

78 rock on his head, undergoes affliction in the public way, suffer 
ing exceeding pain, emaciated with hunger day and night, hi 
head quivering through the pain of his burden. 

79 “Those who have discharged urine, phlegm or orduu 
in water, — they, such as these persons^ have come to a hel 
stinking with phlegm ordure and urine. 

80 “ Pressed with hunger these men are devouring one anotheri 
flesh — these men formerly did not eat according to the rules ol 
hospitality mutually. 

81 “ Those also who have discarded the Vedas and the fire,^ 
themselves kindling their own fires, — they, such as these permn 
are repeatedly hurled down from the loftiest summit of i 
mountain. 

82 “ Those men who have married virgin widows and hau 
grown old to the full extent of life, — these turned into won 
are consumed by ants. 

83 “By receiving favours from an outcaste,J by perforiujni 
sacrifices for an outcaste, by constant attendance on an outcasit 
a man ever reaches the condition of an insect that lives amoni 
stones. 

84 “ The man, who eats sweetmeats all by himself, while hi 
relatives or his friends or a guest look on, eats a pihf 
burning charcoal. 

85 “ This man’s back is continually devoured by fearful wolvei 
because, 0 king ! he was a backbiter of people. 

* Salraali, the Cotton or Silk -cotton tree, Bombax malaharicim {heptaphyll' 

Roxb.), the Bengali simul, the Hindustani semal. It is a large tree, commc 

almost everywhere, with stout hard conical prickles (Hooker, vol. I, P* 

Roxb., p. 514). Here it means a kind of instrument of torture, 
t A kind of instrument of torture. J See Oauto XV. vers|f !• 



PUNISHMENTS B'OR VARIOUS SINS. 


83 


“ Blind, moreover^ deaf, dumb, this man roams about, sick 
with hunger — he, base man, was ungrateful to men who oc- 
cupy themselves in conferring benefits. 

“ This man, who returns evil for good, working injury to 
his friends, very evil-minded, drops into Tapta-kumbha ; 
thereafter he will suffer grinding ; then he will go to Karam- 
bha-balukd next he will undergo mechanical tortures ; then 
A.si-patra-vana ; and rending with saw-liko leaves. After ex- 
periencing, too, division by the thread of Fate and manifold 
toririents, how he will obtain expiation herefrom I know not. 

“ Corrupt Brahmans, for having assailed one another when 
assembled at S'raddhas, drink verily the moisture that exudes 
from every limb. 

“ A gold-stealer, a brdhman- slayer, a drinker of spirituous 
liquors, a defiler of his guru’s bed, remain, being burnt in 
blazing fire beneath, above, around, for very many thousands 
of years ; thereafter they are re-born as men afflicted with 
leprosy, consumption, sickness and other diseases. And when 
again dead, they enter hell ; and when again born, they under- 
go a similar malady until the end of the kalpa, 0 king! 

“ A cow-slayer also goes to hell for a rather less period^ 
namely^ during throe lives. 

“ There is likewise a fixed ordinance regarding all minor sins. 

“ To what various grades of creatures, for what several 
definite sins, men go, when released from hell — listen to mo 
while I recount that.” 

Canto XV. 

Conversation between the fattier and son — (Continued). 

The exposition of sins and their punishments is continued, and 
Jada concludes his story of king Vipas-c'it—The king by his 
'merit delivers all the inhabitants of hell and ascends to heaven. 

Yama’s officer spoke. 

“For accepting anything of value from an outcaste,t let a 
dvija be born an ass : but let him who sacrifices for the 
outcastc become a worm, on his release from hell. 

* See Canto XIII, verse 6. t See Canto XIV. verse 83. 



84 


CANTO XV. 


2 “ But the dvija who has misbehaved towards his spiritnj 
preceptor,* by coveting the latter’s wife and the latter’s 
perty in his mind, undoubtedly becomes a dog. 

3 “ The man also who scorns his parents is bom an ass ; f,j 
reviling his mother and father he is bom a maina ;t and Ik 

4 who scorns his brother’s wife becomes a pigeon ; but fd 
injuring her he becomes a tortoise. 

6 “ He who, while eating his brother’s pi^da, does not pursn 

his brother's welfare, being overwhelmed with folly is indee 
bom after death a monkey. 

6 ‘‘ He who carries away a deposit is bom a worm on lii 
release from hell. And the detractor when released from he| 

7 becomes a Rdkshasa. And the man who destroys trust j 
bom a fish. 

“ For carrying off through folly paddy, barley, sesi 

8 mumj seed, mash beans, § kulattha beans, || mustard-seed,! 
chickpeas,** beans, ft aman rice,JJ: mudga beans, §§ wk 

♦ UpMhyaya. t see note * p. 49. 

X Tila, Sesamum, Sesamim orientate, Roxb, (indicum, LinnEous); tl 
modern til (Roxb., p. 491). Not in Hooker. 

§ Mdsha, a kind of bean, Phaseolus mungo, variety radiatus, the Bengi 
mdsh-kalay. It is esteemed the best of all the leguminous plants, and tl 
meal is made into broad for many religious ceremonies. (Hooker, vol.l 
p. 203 5 Roxb., p. 657.) 

II Kulattha, a kind of bean, Dolichos bijlorus, the Bengali Arwiatii 
(Hooker, vol. II, p. 210 ; Roxb., p. 663.) 

^ Sarshapa, Mustard, Sinapis campestris ; which combines Roxburgh’s! 
dichotoma, (the Beng. iddd rdi or sarishd, Hind, sarson), and 8. glauca (tl 
Beng. sveta rdi). From both varieties an oil is expressed which is used in die 
and for various other purposes. (Hooker, vol. I, p. 166 ; Roxb., p. 497.) 

** C'aija, Chick pea or Qram, Oicer arietinum, the Beng. buf, chand ai 
chhold; it is the same bs vartula, (Hooker, vol. II, p. 176 j Roxb., p. 5^ 
Oliver, p. 196.) 

ft Kalaya. This is the general name for most of the commonly cultivat 
kinds of beans, Phaseolus. 

t J Kalama, the dman (hemania) or later rice, which is sown in May » 
June and is reaped in December and January. The dua (dh) or early rice 
sown about April and reaped about August. 

§§ Mudga, Green gram, Phaaeolua mungo, the Beng. mug or 



PUNISHMENTS FOR VARIOUS SINS. 85 

and flax, or other crops, a man void of understanding is 
bom a large-mouthed rat resembling an ichneumon. 

“Moreover for improperly touching another’s wife he is 
bom a horrible wolf. And the foolish sinner who violates his 
brother’s wife becomes a dog, a jackal, a heron, a vulture, a 
snake, and a bird of prey,* by degrees. And the sinner, who 
has violated his friend’s wife, his guru’s wife, and the king’s 
wife, becomes a cock-cuckoo when released from hell. The 
man of lustful soul is born a hog. 

“ Let him who hinders sacrifice liberality and marriage 
become a worm. 

“ And he who gives his daughter away twice is verily born 
a worm. 

“ He who obtains food, without giving some to the gods 
the pitris and brahmans, is indeed born a crow when released 
from hell. 

“ He who scorns his eldest brother, or a brother who is like 
a father to him, is indeed born a curlew when dismissed 
from hell. 

I And the 4iidra for approaching a brahman- woman is bom 

6 a worm ; for begetting offspring of her, let him become an 
insect living within wood. And a c'andala for the same sin 
is bom a hog, a small worm, a diver.f 

7 “A man ungrateful, base among men, who returns evil for 
good, when released from hell is bom a small worm, an in- 

8 sect, a bird, a scorpion also, and a fish, a cro>^, a tortoise, 
then a pukkasa. 

9 “For slaying an unarmed man, a man is born an ass. The 
murderer of a woman also and a child-slayer are born worms. 

“ But for stealing victuals a man is born a fly. 

0 “ There is moreover a difference among victuals, listen 

thereto. For taking rice-food, he is born a cat, when quit 

lasha (see note § above) is a variety of this. (Hooker, vol. II, p. 203 ; Boxb., 

. 656). 

* Kan-ka. This must liiean a bird of prey. V aka which is a synonym 
jast been mentioned. 

t pMadgu j see note * p. 31. 



86 


CANTO XV. 


21 from hell ; but for taking rice-food mixed with sesamum an 
oil-cake he is horn a rat; and for taking clarified butt( 

22 an ichneumon ; for taking goat’s flesh, a crow, a diver.* * * § 
who carries away fish-meat becomes a crow ; he who carrie 
away venison a hawk ; but when salt is taken away, the ojft% 
der becomes a water-crow if when curdled milk is taken awai 

23 a worm; and for stealing milk he is born a hen-heron- 

24 but he who steals oil is bom a cockroach ; for taking hone’ 
a man is bom a gad-fly ; for taking a cake, an ant ;§ but fo: 

25 stealing pulse|| a small house-lizard ; 

“ For stealing distilled spirits let the sinner become j 
francolin partridge and for taking iron be born a crow 

26 When brass is carried off, he is born a green pigeon 
when a silver vessel is carried off, a pigeon ; but for taking 

27 a golden vessel, he is born a worm ; and for stealing 
a garment of woven silk he becomes a partridge iff and 
when a silk garment is taken away he is born a silk- 

* See note f p. 85. 

t ViVi-kaka. I do not find this in Prof. Monier-Williams’ Dictionary. 1 
would suggest that it is a Torn, most probably the Black-bellied TCrnJ Sterm 
javanica, which has a black and grey plumage and is found in every river in 
India. The Terns are commonly called nangd-chil or gdng-chil, i. e., the river 
kite. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 834 and 840.) 

X BalakA. Balaka is the Pond Heron or Paddy-bird, Ardeola leucoptera, 
the Beng. konch-hak. (Jerdon, vol. II, p. 751.) 

§ Pipilika ; ttio modern pipiya or piprd denotes tho larger species of ants. 

II Nishpava ; this appears to be a general name for most kinds of pulse. 

^ Tittiri, the Francolin or Meadow partridge, of which there are two 
species in India, (1) the Black partridge, Francolinus vulgaris (tho modem 
titir or kala-titar) which is found throughont the whole of Northern India, 
and (2) the Painted partridge, F. pictus (also called kala-titar) which is foundj 
in Central and part of Southern India. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 658 and 661). 
The former is probably the bird meant here. 

Harita j see note ** p. 28. 

tt Krakara. Prof. Monier- Williams says this is Perdix sylvatica, but I do 
not find any such name in Jerdon. It is probably either the Grey partridge, 
Ortygomis ponticeriana, which is common throughout the greater part of 
India, or the Kyah partridge, 0. gularis, which is found throughout Behar 
Bengal. (Jerdon, vol. II, pp. 569, and 672.) 



PUNISHMENTS FOB YARIOUS SINS. 


87 


worm ; when very fine cloth, an instrument of horn* and 
fine cloth are carried off, the sinner is bom a parrot ; and so too 
for taking a garment of goat’s-hair or sheep’s wool, and a linen 
one ; when a cotton thing is taken away he is bom a curlew ; 
and the stealer of a barken thing is horn a pond-heron j for 
taking paint and potherbs he is born a peacock. The man who 
carries off a red garment becomes a jivanjiva pheasant ;t for 
taking splendid perfumes let him become a musk-rat ; and/or 
taking clothes a hare ; for theft of fruit a man becomes a eu- 
nuch ; for theft of wood, a wood-insect and a flower-stealer 
becomes a poor man ; a carriage-stealer lame ; and one who 
takes vegetables becomes a green pigeon ;§ and one who takes 
water a pied-crested cuckoo. || One who takes away land, 
after going to Eaurava and the other very terrible hells 
becomes gi'ass, a bush, a creeper, a climbing shrub, a reed 
and a tree by degrees ; and the man afterwards, when his sins 
have been diminished to insignificance, becomes a worm, an in- 
sect, and a grasshopper, a bird, an aquatic animal, a deer ; and 
having attained the condition of kino, and despicable castes 
such as c'andala and pukkasa, he becomes lame and blind, deaf, 
leprous, and afflicted with pulmonary consumption ; he is seized 
with diseases affecting the mouth and the eyes and the 
anus ; and he becomes epileptic ; he attains also the condi- 
tion of a 4udra. This truly is known to be the course of 
st(!alers of cattle and gold. 

“ And fierce men who steal learning, who fall short in their 
rewards to the guru ; the man who makes another’s wife his 
own wife, — he becomes a eunuch, the foolish man, when 
escaped from the torments of hell. 

“ He who makes the Homa oblation in unkindled fire is 
born afflicted with the pains of indigestion, and dyspeptic. 

“ Abuse of others, the returning evil for good, hurting 

Sarngika. I do not find this word in tho dictionary, 

Jivan.jiva or jiva-jivaka. See note tt P* 28. 
fihuna-kitaka ; or, an armadillo, 

Harita : see note ** p. 28. 

C'dtaka : see note f p. 29. 



88 


CANTO XV. 


40 the vitals of others, coarseness, and cruelty, paying court t 
other men’s wives, perfidy in taking other people’s property 

41 and contempt of the gods, dishonesty, fraud towards men, 
and avarice, manslaughter, and the continued performance 

42 also of whatever things are forbidden ; — one should kngv 
these to be the after-characteristics of those who are released 
from hell. 

“ Compassion towards all creatures, concord, aid to other 

43 people, truth, speech directed towards the welfare of all 
creatures, inculcation of the authority of the Veda, veneratioD 
of gurus devarshis Siddhas and fish is, association with tte 

44 good, hospitality, study, friendship, — let the wise man under- 
stand these and whatever other things constitute the deeds 

45 of truth and righteousness, to he the marks of sinless men 
who have quitted Svarga. 

46 “ This I have declared explicitly to thee, 0 king ! con- 
cerning men, holy and wicked, who eat the fruits of their 
own actions. Come then, we go elsewhere. Thou hast now 
seen everything, for thou hast seen hell. Come then, let 
us go elsewhere.” 

The son spoke. 

47 Thereupon the king prepared to follow him ; and then a 
cry went up from all the men that abode in torment, ‘ Be 

48 gracious, 0 king ! stay but a moment, for the air that clings 

49 to thy body gladdens our mind, and entirely dispels the 
burning and the sufferings and pains from our bodies, 0 
tiger-like man ! Be gracious, 0 king !’ 

50 On hearing this their entreaty, the king asked that seivant 

61 of Yama — “ How do I afford gladness to these men ? Have 

I done such a mighty deed of merit in the world of mortals, 
wherefrom falls this gladdening shower ? Declare me that.” 

Yama’s officer spoke. 

52 “ Inasmuch as thy body was nourished with the food that 
remained, after the pitfis the gods guests and servants wen 

53 satisfied, and since thy mind was attached to them, hence 
the air that clings to thy body brings gladness ; the torment, 0 



THE STORY OP KING VlPAS'-C'lT. 


89 


king ! does not hurt the evil-doers. Whereas thou didst offer 
the horse-sacrifice and other sacrifices according to precept, 
hence from seeing thee Yama’s engines weapons fires and 
crows, which cause intense suffering, such as crushing cutting’ 
burning and so forth, grow mild, 0 king ! when counteracted 
by thy majesty.” 

The king spoke. 

“ Neither in Svarga nor in Brahma-loka do men experience 
such joy, methinks, as arises from conferring bliss on suffeiing 
ci'eatures. If, while I am present, torment does not hurt 
I tlicse men, here then, fair Sir, I will remain firm as a moun- 
' tiiin.” 

Yama’s officer spoke. 

“ Come, 0 king ; we proceed. Enjoy the delights won by 
tliine own merit, casting aside here the torments of evil- 
doers.” 

The king spoke. 

“ For that reason* I will not go as long as these are in sore 
suffering. From my near-presence the denizens of hell grow 
Inippy. Fie on the sickly protection -beggingf life of that man, 
who shews no favour to one distressed, even though ho be a 
resolute foe ! Sacrifices, gifts, austerities do not work for the 
welfare of him, who has no thought for the succour of the 
distressed. Wlioevcr bears a cruel mind towards childi’en, 
the sick and such like, and towards the aged also, I do not 
hold him human; he is truly a Rakshasa. Rut if these men 
have pain originating in hell, whether produced by the heat 
from fire, or produced by overpowering smells, and if they 
have the intense pain arising from hunger and thirst that 
causes faintness, yet the grant of deliverance to them excels, 

I consider, the joy of Svarga. If many sufferers shall obtain 
happiness, while I undergo pain, should I not in truth 
embrace it ? Go thou not therefore long.” 

For tasmdt read a87ndt, (from houco) ? 

I 01 hrandrthinam read saratjtdrthanam (from artha/id), since jtvanam is 


12 



90 


CANTO XV. 


Yama’s officer spoke. 

66 “ Here have both Dhanna and Indra arrived to lead thej 

away. Thou must certainly depart from us : go therefoi^ 
0 king ! ” 1 

Dharma spoke. j 

67 “ Fittingly worshipped by thee, I lead thee to Svarga 
mount this heavenly chariot and linger not ; let us go.” 

The king spoke. 

68 “ Men in thousands, 0 Dharma ! suffer pain here in hell 
and being in affliction they cry to mo to save them ; hence 
depart not.” 

Indra spoke. 

69 “ These evil-doers have come to hell in consequence of th 
own deeds ; thou also, 0 king, must go to Svarga in cons 
quence of thy meritorious deed.” 

The king spoke. 

70 “ If thou dost know, thou, 0 Dharma, or thou, 0 Indra 
S'ac'i’s lord, how great indeed is my authority, then deign' 
to speak aright.” 

Dharma spoke. 

71 “ Just as drops of water in the sea, or as stars in the sh 

72 or as showers of rain, as the sands in the Ganges — just i 
these drops of water and other things are innumerable, 
Maha-raja ! even so thy merit is in truth beyond reckonm 

73 In thy evincing now this compassion here in the hells, t! 
reckoning of that merit of thine has verily amounted to 
hundred thousand. Then go, 0 king ! enjoy then the abo 

74 of the immortals ; let these also consume away in hell t 
sin arising from their own actions ! ” 

The king spoke. 

75 “ How shall men attain their desire in things connec 
with me, if in my presence these people gain no prosper 

76 Hence, whatever good deeds I possess, 0 lord of the thi 
gods ! by means thereof let the sinners who are undergo 
torment be delivered from hell ! ” 


* For arMthah read arhatha ? 



anasiJyX’s gain of a boon. 


91 


Indra spoke. 

“ Thus hast thou, 0 king 1 gained a more exalted station : 
see too these sinners delivered from hell ! 

The son spoke. 

Then fell there a shower of flowers upon that king, and 
Han making him mount the heavenly chariot led him to the 
heaven-world. Both I and the others, who were there, were 
released from the torments ; thereafter we entered the other 
earthly existences, as determined by the results of our own 
actions. 

Thus these hells have been reckoned up, 0 brahman ! And 
for what particular sin to what particular kind of creature a 
man descends, it has all been recounted to thee in detail, 
Rs I saw it of yore, having gained the accurate knowledge that 
springs from previous experience. What else do I tell thee 
ticxt, noble sir ? 


Canto XVI. 

Anasuyd’s gain of a boon. 

The father ash Jada for instruction on yoga or religious . 
devotion — Jada begins a long exposition^ which starts ivith a 
story of Anasuyd — A certain bmhnian was cursed by Mdndavya at 
night that he should die at sunrise, and, his devoted wife restrained 
the sun from rising — All activity ceased, and the gods in alarin 
besought Atri's wife Anasuyd — At her exhortation the wife relents, 
the sun rises, and the brahman dies, but is restored to life by 
Anasuyd — Anasuyd obtains from the gods the boon that Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva should be born her sons, and that she should 
attain yoga. 

The father spoke. 

Thou hast declared to me, 0 son, the established nature of 
mundane existence which should be shunned exceedingly, a 
nature which is immutable like the rope and bucket at a well. 

I have thus then learnt it in its entirety such as it is. Say, 
what must I do in this thus-ordained mundane existence ? 



92 


CANTO XVI. 


The son spoke. 

3 If, 0 father, thou dost believe my word implicitly, thei 
abandoning thy condition as a house-holder become a dis 

4 tinguished hermit. Following that vocation according ti 
precept, forsaking thy fire and possessions, directing thy sou 
towards the Supreme Soul, indifferent in regard to the variou 

6 opposites,* relinquishing thy property, become a mendicani 
eating only every other meal, subdued in soul, unweariec 
grown intent on religious devotion, f withdrawn from contiic 

6 with external things. Thereafter thou shalt attain to tlia 
reli^ous devotion, — which is the cure for connexion m, 
pain, the cause of final emancipation from existence, incon] 
parable, unutterable, devoid of worldly attachments ; throng 
connexion with that devotion thou wilt never again have unio 
with living beings. 


The father spoke. 

7 My son, tell me next of yoga, or religious devotion, tli 
cause of final emancipation from existence ; by which 1 ina 
escape such suffering as this, when I am again born amoii 
/8 living beings. Since I am intent on attachments, and my soi 
docs not by reason of the bonds of mundane existence attai 
to religious devotion, being itself even devoid of religioi 

9 devotion,! speak now of that religious devotion. Spiii 
kle with the water of thy words, which are cool with tl 
water of the knowledge of Brahma, me whose body ar 
mind are disordered with pain through the heat of the sun ' 

10 mundane existence. Re-vivify with the draught of the nccti 
of thy words me, who am bitten by the black serpent of igii 

11 ranee, who am in anguish from its venom, and dead. Hastn 
with the keys of the knowledge of approved goodness, libera 
me, who am galled by the chains of selfishness in the matt 
of son, wife, home and land. 

* Pleasure and pain, &o. 

t Yoga. 

X Or “ devoid of moans there seems to be a pun on tho word yoga. 



anasi^yX’s gain of a boon. 


93 


The son spoke. 

Listen, dear father ! how of yore the wise Dattatreja, when 
duly questioned, expounded the system of religious devotion 
at length to Alarka.* 

The father spoke. 

Whose son was Dattatreya ? Again, how did he discourse 
about religious meditation And who was the distinguished 
Alarka, who enquired concerning religious meditation ? 

The son spoke. 

There was a certain Kau4ika brahman in the town Prati- 
shthana; he by reason of sins committed in other births was 
diseased with leprosy. His wife used to honour him her hus- 
baiul, thus diseased, as a god, by anointing his feet, knead- 
ing his limbs, bathing, clothing, and feeding him, and by 
cleansing the flow of mucus, blood etcetera, and with atten- 
dance in private, and with affectionate conversation. Though 
always exceedingly venerated by that modest lady, he being 
harsh continually menaced her by reason of his excessively 
fiery temper. Nevertheless his wife, bowing hcfm'e him, used 
to esteem him a divinity ;t nevertheless she used to esteem 
him, who was extremely loathful, as superior to all. 

Being also of a constantly roaming disposition, the brahman 
ordered his wife — “ Do thou bring me to her dwellincr. Pro- 
cure for me that courtezan whom I saw living in her house 
iji the high-way, 0 religious one ; she indeed dwells in my 
heart. I saw the maiden at sunrise, and here is night 
come upon us. She does not depart from my heart, ever 
since I saw her. If she, lovely in every limb, with large 
hips and swelling breasts and slender body, does not embrace 
'me, then thou wilt indeed behold me die. Beautiful is love 
among mankind; and she is courted by many; and I am 
unable to go ; it appears perplexing to mo.” 

Then having heard that speech of her husband who was 
sick with love, she his consort, sprung of a high family, very 

* For Anarhdya read Alarkdya, see Canto XXXVI. 

• t For davatam read daieatam. 



94 


CANTO XVI. 


25 virtuous, faithful to her husband, gathered a compact retinm 
and took abundance of money, and bearing her husband o 

26 her shoulder, moved on, slow in her gait, along the hig 
road, in the cloud-covered night, while the sky was reveale 
by the fitful lightning ; for the brdhman lady was desiron 
of doing her husband pleasure. 

27 And on the road, the brahman, while borne on his wife' 
shoulder, through fear of thieves in the darkness pusbei 

28 away Mandavya, who was no thief and who was afflicted witl 
grievous pain, being impaled on a stake. Enraged at thi 

29 brush with a foot, Mandavya addressed him — “Ho, win 
has with his foot puslied me away who am thus exceedinglj 
afflicted, he sinful in soul, base among men, has gotten [ 

30 miserable condition. At sunrise, helpless, he shall be bcrefi 
of life assuredly : at the sight of the sun indeed he shal 

31 perish.” Thereupon his wife hearing that most cruel cum 
exclaimed distressed — “ The sun verily shall not arise !” 

32 Then the sun failed to rise, and there was continual nighl 
for many lengths of day. Thereupon the gods grew afraid 

33 fearing “ How indeed should not all this universe pass ink 
dissolution, when the Vedas are not uttered, and when it ii 
dejirived of oblations with fire and of the Svadha and Svalia! 

34 Without the ordinance of day and night, there is an end ol 
months and seasons : and again from the cessation of thesi 
south and north are not known in the sun’s half yearly comse 

35 And without knowledge of the half yearly course where wouk 
be time, such as the year ? Without the year no other know 

36 ledge of time exists. By reason of the utterance of thai 
devoted wife, the sun rises not: without the sun’s rising 
bathing giving of gifts and the other actions can not indeec 

37 exist ; nor indeed does the fire spread, and sacrifices are seer 
to cease ; nor indeed do we get satisfaction without the homfl 

38 sacrifice. Mortals satisfy us with the appropriate shares oi 
the sacrifices : wo favour mortals with rain for the perfect 

39 ing of their grain and other crops. When plants Iiav« 
ripened, mortals sacrifice to us with sacrifices ; worshipped 

40 their sacrifices &c., we bestow on them their- desires. ^ For 



anasCyX’s gain op a boon. 


95 


we pour rain downwards, and mortals make their rain 
ascend ; for we rain with showers of water, men with showers 
of clarified butter. And evil-minded men, who do not give 
us the periodical sacrifices,* being greedy eat themselves our 
share of the sacrifice. We defile the water, the sun, fire and 
the winds, and the earth for the destruction of those mis- 
chievous sinners. Through partaking of bad water &c., very 
dire portents work towards the death of those doers of evil 
deeds. But to those high-souled men, who after delighting 
us consume the remainder themselves, let us allot the blissful 
worlds. Therefore all this universe f)f a tnith does not exist 
unless these things increase and endure. How indeed may 
the days be liberated ?” — so conversed the gods with one 
another. 

Having heard the speech of these assembled gods who were 
fearful of the destruction of the sacrifices, the god Brahm4 
spoke, “ Majesty is subdued by majesty imleed, and austeri- 
ties also by austerities, 0 ye immortals ! Hearken therefore 
to my advice. Through the might of the faithful wife the 
sun does not rise, and from his not rising loss befalls mortals 
and you. Hence do yo, thivmgh desire that the sun should 
rise, propitiate Atiu’s faithful wife Anasuyd who is rich in 
austerities.” 

The son spoke. 

She, propitiated by them when they resorted to her, said 

Let your wish bo asked for. ” The gods petitioned for day, 
saying “Let it be as before !” 

Anasuya spoke. 

The might of a faithful wife may not be lost in any wise. 
Hence while honouring that good lady, I will liberate the day, 
0 ye gods ! that day and night may again exist, and that 
that good lady's own husband shall not perish.” 

The son spoke. 

Thus having addressed the gods, she the beautiful went to 


* Nitya-naimittiki ; see Canto XXX. 



CANTO XVI. 


her temple, and being asked by that lady regarding the welfar 
and righteousness of her husband, spoke. 

Anasdyd spoke. 

54 “Perchance thou rejoicest, 0 blessed lady, at the sight o 
thy husband’s countenance ! Perchance too thou esteemest tli 

55 husband far above all the gods ! Through obedience indew 
to my husband I have gained a great reward ; through tli 
obtainment of the results of every wish obstacles have beei 

56 removed. Five debts a man must ever discharge, 0 virtuou: 
lady. Thus, he must amass wealth according to the dutie 

57 of his own caste : and ho must next apply the wealth gainec 
to a fitting object according to the precepts : he should alwa}i 
live full of compassion, observing truth, candour, austentipi 

58 and liberality : and he must daily perform the ceremoiiici 
prescribed by the S'astras and free from anger and enmitj 

59 with faith preceding, according to his ability. A man witfc 
great pain gradually obtains the worlds specially allotted 1( 
his own caste, such as that of the Praja-patis and other worlds 

60 0 virtuous lady. So women by obedience to their husband' 
obtain half of the entire merit painfully earned by tboii 

61 husbands. There is no separate sacrifice for women, noi 
^raddlia, nor fasting : for by obedience to their husbaiub 

62 indeed they reach these desired worlds. Therefore, 0 vii' 
tuous and exalted lady, let thy mind ever be turned toward 
obedience to thy husband, since a husband is a wife's suprenr 

63 bliss. Whatever worship the husband may offer by rigb 
ceremonies to the gods, and whatever to the pitris and giicsb 
even one half of that does the wife, whose mind is centred oi 
him alone, enjoy by very obedience to her husband.” 

The son spoke. 

64 Having heard that her speech, the lady saluted Atri ’ 
wife Anasuya respectfully in return, and repljypd thus to her- 

65 “ Happy am T, favoured am I, and regarded by the gods an 
I, since thou, 0 lady blessed by nature, again increasest ni; 

66 faith. I know this — none amojrg women has a conditioi 
equal with her husband, and love for him tends to her beiieli' 



anasuya'^* oatv of a boon. 


97 


in thifl worid Attd the next; thwjngh her htisbftnd's favour 
both here and after death, 0 illustrious lady^ a woman gains 
happiness; for a husband is a woman’s deity. Do thou, 
being such a womm^ 0 exalted lady^ tell me yrho have reached 
thy temple, what I, a noble'** womy.n^ must do, or what my 
noble husband must do, 0 beauteous one !” 

Anaaliyd spoke. 

“Indra and these gods in distress have approached me; 
they are searching for the day and night, the virtuous acts 
prescribed for which have been discarded in consequence of 
thy speech. They beg for the natural uninterrupted con- 
tinuance of day and night : T am come for that object, and 
do thou listen to this my speech. Through the absence of 
day there is the absence of all sacrificial ceremonies ; through 
the absence of these the gods do not get their nourishment, 
0 ascetic lady. Through the destruction of day also all 
work is cut short; from the destruction thereof the world 
will perish through drought. Therefore if thou desirest to 
deliver this world from calamity, bo gracious, 0 virtuous 
lady, to the worlds ; let the sun run his course as before.” 

The brdhman lady spoke. 

“ Mandavya exceedingly furious, 0 illustrious lady, has 
cursed my lord, saying ‘at sunrise thou shalt meet thy 
doom !’ 

AnasdyA spoke. 

“ If, however, it pleases thee, 0 lady, then at thy word I 
will make thee even a new husband, in form the same as before. 
For I must in every way propitiate the majesty of faithful 
wives, 0 high-born lady — thus I do thee honour.” 

The son spoke. 

On her saying ‘be it so !’ the ascetic lady Anastiy^ then 
summoned the sun, raising up the arghya oblation, at mid- 
night on the tenth night. Then the adorable sun, in ap- 
pearance ruddy as the full-blown lotus flower, with wide 
disc, rose aloft above the mighty mountain. Forthwith indeed 
* For drydyd road dryayd f 


13 



98 


CANTO xvr. 


her husband was bereft of life and fell on the ground ; ^ 
she caught him as he felL 

Anastiyd spoke. 

80 “Be not dejected, 0 lady; behold my power. Tlioj 
hast succeeded through thy obedience to thy husbai 

81 What further need hast thou of austerities ? Since I haJ 
nowhere seen another man equal to thy husband, in forJ 
in disposition, in intellect, with sweetness of speech aJ 

82 other adornments, in very truth let this brdhman, frei^ 
from sickness, young again, obtain life in company with lii 

83 wife for a hundred autumns. Since I see no other deity tli 
equal of thy husband, in very truth let this brdhman regaii 

84 his life in sound health. Since thy* effort is constantlj 
directed to propitiate thy husband by deed mind and wori 
let this dvija then come to life.” 

The son spoke. 

85 Then the brdhman arose, free from illness, young again 
with his own lustre illuminating the dwelling, as it were ai 

86 ever-youthful god. Then there fell a shower of flowers, ac 
companied with the strains of heavenly instruments an 
other musical instruments. And the gods were delighted an 
said to Anasuya. 

The gods spoke. 

87 “ Choose a boon, 0 blessed lady. Inasmuch as thou ha 
accomplished a great matter for the gods, therefore the goi 
icill gi'ant thee a boon, 0 ascetic lady'^ 

Anasuya spoke. 

88 “If ye gods headed by Brahma, being favourable, will gra 

89 me a boon, and if ye deem me worthy of a boon, then I 
Brahma, Vishnu, and S^iva become sons to me, and leti 
in company with my husband attain religious devotion, 
the end that I may be delivered from affliction.” 

90 “ Be it so,” exclaimed Brahma, Vishnu, S^iva and the oth 
gods to her; and they departed, duly honouring the ascei 
lady. 


* For mma read tava f 



THE BIRTH OF DATTiTREYA. 


99 


Canto XVIL 
The Birth of Dattdtreya* 

The Prajd-pati Atri begot three sons by his wife Anasuyd^ 
lamely^ Somaj Dattdtreya^ and Durvdsasy who were incarnations 
/ portions of Brahmd^ Vishnu and Siva respectively — Their 
\^ces are described — Dattatreya, assembling young Munis about 
limself tested their loyalty ^ by living immersed in a lake and 
y revelling in sensual pleasures. 

The son spoke. 

Then after many days’ time the adorable Atri, the second 
on of Brahmd, looked upon his wife Anasuyd. Her, bathed 
iter menstruation, very lovely in body, seductive and perfect 
n form, free from blame, the love-possessed Muni enjoyed 
fientally. 

But while he contemplated her, a powerful wind through 
and above brought the change that was produced in her. 
The ten regions of the sky seized the white-lustred form of 
Brahma, as it foil all around, in the form of Soma, charac- 
terized by passion. That mental Soma was begotten in her 
as the son of the prajd-pati Atri, the life and possessor of 
every excellence. Magnanimous Vishnu being pleased begot 
of her Dattdtreya, the brdhman, in whom goodness predomi- 
nated, by production from his own body. Dattatreya was he 
called j he sucked Anasuyd’s breast : he was Vishnu indeed 
incarnate j he was Atri’s second son. He issued from his 
mother’s womb seven days afterwards, being enraged on 
seeing that the haughty king of_the Haihayas was near and 
was offending Atri, being angry he at once desired to bum 
up the Haihaya. Filled with indignation at the long pains 
and toil of his residence in the womb, a portion of S^iva 
was born as Durvasas, in whom darkness predominated. 
Thus three sons were born of her, being portions of Brahmdi 
S^iva and Vishnu. 

Brahmd became Soma, Vishnu was born as Dattdtreya, 
S^iva was born as Durvdsas, through the boon granted by the 
gods. The prajd-pati Soma, ever causing creepers and medi- 



100 


CANTO mh 


cinal plants and mankind to grow with his cool rays, abidq 

13 in Svarga. Dattdtre^a protects offspring from destructioj 
by the malignant Daityas : and Vishnu’s portion must alaolie 

14 known as the benefactor of the docile. Durv^,8as, the ador. 
able birthless god, destroys the scorner ; assuming a formidablj 

15 body, he is haughty in look mind and speech. The adorabli 
pra]4-pati, the son of Atri again created the Soma plant, i 
Dattatreya also, being Vishnu, enjoyed objects of sense wliili 

16 engaged in profound meditation. Durvdsas, deeming lij, 
father and mother to be the chief est object of devotion 
assuming the form known as * frantic,’ roamed about the earth, 

17 Surrounded by the sons of Munis, the lordly yogi Dattdtreji 
also, desirous of obtaining exemption from all attachments, 

18 long immersed himself in a lake. Nevertheless those youths, 
resorting to the bank of the lake, did not forsake him, who’ 

19 was magnanimous and exceedingly benign. When afters 
hundred heavenly years were ended, all those youthful Munij, 
through affection for him, still forsook not the bank of the 

20 lake, the Muni, taking his noble wife clothed in heaveulj 
raiment, beautiful and plump in form, arose from the water 

21 thinking, “ If these sons of Munis shall forsake me becaust 
of the presence of a woman, then I will remain fz'ee from al 

22 attachments.” When nevertheless the sons of the Munis di 
not forsake him, he next drank intoxicating liquors in coi 

23 pany with his wife. Thereupon they did not forsake hii 
though ho was engi'ossed in drinking spirituous liquor 
company with his wife, and though he was rendered impu 
by addiction to singing, musical instruments and such lil 

24 and also by intercourse with his wife ; deeming that the big 
soulod Muni when with her was detached from religious rit( 
The lord of yogis, although drinking spirituous liquor, incurr 
no fault. Dwelling like hlLatarlivan within, the ahodos ^ 

c'a^dalas, drinking strong drink he, skilled in yoga, the Ic 

* The text appears to be corrupt. Another reading has been snggestec 
Baba Hari Mohan VldjAbhushan, the pandit of tha Bengal Asiatic Soci 
from a MS., atrtik piUrai for pnnai ; tfaia ifl profernhlu and I have adc 
ed it. 



gaboa’s $Pe£CH. 101 

of yogia, attended by his wife, performed austerities, being 
meditated on by yogis who longed for deliverance from 
mundane existence. 


Canto XVIII. 

Qa/rga's speech, 

Arjmia the son of Krita-virya^ on succeeding to his 'kingdom,^ 
resolves to rule worthily — His minister Garga advises him to pro- 
pitiate the Muni Dattdtreya — And narrates how^ when the Daityas 
and Bmiavas had conquered the gods^ the gods hy Vfihaspati^s 
counsel propitiated Batidtreya^ who^ being an incarnation of 
Vishnu^ was enjoying himself with Lakshmi ; and how^ when 
the demons penetrated to Dattdtreya' $ hermitage and seized 
Lakshmi, they were destroyed hy Dattdtreya, 

The son spoke. 

Once upon a time Arjuna, the son of Kpta-virya, when 
Kflta-virya had departed to heaven, being invited by the 
ministers and family priest and by the citizens to be in- 
augui’ated as king, spoke thus — 

“ It is not I will wield regal sway, which surpasses hell, 0 
ministers, if I leave that foolishly unaccomplished, for the sake 
of which taxes are levied. Merchants, giving the twelfth part 
of their wares to the king, travel on the road protected from 
robbers by the watchmen. And the herdsmen and husbandmen 
giving the sixth part of the ghee, buttermilk and other pro* 
duce, enjoy the rest. If the merchants gave a larger poi’tion 
than that out of all their wares and other property^ then 
that would tend to the destruction of the sacrifices and pious 
works of the extortionate king who took it. If people who 
Alow that and other livelihoods are protected hy others, 
leW is surely the lot of a king who takes the sixth part as his 
revenue. This has been decreed hy men of old as the perma- 
nent income of a king. When a king fails to afford protection 
from thieves, that is the same as theft j and it would be sin in 
5 king. Therefore if, by performing austerities, he has gained 



102 CANTO XVIII. 

9 the coveted position of a yogi, he is the only king who possesses 
power to protect the earth. Therefore I indeed will he a 
weapon-bearer in the earth, worthy of honour, endowed with 
prosperity ; I will not make myself a participator in sin.*’ 

The son spoke. 

10 Unders^nding that his resolve, standing among the minis- 
ters spoke the leading Muni, G-arga by name, mighty in 
intellect, advanced in age. 

11 “If thus thou desirest to act, rightly to govern the king, 
dom, then hearken to my speech and act, 0 royal scion! 

12 ■ Propitiate, 0 king, Dattteeya, the illustrious, who made 

his abode once in a bucket, who protects the three worlds, 

13 who is busied in religious devotion, who is illustrious, who 
looks impartially everywhere, who is a portion of Vishnu, the 

14 upholder of the world, incarnate on earth. By propitiating 
him the thousand-eyed Indra gained his abode, which had been 
seized by the evil-minded Daityas, and slew the sons of Diti.” 

Arjuna spoke. 

15 “ How did the gods propitiate majestic Dattatreya ? And 
how did Indra regain his godhead, of which he had been 
deprived by the Daityas ?” 

Garga spoke. 

16 “ There was a very fierce contest between the gods and 

s Danavas. The lord of the Daityas was Jambha, and the leadej 

17 of the gods was S'ac'i’s spouse. And while they fought s 
heavenly year elapsed. Then the gods were worsted, tin 

18 Daityas were victorious. The gods led by Vipra-c'itti were 
vanquished by the Ddnavas : they strove to flee, being di» 

19 pirited at the victory of their enemies. Desirous df compass* 
ing the slaughter of the army of Daityas, accompanied by the 
Balikhilyas* and ^ishis, they approached Vrihaspati and 

20 took counsel. Vfihaspati said, ‘Deign to gratify with youi 
faith Dattdtreya, Atri’s high-souled son, the ascetic, who h 

21 occupied in improper practices. He the boon-giver will grant 

* Hoad ‘ Balu-khilyas ’ ? These are divine personages of the aiae the 

thumb. 



gabga’s speech. 103 

yon a boon for the destruction of the Daityas ; then, 0 gods, 
shall yo and your friends slay the Daityas and Danavas.’ 

“ Thus exhorted the gods then went to Dattitreya’s hermi- 
tage, and they beheld the high-souled Muni, attended by 
Lakshmi, hymned by Gandharvas, and engrossed in quaffing 
spirituous liquor. Approaching they expressed in words their 
salutations to him, which were the means of accomplishing 
their objects. And the heaven-dwellers lauded him ; they 
offered him food, viands, garlands and other p-eseyits ; when 
ho stood, they stood near ; when he moved, they moved ; when 
he reposed on his seat, they worshipped him with heads 
down-bent. Dattdtreya addressed the prostrate gods, ‘ What 
desire yo of me, that ye do me this obeisance ?’ 

“ The gods spoke. 

‘ The Danavas, headed by Jambha, have attacked and seized 
upon the earth the atmosphere and the third world, 0 tiger- 
like Muni, and our shares of the sacrifices entirely. Employ 
thou thy wit to their destruction and our deliverance, 0 sin- 
less ono ! Through thy favour do we desire to regain the 
three worlds which they now possess.’ 

“ Dattdtreya spoke. 

‘ I am drinking strong drink, I have remnants of food in my 
mouth, nor have I subdued my senses. How is it, 0 gods, ye 
seek for victory over your enemies even from mo ? ’ 

“ The gods spoke. 

‘ Thou art sinless, 0 lord of the world ; no stain hast thou, 
into whoso heart, purified by the ablution of learning, has 
entered the light of knowledge.’ 

“ Dattdtreya spoke. 

‘ True is this, 0 gods ! all learning have I, who am impar- 
tial in view : but by reason of association with this woman I 
am now impure after eating. For commerce with women 
when continually pursued tends to depravity.* 

•“ Thus addressed, the gods then spoke again. 



104 


CANTO XTIII. 


“ The gods spoke. 

32 ‘ This woman, 0 sinless brdhman ! is the mother of the 
world ; she is not depraved, even like the sun’s halo of rays, 
which touches the dvija and the c'andila alike.* 

Garga spoke. 

33 “ Thus accosted by the gods, Dattatreya then with a smile 
spoke thus to all the thirty gods If this be your opinion, 

34 then summon all the Asuras to battle, 0 most virtuous gods 

35 and bring them here before my view— delay ye not— in order 
that the 'glory of their strength may be consumed by the fire 
of my glance, and that they may all perish from my sight.’ 

36 “ The valiant Daityas, summoned to battle by the gods in 
compliance with that his advice, advanced with fury against 

37 the troops of the gods. The gods being slaughtered by tht 
Daityas were quickly demoralised by fear ; they fled in t 

38 body, seeking protection^ -to Dattatreya’s hermitage. Evei 
there the Daityas penetrated, driving forward the heaven 
dwellers, and saw the high»souled mighty Dattatreya ; am 

39 seated at his left side his wife, Lakshmi, loved by all th 
worlds, beauteous, her shape most graceful, her countenanc 

40 like the moon, her eyes lustrous as the blue waterdily,* h( 
hips largo and breasts full, uttering melodious speech, adorne 

41 with every womanly virtue. Seeing her before them, tl 
Daityas, seized with longing, could not bear the intense lo' 

42 with fortitude ; and pined in mind to carry her off. Desistii 
from the gods, but desirous of seizing the lady, they we 
shattered in vigour, being bewitched by that sin. Then coi 

43 pact together they spoke— ‘ If only this jewel of womankn 
in the three worlds might be our prize, successful then shon 

44 we all this is our engrossing thought. We are resolvi 
therefore, let us all, foes of the gods, raise her up, place I' 
in the palki, and bear her to our abode. 

45 “ Thereupon possessed with longing and thus mutually e 
horted, afflicted by love, the united Daityas and Danav 

46 raised up his virtuous wife, mounted her in the palki, a 

* Nilotpala, tho blue waterdily, see note t pajre 29. 



GARGa’s SPE75CH. 


105 


placing the palki on their heads set off for their own homes. 
7 Thereon Dattatreya smiling spoke thus to the gods — ‘ Bravo 1 
ye prosper ! Here is Lakshmi borne on the heads of the 
Daityas. She has passed beyond the seven stations, she will 
reach another, a new one.’ 

“ The gods spoke. 

] ‘ Say, 0 lord of the world, in what stations has she her 

abode ; and what result of a man’s does she bestow or destroy ?’ 

“ Dattatreya spoke. 

I ‘ When stationed on the foot of men, Lakshmi bestows a 
habitation ; and when stationed on the thigh, clothing and 
I manifold wealth ; and when taking her position in the 
pudenda, a wife ; when resting in the bosom, she grants 
offsi)ring; when stationed in the lieait, she fulfils the thoughts 
of men. Lakshmi, is the best fortune of fortunate men. 
When resting on the neck, ^e adorns the neck with loved 
ivlatives and wives, and close contact with those who are 
absent. When abiding in the countenance, the sea-born god- 
dess bestows beauty fashioned according to her word, real 
eominand also, and poetic fire. When mounted on the head, 
she forsakes the man and thence resorts to another abode. And 
here, nioiinted on their head, she will now de.sert those Dai- 
tyas. Therefore seize your arms and slay these foes of the 
gods ; nor fear them greatly ; I have rendered them impotent ; 
and through touching another’s wife their merit is consumed, 
their might is broken. 

Garga spoke. 

“ Thereupon those enemies of the gods, being slain by divers 
weapons and their heads being assailed by Lakshmi, peidshod — - 
thus have we heard. And Lakshmi, flying up, reached the 
I great Muni Dattatreya, being hymned by all the gods who 
* were filled with joy at the slaughter of the Daityas. There- 
i upon the gods, prostrating themselves before the wise Datta- 
tieya, gained as before the uppermost heaven, being freed from 
' afiliction. Likewise do thou also, 0 king ! if thou wishest to 
obtain matchless sovereignty according to thy desire, straight- 
'fay propitiate him.” 



CANTO XIX. 


m 


Canto XIX. 

The Episode of Dattdtreya. 

King Arjuna^ taking Oarga^a advice, propitiates Dattdtreya, who 
grants him the boon that he should reign righteously, prosperously and 
gloriously — Arjuna is then installed in his kingdom, and his reign w 
described — The blessedness of worshipping Vishnu, who is Dattdtreyu, 
expounded — The story of Alarka is then begun. 

The son spoke. 

1 Having heard the Rishi speak thus, king Arjtma, Knta- 
virya’s son, proceeded to Dattatreya’s hermitage and wor- 
2' shipped him with faith ; by kneading his feet and other 
services, and by offering honey and other delicacies, and by bring- 
ing garlands, sandal, and other perfumes, water, fruit (tc. ; 
S' also with preparations of rice, and by removing the Rishi’s 
fragments of food. Pleased therewith the Muni addressed the 
4 king in the very same way, as he had formerly addressed the 
gods. 

“ Ever indeed am I an object of reproach for ray enjoy* 
ment of spirituous liquor and other bodily pleasures, and an 
object of reproach for this enjoyment in that I have mj 
6 wife here by my side.* Deign thou not thus to obstruct me 
who am unable to benefit thee ; 0 conciliate one who is able." 

6 Thus the Muni addressed him ; and Arjuna Kdrtavirya, 
calling that speech of Garga’s, replied then, bowing before him, 

Arjuna spoke. 

7 “ Why dost thou beguile mo, my lord, resorting to thy 
illusory devices. Sinless thou art, and this brahman lady is 
the path of all existence.” 

8 Thus invoked, the benign brahman answered him, the illus* 
trious Kartavirya, the subduer of the earth. 

9 “ Choose thou a boon ; since thou hast declared my secret, 
I have felt thereby intense gratification in thee to-day, 

10 king. And the men who shall worship me with perfumes, 
garlands and such like, with offerings also of meat and strod 


The text appears obscure. 



ARJUNA AND DATtXtRKYA. 


107 


drink, andjwith sweetmeats accompanied with clarified butter, 
—and who shall worship me and Lakehmi with songs also and 
tlie worship of brahmans, and with lute, flute, conchs and other 
gladsome musical instruments y — to them I will give supreme 
gratification, children, wives, wealth and other blessings^ and I 
will ward off the violent blows of scorners. Do thou then 
choose the choice boon that thy mind desires : my face is very 
gracious to thee through thy declaration of my secret name.” 

Kartavirya spoke. • 

“ If my lord thou art gracious, then grant me supreme pros- 
perity, wherel)y I may protect my people and may not incur 
iniquity. I desire to have knowledge in the customs of others, 
irresistibility in fight, and the dexterity of a thousand arms. 
May my paths be unimpeded on hill, in air, in water, and on 
laud, and in all the hells ! And may my death qpme from a 
superior man ! And let me have moreover a guide to the 
right path when I stray from the path : and may my guests’*^ 
be worthy of praise in the imperishable bestowal of wealth ! 
And let there be freedom from impoverishment in my country 
with repeated recollection of me ! May my faith in thee be 
ever in truth unwavering !” 

Dattatreya spoke. 

“ Thou shalt receive all those boons in the matters that thou 
hast specified; and through my favour thou shalt become a 
universal monarch.” 

Jada spoke. 

Thereon Arjuna prostrated himself before Dattatreya. And 
having convened his subjects^ he duly received his inaugura- 
tion. Then he the Haihaya, established in his kingdom, 
having received supreme prosperity from Dattatreya, owning 
exceeding power, made proclamation ; — ‘ Henceforth whoever 
besides me shall lay hold of a weapon, I shall put him to death 
as a robber or as one bent on injuring others.’ After this 
order had been issued, there was no man that bore arms in 


* For 'tithayah read tithaifah, days P 



108 


CANTO XX. 


24 that country, except that valiant tiger- warrior. He it waa 
who was the guardian of the villages, and he the guar, 
dian of the cattle. He it was who was the guardian of the 

25 fields and the protector of the dvijas. He also was the 
guardian of ascetics, and the guardian of caravans ; the guar, 
dian of those who were sinking amid the fears of robbers, 

26 rogues, fire, arms and so forth, as in the sea, and of those who 
were involved in other calamities ; he was the destroyer of 
hostile warriors. He it was who was ever remembered as 

^7 the upholder of mankind. And there was exemption from im- 
poverishment, while he ruled as king. He offered many 

28 sacrifices, complete with gifts and foes. He also practised 
austerities. He performed exploits in battles. 

Having seen his prosperity and exceeding honour, the Mani 
Angiras spoke. 

29 “Assuredly kings will not follow in Kartavirya’s steps, 
either with sacrifices, alms-giving, or austerities, or with higli 
exploits in battle.” 

30 On the very day when the king received prosperity fron: 

31 Dattatreya, ho performed sacrifice to Dattatreya. And then 
all his subjects having seen the king’s supreme prosperity 
that day offered up sacrifices with devout attention. 

32 Such is this magnanimity of the wise Dattatreya, wh 
is Vishnu, the guru of all things movable and immov 

. 33 able, endless, higli-souled. In the Puranas are narrated th; 
manifestations of the bearer of the bow S^arnga, who is endless 

34 inscmtable, the bearer of the conch discus and club. What 
ever man ponders on his highest form, happy is he, and b 

35 may soon pass over mundane existence. ‘ Ho ! I am ever ii 

truth easy of reach by faith even to V aishnavas, how is il 

that a man should not have recourse to him, whose are thesi 

36 very words ? For the destruction of unrighteousness, and fo) 
the practice of righteousness, the god, who is without begmninj 
and without end, preserves the stability of nature. 

37 Moreover I tell thee of Alarka* also, the famous biitl 


* Read Alarkam for Anarkam. 



THE STORY OF KUVALAtX^VA, 


109 


And thus has been related the union between the high-souled 
Rajarshi Alarka, who was faithful to his father, and Dattd- 
treya. 


Canto XX. 

The Story of Kuvalaydha. 

Kinij S' aim f if* s son j^ita-dhvaja receives into intimate friendship two 
iga princes in the guise of hrdhmans — They live with him by day^ 
d spend the nights in Easdtala — They extol him to their father, and 
ate his story as fohows — Rita-dhvaja sets out to succour the brahman 
ilavn against a Baitya Pdtdla-ketu, with the aid of a wondrous horse 
Died Kuvalaya. 

Jada spoke. 

Tliere was formerly a valorous king named S'atru-jit, in 
whoso sacrifices Indra was pleased by receiving the soma 
juic’c. His son was a valiant destroyer of his foes ; the peer 
of Yrihaspati, Indra and the Asvins in intellect, prowess and 
honiiiy. The king’s son was continually surrounded by young 
princes, who were his equals in age. intellect, virtue, prowess 
and behaviour. He was sometimes resolved on investigating 
the whole S'astra literature ; at other times engrossed* with 
poetry, dialogue, singing and the drama. Moreover he enjoyed 
hinisedf both with gambling pastimes, and in the discipline of 
all kinds of w^eapons : he was intent on the study of elephants, 
horses, and chariots suitable for war.f The king’s son en- 
joyed himself in company with the young princes, being 
absorbed in pleasure by day and night alike. But while they 
sported there, numbers of young brahmans, young princes 
and young vaisyas of the same age came to enjoy themselves 
affectionately. 

Now after a time two young Nagas, the sons of A4vatara,J: 
For 'Samhhavaih read -sambhavah? 

The text appears corrupt ; for yogydni yuddha- read yuddha-niyogya^ t 
A Naga priuce. 



no 


CANTO XX. 


9 visited the surface of the earth from the N4ga*world. Bis 
guised in form as brAhmans, youthful, handsome, those twc 
in company with the young princes and the other dvijai 

10 remained there linked in friendship, occupied with varioQ 
amusements. And all those young princes and the younj 

11 brahmans and vaisyas, and those two young Naga prince 
engaged in bathing, kneading the limbs &c., adorned them 
selves with garments and perfumes, and occupied themselve 

12 with the business of kings.* As day after day went by, tin 
two young Nagas enjoyed themselves, being bound by affectioi 

13 for the king’s son. And the king’s son received the higlies 
pleasure from those two, by various amusements, and by jesti 

14 conversation, &c. Apart from those two he neither ate, no 
bathed, nor di’ank sweet drunks ; he did not disport himsell 
nor take up his weapons to improve his accomplishment 

15 And those two, spending the night in Ra8atala,t mainly oc 
cupied in sighing in the absence of that high-souled prm 
visited him day after day. 

16 “With whom do ye both, my sons, find supreme afPectio 
in the mortal-world ?” thus inquired their father of but 

17 those young Nagas. “ Whilst T have seen you both many daj 
here in Patala, I ever behold you both with kindly couiiti 
nances by day and night.” 

Jada spoke. 

" 18 Thus questioned by their father himself, the two illustn 
ous sons of the Naga king falling prostrate, with hands reve 
rently joined, replied. 

The sons spoke. 

19 “ It is the son of S'atru-jit, dear father, famed by name a 
Rita-dhvaja, shapely, upright in conduct, a hero, proud, kia 

20 of speech, no sneaking tale-bearer, J eloquent, learned 
friendly, a mine of excellencies, an honourer of the honoiii 

21 worthy, intelligent, modest, adorned with courtesy. Ourio^^^ 

* The text seoma incorrect. For -samyuktdmi read •sam^uktdi? 

t The lower world. 

J Fer andprishta-kntho r< ad andprishfha-katho. 



THE STORY OF KUVALAyX^VA. 


HI 


being ravished by attendance on him, affection for him and 
pleasure with him, finds no delight in the Ndga-world or the 
air- world.** By sepairation from him chill Patala does not 
ittul to warm ns, dear fathex’ ; througli union with him the sun 
by day tends to gladden us.” 

The father spoke. 

“ He is the happy son of a holy father^ whose excellencies 
such accomplished persons as ye are thus celebrate even in his 
absence. There are evil-dispositioned men learned in the 
S^astras ; there are good-dispositioned men who are fools : 
but I esteem him, my sons, the happier who equally possesses 
knowledge of S^astraa and a good disposition. A father has- 
indeed a son in that son^ whose friends always declare his 
friendly qualities, and whose enemies hfs valour, among the- 
good. Perchance ye have preferred a request to him as a 
benefactor : he has done something to satisfy your mind, my 
children. Happy is he ! The life of each high-born one has 
been well lived, when petitioners to him turn not away, and the 
petition of his friends is not powerless. In my house what- 
ever gold and other rnetals^ jewels, animals for riding, and seats 
there are, and whatever else imparts delight ; that should be 
given him without hesitation. Fie on the life of that man, 
who, while failing to make a return to beneficent friends, 
believes that he really lives ! The wise man who, cloud-like, 
showers benefits on his circle of fiionds and injury on his 
foes, — men wish him prosperity.” 

The sons spoke. 

“ What might any one do for that successful man, whose 
petitioners are all always honoui’ed in his house with the grant 
o/all their desires. The jewels that are in his house, whence 
can we have them in Patala? And whence his animals for 
riding, his seats, and carriages, ornan^onts and clothing ? The 
knowledge that he has, is found nowhere else. Even for the 
wise he is, dear father, the ablest remover of all doubts. One 
thing he has done, and that in our opinion was impossible of 


* For hhuvo loJce read hhuvarloke f 



112 


CANTO XX. 


accomplishment, except by Brahma, Vishnu,* S'iva, and tli 
other lords. ”t 

The father spoke. 

35 “ Nevertheless I wish to hear what was his highest deeij 
whether it be impossible or possible of accomplishment. J, 

36 anything impossible to the wise ? Men who have determi 
nation attain to the position of the gods, lordship over tli( 
immortals, and the position of being worshipped by them, oi 

37 any other coveted arduous thing. There is nothing unkno^\Ti 
or inacQessible, or unobtainable, either in heaven or here 
to strenuous men who have brought their mind, organ* 

38 and soul under control. An ant by walking travels thousand! 
of yojanas ; even Garuda, if he does not move, does not mov( 

39 a single foot. Where is the surface of the earth, and when 
is the site of the polar star ? Yet Dhruva the son of kinj 

40 Uttana-pada, a denizen of the earth, reached it. Relate thei 
how the good young prince did his feat, that ye may dischargi 
your indebtednees, my sons !” 

The sons spoke. 

41 “ The high-souled prince has told us this feat he did before 
dear father; that he spent his youth, being noted for his gooi 
conduct. 

42 “ But formerly, dear father, a certain brahman, the wisf 
Galava, bringing a magnificent steed, approached S'atrii-jit; 

43 and replied to the king — ‘ A certain vile Daitya, an ovil-docr, 
0 king, springing up, is destroying my hermitage witliout 

44 cause day and night, assuming the several forms of a lion, an 
elephant, and forest-roving beasts, and of other small-bodieil 

45 • animals. When I am absorbed in profound meditation ani 

deep contemplation, and intent on vows of silence, he raisei 

46 obstacles so that my mind wavers. Thou art able instantlj 
to buim him with the fire of thy anger, but not we. 
desire that austerities arduously acquired should be squan- 


'* (xovinda. I 

t The text soema incorrect. For tasydsti kartacyam read tasya 
kdryam P And for thardd read Uvardn f 



ktjvalatX^va guards the brahman gXlava. 113 

dored, 0 king ? But one day 0 king, having perceived the 
demon, I heaved a sigh, being distressed by him, and exced- 
ingly depressed in mind. Thereupon this horse fell forth- 
with from the sky itself, and a voice from no corporeal being 
exclaimed hearken to it, 0 lord of men ! — “ Unwearied the 
noble steed can traverse the whole circle of the earth with 
the sun. Ho has been produced for thee. Nor is his 
course stayed in Patdla, in the sky or in water ; nor does he 
succumb when moving in every direction, or even among the 
mountains. Since he will traverse the whole circle of the 
caitli unwearied, he will become famed in the world under the 
name Kuvalaya. And the base sinful Ddnava, who day and 
night torments thee, him shall slay, 0 brahman, the king named 
S'atru-jit mounted on this horse ; and his son Rita-dhvaja get- 
ting this jewel of a steed shall attain to fame by means of him.” 
I now have met with |thee : do thou, 0 king, ward off that 
obstructor of my austerities, for a king is interested therein. 
Tlicreforc I have told thee, 0 king, of this gem of a horse : do 
thou command thy son, so tliat nghteousness may not perish.’ 

“ At liis word the king, righteous in soul, mounting his son 
Rita-dhvaja, who had performed a solemn ceremony, on that 
gem of a horse, sent him away then with Galava. And the 
Muni, taking him, departed to his own hermitage-home.” 

Canto XXI. 

Kuvalaya^va's marriage with Maddlasd. 

Rita-dhvaja^ called also Kuvalaydsva, wounds and pursues the 
'dija PdteUa-ketu. — In the pursuit he falls through a chasm into 
tala and reaches the city Purandara-pura — There he meets Madd- 
a, {daughter of the Ga7idharva king Visvdvasuj) whom Pdtdla-ketu 
I carried off— He marries her tvith the help of her companion 

'adala, ivho then admonishes them on the blessings of marriage 

hills the Daityas who oppose him, arid brings her home to his father, 

0 praises and blesses him. 

The father spoke. 

“ Relate my sons what the king’s son did after he departed 
in company with Galava ; your story is a surprising one.” 

15 



114 


CANTO XXI. 


The sons spoke. 

2 “ The king’s son, residing in G-alava’s pleasant hermitage 
subdued every obstacle to the reciters of the Veda. 

3 “ The base Danava, infected with frenzy and arrogance, did 
not know the prince Kuvalaya^va who was dwelling in Gala. 

4 va’s hermitage. Then assuming the form of a hog, he ap. 
proached to outrage the brahman Gdlava, who was busied in 

6 the evening service. On an out-cry by the Muni’s disciples, 
the king’s son hastily mounting the horse pursued the boar, 

6 shooting arrows at him ; and drawing his mighty bow, that 
was decorated with pretty designs, he struck the hoar -fith an 

7 arrow shaped like the half -moon. Wounded by the iron 
arrow, the wild beast, intent on its own speedy escape, sot off 

8 for the large forest dense with mountain trees. The horse 
followed him impetuously, swift as thought, being urged on 
by the king’s son who was obeying his father’s command. 

9 After traversing thousands of yojanas with speed the quick- 

10 paced boar fell into an open chasm in the earth. Immediately 
after him, the king’s son also, on his horse, fell into the great 

11 chasm, which was enveloped in crass darkness. Then thej 
beast was lost to the sight of the king’s son therein j and h 
saw Patdla clearly there, but not that animal. 

12 “ Next he saw the city called Purandara-pura filled wit! 
hundreds of golden palaces, embellished with ramparts 

13 Entering it, he beheld no man there in the city, and ash 
wandered about he next saw there a woman hastening along 

14 He questioned her, the slender-limbed, * Why or on whoB( 
account are you proceeding ? ’ The noble lady replied not i 

15 word and ascended into the palace. And the king’s soi 
fastening up his horse on one side followed her indeed, being 
wide-eyed with amazement hut fearless. 

16 “ Then he saw reclining on a very spacious couch, all madf 

17 of gold, a solitary maiden, full of love, as it were Rati hei 
face like the clear moon, her eye-brows beautiful, large-hippei^ 
and full-breasted, scarlet-lipped,* slender-bodied, her eye* 

♦ Vimba-lipped. The Vimba, Cephalandra indica {Momordica 



kuvalayX^va meets with madXlasX. 


116 


J like the blue water-lily, her nails red- tipped, black-complexion- 
ed, Boit-skinnedf her hands and feet copper-coloured, her 
thighs round and tapering, her teeth beautiful, her locks 
dark-blue tine and strong. 

) “ On seeing her, lovely in every limb, as it were a creeper on 

the body of the god of Love, the king’s son thought her the 
I deity of Rasdtala. And the beauteous maiden immediately 
she saw him, with his dark blue wavy hair, and well-developed 
thighs shoulders and arms, deemed him the god of Love. 
And she rose up, the noble lady, feeling an agitation in her 
mind. The slender one was overcome at onpe by bashfulncss, 

[ astonishment and dejection. ‘ Who is this that has come P 
Is ho a god, or a Yaksha, or a Gandharva, or a Ndga, or a 
Vidyadhara, or a man accomplished in virtuous deeds and 
I love ?’ Thinking thus, and sighing often, she seated herself 
on the ground and then the fascinating-eyed lady swooned 
H away. The king’s son, being also smitten by the arrow of 
» Love, revived her. Baying ‘Do not fear.’ And then that 
maiden, whom the high-souled prince saw before, being dis- 
1 tressed took a fan and fanned her. After reviving her, the 
maiden, on being questioned by him, somewhat bashfully made 
' kno^vn the cause of her friend’s fainting. And the noble lady 
related to the king’s son in detail all the cause of the fainting, 
which occurred at the sight of him ; and also her story as the 
other lady had told it. 

“ The lady spoke. 

; ‘ The king of the Gandharvas is named Visvdvasu, and this 

is his beautiful-browed daughter called MadAlas^. The son 
of Yajra-ketu, a fierce Ddnava, the cleaver of his foes, was 
named Patala-ketu, a dweller within Patdla. He, raising an 
illusion of dajrkness, carried off this maiden when she was in 
her garden, unattended by me, and brought her here^ the 
villain. On the coming thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight^ 
it was foretold, an Asura shall carry her off ; but he does not 

Roxb.) bears a bright scarlet berry, 2 inches long, and 1 in diameter, 
ia a climber, common everywhere (Hooker, vol. II, p. 621 ; Hoxb. p. 696). 



116 


CANTO XXT. 


deserve tlie lovely-limbed maiden^ any more than a 

32 deserves to hear the Veda. And when the day was over 
Surabhi said to the maiden who was ready to kill herself 

33 “ This base Danava shall not get thee. He who shall pierce 
him, when he* reaches the world of mortals, with arroAvg, 

34 that one, 0 noble lady, shall shortly be thy husband.” Ani 
I am her prudent companion, Kundald by name, the daughter 
of Yindhyavan, and the wife of Pushkara-mdlin, 0 warrior. 

.3.5 My husband having been killed by S'umbha, I am wandering, 
in fulfilment of a vow, from one place of pilgrimage to another 

36 by a divine course, ready for another world. Patala-ketn, 
evil-souled, when he had assumed a wild boar’s form wasi 
pierced by some one with an arrow, to secure the deliverance 

37 of the Munis. And I having really followed him, have 
returned in haste : it is indeed true, the base Danava has 
been smitten by some one. 

38 ‘ And this ladij fell into a swoon : hear what is the can? 
The maiden is full of affection for thee even at first sight, 

89 pride-inspircr ! who resemblest the sons of the Devas, disti 
guished for gracious speech and other virtues. And she 
allotted as wife to the other, who has wounded the Danav 

40 For this reason she fell into the deep swoon, and all her li 
the slender-limbed maiden will indeed experience sufferir 

41 On thee is fixed her heart, 0 enamoured hero ; and she w 
^ have no otherf husband all her life long. Hence is her sufft 

42 ing. Even so was Surabhi’s prophecy. But I have come he] 
my lord, through affection for her, experiencing grief; f 
there is in truth no difference between one’s friend’s body ai 

43 one’s own. If this lovely lady gets an approved hero for h 
husband, then assuredly may I engage in austerities with 

44 mind at ease. But who art thou ? and wherefore hast th 
come hero, 0 high-minded hero ? Art thou a Deva, or Daitj 

45 Gandharva, Naga, or Kinnara ? For not here can men con 
nor is human body such as thine. Declare thou that, even 
I have spoken truthfully.’ 


* The Danava, 


t For e'dnyo read ndnyo. 



^yjVALAlX^VA MARRIES MAOXlASiC. 


117 


“ Kuvalayd^va spoke. 

‘ Wkat thou askest me, 0 lady skilled in holy law, who I 
am and why I have come, hear that, 0 lady bright of under- 
standing ! I tell it thee fix)m the beginning. Son of king 
S'atru-jit, I was despatched by my father, 0 beauteous one ! 

I reached Gdlava’s hermitage for the purpose of protecting 
the Muni. And while I was affording protection to the Munis 
who observe the holy law, there came one, disguised in hog- 
like form, to hamper them. Pierced by me with an arrow, 
shaped like the half-moon, he rushed away with great speed : 
mounted on horseback I pursued him. Suddenly I fell as in 
play into a chasm, and my horse also. Thus mounted on 
horseback, wandering alone in darkness, I met with light, 
and saw thee lady ; and when questioned, thou gavest mo no 
answer whatever. And following thee I entered this splen- 
did palace. Thus I have related this truly. No Deva am I, 
or Danava, nor Naga, nor Gandharva or Kinnara, 0 sweet- 
smiling one 1 The Devas and the rest are all objects of venera- 
tion to me, 0 Kundala. I am a man ; thou must not be afraid 
of this at any time.’ 

The sons spoke. 

“ Gladdened thereby, the noble maiden, gazing dully through 
bashful ness on the noble countenance of her friend, uttered 
no word. And again the friend, being gladdened, answered 
him, after saying to her^ ‘Truly has he related it, 0 maiden 
obedient to Surabhi’s word !’ 

“ Kundald spoke. 

‘ 0 hero, unvarnished truth is the word thou hast spoken ; 
and her heart, perceiving it no otherwise, will gain com- 
posure. Surpassing beauty indeed clothes the moon, and 
light clothes the sun: prosperity attends the happy man, 
fortitude the resolute man, and patience the great man. 
Thou indeed hast assuredly slain that wicked base Ddnava : 
how shall Surabhi, the mother of cattle, speak falsely? 




118 


CANTO XXI. 


fortune, in gaining union with theo. Perform, 0 hero, tl 
needful ceremony, celebrated according to rule." 

The sons spoke. 

60 “ ‘ I am ready to comply,’ thus spoke the king’s son to he 
0 father. And she thought of him, the large-thighed* her 

61 the chief of his race. And he taking fuel and kiisa grag 
accepted her immediately, through affection for Maddlasa ai 

62 through respect for Kundala. Kindling fire, he sacrificei 
being conversant with the mantras, and caused the blesse 
maiden to 'take part in the marriage ceremony. And as 1 

63 had come, he dopai*ted then, being a wise man, to his ok 
hermitage-abode for the purpose of practising austerities. 

“ And the companionf said to the maiden ‘ My wishes ai 

64 fulfilled, 0 lovely-faced one. Now that I have seen thee,r( 
splendent in beauty, wedded to this husband, I will perfori 

65 matchless austerities, with a mind at ease ; and, having m 
sins washed away in the waters of the sacred pilgriinagi 
places, I shall not again become such as I am now” 

“ And then bending courteously she addressed the king 
son, being desirous to go, yet shaken in her speech throug 
love for her friend. 


“ KundaU spoke. 

66 ‘ No counsel should be given even by men to such as th 
" art, 0 man of boundless understanding ! and much less tlier 

67 fore by women ; hence I offer thee no counsel. But yet tli( 
hast caused me also to confide in thee with a mind drawn I 
love towards this slender-waisted one : I will remind thee, 

68 foe-queller. Verily a husband must ever cherish and proto 
his wife. A wife is her husband’s help-meet unto the con 

* For tumhlrmn read tumlorum, “ whose thighs are like the tumba, 
kind of long gonrd, Lagenaria vMisfans {Oucurhita lagenaria, Roxb.) 
pears to be a wild variety. The common plant is the Sanskrit aUvu, tl 

modem kadu or Idu. It bears a large, thick, membranous or almost woo< 
fruit, often foot long, usually bottle- or dumb-bell-shaped (Hooker, voU 
p. 613 ; Roxb., p. 700). 
f For sakhim read sakhi ? 



KtJVALAYX^VA RETURNS WITH MADXlASX. 


119 


plete attainment of religion, wealth and love. When both 
wife and husband are controlled by each other, then all the 
three combine, religion, wealth and love. How without a wife 
does a man attain to religion or wealth or love, my lord P In 
her the three are set. So also without a husband a wife is 
powerless to fulfil religion and the other duties. This three- 
fold group resides in wedded life. Men cannot perform the 
worship of the gods, pitris and dependants and of guests, with- 
out a wife, 0 prince ! And riches, although acquired by men, 
although brought to their own home, waste away without a 
wife, or even where a worthless wife dwells. But there is 
indeed no love for him without a wife ^ — this is clearly evident. 
By community of the wedded pair in their duties he may 
attain to the three duties. A man satisfies the pitris with 
children ; and guests with preparations of food ; likevnse the 
immortal gods with worship ; as a man ho satisfies a virtuous 
wife. Moreover for a woman there is no religion, love, 
wealth or offspring without a husband. Hence this three- 
fold group rests upon wedded life. This have I spoken to 
you both ; and I go as I have wished. Prosper thou with her 
in riches, children, happiness and long life.’ 

The sons spoke. 

“ Having spoken thus, she embraced her friend and bowed 
to the prince ; and she departed by a divine course according 
to her own purpose. 

“And S^atru-jit’s son, being desirous to depart from Patala, 
mounted her on the horse but was perceived by Danu’s off- 
spring. Thereon they suddenly shouted out, ‘ She is being 
earned off, she is being carried far away, the pearl among 
maidens, whom Patala-ketu brought from heaven. Besides 
lio has won the might of the Ddnavas, the iron-staff, the sword, 
club, the spear, the bow, together with Patala-ketu.’ 
‘Stand, stand!’ thus exclaiming, the Danava chiefs then 
rained* a shower of arrows and spears on the king’s son. And 
S'atru-jit s son, excelling in valour, split their weapons with 

* For vavarshur read vavrishur ? 



120 


CANTO xxr. 


84 a multitude of arrows, laughing as if in sport. In a momenj 
the surface of Pdtdla was covered with the swords, lances, 
spears and arrows, which were split by the multitudes o| 

85 Rita-dhvaja’s arrows. Then taking up Tvashtri’s weapoi 
he hurled it against the Danavas ; thereby all those Danavaj 

86 together with Patala-ketu were turned into heaps of bones 
bursting with the excessive heat from blazing rings of ^ 
just as the oceans were burnt up when the fire of Kapila fel] 
on them. 

87 “ Then tjie prince, seated on horseback, after slaying the 
chiefs of the Asuras, came to his father’s city with that pearl 

88 of women; and prostrating himself ho recounted every- 
thing to his father, both the visit to Patdla, and the meeting 

89 with Kundald, and the meeting with Madalasd, and the con- 
flict with the Ddnavas, and their slaughter with the weapoi^ 
and the return. 

90 “ His father, having thus heard the exploits of his graceful 
minded son, was both filled with affection and embracing hii 

91 son spoke thus— I have been delivered by thee, 0 son 
worthy, magnanimous, who hast saved from their fears tin 

92 Munis who follow true religion. The fame handed dow 
by my ancestors has been further augmented by me : thou, ( 

93 son, mighty in valour, hast multiplied it. Now ho, who doe 
not'diminish the glory, wealth or heroism which his fathei 

94 has acquired, is known as an ordinary man. But whoevei 
strikes out by his own might fresh heroism still, exceeding hii 

95 father’s heroism, the wise call him great among men. Wlw 
ever lessens the wealth and heroism and glory acquired bj 

96 his father, the wise call him base among men. I then hat 
accomplished even as thou hast the brdhman’s deliverance 
And the visit to Patala that thou madest, and the destructioi 

97 of the Asuras that thou didst effect, even this, my child, u 
in excess, hence thou art great among men. Therefore tboi 

98 art fortunate, my boy. I indeed in getting thee, such asoi 
as this, excelling in virtues, am to be praised even by 
righteous men. That man does not, I hold, gain the 

99 tion of adopted sons, who does not surpass his son in nvis- 



ktjvalatXi^va’s happy life. 


121 


dom, liberality and ■^lour. Fie on the birth of him who 
)0 is known in the world through his father ! He who attains 
fame through a son, his birth is the birth of a nobly bom man. '• 
The fortunate man is known by reason of himself ; the 
(1 ordinary man by reason of his father and grandfather ; tho 
base man attains distinction through his mother’s relations and 
his mother. Therefore, my son, prosper thou in riches and 
)2 heroism and in happiness. And never let this daughter of 
the Gandharva be parted from thee.’ 

“ Thus he was addressed by his father kindly again and 
)3 again in various sort ; and after an embrace he was permitted 
to depart with his wife to his own residence. He lived there 
joyfully in the society of his wife in his father’s city, and also 
elsewhere in gardens, woods, and mountain-tops. And she, 
the lovely, the beautiful- waistod, having prostrated herself 
before tho feet of her parents-in-law, thereafter morning by 
morning enjoyed herself in companionship with him.” 


Canto XXII. 

The story of Kuvalaydk^a (continued) : Maddlasd*s death. 

'^dtula-hehis brother Tdla-hetu^ in the guise of a Muni dwelling on 
hank of the Yamund^ induces Kuvalaydha to guard his hermitage, 
the pretext that he had certain cere'inonies to perform in the 
er — Disappearing within the water he goes to the palace and reports 
' Kuvalaydsva had died in battle with the Daily as — Maddlasd dies 
mgh grief and the king and gueen utter their lamentations, and 
^orm the prince's obsequies — Tdla-ketu then returns to the hermitage 
' releases the prince. 

The sons spoke. 

“ Many days afterwards the king again addressed his son, 
‘Mounting this horse go quickly to rescue the brdhmans,' 
and patrol the earth, morning by morning, day by day, 
for the brdhmans’ freedom from molestation must always be 
sought after. There are evil-behaved Ddnavas in hundreds^ 
hofn in wickedness ; do thou so act that the Munis may ex- 
16 



122 


CANTO XXII. 


A> perience no obstacle from them.’ "ttien the king’s son did ty 
he was directed by hie father. After traversing the whol( 

6 earth, the king’s son did obeisance to his father’s feet ij 
the forenoon, as each day came round ; and then during tb 
rest of the day he enjoyed himself with her, the slender 
waisted one. 

6 “ One day, however, while moving about, he saw Pdtah 
ketu’s younger brother Tala-ketu, who had fixed his hermitagi 

7 on the bank of the Yamuna. The wily Danava had assumed i 
Muni’s shape. Bearing the previous enmity in mind, hf 

8 accosted the king’s son — ‘ 0 royal prince ! I accost thee, dc 
thou then accomplish my request if thou art willing : nor miisl 
thou refuse my petition, thou that art true to thy promise 

9 I will offer a sacrifice to Dharma, and the oblations alsi 
must be made. The funeral piles must be put up there, sinci 

10 they have not yet ascended into the air. Hence give me 
0 hero 1 this thy own ornament that is about thy iiecl 

11 for gold, and guard thou my hermitage, until I praisi 
within the water the god V aruna, the lord of marine animals 
with the mantras prescribed by the Vedas for Vanma’ 

12 worship, which cause creatures to thrive, and in hast 
return.* To him as he spoke thus the prince did obeisano 

13 and then gave his neck-omament, and replied to him, ‘ G( 
sir ! with a mind at ease ; I will stay in this very spot neai 

^ thy hermitage according to thy command. Sir! until thj 

14 coming again. No man shall cause thee molestation hen 
while I stay. And do thou in perfect confidence, withont 
hurry, 0 brahman, accomplish thy purpose.’ 

16 “ Being thus addressed by him, he then plunged into tin 

water in the river, while the prince guarded the other’s magic* 

16 raised hermitage. And Tdla-ketu went from that river 
the prince’s town, and spoke thus in the presence of Madalas* 
and other persons. 


“ Tdla-ketu spoke. 

17 ‘ The hero, Kuvalayd^va, while guarding the ascetics clfl< 

to my hermitage, fighting with a certain wicked 



madXlasa^s death through deceit. ' 


123 


and striking down the brahmans’ foes in the conflict with all 
his might, was pierced in the breast with a spear by the 
wicked Baitya who resorted to magic. While dying he 
gave me this neck-omament ; and 4tidra ascetics gave him 
to the fire in the wood. And the frightened horse which 
uttered distressed neighings, with tearful eyes, was led off 
by that cruel Ddnava. This beheld I, malicious, evil-doer. 
Whatever should forthwith be done in this matter, let it be 
done without delay. And take this neck-omament as a con- 
solation to your hearts, for we ascetics may not have anything 
to do with gold.’ 

The sons spoke. 

“ Having so spoken, he left it on the ground and departed 
as he had come. And those people afflicted with grief, fell 
down, ill with fainting. Immediately recovering conscious- 
ness all those royal handmaids, and the queens and the king 
lamented sorely distressed. But Madalasa seeing that his 
neck-omament, and hearing that her husband was slain, 
quickly yielded up her dear life. 

“ Thereon a great cry arose in the houses of the citizens, 
even as there was in the king’s own house. And the king 
beholding Maddlasd bereft of her husband and dead, made 
answer to all the people, having recovered his composure 
after due reflection. ‘ Ye should not weep, nor I, I perceive, 
when one considers the fleetingness of even all relations. 
Why do I bewail my son ? Why do I bewail my daughter-in- 
law ? I think after due reflection, that neither should be 
bewailed, since events happen as they are fated. Why 
should my son, who in obedience to me has met death when 
engaged in guarding the dvijas according to my command, 
be bewailed by the intelligent ? Assuredly if my son has 
quitted his body on account of those dvijas, will not that body, 
to which he resorts, cause him to rise higher ? And how is it 
possible that this high-born lady, thus faithful to her husband, 
should be bewailed ? For women have no deity besides a hus- 
band. For she would have to be thus bewailed by us, and her 
relatives, and 'other compassionate persons, if she were 



124 


CANTO xxir. 


34 separated from her husband. But this noble My, who or 
hearing of the death of her husband has immediately follo^v, 
ed her husband, should not for this reason be bewailed bj 

35 the wise. Those women should be bewailed, who are sepa- 
rated from their husbands ; those should not be bewailed 'wbo 
have died with them : but this grateful wife has not expe. 

36 rienced separation from her husband. Verily what woman 
in both the worlds would think her husband human, wbo 
gives her all happinesses both in this world and the next? 

37 Neither should he be bewailed, nor yet this lady^ nor I, nor 
his mother. Wo were all rescued by him who resigns his life 

38 for the sake of the brahmans. For my high-souled son, by 
relinquishing his body which was half consumed, has freed 
himself from his debt to the brdhmans, to me, to religion, 

39 Though losing his life in war, he did not surrender his 
mother’s honour, the spotless fame of my family, or his own 
heroism.’ 

40 “ Then Kuvalayd^va’s mother, having heard of her son’i 
death, looked upon her husband and, immediately after hei 
husband, spoke similarly. 

“ The mother spoke, 

41 ‘Not such gi’atification did my mother or my sister ge^ 
0 king ! as I have felt in hearing that my son has been slain 

42 while protecting the Muni. Those who die, sighing, in 
great distress, afflicted with illness, while their relatives 
lament, — their mother has brought forth children in vain. 

43 Those who, while fearlessly fighting in battle to guard cattle 
and dvijas, perish crushed with arrows, they indeed are 

44 really men in the world. He who turns not his back on sup- 
pliants, friends, and enemies, in him his father has a renl 

45 son, and in him his mother has given birth to a hero. 1 
woman’s pain of conception reaches, I think, its success at 
the time when her son either vanquishes his foes or is slai®| 
in battle.’ 

The sons spoke. 

46 ‘‘ Then the king bestowed the funeral •obsequi^es on 



kuvalayX^va’s return home. 125 

and daughter : and having gone forth bathed and offered 
the water to his son. 

“And Tdla-ketu also, having issued from the Yamund’s 
water, spoke this honied speech respectfully to the king’s 
son. ‘ Depart, 0 prince ; thou hast caused me to be success- 
ful. While thou hast remained stationary here, the long 
wished-for bu8ines|g, and the sacrificial acts to Varuna the 
high-souled lord of the ocean, all that I have completed, as 
I had desired.’ 

“ The king’s son did him reverence and departed to his 
father’s city, mounting on that steed which sped along like 
Garuda and the wind.” 


Canto XXIII. 

KuvalayAha^s visit to Fatah,. 

^nvalaySiva, returning home,, learnt what had happened — He 
Hnis his loss, and shunning women lives a cheerful life — The Ndga 
g Asvatara, hearing this story, engages in austerities and extols Saras- 
i—Samsvati, p'opitiated hy him, restores him his companion 
mbaln, and gives them hath perfect skill in poeU'y and music — Both 
ylliale S'iva, who at their request gives Akvatara Maddlasd as his 
ujhor, restored to life as before — At Akvatara^s suggestion, his sons 

Kuvalaydkva to their palace in Vdtdla and introduce him to 
ir father — Asvatara asks Kuvalaydkva to rehte his story. 

The sons spoke. 

The king’s son reaching then his own city in haste, desirous 
to salute his parents’ feet respectfully, and eager to see Mad4- 
lasa, beheld some people of the city downcast, with joyless 
countenances, and then again astonished with joyful faces : 
and other people with wide-open eyes, exclaiming “ Hurrah ! 
hurrah !” embracing one another, fiPed with the utmost 
curious interest. “ Long mayest thou live, 0 most fortunate 
prince ! Thy adversaries are slain ; gladden thy parents’ mind 
and ours also, which is relieved of anxiety. 

Surrounded before and behind by the citizens who were 
ciying out thus, his joy forthwith aroused, he entered his 



126 


CANTO XXIII. 


6 father’s palace. And his father and mother and other rei 
tions embraced him, and then invoked on him auspicious bleg 

7 ings, saying “ Long mayest thou live 1” Thereupon havii] 
done obeisance, surprised at what this might mean^ he 
tioned his father ; and he duly explained it to him. 

8 On hearing that his wife Maddlasd, the darling of his hea? 
was dead, and seeing his parents before him^ he fell into tli 

9 midst of a sea of shame and grief. He thought, “ The maidei 
on hearing I was dead, gave up life, the virtuous one : fie o 

10 me harsh-minded that I am ! Malignant am I, worthless ai 
I, that I live most pitiless, when deprived of that deer-eye 

11 one who encountered death for my sake!” Again he thouglii 
having firmly composed his mind, banishing hastily the risii^ 
distraction, and breathing hard outwards and inwards, feelinj 
undone. 

12 “ If I abandon life because she has died on ray accouni 
what benefit shall I confer on her ? Yet this would be praise 

13 worthy in women’s opinion. Or if being downcast I wee| 
repeatedly exclaiming ‘ ah ! my beloved,’ still this would nc 

14 be praiseworthy in us ; for we are men assuredly. Frigid wit 
grief, downcast, ungarlanded, uncleansed, I shall then becom 

15 an object of contumely to my adversaries. I must cut off 
enemies, and obey the king, my father. And how then cani 

16 resign my life which is dependant on him ? But here, I con 

^ sider, I must renounce pleasure with woman, and yet tlii^ 

renunciation does not tend to benefit the slender-limbed one 

17 Nevertheless in every way I must practise harmlessness, whici 
works neither benefit nor injury. This is little for me 
on her account who resigned her life on mine.” 

The sons spoke. 

18 Having thus resolved, Rita-dhvaja then performed tie 
ceremony of offering water, and immediately afterwards pe^ 
formed the obsequies ; and he spoke again. 

Rita-dhvaja spoke. 

19 “ If she, Maddlasd, the slender-limbed, were not my wifeJj 

20 would not have another companion in this life. 
that fawn-eyed daughter of the Gandharva, I .will not 



4[TJVALAt14VA*S widowed life. 


127 


any woman — so have I spoken in truth. Having given up 
that wife, who observed true religion, whose gait was like the 
elephant’s, I will not assent to any woman — this have I declared 

in truth.” 

The sons spoke. 

And having renounced, dear father, all the delights of 
woman, bereft of her, he continued to sport in company with 
his peers, his equals in age, in the perfection of his good dis- 
position. This was his supreme deed, dear father. Who is 
able to do that which is exceedingly difficult of accomplishment 
by the gods, how much more so by others ? 

Ja(la spoke. 

Having heard their speech, their father became dissatified ; 
and after reflecting the Naga king addressed his two sons, as 
if in ridicule. 

The Ndga king A^vatara spoke. 

“ If men, deeming a thing impossible, will put forth no effort 
in the deed, from the loss of exertion there ensues loss. Let 
a man undertake a deed, without squandering his own man- 
hood ; the accomplishment of a deed depends on fate and on 
manhood. Therefore I will so strive, my sons, hence- 
forth— let me so practise austerities diligently, — that this 
may in time be accomplished.” 

Jada spoke. 

Having spoken thus, the Ndga king went to Plakshdvata- 
rana,* the place of pilgrimage on the Himavat mountain, and 
practised most arduous austerities. And then he praised the 
goddess Sarasvati there with his invocations, fixing his mind 
on her, restricting his food, performing the three prescribed 
ablutions.t 

A4vatara spoke. 

“Desii'ous of propitiating the resplendent goddess Jagad- 
dhatri Sarasvati, who is sprung from Brahmd, I will praise 
her, bowing my head before her. Good and bad, 0 goddess, 

* Where the R. Sarasvati takes its rise, 
t At morning, noon, and evening. 



128 


CANTO XXIII. 


whatever there the cause that confers alike final enancipi 
tion and riches, — all that, conjoint and separfite, resides i 

32 thee, 0 goddess. Thou, 0 goddess, art the imperishable an 
the supreme, wherein everything is comprised ; thou art tl] 
imperishable and the supreme, which are established like ti 

33 Atom. The imperishable and the supreme is Brahma, an 
this universe is perishable by nature. Fire resides in wooi] 

34 and the atoms are of earth. So in thee resides Brahma, an 
this world in its entirety ; in thee is the abode of the sonm 
Om, and whatever is immoveable and moveable, 0 goddess 

35 In thee reside the throe prosodial times,* 0 goddess, all tha 
exists and does not exist, the three worlds, f the three Vedas 

36 the three sciences, J the three fires, § the three lights, || am 
the three colours, If and the law-book ; the three qualities 
the three sounds,** the three Vedas, and the three d4rama8,fi 

37 the three times, and the three states of life, the pityis, day 
night and the rest. This trinity of standards is thy form, ( 

38 goddess Sarasvati ! The seven soma-sarpstha sacrifices, am 
the seven havih-samsthd sacrifices, and the seven paka 
saipsth^J J sacrifices, which are deemed the earliest by tlios 

* Mitr4 ; short, long, and prolatod. 

f Loka } earth, atmosphere and the sky. 

X YidyA j metaphysics (with logic), the art of government, and the prao 
tioal arts (?) 

V § Puvaka ; gArhapatya, khavaniya, and dakshiria. 

II Jyotis j fire on the earth, ether in the atmosphere, and the sun in the 
Bky. 

% Yarpa ; or, the three castes. 

** S'ahda. 

tt A^rama ; those of the griha-stha, vana-prastha, and bhikshn. 

The names of these sacrifices are thus given mo by the Pandit of the 
Bengal Asiatic Society. The Soma-samstha are (1) agni-sh^oma, (2) atyangi- 
ehtoma, (3) ukthya, (4) sho^asin, (5) atiratra, (6) vajaheya, and (7) aptor-i 
yama. The havilj-saipBthfi are (1) agnyidheya, (2) agni-hotra, (3)dar^j 
pumamdsan, (4) o’dtormdsyani, (6) palu-bandha, (6) sautra-mani, and (7)! 
agrajaneshti. The paka-sa^isthd are given differently by different author 
According to Apastamba they are (1) aupdsana-homa, (2) vailva-deva, (^1 
parvana, (4) ashtaka, (6) drdddha, (6) sarpa-bali, (7) isfina-bali. Acoordioj: 
to Baudhdyan^a, (1) huta, (2) prahuta, (3) dhuta, (4) ddlagava, (6j bali’j 



THB INVOCATION OP SABASVATl. 


129 


who think ditferently, and which are as eternal as Brahma,* 
are performed by those, who assert that all things are Brahma > 
with the utterance of thy name, 0 goddess. Undefinable, 
composed of half a measure, supremo, unchanging, imperish- 
able, celestial, devoid of alteration is this thy other supreme 
form which I cannot express. And even the mouth does 
not declare it, nor the tongue, the copper-coloured lip, or 
other organs. Even Indra, the Vasus, Brahmd, the Moon and 
Sun, and Light cannot declare thy form, whose dwelling is the 
universe, which has the form of the universe ; which is the 
ruler of the univo^^so, the Supreme Ruler; which is mention- 
ed in the discussions of the Sankhya and Vedanta philo- 
sophies, and firmly established in many S'akhas ; which is 
without beginning middle or end ; which is good, bad, and 
neutral ; which is but one, is many, and yet is not one ; which 
assumes various kinds of existence ; which is without name, 
and yet is named after the six gunas, is named after the classes, 
and resides in the three gunas ; which is one among many 
powerful, possesses the majesty of the S^aktis, and is supreme. 
Happiness and unhappiness, having the form of great happi- 
ness, appear in thee. Thus, 0 goddess, that which has parts 
is pervaded by thee, and so also that which has no parts ; that 
which resides in non-duality, and that which resides in duality 
(0 brahman). Things that arc permanent, and others that 
perish ; those again that are gross, or tliose that are subtler 
than tlic subtle ; those again that are on the earth, or those that 
are in the atmosphere or elsewhere; — they all derive their 
perceptibility from thee indeed. Everything — both that which 
is destitute of visible shape, and that which has visible shape ; 
or whatever is severally single in the elements ; that which is 

ana, (6) piatyavarohana, and (7) aslitakfi-homa According to Gautama, 
ashtaka, (2) parvana, (3) ^rdddha, (4) §ravani, (5) ligrahdyani, (6) o'aitri, 

I (7) ^Isvayuji. 

, .A. MS. in the Sanskrit Colfege reads ddye for ddyd, and sandtane for 
dtandh ; with this reading the first lino of the verse would qualify devi 

if sandtane be taken as an drsha form of sandtani. But these verses 
to obscure. 


17 



130 


OANTO XXIII. 


in heaven, on the surface of the earth, in the sky or el 
where ; — is connected with thee by thy vowels and by t 
consonants ! " 

Jada spoke. 

48 Thereupon, being praised thus, the goddess Sarasvati, who 
Vishnu’s tongue, answered the high-souled N4ga A4vatara. 

Sarasvati spoke. 

49 “I grant thee a boon, 0 Naga king, brother of Kamba] 
speak therefore : I will give thee what is revolving in i 
mind.” 

A4vatara spoke. 

50 Give thou me, 0 goddess, Kambala indeed my form 
companion, and bestow on us both a conversance with i 
sounds.” 

Sarasvati spoke. 

51 “ The seven musical notes, the seven modes in the music 
scale,t 0 most noble Naga! the seven songs also,! and t 

* Svara, a “ musical note.” There are 7 avaras, viz., 8ha4ja, riahahl 
gdndhdraf madhyama, panc'ama, dhaivata, and niahdda ; and they are desigi 
ted by their initial sounds, «a, ri, ga, ma, pa, dha, and ni : but the arranj 
ment varies, and Prof. Monier-Williams in his dictionary places nishdda fin 
shaifja fourth, and panc*ama seventh. Those 7 svaras compose the “ mnsifl 
scale,” grdma (Beng. saptah)* The interval between each consecutive pair 
notes is divided into several ‘ lesser notes ’ called ifuH ; thus there are 
between sa and ri, 3 between n and ga, 2 between ga and ma, 4 between i 
and pa, 4 between pa and dha, 3 between dha and ni, and 2 betweeen ni u 
sa in the higher octave— that is 22 s'rutis in all. The svaras correspond I 
the ‘natural notes,’ and the s^rutis to the ‘ sharps and flats ’ in Europei 
music. (Raja Sourindro Mohun Tagore’s Sangita-sdra-sangraha, pp. 22-J 
where the names of the e^rutis are given j and his Viotoria-giti-mAU in Bfl 
gali, Introduction.) 

t Grdma-rAga. I do not find this in the dictionary. Does it meanti 
“ series of musical scales ” that can bo formed by taking each of the 
(svara) as the ‘ key ’ note ? Thus there would be 7 scales, as there arti 
notes. But Raja S. M. Tagore calls this svara-grdm (Beng.), and he 4 
that only 3 such scales were common in early times, vit,, those with 
gdndhdra and madhyama as key notes (Victoria>giti-m4l4, Introductifj 

p. 2). 

! Gitaka. 1 do not know what the seven songs are, 



181 


gARASVATl’s GRANT OE A BOON. 

same number of modulations,* so also tbe forty-nine musical 
times, t and the three octavesj — all these thou and also Kam- 
bala shalt sing, 0 sinless one ! Thou shalt know more yet 
through my favour, 0 N^ga king. I have given thee the four 
kinds of quater-verse,§ the three sorts of musical tunes, || the 
three kinds of musical movoment,ir also the three pauses in 

Murc'hana. This seems to be “ running up or down the scale j** it is 
ned thus — 

Kramdt svardndm aaptdndm drohai c*dvarohanam 
Murc'haneti/uc'yatp grdma-traye tdh aapta sapta da. 

there are 7 scales obtained by taking any of the 7 notes as the key note, 
re would be 7 mdrdhands ; and this applies to the 3 octaves [grdma- 
ia\ so that there are 21 murdhands altogether {Sangita^sdrasangraha^ 
30, where their names are given). But in his Bengali Treatise Raja 
li. Tagore explains murdhand to be the “ passing uninterruptedly from one 
e (suara) to another, and in the process sounding all the intermediate 
es and lesser notes {druti)'* This corresponds to ‘slurring,* With 
I moaning the number of possible mdrdhands is almost indefinito. 

' T41a, the “ division of time in music.’* It consists of three things, kdla^ 
duration of time, krtyd^ the clapping of the hands (accentuation), and 
m, the interval between the clappings. It seems to correspond to the 
ir ’ and the ‘ kinds of time ’ in European music, European music has only 
linds of time, Common, Triple and Compound, each with a few subdivi- 
as j but in Hindu music there is the utmost variety. I do not know 
at the 49 tdlas here meant are j but Raja S. M. Tagore gives two lists of 
one enumerating 120, and the other 72. 

Grfima, the “ octave.” Hindu music uses only three octaves, which are 
ed nirma (Beng, uddrd), madhya {muddrd) and uc'da {tdrd). 

Pada. 

T6la. This seems to refer to the classification of the tdlae, viz., iuddha, 
'n.ga (or edlan.ka or sdlaga, v. r.) and san-Mrna, (Raja 8. M, Tagore’s 
gita-s4ra-sangraha, p. 201) ; but this classification is also applied to the 
ts (see his Victoria-giti-mala, Introduction, p. 9.). The iuddha are ex- 
ued to be the famous kinds complete in themselves ; the sdlanga are 
Je produced by a mixture of two simple ones j and the sankirna those 
iuced by a mixture of many simple ones, 

Laya, “ musical speed.” The 3 kinds are druta, quick, madhya, mean, 
vilamhita, slow ; the druta being twice as fast as the madhya, and the 
^hya^ twice as fast as the vilamhita. Laya does not take account of pro- 
^ time. This corresponds to “ the movement ‘ in European music. 



m 


CANTO xxin. 


music,’* and the four-fold todya.f This thou shalt knm throng 

55 my favour 0 Naga king, and what lies further. Whati 
contained within this mid dependant thereon^ measured i 
vowels and consonants — all that I have given to thee an 

56 Kambala. I have not so given it to any other on th 
earth or in Patdla, O Naga : and ye shall be the teachei 
of all this in Patala and in heaven and on earth also, y 
two Ndgas !” 

Jada spoke. 

57 Having spoken thus, the lotus-eyed goddess Sarasvati, th 
tongue of all, then disappeared at once from the Naga’s vie\( 

58 And then, as it all happened to those two Ndgasj there m 
begotten in both the fullest knowledge in versificatioi 
musical time, musical notes, &c. 

59 Then the two Nagas, observing musical time on the lute 
strings, being desii'ous of propitiating with seven songs th 

60 lord who dwells on the peaks of Kailasa and Himalayi 
the god S'iva, who destroyed Kama’s body, both exertt 

61 themselves to the utmost, with voice and tone combined, bein 
assiduous morning, night, noon and the two twilights. Tli 
bull-bannered god, being long praised by them both, m 

62 gratified with their song, and said to both, “ Choose ye 
boon.” Thereon Ai^vatara with his brother doing reverenc 

63 made request to S'iva, the blue-throated, Uma’s lord,— 

“ If thou, O adorable three-eyed god of the gods, art pleasei 

64 with us, then grant us this boon according to our desire 

* Yati, “ a break in the laya’^ {laya-pravritti-niyama)^ ‘ a retf in mnsit 
The 3 kinds are samd, sroto’gatd, and go-jpuc'c'hd. The mmd may occur < 
the beginning, in the middle, or at the end of the lay a, and in each of thel 
kinds of laya. The aroto-gatd occurs apparently when the time 
(^accelcTando) after the rest, that is when the laya changes from ^ 

madhya, or from madhya to druta, or from vilembita or madh/ya to d# 
The gO‘puc'c'hd occurs apparently when the time becomes slower (rallento^ 
ritardando) after the rest, that is when the laya changes from druta 
hya, or from madhya to vilambita, 

Todya. 1 do not find this word in the dictionary. Does il* 

‘ drum-music P” ' 



i^adXlasX is raised to . life again. 


18S 


let KuralayXWs deceased -wife, MaddlasX, 0 god, at once 
become my daughter of the same age as when she died^ re- 
membering her life as before, endowed with the selfsame 
beauty, as a devotee, and the mother of Yoga ; let her be 
bora in my house, 0 S'iva.** 

S'iva spoke. 

“ As thou hast spoken, most noble Naga, it shall all happen 
through my favour, in very truth. Hearken also to this, 0 
Naga. But when the ^rdddha is reached, thou shouldst eat 
the middle pinda by thyself, most noble Ndga, being pure, and 
having thy mind subdued ; and then, when that is eaten, 
the happy lady shall rise out of thy middle hood, the same in 
form as when she died. And having pondered on this thy 
desire, do thou perform the libation to the pitris ; immediate- 
ly she, the fine-browed, the auspicious, shall rise out of thy 
breathing middle hood, the same in form as when she died.” 

Having heard this, both then adored S'iva, and returned, 
full of contentment, to Rasdtala. And so the Naga, Kam- 
bala’s younger brother, performed the ^rdddha, and also 
duly ate the middle pinda ; and, while he pondered on that 
liis desire, the slender-waisted lady was produced* at once, 
in the selfsame form, out of his breathing middle hood. 
And the Naga told that to no one : he kept her, the lovely- 
tccthcd one, concealed by his women in the inner apartments. 

And the two sons of the Ndga king pursuing pleasure day 
by day, playedf with Rita-dhvaja like the immortals. But 
one day the Ndga king, being intoxicated, spoke to his sons, 
“ Why indeed do ye not do as I told you before ? The king’s 
son is your benefactor in my opinion j why do ye not confer 
a benefit on him, the pride-inspirer ? Thereupon they both, 
being thus admonished by their kir'dly-afPectioned father, 
went to their friend’s city, and enjoyed themselves with 
the wise prince. Then both, after having held some other 
talk with Kuvalayadva, invited him respectfully to come to 
their house. The king’s son said to them, “ Is not this your 

' i/ajne read jajss. f Read dkriidta for 



134f CANTO XXIII. 

80 house P Whatever is mine, riches, carriages, garments, &c., th 
is indeed yours. But whatever ye desire should be given yo 

81 riches or j e wels, let that be gi ven you, 0 young dvijas, if ye hai 
friendly regard for me. Am I cheated by such a cruel fatei 

82 this, that ye do not evince any sense of ownership in u 
house ? If ye must do me kindness, if I am to receive favoi 

83 from you, then consider my wealth and home as your owi 

84 Whatever is yours is mine, mine is your own. Believe j 
this in truth. My life has gone out into you. Never agai 
must ye ^peak of separate property, 0 virtuous dvijaj 

85 since ye are devoted to my favour, I have adjured you by m 
heart affectionately.” 

Thereupon both the young Ndgas, their faces beaming vit 

86 affection, replied to the king’s son, somewhat feigning ange: 
“ Rita-dhvaja, without doubt, we must not think in our min 

87 in this matter otherwise than thou hast now spoken. Bi 
our high-souled father has himself repeatedly said this—' 

88 wish to see that Kuvalaya^va.’ ” Thereon Kuvalaydi^ 
rising from his seat of honour, prostrated himself on ■ tl 
ground, saying, “ Be it as your dear father says.’* 

Kuvalay^^va spoke. 

89 “ Happy am I ! Most rich in merit am I ! Who else is thei 
like me, that your father shews an earnest mind to see me 

90 Rise ye therefore, let us go ; not even for a moment do I wia 
to transgress his command here. I swear by his feet !” 

Jada spoke. 

91 Having spoken thus the king’s son went with them botl 
and issuing from the city reached the holy river Gomali 

92 They passed through it, the Ndga princes and the king’s sob 
and the king’s son thought their home lay on the other siii 

93 of the river. And drawing him thence, they led the prifl® 
to Pitdlaj and in PaUla he beheld them both as younj 

94 Ndgas, lustrous* with the gems in their hoods, display^ 
the svastika marks. Gazing with eyes wide open 
amazement at them both, who were most handsomely formrf 

• 

• Bead kjritoddyotau for hptod/yotm. 



135 


-*-£IIVALAyX^VA*S visit to pItXla. 

i and smiling he spoke kindly — “ Bravo 1 most noble dvijas T* 

I ^(j they told him of their father, the N^ga king, AiSvatara 
by name, peaceful, worthy of honour by the heaven-dwellers. 

' Then the king’s son saw charming Pdtdlaj which was 
adorned with Ndgas, young adult and old, and also with 
I Naga maidens, who were playing here and there, and who wore 
beautiful ear-rings and necklaces, as the sky is decked with 
‘ stars ; and elsewhere resounding with drums, small drums, 

I and musical instruments, mingled with the strains of singing, 
which kept time with the sounds of lutes and pipes ; filled 
K) with hundreds of charming houses. ' Guzing about on Patala 
S^atru- jit’s son the foe-queller, walked about accompanied by 
i those two Nagas his friends. 

)l Then they all entered the Ndga king’s residence, and they 
: saw the high-souled Naga king seated, clad in heavenly 
garlands and raiment, adorned with gems and ear-rings, re- 
)2 splendent with superb pearl-necklaces, decorated with armlets, 

, hlemd with good fortune, on a throne all of gold, the frame of 
)3 which was overlaid with a multitude of gems coral and lapis 
lazuli. 

They showed the king to him saying “ That is our father 
)4 and they introduced him to their father, saying “ This is the 
- hero Kuvalayd^va.” Then Rita-dhvaja bowed at the feet of 
)5 the Ndga king. Raising him up by force, the Ndga king 
i embraced him warmly, and kissing him on the head he 
>6 said “ Long mayest thou live, and destroying all thy foes, be 
submissive to thy father. My son thy virtues have been 
17 mentioned even in thy absence, happy that thou art; thy 
rare virtues have been reported to me by my two sons. 
^ Mayest thou indeed prosper thereby in mind, speech, body 
and behaviour : the life of a virtuous man is praise- worthy ; 
a worthless man although alive is dead. A virtuous man, 
while accomplishing his own good, brings complete satisfac- 
® tion to his parents, angpiish into the hearts of his enemies, 
I and confidence among the populace. The gods, the pitris, 
^0 brdhmans, friends, suppliants, the maimed and others, and 
his relatives also desire a long life for the virtuous man. 



136 


CANTO mv. 


The life of virtuous men, who eschew abuse, who are coi 
passionate towards those in trouble, who are the refuge 
those in calamity, abounds in good fruit." 

Jada spoke. 

111 Having spoken thus to that hero, the Ndga next addresa 
his two sons thus, being desirous to do honour to Kuy 

112 laya^va. “ When we have finished our ablutions and allt] 
other proceedings in due order, when we have drunk wine ai 
enjoyed other pleasures, when we have feasted up to oi 

113 desire, we shall then with joyful minds spend a sho: 
time with Kuvalaya^va in hearing the story of the Success i 

114 his heart’s festival." And atru-jit’s son assented in sileni 
to that speech. Accordingly the lofty-minded king of tl 
Ndgas did as he had proposed. 

115 The great king of the Nagas, true to his word, assemblii 
with his own sons and the king’s son, filled with joy, foast( 
on foods and wines, up to fitting bounds, self-possessed ai 
enjoying pleasure. 


Canto XXIV. 


The story of KuvalaydSva (continued). 

The Recovery of Maddlasd. 

The Ndga king Ah^atara asks Kuvalaydsva what gift he can cmji 
on him — Kuvalaydha replies he needs nothing^ and is sufficienti 
gratified by the king's favour — The king urges him and at his sm 
suggestion the prince asks to see Maddlasd even in illusion — The kin 
brings her in as an illusion^ and afterwards restores her to Kuvi 
laydsva, 

Jada spoke. 

1 His two sons and the king’s son respectfully attended tin 

2 high souled king of the N6gas, after he had banquetted. Tin 
high-souled Ndga manifested kindly regard towards his sod^ 

3 friend with suitable conversation, and said, “ Declare, Stfi 
what pleasure I must do thoe who hast entered my koun*' 



137 


KTTVALAyX^VA'S MBBTmO WITH THE n/gA KINO. 

cast away hesitation towards me as a son would towards his 
father. Whether silver or gold, raiment, carriages, or seats, 
or whatever thou dost highly appreciate that is hard to be 
got— ask that of me.” 

Kuvalayd^va spoke. 

“ Through thy favour, illustrious Sir ! gold and other wealth 
are in my father’s house ; I have no need of any such thing 
at all now. While my father rules this earth for thousands 
of years and thou also mlest Pdtdla, my mind is not expectant 
in solicitation. They are both possessed of Svarga and are 
very rich in merit, who from their youth possess, in their 
father’s lifetime, a mere particle* of wealth amidst his 
krores of wealth, friends equally-educated, and a body 
free from sickness. My fatherf holds the wealth ; have I 
not youth ? When wealth is wanting, men’s minds become 
prone to petitions. When I have it in full measure, how shall 
my tongue make petition ? Those who need not think 
whether they have any riches at homo or not, happy are they, 
sheltered in the shadow of the tree of their father’s arm. 
But those, who even from childhood losing their father 
liavc had the care of a family, they have in my opinion, 
through the min of their taste for happiness, been tricked by 
the Creator. We therefore through thy favour always give 
willingly to supplicants the hoards of money, gems and other 
ivealth left by our fathers. I have everything then here, 
since I have touched thy feet with my crest- jewel, since I have 
touched thy body.” 

Jada spoke. 

Being answered thus in a modest speech, the noble N4ga 
feplied kindly to the young prince, the benefactor of his sons. 

The Ndga spoke. 

“ If it be not thy mind to receive of me gems, gold or other 
lift ; whatever else may please thy mind, mention thou it. I 
will give it thee” 

^ea^th as small as the point of a blade of grass, 

^ead jonitrd (or Janit4, 

18 



138 


CANTO XXIV. 


Knvalayi^vft spoke. 

16 ** My lord, through thy favour, I whom thou dost ask ha 
everything at home : it has been gained especially thron 

17 sight of thee. And herein I am successful, and my life 1 
been rewarded, that I a mortal have embraced thy body ^ 

18 art divine ; that tho dust of thy feet has found a seat 
my head. What indeed have I not gained thereby, 0 Ki 

19 king ? But if thou needs must give me the boon tha 
desire, tjien let not the faculty of working righteonsni 

20 depart from my heart. Gold, gems, jewels and such HI 
carriages, houses, seats, women, food and drink, and childn 

21 and tasteful garlands and ointments, — ^both these vario 
objects of desire, and also vocal and instrumental music ai 
whatever other music there he — all this I hold to be the fn 

22 of the tree of good works. Therefore a man must sta 
from the root thereof ; he must exert himself, while rulii 
his spirit ; nothing in tho world is hard of attainment to tho 
who adhere to good works.” 

A4vatara spoke. 

23 “ So shall thy mind bo, 0 wise man, relying on righteon 
ness ; and truly all this is the fruit of righteousness as tk 

24 hast said. N’evorthelcss thou must certainly take, now tin 
thou hast entered my house, what thou thinkest hard to I 
gained in the human world.” 

Ja(Ja spoke. 

25 Having heard this his speech, the young prince thfl 

26 looked at the faces of the Hdga king’s sons. Thereupon U 
those heroes prostrating themselves told their father cleari| 
all the young prince’s thoughts. 

The sons spoke. 

27 “ When this prince's beloved wife heard that he was sliw 
she forsook her dear life, being deceived by a certain critf 

28 bad-minded DAnava, who showed his enmity. She was ti 

29 daughter of the Gandharva king ; she was named Mad^ 
Then he, mindful of the past, made this vovr, dear 

30 ‘ No other shall be my wife save MaddlasA* This hew 



mad/las/ is mmt to kuvaiayX^va. 


130 


dhvaja longs, dear failier, to behold her, lovely-liiabed : if 
this may be done, let it be done.” 

A4vatara spoke. 

“ Such magical power as that belongs to one who is exempt 
from such gross elements. How can this be except as a dream 
or as an illusion proceeding from S'ambara ? 

Ja^a spoke. 

Then S'atm-jit*s son prostrated himself before the high- 
souled Naga king and replied, being touched with affection 
and modesty. “ If thou showf me now, dear father, MaddlasA 
even in illusion, I hold that thou hast done me the greatest 
favour.” 

A^vatara spoke. 

“ Look thou here then, my son, if thou wouldest see the 
illusion. I must show thee favour j a visitor at one^s house, 
though a child, is master.” 

Jadla spoke. 

The Naga king led in Madalasa who was concealed in the 
house, and next ho uttered some gibberish distinctly in order 
to bewilder them. And then he showed the young prince the 
beauteous lady, saying, “ Is she or is she not, 0 prince, thy 
wife Madalasd ? ” 

Jaija spoke. 

Then, seeing the slender one, he lost his reticence that very 
moment ; ho moved towards her, uttering the word 
“ Beloved ! ” And the Naga A4vatara hasting held him off. 

A^vatara spoke. 

“ It is illusion, my son ! touch her not ! I told thee so at 
first. The illusion quickly vanishes when touched or other- 
wise meddled with.” 

Thereupon he fell to the ground, overwhelmed by a faint ; 
and exclaiming “ Ah Beloved ! ” he thought of his noble 
wife. “ Alas for the love of this king towards my steadfast 
mind, whereby I have been thus overthrown without the 


-A. Daitya. 


t Bead daria^fose for dariaya t$ t 



140 CANTO XXV. 

41 weapons of foes. She was shown as an illnsion, though it ^ 
clearly no illusion at all by reason of the action of air, watjj 
and fire, earth and ether.” 

Ja(][a spoke. 

42 Then the N4ga reviving Kuvalayd^va, related to him tlie 

whole story of her recovery from death and all else that 

43 hapjaened. Thereat rejoicing he took again his loved one, ami 
after doing obeisance to the N4ga departed in great splendoWj 
mounted . on the horse, to his own city, having attained* tit 
object of his thoughts. 


Canto XXV. 

The story of Kuvalaydiva and Maddlasd {continued). 

Kuvalaydha^ returning homey lives in perfect happiness with Md 
lasd-^Ee succeeds his father Satrufit — A son is horn to theUy VM 
ta— Maddlasd prattles to the infant. 

Jada spoke, 

1 Reaching then his city he narrated the whole story fully 
his parents, how he had regained his slender-limbed one wl 
,2 had died. And the beautiful, slender-limbed lady bowed i 
the feet of her father and mother-in-law, and did honour i 

3 before to her kindred with obeisance, embraces andsn{ 

4 greetingsy according to propriety, and their ages. Then tl 
citizens held a great festival there in the city. 

And fita-dhvaja long enjoyed himself with his beautifc 
6 waisted wifoy both among mountain torrents, and on rivi 
sand-banks, and amid pleasant woods, and in groves. SI 
also, longing to consume her merit by the delights of loi 

6 enjoyed herself with him, her greatly-beloved, inpleasa 
places. 

7 A long time afterwards the kingS'atru-jit, having ruled tl 
earth worthily, underwent the law of Death. Then the cil 


* TSiAdA ahhyupeta^ tov ahhyvpetam f 



ilAB^LASi AND HER EiRST SON. 14l 

zcns inaugurated as king his high-souled son Rita-dhvaja, 
noble in conduct and action. 

While he duly protected his subjects as if they were his 
own sons, Maddlasd gave birth to her first-born son; The 
father gave that clever child the name Vi-kranta. The re- 
tainers were pleased thereat and Madalasd laughed. Mada- 
las4 spoke to her infant boy in the way of prattle,* as he lay 
on his back crying not unmelodiously. 

“ Perfect art thou, darling, nor has thy name been given 
thee now in mere fancy. This very body of thine is composed 
of the five elements, not indeed for this reason dost thou cry 
—wherefore then ? Nor indeed does your highness (this title 
is thy birth-right) cry because thou art a king’s son. Doubt- 
ful are tho various good and bad qualities, that are connected 
with the elements, in all thy organs. Since in a man here tho 
elements, extremely weak, increase by the means of the ele- 
ments, namely, by means of the food and water and other 
nutriments given, of what hast thou no gain, of what hast 
thou no loss ? Do not grow infatuated at this thy bodice 
which is already decaying, and in that thy body ; thy body 
is given thee by good and bad deeds ; tho bodice is fastened 
ou thee by persons infatuated with pride and other pas- 
sions. Do thou gi’eatly esteem each aggregate of elements — 
some one aggregate as a dear father, some other as a child, 
some other as a mother, some other as a- loved wife, some other 
as thy own property., some other as not thy own. A man 
beguiled in mind thinks that evils tend to assuage evils, that 
enjoyments tend to happiness. Again tho unwise man, great- 
ly beguiled in mind, thinks that these very evils are plea- 
sures. Laughter, gazing at tho bones,t a pair of excessively 
bright mocking eyes, firm plump flesh in tho breasts and 
elsewhere, in a woman — that is Love’s abode ; is not woman 

Dllapana : not in the dictionary. Ullapa is said to mean “ calling out in 
oud voice,” “ change of voice in grief, sickness, &c. j ” but no such meaning 
admissible hero. 

1* As^thi-sandorsana j this seems meaningless. Akshi-sandar^ana seems 
perflaous. 



142 


CANTO XXVl. 


18 hell P The carriage rests on the earth ; and the body 
seated in the carriage ; and even in the body there is anotb 
seated, the soul. There is not the same perception of owne 
ship in one’s body, as there is this excessive infatuation vi 
itr 


Canto XXVL 

The story of Kuvalaydha {continued). 

The Education of his Sons. 

Two other sons are horUy Suhdhu and Satru-mardana. — A fourth ta 
is horn whom Maddlasd names Alarha — She criticizes these nmm- 
The king objects to her way of educating themy and wishes them to ! 
brought up as kshatriyas — She prattles to Alarha. 

Jada spoke. 

1 Now the queen trained up that son, as he grew day by di| 

2 to unselfish thought by talking and other means. As \ 
regularly gained strength, as he gained his father’s intcli 
gence, even so he acquired knowledge of himself through li 

3 mother’s talk. So the youth, instructed by her from li 
" birth, having understanding and being unselfish, did nti 

turn his mind towards family life. j 

4 A second son was bom to her. His father named hini 
6 When he said “ This is Su-bahu,” Madalasa laughed. Hi 

also when a child she spoke to with prattle and other 
the same as before, and thus he, having a good intellect, « 
quired knowledge from his childhood. 

6 When the king named the third-bom son S'atru-mardai# 
she the beautiful-browed laughed again very long thereai 

7 The slender-limbed mother similarly instructed him alsofnffl 
childhood. Devoid of desire he performed ceremonies, 
not anything beneficial. 

*8 Now the king, when desirous of naming the fourth sod, ^ 
MaddlasA, well-behaved as she was, laughing slightly* ^ 



BIBTH OF THBBB HOBB SONS. 14g 

king, somewhat eagerly Qurioua, spoke to her as she was 

laughing. 

The king spoke. 

“ Tell me the cause of your laughter, at the very time when 
the name is being given, Vi-krdnta, Su-Mhu and the other 
I S'atru-mardana,— the names given by me are I think fine, 
suited to the kshatriya kindred, and indicative of heroism 
and majesty. If these are not good, lady,— if you think this 
in your mind,— then do thou give a name to this my fourth 
son.” 

Maddlasd spoke. 

\ “ I must obey thy command, Mahd-rdjd, as thou tellest me ; 

t so I will give a name to thy fourth son. ‘ Alarka ’! Learned 
in religion he shall acquire fame in the world, and this thy 
youngest son shall have undei'standing.” 

I On hearing that name given the son by the mother, tho 
king, laughing at ^ Alarka ’ as inappropriate, said — 

The king spoke. 

i “ This name that thou hast given to my son, beauteous 
lady,— why hast thou given such an inappropriate ono ? What 
is its meaning, 0 Maddlasa ?’* 

Maddlasd spoke. 

i “ This is my fancy, Mahd-raja; I have given it as being 
practical. So do thou listen, 0 king, to the meaninglessness 
of tho names given by thee. Since wise men speak of a pervad- 
ing soul ; and ‘ krdnti ’ is described as the course which passes 
- from ono place to another place ; since tho soul is ail^per- 
vading in that it is ubiquitous and does not move about ; 

^ therefore this appellation Vi-kr4nta, ‘ passed beyond,* appears 
' to me meaningless. The appellation Su-bdhu, fine-armed,* 
given to they second son, that too is meaningless because the 
I soul is incorporeal, 0 king. The name that thou hast given 
I the third son, Ari-mardana, * foe-crusher,* I think that too is 
I inappropriate ; and listen to tho reason as regards it. Since 
there is only one soul in all bodies, who then, 0 king, is 
^garded as its enemy in this world, or who as its friend p 



144 OAKTO xirr. 

22 Creatures are crashed by creatures ; how can the inootp- 
real be crushed? This fancy is meaningless because of tjJ 

23 separate existence of anger and the other Ifl 

bad name is fixed upon because of mutual dealing, why d J 
thou think there is no meaning in the name Alarka ? I 


Jada spoke. 

24 Being thus excellently addressed by the queen, the 
having great understanding, assented to his loved wife win 

25 spoke correctly. And the fine-brewed lady spoke to that son, 
just as to the elder sons, what would arouse the intellect 

26 The king'said. to her. “ Why dost thou deal thus, 0 fool 
one, with the tempeitoent of ray child, by giving him a mis- 

27 chievous education as tJbon didst before to my other song. K 


thou shouldest do what pleases me^ ii word should be ac- 

28 cepted, then restrain this son within the path 6^ activity. So 
the path of action will not lead to utter destruction?!^ ^ 
and so the pinda offering to the pitfis will not cease, 0 

29 one. The pitris dwell in the Deva-loka, they are also bdP^i 
brutes, they become men likewise, and they reside within 

30 class of elements. By offering the pin^a and water a 
busied in the ceremonies, ever nourishes them, 0 fine-bra’* 

31 one, both the righteous and the unrighteous, those wornl*^ 
with hunger, those harassed by thirst ; he nourishes the w 
likewise and guests. The gods, mankind, the pitris, depa^ 

32 spirits, goblins, and guhyakas, birds, worms and insects Ij^ 
upon man indeed. Therefore, 0 slender-limbed, cause my 

33 to acquire thoroughly the whole duty of kshatriyas, as r 
gards this life and life in the next world.” 

The queen Madalasa, being thus admonished by her hui 

34 band, apoko to her son Alarka, with prattling word 
“ Thrive my son ! rejoice my husband’s mind with thy de^d 

35 in order to benefit friends and destroy enemies. Happy hi 
thou, my son, who alone, with never an enemy, wilt long pr( 
tect the earth : from protecting it mayest thou have fu! 
enjoyment of happiness, and from righteousness thou shal 


Alarka, a furious dog, or a fabulous hog with eight legs. 



THE BDUOiTION OF ALARKA. 


145 


obtain the fmit, immortality. Mayest thou delight the 
brahmans at the holy festivals ! Mayest thou fulfil the longing 
imong thy kinsmen ! Mayest thou think kindly in thy heart 
for another ! Mayest thou restrain thy mind from the wives 
)f others ! Please continually the gods with numerous sa- 
nifices, and the dvijas who resort to thee with wealth. And 
bhou shalt long satisfy women with unparalleled affections, and 
bhy foes with battles, 0 hero ! As a child gladden the mind 
thy kinsmen ; and as a boy the mind of thy teacher by 
observance of his commands ; as a young man gladden the mind 
of women who are the ornament of high families ; as an old 
man the mind of the hermits in the forest. Exercising thy 
sovereignty mayest thou gladden thy friends ! Guarding the 
^ood, mayest thou offer up sacrifices, darling ! Destroying 
the wicked and thy enemies in battle, mayest thou meet thy 
ileath, my child, on behalf of cattle and brdhmans ! " 

Canto XXVII. 

The Education of the Sons (continued). 

^lasd instructs Alarha in a Ung's duties — Enforcing especially 
^‘''-'sity for self-control^ prudence and maintenance of the laws. 

Jada spoke. 

ifow being talked to in this way by his mother every day, 
child Alarka grew in age and intelligence. Then this son 
Rita-dhvaja, on reaching boyhood, received investiture 
h the sacred thread, and being intelligent did obeisance to 
mother and said, “ What I ought to do now for happiness 
this world and the next world, tell all that to me who am 
nng respectfully before thee ? ” 

Maddlasa spoke. 

‘ My child, a king inaugurated in his kingdom must in the 
jt place conciliate his subjects, without obstructing his. own 
by. Eschewing the seven vices, which are radically injuri- 
he must guard himself from his adversaries without de- 
19 



146 CANTO XXVII. 

6 parting from good counsel. Just as a man meets destruc. 
tion in eight ways from a fine- wheeled chariot, so undoubtedly 
does even a king without departing from good counsel 

7 And let him recognise the bad and good ministers throngli 
bis enemies’ faults ; and he must strenuously trace out tig 

8 enemy’s spies by spies. But a king must not confide ij 
friends, acquaintances, or relatives ; let a king trust even Id 

9 an unfriendly person, if so obliged by his affairs. A king 
must himself be conversant with the stationary, prosperous 
and deteriorating conditions of state 'policy^ be familiar \vitli 
the merits of the six measures of military policy* and not 
be enslaved by desire. 

10 “ A king must first subdue himself, and his ministers, tten 
his dependants, and afterwards his citizens ; then let him, 

11 fight against his enemies. But he who, without having 
indeed conquered these, desires to conquer his adversaries, he, 
with his own self unsubdued and with unsubdued ministers, f 

12 is killed by his enemies’ party. A king must therefore, my 
son, first conquer desire and the other passions ; for v^hei 
they are conquered, victory is his assuredly ; vanquished b] 

13 them, a king perishes. Desire, and anger, and covetousness 
intoxication and pride, joy also, and enemies — these in tnitl 

14 tend to destroy kings. Let him restrain himself, recollect 

" ing how Pan^u himself was killed when engrossed in lov« 

15 and how AnuhradaJ killed his own son through anger; ai 
how Aila§ was killed through covetousness; how Vena|| v 
killed by dvijas through intoxication : how Andyus’l" son B( 

16 was killed through pride; Puranjaya through joy. Rec( 
lecting how, when these were conquered, high-souled Marut 
vanquished all, let a king cast out these his own faults. 

♦ Viz., sandhi, peace ; vigraha, war ; ydna, marching ; dsana., encamp'” 

dvaidhi-hhdva, dividing his forces ; and samiraya, alliance. 

t For ^jitdtTnd jitdmdtyah read ^jitdtmdjitdmdtyah f 

J Son of Hiranya-kaSipu. 

§ Pnruravas. 

II A son of Anga. 

^ She was his mother* 



EXPOSITION OP A KINO S DUTIES. 


147 


“ A king should leam the ways of the crow, cuckoo and 
bee, of the deer, serpent and peacock, of the goose, cock and 
the red goat. A king should act like an insect against an 
opponent ; and a king should carry out the ways of the ants at 
a fitting time. A king, who possesses the natural character 
of the moon and the sun, ought to know for the sake of good 
policy the behaviour of sparks of fire and of the seeds of the 
seemul tree.* And a king ought to gather wisdom from 
a courtezan, the lotus flower,t and a grasshopper, a doe-hare, 
and the breast of pregnant women, and also from a woman of 
the cow-herd caste. 

“ A king should assume the five forms of Indra, the Sun, 
Yama and the Moon, and also of the Wind in the work of 
government. Just as Indiu nourishes the people on the earth 
with showers of water for four months, so should a king 
nourish them with largesses. Just as the Sun draws up the 
water with his rays for eight months, so shmdd a king collect 
the tolls and other dues by truly subtle means. Just as Yama 
restrains friend and foe when the time arrives, so a king 
should be impartial towards friend and foe, towards the 
vicious and the virtuous. Just as by gazing on the full 
Moon, a man grows affectionate, so, where the people are all 
“^.aceful, that is the practice he should adopt from the moon, 
ust as the Wind moves mysterious among a\\ creatures, so 
hould a king move among the citizens, ministers' and others, 
md among his relatives by the agency of spies. 

“ The king, my child, goes to Svarga, whose mind is at- 
tracted neither by covetousness, nor by love, nor by riches, as 
by other motives. The king goes to Svarga, who keeps 
within their duty erring foolish men, who are swerving from 
their duty. He, in whose kingdom the duties of the four 
classes and the four periods of a brdhman’s life do not fall 
into desuetude, has, my child, eternal happiness after death 
and in a future state. A king’s highest duty, and that which 

3'almali j see note • p. 82. The pods contain a quantity of silky cotton 
b w blown about, when the pods burst. 
tfelumhium specio&um ; see note § p. 29. 



m 


CANTO XXVIII. 


brings supreme felicity for him, is the maintenance amonj 
men of their own laws,* since it is disturbed by evil-mindei 
31 men. By protecting creatures indeed a king reaches sue 
cess ; he who duly protects gains by his efforts a portion o 
righteousness.’* 


Canto XXVIIL 


The Education of the Sons (continued). 
Maddlasd's Exhortation. 


Maddlasd enunciates to Alarha the special duties of the four casteh 

and of the four periods of a hrdhman*8 life — and the duties commonk 

those four castes and periods^ which must he strenuously maintained. 

Jada spoke. 

1 Having listened to that his mother’s exhortation, Alarh 
also further questioned his mother both about the duties 
the four classes, and about the duties appertaining to the/oi 
periods of a brdhman’s life. 

Alarka spoke. 

2 “ Thou hast expounded, gracious lady, this the duty relatin 
to the system of kingly government. I wish to hear tin 
duty which concerns the four classes and the four periods of 
brdhman’s life.” 

Madalasa spoke. 

3 “A brdhman’s duty is held to be threefold — liberality, stu^ 
sacrifice. There is no other fourth duty. His duty is regai^ 

4 less of his position. Irreproachable sacrificial and educi 
tional occupations, and the acceptance of gifts from the puri^J^ 
— this is fitly proclaimed his threefold means of livelilioo^i 

5 Liberality, study, sacrifice — this is declared to he the threefold 
duty of a kshatriya also : protection of the earth, and 
sistence by weapons are his means of livelihood. Liberat^ 
study, sacrifice, — that indeed is the threefold duty of a vaifl 

* Dhannai 



149 


A 


Br/hMAN*S POTJR PERiODS OP LIFE. 


also : merchandise, and the tending of cattle, and agriculture 
are his means of livelihood. Liberality, and sacrifice, obe- 
dience to dvijas, I have declared to be the threefold duty of 
the iSudra also ; and his means of livelihood are a handicraft, 
obedience likewise to dvijas, nourishing them, buying and 
gelling. These are said to be the duties of the four classes. 

“ Hoar also the connexions among the four periods of a brah- 
man’s life. A man who has not erred from the duty of his 
own class gains perfect felicity : he goes to hell after death, 

I if he has served what is forbidden. And as long indeed as 
a dvija is not invested with the sacred thread, so long, my 
son, he acts, speaks and eats unrestrainedly. 

“ When duly invested with the sacred thread, he becornes a 
brahma-c'arin in his guru’s house, and he should dwell there. 

; I relate his duty; hear it of me. Private study, atten- 
dance on fire, bathing, and wandering about for alms, and 
always eating that food after informing his guru and obtain- 
1 ing permission from him. Ho should be diligent in the guru’s 
business ; there should be thorough evoking of his affection ; 
and when summoned by him, he should read intently, his mind 
I withdrawn from everything else. After acquiring one, two or 
all the Vedas from his guru’s mouth, he is authorized to give the 
' guru his fee with words of eulogy. But let him enter on the 
griha-stha period when desirous of the period of family life ; 
or, by his own wish, on the vana-prastha period and on the 
' fourth period. Or let the dvija await his decease there in 
the guru’s house, obedient to the guru’s son if the guru be 
dead, or to the guru’s disciple, if there be no son. Obedient, 
free from self-conceit, let him pass through the period of a 
brahnia-c'drin. 

“ Next when he has desisted therefrom, through desire for 
a griha-stha’s status, let him then rightly marry a wife, 
fiprung from the family of a different* Rishi, his equal, free 
from sickness, not deformed, for the sake of a gfiha-stha’s 
status. And having gained money by his own toil, let him duly 


^‘lawclna. His family and hers should not be descended from the same 
This indicates exogamy. 



150 


CANTO XXVIII. 


please the pitfis, gods and guests by faith ; and also nourigi, 

20 those who resort to Um, his dependants and children, and 
his female relatives, and the afflicted, the blind, and the o&t- 
cast, the birds and the cattle,* to the utmost of his power 

21 with gifts, of food. This is the duty of a gfiha-stha; sexual 
intercourse also at the proper season : but he should not, to 
the utmost of his power, neglect the performance of the five 

22 sacrifices. And let the man himself, being zealous to the best 
of his power, together with his dependants, eat the remainii 
of the food consumed by the pitris, the gods, the guests and 
paternal kinsmen. 

23 “ Now I have declared this gyiha-stha period distinctly. ] 
describe to thee the duty of the vdna-prastha : be it heai-d, 

24 Having seen the succession of his offspring, and the stoop ol 
his body, let the wise man enter upon the vana-prastha period 

25 for the purpose of purifying his soul. In it there is tlie 
enjoyment of the forest, and attraction by penances, sleep- 
ing on the ground, sacred study, ceremonies for the pitp's 

26 gods and guests, the homa oblation, the three daily abln- 
tionSjt the wearing matted hair and a bark dress, and dili- 
gence in meditation unceasingly, the use of forest unguentj. 

27 This is the vdna-prastha period, for the purification of sii, 
and beneficial to the soul. But after that comes another, tbj 
last, period of the bhikshu. 

28 “But hear from me the nature of the fourth period, whic 
with its peculiar duties has been described, my darling, \ 

29 high-souled men conversant with its duties.^ Renunciatioi 
of every association, sacred study, abstinence from anger 
control over the senses, no long dwelling in one habitation, 

30 abstaining from undertakings, and eating food obtained b/ 
begging once a day, also desire for the awakening of knoV’ 

81 ledge of the soul, and gazing at the soul. Now I 
acquainted thee with this duty in the fourth period. 

“ Hear from me the common duty of the other classes ando^ 

* For pahvas read c'a paiu^s ? 

t At dawn, noon, and sunset. 

J For yali sva-dharmo 'aya read ava^dharmo yaaya f 



GENERAL DUTIES OF ALL CLASSES. 


151 


the periods of life. Truthfulness, purity and harmlessness, 
freedom from envy, and patience, mercy, generosity,* and con- 
tentment is the eighth virtue. 

“Those duties have been succinctly described to thee con- 

cerning the classes and the periods of life : and a man should 
stand wholly within these his own peculiar duties. And 
the man, who, overstepping his own duty named according to 
his own class or period of life, should behave otherwise, 
should be punished by the king. And the king who over- 
looks men, who after forsaking their own duties commit sin, 
loses his pious acts. Therefore a king must vigorously 
punish all the classes that behave contrary to their special 
duties, and he must keep them within their own occupations.” 


Canto XXIX. 


Maddlasd^s 'Exhortation {continued), 

\r<uldlasd explains to Alarka the position of a griha-stha-^and perso- 
'w a cow, the Vedas, pious acts, the words of the good and the 
'(h svdhd, svadhd, vashat and hanta—She describes the hali 

ring, and utsarga oblation — the duties of a gfilia-stha to guests the 

Idha-^and further duties to guests— She pronounces a blessing on 
gfiha-stha state — and quotes a song by Atri on it. 

Alarka spoke. 

“ And what men must do who are engaged in the griha-stha 
period ; and what becomes confined in the absence of action, 
and what increases by action ; and what is beneficial to men ; 
and what a good man should avoid at home ; and how things 
are done— declare that accurately to me who ask.” 

Madalasa spoke. 

% child, a man on assuming the griha-stha status, thereby 
nourishes all this earth and conquers the worlds he longs for. 
The pitps, the Munis, the gods, living things, and mankind, 

* For akdrpgangam read akdrpanyam f 



152 


CANTO XXIX. 


nnd worms, insects, and flying creatures, birds, cattle, j 

6 Asuras subsist upon the g|iha»Btha, and derive satisfact 
from him ; and gaze indeed at his countenance, wonderi 
‘ Will he give us anything 1 ' 

6 “ The support of everything is this cow, my child, which c 
sists of the three Fedos, in which the universe is establisli 

7 and which is believed to be the cause of the universe. 1 
back is the Rig- Veda ; her loins the Yajur-Veda; her f 
and neck.the Sama-Veda; and her horns are pious acts; 

8 ' hair the excellent words of the good ; her ordure and m 

are tranquillity and prosperity ; she is supported on feet wli 
are the four classes ; she is the sustenance of the worlds ; be 

9 imperishable she does not wane. The word svaha,* * * § and 
word svadha,t and the word vashat, my son, and the ot 

10 word hanta are herj four teats. The gods drink of 
teat which is the word svahd ; and the pitris of that com 
ing of svadha ; and the Munis of that which is the w 

11 vashat; the gods, living things and Asuras, and mank 
drink constantly of tho teat which is the word ba 
Thus this cow consisting of tho three Vedas, my child, fati 

12 them. And the man, who grievously sinning causes tl 
destruction, sinks into the hell Tama8,§ the hell Anc 

1.3 tdmisrall and the hell Tamisra.^T And the man, whog 
this cow drink with his own children and with the immoi 
and other objects of worship at the proper time, attains Svft 

14 “ Therefore, my son, a man must nourish the gods, ris 
and pitris and men and living things daily, oven as his* 

15 body. Therefore having bathed and become clean he sbo 
composed in mind, delight the gods, rishis and pitfis, and 

16 praja-pati also with water at the proper time. And a ma 
having worshipped the gods with the fragrant flowers of 
grbat-flowered jasmine, should next delight Agni ; 

17 bali offering should also be made. Let him cast the 

* The oblation to the gods. II Complete darkness, 

t The oblation to the pitfis, IT Peep gloom. 

J Read tasydh for tasyd, ** mdnavai^ for^ 

§ Darkness, 



rau RITB® Of HOSPITALITY, 


I5S 


offering to Brahmi vnd tHe ViAva-devas inside the house, and 
5 to Dhanrantari to the north-east; let him offer the bali 
eastward to Indra, southwards to Yama, and the bali west- 
) wards to Vamna, and northwards to Soma. And let him also 
givo the bali to Dhdtri and Vidhdtpi at the house-door, and 
let him give it to Aryaman outside and all around the houses. 
) Let him offer the bali to night- walking goblins in the air, and 
let him scatter, it to the pitfis, standing with his face south- 
i ward. Then the griha-stha, being intent and having his mind 
well composed, should take the water and oast it, as a wise 
[ man, into those places for those several deities, that they may 
rinse out their mouths. 

“ Having thus performed in his house the family-bali, the 
I pure griha-stha should perform the utsarga oblation respect- 
fully for the nourishment of living things. And let him 
scatter it on the ground both for the dogs, and low-caste men 
[ and the birds ; for certainly this offering to the Vii§va-devas 
is declared to be one for evening and morning. 

“ And then he, as a wise man, having rinsed out his mouth, 

I should look towards the door the eighth part of a muhdrta, 
whether a guest is to be seen. He should honour the guest, 
who has arrived there, with rice and other food and with 
I water and with fragrant flowers and other presents, according 
to his power. He should not treat as a guest a friend, nor a 
fellow- villager, nor one who bears the name of an unknown 
family, nor one who has arrived at that time. Men call 
a brahman who has arrived, hungry, wearied, supplicat- 
ing, indigent, a guest ; he should be honoured by the wise 
according to their power. A learned man should not inquire 
his lineage or conduct, nor his private study ; he should esteem 
him, whether handsome or unhands .me in appearance, as a 
praja-pati. For since he stays but a transitory time, he is 
therefore called an a-tithi, a guest.’ When he is satisfied, the 
griha-stha is released from the debt which arises from hospita- 
lity. The guilty man, who without giving to the guest him- 
self eats, he incurs only sin and feeds on ordure in another life. 
The guest transferring his misdeeds to that wow, from whose 
20 



CAXTO xxnr. 


154 

32 house he turns hack with broken hopes, and taking iJiat man\ 
merit, goes off. Moreover a man should honour a guest re. 

33 spectfully according to his power with gifts of water anj 
vegetables, or with just what he is himself eating. 

“ And he should daily perform the ^rMdha with rice and 

34 other /ood and with water with regard to the pitris and brill, 
mans ; or he should feed a brdhman. Taking up an agra* ol 

35 the rice, he should present it to a brdhman : and he should 
give an alms to wandering brahmans who ask. The alnu 
should be the size of a mouthful, the agra four mouthfuls 

36 Brdhmans call the agra four times a hanta-kara.f Bui 
without giving food, or a hantakara, an agra or an aim 

37 according to his substance, ho must not himself eat. Aid 
he should eat, after he has done reverence to guests, friends 

38 paternal kinsmen, relatives, and petitioners, the maimed, aw 
children and old men and the sick. 

“ If a man consumed with hunger, or another who is destitut 

39 wants food, he should bo fed by a householder who has adt 
quatej substance. Whatever kinsman is dispirited when h 

40 reaches a prosperous kinsman, the latter gets the sin that lia 
been done by the dispirited man. And the precept mustli 
observed at evening, and he should do reverence to the guei 

41 who has arrived there after sunset, accordingly to his ahilit] 

^ with a bed, a seat and food. 

“ Thus a weight is placed on the shoulder of one wli 

42 undertakes family life. VidhAtyi, and the gods, and tli 
pitris, the great Rishis, all shower bliss on him, and so als 

43 do guests and relatives : and the herds of cattle and the flocl 
of birds, and the minute insects that exist besides, are satisfy 

44 And Atri himself used to sing songs on this subject, noble on( 
Hear those, 0 noble one ! that appertain to the griha-stli 
period — ‘ Having done reverence to the gods, and the pitp 

45 and guests, relatives likewise, and female relations, ani 
gurus also, the gpiha-stha who has substance should scatt 

• A measure. 

t A formula of salutation, or an offering to a guest. 

I Bead samarthe for samrtAo f 



THE OCCASIONAL RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES. 


155 


the fragments on the ground for both dogs and low caste men 
) and birds : for he should certainly perform this offering to tho 
Visva-devas evening and day. And he should not himself 
eat flesh, rice and vegetables and whatever may have been 
prepared in the house, which he may not scatter according to 
the precept.’ ” 


Canto XXX. 


Maddlasa^s Exhortation (continued), 

Maddlasd explains to Alarka the ceremonies to he performed hy a 
•iha-slha^ which are of three hinds, continual, occasional and periodic 
l—She explains the occasional Srdddha, which is celebrated for men 
id mmen, 

Maddlasa spoke. 

“ Xow what the griha-stha’s ceremonies are, tho continual, 
and the occasional, and the periodical, listen thereto, my son. 

“ The continual arc comprised in the five sacrifices,* these 
that I have described to thee : and the occasional are tho 
others, such as the ceremony on the birth of a son, and so 
forth. Tho periodicalf are recognisable by the learned as 
the sacrifices at the moon’s changes, the i^rdddha and others. 

“ PIcreJ I will tell thee of the occasional h'Mdha celebration, 
of the birth-ceremony that should be performed similarly by 
men on the birth of a son ; and everything duly related in 
order that should be done at marriages and on other occasiom. 
And in this the Nandi-mukha pitris§ must bo worshipped; 
and he should give the pi^das mixed with curds and contain- 
ing barley, facing northward or eastward, with composed 
mind making the oblation. Some men like it with the ofPer- 

* Brahma ({. e. Veda)*yajna, deva-yajna, pitfi-yajna, manushya-yajua, and 
iuta-yaji}a (all created beings.) 
t Bead nitya-naimittikam for nitya-naimittika, 
t Bead atra for tatra ? 

§ Nine pltris, viz., the six parents, grandparents and great-grandparents on 
e paternal side, and the grandfather, great-giandfather and great-great- 
®fidfather on the maternal side. 



CAK70 XIX» 


156 

7 ing to the Vi^va-devas omitted. And in this ceremony t]}j 
dvijas must be arranged in pairs, and must be worshipped jj 
dextral circumambulation. This is the occasional cer&m^ 
during growth, and the other is the funeral obsequies. 

8 “ And the ^ddha for a single deceased person should bo 
performed on the day of the death ; listen to that. And il 
should be performed omitting the offering to the gods, and 

9 with a single vessel. And the oblations- with-fire* should noi 
be made .in the fire without the ceremonies. And he should 

10 give one pig^a- to the deceased person near the fragments of 

food, and sesamum-seed and water on the right, accompanying 
them with the recollection of that person’s name. ‘ May he 

11 be exempt from decay,’ let the celebrant say, and ‘ may enjoy, 
ment be his,’ let the others delighted say, at the place where 
the brdhmans are dismissed. Men must do this every montli 

12 for a year. Now at the expiration of the year, or whenever 
the ceremony is performed by men, the ^raddha for deceased 
sapindas must be performed for him also ; so the rule k 

13 stated ; and that must he without the offering to the godsj 
and accompanied with a single argha offering in a singk 
vessel. And that ceremony must not he performed there in 

14 the fire without offering the oblations-with-fire : and on the 
right there, he should feed the single dvijas. 

“ And there is another distinction, consisting in an extn 

15 ceremony every month ; do thou listen attentive to me, as I 
tell thee of it, whilo it is being described. He should fill 
four vessels there with sesamum-seed, perfume and wate, 

16 three for the pitris, one for the deceased person, my son. 
And he should scatter the arghya-oblation in the three ves- 
sels, and in the deceased’s vessel, t uttering the words ‘Y* 

17 samand’ ^c., he should perform the rest as before. 

“ This ^rdddha for a single deeeased person is ordained 

18 precisely the same for women also. The ^raddha for decefts**^ 
sapindas does not exist for them, if they have no son. Tlit 
iSraddha for a single deceased person must be perfQniifi*^| 

* Arihaua. 
t ^eta-^tre for 



THE pilTl^A hJiDDSk, 157 

} every year for a woman By the men, duly on the day of her 
death, as has been here mentioned for men. 

“ But if there are no sons, the sapincjas ; if they are want- 
\ ing, the sahodakas,* and those who may be the mother’s 
sapin^as and those who may be the mother’s sahodakas, 
should duly perform this ceremony for a man who has no 
1 son, and for one who has begotten only a daughter. The 
daughters and their children should in this way perform the 
ceremony for the maternal grandfather. But those who are 
designated as the sons of two such persons should worship 
I their maternal and paternal grandfathers fittingly with the 
' occasional ^raddhas. 

“ When all these relatives are wanting, the women should 
perfonn the ceremony without the mantras for their husbands ; 

I when they too are wanting, the king should cause tJie c&re^ 
mny to be performed by a member of his own family, and 
I tlio (jremation and all the other ceremonies to he ’performed 
[ properly by men of that caste ; for the king indeed is kins- 
1 man to all the classes. 

“ Thus these continual and occasional ceremonies have been 
i desci’ibed to thee, my child. Hear the other periodical cere- 
; mony appertaining to the sraddha. The new moon is 
j just the cause there, and the time is the moon’s waning ; the 
: lixed time indicates the constancy of that ceremony” 

Canto XXXI. 


Description of the Pdrvana Sraddha, 

Maddlasd mentions the seven sapinda ancestors, and the Icpa- 
mas, and the remoter ancestors — She explains how the celebrant of 
5 sraddha nourishes them all — She enumerates the times for the 
\ddha, and the persons who should and who should 'not he invited to 
describes how the hdddha should he performed. 

Maddlasi spoke. 

After the performance of the ^riddha to deceased sapi^idas, 
ho^wLo is the father’s great-grandfather passes to the class of 

* The samiiiQdakaa. 



168 


CAKTO TLllt 


those who feed on the lepa,* having lost his share in the pi^ 

2 offered to the pitris. He, who is the foui’th there-al)OT( 
among those who feed on the lepa bestowed by the deceoseJi 
son, ceases to eat thereof and obtains the satisfaction that y 
freed from the relationship. 

3 “ The father, and grandfather, and also the great-grand, 
father-— these truly must be known as the three males wh 

4 are related by the pinda.f And those who are related bj 
the lepa , are said to be the three others reckoning upward! 
from the grandfather’s grandfather : and the celebrant ii 

5 the seventh among them. Sueh have Munis declared tiij 
seven-ancestral relationship to be, reckoning from the celebmi 
upwards. And there-above are those beyond participation ii 
the lepa. 

6 “ Next are classed all the other ancestors, both those wb 
dwell in Naraka, and those who have become animals, and 
those who reside within living creatures and other things. 

7 “ By what several means the celebrant, while performing 
the sraddha rightly, nourishes all those ancestors^ hear that, 
my child. 

8 “ Now truly those ancestors who have become pisac'as obtaii 
satisfaction from the food that men scatter on the ground 

9 Those ancestors^ my son, who have become trees, receive satii- 
faction from the water that drips from the bathing garment 

10 on the ground. But the drops of water, that fall from tin 
limbs on the ground, 'minister nourishment to those a^icestors^ 

11 the family who have attained divinity. And when tlia 
piiidas are taken up, the particles of food that fall on tin 
earth, — those ancestors in the family who have become anim*!* 

12 gain nourishment therefrom. The children moreover u 
the family who, being capable of performing religious cerf 
monies but not having undergone the purificatory rites, ai* 
burnt on their deaths they in their distress subsist on tl« 

13 scattering of the food and the water used in scouring. ^ 

* The wipings of the hands after offering the funeral oblations to the thK* 

sapip^as* 


t Sapiv^aa. 



the times for the performance of the ^rXddha. 159 

the water, both that which is used by brahmans for rinsing out 
the month after meals, and that which is used hy them for 
sprinkling the feet, — the other ancestors likewise gain satisfac- 
tion indeed therefrom. So whatever water and food is 
scattered by the celebrant and by those dvijas, whether it be 
unsullied or fragmentary, that, my child, in the family of 
those who duly perform the ^raddhas, nourishes the other 
ancestors who have been born among the several crea- 
tions. With the ^rdddhas, which men perform with ill-got- 
ten wealth, are satisfied those ancestors wha have been born as 
c^nulalas, pukka^as and other men of degraded castes. 
f “ Thus many here denvo nourishment, my child, through 
: tluM’r relations who perform the ^raddhas, by means of tL 
t casting away of food and drops of water. Therefore a man 
should perform the ^raddha in faith according to rule even 
with vegetables : no one perishes in the family of one who 
performs the sraddha. 

) “1 will mention the periodic times for it; and learn of 

' me by what rule men perform it. 

> “ The sraddha must necessarily be performed on the niglit 

of the new moon, at the moon’s waning every month, and on 
the eighth days* also. 

“ Learn of me the voluntary seasons. On the ariival of a 
fhstinguished brahman, on an eclipse of the sun or moon, at 
the solstice, at the equinox, at the sun’s passage from one sign 
into another, and on the occasion of a portent,t my son, on 
acquiring property worthy of a ^rdddha, and on seeing a ’bad 
tlream, and at occultations of the constellation or planet 
under which one is bom, one should perform the Mddha 
according to one’s inclination. 

“ A distinguished brdhman learneu in the Veda, a yogi 
one who knows the Veda, one who has mastered the Jyesh- 
t >a-saman, one who has thrice kindled the fire Ndc'iketa, one 
w 0 knows the three verses which begun with ‘ madhu.’J one 
three months. 

read vi)aiipdte. This word has several other 

are admiggible. 

I. 90. 


meanings, 



160 


OAHTO XXXT. 


wfio knows the ^ tri-snparna ' hymns, one •^ho knows theii 

24 Veddngas, a daughter’s son, a Ritvij priest, a dau^ter’s hm 
band, and a sister’s son, and a father-in law also, and one 
is skilled in the business of the five sacred fires, and one 

25 is eminent in austerities, a maternal uncle, and one ^^1) 
is anterior to one’s parents, a disciple, a relative by marriaj 
and a kinsman — these br^mans are all worthy of invitatia 
to a ^raddha. 

26 “ A religious student who has been incontinent, and asid 
man, and one who has a limb superfluous or deficient, the m 
of a widow remarried, and a one-eyed man, an adulterine goi 

27 and a widow’s bastard, my son, a traitor to his friends, on 
who has bad nails, an impotent man, a man with brown teell 
a brdhman negligent of his duties, a man cursed by his fatk 

28 a slanderer, a vendor of soma juice, one who has de 
flowered his daughter, a medical man, and one who has dis 
carded his guru and father, a hired teacher, a friend,* am 

29 the husband of a previously-married woman, one wi 
discards the Vedas, and one who abandons the sacred fire, i 
man who has been corrupted by the husband of a low casti 
woman,t and others who habitually practise improper acts 
— all these persons are verily to bo shunned in ceremonies to tin 
pitris, (0 brahmans.) 

30 “ The celebrant should invite the above-mentioned brahmuBi 
on the day before, to the function performed in honour of tlti 
gods and pitris, and should fetch them also. 

31 “ And both ho, who shall perform a ^raddha that ought it 
be performed by those self-controlling men, and he, 
indulges in sexual intercourse after having offered the 
dha and eaten the food,— the ancestors of these two men venl] 

32 lie down in that semen a month. Moreover he who eats atl 
4raddha and he who goes to a Mddha after intercourse 

33 a woman,— the ancestors of those two men feed on semen 0 
urine for that month. Therefore a wise man must first is®** 

* Bhritakddhyipako mitrab. This seems strangev , 
t For vrishali-pati-dishita4 vrishaU-dUshiU-pati^tOM^kd 

a low*oaste woman or ai deflowered girl p 



THE RITtJAli OP THE ^bXdDHA. 161 

an invitation; and men who have intercjourse with women 
before the day arrives must be shunned. 

“ With his mind controlled he should feast those who 
have come seeking for alms, or ascetics who control them- 
selves at the proper times, after first propitiating them 
with prostrations and other reverential acts. Just as the time 
of the waning moon is dearer to the pitfis than that of the 
waxing moon, so the afternoon pleases the pitfis more than 
tlie forenoon. One should do reverence to these dvijas, who 
have aiTived at his house, with a welcome ; and with the 
pavitra in hand he should seat those, who have rinsed out 
their mouths, on seats. In the case of the pitfis the number 
of brahmans should be uneven, and in the case of the Gods* 
even ; or, according to the circumstances of the celebrant^ there 
sliould be one brahman for the pitfis and one for the Gods. 
Tn like manner for the maternal ancestors the mmher of brah- 
mans should be uneven or only one. The brahmans intended 
for tho Vi4va-dovas may be identical on the side of the pitfis 
and maternal ancestors ; but some other men desire that they 
should bo distinct. Ho should place the brahmans intended 
for tlie Gods with their faces toward the east, and those for 
the pitfis toward the north. f The ceremony due to the 
maternal ancestors has been similarly expounded by the wise. 

Lot tlie intelligent man giving ku^a grass for a seat, and 
worshipping with the arghya and other offerings, giving 
things pure and such like, and obtaining permission from 
them, — let the wise dvija perform the invocation to the gods 
according to the mantras. And having also given the arghya 
offering to all the deities with barley and water, and having 
duly given perfume, garlands, water and incense accompanied 
with a lamp, let him both perform th« whole of the dextral 
circumambulatien for the pitfis ; and having given a double 
quantity of darbha grass, and having obtained permission 

J'or devai read daive. 

The text ia very obscure, and seems corrupt. For this translation I am 
bted to Babu Harimohan VidyAbhushan, the Pandit of the Bengal Asiatic 
ety! 


21 



162 CANTO xxxx. 

44 from them, let the intelligent man perform the invocation! 
the pitpis, prefacing it with the mantras. And let him alj 
perform the dextral circumambulation and give the arglij 

45 offering and barley and money and sesamum seed, intei 
on pleasing the pitris. Then permitted by the dvijas vl 

46 say, ‘ Perform the ceremonies in the fire !’ let him offer ri( 
iinmixed with condiments or salt according to mle. The fir 
rite consists in uttering ‘ Sv6h4 !’ to fire, the bearer i 

47 oblations to the pitris ; and let the next be ‘ Svdhd !’ i 

• Soma who is esteemed by the pityis ; and the third offering 

48 ‘ Svdha !’ to Yama, the lord of the departed. And let hi 
put the remains of the offering into the vessels of the dvijai 
and taking hold of the vessels let him give the rice accordii 

49 to rule. He should say affably “ Ho, do ye enjoy yourselvi 
happily I”* and then they also should eat happily, with the 

50 minds attentive thereon and observing silence. And a ma 
should leisurely give them whatever food they like best, di 

51 playing no wrath and alluring them appropriately. ' And 1 
him utter the mantras which vanquish the Rakshasas, and 1 
him strew the ground with sesamum seed and with whi 
mustard : for the ^raddha possesses abundant devices f 

52 protection. And lot the man, permitted by the dvijas who si 
“Ye are satisfied and we are satisfied by those who a 

^ nourished and satisfied,” scatter food everywhere on tl 

53 ground. Similarly then having obtained permission, let hh 
with voice body and mind controlled, give the dvijas several 

54 waterf to rinse out their mouths. Then, my son, let hi 
witli his loft hand put the pinejas with rice and sesamum-sei 
on the darbha grass, near the remains of the food, for t 

55 pitris. Let him composedly also give them water with t 
part of the handj sacred to the pitris, since 0 prince ! 

56 celebrates the sacrifice with faith for the pitfis. Similft^ 
he should, after giving the pindas on behalf of the materi 
grandfathers according to rule, then give water for rinsi) 

* For yathd sukJiam read yaihd'Suhhani ? 

+ For dpat^ read apah. 

X Pitfi'tfrtha, the part between the forefinger and thumb. 



THE EITUAt OF I’HB ^rIdHHA. 


163 


out the mouth together with scent, garlands &c. ; and having 
given the brahmans* * * § fee according to his ability, address 
them “ May Svadhd be fortunate !” and let him cause them, 
who being satisfied say “ Be it so !” to pronounce the Vai^va- 
devika mantras. Let him say “ May they be pleased !” “ Hail 
to you, 0 Vi^ve devas.” And on those brdhmans, saying, “ Be it 
so !” he should request their benedictions. He should dismiss 
them, addressing them pleasantly and prostrating himself in 
faith ; and he should attend them as far as the door, and he 
should return, a gladdened man. Then he should perform 
the continual ceremony, and should also feed guests. And 
some very good men wish for a continual ceremony to the 
pitris, and others do not wish it for the pitfis. He should 
perform the remainder as the first part : some think ‘ not 
with a separate cooking vessel,’ some prefer it repeated exactly 
in the same order.* Then the celebrant should eat that rice 
in company with his servants and others. 

Thus should the man skilled in religious law perform com- 
posedly the ^raddha to the pitpis, or so as satisfaction accrues 
to the brahmans. There are three pure things in a ^raddha, 
sesamum-seedjf sacrificial grass, and the sesamum-plant ; J 
and they say those, (0 princely brahman,) are to be avoided, 
anger, journeying, haste. A silver vessel is also commended 
at sraddhas, my son. Now silver is for use, for looking at and 
for giving away ; for when the offering to the pitpis is milked 
out in a silver vessel^ the pitpis give oar to the earth ;§ hence 
the pitris desire silver, which increases their affection. 


* The text seems obscure, 

t Dauhitram, see note J, p. 84, 

t Tila. 

§ The text seems inoorreot. 



Canto XXXII. 


The ordinance of the Sraddha, 


Maddlasd explains what hinds of food please the pitris at sHddk 
and for what periods — what hinds are to he avoided — what sites shaiH 
he avoided for' the ceremony — lohat men and animals should he excH 
ed — and what defilements must he avoided — Yogis must have priority 
the srdddha — ancient songs are to he sung — and what benefits accinl 
from the performance. 

Madalasa spoko. 

1 Next hoar, my son, with faith this"* * * § ^ that I say, — what is to 
be avoided in order to please the pitpis, or what conduces ta 
their pleasure. 

2 The pitpis are satisfied with clarified butter and rice fora 
month. The paternal grandfathers receive satisfaction mi 

3 fish-meat for two months. Venison should be known to satis- 
fy the pitris for three months ; and the flesh of bans 

4 nourishes the pitpis for four months ; birds ^ flesh satisfies th 
for five months ; hog’s flesh for six months ; goat’s flcsli 

^5 seven months; and flesh of the black antelopof for eigit 
months ; flesh of the rum deer gives them satisfaction foi 
nine months, without doubt ; flesh of the gayalj gives then 

6 satisfaction for ten months. Moreover sheep’s flesh§ satisfif* 
the pitpis for eleven months ; and milk of kine or anythmi 

7 made of milk satisfies them a year. Flesh of the rhinoceros 
flesh of the red-goat, the dark tulsi plant, || and honey, 

8 flesh of tho rhinoceroslf and whatever else is given by meinbeP 

* For imam read idam, 

t For aineyam read aiwyam. 

X For gavatydmisham read gavaydmiaham f 

§ For urabhram read ailrabkrdm. 

II Kdla-^aka : Ocymum sanctum^ Kozb. I do not find it in Hooker* 

^ Duuliitra ; bat tho rhiaoceroH is already mentioned. 



FOOD TO BE OjrrEItED Ilf THE ^rXdDHA. 


1^5 

of their ovm family, and tulTneri<j and soma juice, and a 'drad- 
dha performed at Gaya without doubt yield the pitfis end- 
less satisfaction. S^yam^ka* grain and raja-i^yamdkat gi*ain, 
and likewise small-grained rice,J wild rice,§ and paushkala 
grain, these among grain tend to satisfy the pitfis. 

Barley, vrihi rice||, and seaamum-sced, and wheat, green 
gram, IF and mustard, priyangu** seed, kovidaraff seed, and 
the finest pulse, markataka§§ seed, raja-masha|||| pulse, and 
anulF IF grai n should be eschewed at a ^raddha. V iprashika*** 
seed and lentilsftt are forbidden in a 4rdddha. GarlicJJ J and 
red garlic,§§§ onions, |||||| carrots, 1F1F1F asparagus,**^* and 
whatever other vegetables are shunned on account of their taste 

' This according to RoxbTU*gh is Panicum frvmentaceumy tho Beng. iydmd ; 

, ho says the Beng. sydtnd also donotos P. colonum. 

■ Porhaps this may bo Panicum hiapididuih^ which Roxburgh says is called 
ig. hara-sydmd. 

; Prasatika. 

NiVara. 

Tho (Us, or rainy season crop P 
f Mndga; see note §§, p. 84. 

* Priyangn, Panicum italicum, (Roxb. p 101.) 
t Kovidara, Bauhinia variegata } see note 1|, p. 27. 

I NLslipava ; soo note ||, p. 86. 

§ Markataka ; this does not seem to be known. 

I Kaja-misha. Prof. Monier- Williams says this is Vigna catiang {Dolichos 
Linn, and Roxb.), (Hooker, vol. II, p. 205). 

If Panicum maliaceum, Roxb., the modern chind, 

** Viprashika ; not given in the Dictionary. 

ft Masura. Prof. Monier-Williams says this is either Ervum hirsutum or 
(Roxb. p. 667). Tho former is the modern musUr chand, and tho 
er masiir. Hooker appears to combine both in Vida hirsuta^ which seems 
'c the common Lentil (Hooker, vol II, pp. 177 and 179). 

Losona. 

§§ Gfinjana. 
llil Palfi^du. 
ill Pin(ia-mulaka. 

** Karambha, neuU Prof. Monier-Williams does not give the neut, but 
8 karambha, fem., is Asparagus racemosusy which is also called i^ta-mdlf 

291 j not in Hooker). 



166 


CANTO xixii. 


and colour ; g^ndhdrik^'**' and kadus,t salts and salted tW 
14 and reddish juices, J and things that are manifestly salt-^tl 
sho uld be indeed avoided in a 4rdddha. And whatever has t 
obtained by talk oi through bribes or other improper meam 
not commended, nor what has been acquired from an outcas 
1»5 and wealth that has been obtained unlawfully as the p 
chase-price of a bride is forbidden in this ceremony, j 
water that is bad-smelling and frothy, and very scanty, j 

16 water that cattle would disdain, and what has been ta) 
by night, and what has been left after every one has cool 
and what is unfit for drinking in a tank — that water sho 

17 bo avoided always in the ceremony to the pitris. All a 
from deer, sheep, camels, and from animals that have i 
cloven hoofs, from buffaloes, and from the yak, and co' 

18 milk that is not more than ten days old,§ and what 1 
been brought to a person who has asked for it on accoiint 

19 the pitris, — such milk must bo always avoided by the g( 
in the ^raddha ceremony. 

And in this ceremony ground must be avoided that 
swarming with insects, that is rough, and that has h. 

20 scorched by fire, and that is hot with the words of enem 
and wicked men, and that is foul- smelling. 

Men who disgrace their family or who injui’o their family 

21 separating themselves from the ^raddha, naked men and crii 
nals may destroy the ceremony to the pitfis with their glan( 
a eunuch, and a man repudiated hy his relations, a cock, ai 

22 the village hog, and a dog, each ruins ^riddhas by his look, a 
so also do Rakshasas. 

Hence let a man offer the ceremony being well secluded, a 

* Gdndh^rikA ; not in ihe Dictionary. Profossor Monier- Williams saysgl 
dh^ri denotes Hedysarum alhagi (Roxb., p. 674), and the Prickly Nightst* * * § 
(which appears to be Solanum Jacquini, Eoxb., p. 191); but neither sea 
appropriate. The text as it stands seems corrupt. For gdndhdriUm^ 
gandholikam, which might mean “ dry ginger”? 

t Alabu ; see note * page 118. 

t Nirydsa; or ‘gums.’ 

§ A-nirda^ This seems strange. 



VARIOUS RULES REGARDING THE ^rXdDHA. 167 

scattering the ground with sesamum seed. Thus may safety 
be secured in the ^’dddha even for both, my child. 

What has been touched by a corpse or by a recently- 
delivered woman,* and by those who have been long ill, by 
outcastes, and by filthy persons, does not nourish the pityis. 

And the celebrant must moreover avoid the sight of a 
woman who is in her courses ; and he must shun sitting to- 
gether with bald-pated men and drunken men at a srMdha, out 
of respect. 

And whatever is infested with hair-lice, and whatever has 
l)cen gazed at by dogs, and whatever is putrid and stale, and 
(ho brill jal,t and ferments, { and whatever has been fanned by 
the wind from clothing, are indeed to bo avoided at a^raddlm. 

Whatever, in the shape of articles of food possessed by 
tliee, is given with supreme faith to the pitris according to 
tlioir name and family, that becomes food for them. Hence 
a man of faith, who desires the pitpis’ satisfaction, must place 
the l)cst tliat ho has in the vessel and according to rule at a 
ceremony to the pitris. 

And the yogis must always be fed by a wise man at a 
sraddha ; for the pitris are patrons of religious devotion ; 
honco one should ever worship them. Now if a yogi is fed 
first, lie can save the person for whom the sacrifice is offered 
and tliosc who feast, just as a boat saves in water, better than 
thousands of brahmans. 

At tliis cereimny also songs in honour of the pitfis are sung 
by those who recite the Veda, songs which were§ formerly sung 
by the pitris to king Pur dravas. “ When will any one of us have 
a son, the chief among his race, who, eating the remains of 
food left by the yogis, will offer the pin^a on earth ? Or will 
tlm pinda, buffalo-beef, the clarified butter, or the vegeta- 

Por hva-sutaka-samprishfam road ffdtahd-iava-samsprishtam P 

tho brinjal, Solanum melongenay Eoxb., the modern begun. Prof. 

Williams calls it the egg-plant. It is a well-known and favonrite 
tiiblo. I do not find it in Hooker. 

dbhishavdij}.s read ahhishavds ? 

For dsin read dean. 



168 


CANTO XXXIfl. 


blo k41a* * * § mixed with sesamnm-seed, or khichxee at j 

34 our monthly satisfaction ? May we obtainf the offering 
the Visva-devas and the soma juice, buffalo-beef, and tl 
finest clarified butter, and the divine foodl by getting a younj 
rhinoceros !” 

35 Let him duly offer the 4raddha on the thirteenth day ai 
when the moon is in the asterism Magha, and milk mixed wi| 
honey and clarified butter during the winter half of the yea 

36 Let a xnan therefore, my son, worship his own pitfis in fait] 
hoping to gain all his wishes and his own deliverance fro 

37 evil. Men’s pitps, when delighted with ^raddhas, please tl 
Vasus, the Rudras and the i^^dityas, the constellations, ti 

38 planets and tho stars. The pitris, when delighted ivit 
^raddhas, bestow long life, wisdom, wealth, knowled^ 
Svarga, final emancipation from existence, and joys ani 
sovereignty. 

39 I have declared to thee, ray son, the 4raddha ceremon; 
as it has been expounded : hear, my child, the praise o 
the Voluntary S'r^iddhas according to the various days on wlk 
they are performed. 


Canto XXXIIL 


The benefits to he obtained from the YoUintary Srdddhas.\\ 

Maddlasd explains the benefits to be obtained from performing Ik 
sraddha voluntarily with a view to the benefit s-^n the various 
the lunar fortnight — and when the Tnoon is in the different asterism' 
Maddlasa spoke. 

1 The first day of the lunar fortnight, if the hdddha he f 
formed on it^ is auspicious for the acquisition of wealth ; ^ 

* There are many plants of this name, 

t For afnuvdmahe read ainuvdmdhai ? 

t Asuryam in the text, bat it seems incorrect. Bead dsuryam or a<i*^** 
from asuroi ? Asur(i is in the dictionary, but not dsurydt 

§ Viahdna-varjya, hornless. 

II Kdmya S^rdddha, . 



the benefits from voluntary ^rIddhas. 


169 


second bestows men ; and the third seeks for boons ; the 
fourth destroys enemies; in the fifth a man acquires for- 
tune ; in the sixth he may become worthy of worship : in the 
seventh he acquires chieftainship ; in the eighth the highest 
prosperity ; in the ninth ho gains women ; in the tenth 
perfect gratification of his wishes. So let him, assiduous in 
the ceremonies, gain all the Vedas in the eleventh. And in 
the twelfth the worshipper of the pitris gains continual vic- 
tories, offspring, mental vigour, cattle, prosperity, indepen- 
dence and perfect nourishment. The man of intense faith, 
who performs the ^rdddha on the thirteenth day, gains length 
of life and sovereignty undoubtedly. Since one is successful in 
^raddhas by means of choice food, he, whoso ancestors died or 
were slain with weapons in their youth, should, if he wishes 
for their pleasure, perform the ceremony on the fourteenth 
day. The pure man, who performs the ^raddha diligently on 
the night of the new moon, obtains all his wishes and attains 
Svarga everlastingly. 

By worshipping the pitris when the moon is in the asterism 
Krittika, a man obtains Svarga. A man who wishes for 
offspring may obtain it when the moon is in the asterism 
Rohini ; and he may gain vigour when she is in the Saumya 
signs of the Zodiac and he may obtain valour when she is 
in the asterism Ardra ; and lands and other possessions when 
she is in Punar-vasu ; and nourishment by always worshipping 
when she is in Pushya ; and noble sons when she is in A-41esha ; 
and pre-eminence among his relations when she is in Maghd ; 
and good fortune when she is in Phalguni.f And the man of 
liberal disposition obtains offspring when she is in Uttard 
Rhalguni. A man who offers 4raddhas when she is in Hasta 
verily attains excellence. And so a man of goodly form may 
obtain offspring when she is in C'itra. Svati bestows success 
IB trade ; Visdkha gives philoprogenitiveness. Men who per- 
form the irdddha when the moon is in Anurddha attain imperial 
and when she is in dyesh^hd lordship ; and when she is 

They are Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, and Capricornus. 

^(ir^halguni read phalguni. 

22 



170 


CANTO XXXIV. 


14 Mdla perfect health. Acquisition of fame comes from perfi^ 
ing the Mddha when she is in Ash^ijhd ; and freedom fro 
grief in Uttard Ashd^hd. And one gains bright 'worldal 
performing it when she is in S'ravana ; and immense ■wealj 

15 when she is in Dhanishthd. One may acquire intimate knoi 
ledge of the Vedas when she is in Abhi-jit ; and sacceMi 
medicine when she is in S'ata-bhishaj ; goats and sheep | 
performing the ceremony in Bhddra; and amorous dalliam 

16 in the latter part of Bhddra. And one who performs the sii 
dha when she is in Revati acquires the baser metals ; andwi^ 
she is in A^vini horses ; and when she is in Bharani full lengl 
of life. 

Hence a man who is skilled in true knowledge stoiil 
perform tlie voluntary Srdddhas at these seasons. 


Canto XXXIV. 

Alarhd*s Education — The exposition of Virtuous Custom,^ 

Maddldsd mentions the benefits of the observance of Virtuous Custour 
which consists in the pursuit of righieoiisness^ wealth and lov^^ 
mentions a large number of general rules regarding religious 
eating ^social behaviour ^ private actions^ and marriage— She gives gew 
rules regarding the sacrifices, and describes the portions of the had< 
he used therein — and mentions how one's residence should be chosa 
Maddlasd spoke. 

1 “ Thus, my son, should the gods and pitris be worshippefi^ 
a householder with the oblations to the gods and the oblatid 
to the pitpis; and with food should guests and kinsnU 

2 living creatures, all dependants, cattle, birds and ants, ^ 
gars and other petitioners be worshipped by the dweller®’ 

3 house, who observes the good customs and performs the i 
mestic sacrifices, my child. He incurs sin if he neglects^ 
periodic ceremonies.” 

* Sad>ao'dra. 



PURSUIT OP RIGHTEOUSNESS, WEALTH AND LOVE 171 

Alarka spoke. 

“ Thou hast declared to me, mother, the threefold ceremonies 
to he observed by men, the perpetual, the occasional, and th© 
periodic.* I wish to hoar, 0 lady who gladdenest thy family, 
about Virtuous Custom by practising which a man gains happi- 
ness in the next world and in this.” 

Maddlasd spoke. 

“ A householder must ever maintain Virtuous Custom tho- 
roughly : for one who has lost Virtuous custom has no happi- 
ness here or in the next world. Sacrifice, alms-giving and 
austerities do not tend to the welfare of a man hero, who 
habitually transgresses Virtuous custom. For a man who 
follows bad custom does not find long life here. One must 
earnestly follow Virtuous custom ; Virtuous custom destroys 
what is inauspicious. 

“ I will expound to thee my son, the nature of that virtuous 
custom. Hear it from me with single mind, and even so 
maintain it. 

“ A householder who performs the domestic sacrifices must 
strive to accomplish the three-fold objects of lifeif in full suc- 
cess therein lies the householder’s own success here and in the 
next world. With a quarter of his Wealth let him, master of 
himself, lay up a store for the next world ; and with half let 
him support himself and perform the periodic sraddhas ; 
and treating a quarter as his capital, he should increase it, 
by exerting himself on his own account. Thus, my son, Wealth 
ought to be fruitful according to Virtuous custom. Similarly 
a wise man must practise Righteousness in order to withstand 
sin ; and so also the third, Love, yields fruit here indeed on ac- 
count of the next world. And the third, Love, is not impeded 
through fear of diminution. Love als*^ is said to be two-fold 
from its not being opposed by this three-fold class. Let a man 
consider all these successive correlations. 

“ Hear from me those opposite correlations, such as Right- 
eousness, &c. Righteousness aims at a succession of right- 

* Nitya, naimittika, and nifcya-r iimittika. 
t Dharma, k^ma and 




172 


CANTO XXXIV. 


eousness.* Righteousness is not destructive to one’s o\r] 
Wealth. And Love is diverse from both ; and those two agaj 
are diverse from it. 

17 “At the Brdhma moment a man should think of and pondg 
over Righteousness and Wealth, after rising up and rinsijj 
out his mouth, standing towards the east, self-restrabed 

18 pure: let him worship the twilight with the constellations ij 
the east, the twilight with the sun in the west, as is right; 
he should not neglect it oven when free from adversity. 

19 “ He should eschew conversation with the wicked, falsehood 
and harsh speech, evil books, evil words and the homage d 
evil, my son. 

20 “ Evening and morning, with soul restrained he should o!ei 
the homa oblation. 

“ He should not gaze up at the orb of the sun at suniiseor 
at sunset. 

21 “ Ho should look in a mirror in order to dress his hair; 
he should wash his teeth ; and delight the gods in the vq 
foremoon. 

22 “ Ho should not defecate or void urine in a path leading to 
the villages, to temples, to places of pilgi’image or to tie 
fields, nor on cultivated ground, nor in a cattle-pen. 

23 “ He should not gaze at another’s wife naked. He should ii« 
look at his own ordure. He should avoid seeing, touching anl 
talking with a woman in-her-courses. 

24 “He should not void urine, or defecate, or engage in sexuil 
intercourse in water. 

25 “ Ho should not stop on ordure, urine, hair, ashes or pot' 
sherds : and a wise man should not step on husks, charcoal 
bones or decayed things, or on rope, clothing, &c., whether oi 
a road, or on the earth. 

26 “ Moreover a householder should do reverence to the 
gods and mankind, and to living creatures, according to 

27 capability, and afterwards eat himself. And a man shooi^ 
always eat his food, facing the east or the north, with ^ 

* Or, brings wealth as a consequence of righteousness. 



MORAL AND SOCIAL MAXIMS. 


173 


mouth well rinsed out, restraining his speech, pure, with his 
mind intent on his food and with his face between his knees. 

“ An intelligent man should not divulge another’s fault ex- 
cept in the event of injury. 

“ Food should be avoided in which salt is visible, and which 
is very hot. 

“ A man of self-control should not defecate nor void urine 
while walking or standing. 

“ And he should not eat anything at all while rinsing out 
his mouth. While he has remains of food in his mouth, he 
should not carry on any conversation and he should cease his 
reading, and he should not touch a cow, a brahman, fire, or 
his own head : 

“ Nor should he look at the sun or the moon or the con- 
stellations with passionate desire.* 

“ And he should avoid a broken seat and bed and cup. 

“ He should oiler a seat to gurus, accompanying the offer 
with rising up and other respectful acts ; and he should salute 
them respectfully and converse with them agreeably; and 
ho should follow them. He should not speak about them ad- 
versely. 

“ And when clad in a single garment he should not eat nor 
engage in the worship of the gods. 

“ An intelligent man should not carry dvijas, nor should he 
void urine in fire, nor should he ever bathe or sleep naked. 

“ And he should not scratch his head with both hands ; nor 
should men wash their heads frequently without cause. And 
when his head is washed he should not touch his body with 
oil at all. 

“ And he should cease his own reading, when every one is 
abstaining from reading. 

“ He should never void urine against a brdhman, the wind, 
cattle or the sun ; facing north by day, and facing south by 
night, he should do his voidance of urine and feeces during 
illnessf whenever he desires. 

* Kamat&a. 

t For dhadhishu read dhddhdsu. 



174 


CANTO XXXIV. 


“ He Bhould not talk of his guru’s evil-doing, and he shoii 

39 appease him when angry. He should not listen to abn 
when others utter it. 

And he should yield the path to brdhmans, to the king, m 

40 to one who is ill with pain, to his superior in learning, to 
pregnant woman, to a man labouring under a burden, to 
younger man, to the dumb, blind and deaf, to a drunken maj 

41 and to a mad man, to a prostitute, to an enemy, to a child m 
to an outcaste. 

“ An intelligent man should respectfully circumambnlatoi 

42 temple, and a fig-tree standing on a sacred spot, and a plao 
where four roads meet, his superior in learning, a guru ant 
a god. 

“ He should not carry shoes, clothes, garlands &c. thai 
others are carrying. 

43 “ He should avoid the sacred thread, an ornament, and t!ie 
water-pot on the fourteenth, eighth and fifteenth days of tlie 

44 moon and at its four changes. Ho should also eschew ruli- 
bing his body with oil, and sexual intercourse with his wife, 
on those days. 

“ And a wise man should never stand with his foot or hislfj 

45 extended : nor should he throw out both his feet ; nor shoalii 
be press one foot on the other. 

" 46 “ He should eschew deadly attacks, abuse and calumny. A 

clever man should not display deceit, self-conceit, or sliai’p- 
ness. He should not disgi^ace with ridicule fools, insane per- 

47 sons, or those in calamity, the deformed, or magicians, or tho« 
who have limbs deficient or superfluous. 

“ He should not inflict punishment on another in order to ip-' 
struct a son or disciple. 

48 “ Likewise the wise man should not draw his seat toward 
him and sit down. 

“ He should not prepare a cake, khichree or flesh for liimseJ 

49 He must have his food evening and morning, after doing « 
verence to his guests. 

“ Facing eastwards or northwards, restraining his voice. 

60 should always wash his teeth, my child. 



MORAL AND SOCIAL MAXIMS. 


176 


“ He BhoTild eschew the prohibited vegetables. 

“ A man should certainly not sleep with his head to the 
north, nor with his head to the west ; he should sleep, plac- 
ing his head to the north east or east. 

“ He should not bathe in perfumed water, nor at night ; bath- 
ing except by day is declared to be most potent for calamity ; 
nor when he has not bathed, should he wipo his limbs with a 
cloth or with his hands. Nor should ho shako his hair, nor 
should be shake his clothes.* Nor should an intelligent man, 
when he has not bathed, ever apply unguents.. 

, “ Nor should ho wear red clothing, nor even variegated or 

black clothing: nor should he make a complete change of his 
clothing or in his ornaments. And transparentf raiment 
should be avoided, and also whatever is very much damaged, 
and whatever is infested with lice, or has been trampled on, 

1 or has been looked at by dogs, and has been licked or thrown 
down, or has been befouled by the extraction of pus. 

“He should never eat flesh from the back, or flesh unfit for 
the gods and pitris, or prohibited flesh, my son, or things 
which are visibly salt. Food that is long stale or that is not 
1 fresh must be avoided, my royal son, because of the changes 
that occur in flour, vegetables, sugarcane and milk ; and meat 
long stale must be avoided, because of the changej that 
occurs in it. 

“ lie should avoid lying down at sunrise and sunset, 

“ Not when unbathed, nor when reposing, nor while thinking 
of other things, nor when sitting on his bed or on the earth, 
nor when making a sound, § nor when clad in a single garment, 
nor when speaking, nor without giving to spectators, but 
when bathed a man should eat evening and morning accord- 
ing to rule. 

“ A wise man should not resort to other men’s wives. Adul- 
tery destroys the religious acts and the life of man. Nothing 
* For vdsasi read vdsdmsi ? 

I For vidaiam read vUadam ? I do not find vidada in the dictionary. 

: vitcdrdmk'a read vikdrdc'c'a ? 

> f'or hhdavat read iahdayan ? 



176 


CANTO XXXIV. 


63 indeed is so short-lived in the world, as a man’s intercom^ 
with another’s wife here. 

“ Let him perform the worship of the gods, and the cere 

64 monies to fire, and the respectful salutation to his guru, amj 
also the ceremony of eating his food, after duly rinsing out hij 

65 mouth. Facing eastwards or northwards he should reverent 
ly rinse out his mouth, my son, with frothless, inodorous, pnrj 

66 and holy water. He should avoid the five earths from l)e. 
neath water, from a habitation, from an ant-hill, from gi’ounil 
infested with mice, and where purificatory actions &c. liare 
been carried on. After washing his hands and feet and sprint 
ling water on them he should, with his face between his knees, 

67 and composed mind, rinse out his mouth. He should diini 
water three or four times after twice wiping the sides ofliij 

68 mouth, the apertures of the body, and his head. After dulj 
rinsing out his mouth with water, being pure, ho should per' 
form the ceremony to the gods, the pishis, and the pitris di- 

69 ligontly. A man should always perform the ceremonies, pre- 
serving a composed mind. A wise man should rinse out lik 
mouth, after he has sneezed, or spitten out, or donned his 

70 raiment. After a sneeze, and licking, and a vomit, and spittiBj 
&c., he should rinse out his mouth, touch a cow’s back, and, 

71 look at the sun ; and he should hold up his right ear, since 
this is in his power ; in the absence of the former, he skould 

72 do the latter ; if the former bo wanting, it is desirable to do 
the latter. 

“He should not gnash his teeth, nor beat his own body. 

73 “ Ho should also avoid sleep, reading and food at bott 
twilights ; and sexual intercourse and setting out on a journej 
at the evening twilight. 

74 “In the fore noon, dear son, he should in faith perform ^ 
worship to the gods, and at noon to men, and in the aftemooii 

76 to the pitfis. And with head bathed, he should perform tha 
ceremonies to the gods or the pitris. And he should trim bu 
beard facing eastwards or northwards. 

76 “He should eschew a maiden although well-bQm, if she is 
formed, or sickly, or disfigured, or tawny-coloured, or talkab^®* 



SOCUL AND MORAL MAXIMS. 


177 


or contaminated by everybody. And one who is free from 
(ieformity, who has a beautiful nose, and is marked with 
all the auspicious marks — such a maiden as that should a man 
ahvays marry who desires welfare. He should marry one 
wlio is in the seventh or fifth degree distant from his parents : 
he should guard his wife, and he should shun jealousy, by day, 
in sleep and in sexual intercourse. 

“ Ho should avoid a deed that causes pain* to others, and 
the infliction of pain on living creatures. 

“ A woman, during menstruation, should be avoided by all 
the east os for four nights. Ho should avoid just the fifth niglit 
of the moon in order to avoid the birth of females : then let 
him approach Ms ivifa on the sixth night, that nigh I is 
best among the even nights, my son. Sons are begotten on 
tlie even nights, daughters on the odd nights : therefore a 
wise man who wishes for a son .should always cohabit ivith his 
iclfe on the even nights. Lawless men cohabit with their wives 
in tlic morning, and eunuchs at evening. 

After shaving, and vomiting and sexual intercourse, my 
son, the wise man should resort to the place where bodies 
are hurntf and should bathe, keeping his clothes on. 

“Ojio should not revile or ridicule the gods, the Vedas, 
or dvija.s, good, truthful or magnanimous men, a guru, or 
(iovoted and virtuous wive.s, or persons who are sacrificing or 
])ei forming austerities, my son. One should never listen to 
tliose unmannerly persons who do such things. 

One should not mount on a high bed or seat, nor on a low 

one. 

One should neither dress unbecomingly, nor speak unbe- 
comingly. One should he clad in pure white raiment, and 
adorned with white flowers. 

^ ^Neither with the haughty, nor with the insane, nor with 
s, nor yet with the unmannerly should a wise man form 
^ headship ; nor yet with those of bad disposition, nor yet with 
^ who are corrupted with thieving and other vices, nor yet 
^^Pa-tapaka, ; not in the dictionary. 

23 



178 


CANTO XXXIV. 


with spend-thrifts, nor with the covetous, nor yet with enenii«( 
nor with prostitutes, nor with inferiors, nor with the husband 

89 of prostitutes. He should never make friendship with tli 
mighty, nor with inferiors, nor with reprobates, nor with ti 

90 ever-timid, nor yet with fatalists. He should contract friend 
ship with good men, with those who always observe Virtnon 
custom, with the wise, with the honest, with the powerfid 
with those who are resolute in action. 

91 “ In Company with one’s friends, the initiated, the kinj 
SnAtaka brahmans, and one’s father-in-law, one should don 
verence to the Ritvij priest, and the five other venerable pei 

92 sons and to guests. One should do reverence, my son, t 
dvijas, who have dwelt for a year, with an offering of hone 
and milk according to one’s ability and with alacrity at 

93 times. And the brahman who desires bliss should obsen 
their governance, and if intelligent he should not contra(li( 
them even though always scolded by them. 

94 “ Having performed the household worship properly in tl 
fitting place and in due order, he should next worship the fii 

95 and offer it the oblations in due order. He should make tl 
first offering to Brahma, and then to to the praja-pati, and tl 

96 third to the Quhyas, and the next to Kafyapa. Thenjhavij 
offered to Anumati* he should next offer the household la 
and the constant oblations, that I have already exMained 

97 thee, according to the ritual. Next he should make^heofj 
ing to the Vi^va-devas, then the offerings to all creatufc*' 
separately to the gods according to place and apportic^ 

98 And he should make the three oblations to Parjanyi^ 
Dharitris, and to M4naka,t and to V4yu in evei^ 

99 to the east and other regions of the sky in due ordBsr;*'^ 
Brahmd, to the Air and to the Sun in order, and to t*^!* 

100 devas and to ail beings; and then he should offer^ 
Dawn, and to S^iva northwards ; and southwards to theW 

101 exclaiming ‘Svadhd, reverence!’ Having done it J 

• The fifteenth day of the moon’s age, personified, 
t This is said to Arum, Indicum, the Bong, mdn-kachu^ the sten 

tubers of which are generally eaten (Roxb., p. 626). 



MINOR EBLIGIOUS RULES. 


179 


right and to the north weet, sayings ‘ O Yakshma,* this is for 
;heo !’ he should, if he wishes, offer the remains of the food 
ind the water fi’om the vessel according to the rule. Then 
■aking up the first part of the food, he should offer it with the 
benediction Hanta to the brahman according to the rule and 
justice. 

“ He should perform the ceremonies to the gods and other 
objects of worship^ with each one’s special portion of the hand ac- 
lording to rule j and he should perform the ceremony of rinsing 
)ut the mouth with the portion of the hand sacred to Brahma. 
This is called the portion of the hand sacred to Brahma for 
;he purpose of rinsing out the mouth, viz.^ a line di’awn to the 
eft of the thumb of the right hand. The pitfis* portion of 
;he hand is said to be the part between the forefinger and 
:he thumb ; by that he should offer the water and other obla- 
;ions to the pitris, except in the n^ndi-mukha iSraddha. And 
;he gods’ portion of the hand is at the tips of the fingers ; the 
itual of ceremonies to the gods should be performed there- 
»vith. The praja-pati’s portion of the hand is at the root of 
:he little finger, his ceremony must be performedf therewith, 
rims always with these portions of the hand sacred to the 
^ods and pitris, he should always perform the ceremonies, 
levor with any other portion of the hand. It is proper al- 
-vays to rinse out the mouth with the portion of the hand 
lacred to Brahma ; and to offer the oblation to the pitpis with 
ihe portion of the hand sacred to the pitris ; and that to the 
jods with the portion of the hand sacred to the gods ; and 
he offering to the prajd-pati with his own portion of the hand, 
^ wise man should perform the cake-and-water ceremony to 
he naudi-mukha ancestors, and whatever is offered to the 
I’aja-pati, with the portion of the hand sacred to the prajd- 
ati. 

, A sensible man should not carry water and fire at the same 
pe ; nor should he thrust out both his feet towards guru 
the gods. 


Jnary disease. 


^ t k&ryam for kiyam P 



180 CANTO XXXV. 

111 “He should not look at a heifer sucking. 

“ He should not drink water with the hands joined togetl, 

“ At all periods of personal purification whether importa 

112 or unimportant, he should not delay for the sake of purifij 
tion. 

“ He should not blow the fire with his mouth. 

“ One ought not to take up one’s abode, my son, 

113 four things do not exist, viz., a person who pays debts, and 
physicikn, a brahman learned in the Vedas, and a river fi 
of water. Where there is a king who has vanquished! 

114 foes, who is powerful, and who is devoted to righteousnei 
there should a wise man always dwell : whence can cw 
happiness, when the king is worthless ? Where the kin^ 

115 unassailable, where the earth is prolific, where the citizei 
are well governed and always practise justice, where folk a 

116 charitable, there does residence bestow happiness. In 
country where the husbandmen are not generally gluttonoc 
and where all medicinal herbs are procurable, there should 

117 sensible man dwell. , One ought not, my son, to dwell thei 
where these three things are constant, a person desirous 
conquering, and a former enemy, and folk who are alwa 

118 holding festival. A wise man should always dwell araoi 
good-tempered neighbours. 

“ Thus, my son, have I, thy well-wisher, expounded this 
thee.” 


Canto XXXV. 


The education of Alarka {continued). 

A 71 exposition of things permitted and forbidden, 

Maddlasd describes what food may he eaten a7id wkat ^ 
how various things are to he cleansed when impure, and ^ 
things are always pure — how one who has contracted imf* 
should purify himself — what actions and conduct one should 



RULES AS TO BATING AND PURIFICATION. 


181 


She insists on the necessity of maintining the daily sacrifice— -Sh^ 
mentions what holidoys are allowed the variotis castes— She des- 
cribes certain post-funeral cere'tnonies— and purification after deaths 
and births. 


Madalasa spoke. 

Next do thou hearken to the remedial measures for things 
forbidden and permitted. Rice should be eaten that has been 
kept awhile, mixed with oil, and long stored ; and wheat, 
barley, and butter-milk and preparations thereof unmixed 
with oil. The hare, the tortoise, the go-samp,* the porcupine 
and the rhinoceros, my son,— these indeed may be eaten ; and 
the domestic pig and fowl should be eschewed. The remains 
of food at a .^raddha after the pitris and gods and other reci- 
'pknts have been satisfied may be eaten at the desire of the 
brahmans. A man who eats flesh that has been killed for the 
parposo of medicine is not defiled. 

Shells, stones, gold, and silver, ropes, and garments, and 
vegetables, roots and fruits, and wicker-work vessels and lea- 
ther, and gems, diamonds, and coral, and pearls, and men's 
bodies are best cleansed with water; just as iron things with 
water, and stone by scrubbing. Oily vessels are cleansed with 
warm water, and winnowing baskets, grain and antelope-skins, 
and the pestle and mortar for husking rice, and thick cloths, 
and a store by Crinkling; and all kinds of bark-made things 
are best cleansed with water and earth. Grass, wood and 
medicinal herbs are best cleansed by sprinkling; and all 
woollen things and hair have ceremonial purity. White mus- 
tard IS cleansed with oily sediment or the sediment from 
f>esdmQm seed. Things that are injured are always cleansed 
''iti water, my son. So also cotton things are cleaned with 
^ater and ashes. Timber, ivory, bone and horn are best 

“ eanod by scraping. Earthen pots are purified ceremo- 
mally by re-buming. 

Pure are alms, a workman’s hand, wares for sale, and a 

^odha, the Go-samp a very large kind of lizard fonnd in jntigle. 



182 CANTO mv. 

13 woman’s face, whateyer passes along tbe high-road, whai 
unknown, what is brought by slaves and other meitiaU, what 
admirable for its sound, what is long past, what is screened I 

14 many, what is light, what is extremely abundant, wlmt 
young, and what is done by the old and the sickly, kitciei 
when the business in them is ended, women who are sncklin 

16 children. Pure also are running water, and odourless bubble 

The ground is cleansed through time, by the rubbing i 

16 bodies, 'and the passage of cattle, by smearing, by digginj 
by watering, by houses, by sweeping and by worship. 

Things infested with hair-lice, or sniffed at by cattle, ( 

17 infested with flies should be sprinkled with earth water an 
ashes to be cleansed, my son; things made of udumbar 

18 wood* with vinegar ; tin and lead with salt. Brass thing 
are cleaned with ashes and water ; and the over-flows of fluid 
are pure. A thing soiled by ordure is cleaned with earth 

19 water and by removing the smell; and other such-like thing 
by removing the colour and smell. 

Water is pure that has satisfied cattle, that is in its natra 

20 state, that is lying on the earth ; and likewise flesh that h 
been slain by C'andalas, Kravyadas and others. And clotbe 
and other things lying on the high-road are said to he wad 

21 pure by the wind. Dust, fire, a horse, a cow, the shade, tl 
rays of the sun and moon, the wind, the earth, drops of watei 
and mosquitoes and other insects infliq^ no contaminatioi 
though they may have been in contact with what is corrupl 

22 A goat and a horse are pure as regards their face ; but the fa® 
of a cow or calf is not pure when the mother is in milk ; a ha^ 

23 is pure when it knocks fruit down. A seat, a bed, a carriag* 
boats, and grass on the road — they are purified by the rays® 
the moon and sun and by the wind, in the same way as artid® 
of trade. 

24 After walking along the high road, and after matters < 
bathing, hunger, drinking, and weariness, one should chanj 

• Udnmbara, Ficus glomerata, Roxb. ; a large tree, oominon about villM* 

(Boxb. p. 646.1 



PURIFICATORY AND BANITARY RULES. 


183 


)iie’s clothes and duly rinse out one’s mouth. Bad roads,* mud, 
lud water, when one comes into contact with them, are cleaned 
by leaving them alone ; and things made of mud or brickf 
ire cleansed by contact with the wind. 

On taking up a morsel of rice-food that has been damaged 
through over-maturity, he should discard it, and should rinse 
[)ut his mouth with water and earth, and should sprinkle the 
remainder with water. One who has eaten bad food whether 
wittingly or unwittingly, should fast for three nights in order 
to assuage^ that fault. 

After touching a menstruous woman, a horse, a jackal, and 
other animals^ or a woman recently delivered of a child, or 
people of low caste, one should bathe for the sake of purifica- 
tion ; and so should those who have carried a corpse. After 
touching an oily human bone a man becomes clean when he 
has bathed ; after touching a dry human bone he becomes clean 
by rinsing out his mouth, or by touching a cow, or by gazing 
it the sun. Moreover one should not disregard blood, spittle, 
iud unguents for the body. 

A wise man should never stand in gardens and other 
places in the afternoons. Nor should one hold converse with 
a woman hated by the populace or with a widow. 

One should cast remnants of food, ordure, urine and the 
water used for washing the feet, outside the house. 

Without taking up five pindas one should not bathe in 
mother man’s water ; one should bathe in holy ponds, and 
n the Ganges, in lakes and rivers. 

After touching or holding converse with blasphemers of the 
gods, pitris, and holy sastras, sacrifices, prayers and other 
sacred objects, oijp should purify one’s self by gazing at the 
sun. And after looking at a menstruous woman, a ^udra, an 
outcaste, or a dead body, the unrighteous, a woman recently 
delivered of a child, a eunuch, a naked person, and persons 
of low caste, and on those who give away children, and 

Jhrathya ; not in the dictionary. % For upaiamena read upaiamdya f 
lsl*\a, brick ? 



184 


CANTO XXXV. 


on the paramours of other men’s wives, the wise rnnstji 

36 deed perform this purification of themselves. One cony^ 
sant with righteousness, after touching forbidden food, a ^ 
man recently delivered, a eunuch, a cat, a rat, a dog, on 
cock, and an outcaste, what is cast away, a C'andala, aiK 

37 those who carry away corpses, is purified by bathing; andj 
also one wlio has touched a woman in her courses, and tli 
domestic hog, and even two men who have been contaminate! 
by the impurity of a nowly-delivered woman. 

38 The base man, both he who daily neglects the continm 
ceremony, and he who is abandoned by brahmans, is polluted 

39 One should never allow the continual ceremony to ccasoj bm 
if it is neglected, there is a stoppage to the re-birth of liij 
deceased relatives. 

40 A brahman should spend ten days, exempt from alms-gmn^, 
the Homa sacrifice and other pious acts : and a kshatriyi 

41 should spend twelve days : and a vaisya half a month ; bnti 
4udra should remain a month, exempt from his peculiar oot 
pation : thereafter all should pursue their own occupation, n 
already expounded. 

42 Water ought to be presented to a departed person, after Iiis 
body has been burnt outside by his relatives,* on the first 

43 and fourth, seventh and ninth days of the moon. His relativa 
should gather together the ashes and bones on the fourth day; 
it is prescribed that after gathering them together, they 

44 should touch their limbs with them. But the sahodakas 
should perform all the ceremonies, after the gathering to- 
gether of the remains. If the sapindas are touched by them 
then both the sapindas and the sahodakas lose their puidtjt 

45 If a person dies directly of his own fr|e will, by the sword, 
by water, by hanging, or by fire, by poison, by a fall, or 
in any other tmnatural way^ or by religious fasting to death, 
or by fasting to death from vindictive motives or if I*® 

Gotrika. 

t For mfitdhani read mfijd-hdnis. 

J For verse 45 of the text read — 

Anvaksham ic'c'hat/d dastra-toyodbandhana-vahnishu 
Visha-Tprapdtddi-mnte 'prdyonaianayor api. 



PURIFICATORY RULES AFTER DEATHS. 


185 


dies as a child, or as a sojourner in a foreign country, or as a 
religious mendicant, purification will be effected at once ; and 
otliers say the period of impurity* is declared to be three days 
for the sapindas ; but if, after tho other person is dead, the 
sapiiida also dies, in this case the ceremonies must be perform- 
ed during the days called the period of the first impurity. 

This same ordinance is applied also to the impurity caused 
by the birth of sapiiidas, among sapindas and properly among 
sahodakas also. When a son is born, the father must bathe 
with his clothes on. And if, after one child has been born 
tliere, another should bo born, the purification in that case 
also is prescribed according to the days of tho elder-bom child. 

When ten or twelve months or half a month have elapsed, 
all the castes should duly perform their respective rites and 
cerenionies. Next the ekoddiahta Mddha should be performed 
for the departed person. And men of understanding must 
give gifts to the brahmans ; whatever is most desired in the 
world, and whatever is prized at home, those very things 
tluu’cfore must one who hopes for immortality give to a hrah- 
mmi endowed with good qualities : but at the end of the days, 
aft(‘r they have touched water, a chariot, a weapon, a goad 
and a rod, and after they have performed the ceremonies, 
they should make the oblationf ordained by the laws of their 
re.spective castes, and perform all pure acts that confer bliss in 
the next world and in this. 

A wise man must study the three Vedas, and must bo con- 
tinually occupied therein ; he must amass riches righteously, 
and strenuously perform sacrifices ; and ho must fearlessly do 
whatever does not entail censure on the soul of him who does it, 
^y sion, and whatever ought not to be concealed in public. The 
good man that so does, my child, brings splendour to his home 

acquiring righteousness wealth and love. 

^I’P text appears to be corrupt. This amended reading is taken from a 
consulted by the pandit of the Bengal Asiatic Society for me, but 
*^‘««'anai/or seems preferable. 

4 iciiic akam ; not in the dictionary, 
for i^paddnam read upaddnam ? 

24 



186 


CANTO XXXVI. 


Canto XXXVL 


The Story of Maddlasd (concluded). 

Pita-dhvaja Kuvalayddva on reaching old age resigns his hingdo^i^ 

his son Alarka, and Maddlasd gives him a token-ring — Both deparH^ 

the forest to practise austerities. 

Jada spoke. 

1 Being thus instructed by his mother, Rita-dhvaja’s son t 

2 tained his youth and duly married a wife, and begat soi 
and as a lord offered sacrifices, and always closely obseryi 

3 his father’s commands. Then after a long time Rita-dhvaj 
on reaching extreme old age, anointed his son in the sovereigi 

4 ty, and with righteous soul desirous to depart to the forest I 
practise austerities in company with his wife descended/™ 
his throne., a mighty protector, an illustrious king. 

5 And Maddlasd. delivered this her last discourse to her so: 
in order that her son might abandon attachment to sensuj 
pleasures. 

Madalasd spoke. 

6 “ When intolerable pain, arising from separation from tk] 
dear kinsmen, or caused by the opposition of thy enemies, a 
springing from the destruction of thy wealth or from thy oiH 

7 self, may befall thee as thou rulest thy kingdom, observing tl 
laws of a householder — for the householder who depends ( 

8 selfishness makes unhappiness his abode — then, my son, dr» 
forth and read from this ring that I have given thee tl 
writing that is inlaid in delicate letters on the plate.” 

Jada spoke. 

9 So saying, she gave him a golden ring, and the blessmj 

10 appropriate for a man who lives the family life. 
Kuvalayadva and his queen Maddlasd, bestowing on their 
the kingdom, departed to the forest to practise austerities ; 



alarka’s reign and dippiculties. 


187 


Canto XXXVII. 


The conversation^ between the Father and Son {continued). 
The discrimination of the Soul. 


Alarka ruled righteously and prosperously, hut was greatly addicted 
pleasure— His brother Suhdhu, wishing to correct him, formed an 
liance with the king of Kdii — Both attacked Alarka to wrest the king- 
mfrom him, and reduced him to great straits — In his distress he 
oks at Maddlasd's token-ring and seeks relief from Dattdtreya — He 
plains to Dattdtreya wherein lies his suffering, and launches into a 
etaphijsical disquisition on the soul, the mind, the body, and plea- 
re and pain. 

Jada spoke. 

And Alarka also, righteous in soul, protected justly and 
like children his glad people who practised each his own 
business. Inflicting punishment on the wicked, and worthily 
adoi'ding pi*otcction to the peaceable, he experienced intense 
delight; and he offered great sacriflccs. 

And there were born to him sons, mighty and valiant, 
1‘igh toons in soul, magnanimous, who were advei’saries to evil 
conduct. And he amassed wealth by means of righteousness, 
and ]•iglltcousness again by means of wealth ; and since those 
two tilings are not antagonistic, he enjoyed even the pleasures 
ot sense. Thus many years passed away as if but a single day, 
'vliilo ho ruled the earth, devoted to righteousness, wealth 
and the gratification of his desires. No feelings of indifference 
occurred while he enjoyed his loved objects of sense ; nor 
again did he grow satiated in amassing righteousness and 
wealth. 

His brother Subahu, who roamed th« forests, heard that he 
\N as thus besotted in his attachment to pleasure, and uncon- 
b'ollcd in his senses. The prince, being desirous of admo- 
aishiRg him, pondered long and concluded that an alliance on 
part with the king’s enemies would be beneficial to the 



188 


CANTO XXXVII. 


9 king. Then he cleverly made repeated visits to the king 
KaiSi, who had numerous armies and chariots, as his protectc 
in order to regain his kingdom. 

10 That king collected together his army against Alarka, ai 
despatched a messenger to demand that the kingdom should 1 

11 gived up to Subahu. Alarka refused, cognizant of his o? 
justice, to give up the kingdom then in obedience to that coi 
mand, and returned answer to the messenger of the king 

12 Ka4i ; — “ Let my elder brother come to me with affection ai 
ask for the kingdom for himself. I will not yield np tl 

13 smallest bit of territory through fear on an attack.” Evi 
wise Subahu made no request then. Supplication is not tl 
duty of kshatriyas, for he was mighty in valour. 

14 Then the king of Kasi accompanied by all his anr 

15 marched to attack the country of king Alarka. And fortliwii 
forming a close union with the contiguous Icings he attack 
with some of their many vassals, and reduced him 

16 subjection. And without harassing Alarka’s neighbouiii 
kings by molesting their realms, he thus subjugated both tl 

17 governors of the fortresses and the forest tribes. Ho i 
ducod into submission some kings by bribes, and some 1 
creating dissension, and others who were well-affected towim 
Alarka by conciliation. 

18 Then the king with his small army, harassed by the adve 
sary’s host, found his treasury depleted extremely by the f 

" 19 that blockaded his city. And being thus straitened and wi 
his treasury diminishing daily, he fell into intense dcjcctit 

20 and perplexity of mind. After suffering the keenest pain, 1 
then bethought him of the ring, about which his mother M 

21 dalasd had formerly spoken to him. Then bathing and pui 
fying himself, he addressed the brahmans, and drawing o 

22 the ring saw the motto thereof in clear characters. The 
pronounced what his mother had written thereon, whilo tl 
hair of his body was visibly standing erect, and his eyes we 

23 expanded with joy ‘ Association must be shunned by evei 
soul ; if to shun it be impossible, it should be formed witti t 

24 good, for association with the good is a panacea. Love 



ALARKA SEEKS AID OP DATTXtREYA. 


189 


lje shuiiDe(f by every soul ; if to eschew jt be impossible, it 
should be display^towarda the desire for final emancipation 
from existence, for that desire is a cure therefor.’ 

N^ovv having exclaimed repeatedly, * How can men really 
attain bliss and having decided that it was through the de- 
sire for final emancipation since that desire is appropriate* 
thereto, the king next pondering upon association with the 
good, and suffering the most poignant grief, visited illus- 
trious Dattatreya. On meeting him, magnanimous, stainless 
and devoid of attachments, ho prostmted himself and wor- 
shipped him and addressed him with propriety; “0 brah- 
man! sliow me favour, thou who art the refuge of refuge- 
seekers ! Eemove affliction from me, who am in affliction, and 
over-addicted to desires.” 

Dattatreya spoke. 

“ At once indeed do I remove thy affliction, 0 king. Tell 
mo truly, wherefore hast thou that affliction, 0 king ? ” 

Jada spoke. 

Being thus addressed by tliat wise Muni^ the king pondered 
over the scat and the nature of his three-fold affliction. The 
king, being noble in intcdlect, held long and repeated delibera- 
tion with liis soul, being steadfast the while, and then laughing 
spoke thus : — 

“ It is not myself, nor the eaHh, nor the sea, nor the stai’s, 
nor the wind, nor the air ; but I wish for happiness in bodily 
coiicerm. Pleasure and pain pass to deficiency or excess in 
this body composed of five elements : what welfare should 
1 not get, if such I might have, in another body wherein I 
should possess a constant and perfect good-disposition and 
should bo raised and depressed through inequalities ? 
Moreover a man of self-denial is perceived by his difference 
from otherfi. And so docs bodily pleasure or pain generate a 
good disposition in one who looks upon the subtle third por- 
tion Avhich exists merely a moment ? Since pain dwells in 
the mind, t and pleasure again is a mental thing; therefore 

^'or talsaiigato read tatsangatd ? t Manas. 



190 


Canto xxxviii. 


neither pain »or pleasure belong to the Ego ; for the Mind is 

37 not the Ego. Inasmuch as neither Self-consciousness,* nor 
Mind, nor Intellectf is the Ego, why then does the in-boru 

38 pain in something else affect me ? Since the Ego is not the 
Body, nor the Mind, the Ego is distinct from the Body and ; 
the Mind. Therefore let pleasures and pains dwell in the i 

39 Mind or in the Body ; how is the Ego concerned hereat ? If 
my elder brother covets the sovereignty over this body, it ig 
an aggregate of five elements. How then is my Self concemed 
with the action of the qualities therein ? He when seated 

40 therein and I are distinct as regards the Body. He who alto- j 
gether lacks hands and other organs, flesh, bones and bead, 
what connexion, even a slight one, has that man here with 

41 elephants, horses, chariots and other treasures ? Hence my 
Self has no foe, it has no pain, it has no pleasure, nor city, nor 
treasury, nor army composed of horses, elephants, &c., neither 
has he, nor a third person, nor any one, nor have T any oj 

42 these things. For as the air that occupies the orb!j! of a small 
water-jar and a pitcher, though one, is perceived in many 
ways, so Subahu and the king of Ka4i and I, raethinks, we 
perceived among bodies by bodily differences.” 


Canto XXXVIII. 


The conversation hetweeti the Father and Son (continued)- 
A series of questio?is. 


Daltdtraya moralizes on the consciousness of Self and its 
under the parable of a tree, and asserts the non-materiality of the Sd 
Alarka asks for instruction about Yoga or religious devotion. 

Jada spoke. 

1 Then the king prostrating himself before the magnanimous 
t Buddhi. t For man4alu read 


* Ahankara. 



A DISQUISITION ON THE SOUL. 


191 


braliuiftii Dattatreya, renewed his speech, bending respect- 
fully before him. 

“No whit of affliction have I, 0 brdhman, when I look on 
things in a proper frame of mind : those who look on things 

3 amiss are always sunk in a sea of unhappiness. In whatever 
thing a man’s intellect becomes self-engrossed, he receives 

4 woes therefrom and pays them back. There is not so much 
pain when a cat eats an unselfish sparrow or mouse, as when 

5 it cats a domestic fowl. I then feel neither pain nor pleasure, 
since I am beyond the material world.* Whoever is subject 
to created things by means of created things, is indeed sensi- 
tive to pleasure and pain.” 

Dattatreya spoke. 

6 “ It is even so, 0 tiger-hero ! as thou hast just declared. 
The thought ‘ it is mine ’ is the root of pain ; and the thought 

7 ‘it is naught of mine’ is the root of calmness. From my 
question indeed has this sublime knowledge sprung up in 
thee, who hast cast off the conviction ‘ It is mine as if it 
were the cotton of the seemul tree.”t 

8 “ With the thought ‘ it is I ’ the germ has sprung up ; with 
the thought ‘ it is mine,’ the germ has grown shoulder-high : 
and home and lands are its topmost boughs ; children and 
wife and other relations are its young shoots ; wealth and 
corn are its great leaves ; it has developed not once only ; and 
merit and demerit are its outmost flowers ; pleasure and pain 

Id are its full-grown fruit. There it fills the path of final 
emancipation ; it oozes out at the commingling of fools j it is 
rich with festoons of bees which are the desire to be doing ; 

11 knowledge of what ought to be done is the full-grown tree. 
Those who, wearied with the road of worldly existence, betake 
themselves to its shade ai'e dominated by error, knowledge 

^2 and happiness ; where is their superiority? But those, who 

* Prakfiti. 

t The capsnlos when ripe burst, and the silky cotton inside is scattered 

er ground for many yards around. 



192 


CANTO XXXVIII. 


hew down the tree of selfishness with the axe of learning 
which is sharpened on the whet-stone of association with tie 

13 good, travel along that path. Reaching the cool, dustlesg^ 
thornless grove of religions knowledge, the wise, ceasing 
action, attain supreme emancipation from existence. 

14 “ Neither art thon, 0 king, nor am I a gi’oss object consist, 
ing of the elements and of organs : neither must I declare m 
are an elementary rudiment, nor that we both have a soul as 

16 an eternal organ. Or, whom 0 king do I see the chief of us two, 
since the conscious soul* * * § is sublime, and the personal aggre- 

16 gate consists of qualities. Just as mosquitoes, the dumbai 
trees, t reeds, munja grass,;}! fish and water have separate 
existences though they dwell together, so is it with the bodj 
and the soul, 0 king.” 

Alarka spoke. 

17 “ Adorable Sir ! through thy favour has sublime know]edg( 
of this kind been revealed to me, which causes one to disceri 

18 the power of the Supreme Intellect ; but no stability remainf 
hero in my mind which is assailed by objects of sense; noi 
moreover do I see how I may be delivered from the bonds o 

19 Natui’e, or how I may cease to exist again, or how I ma; 
attain in perpetuity to this state of being devoid of qualities am 

20 to one-ness with Brahma. Therefore, 0 brahman, mighty ii 
knowledge ! expound religious devotion§ properly to me, whi 
thus beseech thee, prostrate before thee, for association \vitl 
the good is beneficial to men.” 

* Kahetrajna. 

t Udambara, Ficus glomeratay Roxb, the modem dumbur, (p. 646) not i 

Hooker. 

J Saccharum murya, Boxb. (p. 82). 

§ Yoga. 



YOGA OR RELIGIOUS DEVOTION. 


193 


. Canto XXXIX. 


Yoga, or Religious Devotion, 

Dattafreya continues his exhortation^Final emancipation from 
exidetice is attained through yoga or religious devotion^ — and the 
means are restraint of the breathy mental abstraction^ restraint of 
the serises, and deep meditation. These means are analyzed and 
pxphined at length. What circumstances aro inimical to yoga*.* 
The improper performance of yoga entails bodily ailments. Uow 
such bodily ailments may be cured. The signs of the proper per- 
Jot mace of yoga. 

Dattati-eya spoke. 

A yogi’s removal of ignorance by the attainment of know- 
ledge is ‘ mukti this is union with Brahma, and separatioji 
from the three qualities of Nature. ‘ Mukti,’ or final emancipa- 
tion from existence, corner from religious devotion; and reli- 
gious devotion comes rightly from knowledge, 0 king ; know- 
ledge cornea through suffering; suffering is the lot of those 
whose minds are engrossed with self. Hence the man who 
desires final emancipation should strenuously discard every 
association; when associations drop, the designation ‘rfcia 
mine ’ disappears. Freedom from selfishness tends indeed to 
happiness ; the perception of faults comes from passionlessness ; 
and passiorilessness comes indeed from knowledge ; knowledge 
IS preceded by passionlessness. That is one’s house, where 
one resides ; that is food, by which one lives ; that which tends 
to final emancipation is described as knowledge or ignorance. 
% consuming merits and demerits, 0 king, and through not 
doing voluntarily constant acts that ought to be done, through 
not amassing subsequent acts^ and through diminishing acts 
lhat have been previously amassed, the body never again falls 
into the bonds of action. 

I have declared to thee, 0 king ! Listen also to this 
I’cligious devotion from me, by adopting which the religious 
doTotoe may attain to an eternal identity with Brahma. 

25 



194 


CANTO XXXTX. 


9 First indeed the soul must be conquered by soul ; it ^ 
indeed a hard victory .for religious devotees. He should 

10 forth effort in that victory. Hear from mo the means thereto, 
Ho should bum up his faults by restraining his breath,* ani] 
his stains by steady mental abstraction, f his sensual enjoy, 
ments by restraining his senses,}: and his unbridled qualities lij 

11 deep meditation.§ Just as impurities are burnt out of metals 
when they are melted, so the faults wrought by the organs ol 

12 sense are burnt out by restraining the breath. The religious 
devotee should first accomplish the regulation of his breatli 

Now stopping the inhalation || is designated prandyjima 

13 ‘ restraining the breath.’ Pi-anaydma is of three kinds, >vliicl 
are named the ‘slight,’ the ‘medium’ and the ‘intense.'^ 

14 I will describe its measure ; hear it of me, 0 Alarka! TIk 
‘ slight ’ extends during twelve matras or prosodial instants 
and the ‘ medium ’ is double that, and the ‘ intense ’ is well 

15 known as containing thrice that number of instants. TIk 
time of a matra is that of the winking and opening the eye 
lids once. The measure of twelve matras is fixed for tin 

16 reckoning of the pranayama. With the first he should ovei,‘conii 
perspiration, and with the second agitation, and with the thin 

17 dejection; he should gradually overcome his faults. Now a: 
lions, tigers and elephants, when kindly treated become mild 
so the breath falls within the control of the religious devotee 

18 As an elephant-driver brings a rutting elephant under contm 
acegrding to his wish, even so a religious devotee who has th 

19 wish brings his breath to perfect control. For as tho pi’oui 
lion when tamed does not attack deer, so the obstructed wini 

20 destroys men’s guilt but not their body. Therefore the reli 
gious devotee while engaged in devotion should pay good hee< 
to the restraining of his breath. 

Hear its four conditions that bestow the result of 

21 emancipation. They are cesBeitioii** of the consequences of 

* PrAn^yama. || A-pana, a meaning not in the dictionary- 

t Dhdrana. IF Uttariya, a meaning not in the dictionaiy 

$ Pratydhfira. ** Dhvasti, 

) Dhyina. 



METHOD OP PERFORMING YOGA. 


195 


and the power of obtaining everything,* harmonyf and 
serenity, t 0 king I Hear also their nature as I describe it in 
li order. Where the fruits of good and bad actions die sway, 
and the mind attains pellucidity,§ that is called ‘dhvasti.’ 
When the religious devotee himself always continuously resists 
the desires of this world and of the next world, such as covet- 
21 ousness and infatuation, that is ‘ prapti ’ everlasting. When 
the religious devotee possessed of equal power pereeives, by 
2.5 tlie advantage of his knowledge, the past and future remotely- 
concealed meanings of the moon, sun, stars and planets, and 
gains success, then occurs the condition of pranayama called 
20 ‘samvid.’ The ^iafo by which his mind, and his five vital airs, 
his organs of sense and the object.s of those organs become 
serene, is called ‘ prasada.’ 

27 Hear o-lso, 0 king, the characteristics of pranayama, and 
what kind of seat is enjoined for one who always practises 
' yoga. 

IS Adopting the padma half seat, and the svastika sitting 
posture, ho should utter the syllable Om I in his heart and 
!;) p]-actise his religious devotion. Sitting evenly on an even 
Rciit, drawing in both his feet, and firmly fixing his thighs 
to rightly in fi'ont, lie should cover his mouth ; he should sit 
without touching his private parts with his heels, with 
his senses under control ; ho should raise his head slightly ; 

11 he sliould not close his teeth together. Gazing at the tip of 
his own nose and not looking around, the religious devotee 
should conceal the activity of darkness with passion, and that 

12 of passion with goodness, and taking his stand in unsullied 
goodness sliould practise devotion. He should hold in his 
organs of sense from their objects of sense, and his breath and 

Id other faculties and his mind, he should advance to abstrac- 
tion with a steadfast cohesion. But he who should draw in 
his desires, as a tortoise draws in all its limbs, always 
delighting in soul and self-collected, sees soul in soul. The 
wise man after purifying himself externally and internally, 

* Prapti. 

; t SaUvid. 


J PraRdda. 

§ Apa-kaahdya-tva ; not in the dictionary. 



196 


CANTO XXXIX. 


and filling out his body from the navel to the neck, slioulij 
advance to abstraction. A ‘ dhara^a,’ or steady mental 

36 abstraction, is called twelve pr^nayamas. Two kinds of 
dliarana are known in religious devotion by devotees who are 
conversant with the truth. Moreover when a religioag 

37 devotee is steeped in devotion and controls his soul, all hig 
faults perish, and he becomes whole ; and he sees supreme 

38 Brahma and the qualities of Nature separately, the sky and 
the primordial atoms and the unsullied soul. 

Thus a religious devotee, who restricts his food and who is 

39 intent on' restraining his breath, should occupy ground, which 
has been thoroughly and gradually reclaimed, as it were his 
house. Unreclaimed ground when it is taken possession of 

40 increases faults, diseases and foolishness, therefore he should 
not occupy unreclaimed ground. 

* Pranaydma ’ or restraining the breath is so called from the 

41 restriction* placed on the breath ; and this is called ‘ dharana’ 
or mental abstraction, by which the mind is abstracted ; since 

42 the organs, which are occupied with words and other aedm^ 
are restrained by religious devotees by means of devotion, that 
is called ‘ pratyahara,’ or restraining the senses. 

And the means for this is declared by paramarshia who 

43 wore religious devotees, so that diseases and other faults may 
not spring up in a religious devotee. Just as the thirsty may 

44 drink water gradually by vessels, pipes and other mans, bo a 
religious devotee who has overcome his distress may drink air. 
First in the navel, and next in the heart, and thirdly in the 

45 breast, then in the neck, the mouth, the tip of the noso, in the 
eye, eye-brows, and the middle of the head, and in what is 

46 there-beyond, is known the highest mental abstraction. By 
attaining to these ten mental abstractions he reaches equality 
with the imperishable. Not puffed up, nor hungry, uor 

47 wearied, and undisturbed in mind, the yogi should practice 
his yoga respectfully in order to attain final occupation, B 
king ! 


Upa-Ba^li-rodba ; not in the dictionary. 



MITHOD OP PERFORMING YOGA. 


197 


Wlien it is neither very cold nor warm, when there is no 
I strife, when it is not windy, at these times the ascetic who is 
deep in meditation should not* practice yoga. In a place 
where there is a noise, or fire, or water, or where study is going 
) on, in a decayed cow-shed, at a place whore four roads meet, 
amid a collection of dry leaves, in a river, in a burning-ground, 
iu a place infested by snakes, in a place of fear, or on the edgo 
) of a well, amid a number of funeral piles or ant-hills— in these 
places a learned man should avoid practising yoga. And if 
there is no appearance of goodness, ho should avoid the place 

1 and time. There should he no sight of evil during the practice 
of yoga ; hence lie should avoid that. Whoever disregards 
these places and in his infatuation practises yoga, verity his 

2 faults tend to his hindrance. Hearken to mo in this. Deafness, 
stupidity, failure of memory, dumbness, blindness and fever — 

3 tliose several evils straightway befall him who practises yoga in 
ignorance. 

If a yogi should have these faults through inadvei'tonco, 
t yogis should attend to their cure in order to destroy them. 
Hearken to me in this. He should engage in mental absii'ac- 
tion, after eating rice-gruel, mingled with oil and very warm. 
) In the diseases of rheumatism, flatulence, and enlargement of 
the abdomen, circulation of the internal or obstructed wind of 
) the body should be regulated by a diet of rice-gruel. f In 
trenior| a yogi should fix bis mind on a mountain as it is 
steady, in dumbness on the faculty of speech, and in deafness 
^ on the ear; just as one whose tongue is parched with thirst 
should meditate on a mango fruit. In whatever respect the 
body is disordered, in that very respect ho should think 
^ steadily of whatever thought may remedy the disorder, such 
os, a cooling thought amidst heat, and a boating thought 
amidst cold. He should place a stake on his head and beat 
wood with wood. 

tor na yogom road sa yogam, he should practice yoga ? 

1 Hhs is the translation of the Pandit of the Bengal Asiatic Society : the 
d soems obscure. 

1 ^oi'lalpe read lampe j so a MS. in the Sanskrit College. 



198. 


CANTO XL. 


69 In that way memory immediately recurs to a yogi who hnii 
lost his memory. He should think steadily of the wind and 

60 fire which indeed pervade the heaven and the earth. These 
injuries are cured through what is non-human or what springs 

61 from goodness. If goodness that is non-human should enter 
within a yogi, he should utterly burn out the sin that dwells 
in his body by steady thought of the wind and fire. 

Thus must every soul that is wise in yoga compass itg 

62 preservation, 0 king, since the body is the means of attain- 
ing righteousness, wealth, love and final emancipation from 
existence. The yogi’s knowledge perishes through perplexity 
at the narration of the marks of the activities, therefore the 

63 activities must be hidden. Tranquillity,* perfect health, 
gentleness, a pleasant odour, scanty excretions, a fine coin, 
plexiou, benignity, and softness of voice, are indeed the first 

64 indications of the activity of yoga. A loving person proclaims 
one’s virtues in one’s absence. That creatures do not fear him 
is the chiefest sign of complete perfection. He who is not 
injured by excessive cold, heat, or other natural agents, and does 
not fear other persons, has attained complete perfection. 


Canto XL. 


The YogVs bliss. 

I)atiatrcya erplains to Alarha the ailments that beset a f'p 
soul and mentions their five varieties. He describes the yogis duti^ 
the stages by tvhirh final emancipation is attained, the eight pc 
monitwy marlcs of final emancipation, and the results oj 
with the Supreme Spirit. 

Dattatreya spoke. 

I will succinctly declare to thee the ailmentsf that 
in the soul of a yogi when it is viewed : hearken to me. 

He longs for rites performed with a view to future 
and the objects of human desire, for women, the fniib* 

* A-lolya ; not in the dictionary. t Upa-sarga. » 



AILMENTS CONNECTED WITH YOOA. 


199 


alms-giving, for science, for supernatural pow^er, for the baser 
metals and riches, for heaven, god-head, and supreme god- 
head, for actions that yield copious supplies of elixir vitce,’’*' 
for flying on the storm- winds, for sacrifice, and the power of 
inhabiting water and fire, for the fruits of ^rdddhas that con- 
tain every gift, and religious mortifications. Thus he longs 
^^hen menially ailing by reason of fasting, meritorious acts, 
and worship of the gods, and by reason of those several 
actions. 

A yogi should strenuously restrain his mind when beset 
witli such thoughts. By making his mind cling to Brahma he 
is liberated from ailments. When these ailments are overcome 
otiicr ailments still beset a yogi, arising out of goodness, pas- 
sion and ignoi'ance. 

Ailments arising from illusive vision, f from hearing, and, 
from the deity, J and mental aberration, § and enthusiasm || — 
those five are roots of bitterness which tend to ombarass the 
religious meditations of yogis. The ailment arising from 
illusive vision is such to a yogi because in it appear Vedio 
matters, poetic matters, science and the mechanical arts with- 
out end. The ailment connected with hearing is so-called 
) because he perceives the meanings of sounds in all their com- 
]>leieness, and he receives sound from thousands of yojanas. 
i The wise call that ailment one from the deity, as in the case of 
a madman, when like a god he sees all around and in the eight 
- directions. When the yogi’s mind wanders without support 
tlnniigh his own fault by reason of his fall from all the rules of 

I good custom •[[ — that is well known as mental aberration. When 
the seething whirl-pool** of knowledge like a whirl-pool of 

* Read rasdyana-c'aydh for rasdyana-c' ayah ? 

t Pratibla. Prof. Monier-Williams gives the meaning “ relating to divina- 
ition but in this place it seems to relate to vision, as the context shows, 
t Paiva. 

§ Rhrama. 

II ^varta. Deliberation, revolving (in tho mind), so Prof. Monior-Williams | 
it seoina a much stronger word. 

*1 A'c'ara. 



200 


CANTO XL. 


water cugulphs the mind— that ailment is called enthusiasm. 

14 All beings of divine origin, when their religions meditation 
is destroyed by these great and terrible ailments, revolve 
again and again. 

15 Therefore the yogi, having clad himself with a mental white 
blanket, should cast his mind prone on supreme Brahma, and 
meditate on him. A yogi should always be intent on 
religious meditation, he should eat sparingly, he should subdue 

16 his senses. The yogi should contemplate in his head the 
subtle conditions of the seven objects, viz., earth &c.; he 
should contemplate the subtle earth, until he comprehends its 

17 subtlety.’** He deems the earth to be his soul, and he quits 
its bonds. Moreover he quits the subtle taste in water,* and 

18 also the form in the fire ; and bo likewise quits touch in the 
wind, as he bears the subtle form in mind ; and he quits the 

19 subtle activity of the sky, and likewise its sound. When he 
enters with his mind into the mind of all created things, bis 
mind bearing a mental subtle condition of them becomes 

20 subtle also. Likewise the man, conversant with religions 
devotion, on attaining to the intellect of all creatures, gains 
and relinquishes the most perfect subtlety of intellect. Foi 

21 the man conversant with religious devotion, who relinquishcf 
these seven subtle things after having thoroughly conipre 

22 bonded them, there is no retrogression, 0 Alarka ! The soul 
cognisant man, after fully seeing the subtlety of these subtli 
conditions of the seven objects, then utterly abandoning i 

23 may proceed to supreme bliss. And towards whatever creat^ 
thing he evinces feeling, 0 king! to that very thing he be 

24 comes attached, and he perishes. Therefore the corporeal being 

who after perceiving the mutually- associated subtle thing 

25 abandons them, may gain supreme bliss. Having conjoine 
these very seven subtle things, 0 king! passionlessne? 

towards created and other things tends to the final emanci 

pation from existence of the man cognisant of the entities- 

* FOT tat-saukhyam read tat-6aulcshmam ; so a MS. in the Sanskrit CoHeg 
•\ For atsu read apsu f 
J ISad-bhava. 



indications op union with brahma. 


201 


5 When he becomes attached to perfumes and other (Mights, ho 
pci ishes ; he again reverts to human nature apai’t from 
7 Bnihnia. Whatever subtle created thing the yogi desires, 
after transcending the subtle conditions of these seven objects, 
^ in that very thing ho meets his extinction, 0 king ! He 
meets his extinction in the bodies of gods or Asuras, or of 
Camlarvas, Nagas, or Rakshasas; nowhere does he gain any 

attachment. 

} Where minuteness, and lightness,* greatness and the power 
of obtaining every thing, freedom of will,t and lordship, and 
} magical domination and again self -mortification arc — one finds 
these eight sovrreign-like qualities fully indicate union with 

1 tlie Supreme Spirit, J 0 king. The quality of minuteness is far 
subtler than the subtle j lightness means swiftness ; gi’eatness 
msys in being universally reverenced ; the power of obtain- 

2 ing everything, inasmuch as nothing is impossible of obtain- 
ment by him ; freedom of will consists in his power of pervading 
all things ; and lordship inasmuch as ho is lord ; magical 

3 domination indeed, the yogi’s seventh quality consists in his 
Mibjiigntlng things; where the wishes are said to remain 
stati()nary,§ there j| is self-mortification. By these causes of 

1 i'overoignty I have declared 0 king! in eight points the 
indicatory marks^ of the yogi’s final emancipation from 
existence, and of his sublime union with the Supreme Spirit. 

Thenceforth for him there is no birth, nor growth, nor 
death ; he neither decays nor docs he alter ; neither from 
ihiiir and the other w^orlds, nor from the family of created 
beings, docs he experience severance, or moisture, or buniing 
3 or dj yiiesH ; nor is he captivated by sounds or other sensual 
'oiijji ess LOUS ; nor do sounds and other iui^rcssions exist for 

* Laghiml 
t brakainya. 
t Mr-vaija. 

§ but Ijottor, for read santyaktam? “ Where the objects of tho 

aro renounced.” 

' bor yaim road tatra ? 

I ^fRisitc'aka : a word not in the dictionary. 

2G 



202 


CANTO XLI. 


him ; one who experiences them is not united with thei 

37 For as an impure lump of gold, when its impurities are pur 
ed away by fire, unites with another lump into one, ai 

38 undergoes no difference ; even so the ascetic, when his fau] 
are burnt out by the fire of religious devotion, unites wi 

39 Brahma. As fire when thrown into fire may attain samenes 
and, bearing the same name and having the same substan 

40 may not be perceived by any distinction ; even so the yoj 
when his stains are burnt away, attains to union with suprei 
Brahma, and never acquires a separate existence, 0 kinj 

41 As watei’ when thrown into water unites, so the yogi’s so 
attains to sameness in the Supreme Soul. 


Canto XLI. 


The Yogi's religious course. 


Dattdtreya expotmds to Alarka how a yogi should live ;--jn 
whom he should gather his ahns ; — what his ahis should he ;'-h 
he should eat after worshipping the five vital airs ; — tvhat i 
religious obligations are ; — and how he attains to final emand} 
tion from existence. 

Alarka spoke. 

1 Adorable Sir ! I desire to hear thoroughly about a yo^ 
religious course, since the yogi while pursuing the ^vay 
Brahma does not sink into despondency. 

Dattatreya spoke. 

2 Respect and disrespect, which two things cause men pi' 
sure and distress, these are opposites and effect the yogi’s fii 

3 bliss. Respect and disrespect, these two things men inde 
describe as poison and ambrosia ; of them disrespect is ^ 
brosia, but respect is a dire poison. 

4 He should plant his foot after it is purified by his eye ; 
should diunk water that has been purified through clpth ; 



A YOaf’s RULES OP LIFE, 


203 

sliould US 0 speech that is purified with truth ; and he should 
meditate on what is purified by the intellect. 

5 The yogi should nowhere become a guest, nor attend 
.^addlias, or sacrifices, pilgrimages to the gods, or festivals, 
Ig nor visit the banker for the sake of any advantage. The yogi 
j should roam about for alms among what is flung away, among 
i what is smokeless, where the charcoal is extinguished, among 
all people who have eaten, but not constantly among all the 
7 three. The yogi should not move about occupied in religious 
, muditatiou and spoiling the path of the good, so as that folk 
B should despise him or treat him with disrespect. Ho should ‘ 
seek his alms among house-holders, and at the houses of 
va^n’aiit mendicants :* his livelihood is declared to be the best 
p and lirst one. Also the ascetic should ever resort to modest, 
liiithful, tranquil and high-souled brahman householders who 
10 aro learned in the Vedas ; above and after them, to uncorrupt 
^ arid nou-outcasted men. The practice of seeking alms among 
men of no caste is the last livelihood ho should wish for. 
fl Alms consists of rice-gruel, f or dilute butter-milk, J milk or 
barley-gruel, § fruit, roots, or panic secd,|| grain, oil-cake, and 
12 meal. And these are fine articles of food, and cause a yogi 
to obtain felicity. A muni should employ them with faith 
and with the most perfect meditation, 
l-i Having first taken one sip of watei% let him remain silent 
with mind composed ; and then is prescribed the first oblation 
to tlic vital air called Prana, IT and the second should bo to tho 
LI vital air Apana and tho next to that called Sam-ana jff 

* Vayayjxra. 

t For yai't'ujiini road yacdgiis ? Tho dictionary gives this word as fem., and 
'nvotjuin seems an impossible neuter, 
t Takram. 

§ Fttvaka. 

ll Friyangu, Panicum italicum, (Roxb. p. 101.) 

T Prana ; this has its seat in the lungs, and expresses pre-eminently life 
vitality. 

Apana; tho vital air that goes downwards, and out at tho anus, 
tt Sam -ana ; the vital air that circulates about tho navel, and is essential to 



204 


CANTO XLI. 


the fourth to that called Ud-ana and the fifth to that called 

16 Yy-ana.f Having performed these oblations separately, 

' restraining his breath, he should at length eat according 
his inclination. He should drink water once again, and after 
rinsing out his mouth, he should touch his heart. 

16 Honesty and sanctity, self-sacrifice, and uncovetousness 
and harinlessness are the five principal religious obligatioug 

17 of mendicants. Freedom from anger, reverence towards guius 
purity, abstemiousness in food, and constant study of the 

18 Vedas — these are the five well-known observances. Ho should 
devote himself to essential knowledge, which can effect bis 
objects ; for the multiplicity of knowledge that exists here u 

19 a hindrance to religious meditation. He who acts with the 
thirst, that he ought to know this and he ought to know that, 
may perhaps never gain that knowledge in thousands of ages, 

20 Discarding associations, subduing anger, eating sparingly, 
and controlling his oi^gans, he should i^egulate the gates (if 
his body by the intellect, and apply tlie understanding to 

21 profound contemplation. The yogi who is constantly occu- 
pied with rclignous meditation should always have due re- 
course to profound contemplation, in empty places and in 

22 caves and in forests. Control over the speech, coutrol oTcr 
the actions, and control over the mind, arc the three mnidv. 
he who invariably possesses those controls is a great ‘three- 

23 control’ ascetic. Who, 0 king, is agreeable, and wlio is dh- 
agreeable to him to whom all this universe, both real and 
unreal, and composed of good qualities and bad qualities, w 
composed of tho Supreme Soul ? 

24 ' When ho whoso intellect is purified, to whom clods and 
gold are alike, and whose mind is thus composed towards fdl 
created things, comprehends the supreme eternal and im- 
mutable to be the supremo condition he ceases to be bom 

25 again. The Vedas and all sacrifices and ceremonies are very 
good ; prayer is better than sacrifice ; and the path of 

* Ud-dna; tlio vital air tiiat rises up tlio throat and passes into tlic 
t Vy-dna ; the vital air that circulates or is diCfased through tlie bodj- 



EXPOSITION OP THE WORD OM. 


205 


ledge than prayer ; and profound contemplation cut off from 
associations and feelings is better than knowledge ; when that 
20 is attained, the eternal is gained. He who is composed in 
mind, who is intent on Brahma, who is attentive, and pure, 
whose delight is concentrated on one object, and who controls 
his organs — that high-souled man may compass this yoga or 
religions meditation ; thereupon ho gains firial emancipation 
from existence through his own religious meditation. 


Canto XLII. 


'Expusitimi of the word “ Om ” with regard to the 
Law of Tteligious Devotion. 

Ddflatreya erponnds the composition., meaning and effcary of the 
mred word — It designates the Supreme Sotd Brahma ; 

and thorough comprehension of it and meditation on it bring 
final absorption into Brahma. 

I Dattatreya spoke. 

1 The yogi who lives thus, rightly bus^ied in religious devo- 
tion, cannot be turned away even by hundreds of other lives. 

2 And when ho has beheld the Supreme Soul, visible, existing 
ill all forms, whose feet and head and neck the universe 

3 cumposcs, the lord and creator of the universe, let him in 
order to attain thereto utter the one mighty and holy syllable 
Om ! Let it be his study as he listens to it.s true form. 

^ A and U and M are its three letters ; these are its three 
nistant.s ; they are characterized by goodness, passion and 
^ ignorance. And another, a half instant,* which has its scat 
on the top of the syllable, is without quality and can be 
understood by yogis only. It is called gandhari,t as it is to 
^ lie uttered in the gandhdra note. 4, Being pronounced it 

Anusvara, into which the M may be converted ? 
t A meaning not in the dictionary, 

I See Hole * page 130. 



CANTO XLII. 


reaches the head, and it conveys the feeling of ants moving 
over the bod/y. 

7 As the syllable Om being pronounced reaches the head, the 
yogi who is lost in meditation of Om should become united 
with Brahma, the Supremo Soul. Life is his bow, the soul is 

8 his arrow, Brahma is the target sublime. It is to bo pierced 
by the heedful man ; he should be united with Brahma, as 
the arrow becomes embedded in the target. 

The syllable Om, consisting of three and a half instants, 

9 should be known in its true sense as the three Vedas— the 
Ric', Sama and Yajus— the three worlds, the three fires, and 

10’ the three deities Vishnu, Brahma and S'iva. And the yogi, 
who is absorbed in religious meditation thereon, may obtain 
extinction therein. 

Moreover the letter A is designated the bhur-loka, or terres. 
trial world ; and the letter U thobhuvar-loka, or atmospheric 

11 world ; and the letter M with its nasal mark is decided to bo 
the svar-loka, or celestial world. Now the first instant is 
called the discrete,* and the second the indiscrete, and the 

12 third instant is the intellectual faculty ;t the half instant is 
the highest abode.J; In this very order must these stages of 

13 religious meditation be known. By uttering the word Om, 
everything both existent and non-existent may be gi’asped. 
Now the first instant is short, the second is long, and the 

14 third is prolated, and the half instant is not cognisant to 

^ speech. 

Such is this word. Brahma is designated the Supreii^fi 

15 “ Ora.” The man who truly understands it and furtbor 
meditates on it, escaping the circle of mundane e.’cisteiice 

16 casts off the three-fold bonds, and gains sublime extinction 
in Brahma, the Supreme Soul. And he who is bound with 
the unconsumed results of his actions, after experiencing death 

17 through ill omens,§ and recollecting it at the time of bis 

* Vyaktd. 

t Cfic'-o'hakti. 

X Final emancipation from existonco. 

§ Arisb pitas. 



ILL OMENS PRESAGING DEATH. 


207 


depai’ttiPG, attains to a yogi’s condition again. Hence by 
means of imperfect religious devotion, or again by perfected 
religions devotion, are always to be known tlie ill omens, 
so that he does not sink into despondency at the time of his 

departure. 


Canto XLIII. 


An account of HI Omens. 

dattdtreya mentions the signs of approaching and impending 
death, which are partly natural phenomena and partly 
dreams — also the appropriate seasons for religious devotion — and 
hy various similes and apophthegms indicates how final eman- 
clpntiou from existence is to he attained — Alarka thanks Battd- 
(iryafor all the instruction and, going to the king of EdH and 
Siihahn, relimpdshes his kingdom in their favour. 

Dattatreya spoke. 

I “ Listen Maharaja ; I will declare those ill omens to thee, 
by considering which the yogi knows his own death. 

' “ The man who does not see the path of the gods,* the pole- 

star, the planet Venus, the moon’s shadow and the morning 
stal’d Diay not live more than a year. The man, who sees the 
Rim’s orb devoid of rays and tire encircled with rays, does 
I not live more than eleven months. He, who in his dreams 
clearly perceives gold and silver in his vomit and in his urine 
' and fiEces, may live ten months. Ho who sees departed 
persons, Pis'ac'as and other demons and the cities of the 
Landharvas and golden-coloured bulls, lives nine months. 

* lie who when stout becomes thin, and when thin becomes 
stout quite unaccountably, and loses his natural functions, 
^ ii'cs for eight months. He, whose root becomes cracked at 
the heel or at the toe in dust and in mud, lives seven months. 

* Dova-marga ; said to mean the penis or anas, 
t Arundlifli,: 



208 CANTO XLITI. 

8 If a vulture, a pigeon, a raven, or a crow, or a hawk, or j 
blue bird alights on one’s head, that in^cates a life of sjj 

9 months. When a man is assailed by flocks of crows or j 
shower of dust, or when he sees his shadow unnatural, he 

10 lives four or five months. When he sees lightning flashing 
in the south in a cloudless sky, or sees a rainbow at night, 

11 his life will last two or three months. He who cannot seehia 
own body in clariflod butter, in oil, in a mirror, or in water 
or who sees it head-less, does not live more than a month. 

12 When the smell from a yogi’s body resembles that of a goat 
or the smell from a corpse, know 0 king that his life will be 

13 half a month. When one’s breast and foot dry up imme- 
diately after he has bathed, and when water does not 

14 quench his thirst as he drinks, he lives ten days. 

“ When the wind as it strikes one cuts one’s vitals, '•and 
when one feels no delight from the touch of drops of water, 

15 his death has arrived. Whoever sits on a bear, a monkey or 
a carriage, and goes singing towards the south in his sleep, 

16 for him death brooks no delay. He whom a woman clad In 
red or black raiment, and singing and laughing, carries ofito 

17 the south in his sleep, he will live no longer. He who sees 
a single powerful naked mendicant laughing and leaping in 

18 his sleep may find death impending. The man, who sees liiin- 
self sunk to the crown of his head in a sea of mud in hii 

19 sleep, dies at once. And ho, who sees charcoal amidst tlie 
hair of the head, or ashes or a waterless river issuing from a 
serpent, in his sleep, will after ten days die on the ele^’entli 

20 day. He, who in his sleep is beaten with stones hy formi- 
dable and hideous black men who raise .their weapons aloft, 

21 may die at once. He, in front of whom a she- jackal rnns 
howling at sun-rise, whether meeting him or passing 

22 dies at once. He, whose heart is possessed with hunger 
immediately after he has eaten, and whose teeth chatter, bas 

23 without doubt* reached the end of his life. He who docs not 
perceive the smell of a lamp, and who is terrified in thedaf 


♦ For, Sammy am road samiayah ? 



ILL OMENS PRESAGING DEATH. 


209 


as well as at night, and who does not see himself reflected in 

24 another’s eyes, lives no longer. He, who has seen both a rain- 
bow at midnight and all the planets in the day-time, should 

25 as a sensible man deem his life consumed away. He, whose 
uosc becomes crooked, and whose ears bend down or stick up, 

26 and whose left eye waters, has lost his life. When his face 
becomes reddish, or his tongue black, a wise man should 

27 kn w that his death is impending. And one should know 
that he, who in his sleep journeys to the south on a camel, or 

28 an ass, or a carriage, will die outright. He, who cannot 
hear his own murmuring when he shuts his ears, and who 
cannot see the light with his eyes, lives indeed no longer. 

29 Ho over whom a door is closed after he has fallen into a pit, 
and who cannot rise up from the hole, in his sleep, his life 

30 ends tliereat. Sight directed upwards and unsteady,* and 
blood-shot and rolling around, and warmth in the mouth, and 

! 31 dryness at the navel prognosticate a new body for men. He 
who in his sleep may enter the fire, and not come out there- 
from, or if he similarly enters water, his life ends thereat. 
Tlic man who is attacked by evil spirits at night or by day, 
witlioiit doubt meets death at the end of the seventh night. 
Quo should pronounce that death is impending over the 
man who sees his own clean white clothing red or black. 

54 “A revolution in men’s natural disposition and a reversal 
in their nature proclaim always that Yama and Death are at 

55 liiiiid ; as when a man despises and reviles those very persons 
to wliom ho has always been well-behaved, and whom he has 

5*^ considered most deserving of his reverence ; when he does 
uut worship the gods ; when he abuses the aged, the gurus 
and brahmans ; and when he shows no kind treatment to his 

57 mother, father, or sons-in-law, or to yogis skilled in learning 
cr to other high-souled men. But when the time arrives, 
'^'ise menf must understand that. 

“ And yogis must always diligently understand at the close 


Sampratishtha j notin the dictionary 
t i'«r purushas read purubhais ^ 

27 




210 


CANTO XLin. 


of the year that ill omens produce their results day and night 

39 0 king. And the obvious very formidable series of resulti 
therefrom must be considered ; and having ascertained them^ 

40 he should fix that time in his mind, 0 king. And having 
ascertained that time accurately, the yogi should resort to a 
safe place and apply himself to religious devotion, so thal 

41 that time may not bo fruitless to him. And the yogi having 
beheld the ill omen and abandoning the fear of death, ain] 
having regarded then its nature, as it has come after a long 

42 time, should apply himself to religious devotion as ai 
adept therein in just that part of the day, both in the fore. 

43 noon, and in the after-noon and at mid-day on that day. 0i 
where he has seen that ill omen during a part of the night 
there he should engage in religious devotion until thal 

44 day arrives. Then abandoning all fear, and mastering thal 
time self-controlled, he should stay in that habitation oi 

45 wherever he feels his soul firm, and engage in religious medita 
tion on the Supreme Soul after overcoming the three qualities 
and when his soul grows composed of the Supreme Soul, h{ 

46 should cease even from the use of his mind. Thereupon h( 
attains to that sublime absorption into the Supreme Soul 
which is beyond the senses, which transcends the intelleci 
and which is unspeakable. 

47 “ All this I have declared to thee, Alarka, in its real meaning 
Hearken to me briefly how thou mayest attain to tha 
Brahma. 

48 “ The moon-stone does not emit water, if untouched by tin 
rays of the moon ; that is a well known simile for a yogi 

49 That the sun-stone as long as it remains untouched by tin 
rays of the sun does not emit fire, is also a simile for a yogi 

50 Ants, mts, ichneumons, house-lizards, and sparrows inhabit i 
house like the owner of it, and when it is broken down the; 

51 go elsewhere ; but since they feel no such pain at the destruc 
tion of that house as the owner Oking; thatsinul 

62 points to the yogi’s perfect bliss. An ant, though it is compos 
ed of earth and has but a small body, constructs a heavy heal 
of earth with the still minuter point of its mouth : that ^ 



ALARKA THANKS DATtXtRETA. 


211 


53 lesson for a yogi. When yogis see a tree, clothed with leaves 
aowers and fruit, being destroyed by cattle, birds, men and 

54 other creatures, they become perfected. When a yogi sees the 
tender horns of the young ruru deer, which look merely like 
the forehead-mark, growing together with him, he may attain 

i5 final beatitude. When a yogi takes a vessel full of liquid 
from a mound on the earth, and when he sees the human 

S body towering up high, what has he not learnt ? When a 
yogi has truly understood the effort that a man makes, when 
all his wealth sufficient for his living has been dug up, he 

7 has attained success. That is one’s house where one dwells ; 
that is food cn which one lives; and that is wealth by 
which one prospers ; that is happiness when one thinks ‘ what 

8 self-interest have I in this matter.’ Just as a man, although 
he is importuned by his organs, accomplishes his object by 
their means, so a yogi may accomplish his highest aim by 
means of the intellect and other faculties of other persons.” 

Ja(ja spoke. 

9 Then king Alarka prostrated himself before Atri’s son, and 
bowing courteously and filled with intense joy, spoke thus : — 

Alarka spoke. 

3 “ 0 joy ! that this most sore dread, which has sprung from 

my defeat by my foes, and which has rendered me anxious 
about my life, has been caused by the gods, 0 brahman ! 

^ 0 joy, that the victorious attack from the immense hosts of 
the king of Ka^i (routed by which I have come here) has 

J brought about for me this meeting with thee ! 0 joy, that 
my army was weak ! 0 joy, that my dependants were slain ! 

* 0 joy, that my treasury became exhausted ! 0 joy that I 
grew terrified ! 0 joy, that thy feet came to my recollec- 
tion ! 0 joy, that all thy words have found an abode in my 

' ^ind ! 0 joy, that I have both "ained knowledge from 
meeting with thee. Sir ! 0 joy, that thou hast also shown 
compassion to me, 0 brahman ! 

“ Although destitute a man attains success at the auspi- 
cious rise of the Soul, just as this calamity tends to my benefit 



212 


CANTO XLIII. 


66 through my meeting with thee. Suh^hu is my benefactor 
and so also is Kami’s lord, through both of whom I haye come 

67 to thy presence, 0 noble lord of the yogis. Now I have had 
the stains of ignorance burnt out by the fire of thy favour. 
I will so strive that I may not become such a vessel of misery. 

68 I will quit my position as a householder, which is a forest of 
trees of pain, on receiving permission from thee, my high, 
souled instructer in wisdom.” 

Dattatreya spoke. 

69 “ Depart 0 king ! fare thee well ! As I have declared unto 
thee, so do thou practise, free from egotism, free from pride, 
in order to attain to final emancipation from existence.” 

Jada spoke. 

70 Thus addressed he prostrated himself before that Muni, 
and hastened to where tho king of Kdsi and his elder brother 

71 Subahu were. Alarka hastening near smilingly addressed 
the king of Ka^i, that valiant hero, in the presence of 

72 Subahu : — “ 0 king of Ka^i, who desirest my kingdom, enjoy 
thou the mighty kingdom even as it pleases thee, or give it 
to Subahu !” 

The king of Ka^i spoke. 

73 “ Why, 0 Alarka ! hast thou relinquished the kingdom 
without a contest ? This is not right for a kshatriya ; and 

74 thon, Sir, knowest tho law of tho kshatriyas. When his 
counsellors are vanquished, a king should abandon the fear 
of death, and fix his arrow aiming at his enemy as his target. 

75 Having conquered him, a king should certainly enjoy tlio 
choice delights of his desire, and should sacrifice with lai’ge 
sacrifices in order to gain final bliss.” 

Alarka spoke. 

76 “ Even of this very nature was my mind before, 0 hero 

77 Now my object is changed, and do thou hear the cause. ^ 
this body is an aggregate formed of the elements, so is th« 
heart of men, and so are all the qualities likewise even among 

78 all animals. Since this intellectual faculty is single indeed, 
and there is no other, how then does knowledge crea^ 



subIhu’s jot at aj.arka’s awakening. 


213 


^9 condition of friend and enemy, of lord and servant ? I fell 
into that dire misery which was produced by fear of theo, 
' and I have gained knowledge from Dattdtreya’s favour, 0 
jo king. When one subdues all the senses, and abandons utterly 
every association, and fixes one’s mind on Brahma, in that 

I I victory is the sublimest victory. And since there is nothing 
clso to be accomplished in order to attain that final beatitude, 
2 therefore restraining his senses he attains final beatitude. I 

I then am not thy foe ; nor art thou my enemy ; Subahu hero 
is not my injurer. I have seen all this as my own soul ; seek 
then another adversary, 0 king !” 

I Tims he addressed the king. Then uprose Subahu delight- 
ed, and saluting his brother with the word ‘ 0 joy !’ spoke 
thus to the king of Kasi. 


Canto XLIV. 


Judas cx'position in his conversation with his father (concluded). 

Hnhahu explains to the king of Kdsi that it was to reclaim his 
brother Alarha to a proper frame of mind^ that he had induced 
the king io conquer Alarka — Subahu expounds to the kmg the 
cmditions of attaining final emancipation from existence^ and 
both depart — Alarka resigns his kingdom to his son^ and hetakmg 
himself to the forest attains final bliss. 

Here ends Jada's exposition to his father. 

The Birds then conclude by saying that Jada and his father 
attained final bliss. 

Subahu spoke. 

“ In that I have resorted to theo for refuge, 0 tiger-king, 
I have secured every object. I will depart. Rest thou happy !” 

The king of Kaa spoke. 

What object hast thou secured, Sir ? And what aim 
^ast thou attained ? Declare that to me, 0 Subahu, for I 
^ keen curiosity. Thou didst stir me up, saying ‘ Conquer 



214 


CANTO XLIV. 


and give me the great kingdom, that belonged to my gpej 

4 grandfather and is dominated by Alarka/ Thereupon 
attacked the kingdom of this thy younger brother, n 
brought this army for thee. Therefore enjoy it as befits t 
race.”* 

Subahu spoke. 

6 “0 king of Kasi, hearken, why I made this endeavour, n 

6 stirred thee up. Sir, to an unwonted endeavour. Thisi 
brother, who understands truth is addictedf to uurefin 

7 pleasures. My two elder brothers are wise and unbegnili 
because our mother dropped admonition into the ears of bo 
of them and into mine, just as she dropped milk in tbi 

8 mouths and mine during our infancy, 0 king. Our motl 
taught those subjects, that men consider should be kno? 
to both of them and to me, but not to him, Alai 

9 who wished to be illustrious, 0 king. As merchants, who f 
travelling for gain, feel a common grief, if one of tbi 

10 perishes, so is it with us, 0 king. Since he, Alarka, \ 
caught the infatuation of domestic life, and is perishing 
king ; since he is related to this my body, and bears tho ic 

11 of a brother ; hence T, concluding that he would obtain t 
perception of passionlcssness through suffering, resorted totb 

12 Sir, to carry out the undertaking. Therefore he has b 
brought through distress to passionlessness through instr 
tion, 0 king j the work has been accomplished ; maycsttl 

13 farewell. Idepart. ‘ Having dwelt in Madalasa’s womb, ^ 

having drank of her breast, may ho not follow the paUi i 

14 is travelled by the sons of other women, 0 king ! ^ 
deliberated and I did it all by resorting to thee ; and it 
been accomplished. I will again depart to seek final bei 

tude. , .r 

15 “ I do not approve of those, 0 king! who n«gec ^ 
own family, a kinsman, or a friend, when these are m 
ties ; for, though possessed of organs, they are manned m e 

* For ‘hhunTcshvasva IculoifUam read hhunkshva svakuloc'itam f 
t For s'aJfcto road saJeto ? 



215 


SUBAHU’S EXHORTATION. 

{] Ho who falls iijto difficulties when he has an able friend, or 
nicniber of Lis own family, or kinsman, they should be denied 
Hjjihteousness, wealth, love and final emancipation, but he 
7 should not he denied them. Through association with thee, 
0 king, I have accomplished this gi-eat undertaking. Well 
inayest thou fare ! I will depart. Mayest thou participate 
in kDOwledge, most noble king !” 

The king of Kai^i spoke. 

s “ Thou hast done a great benefit to good Alarka ; how is if 
I tliou flo,st not turn thy mind to benefit me ? Since associa- 
tion of good men with good men yields fruit and is not bar- 
1 roll, thereforo I have attained the prosperity that is bound 
; up with thy patronage.” 

: Subahu spoke. 

i) The four-fold aims of men are known as righteousness, 

^ wealth, ploasuro, and final emancipation from existence, 
i 'fliore thou hast righteousness, wealth and pleasure, all of 
^ thorn,— the last is wanting. I will succinctly expound it to 
I dico ; listen now with singleness of mind thereto ; and hav- 
ing heard and rightly deliberated strive after bliss, 0 king ! 

! Thou must have no dealings, 0 king, with the notion “Mine,” 
nor the notion “ I” ; for when one considers rigidly, rigliteons- 
ness has no correlation in the absonco of righteousness. 
When thou hast thought in thy soul, ‘ I must comprehend of 
T'liat lam’; when thou hast thought in after nights ‘ I must 
eonsidei the external and the internal thou must discern 
linn whose beginning, attributes and ending are impercep- 
‘iWe, who is changeless, devoid of intelligence, both percep- 
hlilo and imperceptible ; and thou shalt discern ‘ Who am I ?’ 
Vhen this indeed is discerned thou hast discerned everything. 

0 discern the soul in what is not soul, and one’s own pro- 
Pwty in what is not one’s own— this is folly. I as such have 
passed everywhere, 0 king, according to the intercourse of 

world. I have declared all this that thou hast asked : 
now I depart.” 

tfavmg spoken thus to the king of Ka^i, the wise Subahu 



216 


CANTO XUV. 


departed. And the king of having done obeisance |,| 

Alarka departed to his own city. 

28 Alarka, also, enthroned his eldest son as king, and ahandoi. 
ing every tie resorted to tho forest, for his own perfection 

29 After a long time becoming purged of the contrary qualitim 
and free from all worldly possessions, he attained an nnparal. 
lelcd pitch of religious devotion and gained supremo and fim 

30 bliss. Perceiving all this universe with its gods, demons and 
human beings perpetually bound and being bound in the 

31 meshes woven of the qualities; being drawn by the cause, 
brought into existence by sons and other children, by nephew, 
and other relatvm, and by one’s own and other people’s [w 

32 perty, and so forth; oppressed with woe, wearing divcw 
appearances, wholly enclosed within the mud of ignorance, 
possessing no deliverer; and perceiving himself wholly passed 

33 beyond, tho large-minded king sang this song-“ Alas, wh 
it that I occupied the kingdom formerly ! So have 1 slue, 
learnt. There is no happiness superior to religious devotiuu.’' 


spoko. 

Dear father, do thou practise this sublime religions dero 
tion to attain final emancipation from existence ; ivlierclj 
thou Shalt attain to that Supreme Soul, in reaching 
thou Shalt not grieve. Then 1 also will go. What need ban 
I of sacrifices y what need of prayers ? Action in one wj 
has attained success works towards re-absorption inlo|b 
Supreme Soul. Obtaining permission from thee, 1 al* 
fi-ee from the contrary qualities, free from worldly posses*, 
will so strive after final emancipation that I may aUa» 
Bupremc bliss. 

The birds spoke. 

Having thus addressed his father, and having ottai* 

permission from him, the wise /ada, abandoning all 

possessions, departed, 0 brdhman. 

most large-minded, in like course be<=°“ 

prastha entered on tho fourth stage of i • 

met with his son, and having forsaken the bonds , 



JATMTXI AOAIX ADT'lfESSES THE lURDS. 


2J7 


j]ic qualities <tc., lie attHiiied supreme perfeetioii, being wise 
j,,kI lia\ing aequirecl self-;kiiowledge at the saiiie time. 

Ail tliis lias been declared to thee, 0 brahman, wliicli tliou, 
Sir. did ask of us— at full length and with truth. What 
^■l^c dost thou desii'o to hear ? 

('\Nm XLV. 

Tltn JVulJi oj linijinid. 


Uiiiini Huinh the UmL Jor <ill the information tliPij have yicen 
eii.l as/, 5 ' about creation, the ivorld, mankind t^T.—ln reply thry 
iihal Mdrkandeya had lamjht Kraushlnki regardiny all tJw.io 
I Hi, (i'i Jt)U(>iC)>. 

'iikamhjii rxlvh Ihis Puroiia ((s htn-iiif/ naamh'd from linthmA 
iMuuj hr, 01 hamlrd down h,j mniuent ri,his—Adun,l iou is paid 

'ill III d 

r blrutihj of Vradhdna and Vrakriti U asserted— lhahmd alone, 
del III. t- Fiomhim emanated J^radhdna, udiich is called the 
K'. 'Idle— Out of it issued Mahal (the [nlelleclnal priciple) — 
-idofduhat issued Jhankdra (the principle of Individual it y) 
iH tluce characters, the Fvolriny, the Modifying, and the Ener~ 
l—lh ' Ecolnny Ahankdra created sound, touch, form, taste and 
' iheir corresponding elements, ether, air, light, water and 
lie Modijying Ahauka.tuf produced the eleven human org<nis — 
li'iiiiclers oj the elements are expounded. 

ami th" other principles produced an egg, the, composition of 
<''dsiidird It ivas animated hy Brahma as the Bold, and it 
'<"1 Hie uiiiccrsc, the gods, demons and mankind. 

dainiini spoke. 

h<i\c Moll i-elated this to me, 0 noble brahman, s, both 
and inactivity, the two-fohl deed.s enjoined by the 
Ah, through your father’s favour, ye have such 
|'l'do(> ns this, by wbieb ye have overconu' folly altliough 
'*<""‘’'"ded to tliis animal .>late. Happy are ye in 



218 


CANTO XLT. 


Unit your uiiud, steadfast in your pi istinc state towards ((, 
attainment of final emancipation, is not swayed by the 
wildormonts that spring from objects of sense. 0 joy that 
the wise lord Markandeya made you known to mo as the 
sipators of every doubt ! For men who wander in this closely, 
thronged mundane existence there is available associatio, 
with such as your honours ; not for ascetics. If I after g™, 
ing association with you who have perspicacity in knowlcdg, 
should not succeed in my object, then assuredly* tlieiccai 
bo no success for me elsewhere. Both in activity nod i, 
inactivity, in knowledge and deed, no one else has, I tlibk 
a mind so unsulli.ul as your honours have. 

If then your mind, 0 noble brahmans, is favourahlc to 
wards me, then deign to expound this completely t-How dii 
this universe, both moveable and immoveable, come iiti 
existence? And how will it fall into dissolution at the pw 
per time, most excellent brahmans ? And how came th 
familiest that sprang from the gods, the pdiis, tlicpitn 
created things Ac. ? And how did the Mauvantaras w 
And what was the history of the families of old ; and whaten 
creations and whatever dissolutions of the. universe han s 
curved; and how the ages have been divided; and what ll 
duration of the Manvaiilaras has been; and how the cart 
remains stable ; and what is the size of the world; and A 
are the oceans, mountains and rivers and foists aceon mg 

their situation; what is the number of the worlds, he I » 

loka, svar-loka &c., including the lower regions; an in® 
the course of the sun, moon, and other planets, of thcBtam a 
heavenly bodies also. I wish to hear of all 
destined to subversion and what will be the end wm" 
universe is dissolved. 

The Birds spoke. 

15 Unparalleled is this load of questions which tho« 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


* For nyunam read nunam. 
t For road vai(i8<i ? 


J Ahuta-satnplava. 



THE ANTK^UITY OF THTS PURANA. 


219 


I asked, 0 bivihman : we will declare it to thee ; listen to it 
liei'O, 0 Jaimini, as Markandeya exponiided it formerly to the 
calm and wise Kraushtuki, a youn^r brahman, who had com- 
plclod Ills term of studentship. Kraushtuki asked the high- 
souled Markandeya, whom the brahmans were waiting upon, 
wliat you have asked, my lord; and wo will tell thee what 
\ the Muni, Bhrigu’s son, told him with affection; listen, O 
! braliman, after having paid adoration to the h'orefather Brah- 
; ma, tlie lord of the universe, the origin of the universe, who 
: presided over creation, who in the foi-ni of Vishnu presides 
^ ()\cr its maintenance, and who in the form of the terrible 
’ S'i\;L (lesil'uys it at the dissolution. 

Markandeya spoke. 

( Foj'im'rly as soon as Brahma, wliose origin is inscrutable, 
i ciuiK' into being, this Purana and the Vedas issued* from his 
iiionths ; and many paramai-shis composed the collections of 
llu‘ 1 iiiMuas; and the Vedas were divided by them in a 
tlioiisiuid ways. Righteousness and knowledge, passionless- 
iKN^, nnd sovereignty— these four indeed were not perfected 
I v\itlioii(, instruction from him, the high-souled. ITis seven 
I niind-hornt rishis took the Vedas from him, and his mind-born 
•uiririit munis took the Piiimna. C^yavana took' it from 
hluigu, and he declared it to the brahmans ; and this piiriuja 
repeated by the high-souled rishis to Daksha; and then 
llaksba repeatc'd it to me. I will now tell it t.o thee : it de- 
strife and sin. Hear all this from me with composure, 
'llnslrious Muni, as T formerly heard it when Daksha I’clated 

It. 

lljiviiig paid ado7’ation to the origin of the universe, un- 
changeless, the asylum, tlie upholder of the movtmble 
-^'*'1 inimov(3ablc universe, the supreme object, lb*nhma, the 
1*'^! nude, the cause which, itself uii begotten, | woiks in pro- 

* Annviniliflrita, not in tho dictionary, 
t Manasa. 

I Aiianrasyn; not in the dictionary 



220 


CAN' TO XI.V. 


(iuciioii, niiiiulciuiiioe ai»(l dinsolntion, wlioi'ein evcryiliiu-, 

29 ostablisliud — bavin" paid adoration to liim, Hiranya-jrailj 
tho framework of the world, the wise, I will duly tell of i 

30 maltitnde of created things, matcdilcss, great, primeval, foi-Q, 
for special ends, various in shape, possessitig characteristics 
certainablo by the five standards of measure, possessiiifr | 

31 five streams of life, governed by the soul, existent as if j, 
petual and temporary — listen thei'cto with sublime eoiapo.^u 
illustrious Sir! 

32 Pradliana is the cause, which is designated tho Tmporccptili 
and which the groat rishis call the subtle, permanent Pmlq’j 

33 composed of good and evil. Tfrahiiui at first existed entiv 
impcndshable, undecaying, immeasurable, self-dependent, di 

34* tituto of odour, form, and taste, devoid of sound and tom 
without ])eginning or eml, tho origin of tho iim'vcjNc.n 
changed* hy the power of tho thi’co qualities, not inmlm 

35 unknowable. Subsequent to the dissolution, all this (onhi 
Avas pervaded by him complofcly. 

Then from him, in whom iJio fhreo qualities exist'd 
eipiipoiso, and in whom the Soull became prev.ilent, 0 .Mm: 

30 and next from the coming into existence of the qualili 
which wore being created, at tho time of creation tlio tii 

37 ]ndnciplo Pradluina came into existence. It envidop 
Mahat;§ as the seed is enveloped by its rind, even so Mali 
was enveloped by tlie Inqu'recptible. It is three-fold, tli 
characterized by goodness, that fiy passion, and tlnd I 

33 ignorance Then from it Avas evolved Aliaukara,|| vlddi 
three-fold, the Modifying,*^ tlu' Energizing,** and tlic 

39 vingft which is eharaetiUTzed by darkness. And it was c 
velopod by Mahat, just as Maliat was by the Imporccpld>l^’' 

Noav the Evolving Ahaakanty modifying itself, eimatid 

40 subtle element];]; of sound§§ next. Krom the suhih; elciuc 

* For -prabhavdpynyam read ~pr<ibliav<ivijaijam ^ 
t A-samprata, t Kshctra-jna. 

§ Tho groat Intollectaal principle. || Tlie principle of IndidtO'' 

^ Vaiktinka. ** Taijasa. ft Bliutddi. 'l in'"''” 

For mhdatf tanmatmliani road suhda-f(inm>iti akcim ^ > 



nii: I'KMm'KSS uF ri;i'A'II<i\ bl^FKrUFP. 2‘Jl 

.^01111(1 tlic KUht, wliicli has the propuJ-tv of soinul ; 

,)o\v ctJitT is tho sound-clenionfc, and the evolving Ahanhlra 
[ ('iiMlo[)cd it then. The subtle element of toneh is indeed 
h:)in next without doubt; the mig-hty Air is born, its pro- 
) ju'i’fv of toiudi is well known. And the air, modifying itself, 
ciT.\ted the s\ihth element of form ; Light was produced from 
; (1,0 air; it is said to have the property of form ; the air which 
1^ the element of toneh enveloped the clement of form. And 
light, modifying its('lf created the s^uhth element of taste; 

; ilnTefrom indeed water also was produced; it has tlio pi'O- 
pcify of taste; now the element of foian enveloped the water* 

) wliich is the element of taste. And the water, modifying 
it-i'ir. ci‘(‘:ited the subtle element of smell; therefrom Solid 
li is ])rodii(;ed ; smell is v>'ell known to be its property. 

Xn\\ ill each flmnenl resides \ts, p-niliur subtle element; there- 
hv its possession of that subtle element is a well-established 
f,;ct And hence those are uniform, imismuch as no 

• ( (liil'('reneo can bo [n'cdicated. They are all neither calm, nor 
ti'ii ilih'. nor crass 'I 'riii.s is the creation of tln‘ (dements and 
I lie oihllc elements from Aliankai’a when it is characterized 
li\ hi I'!: 1 1 ess. 

Idoiii Aliniik;ira in its Modifying character, which is distin- 
riii'licd by goodness and po.s.sesses goodness in excess, the 
'iiodilicnloiy ci’catioii began at once, 
k blu' live oi’giins of tlie intellect, § jiiid the five organs of 
adioii, men call these the enorgetic|| organs; th('y are the ten 
\aik.i)ika deil.ies The mind*![ is the eleventh among 

ihoHi S/irh are the Vdiikarika deities kiiovvji io Ixi. The 
d lai’. ilie skin, tlie pair of (‘yes, the hmgue, ami liftlily the 
11 men say'"'' ^ these are //e- (^onneeh'd with the iji- 

n lkftbir the jmrpose of perceiving sound and the other 
' ‘ |•|>y'^l('lls The pair of feel, the arms, tin* organ of gencra- 
boii, tlie pail’ of hands, a,nd lire voie( may rank as fifth with 

bu- rt'e > ro:nl opo ; for tiio water was erivo1op(Hl by tlio light which 
f" ‘ '‘'d il ; l)ai till' cliango .spoils the metn;. 
t ' Miiillia, § Diuhlhi. 

'‘id'i. ^ Manas. t’oi vcu\\ c'akshale ^ 



222 


CANTO XLV. 


52 them; wal Icing, evacuation, delight, manual work and 

speech — that is the work fen' each of these organs respectively. 

Ether has the clement* of sound only. When the element 

53 of touch accrued, Air comes into existence with two proper- 
tiesf ; touch is known to be its peculiar property. Moreover, 
when to form accrued both the properties, sound and touch, 

54 then Fire also came into existence with its threej proportion; 
it has sound and touch and form. Sound, and touch and 

55 form,— when the clement of taste accrued to them, then Water 
with its four properties came into existence ; it is to he known 
as being'charactcrized by taste. Sound and touch anti form 

56 and taste, when smell accrued, they consolidated witli the 
element of smell enclosed this Earth ; hence earth has five 
properties ; it is seen to be the gross one among created 
things. 

57 Calm and terrible and crass§ are their distinguishing 
marks ; thereby they are known : they contain one another 

68 through their mutual interpenetration. Within the cartli 
is contained all thisjl visible and invisible world firmly en- 
closed. And those distiuguisliing marks arc perceptible hy 

59 the organs of sense, and are recollected by reason of their 
perTuanency. They take each successive one the property of 
its preceding one. These sovcm principles when un-conihin- 

60 cd are distinctand have various energies : they could not li:i\e 
created mankind, unless they had united. And mcetui(,Mn 

61 mutual combination, they become mutually dependent ; ind 
when they all unite into one, they have the marks of a single 
complex body. 

By reason of their being governed by the SoulU and aho 

62 through the favour of the Imperceptible, Mahat and the othoi 

* principles, which have different limits, cause an egg to e 

into existence. There like a bubble on water, the 

63 dually increased by means of the things that existed, 0 
most intelligent! In its enlarged state it lay on the A\al(i 

§ Mudha. 

II For imam road ^ 

^ Punisha. 


* Mdtra. 
t Guna. 

I For read hi-qwna^? 



the production of the mundane egg. 


223 


The Soul,* having increased inside the egg sprung from Pra- 
Ot kfitii i-ock the name Brahmd; it indeed was the first cor- 
poreal being, it indeed is called Purusha. And Brahmd 
G.> existed first, the original maker of created beings. That egg 
enclosed all these three worlds with all that they contain 
moveable and immoveable. Meru was born from it, and as 
GG the after-birth were horn the mountains ; the oceans were the 
fluid contained within that egg which held the great Soul. 
Within that egg was all this world, with the gods and de- 
li? mon.s and mankind, and the continents and other lands, the 
moinitaius and oceans, and the throng of luminous worlds. 

Then the egg was enveloped by water, air, fire and ether 
(18 and by the evolving Ahankara externally, ten times over by 
each of them. It was then surroundedf by Mahat which I 
(il) have mentioned, which had the same magnitude. Mahat 
with them all was enveloped by the Imperceptible, 
With those seven coverings formed from Prakriti was the 
ctrg enveloped. Enveloping one another the eight Prakritis 
c'vi.stcd. This very Prakriti is permanent; and that Purusha 
is limited by it. 

Ileaj* thou, moreover, briefly of him who is spoken of by 
du* iinme Brahma. Just as one sunk in water, on emerging 
from it, seems to be born from waterj and flings the water 
I away, so Brahma is both Prakriti and the Soul.§ The fm- 
})orce}»tihle is declared to be his sphere of action ;|| hence 
* bialiiiui is called Kshotra-jna, the Soul. A man should 
know all these characteristics of the Soul and its sphere of 
nctioii. 

Sucli was this creation from Prakriti ; and it is govemed 
•>}' die Soul ; the first dage of creation was ]>rcceded by non-in- 
le] licence, it became manifest like the lightning. 


Ksliotrn-jna. f For vedititah read t'edtitain ? 

+ }d a- HmhhaiHim road jala-samhhavah? 

^ II Kshotra. 



221 


f'AXTO XLVT, 


Cam'o XLVl. 

The conipufatum of Brahma s life. 

Mdrliandeya moralizes uu Ihahmd and Prakrili —anddescrlh,^ 
Vishnu and S’iva as special forms of Hrahnid — He e.cplaim hmi 
h'lDnan and divine years are reckoned., the duration oj' fhc 
ages, the Krita, Hie Tretd, the Dvdpara and the Kal 1 ^ and i,i ,i 
Mauva'nlara, and the length oJ Brainnd s day and lije. 

Kraiishtiilci s[)<)ki'. 

1 Adomble 8ii'’ tliou hnst le'latcd lo mo curivctly tlu' n(Mi( >). 
uf the and thou hast told iiiu of the birth of the ininhu 

2 Soul JlrahiJia within tlie e^g of Brahma. T wish to hear tin. 
from tliee, 0 scion of Bliri^ru’s race, when tliino;s arc not 
created, and nothing exists, ever) tiling having been de,btrtn(d 
by Time at the end of the ilissolulion <f the fhiicerse 

Markandi'ya spok(‘. 

3 When all this univi'rse becinnes d .ssoh ed in Xatmv. tlis 

4 dissolution is designated ‘ natuial t by the wise, Wlieii I'lP 
Imperceptible subsists within itself, and when nil iiickIiIi'm- 
tion is suspended, Nature and the Soul J. subsist w ith h-iiiii- 

5 ness of character. Then both dark ness and gooduess suhsi^r 
ill equipoise, neither being in excess or in deliciiniev, iinl 

(3 permeated by each other. Just as oil exists in sesaniiiin 
seeds, or as ghee in milk, so passion also exisls permeant 
within darkness and goodness. 

7 The day of the Supreme liord§ lasts from the hirtli "1 
Brahma, as long as the two half paras which compose Im 
life ;|1 and Ids night during the dissolution is of the saim' 

8 duration.^! Now at the dawn of day he awakes, he \a1"» 

# Prakriti. t Prakjrita. J Puruaha. § 

II The text seems incorrect ; a better rending obtained from a .MS 

ing to Baba Nagomlrn Chandra liasu of Calcutta is tdpa//e?' for utr'iCoo iH" 

dii'ir vai for dj/e.s/in. See vors(' 1'2. 

The same reads oa-saiunti ^amayo instead of tat-.^niiifi 

with practically Ibn same nioaning. • 



THE COMPUTATION OP BRAHMA's LIFE. 


225 


the origin of the universe, who is without beginning, who is 
the cause of all things, whose soul transcends thought; every 
‘ one else works in an inferior way. 

9 The Supremo God, quickly enters into Nature and the Soul, 
as the lord of the universe, and agitates them with his intense 
[) supernatural power. Just as love, or a breeze of Spring, 
entering into young women tends to produce agitation, so 
does lie, who is the embodiment of supernatural power. 

I ^\1lcn Pradhana is agitated, the god Brahma is born and is 
rontained within the cavity of the egg, as I have already 
\ told tlicc. At first he is the agitator ; as the husband of 
iViiturc, he is the thing to be agitated ; and ho exists with 
I ronti'iiciioii and exiiansion oven in the state of Pradhana. He 
is hoi’ll, though he is the birth-place of the universe; though 
devoid of qualities, he possesses the (piality of passion ; when 
lie assnnies the character of Brahma, ho engages in creation. 

I: In the character of Brahma he creates mankind ; then 

possessing an excess of goodness, he becomes Yishnu and 
) protects iJiem righteously ; then, with darkness prepondera- 
ting ill him, ho as Rudra dissolves the whole universe with 
(hrc’o worlds, and sleeps. He possesses the three qualities, 

' and ,jpt he is destitute of qualities. Jmst as he is at first the 
pervading Soul, then the preserver, and lastly the destroyer,* 
^0 he takes appellations which designate him as Brahma, 

\ i^hnn or Siva. As Brahma he creates the world ; and as 
findiu he destroys them; and as Vishnu ho holds a neutral 
l>o^ilio)l. These are the three conditions of the Self-existent, 
fa^sioti a}ul Brahma; darkness and Rudra; goodness and 
Ysliiiu (Pq world; these indeed are the three 

these indeed are the three qualities. These verily 
ait mutually paired, and are mutually dependant: they are 
^ot scqmvated for a moment; they do not forsake one another, 
dims Brahma, the four-faced god of gods, is anterior to 
le universe : assuming the quality of passion, ho engages in 
fi'eation. 


(from HI ono 
’T) bo better, 

• 29 


who cuts to pieces, ono who destroys, 
one who brings on the dissolution ? 


Would not 



226 


CANTO XLVI. 


21 Brahma who is adored as Hiranya-garbha, the first of tin 
gods, and without beginning, who sits in the middle of tlu 

22 lotus-like earth, was born in the beginning. One hundred 
years is the full length of life for him, the high-souled, accord 
ing to the true Brahmya computation. Hear from me how ii 
is reckoned. 

23 A kashtha is said to he composed of fifteen winks of thi 
eyelids ; and thirty kashthas make a kala ; and thirty bhq] 

24 kalas make a muhurta. A day and night among men contain 
it has been settled, thirty muhurtas ; and with thirty day 

25 are reckoned the two lunar fortnights and the month oi 
six months consists the sun’s half-yearly course; the twe 
half-yearly courses on the south and north of the equator com- 
pose the year. Such a year is a day and night of the gods;* 
the day thereof is the sun’s northern half-yearly course, 

26 Now of twelve thousand divine years consist the four ages 
named the Krita, the Treta, &c. Hear from me how they 
are divided. 

27 Now the Krita age is said to have contained four thousand 
years ; its commencing twilight was four hundred years, and 

28 the closing twilight was of the same duration. The Treta 
age was three thousand divine years; and three hundred 
years was its commencing twilight, which was indeed of that 
duration, and its closing twilight was of the same duration, 

29 The Dvapara age was two thousand years ; and its commen- 
cing twilight is declared to have been two hundred year.?, and 

30 its closing twilight was two hundred years. The Kali age 
is a thousand divine years, 0 brahman ; two hundieds of 
years are called its commencing and closing twilights. 

31 This period of twelve thousand divine years is called a pg*i 
it has been laid down by the poets ; a thousand times this 
period are called one of Brahma’s days. 

32 In one of Brahma’s days, 0 brahman, there may be foiif* 
teen Manus. They live according to their portions; 

33 thousand is divided among them. The gods, the sever 

** Thus one divine year — 360 human years. 



THE COMPUTATION OP BRAHMa’s tIPB. 227 

fishis, and Indra, Manu, and the kings his sonS) are created 
with Mann and pass to dissolution with him in regular order. 
Seventy-one repetitions of the four ages, with a fraction in ex- 
cess, constitute a manvantara ; hear from mo its computation in 
5 human years. Thirty full crores reckoned duly, O brahman, 
i and sixty-seven lakhs more by reckoning, and twenty thou- 
sands — this is the period of seventy ’■one times the four ages 
without the excess fraction ; this is called a manvantara. 
f Hear it from me in divine years ; eight hundred thousands 
of years by divine reckoning,* and fifty-two thousands of 
\ years more in addition. A day of Brahma is declared to be 
this period multiplied fourteen times.f At its termination 
the dissolution is declared by the wise to be the necessary 
result, 0 brahman. 

I The Bhur-loka, the Bhuvar-loka and the Svar-loka are 
perishable and pass^ to dissolution; and the Mahar-loka 
) stands, yet the dwellers therein by reason of the heat go to 
the dana-loka. And Brahma sleeps indeed during the night 
in the three worlds which have been dissolved into one ocean. 

I That night is of exactly the same duration. At its terraina- 

• This lino as it stands in the text seems incorrect. The fonv ages con* 

In 12,000 divine years or 4,320,000 human years, and 71 times tnis period 
ntain 8,52,000 divine years, or 300,720,000 human years. This latter 
nod agrees with the enumeration in verso 36 {viz., 30,67,20,000 years), but 
iioad of the former the text gives 8,000 + 62,000, i. e , 60,000 divine years, 
li'ss we read iaia-sahasrdni for varsha-sahasrdf^i. Yutam, however, seems 
■ong as regards both grammar and moaning. 

t This docs not agree with verse 31, if we take the words “this period" 
refer to verses 35, 36 and 37. In verse 31 one of Brahma’s days is said to 
12,000,000 divine years or 4,320,000,000 human years, but 14 times the 
‘’od mentioned in the latter verses contain 11,928,000 divine years, or 
lh>080,000 human years. Wo must bring in hero the excess fraction re- 
red to in verse 34, which by calculation is found to be -f j thus 71f times 
^ JTiga of 12,000 divine years = 867,l42f divb.o years of the manvantara 
1 H times this last period exactly - 12,000,000 divine years of Brahma's 
^• Similarly with regard to human years. 

f ^ordydftreadavdn^if 



228 


CANTO XLVIT. 


tion creation begins again. And so jpasses one of Bratma-g 

42 years, and a hundred years is the whole. For a hundred of 
his years is denominated a Para; and a Parardha or half j 

43 Para is well-known to be composed of fifty years. So then a 
Parardha of his life has elapsed, O brahman ; at the close of 
which occurred the Mahd-kalpa, lohich is famed as the Padmj 

44 Of the second Parardha which is now passing, 0 brahman 
the first kalpa (or cycle) ordained is this one called the 
Vdraha. 


Canto XLVTI. 


The Creation from Prakriti and the Vikdras.* 

Mdrkandeya continues — After the Fddma Mahd-kaljpa Bmlm 
awoke, and as Ndrdyana raised the earth out of the sea 
of dissolution and fashioned it in its present shape — Then k 
created, first, the vegetable world — secondly, the animal mrld-- 
thirdly, the gods — fourthly, mankind — fifthly, Anugraha—ad 
sixthly, the hhutas — Markandcya summarizes the nine creationif 
viz., these six, arid the three described in Canto XLV. 

Kraushtuki spoke. 

1 Tell mo fully how Brahma, the adorable, the creator, the 
lord of all creatures, the master, the divine, created all crea* 
tures. 

Markandeya spoke. 

2 Here I tell thee, 0 brahman, how the adorable eternal 
framer of the worlds created all the universe moveable and 
immoveable. 

3 At the dissolution which followed the Pddmaf Mald-yp^ 
the lord Brahma awoke after having slept through the 

* The products evolved from Prakyiti. 
t For jpadmavasdne read pddmdvasdne ? 



THE CE RATION PROM PEAKRITI AND THE VINARA??. 229 

Then goodness predominating in him he gazed on the 
empty world. And here men utter this verse to Narayana, 
^lio h<as Brahma’s own form, god of the universe, changeless 
ia might. “N’ara means water and bodies ”* — we have thus 
heard it is a name for water ; and in it he lies, hence he is 
called NarAyana. 

On awaking he knew that the earth liad disappeared with- 
in that water, and then hecmne desirous through reflection to 
deli vert the earth therefrom. Ho assumed as of old in the 
kalt^as and othei* limes, other bodies such as those of a fish, a 
tortoise and other animals, and likewise he took the body of 
a hoar. The krd who is composed of the Vedas and sacri- 
fices assumed a heavenly form composed of the Vedas and 
sacrifices, and entered the water; he reached everywhere and 
existed everywhere. And the lord of the world raised the 
eartli out of the lower regions, and set it free in the water, 
while the Siddhas who abode in Jana-loka bent their thoughts 

[) on him. The earth floated liko an immense boat on that 
ocean, hut docs not sink by reason of the amplitude of its size. 

1 Then ho made the earth level and created the mountains on 
the earth. Formerly when creation was burnt up by tho 

2 then world-destroying fire, those mountains on tho earth were 
totally consumed by that fire. Tlio rocks were engulphed in 
that one ocean, and the water was driven together by the 

3 wind; wherever they adhered and remained, there the moun- 
tains grew into being. Then he divided the earth, adorned 

1 uith seven dvipas ; and ho fashioned the four worlds, the 
Rhiir-loka and tho others, as before. 

Wliile he pondered on creation, as of old in the kalpas and 
other iimes, he next became manifested as devoid of intelli- 
gence, as enveloped in darkness. Darkness, folly, infatuation, 
gloominess, and blind consciousness — ignorance,}: composed of 
these five, became manifested out of the Supremo Soul. 
Creation irrational became established in five ways while he 
was meditating. Externally and internally it was destitute of 
Tanavah. -j- Sam-ud-dUttra j not in the dictionary. % A-vidyti. 



230 


CANTO XLVII. 


light,* * * § its soul was concealed, it consisted of vegetation j 
and since vegetation is declared to be “ primary, 
this is indeed the Mukhya creation. 

18 He considered that creation incapable of causation, § and 
thought of creating another yet. While he was meditating 
on its creation, the animal world, in which the stream of life|| 

19 is horizontal,^ came next into existence. Since its activities 
are displayed horizontally, hence it** is known as the “ tiryak- 
srotas.” Cattle and other quadrupeds are well-known as being 
of that kind ; they are indeed characterized chiefly by igno. 

20 ranee apd are unintelligent ; and they stray in wrong courses 
and in their ignorance are subservient to knowledge; they 
are self-swayed, and devoted to self ; they comprise twenty. 

21 eight classes. They all possess light* internally, but they 
are mutually circumscribed. ff 

Ho thought oven that creation was incapable of causation, 

22 and while he meditated, another came into existence ; now 
this^ the third, was the group of beings in which the stream 
of life passed upwards it was characterized chiefly by good- 
ness. Those beings abound in pleasure and affection ; they 

23 are uncircumscribed outwardly and inwardly; and possess 
light* externally and internally ; they originated from an up- 
ward stream of life. Now that third creation of the 
Being who was satisfied in soul thereat is known as the crea- 

24 tion of the gods. When that creation came into beiug, 
Brahma was pleased. 

* Praka^a. This is defined by S'n-dhara Svami to mean " clear knowledge” 

(prakfishtaip jnAnam). It had no clear external perception of sound Ac., ot 
clear internal feeling of happiness, &c. 

t Naga. X Mnkhya. 

§ For dfishfvd sddhajeam read dfishtvdsddhaham; see the second lirf^ 
verso 21. 

jj Srotas ; or the current of nutriment. T Tiryak. 

** For sd read saA ? 

tt A-vyita. S'n-dhara explains this as, “mutually ignorant of their bir 
nature, Ac.” 

tt iTrdhva-srotaa. 



THE CllEATION PROM PRAKRITI AND THE VIKARAS 


231 


Then he meditated further on another creation which should 
IS be capable of causation and be the highest. While he medita- 
ted so, and meditated on truth, the group of beings in which 
the stream of life passes downwards,* and which is capable 
of causation,t next became manifest out of the Impercepti- 
M ble. Since the streams of life in them moved downwards 
hence theyj are “ arvak-srotas and they possess light§’ 
copiously : they are characterized chiefly by ignorance and pas- 
17 Sion. Hence they have abundance of suffering, and are con- 
tinuously engaged in action ; and they possess light externally 
and internally. They are mankind and are capable of causation. 
!8 Auugrahall was the fifth creation; it is disposed in four 
ways, by contrariety,! and by perfection,** bytranquillity,tt 
19 and by satisfaction:: likewise. The objects of this creation 
moreover have knowledge of the past and of the present. 

0 The creation of the origins of the gross elements§§ and the 
gross clomontsllll is called the sixth; they all possess com- 
prolionsivencss,!! and are prone to mutual division ;*** and 
file origins of the gross elements are to be known as both 
impulsive and devoid of propensities. 

1 Now the creation of “ mahat ” is to be known as the first 
by nraluiia ; and the second of the “ tan-mdtras ” is called 
tile creation of the “bluUas;” and the third creation is that 
of the “ vikiiras,”ttt and it is perceptible by the senses. So was 
produced the creation from Prakfiti wherein Intelligence pre- 


* t sidhakah reai sadhakamt 

A f or /(X read te ^ r i (' r * 

Ij ' § PrakAsa, soo note * p. 230. 

U IS IS the Prafcyaya-sarga or intolloctnal creation of the Sankhya philo- 
FJ. ^ Hut S'ri-dhara explains it as an inferior creation of gods (deya-sarga), 

It is characterized 


chai.ictprizod by both goodness and ignorance. 


">rance because it is nourished by the ignorance among immoveable 
the animal creation j it is characterized by goodness, because it 
with and thrives upon the perfection and satisfaction among 
and the gods ; and it is called Anngix na, because it favours (ana- 
the several natural dispositions of those objects. 

"W. siadhi. ft S'anti. Tushti. 

nil Bhuta. ff Pari.graha. Saip-vi-bhdga. 

H>roductH 



232 CANTO XLVTII. 

33 ceded. The “ raukhya” creation was the fourth, the makliya 
things are known as immoveable. The fifth was that called 

34 “tiryak-srotas”'*' and “tally ag-yonya.’’ Next was the sixth 
creation^ that of the “ urdhva-srotas’’ ;t it is known as the 
creation of the gods. Then the creation of the “ arvdk-srotas ” 

36 is the seventh ; it is that of mankind. The eighth creation 
is “ anugraha” ; it is characterized by goodness and ignorance. 
These last five creations are known as those which were 
evolved from the Vikaras,| and the first three as those 
36 evolved from Prakriti.§ The ninth creation was Prakrita 
and also Vaikrita; it is known as “ Kaumara.”|| Thus these 
nine creations of the Praja-pati have been declared. 

Canto XLVIll. 

The Course of Creation. 

Mdrlcandcya relates Jmo Brahma created the Asuras^ thegods^ 
the pitris and manhind, and the night and day and the two 
twilights — lie mentions the limes when those beings are power jd 
— Tie relates the creation of the Ii((kshasas\ Yalcshas, Serpents^ 
Pisdc'as, and Oandharvas — Next of all beasts^ birds and other 
animals — Then of various sacred hymns and metres — Then of ik 
lightning^ thunder., and other phenomena — And lastly Brahm 
assigned all things their shapes, purstiits and names. 

Krauslitiiki spoke. 

1 0 adorable Sir, right well hast thou related the creation 

briefly to me; tell me, 0 brahman, fully of the origin of the 
gods, 

• For tiryalc-srotas road tiryah-srofds ? 

f For tato ’rddha-sn>tasdii} read tathorddhva-srntasdm ? 

Vaikrita. § Prakrita. 

II This is the creation of Nila-lohita Rudra (soo Canto LII) and of Sanat- 
kumara and the other niind-born sons of Brahma, the Komaras. This crea- 
tion is called prakj-ita because Rudra sprang into existence by himself' a* 
mentionod in that canto, verse 3. It is also called vaikfita, because 
Kumdrus wore created by Brahmd in the form he assumed of a ytiaxi 
(vikfiti-bhuta). 



THE COUBSE OP CREATION. 


233 


spoke. 

Creation is impregnated with the good and bad* actions of 
previous existence, 0 brdhman; and because of this well- 
known lawt, created beings, though they are destroyed in the 
dissolution, are not delivered, from the consequences of their 
actions. 

The gods and other divine beings^ and stationary things, and 
the four classes of mankind, 0 brahman, were produced in 
his mind when Brahma was engaged in creation. 

Then being desirous of creating the four classes of beings, 
namely, the gods, the Asuras and the pitris, and mankind, he 
infusedf himself in the waters. The particle of darkness 
grew up in excess as the Prajd-pati was rapt in medita- 
tion. First then out of his buttocks, as he was desirous 
of creating, were produced the Asuras. And then he cast 
aside that body which was composed of the particle of dark- 
ness ; that body cast aside by him forthwith became Night. 

Being desirous of creating, he assumed another body and 
experienced delight ; then were produced from his mouth the 
Gods in whom goodness predominates. And the mighty lord 
of created beings abandoned that body also, and when cast 
a.side it became Day wherein goodness predominates. 

Then he took another body which was indeed characterized 
by tlio particle of goodness ; the Pitris were produced from 
' him while he deemed himself to be a pitpi. The lord, after 
creating the pitpis, abandoned that body also, and when 
abandoned it became the Twilight that intervenes between 
day and night. Next the lord assumed another body charac- 
terized by the particle of passion, and then were produced 
! Mankind who spring from the particle of passion. After 
creating mankind, the lord abandoned that body, and it be- 
came the Twilight that ends the night and begins the day. 

^ Thus these bodies of the wise God of gods have become 
famed as the night and day, and the evening twilight and 

J'or hiiald kuialair read kuialdkuhlair. 
i t Fof khyitd read khydtgd ? % Or, united himself with. 

30 



CANTO XLVIII. 


234 

14 the morning twilight, 0 brahman. Three are characterijed 
by the particle of goodness, namely, the morning twiligl^t, the 
evening twilight and the day ; the night is characterized by 

15 the particle of darkness, hence it w called Tri-y4mika * Hence 
the gods are powerful by day, but the Asuras by night, and 
mankind at the coming of the morning twilight, and the pitfij 

16 at the evening twilight. At these times these classes of beings are 
undoubtedly powerful and unassailable by their foes; and 
when they light upon the adverse times they lose their power. 

17 The morning twilight, the night, the day, and the evening 
twilight', these four are indeed the bodies of the lord Brahma, 
and they are invested with the three qualities. 

18 Now after creating these four, the Praja-pati, feeling hunger 
and thirst, took another body composed of passion and dark- 

19 ness during the night; during its darkness the adorable 
unborn god created bearded monsters wasted with hunger; 

20 and they endeavoured to eat up that body. Some of those 
monsters, W'ho said “ let us preservef it from them,” were 
called Rikshasas in consequence ; aud those who said “ let us 
devour! it were called Yakshas, from yakshana, ‘ eating, ’§ 
0 brdhman. 

21 When the creator Brahma saw them, the hair of his head 
through his displeasure grew withered |[ and lost its erectibi* 

22 lity.lT Through its downward gliding** it became the Ser- 
pents, ft lossJJ of erectihility they are known aa 

the Allis or Snakes. Thereupon in anger at having seen the 

23 Serpents, he fashioned beings possessed with anger ;§§ they 
were born as the flesh-eating demons, tawny-hued and fierce. 


« That is, having its course with the three others,” from tri and ;/«•* 
(from root yd) ; or, “ keeping the three others in cheek,” from tri and 
(from root yam). The moaning “ having three watches” from tH and yi** 
(from root yd) is discaifled hero. 

f Rakshdma. t Khfidama. 

§ Yaksha^ia seems a mistake for jakshaija. 

\\ For s'iryanta read ^irifds tuf 

^ Sam&rohai?a-hina. ** Sarpaija. ff Sarpa. tt 

For itrodhdtmdno read krodhaimano f * 



THE COURSE OP CREATION. 


236 

Kext while he meditated on the earth ,♦ the Gandharvas 
(4 were born as his offspring. They were bom from him as he 
drank speech m,+ hence they are known as the Gandharvas. 

When these eight classes of divine beings were created, the 
15 lord next created other things, birds and cattle.J Ho created 
goat8§ from his mouth; and he created sheep from his 
to breast; and Brahma fashioned kine|| from his belly and from 
his loins ; and from his feet swift^ horses and asses, and hares 

7 and deer, camels and mules and other uhiiticlIs of various 
kinds ; plants and fruit-trees were produced from the hair of 

8 his body. When he had thus created the cattle and plants, 
the lord performed a sacrifice. 

From him at the beginning of the kalpa, at the commence- 

9 ment of the Tretd Age issued the cow, the goat, mankind, the 
sheep, the horse, the mule, and the ass (these animals men 
call domestic cattle), and others (which they call wild animals, 

0 hearken to me), namely the beast of prey, the cloven-hoofed 
beast, the elephant, monkeys, fifthly birds, sixthly aquatic 
beasts, and seventhly creeping animals. 

1 And for the sacrifices he fashioned from his front mouth 
the gayatri, and tho tyic'a strophe, the tri-vrit hymn of praise,*^ 

I the rathantara sdmans, and tho agni-shtoma verses. And he 
created from his right mouth the yajur hymns, the tri-shtubh 
metre, sacred hymas,tt and the fifteen hymns of praise,^ J: and 
^ the brihat-saman and the uktha verses.§§ He fashioned from 
his hindmost mouth the sdman hymns, the metre jagati, and 


* Dliyayato gam. f Pivato vac 'am j tho deiivation is not apparent, 

t Pa/avo; by ancient use for <paHn. 

§ AaA for ajan, by ancient use j so also avayo for avin ‘ sheep.’ 

1 Odvas for gds, by ancient use. But the MS. in the Sanskrit College 
‘fwy, Calcutta, reads instead— 


‘Then he 
^ wish.” 


Tatah svac'c'handato *nydni vaydmsi vayaso *8rijat. 
created other winged animals from his bodily energy according 


f dictionary ; from the root sam-d-tang t 

e eleventh hymn of the ninth Ma^dala of the Rig-Yeda snng in a 

ft C'handas. Stoma. 

SS <’or read 



23e 


CAHTO XLVIir. 


the fifteen hymns of praise ,* the vairiipa siman, and the att 

34 r^tra verse.f He created from his left mouth the twenty, 
first Atharva hyrmn, and the aptor-ydman sacrificial verse, f 
the anu-shtnhh metre and the virdj metre. 

35 The mighty adorable god created at the beginning of the 
kalpa the lightning, the thunderbolts and the clouds, and 

36 the ruddy rainbows, and the periods of life.J And crea, 
ted things great and small were produced from his limbs. 

Having created the first four classes of beings, the gods, 

37 the Asuras, the pitps and mankind, he next created the 
things that exist both immoveable and moveable, the Yakshas, 
the Pi^ac'as, the Gandharvas and the bevies of Apsarases, 

38 men and Kinnaras and Rdkshasas, birds, cattle, wild animals 
and snakes, and whatever is changeless and changeful, 
stationary and moveable. 

39 Whatever actions they were severally endowed with ori- 
ginally at their creation, those very actions they are endowed 

40 with when they are created again and again. Noxionsnesa 
and harmlessness, gentleness and cruelty, righteousness and 
unrighteousness, truth and falsehood,— animated thereby they 
have their being; therefore they severally take delight in 

41 those characteristics. The lord, the creator, himself ordained 
diversity and specialization§ among created things in their 

42 organs and pursuits and bodies. And he assigned the name* 
and shapes of created things, and propounded the duties of 
the gods and other beings, even by the words of the Vedaatthe 

43 beginning. He gives names to the Rishis, and to the semd 
created classes|| among the gods, and to the other things that 

44 wore brought forth at the close of the night.f As the sigm 
of the seasons appear at their appropriate season,** and variooi 
forms appear amid alteration, so those very signs and fom 
appear as actual factsft in the ages and other periods. 

* Stoma j but another reading is seventeen, 
f A part of the seven soma-saupstha sacrifices. 
t Vaydipsi ; or, birds. § Viniyoga. 

11 Srisljti* ^ s*arvsris0 

For yathdrttau read yatharttau ? tt » 



THE COURSE OP CREATION’. 237 

j 5 Such then* «we the creations of Brahm4 whose origin 
I is undiscernihle ; they occur from kalpa to kalpa as he awakes 
i at the close of his night.f 


Canto XLIX. 


The Course of Creation, 

Uirkandeya deseribea the creation of the primeval human race 
„,d their simple condition and happy life-When they ultimately 
lied out, modern men fell from the sky, and lived in kalpa trees— 
Passmiate affection sprung up among them— and covetousness neset, 
ehich destroyed the trees, and drove them to form communities— Their 
usmres of length are explained— and fortresses, towns, villages and 
mtses descnled—The Tretd Age began— with the existing rivers and 
vgetalion-and the people lived on the vegetation— They then took 
mate possession of property according to might, and the vegetation 
<emhed-Then they supplicated Brahmd, and he created all existing 
mats and plants— The seventeen cereals and the fourteen sacrificial 
knts are specified— Brahmd ordained their means of livelihood, 
tlmh couU be gained only through labour, and their laws, castes, Ac! 
-The spheres assigned to various classes after death are mentioned. 

Krauah{:uki spoke. 

Thou hast told me, Sir, of the group of beings in which 
^ e stream of lifej passes downwards; tell me fully, 0 
brdhman, how Brahmd created the human creation, and how 
e created the classes of men, and how their qualities, O 
Sir ; and tell me what business has been assigned to 
^ le brdhmans and those other classes severally. 

Markancjeya spoke. 

While Brahmd was first creating and was meditating on 
ruth, he created a thousand pairs of human beings from his 
ttiouth, 0 Muni ; when born, they come into being, charac- 
®rized chiefly by goodness, and self-glorious. He created 

* Tor ta read tu ? 

J O^current of nutriment. 


t For survaryyants read s^arvaryanis t 



238 


CANTO XLIX. 


5 another thousand pairs from his breast; they were ^ 
characterized chiefly by passion, and were fiery and imp^. 
tient. And he created again another thousand miserable 

6 pairs from his thighs;* they were known as characterijed 
chiefly by passion and ignorance, and as enviously disposed. 

7 And he created another thousand pairs from his feet ; they 
were all characterized chiefly by ignorance, aud were un. 
fortunate and little of understanding. 

Then those living beings, produced in pairs, were rejoicing 

8 together ; urged by their mutual distress they hastened to 
sexual intercourse. Thenceforward pairing originated in 

8 this kalpa. Women did not have their courses month by 
month ; hence they did not then bring forth offspring, although 

10 they engaged in sexual intercourse. They bring forth juat 
pairs of children once at the close of life. Thenceforward 

11 pairing originated in this kalpa. By meditation and thought 
those human beings give birth to offspring once. Sound and 
the other objects of sense were pure severally in their fire 


marks. 

12 This was this creation of the human race which the Praji- 
pati formerly produced. Sprung of his lineage they worship- 

13 ped this world, and they pay homage to rivers, lakes, aud 
seas and the mountains also. During that age those human 

14 beings lived indeed feeling Uttle cold or heat. They received 
delight according to their natural dispositions from the objecte 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


of sense, 0 wise Sir,- uo opposition, nor enmity, nor envy 
existed among them. They paid homage to the mountains 

and the seas; they lived wholly without habitations ; their 

actions were unswayed by love ; their minds were always 
joyful. Neither Pi^dc'as, nor Nagas, nor Rdkshasas, nor en- 
vious men, nor cattle, nor birds, nor crocodiles, nor fish, nor 
creeping insects, nor egg-bom animals hindered them, ( ^ 
those animals are the offspring of iniquity,) nor roots, 
fruits, nor flowers, nor the seasons, nor the years. Time w 
always happy ; there was neither heat nor cold in 
time passed by, they attained wonderful perfection. ® 

* For marv/tah read 



THE COURSE OP CRBATIO.N. 2^9 

over they enjoyed satisfaction in the fore-noon and at noon j 
and again satisfaction came without exertion to those who 
wished for it, and exertion also sprang up in the mind of 
those who wished for it. The water was exquisite. Perfec- 
tion was merry with many a delight for them and another 
was produced that conferred every wish. And with bodies 
uncared for, those human beings had lasting youth. Without 
resolve they produce offspring in pairs ; alike is their birth 
and form, and together also they die. Devoid of desire and 
hatred they lived to each other. All were equal in form and 
length of life, without inferiority or superiority. They live 
their measure of life, four thousand human years ; nor have 
they misfortunes through affliction. Everywhere moreover 
the earth was entirely blessed with good fortune. 

As the people died in the course of time, so their prosperity 
gradually perished everywhere ; and when it had altogether 
perished, men fell down from the sky. Those kalpa trees 
were commonly produced which are called houses ; and they 
hronght forth every kind of enjoyment to those people. At the 
beginning of the Tretd age the people got their subsistence 
from those trees. Afterwards in the course of time passionate 
affectionf sprung up suddenly among them. By reason of 
the occurrence of passionate affection menstruation occurred 
month by month, and conception frequently took place. 
Then those trees were called housesj by them. But branches 
certainly fall from other trees, 0 brahman ; and they yield 
clothing and ornaments out of their fruits. In the separate 
cavities of the same fruit of those trees was produced very 
strong honey, which excelled in smell, colour and taste, and 
' which no bee had made ; on that they subsisted at the begin- 
ning of the Treta age. 

Afterwards in course of time those people grew covetous 
' besides ; their minds being filled with selfishness they fenced 

* The text siddhir ndmndvayo na sd seems incorrect j instead of it, another 
S- reads iiddhir ndndrasoUasd, which I have adopted, 
t Rsga. 

X Do^s this mean the trees were called houses (gr^ha) from the offspring 
irbha) begotten there P 



24 ^ 


CANTO XLIX. 


the trees* round ; and those trees perished By reason of tliat 

34 wrong conduct on their part. Strife sprang up inconae. 
quence; their faces felt cold and heat and hunger. Thei 
for the sake of combination and resistance they made toima 

35 at first ; and they resort to fortresses in inaccessible deserts 
and wastes, in mountains and caves ; also they industriously 

36 constructed with their own fingers an artificial fort on trees, 
on mountains and in water, and they first made measures 
intended for measurement. 

37 A minute atom, a para siikshma, the mote in a sunbeam,! 
the dust of the earth, and the point of a hair, and a young 
louse, t and a louse, § and the body of a barley-corn ;|| men 

38 say each of those things is eight times the size of the preced- 
ing thing.ll Eight barley-corns eqml an angula or finger- 

39 breadth ;** six finger-breadths are a pada,tt and twice that 
is known as a span and two spans make a cubit measured 
with the fingers closed in at the root of the thumb ;§§ four 
cubits make a bow, a pole,|||| and equal two nddikds; tw 

40 thousand bows make a gavyiiti;lt and four times that are 
declared by the wise to be a yojana;*** this is the utmost 
measure for purposes of calculation. 

41 Now of the four kinds of fortresses three occur naturally; 
the fourth kind of fortress is artificial. Now those men 

42 constructed it laboriously ;ttt and they alpo constmted, 0 

* For vfiJtshds read vrikshdma ? t For trasha-rei^ur read trasa-mw. 

X For nishkdm read lihshd. § For yUkdm read yM. [1 Yftvoda» 
f For ekddah’gur^atn Ushdsj^ another MS. reads kramdd aah(a-gundnp^^> 
which is much better. 

•* For yava^madhyam another MS. reads yavdnyashfau. 
ft A foot’s breadth? Jt For vitasti-dvigui^am read vitastir dviguiw^ 
§§ For -veshtanam read -veshfanaA ? This relation indioatea a long arM 
small hands and feet. An a\ erage cubit so measured would be equal to a 
16 inches. II II US’Vd®'- « 

f A stretch of pasture-ground. Taking the cubit at 15 inches, tJuB e g» 

would be 10,0C0 feet, or about mile. ^ 

•** Taking the cubit at 16 inches, the yojana equals 40,000 feet,^r 

. * wf^rraadiagi 

ttt The text tae* c'a kmydt dfdastu tt appears corrupt. A beteer 
tad ddkfuf yaJtnatas tu te from ^ M8. in the Sanskrit Library- 



THE DBVBIiOPBMENT OP MANKIND. 241 

brahman * the piira,t and the khetaka, the dro^i-mnkhaj 
likewise, § and ^dkhd-nagarakas and the tfiree kinds of kar. 

3 vatakas,|| and the grdmas together with the arrangement of 
the ghoshaSjIT and the separate habitations therein ; and fhmf 

4 hdlt lofty ramparts surrounded on all sides with fosses. They 
made the pura, or town, extend for a quarter of a yojana in 
every direction, and slope down to water on the east; they 
made it auspicious and peopled it with colonies from noble 
families And with a half of it they laid out the kheta,tt 
and with a quarter of it the karvata and then the inferior 
portion which is made with the remaining quarter is called the 

16 droni-iriukha.§§ A town destitute of ramparts and fosses || || is 


• For dvijah read dvija? The vocative seems preferable as MArkail^^eya 
B relating what happened in a previous age, and the work described would 
lot fall to a brahman’s duty. If dvijafy be retained, the word hurydt must be 
indorBtood. 

t This is explained in verse 44. 

t Those two words are explained in verse 46. 

§ For tadva read tadvad. 

II Those two words are not in the dictionary ; they are explained in verses 
i5 and 46. For karvafalcam trayi road Tcarvafdka-trayim ? 

y Sanghosha is not in the dictionary. For gramd-aanghoBha^vinydsat^ read 
ramam aa^ghoaha-vinydsam ? Gr6ma is explained in verse 47, and ghosha in 
erse 60. 


** S'oddha-vaipSa-vahirgamam. 

tf Prof, Sir M. Monier-Williams explains khe^a, “ a village, the residenoa 
t peasants and farmers ; a small town, half a pura " j but here it apparently 
lOMs a particular portion of the pura; does it mean the “inhabited or 
BBidential area ’’ ? 


tJ This word is said to mean “a village, market-town, the capital of a 
wtrict,” but here it denotes a particular portion of the pura ; does it mean 
0 bazar or the “ area occupied with the market and shops “ P 
This word said to mean “ the capital of a district, the chief of 400 vil- 
but hero it evidently refers to the lowest part of the pura j does it 
the area inhabited by the labouring population or the lowest classes ” P 
Jrse parihhd^hinam read prdkdra-parikhd-hinam f Or, is the 

intended to say that a town surrounded with a rampart but without a 
® ifl a varma-vat f This would agree better with the meaning of vama- 
Sir M. Monier-Williams explains it as “an unfortified (?) town/* 

31 



242 


CANTO XLIX. 


47 


48 


49 


60 


61 


called a varma-vai ; and a ^dkhi-nagaraka* is anotBer kin^ ^ 
town which possesses ministers and fendatory princes. 
over, a dwelling placet which abounds with ^ddras and waterj 
where the cnltivators are independently prosperous, § 
which is situated on land that can be used for fields, is called 
a grama. II The dwelling-place, which men make, different 
from cities and other abodes, for the sake of their busineas 
is to be known as a vasati by modem men.^f The grimj 
which springs np on the land of another grama^ and thrivea 
which has no fields of its own, which is for the most part 
vicious,' and which is the resoi-t of a king’s favourites, is 
called an akrimi.** And a collection of cattle and herdsmen, 
who have brought their utensils there on carts, where there 
is no barter, is called a ghosha ;tt its situation on the land 
may be wherever they please. 

Those ^people thus made towns and other abodes for them- 
selves to dwell in ; they made houses for the several 


* This word is said to mean, “ a * branoh-town,’ a suburb,” but here is seem# 
to mean a * town with branches,’ a *• capital town ” or “ metropolis." 
t Vasati ; see verse 48. 

X For Udra-jala-prdyd/i read iudra-jaU^priyd t 
§ For -Itfshibaldfy read ’hfisUbdld ? 

II The village. The word thns denotes a local area, and includes both the 
dwellings and the fields. It seems to designate specially the large and proi- 
perons villages. 

f The word is explained in the dictionary as “ a dwelling-place, dwelling- 
house, abode, residence,” but here it is explained to be a ” mart,” apparently 
either permanent or temporary. It corresponds to the modem (PersiM) 
word ganjy or the vernacular word hd( (Sanskrit hatta), in Bengal. The word 
vasati appears as hasti in the modern vernaculars, and means in Bengal 
the populated part of a village,” and “ the part of a town occupied by the 
common bamboo-built houses.” The verse seems to indicate that the 
word vasati was either newly-coined, or had recently acquired (or the authtf 
wished it to acquire) a special meaning. The complete change from tha 

meaning to that of the modem basti, which rather excludes any notion rf 

trade, is note-worthy. 

** Or ahrimi. These words are not in the dictionary. If we might re»^ 
d-lerami’ instead, the word would be rather appropriate. 

tt This word is said to mean ” a station of herdsmen.’^ It appeal to 
note a temporary dwelling only, resorted to for purposes of pasturagej 



THE DEVELOPEMSirr OF MANEIHD. 


243 

52 to dwell in. As trees were their first kind of houses, so, with 
a remembrance of all that, those people built their houses. 

53 As some branches of a tree go in one direction, and others go 
in another direction, and some rise upwards and some bend 

i downwards, even so they fashioned the branches in thew 

U houses. Those branches, which were the branches of the 

I kalpa trees at first, 0 biAhman, became rooms in the houses 
in consequence among those people, 

55 Those people ruined the trees by their strife, and afterwards 
pondered* on their means of livelihood. When the kalpa 

56 trees had utterly perished along with the honey, those people 
were distressed by their afflictions, and suffered from thirst 
and hunger. Then became manifest their perfection at tho 

57 beginning of the Tretd age. For their other business was 
spontaneously accomplished ;t they had rain according to 
their desire. Tho waters of their rain are tho rivers J which 

58 flow here. By the obstruction of the rain§ the rivers, whichU 
existed on the earth scanty of water before that, became^ 
deep flowing channels. 

69 And then by their union with the earth plants came into 
existence, of fourteen kinds, both those which grow on un- 
cultivated soil, and those which grow unsown, both culti- 

30 vated and wild. And trees and shrubs bearing flowers and 
fruit in their seasons were produced. This manifestation of 

31 vegetation appeared first in the Treta age. On that vegeta- 
tion the people subsist in the Tretd age, 0 Muni, And then 

>2 lapsing into novel passion and covetousness those people next 
took possession of rivers and fields, mountains, and trees, 
shrubs and plants In their own right even according to might. 

* For ao'intayat read ac'intayan ? 

t For vdrttd-sva-siidhitd read vdrttd sva-sddhitd ? 

t Nitnna-gata wew^-nimna-gd ? This meaning is not in the dictionary. 

Y or n^shtydvaruddhoLir read vrishfyavarodhair ? 

correct, wo must take nimna-ga Tnasc. as ** a 
) a meaning not given in the dictionary j if we read nimna-gdh hm as 
“mst read ydh for ye, 

^ ubhavQt read ahhavan r 



CANTO XLIX. 


244 

63 Through that iheir sin those plants perished before their very 
eyes, and the earth then devoured, those plants at once^ 0 

64 most wise brdhman.* Moreover when that mgetaiitm 
perished, those people fell into still further confusion. 

Suffering from hunger, they resorted to Brahmi, the most 

65 high, as their preserver. And he, the mighty lord, knowing 
full well then that the earth had swallowed it up,f milked 

66 her treating mount Mem as her calf This earth-cow was 
then milked by him, the cereals came into existence on the 

67 face of the earth, the seeds, the cultivated and wild plants 
besides; ^ which are annuals, § known as comprising seventeen 
classes according to tradition. The various kinds of both 

68 rice and barley, wheat, a^u grain, || sesamum, priyangn,^ 
nddra,** koradusha,tt and c'inaka,!!: masha,§§ green gramJI 

69 and mastira,l[ir the finest pulse,*** and kulatthaka,ttt ^<}taka 

* For dvijah read dvija ? 

!> Grasta. The context Beems to require this word to be taken in an active 

Bcnse. 

X The calf is tied near the cow, while she is being milked, as otherwise, 
it IB said, she will not let her milk flow. 

^ Fhala*pAk&nta. 

II Fanicum miliaoeum, the modem chind, Roxb. p. 104. It is a cnltivated 
cereal, grown on an elevated, light, rich soil, immediately after the rains. 
See note ** p. 166. 

** The Dictionary says this is a kind of grain with long stalks, bub I cannot 
s. trace it out in Roxburgh. 

ft Faspalum scrobiculatum, the modern kodo, Roxb. p. 93. He 8ayB“Th8 

seed is an article of diet with the Hindoos, particularly with thoae who in- 
habit the mountains and most barren parts of the country, for it is m anoh 

countries only where it is cultivated, it being an unprofitable crop, and n 

sown where others more beneficial will thrive. I have eaten of the boi 
grain, and think it as palatable as rice.” 

This is said to bo Panicum miliaceum which is already mentiono ; 
word means fennel also, but that is inappropriate. I do not find any other 
grain of this name. 

§§ See note $ p. 84. 

II i| Mudga; See note §§ p. 84. 

%% See note ttt P- 165. 

#e# Nisbpitva ; see note || p. 86. 
ttt J^ohe 11 p. 84. 



THE DEVEIiOPEMBNT OP MANKIND. 


245 


pulse,* a^d chick-peat and hempt are known as the seven 
teen classes. These are the olden kinds of cultivated plants. 

And there are fourteen kinds of plants for use in sacrifices, 
l)oth cultivated and wild, viz.^ the various kinds of both rice 
and barley, wheat, a^u grain, sesamum, and seventh§ among 
them priyangu, and eighth kulatthaka, and 6y4maka|| grain, 
wild rice, wild sesamum, If and gavedhuka** grass, kuruvindaft 
grass, markataka,Jt and ve^u-gradha ;§§ and these indeed are 
traditionally known as the fourteen cultivated and wild plants 
I for use in sacrifices. When these plants are abandoned, |||1 they 
do not spring forth again. 

Thereupon the adorable self-existent Brahmd devised 
I, means of livelihood for the advancement of those people^ and 
the perfection of the hands which results from work. Thence- 
forward plants were produced, which must ripen after plough- 
5 ing. But when their livelihood was thoroughly ordained, the 

• The dictionary does not give aijihaka, maac. or fern., as the name of any 
ant ; but idhaki, /em., is said to mean a kind of pulse, Cajanua indicuSf 
preng. I'do nob find it in Roxb., but Oliver calls the Pigeon Pea Cajanua, 
t For c'anahdi read c'a^^ahdi. See note p. 84. 

I B'ana. For gandh road hndh, as in several MSS. 

§ The reckoning seems wrong j priyangu is the sixth and kulatthaka the 
iventh. 

II See note * p. 165. 

f Yattila is not in the dictionary. For yattild read jartildiji. 

** Coia barbata, Roxb. p. 649 ; it is a coarse grass, and cattle do not eat it. 

! ia also said to mean Uedyaarum lagopodioidea^ which is mentioueed by Rox- 
■irgh (p. 573), but of which I find no description in his work, 
tt Cypenis rotundus, Roxb. p. 66 ; a common grass, the roots of which dried 
id powdered are used as a perfume. 

W This has been mentioned in Canto XXXII, verse 11, and is described in 
le dictionary as “a kind of wild panic j a species of grain.’* I find that 
pruriens is assigned by Roxburgh to the Sanskrit word markati 
p. 653). That is a common legume, but he says no use seems to be made of 
I) except that the hairs of the legumes are used as a vermifuge and are be- 
eved to be poisonous. 

; This is not in the dictionary, and I do not know what it is. 

[ 1*11 Frasrishta. Does this mean that these plants grow only in a cultivated 
fate? 



246 


CANTO L. 


lord himself next established bounds for them according to 

76 justice and according to their qualities ; also the la^^g 
the castes and of the four periods of a br4hman*s life^ 
of the worlds* with all their castes which duly maintain 
righteousness and wealth, 0 most righteous Muni, 

77 Prdjdpatyat is traditionally declared to be the gpliere 
assigned after death to brahmans who perform the ceremonies. 
AindraJ is the sphere of kshatriyas who flee not in battle. 

78 Mdruta§ is the sphere of vai^yas who observe their own 
proper laws. G-4ndharval| is the sphere of the various claaseg 

79 of fitidrtis who perform menial service. The sphere of those 
eighty-eight thousand fishis who live in perpetual chastity 
has been traditionally declared to be that of the inhabitants 

80 of Jupiter. The sphere of the Seven Rishial has been tradi- 
tionally declared to be that of hermits. Prajdpatya** isthe 
sphere of householders; the abode of Brahma is for those 
men who have abandoned all worldly concerns ; the world 
of immortality is for yogis — such is the ordinance of the 
various spheres assigned after death. 


Canto L. 

The mandate to the Yaksha Duhsaha, 

Brahma next created the nine Sages ^ Bhrigu, Pulastya^ Tuhk, 
KratUj Angiras^ Maric*i, Baksha, Atri and Vasishtha—af^A 
Eudraj Sankalpa and Dharma—All these were alUwise and dewdof 
passions-^ Brahma in anger created a being half male^ half 
who at his order divided himself into many male and female heings> 

• Loka. 

t The heaven of the pitris ? 

% The 18th lunar mansion ? 

§ The constellation SvAti. 

)| GAndharva is the name of one of 
but this seems inappropriate. 

*|f The constellation Ursa Major. 

** See verse 77. 


the nine portions of BhArata*vawh» i 



^ THE OBEATIOX OP THE NIKE SAGE&. 247 

BrahiM then created the Mam Svdydmhhtva and hie wife 8'ata. 
,ipor-They had two eons Priya-vrata and Uttdna-pdda, and aleo two 
laughters. Bnc'i married one daughter ftiddhi and begat Tajna and 

Da1cshi9^> 

Bakha married the other daughter Prasdti and begot 24 daughtere, 
chose names are mentioned, and who became Dharma’e wives, and aleo 
il other daughters whose names are mentioned, and who became the 
lives of the other sages and of Agni and the PUris — 2%a children of 
hse daughters are mentioned, 

A-dharma and his offspring are mentioned, Naraka, Shaya, Mrityu 
■c.-the actions of Mfityu’s sons are explained— Chief among them 
t Bukaha—to him Srahmd assigned a dwelling and raiment, a long 
itahgue of bad deeds as nourishment, and certain places and times 
tr his success, but excluded o list of other persons and places from 
is influence. 

M4rkaij(Jeya spoke. 

Then while he was meditating, mankind were begotten 
in his mind, together with their occupations, and implements 
which were produced from his body. Spirits in bodily form* 
were produced from the limbs of him, the wise god. All 
those whom I have already mentioned came into existence. 
All created beings from the gods down to those whose 
condition is stationary are known to be subject to the three 
qualities :t such was the constitution of created things 
immoveable and moveable. * 

When all that offspring of him, the wise one, did not in- 
crease, he created other mind-bom sons like unto himself, vis., 
fign, Pulastya, Pulaha, Sratu, and Angiras, Mario'i, Dak- 
sha, and Atri, and the mind-born Vasishtha J— these were the 

mne sons of BrahmA, they are positively mentioned in the 
Puranas. 

Next Brahmd further created Rudra, whose birth was from 
IS soul when it was angry, and Sanknlpe, and Dharma who 
was egotten before all the preceding sons. 

* Kshetra-jna. 

I passion, and ignorance. 

“ read rasUhtham. 



248 


CANTO L. 


And those who with their sons and other rehiim were 

8 created by the Self-existent, felt no attachment for the worl^i 
but showed disregard and were composed in mind, 

all knew the fntnre, they were free from passion, free froai 
envy. 

9 When they thus showed disregard at the creation of the 
worlds, the high-souled Brahmd grew very wrathful; thm 

10 was produced there a male* like to the sun, possessed of an 
immense body, the body being half man’s and half woman’s, 

11 ‘‘Divide thyself” said the god, and then disappeared. And 
he being thus accosted separated the female and male 
natures ; and he divided the male nature into eleven parts. 

12 Then the divine lord divided the male and female natures 
into many parts with men, gentle and cruel, calm, black and 
white. 

13 Next the lord BrahmA became the guardian of his off- 
spring by creating the first Manu SvAyambhuva,t begotten 

14 from and like unto himself, 0 brAhman,t and the woman 
S^ata-rdpA, who was cleansed from blemishes through austeri. 
ties. The divine and mighty Manu SvAyambhuva took her 

15 for his wife. And through him her husband 8ata-r(ip4 
brought forth two sons, Priya-vrata and DttAna-pAda, famed 

16 through their own actions, and two daughters also, Riddhi 
and Prastiti, Then their father gave PrasAti in wumoje to 

17 Daksha and Riddhi to Ruo'i§ of yore. The PrajA-pati 
took his wife, and from them both a son Yajsa was born and 
a daughter Dakshii?A,|| 0 illustrious Sir; these two then 

18 became husband and wife, and Yajaa begat of Dakshi? 
twelve sons ; the glorious sons of Yajija and Dakshina were 

19 the gods well known as the YAmas in the epoch of moh* 
SvAyambhuva. 

* Purt^ha. 

t The son of Svayam-bhd (the Self -existent Brahmd), 

X For dvijab read dvya ? 

% He is one of the PrajA-patis. ^^tiooedi* 

11 This verse must refer to Euo'i, as Daksha’s progeny » » 



daksha’s offspring. 


249 

I And Daksha moreover begat twenty and four daughters of 

|o Prasdti ; hear also from pie theii- names in order S'raddhi 

i (Faith), Lakshmi (Good Fortune), Dhfiti (Constancy), Tushti 
(Satisfaction), Pushti (Nourishment), Medha (Mental Vigour) 

!1 and Kriyd (Action), Buddhi (Intelligence), Lajjd (Modesty)^ 
Vapus (Bodily Beauty), S'anti (Ti-anquillity), Siddhi (Per-’ 
fection), and Kirti (Fame) the thirteenth. The lord Dharma 
took these daughters of Daksha for his wives, 
a Besides them and younger were the eleven lovoly-eyed 
da«#m-Khy4ti (Celebrity), and Sati (Truth), Sambhdti 
(Fitness), Smriti (Memory), Priti (Affection), and Ksham4 

3 (Patience), and Sannati (Humility),* and Anasdya (Sin- 
cerity), ITrja (Strength), Svdha (the oblation to the gods), 
and Svadhd (the oblation to the pitris). The Riahis Bhrigui 

4 Bhayat and Maric'i, and the Muni Angiras also, Pul'astya 
and Pulaha, and Kratu,J Vasishtha, and Atri, Vahni and the 

5 Pitfis in order— these Munis, the most illustrious among Munis, 
took these daughters, Khydti and the others, in marnage.l 

Sraddhi gave birth to Kama (Lovo) ; and KriH to Darpa 

6 (Pride); Dhfiti to Niyama (Restraint) her sun; and Tushti 
also to Santosha (Contentment) ; Pnshti to Lobha (Covetous- 
ness) ; Medhd to Hruta (Revelation) ; Kiiyd to Danija 
(Punishment), Naya (Prudence), and Vinaya (Decorum); 

i Buddhi gave birth to Bodha (Wisdom) ; and Lajja to Vinaya 
(Decorum); Vapus to Vyavasaya (Industry) her son; and 
? .Vanti gave birth to Kshema (Base) ; Siddhi to Sukha 
(Happiness) ; Kii-ti to Ya4as (Renown). Those were the off- 
spring of Dharma. 

Slie^ bare by Kama a gi’andson to Dharma, namdy, Har- 
sha (Joy) who brims oyer with joyousness. 

* For Santatii in the text reaii Sannatii see Canto LII, v. 24. 

t That is,. Siva; and he married Sati. She put an end to herself In 
l&eqaeuco of her father Dakaha’s curse, and wap ro*boni as the dnughtor of 

when Siva married her again. See Canto LIT, vv. 12-14. 
i Kritni read Kratu^, 

§«co Canto LII, w. 14, &o. 

* ® Lakshmi, 

^ This seems obsonre. 

32 



250 


CAKTO L. 


29 Now Hiipa^ (Injury) was the wife of A*dharma (ITnriglit, 
eousness) ; and Aufita (Falsehood) was horn of her, and a 
daughter Nirriti (Destruction) was horn of her, and two sons 

30 Naraka (Hell) and Bhaya (Fear), and Mdy4 (Illusion) and 
Vedand (Pain). And with these two females the two tom 
formed two married pairs ; and of those two, Mdyd gave birth 
to Mrityu (Death) who carries created beings away, and 

31 Vedand gave birth by Raurava* to her son Dubkha (Misery), 
And Yyadhi (Sickness), Jard (Old Age), S^oka (Grief), 
Tfish^d (Thirst) and Krodha (Anger) were begotten by 

32 Mfityu ; or all these, who have the characteristics of A-dhar- 
ma, are traditionally declared to have sprung from Dubkha. 
No wife have they, nor son ; they all live in perpetual chas- 
tjty. 

33 Nirfiti also was the wife of Mfityu^ and Mrityu had another 
wife called A-lakshmi (111 Fortune) ; and by the latter Mptyn 

34 had fourteen sons. These are his sons by A-lakshmi; 
they carry out Mrityu’s commands ; they visit men at the 

35 times of dissolution ; hear about them. They dwell in the ter 
organs of sense and in the mind; for they influence man oi 

36 woman each towards his own object of sense; and assailing 
the organs of sense they influence men by means of passion 
anger and other feeUngs, so that men suffer injury througl 
unrighteousness and other evil ways^ 0 brahman. 

37 And one of them takes possession of self-consciousness 
and another resides in the intellect ; hence bewildered b] 
folly, men strive to destroy women. 

38 And another! famed by his name Duhsahat resides in men 
houses ; he is wasted with hunger, his face is downward 
bent ; he is naked, clothed in rags, and his voice is as hoarsi 

39 as a crow’s. He was created by Brahmd to eat all hmgi 
Him, exceedingly terrific by reason of his long teeth, opw 
mouthed, very terrible, and ravenous in mind, him thus 

* Raurava is the name of a particular hell, but here it seems to 
equivalent to Naraka. 

f For anye read anyo f 
J The “ Unendurable, “Intolerable.” 



251 


thb manpatb to thb taksba duhsaha. 

I dressed Brahmd, the store-house of austerities,* the fore- 
father of the worlds, he who is entirely consubstantial with 
Brahma, the pure, the cause of the universe, the changeless. 

Brahma spoke. 

“Thou must not devour this universe; quit thy anger, 
keep thee calm ; cast off the atom of passion and forsake this 
career of ignorance.” 

Dubsaha spoke. 

I “ I am wasted with hunger, 0 ruler of the world, I am 
thirsty also and my strength is gone. How may I be satisfied, 
0 master ? How may I grow strong ? And tell me, who 
will he my refuge where I may abide tranquil ? ” 

Brahmfi spoke. 

I “ Thy refuge shall he men’s houses, and unrighteous men 
shall he thy strength. Thou shalt be satisfied, my child, with 
[ their neglect to perform the constant sacrifices. And spon- 
taneous boils shall he thy raiment ; and for foodf I give to 
thee whatever is injured, and what is infested with vermin, 
) and what has been gazed into by dogs, likewise what is con- 
tained in broken pots, what has been made still by the breath 
from a marHs mouth, the fragments that remain from a meal, 
what is unripe, that on which perspiration has fallen, J what 
5 has been licked, what has not been cooked properly, what 
has been eaten of by people sitting on broken seats, and food 
that has fallen on the seat,§ and what turns away from the 
sky II at the two twilights, what is distinguished by the 
7 sound of dancing and musical instruments, what a woman in 
her courses has polluted, what such a woman has eaten of 
and has gazed at, and whatever food or drink has been 
^ daniaged*|[ at all — these shall he for thy nourishment, and 
whatever else I give to thee ; whatever persons, who have 

* Or, for tapaao nidhih read tapaso nidhSf vocative ? 

+ For dharatp read dhdrat^ ? 
t For tt-svinnam read d-svinnam f 

^ For asanndgatam another reading ie dsandi-gatam which is preferable. 

} IS Vi-din-rnnkha ; not in the dictionary. 

[ ? bipa-ghita-vat j not in the dictionary. 



m 


CAICTO t. 


not performed their ablutions, have sacrificed or giv<en in 

49 alms, without faith or in contempt ; what has been cast away 
without the previous use of water, and what has been render, 
ed valueless, and what has been exhibited in order to be dig. 
carded, and what has been given away through utter amaze- 

50 ment ; what is corrupt, and what has been given away by a 
person in anger or in pain, that 0 goblin,* thou shalt obtainf 
as thy reward ; and whatever the son of a re-married widow 

51 does as an undertaking for the next world, and whatever 
the daughter of a re-niarricd widow so does ; that, 0 goblin, 

• shall be for thy satisfaction. The wealth-procuring cere- 
monies in which a maiden engages along with her lover for 
62 the sake of the obligation of dower, and the cereraoniea also 
which are 'performed according to wicked books, shall h for 
thy nourishment, 0 goblin ; and whatever has been studied 
53 for the sake of enjoying wealthj and whatever has not been 
read truly— all that I give thee, and these periods also for thy 
perfection. Thou shalt ever have conquering power, 0 
64 Duhsaha, among men, if they approach a pregnant woman 
carnally, or if they transgress the evening rites and the 
constant ceremonies, and among men who have been corrupted 
by wicked books, deeds or conversation. 

55 “ Thy business lies in creating social dissensions, in render* 

ing cookery useless, and in interrupting cookery ; and thy 
^50 dvvelling shall perpetually be in household wrangling. And 
men shall dread thee§ in what pines away,|| and in bullock- 
carts and other conveyances which are shut up, in rooms which 
57 are not sprinkled at twilight, and at death. On the occasions 
of eclipses of the starsIT and planets, and at the appearand 


» xaKsna, ^ j iwi 

t Tad’hhdgi in the text seemS incorrect. Another reading is 
but tvad-hhdgi and tvad’gdmi seem preferable. Another reading is 
and this I have adopted, ^ ^ 

X For artham nirvritam another and better reading is 
which I have adopted. A third reading is diu vikritam. 

§ For fvattvo read tvatto ? 

ij A-poshyam<ine. IT ^iftkshatrft. 



MANDATE TO TJTE YAKSHA DUHSAHA. 253 

of the three kinds of portents, thon O goblin, over- 

hS come men who disregard propitiatory ceremonies. Men who 

fast vainly, who always delight in gambling and women, who 
confer benefits according to thy word, and who are religious 
hy])ocrites, shall be thy •prey* * * § 

59 “Study by one who is not a brahma-c'dri, and saorifice 
performed by an unlearned man ; austerities practised in a 
forest* by men who indulge in worldly pleasuresf and by 

60 men of unsubdued soul ; the action which is done according 
to their respective occupations by br^lhmans, kshatriyas, 
vaisyaa and ^udras, who have fallen /rom their castes, and who 

f,l desire to gain the objects of the next world, and whatever 
tlie results of that action— ^W. that shall be thine, 0 goblin. 
And more yet I give thee for thy nourishment; hearken 
32 thereto. Men shall give thee a plenteous bali offering at the 
close of the Vai^vadeva ceremony, first uttering thy name 
and then saying “this is for thee/* 
till “Abandon the house of him, who eats only properly cooked 
food according to rule, who is pure within and without, who 
64 is free from covetousness, who governs his wife.f Abandon 
that house, 0 goblin, where the gods and the pitpis are wor- 
shipped with their respective oblations, and where the female 
35 relatives and guests are honoured. And abandon that house 
also, where concord§ dwells at home among the children, the 
aged, the women and men, and among the various classes of 
it) kinsmen. Abandon that house, 0 goblin, where the women* 
folk are delighted, are not eager to go outside, and are always 
)7 modest. Abandon that house, 0 goblin, at my command, 
where the bedding and viands are suited to the ages and rela- 
tions of the inmates. Abandon that house, 0 goblin, where 
the inmates are always kind, and busied in good deeds, and 
possess the common household utensils. And thon must also 
over abandon that house, 0 goblin, wh^ re the inmates do not 

* For tapo.vam read tape vane ? 

Graraya-bhuj. 

t For jita-strikas read jita-strikas f 

§ ?or maitri-grihs read maitH gfihe f 



254 


Canto t. 


keep their seats while the religious preceptors, the aged, 

70 dvijas are standing and where they do not stand. That win 
not be an excellent abode for thee, where the house-door j| 
not penetrated by trees, shrubs or other vegetation^ nor by a 

71 man who pierces one’s vitals. Abandon the house of the 
man who supports the gods, the pitfis, mankind and gaeatg 

72 with the remnants of his food, Abandon, 0 goblin, such 
men as these, the true in word, the forbearing in disposition, 
the harmless, and those free from remorse, and also the 

73 envious. Abandon the woman, who is devoted to her husband’s 
service, who keeps aloof from associating with bad women, and 
who feeds on the food which has been left by her family and 

74 husband. Abandon the hrdhman dvija always, whose mind is 
engrossed with sacrifice, study, discipline and alms-giving, and 
who has made his livelihood by means of the performance of 

75 sacrifices, teaching, and receiving alms;* And abandon, 0 Da^- 
saha, the kshatriya who is always energetic in alms-giving, 
study, and sacrifice, and who earns his livelihood from good 

76 taxes and by the occupation of arms. Abandon the stainless 
vai^ya, who is endowed with the three previous virtues, f and 
who gains his livelihood from the keeping of cattle and trade 

77 and cultivation. Abandon also the 6udra, who is diligent in 
alms-giving, Sacrifice and the service of dvijas, and who sup- 
ports himself by menial service under brdhmans and other 

^ dvijas, 0 goblin. 

78 “In whatever house the master of the house earns his 
livelihood without contravening 4ruti and smyiti, and where 

79 his wife is obedient to him from her very soul, and where the 
son shows reverence to his spiritual preceptor and the gods 
and his father, and where the wife shows reverence to her 
husband— -whence should there be fear of misfortune m that 

80 house ? When a house is smeared over in the evenings, an 
thoroughly sprinkled with water, and the bali of 

81 made in it, thou canst not gaze thereat, 0 goblin. ® 
houses where the sun sees not the beds, and where fire 

• A-d&oa. 

f Gxii^, wi*., almfl.giving, study and sacrifice. 



THE MANDATE TO TfiE YAKSHA DTJHSAHA. 25& 

water are constantly kept, and where the lamps behold the 
gi 8UD, are places patronized by Lakshmi. That house is not 
a resort for thee> where a/re kept a bull, sandal-wood perfume, 
ft lute, a mirror, honey and ghee, and where copper vessels 
are used both for poisons and for the clarified butter of holy 
oblations. 

53 “That Ao!t«eis% temple, 0 goblin, where thorny trees 
jrow, and where leguminous plants creep about, and where the 
B4 wife is a re-married widow, and ant-hills are found. That 
house is thy dwelling, wherein live five men, and three 
women, and as many cows, and where the fire from the fuel 
B5 is mere darkness. Thou shalt quickly, 0 goblin, parch up 
the house, which contains one goat, two asses, three cattle, 
% five buffaloes,* six horses, and seven elephants. Wherever a 
spade, a d4,f a basket, and also a caldron and other utensils are 
37 scattered about, they may give thee shelter. Sitting by 
women on the wooden pestle and mortar, and also upon 
udumbara wood,J and the utterance of sacred verses at the 
58 privy, this shall be advantageous for thee, O goblin. Roam, 
0 Duhsaha, to thy heart’s content, in that house where all 
kinds of com whether cooked or uncooked, and where the 
39 scriptures also are disdained. Rndless misfortunes take up 
their abode in that house, where fire lies upon the lid of the 
H) caldron or is offered with the point of a spoon. Thou, 0 
goblin, and other Rdkshasas also shall have a dwelling in the 
house, where human bones lie and where a corpse remains a 
'1 whole day and night. Resort at once to those men who feed 
on a kinsman’s pin(}a and water, without ^ving any to the 
sapin^as and sahodakas. 

2 “Abandon the house where the lotus and the white lotus 
are found, where a maiden dwells who feeds on sweetmeats, § 

* Miihisha (in ?) ,• in this sense, not in the dictionary, 
t mtra, R large heavy knife with a onrved-in point, used for all purposes 
'‘Wing, chopping and splitting, 
t This is forbidden because the tree is holy. 

ModakA^ini j afin, from aA, to eat, not in the dictionary. 



CANTO L. 


m 

93 and where a bull and a fine elephant* * * § are kepif Abaadoi 
the habitation where the unarmed, the deities, and those wb 
bear arms without engaging in battle, are esteemed worthj 

94 of honour by men. Roam not in that house, where are cele 
brated as of yore the great urban and rural festivals whicl 

95 were famous of old. Visit those unlucky men who fan them 
selves with winnowing fans,^ and who bathe with the wate: 
'poured from jars§ or with the. drops of water from cloths 

96 and with water up by the tips of their nails. Join no 

thyself with the man who establishes the country customs 
the conventional ordinances, the laws regarding kinsmen 
who performs the victorious homa oblation and the auspicioui 
sacrifice to the gods, who maintains perfect personal purifi 
cation according to the precepts, and who fashions the pub 
lie talk.” 

Markai^dey^ spoke. 

97 Having spoken thus to Duhsaha, Brahma disappeared fron 
sight there, and the other followed the command of the lotus 
born go(L 

• For vrishabhairdvato read vrishabhairdvaUm ? 

t For kalpyate read kalpyete or halpyante f 

X This seems to be the best meaning} bat if so mrp.fV&tin would b 
more intelligible. 

§ Te kurvanti must be understood. 



257 


I'HE OFFBPIBING ‘OF DU^lSAfiA, 


i.;anto LI. 


The Offspring <j/ Duhsaha. 

I tlnhoha held eight sons and eight daughters — their na^nes aft 
\}iefitiofied—The evil functions of the several sons and daughters are 
desmhed^ and the remedies against them — Their offspring are men* 
iioned, and their evil actions described. 

‘ These beings are almost all personifications of physical injuriesy, 
moral vices and social offences. 

Markan^eya spoke. 

I Duhsaha had a wife named Nirmasli^i* ; now she was be- 
gotten in Kali’s wife when she saw a c'andila at the time of 
^ lier menstruation. They had sixteen children, who pervade 
■ the world, eight sons and eight daughters, all very terriblov 
5 Dantiikfishti and Ukti, and Parivarta the next, Anga-dhfish 
I and S'akuni and Ganda-prdnta-rati, Garbha-han and the last 
Sasya-han were their male children. And they had eight 
1 daughters besides ; hear their names from me. The first was 
Niyojika, and the second Virodhini, and Svayarp-hdra-kan^ 
i Bhramani, Ritu-harika, and two other very terrible daughters 
Smriti-hard and Vija-hara; and the eighth daughter was 
named Vidveshani who causes terror to mankind. 

I will describe what the several functions of the eight sons 
are, and what are the remedies against the evils which they 
work; hearken to me, 0 brahman. 

Pantakfishtif taking his station in the teeth of newly born 
children produces intense wind,I with the desire of efEecting 

I’rof. Sir M. Monier- Williams gives the name as Nir-mnnbti (Unoleaned) 
seems preferable. 

1 1'®6th -attractor, Lock«jaw ? 
t Sa^^-harsha ; or bristling of the hair of the body* 

33 



25S 


OANTO LI. 


9 an attack from Dahsaha. The remedy against him is to | 
applied by men by means of white mustard cast upon the be 

10 and upon the teeth of the sle'eping child; and by bathing i 
with medicinal herbs of great splendour, by reciting goo 
scriptures,* ** and by supportingf it on a camel, a thorn 
sword, a bone, or a linen cloth. 

11 Now the second son assigns good and bad fortune to mei 
while he says repeatedly, “ let it be so ! ; hence he is calk 

12 UktijJ and that is his precise function. Hence wise me 
must always say, “ May fate be auspicious ! ” And when anj 

13 thing bad is heard or spoken, let praise be ofFered to S'ivs 
and to Brahma, the spiritual preceptor of all that exists hot] 
moveable and immoveable, and to each person’s own parti 
cular family-deity. 

14 The son who finds delight in always interchanging th 
foetus between one womb and another, and in interchangini 
the words in the month of a speaker, is called Parivartaka§ 

15 a wise man should preserve himself against him by means c 
white mustard and the prayers and spells that destroy 
Rakshasas. 

16 And another 6 ’ 0 w|| like the wind announces good and bac 
fortune as indicated by throbbings in men’s bodies; m^tfu 
remedy against him is to strike the side of the body with kiisj 
grass. 

17 Another son S'akuni^ stationed on a crow or some otboi 
bird, announces weal or woo by means of food or birds 
With regard thereto, however, the Praja-pati has said, “li 

18 an evil matter delay and the abandonment of the undertaking 
are best ; in a good matter one should act very speedily.” 

• For sac/c'hvdstra read sao'c'hdstra. 

f Vidharaua ; not in the dictionary. J The Word of Fate 

§ The Interohanger. || Anga-dhyish, the Assailer of the body 

^ S'aknni, a Bird (in general). The word hua'alaih in the text is not sup 

ported by the MSS. and seems wrong. They read S^dkunify (which I 

adopted) or hkunam, ‘*an omen.” 

** Khaga^tas, this seems the best meaning ; but it might also b© f®® 

kha-gatas as an adjeotiye to S'akunii^. 



259 


THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHA. 

Another son’*' stationed in the borders of the cheeks for 

19 half a mnhtirta, 0 brahman, consumes every undertaking, and 
eulogium, and sincerity. By addresses to brdhmans, by 

20 praise to the gods, and by extracting roots, 0 briliman, by 
ablutions with cows’ urine and mustard seed, so also by 
worship paid to the constellations and planets, and also by 
the observance of righteousness and the Upanishads, by 

21 repeatedly looking at weapons, and by contempt for bix'th 
Ganda-pranta-rati succumbs. 

Another most terrible son,t moreover, destroys the fruit 

22 of pregnant women. Women should always secure protection 
against him by exjustant personal purification, by writing out 
famous spells, by wearing auspicious garlands and other 

123 decorations, by dwelling in well-cleaned houses, and by abstain- 
ing from over-exertion, 0 brahman. 

The other son Sasya-hanJ moreover is he who destroys the 
4 growth of the crops. Against him indeed one should secure 
protection by wearing worn-out shoes, and by walking on the 
!.j left side, and by causing a c'andala to enter the field, and by 
offering the ball outside, and by eulogizing the soma juice. 

And Niyojika§ is the daughter who incites some men to 
16 seize and otherwise molest other men’s wives and other men’s 
goods. Immunity from her comes by reciting purifying 
prayers, by refraining from anger, covetousness and other 

27 jxissions, and by resistance with the thought ‘ She is inciting me 
to these acts' When one is railed against or beaten by 

28 another, one should wisely think ‘ sho is inciting him,’ and 
should not fall into subjection to her. In this mundane exis- 
tence, where there are other men’s wives and other alluring 
objects, the wise man should consider, ‘ She is inciting my 
mind and my soul here.’ 

And the next daughter who causes opposition between a 
30 loving married couple, among relatives- and friends, between 
parents and children, and among fellow-caste-people [j — 

* fiftnda-pranta-rati, the Reveller in the borders of the cheeks. 

t Garbha-han, the Foetus -destroyer. t The Crop-destroyer. 

§ The Inciter. )| Savarnika ; in this sense not in the dictionary 


1 



m 


CANTO LI. 


she is Virodhini * One should secure protection fifom 

31 by offering the bali, by enduring outrageous language, aiti 
by observing the sastras and Virtuous Custom. 

Another daughter destroys grain from granaries and house 

32 the milk from cows, and ghee, and the produce from prolifi 
things. She is called Svayam-harikaf ; she is ever addicte 

33 to concealment, She consumes the half-cooked food out c 
the kitchen, and whatever is kept in the store-house ; and sh 
always consumes whatever food is being served up|, alou 

S4 with the person who eats it. She takes the remains of foo 
from men and also their food. She is hard to be restrained. 
She takes the success which men have aocomplishod froi 

35 their business offices and from their abodes, 0 brdhman. SI 
is constantly taking the fluid and the milk out of cows’ u( 
ders and women’s breasts, the ghee out of curdled milk, tl 
oil out of sesamum seed, and the spirituous liquor out of t\ 

36 liquor-stores, the colour out of saffron || and other cofown 
objects, and the thread out of cotton clothes. She is right] 
named Svayaip-harika, for she is perpetually taking 

37 away, 0 brahman. For the sake of protection against hr oi 
should make a pair of peacocks and an artificial womai 
and prophylactic marksl" should be drawn** on the houB 
and allowing the house to be littered with fragments of food] 

38 should be avoided, and vessels in which milk and other thin 
have been kept should certainly be cleaned with the ashes « 
the incense offered to the gods in the sacrificial fire. AU thi 
is well-known to be a preservative. 

39 Now the other daughter, who produces perturbation in 

♦ The Strife-maker. t Tke Voluntary thief. 

X For pari- ins' yamdnaij^ read pari-vishr/amdnafii. This half -line has ni 
syllables by poetic license. 

§ The MSS. read dutr-dhard instead of the text dttr-hard. I bars 
the former ; the latter might mean “ a confirmed thief.” 

H For leUMmbhuka read kutfumbhaha ? This would be the same as 
hha, but is not in the dictionary. 

t Rakshfw. ** For takhyd read IskhyA. 

tt For c'tt soshmatd another reading is c'oe'c'hishiatd which I hare 
tm preferable. * 



THE OFFSPRING OF DUHSAHi. 261 

mMi who dwells in one place, is called BhrAma^i * Now a 
man should secure protection against her by scattering white 
mnstard seed on his seat, on his bed, and on the ground 
where he sits; and a man should reflect, ‘This wicked, 
evil-minded creature causes me to go astray ’ ; he should 
mutter the Bhuvas hymn repeatedly, with composed mind. 
12 Another daughter robs women of their monthly courses, 
when they have begun and before they have begunf ; she is 
t3 known as Ritu-hdrik£,t the daughter of Duhsaha. One 
should cause one^s women-folh to bathe at places of pilgrimage, 
at temples, beside sacred public objects, § on mountain tops,* 
at the confluence of rivers, and in excavated places in order 
4 to subdue her. And one who knows the spells and knows 
tho principles of action should cause them to bathe at the four 
changes of the moon and at dawn,|| 0 brahman; and a 
physicianlf who is skilled in medicine should cause them to 
lathe with choice herbs combined together. 

!45 And Smriti-harika*^ is another daughter who deprives 
I women of their memory. And she may be overcome by 
I observing places distinguished separately. 

46 And Vijdpahdririitt is another daughter very terrible, 
who robs man and woman of their seed. And she may be 
overcome by eating clean food and by bathing. 

47 And the eighth daughter named Dveshani, J J who causes 
terror among mankind, is she who renders a man, or even 

^ a woman, newly hated. Now in order to vanquish her, 
one should offer an oblation §§ of sesamum seed moistened 
With honey, milk and ghee ; and one should also perform 
a sacrifice which will procure friends in order to van- 
quish her. 


* The Bewilderer. 

t For atha prmrittaij^ another reading is tathdpravrittav^ which I have 
op d as preferable. A third reading is athdpavrittih. 

I The Stealer of the Menses. 

J^Caityajthe primary meaning, “a funeral pile/’ seems inappropriate 

II^Fw parvarnmaH read parvasu'shaffi. f For vedyaA read vaidyai^'. 

U ThI H Memory. ft Tha Stealer of seed. 

^ §§ Homayet ; verb from homa? Not in ^he dictionary. 



262 CANTO LI, 

49 Now these sons and daughters have thirty-eight childrei 
0 brahman ; hear from me their names. 

50 Vijalpd (Chatterer) was Dantdkrishti’s daughter, and Kala 
hd (Quarreller) also. Vijalpa indulges in contemptuom 

51 false and corrupt talk. In order to vanquish her, let the wis 
house-holder ponder on her and preserve his self-contro 

52 Kalaha is always creating disturbances in men’s houses ; sh 
is the cause why families perish. Hearken how she may I 
subdued. One should throw blades of durba grass smearei 

53 with honey, ghee, and milk in the bali ceremony, and offer 

. sacrifice to fire, and extol one’s friends, for the performanc 
of a propitiatory rite to avert evil from all living beingg, an 
boys along with their mothers, and the sciences, and pt 

64 nances,’*'^ religious vows and the great moral duties.f In th 
cultivation of land and in the profits of trade let mm alway 

65 pacify me. And let the Kushmandas and the Yatu-dhanaa 
and whatever other beings are named according to thoi 
classes, let these, when duly adored, always become pacifioc 

56 By the favour of Maha-deva,§ and by the counsel of Mahd 
vara 1 1 let all these soon become satisfied with regard to men 

57 When 'pleased let them cast aside every evil deed and evi 
work, and every result that springs from the groat sing, am 

58 whatever else causes obstacles. By their favour indeed le 
obstacles wholly perish. And in all marriages and in cere 

^9 monies performed for increase of prosperity, in moritorion 
undertakings and in religious devotion, and in the worship o 
spiritual teachers and the gods, in the rites of prayer an 

60 sacrifice, and in the fourteen pilgrimages, in the pleasure 
enjoyable in bodily health, and in happiness, liberality an 

wealth, and among the aged, children and the sick, let ther 
always pacify me. 

61 Ukti had sons Soma-p4, Aipbu-pa, and Ambho-dhi, am 
Savitri, Anila and Analaf ; and he had also a sou KaU 

* For tapasds^ read taptsdns- ? t Saniyainasya 

X TWO classes of evil-spirits. § S'iva. '' 

f That is, Soma-drinkor, Water-drinker, Ocean, Sun, Wind and Fire- 

line, however, seems incongruous. 



263 


THE OFPSPHING OF DUHSAHA. 

-I jihva* who roBides in the palms.f Ho torments those bad 
men in whose mothers he abides. 

Now Parivarta had two sons, VirupaJ and VikFiti,§ 0 

3 brahman ; and they both inhabit the tops of trees, ditches, 
ramparts and the sea. They both interchange tlie foetus 

4 from one pregnant woman to another, if she walks about 

among trees and the other which they frequenty 0 

Krauslituki. In truth-, a pregnant woman should not ap- 

5 proach a tree, nor a mountain, nor a rampart, nor the sea, 
nor a ditch. 

f) Anga-dhrish begat a son, by name Pis'una. If he enters 
tho marrow inside men’s bones, he consumes the energy of 
even invincible men. 

S'akimi begat five sons, S-yona (Hawk), Kdka (Crow), and 
? Kapotii (Pigeon) Gridhra (Vulture) and Uliika (Owl).|| The 
gods and the demons took them. And Mptyu (Death) took 
i S-yena ; Kala (Destiny) took Kaka ; and Nirriti (Destruction) 
tm,i Uluka who causes great terror ; Vyddhi (Sickness) took 
Gridlita and was his lord ; and Yama himself took Kapota. 

! lii) And the evil beings which sprang from them are indeed said tq 
produce .sin. Hence he, on whose head a hawk and tho 
10 other birds should alight, should take effectual pacificatory 
measures tor his safety, 0 brdhman. If they are born inside 
n a house or if likewise water should settle in a house, a man 
should abandon that house and also a house on the top of 
which pigeons alight. When a hawk, a pigeon, and a vul- 
tore, a crow, and an owl have entered a house, 0 brdhman, 
1'1 one shonld pi'ophosy the end of the residents in that dwelling! 

^ A wise man should abandon sueh a house and should employ 
'3 pacificatory measures. Kven in sleep indeed it is unlucky to 
8ee a pigeon. 

And the offspring of Ga^cla-prdnta-rati are said to be six 
number. They dwell in women’s menses. Hear from me 

Black-tongue. 

t n”! read tdlu-niketanah, who resides in the palate P 

I iJeformed o th u ti.i 

jl j, § Ill-health. 

Of oridhroHkais' read gridhroliikdu ? 



264 


CANTO LI. 


also their peculiar periods. Of his offspring one takes 
of the first four days after menstruation and the thirteenth 

76 day ; and another is powerful on the eleventh day ; another 
at dawn ; and two others on occasions of ^r^ddhas and aims* 

76 giving ; and another at festivals ; hence these days should be 
shunned by the wise in sexual intercourse. 

Garbha-hantri had a son Nighna* and a daughter Mohani.f 

77 The former enters within and eats the foetus ; and after he 
has eaten it, the latter beguilesj it. Through her beguiling, 

78 the offspring are born as snakes, frogs, tortoises, and reptiles 

• also, or yet again as ordure. The son may enter into the six* 
months pregnant woman who in waywardness eats fle8h§ ; or 

79 into the woman, who seeks the shade of a tree by night or 
at a place where three or four roads meet, who stands in a 
buming-^ground or any place pervaded by strong smells, who 

80 leaves off her upper garment, or who weeps at midnight. 

And Sasya-hantri had one son named Kshudraka (Puny). 

81 He is constantly injuring the growth of the crops, when he 
has gained a weak place. Listen thereto. And he, who sows 

82 highly pleased at the beginning of an inauspicious day, pro* 
vides an entrance behind him for this sprite into the fields 
which touch other fields along their boundaries. H Hence it 
is the proper practice that a man should worship the moon, 

83 and then carry out his undertaking and sow his seed in glad* 

' ness and contentment, with a companion. 

84 Niyojikd, who was Duhsaha’s daughter as I have said, 
gave birth to four daughters who bear the names Prae'odika 
(Instigator), Mattd (Intoxicated), Unmatti (Frantic) and Pra- 

86 matU (Wanton). Now they are always entering into young 
women in order to destroy them, and incite them here vehe- 
mently towards unrighteousness with the appearance o 
righteousness, and to love which bears no appearance of love, 

86 and ’to that which is not wealth with the appearance o 

• Nighna means dependant ” ; but here it rather seems to mean akf 

t Beguiler. t Mohayate. 

§ For gurvii^i-mdmsam read gurvinim mdmeam. 
li Antopasangifthu;- Upa-sangin, a word not in the dioticnwy* 



THE OErSPRING OF DU^SIHA. 


265 


wealth, and to a final emancipation from existence which 
bears no appearance of final emancipation. Evilly disposed 
without purity they lead young women to gaze at strange men ; 
those angry sprites* cause strange men to wander near women 
for the sake of philandering. Those female sjprites enter into 
a house and into clothing when they are reddened by sunset, t 
and wherever the ball is not offered to Dhdtri and Vidhdtfi 
at the proper time. They make a suddenj attack upon men 
and vvomen§ among those people who eat or drink with drops 
of water clinging to them. 

Virodhiui }iad three sons, O'odaka (Instigator) || and Grd- 
haka (Scizer) and the other Tamah-prac'c'hddaka (Gloom- 
enveloper). Hoar their characters from mo. Where the 
pestle and mortar, and where a woman’s shoes and her up^er 
and lower garments are befouled by contact with burning oil, 
and arc disdained ; and where people use a seat, after first 
draAving it to them with a winnowing basket or a hatchet or 
other implement or with their foot ; and where pastime is held 
in a house without respecting the place which has been smeared 
and cleaned ; where fire is taken up and carried elsewhere in 
the boAvl of a spoon — there Virodhini’s sons are impelled and 
display their activity. One dwells in men’s and women’s 
tongues and utters falsehood as truth ; ho is called C'odaka ; 
ho Avorks calumny in the house. And another who acts with 
care dwells in the ears and is exceedingly evil-minded ; he 
takes hold of people’s words ; so he is called Grdhaka. The 
third is ho who, with evil mind, attacks men’s minds and 
envelopiug them with darkness arouses anger; so he is called 
Tamali‘pracc'hadaka. 

Noav Svayarp-hari gave birth to three sons by C'aurya 
(Theft), Sarva-hari,1f Arddha-hari,** and also Virya-hari.ft 

For tdbhir ash^bhih read tdbhi rushfdbhih. 

Iho text violates sandhi and seems obscuro. I have adopted a different 

i>andhyd-rakte hy-athdnibare instead of sandhyarla^heshu udnmhare. 

For dsv read d/v ? § For nava-ndrUhu road nara-ndrinhu. 

For C'odaku’grdhahas road c'odah grdhakas ? 




266 


CANTO LI. 


In the houses of those who do not rinse their months out after 
meals, and in the houses of those who observe bad customs, 

98 and among those who enter the kitchen with unwashed feet, 
and in granaries and cattle-pens and houses where perfidy 

99 prevails— in such places all these sprites fittingly sport and 
have their pleasure. 

Now Bhrdmani had one son ; he is known as Kdka-janglia 

100 (Crow-leg). No one possessed by him can get pleasure in 
the town. He enters into the man, who while eating sings 
to a friepd, and who sings and laughs at the same time^ and 

101 who indulges in sexual intercourse during the twilight, 0 
brdhman. 

The daughter Ritu-hdrini gave birth to three daughters; 

102 the first daughter was Kuc'a-hard,* the next Vyanjana-hdri. 

103 ka,t and the third daughter was called Jata-harini4 The 
first robs of both breasts the maiden, all whose marriage rites 
are not performed duly, or are performed after the prescribed 

104 time. And the second robs of her signs of puberty the mar- 
ried maiden, who has been married without duly offering the 
^raddha, and without paying due reverence to her mother. 

105 When the lying-in chamber is destitute of fire and water, and 
is devoid of incense, when it has no lamp or weapon or pestle, 

106 when it is destitute of ashe8§ and mustard-seeed, the iliri 
daughter enters in, and bringing about immediate deliverj 
snatches away the new-born child, and castes the child awaj 

107 in that very place, 0 brahman ; she is called Jata-harini 
very terrible is she, she feeds on flesh. Hence one shoulii 
strenuously guard against her in the lying-in chamber. 

108 And she, who destroys the memory of men destitute of self 
control through inhabiting empty abodes, had a son, by nani 

109 Pra-c'anda (Impetuous). From his son’s sons were bomth 
Likas 11 in hundreds and thousands and eight tribes of Ca^ 

110 dalas, very terrible with staves and nooses. Then the Likas an 
those tribes of C'ap^dlas were possessed by hunger, and rani 

• She who steals the breasts, t She who steals the signs of poM 

X She who steals new-born children. § Bhuti. 

\\ A class of evil spirits. 



267 


THE OPFSPRINa OF Dtr^SAHA. 

1 one another, desirous of eating one another. But Pra-c'an<}a 
restrained the se Feral tribes of 0'ai?(J«las, and established 
them with such and such ordinances : hear what those sure, 

[2 Hearafter from to-day whoever shall give a dwelling to the 
Likas, I will assuredly cause an unparalleled punishment to 

3 fall on him. The female Lika who shall give birth to off- 
spring in the dwelling of a C'andala,^ her child shall die first 
and she also shall perish at once. 

4 Now Vija-hdrini, who robs man and woman of their seed, 
gives birth to two daughters, Vdta-rupdf and A-rfipd.t T 

5 will tell thee of her method of attack. The man or the wife, 
to whom Vata-rdpa casts a son at the end of the impregnation, 
suffers from the seminal secretion becoming dried up through 

6 disorder of the wind within the body.§ Similarly both the 
man who eats without first bathing, and the man who eats 
flesh, II are deprived of their seed at once by A-rupa. A man 
or a woman, if he or she neglects personal cleanliness, lapses 
into sterility.^ 

7 Now the daughter called Vi-dveshani has a countenance 
rugged with frowns. She had two sons, Apa-kara** and Pra- 

8 kasaka.ft These two sons come to a man, who delights 
in calumny, who is inconstant, and who uses impure water, 

9 and who hates mankind, and stay with him permanently. 
Hated by mother, by brother, by beloved friends, by kinsmen, 
by strangers, a man perishes from righteousness or wealth. 
Now one son, working sin, divulgesJJ men's peculiar qualities 

121 in the world ; and the second plucks away§§ one’s good 
qualities and the friendship that exists among people. 

• C'andala-yonyo ^asathe seem wrong j read c'anddla-yony-avasathe instead P 

t She who has the form of wind. | Form-less. 

§ Vdta-gukra-tvam j such is said to be the meaning of this word. 

li y^yogxnati in the text seems wrong. I have adopted another reading, 

!/'> »'ai tathaiva pUitdianah for yo 'sau tathd o^dpi riyoginah, 

1l This sentence is made the first line of verse 118 in the text, and is 

! ^ Pl^ce there. I have placed it after verse 116 which is the na- 

context. 

Apa-karsha, which must be the real name of the son (see verso 121) is 
Apa-kdra, for neither son has anything to do with injuries i but 
® SS. read apaMra, and 1 have not ventured to alter it. 

‘‘il Divnlger. « Pra-kilayati. §§ Apa-karshati. 



208 


CANTO LTI. 


All ilieae are the offspring of Duljisaha, in the pedigree 
of that goblin* ; they are notorious as observors of kicked 
customs ; it i$ they who have overspread the whole world. 


Canto Lll. 


The Creation and Appellations of the Budras. 

Mdrhandya x^arrates the creation of Budra in his eight personalities 
— -and mentions their names^ stations^ wives and sons — He nienlions 
briefly the wives and offspring of the rishis^ Bhrigu {from whom he 
himself was descended), Marie i, Angiras, Atri, Piilastya, Fulaha, 
Vasishtha, and Agni, and also of the Pitris. 

Markandeya spoke. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 


Such was tho creation, which Brahma of inscrutable origin 
made, characterized by darkness. I will toll thee of the 
creation of the Rudras. Hearken to me while I narrate it. 
Now they were eight sons indeed of Brahma, and they hd 


wives and children. 

At the beginning of the kalpa, while tho Lord was medi- 
tating about a son who should be his equal, there appeared 
in his lap a youth blue and red in colour ; and running about 
he cried with a sweet voice, 0 brahman. “Why criest 
thou ? ” answered Brahm^ to him as he cried. “ Give me a 
name,” then replied he to the lord of tho world. “ Thou art 
named ‘Rudra.’t 0 divine one ; cry not, assume some forti- 
tude," thus was he addressed. Then he cried seven times more, 
and the Lord gave him seven other names, and stations for 
these eight jiersomlities, and wives and sons, 0 brttman. Tl‘« 
Lord, the forefather, called him Bhava, Sarva, and W”*. 
and Pasu-pati, Bhima, Ugra, and Maha-deva. He gave the<e 
names, and assigned stations for these-the sun, water, tho 
earth, fire, the wind, and the ether, an initiated brihman, 


• For yakshariah read yahshasya ? y, me*® 

t By a pun on the root rud, to cry, to weep j rudra would t uj 

“ crier," " weeper." 



THB creation and APPEtLATIONS OF THE RUDRAH. 26& 

•uid the moon. These were the wives'* in order,— Sn-varc'a- 
na and Vi-ke4i, and the next Svadhd, Svdhd, the 

) Disasf and Dikshi, and Rohini in due order— of the sun and 
the other stations, 0 brahman, together with Rudra and the 
[ other names. And there were born to him gradually C'ara, 
and S'ukra, Lohitdnga, Mano-java, Skanda, and Sarga, San- 
tana and Budha successively. 

0 Such was Rudra himself. He found Sati for his wifej j 
and through ' Daksha’s curse Sati quitted her body. She 
3 was the daughter of Himavat by Mend, 0 brahman ; her 
brother was Maindka, the chiefost friend of Ambho-dhi (the 
14 Ocean.) And the lord Bhava married her again as his only 
wife. 

lihydti the wife of Bhrigu§ gave birth to the two gods 
ir, Uhatri and Vidhdtri, and to SVi who was the wife of the 
supreme god N6rayana. Ayati and Niyati were the two 
IG daughters of high-soulod Meru ; they became the wives of 
Dhatri and Vidlultfi. A son was born from each of them, 
both Prana and Mpkanda. 

7 The latter was my illustrious father. I am his son by 
Manas vini ; Veda-siras is my son, ho was born of Dhdipravati. 

[8 Hear also from me of the offspring of Prana. Dyutiman 
was the son begotten by Prana, and A-jaras was his son 
also ; from them both issued many sons and grandsons. 

19 Sainbliuti was the wife of Maric'i || ; she brought forth 
Paurna-mavsa ; he high-souled man had two sons Vi-rajas and 
2(1 Parvata ; but I will defer mentioning their sons till I detail 
the genealogies, 0 brahman. 

And Smriti was the wife of Angiras,^ and daughters were 
21 born of her, S'inibali, and Kuhu, R4ka and Bhanumati. 

^ Moreover, An-asuyd gave birth by Atri** to sons without 
1 blenii.sh, Soma, and Durvasas and the yogi Dattatreya. 

Dattoli was born the son of Pulasiyatt by his wife Priti : 

* Tanavah. f The eight regions of the sky. 

I See Canto L, verses 22-25. § See Canto L, versus 22-26. 

!i Soe Canto L, verses 22-25. IT See Canto L, verses 22-26. 

** Pw anusuyd read anaauyd ; see canto L, verses 23-26. 

H iseo Canto L, versos 22-26. 



CANTO tIT. 


270 

23 he was known as Agastya in a previous life during the 
Svdyambhuva Manv-antara. 

Now Kshamd, the wife of the Prajd-pati Pulaha’* * * * brought 

24 forth three sons, who were Kardama, and Arva-vira and 
Sahishnn. 

Now Sannati was the wife of Kratuf / she gave birth to 

25 the Balikhilyas, the sixty thousands, which they are, of riahis 
who live in perpetual chastity.J; 

26 Now seven sons were bom of Urjd by Vasishtha,§ Rajas, 
Gatra and Urdhva-bahu, and Sa-bala, and An-agha, Su-tapas, 
S'ukta ; all these are well-known as seven Rishis. 

27 Agni, who is arrogant, was the eldest son of Brahma; by 
him Svahall begat three sons of exalted vigour, 0 brdhman, 
Pavaka, and Pavamdna, and S'uc'i who pervades^ water; 

29 but in descent from them were forty and five others. These 
and the father and his three sons are often spoken of as the 
invincible and illustrious forty and nine. 

30 Brahmd created the Pityis** * * §§ whom I have mentioned to 
thee, who are the Agni-shvattas,tt the Barhi-8hads,t{ those 
who did not maintain the sacred fire on earth and those who 

31 did maintain the firc.§§ By them Svadha|l|| gave birth to 
two daughters, Mena and Dharini ; they both were teachers 
of the Veda, and they both were female yogis. 


• See canto L, verses 22-26. t See canto L, verses 22-2S 

if For iirddha-ratasdm read urddhva-retasdm, 

§ See canto L, verses 23-26. 

II For khdhd read svdhd ; see canto L, verses 23-25. 

^ JaldSiuam. 

This aoconnt differs from what Mann says (III, 193-199). 

tt The Manes, especially of those who on earth neglected the saorilic'* 
fire. tt A particular class of the Pitr« 

§§ An-agnayas &nd sdgnayas ; these anpear to be the same as Mann 
Agni'dagdhas and Ari'agni-dagdhas, (III. 109J, 
till See canto L, 23-26. 



THE SVi^YAMBHUVA MANVANTARA. 

Canto LIII. 


271 


* The Story of the Svdyamhhuva Manv-antara. 
idrkandeya states the duration of the Manv-antaras^ and mentions 
names of the Manus past, present and future — He mentions the 
^.endants of Manu Svdyamhhuva and his son Priya-vrata^ and 
)lains how the whole world with its seven continents was peopled 
them and divided among them — Jambu-dvipa was assigned to 
iya-vrata's son Agntdhra^ and was portioned out among Agnidhra^s 
s—JIis eldest son Ndbhi begot Jftishabha^ and ftishabha begot 
arata, to whom India was assigned. 

Kraushtuki spoke. 

Adoraklo Sir ! I wish to hear fully of this Svdyambhuva 
Manv-antara also which thou hast mentioned. Tell me of it, 
and also of the duration of this Manv-antara, and its gods and 
risliis, and the kings who ruled during it, and also who was 
tlie lord of the gods during it, adorable Sir ! 

Markandeya spoke. 

The duration of the Manv-antaras has been declared to be 
the four yugas multiplied by seventy-one and a fraction.'^ 
Hear the duration of a Manv-antara from me in human 
reckoning. Thirty times ten millions are announced, and 
twenty thousands, and sixty-seven lakhsf more by computa- 
tion— this is the length of the Manv-antara in human years, 
omitting the fraction : it is known to be eight hundreds of 
thousands and fifty two thousands more besides of years by 
the divine reckoning. 

At first was the Manu Svayambhuva, then tho Mann 
Svaroc'isha, Auttama,! and Tamasa, Raivata, and C'akshusha ; 
these six Manus have passed, and Vaivasvata is the Manu now, 
Theso are to come, the five Savarnas and Rauo'ya, and 
Bhautya.§ Of these I will tell thee fully afterwards in con- 

• See Canto XLVI, verses 84—38. 

t Niyuta. Verses 4, 6 and 6 agree with Canto XLVI, verses 35—37. 
t t’or auttamas read auttamis. 

§ Tho text appears to be wrong. For Sdvarnify pane* a raue'ydiaa bhautydi 
^dm^dh pam*a rauo'yah'a bhautyai. The five Bivari^a or Sivar^i Manns 



272 


CANTO LIII. 


9 nexion with their respective Manv-antaras, and of their goda 
and fishis, and the lords of the Yakshas and the Pitris who 
lived during each, of their commencement and end, 0 brahman 

10 Hear who were his offspring, and who were thewiyesof 
those their high-souled sons. 

11 Now Mann Svayambhuva had ten sons equal to himself 
by whom all this tributary earth with its seven continents 
with its mountains, and with its oceans was peopled accord- 

12 ing to its countries. It was first people J in the Svayam- 
bhuva period in the Krita and Treta ages by the sons bf 
Priya-vrata and the grandsons of Svayambhuva. 

13 A daughter was begotten of Praja-vati by the hero Priya. 
vrata. Now that illustrious daughter gave birth through tho 

14 Prajd-pati Kardama to two daughters and ten* sons ; those 
two daughters were Samrdjf and Kukshi ; their ton brothers 

15 were warriors equal to the Praja-pati their father. Agnidhra, 
and Medha-tithi, and Vapush-matJ the next, Jyotibh-mat, 
Dyuti-mat. Bhavya, Savana, they were seven of them indeed. 

16 Priya-vrata anointed those seven as kings over the seven 
continents. According to that his statute, hear their conti- 
nents also from me. 

17 Their father made Agnidhra thus king over Jambu-dvipa; 

18 and he made Medha-tithi lord over Plaksha-dvipa ; and h 
made Vapush-mat lord of S'almali, Jyotish-mat lord over 
Ku^a-dvipa, Dyuti-mat lord over Kraunc'a-dvipa, Bhavya 

19 lord over S'aka-dvipa, and his son Savana ruler over Pu.sli- 
kara-dvipa. 

Maha-vita and Dhataki were the two sons of Savana, tlio 

20 ruler over Pushkara-dvipa j he divided the Puslikara§ 
into two parts, and assigned to them one part each. 

are n". 8 Sdvarni, n°. 9 Dakhsha-sdvarni, n°. 10 Brahma-sdvarni, n • P 

iiia-s&yari[]ii audn^ 12 Bndra-savarni. 

* Only seven are mentioned in verse 16. 
t This name as a feminine is not in the Dictionary. 

X Vapushyat in the text seems incorrect. Vapush-mat is give“ 

in voracs 18 and 26. 

§ For pushknrah read pusUharaif^ ? 



^ THB SVATAMBH0VA MANVANTARA. 


273 

Bharyft had seven sons, hear them by name from me ; 

21 both Jala-da, and Kum&ra, Sn-knmira, Manivaka, and Ku^ot- 

22 tara, McdhArin, and Mah4-drama the seventh. He portioned 
out /or them countries in Sika-dvipa, which were named after 
them. 

Moreover Dynti-mat had seven sons ; hear them also from 

23 me ; KuMa, and Manu-ga, Ushna, and PrAkara, Artha-kiraka, 
and Muni, and Hundnbhi who was famed as the seventh. 

24 And they had countries in Kraunc'a-dvipa, which were named 
after them. 

Tn Kui^a-dvipa itself also there were seven countries called 

25 by the names of the sons of Jyotish-niat ; hear their names 
from me— Ud-bhida, and Vaiiiava, Su-ratha, and Lambana, 

2() Dhritimat, and PrAkara, and Kdpila the seventh. 

And Vapush-mat the lord of S'Almali had seven sons, both 

27 S'veta, and Harita, Jimuta, and Rohita, Vaidynta, and MAna- 

28 sa, and Kctu-mat the seventh. And they had seven countries 
in S'almali, which bore the same names. 

29 Medha-tithi, the lord of Plaksha-dvipa had seven sons, and 
Plaksha-dvipa was divided into seven parts hy the countries 
nliich were named after them, first the S'Aka-bhava country, 

lu then S'i^ira, Sukhodaya, and Ananda, and S'iva, and Kshe- 
maka, and Dhruva. 

In the five continents, which begin with Plaksha-dvipa and 
>1 end with S'aka-dvipa, righteousness also must bo known as 
arising from the divisions of the castes and the several stages 
of a braliman’s life. The righteousness which is settled,* and 
springs from one’s natural disposition, and is exempt from 
the rules of harmlessness is well-known to be universal in 
these five continents. 

His father Friya-vrata gave Jambu-dvipa to Agnidhra at 
3 the first, 0 brahman. He had nine sons indeed, who were 
equal to the Praja-pati Priya-vrata. The eldest was named 
^abhi ; his younger brother was Kim-purusha ; the third son 
was Havir-varsha ; the fourth was Ilavpita ; and the fifth 
9on was Va^ya ; the sixth was called Hiranya ; the seventh 


35 


Nitya. 



274 


OANIO LIII. 


36 

37 

38 


of them was Kuru ; the eighth was known as Bhadrd^va ; and 
the ninth was Ketu-mdla. Designated by their names 
the arrangement of their countries. 

Perfection eceists naturally in Kim-purusha, and the other 
cmtinents^^ with the exception of that named from the 
mountain Himat ; and the perfection is almost complete hap. 
piness which comes without exertion. There is no adversity 
there, nor old age, death or fear ; neither righteousness nor 
unrighteousness existed there, nor had the people differences of 
position^ such as high, low or middling ; nor have the four 
ages existed there^ nor periodic times, nor the seasons of the 


year. 

Now Agnidhra’s sonNdbhi had a son Rishabha, 0 brahman. 

39 Rishabha begot Bharata, a hero, the best among his hundred 
sons. Rishabha having anointed his son in his stead betook 
himself to the strictest life of a wandering religious meudi- 

40 cant, and devoted himself to austerities, an illustrious hermit, 
dwelling in Pulaha’s hermitage. His father gave Bharata 
the southern country named after the mountain 

41 hence the country is called Bharata after the name of that 
high-souled king, Bharata also had a righteous son called 

42 Su-mati ; and Bharata transferred the kingdom to him and 
departed to the forest. 

Now during the Sv^yambhuva period Priya-vrata’s sons, 
s 43 and their sons and grandsons enjoyed§ the earth with its 
seven continents. This was the Svayambhuva creation ; I 

44 have narrated it to thee, 0 brahman. What else shall I 
fully tell thee of in the first Manv-antara ? 


* For Itimpuruehdlchydni read Umpurushddydni ? 

f Himdhvaya, See also verses 40 and 41 where this is said to ^ a 
for India, This meaning is not in the dictionary. 

X Himihva ; this meaning, * * * § India,” is not in the dictionary. 

§ For hhuletvd read bhuhtd, •• 



275 


THE DESCRIPTION OP JAMBD-DVIPi. 

Canto LIV, 

The description of Jamhu-dmpa, 

MdrJcandeya tells Krausktuki further the size of the earthy and th^ 

^rder and diinensions of the seven continents and their oceans — He 

describes Jamhu-dvipay the countries in it, and Meru and the other 

muniains; and mentions various heal facts, 

Kraus^uki spoke. 

1 How many are the continents, and how many the oceans, 
and how many are the mountains, 0 brihman ? And how 
many are the countries, and what are their rivers, 0 Muni P 

2 And tho size of the great objects of nature* and the LokA- 
loka mountain-range ; the circumference, and the size and 

3 tho course of the moon and the sun also — tell me all this at 
length, 0 great Muni. 

Markandeya spoke. 

4 The earth is fifty times ten million yojanasf broad in 
every direction,! 0 brahman. I tell thee of its entire consti- 

5 tution, hearken thereto. The dvipas which I have mentioned 
to thee, began with Jambu-dvipa and ended with Pubhkara- 
dvipa, 0 illustrious brahman ; listen further to their dimen- 

6 sions. Now each dvipa is twice the size of the dvipa which 
precedes it in this order, Jambu, and Plaksha, Sialmala, Ku^a, 

J Kraunc'a and S'aka, and the Pushkara-dvipa. They are 
completely surrounded by oceans of salt water, sugar-cane 
jaiee, wine, ghee, curdled milk, and milk, which increase 
doable and double, compared with each preceding one, 

I will tell thee of the constitution of Jambu-dvfpa ; hearken 
to me. It is a hundred thousand yojanas in breadth and length, 
it being of a circular shape. § Himavat, and Hema-kuta, 
Nishadha,|| and Meru, Nila, S'veta and S'j-ingin are the seven 

Mahd-bhuta. f This word must obviously be supplied j see verse 8, 
Taking the yojana as 40,000 feet (seeCanto xlix, 40), this diameter of the 
b equals 3,787,878,788 miles. 

Vritfcau. This distance oannot apply to the oiroumferenoe (vyitti) as well, 
the ciroumferenoe, length and breadth oannot all be the same. 

The text reads Rishabha, which disagrees with other PurAnastuid versos 
wd 2*3, 



m 


CAKTO LIT, 


10 great mountain-systems* in it. Two of these great monj 
tain-rangesf are a hundred thousand yojanas in extent, ani 
are situated in the middle of Jamhu-dvlpa ; there are two Tnsrt 
mountain-ranges which are south of those two, and two 

11 which ai"e north. They are severally less by ten and teti 
thousand yojanas in length they ai’e all two thousand yt^'ano# 

12 in height, and they have the same breadth. And sii of 
the mountain-ranges in it extend into the sea. The earth 
is low on the south and north, it is highly elevated in the 
middle. 

13 On the southera half of the elevated ground§ are three 
countries, and on the north are three. lUvrita is situated 
between those halves, and is shaped like the half. moon. 

14 Bast of it is Bhadrasva, and west is Ketu-mala.|| 

Now in the middle of Ilavpita is Meru, the mountain of 
16 gold. The height of that immense mountain is eighty-four^ 
thousand yojanas ; it penetrates downwards sixteen thmaU 

16 yojanas, and it is just sixteen thousand ycj anas hroixd] and 
since it is fashioned like a cup,** it is thirty -two thmsani 
yojanas broad at the summit. It is white, yellow, black- and 

17 red on the east and other sides consecutively ; and a brahman, 
a vai^ya, a 4udra, and a kshatriya are stationed there according 
to the castes. Moreover, upon it on tho east and tlie sem ; 

18 other directions of the shy consecutively ft a-re the Courts of Indra | 

• Vareha-parvata. 

t Nishadha on tho south of Meru, and Nila on the north, according to the 
Vishnu-Purana, Bk. II, oh. ii. i 

X Tho text of the first line of vorae 1 1 seems wrong : read instead, aa in the j 
MS. — Daiahhir dasahhir nyundh sahasrais te parasparam. Hema-kdta (sooth j 
of Nishadha) and S Vet a (north of Nila) are 90,000 yojanas long. Himarat 
(south of Hema-ku^a) and S'fingin (north of SVeta) are 80,000 yojanas long. 
The decrease is due to their position in the oirolo of the earth. See Viah^n* 
Pura^ia, Bk. II., ch. ii. § Vedi. 

II These are the nine countries mentioned in canto liii, rersee 32*35. 

•f For c'atur-asiti read c'atur-aiiti ? 

SVrava; other authorities compare it to tho inverted seed 
lotus, which is somewhat like an inverted cone. 

ft The MS, reads puryo dikahu for pdrvddishu, with iwaCtaosHy th® 
meaning* 



THE DESCRIPTION OF JAMBU-DTIPA. 277 

and the other Lokdrp41as ; and in the centre is Brahmi’s 
Court, which is fourteen thousand yojanas high, 

[9 Moreover below it are the subjacent hills* with a height 
of ten thousand yojanas. On the east and other sides con- 
secutively are the mountains Mandara, Oandha-mddana, and 
Vipula, and Su-pdi^vaf ; they are decorated with trees as 
standards. The kadam treej is the standard on Mandara, 
}1 the jambu tree§ on Gandha-mddana, and the a^vattha tree|| on 
Vipula, and the great banyanf on Su-pdr^va. These mountains 
!2 are eleven hundred yojanas in extent. Ja^hara and Deva- 
kuta are two mountains on the east side ; they stretch up to 
Nila and Nishadha without any space intervening between 
'.3 them. Nishadha** and Paripatra are on the west side of Meru ; 
these two mountains, like the two former, extend to Nila 

4 and Nishadha. Kaildsa and Himavat are two great rnountains 
on the south ; they stretch east and west ; they extend into 

5 the ocean. S'ringavat and Jarudhi, moreover, are two moun- 
tains on the north ; they, like the two on the south, extend 

6 into the ocean.ft These eight are called the boundary moun- 
tains, 0 brahman. Hima-vat, Hcma-kdta and the other 

7 mountains comprise^ ovlq with another, nine thousand yojanas, 
eastward, westward, southward and northward. Similarly 
Meru stretches to the four quarters in the middle in Ilavyita. 

5 The fruits which the jambujj!! tvQQ produces on the mountain 

* Vishkambha-parvata. 

t M.andara is on the East ; Gandha-madana on the South j Vipula on ^he 
est; and Su-p&r^va on the North. See Canto Ivi, yerses 7, 13 and 16. 
t See note page 25. 

; § Eugenia Jambolana, Hooker, vol. II, p. 499 ; Boxb. p. 398. A large tree, 
common everywhere, with a rather crooked trank, shining leaves, and edible 
Irnit. The bark yields brown dyes. 

II Called also pippala ; Ficus religiosa (Oliver, p. 272 ; Roxb. p. 642) j the 
aiodem peepul ; a largo spreading tree with a graceful shade, common every- 
*core. See also note *, p. 38. 

^ T Va^, Fkus henghalensis (Oliver, p. 272 ; F. indica, Roxb. p. 639), the 
common, well-known tree. Bead Rishahha f 

t For Q.utarvdntaT read anj^vdntar f 
U For jamM read jamhd f 



278 


CANTO LY. 


Gandha-inddana, are as large as an elephant’s body; 

29 fall- on the top of the mountain. From their juice spring, 
the famous Jambu river, in which is found the gold called 

30 Jdmbti-nada. That river passes around Mem and thei 
enters Jambd-mhla, 0 brahman; and those people drink of it 

31 In Bhadra4va Vishnu is figured with a horse’s head • h 
Bhdrata* he has the shape of a tortoise ; and he is h'jfee j 
boar in Ketu-mala; and he has a fish’s form in tho north 

32 In all those four countries^ worldly affairs are governed 
by the arrangement of the constellations, 0 brahman ; tJn 

. people there study the influence of the planets. 


Canto LV. 


The Geography of Jambu-dvipa. 

Mdrhandeya mentions the forests and lakes and mountains amod 
— Jll the heavenly beings dwell in that region where there is 

the most charming scenery — Bhdrata alone is the land of action, which 

entails merit and sin, 

Markandeya spoke. 

1 Hoar from me of the four forests and lakes which exist on 

2 Mandara and the three other moun tains, t 0 brahman. On 
the east is the forest named C'aitra-ratha, on tho southern 
mountain the forest Nandana, on the western mountain th 
forest Vaibhraja, and on the northern mountain the forest 

3 Sdvitra. On the east is the lake Aruijioda,! and on the south 
Manasa, on the west of Meru is S^itoda, and Mahd-bhadra on 
the north, 

4 On the east of Mandara are tho mountains S^itartta,§ an 
O^akra-munja, and Kulira, Su-kanka-vat, and Mani-^iiai 

5 Vrisha-vat, Maha-nila, Bhavac'ala, Sa-bindu, Mandara, Venn, 
Tdmasa, and Nishadha, and Deva-^aila. 

• For hhdrite read hhdrate 9 • rafi t 

t For ^ailashu read iaileshu. t Or Varuuoda, see Canto Ivi, 

§ S'itdrttai read ^MntaS f See verse 17, and Oantp Ivi, verse 6. • 



^ THE OEOGRAPHY OP JAMBU-DVIPA. 


279 


The mountain STikhara with its three peaks ,♦ and Kalinga, 
Patangaka, Ruc'aka, and the mountain SAnu-mat, and Tdm- 
raka, Vi^akha-vat, S'vetodara, and Sa-mula, and Vasn-dhAra, 
Ratna-vat, Eka-^ringa, Mahd-^aila, Raja4aila, Pipdthaka, and 
panc'a-^aila, Kaildsa, and Hima-vat the loftiest of mountains ; 
these mountains are said to lie on the south side of Meru. 

Su-raksha,t and S^i^iraksha, Vaiduiya, and Kapila,J and 
) Pinjara, Mah^-bhadi-a, Su-rasa, Kapila, Madhu, Anjana, 
Kiikkiita, Krishna, and Pandura the loftiest of mountains, 
and the mountain Sahasm-^ikhara, Paripdtra, and S'ringa- 

11 vat; these mountains aro well-known as lying on the west of 
Meru beyond the subjacent hills§ which are on the west side. 

12 Hear yet the other rr.ountains on the north. S^ankha-kuta, 
Vrishabha, and the mountain Haipsa-n^bha, and the moun- 

13 tain Kapilendra, Sanu-mat, and Nila, Svarna-^ringin, S'dta- 
^ringin, Pushpaka, MegWparvata, Virajdksha, Varahddri, 

14 Mayura, and Jarudhi ; these are said to be the mountains on 
the north of Meru, 0 brahman. 

The valleys among those mountains aro exceedingly charm- 

|l5 iiig; they are decorated with forests and lakes of the clearest 
water. In them men are born who practise meritorious deeds, 

16 0 brahman. These are terrestrial Svargas, 0 brdhman ; they- 
surpass Svarga with their excellences. In them no fresh 

17 merit or sin accrues. Even the gods are said to enjoy merit 
m them. And on these mountain.^, Sltdnta|| and the rest, 0 

18 brdhman, are the great and resplendent abodes of the Vidya- 
dharas, the Yakshas, the Kin-naras, the Nagas, and the 

19 Rdkshasas, and the gods, and the Gandharvas, which possess 
great merit and are studded with charming groves which tho 
gods frequent. And the lakes are charming ; the breeze is 

See Cauto Ivi, verse 9. STkhara must be first mountain on the south, 

^ Ma lauat be an adjective qualifying it. 
t See Canto Ivi, verse 14. 

iftYf * Kapila ” seems erroneous, as it mentions Kapila again in the 

aie. Another reading is Pingala. 

f ^iffkatnhhdt read viehjcambhdt ; see Canto liv, verse 19. 

'' verse 4. 



CANTO LV. 


20 pleasant at every season. Nor anywhere on these mountain 
do men have any kind of mental agitation. 

21 Thus have I told thee of that four-leaved lotus.flowei 
which is the earth ; its leaves are Bhadra^va, Bhdrata aw 
the other countries on the four sides. The country namec 

22 II Bhdrata, which I liave told thee of on the south, is the law 

of action ; nowhere else is merit and sin acquired; this inus 
be known to be the chief country^ wherein everything i 

23 fixedly established.* And from it a man gains Svarga aw 
final emancipation from existence, or the human world aw 
boll, or yet again the brute-condition, 0 brahman. 

Canto LVI. 

The Descent of the Ganges. 

Mdrhandeya describes the course of the River Ganges from the moot 
on to mount Meru, then in four streams flowing east^ south, west am 
north, of which the southern stream was allowed by S'ivatofou 
through India at the entreaties of King BhagWatha. 

Me describes briefly the happy condition of all the other countm 
(except India) in Jambu-dvvpa* 

Markandeya spoke. 

1 The foot of Narayana, moreover, who is the origin of tlu 
universe, t supports the earth. The divine river Gangei 

2 which issued thence flows in three courses. She enters thi 
moon, which is the womb of the nectar and the receptacle o 
the waters, and thence, having purified with her contact thi 
rays of the sunj which is indissolubly connected with the moon 

3 she fell on the summit of Meru, and then divided into foai 
streams. As she fell from the summit and the sides and thi 
outer bounds of Meru, she turned around, and finding 

4 support fell scattering her waters widely. Dividing be, 
waters equally at the foot of Mandara and the three othe 

6 mountains, she fell, piling high the rocks broken off from tlicii 
bases by her waters. 

* Prati-shtbita. 

t Jagad-yonim in the text seemB impossible. Read jagad-yoneh t 



TH£ DESCENT OF THE GANGES FROM MERC. 


281 


The eastern stream, which is celebrated by its name SitA,* 
g flowed to the forest C aitt*a-ratha,t and overflowing it, passed 
on to the lake Varunoda,J and thence to the mountain 
S'itanta,§ and thence to the other mountains on the east in 
7 order. Descending to the earth in her course, she flowed 
from Bhadra^va into the ocean. 

Moreover the second stream called Alaka-nandd flowed 
^ pouth towards Gandha-madana into the Nandana that 
delights the gods and that lies at the foot of Meru, and over- 
9 flowed the lake Mdnasa with great force, and reached the de- 
ligliifiil kingly mountain S'ikhara,|| and thence overflowed all 

10 the mountains which I have mentioned in order on the south 
and reached the lofty morntain Hima-vat. There the bull- 

11 haniicrcd S'iva held her and would not let her 'go. The 
lord was propitiated by king Bliagiratha with fastings and 
hymns, and S'iva released her there. She entered the south- 

12 erii ocean in seven streams, and in three streams on the east ; 
inundating as a gi-eat river the south with the overflow from 
her .sti’carn, behind Bhagiratha’s chariot, 

13 Moreover the great river famed as Sva-rakshu fell on 
IkuHt Vipula on the west side, and went towards the forestlT 

U Vaihhraja ; and thence the great river overflowing the lake 
Sitoda reached the mountain Sva-rakshu, and thenco she 
15 went to the mountain Tri-^ikha ;tt and thence falling on tho 

Tho text appears incorrect. For pw'vdsUe ’tivikhf/dUi read purvd siteti 

t Sec canto Iv, vorso 2. 
t Or Arunoda, see canto Iv, verso 3. 

§ See canto Iv, vorse 4. 

Il See canto Iv, verse 6. 

sdy alam road sd vanam ? ‘See canto Iv, verse 2. 
ftere seems to be a confusion in the text between the names of the 

the mountain, which latter is called Su-ruksha in canto Iv, verse 9 ; 
or I'a-rciLs'/iuA then read Sii-raksham ? 

is name seems erroneous. See canto Iv, verse 9, whore S^iSirdksha is 
“entioned mountain. No mountain of the name Tri-sikha is 

he tw following verses among the western mountains, 

should agree ; compare Vrishabha in verse 18, and canto Iv, verse 12 . 

30 - 



282 


CANTO i.rr. 


ftumraits of the other mountains on 'the west in order j 
reached Ketumala and entered the salt ocean, 

16 Now she flowed on to mount Su-pariSva ^Iso, which is at 
the foot of Meru ; there she is famed as Soma. She Howed 

17 to the wood of Savitri.* Overflowingf it, she reached lake 
Mahd-bhadra and tlience she passed as a great river to 

18 mount S'ankha-kuta ;§ and thence reaching in succession 
Vrishabha and the other mountains on the north, and over- 
flowing the Northern Kurus she entered the great ocean. 

19 Thus I have appropriately described to thee, 0 brahman 
this river, the Ganges, and the countries according to their 

20 arrangement in Jambii-dvfpa. In Kim-purusha and all the 
other countries dwell people, who have almost unalloyed 
happi'ness, who arc free from sickness, and who are exempt 

21 from low and high diversities of condition. In each of the 
nine countries in it are seven mountain ranges. And then 
in each country there are rivers flowing down from tho 

22 mountains. In Kim-puru.sha and the seven other countries, 
0 brahman, waters bubble up/ro?/t the ground; here in Blii- 

23 rata we have rain. And in these eight countries || mon enjoy 
a perfection which comes from tho trees, from their 0 ^,^ 
natural dispositions, from the localities, from tho water, from 

24 their mental condition and from their actions. The tree- 
bestowed perfection is obtained from the trees that grant 
them every wish ; tho natural is well-known as that which 
springs from the natural disposition ; and the local delight 

25 is that which is connected with the land itself; and the 
water-given** perfection comes from the delicacy of the water; 
and tho mental is derived from meditation ; and the perjec- 
tion which comes from reverential service and the performance 
of * other duties is denominated righteousness-produced.ft 

• S6vitra ; see canto Iv, verse 2. f For pdvayanti read pldvayanti 

X See canto Iv, verse 3. § See canto Iv, verse 12. 

|[ For vashershv read varsheshv. 

If KarTna-jd, this seems preferable to dharmafd in verse 25. 

** For toydtthd read toyotthd. 

ft Dharma-ja j verse 23 reads karma-jd instead, which seems preferable. 



NINE DIVISIONS OP BhXrATA. 


283 


5 Xnd \n these countries the ages do not exist, nor bodily nor 
niental sicknesses ; nor is there any undertaking involving 
menti or demerit there, 0 brahman. 


Canto LVII. 


I llarhinflayd mentions the nme divisions of Bhdrafa, one of which 
^ India— Ife mentions the seven mountain ranges in India {exclusive 

\j lU Eimdlay a Mountains) and names twenty-two separate hills 

Ih mentions the chief rivers in India, grouping them according to 
tho mountain ranges out of which they rise — He mentions the chief 
^cuylvs in India and on its borders, arranging them according to 
ih main natural divisions of the country — and he concludes with 
general desrriptioe remarks and an encomium on India as the sole 
land of 'rdion. 

Kraushtuki spoke. 

1 A(lonc\lo Sir ! thou liast fully described this Jambu-dvipa. 
Just as thou hast declared it, merit-producing action exists 

2 nowlicj-o else, nor action that tends to sin, except in Bharata, 
0 illustrious Sir ! And from this land both Svarga is at- 
tained, aud final emancipation from existence, and the me- 

3 diiim end also. Verily nowhere else on earth is action 
ordained for mortals. Therefore toll me, O brahman, about 

^ this Bharata in detail, and what arc its divisions, and how 
many they are, and what is its constitution accurately ; it is 
tlio country,* and what are the provinces and the mountains 
hi it, 0 brahman ? 

Markandeya spoke, 

^ Hear from me the nine divisions of this country Bharata ; 

^ they must be known as extending to the ocean, but as being 
Biutualiy inaccessible. Theyf are ludra-dvipa, Kaserumat,t 

* Varslia. 

t This and the three following verses agree closely with the KiimiaPariria 
xlvii, versos 22—25. 

^ The dictionary gives the word as Meru-mat ; the Kurma Pnr^na as 
, (canto xlvii, verse 22), in preference. Another form is said to be 



284 


CANTO LVIl. 


7 Tamra-varna,* Gnbhasti-mat, and Ndga-dvipa, Sadtnyj^^ 
Gandharva,t and Varuna; and this is the ninth dvi 
among them, and it is surrounded by the sea.J This dvipj 

8 is a thousand yojanas from south to north. § At its east end 
are the Kiratas,|| and at the west the Yavanas.^ Within 
it dwell brahmans, kshatriyas, vaisyas and ^ddras, 0 brah 

9 man. They accomplish their purification with the occdpa. 
tions of sacrifice, meditation, trade, &c. ; and they seek their 

10 mutual business through these occupations, and they gain 
Svarga or final emancipation from existence, merit and sin 
then. 

The seven mountain ranges** in it are Mahendmjtf 


rl 


* The Kurma Parana gives the word as tdmra-parna in preference (canto 
xlvii, verse 22). It is Ceylon. 

t Or, gandharva, Kurma Purdna, canto xlvii, verse 23. 

J This is understood to mean India, as the following verses show ; soe 
Wilson’s Vishim Puraria, Edn FitzEdward TTall, Book II, chap, iii, note on 
the similar passage. But this Parana states clenrly enough (see verso 59 
below) that India is not snrronndcd by tho sea, but bounded by it only on 
the oast, south, and west, and only partially so on tho east and west, for 
verse 8 places the Kiratas and Yavanas thoro respectively. 

§ The yojaua is defined in canto xlix, verse 40, to bo about 40,OiX) feet ; 
this length therefore is 7,576 miles. 

j| The Kiratas are tho uncivilized tribes of the forests and mountains) 
. here the word appears to denote all the races with tho Burmese typo of 
features along tho eastern limits of India. 

% The' Greeks originally, and afterwards the Mohammedans. 

** For the notes in this Canto I have consulted, Wilson’s Vishnu Purina 
(Edn. FitzEdward Hall), General Cunningham’s Ancient Geography ol 
India (1873 ), his Archaeological Survey of India Reports, besides other worki 
and maps. 

f f “ Muhendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orispa and thi 
northern Ciroars to Gondwana, part of which near l^anjara is still callet 
Mahiudra Maloi or hills of Mahindra.” Wilson’s Vishnu Purana, Book H 
chap, iii, note. The rivers which flow from these hills are named in verse 
28 and 29, but only a few of them have been identified. This range thei 
appears to be the portion of tho Eastern Ghats between the Godaveri an( 
Mahinadi rivers, and the hills in the south of Berar, See, however, note 
the S^ukti-ruat range on the next page. 



-V MOUNTAIN RANGES OF INDIA. 


285 


I Malaya,* Sahya,t &^ukti-mat,J the Riksha moun- 

# This is the southern portion of the Western Ghats. Only four rivers 
ro mentioued in verses 27 and 28 as rising in these hills, and none of them 
ppcar to have been identified ; but as the River Kavori is said in verses 25 
ud 27 to rlso in the Sahya monntains, the Malaya mountains can bo only 
portion of the Western Ghats from the Nil-giria to Cape Comorin, 
f Tho S:ihya mountains are the Northern portion of the Western Ghats, 
nd as them (see verses 26 and 27), 

xtend from tho River Tapti down to tho Nil-giris. 

I This rango is not definitely identified, nor the rivers which are said 
1 verses 29 and 30 to rise in it 

General CuiiniTigham says tho R Suktimati “ derived its name from the 
nktimal (sicj raoun tains, in which it had its source’’ ; asserts that tho river 
mst bo the samo as tho Mahanndi ; and infers that tho S'nkti-mat mountains 
inst “ correspond with the high range of monntains to tho south of Sohoa 
nd Kank(‘r, which gives rise to tho Mahanadi, the Puiri and the Seonath 
ivers, and which forms tho boundary between Chattisgarh and tho feudatory 
lute of Bastar.” (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. X VJI, pp. 24 and 69 ; and map 
it Olid ) llifl promises seem to mo unsafe ; and his conclusion confounds 
lio S'nkti-mat range with the Mahondra rango, and must be incorrect, for the 
alter range appears to bo identified beyond doubt. 

Mr. Bc'ghir proposes to identify the R. S'ukti-mati with tho Sakri (which is 
itrilmtiiry of tho Ganges, and fiows northwards about 35 miles east of Gaya), 
lOcoiiiKict the river with the S'nkti-mat rango, and apparently to identify the 
'aiigo with tho hills in the noi*th of the Tlazaribagh district. He proposes to 
itrengtlieu this position by identify iiig tho rivers Kiyul (another tributary of 
ho Ganges, east of the Sakri) ntid Kaorhari (which I do not find, but which 
looms to bo another small tributary) with tbe RivSlii-kulya and Kumari, which 
'ISO in tlio S'likti-inat mountains j see verse.s 29 and 30. (Arch. Snrvoy Reports, 
\Ilf, pp. ]2i and 125). Hut the S'ukti-mat range and S'ukti-mati river 
lo not seem necossarily connected ; neither this nor the Vdyu Pnrdna makes 
ho nvor liec in the S'ukti-raat range, (see verso 23) ; Sakri does not appear 
ho natuiiil oqiiivaleiit for S'ukti-mati, (there is besides another river Sakri, a 
iibutary of the Seonath,) nor Kiyul and Kaorhari of Rishi-kulya and Kumari ; 

corresponds bettor with S'akuli (see verse 23) ; and the hills in tho 
^orth of the Hazaribogh district are not remarkable, and are rather the ter- 
“I'latioii of the Vindliya range than a separate mountain system, 
hbe only mountains, w'hioh have not been appropriated to the Sanskrit 
are the Aravalli monntaibs and the southern portion of the Eastern 
so that this rango might be one of these two ; and if the former 
^ ® rightly included in the Paripatra Range, (see note J, next page) the 
mat range might be the .southern portion of tho Eastern Ghats and 



286 


CANTO LVTT. 


rs/ 

tains,*' and Vindhyajf and Paripdtra.J And there are 
other hills besides them in thousands, which are situated 
12 near them. Their summits are broad and lofty, and are 
delightful and spacious; — Kolahala,§ and Vaibliraja,|| 

the hills of Mysore. If, however, the S'akti-mafc range must be placed ia 
Berar, the Maliendra range will be restricted to the Eastern Ghats. 

* These are said to be the mountains of Qondwana, see Wilson’s Vishnu. 
Tnrana, Book II, chap, iii, note Judging from the rivers which are said in 
verses 21 to 25 to rise in the Vindhya and Riksha Ranges, it appears this 
range consists pf the hills which form the water-shed between the Nar- 
budda, Sone and Mahanadi on one side, and the Tapti and northern tnou- 
taries of the Godavari on the other side ; that is, it comprises the Satpura 
Hills, and the hills extending through tlie middle of Berar and the south o( 
Chutia Nagpur nearly into West Bengal. 

f For vindha^ read vindhyai. This does not denote the whole of the 
modern Vindhya Range, but only the portion of it oast of Bhopal, and also 
the water-shed hills which extend from it into Behar, as will appear from 
a comparison of the rivers which rise in it according to verses 21—23. 

I Called also Piriyatra. This is the western portion of the modern Vin- 
dhya Range, west of Bhopal, as appears from the rivers which rise in it 
according to verses 19 and 20. Prof. Wilson says (Vishnn Parana; Book 
II, chap iii, note) “ the name, indeed, is still given to a range of moan- 
tains in Guzerat (see Colonel Tod’s Map of Rajasthan),” and that may be 
considered an offshoot of the main range. If the Vayu Purina is ri;i:ht in 
reading Varija^a instead of Venva in verse 19, this range would also probably 
include the Aravalli mountains in Rajputana, If this be so, the configuration 

'' of this range, a curve around the west and south of Malwa, would suggest n 
derivation for both the names, viz., Paripatra, from pari + pdfra, “ the moun- 
tains shaped like an enclosing receptacle ”, or “the mountains which fom fv 
protection around ; ” or Pariyatra, from ymri + yd, “ the mountains which 
curve around ” The name may thus still survive in the Pathar range, which 
lies between the rivers Chambal and Bands (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VI, 
p, 1 and map ; and vol. XIV, p. 151). 

§ Mr. Boglar proposes to identify this hill with the Kawa Kol range, whic 

is east of the R. Sakri (a tributary of the Ganges about 35 miles east o 

Gaya) j but there does not appear to be anything about the range agreo’^e^ 
with the description in the text. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VlUj PP- 
to 126, and map at end). ’ 

II This as a mountain is not mentioned in the diotionary, ^ i 

any such mountain. The Vdyu Purdna roads Vaihdra instead ^*1^ 

is a synonym for a famous hill called Vaihhdra or Baibhdra^ 



FAMOUS HILLS IN IKDlA. 


287 


18 

and 


the hill 
Vaidyuta, § 


Dardu ra,t Vata-svana,J 
MaJn^a, || and 


and about 28 miles north-east of Gaya. (Cunningham’s Ano. Qeog. of India, 
vol I, p- P' Survey Reports, vol. I, p. 21 and plates 

III. and XIV.} vol. III., p. 140). 

* Maiidara, the famous mountain, is situated about 35 miles south of 
Bliac^alpur, in Behar (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. VIII., p 130). There was 
-inotlior mountain of this name in the neighbourhood of S^veta-giri and 
Kailasa; soe Maha-Bhdrata, Sabhd-P. li. 1858; Vana-P. cxxxix. 10820-30; 
and Auusas-P. xix. 1434. This Mandara seems to have been the famous 
moimtain originally. 

f Tliis form i'l not in the dictionary, but it occurs in the Rdmdyana 
Siiudara-K. xcv. 25, and is the same as Dardura, which is the usual form, 
and Uiirdara, which is mentioned in the dictionaiy. It was a mountain or 
group of mountains, in tho extreme South of India. It is mentioned in the 
Maha-Bliarata, Sabha-P. li. 1891-3, where the context suggests that it was 
on tho borders of the C'ola and Pandya kingdoms ; and it appears to be intend- 
ed in tho Anulas-P, clxv. 7658, by the name Dururduda, which violates 
tho metro. Malaya and Dardura are mentioned as the two highest moun- 
tnii.^ in tho extreme South in tho Raghu-V. (iv. 51.) In a paper on the 
Geogra})hy of Rama’s Dxilo, in tho Journal, R. A. S., April 1894, p. 262, 1 
Imvo proposed to identify this mountain with tho Nilgiris^ 

J This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary. The V^yu Purfina 
reads Patandhama instead (xlv. 91). I do not find either. But Mr. Beglaj 
found a hill Bathan or Bathani in south Behar, and mentions a hill oallec 
lianthawa or Pandlmwa in Buddhist records. Those names might be easj 
corru[ttion3 of Patandhama. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol VIII., p. 46). 

§ This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary, and I do nol 
find it, Is it to be connected with Baijnath or Vaidya-nath, tho famous place 
of pilgrimage, near the R. Karma-nasa, south of Ghazipur ? There does nol 
Boom, liowever, to be any prominent hill there. (Arch. Survey Reports, vol 
VIII, p 137; and vol. XIX, p. 27). Or, should the reading be Vaidurya\ 
This soems preferable. Tho Vaidurya Mts. are tho Satpura Kange; compari 
MahH-Bharata, Vana-P. Ixxxviii. 8343; Ixxxix. 8364-61; and oxxi; am 
Journal, R. A. S., April 1894, p. 246. 

11 There were three mountains of this name. One is the famous Mouu 
taiu in tho north ; it is called a son of Hima-vat by the apsaras Men^i, an( 
^asa part of the great Hima-vat Range. It was near Kaildsa, Gandha-mddan 
ftnd S'peta-giri (see M-Bh„ Sabhd-P. iii. 68-60; Vana-P. cxxxv. 10694-6 
cmix. 10820; and olviii. 11640; and Bhishma-P. vi. 237) : and from Vana-I 
c*lr. 11051-64} and Hari-Vaihsa oxxxiiL 7698-7605, it appears to hav 



288 


CANTU LVil. 


Svarasa,* Tuiiga-prastha,f Naga-giri,J; Roc^aua,§ the 
14 hill Pandara,|| the hill Pushpa,^ Diir-jayant a ** 

been situated near the eastern sources of the Ganges ; hence this Mainaki 
probably denoted the group of hills in the north of the Ahnora district ; bu 
these passages are not quite consistent. The Rdmayana in Kishk. K. xliv 
86-37 places lake Mdnasii on Mt Kraunc'a, (which is called Mainaka’s son, ii 
Hari-V., xviii. 941-2,) and Maindka beyond Krauilc'a; but those geogra 
phical cantos, xl to xliv, seem to bo a late interpolation. 

Another Mainaka is the fabulous mountain situated in the sea, midwaj 
between the Bouthorn point of the Indian Peninsula and Ceylon ; see Kama 
yana, Sund. K. vii; and in this connexion see canto lii., verso 13. 

And the third Mainaka is in Western India, apparently in Khandesh ai 
it seems to be connected with C'yavana ; see M.-Rh., Vana-P. Ixxxix. 8364-5, 
In Gen. Cunningham’s Arch. Surv. Reports (vol. VIII, p. 124) the K. Soiie 
is said to bo called Mainaka-prabha, from the mountain in which it rises 
but Mainska is probably a mistake for Mokala. 

• This as a mountain is not mentioned in the dictionary ; and I do uoi 
find it. The Vayu Purdna reads Saeurasa, or Su-sarasa instead (xlv 90) ; 1 
do not find any such hill. Surasa is one of the mountains mentioned in cautt. 
Iv. verse 9. 

f I do not find this. The Vayu Purdna reads Gantu-prastha instead (xlv 
91) which seems a mistake. 

I I do not find this. In a list of mountains in Ilari-Vamsa, clxviii., 
9499-9505 are mentioned Naga and Ndga-rat. Perhaps these mountains 
may be placed in the Naga country, near Nagpur in the Central Provinces. 

§ I do not find this. 

II The Vayu Purana reads Pdndura (xlv. 00) ; neither is mentioned in the 
dictionary as a mountain. Should wo read Pitndava instead ? Thero arc two 
hills new which arc called Pandua Hill or the Pandus’ Hill, one found by Mr. 
Carlleyle, north-west of Bairat (or Vairata) in Alwar (Arch. Survey Reports, 
vol. VI, pp. 96-101) } and the other by Mr. Bcglar, north of Ilatta and near 
the R. Ken in Bandelkhand, where pilgrimages are still made (id. vol. VII., 

p. 56). ... 

I do not find this. Pushpaka isono of the mountains mentioned in canto 
Iv. verse 13. A river called Pushpa*j& is said to rise in the Malaya Mts. (see 
verso 27, below). 

** I do not find this. The Vayu Purana reads Uj-jayanta instead (xlv. 
which Gen. Cunningham identifies with Gimar hill, which is situated on Oio 
east side of Juna-gadh in the peninsula of Gujarat (Anct. Geog., vol. I. P- 
It was in Su-rashtra (M.-Bh., Vana*P. Ixxxviii. 8347-9). There are 
the Ajanta Hills, north-east of Aurangabad (Arch. Survey Reports, vol.J •> 



FAMOUS Hir.LS IN INDIA. 


289 


Raivgia, * 8.nd Arbuda, f Rishyamiika, X and Gomanta, § 


] 0 l) wliich seem to bo the same as tho Ajayanti Hill (Anc, Geog. of India, 
rol I- P- 

i or Raivataka, was near Dvar a ka or Kusa-sthal i. which was near 

extreino western promontory, and was tho capital of tho country Anarta, 
jj, t],c ppiilusula of Gujarat j for in tho M -Bh., a festival on this mountain is 
[l(> 3 cnl)C(l, in which the citizens of Dvaraka went out there with their fami- 
ln.g in thousands, on foot or in carriages (Adi-P. ccxix. 790G-17) ; and it i s 
fiillrd the ornament of the gate of that city in the llari-V. (cxiii. 6361-70; 
^ 1(1 cxi 7 . 6110-15.}. The Girnar hill mentioned in the last preceding 
tc is Bonictimoa identified with this hill, but Mt Girnar is about 110 miles 
)m Dvaraka, and this distance is incompatible with either of tho passages 
loted. There docs not appear to bo any mountain close to that city, but 
e Riiradd group of hills is not far from it, and they are tho only hills 
lit comply with tho conditions (see Arch, Surv. of W. India, by J. Bur- 
ss, Kathiawad, pp. 12, 15, 84- and 154). Kaivata is not necessarily a single 
mintMin, for the Hima*vat, Vinclhya and other ranges are often spoken of 
the singular. I would therefore propose to identify Raivata with the 
aiadi llillB in Halar, the western corner of the peninsula, 
t Tho modern Mount Abu, at the south end of the AravalH range. Vasish- 
la 18 said to liave had his hermitage there (M.*Bh , Vana*P. Ixxxii. 4097-8). 
he country .aronnd Arbuda was noted for its brood of horses {id. Sabhd-P. 
1851 ) 

1 Uishyamuka is in the Dokhan. It was the scone of Rama’s meeting with 
iiKiivii and llanuman. I have proposed to identify it with the range of 
ills \\hicli stretches from Ahmadnagar to beyon^dji^al drug and Kalyanh divid- 
1^ dm Manjira and Bhima rivor^ o urnal, R. A. S., April, 1894, p. 263). 

§ There are two hills of this name. One is mentioned in tho Hari-VamSa 
B Situated in a gap or opening (vivaTa) of the Sahya Mts. (xevi. 6331-40). 
t ^as throe or four days’ journey by swift chariot from Karavira-pura 
tovi. 5325-40; and c. 5650-52), i.e., probably 100 or 120 miles in a hilly 
Duntry and that city, which was the capital of tho country Padmfivata, 
^asori the Sahya Mts. on (and therefore near tho source of) the R. Venva, 
"d I'l’esinnably near S'urparaka (xcv. 6212, 6228-31 ; and xevi. 6283-6322). 
•“sH Amiva would therefore appear to be tho river Puma (or one of tho 
■b'r small rivers south of Surat), flowing into the Gulf of Cambay, south 
R. Tapti ; Karavira-pura would have been near its source on the 
Ghats, and Gomanta would probably be the hills S. or S.-E. of Nasik. 
'^ther Gomanta is the hill of Gwalior. Gen. Cunningham says it was 
called Oopdc'ala and Qopa~giri, Qopdhvayay and later, Qo-manta 

37 



290 


CANTO LVII. 


16 Ktita-^aila, * Kfita-smara, t and S^ri-^rvata, J 

Kora,§ and other mountains in hundreds. By them tbe 
people, both Mlecchas and Aryas, are mingled togetligf 
according to their divisions. 

16 The chief rivers of which those people drink 
hear them from me duly. Gangil, Sara8-vati,|| Sin 

(Arch Survey Reports, vol. II. pp. 372, 373). The V6yu Parana montioni 
Qo-dhana instead (xlv. 91); but I have mot with no hill of this namo elae- 
whore ; it sug^^ests Qo-vardhana, but Qo-vardhana does not suit the metro. 

• I do not find this. 

t I do not find this. Is this to be connected with the Karamar hill in 
Gandhara ? (Arch. Survey Rej^rts, vol. II. pp. 92 and 106, and map at p, 
87; vol. XIX. p. 126). 

X S'n-parvata, or S'ri*saila, is the name of a lofty rock which over-han^ 
the R. Krishna in the Kuraool Dis^ ict ; it is the site of a famous temple 
called Mallikarjuna, one of the twelve great Linga shrines (Arch. Surr. of 
S. India, by R. Sewell, Vol. I. 90; Arch Surv. of W India, by J, Rurgesi, 
p. 223). The Agni Purina places S'n-parvata on the R. Kaveri, and says it was 
dedicated to the goddess S'!! by Vishnu, because she had once performed some 
austerities (cxiii. 3, 4). But Mr. Beglar, in a list of tirthas where portions of 
Parvati’s body are fabled to have fallen when she was destroyed at Daksha’s 
sacrifice, mentions “ Sri Parvat, near the Karatoya River.” This may peihaps 
be the river mentioned in verse 25, for I do not think there is auy such 
hill near the other Karatoya in North-East Bengal. 

§ The Vayu Purina reads Kdru, or Ketu (xlv. 92) and a mountain Konvait 
mentioned in the Hhagavata-P. (V. xix. 16); none are mentioned as moun- 
tains in the dictionary. There is a hill called Kolia in Mewat (Arch. Survey 
Reports, vol. XX. p. 133). 

II The modern Sursooty, between the Jumna and Sutlej. For a clear 
deseription, see Arch. Survey Reports, vol. II. 214, &o; and XIV. pp. 87-90 
and Plate XXVI. There can be little doubt that in ancient times it was a 
very much larger river than it is now ; see an interesting paper in the 
Journal, Beng. Asiat. Socy. 1886, Part II. p. 340; but in later times it 
perished, as it does now, in the sands of the desert, and Vinaiana was 
the name of the place where it disappeared (M.-Bh, Vana-P. 
6052-5; and S'alya-P. xxxviii. 2119-20.). South and East of it was the 
Drishadvati, and between them lay the sacred region called Brahmdvartt 
(Manu II. 17, 18) and Tri-pishUpa (M.-Bh. Vana-P. Ixixiii. 3074 and 7o75) 
and also apparently Brahma-kahetra (ibid.^ 5076). The name Saras’Vnti, how 
ever, was given to the seven rivers Su-prahhd, Kd^c'amJahi, Visdld, 3fanora»4^ 
Oglut’Vati, Su-renu and VimalodM (id., S'alya-P. z^zix. 2188-2216.) , ; 



FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


291 


17 dhu,* and C'andra-bhdga f also, J and 
Yamuna, and S'ata-dru, § Vitasta, |j Ira vat i, f 
Kiiliu,** Go-mati.tt and Dhtita-p4pa,JJ Bahuda, §§ 

# The Indus, As to its ancient course through Sindh, see Journal, Beng 
Asittt S0C7., 1886, Part IL p. 323. 

t The R. Chenab, in the Punjab. It was also called the Anilcni, the Greek 

Akcsincs. 

I Or, “ and another C* andra-hhdgd'* There were two rivers of this name 
(M-Bh , Bliishma-P. ix. 322 and 327), but I have found no data to identifj 

the second. 

§ The K. Sutlej ; the Greek Hyphasis. In ancient times this river probably 
did not join the lleas, as it does now, but pursued an independent course to 
the routines of Sindh. It flowed South-West from where it issues from the 
tiini.ilajas, into the channel called the Naiwal and then along the dry bed 
called tho Hakra or Ghaggar, at a distance of 30 to 60 miles south of, and 
inoio or I0S.S parallel to, its present course. See Journal, Beng. Asiat. Socy., 
Ihbd, Partll p. 332. 

ij The niodoni ll. Jholam, in the Panjab; the Greek Hydaspes. 

^ I'ho modern R. Ravi, in the Panjab; the Greek Ilydraotes. 

** This does not appear to be known, though it is also mentioned by the 
Vaju (xlv, 95) and Kurma Puranas (xlvii 27), both of which read KuU As 
uis mrntioiu'd in conjunction with rivers in the Panjab, is it to be identified 
wirhtlio KithKii (Rig-V. x., 75. 6.), the Greek Koph/cn, the modern Kabul river? 
(Cunniugliam, Anc. Goog of India, I, 37). 

ft 'Iho mod(3rn Goomti, which joins the Ganges on the left bank below 
Beiiaios There was, however, another and older Go-raati (Rig*V. x. 75. 6) 
'Thich is probably the modern R. Gomal, a western tributary of the Indus 
(iluir, Sansk. Texts, II. 357). 

++ Gen. Sir A. Cunningham says this is a name of the Go-mati 
Arch. Suit. Ropts, I. 315). The text is Qo-matl Dhuta-pdpd c'a; and the Vayu 
95), Kurma 'xlvii. 27), Varaha (Ixxxv.) and Vishnu Puran.as all read the 
i‘ime 1 lie two words are also linked together in the Maha-Bharata (Bhish- 
‘la P ix. 3 T believe, in the Ramiiyana, where the Go-mati is gene- 

c.illcd “ crowded with cattle.” Dhuta-pdpd then either means the Go- 
and the translation would be, “and the sin-cleansing Go-mati;” or it 
denotes some tributary of that river. 

§§ There were two rivers of this name, this one (see M-Bh., Bhishma- 
■^•337,, and another in the Dekhan (ihid., 322; Anu^ -P. clxv. 7653 ; and 
^®ayana, Kishk. K. xli. 13). This river is mentioned in various passages 
Vaua-P. Ixxxiv. 8045-6; Ixxxvii, 8323; xov. 8513; S'anti-P. xxiii. 

' ^^ttUs-P, xix. 1408-11; and Hari-YaTiila xii. 710), and from these 



292 


CANTO LVIT. 


18 and Dri^ad-vati, * Vi-pasa, t Devikd, J Ranl^hQ^j 
Ni^cira, II andGap^ki, T an(3r Kau^ika** are the riversff 

it appears to have been a considerable river between the Go-mati and Ganges 
in or near the territory of Ayodhya, and having its source well up in the 
Himalayas. The only river which satisfies these conditions is the modern 
Ramganga, which joins the Ganges on the left, near Kanauj ; and this river 
therefore is probably the Bahudi. 

* Or, better, Drishad-vati ; the famous river between the Sarns-vati and 
Jumna. It was the southern and eastern boundary of Brahmavarta (Manuii 
17). For a full description, see Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 214, ic.. 
and XIV. 87*90, and plate xxvi. See also note under Saias-vati in verse 16. 

t Read Vi-piUd, for Vi~pdsd. It is the modem R. Bias, in the Panjab, the 
Greek Hyphasis. It is now a tributary of tho Sutlej, but was probably 
altogether separate in olden times, for the Sutlej then had an independent 
course considerably to tho south-east. 

X There are two Dovikas, one in the Dekhan (Ram%. Kishk. K. xli. 13), 
and this river (M-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 324 j Anusas-P. xxv. 1696-7 ; and Vana* 
P. ccxxi. 14229). From the second of these passages it appears that the 
northern Devika was near Kashmir, and it may probably be identified with 
the modern river Decg, a tributary of tho Ravi on its right bank. The 
Devikd, which is mentioned in Vana-P. Ixxxii. 6044-9, seems to be a lake, and 
may be the same as Devika Sundarikd hrada in Anu^is.-P. xxv. 1707-8. 

§ I do not find any river of this name mentioned elsewhere. Tho Vayn 
Pur6na reads Ikshuixlv. 96), and this occurs in tho M-Bh. (Bhishma-P.ix. 324) | 
bnt I have found no data to identify it.. Probably, however, we should read 
I Vakshu or Vankshu, which is tho Oxus. 

II This is not in tho dictionary. Tho Vdyu Purana gives the same name (xlv. ; 
96), and the Varaha reads Nisv^rd (Ixxxv) ; while other readings are i 

Nirvird, and Mic'itd. The Nisc'itd and two other rivers, tho Nic'itd mdNlma, j 
are mentioned in tho Bhfshma-Parva list (ix. 326, 328), and the Nirvird in 
M-Bh., Vana-P. Ixxxiv. 8116-9, but there appears to bo nothing to identify 
them beyond that the Nirvird is connected with the Kausiki (see note** 
below) in the last passage and its context. 

^ The R. Gandak, which flows into the Ganges on its north bank near 
Patna. It has shifted its course considerably ; and formerly it flowed east of 
its present course, through tho middle of tho districts of Champaran, 
Miizaffarpur and Darbhanga. 

** Or, generally, Kauuki ; the modern R. Kosi, which flows into the Ganges 
on its north bank, through the district of Purnea. It has shifted its course 
very remarkably. Formerly it flowed east of its present position. 

t+ Or, as the text may be read, “ and the Apaga 4ow,’' Ac. There ifjariver 



FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


293 


^hicli flow from the slopes of Hima-vat, 0 brdhman, 

19 T'’o Veda-smiiti,* Veda-vatl,t 

Vritra-ghnl, J and Sindhu, § 

„|lcJ Itio Apan'i ill Kuru-kshotra (M-Bh. Vaoa-P. Ixxxiii, 6038-40; Catling. 
haTi.'« Arch. SarT. Bepta., XIV. 88, and plate xxvi). The Kurma Piirona reads 
lohml c'iti instead (xlvii 28) ; and the Vayu (xlv 96) and Varaha Paranas 
h;xv) nictition the Lohifa. The Lohita is the Brahma-putra, which till last 
(lowed round the soath side ef the Garo Hills, and then soath- 
aard tlirongh the districts of Maimansingh and Dacca. Lohini, though fern , 
inearis the same. The Vayu Purina reads Jfiml.W c'a triUyd ti 
,„slfflj(xlv. 96), which may moan the “third Kauiiki," for there seem to 
b,, threo rivers of this name (see M-Bh, Vana-P. coxxi. 14231) j or may 
reffr to a river Tnthjd which is mentioned in the M-Bh. (Sabha-P. i'x. 373) . 
s„l 1 would suggest as preferable, KauHU Karaloyd tu, or KauiiU c’a 
lu. The Karatoyd is the modern Kuratoe in the Bogra District 

:ii North Bengal; and iri-srotaa or Trih-s^olasi (see M-Bh., Sabha P., 

I. 375) IS, I believe, the ancient name of the modern Teesta, which is 
.let (if Unit; both now flow into the Brahmaputra; but the first formerly 
limel into the delta, before the Ganges and Brahmaputra shifted their 
■dursos (Onniiiiigham, Arch. Surv. Kopts., XV. 127 and 131, and plates 
811(1 xxtiii. The Variha Purina adds the C'akslush-mati (Ixxxr), an 
jiiulnowu 11 ,'niio. 

I * Or I Both names are mentioned iu the M-Bh., the former 

;mAnuMis-P clxv, 7651, and the latter in Bhishma-P. ix. 324; and the 

la also mentioned in the Bhagavata-P. (V. xix. 17) ; but I have 
|fuini(l nothing to identify it, 

t t Oi ]r((asini, or VetasinL I have not met with these two names else- 
" ‘W); tlie Vcda-v(fH is mentioned in the M-Bh., (Bhishma-P. ix. 324; 
iiii-aa P cl XV /G51), but there appears to be nothing to identify it. 

Vrata-ghni, as tho Kurma Purana reads (xlvii. 28 j. I have not met 
yiuor name elsewhere, autUtlm rivor is not known apparently. 

^ is most probably the modern Kah Sindh, a tributary of the R.' 
boti\ be the Sindh, which is a tributary of tho Jumna, 

tho Chamhal and Botwa. The former is the more probable, because 
Paripatra range, and suits the fol- 
H'reiu 'f .H better. This Sindhu was a rivor t< much note, and on it was 

^"iarbh Agastya met Lopd-mudra, daughter of the King of 

for her husband (M-Bh., Vana-P. xevi, xcvii ; and 
’*'*'1,4082 ^ Smd/iM7ta7aa, (id. 

but if so, it must bo distin- 
S021^ <^irtha SindhUtama, which was on the Indus (Vana-P. 



294 


CANTO LVII. 


Venva, * and Anandini f also, Sa^-nira, | and Mahi § 

* This name is not in the dictionary, bnt it occurs several times, and ig 
variation of Vend. There is a river of this name in the Dekhan (see verge 
24, note to Venyd \ and one in Western India (see verse 26, note to Venyd) bnt 
I have not met with any river of this name in North India. Both the Vayn 
(xlv. dT)y and the Kiirrna (xlvii. 29) Piiranas read Varndid instead ; the Varaha 
reads Parnd instead (Ixxxv), and the Kurma offers Parnd and Parnagti m 
a note, (loc. cit ) The Varnusa or Parnaia i s the modern Bands, and there 
are two rivers of this name ; one a tributary of the Ohambal, rising near 
Udaypur (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts , VI., plate i.), and the other 
a stream rising near Mt. Abu and flowing into the Rann of Kachh; the 
former is the larger, and is probably the river meant in the text. Cun- 
ningham writes the name Parndsd {id. VI 157) and Parna-nd^d {id. XV. 132), 
bub the latter form seems doubtful. Devayfidha is said to have married 
one of these rivers (Ilari V xxxviii 1999, and 2004-10), probably the second. 

t Or, Sdnandini. The Vfiyu (xlv. 97) and Kiirma (xlvii. 29) Piiranag 
read C'andond instead, and the latter proposes Bandhand and Sdbandhani 
in a note. The Varaha reads C'andandbhd ndiaddc'drd (Ixxxv.) for this and 
the next river, but not very intelligibly. None of these names appear to be 
identified. 

X The river “ that is always filled with water.*’ The inclusion of this 
name among the rivers that rise in the Paripatra Mountains is strange 
yet the Kurma Purana places it in the s.imo group (xlvii. 29, note) 1 have , 
met with no river Sada-uira except that in North India A river Sada nfra- | 
may6 is mentioned in Bhishma-P ix. 310, but there is nothing to identify 
it. The Vayu Purana reads Satird aud SaddHrd instead (xlv 97), but 1 have 
not found these names elsewhere 

A few remarks may be offered about the Sadd-nird in North India Sa- 
yana says it is the Karatoya, the modern Kurattee (see verso 18, noteff), 
but it is stated in the Sata*patha Briihmana (I iv. 1), that the Sad.i-mra 
was the boundary between Kosala and Videha. It is therefore identified 
With the R. Gandak by Dr. Eggeling {loc. cit.. note) and Muir (Sansk Texts, 
II. 419-422). But the old stream of the Gandak flowed through the district) 
of Champaran, Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga, i.e , through the middle of the 
Videha country ; and the Gandaki and Sada-nira are mentioned as distinct 
rivers in M-Bh., Sabha-P xix , 794. The Sada-nira can hardly, therefore, be 
the same as the Gandak, and is more probably the modern Rapti, 
of the Sarayu, and the midway position of the Rapti eminently satisBes 
position of a boundary 

§ The R. Mahi, which rises in Malwa and falls into the Bay of a 
The Vayu Puraija has a variant, Mahati (xlv. 97 sad the Varaha r ^ 



FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


20 ?ivk* C'arm^ati.t Nfipi.J VidiS 4 ,§ and Vetra-TOti, || 
Sfipra, f and Avaroi *• also are known ft as those connected 
witli the Paripatra mountains. 

and Maha-nada, §§ 

both seem incorrect. The Mahitd mentioned in M-Bh., Bhiahma-P. 

it appears to be this river. 

* Or Para, according to the Vayu Parana (xlv. 98). This is said to bo 
ieromlcrnK. Parbati, which rises in Bhopal and falls into the Chambal 
CnnniDgliam, Arch. Surr Ropts , II 308 and Ronnoll’s Atlas of 1781). 
t For C’ar,M,,-vaU, read C'arman-vati. The R. Chambal, the West 

ributary of the Jumna. ° 

; This is not in the dictionary. The Kirma Purina mentions the 
W«ndthoS,ir!,a(xlvii.29), but I have found no other mention of them 
mJ they do not appear to be known. ’ 

I § This must, no doubt, be connected with the town VidiSi, which was on the 
I E VetisTHti (Mogha D. i. 25) the modern R. Betwa (see next note). Vidiii 
to bo Iho modern town Bhilsa. The B. Vidiii therefore was pro 
I kbir the small tributary which joins the Betwa on its left bank at Bhilsa. 

[ Tho modern R. Betwa, which rises near Bhopal and flows into the 
J«m„a There was another river of this name in Western India (Hari-V 
tlrrni, !lol4-6). Tho Variha Puraija reads Veda-irayi wrongly (l«xv). 

I Tins is the river on which the modern Djjain, stands (Mogha 

I 1 Another Sipra is mentioned in verse 24. 

•• This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The 
..vu P"ra,.,v roads AranM instead (xlv. 98), which is preferable, and would 
mer of the Avanti country (see notes to verses 63 and 65, below). 

mu, the Chambal. The Yaraha Pur.pa reads r„pun« (Ixxxv.) 

tt Kir amaidh, read smritdh. 

'«tail,!Ga!,/“T the Narbada and flows 

. the T T7 '' 

Orissa into the Bay of Bengal. The 
"“‘■■»i,not bo ‘0 be the river which rises near Ranker, bnt 

‘'»-riwat:r.,h:rTLTh- ■’^longtequitea 

‘ie Has, luorR I aesignatethe bmnch now 

Su,.„ n , “8“' ‘'■8 soorco of the Sono (Cunning. 

.^•»d reads /p„«.ratW instead (Ixxxv). This river, which i, also 



296 


CANTO LVII. 


Narmada,'* Su-ratha,t Adri-ja,t Maj^dakini 
and Da4drna, || and C'itra-J^u^a ^ 

22 C'itrofcpala, ^ and Tamasa, ft Karamoda,J' 

called Jyoii-rathyd (M-Bh., Vana-P. Ixxxv, 8150) and Jyoti-rathd (Hari-V 
clxviii 9510-12) is said to be a tributary of the S'ona in the former passaije 
and is placed in the Deklian in the latter. It is, therefore, probably tli( 
modern Johtla, the southern of the two sources of the R. Sone. 

* The modern Narbada or Nerbudda, which rises near the Sone and fluffs 
into the Gulf of Cambay. 

t This is not in the dictionary, and I have not met the name elsewhere 
it is a synonym of Jyoti-rathd ^ (See last paj^e, note §§). The Kurma Panina 
mentions the Sii-rosd (xlvii. 30), and so also the Varaha (Ixxxv) ; instead 
of this and the next river the Vayu Purdna reads Sii-makd-drunni or 
Surahddrumd (xlv. 99) ; but I have not met with any of these naraog 
elsewhere, except Sn-rasa in the Bhagavata-P. (V. xix. 17) 

X This is not in the dictionary, but is mentioned in M-Bh., Anuias- 
P. clxv. 7648. I have found nothing to identify it. 

^ The R Mandakin, which flows near Mt. Chitrakut into the R. Paisuni, 
a tributary of the Jumna betwoou the Ken and the Tons (Cunning., Arch. Suit. 
Repts., XXI. 11). Mr. Boglar’s proposal to identify it with the R. Reiir, a 
southern tributary of the Sone {Ibid. XIII. 42-64) depends upon his idoiitifica’ 
tion of Mt. C'itra-kuta with Ramgarh hill in Chhattisgarh, and is untcnuble 
(see Journal, R. A. S., April, 1894, page 240). The river Reur, or Rcr, is iiho 
called Arand, and all these forms appear to point to Erandd as the original 
name. 

II The river of the country Dasarna, the modern R. Dasan, between the 
J^otwa and the Ken. 

% This is not in the dictionary. It is no doubt to be connected with Mt. 
C'itra-kuta, the modern Chitrakut (see Journal, R. A. S. April, l^^H 
page 239), and is probably the stream which flows round the south and 
east of the modern Mt Chitrakut, past Karwi into the Jumna. 

** This is not in the dictionary, but a C'ltropald is mentioned in M Bh, 
Bhishma-P. ix. 341. Cunningham says C'itrotpala is the name of the modern 
main-stream of the Maha-nadi below its junction with the Pairi (Arch. Surv. 
Repts., VII. 165, and XVII. 70) ; but that river as mentioned already (paii® 
295, note §§) would belong to a different water-shed. 

ft Or Tdmast, as the Kurma Parana reads (xlvii. 30). It is the R- Tons 
which flows into the Ganges on the right bank below Allahabad. 

tt This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found the name elnewhcre. 
The Vayu Parana (xlv. 100) and the Var4ha (Ixxxv.) read Karatoyd 
Should we read Karma-nodd, as a synonym of Kcur>na-nddd ^ Hi® 



► FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


297 


Pisiic'ika, * and Pippali-^roni f also, Vi-pa^a, J 
23 tho river Vaujula, § Sumeruja, || S'ukti-mati, 1 [ 

incant is no doubt the modern Karamnasa, which flows into the Ganges on 
■lie nglit bank just above the Sone. 

* I bavo not met with this river elsewhere. Pis^c^a was a name given to 
raiioas races, chiefly barbarous hill tribes (Muir, Sansk. Texts, II. 69). In 
Ills itlace it would, no doubt, mean the tribes inhabiting Rewah and Chuta 
Sagpore, and the Pisac ika is probably one of the southern tributaries of the 
50UC, sacli as the Ror (see page 296, note §), or Kanhar. 
t Or rqmild iron<, as the Vayu Purana reads (xlv. 100) • or Pippald, as 
lie Varalia roads (Ixxxv). I have not found any data to identify it, but have 
eeii tho nanio assigned to the modern river Patsitni or Parsaroni, a tributary 
f rlio Jumna between the Ken and the Tons (Arch. Surv. Hepts , XXL 11), 
Hill rlioso words may well he corruptions of Pippali-iron£. 

J This appears to be the river mentioned in M.-Bh., Anu^as-P. xxv. 1733 
Hid perhaps 1710-11 also. It is probably tho modern Bias which flows past 
Suajoi and joins the R. Ken, a tributary on tho right bank of the Jumna. 
fCiinniag , Arch. Surv. Repts., XXI. 1 57, and plate xxxiv). Tho Ken or Kiy^n, an 
mporiant stream, does not appear to be mentioned ; it is said to be a corrup- 
1011 of Karnu-vati {Ibid, 156; and II. 446), though Lassen gives Kdyana as 
Muioiout form (Irid. Alt , Map). Was FV-pdm the ancient name of this whole 
iTcr." The Yi-pasd in the Panjal) is mentioned in verse 18 The Varaha 
’urana reads Vimld (Ixxxv), and the Kurma montions this name as a 
ariant (xlvii. 31). There are several rivers of this name, and the river 
here meant is no doubt the Sarasn'utC Vi£dld at Gaya (M.-Bh., S'alya- 
P. uxix. 2188-9, and 2205-6), probably the modern Lilajan which flows 
past Bodh Gaya. 

§ I have not found this name elsewhere. Tho Varaha Purdna reads 
(Ixxxv), the Kurma Maujuld (ilvii 31), and the Vayu Jamhuld 

(xh. 100). Of these names I have mot only with Manjula elsewhere 

(^I-hli , Bhishma-P. ix. 3-11), but with no data to identify it. Tho river 
18 probably that on which Gaya stands; its eastern source is called the 
its middle portion the Phalgu, and the eastern branch, into which it 
the Jumna. 

I! Tho V^yu Purdna reads Siterajd (xlv. 101), and tho Vardha Virajd 
I have not met with any of these names elsewhere, but the M.-Bh. 
ions three rivers Vird (Bhishma-P., ix. 329), Ffra-nat< (tttd., 332) and 
Damp distinct. The Matsya Purana reads two 

^ and Lnjjd (oxiii. 26), probably erroneous, 

fied much written about but does not seem to be identi- 

®®Hyyet. See p. 285, note and also Cunning., Arch. Surv. Repts., 



298 


CANTO LVII. 


S'akuH,* Tridiva in regular order, f Vega- valiinij also § flow 
from the slopes of the Vindhya|| Mountains. 

IX. 65. It is mentioned in the Ilari-Varii^a (clxviii. 9609-13) and is said there 
to be in the Dekhan ; it seems to bo meant by tho name Mulcti-maU in M.-Rh 
Bhishma-?. ix. 342 ; and -perhaps it is referred to in Hari-V. xxxvii. 1980-7 
These passages, however, may allude to two rivers of this name. It the 
river on which stood S^ukti-mati, tho capital of C odi ; see note to C^edi in 
canto Iviii, verso 16. 

* The VAyu Parana reads Mahrund or MaUhand (xlv. 101), and the 
Vardha Pan/tinl (Jxxxv), but I have not met with any of these names else- 
where. The 8'akuh, however, may probably be identified with the 1{. Sain, 
which flows into the Ganges on tho south, about half-way between I'atiia 
and Monghyr (Cunning., Arch. Siirv. Kepts., Vlll. plate i ; and XV plate 
iv). There is also another Sakri which is a tributary of tho h. SeonatL, o 
tributary of tho Mahanadi {td. XV ll. plate i), but that rises rather in the 
Riksha Mts. Tho Bhishma-P. list mentions a river called Mahari (ix. 331); 
and tho Matsya Parana reads Muhifd instead (cxiii. 26). 

f The text TrUlivd-knimu seems wrong, and I have adopted the roafling: of 
the Vayu Parana Tndivd hrmndt, which is preferable. Tho word Irn/zui'f, 
if right, would indicate that tho rivers are montioned in regiilur ordu- from 
west to east. Tho Tridiva is also montioned in the M.-Bh., (Hhislnna-l’. ix 
324* and Auusas.-P. clxv. 7654), but no data are given to identify it. It may 
bo noticed thoro is a river called tho Knimu (Rig.-V , X 75.fi), which is pro- 
bahly tho modern R. Kuram, a tributary of the Indus, south of the Kabul H 
(Muir’s Sausk. Texts, II. 357) ; but it cannot be intended hero. Anuthoi 
Tridiva is mentioned in verso 28. 

'• J This is not in the dictionary, but it occurs in M.-Bh., Sablia-P. ix. 3d 
The Vayu (xlv. 100) and Vuraha (Ixxxv) and Kiirina Purtlnas (xlvii. 3])rca^ 
Bdlu-vdhini instead, and the last gives Ratna-vdhini as a variant. I have nw 
met with either of these names elsewhere. 

§ The Varaha Purilna adds another river Bdtri (Ixxxv), but I have not me 

with it elsewhere. ^ . 

II The text reads Skandha, which is clearly wrong. The Vayu (xlv 
Kurma (xlvii. 31) and Varaha Puranas (Ixxxv) read Riksha. There is certain 
ly some confusion in this group of rivers, for the Mandsikini, Da^arnH, an 
Tamasa rise in the Vindhya watershed, while the S'ona, Malui-natla, an 
Narmada rise rather in the Riksha Mts ; but the rivers mentioned in ^ 
riso in tho Riksha Mts, so that tho proper reading here should no doin^^^ 
Vmdhya. Tho Agni Purann says the Narmadd rises in 
(cxviii. 7) j so that perhaps this river and also the Sone and o 
branch of the Mahinadi, which all rise close together near Ainarn-. an 



FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


299 


OJ TLe S'iprd, * Payoshni, f Nir-bindhyd, t Tdpi, § and 

may have been considered to belong to the Vindhya watershed. There seems 
been some vagnorioss in this matter, for the Utkalaa and (Dakshipa) 
Kosalas ai'o classed among the races who inhabited the Vindhya Mta. in yerses 
53 and 54. 

# One B'ipra has been mentioned already in verso 20, and the Hari-Vaih^a 
jayMboro is a S'ipra in the southern region (clxviii. 9509). The Vayu Purana 
rea(h instead (xlv. 102); and the Kurma (xlvii. 32) and Vardha (Ixxxv) 
guihoild. 1 have not found either of these names elsewhere, but a river 
5 '/,,/,K(is mentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 336) and another called S’ivd 
, 332). TliO Matsya Purana reads Kshiprd (cxiii. 27). 
f The Payoshni was in the southern region (M.-Bh., Vana-P. Ixxxviii. 
M21)-351 ; it wasjho river of Vidarbh a (ibid, cxx. 10289-90), and was sepa- 
ntod from tlio Narmada by the Vaidurya Mts. {ibid, cxxl 10306-7). It was 
tJic modern river Puma (the tributary of the Tapti) together with the lower 
pun ot the Tapti into which the Puma continues. A careful consideration 
of Kniu Nil la’s remarks {ibid. Ixi. 2317-9) with a map will show that the view 
disciilicd could only have been obtained from a position on the Satpura Mts. 
about lonj'itiulo 75°; hence the Payoshni visible from there could be only the 
linu'i [0111 of the Tapti. Such was considered the main stream in old times, 
and It Mas a famous and sacred river. Gen. Cunningham’s proposal to iden- 
tif\ the J’iiyoshni with the Pahoj, a tributary of tho Jumna between the 
Siiulh and Botwa, (Arch. Surv. Keports, VII. plate xxii.) is untenable as 
rc'.Mnls tins famous river; but there were two rivers of this name (M.-Bh., 
Bii.sbiiia.P i\. 32tan<l 327), and tho Pahoj may be the other Payoshni. 
Tilt' Vaiiiha J’lirana reads FaijolU (Ixxxv), which seems a mistake. 

+ Or Ao -/ ludhyd ; or according to tho Vayu Pumia, Nir-handhyd (xlv. 102). 
Orio mil' Nir-vindliya is mentioned in the Megha-D. (I. 28 and 29, cem- 
mfiitaiy) as lying between tho It. Vetra-vati (or Betwa) and Ujjayini (Qjjain), 
and (if rluj Para is rightly identified with the modern Parbati, see note to 
niso20j iniisii bo the modern Parwa ii which is west of the Parbati; but 
(lini n\f'r uses in tho Vindhya llange according to tho Mogha-Duta, and be- 
to tho iViripdtra watershed according to verses 19 and 20 above; on 
Either view it is out of place hero. There was, however, another large river 
pf ^Ins imiiio in the Dokhan, for it is mentioned along with the Payoshni, 
Tapi fuul tlio Godavari and its tributaries in the Bhagavata-Purana (V. 
17), and judged by its position there, it may be the Peu-ganga a tributary 
tlio Warda, ^ 

§ ^('0 note to Payoshni above. This is tho upper part of the modern Tapti 
^ ^ ]<nns tlm Parna. This branch was hardly known in early times; 

not appear to be named in the Maha-Bharata or Ramayana, nor 



300 


CANTO LVII. 


Nishadha-vati,* Venya, f and Vait^ni,J Simbali,§ Kunind 

is it mentioned in the copious list in the Bhishma-P. (ix). The reason wag 
no doubt, it was hidden amid hills and forests. 

* Or Nishadhd, as the Vayu Parana reads (xlv. 102). I have not met 
with this name elsewhere, but It naturally suggests a connexion with Nishadha 
the realm of Nala. As regards Nishadha, see the note to verse 54 below 
This river then may be one of the small tributaries of the Narmadi 
or Tapti, which rise in the middle part of the Satpura Range. The Kurma 
Parana reads Mahdnadi instead (xlvii. 32), which may mean the Mahanadi 
in Chhattisgarh and Orissa, but is unsatisfactory, as it has mentioned that 
river before [ibid.] 30). The Matsya Parana roads Rishdbhd instead (cxiii. 27) 
which I have not mot elsewhere. 

t This form is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purtiija reads Venvd (xlv. 102) ; 
the Kurma roads Vinnd and gives Venya and C'intd as variants (xlvii. 32). 
C'lntd is no doubt an error. The other names are merely different forms of 
the same word. Tho river is called Fenrd in the Hari-V. (clxviii. 9509-10) 
and also in the M.-Bh. fSabh4-P. xxx. 1118), but in the latter poem it'is 
generally called Vend, and this seems the proper term (Bhishma-P. ix. 335; 
Anu^as-P. clxv. 7648; Vana-P. Ixxxviii. 8328, clxxxix. 12909, and Ixxxv. 
8176-7 ; whether the same river is also meant in line 8175 is not clear). 
From the passage last cited it appears the Verj^d is the river which joins the Goda- 
vari and Varada (the modern Warda), that is, the modern Wain-ganga and 
its continuation the Pranhita. The Varaha Parana reads Veshndydid (Ixxxv) 
which seems a mistake. This river appears to be also called Su-vend (M - 
Bh., Vana-P. clxxxix. 12900) in contra-distinction to the Kf'ixhna-veni 
{ibid.; and also id. Vana-P. Ixxxv. 8180-1 ; Bhishma-P. ix. 335, and Anum- 
P. clxv. 7648; and Hari-V. clxviii. 9509-11) which appears from the second 
passage to bo a tributary of the Vena, and which I have proposed to identify 
with the westerri tributary rising near Deoghar and Seoni (Journal, R. A 
1894, p. 244). Another river of this name is mentioned in verso 26, and » 
Venvd in verse 19. 

J This is no doubt the modern Bytarni, which flows through the narth 
of Orissa ; and if it is rightly classed here, the Riksha Range must include the 
hills which stretch along the south of Chuta Nagpore. 

§ 'I'he Vayu Purana reads S'itihdhu (xlv. 102), the Kurma Baldkd (xb’ii- 32) 
and tho Variiha Vedipdld (Ixxxv). None of those rivers are mentioned in the 
dictionary, but the name S'inibdhu is given. I have not found any of the« 
names elsewhere, except Baldkd in M.-Bh., AnuS^S.-P. xxv. 1706-7, ^ 
may be a river, but appears from the context to be in Northern India. 
haps tho reading should bo S'ildvati or Sildvati, which seems to have 
ancient name of the modem river Selye ; this after uniting with the 



FAMOUS RIVERS TN INDIA. 


301 

25 vati,* Karatoya.t Maha-gauri,t Durga,§ and Anfati-^ira ; || 

is the river on which Tamliik, tho ancient Tdmra4ipfaJca (see verse 
44 he]o^v). is situated; and which may well find mention here. Perhaps 
jIjp iiaino Bnld/cd may bo connected with tho modern river Bar^ikar, a tri- 
butary of the Damud^i these two combined form tho largest river in 
Western bongal, and flow close to Tamluk. Tamluk was a famous port, and 
it would bo stiango if the rivers near it were overlooked. The M -Bh. men- 
a river SUta-hnld^ (Bhishma-P. ix. 328). The Matsya Parana reads 
w(//d instead (cxiii. 37). I have not met either name elsewhere. 

* I have not mot with this name elsewhere. It may bo the Subarna-rekha 
or one of tho small rivers in the north of Orissa; or may wo cotijoctiire 
i,,vnn<}-vat(, and identify it with tho K. Damudd in West Bengal ? See tho 
Inst Doto. 

+ Olio river of this name in North Bengal has been mentioned in verso 18 
nntett ; find there was another of the same name in the north of India (M -Bh , 
AiiiiVia-P xvv 1099); neither can bo meant here. I have not found any 
A'</ui/o//dplsowhore, which rises in tho Riksha range. Tho Vayu Parana 
rw.ls Toijd instead (xlv. 103), and so also the Varaha (Ixxxv) ; but I have 
nor found this name elsewhere. Perhaps the reading should he Karahhdc'a. 
kithtbJui or Knpi$d is the name of a river on the confines of Utkala and 
Khin^ii (Hughii-V. iv. 38, commentary), but no details are given to identify 
u, Thu name Kapisd suggests identification with tho modern Cossye or 
Knn..iu (iho chief river in the Midnapur district) which is said to be modified 
from KimsiiL'uif, bat may well bo a corruption of Kapiid-vati. 

J Tins IS also mentioned in M.-Bh., Bhishrna-P. ix. 341. It is no doubt a 

()[ Ihnhmdni (ind Brdhmani, all being names of Dui’ga; it would 
lioa !'(' rlio tuudorn R, Brahmani in Orissa. 

§ 1 lierc arc two rivers of this name mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 337 
uul 341) in the M.-Bh., and tho second is that intended here, as it is placed 
'Jth the Mohd.gauH; but I have not mot with tho name elsewhere. It 
“av !>(' a synonym of the small river Bralimani which Hows through the 
h>oishu(labad district into tho right bank of tho Bhagirathi branch of the 

langes. 

iliis IS not in the dictionary. Tho Vayu (xlv. 103) and Kurma (xlvii. 33) 
I'liinas le.ul The Varaha reads A^itydgird (Ixxxv), which is no 

dit an intended synonym. X have not met witl any of these names else- 
''!‘f‘rt',lnit Antm.«ifais mentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P. ix. 337). Antah-iild 
’"s to ho tho correct form ; and if the name is descriptive, the river is 
P ^ddhly northern tributaries of tho Mahanadi ; all of which are 

^ compassed with hills. See however a people called Antar-giryas in verse 24 



302 


Ckmo Lvii. 


26 


those rivers* flow from the slopes of the Rikshaf 1 
have holy waters and are bright. 

The Godavari, t Bhima-ra^a,§ Krishna, || and another^ 


* Tho Varaha Purd^a montions also Mnnijdld S'uhhd (Ixxxvj • i 
found tho former name elsewhere; but the S'uhlid is mentioned in tho 
Hari-Vamsa (olxriii. 9509-10), and a river Maningd is mentioned in the 
Bhishma-P. list (ix. 342). There are no data to identify them, except that 
the passage in the Tlari-Vaih^a places the S'ubhd in the Dekhan. 

t The text roads Biiuihya or Vindhya, and yet makes the next group of 
rivers also rise )n tho same range. The Viiyu (xlv- 103) and Kurma (xlvii 
33) and Vnraha (Ixxxv) Puranns read the same; but tho proper reading 
must bo Rilsha as tho Vishnu Purdna says (Bk. 11. Chap, iii), f].,g 
Tapi, Venya and Vaitarani certainly do not rise in the former mountains 
but in the latter. Tho Agni Purana wrongly groups the Tdpi and Payoshn 
with the Godavari and other rivers as rising in the Sahya Mts. 

X The modern Oodaveri. This river was famous from the earliest times 
Jana-sthana, the scene of Kama’s first conflict with the Rakshasas was tbf 
country on both its banks between its tributaries the Manjira and Pranhitj 
(see Journal, R A. S , 1894, p. 247). 

§ Or Bhhia-rathi as tho Vayii (xlv. 104) and Varaha (Ixxxv) Puranas read; 
Bh^ma-rahslii which the Kurma gives (xlvii. 34) seems incorrect. The former 
is the name as given in tho M,-Bh. (Vana-P. Ixxxviii. 8328; llhhhma-F. 
ix. 327 ; and Anusas.-P. clxv. 7G53). This is the mo dern Bhiina, the tiibiitary 
of tho Krishna, rising near Poona. The Varaha Purana adds immiKliatt'ly 
Marathi (Ixxxv) ; is it a mistaken repetition of the last throe syllables of 
tho preceding river ? I have found no such river, 

" II Tho modern Kistna. This river received very little notice in ancient 
times, and was almost unknown compared with tho Godavari and KBveri. 
Besides its inclusion in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 340), it is doubtful if it i^so 
mentioned in the M.-Bli., or Ramayana. It is omitted from the lengthy 
account of Sahadeva’s conquests in tho south (Sabhd-P. xxx), and the detailed 
pilgrimage itineraries (Vnna-P, Tirtha-yatra-P.) and other gengraphifd 
discourses. It does not occur in the story of Raghu’s conquests cvenm 
the late poem, the Rnghu-Varii^a. The reason seems to be that the country 
through which it flows was nearly all forest in ancient times. 

^ For tathdpard of the text tho V»yu Purana reads c'a vanjuld (xlv. lOt) 
and the Kurma c' a vaiyatd ov c' a vatsari {xhii. Z4i). I have not found these 

names elsewhere. Perhaps we should read some name like Mahjira, as 
largo southern tributary of the Godavari is now called, though its earlies 
name was apparently Manddkini (Ramay., Yuddha K. ox. 38, 39; 

R. A. S., 1894, p. 250). 



FAMOUS RIVERS IN INDIA. 


303 

Venya,* Tunga-bh^d.f Saprayoga.t Vahyi,§ and tbo 
2; riicr Kaveri; || these noble rivers f issue from the slopes 
of tlio Saliya** Mountains. 

Tho Krita-mala, tt Tamra-p^ni, Pushpa- 

• Thi'iform ia not in the dictionary. The Varaha Parana reads Vend 
,„v)i tho Kurma Vend or Furnd (xlvii. 34); and tlio Vayu Vain/ (xlv. 
Olj-alliiK'ro variations, the proper name no doubt being Vend. This is 
lieilurd river of this name mentioned here, seo verses 19 and 24. It is 
,,,hubly the sarno as tho V/nd in the Bhiahrna-P. list (ix. 328), and the 
V,„„f ni the llhagavata Parana (V. xix. 17). Is it to bo identified with the 
MViiiu'r winch is between the Kistna and Kavori ; though the Simslcrit 
a, UP „f the IVnner is said to be Pinaka (Arch. Surv. of S. India, by R. 
L 123 and 129) ? 

t The iiioderii Tainbhudra, tho largo southorn tributary of the Kistna, 
iiiRismm of tlio combined streams of the Tunga and Bhadra. 

I Minis not 111 tho dictionary, but it is also mentioned in the Bhishma-P. 
K(.t 32S) and in the Vana-P. (ccxxi. 14232), and was a large and known 
u>i, Tho.i.li not apparently identified, it is probably one of the largo we.stern 
hull, HUM of tho Kistna. 

§ 'ri„3 ,» mt in tho dictionary, but the Varaha Parana agrees (Ixixv) 
«l tl..' JI.USJ,. (cxiii. 29). I liave not found tho name elsowhero and it does 
lo he identified. Tho Agni P. read.s Varmld (cix. 22), tho large 
"Iilim, tnimlary of tho Kistna called Varada or Vedavati. 

nu.,n,KlernCavcryorColeroonin south India. It was better known 
«'ilie Ivutua 111 ancient times. It is mentioned in tho M.-Bh., (Vnna-P, 
w .yiil-iil clxxxiic. I2UI0j and Bhishma-P ir. »28) and Bamay. (Kishk! 
'll 21 , 111,1 25). King Jalmu is said in the Ilari-Vamsa to have married this 

"‘r and niado the Ganges his daughter (mrii. 1416-22, and xixii 

oT-fllj, 

’llio Miilsya (cxiii. 29) and Varaha flxxxv) Puranas add the Vaitmld • 
to iviiicli S ('0 verse 26 note . 

MhoJexi.rcailsBmd/i^aor Fmd/iyahere, after having read it already 
venu 2 j ; and offers Sahya a as variant in a note. The latter is maui- 
proper reading, and agrees with tho Kurma (xlvii. 34) and Fayu 

'V, 104) Pura^^as. ^ 

•-is not in the dictionary. The Agni Pur4na agrees with it (cxviii. 8J* 

• reads (xlvii. 35), the Vardha 8'ata.mdld (Ixxxv), and 

(V. xix. 17). Is it to bo identified with tlie Veda- 
y oivs oat north of Cochin ? The people of Kac'c/ha or Cochin are 
'I Ik Iviii. verse 28. 

® inentionod as a place of pilgrimage in tho M.-Bh. (Vana-P. 



304 


CANTO LVII. 


28 ja, * Sutpald-vati ; f these are rivers J which rise in the 
Malaya Mountains, and have cool water. 

And tlio Pitri-soma, § and Ris hi-kuly a, || Il^shukd, ^ and 

Ixxxviii. 8340), and the Raghu-V. says (iv. 49 and 60), that the vanquished 
Pandya kings gave Raghn the choicest pearls from the sea at the mouth 
of the R. Tamra-parni, where (the commentator adds, it is well-known) pearh 
were produced. This rivor then was in the Pandya country and flowed 
into the G. of Manaar. It is the modern Chittar, the river of Tinnevelly 
(Arch. Surv. of S. India, by R. Sewell, I. 303). 

* The Vayu Parana reads Pushpa-jdti {xlv. 106), the Kurraa Push^a-vuti 
(xlvii. 35), and the Varaha Piishpd-vatt (Ixxxv). 1 do not find any of 
these names elsewhere. A tirtha is mentioned { M.-Bh., Vana-P, 

Ixxxv. 8151-5), but it was situated between Dakshina Kosala (Chhattisgarh) 
and C'ampa (Bhagalpur). A river Pushpa^veni is mentioned (id., Bhishma-P, 
ix. 342), which is joined with a river VtpaUUvaH and therefore is probably 
the same as the river in the text. A Pushpa-vdhini is mentioned as situated 
in the south in the Ilari-Vaihsa (clxviii. 9510-2). 

f This is the same as the Utpald-vati menlioned in the last note (M.-flli, 
Bhishma-P ix. 342) and the fJ/paid (Hari-V., clxviii. 9510-2); and Uie Vayu 
(xlv. 105) and Kurma (xlvii. 35), Matsya (cxiii. 30) and Varaha (Ixxxv) Puraiias 
read Vtpald-vati. 

J There are only six noteworthy rivers rising in the Malaya Mts., viz., the 
Vaigai, Vaippar and Chittar on the east, the Amaravati (a tributary of the 
Kaveri) on the north, and tho Ponani and Peri or Veda-mali on the ^^est, 
The Chittar is tho Tamra-parni, hence the three others named in the texi 
must be found among tho five remaining modern rivers. 

^ § Not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purdna roads Tri-sdmd (xlv. 106), and 
the Agni P. also (cxviii. 8); while the Vardha reads Tri-ydmd (Ixx.xv). 1 
have mot only with the Tri-sama elsewhere (Blnigavata Parana, V. xix. hi 
It is probably one of tho small rivers on the Eastern coast, for the mterioi 
behind these mountains was not well known. The Matsya Parana reads 
Tri-hhdgd (cxiii. 31) which I have not met elsewhere. 

II This is tho river on which Ganjam stand s, and it bears tho same naini 
still. It is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 343). Tho Vayu Purai}! 
reads Ritu-kiilyd (xlv. 106), by mistake. Another Rishi-hulyd is ineutionei 

in verse 29. . ^ 

^ This is not in tho dictionary. The Vayu (xlv. 106) andVar a 
(Ixxxv) read Ik^huld; and Ikshudd which the Matsya Purana reads 
is a variant. I have not found any of these names elsewhere, but the B- 
is mentioned (M.-Bh., Bhishxna-P. ix. 324). It is probably one of the am 
streams on the Eastern coast. 



FAMOUS EIVERS IN INDIA. 


305 


;*29 TiKiiva,’" Langulini^^f and V ami^a-kar al are known to 
spiiiif? from the Mahendra § Mountains. 

The Rishi-kulya, || and Kumari, f Manda-gd,*# Manda- 

# -J'hig is tl.o second Tridivd, see verse 23 j but I have not found two 
rirors of Lhif! niimo mentioned anywhere else. Instead of Tridivd c'a yd as 
int'ie toxt, tho Matsya Parana reads Tridicdc'ald (cxiii. 31). 

t This is tho modern Languliy a, on which Chicacolo between 

Viiiauii^nain and Calingapatam. 'the Vai^ha Parana reads Mulini or Lam'd- 
|,IU' (Isvxv) ami the Mataya JIftMf {cxiii. 31); 1 have not found theae names 
elM'wht'ie ami they seem incorrect. The Ldngali mentioned in the M.-Bb. 
(Scil)hii-r. IX 374), is probably this river. 

I riic Varaha Parana reads Farhsa-vard (Ixxxv), and tho Vayu Varhia- 
ihnd (xlv. lOG) j the latter is the correct name. It is the modern Baris- 
dhind, the river on which Calingapatam stands. * 

§ The Kurina Parana omits this group of rivers altogether, and puts 
time of them Tri-sdmd, Rishikd and Vamia-dhdrini into tho next group 
(vliii 3G). Tho Matsya Parana mentions tlireo more rivers, the Tdmra- 
and Vimald ((ixiii. 31), but all these seem doubtful. A Tiimra- 
pirni has boon mentioned in verse 28. A S'ardvati is named in the Bhishma- 
P. lisr. (ix 327 j, and a Vitmild or Vimalodd in various passages (e. g. 
?aha-P xxxix. 2214-5; Hari-V., olxviii. 9517-8); but they are in North- 
ern and Western India. 

Jnnofe ff on page 284, the Mahondra mountains are said to be “the 
poitioii of the Eastern Ghats between tho Godavari and Mahanadi 
rncis juilI tho liilla in the south of Berar,” but this proposition must be 
iiM'iiliod on a full consideration of all tlie foregoing identifications. Gondwa- 
IIS Uhod by Wilson was applied to a very wide tract in Central India. 

I ho M.ihcndra Mts. cannot extend as far west as Borar nor beyond the 
and must bo limited to the hills between the Mahanadi, Goda- 
and Wam-ganga, and may perhaps comprise only the portion of tho 
(dials north of tho Godavari. It is in this last tract only that the 
‘amu lias snrvuvod. See Raghu Vamsa, iv. 43. 
i finals the second Rishi-kulya, see verse 28. Tho Vayu Parana reads 
(xlv. 1U7), and the Varaha Rishikd (Ixxxv), and tho Matsya Kdiikd 
3..). I these names elsewhere. 

^ flH' Vayu Parana reads Su-kumdri (xlv. 107), and the Varaha Ldsati 

J'o not found those names elsewhere, but tho Kumdri is mentioned in the 

Ihishnnvp list (ix. 313). 

‘ads T" Bhishma-P. list (ix. 340). The Varaha Pur^^a 

Md} I ; and for this and the next river the Kurma reads 

(xlvii. 30), which is probably erroneous. 



306 


CANTO LVII. 


30 vahini,* Kripa,t and Pahyini J are known to spring 
S'ukti-mat § Mountains. 

All the rivers II possess holy merit; all are rivers flowing 

31 into the ocean ; all are mothers of the world ; ^ they are 
well-known to cleanse from all sin. 

* This is mentioned in *tho Bliishma-P. list (ix. 340), but hardly in the 
same connexion. 

f Tho Vayii Parana roads Knpd (xlv. 107), and the Kurma Ksthipnl or 
Rupd (xlvii. 36). I do not find any of these names elsewhere. A river 
Krityd is mentioned in tho Bhislirna-P. list (ix. 326), but that appears from 
its context to bo in north India. 

J This is mentioned in tho Bhishma-P. list (ix. 330), but in so differ- 
ent a connexion that the referoncos appear to bo to two separate rivers. The 
Matsya Parana reads Rdsini (cxiii. 32), which however I have not mot else' 
where. 

§ These Mts^ arc but very rarely mentioned, and in page 285 note t T ha^e 
noticed what has boon written about them. They wore in tho Eastern re- 
gion, for Bhfma in his conquests in that quarter marched from llima vai 
towards Bhalldlja and conquered tho S'ukti-mat Mountain (M-Bh,, SabLa-P. 
xxir. 1079). Though Bhallata does not appear to have been identified, the 
only noteworthy hills in tho east which have not boon assigned to the other 
great ranges are the Garo, Khasi and Tipporah Hills which bound Bengal in 
that direction. Can these be the S'ukti-mat Mts. ? There seems to be no 
improbability in this, for tho river Lohita or Brahraa-putra and the country 
Kama-rupa, which is in tho Assam Valley, were known. If this identifica- 
tion is satisfactory, the R. Kiimdri may bo the modem Someiwarl which 
flows southward between tho Garo and Khasi Hills (both being names of 
DurgA) ; and tho Kripd may perhap.s bo the Kapili which flows into the 
Brahma-putra a little above Gauhati, tho ancient K4ma-rupa ; the other 
streams are not recognizable. 

II Saras-vatyah. Or should this moan only tho rivors called Saras-vai(? 
There were seven rivers specially distinguished by this name (M.-Bh , Salya P, 
xxxix. 2188-9), namely, 1. the 8u-pral)hd among the Pushkaras {ihid. 2198 - 32 O 0 )p 
that is, near Ajmir ; 2. tho Kdnc'andksy in Naimisha forest (thid. 2201-^h 
which was on the Go-moti; 3. the Vimld at Gaya {Hid. 2205 - 6 ) ; k the , 
Mano-ramdy the swift stream flowing from Himavat in tho north 
Kosala {ibid. 2207-10) ; 6. the Ogha-vati, which seems to be in Kuru-kshefra 
(ibid. 2212-3) ; 6. the 8u-renu, which seems to be in Kuru-kshetra or 
Ganga-dvara (ibid 2211-4); and 7. the Vimalodd or Vimalodakaat Hannan 
ta-giri (ibid 2214-6). 

•[[ Visvasya matarah ; compare M-Bh., Bhislima-P. ix. 344. - 



'^COUNTRIES AND RACES IN INDIA. 


307 


And ot^iers, small streams, are mentioned in thousands, 
Q those which flow only during the rainy season, and 

tliosc which flow at all seasons. 

The Matsyas, ■* and Aavakutas,t and Kulyas, J 

» Thf* pooplo and their country both went by the name Matsya. This 
miry as part of the region called Brahmarshi (Manu ii. 19). It was 
iili or south-west of Indra-praatha, the modern Delhi (M-Bh., Sabha P., 
1105-6 j the mention in ihid. xxix. 1083 may be a mistake; but the 
iisvas are named twice in the Bhishma-P. list, ix. 347 and 348, unless one 
bo a mistake for Vatsa); and it was west of Surasena, which was the 
iiiitn round Mathura, the modern Muttra (Virata-P., v. 141-6; see note 
cAtUu Iviii. verso 7) : houco Matsya comprised the modern Alwar State and 
■ l,iiid aiound that. It appears to have extended up to Kuru-kshetra, 
Luiisc )iu ether country which could intervene is mentioned in Manu ii. 19. 

, was Upaplavya or Upaplava (S'alya-P., xxxvi. 1973-6) which was 
or 2 (lays’ journey by chariot from Hustinapura (Udyoga-P., Ixxxiii. 3010* 
,h\\v 3010; and Ixxxviii. 3101). Cunningham says Mataya was the 
nnti\ west of Agra and north of the 11. Chambal, i. e., the whole of Alwar 
ill [jurtious of Jaypur and Bharatpur; audits capital was Vai rata, the 
jdoiii Haaat (Arch. Surv. Bepts , II. 242; and XX. 2, and pl.ito i). 

The Wiyu Ihir.ina roads Fahsas instead (xlv. lit)). Vaisa or FaVsya was 
tli(^ reuioii (‘ast of Delhi (Sabha-P., xxix. 1084), and king Vatsa who is said 
lime giveu his name to the country was grandson of Divodasa, king of 
‘iiaii'H (Ifaii-V’"., xxix. 1587, 1697; and xxxii. 1753). Kau^dnibi was the 
piial, .Liid it has been identilicd by Cunningham with the niodoni Kosam 
neli is on the north bank of tlio Jumna about 31 miles above Allahabad, 
iiee the coiiutiy was also called Kausdmha (Arch. Surv. Kepts., I. 301-310), 
(tNi or Kiuivuiiba therefore comprised the lower part of the Canges and 
Doiib iiud also probably the tract south of that, on the other side of 
(' •liiiniia 

t rile Vilyii Parana roads Klsashnai^, Kinashtas or Kiiiadya<i instead (xlv. 
'"it none of these names are in the dictionary. The Matsya reads 
(eviii. 35) but they are out of place here. The text reads MatsydmihX' 
U’lsc'a, hut J would suggest instead Matsijds c'a Kanydkuhjd^ c'a^ thus 
haiiijd.luhjas or Kdnya-kuhjas instead Ancakutas and Iiulyas. 
i-Filija or Kanya-kubja is the modern Kanauj, on the Canges about 
al)o\(' Cawnpore ; it was a famous city all through Indian history, 
"piecallod Hiikufyas are mentioned (Blushuia-P. ix 347), Asvakas {ibid. 
'^'-and (jhui li 2105) 

+ is not in tlie dictionary as a people; the word occurs in Vana-P., 
init does not appear to mean a j>eoplc there. See the last note. 



808 

33 


CANTO LVII. 

the Kuntalas, * the people of Kd4i, f and the Ko^alas j 
and the Atharvas, and Arka-lingas, § and the Malakas | 


• This country is said by Muir to be one of the Pisac'a countries (Sansk 
Texts, II. 69), but there were three people of this name, one in the Dekha 
(Bhishma-P., ix. 367), who are mentioned in verso 48 below ; and two others 
elsewhere {ibid. 347 and 369). Those mentioned in verso 347 are the poop]® 
meant here, for they are grouped with the people of Kasi and Kosala ; and 
they probably occupied the country near Chunar (south of Benares), which 
Cunningham calls Kuntila (Arch. 8urv. Repts., XL 123). The third people 
were probably iivthe West. 

t Benares, the ancient Varanasi. It was the capital of an ancient and 
famous kingdom. According to the Ram^yana Kasi was a kingdom (A'di-K 
xii. 20) while Prayaga and the country all around it was still forest (Journal 
R. A. S., 1894, pp. 237*239). Its sacred character dates from comparatively 
late times, for it was one of the exploits for which Kpishna was extolled that 
he burnt it for a succession of years and devastated it (Udyoga-P, xlvii, 
1883 j and Hari-V., clxi. 9142-3). For some vicissitudes in its early history, 
see Hari-V., xxix. and xxxii. 

X KoSala, Kosala or Uttara Kosala, with its capital Ayodhya, is the modem 
Oudh. Gen. Cunningham says it meant more particularly the country north 
and east of the R. Rapti (Arch. Surv. Ropts., 1. 327; and XVII. 68); biitit 
seems rather to have denoted the country stretching from the Rapti on the 
east (see page 294 note J) to the confines of the Kura and PAnc'ala kingdom* 
on the west. Northwai’d it was bounded by the tribes that inhabited tho 
slopes of tho Himalayas, and southward by tho kingdom of Benaros. It wai 
distinguished from another Kosala, which was called Dakshina or Mali 
'Kosala and which is mentioned in verse 54. 

§ These two names are not in tho dictionary, and I have not found them 
elsewhere; they seem to be mistakes. The Vayu Parana reads instead of 
them afha pdrke tilangdi c'a (xlv. Ill); but this is doubtful and unsatis- 
factory, for the Tilangas are mentioned as a southern people in canto Iviii. 
verse 28. The Matsya roads and Avantas and Kalingas (cxiii 36), but these 
are hardly satisfactory ; the former are mentioned in versos 62 and 65, 
the latter in verses 37 and 46 below. Perhaps Arka-lihgas may 1)0 meant 
as a synonym of Surya-vamsa?, the Solar Race, yet this again is hardly 
satisfactory, for that race reigned in Kosala, which has just been mentioned 
separately. There is a low group of Brahmans in Behar called Atharra® 
(Risley’s Tribes and Castes of Bengal, I. 26). 

11 This is not in the dictionary and seems erroneous. The V^yQ 
reads Magadhas instead (xlv. Ill), the people of Magadha 
bub this is unsatisfactory for the Magadhas are mentioned in verse 44. 



"tJOUNTRIES AND RACES IN INDIA. 


309 


and Vfikas*; these f are well known generally as the 
peoples who inhabit the Central Region J 


tsya reads Mukas (oxiii. 36), which I have not met elsowhero. The read- 
^ should be Ka/aj as probably. They are mentioned in the M-Uh ( Bhigh- 
a.P.ix.357}, and Rdmdyana (Adi-K. xxvii. 16-23), and from the course 
jscribcd in the latter poem as takon by Vi^va-mitra and lUma it appears 
were rieiKbboiirs of the Kardshas, (see note to verso 53), and occupied 
ic district of Slmhabad, west of the Sone, for Viava-mitra and llama cross- 
g from tlie Sarayu to the south of the Ganges entered that district, which 
id been iiiluibited by the Malajas (ibid., 8-16.) 

* The Vnkas are named in Bhishma-P., li. 2106, and a king Vrika is allud- 
1 to ill the llari-Vamsa (xiii. 760-61) ; but there is nothing to identify them. 
IIP Mats} a Purana roads Andhakas (cxiii. 36). The Andhakas were n 
bordinate family of the Yadava race, and are often mentioned in the 
.-Bh {eii IJ(lyoga-P. Ixxxv. 301), and Hari-Vamsa (xxxv. 1907-8; and 
:\i\. 2011; andxoiv. 5190-5201), but they dwelt in Su-rashtra in the 
Pbtand a])poar to bo out of place here. The most probable reading seems 
be the Piajas, the people of Vraja (or Vriji, as it was also called), 
p modern Braj, the country north-west of Mathura or Muttra, 
t This is a short list. Besides these the Vayu Purana has two lines at the 
ginning of tliis group, viz., “the Kurus, the Pancalas, and the S'illvas, and the 
ngalas tlio S'urascnas, the Bhadrakaras, the Bodhas and the lords of S'ata- 
iha” (\lv. 100 and 110) ; much like a passage in the M.-Bh. (Blu'shina-P., 
316-7). The jMatsya has the same linos, but gives the last two names as 
i/ivuiand Pa^ac'c'ayns (cxiii. 35, 36). For the Kurus, see canto Iviii, verso 9; 
r the Pancalas, canto Iviii. verso 8 ; for the S alvas, canto Iviii. verso 6 ; the 
ngaliis arc no doubt the people of Kuru-jangala, see note to Kuru, canto 
in verse 0 j for tho S'urasonas, see canto Iviii. verso 7. The Bhadrakaras 
^mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P., xiii. 690) and may perhaps be the 
inc as tlie Bhadras mentioned in Vana-P. ccliii. 15266 ; they appear from 
58e passages to have been situated on tho west bank of tho Jumna, somo- 
icre between Delhi and Muttra. The Bodhas are mentioned in tho M.-Bh. 
ibha-p., xin 590 j Bhishma-P., ix. 347) and aro probably the same as 
sKodhis (Ramay., Ayodh-K. Ixx 15), who appear to have been situated 
die eastern coahiies of the Panjab. I have no met Bdhyas elsewhere ; 
l^ems ei ronoous. S'ata-patha seems to be erroneous, and Patac'c'ara is much 
Iho Patac'c'aras are mentioned in tho M-Bh. (Sabha-P. xiii. 690-1 • 

c 11 Or * \ t * * ' 1 

» irata-P., i 11.12 ; &o.,) and appear from the second of those pass- 

to have occupied the tract south of the Apara-matsyas, that i&, 
t M ^ south-west of Gwalior. 

^ •jja-deia, the whole of the Ganges basin from the Panjab as far 



310 


CANTO LVII. 


34 Now along the northern half of the Sahya mountains * that 
region, in which the river Godavari Jlotvs, is a de]ig|,tfaj 

35 one compared even with the whole earth; Go-vaidliana 
is the charming city of the higli-souled Bhargava race.f 

east as tho confines of Bohar ; but Maim restricts it and defines its limitg 
thus (ii. 21) — north, tho Himalayas; south, tho Vindhya Range; 
Vinnsana which is where tho R. Saras-vati perishes in tho desert (M-Bh 
Mya-P. xxxviii. 2119-20) ; and east, Praydga or Allahabad. 

* Tho text Sainjnsya c'ottare yds t <4 seems incorrect; these words cannot 
well go with tho preceding verso, for no people north of the Sahja Mts. 
and south of the Paripatra Mts. could ho within Madhya-desa; and they dg 
not agree with the following words. The Vayn Parana reads sahtju^ya 
c'ottardrddhe tu, which I have adopted. That Parana agrees and is a little 
fuller — “ Now along the northern half of tlio Sahya Mts., where the river 
Godavari yJoic.'?, that region is a delightful one within the whole of this canh. 
This paradise named Go-vardhana was built there by Sura-rnja for the sake of 
Rama’s spouse; tho trees and herbs there were brought down from abo^e by 
tho Mnni Bharadvaja for tho sake of Rama’s spouse. He made a delightful 
wooded tract the private part of tho palace (antah-pura) ” (kIv. 112-lU). 
The Matsya Parana roads Suhyasydnantaie c'aiie and is similar, but varie^at 
the second sentence, thus— “ Where for the sake of Rdma’s spouse t/ie ln/l 
named Go-vardhana, Mandara, Gandha-madana, trees from Svarga and 
heavenly plants (oshadhih^ acc.) were brought down by tho Muni Bharadvaja 
for the sake of tho spouse; hence that region excels in flowers, thcreforeMt Inn 
become delightful.” (cxiii. 37-39). The Rama alluded to here mast be 
vRama Jamadagnya or Parasu-Rarna, who dwelt in this region; see the next 
note. 

t These people aro hero placed on tho east side of the Sahya Mts. amoni' 
the sources of tho Godavari. This region and the country west of it on Hie 

other side of these mountains and the tract northwards to the Narmada are 

connected in many a story with Bhngu, his son C'yavana and his desa'ndaun 
Ric'ika, Jamadagni and Para^u-Rhma («?. y. M-Bh., Adi-P. clxxvin. 68O.--10, 
Vana-P. exxi and cxxii with S'ata-patha Brahmana IV. i 6; Vana-1 . 
8364-5 ;cxv. 10150-2; S'onti-P. xlix. 1778-82; Vana-P. 

S'anti-P. ii). Tho Bhargavas were however a numerous race and spr 
into other regions ; they aro also mentioned as ono of the eastern 
verse 43 below. They held a Idgh position and appear to liave 
in king Kj-ita-virya’s kingdom at Mahish-mati, and after Ins 
wealth, it is said, brought down on them the hostility of the 
(Adi-P. clxxviii. 6802-15). Go-vardhana aa a city is 

tionary. I have not found it alluded to elsewhere. 



-eOUNTRIES AND RACES TN INDIA. 


311 


'I'ke North-western peoples an- these — Tlio Vahllkas * 

* or BtildiJca or Bdlhika is said in the dictionary to be the modern 

ilkh Lasaon’s map to be the ancient Bactriano ; but there was 

pother countiy, if n(»t two tribes of this name, in the Panjab, The name 
i\\ritteti ViddiJ^a or VdJdiJca and tliero may have been a distinction between 
wnrdH, for both aro mentioned in tho Bhishma-P. list {ix. 364 and 
(;i) were not uncommon names, and thero wore two princes called 

'ihlikii between Farikshit and Bhishma in the Lunar Dynasty, and tho later 
, II, PP H St} led a king (M -Bh., A'di-P , xciv. 3745, and 3750-51; and xcv. 
j'lS-IlSOO), Tke V''ahlikas aro mentioned twice in tho Kamayana and are 
];i('P(l)ii tlio wosleru region Hvishk. K xliii. 5), and also in tho northern region 
\liv. 13). A distinction as between two people of this name is also 
iplujteil by tlio mention of two independent kings of the Vahlikas reigning 
ip.itrniiii'i'iuieously in the M.-Bh. (Adi-P. clxxxvi. 6992; Sabha-P. xxxiii. 1266 
ii,fll272, Udyoga-P. iii. 74 and 77). One of these two peoples was closely 
leihMth the Madras, for Salya, king of Madra, is also called lord of the 
^Hhlikiis ( Vdl-P. cxiii. 4426-40; and Ixvii. 2642), and his sister Madri is 
lod Viililiki also {Hid, exxv. 4886); and an ancient eponymous king 
hlika w placed in the same Krodha-vam gana with the eponymous kings 
ilntka niid Siivira {ibid., Ixvii. 2695-6). The other people of this name 
pear to have been closely coimectod with tho Daradas who wore a moun- 

II ri’ilic ui the north of the Panjab (see note to verse 38), and are the 

III rn Dards of Dardistau ; for an ancient king Darada tho Vahlika is 
ntionncl \^ho did not belong to tho Krodha-vasa group (A'di-P. Ixvii. 2694), 
'1 tlio Vdlilikas aro linked with tho Daradas (Bhishma-P, cxviii. 6484) and 
Miicntloned with tho Kambojas and Yavanas and other ultra-Panjab tribes 
loim-P. tw\i. 1818 ; see also 8abh{l-P. xxvi. 1031-2). If these inforencos may 
ini'K’d, one Vahlika or Vahlika was situated in the plains of tho Panjab 
’iitt'idt' M,ulra-doda and very possibly south of it (see Haindy., Ayodh-K. 
^ h)-l!), with note to Madrakas in verso 36, and note to Kaikoyas in verse 
i > t' , bor,\v('en the rivers Chenab and Sutlej ; and tlie other among the lower 
'l"’s of the Himalayas, very possibly between tho Chenab and Bias. The 
'“'i' Utilika a])[)oars to have been altered in later times to Bdhika seemingly 
•‘P"tiiiinjr rcsoniblanoe to vahia, “outside,” because they were shut out by 
c ^'itras-vati, Kuru-kshetra and other natural fer*^ures from the central 
'‘"hy which remained true to Brahmanism. Tho people of the Panjab 

thou collectively called or Bdhikas, and they and all the tribes 

.''>ud stigmatized as impure and contemptible by tho arrogant and 
brahmans of Madhya-do.^a (Muir’s Sansk. Texts. II. 482, and 
''’‘f'.ia-P. xliv. 2026 Ac ; flee also Cunningham’s Arch Surv. Ropts., II. 



312 


CANTO LVII. 


and the Vatadhanas, * and the Abhiras, f the Kala. 

* This people is mentioned in several passages in the M-Bh. (Sablia pi^ 
182f3; Udyoga-P. iii. 86; Bhishma-P. ix. 364; and Drona-P. xi. 398), and they 
name appears to be derived from an eponymous king Vdiadhdm, who ^vasof 
the same Krodha^vah gronp as the eponymous kings of the Vihlikas, Madrai 
and Sauviras (Adi*P. Ixvii. 2695-9). No doubt therefore they dwelt along, 
side those tribes. Their country Vatadhana was part of the territory 
Btrotchhig from Panc'a-nada to the Ganges, over which the hosts assembled on 
the Kauravas’ side spread at the beginning of the great war (Udyoga-P. xviii, 
69G-G01), and it was in the western region (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1190-1). Prom 
these data it may bo inferred that the Vatadhanas inhabited the country on 
the east side of the Sutlej, southward from Ferozpnr. Manu declares a 
Vatadhnna to bo the offspring of an outcasto brahman and a brahman 
woman (x. 21), but that is no doubt an expression of the same arrogance 
which in later times stigmatized all the Panjab races as outcastes (as 
mentioned in the last note), for Vatadhana dvijas were among the people 
whom Nakiila conquered (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1190-1). The Vayu Purana roads 
Vddhadhanas (xlv, 116) erroneously. 

t Tlioy were an aboriginal tribe and are called mlec'c'has and dasyna. 
(M-Bh.,Vana-P. olxxxviii. 12838-40; and Mausala-P. vii. 222, &c.) They were 
scattered over various tracts and gained their livelihood in various ways. 
Three divisions of them are mentioned in the M-Bh. (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1192 ), 
those who dwelt along the river Saras-vati, those who lived by fishing, and 
those who inhabited the mountains. The first group ocenpiod the north 
portion of the desert as far oast as Vinasana on that river, for it is said the 
river perished there because of her hatred of them (S'alya-P. xxxviii. 2119 - 
20), and as far west as Panc^a-nada (Maiisala-P. vii. 220-242 ; and viii. 270 | 
where Panc'a-j ana is probably a mistake for Panc'a-nada) ; this groupie 
probably the tribe of Abhiras mentioned in Bhishma-P. ix. 354, and Ramiy., 
Kishk. K. xllii. 19. The second group must no doubt mean those who lived 
by the sea and not simply on rivers, hence it would have inhabited tlio coast 
along the Rann of Kachh and tho delta of the Indus ; and it is no doubt the 
tribe of Abhiras mentioned in Kishk. K. xliii. 6. The context indicates that 
the third group were the mountaineers of the Aravalli Range and tho 
of Malwa ; but there was another section of this group which appeal ^ 
have occupied the hilly tracts in the north or west of the Panjab, 
classed with the Daradas and Ka^miras (Bhishma-P. ix. 076; and see n 
to verse 38), and with the Paradas (Sabh^P. 1. 1832 j and see note to 
The Abhiras were closely connected with the S^udras in these three group^ 
(Sabhil-P. xxxi 1192; and see note to next verse). The 
these i\bhiraa are the modern Ahirs who are scattered widely over 



COtrNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 


313 

56 tojakas/ and the Aparantas^f and the S'ddras, f the 

roper. Another body of Abhiras was found in tho Dokhan (see verse 47). 
■ho Abhi'ras are said in the Hari-Vaihsa to have boon dominated by thj 
iait}as and Danavas m ancient times, and to have boon the chief inhabitants 
f the country from the Jumna to the peninsula of Gujarat (xciv. 5142-80) 
i So also in tlio Matsya Parana (cxiii. 40). This word is v^ritten KdlajoshaJca 
. tho M.-13h. (Bliishma-P., ix. 354), but I have not found cither nnmo olse- 
hete. Tussiblo readings might be Bdla.jartikdh or Bdla-kdthikdh. Tho 
irnior, lio\\Tvcr, seems inappropriate ; the Jartihis are tho same as the B Jhikua 
urna-P. xliv. 2033 ; Arch. Surv. Ropts., 11.13 and 195) wlio are noticed 
tboaotcto“Vahlikas” (page 311). The “ and Aa'/hi.s » would bo a 
vfcrahlo reading. Tho Balas, according to Cunningham, occupied tho northern 
irtioii of Sindli and were ousted from there about tho middle of tho seventh 
iituryAD and moved south-east. Tho Kathis (tho Kathxi of tho Greek 
rucis), according to the same authority occupied the Rechua Doab between 
e ChcMiah and Ravi rivers and also probably tho northern portion of 
ndli; they have retained tho former territory, but those who held the 
acnrcrc driven from it about tho middio of the seventh century A. D. 
il Pcttled in tho peninsula of Gujarat where they have given the name 
ithiaaar to a district (Arch Surv. Ropts , JI. GG-Sy). 

tdjifmhda- moans “ living at tho western border.” A people of this name 
nioniionod in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 355), and allusion is often made to 
-fiMbPcanddie Apurd/ifai}(e.</., Vana-P., ccxvii. 7885-0 ; and Santi-P., xlix. 
^>-2); l)iiL the word, though it no doubt de.signates a people living in the ex- 
'nio vest, _y('t seems to have a general meaning in most passages (see verso 
hclov), and those pa.ssagos which use it in a restrictml .semso do not agree— 

IS iparania is stated to bo a country in tho rniddlo of the sea (Ragliu-V., 

‘>8, coimiieiitjvvy)^ yot tho ApumnfjAfls in canto Iviii., venso 34 aro placed 
tho tovi()is(>’s tail, that is, north of Sindlm ami Sauvira which are placed by 
rso 30 in the right hind foot. Cunningham, judging from tho spot.s where 
'i^hinchecn found, was inclined to locate them in Nortlu'rn Sindh and parts 
Hajpnt.aua (Arch. Surv. Repts., XIV. 136, 137) which will satisfy canto 
The V.'lyu Purana reads Apwntus instead (xlv. 115) which 
erroneous. The Ramayana mentions simply the Aparaa (Kishk.-K.^ 

‘ llio Matsya Purana reads Purandhras (cxiii. '10) erroneously. 

^1“{ Smlras are often linked together with the Al ums (M -Bh., Sabha-P., 
Bhishma-P., ix. 375; Drona-P , xx. 798; S'alya-P., xxxviii! 

They appear to have been considered dasyus (S'aiiti-P., clxxi. 
vnd elv'xiii. 0446) and rnloe'c'has (Vana-P, elxxxviii. 12838-40 
ut s('oni8 a mistake for S'udra) ; yet their women are alluded to in ■ 
aumialile terms (Sabha-P., 1. 1829). They were divided into the same 

40 



314 


CANTO LVII. 


Pallavas, * C'arma-kha^dikas, t Gdndhdras, X and Gabalas j 

three groups as the Abhiras, vit., men of the plains, men of the sea-coast ^ 
men of the hills (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1192), inhabiting much the same region, 
(see note to Abhiras in verse 35 ; for S'liras in Eamay., Kishk.-K., xiiu. u 
read probably S^adras], hence it would seem those two people were considerahlj 
intermixed and' were probably closely connected aboriginal races. One 
group of the S'udras was known to the Greeks as SudraJese, and is placed bj 
Cunningham in tho middle of the triangle of the Panjab (Anc. Geog.,I 
214-218 ; and Arch. Surv. Eepts., II.). 

* This is no .doubt a mistake for Pahlavat^, which the V&yu Purfipreadi 
(xlv. 116) and which occurs in canto Iviii., verse 30; though Pai^aia* are 
mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., li. 1990). The Pahlavas are understood 
to be the Pehlavi or ancient Persiane. Two people of this name are mentioned 

in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 355 and 376), but there appear to be no data tc 

make a distinction as tho allusions to the Pahlavas are generally vague, 
unless it be supposed there was a Pahlava colony in the Panjab; and thij 
supposition would suit this verse, for tho Persians were altogether ontside 
India. The Hari-Vamsa says King Sagara defeated a great confederation of 
Palilavas and other people, abrogated thoir laws, degraded thorn and made 
thorn wear beards (xiii. 763-4 and xiv. 775-783) ; but this soeins a late fable, 
on a par wnth their being called dasyus {id., oxv. 6440-8). The Eamayana 
has an absurd fable about the creation of tho Pahlavas and other foreign 
races by Vasishtha (Adi-K., Iv. 18-20; and Ivi. 2-3)5 when contending with 
Vi^va-mitra ho made his oow create Pahlavas. Siakas, Yavauas, &c.,and 
Vi^vA-mitra destroyed them all in succession. 

t Or G'arma-tnandalas as in tho Bhishma-P. list (ix. 355) which tliis Parana 
has followed closely in enumerating this group of races. The Yijn, however, 
reads the same as in the text (xlv. 115). I have not found any of these 
names elsewhere ; but the namo suggests identification with Samadani 
The Matsya Parana reads Atta-khandihas or C'dtta’khandikas (oxiii. 40) 
appear to be erroneous. 

J Qdndhdra was the whole of the lower basin of the Kabul river, (Arch' 
Surv. Eepts., II. 15, and map to p. 87). It was a famous country in 
times, its kings ranked with the highest Indian Sovereigns, and its princcsscJ 
married into tho noblest royal families. Tho passages in which tho 
dharas are pronounced bad and impure [e.g , S»nti-P., Ixv. 2429-31 ; andcc^ 

7560-1 ; and Karna-P. xliv. 2070) betray tho interpolated sentiments of a ac 

age (Muir’s Sansk. Texts, IT. 482). 

§Thi8 is not in the dictionary. The VAyn PurApa reads 
(xlv. 116), and so also the Matsya (cxiii. 41) ; this word is supposed 

denoted the Greeks originally, but the Yavanas appear to ha^o be^ 



CO%TRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 315 

37 tho Sindhus, ♦ Sauviras,t and Madrakas, J and the 

In India long before Alexander’a time. The Bhishma*P, list mentions the 
g,ri-9<ihvaras in this region (ix. 376). 

* primarily Sindhu meant tho country along tho Indus, but it has generally 
denutod the lower portion of that country, that is, the modern Sindh more or 
less closely. H is placed by canto Iviii., verso 30 in the Tortoise’s right hind 
foot, and it stretched down to the peninsula of Kathiawar which is called the 
territory of Sindhu-Raja in the Hari-Vaih^ (cxiv. 6407-12) The Sindhua 
BFC mentioned frequently in the M.-Bh., and are named twice in the Bhishma- 
P. list, first in connexion with the Pnliudas (ix. 348), and again in conjunc- 
tiun with the Sauviras (ix. 361), but there do not appear to be any other 
passages which tend to shew a division. Sindhu had a well-known breed of 
jborses (Drona-P., xxiii. 973). 

f- Tho Sauviras claimed descent from an eponymous king Suvira of tho 
ne Kfodha-vasa group as tho Madras and Vahlikas (M.-Bh., A'di-P., Ixvii. 
Do'G) ; but the genealogy of Suvira in tire Hari-Vaihla (xxxi. 1679) is fanci- 
1, Sanvira was closely connected with Sindhu, for tho two are often 
nplod together, and Jayad-ratha king of Sindhu was also lord of Sauvira 
d tlie Sauviras, and is styled Saindhava and Suvira indifferently (Vana* 

, rH\iii. 1C576-81 ; cclxvi. 15618 and 15635-7; and cckvii. 15639-51). 
inninglmm identifies Sauvira with the country between tho Indus and 
(‘liim, that is, the Sindh-Sagar Doab (Arch. Surv. Eepts., IL 4-6, 14 
d 23) ; that hardly agrees with tho position assigned to it in the Tortoise’s 
'lit hind foot, but the oollocatiou of races in that region is rather confused, 
iiy wo suppose that Sauvira was rather the name of the people while 
iidhu more properly denoted tho territory ? The Sauviras might then 
ivo inhabited the northern part of Sindhu, and Sauvira would have been 
at portion only of the larger area. This theory seoms to satisfy the 
'inhtiotia generally. 

Along with tlie Sauviras and Saindhavas the Kurma Purina mentions 
lui 40] “the Hunas (or Kunasj, the Malyas (or S'alvas), the iohabi- 
Dts of B.'ilya (or Kalpa).” For the Hunas, seo note to canto Iviii., verse 46 ; 

seems erroneous ; for the S'dlvas, see canto Iviii. verso 6 ; Mdlya seems 
roneoiis ; Bdlyd and Kalpa seem unidentifiable. 

I The Madras or Mddras claimed descent from an eponymous king 
'‘draka of the same Krodha-va^a group as the Sauviras and VAhlikas 
Adi-p., l|:vii. 2695-6 ; and seo note on page 311); but his genealogy 
^ the llari-Variisa (xxxi. 1679) seems fanciful. Cunningham places Madra 
■I't'cen tho Jholam and Eavi rivers, that is, in the Chej and Rechna Doabs 
Surv. Ropts , II. 4, 8, 14 and 39), yet he also says it is the country 
' tho Jholam and Bias, or between theChenab and Bias(i6td., 190) ; 



316 


CANTO LVIL 


people who dwell along the S'^atadru, * the Kalingag j- 


but it could hardly have comprised much of the Chej Doab for the Kaikeyaj 
occupied the greater part of that (see note to next verse). The capital o{ 
Madra was S'dkala (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1197) which Cunningham has idontified 
with the modern Sangala, on the R. Apagd which is the modern Ayak (Arch- 
Surv. Itepts., IT; 195-6 and Kartia-P., xHv. 2033). The R. Iravati flowed 
through Madra-do^a, but near the eastern border {ibid., 2038-41 ; and Matsya 
Purana cxiv, 7 and 15-18.) Madra then was the country around Saiigala, 
with the tracts on either side watered by the Chenab and Ravi. It was a 
famous kingdom,. The weird story told about king Vyusliitdhva’s queen 
(A'di-P., exxi. 4095-4714) no doubt means her sons became Madras and did 
not originato tho Madras. In later times the brahmans of Hindustan pro. 
nouncod the Madras, like the Gandharaa, base And impure (Santi-P, ccu'i. 
7559-61 ; and Hari-V"., xiv. 784) ; see c.spocially Karna-P., xliv. 2033-53, whero 
the Madras are abused in good set terms. Tho Vayu Purana reads Bhadralm 


erroneously (xlv 116). 

* That is, tho Sutlej, S'atadrn-ja. But this seems mistaken, for tho Vaj-u 
Purnna reads S'alcas and Hrada» (xlv. 116) ; and the Matsya Sakns and Druh. 
yas (cxiii 41). Tho S'akas, therefore, are no doubt one of the people meant 
(see note to canto Iviii., verse 6). ITrada seems erroneous. I'ho Drulips 
may be conuccted with Yayati’s son Druhyu who was king of the West, 
(Hari-V. xxx. IGOl and 1018), but I have not met with tliem elsewhere. 

t This seems erroneous. These people are mentioned in verso 46, and Ihcro 
seems to bo no ground for thinking any Kalingas lived in North India; yet 
Kaliugas aro mentioned in such a connexion (Bhishraa-P., ix. 376; and Ini. 


8133 ; and see note to Arkalingas in verso 33), and a town Kali nga^mgam is men. 
Hioned in tho Ramay. ou tho west of the Go-mati and not far from it (Ajodh. 
K., Lxxiii. 14,15). A tribe called Kalingas is alluded to (Drona-P., cmi. 
4819). Tho Vayu Purana reads Kuhndas instead (xlv. 116), which is no doubt 
right. Cunningham says tho Kulindas or Kuuindas aro tho modern Knacts 
who occupy Kullu and tho Simla hills and the slopes below, along both snea 
of tho Sutloj (Arch. Surv. Repts., XIV. 116 and 125-130). The Kul.ndaa en 
tended further east along tho southern slopes of tho Himalayas as 
Nepal, for they were the first nation which Arjuna conquered in his ^ 
ward march from Indra-prastha (Sabha-P., xxv. 996), and ^ 

tho hills north of Mundara, that is, the Almora hills {id., li. i ^ 

note* to page 287 above); indeed the name appears . eu 

considerable body of hill tribes, for “ all tho countries of Kulinda 


of (Vana-P., clxxvii. 12350). ^ 

The Matsya Parana reads Pulindas (cxiii. 41). The Pulmdas we 
tribe inhabiting the Himalayas and intermixed with Kirfitas an , 



COtrUTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA, 


317 


^])e Paradas,* the Ilara-bhushikas, f the Md^haras, J 
jjinl tlio Bahu-bliadras, § the Kaikeyas, |1 the Da^a-mali- 

1 ) pvl 10863-5: and Drona-P , cxxi. 481'6-7 ; and see notes to verses 
^ ,j(] 41 );thoy were considered mlocVhas (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 12838-40), 

I arc declared to have bocomo degraded because of the extinction of 
j rites, &c. (Anusus.-P., Ivii. 2103, &o.). There was another body 
f [^tlindas in Central India (Sabha-P., xxviii. 1068; and xxx. 1120; and 
iliiti-l’ , ccvii. 7559). 

* The Pallidas are generally mentioned with hill tribes (Sabha-P., 1. 1832 j li. 

(\]id Drona-P., cxxi. 4819). They appear to have been a hill tribo 
ike the Kalindas and Tanganas (see note to verse 41 below) and to have 
null m the western portiuii of the Himala 3 '^aB (Sabha-P , li. 1868-9), though 
In ', arc placed in the tortoise’s right hind foot by canto Iviii., verse 31 ; 
In' raocH placed there, however, are strangely confused. Manu says they 
u'li' Khliattiiyas and became degraded because of the extinction of sacred 
(x. •13-41); and the Ifari-Vaihsa says king Sagara degraded them 
1 , 1(1 oidcrcd them to wear long hair (xiii. 763-4; and xiv. 775-83), and they 
rtcivink'cV'liaa and dasyus (id., cxv. 6440-42). The VAyu Parana reads 
instead (xlv. IIG). 

t This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Parana reads Hdra-purilcas 
iiiai'iul (xlv. 116), and tho Matsya lldra-mtirtikas (cxiii. 41); but I have 
noi found any of those names elsewhere. Should tho reading be Kara- 
hrink^ '' Tlic iliira-hiinas are mentioned in the M.-Bh., as a people outsido 
Imluion the west (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1191; 1. 1844; and Vana-P., li. 1991). 

I Till' Yayii Parana reads Ramafas instead (xlv. 117), and the Matsya 
(cxiii. 42), and tho Kiirnia mentions a people called Rdmas (xlvii, 
41) 'llio reading should, no doubt, bo Ramafaf, Raniafhas or Rdma(hasj they 
vd'c a lu'stoin peo])le raentionod in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P., xxxi. 1196; Vana- 
1’ , li 1991 , and S'dnti.-P., Ixv. 2430). Tho Mamams ( Bhishma-P., ix. 374) may 
h' the bailie people. There are, however, no sufficient data to identify any 
nf them. 

^ The Vayu Parana tcmIs Raddha-kafaJeas instead (xlv. 1 17); the M.-Bh. 
moiiiioiis the Bdhu-hddhas (Bhisliraa-P., ix, 362) and tho Bdlahhadras (Karna-P. 
'' Tjo) ; iiiul rlio Matsya Parana reads Kantukdraa (oxiii. 42); but none of 
jtheso bei'ins satisfactory and I have not mot any of them elsewhere. 

I li Tli(W(^ jicoplu were called KeJeayas, Kaikayas aad Kaikeyas, An opony- 
fDi'ius aiu i'stor Knikeya is assigned to them by tho Ilari-Vaihsa (xxxi. 1679), 
[hut gfiieiiiogy seems fanciful. They were a powerful and famous nation, 
^'^'Iwcre noted bowmen (Sabha-P., iv. 126; and Vana-P., cclxvii. 16664). 
iiihahited tho Panjah and appear to have joined tho Madras, for tho two 
suiueliiacs coupled together ( Sabha-P., li. 1870 j and Drona-P., xx. 799) ; and 



318 


CAiJTO int. 


38 kas, * and the fiettlements f of Kshattriyas, atd the fa ‘ 
lies of Vai^yas and S'ddras. J 
The Kambojas,§ and the Daradas,|| .. 


canto Iviii. places them both in the tortoise’s left side (verses 42 and 45), ^lie' 
capital was Raja-griha (Ranlay., Adi-It., Ixxix. 35-44) or Oiri'-vraja {id , 

It., Ixxi. 1; and Ixxii. 1). Lassen places the Kaikeyas between the Rav^iand 
Bias rivers. Cunningham, however, dissents and places them on the line of 
the Jholam, west of tho Bahikas, and proposes to identify Giri-vraja 
Girjak, which was the ancient name of Jalalpur on that river (Arcli. Snrv 
Repts., II. 14) and this agrees with tho Ramay. (Ayodh. K., ]zx. 16-19) 

* These people are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 37.1), fpijg 

Vayu Purina reads Da/a-mdmi'as (xlv. 117). Does tho word moan “ the ten 

tribes of Malikas ” ? The Malikas may perhaps be identified with the Mam 
. (Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 37). The Matsya Purina reads Dah-ndmaliai 
(cxiii. 42), which seems mistaken. 

t Upa-ni-vehy a word not in the dictionary. It seems to be synonymons 
with ni-vesa which appears to bo tho word meant in tho corrosponilingpassaf'e 
in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 374, kshattnyd yoniveddi c'a ; but hhattriyopanivem 
c*a would bo preferable), Ni-ves'a is used elsewhere in tho M.-Bli (ei/, Sa- 
bha-P., xiii. 615 ; and xix. 798), and in the Ramay. (Kishk.-K , xh'ii. 24), and i 
appears to denote a military colony or soitloment in a foreign country. 

J That is, S'udras as a caste, and not as a race; as a race they have been 
mentioned in verso 36. 

§ The Kambojas were in the extreme north of the Panjab beyond the 
Indus, and were classed with tho Darad-ts (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1031), with Yavanas 
and S'akas (Udyoga-P., xviii. 590), and with C'lnas (Bhishma-P., is. 373). 
Their country was famous for its largo and fleet breed of horses which are 
often montiouod (Sabha-P., 1, 1824; Bhishma-P., Ixxi, 3131 ; Drona-P , 

972 ; exxi. 4831-2 ; — also Ramay., Adi-K., vi. 24 ; and Sundar -K., in- 
36; — and Raghu-Y., iv. 70). Lassen places K^lmboja doubtfully south of | 
Kashgar and east of the modem Kafiristan (Ind. Alt., map). They ( 
wero Aryans by language (Muir’s Sansk. Texts, JI. 368-9), Mami says (x 
43-44) they wero Kshattriyas and became degraded through tho extiiictioi 
of sacred rites, &c. ; they are called mloc'o'has (Vana-P., clxxxviii. 12838-40 
and said to have evil customs (S'anti-P., cevii. 7560-61). Tho Hari-Vaihsi 
says they were degraded by King Sagara and ordered to shave tlie whole 0 
the head like the Yavanas (xiii. 763-4 ; and xiv. 776-83). TheRara«y.bai 
an absurd fable about their origin (Adi K. Ivi. 2 ; see page 314 note *)• 

II Darada is tho modem Dardistan, the country north of Gandhira an 
north-west of Ka^mir. This region satisfies all the allusions to tho Daradas 
They wero a hill people (Drona-P., oxxi. 4836-7 and 4846-7 ; neighbouK 



COtrsTRIKa AND RACES NORTH OP INDIA. 


319 

39 Varvaras* the Harshavardhanas.t and the C'inas.t the 

)f the Kii^niiraa {id., Ixx. 248a), of the Eambojaa (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1031), 
of the c'inaa and TnsMras (Tana-P , cUxvii. 12350); they fonght 
art-ily with stones and were skilled in slinging stones (Droija-P., cxii. 4835- 
; 7 ). JliUiu says they wore Kshattriyas and became degraded becanse of the 
;sti,iftion of sacred rites, &c. (x. 43 and 44) ; and like the Parades and others 
hey ivero considered mlec'c'has and dasyus (Hari-V., cxv. 6440-6442). 

# This word is also written Barvara and Barbara, and often means any bar- 
larous lacc. The Varvaras aro-gcnerally mentioned in conjunction with the 
i;ik!i 3 or V^ivanas f Sabha-P., xxxi. 1199 j Vana-P., ccliii. 15264 ; S'anti-P., cevii. 
5 e;(j. 61 ; d'c); and from those allusions it appears they were mainly a west- 
ni or north-woatern race j but Varvaras were also to be found in the oast or 
orili.oast of ^ndia (Sabha-P., rxix. 1088), and seemingly also in the south 
Tana-P.. li. If^} liko the S'avaras (S'dnti-P., Ixv. 2429). The name no doubt 
qiK'^onts the tolling of the letter r or rough and unknown speech j hence it 
lOiikl be a|)[tlicii to various rude tribes. 

t This IS not^ the dictionary. The Vdyn Purana reads Priya-laulcikas in- 
[oa<l (vlv. 118), but I have not found either word elsewhere. Canto Iviii 
K'linoiis certain Bhoga.pmsthas (verso 42) in the north. All these names 
cm stive, and may perhaps be equivalents of Utsava-sanketa (people 
1)0 hiivo no niarriago and practise promiscuous intercourse, utsava meaning 
fiLciiiiri, and >nniketa, a gesture of invitation) a people mentioned in the M,- 
1' in the north among the hills (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1025) and west {id., xxxi, 
llil); though ahso in the south (Bhishma-P., ix. 36il) j and the Raghu-V., 
Lvos them in the Himalayas (iv. 78). This derivation of Utsava-sanketa ij 
’U'li ill a note to the commentary on Raghu-V., iv. 77. 

ri'lio Ul.ii.cso; but G’ina comprised the country of Thibet along the 
raiiso of the Himalayas, for tlio CTnas are linked witli the KAmbojas 
>ll■«B 0 rtl,.wo,t (Bhishma-P., ix. 373), they are frequently mentioned among 
icrciiniio of Bhaga-datta king of PrAg-jyotisha, in the oast {e.g., Udyoga- 
. JVUI. 68I.-5; see note to verse 44 below), and they wore near the sources 
tin' Uiingos in the country midway between tliose regions (Vnna-P., 
mu, 12350; S'dnti-P, oooxxvii. 12226-9). The country had a Taluablo 
of horses (Udyoga-P., Ixxxv. 3049). In the M.-Bh, tho CT'nas are 
spoken of with respect and even admiration (Udyoga-P., xviii. 
ami one of their kings called Dhautamdlaka is classed among eighteen 
ancient kings who extirpated their kinsmen (|d., Ixxiii. 2730) j hence 
■i-tu 8 lemark that the C'inas wore Kshattriyas and became degraded because 
‘‘costinction of sacred rites, &o. (x. 43 and 44) betrays the sontimenta 
W aterage. The Vayu Purana reads P/was (xlv. 118) erroneously. The 
mentions also Apara-cHnas (Kishk.-K., xliv. 15), “ the further C'inas.’* 



320 


CANTO LVIL 


Tukharas* are the populousf races of men outside. J 
And the Atreyas,§ the Bharadvajas,|| and Pushkalas,! tin 

* For tu khdrd^ read tukhdrdi. The Tukhdras are mentioned * 
M.-Bh. (Sabha*P., 1. 1850} and Ramay. (Kishk -K., xliv. 16). The V 
Purana reads Tushdras (xly. 118), and they are mentioned in the M bj 
(V ana*P., li. 1991 ; S'Anti-P., Uv. 2429; Ac.). The two names seem to meaj 
the same people. They were an outside northern race bordering on th 
Himalayas (Vana-P., clxxvii. 12360). In the Hari-Vamsa they are classoc 
along with S'ahas, Daradas, Pahlavas, Ac , and considered to bo mlec'c'haj 
and dasyus (cxr. 6410-42), they are ranked with wild hill-tribes as originat- 
ing from king Vena’s sins (v. 310-11) , and are said to have been 
repressed by king Sagara (xiv. 784). Lassen identifies thorn with the 
Tochari, and places them on the north side of the Hindu Kush (Ind. Alt. 
map). The Ramay. has an absurd fable about their origin (Adi.-K. hi. 3. 
see page 314, note*). 

f Bahuld, The Vayu Purana roads Pahlavas or Ratna-dhdras instead 
(xlv. 118), probably erroneously ; the former Imvo been mentioned in verso 
S6. I have not mot with the latter word elsewhere, but it may be noticed 
that great quantities of precious stones were found among tho Tukharas 
and other northern nations (Sabha-P., 1. 1849-50). 

X Vdhyato-nardh. The Vayu Purana reads Vdhyatodardh or hhatodardh 
instead (xlv. 118) erroneously. 

§ This tribe is mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 376). Tho Hari-V. 
says that king Raudrasva’s ten daughters all married the rishi Prabhii-kara 
of Atri’s race and gave rise to tho Atreyas fxxxi. 1660-68) ; and A'treyas 
are mqptionod as a family of brahmans dwelling in Dvaita-vana (M.-Bli., 
'Vana-P., XX vi. 971) which was a forest and lake near tho Saras- vati 
clxxvii. 12354-62). Tho Matsya Purana rends “the Atris'* (cxiii. 43), which 
is the same. Are they to be identified with the Atroya gotra of brahmans 
(Risley’s Tribes and Castes of Bengal, I. 27) formerly living perhaps in 
Sirmour or Garhwal; or to bo connected with R. Atreyi (Sabhn-P., ix. 374) 
tho modern Atrai in North Bengal ? The former seems more probable. 

II Or Bharadvajas; they are named in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 376). 
Bharadvaja is often mentioned in the M.-Bh. in connexion with the uppt''^ 
part of the Ganges near the hills (eg., Adi-P., exxx. 5102-6 ; clxvi. 6328-32, 
Vana-P., oxxxv. 10700-728 ; and S'alya-P., xlix. 2762-2824). These wore 
no doubt his descendants, living in Garhwal or Kumaon. The name 
Bharadvdja is given to various caste divisions (Risley’s Tribes and Castes 
of Bengal, I. 96.) 

% The Vayu (xlv. 119) and Matsya (cxiii. 43) Puriijas read Pradhahs 
and they are no doubt tho same as the Proshakas (BhishmacP*) 



COUNTRIES AND RACES NORTH OF INDIA. 


321 


40 Kuscriikas,* the Lampakas,f the S'ulakaras,J the 

Jill being placed in the same connexion. If Cunningham is right in identi- 
iMHg Urnpiika with Lamghan (see second note holow), Pushkala suggests 
rMihmiti or PushhirdvaH (R5may., Kishk.-K., xliii. 23), the ancient 
cvapirid of Gandhara (Ano. Geog., I. 49), but the Gandharas have been men- 
tioncd in their proper place in verse 36 above. I have not met the name 
Pn)g]iakas any whore else. 

ihiistliala was a country closely connected with Trigarta, for Su-^arman 
king of Trigarta is also called lord of Prasthala (Virata-P., xxx. 971 • 
BhWima.r , \\KV. 329G ; Ixxxviii. 3856 ; and Droi.ia-P., xvii. 691), and Trigarta 
joMiprisod the territory from Arnballa and Pattiala to tho R. Bias (seo note 
10 \Trs,c 57). Prasthala was also near tho Panjab (Drona-P., xvii. 691 • and 
Kania-P, xliv. 2063-70), and in the second of theso passages its people are 
(I, mil along with the Punjab nations, and all according to the ideas of a 
l.uci ago ^\oro pronounced degraded (Muir, Sansk. Texts. II. 482). From 
thisp (lata it seems Prasthala must have boon tho district between Ferozpur, 
ratiiakiimd Sirsa. If this position bo right, the Prasthalas do not fall into 
ilio group of northern peoples named in the text, and tho correct reading 
caiiiio^ he ]^i'ot.thaIas. 

* The Vayu Parana reads Kaserahas (xlv. 119) j and the Matsya D<isernkaft 
f( via. 43). I have not met the first form of name elsewhere ; but the 
D.ei’inkas, or Diiscrakas, or Daserakas are mentioned as joining in tho great 
ill the M.-Bh. {eg., Bhishma-P., 1. 2080 j cxviii 6183; Drona-P., xi. 
'h7, imil x.v. 708 j ; and they appear to have comprised several bauds, as 
he tiord yana is nearly always added to tho name; but there •re no 
lal.i to identify them. 

t This iiaino occurs in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., exxi. 4846-7) and there tho 
"inipikas arc described as a mountain tribe, like the Daradas and Pulindas, 
'lio fonglit largely with stones and were skilled in slinging stones; but 
‘thciwiso there are very few references to them in the M.-Bh. Lassen 
I'hiitifios Jiampaka with the Lambagoo and places them south of tho Hindii- 
ill moderu Kafiristan. Cunningham says Lampaka is tho modern Lam- 
phan, iioith-oast of Kabul (Ano. Geog., I. 17 and 27), which agrees with 
-r^s(ii. iiip Jiatsya Parana reads Lampalcas (cxiii 43), no doubt by a mistako- 
+ IboVayn Parana reads Stanapas or Titnapan (xlv. 119). I have not 
t any of those names elsewhere, but the latter words resemble the 
^ ^ (Bhishtna-P., ix, 376), and also Tanayas (ibid, 371), whoso 
different, Tho Matsya Parana roads Talogdnas (cxiii. 43) , 

^ ^ ‘ sei'iiis erroneous. Perhaps the S'ulakaraa may bo identified with the 
a cultivating tribe of Nepal, forming part of the highest class 
8 Castes and Tribes of Bengal, II. 281). 

41 ' 



3-22 


CATiTO L\n. 


C'ulilcas,* and the JdgudaR,t and the AupadIias,J a 
the Animadras,§ and the races of Kirdtas,|| \ 

* The Vayn Pur£na reads P/rftfcas instead (xlv. 119). Canto Iviii. verse 
places the C'ulikaa in the Tortoise’s tail at the westernmost part of Int 
1 have not met with either name elsewhere. The Matsya Parana re? 
Sainikns (cxiii. 43), “ Soldiers.” 

t Or Jitgiujas according to the Vuyu Parana fxiv. 119) The JnV^f 
are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana -P., li. 1091). The Matsya Purana re, 
Jiingalas (cxiii. 43), which is of no help, for it cannot refer to Kuni-jan^t 
(see note to Kunia, canto Iviii, verso 9), and I have not met with any oth 
Jangala; but the samo Parana mentions the Jagudas as a people tliroiij 
whoso coiintiy the Indus flows, so that they appear to bo north or east 
Kashmir (cxx. 4G-48). 

it Tlio Viiyii Paraiiri reads instead (xlv. 120). I have not m 

with either name elsewhere. Should the rriuling be Apavai^, the descendan 
of Vasish^ha ? Atreyas and Bharadvujas have been mentioned, and GhIiw 
are named in verse 57. 

§ Or A'liimadras or C'dnitnadras. The Vnyu Parana reads 
c'a (xlv. 120). None of these nHUiesarcin the dictionary, and 1 have nut me 
any of them olNCwhere. 

11 The word Ki/atrt is no doubt tho sanro as the modern nanios Kill'd 
and Kirdnti, which mean “ a native of tho Kirant-dos or inonntainon' 
country lying l>otween the Diid-Kosi and the Karki rivers in K('pal Tin 
term includes the KIniinbu, bimbu and Yakliil ti^ibos; and tho Baiiuar, Uiiu 
and TffSmi also claim to bo Kir.nti,” but their claim is <lisj)iite(l by tli( 
first three tribes which are suj'K'rior ( Uisley’s Castes and Tribes of Bengal 
I. 490). But formerly they had a niuch larger range and were spread along 
the greater part of tho southern side of the Himalayas, for Arjun.a onconnt- 
ered thorn in his northern expedition (Sabha-P , xxv. 1002), Bhiina m 
eastern {id, xxix. 1089), and Nakjila in his western exi>edition (id , 
1199). They formed a group of closcdy allied yet distinct tribes or elana 
for two separate Kirdta kings aro named (Sabha-P., iv. 119 and 120), sewr 
kings are alluded to (id., xxix, 1089), “all the Kirtitas ” ai’0 
(Vana-P., li. 1990), and tho> aro mentioned thrice in the Bhishma P- I'"’ 
(ix. 358, 364 and 376). Their chief territory was among tho moimtains 
Kaildsa, Mandara (see page 287 note *) and Haima (Anu^as.-P., xix. 1^34)^ 
that is, tho region around Lake Manasa. They were allied to tho fangai' 
(see next verse) and Pulindas (see page 316 note f) for the three people 
habited one large kingdom ruled by Su-bahu, who was king of tho a 
(Vana-P., cxl. 108G3-0) and is also styled a Kirata (id., clxxvii.‘ 1234^)' 
tribes differed much iu .material condition, for some were civilised 



323 


COUNTRIES AND RACES NORTH OF INDIA, 

41 Tamasas,* and tbe Hamsa.margas,t the Kajlmiras,J 
and the Tunganas, § the S'ulikas, || and the 

icntofiienclly iiitorcourse (Vana-P , cxl 10805-6; and Udjoga-P., Ixlii. 
^ 70 ], u.ul othors^ were clad in skins, livrod on fruit and roots and wore 
,iel (Sabha-P, Ij. 1805). Their women were iisod as slaves {Uid , 1867). 
h, Ibiinay. aLScribes them as wearing thick top-kuots (Kishk -K., xl. 30). 
„Hi's rciiiark that the Kiratas were kshaitriyas and became degraded 
.e;uis(‘of the extinction of sacred rites, &c. (x. 43 and 41) reflects the 
o1 a latiT age. 

♦ Ihe same ])coplG are mentioned again in verse 57, but I have not found 
0 imino olscwlierc, and it is not in tho dictionary. Tlie Vayu Parana 
a, Is Tuu,>,ins (xlv. 120), and tno Bliishnia-P. agrees (ix. 377). The MaUya 
.1 ill, I iin iiiioiis the Tomaras and tho llamsa-inargas as two tribes through 
hi.vo coiinlnns ilows tlie R. Pavani, ono of tho three largo rivers which riso 

till' middle of the- Himalaya moimtaiii-systcm and flow eastward (cxx. 

1 ho river is doubtful, but tho passage places the Tomaras and the 
jms,i-m!h vas in tho east of Thibet. 

t fiu'duck-fowlcrs” Tlicy arc mentioned again in verso 50, and also 
rliv hjiMiiim-i*. ]i,.t (ix 377) j and scorn to bo tho sumo as tho Hami^a-padas 
'riiiii-I’, \x. 7t)S) and perhaps Ilark.a-kdyanas (Sabha-P,, li. 1870); but 
'iv niiiHMi- to be no data (o idcnlify then), except that they wero a people in 
'lorn 'fliihot as explained in the last note. 

t llio }Hoi)]c of Kashmir. They are named twice in tho Blifshma-P. list 
: 3i]l nird 375). 

§ (h'betti'r, ns tho Vayu Purana reads, Taiiganas (xlv. 120); tho Ramay. 

tliom Tankanas (Kishk.-K., xliv. 20). They wero a mountain iribo 
1.110 mciitioucd rather often in tho M.-Bh., whore two sections ai'o spoken 
tl‘0 and Fara-tmyanas (Sabha-P , li. 1850; Bhishma-P , ix. 372; 

* 1 -O.s.ji, that is, “the nearer’’ and “the further” Tangauas. They 
ff’ iDtormixofl with the Kiratas and Pulindas (or Kulindas), for they all 
"^Ijitcd a largo kingdom ruled ovpr by Su-bnhii, which was in the middle 

the Himalayas (Vana-P., cxl. 10*63-5; Sabha-P., li. 1858-9); 
'*"} .iM' ;i iso linked with the Am bashthas (Droria-P., exxi. 4819). They 
^‘^"1 to liave otcujiied the upper part of tho valley of the II. Sarnyu 
t) Like otlier hill tribes they fought largely with stones and were 
in slinging stones (Dro^a-P., exxi. 4835-17). 

^ ^liis resembles S'ulakaras in tho last verse. The Vayu Purana reads 
which has also boon mentioned in that vorse. Tho 
f'oiiri ’^‘f^utioned in tho Matsya Purana as a people through whose 
^'tikshn, ono of the three large rivers which rise in tho 
^ the Himalaya mountain -system and flow westward (cxx. 45, 46). 



324 


Can'jO Lvri. 


42 Kuhakas, * the Urnas, f andDarvas;}: are the pcopj^^ 

of the Noi'thern countries. 

Hear from me the peoples who inhabit the Enstem 
countries. The Adhraraka8,§ the Muclakaras,|| the Antar 

C'akalm may perhaps bo meant for Vakshu, which is the Oxusj if so the 
S'ulikaa would bo a people on the Oxus in Turkestan. 

* Knhaka means a juggler. Tho Vayu Purana rends C'dhukag or AhuUi 
or Ahulcas (xlv. 121); Ahuka was the name of a family of tho Ancllmhig 
(c.j/.j M.-Bh., Uclyoga-P., Ixxxv. 3041 ; and Ilari-V., xxxviii 2017-21) but 
they wore in tho west and cannot bo meant here. I have not mot ^ith 
any of these words elsewhere as tho name of a people in the north. Tho 
proper reading muy ho KuhuJeas. Kuhuka would be tho same as Kuhu, jiuij 
the Kuhus are mentioned in the Matsya Purana as a people on the Imo of 
tho Indus (cxx. 46-48). 

t Those people are mentioned again in verso 57. A country Ifimnlm 
is placed by Lassen on the Sutlej north of Garhwal (Ind. Alt, map). The 
whole of tho upper Sutlej valley is now called Nari-khorsum or Hun-Joi). 
The Vayu Purdnii reads Purnas hero (xlv'. 121), which seems erroneous. 

J Those appear to bo the same as the Ddrvas in verso 57. They wero a 
northern people and are generally associated with tho Trigartas and JJaiad.i'i 
(Sabhd-P , xxvi. 1020; and li. 1800) and other tribes in the north of the 
Panjab (Bhishma-P., ix. 3G2) A river or town called Darvi ia mentiomd 
(thui.), and a tirtha Darvi-sankramana is placed between the sonuTs 
of the Jumna and Indus (Yana- P., Ixxxiv. 8022-4) ; and this tract porliaps 
was their territory. But Lassen places tho Darvas betAVCon tho Indus ami 
jdielam in the north-west of Kashmir (Ind. Alt., map). 

§ This seems incorrect. Tho Vdyii Purapa reads Andhravdkas (\lr. 12?), 
which is hardly acceptable, tho And/rma being properly in tho Soiitii, rather 
than in tho East, and being presumably intended in verso 48 (sec note to 

Andhas). The Matsya Parana reads Angd vangd instead (cxiii. 41), Adiiih 
is preferable, but these nations are mentioned below (see page 325 note J imd 

page 320 note *j. ^ • hs 

11 The Matsya Purana reads Madgurakas (cxiii. 44), and the Vayu ^ 
(xlv. 122). I have not found any of these names elsewhere, except 
Madguras, “ divers,” are mentioned in a totally different conuoxion 
Hari-Vamsa (xcv. 6233-9). Seemingly the word should be connected^ 
Modd-giri in the Eastern region where a kingdom once existed (5 • ’ 

Sabha-P., xxix. 1095) ; is it to be identified with the modern 
(commonly Monghyr) on the Ganges in Behar, where the 

crop of hills: Cunningham says Mudgala-puri, Mudgdldkama^ (toj 
Matsya Parana reading approximates) and Mudga-giri were the o 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 


326 


43 g’l'iyas,* the Vahir-gira8,t and the Pravangas J also, 

; and an earlier name was Kashta-harana-parvafa (XV. 15 and 18), biifc 
l,is i:isL i.^ oi)en to tho objection that no name can well be older than that pro* 
in tlio M.-Bh. Tho Madgalas are mentioned in Drona-P., xi. 307. 

* Ov Aidtn-yiri as tho Mataya Parana reads (cxiii. 4i). They are men- 
loiK'il in tlie Bliislima-P. list (ix. 357). Tho name, no doubt, means “those 
duL'll amid tho hills,” and as tho people are placed in all these passages 
„ pioxiuiity to the Angas, it seems reasonable to identify Antar-giri with 
l,(. hills (in tho modern district of tho Santhal Parganas) which 

„i.,„ a maikcd natural division between Anga and Vanga. In the only 
iilicr passngo where I have found this name (8abha-P., xxvi. 1012) Aiitar. 

Wihir-'itii (sec next note) and Upa-giri are mentioned in obvious contra- 
li.tiiictma uiid are placed in tho Northern region; it is doubtful, theroforo, 
di.'tlii'i- tlioy denote the tracts mentioned hero; and they may perhaps refer 

0 M)iiu' pnition of tho slopes of tho Himalayas. 

i Or V(ihu-inri as tho Matsya Parana roads (cxiii. 41). Tho name, no 
Iniilit, iiu'iins “ those who dwell outside tho hills,” and those people are 
MitioiH'd cilurig with tho Angas and Malajas in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 357), 

1 'uMiKiy identify Antar-giri with tho Rajmahall hills (see tho hist note), 
'.iliir-nirl mipht well designate the outskirts of those hills bordering on 

that is. the .southern portions of the Bhagalpur and Monghyr districts 
ii'l tlu' finds bordering thereon to tho south in the Santhal Parganas and 

ia/,11 iljimh. 


X I not met this name elsewhere, though it is stated in the dictionary 
" tlir nnnm of a people and analy.sod thus, Pravam-g.i = Plavam-ga ; 1 would 
iiLi'gNt, howc\er, tlmfc it should be read hero as Pra^vangas, “ those who are in 
nl till' Ynngas,” i. c , tho Avgas. The Matsya Parana reads Angas and 
(c\iii. 11). The Angas are clearly meant. Anga was a distinct and 
'itkd country ill early times, and its princes were allied with Aryan royal 
, Aai-P., xov. 3773 and 3777 ; and Tldmriy., A'di-K., x. 1-10). 
pcojilo .‘lie said to have been so called after an cjioiiyinous king Anga ; 
'■\aii^ii, Kalinga, Piindra and Sulima are described with considerable 


"'^ niisiiintial delail as tho five sons of king Bali’s queen (Bali being king of 
I'c hii^lern rooion) hy the rishi Dirgba-tamas (M -Bh., Adi-P., cjv. 4217-21 ; 
I'u j xwi. 1081-93). Anga comprised tho modern districts of Bhagal- 
'“’‘inj Monghyr, (3xclading tho extreme nonh and south portions. Tho ancient 
Ari'^r.^ drofipod out of use and Bihar (of Buddhist origin) has usurped 
; is Pra-vanga here significant of the change ? The 

Wcis first called Mdlini, and that name is said to have been superseded 
*^^**^^ ^ ampd in honour of a king C'ampa, Loma-pada’a great grand- 
1G99 and 1700; and M.-Bh., S^anti-P., v. 134-5), but the 



326 


CANTO LVn. 


the Rangeyas, * the Manadas, f the Mana-vartikas { 

Kamay makes a punning connexion between this name and the ^Toveaof 
c'ampaka trees around the town (Adi-K., xvii. 23) ; it is the modern Bliag^] 
pur on the south bank of the Ganges (Vana-P., Ixxxv. 8156). Tho tr^ct noar 
C'ampd, was called Suta-vishaya (Vana-P , cccvii. 17150-61), that is, 
of bards or charioteers.” Tho Angas are mentioned twice in tho Bln'slmia-p 
list (ix. 353 and 357) ; it does not appear why. 

* This is, no doubt, a mistake for Vangeyns which the Vayu Purana reads 
(xlv. 122), and V({nga^ which the Matsya mentions (oxiii. 44). The Van'kas 
or Vangoyas were tho people of Vanga or Banga, the original of tho modern 
Bengal. Vanga was a distinct country in early times and is frc(jn('ntly 
mentioned, though tho references to it very rarely convey any definite 
information. It lay beyond Anga, to the south-east j and was connected 
with Kalinga, for tho Augas, Vangas and Kalingas are constantly hided 
together as people closely allied by race and position, {e j/., Drona-P.,hx 213G), 
And the Vangas are said to have been so called after an oiionymoiis kinjf 
Vanga who was Anga’s and Kalinga’s brother (see last note), Vanga oomprised 
the northern portion of ^Ycstorn and Central Bengal, i. c., tho modern districts 
of Birbhiun, Moorslicdabad, Bardwan and Nuddoa. Its capital in early times 
does not appear to bo mentioned. In later timt3S the name was extended over 
tho whole of Central Bengal, for tho Raghu Vam^a doscribos tho Vangas ns 
dwelling in the islands of tlie Ganges delta, warring cliiofly in l)oat^, and 
transplanting their rice seedlings into tho field-s just as at the present day 
(iv. 36, 37). In those early times tho upper part of the delta consisted of 
numerous islands separated by largo rivers, and tho southern part could not 
have been formed. 

t The Vilyu Purana roads Mdfadas (xlv. 122) which appears preferable, 
and this may mean tho people of tho modern district of Maklah, in wliich tlia 
old cities of Ganr and Pamlua are situated, while tho town Maklah itEelf 
is old (Cunningham, Arch. Surv. llopts , XV. 77). Tho M<ilnda>^ arc mention- 
od as an eastern people in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P., xxix. 1081-2; and also 
Drona-P., vii. 183), but without data enough to say where they were. 

The Vayu Parana read.s Mdla-vartinnh fxlv. 122). The M.-Bh. mentions 
tho Mdna-varjakas (Bliishma-P., ix. 357) anti they appear from tb® coi 
to bo the people meant hero. The name seems intended to carry a meanin^^ 
either “ people who live decorously ” according to the text, or people 
are devoid of decorum” according to tho last word. Does it lefer 
wild tribe in a state of nature ? Or does Mana-vartika (Mana-vai t'r* 
Mhn-bhdm (Mana-bhumi) a district in West Bengal ? The 
mentioned in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 307) belong to a differ ^ 
altogether. 



rOUNTRIES AND DACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 


327 


tl)c Brahmottaras, * the Pravijayas, f the Bhdrgavas, { 


* The Mat^ya Parana reads 8nhmottara<i (cKiii. 44), which ia preferable, 
fins means tho people north of Suhma.” Suhma was a well-known 
country. It was generally classed with Pumlra (e. g., M.-Bh , Adi-P., cxiii, 
4153 ] nml both of them are declared to bo closely allied to Anga, Vanga and 
Kulin^a by being derived from five eponymous kings of those names who 
^ ere brothers (M.-Bh., A'di-P , civ. 4217-21; Uari-V.nm&a, xxxi. 1081-93). 


8iilnnii w:is near the sea (Sabha-P , xxix. 1099 ; and Raghu-V., iv. 34 and 35), 
and I'him-lipta (Tamra-lipta, the modern Tamluk, see next verso) is said 
to bo AMthiii its borders .n the Dasa-kumara-c'arita (Story of Mitra-giipta), 
{^uhmn tlu refore corresponded with the modern districts of Midnapur nnd 
Bankiira .urn! perhaps also Purnlia and Manbhum in West Bengal. Svhmotta- 
ni ^\oul<l bo tb(3 tract north of that, and was probably the same as Pni-suhma 
(Snhlia-r., xxiv. 1090). T'he Mahyuttaras of the BhivShma-P. list (ix. 358) 
ge.'iii to bo the .s lino people under an error in the spelling. 

'l]i(' ivuiling Nidi mottanM, however, is hardly satisfactory in omitting the 
Siihmus and rrforring indefinitely to tlio people north of thorn, and I would 
1 1 mt the proper reading should bo Siihmotkaldh, “ the Sub mas and 
1*1 Lulu, =1 ” The were well-known (though not I believe mentioned 

ofri'ii in the l\t.-Bli ), and wore a rude tribe of very early origin, for they do 
not fipponr io liiivo had any clo.so aflfinities with the races around them, and 
till- llari-Viim-a throws their origin back to the fabulous time of Ila (x. 631-2). 
Tl'oii' tcriitery reivchod on the oast the R. Kapisa (Baghu-V., iv. 38), 
inch biisscn identifies with the modern Subarna-rckha near the northern 
houiifhiiy of Orissa (Ind. Alt , Map), but which 1 propose to identify with 
till' 11, (h)ssyo in Midnaporo (see page 301 note f ) ; and on the west they 
t 'liilu'd the iMokalas, for the two people are coupled together in the M.-Bh* 
(hliidiiiui-l’., ix, 318; see also Drona-P., iv. 122, and Karna-P,, xxii. 882) and 
bfnniy (Kislik.-K,, xli. 14), and the Mekalas were the inhabitants of the 
k.ihi lulls, I. the hills bounding Chhattisgayh on the west and north, 
•Vi)ii!n\iiri (hvolt the Pnndras and southward tho Kalingas. Hence Utkala 
("'npii-CHl I he soutlicrn portion of Chuta Nagpur, tho northern Tributary 
of (/I'lssa iind the Balasore district. Various derivations have been 
of tho iiaino Dtknla, but I would only d”aw attention to some Of 
.ibr)\o piissugos where Utkala and Mokala are placed together as if their 


■'^'fies pos.N'ssod something in common See also in verso 53. 
t The Mafsya same (cxiii. 44', but I have not found 

'’I' ldioii 'd elsewhere They appear from the context to be the same. as 


■ho P-dn,./a 


I l\ 


of tho Bhfshma-P. list (ix. 358). 


^0 ar(> mentioned in tho Bhishma-P. list {'x. 358), and were perhaps 


^ oft'-lying branch of 


the Bhnrgava race in the East ; see note to verse 35, 



328 


CANTO LVII. 


44 the Jneya-mallakas, * and 


the Prag-jyotislin8,t and 


Tho Hari-Vaihsa mentions a prince callorl Bhdrga or Bhdrgava, who founded 
Bhrign-bhumi or Bharj^a-bhumi j and as he was a grandson of Divodasakin 
of Benares, his country may perhaps have boon in the Eastern region (vxi^ 
1587 and 1597 ; and xxxii. 1753). Tho Bhishrna-P. list names also Bhdryas 
{loc. cit ). 

* The Vayii Parana reads OayainarthaJcas (xlv. 123), and tho Mat^y.i 
(cxiii. 41), and the Blushma-P. list omits tho coiTcspondii,,, 
name (soo ix. 358). Kone of these names are in tho dictionary, and I t 
not met any of them olsowhoro. 

f Prag-jyotisha was a famous kingdom in oarly times and is often men. 
tionod in tho M.-Bh. The references to it, however, are rather perplcxin'^ 
for in some passages it is called a Mloc'c'ha kingdom ruled overbykmff 
Bhagadatta, who is always spoken of in respectful and even eulogistic torim 
(c. (/., Sabha-P., xxv. 1000-1 ; and 1. 1831 ; IJdyoga-P , clxvi. 5804 j aiidKarna- 
P., V. 104-5), and in other passages it is called a Danava or Asnra kingdom 
ruled over by the demons Naraka and Muru (Vana-P., xii. 488 j Udyoga-P, 
xlvii. 1887-92; Hari-V'., exxi, 6791-0; cxxii 6873, etc. ; and clxxiv. 9790; nrid 
Annotations to Kishk.-K., xliii. in Gorresio’s Ramayana); while in some oilier 
passages tho allusions seem mixed (c </., Sabha-P., xiii. 578-80, wiiich seems 
to call Bhagadatta a Yavana; and as to this, see id. 1. 183 1-G). The secnml 
cla'«s of passages occur, I believe, only in descriptions of Krishna’s exji'oirs; 
they are spoilt by hyperbolical laudation and are probably later thnn the 
first class. Prtig-jyotisha was placed in the North region (Sablia-P., \n’, 
1000; and Vana-P., ccliii. 15240-2), but was also considered to bo in tlieKa't 
as in the text hero. North of it seemingly lay tracts called Antar-giri, 
Vahir-giri and Upa-giri (Sabha-P,, xxv. 1000— xxvi 1012) which appear to bo 
the lower slopes of the Himalayas and the Tcrai ; and it was close to the 
mountains for Bhagadatta is called S'uilalaya (Stri-P., xxiii. 644). It borJored 
on tho Kiratas and CTnas for they formed his rotiimo (Sabha-P., x.xv. 1002; 


Udyoga-P , xviii. 584-5). He also drew his troops from among the p('O|)l0 
who dwelt in the mai:shy regions near tho sea, Sdgardnilpa (Sabhi-P , 
1002 ; xxxiii. 1268-9; and Karna-P , v. 104-5), and it is even said ho dwelt ut 
the Eastern Ocean (Udyoga-P., iii. 74) ; these marshy regions can only be 


alluvial tracts and islands near tho mouths of tho Ganges and Brahma-p'h'^ 
as they existed anciently. These data indicate that Prag-jyotisha coinpi'*'^'^ 
the whole of North Bengal proper. Tho Raghu Vaia4a places it seeniin.,ly 
beyond tho Brahma-putra (iv. 81) ; but Kalidasa was a little ouceitam 
distant geography. Its capitnl was called Prag-jyotisha also. 
tho people were mlcc'c'has, the Ramnyana ascribes the founding <P ^ 
kingdom to Amurta-rajas, one of the four sons of a great king Kusa 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 


Madras, * (ind the Videhas, f and the Timra- 

i_fi) Amiirta-rayas, as the name is generally written in the M.-Bh., is 

I.XXV 7' 

ciitioucd ll^ore simply as father of the famous king Gaya (e. g., Vana-P., 
"v 8528-311; and Drona-P., Ixvi. 2334, &c). 

* Tlii« an impossible name here (see verso 36). The Vayu PurAna 
■oads instead (xlv. 123) which is permissible. The Mundas area 

•atro IJiavidinii tribe in Chuta Nagpur (Risley’s Tribes and Castes of Bengal, 

[ lOl), and are named in the M.-Bh (Bhishma-P:, Ivi. 2110). 

The iMaisva Burana however reads instead (cxiii. 45) and the Blush* 

na-P li-’t also mentions them in this region (ix. 358). This is the best reading, 
for tlio Piindr.'is wore hehl to be closely allied to the Angas, Vangas and 
SiihiiiaH (R'-e page 325 note .t, page 326 note * and page 327 note *), and 
plmiild nglitly he plac( 3 (l here along with those races,, rather than in the South 
according »o vorso ‘15. The name occurs in various forms, Fundraka (Sabhn-?., 
a \\9), I'aniKha, ohxxvii. 7020), Paundraka ( A'di- P , clxxxvi. 6992 ; 

Salihii-P , 1270) and Paiuidrika (Sabha-P., li. 1872). They appear to be 

used uflci) us if equivalent (e. p., Sabha*P , xiii. 584), and yet a distinction 
uciiis to he niiule between Pundras and Paundras for they are separately 
iiicniioned ill the Bhishnia-P. list (ix. 358 and 365) ; and Pundras, Pundra* 
Ifciiiid P.uiiidukas are all mentioned in one passage (Sabha-P., li. 1872-1), 
All, appear to. have composed one people, and they were not a 

!)nri)iuous luitiou. From the arrangements of names and descriptions given 
mMiiiotis pus, sagos (Adi-P., cxiii. 4453; Sabha-P., xiii. 681 ; xxix. 1091-7 ; 
Vana-P,h 19''8; A<vamodh.-P., Ixxxii. .2164-5) it appeal's the Pundras had 
the kii'i 3 oil tlieir north, the Angas, Vangas and Snhmas on their north-east 
and eubt; and the Odras on their south-east; hence their territory correspond- 
ed to the inoclcni Clmta Nagpur with the exception of its southern portions. 
'Ihcir bounds on the soutli wei'e no doubt the laud of the Utk.alas (see pago 
32? note *), in one passage (Adi-P., Ixvii. 2679) it is stated an ancient 
Ivlin; Ihiliiia roignod over both Panndra and Mat.sya; this suggests that their 
tcinrory extended to near the II. Chumbal anciently (see page 307 note •), 
;fuid fends to part them from the Angas, Vangas, &c. 

tVideha was a famous country in early times. Cunningham says it 
apfioars to liavo comprised the northern portion of North Beliar from the 
11. Gandak to tlie R. Kau^iki or Kosi (Arch. Surv. Repts , XVI. 34 and map); 
but its nobtoni boundary was the Sada-nira (see pago'29t note J), and it 
BOems V idolia extended from the Rapti to the Kosi. Nortlnvards it extended 
riose to the Himalayas, and on the south it was bounded by a kingdom, the 
capital of wliicli was Vaisdli (Ramay., Adi-K., xlvi. 10-11 ; and xlviii. 21-25), 
the niodorii Resarh which is about 27 milos north of Patna (Arch. Surv, 
I'l'l'is., L 55 ; and XVI. 6 and 34). The capital was Mithild (Ramay., Adi-K., 

42 



330 


CANtO LVII. 


liptakas, * the Mallas, f tlie Magadhas,{ the Go 

xlix. 9-16 ; and M.-Bh., S'anti-P., ccoxxvii. 12233-8), and this name oftej 
designated the country itself, especially in the Ramaya^a. The people wer 
called Vidohas (or Videgha, as the earlier form was, see S'ata-P. Brah I jy 
14), and also Mithilas (Vana-P., ccliii. 15243). Its kings, who were often hjgjj|y 
educated (S'anti-P., cccxxvii. 12215-25), are generally called Jauaka, wliich 
seems to have been the ordinary royal title (Vana-P., cxxxiii, 10637), Cun- 
ningham says the capital was Janakpur, which is now a small town just within 
the Nepal border, north of where the Mozufferpur and Darbhanga districts 
meet (Arch. SuiV. Repts., XVI. 34 and map), but I have not met this name 
in Sanskrit works. 

* Or Tdmra-liptaa. Tho country and people are often mentioned in the 
M.-Bh., and both forms of the name are used (Adi-P., clxxxvi. 6993 ; Sabhd-P. 
xxix. 1098; and Drona-P., Ixx. 2436). The name was modified into 
Tama-liptaka which tho Vdyu Parana reads (xlv. 123), and Tama-lipta 
(which occurs in canto Iviii. verso 14), and Dama-lipta (see Story of 
Mitra-gupta in the Da^-knmara-c'arita), and corrupted into the modem 
Tamluk. The town Tamluk is in the Midnapur district near the mouth 
of the Rupnarayan River. It used to be a famous port during the middle • 
ages of Indian history. The country Tamra-liptaka corresponded therefore 
to tho eastern part of the present district of Midnapur. 

t The Vayu Parana reads Mdlas (xlv. 123). This people appear to be the 
MAles (properly Mals) and Mai Pahariyas, two Dravi^lian tribes which now 
inhabit the Rajmahall and Ramgarh hills in Western Bengal (Risloy’s Tribes 
and Castes of Bengal, II. 61 and 66). The Matsya Parana reads S'alvas (cxiii- 
45) erroneously. 

t Or MAgadhas. Magadha comprised the present districts of Gaya and 
Patna. It was a famous kingdom from the eeurliest times. The Ramayana 
Bays it was four^ded by Vasu one of tho four sons of a groat king Knia 
(Adi-K., XXXV. 1-9) ; and the M.-Bh. says it was established by Vrihad-ratha, 
who was son of Vasu king of C^edi (Adi-P., Ixiii. 2361-6 ; and Hari-V., 
1805), but who is also called an Anga (9^finti-P., xxix. 921-31.) One appears 
to be an eastern account and the other a western account, but there may 
be truth in both accounts, for there was an interval of eight or twelve genera- 
tions between the two periods spoken of. Both agree that 
made the capital by the founder of the kingdom, the former says by ^ 
(loc. cit), and the latter says by Vyihad-ratha (Hari-V., cxvii. 6698 ; 

XX. 798-800). Cunningham has identified Giri-vraja with the 
on the Panohana river about 36 miles north-east of Gaya (Arch. Surv- 
1. 16 and plate iii). RAja-griha appears to have been another name ^ 
capital (Adi-P., cxiii. 4451-2 ; and ASvamedh -P., bcixii- 3436-63), ¥ 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


331 


mantas, * are known as the peoples in the East, f 
5 Now the other peoples who dwell in the Southern Region { 
are the Pun4ras,§ and Kevalas,|j and Go-langulas If also, 

ingham idontifles it with the rnodorn Raj-gir about 6 miles west of Giryek 
Arch. Sarv. Repts., I. 20 and plate iii). The oldest name of this country ia 
iid to have been Kikatay which occurs in Rig-Veda III, 63.14 (Muir’s Sansk. 
'exts. II. 362, 363). 

# file Vilyu Parana reads Oovindaa (xlv. 123) ; and the Matsya Oonarddhas 
cxiii. 45 ); and the bitter people are mentioned in canto Iviii. verse 23, but 
re placed in the South. I have not met with an Eastern people of any of 

hcse names el.sewhere. 

f The Kurina Parana adds Kdma-riipa (xlvii. 38), the modern Kamrup or 
Jiiuhati in Assam. It is mentioned in the Raghu-Vam^a (iv. 84), but not, 
believe, in the Ramayana nor Mahd-Bhdrata. 

I DakshinBpatlia ; this generally means South India below the Vindhya 
lingo, and a lino from Araara-kantaka to the north of Orissa. 

§ This scorns to bo orroneous, for the Pundras were not properly in the 
ioiitli, and they have been noticed in their appropriate place in the Bast 
see page 329 note *}, The Vayu Parana roads Pdndym instead (xlv. 124) 
itidsoalso the Matsya fexiii. 46), and this is, no doubt, the proper reading, 
or otherwise this nation, which was the most famous and best known in the 
South, would bo omitted from this list. Paijdya is often mentioned in the 
M.-Bli. ; bat not in the Ramuy., except in the geographical canto (Kishk. K., 
111. 15 and 25) which is probably an addition to the original poem. It 
comprised the modern districts of Madum and Tinnevelly. The capital 
ffas Mathura, the modern Madura. The Pandyas belong to the Drdvidian 
family, but the Tlari-Yariisa makes them, or more probably the royal house, 
dtscendants of the Paurava raoo ; it says Pandya, Kerala, Kola and C'ola 
vere four brothers and gave origin to the four peoples of those names 
(mii, 1832-6). 

II This is, no doubt, a mistake for Keralas, which the Vayu (xlv. 124) and 
Matsya (cxiii, 46) Puranas read; and the Bhishma-P. list twice (ix. 352 and 
365 ; though the first mention is probably a mistake). They were a forest- 

(Sabha-P., xxx. 1174-5) and are placed on the west side by the Raghu- 
Vaiiisa (iv. 53-54). They are said to be descer.ded from an eponymous 
king Kerala, and to be closely allied to the Pandyas, C'olas, &c. in the Hari- 
(xxxii. 1836). They appear to have occupied the whole of the west 
tJast from Calicut to Capo Comorin. 

f The Cow-tails ; ” a pure fancy, stories of tailed races being common 
over the world. It may correspond to Gonarddhas in canto Iviii, verse 23 j 
I'lie Matsya Purania reads C'ola$ and Eulyae (oxiii. 46), and the VAya 



332 


CANTO LVir. 


46 the S'ailiislias,’*' and Muslnkas,t the Ku8iimaR,+ j] 

C'aulyas and Kiilyos (xlv. 124) ; and the proper reading should, no doubt 
C'oZaa and The Tlari-Vam^a makes these two tribes closely allied t 

the P^ndyas and Keralas (see the last two notes). 

C’ola was a kingdom in early times (Sabh^i-P., li. 1891-3) and is oft 
mentioned in the M -l>h. {e. g , Vana-P , li, 1988; and Sabha-P., xxx 11^4 
where C'odra is, no doubt, a mistake for O'ola ; also Bhishma-P., ix. 367. 
Drona-P. xi. 398). The Ilari-Vaihm says king Sagara degraded them (ji^ 
784). C'ola comprised the modern districts of Tanjore, Trichinopolv 
Pudukota and RputhArcot. 

The Kolaa are scarcely ever mentioned ; yet they appear to be reforred 
to in SabhfbP., xxx. 1171, and A':ivumodli.-P., Ixxxiii. 247G-7. Their position 
is uncertain Are they to bo identilied with iho Koravas or Kwrus, wlioan-a 
vagrant tribe in Madras (Madras Census of 1891, Beport, p. 304). 

* Cnnto Iviii, verse 20 mentions the SailiJcun ; and the Vayu rurain 
(xlv. 125) and Matsya (cxiii. 47) road Setulcns, I have not found any of 
these names elsewhere, but Saila occurs in Vana-P., ccliii. 15250, perhaps as 
the name of a country near Pandya in the extreme south, so that S'nilikas 
might mean its people. Does Setuka refer to llama’s sctu or Adam’s 
and mean the people who live close to it ? 

t The Bhishma-P. list mentions these people in the same connexion 
(ix. 366), and another Southern people called MAtfhakas twice (ix 360 and 
371). Canto Iviii mentions instead of them the Jiiahilcasm the Soul h (verse 
27), and the MrisliiJcas in the South-east (verso 16). I have not found tlie 
latter name else whore, but I lie Ilishikas appear to have been well-kuoivn, 
there being one people of that name in the North (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1033-6; 
'•Ramay., Kishk-K., xliv. 13 ; and Matsya Purdna exx, 63) and another iu tlie 
South (Kishk-K., xli. 16; and Hari-V , cxix. 6724-6). The Matsya Purana 
reads Sutikas (cxiii. 47) which appears to be erroneous. 

X Canto Iviii omits this people and names Kumuda hill (verso 26). Tke 
Vayu Purana reads Kiimanas (xlv. 125), and the Matsya Kupathns (cxiii. 47). 
I have not found any of those names elsewhere. Probably the reailmif 
should be Kuriunhas or Kuruhas. The ancient Kurumbas or Pallavas occupied 
a territory which comprised the modern districts of Madras, Chiugl'^P^^’ 
North and South Arcot, Salem and the south-east portion of Mysore, wth 
Kauc'i, the modern Conjeveram, for their capital, and their power attain 
its zenith about the 7th cent. A. D., or perhaps a century or two la 
After their ovef throw they wore scattered far and wide and aro 
now iu most of the districts south of the R. Kiatna iu tho middle 
eastern parts of the Madras Presidency and in Mysore (Madras Censu 
1891, Report, pp. 259 and 289). 



ENTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


333 


Kama-vasakas,* the Maha-rashtras,t Mahisliakasf and Ka- 

* This is, doubt, the same as the Vann-vdsakas of the Bhishma-P. list 
(i\, with udiich the Vayu Parana agrees in reading Vana-vdsikas (xlv, 
jo;,) As tiiis nanio simply means ‘ Forest-dwellers,” it may include several 
vho inhabited the great Southern forests; or it may denote the 
pcoi'h’ of the kingdom called Vana-vasin, which was founded by Siirasa in 
(lie Dolvlian (!Tari-V., xcv. 5213 and 5231-3). Perhaps they may bo identiQed 
\Mth th<^ BiHijfiris or Lambadia, who are the groat travelling traders of South 
India, and who are supposed to bo descendants of Balin and Sugriva the 
Vi'ui.ua kings in tho Bimayana (Madras Census of 1891, Report, pp. 18(> 

[iiid 27il), The Matsya Parana reads Vdji-vdsikas (cxiii. 47), which seoma 

Lill'dllt'UllS. 

f The ])eoide of Alahil-rashtrp,, the modern Mahrattas, whom canto Iviii 
d-o consiih'i-s to bo in tho South (verso 23). The name is a lato one as 
1 lijw'o nut found it in tho Maha-Bharata or Hamayana. It was a largo 
kiiiMi)iii in ITiiicn d'lisaug’s time in the 7th cent. A. D., and Cunningham 
ii.diMt c()nipvi.se nearly tho wostorn half of tho Dekhan between tho 16th 
md 2('th |)aiallels of latitude, with its capital at Kalyani (Anc. Geog. of 
India, 1 

Thr aMuti^ya I’unina roads Nava-rdshtras (cxiii. 47), but not well, for this 
[■(Mirtry iirid pc'oplo aro mentioned in tho M-Bh. as one of tho kingdoms near 
llii‘ Kurus, and as situated in the south-west of Madhya-desa or on tho 
iKM'driH of Kajputana (Sabha-P., xxx. 1110; and Virata-P., i. 11-12); and 
till' liaii-Vaui'a derives thorn from an eponymous king Nava, making him 
luid t lie progenitors of the Yaudhoyas, Ambashthas and S'ivis (which were 
Ildus ill or near the Pan jab) all sons of king Usinara (xxxi, 1674-8). 
N’u\a-nif,]itra is therefore out of place here. 

t So also ill tho Bhishma-P. list (ix. 36G), or Mdhishikas as tho Matsya 
hiii.ina reads (cxiii 47). Those people are, no doubt, tho same as the Mdkish' • 
'''"'he (AKvaiuedh-P, Ixxxiii. 2475-7), that is, the people of Mdhuh-maH. 
^hdiidi-iiiati was aii ancient and famous city (Sabha-P., xxx. 1125-63) and 
''<is Hiliiated on the R. Narmada, at a place where the Vindhyasand tho 
iikslia Mia. ((ho Satpura range) contract tho valley (Hari-V., xcv. 5218, Ac). 

Tu ukiiuda was its founder according to that passage, and Mahish-mat 
001 ding to another (id., xxxiii. 1846-7). Their descendant was the groat 
hiUau Kaitavirya {ibid., 1850-xxxiv. 1890). Matiish-muti is identified with 
luodcin Malieswar on tho Narmada in tho Imp. Gaz. of India (Vol. X, 
but t Ilia hardly agrees with the notices in Sanskrit writings; for 
^ 'c'swai must have lain within the ancient Avanti (see verse 62), and 
ke sometimes in the South and sometimes in tho West, 
Mahish-mati is never, I beliovo, placed anywhere but in the South. 



334 


CANTO LVir. 


47 lingas* on all sides,! Abhxras,}: and Vai^ikyas,§ ^^liakyasj 

A more easterly position, such as Mandhdtd or near there, seems bette 
At the time of the great war its king was Nila and his people were called 
Lilayudhas (Udyoga-P., xviii. 692-3) or Nilayudhas (Bhfshma-P., lyj 24141 
Its people were afterwards declared to have become degraded because of the 
extinction of sacred rites, Ac. (Anu^^s.-R, xxxiii 2103-4 • Muir’s Sanskrit 
Texts, I. 177). A Mdhishiki, which seems to be a river, is mentioned in the 
Eamay. in this region (Kishk.-K., xli. 16.) 

* Or Kdlingas. Kalinga was an ancient kingdom, its kings were famoua 
(Adi-P., Ixvii. 2701), and its princesses married into the Aryan royal familiee 
(«. g.y Adi-P., xcv. 3774-5, & 3780; and S'anti-P., iv). Its people were closely 
allied to the Angas and Vangas, and the three nations are often linked together 
(e. g., Adi-P., eexv. 7820; and Drona-P., Ixx. 2436), and this connexion ig 
emphasized by the allegation that these three and also the Suhmasand 
Pundras were descended from five eponymous brothers (see page 325 note |). 
Kalinga comprised all the Eastern coast between the Utkalas on the north 
(Raghu-V., iv. 38) and the Telingas or Telugus on the south. The R. 
Vaitarani (the modern Byturni) flowed through it, and the Mahendra Mtn. 
(the Eastern Ghats) were within its southern limits (Adi-P., oexv. 7820-24; 
and Raghu-V., iv. 38-43). Kalinga therefore comprised the modern province 
of Orissa and the district of Ganjam and probably also that of Vizagapatam. 
The Matsya Parana makes Kalinga extend as far west as the Amara-kantaka 
hills (olxxxv. 12), but Kalinga there is, no donbt, an error for Kosala. Certain 
Kalingas have been mentioned in verso 37 above. 

t Sarvahh. This seems to be rather a stereotyped phrase. Tho Matsya 
Parana also reads the same (cxiii 47). Purvaiah would bo a preferable 
reading, for the Kalingas occupied a large part of the Eastern coast and 
do not appear to have inhabited any other part of the Dokhan. 

X These may have been an off-lying branch of this aboriginal race (see 
note to verse 35). The Vayu Parana reads Abhiras here (xlv. 120). The 
Matsya Purana reads Kdrushas (cxiii. 48); they are the same as the Kiirus^<i» 
mentioned in verse 63 ; they come in their proper position there and are out 
of place here, 

§ This is not in the dictionary. For saha vaiiikyd read either one wo 
or suha vaiHlyair, The Vayu (xlv. 126) and Matsya (cxiii. 48) Pur^ 
read EshiTcas or Aishikas ; but I have not found any of these names else 

II I have not met this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. 

Vayu Purana (xlv. 126) and the Matsya (cxiii. 48) read Atavyas, , 
may moan either “forest-dwellers,” or more probably “ the 
which is mentioned as a city in the Dekhan, but without any data 
it (Sabhii-P., xxx. 1176). 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


335 


tlie S'avaras,’’^ the Pulindas,t the Vindhya- 
niauleyas,+ the people of Vidarblia§ and the Danda- 

* Tlio S'avaras are an aboriginal tribe, according to somo Dravidian, and 
cording to otliers Kolarian. They are mentioned rarely in the M.-Bh. 
Vmti 2-129; clxviii. 6294r-6303 j clxxiii. 641-5; and ccvii. 7559-61) 

1(1 llamay. (Adi-K., i. 69; Aranya-K., Ixxvii. 6-32; Ac). They are represeut- 

I iu tlieao passages as dwelling io Central India and the Dokhan, as being 
i^-ked Dasyus, and as practising evil customs. They are still found scattered 
)oiil in those parts and also towards Orissa, under tho names Sabar, Saur, 
iir Ao. In tho Madras Presidency they are found chiefly in tho Ganjam 
1(1 Vizagapatam distrots (Madras Census of 1891, Report, p. 251) “The 
nais believe their original condition to have been that of a wandering tribe, 
,;anui>' tlirongh the hills of Orissa and Chota Nagpur, living on the fruits 
the forest and acknowledging the rule of no recognized chief.*' (Risloy’s 

and Tribes of Bengal, II. 21)l-2-I<6) ; and this belief agrees, if wo 
itend their range, with tho earliest notices of them. See also Cunningham, 
rch Siirv. liepts., XVII and XX. 

f These poojilo are mentioned again in verse 60 as being also in the 
and tlicro appears to have been a Northern branch of them in the 
iiiiahiyas (soo page 316 note f). This Southern branch seems from the 
i -Ilh to have occupied tlie middle portion of tho Bekhan (Sabha-P., xxx. 1120; 
lid Bliisliina-P., ix. 369 ; and Ramay., Kishk.-K , xli.l7), and extended 
istward whore they had a great city (Sabha-P., xxviii. 1068). They were 

II iilionginal tribe, for they were mlocVhas (Vana-P., olxxxviii. 12838-40); 
tn-ybccaino out-castes from not seeing brahmans (Anutas. -P., xxxiii. 2104-5) ; 
ity are called wicked and are said to have practised evil customs (S'anti-P., 
:ni, 755D-61). Tho Vayu Parana reads Pulindras (xlv. 126) erroneously. 

+ The Vayu Parana roads Vindhya-muUkas (xlv. 126), which is synonymous, 
those who dwell at tho foot of the Vihdhya mountains,’’ or “ tho aborigines 
f tho Viiidliya mountains.’’ I have not met this name as describing any 
articular people, and taken in its general meaning it would include the 
(ices mentioned iu verses 63-55 below : but perhaps it may be read as an 
djictive to “ Puliudas,’’ The Matsya Parana roads (oxiii. 

which seems erroneous. 

§ ^ idiirbha wa.s one of the most auoient and renowned kingdoms in tho 
leklwn (Vaiia-P., xevi and xcvii). It comprised the valley of the Payoshni, 
lie modern Purna and the middle portion of the Tapti (see page 299 note f 
ii‘l\ana-P., cxx. 10289-90), and corresponded to the western part of the 
'lodern Bcrar and tlie valley- country west of that. It is said to have been 
ornidod by a king Vidarbha who built a city called Yidarbhi (Hari-V., oxvii. 
and 6605-8 ; and Vana-P., Ixxii), which seems to have been the same 



336 


CANTO LTIl, 


48 


kas,* the Paurikas,t and the 


Maiilikas4 the Aimakas.| 


8S Kundina the capital (Vana-P. Ixxii ; and Hari-V., civ. 5800-'’. 
6661-2). Its moat famous king was Bhishmaka, who held the title “](■ 
of tho Dekhan” (id., cxvii 6590-1). The people were Bhojas (Udyoga 
xlvii. 1881) or perhaps only the royal family was so called {id., clvii. 5350-i 
Sahhd-P., xiii. 585-8), and so also in the Raghu-Vaihiia with referonco to 
period many generations anterior (vi. 59 and 69 ; and vii). The name Blio' 
seems to have more than one application, for tho Bhojas together with t^o 
Andhakas and Vrishnis belonged to the Yadava race (Hari-V., xciv 5i8i 
5204), and the name appears to have been applied also in a much wider sonse 
to Kshattriyas descended from Yayati (Sabha-P., xiii 566-71). 

* The Dandakas are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sabha-P., xxx. 1109) and 
were tho inhabitants of the forest region called Dandahdramja. Dandaka 
originally was tho namo of tho immense forest, whore Kama went in baiiigh- 
ment, and which is described in the Ram dy. as covering the whole of Cenli-al 
India from Bundelkhand on tho north to southward of tho Godaveri (Jouml, 
R. A. 8,, 1894, p. 2U) ; but as this forest was gradually cleared away by the 
spread of the Aryan colonies, its limits diminished till at last Danduka 
denoted only the country around the sources of the Godaveri and lower part 
of the Tapti (M -Bh , Sabha-P , xxx. 1169; Vana-P., Ixxxv. 8183-1). It could 
only have been at this stage that its inhabitants could well have been 
described by tho namo Dandakas, and it is no doubt tho people of that 
moderate area who are meant hero. To account for the name tho Hari- 
Vaihia has provided an eponymous king Dandaka who made Dandakaraiiya 
(x. 637-9). 

t The people of Purika. This may be either the famous towm Pun m 
Orissa, or the town Purikd which Muc'ukuiida is said to have built on ihc 
northern slope of tho Riksha Mts. in tho kingdom of Mahish-mati (Ihiri-V,, 
xcv. 5220-3) ; but the latter seems more probable, judging from the context 
For Mahish-mati, see page 333 note X- Parana reads Pnuntias, 

(xlv. 127); is this to be connected with Poonah, south-east of Bombay? i 
have not met it elsewhere. 

X The Vayu Purana reads Maunikas (xlv. 127); and Mauleyas aro uien- 
tioned in Sabha-P., li. 1871 ; but 1 have not found any of these names 
elsewhere. 

§ This as a people is not in tho dictionary. The Vayu PnrnnarcafS 
Asmakas (xlv. 127), but Asmaka seems to be tho proper form. These pcop'® 
aro mentioned in tho Ramay. (Kishk.-K , xli. 17) and M.-Bh.^ J 
xxxvii. 1605-8) ; and are placed in the middle of India by canto Ivid. ve 
7. They may have been the descendants of Asmaka, who was tbo son^^^ 
king Kalmasha-pada Saudasa’s queen Madayanti by Vasish^ha (Adi P ) 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


337 


IJboga-vardhanas, • Naishikas, f Kuntalas, t Andhas, § Udbhi- 
4() dan, II Vana-darakaslf ; these are the peoples of the ooutitrios 
of the Soafchern region.ff 

4736-7; and clxxvii. 6777-91), and who founded tho town Paudanya (i6tU, 

1 679 1). A quoon A^maki is mentioned in the Lunar lino {id., xov. 3766). 

I • I liavo not found this name elsewhere. Perhaps it may be connected with 
; the Southern Utsava-sanketas (Bhishma-P., ix. 368 ; and see page 319 note f). 

, f This IS not in the dictionary. It much resembles tho Ndsikyae of 
(MMfo kill. vorsG 24, who are, no doubt, tho people of Nasik, north-east of 
i but they seem to be intended by Ndsikydvas in verso 61. Naisha- 
(Ihas can hardly bo moart, for thoy are named in verse 54 and were not in 
South India. Tim \^ayu Parana reads NairniJcas (xlv. 127) which somewhat 
re^icmblea tho Nauritaa of the Bhiahma-P. list (ix. 359). 

I A people of this name have boon mentioned in vorse 32, as dwelling 
III Madhya-desa. The Kuntalas here wore in tho Dekhan and are the same 
a'l thoso inontionod in Bhishma-P., ix. 867, and Knrna*P., xx. 779. It 
appears Kuntula lay in the region between Bolganm and Bollary (Arch. Sarv. 
of W. India, No. 6 by J. F. Fleet, p. 6 ; and No. 10 by J. Burgoss, p* 72 note). 

§ Tho Yayii Parana reads Andhraa (xlv. 127), which is, no doubt, right. 
An.lliu. arc iiiontioned in tho M.-Bh. (Udyoga-P., xviii. 586 ; and Bhishma- P, 
X. 357), but mistakenly for Andhakas and Andhraa respectively. The An- 
dliins or Andhi-as wore arudo race in early times (Sabha-P., iv. 119 5 xxx. 1176* 
xum. 1270; and Vaiia-P., li. 1983); but thoy established a kingdom during 
the thud and second centuries B. 0. Andhra was a kingdom also in Hiuen 
rhs.tngs time ill the 7th century A.D,, and oomprisod the eastern portion 
of the Nizam’s territories, with its capital at Warangal, according to Cun- 
{Auc. Goog. of India). Another capital was Dlionuk^kata, which 
bl.anuiikoia near Amaravati on tho Kistna (Arch. Surv. of \V. India, No. 10 
hy 1 lhiig<'.ss, p. 32). Andhra is said to bo probably tho same as Telinga 
(>' "b, p, /2 note ; and dictionary), and is taken to bo the Sanskrit name for 
‘bigu m tho Madras Census Report. Telugu is the speech of the region 
puiding from a parallel of latitude a little north of Madras northward as 
<18 Icliapur in Ganjam ; it does not penetrate into Mysore nor the western 
fiuts of Aiiantapur and Bellary, but is spoken by many of the inhabitauta 
j izam 8 Dominions and the Central Provinc 'S (Report, p. 188). 

_ 'IS IS not in the dictionary and,I have not mot with it elsewhere. 

orms The Vayu Parana reads NaZafcaZi&as (xlv. 127), other 

Nalakdnanas and Nahhakdnanas (diet.), 
leatio Purina adds Magadhas (xlvii. 38) mistakenly ; they are 

ft Proper place in verse 44. 

Dahhiniiyd, md Dak$hifdvd» f The Matsja Pardija keep, pace 



338 


CANTO LVII. 


Hear from me the names of the Western peoples, Tbe 
Suryarakas,* the KalibalaSjf and the Hurgas,! and tli 
50 Anikatas,§ and the Pulindas, || and the Sunima8,| the 


with the text as far as the "Dandakas” and then jumps at once, withont 
any intimation, to the Western peoples beginning with the “ Kuliyas " >v 1 iq 
correspond to the “ Pulindas ” of verse 60. 

* This is obviously a mistake for SurpdrakaSf which the Vayu Puram 
reads (xlv. 128). Surparaka or S'urparaka (both forms seem correct, though 
the dictionary gives only the latter) was the country in the West where 
Rama Jamadaghya dwelt (Vana-P., Ixxxv. 8186); though it is also placed in 
the South (Sabhi-P, xxx. 1169; and Vana-P., Ixxxviii. 8337), because it was 
near the Southern sea in tho Wosterii region (S'anti-P., xlix, 1778-82). It 
bordered on the sea near Prabhdsa (Vana-P., oxviii. 10221-7), which is the 
modern Somnath in the peninsula of Kathiawar ; it included tho countrj 
around the mouth of tho Narmada (Anusas.-P., xxv. 1736), and the mouth of 
that river was so specially connected with Rama that it was called Jamad- 
agnya (Matsya Purana, cxciii. 33-34). l£o built the city Surparaka there 
(Hari-V., xovi. 5300), and Dr. Burgess has identified it with the small modern 
town Supara near Bassein, north of Bombay. The country Surparaka there- 
fore comprised tho littoral tract from about Bassein to about the 11 Narmada. 
(Arch. Surv. of W. India, No. 10 p. 31). The proper reading in Hamay. 
Kishk.-K., xliii. 6, should, no doubt, be “tho Surparakas also” instead of 
“the extensive towns” (Gorresio’s Edition, Annotations). 

f This is nob in the dictionary. Tho Vayu Purana reads Kolavanas (xlr. 
128), but I have not found either name elsewhere. Perhaps this is to be 
connected with Kalwan, a town about 37 miles north of Nasik (which is 
mentioned in page 339, note ||). 

t This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere; 
but the Dur^afas are mentioned in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 359). Perhaps 
this is to be connected with Dwigar-pur, a town and state about 90 miles 


north-east of Ahmedabad. 

§ Or Anikalas, or C'anikatas; neither is in tho dictionary. Tho Vay“ 
Purai^a reads Kdlitakas (xlv. 128); but I have not found these words else- 
where. These names suggest Calicut, but that is too far south to be admis- 
sible here in tho Western region. ^ 

II See note to verse 47 above. This branch would be among the 
south-west of Malwa or the southern portion of the Aravolli hills 
The Vayu Purana reads Paleyaa (xlv. 129), and the Matsya Km If 
49) ; but I have nob met with either name elsewhere. 

^ This is not in the dictionary. The Vdyu Parana reads SurdUs 
and the Matsya Birdlas (cxiii. 49) ; but I have not found any of 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN' WESTERN INDIA. 


339 


Rupapas,* and the Svapadas,t and the Kurumins,! and 
51 all Kathaksharas, § and the others are called Na- 
sikyavas,|| and the others who live on the north bank of the 
I^arinada, the Bhiru-kacchas, ** and the Maheyas,‘f“|* and 

lelsowhero. Aro these two names to bo identified with Israel ? There was an 
lanoiont Jewish colony, the modern Beni-Israel, on the Bombay coast before 
thf> 2ncl cent. A. D. (Hunter’s Indian Empire, p. 234). 

: t Tho Vayii(xl7. 129), and the Matsya (oxiii. 49) Pararias read Bupasas. 

I have not met either name elsewhere. Tho Bhishma-P. list mentions Rupa- 
rahdos (ix. 351). 

f This as tho name of a people is not in the dictionary ; but S'va-pac'a 
"doir-cooking,” { = S'va-pdka, which would not suit the metro) occurs, as the 
namo of a degraded tribe (Manu, x. 19 and 61). Tri-^anku is said to have 
associated with tho SVa-pakas, when discarded by his father (Hari-V., xii, 
721-3). The Vayn Purana (xlv. 129) and tho Matsya (cxiii. 49) read Tdpa- 
m, vrliich resembles tho Tdpasdsramaa placed in tho south region by canto 
Iviii. verso 27, which might mean tho descendants of ascetics. 

I This is not in the dictionary. Tho Vayu Purana reads Turasitns (xlv. 
120), but I have not mot either name elsowhore. Tho Matsya roads Taittirikas 
(cxm. 49), which rosornblos the Tithras mentioned in Bhishma-P., 1. 2084 
but there aro no data to identify them. 

§ This is not in tho dictionary. Tlie Vayu Purina reads Paraksharas (xlv. 
129), and the Matsya Kdraskaras (cxiii. 49). Tho Pdrasavns of canto Iviii 
versp 31 nppoar to bo tho same people. I have not met with any of these 
tames elsowhore, except Kdraskaras in Sabhd-P., xlix. 1804, bub tho Parana- 
ras mij^bt mean a tribe which claimed descent from Parasu-Rdma 
I! This is not in the dictionary. The Vayu Purana reads “ Nasikyas and 
fdipis” (vlv, 130); this agrees with the Ndsikyas of canto Iviii, verso 24 
Jwppt that Iho latter aro placed in the South. Tho Nasikyas are, no doubt, 

;be people of Nasik, which is an ancient and sacred city north-east of 
Bombay. The Matsya Parana reads “ and others who are called Vasikas ’* 
ciiii. 60), but I liave not met this name elsewhere. 

I fho Vayu Purana (xlv. 130) and tho Matsya (oxiii. 60) say “ within the 
iariTiiida.” 

Or Bharu-kac'chas as tho Matsya Purana reads (cxiii. 60). These are, no 
oubt, the same as the Bhrigu-kac'c'has of canto Iviii. verso 21. The word is 
e Greek Barugaza and survives in tho modern Bharuch or Broach, a large 
near the month of the Narmada (Anc. Geog. of India). The Vdyu 
'■ana reads Bhavu-kac'c'hras (xlv. 130) erroneously. None of these names 
behove in the Rdmayana or Mahd-Bhdrata. 

h*se are, no doubt, the people who dwelt along the R. Mahi (see page 



340 


CANTO LVir.- 


52 the Sarasvatas* also, and the Ka^m(ras,t and the Su-rnsi^ 
trasjj: and the Avantyas, § and theArbudasH also. Tliege 
are the Western peoples. 

53 Hear the inhabitants of the Viudhya Mountains. If The 

294, note §) north of Baroda. The Mdhilcas of tho Bhi'shma-P. list (jj 35 ^j 
are no doubt the same. 

• So also the Matsya Parana (cxiii. 50). “The people who dwell along 
the R. Saraa-vati,” whioh is, no doubt, the small river of that name that flows 
' Into the sea at Prabhaaa, the modern Somuath, in the peninsula of Kathiawar 
(Yanu-P., Ixxxii. 6002-4 j and S'alya-P., xxxvi. 2048-51).' They are not tie 
■ame as the Sarasvatas of canto Iviii. rerao 7, who were in Jradliya-dnsa, 
The V^yu Parana rends instead “Sahaeasand S'a^vatas” (xlv. 180); I hare 
not found either name elsewhere, but the S'dsiJcas of the Bhishma-P. list 
(ix. 364) are, no doubt, the same as the second of theso. 

t This name is altogether out of place here, and the Kasrairaa have been 
mentioned in their proper position in verso 41. Tho Vdyu rurdna reads 
JSTafVAr^t/as instead (xiv. 131) and the Matsya Kac'c'hikas (cxiii, 51 j, which 
indicate tho correct reading. They are tho people of Kac'c'ha (sco canto Inii. 
verso 28) tho modern Kaohh or Kutch. 

X Su-rdsh^ra is a country frequently mentioned in tho M -Bli., but the 
references seldom convoy any definito information. It included tlio punin. 
gala of Kathiawar and tho country around tho Gr. of Cambay —that ia, not 
quite all the modern territory called Gujarat ( Vana-P., Ixxxviii. 8341-9). it 
is very rarely alluded to in tho Hamay. (see once in Adi-K., xii. 23), Tlio 
old name survives in tho town Surat near tho mouth of tho Ta{)li. 

§ This form is not given in tho dictionary ; re&d Avantyds Awdmf 
They are the people of Avantij seo note to verse 65 where tho A>anti8 are 
mentioned again, and more appropriately, for canto Iviii. verse 22 places 
them in the Tortoise’s right side, t.c., the South : but they wore considered 
to be in both regions. 

The Ydyu Parana (xlv. 131) and the Matsya (cxiii. 61) read A'mriaf, ivhic 
is perhaps better, as they are placed by canto Iviii. verse 30 in tho Tortoises 
right hind-foot. Anarta was tho country which had for its capital Dfaraka 

or Dvara-vati or Kula-sthali, the modern Dwarka on tho sea-shoro at the 

extreme west of the peninsula of Kathiawar (Santi-P., cccxli. 12955; Han , 
oxiii. 6265-6). It was Krishna’s special kingdom, but it was founded ong 
before (Hari*V., x. 642-9; and xciv. 5163-9). 

II The people of Arbuda, the modern Mt. Abu near the south en ® 

AravaUi hills. ^ yindhyais 

^ For Vindha-nivdsinah read Vindhya-n%va8%nnh ; see verse oo. 
used here in its general and wider moaning, as denoting the whole mpu 



COUNTRIES AND RACES NEAR THE VINDHTA MOUNTAINS. 341 
Sarajas,* and KardshaB,t and the KeralaSjJ and Ufekala8,§ 

• from Gujarat eastwards, and not in the precise sense given it in verses 
21 23 because the Naishadhas, Avantis and other western people are includ- 
ed in this group. 

• I hare not met with this name elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary. 

The Vay‘1 Pnrana Cxlv. 132) and the Matsya (oxiii. 62) read Mdlavas, which 
' uo doubt correct. Malava is the modern Malwa; and the people are 
l]v mentioned in the M.-Bh. as a tribe rather than as a settled nation 
[eg Sabha-P., xxxiii. 1270 j li. 1871 ; and Vana-P , ccliii. 16256). Malava does ^ 
not appear to havd been so extensive however as Malwa and, as this passage 
indicates, denoted rathjr the upper portion of that region bordering on the 
Viudhyas, west of Avanti. 

if The name is also written Kdmsha, KdriHsha and Kdrushalca. This people 
■ constituted a poweiful nation under king Danta-vakra in the Pandavas’ time 
I (8abluv-P., xiii. 575-7; and Hari-V., xci 4963) ; but they socni to have con- 
istedof Roveral tribes (Gdyoga-P., iii. 81) aud were not looked upon as closely 
Ihod to tlie races around thorn, for their origin is carried directly back to 
n epouymous ancestor Karusha, a son of Manu Vaivasvata, in tlie Ilari* 
'anisa (x. 614; and xi 658). The position of KarCisha is indicated by the 
ollowiiig alliisioDS, It is linked with C'odi and with Kfrii (Adi-P., cxxiii, 4796 ; 
Jhishma P., ix. 348; liv. 2242 ; Ivi 2416; cxvii. 6446; and Karna-P., xxx. 
231), and witli the Vatayas or Vatsas (Droi?a-P., xi. 396; see page 807, 
3oto*)i it was not a very accessible country (Sabha-P., li. 1864); and 
lero it 18 said to rest on the Vindhyas. Moreover Danta-vakra acknow- 
cfk'ed Jarnsandha, king of Magadha (see page 330 no to J) as his suzerain 
[Sahha-P,, xiii 575-7; and Hari-V., xci. 4963). Karusha therefore was a 
hilly country, south of Kasi and Vatsa, between C'cdi aud Magadha; that is, 
itcompriaed the hilly country of which Rowa is the centre, from about the 
R Ken on the west as far as the confines of Behar on the cast. I have dis- 
cassed Karusha in a paper on “Ancient Cedi, Matsya and Karu§a” in the 
Benj^al Asiatic Society’s Journal^ 1895, Part I. p. 249. 

t Tins must be incorrect, for the Keralas were a well-known people in the 
South ; see note to Kevalas in verse 45. The Vayu Purdna (xlv. 132) and 
Matsya (cxiii. 52) read Mekalas, which is no doubt right. They are men- 
tioned in the M.-Rh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 348; and li. 2103) and occupied the 
Mekala hillg and the hilly country around. The Mokala hills are the hills 
iu which the R. Soue rises (Ramay., Kishk.*K , xl. 20), and which bound 
Cthattisgarh on the west and north. Those people are often coupled, as here, 
the Utkahis. 

§ See page 327^ note *. Ctkala had a wide extension and falls within this 
K^oup as well ag within the Eastern group. 



342 


CANTO LVtT. 


the Uttaraarnas,* and the Da4arnas,t 
54 the Kiskindhakas, § the To^alas, || 


the Bhojya84 and 
and the KodaIits,d[ 


* The Uttamas SiTO mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 348) and are no 
doubt the same people. The Matsya Parana reads Aundrdmdshas (cxiii 62) 
A people called iTrddhva-lcarnas are mentioned in canto Iviii. verse 16 i 
have not, however, found any of these names elsewhere. 

t This people formed a well-known kingdom in early times (Adi-P., cxiii. 
4449; Vana-P., Ixix. 2707-8 ; and Udyoga-P., cxc.-oxoiii), and inhabited tie 
Qountry watered by the R. Dasdrija, the modern Dasan, a tributary of the 
Jumna. They are named thrice in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 348, 350 and 363), 
which seems inexplicable. They aro mentioned both in the Eastern and in 
the Western regions in the accounts of Bhima’s and Nakula’s campaigns 
(Sabha-P., xxviii. 1063-6; and xxxi. 1189) ; tho former of these allusions is 
correob, but the latter seems to be an error. Tho capital was Vidisa, see page 
343, note f. 

X Or better, Bhojas, as the Vayu (xlv. 132) and Matsya fexiii. 62) Puranaa 
read. This name, as mentioned in page 335, note §, seems to liavo had 
more than one application. Bhojas as a Yadava tribe dwelt in Krishna’s 
kingdom in Su-r^shtra; and Bhojas inhabited Mpittikavati, which seems from 
the varions references to it to have been situated somewhere ou tho ngrth- 
eastern limits of the modern Gujarat (Vana-P., xiv. 629; xx. 791; «a 
10172 - 6 ; ccliii. 15245; Mansala-P., vii. 244-5 ; and Ilari-V., xxxvii. 1980-7; 
and xxxviii. 2014). These may bo the Bhojas mentioned in tho text, inhabit- 
ing the extreme western end of tho Vindhya range. 

§ Or better, Ktshkindhakas, as tho Matsya Furana reads (cxiii. 52). They 
-are no doubt the same as tho KaMindhyas of canto Iviii. verse 18; but they 
cannot have any reference to Kishkindhyd in tho Ramdy., for that country 
lay far to the south of the Godavari (see Journal, R. A. S., 1894, pp. 255, Ac ), 
and is referred to in M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxx. 1122. The Kishkirrdhakas men- 
tionedinthe Hari-Vaihsa (xiv. 784) may be tho people intended bore, but 
there appear to be no data to identify them. 

II The Matsya Purdna re.uds Stohlas (cxiii. 63). They are not in the ic 
tionary, but Toshala and Tosala aro given doubtfully. I have not however 

found any of these names elsewhere. 

% These aro the people of Dakshina Kosala or Maha-Kosala, t ° ^ ^ ^ 
Chhattiagarh. la the Journal, K. A. S., 1894, p. 216, Bome reasons 
given for placing the Paac'lpsn>-“ lake, where Rama spent ton 
exile, in this region. May one hazard the conjecture that it was 

quenco of his long residence here, that a colony from North 

this region, established a kingdom here and gave their name to '• ^ 

The connexion was ancient (Alvamedh.-P., Ixxxii. 2464-5)- 



COgNTRIES AND RACES NEAR THE VINDHYA MOUNTAINS. 343 

the Traipuras,* and the Vaidi4as,t the Tumburas,! 
and the Tumbula8,§ the Patua, || and the Naishadhas,ir 

# The people of Tripurd, the modern Tewar, on the R. N'armadl It waa 
famons city (Sabha-P., xxx. 1164; Vana-P., ccliii. 15246) deriving its name 
(Jill a legend that the demons had a triple city T^i-pura here, made of gold, 
l^cr and iron, and R'iva destroyed it at the intercession of the gods ; this is a 
nuiirito subject with the poots fKarna-P., xxxiii and xxxiv; and see 
jtaieya llraliin , 1. iv. 26 and 24, for the story in an older form) ; see also 
'unuingltam’s Arch. Surv. Repts., VIII. 124; IX. 64-55; and, XXL 23 ; but 
is coiuiovion of Tripura with C'edi in early times is mistaken, see paper on 
Licieut Cedi, Matsya and Karusa** in Journal, Bengal Asiatic Society, 
81 ) 5 , Fart L !>• 

f For \'a id isas vc&d VnidiM^. These are the people of Vidiid. It was a 
amous town, tho capital of the country Da.4arna, and situated on the R. 
iXra-vati, tlio modern Botwa, a little way east of Ujjain (Mogha-D., i. 24, 
15 :ui(l 28). It is probably to be identified with the modern Bhilsa, or rather 
iMtli BcR-nagar the ancient capital which is close to Bhilsa (Cunningham’s 
Siupa of llliarhut, 132, Ac). The Vityu Purana roads Vaidilcas (xlv. 133), 
which scorns erroneous, though the Vaidiaas are really included among the 
Dfihrrnas in tlio last verse. 

I These are mentioned as a wild aboriginal tribe who inhabited tho slopes 
(if the Vindliya Mountains in tho Hari-Vaih^a (v. 310-11). The Matsya 
Piinina roads Tiimuras (oxiii. 63), and the Tumburncts (Bhishma-P., 1. 2084) 

amv 1)6 tho same. 

§ The \Tiya Purana roads Tumuras (xlv. 133); see tho last note. Tho 
Mrir^a reads Tumlaras (cxiii. 53). This is no doubt a tribe closely allied ta 

the la's!. 

ii Tins people seems to be tho same as the Patac'c'aras, who are mentioned 
several times in tho M.-Bh. ; see page 309, note ^ Tho Vayu Purana reads 
Shulmas (slv. 133), and the Matsya Pad^amas (cxiii. 53) ; but I have not 
in'T either of those names elsewhere. 

T Tlio people of Nishadba; the Nishadhas, as the V^yu Purana reads (xlv. 
133), This country is chiefly known from tho story of its king Nala (Vana-P., 
otherwise it is rarely mentioned. The chief data for fixing its 
position are Nala’s remarks to his wife when ho *i banished from his kingdom 
(' ^ ’ 2317-9) ; and, as stated in note f to page 299, it seems to me the 

which he do.scribos could only bo obtained completely from a position 
the yatpura Mountains about longitude 75*^ E. The text says also 
^'Rhadlia rested on tho Vlndhya Mountains. Hence it may bo inferred that 
'shaiDia comprised the country south of the Vindhyas between long. 74 ® 
75^^ ^vith Avanti to the north-east and Vida •'bha to the south-east. Its 



344 


CANTO LVII. 


65 Annajas,* and the Tushti.karas,t the VirahotraSjJ andthe 
Avantis.§ All these peoples dwell on the slopes of tlie 
Vindhya Mountains. 

capital was probably in the Tapti valley; Damayanti in wandering 
it found her W8|y north-eastward to C'edi (see note to C'edi iu Ivlii 
verse 16). 

* I have not met this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. The 
Matsya Purdna roads Arupaa (cxiii. 54) which sootns erroneous. The Vayn 
Parana reads An'&paa (xlv. 134) which is no doubt correct. Anupa means 
“a country situated near water,” or “ a marshy country.” It was applied to 
various tracts near the sea, generally in the combination adgardniipa, e.g., in 
Bengal (Sabha-P., xxv. 1002; xxix. 1101; and xxxiii. 1268-9); in or near 
the Pandya* kingdom in the South (Udyoga-P , xviii. 678); in the north and 
west of the peninsula of Kathiawar (Hari-V., cxiii. 6361-9; and cxir. 
6410-11); and on tho western coast generally (Udyoga-P., iii. 81); but the 
name was more specially applied to a tract on tho west coast which consti- 
tuted a kingdom in the Pandavas’ time (Sabha-P., iv. 123). Tho only coiintiy 
which rests on tho Vindhyas and borders on the sea is the tract on tho east 
of the G. of Cambay, north of the Narmada, and this no doubt was Anupa. 
It is also indicated that Su-rashtra, Anupa and Anarta were contiguous coun* 
tnes, and that Amipa lay beyond and south of Su-rdshtra (Hari-V., xciv 5143- 
80). When the kings of Mahish-mati (see page 333, note J) were powerful, 
the valley of the lower Narmada and Anupa would naturally fall under their 
sway, and this no doubt explains why Kartavirya is called “lord of Anupa" 
(Vana-P., cxvi. 10180-90), and king Nila also (Bhishma-P., xov. 4210). 

f I have not found this name elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary 
The reading should no doubt be Twnf/tfccras as the V&yu Purana reads (xh- 
134). A Tuiulikera king is mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., xvii. 691), 
and the Tundikeras (Karva-P., v. 138); and tho Tundikeras arc said in 
the Hari-YamSa to bo a branch of tho Haihaya race (xxxiv. 1895). There is 
a town called Tendukhcra a little north of the Narmadd at nearly long. 
79° B. ; and as this site suits the text, it may be prosutnod these pooijfl 
occupied that position in the Narmada valley. The Matsya Parana re s 
S'aundikeraa (cxiii. 54), not quite correctly. 

X The Vayu Purana (xlv. 134) and the Matsya (oxiil. 64) read Y t 
which is no doubt oorreot. Vitihotra was a famous Haihaya king, ^ 
Vitihotras were a branch of that race (Hari-V., xxxiv. 1895). ^7 

called Fitahofras in tho M.-Bh. (Drona-P., Ixx. 2436). Being Haihaya , 
probably occupied a part of the upper Narmadd valley. _ 

§ They have been mentioned already in verse 52. Avanti a 
mada flowing through it (Sabhd-P., xxx. 1114; and Vana*F , « 



345 


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN THE HIMALAYAS. 

Next I will tell thee also the names of the coiin* 
tries which rest against the Mountains.* The Nih^as,t 
and the Hamsa-margas, J the Kurus, § the Gurga^as,!! 

*-,nd was on the lower portion of that river, for it is placed in the South in 
he first of these passages, and in the West in the second passage and in 
erse 52. It appears to have been bounded by the Riksha Mountain# 
Satpnra range) on the south (Vana-P., Ixi 2317), but its limits on the north 
rc not clear. Its capital, though not mentioned in the M.-Bh., was Ujjayini 
r the modern Ujjain, in later times (Megha-D., i. 31). Avanti there- 
)ro comprised the region of the sources of the Chambal and the country 
3 uth*westward as far as the Satpura range. Two brothers Viuda and Anu- 
ludu are often named as the kings of Avanti in the M.-Bh. (Udyoga-P. cIjcv. 
Jj3; Drona-P., xeix. 3682-92; and Karna-P., xiii. 498-9), but they were 
so Ivaikeyas and led Kaikeya troops (ibid., 492-524). May it be inferred a 
lancli of the Kaikoyas had invaded and conquered Avanti ? 

* Pa)vatdir(iym. These mountains are it seems only the Himalaya range, 
his group repeats many of the tribes montionod in versos 40-42. 
t I liavo not mot this name elsewhere. Are these the modern Newiirs, 
ho inhabit the groat valley of Nepal and its vicinity, and who were the 
vnera of the country prior to the Gurkha invasion (Journal, Beng. Aff. Socy., 
ol LXIir, Part I, 213, 214 and 217). The Vayu Purana reads Nigarharaa 
Iv. 135), but I have not found it elsewhere. The Matsya reads Nirdhdras 
xiii. 55) which soeras erroneous. 

t Soo page 323 note f. The Matsya Parana roads Sarvagas (ciiii. 66) 
Inch seems erroneous. 

§ These are probably the Uttara or Northern Kurus, for the Kurus of 
adhya-desa could not properly be described as dwelling among mountains. 

seem to have been the stock from which the Kurus of Madhya-deSa 
parated off, for the period when Dhrita-rashtra and Pandu were born is 
scribed as a golden age, in which both branches of the Kurus engaged in 
iPy livalry (Adi-P., cix. 4337-46); but the wistful recollections of their 
’ homo idealized it afterwards into a blissful land, where fancy gave 
fcee scope (Ramay., Kishk.-K., xliv. 82-115) They seem to have 
^ Pjd the uppermost valleys of the Indus near its sources, with Kailasa 
'm cl 11026-35); and fervid imagination also placed 

to Mount Meru on its north side (Bhishma-P., vi. 207-8; and vii. 
la d Ilari-varsha, and declared men could not enter their 

»'^oha 'i ^^^^^^■^■’**’'^^'^054-8). Theyarodescribedaslivinginprimi- 

ind R utmost freedom there (oxxii. 4719-23 1 

“^“Ql&y., ioc. ctf.). 

Qofc in the dictionary and I have not met it elsewhere. Axe these 
44 



CANTO LVII. 


.346 

57 the Khasas,* and the Kunta-privara^as,! tlij 
I7rnas,t the D4rvas,§ the Sakfitrakas, [[ the Tri 

people the modem Gurungs, an important tribe of Tatar race, who dwell noij 
throughout Nepal, but whose territory was formerly the country aboni 
Lamzung, Ghandrung and Siklis, west of the great valley of Nepal (Journal, 
Bengal Asiatic Society, Vol. LXIII. Part I. 213, 2l7 and 223—229; Rigiey’, 
Castes and Tribes of Bengal, I. 304) ? The Vayu Purina reads Tangar^at herj 
(xlv. 135), after having named them previously (tbid., 120); see verse 41, 
The Matsya roads A-pathas (cxiii. 55), which seems erroneous. 

* The Khasas or Khaks are generally mentioned as a half-civilized tribt 
ontsido India, along with S^akas, Daradas, &o. (Sabha-P., li. 1859; Drona-P 
xi. 399 ; and cxxi. 4846-7) They aro said to have been defeated and de- 
graded by Sagara (Hari-V., xiv. 784), and were considered mlecVhas (ul.,xcv, 
6440-1; see also Muir’s Sansk. Texts, II. 482). The Khasas in the text 
however, may perhaps be identified with the Khas, who were formerly a smal 
clan but have developed into the predominant military order of the kingdou 
of Nepal through intermarriages with brahmans {Journal, Bengal Asiatk 
Society, Vol. LXIII. Part I. 217-223). See canto Iviii. verse 6. 

t 1 have not found this name elsewhere. The Vayu Purana reads M 
instead of Kunta (xlv. 136), which does not seem satisfactory. Tbeprope] 
reading should no doubt be Karna-pi'dvaranas, “ those who cover themaelvei 
with their ears,” a people mentioned several times in the M.-Bh. (Sabba P- 
li. 1875; and Bhishma-P., li. 2103). They are placed in the South in 
Btory of Sahadova’s conquests (Sabha-P , xxx. 1170) and among the Kiratai 
in the Eastern region in the Ramay. (Kishk -K. xl. 29); but it seems per 
" missible to identify them with the Ulukas, for a story is told about an Uliiki 
named Pravara-karna (Vana-P, cxcviii. 13334). The Ulukas dwelt in thi 
Himalayas (ibid.), and formed a kingdom in the Pa^i^vas’ time (UdyogaP- 
clix. and clx), but it seems impossible to fix their position more definitely tbai 
somewhere in Nopal (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1014-20). The word Karna-Favara?' 
is also nsed as an adjective, for Hanfimfin saw female Rikshasas in La 
“ three-eared and pin-eared, long-eared, ear-less, and one-eyed and onc-car^ 
and having their ears as a covering” (R^mfiy., Sund.*K., xvii. 24); 
was an ancient belief that there were people with immense ears which covew 
their bodies (Plin., iv. 13; and vii. 2 ; Mandeville’s Travels, chap- 
Matsya P. mentions Kutha-prdvaranas and Katna-prdvarams (oxx. 5 an 
X This people have been already mentioned in verse 42. ^ ^ 

§ These appear to be the same as the Darvas mentioned in verse » 
Cunningham’s Arch. Snrv. Repts., II. 15 ; and XIV. 146. ^ 

11 This is not in the dictionary j but it seems to be the same as a r 
or Sakrid-grdhas, who are said to be a terrible mleo'c'ha tribe m 



PRAWB OP INDIA. 


347 


garfcas,* and the G41avas,t the Kir4tas,t and the Tdinasas.§ 
g And in this Bhdvdtci is estdhlished the law of the four a^es, 
the Krita, Treta and the two others. Such is this country 
9 Bharata, constituted with a four-fold conformation. || On its 
south and west and east is the great ocean ; the Himavat 
range stretches along on its north, like the string of a bow.^ 
0 Then this country Bhamta is filled with every kind of seed, 
0 brahman. It has the supremacy of Brahma, the lordship 
of the Ruler of the Immortals, the divinity of the gods, and 

ihi'shma-P., ix. 373). Thoro appear to be no data to fix thoir position unless 
fj may be connected with the Sakfin-nanddy which seems to be a river ia 
e past of Nepal (Vana-P., Ixxxiv. 8137). The text might also be read “and 
e Kptrakag,” but I have found no such name elsewhere. 

* Or Traigartas. Trigarta was considered to be in the Northern region 
abhi-P., xxvi. 1026) and also in tho Western (id., xxxl 1189). It is generally 
mtioned in counexion with the Sindhus, Madras and other Panjab nations 
?,li. 1870; Vana-P., cclxiv. 15693-9; cclxx. 15743; Bhishma-P., xviii. 688; 
viii 5485; cxx. 5649; Drona-P., vii. 183; and also Hari-V,, xci. 4965-70). It 
IS near tho Kurus, for the Pandavas when burnt out of Varanavata visited 
[' Trigartas and other contiguous nations (Adi-P., elvi. 6084-7); and also 
ar Malsya and Salva, for those two kingdoms had often raided into Trigarta 
irilta-P., x\x). From these indications it appears that Trigarta must have 
icbodtho Pan jab on the west, and tho Kurus on the south-east, and beea 
•so to Matsya (seo page 307 note *) and S'dlva (see note to canto Iviii. verse 
on the south ; hence it must have comprised the country from Amballa and 
ttiiila to the R. Bias, i.e., the Jalandhar doab and the country south-east 
diat. Cunningham includes Kangra also (Arch. Surv. Repts., II. 16 ; and 
V. no and 117 ; and Buddh. Cavo Temples, p. 93). At the time of tho great 
r Prasthala belonged to Trigarta (soe note on page 321), and so brought 
' Trigarta territories close to Matsya and OTva. 

f Tlieso pGO})le, no doubt, claimed to bo the descendants of the fishi Galava 
xxvii 14G3-7 ; and xxxii. 1767-76), who was a famous son of Vi^vA- 
ra (Auusas.-P., iy. 249-259; Udyoga-P., cv-cxviii; and see cantos XX and 
r - ajove), or took their name from him; se': similarly the Atreyas and 
r^radvajaa of verso 39. 

; I See note to verse 40. 

I ese have been already mentioned in verse 41. 

^'08 Himavat range included also the Sulaiman Moun- 

»ith thA^f Panjab. The simik must refer to a dravra bow, 

"'^®8tnng angular in the middle. 



.^48 


CANTrr Lvin. ' ’ 


*61 the mortfit nature of men. * It has' various^ kinds of 
animals, cattle and aquatic animals ;t and all creeping thi^g, 
likewise. And from it are produced J all immovable'tliiiiM, 
62 together with things good or bad. No other land of 


63 


64 


ftctioj 

exists among the worlds, 0 brahman. Evenfamoug the godg 
0 saintly brdhman, this is ever in truth § the wish— “Olj 
that we shall become men on the earth, when we fall fpojj 
our divine condition! A man indeed does actions that th( 
gods and demons cannot do!” Those who are involved intb< 
fetters of such action, who ai’e eeger to proclaim their owi 
actions, || and who are possessed of a small portion of happi 
ness perform no action at all. 


Canto LVIII. 

Mdrkand(*ya continuing represents India as resting upon Vislm h 
the form of a tortoise looking eastward^ and distribukstk 
various countries and peoples accordingly over the several farh 
ef his hody^ together with the corresponding hmar condellaiiou 
He gives an astrological application to this arrangement ad 
enjoins the performance of religious rites to crvoid calamity. Ei 
also distributes the constellations of the Zodiac over the Tortoise) 
body, 

Kraushtuki*|f spoke 

1 Adorable Sir ! Thou hast duly declared Bharata to me, it* 

2 rivers, mountains, countries, and the people who inhabit it 

• Marutas tathd seems incorrect. Read instead martyatd tathd ? 

t Mfiga-pafv-ajisaro-yonis. The meaning of “ aquatic animal ” is given t 
op-sara but not to ap-saras in the dictionary. 

X For pra-ydti read pra-jatih ? 

§ For sadd esha read sadaivaisha ? 

II This seems rather meaningless. Yot svaItarma’‘lhydpanotsuU\hi^^ ^ 
reads sva-karmaMapanonmulchaih, "who are averse to diminishing the 8^^ 
of their actions;” hut hshapanotsukaih seems preferable, "who are eager 

diminish the stock of their actions.” 

% For Kroshiukir read Kraushtukir. 



POSITFON OF VISHNU AS TOHTOISE IN INDIA. 


Blit thou didst previously make mention of the Tortoise, who 
is tho adorable Vishnu, in Bhiirata j I desire to hear fully 
about his position. 

3 What position does he, the god Janardana, occupy in his 
form of the Tortoise ? And how are weal and woe indicated 
thereby to mankind according to the position of his face and 
of his feet ? Expound all that about him. 

MArkandoya spoke 

i With his face looking eastwards the adorable Tortoise- formed 
god takes bis po^iition, when he approaches this nine-portioned 
3 countiy Bharata, 0 brahman. The constellations are arrang- 
ed all about him in nine divisions, and the countries ^ also, 
0 hrahman. Hear duly from me which they are. 

) The Veda-mautras,t the Vimandavyas,t the S'dlvas,§ 

•Tho arrangement of the countries is very far from correct,* and this 
^anto cannot be compared with the last canto for accuracy. To make the 
ihnj>e of India conform to that of a Tortoise lying outspread and facing 
lastwarda is an absurd fancy and a difficult problem. 

+ This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere# 
Does It mean “those who observe the Vedas and the Mantras especially" 
)r has it any reference to Brahmavarta ? 

t I have not found this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. Mdn4a» 
W fu'o mentioned in verse 38. 

§ Or Salveyas as they were also called (Vana-P. cclxiii. 15576-82). The 
'iilvag are often mentioned in the M.-Bh They were near the Kurus 
lirata-P. 1 11-12) and the Trigartaa (id., xxx) ; and in the beautiful story 
Satya vat and Savitri, he was a Salva prince and she a Madra princess 
ccxcii, &c.). Other indications of Salva are given in the allusions 
^ Krishna’s conquest of it, but the story is marred because the people are 
IDaityas and Dauavas, and Sauhka which soems to have been tho 
IS desenbed as a city and as situated in the air, and also as able to 
^m) (Vana-P. xiv-xxii; Udyoga-P. xlvii. 1886; and Dro^ia-P. 

, 11 ^/ attacked Dvara-vati, and Krishna in retaliation 

oao otT " '"'f at the gulf of the sea {ibid ), which can be 

Kachh. From these indications it appears 
incanall western side of the Aravalli hills. Sanbha 

‘y caUeti determined, Salva seems to have contained another 

%tt k' (or MfittiJed-vati which is probably the same as 

^ “-vati mentioned in page 342, notet (Vana-P. riv. 629; and 



350 


CANTO LVIII. 


and tlie Nfpas^ and the S'akaSjt and the Ujj|. 

XX. 791). The Hari-Vam^a says king Sagara degraded the S^^lvas fxir. 
but this is a late fable for the Shalva king was one of the leading monarchs in 
Krishna’s time {id , cviii. 6029), and was brother of S^iSu-pala king of C'edi (Vj. 
na-P. xiv. 620-7) ; and other allasions shew that S'alva was a famoua kingdom 
before that (Udyoga-P. clxxiii and clxxiv; and AnuSas.-P. cxxxvii. 6267) ;be. 
sides which, Satya-vat and Savitrf rank with the noblest characters in ancient 
Indian story. The weird legend of Vyuahita§va’s queen no doubt means hei 
sons became S'^lvas and did not originate the race (Adi-P. oxxi. 4695-47l4)| 
as in the case of tho Madras (page 315, note %)• 

* The Nipas began with king Nipa of the Paurava race, who establishea 
his dynasty in Kampilya, tho capital of Southern Pauc'ala, about 12 or 
16 generations anterior to the Pandavas ; the dynasty flourished in king 
Brahma-datta who was contemporary with their fifth ancestor Pratipa, and 
it was destroyed in Bhishma’s time (IIari*Y., xx. 1060-73; M-Bh., A'di-P. 
cxxxviii. 6512-3 ; and Matsya-P. xlix. 62 and 63) in the person of Janamejaya, 
nicknamed Durbuddhi, who after exterminating his kinsmen was himBell 
killed by Ugrayudha (Udyoga-P. Ixxiii. 2729; Hari-V., xx. 1071-2; and 
Matsya-P. xlix. 69). Kampilya is the modern Kampil on the old Ganges 
between Budaon and Farokhabad (Cunningham, Arch. Sorv. Repts., 1. 255). 
Pfishata, who is said to have been the last king’s grandson but was a 
Panc'ala with a different ancestry, obtained the kingdom and handed downs 
new dynasty to his son Drupada (Hari-V., xx. 1082-1115 ; and xxxii. 1778-93), 
The Nipas who survived are mentioned in tho M.-Bh. as an inferior people 
(Sabhd-P. xlix. 1804 ; and 1. 1844). 

t The S'akas were originally an outside race and are mentioned often m 
the M-Bh. They wore considered to be mleo'c'has (Vana-P. dxxxviii 12838- 
9), and were classed generally with Yavanas, bnt also with Kawhojas, Pah 
lavas, Tukharas and Kha^s (Sabha-P. xxxi. 1199; 1. I860; Udyoga-P ui- 
78; xviii. 690; Drona-P, xi. 399 ; xx. 798; cxxi. 4818; STanti-P. 
and Vana-P. li. 1990; and also Ramay., Kishk. K. xliv. 13). Their liom< 
therefore lay to tho north-west, and they are generally identified with t ^ 
Scythians (Lat. Sacm). They penetrated into India by invasions, an 

branch is mentioned in the M-Bh. as in the Extern region, apparent y>i 

Behar (Sabha-P. xxix. 1088; and U. 1872; see also RamAy., Kishk. K. x 
Buddha S^akya-muni is considered to have been of S'aka race. Thmr mro^^ 
jcontinued through many centuries, and were resisted by various 
they are mentioned in the text as having established themselves »n ^ 
de^. The Hari-Vam^ makes them the descendants of Nans ya 
Manu Vaivaavata’s sons (x. 614 and 641); another account says 
Kshattriyas and became degraded from having no brahmans (M- •> 



351 


COUNTRIES AND RACES IN MADHTA-DES'A. 

hanas,^ my child, f the Ghosha-sankhyas, J and the 
7 Khavas, § the Saras vatas, || theMatsyas,t the S'urasenas,** 

p xxxiii. 2103 ; and Mann x. 43-44). The RamAy. has an absurd fable about 
their creation (Adi-K. Ivi. 3 j see page 314 note ♦). 

# Ujjihana is given in the dictionary as the name of a region, but have 
lot met it anywhere. Perhaps it is to be identified with the town Urjihdndj 
irhich was situated south-east of VArana-sthala, which is tho same as Hasti- 
iapura,oriiearit(Ramay., Ayodh. K. Ixxiii. 8-10); and in that direotion 
here is now a town called Ujha7n about 11 miles south-west of Budaon. 
t Viitsa; but it would bo better to read Vatsd, “ the Vatsas ; ” seepage 
i07, note. * 

I This is not in tho dictionary and I have not found the name elsewhere, 
t may mean “ those who are reckoned among Ghoshas or herdsmen,” and bo 
,n adjective to Khasas. 

§ Or Khams. They were an outside people on the north, as mentioned in 
wgo 316 note, * In one passage they are placed between Meru and Mandara 
irar the K. S'ailocU (Sabha-P. li. 1858-9), that is somewhere in Western 
I'hibet; according to the Matsya Purana the R. STailodaka rises at Mt. Aruria 
vluch IS west of Kailasa and flows into tho Western Sea (cxx. 19-23). Khaia 
las bocti connected with Kashgar. The Khavas also made inroads into India, 
ur they are classed among the Pan jab nations in a passage in the M-Bh., 
^hieh shews its later age by its tone (Karna P. xliv. 2070), and they are 
nbntionod in the text hero as settled in Madhya-desa. Manu says they were 
ishattriyas and became degraded by the loss of sacred rites and the absence 
if brahmans (x. 43-44). 

II Those who live along tho Saras- vati,” that is, tho sacred river north of 

^nru-kshetra. They are not tho same as the people named in canto Ivii, 
'ersc 51. 

? Sec page 307 note 

•‘Surasena lay immediately south of Indra-prastha or Delhi (Sabhfi-P., 
n. 1105-6), and comprised the country around Mathura, the modern Muttra 
3 o93«3io 2; and xci. 4973) to the oast of Matsya (Virafa-P., v. 

^ -ij) ; and it extended apparently from the Chambal to about 60 miles north 
(see Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Repts., XX. 2). The S'urasenas be- 
c 11 and Ilaihaya race, for Mathura tho capital is special- 

e the capital of the Yadavas, and tho kings who reigned there be- 
to that race (Hari-V., Ivii. 3180-83; Ixxix. 4124-34; xo. 4904; oxiv. 

2024 and 2027). A king named S'urasena, a son of Arjuna 
18 mentioned (id., xxxiv. 1892), who is, no doubt, intended as the 
^^cestor of this people, for Arjuna who vanquished Ravana was 
y anterior to Rama, and the Hari-Yamta says S'urasena occupied this 



352 


CANTO LVIII. 


and the people of Mathura,* the Dharmaranyas,t the 
Jyotishikas, t the Gaura-grivas, § the Gu^asH and 
8 the A^makaSjf the Vaidehakas,** and the Paj. 

country after S'atru-glina’s time (id., Iv. 3102) ; see next note. The S^urngfinj, 
constituted a powerful kingdom shortly before the Pan(Java8’ time, and Kyish. 
^a killed Kamsa, who was one of the chief monarchs of that age, broke up th( 
sovereignty and betook himsolf to Anarta. In later times S'drasena pre, 
Bumably regained importance, for it gave its name to S'auraseni one of th( 
chief PrAkpits. ' 

* Mathura was the capital of S'urascna as mentioned in the last note, and ii 
the modern Muttra on the R. Jumna (TIari-V ., Iv. 3060-61). Tho Hari-Vaiiisj 
says that Madhu, king of tho Daityas and Danavas, and his son Lavana reign, 
ed at Madhu-pura and Madhu-vana (Iv. 3061-3) ; and during Rama’s reign 
S'atru-ghna killed Lavana, cut down Madhu-vana and built Mathura on its siu 
(Iv. 3083-96 ; and xcv. 5243-7) ; and after tho death of Rama and his brothers 
Bhfma of the Yadava race according to one passage (id., xcv. 5243-7) took the 
city and established it in his own family ; and Surasena (see tho last note) 
according to another passage occupied the country around {uh, Iv. 3102). It 
is said Bhima’s son Andhaka was reigning in MathurA while KuSa and Lava 
reigned in Ayodhya (id., xcv. 5247-8). These passages seem to make a mark, 
ed distinction between the population in tho country and tho dynasty in the 
city, 

t Dharmdranya was the name of a wood near GayA (Vana-P. Imir 
8063-4; AnuAAs.-P. xxv. 1744; and clxv. 7656; with Vana-P. Ikxvu. 
8304-8). 

X This is not in the dictionary and I have not found the name eleew ere, 
but Buchanan Hamilton says there was a class of brahmans in Behar, called 
Jausi, the vulgar pronunciation of Jyotish (Vol, I. p. 166). 

§ These are stated in the dictionary as in the text to bo a people m 
Madhya-deAa ; but I have not met the name elsewhere. The word may ho^vever 
be an adjective, “ yellow-necked,” and qualify Gn(Jas and A^makas whic 
are joined together in a compound. 

II These are stated in the dictionary as in the text to be * 
Madhya-desa, but I have not found tho name elsewhere. Proba 
be connected with the country Gauda which Cunningham says wa® 
the southern part of North Kosala, i.e. tho southern 
tract between tho Ghogra and Rapti rivers (Arch. Snrv. ol 

town Gaur in the Maldah district in Behar, which was once t e 
the Bengal kingdom, is too far east to be admissible here. 

% See page 336, note §. . ^ 

## The people of Videha, see page 829, note f* 



COUNTRIES AND RACES TN MADHYA-DES'A 


353 


c'alas* the Sanketas,t the KankasJ and Mdrutas, § the 

# ranc'ala or Pano'ala was a large country, comprising the territory on both 
mill's of the Ganges, and bounded on the north by Sub-Himalayan tribes, on 
lie enst by the same tribes and Kosala, on the south by S'urasena, the Junc- 
,ou of the Jnmiia and Chambal, and Kanya-kubja (A'di-P., cxxxviii. 6512-3 
ml Vinlta-P., v. Ul), and on the west by the Kurus and S'urasenaa (Sabha-P., 
x\ni. lOGl ; and Bhishma-P,, ix. 340). The Pauc'alas originated in the de* 
ccmlaiils of Ajamidha by his wife Nili, though the M.-Bh. (A'di-P., xciv. 
7L'2-3j and Bari-Yanisa (xxxii. 1776-80, with which agrees the Matsya 
'uiiina, xlix. 43-4 and 1. 1-4) differ in the number and names of the desoen- 
ants. 'I hoHO passages from the Hari-Tam^a and Matsya Purdna date their 
about oighi or nine generations prior to tho Pdndavaa, and the passage 
lom the M.-Bh. soorns to point to a much earlier kingdom. The country 
large was divided into two kingdoms, tho Ganges being the dividing line 
A'lli P , cxxxviii 55011-16) j to the north was North Pauo'ala or Ahi-eVhatra, 
nil its ca])ital at Alii-cVhatra, tho modern Ahichhatr, 18 miles west of 
luicilly niid 7 north of Aonla (Cunningham, Arch, Surv. Hepts., 1.255-7); 
iiiltotlio south was South PaucYda, with its capital at Kampilya, the 
Knlmii KanipP, on tlio old Canges between Budaon and Fa • khabad {ihid, 
5,)). Tlio Siiujajas, or descendants of Srinjaya, who are often mentioned 
1 the M -Bh fc y., A'(li-P., cxxxviii. 6476; and Drona-P., xxi 883, 895 and 916) 
li|iefir to hfive roigiuMl in North Panc'ala, and tho Nipas in South Pauc'ala 
im^'o ;h:o note *) ; on the destruction of tho latter, Prishata of tho former 
^ misty nniud the two kingdoms, but Drona conquered his son Drupada and 
'cMahlishcd tho tw'o kingdoms, keeping North PaMla himself, and restor- 
'h'tlic iSiiiith to Drupada who then reigned in Kampilya and Makandi (.Adi-P. 
f^win; Uari-V., xx. 1060-1115). 

t i’lbtiug aside tho Uteava-sankotas (see page 319 note f), the only instance 
J have met tins name is in the M -Bh. (S anti-P., clxxiv. 6514) where it is 
I'miiiccd apimrontly as tho name of a town; but there is nothing to indicate 
It was, and it is not so given in the dictionary. Probably however the 

Ayodhya and its people, 
they are not mentioned in this group where they should bo, and 
a haidly bo intended by tho Kosalas in verse 14, 
ibhai ^'cntioned in the M.-Bh, only as an outside race, along with the 
‘ Jims, Sakas, Pahlavas, Ac. (Sabhu-P., 1. 1850 ; and Santi-P., Ixv. 2429) 
^icntioiied here in the middle of India suggests that they must 
noticed also that Yudhish^hira 
jme Kanka during his disguised residence at Virata’s Court (Vira^i.P, 

Wet no people of this name elsewhere. Perhaps tho reading 



354 


CANTO L7in. 


Kala-kotisafl, ♦ and Pashau4as,t and the inhabitants of 
9 the Paripatra mountains, J the Kapingalas,§ Kururvdhyas || 

should be Mdlavas, the people of Malwa (boo page 341 note *) j thoy aro moQ 
tioned in verse 43 below, but their more appropriate position is here. 

* I liave not' met this name elsewhoro, but it may mean the people ol 
Kdla-Jco^i, which is mentioned in the M.-JBh. as a place of pilgrimage (Vana-p 
xcv. 8513), nncl which appears from the context to be between the Ganges and 
the Baliuda (the Ram-ganga or perhaps the Gurra east of it j see page 291 
note § §). Koti-tirtha mentioned in the Matsya Purana (ov. 44) seems to be 
the same. Moreover Kala-koti may be the same as Edla'lcuta, which is allnd. 
ed to occasionally (Sabha-P., xxv. 9U7 •, Udyoga-P., xviii. 696-601 ; ami perhaps 
Adi-P., oxix. 4637), and for which the second passage indicates a similar posi- 
tiori. 

t “ Heretics j ” applied to Jains and Buddhists. I have met with no pcopla 
of this name. 

J See page 286 note J. 

§ I have not mot this name elsewhere. A river called KapiUjald is mnn. 
tioned in tho Bliishma-P. list (ix. 334), but without any data to identify 
it. Two other readings may be suggested Kdiingakas, i.e., Kalingas (soo 
page 316, note f) ; or better perhaps Kdlanjams, the inhabitants of Kalin]iir, an 
ancient and celebrated hill and fort 33 miles south of Banda in Bundclkhand; 
it Is mentioned only as atibf/uz in tho M,-Bh. (Vana-P,, Ixxxv. 8198-8200; 
Ixxxvii. 8317; and Annsas.-P , xxv. 1721-2). 

II This reading appears to be wrong, but it is not easy to siiggost another 
entirely satisfactory. It is clear, however, that the Kurus are one of thoraces 
meant. Vdhyas are said to bo a people in the dictionary. 

The Kurus occupied tho country from the S'ivis and Sub-Hinialayati tribes 
on the north to Matsya, Sfurasena and South Panc'ala on tho south, and between 
North Pafio'ala on the oast and Maru-bhumi (the Rajputana desert) on th® 
west. Their territory appears to have boon divided into three parts, 
kslietra, the Kurus and Kuru-jangala (Adi-P., oix, 4337-40). Kuini-ksliotra, 

‘ the cultivated land of the Kurus,’ comprised the whole tract on tho irost o 
the Jumna and included the sacred region botiveen tho Sar<is-vati and 
Drishad-vati (V'ana-P., Ixxxiii 5071-8 and 7073-6; Ramay.,Ayodh -K.. !«• 
and Megha-D., i. 49-60) ; it is said to have obtained this name bocauso it ^ 
raised to honour, pra-fcns^(a,by Kuru (S'alya-P., liv. 3009) ; the Hari-V.,in^^^^ 

1800, inverts the course of history, and this explanation was afterwards 

t> 1 50-22). 

fused and altered into that of hiaploughing it (e g., Matsya-P., *• “ ^ 

jangala, ‘ the waste land of the Kurus,’ was the eastern part of their e 
and appears to have comprised the tract between the Ganges 
Pano'dla (Ramdy., Ayodh.-K., Ixx. ] I , and M.-Bln, Sabhd*P»» ***' ^ 



COnNTRIES AND RACES tN MADHTA-DEs'a 


355 


and the Udnmbara people,* and the Gajahvayasf — these are 
in the middle! of the Tortoise as he lies within the water. 

^0 To theso people, who dwell in his middle, the three con- 
sfellaiions, Kfittikd, Rohi^i and Saumya,§ reveal)] weal and 
woe, 0 brahman. 

iiM.ljo rogion between fcho Ganges and Jrnnna seems to have been called simply 
1,0 Kurus’ country. The capital was Hastinapiira (see notof below), and 
:ii.i„(Iriv.a-i)rastlia or Indra-prastha, the modern Delhi, was a second capital 
l.y tlic Pandavasf A'di-P., cevii. 7568-94). Kuru was the eleventh an- 
.ptur uf the Pnndavas (id , xciv. 8738-51; and xov. 3791-3820; and llari-V. 

x\n. 17 'jy- 1800 ). 

* UdiiiTibara is Kac'lih or Kutoh according to Lassen (Ind. Alt , Map) and 
iinruu-liara (Arch. Snrv. Ropts, XI\r. 115 and 135), and their identiGcation 
inv fipply to the Audumharas mentioned in SabhA-P., li. 1869- but the 
diiniharuH here are placed in Madhya-desa. I have not met with the name 
s -wliorc and it is not in the dictionary. Contain descojidants of Vi^va- 
iitia were called Audumharas (Ilari-V , xxvii. 1466); and there was a river 
(iinnln\}d~uifi in f he South (id., clxviii. 9511). 

t The ])('()[ lo of Hastina-pura or Hastina-pura, the capital of the Kurus 
(v 35 1 note ||), which is situated on the old bod of the Ganges, 22 miles 
uili-L'Ubiof Meerut; hit 29" 9^ N., long. 78" 3' K It is said to have boon 
rniidl 1 )) king llastln who was the fourth ancestor of Kuru (Adi-P., xov. 

and ITuri-V., XX. 1053-4); but ho is omitted from tho genealogy 
bh-l’., \v\v 3714-39 and llari-V., xxxii. 1754-6 and 1795-9. By a play on 
' nuaiiiiig of tho word hastin, ‘elephant,’ the city was also called Ilastina- 
la (ATr,,ma-v«s.-P., xvii. 5u8 and xxxvi. 1010', Gaja-pura (diet.), Gajahvaya 
clxxvi. 6071), Gaja-sahvaya (Adi-P., cxiii. 4tll and 4460), Naga- 
(du(/., 4101-2), Niigahva (diet.), Naga-sahvaya (Adi-P., cxxxi. 5146) 
(Ar-rama-vas.-P., xxxix. 1098), and V8rana-.sahvaya (diet.). It 
pioh.jhlo, however, that tho derivation from ‘elephant* is tho real one, 
f uiho of i|,o numerous freely-coined synonyms with that meaning, and 
there was another town Varanavata among tho Kurus not far from 
(Adi-P., cxiii, with tho description of the Pandavaa’ subsequent 
c\hx.-cli., and clvi. 6084-7), and also a place called Va'rana-sthala 
Kurus or North Pdfio'alas (Raraay., Ayodh.-K., Ixxiii. 8) which was 
Jips the sairio as Hastina-pura (see page 351, note *). 

I iu verse 7. 

•ail M to be tho name of any nakahutra, but seems to 

"ga-biraa or Agrahayani, which follows RoUini and preoodos ArdiA 
tifid note). 

t , not in the dictionary. 



356 


CANTO LTIII. 


11 The hilU* Vri8ha-dlivaja,t and Anjana,J 
akliya,§ and Manavac'ala,|| Surpa-karna,lf V'yaghra-muklia*! 

12 Kharmaka,tt and Karvata^ana ; these hills, §§ 
people of Mifchila,|||| the S^abhra3,1[l and the Vadau^ 

* Oirayo in verse 12 ; see note §§ below. 

t I have nob met with this name anywhere else, and it is not in the die 
tionary as the name of a hill. Is it to be identified with Baidyanath nea 
Deogarh in the Santal Parganas, where there is said to be one of the tweh 
oldest lingaa S'iva (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Deogayh) ? 

• J This may be the moantain from which Sngriva summoned hia vassc 
monkeys (Ram6y., Kishk.-K., xxxvii. 5), and also the mountain called Ahjani 
Iha, mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Anutas. -P,, ckv. 7658) ; bat there are no clat 
to identify it. 

§ Jainhu-mat is given in the dictionary as the name of a mountain, bnt 
have not met with either name elsewhere. 

II This is mentioned in the dictionary^ but I have not found it anywher 
else. 

^ Or, no doubt, Surpa^Jearna, bnt I have not met with either as tho namoo 
a moantain, nor is it given in the dictionary. 

** I have nob met with this as the name of a mountain elsewhere, nor is i 
in tho dictionary. On hill Udaya-giri near Bhubaneswar, about 20 imie 
south of Cuttack, are a number of rock-ent caves, and one is sculptnred ii 
tho form of a tiger’s open mouth, and is known by the name Vydghra mulk 
can this be the hill intended hero ? It would be somewhat oat of placi 
here, but the grouping in this canto is far from perfect. 

tt I have not found this name elsewhere, nor is it in the dictionary. I 
it to be connected with the Kharah-pur hills in tho south of the Mongliy 
District in Behar ? A people called Karbulcas are mentioned in tho Eist in th 
Earnay. (Kishk. K. xl. 29). 

Jit This is not in the dictionary, and I have not met with it elsewliere; tn 
it is no doubt to be connected with the country or town Karvatd, vvhich i 
mentioned in conjunction with Tamra-lipta and Suhma in tho west of 
(M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxix. 1098-9). See Karhukas in the last note. 

§§ The t.TO lines of verse 12 tnnst, it seems, be inverted, so as to bring tli 
word girayo next to tho mountains named in verse 11 : otherwise 
meaningless. 

nil For Mithild, see page 329 notof; but the people of Videha 
mentiooed already in verso 8 as situated in Madhya-dela. 

IFfl have not met this name elsewhere, nor is it in the diction 
name of a people. Probably the reading should be Suhma^i see p 
The Sumbbas (Rdmfiy., Kishk.-K., xl. 25) are no doubt the same.^ 




COUNTRIES, HILLS AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA 


357 


danturas,* and the C'andre^varas f also, and the Kha^s,! 

13 and the Magadhas, § the Prag- jyotislias, || and the Lauhityas,l[ 
[lie cannibals who dwell on the sea-const;** the hills 
pdrnotkata,tt Bhadra-gaiira,I+ and Udaya-giri ;§§ 
and the Ka^ayas,|||| tlie Meklialamushtas,1fir the Tama- 


♦ This is in the dictionary as tl o name of a people, but I have not met with 
ei<;ewlior 0 . It may mean “ showing thoir long toeth when speaking ; ” but 
ere lb i^ no doubt the name of a people as stated in the dictionary, 
f I h ive not found this elsewhere nor is it in the dictionary ns tlio name of 
lioople. A people called C'audm-vatsas are mentioned in thoM.-Bh. (Udyoga- 
' , Ixxtii. 2732 ). 

§ S('o piigc 340 note * and page 351 note §. Here a branch of these people 
, lilaced in the East of India. 


I See page 330 note ijli 
j See poge 328 note f. 

• The people of Lauhitya (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxix. 1 100 ; and li. 1864) which 
riisthe coniitry on the banka of the R. Lohita, or Lauhitya (Sablia-P. ix. 
74; Kiimay., Kishk.-K., xl. 26 ; and Raghn-V., iv. 81 ) or Lobitya (Bhishnui-P.) 

313), and probably also Lohita-ganga (Hari-V., exxii. 0873-6), the modern 
T.iliiiiii-piibin. The mention of Lohita in SabhA-P., xxvi. 1025 and Laahitya 
1 AiiuNis.-r , XXV. 1732 appears to have a different application ; and a i>lac*e 
ohiry.i ia mentioned in Uumdy , Ayodh.-K., Ixxiii. 13, as situated between iho 
angea and Oo-matf. Vilvd-mitra had certain descendants called Lohitas 
tlui-V, xxvii. 14G5) or Lanbitas (id., xxxii. 1771) who may have been the 
iiildren of his grandson Lauhi (id., xxvii. 1474). 

*♦ Sriuiudrah purwshddalcdh } that is, on the coast of the Bay of Bengal which 
the Eastern Ocean. They arc mentioned in the Ramay. (Kishk.-K., xl. 

ft rims IS mentioned in the dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere. 

U Tins is in the dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere. 

§§ ihero are several hills of this name ; that intended here is no doubt the 
' t't'iir Raja-gpiha, or Rajgir. Its ancient name Cunningham says was 
8'ri (Arch. Surv. Hepts., I. 21 and olate iii), which is mentioned in the 
' (Sablm-P., XX. 798-800). 

rius is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. The 
P is probably Kd/ayo, ‘‘ the Kdsis,” the people of Benares (see 

nuto fj. They are a little out of place here, and should fall within 
rmer group (versos 6-9), bub are not mentioned there, and therefore 
probably, for the grouping in this canto is far from perfect, 
dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. The 
of the word is no doubt a mistake for Mehala or Mekald, for the 



358 


CANTO LVIlr. 


liptas,* the Eka-pddapas,! the Vardhamanas,! 
the Ko4alas§ are situated in tlie Tortoise’s face. 

15 The three constellations Raudra,|| Punar-vasu, and Pusij, 

are situated in its face. 

Now these are the count j-ies which are situated 

16 iho Tortoise* 8 right fore foot: listen while I mention tliei 
0 Kraushtuki.|| The Kalingas,** the Bangas,tt and t! 


Mekalaa and Melcala hills arc not montionod in any other gronp ia tli 
canto and mily bo intended here, though considerably oat of their propi 
position (soo pngo 341 notoj). There was also a town or river called MfU 
which (if a river) was distinct from tho Narmada; but it appears to hii 
been more on tho westorn sido (TTari-V., xxxvii. 1983} and thoreforo lei 
admissible in this passage. I would suggest that tho second part of tl 
word should be Paw d/ (is, “tho Pundras” (see page 329 note*). Tho tea 
Melchald-inush(ds however might moan “ those who have been robbed of tli 
triple zone” worn by P'o first three classes (see Mann, ii. 42; and migh 
then bo an adjective qualifying Kasayas, 

* Or Tdmra-liytalcas ; soo page 330 note *, 

t “ People who have only one tree ; ” but perhaps the reading should b 
Eka-pddakds, “people who havo only ono foot ” ? It was a common bclio 
that such people existed, soo M.-Bh., Sabhd-P , 1. 1838 (where they are plaw 
in the South) and Pliny, vii. 2; and it lasted down to modern time?, soi 
Mandoville’a Travels, chap. XIV. See Eha-padas in verso 51. 

J Tho people of Vardhamana, the modcru Bardhwan (commonly Bnrd 
wan) in West Bengal. It is not montionod in tho Kamay., nor M.-Bb., but! 


a comparatively old town. 

§ This can hardly refer to Kosala, or Oodh (soo page 808 note J) foi’i 
this pooplo would have been placed along with the people of Mitbila 


Magaclha in verse 12 ; whereas here the Kosalas are separated off from those 
nations by the insertion of three hills in verso 13, and are grouped with y| 
MokhalSmnshtas, Tamra-liptas and Vardhamanas. Kosala hero must 
mean Dakshina Kosala which is mentioned in canto Ivii, verse 54, 
the slope of tho Vindhya mountains (see page 342 note*ff), and 
north and oast portions of it, for the southorn part is placed appr|^^Bijiiij'‘ 
the right fore foot in verse 16. 

11 This appears incorrect. Road Raud^{ (fern J, a name for 


lation Ardra. 


^ For Kroshtuke read Kraui}h(uke. 
** Se*» page 334 note*, 
tt See page 320 note*. 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 359 

Jntliaras,* the Ko§alas,t and the MpshikaSjJ; and the 0'edis,§ 

[ # They firo mentioned in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 350) bat with no data 
L iVlontify thoir territory. Hero they aro joined in one compound with 
Ka!i'>n'!is .and Jhangus. 

t The F'OPlo of Dakshina or Southern Kosala ; gee page 342 note ^ j tho 
Boiitli poition 13 especially meant, see verso 14. 

I S(0 p.'ige 332 note f. 

§ Tliere is no mention of a people call<‘d C'edis in the Eastern region in 
tho old. r poems ; bat Onnningluira repeatedly places a C'edi race in Chhattis- 
(Audi Surv. Ropta., IX. 54-57 ; and XVII. 24), yec in ancient times it 
not so. C'edi was then one of tho countries near tho Kurus (M.-Bh 
11-12; Udyoga-P., Ixxi 2594-5). It is placed in the Eastern 
•lyioii ill tho account of Bhima’s conquests there tS.ibha-P., xxviii. 1069-74) 
indiilso m tho South region in tho description of Arjuna’s followincr the 
.umUdal horse (A<ya.medh.-P , Ixxxiii. 246G-9) ; and it is also mentloried 
ilong with tho Dasarnas (see page 31-2 note f) and Pulindas ( see p.igo 335 
i„t. t) m tlio former passage. C'edi bordered on tho Jumna, for king Vasa 
diML iMiiitnig in a forest sent a mossago homo to lis queen across that 
•nor, and tho forest could not have been far from his territory (Adi-P., 
xni 2:{:3-.S7). C'edi, moreover, is often linked with Matsya and Karusha 
l y, lihidmia-l’., ix. 348; liv. 2242; and Karna-P , xxx. 1231; see page 307 
iotr^amlpage3llnotet), and with Kali and Karusha (eg, Adi-P., oxxiii. 
'di; .^ 111(1 Bln, shma-P , cxvii. 6446). It was closely associated with Matsya 

ml iiiu&t have toucdiod it, for an ancient king Sahaja reigned over both 
ixxiii. 2732); and it seems prob, able that king Vasu’s son 
IrhsyUjecamo king of Matsya (Adi-P., Ixiii. 2371-93; and Ilari-V, xxxii. 

From theso indications it appears C'edi comprised the country 
t-nthot tlio.lunina, from tho R. Chambal on the north-west to nearC'itro- 
|'t'nninc.soiil,h.(.:i.st; and on tho south it was bounded by tho plateau of 
at.d tho hill, of Bundolkhand. 

capital was ov SWcti-sdhvayd, (Vana-P., xxii. 898; and Asva- 

^•d ,]vxMn 2ir)f).7)and was situated on the R S'uJdi-maH, which is said to 
the Kolahala hills (Adi-P., Ixiii. 2307-70; see page 286 note §). 
‘'er ri.sos iti the Vinci hya Range, and must bo oast of tho R. Dasdrna, 

^ s tho most westerly river that rises in that range (compare notes f and J 
-«(>); it is probably the modorn R. Ken, for which I have found no 
tnamo. ) Ilonco the Kolaliala hills were probably thoso between Panna 
J 'vai ill and tho Capital S'ukti-mati was probably near 

town Banda. The kingdom of C'edi seems to have been founded as 
by the Vadavas of Vid.irbha (Matsya- Parana, xliii. 4-7; and xliv. 14 
» and after it had lasted through some 20 or 25 reigns, Vasu Upari- 

I 



360 


CANTO LVIII. 


and the l/rdhva-karnas * the Matsyasf and others 

17 dwell on the Vindhya mountains,! the Vidarbhas, § a, 
the Narikelasll, the Dharma-dvipasT, and the ElikaJ 
the Vyaghra-grivas,tt the Maha-grivas,!! the beanl, 

18 Traipuras,§§ the Kaiskiridhyas,|||| and the Hairaa-kutag^' 
the Nis'liadhas,*** the Ka^ka-sthalasfff, the Da!5arnas+^ 
the naked Hankas,§§§ the Nishadas,|||| || the Kakn] 


c'ara, who wag a Kanrava of tho Panrararaoo, invaded it from the north Bot 
nine generatioAs anterior to the Pandavaa, and cotjqnoring it established 1 
own dynasty in it {id , 1. 20-50), which lasted till after their time. Fora ft 
discussion see Jourixd, Bengal As. Sooy., 1895, Part I., p. 249. 

* “ Those who have erect ears ; ’* bat I have not met this name elsewher 
and it is not, probably, tho name of any people, 
t This sooms wholly out of place here : see page 307 note*. 

J These mountains are also out of place here j they die away in Beliii; 
that is, in tho region occupied by the Tortoise’s head. 

§ Those are absolutely out of place here j see page 335 note §. 

II Narikela is given in tho dictionary as tho name of an island, bnt 1 liav 
not mot with any people of any such name elsewhere. 

^ 1 have not met with this name any where else. 

Or Ailikas. Neither name is in tho dictionary, and I have not fonni 
them elsewhere. A river Eld is mentioned as situated in the Deklian (llari 
V., clxviii. 9512), but without data to identify it. 
ft- “ Having necks like tigers” ; perhaps an epithet to Traiparas. 
tt “ Large-necked ” ; perhaps also an epithet to Traipuras. 

§§ The people of Tripura, see page 343 noto*j but they are qmto out ol 
place hero. 


11 II These seem to be the same as the Kiskindhakas ; see puge 312 noto§. 

The people of Homa-kuta. I have found mention of only 0116 lltunii' 
kata : it was a mountain or gronp of mountains in the Himalayas in tin 
western part of Nepal (M.-Bh., Vana.-F., cx. 9968-87) ; but tbut does uot 
seem appropriate here. 

*** See page 343 note!. These people are altogether out 
ttt The people of Kataka, the modern Cuttack iu Orissa, 
name and is mentioned in the Dasa-kumara-c^arita (Story 
The name given to it by the Brahmans was Vdrd^asi in 
Benares. 

!!! See page 342 notef. These people are altogether out 
§§§ This name is not iu the dictionary and I have not foam 
mill Tho Nishadas were an aboriginal race and are described] 
dwarfish and short-linubed, with large mouth, jaws and ea^ 


^kce here- 

'lu8 isH modem 

,[ Sonia-datU). 


leuinUtioa 


Witl 


llacc boro- 
1 it elsefflief®* 



UUUNTRIES AND RACES IN EASTERN INDIA. 


361 


9 lakaa,* and the Panja-iavaras.t— these all are in the right 

fore foot. 

The three constellations A-tlesha, and PaitryaJ 

0 and the First Phalgunis have their station in the 
j riglit fora foot. 

[nose, red eyes and copper coloured hair, and with a protuberant belly. Their 
ijiamc is fancifully derived from the command nisMda, “ sit down,” given to the 
first of them who was created. (Hari-V,, v. 306-10; and Muir’s 
Sansk Texts, II. 428.) They were specially a forest people, and were 
Bcattered all over Northern and Central India. The earliest references shew, 
they occupied the forest tracts throughout North India. In Rima’s time 
they held the country all around Praydga and apparently southwards also 
{Joinual, R. A. S., 1895, page 237 ) j but in the Pandavas’ time they occupied the 
hitrh lands of I^lalwa and Central India (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xxix. 1086; xxx. 
1109 unci 1170; and A'^vamodli.-P., Ixxxiii. 2472-5) and still formed a kingdom 
(Ldyoga-P., iii. 84; and xlvii. 1881). It would seem that, as the Aryans 
Dxieatled their conquests, the Nishadas wore partly driven back into the 
bills nnd forests of Central India, and wcr(3 partly subjugated and absorbed 
iiiiong the lowest classes of the population as appears from cnsual allusions 
[Ihimay., A'di-K , ii. 12; and M.-Bh., A'di-P., cxlviii ; and Vana-P., exxx. 
lu5:iS.9). They aio also mentioned as being pearl-divers and seamen in 
niisluncl winch seems to be on the west coast (Hari-V., xov, 6214 and 
They wore looked upon as very degraded in later times, but at 
n^t Ihoir poMtiori was not despicable, for Kama and Guha king of the 
Sibhiulas met as friends on equal terms (Ayodh.-K., xlvi. 20; xlvii. 9-12; and 
^cii. 3), and it seems Krishna s annt S'ruta-dovd married the king of the 
'iisliiulas (Hari-V., xxxv. 1930 and 1937-8). 

• I have not found this name elsewhere, nor is it in the dictionary. Per- 
r it is to be coimocted with STf-kakula, the modern Sreewacolum, a town 
9 miles west of llasalipatam. It was founded bj king Samati of the Sata- 
a ‘juias or Aiidhras, and was their first capital (Arch. Surv. of S. India 
} b Sewell, L 55 ; and Report on Amaravati, pp. 3 and 4), 

^ ese wtro a tribe of Savaras (see page 835 note*) who lived upon leaves ; 

^ ce their nams according to the dictionary ; but a forest tribe would hardly 
^^^solely on leaves. Might it not more properly moan “the S'avaras who 
ie ab ^ ^ g'^^dle of leaves was the ordinary clothing of moat of 
® uiod tribes ; see Dalton’s Ethnology, passim. They appear to be 

ula/is, a very low aboriginal casto, common in Orissa and the 
Circars. 

1 Thig 

Magha, whioh comes between A-Hesha and Purva- 
riot in the diotiouary. 



862 


CANTO LVIII. 


Lankd,* and the KaUjmas,t the S'ailikaeJ, and the 

21 Nikatas,§ and those who inhabit the Mahendra|| and 
Malaya *![ Mountains and the hill Dnrdura,** and those 
who dwell in the Karko^aka forest,tt the Bhrign. 

22 kacVha3,tJ and the Konkana3,§§ and the Sarvas,||H and the 
Abhirasl'ir who dwell on the banks of the river Veni,**« 

• Rivana’i capital in Ceylon. 

f This ia given in the dictionary aa the name of a people and analysed 
thna — Jcdla-ojwia, “ those who wear black antelope skins;" but I have not 
found the name elsewhere. 

X Perhaps the same as the S'ailmhas in canto Ivii, verse 46, 

§ This name is not in tho dictionary, and I have not met it elsewhere. 

II See page 284, note ft pag® 305, note § ; yet these may be the monnt- 
ains at C. Comorin, see Journal^ R. A. S. 1894, p. 261. 

^ See page 286 note*. 

•• See page 287 notef* 

ft Karkotaka was the name of the Ndga king whom Nala saved from a 
forest fire (M.-Bh., Vana-R, Ixvi); where that happened is not clear, bnt 
probably it was somewhere in the middle or eastern part of the Satpnra 
range (see page 343 note If); can that region be intended here? Karkotaka ia 
also stated in the dictionary to be tho name of a barbarous tribe of low origin, 
but I have not met with them elsewhere. Perhaps this word, however, 
may bo connected with tho modern Karad, a town in tho Satara District, 
near which are many Buddhist caves. Its ancient name was 
or Karahdkafa according to inscriptions (Arch. Surv. of W. India by J. 
Burgess, Memo. No. 10, page 16, and Cunningham’s Stupa of Bharhoi 
pp. 131, 135 and 136), and it seems to bo tbe same as KaraUtaU men. 

tioned in the M.-Bh. (SabhA-R, xxx. 1173) and spoken of there as heretics , 

pdshanda, no donbt because it was a Buddhist sanctuary as evidenced / 
its oaves. See also Matsya R xliii. 29 about Karkotaka. 

See page 339 note**. 

§§ Or, more correctly, Konhanas. They are the inhabitants of the mo 
Konkan, the Marathi-speaking lowland strip between the Western >“ 
and the sea, from about Bombay southward to Goa. Tbe( Han-V » » 
king Sagara degraded these people (xiv. 784). I 

111! These people are not mentioned in the dictionary andU have uo 
with them elsewhere. Perhaps the reading should be the |Sarp<w, ^ 

Nfigas,” or tho S'aravas who are named in M.-Bb. (Bbisfcma' •» 
unless this be a mistake for S^avaras.) 1 

Iflf See page 312 notef. Jl tb» 

♦** This is no doubt the same as Ver^yd, the name of ^iro 




COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


363 


the Avantis,* the Disa-puras,t and the AkaninJ people, 
13 the Mah 4 -rAshtras§, and Karnatas||, the Glonarddhas^, 
C'itra-kutakas**, the C'olasft, and the KolagirasJI, 

lekhan ; see canto Ivii, verses 24 and 26, Either river is admissible in this 
assage, hot the Wain-ganga is meant more probably, because it flows 
hrongh territory oocapied by aboriginal tribes. 

• See page 340 note § and page 344 note§. 

f Or, better, Ddh-puras, the people of Dala-pnra. This was the capital 
f king Banti-deva (Megha*D., I. 46-48), and seems from the context there 

0 have been situated on or near the R. Chambal in its lower portion. Bat 
ho two accounts of Ranti-deva (M.-Bh., Droria-P., Ixvii; and S'anti-P., xxix, 
013-22J describe him as exercising boundless hospitality chiefly with animal 
x)d, and fancifully explain the origin of the river, C'armnn-vati, as the 
tiices from the piles of the hides of the slanghtered animals ; this suggests 
Int he reigned along the upper portion of the river. 

1 Or A'kaniii. Neither is in the dictionary, and I have not found them 

heirhere. 

§ See page 333 note f • 

t; The Cauarese. Karnata properly comprises tho south-west portion of 
he Nizam’s Dominions, and all the country west of that as far as tho Wes* 
eruGhata, and south of that as far as the Nilgiris, It did not include any 
'art of the country below the Ghats, but its application has been greatly 
iistorted hy the Mohammedans and English. The name is probably derived 
rom two Dravidian words moaning “ black country," because of the “ black 
iotton-soil" of the plateau of the Southern Dekhan (Caldwell, Grammar 
if the Dravidian Languages, 34 and 35 ; and Hunter's Imp. Gaz. of 
'dia, Art. KarnUik). The Karn^takas are mentioned in the Bhishma-P. 
366 ). 

T Go-narda is given in the dictionary as the name of a people in the De- 
hot J have not found either form elsewhere. Goa is said to have liad 
'large number of names in ancient times ; but this does not appear to have 
^wnoneof them (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Goa). • 

*• The people of C'itra-kuta ; it appears to have been the range of hills 
<'o®pnsing the modern mount Chitrakut) extending from south of AlJaha- 
about Panna near the R. Ken (see Journal^ R. A. S., 1894, p. 239) j but 
I'ese people are very much out of place here. 

^ Seepage 331 note t- 

^ name does not seem to be connected with the Kolas who are men- 
'oned in verge 25. The Kolagiras are no doubt the same as the Kolvagtreyaa, 
'^0 are placed in. South India in the description of Ajjuna’s following the 
horse /(Aiva-medh.-P., Ixxxiii. 2476-7); and they would presum- 



364 


CANTO LVIir. 


the people who wear matted hair* in Kraunc a-dvipa| 
24 the people who dwell by the Kaveri and on 

ably be the inhabitants of Kolagiri^ which is placed in South India in the 
account of Sahadova’s conquests there, and which appears to have been &n 
extensive region for the whole of it is siiokon of (Sabha-P., xxr. 1171). Knla. 
giri may mean “the hills belonging to the Kols,” but the Kols seem to bo 
intended by the Kolas in verso 25. Kolagira may be compared with Kodni/u 
the ancient name of Coorg, which moans ‘ steep mountains ’ (Imp. Gaz of 
India, Art. Coorg), and might therofoi-e have led to the modification of the 
final part of tho name to agi-ee with the Sanskrit giri ; but see page 306 note * 
The name Kolagira somewhat resembles tho Qoldmjulas of canto Ivii veibo 
45 j and Golangula might bo a corruption of Kodiingalur, which is tho 
modern town Oranganore, 18 miles north of Cochin. It had a good haibour 
in early times, and was a capital town in the 4th century A.D. Syrian Chris- 
tiana were established there before the 9th century, and the Jews liaJ a 
settlement there which was probably still earlier. It is considered of threat 
iftnetity by both Christians and Hindus (Itnp. Gaz, of India, Art. Ko- 
dungaKir). 

• Ja(d-ilhara! the dictionary gives it as a proper name. Jata also means 
“ long tresses of hair twisted or braided together, and coilod in a knot over 
the head so as to project like a horn from the forehead, or at other times 
allowed to fall carelessly over tho back and sliouldcrs.*' 

t Ibis was no doubt tho county of which was tho capital, 

for dvipa appears to liavo had the moaning of “ land enclosed between 
two rivers,” tho modern doetb ; cf. (Sf/A-ufa-dt'/pu, the doab in which Saknia 
(see page 315 note J) was situated, and tho Seven dvtpns all in North Iiulia 
(Sabhi-l^., XXV. 998-9), Tho Hari-Vaih^a says Sarasa, one of Yadu’s sons, 
founded KrauuoVpura in tho South region in a district where the soil was 
copper-coloured and champaka and a»oka trees abounded, and his country 
was known as Vana-vfisi or Vana-vasin (xcv. 6213 and 5231-3] ; and 
alpo that that town was near tho Sahya Mts., and was situated appa* 
reutly south gf a river Khatvnngi and north of Gomanta bill (xovi. 6325-40). 
If Gomanta was the modern Goa^ these indications agree fairly well with 
the Kraunc'alaya forest mentioned in the Ramay. (Aran.-K., Ixxiv. 7)> which 
appears to have been situated between the Godavari ajod Bhima rivers 
(Journal, R. A. S., 1894, page 250). Bat the town Bana-4asi or Banawasi, 
which was a city of note in early times, is in the North Kanara district, on 
the R. Warda (tributary of the Tungabhadra}^ 14 miles f^m Shsi, in 
14° 83' N., long. 75° 5' K (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. iBanavasi; Arch. 
Bury, of W. India, No. 10, pp. 60 note and 100); and I this is south of 
Goa. This was the country of tho Vana-vdsakas (aoo page ^8 note j 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 


365 


Kisbyamuka, * and those who are called Nasikyas.t and 
tliofio who wander by the borders of the S'ankha and 
SuhtiJ and other hills and of the Vahlurya niciintains, § 

25 Varic aras, |[ the Kolas, ^ those who inhabit 
C'armapatta, the Gana-vahyas, ff the Paras, ^ tho.se who 

26 have their dwellings in Kpshua-dvipa, §§ and the peoples 
wlio live by the Surya hill|||| and the Kumuda hill,mf 


# Sl‘o pas^o 289 note ij;. 

t TIk'so ar(', no doubt, tho people of Nasik ; see page 330 note ||. 
t Tlio t«'\i is Snnlha-ai kfy-ddi-vaidunja-hila, which may bo so rendered 
as lu inako 8'ankha and Sukti two of tho hills which compo.so the Vaidurya 
cliam I liavo not met with them elsewhere, and neither is in the dic tionnry 
a; ih-^ name of a hill. Snkti can hardly be an error for the S'nkti-mat range 
i 5 f 0 paire o06 note §). 

§ This Is tho Satpnra range, for tho Panda vaa in their pilgrimage went 
from Vid.'U'bha and the R. Payoshni (tho Puma and Tapti, see page 299 
i.oto+), noross these mountains, to tho R. Narmada (Vaua-P, cxx. and 
cm). This range was placed in tho Southern region (thid., Ixxxviii 8313), 

and also apparently, as Vaiddnja-siJchara, in the Western region (ihid, 
Itwix S.15:)-61) j and in the former of these two passages it is called 

Kmii-iiiinin. 

I havo not found this name elsewhere, nor is it in tho diction.ary. 

»■ See page 331 note but tho p.<)ssagos cited there with reference to this 
p''ople. ajjpear to refer to the Kolagiras ; soo page 363 note Tho Kola are 
a collection of aboriginal tribes, who are said to havo dwelt in Behar in 
ancient times, but who now inhabit the mountainous districts and plateaux 
ofChntia Nagpur and are to bo found to a smaller extent in the Tiibutnry 
States i»f Orissa and in some districts of the Central Provinces (Imp. Gaz. 
t-flnditi, Art. Kol). 

*• This is not in the dictionary and I Lave not met it elsewhere. Is ifc 
In W- idcutifietl with Salem in Madras ? 

tt 1 Imve not met this elsewhere. Does it refer to the Qnnapati'dynasfcy 
''t ich flonrished on the eastern coast daring the 33th cent A.D. ? 

♦t This is not in the dictionary and I have not ^ound it elsewhere. 

§§ 1 have not mot this name elsewhere, but it obviously refers to the R. 
^pshni or Kisti^a, and probably moans one of tho doabs (see page 364 
t) beside thit river, either between the Kistna and Bhima or between 
^*^6 Kistna and 'Unngabhadra. 

U I have not (met this name elsewhere. 

■ " I have not^foand this name elsewhere. Comparing tho various readings, 



366 


CANTO LVriI. 


the Aukhavanas,* and the Pi^ikas,t and those who are 
27 .Karma-n4yakas,t and those who are called the Sonthen 
Kaurushas,§ the RiShikas, || the Tapasd^amas,! tljj 
Rishabhas,** and the Simhalas, ft and those who inhabit 

it seems to have some connexion with the Kusumai of canto Ivii verse 46* 
see page 332 note ' 

• This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. Pe^ 
haps it is to be connected with the Okhalahiyaa mentioned in Arch. Surr of 
W. India, no. 10, pp. 34-36. 

.f Or as the text may be read, Sapiiikas. Pi^ika is in the dictionary, bnt I 
have not met with either name elsewhere. 

J I have not found this name elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. 
Perhaps the reading should bo Karnhu-ndyakaa or Komhu-ndyakaa, and mcaa 
the people of Coorg. “According to tradition, Coorg was at this period 
(16th century A. D. ?) divided into 12 komhua or districts, each ruled by an 
independent chieftain, called a ndyak” (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Coorg). 
The similarity of the names is very remarkable. 

§ Tliis name is not in tho dictionary and I have not met with it elsewhere 
Perhaps it should be Kdrushas (seo page 341 note f), and the people intended 
are a southern branch of that nation. 

II Those are the people mentioned in the RamAy. (Kishk -K., xli. 16 ) and 
M.-Bh. (Kariia-P., viii. 237) and Hari-Variisa (cxix. 6724-6). There was also 
a river called the Rishikd (M.-Bh., Vana-P,, xii. 493) which may bo connected 
with the same people. I have found no further data for fixing their position. 
See page 332 note f ; the Mitishikas mentioned there may perhaps be the 
speople dwelling on the R. Musi, the tributary of the Kistna on which 
Haidarabad stands (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art, Kistna). 

^ I have not met this name elsewhere nor is it in the dictionary. Perhaps 
it refers to the descendants of ascetics, see page 339 note f , 

*** These are, no doubt, the inhabitants of Rishahha-parmta mentioned in 
the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., Ixxxv. 8163-4) and placed there between S'rf-parvata 
and the’Kaverf. S'ri-parvata is on the Kistna in the Karnul district (see 

page 290, notej). The Rishabha hills are therefore probably the southern 

portion of the Eastern Ghats, but none of the ranges there appears to haw 
any name resembling this. \ 

tt The people of Ceylon. They are named in the M.- Bh.; it is said the 

Siihhala king attended Yudhishthira’s RAja-suya sacrifice (jSabhA-P.» ****‘‘' 
1271 ; and Vana-P., li, 1989) ; and the Siihhalas brought to uiim presents of 
lapis lazuli, which is the essence of the sea (aamudra-adra), apd abundance p 
pearls and elephants’ housings (Sabha-P., li. 1893-4). ’ They are also^nam 
as fighting on the Kauravas’ side in the great war (DreJna'P-) *** 




vv^UNTRIES AND RACES IN SOUTH INDIA. 367 

g K^nc 1 *, the Tilangas, f and the peoples who dwell in 
Kuiijai’^'dari J and Kac c'ha, § and Tdmra-parpi, {| -—such is 
the Tortoise’s right flank. 

9 And the constellations, the Last Phdlgu^ig, Hastd and C'itrd 
are in the Tortoise’s right flank. 

his name is not I believe giren to Ceylon in the Ramiy., but the name 
10 given to a terrible female RaVshasa who dwelt in the middle of 
ihc sea between India and Ceylon, and whom Hanumdn killed as he leapt 
kcrossto the island (Kishk.-K., xli. 38; and Sund.-K., via. 6-13). 

• This is Kdnc*i-^uram or Kdnc'i-varam, the modem Conjevaram, about 
miles south-west of Madras. It is not, I believe, mentioned in the 
^amay. or M.-Bh., unless the Kdnc'yaa who are named as lighting in the groat 
V!ir(Karna-P., xii. 459) are the people of this town, but the proper reading 
there should probably be Kdsyas, the people of K4li or Benares. Conjevaram, 
tevcrtheloss, is a place of special sanctity, and is one of the seven holy 
rities of India. Mwen Thsang speaks of it in the 7th century A.B. as the 
capiialofDravida, It was then a great Buddhist centre, but about the 8th 
ceriuiry began a Jain epoch, and that was succeeded by a period of Hindu 
predomiiianco (Imp. Gaz. of India, Art. Conjevaram). 

t This form is not in the dictionary ; but it is no doubt the same as 
Tui or Tn-linga, that is Telinga, the modem Telugu country. It coin* 
cidud more or less with the ancient kingdom of Andhra (see page 337 note §). 
Ihaio not found this name in any shape in the Ramdy. or M.-Bh.; Andhra 
is the name which occurs in those books, 

+ This probably means “ the valleys of the Kunjara hills,” and the re- 
ference may bo to mount Kunjara, which is mentioned in the Ramay. as 
Bitnatcd in the South, but not in a clear manner (Kishk.-K., xli. 60). I have 
aot met the name elsewhere, but as this place is joined with KaoVha in 
cue compwnnd (see next note) it may mean part of the Travancore hills. 
KuSjara dari is given in the dictionary as the name of a place. 

§ This 18 Kochchi, the modem Cochin, in Travancore. It is not I believe 
mentioned in the Rdm^y. or M.-Bh., except once in the latter book in the 
account of Sahadeva’s conquests in the South (Sabhd-P., xxx. 1176). Both 
t^hristians and Jews are said to have settled here early in the Christian era, 
‘fid they were firmly established her© by the 8th century, 

II I his is the name of the modern river Chittor in the extreme South 
Pfige 303, not/e J J), and also of the district near it. It appears, moreover, 

^ the name 0 ^ a hill in the extreme South (Bhfshma-P., vi. 252). It is 
the name of a town in Ceylon, after which the name was extended to 
^ ‘whole island (jdictionary). The island seems to be meaut by the words 



368 


CANTO LVIII. 


30 And next is the outer foot.* The Kambojas,t and pj] 
lava^, X and the Badava-mukhas, § and the Sindhus || andSai 

31 viras, % the Anartas, ***the Yanita-mukhas, ft the Dravanas ^ 
the Sargigas, §§ the Sfiidras, |||| the Karna-pradhejas^ 

* Vdhya-pddasi the right hind foot is meant as is stated expressly 
verse 33, but (because perhaps this word is vague) the names that follow a 
sadly confused and belong to all regions in the west and north-west. 

t See page 318, note § ; they are out of place here. 

J See page 314, note *; these also are out of place. 

§ This should perhaps be connected with Badavd, a tirtha appareotly 
Kashmir (M.-Bh., Vana-P., Ixxxii. 5034-42). A river of the same name 
mentioned (id., ccxxi. 14232), but that seems from its context to be rather i 
South India. Bada^a-mukha (which means ‘submarine fire ’) may alsomea 
“having faces like marcs” ; and a people called Aava-miikhas are mentione 
in Matsya Purdna, cxx. 58, as dwelling north of the Himalayas: see als 
verso 43 below. 

II See page 315, note they are hardly in place here, 

^ See page 315, note f ; these are out of place here. 

** See ptige 840 note §. The name is derived from an eponymous kiuj 
Anarta, who was tlie son of S'aryati one of the sous of Maaii VaivaMati 
(Hari-V., x, 613 and 642-9). 

ft “ Those who have faces like women.” I have not met this name dso 
where. It seems, however, to be a proper name and not an adjective. 

Xt 1'kia as a name is not in tho dictionary, and I have not found it else 
where. 

§§ Or “and the Argigas or A'rgigas,” as the text may be read. Those 
names are not in the dictionary and I have not met with them elsewhere 
Perhaps tho con’oet reading should bo S'drydtas. T'hey were a tribe, so-calK'<; 
from their chief S'aryata tho Manava, who settled down near where the lish 
Cyavaiui dwelt, and gave his daughter Su-kanyd to tho fishi to appease hii 
wrath (S'ata-P. Brah,, IV. i. 5). Ho is called fS'aryati in the M.-Bh. (Vaua l 
exxi. 10312; and exxii.) where the s.imo story is told rather diiforently, 
also in the Hari-Voih^a, where he is said to be a son of Manu and progeiiitoi 
of Anarta and the kings of Anarta (x. 613, and 642-9). From all these pfts 
sages it appears theS^aryatas were in tho West, in Gujarati and C'ya^ana asi 
Bhdrgava is always placed in tho West, near the mouths (if the Narbada aa< 
Tapti, But perhaps the most probable reading is Bhdrgavas ; they were u 
tho West (see page 310, note fi. 

nil See page 313 note J. 

This name is not in the dictionary and I have not 
It can have nothing to do with Karna on© of the heroes of 




COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 


369 


and Varvaras,* the Kiratas,t the ParadaSjJ the 
PaiKjyas§ and the Parai^vas, || the Kalas,^ the 
pi, lir takas,** the Haimagirikas,tt the Sindhu-kalaka- 

ijned in Auga in the East. Prddhe^a means a descendant of Pradhfi, one 
Dakslia's daaghters, and that also is inadmissible. It suggests Rddheya, 
K'h was a metronymic of Karna, but that is equally unsuitable. It seems 
>refore the words must be taken as a whole forming one name, and then it 
/g(>sta comparison with Karna-prdvdra which would be the same as Karima* 
ivarana (sec page 346, note f)- 

i geo page 319, note *. This word is compounded with the preceding 
me, it hardly seems to bo in place here, 
t See page 322, note || ; they seem to be out of place here, unless any 
raias inhabited the southern part of the Aravalli hills or the extreme 
-stern part of the Vindhya mountains, and that seems improbable. See 
so in vorso 44 below, and Khdtaa are mentioned again in 

■rso 51). 

J See page 317, note * ; they seem to be out of place here. 

§ These people are out of place here; see page 331, note §; they should 
'P'operly in the right flank. 

1 I have not met this name elsewhere ; but, no doubt, it denotes some 
wple, who claimed descent from Parasn-Rama and who would therefore be 
jinewhere on the western coast between Bombay and the NarmadA ; see 
igo 310, note f- It is said there was a dynasty of Parasiiva kings after the 
HMt Paurava lino came to an end (Matsya Parana, 1 73—76} but it does not 
I'peiir where. 

This is not in the dictionary, and I have not mot it elsewhere. It sug* 
ws a connexion with the ifd/i6a^a» of canto Ivii, verse 49; but Kala. also 
“fans, "emitting a low or inarticulate sound,*’ and it was nn old fable that 
People existed, who could not speak articulately, but hissed like serpents, 
w Mandoville’s Travels, chap, xviii. and xix. Kala occurs again in 
frse 3fi. 

** I have not found this elsewhere as the name of a people. The word 
'O’^ever means “ a rogue " and may be an adjective to Haima-girikas. 

ft The people of Hema-giri. This is not given as the name of a place in 
lie dictionary, buti it may be a synonym for Hema-Mta or Hema-iringa. It 
* eaid in the Hlj-Bh. the latter is the portion of Himavat from which the 
issued formerly (Adi*P , olxx. 6454-5), and Hnanya-iringa is probably 
eame (Bhishn/a-P., vi. 237). Hema-kuta was near the rivers Nandd and 
Wa-nandd and! between the sources of the Ganges and Kausiki (Vana-P., 
;*• p-i it is alluded to in other passages but they are not clear 

iljTev. 12917 ; Bhi'shma-P., vi. 198, 202, 236 and 246). The last of 



370 


CANTO LVIlf. 


vairatas, * the Saaraslitrasjf and the Daradas,J and f 

33 DravidaSj § the Mah^rnavas || — these peoples are situated 
the right hind foot. 

And the SvatiSjf Vi^akha and Maitra** are the tbr 
corresponding constellations. 

34 The hills Mani-megha,tt and Kshuradri,! J and Khanjana, 

these passages says the Guhyakas dwell on ITema-k6ta. The Matsya Pori 
nays Hema-^ringa is south-east of Kailasa, and the R. Lauhitya, or Briihn,* 
putra, rises at its foot (cxx. 10-12)} and that two rivers rise in Hema-kuti 
.which flow into the eastern and western seas (ibid., 61-6). 

* This seems to bo erroneous, yet it is not easy to suggest an amendment 
The first part, no doubt, refers to the R. Sindhu and the Sindhu people hnt tin 
latter part appears unintelligible. Perhaps the reading should be Smlk 
kiila-bvviralcdh or SindhavdS c'a snvirahdh meaning the Sindhus ami thi 
Suviras (see page 315, notes * and f)} but these two people have been men 
tioned already in verse 30. 

t The people of Snrdshtra; see page 340, note J. 

J See page 318, note \\. They are quite out of place hero. 

§ The Dravidas are often alluded to in the M.-Bh. (e.g., Sabhu-P, xxnii 
1271} Vana-P., li. 1988} Karna*P., xii. 454} &c.), but are not mentioned in 
lUnaay., I believe, except in the geographical canto (xli, 18). They fir 
sometimes closely connected with the Paodyas (Sabha-P., xxx, 1174), but tb 
name was applied in a general way to denote the southern branches of the raic 
now classed ns Diuvidum, and it is the same as Tamil {Caldwell’s Grammar o 
the Dravidiau Languages, pp. 12-15). Their territory included theecacoas 
in early times (Vana-P., cxviii. 10217). It is also said they were kshaltriva 
and became degraded from tho absence of brahmans and the extinction o 
sacred rites (Anu^^s.-P., xxxiii. 2104-6} Manu, x. 43-44). 

II I have not met this name elsewhere. It means “ dwelling by th 
ocean,” and is probably an epithet of Dravidas, for they bordered ou the sc 
as mentioned in tho last note. 


The plural seems peculiar. 

Or Anu-radha. 

ft I have not met this elsewhere. It may be the same as Mt. 
{Drona*P., Ixxx. 2843)} which appears to be also intended |n Vana-?., l*^*’** 

6043, and if so would denote the range of hills enclosMg Kashmir on tW 

south, according to tho context. It may also bo the same las the “ 
mountain Su-megha ” mentioned in the Rdmay. (Ki8hk.-K.,\xliii- 4^)* /, 

XX 'I’bis is not in the dictionary, and I have not found iii els ewhe^) 

§§ This is not in dictionary as tho name of a moan j 

not found it elsewhere. 



CODNTKIPS AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 


371 


and Asta-giri the Apardotika people, f and Jlaihayas, 

jhis does not appear to bo the name of any particular mountains, 
)mt rather denoted in a vague way mountains in the west behind which the 
gnn sets. It is mentioned jn the Kamay. as Asta-giri (Kishk.-K., xxxvii. 22), 
and as Asta-parvata (id., xliii. 64). 

I I SCO note to Aparantas, page 31S, note f. This half line ApardnftU 
is a syllable too long,- it would bo better to read either Apardntd 
or omit iho c'o. 

T Tho llaihayas were a famous race, the descendants of an eponymous 
line; llnihaya, who is said to have been a grandson or great-grandson of 
Yadn, the eldest son of Yayati (Hari-V., xxxiii. 1843-4; and Matsya Purana, 
xliii. KS. Yadii is said to have been king of the north-east region (Hari-V xxx 
1 ( 101 , 1018), but tho references to the earliest movements of the Haihayas 
are lianlly consistent. Jfahish-mat, who was fourth in descent from Hal- 
1, is said to have founded tho city Mahish-mati on the Narmada (see page 
:U|note + ; and i(?., xxxiii. 1840-7), and his son Bhadra-i^rcnya is said tq 
li.ivo rcii^ried in Ka^i or Benares, which the Vitahavya braftch of tho Hai- 
liieiis li:i(l previously conquered fioni its king Harya^va, but Ilaryasva’s 
pr.iiid'^mi Divodtlsa defeated them and regained his capital (M.-Hh., Anusas.- 
U)UM)2; Ilari-V., xxix. 1641-6; and xxxii 1730-40). Tho great 
kinir Ariana Kartavirya, who was ninth in descent (Hari-V., xxxiii 1860-90 • 
nul Maisui P , xHii. 13-45), reigned in Anupa and on the Narmada and had 
tlip?rpat conHict with Rama Jamadagnya, which ended in the overthrow of 
tiio llaihayas (M.-Bh,, Vana-P., cxvi. 10189— cxvii. 10204; and S'anti-P., 
1750 - 70 ; and pages 338 note and 344 note *). The Haihayas and 
l’'*lajaafrhaa in alliance with S'akas, Yavanas, Kdmbojas and Pahlavas are 
'f'l have driven Bahii king of Ayodhya out of his realm, but his son 
drove Llieni out and recovered the kingdom (Vana-P,, cvi. 8831-2 • 

''I xiii 760 -xiv 783) 

Haihaya raoo comprised the following tribes, Vitihotras (or Vita- 
•' 1 , >nrjatas, Bhojas, Avantis, Taiindikoras (or Kundikeras), and 
Talajanglias ; the Bharatas, Sujatyas and Yadavas are added, and the 
urasmins, A'nartas and C'edis also appear to have sprung from thorn (Hari-V. 

1892-0 ; and Matsya-P., xliii, 46-49). Comparing the territoriog 
^ 'ipied by those tribes, it appears tho Haihaya race dominated nearly all 
® I’PRiou south of the Jumna and Aravalli hills as far as tho valley of the 
inclusive of Gujarat in ancient times (see pages 333 note 335 note §, 

§, 342 note J, 844 all the notes, 351 note 352 note *, and 308 
§§) J mid Cunningham says that two great Haihaya States in later ‘ ‘ 
had their capitals at Manipur in Mahd Kos» la (or Chhnttisgarh) and at 
(or Towar) on the Narbada (Arch. Surv. Septs., IX. 64-57). 



372 


CANTO LVIU. 


36 the S'^ntlkas, ^ Viprai^astakas, f the Kokanka^ap, J 
daka8,§ the Vamana8,|| and tlie Avaras,!" the T^rakshuras 

* I have not met this elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary as the nam 
of a people. It tnay be the same as the S'dtikas (M.-Bh., Bhishma-P., ix 35 ^ 
perhaps the S'aiakas in Vana-P., ccliii. 16267 are the same) ; or the reading maj 
be S'dkalos, the people of Sakala, the cnpital of Madra (see page 315, note 
t This is not in the dictionary and I have not met it elsewhere. It appean 
to be a proper name and not an adjective. 

t This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. Perhapi 
the reading shodld be a people in the norlh-west classed with 

the Trignrtns and D/.rvas (M.-Bh , Sabhd-P., xxvi. 1026', or IToiaraJtaa who 
seem to be the same (Bhishma*P., ix. 369). 

§ This is given in the dictionary as the name of a people, but I have not 
met it elsewhere. Perhaps a better reading would be Panc'odakas or Puuc'a. 
nadas, “ the people living beside the R. Pafic'anada,” which appears to be 
the single stream formed by the confluence of the five rivers of the PnDjab 
(M.-Bh., Vana-P., Ixxxii. 6025; Bhishma-P., Ivi. 2406; and dictionary) ; bat 
this name seems to be also applied to the five rivers collectively (Vana-P, 
ccxxi 14229), and to the country watered by those five rivers (Sablia-P, 
xxxi. 1193; Udyoga-P., Hi 82 ; and xviii. 596-601; Karna-P., xlv. 2100 and 
2110; &c. ; Hari-V., xcii. 6018; and Ramfiy., Kishk.-K., xliil. 21), and to the 
inhabitants of it (Bhishma-P., Ivi. 2406; and Karna-P., xlv. 2086): see also 
Lassen’s map (Ind Alt). 

(I This is given in the dictionary as the name of a people, but I have not 
found it elsewhere. Perhaps a better reading would be Vdnavns, who are 
mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Vana-P., ix 362), or Vnndyavas. There was a 
district called Vaitdyn or Vdndiiu, which appears to have been situated in the 
north-west, and which was famous for its breed of horses Bhi'shma- 

P., xci. 3974; Dropa-P., exxi 4831 ; Karr»a-P , vii 200; and llamuy., A'di-K., 
vi 24). It appears to be the modern Bunnn in the north-west of the Panjab. 

^ Tliis is not given as the name of n people, and the word means, "low," 
and *■ western ” This name may be compared with Aparas, a people men- 
tioned in tlie Ramay. (Kishk.-K., xliii 23); and see page 813, note t and 
Aparantikas in verse 34. But a bettor reading for the text hyavardt )« 
perhaps Varvaras ; see page 319, note * and page 369, note 

•• This is not in the dictionary, and I have not met with it elsewhere; but 
Tdrakshnti and Tdrakshiti are given as the name of a district to the west of 
Madhya-de&,. There w’as also a kingdom called Turushka in hiteJ* 
(.Arch. Snrv. of W. India, Memo. No. 10, p. 7). The Turushkas are the 
Turks, and their country Turkestan A people called Tdrkshyas are men- 
tioned in M.-Bh., Sabha-P., li. 1871. • 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN WESTERN INDIA. 373 

tlm Angatakas,* the S'arkaras.f the S'alma-ve^makafl, t 
35 the Gnra.sva.-aa,§ the Phalg,,.,ak«.s || and the people who 


(bvell 

liikas, 


by the river 


Vciju-mat!,f and the 


Phalgtt- 


*• the Gho,;as,tt and the Qu.uhae, U and the 


have not found thie eUo„here, and it i. not in the dictionary. A 
place called Anga-loka la asaigned to the west in the Itanniy (Kishk -K xliii 

S),.„d A,„a. and Anga-lokya, are mentioned to the north of India'in the 
Matsjii Parana (cxx. 44 and 45). 

tTIda is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere A 
merhMamcortais mentioned (Bhigavata Parapa-V., xix. 17;, but apneor, 
„kc i" ‘teto«th. A great honse-holder and theologian Jana Sirksrakshya 
..alluded to C h.ndogya.Up..V., xi. 1). Perhaps the reading may be «ikniL, 
the people of Snkala the capital of Madra (see page 315, note J) 

: This is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it ’ elsewhere. 
I. ..ggosta ,aia.t,e/,„„kns, “ those who live in houses with spacious rooms ” 
tad ,1 may be an adjective to S-arkaras. Perhaps we should read as the 

tm part of the word (see page 349, note §) but, if so, the latter part seems 

unrecognizable. 

si have not met with this elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionary. 

bo an adjective, “ deep-voiced,” describing the Phalgnnalas. Per. 
y .he reading should be au,-jaras They appear to have been settled in 
-Pa ab or Upper Sindh, and to have been driven out by the Bdlas about 
■ ■' lb, and pushed gradually southward, till at length they ocenpied the 
around the peninsula of Kathiawar, thence called GujaraTane: 

«ivhtbc''r"'wr7 «^P»I>aps the reading 

alia in"™ ^ with it elsewhere. It 

(Bhlshma-P , li. 2097} Uh- 

P, fo«nd it elsewhere, 

iu the or Pkala-gtn is mbntioued in the Rimiy. as 

^’'"otatuins). (Kishk.-K., xliii. 13-17, and 

Sa'iha-p K ^ mentioned in the M.-Bh., 

’ 70; bat I have not found any deta to fix their position. 

'»V0 nnf. A 1 • • . ^ 


H I have f ® ^*‘®'** position. 

'k' camb of »" T*’ in the dictionary to be 

•''“'“‘a and OuTuTa “ “'*» written 0„duha, 



374 


CANTO fiVIII. 


Kalas/ the Kkokvlianas,t the Vaji-koiaa, J the 

37 grivas, § and the C'ulikas, || and the Asva-kesas, ^ tlon^ 
peoples are situated in the Tortoise’s tail. 

38 And so situated also are the three constellations Aindra ♦♦ 
Mula, and Purva Ashadlia. 

The Mdndav 3 'as,tt and C^indakhai‘as,JJ and Asvakalanatas,^^ 

* This has occurred before in verso 31. 

f “The one-oyod.” It was nn old belief that such people existed. “Men 
with only one eye in their forehead ” are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Sablin-P 
1. 1837) ; the Cyclopes aro famous in Greek and Latin literatiiro ; and a 
one-eyed race is spoken of as dwelling somowhero in the Indian Ocean bj 
Mandevillo (Travels, Chnp XIX). 

X “ Those who liavo hair or manes, like horses ” T have mot no snch i anio 
elsewhere, except that the synonymous name Ah'a-lcesns occurs in the next 
lino of this verso. Neither is it in the dictionary. 

§ “ The long-necks.” 1 have met no such name elsewhere. 

II This name is the same as the C^uUkas mentioned in canto Ivii verso 40, 
but the position docs not quite agree j these aro in the west and the otlirra 
in the north. A people Viudha-c'nlakas are named in tlio BhislimivP ]i« 
(ix. 369) and appear to he in the north A dyn.asty of kings called G'ulika 
is said to have reigned after the great Paurava line came to an end (MaUv 
Puraiia, I 73-76). 

% “Those who have hair, or manes, like horses.” It is the eaino a 
Vdji-kehs mentioned above. 

** For Anidra-m Alam retid Aiiuirim iniHom. Aindra is the same as Jyoihthfi 
ft They are mentioned again in veiso 46. They may be a tribe 

claimed descent from the risl'* ya, to whom Janaka king of Vuklii 

is said to have sung a song (M.-Ilh , S'^nii-P., cclxxvii), and whoso hcriniiai: 
is alluded to, ns situated somewhere perhaps between Oudh and North Ihhu 
(Udyogo-P., cKxxvii. 7355); but Munduvya-pura is said in the dictionaiy tob 
situated on the 11 Godavari. A people called Mnndikas are mentioned m ih 
M.-Bli. { Vnna-P., ediii. 15243). The Vimandavyas are named in verso 6 abo\( 

I have not met this name elsewhere, nor i.s it in the dictionary; bu 
it suggests Kandahar, and the position agrees. A people C'arma-khandda 
are mentioned in canto Ivii. verse 36. 

§§ This seems a compound. The first part appears to be thei i'<i ‘ 
they ai’o mentioned in the M -Bh. (Bhishma-P., ix. 351), and are place J 
the north-west and identified with the Aspasii and Assakani by 
Alt., Map). The latter part liowever is very doubtful. A people 
are mentioned in the M.-Bh. (Drona-P., xvii. 692) and app^ from theco 
text to have been a north-western race. 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-WEST INDIA 


375 


33 „„,1 the KuiijataMahas, » the Stri-vahyas, f and the Ra- 
likas,I and the Nri.siriihas§ who dwell on the Venn- 
40 nmtill, and the other joeoide who dwell in Valava% and the 
I)l,anna-baddhas,*» the Alukas,t+ the people who occupy 

. Tl,is appears to mean the same people as tho E„uyaldouna> of tl,e 
list (ix. 360). It seems to bo a eomponnd, but the component 
,„e very unrartam. The latter part may be ladoia , , they are mentioned 
,„.,,oM.|lh. (l3h,shma.P., I. 208.1), though there are no data to identify 
,1™,, hut Indu;m.SK,yenin tho dictionary as the name of a people. As 
the hrat part .Vutiupu end i'x’x'ta are given in the dictionary as tl,o 

„„K of u people , and K,dalthm are montione.l i,. the M -Bh. , Dhlshma 1> 
r S7.1) and Mataya I’nrapa fex.x. 44) ns a people to tho north of India ' A 
>,.„l,y he/,i/,« is placed in the west in tho Ratndy., and Kohlta seem, to 
-mother name for it (Kiahk-.-K., .xliii. 8, and Annotations). A country 
tie to ,S also mentioned in tho At - Bh. , Karna-P , xii. 475 and 485) 

/t I Imro not met this elsewhere, and it is not in tho dictionary’. It may 
-.imps...™,, those who live apart from women," but the Ldinr ^ 

.. rc prohahly Mn-rajya. This was the name of a country and 00 .” 
«.s.t.....o,l in tl.o M .Bh. and situated app.arently north of the ir ^ 

.mr Ik- llmnas and Tangap.as (V-ana-P., li. 1991 , and -Santi-P ’ i'v lu? 

: " "‘™.' a, a place north-west of India in an 

road.ng to liamay., Kishk -K., xliii. BO rGorresio's Edition, Ann " 

t Tins is not in the dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere The 
should probably be Bahlihos or Vahlikas, see page 311, note . ' 

-snotinthe 

IS not in tho dicLionnry and I have nnf i 
in the norll. wn«f i , ^ ^ any riror of this 

icnoith-wcat. It lu.s been mentioned in vorso 36 aboro 

I ™'mra::;r,d'::w,it "a? ^ >'-<■ -t met 

- . X '«<>"‘''onod in the M -Bh 

• ml in North India (Anuias.-P., XXV. 1706). 

'""'''k’‘‘Zr:'h:" - po‘-t..-.ps mor... 

! !, nfT' resemblance to it is 

° 317, notes. The 

XI, .,1 i 1 T° ‘'‘® P®®P'- 


pi "inte‘nde"r “‘"a ^ fonndTu Where. The- 

f^fhaluk^ ^ForTe MhoMkd 

<^HUKa. For the Ulukas see^page 340, not© f. 



376 


CANTO LVm. 


Uru-karma* — these peoploa are in the Tortoise’s left hind f 

foot. X 

41 Where also A'sliadlia and SViivnna and Dhanishtha are 

situated. 

The mountains Kaila.sa, § and Hima-vat, Dhanu8h-mat,|| smci 

42 Vnsu-mat,^ the Krauncas,** and the Kurus ft and Vakas JJ 

* I hare not met this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. It is ppr. 
haps to be connected ^Yith the ITrnae; see page 324, note f. A people called 
Urdamarus arc placed in the north in the Matsya Parana (cxx. 48). 

+ For pdrive road pasc'e ? 

t This verso closes with the word bhagure} it is not in the dictionary and 
seems to be erroneous. Should the reading be bhasurCf “ brilliant,” an epithet 
to A'sh^^ha and fi'ravnna ? 

§ This mountain is of course constantly mentioned throughout Sanskril 
literature, and the references indicate that it was on the north of the middle 
portion of the Himalaya range. The name is given in modern maps to the 
range of mountains which is situated immediately north of the Manasa lakeg, 
and in which the Indus rises. 

II This is given in the dictionary, but I have not met with it elsewhere 
It may perhaps refer to Himavat ; see canto Ivii verso 59, where the range is 
compared to a bow in shape. 

^ I have not found this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary as ths 
name of a hill. It may perhaps mean “abounding in wealth” and qualify 
Himavat. 

These are no doubt tho people who dwelt near the Krauuo'a group of 
mountains. This group is called tho son of Rlninaka, which is called the son 
of Himavat, and therefore appears to have been a portion of the Miiinaka 
mountains in the great Himavat raonntain system ( Hari-V., xviii. 941'2). h 
is mentioned iu tho Ramdy. as having lake Manasa on its sumnub with Msi- 
naka lying beyond (Kishk.-K., xliv. 32-37); but in the Megha-Diita Krauuc'a 
is placed south of that lake, and there is said to bo a pass through it leading 
to the lake (I. 68 and 69 with commentary). The pass must apparently be 
the valley of the source of tho Sarju or Ghogra, and the Kraunc'a mountami 
would therefore be the portion of the Himalaya chain bounding Nepal at the 
extreme north-west. 

tt These must be the Uttara Kurus, see page 346, note §. The Kurus 
Madhya-de^ have been mentioned in verse 9 above. 

'I'hese are mentioned in tho dictionary, but J have not found tkem 
elsewhere. A people called Varvas are alluded to in the Matsya^P'*’^^ 
(cxx. 47). 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 


877 


and the people who are called Kshudra-vi^as,* the RasdlayaSjf 
and the Kaikeyas, J the Bhoga-prasthas, § and the Yamunas,|( 

• Thoso who have small lutes.” This is not in the dictionary and I have 
not met with it elsewhere. A people cslled Kshudrakas are mentioned in the 
H-Bh. (Karna-P., v. 137) ; they lived in north India and are generally named 
n coiijiinetion with the Malavas (Sabha-P., li. 1871 ; Bhiahma-P., li. 2106; 
ixxnii. 3853; Diona-P , Ixx. 2435), and are said to be the Greek Oxydraci. 

t I have not found this elsewhere. It may mean ” those who dwell near 
he river Rasa” which is mentioned in the Rig-V. (x 75,6). 1 have met 
fiih no other allusion to it, but Dr. Muir thinks it is probably are affluent of 
he Indus (8ansk. Texts, II. 356 and 357). 

♦ Sue page 317 note j] . 

§ I h ive not met with this word elsewhere, though it is given in the 
icfionary as the name of a people. Perhaps the reading should be Bhoja- 
"lutba, as a synonym of Bhoja-nagaroy which is mentioned in the M.^Bh. as 
lecipital of king ITsinara or Ushinara, father of king S'ivi (Udyoga-P., cxvii), 
loth of whom were famous monarohs and are often alluded to in the M.-Bh. 
p,?,, Yana-P., cxxxi. 10582-94; oxcvi. 13274; Drona*P., Iviii ; and Benti-P., 
lit 932-7). According to the genealogies given (Hari-V., xxxi. 1674-9 ; 
Dd Matsya Purana, xlviii. 15-21) various Panjab races claimed descent 
■oin Usmara, but the name U^maras was especially appropriated to the 
esceiidants of S^ivi (Vana-P., cxxxi. 10582). The Usinnras are alluded to 
'casioually (e.g., Karna-P., v. 137; Aitar. Brdh , viii. 3, 14; and Kaushit.- 
P.17.1), but S'ivi or S'ibi is the name which is generally used in the 
•Bh. From these passages and others (e.g., Sabha-P., xxxi. 1189 ; li. 1870 ; 
auvP,,cxciv. 13249-55; colxv ; cclxx. 15718 and 15743; Bhishma-P., xviii. 
'^-W; and li. 2104) it appears the S^ivis were grouped with the Trigartas, 
'idras, and other Panjab nations on one side and with the Kurus, S'urasenas 
^^-'‘^syas on the other side, that is, with all the nations which surrounded 
■alimavarta ; and that their territory was near the Jumna and close to Tri- 
■iitipa or Tri-piah^'ipa which was part of Brahmavrt,rta (Vana-P., oxxx. 
f56-cxxxi. 10595 ; with Ixxxiii. 6054-6 and 7073-8; and page 290, note ||). 
8ivig or U^inaras therefore appear to have possessed the country 
upper part of tke Sarasvati, Drishad-vau and Jumna, from Saha* 
^npur to Pattiala ; with the Ambnsh^hns to the north-west (see page 879 
t). In later times they shared the degradation which the brahmans 
P^uounced on the nations of the north-west because of the absence of 
among them (AnuSas.-P., xxxiii. 2103). 

I These are mentioned in the Bhishma-P, list (ix. 368) and were the 
6 yho inhabited the Yamuna hills. The Pandavas in returning from 
'isit beyond the Himalayas camovto the Yimuna hills, and then to 

48 



378 


CANTO LVIII, 


43 the Antar-dvipa49,* and the TrigartaSjf the Agnijyaa,| the 
Sardana peoples, § the A^va-mukhas || also, the PrApt^s^ 

44 the long-haired C'ividas,** the DasorakaSjtf tlie Vata. 
dhfinas,tt and the S'ava-dhdnas, §§ the Puahkalas, |||| 

the Sarnavati (Vana-P., olxxvii. 12346-62). The hosts collected on the 
Kaaravaa’ side before the great war overspread all the country from PaficV 
nada (the Panjab) to AhicVhatra (see page 353, note *) including the 
Yamuna hills (Udyoga-P., xviii. 696-601). Hence it appears these hills were 
the portion of 'the Himnlayas, in which tho Jumna has its sources, and 
which separate it from the Sutlej. 

* Dvipa in this connexion cannot mean any island, and must mean a dodj 
(see page 364, note f). Tho Antar-dvipas then would moan “ihoje 
who dwell within the doabs.” I have not met with this word elsewhere 
and here it is probably an adjective to the Trigartas, to whom it is T 07 
appropriate. 

t Sec page 374, note * . 

X I have not found this elsewhere, and it is not in the dictionarji 
The proper reading should no doubt be Agneyas. They are mentioned in thi 
M.-Bh. (Vana-P., ccliii. 15256). A rishi or man called Agneya Su-darssiv 
is spoken of who dwelt in Kuru-kshetra (Ann^ns.-P., ii. 102-172); and tin 
Agneya Salya-kirtana is alluded to in the same region (Ramay., Ayodh.-K, 
Ixxiii. 3). It seems probable therefore that the Agneyas were a small trilx 
inhabiting the northern part of Kuru-kshetra. 

§ Or perhaps ** and the Ardana peoples.” I have not met with eithe: 
name elsewhere, nor are they in the dictionary. 

II These are mentioned in the Matsya Pur^pa (oxx. 58). Tho synonymoi 
name Badavd-mukhas occurs in verse 30 above. It may be noted here that i 
was an old belief there were people who had heads like dogs, Cynocephal 
(Pliny, vi. 30; Mandeville’s Travels, chap, xviii). 

•|f I have not found this elsewhere. It may perhaps mean the people callei 
Vadhrag or Badhnas in the Bhishma-P. list (ix. 363). 

** This is not in the dictionary, but C'ivuka or C'ibuka is given. I have no 
however met any of these names elsewhere. The word c'ipiia means ‘ A** 
nosed.” 

ft See page 321, note *. 

Xt S®® page 312, note •, ^ 

§§ This is not in the dictionary, and I have nert found it elsewhere, 
seems to be formed on the same plan as Vdfa-dhdna and Ydtu-dhdna. R 
perhaps mean “ those who place their dead in receptacles,” yet it e®*® 
rather to be a name. 

# 

II l| See page 820, note f . 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH INDIA. 


379 


and Adhama Kair^tos,* and those who are settled 

45 in Taksha-6il6,t the Amb^laa,! the Malava8,§ the 
Madras, II the Vepukas,! and the Vndantikas,** the 

46 Pingalas,tt the Mana-kalahas,tJ the HtinaB,§§ and the 


# The basest or rudest races of Kiratas; see page 322, note \\. 

f The Greek Taxila. It is mentioned in the M.-Bh. The name is generally- 
connected with Takshaka king of the Nagasj it is said he killed Arjuna’s 
grandson king Pan'kshit according to a curse j and that king’s son Janamejaya 
iuvaded Taksha-^ila and conquered it (Adi- P., iii. 682-3 and 832-4 ; xl-xliv; 
and xlix. 1054 j 1.1991). It appears however to have been named from the 
Takkas, whose capital it was, and Cunningham has identified it near the 
modern Shah-dheri or Dheri Shahan in the Panjab. It was a large and 
famous city and the Takkas held all the country around (Arch. Surv. Repts., 
II. 6, 111, 112 j XIV. 8). It appears to have contained a great Buddhist uni- 
versity also, 

I Those would be the people of Ambala. This name is a late one. It may 
probably be derived from the old Ambashfha, the name of a people often men- 
tioned ill the M.-Bh. They are said to have been descendants of king USi- 
nara iind to have been closely rol tted to the S'ivis ; see page 377, note § 
HJari-V , xxxi 1674-9; Matsya Parana, xlviii. 16-21). They were in the 
north-west and are generally mentioned along with north-western nations 
p'podilly tho S'ivis and Trigartas (M.-Bh., SabhA-P., xxxi. 1189; Bhishma-P, 
xvm. 588-99; cxviii. 6486; cxx. 6649; and Dro^a-P., vii. 183). It seems, 
very probable therefore that they occupied the country between Ambnla, 
sad tho Sutlej with tho S'ivis on their east and south and the Trigartas on 
their north-west. 


§ See page 341, note * ; but they are quite out of place here. 

II See page 329, note *. 

i’his ia not in tho dictionary, and I have not found it elsewhere. A 
>eaple called Venikas are mentioned in M.-Bh., Bhiahma-P., li. 2097. 

** I have not met with this elsewhere. 


tt These people are mentioned in the Ramdy., as situated in the West 
Kidk-K., xliii. 23, alternative reading; Gorresio's Edition, Annotations), 
■■‘^er PiHjald is included in the Bhishma-P. -ist (ix. 385). But perhaps 
I an adjective here, “light brown,” and qualifies Hiinas; for the 


I P'fiRala 
I Hqii! 


appear to have been a light-oomplexioned people ; see note §§ below, 
^ave not met this as a name elsewhere. It may be an adjective, 
pride,” and qualify the Hunas. 

»ith They are mentioned os an outside people to tho north along 

(Vana-P., li. 1991 ; Bhishma-P , ix. 373 ; and STanti-P., 
^2229), but are not often alluded to at first. In the Raghu-Vaiiiia 



380 


CANTO LVIII. 


Kohalakag,* the Mancjlavyas, f the Rhuti-yuvakas^ t|]g 
S'atakas,§ the Hema-tarakas, || the Yjiso-matyaR.f and the 
47 Gandharas,** the Kliai^.8a^.ira.ra^ia,tt the Yaudheyag +! 
and the Dasameyas,§§ the Rajaiiyas,|||| and the S'^yamfikas,^! 

they are placed on the northernmost part of the Indus, and the commentator 
calls them Mujjanapaddkhydh kshattriydh (iv. 67-68). They appear to have 
been of a light complexion, for their women aro pictured as having made 
their oheelts pale red (pd(nla) by boating them in grief (t 6 td.). For the 
Ephthalites or White Huns, see Cunninghnm’s Arch. Surv. Repts., II 75-79 
All the valley of tho Upper Satlej is called Ilimdes. A people called Hdra- 
Alinas are also alluded to in tho M.-Eh. as an outside people to the north, 
west (Sabha-E., xxxi. and 1 18 hi). 

* I have not found this elsewhere, but it seems to bo the same as the 
KokaraJcas (Biiishrna-l*., ix. 369) and Kokanadas (Sabha-P., xxvi, 1026), both 
of whom appear to have been a tribe to the north of tho Panjab. 

t See page 374, note ft. 

t I have not met this elsewhere. Perhaps it should be connected with BhuU. 
laya, which was a place in tho north of tho Panjab (Karpa-P., xliv, 2062-3). 

§ I have not fonnd this elsewhere. 

II This is not in the dictionary atid I have not met with it elsewhere. 

^ I have not found this elsewhere ; it seems to mean a people who lire 
on a river Ya^o-mati. 

See page 314, note %. 

ft I have not mot this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. Certnin 
Kh'tra-patha countries are alluded to in the Matsya Purina (cxx. 66 ); but 
the name in the text should probably be split up into two names. 

These people are generally mentioned along with the Trigartas, Madras 
and otlier Panjab nations (Sabha-P., li. 1870; and Karpa-P., v. 137 ), and the 
epithet adri-ja, “ mountaineer,” seems to be applied to them (Dropa-P-, chi- 
7208). They are said to have been descended from king Usimira, like the 
S'ivis and Ambashtlmp (Hari-V., xxxi. 1674-8). I have not found any thing 

more to indicate their position, but judging from the portions of the Panjab 
oconpied by other nations the Yaudhoyas may perhaps be placed north of 

the Madras near Lahore. 

§§ Or Ddsatniyas, as they were also called (Sabbii-P., 1. 1826). They were 
a people in the Panjnb; they are called out-castes and are denounced in tb« 
Karna-P. of the M.-Bh. like the other Punjab nations (xliv. 2064-6, and 2069i 
and xlv. 2090), but I have found no data to fit their position. 

111 ! Rdjanya means a ‘‘kshattriya ” or ” noble,” but here it seems to both* 
name of a people. 1 have not found it as such elsewhere. « 

f f 1 have not met with this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-EAST INDIA. 


381 


^nd the Kshema-dhiirfcas* have taken up their position in 
the Tortoise’s left flank. 

And there is the constellation Varuna,t there the two 
constellations of Praushtha-pada J. 

And the kingdom of the Yena8§ and Kinnaras, |1 
the country Prasupala,^ and the country Kic'aka,** 

♦ I have not found this elsewhere. A king of Kuluta named Kshema- 
mentioned in the M.-I3h. (Karna-P., xii. 475, &c.). 

f OrS'ata-bhishaj. 

I They are Pui va-bliadra-pada and Uttnra-bhadra-pada. 

§ The word Yena must be a mistake, and the name meant should, no doubt, 
joined with Kinnara-rdjynm. The proper reading may be cither Yauna- 
nnam-nijynin, or better perhaps, C/ina-kinnara rajyam. For C'inas, see 
i^re 319, note t- Yauna appears to be an abbreviated form of Yavana and 
rarely mot with (see S'inti-P., cevii. 7560) ; the Yavanas were in 

,e north-west; see p<Mgo 314, note §, yet they are mentioned again in verse 62. 

Tho Kinnaras are said in the dictionary to bo mythical beings with a 
iman figure and the head of a horse; such creatures have been already 
iml-d to, see Badava-mnkhas in verse 30, and Asva-mukhas in verse 43. 
hoy woro placed on Mount Gandha-madana (Vana-P., cxliii. 10964-8), 
n Mount Mandar.i (Drona-P., Ixxx. 2848-62;, and generally in the central 
I'gion of the Himalayas (Rnghii-V., iv. 78); and they, are probably meant 
y the Kinkaras in Hamay., Kishk.-K., xliv. 13. The Kinnaras were to 
Dine extent identified with the Kinipurushas, though both are mentioned 
pparately in the Matsya-Purana, cxx. 48-49. It is stated in the diction- 
ry that this occurred in later times, but the chief of tho Kimpurushas is 
aid in tho M -llh. to havo dwelt at Gandlia-mddana (Udyoga-P., clvii, 
'3'>2) which was the Kinnaras’ territory. The Kimpurushas are described 
IS fiirming a kingdom in the Pandavas’ time and owning the country beyond 
wora parvata (Sabha-P., xxvii. 1038-9; Hari-V., xcii. 6013-5; and xeix. 
'W3-5) Thoy are alluded to as being men of an inferior type (Aitar. Brah., 
i- 81, and as being forest-men (S^anti-P., clxix), and also as skilled 
“the use of the bow (Udyoga-P., clvii. 6352). 

This is, no doubt, a mistake for Pciiu-pdla which is stated to be the name 
a country and people to the north-east of Madhya-desa (diet.). They 
mentioned along with Kiratas and Tanganas and are placed among the 
Himalayan r.anges in the Ramay. (Kishk.-K., xliv. 20). Another 
Ming in tlmt passage is Pdihiapdlas (see Annotations). 

The text is sa-kic^akam. This seems to be the region of the reeds or 
called kic'akas ; they are said to line the banks of the R. S'ailoda 
North (Rdmiy., Kishk.-K., xliv. 70-79; M.-Bh., 8abhA-P., li. 1868-9 j 



382 


CANjTO LVIir. 

49 and the country of Ka^mira,* and the people of Abr 
Bara,t the DavadaB,^ and the Tvahganas,§ the Kula^g | 
60 the Vana-rashtrakas,! the Sairishthas,** the Bi-ahma. 

and Raghu-V., iv. 73). It is nofc clear where this country wag The 
R. S^ailoda is placed between Mem and Mandara in the passage from the 
M.-Bh., and the Khasas, Paradas and Tanganas dwelt near it. The R ^ailo 
daka is said to rise at the foot of Mount Arnna, west of Kailasa, in the Matsja 
Puraija (<5xx. 22-23). 

A people called Kic'alcaa are mentioned in the M.*Bh., as being near the 
MatsyaSj Trigartas and PAnc'alas, i.e., in Madhya-de^a (Adi-P., clvi. 6084-7) 
and Kio'aka was tho name of the general of Virata king of Matsya (Virata- 
P., xiv. 376-7). The dictionary states that they were a tribe of the Kekayas 
(see page 317, note ||) and that Eka-c'akr4 was one of their towns ; but 
Eka-o'akra seems rather to have been in Madhya-de^a (Adi-P., clvii. GlOl-9' 
clx. 6207 j olxiv, 6306 ; and Vana-P., xi. 388-415), and Arrah in Beharclniins 
to be that town. Perhaps there may be some confusion with Kikata, the old 
name of Behar, in this. 

* KdimiraTcam rdah^ram^ it is called Kdimiraka-mandala (M.*Bh., Vana-P., 
cxxx. 10545-6; and AuuSAs.-P., xxv. 1695); see page 323, note J. It is quite 
out of place here. 

t This was a country in the north of tho Panjab and its capital was 
Abhtsarf (M.-Bh., Sabhii-P., xxvi. 1027; and Bhishma-P., ix. 361). It is not 
often mentioned (Karna-P., xiv. 640-1 ; and see also perhaps Drona-P., xciii. 
3379-80), unless the Ahhishdhas or AhMshdhas are the same people (Bhislima- 
P., xviii. 688 ; cxviii. 6485 ; Drona-P., clxi, 7207). But Abhisara is quite ont 
of place here in tho north-eastern region. 

X This is not in the dictionary. I have met with it elsewhere only in 
Hari-Vaih^, xcix. 5603-4, but there it is a mistake for Darada; compare 
xcii. 6022-3, and xci. 4966-70. Tho Daradas are out of placo hero; see page 
318, note, ||. They arc mentioned in verse 32 also. 

§ No doubt a mistake for Tanganas, see page 323, note §. 

II This is not in the dictionary, but a people called Kulati are mentioned 
there. I have not found it elsewhere. The word resembles KultUii (Karna- 
P , xii. 476 and 485) and Koliita and Koluka (RaraAy., Kishk.-K., xliii and 
Annotations) which seem to bo tho modern Kulu near the source of the 
R. Bias, but it is out of place here. A similar name Kurufas is mentioned 
in verse 61. 

f This is mentioned in tho dictionary, but I have not found it elsewhere. 
Vana-rashtra as “ the country of forests ” would apply well to the densel) 
wooded tracts of Assam. ^ ^ 

** I have not met wit.h this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. 



COUNTRIES AND RACES IN NORTH-EAST INDIA. 


383 


pnrakas,* and the Vana-vahyakas,t the KirAtast and 
Kau^ika8§ and Ananda8,|| the Pahlavat andLolana** peo- 
51 pics, the Darvadas.tt and the Marakas.JJ and the Kuru{a8,§§ 
the Anna-daraka 8 ,|||| the Eka-padas.ft the KhaiSas,*** 
the GhoshaSittt the Svarga-bliaumanavadyakas, JJJ 


pliico called Sairishaka Ib mentioned, bat it ^v&b west of Delhi 
[^jibha-P., xxxi. 1187-8). 

* This 18 mentioned in the dictionary, and Brahma-pura ia said to be the 
name of a peak in the Himalayas, but I have not met either name elsewhere. 

f Thia ia in the dictionary but I have not found it elsewhere. 

I See page 322, note || ; and canto Ivii, verse 8. 

§ These would be the people dwelling on the banks of the R. Kau^ikf or 
Kosi (see page 292, note **). 

, Thia is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. The 
;ext should no doubt read Nandd separate from Kirdta^kaufikd, and the people 
ire the Nandns, those who live on the banks of the rivers Nnnda and 
Apura iiatidd, which are often mentioned ns situated in the North between 
[lie (Jangea and Kaudiki or Kosi, and near the R. Bahuda and Mt. Hemaku^a 
(M Bh, Adi-P., coxv. 7818-9 5 V’’ana-P., Ixxxvii. 8323; ox. 9968--87; and 
Druna-P , liv. 2092). 

Soo page 314, note *. They are altogether out of place hero. 

•* Ting is given in the dictionary, but I have not met with it elsewhere. 

+t This seems to be a mistake ; it seems the reading should be either 

“ the Darvas and others,” or Ddrvd ddmarakdi. For the Ddrvas see 

Jifje 324, note J. 


:: Or perhaps Ddmarakas as suggested in the last note. Maraka is given 
] ‘^‘c^ionary but I have not found it elsewhere. It suggests Muru and 
the names of two Danava or A.sara chiefs, in Prdg-jyotisha whom 
^n^hna conquered (M.-Bh., Sabha-P., xiii. 678; Vana-P., xii. 488 ; Udyoga- 
’,xlvn. 1887-92; cxxix. 440S-9 ; clvii. 6353-8; STanti-P., cccxli. 12964-6; and 
G791— cxxiii. 6921). Prag-jyotisha was the North of Bengal, 
Pf'go 328, note f. 

!!, dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. Is it 

“ f'onnectcd with the R. Karatoyd, the modern Kuratee (see page 292, 

ote ff) ? 

r^Thia if, ^ot in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere, 

The men with only one foot,” see page 368, note f. 

1 hey are mentioned above in verse 6 ; see also page 346 note ♦. 

1 have nob met with these elsewhere. The Ohosha-aankhyas are men- 
in vorso 6 above. 

^ ^ids seems to be a compound name, but it is not in the dictionary and 



884 


CANTO LVIII. 


62 and the Hingas,* and tlie Yavanas,t and i% 08 e who 
called C'ira-pi-avaranas, J the Tri-netra8,§ and the Pauravas || 

63 and the Gandharvas, T 0 brahman. These people are 

situated in tlie Tortoise’s noi tli-east foot. 

And the tiu-ee constellations, the Revatis,** 4.4vi-daivatjatf 

64 and Yjvmya,JJ are declared to he situaU^d in that foot and tend 
to the complete development of actions, §§ 0 best of munis 

And these very constellations are situated in tliese places, ||i| 


I have not found any thing like it elsewhere. As an adjective it might mean 
“ faultless as Svarga and the planet Mars,” but that seems inappropriate. 

* I have not met with this elsewhere and it is not in the dictionary. 

t The Yavanas were in the North-west, see page 314, note §, and aho 
canto Ivii, verso 8; but they seem to have spread widely and here they are 
mentioned in the North-east. 

J “ Those who wear bark clothing.” I have not met with it elsewhere 
as the name of a people. 

§ “ The three-eyed people.” It was believed there were such people, loe 
M.-Bh,, Sabha-P., 1. 1837- 

11 The P.iurava race was descended from Puru, one of Yaydti’s sons (M,-Bh,, 
Adi-P,, Ixxxv. 3533-4 ; and xcv. 3762-4) who is said to have got Madhya-doia 
(Hari-V., xxx. 1604 and 1619); and the Pauravag spread in various direc- 
tions. A Paurava kingdom is placed in the North ^gion, in the account of j 
Arjnna’s conquests there (Sabha-P., xxvi. 1022-6) and that may be the nation j 
intended here. There were also Panravas elsewhere {eg., Santi-P., xlu. ' 
1790-2; and Adi-P., clxxxvi. 6995; but Sabha-P., xxx. 1164 is probably a 
mistake). | 

■[[ The Gandharvas were fabled to be heavenly musiciftas, but they are also | 
spoken of as a people dwelling beyond lake Mariasa, and it is said Arjuna I 
conquered them and brought back a tribute of fine roan horses ffdbrt- ; 
Icdmdsha) from their country (Sabha-P., xxvii 1041-3). It is said the Gau- j 
dharvas are more powerful by night (Adi-P., clxx 6504). It is also fabled 
that the gods obtained Soma from them because they lust after women 
(Altar. Brah., I. v. 27); and they were said to possess or inspire people 
V. v. 29; and Bfib. Arap. Up., III. iii. 1 and vii. 1). 

** For Bevatydi read Eevatyai; the plural is sometimes used. 

ft Or ASvini. 

Or Bharani. 

§§ Pdkdya. 

nil There do not appear to be any particular reasoni wKy thelun**"®*® 
stellatious are assigned to the respective portions ot the Tortoise’s body* 



ASTBOLOQfCAL APPLICATIONS, 385 

0 brahman. These places, which have' been mentioned in 
order, undergo calamity* when these their constellations are 
occulted, t and gain ascendancy, t 0 brdhman,§ along with 
56 the planets which are favourably situated. Of whichever con- 
stellation whichever planet is lord, both the constellation and 
the corresponding country are dominated by it j|| at its ascend- 
ancyf good fortune accrues to that country, 0 best of munis- 
)7 Singly all countries are alike; fear or prosperity** comes 
to people according as either arises out of the particular 
,8 constellation and planet, 0 brahman. The thought, that man- 
kind are in a common predicament with their own particular 
constellations when these are unfavourable, inspires fear. 
Along with the particular planets there arises from thdr 
occultations an unfavourable injiuenc-e which discourages exer- 
)9 tion. Likewise the development of the conditions may be 
favourable ; and so when the planets are badly situated it tends 
to produce slight benefit to men and to themselves with the 
W wise who are learned in geography.tt When the particular 
planet is badly situated, J { men even of sacred merit have fear 
for their goods w cattle-pen, their dependants, frienda or 
v/l children or wife, ^ow men of little merit feel fear in their 
souls, very sinful men feel it everywhere indeed, but the 
62 sinless never in a single place. Man experiences good or evil, 
which may arise from community of region, place and people, 
or which may arise from having a common king, or which 
may arise peculiarly from himself, §§ or which may arise 
^■1 from community of constellation and planet. And mutual 
preservation is produced by the non-malignity |||1 of tho.pla- 


* ^idyante. f p{dd, 

I ^^hy^udaya. § For vipram road vipra. 

ii Tke text is tad-bhivito hKayam\ but it seems better to take the whole as 
word. 


^ ^titarsha. 

tt Those versos seem rather obscure. 
4 For du-sthe read duh-sthe. 


** Sbhhana, “ brightening up.** 


1 srahddausthyena road grahddaui^thyena* 



CANTO LVIII. 


nets ; and loss of good is produced by the evil results 
spring from these very planets^ 0 lordly brdhman. 

64 I have described to thee what is the position of the Tortoise 
among the constellations. Bui this community of countries 

65 is inauspicious and also auspicious. Therefore a wise man, 
knowing the constellation of Ms particular country and the 
occiiltation of the planets, should perform a propitiatory rite 
for himself and observe the popular rumours, 0 best of men, 

66 Bad impulses* both of the gods and of the Daityas and other 
demons descend from the sky upon the earth ; they have been 
called by sacred writings “ popular rumours in the world. 

67 So a wise man should perform that propitiatory rite; he 
should not discard the popular rumours. By reason of them 

68 the decay of corrupt traditional doctrine J befits men. Those 
rumours may effect the rise of good and the casting off of sins, 
also the forsaking of wisdom, § 0 brahman ; they cause tk 

69 loss of goods and other property. Therefore a wise man, being 
devoted to propitiatory rites and taking an interest in the 
popular rumours, should have the popular rumours proclavned 

70 and the propitiatory rites performed at the occultations of 
planets ; and he should practise fastings, devoid of malice, the 
praise-worthy laudation of funeral monuments and other 
objects of veneration^ prayer, the homa oblation, and liberality 

71 and ablution ; he should eschew anger and other passions. And 
a learned man should be devoid of malice and shew bene- 
volence towards all created things ; he should discard evil 

72 speech and also outrageous words. And a man should perform 
the worship of the planets at all occultations. Thus all terri- 
ble things which result from the planets and constellations 

73 are without exception pacified with regard to self-subdued 

This Tortoise described by me in India is in truth ® 

74 adorable lord NArAyana, whose soul is inconceivable, and m 
whom everything is established. In it all the gods have tbeir 

* Daurhriddh ; the dictionary gives this word only as neuter, 
t Loka-vAda. % PushtAgama. § PrajfiA-hAni. 



ARRANGEMENT OF THE ZODIAC. 


387 


75 station, each resorting to his own constellation. Thus, in its 
middle are Agni, the Earth, and the Moon, 0 brahman. In 
its middle *are Aries and the next two constellations;* in its 

76 mouth are Gemini and the next constellation; and in the 

south-east foot Cancer and Leo are situated; and in its 

side are placed the three signs of the zodiac, Leo, Virgo 

77 and Libra: and both Libra and Scorpio are in its south- 

west foot; and at its hinder partf is stationed Sagittarius 

78 along with Scorpio; and in its north-west foot are the 
three signs Sagittarius and the next two ; and Aquarius and 

79 Pisces have resorted to its northern side ; Pisces and Aries 
ai'e placed in its north-east foot, 0 brahman. 

The countries are placed in the Tortoise, and the constella>- 
^ tions in these countries, 0 brahman, and the signs of the zodiac 
in the constellations, the planets in the signs of the zodiao-t 
Therefore one should indicate calamity to a country when 
si its particular planets and constellations are occulted. In that 
mnt one should bathe and give alms and perform the homa 
oblation and the rest of the ritual. 

This ver^ foot of Vishnu, which is in the midst of the 
planets, is Brahmd. 


Canto LIX. 


Description of the Earth continued* 


Mdrkandeya tells of the continents Bhadrds'va and Ketumdla, 
and the country of the Northern Kurusy and describes their 
muntainSy rivers and people. 


Mdrkandeya spoke 

^ Thus then have I declared this continent Bhdrata accurately, 
0 muni, and the Kpita, Treta, and Dvapara, and Kali ages 
2 which are the four ages.§ And now indeed there is a fourfold 


Taurua and Gemini ; the signs of the Zodiac overlap in the different 
i Pfishthe; brt pwc'c'ha would be better, 
graha-rdHshv read grahd rdiiehv f 
tatH-tishya-c^atuah^hayom read'tafhd tishya^'C^atushfayam, 



588 


CANTO LIX. 


classification^ in these ages, 0 brahman. Pour, ftroQ 

3 two hundreds and one hundred of autumns men live herein 
the Kfita, Treta and two other ages respectively, 0 brahman 

Hear from me of the continent Bhadrasva, which is situated 

4 east of the magnificent eastern mountain Deva-kfita. 

Both S'veta-paroa, and Nila, and the lofty mountain S^aivala, 

h Kauranja, Par^a-^alagra — these indeed are the five mountain 
ranges. There are many small mountains besides, which am 

0 ofishoots of those ranges ; the countries there are distinguished 
by them, they are of various shapes and occur in thousands. 
Moreover they are like white water-lilies and are auspicious 

7 with their pure summits. Such-like and diverse also are 
other hills by hundreds and thousands. The Sfita, the 

8 S^ahkhavati, the Bhadra, and the C'akravartd and many other 
rivers spread abroad there, bearing down volumes of cold 
water. In this country mankind are lustrous as shells and 

9 like pure gold; t they associate with the celestials ; they arc 
holy ; their lires last a thousand years ; neither inferior nor 

10 superior exists among them ; they are all of equal appear- 
ance ; they are endowed naturally with patience and the 
seven other good qualities. 

And there the god Janardana has a horse’s head and four 

11 arms ; with head, chest, penis, feet and forearms resembling a 
horse's, and he has three eyes. And thus the objects of sense 
are perceptible by him, the lord of the world. 

12 Now hear from mo about the continent Ketumala which 
is on the west. 

13 Vi6ala, Kambala, Kpishna, Jayanta, Hari-parvata, Visoka, 
and Vardhamdna — these seven are the mountain rangca. 
There are other hills by thousands, among which a multitude 

14 of people dwell. Those people dwell there in hundreds, the 
ManlisJ huge in stature, the S'akas, Potas and Karamhliakas,§ 


* C^atur-vart^yo, a maao. abstract noun. 

t S^anlcha-hddha-hema'sama-prabhdh. 

t This and the following words seem to be the names ef 
tains and rivers in those continents are named, and it seems most w 
and reasonable to take these words as names. * ^ ; 

§ S^dhapotaharamhkakdJ ^ ; or perhaps “ S^iikaS} Potokas and Bamblial*®* : 



kbtomXla and thb nosthebn Kurds. 389 | 

jj and thosa who are distingaished by their thumbs, who drink 
of the great rivers, the Vankshu, the Syimi, the Svakambald, 
tho Araogha, the Kdmini, the S'ydma, and of others in 

Id thousands. And here life is equal to the above-mentioned 
Urn in Bhadr^ha. And hero tho adorable Hari wears a 
boar’s shape and resembles a boar in feet, face, chest, back and 

17 flanks. And the lunar constellations are beautiful in that 
country which enjoys three constellations only. Such is this 
continent of Kotumdla, which I have described to thee, 0 best 
of munis. 

18 Next I will tell thee of the Northern Kurus ; hearken to 
me now. 

llioro tho trees yield sweet fruit, they bear blossoms and 

19 fruit in constant succession j and they produce garments and 
ornaments inside their fruits ; verily they bestow all one’s 

20 desire; they yield fruit according to all one’s desire. The 
jjround abounds with precious stones; tho air is fragrant and 
always delightful. Mankind are born there, when they quit 

21 the world of the gods. They are born in pairs ; the pairs abide 
an equal time, and are as fond of each other as c'akravakas. 

22 llieir stay there is fourteen and a half thousands 0 / years 
indeed. And C'andra-kanta is the chief of the mountains, 

-3 and Surya-kanta is the next; they are the two mountain 
ranges in that continent. And in the midst thereof the great 
river Bhadra-soma flows through the earth with a volume of 

2i sacred and pure water. And there are other rivers by thou- 
sands in that northeim continent ; and some flow with milk 
and others flow with ghee. And there are lakes of curdled 
milk there, and others lie among tho various hills. And fruits 

-3 of various kinds, which taste rather like amrita, are produced 
hundreds and thousands in the woods in those continents. 
And there the adorable Vishnu has his head turned to tho 
east and wears a fish’s shape. And the lunar constellations 
are divided f into nine parts, three and three, and the regions 
of tho sky are divided into nine pai’ts, 0 best of munis. 

* ^^ula-pramuJchdS, 
t For vxlhaMo read vibhahtir ? 



390 


CANTO LX. 


28 And in the ocean are the islands O'andra-dyipa, and next 
Bhadra-dvipa; and there also within the ocean is the famous 
island Pupya, 0 great muni. 

20 Thus I have described this northern continent of Kum 
0 brahman. Hearken while I tell thee of Kim-purusha and 
the other continents. 


Canto LX. 

The descrijotion of the Earth concluded, 

Mdrkandeya briefly describes the continents, Kim-pumk 
Hari’Varsha, Ildvjrita, Bamyaka and Hiran-maya, and their 
inhabitants, 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 I will toll thee, 0 brahman, what the continent Kim- 
purusha is ; where men with real bodies live ten thousand 

2 years; where men and women are indeed free from sickness 
and free from sorrow, and there the fig-tree* is called shanda; 

3 it grows very high, it is like a grove.f Those men are always 
drinking the juice of its fruit ; and the women are horn with 
lasting youthfulness and are fragrant as the lotus.J 

,4 Next to Kim-purusha is mentioned Hari-varsha. There 

5 mankind are born of the appearance of gold ; they all de- 
scend there from the world of the gods, and are shaped like 
the gods in all respects. In Hari-varsha all the men quaS 

6 fine sugar-cane juice j neither old ago afflicts them there, nor 
do they suffer from decay at all ; and they live in truth for 
the whole of their time free from sickness. 

7 I have mentioned Ilavfita, which is in the middle, the 
continent of Meru. The sun does not burn there, nor do men 

8 suffer from decay ; and they do not grasp at selfish gamfl‘5 

* Plaksha, t Nandanopamah, , 

it Utpata-gandhilcdh ; this word, neuter, also means a flpeoiofl of san 
the colour of brass and very fragrant. ‘ ’th 

§ Lahhante nitma-ldliha^ c'a; it seems impossible to take these wopw 

raimayai c'andra'sHryayo^, 



IL^y^lTA, BAMTAKA AND HIRAN-MAYA. 391 

The rays of the moon and the snn, of the constellations and 
9 planets there are the sublime lustre of Meru. Mankind are 
bom there bright as the lotus flower, fragrant as the lotus 
Bower; they feed on the juice of the jambu fruit; and 

; 10 tboir eyes are as wide as the lotus leaf. And their life 
there lasts for thirteen thousand years. There is a saucer- 

11 shaped expanse in tho middle of Meru* in Ilavrita; therein 
is the great mountain Meru ; thus is made known Ildvrita. 

Next I will tell of the continent Ramyaka ; hearken thereto. 

12 And there the green-leaved Indian fig-treof is the lofty tree. 
And the people there pass their time drinking the juice of its 

l:] fruit. There the men who eat its fruit live for ten thousand 
years; they are pre-eminent for sexual pleasures and are 
pure; they are free from old age and ill odours. 

U And north of that is the continent famed by name as 
Hiran-maya ; where the river Hiran-vati gleams with abun- 

15 dant lotuses. Mankind there are born with great strength, 
full of vigour, with large bodies, eminently good, wealthy and 
benign of look. 


Canto LXI. 

The Story of the Brahman in the Svdrofisha 
Manvantara, 

UMandeya begins the relation of the Svdroc'isha Manvan- 
tara— A young brahman, by virtue of a magic ointment a'pplied 
tolas feet, visits the Himalaya mountains in half a day— The 
somry there described — He wishes to return home, but the magic 
ointment has been dissolved by the snow, and he loses his way— 
The Apsaras Varuthini meets him, and falling in love with him 
hegs him for his love— He refuses all her entreaties, and at 
^^gth appeals to the gdrhapatya fire to help him homeward. 

Kraushtuki spoke ; 

Thou hast duly related what thou wast asked, 0 great muni, 

• * For meru-madhye read meru-madhya. 

t Nyag-rodtai, Ficus indioa. 



392 


CANTO Lll. 


namehfy the confltftufcion of the earth, ocean, &o., their dimen 

2 sions, also the planets and their dimensions, and the oonetitu. 
tion of the constellations, and the bhdr-loka and the other 

3 worlds, and all the Lower Regions. And thou hast declared 
the Svdyambhnva Manvantara to me, 0 muni. Next I wiah 
to hear about the Manvantaras which succeeded that, the 
deities who ruled over the Manvantaras, the pshis, and the 
kings who were their sons. 

Markandeya spoke : 

4 I have made known to thee the Manvantara which is 
called Svayambhuva. Now next to that hear about another 
which is named after Svarodisha.* 

5 There lived a certain brahman eminent among the dvijas 
in the town Arunaspada on the bank of the Varund; and he 

6 surpassed the Asvins t in beauty of form. He was gentle 
in disposition, upright iu conduct, he had studied all the 
Vedas and Vedangas ; always gracious to guests, he was 

7 the refuge of all persons who arrived at night. Now he 
had this intention, “ I wiU see the earth which has most 
charming forests and gardens, and is embellished with many a 
town.” 

8 Now a certain guest once arrived at his abode, who was 
acquainted with the powers of various medicinal herbs, and 

9 skilled in the magic art. Now being requested by the former, 
whose mind was purified by faith, he described to him both 

10 countries and charming towns, forests, rivers, J and moun- 
tains, and holy sanctuaries. Then the former filled with 

11 astonishment said to that best of brahmans, “ In that thon 
liast seen many countries thou art not worn with excessive 
toil, thou art not very old in life, nor hast thou long 

thy youth ; how dost thou roam the earth in a short tiiiie> 

0 brdbman ? ” 

* fox amrocHMhhyam svdroc^Uhdkhyam ? 

I Aty-akinaut “ one who sorpasBes the two ' Alviufl | ” b®® ^ ‘ 

M. Monier-Williams’ Grammar, rule 126 <. 

J For nadyafy read nadih, I 



4 


DBSORIPnOir OF THE BIMALATA8. 393 

The brdhman spoke : 

[3 By the power of spells and medicinal herbs my course is 
rendered free, 0 brahman; verily I travel a thousand yojanas 
ia half a day. 


M^kan^eya spoke : 

1 13 Then the brdhman made him this answer in return with due 

; U respect, believing * the word of that wise brahman, “ Ador- 
able Sir, give me the favour that comes from the power of 

15 spells ; I have an intense desire to see this earth.” And 
that brahman of exalted intellect gave him an ointment 
for the feetj and offered careful counsel t regarding the 
region which the other mentioned. 

16 Now the brahman, with his feet anointed by the other, 
went to see the Hima-vat range, where many a cascade 

17 pours down, 0 best of dvijas, for he thought, Since I can 
indeed travel a thousand yojanas in half a day,t I will cer- 

18 taiuly return in the other half of it.” He reached the top 
of Hima-vat, not much fatigued in body, 0 brdhman. Then 
he roamed about there over the surface of the snowy moun- 

19 tain. Now the ointment on his feet, which was extracted 
from the choicest medicinal herbs, became washed off by the 

20 melting snow which accumulated on his feet. Thereupon 
ho grow slack in his walk, as he wandered about hither and 
thither. He saw the peaks of the snowy range which most 

21 fascinate the mind. Grazing at those peaks which are loved 
of the Siddhas and Gandharvas, and where the Kin-naras 
disport themselves, which are delightful here and there for 
play and pastime among the gods and other heavenly beings^ 
and which were thronged with hundreds of bevies of heavenly 
Apsarases, the brAhman, whose hair stood erect with delight, 

^ was not satiated, 0 muni. Filled with rapture he gazed 
at the mighty mountain range Hima-vat, which in one place 
captivated him with the fall of the broken water from a 


^’or ^rad'dhadhdno read irad’dadhdno, 

^^^^l^^''^ntray<irndea i this meaning is not i^ven to the verb in the 
^ ^ t For dindddhana read dMrddhena, 

50 



ojtmo ixn 


m 

torrent) and which m ftnother made resonant with 

24 tha crieSrof peaoodca. as they daoced^ and which was thronged 
hera and there with pied-crested oockooS)* lapwings and 
other pretty birds, and with oock-koils and humming bees 

25 which (»ptivated the ear, and which was fanned by breezes 
perfumed with scents from trees that were in ftdl blossom. 

2d< And aifter viewing the mighty mountain Hima-vat as it 
ihtts WBS,^ the young brAhman resolved to go homewards, 

27 intending to* see it again the next day. Now he had lost the 
ointment from his feet, his stop was slow by .reason of his 

28 kmg toalJcing, he pondered ^‘What is this? I have acted 
imwisely, if the ointment is destroyed, having dissolved off 
me by the melted snow ; and this mountain is very difficult 

2d of access, and it is a longdistance that I have oome here. I 
shall suffer loss in my rites. How shall I kindle a fire and do 
my dutiful homage and all else that is needful ? I have fallen 

30 into a terrible strait. ^ This is charming I that is charming 
with my sight so engrossed on this fine mountain, I shall not 

31 be satiated even in hundreds of years. The melodious talk of 
the Kin-naraa ravishes my ears all around, and ray nose eagerly 

32 seeks the scents from the trees that are in full blossom, and 
the breeze is delightful to the touch, and the fruits are full of 
jnice, aud the charming lakes forcibly captivate the mind. 

^ 33 In these circumstances then if I may chance to see some 
asoetio, he may point out the road for me to go homeward." 

Mdrkan(j[eya spoke ; 

34 The brahman, reflecting so, wandered yet on the snowy 
mountain; having lost the efficacy of the medicinal herbs 

35 from his foot, he sank into intense fatigue. And Vardthim 
saw him, that goodly muni, as he was wandering; she a 
choice Apsaras, of high station, the daughter of Mdli,t 

36 beauteous in shape. As soon as she saw him Vardthini 

• &dtaTca f ieh page 29 note f. 

f Mauleyd, The dictionary giTOS Maufeyq as the name of a peopk, bo* *ba* 

THoaning soema inappropriate here. As a patronymic W 0 uW app®*^ 

more correct. See verse 40 below. 



A BBiBMiS) AITB AK APSABAS. Hd 

I felt het heart dt^awn towards that aohle Iff love, 

1 37 in truth i^he ^ immediately ^Ued witih aflfectien. She 
thought, “ Who then is this, of most faeoinatm^ appee^mce P 

3g My birth may rewh its reward if he do not despise me. How 

handsome his shape 1 How graceful his gait 1 How deep his 

39 gaze ! Where is there his equal on the earth P I have seen 
the gods and the ©aityas, iho Siddhas, the Handharvas and 
the N4gas; how is it there is not even one who rivals this 

40 high-souled man in figure P If he should Ml in love with 
me as I have fallen in love with him, the store of merit 

41 which he has acquired may bo attainable by me hero. If he 
should cast a really loving glance on me to-day, then there 
would bo no other woman in the three worlds, who has 
gained more merit than 1.** 

Mdrkai?deya spoko ; 

42 So reflecting the heavenly maiden, who was sick for love, 

43 showed herself in very lovely form. Now on seeing her, 
gracefully-formed Vardthini, the young brahman approached 

44 with deference and spoke this word— Who art thou, 0 
maiden bright as the lotus-cup ? Or on whom dost thou 
attend P I am a brahman, I have come here from the city 

45 Aru^aspada. The ointment on my feet, by the power of 
which I came here, has perished being dissolved by the 
melting snow here, 0 maiden of fascinating glance I ” 

Vardthini spoke ; 

^ I am the daughter of Mdli, of high station.; I am well- 
known by name as Vardthini. I roam here at all times 

I iudeed on this charming mountain. Being such I am com- 
pelled by the sight of thee, 0 brahman, to declare my love, 
Do thou enjoin me what I must do, I am now submissive 
to thee.’* 

The brdhman spoke : 

^ p. . 

u benign swjeet-smiler, tell me the means whereby I may 
80 to my own home. Loss is befalling us in all our actions, 
grievous loss befalls a .hrdhman in the perpetual and 



396 


CANTO LH. 


occasional ceremonies* Therefore, 0 lady, do thou deliver hk 

60 from the Himdlaya mountains. Absence from home is nevei 
commended in brdhmans. I have not sinned, 0 timid one 

61 was my curiosity to see other countries. All actions an^ 
the perpetual and occasional ceremonies are accomplished b) 
a brdhman when ho stays at home j so they are lost if he 

62 dwells away from home. Such as thou art, why should 
I say much. Do then, 0 illustrious lady^ so that I may sw 
my own abode ere the sun sets. 

Vartithim spoke ! 

53 Speak not so, illustrious Sir ; let not that day come for me, 
in which abandoning me thou shalt resort to thy own abode ! 

54 Ah ! since heaven is not more charming, 0 young brahman, 

65 then abandoning the gods* abode we will stay hero. Sport- 

ing with me on this beloved snowy mountain, thou thyself, 

60 0 my beloved, wilt not remember thy mortal kinsmen. Seized 
and rendered submissive by love, I too will give thee here 
garlands, garments, ornaments, loving joys,* and dainty food 

67 and unguents. Charming is the song of the Kin-nara*, 
accompanied with the strains of the lute and flute; the 

68 breeze brings gladness to the body ; there is warm food, the 
water is pure. Longed for by the mind is the bed, fragrant is 
the ointment. While thou remainest here, illustrious Sir, 

69 what more wilt thou have in thine own house ? While thou 
remainest here, never will old age light on thee. This is the 

60 land of the thirty gods / it gives fullness to youth ! ” Having 
spoken thus, the lotus-eyed maiden^ full of affection, exclaim- 
ing sweetly “ Be thou gracious ! suddenly embraced him 
in the eagerness of her mind. 

The brdhman spoke: 

61 Touch me not ; go to some other man who is like thysellj 
0 worthless one ! I have been wooed in one way, thou indeed 

62 approaohest me in a very different way. The oblation ^ 
the gods, offered evening and morning, sustains the etern 

• BhoJtsha, not in the dictionary j road f 



897 


A br/hman and an apsabas. 

worlds ; the whole of these three worlds is established on the 
oblation to the gods, 0 foolish one ! 

Vardthini spoke : 

] Ami not dear to thee, 0 brdfaman ? Is not the moun- 
tain charming ? Leaving aside the Gandharvas, the Kin- 
t naras and the others, whom dost thou desire P Surely, Sir, 
thou shalt go away from here to thy own abode without 
doubt ; enjoy with mo for a very little while the delights 
that are hard to be won. 

The brdhman spoke : 

I I continually desire the garhapatya and the two other 
fires ; the fire-place is charming to me ; my dear wife is the 
goddess who diffuses herself about me.* 

Vartithini spoke r 

Compassion, 0 brdhman, is the foremost of the eight good 
qualities of the soul ; why dost thou not display it towards 
me, 0 cherisher of truth and righteousness P Forsaken by 
theo, I do not live j and I am full of affection for thee ; 
I say not this falsely j be gracious, 0 gladdener of thy family ! 

The brahman spoke ; 

If thou art in truth full of affection, and dost not speak to 
me out of mere politeness, then tell me the moans by which 
I may go to my own home, 

Varuthini spoke : 

Surely, Sir, thou shalt go away from here to thy own abode 
without doubt ; enjoy with me for a very littlo while the 
^lelights that are hard to be won ! 

The br&hman spoke ; 

70 

Striving after delights is not at all commended in brdhmans, 
0 Vanithini ; f such striving in brahmans tends to weariness in 
this world, and yields no fruit after death, 

l^ntarai^i^ not in the diotiosary* 


t For Variithini read Varithini* 



CTAUTO rxn. 


Varfttihini spokei 

71 If thou savest me who am at the point of dettth, *thott wilt 
have the fruit of merit itself in the next world, and delights 

72 in another life ; and thus the two things will procure theo 
prosperity in this world j if thou dost refuse, I shall die and 
thou wilt incur sin. 

The brahman spoke : 

73 My spiritual preceptors have told mo that one should not 
covet another’s wife ; therefore I long not for thee ; bewail 
thy love or be thou withered ! 

Markup dey a spoke : 

74 Having spoken thus, the illustrious hrdhman^ self-controlled 
and pure, touched water and prostrating himself addressed 

75 the garhapatya fire with this muttered prayer, — “0 adorable 
Garhapatya fire I thou art the source of all rites ; from theo 
and thee alone come the dhavaniya fire and the dakshina 

76 fire ! By the nourishment given by thee the gods subsist 
who cause the rain, the crops and other benefits ; by the crops, 

77 and them alone, the whole world subsists. Thus this world 
subsists through thee— by this truth I adjure thee that I may 

78 see my home to-day, ore sets the sun ! By this truth I odjm 
thee that I may behold the sun to-day while I sit in my 
house, so that I may not neglect tho Yedio rites at the proper 

79 time! And that, as the thought of and the longing for 
another’s goods and another’s wife have never occurred to 
me, so this virtue may be perfected in me ! ” 


Canto LXII. 

About the Svdroc'isha Manvantora. 

The young brahman is succoured by Agni and returns 
A Oandharva Kali sees Varuthini disconsolate and in the guue 
of the hrdJman gains her love, 

Mdrkapd^ya flpoke ! . 

1 Now as the young brdhman thus spoke, the Garhapatj^ 

2 Fire in sooth appeared at hand upon his tody; ^ 



TH* DlSOOffSOUra APSABAS, 


gnrmoTintiDg him,, he ateod amid a oirde of light, and illu- 

3 mined th*iidace tt if he were Agni in bodily form. Now 
vehement love aeized: upon the heavenly maiden aa she beheld 

4 the brdhman, who stood there in so glorious a fonn. Then 
Iheyonngbrdhman,* surmounted by that Fire, immediately 

5 started to go as before; and he departed in haste while the 
slender-shaped heavenly maiden gazed after him as far as 

6 her eye could reach, her throat quivering with sighs. Then 

in one moment from that time the brdhman reached his own 
abode and performed all the rites as he had mentioned. 

7 Now she, the beauteous in every limb, remained with soul 
and mind clinging fast to him, and passed the remainder of the 

8 day and also the night in almost ceaseless sighing. And 

the faultlessly-shaped maiden sighing and crying “Ah! Ah!“ 

continually, reproached herself, “ 0 luckless one that lam /” 

9 iMgh her eyes were fascinating. Neither in sport, nor in 
food, nor yet on delightsome forest, nor on the charming 

19 glens did she then fii her joy. She turned her desire to- 
wards a pair of billing dakravikas. Forsaken by him the 
finely-shaped maiden reproached her own youthful woman- 

11 hood, “ How happened it t that I came to this mountain, 
forcibly attracted by evil fate? And how happened it that 

12 he, such a man as that, crossed the range of my eye P If 
that grand man shall not come to mo to-day, verily the intoler- 

I’l able fire of my love for him will consume me away. The song 
of the cock-koil which was so delightful, this self same song 
when disunited J from him is burning enough, as it were, 
to mo to-day,” 

Mirkan^eya spoke ; 

she poared forth her words, 0 brahman, § absorbed in 

and her passion for him grew every moment then. 

For dija-nandana^ read dvija-nandanaJ^, t Kva. 

ead in preference Mndm for hinafk, to agree with mdm ? 

^ ® text reads, Jagdm^ / but these words seem meaning- 

/oflfdda seeia preferable, and I have 

to adopt them in the translation. 



400 


CANTO LXir. 


16 Now a Gandharva named Kali was enamoured of her, 

16 had been rejected by her before. He beheld her in that 
condition. Then he pondered, “ Why now is this Vartithini 
who moves as gracefully as an elephant, faded by the kt 

17 blast of sighing on this mountain ? Has she been woonded 
by some muni’s curse, or has any one treated her with dis. 
honour, since she keeps on bedewing her face copiously with 

18 tears?” Then Kali through curiosity meditated on that 
matter full long, and perceived the truth by the power of 

19 concentrated thought. Comprehending that matter of the 
muni,* Kali pondered again, “ I have well accomplished this, 

20 by reason of fortunate actions done before. Though often 
entreated by me who love her, she, this very maiden^ rejected 

21 me \ to-day I shall gain her. She is in love with a human 
being; by virtue of that fact she shall all-unsuspectingly 
bestow her love on me while I assume his shape. Why 
then do I delay ? ” 


22 
23 
^ 24 

25 

26 

27 


Markan<Jeya spoke: 

Thereupon he assumed that brahman’s shape by his inherent 
power, and moved to where sits Vardthini disconsolate. 
Seeing him, a little wide grew the eyes of the finely-shaped 
maiden. In her slender form she approached him and ex- 
claimed ** Be kind!” again and again; “Bereft of thee I 
shall assuredly abandon my life; thereby thou wilt 
veiy sore unrighteousness, and thy sacred ceremonies will 
come to ruin. Joining with me in this charming gkQ 
among the great glens, thou wilt certainly acquhe right- 
eousness by saving me. Life verily has some remnant t for 
me, 0 wise hrdhman! Surely thou hast returned for that 
reason, and bringest gladness to my heart.” 


Kali spoke: 

What am I doing ? My ceremonies suffer harm while 1 
linger here. Dost thou tell me such a tale as this, 0 slender 


• Or better perhaps, for Mufieh read Jfwna, “ 0 Muni” ^ 

I For sdvaUsham road c^dvafwham ? Ava-^esha may apP«®ntly ^ 
sometimes . 



401 


MARRUOE OF THE IPSiRAS WITH A OANDHARTA. 

I 3 wuisted maiden ? Therefore I am fallen into a strait. Thou 
must do * what I say, and not otherwise, if there is to bo 
union between me and thee, lady, to-day. 

Vardtbini spoke : 

9 Be kind ! What thou sayest, that I will do for thee without 
falsehood— I say this without fear— whatever I must do now 
for thy sake. 

Kali spoke : 

30 Thou must not gaze on me wliilo we meet in union in the 
wood to-day ; thou must close thhio eyes, 0 lady with beauti- 
ful brows, the while thou dost unite with me. 

Varuthini spoke : 

31 So be it as t is good to thee ! As thou wishest, so let it be ! 
Truly I must remain submissive to thee now in every way, 


Canto LXIll. 


About the SvdrocUsha Mau,v<xnt(ira, 

ThoApsarm Varuthini had by the Oandharva Kali a son who 
ms named Sva-roc'is—IIe delivered a maiden Mano-ramd a?idher 
father the Vidyd^dhara Indivara from a curse— and married her. 


Markandeya spoke : 

Then with her he sported on mountain tops, which 
charmed the heart with their blossoming forests, and midst 
charming lakes, and in pleasant glens, and on sand-banka in 
^he rivers, and in other delightsome places, with merry 
heait, 0 brahman. With eyes closed fast during their om- 
races, she thought by reason of his ardour that his form was 
^hatof the young hrdhman surmounted with fire. Then after a 
hnie she conceived a child, O best of munis ; it took its form 
the Gandharva’s energy and her dwelling in thought on 


61 


* For kafoshi read kurushva? 



402 


CANTO LXIII. 


6 the brdhman. Then he having soothed Vardthini in 
pregnant condition departed, ttill assuming the brahman’s 
shape ; she gave him a loving dismissal. 

6 The child was bom a boy, with a splendour like the blazing 
orb of light, illuminating all the regions of the sky with his 

7 own lustre like the sun. Because he shines with his own 
lustre,* like the sun, the boy became therefore famed by the 

8 appropriate name Sva-rocis. And the noble boy grew day 
by day in ago and with a multitude of good qualities, just 

9 as the new moon increases with its daily increments ; he 
acquired skill in archery, and learnt the Vedas in due oi-der 
and the sciences ; then the noble hoy entered on the period 
of early manhood. 

10 Once upon a time, while he who was fascinating in his 
ways was roaming on Mouut Mandara, he saw a lonely 

11 maiden helpless with fear on the mountain’s slope. Seeing 
him, at once she uttered the words “ Save me ! ” “ Fear not ! ” 
he exclaimed to her whose eyes wore flooded with fear; 

12 Why is this ? ” said the high-souled youth in heroic speech. 
Thereupon she gave him this account, in words broken by 
her palpitating breath. 

The maiden spoke : 

^13 I am indeed the daughter of the Yidyd-dhara Indivara, 
Mano-rama by name ; I was boru of Maru-dhanvan’s daughter. 

14 Vibhd-vari daughter of the Yidya-dbara Mandara was my 
friend, and Kala-vati, the muni Para’s daughter, was my other 

15 friend. With them I went to Kailasa’s lofty f slope. There 
I saw a certain muni ; exceedingly thin was his face through 

16 his austerities, wasted was his neck through hunger, xigoui* 
less was he, deep sunk were the pupils of his eyes. I laughed 

17 at hinij and then he grew enraged and cursed mo, in a veiy 
infirm voice and with his shoot-like lower lip somewhat 
quivering! — “ Since thou hast laughed at mo, 0 ignoble au 

18 bad ascetic maiden, a Rakshasa shall therefore overcome 

* Sva.roc'ihhir. t For attamam read‘ utimam. ^ 

t For kiUc'it kalpitddhara-paUavaJlf road kinc'it’kampitddhara-p<^^^^'-'^‘ ‘ 



mano-ram/’s story. 


403 


in no long time indeed.” But when the curae was pro- 

j9 Dounced, my two friends npbmided the muni— “ Fie ! 
through thy want of forbearance, done is thy brahman-hood, 
done all thine austerities 1 Thou art violated through thy 
wrathfulness, thou art not greatly worn out * through aus- 

20 terities. The dwelling-place of forbearance is verily brah- 
man-hood j the controlling of wrath is the performance of 
austerities.” Hearing this the sage of measureless glory 

21 cursed both of them also,— “ Leprosy in the limbs shall light 
on one of you, and consumption on the other.” Exactly ns 
he said, it befell them both immediately. 

22 So on my track also a mightly Rakshasa is approaching. 
Dost thou not hear his loud roar, as he thunders forth even 

23 close at hand P To-day is the third day that he quits not my 
back. Now out of all the multitude of weapons I give thee 

24 the weapon wliich strikes to the heart ; save me from this 
Rakshasa, 0 high-minded youth! Rudra, who wields the 
bow Pinaka, himself gave it to Svayambhuva originally ; 

2o Svayambhuva gave it to Va^ishtha the chief of the Siddhas ; 
he moreover gave it to C'itrayudha, my mother’s father ; 

26 ho again, as father-in-law, himself gave it to my father as 
a wedding gift. I, though a maiden, learnt, 0 hero ! from my 

27 father how to use this Heart of all weapons, which destroys 
every foe. This is it, take it quickly, the essence of all 

28 weapons, then slay this vile-souled Bakshasa who has come 
into conflict with sacred spell.f 

Markandeya spoke : 

^ “ Yea ! ” then quoth he, and she sprinkling water on it 

Ifave him the Heart of weapons together with the spell for 
stopping its secret virtue. 

In this interval appeared that Rakshasa. Then with apall- 
aspect, and roaring with a loud roar, he came hastily on. 
He looked at that demon who was exclaiming — “ Overpowered 
me, to what dost thou resort for deliverance ? Come 

hrshitah ; or, “ thou art cot greatly attracted by austerities.” 

T ^^^m.samdgatam. 



404 


CANTO LXTir. 


speedily to me !• What good is it to delay thy being devoured 

32 Seeing him at hnnd, Sva-rodis thought, “ Let him seize her 
so will the great muni’s word become true with regard to her’ 

33 The Rakshasa approaching with haste seized the maiden ol 
beauteous waist, as she was piteously bewailing, “ Save me 

34 Save me ! ” Then Sva-rodis enraged looked at the active and 
most terrible weapon, and plunging it into that Rakshasa 

85 looked on it with unwinking eyes. Vanquished thereby * * * § the 
night-stalking demon then quitted her and said — “ Be gracious! 

36 let the weapon bo kept in peace, and hearken ! I have been 
delivered by thee, 0 most glorious hero ! from a very grievous 
curse, which was inflicted by wise and exceedingly fierce 

37 Brahma-mitra. It is a benefit (none other greater can I 
receive from thee, 0 illustrious hero whereby I have been 
delivered from a great and most sore curse.” 

Sva-rodis spoke : 

38 Why wert thou cursed formerly by the high-souled muni 
Brahma-mitra, and what kind of curse was imprecated on 

The Rakshasa spoke : 

39 The brdhman Brahma-mitra had mastered the thirteen 
sections of the Athavva Veda, and had just studied the 

40 veda which is divided into eight parts. And I was well 
known by the name Indivara ; I was the father of this viaidcn. 
I was the son of the swordsman Nala-nablia king of the 

41 Vidya-dharas. And at first 1 besought the muni Brahma- 
mitra, “ Deign, adorable Sir ! f to communicate to mo the 

42 whole of the Ayur-veda.” But though entreated often by me 

who remained bent with respect, he did not bestow on me the 

43 science of the Ayur-veda, 0 hero : then indeed I gained the 
science of the Ayur-veda, as he was communicating it to his 
disciples, by rendering myself invisible J, 0 sinless man.§ 

44 Now when the science was gained after a space of eight 

• For taddbhibMtah road tadahhihhutah ? 

t For hhagavdn read hhagavan ? Or, for arhasi read arhati ? 

t For antardhdya-gena read antardhdna-gena ? ^ 

§ For anadha read anagha. 



THE GANDHARVX INDfVARA*S STORY. 


405 


months, I gave way to excessive and repeated fits of laughter 

45 out of my great delight. Recognizing me by the laughter, 
the muni, enraged and with quivering neck spoke thus to 

46 mo in harsh words— “Since thou in invisible form, like a 
Eiiksliasa, • hast snatched the science from me, 0 evil-minded 

47 one, and despising me hast indulged in laughter; therefore 
thou shalt be assuredly oast out as a terrible Rakshasa by 

48 my curse, 0 wicked one, after seven nights,” On his utter- 
ing tliis, I propitiated him by prostrating myself before him 
and by other cots of deference; the brahman with his mind 

411 immediately softened, said to me again— “ Wliat I have 
uttered will assuredly come to pass, 0 Gandharva; it can not 
happen otherwise ; but after becoming a Rakshasa, thou 

50 shalt regain thy own form, when with memory dead and in 
anger thou shalt wish to devour thy own child. Thou shalt 
be turned into a night-stalking demon ; when smarting with 

51 the lire of thy child’s weapon, thou shalt again obtain thy 
own consciousness, and recover thy own body, and likewise thy 
own station in the Gandharva world.” Since such I am and 
■siiico I have been delivered by thee, 0 illustrious hero, from 
tlii.s most fearful demon-condition, therefore perform my re- 
finest. This maiden give I thee as wife, accept her; and 
take, 0 high-minded man, the whole of the Xyur-veda with 
Its ejght parts, which I acquired from beside that muni. 


51 

55 


56 

67 


Mirkandeja spoke : 

Having so spoken he, gleaming in heavenijr raiment, be- 
decked with garlands and ornaments, and bearing his pris- 
tine heavenly body, bestowed the science. After bestowing 
tile science, lie next proceeded to give his daughter. Then 
the maiden spoke to her father who had regained liis own form, 
Altliough lovef has sprung up exceedingly with mo, even at 
rsfc siglit, for this high-souled man, who is especially my 
Gnefdctor, 0 father ; yet this maiden is my friend and that one al- 
they are afflicted with pain for my sake ; hence I do not d 6 sire 


* Fo ' Ir 

'» f^Juiftenaiva read rdkshaseneva 7 He was a Gandharva then. 
«naj-dj,o read anwra> ? 



406 


CANTO LXIir. 


68 to gratify myself in delights with this man. Such basen 
cannot be displayed even by men ; how shall a woman like mi 

69 behave so with things pleasing to her disposition. Since sucl 
I am and since those two maidens are afflicted with pain fe 
my sake, 0 father, I will likewise remain in their pain, bam 
with the fire of their grief.” 

Sva-rocis spoke: 

60 By the favour of the Ayur-veda I will make thy twofriendi 
fresh again, removing thy great grief, 0 maiden with beaati 
ful waist. 

Mdrkancjeya spoke: 

61 Then Sva-rodis married that beauteous-eyed maiden, whom 
her father himself gave, according to the rites on that moun- 

62 tain. And having comforted * the proud maiden then given 
away, the Gandharva departed then to his own city by a 
heavenly course. 

63 And then Sva-rocHs also, accompanied by the slender maiden, 
went to that garden, where the pair of maidens dwelt speech- 

64 less and diseased f through that curse. Then unconquered 
Sva-rodis, knowing their condition accurately, brought them 
both back to a healthy body by means of medicines and po- 

65 tions which cure disease. Then the two maidens, most re- 
splendent, freed from disease, beautiful, rendered that moun- 
tain more luminous J than the regions of the sky by their oo 
beauty. 


Canto LXIV. 

About the Svdroc'isha Manvantara, 

Vihhd~vari and KaWvati then tell Sva-roc'is their 
he marries them both. 

* For ahhi-idntya read dbhuidntvya ? 
t Agaddturam ; a compound adjective from a-gada and dtura. 
t Uj-jyotii not in the dictionary. 



the speech op the maidens to sva-roc'is. 


407 


M4rka9(}eya spoke : 

1 Now the maiden, being thus freed from her disease and 
filled with joy, spoke thus * to Sva-rodis— “ Hear my word, 

2 0 lord. I am the daughter of the Vidya-dhara Mandara,’ 
famed by name as Vibha-vari.t 0 my benefactor, I offer thee 

3 my very self, do thou accept me. And I will give thee 
knowledge, by which the utterances of all created things shall 
become manifest to thee. Be thou favourably inclined ! ” 

MArkan^eya spoke : 

4 “ So be it ! ” said S v^a-rodis, wise in righteousness. And then 
the second maiden spoke these words — 

6 “A youthful brahma-darin was my father, by name Para, 
a bralimarshi, exceedingly illustrious, thoroughly learned in 

6 the Vedas and VedAiigas. Formerly in a spring-time, which 
was charming by reason of the songs of the male koils, 
an Apsaras known as Punjika-stana approached near him. 

7 Then the noble muni was moved so that he could not but 
speak of love. By their union I was born of her on this great 

8 mountain. My mother abandoned mo, a girl, all alone, in this 
desolate forest on the earth’s surface, which swarms with 

9 snakes aud wild beasts, and went away. Since then being 
nournshed daily by the moon’s increasing phases, wliich cause 

0 wane to wax again I have grown up, Obest of men. Hence 
Kala.vati§ is the name which my high-souled father gave mo 

1 when he took me. My high-souled /a^/ier, when solicited by a 
Gaiidliarva, did not give mo who am beautiful of face||m 
mrnage to Mm then, hence he was cursed ^ by Ali** the foe of 

l^or uvdc'eda read uvdc'edafh ? 

^ " 't'lie resplendent.” 

t alabhir varddhanUbhir ava-lcahayam. The allusion appears to be to the 
‘“g of the moon after its waning. 

' fossessiug the digits of the moon.” 
or subhdnand read iubhdnand ? 

read <bj»«a8. 

1 have ’ T dictionary, 

ao met with it elsewhere, AH may however be taken as an 



CANTO LXIV. 


4jU« 

12 the gods and perished*. I was about to destroy myself tte 
from excessive despair. S'ambhu’s wife Sati who is true 

13 her promises prevented me, by saying ^ ‘ Grieve not, beauteous 
browed maiden; thou shalt have an illustrious husband by 

14 name ^va-rodis, and thy son by him shall be a Manu 

all the Nidhisf shall submissively obey thy command and 
shall give thee wealth according to thy desire, 0 beauieoua 

15 one ! Take, my child, the knowledge by the power of which 
thou shalt succeed; this knowledge is called Padmini, it jg 

16 greatly worshipped by Maha-padma.* So spake to me 
Daksha’s daughter Sati, who is devoted to truth. Thou art 

17 Sva-rodis in sooth — the goddess will not speak amiss. I now 
offer that knowledge and myself in my true form to thee who 
hast given me life; do thou receive them with favour 
beaming from tliy face on mo.’’ 

Markandeya spoke : 

18 “ So be it ! ” said he to the maiden KaU-vati. The loving 
glances of Vibha-vari and Kald-vati urged him on to joy, 

19 and he, lustrous as the immortals, then took the hands of both 
in marriage, while heavenly musical instruments sounded 
out and the Apsarases danced. 


Canto fjXY. 

About the Sv&rocisha Manvantara. 

Sva-rocis lived m pleasure with his toives till aroused 
conversation between two birds, and by a deers remarks. 

Markanejoya spoke: 

1 Then he, lustrous as the immortals, accompanied by 
wives, lived in pleasure on that high mountain whei’e were 

adjective meaning “ idle, worthless ”, and the text rendered “ by a worthies* 
foe of the gods ”, but this cannot refer to the Gaudharva. 

* This passage seems erroneous. Gandharve^a cannot be tal^®® 
jpitrd (see verse 6) nor with devdrind. 
t See canto Ixyiii. 



HAPPINESS IN WEDDED LIFE. 


409 

2 charming woods and cascades. The Nidhis * being snbject 
through th9 knowledge Padmini, brought gems for every kind 

3 of enjoyment, sweets and melodies, garlands, raiment, 
omaraonts, richly scented unguent, most brilliant golden 

4 seats according to his desire, golden things (illustrious Sir!), 

pots and vessels, and also beds of divers kinds arrayed with 
6 heavenly coverings. Thus accompanied by them, he lived in 
pleasure at his own liking on that fine mountain, perfumed 
with heavenly odours and other fragrance, and illuminated 

6 with Im lustre. And they enjoyed supreme delight, for that 
ilmjwere with him, sporting on that high mountain even as 
in Svarga. 

7 A grey lag-goose t said to a hen-dakra-vdka who was in 
some water, being moved to desire at the dalliance and union 

8 between him and those two mres— “Happy is this man, 
exceeding merit has he, who in the heyday of youth enjoys’ 

9 eagerly-dosired delights with these darling wives. Young 
men are worthy of praise, their wives are not of exceeding 
beauty ; few are the wives and husbands of exceeding beauty 

h) in the world I A man dearly longs for the women he loves ; 

a woman desires to obtain a lover ; most rare is it to find a 
II wedded pair rich in mutual affection. Happy is this mon 
w lora his darlings long for ; these women are indeed very 
dear to him , verily, it is among the happy that mutual 
• al eetion exists ! ” Hearing this speech uttered by the grey 
ag-gooso, the hen-dakra-vaka scarcely surprised in mind 
spoko to her— “ This man is not happy, because modesty 
not from proximity with other women ; he is enjoy- 
^ 'ag one or other of the women, his mind does not dwell on 
» of /hem. Since the heart’s affection has only one basis, 

5 Tf “““ to several 

? These women are not beloved by their husband, nor ■ 

5 aV.'** beloved by them ; these women are only just 

an amusement as any other attendant might he. And if he 
'* esired by these women, why then does he not quit his 

* Saa vanto Ixviii. 


t Kala-hamsi; see page 30 note § . 



410 


CANTO LXV. 


life ? He embraces some loved woman, tbe while he is in tig 

17 thoughts of some other loving woman. He is bartered at 
the price of the bestowal of knowledge, as if he were a ser- 
vant. Because of the excitements,* affection verily exists not 

18 equally towards many women. 0 grey lag-goose! my hug. 
band is happy, and I indeed am happy ; he, for his mind ig 
fixed steadfastly on me alone, and I, for mine is on him 
alone.’* 


' Mdrkandeya spoke : 

19 Sva-rodis the unconquered, understanding the speech of 
all living creatures, on hearing this was ashamed and pon- 
dered, “it is indeed true, without any falsehood.” 

20 After a hundred years had passed from that time, while 
sporting on the great mountain, while sporting with Us mm 

21 around him, ho saw a buck in front of him, with very glossy 
and plump limbs, playing among a herd of does, and surrounded 
with does shaped like he was, which were in the rutting time.f 

22 The buck then said to the does who were sniffing with out- 
stretched nostrils, “ 0 ye charming does, one should behave with- 

23 out bashfulness ; hut I am not Sva-rodis, nor am I like him in 
disposition, 0 pretty-eyed does I Many have no modesty ; do 

24 ye, who are such, go to him. Now as one female who follows 
after many males is a laughing-stock among mankind, just 
so is one male, who is gazed on by many females with lustful 

25 glances. He suffers loss from day to day in his deeds of 
righteousness ; and he is always attached to some other wife, 

26 and addicted to other loves. Do ye love some other, who i3 
like that, who has that disposition, who turns away from the 
future world ; it will he well for you ; I am not a rival of 
Sva-rodis.” 

• Fravartato, 

t Vasitdbhih j this appears to refer to the rutting season. 



THE THREE SONS OF SVA-ROC'iS. 


411 


Canto LXVI. 

About the Sv&roc'isha Manvantara. 

Sva-rocis had three sons whom he settled in separate king- 
doms Vijaya in a city Vijaya in Kdma-rupa, Meru-nanda in 
Nanda-vati in the Norths and Prahhdva in Tdla in the South , — 
One day he met the goddess of a forest, and had by her a son 
Oifuti-'niat Svdrocisha, who became a Manu, — Sva-roc'is, being 
again admonished by a conversation between two ducks, gives 
himself up to a religious life and dies, 

Markaiideya spoke : 

Thus were those does discai'ded by the buck. Sva-rodis, 
hearing it, thought how he must have fallen ; and he set 
his mind on quitting those his wives, 0 best of munis, spoken 
of as ho had been by the hen-cakra*v6ka and the buck, and 

3 despised as he was for his animal behaviour.* Yet on again 
meeting with them, his love increased. Casting aside those 

i disparaging speeches he sported for six hundred years. But 
while performing the works of righteousness without hind- 
rance to righteousness, wise Sva-rocis continues to enjoy 
the pleasures of sense with those wives. 

5 And then three sons were born to Sva-rodis, Vijaya, and 

6 Meru-nanda, and mighty Prabhava ; and Indivara’s daughter 
Mano-rama gave birth to Vijaya, Vibha-vari to Meru-nanda, 

7 and Kala-vati to Prabhava. And by the power of the 
knowledge named Padmini,t which accomplishes all pleasures, 

8 he their father built three cities for them. Now he gave a 
noble city named Vijaya on a hill in Kama-rupa J in the 
Eastern region to his son Vijaya at first ; and he made 
Merumanda’s city the famous one in the north, called Nanda- 

* ^rm<'aryd. 

t Seo canto Ixviii. 

t The western portion of Assam. A town on a hill there can only be in 

^^0 Himalayas in the North, or in the Garo und Khasia hills on the Sonth ; 

'0'the*8eem8 a likely situation for an ancient Hindu capital. 



412 


CANTO LXYI. 


10 

11 

12 

13 

14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


vati,* which is begirt with lofty ramparts and walls ; and h 
made Kald-vati’s son Prabhava to dwell in the famoaa city 
Tdlaf which is situated in the Southern region. Havi 
thus settled his sons in their cities, he, the manly hero, sported 
with those his wives in charming highlands. 

Now once upon a time he went to the forest for sport with 
bow in hand. Seeing a boar a long distance off, he drew 
his bow ; and then a certain doe approached him and said 
“ At me let the arrow be shot ; show me this favour,” again 
and again ; “ What need hast thou to slay him now ? lay me 
low quickly ; an arrow discharged by thee will free me from 
suffering.’* 

Sva-rodis spoke : 

I do not perceive thy body to be diseased. What then is the 
reason that thou wouldest quit thy life ? 


The doe spoke : 

Without him on whom, though his heart is devoted to 
other females, my miud has fixed her seat, I must die ; what 
other remedy is there in this life ? 

Sva-rodis spoke : 

Who would not love thee, timid one ? Or with whom art 
thou in lovo, that failing to gain him thou resol vest to quit 
thy life P 

The doe spoke : 

Tt is thee I desire ; be welfare thine ! Thou hast captivated 
my heart. Hence I choose death, let the arrow be dis- 
charged at me, 

Sva-rodis spoke : 

Thou art a doe with eyes always in motion; I 


* This is not in the dictionary and I have not found it elsewhere. 
it may be connected with the river Nandd, and the people Nandas, 
page 383 note II . ^ 

t Or PurantAla ; neither seems to be in the dictionary, Jior have I o 
any reference to them elsewhere. • 



JIRTH or MANU SV/rOC'iSHA. 


413 

human form ; how shall there be union between such as me 

and thee r* 


The doe spoke : 

^0 If thy mind has any regard for me, do thou embrace me ; 
or if thou dost think good, I will do as thou dcsirest. I 
shall be supremely honoured by tliee, Sir, such as thou art. 

MarkatKjeya spoke : 

21 Sva-rocis then embraced the doe ; and as soon as he em- 

22 braced her, she assumed a heavenly body. Then filled with 
astonishment said he, “ Who art thou?” And she told him 
this story in words rendered slow by love and modesty.— 

23 “ I have been besought by the gods, I the goddess of this 
forest, with the demand that ‘Verily a Mann must be begotten 

14 of me by thee.’ 0 magnanimous man ! Beget that son, who 
shall guard the terrestrial world, of me who am full of 
love. I speak to thee according to the go,d8’ * behest 1 ” 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

lo Forthwith ho begat in her a son marked with every aus- 
6 picious mark, full of energy like unto himself. And as soon 
as ho was born, heavenly instruments of music sounded forth, 
the Gandharva princes sang, and bands of Apsarases danced ; 
t the celestial elephants bedewed him with drops of water^ 
and the rishis rich in austerities and the gods scattered also 
^ a shower of flowers around. Beholding bis splendour his father 
himself bestowed on him the name Dyuti-mat, since the 
^ regions of the sky wore illuminated by his splendour. The 
hoy named Dyuti-mat possessed great strength and valour ; 
Since ho was son of Sva-rocis, he became known as Svarodisba. 

^ Sva-rocis also once, while roaming by a charming mountain 
^ cascade, saw a duck attended by his mate. He said then to 
his mate, who was full of continuous longings, — “ Restrain 
^ Ihyself, I have played with thee full long. What dost thou need 
'vith pleasures at all times ? Old age has fallen on ks, the 


* For davdndm read devdndm. 



414 


CANTO LX VI. 


time to relinquish them has come to me and thee also 0 
water-roamer ! " 


The female duck replied : 

33 What time is unfit for pleasures ? The world is all composed 
of pleasures. Brahmans with souls subdued perform sacri 

34 fices in order to get pleasures. Moreover people of discri 
mination, being eager for pleasures experienced and not jet 
experienced, both give alms and perform the full round of 

35 righteous acts. Why then dost thou not wish for pleasures S' 
Pleasure is the reward of effort among men who have dis- 
crimination and among brute animals, how much more among 
those who have subdued their souls ? 

The duck spoke : 

36 The mind of those who are not attached to pleasures is 
with the Supreme Soul. And when will it be so among those 

37 who have contracted attachments towards relatives ? Crea- 
tures perish when attached to son, friend and wife, just as 

38 aged wild elephants when sunk in lake or mire or sea. Or 
dost thou not see, lady, how Sva-rocis, in whom attachments 
have grown up and who has been devoted to his lusts 
from his boyhood, has sunk in the watery mire of affection? 

39 Sva-rocis’ mind was exceedingly sunk in his wives in his 
youth, now in his sons and grandsons ; whence will it obtain 

40 deliverance? lam not the equal of Sva-rodis, nor am I one 
to be distressed by females, 0 water-roamer ! I possess also 
discrimination in pleasures, and I have desisted therefrom now. 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

41 Sva-rocis hearing this speech from a bird felt disturbed m 
mind ; taking his wives he departed to another grove to pJ’ac* 

42 tise austerities. After performing severe austerities there 
with his wives, he, lofty iu mind, reached the pure worlds 
with every stain removed. 



svXroc'isha’s manvantara. 


415 


Canto LXVII. 

The Story of Svdroc'isha concluded. 

Mirhandeya mentions the gods, rishis and Icings in the SmrooHsha 
Manvantara. 

M«arkandeja spoke : 

1 Then the adorable god made the Prajdpati named Svaro- 
cisha D)’uti-mat a Manu. Listen to his Manv-antara ; who 

2 were the gods during that period, who were the munis and 
their sons, who were the princes, listen while I tell of them^ 
0 Kraiishtnki. 

3 The gods in that period were the Paravatas and also the 
Tnshitas. 0 brahman; and in Svarocisha’s period the 

4 Inclra was famed as Yipad-cit. l/rja, Tamba and Prana, 
Dattoli and Rishabha, Ni^cara and Carva-virat were the seven 

5 rishis in that 'period. And seven sons had that high souled 
^lann, C'aitra, Kim-purusha, &c., very valiant, guardians of 

6 the earth. So long as his Manv-antara lasted, all this earth 
was enjoyed among the outspreadings of his family. That 
was the second Ifawr-antara. 

7 Now the man who hears of Sva-rodis’ deeds and Svdro- 
cisha’s birth, and believes them, is delivered from his sins. 


Canto LXVIIL 
A description of the Nidhis.* 

Mdrkandeya tells of the knowledge called Padmini, of the 
Nidhis connected with it, and of the injltiences which they 
exercise over men. 

Kraushtuki spoke : 

^ Adorable Sir ! thou hast related it all fully to me, both 
Sva-rocis’ deeds and Svdrodisha’s birth. Now tell me at 

® are demi-goda who preside over and influence men’s propensities, 
pleasures, tastes, &c. 


4 



416 


CANTO LXVIIT. 


2 length about the knowledge named Padmini which compaggej 
all pleasures, aud about the Nidhis who are allied thereto 

3 and about the nature of the eight Nidhis who exist, and the 
composition of their wealth. I desire to hear it expounded 
by thee thoroughly, 0 guru ! 

Markandeya spoke : 

4 The knowledge which is named Padmini has Lakshmi for 
its deity, and the Nidhis for its supporters. Listen while I 

5 tell thee of it. The Nidhis therein are Padma and Maba- 
padma, and Makara, and Kacchapa, Mukunda and Nandaka 
Nila, and S'aiikha is the eighth Nidhi. These live in real 

6 good -fortune * ; verily perfection springs from them. These 
eight Nidhis indeed have been proclaimed to thee, 0 Kraush- 

7 tuki f. By means of the gods’ favour and by attendance on 
good men a man’s wealth is always watched over by them, 

8 0 muni. Listen while I tell thee what their nature is like. 

First, the Nidhi named Padma belongs, 0 brahman, to 

9 Maya,! to liis son, and to the sons and grandsons of' his son 
perpetually. And a man dominated thereby may become the 

10 perfection of politeness, since this Nidhi is supported by good- 
ness, yields great enjoyment and is sincere. And ho amasses 

11 immense quantities of gold, silver, copper and other metals, 
and buys and sells them ; he also makes sacrifices, and be- 

12 stows the sacred fee ; and he causes a palace to bo built and 
temples for the gods, applying his mind thereto. 

And another Nidhi who is supported by goodness is 

13 known as Maha-padma. He has goodness for his chief quality 
And a man dominated thereby amasses rubies and other gems, 

14 pearls and coral, and buys and sells them ; and ho gives to 
those whose disposition is towards religious devotion, and 

16 has dwellings constructed for them ; and he himself, develops 
into that disposition. And from him are born others of sum- 

* Or, prosperity ; satydm riddhau. ^ 

t Tava kro8h(u1cei this violates the metre j read instead hraushfuke 

J Maya was an Asura, the great artificer of the Dfinavas, and construe 

a magnificent Oonrb for the Panda vas; see Mah4*Bh4rata, Sabbif» 



DBSCBIPTION OF THE NIDHTS. 


417 


16 lar disposition in the descent of sons and grandsons. ThU 
}fidhi comes only from prior good-fortune *, and does not depart 
for seven generations. 

The Nidhi who is composed of darkness f is named 

17 Makara. And a man on whom he looks J is indeed born 
characterized chiefly by ignorance, though good in disposi- 

18 tion. He gathers together arrows, swords, spears and bows, 
and shields and rope, and attains to friendship with kings ; 
and ho gives to kings who occupy themselves with heroic 

19 deeds, and to those whom they esteem ; and he finds plea- 
sure in buying and selling weapons and in nothing else. 
This Nidhi belongs to a man singly, and does not descend to 

20 his progeny. Such a man may meet§ death for the sake of 
wealth at the hands of robbex^s and also in battle. 

And the man on whom the Nidhi, who fs called Kaddhapa, 

21 casts his eye is dominated by ignorance, because that Nidhi 
is characterized by darkness ; and he performs all tlie rules 

22 of life|| along with men who have acquired merit, and makes 
all those rules consist in mere acts ; he confides in no one. 

23 Just as a tortoise draws all its limbs in, so drawing in all his 
thoughts while unharmed he remains with diffuse mind.T 
He gives not nor does he enjoy, being afraid of destruction 

21 thereby ; he makes his resting-place on the earth. That 
Nidhi also is limited to men singly. 

And another Nidhi, who is named Mukunda, is composed 

25 of the quality of passion.** The man on whom he looks be- 
comes of the same quality, 0 brahman. He gathers together 
intes, flutes and drums, and any musical instrument of per- 

2 ^ cussion ; he bestows wealth on singers and dancers, and on 
minstrels, bai-ds, sycophants and those who ai^e skilled in 

For purvarddha-mitral^ the Bombay Edition reads piirvarddhumdtrah, 

»^ichlhave adopted. 

+ Or ignorance ; idmaea. 

J ^V'i-lokita ; freqaently used in this canto. 

For savraje read sa vrajet ? || Vyavahdra. 

f or better dyatta-mdnasah ‘with submissive mind” P 
%'a«. ^ 



418 


CANTO Lxvrir, 


27 di’ama; he bestows pleasures on them day and night, and 
enjoys life along wifeh those com'panions^ 0 bribman ; and he 
finds no delight in women of loose character, nor with other 

28 folk of that kind. He forms a single union, the man to whom 
this Nidhi resorts. 

And composed of passion and darkness is another greal 

29 Nidhi called Nanda. The man on whom he looks attains t( 
eminent firmness.* Ho gathers together all hinds of miner 

30 ala and precious stones and trade- wares, t grain and othei 
articles, and also buys and sells the same ; he is the support 

3L of his own family and of each visitor and guest ; he does nol 
brook disrespectful language although it be very slight 
0 great muni ! and when praised he entertains strong affee 

32 tion and proffers it ; and whatever object of desire he wants 
he has recourse to tetidernoss to obtain it. He has manj 

33 wives, who are prolific and very beautiful to his delight. Anc 
the Nidhi Nanda passes down to seven generations, and whei 
strongly developed passes on to the next descendant with ai 

34 eighth portion, 0 best of men ! and he bestows length o: 
life on all men. Nanda verily provides support to kinsmei 

35 indeed, and to those guests who have arrived from afar; anc 
he is not held in honour in the next world ; affection doei 
not belong to him, hut is born among those who dwell together 

36 he causes laxity among those who were former friends, aD( 
affection with others. 

Moreover the groat Nidhi who contains goodness an( 

37 passion is termed Lila.J A man united with him may beconn 
of that disposition. He leads a man to collect clothing, cottoi 

38 cloth, grain and other fruit and flowers, also pearls, coral 
and shells, and small shells and other similar things, timhe 
and other materials and whatever else is produced in wa ^ 

39 O muni ; he leads him to buy and sell other things. 
nothing else does his mind delight ; and he constructs p 

• Or solidity: stamhha, 

t For punya-dhdnyddikasya read panya-dhd/nyddiJcasyaf 

J For sa-lila-saHjiias read sa Wa-sanjnas P Ho is also called NUn ^ 

above and verse 41 below. 



DESCRIPTlOJf OP THE MIDHIS. 


419 

40 and tonka and places, for pleasure j and «*cA a man makes 
embankments across rivers and plants trees; and after 
enjoying unguents, flowers and other objects of delight he is 
H born again. And this Nidhi named Nila persbts for three 

generations. 

And composed of passion and darkness is another Nidhi 
t 2 who ia named S'ahkha. And the man who is lord of this 
Nidhi is led by him to possess the same qualities, 0 brihman. 
He exists in a ma» singly, and does not pass on to another 
(3 generation. Listen, O Kraushtuki, to the character of a man 
who possesses the Nidhi Sahkha. It is when quite alone that 
he enjoys food and clothing such as he himself has made- 
4 his family eat wretched food and wear no bright clothing! 

he makes no gift to friend, wife, brother, son, daughter-in- 
0 law and other relatives. Always intent on his own nourish- 
ment is the man who posse8.se8 S'ahkha. 

Thus these Nidhis have been described, the deities of wealth 
6 among men. When their looks are blended, the blended 
An/hi.s produce results according to their natures, just as each 
nature described above springs indeed from the aspect of a 
iMitwular Nidhi. And in sovereignty over them all sits 
Lakahrai, who is this knowledge culled Padmini of the dvijas. 


Canto LXIX. 


About the Auttdna* Manv-antara. 

Utiama banished his queen to a forest because of her 
Persistent unloving behaviour. — A hrdhman whose wife had been 
invokes the king's help to recover her. — The king in 
' d ching fo) her reaches a munVs hermitage., and is censured 
g fhe muni for his conduct to the queen. 


Kraushtuki spoke: 

0 brahman, thou hast described to me the Svarodisha 

^ J ; see canto liii, verse 7, and Ixxii, verse 3d. It 

^oise 3 ^ caused by the fact that Uotama was eon of Uttdna-pdda, 

It occurs in the next cai^to, bnt is corrected in canto Ixxf. 



CANTO TiXlX. 


420 

2 manv-antam at lengih and also the eight Nidhis, whom I 
asked about. Thou didst tell me of the Sv4yambhnva many, 
antara before that. Tell me of the third manv-antara which 
is named after Utfcama.* * * § 

Mdrkapdeya spoke: 

3 There was a son of Uttdna-pada named Uttama, sonof 

4 Su-ru(5i,t famous, great in strength and valour, and righteoui 
of soul, and magnanimous, a monarch rich in valour. Excell. 

6 ing all'created beings he shone in valour like the sun. H« 
was the same both to foe and friend, to his city and to hia 
son, being one who understood righteousness ; and he was like 
Yama to the wicked, and like Soma to the good, 0 groat muni! 

6 A knower of righteousness, Uttana-pada^s sou Uttama 
married a maiden of Babhru’s race named Bahula, as supreme 

7 Indra mairied famous S'a(^i. His mind was always exceedinglj 
affectionate ^0 her, 0 noble brahman, { just as is the moon’s 

8 mind which has fixed its abode in Rob ini. Verily his mind 
felt no attachment to any other object ; in sleep also thal 
king’s mind rested on her. And the king at the very sight 

9 of her, who was most beautiful in every limb, was continuallj 
touching her body, and at the touch of her body he became 

10 one with her. § The king’s woi ds, although kindly, caused 
annoyance to her ears, and she deemed his special respect ai 

11 humiliation from him. She contemned a garland when givei 
by him, and his beautiful ornaments ; and she arose as i 
pained in body when be drank the choice nectar of hr 

12 and only a moment did the king hold her by the hand whei 
he enjoyed her. She ate very little food, 0 brabman, an( 

13 that with no great delight. Thus she was not favourable t 
the magnanimous king who was favourable to her; 
abundant and excessive love did the king show. 

14 Now once the king, when engaged in drinking, respect a 

* Auttama would be preferable, as he was the Mann, see canto ^ 

89 } read then hathayauttama-sanjnitam for kathayottama^sarijnitam ■ 

t Or 8u-ruc'i, a feminine name. 

% For dvija-varyd read dvija-varya ? ■ 

§ Tan^maya, 



421 


KINO UTTAMA BANISHED HIS QUEEN. 

caused that wilful queen to hold a drinking cup which 

15 had been cleansed with wine, he being then surrounded with 
accomplished attendants • who were melodious in their singing, 
and who were assiduously singing and chanting while kings 

16 looked on ; but she does not wish to take that cup, turning 
her face away from it, in the sight of the kings. Thereat 

17 the king was enraged. Breathing hard like a serpent, when 
set at nought by his dear queen, as if u husband not dear 

18 to her, he called the door-keeper and said,— “ 0 door-keeper ! 
Take this lady of evil heart to a desolate forest and abandon 
her forthwith ! Deliberate thou not on this my command ! ” 

Markaijdeya spoke ; 

19 Thereupon the door-keeper, deeming the king’s word was 
not to be questioned, mounted the beautiful-browed lady in a 

20 chariot and left her in a forest. And she, when abandoned 
thus by the king in the forest and being away from his sight, 

21 held he had done her the greatest favour. And king Autta- 
na-padi, with soul and mind burning with the anguish of love 

22 for her, took no other wife. He remembered her who was 
beauteous in every limb, day and night bereft of ease, and 
ruled his kingdom, governing his people righteously. 

23 While he ruled his people, as a father his own childi-en, 
a certain brahman suffering in mind arrived and spoke 
thus— 

The brahman spoke : 

24 0 Mahd-raja ! in grievous suffering am I ; hearken while I 
speak. Men’s deliverance from pain comes from no where 

25 but the king ! Some one carried off my wife by night while 
I slept, without unlocking the house door. Deign to bring 

back to me. 

The king spoke : 

Knowest thou not, 0 brahman, who carried her off or 
^here has she been taken ? With whom shall I strive in 
fight ? or whence shall I bring her back ? 

I ^ra^tnukhyaih i the dictionary gives only the fern., vdra-mukhyd, "a 

foyiiWourtezan.’* 



CANTO LXIX. 


m 

The brahman spoke : 

27 While I slept just as I was, with the door fastened, 0 ki 
why and by whom my wife was carried off— this thou, Sir* 

5S8 knowest. Thou art our guardian, 0 king, whose due is tho 
levy of a sixth part of our wealth.^ Therefore men sleep 
at night, freed from anxiety about justice. 

The king spoke : 

29 I have not seen thy wife. Tell mo what is she like in 
body, and what is her age ; and of what disposition is the 
brdhman lady ? 

The brahman spoke : 

30 Sharp-eyed is she, very tall, short-armed, thin-faced, 
ungainly in form, 0 king. I defame her not by this description ; 

31 very harsh in speech, and ungentle is she in disposition, 
0 king — thus I have described my wife ; she is a do-nothing, 

32 unpleasant in look, and she has slightly passed early woman- 
hood, 0 king. Such is my wife in form ; true is this I have 
spoken. 

The king spoke : 

83 Enough hast thou had of her, 0 brAhman. I toill give 
thee another wife. An excellent wife tends to one’s happiness, 

84 such a one as that is verily a source of pain. Bodily beauty 
consists in healthfalncss,t 0 brahman, its cause is a noble 
disposition. She who has neither beauty nor good disposition 
should bo abandoned for that very reason. 

The brahman spoke : 

35 “A wife must be guarded,” 0 king — such is our highest 
divine teaching. When a wife is guarded, the offspring is gnai’* 

36 ded. For the Soul is born in her, hence she must be guarded, 
0 king. When the offspring is guarded, the Soul is guarded. 

37 When she is not guarded, there will arise confusion among 
the castes ; that will hurl one’s forefathers down fro® 

38 Svarga, 0 king. And I may have loss of righteousness fro® 

* For shaddgdddna read shad-thdgdddna ? See verse 39. 

t There is a play on words here, kahjd^i^ “ an excellent (wife)> 

“ in healthfulness.” t Or, one’s self ; dtmd. 



KINO UTTAMA SBEffS A LOST BRADMAN WOMAN. 


423 


day to-day, while I remain wifeless ; and that, through the 
destruction of the perpetual ceremonies, xnll tend to my down- 

39 fall. And in her will be my ofPspring, 0 king. She will 
give thee the sixth part; she will be a cause of righteousness. 

40 For that reason I have declared this to thee. Bring back my 
wife who has been carried off, my lord, since your honour is 
placed supreme for our protection. 

Markandeya spoke : 

41 The king, on hearing him so speak, took thought, and 
mounted his great chariot which was furnished with every 

42 useful requisite. Hither and thither he wandered over the 
earth with that brahman, and saw a fine hermitage of ascetics 

43 in a large forest ; and alighting there he entered and saw a 
muni, seated on a silken cushion, and blazing as it were with 

44 splendour. Seeing the king arrived, he rose in haste, and 
welcoming him with full respect commanded his disciple to 

45 bring the arghya offering. His disciple said to him quietly 
-“Why should the arghya be given to him, 0 muni ? Think 
well of it and command me, for I carry out thy command.’* 

46 Then the brahman being acquainted with the king’s history, 
with self-possession did him respect in conversation and by 
giving him a seat. 


The pishi spoke : 

47 Why hast thou come here, Sir; and what dost thou wish 
lo do ? I know thee, 0 king, to be IJttana-pdda’s son Uttama. 


48 

49 


The king spoke : 

A brahman's wife was carried off from his house by some 
one whose person is unknown, 0 muni; to seek her I have 
come here. Deign, adorable Sir, in compassion to tell me, who 
have reached thy house and am prostrate before thee, what 
1 ask thee ! 


The pishi spoke : 

me, 0 king, without fear what thou must ask. I will 
^ell thee truthfully if I ought to tell it thee. 

j The king spoke : 

• ^hy is the arghya offering kept back, which thou wast pre- 



424 


CANTO LXIX. 


paved to give me on fivst seeing me on my arrival at thj 
house, 0 muni ? 

The rishi spoke : 

62 When through agitation at the sight of thee, 0 king, I com, 
manded this disciple to give it, then I was cautioned by him 

53 Through my favour he knows the future in this world ai 

54 I know both the past and the present thoroughly. When h( 
said, “ Consider and give thy order,” then I also know it 
hence I did not give thee the arghya according to precept 

55 Truly 0 king, thou art worthy of the arghya and thou hehnijet 
to the race of Svayambhuva ; nevertheless we deem thei 
Uttama not fit for the arghya. 

The king spoke : 

66 What then have I done, 0 brahman, whether wittingly oi 
unwittingly, that arriving after a long time I am not worthj 
of the arghya from thee ? 

The fishi spoke : 

67 Hast thou forgotten, both that thou didst abandon thj 
wife in the forest, and that along with her thou didst abandoi 

’58 all thy righteousness, 0 king. Through neglect of religion, 
acts a man becomes unfit to be touched by his adherents, liki 
one on whom ordure and urine have been showered;* thoi 

59 hast neglected an act of permanent observance. Just a 
a complaisant wife must bear with her husband tliougl 
he be of bad disposition, so a wife although of bad dispo 

60 sition must be cherished by her husband, 0 king. Ungracioa 
indeed was that brdhman’s wife who was carried off ; never 
theless he, being a lover of righteousness, very much excels 

61 thee, 0 king. Thou establishest other men in their prop® 
ways of righteousness when they swerve therefrom, 0 kio^ 
What other person will establish thee when thou swerves 
from thy righteousness ? 

* Vdrshiki, a noun, not given in the dictionary ; it must apparently 

“a shower.” . aiction®* 

t Ud-ydti-tardm. The only meanings assigned to ud-yd m the ^ 

kre, ” to go up or out, to rise, originate.” 



kino UTTAMA FINIW the BRi^HMAN WOMAN, 425‘ 

Markaijdeya spoke : 

(52 A gazing-stock was the king when thus addressed by the ^ 
wise rishi ; and saying “ So be it I ” he enquired about the 
53 biahninn’s wife who had been camod off— “ Adorable Sir, 
who has taken away the brahman’s wife, or where is she? 
Thou Sir knowest unerringly the past and the future in 
this world.” 

The fishi spoke : 

A Rakshasa named Valaka, son of Adri, has captured her, 
and thou shall see her now in Utpalavataka forest, 0 king. 

65 Go, unite the brahman with his wife quickly Let him not 
become a seat of sin as thou art day after day. 

Canto LXX. 

About the Auttdna* Manv-antciTd. 

King JJttama finds the hrahman*8 wife in the forest and is 
court vonsly received by the Rdkshasa, who says he carried her 
off in order to impair the brahman's religious merit. — At the 
huufs request the Edkshasa consumes her evil disposition and 
restores her to her husband, 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 Then the king prostrated himself before the great muni, 
and mounted his chariot, and went to the forest Utpalavata 

2 nicutioiied by him. And the king saw t the brahman’s wife, 
hi appearance such as her husbnnd described her, eating the 
huit of the bel tree and asked — ” How didst thou come to 

* Tl.ig should be Anttama, see page 419, note 
t lor daddrh read dadarh. 

I the fruit of the hilva or vilva tree, JEgle marmelos, and also the 

jj, It is a pretty large tree, a native of the mountainous parts of 

hast coast, and also found in the low lauds ; its fruit is considered 
‘iiiOQs, warm, cathartic; in taste delicious; in fragrance exquisite 
® I’lora Indioa, vol II. 679*80. See page 26 note * ; but T have 
the there in assigning the name hel-phul to this tree. Bel-jphtU 

double Arabian jasmine, Jaaminum ZamhaCf Boxb. (I. 88) 
>atac, Oliver. This jasmine is a. shrub with delightfully fragrant white 
54 



426 


CANTO m. 


this forest, lady P tell me plainly ; art thou the ^vife oi 
Su-^arraan Vai^ali P * 

The brahman woman spoke : 

4 lam daughter of the brdhman Ati-ratra, who dwells in the 
forest, and wife of Vi^ala’s son whose name thou hast uttered. 

6 Being such, I was carried off by the evil-minded Rakshasa 
Valdka, while asleep at the extremity of my house, and parted 

6 from ray brothers and mother. May that Rakshasa become 
ashes, by whom I have been parted thus from my mother 
brothers and other relatives ! Here I remain in great affliction. 

7 Bringing me to this very dense forest he has cast me off. 
I know not what is the reason he neither has intercourse with 
me nor devours me. 

The king spoke: 

8 Perchance thou knowest, where has the Rakshasa gone 
after leaving thee ? I have been sent here by thy husband 
indeed, 0 brahman lady. 

The brahman woman spoke : 

9 The night-stalking demon stands at the edge of this ve^ 
forest. Enter and see him, Sir, if thou dost not fear him. 

Markandeya spoke : 

10 Then he entered by the path that she showed, and saw the 

11 Rakshasa attended by his retinue. Then the Rdkshasa hurry* 
in g, the moment he saw him, touching the earth with bis 
head from afar indeed, approached his feet. 

The Rakshasa spoke : 

12 Thou hast done me great favour in that thou hast come 
to my abode here. Give me thy command. What shall I do, 

13 such as [ am here ? I dwell within thy country. Accept thou 
this arghya offering, and let this seat be placed for thee. 
are servants, thou. Sir, art master ; command me firmly* 

flowers, and is in common cultivation. Its Sanskrit name ia malUUi and ftlw 
s(x<ptal(l ; and heUphUl is the common modem name both for the flower 
for the plant itself. It has numerous other vernacular names, aad Bo* 
says hela is one of them, bat this seems doubtful. 

* Son of Yi^ila ; see next verse. 



KING UTTAMA CONVERSES WITH A RifKSHASA. 427 

The king spoke : 

14 Thou hast done everything, even every rite due to a guest. • 
Why hast thou brought the bmhman’s wife h&re, 0 night- 

15 stalker ? She is not comely ; there are others comely, if thou 
didst carry her off for a wife : if to devour her, why hast thou 
not eaten her ? Tell me this. 


The Rakshasa spoke j 

16 We do not feed on men ; such are other Rakshasas. But we 
eat the fruit that springs from a good deed, 0 king ; and we 

17 consume the natural disposition of men and women, being 
treated with disrespect, and yet honoured ; we are not eaters 

18 of living creatures. When we have eaten the patience of 
men, they become enraged ; and when we have eaten their 

19 evil nature, they also become virtuous. We have Rakshasis 
who are fascinating, rivalling the Apsarases in beauty, 0 
king; while they are with us, how should we delight in 
the females of mankind ? 


The king spoke : 

20 If she is not for sensual enjoyment nor for food, 0 night- 
roamer, why then didst thou enter the brahman’s house and 
carry her off ? 


The Rakshasa spoke : 

11 That excellent brdhman, learned in spells, keeps on expelling 
me, when I go to sacrifice after sacrifice, by uttering spells that 
destroy Rakshasas, 0 king. By reason of his spells and ex- 
pulsive rites we were a- hungered ; whore shall wo go ? that 
^ brahman t is the priest at every sacrifice. Therefore we 
inflicted this damage J on him ; without a wife a man becomes 
nntit to perform sacrifices. 


Markandeya spoke : 

■A^t his announcement of the high-minded brahman’s im- 

I 'pi 

kit “mistake in this line, read hfitavan eva tvam instead 

• ‘era tvayd ? or else aarvd evdtithi-kriydh for sarvdm evdtithi-kriydm P 
kita^vdn is understood in the second half of the line. 

I seems preferable to dvija. 

^^alyam, “ impaired or mutilated condition.'* 



428 


CANTO LXX. 


paired condition the king became exceedingly dejected then 

26 thinking “ While he speaks of the brahman’s impaired condi' 
tion, it is me indeed he censures. That best of munis also 

26 said I was unworthy of the argha offering. As the-Rakshasa 
also has spoken to me of that brahman's impaired condition I 
being in like plight am placed in a great strait, becaose I 
am wifeless." 

Markande 3 ra spoke : 

27 While he thus thought, 0 muni, the RAkshasa spoke again 
to the king, bowing in obeisance and placing his hands to- 

28 gether respectfully — “ 0 king, favour with thy command 
mo, thy servant, prostrate before thee*, a dweller within thy 
realm.” 

The king spoke : 

29 Since thou hast said, 0 niglit-roamer — “We feed on aper- 
fiort-’s disposition," hear then from mo what deed we solicit. 

30 Do thou consume this brahman woman’s evil disposition this 
day ; since sbe will have her evil disposition eaten by thee, 

31 she may then become good in behaviour. Take her to hii 
house whose wife she is, 0 night-roamer. When this is done, 
thou hast done all for me who am come as a gitte^ftothy 
house. 

Markandeya spoke ; 

32 Thereupon the Rakshasa, entering within her though his 
own faculty of illusion, devoured her evil disposition by hii 

33 own power at the king’s command. Being rid entirely of 
that very violent evil disposition that brahman’s wife sai^ 

34 to the king — “ By the maturing of the fruit of my own 
actions I was separated from that magnanimous man, wj 
husband ; this night-rooming demon was the cause theieof 

35 He is not in fault, nor that magnanimous ?now, my husband 
mine in truth was the fault, no one else’s. A good dee ^ 

36 verily enjoyed. In some former life I separated myself ^ 
some husband ; that same separation^ has been encoun 

* For tvam read tvdm ? 

t Or perhaps “ fault,’* should be understood. 



the brahman woman restored to her husband. 429 

again even by m©. What fault is there in this magnanim- 

ous man ? ’’ 

The R^kshasa spoke : 

37 I will cause her to reach her husband’s house at thy com- 
mand, my lord. Enjoin me whatever else should be done for 
thee, 0 king ! 

The king spoke : 

38 When this is done, thou hast done all for me, 0 night- 
roanier. And thou must come, O hero, at the time of action 
when I recall thee to mind.f 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

.39 “ So be it ! ” then quoth tbe Rakshasa, and taking the 

brahman woman conveyed her, purified then by the removal 
of her evil disposition, to her husband’s house. 


Canto LXXI. 


2 


About the Auttama Manv-aniara, 

King Uttama visits the Tish% learns his queen has been taken 
io Pdtdla by a Ndga king^ who then curses his daughter for 
hiding the queen from him^and he is also told his unhappy 
married life was caused by adverse planetary influence. 
Markandeya spoke : • 

Now the king, after despatching the woman to her husband’s 
house, sighed and thought, “ What good deed may there bo 
in this ? The high-minded muni declared I was wretched 
hwanso of my unfitness for the arghya offering ; and this 
ni^dit-roaming demon spoke of ‘ impaired condition ’ with 
reference to the brahman. Being such, what shall I do, 
ior I abnndonod her, my wife ? Or shall I enquire of that 
host of munis who has the eye of knowledge ?” 

Thus pondered the king, and mounting the chariot went 
^ ^here dwelt the great muni, righteous in soul, who knew the 
three periods of time. And descending from the chariot he 

I for maydpy’Upagatafy we should read mayy-apy-ufagata^ P 

mr\f ^ t^vayd, in order to make a pronoun agreeing with 

? See canto Ixxii, verses 16 and 16 . 



CANTO LXXI. 




approached and prostrated himself before that muni, and 
related how happened his meeting with the Rdkshasa, and 

6 his interview with the brdhman woman, and the removal of 
her evil disposition,* and her despatch to her husband's 
house, and what was his business in coming hack. 

The vishi spoke ; 

7 I knew this before, which thou hast done, 0 king, and 

8 the whole of thy business in coming hack to me. Ask me 
here what must I do ? ” with anxious mind ; and since 

9 thou art come, 0 king, hear what thou must do. A \vife 
is a potent cause of righteousness, wealth and love among 
men ; and in particular one who forsakes her has in sooth 

10 abandoned righteousness. A wifeless man, 0 king, is not 
fit for his own works, he he brahman or kshatriya, vaisya or 

11 even ^udra, 0 king. No brilliant deed didst thou do, Sir, 
when thou didst abandon thy wife ; for as women must not 
forsake a husband, so men must not forsake a wife. 

The king spoke : 

12 Adorable Sir, what shall 1 do, such as I am ? It was the 
maturing of my actions, that I abandoned her because she 
was not favourably disposed to me while I was favourable 

13 to her. Whatever one does, that one endures with ones 
mind burning, even that with one’s inmost soul terrified at 

14 the pain of separation thereby, adorable Sir. But now I know 
not where she when abandoned in the forest has gone, or 
whether she has been devoured by lions, tigers and 
roaming heasts in the forest. 

The fishi spoke : 

15 She has not been devoured by lions or tigers or night 
roaming heasts, 0 king, but she is now in Rasatala with nn 

blemished character. 

The king spoke : 

16 Who conveyed her to Pdtala ? How dwells she ' ^ 
uncorrupted ? Most wonderful is this, 0 brdhman , de 

tell me of it as it happened. 

* For doh'‘Mydpagamam.retA dau^’Silyipagainaih f 



planetary influences against king uttama. 431 

The rishi spoke: 

In Patdla is a Naga king and he is famed as Kapotaka. 
He saw her when abandoned by thee she was wandering 
in the great forest. Enamoured of her then he declared his 
object and earned the beautiful young queen to Patala, 0 
king. Now that wise Naga king has a beautiful-browed 
daughter named Naudd, 0 king, aud a charming wife. That 
daughter saw thy beautiful queen, and thinking, “ this bright 
lady will become a rival wife to my mother,” brought her to 
her own house and concealed her in the women’s apartments. 
But Nanda, when entreated, continually refuses to answer the 
king; then the father cursed her his daughter that she should 
become dumb. Thus did he curse his daughter; and she, 
ihj wife, remains there, 0 king, carried off by that Naga king, 
detained by his daughter, and still chaste. 

Markandeya spoke : 

Rejoicing greatly thereat, the king asked the eminent 
brahman * what was the reason of his ill-fortune with regard 
to his darling wife. 

The king spoke: 

( Adorable Sir ! I meet with the utmost affection from all 
the world, what then is the reason, why my own wife is not 
' very tender? On the one hand I dearly long for her even 
beyond my own life, 0 great muni, and on the other she 
is ill-disposed towards me. Say, what is the reason, 0 
brahman. 

The fishi spoke : 

^ When thou didst take her hand in marriage, the Sun aud 
Mars and Saturn looked on thee, and Venus and Jupiter 
^ looked on thy wife. At that morrent the moon was favour- 
to thee, and Mercury to her. Those two groups of 
planets are mutually hostile ; hence they have been exceed- 
^ j^gly adverse to thee, 0 king. Go then; atl ended by thy 

* The text reads dvija-varjyam. But dvija-varyam, which the Bombay edition 
18 much better and I have adopted it ; see rdja-varyya in canto hxii, 
I The translation of the text T^ould be ” putting aside brdhmanB.” 



^06 


VAATU IjAAIl. 


wife, rule the earth in thy righteousness, and perform 
every rite that pertains to righteousness ! 

Mdrkandeya spoke ; 

29 At this exhortation king Uttama prostrated himself before 
the and then mounting his chariot went to his own city 


Canto LXXIL 

About the Auttama Manv-antara. 

The brahman performs a sacrifice which turns the queen't 
heart to the hing^ and the Edkshasa brings her back from Fdt&lci- 
The brdhman frees the Ndga princess from the curse, and sk 
earning to thank the king promises him a son who shall k a 
Manu — Accordingly a son is horn who was the Mann Auttama. 

Markaijdeya spoke : 

1 Then arriving at his city, the king saw the joyful brahman 
accompanied by his wife also who was sweet-dispositioned. 

The brAhman spoke ; 

2 0 noble king, successful am I inasmuch as righteousness 
has been preserved by thee, who art wise in righteousness 
here and who bringest hack my wife. 

The king spoke : 

3 Successful art thou, 0 brahman, because thou observest thy 
own laws of righteousness. I am in a strait, who have no 
wife at home, 0 brahman. 

The brahman spoke : 

4 0 king, if she, thy queen^ has indeed been devoured by wild 
beasts in the forest, away with her ! Why dost thou not 
take another’s hand in marriage ? Falling under the dominion 
of anger thou didst not preserve righteousness. 

The king spoke ; . 

5 My darling wife is' not devoured by wild 

she is alive, with character unblemished.^ Rovf sh 
in this matter ? 



king uttama ekqatns his qttebn. 


m 


The brahman spoke; 

Tf thy wife lives and has not gone astray, why then dost thou 
ommit a sin which will render thee wifeless in another birth ? 
The king spoke; 

In sooth, altliough she were brought back, she is ever 
ipposud to mo, 0 brahman, she would tend to unhappiuess, not 
0 happiness ; enough ! her friendship is not at all towards 
ne. Oo thou so strive for me that she may become submis- 
iivc Unto uie. 

The brahman spoke; 

The Vara sacrifice* is beneficial for mutual affection 
between thee and her. I will perform the Mitra-vindaf 
saciilice which those perform who wish for friends ; for it 
pioduees affection ])Gtween two persons who love not each 
othej-; it creates J the warmest § «/c>c/fow between wife and 
hnshaad, 0 king. I will perform that sacrifice for thee, 
Fetch thy bcautifiil-hrowed wife from wherever she is now, 

0 king ; she shall feel tho warmest love for thee ! 

Markandeya spoke; 

Thus admonished, the king then collected all tho materials 
requisite, and the brahman performed that sacrifice. Seven 
times then tho brahman performed the sacrifice in rejietition 
in order to procure foJ* the king his wife. When the great 
muni deemed that he had aroused friendliness within her to- 
wards her husband, tlien be, the brahman, addressed the 
king — “ Fetch lier, 0 king, who is dear to thee, close to thy 
enjoy all enjoyments with her, and offer sacrifices, 
keing duly respected, ” 

Markandeya spoke ; 

Thus exhorted by the brahman the king a-wondcring tlien 
'('Called to mind the very valiant, ti’uthful, night-roaming 

^omhh. f “ Friend-finding.” 

not in the dictionary. 8an-janana is given only as a 

'er noun. 

1 "nun : (inu.rdgam or some similar non-feminine noun must be understood j 

read pardm to agroo with priti as in the next verse. 

65 



CANTO LXXTT. 


4^54 

16 Rdkshasa.* And he, the Bdhhasa, being remembered by bin 
approached the king at once then, and prostrating himgei 
before the great muni exclaimed, “ What shall I do?” 

17 Thereupon, after the king had declared the matter fully h 

18 went to Patala and brought the queen back. And she, whei 
brought back, gazed on her husband then with exceeding Ion 
and said “Be gjncious!” again and again, while filled witl 

19 joy. Thereat the king embraced the stately lady impetuottsli 
and said — “ Darling, I am indeed well pleased ! why dostthoi 
keep on repeating that ? ” 

The queen spoke : 

20 If thy mind is inclined with favour to me, 0 king, then : 
make thee this request; do thou do it as an honour to me. 

The king spoke : 

21 Speak out fearlessly whatever thou desiresb from me, lady 
Thou shalt certainly obtain it, timid one ! I am all docili 
towards thee and not otherwise, 

• The queen spoke : 

22 On my account the Naga cursed his daughter toh is mi 
friend ; ho said “Thou shalt become dumb, ” and she becami 

23 dumb. If thou, Sir, canst for love of me devise a remedy foi 
her to cure her deprivation of speech, then what wilt thoi 
not have done for me ? 

Markandeya spoke : 

2i Then said the king to the brahman — “Whatkindfo 
ceremony is there for this, in order to dispel her dumb 
ness ?” And he replied to the king : — 

The brdhman spoke : 

25 0 king, I will perform a sacrifice to Sarns-vati at thy word 
Let this thy wife discharge her debt of gratitude by stimula 
ting the power of speech in that friend. 

Markandeya spoke ; 

26 The brahman performed the sacrifice to Saras-val^i on 

* See canto Ixx, verse 38. • 

f For kidfUi road Mdi i4i ? 



THE BIBT& OF MANU AUTTAMA. 


4,35 


behalf, and uttered the liymns addressed to Saras-vati, with 
composed mind. 

17 Tliercupon Garga* spoke to the maiden, who had recom-ed 
her speech, in Rasitala— “This most difficult benefit has 
I been effected by thy friend’s husband.” 

128 Having gained this infoi-mation Nnnda sped in haste to the 
I city. Then the Naga’s daughter, embracing her friend the 
22 queen and praising the king with auspicious words again and 
again, spoke sweetly, she, the Naga maiden placing herself 
upon a scat, — 

so “ By this benefit, that thou, 0 noble hero, hast done me 
no\v,t my heart is drawn out. Listen to what I tell thee. 
31 Thou shalt have a sou great in valour, O king ; ho shall 
Si wield the discus unresisted on this earth. He shall he skilled 
in tile principles of all the useful sciences, J devoted to the 
practice of i-ighteousness, in truth a Mauu, the wise lord of 
a inaiiv-antara.” 


33 


.34 

o’) 

3 ; 


38 


Markandeya spoke : 

Having thus beslowed a boon on him, tbe Naga king’s 
tlfmgliter tlien closely embraced her friend and departed to 
IVitala, 0 muni. 

While the king lived in pleasure there along with lier and 
niled his subjects, a very long time passed by. Then the son 
'Viis born of her to the liigh-souled king, like the lovely full. 

moon at the period of full-moon. At the birth of that 
*"gh-son]ed child all the people rejoiced, heavenly drums 
*5‘>unded forth, and a shower of flowers fell. 

‘Seeing that his body would be lovely and his disposition 
f‘lso, and reflecting that he was the son of Uttama,§ the assem- 
l^dd munis gave him a namernyw^, “ He is born in an ex- 
Hlentjl family and at an excellent time in it ; he has excel- 
limbs ; hence he shall be Auttama.” 


* Seo canto kxv, 
of Bharad- 


verso 13. Garga was the mame of an old rishi, a descen 

'■aridn L Angiras (see M.-Bh., S'alya-P. liiij- and also o 

” other persons. 


t F 

f ''»<imdghun4 read mamddhund ? 
5 ^mma. 


t Tho Artha-^stras. 
11 VttQma. 



436 


CANTO LXXflT. 


Markancjeya spoke ; 

39 So he was Uttama’s son and was famed as Aatiania 1 ,^ 
name. He was a Manu, possessing the majesty of each- 
hearken to me, 0 Bhaguri. * * * § 

40 He who listens constantly to the entire story of Uttama 
and also tho birth of Uttama, f never experiences enmity • 

41 nor shall tho man who listens to it or roads it over incur 

42 separation from his loved wife or sons or kinsmen. Heaikou 
while 1 tell thee, 0 brahman, about his manv-antara, 
and hear who was the Indi a in it and who were tho gods 
and rishis. 

Canid LXXIII. 

End of the Auftania Manv-antara. 

Mdrkandeya names the gods of the Autfama Manv-antara (ncl 
their lordy and mentions the kings and fishis. 

Markandoya spoke : 

1 Listen while I speak of tho gods, the Indra, tho rishis, the 
kings in this third manv-antara of tho Praja-pati Auttama. 

2 Thus the first group o/ gods was tho Sva-dliaman8,t who 
acted according to their name ; and anotlier also, the second 

3 group of tho thirty gods^ was the Satyakhyas. § Now the 
gods in the third group were the S'ivdkhyas, || 0 best of 
munis : now they were auspicious by nature ; they are de- 

4 dared to have destroyed sin. And the fourth group of the 
gods therein was the Pratardanakliyas,ir 0 best of mums, 

6 in tbe period of Auttama Manu. And the gods in the tifth 
group therein were tho Va^a-vartius,** 0 brahman ; now 

* Bhdgure ; see canto Iviii, veree 40, note J. It ia said to be a patro y 

of Kraustituki. ^ ; 

f But Auttama seoms preferable : read e'aivauttamasya for c aivo a? 

t “ Deities who reside in their own dwoHinffs. ” 

§ “ Named after truth,” or “ named as true.” 

It “ Named as auspicious.” 

^ “ Named Pratardanas.” ‘ . u g syU*- 

** “Those who are obedient to another's will.” This half line « ^ 

ble too much. 



auttama’s manv-antara. 


437 


fill of ihem indeed had natures corresponding to tlieir 
•; iKimos, 0 great muni. And these five gi’oups of gods are 
reported to have fed of the sacrifices All tlie groups were 
twelve in the manv-antara which appertained to that best 
; of Manus. Their lord* was illustrious ; may ho become the 
spiritual preceptor in the three worlds ! Having offered a 
^ hundred sacrifices, he was verily named Sii-santi.f Now 
a song, which is embellished with the words composing 
his name in order to avert portents emanating from him, is 
P suiighy men on the eartli oven to this day, — “ Sweetly serene 
is tlio kindly ruler of tho gods, he bestows sweet serenity.” Ho 
is attended by tho S'ivas and Satyas + and otlier groups of 
I) gods and also by the Vasa- vartins.§ Without birth || xoas 
he, ahsolntely [)uro, supernatural. 

Veiy powerful and valiant were that Mann’s sons, renowned, 

1 like unto tho thirty gods. The descendants of his sons ruled 
over the eartli as kings during the manv-antarti of that 
'1 Mann of supremo splendour. Of his four ages were reckoned 
in truth soyoiity-one and a half, of tJie ages called Krita, 
Ireta and so on, which I have declared in the account of 
//leAgo. By tho innate splendour of tho austerities of that 
most excellent liigh-souled Manu his seven sous became the 
Mven risliis in that period. 

1 This third manv-antara I have declared to thee. Now the 
^ fonrth is called tlio period of Manu T.arnasn, who born of an 
aminars womb illuminated the world with his fame ; hearken 
' to the birth of that Manu, as I tell thee, 0 hreihman. And 
die exploits of all those ^ Manus transcend the cognizance 
ef the senses ; and the birth of tho high-souied Manus is to be 
i'-nowu as sicch^ and their majesty also. 

* tii'ho 

t ‘'sweetly sorono. ” 

^ See veraoa 2 and 3 above. 

laisa-vartinah read m^a-vartinaiff. f 
or “a leader. » 
t'or Quiundm road amishdm ? 



488 


CANTO LXXIY. 


Canio LXXIV. 

About the Tdmasa Manv-atttara. 

King 8va-rdsh{ra being driven from his kingdom by 
became an ascetic^ and met his deceased queen in the shape of a 
doe during a great flood. — He begot a son by her who became the 
Manu Tdmasa.— The gods, rkhis and kings of that 'manv^aidaiQ 
are named, 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 There lived on the earth a famous king, by name Sva- 
rash^ra, valiant, an offerer of many sacrifices, wise, invincihio 

2 in battles. The sun being invoked by hia ministers gave 
liim a very long life ; and ho had a hundred happy wives, 

3 0 biihman. The wives of that long-lived king were not 
very long-lived, 0 muni ; and in time his servants, ministers 

4 and people came to their end. And he, being bereft* * * § of his 
wives and his servants who were his equals in age, was 
dejected in mind atid dwindled in vigour day and night. 

6 A neighbouring king named Vi-marda ousted him then from 
his kingdom, failing as he was in vigour, deprived of his 

6 devoted adherents, greatly afflicted. And being ousted t 
from his kingdom, he went to a forest, despairing in mind, 
and taking up his abode on a sandbank in the Vitasta, 

7 illustrious as he was, be practised austerities. Undergoing 
tliefive fires in the hot season, J exposing himself nabdio 
the showers § in the rainy season, and lying m water m 
the cold season, he lived abstaining from food, sinot m '•» 

devout rites. ^ . 

8 Afterwards there occurred, while he practised his aus eii i » 
a great flood day after day in the rainy season, wi . 

9 clouds pouring down rain incessantly. The east cou i 

• For yMo leMyakto (see verse 6) ? The Bombay editioo reads «»'»■ 

f For dyutam read c'yutah ? 

X Four ares around and the sun over-head j see Mantuvi. ■ 

§ For alhrankasHHkali read aihrdoakaiikai, nbioh is the wo 
vi. 23. 



KINO SVA-R/SHTRA MEETS A DOE. 439 

distltignished, nor the south, nor the west, nor the north ; 

10 everything looked as if besmeared with darkness. The king, 
forced then in the excessive flood to seek the river bank, 
could not reach it although seeking it, being carried away 

11 by the exceedingly furious current. Now the king, after 
being carried a long way by the swollen water, chanced upon 

12 a Rauha doe in the water and seized her by her tail. Borne 
along by that flood he passed over the surface of the land 
hither and thither in the darkness ; at length he reached a 

13 bank. Crossing an expanse of mud, which was extremely 
hard to be crossed, the king being drawn along by her still, 

14 gained another charming forest. The Rauha doe dragged 
the illustrious king along in the darkness there, while he 
clung to her tail, enfeebled throughout his nervous system. 

15 And he experienced an intense pleasure which arose from 
toiicliing her, as he wandered continually in the darkness, 

lO witli his mind drawn out in love to hcT, Perceiving that 
the king was enamoured of her, and was engrossed in touch- 
ing her back, the doe veiily spoke to him within that 
forest; — 

h “ Why dost thou touch my back with trembling hand ? 
18 Quite otherwise has this affair turned out, 0 king. To no 
unsuitable object has thy mind gone forth ; not unapproach- 
able am I to thee, 0 king ; but this Lola creates an obstacle 
to my union with thee."’ 

Markandeya spoke : 

And the king, on hearing the doe say thus, was aroused to 
curiosity and spoke thus to the Rauha doe. 

“dell we, who art thou ? How dost thou, a doo, speak 
language* like human beings ? And who is this Lola who 
creates an obstacle to my union with thee ? ” 

The doe spoke : 

I was formerly thy darling UtpaRvati, 0 king, thy 
thy queen above a hundred others^ Dfidha-dharivan’s 
‘Jaugliter. 

* ifl' / 

‘1/ -^ikyaii^ seems preferable asrtwo words and not a compound. 



440 


CANTO LXXIV. 


The king spoke : 

22 What deed then didst thou do,* that thou hast reached this 
animal condition ? And true to thy husband, devoted to 
righteousness, such as thou wert^ how hast thou thus become 
like this ? 

The doe spoke : 

23 While a girl in my father’s home I went with my com- 
panions to a wood to play, and saw a deer united with a 

24 doe. Then approaching closo I struck the doe. Frightened 
by me she fled away, and then tho deer enraged said to me 

25 “ Silly girl ! why art thou so insane ? Fie on this thy evil 
disposition, by which tliou hast rendered this period of 

26 impregnation fruitless for me ! ” Frightened then at hearing 
him speaking language as of a human being, I said to him- 
“ Who art thou who hast reached this animal cowditmV' 

27 Thereupon he replied— “ I am son of the rishi Nirvriti-cakslnis, 
by name Su-tapas, but being enamoured of this doe I became 

28 a deer, and followed ber in love, and she longed for me in 
this wood. Thou bast parted us, 0 naughty girl, therefore 

29 I inflict a curse on thee.” And I said— “ Knowing thee not. 
I have sinned, 0 muni ; bo gracious ! deign not Sir to ca^t a 

30 curse on me.” And so addressed the muni gave me this 
reply, 0 king, — “I do nob inflict a curse on thee, if lma]j 

31 give myself to thee.” And I said— “ I am not a doo, nor 
of deer-like form ; in this wood thou wilt find another doe; 

32 meanwbilo let tby feeling towards me be repressed.” When 
thus addressed be exclaimed, his eyes red with auger, and 
his lower lip quivering— No doe am 1’ saidst tliou. 

33 thou shalt become a doe, 0 silly girl.” Then exceeding J 
agitated I fell prostrate before the highly-onraged muni, 
who had resumed his own form, and exclaimed J 

34 gracious ! ” again and again ; “ a girl is unskilled in ivoi( 

henco I spoke as I did] assuredly women 

35 father choose a husband themselves ; and since , 

father, bow can I choose, 0 best of munis, or do wionp 

* road hm tvayd vai kritaifi- 



BIRTH OP MANU T^MASA. 


441 


^ at thy feet I bow, be gracious, my lord ! ” While thus I lay 
prostrate, exclaiming repeatedly, “Be gracious! be gracious,” 
0 high-minded hing^ that lordly muni spoke— “ My uttered 

1 37 word never goes amiss. After thy death thou shalt become a 

I doe in this very wood in thy next birth ; and in the doe- 

1 3S condition tliou shalt conceive within thee the muni Siddha- 
virya’s mighty-armed son named Lola, 0 proud lady ; and 

39 when the embryo is conceived within thee, thou shalt re- 
member thy former life; regaining thy memory, thou 

40 slialtalso utter human language. After his birth thou shalt 
bo freed from the doe-condition and bo honoured by thy 
husband ; thou shalt attain to the worlds which * are un- 

41 attainable by those who commit sin. And he, Lola, mighty 
in valour, shall indeed strike down his father’s foes, and 
conquer the whole earth and then become a Manu.” 

12 Incurring this curse I died and reached this brute con- 
dition, f and through thy touch that embryo has come into 

13 being in my womb. Hence I say — To no unsuitable object 
has thy mind gone forth in coming to me, nor am I unap- 
proachable ; X hut this Lola who is conceived within mo 
creates an obstacle. 


Markandeya spoke : 

11 Being thus addressed the king also experienced intense 
joy then, thinking, “ My son will conquer my enemies and be- 
come a Manu on the earth.” 

lo Afterwards the doe brought forth that son marked with 
the auspicious marks ; and at his birth all created things 
Iti rejoiced, and especially the king. At the birth of that 
mighty son the doe was freed from the curse and atlained 
1^ to the sublime worlds. Then all tbe rishis assembled, 0 
best of muuis, and perceiving the future prosperity of that 
liigh-souled child gave him a name— “ He was born of his 
mother while she existed as an ignorant animal, § and the 


* For ya read ye. 

t For tirynhtvam read tiryaktvam. 

+ ugamyo read agamy d ? see vorse 18 . 



442 


CANTO LXXIV. 


woj Id was enveloped in darkness,* heim he shall be Tamasa " 

49 Then Taniasa was brought up by the father in the forest 
When he reached the age of intelligence he spoke thus to his 

60 father, 0 best of munis, — “Who art thou, dear father? 
and how am I thy son ? and who was my mother ? and whj 
hast thou come here ? Tell me this truly.” 

Markancjcya spoke: 

51 Thereupon his father, the large-armed king, narrated to 
his son how he was ousted from his kingdom and all other 

62 events. And on hearing all that, ho invoked the sun and 
obtained celestial weapons together with tlio spells that 

63 controlled them in their completeness. Having mastered 
the use of the weapons he vanquished those enemies, and 
bringing them near his father released them, when they weie 
permitted by the father to depart, observing thushnoM 

64 righteousness. And his father, after seeing his son’s face 
happy, quitted his body and attained to the worlds, which he 
had won for his own by austerities and sacrifices. 

65 He having conquered the whole earth as king by the name 
Tdmasn, became a Manu by name Tamasa. Hear about his 

66 manv-antara: who were the gods, who was the iuler,t andwlio 
was the lord of the gods, and who were the fishis, and who 
were that Manu’s sons, the guardians of the world. 

67 The Satyas and next tho Su-dhis, the Su-rupas, and the ! 
Haris, these were the classes of gods therein, seven and , 

58 twenty in number, 0 muni. And S'ikhi Indra, mighty, great | 
ill valour, distinguished by a hundred sacrifices, became the 

69 lord of those gods. Jyotir-dhaman, Pfithu, Kavya, C aiti-a, 
Agni, and Valaka, and also Pivara, these seven, were the 

60 seven fishis, 0 brahman. And Nara, Kshauti, and Santa, 
Danta, J^nu, Jahgha and others were lAmasa’s sons, very 
mighty kings. 

♦ Tamasd. 

t For yaUjpatir read tat-patir, according to the Bombay edition. 



STORT OP THE l^LISHI RITA•Vifc^ 


443 


Canto LXXV. 

Raivata's Manv-antara. 

The Tislii ^ita-vdc had a son who was had because horn under 
fU constellation Bevati, and the fishi made the constellation 
fall HU III his curse, A daughter teas horn therefrom whom the 
rishi Pramnea adopted and named Uevati. — King Durgama 
visited Prainuc a and married Bcvatl^ and the constellation was 
restored to Us place at t he marriage. — They had a son, the Ma 7 iu 
llaivata . — The gods, rishis and kings m his period are named. 

Markandoya spoke : 

1 Moreover the fifth Mann was tlie famous one named 
lUivata. Listen ! I tell thee fully about liis birth. 

2 There was au illustrious and famous fishi named Rita-vac^ 
To tijafc high-soul cd fishi who had no son a son was born at 

.3 the termination of the constellation Revati. lie performed 
tliu birth ceremony and all other rites for that son according 
to tlie ordinances, and also the investiture with the sacred 
1 thread and other ceremonies. And ho was of bad disposition, 
0 muni. And even from his soil's very birth the that 

lordly nuini, became afflicted with a lingering disease; his 
0 mother suffered extreme pain, being attacked with leprosy 
and other diseases. And his father in his affliction pondered — 

6 “ Why is this ? ” And that his son also, being exceedingly 
^'icked in mind, took another muni’s son’s wife whom he met. 

^ Tlien dejected in mind Rita-vac spoke thus— “ Better is it 
^ tor men to have no son than a bad sou ! A bad son is always 
causing trouble to bis father’s and mother’s heart; and casts 
downwards his ancestors who dwell in Svarga. He benefits 
not Ills friends, be satisfies not his ancestors, he causes suf- 
teiing to his parents — fie on the birth of that son who 
commits evil deeds I Happy are they whose sons are com- 
’^’cnded by all the world, who benefit others, who are peaceful, 
^lio are devoted to good work ! Uneasy and dull, averse to 
J 2 . world, tending towards bell and not towards beatitude 
^ oui’ life which depends on our son. A bad son brings 



444 


CANTO LXXV. 


misery on his friends and joy to bis adversaries, audh 
assuredly brings untimely old age on liis parents.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

13 With his thoughts thus burning through the conduct of 
his exceedingly perverse son, the muni questioned Garga* 
as to what had happened. 

Rita-vad spoke: 

14 Keeping my religious vows strictly I learned the Vedas 
formerly according to precept ; after acquiring the Vedas 

15 I married a wife according to precept. Along with my wife, 
the rites to bo performed, those enjoined by revealed religioo, 
those enjoined by tradition, the oblations made in firo with 
tho exclamation YSbsh&i, I have never failed to perform to the full 

16 unto this day, 0 groat muni. Following the ordinances 
prescribed concerning conception, without gratifying f my lust 
and in order to have a son, T begot this ton, I who fear tk 

17 hell named Put, 0 muni. Is it through his own fault or 
through my fault, that this scn\ has been born, bringing 
suffering on us and causing grief to his kinsmen by liis 
had disposition, 0 muni ? 

Garga spoke: 

18 0 best of munis, this thy son was born at the termination 
of the constellation Revati ; therefore he causes thee suffering 

19 since be was born at an evil time. This is no transgression 
by thee nor yet by his mother, nor by thy family ; but 
the termination of Revati befell as tho cause of his bad 
disposition. 

Rita-vad spoke : 

20 Because this my only son's had disposition sprang from tlie 
termination of Revati, lot that Revati therefore fall quickly 

Markanejeya spoke : 

21 When he uttered this curse, the constellation Revati veny 
fell, while all the world beheld with minds pervaded with afl 

^ See canto Ixxii, verse 27. 
t For anurundhyatd read anurudhyatd. 



445 


birth of REVATi PROM THE CONSTELLATION. 

•j’j And the coiiBtellation B/Cvati, falling on and 

around the mountain Kumuda, suddenly illuminated* its 
23 woods, ravines and cascades. And the mountain Kumuda, 
by renson of her down-fall, became famous as Raivataka,t 
a mountain exceedingly charming through the whole earth. 
2t Blit the beauty of that constellation became the lake Pahka- 
jini;t therefrom a maiden was born then exceedingly 
25 brilliant in form. The rnuni Pramuca saw her who was 
born from Revati’s beauty, and so gave her a name, the name 
2G Revati, 0 Uuaguri. And illustrious Pramuca nourished her, 
who had been born near his hermitage, in that same land. 
27 Now .seeing the maiden grown to the bloom of youth, and 
beautifully formed, the muni bothought— “ Who may be 
2.^ lier hu.sband ? ” While he thus pondered a long time passed 
by, 0 muni; nor did the great nmni light upon a bridegroom 
equal to her. At length the muni Pramuca entered his room 
where the sacred fire burned, to ask Agiii about a bridegroom 
for her. Agni replied to the questioner,— “ Great in strength, 
great in valour, kind of speech, fond of i ighteousness, the 
king named Durgama shall assuredly be her husband.’' 

Markandoya spoke : 

31 And immediately there reached his hermitage, 0 muni, in 
the course of hunting that wise king Durgama, who was 
f^prung from Priya-vrata’s lineage, great in sti-ength and 
prowess, Vikrama-^ila’s son, born of Kalindi’s womb. I’he 
>3 king entered the hermitage and, not seeing the pshi, hailed 
the slender maiden with the word “ Dear ! ” and asked 

^ The king spoke: 

Whither has he gone from this hermitage, the adorable 
loidly muni? I wish to pay him my affection ‘here. Tell him 
60 , 0 bright maiden ! 

Markandoya spoke : 

fhe brahman, who was in the room where the sacred fire 

or ^hdshaydmdsa read bhdsaydmdm, 

' Scepnge 289 note* 

^ a lake of lotusea " 



446 


CANTO LXXV. 


36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 


43 


44 


46 

46 


47 


burned, heard that his speech and the hailing her as “ Deari" 
and came out in haste. The muni saw high-souled king Darga. 
ma, bearing the royal insignia, bowing respectfully before him 
Now on seeing him ho spoke at once to his disciple Gautama 
— “ Gautama ! bring quickly the argha offering for this king 
At length he has come alone after a long time, this king and 
in particular my son-in-law ; I deem him worthy of the argha." 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

Thereat the king pondered on the reason for his using the 
term son-in-law and understood it not ; therefore keeping 
silence the king accepted the ai’gha. When the king had 
taken a seat and accepted the argha, the brahman, tlie great 
muni, addressed him a welcome — “ I trust thou farest wll 
in thy homo, in thy treasury, and army, in thy friends, in 
thy servants and ministers, and in thy own self whereon 
rests every thing, 0 king of mighty arm ! And thy wife fares 
well ; since she is indeed at hand, I nsk not therefore about 
her, but I hope thy other wives fare well ! ” 

The king spoke : 

Through thy favour I have no ill-fortune any where, 0 
strict observer of vows ; and my curiosity is aroused, what 
wife have I here, 0 muni ? 


The pishi spoke : 

Most noble Revati, beautiful even through the throe woiiJs, 
is thy wife of exquisite figure ; dost thou not know her, 0 
king ? 


The king spoke : 

My lord ! Su-bhadra, Santa’s daughter, Kaveri’s daughter, 
and Su-jdta born in Su-rash^ra, and Variitha’s daughter 
Kadamba, Vipitha, and Nandini — these I know as my 'viu i 
0 brahman ; they remain at ray home. I know not Revati> 
adorable Sir ; who then is she ? 


The rishi spoke: 

She is this maiden of beautiful . complexion, whom t ‘O 
didst address just now as “ Dear ! Hast thou fmg^ 

0 king P Worthy of praise is this lady of thy house . 



KING DUEGAMA MARRIES REVATI. 


4i7 


The king spoke ; 

43 In truth I said so, but no improper feeling had I, 0 muni. 
Deigti not to be angry with mo for this, I beseech thee, 
Sir ! ■ * 

The rishi spoke : 

49 Thou speakest truly, 0 king ; no improper feeling hadst 
thou. Thou didst utter this word, being impelled by Agni, 

50 0 king. I asked Agni, “ Who shall he her husband ? O 
king i and ho replied that thou thyself. Sir, shouldst verily 

51 bo her bridegroom this day. Take hor then ; I give thee 
the maiden, 0 king, and thou didst hail her as “ Dear ! 
How dost thou decide ? 

Markandeya spoke : 

52 At his address the king then kept silence ; and the ^ishi 

53 prepared to perform her wedding ceremony. The maiden 
spoke a little tiling to her father who was prepared for the 
marriage, her countenance bent downward with respect— 

)1 “If thou lovest me, dear father, deign to give me a favour; 
pel form then my marriage in the constellation Hevati, since 
I huvo won thy favour." 

The rishi spoke: 

w Fair maiden ! the constellation Revati is not declared to be 
one that unites with the moon. The constellations appro- 
priate to thy marriage are others, 0 beautiful-browed ! 

The maiden spoke : 

^ Dear father ! without that constellation the time appears 
to me unprofitable. How may the marriage of such as me 
take place at an unprofitable time ; 

The rishi spoke : 

dhe famous ascetic named Rita- vac was enraged against 
Hevati ; in his anger he caused the constellation to fall down. 

; I have promised thee as wife to this king, 0 maiden 
'yth intoxicating eyes ; and if thou desirest not the marriage, 
have fallen into a strait f 



448 


CANTO LXXV. 


The maiden spokO : 

59 Dear father ! Why did that muni Rita- v ad perform aus 
terities in that fashion ? Have I nought to do with thee as 
father ? Am I the daughter of an unworthy brahman ? 

The rishi spoke : 

60 Thou art not the daughter of an unworthy brahman, nor of 
an ascetic, 0 maiden. Thou art daughter to mo who am 
striving to make other gods.* 

The maiden spoke : 

61 If my father is a practiser of austerities, why then does 
he not raise this constellation to the sky and perform my 
wedding under the constellation ? 

The rishi spoke : 

62 Be it so ! prosperity bo thine, fair maiden ; be thou affec- 
tionate ! I raise the constellation Revati to the moon’s path- 
way for thy sake. 

Markandeya spoke : 

63 Then by the power of his austerities the great muni placed 
the constellation Revati as before in conjunction with the 

64 moon, 0 brahman. And full of affection he celebrated his 
daughter’s marriage accompanied with sacred texts accordiug 

65 to rule, and said to his son-in-law again, “ Tell mo, 0 king, 
what shall I give thee as a wedding gift ? I will give even 
that which is hard to be obtained, for irresistible are my 
austerities.” 

The king spoke : 

66 Of Mann Svayambbuva’s lineage t I sprung, 0 mam 
I choose as gift a son who shall reign over a manv-anl»» 
through thy favour. 

The rishi spoke : 

67 This thy wish shall be fulfilled. As a Manu thy son 
enjoy the whole earth, and shall be wise in righteous 
0 king. 

• Devdn ; this sooraa errotiooas, but the Bombay edition reads the ^ 
t For santato read santatau f 



raivata's manv-antara. 


449 


Mdrkan^eya spoke : 

Then taking her the king went to his own city. From him 
was born of Revati a son, the Mann Raivata, possessed of 
all righteousness, unconquered by mankind, who understood 
the meaning of every sacred book, who knew the Vedas, the 
sciences and the books of practical arts. 

Hear most composedly, 0 brahman, about the gods, the 
munis, the lord of the gods and the kings in his manv-antara, 
as I mention them. The gods therein were the Su-medhases. 
And the kings wore Vaikuntha and Amitablia, fourteen and 
fourteen, 0 braliman. And now the lord of those very four 
classes of gods was named Vibhu, who was the rogarder of 
a liundred sacrifices, 0 king. Hiranya-loinan, Veda-sri, and 
also Hrddli va-babu, Veda-babu, and Su-dhaman and the 
great muni Parjanya, and illustrious Vasishtha who was 
thoroughly versed in the Vodas and Vedanta— these were 
the seven risbis also in Manu Raivata’s period. Bala-bandhu 
mighty in valour, and also Su-yasbtavya, and Satyaka and 
others were Manu Jiaivata’a sons. 

Now are the Manus down to Raivata, whom I have 
told ihco about; they were indeed connected with Svayam- 
bliuva, oxcejit* Manu Svarodisba.f 


Canto LXXVI. 


The Siorth Manv-antara. 

C akshnsha tvlien an infant was taken by a hag from his 
P<i^cnts and changed for the son of king Vi-krdntay and was 
vp as a prince. — On reaching boyhood he revealed the 
P^aid., and abandoning his prince' j state became an ascetic. 

made him the sixth Manu. — The deities^ rishis and 
icings of his period are mentioned. 


% p 

t ^ith the Bombay edition, 

boar ^ edition adds a verse within brackets. “He who may 

4ll aablimo story of tliese Manu.'* conlinually, is delivered from 

• ^ 'Attains to the world that ia earnestly desired." 

57 



460 


CANTO LXXVI. 


Mdrkandeya spoke : 

1 Thns I have narrated these live manv-antaras to tbco* 
Hear about this sixth period, ihat of the Manu C’akshusha 

2 In another birth he was born from the eyef of the siipreme 
deity* hence in this birth also he retained the condition + of 

3 C'akshusha, 0 brahman. § His mother repeatedly makes him 
prattle |( as he lies in her lap after his birth, and embraces 

4 him lovingly and then again makes him prattle.f Being 
indeed born with a recollection of his previous existences he 

5 laughed as he lay on his mother’s lap. His mother said to 
him angrily then — “ I am frightened ; what is this, my child, 
that there is laughter in thy mouth ? Thou art horn with 
premature intelligence. Perhaps thou scest something 
bright ! ” 

The son spoke : 

6 Dost thou not see, a cat in front wishes todevonrmc? 
And another, the hag who seizes newly-born children,'^* liaa 

7 vanished. And since thou, lady, looking on mo lovingly in 
thy affection for thy son, dost keep on making me prattle and 

8 dost embrace me much, while thy hair rises upandthiuo 
eyes are suffused with tears springing from love, therefore 

9 I chanced to laugh. Hear also the reason of it. The cat 
intent on its own object looks on me who am attached io 
thee; and the other also, the hag who seizes ncwly-bora 

10 children, has vanished. Just as these two, with hearts solici- 
tous for their own solf-intorest,tt wore busy over me, even 

* For tava read tathd ? The Bombay edition reads mnyd, 

t C'ahshusJiah. % Or “ appellation.” 

§ The Bombay edition inserts an explanatory vorsehere — “ Bhadra, v^ifeof 
the high-soalod royal yishi An*amitra, gave birth to a son, tvlio urts very 
pure, who reraemhored his former lives, a very sovereign.’’ Sco verso 27. 

II JJl-ldpya, Ul-lap is not given as a verb in the dictionary ; 
given as a noun meaning “calling out in a loud voice; change of voitc^^ 
grief, sickness, &c. but those meanings seem inadmissible 
ul-ldpana in canto xxv, verse 10. 

^ VUldpayati. ** Jdta-hdrin{ } see canto li, verse 102. ^ 

+t For anigdha-hpidayd read anigdha-hridaye to agree with etc pra- . ' 

the Bombay edition roads. • 



THE CHILDHOOD OP MANTT C^i^KSHUSHA. 


451 


so thou appearesfc to me to bo engaged in thy own self-iii- 

11 tcrest. But the cat and the hag who seizes newly-born 
cliildren aimed at enjoying me ; thou on the other hand de- 
sircst to obtain good results from me which shall bo enjoyed 

12 pfiadiially. Thou dost not know me who I am, nor the benefit 
that I have conferred. Our meeting is for no very long time, 

13 a period of five and seven days. Nevertheless thou lovest 
and cinbracest me excessively with tears in thine eyes; 
sincerely thou callest mo “ dear child ” and “ lovely darling.*^ 

The mother spoke : 

11 “It is not for the sake of a benefit that I embrace thee 
lovingly, my darling, nor shall I be deprived of thee, if this 

15 shall be for thy pleasure.* I have now relinquished any 
si'lf-interest which shall accrue to mo from thco.”t 

h'l So saying she left him and went out of the lying-in house. 
The hag Jata-liarini then seized him v/hen left, Ins body and 
external organa of sense being apathetic, his heart and soul 

17 pure. Having seized the’ boy she placed him then as a now- 
horn child on the bed of king Vi-krauta’s wife, and took his 

18 new-born son and carried himj to another house, and tak- 
ing a son from that house she, Jata-harini, in regular course 

19 devoured this third c/wZd. Now carrying children off in succes- 
sion she devours the third child^ totally devoid of pity ; but 
she makes a substitution thus with the other two day after day, 

20 And then king Vi-kranta performed the purificatory rites, 

21 wliich appertain to a prince, for that very son ; and as father 
hing Vi-kranta gave him the name Ananda according to rule, 

22 king himself filled with intense joy. Now when as a youth 
he had donned the sacred thread, his spiritual guide ordered 
him — “Approach before thy mother respectfully and salute 

‘8 her!” Hearing that his guru’s speech, ho smiled and spoke 
thus— “Which of my mothers shall I praise, her who gave 
uio birth or her who has nourished me ? ” 


•This 

tPor 

+ jy 


seoma a little involved, but both editions read alike, 
falto read tvatto, 

tvam road tam ? but both editions read tvam, 



452 


CANTO LXXVr. 


The guru spoke : 

24 Not the latter, indeed ! Thy mother who bore thee nob] 
youths is Rutha’s daughter, Vi-kraiita's chief queen, Haimi ' 
by name. 

Annnda spoke: 

25 She ia tho mother of C'aitra, who dwells in the village 
Vi^ala, as son of the leading brahman Bodha, and who was 
bom of her. 1 come from elsewhere. 

The guru spoke ; 

26 Whence art thou ? tell mo, 0 A'nanda. What C'aitra affain 
dost thou mention ? It appears to bo a great difficulty. Where 
waat thou born ? What dost thou say of this ? 

Ananda spoke: 

27 I was born in a kshatriya king’s house of his wife Giri- 
bhadrd, 0 brahman. The hag that steals new-born children 

28 took me ; she left me here, and taking Haimini’s son also 
carried him further to the house of the leading brahman 

29 Bodha, and devoured tho brahman Bodha’s son. Ilaimini'sson 
has been consecrated with the sanctifying rites of a brahman 

80 there. I have been consecrated here by thee ns guru, illiis* 
trious Sir, I must obey thy command : wliich molhr shall 
I approach, O gum ? 

Tho guru spoke : 

31 Extremely intricate, my child, is this great difficulty that 
has befallen. I understand it not at all, for my wits aw 
wandering as it were through enchantment. 

Ananda spoke : 

32 What case of enchantment is there here, while the world 
is thus constituted? Who is whose son, 0 briiliman 

33 Or who is not whose kinsman ? Beginning from his birth, 
whatever man enters into connexions, tho others who 
connected with him are made to pass away by death, 

34 brahman. Moreover when he is born here, whatever con 
nexion he has with kinsmen, that also ceases with tho en 

35 ing of his body. This is the entire process. Heuce I ® 

“ Who is not a kinsman to one who dwells in this wj>r 



c'aKSHUSHA APPOTNTRD to be a MAN0. 453 

existence? Or who is a kinsman for ever?” Is thy mind 
bewildered ? I kave had two fathers indeed in this very 
birth, and two mothers ; is it wonderful that it should he 
37 otherwise in the recurring birth of the body ? Being such, I 
TS'ill practise austerities. Do thou bring hero C'aitra, who is 
indeed the son of this king, from the village Visala. 

Markandoya spoke : 

33 Thereupon the king was astoiiislied with his wives and 
kinsmen; withdrawing his feeling of ownership from that 
39 boy, lie permitted him to depart to tlie forest. Fetching his 
son C'aitra ho made him worthy of the kingdom, after 
honouring the brahman who brought him up in the belief 
tliat ho was his son. 

to And ho, Ananda, a mere boy, practised austerities in the 
great forest, in order to consume away his actions which 
U were adversaries in tlie path to final emancipation* And 
to him then as ho practised austerities spoke the divine 
Praj;i-pati— “ Why art thou performing severe austerities 
my child? tell mo that.” 

A'nanda spoke: 

42 Desirous of purity of soul I perform austerities, adorable 
lord ! setting my face towards consuming the actions which 
tend to fetter mo. 

Brahma spoke : 

43 He who is lord over consumed actions is fit for final emanci- 
pation, not he who engages in action. Hence Sir ! thou shalt 
obtain final emancipation, when thou hast the lordship of 
goodness. Thou must be the sixth Maiiu ; go ; do accor- 
ilingly ! Enough of austerities for thee ! When thou hast 
done that, thou shalt obtain final emancipation. 

Markandeya spoke : 

Being thus exhorted by Brahra^, ho then the high-minded 
replied, “ So he it ! ” and wont directing himself to that 
^ pursuit. He ceased indeed from austerities. Turning him 
away from austerities Brahin^ addressed him as C'akshusha j 



454 


CANTO LXXVt. 


formerly he was known by that name ; ho became famous as 
Manu C'akshusha. 

47 lie married Vidarbh4, daughter of king TJgra, and begot 
by her sons celebrated for valour. 

48 Hear, 0 brahman, who were the gods of the period, uliilo 
he reigned over the manv-antara | and who were tlio rishig, 

49 and who was the Indra, and who were his sons. Tho gods 
therein were named Aryas ; they formed one group of cigU 
persons ; it was composed of those who had done famous 
deeds, who partook of the oblations at the sacrifice, 0 brah. 

50 man, of those who were famous for strength and valour, 
who wore hardly to be gazed at because of their lialo of 
splendour. And the second class of gods was called Pragu- 

51 tas, consisting of eight persons. There was another class 
of gods also called Bhavyas, consisting of just eight persous ; 
and a fourth class therein was called Yiitha-gas, which also 

52 consisted of eight persons. There were, moreover, other 
gods called Lekha in a fifth class also in that manv-antara, 

53 0 brahman ; those so named fed indeed on amrita. And 
the Indra was Mano-java, who offered a hundred sacrifice! 
and became their lord ; he tms reckoned the eater of a por 

54 tion of the sacrifices. And Su-medhas, and Vi-rajas, Havish 
mat, Un.nata, Madhu, Ati-ndraan, and Sahishnu were th 

55 seven fishis. Manu C'akshusha’s sons, chief of whom wer 
Uru,* Puru, and S'ata-dyumna, very great in strength, wer 

the kings of the earth. 

56 Thus I have narrated to thee tho sixth manv-antnra, 
brahman, both the birth and the exploits of^ high-soue 

57 C'akshusha. He who subsists at the present time is name 
Manu Vaivasvata ; hear from me about the gods an o 
chief personages in his, the seventh, period. 


* i'or read Ifru, 



STORY OP THE SUN AND HIS WIPE SANJNA. 


455 


Canto LXXVII. 

The Vaivasvata Manv-antara, 

The married Tvashfri's daughter Sanjndf and their child- 
rm u'ero Manu Vaivasvata and Yama — MdrJcandeya narrates^ 
how the Suns splendour was pared down by Tvashfri because she 
could not endure it, 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 Tlic Sun Martanda’s wife was Vi^va-karman’s illustrious 

2 (laughter, by name Safijua. The Sun begot of her a son, a 
Mami, of celebrated fame, learned in many sciences ; since 
he was Vivasvat’s son, he was called Vaivasvata in sooth. 

3 And Safijha used to shut her eyes when the Sun gazed on 
luT, aiul the Sun in anger thereat spoke sharply to Safijua — 

4 ‘‘Because thou dost always imprison thine eyes when tliou 
scost me, 0 silly one, thou shalt therefore give birth to Yama, 
the imprisoner * of mankind.” 

Markancleya spoke: 

5 Tlicrcupoii the goddess, unnerved by fear, became wild- 
eyed, and the Sun seeing her agitated glances addressed her 

C jigain — “Since thine eye-sight has become agitated, f now 
that thou bast seen me, thou shalt therefore give biith to a 
daughter, the river Vi-lola.”J 

Markandeya spoko : 

^ Hence through that her husband’s curse Yama verily was 
hern of her, and also Yamuna this famous and very great 

^ river. And it was with pain that Sahjila, the noble lady, 
cudiirod the Sun’s splendour ; and then unable to bear the 
‘'plendour she fell into thought — “What am I to do ? Where 
tmi I to go ? Where shall I go that T may find ease ? And 
liow shall the Sun, my husband, control his wrath ?” So 
pondering in many ways, the Praja-pati’s illustrious daughter 

^ play on the words sam-yama, yama and eam^yamana, 
t Tl ’ 

+ ‘18 incans the Yamunfi, see the next verso. This namo is not given 

111* (lictiouary and 1 have not met* with it elsewhere. 



456 


CANTO LXXVIT. 


then thought much of actually taking refuge with her father 

1 1 Thereupon the famous lady having resolved to go to he* 
father’s house fashioned her body, that the Sun loved in 

12 shadow-form, and addressed her shadoio-self — Remain thon 
here in the Sun’s house even as I ; and behave thou becom 

13 ingly to the children even as to the Sun. And though ques 
tioned say nothing of this my going away ; say always thia 
‘ I am she indeed, Sanjiia by name.* ” 

The Shadow- Sanj ha spoke : 

14 0 lady, I will obey thy order and will so declare, as far 
as sitffering my hair to bo seized and as far as undergoing 
curses ; it is performed indeed as far as drawing curses down 
upon myself 

15 The goddess'**, receiving this assurance^ then went to her 
father’s abode. Sho saw Tvashtfi there cleansed from stniii 

16 by means of austerities. And being honoured by him, 
karman, with much respect, she remained in her fatlior’s 

17 house sonio time, unreproaclied. Then her father spoke to 
the beautiful lady, his daughter, when she had dwclb there 
not very long, after praising her and prefacing liu speah 
with love and much respect — 

18 “Now while I have been seeing thoe my child, ilio days 
though very many may be reckoned as equal to half a mo- 

19 merit ; nevertheless righteousness suffers loss. Dwelling a 

long timo among kinsmen brings no good repute to women ; 
kinsmen hold a woman’s proper residence is in her husbands 

20 house. Such art thou, and thou art mated to a husband, the 
Sun, the lord of tho three worlds ; deign not ray daughter 

21 to dwell a long time in thy father’s house. Being such, gu 
thou to thy husband’s home. I am pleased ; thou hast been 
honoured by me. Thou must come again to see me, niy 
beautiful one.” 

MA-rkandeya spoke : 

22 Thus was sho admonished by her father then, and 
agreeing saluted her father respectfully and wont to 


* For davi road devi» 



457 


tAMA*S. UNftLtAr. BftHAVrOtJR. 

^ Northern Kurus, O muni, disliking the Sun’s heat, afraid of 
his splendour; and there she practised austerities, changed 
into a mare’s shape. 

24 The lord of day tliinking the shadoiv-form was SanjnA, begot 

25 of that other two sons and a charming daughter. Now the 
Shadow- Safi jnd was very affectionate to the other children 
just as to her own ; Safijna did not use to show special atten- 

!6 tion to her daughter and two sons daily by caresses * and 
otlier marks of pleasure. Manu accepted that ajfection from 
her ; Yama did not bear it patiently from her, and indeed he 
lifted his foot in anger to kick her, but, again moved with 
forbearance towards her, did not strike it against her body. 

28 Tliereupon, 0 brahman, the Shadow- Safijna in anger cursed 
Yama, her upper lip quiveiing slightly, and her delicate 

29 hand shaking — ‘^Because thou spurnest me, thy father’s 
wife, disrespectfully with thy foot, this thy foot shall there- 
fore fall this very day to the earth.” 

MArkaij(}eya spoko : 

30 Yama, terrified on hearing the curse that his mother had 
pronounced on him, went to his father and falling prostrate 
before him spoke • 

Yama spoke : 

31 0 father; this great marvel was never seen by any one, 
that a mother casting love away imprecates a curse on her 

32 eon. She is not mother to mo in the same way as Manu calls 
her his mother ; no mother would abandon her good qualities 
Iven towards sons devoid of good qualities. 

M^rkandeya spoke : 

^ Hearing this speech from Yama, the adorable Dispeller of 
<larkness called the Shadow-Saujha and asked her — “ Where 
basshegone?” And she answered — “I am Tvashtri’s daughter 

^ Saujfia, 0 god of fire, thy wife ; through thee these children 

^ ^ero begotten of me.” Now when, as Vivasvat was thus 
^^®8tioning her repeatedly, she did not speak /wr^/ter, the Sun 
Garaged thereat prepared to curse her. Thereupon she told 

For nalinddi read Idlanddt. with the Bombay edition* 

58 



458 


CAfJTO Lmilf. 


the Sun what had happened, and the god knowing the tmt] 
went to Tvaslitfi’s abode. 

87 Ho then paid honour to the Sun, the god honoured by 
three worlds, who had visited his house, with sublime faltl 

88 Vi4va-kj-it on being asked about Sanjna, then told him- 

' She came indeed here to my house, saying she had bee: 

89 rerily sent by thee/’ And the Snn, collecting bis mind i 
meditation, perceived her in mare’s shape practising austeri 

40 ties among the Northern Kurus, and the Sun understood tb 
purpose of her austerities, namely, ‘ May my husband becom 

41 mild in body, beautiful in form.’ “ Pare down my splendou 
now” quoth the Sun also to Sanj ha’s father Vi^va-karmai 

42 0 brahman. And Vi4va-karman thereupon pared down tb 
splendour of the year-revolving Sun, and obtains the praise 
of the gods. 

Canto LXXVIII. 

The Birth of Vaivasvata in the Sdvarnika Uanv-antara.* 

Mdrhandeya relates how the gods praised theSnn^iohath 
came of the splendotir pared off from the Sun^ and hmo the 
regained his wife-— He mentions the positions assigned toil 
Burt's children, 

Markandoya spoke: 

Then the gods and the dovarshis assembling praised i 
words the Sun, who is worthy of being praised by the entii 
three worlds. 

The gods spoke : ^ 

“ Adoration to thee who hast the nature of the Kic 
adoration to thee who hast the nature of theSaman ! adoratio 
to thee whose form has the nature of the Yajus! to 
8 hast the glory of the Sdmans ! Adoration to thee who ^ 
become the sole domain of knowledge, to the 
darkness ! to thee who hast the nature of pure light . 

♦ This title is a mistake as the canto shews. It should be the V ^ 

xnanv-antara. 



HYMN TO THE SUN. 


459 


4 purified, to the stainless Soull Adoration to the most excel- 
lent, to the desirable one ! to the utmost one, to the supreme 
Soul ! Adoration to thee whose nature pervades the entire 

5 universe, to the embodiment of Soul ! ’» (This fine delight- 
some eulogy must be heard by men with faith. Having become 
a disciple and having given also the guru his fee one may hear 

6 it rapt in meditation. It must not be heard by those wlio 
have l)ecome empty-handed. How may this become fruitful!) 

Adoration to the being who is the universal cause, to 

7 the goal* of men of wise intellect I Adoration to thee 
who hast the nature of the sun, who hast the nature of 
the bi illiant Soul I Adoration to thee, the illuminator, and 

8 adoration to the maker of day ! And adoration to the causer 
of night, to the maker of twilight and moon-light ! Thou 
art this universe, thou art the adorable I With thee, as thou 

9 revolvest above the world, the entire egg of Brahma, devoid 
of intelligence,! with everything moveable and immoveable, 
turns round I This universe when touched by thy rays 

) comes to life, pure 1 Water and other objects are cleansed 
by contact with thy rays ! Oblations, alms-giving and the 
other deeds which compose righteousness tend to no benefit 

I 80 long as this world has no contact with thy rays I All 
these Rie'es verily are thine ; these Yajushes on the other hand 

I are thine also ; and all the Samans drop from thy body I Since 
thou aro composed of the Rio', 0 lord of the world, and thou 
nidoed art composed of the Yajus, and composed also of 
the Sj'nnan, therefore, 0 lord, thou art composed of the 
three! Thou verily art Brahma’s form; thou art the 
highest and the lowest also ! Moreover thou art material and 
non-material ; thou art minute and yet thou dost exist in 
niassive shape ! Thou hast the form of Time, composed of 
niomeuts, kash^has and other divisions of time^ yet subject 
decay ! Be gracious ! Of thine own will mitigate tha 
*Jniato splendour of thy form ! ” 


* Niahfhdyai, 
t Or, illusory ; d-viddha* 



460 


bANTO LXXVIII. 


MArkandeya spoke : 

16 Being extolled thus by the gods and devarsbis, the im 
perishable globe ef splendour shed his splendour then 

16 That pm'tion of the Sun’s splendour which was composed of 

the Ric' became the earth, and of composed of 

17 the Yajus was made the sky, and that portion composed of 
tlie Saman became heaven.* Of the fifteen shreds of his 
splendour which were pared off by Tvash^rb the high-souled 

18 Tvashtri verily ninde Sarva's f trident, the discus of Vishnu 
and the Yasus, the very temble weapon of S'ankara, and 

19 Agni’s spear and Kuvera’s palki ; and all the fierce weapons 
of the others who are tl»e gods’ foes, and of the Yakshas and 

20 VidyMharas — those Vi4va-kpit made. And therefore the 
adorable loi*d bears only a sixteenth part. His splendour 
was pared off by Visva-karman into fifteen parts. 

21 Then assuming a horse’s form the Sun went to the Northern 

22 Kurus, and saw Sanjna there disguised in mare’s shape. And 
she, seeing him approaching and afraid of a strans^e male, 
went towards him face to face, intent on guarding her rear. 

23 And thereupon as the two met there and joined their noses, 
two sons issued from the mare’s mouth, Nasatya and Dasra; 

24 and at the termination of the flow of semen Revanta was 
born, bearing sword, shield and armour, mounted on horse- 

25 back, furnished with arrows and quiver. Then the Sun dis- 
played his own peerless form, and she gazing upon his true 

26 form felt a keen joy ; and tho Sun, the robber of the wateis, 
brought home this his loving wife Sanjna restoreil to her 
own shape. 

27 Her eldest son then became Yaivasvata Manu ; and ber 
second son Yama became the righteous-eyed judge because 

28 of tho curso. His father himself made an end of the curse 
by saying — “ Insects taking flesh J from his foot shall fall 

29 the earth,” And because he is righteous of eyo, 

* Svarga, * 

+ S'iva’s. ‘ 

X For tritiyo mdm samdddija, which is erroneous, the Bom 

reads kfimayo mdmsam dddya which is intelligible } but 

both editions read in the next line must then be changed to V®** 



4S1 


the sun’s sons and th* vaivasvata mant-antaba. 

to friend and foe, therefore the Dispeller of darkness ap- 
;i) pointed him over the southern region.* And Yainun4 be- 
came the river which flows from the recesses of mount 
Kalinds. The Atvins were made the gods’ physicians by 
:) their high-souled father. And Revanta also was appointed 
king of the Guhyakas. Hear also from me the places assign- 

2 cd to the Shadow-Safijna’s sons. The eldest son of the 
Shadow-Saiijna was equal to Mann the eldest-born; hence 

3 this son of the Snn obtained the title Shvarnika. He also 
slmll bo a Manu when Bali shall become Indra. He was 
appointed by his father as the planet Saturn among the 

1 planets. The third of them, the daughter named Tapati 
had a son Kuru, king of men, by king Sambarana.f 
5 Thus I describe the seventh period, that of Manu Vaivas- 
vatn, his sons, the kings, the rishis, the gods and the kin^ of 
the gods. ° 


Canto LXXIX. 

The praise of Vaivasvata in the SAvarnika Manv-antara.t 

lUtrhindeya names the deities, munis and kings of the Vai- 

Vdsviita Manv-antara, 

Markandeya spoke ; 

The A'dityas, the Vasus, tho Kudras, the Sidhyas, the 
V,sve-, ovas the Maruts, tl,e Bhrigus, and the Ahgirases are 
j fig it whereof the classes of gods are traditionally held 
" e composed. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras are to 
e 'nown as Ka^yapa's sons ; and the Sadhyas, the Vasus, § 

* 

“O®*- 

•“'tclui 6521 “’;“'^“’ ““■’'“•BWrata, Adi-P. xoiv. 3738-9; xov.8791, 

L 6616. 

§ This title as the canto shews. 

Murats ; for vasavo read maruto f But both 



462 


CANTO LXXIX. 


3 the Vi^ve-devas are the three groups of Dharma’s sons. Now 
the Bhrigu class of gods are the sons of Blifigu, and tk 
Angirases are the sons of Aiigiras. And it is the present 
creation. Maric'a is to be known as the lord at preseot 

4 And the Indra is named Urjjasvin, high-souled, the con. 
auraor of a share of the sacrifices. Now all those lords of 

6 the thirty gods, who have passed away, and who Lave 
not yet come, and who reign now, are to be known as having 
equal charactoiistics — all indeed are thousand-eyed, wielders 

6 of the thunder-bolt, smiters asunder of cities ; all are 
bestowers of gifts, pre-eminent, bearers of crests, walking 
like elephants ; tliey are all receivers of a hundred sacrifices, 

7 dominating created things with their splendour, possessing 
the good qualities of sovereignty with righteousness and 
other pure actions, masters of the past, the future and the 
present. 

8 Hear also about this triple ivorldy 0 brahman. Bhur-loka 
is traditionally held to be this earth ; antariksha i.s held to 
be the sky,* * * § and svarga is called heaveiif — such is spoken 
of as the triple-world. 

9 And Atri and Vasishtlia and the great rishi Ka^yapa, and 

10 Gautama, Bharadvaja and Visva-initra Kausika, and also 
the adorable son of the high-soulcd Ric'ika, namely Jamad- 
agni — these seven are thus the munis in tlie present period. 

11 IkshvakUjJ and Nabhaga,§ aud Dhrishta-^armati,|l and 


* Divah ; read divam, neuter P 

f JDivya. 

X Ikshvaku was the eldest son of Maim Vaivnsvata. He got Madhya 
de^a and was the ancestor of several dynasties, the chief of which was ili« 
Solar dynasty that reigned in Ayodhya (Hari-VamSa, x. 63 4, and xi 661 
M.-I3h., Sabha-P. xiii. 568-9 ; Ramay., Adi-K. Ixxii. and Ayodh.-K. cxix). 

§ Or Nabhaga. He was father or ancestor of famous king Ambaria 
(Hari-V., x. 613 and 641; M.-Bh., Dro^a-P. Ixiv; Santi-P. xxix- 993-7, 
ocxxxiv. 8597 ; and AnuSas.-P. cxxxvii. 6252). . ^ 

II This is given as a single n.amo, but should be two; thus for 
iarmdtir read Dhrish(ah Shrydtir, “ Dhrishta and S'aryiti " according 
Bombay edition. Dhyislita or Dhrishnu was ancestor of the P ^ 
kshattriyas (Hari-V., x. 613 and 642). Barmati should be 



tHE SAVARNIKA MANV^ANtAftA. 4^3 

2 fnmous Narishyanta ,* Nabhagaf and Dislita,|: and K:uri5sha,§ 
and Prasliadhra,|| world renowned Vasu-matf— these are 
the nino celebrated sons of Mann VaiTasvata. 
j I have declared this Vaivasvata period to thee, 0 brdhtnan. 
When ho hears and reads this, a man forthwith is freed from 
all sins and gains great merit, 0 best of munis. 


Canto LXXX. 


The SAvarnalca Afanv-antara, 

Um-kandeya names the rishis, gods and kings of that period. 
Kraushtuki** spoke : 

1 Thou hast told mo+t about these seven Manns, Svayambhnva 
and tlie rest, the gods, the kings and muni's which ruled in 

2 their periods. Tell mo, 0 great muni, of the seven other 
JIanus which shall follow in this kalpa, and the gods and 


Faryita, he dwelt in the country around the Gulf of Cambay, and founded 
adjnasty which reigned in Anarta (Hari-V., a. 613 and 642-9; M.-Bh. 
'rnn-F. crxi. 10312, and oxxiij Anusas.-P. xxx. 1946; S'ata-p. Brah. iv, l! 

6; and pnge 3G8 note §§), 

• Or Narisli^-a ; he is said to hare been the progenitor of the S'akas 
(nari>V., X. 614 and 641). 

+ This and the next name should apparently be read as one, viz., for 
<^M,o ditihta read Ndhhagddish(a, or better, Ndbhdgdrish(a. He is said 
<* >nvo had two sons, who were vai^yas and became brAhmans (Hari-V x 
^^and xi. 658). ’ 

J Soe the preceding note, 

§ 'Ihis ghonid be Karusba as the Bombay edition reads. He was the 

recko-mdas kshattriyas (Hari-V., x. 

tee’ir occupied the country of which Itowa is the centre*, 

I'age d4l rjotiQ 




horsed , Pfishadhra as the Bombay edition reads ; it is said 
^ ^ > his guru and became a ^udra (Ilari-V., x. 01 4, and xi. 659). 

C\Z T'!" same as Prdmsu (Hari-V., x. 614), but I hare found 

^j^^rallaa^ons to him elsewhere. 

II ^'®«^^?w^>tVread Krau8h(uJcir. 

would be better than mayd'; the Bombay reading mama is preferable. 



4^4 


cmo tx^x. 


other rulers^ whoever they may be, mho shall characterize 
periods. 

Markandieya spoke t 

8 I have told thee about Savarni also who Was the son of the 
Shadow-Sanjna } equal to his eldest hrothet Manu, ho shall 

4 be the eighth Manu. Rania,* Vyasa and G^lava.f Dipti.mat} 
and Kripa,§ Rishya^ringa.ll and Dro^if wero^^’* the seven 
rishisft of thatpmod. 

5 And the Suta-pas and Amitablms and Mukhyas shall be 
the gods in three divisions ; and each group of these three 
is said 11 to bo composed of twenty, and to have the three 

6 good qualities. Tapa and Tapa8,§§ and S'akra, Dyuti, Jyotig, 
Prabha-kara, Prabhasa, Dayita, Gharma, Tojas, Ra^mi,||i| 

7 Vakratu, and so forth aro the Suta-pas, the twenty.fold 

• Jdraadagnya. 

t The name of a son of Vilva-mitra, and a famous yishi; see M.-Bh,, 
AnuSas.-P. iv. 249-69; Hari-V. xxvii. 1460-63, xxxii. 1767-76, and xii. 72‘) 

A story of him is told in cantos xx and xxi ante ; and a long story in M.-I 
Udyoga-P. ov. and cxiii-oxviii. He is also referred to in S'anti-P. cchxx 
but the G ilava mentioned in Hari-V. xx, 1047-60 belonged to a later per 
and was probably a descendant. 

X I have not mot with this name elsewhere as the name of a ps 
nor is it as such in the dictionary. 

§ The name of one of Dhpita-rashtra’s connoillors, a well-known figi 
in the Mahi-Bharata. He was son or descendant of S'arad-vat. 

II The name of a famous yishi, who was brought up in sorlnsion ii 
forest j he put an end to a long drought in Ahga during king Loma psdi 
reign, and by sacrifice obtained four sons for king Da^a-ratha of Ayo'iliy 
see Ramdy,, Adi-K. viii. 7— ix. 69; x-xiv and xvii and xviii ; M.-Hh., 
cx. 9991— oxiii. 10094 ; S'anti-P. ccxxxiv. 8609; and Anusas.-P. cxxxvii. fi26. 

^ This is not the name of any fishi, and the name should apparently 
Dro^a or his sou Drauni Aivatthdman. Both are leading figures in t 
Mahd-Bhdrata. 

Ahhavani the past for the future. 

ft All these names are the names of past pishis, and this manv-antara, 
Sdvar^ika, is still future ; see canto liii. verses 7 and 8. 

JJ For hathitdi read kathitai f 

5§ Tapae tapai c'a; the two words must be different, it seems; 
neuter, is supported by the following jyotis, neuter, # 

nil Or Tejo-raimif as one name. 



THE SXVAR^IKA MANV-iNTARA. 


46$ 

group of goda. Prabhvi, Vibhu, Vibhdsa aud oihai's are like* 
5 wise another group of twenty. Hear also from me tl;e third 
group of Amita gods ; Dama, Daiita, fita, Soma, and Vinfa 
9 and the I’est are the group of twenty. And these shall he 
celebrated as Mukhya* gods, rulers of the manv-antara— 
they are verily the sons of Maric'a and of the Praja-pati 
JO Ka^yapa, and they shall be in the futui-e during Sdvarga 
Mann’s period. J^ow the lord of them, 0 muni, shall be Bali 
jl Vairoc ani, the Daitya who dwells in Patila at present, bound 
by a compact. t 

And Virajas, and Arvavira, Nirmoha, Satya-v4c’, Kfiti, 
Vishiju and others, the sons of Savaroa Manu, sHll be 
kings. 


Canto LXXXT. 

Commencement of the DevUMdhdtmya. 

The slaughter of Madhu and Kaifahha 
in the account of the Sdvarnika Manv-antara. 

^ing Su-ratha being defeated and driven from his kingdom took 
rf/iije in the forest with a muni— He met a vaiiya who had been 
dricenfrom his home by his relatives, and both asked the muni about 
selfish feelings which still possessed them.^He ascribes those feel- 
lo the goddess Mahd-mdyd or Great Illusion^ and relates how 
rahnid lauded the goddess at the end of a former kalpa in order to 
deliverance from the demons Madhu and Kaitahha^ and how 
l^hnu awaking slew the demons. 


Om ! Reverence to C'andikd. 

Mirkan<j[eya spoke : 

^ ®^rya 8 son Savarni 15 who is called the eighth Manu. 
about his birth, as I toll it at full length, how by 
^■eaaon of the authority of the Gr^at Illusion J that illustrious 

rincipal, “ chief.” f Qamaya-handhanafy ; or ” bound for a season.’* 
Milhd-mdyd, 


59 



466 


CANTO LXXXI. 


son of the Sun, S4varni, became the king of the eijlin 
manv-antara. 

3 In times ago in the Svaroc'islia period, a king named Su. 
rafcha, sprung of the race of C'aitra, reigned oyer the Trhole 

4 earth. And while he guarded his subjects duly asifi/i^y 
were his own children, there arose hostile kings, ^hodid 

5 not destroy the Kolas.* He the bearer of a very powednl 
sceptre had war with them, and was defeated in why 
them, inferior though they were, those non-destroyers of the 

6 Kolas. Then coming to his own city he reigned as king over 
his own country. That illustrious king was attacked then by 

7 those powerful enemies. His powerful and corrupt ministers, 
who were evil-disposed to a weak person, thereupon robbed 

8 him of treasury and army even there in his own city. Hence 
the king deprived of his sovereignty departed alone on horse- 

9 back to a dense forest under the pretence of hunting. There 
he saw the hermitage of the noble dvija Medhas, inhabited 
by wild animals which were peaceful, graced by the muni's 

10 disciples; and he dwelt there some time, honoured by tlie 
muni. And roaming hither and thither in that fine hermi* 

11 tage of the muui, he fell into thought there then, his mind 
being distraught by selfishness, egotistical Lost indeed 
is the city which I guarded formerly. Whether it is guarded 
righteously or not by those my servants of wicked conduct, 

12 I know not. My chief wav-elephant, always ardent, has passed 

into the power of my foes; what pleasures will he obtam? 

13 They who were my constant followers now assuredly pay 

14 court to other kings with favour, riches and food. 
treasure which I amassed with great difficulty will go 
waste through those men, addicted to unbecoming 

15 ture, who are squandering it continually.” These an o 
matters the king thought of continually. 

* Koldvidhvarhsinah. This is an adjective in the nom. plurah 
• hUpdh, and not a gen. case i and it is also a single compound, as 
the next verse. Besides various fanciful explanations, plaiB 

renders JltoZa as ^karo, and the whole word as “Yavanas. 
that the Kolas mean aboriginal races, the Kols, and the who e w 
some enemies who were in allianoe with the Kolas. 



KJNQ aU-RATHA AND THE DESOLATE VAl^YA. 


467 


Near tho brahman s liermitage there he saw a solitary 

16 vai^ya, and asked him, “ Ho ! who art thou ? and what is the 
reason of thy coming here ? Why appearost thou as if full 

17 of sorrow, as if afflicted in mind ? ” Hearing this speech of 
the king, which was uttered in friendly mood, the vai^ya, 

18 bowing respectfully, replied to the king, “I am a vai^ya, 
Samadhi by name, born in a family of wealthy folk, and have 
been cast out by my sons and wife, who are wicked through 

19 greed for wealth. And bereft of riches, wife and sons, taking 
my wealth I have come to the forest, unhappy and cast out 

20 by my trusted kinsmen. In this state I know not what is 
the behaviour of my sons as regards prosperity or adversity, 

21 nor of my family nor of my wife. Here I dwell. Is welfare 
theirs at home now or ill-luck ? How are they p Are my 
sons living good or evil lives ? 

The king spoke : 

12 Why dost thou, Sir, fix thy mental affection on those 
covetous /oi/c, thy sons, wife and others, who have cast thee 
out from thy wealth ? 

. The vaisya spoke : 

23 This very thought has occurred to mo, just as thou hast 
[ uttered it, Sir. What can I do ? My mind does not enter- 
:24 tain implacability ; and my mind, which bears affection as of a 
I master to his family, is affectionate to those very persons, 

I who have abandoned affection for a father and driven me 

P out in their greed for riches. I do not comprehend, although 
I know it, 0 high-minded Sir, how it is that the mind is prone’ 
26 to love even towards worthless kinsmen. On their account 
^y sighs flow and distress of mind arises. What can I do 
since ray mind is not relentless to those unloving relatives ? 

Mdrkandeya spoke: 

^^6reupon they both, tho vaisya named Samadhi and the 
^ble king approached the muni, 0 brahman, and having 
th observed the etiquette wor^-hy of him, as was proper, 
ey sat down and held various discourse, the vaiiSya and tjie 

inner 



CANTO LXXXI. 


The king spoke : 

29 Adorable Sir I I desire to ask thee one thing j tell me tliat 
since it tends to afflict my mind without producing snbmig 

30 siveness of my intellect. I have a selfish feeling for 
kingdom, even with negat'd to all the requisites, of regal 
administration, althongh I know what it is^ yet like one wbo 

31 is ignorant ; how is this, 0 est of mnnis ? And this waa 
has been Set at nought and cast ofE by his children^ wife and 
servants ; and when forsaken by his family he is neverthelew 

32 exceedingly full of affection towards them. Thus he and I 
also are both excessively unhappy ; our minds are drawn bj 
selfish thoughts to this matter, even though we perceive the 

33 faults in it, How happens this then, illustrious Sir, that wi 
are deluded althongh aWare of itf and that this state of dcla- 
sion besets me and him, who are each blind in respect of 
discrimination P 

The jrishi spokS : 

34 Every animal has this knowledge in objects cognizable by 
the senses and an object of sense reaches it thus in divers ways, 

35 illustrious Sir ! Some living beings are blind by day, and 
others are blind at night ; some living beings can see equally 

36 well by day and at night. Mankind know what is true, but 
not they alone indeed, because cattle, birds, wild auimab 

37 and other creatures all certainly know it ; and men have * the 
•same knowledge which those wild animals and birds have, 
and eqfually both wild animals and birds have the other knov> 

38 ledge which those men haVe. Though they have such bow* 
ledge, look at these birds, which, though distressed by btmgW 
themselves^ are yet because of that came delusion assiduous m 

39 dropping grains into the beaks of their ybuug ones. 
beings are full of longings towards their children, 0 hew, ^ 
they not pass from greed for self unto mutual benefaction , 

^ l^he Bombay edition reads wo instead of c^o, ** toen have not tte 

knowledge, 

^ This is very noteworthy. The altruistlo VittntiS hie bore ^ 

been evolved out of the parental virtues. 



MAhX-MXyX, the G0DDES8 GREAT ILLUSION. 469 

10 dost thon not perceive this P Nevertlieless they are hurled 
into tlie whirlpool of eeiashness which is the pit of delusion j 
through the power of the Great Illusion * they make worldly 

\\ existence permunent.t Marvel not then at this. This is tho 
contemplation- sleep of the lord of the world, and the Great 
Illusion that comes from Hari ; by it the world is completely 

i 42 deluded. Verily she, the adorable goddess, Great Illusion, 
forcibly drawing the minds even of those who know, presents 

43 them to delusion. By her is created this whole universel 
both moveable and immoveable j she it is who when propitious 
bestows boons on men with a view to their final emancipation, 

44 She is Itnowledge Supreme ; she is the eternal cause of final 
emancipation, and the cause of the bondage of worldly 
existence ; she indeed is the queen over all lords. 

Tho king spoke : 

45 Adorable Sir ! Who thon is that goddess whom thon stylesfc 
Maha-maya? How was she born, and what is her sphere of 

46 action, 0 brahman f And what is her disposition, and what 
18 her nature, and whence did she originate, the goddess— -all 
that I wish to bear from thee, 0 thou most learned in sacred 
knowledge ! 

The {•ishi spoke : 

47 She exists eternally, embodied as the world. By her this 
universe was stretched forth. Nevertheless her origin is in 

48 many ways; hear it from me. When she reveals herself 
m order to accomplish the purposes of the gods, it is theu 
md m the world tliat she is born ; she is also named the 

49 Eternal One.J: While the adorable lord Vishnu, stretching 
Stesha out, wooed the sleep of contemplation at tho end of 
the kalpa, when the nniverse was converted into absolute 
ocean, then two terrible Asuras named Madhu and Kaitabha,§ 

* MahArtnayd. ^ 

Bombay edition reads Samsdra^sthiti- 

inakA. ,5 ^ hurled, &a, through the power of the Great Illusion which 
68 worldly existence permanent.” 

I Mityd, 


§ See Hari-Yaihia, ccii. 13562*81. 



470 


CANTO LXXXI. 


62 

63 


Bralim^ spoke : 

64 Thou art Svaha, thou art Svadha ; thou indeed art Vashat. 
kdra, thou hast sound for thy soul j f thou art the nectar 
of the gods, the two eternal letters^ thou existest having 
66 the three-fold matras for thy soul ; § thou existest half a 
matra in duration yet eternal ; thou indeed canst not be 
uttered specifically ; thou art || the Sdvitri,T thou art ik 

66 divine mother** sublime. By thee indeed everything is main* 
tained, by thee this world is created, by thee ft it is pro* 
tected, 0 goddess ! and thou dost always consume it at llie 

67 end. At its emanation thou didst take the form of creationi 
and in protecting it thou hast the form of permanence, and 
at the end of this world thou wilt have tlio form of con- 

68 traction, 0 thou who containest the world ! Thou art tbfi 

* The Bombay edition introduces Btaumi and some changes in the second 
line, and reads this verse as the beginning of Brahma’s invocation. 

' t Or, “ thou hast heaven for thy soul,” svardtmikd. The meaning “ sound 
fieems preferable, as it agrees with the rest of the verse. 

X Om f The commentary overlooks this expression, akshare nitye. 

§ “ The three prosodial measures.” The expression tridhdmdtrdtmiU, 
is also divided by the commentator into trudhdmd trdtmikd, “ thou hast tta 
three mansions, {i. e., the three worlds, the three Vedas, the three chie 
deities, &c.), thou hast the preserver (Vishpu) for thy soul.” 

11 For sd tvam the Bombay edition reads sandhyd, “ the twilight. 

% The Gayatri verse, 

** For devi janani the Bombay edition reads Vedafd^uni, “ the mo 
the Veda.” , 

tf For tvayetat read tvayaitat. 


springing from the root of Vishnu’s ear, sought to 
Brahma. Brahma the Prajd-pati stood on the lotus th^t 
from Vishnu’s navel; and seeing those two fierce 
and sleeping Jandrdana, and standing with heart solely thereo 
intent, in order to awaken Hari, extolled that Sleep of S 
templation which had made its dwelling in Hari’s eyes- the 
lord of splendour extolled Vishnu’s Sleep, which is Queen of tlie 
universe, the supporter of the world, the cause of permanence 
and dissolution, full of reverence, incompni’able.* * * § 



Ot>E' TO MAHA-MaVA. 


4^1 


Great Knowledge, the Great Illusion, the Great Vigour, the 
Great Memory, and the Great Delusion,* the Lady, the Great 

59 Goddess, the Great Demon.f And thou art the original 
source t of tho universe, the exciting cause of the three 
qualities ; thou art the Night of the world’s destruction, the 

90 Great Night, and the Night of delusion, terrible ! Thou art 
Good Fortune, thou art Queen, thou art Modesty j thou art 
Intelligence characterized by perception; thou art Shame, 
Nourishment, and Contentment, Tranquillity and Patience 

61 also. Thou art terrible, armed with sword, with spear, with 
club, and with discus, with conch, with bow, and having as 

62 weapons arrows, slings § and an iron mace. Thou art gentle, 
yea more than gentle, exceedingly beautiful to those who aro 
wholly gentle ; thou art indeed beyond the highest and the 

63 lowest, Queen supremo ! And whatever or wherever a thing 
is, whether good or bad, thou art the energy which all that 
possesses, 0 thou who art the soul of everything. Oau I 

54 extol thee more than this ? || By thee, who art such, he 
indeed, who created the world, who protects the world, ^ who 
consumes the world, is brought under the dominion of sleep, 

55 Who is able here to extol thee P Since Vishnu, I and S'iva 
have been made by thee to assume bodies, who then may be 

66 powerful enough to extol thee ? Being such, do thou, 0 
goddess, lauded thus, bewitch these two unassailable Asuras, 

67 Madliu and Kaitabha, with thy exalted powers, and let the 
imperishable master of the world be lightly brought back to 
consciousness, and let him rouse up his intelligence to slay 
these two great Asuras ! 

* Or rather, “thou hast tho great delusioD," MaJid~mohd, 

\ Mahdswi. The Bombay edition reads ik/ttAe/yari, “ the Great Queen.'* 

t frahiti, 

§ Bhuiundi, After explaining this word as a contraction of hhuja^iatru’ 
enemies with her arms,” the commentator says it 

~5op?iantfci, “a sling.” The dictionary says it is “a kind of ’ weapon 

^perhaps a kind of fire-arms}.” 

as in the Bombay edition is preferable to tadd. 

^ J’or gajQtpdtdtti read jagat pdty atti according to the Bombay edition j 
Terse 56. 



472 


CANTO LXXXI. 


The pshi spoke : 

68 Then the goddess of darkness, extolled thus by the Creator 
there in order to awaken Vishiju to slay Madhu and Kaitablia 

69 issued forth from his eyes, mouth, nose, arms and heart and 
breast, and stood in the sight of BrahmA whose birth is 

70 inscrutable ; and Jandrdana, master of the world, bein|^ 
quitted by her, rose up from his couch in the universal ocean* 

71 and'he saw those two then, Madhu and Kaitabha, evil of sonl, 
excelling in heroism and prowess, red-eyed through anger, 

72 fully prepared to devour Brahma. Thereupon the adorable 
lord Hari rose up and fought with those two, striking them 

73 with his arms, for five thousands of years. And they, exceed- 
ingly frenzied with their power, deluded by the Great Ilia- 
sion, exclaimed to Ke^ava, “ Choose a boon from us ! ” 

The god spoke : 

74 Be ye both now content with me ; ye must both be slain 
by me I What need is there of any other boon here ? Tims 
much indeed is my choice. 

The risbi spoke : 

76 Gazing then at the entire world which was nothing bat 
water, those two, who had been thus tricked, spoke to the 
adorable lotus-eyed gfod,— “ Slay us where the earth is not 
overwhelmed with water.” ^ 


The rishi spoke : 

76 “ Be it so ” said the adorable wielder of the conch, discns 
and club, and cutting f them with his discus clove them bot 
asunder, heads and buttocks. 

77 Thus was she bom when praised by Brahma himse 
listen again, I tell thee of this goddess’ majesty. 


• The Bombay edition makes this sentence the second Ime J 
and reads as the first line of ib-Prto anas 
mrityur dvayoh, “ We are pleased at the battle with thee j thou 


praise as Death to us ! ” 
t For kritvd read hrittvd f 



VICTORY OF THE AStTRAS OYER THE GODS. 


47a 


Canto LXXXII. 


The Dem^nidhatmya. 

Slaughter of the army of the Asum Mahisha. 

The gods were defeated in a great battle formerly by the Asuras and 
driven from heaven, and the Asura Jhlahisha became supreme. — All 
the gods gave forth their special energies, which combined and formed 
the goddess C' and ikd. — They gave her their weapons, and she fought 
vjilh and destroyed the Asuras. 


The rishi spoke : 

Of yore there was a fight for a full hundred years between 
the ;/ods * and Asuras, wlien Mahisha was lord of the Asuras 

2 and Indra lord of the gods ; in it the army of the gods was 
vanquished by the Asuras who excelled in valour, and the 
Asura Mahisha after conquering all the gods became the 

3 ludra. Then the vanquished gods, placing the Praja-pati 
Brahma ai their head, went where abode S'iva and Vishnu. 

4 The thirty gods described to them accurately what had 
happened, the full story of the gods’ discomfiture which 

5 had been wrought by the Asura Mahisha,— “ He, Mahisha, in 
his own person domineers over the jurisdictions of the 
Sun, Indra, Agni, Viyu and the Moon, of Yama and Varu^ia 

6 and of the other gods. Cast out by that evihsouled Mahisha 
from Svarga all the hosts of the gods wander on the eai*th 
like mortals. It has now been related to you both, all that 
has been wrought by the foe of the Immortals, and we have 

^ sought you both as a refuge ; let hiS destruction be devised ! ” 
Having thus heard the words of the gods, Vishnu was 

^ roth and Siva also ; both their faces became furrowed with 
Then issued forth gi’eat energy f from the mouth 

5 ° who was full of intense anger, and from the 

^mths of Brahma and S'iva ; and from the bodies of Indra 

orflsuram read Devdsuram, 

60 


t Tejas. 



474 


CANTO LXXXn. 


11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 
17 


18 

19 

20 
21 

22 

23 


and the other gods went forth a very great energy . • 

all amalgamated. The gods beheld the mass of i ' 
energy there like a burning mountain, pervading thg 
regions of tl.o sky with its blaze; and that unparalleled 
energy born of the bodies of all the gods, which pervaded 

the three worlds with its light, gathering into one became 
a female. By what was S'iva’s energy her face was deve. 
loped, and by Ynma’s energy grew her hair, and her arms 
by Vislinu’s energy, by the Moon’s her twin breasts; and 
her waist camo into being by Inclra’s energy, and by Varuna’g 
her legs and tliigh.s, by the Earth’s eneigy her hips, by 
Brahma’s energy her feet, her toes by the Sun’s energy, and 
by the Va.sus’ energy her hands and fingers, and by Kuvera’a 
her nose; and her teeth grew by the Praja-pati’s energy, 
and three eyes were developed by Agni’s energy ; and lier 
eyebrows were the energy of the two twilights, and her ears 
Vayu’s ewer/yy ; and the coming into being of the energies of 
the otlior gods became the auspicious goddess 
Then gazing at her, who liad sprung from the combined 
energies of all the gods, the Immortals who were afflicted by 
Mahisha felt a keen joy.* The bearer of the how Pinaka 
di-avving a trident forth from his own trident gave it to lier; 
and Krishna gave a discus pulling it out of his own discos; 
and Varuna gave her a couch, Agni a spear, Marutagavea 
bow and a quiver filled with ari’ows.f Indra lord of the 
Immortals gave a thunder-bolt pulling it out of his aif» 
thunder-bolt ; the Thousand-eyed gave her a bell from his 
elephant Air^vala. Yama gave a rod from his own rod of 
Fate, and the lord of the waters a noose ; and the Praji-pah 
gave her a necklace of beads, Brahma an earthen water-pot') 
the Sun bestowed his own rays on all the pores of her skin, 
and Destiny J gave her a sword and a spotless shield, 


* The Bombay edition inserts a verse here. “ Then the gods ga^e her slw 
their own several weapons ; wishing for victory they shouted aloQ 
victorious goddess ‘ Conquer ! conquer ! ’ ” 
t For vdna-purue read vana-pitrn4 f 
J Or Time, Kdla. 



476 


OEtGIN 0 ^ THE GODDESS C'ANpiKX. 


24 and the Ocean of milk a spotless necklace of pearls and also 
a pair of undecaying garments. And a celestial crest-jewel, a 

25 pair of ear-rings, and bracelets, and a brilliant half-moon 
ornament, and armlets over all her arms, and also a pair of 

2 (i bright anclets, a necklet of the finest make, and rings and 
gems on all her fingers — Vi4va-karman gave to her, and 
27 aUo a brightly polished axe, weapons of many shapes and also 
armour that conld not be pierced. And Ocean gave her a 
)8 garland of fadeless lotus-flowers for lier head and another for 
her hreest, and a very .brilliant lotus-flower besides, Jlimavat 
gave her a lion to i*ido on and gems of various kinds. Kuvora 
gave a drinking cup full of wine. And S'eslia, the lord of all 

10 the serpents, who siipporl.s this oartli, gave her a sorpent- 
nccklace adorned with large gems. Honoured by other gods 

11 also with gifts of ornaments* and W(‘npons, the goddess 
uttered a loud roar blended with a horse-laugh again and 
again. The whole welkin was filled with her terrible roar. 

- fly that penetrating and exceedingly great roar a great echo 
-i aros(>, all the worlds shook and the seas trembled, the earth 
(|uaked and all the inomitaius moved. And “ Conquer thou ! ” 
cx(!laimed tlio gods with joy to her who ro lo on the lion 
t and the munis extolled her as they bowed their bodies in 
faith. 


Seeing nil the three worhls greatly agitated, the foes of the 
^ Immortals uniting all their armies rose up together, with up- 
lifted weapons. “ Ha ! what is this ? ” exclaimed the Asura 
5 Malii.slia in wrath, and rushed surrounded by all the Asuras 
towards that roar. Thou he saw the goddess, peivadingtho 
three worlds f with her Hf^ht, causing the earth to bow at the 
^ louch of her feet, grazing the fiimanient witli her crest, 

, shaking the whole of Pat^la with the twang of her bow-string, 

I standing pervading the sky all aroimd with her thousand 
J^rrns. Then began a battle between tlie goddess and the 

* For hhashanair read hhushanair. 
t For ' 

^y^P^^^'^aka-trayain read vydpta-loka-traydm, wJtb the Bombay 
0^1 otherwise this word, read as'a neuter ii iun, separates devim from the 
adjectives which follow. 



476 


CANTO LXXXII. 


39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 
60 

61 

62 

63 


enemies of the gods, in which every region of the shj 
illumined with the weapons and arms hurled in abundan 
And the Asura Mahiaha’s general, the great Aaura named 
Olkshura, fought with her ; and the Asura C'amara attended by 
his cavalry fought along with others. The great Asura 
named Udagra with six myriads of chariots fought; and 
Maha-hanu with a thousand myriads gave battle ; and the 
great Asura Asi-loman with xifty millions ; with six hundred 
myriads Vaskala fought in the battle ; Ugra-dar^ana* with 
many troops of thousands of elephants and horses, and sur- 
rounded with ten million chariots fought in that battle; and 
the Asura named Vidala fought in the battle there, surround- 
ed with fifty myriads of mjriads of chariots. And other 
gi’eht Asuras in my’riads, surrounded with chariots, elephants 
and horses, fought with the goddess in that battle there. Now 
the Asura Mahisha was surrounded with thousands of ten 


million times ten millions of chariots and elephants and horses 
ill the battle there. With iron maces and javelins, with spears 
and clubs, with swords, with axes and halberds they fought 
in the battle against the goddess. And some hurled spears, 
and others nooses, but they assailed the goddess with blows 
from their swords in order to slay her. 

And then the goddess C'anijika cIotc, as it were in merest 


play, those weapons and arras by raining forth her own 
weapons and arms. The goddess betrayed no exertion in her 
countenance, while the gods and pishis were praising her. The 
queenly goddess hurled her weapons and arms at the Asuras 
bodies. The lion also that bore the goddess, enraged 
with ruffled mane, stalked among the armies of Asuias, liks 
fire through the forests. And the deep breaths, »vhic^ 
Arabika fighting in the battle breathed forth, came into le 
being at once as troops by hundreds and thousands. 


th javelins, and swords and halbe^i 


fought with axes, with javelins, and swor 
destroying the Asura bands, being invigori 


ated by the i 


* Instead of j)on*i'anfaA J take the reading of the Bombay ed' 

‘darhnah as a proper nHine. The Calcutta text contains no name as , 
native in this line or the next. 



the goddess slaughters the asura armies. 477 

dess’ energy. And of these bands some raised a din with 

54 large drums, and others with conchs, and others besides with 
drums, in that great battle-festival. Then the goddess with 

55 her trident, her club, with showers of spears, and with her 
sword and otlier weapons slaughtered the great Asuras in 

56 hundreds, and laid others low who were bewitched with the 
ringing of her bell ; and binding other Asuras with her noose 
drngged them on the ground. And others agnin, cloven in 

57 twain by sharp slashes of her sword and crushed * * * § by blows 
witli her mace, lie on the ground ; and some grievously 

58 battered by her club vomited forth blood. Some were felled 
to the ground, pierced in the breast by her trident. Some 
being closely massed together were cut in pieces f by the 

59 torrent of her arrows in the battle-field. Following the manner 
of an army,J: the afflicters of the thirty gods gave up the 
gliost ; some with their arras cut off, and others with severed 

60 necks ; their heads fell from others, others were torn asunder 
in tlic middle ; and other great Asuras fell to the earth with 

61 legs clean cut off ; some were cloven by the goddess into two 
parts, with a single arm and eye and ioot to each part ; and 
others fell and rose again, although with head cut off. 

62 Headless corpses, still grasping the finest weapons, fought 
with the goddess ; and others danced there in the battle, 
keeping time to the strains of the musical instruments. 

63 Corpses, with heads severed, still held swords and spears and 
lances § iu their hands ; and other great Asuras were shouting 

61 to the goddess, Stand ! stand !” || With the prostrate chariot 
elephants and horses and Asuras the earth became impassable 


* yi-pothita ; vi-puth is not in the dictionary, 

t For kritdh read Tipittdh ? 

t ^^nmukdrinah ; but the commentator translates it, '' fighting in the 
of the army.” The Bombay edition reads iaildnukdrinah, ” who resem- 
mountains.” 

§ For iisJiti road fishti. 

•'he Bombay edition adds a line to this verse, ” while from their mangled 
h’nh« fifnved streams of blood (rjidhiraugha-viluptdngdh) in that appalling 



478 


CANTO LXXXIll. 


66 where that great battle took place. And large rivers formed 
of torrerits of blood straightway flowed along thei-e amidst 
the armies of Asuras, and among the elephants, Asurasand 
horses. 

66 Thms Arabikd brought that great array of the Asuras to 
utter destruction in a moment, even as fire utterly consum^t 

67 a huge pile of grass and timber. And the lion, with quiverini^ 
mane, stalked on roaring nload.* While he prowled f ns it 
were for lives out of the bodies of the foes of the Immortals, 

68 the battle was fought there between those troops of the 
goddess and the Asuras, so that the gods in heaven sending 
down showers of flowers gratified J her.§ 


Canto LXXXIll. 


The Deoi-rndhcUmya* 

The slaying of the Asw'a Mahisha. 


The description of the battle is continued — The goddess slew Ikt 
Asura chiefs in single combat and finally the Asura Mahisha, 


The yishi spoke : 

1 Now the great Asura, the genei'Jil C'ikshura, seeing that 
army being slaughtered, advanced in wrath to fight ^vith 

2 Ambikti. The Asura rained a sbowerofairowsoiitliegid* * § 
dess in tbe battle, as a cloud deluges mount Merus summit 

3 with a shower of rain. The goddess, cutting asundei the 
masses of his arrows then as it were in play, smote lii** l^^rses 

4 with her arrows and their charioteer ; and split his bow or 
with and his banner raised high aloft ; and with swi 

* The Bombny edition repeats here the second line of verse 60. 

f Vi-c'invati, the loc. case, with siihhe urtderstood. 

X Or “ lauded, ’’ according to another reading. 

§ For eshdm read endm. 



THE GODDESS SLAYS THE ASURA CHIEFS. 


479 

mhsihs pierced his limbs as he stood with shattered bow. 

5 His bow shattered, his chariot useless, his horses killed, Ida 
chaiiotoar slain, the Asura armed with sword and shield 

6 rnslicd at the goddess. With the utmost celerity he smote 
the lion on the head with his sharp-edged sword, and struck 

7 the goddess also on her left arm. His sword shivered to 
pieces as it touched her arm (O prince). Thereon red-eyed 

8 with anger, he grasped his pike, and ho, the great Asura, 
flung it at Bhadra-kali, as it were the Sun’s orb blazing 

9 brightly with its splendour from out the sky. Seeing that 
pike falling on hei', the goddess hurled her pike, and it 

shattered that pike into a hundred fragments and the great 

Asura also. 


1(1 When ho, Mahisha’s very valiaot general, was slain, 
C'amara, the afflicter of the thirty go<Is, advanced mounted 

11 on an elephant ; and he also hurled his spear at the goddess. 
Down to the ground Ambika quickly struck it, assailed with 

12 a contemptuous hoot aud rendered lustre-less. Seeing his 
spear broken a7id fallen, C'amara filled with rage flung a pike; 

13 and that she split with her arrows. I'heu the lion leaping 
np fastened on to the hollow of the elephant's forehead, and 
fought in close combat aloft with that foe of the thirty gods; 
hut both then fell, as they were fighting, from the elephant 
to the ground. They fought closely locked together with 
most terrible blows. Then quickly springing up to the sky, 
find descending, the lion severed C'amara s head with a blow 
h’oni his paw. 

And Udagra was slain in battle by the goddess with stones, 
trees and other things, and Kara la also was stricken down 
hy her teeth and fists and feet And the goddess enraged 
gi’ound Ud-dhata to powder with blows from her club ; and 
hlled Vaskala with a dart, Tamra and Andhnka with arrows, 
supreme three-eyed goddess slew Ugrasya and Ugra- 
and Maha-hanu also with her trident. With her sword 
she struck Viijiala’s head clean down from his body. She 


^ • op, according to the commentator, “ with the lower 

' I'er ivory aword-lnlt.” 



480 


CANTO LXXXIII. 


despatched both Dur-dhara and Dar-mukha to Tama’s alwd 
■witli her arrows.* 

20 Now, as his army was beiug thus destroyed utterly, ih« 
Asura Mahisha in his own buffalo-shape terrified her troopg 

21 Some he laiii low by a blow from his muzzle, and others by 
stamping with his hooves, and others because they were lashed 

22 with his tail and gashed with his horns, and others again by 
his iVnpetuous rush, his bellowing and his wheeling career 
and others by the blast of his breath he laid them low 

23 on the face of the earth. Having laid low the van of her 
army, the Asura rushed to attack the gi-eat goddess’ lion. 

24 Thereat Ambika displayed her wrath. And he, great in 
valour, pounding the surface of the earth with his hooves in 
his rage, tossed the mountains aloft t with his horns and 

25 bellowed. Crushed by his impetuous wheelings the earth 
crumbled to pieces ; and the sea lashed by his tail overtlowed 

26 in every direction ; and the clouds pierced by his swaying 
horns were rent to fragments ; mountains fell in hundreds 
from the sky, being cast down by the blast of his breath. 

27 C'apdika looked on the great Asura, as swollen with rage he 
rushed on, and gave a way to her wrath then in order to shy 

28 him. She flung her noose full over him, and bound the great 
Asura fast. And he quitted his buffalo shape when held 

29 bound in the great battle, and then became a lion suddenly. 
While Ambika is cutting off his head he took the appeal ance 

30 of a man with scymitar in hand. Straightway the goddess 
with her arrows swiftly pierced the man together with ^ 
scyipitar and shield. Then he became a huge elephant, an 

31 tugged at her great lion with his trunk and roared, bat t e 
goddess cut off his trunk with her sword as he made his tags. 

• The Bombay edition inserts four lines here. “ And she, who ifl 
of Fate, laid Kala low with her rod of Fate. She belabonrod grft 
with very fierce blows from her scymitar. She clove Asi-loman in 
her sword in the battle-festival. Her troops, her lion and the go 
^sed alond the battle-cry of victory along with those 
t UcWh, which the Bombay edition reads, is preferable 
Mountains'* 



the goddess ,3UYS the as>dra mahisha. 481 

jjext tli0 great Asura assumed his buffalo shape again, and 
go shook the three worlds with all that is moveable and im- 
moveable therein. Enraged thereat C'a^^ika, the mother of 
the world, quaffed a sublime beverage again and again,* and 
laughed as her eyes gleamed ruddy. And the Asura roared 
out, puffed up with his strength and valour and frenzy, and 
hurled mountains against C'andika with his horns. And she, 
shivering to atoms with showers of arrows those mountains 
that he hurled, spoke to him in confused words, while her 

‘ mouth was rendered ruddier by the mead that she had drunk. 

The goddess spoke : 

J6 Roar, roar on thy brief moment, 0 fool, the while I quaff 
this mead ! The gods shall soon roar, when I shall slay thee 
even here. 

17 Exclaiming thus she leaped upwards and sat herself on that 
great Asura, and kicked him on the neck with her foot and 

18 struck him with her spear. And thereupon he, being assailed 
by her foot, half issued forth f from his own mouth in sooth, 

19 beiug completely encompassed by the goddess’ valour. That 
great Asura being thus attacked half issued forth indeed. 
The goddess struck off his head with her great sword and 
laid him low. J 

Then perished all that Daitya army with great lamentation. 
And all the hosts of the gods rose to the highest exultation. 

^ The gods and the great heavenly pehis poured forth praises 
to the goddess, the Gandharva chiefs burst into song and the 
bevies of Apsarases into dances. 

* See canto Ixxxii, veree 29. 

t For evdti the Bombay edition reads evdnid. 

+ ^bo Bombay edition inserts two verses here. Thus the Asura named 
was destroyed by the goddess along with bis army and his bands of 
after he had bewitched the three worlds. When Mahisha was slain. 
*^ated things in the three worlds then uttered the sltout ‘ Conquer thou 1 * 

“8 with gods and Asuras and men.” 


61 



CANTO LXXXir. 


m 


Canto LXXXIV. 


The Devi-mdhdtmya* 

The Slaying of the Asura Mahisha concluded. 

The gods poured forth their praises to O'andihd on her victory^Am 
she gave them the boon that she would always befriend them, i 
they recalled her to mind in calamities, 

* 

The fishi spoke : * 


1 When that most valiant evil-souled army of the gods’ foe! 
was vanquished by the goddess, S'akra and the hosts of olhei 
gods poured forth their praises to her with their voices 
reverently bending down their necks f and shoulders, wbih 
their bodies looked handsome because their hair stood eieci 
■with exultation. 

2 The goddess, who stretched out this world by her power, 
Whose body comprises the entire powers of all the host! 

of gods, 

Her, Ambikd, worthy of worship by all gods and greal 
pishis, 

We bow before J in faith ; may she ordain blessings for ns 

3 May she, whose peerless majesty and power Ananta 
Adorable, Brahm4 and Hara cannot in sooth declare, 

May she, C'andika, to protect the entire world 
And to destroy the fear of evil turn her mind ! 

4 Her, who is Good-Fortune herself in the dwellings of mei 

of good deeds, Ill-Fortune 

, (i p'}^ 0 o all th 

♦ The Bombay edition inserts a preliminary verse here 
hosts of gods with Indra at their head began to smg the ^ 
goddess, when the Asara Mahisha was slain.” This is tao o o 

Buperflaous. ^ 

f For '‘iir0'’dhardms4 read -iirodhardma as in the Bom ay e 
X Natdh sma:; so again in verse 4. This seems a peculiar u ^ 
particle sma. Similarly 'pra^nf^tdli sma in canto 



483 


HYMN TO c'andIKa. 

Jn those of men of sinful souls ; who is Intelligence in the 
liearts of the prudent, 

Who is Faith in those of the good, and Modesty in that of 
the high-born man 

Her, even thee, we bow before; protect the universe, 
0 goddess ! 

5 Can we describe f this thy thought- transcending form ? 

Or thy abundant surpassing valour that destroyed the 
A sums ? 

Oi’ thy surpassing^ feats which tvere displayed in battles 
Among all the hosts of Asuras, gods and others, 0 goddess ? 
i Thou ait the cause of all the worlds ! Though character- 
ized by the three qualities, by faults § 

Thou art not known ! Even by Hari, Kara and the other 
gods thou art incomprehensible ! 

Thou art the resort of all ; thou art this entire world which 
is composed of parts ! 

Thou verily art sublime original Nature || untransformed ! 

7 Thou, whose complete divinity by means of utterance 
linds satisfaction in all sacrifices, 0 goddess,*^ 

Art verily Svalia, and givest satisfaction to the Pitri-hosts! 
Hence thou art in truth declared by men to be SvadhA 
also. 

^ Thou art she^ who effects final emancipation, and performs 
great thought-transcending penances ! 

Thou studies!§ ** with thy organs, which are the essence of 
strength, ft well-restrained! 

tor tcula-jana-prahhasya read kula-jana-prabhavasyaf with the Bombay 
t Kim varnaydma. 

^ t’or tavdti ydni the Bombay edition reads tavddhhutdni, which is 

'^Qivaleut. 

§ t or doshair the Bombay edition reads devair, which is inferior. 

I Prakrxti, 

,, Bombay edition reads plurals. 

^^hy-asyase; 6tmane-pada, which seems rare. 

^^dva-sdraih of the Bombay edition is preferable to tattva-siraih. 



484 


CANTO LXXXIV. 


With munis, who seek final emancipation and whob 
shed all their faults, 

Thou art The Knowledge, adorable, sublime in sooth 0 
goddess ! 

9 Sound is thy soul ! thou art the repository of the most 

spotless fid and yajus hymns, 

And of the samans, which have the charming. worded text* 
' of the Ud-githa ! 

Thou as goddess art the triple Fedn, the adorable, and for 
the existence and production 
Of all the worlds art active ; thou art the supreme destroyer 
of their pains !* 

10 Thou art Mental Vigour, f 0 goddess! thou hast compre- 

hended the essence of all the Scriptures I 
Thou art Durga ; the boat to cross the difficult ocean of 
existence ; devoid of attachments ! 

Thou art S'ri, who has planted her dominion alone in the 
heart of Kaitabha’s foe I 

Thou indeed art Qauri, who has fixed her dweling in the 
moon-crested god ! 

11 Slightly-smiling, spotless, resembling the full moon’s 
Orb, beautiful as the choicest gold, and lovely im Ihn 

face ! 

Yet 't was very marvellous that, being swayed by anger, 
The Asura Mahisha suddenly smote thy face when he 
saw it. 

12 But after seeing thy wrathful face, 0 goddess, terrible with 

its frowns. 

And sheeny in hue like the rising moon, that Mahisha 
Did not forthwith yield up his life, 't was passing wonder- 
ful f 

• This half verse admits of more than one translation. I hare adopted 

IT 

from the commentary what seems the most natni^ meaniog. r ^ 
obsonre ; the commentary explains it as vtittdi/nta‘r4pd, “ having ° 
events ” or “ having the form of history ; ” or as | 

following the occupations of cnltivafeion, cattle-rearing and such like, 

t Msdhd, 



HYMN TO c'ANplKA. 


485 


li’or who can live after beholding the King of Death en- 
raged ? 

] Be gracious, 0 goddess, as supreme lady, to life ! 

When enraged thou dost forthwith destroy whole families ! 
Known at this very moment is this, that here is brought 
to its end 

The Asura Mahisha’s most extensive might! 

4 Esteemed are they among the nations, theirs are riches, 

Theirs are glories, and their sum of righteousness* 
perishes not, 

Happy are they indeed, and they possess devoted children, 
servants and wives, 

On whom thou, well-pleased, dost always bestow prosperity, 

0 lady ! 

15 All righteous actions ever indeed, 0 goddess, 

With utmost respect the man of good deeds daily performs, 
And gains heaven thereafter by thy favour, 0 lady. 

Dost thou not by himf bestow rewards even on the three 
worlds, 0 goddess ? 

16 Thou, 0 Durga, when called to mind, dost remove terror 

from every creature ! 

Thou, when called to mind by those in health, dost bestow 
a mind extremely bright ! 

What goddess but thou, 0 dispeller of poverty, pain and 
fear, 

Has ever benevolent thoughts in order to work benefits to 
all? 

By these slain foes the world attains J: to happiness ; thus 
let these 

Forsooth practise sin so as to descend to hell for long ! § 

* landhu‘vargahy “whole body of kinsfolk,” according to the Bombay 
edition, 

t Teno, or “ therefore.” 

t Or lipatttt, “ may it attain,” according to the Bombay edition. 

’s appears to be one meaning given in the commentary j another, 
“ tef r**"'^* ^ ^ preferred, is to read ndma narakdya as na dma-narakdya, 
® t ese not practice sin so as to descend to the Hell of Disease for long I” 



486 


CANTO LXXXIV. 


‘ Meeting death in battle lot them proceed to heaven 
Thinking thus, thou dost assuredly destroy tho • 

0 goddess! 

18 Having indeed seen them, why dost thou not, 0 1 d 

reduce to ashes 

All the Asuras, since thou directest thy weapons aj?ain 
the foes ? 

••Let even enemies, purified by dying in arms, attain ia 
sooth to i\\Q%right worlds ’ — 

Such is thy most kindly intention towards even them. 

19 And though, neither by the sharp flashes* of abundant 

light from thy scymitar, 

Nor by the copious lustre of thy spear-point, the eyes c' 
the Asuras 

Were destroyed ; yet, as they gazed upon thy countenance 
Which bore a portion of the radiant moon, this very thin] 
happened. 

20 Thy disposition, 0 goddess, subdues the conduct of me 

of evil conduct ; 

And this thy form surpasses thought and rivalry by others 
And thy valour vanquishes those who have robbed the god 
of their prowess ; 

Thou hast as it weref manifested pity thus even oi 
enemies 1 

21 To what my this thy prowess be compared ? 

And whereto thy form most charming, which strikes fea 
among foes ? 

Compassion in mind and relentlessness in battle are seen 
In thee, 0 goddess, who bestowest boons even on the threi 
worlds ! 

22 Through the destruction of the foes, these three worl 

entire 

Have been saved by thee. Having slain them in the batt 
front 

* ViBphurai^a ; not in the dictionary. 

t Or jprakatitaiva^ thoa bast indeed manifested,” as in t e , 
edition. 



ttYMN TO c'aNdIKA. 


487 


Thou hast led even those hosts of foes to heaven^ and 
dispelled the fear 

Which beset us from the frenzied foes of the gods. 
Reverence to thee ! 

With thy spear protect us, 0 goddess ! 

Protect us with thy sword also, 0 Ambika ! 

By the clanging of thy bell protect us, 

And by the twanging of the thong of thy bow ! 

•4 In the east guard us, and in the west ; 

0 C'andika, guard us in the south 
By the brandishing of tliy spear, 

And also in the north, 0 goddess ! 

15 Whatever gentle forms of thee wander about in the three 
worlds. 

And whatever exceedingly terrible forms wander^ by means 
of tliem guard us and tl»o earth ! 

26 Thy sword and spear and club, and whatever other weapons, 

0 Ambika, 

Rest in tliy pliant hand, with them guard us on every side ! 
Tl»e rishi spoke : 

27 Thus was she, the Upholder of tlie worlds, hymned by the 
gods, and they paid honour to her with celestial flovvers that 
blossomed in Nandana, and with perfumes and unguents. 

28 Moreover all the thirty gods in faith censed her with heavenly 
incenses. Benignly sweet in countenance she spoke to all 
the prostrate gods. 

The goddess spoke : 

Choose, ye thirty all ! whatever ye desire of me, for I grant 
it with pleasure, being highly honoured by these hymns.* 

The gods spoke ; 

Thou, 0 adorable lady, hast accomplished all, nought 
remains undone, in that this Asura Mahisha, our foe has 

file Bombay edition inserts another verso here— “ ‘ And whatever else 
done, I do not deem ifc. difficnlfc.’ Hearing this speech from the 
\ 2^4688, those heaven^dwellers made answer.'* 



CANTO LXXXV. 


31 been slain. Yet if thoa must grant us a boon, 0 goddess 
great! whenever we call thee, call thee to mind, do thou 

32 away with oar direst calamities I And whatever mortal 
shall praise thee with these hymns, 0 lady of spotless conn 
tenance, to prosper him in wealth and wife and other bless 
ings by means of riches, success and power do thou incline 
always, 0 Ambika, who art propitious to us ! 

The pishi spoke : 

33 Being thus propitiated by the gods for the good of the 
world and on their own behalf ^ “ Be it so I ” said she, Bhadra- 
k^li ; and vanished frOm their sight, 0 king. 

. 34 Thus I have narrated this, 0 king, how the goddess came into 

being of yore from out of the gods’ bodies, she who desires the 

35 good of all the three worlds. And again she came into existence 
having the body of Gauvi, just as she did before, in order 

36 to slay the wicked Daityas and S'umbha and Nisumbha, and 
to preserve the worlds, as benefactress of the gods. Hearken 
then to what I have declared to thee. I have truly told it 
thee. 


Canto LXXXV. 


The Bevi-m&hdtmya. 

The goddess' conversation with the Asura's messenger. 

The Asurcw Sumhha and Nisumbha conquered the gods and drove 
them from heaven, — The gods invoked G'andikd at Himavat in n 
hymn, appealing to her by all her attributes to help them.-'^drvd 
came there and G'an4ikd sprang forth from her body-'^'^ 
servants of Sumbha and Nidumbha saw her and extolled he 
perfect beauty to Sumhha. — Re sent a messenger to invite her 
marry him. — She explained that by a vow she could marry no o 
who did not conquer her in fight. 

The rishi spoke : • * in 

Of yore the Asuras S'umbha and Nisumbha, trusting 



THE GODS invoke c'aNDIKA 

their pride and strength, robbed S'aci’s lord of the three 
5 worlds* and of his portions of the sacrifices; they both 
naurped likewise the sun’s dignity and the moon’s dominion, 

1 and Kuvera’s and Yama’s and Varnna’a ; and they both 
exercised Vayu’s authority and Agni’s sphere of action.f 
Thereby the gods were scattered, deprived of their sover- 
eignties and put to rout. The thirty gods, bereft of their 
dominion and set at nought by those two great Asuras, all 
recall to mind that never-vanquished goddess,— “ Thou didst 
grant ns the boon,+ ‘ As ye when in calamities shall call me to 
mind,§ that very moment will I put an end to all your direst 
calamities.’ ” Making this resolve the gods went to Hima- 
vat, lord among mountains, and there raised their hymn to ' 
the goddess, who is Vishnu’s illusive power. || 

The gods spoke : 

Reverence to the goddess, to the great goddess ! 

To her who is auspicious reverence perpetually ! 

Reverence to Prakfiti the good ! 

Submissive we fall prostrate before her ! % 

Reverence to her who is terrible, to her who is constant ! 

To Gauri, to Dhatri reverence, yea reverence ! 

And to the Moon-light,** to her who has the moon’s form, 

To her who is happy, reverence continually ! 


* Tor iraikoJcyam read tmilokyam. 
t The Bombay edition inserts a lino here— 

anyesham c'ddhUdrdn sah svayam evddhitish(hati 
feada the first three words with the preceding words, but does not 
P'liin the last four in its commentary. I would suggest that the line 
"Md run thus — 

„ anyesham adhikdrdmie'a svayam evddhitash^hatuh 

^nd they themselves dominated the lordships of the other gods.*' 

+ See canto Ixxxiv, verse 81. 

^ ^Titdkhildh, i.e., smritd, and aJchildh agreeing with •paramdpadafy. 

^^^hu-mdyd. 

I, ; sma is used here with a past participle. 

hofsndyai, 

62 



490 


'canto lxxxt. 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


Falling; prostrate, to her who is propitious, to Prosperit t 
To Perfection let us pay t reverence, yea reverence • 

To Nirpti,}: to the goddess of Good-Fortune of kings 
To thee, S'arvani, reverence, yea reverence! 

To Darga, to her who is a further shore difficult to be 
reach ed,§ 

To her who is essential, to her who works all things, || 

' And to Fame also, to her who is blu e-black, •[[ 

To her who is smoke-dark reverence continually ! 

Before her who is at once most gentle and most harsh 
We fall prostrate ; to her reverence, yea reverence! 
Reverence to her who is the foundation of the world! 

To the goddess who is Action reverence, yea reverence ! 

To the goddess who among all created things 
Is called Vishpu’s illusive power. 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

To the goddess who among all created beings 
Bears the name Consciousness,** 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm ff with the form of Intellect, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 


* For Vfidvyai read Vfiddhyai, But the Bombay edition reads mridvyuii 
“ to her who is gentle.” 

t Kurmo ; the Bombay edition reads Kurmyai^ “ to the female Tortoise. 

X “Dissolution.” 

§ Dwrga^'pdrdyai, 

II Sarva-hdrinyai ; this violates the metre. The Bombay edition res 
better, sarva-lcdri^i, " 0 thou who workest all things I ” 

^ Kfishndyai. 

•• O'etani. ^ 

tt Samthitd; or “abides.” The commentary explmu® it 
sthitd. • 

XX Buddhi-rdper^a, 



HYMN TO C'ANpiKA 


15 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Sleep, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

[6 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Hunger, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence, 

[7 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Shadow, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

18 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Energy,* 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to hor, reverence, yea reverence ! 

19 To the goddess who among all crfeated beings 
Stands firm with the form of Thirst, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

20 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Patience, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to lier ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

21 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Speciality, f 
Reverence to her, yea reverence to her I 
Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Modesty, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

To the goddess who among all created beings 

t {dti. The commentary explains it ns nityaikdnugata-pratyaya- 
^'^^(t-9amavdyin{. 



CANTO LXIXT. 


492 

Stands firm with the form of Peaceableness, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

24 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Faith, 

Reverence to her, yea^ reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

25 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Loveliness, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

26 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Good- Fortune, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! * 

27 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Activity, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

28 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Memory, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

29 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Mercy, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! t 

30 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Contentment, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

31 To the goddess who among all created beings 

* The Bombay edition inserts here a similar verse, invoking the g 
in the form of SteadfastneBS (dhriti). ^ 

t After this verao and after verse 30 the Bombay e n _ 
similar verses, invoking the goddess in the form of Good 
Nourishment (pushii) respectively. 



HYMN TO C'aNDIK'A 


493 


Stands firm with the form of Mother, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

50 To the goddess who among all created beings 
Stands firm with the form of Error, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

3.1 To her who both governs the organs of sense 
Of created beings, and rules among all 
Created beings perpetually, — to her 
The goddess of Pervasiveness reverence, yea reverence ! 

her who exists pervading this entire 
World with the form of Thinking Mind, 

Reverence to her, yea reverence to her ! 

Reverence to her, reverence, yea reverence ! 

Praised by the gods afore-time because of eagerly-desired 
protection, 

And waited upon by the lord of the gods many days, 

May she, the goddess, the origin of brightness, accomplish 
for us 

Bright things, yea good things, and ward off calamities ! 

And she, who is both reverenced as queen by us gods, 

Who ai'e tormented now by the arrogant Daityas, 

And whom we called to mind as we bow our bodies in faith,* 
fihe this very moment destroys f all our calamities ! 

The rishi spoke : 

While the gods were thus engaged in offering hymns and 
other reverential acts, Parvati came there to bathe in the water 
of the Ganges, 0 prince. She, the beautiful-browed, said to 
those gods, — “ Whom do ye, lords, hymn here ? ” And spring- 

^^^^i^-vinamra-murftibhify must be taken with asmdbhir, thongli it is 
phoed H8 the verse stands. It wonid be better to read the second half of 
^ ^erse thus— 

Yd c*a smritd bhahti-vinamra'inurttibhthk 
• Sarvdpadas tat-ksJtamm eva hanti nah. 

“ niay destroy,” would be bettor than hanti. 



494 


CANTO LXXXV. 


ing forth from the treasure-house of her body the augpici(„jj 

39 goddess spoke— “ For me this hymn is uttered by the assem. 
bled gods, who have been set at nought by the Daitya 

40 S'umbha and routed in battle by Ni^umbha.” Because 
Ambika issued forth from the treasure-house* of Parvati's 
body, she is therefore named in song as Kausbildf 

41 among all the worlds. Now after she had issued forth, the 
other also, even P6rvati, became Kjishna ; she is celebrated 
as Ki^likd; she fixed her abode on Mount Hima-vat. 

42 Thereafter C'anda, and Mun^a, the two servants of S'umbha 
and Ni^umbha, saw Ambika displaying her sublime and most 

43 captivating form ; and both spake out unto S'umbha 

“What woman then, most surpassingly captivating, dwells 

44 here, illuminating Mount Hima-vat, 0 great king? Such 
sublime beauty was never in sooth seen by anyone anywhere; 
let it be ascertained if she is any goddess, and let her be taken 

46 possession of, 0 lord of the Asuras. A gem ailiong women, 
surpassingly beautiful in body, illuminating the regions of 
the sky with her lustre, there she is then, 0 lord of the 

46 Daityas; deign, Sir, to look at her. Moreover, whatevei 
gems, precious stones, elephants, horses and other valmhli 
things indeed exist in the three worlds, 0 lord, all thos< 
display their splendour at this present time in thy house 

47 Airavata, gem among elephants, has been captured fron 
Purandara ; and this Pdrijata tree and also the horse Uccail? 

48 ^ravas. Here stands the heavenly chariot yoked with swan 
in thy court-yard ; it has, been brought here, the won er ^ 
chariot composed of gems, which belonged to 

49 Here is the Nidhi Mahd-padma,! captured from 
of wealth. And the Ocean gave a garland made of 

60 and of undying lotus fiowers. In thy house stan s 
umbrella, which streams with gold. And here is 

61 chariot that belonged to Praja-pati formerly, ^hou, 

• Kosha \ but koia is better. 

t KauiiU is better. The derivation is of pourse absurd. 

% See canto Ixviii, verse 12. 



Kumbha s message to c^a^PIka ^95 

hast carried off Death’s power which is named Utlcr4nti-da.* 
The noose of the Ooean-kinK w in thy brother’s possession. 

52 And Niiumbha has every kind of gem which is produced 
in the sea. Agni also gave thee two garments which are 

53 purified by fire. Thus, 0 lord of the Daityas, all gems 
have been captured by thee ; why dost thou not seize this 
auspicious lady, this gem of womankind ? ” 

The rishi spoke : 

S'umbha, on hearing this speech then from C'anda and 
Munda, sent the great Asura Su-griva as messenger to the 

)5 goddess, “ Go and address her thus and thus 

according to my words, and lightly conduct the matter so that 
she may come to me of her own good pleasure ” He wont to 

16 where the goddess sat on a very bright spot in the mountain 
and spoke gently with mellifluous voice. 

The messenger spoke : 

7 0 goddess! S'umbha, lord of the Daityas, is supreme lord, 
over the three worlds. A messenger am I, sent by him ; to 

8 thy presence here I have come. Hearken to wliat he has 
said, whose command is never resisted among all beings of 
divine origin, and who has vanquished every foe of the 

^ Daityas — “ Mine are all the three worlds ; obedient to my 
authority are the gods, I eat every portion of the sacrifices 

^ separately. The choicest gems in the three worlds are alto- 
gether under my power ; and sp are the finest elephants and 
the chariot of the lord of the gods, since I have captured 
That gem among horses, named Uccaih-sravasa, which 
came forth at the churning of the sea of milk, was presented 
to me by the immortals who prostrated themselves before me. 
■A^iid whatever other created things in the shape of gems 
listed among the gods, Gandharvas and Nagas, they were 
Presented even to me, 0 brilliant lady. I esteem thee 
^ goddess, to be the gem of womankind in the world ; do 


Giving an exit,” “ granting departure.’ 



CANTO LXXXV. 


64 

65 


thou, who art such, approach unto me, since I am an 


enjorer 


of gems. Either to me, or to my younger 1 
of wide-reaching prowess, approach thou, 0 lady of 
side-glances, since thou art in truth a gem. Supreme 
dominion beyond compare thou shalt gain by wedding me. 
Understand and consider this, and come unto wedlock with 


The rishi spoke : 

66 Thus accosted the goddess, smiling deeply within 

she^ Durga the adorable and good, who supports this world, 
saug this reply then. 

The goddess spoke : 

67 Truly hast thou spoken ; nought hast thou uttered falsely 
herein. Sovereign of the three worlds is S'umblia, and like 

68 unto him is Nisumbha also ! But how can that which has 
been promised concerning this myself be fulfilled falsely? 
Hearken, what vow I made formerly by reason of my small 

69 understanding at that time,—' He who vanquishes me in fight, 
who forces my pride from me, and who is my match in 

70 strength in the world, he shall be ray husband.’ Let S'nmbha 
come here then, or Nisumbha the great Asura ; let him 
vanquish me— what need of delay here ? and let him lightly 
take my hand in marriage ! 

The messenger spoke : 

71 Proud art thou! Talk not so before me, 0 goddess! 
What male in the three worlds may stand front to ^ 

72 g'umbha and Nisumbha ? All the gods verily stand no ^ 

to face with even the other Daityas in battle, 0 go 
how much less canst thou so stand, a woman 

73 With S'umhha and those other DaUyat, against w om 
and all the other gods stood not in battle, hows a ^ 

74 a woman, venture face to face? Do thou, 

whom 1 have in sooth delivered my ^ •«i(l 

g’umbha and Nisumbha ; let it not he that thou s 



c'ANpikiC’S MESSAGB TO ^UMBHA. 497 

thy dignity shattered in that thou wilt be dragged thither by 
thy bair ! 

The goddess spoke : 

Ifo So strong as this is Kumbha ! and so exceedingly heroic is 
Nisumbha ! What caw I do, since there stands my ill-con- 
;() sidered promise of long ago ? Go thou thyself ; make known 
respectfully to the lord of the Asuras all this that I have said 
to thee, and let him do whatever is htting. 


Canto LXXXVI. 


The Devi-mdhatmya : 

The slaying of Sumbha and Nisumbha^s general Dhumra-locana, 
Sumhha despatched his general Dhumra4oc'a7ia and an army to 
tuptnre the goddess and she destroyed them, — He then despatched 
C'ania and Mnnda with another army. 

The fishi spoke : 

1 The messenger, on hearing this speech from the goddess, 
was filled with indignation, and approaching related it fully 
to the Daitya king. The Asura monarch then, after hearing 
that report from his messenger, was wroth and commanded 
Dhumra-lodana, a chieftain of the Daityas ; — 

“ Ho ! Dhumra-locana, haste thee together with thy army ; 
fetch by force that shrew, who will he unnerved when dragged 
along by her hair. Or if any man besides stands up to offer 
her deliverance, let him be slain, be he an Immortal, a Yaksba 
or a Gandharva forsooth.’^ 

The rishi spoke : 

Thereupon at his command the Daitya Dhumra-locana went 
forthwith quickly, accompanied by sixty thousand Asuras. On 
seeing the goddess stationed on the snowy mountain, he cried 
^loud to her there—** Comd forward to the presence of S^umbha 
and Ni^umbhaj if thou wilt not, lady, approach my lord with 
63 



498 


CANTO LXXXVr. 


affection now, I will hero take thee by force, who wili he tu. 
nerved since thou shalt be dragged along by thy hair! ” 

The goddess spoke : 

8 Sent by the king of the Daityas, mighty thyself, and accom. 
panied by an army, thou dost thus take me by force-then 
what can I do unto thee ? 

The rishi spoke : 

9 At this reply the Asura Dh6mra-locana rushed towards her. 

10 Then Ambika with a mere roar reduced him to ashes. And 
the great army of Asuras enraged poured on Ambik4 a shower 

11 both of sharp arrows and of javelins and axes. The lion that 
carried* the goddess, shaking his mane in anger and uttering a 

12 most terrific roar, fell on the army of Asuras ; he slanghtered 
some Asuras with a blow from his fore-paw, and others 
with his mouth, and others, very great Asuras, by striking 

13 them with his hind foot.f The lion with his claws tore oat 
the entrails of some, and struck their heads off with a cnff-hke 

14 blow. And be severed arras and heads from others, and 
shaking his mane drank the blood that flowed from, the entrailst 

15 of others. In a moment all that army was brought to destm^ 
tion by the high-spirited lion, who bore the goddess and wbo 
was enraged exceedingly. 

16 When be heard that that Asura Dhiimra-locana was sain 
by the goddess, and all his army besides was destroyed by t e 

17 goddess’ liont S'umbha, the lord of the Daityas, 
rage and his lip quivered greatly, and he 

16 mighty Asuras C'a^da and Mui^da H®, C'anda 1 o, 

take with you a multitude of troops and go there , 

19 there bring her here speedily, dragging her by 
binding her; if ye have a doubt of that, then e e 
outright in fight by all the Asuraa 

20 weapons. When that shrew is slain and her ion s ^ ^ 

seize her, AmbM, bind her and bring ber ’ 

• Tu vdhanalb in the Bombay edition is better than $va-vdhana. 
f of the Bombay edition is better than 6 ddha 

X For kausM^dd read hoshfhdd. 



tkll DKSTROYS THE ASORAS. 


499 


Canto LXXXVII. 

The Devi-mdhdtmya, 

The slaying of Chanda and Munda, 

The goddess Kdli destroyed the second Asura army and also the 
werals O'anda and Munda — G'andikd gave Kdli as a reward the 
me C'dmun4d» 

The rishi spoke : 

Then at his command the Daityas, led by C'an^a and 
Munda, and arrayed in the four-fold order of an army, march- 
> ed with weapons uplifted. Soon they saw the goddess, slightly 
smiling, seated upon the lion, on a huge golden peak of the 
1 majestic mountain. On seeing her some of them made a 
strenuous effort to capture her, and others approached her 
holding their bows bent and their swords drawn, 

( Thereat Ambika uttered her wrath aloud against those foes, 

I and her countenance then grew dark as ink in lier wrath. Out 
from the surface of her forehead, which was rugged with 
frowns, issued suddenly Kdli of the terrible countenance, 

• armed with a sword and noose, bearing a many-coloured 
skull-topped staff,* decorated with a garland of skulls, clad in 
a tiger’s skin, very appalling because of her emaciated flesh, 

' exceedingly wide of mouth, lolling out her tongue terribly, 
having deep-sunk reddish eyes, and filling the regions of the 
sky with her roars. She fell upon the great Asuras impetuous- 
ly, dealing slaughter among the host, and devoured that army 
^ of the gods’ foes there. Taking up the elephants with one 
hand she flung them into her morth, together with their rear- 

II men and drivers and their warrior-riders and bells. Flinging 
likewise waixior with his horses, and chariot with its driver 
into her mouth, she ground them most frightfully with her 

^ teeth. She seized one by the hair, and another by the neck ; 
and she kicked another with her foot, and crushed another 
against her breast. ,And she seized with her mouth the 

read Ihatvdhga here and again in verse 14, 



500 


CANTO LXXXTtl. 


weapons and tlie great arms which those Asuraa abandoned 

33 and crunched them np with her teeth in her fury 
crushed all that host of mighty and high-spirited Asm as 

14 and devoured some and battered others ; some were slain with 
her sword, some were struck with her skull-topped staff and 
other Asuras met their death being wounded with the edge of 
her teeth. 

15 ' Seeing all that host of Asuras laid low in a moment 
C'anda rushed against her, Kali, who was exceedingly appal- 

16 ling. Munda the great Asura covered her, the terrible-eyed 
goddess^ with very terrible showers of arrows and with dis- 

17 cases hurled in thousands. Those discuses seemed to be 
penetrating her countenance in multitudes, like as very many 
solar orbs might 'penetrate the body of a thunder-clnnd, 

18 Thereat Kdli, who was roaring frightfully, laughed terribly 
with excessive fury, showing the gleam of her unsightly teeth 

19 within her dreadful mouth. And the goddess, mounting upon 
her great lion, rushed at C'anda, and seizing him by his bair 

20 struck off bis head with her sword. And Mu^da also rushed 
at her when he saw C'andia laid low ; him also she felled to the 

21 ground,stricken with her scymitar in her fury. Then the army, 
so much as ^escaped unslain, seeing C'anda laid low and most 
valiant Munda also, seized with panic fled in all directions. 

22 And Kali, holding C'anda’s head and Muncja also, appi onclied 
C'andika and said, her voice mingled with passionate loud 

23 laughter — “ Here 1 have brought thee C'anda and Munda, 
great beasts ; thou thyself shalt slay S'umbha and Nisumbba 
in the battle-sacrifice. ” 

The rishi spoke : 

24 Thereon, seeing those two great Asuras C'anda and Munda 
brought to her^ auspicious C'aij^ikd spoke to Kali 

25 speech,* “ Because thou hast seized both C'anda and 
and brought thevi^ thou, 0 goddess, slialt therefoie be 
in the world by the name OAmu^^d !” 


* Lalitam vac' ah j a hon moU 



HA GOES FORTH AGAINST c'aNQIKa'. 

Canto LXXXVIII. 


501 


The Devi-mdhdtmya^ 

The slaying of Ealta^vija. 

Snmhha sent forth all his armies against C'andikd~To help her the 
Energies (SaJctis) of the gods took bodily shape— G'andikd despatched 

Sna to offer ter-ns of peace to Sumbha, but the Asura hosts attacked 
hr and the battle began— Candika's fight with the great Asura 
Rakta-vija is described — He was killed. 

The rishi spoke ; 

I After both the Daitya Chanda was slain and Mnnda was laid 
low, and many soldiers were destroyed, the lord of the Asuras, 

I majestic S’uniblia, with mind overcome by wrath, gave com- 
5 mand then to array all the Daitya hosts, Now let the 
ciglity-six Daityas, upraising their weapons, march forth with 
all their forces ; let the eighty-four Kambiis* march forth 
' surrounded by their own forces ; let the fifty Asura families 
who excel in valour go foi'th; let the hundred families of 
' Dhaurnrast forth at my command. Let the KaIakas,J the 
l)aurhritas,§ the Mauryas,|| and the Kalakeyas,^— let these 
Asuras, hastening at my command, march forth ready for 
battle.” 

After issuing these commands S'urabha, the lord of the 
Asuras, who ruled with fear, went forth, attended by many 

Kamhi means a thief or plunderer. The commentary says Rambus are a 
^8 of Daityas. 

t "Tf'e descendants of Dhumra.” is the reading in the Bombay 

lition. They are a class of Daityas. 

^ A group of Dduavas. 

§ The Bombay edition reads Daurkfidas, “ the descendants of Durhyid.’’ 

The descendants of Mura.” Mura or Muru is referred to generally in 
•lexion with Pr^gjyotisha ; e.g., Mahd-Bharata, Sabha-P., xiii. 578; Yana-' 

> 488; and Udyoga-P., xlvii. 1887*92 : Hari-V., oxxi. 6791-6801. 

A group of Danavas. They afe mentioned in the Mah&*Bh&rata, Sabha> 

’ ’ i^dyoga-P., olvii. 6379 : and Vana-P., c. 8691. 



602 


CANTO I,XXXYIII. 


♦ 

7 thousands of jifreat soldiers. C'ancjikd, seeing that most 
terrible army at hand, filled the space between the earth and 

8 the firmament with the twanging of her bow-string. Thereon 
her lion roared exceedingly loud, 0 king; and Ambika 

9 augmented* those roars with the clanging of her bell. Kali 
filling the regions of the sky with the noise from her bow- 
string, from her lion and from her bell, and expanding her 
mouth wide with her terrific roars, had the predominance.f 

10 On hearing that roar which filled the four regions of the sky, 
the Daitya armies enraged^ surrounded the goddess’ lion and 
Kill 

11 At this moment, 0 king, in ordep to destroy the gods’ foes, 
and for the well-being of the lion-like Immortals, there issued 

12 forth endowed with excessive vigour and strength the 
Energie8§ from the bodies of Brahma, S'iva, Guha and Visbna 
and of Iridra also, and went in the forms of those to 

13 C'an^ikd. Whatever was the form of each god, and what- 
ever his ornaments and vehicle, in that very appearance his 

14 Energy advanced to fight with the Asuras. In the front of a 
heavenly car drawn by swans advanced Brahma’s Energy, bear- 
ing a rosary of seeds and an earthen water-pot ; she is called 

15 Brahm^ni. Jklahesvara’s Ewergry, seated on a bull, grasping a 
fine trident, and wearing a girdle bf large snakes, arrived, 

16 adorned with a digit of the moon. AndKumaras Eneryj/, 
Ambikd, with spear in hand and riding on a choice peacock, 

17 advanced in Guha’s shape to attack the Daityas. Likewise 
Vishnu’s Energy, seated upon Garuda, advanced with coiicb> 

18 discus, club, bow and scyraitar iu band. The Energy of Har^ 
who assumes the peerless form of a sacrificial boar, she a so 


• For c'opavfiihhayat read c*dpy avfimhayat as in the Bombay editi 
t i P i® here used by itself in the Atmane-pada. The 
gives “ vanqnished the enemies ” as an alternative 
jajife as an alternative reading, which means then expan 

wide with her terrific roars.” . n • h 

J For sa-roshaiT the Bombay edition reads iaraughaif wit 


§ S'aktayah. 



the energies of the gods join THEfFIOHT. 503 

19 advanced assuming a hog-like form. Nfi-simha’s Energy 
assuming a body like Nri-simha’s arrived there, adorned with 
a cluster of constellations hurled down by the tossing of his 
>0 mane. Likewise Indra’s Energy, with thunder-bolt in hand, 
seated upon the lord of elephants and having a thousand eyes, 

|1 arrived; as is S'akra, such indeed was she. Then those 
Energies of the gods surrounded S'iva. He said to C'apdika, 
“Let the Asuras be slain forthwith through ray good-will.” 

22 Thereupon from the goddess’ body there came forth 
C andika’s Energy, most terrific, exceedingly fierce, howling 

23 hke a hundred jackals. And she the unconquered said to 
g'iva, who was smoke-coloured and had matted locks, “ Be 
thou, ray lord, a messenger to the presence of S’urabha and 

'24 Nisumbha. Say unto the two overweening Dauavas, S'umbha 
1 and Nisumbha, and to whatever other Ddnavas are assembled 
I 25 there to do battle— * Let Indra obtain the three worlds, 
let the gods be the enjoyers of the oblations ; go ye to Pdtdla 
) if ye wish to live. Yet if through pride in your strength ye 
are longing for battle, come ye on then ! let my jackals be 
I glutted with your flesh.’” Because the goddess appointed 
S'iva himself to be ambassador * she has hence attained fame 
as S'iva-dubi in this world. 

8 Those great Asuras however, on hearing the goddess’ speech 
fully announced, were filled with indignation and went whcref 

9 KatyayaniJ stood. Then, at the very first, the arrogant and 
indignant foes of the Immortals in front poured on the god- 

10 dess showers of arrows, javelins and spears. And gracefully 
she clove those arrows, darts, discuses and axes, which were 
hurled, § with large arrows shot from her resounding bow.|| 

31 And in front of her stalked Kali then, tearing the foes asunder 

* For daityena read dlifyena os in the Bombay edition, or perhaps dautyena 

the rank of ambassador.” 

t Tntra as in the Bombay edition is better than yataA. 

♦ A name of C'ap^ika. 

: § For pratihdn read prahitdn. 

I !! ^^'^dta'dhanur-muhtair I the commentary explains dhmata as mavfv 
^^■kirena Mitam, “ resonant with the twanging of the bow string.” 



604 


CANTO LXXXVIII. 


with the onset of her darts and crushing them with her skn]| 

32 topped staff.* And Brahm^ni caused the foes to lose the * 
courage by casting water on them from her earthen pot 

33 weakened their vigour, by whatever way she ran. Mahei 
wara’s Enei-gy slew Daityas with her trident, and Visbu’s 
Energy with her discus, and Kumara’s Energy ^ very wrathful 

34 slew them with her javelin. Torn to pieces by the down- 
rush of the thunder-bolt hurled by Indra’s Energy, Daityas and 
Danavas fell on the earth in hundreds, pouring out stieams 

35 of blood. Shattered by the hog-embodied Energy with blows 
from her snout, wounded in their breasts by the points of her 

36 tushes, and tom by her discus, demons fell down. And Nri- 
sirhha’s Energy roamed about in the battle, devouring other 
great Asuras who were torn by her claws, as she filled the 

37 intermediate region of the sky with her roaring.f Asuras, 
demoralized by S'iva-dtiti with her violent loud laughs, fell 
down on the earth ; she then devoured those fallen ones. 

38 Seeing the enraged band of Mothers^ crushing the great 
Asuras thus by various means, the troops of the gods’ foes 
perished. 

39 Rakta-vija, a great Asura, seeing the Daityas, who were 
hard-pressed by the band of Mothers, intent on fleeing, strode 

40 forward to fight in wrath. When from his body there falls 
to the ground a drop of blood, at that moment starts up from 

41 the earth an Asura of his stature. He, a great Asura, with 
club in hand fought with Indra’s Energy, and India s Energy 

42 then struck Rakta-vija with her thunder-bolt ; blood flowed 
quickly from him when wounded by the thunder-bolt. There 
upon stood up together fresh combatants, like him in i^ody^ 

43 like him in valour ; /or as many blood-drops fell from ^ 
body, so many men came into being, like him in 

44 strength and valour. And those men also who 
his blood fought there with the Mothers in a combat, 

45 because of the sweep of their very sharp weapons. » 

* For hhaUdnga read kha*vdnga. 

f Ndddp^rna’dig-antard. The reading of the Calcutta e i m ^ 

dig-amhard is hardly satisfactory. 

X Mdtri-gana : i.e., the Energies, 



the slating of the asura rakta-v£ja. ^05 

when his head was wounded by the fall of her thunder-bolt, 
his blood poured forth ; therefrom were born men by thou- 
sands. And Vishnu s Energy struck at this foe with her discus 
in the battle. Indra’s Energy beat that lord of the Asuras 
17 with her club. The world was filled by the thousands of 
great Asuras, who wei-e his equals, and who sprang from the 
blood that flowed from him when cloven by the discus of 
(8 Vishnu’s Energy. Kumara’s Energy struck the great Asura 
Rakta-vija with her spear, and Varaha’s Energy also struck 
Am with her sword, and Mahe4vara’s ^nergf^ with her trident. 
4!) And the Daitya Hakta-vija, that great Asura, filled full of 
wrath, sfruck every one of the Mothers in turn with his club. 

50 By the stream of blood, which fell on tlio earth from him 
when he received many wounds from the spears, darts and 
other weapons^ Asuras came verily* into being in hundreds. 

51 And those Asuras wiio sprang from Asura’s blood pervaded 
the whole world ; thereat the gods fell into the utmost terror. 

52 Seeing the gods dejected, C'andika spoke with haste ; she said 
58 to Kali, “0 C'amuncla ! stretch out thy mouth wide ; with this 

mouth do thou quickly take in the great Asuras, which are 
the drops of blood, that have come into being out of Kakta- 
vijaf at the descent of my weapon on him. Beam about in 
the battle, devouring the great Asuras who spi ang from him ; 
so shall this Daitya with his blood ebbing away meet destruc- 
)5 tion. These fierce demons are being devoured by thee and at 
the same time no others will be produced.” 

Having enjoined her thus, the goddess next smoto him with 
her dart. Kali swallowed Rakta-vija’s blood with her mouth. 

>7 Then ho struck C'andika with his club there ; and the blow of 
his club caused her no pain, even the slightest, but from his 
h stricken body blood flowed copiously, and from whatever 
direction it came, C'amunda takes it then with her mouth. The 
?rcat Asuras, who sprang up from the flow of blood in her 
^ mouth, C'amundA both devoured them and quaffed his blood. 
The goddess smote Rakta-vija wilh her dart, her thunder-bolt, 

yodhai read yo vai aB in the Bombny edition, 
t J'or Rakta.vmdoh read Rahta-vijaf, as in the Bombay edition. 

64 



506 


CANTO LXXXIX. 


60 

61 


arrows, swords and spears, when C'dmtio^A drank up his blood. 
Stricken with that multitude of weapons, he fell on the earth’i 
surface, and the great Asura Rakta-vija became blood-^ 
0 king. Thereat the thirty gods gained joy unparalleled 
0 king. The band of Mothers which sprang from them 
broke into a dance, being intoxicated with blood. 


Canto LXXXIX. 


The Devi-mdhdbnya» 

The slaying of Nisumbha, 

Niiumhha attacked the goddess O'andikd and was worsted in single 
combat. — Sumbha came to his help, but the goddess foiled hi% 
and slew Nisumbha’-^Numbers of the Asuras were destroyed. 

The king spoke : 

1 Wonderful is this that thou. Sir, hast related to me, 
the majesty of the goddess’ exploits in connexion with 

2 the slaying of Rakta-vija ; and I wish to hear further what 
deed did S'umbha do after Rakta-vija was killed, and wkt 
the very irascible Niiumhha did. 

The rishi spoke : 

3 After Rakta-vija was slain and other demons were killed 
in the fight, the Asura S'umbha gave way to unbounded wrath, 

4 and Niiumhha also. Pouring out his indignation at behold 
ing his great army being slaughtered, Niiumhha then rns e 

6 forward with the flower of the Asura army. In Iro”* 
and behind and on both sides great Asuras, biting their 

6 and enraged, advanced to slay the goddess. 

forward, mighty in valour, surrounded with bis own ^ 
to slay O'aijKjika in his rage, after engaging in hat^® ^ 

7 the Mothers. Then occurred a desperate combat 
the goddess and S'umbha and Ni^umbba, who both, » ® 



507 


C^AlSrpIKA FIGHTS WITH dUMBHA AND NI^DMBHA. 

I thunder-clouds, rained a most tempestuous shower of arrows 

I ^ on her. C'a^<JikA with multitudes of arrows quickly split 
the arrows shot by them, and smote the two Asura lords on 
tlieir limbs with her numerous weapons. 

9 Ni^umbha grasping a sharp scymitar and glittering shield 

struck the lion, the noble beast that bore the goddess, on the 

10 head. When her animal was struck, the goddess quickly 
clove Nis^umbha’s superb sword with a horse-shoe-shaped 
arrow, and also his shield on which eight moons were pour- 

ill trayed. When his shield was cloven and his sword too, the 
Asura hurled his spear ; and that his missile also, as it came 

12 towards her, she split in two with her discus. Then Ni4um- 
bha, the Danava, pufEed up with wrath, seized a dart ; and 
that also, when it came, the goddess shattered with a blow of 

13 her fist. And then aiming* his club he fiung it against 
C andika, yet that was shivered by the goddess’ trident and 

14 became ashes. As that lordly Daitya then advanced with 
battle-axe in hand, the goddess struck him with a multi- 
tado of arrows and laid him low on the ground. 

15 When his brother Ni^umbha, who was terrible in prowess, 
fell to the ground, Sumbha in utmost fury strode forward to 

16 slay Ambika. And he, standing in his chariot, appeared to 
fill the entire sky with his eight arms, which were lifted far 
on high grasping his superb weapons. 

1^ Beholding him approaching, the goddess sounded her 
conch, and made her bow also give forth from its string a 

8 note which was exceedingly hard to endure. And she filled 

regions with the clanging of her bell, which caused 

9 the vigour of all the Daitya hosts to die away. Then her 
lion filled the heaven, the earth and the ten regions of the 
sky with loud roars, which checked the copious flow of 

^ the exudation from the demons^ rutting elephants. KAli 

^ springing upward then struck the heaven and the earth with 
l>otIi her hands ; the boom thereof drowned those previous 
sounds. S’iva-dfitit uttered a loud inauspicious laugh. At 

^dhya. The Bombay edition reads dddya, “ taking." 

• «•) C'a^^dikA ; tee canto Ixxxviii, verso 27. 



508 


CANTO LXXXrX, 


those sounds the Asuras trembled ; * Sfumblia 

gHV0 

22 to utmost rage. When Ambika cried out “ Stand 0 evil 
Bouled I stand ! ” the gods who had taken their stations ia the 
air then called to her, “ Be thou victorious !” 

23 The spear flaming most terribly, which S'umbha approachinj^ 
hurled, that, gleaming like a mass of fire as it came along, viu 

24 driven aside by a great fire-brand. The vault between th( 
three worlds reverberated with S'umbha’s lion-like roaring, hw 
the dreadful sound of the slaughter among his soldiers snr 

25 passed that, 0 king. The goddess split the arrows shot bj 
S'umbha, and S'umbha the arrows that she discharged, eacl 
with het' and his sharp arrows in hundreds and thousands 

26 C'andik^. enraged thereat smote him with a dart. Woundd 
therewith he fell in a faint to the ground. 

27 Thereupon Nisumbha, regaining consciousness, seized his bon 
again and struck the goddess, and Kali and the lion witt 

28 arrows. And the Danava lord, that son of Diti, putting fortl 
a myriad arras, again covered C'andika with a myriad discuses.! 

29 The goddess then enraged, she, Durga who destroys the afflic- 
tions of adversity, split those discuses and those arrows with 

80 her own arrows. Then Nisumbha seizing bis clnb rushed 
impetuously at C'andikd to slay her outright, with the Daitja 

31 host surrounding him. As he was just falling upon k, 
C'andika swiftly clove his club with her sharp-edged scymi- 

32 tar. And he took hold of a dart. C'andika with a 
hurled swiftly pierced Nisumbha, the afilicter of the Iiumor- 
tals, in the heart, as he approached with dart 

33 When he was pierced by the dart, out of his heart issu 
another man of great strength and great valour, exclaiun*'? 

34 “ Stand ! " When he stepped forth, the goddess laughinga 
then struck off his head with her scymitar ; thereupon 
fell to the ground. 

35 The lion then devoured those Asuras whose necks ^ 
crushed with his savage teeth, and K^li and 

36 voured the others. Some great Asuras perishe , 

♦ For Asurdstreshu read Asuras tresuTf^ as in the Bombay edition 
t For e*ahrdyudhena read c'akrdyutena as in the Bombay edition 



C'ANpiKA’s COMBAT WITH 6UMBHA. 500 

pierced through by the spear held by Kumdra‘8 Energy; 
others were driven back by the water purified by the spell 
uttered by Brahma’s Energy ; and others fell, pierced by the 
trident wielded by S'iva's Energy; some were pounded to 
dust on the ground by blows from the snout of Vardha’s 
Energy; some Danavas were out to pieces by the discus 
hurled by Vishnu’s Energy ; and others again by the thunder- 
bolt discharged from the fingers of Indra’s Energy. Some 
Asums perished outright, some perished by reason of the 
great battle, and others were devoured by Kali, S^iva-ddti 
and the lion. 


Canto XC. 

The Dcvi-mdhdtmya. 

The slaying of Sumbha. 

hihikd absorbed all the other goddesses^ and fighting with Sumbha 
in single combat^ hilled him,-— -The universe was then filled 
with joy. 

The yishi spoke : 

1 Seeing his brother Nisumbha slain, who was dear to him 

his life, and his array being slaughtered, S'umbha in 

2 wrath spoke thus — “ 0 Durgd, who art tainted with the 
arrogance of strength, bring not thy pride here^ thou who, 
trusting in the strength of the other goddesseSf dost fight in 
exceeding haughtiness ! ” 

The goddess spoke .* 

Alone verily am I in the world here ; what other goddess 
18 there besides me P See, vile one ! that these goddesses^ who 
|iave their divine power from me, are entering into me 
indeed. 

^ Then all those goddesses, Brahmd^i and the others, became 
?-bsorbed into the goddess’ breasts ; Arabika then remained 
alone indeed. 



510 


CANTO tCr 


The goddess spoke : 

6 Whereas I existed* with my divine power in 

here — that has been drawn in by me, truly alone Istan^ 
now. Be thou steadfast in combat ! 

The rishi spoke : 

6 , Thereupon commenced a battle between them both, thi 
goddess and S'umbha, while all the gods and the Asnra 

7 looked on— a battle without quarter. With showers of arrows 
with sharp weapons and also with pitiless missiles botl 
.engaged anew in a combat which set all the world in feat 

8 And the lord of the Baityas broke the heavenly missiles 
which Ambika discharged in hundreds, with weapons tha 

9 parried them. And the supreme goddess in merest pla; 
broke the heavenly missiles that he discharged, with 6erc 

10 shouts, ejaculations and other sounds. Then the Asur 
covered the goddess with hundreds of arrows, and the god 
dess enraged thereat split his bow also with her arrow! 

11 And when his bow was split the lord of the Daityas too 
up his spear. The goddess split it, as ho held it in hi 

12 hand, with a discus. Next the supreme monarch of th 
Daityas, seizing his scymitar and sun-liko shield^ on wlnci 
a hundred moons were pourtrayed, rushed at the goddess 

13 at that monent. Just as he was falling upon her, C'anijik 
hastily split his scymitar with sharp arrows shot from he 
bow, and his shield also which was spotless as the sun s rayi 

14 With his steeds wounded, with his bow split, without 
charioteer, the Daitya thenj grasped his terrible mace, beio 

15 ready to slay Ambika. As he was falling upon her, she c ov 
his mace with sharp arrows ; nevertheless raising his J 

16 he rushed swiftly at her. The lordly Daitya broug 
fist down on the goddess’ heart, and the goddess a so sm ^ 

17 him on his breast with her palm. Wounded by the 

• For yadd sthitd read yud dsthitd aa in the Bombay edition. 

t For read devim. The Bombay edition r«ad» tarn , 

J For tadd read tadd. 



c'lNpiKA' SLATS ^UMBHA. 


Ml 


her palm the Daitya king fell suddenly on the earth ; and 
I ^gain indeed he rose up, and springing upward he seized 
the goddess and mounted on high into the sky. There also 
I C'andika, being without any support, fought with him. The 
Daitya and C'aijidika then fought at first with each other in 
the sky in a close combat, which wrought dismay among the 
) Siddhas and munis ; after carrying on the close combat for a 
very long time with him, Ambikd lifted him up then and 
whirled hipi around and flung him on the earth. When flung 
thus he touched the earth, he raised his fist hastily and 
rushed, evil of soul as he was, with the wish to kill C'andik^. 

I Seeing him, the lord of all the Daitya folk, approaching, 
the goddess then pierced him in the breast with a dart and 
i felled him down on the earth. Shattered by the point 
of the goddess’ dart he fell lifeless on the ground, shaking 
the whole earth and its seas, islands and mountains. 

4 When that evil-souled demon was slain, the universe 
became placid, the earth regained perfect well-being, and the 

5 sky grew pure. Portent-clouds, which were full of flame 
before, became tranquil, and the rivers kept within their 
channels, when be was stricken down there. All the bands 
of gods then grew exceedingly joyful in mind, when be was 
slain ; the Gandharvas sang out sweetly, and others of 
them sounded their instruments, and the bevies of Apsarases 
danced ; and favourable breezes blew, very brilliant grew the 
sun, and the tranquil sacred fires blazed freely, and tranquil 
became the strange sounds that had occurred in the regions 
of the sky. 


Canto XOL 

The Dem-mdhdtmya, 

The Eulogy of the Goddess. 

® pd$ offered a hymn of praise to the goddess.-^She granted them 
boon that she will always become incarnate and deliver the 
^^orU whenever it is oppressed by demons. 



m 


CANTO XCI. 


The fishi spoke : 

1 When the great lord of the Asuras was slain there by tlj( 
goddess, Indra and the other gods led by Agni offered praig^ 
to her, Katydyani, because' they had gained their desire;^ 
and their faces shone forth, and their hopes became mani 
fest.t 

2 , “ 0 goddess, who removest the sufferings of thy suppliants 

be gracious ! 

Be gracious, 0 mother of the whole world ! 

Be gracious, 0 queen of the universe! safeguard thi 
universe ! 

Thou, 0 goddess, art queen of all that is moveable am 
immoveable ! 

3 Thou alone hast become the support of the world, 
Because thou dost subsist in the form of the earth ! 

By thee, who existest in the form of water, all 
This universe is filled, 0 thou inviolable in thy valour! 

4 Thou art Vishnu's energy, boundless in thy valour; 
Thou art the germ of the universe, thou art Illusion 

sublime ! 

All this world has been bewitched, 0 goddess ; 

Thou indeed when attained^ art the cause of final emauci 
patiou from existence on the earth I 

5 All sciences are portions of thee, 0 goddess ; 

So are all females without exception in the worlds§ ! 

By thee alone, as mother, this world has been filled ! 
What praise can there be for thee ? Thou art beyoud praise 
the sublimest expression || ! 


# For ishta-lamhhdd read isMaMhdd with the 
t The Bombay edition reads vihdii-vaktrdbja-vika^itaia., 

nuoh the same. RnnibaT eili*'®" ^ 

t Propanuii but proamd, “ weU-pleMed ,» m the Bombay 

setter. 

§ The Bombay edition reads— 

Hriyah samastdh sakalam jagae' e'a. 

“ So are all fcmalee, and so is the whole world. 

. ” 


” 00 are an ^ 

1 Paroktih ; or “ the expression of the sublime. 



513 


HYMN TO C'ANpiK/. 


6 When as being the goddess, who constitntes everj created 

thing, 

And who bestows Svarga and final emancipation from 
existence, 

Thou are praised— for thy praise again 
What sublime words can be sufficient ? 

7 0 thou, who abidest under the form of Intelligence 
In the heart of every living creature ; 

0 goddess, who bestowest Svarga and final emancipation 
from existence, 

0 Narayapi, reverence be to thee! 

8 Thou in the form of minutes, moments and other ^rtions 

of time^ 

Dost bring results to pass ; 

0 thou wlio art mighty in the death of the universe, 

0 Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

^ 0 thou who art beneficent with every happinessj 

0 lady auspicious, who accomplishest every petition, 

0 giver of refuge, 0 Tryarabaka, 0 brilliant one, 

0 Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

* 0 eternal goddess, who constitutest the energy 

Of creation, permanence and destruction, 

0 thon abode of good qualities, who consistest of good 
qualities, 

0 Nardyani, reverence be to thee ! * 

0 thou who ridest in a heavenly car yoked with swans. 

Who assuraest the form of BrahraaiM,t 
0 goddess who sprinklest ku^a-grass-steeped water,! 

0 Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

0 thou who boldest a trident, the moon and a serpent, 


to Bombay edition inserts a verso horo — 

0 thou who art the Sapremo Way for the salvation 

Of those that seek refuge, of the woe-begone and of the afflicted, 

0 goddess who takest suffering away from every one, 

Tho ^ reverence be to thee ! 

® Energy (/aAti, fem.) o| Brahma. The swan is his vehicle* 

® Commentary traDslates kahankd as kthepai^a-kdriiff or d-iektri^ 

65 



514 CANTO XCI, 

Who art borne on a huge bull. 

With the natural character of Mahe^vari,* * * § 

0 Naraya^i, reverence be to thee ! 

13 0 thou who art attended by the peacock and cock, 

Who bearest a great spear, 0 sinless one ; 

0 thou who takest thy station in Kaumdri’sf form, 

0 Ndraya^i, reverence be to thee ! 

14 ' 0 thou who boldest as thy finest weapons 

A conch, discus, club, and the bow S'arnga, 

Be gracious, 0 thou who hast Vaishnavi’st form; 

0 N^raya^i, reverence be to thee ! 

15 0 thou who graspest a huge formidable discus. 

Who hast uplifted the earth with thy tushes, 

0 auspicious one, who hast a hog-like form,§ 

0 Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

16 0 thou who in the fierce man'lion|| form 
Didst put forth thy efforts to slay the Daityas, 

0 thou who art connected^ with the deliverance of tl 
three worlds, 

O Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

17 0 thou who hast a diadem and a great thunderbolt, 
Who art dazzling with a thousand eyes, 

And who tookest away Vpitra’s life-breath, 0 Aindri,** 
0 Nardyani, reverence be to thee ! 

18 0 thou who with the nature of S'iva-dutitt 


• The Energy {iahti) of Mabeivara or S'iva. The trident, moon and W 
pent are his emblems and ornaments, and the bull is his vehicle. 

t The Energy of Kumfira or Karttikeya. The peacock is his vehicle, an 

the cook is an attendant of his parents, S'iva and Parvati. ^ 

X The Energy of Vishi^a. The conoh, disoas, club and bow wc 
weapons. 

§ The Energy of Vishpu in his incarnation as a boar. 

II The Energy of Vishpn in his incarnation as a lion-headed man. 

^ Another reading is TrailoJcya-trd^'mahitej “Othon who art 
with the deliverance of the three worlds." . is k 

The Energy {iakti) of Indra, the slayer of Vritra. The d‘ 
ornament, the thnnder-bolt his weapon, and hp has a thonsand ej®** ^ 

' tt See canto IxKXvii, verse 25* 



HYMN TO C'ANDIk/. 

Slowest the mighty hosts of the Daityas, 

0 thou of terrible form, of loud shrieks, 

0 N^rayani, reverence be to thee ! 

^9 0 thou who hast a face formidable with tushes, 

Who art decorated with a garland of heads, 

0 C'amundia, who grindest shaven heads, 

0 Nariya?!, reverence be to thee ! 

0 0 Lakshmi, Modesty, Wide- Knowledge ! 

0 Faith, Nourishment, Svadha, Immoveable ! 

0 Great-Night, Great- Illusion !* 

0 Narayani, reverence be to thee ! 

1 0 Mental- Vigour, Saras vati, Choice One ! 

0 Welfare, Wife of Babhru,t Dark One ! 

0 Self-controlled Queen, be thou gracious! 

0 Nirayarii, reverence be to thee It 

! 0 thou who hast the nature of all, Queen of all I 

0 thou who possessest the might of all ! 

From terrors save us, 0 goddess 1 
0 goddess Durga, reverence be to thee ! 

• Kindly is this thy countenance, 

Which is adorned with three eyes ; 

May it guard us from all created things ! 

0 Katydyani, reverence be tp thee ! 

Formidable with flames, exceedingly sharp, 
Destroying the Asuras without quarter, 

May thy trident guard us from fear ! 

0 Bhadra-kali, reverence be to thee I 
Thy heUy that fills the world with its ringing 
And destroys the glories of the Daityas, 

May thy bell guard us, 0 goddess, 

Tto Calcutta edition reads “ Wide-knowledge ” again here, 

S'iva. 

The Bombay edition inserts a verse here — 

0 thon, the limit of whose hands and feet is everywhere, 
Whose eyes and head and mouth are everywhere, 

Whose ears and nose are. everywhere ; 

O N^Aya^i, reverence be to thee ! 



516 


CANfO XCI. 


Even ns like children from sins ! 

26 Besmirched with the blood and fat of the AsnrsB 
As with mire, gleaming with rays, 

May thy scymitar be for our welfare ! 

0 C'andika, to thee we bow ! 

27 Thou destroyst all sicknesses, when gratified ; 

But when wrathful destroyest all longed-for desires. 

No calamity befalls men who have sought unto thee ! 
They who have sought unto thee become verily a refagi 

themselves ! 

28 This slaughter that thou hast now wrought 

On the great Asuras who hate righteousness, 0 goddess, 
By multiplying thy body in many forms, — 

0 Ambika, what other goddess achieves that ? 

29 In the sciences, in the scriptures, which need the lamp o: 

discrimination, 

And in the ancient d'ayings, who but thou 
Within the pit of selfishness, wherein is exceeding greai 
darkness, 

Causes this universe to whirl about most griovonsly? 

30 Wherever dwell Rakshasas and virulently-poisonous Nagaa 
Wherever foes exists wherever the powers of the Dasyus, 
And where flaming fire appears amid the ocean, 

There abiding thou dost safeguard the universe ! 

31 0 queen of the universe, thou safeguardest the universe! 
Thou hast the nature of the universe, for thou upholdesi 

the universe. 

Thou art the lady worthy to be praised by the lord of tl)( 
universe. They are ^ 

The refuge of the universe, who bow in faith before thee. 

32 0 goddess, be gracious ! Protect us wholly from foar o 

our foes . 

Perpetually, as thou hast at this very time saved ns promp J 
by the slaughter of the Asuras !* 

And bring thou quickly to rest the sins of all the wor 

* # For yathd sura-hadhdd read yathdswra'ladhd^^ 



C ANpIKA GIVES THE GODS A BOON. 517 

And the great calamities which hare sprang from the 
maturing of portents ! 

j To U8 who are prostrate be thou gracious, 

0 goddess, who takest away affliction from the universe ! 

0 thon worthy of praise from the dwellers in the three 
worlds, 

Bestow thou boons on the worlds ! ” 

The goddess spoke : 

1 am, ready to bestow a boon. 0 ye hosts of gods, choose 
whatever boon ye desire in your mind j I grant it as a thing 
that benefits the worlds. 

The gods spoke : 

0 queen of all, complete thou* thus indeed the pacification 
of every trouble of the three worlds, and the destruction of 
our onetnies, 

The goddess spoke: 

When the twenty-eighth age has arrived, in the Vaivasvata 
Manv-antara, two other great Aauras shall bo bom, S^umbha 
and Ni^umbha. Then born as the offspring of Ya^oda’s womb 
in the cowherd Nanda’s house, and dwelling on the Vindhya 
mountains, I will destroy them both. And again becoming 
incarnate in a very terrible form on the face of tho earth, I 
will slay the Vaiprac'ittaf Dariavas ; and when I devour those 
fierce and great Vaiprac'itta Asuras, my teeth shall become 
red like the flowers of the pomegranate. Hence the gods 
in Svarga and men in the world of mortals praising me shall 
always talk of me as “ Red-toothed.”J 
And again after a period of a hundred years during which 
rain and water shall fail, pra.sed by the munis I shall be 
horn, but not womb-begotten, on the earth. Then because 
I shall behold the munis with a hundred eyes, mankind shall 
therefore celebrate me as Hundred-eyed.”§ 

For tvatU read tvayd. 

The descendants of Viprao'itti, 

^tdkBhi, 



518 


CANTO xcir. 


43 Next, 0 ye gods, I shall support* * * § the whole world with the 
life-sustaining vegetables, which shall grow out of my 

44 body, during a period of heavy rain. I shall gain fame oa 
the earth then as S^akambhari ; f and in that very period I 
shall slay the great Asura named Durgama. 

45 And again when taking a terrible form on mount Himavatl 
shall destroy Rdkshasas for the sake of delivering the munis 

46 all the munis bowing their bodies reverently shall laud me 
then ; hence my name “ The terrible goddess shall become 
celebrated. 

47 When Arunakshag shall work great trouble in the three 
worlds, I shall take a bee-like form, the form of innumerable 

48 bees, and shall slay the great Asura for the welfare of the 
three worlds, and folk shall then extol me everyone as 
Bhrilmari.il 

49 Thus whenever trouble shall arise caused by the Ddnavas, 
at each such time I shall become incarnate and accomplish 
the foes’ destruction. 


Canto XCII. 


The Devi-mdhdtmya. 

The slaying of Sumhha and Niiumhha concluded. 

The goddess descants on the merits of this poem and the beneficent 
results of reading and listening to it, — The gods regained thei 
rights and the Daityas departed to Pdtdla,‘^Her attributes an 
beneficence are extolled. 

* I.e.t nourish. 

t “ Herb-bearing ” or “ Herb-nourishing.** 

J Bhimd Dev(. 

§ Or Arundkhya in the Bombay edition j When the Asura na 
shall work, Ao.” 

II “ The bee-like goddess^** 



BULOOY OF THE DEVi-MAtfATMYA. 619 

The goddess spoke : 

1 And whoever with mind composed shall praise me constant- 
ly with these hymns, 1 will quiet down every troable for him 

2 assuredly. And those who shall celebrate the destruction of 
Madhu and Kaitabha, the slaughter of the Asura Mahisha, 

3 and the slaying of S'umbha and Ni^umbha likewise; and 
those also who shall listen* in faith to this poem of my 
sublime majesty on the eighth day of the lunar fortnight ^ on 

i the fourteenth and on the ninth, with intent mind, to them 
shall happen no wrong-doing whatever, nor calamities that 
arise from wrong-doing, nor poverty, nor indeed deprivation of 

5 their desires.f Never shall he experience fear from enemies, 
from robbers, nor from kings, nor from weapon or fire or 

G water-flood. Hence this poem of my majesty must be read 
by men of composed minds and listened to by them always 

7 with faith, for it is the supreme course of blessings. Now 
may this poem of my majesty quell all kinds of calamities, 
which arise from grievous pestilence, ^ and the three- fold 

8 portent. Whore this poem is duly read constantly at my 
sanctuary, I will never forsake that place^ and there my 

9 presence is fixed. At the offering of the bali, and during 
worship, in the ceremonies with fire, and at a great festival, 
all this story of my exploits must verily be proclaimed and 

10 listened to. I will accept with kindliness both the bali 
worship that is paid, and the oblation by fire that is offered, by 

11 him who understands or him who understands not. And at 
the great annual worship that is performed in autumn time, 
the man, who listens filled with faith to this poem of my 

12 majesty, shall assuredly through my favour bo delivered from 
every trouble, and be blessed with riches, grain and children. 

13 From listening to this poem of my majesty moreover come 
splendid issues and prowess in battles, and a man becomes 


* The Bombay edition reads stoshyanti, “ shall celebrate in song.” 
t tshta-viyajana i or ** separation from loved ones.” Piyojana is not io the 
iictlOOafy^ ^ 

t ^uha^mdri ; or ** cholera.'' 



520 


CAHTO XOII. 


14 


16 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


fearless.* When men listen to this poem of my ma’egf* 
enemies pass to destruction, and prosperity accrues and thej 
family rejoices. Let a man listen to this poem o/my majegty 
everywhere, at a ceremony for securing tranquillity, and after 
seeing an ill-dream and when planets are greatly eclipsed 
Thereby portents turn into calm, and also dreadful eclipses of 
the planets, and also an ill-dream which men have seen • and 
a sweet dream appears. It produces peacefulness in children 
who have been possessed by the demon that seizes children, f and 
it is the best promoter of friendship among men when union 
is dissolved ; it is the most potent diminisher of the power 
of all men of ill livelihood ; verily through reading it, met 
the destruction of Rakshasas, goblins and Pi^ddas. All tliig 
poem of my majesty brings a man near untome. And by 
means of cattle, flowers, arghya offerings and incenses, and 
by the finest perfumes and lamps, by feasts given to brahmans, 
by oblations, by sprinkled water day and night, and by 
various other objects of enjoyment, by gifts yeeAy-ik 
favour which comes by such means^ such favour is won from me 
when this story of my noble exploits is once heard. When 
heard it takes away sins and confers perfect health. 
celebration of me preserves created beings from /wto births, 
even this story of my exploits in battles, the annihilation of 
the wicked Daityas. When it is heard, no fear, that is 
caused by enmity, springs up among men. And the hymns 
which ye bave composed, and those composed by brahman 
fishis, and those composed by Brahm^ bestow a 
mind.f Ho who is surrounded by a raging fire in a fo 


* The text as it stands is incorrect, for pardkrama is maso., and 
mam, aco., has no verb. I have read therefore pardkramaS c'a for 
mam c'a. The Bombay edition reads tathotpattih pfithah hh 
mdmd c'a, and the commentary translates the verse thus— “From i 
this poem of my majesty, and to my splendid diverse appoara 
forms of the Energies, and to my feats of prowe^ in battles, a man 
fearless.” 

f Bdla‘gra1ia ; see canto li. • 

•X Or gatim, “ opurso” or ” issue.” 



the demons were banished to patala. 


52’! 


5 or on a lonesome road, or who is encompassed by robbers in 
a desolate spot, or who is captured by enemies^ or who is 
prowled after by a lion or tiger or by wild elephants in a 
5 forest, or who is under the command of an enraged king, 
or who is sentenced to death, or who has fallen into bonds, 
or who is whirled around by the wind, or who stands in a 

7 ship in the wide sea, or, who is in the most dreadful battle 
with weapons falling upon him^ or who is afflicted with pain 

8 amidst all kinds of terrible troubles— sucli a mau on calling 
to mind this story of my exploits is delivered from his strait. 
Through my power lions and other dangerous beasts, robbers 
and enornies, from a distance indeed, fteo from him who calls 
to raiud this story of my exploits. 

The rishi spoke : 

9 Having spoken thus the adorable C'andika, who is fierce in 
prowess, vanished there, while the gods were gazing indeed 

0 on her. The gods also relieved from fear, their foes being 
slain, all resumed their own dominions as before, participating 
in their shares of sacrificos. 

il And the Daityas — when S'urabha, that most fierce foe of 
the gods, who brought ruin on the world and who was peerless 
? in prowess, had been slain by the goddess in fights and 
j Ni^umbha also great in valour was slain — all came to P^ala. 

Thus that adorablo goddess, although everlasting, yet 
3 taking birth again and again, accomplishes the safeguarding 
of the world, 0 king. By her this universe is bewitched ; she 
verily gives birth to the universe. And when besought, she 
hestoivs knowledge ; when gratified, she bestows prosperity, 
^ All this egg of Brahma, 0 king, is pervaded by her, who is 
[ ilahakali at Mahakala,* and who has the nature of the Great 

1 Destroying Goddess.f She indeed is Mahd-mari at the fated 
time ; she indeed is creation, the Unborn ; she indeed the Eternal 
gives stability to created beings at their fated time. She indeed 

Bhrine sacred to- S'iva at Ujjain; see Ragbu-Yamw, vi. 32-34; and 
* 8 ta.Duta i. 34 . 

“t ^ahd-nidr{; geo verse 7 above, 

G6 



622 


CASIO XCIII. 


is Laksbmi, bestowing prosperity on the houses of men wliile 
37 she abides with them ; and she indeed when she ig absent 
becomes the goddess of 111 Fortune* unto their destrnction 
When hymned and worshipped with flowers, and with inceDse, 
perfumes and other offerings, she bestows wealth and sons, and 
a mind brilliant in righteousness. 


Canto XCIII. 


The Devi-mdhdtmya {concluded). 


After hearing this poem, king 8u-ratha and the vaiiya firactitd 
austerities and worshipped the goddess. — C'andikd apjpeard ii 
them and gave the king the boon that he should be Mann 8mm 
in a future life, and bestowed knowledge on the vaiiya. 


The pshi spoke : 

1 I have now related to thee, 0 king, this sublime th 
Devi-mahatmya. Such majestic power has the goddess, by 

2 whom this world is upheld. Moreover knowledge is conferred 
by her who is the adorable Vishnu’s Illusive power. By bet 
thou and this vai^ya and other men of discrimination, and 

3 celebrated men are bewitched; and others shall became 
bewitched. Go unto her, the supreme queen, as to a place 
refuge, 0 great king. She indeed, when propitiated by 
bestows enjoyment, Svarga and final emancipation » 
existence. 


4 

5 

6 


Markandeya spoke : 

Haring heard this his speech, king Su-ratha fell 
before the illastrions risbi who performed 
and being down-oast by his excessire regarf for ^ 
by the deprivation of his kingdom, went fort wi 
form austerities ; and the vaiiya, 0 great muni, ^ 
get a vision of Amb4, took up his station on 


* A^ldkshtni. 



523 


WHO SHAriti BE THE MlNU S/VARNI, 

7 in fi river; and the vai^ya practised austerities, muttering the 
sublime hymn to the goddess. They both made an earthen 
image of the goddess on that sand-bank, and paid worship 

8 to it with flowers, incense, fire and libations of water. Ab- 
staining from food, restricting their food, concentrating their 
minds on her, keeping their thoughts composed, they both 

9 offei-ed the bali offering also sprinkled with blood drawn 
from tlieir own limbs. When they continued with subdued 
souls to propitiate her thus for three years, C'a^njikd, who 
upholds the woild, well-pleased spoke in visible shape. 

The goddess spoke : 

(J What thou dost solicit, 0 king, and thou 0 rejoicer of thy 
family, receive ye all that from me ; well-pleased I bestow it. 

Markaiideya spoke i 

1 Then the king chose a kingdom that should not perish in 
anotlicr life, and in this life his own kingdom wherein the 

2 power of his enemies should bo destroyed by force. Then 
the vai^ya also, whoso mind was down-cast, chose know- 
ledge,— ^0 he wise, knowing *what is mine,’ and ^what I 
!in\,'~kiwwledge that causes the downfall of worldly attach- 
ments. 

The goddess spoke t 

^ 0 king, thou shalt obtain thine own kingdom in a very few 

duys, after slaying thine enemies ; it shall be steadfast for 

^ thee there ; and wiien dead thou shalt gain another life from 
the god Vivasvat, and shalt be a Manu on earth, by name 

> 'Savarnika. And 0 excellent vaisya, I bestow on thee the 
boon which tbon hast besought of me ; knowledge shall be 
thine unto full perfection. 

Markanejeya spoke : 

* Having thus given them botli the boon that each desired) 
the goddess vanished fortliwith, while extolled by them 
both in faith. ^ 

Having thus gained the boon from tlie goddess, Su-ratha 
the noble kshattriya shall obtain a new birth tlii-ough the 
•Sun, and shall be the Manu SAvarpi. 



524 


CANTO XCIV. 


Canto XCIV. 


The Bauc^ya and future Manv^anfaras, 

M&r'kandeya mentions hriejly the succeeding Manus, the ninth to fJu 
thirteenth, and declares wliat shall be the names of the gods, risldi 
' and kings in their several periods. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 I have duly declared unto thee this account of the Siivarnlki 
Manv-antara, and also the Devi-m^hatmya which tells of tb 

2 slaughter of the A.sura Mahisha. And the origins of th 
Mothers also which were from the goddess in the great liattk 

3 and the origin as well as the life of the goddess C'amunda, am 
the majesty of S'iva-duti, the slaying of S'umbha and Ni^uiii 
bha, and the killing of Rakta-vija— all this has been narrate 
to thee. 

4 Now hear 0 noble muni, of the next Manu Savarnika. Ad 
Daksha’s son shall be Sdvarnia, who will he the niiitli Mam 

5 I tell thee about that Maim, and who shall he the gods, tli 
munis and the kings in his period, Tlie Paras and tlie Marie: 

6 and the Bhargas and the Su-dharmans shall he the gods ; tin'' 
shall be in threes; they shall be twelve groups in all; no 

7 their lord* shall be Sahasriiksha, great in power. He, wlio 
at present Agni’s six-faced son Karttikeya, shall be the Indi 

8 by name Adbhuta, in that Manu’s period. Medliatithi, Vas 
Satya, Jyotish-mat and Dyuti-mat, Sabala another, and Ha\y 

9 vahana another — be the seven rishis. PhrisM^'^^^ 
Varha-ketu, Panca-hasta, Nir-amaya, Pfithu-sravas, 

10 Ardish-mat, Bhuri-dynmna, Vfihad-bbaya — these 
royal sons of that son of Daksha, yea the kings. 

Now hear, 0 brahman, about the next Manv-antara, that o ^ 

11 tenth Manu. And in the tenth Manv-antara of the wise s ^ 
Brahma, the Sukhasinas and the Niruddhas shall he tbe^g^ 

12 with three classes each, according to tradition , they 


* Indra, 



ACCOUNT OP THE FUTURE MANUS. 525 

Sliiill bo the gods, a hundred in number, in the period of that 
future Manu. As there shall he a hundred sons* of his, 
!3 so Ml there be a hundred gods then. And S-auti shall be the 
ludra, endowed with all ludra’s good qualities. Hear thou 
4 ivlio shall indeed be the seven rishis then ; Apo-murtti and 
Havish-mat, Su-kritin and Satya, Nabhdga and A-pratima, 
0 and Vadishtha the seventh. And Su-kshetra and Uttamaujas 
and valiant Bhumi-sena, and Hataiiika, Vrishabha and An- 
li amitra, Jayad-ratha, Bhiiri-dyumna, and Su-parvan-theso 
hliall be that Manu’s sons. 

7 Hoar about the period of Dharma’s son Savarna. The 
Vilian.gamas, and the Kama-gas and the Nirmaua-ratis shall 
bo the (jods of three kinds; each shall be a group of thirty. 

3 Now tlie Nii’mana-ratis shall be those who preside over the 
luonths, seasons and days; and the Vihan-gamas shall he 
those who preside over the nights ;t the groups of Kama-gas 
) shall be those who preside over the motnerits.J Their Indra 
sliall bo named Vfisha, celebrated for valour. And Havish- 
' mat, and Varishtha, and another rishi§ Aruni, and Ni^-cara 
and An-agha, and another great muni Vish^i, a 7 id Agni-deva 
Hie seventh, these shall be the seven rishis in that period. 
ISarvatra-ga and Su-sarraan, Devanika, Purudvaha, Heraa- 
dliiuivan, and Dridhayu shall be the sons of that Mamij yea 
Hio kings. 

When the twelfth Manv-antara of Rudra’s son, the Manu 
n.iiiied Savarna, shall have arrived, who shall he the gods 
and munis, — hear about them. The Su-dharmans, the Su- 
mauases, the Haritas and the Rohitas and the Su-varnas 

^ Vranindni read putrdndin as in t ’.9 Bombay edition, 
both the Calcutta and Bombay editions road rdtrayo ’tha, which 
^ P oral of rdtri ; but this word should npparoutly be analogous to 
in formation, and bo an adjective derived from rdtri. Perhaps 
reading shonld be rdtrakds tu instead. 

^kis seems to be the meaning intended by the word mauhurttdfy ; but 
meaning given in the dictionary is “ asti-ologer.” 
editions read rishfir, but it can hardly be right, for it would be a 
name, and the number would then exceed seven. It seems to be a 
^01 ri,hir. ^ 



m 


CANTO XCV. 


% 

shall le tlic gods therein ; these five shall he ten-fold OTm 

24 Now their Indra shall be known ns ^lita-dhaman • 

■“5 in 

power, endowed with nil Indra’s food qualities. Hear 

25 me the seven r»8his also—Dyuti, Tapas-vin, Su^tapas, Tapo. 
miirtti, -^rapo-nidhi, and Tnpo-rati another, and Tapo.dh|iti 

26 the seventh. Deva-vat, and Upa-deva, Heva-Sresh^ha, Vidu. 
rntha, Mitra-vat, and Mitra-vinda, shall be the sons of that 
ManUf yea the kings. 

27 Listen while I tell thee of the Manuks sons and of the 
seven pishis and of the kings in the turn of the thirteentli 

28 Manu named Rauidya. The gods therein shall he the Sa- 
d barmans, the Su-karmans, and the Su-^rmnns the others; 

29 all these verily shall he the gods," O best of munis. Theii 
Indiu shall he Divas-pati, great in power, great in valour 

so Now hear while I tell thee of the seven psliis who shall be 
then — Dhriti-mat, and A-vyaya, Tattva-dariin, Nir-utsuka, 
Nir-moha, and Su-tapns another, and Nish-prakampa tbe 
31 seventh. C'itra*sena and Vi-ditra, Nayati, Nir-bhaya, Dridha, 
Su-netra, and Kshatra-buddhi, and Su-vrata shall he the sow 
of that ilfaww. 

Canto XCV. 

The Story of 

A Praji-pali named Rw'i formerly lived in solitary discovifort-H'^ 
forefathers appeared to him and urged him, to marry 
*red and they insisted on the importance of mamage. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 A Praj4-pati Ruci, who was devoid of self, free from pri^® 
fearless and moderate in sleeping, formerly roamed this 

2 Seeing that he was destitute of fii-e, had no 

he ate but once a day, had no hermitage, and was cut 0 
all attachments, his ancestors spoke to him, the muni. 

The Pitpis spoke : 

3 Dear son, wherefore host thou not done the 

^ taking a wife, since that is the cause of gaining 



*nU(/l AND HIS ANCmORS. 


527 


final emancipation from existence? without that there is 

4 bondage perpetually. A house-holder by paying worship to 
all the gods and the PiUps likewise, to pshis and guests, gains 

5 the heavenly worlds. He apportions the gods their share by 
uttering * svdhd* aloud, the Pitris by uttering * svadhd* aloud, 

6 created beings and other guests by the giving of food. Being 
such a negligent oiie^ thou dost incur bondage by reason of 
the debt due to the gods, bondage by reason of the debt due 
to us also, bondage unto men and created beings day by day, 

7 by not begetting sons, by not satisfying the gods and Pitfis. 
And how, by not fulfilling these duties through folly, dost thou 

8 hope to go the good way ? We think affliction, one affliction 
after another, may be for thee in this world, 0 son ; hell 
likewise when thou art dead, and affliction in sooth in another 
birth. 

Ru(5i spoke : 

9 Wedlock tends to excessive suffering, and is a downward 

0 course toward sin j hene'e I took no wife hitherto. Control which 

is gained over one's self, this is effected by firm suppression it 
is the cause of final emancipation from existence ; that emanci- 

!1 pation verily comes not from wedlock. That the sonl, though 
besmirched with the mire of selfishness, be washed clean day 
by day by those who have no family ties with the waters of 

!2 thought — better verily is this ! The soul, which is marked 
with the mire of actions that have developed during many 
existences, must bo washed clean with the waters of good 
perceptions by wise men who keep their bodily organs under 
control. 

The Pitfis spoke : 

Pitting it is that those who have their organs under control 
should cleanse their soul ; but does this path, wherein thou 
wendest, 0 son, tend to final emancipation from existence ?t 

^i-yantra^a ; a word not in the dictionary. 

1 1 take kiniu as fern tu interrogatively ; but the Bombay edition reads 
for mokshdya and kintu then would mean simply “ but “ but this 

^^1>. wherein, &o., tends to defilement.” 



528 


CAl^TO ICV. 


34 Moreover evil is driven away by means of disinterested* gift, 
and by results and enjoyments which are good or D1 according 

15 . to former actions. Thus no bondage befalls him wlio acts 

with a tender heart, and such action being disinterested tends 

16 not to bondage. Thus a former action done, which consists of 
merit and demerit, is diminished day and night by enjoyments 

. which consist of pleasure and pain, 0 Ion, among mankind, 

17 Thus wise men cleanse their soul and guard it from bonds; 
thus, on the other hand, indiscrimination, which is the m 
of sin, does not lay hold of it. 


Ruci spoke : 


18 It is declared in the Veda, ignorance is the path of action 
0 my forefathers. How then do ye, sirs, despatch me on tki 
path of action ? 

The Pitris spoke : 

19 Ignorance in very truth is thisf action thou mentmest-i]\i 
maxim is not erroneous ; nevertheless action is the cause nn 

20 douhtedly of full acquisition of knowledge. On that vierntt 
restraint, which bad men observe because they do not pei-forr 
what is enjoined, should tend ultimately to final emancipatio 
from existence on the contrary it produces a downwar 

21 course. But thou thinkest, 0 son, ‘ I will cleanse my soul , y( 
thou art burnt up by sins which arise from not performing 

22 is enjoined. Even Ignorance exists for the benefit of me' 
just as poison does ; although it is different, it ffoc 5 notiiitru| 
tend to bondage§ by reason of the means which are put m 

23 practice. Therefore, 0 son, do thou take a wife according 

precept; let not thy birth be unprofitable by thy not o se 
ing the business of ordinary life fully. 


# An-abhisandhita : dbhi-sandhitu is not in the dictionary. 

t For evait read evaitat. ^ meaning 

X The Bombay edition reads ndsau instead of so nte, an 
does not tend to final emancipation.” ' v “ beoanae it 

§ The Bombay edition reads handhdydnyd yato t « » 
different, it tends in truth to bondage.” to bond#?®’ 

a-nydyato, it would mean ” because of iniquity it ten s m 



RUC'l. PROPITIATES BRAHMA. 523 

Hu(5i spoko : 

[ I am now aged ; who will bestow a wife on me, 0 my fore- 
fathers ? Moreover it is hard for a poor man to take a wife. 

The Pitfis spoke : 

) Our downfall will assuredly come to pass, 0 son, and so also 
will thy downwaipd course j thou dost not welcome our speech. 

Mdrkandoya spoke : 

] Having spoken thus, the Pitpia suddenly vanished from 
sight while he beheld them, 0 best of munis, just as lights 
when blown by the wind. 


Canto XCVI. 

The sterry of Ruc'i (continued). 

hinrhcil hy his forefathers* admonition Ruci offered tuorship to 
Brahnidf and Brahnd promised he should gain his desire with 
the Pitris* help^Ruci poured forth therefore a long hymn auid 
prayer to the Pitfis, 

Markandeya spoke r • ‘ 

1 The brahman rishi Rucit being greatly agitated in mind at 
that his forefathers’ counsel, wandered about the earth, desir- 
! ous to find a maiden. Failing to obtain a maiden lie, iHu* 
minated by the fire of his forefathers’ counsel, fell into, deep 
1 thought, while his mind was exceedingly agitated;— “.What 
can I do ? Where am I going ? How am I to take a wife ? 
May that come to pass quickly, which will effect my, fore- 
1 fathers’ advancement I ” While the high-souled muni, pon- 
dered thus, a thought occurred to him — “ I will propitiato 
» lotus-born Brahma with austerities.” Thereupon. hq per- 
formed austerities to Brahrad for a hundred celestial years, 
and for the purpose of propitiating him engaged thou in the 
^ utmost scif-mortificatiou. Brahma the forefather of the 
•'vorlds thereupon showed himself and said to him— “ I 
67 



CAKTO XCVl. 


d30' 

7 well-pleased) declare thy earnest wish.” He fell 

then before Brabrnd, who w the origin of the world, and declared 
what he wished earnestly to do according to the counsel of hj, 
forefathers. And Brahm4 hearing his earnest wish spoks 
to the brahman Rudi. 


Brahma spoke t 


8 ' Thou shalt be a Prajd-pati ; thou shalt create human folk, 
After creating human folk, 0 brahman, and begetting soni 

9 and performing ceremonies, thou shalt then, after thy domi 
nion shall be taken away, attain perfect felicity. Being suck 

10 do thou take a wife as enjoined by thy forefathers ; and aftei 
reflecting on this desire, perform worship to the Pitfis 
those Pitfis indeed being gratified shall bestow on thei 
the wife and sons desired. When satisfied what may tlij 
ancestors not bestow F 


Mdrka^deya spoke i 

11 The on hearing this speech from Brahma, wh(W 

birth is inscrutable, performed worship to the Pityis oi 

12 a distant sand-bank in a river, and also gratified thf 
Pitfis, 0 brdhman, with these praises, respectfully, witl 
single mind, subduing his body, and bending hia neck 
faith. 


13 


U 


15 


16 


Ruc'i spoke i 

I pay reverence nnto the Pitps who dwell as _ 
deities in the ^rdddha; and whom even the gods verily 
with invocation concluding with the word svadha at ' 
^riddha. I pay reverence unto the Pitps, whom maharshu 
who desire to obtain enjoyment and final emancipation 
existence^ delight with mental ^rdddhas and with fait ^ 

Svarga. I pay reverence unto the Pitfis, whom the 
delight with all kinds of incomparable heavenly offering ^ 

Irdddhas iu Svarga. I pay reverence unto the Pitp8» ^ 
Qubyakas also, who earnestly desire boundless su 


* For rwAer read t 



531 


RUO'l’s HTMN TO THB PIT^LIS. 

peri I y because they are absorbed therein,* honour with faith. 

7 I pay reverence unto the Pifcfis, who are always honoured by 
mortals on the earth, and who grant unto men to attain unto 

8 the desired worlds by means of faith at the ^raddhas. I pay 
reverence unto the Pitfis, who are always honoured by 
brahmans on the earth, and who grant generative power for 

9 the obtaining of what they earnestly desire and long for. I pay 
reverence unto the Pitris, whom indeed forest-dwelling 

who are restrained in their diet and whose stains have been 
washed away by austerities, delight with ^raddhas performed 

0 in the forests, I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom 
brahmans, who practise the vow of perpetual celibate student- 
ship and who have subdued their souls, delight with intense 

1 meditation continually. I pay reverence unto the Pityis, 
whom as being bestowers of benefits in the three worlds princes 
delight with ^raddhas and all kinds of food-oblations accord- 

2 ing to precept. I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom 
vai^yas, who take pleasure in their own occupations, honour 
with Rowers, incense, food and water continually on the earth. 

13 I pay reverence unto the Pitris, whom as famed by the name 
Su-kilinf Madras also in faith always delight with ^rdddhas in 

14 this world. I pay reverence unto the Pitfis, whom as feeding 
on the svadha great Asuras, who have forsaken deceit and 

15 arrogance, always delight with ^raddhas in Patala. I pay 
reverence unto the Pitris, whom Nagas, who wish to obtain 
their desires, honour with 4riddhas and all kinds of enjoy- 

•6 ments according to precept in Rasatala. I pay reverence 
unto the Pitris, whom the Serpents, J who possess spells^ 
enjoyments and good fortune, always delight there indeed 
with ^raddhas according to precept. I pay reverence unto 
the Pitris, who dwell visibly both in the world of the gods 
and in the atmosphere, and who are worthy of worship by 
gods and other on the face of the earth. May they 

• Ton.maya.<uena ; referring to wealth, because they are the atteodanti of 

^^vera the god of wealth, and guardians of his treasures ? 
t A class of Pitfis regarded as the especial Pitris of lidras, 

I ^arpaik. 





CANTO xcn. 


28 feo^ive my offering. I pay reverence 
have become united with the Supreme Sc 

/ form dwell verily in a heavenly car, and 

deliverance from affliction the noblest yogins offer sacrifi^ 

29 with minds cleansed from defilement. I pay reverence unto 
the Pitfis, who also in bodily form in heaven feed on the 

^ svadhd for the purpose of bestowing desirable benefits, and 
who are powerful to bestow all desired ot^ects and who grant 

90 deliverance to those who have no engrossing interests, May 
all the Pitfis be delighted herein, who signify desires to thosA 
who wish for them^ namely ^ godhead, Indra’s status, or ^hat 
is more than this, and also sons, cattle, might and houses ol 

31 their very own ! May the Pit^is, who always dwell in the 
moon’s rays, in the sun’s orb and in a white heavenly car, be 
delighted herein with food and water, with perfumes and 

32 other odours ; may they obtain nourishment herefrom ! And 
may the Pityis, who have satisfaction from the clarified buttei 
in the oblation to Agni, who dwelling in the bodies of brah. 
mans feed on the same, and who reach intense delight by the 
offering of the pin(}a, be satisfied herein with food and water! 

33 May they, who have been greatly pleased by the chief 
maharshis with rhinoceros-flesh and with dark sesamum seeds, 
which attract the minds of celestial beings and are mnch 


WHO 

bodily 

0 whom as effcofi.™ 


desired by the gods, and with the herb Ocimum sanctum, 
S4 reach intense delight herein ! And may all poems which lire 
exceedingly coveted be for them, who are honoured by the 
Immortals ! May they then be present here at the flowers, 

35 perfumes, food and enjoyments which I have procured ! May 

they, my forefathers,^, who receive honour day by day, 

should be worshipped on earth at the end of the mouth 
on the eighth day, and who should be worshipped ^ 
end of the year and at its beginningjf obtain sati 

36 herein! May who as being luminous as the fn 

are worthy of worship from brdhm^ns, and who as 


* Or, “ The Pitris.” 

Ahhifudaye s or “ the rising qf the 
X Kumudendu-hhdso, 



RUO'i’s HYMN TO THE PITRIS. 


tlic hue of the risinpf sun are worthy of worship from 
ksliafctriyas, and who as bestowers of gold are worthy of 
worship from vaiSyas, and who as resembling the indigo plant* 

57 are worthy of worship from 4udra folk, may they all reach 
delight with my offering of flowers, perfamos, incense, food, 
water and other gifts and with the fire-oblation also ! Before 

38 them, the Pit^is, I am ever prostrate. May they, who eat 
of the food-oblations, those splendid sacrifices, which have 
been previously offered to the gods for the sake of exceeding 
delight, and who when delighted become creators of welfare 
for ns, be delighted herein ! I am prostrate before them. 

39 Hay they, who expolf Rakshasas, goblins and fierce Asuras, 
yea, what is unpropitious to people, and who are the most 

i ancient of gods, and who are worthy of worship by the Idrd 
of the Immortals, be delighted herein ! I am prostrate before 

40 them. May the Agni-shvattaJ Pitris, the Bar}ii-shad§ Pitfis^ 
the Ajya-pa|| Pitris and the Soma-pa^ Pitris attain delight 

1 in this ^raddha ! I have delighted the Pitris. May the bands 
of Agni-ahvatta Pitris protect the eastern region for me ! 
And may the Pityis who are known as Barhi-shads protect 

2 the son them region ! May tho Ajya-pa Pitris Vikewhso protect 
the western region, and the Soma-pa Pitris the northern 
region from Rakshasas, goblins and Pi^acas, and indeed from 

3 harm inflicted by Asuras ! And may their ruler Yama safe- 
guard me everywhere ! The Visva, Vi^va-bhuj, Aradhya, 

I Dharraa, Dhanya, S'ubhanana, Bh6ti-da, Bhiiti-krit md Bhuti 
are nine classes which exist among tho Pitfis. The Kalydpa, 

5 Kalyata-kartfi, Kalya, Kalyatard^raya, Kalyata-hetu and An- 
aglia — these six, they are known as classes of Pitris also. 


* NUtnihhdh, This is obscure. 

t Nir-ndiayantaSt Aa a verb this is not given in the dictionary, 
t The spirits of those who on earth neglected tho sacrificial fire. See 
fana III. 195 and 199. ♦ 

§ See Manu III. 196 and 199. 

Those who were the sons of Pulabtya and the ancestors of tho vailya 
See Manu III. 108. 

^ ,ThoBe especially who were tho progenitors of the brahmans. See Manu 
197 and 198. 



534 


CANTO XOVII. 


46 The Vara, Varenya, Vara-da, Pushti-da and Tushti-daji^ 
patfi and Dh^tyi — these seven indeed are also classes. Tiig 

47 Mahat, Mahatman, Mahita, Mahima-vat and Mahd.bala— these 
five moreover are classes of Pitfis, being destroyers of sia 
Sukha-da, and Dhana-da also, Dharraa-da and Bhuti.da« 

48 besides —such also is likewise called a four-fold class of Pitp, 
^ There are thus thirty-one classes of Pitpis, who pervade thi 

entire world. Delighted with mo, may they be satisfied anc 
ever grant me what is beneficial. 


Canto XCVII. 


The bestowal of a boon by the Pitris in the Bauc'ya Manv-antm. 

A body of light appeared in the shjy and Rtic'i offered a hymn to at 
the deities and Pitris — The Pitfis appeared^ and to enable kin 
to be a Prajd-pati granted him the boon of a wife— They cm 
mend the hymn offered to them and declare its manifold efficacy. 


Markandeya spoke : 


1 Now while he offered praises thus, a lofty pile of Hgh! 

2 appeared suddenly, suffusing the sky. When he saw tha 
very great light, which remained stationary encompassing thi 
world, Ruc'i sank to the earth on his knees and sang thii 
hymn. 


Ruc'i spoke : 

3 I pay reverencet ever to those Pityis, who are honoured 
incorporeal, t luminously splendid, who are rapt in raedita i 


• This word occurs twice, in verses 44 and 47. The Bombay editio 
the same. It seems to follow the Calcutta edition rather close y 


read 

erth' 


Devi-m&hatmya, ^ We and in 

t Namasydmi. It is used with the object ii| the gem i 

6 ; in the accusative in verses 4, 5, 7, 10 and 11 ; an m 
8 and 9. The construction with the accusative is‘ the on y 

the dictionary. ^ <, 1 ,^ »re 

f The Bombay edition reads A-murttdndm c*a murtidn i 

poreal and who are corporeal.” 



535 


RUC^I PRAISES THE PITIBLIS. 

4 and who possess supernatural sight. And I pay reverence to 
those granters of men's desires, who are the leaders of Indra 
and the other gods^ and of Daksha and Maric'a, of the seven 

5 rishis and of other sages. I pay reverence to all the Pitpis of 
Manu and the other chief munis, and of the sun and moon, 

6 among the waters and in the sea. With conjoint hands I 
pay reverence likewise to the c6nstellations and planets, to 

7 wind and fire and the sky, and to heaven and earth. And with 
conjoint hands I pay reverence to the devarshis’ progenitors* 
unto whom reverence is paid by all the worlds, who are always 

8 givers of what is imperishable. With conjoint hands I pay 
reverence always to the Praja-pati* Kasyapa, to Somaf and to 

9 Varuna, and to the princes of religious devotion. Reverence 
to the seven classes of moreover in the seven worlds If 
I pay reverence to self-existent Brahma who is contemplation- 

0 eyed. I pay reverence to the Somadhara and Yoga-mfirtti- 
dhara classes of Pitfis, and to Soma the father of the worlds. 

1 I pay reverence moreover to the other Pitfis who have the 
form of fire,§ because this universe is entirely composed of 

2 Agni and Soma. Now these who dwell in this light, and who 
have the bodies of the moon, sun and fire, || and whose true na- 
ture is the world, and whose true nature is BrahradV — to all 

1 those Pitris, practisers of religious devotion, I pay reverence 
with subdued mind, reverence, yea reverence. May they, the 
consumers of the svadha, be gracious unto me ! 

Markandeya syoke : 

^ Being thus praised by him, 0 best of munis, those Pitfis 
issued forth with their splendour, illuminating the ten regions 

' of the sky ; and he beheld them standing in front then, 


or Prajd-paUh read Prajd-pate ? 

1 Or, “ the moon.” * Soma ’ seems to be played upon in its various mean- 
in these verses. 

I Or, Reverence to the seven classes of Pifris and to the seven worlds ! 

is also played upon in its different meanings. 

I Surya and Agni.” ^ 

“Brahman,” 



^36 


CANTO XCVII. 


adorned with the flowers, perfumes <tnd unguents which he 

16 had presented unto them. Falling prostrate again in faith 
again indeed joining his hands, full of respect he exclaimed, 
separately to each of them,, “ Reverence to thee!” “Roverenoe 

17 to thee ! ** Well-pleased the Pitris thereupon said to him, the 
best of munis, “ Choose thon a boon.” To them ho spoke, 
bending his neck respectfully. 

Ruo'i spoke : 

18 Brahma has commanded me now to be the maker of a net 
creation. In such capacity I desire to obtain a mio^iohskl 
he happy, of heavenly kind, prolific. 

The Pitfis spoke : 

19 Here verily for theo let a wife be produced forthwith wh 
shall be most fascinating, and by her thou shalt have a soi 

20 a isdanu supreme, the ruler of a Mauv-antara,. wise, chara( 
terized by thy veiy own name, being called iRaucya jm 

21 thee, 0 Ru<5i ; he shall attain fame in the three worlds. B 
shall also have many sons, great in strength and prowes 

22 great of soul, guardians of the earth. And thou, becomhi 
a Prajd-pati, shalt create people of the foui- classes ; ao 
when thy dominion shall come to an end and thou shalt I 
wise in righteousness, thou shalt thereafter attain perfe 

felicity. i,- f, n 

23 And whatever man shall gratify us with t is y 
in faith, we being gratified will give him enjoymen 

24 sublime spiritual knowledge, perfect bodily health, an 
and sons, grandsons and other descendants . 

those who desire blessings must constantly praise ^ 

25 hymn. And he who shall recite this tymn, ^ 
pleasure, with faith at a srdddha, standing the w 

* The Bombay edition inserts a verse and a half desir* 

[the foregoing blessings] assuredly and whatever ese ^ 

Therefore men who continually desire sacred recompe ^ ^ 

the imperishable gratification of the • 

a'^nymn.” 



587 


THE MERITS OP -THE HTMN TO THE PllRIS 

5 of the br4hmans as they feast, that ttaddha, shall nn- 
doubtedly become ours imperishably, because of onr pleasuro 
in hearing the hymn when a man makes close approach unto us. 
I Although a driddha be performed without a br4hman learned 
in the Veda, although it may be vitiated by means of wealth 
i which has been gained unjustly, or although it be performed 
in any other defective manner, or although moreover it be 
performed with blemished offerings unfit for a iriddha, or 
be performed also at a wrong time or in a wrong place, or 
yet be unaccompanied {by the proper ordinances, or if it is 
performed by men without faith or in reliance on deceit— 
nevertheless such a draddha shall be to onr delight because 
this hymn is uttered thereat. Wherever this hymn which 
brings us happiness is recited at a 4r4ddha, there delight 
accrues unto us, lasting for twelve years. This hymn reeled 
in the winter yields delight for twelve years ; and this beauti- 
ful hymn recited in the dewy season yields delight for twice 
that number of years ; when recited at a traddha ceremony in 
the spring it tends to delight us for sixteen years ; and this 
hymn recited in the hot season causes delight toe sixteen years 
indeed. When a drAddha although performed imperfectly is 
consummated with this hymn in the rainy season, imperish* 
able delight accrues unto us, 0 Rudi. When recited at the 
time of a ^rdddha even in the autumn season, it yields us 
delight with men which lasts for fifteen years. And in whose- 
soever house this hymn remains constantly in written form, 
there shall we be present when a ^raddha is performed. 
Therefore standing at a ^lAddha in front of the feasting 
brahmans, 0 illustrious Sir ! th^u must hear this hymn which 
aapplieg nourishment unto us.* 

Tte Bombay edition adds— “Having spoken thus, his ancestors (Pitfis) 
to heaven, 0 beat of munis,” 


68 



m 


CANTO ICVIII. 


Canto XOVIII. 


The marriage of Mdlini and the conclusion of the Rauc^ya Mm- 
antara, 

Btic^i' married an Apsaras named Mdlini, and had hy her a son, tht 
Manu Bauc*ya, who will he the ruler of a manv-antara, 

M4rka9(}eya spoke : 

1 ‘Thereupoti from the midst of that river uprose an exqui- 
site Apsaras, charming, slender-shaped, named PramWa. 

2 And she spoke to high-souled Ruci in very sweet accents, 
bowing courteously towards him, she, beautiful-browed Pram- 
loca, verily a choice Apsaras. 

3 “A maiden of exceeding bodily beauty is my daughter, 0 
best of ascetics; she was begotten by Varuna’s high-souled 

4 son Pushkara* Take her when I give her, a maiden of exqui- 
, site complexion, to be thy wife; a Manu of great intellect 
shall be born of her as son to thee I ” 

Mdrkandeya spoke ; 

5 When he replied, “ So be it,’’ to her, she fetched up from 

6 out that water then a shapely maiden named Mai ini ; and on 
that sand-bank in the river Rudi, best of munis, after sum- 
moning the great munis together, took her hand %n marriage 

7 according to the ordinances. Of her was born to him a son, 
great in valour, great in intellect; he was named Rawyj 

8 after his father’s name ; he was famous on this earth. 
in his manv-antara who will be the gods and the seven 
and his sons and the kings, they have been duly 

9 . Increase of righteousness, and perfect health, and t e g 

of riches, grain and children — this without doubt is 
in this manv-antara, which thou hast heard about 

10 After hearing -of both the praise of the 

classes of the Pitpis also, a man obtains a ^ 

* through their favour, 0 great muni. 



THE STORY OF BHdn iND 6 XnTI. 


539 


Canto XCIX. 


Eulogy of Agni and fire. 

lere was formerly a very irascible muni named Bhuti, to whom 
everything was subservient— He left his hermitage once and put 
his disciple Sdnti in charge— The sacred fire went out, and Sdnti 
in consternation offered up a long prayer and eulogy tq Agni. 

Markai^ijieya spoke : 

Hear next thereafter about the birth of Bhautja, and 
about the gods, the yishis, his sons and the kings of the 
earth in his period. 

There was a disciple of Ahgiras, by name Bhdti, very 
irascible, a muni who used to invoke bitter curses for a smaU 
matter, and who spoke harshly on the occasion of a trans- 
gression. At his hermitage Matari^van blew not very 
fiercely, the sun caused no excessive heat, nor Parjanya 
excessive mud, nor did the moon even when full cause 
excessive cold with its rays, through fear verily of that 
irascible and very glorious muni. And the seasons, aban- 
doning their course, produced flowers and fruit at all times 
on the trees that grew in his hermitage according to his 
command. And the waters that flowed near his hermitage 
glided on according to his pleasure, and when taken into 
his water-pot were frightened at that high-souled muni. He 
was impatient of excessive trouble and was exceedingly 
irascible, 0 br4hman. 

And that illustrious muni having no son set his mind on 
austerities. Desiring a son, restricting his food, exposing 
bimself to cold, wind and fire, he fixed his mind on austeri- 
ties indeed with the resolve, “I will practice austerities.” 
The moon did not tend to make him very cold, nor the sun 
to make him very hot, nor did Matari^van blow on him 
•Severely, Q great muni. And Bhiiti, best of munis, beiftg 



540 


CANTO XCIX. 


greatly pained by the couples of opposite causes* did Bot 
obtain that desire and so ceased fcom bis austerities, 

11 His brother was Su-var(5a8. Being invited by him to % 
sacrifice and being desirous of going, said to his high. 

12 miitded disciple named S'inti, who was calm, who had the 
measure of religious knowledge, t who was well-behaved, 
always zealous in the guru’s business, observant of good 
customs, noble, an excellent muni. 

Bbtiti spoke: 

13 I shall go to the sacrifice of my brother Sn-varcas, ( 
^4nti, being summoned by him, and do thou listen to wbj 

14 thou must do here. Thou must keep watch over the fire i 
my hermitage thus and thus diligently, so that the fire ms 
not become extinguished. 


16 


18 


M4rka9(}eya spoke: 

15 Having given this command and receiving the ausv 
“ Yea ” from his disciple S’^nti, the guru went to that hia bi 
ther’s sacrifice, being summoned theretohy his younger W 
And while S’anti is fetching fuel, flowers, fruit and other thv 
from the forest for that high-souled guru’s maintenance, and 
17 performing other business, being faithfully obedient to 
guru, the fire which was the root of his . 

during that interval Seeing the fire had died ou , . 

sorely distressed and afraid of BhtiM, fell, though o ^ 
intellect, into manifold anxiety, thinking— . 

19 “ What am I to do ? or how will the gum 8 re 

I must accomplish something now ; ^ ^ishcc 

20 beagood thing done? « 

fire occupying the hearth, he will assure ^ 

21 once because of it to some grievous 

another fire here in the fire-place, then ° . ^^j^h la® 

22 vi8ibly§ will of a surety turn me into as 
sinful on account of the wrath and curse of 

• Heat and cold ja»d icon. % Bhm^parigruhah ' . 

a difBoult word.’ § Agni. 



HYMN TO AGNI. 


541 

not grieve so much for myself as for the sin committed against 

!3 the guru. The guru on seeing the fire extingnished will 
certainly curse me, or Agni be angry. That brahman is 

U truly of such immense power ! With what fitness will not he, 
under whose command the gods live in terror of his majestic 
power, assail me who have committed sin ! ” 

Marka 9 (}eya spoke : 

15 After pondering thus in many ways, being always afraid of 
that guru he, best of intelligent munis, sought refuge with 

16 Agni. Controlling his mind then he offered a hymn to the 
seven fires ; and with thoughts intent on them he joined his 
hands and knelt down on the ground. 

S'anti spoke : 

27 Ora ! Reverence to the high-soulcd perfecter of all created 
things, to him who has one, two and five side-altars at the 

28 raja-suya sacrijicey to the six-souled god ! Reverence to the very 
brilliant one, who gives their functions* to all the gods, to 
him who has S'ukra’s form! Thou bestowest permanence 

29 on all the worlds. Thou art the mouth of all the gods ! The 
oblation that is taken by thee, 0 adorable one,t cheers all the 

30 gods I All the gods have their life-breath in thee ! The obla- 
tion sacrificed in thee turns into a fiery J cloud ; and after- 
wards the modification which it undergoes in the form of 

31 water, by that comes the growth of all herbs, 0 wind-chario- 

32 teered god. Upon all the herbs animals live in happiness. Men 
perform sacrifices among the herbs also which thou hast crea- 
ted. With sacrifices also gods and Daityas and Rakshasas like- 

33 wise are fattened, 0 Purifier ; those sacrifices have thee for their 
support, 0 Fire. Hence thou art the origin of everything; and 
tbou, 0 Fire, aH composed of everything. The gods, DAnavas, 
Yakshas, Daityas, Gandharvas and Rdkshasas, men, cattle, 

* Or“meansof Bubgiatenoe.’* 

t Instead of tvaydttum bhagavdn havih^ the Bombay edition reads tvaydt- 
which I have adopted. 

in the Bombay edition is preferable to atnala^migha 

cloud." 



542 


CANTO XCIX. 


35 trees, deer, birds and reptiles are all fattened and nonrislied 
up by thee, 0 Fire. From thee indeed they take their birth 
and in thee likewise they meet their dissolution at the end 

36 Thou, 0 god, createst the waters, thou again indeed con 
sumest them, and by thee they are rendered wholesome to k 

37 the source of nourishment for breathing beings. Thouabidest 
among the gods under the form of glowing light* among 
the Siddhas with loveliness, among N4gas under the 
form of poison, among birds under the form of wind* 

38 Among mankind thou art anger ; among birds, deer and 
other animals thou art silliness ;t thou art stability among 
trees; thou art hardness with reference to the earth; 

39 thou art fluidity in water, 0 adorable god; and thou 
hast the form of swiftness in the wind ; thon moreover, 
0 Fire, with thy faculty of permeation abidest as soul in the 

40 sky.}: Thou, 0 Fire, who art the end of all created beings, 
movest about safe-guarding them. Wise men style tliee one; 

41 again they style thee three-fold. § Having fashioned thee in 
eight ways, they fashioned the original 8acrifice||. Supreme 

42 jrishis say this universe was created by thee. Without thee 
verily the whole world would perish at once, 0 Fire. A twice- 
born man proceeds on the course which is ordained by bis own 

43 actions, when he has paid worship to thee with oblations to 
the gods, oblations to deceased ancestors and other offerings 
after uttering the words svadha and svaha. Living beings 
have in truth the innate power of modification, f 0 thou who 

• Tejo-rupena. 

t Moha^, 

t The Bombay edition reads nahhasi tvam vyavasthitah instead, t 
abidest in the sky,” omitting ” as soul.” 

§ The three kinds of sacrificial fire, g^rhapatya, ^havapiya 
y The Bombay edition reads instead yajna-vdham akalpayf^^t 
fashioned thee in eight ways they fashioned (or esteemed) thee to be 
conveys the sacrifice to the gods.** 

^ Pari^dmdtma-viryd. The Bombay edition reads ^viryA^h » ^ 
instead of a ^ingnlar feminine noun ; but it means the same. ^ 

” alteration,” ” modification,” means “ adaptation,” this passage ^ 
able anticipation of modern scientific generalization. 



hymn to agni. 


543 

^ art honoured by the Immortals. Flames issuing from thee, 
moreover,* burn up all created things. 0 most brilliant 
Jita-vedas,t thine verily is this creation of the universe ! 
45 Thine are the Vedio ceremonial and the world which consists 
of all created things. Reverence to thee, 0 yellow-eyed 
16 Fire! Reverence be to thee, 0 consumer of oblations I 0 
Purifier, reverence be to thee now ; reverence to thee, 0 
bearer of oblations to the gods.t Thou verily art the maturer 
of the universe by reason of thy maturing§ things that are 
147 eaten and drunk. Thou art the maturer of the crops; and 
I thou art the nourisber of the world. Thou verily art cloud, 

48 thou art wind, thou art seed that produces the crops. Thou 
indeed hast been, and shalt be, and art for the nourishing of 
all created things. Thou art light among all created things ; 

49 thou art the illuminating Sun. Thou art day, thou also art 
night ; and thou art both the twilights. Thou hast golden 
semen, 0 Fire ; thou art the cause of the production of 

50 gold ; and thou hast gold within thy bosom ; || thou hast 
lustre like unto gold ! Thou art a muhurtta, and thou a 

51 ksha^a ; thou art a tru^i and thou a lava ; ^ thou existest 
in the form of kalas, kashthas, nimeshas and other periods of 
time, 0 lord of the world. Thou art all this universe, Thou 
art Destiny, which consists in continuous change. 

Thy tongue which is called Kali brings about the conclusion 
at the fated time, 0 lord ; by it** preserve us from fear, from 
sins and from the great terror of this world I Thy tongue, 
which is named Karaliff is the cause of the great dissolution 
of the world ; by it preserve us from sins and from the great 
terror of this world I And thy tongue which is called Mano< 

Tvatto, “ from thee,” would seem preferable to tato, “moreover.” 
t A name of Agni. 

t The Bombay edition inserts a line here — “ Thou indeed art the purifier 
the universe because of thy purification of all existing things.” 

§ f uc aica and pdc'ana ; the metaphor is from “ cooking ” with fire. 

I! 

“ewnre. of time. 

UBtead of bhaydt, “ from fehr,” the Bombay edition reads tayd, “ by it.” 

" Formidable.” 



$44 


CANTO XCIX. 


55 


56 


57 


58 


59 


60 


61 


62 


jav4* is characterized by the quality of lightness; by it ^ 
serve us from sins and from the great terror of this world ' 
tongue which is called Su-lohitaf accomplishes their desi^ 
for created beings, by it preserve us from sins and from the 
great terror of this world ! Thy tongue which is odlki 
Sa-dhtimra-var^idl causes sickness among breathing beings, 
by it preserve us from sins and from the great terror 
of this world ! And thy tongue which is called Sphnliii. 
gini,§ because it is altogether shapely, by it preserve ns 
from sins and from the great terror of this world! And 
thy tongue which is called Vi4vA8a-da|| bestows blessings 
on Ijpeathing beings ; by it preserve us from sins and from 
the great terror of this world ! 0 yellow-eyed, red-necked, 
black-pathed^lf consumer of oblations, save me from all faults; 
deliver me here from worldly existence ! Be gracious, 0 
seven-flamed Fire, 0 Kfisanu, 0 bearer of the oblations to 
the gods I Thou art proclaimed by the eight names of Agni, 
Pivaka, S'ukra and the rest. 0 Agni, 0 thou who didst 
spring up before all created beings, 0 VibhA-vaan, begia* 
cions, 0 thou who art called the Carrier of the oblations iotkt 
gods, 0 changeless one whom I extol ! 

Thou art Fire imperishable, thou hast inconceivable beauty, 
thou prosperest greatly, thou art hard to be endured,** ex- 
ceedingly ardent : or thy surpassing valour, which is changeless 
and terrible, vanquishes him who injures all the woridstt 


• “ Swift as thought.” 
t “Very red.” 

X Smoky-coloured.” 

§ “ Having sparks of fire.” 

II Forvt/vd aaddread vi/rdsa-dd ; “bestowing confidence”; ^ 

edition reads vUva-sfyd, “ creating the universe.” 

. ^ iTfisk^w-uartman “ blaok-pathed ” of the Bombay edition is better t 

krtsk^a-varnu “ blaok-hued ” of the Oaloutta edition. 

*• For dush-prahaso read dush’prasaho as in the Bombay edition. 
ft This passage appears to be corrupt. It runs thus in tbe 
edition;— 

Tvam a’Vyayam hh^nufm a»ie,8ha»lokaM 
Sami^rtako lianty athavdti-viryaw. 



HYMN TO AONI. 


545 


e3 Thou art tl.e sublime principle of being* that dwells in the 
lotus-heart of every being, f unending, worthy of praise. 
By thee was stretched out this universe which comprises what 
is moveable and immoveable. 0 consumer of oblations, thou 
61 art one in many forms here! Thou are undecaying; thou 
art the earth with its mountains and forests ; thou art the 
sky that holds the moon and the sun ; thou art everything 
that exists daily and thou art the submarine fire that 
is held within the bosom of the great ocean ; thou standest with 
)5 superhuman power in thy hand.§ Thou art always, 
worshipped as the ‘ Consumer of oblations * at the great 
sacrifice by great rishis who are devoted to self-restraint ; and 
when extolled thou drinkest the soma at the sacrifice, and 
mh'st the oblations also, that are offered in firo with the ex- 
!'i clamation vashat, for thy well-being. Thou art longed for|| 
continually by brahmans here for the sake of recompense ; 
i and thou art sung of in all the Vedangas. For thy sake 
brahmans, who are zealously devoted to sacrificing, study the 
C7 Vedahgas at all times. Thou art Brahma who is devoted to 
sacrificing, and also Vishnu, goblin-ruling Siva, Indra lord of 
the gods, Aryaman, and water-dwelling Varuna, Both the 

^Hich seema uniutelligible. Tho Bombay edition reads ; — 

Tavd-vyayam hhtmam a'hsfha4oka- 
Savardhakam hanty athavdti’Viryam. 

I have followed it except as regards tho word sa-vardhakam which seems 
ifiutrrcct. By comparing the two versions it maybe conjectured that tho 
fr^per reading should bo sani’ mardakam, or sam-indhakam or some such word, 

I have ventured to translate it by tho general phrase, “who injures.” 

Oi* “gondnesa,” sattva, Tho Bombay edition reads taitva, “ossontial 
ti-ath.” 

t l^or ‘pundarilcas tvam the Bombay edition reads •pundaHka-itham, which 
preferable. 

I ^^ar.divdkhilam. 

§ t)r, “iQ thy ray of light,” kare. Tho Bombay edition has a wholly 
reading here;- 

Bhavdn vihhuh pivati paydmsi pdvaka. 
as lord drinkest tho waters, 0 Fire ! ” 

. bat the readinff in tho Bombay edition ijyase, “ thou art sayi- 

in better. 

69 



646 


CANTO C. 


sun and moon and all the gods and Asuras gratifying the 

68 with oblations obtain from thee much-prized rewards. Every, 
thing, though corrupted with grave malady to the utmost 
degree, becomes pure when touched by thy flames. Of ablu- 
tions the most excellent by far is that which is performed with 
ashes ; therefore munis wait upon thee pre-eminently at even- 

69 ing.* Be gracious, 0 Fire, who art named the Pure ! Be 
gracious, 0 Air, who art unsullied and exceedingly brilliant! 
Be gracious unto me now, 0 purifying Fire who comest from 
lightning !t Be gracious, 0 Consumer of oblations ! Protect 

70 thou me ! With the auspicious form that is thine, 0 Fire, and 
with the seven flames that are thine — when praised by ms protect 
us therewith, 0 god, even as a father pro^eds the son whom he 
has begotten ! 


Canto C. 


The Fourteen Manv-antaras concluded. 

Agni pleased with the hymn granted Sdnti two loons; namely, the Jin 

was re-kindled; and Bhuti obtained a son who toiU he the Mam 

Bhautya, and became gentle to all— Agni also blessed the hym 
— The gods, rishis and kings in the Bhautya mano-anlara a 
named.— The merits obtained by hearing about the mmv-mim- 
are proclaimed. 


Markandeya spoke: 

1 Being thus hymned by him the adorable Fir^ 
appeared before him there, encircled with ^ 

2 0 muni. And the god who abounds in lig^^) please 

, « After doing tba* 

• The Bombay edition inserts a short verse nere. j^^aven whid 

people, who have easy self-control, by means of real fait ga 
is sung of by multitudes.’* 

t For vaidyutddya the Bombay edition reads vaidyu a > 
lightning-like splendour.’* * 

1 For prita-stotrena read pi itdlb stotrei^a ? 



STORT OF BHiJtI AND ^ANTI. 


547 


with that hymn, 0 brahman, spoke with a voice as deep as 
a thunder-cloud’s to S’anti who fell prostrate before him. 

Agni spoke: 

3 Well pleased am I with thee, 0 brahman, for the praise 
which thou hast offered in faith. I grant thee a boon ; choose 
what thou desirest. 

S'anti spoke : 

4 0 adorable god, I have accomplished my object inasmuch 
as I see thee in bodily shape ; nevertheless deign to hear me 

0 who bow to thee in faith. My guru has gone from the 
hermitage to his brother’s sacrifice, 0 god, and when he shall 
return to the hermitage may ho see tho sacrificial altar* 
0 with thee for its master. The sacrificial altar that has been 
forsaken Jby thee through my transgression, 0 Fire, may the 
7 bruliman sec that now presided over by thee as before ! And 
if thou shewest me grace in any other way, 0 god, then let 
^ my guru who is sonless obtain a distinguished son. And as 
my guru will display friendliness to his son, so may his mind 
9 become gentle towards to all beings. And whoever shall 
praise thoc f with this hymn, whereby thou art pleased with 
me, 0 changeless god^ mayest thou whom I have propitiated 
bestow a boon on him ! 

Markandeya spoke : 

On hearing this his speech, Agni, being highly conciliated 
with the hymn and with his devotion to bis guru, spoke to 
that best of brahmans. 

Agni sp^ko : 

Inasmuch as thou hast asked, 0 brahman, for two boons 
on thy guru’s behalf and not for thyself, therefore I am 
exceedingly pleased with thee, 0 great muni. All this Siiall 

* t'or dU^htyam road dhishnyam as in the Bombay edition, here and in 
^^0 next verso and verse 21. In the next verse dhishnya is treated as a neuter 
“'’0n, but the dictionary gives dhishnya, maso. only, this meaning, 
t yaiyatdm read yaic'u tvdm with tho Bombay, edition. 



548 


CANTO C. 


13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 


happen to thy gnru which thou hast prayed for— he shall be 
friendly to all beings and shall have a son. The sou shall 
bo the lord of a manv-antara, by name Bhautya, great in 
strength, great in valour, great in knowledge, 0 thou who 
praisest thy guru.^ 

And whoever with composed mind shall praise me with 
.this hymn, all his desire shall come to pass and he shall 
have merit. At sacrifices, on festival days, at places of 
pilgrimage, at sacrifices, at oblations to the gods, and at 
ceremonies let o Ttian read this sublime hjmn^ which yields 
nourishment to me, to attain unto righteousness. This 
sublime hymn^ which yields pleasure to me, when heard once, 
0 brahman, shall without doubt destroy sin committed by 
day and night. This hymn when heard shall at once quell 
the faults and other defects that attend improper oblations 
and times, and the faults which are committeMhj unworthy 
men also who have made such mistakes. This liymn of praise 
to me, when heard by mortals at full-moon, at new-moon ad 
on other sacred festivals, shall destroy sin* 


Markandeya spoke : 

Having spoken thus, adorable Agni became invisible forth 
with, while he indeed looked on, 0 mnnkjastasfe^’W 
npon a lamp expires. And when Agni had departed, Sint., 
with mind fully satisfied and with the hair of his body sta 
ing erect with gladness, entered the guru’s herm.toge 
There he saw the fire blazing brightly on the gurus sacn tm 


altar as before; thereat he felt an intense joy. t , ■ /. 

At this moment the guru also of that high-soule 
returned from his younger brother’s tfu 

hermitage; and before him the disciple pw 
salutation to his feet. And the gum, after acwp lOg ^ ^ 
and worship ogered, said to him J ^^^^turcs ah« 

exceeding loving-kindness to thee and too er 
I know not what this is; if thou knowest, “y ® 
quickly unto me.” Thereupon the brahman 

• Quru-ttava. This is better than reading 



THE MANU BHATTTYA’S MANV-ANTARA. 


549 

all that, namely, the extinction of the fire and ilie other 
20 incidents, to his teacher truly, 0 great muni. On hearing it 
the guru with eyes moist through affection embraced him, 
and gave the disciple the Vedas and Artgas and Upaiigas, 

0 great muni. 

27 A son was born to Bhuti, the Manu named Bhautya. Hear 
from me of the gods, rishis and kings in his manv-antara, 

28 namely, those who shall belong to that future Mann, while 

1 declare them at length ; and who shall bo the lord of the 

29 gods in the time of that Ma7iu famous for Ids deeds. Both 

the C akshushas and the Kanishthas, the Pavitras and the 
Bhrajiras, and the Dharavpkas— these shall be the five 

30 classes of gods according to tradition. S'uci shall be the 

; Indra of those gods then, great in strength, great in valour, 

31 endowed with all an Indra’s qualities. And Agnidhra, and 
Agni-bahu, S'uci and Mukta, Midhava, S'ukra and Ajita — 
these seven shall bo the yishis then according to tradition. 

•32 Guru, Gabhira, and Bradhna, Bliarata and Anugraha, and 
33 Strimanin * and Pratira, Vishnu and Saiiktandana,t Tejas- 
vin and Subala — these shall he the Manu Bhautya’s sons. I 
have declared this fourteenth manv-antara to thee. 

'd After hearing of the manv-antaras thus in order, 0 best of 
munis, a man obtains merit, and a diminished succession. J 
33 By listening to the first manv-antara a man obtains 
rigliteousness. By listening to S'^arocislia’s prriod he 
gains all his desires. He obtains wealth from listening to 
Aiittami’s story, and acquires knowledge in hearing the story 
^{/Tainasa; and when Raivata is heard about, ho finds 
37 intL'lligence and a handsome wife. Perfect health accrues 
fo men when C'akshuslia is lieard of, and strength when 
Vaivasvata is heard of, and virtuous sons and grandsons 
3^ when the Sun’s son Sdvarnika is heard of. A man obtains 
gteatness of soul when Brahma- Savarna is heard of, a bright 
uitellect when Dharma-Savarnika is heard of, victory when 

* ' f m 

fimanin in the Bombay edition is better. 

^ ^‘‘Ti-krandana in tho Bombay edition, 
future births ? 



650 


CANTO cr. 


39 Rudra-Savarnika is heard of, A man becomes the chief of liij 
kindred and is endowed Avith good qualities, when Daksha- 
Savarnika is heard of; he makes his enemies’ power small* 

40 after hearing of Raudya, 0 best of men. He acquires the 
favour of the gods when the Bhautya manv-autara is heard 
of, and also obtains the sacred fire and sons endowed witli 

41 gqod qualities. And whoever listens to all the manv-antarai 
in regular order, 0 best of munis, hearken to his supremi 

42 reward also. After hearing of the gods, rishis, Indras, Manus 
their sons the kings, and their genealogies therein, ho i 

43 delivered from all his sins. And the other gods, p’shit 
Indras and kings who rule over those manv-autaras ar 
pleased with him, and when pleased they bestow a brigli 

44 intellect. Having obtained then a bright intellect and having 
performed a splendid deed, ho attains a splendid course as long 

45 as the fourteen Indras continue.^ May all the seasons bo 
salubrious ; may all the planets be benign ! Assurodlj they 
are so, when ho has listened to the ordinance of the many, 
antaras in their order. 


Canto CI. 


The Announcement of the Genealogies. 

Mdrkandeya alludes to the famous races of hngs and hepns an 

account of the creation.-Brahmd created Daksha, a, d > 

daughter Aditi bore to Kahjapa a son Mdrtanda, loho m '« 
Sun incarnate.-Mdrkay}eya tells of the Mundane hgg «« 
Brahma's birth from it, —and expounds the word “ ni. 
KraushtukiJ spoke : 

1 Adorable Sir, thoa bast duly expounded ® thee 
the manv-antaras, and I have aseeitaincd i 


• NiMtayati ; not in dictionary. , 

\ For c'aturMiah read c'atur-dasa with tho Bombay e ^ 

t The discourse goes back to Canto Ixxx, and Krausbtn i, 

peered during the Devi-mdhitmya and the oonplading aw 

antaras, re appears here with the p— nortion o 



551 


the BEGlNNraa OF THE CREATION BT BRAHMA. 

giadaally and at length. As I wish to hear of the complete 
genealogy of the kings of the earth, beginning from Brahm4 
and the other progenitors, 0 best of dvijas, do thou declare 
it to me duly, adorable Sir. 

Markandeya spoke : 

3 Listen, my son, to the origin of all the kings and their 
exploits, taking for the commencement the Praja-pati who is 

4 the source of this present world, for this his progeny is 
adorned with kings, who celebrated many sacrifices, who 
were victorious in battle, who were wise in righteousness, 

5 who were numbered by hundreds. And by hearing of the 
exploits of these high-souled kings and their manifestations* 

6 a man is delivered from all sins. The race, in which arose 
Manu and Ikshvaku, An-aranya,t Bhagiratha and other 
kiags in hundreds, who all protected their territories well, 

7 were wise in righteousness, performed sjicrifices, wore heroic 
and understood thoroughly the sublimest matters — when one 
hears about that race, a man is delivered from a multitude 

8 of sins. Hear then about this race wherefrom thousands 
of subordinate lines of kings were separated off like subsidiary 
stems from a banyan tree. 

^ The Praja-pati Brahma, being desirous of yore of creating 
various peoples, created Daksha from his right thumb, J 0 

10 best of dvijas ; and the adorable lord Brahm^ who causes 
the birth of the worlds, and who is the supreme maker of 
the worlds, created a wife for him from his left thumb. 

^1 Resplendent Aditi was born as a daughter to that Daksha, 
and of her Ka.'^yapa begot divine Martanda,§ who has the 
nature of Brahma, (J who besto s boons on all the worlds, 

j^fpattayai c'a ; the Bombay edition reads the same. This is the nomin., 

^ inadmissible ; read instead c'aiva? 

t This is the reading of the Bombay edition and is right., The Calcutta 
reads Rau.avanya j this name is given in the dictionary, but I have 

^ met with it elsewhere, 

+ ^^yfishthdd dalcshit^dd daksham ; a play on the word. § /.e., the Sun. 

The Bombay edition aUo reads Bralmi sm-rufam j bnt read Brahma- 

“"■Vam instead ? 



552 


CANTO Cl. 


and who constitntes the beginning, the midaie and tho end 
in the operations of the creation, continuance and termination 

13 of the world ; from whom proceeded this unwerse and in whom 
everything subsists, 0 dvija; and whose nature this world 

14 with its gods, Asuras and men possesses; who constitutes 
everything, who is the soul of all, the Supreme Soul, eternal, 
yhe Sun took birth in Aditi, after she Lad first propitiated 
him. 


Kraiishtuki spoke: 

15 Adorable Sir, I desire to hear what is tho Sun’s nature and 
what is tho cause tvhy ho, the earliest god, became Kasyapa'g 

16 son ; and how ho was propitiated by divine Aditi and Kasyapa; 
and what he, the divine Sun, said when propitiated by her 

17 and what truly was his majestic power when be becamt 
incarnate, 0 best of munis. I wish to hoar it in its fuluesi 
duly related, Sir, by thee. 


Mdrkandeya spoke : 

18 Clear sublime Knowledge, Light, Luminosity eternal an 
free. Perfect Isolation,* Uuderstanding, Visible Mamfest 

19 tion,t Freedom of will, and Comprehension,! and Tnlell 

gence, and Perception, Memory and Discemment-te 

20 tho forms of that luminous Form here. Hearken as 
illustrious sir, while I tell thee at length what t o 
asked, how the Sun became manifest. 

21 In this world, destitute of light, obscure, w ic 

enveloped with darkness all around, a single huge egg c 

22 into existence, an imperishable most potent me ^ 

open; within it stood the \ 1 „ 

Brahma himself, who is the creator of the wor 

23 Cat of his mouth issued the great word m, 

and then the Bhdr, after that the Bhuvas,|| and 

. rnmlyam. t Mr-hh4t: a Word not in the 

t Sam-vid. § See Mann 1. 6, &o. 

11 These and the the ““n>ee, tb® ® 

tuLselvee and also the worlds that goby thesam 



the creation op the worlds and VIDAS. 553 

j4 diately thereafter the Svar.* These three mystic words 
therefore express the essential property of the Sun. Now 
from this essential property indicated by “ Om ” comes the 

25 subtle sublime form of the Sun. Next there ismed the gross 
Mahar-loifca, then the grosser Jana-Zofta, then the TapO‘loka, 
then the Satya-Zoika these are the seven-fold substantial 

26 forms. His permanent forms exist and do not exist, inasmuch 
as they assuredly come into existence in innate disposition 
and in feeling.t 

The word “ Om which I have uttered, 0 brahman, which 
has a beginning and an end, which is sublime, subtle, form- 
less, most sublime, permanent— that is the Supreme Spirit, 
yea his body. 


Canto CII. 


The Majesty of the Sun. 

irkandeya says that from Brahm&^s mouths issued the four Vdas 
and explains their peculiar qualities and transcendent merits^ 
The gods and the Vedas are hut manifestations of the Sun. 

Markandeya spoke : 

Now when that egg split open, out of the anterior mouth 
of Brahma whose origin is inscrutable, 0 mun), came forth 
1 hrst the Rid hymns, at once resplendent as the flowers of 
the China rose,! glorious in form, but disoon nec ted, § and 
divided into separate portions, and therefore bearing the 


"1 the Bharar-loka; and the moaning seems to be that, aa bo uttered eao 
yatic word, the corresponding world oamo into existence. 

* The Svaf'loka, „ , 

t Svahhdva-hhdvayor hhdvam yaio gac'e'hanti samiayam. Tbo y 

htion reads the same, bat it seems obscure. I have ventar 

* ’^'hyanty a^saihiayam instead. j r 

J Jwi; ro«a Sineiww. The flowers are very large and of 

crimson-scarlet ooloar, very conspicuous, / . . 

§ Noun the order in which they are new arranged For 

the Bombay editiun reada lejo-riva l>y “ “F 

Copied. 


70 



554 


(X^NTO on. 


3 form of passion.* * * § Out of his right mouth issued the Y ’ 
hymns, unimpeded, coloured like the colour of gold a"*] 

4 disconnected. Out of the posterior mouth of the lord 
Brahma, who is the highest of all, were revealed the Samar 

6 hymns, and the C'handas hymns. And the entire Atharvanj 
then, resplendent as a mass of black pigment or a clastei 
of bees, — that which has a nature as terrible as possible ^ 
which contains the magical rites and the rites for removing 

6 calamities, — became manifest out of the Creator’s left mouth 
it is composed chiefly of pleasure, goodness and darkness ^ 
and has the essential properties of gentleness and harshness 

7 The Rid hymns have the quality of passion ; and gooiines: 
is the qualityll of the Yajus hymns, 0 muni; the Saraat 
hymns have the quality of darkness ; darkness and goodnnsi 

8 exist in the Atharvan hymns. These emanations, blazing 
indeed with unrivalled glory, obtained each a separate station 
almost at first.l[ 

9 That then was the original glory which is declared** hj 
uttering the word Om.” The glory which comes from tlie 
essential nature thereof—that, having encompassed it com- 

10 pletely, remains fixed. As is the glory which consists of the 
Yajus, such is that of the Samans, 0 great muni ; they have 

11 grown into one in resorting to a supremo glory. Rites for 
the removal of calamities, and rites for promoting growth 
and magical rites also — these three things gained uDiuiift 
with the three Vedas, the Rid and tlie two others, 0 brahmau. 


• Rajo-rupa vahds, . 

t Atharvdnam, neut. nomhi. The meaning given in the dictionary is 
work, i.e., ritual of the Atharva-Veda,” but here it must mean 
Veda itself. This Veda receives marked praise here. 

X Tavad-ghora-svarupam tad. 

§ Sukha-Battva-tamah‘prdyam ; eukha is peculiar in this connexion ^ 
II For gund read guno ? It is remarkable that a higher quality is i> 
the YajurYeda here than to the Rig-Veda. ^ , 

^ Purvam iva. 

** Ahhi-hldyate ; ahhuhhd as a verb is not in the dictionary gee 

f;t Layam agamat. The reference seems to be to the 
verso 6 whore these rites are said to bo part of that \ eda. 



THE MERITS AND GLORY OP THE VEDAS. 


SS5 

]2 This uuiveiBe became moat stainless then through the sudden 
destruction of darkness, and was to be developed horizontally, 

13 upwards and downwards, 0 brahman rishi. That excellent 
glory of the C'handas became then an orb, and grow into 

14 oneness with the supreme glory, 0 brdhman. Since it 
obtained the name of Aditya at tho very beginning, it became 
also the essentially unchanging cause of this universe, 0 
illustrious Sir. 


5 The triple Veda, which is named tho Rid, Yajus and S^man, 
gives warmth in the morning and at mid-day and in tho 

6 afternoon also. The Ric hymns give warmth in the forenoon, 
and the Yajus hymns truly at mid-day, and tho Samau 
hymns give warmth truly in tho afternoon, 0 best of munis. 

7 Rites for the removal of calamities are deposited* in tho 
Ric hymns in the forenoon, rites for promoting internal 
growth in the Yajus hymns at mid-day, and magical rites 

18 lastly in the Saman at evening. Magical rites moreover 
should be performed at mid-day and in the afternoon eq^ually, 
but the particular ceremonies for the Pitris should bo per- 
formed with the Saman in the afternoon. 

19 In tlie creation of the world is manifested Brahm^, who is 
composed of the Rid hymns; in its permanencaf Vishnu 
^vho is composed of tho Yajus hymns; and S^iva, who is 

I composed of the Saman, at the dissolution ; therefore its 
pu sound is impure. J Thus tho adorable Sun, whose self is 
I the Veda, who abides in tho Veda and whose self is Vodio 

;2l knowledge, is called the Supremo Soul.§ And ho, tho 
eternal, who is the cause of creation, || permanence and 
'lissolution, on taking recourse to passion, goodness and the 

to iho cliangos by which that work gained rank as a Veda. But those 

^'ffla may also mean “ became blended with the three Vedas; ” see verse 17 
wlow. 




656 


CAMTO cm. 


otlier qualities, acquires the names of Brahtnd, Vishn 
tlip other gods. ‘ 

Now ever to be praised by the gods is he whose bod * 
the Veda, ^ “ 

Yet who has no body, who was in the beginning, who ' 
embodied in all mortals ; 

, Who is the Light that is the refuge of the universe who 
has righteousness that passes knowledge. 

Who is to be attained unto in the Vedanta, supreme 
beyond things that are sublime ! 


Canto CIII. 

Eymn to the Sun. 

BrahmA, finding the Sun^s glory too great for creation, offered a h\jm 
to the Sun, — The Sun contracted his glory, and Brahma accom- 
plished the creation, 

Mirkandeya spoke : 

1 Now when the egg was being heated by his glory abore 
and beneath, the lotus-born Forefather, being desirous of 

2 creating, pondered — “My creation although accompHsbed 
will assuredly pass to destruction through the intense glory* 
of the Sun, who is the cause of creation, dissolution and pe^ 

3 manence, great of soul. Breathing beings will all he bereft 
of breath, the waters will dry up through his glory, aoj 

4 without water there will be no creation of this universe. 
Pondering thus the adorable Brahmd, Forefather of the 
world, becoming intent thereon, composed a hymn to the 
adorable Sun. 

Brahmd spoke : 

5 I pay reverence to thee of whom everything consists 
Here, and who consistest of everything ; 

Whose body is the universe, who art the sublime ig 
Wbereon religious devotees meditate ; 


• Abhi^t^asah j a word not in the dictionary* 



HTMW TO THE SUN. 


667 


^ Who art composed of the Ri(^ hymns, who art the reposi- 
tory of the Yajus hymns, 

And who art the origin of the Saman hymns ; whose power 
passes thought ; 

Who consistest of the three Vedas f who art half a short 
syllable as touching grossness, f 

Whose nature is sublime, who art worthy of the fullness of 
good qualities.^ 

7 To thee,§ the cause of all, who art to be known as 

supremely worthy of prai8e,|| 

The supreme Light that was at the beginning, not in the 
form of fire 

And who art gross by reason that thy spirit is in the gods 
— to thee I pay reverence, 

The shining one, who wast in the beginning, the sublimeat 
beyond the sublime ! 

8 Thine is the primeval power, in that urged on thereby 

I achieve this creation, which is in the forms of water, 
earth, wind and lire. 

Which has those elements^ the gods and other beings for 
its objects, and which is complete with the word “ Ora 
and other sounds — 

Not at my own wish ; and that I effect its continuance and 
dissolution in the self-same manner. 


• For trayi-may{ read trayi^mayo as in the Bombay edition, 
t Sthulataydrdha-mdtrd ; this seems obscure. 

X Onna^pdra-yogyah. This may be taken in several ways j " who art adapted 
0 the fullest measnre of a suppliant's £ lod qualities,” or “ who art worthy 
f religious devotion by reason of the fullness of thy good qualities,” or 
who art worthy of religions devotion with the fullness of a suppliant’s good 
'lalities,” 

§ For (aw read tvdm as in the Bombay edition. 

II The Bombay edition reads, but not so well, paramosh ^ a ” and 

art to be known as the snblimest cue.” 

^ The Bombay edition reads instead, ddyam param jyotir a-vedya-rupam, 
Bopremo Light that was' in the beginning, whose form passes know- 



558 


CANTO CIV. 


9 Thou verily art fire. By reason of thy drying up of tt 
water thou achiovest* 

The creation of the earth and the primeval completion of 
the worlds. 

Thou indeed, 0 lord, pervadest the very form of the sky 
Thou in five ways protectest all this world. 

10 ^ They who know the Supremo Soul sacrihco with sacrifices 

to thee, 

Who hast the nature of Vishnu, who consistest of all 
sacrifices, 0 Sun ! 

And self-subdued ascetics, who curb their souls and 
thoughts, meditate 

On thee, the lord of all, the supremest, while they desire 
final emancipation from existence for themselves. 

11 Reverence to thee, whoso form is divine ; 

To thee, whose form is sacrifice, be reverence ; 

Yea to thee who in thy very nature art the Supreme Spirit, 
Who art meditated upon by religious devotees ! 

12 Contract thy glory, since the abundance of thy glory 
Tends to obstruct creation, 0 lord, and I am ready to begin 

creation ! 

Markandeya spoke : 

18 Being praised thus by the Creator Brahmd, the >Sun 
contracted his supreme glory and retained but very little. 

14 And the lotus-born god accomplished the creation of the 
world. Thus in those intervals of the former kalpM 

15 illustrious Brahma created indeed, as before, the god&, 
Asuras and other beings, and mortals, cattle and other 
animals, trees and shrubs and the hells, 0 great muni. 


Canto CIV, 

Praise of the Sun, ^ 

Brahmd finished the creation — He had a son Manch 'tvho h( 

* For karomi, “ I achieve,” the Bombay edition reads kar 
1 have adopted as preferable. 



CREATION Of THE QODS, MANKIND, ANIMALS, <&C. 559 

Kasyapa-Ka^yapa married Daksha’s thirteen daughters, and 

begot by them the gods, demons, mankind, animals, birds, ^c, 

The gods were subdued by the demons, and Aditi offered a hymn 
to the Sun^ imploring his help. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 Having created this world, Brahma then separated off the 
castes, the brdhmau’s four periods of life, the seas, tlio 

2 mountains, and tho islands even as before. The adorable 
lotus-born god fixed the forms and abodes of tho gods, 
Daityas, Nagas and other beings, as before, according to tho 
Vedas* indeed. 

3 Brahma had a son, who was famed as Marridi ; his son was 

4 Kasyapa, namely Ka^yapa by name.f Daksha’s thirteen 
daughters were his wives, O brahman ; and they had many 
cliildren who were tho gods, Daityas, Nagas and tho rest. 

•» Aditi gave birth to the gods who rule over the throe worlds, 
Uiti to tho Daityas, and Dauu to tho fierce Danavas whoso 
prowess is wide-reaching. And Vinata bore Garuda and 
Aruiia; Khasa tho Yakshas and Rakshasas indeed; and 
7 Kadru bore tho Nagas ; Muni boro the Gandharvas ; from 
Krodha were born tho Kulyas ; and from Rishta tho bevies 
of A])sarases ; and Ira boro Airavata and other elephants, 0 
^ fivija; and Tamra bore daughters of whom S'yoni was tho 
cliiet, 0 dvija, from all of whom were born tho hawks, 

‘I vultures, parrots and other birds ; from lid were born the 
trees ; from Pradha the various kinds of aquatic animals. J 
Ihis is the progeny which was begotten of Aditi by Kasyapa. § 

1 And by her sons and daughter.*^’ sons, by her sons’ sons and 

for devehhyas tho Bombay edition reads Vedchhyas, which is preferable, 
t ndma ndtnatali ; tho Bombay edition agrees, but this can hardly 

^ 'Ktt. Kasyapa would bo name of Kasyapa’s descendants. 

+ t or Prudhdydspatasdni gandh read Pradhaya yddasdm yandli as in the 
edition. 

^ ^‘Mapa’s wives and children are given differently in other authorities, 

'> ^Uha-liharata, Adi-p., xvi, Ixv. and Ixvi; Kurma Parana xviii; A^pii 
xix. 



m 


CANTO CIV. 

daughters* grandsons* and other descendantg this world 
overspread, yea by the offspring of those males and those 
females^ 0 muni. 

11 The chief of those sons of Ka^yapa are the hosts of godj 

Now these hosts are characterized by goodness, by passion 

12 and by ignorance, 0 muni. Brahm6, the chief of those 
learned in sacred lore, the highest of ally the Praja-pati, made 
the gods participators in the sacrifices, and rulers over the 

13 three worlds. The hostile Daityas and Danavas and Rakshasas 
combining harassed them, and a very terrible war occurred 

14 between them. Now the deities were vanquished for a 
thousand divine years, and the powerful Daityas and Danavas 

15 were victoriotfs, 0 brahman. Then Aditi, seeing her sous 
cast out and robbed of the three worlds by the Daityas and 

16 Danavas, 0 beet of munis, and deprived of their shares of 
sacrifices, was exceedingly afflicted with grief, and made the 

17 utmost efforts to propitiate the Sun. Concentrating her 
mind thereotiy restricting her food, observing the utmost self- 
repression, she hymned the Sun, the ball of light that dwells 
in the sky. 

Aditi spoke : 

18 Reverence to thee who hast a sublime subtle golden body, 
0 splendour of those who have splendour, 0 lord, 0 reposi- 

19 tory of splendours, 0 eternal one ! And the ardent form 
which thou hast who drawest up the waters for the benefit 
of the worlds, 0 lord of the heavenly cattle, to that I bow 

20 reverently! The most ardent form which thou 
bearest the nectar that composes the moon to tak ^ 
during the space of eight months, to that I bow 

21 The well-fattenedt form which thou hasty who ven y 
chargest all that same nectar to produce ram, to a 

22 cloud./or??i be reverence, 0 Sun! And that 
form of thine, which tends to mature the w 
of plants that are produced through the 

* Dauhitifika, a word not in the dictionary.. 

^ j^’Pydyaka ; a word not in the dictionary. 



HYMN TO THE SDN. 


'561 

83 water, to that* I bow reverently ! And that form of thine 
which, when there is excessive cold by reason of the pourinjf 
forth of snow and other causes, tends to nourish the crops 
of that winter season— to the passing over of that ihyform 
>4 be reverence ! And that form of thine, which is not very 
ardent and which is not very cold, and is mild in the season 
of spring, to that be reverence, 0 divine Sun, yea reverence ! 
:5 And thy other form, which fattens both all the gods and tho 
pitfis, to that which causes the ripening of the crops bo 
tJ rovenence ! That one form of thine which, being composed 
of nectar for the vivification of plants, is quaffed by tho 
gods and pitfis, to that, which is the soul of tho moon, be 
7 reverence! That form of thine which, consisting of tho 
universe, is combined with Agni and Soma tlicso two forms 
of the Suu,t to that, tho soul of which is tho good quali- 

[28 im,l be reverence ! That form of thine which, named tho 
three-fold Veda by reason of tho unity of the Rio, Yajus and 
Sarna Vedas, gives heat to this universe, to that bo reverence, 

0 luminous one ! That thy form moreover, which transcends 
that former one, which is enunciated by uttering the word 
‘‘ Ora,” and which is subtle, endless and stainless, reverence 
he to that, tho soul of which is Truth ! 

Markandeya spoke : 

In this manner tho goddess, self-restrained, abstaining 
from food, offered praise day and night, desirous of propitiat- 
iug the Sun, 0 muni. 

A long time thereafter the adorable Sun rendered himsplf 
visible to her, Daksha’s daughter, in tho sky, 0 best of 
dvijas. She behold a huge n ass of glory, dwelling in the 
sky and stationed on the earth, full of light, most difficult 
to be gazed at because of its halo of flame. Seeing him then, 
the goddess became bold to tho utmost and spoke — 

f’or tarn read tan ? 

^ Bombay edition roads dpyaya-ddha-ritpdbhyam, “ two forms of 

and conflagration.” 

+ ®"«'dmanc in the Bombay edition is better than gandtmanG, 

71 



CANTO cnr. 


“ Be gracious to me ! I can not gaze on thee, 0 lord of 

34 "heavenly cattle. Since I while fasting have beheld thee at 
first standing in the sky and most difficult to be gazed upon 

35 and afterwards as brilliant and burning, even so I behold 
thee here on earth a globe of glory. Be gracious; may I see 
thy form, 0 maker of day ! 0 thou lord, who hast coinpas. 
sion on thy believers, I believe ; protect my sons ! 

36 Thou, the Creator, Greatest this universe ; 

Exerting thyself thou protectest it to make it permanent- 
In thee everything passes to its dissolution at the end. 

Thou art it. 

Besides thee verily there is no other way of existence in all 
the world ! 

37 Thou art Brahm4 and Hari ! thou bearest the name Aja!* 

Thou art Indra, 

The lord of wealth Kuvera^ the lord of the pityis Yamo, 
the lord of the watersf Varuna^ the wind tayu ! 

Thou art the Moon, Agni, the lord of the sky, the sup- 
porter of the earth, t the Ocean ! 

What praise must be given to thee who art the splendour of 
all souls and forms ? 

38 0 lord of sacrifice, brahmans devoted to their own 

ceremonies, day by day. 

Praising thee with manifold words, offer sacrifice to thee. 
Meditating on thee with ifirmly restrained minds 
And absorbed in religious devotion mortals§ attain unto 
the Bublimest condition. 

39 Thou warmest, thou maturest the universe ; thou protectest 

it, thou turnest it to ashes. 


• Either the unborn one, ” or “ the driver, mover, instigator.” 
t Amhu-pattfjk violates the metre ; read ap-patih as in the Bomba; 
t Gagana-patih mahi-dharo j this is the reading of the Bombay 
The Calcutta reading gagana-mahi-dharo makes the verse two ny » ; 

‘ pd’tion I 

§ Martydlf,, the reading of the Bombay edition. The i 

reads instead yoga‘in<Lrtyd, " by means of the body which belongs ^ j 
devotion ; ” but this violates the metre. 



THE SUN REVEALS HIMSELF TO ADITI. 563 

Thou makest it manifest, thou makest it sound forth* with 
thy rays which are pregnant with water. 

Thou Greatest it again also in unerring manifestations* 
Thou art reverenced by mortal heings that move, but art 
unapproachable by workers of iniquity .f 


Canto CV. 


The Birth of Mdrttandn. 

The Sun revealed himself to Aditi and became her son as Udrtta^da-^ 
This name is explained — Mdrttania destroyed the demons and 
restored the gods to their sovereign positions. 

Markan^eya spoke ; 

1 Thereupon from out of that his own glory the Sun re- 
vealodj himself ; the lord, the Sun, appeared then, like unto 

2 glowing copper. And the luminous one spoke, 0 muni, unto 
the goddess, who fell prostrate when she beheld him — 

3 “ Choose from me the coveted boon that thou desirest.” And 
she, lying prostrate with her head on the ground and pressing 
the earth with her knees, answered the Sun who present in 
his very person offered her a boon 

^ 0 god ! be gracious j the three worlds have been snatched§ 

from my sons, and the shares in sacrifices also^ by both the 

S Daityas and the DAnavas who excel them in strength. Do 
thou, 0 lord of the heavenly cattle, bestow on me favour for 

* SradaycLsi in both editions* The meaning is no doubt to shout for 
5 see the Bible, Psalm Ixv* 9-13. 

t The Bombay edition reads the second half of this verse very differ- 

iitly_“Thou the lotns-bom god Greatest itj then who art named the 

^“Wavering one protectest it, and thou destroyest it at the end of the ago. 
alone art awful in form I ” 

t For ddir hHto read dvir-hh^o^ as in the Bombay edition. 

§»For Afitam road hritam. 



664 


CANTO CV. 


6 

7 . 


that purpose ; with a portion o/ thyself enter thou into broth 
hood with them and destroy their enemies. In order that 
sons may again partake of the shares of the sacrifices, 0 
and may become rulers of the three worlds, 0 Sun, do thou 


then most graciously show compassion* on my sons, 0 San 
who removest the afflictions of suppliants; thou art called the 


Author of permanence.* * * § ’ 


Markandeya spoke : 


8 Thereupon the*^ adorable lord, the Sun, the robber of the 
waters, spoke unto prostrate Aditi, 0 brihman, while his 

9 countenance was benign with favourf — “ Taking birth in thy 
womb with all my thousand portions, I will speedily destroy 
the foes of thy sons, 0 Aditi, in security.'*! 

10 Having spoken thus the adorable Sun vanished /rent br 
sight ; and she ceased from her austerities, having gained all , 
J 1 her desire. Thereupon the Sun's ray called Sausumna§ from 
out of his thousand raysH became incarnate in the worab of 
,12 the mother of the gods, 0 brahman. And she, with her 
, mind composed, performed the arduous edndrayana penance^ i 
and other austerities. Being pure she conceived him, knowing 
13 that the embryo was a heavenly one, 0 brahman. Then 
spoke Ka^yapa to her with words somewhat confused through 
14j anger, — “ Why dost thou destroy the egg in thy womb by 
continual fasting ?” And sho said to him, — “ Seost thou 
this egg within ray worab, 0 wrathful man? It 
not been destroyed; it shall be for the death of 
adversaries,” 


* For anuhampd road anuhampdm, 

t For prouddam sumukho read prasddA'Sumukho, 

J For nir-vritdh read nir^vrita^, , 

§ This is the reading of both the editions, but it is not in the die 
Su-shumnu is the name of one of the Sun’s seven principal rays, 
supposed to supply heat to the moon. The reading hero shoal 
presumably be Su-shumna or Baushurnna, 

II For ra4mi-8aha8raih read raimi’Scihaifdt as in the Bomb®/ ^ 

•j[ See Manu vi. 20. 



mXhttanpa destroys the asuras. 


665 


MArka^deya spoke : 

]5 Having spoken so she, who is the path of the gods,* 
in anger at her husband’s words, gave birth to the child then 

16 which blazed brilliantly with glory. Ka^yapa, on seeing the 
child which shone like the rising sun, fell prostrate and 

17 praised it respectfully with ancient Ric hymns. Being 
so praised, he revealed himself from out the fcetal egg, having 
a lustre hke unto the petal of a lotus-flower, pervading tho 

IS regions of the sky with his glory, l^oreover a voice deep 
as a thunder-cloud’s, addressingf Ka^yapfi, best of munis, 
from the air, spoke, issuing from no corporeal being — 

19 “ W hereas thou, 0 muni, hast spoken of this egg as des- 
troyed]: to thee, therefore, 0 muni, this thy son shall bo 

‘20 called Marttanda. And he as lord shall exercise the Sun’s 
sway on the earth ; and he shall slay the Asuras, the foes 
who have carried off the shares of the sacrifices.” 

‘21 The gods hearing this speech from heaven assembled 
together, and experienced unparalleled joy ; and tho Danavas 
1 were bereft of their vigour. Thereupon Indra challenged 
tho Daityas to battle ; and the Danavas filled with joy 
I encountered the gods. Terrible was the battle of the gods 
with the Asuras, wherein all the regions between the worlds 
were rendered brilliant with the light from the arms and 
1 weapons. In that battle the adorable Marttanda looked at 
those great Asuras, and being burnt up by his splendour they 
> were reduced to ashes. Thereupon all the dwellers in 
heaven experienced unparalleled joy, and praised Martta^^*** 
J the source of splendour and also Aditi ; moreover they re- 
gained their own spheres of dominion and their shares of tho 
sacrifices as before ; and the adorable Marttanda also exer- 
^ cised his own dominion. Like unto a rounded ball of firo 
^vith rays shooting out both downward and upward like a 
globular flower-head of the kadamba, the Suu assumed a 
body that did not flash over-poweringly. 

* This is the Bombay reading, surdranih. The Calcutta reading 
seems incorrect. 

t ^or dbhdsya read dbUshya ? t andam. 



666 


CANTO CVI. 


Canto CVI. 


The sparing down of the Sun^s hody. 

The Sun married ViSm^harman' 8 daughter Sahjhd and had thret 
, children hy her, Manu Vaivasvata, Yama and Yamund—Sarijm 
could not endure the Sun^s glory and leaving her shadow G'hdyi 
departed — C'hdyd-Sanjnd took her place and had three cJdldren 
hy the SunShe cursed Yama for unfilial conduct, hut the Sun 
minimised the curse and perceived the deception,— The Sun 
visited Viiva-karman and the latter placing the Sun on hit 
wheel pared down his glory — The world was thrown into chm 
as the Sun was whirled around — The gods and celestial beingt 
hymned the Sun, 


Marka^^eya spoke : 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


Now the Praja-pati Visva-karman, after falling prostrate 
and propitiating him, gave his daughter named Sanjni to 
the Sun, Vivasvat.* Manu Vaivasvata was begotten by 
Vivasvat of her then, and his nature has been already indeed 
declared particularly.! He, Vivasvat, lord of the heaml^ 
cattle, begot three children of her, two most illustrious sons 
and a daughter Yamuna, 0 muni. Manu Vaivasvata was the 
eldest, the god who presides over ^raddhas, the Praja-pa , 
thea -were bora Yama and Yarni as twins. With the eice • 
ing splendour that Mirttapda Vivasvat po^essed, he scok 
the three worlds and the moveable and immovea e i 


therein very grievously. But SaSjna saw Vivasv 
form and, being impatient of his great splendour, g 
her own shadow O'hdyd and spoke : 


Sahjni spoke : 


Fare thee well ! I will go to my 
Tfit thou must stay here without chsago a J 


t See Canto InviS. The same story is reposted here. 
* t See Canto {xxviii, verse 27, and Canto hobi* 



SA^fj^A LEAVES HER HUSBAND THE SUN* 


667 


8 fair one ; and thou mnst show honour to these two boys for 
me and to this daughter who is of noble rank ; and thou must 
not declare this at all to the god. 

C^hdya the Shadow spoke : 

9 “ Unto enduring the seizing of my hair, unto undergoing 
curses, 0 goddess, I will never declare thy intention j go where 
thou wishest.” 

10 Being addressed thus by C'hdya, Sanjua went to her 
father’s dwelling; and there she, the beautiful of eyes, 

11 abode some time in her father’s house. Her father told her 
again and again to go to her husband. Then turning herself 
into a mare she departed to the Northern Kurus, 0 brdhman. 

12 There, lihe a chaste wife, she practised austerities, fasting, 
0 great muni. 

When Saujna had gone to her father, C’haya, assiduous to 

13 Sanjhd's command, and assuming her form, waited on the 
Sun; and the' adorable Sun begat of her, he thinking it was 

U of Sanjna, two sons in addition and a daughter. The first- 
born of the two sons was equal to the eldest son Manu, 

15 hence he was called Savarni, 0 best of dvijas. And the 
other, who was the seobnd son, became the planet Saturn. 

16 And the daughter who was Tapati, her king Samvarana 
chose in marriage.* 

Now as queen Sanjnd used to behave to those her own sons, 

17 G'hdyd did not behave to those eldest born sons with such 
affection. Manu suffered that cmduct in her, and Yama did 

18 not suffer it in her. Now being sorely distressed when his 
father’s wife used to beseech him frequently, he Yama, by 
reason of both anger and childishness apd indeed by the 

19 force of predestination, threatened C'haya-Sanjna with his 

foot, 0 muni, and thereupon the San jna,f full of 

resentment, cursed Yama severely. 

* Seo MahA-BhArata, Adi-p. xcir. 3738, iC7. 3791 ; and olxxi-olxxiii whore 
w described how Sambarapa while hunting mot her, fell in Jove with her 
gained her at length after propitiating the Sun. Her son was Kuru, the 

Progenitor of the Kauravas. ' 

’t This must be C'hdyd-SaHjnd ; but both editions read 8ari-JM, 



568 


CANTO CVI. 


20 

21 


22 

23 

24 


25 


27 

28 

29 

30 


C'ljaya spoke : 

Since thou threatenesfc thy father’s wife, a venerable 
. lady^ with thy foot, thy very foot shall therefore assuredly 
drop down.” 

Now Yama was deeply afflicted in mind at that corse, and 
he, righteous of soul, along with Manu made it all known 
' to his father. 


Yama spoke : 

0 lord, our mother behaves not with equal affection towai-dg 
us all j leaving us aside who are the elder, she wishes to foster 
the two younger. I lifted my foot against her, but did not let 
it fall on her body ; whether it was through childishness or 
through foolishness, do thou, Sir, deign to pardon it. I have 
been cursed, dear father, by my mother in her anger. Since 
lam her son, verily therefore I revere her, my mother, (Obest 
of ascetics). Even towards unworthy sons a mother is not 
wanting in good feelings, 0 father; how shall a Tao/Hersay 
this out — “May thy foot drop down, 0 son!” Think, 0 
adorable* lord of the heavenly cattle, of some way , so that 
through thy favour this my fo(Jt may not drop down now by 
reason of my mother’s curse. 


The Sun spoke : 

Without doubt, my son, this curse must take effect here 
since anger entered into thee, who art wise in rightcouw* 
and who speakest truth. For all curses indeed a r»e ) 
assuredly exists ; yet nowhere is there that which wn ■ 
curse away from those who are «“«ed by a mother^ 
thy mother’s word then cannot be made false ; i wi 
devise something as a favour for thee, because y ^ 
thee my son. Insects taking some flesh from t ly /« ^ 

forth to the earth ;t her word is thus made tra , 
shalt be saved. 


# For hhagavdn read bhagavan aa in the Bombay edition. 
* t Se? Canto Ixxvih, verae 28. 



THE SUN DISCOVERS HIS WIPERS DECEPTION. 


Markan^eya spoke : 

31 Now the Sun said to C'hdyi,_«Why among thy gone, 
who are quite equal, dost thou show more afEection to one ? 

32 Assuredly thou art not Sanjfid the mother of these ; thou ar* 
some one else come in her stead; for how could a mother curse 
one son even among worthless children 

Markandeya spoke : 

33 And she avoiding that question gave no answer to the Suiw 
And he concentrating his soul fell into abstract thought* and 

U perceived the truth. C'haya-Sanjna saw the lord of heaven 
was ready to curse her, and trembling with fear declared to 

15 him what had happened, 0 brahman. Now the Sun, enraged at 
hearing that, went then to his father-in-law. And he paid 
honour fittingly to the Maker of day, and being strictly 
religious he pacified him who wished to burn him up in his 
wrath. 

Vi^va-karman spoke : 

36 Permeated with surpassing glory is this thy form which 
is 80 hardly endurable ; hence Sanjna, unable to endure it, 

37 practises austerities in the forest in sooth. Thou shalt now 
see her, Sir, thy own wife, beautiful in her behaviour, prac- 
tising most arduous austerities in the forest on account of 

38 thy too glorious form. I remember Brahma’s word : if it 
please thee, my lord, I will restrain thy beloved form, 0 lord 
of heaven. 

Markancjeya spoke : 

39 Inasmuch as the Sun’s form was formerly spherical, so the 

^0 adorable Sun said to Tvas.4rh ** Vi^va- 

karman, being permitted by the Sun in S^ika-dvipa, mounted 
the Sun on his wheel and set to work to pare down his glory. 
While the Sun, which was the centre of all the worlds, was 
whirling round, the earth with its oceans, mountains and 

^2 forests mounted up to the sky, and the whole heavens with 
the moon, planets and stars went downward, and were tossed 

* For muktas read yuktas as in the Bombay edition, 

72 



670 


CANTO OVI. 


54 


43 togetlier and confased, 0 illustrious brahman. ^jl 
creaturofi also were scattered about with the waters out o) 
the occati ;* lofty hills were shattered to pieces, their sum 

44 mits and roots were torn asunder. The supports of the pole 
all the asterismsjt 0 best of munis, with their bands and 

45 foundations splitting, went downwards in thousands. Hurlec 
, away by the wind caused by the swift whirling, greai 

clouds wandering about with terrible thunder crumbled tc 

46 pieces all around. The earth, the air and the nether regions 

rolled about by the Sun’s whirling, uttered their voic&s 

47 there was exceeding chaos then, 0 best of munis. While all 
the worlds wore whirling round, 0 brahman, the divine 
rishis and the gods with Brahma sang praises to the Snn:~ 

48 Thou art the most ancient god among the gods; this is 
known from thy nature. At the periods of creation, conti- 
nuance and dissolution thou existest with a triple division. 

49 Hail to thee, 0 lord of the world, thou producer of warmth, 
rain and snow ! Have pleasure in the peace of the worlds, 
0 god of gods, 0 Maker of the day ! ” 

50 And Indra approaching the god, aS he was 
down, praised him, — “ Be victorious, 0 god who 

51 the world ! Be victorious, 0 lord of all the worlds ! " And 
the seven rishis next, with Vasishtha and Atri at their head, 
praised the Sun with various hymns, exclaiming “Hail. 

52 hail ! ” And the Balikhilyas then, filled with joy, 

Sun with the noblest and most ancient pid hymns 

63 in the Veda, as he was being pared down— “ Thou, 0 master, 
art final emancipation from existence to those who stnre 
after emancipation ; thou art worthy to be com 


the supreme one by those who engage m 
Thou art the way for all created beings, even for those ^ 
are occupied with ritual. J May there be a blessing 

* This is the reading of the Bombay edition which ifl P 
abdhitafyy instead of arc'ishah. 

f For dhishfytini read dhishnydni. 

X Karma-ha^ ; t^ie department of the Veda which relates ^ 
and sacrifioial rites. 


contempia^^^’”- 



ALL HEAVENLY BEINGS WORSHIP THE SUN. 


671 


people, 0 lord of th© gods ! May ther© be a blessing for us, 
0 lord of the worlds ! May there ever b© a blessing for us in 
what is two-footed ! And may there be a blessing for us in 
j what is four-footed ! ” 

i 55 Then the bands of VidyMharas and the Yakshas, Rakshasas 
and N^gas joining their hands reverently all fell prostrate 

56 with their heads before the Sun, and uttered words such as 
those, giving joy to his mind and ears,— “May thy glory become 
endurable to created beings, 0 thou who causost created 

57 beings to exist !” Next Haha and Huhu, Narada and Tumburu, 
who were skilful in music, and who were accomplished in the 

68 three musical scales based on the shadja, madhyama and 
gandhara notes,* * * § began to sing in joy-giving accents to the 
Sun both with modulations f and various divisions of time,! 
59 with combinations. § And Visvac'i and Ghptaci, Urva4i and 
Tilottama, Menaka and Saha-janyd and Rambh4,|| the choicest 
CO among the Apsarases, danced whilst th© Sun, the lord of the 
worlds, was being pared down, the while they displayed If 
many dramatic actions replete with amorous and coquettish 
Cl gestures and dalliance. Then were caused to give forth their 
music there flutes and lutes, and other musical pipes, drums 
52 and kottle-drums, tabours, large drums and double drums, the 
[ drums of the gods and conchs in hundreds and thousands. 
And every place was rendered loudly resonant by the 

03 Gandharvas who were singing, and the bevies of Apsarases 
who were dancing, and with the sounds of trumpets and 
musical instruments. 

Then all the gods, joining their hands reverently, and 

04 bowing their bodies in faith, prostrated themselves before 
the Thousand-rayed god as he was being pared down. In 

* See page 130, note 

t ^urc'hand ; see page 131, note •. 

t Tdlai see page 131, notes t ||> But the Bombay edition reads 
“ vrith protracted tones.” 

§ Sa-prayogaih ; or samprayogailk as in the Bombay edition. 

II For Bambhds'c'a read Batnhhd c'a. 

IF Both editions read kurv<Mt,to, but read kurvatyo instead ? 



572 


CANTO cvir. 


that resounding noise, where all the gods were gathered 
together, VWva-karman then gradually diminished his 
glory. ^ 

65 After hearing thus of the paring down of the body of the 
Sun, who is the cause of the cold, rainy and hot seasons 
and who is praised by Vishnu on the lotus seat of ^iva, one 
goes'* to the Sun’s world at the close of life. 


Canto CVII. 

Hymn to the 8un» 

Viiva-karman praises the SuUy while he is reducing the Sun'i 
splendour^ 

Markandeya spoke ^ 

1 While the Sun was being pared down, the Praja-patiVim- 
karman then uttered this hymn, wherewith his hair stood 
erect with joy,t to the Sun. 

2 ** To the Sun, who is compassionate for the welfare of those 
who fall prostrate before him, who is great of soul, ■who has 
seven equally swift horses, who has great glory, who awakens 
the beds of lotuses, who splits asunderj the covering of the 

3 veil of darkness, be reverence ! To him who works merit 
through the superabundance of fire, who gives many objects 
of desire, who reclines amid beams of radiant fire, who brin^ 

4 welfare to all the world, be reverence ! To the Sun, who is 
without birth§, the cause of the three worlds, the sou o 
created beings, the lord of the heavenly cattle, 
highest among those who are greatly compassionate, the 

6 whence the eye originated, |1 be reverence ! To the Sqd, 

• For vajati read vrajati. 

t Vdhhuta-jmlaka-stotram} both editions read the same, ^ 
ptddhah stotram would seem preferable. 

X Ava-pdline,- a word not in the dictionary. 

§ Ajdya; or **who is the driver, the instigator.** „ . 



HYMN TO THE SDN. 


573 


ig maintained by knowledge, who is the inmost soul,* the 
foundation of the world, desirer of the world’s welfare, the 
self-existent, the eye of all the worlds, highest among the 

6 gods, boundless in glory, be reverence ! Thoti, for a monent 
the crest jewel of the day-spring mountainf, the honoured 
messengerj of the hosts of gods to the world, thou, whose 
body consists of a thousand wide-spreading rays of light, 

7 shinest on the world, driving away the darknesses. By 
reason of thy intoxication from drinking up like spirituous 
liquor the darkness of the world, thy body has acquired a 
deep red 0 Sun, so that thou shinest exceedingly with 

8 masses of light that calls the three worlds into life. Mount- 
ing thy equally proportioned chariot that sways about grace- 
fully and is widely pleasing||, with horses that are ever 
unwearied^, 0 adorable yod, thou coursest the broad world 

0 for our good.** 0 Sun, thou purifier of the three worlds, 
protect me, who am devoted to thy parrot-huod steeds, and 
who am most pureft through the dust of thy feet, and who am 

* For jndna-hhutdntardtmane (the third syllable of which violates the 
metre, the Vamia-sthavila) the Bombay edition reads jMna-hhfite *ntardtmanef 
which I have adopted. 

t For udaydc' ala-mauli-mdline (the last word of which violates the metro, 
the SumiiJchi) the Bombay edition reads udaydc'ala-mauli-manih, which I 
have adopted. 

1 Sura^gana-mahita-hito ; both editions read the same, but the word 
wahtto violates the metre; it should consist of a long and a short syllablot 
Perhaps the word should be mdnya. 

§ For vilohita-vigrahdt (which violates the metre in the last word) the 
Bombay edition roads vilohita-vigrdhatd, which is correct. 

II C'dru'vikampitam uru-ruc'iram ; both editions read the same, but it 
violates the metre, the SumuJchi. I would suggest as an amendment 
^I'd'vikampitam ‘drdhva-c'aranif “that sways about pleasingly, moving 
on high.” 

t For akhila-hayair, which violates the metre, read akhiwna-hayair with 
the Bombay edition. 

** G'arasi jagad-dhitdya vitatam ; both editions read the same, but it 
folates the metre, the Sumukhi. Tho metro is satisfied by altering the 
'’^^*‘‘18, c'arasi hitdya jagad vitatam. 

tt Instead of •pavitra-taXam I take tho Bombay reading ^pavitra tamanM 



574 


CANTO cvni. 


10 


prostrate before tliee^ 0 thou who art kind to folk that bo 
to thee ! Thus to the Sun, who exists as the procreator of n 
the worlds, who is the sole cause of the glory that calh th 
three worlds into life,* who exists as the lamp of all the 
worlds — to thee, 0 choicest of the thirty gods^ I ever prost 

myself !”t 


Canto CVIII. 

The Majesty of the Sun. 

From the glory pared off from the Sun^ VUva-karman made the 
gods' weapons. — The Sun found his wife among the Northern 
Kurus and begat of her the Akvins and Bevanta.—The statiom 
allotted to the Sun's offspring are declared. 

Mdrkandeya spoke ; 

1 While he was thus hymning the Sun Vi^va-karman kept 
intact in spherical shape the sixteenth part of the glory of 
•2 the lord of heaven; and when fifteen parts of his glory 
had been pared away, the Sun’s body was exceedingly boauti- 

3 ful and charming then. And with the splendour that was 
pared away from him was fashioned Vishnu’s discus ; and 

4 S'iva’s trident, and Kuvera’s palki, the rod of the lord of 
the dead, and the spear of the gods’ general. And Visva* 

5 karman made the brilliant weapons of the other gods with 
the Sun’s splendour for the quelling of their foes. He 
whose splendour had been thus pared down shone with no 

6 excessive splendour, Mdrttapda retained a body resplenden 
in every limb. 

• Instead of TriMuvana-pdvana'dhdrna-hMtamt which 

metre, the Pushpitdgrd, I have taken the Bombay reading 
hhdvana-dhdma-hetum eham. ^ tho 

t The Calcutta reading Devam prar!Mto*miV^8^adcarmdr}arn 
metre, and is incorrect because it is ViSva-karman who w In- 

followed the Bombay reading Tridaia>>vara pranato ’sww ^ 

stdad of these last two words Vifm-karmd might well be rea . 



THE sun’s offspring. 


575 


Concentrating his thoughts he beheld his wife in the form 

j of a marc, unassailable by all created beings by reason of her 
ansterifies and self-repression. And going to the Northern 

] Kurus, the Sun became a horse and approached her. And 
she, beholding him approaching, because of her fear of a 
strange male, wont face to face with him, being intent on 

9 guarding her rear. And thereupon they joined their noses, 
when tlioy both met there, and his glory passed from the 

10 Sun’s two nostrils* into the mare. Two gods were begotten 
there, the. two Alvins, who are the two best physicians, 
namely Nasatya and Dasra, the sons who issued forth from 

11 the marc’sf mouth ; these two are indeed the sons of Mart- 
tanda while he bore a horse’s form. And at the termination 
of the flow of his semen was born Revanta, holding a sword 

12 and bow, clad in armour, riding on horseback, and carrying 
arrows and a quiver. 

Then the Sun revealed his own unsullied form. She 

13 perceiving his form was mild felt a joy; and the Sun, the 
robber of the waters, led to his own home this his wife 

U Sanjna, changed again into her own form and full of love. 
After that he who was her first-born son became Manu 
Vaivasvata. 

15 And the second was “ Tama because of the curse, and 
he was “ The Righteous-eyed ” because of his father" s favour. 
Now he was called Yama as having been greatly afflicted in 

h> mind by that curse ; and since righteousness delights him, 
is known therefore as the “ King of righteousness,” 
Worms taking flesh from thy foot shall fall to the earth 
saying his father himself put§ an end to this curse. And 
because be is righteous-eyed, he is impartial to the good and 
the evil. Therefore the Dispeller of darkness appointed him 
fo the southern region ; his adorable father gave to him the 

^ ikabhyam. NasiJed here has its original meaning. 

roads and the Bombay ahi-vdktrdd* 

^ “ Roatraint, check.” 

^ c'a)c<c read c'aJkre. 



576 


' CANTO CVIII. 


duty of protecting the world, 0 briihman, and the lordgh' 
over the pitfia, 

And the Sun, being well-satisfied, made Yamnnd the ‘ 
which flows from the recesses of mount Kalinda. 

The two Alvins were made the gods’ physicians by thei 
high-souled father. 

And Revanta was appointed to the lordship over thi 
Quhyakas ; and even thus spoke the adorable god then wb 
is acknowledged by the world,— “Thou shalt indeed h 
worthy of worship by the entire world, my child; m 
mortals, who shall call thee to mind amid the terrors ol 
forests and other lonely places, of great conflagrations, ol 
enemies and robbers, shall be delivered out of great calamity 
Comfort, intelligence, happiness, kingship, perfect health, 
fame, exalted position— fAese, when worshipped and T?ell 
satisfied, thou shalt bestow on men.” 

And CTidyd-Sanj fid’s son Sdvarna was of very great fame; 
he will be the eighth Mann, hy name Savarnaka, in a fature 
time. At present, indeed, this lord performs terrible austeri- 
ties on Meru’s summit. His brother became the planet Satan 
according to the Sun’s command.*^ Now the Sun’s daughter, 
who was younger than they, 0 brdhman, became th»t 
best of rivers, the Yamnna, which cleanses the world.f 

Now I will speak fully of Manu Vaivasvata, who was the 
illustrious eldest son, and to whom belongs this present 
creation. He, who may either hear or read of this, the 
origin of the gods who are the offspring of Vivasvat, ajl 
of the Sun’s majesty, may obtain deliverance when he fa 


into calamity and may gain great fame. 


This story of tk 


O'- — e -ytAM ndl. 

majesty of the primeval god, the high-souled 

when listened to, quells the sin that has been com 

by day or night. 

• See Canto ovi, verse 16. In Canto Ixxvili, verse 33 he 
brother are not distinguished clearly, . ^ 

t This is a mistake, see verse 19 above. Sli® was » » j 

Ix^viiii yorse 34, and Canto ovi, verse 16, 



KINO R/jTAVABDHANA*S KEIGN. 
Canto OIX. 


577 


Praise of the Sun, 

fdrkandeya tells the story of king Bdjya-vardhana,— After the king 
had reigned many years, his queen sorrowed over finding a grey 
hair in his head— He comforted her and resolved to depart to the 
forest— His vassals and subjects tried to dissuade him and in 
vain They performed many austerities in order to propitiate 
the Sun and went to Kdma-rupa and continued their worship 
—At length the Sun appeared to them in bodily shape, 

Kraushtuki spoke : 

1 Adorable Sir ! thou hast well declared the birth of the Sun’s 
offspring, the majesty of the primeval god and his nature 

2 at very full length. Nevertheless I desire, 0 best of munis, 
to hear more about the Sun’s majesty comprehensively ; deign 
therefore with favour to tell me of it. 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

^ Be it heard then ! I tell thee of the majesty of the primeval 
god, Vivasvat, what he did formerly when worshipped by 
mankind. 

4 There was a famous king, Dama’s son, named Rajya-var- 
dhana he, lord of the earth, kept the earth well protected, 

5 Now the realm, being protected by that high-souled monarch 
m righteousness, increased day by day in people and wealth, 0 

6 brahman. And joyous and thriving exceedingly were all the 
subordinate kings on the earth without exception, while he 

^ uas king ; and so also were his people, both town and country 
^ • No portent visited them, nor sickness, nor the fear that 

^ comes from serpents, nor was there fear of drought there, 
J ile Dama’s son was king. And he offered up great sacri- 
bees, and gave gifts to those who asked j he enjoyed even the 

Narishyanta 

® cantos Marjitta. The story of these three kings is told 

cxxxvi below, and the FnrA^a ends abruptly with Dama. 



m 


CARTO one, 


pleasures of sense witlioat hindrinoe to true righteonBimi, 
9 While he ruled the kingdom thus and protected hig people 
duly, seven thousand years passed away as if a single day 

10 Now the daughter of Tiddratha, king of the South, was hii 

11 queen, Mdnini by name and high-spirited* indeed. One day 
she, the fine-browed noble ladyy shed tears when his head had 

' not been dressed with ointment, in the sight of the king’s 

12 folk. When her tear-drops fell on the king’s body, he sat 
Mdnini was of tearful countenance then and questioned her. 

13 In sooth beholding her weeping and shedding tears silently, 

14 Rdjya-vardhana asked Mdnini, ** W'hy is this P ” Bnt she, 
being prudent, when questioned by her husband, replied then, 

15 It is nothing.** The king questioned her again.f And after 
the king had questioned her often, she, the slender-waieied 
ladyy showed him a grey hair growing among his ahnndaal 

16 locks. Look at this, 0 king ; is this a cause of vexation to 
me, most luckless that lam?’* And the king laughed thereat 

17 With a smile quoth he to his wife — while listened all tl» 
kings and citizens, and the kings who were assembled there- 

18 “ Away with grief, 0 wide-eyed lady ! thou must not weep, 
pretty one ! Birth, growth, decline of life and other cbangei 

19 befall all living beings. I have studied all the Vedas ; I haw 
offered sacrifices by thousands ; I have given aim to brih- 
mans ; and I have begotten sons, 0 lady of finest countenance; 

20 I have enjoyed along with thee pleasures Which are 
hardly attainable by mortals ; and I have protected the eaitt 

21 well j I have borne myself ably in battles ; I have laugh 
with my beloved friends ; and I have sported in the 

of the woods. What else is there which I have not ^ 

22 that thou art frightened at grey hairs, 0 lady? 

become grey ; let wrinkles came to ine» 0 0^ 

my body pass into weakness; for I been sa 

23 M^nini I Because thou hast shown me a grey J 
head, 0 lady, here lihen I take 

24 through meutmg totJieloresi ^ ^ 

f For hhdpali^ read hh4ya]^. 



(THE kino's NO&LBNSfifi IN OtO AGE. 


childliood’s action j «imilari/ h action which is natwal 
in youth ; and elso Baoh as is fitting in early manhodd ; in <M 
p age there is resort to the forest. Since those who lired before 
i me did so, lady, end also those who lived before thea, 
I see no reason whatever then for thee to shed tears. Away 
'p with thy vexaticm ! Does not the si^t of this grey hair 
cause me elevation ? Weep not ; it is futile.” 

Mstrfcai^^feya spoke : 

11 Then the kings and citizens who were in his presence did 
him reverence, and the kings addressed Rdjyarvardhana with 
conciliatory words, 0 great yii^i : — 

I8 “ It is not for thee to weep with this thy wife, 0 king ; it is 
» we who must weep here, or rather all living beings. Since 
thou, *0 nmeter, speakest the word indicating that thou wilt 
dweU in the forest, life falls therefore from ns who have been 
lO tenderly cherished by thee, 0 king. We will all go, 0 king, 
if thou goest to the forest. All the inhabitants of the earth 

1 will thereby sufEer loss in all their ceremonies without doubt, 
when thou, 0 master, shalt take up thy abode in the forest ; 
and if that loss tends to injure righteousness, let that course 

2 be discarded. Seven thousand years this earth has been 
guarded by thee ; have regard, 0 king, to the great merit that 

3 has accrued therefrom ! The austerities, which thou, 0 great 
hing, wilt j)erform while dwelling in the forest, are not worth* 
the sixteenth part of this thy guardianship over the earthi ” 

The king spoke : 

^ “ Seven thops^^ years 1 have protected this dearth; now 

> this my time kw come io dwell in the fozest. I have begotten 
children. Now that I have jeen my children and .their de- 
scBudatrifea, TVtiftifa ‘vdll not allow me a very few days. 

^ Uuderatand, hQ )ihat this grey hair onmy Jmad has 

become a messeiiger from ignohl^ Death, who is veiy sharp 
inhisadaouB. r ttoiii ptupA my eon in my^kiafdom. 

^d aban and will| .as la dvi^Uer in tin 



580 


CANTO CIX. 


Marka^^eya spoke : 

38 Being desirous of departing to the forest the king then en. 
qnired of the astrologers about the best days and moments for 

39 anointing his son in the kingdom. And on hearing the king’s 
speech they became confused in mind ; they who were skil^ 
in the scriptures knew not the day nor moment nor the hours .• 

40 And the astrologers spoke to the king with voices inarticulate 
with teai’s “ Our vaiious knowledge has perished after tkt 
we have heard this thy speech, 0 king.” 

41 Then people came in a multitude both from other cities and 
also from dependent countries, a;id next from that city. 

42 Springing up, 0 muni, the most eminent brdhmans, their headi 
quivering with eMotion^ addressed the king who desired to 

43 depart to the forest Be gracious! Protect us, 0 king, 
as we have been protected a long time past. The whole world 
will sink down, when thou, 0 king, hast betaken thyself to 

44 the forest. Do thou then so act, 0 king, that the world sink 
not, And while we, such as we are^ live our very short time, 0 
hero, we desire not to see the regal throne deprived of thee,0 
lord.” 

Markancjeya spoke : 

45 Thus both they and other dvijas heading the citizens, wd 
kings, dependants and ministers appealed to him, 

46 

47 


48 

49 


50 

• Eord (the Greek word) , or « the rieieg <* the .odlao.1 


lin and again; but when he does not withdraw 
nation to take up his abode in the forest, and returns t 
) answer, “ Death will not suffer it,” both his minister 
pendants, and the citizens, and the aged men and t e ^ ' 
iembled together and took counsel, “What mas 
«P” While they took counsel, 0 
iondeveloped there among those who w®”* 

that most righteous king—' Giving ourselves ove ^ 

deep meditation, we wiU with compose Tv,:8iQBg’«lih’ 
, Sun with austerities 

,ing all resolved alike there on ttal ohjwt, . „ 

rto Snr, -mth thBitf om bo^iesi by 



iNVOCATiON TO THE SDN. 


iim the nrgha oftermg and presents and other oblations indue 
course-, others gratified the Sun by maintaining silence, and 
others by repeating the ^i(S, Yajus and Stiman hymns; and 
other dvijas abstaining from food and lying down on river sand- 
banks, wearied with austerities, made propitiation of the Sun ; 
and others, applying themselves to the oblation to Fire, day 
and night repeated hymns composed to the Sun; others cast- 
ing their eyes on the Sun remained standing there. Even 
thus, applying themselves to those several rites, did they work 
in manifold ways with exceeding determination in order to 
propitiate the Sun. 

Now while they were striving thus to propitiate the Sun, a 
Gandharva named Su-ddman came near and spoke thus—" If 
ye desire, 0 dvijas, to propitiate the Sun, let this then be done, 
whereby the Sun will become well-pleased. Therefore— there 
is a forest named Guru-viiMla, frequented by the Siddhas, in 
very mountainous Kima-rfipa— go there verily in haste. 
There perform your propitiation of the Sun with minds com- 
pletely composed ; the Siddhas’ friendly region is there ; there 
yo shall obtain all your desires.’* 

M4rka9<}eya spoke : 

On hearing this his speech, tjiose dvijas went to that forest 
and beheld the sacred and beautiful shrine of the Sun there. 
Those brahmans and men of other castes, diminishing their food, 
omi being indefatigable, 0 brahman, offered worship there en- 
riched with incense, flowers and oblations ; and with composed 
minds, celebrating his worship with flowers, ungnents and 
other gifts^ ^Jth incense, perfumes and other fragrance also, 
yith prayers, sacrificial oblations, food, lamps and other offers 
those dvijas gratified the Sun, 0 brahman. 

The brdhmans spoke : 

Let us approach the Sun as our refuge, the god who in splen- 
^0^ surpasses gods, Dinavas and Yakshas, the planets, and 

heavenly bodies ; the lord of gods, who dwelling also 
m the sky makes everything around brilliant, and penetrates 
the earth and the atmosphere with his rays \ etm him who hew 



(UKto cU, 


the name$ Bhiskara, BMun, Savkfi) ^iv4kata,P4]i|Q 

65 and Aiyamaa, Svar-bbdnn him who has flaming rays, whoa 
the fire which shall destroy the universe at the end of ibo ^ 
i^es, difficult to he gazed at, who persists to the end of the 
final dissolution; the lord of yogins, and the never-ending ow* 

66 who is red, yellow, white and black ; him who dwelle in the 
^ oblation made to Fire by fishis, and among the gods of eacri. 

fice ; imperishable, sublime, secret, who is the supreme g&tete 

6? final emancipation from existence ; and who traverses the skj 
with hymns in the form of horses which are yoked together it 
his rising and setting ; who is always intent on circmuambulatiiig 

68 Meru revewntly. And we have sooght unto the light-giyai 
who is not true and yet true, who is a sacred multiform plui 
of pilgnmage, who is the permanence of the universei, and is be- 

69 yond thought j him who is Brahmi, who is S'iva, who is Vi^ 
who is Praja-paia ; who is the wind,t the atmosphere and water, 

70 the earth and its mountains and oceans ; who is the planets, tb 
constellations, the moon and other heavenly bodies, trees bear 
ing blossom and fruit, other trees and herbs ; who sets ra mo- 
tion righteousness and xmrighteousness, among crsatel 
beings, those which are manifest and those which i» 

71 not manifest, BrahmVs hody, and Siiva’s, and Vishjo* 
is the body, of thee, the Stm, whose special nature is three-f(8 

72 indeed. May the Bun be gi^aoious'l Way the Sun, of 
lord withottt beginning, ah this world composes the body, ^ 
whoisijhe'the Hfe 'of 'the worlds — ^may he be gracious tow- 

76 Wuy the 'Sun, whose first J fom'is Itomnous and can 

gfa^sed upon becfetuse of its cirote df splendour, and whose ^ i 

n is ‘the gentle ltmar«^6—iitoy he ^ 

may the Btm, from those iwo iorms df whomhns j j 
been fashion^ consisting trf AgrS ‘and Soma— ® 
be gracious to us I 

• As^name of^lhe Stm,- not in the^dietUilMlyv 
4 VAyu. . ^ 

4 4Per -iJk'SywoMjpfWad Am 

eX^am aktharsm ** whose first fern Is 



THE 8UK OBANtS tHK UNO LONG LIVE, &S9 

tpokt : 

5 While they are thus entirely worshipping hlta with praise 
and faith, the adorable Sun became pleased after three months, 
5 0 brahman. Thereupon issuing from his orb, with the same 
splendour as his disk possesm^ the Sun, who is hardly to be 
1 gazed at, descended and displayed himself to them. Those 
brahman folk bowing in faith then prostrated themselres 
before the Snn, who is without beginning, m he manifested 
himelf in bodily shape, while they quivered with thrills of 
3 awe ; exclaiming Reverence, reverence be to thee, the thousand- 
rayed one ! Thou art the cause of everything— -brilliant every 
wliit. Thou art to be invoked against harmftil assault, being 
the site of all sacrifices ; and to be meditated upon by those 
skilled in religious devotion. Bo thou gracious ! ” 


Canto OX. 

The Majesty of the Sun^ cominded. 


ling Bdjya-vardhana's siibjects besought of the 8un that the hing 
might reign ten thousand years more^ and the 8un granted it — 
But the hing^ distressed that the horn did not include all his 
family and subjects^ went and propitiated the 8un^ and at length 
gained his desire — This story is commented pn and its merits are 
extolled. 

M£rka 9 d«ya spoke: 

i Well-pleased then, the adorable Sun said to all the populace 
— “ Choose, 0 ye dvijas and other people^ what ye have wished 
to obtain from me ! ’* 

® Thereupon those hrAhmans and other people gazing in fear 
on the fiery-rayed Sun^ as he stood before them^ prostrated 
i themselves and said, 0 brAhman 

The people spoke; 

^ Ihostrating themselyes they said then to the lord of the 
•world who proffemdthem a boon--“ 0 adoi*We DiepeUee of 
f \tthiMmt phased wtth onr Mk, «ien let onr king 



584 


CANTO OX. 


live* ten thousand years, free from sickness, victorious over 
his enemies, rich in his treasury, and with firmly-endnring 
youth ! May RAjya-vardhana live ten thoasand years ! ” 

MArkapdeya spoke : 

5 “ So be it ! ” said the Sun to the populace, and became too 
dazzling for sight, 0 great muni. And they, having gained 

6 the boon and joyous thereat^ assembled about the king. And 
having gained the boon completely from the thousand-rayed 
gfod, 0 brAhman, they made known to the king how it had 
happened. 

7 On hearing that, his queen MAnini rejoiced, 0 brAhman ; and 
the king pondered a long while and said nothing to the people. 

8 Thereupon she MAnini, whose mind was filled with joy, ex- 
claimed to the king her husband How fortunate ! Prosper, 

9 0 king, with long life ! ” Thus did MAnini courteously salute 
her husband in her delight, hut the king said nothing, his mind 

10 being numbed with thought, 0 brAhman. She addressed her 
husband again, as he was rapt in thought with counten- 
ance bent downwards, — “ Why dost thou not give way to joy in 

11 this supreme moment of exaltation, 0 king ? Thou shalt live 
free from Sickness, with firmly-enduring youth, ten thousand 
years from to-day. Why nevertheless dost thou not rejoice t 

12 But declare thou the reason, why thou hast thy mind drawn 
away by thought, even when a supreme moment of exaltation 
has been reached, 0 king ? ” 

The king spoke ; 

13 How has a moment of exaltation come, 0 lady, and why dost 
thou courteously salute me P When thousands of afflictions 

14 are incun^ed, is courteous salutation wished for Ft 1 shall 
live alone ten thousand years, but not thou ; when calamity 

15 befalls thee, shall I not have affliction ? When I see sons, 
grandsons, and great-grandsons and other beloved relatives 

16 dead, will my affliction indeed be small P And when my moi 
faithful servants are d&ad^ and when my circle of friends is 

•tHvatdm ; Atmane-pada j and again in this verso. 

t For salhdganayishyixte read 8ahh4janam ishyate as in the Bombay editio®* 



THR king’s mSTRRSS AT A LONG SOLITARY LIFE. 585 

dead, there will then be boundless affliction for mo continual- 
17 ly, 0 lady. They who with emaciated bodies, constantly 
attached to * righteousness, have performed austerities for my 
sake, they shall die, and I who enjoy the benefit shall live— this 
IS is censurable ! f This, such as it is, is a calamity that has be- 
fallen me, 0 lady of beautiful hips ; it is not a moment of exalt- 
ation. How again is it thou dost not think in that thou dost 
courteously salute me now ? 

Man ini spoke *. 

l!) 0 great king, as thou hast said, so indeed it is ; herein there 

is no doubt. [ and the citizens in our affection for thee did 
jo not perceive this mistake. Since it has gone so, consider what 
should be done in this matter, 0 lord of men. What the ador- 
iiblo Sun has said in his graciousness shall not be otherwise. 

’Phe king spoke : 

il It is a benefit that my citizens and servants have done to 
me out of affeidion ; how .shall I taste enjoyments, without 
li discharging my obligation to them ? I then in this position 
will go with subdued mind to the mountain from to-dayj and 
will practise austerities, abstaining from food, I'esolved to pro- 
jiitiate the Sun. Since F shall live in firmly-enduring youth 
free from sickness ten thousand years through that god’s favour 
-1 therefore, if the adorable Sun grants us this favour, that all 
my people, my servants, and thou and my children, sons, 
>■' }<randsons and great-gi’andsons, and my friends shall also live, 
0 lovely-faced one — then I shall continue in the kingdom and 
shfdl taste enjoyments with delight. If the 8un does not do 
this, then, 0 Manini, I will practise .austerities on the moun- 
tain there, abstaining from food until my life perish. 

Markai;ideya spoke : 

Being thus addressed by him, she said to the king then, “ Be 
it so ! ” And she^also went with him to that mountain. TJie 
king going with his queen to the sanctuary there engaged in 

* not in the dictionary. 

^ ^hik.Jcara, not in the dictionary, 

+ The Bombay edition inserts two lines here doubtfally, 

74 



CAXTO CX. 


worshipping the Sun, being asBidnous in his service, 0 brahman 

29 and becoming emaciated through want of food ; and she, just 
as that king did, practised severe austerities likewise, entlnr- 

30 ing cold, wind and the sun’s heat. While he was worshippinfj 
the Sun and practising great austerities, when a year and 
part of the next year had passed, the Maker of the day was 

31 pleased then and granted him, 0 dvija, a boon according to 
his desire for the sake of all his dependants, citizens and otlici 
subjects, and his sons, 0 excellent brahman. 

32 On gaining the boon, the king going to his city ruled his 

33 kingdom in joyousness, protecting his people nghteously ; and 
he offei’ed many sacrifices, gave away gifts day and night, and 
in compan}^ with Manini indulged in enjoyments, being u i.se in 

34 righteousness. He rejoiced* with his sons, grandsons an<l oti ei 
desceiulaufs, with his dependants and citizensf for ton (lionsond 
yonrs ; he remained continuously youthful. 

35 A Bhargava named Pramati, after seeing that his exploit, sanff 
this song while his heart was drawn out with astonishment,— j 

3G “ Lo, the power of faith in the Sun, in that king Rajya-var- 
dhana has been bom for the increase of life of his own ])C()plo 
as well as of himself ! ” 

37 Thus I have related to thee, 0 brahman, what thou didst 
ask me, namely, the majesty of the loi'dj Aditya Vivasvat, the 

38 god who was in the beginning. The man who, after 
hearing the whole of that story of the Sun’s sublime majest} 
with the brahmans, reads it also during the space of se\eii; 

39 nights, is delivered from his sin8.§ And the intelligent j 
man, who may hold this fast, becomes free from sickness.! 
possessed of riches and opulent ; and is bom again a man of i 

40 great understanding in a gi’eat family of wise men.|| And 

* For samuditab read sa muditab- 

t Pauttraii^ in the text ; but read probably pauraih, which I have adopted 

:J: ftbho ; but vihhoh eeeniB preferable and . I have adopted it. Tho Bom- 
bay edition reads dditabt what tbon didst ask me from the first.” 

§ Or “ reads it. also, is delivered from the sim he has conumtte*! 

during seven nights ” as the Bombay edition reads* 

11 S?he Bombay edition inserts here, though doubtfully^" And he tdilT 



I’HB sun’s MAilsn, 


miserable are they who are smitten herein by the Sun, 0 best 
of munis.* The repetition of each of these verses during three 
twilights destroys sin. And in whatever sanctuary of the Sun 
all this poeiu 0 / Aw majesty is recited, there the adoreble Sun 
Avithdraws not his presence. Therefore thou, 0 brahman, who 
(k'sirest to gain great merit, must retain thispoewi of the Sun’s 
'lublime majesty in thy mind and must mutter it over. Verily 
lie who makes a gift of a milch cow with gilded horns and 
most handsome body, and the man tvho self-possessed listens 
to this poe 7 )i for three days — equal are the merit and rew'ard 
of them both, 0 brahman !t 


Canto CXI. 

The guide to the genealogies, 

ktn hid seven sons, whose names are mentioned — and also a child, 
u‘h) teas horn as a daughter named Ild, and afterwards became 
'I man hy name Su-dyumna — This child as Ed had a sent Turd- 
rums, who reigned at PratisMhdna, and as Su-dynmnahad three 

M^rkap^eya spoke : 

1 Sach power ha.s the adoreble Sun, who is without beginning 
and without end, concerning whose majesty thou, 0 I^ush- 
‘ tuki, dost ask me in faith. He is the Supreme Soul among 
religious devotees who meditate deeply on the dissolution of 
their intellects ; J he is the Conscious Soul among those who 

after hearing of this exploit sacrifices with great sacrifioea replete with 
and fees, gains honour as his reward.” 

* The Bombay edition rends differently—” And the verses which were 
addressed [read dbhihitd for abhihotd^^ to the Sun, 0 best of munis, 
repetition of each of these verses during three twilights destroys sin.” 
t»For dvijdgryam read dvijdgrya. 

+ This is the best meaning that I can get out of the text— ParonMft^ndr sa 
detasdth layam, which is the reading in the Calcutta, Boml»y, 
I’houa editions, though the last in its corrigenda .alters it to yogdnAhi 



CANTO Cxi* 


5$g 

apply the Sahkhya doctrine to the knowledge of spiiit ; and 
Jie is the Lord of saciifice among those who ai*e sacrificei s : * 

3 while Vishi^u, S'iva and Brahmd each supports the Sun's 
supremacy. 

Manu was his son, a solver of doubts in all matters, the rulev 

4 of a manv-autara, whose is the seventh period, 0 brahman. 

Ikshvaku, Nabhaga and Rishta — who were great in strength 

5 and prowess — and Naiishyanta, Nabhaga, Pushadhra and 
Dhrishta ;t these were that Manu’s sons, each the guaixlian uf 

6 a separate kingdom. All were celebrated in fame, all had thu 
utmost skill in arms and weapons. 

Seeking yet again for a son tvho should he moi^e distinguished, 

7 Manu, best of the skilful ones, offered a sacrifice to 

and Varuna ; in which sacrifice moreover when the offering anu?* 
perversely made through the improper conduct^ of the priest, 

and then sa yogdudm must be read as one word sa-yoydnam. But the led 
is no doubt corrupt j yogindm should be yogindni, and yunjatdfn should per- 
haps be yunjdndndm, though both Parasmai*pada and Atmane-pada liave tlie 
meaning ^‘to meditute deeply.” Mahdraahopfidhyaya Hara Prasad S'kri 
suggests also that layah w'ould be better than layam and would traiisliiie 
thus, “ Ho is the Supremo Soul to those who are successful in lueditaiiuii 
[i.e., the Vcdautiats] j he is that in which the minds of those who are en- 
gaged in meditation, but who are not yet successful, mq absorbed ” [».e , iIk 
S aguiia Brahman of the Vedantists]. 

* Yameio yajcindm api; but yajvandm must be read for yajcindw, ainl 
Mahamahopadhyaya Kara Prasdd S'astri gives it the meaning “ to those 
consider sacrifices to bo the means leading to beatitude" [it’) 
Mimamsists]. I 

t Only seven sons are mentioned here. The number is generally given M 
ten. There is much diversity regarding the names of all of tUoiu exetf 
Ikshvdku, Narishyanta, and Dbpishta. Other names omitted arc Sarj>t 
Karusha, Vena, and Prdm$u. See Wilson’s Vishnu Purina, book IV, cb«P 
ter i, notes. The second and third names Nabhaga and Bishfa are sometim^ 
given as a single name, Nabhigadishta in the Veda and Nibhanedishtha 
Aitareya Brihmana j and the last-named book says~he was given to 
study, his brothers deprived him of his share in the paternal property, 
ferred him to their father, and by his father’s advice he helped the Angu'®^ 
in their sacrificial session and obtained gront wealth (V. ii. 14 )» 

\ For Hpahrite read ddpahute, as in the Poona edition, The verb tipw* “ 



IfANO’s DESCENDANTS. 


8 0 gi’eat muni, a daughter was bom to Manu named Ila, slen- 
der of waist. On seeing that daughter born there, Manu 

9 offered praise to Mitra and Varu^a then and spoke this word, 
— “ When I made made the sacrifice with the prayer^ ‘ Thmugli 

10 yoiu* favour may I obtain a distinguished sou,’ a daughter was 
born to me who am wise. If ye being gracious grant me a 

11 boon, then let this my daughter, through the favour of you 
both, become a son endowed with surpassing virtues ! ” And 
when these two gods in sooth said, “ Be it so ! ” that same 

12 daughter Ila became forthwith a sm famed by the name 
Su-dyumna, 

And afterwards that wise son of Manu, while roving the 
1;] forest a-hunting, was turned into a woman througli the wrath 
of the god ; * in which condition Soma’s son Budha begat of 

14 her a son named Pui’umvaSjl* who was a mighty universal 
monarch. When that son was born, Su-dyumna again per- 

15 formed a groat horse- sacrifice and rogained a man’s nature and 
became a king. 

Su-dyumna during his manhood had three sons, Utkala,^ 
10 Vinaya§ and Gaya,|| who were most valiant, given to sacrific- 
ing, groat in bodily strength. Now those three sons, who 
17 were bom to him during his manhood, enjoyed this earth % 
while governing their minds in righteousness. 

not in the dictionary. The Poona commentaiy explains apahutc aj^ddrdt by 
^Hxiiita-havane vyatyaydt. 

* The Hari-V. narrates only one change, namely, from womanhood (after 
>>l‘e had given birth to Pururavas) to manhood (x. 615*37). 

t Properly Puriiravas, as in verse 17. * 

t Prom whom were descended the Utkalns, see note • on canto Ivii, verse 
43, ami also verse 63, pp. 327 and 341 ante ; all the authorities agi-ee about 

this. 

§ He is also oalled Vinata, Vinatalva, and llHriUsva by different authorities, 
lie was king of the East according to the Matsya Pur., and king of tho West 
according to the Hari-V. (x. 631-2) and Vayu Par. 

il ile gave his name to the city Gaya, as all tho authorities agree ; and lie 
king of the East as the Hari-V. says (x, 631-3). 

^ The Bhagavata Pur. says wrongly all three sons were rujors of the South, 
^^hhi/jidpath<tt 



590 


CANTO exit. 


But Pururavas, who was born of that monarch 8u-dytmm 
18 (luring his womanhood, got no share of the earth, because he 
was Budha’s son. Thereupon at Vasishtha’s word PiatislV 
thana,* * * § an excellent city, was given to him ; he became king 
in that exceedingly charming city. 


Canto CXIL 


TJic 8tm'y of Pushadhra. 

Mmitia son Pushadhra while hunting accidentally killed a brahman's 

row The brahman'' 8 son fell into a rage and cursed hitn—The 

brahman reproved his son fm' his passiemate conduct^ hut the curse 
could not be altered and Pushadhra became a iudra. 

Marka^deya spoke : 

1 Mann’s son who was named Pdshadhre t went a-liuntiiig tu 
a forest. While walking about in that dense lonely forest he 

2 lighted n\wn no deer at all, he was scorched by the sun’s rays, 
and his body was seized with hunger, thirst and heat as he 

3 walked hither and thither.^ Then he saw there a beautiful 
cow which yielded milk for sacrifice, belonging to a brahman 
who maintained the sacrificial fire, half the body of whicli was 

4 hidden among creepers, t Thinking she was a gayal, ho shot 
her with an arrow, and she fell to the earth, pierced to the lieait 

5 with the anx)w. Thereupon the sacrificial piiest’s son Tapo- 
i'ati,§ who was a religious student, on seeing his father’s sacn- 

6 ficial cow stricken dowfi cursed him ; and sent forward his son 

* Manu gave this city Ut Su-dynmna who was oxclttded from the paternul 
dominions because he had been a female, and Su-dyumna gave it to Pururavas. 
It was situated on the north bank of the Ganges at its junction with tbe 
Yamnni (Hari-V., xxvi. 1371 and 1411-2). 

t This name is generally written Vrishadhra, which U the (jorreot form. 

J This is the reading of the Poona edition, latdntarMha^dhanndrdhdm s tbe 
text of the Calcutta edition is erroneous. The Bombay edition reads less pro- 
perly latdntar-deha-dhi'n/ndrdhdm. 

§ I tave not found this name elsewhere. 



pdSHAPHRA IS OUHBED TIT A BUAHMAN. 


591 


named Vibhravya* wbo tended the cow. Then, 0 muni, his 
7 mental feelings were overcome by wrath and resentment, mid he 
fell into a rage, while bis eyes rolled and were bluri’ed with drops 
of perspiration that trickled down. The king Pushadhra seeing 
H that muni’s son enraged said, — “ Be gi’aei us, wherefore dost 
thou give way to anger like a 4udra. No ksliatriya, no 
\ai,^ya t in truth indulges so in wrath as thou dost like a 
sudm, thoUjf^Yio art bora in the noble family of a brahman.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

fi When that son of a pre-eminent hnihnianX was upbraided 
thus by the king, he cursed the evil-souled staying : “ Thou 

10 slialt become § a ^ddra indeed ! Whatever sacred lore thou 
hast loarnt from thy guru’s mouth shall waste away, because 

I hou hast hurt this ray guru’s sacrificial cow.” 

U AVhen cursed thus the king became angry, yet he was tor- 
iiionted greatly by that curse. Ho took water up in bis band, 

11 intent on cursing the other in retaliation, 0 brahman. That 

I I rah man also gave way to wrath in order to destwy the king. 
His father approached him hastily and forbad him in sooth, 
imaging — ■ 

‘‘ My son, enough, moi’e than enough, of wrath which 
does not counteract hostility ! || Verily calmness is beneficial 
to the twice-born in things of this world and of the next 
1 world. Anger destroys austerities; and the angry man falls 
away from long life ; the angry man’s knowledge melts away, 

• Tltis is a patronymic from Vabhru or Babhrn Visv»mitra had a son 
^'‘bhru from whom was descended the family of the Vabhrus (Mah^-Bh., 
^iiuias .p., iv, 249-259 ; Hari-V., xxvii. 1463-67 ; but see Aitnr. Brdh. VIT. iii. 

ttiul S^uunaka had a pupil named Vabhru (Wilson’s Vishnii-P. — edit. F> 
*lall-nr. vi.) ; but the name Vibhravya soon after Mann’s time seems out of 
plico. 

t riio Poona edition gives the right reading, m Matriyo 7m vd vai^ya / 
Calcutta edition wrongly puts the accusatives. 

l^aulina^; « tVcjjhf/msya according to the commentator. This moaning 
'* iu tlie dioiiotiaiy* 

^ ^or hhavinhyati read bhavishyasi. ^ 

I Itopendydti.vniri^d read hov^ndprativairiifd as in the Poona edition, 



502 


CANTO CXII, 


15 and the angi'y man fails of his object also. There is no right- 
eousness in the man of angry disposition ; and the passionate 
man obtains not his object ; nor among those whose minds are 
possessed by wrath is the obtaining of their wishes enough for 

16 happiness. If the king has killed this cow with his full know- 
ledge, it is right for one, who perceives what is for his own 

17 benefit, to extend pardon here. Or 2/ he has slain this my 
cow in ignorance, how then is ho worthy of curse, since his 

18 mind was not evil ? Whatever man, while seeking his own 
good, harasses another— merciful men should shew pardon to 

10 that man in the knowledge that he is benighted.* If wise 
men inflict punishment for what is done by a man in ignomnee, 
I esteem him more than the wise men ; better are the men 

20 who are ignorant, t Invoke thou no curse now on this king, 
my son ; by her own action indeed this cow has fallen in a 
painful death.” 

Markan^eya spoke : 

•21 PiiBliadlii'a also, pi-osti-ating himself with bowed neck l)c- 
fore the muni’s son, exclaimed aloud, “ Be gracious ! ” and" She 

22 was slain by me in ignorance, for I thought she was a gayal ; 
a cow must not he killed ; through ignorance, 0 muni, I sH 
thy saoriacial cow. Be thou also gracious to me, 0 muni ! " 

The rishi’s son spoke : 

•23 Since my birth, 0 king, I have uttered nothing m vain, 
and my anger this day can never be altered, illu.strionR m. 

24 Therefoi-e I cannot make this curse otherwise, 0 king ; l"< 
the second curse which was prepared for thee is averted. 

2.') Tlie father then took the son who had spoken thus am ae" 
to his own hermitage. And Pushadhra in sooth heenn 

4iidra. 

• Or, “ to that mftn whoHO understanding ia foolish. ^ 

t Tam appears to be the right reading , but read (od instead of (am • 

better than the wise are, in my opinion, the men who are ignoran . 



XAnHAI/A LOVEt) A VAf(iVA MAfriEN. 

Uaxto CXIII. 


5»3 


Nabhdga’s ejcploits, 

Umsha's descenda,tf8 wm-e the Kdrmhas-DMia'a son was Nibhdga ; 
Ndbhdga wanted to many a vaisya maiden— Her father referred 
the matter to the king Dishfa, and the king cmwuttod the rishis— 
They decided the prince might many her, provided he first 
married a kshntriya maiden— He spnnml that and took her— 
The king tried to vanquish him by force, but was caused by a 
hrAhmin to desist, on the ground that the qrrince had degenerated 
into a vaisya. 

Mdrkan(}eya spoke r 

I Karuslia s sons were ilie Karuslias,* who wvty kshatriyas 
waiTiors Now they wei‘e seven hundred valiant n^en ; 
and from them descended others in thousands. 

Now Disldasf .son was Nabha^a ; J; he continued in the 
l>loom of youthful ne.ss. He saw a most surpassingly charm- 

• mg vaisya maiden. As soon as he beheld her, the prince was 
stricken in milld with love ; he became absorbed in sighs and 

i reproaches. He went to her father and asked for the vaisya 
maiden in marriage ; and then to the prince, whose mental 
J feelings were under the dominion of the god of love, spoke 
her father— to the king’s son spoke he, joining his hands respect- 
fully, being afraid of the prince's father, this speech as he 
' bowed with defei’ence, 0 brahman— “ Nobles of thy class are 
the enjoyers of the earth ; dependants are we, paying tax to 

* Bee note f to canto Ivii, verse 68, p. 341 ante. 

t This Dighta mnst be the Rishta mentioned in canto cxii, verse 4. The 
“’e is given variously as Nedishtha, Dishta, and Arislda. The Hnri-Vaih^ 
fs two of his sons though vai^yas became hrdhmens (xi. 658) | and the 
“gavata Pur. says two of his sons, though kshatriyas obtained br^hmnn- 
'^(IX. ii. 17). 

+ ^abhdga and bis descendants are named in Vishnu Pur, IV. i. The 
agree generally that hp was degraded to be a vaisya. His descend- 
and their exploits form the remainder of this Parana. There were 
kings afterwards of the same name. 

75 



CAXTO cxin. 




yo\^. Why dost thou earnestly desire connes^ion with us wIk 
are not thy equals ? ” 

The prince spoke ; 

1 Equality of the human body is wrought by love, folly aut 
other feelings. So indeed the human body is endowed 

8 those very feelings at the app'opiate time,* and thus in tnitl 
tliose feelings also come into existence for its benefit. Am 
different feelings^ different persms exist when folk exist o! 

0 separate castes. Moi^eover, other feelings alsof ihat air in 
apimipriato become pmper according to season, and likrin<i 
appropriate /cc/Zw^/.v bcconio ina])])ropriate ; for proprlciy di- 

10 jioiuls upon soa.son. As the body is fattened by food and otlui 
things that are longed for, so that same Itodg when iiscdj: will 

11 due regard to season is well regulated. § Do thou accordinfjl) 
bestow this thy highly esteemed daughter on mo ; othon\iM 
calaniity will be beheld in my body. 

The vui^ya spoke : 

12 We are under another’s authority^ and thou art inidei' an- 
other's authority, namely the king'.s. "Vyhen he tliy failiti 
permits tliee, take thou her ; I will give her. 

The prince spoke : 

1:1 Those who treat gurus|| with respect should con.snlt tlnii 
gumsl[ in all things that must be done ; but not in such 
as this, things which arc not to be done, ** do the words nl 

# Or, season.” 

f For anydn api read anydny api, as in the Poona edition. 

I Bhuktam, The Poona edition reads hhitam; and the meaning would h 
“ that same body when bo constituted with due regard to season i.s irel 
regulated.” 

§ Paridishyate. I take this as the passive of p/ri -/as; but 
ill tlie dictionniy. 

II Venerable persons, parents or spiritual preceptors. 

% For guruvo read guravo here and in the next verse. 

** For the text idfideshv a-kdryebhu it seems Urideslni kdryedm wouk 
be better— “ but not in such businesses as this do the words of gums hav‘ 
scope.” 



MARRIAGE BETWEEN K.’SMATRIYAS AND VAliVAH. 


595 


gurus hav^ scope. What has Love’s conversation to do with 
listening to gurus ? This is incompatible. In other things 
men should consult their gurus. 

The vaiiya spoke : 

15 Such, even this, is Love’s talk ! I, I here, will ask the guru, 
thine, tho suitor’s. My talk is not based on the speech of 
love. 

Marka^^eya spoke : 

l(i When addressed thus the prince became silent. And he, 
the vaisya^ related to that prince's father all that the prince 
11 thought. Thereupon his father summoned, before him the 
chief dvijas, Ricika* and the other brahmans, and the prince ; 
and he made known the matter as it had been announced la 
him ; and after making it known he, being so situated in the 
matter^ said to tho munis, — “Thobesiof dvijas deign f to 
declare what ought to be done.” 

The rishis spoke : 

I'J 0 prince, if thou hast love for this vaisya's child, tlien let 
this ordinance of righteousnessj verily be observed, but let it 
.'0 he observed in the order enjoined bylaw. Mamage was enjoined 
j<n' princes in the first place with fhe daughter of one who had 
been rorjally anointed. Be it so now jirst in thy case ; and im- 
mediately afterwards this maiden also shall beconie thy \Aife. 

* A famous rishi, sou of Bhpgu and father by Satya>vati of Jamadagni ; 
Maha-Bh., &Anti-p, xlix. 1716-21 ; Hari.-V., xxTii, 1423-63, and xxxii. 

"C1.7(j ; and Vishnu Pur. IV. vii. He married Satya»vati, daughter of Gadhi 
'•“g of Kanya-kubja, by Riving a present of a thousand horses for her (Maha- 
lii-, Vaiia-p, cxv, 10144-163, and Udyoga-p. cxviii, 4006-7). Though Satya- 
is connected with tho B. Kau^iki (the R. Kosi, see canto Ivii, verse 
*•) in the passages cited above from the Hari V. and Vishnu Pur., 
Ri6ika is generally connected with the west coast around the Gulf of 
‘‘"'tay (see Maha-Bh., Vana-p. oxviii, 10221-27 and the two other passages 
cited above), and Dynti-mat king of S'alva (see canto Iviii, verso 6, 
gave his kingdom to Ridika (Mahfi-Bh., S^anti-p. ccxxxiv. 8607, and 
cxxxvii. 6267). 

^ f'or nrhanU read arhantu ? " Lot the best of dvijas deign, Ac.” 

♦ ^ marriage. 



596 CANTO CXIII. 

21 In this way no wickedness will attach* to ^feetrwhen thou en- 
joyest her thus ; otherwise it does accrue : thy high rank comcn 
from marriage with exalted maidens.t 

Marka^deya spoke : 

22 When admonislied thus, he flung aside altogether tlmt 
speech of those high-souled mums; and going outside lie 

23 seized her, and raising his sword aloft exclaimed,— I haM- 
caiTied off the vaisya’s daughter by the Rakshasa form of 
marriage ; let him who hns power here rescue her ! ” 

24 Then the vaisya seeing his daughter seized, 0 braliman. 
hastened to that jjriWe’s father for help, exclaiming “Save 

25 her ! ” His father eumged thereat gave command to his great 
army — “ Let him be slain ; let wicked Nabhaga who violates 

26 righteousness bo slain ! ” Thereon that army fought indeed 
with the king’s son ; it >vas laid low then in gi'eat numbers by 

27 him, who was skilled in weapons, with his ^veapon. The king, 
on hearing that the army was slain by the prince, went forth 

28 himself indeed to fight, sun'ounded by his army. In the 
battle then which took place between tho king and his son, the 
father excelled the prince in weapons and arms. 

29 Thereupon a wandering Muni suddenly appi'oachcd from 
out the air and spoke back to the king ; — 

30 “ Cease from combat. 0 illustrious sir, thy high-soulcd son 
is in tho right here ; moreover fighting between thee and a 

31 vaisyaj is not according to righteousness, 0 king. A biah- 
man who marries wives among all the castes, provided that 
ho manies first a brahman woman, incurs no injury in his 

32 brahman-hood. Likewise a kshatriya who marries first a 
kshatriya’s daughter, incurs no harm if he marries ivkes 
lower castes ; and therefore, 0 king, these other iaVe5§ fall not 

* Bhavitd in the Poona edition is better than hhavati, 
t The Calcutta edition reads utkrish^dhdlikdm haran ; the Poona reading; 

is utkrishtdbdla sarvadd, and the Bombay readihg utkfi8htibdlalid-n<iy^^'\ 

From these readings it wonld seem the correct reading should be 

hdlikd‘naydf^ and I nave adopted this. 

Explained in verses 35 and 36 below. • 

•§ I,e,, daughters of vai^yos and 4udras, as the commentator explains 



NABHIGA MARRIED THE VA18YA MAIDEN. 597 

3;3 fi’om theii^wn righteousness. Thus a who marries first 

a vaisya woman and afterwards a girl bora fiN>m a 4ddra 
family, is not excluded fix)m the vaisya family. The law is 
thus declared in order. Brahmans, kshatnyns, vai^yas, who 
do not first marry w’^omen of the same caste,* fall by marrying 
women of other castes, 0 king. Whatever excluded woman 
a man marries after neglecting union in his own caste, of that 
:](5 woman's caste let him indeedf become a participator. This 
tliy son, who is such, has fallen to vai4ya-hood ; he is of 
wretched undoi'standing. He has no right to combat with 
37 thee a kshatiiya. We do not acknowledge this to be a reason 
far combat^ 0 royal scion ; and since this shall be so, desist 
(hou from the business of battle !” 


Canto CXIV. 

Ncibhaga's exploits. 

hiihhdga married the miiya maiden and became a vaiiya — He had a 
son Bhanandana^ who ivith the help of the yishi Nipa conquered 
fhe eaiih and offered the sovereignty to his father NdbhSga — 
Ndbhdga declined it as he was a vaUya^ and his wife Su-prahhd 
(hen explained to him, that she was not really of vaisya descent, 
hut the daughter of king Su-deva who became a vaiiya under the 
rishi Pramatis curse, because he would not rescue PramatHs wife 
from his own friend Nala. 

Mlrka^d^ya spoke : 

1 The king thereupon desisted from battle with his son ; and 
- he indeed, that "king's son, married that vaiiya maiden. He 
became a vai4ya thereby, Starting up he spoke to the king, — 
“ 0 king, let it be declared to me what I must do.” 


* t’or sa-van^- read sva^var^' ? but the meauiug wiMiJd be the some* 
t for no *pi tad-vastu-hhdff read so 'pi tad‘Var^4fhdg as in the Poona 

'''liUoii, . * 



598 


CANTO CXIV. 


The king spoke : 

3 Let Babhrayya* and the other ascetics, whoai’e engaged in 
the superintendence of righteousness, declare what is the occu. 
pation for this man for the end of righteousness — do thou act 
accordingly. 

M4rkai;^deya spoke ; 

4 Tiien those munis seated in the council announced tliat for 
him the tending of cattle and cultivation and trade should hr 

5 the highest righteousness. And the king’s son complied with 
what was declared by those expounders of righteousness to l)e 
righteousness for him who had fallen from his own sphere <>( 
nghteousness. 

<) A sou was born to him afterwards, who was famed by tlir 
name Bhanandana.f Being sent by his mother who said, “Bi* 

7 a keeper of cattle, my son,” he went forth ; and when enjoined 
thus by his mother, ho prostrated himself before his motlier 
and went to the royal fishi Nipaj! who had resorted to mount 

8 Himavat ; and approaching him Bhanandana held his feet 
according to rule, and pi-ostrating himself before this royal 
rishi spoke : 

9 “ Adorable sir, verily I have been commanded by my mother 
thus, ‘Be thou a keeper of cattle ’§; and yet I must pioteet 

10 the earth; how can assent to her? Verily I niiiht 

protect the earth, || when it may be appropriated^f hy men. 

11 This my earth is assailed by powerful heirs. Shew me how 
I may gain the earth through thy favour, 0 lord j I will carry 
out thy command ; I am prostrate before thee. ” 

* See note * page 501. 

t Or Bhalandana according to the Visbou Pur. IV, i. 

X This was apparently Nipa of the Paurava race, who was king of Kim- 
pilya. Ho had a hundred sons who were all styled Nipas. His dynasty lasted 
till Ugrayudha killed all the Nipas just before the Pdn^vas* time; sec 
Hari-V., xx. 1040, 1060.73,1082-86; Matsya Pur. xlix. 62.69. 

§ Go’pdla, 

11 Oaulf, pdlaniya. There a double pun here with go, “cattle” and the 
earth,”’ and tlio verb pdl, “ to tend” and to protect.” 

f There is also a play on the words sv(-karam, ” assent,” in verse H 
eii-fri'ttfl, “appropriated,” here. 



laTAXANDANA .iAINS TUK KfK«;l>n\f 


5<M> 


Mdrkandeya spoke : 

[j The TOjal fishi Nipa then gave to high-soiiled Bhananda 
[:{ a complete set of weapons, 0 brdhman. After acquiring skill 
in the weapons he went to bis paternal uncle’s sons, Vasurata 
and the other sons, 0 dvija ; he was so commanded by that 

14 high-souled yishi. He demanded half of the kingdom as be- 
fitted his father and paternal grandfather ; and they said, — “ A 

15 vaisya’s son thou art ; how shalt thou enjoy the earth ? ” A 
battle then occuired between Bhananda who was skilled in 
weapons and those his kinsmen Vasurata and the rest, whowere 

1(1 iingry and showered weapons oti him ; but vanquishing them 
all when their troops had ]>cen shattei'ed with his weapons, 
lie, wise in righteousness, took the earth away from them liy 
17 righteous combat. After vanquishing his foes, he next pre- 
sented all the earth and the sovereignty to his father ; and his 
father did not accept it, and in front of his wife made an- 
swer to the son then. 

Nabhiga spoke : 

IS 0 Bhananda, this kingdom is thine ; let it which was I'uled 
l)y thy ancestors be ruled by thee. 

The king spoke :* 

h* I did not rule the kingdom ; I w’as not devoid of the capacity 
for It t formerly ; but preferring a vaifya’s condition I obeyed 
iny father’s command to that effect. Because I showed want 
of affection for my father in that I wedded a vaisya maiden, I 
did not hemne a king, who enjoys the sacred worlds until the 
-d subversion of the world has arrived, J If disregai-ding his 
command again I mle over the earth, there i.s verily no final 
emancipation from existence for me thereafter even during 
hundreds of kalpas, Nor indeed is it fit that I, who have my 

* This lieadiog is euperfliious j it is still Nabhsga who speaks, 

' ^dsamurthya-yiitoJi. The commentator explains it by ati'samarthya'yuto 
PU I did tiot rule the kingdom, although I possessed exceptional capacity 

I tor y<ivad.dhuta^8amplavu}f, the Bombay and Poona editions read ydvad- 
^^Ida-samflavam, An avyayl’hhdvd compound is preferable. 



own pride, should enjoy the kingdom which thou hast won ))v 
thy arm, wheu I have no desire for it, like any weaklin<^ * * * § 

23 Rule thou the kingdom thyself the while, or relinquisli it to 
thy heirs. For me it is good to keep my father’s comnumd 
and not to rule the eaith. 

Markandeya spoke : 

24 Laughing thereat his wife, the lady Su-prabha by name, 
made answer to her husband, “ 0 king, take the mighty kiii<r- 

25 dom. Thou art no vaisya, nor indeed was I born of a vaisja 
family, 0 king ; thou art a kshatriya and I also was born of a 

26 family of kshatriyas. Formerly tliere was a famous king Sii- 
deva t by name, and his friend was king Dhumrasva’s son 

27 Nala.J Accompanied by his friend he went to the wood ^mm- 
vana, § he to sport with his wives in the month of spring, 0 

28 king. Accompanied by those wives and attended by that frieml 

29 he enjoyed many kinds of drinks and food then. After\vanl> 
he saw the extremely fascinating and I’oyally born wiftMil 

30 Cyavana’s son Pramati || on the bank of a tank. His frinid 
Nala, who was intoxicated and not in his right mind, laid hold 
of her, the while she cried out “ Save me, Save me ! ” even as 

31 the king looked on. Her husband Pramati, on hearing her 

32 ciy, at once came up hastily exclaiming “ What is it?” Tlun 

• For durhalasyeha road durbalasyeva, na in the Poona edition. 

t 'I he most famous king of this name appears to have been Su deva nt 
the Kisis who had a great contest with the Vitnhavyas, and wns father <'f 
Divodisa (Mahk-Bh., AnuSas.-p. %xx. 1950-54); but this story pays no regard 
to chronology. 

X There were many kings of this name, but none of them (as far as I ha^e 
found) son of Dhumr4^ya« One of the kings of Vai^li was Dhiiinra^Ta 
(Vishnu Pur, IV. i.) 

§ I liave not found any wood of this name in western India where this story 
is laid ; but Amra-vana may mean simply “ a grove of mungoes.” 

11 Cyavana was a famous pshi, son of Bhrigu. He married Sokanu 
daughter of Manu’s son Haryiti, and by her had a ion Pramati. Framat 
married GhpUdi; see Uahi-Bh., Adi-p. r. 870 and 871 , aed viii. 039, 
and Vana-p. oxxii : also S'ata-patha Br4h. IV, 5; Aitar.-BrOi. VIH. ir- 30 
Cjayana’a region was in the weat near the mouth of the R. Nai’madt, *' 
Mah*.Bh., Vana-p. U»ii. 8864, 8364 and 836S ; cii. 8787-10 and ciii. 1031*' 



PRVMATl's CrRSE ON SL-DHVA AXP XALA. 001 

]ic saw king Su-deva standing there, and his wife in the 
[ gi*asp of Nala, who was vety much out of his senses. Pramati < 
spoke to the king then, — 

“ Make this man quiet ! And thou art the ruler ; thou. Sir, 
art tlie king ; and this Nala is a bad man, 0 king.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

|. On hearing tliat distressed rishi’s appeal, Su-deva deterred 
by reason of Nala’s high position replied, — “ I am a vai^ya ; 

') seek someone else, a kshairiya, in order to rescue her.” Then 
Pramati enraged, burning fortli as it wei*e with splendour, 
made answer to the king who said “ 1 am a vaisya.” 

Pramati spoke : 

il Be it so ! thou, Sir, art a vaisya.* A kshatriya is so named 
))ecau8e he guards one from injury, t Kshatriyas hold the 
weapon in order that there may be no cry of distress. Thou 
being such art no ksliatiiya ; verily thou shalt be a vaisya of 
base family. 


Canto CXV. 


'''I'prahlid continues her story to Nahh(ig({ — That Pramati reduc£d 
Nala to ashes, and, on Sn-deva’s imploring pardon, mitigated the 
curse on Sn-deiut, with the promise that he should regain his 
I'shatriya-hood—Also that she had heen the daughter of the royal 
rishi Su-ratha, and had heen cursed by Agastya to be horn a 
vaisya woman temporarily, 

Marka^deya spoke : 

1 After imprecating the curse on him then, Pramati, the 
descendant of Bhfigu, enraged and burning up, as it were, the 
three worlds by reason of his wrath, spoke to Nala, 0 dvija ; 

“ “ Inasmuch as thou, Sii', intoxicated w’ith lust, forcibly seizest 
lily wife here in my hermitage, become thou therefor ashes 

* For vaiiya read vaiiyah as' in the Poona edition. 

t K.hatriyah kshata-rakshandt. For a different derivation, see cftnto lyxii. 

24 * 


70 



602 


CANTO CXV. 


3 forthwith.” And then immediately as he uttered that speech 
W Nala, consumed by the fire that spranj^ from the rishi's body, 

became forthwith a heap of ashes. 

4 On seeing that rishi's power then Su-deva sobered thereat 
bending himself in reverence, said thus— “ Orant pardon! 

5 grant pardon ! Let that which I have spoken,* adorable sir, 
a thing disordered by reason of into.'^ication through drinking 
spirituous liquor, be pardoned ; be thou gracious ; let this 

6 curse be turned aside ! ” Being thus propitiated by him, Pra- 
mati, the descendant of Bhrigu, whose anger had passed off 
when Nala was burnt up, replied with mind devoid of strong 

7 feeling ; — “The word which I have uttered shall not be otherwise; 
nevertheless being gracious I will do thee a supreme favour. 

8 Thou, sir, shalt be a vai^ya by race -of this there can bo no 
doubt ; thou, a kshatriya, shalt be a vaisya soon in the very 

9 'next birth. When a kshatriya’s son shall seize thy daughter 
by force, thou being seized by one of thy own race shalt then 

10 become t a kshatriya again, 0 variya.” Thus that Su-deva 
as a vaisya became my father, 0 king. 

11 Hear also, illustrious sir, all the stcn'ij I who I am. There 
was of yore a royal rishi named Su-ratha on mount Gandha- 
mddana, who practised austerities, restricted his food, aban- 

12 doned worldly associations, and abode in the forest. On his 
seeing then a maina § fallen from a hawk’s beak to tlie 
ground, compassion sprang up within that high-souled rkh^ 

13 and he swooned therewith ; then when the swoon passed off, I 
was produced from his body, and seeing me he took me with 

14 a loving mind. “ Because she has been born from me, while I 
was overcome with compassion, she shall therefore be hwicn by 

15 the name Kppa-vati ” ||— so said he, my lord. Thereafter 
growing up in his hermitage, I used to wander day and night 

* For yad uletavdms #vaw,read yad uhtavdms tvdm as in the Poona oditio". 

and the commentator says aham must bo understood. . 
t For hhavishyati read hhavishyasi, 

J For tvaUsarvdm read tat aarvam. 

§ S^drikd, a bird. , 

II ^ Fall of compassion.’* 



AUASTYA's curse on KklPA-VAlf. 


through the woods also with my girl-companions of the same 
It) age. Then the muni Agastya’s brother, who was known as 
A'gastya,* * * § while seeking for forest-products in' the forest, 

17 was angered by my girl-companions and cursed me ; and I said 
— “No offence have I committed against thee, 0 best of dvijas ; 
why because of an offence by other girls hast thou cursed me f 

The rishi spoke : 

IS “By reason of contact with the bad oven that which i$ not 
bad becomes bad, just as a jar containing the five substances 
obtained from cows t becomes spoilt if a dixip of spirituous 
19 liquor falls into it. Since thou hast fallen prostrate aud prO" 
pitifited me hy declaring ‘ I am not bad,’ hear therefore whatt 
li) favour I will do to thee, 0 maiden. When, being bom in a 
vaisya family, thou shalt admonish thy husband § to under- 
lake kingly rule, thou shalt then fully recover the remembrance 

1 of this existence ; and thou shalt resume thy kshatriya caste 
along with thy husband and shalt obtain heavenly pleasures. 
Go notv^ let fear depart from thee ! ” 

2 Thus was I cursed formerly by that gi’eat fishi, 0 king of 
kings ; and my father was thus cui’sed by Pramati formei'ly. 

!3 So thou art not a vais^ya, 0 king ; nor was my father a vaisya ; 
nor indeed am I ; || how dost thou, who art not degraded, 
become degraded in marnjmg me who am not degraded P 

* Or Agastyn. 

t Milk, cheese, batter, urine and dung. 

+ For sri^uydt read yat, as in the Poona edition. 

§ Tvam putram, “ thou shalt admonish thy son, &c.,” is the reading in tljo 
"alcutta and Poona editions, but the latter in its Corrigenda alters it to sva- 
potiw, and I have followed this. 

li ivath hi is the reading in the editions, but is incorrect. 1 venture 
^lunend it to na tv^aham, and have translated it accordingly. Another emend- 
ie to read aa for nu, and then the meaning of these and the following 
’^orda would be— “ How indeed dost thou, who art suoh <md who art unde- 
’ ’ degraded in marryiug me who am undegraded ? ” 



m 


CAKTO CXVI. 


Canto CXVI. 

The Exploits of Bhannnda and Vatsa-'pri. 

Nnbhdija dcidined the kingdom and Bkanandana became king—Be hm] 
It son Vatsa-pri — A Baity a king Knjrimhha, who had a magic 
club called Bnnanda, opened a great hole near king Vidurathne 
city and carried the princess Muddvati down to Pdtala—Her 
brothers failed to rescue her and were made capthe — Vatsa-pri 
killed the Daitya^ after she destroyed the cluEs magic power, and 
rescued her and her brothers-- Bhe was named Sunandd afferfhe 
club, and Vatsa-pri married her. 

Mfirkandeya spoke : 

1 Oil Hearing this herspeech and his son’s, tlie king, wise in 

2 righteousness, addressed his wdfe and son again, — Inasniiicli 
as I relinquished the kingdom at my father’s command, I will 
not take it again ; why dost thou, 0 wife, draw out my soul 

3 with vain words ? Standing fast in my duties as vaisya I will 
pay thee taxes, my son. hlnjoy thou the whole kingdom, or 
relinquish it if thou wi sliest.” 

4 Being addressed thus by his father, prince Bhanandaim * 
then governed the kingd(/m in righteousness and in likewise 

5 married a wife. Unrepulsed was his discus in the earth, 0 
brahman, and his mind was noti'c^ upon unrighteousness. All 

6 kings were in subjection to him. He performed a sacritiee ac- 
cording to precept ; he rules the earth well. He in sooth wa^ 
the only lord ; his commands pervaded the earth. 

7 A son was born to him, namely Vatsa-prf by name, who. a 
high-souled king, surpassed his father with the multitude "f 

8 his good qualities. And his wife was Saunanda, daughter of 
Viduratha, who was devoted to her husband, an illustrious 
woman. He gained her by his valour in slaying the Baitjn 
king Kuji*imbha,t the enemy of Indra. . 

* Or Bhalandana according to Vishnu Pur. IV. i. where his desoentlants are 

given, 

it The Calcutta text reads Kujnmhha here and in verse 9, incorrectly# 

verse 16. 



THE DEMON Kl JRIMRHA AND IIIS CLUB SUNANDA. 


605 


Kraush^uki spoke ! 

9 Adorable sir, how did ho gain her throiigli the destruction of 
Kujrinibha ? Tell me this story with benignant mind. 

Markandeya spoke : 

111 There was a king named Vidiiratha * whose fame was cele- 
brated in the earth. Two sons wei-e born to him, Su-niti and 
]l Sn-mati. Now Viduratha went to the forest once upon a time 
fo bunt. He beheld a very great pit, as it were the earth’s 
12 mouth thrust up. On seeing it he pondered, “ What is this 
dreadful thing ? 1 trow it is a hole <hvni to Patala : it has 

11 not belonged to the earth a long while.” While thinking thus, 
lie saw in a lonely wood there an ascetic brahman named Su- 
it viuta approaching, and the king being astonished asked him, 
— “ What is this Tt is very deep and displays the earth’s 
belly which is situated within.” 

The rishi spoke : 

1') “ Knowest thou it not, 0 king ? for then art deemed by me 

to have spies as thine eyes, f A king ought to know everything 
M that passes on the face of the earth. A very valiant fierce 
Diinava dwells in Rasatala ; because he makes the earth to 
yawn, J he is therefore called Ku-jrimbha. Whatever has been 
produced, whether pi'oduced on the earth or in heaven, is 
wrought by him, 0 king ; how is it then that thou dost not 
know him, Sir ? That wicked-souled demon carried off the 
club named Su-nanda, which Tvasht pi fashioned of yore; there- 
1'* with he slays his enemies in battle. Hidden within Patala that 
Asura cleaves this earth wit^i it, and makes doors of exit for 
:dl the Asuras ; with that weapon, the club Su-nanda, the 
earth has been pierced in this spot. How shalt thou. Sir, enjoy 

* Tilt' story sliowB tliat this king’s capital whs near the river Nirvindhya 
"liich was apparently in the M4lwa region (see verses 27 and 33). There 
^ere several kings of this name, but I have found none who had two sons 
the iifinies mentioned. 

t For vdg-arthas, which the Calcutta and Bombay editions have, read ddrdk- 
in the Poona edition. 

+ '^riin'bhayati. 



( 500 ) 


CANTO OXVI. 


21 tills earth unless thou conquerest him P That fierce, mighty 
adversary of the gods, amed with the club, destroys sacn’fices 

22 arid fattens up the Daityas. If thou slayest this foe, whose 
sphere is in Pdtala, thou slialt thereby become lord of all the 

23 earth, the supreme monarch. That mighty demon's club is 
called Saiinanda by men-folk ; and the wise moreover speak of 

24 it* * * § as partly strong and partly weak ; yet when touch eel by a 
woman it loses its power on that day,t 0 king ; on the following 

25 day it issues forth with its power regained. That demon of 
evil ways does not know then the majestic power of the club, 
nerr the defect which comes at the touch of a woman’s fincrers, 
that is, the collapse of its power. 

26 “ Thus I have declared to thee, 0 king, the might of that 
ovil-souled Ddnava and of his club. As.l have spoken, so do 

27 thou comport thyself. This hole which he has made in the 
earth is near thy city, 0 king ; why art thou foolishly J un- 
concerned about it. Sir ? ” 

28 • Now when that rishl. had spoken thus and departed, the 
king went to his city and took counsel with his ministeis who 

29 were skilled in counsel within his city. He made known to 
tlie ministers all that story as he had lieard it, both tlie majestic 

30 power of the club and also the waning of its power. Now' his 
daughter Muda-vati, who was by his side, heard that counsel 
which the king was taking wdth his ministers. 

31 But some days afterwards, the Daitya Kujfimbha carried off 
that maiden, who was possessed of energy, fi'om a grove, w hile 

32 she was accompanied by her maiden-friends. On heaiing 
that, the king’s eyes were distraught with anger, and he said 
to his two sons, “ Hasten quickly ye two who are well acquaint- 

33 ed with the forests : there is a hole on the hank of the Nir-vin* 
dha ; § go ye doivn thereby to Rasatala and slay him who with 
most evil mind has carried Muda-vati off.” 

• For tarn read tad as in the Poona edition, 

t On the day on which it is touched, sparia-dine (comment.) 

X For yathi read vfithd as in the Poona edition. 

§ Or Nirvindhyd, as in the Poona edition, which is the preFerablo fo^® » 

see canto Ivii, verso 24, note J. 



007 


VATSAPRf GOES TO RESCUE MUDAVAlf. 

Markandeya spoke: 

34 1 hereupon those two sons of his, following on the steps of that 
demon'j reached that hole and in excessive wrath fought with 

35 Knjrimbha with the aid of their own army. Then occurred a 
very terrible combat between them with maces, swords, spears, 

36 javelins, and axes and arrows without intermission. After it 
ill at Daitya, who possessed the might of illusive power, bound 
tliose two princes in battle after slaying all their soldiers. 

37 On hearing of that, the king spoke thus to all his soldiers, 
‘‘ I have fallen into utter misery, now that my sons are in 
bonds, (0 best of munis) ; whoever shall slay that Daitya 
and shall set my daughter there free, I will bestow even her, 

) tlio large-eyed maiden, on him.” Even thus the desperate 
king made a proclamation in his city then in order to obtain 
ilio deliverance of his sons and daughter from bondage, 0 
muni. 

) Bhanandana’s son Vatsa-pri then heard (f that promise in 
sooth, which was proclaimed abroad — he, possessed of strength, 

[ skilled in weapons, endowed with heroism. And arriving there 
lie saluted this noblest of kings, and bowing with deference 

1 spoke to him who was his own father’s peerless friend ; — “ Com- 
mand me in sooth speedily ; I mil deliver thy two sons and 
also thy daughter, after slaying that Daitya through thy very 
glory.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 Kmbracing him joyfully, who was his dear friend’s son, the 
king said ; 

^ Go thou to full success,* my dear son. My dear son shall 
•‘^tand in my place, if he pei*forms the precept thus. Do this 
'piickly, my dear son, if thy mind is resolute.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

^ Then armed with scymitar and bow, having a leathern bow- 
gmud and finger- protector bound on him^ the heimc prince 
^vent in haste to Patiila by that hole. The prince made 
his bow-string twang with an exceedingly vehement sound 
• • 
for samiddhai read samsiddhyai, ng corrected in the Poona edition, 



608 


CANTO CXVT. 


then, wherewith the whole of Pdtdla was filled throughout. 

47 Hearing the sound of the bow-string, the Danava king, Ku- 
jirimbha came forward then in excessive wrath, attended by his 

48 army. Then occurred a battle between him and the king’s 
son, one with his army against the other with his army, mighty 

49 against mighty. When the Danava had fought with him for 
three days, he was filled with rage in his soul and rushed 

50 to get his club. Worshipped with perfumes, garlands and in- 
cense, it stands in the private apartments, 0 illustrious sir : /o/- 

51 it had been fashioned by the Praja-pati.* Muda-vati, wlio 
knew well the secret of the club’s majestic power, bowing her 

52 neck very low, touched the noble club then. Until the great 
demon grasps tlie club again, till then the beautiful maiden 
touched it many times under pretence of paying reverence 

56 to it. Going hacJc then the king of the demons fought 
with the club. Vainly fell the blows of the club on those 

54 enemies. But inasmuch as the supremo weapon, the cliih 
Saunanda, had lost its power, 0 muni, the Daitya fought 
with his weapons and arms against his foe in the battle. 

55 With his arms and weapons tlie demon was not the 
prince’s equal, and that, his might with the club, had been 

56 dissipated by the maiden. f Conquering then the Danava s 
weapons and arms, the king’s son forthwith forced him from 
his chariot ; and then the demon grasping his .shield and scy- 

57 mitar rushed at him again. The pidnce felled that enemy of 
the lord of the thirty gods, as he rushed forwards violently in- 
cited and displaying his ra.ge,— felled him to the earth with his 
weapon of fire which gleamed like the Fire that burns up the 

58 ^orU finally. That foe of the thirty gods was wounded gr]e^• 

ously in the heart by the fiery weapon and quitted his body. 
And forthwith there was high festival among the huge .snakes 
within the confines of Rasatala-. ^ ^ 

59 Then fell a shower of flowers upon the king’s sou ; t le 
Gandharva lords sang forth, the gods’ instruments of niiui' 

60 sounded out. And the prince, after slaying that demm, set «« 

*.See verse 18 . * 

c , , 

t For huddhya road tcinvyd ns in tbo Poona edition. 



VATSAPRI RESCtJEP AND MARRIED SUNANPA. 


609 


the king’s two sons and the slender-shaped maiden Mudd-vati. 
And the king of the serpents, Ananta who is named S'esha, 
took that club, when that Kujfimbha was slain ; and he, Stesha 
lord of all the serpents, was satisfied with her ; he rich in aus- 
terities had meditated with glee upon the course of Mud4- 
vati’s mind. Because the most beautiful maiden had repeated- 
ly touched the club Sunanda, knowing tlie power of the 
touch of a woman’s palm * cn it, therefore the serpent 
king in his joy gave Muda-vati then the name Su-nand^, 
derived from the quality of the club Saunanda, 0 dvija. 

And the prince brought her in company with her two bix)- 
tliers to their father’s presence quickly, and bowing down 
spoke to him thus — “ Here are brought thy two sons, dear 
father, and here is brought Mudd-vati according to thy com- 
mand ; what else I must do, declare thou that. ” 

Markandeya spoke : 

Thereat the king’s heart was filled with gladness, and he 
exclaimed aloud, “Well done ! well done 1” and “ Splendid ! 
my dear son, my dear son ! T am honoured by the thirty gods, 
my dear son, for three reasons — in that 1 have both gained thee 
I for my son-in-law, and that the foe has been stricken down, and 
that my children have come unharmed to me here again ; there- 
) fore take her hand now on this auspicious day--I have said it ; 
make my word true — that thou, 0 prince, be joined in joy 
with my daughter Muda-vati, a maiden of lovely form. 

The prince spoke : 

1 I must obey thy command^ dear father ; what thou sayest I 
will do. Thou verily knowest, dear father, that in this matter 
we are in truth unchanged. 

Markainjeya spoke : 

^ Then the great king performed the series of marriage ntes 
for them both, for his daughter Muda-vati and Bhanandana’s 

* Head yoshit as part of the compound yoshit-karotnla-iTparh- &o., and not 
“^pirately as in the Calcutta edition. . * 

77 



610 


CANTO CXVII. 


73 son. Thereafter Vatsa-pri in his early manhood sported will 
her in charming regions and in palaces and on hill-tops. 

74 As time passed on, his father Bhanandana grew old ati< 

75 departed to the forest ; Vatsa-pri himself became king. H 
offered up sacrifices continually, while protecting his peopl 
with righteousness. Now the people, being protected by tha 
high-souled monarch as if they ivere his childi^en, prospered 

76 and in his realm there was no confusion among the castes 
and no one felt any fear of robbers, rogues or villains, nor air 
fear of calamities, while he ruled as king. 


Can'io CXVII.'' 

Khanitra\s eorploits. 

Vatsa-pri was succeeded by his son Prdthsn, and Frdmsii by his sm 
Prajati. — Prajdti had five sons, of whom Khanitra succmh 
him — Khanitra\ special p^rayer is given — He made his four ho 
thers suhmliiiate kings — The minister of one. of them subdiuai 
the other brothers atid tried to gain the supreme power for hr 
master through magic performed by the family priests of all fon 
brothers — The magic produced a female deity tvhich destroyed th 
four priests and the minister. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 To him, Vatsa-pri, were born of Su-nanda twelve sons 

2 Pram^u, Pradira and S'ura, Su-cakra, Vikrama, Krama, Balii 
Balaka, and Canda and Pracanda, Su-vikrama and Sva-rupa- 
all pinces of great parts, most victorious in battle. 

3 The eldest of them, Prdmsu, who was great in valoui’, wa 
king ; these others were subordinate to his authonty like de 

4 pendants. At his sacrifice the earthf justified her name b 
i*ea8on of the many multitudes of things, which she gave aw a 

* The Calcutta edition makes a mistake in the numbering. It omits 

calls this Canto oxriii, and continues the mistaken numbering to the end. 
f I'asan-d/iarci, “container of wealth,” 



kHANITRA’s VIHTUKS AND PRATER. 


611 


to the twice-bom and which she parted with to the inferior 
5 rastes. While he duly protected his people as if his own be- 
gotten children, the sacrifices then, whicli he performed with 
8 t]ie accumulation of wealth that lay in his treasury, were hun- 
dreds of thousands ; their number is not reckoned by ten 
thousand or such & figure^ nor by ten millions, nor by a thousand 
billion or such a figure^ 0 muni. 

7 Pra-jati* wss his son ; at whose sacrifice Indra, gaining 
uiiparallcd grjitification along with the gods who partake of 
S shares of sacrifices, the chiefest of the mighty, f smote nine 
nineties!]! of valiant Danavas and Bala and Jambha noblest of 
!• Asuras, and smote other very vali.ant foes of the gods. 

Prajati had five sons, of whom Khanitra was chief, 0 muni. 

10 Of them Khanitra became king; he was celebrated for his 
])crsoiial feats of prowess. He was a ])acific, truth-speaking 

11 hero ; he delighted in doing good to all living creatures ; he 
took delight in his own sphere of righteousness constantly : he 
waited upon the aged, he was well versed in the Vedas, he 
was elo(|uent, endowed with modesty, yet skilled in weapons 

12 and no boaster. He was the beloved of all people continually ; 
he uttered this prayer day and night 

‘ Let all created things rejoice, let them be affectiouate 
1 1 even in solitary places ! May there be welfare for all created 
tilings, and may they be free from affliction ! May created 
things experience no bodily sickness nor any mental diseases ! 
I't May all created things cherish friendliness to every living 
being ! May there be bliss for all the twice-bom ; may they have 
b) mutual lovingkindness ! May all castes have full prosperity, 
and may all deeds attain perfect accomplishment! May the 
worlds be p'opitious to all created things! May your mind 
always be propitious ! Desire ye at all times what is good for your 
son even as for yourselves ! Similarly be ye benevolent in mind 

* Ho is called Prajani in the Vishnu Pnr. (TV. i.) and Pramati in the 
^tsgavata Pur. He seems to be the same as Prasandhi in the genealogy in 
^“•'a-Blj., Asvam.-p. iii. 66. 
t That is, Indra. 
r l^aiddhilcdshfaiatim, comment. 



61^ CANTO CXVIt. 

17 to all created things! This is unbounded good for you. More- 
over who sins against whom, that he causes any harm to any 

18 one besotted in mind? To him assuredly ♦ comes that result, 
that which accrues to the doer thereof. So thinking, ho! let the 

19 people be informed of their duties t to all, J lest ye wise people 
shall undergo secular sin. § May there ever be bliss on the 

20 earth for him, who loves me now; and may even he, who hates 
me, see good things in this world ! ’ 

21 Such was that king’s son Khanitra in disposition; he was 
endowed with every good quality; ho possessed good fortune, 
his eyes wei’e like a lotus-leaf. He appointed those hia/(;Mr 

22 brothers to separate kingdoms out of affection, and he himself 
enjoyed this earth bounded by the seas ; thm he placed S'aiiri ovei' 

23 the east region, Mudava8u|| over the south, Sunaya over the 
western region, and Maha-ratha over the northern. They and 

24 that king had separate families of brahmans as puTOhitas, and 
also munis, who descended in a regular lineage of ministers. 
S auri’s purohita umabrahman % Su-hotra by name who sprang 

25 from the family of Atri; Udavasu’s was Kusavartta, who was 
born of the lineage of Gautama; a Kaiyapa by name Pra-mati 

26 was Sunaya’s purohita; Vasishtlia was purohita to king Maha- 
ratha. Those four kings indeed enjoyed their own kingdoms. 

27 and Khanitra was their over-lord, being over-lord of all the 
earth. King Khanitra was always kindly to those his four 

28 brothers and to all his people as to his own sons. 

One day S'auri was addressed by his minister Vi4va-vedin— 

29 “ 0 king, we have somewhat to say unto thee in private. He, 
who possesses all this earth, to whom all kings are in subjec- 

30 tioji, is the king, and so will be his son and his grandsons and 
thereafter his descendants. These others, his brothers, are 

* For nyunam read nunam as in the Poona edition, 

t The Poona edition reads hitu-huddhayah, and the meaning would tlion h 

“ be friendly-minded.” 

X Or, ‘in all things.’ 

§ Laukikampdpam, 

II Or better Uddvasu, as in the Poona edition and in verse 26. 

^‘Family priest. For dvijdh read dvijab as in the Poona edition, 



A PLOT against kHANITllA. 


m 


I kings of very small * * * § territories ; and his son is smaller than 
lie ;t and his grandsons will be of smaller make. Degenerat- 
•I ing in time from individual to individual, his descendant's will 
become dependant on agriculture for their living, O king. Thy 
brother, bestowing affection and power on his brothers, makes 
3 no division of the patrimony.}; AVTiat affection will he have, 
0 king, for tlie two more distant, his brothers’ sons§ ? His 
mind will he more distant with regard to their two sons, 0 
3 king. J3y what thing that is to be done will his son be endowed 
with affection ? Or if a king is satisfied by anything whatsoever, 

15 yet to what end then do kings entertain ministers ? || The 
whole kingdom is enjoyed by me while 1 remain thy minister. 

!() Dost thou retain that to no pui-pose,!! if it gives** satisfaction ? 

Sovereignty accomplishes what should be done ; an instru- 
17 ment is desired by one who operates. And the acquirement 
of sovereigntytf is what thou must accomplish ; thou art the 
worker, wo are the instrument. Do thou, being such, rule 
the kingdom that belonged to thy father and grandfather by 
means of us, the instruments. We shall not bestow benefits 
on thee in another world. 

The king spoke : 

Inasmuch as the eldest brother is king (0 monarch), and 
we are his younger brothers, he therefore enjoys the earth 
and we enjoy small portions of the earth. Now we are five 

* For kalpa-vishayddhipdh read avalpa>vi8hayddhipd'b as in the Poona 

Cflitioii. 

t (fct/paifcas referring to each of the brothers; but a plural 

reading would bo preferable, “their sons are smaller thnn they,’’ 
t Uddhdram. The Poona edition reads hhrdtvh an^ha-haldrpiifahf and the 
meaning would then bo, “ Thy brother makes no division of the patrimony for 
ibrotlier who bestows affection and power though nrpa and orpin are not in 
Ibc dictionary. 

§ For snehakoh the Poona edition reads better snehah kah, 

I! For mantra-parigrahalf, the Poona edition roads better mantri-parigrahalf,. 
^ For sukhddhdrayaae read>»wdhd dhdrayaae as in the Poona edition. 

** For kurute the Poona edition reads kuiushe, 
i tt For rdjyadubdhad read rdjya-lamhhai as in the Poona edition. 



614 


OANtO CXVll. 


brothers, and there is hut one earth, 0 high-minded sir, hence 
how can there be entire sovereignty over it separately for us / 

Vi^va-vedin spoke : 

40 Be this so here !* If there is hut one earth, 0 king, do thou 
thyself take possession of it; do thon Sir, as eldest hi other, 

41 rul,e the earth. Be thou the absolute ruler, exercising entire 
sovereignty, unto all. And the ministers whom they have enter- 
tained strive for themt as 1 strive foi* thee. 

The king spoke : 

42 Since the eldest, the king, esteems us affectionately like 
sons, how shall I display against him a selfishness that relates 
to the world F 

Vis\a-vedm spoke : 

43 When seated in the kingdom, thou mayest do worship as 
the eldest with new kingly honours. What is. this position 
of youngest and eldest ? Sovereignty is for men who want it 

Markandeya s])oke : 

44 And on the king’s assenting, “ So be it,” 0 best of wnu 
Visva-vedin the minister brought his brothers into subjection 

45 to him then, and brought their purohitas into subjection to him- 
self in ceremonies performed for the removal of obstacles and 
other rites. Next he employed them in spells directed against 

46 Khanitra, and severed his faithful adherents by conciliation, 
gifts and other means ; and he exerted the utmost efforts m 

47 repelling punishment from his own folh. And while the foin 
purohitas were performing an exceedingly arduous magical 
incantation day by day, there was produced a four-fold female 

48 deityt which was very fonnidable, had a large mouth, was ex 
ceedingly ten'ible to behold, held a large pike raised aloft, w 

49 lofty and was exceedingly pitiless. It came to the place t 
where king Khanitra was, and it was cast out by that 

50 blemished Icing’s store of merit. The fbur-fold female dm J 

* For hhavdihs tatra read hhavatv aira ns in the Bombay edition, 
t Jeshdm; the comniontHtor explains thus, hhrdtrindtk karya-vtshayt. ^ 

X Krityd-datushtaya. 



THE PLOTTERS WERE DESTROYED IGNOMINIODSLY. 616 

fell on those evil-souled purohitas of his brother kings, and on 
M Visva-vedin indeed. Then were burnt up by that female 
deity, who assailed them, those purohitas and Visva-vedin the 
minister who gave evil counsel to S'auri. 


Canto CXVTIL* 

Khanitras explcdls cmcluded. 

Khanitra, on hearing of the destruction of the family priests^ lamented 
and took the blame on himself — I[e resigned the kingdom to his 
son Kshnpa^ departed to the forest, and died there in sanctity. 

1 Thereupon tliere was great dismay in all the world, in- 
asmuch as those purohitas dwelling in separate cities perished 

2 at the same time. Khanitrahe^vd then that his brothers’ puro- 

hitas had readied tlieir death, and that his brother’s minister 
Viil^va-vedin also had been burnt up. Khanitra the great king 
was extremely surprised, wmdering “ What is this r* ” 0 best 

4 of munis ; and knew not the cause. Then the king asked 
Yasishtha who had come to his palace, what the reason was 
why those, the minister and purohitas of his brothers, had 

5 perished. When questioned by him the great muni related 
then how it had happened, what S'auri’s minister had said 

'■ and what S'auri had replied to him, and what he, that evil 
minister, had performed as a means of producing dissension 
among the brothers and what the purohitas had done ; for what 
reason they, the puiohitas who were absolutely compassionate 
even to an enemy, had perished, while injuring that sinless 
king. On hearing that, the king reproached himself exceed- 
ingly then, exclaiming, Alas ! I am sore stricken ! in Vasish- 
tha’s presence, 0 dvija. 

The king spoke : 

^ “ Fie on me, who am of unholy composition, of scanty good- 


* Canto oxix iu the Calcutta editioUf 



616 


CANTO CXVIIT. 


fortune, destitute of splendour ! Sin which is utterly contemn, 
ed by all the worlds has been committed hy me. through the 

10 fault of fate. That is the reason why those four brahmans 
have perished : what other man besides me will there be more 

11 sinful on the earth ? If I were not a man here on the earth, 
they, ray brothers’ purohitas, would not have perished then. 

12 Fie on the kingdom ! fie too on my birth in the family of great 
kings — I who have become the cause of the destruction of the 

13 brdhraans ! They, my brothers’ sacrificing priests, met their 
end while working at their masters’ object ; no wicked 
men were they; I am wicked in causing their destruction. 

14 What am I to do P Where am I to go ? No one verily is a 
sinner on the earth but I who have become the cause of the 
brahmans’ destruction.” 

15 Thus grieving in heart, king Khanitm being desirous of 

16 departing to the forest anointed his son to the throne. After 
anointing his son who was named Kshupa to the kingdom, 
the king departed to the forest, along with his three wives, tc 

17 perfcrrm austerities. Going there he, best of kings, being well- 
versed in the ordinances concerning vana-prasthas, performed 

18 austerities three hundred and fifty years. Now, when his 
body had become emaciated through austerities, the noble 
king, having restrained all the organs of sense, quitted his life 

19 while dwelling in the forest, 0 chief of brahmans. He weni 
then to the sacred worlds which yield every desire and are 
undecaying, which are to be gained by kings by means o 

20 horse-sacrifices and other sacrifices. And those his three wives 
quitted their life at the very same time with him, and gainet 
the same world* along with him indeed, their most high 

souled lord. . 

21 This is the stwy of Khanitra’s exploits ; when heard, i' 
destroys stains ; and it destroys the stcUns of those who read it 
illustrious sir. H ear next about Kshupa. 

♦ For vdpuJik' mmdlokyam read avdpufy sdloky^nn ns in the Poona edition. 



KSHUPA WAS A GREAT SACRIPICBR* 


617 


Canto CXIX * 

Vivim^a's erploits* 

hipa (emulated a more ancient king of the same name and enriched 
the brahmans — He teas succeeded by his son Vira ; and Vira by 
his son Vivim^a whose loas a pi'osperous reign. 

Markandeya spoke : 

Now Khanitra’fl son Kahupa on feceivinj^ the kingdom pro- 
tected his people, while delighting them in righteousness, even 
as his father had done. That king was by disposition liberal 
of gifts, and a sacrificer of sacrifices ; he was just alike both to 
foe and friend in the path of the administration of justice and 
so forth. 

One day the king, while at his own residence, 0 muni, was 
addressed by his bards, — “ As was king Kshupa of yore, so art 
thou, sir. ”t Of yore there was a king Kshupa, J Brahmd’s son ; 
as had been the exploits of this king, such that one indeed en- 
deavoured to achieve. 

The king spoke : 

I wish to hear of the exploits of the most high-souled Kshupa. 
If such can be accomplished by me, I will perform them. 

The bards spoke : 

That king made caii\e-keeping brahmans § multitudes of 
yore, 0 king ; and with the tribute of the sixth portion that 
high-souled king performed a sacrifice on the earth. 

Canto cxx in the Calcutta edition. 

For tathdhhavat read tathd hhavdn as in the Poona edition. 

■ It must apparently bo this Kshupa to whom reference is made in the 
ta-Bli, (Sfinti-p. okvi. 6164-66 and 6192-93) where it is said that after the 
was fn8hioned Manu gave it to Kshupa for the protection of the people, 

1 Ikshvaku got it from Kshupa. 

i Go-brdhma^dn, The compound occnrs again in verses 10 and 12. It does 
^ soem to mean “ cattle and brahmans,” for this meaning hardly suits the 
need, and the compound occurs twice in the smgular in verse 12 In that 
the Poona edition varies in reading go-hrdhmai}ah, plural, but both oditions 
in reading go-lrdhmai^dya, singular. ’ * 

78 



618 


CANTO CXIX. 


The king spoke : 

7 Who like me will follow those high-souled kings ? Never 
theless, may he be strenuous after the exploits of those limp 

8 of exalted exploits ! Heai* then the promise which I nov 

9 make — I will imitate the great king Kshupa’s exploits, 
will perform samafices three and three on the present am 
future* gathering of the hai’vosta on the earth which has foil 

10 streams — this promise I have made. And the tribute whicl 
cattle- brahmans gave to that king of yore, the \pi’ 
same I will restore to the brahmans and the cattle 

Markandeya spoke ; 

11 Having thus pledged his word, Kshupa performed it aeconl 
ingly. He, best of sacrificers, qli'ered three sacrifices on tli 

12 appearance of the ci’ops. And the very tribufe which a catilc 
keeping brahman gave to king.s before, of that same quantit 
gave he other wealth to the catth-kceping brahman. 

Ill He had a son, Vh*a,t of nife Pramatha, a blamel('< 
prince^ by whose majesty and valour kings were brought int 

14 subjection. And his dear wife was a Vidarbha princess name 
NTandini ; he, the lord, begat a son VivimsaJ of her. 

15 While Vivim^a was ruling the earth, as a king of great v 

16 gour, the earth became densely populated with men. Pai 
janya rained in due season, and the earth abounded wit 

17 harvests, and the harvests were most fruitful, and the hut 
were full of juice, and the juices gave noui’ishment, yet tl 
nourishment caused no outrageous behaviour; nor did tl 
stores of riches become causes of debauchery among me 

18 His enemies were cowed by his energy, Ogi'eatmuni. Tl 
people, who were all a band of friends, desire good health ; tl 

19 citizens desii’e mirth. After performing very many sacrilice 

• Sasydpdte gatdgate ; ^ mftya-prdpfau jdtdydm ajdtdydm vd (comment.) ^ 
f This kioR is called ViihSa in the Vishnu Pnr. (IV. i) Between Ks ^ 

and Vim^a a king IkshvSku is inserted in the geneMlocy given in Mats 

Aavara.-p. Hi. 66-68. , 

I 'The Vishnu Pur. calls him Viviihsa or Viviihiaii (TV, i). 



KHANINfiTRA WAS AN EXTRAORDINARY SACRIPICBR. 619 


Hftcr protecting the earth well, he met his death in battle and 
(le[)arted hence to the world of Indra.* 


Canto CXX.f 


KluinhiHra’ s exploits. 

lOos succeeded by hi.s son Kluiniuefni^ who was a great sacri- 
fleer — Being son-less he, went hunfing to kill a deer for a sacrifice.^ 
(Old two deer came^ one having no ([ffspring and the other many — 
Bach pressed his claim to he killed^ hut fhe king refused to kill 
either. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 His son was Khaninetra, great in strength and prowess, at 
wliosc sacrifices sang the Gandhaiwas, filled with astonishmeid, 

'1 llias — Like mito Khaninetra there will bo no other sacrificer 
oil earth.” After completing ten thousand sacrifices, he gave 
■ ! I he earth with its seas away. And he it was who, after giving 
away all the earth to high-soul ed brahmans, acquired wealth 
thi'ough austerities fully performed, and lavished that ako;l 
i and after obtaining unparalleled increase of riches from that 
most noble giver, brahmans accepted no donation from any 
•) oilier king, 0 brHiman:— /m it was who sacrificed sixty-seven 
thousand and sixty-seven Immlred and sixty-seven sacrifices 
with abundance of largesse. 

h That monarch being son-less engaged in a hunt with the 
desire of obtaining flesh for a sacrifice to the pitfis in oi*der to 
I obtain a son, 0 great muni. He rode on his horse, away from 
his troops, absolutely alone in a gi’eat forest, having his 
leathern bow-guard and finger-protector bound on him, and 
carrying aiTOws, sword and bow. A deer issuing out of a dense 

* For satru-lokam road ^akra-lokam, as in tho Poona edition. 

t Fanto cxxi in the Calcutta edition. 

t The Poona edition reads dsddydfnodayat sddhikena for asddya tnoddyet 
“ acquired wealth through austerities and lavished that together 
''^th more besides ” {koia-stha-dravyei^a saha), • * 



620 


CANTO OXX. 


forest from another side said to the horse that carried him— 
“ Accomplish thy object by killing me.” 

The king spoke : 

9 Other deer on seeing me flee in great terror ; how is il that 
thou wishest to yield thyself as a gift to death ? 

The deer spoke : 

10 T have no son, 0 great king ; vain is the purpose of my 
existence ; while wandering about I do not perceive the w-sv oj 
maintaining my life here. 

Markandeya spoke : 

11 Now another deer approached the king and said in tlit 
presence of thatyir^^ deer— “ Enough of this, 0 king ; slay me. 

12 perform thy rite with my flesh. As thou mayest thus 
succeed in thy object, so will that also he beneficial to me 

13 Thou, 0 great king, desirest to sacrifice to thy pit^is in ordci 
to obtain a son ; how wilt thou gain thy earnest wish by mean? 

14 of the flesh of this other son-less deer r As is the rite that is tc 
be performed, such is the thing one should offer. Enowledp( 
of the odours of sweetly-odorous things is not ascertained bj 
means of ill-odorous things. 

The king spoke : 

15 This other deer has declared to me that the reason of his 
indifference to worldly desires is his son-lessness : tell thou im 
what is the reason of thy indifference to worldly desires u 
thy abandonment of life. 

The deer spoke : 

16 Many are my sons, 0 king ; many are my daughters also 
in the miseries of my anxieties for whom I dwell as amid thi 

17 flames of a raging conflagration. 0 king, this most weak!; 
deer-tribe is to be mastered by every one, and 1 have excessive 
self-interest in those my children— therefore I am distressed 

18 I am in' fear of men, lions, tigers, wolves, and other raverm 
beasts, but not of a feeble animal, rwr of all good creatures, w 

19 'even of a dog or jackal, my lord. Being such, 1 desire mt* 



khaninetra’s encounter with two deer. 


621 


earnestly for the sake of my kindred, that all this earth may 
he free for once from the fear of men, lions, and other heasts. 
liO Some animah, cows, goats, sheep, horses and such like, feed 
on grass ; for their thriving I wish those heasts sent to de- 

21 struction. After those beauts then have departed and my off- 
spring remain separate, anxious thouglits occur by hundreds 

22 to me whose mind is enveloped by self-interest, such Has 
a son ot mine while browsing in the forest encountered a 
crafty trap, or a thunderbolt, or a noose P or has he fallen 
into the power of a man, or lion or other dangerous creature t 

2.) What condition has this one reached P what condition have 
those sons of mine reacdied, who while actually grazing 
24 have now gone to the very great forest p’ On seeing 
that those iny sons have reached my presence,* * * § *• 0 king, 
J, panting somewhat, wish for night however as security 
-•) At dawn I desire day earnestly as security, and when 
the sun has set I desire again the night earnestly : when 
2(! will there be safety at every tinieP This I have declared 
to thee, 0 king, is the cause of my anxiety. Bo gracious 
to me the^’efore — let this thy arrow be discharged at me ! 
27 That is the cause why pierced by hundreds of sufferings I 
thus forsake even my life; hearken thou as 1 speak, 0 king! 
2.^ Named ‘ The Sun-less ’ are the worlds, to which those who kill 
themselves go ; hut cattle that are suitable for sacrifice attain 
2h t hns to exalted stations,t 0 lord. Agni was a domestic animal J 
formerly ; the lord of the waters was a domestic animal ; and 
so was the Sun, who gained exalted stations and reached his 
’f* culmination in sacrifice. § Shew me this pity then, and conduct 
me to an exalted position ; and thou shalt obtain the earnestly 
desired wish of thy soul by gaining a son. 

* This ia th© reading of the Bombay edition 'prd'ptdn mamdbhydiam ; instead 
•jf tho Calcutta reading prapta-samahkydsam, which seems incorrect; samd^ 
is not in the dictionary, 

t tJttamadokdn (comment.) 

I Pa/w, 

§ Or “ and the Sun gained exalted stations and reached his culmination 

*•1 Sacrifice,* • » 



622 


CANTO CXXI. 


The first deer spoke : 

JU 0 supreme king, this deer must not be killed ; he is happy 
(IB a kind doer, who has many sons ; I must be killed who have 
no progeny. 

The second deer spoke : 

62 Happy in truth art thou, sir deer, being such a one for whom 
suffenng exists in a single body ! He who has many bodies has 

36 manifold sufferings. But formerly when I was single, the suf- 
fering that arises from the body comufed then in my i'eg.ard 
for myself ; that become doubled when there was a wife 

34 When children were born, then as many as they were, so many 

65 sites in my body did my sufferings find in sooth. Hast not 
thou, sir, been successful, for whom existence has not tended 
to excessive suffering? My offspring are for suffering in tin’s 

36 world, and will he of opposite cjualities in the next world. Since 
T do that for the preservation and nourishment of my children, 
and am anxious about that, my birth ivill therefore certainly l»’ 
in hell.* 

The king sj)oke ; 

37 L know not, 0 deer, whether he who has offspring is liiipp} 
in this world, or he who has no son ; and this undertaking of 

38 mine in order to obtain a son makes my mind vacillate. Oil- 
spring verily tend then to cause suffering both in this 
and in the other wcrrld ; nevertheless, debts come upon tliosc 

69 who have no son— so have I heard. I being such will -strive 
to obtain a son, without the slaughter of breathing beings, 0 
deer, even with very arduous austenties, as did a king of 


Canto CXXI.f 

Karandhama' 8 exploits. 

Khaninetra propitiated Indr a and obtained the gift of a 

* The Poona edition readd instead 6intaydmi 6a sambhutirh tern me 
iJhrnvarn, “and am anxious about my offspring (samhhtki»>8antatt, commen 
therefore hell is certainly deitined for mo. ^ 
. t eanto cxxii in the Calcutta edition. 



khanInetra hap a son karandhama. 


623 


l&sva — King Baldha was besieged by his rebellious vassal kings 
and was delivered by an army which issued f rom his hands that , 
shook with distress — Hence he was named Karandhama. 

M4rkandeya spoke : 

1 Thereupon the king went to the sin-destroying river Go- 
iiiati,* and, practising self-restraint, gratified the god Puraii- 

2 dura there. And assiduously practising severe austerities, 
subduing liis voice, bod}^ and mind, and controlling himself, 

< he king gratified Indra in order to obtain a son. The ad- 
orable Indra, lord of the gods, was gratified with his praise, 

t austerities and faith, and said to him, 0 great muni, — “By 
reason of these austerities, faith and praise uttered by thee, 

1 am well satisfied with thee, 0 king ; choose a boon, sir! ” 

The king spoke : 

a May 1 who am son- less obtain a son, who shall be chief among 
all who bear arms, and always unrepulsed in his sover- 
(‘ignty,t a doer of righteousness, a knower of righteousness, 
ami skilful. 

M(4rkandeya spoke : 

0 And when Indra said to him, “Be it sol” the king gained 
his desire. The king returned to his own city to protect his 
7 people. As he was performing sacrifice there, as he was duly 
protecting his people, a son was born to him tlien through 
Indra’s favour, 0 biAhraan. The king, his father, gave him 
the name Balasva,i|! and caused the son to acquire skill in every 
0 kind of weapon. When his father died, 0 brahman, he stood 

* Hoc p. 291, note ft* 

t For (^dbhydhataisvaryo read ddvydhataisvaryo as in the Poona edition. 

+ He was also called Siivardas (Muha-Bh., Asvara.-p. hi. 72-79) and 
lalaka>vaor Snbala^va } but his most famous name was Karandh.ama which 
s fancifully explained inverse 21, and in the abovc-moiitidned passage of 
•ip Mah^i-Bharata. A king Vibhuti or Ati vibhuti is sometimes inserted 
•etween Klianmetra and this king. This famous Karandhama must be dis* 
'^"(ulshod from another king of the same name, wlio was fourth m descent 
ronv Yayuti’s son Turvasu (Hari-V'., xxxii- 1829-31; and Matsya Pur, 

^^^ii-1,2.) , • * 



624 


OANTO CXXI. 


as king in the supreme sovereignty.* Bald^va brought all 

10 kings on the earth into subjection ; and the king after first 
taking away their choicest property, f made all the kings pay 
him tribute ; and he protected his people. 

11 Now all those kings as claimants were furious against him ; and 
at all times they neither rose up before him nor paid him tribute. 

12 They stood upj then in their own countries; disregarding con- 
tentment as the chief good^ those kings seized that king’s terri- 

13 tory. That king held fast his own kingdom by force, § 0 muni, 
and made hi.s stand in his own city. Many kings besieged liim 

14 Kings, very great in valour, possessing military apparatus and 
riches, ‘assembled then and besieged that king in that city 

15 Now the king was enraged at that sie^e of his city, hd, haviii;,^ 
very little treasure and a small army, fell into the utmost 

16 distress. Beholding no succour though possessing an army, 
0 best of dvijas, he put his hands before his face and sighed 

17 in mental suffering. Then compacted together|| by the hreatli 
from his mouth, which issued^ through the interstice between 
his hands, there went foidh^ in hundreds warriors accorn- 

18 panied by chariots, elephants and horses. Thereby in a 
moment all that city of that king was pervaded by a host of 
forces, choice by reason of their extreme strength, 0 muni. 

19 Surrounded then by that exceeding great host of forces, the 
■ king sallied forth from that city and conquered those Jock. 

20 And after vanquishing them the king, having great good lor- 
tune, brought them into subjection and made them pay tri- 

21 bute again as before, illustrious sir. Because from his agi- 

* The Mahd-Bli. says Khanmetra was deposed by his subjects (Asvam.-p. 

hi. 70-72.) 

\ Sdra-grahana-purvaham ; sdra-sreshthn-vastu (comment.) 

I Vyutfhitdh. The root vy-ut^thd in given only in the caush form m the 

dictionary. ^ ^ 

§ For <prithivUe haldn the Poona edition reads fJrithiWo pn 

haldn appears therefore to be the correct reading. 

II SomiftaJ<i^.appear8 to be the reading, bnt hardly yields a aoitable mean- 
ing ; somdMfdb, “ pat into order, arrayed” would be preferable. 

t For has(a-Ktraed» read fcosta-tHiinr(in, and forni-jajmuJ read 

asin^he Poona edition. 



BAL^^VA (JOT THR NAMR KAHANOnAMA. 


626 


fated hands was produced an army wln'ch burnt up his 
'j'2 foes, BaM^va is thence called Karandhama.* * * § He was right- 
eous of soul and great of soul ; he was benevolent to all living 
creatures. King Karandhama was celebi’ated in the three 
28 worlds. And Power, which is denounced by Righteousness 
itself approaching the king, who had undergone intense suffer- 
ing, granted him the destruction of his enemics.f 


Canto CXXII.t 


Avikshifah p^'ploifs. 

Kamndhnma had a son Avtkshifa, who was so called because benirjn 
planets looked upon his birth — Av'kshita was a great prince; Ju 
was chosen by many princesses and ho also carried off others at their 
srayam-varas — He carried off Vaisalini princess of Vidisd, and 
other kings arrayed themselves against him. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 V irya-candra’s§ beautiful-browed daughter was named VirA ; 
she was noble in her vows. She chose the great king Karan- 

2 dliama for her husband at her svayam-vara. That valiant king 
of kings begat of her a son named Avikshita,|| who attained 

8 fame on the face of the earth. When that son was bora, 

* The derivation given here is from karayor dhutnyor, but this is insuffi- 
ot’nt ; the root dhmd would support this fanciful explanation better than dtiu 

or (i/lit. 

tThe verse seems involved. The Poona edition has been followed. It 
mmprdptam paramdm Jrtim for snmprdptasya pardm drtim, and npipam 
fornftpa^ ; and the commentator says halam is the subject and ari-vinddanam 
•bio object. 

+ Canto cxxiii in the Calcutta edition. 

§ I have not found this king elsewhere. 

'1 Ho is called Avfkshit and Avikshi in various passages in the following 
oantoB (see canto exxz, verse 22) ; see also Mahd-Bh., A^vam.-p; iii. 80-86, 
Vishnu Pur. IV. i. In the former of those passages he is also called 
^h^ndhama, is highly extolled as a great king, and is said to have reigned at 
tbe beginning of the Tret6 Age with AAgiras as his priest. • 

79 



62r» 


CANTO CXXII. 


the king asked the astrologers who could read fate — “ I trust 
my son is horn under an excellent^ constellation, at an excellent 

4 conjuncture ? And I trust that benignant planets have looked 
upon my son’s birth ; I trust it did not pass into the path of 
view of evil planets ? ” 

5 When addressed thus by him, the astrologers spake then to 
the 'king— “ When the moment, the constellation and the con- 

6 juncture have been excellent, thy son has been born to he great 
in valour, great in his parts, great in strength. 0 gi-eat king, thy 

7 son shall be a great king. The planet Jupiter, preceptor of the 
gods, has looked on him, and Venus which is the seventh; 
and the Moon the fourth planet has looked upon this thy son ; 

8 and Soma’s son Mercury also, which is stationed at the edge, 

9 has guarded him. The Sun has not looked on him ; nor has Mars 
or Saturn looked on thy son, 0 great king. Happy is this thy 
son ! he will be endowed with all good fortune and prosperity.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

10 On hearing this the astrologers’ speech, the king was filled 
with gladness in his mind, and going then to his own abode he 
said— 

11 “ The preceptor of the gods has looked on him, and so 
Soma’s son Mercury. The Sun has not looked on him, nor 

12 has the Sun’s son* nor Mars. This word ‘ Has looked upon t 
that ye, sirs, have uttered often,— celebrated by reason of li 
his name shall be Avikshita.” 

Markandeya spoke : 

13 His son Avikshita learnt the whole of the Vedas and Vedah- 
gas. He acquired too from Ka^va’s son perfect skill in ever) 

14 weapon. The prince surpassed both the Physicians of the 
gods in figure, Vddas-pati in intellect, the Moon in loveliness, 

15 the Sun in .splendour, the Ocean in steadfastness, and the 
Earth in endurance, full of valour as he was. In heroism no 
one was the equal of that high-souled prince. 


* Arka^sHnu. 

t /vaikshata from the root ava + iksh. 



avIkshita carried off princess vai^/lini. 627 

1« At her svayam-vara Hema-dharma’s daughterVarA chose him 

for her husband; so also did Sudeva's daughter Gauri, Balin’s 

17 daughter Su-bhadra, Vira’s daughter Lilavati, Vira-bhadi-a’s 
daughter Anibha ,* Bhima’s daughter Manya-vati, Dambha’s 

18 daughtei Kumud-vati. And those nsaide.ns who, awaiting the 
piecise moment at their svayam-varas, did not approve him,t 

ID even them the hero prince took by foree. Driving off all the 
kings and the fathers and families of those princesses and trust- 
ing m his own valour, the mighty prince was indeed proud of 
his strength. 

:’0 Now one day }ie spizml VaisSalini of the beautiful teeth 
daughter of the VaidisaJ king Vi.sala, as she was waiting for 
the proper moment at her svayam-vara ; after vanquishing 
all the kings ho seized her by force, because in her own free 
lancy she chose him not, 0 brahmau-rishi, just as, proud of 
— his sti’ength, he had seized other inincesses. Then all those 
kings, being repeatedly driven off by that haughty prince 
•tad being sorely dejected, spoke to one another, all throng- 
■•3 mg togetlier, — 

^ ie on the birth of you kings, who being endowed with 
strength submit to this defrauding deed § at the hands of 
d <i singlo man, and who are many, of the same caste! A 
kshatriya is he who delivers from injury|| a man, who is being 
killed by ferocious men ; that is the name of such a one ; for 
in vain verily do others bear that name ! Of you, sirs, who, 
Ihough born of kshatriya lineage, cannot save even your own 
selves from injury at the hands of this scoundrel, what is 
^ your resolution like ? Lot the pi*aise, which is poured forth 
to you % hy bards and minstrels and heralds, be true — let it 

* Or Nihhds 

t Bor daivafk ndbhinandanti read €ainam mhhyanandantasM in the Poona 
titiou. 

t The adjective of Vidisa, a town, pco p. 343, note f. 
s Ifor lalandm read vaiidandm as in the Bombay edition. 

J^shatnyo yahb Uhata-tidi^am karoti. This fanciful derivation is also in 
■^lui Vamsa ii. 53. For a different derivation, see ante, canto cxiv, 36. 

I’w- rfetread vafy with the Bombay edition. ' • 



m 


cAuro cxxui. 


not be in vain— 0 heroes, by reason of the destiniction of your 

27 foes ! Let not this shnj vainly spread itself about by messen- 
gers belonging to other regions,* 0 kings ! Ye all rely on your 
manhood, ye are sprung from exalted families. Who fears 

28 not death ? Who is immortal without battling ? With these 
thoughts ye whose profession is arms must not abandon your 
manhood.” 

29 On hearing this the kings were filled with openly displayed 
wrath; all spoke at once to one another and rose up wiili 

dO their weapons. Some mounted chariots, some elephants and 
others horses ; others overpowered with wi'uth advanced on 
foot against him. 


Canto CXXlJI.t 
Avtkshitas exploits. 

The kings had a great battle with Avikshita and coiapiered nw, 
captured him. — The svayam-vara was re-opened., but the jn'inci's^ 
ivould not choose any husband., and the tvedding was postponed. 

Markai;ideya spoke : 

1 Thus were prepared for battle those kings and princes, wh( 
had been beaten off repeatedly and yet were not desti’oyedj a 

2 that time. Then began a tennble battle between him and them 
between the p'ince migh-hamled and many kings and nobh 

3 princes, 0 muni. In great ferocity they fought, assailing hin 
with their swords, spears, clubs, arrows, and hands ; and li< 

4 fought with them all. The prince mighty and skilled in wea- 
pons pierced them with hundreds of tierce airews ; and the} 

♦The Calcutta edition reads caratdm sd i j'ithaivaisha hhd/pai Sarairdtg 

antaraxfy; the Bombay edition 6aratdm sdtathaivaisloihhwpdi 6dra\.r dig-a.ntQ.re 
and the Poona edition 6aratdm md vTithaivaisha hhupa-^ahdo dig-aatare. It* 
first is incorrect j the second is sound whether it reads dig-antare or dig-vdn 
aibf and the third is also good. Comparing these, the best reading app©“*^* 
be daratdm md vfithaivaishd hkn^pdi 6drair dig-antaraib, and I have taken thi** 

t Canto cxxiv in the Calcutta edition. 

X Kor a-vikshUdli, read a-vi-kshitd^ as in th? Bombay edition. • 



avIkshita was attacked by many kings. 


5 pierced him with sharp arrows. He out oSt the anu of one, 
and the neck of another ; and pierced another in the heart, 

(3 juid smote another in the breast. He cut off the trunk of an 
elephant and the head of a hoi*se, and wounded the hoi’ses of 
the chai’iot of these foes,* and the driver of the chariot of 
7 another. And he split in two with his own airows his enemies’ 
arrows which were falling on him, and in his agility cracked 
S the scymitar of another and the bow of another. One prince 
perished when his armour was torn away by the ^prince, and 
another who was on foot being wounded by Avikshita quitted 
the battle. 

!> When that entire band of kings was thus thrown into con^ 
fusion, seven hundred warriors stood /or/A resolute unto death, 

10 who were noWy born, in the flower of their age, heroic, valiant, 
and modest, after all the army was defeated and was in a panic of 

11 flight. Now the king’s son coming to close quaiders with those 
kings fought in righteously-conducted determined combat.t 

12 Deeply angered by this and that foe, ho, great in his strength, 

* For tathdnyeshdm read rathasyaish(im,yfhloh. the Bombay edition seems to 
iiieau by rathasyeshdm* 

t Dharma-yuddJui, “ battle according to the (kshatriyas’) code of Right.” 
It apiicars to moan a battle according to the fair rules of war, fought out to 
end till one or other combatant is completely vanquished or slain. Thus 
llliishnia said to Karna— “ If this most terrible enmity cannot be relinquished, 

I k'ivo permission, O Karua ; tight thou with the desire to gain heaven. With- 
out passion, with impetuosity subdued, do the deed of a king in sootli, to the 
utmost of thy power, with thy full effort, conducting thyself according to the 
conduct of good men , ...Thou shalt gain from Dhananjaya the worlds wliieh 
are won by the righteousness of ksUairiyas {kshutra^dharmi). Fight without 
arrogance, relying on thy strength and valour, for there is nought bettor for a 
Uhatriya than righteously conducted battle ” {dharmyu yuddhu : M.-Bh*, 
llhishma-p. exxiv. 5851-4). Again, Soraa-datta said to Satyaki, “ How is it 
thon, 0 Suttvata, hast forsaken the righteousness of kshatriyas, which 
of old by the liigh-souled gods, and delightest in the righteoueness of 
lliisyus ? At one who has turned to hoe, at one in distressi at one who has laid 
'I'wii Ilia arms, at one who bQgs for quarter — bow indeed did a wise man, who 
in the righteouspess of kshatriyas, occr strike at such a one in battle ? ” 
p. clvi. 6730-1). The matter is summed up by Karri a thus— “ Thif, wc 



630 


CANTO CXXIII. 


set himself to cleave asunder their hamess and armour* also ; 

13 and eiii-aged thereat, 0 gimt muni, those princes forsaking 
the code of Rightf all together fought with him, who coutinued 
to tight according to the code of Right, while their faces were 

14 wet with drops of perspiration. One pierced him with multi- 
tudes of arrows, another split his how, another splitting his 

15 bahner with arrows, laid it low on the ground. Moi'eover. 
othei-s smote his horses, and others broke his chariot, and others 
besides smotej his back with blows of their clubs and with 

16 arrows. When his bow was split, the king’s son eiii*a get! then 
gi'aspedhis sword and shield, but thatalso another strucic dowii.§ 

17 When his .sword and shield were broken, he best of club-wield- 
ers grasped his club *, and another, like a dexterous niaii, split 

18 it with a sharp curved-headed arrow. The kings, turning 
their faces away from righteously conducted combat, surround- 
ed him and pierced him, some with a thousand arrows, some 

19 with a hundred. He fell exhausted on the earth, one torment- 
ed by many ; and those illustrious princes then bound him. 

20 Having captured that king’s son by unrighteousness they 

21 all in company with king Visala entered the Vaidisa city, glad 
and merry, taking the king’s son bound. And the maiden, 
who was holding her svayam-vara, was placed by that hug m 

22 front of them ; and was asked by her father again and again, 
and likewise by the family priest,— ‘‘ Take by the hand an thij 

23 bridegroom kini who among these kings pleases thee.” When 
the high-spirited maiden chose not any o///ieja as her bridegroom. 
0 muni, the king enquired of the astrologer then concerning 

24 her mamage,— “ Tell me the most distinguished day for the 
wedding; such a battle as this which has occurred to-day im- 
poses an obstacle. 

h»vo heiird, is a kshatriya’s oUofest righteouBness((i/iarm®),thatho Uo, ala'” 

in battle, highly honoured by the good." (Karna-p. xl. 1858-9). 

• yiiihiiina-yaHtra-kamidn in the Calcutta and Bombay editions, 

the Poona edition roads m!6hia»a-patra-kamiin “ their vehicles and arootti. 
t Dharmam utsrijya, 

X For atddagat read alddayan with the Bombay edition. 

§ F*»r atiycna pdtayat read aayo av apdtayal as in the Bombay e itiuu. 



VAI!§XlTN1 t?eptjst:d to marky any prince. 


6^1 


Markandeya spoke ; 

15 When asked thus by the king, the astrologer reflected there- 
on and perceiving the real truth spoke with troubled mind* 
15 to the king, — “ There will be, 0 king, other days here, charac- 
terized by excellent conjunctures, auspicious, and after no long 
>7 delay. Thou shalt perform the weddingf when they have 
arrived, 0 bestower of honour. Enough of this da.y^ wherein a 
great obstacle has presented itself, 0 noble Sir ! ” 


Canto CXXIV.J 
Avihshita^ a ea'ploita. 

Arihhita's mother Vtrd roused up his father and allied kings to rescue 
Avikshita, and they defeated VUdla and his confederates — 
Avtkshita was set free^ but refused to marry the princess as she 
had seen him overpowered^ although she praised him and his 
father entreated him — She voiced to marry no one else^ and 
departed to the forest and wore herself away with austerities-^ 
The gods in compassion sent a messenger to her and promised that 
she should have a son who should be a universal monarch— She 
then regained her health. 

Markandeya spoke : 

1 Karandhama heard then that his son had been captured ; and 
^ his wife Vira and other kings also heard it. On hearing that 
his son had been captured unrighteously, the king pondered 
a long time in company with the neighbouring§ kings, 0 
'1 great muni. Some of the kings said, — “ All those kings should 
he slain, who handing themselves all together captured him 
1 ?i\ng\e-handed unrighteously in fight. ” “ Let the army be 
made ready ; why sit the othei^ still ^ Let wicked Vis41a be 

* For duT’inand read dur-maimh. 

t The Calcutta text is karishyati rivdhdriham, and the Bombay text karish^ 
V'lSi. vivdha tvain ; the proper reading should then be karishyasi vivdham 

• Canto exxv ia the Calcutta edition. 

I f'or samastaify read samantathk with the Bombay edition. 



m 


CANtO cxxrv. 


5 slain ! ” said others who were assembled there. And others 
said, — “Righteousness was first discarded in this affair by 
Avikshit,* who acting unjustly forcibly seized the •princess who 

6 did not desire him. In all svayam-varas then he has reduced 
all the princes to ruin at once ; when they combined, he was 
subdued.” 

7 On hearing this their speech Vira, mother of a hero, daugh- 

8 ter of a race of heroes, and wife of a hero, rejoiced and spoke 
in view of her husband and of the other kings, — “ A noble 

9 deed, 0 kings, has my son who feasts on noble deeds done, in 
that vanquishing all the kings he seized the maiden by force. 
While fighting for that object single-handed he was capturedf 

10 unrighteously. Even that I reckon entails no deterioration 
on my son in battle. For this in truth is manliness, that a 

11 man under the influence of passion J recks not so of good poli- 
cy, just as a lion when attacking recks not. Many maidens§ 

12 presented for their svayam-vara have been seized by my son 
in full sight of exceedingly proud kings. What compaiison 
is there between birth in a kshatriya family and entreaty 

13 which is used by the feeble ? By force verily a kshatriya takes 
things to himself in the presence of the mighty. On tlie other 
hand do not weaklings, being bound with iron chains, pass 

14 into subjection ? Do kings imbued with righteousness, who do 
daring deeds, pass thereinto f Away then with weak-minded- 

15 ness ! Praiseworthy in sooth is his captivity ! Let there ti- 
the down-rush of your weapons among bodies and heads! 
After ye have actually taken from the kings their teiritory, 

16 sons and other wealth, then the objects aimed at by your 
valour, even their wives, || have becx)me matters of import- 


# ^or nuthikshitaih the Bombay edition reads dhavikshitd ; the correct read- 
ing seems to be avihhiti ond this I hove adopted. 

+ For vttddHo read iaddha with the Bombay edition, 
t Am<ir>h«.va£d^ in the Bombsy edition is better than 
§ Both editions rend ; bnt the plural kanydkii. is roq'uwd 1 


adject, hahvyo, . . ^ ^ 

II For hhdrydddrya-nimittdni read khdryd vrrya^mnhitdm As m 


the Bomba) 


ediMon. 



KARANDHAMA RBSCDBD AvfKSHlTA. 633 

ance » HaBten then quickly to battle; mount ye the cjhariots ; 
17 make ready the elephants and horses without delay, and:al8o 
the charioteers.f What think ye of battling with many kings ? 
[8 Deeds have occurred, indeed, enough to satisfy a warrior in a 
small battle. Who finds not strength wUn amongst petty 
9 kings and other 'petty 'men that inspire no fear ? For in sooth, 
0 muni, the man who, after prevailing so as to slay 'my son’s 
foesj which have all pervaded the world, is self-controlled, 
he shines forth§ a hero, just as the sun after pre^miliiai^ over 
the darknesses.” 

Markan^eya spoke ; 

0 Thus was king Karandhama aroused to boldness by this U& 
wife. He set his army in array to slay his son’s foes, 0 muni. 

1 Then occurred a conflict between him whose son had been cap- 
t tured and all those kings and Vi^^la, 0 great muni. Three 

days lasted the battle then between king Karandhama and 
i the kings who followed Vi^ala’s lead. When all that confederacy 
of kings was almost defeated, || Vi4^1a with arghya offering in 
i hand approached Karandhama then. And that king highly 
honoured Karandhama with kindly feeling. On his son being 
i set free,*|[ he abode there that night in happiness. And when 

* Or, “the objects of your wives and spiritual guides then attained to im- 
)rtaiico. “ The Bombay edition reads differently in verse 16 and the first . 
»lf of verse 10; — “For you also, who, by accomplishing the slaughter of 
>ur foo8 and by taking away in sooth tho territory, sons and other wealth 
tho kiiigB, stood foremost, a wife became then of exceeding importance 
being the sum of the objects of your valour. ” But neither text seems 
tisfactory, and the future appears to be intended rather than the past, 
t For m-sdrathim read sa-sdrathi as 'n the Poona edition (corrigenda'. 

+ J’bo Bombay edition rends differently, thus, — “Who finds not strength 
amongst petty kings and other 'petty men, that inspire no fear in one who 
s really displayed his prowess ngainst foes ? For in sooth the man who, 
prevailing over all those men which have pervaded the world, wns 
'f-contiolled, shone forth, &o,” 

3 yarodata + iti. The past tense doos not seem happy, and the iti is wrong, 
da 18 the reading of the Poona edition (corrigenda), and is preferable. 
For pardjaya-prdyam read pardjita-prdyam as in the Poona edition (oor- 

Jenda. 

For viyuJcte read vimuJete as in the Poona edition (corrigenda) . * 

80 



634 


CANTO CXXIV. 


Vi6dla taking the maiden came near, Avikshit spoke before 
his father touching the marriage, 0 brahman yishi 

26 “0 king, I will not take this maiden, nor any other woman, 
in whose very sight I have been vanquished by adversaries in 

27 fight. Bestow her on some one else, and let her choose some one 
else, who is unscathed in fame and valour and has not been 

28 subjected to indignity by adversaries. Since I have been van- 
quished by adversaries just as this weak girl might he, what 
manhood have I here ? there is no difference between her and 

29 me. Self-reliance is the quality of men; a girl is always 
dependant on others. Of what kind is the manhood of tliat 

80 man who is oven dependant on others ? How shall I, who am 
such, show her again the face which she has often seen, I who 
have been worsted to the ground in her presence by adverse 
kings ? ” 

81 When he had thus spoken, the king spoke to the maideo - 
“ Thou hast heard, dear child, the speech of this high-soulcd 

32 p‘inc£ as he has been speaking. Choose another as thy hus- 
band in whom thy mind delights, 0 beauteous one. We bestow 
perfume * on whomsoever thou dost honour.f Adopt one of 
these two very courses, 0 sweet-faced one ! ” 

The maiden spoke : 

33 Vanquished he has been by many together, yet they dealt not 
absolutely honourably in the fight which brought loss to las 

84 fame and valour, 0 king. Since ho set himself single-Zw^'^'^ 
to battle with many, like a lion with elephants, he has mani- 

35 Tested thereby the highest heroism. It is not only that lie 
stcod fast in the battle, hut also that they were all defeated. 

36 He displayed prowess also abundantly by his efforts. J All the 
kings have by unrighteousness conquered him, who is endued 
with heroism and prowess and who observed righteous combat 

• Vd>aim; or “ a dwelling,” or “ clothing.” ' 
t For ddritdh rend ddritii^ with the Bombay edition ; ddfiti is not m 

dictionary. The Poona edition reads yasmims te hy ddritum manaa with 

same seitse. , 

For ynt tenc^ read yatnena, as in the Bombay edition. 



AvfKSHriA REFUSED TO MABRY VAldi^LINI. 


635 


what fame is there herein ? And it is certainly not for mere 
beauty that I have become desirous of him, 0 father ! His 
heroism, prowess and fortitude captivate my mind. What 
need then of much speaking ? Do thou make entreaty to this 
most excellent king on my behalf ; no other shall be my hus^ 
hand. 

Vi4ala spoke : 

;{() 0 prince ! my daughter has pronounced this splendid declara- 

tion, and there lives not on the earth a royal youth, who is thus 

^1) indeed thy peer. Thy heroism cannot bo gainsaid, and thy 
prowess is surpassing ; purify my family, 0 warrior, by marry- 
ing my daughter ! 

The prince spoke ; 

II I will not take her nor any other woman, 0 king, for in my 
inmost self mj intellect is womanish, 0 lord of men. 

Markarujeya spoke : 

Then spoke Karandhama, — “ 0 son, take thou this beauteous- 
browed daughter of Visala ; she is deeply enamoured of thee. 

The prince spoke : 

I No infringement of thy command have I ever committed 
be fore, 0 lord ; command me in such wise, dear father, as I may 

obey thy command. 

Markandeya spoke : 

4 Since the prince was so exceedingly determined in his sem 
timents, Visala also troubled in mind spoke to his daughter * 

0 Turn back thy mind, my daughter, even from this object : 
choose some other as thy husband ; there are many princes litre." 

The maiden spoke ; 

« A boon I choose, dear father ! If thispr‘»»“ 

other than a course of religious austerities shall be my husband 

bi this life ! 

1 Markandoyfl' • 

Then king Karandhama stayed there thi'ee days joyously 


‘for t,afdm rend sutdm. 



636 CANTO CXXIV. 

48 with Vi^41a and returned to his own city. Avikshita also, after 
being soothed by his own father and the other kings and hy 
precepts of ancient times, returned to his city. 

49 That maiden also went to the forest, being set free by her 
relatives, and practised austerities, abstaining from food and 

50 adhering to utter passionlessness. Now when abstaining from 
food she had dwelt them three months, she reached the deepest 
distress, being emaciated, in the lowest conditum and prostrat* 

51 od.* The maiden was weakened in energy, extremely thin in 
body, even ready to die. The princess then made up her mind 

52 to quit the body. Thereupon the gods, perceiving that shn 
had made up her mind to abandon herself, assembled and dcs- 

53 patched the gods’ messenger to her. Approaching the maiden 
he aaid 

I am a messenger, 0 princess, sent to tjiee by the thirty 

54 gods ; hearken to what must be done ! Thou, 0 lady, must not 
forsake thy body which is exceedingly difficult to be obtained 
Thou, 0 fortunate one, shalt become the mother of a iiniversn] 

56 monarch ; and along with thy son, who shall have slain lii» 
foes and whose command shall be unresisted, thou, 0 illustrious 

56 My, shalt long enjoy the earth and its seven continents. He 
must kill the enemy Tam-jit in the pre.scnce of the gods, ami 
Aya and cruel S'anku, and then establish the people in light- 

57 eousness. All the four castes must be fully safeguarded acccni- 

ing to their respective mhs of righteousness ; he must slaj' 
the robbers, the ralecchas and others who work wickedness 

58 He must sacriHce with manifold sacrifices replete with gift 
and largesse, and with horse-sacrifices and other swrifiaen si> 
thousand in number, 0 noble lady." 

MarkaijiJeya spoke : 

59 Seeing that messenger of the gods, stationed in the air, ad 
mied with heavenly garlands and unguents, the 

60 princess then said this,-** Truly thou hast come from Sva^'» 
a messenger of the gods without doubt; nevertheless 

• • Kriiddhama-nuantati ; ni-mn-tata om ni-san-lan, not in the dioti»«“7 



TfiE PRINCESS TDftNED tO AN ASCETtC LIFE. 


es7 


51 shall I have eu<5h a son without a husband P ‘ No one but 
Avikshita shall be my husband in this life,’ — this I vowed 
5‘j in my father’s presence. And me he wants not, though he 
was admonished by my father and his sire Karandhama, and 
though he was entreated by me also in seemly wise.” 

The gods’ messenger spoke : 

8 What need of this further speaking, 0 illustrious lady ! A 
son shall be born to thee. Abandon not thyself unright- 
4 eously ! Remain in this very forestand nourish up thy emaci- 
ated body. Through the power of austerities all this shall be 
well for thee. 

Markandeya spoke : 

’) After speaking thus, the messenger of the gods went away 
as he had come. And the beautiful-browed lady nourished 
np her body day by day. 


Canto CXXV.* 

AviksliMs exploits. 

irikshita\<t 7^other induced him to engage in the ‘ What~want~ye t ’ 
pf'Wflwce, in ivhich he declared he, would bestow on any one who 
asked whatever he wanted — His father Karandha^tiUf being en- 
treated by his ministers^ pi'essed Avikshita to forgo his religious 
f'ontinence and beget a son — Avikshita though very loth was 
obliged to promise compliance.. 

Markan(}eya spoke : 

^ Now Avikshita’s mother Vira, mother of a hero, called her 
son Avikshita on a saered day and said : — 

” My son, permitted by thy high-souled father, I will engage 
in a fast ; it is this difficult p&nance, the ‘ What-want-ye ? ’f 

* Canto cxxvi, in the Calcutta edition, 

t “ Whatever one wants I will give” A paaaflioa in whieli 

binds one’s self to satisfy the wish of any applicant (ooBMnanU) • 



638 


CANTO CXXV. 


3 And it depends* on thy father, and must he achieved by 
thee and by me also. When thou hast consented, my son 

4 1' will then give my endeavours thereto. I will give tbee 
half the riches from thy father’s great treasury ; thy riches 

^ depend on thy father, and I have his permission. To be 
achieved through affliction is the part of the penance that 
depends upon me ; it will indeed be a noble thing. If, on 
the other hand, any part of it may be achievable by thee 

6 through strength and prowess, that will indeed be unachievable 
by thee otherwise, or will be achievable with difficulty. 
If then thou givest me a promise, my son, I also will pledge 
thee here the very same thing. Tell me what thou thinkest.” 

Avikshita spoke : 

7 Riches depend on my father ; I indeed have no ownership 
therein. t I will perform what can bo accomplished by rny 

8 body, as thou hast said, even the ‘ What-want-ye? ’ penance, 
0 mother— cease then from anxiety and distress^— if it 
has been approved for me by the king, my father, the mastei' 
of the riches. 

Markandeya spoke : 

9 Then the queen applied herself wholly to that penance. She 
performed the worship of tho king of kings§ as directed, 

10 with self subdued, and of all the HidhisH and of 

the band of Nidhi-guardians and of Lakshmi, with profound 
faith, with voice, body and mind restrained. 

11 Now this king Karandliama dwelt in his house in a se- 
questered part. As he sat there, his ministers, learned m 
the books of Good Policy, addressed him. 

The ministers spoke : 

12 0 king, this thy time of life has reached its decline, while 

* Ayattas. 

t For mdm asi tvam read mat-svdmitvam as in the Bombay edition . 

J Or " cease .then, mother, from anxiety and distress with regard to the 

* What-want-ye * penance." (comment.) 

§ Kuvera (comment.) 

I) See canto Ixviii. 



AVIK8HITA PERFOEMED THE ‘ WHAT-WANT-YE’ PENANCE. 639 

thou art ruling the earth. Thy only son Avikshit has for- 
[;] sworn possession of his wives ; and he has no son. When 
he shall reach thy condition,* 0 king, thy territory will 

14 assuredly pass to thy enemies then. There will be ruin to 
thy family, and ruin to the cakes and water offered to the 
])itris ; thou vdlt have this great dread of enemieaf with 

15 loss of sacrifices. Contrive therefore, 0 king, so that thy 
sou shall again steadfastly apply his mind so as to benefit 
the pitris ! 

Markandeya spoke : 

l(j At this moment the king heard the sound of Vird’s family 
[)ricst speaking to some petitioner ; — 

17 ‘‘ ‘ Who wishes for what, that is hard to be achieved ? 

Who must achieve what ? ’ — this ‘ What-want-ye ? ’ 'penance 
Karandhama’s queen is intent upon ! ” 

Is Now prince Aviksliit also heard the priest’s speech and 
replied to all the petitioners who were assembled at the 
19 king’s gate ; — “ Let him speak out, for whom I must nc- 
eoiuplish anything with my body ; my illustrious mother 
iO is intent upon the ‘ What-want-ye ? ’ penance. Let all peti- 
tioners hear me. I have promised then ; what want ye ? 
here I give it, while the ‘ What-want-ye ? ’ penance is being 
performed ! ” 

Markandeya spoke : 

-1 Thereupon the king, on hearing this speech that fell from 
his son’s mouth, springing up said to his son, “ I have a 
petition ; grant it me ! ” 

Avikshit spoke : 

- Tell me, dear father, what I must give to your highness ; 
I must do it for thee, whether it he difficult, m' readily accom- 
plishable, or truly hard to be accomplished ! 

* he., the decline of life ; nhhthdm ^ antam (comment.) 
t Te WMayam ; this is the Bombay reading. The Calcutta edition reads 
“'ai'flTn, which is incorrect ; virava is msso., and a Vedio word. The 
edition reads te vivarem. “ thou wilt have this great breach with loss 

f '‘acriaces;* 



640 


CANTO cm. 


The king spoke : 

23 , If thou art true to thy word, and thou grantest the ‘ What- 
want-yo ? ’ hoon^ show me then the face of a grandson lying 
upon my lap ! 

Avikshit spoke : 

24 ' I am thy only son, and religious continence is my lot, 0 
king ; no son have how can I show thee a grandson’s face ? 

The king spoke : 

25 Thy religious continence tends to sin, if thou boldest to this 
Therefore deliver thou thy own self and show me a 
grandson ! 

Avikshit spoke : 

26 Any other thing that may he arduous,* 0 great king, com- 
mand me that. Intercourse with women has been eschewed 
by me, with passionlessness — let it be so still ! 

The king spoke : 

2*7 Thou in sooth hast seen victoiy over enemies who wei 
fighting against thee with numbers ; yet, there if thou Im 

28 recourse to passionlessness, then thou art unwise. Yet whi 
need have we of more talking ? Abandon thy religious coi 
tinence. At thy mother’s desire show thou me a grandson 
face ! 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

29 When the king, though accosted by the son in many word 

30 makes no other request, the son then spoke again;— “E 
granting thee the ‘ What-want-ye ? ’ fcoon, T am in a strai 
dear father, t will therefore without shame wed a wi 

31 again. He, who in a woman’s sight has been vanquishe 
and has fallen to the face of the earth, shall further be thJ 
woman’s husband — ^this is exceedingly hard, dear fatbe 

32 Nevertheless what am I to do here, who have passed undi 
the power of Truth’s fetters ? I will do as thou hast sai(i 
do thou enjoy thy prevailing in this maiter ! ” 

*For visham aamdn read vishamath sydn as in the Bombay edition. 



AVfKSHIT EBSCUED THE PRINCESS FROM A DEMON. 

Canto CXXVI.* 


641 


Avikshita's exploits. 

iMiit while hunting found a Baitya had seized a maiden who called 
herself his (Avikshit's) wife — He killed the Baitya— The gods 
appeared and offered him a boon — He asked for a son^ and they 
said he should have a «on, who would he a universal monarchy by 
her — She then explained to him she was king ViMWs daughter^ 
and told him her history. 

M4rka9<leya spoke : 

1 The prince went hunting in the forest one day, piercing deer 
and wild boars and tigers and other beasts and elephants. 

2 Suddenly he heard the cry, “ Save tne / Save Twe / ” from a 
woman who was screaming aloud very often in a voice in- 

3 articulate through terror. The prince exclaiming, “ Fear not I 
fear not ! ” urged his horse in haste thither whence the sound 

1 proceeded. And the maiden then cried out, for seized by 
Danu’s son Dfi^ha-ke^ in the lonely forest was she^ a high- 
spirited lady : — 

5 “ I belong to Karandhama’s son and I am Avikshit’s wife ; 
a villain is carrying off into a thicket me, the wife of the 

6 wise king. I, wife of him, before whom all the kings with 
the Gandharvas and Guhyakas could not stand, am carried 

7 off ! 1 here, wife of him, Karandhama’s son, whose wrath 
is like that of Death, whose prowess is like Indra’s, am carried 
off!’’ 

MdrkaodeTft spoke : 

On hearing this, the king’s son, bearer of the bow, re- 
I fleeted, — 

^ “ What is this P Have I a wife here in the forest P She is 

surely an illusion produced by the wicked RAkshasas who 
inhabit the forest. However+ I have certainly come ; I will 
ascertain the whole cause.” 

* Canto cxxvii in the Calonttii editiout 
1 Mha.vi. 

81 



CANTO cxxrr. 


m 

M^rka 94 eya spoke : 

10 Hastening on then he beheld a surpassingly fascinating 
maiden alone in the forest, adorned with every kind of oma- 

11 merit, seized by Danu’s son Hfi^ha-ke^a who bore a staff, and 
screaming out pitifully “ Save vne ! save me t ” again and 

12 again. “Fear not!** said he to her, and exclaiming “ Thon 
art slain ! ** to him, he said — 

“ What wicked man exercises rule over this earth while I 

13 ' Karandhama is king here,* before whose majesty all kingj 
bow down to the earth P ** 

Seeing him at hand then, grasping his choice bow, the 

14 slender-limbed maiden exclaimed moi’e than once— “Sayej 
me ! ’* and— 

“ Here I am carried off I lam king Karandharaa’s daughter- 
in-law and Avikshit’s wife. I am carried off by this wicked 
demon in the forest,— I who belong to a master— as if I belong 
to no master.** 

Mdrkaijdeya spoke : 

15 Thereupon Aviksbit considered the speech so uttered, - 
“How in truth is she my wife? or how is she my dear father’^ 

16t dapghter-in-law P However I will set her free, the slender 
maiden; I will find that out afterwards. Kshatriyas beai^ 
arms for the sake of delivering the afflicted.” J 

17 Then, the angry hero addressed that most evil-minded 
Ddnava,— “ Release her and depart while alive ; otherwij 

18 thou Shalt not live!’* Quitting her then the Dtoa 

his staff aloft and rushed at him ; and he also, the 

19 ponred a shower of arrows on him. The Hanava, fill 
with exceeding frenzy, warded them off with a multitn 
of arrows, and hurled his staff that was studded wit i 

20 hundred spikes at the prince. The prince spHt it then, as i 
was rushing onwards, with arrows. And he, the Danavfi, 
ing aloft a tree that was near, stood firmly in the bait e aw 

• Qp, “ Who ia this wicked man, while KsiWidhama tules this esrtli 

king here, Ac.” wg rH 

t The Calcutta edition nnmbera this 16 also, apu 

blowing verses inoorreotly. 



l\ then hufled that fit'e at the prtnc6 who was dischjirging clouds 
of arrows. And he shattered it into small fragments with 
fi crescent^headed aiTows shot from his bow.* And the 
Danava next flung a piece of rock at the prince, and it fell 
vainly on the ground, for he avoidodf it by agility. 

3 Whatever the enraged D4nava flung at the prince, each 
thing the king s son playfully split with multitudes of arrows. 

4 Then, his staff being shattered and all his weapons shattered, 
he raised his fist in anger and rushed upon the prince. 

5 Karandhama’s son struck off his head with a two-edged sword, J 
as he was in the act of falling upon him, and felled him to the 
very giound. 

5 When that Danava, the evil doer, was slain, all the gods 
exclaimed to Karandhama’s son, “ Well done, well done ! ” 

1 The gods said to the prince then, “ Choose thee a boon ! 
and he replied by reason of his desire to benefit his father, 
“ I choose a son, great in valour.” 

The gods spoke : 

i Verily thou shalt have a son, who shall be a universal monarch 
great in valour, by this very maiden in sooth whom thou, 
0 sinless one, hast delivered ! 

The prince spoke : 

* Being bound to my father by a bond of truthfulness 1 wish 
for a son, hut having been vanquished by the kings in fight 

* I have discarded wedlock. And 1 have abandoned king 
Villa’s daughter, who wanted§ me, and she has for my 
sake abandoned union with any man but me. How then 
after discarding her, Vi4dla*s daughter, shall I with cruel 
8oul|| marry another woman now P 

* For kdrmukam vjjhitaih read kdrmuka.tnod itaih as in the Bombay edition. 

^ For un<!itd read ujjhitd with the Bombay edition. 

t ^itdsa-patra, a “ reed-Ie«£ ” on “ennedeaf.” It is not in the diotionary, 

^ ‘‘ppeiirg to denote a weapon shaped like the leaf of a reed or of a ceoe, 

^ Would fteem to mean something like a narrow (lotibIe*edgedl sword. 

^ For ydvati read yddaH as in the Paona edition. 

read nfitamiidtmd as iu the Poona ecUfionr 



CANTO OXXYI, 


The gods spoke : . 

32 This very maiden is indeed thy wife, whom thou dost always 
extol, even Vii41a’s beautiful-browed daughter, who hag 

33 devoted herself to austerities for thy sake. Of her shall 
be bom to thee a son who shall be a hero, an embellisher of 
the seven continents,* * * § a sacrificer of a thousand sacrificeg^ 
a universal monarch. 

, Mai*kagi(}eya spoke : 

34 After announcing this to Karandhama’s son the gods 
departed, 0 brahman ; and he then addressed her who was 

35 his wife — “ Say, timid one, what now is this ? ” And she 
told him this story : — 

“ When thou, sir, didst forsake me, I forsook my kins- 

36 folk and came away to the forest in despair. There I wished 
to quit this body which became almost wasted away with 
austerities, 0 hero, hut a messenger of the gods came to me 

37 and prevented we, saying— Thou shalt also have a son, 
a universal monarch great in valour, who shall please the 

38 gods and slay the demons.’ By this command from the gods 
that messenger of the gods prevented me. I did not abandon 

39 my body, having my thoughts on union with thee. And 
the day before yesterday, 0 illustrious one, I went to Gangs- 
hradat to bathe, and as I went down into the water, I was drag* 

40 ged away by a certain old Ndga. He took me then to Rasatala, 
and there in frontj of me stood Ndgas and Naga wives 

41 and youths in thousands ; they approached and offered me 
praise, and some others paid me worship; and the Naga 

42 women besought me respectfully, — ‘ Do thou shew favoui 
to us all ; thou must turn aside thy son,§ who will seek to 

43 slay us who shall have incurred offence. The Nigas will 

• Or “ islonds” or “ do-abe dvipa. 

t This is also mentioned as a sacred place of pilgrimage in the Mnhi-Bh., 

V«na-p. Ixxxiii. 7046-49, and Ann^.-p. axv. 1720-21. 

J For puram read purah, as in the Poona edition. 

§ The son which should be born to her in the future, named Marulta. 

canto cxxx, yeraea 11<14« • 





44 

45 

46 

47 


commit offence against thy ton ; for tliat reason tlum must 
turn him aside ; let this favour be done ! ’ And when I 
said, ‘ Be it so,’ they decorated me with divine ornaments 
from P4)t^la and with choicest flowers odorous and fragrant. 
And that Naga brought me back to this world, as lovely 
as I laofi before, as beautiful in form as before. Seeing me 
so beautiful and adorned with every kind of ornament, this 
most evil-minded Dfidha-ke^ seixed me in the desire to 
carry me off. By the strength of thy arm, 0 prince, I 
have been rescued ; therefore be gracious, 0 mighty-armed 
one ; receive me ! Equal to thee lives no other prince in 
the world ; I speak the truth.” 


Canto CXXVII * 

AvikshHa^s exploits. 

Avikshit agreed to marry the rescued maiden — The Oandharvas 
appeared then, and one of them explained she was his daughter 
and had been horn as king Vi^dla's daughter Bhdvini because 
of Agastya's curse — They were married and lived in the Oan- 
dharvas' world — She gave birth to a son there — All the celestial 
beings came to the boy's birth-ceremony^ and because of the 
blessings invoked for him from the Maruts he was called Marutta, 

Markan^eya spoke : 

1 On hearing this her speech, he remembered his father’s 
fine speech which the king had uttered upon the promise re- 

2 garding the “ What-want-ye ” penance, and prince Avikshit re- 
plied to the maiden, he with mind full of love to the maiden 
who had also abandoned all enjoyments for his sake, — 

^ “ When I forsook thee, 0 slender one, I waa vanquished 
by my enemies* I have now metf thee here after conquering , 
the foes ; what shall I do P ” 

Canto cnviirm the Oaloutia edition. 

J for iam’gri’pto read samprdptd as in the Poona edition. 



CANTO OXXVII. 


m 

The maiden epoke r 

4 Take thou my hand tn wedlock in this chaining forest. 
May the union of a loving maiden and a lover be fraught 
with merit ! 

* The prince spoke i 

5 Be it so ; may welfare be thine 1 Destiny itself is the 
cause here. Otherwise how have thou and I met together 
here P* 

' M4rkaii(}eya spoke : 

6 At this moment, 0 muni, the Gundharva Tunaya arrived, 
accompanied by the fairest Apsarases and surrounded by 
other Gandharvas. 

The Gandharva spoke : 

7 0 prince, this high-spirited maiden is my daughter, by 
name Bhdmini. By reason of Agastya’s curse she beoarae 

8 Vh^ila’s daughter. It was Agastya who was angered with 
her as she was playing in a child’s manner, so he cursed 

9 her then, saying, “ Thou shaJt become a woman ! ”t And we 
appeased him by saying, “ She is a child and cannot 
reflect ; do thou show favour for the ofEeuce against thee, 

10 0 brihman riuhV' Being appeased by us the great muni 
said this— “I passed a lenient curse on her, because I 
considered she is but a child ; it cannot indeed be altered.” 

11 By reason of that curse by Agastya my daughter was bom 
in Vi^Ala’s house as this beautiful fine-browed maiden, called 

12 by the name Bhdvini. Therefore I have come on this 
account ; take this princess who is my daughter in marriage , 
of her thou shalt have a son, a universal monarch. 

Markan^eya spoke : 

13 Uttering the words “ Be it so ! ” the prince then took herj 

• AnyMfrct tram aham twmigaUxf ^ ; th© Poona edition reads atra 
umd§atai^ Thwe can hardly be correct ; read atra trm « 

€aiva samdgatau f 

+ That i«, of homan race. The Gaadhwroa were •emi celeitial. 

J For tofhety nhtveti tarydtha read taOnt, aWeii tatat •« 

Pooi^ edition. 



mUTH or MARtlTTA. 


m 

hand according to the ordinance, and Tninburu* offered 

14 up the saorifioe there » The gods and Gandharyas sang forth, 
and bevies of Apsarases danced, the clouds dropped down 

15 flowers, and the heavenly instruments sounded forth ,t as 
the prince united in marriage with her, who became the* 
instrument for the agent of the deliverance of the whole 
world. 

16 Then they went everyone with that high-sooled muni to the 
Gandharvas’ world, and she and the prince went altOy 0 muni* 

17 Prince Avikshit took his joy in company with BhAvini, and she 
obtained the riches of enjoyment together with him there. 

18 Sometimes he sports with that slender one in a charming grove 

19 near the city ; sometimes on a low hill ; J sometimes on a sand- 
bank brightened by geese and s^rasa cranes in a river ; some- 
times near the mansion and in the very resplendent palace* 

20 In other charming pleasure-grounds be sported in company 
with the slender hride^ and she with that high-souled pince» 

21 Munis, Gandharvas and Kinnaras offered them both food and 
unguents, clothing, <md the choicest garlands, beverages and 
other gifts there. 

22 And when the hero sported with Bhivini in the hardly 
accessible world of the Gandharvas, the bright bride gave 

23 birth to a son. When ho was bom, who would he great iri 
valour, a tiger among men, the Gandharvas perceiving what 

24 ho would accomplish hold a great festival ; and some of them 
sang, and others beat drums and kettle-dmms and double 
drums, and others played on flutes, lutes and other musical 

25 instruments ; and many bevies of Apsarases also danced 
there ; the clouds showered down flowers while they rumbled 

26 with gentle sound. Now while that medley of sounds so con- 

* A muni, see verse 26. He nay be tbe person nentioned in the Mahi- 
, whose happy conjugal life with his wife RanibhA was famous (Udyoga- 

P cxvi 3976). There was a Gandharva of this name (Snbhl-p. li. 1861), 
iti the Vlshpu Pur. as a friend of Kala Candanodaka-duudubhi, 

t Nusasvanul^ ; this root as a Verb is not in the dictionary. 

t Upa-parvate ; not in the dictionary. The Poona edition roads vara- 
“ on a choice hill.’\ , 



648 


CANTO cxxvn. 


tinned, the muni Tumburu, who was remembered by Tunaya • 

27 approaohedf and performed the birth-ceremonies. All tht 
gods assembled, and the pure divine rishis ; and from Pitala 

28 came the Ndga lords, Stesha, Vasuki, and Takshaka ; and 
. there came also the chiefs of the gods and Asuras, of the 
Yakshas and Guhyakas, 0 brahman, and all the WindsJ 

29 also. Then the Gandharvas’ great city was thronged with 
those who had Come, all the rishis, gods, Dinavas and Ifdgai 

30 'and the munis. Tumburu then performed the birth-cei'e- 
mony and other rites, and performed the rite, which is pre. 
ceded by praises, to secure good fortune on behalf of that boy, 
saying-^ 

31 As a universal monarch, great in valour, mighty of arm, 
great in sti^ength, exercise thou sovereignty over the entire 

32 earth a long time. May Indra and all these other world- 
guardians and the jishis bestow bliss and foe-destroying 

33 valour on thee, 0 hero I May the wind§ tend to what is 
auspicious for thee, even the east wind that blows no dust ! 
May the south wind which is clean and unflagging tend to 

34 gentleness for thee ! May the west wind bestow heroism 
on thee, the noblest heroism on thee ! And may the north 
wind likewise confer on thee excellent strength also ! ” 

35 At the end of this rite to secure good fortune a voice 
spake, issuing from no earthly body, — 

“ Because the preceptor uttered this phrase ‘ Marut-tava’|| 

36 repeatedly, hence this hoy shall be famed on earth as 
‘ Marutta j ’ and because kings shall pass into subjection to 

37 his commands on the earth, this boy as a hero shall stand on 

* Tumbuni had solemnized the parents* wedding, see verse 13* Tunaja 
is the Gandharva of verse 6. The Poona edition reads instead pranayena 
smfito, “ who was remembered with affection.’* 

f For jdta-jdta-Jtarmdksiron read * § hhetya jita-karmakaron as in the Poooa 
edition. 

J Vdyu in the plural ; they are mentioned here because of the invocation 
which comes nfterwards, in which they aw called Marut 

§ Marut, with tava or te added here and in the following sentences. 

II “ May tbe wind for thee } ** the words need in the preceding invocationfc. 



AVIkSHIT PBBSBNTBl) im m ^ HIS PATHKR. ^ 

ths beflsl^of'iill kings. Ad a tiiikeiAd xiibnakA , viioair, 

33 he shall absdil Iniigs and shall nhohsirttotad riijojr <^M*th 
which contwina s4Vhn continents. He shall he' chief among 
kings Who bffe^ saoriflces. Bis sliall be the • enprS^acy aihong 
kings by reason' of valohr and heroism.” 

. M^rkandeya spoke,; > 

39 On hearing this speech uttered -^by some one from among 
the dwellers in heaven, all were gratified, the br^hmane and 
Gandharvas also and his mother and father. 


CAkTo oxt^nu 

r ' 

Marutta's exploits. 

Arikshit returned and presented kis son to his father Kasrandhama., 
and there was great rejoicing — The boy grew up^ learned in sacred 
lore and skilful with all weapons — Karandhama resigned the 
kingdom^ but -Avikshit refused it because of the shame of his 
forirnr captivity — Ma/rutta was made king^ and Karandhama 
retired to the forest. 

Mdrkand^ya spoke: 

1 Then the prince, taking that beloved son and followed by 
his wife| and tbe brahmans and Gandharvas, went ^ his 

2 city. Reaching his father’s palace he extolled his father’s feet 
with respect ; and so did his slender-limb^ wife^ the bash! iif 

3 princess. And the prince holding his infant son addressed 
king Karandhama, who was seated on the throne Of justice in 

4 the midst of kings,—** Behold this face of thy grandson who 
rests in my lap, as I promised formerly to idiee for my mother’s 

5 sake at the ‘ What^want-ye ? ’ rote.” So saying he leid 'that 
son then on his father’s lap, and related to him everything-a^ 

* Or « at the head.” 

t Canto oxzix in the Oaloatta edition. 

i ^or padhhgdAivM paingdt sk In the l^oona edition. 

82 



660 CANTO CMVfir, 

6 it had ocoarred. The embracing his grandson, T^hile his 

eyes were beclouded with tears of joy, felicitated himself again 

7 and again in saying “ Fortunate am I ! ’* Then he duly paid 
honour to the assembled Gandharvas with the arghya offering 
and other presents,* forgetting other needs by reason of his 
joy-t 

8 In the city then there was great rejoicing in the houses of the 
citizens, who exclaimed — “ A son has been bom to our master!” 

9 0 great muni. In that glad and opulent city sportive cour- 
tesans of the prettiest forms danced an exquisite dance to the 

10 accompaniment of songs and musical instruments. And the 
king with glad mind bestowed on the chief brdhmans both 
gems and riches, cattle, clothing and ornaments. 

11 The boy grew thenceforward, as the moon waxes in its bright 
fortnight. He was the source of pleasure to his parents, and 

12 the desire of the people. He acquired the Vedas first from the 
religious teachers, 0 muni, then skill in all kinds of weapons, 

13 then complete knowledge of archery. When he had complete 
his efforts in the use of the sword and bow, he next overcame 
toil like a hero in learning the use of other weapons also. 

14 Then he obtained weapons from Bhdrgava,t descendant of 
Bhfigu, — bowing modestly and intent on pleasing his guru, 0 

15 brdhman. Accomplished in the use of weapons, skilled in 
the Veda, thoroughly master of the knowledge of archery, 
deeply versed in all sciences— none such had there been before 
him* 

16 Vi^ala also, on hearing all this story of his daughter and of 
the ability of his daughter’s son, rejoiced exceedingly in mind. 

17 Now the king Ka/randhama had attained his wishes, in that he 
had seen his son’s son and had offered many sacrifices, and had 

• For *rdhyddind read Wghyddind, as in the Poona edition. 

f The Poona edition ampliflee this and, instead of the second line as in the 
Calcutta edition, reads—” Then he duly paid honour to the assembled 0^ 
dharvas with the arghya offering and other presents joyfully, and dismissed 
them with propriety. He continues playing with his grandson, forgetful o 
other needs.” 

X that is ffnkra Adirya (comment.). He was the preceptor of the Asutm 



AVIKSHIT REUSED T6 BE KtNQ. 




18 bestowedlgifts on those who asked. He had performed all cere- 
monies ; he was united with his fellow-Wngrs •; having safe- 
pjuarded the earth righteonsly, he had conquered his enemies ; 

19 he was endowed with strength and intelligence. Being desirous 
of departing to the forest he addressed his son Avikshit — 

“ My son, I am old, T am going to the forest, take over the 

20 kingdom from me. I have done what ought to be done; 
nothing remains but to anoint thee. Do thou who art highly 
accomplished in thy opinions take the kingdom which I have 

21 transfered to thee.’* Being addressed thus, Avikshit the prince, 
respectfully bowing down, said to his father who was desirous 
of goingt to the forest to perform austerities, — 

22 “I will not, dear father, do the safeguarding of the earth ; 
shame departs not fi*om my mind ; do thou appoint some one 

2:l else to the kingdom. Since I when captured was delivered by 
my dear father and not by my own valour, how much manliness 

24 then have I P The earth is piotected by real men. I who was 
not sufficient to protect even myself, how shall I, being such, 

25 protect the earth ? Cast the kingdom on some one else. On 
the same level as a womanj is the man who is downright 
iujured§ by another. And my soul has been delivered from 
delusion by thee, sir,|l who hast delivered me from bondage. 
How shall I, being such, who am on the same level as a woman, 
become king P ” 

The father spoke ; 

20 Not distinct t in sooth is the father from the son, nor the 

* Sa-i?a»‘«air,« (coinmeixt,), ” with his provinoial kings, 

“ with his vassal kings.” 

t For yiydaus read yiydeuihf as iu the Poona edition. 

t For mantri aa-d/iarmojk read «a ^tri-sadharmdbt as in the Poona edition. 

§ Ava*drwhyate j the verb ava-druh is not in the dictionary • 

il For dtmd 'nwhdya hhavato the Poona edition reads dtmd 'imUd da hiui* 
and the comment, says amhdt^sneUt (which seems strange). The 
’ttoaning thfcirpiild be, ” fifltoe I myself have been delivered from bondage 
by thee, 8ir,^'o£ affection, how shall I &o.'’ But I have ventured to read 
ahtta mohid da hhavatd. 

^Nahhinnui according to the commeut. this means patra-nirupita.bheda- 
na» 



lit oANt(^. 

jSftii il^ fester* Not:d?liv^ a^y one alse wast 
thoi^, who wpt delivered by thy fathwt 

' The son spoko! 

27 I cannot direct my heart in any other wise, 0 king. There 
is exceeding shame in my heart — I, who was delivered by thee. 

28 He who has been rescued by his father consumes the glory 
acquired by his father ; and let not the man, who is known by 

29 reason of his father, exist in the family. Let mine be that 
course, which is the course of those who have themselves 
amassed riches, who have themselves attained to fame, who 
have themselves come forth safe out of difficulties ! 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

80 - When he, although exhorted* often by his father, spoke 
thus, 0 muni, the king then appointed hist son Marutta to 

31 the kingdom. Receiving from his grandfather the SQvereignty 
' < as autboriaed by his father, he ruled well, inspiring gladness 

among his friends. 

32 • And king Karandhama„ taking Vird also, departed to the 
forest to praetise austerities with voice, body and mind re- 

33 strained. After practising very arduous austerities there a 
thousand years, the king quitted his body and gained the 

34 worldt of Indra. His wife Vird then practised austerities 
a hundred years longer, with her hair matted and her body 

35 covered with dirt and mud, desirous of gaiping the same 
world aS“h6r high-souled lord who had reached Svarga, making 

. fmiifca and roots her food, dwelling in BhArgava’s hermitage 
encircled by wives of twice-bom men, and sustained by th( 
devoted attendance of the twice-horh. 

• For yadipv vUo ttaA yadi proito, u to th* Poona eaiMon. Arflahtt « 

mentioned to thaMaM-Bh., A«vam,-p. iv. 80.06, tort wely elMwhw. » 

n^me ehiefly ooonn to the prtronymio tona JMIalUti applied to an> 

There wa# another AyikaMt, a ion ol Karo, 'XVp. wito. W40. 

^ Tdiio, l.e., Avflbrldt*8^^ 

% For aa lohUdm read ea^lolcatdm. 



KING. 


Canto CXXIX* ^ ^ 

MaruMs exploits. 

Mamtta reiyned as a wiiversal monarch--- 8 amv( 3 /rta was his priest-- 
Marutta was a great saonjicer, and a liberal benefactor to hrdh^ 
mans— Some verses in his honour are quoted— But the Ndgas 
troubled the rishis grievously, and his grandmother Vird sent him 
a message to administer justice and secure peauce. 

Kraushtnki spoke : 

1 Adorable sir, thou hast fully narrated all this to me, namely, 
ICarandhama’s exploits and what were Avikshit’s exploits. I 
i wish to hear of the exploits of the high-souled king Martttta,t 
Avikshit s son ; I he is heard of because of his stirpassing 
;{ feats as a universal monarch, o f great parts, a warrior, a beloved 
king, high-minded, wise in righteousness and a doer of right- 
eousness, a real protector of the earth. 

Marka^Kjeya spoke : 

4 Receiving from his grandfather the kingdom with his 
father’s consent, he protected it righteously, as a father protects 

* Canto oxxx in the Calcutta edition. 

t He is fatned as a universal monarch (Mahi-Bh., A^vam.-p. iv. 86-91 and 
Vishnu Par. IV. i), and it said he gained his supreme sovereignty through his 
prosperity {fiddhyd} SabhA-p. xiv^ 650). He was one of the sixteen greatest 
nnd most famous kings of antiquity (Dro^a-p. Iv. 2170-83 j S^Anti-p. xxix. 910- 
17)- He is said to have offered a saoriffoe to the brAhman pshi U^iravlja at 
the Jambu-nada lake in the Northern region (Udyoga-p. ox. 8642^), and was 
priiised for his liberality in that he gave his daughter to Ahgiras (8fAnti-p. 
ccxxxiv. 8602 1 AnuSAs.-p. oxxxvii. 0260), but more probably to Aftgirasa, thai 
•8, Samvarta, see verse 11 note, • 

There were other less famous kings of the same name, as M arutta, son oi 
Karandhama and fifth in descent from YayAti’s son Turvasu (Hari-V., xxxii 
1829-1834} Vishi^u Pur. IP. xvi) j Marutta, fifth in descent from 9aAa-vind( 
(®ari.V., xrxTii. 1972-76} Mijiiya Pur. xliv. 24; also VAyu and other PurA^ai 
'‘Jid probably MahA-Bh., fiffeti.p. xxix. 981)| and one or two more of the^sami 
or similar name.. 

X Pm* Avikshitasya read Avikshitasya, Marutta’s father is generally spoken bi 
^ as Avikshit and not as Avtkshita, The Poona edition reads AtvaikahMasya 



654 


CiUTO CXXIX. 


6^ his own begotten sons. He sacrificed very many sacrifices ap. 
propriately, whereat most suitable fees were given omay^ m a king 
whose mind took pleasure* in the commands of his sacrificing 

6 priest and family priest. His discus was unresisted in the 
seven continents ; and his course uninterruptedf in the sky, in 

7 the lower regions, in the waters and elsewhere. He gained 
riches thereby, being duly intent on his own rites, 0 brah- 
man, and sacrificed with great sacrifices to Indra and the 

8 other gods ;t just as these other castes also, unwearied each in 
its own business and possessing riches amassed thereby, per- 

9 formed pious obligations and other rites. The earth while 
under high-souled Marutta’s protection entered into rivalry 
with the dwellers in the dwellings of the thirty god8,§ 0 best 

10 of twice-bom men. Not only were all kings of the earth sur- 
passed by him, but even the king of the gods was swrpassed by 
him as a sacrificer with declarations |1 of a hundred sacrifices.l 

11 Now his sacrificing priest was Angiras’ son Samvai-ta,** 
who teas Vrihaspati’s brother, high-souled, a treasure-house of 

* Or, “was aubserviont to’^ ramya^vaiya (comniont.). 

t For 6dpy amvicdhinnd read ddsya na viddhinnd, as in the Poona edition. 

t The Vishnu Pur. says— he offered an unparalleled sacrifice, his utensils 
were of gold, Indra was intoxicated with his libations of soma, and the brah- 
mans were enriched (IV. i). So also Maha-Bh., Asvara.-p. x. 275-92. 

§ It ia aaid in the Maha-Bh., the earth brought forth fruit without plougli- 
ing and waa garlanded with daityas in hia reign (Banti-p. xxix. 910-17). 

II S^uta-yajmbhisandhibhih ; tho Poona edition reads fata^yajiio 'pi iahiM' 

1 The MahA-Bh. aaya he overcame Indra in rivalry and ao iuourred 
V(ihaspatp8 opposition (SfAnti*p. xxix. 910-14). 

♦* Tho Maha-Bh. aaya Angiraa waa Avikshit’s priest (A^vam.-p. iv. 80-85). 
Angiras had two aona, Vrihaapati and Samvarta, and there waa rivalry be- 
tween them, but Vrihaapati the elder ,gob the pre-eminence and be»«0 
Indra's purohita. Marutta in rivalry overcame Indra, and Vribaspati who 
desired India’s good repnlaed Marutta, and declined to be hia family pries* 
Marutta then by Nirada’a advice went to VAri^asi (Benares) and secate^ 
Samvarta as hia priest (Dropa-p. Iv. 2170-71; SiAnti-p. xxix. 910-16 
Asvam.-p. iv. 86 to ix, 274), There waa a great quarrel between Vrihesp****®** 
Samvarta in consequence (ibid., and VayuPur.). v Tho Aitareya^BrAhma9*8»y» 
Samvarta inaugurated Marutta with the Mahdbhiihska ceremosyt the 
inauguration oerontony of Indra (Vlll. iv. 21). 



MARlTTTA*St GREAT FAME. 


665 


2 austerities. The golden mountain Yufijavat* is frequented by 
the gods ; he struck down its summit and carried it offf 

3 that king. The whole of that hing^X territory, allotraent§ 
and other property and palaces were made brilliant, all golden, 
by that friest at a sacrifice by means of austerities, 0 brdh- 

4 man. And in this connexion^ those who are interested in Ma- 
rutta’s exploits sing songs, while all yishis are carrying on their 
study without intermission, thus — 

[5 “ Equal to Marutta never lived a sacrificer on the face of 

the earth — at whose sacrifice his dwelling-house was cast and 

16 also golden palaces as largesse^ Indra was made intoxicated 
with soma and twice-bom brahmans with gifts, and Indra and 
other chiefs of the thirty gods became waiters to the brih- 

17 mans. At what king’s sacrifice was everything of gold aban- 
doned, as at Marutta’s sacrifice, by the twice-bom hrdhmans, 

18 whose houses were stocked with gems P II And at his sacrifice 
what gold in the shape of palaces and other things was cast ns 
largesse, that indeed the three other castes received ; therefrom 
some of them gave similar gifts.”^ 

19 While thus he ruled the kingdom and protected his subjects 
well, a certain ascetic came, 0 best of munis, and said to him 

20 —“Thy father’s mother, seeing the community of ascetic.s 

• For YuHjavat read Mmjavat, as in the Poona edition. It is a mountwn 
ion the ridge of Himavat (Maha-Bh., A'lvam.-p. viii. 180). It seems to have 
wn also oalled Mnfij&vata, and the summit Munja-pfishtha. It was visited 
y Vasu-homa, king of Anga, and lUma and MindhAtfi (Binti-p. oxxii. 4469. 
5). It was a sacred place of pilgrimage (Kurma Pur. II. xxxvii. 88). This 
ttay be meant by Mujavant in Atharva-Veda I. xxv. 2. 8. There wes another 
>lwe of pilgrimage oalled Mnfija-vata which was apparently in or near 
Knni.kshetra (Mahi-Bh., Vana*p. Ixxxiii. 5092, and Ixxxv. 8210). 

t For Aritom the Poona edition reads krite, “he strnok down Us summit 
for that king’s sake." 
t Yasf/a, i.e., Marutta’s. 

§ Bh4ga, 

11 For ntna.p6rfaff^ ntd rahwi-ptifyo-yri''"''. »• >" edi«0“ 

^ Th« Poon» edition sdde ft TOree here-The well-bftllftTod Wk, who hftd 
>l»ir thoughta intilfled by whftt Wfte giren »wfty, »1bo ofleied eftorifieei there- 
!»ith in vftrions piftoee sepeifttely.” 



650^ t .CANTO exxn, * 

r 

^ T 

ovorwbehned with* poisoh by tho Njg»3 whb aro \nt} 
frenzy, saith this to thee; 0 king , 

21 “ Thy grandfathw, after protecting the earth well, has de 
parted to he^ren, and B am able to practiae ansterities here 

22 dwelling in Anrva’s* hermitage, I, being snob, perceivi 
dii^rganizatidn while thou ruleat the kingdom, such as wai 
nott while thy grandfather and thy ancestors mgned^ ( 

23 king. Assuredly thm art heedless or addicted to sensua 
enjoyments, or thy senses are uncontrolled, in that thou dos 
not know the wicked and the good because they, thine orgcm, ar 

24 blind h'eca^ thou hast no spies. Now the Ndgas^ who have comi 
up from P4t61a possessed with frenzy, have bitten seven sous o 

25 munid, and have defiled the tanks, and have defiled the elnri 
fied butter offered in sacrifice with sweat, urine and ordurt 
Tribute has loj^ been given to the Ndgas, thm fully indicatiiij 

26 an offence. These munis are able to reduce the Nigas ti 
ashes, but have no authority herein ; thou indeed hast th 

27 authority herein. Kings* sons have the happiness that comes o 
sensual enjoyments so long, *0 king, as the water of regal in 

28 aUguration is not poured on their head. But when hings the 
must think — ‘ What friends are there ? ’ ‘ Who is an enemy ? 

* How great is my enemy’s strength P ’ ‘ Who am I P ’ ‘ Wh 
are in my minister’s party P ’ Or, ‘ Who are my vassal kings ? 

29 ‘ Either such a one is ill-disposed, or he has been alienated b 
others ; what is he like with regard to my adversaries also r 

* Who is wholly a Uege-vam to me herein in the city or in tt 

* Aurra was a famous rishi descended from BhHgu. The Matsya Po 
says he was son of Bhrigu’s son Apnnvina and was father of Jamadagni, 
that he estsbUshed the gotros of the Bh&rgavas (oxoiy> 14.29).. It i«| said 
Sagara was brought np in h|8 hermitage (Harf.V riU- 762.xiv. 795) aud letf 
from him the Vedas and the use of arms (Vishpu Pur. HI. viil, and IV >« 
The Mahi-Bh. says he was bom when theBhirgavas were almost exterminate 
by the princes of Ktrtarirya’s race after Ktrtarirya’s death, hecoUie they d 
not restore at the demand of those princes the rfohss which they had amae^ 
as K^itaviryafe sacrificial priestsi and it eapWas-'W* naaae tqrsayj^S 
was bom from hlfie^othar’e thigh, '980^45 tht 

6827);. 

t Bor tendbhdd read U ndbkdd. 



MARttTTA WAS KKQmRED TO PRNtSH THF! NAOAS, 657» 

30 country P* He wl^o phts life trast BoUlyin deeds of right* 

eousness is besotted, A king must take Radical ‘ Who 

behaves quite properly ? » * Who must be punished ? * * Who 
must be pibteeted P ' Or, ‘ What men must be regarded* by 

31 me, who have to considert the person to be subdued, the plaee 
aad the time with regard to my condition of alliance or 
disunion P*]! Further, a king should ward off unknown 

32 spies by other spies. A king should set spies upon all his 
ministers and other servants. In this and in other ways a 
king, whose mind is intent upon business, should constantly 

3.3 spend day and night, but not be engrossed with sensual enjoy- 
ments, The possession by kings of bodies is not for the sake 

34 of sensual enjoyment, 0 king ; it excites them to undertake 
ti’Ouble§ in the umk of protecting the earth and their own 
lighteousness. For a king who pi’otects fch|^oarth and his own 

35 righteousness well, there is great trouble in this world and 
supreme nndecaying happiness in heaven. Recognizing this 
therefore, 0 king, discai'd sensual enjoyments and deign to 
undertake trouble in this world for the protection of the earth. 
The calamity, which originating from tlie N'agas has thus be- 

\) fallen the risbis, while thou art roigning. 0 king, thou being 
blind because thou hast no spies dost not even know it. What 
need of saying moro in this matter / Let punishment 1)6 inflicted 
on him who is wicked ; protect thou the well-behaved, 0 king ; 
thou shalt gain the sixth part allowed thee as tribute by right- 
eous law. By witholding protection thou shalt without doubt 

39 fully acquire all the sin that is committed by wicked men 
through unruliness. Do what thou wishest ! 

“ I have told tiee all this that thy grandmother saith to thee. 
Act, when things are so, as pleases thee, 0 king. 

^ Upeishyit j or *' must bo disrogorded.*’ 
h For meithaU rood avehthaidm ! “ Let o Wng consider, Ac." 
t For «(Migo.WM)d«.(av«i ^mya- the Pooi» edition reeds numirt-lMt-itutyid 
», “ who have to ooneider ptaoe end time in this matter by reason of few lest 
^ eoansel should be divulged.” 

\ Or « it is nmiU for undertaki^Hf great trouble.'^ 


33 



as» -wsto^MeR' 

• ,.s(Sf/ I -tf 

gre^ndmther^^ htnidtd^ fmA ^a$' wmU 
: iOA jfh&--^Th&giniphted hds moth^ MkiM^i^pn^f^^on according 
Iff hefjM' pwwise-^Skd <Mtd Avihl^nt entreaim 

.• Undii^hMariiUta, < -'.'v/vf 

, Mirka^^eyt^fpoke:, 

1 ^ On hearing this speech frQm the aacetic, the king became 
covered with sham^, Exclaming* * * § “.Be 9?^ pt^e* who am bliud 

2 hfiCAUse I have no spies,” he sighed and took ixis bow. He went 
. . h^tilythen towards Aurva's hermitage atid made obeisance 

to his fatherj^other Vird with his head, and to the ascetics 

3 as was propPj and they landed him with blessings. And 
seeing the seven sons,t the ascetics, bitten by the Nigas on 

4 the ground, the king I'eproached himself repeatedly in front 
of them, and said thus, — 

5 “ What I do now unto the wicked N%as, who despise my 
. • valour and who hate the brahmans, let all^he world with the 

gods,' demons and mankind see that ! ” 

ifirkapdeya spbke : . 

6 . So saying the king took his weappn SaibyarlakaJ in anger, 

in order to destroy all the N^gas that in Patala 

7 apd onihe earth. The Wgas’ world bnW intb flame then 
' suddenly all around ; while it was being burnt if the glowing 

8 , power of the great weapbn§, he hemmed it 

dearfathWU^Ah mother ! Ah ! Ah f to child 
cries arose then ataong theltfigas in that cdiilusfdh <?aased by 

• Canto oiixt fa tba Qatetdta .r<. ~ 

’ ^ 1^>V Wea read the sow * j # a* 

: ‘‘^»e to tbM 

worW* The Calcutta edition .r ’ , ^ j 

§ fat mdtMi tu tejoed tielHktoh.^8^ 
havef'foitew^ 



THB N/GfA8 BBSOUOHT FOR PROTICTION. 

3 the weapon, ^me witk otuis of their tails boming, other 
Nigas li<^ both eeiaed their ehi]4i:en arA 

aud wiT69) 0n4 abandoned their conanienie and idothing. 

} Quitting Piitlla they went for pi^teotion to Marutta’a inather 
Bhavini, 'W}io had formerly given them a promise of safety 
I then* Approaching her all the N^gas, sick terror, 
piostrated themselves and spoke thus in broken 
“ Let that be remembered which was formerly dJRved by thee 
i to us. .^?bat wo entreatedf formerly after prostrating oui*- 
selves in Jl^itala, the time for that has here arrived ; save us, 0 
:] mother of the hero ! Let thy son be turned aside, 0 queen ; 

let us retain j our lives. All the world of the KAgas is being 
1 burnt by the fire from his weapon. For us, who are being 
thus utterly burnt up by thy son, there is no other refhge but 
thou ; have mercjr on us, 0 renowned lady 1^ 

Mirkao^eya spoke : 

5 Hearing this their speech and remembering what she had 
said at first, the good lady spoke this speech to her husband 
with agitation)^ 

6 “ I related to thee before indeed, what the K^gas.in jWtAIa 
after making petition said to me with reference to my son. 

7 They are these who have come in terror ; they are being burnt 
by his splendour ; these sought refuge with me before and 1 
gave them a promise of safety. Those who have come to me 
for refuge have approached thee for refuge, for I do not observe 
a righteousness separate from thine, I have come to thee for 
refuge.. Therefore d6 thou turn aside son Marutta by thy 
word ; when b^e^pugh^ by me also, he will assuredly pj;oceed§. 
to quietness.’* 

* The promise was given is .canto cppiri, verses 42'44. For the text Fflj/f 
^kfh ta(i<ibhapams^,h^i^rjt0a4iog Would Ifeyathd ddttm siqce 

*be had formerly gives a promweo/ safety.” See verse 17. 
t For as hi the Podna 'e*tfoA» . 's M ’ 

t ^yojyam t ft wM setlii tfie diotlw^i Bdyujyam ie gives -ther#, asd 
is the reading of % Pbosa 
! dhhy,upa,yd8yaH j this set Id « 



cant 6 cxxxi. 


The king sjwke ; 

20 Marutta hae given way to wrath Vhleh'haB become fixed in 

a great crime. It will be bard, I think, to turn away the wrath 
of him, thy eon. , > > 

The Nagas spoke : 

21 We have sought thy pix)tection ; shew us favour, 0 king; 
weapons are borne in order to save from pain him who is 
wounJtl. 

' Markat^<j[^ya spoke : 

22 On hearing that speech of the Ndgas who ha^ become sup- 
pliants for protection, and being entreated by his wife, most 
famous Avikshi* spoke,— 

23 “ I go, lady, and tvill with haste speak to that thy son in older 
to deliver the Nagas : those who have come for protection must 

24 not be forsaken. If he, the king, does not draw back his 
weapon at my Word, then I will pany the weapon of that thy 
son with iny own weapons.” 

M^kapdeya spoke ; 

25 Thereupon Avikshi, noblest of kshatriyas, took up his bow 

and accompanied by his wife went in haste to Bhargava's 
hermitage. 

Canto CXXXLt 
Marutta^ 8 exploits (concluded). 

Avikshit called on Marutta to spare the N6ga$^ hut Marutta umdut^ 
on his duty refused — Avikshit pi'oposed to fight with hivi, 
Marutta^ though deprecating such combat^ agreed-^Th t^shi^ 
intervened^ the Ndgas restored the dead rishis to life^ and allpri^^ 
affectionately — Marutta^ s wives and successor are named. 

. . Markaud^ya spoke : 

1 Now he, Avikshit, on seeing his son there}: grasping his choice 

* Here and in verse 26 the text shortens the name to Avikshi. So 

in canto cxxxi, verses 9, XI, and 17. See canto, pixii, verse 2, opto, 
t Canto czxiii in the Calontta edition. ^ 

X€<drai3H the Bombay edition is better than taaydji. 



IVIKSHIT FAYOUfiED THE NAGAs’ CAUSE. 6^1 

bow, and seeing his son's bow and keen weapon filling all the 
2 regions </ slcy with its fiery light, belching forth a greafc 
flame, iUnminating all the surface of the earth, penetrating down 
into Patila, unendurable, dreadful and terrifying, and actually 
,) imdy for me he, seeing the king whose countenance was 
wrinkled with frowns, sat’d,— “ Be not thou wrathful, 0 
4 Marutta; let thy weapon be drawn back.” More than once 
so said he, lofty-minded AvihUt, to him, the tih/% course 
of whose colour speedily vanished in pallor. Listening to 
his father s speech and looking at him again and again, he, 
T) still grasping his bow, prostrated himself before his parents 
with veneration and i-eplied 

“ Most grievously have the N^gas offended me, 0 father, 
(j Wliile I rule this earth, they despising my might advanced to 

7 the hermitage and bit seven youthful munis ; and the fii'e-offer- 
ings of these jishis who dwell in the hermitage have been 
defiled by the evil-behaved NdgaSj while I am reigning, 0 

8 king. Morever every one of the tanks has in truth been 
defiled by them. This then is the reason ; thou must say 
nothing in their favour , 0 father. I am not to be tuimed aside 
as regards the brdhman-killing Ndgas.” 

Avikshi* spoke : 

If these Ndgas have slain brahmans, they will go to hell when 
dead. Let this my woi*d be complied with ; desist from using 
thy weapon. 

Marutta spoke : 

I will not pardon these wicked offenders. I in truth shall 
go to hell if I strive not to curb these sinners. Turn me not 
back, 0 father I 

Avikshi spoke : 

These Nagas hare come to me for refuge. Because of the 
veneration due to me draw back thy weapon. Enough of thy 
wrath, 0 king 1 

* Tlie text reads Avikshi here and iu the followmg places. See canto cxxil, 
verse 2, note. 



m 


QAXfo mauu -• 

Hamita spoke e 

12 ' I not pi^ii those . nvfekS&d ciflenllW; Soft shall 1, 

transgressing my own i^bteonsriessi word? 

13 By infliciang punishment (to him' wlw ^6^ punished 

and by protecting the well-h©ha;ved, a king giim the saci-ed 
worlds and disregards the hells. * ' ‘ 

. . MarkaeW*^ spoke i 

14 . When the son thus repeatedly forbidden by kis father 
diaws not back the weapon, lie, father, then spoke again,— 

15 “ Thou injurest these ; teiTified who have come to me 

for refuge, although thou art forbidden ; I will theiefore 

1(3 employ a means to counteract thee. I also .acquired skill k 
weapons j not thou alone art skilled in weapons on the earth ; 

‘ and how great will he thy manhood in my preseuce, 0 most 
ill-behaved one F *’ 

17 Avikshi, the lordly muni, with eyes dusky-red through anger, 

18 strung his bow and grasped the weapon of fate. Next he 
fitted in his bow the noblest weapon of fate, which was 

• surrounded with fiery light, which could slaughter hosts of 

19 foes, which had great vigour. Then made hot by the weapon 
of conflagration,* quaked the whole heaven and earth with the 
seas and mountains, Q brahman, when the weapon of fatef was 

raised aloft. - 

MArkagdcya spoke : 

20 Marutta also, seeing that weapon of fate made rndy by his 
father, spoke aloud, — 

“ This my weapon is raised aloft for the punishment of the 

21 wicked— not to kill thee, my dost thou, sir, discharge the 

weapon of fete ’^t me, tliy son, true righteous- 

22 ness and who have ever indeed command? 1 

must protect my subjects fuHy, 4i|iAtidoul «V/ why dost thou 
thus prepaid the weapon to kill 

' ' ■ ' Avlkslu spoke 

23 We are determined to acctoj^nBah r^i^e 

•• ^ 8afhmm>i see eaotp wt, vebss*'^.' 
t Kilditrai 



CONTiST BETWEIH ATfESBIt A?rD MAR0TTA, 

bM coa»; 5 lioa ai^ hfe terail«iiit, thou ih^ |iot be 

24 let .go^^mSmt M. Either gbjt thoe me by the might o* 

thy wwtxm add ^en elay'the wicked Nigae here; or I wOl 

25 slay thie with tty trbapbn anil&Ta the great Nigas, Pie on 
the lift of that ‘ttan that ehewe ao fatonr to one iu pain, who 
hae oome adeldng for ptotecthm even though oertafnly belong- 

26 ing to W Mtetty’g p%! it kehatriya am 1; . these terrified 
Ndgat hsit'e dfime to me for protection ; thou ind^ aH their 
injurer ; why shouldest thou not be killed by me P 

Mamtta spoke : 

27 Whoever tends to be an obstacle to the protection of the 
subjects, whether he be a friend or even a kinsman or a fether 

2« or a spiritual preceptot, he must be killed by a king. I, being 
such <i Irtng, ifill fight with thee ; be not thon angry, O father. 

I must preserve my own righteousness, ' I have no anger 
nj^ninst thee. 

M^rkap^eya spoke ; 

2!) Seeing thbsci two determined to kill each other, Bh/lrgava 
and the other munis sprang Up then and stood between them, 

•lO and said, — Thou must not discharge thy weapon against this 
thy father ; nor must thou slay this thy son who is renowned 
for his deeds.” 

Marutta spoke j 

•^1 I must as Idng slay the wicked and guAiHi the good ; and ’ 
these are wieked Ndgas. What is my fault in tin's matter^ 0 
ye twicc-bom P 

Avikshi spoke i 

T must rSseue those who have come to me for i^efuge, and 
this my sbn £1 in ollender,* who kills those that have come 
for refngfC^ O Brihxhahs. 

The rishk spoke { 

These ^^i^s ’whosf eyes a|« rolling about iu terror say, 

' We wiU l^r||i§i tq We agiMu tl^ brihmami were hittmi 
hy wicked Enough then of combat ! Be ye both 

For aparddhya^p^^^Jlfl^^ SgJu the Poona oditk^. 



m 


CANTO CXXTK 


appeated, 0 noble kings t Ye hoik indeed, #bo atfe faithful to 
your promises, are well acquainted with righteensness. 

M4rkai^eya spoke ; 

35 Now Vira approaching her son said this,'t-“ At my word 

3ti this thy son has tided to kill the Nagas. .That is finished. 
When the brahmans live ta^molested and the mum also 
come to life again, the Ndgas may be set free, since they have 
'sought thee for protection,’* 

BhAvini spoke : 

37 I was formerly entreated by these denizens of Patala j for that 

38 reason I commissioned this my husband in this matter. There- 
fore has occurred this noble outcome, splendid, in both of them, 
both in my husband and my son, in thy grandson and thy son. 

M^rkapdeya spoke : 

39 Those Nagas then restored those brahmans to life both by 
means of various divine herbs and by drawing out the poison. 

40 The king then bowed at his parents* feet ; and he, Avikshii. 

41 embracing Marutta affectionately spoke thus— “ Be thou a de- 
strayer of thy enemies’ pride ; long do thou protect the eaith ; 
be thou also merry with thy sons and grandsons ; and may they 
not be haters of thee ! ’* 

4:2 Permitted* then by the brdhmans and by Vird to depart, 
the two kings mounted the chariot together; and Bhavim 
went to her own city. 

43 Vira also, best of those who maintain righteousness, after 
performing very great austerities, gained the same world* as 
her husband, she an illustrious wife, devoted to her lord. 

44 Marutta also protected the earth fully in righteousness, an 
having vanquished the six classes of enemies enjoyed enjoy* 

45 mentsasking. And his wife was Prabhd-vati, the illtistr^j^ 

daughter of the Ung of Vidarbha; and Suvfra’s da^ 

46 Sauviri was also hk wife) Su*kedi, daughter of tbe 

* For anuiMio read avMjUdtau, aa in the Poona edition. , 

t Yfyr set lokatdm read «a.?oAafdw, as in the Poona edition. 



marottaVs wives and sons. 


m 


king K0tti**viiy0. was his. wife. Kekayi alsoi daughter of 
7 Sindliu-viiya king of Madra, and Kekaja's daughter Sairan* 
dhri, and Vapush-mati, daughter oi the lord of Sindhu,* were 
also his wives ; and Sa-4obhan£, daughter of the king of C'edi, 
^ was his wife. And his sons by those queens became eighteen 
kings, 0 brahman. Chief among them and the eldest son was 
Narishyanta. 

^ Such in valour was Marutta, a great king, great in strength • 
His discus was unopposed in the seven continents ; equal to 
3 whom no other king ever lived or shall live. After hearing of 
these exploHs of that royal fishi, high-souled Marutta, who was 
I endowed with goodness and prowess, and who was of boundless 
vigour, and of his pre-eminent birth, 0 brahman, a man is 
freed from all offences. 


Canto CXXXII.f 


Narisl^anla's exploits. 

krntta gave the kingdom to his son Nanshyanta — Narishyanta resolv- 
ed to do some]great deed and performed a great sacrifice at which 
he enriched the brahmans for life — Consequently he could not 
induce any hrdhmans to attend a secmid sacrifice except after great 
difficulty-^AU hrdhmans then were themselves offering sacrifices, 

Ki’aushtuki spoke ; 

I Adorable sir, thou hast narrated all Marutta’s exploits ; the 
wish to hear completely about his descendants prevails in me. 

* These names seem to be confused so as to be in impossible combinations, 
•r Sindhu, Kekaja and Madra were distinct countries, see oanto Ivii, versos 
J and 37. For Smrindhri read Sairmdhri as in the Poona edition. The 
>cond line of verse 46 and the first of verse 47 would read better thus, by 
erely transposing the words,— 

Sutd (fa Sindhu-viryasya Sindhu-hhartur Vapush-mati, 

Madra-rdjasya Sairandhri, Keteayasya da Kehayi. 

“Vapush-mati also daughter of Sindhn-vlrya lord of Sindhn, Sairandhri 
^Hhter of the Hag of Madra, and Kekayi daughter of the king of Kekaya were 
ho his wives,** 

f Oanto oxzxUi in the OMdutta edition, 

84 



660 


CiNTO CXXXII. 


I .wish to hoftT of thofio among his dosoondan^S^ as thoa de* 
soribest them, who were lords of the earth, worthy of eorere^ty, 
and endowed with valour, 0 great muni. 

Mirke^^eya spoke ; 

Marutta’s son was famed as Narishyanta* ; he was tlie 
eldest and indeed the best of the eighteen sons. And for 
eighty-flve thousands of years the lordly kshatriya Mamtta 
■enjoyed the entire earth. After ruling the kingdom accord, 
ing to his own righteousness, after offering peerless sacrificea 
he anointed hie eldest son Narishyanta o« Tang and departed t( 
the forest. With his mind concentrated on one idea the kinj 
practised great austerities there. He ascended to the sky 
covering the heaven and earth with his glory, 0 brihman. 

His son Narishyanta, being wise, pondered thn$, considennii 
how his father had acted and other kings also,— 

“ In my family my ancestors have been high-souled king! 
Offerers of sacrifices, they protected the earth righteously, beini 

9 powerful; and they were givers of riches; they turned no 
back in battle. But who is able to imitate the exploits o 
those high-souled kingi ? Yet the righteous deed which they 
did with sacrifices and other ojferings, that I wish to do ; an 
that is not feoMle , what can I do ? The earth is protete 
according to righteousness ; what virtue has the king in this 
If he does not duly protect, a king is sinful and goes to he 
If he has riches, a king must certainly offer great sacrifice 
and must bestow gifts ; what is there wonderful toremt 
kiwc is the refuge of those who are perishing. High wt 
and skame and anger, dependance on hostile folk and o« 
own rules of righteousness ensure that there is no 
battle. As all this has been weU achieved by my ancestor^ 
by my father Marutta, who now can do it so mUf 
then shall I do, that has not been done by those anwsto 
were sacrifioers, choice men, gentle, and who turn 
s He and Us deieendanti are given in Viah*u ^ 

tingnished fromNarishymitaor Narishya oneol the ioni of Mann 

see page 688. • 

^ ^ V®* “ 


6 


8 


10 


11 


12 


lv3 


14 

15 

16 



i^AftlS^YANTA WAS A ORKAT SACRIFIGRB. 

tom batU0( .wliese manliness did not fail in great bathes and 
confliota* ? With whose deed shall I coming strive nnappal- 

17 ledlyP Moreover those kings, my ancestors, themselves 
performed sacrifices nnweariedly, but did not have them per- 
formed by others ; I mil do that.” 

M^ka^d^ya sp ke : 

18 After deliberating thus the king performed a single sacrifice, 
the like of which, made splendid by the lavishing of riches, no 

9 one else had performed. Now after giving very great wealth 
to the twice-bom hrdhmansy enough for life, tlie king further 

>0 gave them a hundred times as much food at the sacrifice, and 
cattle, clothing, ornaments and granaries and other gifts. 
Thus he intoxicated each one of them who dwelt in the earth. 

21 Consequently when the king began a sacrifice again, he got no 
twice-bom hrdhmam then to conduct it after the sacrifice had 

^ been begun. Whatever brahmans the king selects for the 
business of .sacrificial priesthood,! they said everyone to him, — 

“ We have consecrated ourselves for a sacrifice elsewhere. 

23 Choose thou some one else ; the riches which thou didst lavish 
among us, there is no end thereof. Yet thou mayest give 
wealth to others at thy sacrifices.” 

M^rka^ideya spoke : 

And the lord of the whole earth obtained no brahmans then 
as sacrificial priests. He began then to give a gift on the 
space outside the sacrificial altar. Neverthless they did not 
accept it at all, having their houses full of wealth. In order 
to give again to a twice-bom hrdhman he spoke thus, being de- 
jected,— 

“Alas! it is very splbndid that there is no poor brahman 
anywhere in the earih: and it is not splendid that this 
treasury is useless to one who does not sacrifice. No one 

For mahaUsai^rdma-safksargd visamvddita-paunM^ read ma^aMoA. 
^•sammardeOiv aviwikvidupmrusM^s^ the Bombay and Poona edi- 
18 . 

tFor drttijya»l(armafi tesAdrtvijya-fiatmayu 



668 CASTO cxixtt. 

undertakes sacrificial priesthood* * * § ; all folk amo&g the twice- 
born are sacrificing, and do not assent when we are giving a 
gift;* 

M^ka^^eya spoke : 

28 Prostrating himself then before some twice-bpm brahmanB 
again and again in faith, he appointed them sacrificial pnests 
at his own sacrifice. They pei'formed the great sacrifice. 

29 And this was very surprising, — when that sacrifice offered by 
fhe king took place, all folk of the twice-bom on the earth 

30 were offering sacrifices at that time ; no one was present as a 
spectator thereat. Some of the twice-born were having sacri- 
fices offered, and some of them were themselves offering sacri- 

31 fices. Whenever king Narishyanta sacrificed, people might 
make a sacrifice on the earth entirely with the riches given by 

32 that giver. Now in the eastern region there were more than 
one hundred and eighty million sacrifices ; in the west seventy 

33 millionsf in sooth ; in the south fourteen tens of millions ; and 
in the north there were then fifty tens of millions of sacrifices 
at one time, 0 brahman muni, when Nai'ishyanta was sacWficing, 

34 Such, 0 brahman, was Marutta’s son king Narishyanta of 
yore, righteous in soul, famed for his strength and manliness. 

Camto CXXXIII.J: 

Bamas e,eploits. 

Narishyanta was succeeded hy Ins son Bama, an accomplished king— 
Simand daughter of the king of Baidrna chose him as her fmhand 
at her svayam-vara — Three other prmces tried to take her by faro ^ 
and Bama, after appealing to the assembled kings against their 
ccmductj was left in accordance with mamage rules to assert his 
right hy arms — He defeated those kings and married Sumand. 

Marka^idejf^ spoke : 

1 Narishyanta's son was Dama,§ the tamer oi the wicked an 

* For drttijyam read drtvijyam. 

t For kofyd read kotyo as in the Poona edition. ‘ 

X Canto oxxxiv in the Calcutta edition* 

§ He and his descendants are given in Vishnu Pur. IV. i. 



bAMA^s biitTk AifD irooTa. 66d 

of enemies; like Indra’s was liis strength; compassion such 

2 as a mtmi’s was his disposition. That very famous son was 
bom to that king of Indra-sena, a princess descended from 
Babhru * after abiding nine years in his mother’s womb. 

3 Because while abiding in her womb he caused his mother to 
acquire self-restraint, and because it was supposedy ‘ this prince 

4 also will be self -restrained in disposition,’ therefore indeed his 
family priest, who knew the three times, f gave Narishyanta’s 
son the name ‘ Dama.’J 

5 Now prince Dama learnt the knowledge of the bow entirely 

6 from VTisha-parvan, king of men ;§ and he leamt the use of all 
kinds of weapons thoroughly from the noble Daitya Dun- 

7 dubhill who dwelt in Tapo-vana and he leamt the Vedas 
and all the VedAhgas from S^akti ;** and coiifcrolling himself 
he learnt the practice of religious devotion from the royal pshi 

Arsh^i-shenatt- 

* Thio may be Babhru or Vabhru, son of Druhyu, son of YayAti (Hari-V., 
ixxii. 1837). There were other kings of the same name later, as Vabhrn son 
of Devavyidha (Hari*V., xxxyiii. 2010.13, and Matsya Pur. xliv, 66), Babhru 
son of Visva'garbha (Hari-V,, xcv. 5262), &o. 

t The past, the present and the future. 

I “ Self-control.” 

§ This would appear to be Vrisha-parvan, a famous king of tho Danavas 
(Maha-Bh., Adi-p. Ixxxi. 3367*8, Sabba*p .iii. 68-60), whoso daughter Barmish- 
tba married Yay6ti {ibid., and Adi-p. xcv. 3760-1, Udyoga-p. cxlviii. 5042-5; 
ilmi V., XXX. 1600*3 j and Vishnu Pur. IV. x). There was a famous hermitage 
called Vrisha-parvan’s hermitage near Mount Kailasa in the Himalayas 
[Maha-Bh., Vana-p. clviii. 11641-3, clzxvii. 12340-44), but that Vrisha'parvan 
^ppe^^8 to have been contemporary with the Pandavas, according to the first 
cf these last two passages. 

II I have not found a Daitya of this name elsewhere. 

^ This means a ” grove where’.nusterities are practised”; but there appears 
® have been a place of this name, for YayAti retired there (Vishriu Pur. IV. x). 

This appears to be Vasishtha’s son who was called Bakti (Wilson’s 
l^ish^n Par. — edit. P. Hall — I. p. 8, and III, iii., pp. 36 and 36) and, better, 
^ftktri (MahA-Bh,, Adi-p .olxxvii. 6757, clxxviii* 6792*4; Bsnti-p, cocli) Ho 
ParAsara's father (loc. sit), see canto cxzziv. verse 82, 

tt For A^rshfi-she^ read jtrshfi-she^, as in the Poona edition. He is 
^litioned in the MahA-Bh., as having a famous hermitage near HJount 



iAMTo exxxtit. 


m 

8 Him, who waa natorally high-soulad, who wa» acoomplialied 
in arms and was great in strength, did Snmand, when placedt 

9 at the svayam'-rara by her father, choose as her husband, th, 
daughter of mighty (5diii-karmant king of Da^ir^a,} while 
all the kings looked on, who had assembled there for her sake. 

10 Now the Madra§ king’s son Mahd-ndda, who was great in 

11 strength and prowess, was also deeply enamoured of her, and 
80 also mre the son of SaAkrandana king of Vidarbha,|| and 
prince Vapnsh-mat, who bore a great bow and was of lofty 

12 intellect. Now seeing that Dama, tamer of the wicked and of 
enemies, was chosen by her, If they took counwl thus with one 
another there, being infatuated by love, — 

13 “ We will seize this beautifully-formed maiden from him by 
force and go home. She shall be his among us, whom she, 

14 the maiden of beautiful hips, shall take with the intention 
that he shall he her husband according to the ordinance of the 
svayam-vara — his wife she shall be, delivered over according 

15 to righteousness by our wish. Yet if that maiden of intoxi- 
cating eyes does not desire any of us, then she shall be his who 
shall slay Dama.” 

Marka^ideya spoke : 

16 Having formed this resolve, those three princes seized that 
most beautifully-formed maiden^ as she attended by Damas 

17 side. Thereupon some kings among them who were of his** 
party cried out, and other kings shouted out on the other side ; 

Oandha-midana in the Himalayas (Vana-p. clviii. 11626-7, Sialya-p. xl'i 
Anusdi..p. xiv. 1741), and he is there made a contemporary of the 
That Arahtishena or another of the same name was son of ffala (or Ia^)» vh® 
was son of Su-hotra (Hari-V., xxix. 1618-20} see also the Vlyn, Bwhma w 
Bhhg. Purdijaa). 

• Kfitd } 8wyam*voLte hfite pitrd, at tho svayam-tsiisa arranged y 
father,” would seem better. 

f 1 have not found this name elsewhere. 

. I See canto Ivii, Terse 63. 
f See p. 815, note t* 

II See canto Ivii, rerte 47. 

t For to 'iha ,<«Air*to* •'“d *«»<< to* Vr*to* m to tbe ®'‘'“ 



pama’s contrst at sumah^s syayamvaea. 671 

18 some took « nentna position. Then Dune. looking ot those 
kings ell eroand, mode this eppeel with full presence of mind, 
0 great muni. 

Dama spoke : 

19 “ Ho, ye kings! Since men say a svayam-vaiu is among the 
duties of righteousness, is it unrighteousness or righteousness 

20 that these have seized her by force ? If it is unrighteousness, 
it is no duty of mine that there shall be another wife /or me / 
or if it is righteousness, then enough of the life which is 
retained in an outrage by an enemy ! ” 

21 Then king Odru-dharman,* king of Daddr^a, making that 

22 assemblage keep silence, spoke, 0 great muni,-~“ If this which 
Dama has spoken depends on righteousness or unrighteousness, 
0 kings, declare it then, so that mine and his righteousness be 
not violated.’* 

MdrkaQ(}eya spoko : 

23 Then certain kings addressed that king,-— “ With mutual 
affection the Gdndharva ceremony of marriage is oixlained for 

24 kshatriyasjt but it is not for vaidyas, dddras or twioe-bora 
brahmans. And it has been effected by this thy daughter in 

25 that she has prefeiTed Dama. Thus according to righteous- 
ness this thy daughter belongs to Dama, 0 king. He who 
behaves otherwise, proceeds through infatuation as one licen- 
tious in soul.” 

26 And others, high-souled kings, who belonged to the party of 
the hostile kings, spoke this speech to the king of Daddr^a, 0 
brahman, — 

2^ “ Why say they through infatuation that this Gdndharva/om 

is the rule of righteousness for him who is kshatriya-bom ? 
But this is certainly not approved. There is another^ 

28 form oZso, the B)dkBhasa,§ for those who live by hearing 
arras. How whoever carries off this maiden by force after 

* Or 'odm-hoTtMin in verse 9 above. 

f See Kanu UL 26 and 32. 

X For na tvasha ddstd n^nyo hi read na tv ssho sva disto 'nyo, as in the 

Foona edition. 

‘ 5 See Manu iib 26 and 



672 


CANTO CXXXIII. 


slaying those who beset his path, hie in truth she is by tlje 

29 RAkshasa marriage, O kings. Of the two /orww 0 / maniage 
this Rdkshasa form is esteemed the more excellent here among 
kshatriyaa ; hence Mah^nanda * and the other princes have 
acted righteously.** 

Mdrkaflideya spoke : 

30 Then the kings, who had first addressed the assembled kingg 
spoke again this speech dealing with the righteousness of their 

' caste as concerned with mutual affection ; — 

31 “ It is true the Rakshasa /om also is commended as an 
excellent ordinance for kshatriyas, but the maiden has approved 
him, Dama, as her husband under her father’s authority. 

32 Now she who is carried off by force by a man^ who has killed 
her father or kinsman— that is declared to be the Riksliasa 

33 ordinance— prodded she is living in the possession of no one else 
as husband.t lu ^is completion of the Gandharva fom 
here — since this midden chose Dama in the sight of all the 

34 kings — what Rdkshasa marriage has there been here? A 
maiden when married certainly I'etnins not her maidenhood, 

35 and marriage creates a bondj on a maiden, 0 kings. Thesi 
particular princes^ who are prepared to take her by force fron 
Dama, let them do so then, if they are strong enough ; bui 
that is not good.” 

Marka^deya spoke : 

36 Hearing that, Dama with eyes reddened with wrath strung 

37 his bow and spoke this speech, — “ If my own wife is carried 
off by strong men before my eyes — what then is the value of 
the existence of an impotent man as regards his family or his 

38 two arms ? § j Fie on my weapons ! fie on my valour ! fie on my 
arrows ! fie on my bow ! fie on my useless birth in the family 

39 of high-souled Marutta ! If these powerftil princes in their in* 

* Or Mahdndda, as in verse 10. 

t This is aooording to the oomment., which makes ndnya-hhartri-y^ 

sthitd a clause qualifying the preceding words. The oomment. e*pl«i“ 

hatvd pitfi-samhandham as '* * § severing her iao to hei^^her.** 

X Sambandhalf, ; msvdrrdtvarnf “ownership” (comment.). 

§ Far hhujdmydm read bhujdbhydm, m in the Poona edition. 



673 


dama’s battle with the kings. 

fatuation take my wife and depart while I live, shame on my 
useless possession of a bow ! ” ^ 

40 So exclaiming, mighty Dama, the tamer of great enemies, 
then addressed all those other kings with Mahdnanda at their 

41 head,— “ Here stand) the surpassingly bright maiden, pretty in 
form, and with intoxicating eyes ; what has he to do with life, 

42 to whom this high-born maiden becomes not wife f Thinking 
«ms, 0 kings, so strive ye in combat that ye may by vanquish- 
ing me proudly make her your wife.” 

43 Having challenged them thus, he then discharged a shower 
of aiTows there, covering the kings fhereivith as a storm of rain 

41 covers ti-ees with darkness. Those heroic kings also discharged 
arrows, pikes, apeans and maces, and Damn playfully clove the 
mmiles used by them. They also clove the arrows shot by 
him, and Narishyanta’s son clove Hxe multitudes of arrows 
40 discharged by those kings, 0 muni, ^s the fight went on then 
between Dama and the princes, Mahdnanda penetrated with 
47 .sword in hand where Dama icas, Dama, seeing him advancing 
with sword in hand in the great fight, discharged showers of 
arrows as Indra jpours out the rains. Mahananda immediately 
then clove those his missiles, which composed meshes of arrows, 

49 with his sword and avoided oihers. Mahananda, great in 
valour, next mounted on Dama’s chaiiot in fury then and fought 
with Dama. As Mahananda was fighting agilely in many 
ways, Dama shot an arrow gleamipg like the fire of fate into 
M his heart. Mahananda, with himself pierced as he was^ pulled 
out the arrow that had stuck in his heart, and then hurled 
52 his glittering sword against Dama. And Dama dashed aside 
this torch-like sword, which was falling on him, with a pike, 
and cut Mahananda’s head off with a double-edged sword.* 

5^ When Mahananda was killed, the kings in a mass turned 
backwards, hut Vapush-mat, king of Kundina,t stood his 
^ ground j and full of strength, pride, and frenzy he fought 
with Dama. He waa son of a king of the Southern country 

* 4 etam^'patrae See canto oxf vi verse 24. 

> Seep. 336, note §. * ^ 

85 



674 <^anto cxxxiv. 

56 and was a habitual fighter:* As that p'ince was figlitint 
fiercely, he, Damn, with a scymitait lightly clove both hif 

56 charioteer’s head and his banner in the battle. His sworr 
being broken, that prince then seized his mace studded witl 
many spikes, and he, Dama^ hastily split that also while i 

57 was in his very hand. Whilst Vapush-mat is taking uj 
anotlier choice weapon, during that interval Dama pierce( 

58 ,him with an arrow and laid him low on the ground. Tha 

prince was laid low on the gi’ound then, powerless in his limb 

59 and quivering, nnd ceased in his mind from fighting. Afte 
gazing on him as he lay .so with no more thought of fightinc 
Dama restraining himself abandoned him, and taking Suman 
went forth with happy mind. 

60 Then the king of Da^arna filled with pleasure performei 
the marriage of those two, of Dama and Sumana, according t 

61 the ordinances. Dama wedded to his wife remained a shor 
time there in the city of the king of Da^arpa, and departed witl 

62 his wife to his own abode. And the king of Da4ar^a§ ga\ 
him elephants, horses and chariots, cattle, horses, asses nn 

63 camels, and many slaves both female and male, clothing, orn? 
ments, bows and other apparel^ the choicest household utensil 
of his owm ; and sent him away, replete also with those othe 

vessels. 


Canto CXXXIV. || 

Vaind's exploits, 

])mna retnnied home [tnnmphani-Karishyanta trawfened the K»! 
dmi to him ami retired with his queen Indra-send to the /wff - 

* Rfina-go6ar(i'h. , ^ 

t For kara-bdlawj which form is not in the dictionary, read 

hetter hara-pdlenar . ..nnnars in tt 

X He did not give him the coup de grace, VapuSh-mat re-appea 

next canto. . 

§Por Daidrnddhipatei (fdsaw read DaidrnddhipUf ddsmat, as mtn 

edition, 

Ij 6auto cxxxv iu the Calcutta edition, 



DAMA CONQUERED THE KINGS AND WON SUMANA. 675 

The defeated pince Vapush-mdi met him there^ and, in revenge 
kilUd him — Indra-send sent tidings to Dama that he should 
punish the murderer. 

Mdrka^icjeya spoke : 

1 Thus the prince gained her, Suman4, as his wife, 0 most 
great muni, and prostrated liimself* at liis father’s and 

2 mother’s feet; and she, beautiful-browed Sumana, bowed then 
before her parents-in-law. And they were both welcomed then 

;j with blessings by them both. And a great festival was held 
in Kaiishyanta’s city itself, since Dama bad both mamed a 

4 wife and arrived from the city of the king of Dasarna. On hear- 
ing that he was thus connected hy marriage witli the . lord of 
Uasarna and that the kings were defeated, king Narishyanta 

j rejoiced with his son. And Dama, son of the great king> 
sported with Sumana amidst choice gardens and woodland 
spots, in palaces and on the summits of hills. 

() Js’^ow after a long time Sumana, daughter of the king of 

7 Dasari.ia, while sporting with Dama conceived a child. And 
king Naiishyanta, who had enjoyed enjoyments as lord of the 
eai'tli, reached his declining years, and anointing Dama to the 

H kingdom departed to the forest ; and his wife Indra-sena also 
went as a female ascetic. He dwelt there according to the 
ordinance of vana-prasthas-t 

Sankrandana’s son Vapush-mat, king of the Southern region, 
most evil in conduct, went to the forest to kill deer, with a small 

10 body of followers. He saw Narishyanta as an ascetic dirty 
and mud-covered, and his wife Indi’a-sena most exti’emely 

11 weakened by austerities, and asked, — “Who art thou, a brdh- 
luan, or a forest-wandering kshatriya, or a vai6ya who has 

1- reached the vana-prastha stage Tell me! Ihe king, 
being under a rule of silence, gave him no answer at all then : 
and Indra-sena told him all that truly. 

Markai]i(.ieya spoke : 

1'^ And on knowing that that Narishyanta was his enemy’ s 
* Prai^amya sa is the reading, but. pran^anima would be better, 
t For vd^prastha read vdnaprastha. , 

+ For vdtfaprastham vQSkd'vdmpraslhyam ^ 



m 


CANTO CXXXIV. 


fathw, VapuBh-mat exclaiming ‘‘I have got him!” both 

14 seized him angrily by his matted locks and, while Indra-sena 
bewailed “ Alas ! Alas ! ” with sobbing voice, drew forth his 
sword angiily and spoke this word, — 

15 “ I will seize the father of that Dama, who defeated me in 
battle and who carried Surnana off from me ; let Dama protect 

16 him ! I will kill the father of that evil-minded man, who cast 
off all the princes that had assembled for the maiden’s saka 

17 Let that Daina, who evil-souled naturally domineers in battles, 
prevent it ; such as I am here, 1 kill that foe’s father. ’ 

Markaodeya spoke : 

18 So saying that king Vapush-mat, evil in conduct, cut off 

19 his head also, while Indra-send cried out. The muni folk and 
other forest-dwellers then said to him, “Shame! Shame!'’ 
And after looking at him he, Vapnsh-matj went from the 
forest to his own city. 

20 When that Vapush-mat had gone, she, Indra-sena, sighing 
deeply despatched a ^ddra ascetic to her son’s presence, 
saying,— 

21 “ Go thou quickly and tell my son Dama my word. Thou 
verily knowest what tidings of my husband are told hei’e; 

22 nevertheless thou must tell my son, what I say in my veiy sow 
affliction after having seen such an outrage* as this fallen on 

23 the king ‘ Thou art king, appointed by my lord— a protector 
of the four stages of life. Is it fit that thou dost not safeguard 
the ascetics ?t My lord Narishyanta was engaged in the 
austerities of an ascetic ; and there is no such lord for m who 

25 bewail, while thou art such a lord.J Vapush-mat dragg 
tim by the hair with violence and then killed him for no fau t , 

26 thus thy king has attained to glory. In these circumstances 


• Longhand; this word in.the feminine gender is not in the diotioiuury. It 

occurs again in verses 33 and 86. .... read 

t For inadi-hharttddhikfito read mad-hhartradhiJcfito f for kt yu 
kifh yuktafk ; and for yan nirihshaai read yan na ralishasi, as in the 

edition. .-gteid 

J This is according to the comment., with the Poona reading na ^ 

of nd^ti. 



VArt’S&4lAt MtJUDEfeEl) NAklsUtAKtA. 


677 


do thou that whereby nghteousnesa may not be violated — bo do 

7 thou ! I must not* * * § say more than this, for I am an ascetic. Arid 
tliy father was an aged ascetic unvitiated by any offence. Do 
thou determine what should be done to that man who killed him. 

8 Thou hast heroic ministers who can expound the meaning of all 
the scriptures. Consider with them and do what ought to be 

19 done in these ciroumstances. We ascetics have no authoiity 
in this matter, 0 king. “ Do thou this ” — “ do thou so ’’ — 
0 such is a king’s speech. f As Viduratha’sJ father was slain 
by the Yavana, so has this king, the father of thee, my son, 
ll been slam ; thereby thy family has been destroyed. The father 
of the Asura king Jambha was bitten by Nagas, and that 
king also destroyed the N'igas who inhabited the whole of 
Patiila. Par^^ara,§ when lie heard that his father S'akti|| 
had been smitten by a Rakshasa, cast the whole luce of 
13 Rukshasas into the lire. Moreover a kshatriya cannot verily 
endure the outrage which any other person makes against 
his lineage ; how much less tcill he endure the murder of his 
U fatlier ? It is not this thy father who is slain, it is not on him 
that the weapon has been made to fall ; it is thou who hast been 
slain hero I <|^om, it is on thee that the weapon has been made 
15 to fall. Who indeed feare this foe, that has laid his weapon 

• For du naiva r«ad <fa?'a na as in the Poona edition. 

t Tlie Poona edition reads hhiHyo *'pi hhashitutn for bhupati’bhdshitatn, Wo 
[lacctjcs liovo no authority hero, 0 king, to sny thus “ Do thou this,” or oven 
further “ Do thou so.” ’ 

X This may be the Viduratha mentioned above in canto cxvl, verse 10. 
There were other kings of tho same name, but all later in time, and it does 
not appear any of them were killed by a Yavana ; as Viduratha son of Kuril, of 
tho Pauruva race (Maha-Bb., A^di-p. xcv. 3791*6, S'anti-p. xlix. 1790*97, and 
Hari-V., xxxii. 1816), Viduratha son of Bhajamana (Hari*V., xxxix. 2032, and 
Matsya Pur. xliv. 77), and another later Viduratha (UnriW., xoii. 6016*8, and 
xeix. 0493*6604). 

§ ParWara was a famous riahi, son of Saktri or ffakti, see canto cxxxiii, 
verso 7. He was father by Satya-vati of Krishna DvaipAyana (Mahi-Bh., 
^di p. \x. 2209, xov. 8801*2, and gTariti-p. ccoli). But he is wholly out of time 
ht this story. • 

' i For pitari ShJetau read pitaram S’aktim as in the Poona edition. • 



CANTO CXXXV. 


'678 


on simple forest-dwellers; let him not fear thee, iny son, ks ki] 
^^6 or let him fear thee* Since this outrage has been direct 
against thee, do thou take thorough measures therefore agair 
this Vapush-mat with his dependants, kinsmen and friends.’ 

Markan^eya spoke : 

37 Dismissing him, Indra-dasa, to whom this message had be 
communicated, the noble-spirited lady embracing her Ion 
body entered the funeral pyre. 


Canto CXXXV.f 

Damais exploits. 

iJdma heivails his father's death and vows vengeance against i 
murderer* 

Markandeya spoke : + 

1 At the tidings of his father’s death declared by that asccti 
Dama blazed oat with exceeding wrath, as fire’ is intensifiei 

2 with clarified butter. Now that steadfast king burning m 

the fire of wrath, 0 great muni, crushed his hands togetli 
and spoke out this speech ; — ^ 

3 “ Like a master-less wretch my dear father has been slaug 
tered, while I his son actually live, by a very cruel 7 aa« who Ii 

4 overwhelmed my family. Let not people utter the calumnj 
that I, such as I am, condone this by reason of impotence. I {i 
in authority to quell the umnily and to protect the well-behave 

5 My father has been slain even by him— seeing that, my enemii 

* This is the Poona and Bombay reading, putrasya md hihhetu for vipras] 
mdrite tu ; but both seem corrupt, 

t Canto cxxxvi in the Calcutta edition. 

J The Bombay and Poona editions make the story more precise by inser 
ing a verse here— “ That ^udra ascetic ns commanded by ludra-scns wei 
and relates to Dama his father’s death as narrated above.” 

§ For samdkhydtam badham road samdkhydte hadhe as in the Poo® 
edition* 

l)For read uddhataff, as in the Poona edition. 

IF For nydya’Vddo jane tasydpy read ndpavddo janeua sydd as in the Foo«i 
editioA. 



DAMA VOWKD VENGEANCE AGAINST VAPnSH-HAT. 679 

live* What JS tho. tfuai then of this much lamentation ? 

6 And why again the cry, ‘ Alas ! dear father ! ’ ? What should 
be done by lamentation heie, that I, such as I am, will Ao 
here. When I give no gratification to my sire with the blood 
that spurts from that Vapush-mat’s body, then I will enter the 

7 fire ! If no water-oblation Ik made to my dear slain father with 
the blood of that hmg in fight, t and if no feast be given duly 
to twice-born brdhmans with flesh, then I will enter the fire ! 

8 If those who are named Asm-as, gods, Yakslias, Gandharvas, 
Vulyadhai'as, and Siddbas give him assistance, even them also 
1, such as I am, possessed with fury will reduce to ashes with 

!» multitudes of weapons. 1 will kill in battle that king of tho 
Southein country, who is cruel, very uniighteousj; and un- 
worthy of pi-aise, and I will then enjoy the whole earth also; 

10 or failing to kill him 1 will enter the fire. 1 will forthwith 
slay him, most evil-minded, who slaughtered an old man 
among the asootics,§ who dwells in the forest, is greatly 
agitated at peaceful words.|| accompanied as he is by all his 
kinsmen, friends, and army of foot-soldiere, elephants and 

11 cavalry. Let all the assembled bands of my gods see the 

• The Poona cditiom reads Pitnram (fiipi iiiAatam drish/va jivaty a-sattamab, 
“and seeing my father slain, tho evil man lives/* 
t Or read sahkliye *vinipdtitasya, “ to my dear father, who was slain not in 
battle, witli that king’s blood ” ? Tho Bombay and Poona editions omit tho 
aecniid quarter-verse and read as tho third quarter-verse pitus tanya 6a 

i^nda-ddnam^ “ Let me with his blood make the water-oblation, and with hia 
Kosh a Jittiug feast to bi'ahmans and tho oblation of tho funeral cako to that 
tathiT of mine ; if not, then I will enter tho fire ! ” Tasya in the first quarter- 
verso may refer to pituh, but by position tasya indmsena corresponds to 
f<id-6lio7iitena ; the result is extraordinary, but see verses 34 to 36 on page 
below. 

+ The Poona edition roads nishfhuram for nil^»£uramj and the comment, 
explains d^dhdrmikam as atyantam a-dhdrmilcam. 

§ For tdpaia-vriddha-inauninam the Bombay and Poona editions road 
^^pusa-vtiddha-ghdUfiam ; but both violate the metre. Read tdpasa^vriddha- 
yhdtaik 

11 The Poona edition reads the second quarter- verse thus — lana-sthagam 
^ddhu^vidhim vidagdhamf “ a forest-rogue, observing good ordinances, 
cunning j’* hut Mhu-vydtiifh is erroneous. The Bombay reading is similar. 



680 


CANTO CXXXVt. 


destruction that I, such as I uni, will verily make, taking my 
bow, armed with a sword, and mounted in my chariot, 
12 meeting my enemy’s might. Whoever shall be his comrade 
to-day when he comes to battle with me again, I am prepared, 
with my two arms as my soldiers, speedily to destroy his family 
l.S utterly.* If in this battle the king of the gods with 
thunderbolt in hand, and the lord of the pityis too raising hie 
terrible soeptre wrathfully, and the loi-d of wealth, Vampa and 
the Sun strive to safeguard him, I will nevertheless slaughter 
14 him with multitudes of choice sharp arrows. May the 
vultures be satisfied this day with the flesh and blood of that 
man, by whom was killed, while I the son am powerful, my dear 
father, whose mind was subdued, who was without fault, who 
dwelt in a small spot in the forest,t who ate only fruits that 
had fallcM, who was friendly to all beings !” 


Canto CXXXVI. 


Duma’s exploits-The slaying of Vapnsh-mat.X 

DamacmM his ministers ^ 

and Vupush.mat met mth their armies, and he hlkd Vapush-wd 

in fight-He celebrated his father's obsequies mth Vapush-mats 

fieih and Uood. 

^ MArkandeya spoke : 

1 When Narishyanta’s son Dama uttered this vow, his eyes 
rolled with anger and passion, while he 

2 his hand. DiicUiming “Alas! I am stricken!” he kepth. 

■ father in mind and reproached Fate ; and he addressed 

those ministers ; lie brought the family priest there. 

. For toMi-o read tm^u a. ta the Poona edition, or to^va as » 

iThi. and the next oantoe are the ending given in , 

eaLs. The Oalentta ^ 

printed at the end. This ending »a print ed u “ ^ 4,^ i« th*. 

tlon. but the text there is very 'iuoorrsot; and I h ^ 

tor.;er ediUons. noting only snob variation, a. appear worthy of 



DAMANS expedition AGAINST VAPUSH-MAT. 6^11 

Dama spoke : 

3 Tell me what should be done in this matter, now that my 
dear father has reached the gods’ abode. Ye, sirs, have heard 

4 what that sudra ascetic has said. That king was aged, an 
ascetic, engaged in the vana-prastha’s vow% observing the rule 
of silence, unarmed and dwelling with my mother Indra-sena. 

5 She who was associated with him told the exact account to 
Vapush-mat. Thereupon the evil-souled foe, drawing his 
scymitar and seizing my father's matted locks with his left hand, 

b killed the world s master as if he were a masterless churl. 
And my mother, having actually commissioned me, was utter- 

7 ing the word “ Shame ! ” and, catling me feeble in lot and void 
of good fortune, has entered the fire. Embracing.him, Narisli- 

8 yanta, she has departed to the abode of the tliirty gods. I 
being such will now do what my mother has said. And let 
my army composed of elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry 

!l be ari'anged. If I drive not away the enmity against my 
father, if T kill not my father’s murderer and comply not witli 
my mother’s word, how can I endure to live here ? 

Markandeya spoke : 

h) The ministers hearing his speech exclaimed “ Alas ! Alas ! ” 
and did accordingly therefore, while distraught in mind. Ac- 
11 companied by his dependants, army, and chariots, and by his 
retinue, they, placing king Dama at their head and taking 
the blessings of the brahman family priest who knew the 
1- three divisions of time, went forth. Breathing hard like the 
Serpent king, ‘Dama advanced against Vapush-mat, while 
slaying the wardens on his boundaries and other neighbouring 
princes, and hastening* towards the southei'ii region. 

1-^ Seeing him approaching, Vapush-mat was filled with pa- 
tience ;t and Saiikrandana’s son Vapush-mat recognized Dama, 
who had arrived attended by his retinue, by his ministers, and 
by his dependants. With unwavering mind he directed his 
armies ; and issuing from his city he despatched a messenger to 

* Tvargn of the Calcutta Appendix is better than tvar4. 

t ^arsha^pHritaJu. This is hardly appropriate, unless it means " was filled 
'^ith caution.’* ' • 

86 



CAliTO OXXXYI. 


15 a?wounctf,— “Come tbott (Sn faoi^ qaiokly! Narishyanta with 
hk wife awaits thee ! O thou of kshatriya caste, approach near 

'1ft met These sharp airows discharged by my arm, which are 
thirsting, shall pierce thy body in battle and drink thy 
blood/^ 

17 Bnt Dama, on hearing all that speech from the messenger, 
went on hastily, remembering his previonsly uttered vow, 

18 ^ breathing hard like a serpent. And the man who boasted of 

his army* was summoned to battle. And then there was an 
exceedingly fierce combat between Dama and Vapush-mat. 

19 And the armies fought, both chariot-rider against chariot-rider, 
elephant-rider against elephant-rider, f horseman against 
horseman, 0 brahman fishi. That battle was tumultuous, 

20 while all the gods, Siddhas, Gandharvas, and Rdkshasas looked 
on. The earth quaked, 0 brahman, as Dama fought in that 

21 battle. There was no elephant, no chariot-rider, no liorse 
which could endure his arrows. Next Vapush-mat’s general 

22 fought with Dama, and Dama pierced him deeply in the heart 
with an an’ow at close-quarters. When he fell, his army 
verily was seized with a panic to flee* 

23 Then spoke Dama, tamer of his foes, to master thus,— 
“ Where goest thou, wicked one, after having slaughtered my 

24 father, who was an ascetic and weapon-less and practising 
austeritiee ? Thou art a kshatriya ; stay thou ! ” Then stay- 
ing back be, Vapush-mat, attended by his younger brother 

25 fought with Dama. Mounted in his chariot he fought in com- 
pany with his sons, relations, and kinsmen. With the ari-ows 
discharged ftjom his bow the regions of the sky were then 

26 pervaded, J and he filled Dama and his chariot with multitudes 
of arrows quickly. And thereupon Dama in wrath excited by 

27 hia lathw’s murder split the arrows discharged by them § 

• Pumdn send-vihatthanah ; bnt Vapushmdn sainya-katthenafy is suggested ft* 

bettet', And Vapush-mat who boasted erf his army was summoned tobsttc. 

' f Ndgindi this meaning is not in the Diotionarj. 

J For the first tatojk, twrc woiold be better. 

tharMi or iiftMa m* »iotH *« 

admissible- 



dama’s vengeanog on vapdsh-mat. M8 

pierced them also with other da-yvtcs. In that #4y hronght 
IS down to Tama s abode the seven sons, the relations and kins* * * § 
men and friends * each with a single arrow, 0 dvija. 

!9 And Vapush-mat. after his sons and kinsmen had been killed, 

mounted in a chariot fought wi^athfully with him in battle 
with serpent-like arrows. t And Dama split those his an‘ 0 W 8 , 
oO 0 great muni.!^ And those two fought together, being ex- 
asperated, wishing to conquer each other, each one’s bow being 
quickly split by the impetus of the other’s arrows. They both, 

81 great in strength, grasping their swords, made play. § Dama, 
reflecting for a moment on the king his father who had been 

82 killed in the forest, || seized Vapush^ntat by the hair and attacked 
him and felled him to the earth ; and with his foot on his neck, 

88 raising his arm he exclaimed, — “ Let all the gods^ men, Ser- 
pents and birds see the heart also of Vapush-mat, i^ho is of 
84 kshatriya caste, split open ! ” And so saying Dama tore open 
his heart also, and desirous of drinkingif was forbidden bjr the 
gods from tasting the blood. 

35 Then he offered the water-oblation to his dear father with 
the very blood. Having discharged his debt to his father he 

86 returned to his own house. And with Vapush-mfct’s flesh he 
offered the cakes to his father, he feasted the brilhmans who 
were sprung from families of R^kshasas.** 

87 Such verily were the kings born of the Solar Race. Others 
also were of fine intellect, heroic, sacrificers, learned in right- 

88 eousnesB, deeply versed in the Vedanta. And I am not able to 

* Mitrdn ; the masculine with this meaning is unusual, 
t The Calcutta Appendix reads sa rathi vihudhopama^, “ He, riding in his 
chariot, resembled a god ’’—which probably would refer to Dama. 

tC?a mahdfnune, a mere expletive. The Oaleutta Appendix reads pratyn* 

Wc'a ha. 

§ Or « made feints.” The Calcutta Appendix reads yrihita-kha^gam udya- 
m dikrt^ati VapwshmUti, “ While Vapush-mat raising the sword in his grasp 
vf-s making play,” or ** making a feint,” Danaa, Ac. 

II The Calcutca Appendix reads jhdtvd pitaraih da Bthitaih V(tit.9k 
If The Calcutta Appendix reads ivdtta’kdmad for pdtarlMmaf. 

An extraordinary statoment. 



684 CANTO CXXXVIT. 

mention them fully.* By listening to their exploits a man k 
delivered from sins. 


Canto CXXXVII. 

Conclusion, 

The Birds close here the long discourse delivered hy Mdrkandeya, ami 
Jaimini thanks them and departs. 

The Birds spoke : 

1 Having spoken thus, 0 Jaimineya,t the great maiii Mar- 
ka^^deya let the muni Kraush^uki depart, and performed tlie 

2 mid-day ceremony. From him we also have heard what we 
have declared to thee, 0 great muni. For this was perfected 
by Him who is without beginning. J Spoken formerly by the 

8 Self-existent One to the muni Markan^eya was this which ^^e 
have uttered to thee. It is sacred, pure, and grants length of life 
it bestows righteousness, love, wealth and filial emancipation 

4 from existence; it delivers immediately from all sin those tnIio 
read it, those who hear it. 

5 And the very four questions indeed, which thou didst put to 
us at the veiy first — the conversation between the father and son, 
and the creation by the Self-existent One, and the administra- 

G tiona § of the Manus, and the exploits of the kings, 0 muni, 
this we have declared to thee. What now dost thou wish to 
hear ? After hearing or reading || all these matters in assem- 

* Dama’s descendants are given in the Vislir^u Par, IV. i. His son was 
Rajya-vardhana, who is the subject of cantos cix and cx, above. 

tHo and the Birds reappear from canto xlv. The text is Jaimincymh 
“ Having spoken thus to Jaimineya j but the Birds have been relating to 
Jaimini what Markan^eya had before told to Kraushtuki, and this reading i* 
unsuitable unless Jaimineya be taken as Kraush^akPs patronymic; and that 
it cannot bo, for Kraushtuki’s patronymic is said to have been Bhdguri, see 
pp. 430 and 446. I have ventured therefore to road Jaimineya instead. 

X Anddi-siddham. The Calcutta Appendix reads ai^imd’Siddham) “ 
in minuteness.” 

§ Sthiti ; or “ positions.” , 

II 'Bhe Calcutta reading j)a(httvd appears preferable to pafhate. 



685 


LIST OF THE EIGHTIEN PURANAS. 

7 blios, a man discai'ding all sins may reach absorption into 
Brahman at the end.* * * § 

Theret are eighteen Puranas which the Forefather spoke. 

S 1^0 w the seventh of them is to be known as the very famous 
Markaijdeya Furdna.X They are the Brihma, the Padma, and 

9 the Vaishnava, the Saiva and the Bhagavata, and also the Nara- 
diya besides, and the M^rkandleya as seventh, the ^gneya which 
was declared the eighth, and the Bhavishya ninth, the Brahma- 

10 vaivarta tenth, the Lainga known as the eleventh, Varaha do- 
ll dared the twelfth, the Skanda next as thirteenth, and the 

Vamana fourteenth, and the Kaurma fifteenth, and the Matsya, 
and the Garuda and next the Brahmanda* 

U He who may read the titles of the eighteen Puranas, tvho 
repeats § them at the three periods of the day continually, 
may obtain the result of a horse-sacrifice. 

13 Both creation and secondary creation, genealogy and the 
manvantaras and the exploits in the genealogies constitute a 
Piu’ana with the five characteristics. || 

1 1 This Parana which contains the four questions is indeed of 
the highest quality. Now when it is heard, sin committed in 

15 hundreds of ten millions of ages perishes. Brahmanicide and 
other sins, and other deeds that are vile, all those pei ish there- 
10 fcy, like grass smitten by the blast. The merit that is gained 
by making gifts at Pushkaralf accrues from hearing this 
Tnrdna; and a man attains to a benefit superior to all the Vedas 
17 by completely acquiring this. A man should worship him who 
may cause it to be heard, as he worships the divine Fore- 

* The Calcutta Appendix here introduces Jaimini's reply which is at page 
688 ; and puts what follows here regarding the Purd^as as a soparate pro- 
nouncement by Brahma. 

t The Calcutta Appendix puts all that follows down to verse 30, and also 
the concluding two verses, into the mouth of Brahms, and plsces it at the 
veiy end. 

+ This sentence is omitted from the Calcutta Appendix, 

§ For ^apato read japate, 

11 This verse and the next are not in the Calcutta Appendix, 

H See p. 306, note |(. 



CAKTO GXXXVIL 


father, *with perfumes and flowers and with gifts o/i«lothing 

18 and with gratifications to brahmans. And kings should give 
according to their ability villages and other lands and car- 
riages.f After hearing all this Purdpa, which is augmented 
with the objects of the Veda and which is the sole abode of 
the Dharma-^dstras, a man may obtain every object.J After 

19 hearing the entire Purdoa, let a wise man do full reverence to 
yydsaior the sake of the benefits of righteousness, wealth, love 
and final emancipation from existence as therein declared. Let 

20 him give his spiritual preceptor a cow, accompanied with gold, 

5 clothing and ornaments. In order to gain the benefits that come 

from hearing it let him gratify his spiritual preceptor with gifts. 

21 He who, without paying reverence to the man who reads 
the Pur&na out, hears a single verse, acquires no merit ; verily 

22 he is known as a Scripture-thief. § Not him do the gods 
gladden, nor the Pitfis, with sons ; and they desire not || the 
^raddha given hy him nor the benefit gained by bathing at 

23 sacred places of pilgrimage. He incurs the censure of a Scrip- 
ture-thief in an assembly of good men. Wise men must not 

24 listen to this scripture witli contempt; but when this noble 

scripture is coniipmned as it is being read by sages, T the offender 
becomes dumb ; he is born as a fool in seven births. 

25 Now he, who after hearing this seventh Purd^a may 
further do reverence to it, being delivered from all sin verily 

26 purifies his own family. The purified man goes without doubt 
to Vishiju’s eternal world ; never shall he falling therefrom 

27 become a man again,** By the very hearing of this Puraaa 
a man may obtain supreme union with the universal soul. 

* The Calcutta Appendix reads irAyeta <piijaye6 rfhdfitraw, “ let him hear 

and reverence this Sdstra.’* 

t The Calcutta Appendix reads instead— “ And he should give accor mg 

to his ability royal carriages and other vehicles.*’ 

X This verso and the next two are not in the Calcutta Appendix. 

§ S'dstrardordh. 

11 Ca neSdhcmti of the Calcutta Appendix is better than taths66hanti. 

f Sddhubhifi. , 

** The Calcutta Appendix reads--” Moreover until seven Manus 



687 


ENCOMIUM ON THIS 

28 should be made to ah atheist, to one fallen from 
his caste, to, a oontemher of' the Vedas, to one who contemns 
religious preceptors and twice-bom men, or moreover to one 
who has broken his vows, to one who contemns his parents, to 

29 one who contemns the Vedas, S'astras and other scriptures, or 
to one who infringes the rules of good breeding, or indeed to 
one who is passionate towards his caste-folk. To these men 
certainly no gift must be made, even when one’s life is at its 
last gasp. 

:10 If entirely through covetousness or infatuation or fear one 
should read thu Purdna or cause it to be read, he may assured- 
ly go to hell. 

Markande^ spoke : 

31 All this story is characterized by righteousness, and bestows 
heaven and final emancipation from existence. Who hears it 

32 or may read it, his earnest endeavour is achieved ; he is never 
affected by the pain of mental or bodily sickness j he is deli- 
vered from brahmanicide and other sins, there is no doubt 

33 of this. Good men become his kindly * friends, affectionate 
in mind. No enemies nor robbers will ever arise against him. 

3)4 Aspiring to what is ' good, f and eating savoury food, he 
perishes not with famines; nor with sins touching others’ 
wives or others’ property, or with injury to others or with 

35 such like crimes ; and he is continually freed from many pains, 
0 best of dvijas. Success, affluence, memory, peace, good 
fortune, nourishment, and contentment — may each of these 

30 be his continually, who hears this story, 0 brahman ! The 
man who hears the whole of this Markan^eya Puraijia is not 
to be lamented ; nor is he indeed to be lamented who recites 
this poetical work properly, 0 dvija. Endowed with perfec- 
tion that is purified by knowledge of religious devotion, J 
and surrounded even in Svarga and the other worlds by Indra 

he may, after enjoying delights according to his wishes, and after enjoying the 

very earth, attain to supreme anion with the universal soul.” 

* 8u-jana of the Calcutta Appendix is better than svafana. 
t Sad^ai'tho; or perhaps " being in good oiroumstances ” P 
X Or “ possessing pure success in the knowledge of religious devotion** 



688 


CANTO CNXXVIT. 


and other ^ods and other heavenly heings, he is always roRerenced 

37 in Svarga. And after hearing this Purdna, which is replete 
with knowledge and intelligence, being mounted in a choice 
heavenly car he is magnified in Svarga. 

38 And the number of the syllables in the Pura^ has been 
declared by him who is intelligent in exactitude. There are 

39 of verses six thousands and eight hundreds also, tliereto are 
, added eighty-nine verses and eleven — pronounced of yore by 
the wise muni Markandeya. 

Jaimini spoke : 

40 In India there was not that which burst asunder my doubts, 
0 ye tw ice-bom ye, sirs, have accomplished that which no 

41 one else now will do. Ye have attained long life, are good,t 
and are clever in knowledge and intelligence. And thus let 
there be unerring intelligence in the application of the 

42 Sankhya doctrine to the knoivledge of spirit ! Let evil-minded- 
ness that springs from pain wrought by a father’s curse depart 
from you ! After speaking this much the muni went to 
his own hermitage, pondering over the speech uttered by the 
Birds, which was sublimely noble. 

End of the Markandeya Parana. 


* The Calcutta Appendix reads more bluntly, “In India twice-bom 
brahmans have lost the power of bursting asunder perplexities and doubts.” 

+ For santu of the Bombay and Poona editions read santa^f, with the 
Calcutta Appendix, 

J Vyapaitu va^. See pages 13-16. 



KNf) OK THE VUHANA. 


689 


DIFFERENT ENDING 
according to the Calcutta Edition. 
Canto CXXXVI 


Conclusion. 

TJic story of Eaw>a hreaTcs off-^A high encomium is passed upon this 
Purdna, 

Mdrkandeya spoke : 

1 When king Dama had spoken thus, his father’s enemy fled. 
“ My father was an ascetic ; and let any other man practise 
great austerities fearlessly.” Dama said nothing to them when 
he saw them intent on flight. 

Markandeya spoke -.f 

2 All this story is characterized by righteousness, and bestows 
heaven and final emancipation from existence. Who hears 
it &o. 

* Canto cxxxvii in the Calcutta edition. 

t Hero the narrative ends abruptly j and what follows is the same as 
Yorses 31 to 37 on page 687 above. The Purfina ends with them according to 
the Calcutta edition. 


87 



690 


INDBX. 


Note to the Index. 


The system of transliteration followed in this translation is one 
that was in use formerly, yet has not been quite unuorm. The trans- 
literations of Sanskrit words contained in this Index have been re- 
' Vreed and are brought into agreement with the system that is now 
approved by the Asiatic Society of Bengal and the Royal Asiatic 
S^iety. Sanskrit words are printed in the Roman character; all 
other words are put in italics, whether vernacular or Mg ish, Latin 
or Greek, and the spelling of vernacular words is generally that in 

common geographical names is indicated Iry the letters M 

(Madhya-deSa), 0 (Central India), and N., S., E., W-, NE., NW., SE., 
and SW. which explain themselves. 


Abbreviations used* 


ops. Apsaras. 

b. brEhman. 
hd. bird. 

c. country. 
cer. cereal. 

cst. constellation, asterism. 

d. demon (Daitya, DSnava, Asura, 
REksasa). 

dg. deihi-god, cClestial being. 
dt district. 
dyn. dynasty. 

/. family. 

f,d. female demon, 

for. forest. 

gb. goblin. 
gdh, gandharva, 

gr. grass. 

gs. goddess. 

1. hill. 

hb. herb. 
isl, island, 


k. king. 

kst. k^atriya. 

l. lake. 

m. man. 

mt. mountain. 
mts. mountain-range. 

p. people. 

pat. patronymic.^ 
pfn. personification. 
pi. place. 

pr. prince. 
prs. princess. 

ps. person. 

pt. plant. 

q. queen. 

r. river. 
rs. r^i. 

sf. sacrifice. 

t. town, city. , . 

ti. Hrtha, place of pilgnmage. 
tr. tree. 
vj. woman. 





6^1 


INDEX. 


Abhi-jit osL 170. 

AbhTrap. NW, M. 312-314. 

Abhlra jp. S. 334, 362. 

Abhi^aha p. NW P 382. 

AbhisSra c. NW. 382. 

Abhisarl t NW. 882. 

Abilvaka pt: 25. 

Abu mt. W. ^9, 340. 

Acara, see Custom. 

Acridotheres bd. 49, 58. 

Adhaka, -kl pt 244, 245. 

Adhakya p. S. 334. 
Adhama-kairSta p. N. 369, 379. 
A-dharma pfn. 247, 250, 

Adhraraka P p. -E. 824. 

Adi Id. 58. 

Adifci ga. 550-562, 569, 560, 663-565. 
Aditya g, 168, 461, 666, 682, 586. 
Adri d, 426. 

Adrija r. 296. 

AiJgle tr.f see Bilva. 

Aganosma pt., see Malatl. 

Agastya rs. 270, 293, ^1-603, 646, 
_t>46. 

Agastya rs, 603. 

AgeSf the Fov/Tf 32, 218, 224, 226, 
347, 387, 437. 

Agneya p. N. 878. 

Agni g, 10, 23, 152, 247, 249, 270, 
387, 398, 399, 446, 447, 460, 473, 
474, 489, 495, 512, 624, 532, 535, 
539-548, 661, 662, 682, 621. 

Agni rs. 442. 

Agnidhra h. 271-274. 

Agnijya P p. N. 378. 
AgnievSttapitfa, 270, 533. 
Agrahaya^il cat. 356. 

Ahalyft b. w. 22. 

Ahafdcara 190, 217, 220-223. 
Ahicchatra o. M. 353, 378. 
AhicchatrS t. M. 353. 

Ahir p., see Abhlra. 

Ahmadnagar t W. 289. 

Ahuka p. W. 324. 


Aila k. 146. 

Ailika P p. SE. 360. 

Aindra pi. 246» 

Aindra cst 374. 

Air 217, 221, 222. 

Airavata eleph. 474, 494, 559. 
Ai|fkaPp. 1334. 

Am (=Sun) 562, 572. 

Ammt^ha k. 353. 

A^anta h. W. 288. 

Ajjaraa rs. 269. » 

Aiyapa pitfs, 533. 

Alanin p. 0 P 363. 

Akesines r, NW. 291. 

Akriml, village^ 242.. 

Alakananda r. N. 281. 

Alarka h 93-109, 142-145, 148, 
151, 155, 170, 171, 180, 186-190, 
194, 198-202, 207, 210-216. 
Alavu pt. 118, 166. 

AU, ili dg. 407. 

Alimadra«P p. N. 322. 

Allahabad t 310. 

Almond tr. 26. 

Almora t. N. 288, 316. 

Alms 203, 685-687. 

Alstonia tr. 27. 

AiakaP p. NW,375. 

Alw<w dt. M. 288, 307. 

Amalaka tr. 25, 26. 

Amara-kay^aka mt 0. 298, 331, 
334. 

AmarcwaH r, 8. 304. 

Amaravatl t. 8. 337. 

Amb&, see Ambika. 

Am^la t and p. N. 321, 347, 379. 
AmBarl^a k. 462. 

Amba^^ha p. NW. 323, 333, 877- 
380. 

Ambhbdhi d. 262. 

AmbikS gs. 476-482, 487, 488, 494, 
498, 502,507-511, 516. 

Ambuja pt. 29.' 

Ambup5/.d. 26^^ 

Amita gods, 46 
Amitabha k. 4^ 



692 


INDEiX. 


AmitSbha gods^ 464. 

Amla. tr. see Amalaka. 

Amla-vetasa pt. 25. 

Amogha r. NW. 389. 

Amra tr. see Amrataka. 

Amrataka tr. 23. 

Amra- vana /or. W.P 600. 
Amflrtarajas k. 328. 

AraQrtarayas k. 329, 

Anagha rs. 270. 

Anam d. 262. 

Anamitra k. 460. 

Ananda k. and c. 273. 

Ananda k. 451-463. 

Ananda? p. NE. 383. 

AnandinI r. 294* 

Ananta g. 482. 

Ananta (=Sie^), 609. 

An-aranya k, 661. 

Anarta k. 368. 

Anarta c. and p. 289, 340, 344, 362, 
368,371,463. 

Anas hd. 30. 

AnasQya to. 91, 96-99, 249, 269. 
Anayus 146. 

AndhaP n. S. 337. 

Andhaka p, W. 309, 324, 336, 337 . 
Andhaka Ic. 362. 

Andhaka d. 479, 

Andha-tamisra hellt 162. 

Andhra jj. SE. 324, 337, 361, 367. 
Andhravaka p. 324. 

Andropogon gr. 79. 

Auga k» 326. 

Anga p. and c. E. 324-329, 334, 
369, 464, 656. 

Ahga k ? 146. 

Ahga P n. N. 373. 

Ahga-dhrs d. 267, 268, 263. 
Anga-Ioka pi. W. 373. 

AngatakaP jp. W. 373, 

Anger (Krodna), 15, 16, 260. * 
Ahgiras rs, 108, 246, 249, 269, 436, 
462, 539, 626, 653, 664. 

AAgiras demi^godsy 461, 462. 
Ahgirasa/. 688, 663. 

Anibha prs. 627. 

Anlkata p. W. 338. 

Anila fi. 262. 

Animadrajp. N. 322. 

Afijana vnt. NW. 279. 

Ainjatia mi. E. 366. 


AhjanSbha mt. 366. ^ 

' Annadaraka P p. NE. 383. 

Annaja p. C. 344. 

Anser ha. 30, 409, 410. 

Ant, 147, 170, 206, 210. 

Anta^-sil5, -sira r. E P 301. 
Antar-dvlpa p. N. 378. 

Antar-gin dt. N. 326, 828. 
Antar-giri p. E. 325. 

Antargirya p. E. 801, 324, 325. 
Antelope 31, 164, 181. 
Anthocephalus tr. 26. 

Antra-^ila r. E P 301. 

AntyagiraP r. E P 301. 

Aim cer. 165, 244, 246. 

Anugraha, 228, 231. 

Annhrada pr. 146. 

Anumati p/w. 178. 

Anapa c. W. 344, 371. 

Anuradha cst. 169, 370. 
Anuvinda k. 345. 

Apaga r. M. 293. 

Apaga r. NW. 316. 

Apakara d. 267. 

Apana, vital air, 203. 

Apara p. 313, 372. 

Apara-cina p. NE. 319. 
Apara-matsya p. M. 309. 
Apara-nanda r. N. 369, 383. 
Aparanta p. W. 313, 371. 

, Aparantika p. W . 371, 372. 
Aparlta p. NW. 313. 

Apatha p. N. 346. 

Apnuvana rs. 666. 

Apratistha pi. 71, 73. 

Apsaras, 2-8, 24, 68, 78, 236. 3 ' . 
^93, 413, 427, 481, 511^ 538, 

671, 646, 647. 

Apyayani, 70. 

Arachnechthra hd. 80. 

Arayid r. C. 296. 

Aratka c. and p. NW. 311. 
Aravalli mis. 286, 289, 312, 3* . 

340, 349, 369. 

Arbuda mt. W. 289, 340. 
/Arbuda p. W. 340. 

^ Arcot dt. S. 332. 

ArdanaP p. N. 378. 

Ard^ hd. 58. 

Ardeola hd. 69, 86. 
Ardha-h5rl/.d. 266. 

Ardra C8^. 169, 368. ^ lo oft 

Argha, Arghya offering t 1 t 




« 



INDEX. 


693 


97, 166, 161, 162, 423^29, 446, 
ArgigaPp. WP368. [681,633. 

Ari-mardanapr. 143. 

Arista k. see Nabhagari§ta. 
Aristanemi dg. 6. 

Arjuua (KartavTrya) k. 101, 106- 
108, 310, 333, 344, 351, 371, 656. 
Arjuna (Pauc^ava) k. 8, 23, 24, 
316, 322, 359, 363, 379, 384, 629. 
Ai’ka-linga p. M. 308. 

Arrah t. M. 382. 

Arsti§eria k. and rs. 669, 670. 
Artha-karaka k. and c. 273. 
Ariocarpua ir, 26. 

Arum pt. 178. 

Aruya g. 559. 

Aruiia mt. N. 351, 382. 

Aruna d. 518. 

Aruyak^a d. 518. 

Aruyaspada t. N. 392, 395. 
Arundhatl star, 207. 

ArupaPp. C P 344. 

A-rupa/.ci. 267. 

Arvavira rs. 270. 

Arya race, 290. 

Arya, gods, 464. 

Aryaman g. 163, 645, 582. 

A§adha cat. 170, 374, 376. 

Asikni r. NW. 291. 

Asi-loman d. 476, 480 
Asi.patra /or. 64, 71-74, 83. 

Asleaa cat. 169, 861, 

Asmakap. AI. 352. 

Ahitiakap. S. 336. 

A^maka k. 336. 

Asrnaka, p. S. 336. 

Aimak! q. 337. 

Asoka tr. 25, 26, 364. 

Asparagus pt, 165. 

Aspasii p. NW. 374. 

Asrama 148-151, 246. 

Am, 83-85, 209, 236, 265. 
Assakcmip. NW. 374. 

Assam, 382, 411. 

Asta-giri mt 371 . 

Asta-parvata mt. 371. 

Asterisms, 168-170. 

Mrologer, 680, 626, 630, 631. 

Asura d. 20-23, 104, 116, 120, 152, 
‘^01, 232, 233, 236, 328, 383, 416, 
469-484, 494-612, 616-619, 524, 
531, 533, 646, 662, 658, 660, 566. 
’ ^05, 611, 648, 660, 677, 679. 


Agvaka p. NW. 307, 374. 
Asvakalanata p. NW. 374. 
Asva-kcf a p. W P 374. 

A^va-kuta p. M. 307. 

; Asva-mukha p. W. and N. 368, 
378, 381. 

I Asva4aka p. M. 307. 

Aivatara k. 109, 125, 127, 130, 132, 

I 136-139. 

Aivattha tr. 277. 

A^vatthaman b. 46 i. 

AsvinI cat 170, 384. 

Alvins g. 22, 55, 109, 392, 460, 461, 

I 574-576, 626. 

Atavi t. 8. 331. 

Atavya p. S. 334. 

Atharva Veda, 236, 404, 654. 
Atharva p. M. 308. 

Ati-namari rs. 454. 

Ati-ratra 6. 426. 

Atitbi 153. 

Ati-vibhati k. 623. 

Atom 128. 

Atrai r. E. 320. 

Atreya p. N. 320, 347. 

Atreyi r. E. 320. 

Atri rs. 96, 96, 99, 102, 161, 154, 
246, 249, 269, 320, 462, 570, 021. 
Atri p., see Jtreya. 

Atta-khaydika P p. N W. 314. 
Audumbara p. M. P 355. 
Aukhavunap. 8. P 366. 
Auydramasa p. M. P 342. 

Anpadha p. N. 322. 

Aurangabad t W. 288. 

Aiirva rs. 666, 658. 

Auttama, Mann and manvantara, 
271, 419, 426, 429, 432, 436-437, 
649. 

Auttana, see Auttama.^ 
Anttanapadi k. 421. 

Avahana offering, 156. 

Avanta P p. M. 308. 

Avanti r. M. 295. 

Avanti c. M. 295, 333, 340-315, 
363, 371. 

Avantya p. M. 340. 

Avara p. W, 372. 

Avanil r. M. 295. 

Averrhoa ir. 24. 

(k. 625, 628, 631, 
Avikyi } 634-642, 645- 

Av!kyit,*ta (. 654, 658-664. 



tND£l. 


Avlk§it («o»i qf Kuru) pr. 662. 
Aviksita pat 662, 653. 

Aya d. 636. 

Ayah r. NW. 316. 

Ayati gs, 269. 

Ayodhya 1 67, 58. 308, 352,353, 371. 
Ay ur- Veda, 404-406. 

Babhru b, 591. 

Babhru k. 669. 

Babbru (S'iva) g. 515. 

Babhru h. 420. 

Babhravya b. 591. 

Babhravya, h. 598. 

Bactriane c. N. 311. 

Baddm ir, 26. 

Badara ir. 27. 

Ba^avS it NW. 368. 

Ba(}ava r. S. P 368. 

Badava-mukba N. 368, 378, 381. 
Badhua p. N. 378. 

Bag, Bagldf hd. 58, 59. 

Baker a tr. 26. 

Bahlkajj. NW. 311. 313, 318. 
BShlikajp., see Vahlfka. 

Bahu fc, 371. 

B&bubadha N W. 317, 375. 
Bahubhadra «. NW. 317. 

Bdhuda r, M. 291, 354, 383. 

Bahuda r. S. 291. 

Bahu la g. 420. 

Bahyaj5, M,P309, 

Baibhdra h. M. 286. 

Baidyandth h, E. 287, 356. 
Baijndth, see Baidyandth, 

Bairdt t, M. 288, 307. 

Bah hd. 68. 

Bcdcul tr. see Vakula* 

Bala d. 4, 611. 

Pala p. NW..313, 373. 

Bala-oandhu h. 449. 

BSlabhadra jj. NW. 317. 

Bala>deva, see Bala-Bama. 
BSla-graha d. 520, 

Balftte hd. 86. 

Bal&ka pr. 610. 

BalftkSr. O.P300, 301. 

Balaka r. or t. N. 375. 

Balak&^va h. 62S. 

BSlakhilya r?i«, 102, 270, 570. . 
Bala-RSma k, 3, 19, 23, 24, 31. 
Bal&^ya h 623-625. 

Balas$r dt E. 327. 


Bftlhikaj}., 9ee Vlhllln^ 

Bali offering, 161-158, 178, 253. 264 
259-261,265.519. ^ 

Bali k. 146 (325). 

Bali dg. 461, 46o. 

BSlika p. NW. 376. 

Balin k. 627. 

Balin pr. 610. 

BSlin *. 333. 

Ballna k. 329. 

Balkli c. N. 311. 

BSlu-v5hinl r. M. ? 298. 

Balya P2?4 NW. 315. 

Bands r. M. 286, 294. 

Banavdsi t. 8. 364. 

Banda t. M. 359. 

Bandelkhand dt. M. 288, 336, 364 
369. 

Baudhana r. M. P 294. 

Banga see Yahga. 

Banjdnp. 8. 333. 

Bankura dt. E. 327. 

Bannu dt. NW. 372. 

Bansdhard r. SE. 305. 

BantJmwa h. E. 287. 


Banyan ir. 277, 561, 

Baradd hills, W. 289, 

Bardkar r. E. SOI. 

Barbara p. N. 319. 

Bardhwdn t and dL 326, 359. 
Barhifad pitfs, 270, 533. 

Bark clothing, 35, 42, 150, 181. 
Bar% 84, 155, 361, 162, 165, 181, 
203, 240, 244, 245. 

Baroda t. W. 340. 

Barugaza t. W. 339. 

Barvara p. N. 319. 

Bassein t. W. 338. 

Bathan-i h. E..287. 

Bauhinia tr. 27, 166. 

Bean pt. 84. 

Bear, 208. 

Bees, 36, 147 . 

Begun pt 167. 

Bet tr. 25, 425. 


Bela pt. 426. 

BelgoMm t 8. 887. 

Beilary t 8. ^37. 

BeUphul pt, see 

B«nam € 88, 48, 307, 308, 360, M 

371, 664; »e« Varjuasi. 

Sengal, 826, 328, 383. 
Bem’Israelp.yf. 389. 

Ber tr., see Jujube. * 



INPKX. 


m 


Berdf c. 284, 286, 306, 336. 

Besarh t. M. 329. 

Bes-nagdr t. M. 343. 

Beiwa r, M. 296, 343. 

Bhadra p. M. 309. 

Bliadra r. 8. SOS. 

Bhadra r. NE. 388. 

Bhadra q. 450. 

Bhadra-dvipa ial S. P 390 
Bhadra-gaura h. E. 357. 

Bhadraka p. NW. 316. 

Bliadra-kall gs, 479, 488, 515. 
Bhadra-kara p. M. 309. 
Bhadrapada cat. 381. 

Bhadra-somS r. N. 389. 
Bhadra-^re^iya k. 371. 

Bhadrasva k. and c. NE. 274, 276, 
278, 280, 281, 887, 388. 
Bhagadatta k. 8, 9, 319, 828. 
Bhdgalpur t. and dt. E. 325, 326. 
Bhagiratha k. 280, 281, 651. 
BhSgori pat. 436, 445, 684. 
Bhaiamana h. 677. 

Bhallataka tr. 26. 

Bharainl gdh. 646. 

Bhananda-na k. 597-599, 604, 607- 
610. 

BhanukacohraP p. W. 389. 
Bharadvija rs. 31, 310, 320, 435, 
462. 

Bhara^il cat. 170, 384. 

Bharata k. 271, 274. 

Bharata p. M. P 371. 

Bharata c. 274, 278, 280, 282, 283, 
347-349, 387, 688. 

Bharga k. 328. 

Bharga «. E. 328. 

Bharga-ohami dt, E. 328. 
Bhargava/. 310, 327, 368, 686, 660 
652, 656, 660, 663. 


Bhargava Ic. 328. 

Bharuch t. W. 339. 

Bhautya, ]^nu, 271, 639, 546-560. 
Bhava g. 268, 269. 

Bhava r$, 249. 

Bhavacala N. 278. 

BhavinI pra. 645, 647, 658, 669, 664, 
Bhavya 6.272, 278. 

Bhavya tr. 24.* 

Bhavya ooda, 464. 

^hela tr, 25.* ^ 


BMlaa t. M. 295, 343. 

Bhlma (Pavcjava) k. 23, 322, 342, 
359. 

Bhlma (Yadava) k. 352. 

Bhlma k. 627. 

Bhima dg. 268. 

Bhima r. S. 289, 302, 364. 

Bhlma ga. 518. 

Bhlma-rak§i r. S. 302. 

Bhimaratlia, -thT, r. S. 302. 
Bhirukaccha p. W. 339. 

Bhi§ma k. 9, 350, 629. 

Bhl^rnaka k. 336. 

Bhoga-prastha p. N. 319, *77. 
Bhoga-vardhana p. S. 337. 

Bhoja f. 336, 342. 

Bhoiap. W. 342, 371. 

Bhoia-nagara t. NW. P 377. 
Bhoia-prastha P t. NW.P 377. 
Bhojya* p. C. P 342. 

Bhopal dt. 0. 286. 

BhramanI gh. 267, 261, 266. 
Bhramarl ga. 618. 

Bhrgu r«. 19, 81, 63, 219, 224, 246, 
249, 269, 310, 462, 595, 600-602, 
650, 656. 

Bhrgu demi-goda, 461, 462. 
Bhrgu-bharai dt. E. P 328. 
Bhfgu-kaccha p. W. 339, 362. 
Bhriiga-raja hd. 28. 

Bhuhaneawar t. E. 366. 

BhSr 201, 206, 218, 227, 229, 462, 
652. 

Bhilta gb. 46, 47. 

Bhati r«. 689, 640, 646, 648. 
Bhatilaya pi. NW. 380. 
Bhati-yuvaka P. N. 380. 

Bhuvas 206, 227, 261, 652. 

Biaa r. NW. 291, 292, 311, 816, 
318, 321, 347, 382. 

Biaa r. M. 297. 

Bignonia tr. 27. 

Bihar o.m, 825,829,382. 

Bilva tr. 25, 426. 

BXrhhura dt. E* 327. 

Birds, The, 1-6, 9-12, 16-21, 82, 
34-46, 66-66, 216-218, 684, 688. 
Blm wcUef’Uly, 29, 80, 104, 116. 
Boar, 85, 111,' 117.164, m, 181, 
184, 278, 389, 502-604, 514. 
Bodhai).M.809, 

Bodha6.452. 

Bodhi p. M. 309. 

Body, 16, 23, 66-70, 190* 



m 


INDEX. 


Bomhm tr. 82. 

Bormsus tr. 27. 

Brahma g. 6, 17, 20, 69, 61, 76. 95, 
98,99, 112, 127, 129, 168, 172, 
178, 179, 206, 217-220, 223-238, 
244-261, 266, 268, 268, 270, 277, 
34‘7, 887, 449, 453, 469, 466, 470- 
474, 482, 494, 602, 509, 621, 624, 
629, 630, 636, 636, 645, 650-562, 
670, 682, 688, 686. 

Brahma-carin, 149, 160. 

Brabma-datta h. 860. 

Brahma-ksetra dt. 290. 

Brahma-loka 89. 

Brahma-mitra rs. 404. 

Brahman q. 65, 92, 128, 129, 192, 
193, 196,‘ 199-202, 205, 206, 210, 
213, 251, 635, 588, 685; see Su- 
preme Soul. 

Brdhman-lwod, 14, 43, 696. 

Brahmain gs. 502, 604, 609, 613. 

Brahman! r. E. 301. 

Brahman! r. E. 301. 

Brahmanicide, 8, 19, 22,23, 31, 67, 
83, 616, 661, 686, 687. 

Brahman's duties^ 148. 

Brahma-pura mt. N. 383. 

Brahma-puraka p. NE. 382, 383.^ 

Brahma'putra T. NE. 293, 328, 367, 
370, 

Brahmarsi dt, M, 307. 

Brahmavarfca dt. M. 290, 292, 349 
377. 

Brahminy Duch, 30. 

Brahmottara 5^. E. 327. 

Braj dt. M. 309. 

Brihjal pt. 167. 

Broach t. W. 339. 

Buddha, 350. 

Buddhi (Intelligence), 190, 221, 249. 

Buddhist, 354, 362, 367. 

Budha dg. 269, 689, 690. 

BudhOaydt. M. 297, 

Buffalo 47, 166-168, 266. 

Bull, 266, 266. 

Buphus id. 69. 

Burdwdn, see Bct/rdhwdn, 

Burning*ground, 88, 89, 46-48, 61, 
63,177,197,264. 

But pt, 84. 

Buteatr. 28, 

Bytarni f . E. 300, 334. 

Oacc^his hd, 28, 29. 


CahiikaPu. N. 324. 

Caitra k. 416, 466. 

Caitra rs. 442. 

Caitra pr. 452, 453. 

Caitraratha /or. 278, 281. 
Gajanus pt. 246. 

Cakora hd. 28, 29. 

Cakra-muhja mt. N. 278. 
Cakravaka bd. 30 389, 399, 409 
411. 

Cakravarta r. NE. 388. 


Caksu r. N. 323. 

Caksusa, Manu and raanvantara, 
271, 449, 460, 453, 464, 549. 
Caksusmat! r. N. P 293. 

Oalicn't t. S. 331, 338. 

Calimadrap p. N. 322. 
Oalingapatam <. SE. 306. 
Camara d. 476, 479. 

Camel, 166, 209, 235, 268. 

Campa k. 325. 

Carapa t. E. 325. 

Campaka tr. 26, 826, 364. [524. 

Camunda gs. 499, 505, 606, 61-5, 
Ca\ia pt. 84. 

Ganarese p. S. 368. 

Cauda d. 494, 495, 497-601. 
Cauda |)r. 610. 

Ca{4akhara p. NW. 374. 

Caudala caste, 88, 44-47, 63, 54, 59, 
68*, 85, 87, 100, 104, 169, 182, 184, 
257, 259, 266, 267. 

Candana r. M. P 294. 

Caudika qs. 465, 473, 476, 480*482, 
48*7, 48^, 499-511, 616, 521 - 523 . 
Candrabhaga r. NW. 291. 
Candrabhaga r. N. P 291. 
Candra-dvipa isl. S. P 390. 
Candra-kanta mis. N. 389. 
Candra-vatsa p. E. P 367. 
Candrayaya |>ena.noe, 564, 
CandreSvara p. E. 357. 

CSnlkafa ? p.W, 338. 
C&nimadra P p. N. 322. 
Gannibalism 367, 679, 683. 


i88atr.2b. 

tnakha^idika N. 314, 374. 
ma-maudala p. N. 314. 
mau-vatl r. M. 294, 363. 


Oa/rpophaga hd. 28. 
Owrpo^gon pt. 245. 
Carrot pt. 166. 
05ru-dnarman k, 67h 



INDEX. 


697 


'aru-karman h. 670. 

Jarvavlrat rs. 416. 

Jasarca bd., see Cakravaka. 

'Jasiesy duties of, 148-161, 246. 694- 
597. 

Oaf, 49, 86, 184, 191, 450. 

Jataka bd. 29, 87, 394. 
'attakha^idika? N. 314. 

■Jojile, 74, So, 83, 182, 236, 238, 256, 
687, 598. 

laulyaPy. 9.332. 

Jaiirya {TJieft)pfn. 266. 

Oavery r. S. 30a. 

^'edi c. and p. M. 298, 341-314, 360, 
359, 371, 665. 

Uphalandra pL 114. 
fereals, 165, 166, 244. 

Jeylon 284, 288, 362, 366. 367. 
JJbakor bd. 28, 

Jhambal r. M. 286, 296, 346, 361, 
359, 363. 

fhamheli, (Jhameli, see Malati. 
Jhampd, Uliampak, tr., see Cam- 
paka. 

Ihand pt, 8 1, 165. 

Miandas, riS*!-, 665. 
iluitak hcl. see Cataka. 
;haya-8anjna gs, 466-461, 464, 
666—669, 676. 

Jheer pheasant, 29. 

Jhej doah NW. 316, 316. 

Jhenab r. NW. 291, 311, 313-316. 
'hhattisgafh dt. C. 286, 327,311, 
342, 369, 371. 

Viicacole t. SE. 306. 
f hick-pea pt, 84, 246. 

)hina, 319. 

Ihind cer., see Auu. 
fhindpt., see Jira. 

Ihvna rose, see Java. 

Ihingleput dt. S. 332. 

^hitrakut mt. M. 290, 363. 

Mttar r. S. 304, 367. 

Jholera, 619. 

Ihristian, 364, 367. 
fhutia Nagpur dt. 286, 297, 327, 
329, 336, 365. 
libuka, p. N. 378. 

^icerpt,B4,,m. 

"ik^ura d. 476, 478. 

'ina p. NE. 318, 319, 328, 379, 381. 
^inaka cer. 244. 

"intSPr. O.P300. 

'ira-prftvara^a P p. N^. 384. 


Citra cat. 169, 367. 

Citra-ka^a mt. M. 296, 369, 368. 
Citra-kQta r. M. 296. 

Citra-kuiaka p. S. ? 363. 

Oitron tr. 25. 

Citropala, Citrofcpala r. M.P 296. 
Citrus tr. 25. 

Civida p. N. 378. 

Civilization, early, 238-246. 

Civuka p. N. 378. 

Coccystes bd. 29, 87, 3.04. 

Cochin t. and dt. 8W. 303, 367. 
Cock, 147, 166. 184. 

Oocoanut tr, 24, 69. 

Codaka gb. 265. 

CodraPp. S. 332. 

Ooix gr. 246. 

Cola 7c. 331. 

Colap. S. 287, 331,332, 363. 
(hleroon r. S. 303. 

Combat 124, 629, 630, 673. 
iJomorin, cape, S. 285, 331. 
Conj&i^eram t. S. 332, 367. 

Conjugal life, 118, 119, 422. 121, 
130,’ 433, 456. 

Constellations, 168-173. 259, 278. 
348, 349, 355, 368, 361, 367, 370, 
374,376, 381, 384-389, 413, 447. 
635, 626. 

Continents, 272-277, 

Coor<7 dt. 364, 866. 

Cool bd. 31. 

Corpse, 44-50, 183, 181. 

Cosaye r. E. 301, 327. 

Covelouamaa, 16, 16. 

Cranganore t. S. 364. 

Creation, 217-226, 228-248, 268. 
Creator, 10, 20, 47, 50, 51, 137. 
Cri/me, see Sin, 

Crocodile, 238. 

Crocopua bd. 28, 86, 87. 

Crops, care of, 259, 260, 264, 598. 
Crow, 4,7, 72, 76, 86, 86, 147, 208, 
268, 263. 

Cuckoo 6, 7, 29, 86, 87, 147, 394. 
Uuculua bd. 29. 

Cucurbita pt. 118. 

Culika, C^ika p, N. 822, 323. 
CQlikap. W. 374. 

Cillika dyn. 374. 

Cumin, Ovmimm pt. 25. 

Curlew bd.^ 85, 87. 

Custom (AeSra), 2, 107, 170-186, 
199, 251-268. ' 



INDEX. 


Outtack t B. 860. 

Cyavana rg. 219, 288, 810,^68, 600. 
Oynocephalip. 378. 

Oyperus gr. 

Badrma tr. 25. 

Daitya p. and d. 9, 10, 22, 23, 58, 

100- 105, 109, 112-123, 312, 349, 
852, 386, 395, 465, 481, 488, 493- 
511, 514, 515, 518-521, 541, 559, 
56p, 563, 565, 604-608, 641, 669. 

219, 246-249, 269, 259, 
369, 408, 524, 535, 550, 551, 590, 
561. 

Daksi^iS pfn. 247, 248. 

Dak§i\ia Kosala, see Kosala, Dak- 
^i^a. 

Dak§i\iapatha c, S. 331. 

Dalbergia tr. 28. 

Ddlim tr. 25. 

Datna k. 577, 668-689. 

Ddmalipta t., see Tamraliptaka. 
Damaraka P p. NE. 383. 

Damayantl q. 844. 

J)(Mnudd r. E. 301. 

Danava p. and d. 10, 21, 23, 31, 

101- 105, 113-123, 138, 312, 328, 
349, 352, 383, 416, 501-504, 507- 
509, 517, 518, 541, 559, 560, 563, 
565, 581, 605-608, 611, 642, 643, 
648. 

Dancing, 3, 4, 251. 

Dauda pfn. 249. 

Daydaka /or. S. 336. 

Dai4akan. S. 335, 886. 

Da^^aka «. 336. 

Danta k. 442. 

Dantakpf^i d. 257, 262. 
Danta-vakra k. 341'. 

Banvi dgs. 119, 559,641,642. 
Doimdr *). N. 822. 

Daradav). NW. 811, 312, 318-321, 
324, 346, 370, 382; 

Darada k. 311. 

Darbha gr. 161, 162. 

Dord n. NW. 311, 

Dardistdn o. NW. 311, 318, 
Dardnra mt. 8. 287. 

Ddrim, tr. 25. 

Darkness (Tajnasy, see 
Darva, Dirva p. NW* 324> 346, 
372, 383. • ■ 

parradaf f. NB. 888, 


Daryl t. or r. N. 824. 
Darvl-saiikramaiia t\. N. 324. 
Da^amalika^. NW. 317. 
Da^amanika p. NW . 318. 
Dasameya, Dasamlya p. NW. 380. 
Dasdn r. M. 296, 842. 
Datoamaka p. NW. 318. 
Daia-pura, t. M. 863. 

Dalapura p. M. 363. 

Dasapura r p. M. 368. 

Daila-ratha Ic. 464. 

Da^arna c. and p. M, 296, 342, 343, 
359,‘360, 670, 671, 674, 675. 
Da^rna r. M. 296, 298, 342. 
Daseraka, Daseraka p. N. 321, 378. 
Daseraka p. N. 321. 

Dasra q. 460, 575; see Asvins. 
Dasyu 312-314, 317-320, 335, 
516, 629. 

DattStreya rs. 93, 99-109, 187-193, 
198,202, 205, 207,212,213,209. 
Dattoli rs. 269. 

Dattoli rs. 415. 

Dauhitra, animal, 164. 
Daurhrda, Daurhpta demons, 501. 
DavodaP jp. NE. 382. 

Day, 224-227. 

Death g. 47, 51, 207-210, 250; 

Mrtyu. 

Deeg r. N. ! 


Delfd t. 807, 351, 855. 

Deogafh t. E. 356, 

Dephul tr. 25. 

Destiny, 474, 543, 646; see Fate. 
Deva-daru tr, 27. 

Deva-kQ^fl' mts. N. 277, 388. 
Deva-5aila mt, N. 278. 
Devavpdha k. 294, 669. 

Devddr tr. 27. 

Devika r. N, 292. 

DevikS r. S. 292. 

DevikE I P 292. 

Devi-mihStinya, 465-522, 524. 
Dhak tr. 28. .p. 

Dhanafijaya k., see Arjuna (r 
dava). 

Dhani§tb5 cst. 170, 376. 
Dhann^-mat mt. N. 376. 
Dhanvantari gf. 158. .j 

DhRrani (mental Mraction), 
196.‘ 

Dhari^T 2?«. 270. 

Dharaifi^ta t^ • ' 

Pbaritrl 179* 



iNDBt. 


’699 


Pharma g. 9, S2\ 88, 56. 

66-67, 90, 122, 246-249, 462, 625. 
Pharma, see Righteousness > 
Pharma-baddha p. NW: 876. 
Dharma-dvlpa p. W. 360. 
Dharmfiravyay^r. and p. M, 362. 
Dharma-^astra, 2, 19, 83, 39, 686. 
PhSrBvaka/, 462. 

Phataki k, 272. 

Dhatr g. 10, 163, 269. 

Dhatrl gs. -^9. 

Dhaumra demons, 601. 
Dhautamiilaka k. 319. 
Dlienukakata t, S. 887. 

Dheri Shdhan t. NW. 379. 

Dhr§im k. 462. 

k 462, 688. 

Dhrta-rS^^ra k. 346. 

Dhrti-mat k. and c. 273. 

Dhruva pr. 112. 

Dhruva k. and c. 273. 
J)hilmra-locana d. 497, 498. 
Phnmra^va k. 600. 

Dhumravatl w. 269. 

DhQrtaka^. W. 369. 

Dhilta*papS r. M. 291. 

Diospyros, various ireeSf 24-28. 
Dipti-mat rs. 464. 

Dlrghu-grlva p. NW. 374. 
Dlrgha-tarnaa rs. 326. 

Dissolution of the universe, 218, 219, 
224, 227, 229. 

Di§^a, see Nabhagadi^ta. 

Diti gs. 102, 608, 569. * 

Diver bd. 31. 

DivodSsa k. 807, 328, 371, 600. 

Doah 364, 378. 

Dock pi. 26. 

Dog, 44, 46, 49, 73, 74, 84, 86, 163, 
156, 166, 167, 176, 184, 261. 
Dolichos pt. 84, 166. 

Drauiii P rs. 464. 

DranpjwH q. 3, 20, 21, 32, 37 ; see 
Kr§\ia. 

Pravayap. NW.P 368. 

Pravi^a c. and p. S. 367, 370. 
Dr(Jha*dhanvan k. 439. 

Pp^ba-ke^a d. 641, 642, 646. 
Dreams, 207-211, 263. 

Premia b. 1-8, 17, 19 (464>. 

Pro^i rs. 464, 

Proiu-mukha pi. 241. 

Pr^idvatT r. M. 290, 292, 354, 877, 
Prupada k. 3, 19, 860^ 363. 


Dnihyap.lSrW.816. 

Drnhyuife. 316, 669. 

Dubduhi hd. 31. 

Duck, 30. 

Dud-Kosi r. E. 822, 

Dntisaha d. 246-268. 

Dumbur tr. 192. 

Pundubhi k. and c. 273. 

Pundubhi d. 669. 

Dungarpur t. W. 338. 

Durba gr. 262. 

Pur-buddhi k. 360. 

Pur-dhara d. 480. 

Purdura mt. S. 277, 862, 

Purga p. W. 338. 

Purga gs. 484, 485, 490, 496, 608, 

m, 616. 

Purga r. E. P 301. 

Purgala p. W. 338. 

Durgama k. 446, 446. 

Purgama d. 618. 

Purjayanta mt. W. 288. 
Dur-mukha d. 480. 

Dururduda P mt. S. 287. 

Durvasas rs. 2, 5, 99, 100, 269. 
Puryodhana k. 23, 24. 
Dvaitavana/or. M. 320. 

PvEpara age, 224, 226, 387, 888. 
Dv§raka t, W. 24, 289, 340, 349. 
DvaravaW t., see Dv8raka. 

Pve§anl gh. 261. 

Dvipa, doab, 364, 378. 

Dwarka t. W. 340, 

Pyuti-mat rs. 269. 

Dyuti-mat k. 272, 273. 

Dyuti-mat, Manu, 411-416^ 
Pyuti-mat k. 696, 

Earth, The, 218, 24^-245, 271-280, 
462, 474. 

Earth (element), 217, 221, 222. 
Eating, rules of, 170-180. 

Ebony tr. 24. 

IJchiies pt. 27. 

Edolius bd. 28. 

Egg, Mwndane, 217, 222-226, 469, 
521, 650-563, 566. 

Egg-plant, 167. 

Ego, 190, 191, 216. 

Egret bd. 68, 69. 

Ek-cakra i. NW.PS82. 

Eka-cakra U M. 382. 

Ekapada-ka p. NE. 358, 388. 
EkapEdai^ P p. NE. 368. • 



700 - 


INDEX. 


Eka-srAga ml. N. 279. 

Ekek^na p. NW. 374. 

Ekoddis^ a/. 186. 

Ela r. S. 360. 

Elements, 217, 220-222, 231, 657. 

Elephant, 77, 236, 255, 266, 413, 
414, 466, 474, 494, 569. 

Elika p. SE. 360. 

Emancipation from existence, see 
Final emancipation. 

Emhlica tr. 25, 26. 

Energies, goddesses, see ^akti. 

Ephikalites p. N. 380. 

Era^da ? r. C. 296. 

Erannohoas r. M. 295. 

Ervum pt. 165, 

Erythrina tr. 27, 494. 

E^lka p. S. 3,34. 

Ether, 221, 222. 

Eudynamis bd., see Kokila. 

Eugenia tr. 277. 

Emahes bd. 49. 

Fate, 18, 52-54, 70, 73, 83, 123, 127, 
178, 258, 263, 474, 662,680; see 
Destiny, 

Fennel pt. 244. 

Fero9pur t. NW. 312, 321. 

Ficus, trees, 33, 182, 192, 277, 390, 
391. 

Fig, see Ficus. 

Final emancipation from existenee, 
2, 64, 71, 72, 92, 128, 168, 189- 
194, 198-202, 205, 206, 210-216, 
265, 280, 283, 284, 453, 469, 512, 
513, 527, 528, 570, 599, 687. 

Fire {element), 222, 581, 582, 608. 

Fires, sacred, 82, 128, 159, 160, 176, 
178, 206, 391, 397-399. 

Flax pi. 85. 

Flesh-food, 164, 167, 168, 174, 175, 
181, 182, 264, 267, 679, 683. 

Flute,39ii, 417, 571,647. 

Foetus, 62, 69, 70, 258, 259, 263-266. 

Food (various), 180, 181, 

Form (element), 217, 221, 222. 

Forms, Divine; Indra’s, 21 23; 
Yisim’s, 1, 20, 21 ; Brahma’s, 224, 
225, 229. 

Fortress, 240, 241. 

Fowl, domestic, 181, 191. 

Francolinus bd. 86. 

Fruit, wonderful, 389. 

FuHoOfbd. 31. 


Gab tr. 25, 26. 

Gabala p. NW. 314. 

Gabhastimat c. 284. 

Gadhi k. 57, 595. 

Gajabvaya t. andjp. M. 355. 
Ga,]a-pura t. M. 865. 
Ga3a-s5livaya t. M. 355. 

Galava ra. 109, 112-114, 117, 347 
464. 

Galava p. N. 347. 

Gallinula bd. 30. 

Gaya dg. 47. 

Gayapati dyn. 365. 

Gaya-vahya p. E. 365. 

Oandak, see GaydakT. 

Gaydaki r. M. 292, 294, 320. 
Gandhamadana mts. N. 277, 278, 
281, 287, 310, 381, 602, 670. 
Gandhamadana-gamirn ? r. 305. 
Gayda-pranta-rafci gb. 257, 250, 26:5. 
Gandhara c. and p. NW. 314,316, 
318, 321, 380. 

Gandhari, sound, 205. 

Gandhari pt. 166. 

Gandliarika pt. 166. 

Gandharva ag. 55, 68, 78, 103, 113- 
117, 121, 126, 138, 201, 207, 232, 
235, 236, 279, 393-401, 406-408, 
413, 481, 495, 407, 511, 541, 659, 
571, 581, 608, 619, 641, 645 660, 
679, 682. 

Gandharva p. N. 384. 

Gandharva c. 284. 

Gandharva pi. 246. 

Gandharva c. 284. 

Gandharva marriage, 671, 672. 
Gandholika pt. 166. 

Gahga, see Ganges. 

Gangd-rMl, gdng-chil bd. 86. 
Gahga-hrada h M. ? 644. 

Gauffos G, 59, 183, 280-282, 290, 
303, 319, 320, 369, 493, 590. 
Ganjam t. and dt, E. 284, 304, 3:i4- 
337. 

Gantu-prasthaP mt. 288. 
Garbhahan-tr gb. 257, 269, 264. 
Garcinia tr. 28. 

Garga rs. 101-106, 436, 444. 
Garhodl dt. N. 29, 320. 

Garlic, pt, 165. 

Ga^Q hms E. 306. 

Garu(}a, bird, 6, 8, 112, 125. 50*. 
569. 

Gatha, 235, 261. 



iNDteX. 


701 


GSfcrarfl. 270. 
fiauda d, E. 352. 

Gauhdti t. NE. 306, 331. 

Qauf t. E. 326, 352. 

Gaura-griva p. M. 352. 

Gauri ga. 484, 488, 489. 

(Jauri^rd. 627. 

Gautama ra. 22, 462, 612. 

(Gautama b. 446. 

(Javedhuka or. 245. 

Gaya {aon of Vaivasvata) k. 589. 
(Jaya {aon of Amurtarayas) k. 329. 
(Jaya t. M. 165, 168, 297, 306, 330, 
352, 589. 

Gaydl, ht. 164, 590, 592. 

Geography, 271-384, 387-391. 
Gcyaraalava p. E. 328. 

( reyamartliaka p. E. 328. 

(rhaggar r. N. 291. 

Ghdta mta. E. and W. 284, 285. 
Ghogra r. M. 376. 

(ihora-ka ji?. W, 373. 

(jho§a p. NE. 383. 

Gho§a {village), 241, 242. 
(Giosa-Hankhya j?. M. 351, 383. 
GhftacT apa. 4, 571. 

Ghrtaci w, 600. 

(Jhuya-klfaka, inaect, 87. 

Ginger, 166. 

(Gri-bhadra q. 452. 

(Gri-vraja t. NW. 318. 

(Gri-vraia t. E. 330. 

Girjak NW. 3ia 
Giniar h. W. 288, 289. 

Girgek t. E. 330. 

Goa t. .SW. 362 -364. 

Goat, 147, 164, 182, 235, 255. 
Gnhlina, 250 268, 533, 545. 
(fodavarl r. 8. 284, 286, 302, 305, 
310, 336. 

Godha, reptile, 181. 

Godliaiia ml. M. 290. 

(jiolaiigiila p. S. 331, 364. 

Gomal r. NW. 291. 

Gomanfca mt. N. 289. 

Gomanta mt. W. 289, 364. 

Gomanta p. E. 330, 331. 

Gomati r. M. 184, 291, 306, 316, 
623. 

Gomati r. NW. 291. 

Gonarda p. S. 363. 

Gonarddha p. S. 331, 363. 
Gowiwdna c. C. 284, 286, 305. 
Qoodneaa (Sattva), aee Quahliea. 


Ooomti r. M. 291. 

Gooae, 30, 147, 409, 410. 

GopScala mi. M. 289. 

Gopa-giri mt. M. 289. 

Oo-adihp, reptile, 181. 

Gotama ra. 31. 

Gourd pt. 118. 

Govardhana mi. M. 290, 310. 
Govardhana t. W. 310. 

Govinda g. 112; aee Vi§vu. 
Govinda p. E. 331. 

Gracula bd. 49. 

Grahaka gh. 265. 

Gram pt. 84, 165, 244. 

Grama {village), 241, 242. 

Grama {muaic), 131. 

Grama-raga {music), 130. 
Graaalwpper, 147. 

Grebe U. 31. 

Greek, 284, 314. 

Grhastha, 149-156, 186. 
Grfijanaj?^ 165. 

Guava tr. 25. 

Gu(Ja p. M. 352. 

Guejuhap. M, 373. 

Guha g. 502. 

Guha k. 361. 

Guhya dg. 178. 

Guhyaka dg. 370, 461, 530, 576, 
641, 618. ' 

Gujardt c. W. 24, 28, 29. 286, 313, 
338-342, 368, 373. 

Gulaha, Guluha p. M. 373, 
Gurgaiia p. N. 345. 

Gunara p. N W. 373. 

Gurkha p. N. 345. 

Guruha p. W. 373. 

Giiru-nadI r. W. 373, 

Gurung p. N. 346. 

Guru-sthala? p. NW. 373. 
Guru-svaraH p. NW. 373. 
Guru-visala f>r. E. 581. 

Gioalior t. M. 289. 

Haha dg. 571. 

Haidarabdd t. S. 366, 

Haihaya A;. 371. 

Haibaya, p. M., C, and W. 99, 107. 

344, 351, 371. 

Haima mt. N. 322. 

Hairaagirika p. NW. 369. 
Hairaaku^ p. 8E. 360. 
Haimanta-giri mt. N. ? 306. 
HaiminI q. 452. 



702 


INDEX. 


Hdkra ir, N. 291. 

Hdldr dt W. 289. 

Halayudha h 3, 19, 24 ; Bala- 
Bama. 

Hamsa hd, 80. 

Haihgakayana p. N. F 823. 
Hamsa*m5rga N. 323, 345* 
Hamsa-nibha mt. N. 279. 
Hamsa-pada p. N. P 323. 

Hanta, 151, 152, 179. 

HanQ-mat, monkey t 289, 346, 367. 
Hara o. 482, 483. 

Hara-bhQ^ika «. NW. 317. 
Hara-hupa p. NW. 317, 380. 
Hara-mfirtftca NW. 317. 
Hara-pflrika p. NW. 317. 

Hare, 164, 181, 235. 

Hari g. 55, 91, 389, 469-472, 483, 
502, 562. 

Hari gods, 442. 

Harika p. SE. 360. 

Hari-parvata mts. NW. 388. 
Hari^candra k, 32-61. 

Harita k, and c. 273, 

Harlta bd. 28, 86 -, 87. 

Harltaka tr, 26. 

Harit&Sva k. 589. 

Hari-var^a c. N. 345, 890. 
Har^a-vardhana 2 ?* N. 319. 
Hary-a^va k. 371. 

Hasda r. 0. 295, 298. 

Hasta cst, 169, 367. 

Hastin k. 355. 

HastinS-pura j ^ ggj 355 

Hastma-pura j 
Havil^-samstha sf . 128. 
Havir-var^a k. and c. 273, 
Havia-mat rs, 454. 

Hawk, 182, 208, 263. 

Ha/yu p. N, 322, 

Hazdribdgh dt. G. 285, 

Hedysarum pt. Itid, 245. 

Hell, 7, 62, 68 , 71-91, 101, 107, 149, 
280, 485, 622, 661, 662, 687. 
Hema-dharma h 627. 

Hema-giri P wt. W. 369. 
Hema-kilta wits. N. 275-277. 
Hema*k&^a wit. N, 360, 369, 370, 
383. 

Hema-kQta wit. SE. 360. 
Hema-^rnga mt N. 369, 370. 
Hema-taraka P N, 380. 

Hemp pt 245. 

Berodias hd, 69. 


Heron hd. 49, 5^61, 72, 85, 86. 
Heethor.G. 296. 

Hibiscus tr: 558. 

Hima wit.—Himavat 
Himalaya n/Us., see Himavat. 
Hima- vat wits. 5, 28, 29, 127, 132 
249, 275-283, 287, 293, 345, 34?' 
869, 376, 891-396, 475, 488, 489 
494, 518, 598, 655, 669, 670. ’ 

Himsap/w. 250. 
mtiga p. NE. 384. 

Hij*a^i-maya c. N. 390, 391. 
Hii’a\i-vatl r. N. 891. 

Hirapya k. and c. 273. 
Hira\iya-bahu r. M. 295. 
Hiravya-garbha g. 220, 226. 
Hirayya-ka^ipu k. 146. 
Hira\iya-loman rs. 449. 
Hirayya-Srnga mt. N. P 369. 
Hiravya-vSha r. M. 295. 

Hire, see Wages. 

Hog, see Boar. 

Hog-plum tr. 23. 

Homa, 87, 94, 150, 172, 184, 256, 
386. 

Honey-sucker bd. 80. 

Hoopoe hd. 80. 

Horn article, 87. 

Horse, 182, 183, 285, 255, 278, 388, 
457, 460, 567, 573, 575. 
Horse-sacrifice, 41, 89, 616, 685. 
House, ancient, 239-243. 
HradaPp. NW. 316. 

Huhu dg. 571. 

Hun p. 379. 

Huya p. N. 315, 375, 379. 
Hun-des c. NW. 324, 380. 
Hydaspes r. NW. 291. 

Hydraotes r. NW. 291. 

Hymns, see Gatba. 

Ilyphasis r. NW. 291, 292. 


Ichneumon, 210. 

Iksn? r. N. 292. 

Ik^ur. E.P304. 

Ik^udS r. E. 804. 

Ikijuka r. E. 304. 

Ik^nlS r. E, 304. 

Ik^vSku k.m,hbl, 588, 617. 
IksvSku (sow of KfUpa) k. 618. 
527, 587-689. 

lift demugoddess, 559. - 

Ilftvyta k, and c. N. 273, 276, 277, 
890. 



INDRX. 


708 


see M^ha-maya. 

Impuniies, 172-185'.' 

Incarnations^ 23 ; Tndra’s, 12-14, 
23 ; Visvu’s, 21 ; Daily as’ 22, 23. 

India, see Bharata. 

Indigo pU 25. 

Indigofera pt. 25. 

Indivara 29. 

Iiidivara agr. 401-404, 411. 

Indra g. 4, 8-15, 21-23, 38, 40, 50, 
55-57, 68, 75, 90, 97, 102, 109, 
129, 147, 163, 227, 276, 415, 420, 
436, 437, 442, 464, 461, 462, 473, 
474, 496, 502- 505, 609, 512, 514. 
524-526, 632, 635, 645, 519, 550, 
562, 665, 570, 604, 611, 619. 623, 
641, 648, 652-655, 669, 673, 680, 
687. 

Indra-dasa m, 678. 

Indra-dvipa c. 283. 

Indra-prastha t. M. 307, 316, 351, 
355. 

Indra-sena q. 669, 674-678, 681. 

Indus r. 291, 293, 312, 315, 318, 
322, 324, 345, 376, 377, 380. 

Infanticide, 32. 

Ifiguda tr. 26. 

Intelligence (Buddhi), 15, 16, 221, 
231. 

Intoxication, 24, 31, 133, 146, 600, 
602. 

Ir5 demi-gs. 559. 

IrSvatl r.' NW, 291, 316. 

T^ana dg, 268. 

Israel 339. 

Jack tree, 25. 

Jaekal, 46, 47, 53, 67, 85, 183, 208. 

Ja<}a b. 62, 69, 71. 76, 83, 91, 107- 
110, 127, 130-146, 186-190, 211. 

Jagad-dhatrl gs, 127. 

Jagu^a p. N. 322. 

Jahnu k. 303. 

Jaimineya b. 684. 

Jaimini rs. 1-4, 17-21, 38, 62, 217, 
219, 684, 685, 688. 

Jain, 354, 367. 

Jalada k. and o. 273. 

Jala>kukkuta bd. 30. 
t NW. 318. 

Jalamha/r doaib N. 347. 

Jamadagni ra. 810, 462, 59‘>, 656. 

JSmadagnya pat,, see Para^u* 

. BSma. - , 


Jamadagnya dt. W. 338. 

Jambha d. 102, 103, 611, 677. 
Jambu tr. 277, 391. 

Jamba r. N. 278. 

Jambu-dvlpa. 271-283. 

Jambula r. M.P 297. 

Jambu-mat mt. 356. 

.Tamba-mula c. N. 278. 

Jambanada 1. 653. 

Jambaiiada gold, 278. 
.rambv-Rklwa h. E. 356. 

Janaka k. 330. 

Janaka/. 75, 374. 

Janahmr t. N. 330. 

.Tana-foka, 227, 229, 553. 
Janamejaya k, 350. 

Janamojaya k. 379. 

Janardana, 2, 6, 19, 349, 388, 470, 
472 ; see Krs^ja and Vi§uu. 
Janasthana dt\ 302. 

Jangala jp. M. 309. 

Jangalar p. N. 322, 

Jafigha k. 442. 

Janu k. 442. 

Jar and well-rom, 70-'73, 91. 
Jar&sandha k. 341. 

Jaritari b. 8. 

Jartika p, NW. 313. 

JSrudhi mt. N. 277, 279. 

Jasmine pt. 27, 152. 

Jasminum pt. 24r-27, 152, 425, 426. 
Jaf Sdhara f p. S. 864. 

J5ta-hiripT gh. 266, 450, 451. 

' Ja^hara mis. N. 277. 

Jatl pU 27, 152. 

Jausi/. 352. 

JavS tr. 553. 

Jayadratha k. 315. 

Jayanta mis. NW. 388. 

Jew, 339, 364, 367. 

Jhelam r. NW. 291, 315, 318, 324. 
Jlmfita k. and c. 273. 

JTra pt. 25. 

Jlvajlva-ka bd, 28, 87. 

.rivafijiva bd. 28, 87. 

Jfieyamallaka v. E. 328. 

Johila r. 0. 296. 

Jonesia tr. 25, 2^ 364, 

Jugu^ap. N. 3^‘. 

Jujube tr, 27.' 

Jimna r. M. ; see Yamunfl. 

Jumna t. E. 297. 

Jwn^adh t. W. 288. 

2i(6, 



704 


INDEX. 


Jyesfcha cst. 1G9, 374. 

J ycBtha-saman, 169. 

Jyotlratha, -thy 5, r. G. 295, 296. 
Jyotir-dhanuiii 442, 
Jyotisika^. M. 362. 

Jyotis-Tiiat h. 272, 273. 

Kdhal r. NW. 291, 311. 

Kaccha di. W. 303, 340. 

Kaocha di. S. 367. 

Kacphapa dq. 416, 417. 

Kacchika W. 340. 

KacclivTya p. W. 340. 

Kachh di. W. 312, 340, 349, 356. 
Kadam tr., see Kadamba. 
Kadamba ir. 25, 277, 6(55. 
Kadamba q. 446. 

Kadamba bd. 30. 

Kadru demi-gs. 569. 

Kadupt. 118, 166, 

Kdjirisidn c. NW. 818, 321. 
Kahlara pi. 30. 

Kaikaya ^.=Kaikeya. 

Kaikoya A. 317. 

Kaikeya p. NW. 316-318, 345, 377, 
382, 666. 

Kaikeyl q. 76. 

Kailasa mt. N. 6, 132, 277, 279, 
287, 322, 345, 361, 370, m 382, 
402, 669. 

Kairata p, N. 379. 

Kaiskindhya p. 0. 342, 360. 
Kaitabha d. 466, 469-472, 484, 619, 
Kaka-jangha 9^5. 266. 

Kakulalaka SE. 360, 361. 

Kala p. W. 369, 374. 

Kala, see Fate. 

Kala pt. 168. 

Kala d. 480. 

Kalaha gb. 262. 

Kala-haihsa bd. 30. 

Kala-jihva gb. 262. 

Kalajina p.C.? 362. 

Kalaio§aka p. NW. 313. 

KSlaka demonSy 501. 

Kalakeya demons, 501. 

Kalakojfl ti. M, 354. 

Kalako^sa M, 354. 

KalakQta ti. M. P 354. 

Kalama pt. 84. 

Kalanjara M. 854. 

Kala-Saka pt. 164. 

Kala-titar bd. 86. 

Kala1«)yaka|). NW. 312, 313, 


Kalavatl iv. 402, 406-408, 411, 412. 
Kalaya pt. 84. 

Kali d. 257. 

Kali dg. 398-401. 

Kali age, 224, 226, 387, 388. 

Kali gs. 499-609. 

Kalibalaj). W. 338, 369. 

Kiilika gs. 494. 

Kalindam(. N. 461, 576. 

Kaliiidl q. 446. 

Kalihga c. and p. SE. 325-327, 331 
334, 368, 359. 

Kalinga k. .325. 

Kalihga P p. M. 308, 316, 3.54. 
Kalihga ? p. NW. 316. 

Kalihga mi. N. 279. 
Kalihga=Kalihga jp. SE. 
Kalihgaka^. 0. 354. 
Kalihga-nagara t. M. 316. 
Kaliiljar h. M. 364. 

Kali Sindh r. M. 293. 

Kalitaka p. W. 338. 

Kalmasapada k. 336. 

Kalpa (Age), 228, 229, 235-218, 

268 . 

Kalpa (Tree), 239, 243. 

Kalpa P pi. 315. 

Kalwan t. W. 338, 

Kalydni t. S. 289, 833. 

K5ma g. 115, 132, 249. 

Kamala pt. 30. 

Kamarahga ir. 24. 

Kamarupa c. NE. 306, 331, 411, 
577, 681. 

Kama-^astra, 2. 

Kambala k. 125, 130-133. 
Kambala NW. 388. 

Kamboja c. and p. NW. 311, 318, 
319, 350, 368, 371. 

Kambu demons, 501. 
Kambunayaka P p. S. 366. 

KaminI r. NW. 389. 

Kampil t. M. 360, 363. 

Kampilya t. M. 360, 353, 598. 
Kdmrup di. NE. 331. 

Kaihsa k. 362. 

Kaihsavatl P r. E. 301. 
Kanak-champa tr. 27. 

Kanara dt. 8. 364, 

KanauJ t. M. 292, 307. 
KahcanSk^I r. M. 290, 306. 

KSficI t. S. 332, 367. 

Kcmcipuram t. S. 367« , 

Kdnciva/ram t. S. 367. 



INDRX. 


705 


KwioyaP^j. S. 367. 

Kandahar t, NW. 374, 

Kaudhara bd. 6 -fi. 

Kangra dt. NW. 347. 

Kanhar r, C. 297. 

K.anka p. M. 353. 

Jvahka p. N. 353. 

Kanka od. 6, 7. 

Kankella tr. 25. 

Kankola ir. 25. 

Kav^akara P NW. 317. 

Kdnlhdl tr. 25. 

Kanvakaguna ? NW. 375. 
Kanyakubja t. M. 307, 353, 595. 
Kaorhari r. C. 285. 

Kapila rs. 120. 

Kapila mt. N. 279. 

Kapila Jc. and c. 273. 

Kapilendra mt. N, 279. 

Kapili r. NK. 306. 

Kapingala p. M. 354. 

Kapifijala r. 354. 

Kapila r. E. 301, 327. 

Kapotaka. Naga k. 431. 

Karabha r. E, 301. 

Kardd t. S. 362, 

Karabakada t. S. 362. 

Karahakata t. 8. 362. 

Karaha^ka t. 8. 362. 

Karala d. 479. 

Kdramdr mi. NW. 290. 
Karamarda tr. 26. 

Karatubha pt. 165, 
Karambba-baluka pi. 83. 
KarambhakaP p. NW. 388. 
Karamcha tr. 26. 

Kararmtdsa r. M. 297. 

Karamodil r. M. 296. 

Kara^ida hd. 30. 

Karaiajava hd. 30, 

Karandhama k. 622-625, 631-644, 
649 653. 

Karandhama k. 653, 

Karandhama pat. 625. 

Karaskara p. W. 339. 

Karatoya r. NE. 290, 293, 383. 
Karatoya r. C. 290, 294. 

Karatoya r. E. 301. 

Karatoya P r. N. 296. 
Karavira-pura t. W. 289. 

Karbuka p. E. 356. 

Kardama rs. 270, 272. 

Kardo hd. 30. 

Kar-hdfhs bd. 30, 409, 410. 

89 


Karkaia aps. 4. 

Karki r. N. 822. 

Karko^ka/or, S. 362. 

Karkotaka k. 362. 

Karma, doctrine of, 10, 57, 62, 67- 
71, 77, 78, 87-90, 193-233, 282, 
283, 528, 592. 

Karma-nasa r. M. 287, 296. 
Karma-nay aka p. S. 366. 
Karma-noda P r. M. 296. 

Karna k. 368, 369, 629. 
Kar\iapradheya p. W. 368. 
Kariia-pravarana p. N. 346, 369. 
Karnata c. and p. S. 363. 
Karnataka p. S. 363. 

Karna vatl r. JVT. 297. 

Karyikara ir. 27. 

Karnul dt. S. 366. 

KartavTrya k., see Arjuna. 
Karttikcya y. 524, 574. 

Kara mt. 290. 

Karusa k. 341. 

KarQ§a k. 463, 588, 593. 

Karusa ) p. 0. 309, 334, 341, 359, 
Karusa j 366, 463, 593. 
Kariisaka jp.=KarQ§a. 

Karvata c. or t. E. 356. 

Karvuta-ka {town), 241. 
Karvaialana h. E. 356. 

Kasaya ? p. E. 357. 

Kaseruka p. N. 321. 

Ka.serukmat c. 283. 

Ka^erumat, Kaifcrumat c. 283. 
Ka.setii c. 283. 

Kashgar c. N. 318. 

Kasi t. M. {^^Benarea), 187-190, 
207,211 216, 308, 329, 341, 357, 
359, 367, 371, 600. 

Kasi p. M. 357, 367. 

Kl^ika r. 305. 

Ka^inlra c. and j;. NW. 312, 318, 
319, 322, 323, 340, 370, 382. 
Ka§ta-hara^a-parvataP pi. E. 325. 
Kasya p. M. 367. 

Ka^yapa dg. 178, 461, 535, 550-552, 
559-565. 

Kasyapa rs. and/. 462, 465, 612. 
Kanaka i. SE. 360. 

Kataka-sthala p. SE. 360. 
Katamala r. S. 303. 

Kathxi p. NW. 313. 

Kathak^ara n. W. 339. 

Kdihi p. NW. 313. [344, 373. 

Kdthiawdfdt. W. 313, 338,^340, 



706 

KStyayanl gs. 603, 512, 616. 
Kaurafija mi. NE. 388. 

Kaurava pat., race, 6-9, 23, 24. 

360, 878, 567, 

Kauru§a p. S. 366. 

Kau^imba c. M. 307. 

Kaufiftmbi t. M. 307. 

KaiUika pat. 34, 37, 43, 44. 60. 
93, 462. 

Kausika p. NE. 383. 

Kau.^ika r.=Kaulik!. 

KauSikI r. NE. 292, 293, 329, 3 
383, 695. 

KausikI gs. 494. 

Kaveri r\ 285, 290, 303, 364, 366, 
Kaverl q. 446. 

Kavya rs. 442. 

Kawa Kol mis. E. 286. 

Kay ana? r. M. 297. 

Kekaya p.=:Kaikeya. 

Kekaya Ic. 665. 

Kekayi a. 665. 

Ken r. M. 288, 297, 341, 369. 
Keora, shrub, 26. 

Kerala k. 331. 

Kerala p. S. 331, 332. 

Kerala p. C. 841. 

Kerra M. 30. 

Kelava g. 472; see Viauu. 

KetakI pt. 7, 26. 

Ketu mt. 290. 

Ketumala k. and c. NW. 274-278, 
282, 387-389. 

Ketumat k. and c. 273. 

Ketu-virya k. 666. 

KevalaP p. S. 331. 

Khambup. N. 322. 
Khav<}ava-praBtha t. M. 366 
Khdndesh dt. W. 288. 

Khanlnetra k. 619-624. 

Khanitra k. 610-617. 

Khanjana h. NW. 370. 

KJuirakpur hills E, 356. 
Kharapatha c. N. 380. 
KharasigararaSi P p. N. 380. 
Kharmaka h. E. 356. 

Khasp. N. 846. 

Khala p. N. 346, 360, 361, 367, 383. 
Khasap. N. 346, 382. 

Khasa demi-gs. 559. 

Khdsi hills E. 306, 

Kkas-khas gr. 79. 

KhatvEngl r. S. 364. 

Khe^ka (town), 241. 


INDEX. 

Khiohree, 168, 174. 

Khyati w. 249, 269. 

87, Kicaka c. NE. 381. 

Klcaka p. M. 382. 

Kicaka m. 382. 

Kikata c. E. 331, 382. 

Kimpuru§a k. and e. N. 273 274 
61, 282,381,390. ’ ’ 

Kimpurusa k. 416. 

Kimsuka tr. 28. 

King, his duties, 144-148, 157, 656 
^ 667, 666. 

King-crow bd. 28. 

KinkaraPp. N. 381. 

Kinnara p. N. and E. 116, 117 236 
279, 381, 393-397, 647. 

Kirdnti p. N. 322. 

Kirata p. and c., N. and E. 284 
307, 316, 322, 323, 328, 346, 84?’ 
369, 379, 381, 383. 

Kirati p. N. 322. 

Kisadya p. M. 307. 

Kisa§na p. M. 307. 

Kisasta p. M. 307. 

Kiskindhaka p. 0. 342, 360. 
t Ki^kindhya c. S. 342. 

Kistna r. S. 302, 303, 365. 

Kite bd. 86. 

Kiydn r. M. 297. 

Kiyul r. E. 285. 

KochcU t. S. 367. 

Kodagu dt. S. 364. 

Kodo cer. 244'. 

Kodungalur t. S. 364. 

Kohalaka p. N. 380. 

Koil bd., see Kokila. 

Kokanada p. NW. 372, 380. 
Kokanadapf. 30. 

Kokankaua p. NW. 372. 

Kokaraka p. N W. 372, 380. 

Kokila 5d.28,394, 399,407. 

Kol p. C. 364, 365, 466. 

Kola k, 331. 

Kola p. C. 331, 332, 363, 365. 

Kola p. 466. 

Kolagira p. 8- 363, 365. 

Kolagiri dt. S. 364. 

Kolahala mt. 0. 286, 359. 

Kolavana p. W. 338. 

Kolia h. M. 290. 

KolQka,Kolutac. N. 376, 382. 
Kolvagireya p. S. 363. 
Kombunayaka P p. S. 366. 

Konc-bak od, 86, 



twniii. 




Konkan dt. S. 362. 

Konkana p. S. 362. 

Ko\iva,w<. 290. 

Kophen r. NW. 291. 

Kora mt 290. 

Korada^a cer. 244. 

Koravay tribe S. 332. 

Kosala, Dak^iiia or Mah5-, o. C 
299, 308, 384,’ 342, 368, 369, 371. 
Kosala, Uttara, o. M. 294, 308, 342 
362, 363, 368. 

Kosala t M. 67. 

Ko8J.m t. M. 307. 

Kosi r. NE. 292, 329, 383, 596. 
Kovidara tr. 27, 166. 

Krakara hd. 86. ♦ 

Krama pr. 610. 

Kratu ra. 246, 249, 270. 

Kraunca mt. N. 288, 376. 

Kraunca p. N. 376. 

Kraufica-dvTpa 272-275. 
Kraunca-dvipa dt. S. 364. 
Krauficalay a /or. S. 364. 
Krauuca-piira t. S. 364. 

Krauetuki b. 217, and paaaim 224- 
237, 263 -283, 34S, 368, 391, 415- 
419, 436, 463, 650, 552, 587, 663, 
665, 684. 

Kravyada, caste, 182. 

Krodha demi-ga. 669, 

Krpa ra. 464. 

Krpa r. 306. 

Krpavat! pra. 602. 

Krsiia k. and g. 23, 24, 50, 66, 308, 
328, 340, 342, 349-352, 361, 383, 
474. 

Kr^^a mt. N. 279. 

Kr^iia mta. NW. 388. 

Krsya Dvaipayana ra. 677. 

Knua r. S. 290, 302, 366, 366. 
Kr§\ia ga. 490, 494. 

Kr^^ia q. (=Di'aupadI) 3, 19, 23. 
Kr^ua-dvTpa dt. S. 365. 
Kr^ya-ve^a r. 0. 300. 

Krta ^ae, 224, 226, 272, 347, 387, 
388, 437. 

Kftamaia r. S. 303. 

Kptasmara mt. NW. P 290. 
Krtavlrya k. 101, 106. 

Kxti k. 39. 

KrtrakaP p. N. 347. 

Kpttika cat. 169, 366. 

Krtyft r. 306. 

•Krumu r. NW. 298. 


K|am& w. 249, 270. 

K^anti k. 442. 

K^atodara P p. N. 320. 

Ksatriya eaate, 36, 317 -319, 823, 
336, 350, 361, 370, 380, 594r-696, 
671, 672. 

K^afcriya virtv^e, 124, 144, 146, 148, 
188, 212, 240, 442, 591, 696-601, 
627-634, 642, 668, 671, 672, 677. 
KsemadhartaP p. N. 381. 
Ksemadhurti k. 381. 

Ksemaka k. and c. 273. 

K§etra-jna, 220, 223 j see Pnttiaa. 
Ksipra f. W. P 299. 

Ksipra r. 306. 

K^udraka p. M. 377. 

Ksudravi^iaP ^ N. 377. 

K§iipa {son o/ Brahma) k. 617, 618. 
Ksupa {aon of Khanitra) k. 616- 
618. 

Ksuradri li. NW. 370. 

Kibha r. NW. 291. 

Kuca-hara gb. 266. 

Kuhn r.NW.P291. 

Kuhaka p. N. 324. 

Kuhu p. NW. 324. 

Kuhuka? p. N. 324. 

Kujrmbha d. 604-609. 

Knkkuta mt. N. 279. 

Kuksi pra. 272. 

Kul tr. 27. 

Knla^a, Kulati p. NE. 382. 
Kulattha pt. 84, 244, 245. 

Kulattba p. N. 375. 

Kulinda p. N. 316, 317, 828. 
Kulifigai^. N.P316 
Kullra mt. N. 278. 

KulTyan. W. 338. 

Kuhu dt. N. 310, 382. 

Kuluta c. N. 375, 381, 382. 

Kulya p. N. 307. 

Kulya p. S. 331, 332. 

Kulya {aemi-divine race P) 669» 
Kumana p. S. 832. 

Kumaon at. N. 29, 286, 320. 
Kumara k. and c. 273. 

Kumara g. 502-605, 609, 514. 
Kumira dg. 282. 

KumSri r. 0. 285. 

Kumarl r. 305. 

Kumud pt. 

Kumuda mt. W.F 332, 366|445« 
Komnd-yatl r. E. F 300. 

1 Kumud-yatl pra. ^7. 



lifbicx. 


^^08 

KunaPj). NW.P315. 

KubahaP^J. NW.P 376. 

Ku^iapa p. NW. P 376. 

Kuiidala w, 113, 116-118, 120. 
Kundikera ? p. C. ? 371. 

Kuiidina t. C. 336, 673. 

Kunet p. N. 316. 

Kuninda ? jp. N. 316. 

Kunjara h, S. 367. 

Kunjara-dari pi. S. 367. 

Kunt^ila p. S. 308, 337. 

Kuntala p. M. 308. 

Kuntala p, W. P 308. 
Kuntapravarana p. N. 346. 

Kunti od. 6. 

Kiintl q. 23. 

Kuntila dt. M. 308. 

Kunyataladaha P p. NW. 375. 
KQpa r. 306. 

Kupatha p. S. 332. 

Kuram r. NW. 298. 

Kurattee r. E. 294, 383. 

Kurnool dt. S. 290. 

Kurru tribe, S. 332. 

Kuru k. and c. 274, 

Kuru k. 354, 355, 461, 567, 652, 
677. 

Kuru/., see Kaurava. 

Kuru p. M. 308, 309, 333, 345-349, 
353-365, 359, 377. 

Kuru, Uttara {Northern), p. N. 282, 
345, 376, 387-390, 457-460, 567, 
575. 

Kuruba p. S. 332. 

Kuru-iangala dt. M. 309, 354. 
Kuru-Ksetra dt. M. 8, 293, 307, 354, 
378, 666. 

Kurumba p. S. 332. 

Kurumin p. W. 339. 

Kururvahya ? «. M. 354. 
Kuruta_p. N. 382, 383. 

Kuruvinda gr, 246. 

Ku^a k, 352. 

KuiSa k. 328, 330. 

Kusa gr. 31, 67, 118, 161, 268. 
Kusa-dvipa, 272-275. 

Ku^ala k. and c. 273. 

Ku^a-sthall t. (-Dvaraka), 289. 
Ku^avartta b. 612. 

Ku^eruka^J- N. 321. 

Ku^ika rs. 31, 46, 60, 61. 
Ku^maiida gb. 262. 

Ku^ottara k. and c. 273. 

Kusuppia p. S. 332, 366. 


Kat;a-4aila mt. 290. 

Kutch dt. W., see Kachh. 
Kuthapravaraiia p. N. 346, 
Kuvalaya pt. 29. 

Kuvalaya, horse, 109, 113. 
Kuvalaya^va k. 109-127, 133'-142, 
146, 186. 

Kuvera g. 6 -10, 460, 474, 476, 489, 
494, 531, 662, 574, 638, 680. 
Kyah partridge, 86. 


Ladaha p. NW. 375. 

Ladaka?i7. NW. 375. 

Lagenaria, pt. 118. 

Laq-Ooose, 30, 409, 410. 

LaijaPr. M.P 297. 

Lakiica tr. 25. 

Laksmi gs, (=^ri), 101-105, 249, 
256, 269, 416, 419, 515, 522, 638. 
Lalittha p. NW. 374. 

Lamhddi p. S. 333. 

Lambagie p. NW. 321. 

Lambana k. and c. 273. 

Lamghdn dt. NW. 321. 

Lampaka c. NW. 321. 

Lamulini r. E. 305. 


LangalT r. E. ? 305. 
LangulinI r. E. 305. 
Lanius hd. 28. 

Lanka t. S. 346, 362. 

Lapis lazuli, 366. 

Lapwing hd. 394. 

Lasa pr. 670. 

Lacuna 2?^- 165. 

Ldu pt. 118. 

Lauhi h. 357. 

Lauhita/. 357. 

Lauhitya r. NE. 357, 370. 
Lauhitya c. NE. 357. 

Lava k. 362. 

Lavaiia k. 352. 

Laya {inusic), 131. 

Lekha gods, 464. 

Lentil pt. 165. 
Lepa-bnuja^iifs, 157, 158. 

aTii-). 

230. 

Lika d. 266, 267. 

Lila dg. 418 (=NIla). 
Lilajan r. M. 297. 

Lilavatl 627. 
LlUyndha p. W. 334. 
Li/mbu p. N. 322. 



Ind^x. 




Lizard, 181, 210. 

Locust, 8. 

Lohini r. NE. 293. 

Lohita r. NE. 293, 367. 

Lohita fl ? 367. 

Lohita/. 367. 

Lohitya fl. M. 367. 

Lohitya r. NE. 367. 

Loka, see World. 

Lokaloka mis. 275, 

Loka-pala dg. 56, 277. 

Lola k. 439, 441. 

Lolanap. NE. 383. 

Loma-pada k. 325, 464. 

Lopamudra frs. 293. 

Lotus, 1, 2, 18, 24, 29, 30, 97, 147 
256, ko,. 

Lotus Water dilif, pt. 29. 

Love. 2, 16, 115' 119, 170-172, 185, 
188, 198, 216, 264, 430, 467. 
Tjove-god. see Kama. 

Lusatl r. 306, 

Lute, 132, 135, 396, 417, 571, 647. 

Madalasa g. 114, 115, 118-126, 133, 
136-145, 148, 161, 156, 157, 160, 
164, 168-171, 180, 181, 186-188, 
214. 

Madanika fern, d. 7. 

MadayantI q. 336. 

Madgu hd. 31, 85, 86. 

Madguraka p. E. 324. 

Madhu mt. N. 279. 

Madhu k. 352. 

Madhu rs. 164, 

Madhu d. 466, 469-472, 519. 
Madhumatta p. NW. P 375. 
Madlui-pura t. M. 362. 

Modhu-vaiia M. 362. 

Madhya-desa c. 309, 333, 346, 351- 
365. 

Madra c. and p. NW. 311, 315-317, 
347-360, 372, 373, 377-380, 665, 
670. 

Madra? p. E. 329. 

MadrS r. C. 299. 

Madra p.,=Madra. 

Madraka k. 311, 315. 

Madraka p.,=Madra. 

Madras, 332. 

Madri q. 23. 

Madura t. and dt. S. 331. 

Magadha c. and p. M. 308, 330, 
•337, 341, .357, 358.' 


Magadha p, M. 330, 664. 

Magha cst. 168, 169. 

Magw, 79, 201, 392-396, 664, 665, 
614. 

Magician, 174. 

Maka-bhadra 1. N. 278, 282. 
Maha-bhadra mt. N. 279. 
Maha-deva g. 268. 

Maha-druma k. and o. 273. 
Maha-gaurl r. E. ? 301. 

Maha-griva p. SE, 360. 

Maha-hanu a. 476, 479. 

Maha-kala t. C. 621. 

Maha-kali gs. 621. 

Maha-Kosala c. 308, 342, 371. 
Maha-marl, disease, 519, 621. 
Malia-Maya gs. 465, 469, 515. 
Maha-iiada r. SE. 295, 298. 
Maha-nada pr. 670, 672. 

Maha-nadl r. SB, 284-286, 296- 
298, 300, 306. 

Mahananda pr. 672, 673. 

Maha-mla mt. N. 278. 

Maha-padma dg. 408, 416, 494. 
Malia-rasfera c. and p. W. 333, 363. 
Maha-ratha k. 612. 

Maha-raurava Jiell, 64, 71, 72. 
Mahar-loka, 227, 653. 

Maharyava p. W. 370. 

Maha-saila mt. N. 279. 

Mahat, 217, 220-223, 231. 

Mahatl r. W. 294. 

Mahavita k. 272. 

Maliendra mts. E. 284-286, 306, 
334, 362. 

Mahesvara g. 504, 606, 514. 

Makes war t. 0. 333. 

Maheya p. W. 339. 

Main r. W. 294, 339. 

Mahika p. W. 340. 

Mahindra mts. S B. 284. 

Mahi§a d. 473-487, 619, 624. 
Mahifaka p. S. 333. 

Mahifikap. S. 333. 

Mahi§ikl r. P C. 334. 

Mahi^maka p. C. 333. 

Mahismat k. 333, 371. 

Mahiamatl i. 0. 310 333, 336, 344, 

’ 371. 

Mahita r. W. 295. 

Mahraltap. W. 333. 

Mahyuttara p. E. P 327. 

Maind bd. 40, 68-61, 84. 

Maiuaka mt. N. 269, 287, 376 



MainSka mt, W. 288. 

Mainaka mt S. 288. 
Main&ka-prabha ? r. G. 288. 

Maitra cat. 370. 

Makandi t. M. 353. 

Makara dg. 416, 417. 

Makarl r. M. P 298. 

Makru^^ia r. M. P 298. 

Maksaya r. M. P 298. 

Mdl p. E. 330. 

Malada^. E. 326. 

Malada p. E. 326. 

Malaja p. M. 309, 326. 

Malaka p, M. 308. 

Malati pi. 27, 162. 

Malava p. M. 341, 364, 377, 379. 
MalavSnaka jp. 0. P 326. 

Malavartin p. E. 326. 

Malaya mta. S. 286, 287, 304, 362. 
Mdlda dt. E. 326. 

M515 p. E. 330. 

Malignant apvnta, 260-268. 

Malika? p. NW. 318. 

Malinl t. E. 326. 

Malinl apa. 538. 

Malla p. E. 330. 

Mallip. 318. 

Mallika pt. 24, 26, 426, 426. 
Mallikarjuna temple, S. 290. 

Mdl Pahariya p. E. 330. 

Mdkoa c. 2S6, 312, 338, 341, 364, 
861.. 

Malya ?p. NW. 316. 

Mdna^bhumi dt. E. 326, 

Manada p. E. 326. 

Ma^iaka, 178. 

Manakalaha P p. N. 379. 

Manas (Mind), 221. 

Manasa I N. 278, 281, 288, 322, 
376, 384. 

Manasa k. and o. 273. 

ManasvinI w. 269. 

Manavacala h. E. 366. 
Manavarjaka p. E. 326. 
Manavartika p. E. 826. 

Mdnhhum dt. E. 326, 827. 

Mandaga r. 306. 

Manda-gSminl f. 305. 

MandSkinT r. N. 296, 298. 
Mandakini r. S. 302, 

Manda-pala 6. 8. 

Manddr tr,. 27, 494. 

Mandara mt$. N. 277-280,810,316, 
322, 861, 881, 882, 402. 


Mandara mt. E. 287. 

MandSra tr. 27. 

Mandara dg. 402, 407. 
Manda-vamnl r. 806, 306. 
Maydavya m. 91, 94, 97. 
Ma^idavya p. NW. 349, 374, 380. 
May^^-vya ra. 374. 
May4avya-pura t. S. 374. 
Mandhatd t. 0. 334. 

Mandhatr k. 655. 

Maudikap. NW.P 374. 

Mango tr. 24, 197. 

Manijala r. C. 302. 

Maijimat mt. NW. 370. 
Maiii-megha h. NW. ? 370. 
Maninga r. C. P 302. 

ManinT q. 578, 684-586. 

Manipur t. C. 371. 

Mani-^aila mt. M. 278. ■ 
Manivaka k. and c. 273. 

Maujird r. S. 289, 302. 

Manjula r. M. P 297. 

Mdn-kaclm pt. 178. 

Mankind, Primeval, 231-247. 
Mansion incarnation, 21, 503, 604. 
Mano-java g. 464. 

Mano-rama r. M. 290, 306. 
Mano-rama demi-ga. 401, 402, 411 . 
Manus, The, 226, 227, 271, 408 , 
411-416, 432, 436-437, 441, 449, 
466, 461-465, 636, 549, 560, 684 , 
686. See Svayambhuva, Syaro- 
ci§a, Auttama, Tamasa, Raivata, 
Caksusa, Yaivasvata, SSvariii, 
Raucya, and Bhautya. 

Manuga k. and o, 273. 
Manvantaras, The, 218, 224, 227, 
271, 649, 560, 685. 

Manya-vati pra, 627. 

Maraka P p. NE. 883. 

Marathi P r. S. 302. 

Maricad^.P 462,465,635. 

Marlci ra. 246, 249, 269, 
Markaucjeya ra. 1-7, 
and paaaim 217-237, ^7, ^6, 
268-^3, 348, 349, 387, 891-40?* 
622-689. ^ 

Marka^^eya Purapa, 219, 684-ooo. 
Markatakapt. 166, 246. 

. Marka^i P pt. 246. 

Marking-nut tree, 25. ^ 

Marriage, 118, 119, 149, 166, * 

17(^176, 177, 262, 626, 527, 5»^ 
696, 670-672. 



tNDEX. 


711 


Mars, phmt, 431, 626. 

K5rtav(Ja g. 456, 650, 551, 663-666 
574^576. 

MarttikSvata t. W. 349. 
Maru-dhauvan dg. 402. 
Maru-bhumi c. W. 354. 

Marut g. 65, 461, 645, 648. 

Maruta pi. 246. 

Maruta p. M. 353. 

MSruta g, 474. 

Marutta k. 146, 644r.649, 652-656, 
672. 

Marutta k, 663. 

84, 86, 165, 244. 
Mdsh-kaldy pi. 84. 

MasQra pi. 165, 244. 

Matarisvan g. 100, 539. 

Mathara P p. NW. 317. 

Mathura U M. 21, 307, 361, 352. 
Mathura t. S. 331. 

Matra 128, 194, 205, 470. 

Matsya k. 359. 

Matsya c. and p. 307, 329, 347, 361, 
354, 369, 360, 377, 382. 

Matta gh, 264. 

Matter {element), 221. 

Mauleya p. S. P 336. 

Mauli? p. NW. 388. 

Maulika p. S. 336. 

Maunika p. S. 336. 

Maurya demons, 501. 

Maya d. 416. 

Maya gs. 250 ; see Ma}ia>MayS. 
Mayura mt. N. 279. 

Maxims, see Custom. 

Measures of length, 240; of time, 
226-228. 

Meat, 164, 167, 168, 174, 175. 
Medhas b. 466. 

Medhatithi k. 272, 273. 

Medhavin k. and c. 273. 
Megha-parvata mt> N. 279. 

Mekala hills 0. 288, 327, 341. 
Mekala c. and p. C. 327, 341, 367. 
MekalS t. or r. C. P 358. 
Mekhalamus^ P p. £!. 367, 358. 
Mena demi-gs. 269. 

Mena ps. 270. 

Mena aps. 287. 

Menaka aps. 4, 8, 571. 

Merokami, see Trade. 

Mercury, planet, 431, 626 ; see 
Budha. 

Jleru 22, 223,. 244, 269, 275- 


282, 345, 351, 390. 391, 478, 576. 
582. 

Meru-nanda k. 411. 
Metempsychosis, see Transmigra- 
tion. 

Metres, 285, 236. 

Michelia ir. 26, 326, 364. 

MicitR r. M. 292. 

Midnupur dt, E. 301, 327, 330. 
Mimusops tr. 26. 

Mind, 190, 221. 

Mithila p. M. 330. 

Mithila t. and c. M. 329, 366, 358. 
Mitra g. 688, 689. 

Mitra-vinda sf. 433. 

Mleccha p. 290, 312, 313, 317-320, 
328, 335, 346, 360, 636. 

Modagiri pi. E. 324. 
Mohammedans, 284, 

Mohana r. 0. 297. 

MohanI gh. 264. 

Mok^a-^astra, 2. 

Momordica pt. 114. 

Monghyr t. and dt. E. 324, 325. 
366. 

Monkey, 49, 84, 208, 236. 

Monkey fack tr. 25. 

Moon, planet and g., 147, 280, 431, 
447, 448, 473, 474, 562, 626. 
Moon-worship, 80, 173, 264. 
Morning-star, 207. 

Mosquito, 72, &c. 

Mothers, goddesses, 604-506, 524; 
see Bakti. 

Mountains, 275-289, 356, 357, 362, 
370, 376. 

Mrga-siras cst, 356. 

Mrl^uda dg. 269. 

Mr§ikap. SE. 332, 359. 
Mfttikavatl t. W. 342, 349. 

Mrtyu pfn. 247, 250, 263. 
Mucukunda k. 333, 336. 

Mudakara p« E. 324. 

MudavasuP k. (=Ud5va8u). 
Mudavat! prs. 604-609. 

Mudga pt, 84, 166, 244. 
Mudga-giri pi. E. 324. 

Mudgala p. E. P 325. 

Mudgalapuri L E. 324. 
Mudgala^rama t. E. 324. 

Mug pt. 84 
Mug-kaldy pi. 84. 

Muiavant pi. N. P 655, 

Mdca p. 0 . 309, 



712 


INDEX. 


Mukhya gods, 464, 466. 

Mukti, see Final emancipation. 
Mukti-matl r. 0. 298. 

Mukuta r. M. P 298, 

Mukunda dg. 416, 417. 

Mulacs^. 170, 374. 

Mule, 235. 

Mull dg. 394, 395. 

Mull r. SE. 305. 

Mulinl r. SE. 305. 

Muiida p. C. 329. 

Mu\iia d. 494-501. 

Mungir t. E. 324, 325. 

Muni k. and c, 273. 

Muni demi-gs. 569. 

Munja gr. 192. 

Muilja-prstha mt. N. 666 . 
Munjavat mt. N. 655. 

Muil]ava^a ti. M. 666 . 

Munjavata mt. N. 665. 

Mura, see Muru. 

Murcliana (music), 131. 
Murshidcibad dt, E. 326. 

Muru k. 328, 383, 501. 

Musaka p. S. 332. 

Musi r. S. 366. 

Music, 100, 107, 109, 130—132, 135, 
138, 261, 571. 

Musika p. S. 332, 366. 

Musk-rat, 87. 

Mustard pt, 84, 162, 165, 181, 258- 
261, 266. 

Muttra t, M. 307, 351, 352. 

Myna bd., see Maind. 

Myrobalan tr. 25, 26. 

Mysore c. S. 286, 332. 


Nabhaga ) (son of Manu Yaivas- 

Nabhaga j vata) k. 462, 588. 

-.T-. 1 C (son of Manu Vaivas- 

Nabhaga \ N^bha- 

Nabhagal^ gadisfa. 

Nabhaga (son of Rista) pr. 593- 
604. 

Nabbagadista ) 533 ^ 593 ^ 

Nabhagarista ) 

Nabhakanana p. S. 337. 
Nabhanedistha k. 588, 593. 

Nabhi k. 27i, 273, 274. 

Naciketa 169. 

Nadia dt. E. 326. 

Naca, ra>ce, 7, 66, 109-111,116-117, 
125, 127, 130-140, 201, (232, 234), 
23^ 279, 288, 362, 379, 395, 429- 


436, 495, 516, 631, 542, 569, 671 
644, 645, 648, 653, 657-664, 677.’ 
Naga-dvlpa c. 284. 

Naga-giri mU C. P 288. 

Nagahva, Naga-pura ) ^ ^ ^ 
Naga-sahvaya ) ’ ' ’ * 

Nagpur t. C. 288. 

Naimiaa /or. M. 306. 

NainiiKa p. S. 337. 

Nairrta p. S. ? 337. 

Naisadha p. W. 337, 341, 343. 
Nai§ika p. S. 337. 

Naiwal r. N. 291. 

Nakula k. 312, 322, 342. 

Nala k. 299. 343, 362. 

Nala pr. 597, 600-602. 

Nala candanodaka-dundubhi ? pr. 


647. 

Nalakalikap. S. 337. 
Nalakananap. S. 337, 
Nala-nabba dg. 404. 

Naldrug t. S. 289. 

Naliiia tr. 25. 

Nalini pt. 30. 

Namavtoka p. S. 333. 
Nanda p. N. fe3, 412. 

Nanda m. 517. 

Nanda r. N. 369, 383, 412. 
Nanda-ka dg. 416, 418. 
Nandana pi. 4, 487. 
Nandana /or. N. 278, 281. 
Nanda-vati t. N. 411. 
NandTmukha pitrs, 155, 179. 
Nandini q. 446. 

Nandini q. 618- 
Nara 2. 

Nara k. 442. 

Nara, waters, 20, 229. 
Narada rs. 4, 671, 654. 


Naraka k. 328, 383. 

Naraka 47-49, 54, 57, 

247, 250 ; see 

Nara-siihha hwamation, ‘21, ow, 
Narayaiia g* 2, 20, 55, 228, 

269, 280, 386. 

Narayayi gs. 513-515. 

Narikela jo. SE. 360. 

Narikela isl. 360. ^ 

Narikhorsum N. 324. 

Nari^ya k. 350, 463. VoJvas- 
Narisyanta (son of Manu Va 
vata) k. 463, 588, 666 . 
Narisyanta (son of Marutta) k. 
665-668, 673-676, 680-682. 



INDEX. 


m 


NarmadS (Nerhudda) >. 0. and W* 
19, 286, 296, 298, 333, 338, 339. 
343, 344, 866, 368, 371, 600. 
Nasatya g. 460, 676 ; see Aavins. 
JSfasik t. W. 289, 337, 339; 366. 
Naaikya p. W. 337, 339, 366. 
NasikySva P p, W. 337, 839. 

Nature (Prakrti), 192, 193, 196, 
224, 225, 231, 232. 

Nauclea tr, 25, 277, 566. 

Nava h. 333. 

Nava-ras^ra c. and p. M. 333. 

Nebu tr. 25. 

Nedi§tha, see Nabhanedi^^ha. 
Nelumhivm pt. 29, SO, 147; see 
Lotus. 

Nepal c. N. 316, 321, 322, 345-347, 
360, 376. 

Nerhudda r . ; see Narmada. 

Newar p. N. 345. 

Nibha P prs. 627. 

Nicita r. M. 292. 

Nidhi dg. 408, 409, 416-419, 494, 
638. 

Nigarhara P p. N. 346. 

Nighna gb. 264. 

Nightshade pt. 166. 

Nlhara p. N..345. 

Nika^a p. S. 862. 

Nikrntana, hell, 71, 72. 

Nila mis. N. 275-279, 388. 

Nila k. 334, 344. 

Nila dg. 416, 419. 

Nllayudha p. W. 334. 

Nilgtri mts. S. 285, 363. 

Nill q. 363. 

Nllotpala pt. 29, 30, 104. 

Nipa k. 350, 598. 

Nipa rs. 597-699. 

Nipa p. 350, 353, 698. 

Nipa tr. see Kadamba. 

NirahEra P p. N. 345. 

Niraya, hell, 68, 70. 

Nirbandhya r. C. 299. 

NirbindhyS r. C. 299. 

Nir-mSrsti d. 267. 

Nir|*ti Sf8*.‘260, 263, 490. 

NirvindhyS r. C. 299, 606, 606. 
NirvindhyS r. 8. 299. 

NirvIrS r. M. 292. 

Nirvrti-cal^us rs. 440. 

Ni§5daf>. 0.860,361. 

Ni^ha c. and p. W. 300, 843, 
.360. . 

90 


Ni^adha mts. N. 276-277. 
Niiadham^. NW. 278. 

NifadhS r. W. P 800. ^ 

Nif adh&vatl r. W. P 300. 

NiScara rs. 415. 

Ni^cIrS r. M. 292. 

Ni^cita r. M. 292. ^ 

Ni§pava^i. 86, 165, 244. ^ 5 

Nifiumbha d. 488, 494-497;. 600^ 
503, 506-609, 517-621, 624. 
NisvIrS r. M. 292. 

Nitya-naimittika sf. 95. 

NlvSra cer. 166. 

Nlv5r5 r. M. 292, 

Nivela, 318. 

Niyati 08 . 269. - '' 

Niyojika gb. 267, 269, 264. 
Nr8irfahaPi).NW.375. 

NQpI r. M. P 296. . 

Nymphcea pt. 29, 30. 

Oceans, 276. 

Ocymtm pU 164, 632. 

0<Jra|). and c. E. 329*. ^ 

Ogha-vatl r. M. 200, 306. 
Okhalakiya p. 366. > 

Om, 128, 196, 206, 206, 660-664, 
557, 561. 

Omms, 207-211, 263. 

Onion pt. 165, ' 

Organs of sense (indriya), 15, 16. 
Orissa c. E. 284, 301, 327, 334, 336, 
360, 361, 366. 

Ortygomis hd. 28, 86. 

Osmotreron bd. 28. 

Ougeinia tr. 28. 

Owl, 72, 263. 

Oxalis pt. 25. 

Oxus r. NW. 292, 324. 

Oxydraci p. N. 377. 

Faddy, 84. 

Paddy ’bird, 69, 86. 

Fadgama p. C. 343. 

Padma, flower, 30. 

Padma, seat, 196. 

Padma dg. 416. 

Padma maha4calpa, 228. 
PadmEvata c. W. 289. 

PadminI pt.dO. . - ' ' • > i 

PadminI, science, 408-411, 416, 416. 

419. ' .. . ’ 

Pahlava «. W. 314, 820, 360, 368, 
868,371,389. : 



714 

Pahoj r. W. 299. 

Pairi r. 0. 285. 

Paisuni r. M. 297. 

Paitrya at,. 361. 

PSka-samstha if, 128. 

Palaiidu pt. 165. 

Paldsh tr. 28. 

Palatini r. 306. 

Pallava P p. N. 314. 

Pallava p. S. 332. 

Palinyra palm, tr. 27. 
Pamla-palaPp. NE. 381. 

Pd^ p. SE. 361. 

Panasa tr. 25. 

Pafioadaka p. NW. 372. 
PafloajanaP dt. NW. 312. 

Pafloala c. and p, M. 308, 309, 350- 
855, 382. 

Pafloala p,,=Pancala. 

Paiicma r. M. 330. 

Pancanada c. and p. NW. 312, 372, 
378. 

Pancapsaras 1. 0. P 842. 

Pafloa-iaila mt. N. 279. 

Palioodaka P p. NW. 372* 
Pandanui, shrub, 26. 

Paycjara mt. M. P 288. 

Pau^ava /. 6-9, 19-24, 341, 344- 
347, 355, 365, 877, 416, 461, 669, 
670. 

PSpdaveyapr. 31, 37. 

Pandhawa mt. M. P 287. 

Pandu h 3, 19, 20, 37, 146, 345. 
Pamdua t, E. 326. 

Pdmua h. M. 288. 

PaJidura mt. N. 279. 

PSMura mt. M. P 288. 

Pavdya p. S. 287, 304, 331, 832, 

PaiidyaP p. W. 369. 

Panicum cer. 165, 203, 244. 

Panjdb 311-318, 321, 324, 333,347, 
351, 373, 377-380. 

Pankaja, flower, 30. 

Pankajini 1. W. 445. 

Pacini r. M. P 298. 

Para p. S. 865. 

Para period, 224, 228. 

Par& r. M. 295. 

PSra rs. 402, 407* 

Pars r. M. 295, 299. 

PSrada p. NW. 312, 817, 319, 869, 
382. 

par^^ra W» 339, 


INDEX. 

Para^ara rs. 669, 677. 

PSrafiava p. W. 339, 369. 
Para^ava/. 369. 

Paraiu-Rama n. 310, 338, 339, 369 
371, 464. 

Para-tanga^a p. N. 323. 

Paravata tr. 25. 

Paravata gods, 415. 

Pdrhati r. M. 296, 299. 

Parijata tr, 27, 494. 

Parik^it k, 379. 

Paripatra mts. M. 285, 286, 295, 
354. 

Paripatra mts. N. 277, 279. 
Paritap. NW. 317. 

Parivarta-ka gb. 267, 258, 263, 
Pariyatra mts. M. ;= Paripatra. 
Parjanya g. 178, 539, 618. 
Par]anya rs. 449. 

Parpa r. M. 294. 

Parnasa r. M. 294. 

Parua-salagra mt. NE. 388. 
Parpa-^avara p. SE. 361. 

Parrot, 28, 87. 

Parsaroni r, M. 297. 

Partridge, 28, 86. 

Pdrul tr. 27. 

PSrvapa ^raddha 157. 

Parvata n. 269. 

Parvatl gi. 290, 488, 493, 494. 
Parwan r. M. 299. 

Pa§apda«. M. 354. 

Pasin! r. 306. 

Paspalum cer. 244. 

Passion (raga), 15, 16. 

Passion (ra 3 a 8 ), see Qualities, 
Pa^u-pala c. NE. 381. 

Pa^U'pati dg. 268. 

Pataccara p. M. 809, 343. 
Patala<r. 27. 

PatSla, world, 4i7, 56, 60, 110-115, 
119, 120, 126, 132-137, 429 - 436 . 
465, 475, 503, 518, 521, 531, 604- 
608, 645, 648, 656-661, 664, 677. 
PStala-ketu d. 109, 11^116, 119- 
122 . 

Patandhama mt. M. P 287 
Patangaka mt. N. 279. 

Pathar mts. M. 286. 

Patruk t. and dt. M. 330. 

Pattidla dt. N. 321, 347. 

Pa^u p. 0. 843. 

Paudanya t. 0. P 387. 

Pau^^ra p, and o, E. 329, 



ikDEX. 


?15 


Pau^^raka, Paun<}rika p. E. 829. 
Paunika p, W. P 336. 

Paurava, race, 331, 350, 360, 369, 
374, 384, 461, 698, 677. 

Paurava P p. NE. 384. 

Paurika p. S. 336. 

Paur^amasa rs. 269. 

Paufkala cer. 165. 

Pavaka dg, 270. 

Pavamana dg. 270. 

PavanI r. NE. 323. 

PayolliPr. C.P 299. 

Payo^ui r. W. 299, 335, 365. 
Payosn! r. M. 299. 

Pea, Si, 86, 244, 24S. 

Peacock, 87, 147, 260, 394. 

Pearl, 304, 366, 476. 

Pee'j^ul, see Pipal. 

Pelican, 30. 

Pelicanue, hd. 30. 

Pen-ganga r. 0. 299. 

Penner r. S. 303. 

Perdiz hd. 28, 86. 

Peri r. S. 304. 

Persia, 314. 

Peydrd tr. 25. 

Phala-giri mt. W. 373. 

Phalgu r. M. 297. 

Phalguluka p. W. 373. 

Phalgunaka p. W. 373. 

PhalgunI cst. 169, 361, 367. 
Phascolus pt. 84. 

Phasianus hd, 29. 

Phcna-giri mt. W. 373. 

Pheasant, 28, 29. 

Phyllanthus ir. 25, 26. 

Physician, 160, 180, 261. 

Pl(Jika p. N. 322. 

Pig, see Boar. 

Pigeon, 28, 84, 86, 87, 208, 263. 
PlnaPp. N. 319. 

Pinaka, how, 403, 474. 

PinakaPr. S. 303. 

Pinda, cake, 144, 165-168, 1"2, 167, 
179, 183, 265, 632, 683. 
Piuda-malakapi. 166. 

Pingak^ hd. 3. 

Piiigala mt. N. 279. 

Pingala p. NW. 379. 

Pin^ala r. 379. 

Pinjara mt. N. 279. 

Pinus tr. 27. 

Pipal tr. 33, 277. 

PipS$hakam«.N. 279. 


Pipilika, an<, 86. 

Pipird, large ant, 86- 
Pippala tr. S3, 277. 

Pippala r. M. 297. 

Pippali^ro^iT r. M. 297 
Pipfd, large ant, 86. 

Pipyala^roiil r. M. 297. 

Pi^aca d. 46, 47, 168, 207 232 236, 
238, 308, 520, 633. 

Pi^acika r. M. 297. 

Pi^ikap. S. 366. 

Pi^una gh. 263. 

Pitrs, 14, 75, 79, 80, 86, 88, 96, 119, 
128, 133, 135, 144, 160-172, 176- 
183, 218, 232, 233, 236, 247, 249, 
263, 254, 270, 272, 483, 526-538, 
566, 561, 676, 619, 620, 639, 680, 
686 ; their 31 classes, 533-585. 
Pitrsoma r. SE. 304. 

Pi vara rs. 442. 

Pivarl g. 76. 

Plak§a-dvlpa, 272-275. 
Plak^avataraya ii. N. 127. 

Planet, 168, 259, 278,385-387, 431, 
635, 681, 626. 

Plantain tr. 25. 

Plava bd. 30. 

Podiceps hd. 31. 

Pole-star, 112, 207. 

Polyandry, 3, 19, 21, 23. 
Pomegranate tr, 25. 

Ponani r, S. 304. 

Poona t. W. 336. 


Porcupine, 49, 181. 
Pota-ka p. NW. 388 
Potters wheel, 72. 
Prabhakara rs. 320. 
PrabhSsa ti. W. 3^, 340. 
Prabhava k. 411, 412. 
Prabba-vatl q. 664. 
Pracay<Ja d. 266, 267. 

Praca^^®- P*- 

Praclra pr. 610. 
Pracodika gh. 264. 
Pradha demi-gs. 369, 659. 
Pradhaua, 217, 220, 225. 


Pradheya p. W. 368, 369. 
Pradyumna g. 21. 

Pragjyoti^a p„ c. and t. NE. 319, 
328, 357, 383, 501. 


Praiani k. 611. 

PraiSpati, 22, 70, 96, 99, 162, 163, 
178, 179, 219, 233, 284, 238, 248, 
268, 272, 273, 416, 436, 



716 


tNDet. 


465, 470, 473, 474» 494,, 626; 534* 
536, 661, 660, 666, 672, 582, 608, 
686 . . * ^ 
PraiSpatya pi 24p. 

Praiati fc. 610, 611. 

Praia-vatl q. 272. 

Prakara h, apd c, 273. 

Prakara h. and c. 273. 

Praka^ka gb. 267« 

Prakft, 352. 

Prakrti, 217, 220-225, 228, 231, 
232, 483, 489, 

Pralolupa bd, 6. 

Pramatna q. 618. 

Pramati rs. 686, 697, 600-603, 
Pramati h. 611. 

Pramati h. 612. 

Pramatta gd. 264. 

Pramloca apa. 638. 

Praitisu (son o/Manu Vaivasvata) 
k, 463, 688 

PrartJu (son of Vateaprl) k. 610. 
Pramuca rs. 4^,. 446. 



Prapa rs, 416, 

PrapSySma, 194-196. 

Prmhita r. S, 300, 302. 

Prapta p. N. 378. , . 

Prapti (faculty) 195. 

Prasandhi k. 611. 

Praa&tika cer. 166. 

Prasthala 320, 821, 347. 
Prasuhma c. and p. 327. 

PraSupSla c. NE. 381. 

PrasQta gods^ 464. 

PrckBQti demi-gs, 247-240. 
Pratardanakhya^ods, 436. 
PratilomS Sarasvati r. 31. 

Pratlpa k, 360. 

Pratip^hana t. M. 93, 687, 590. 
Pratyfthara, IJil6. . 
Pratyaya-sarga, 231. 
PrauppapadS cst. 381. 

Pravanga jj. E. 326. 
Prav&ra-karpa tn. 346. 

Pravijaya p. E, 327. 

Pravira w. 44. 

Pravrpeya p. E.P327. 

PraySga ti M. 310, 361. 

Prtti w, 269. 

Priyalankika P p, N. 3X9. 
Priya&gu cer. 165, 203, 244, 246. 
I^y^putra id, 28, 29. 


Priya-vrata, 247, 248, 271-274 445. 
Propaka j?. N. 320, 321. 
Pfpadhrafc. 463, 688-692. 

Prpata k. 860, 363. 

Prtha q, 23 ; see KuntT. 

Prthu rs. 442. 

Prupadhru, see Prpadkra. 
Psidvum tr, 26. 


Pterospemmm tr, 27. 

Pudukota dt. S. 332. 

Pukkasa, tribe, 47-60, 68, 85, 87, 
159. 


Pulahars. 246, 249, 270, 274. 
Pulastya rs. 246, 249, 269, 533. 
Puleya p. W. 338. 

Pulinda p. N. 316, 816, 321-323. 
Pulindap. 0. 317. 

Pulinda p, S. 336, 359. 

Pulinda p. W. 338. 

Pulse, 84, 86, 166, 244, 246. 
Punarvasu cst 169, 368. 
Pu^idarlkapt. 29 ; see Lotus, 
PuiKjra k. 326. 

Puudra p. and o. E. 327, 329, 331, 
334, 868. 


Puiidraka p. E. 


329. 


Punxca tr. 26, 

PunjikS-stana aps, 407. 
Punnaga tr, 26. 

Pu^iya isl. S. P 390. 

Pura, tovm, 241, 242. 

Puravas, 108, 219, 247, 685-689. 
Purandara g. 494, 623. 
Purandara-pura 1 113, 114. 
Purandlira ? p. N W. 313. 
Puranjaya ns. 146. 

Purantala.P t. S. 412. 

Pv/re articles, 181, 182. 

PuH t. E. 336. 

Pv/rijkation, 180-186. 

Puriaa t. S. 336. 

P«rwi r. W. 289, 299, 836, 866. 
Parya p. N. 324. 

Puri^otkajfa h, E. 367. 

Puru k. 464. 

Puru k. 384. 

Pururavas k. 146, 167, 687, 589. 


laa, 220-224, 248. 
dhra, see Pf^adhra. 
n (8un), 682. v 
»lap. N.320, ?21, 378. 
alavatl t. NW. 821. 

:ara t, andp* W. 306, 686. 
:ara rs. P 638. ;• 



Pu^kara-dvlpa, 278, 275. 
Pu^kara-mMin ti>4 116. 
PufkarSvatl U NW. 321. 

Fa§pa mi. 288. 

Pu§paja r. S. 288, 303. 

Pu^pa-jati I*. S. 304. 

Pu^paka mU N. 279. 

Pu§pa-vahinl r. S. 304. 

Puspa-vatl r. S. 304. 

Pu§pa-vatl ti. E.'304. 

Pu^pa-vepT r. 8. P 304. 

Pu^ya C8t. 169, 368. 

Put, hell^ 444. 

Qualities (guua), 8-6, 16, 19-21 
220, 221, 224, 225, 229-239, 247 
261. 

Querquedula hd. 30. 

Quince ir. 26, 426. 

Eaddhakafcaka p. NW. 317. 
RadheyaP/. 369. 

Baghu k. 304. 

Rd% pi. 84, 

Raivata mt. W. 289, (446). 

Raivata /or. W. P 23, 24. 

Raivata, Manu amd manvantaraj 
271, 443, 449, 649. 

Raivataka mt. W. P 445. 

Raja-grha t. NW. 318. 

Ra^a-grha t.M. 286, 830, 367. 
Ra;]a-mafa pt. 165, 

Rajanya p. N. 380. 

Ra.jas rs. 270. 

Ram-^aila mt. N. 279. 

RSjasaya sf. 34, 36, 89, 68, 61, 366, 
641. 

Raja-i$yamaka cer. 166. 

R^gir t. M. 331, 867. 

Rajmahall hills, E, 326, 330. 
Rdjputdna c. W. 286, 333, 364. 
Rajya-vardhaua k. 677-679, 683- 
m, 684. 

Rak§asa d. 6-8, 42, 47, 84, 39, 162, 
166, 201, 232-238, 265, 258, 279, 
346, 367, 402-405, 426-434, 616- 
620, 633, 541, 669, 671, 641, 677, 
682, 683. 

RSk^asa marriage, 696, 671, 672. 
Rakta-kanchan tr. 27, 166. 
Rakta-vlja d. 601, 604-606, 624. 
Raktotpaia pt. 29, 80. 

RSma (Oan^a), h. 309, 851, 352, 
« 655. 


71-7 


R&ma Jamadagnya> see Paralu- 
Bama. i 

Rama (Bala-), see Bala-Rftma. 
Rama i?. NW. P 817. 

Ramapa p. NW. P 317. 

Ramafca p. NW. 817. 

Ramathap. NW. 317. 

Rambka w. 647. 

RambhakaP p. NW. 388. 
Rdm-gangd r. M. 292, 864. 
Rdmgafh c. C. 296, i 

Rdmgafh k. E. 330. 

Ramyaka c. N. 390, 391. 
Rapavanya P h 661. 

Ra6geya P p. E. 326. 

Rank§u P r. N. 292. 

Rantideva k. 363. 

Rapti r. M. 294, 329. 

Rasa r. NW. 377. 

Rasalaya p. N. 877. 

Rasatala, world, 109, 110, 115, 188, 
430, 435, 631, 606-608, 644, 669: 
Ra^^ra-vardhana k. 677, , 

Rat, 86, 86, 184, 210, 

Rati gs, 114, 

Ratnadhfira P p, N. 820. 
Ratna-vahinI r. M. P 298. 

Ratnavat mt, N. 279. 

Ratrl r M. P 298. 

Raucya, Manu and manvantara 
271, 624, 626, 636-638, 660. 
Raudra d. P 82. 

RaudrSfiva k. 320. 

RaudrI cst. 368. 

Baurava, hell, 54, 62, 68, 72, 87, 
260. 

RSvapa d. k. 362. 

Rcwen, 81, 208. 

Ravi r. NW. 291, 292, 313-818. , 

Ro hymns, 20, 64, 468-460, 484, 
653-667, 661, 666, 570, 581. 

Rolka rs. 310, 462, 695. 

9ddhi w. 247, 248. 

Rddhi demi-gs, 248. 

Rechna doab, NW. 315. 

Religion, 119, 120, 124, 170-173, 
178,179. 

Religious devotion (yoga), 92, 167. 

190-207, 210, 213-216. 

Rer r. C. 296, 297. 

Rest-house, 81. 

Bewr r. 0. 296. 

Bevanta 460, 461, 575, 51^. 



718 


iKDEJt. 


Eevatl C8t 170, 884, 443-448. 
Eevati 9 * 24. 

Revati q, 443-449. 

Reverme, 422, 423, 593, 617, 618, 657. 
Rewa dt. C. 297, 341. 

Eg- Veda, 152, 206; see Rc hymns. 
Rhinoceros^ 164, 168, isi, 632. 

Rice, 84, 165, 244, 245. 

Riches, see Wealth. 

Righteousness (Dharma), 21, 36, 
39, 41, 53, 54, 66, 88, 96, 108, 124, 
138, 144, 148, 170-172, 185, 187, 
198, 215, 264, 273, 282, 400, 422, 
424, 430, 442, 459, 575, 578, 595- 
598, 629, 630, 657, 671, 672. 

Ei^ta k. 5^, 593. 

Rista demi-gs. 659. 

Rk§a mis. C, 285, 286, 298-302, 336, 
’ 345. 

Rocana mt. 288. 

Rohi rs. 294. 

Rohi\iI cst, 169, 366. 

Rohi\iT demi-gs. 269, 420. 

Rohita k. and c. 273. 

Rohitaaya pr. 42, 51, 58. 

Rope arid jar at the well, 70, 71, 
Rottleria tr. 26. 

R§abha k. 271, 274. 

R§abha ? mts. N. 275, 277. 

R§abha h. fcJ. 366. 

Rsabha p. S. 366. 

R§abba rs. 415. 

R§abha r. C P 300, 

R|i-giriP/t. M. 357. 

R§ika p» N. 332. 

Rfika^. S. 332, 366. 

R§ika r. S. 366. 

E^Ika r. 305. 

R§ikulya r. E. 285, 304. 

R§ikulya r. 305. 

Rsis, Seven, 22, 226, 246, 270. 
Ri^yamuka mt. S. 289, 365. 
Esya^rnga rs. 464. 

Rta-dhvaja k. ; see KuvalaySIva. 
Rta-vac rs. 443, 444, 447, 448. 
Rtu-harikS gb. 267, 261, 266. 
Rtukulya P r. SE. 304. 

Rtu-mala r. S. 303. 

9tvijrl60,178. 


Rucaka mt. N. 279. 

Ruci dg. 24,7, 248. 

Ruci rs. 526-538, 

Rudra g. 10, 55, 168, 225, 232, 246 
247, ^68, 269, 403, 461, 525. ’ 

Rules, various, 170-186. 

Rumex, pt. 25. ( 

Rupa r. 306. 

Rupapa p. W. 339. 

Rfipasa p. W. 339. 

Rupavahika p. W. P 339. 
Rupnarain r. E. 300, 301, 330. 
Ruru, deer, 164, 211. 

Rutha k. 452. 

Sabala rs. 270. 

Sabandhana r. M ? 294. 

Sahar p. C« and S. 336. 

S^abara ps. 18. 

Sabindu mt. N. 278. 

Saccarum gr. 192. 

^aci gs. 4, 90, 102, 420, 489. 
Sacrifices, 170, 203, 433, 434, 621; 

see ^raddha, &c. 

Sad*acara, see Custom, 

Sadamra r. W. 294. 

Sadanlra r. M. 294, 829. 
Sadanira-maya r. M.P 294. 
Sadatira r. M. ? 294. 

Sadhya dg. 55, 461. 

Sagara k. 314, 317-320, 332, 346, 
350, 362, 371, 656. 

Sagaranupa c. E. 328, 344. 
Saha-deva k. 346, 364, 367. 
Sahara k. 359. 

Sahajanya aps. 571. 

Sahasa P p. W. 340. 

Sahasrak^a g. 524. 

Sahasra-patra pi. 30. 
Sahasra-Sikhara mt. jN. 279. 
SahiBUu rs. 270. 

Sahi§iiu rs. 454. 

Sahodaka kinsman, 157, 184, loo, 
256 

Sahya mts. 285, 289, 303, 310. 
Saila c. S. 332. 

^ailika p. S. 332, 362. 

S'ailoda r. N. 351, 881, 382. 
8’ailodakft r. N. 351, 382. 

SailSfa p. 8. 332, 362. 
Saindhavai?. NW. 315. 

Sainika P N. 322. 

Sairandhrl g, 665. 

Sairl^aka pt M. 883. 



INDBX, 


719 


SairifthaP NE. 382. 

S^aivala mt. N. 388. 

Sfaivya q. 36, 38, 47-62. 

Sfaka p. NW, 314-320, 346, 353, 
371, 463. 

S^aka p, M. 360. 

Sfaka p. NW. 388. 

S^akabhava k. and c. 273. 
Siaka-dvipa, 272-276, 669. 

S^akala t. NW. 316, 364, 372, 373. 
Bakala-dvlpa dt. NIV. 364. 
S^akambharl gs. 518. 

Sakcta i. M. 363. 

Bakha, 129. 

Sfakha-nagaraka, ci^y, 241, 242. 
S^akra g, &2, 603. 

S^akrdgraha p, N. 346. 

Sakrdgraha p, N. 346. 

Sakri r. E. 285, 286, 298. 
Sakfn-nanda r. NE. 347. 
Sakrtraka p. N. 346. 

S'akti g8. 129, 601-609, 612-514, 
620. 

S^akti, S'aktri rs. 669, 677. 

Sfakuli r. E. ? 286, 298. 

8akuni gh. 257, 268, 263. 
Sakya-muni, 350. 

Sal tr. 27. 

Ma pr. 670. 

Sfala tr, 27. 

Salem t. and dt. S. 332, 365. 

Salik hd, 68. 

Sfalmali tr. 82, 147. 

S^almali-dviim, 272-276. 
Salmavcsmaka p. W. 373. 

Salt, 166, 175, 182. 

Sfalva c.and p. W, 309, 316, 347- 
350, 373, 596. 

S'alveya p. ; see Shalva. 

S^alya k. 311. 

S'alya-kTrtana pi. P M. 378. 

Samadhi m. 467. 

Saman hymns, 20, 64, 236, 236, 
468-460, 484, 564-567, 6«1, 581. 
Samana, {vital air) 203. 
Samanodaka, 157 ; see Sahodaka; 
Samarkand c. 314. 

Sama-Yeda, 162, 206, 236. 

Siambara d. 10, 139. 

S^ambara^ia, see Samvara^ia. 
S^ambhu g. 408. 

Sambhati w. 249, 269. 

Sfamika ra. 6, 9, 11, 17. 

^ampati hd. 6. 


Saifaraj prs, 272. 

Samula mt. N. 279. 

Saibvara^a k. 461, 667. 

Saihvarta rs. 663, 654. 
Saifavarta-ka, weapon, 668, 662. 
S^a\ia pt. 245. 

SanandinI r. M. 294. 
Sanatknmara, 232. 

Sa 9 (Ja tr. 390. 

Sanqala t. NW. 316. 

Saniiia gs. 456-460, 666-669, 676. 
Saakalana, 7. 

Sankalpa pfn. 246, 247. 

S^ankara g. 460. 

Sanketa P p. M. 363. 

S^ankha h. S. 366. 

Sfankha dg. 416, 419. 

Sfankha-kufra mt. N. 279, 282. 
S^ankhavati r. NE. 388. 

Saiikliya, 129, 231, 688, 688. 
Safikrandana k. 670, 676, 681. 
S^anku d. 636. 

Sannati w. 249, 270. 

Quanta k, 442. 

Quanta k. 446, 

Santdl Parganas dt, 326, 356. 
Siantanu k. 9. 

Sfanti b. 639-541, 546-548. 

Sfantika p. NW. 372. 

Sanumat mt. N. 279. 

Sanumafc mt. .N 279. 

Sapiiida 166-158, 184, 185, 256, 
Sapisika P p. S. 366. 

Saptala pi.=Mallika. 

Sapta-par^ia tr. 27. 

S^arabha {beast), 49. 

Saraca tr, see ASoka, 

S^aradvat ps. 464. 

Saraja p. C. 341. 

&araii bd. 68. 

Sarasa k. 333, 364. 

Sarasa hd. 647. 

Sarasi'ja pt. 30. 

Saras vata p, M. 340, 351, 
Sarasvata p. W. 340. 

Sarasvatl as. 2, 17, 18, 125-132, 
434, 435, 615. 

Sarasvatl r. M. 23, 127, 290, 310, 
312, 320, 861, 364, 377, 378. 
Sarasvatl r. W. 340. 

Sarasvatl, Prati-lomS, r. 31. 
Sarasvatl (other rivers), 290, 306. 
Sarava p. S.P 362. 

SaravSP r.’^SE. 306 , 



INDEX. 


SfarSvatl r. SE.P 805. 

Sarayil r. M. 328. 376. 

Sardana P jp. N. 378. 

SargigaPp. W. 868. 

Sfarika :6d. 49, 58, 84. 

Sarisa’pt. 84. 

Sarju r. M. 376. 

S'arkara p. NW. 373. 

SfarkarEk^ya h. 873. 

^arkaravarta r. S. P 373. 

Sarmati, see Sfaryati. 

Sfarmi§^ha q, 669. 

SfarAga, how, 108, 514. 

Sarpa P p. C. 862. 

Sarfapa pt. 84. 

Sarson pt. 84. 

S&TCY&dg. 268. 

Sarva g. 460. 

Sarva p. S. 362. 

Sarvaga P p. N. 345. 

Sarva-hari gh. 265. 

Sarvaul as. 490. 

Sfaryata fc. 368 ; see Saryati. 
Saryata p. W. 368, 371. 

Sfaryati i 368, 462, 463, 588, 600. 
Sfa^akap. W.P 872. 

S^a^a-yindu k. 653, 

Sfaito p. W.P 34^, 872. 

Sastras, Wicked, 79, 252. 

Sasurasa mt 288. 

Sagvata p. W. 340. 

Sasya-han-tr gh. 257, 259, 264. 
Satabala r. E.r 801. 

Sata-bhi§aj cst. 170, 381. 

^atadru r. NW. 291, 316. 
Siata-dyumna k. 454. 

Sfataka p. N. 380. 
gfatamala r. S. 303. 

SatamSW pt. 165. 

Sata-patba P ? M. 809. 

Satdra dt. W. 362, 

Sfata-rdpa, 247, 248. 

Sata-^rngin mt. N. 279. 
Sfata-vahana p. 8E, 361. 

Satl gs. 269, 408. 

Satlra r. M. 294. 

^dtpura mis. 0. 286, 287, 299, 343, 
345, 862, 365. 

Sfatru-gbna pr. 352. 

Sfatru.]it k. 109-113, 117, 119, 185, 
139, 140, ‘ 

Siatru-ipardana w. 142, 148. 
Satsura p. 0. 348. 

Sattv8,ta/.629. 


Saturn^, plamt, 431, 461, 567, 576 
626. 

Satya gods, 436, 437, 442. 
Satyaka k. 449. 

Satyakhya gods, 436, 437. 

Satyaki pr, 629. 

Satya-loka, 553. 

Satya- vat pr. 349, 350. 

Satya-vat! q. 677. ' - 
Satya- vatT prs. 595. 

Saubha t. W. 349. 

Saudasa k. 336. 

Saumya c. 284. 

Saumya cst. 855. 

Saunaka r8. 591, ' 

Saunanda, club, 606--609. 
Saunanda q. 604. 

Sauudikera? p. 0. 344. 

8mr p. G.cmd S. 335. 
Sauraftraup. W. 370. 

Sauri pat. 31. 

Sauri fc. {son of PrajUti), 612, 615. 
Sauvira p. and c. 315, 368. 
Sauvirl q. 664. 

Savadhana ? p. N. 378. 


Savana fc. 272. 

Savarap. C. and S. 319, 335, 361, 
362. 

Savarna-ka, Manns and manvan- 
taras, 524, 525, 549, 550. 

Savarivi-ka, Mann and manvan- 
tara, 458, 461, 463-466, 522-624, 
549, 567, 576. 

Savitr {8un), 282, 582. 

Savitf d. 262. 

Savitra for. N. 278, 282. 

Savitrl prs. 349, 350. 

Savitrl, hymn, 470. 

Scythians, 850. 

Scorpion rp. 172, 81, 85. 

ScreW‘pine, shrub, 26. 

8elf, see Soul. 

Self-emtent, The, 225 ; see Supreme 


king. 

f-repression, 194-200. 
ye r. E. 800. 
leoarpus tr. 25. • 

Yml tr. 82, 147, 191. 

1868 , see Organs of Sense, 
nath r. G. 285. ' 


681, 683;86d'Nagft. 

Sfe^a (Serpent) fc. 1, i 


:21, .469, 475, 


609, 648, 681. 



I5DBX, 


721 


Sesamum pt and seed, 84, 86, 166, 
162-168, 181, 224, 244, 246; 260, 
261, 632. 

Sefeuka p, S. 332. 

AS'/iac^ow-Safiina gs, 466-461. 464 
666-669, 676. 

Shdhdbdd dt M. 309. 

Shdh’dhen t NW. 379. 

Sheep, 164, 166, 236. 

Shieldrake Id. 30 ; see Cakravaka. 
Shorea tr. 27. 

Shrike hd. 28. 

Sihi p. NW. 377. 

Siddha dg, 66, 68, 78, 229, 393 
396, 403, 611, 630, 542, 681. 679' 
682. 

Siddha-virya k. and rs. 441. 

Slghra r C.P 299. 

S'lghroda r. 0. 299. | 

S'ikhara mt. N. 279, 281. 

S'ikhi g. 442. 

S^ilavatT ? S'ilavatT ? r. E. 300. 

Silk, 86, 423. 

Silk-cotton tree, see Seemul. 
Silk-worm, 86. 

Siriihala j;, S. 366. 

Simhika d. 367. 

Simla t. N. 316. 

Sin {particular), 78-88. 

Sinapis pt. 84. 

Sindh c. W. 313, 316, 373. 

Sindh r. M. 293. 

Sindh-sdgar doah, NW. 315. 

Sindhu r. NW. 290, 370. 

Sindhu r M. 293. 

Sindhu j[7. and o. W. 316, 347, 368, 
370, 666. 

Sindhu-kalaka-vairata ? p. W. 369, 
370. 

Sindhattanm ii. M. 293. 
Sindhuttama ti. W. 293. 
Sindhu-vTrya k. 666. 

Sinibahu r. E. 300. 

SinibalT r. E. 300. 

Sipra r. N. 285. 

Sipra r. C. 299. 

Sirala p. W. 338. 

Sirmour dt. N. 320. 

Sirsa dt. N. 321. 

Si^ira k. and c. 273. 

SUirakfa mt. N. 279. 

SiSu-pala k. 360. 

Sm r. NE. 281, 388. 

,Sitambuja pt. 30. - 

91 


SttSnta mL N. 278-281 
Sltfirtta mt. N. 278. 

Siteraja r. M.P 297. 

Sfitibaiiu r. E. 300. 

Sitoda 1. N. 278, 281 
Siva g. 6, 17, 32, 38, 66, 98-100, 
112, 126. 132, 133, 178, 206, 219, 
224, 226, 249, 268, 262, 280, 281, 
343, 356. 460, 471-474, 601-603, 
609, 516, 621. 646, 666, 672, 674. 
682, 688. 

Siva k. and c. 273. 

Siva r. 299. 

Siva-duM gs. 603, 604, 607-609, 
614, 624.’ 

Sivi k. 377. 

Sivi p. NW. 333, 364, 377-380. 

! Sivakhya gods, 436, 437. 

I Skanda g. 269. 

Slavery,' ^2-43, 323, 674. 

Smell \element). 217, 221, 222. 

Smrti w. 249, 269. 

Smrti-harika gb. 267, 261, 266. 
Snake, 76, 86. 

Snataka, 178. 

Snowy Mountains, see Himavat. 
Social rules, 170-184. 

Solanum pt. 166, 167, 

Solar Race, dyn. 43, 46, 683. 

Soma {Moon), g. 163, 162, 420, 636, 
661, 682, 689, 626. 

Soma rs. 99, 269. 

Soma, uice, 259, 262, 646, 666. 
Soma r. N. 282. 

Sorna-datta pr. 629. 

Soma-pa pitfs, 633. 

Soma-pa gb. 262. 

Soma-.samstlKi sf. 128. 

Someivari r. NE. 306. 

Sommiih t. W. 338, 340. 

Soiia r. C. and M. 286, 288, 296 
298, 341. 

Sone r.=Soua. 

Sorrel pt. 26. 

Soul, 16, 142, 143, 160, 187, 190- 
194, 200, 206, 211, 220-226, 422 
469, 627, 642, 687. 

Sound {element), 217, 220-222 
238 * * 

Sparrow bd. 0, 28, 210. 

Spirituous liguor, 32, 83 86 100 
103, 106, 107, 136, 260, 673, 600,’ 
603 ; see Intoxication. ’ 

Spondias tr. 24. 



722 


INDEX. 


Sprite, 250-268, 533, 546. 

Sfraddha, 79, 83, 133, 151, 154^171, 
181, 185, 199, 203, 264, 266, 530, 
531, 536, 537, 566, 686. 

Sfravaiui cst. 170, 376. 

Sreewacolum t SE. 361. 

M 08 . 249, 269, 290, 484; see 
Laksmi. 

8fn-kakula t. SE. 361. 

Sfrl-parvata mt. S. 290, 366, 
S'riphal tr. 25, 425. 
Sri-Saila=S'r!-parvata. 

Sfrngavat mts. N. 277. 

S^rngavat mts. N. 279. 

S'rngin rs. 12. 

Sirngin mts. N. 275, 276. 

Srniaya h. 353. 

Srn.iaya/. 363. 

Sruta-deva q. 361. 

Stanapa p. N. 321. 

Stanayosika p. N.P 321. 
Star-worship 80. 

Sterna hd. 86. 

Sto^ala p. 0. 342. 

Strl-loka pi. NW. 375. 
yStrl-rajya c, and p, N, 375. 

^ Stn-vahya p. N W. 375. 

Su-bahu pr. 142, 143, 187-190, 
207, 212-216. 

Su-bahu k. 322, 323. 

Subala^va k. 623. 

Subarna-rekhd r. E. 301, 327. 
S'ubhaV. C. 302. 

Subbadra q, 446. 

Subhadra prs, 627. 

Subhra ? p. E. 356. 

Su-cakra pr. 610. 

Supi dg. 270. 

Sucl-mukha hd. 80, 

Sudaman dg. 581. 

Su-darsana rs. 378. 

Su-deva k. 697, 600-602. 

Su-deva k. 600. 

Su-deva k. 627. 

Sudhaman rs. 449. 

Sudh! gods, 442. 

I^adra, caste 86, 116, 123, 183, 318, 
531,591,671,676; their duties, 
149. 

Sudra p. W. and NW. 312-314, 

Svdrakse p. NW. 314. 

Su-dyumna k. 587-690. 

Sugar-cane, 176. 


Su-griva, monkey k. 289, 338, 3S8 
Su-griva d. 495. . 

Suhma k. 325. 

Suhma p. E. 327, 329, 334, 356. 
Suhmottarap. E. 327. 

Su-hotra b. 612. 

Su-hotra k. 670. 

Suicide, 621. 

Suir p. C. 335. 

Su^araka p. E. 324. 

Su’iata q. 446. 

Sui'atya p. M. o>* W. 371. 

Sukalin pitfs, 531. 

Sukaiikavat mt N. 278. 
Su-kanya prs. 368, 600. 

Su-ke^i q. 664. 

Sukhodaya k. and c. 273. 

Sukra dg. 58, 269, 650. 

Sukra (=:Agni), 541, 644. 

Sukrsa rs. 11, 12. 

Sfukta rs. 270. 

Sukti h. S. 366. 

Suktimat mts. 284, 286, 306. 
Suktimafci r. M. 285, 297. 
Suktimati t. M. 298, 359. 
Suktii-aahvaya U M. 359. 
Su-kumara k. and c. 273. 
Su-kuman r. 305. 

Sukutya p. 307. 

Sulaiman mts. W. 347. 

Sulakara p. N. 321. 

Sulikap. N. 323. 

Sumaha-druma r. M. ? 296. 
Sumana q. 670, 674-676. 

Su-mati h. 62, 69, 74, 76; see Jadii. 
Su-mati k. 274. 

Su-mati k. 361. 

Su-mati pr. 605. 

Sumbha d. 116, 488, 494-500, 503, 


506-510, 517-521, 524. 

Sumbha p. E. ? 356. 

Sumedhas gods, 449. 

Sumedhas rs. 464. 

Su-megha mt. W. P 370. 
Sumeruja r. M. ? 297. 

Sumlna p. W. 338. 

Su-mukha bd. 3. 

Sun (Surya &c.) g. 147, 178, 
431, 468-461, 468, 466, 473, 474, 
822, 886, 843, 880-663, 860-6«'’ 
880-588, 621, 626, 680. 
Sunanda, chib, 604, 609. 
Su-nanda q, 604, 609, 611. 
Su-naya k. 612. 



INDEX. 


72 .^ 


S^unlPr. M. 297. 

Su-nlfci jpr. 605. 

Sunuwdr p. N. 321. 

Sun-worship, 80, 173. 

Supara i. W. 338. 

Su-pariva hd. 6. 

Suparsva mta. N. 277, 282, 
Su-patra hd, 3. 

Su-prabha r. N. 290, 306. 
Su-prabha w. 697, 600, 601. 
Supratika, elephant, 9. 

Suprayoga r. S. 303. 

Supreme Being or Soul or Spirit, 
55, 63-65, 92, 198, 201-206, 210, 
216, 217, 229, 414, 459, 632,552- 
555, 558, 570, 587, 688, 687; see 
Brahman. 

S'ftra k. 24. 

Sura r.M.P 295. 

Sura? p. NW. 313. 

S^ura {son of VatsaprI) pr. 610. 
Surabhi dg. 116, 117. 
Surahadruraa r. M. P 296. 

Suraksa wA N. 279, 281. 

Suralap. W. 338. 

Surasa mt. N. 279. 

Surasa r. M. ? 296. 

Siurasuna k. 351. 

STirasena c. and p. M. 307, 309, 
351-354, 371, 377. 

Surastra c. and p. W. 288, 309, 
340,342, 341, 370, 446. 

Surat t W 340. 

Su-ratha k. and c. 273. 

Su-ratha k. 465, 466, 522, 523 
Su-ratha k, 601, 602. 

Suratha r. M. 296. 

Su-reyu r. M. 290, 306. 
Surpakariia h. E. 356. 

Surparaka r., t. and p. W. 289, 
338. 

Swsooty, see Saras vati r. M. 
Su-ruci q. 420. 

Su-rupa gods, 442. 

Surya, see Sun. 

Surya h. S. 365. 

Surya P r. M. ? 295. 

Sarya-kanta mts. N. 389. 
Suryaraka? see S^arparaka. 
Sarya-vamsa dyn. 308. 

Su-santi Manu;=Auttaina. 
Susarasa mt. 288. 

Su-^rman k. 321. 

S^i-iarman b. 426. ^ 


Su-8obhan& q, 665. 

Sata, 28, 31. 

Sutapa gods, 464. 

Su-tapas rs. 270. 

Su-tapas b. 440. 

Sata-vi^aya dt. E. 326. 

SatikaPp. S. 332. 

SuthJ r. NW. 291, 292, 311, 312, 
316, 324, 378-380. 

Sutpalavati r. S. 304. 

Su-varcas rs. 640. 

Su-varcaa k. 623. 

Suveiia r. C. 300. 

Su-vikrama pr. 610. 

Suvira k. 311, 315. 

Suvira p. NW. 370. 

Suvira k. 664. 

Su-vrata rs. 605. 

Su-yastavya k. 449. 

Svadha, 94, 151, 152, 163, 178, 249, 

269, 270, 470, 483, 616, 527, 530- 
532, 542. 

Svadhamaii gods, 436. 

Svaha, 94, 161, 162, 162, 249, 269, 

270, 470, 483, 627, 642. 
Svakambala r. NW. 389. 

S vapaca p. W. ? 339. 

Svapada p. W. 339. 

Svapaka p. W. ? 339. 

Svar, 71, 206, 218, 227, 663. 

Svara, 130. 

Svarak§u mt. N. 281. 

Svaraksu r. N. 281. 

Svarasa mt. 288. 

Sva-ra§t;ra k. 438. 

Svar-bhanu (Sun), 582. 

Svarga 36-41, 50, 57-61, 69-71, 
76-78, 88-90, 147, 162, 168, 169, 
279, 280, 283, 284, 310, 409, 443, 
460, 462, 473, 613, 630, 662, 687, 
688. [383. 

Svarga-bhaumanavadyakaPp.NE. 
Svarna-srngin mt. N. 279. 
Sva-rocis 401-416. 

Svarocisa, Mauu ami manvuutara, 

271, 391, 392, 398, 401, 406, 408, 
411-416, 449, 466, 649. 

Sva-rQpa.pr. 610. 

Svastil^ posture, 196. 

Svati Qst. 169, 370. 

Svayam-bha g., see Self-existent. 
Svayambhuva, Manu amd man- 
vantara, 247, 248, 270- 274, 403, 
424, 448, 449, 649. 



724 


INDBt. 


Svayam-hSrika gh. 257, 260, 265, 

S> veta fc. and c. 273. 

Sveta mts. N. 275, 276. 

Sveta-giri mt N. ‘<d87, 381. 
Sveta-paviia mt. NE. 388. 
Sveta-parvata, see S^tagiri. 
S'vetodava mi. K. 279. 

Syama cer, ,165. 

Syiima r. NW. 389. 

Syama r. NW, 389, 

Syatnakaj?. N. 380. 

Syamaka cer. 165, 245. 

Sycni demi^gs. 569. 

Tailanga^. S. 367. 

Taittirika p. W. 339. 

Takka p. NW. 379. 

Takaaka d. k. 379, 648. 

Tak§a-^ila t. NW. 379. 

Tala ir. 27. 

Tala {music) i 131. 

Tala t. S. 411, 412. 

Talagana P p. N. 321. 

Talajangha p, M. 371. 

Tala-ketu d. 121, 122, 125. 
Taraah-praochMaka gh, 265. 

Tam ala ir. 28. 

Tamalipta*ka p. E. 330, 367, 358. 
Tamarasa pf. 30. 

Tamas, hetk 71, 72, 162. 

Tamasa r, M. 296, 298. 

Tamasa mt. N. 278. 

Tamasa, Manu and raanvantara. 

271, 437, 438, 442, 649. 

Tamasa p. N. 323, 347. 

Taraasi r M. 296. 

Tamba re. 416. 

Tamil p. S, 370. 

Tamisra, hell, 152. 

Tamluk t. E. 301, 327, 330. 

Tamra d. 479. 

Tamrii, demuge. 669. 
Tamrahvaya-dvina c, 367. 
Tamraka mt. N. 279, 
Tamralipta-ka c. and t. E. SOI, 
329,330. 

Tami aperna c. 284. 

Tamraparyi r, S. 303, 367. 
Tamraparnl P r, SE. 305. 
Tamraparyl i. and isl, 8. 367» 
Tamraparyi h. S. 367. 
Tdmraparifi dt 8. 367. , 
Tamravarna c. 284. 

Tan^ap, K. 321. 


Tanaya p. N. P 821. 

Taiiga^a p. N. 316, 317, 322, 323 
846, 376, 881, 382. 

Tanjor dt, 8. 332. 

Tanka va p. N. 823. 

Tan*matra, 231. 

Tapasa p. W. 339. 

TiipasftSrama p. 8. 339, 366. 
Tapati g. 461, 667, 676. 

Tapi r. C. and W. 299. 

Tapo-loka, 653. 

Tapo-rati b. 590. 

Tape- vana /or. 669. 
Tapta-kumbha, hdl, 71, 74, 83. 
Tapti r. C. and W. 285, 286, 299, 
335, 336, 340, 344, 365, 368. 
Tarak§ati, Tarak^iti, dt. W. 372. 
Tarak^ura p. NW. P 372. 

Tarks! id. 6, 8. 

Tark^ya p. NW. ? 372. 

Taru* 3 it d. 663. 

Taste {element), 217, 221, 222. 
Tauu^ikera P p. C. ? 371. 

TaxUa t. NW. 379. 

Teal hd. 30. 

Teesta r. NE. 293. 
Telingao.andp. SE. 334, 337, 367. 
Telugu p. 8. 334,337, 367. 
Tenaukhera t. 0. 344, 
Tephrodomis hd. 28. 

Terminalia ir. 26. 

Tern hd. 86. 

Teirao hd. 28. 

Tewar t. C. 343, 371. 

Thdmi p, N. 322. 

Thibet c. 319, 323. 

Thunder~holt, 2, 76. 

Til pt. 84. 

Tila pi. 84 ; see Seeamvm. 
Tilanga P p. N. 308. 

Tilangap. 8. 367. 

Tilottama aps. 4, 671. 

Time, measures of, 224-228, 4o9 
543, 680. 

Tindaka ir, 24, 26. 

Tindu-ka tr, 24, 26. 

Tinnevelly dt. 8. 331. 

Tippera hiUs, E. 306. 

Titir bd. 86. 

Tittira p. 839. 

Tittiri bd. 86. 

TochaH p. N. 320. 

Todya {musit), 132. 

Tomara p. N. 823. 



INDI(. 


725 


Tons r. M. 29§. 

Tortoise, 80, ,49, 84, 86, 181, 196, 
278, 848, 349, 866, 868, 867, ^74, 
376, 381, 884-387, 417. 

Tortures, 49, 66-68, 72-90. 
To^ala p. C. 342. 

Tovxih {element), 217, 221,222. 
Towns, 240-242. 

Toya r. C. 301. 

Trade, 101, 108, 214. 

Traigarta p. N. 347. 

Traipura p. C. 343, 360. 

I'ran ^'migration, 3, 6, 8-18, 38, 48- 
60. 64, 66-71, 77-88, 91, 168, 280. 
Travo.ncore dt, S. 367. 

Treta age, 32, 224, 226, 236, 239, 
243, 272, 347, 387, 388, 437. 
Tribhaga r. >1. 304. 

Trichinopoly dt. iS. 332. 

Tricliva r. C. 298. 

Tridiva r.. E. 305. 

Tridivacala r. E. 305. 

Trigarta r. N. 321, 324, 346-349, 
372, 377-382. 

Tri^-srotaal r. NE. ? 293. 

^Vilinga o. and p. SE. 367. 
Tri-netra p. NE. 384. 

Tripi§^apa di. M. 290. 

Tripura t. C. 343, 360. 371. 
Trisama r. SE. 304, 306. 

Trisanku fc. 839. 

Tri-sikha mt. NW. 281. 

Tri-srota.s r. NE. ? 293. 
IVi-suparna hymns, 160. 

Tritlya r. E. ? 293. 

Triyamar. SE. 304. 

Truthfulness, 14, 16, 36, 39, 41, 66, 
68, 88, 122, 161, 668, 640. 
Trumpet-flower tr. 2U. 

TryainbakS gs. 613. 

Tulchara p. N. 320, 360, 363# 

Tulsi pt. 164. 

Tumba pt. 118. 

Tumbara p. C. 343. 

Tumhhadra r. S. 303 
Tumbula p. C. 343. 

Tumbuma p. C. 343. 

Turabura p. C. 343. 

Tumburu rs. 12, (118), 671, 647, 
* 648. 

Tumura p. C. 343. 

Tunaya gdh. 646, 648. 

Tm^^ikera p. C. 344. 

Tukga f. S. 303. 


Tuiga-bbadra r. S. 308. 

Tufkgana p. N. 323. 
Tunga-prastha mt, 288. 

Turasita p. W. 339. 

Turdus ha. 49, 68. 

Turlc p. 372.*' 

Turkestan c. N. 324, 372. 

Turmeric pt. 166. 

Turii§ka p. W. 372. 

Tnrvasn k. 623, 663. 

Tu^ara p. N. 319, 320. 

Tu^ita gods, 416. 

Tu^^ikara F p. C. 344. 

Tvangana p. NE. 382. 

Tva^tr g. 21, 22, 120,465-460, 669, 
605.* 

Uccaih-sravab, horse, 494, 495. 
Udagra d. 476, 479. 

Udana, air, 66, 204. 

Udara cer. 244. 

Udavasu k. 612. 

' Udaya-giri h, M. 367. 
i TIdaya-giri h. B. 366. 
i Udbhida k. and c. 273. 

I Udbhida p. S. 337. 

I Uddhata d. 479. 

I Udgltha,484. 
i Udumbara p. M. 366. 

Udumbara c. W. 366. 

Udumbara tr. 182, 192, 266. 
Udumbaravatl r. S. 366. 

Ugra dg. 268. 

Ugra k. 454. 

Ugra dariana d. 476, 480. 

Ugrasya d, 479. 

Ugra-virya d. 479. 

Ugrayudha k. 360, 698, * 

UMni t. M. 361. 

Ujjain t. C. 296, 346, 621. 
Ujjayanta mt. W. 2^. 

Uliayinl t. 0. 296, 346. 

Ujjihana p. M. 360, 351. 

Ukti gh. 267, 268, 262. 

Uiaka p. N. 346, 376. 

Uma as. 132, 269. 

Umbilical cord, 70. 

Unmatti gh. 264. 

Unnata rs. 464. 

Upa-giri dt. N. 326, 328. 
Upaui^ad, 259. 

Upaniveia, 318. 

Upaplava, -vya, t. M# 307. 

Upupa hd. 80. 



726 


INPEXJ 


Urdamaru p. N. 376. 
Urdhva-bahu ra. 270, 449. 
tirdhva-kariia p, SE. 342, 360. 
Urja ra. 416. 

Urja w. 249, 270. 

Urjasvin g^ 462. 

Urjihana t. M. 361. 

Uriia p. and c. N. 324, 346, 376. 
Uru, Uru, k. 454 . 

Urukarma? pi. N. 376 . 

Urvasi aps. and q. 4, 671. 

U^anas dg. 9, 10, 68. 

Usinara k. 333, 377-380. 
Usinarap. M. 377. 

Usira gr. 79. 

IJpira^vlja ra. 663. 

Usiia k. and c. 273. 

Utkala k. 689. 

Utkala p. and c. E. 299, 327. 329, 
334, 341, 689. 

Utpala pt, 29. 

Utpala r. S. 304. 

Utpala vata-ka /or. 425. 

Utpala vatl r. 8. 304. 

Utpala vati 7 . 439. 

Utsarga oblation, 161, 163. 
Utsava-sanketa p. N., W. and S. 
319, 337. 

Uttama p. C. ? 342. 

Uttama k. 419, 420, 423-426, 429, 
432,436,436. 

Uttamarnap. C. 342. 

Uttanapada k. 247, 248, 419, 420, 
423. 

Uttanapala fc. 112. 

Vabhravya pat., see Babliravya. 
Vabhru, see Babhru. 

Vacaspati dg. 626. 
Vadana-dantura p. E. 366, 367, 
Vadantika ? p. N. 379. 
Vadhadhana? p. NW. 312. 

Vadhra p. N. 378. 

Vahirgira p. E. 326. 

Vahir-giri p. E. 326. 

Vahir-giri dt. NE. 325, 328, 
Vahlika k. 311. 

Vahllka p. NW. 311, 316, 376* 
Vahya? p. M. 364. 

Vahya r. S. 303. 

Vahyatodara? p. N. 320. 

Vaibhara mt. M. 286. 


Vaibhraja /or. N. 278| 281. 
Vaibhraia mt. M. 286. 
Vaidehakap. M. 362. 

Vaidika ? p. 0. 343. 

Vaidi^ p. M. 343, 627, 630. 
Vaidiirya mt, W. and C. 279, 287 
299, 366. 

Vaidyanatha h. E. 287. 

Vaidyuta k. and 0 . 273. 

Vaidyuta mt. 287, 

Vaigai r. S. 304. 

Vaiiiara mt. M. 286. 

Vaikarika, 221. 

Vaikuntha k. 449. 

Vainava k. and c. 273. 

Vaini r. vS. 303. 

Faippar r. 304. 

Vaipracitta pat. d. 617. 

Vaira^ c. M. 288, 307. 

Vairocani d. 466. 

Vaisali pat. 426. 

Vaisali t. M. 329, 600. 

Vaisalini prs. 626, 627. 

Vaisikya p. 8 . 334. 

Vaisiiava sect, 108. 

Vaisya caste, 74, 318, 671 ; its 
duties, &c., 148, 691, 694, 597. 
VaitaraiiT r. E. 300, 334. 
VaitarinT,/a 57 t^oM 8 r. 54. 
Vaivasvata, Ma-nu and manvjiii- 
tara, 271, 341, 350, 368, 464- 
463, 617, 649, 651, 566, 568, 675, 
676, 687-590, (600), 617, 666 . 
Vaji-kc^a p. NW. 374. 

Va]ivasika ? p. 8 . 333. 

Vajra-ketu d. 116. 

Vaka hd. 68 . 

Vaka p. N. 376. 

Vaksu r. NW. 292, 324. 

Vakula tr. 26. 

ValaP pi. NW. 376. 

Valaka rs. 442. 

Yalaka d. 426, 426. 

Valava ? pi. NW. 376. 

Vamanap. NW. 372. 

Vamana incarnation, 21 . 
Vamsa-dhara r. SE. 306. 
Vaih^a-dharivi r. SE. 306. 
Vanasa^kara r. SE. 306. 
Vamsa-vara r. SE. 305. 


inadarakap. S. 337. 
inaprastha, 149, 1^, 216, 61 , 
576, 681. ^ 

nn.rafltra.ka? n. andc. 



INDEX. 72V 


Vanava ]}. NW. ? 372. 
Vanavahyaka f. NE. 383. 
Vanavasaka p, S. 333, 364. 
Vanavasi, c. S. 883. 

Vanavasika^. S. 333. 

Vanavasin c. S. 333, 364. 

Vanajii, Vanayii, c. and p, NW. 
372. 

Vaiiga k. 325, 326. 

Vanga p. and c. E. 324-329, 334. 
Vangeya ^j.=Van«:a. 
Vanita-mukha p. W. 368. 

Vaujiika r. M. 297. 

Vaujula tr. 28. 

Van] 11 la /. M. 297. 

Vafijiila r. S. 302, 303. 

Van'ksu r. NW. 292, 389. 

VapantI ? r. C. 296. 

Vapu aps. 1, 2, 5 8. 

VapuB-mat k. 272, 273. 

Vapii8*mat pr. 670, 673-688. 
Vapus-mati q. 665. 

Vara sf, 433. 

Vara 627. 

Varada r. C. 300. 

Varada /. 8. 303. 

Varaha incarnation, 21. 

Varaha y. 505, 509. 

Varaha kalpa, 228. 

Varahadri mt. N. 279. 
Varanahvaya t. M. 355. 
Varaiia-aahvaya t, M. 355. 
Varanasi (fienares) t. M. 308, 654 
Varanasi i. K. 360. 

Varaua-sthala t. M. 351, 355. 
Varaiiavata t. M. 347, 355. 
Vardhamaiia min. NW. 388. 
Vardhamana^. E. 358, 

Vari-cara jj. 8. 365. 

Varmavat {town)f 242. 

Varna r. 8. 303. 

Var^a.sa r. M. 286, 294. 

Vartaki^h 167. 

Vartula jjt. 84. 

Vanina g. 10, 122, 126, 153, 473, 
474,* 489, 494, 636, 538, 545, 562, 
588, 589, 621, 680. 

Varuya r. N. 392. 

Varuua c. 284. 

Varuna cat, 381 
Varuyoda I N. 278, 381. 

VarQtha A. 446. 

Varathinl (tpa. 391, 394-402. 

, Varva|). N. 376. ' 


Varvara p. NW., NE. and S. 319, 
369, 372. 

Vasat, 151, 152, 444, 470, 645. 
Vasati (tnllago), 242. 

Vam-vartin goda, 436, 437. 

Vasika p. W. 339. 

Vnsistha r6. 59, 246, 249, 270, 289, 
314, 336. 462, 570, 590, 615. 
V’^asistha rs, 449. 

Vuiiisfcha dg, 1-03. 

Vasistha pat. 6. 612. 

Vaskala d. 476, 479. 

Vasn g. 129, 168. 460. 401, 474. 
Vasu k. (tf/Oedi), 330, 359. 

Vasil k. (of Magadha), 330. 
Vasndova k. and g. 3, 19-21, 65. 
Vasn-dhara mt. N. 279. 

Vasii-homa k. 655. 

Va.siiki, Naga k. 648. 

Vasu-mat k. 463. 

Vasu-nmt ? mt. N. 376. 

Vasurata pr. 599. 

Vasya k. and c. 273, 

Vasynta ? r. 8. 302. 

Vatadhana k. 312. 

Vatadhana p. NW, 312, 378. 
Vata-rapa gb. 267. 

Vata.svana mt. 277. 

V^atsa k. 307. 

Vat.sa c. and p. M. 307, 841, 351. 
Vatsa-pri k. 604, 607, 610. 

Vatsari ? r. 8. 302. 

Vatsya c. and p. M. 307, 341. 

Viiyn ( [Vind) g. 6. 10, 22. 23, 147, 
178, 473, 474, 489, 562, 582, 648. 
Veda- balm ra. 449. 

Vndamali r. 8 303. 

Veda-inantra p. M. 349. 

Vedanta 129, 683. 

Veda, 553-557, 685-687. 
i Vedasini r. M. 29J. 

I Veda-siras ra. 269. 

I Veda-smrta, -ti, r. M. 293. 

I Voda-sri ra. 449. 

I Veda-trayi ? r. M. 295. 

I Veda-vati r. N. 293. 

I Veda-vati r. 8. 303. 

! Vedi-pala r. C. ? 300. 

Vegetahloa, 165, 166, 244, 245. 

Vega- va hint r. M. ? 298 
Vena k. 146, 320, 688. 

Veya r. 8. 300. 

Vey5 r., aee VeyvR amd Veovft. 
i Veyi r. 8. 862. ^ 



?28 


itri>ix« 


Ve^ika p. W. P 378. 

VeuyS r. S. 803. 

Veim mt N. 278. 

Veyugradha pL 246. 

Veiiuka^). N. 879. 

Veiu-mati r. W. 373. 

Veuu-matl r. NW. P 375. 

Venus, planet, 9, 207, 431, 626. 
Veyva r. N. 286, 294. 

Veuva r. N. P 294. 

Yenva r. W. 289. ♦ 

VeuvS r. S. 294, 300. 

Veuya r. C. 300, 362. 

Ve^iya r. S. 303, 362. 

Veauapa^a P r. C. ? 300. 

VetSla gh. 46. 47. 

Vetasinl r. M. 293. 

Vetra-vatl r. M. 295, 343. 
Vetra-vatl r. W. 296. 

Vibhavarl demi-gs. 402, 406-408, 
411. 

Vibhltaka tr. 26. 

Vibodha hd. 3. 

Vibhu g. 449. 

Vibhati h 623. 

Vida pt. 165. 

Vlol-k§ka bd, 86. 

Yidala d. 476, 479. 

Vidarbha c. C. 76, 293, 299, 336, 
343, 359, 360, 365, 618, 664, 670. 
Vidarbha k. 385, 

Vidarbha t. 0. 335. 

Vidarbha q, 464. 

Videgha pr. 330. 

Videha c. and p. M. 75, 294, 329, 
330, 352, 356, 374. 

Vidhatr g. 10, 153, 154, 269. 
Vidi«5 ‘t. M. 295, 342, 343, 625, 
627. 

Vidi^a r. M. 295. 

Viddrathalf. 578. 

Viduratha k. 604, 605, 677. 
Viduratha k. 677. 

Vi-dve§aui gh. 267, 261, 267. 
Vidya (Sdence), 128. 

Vidyadhara dg. 115, 279, 401-404, 
^►7, 460, 571, 679. 

Vidyud-rflpa d. 6-8. 

Vignna-ra 3 dg. ? 32. 

Viqna pi. 165. 

Vlja-hirivl gb. 257, 261, 267. 
ViJ^alpS gb. 262. 

VijSpahiri^l gh. 261. 

Vija-pilraka tr, 25. 


Vijaya k. 411. 

Viiaya t. NE. 411. 

Vikara 228, 281, 232. 

Vikrama pr. 610. 

Vikrama-^lla k. 445. 

Vikranta pr. 140-143. 

Vikranta k. 449-452. 

Vikrti gs. 263. 

Village, ancient, 242. 

Vilola r. M. 455 (=YaTnuna) 
Vimala r. N. 306. 

Vimala r. E. ? 805. 

Vimaloda r. N. 305, 306. 
Vimalodaka r. N. ? 290, 306. 
Vimap(Javya p. M. 349. 
Vimarda k. 438. 

Vimba pt 114. 

Viih.% k. 618. 

Vlya r. 8. ? 303. 

Vinalana t. M. 290, 310, 312. 
Vinata k. 589. 

Vinata demi-gs. 559. 

Vinatasva k, 589. 

Vinaya k. 589. 

Vinda k. 345. 

Vindhaculaka p. N. 374. 
Vindhya mts. 0. 3, 11, 12, 17, 1 
285, 286, 298, 299, 810, 331, 34C 
344, 360, 517. 

Vindhya-maulcya p. C. 335. 
Vindhya-mdlika p. C. 335. 
Vindhya-pu§ika P p. C. 335. 
Vindhyavat m. 116. 

Vinna r. 0. 300. 


/"ipa^a r. N. 292. 

/"ipa^a r. 0. 297. 

/■ipa^cit g. 415. 

7ipa$cit k. 76, 76, 83. 

7ip5tha q. 446. 

7ipracitti d. 21, 102, 517. 
/^ipra^astaka p. W. 372. 
k^iprasika nf. 165. 

/ipula mts, N. 277, 281. 
/^ipulas^at rs. l2. 

7Iva k. 618. 

i^fra k, 627. .q 

^Ira q. 625, 631, 632, 637, b39, b. 

653, 658, 664. 

HrS r. 297. 

Vira-bhadra k. 627, 

^Trahotra P p. C. 344. 

^fraifi r. M. P 297. 

^iraiSki^ mt. N. 279. 

^irajas rs, 269, 



INDEX. 


721) 


Vii’ajas rs. 454. 

Yirankara r. 297. 

Virata k. 363, 382. 

Vira-vatl r. 297. 

Yirodhim yh. 257, 260, 265. 

Virtue (see itighteousnesa), 2, 14, 34, 
36, 468. 

Virupa gh, 263. 

Virya-candra k. 625. 

Virya-hari gb. 265. 

Visakha rst. 169, 370. 

Vi^akha-vat mt. N. 279. 

Visala mts. NW. 388. 

Visala d. 4-26. 

Visala k. 627. 630 636, 6U 646, 
650. 

Visala, vilhige, 452, 453. 

Vi.aia r. E.‘290, 297, 306. 

Visala t. M. 345. 

Visala r. C. 297. 

Visiiu g. 1, 2, 10, 17, 20, 21, 40, 70, 
98 102, 106, log, 112, 130, 206, 
219. 224, 225, 278, 290. 348, 349, j 
387, 389, 460, 465, 469-474, 489, , 
190.502-505,509,512,514, 522, i 
545,555 558.572,574. 582, 588, ' 
686 . : 
Viboka i/t/s. NW. 388. ! 

Vi^vacI aps. 571. j 

A'i.Wa-garbha k. 669. ; 

Vi^va-karmaii (=Tvastr) g, 456- . 

460, 475, 566. 569, 572,’ 57 4. 

\ i!5vH-krt .9.= Visva-karman. 
A’i‘<\a-mala r. E. ? 301. 

A^isvariiitra ra. 32-47, 50. 55-60, j 
309, 314, 347. 357, 462. 464, 591. i 
Vi.svavasu r/. 113, 115. ! 

Visva-wdiii w. 612 615. 

Vi<ve iJovas, gods, 32, 37, 153- 
156, 161, 163, 168, 178, 253, 4G1. 
462. 

Vltahavya/. 371, 600. 

Vltahotra p. C, 344. 

Vital airs, 66, 197, 202-204. 

Vitasta r. N. 291, 438. 

Vitihotra k. 344. 

Vibihotra p. 0. 344, 371. 

Vivasvat (Sun) g. 455, 457, 523. 

666, 576,. 577, 586. 

Viviihga, .gati, k. 618, 619. 
Vizagapatam t. SE. 334, 335. 

Vraja dt. and p, M. 308. 

Vrata-ghnT n M. P 293. 

Vrhad-ratha k. 380. 


Vrbaspati 10, 50, 101, 102, 109. 
Vrhas])ati rs. 664. 

Viihi cer, 165. 

Vrji di. M. 309. 

V rka k. 309. 

Vrka p. M. 309. 

Vi-sabha mt. N. 279-282. 
Vrsa-dhvaja h. E. 356. 
Vr|aparvan k. 669. 

Vrsavat mi. N. 278. 

V rsui p. W. 336. 

Vftra d. 4, 22, 614. 

V^rbra-gliuT r. M. P 293. 

Vulture hd. 46. 53. 72, 74, 85. 208, 
26.3, 680. 

Vyagbra-grlva p. 8E. 360. 
Vyaghra-mukba h. E. 356. 

Vyana {vital air), 204. 
Vyanjana-harika gb. 266. 

Vyasa rs. 2. 18, 20, 464, 677, 686. 
VyusitaWa k. 316, 350. 


Wages. 43, 46-60. 

Wain^gangd r. 0. 300, 306, 363. 
Warangal t. S. 337. 

Warda r. 8. 300, 364. 

Water (element), 217, 221, 222. 
Water-fowl, 30. 

Water-lily, 29, 30. 104, 116. 

Wealth (Artha), 2, 119, 128, 170- 
172, 186, 187, 198, 252, 264, 430. 
Well-rope and jar, 70-72, 91. 
Wheat, 84, 165. 181, 244, 245. 
Wind, see Vayu. 

Wim, 421. 

Wolf 72, 82, 85. 

Wood-perker hd. 28. 

Wool, 40. 


Worlds (lioka), 20, 22, 55, 57 71 
89, 96. 96, 102, 103, 110, Ul.’lio’ 
124, 128, 144, 151, 201, 206, 218’ 
223, 225. 2,27, 229, 246, 397, 462* 

574. 662. ^ 


Xanthoehymus tr. 28. 

Yadava race, 309, 336, 342 351 
362,359,371. ' 

Yadu k. 26, 364, 371. 

Yajna pfn, 247, 248. 

Vajur-Veda, 162, 206, 235 
Ya.ius%wm8,64, 235,458-460 484 
554—557, 561, 581. * 

Yak bt. 166. 



730 


INDKX. 


Ydmp.u.m. 

Yaksa ag, 46, 116, 232, 
246, 272, 279, 460, 4»7, 
571, 581, 648, 679; 

Yaksijia, 179. 

Yama g. 7, 10, 23, 48, 
71-77, 80-83, 88-90, 
162, 209, 216, 263, 420, 
460, 473, 474, 489, 638, 
668, 574, 675, 579, 680, 

Yama godn, 248. 

Yaml 566. 

Yamuna r. M. 121, 122, 
877, 378, 455, 461, 566, 


234, 236, 
, 541, 659, 


£ 0 , 66 - 68 , 
147, 158, 
, 456, 457, 
, 662, 566- 
, 683. 


ill I , Vf - 

VRTnnnfl, Ulh N. 377, 378. 


126, 291, 
676, 690. 


Yamuna^. N. 377. 
Yaraya est. 384. 
Ya^oda q. 617. 
Yaso-matl P r. N. 880, 
y-aiSomatya j3. N. 38(X 


Yati (music), 132. 

YatudhSna gh. 2G2. 

Yaudheya p. N W. 333, 380. 
Yauna p. (=Yavaiia), 381. 
Yavana p. NW. 284, 311, 314. 8] 
819, 328, 350, 371, 877, 384, M 
677. 

Yayati h 316, 336, 871, 384, 65 
663, 669. 

Year, 224-228, 271. 

Yena P p. NE. 881. 

Yoga, 91, 92, 100, 133. 

Yomna, 240, 276-277, 284. 
Yiidhisthira Ic. 9, 23, 363, 366. 
Yuga, '226. 

Yunjavat ? mt. N. 655. 
Yiithaga gods, 464. 

Zizyphus ir. 27. 
iJoaiac, 169, 348, 387, 580. 



Reed. on. 3.4 .6. •.■SPi. 
R. R. 

Q,B.Ko.SJA0 








WEE pindi»8 WORin 

W.KALAB4C4SLAim 
CALCUTTA- -inm. 



