g^^= 

1  2  55  5 

=cr> 

9   ^           ?co 

1   u.            00   ' 

*"**"  C-J    - 

t         c~o 

1     cr^™™""" ™ 

j     uj               ;■, — 

UNI\ 

111 

176 

^^^^ 

CO    | 

V 


y 


THE 

HERITAGE   OF   INDIA 

(The  Right  Reverend  V.  S.  Azariah, 

Editors    I  Bish°P  °f  DomakaL 

I  J.  N.  Farquhar,  M.A.,  D.Litt.  (Oxon.). 


Already  published. 

The  Heart  of  Buddhism.     K.  J.  Saunders,  M.A. 
Asoka.     Rev.  J.  M.  Macphail,  M.A.,  M.D. 
Indian  Painting.     Principal  Percy  Brown,  Calcutta. 
Kanarese  Literature.     Rev.  E.  P.  Rice,  B.A. 
The  Sarhkhya  System.      Prof.  A.  Berriedale  Keith,  D.C.L., 
D.Litt. 


Subjects  proposed  and  volumes  under  preparation. 

SANSKRIT   AND    PALI   LITERATURE. 

Hymns  from  the  Vedas.     Prof.  A.  A.  Macdonell,  Oxford. 
Anthology  of   Mahayana    Literature.       Prof.  L.  de  la  Vallee 

Poussin,  Ghent. 
Selections  from  the  Upani$ads.     F.  J.  Western,  M.A.,  Delhi. 
Scenes  from  the   Ramayana.       James  Morison,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 

Oxford. 
Selections  from  the  Mahabharata. 

THE   PHILOSOPHIES. 

The  Philosophy  of  the  Upani§ads.     Prof.  Franklin   Edgerton, 

University  of  Pennsylvania. 
Sankara's  Vedanta.     A.  K.  Sharma,  M.A.,  Patiala. 
Ramanuja's  Vedanta. 
The  Buddhist  System. 


11 

FINE  ART  AND  MUSIC. 

Indian  Architecture.     R.  L.  Ewing,  B.A.,  Madras. 
Indian  Sculpture.     Principal  W.  M.  Zumbro,  Madura. 
Indian  Music.     Rev.  H.  A.  Popley,  B.A.,  Erode. 
The  Minor  Arts.     Principal  Percy  Brown,  Calcutta. 
Indian  Coins.     C.  J.  Brown,  M.A.  (Oxon.),  Lucknow. 

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  EMINENT  INDIANS. 

Gautama  Buddha.     K.  J.  Saunders,  M.A.,  Rangoon. 

Ramanuja. 

Akbar.     F.  V.  Slack,  M.A.,  Calcutta. 

Tulsidas.     S.  K.  Datta,  B.A.,  M.B.,  Ch.B.,  Lahore. 

Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore.     E.  J.  Thompson,  M.A.,  Bankura. 

VERNACULAR  LITERATURE. 

The  Kurral.     Rev.  H.  A.  Popley,  B.A.,  Erode. 

Hymns  of  the  Tamil  Saivite  Saints.      G.  E.  Phillips,  M.A.  and 

Francis  Kingsbury,  B.A.,  Bangalore. 
Hymns  of  the  Alvars.     Rev.  J.  S.  M.  Hooper,  M.A.,  Madras. 
Hymns  of  Hindustan. 

Hymns  of  Bengali  Singers.     E.  J.  Thompson,  M.A.,  Bankura. 
Gujarati  Hymns. 

HISTORIES  OF  VERNACULAR  LITERATURE. 
Bengali.     C.  S.  Paterson,  M.A.,  Calcutta. 
Gujarat!. 
Hindi. 

Marathi.     Nicol  Macnicol,  M.A.,  D.Litt.,  Poona. 
Tamil.     Francis  Kingsbury,  B.A.,  Bangalore. 
Telugu. 
Sinhalese.     H.  S.  Perera,  B.A.,  Kandy. 

VILLAGE   LIFE. 

Modern    Folk    Tales.      W.    Norman     Brown,    M.A.,    Ph.D., 

Philadelphia. 
Indian  Village  Government. 


EDITORIAL   PREFACE 

Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  things  are  true, 
whatsoever  things  are  honourable,  whatsoever  things 
are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good 
report ;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any 
praise,  think  on  these  things. 

No  section  of  the  population  of  India  can  afford  to 
neglect  her  ancient  heritage.  In  her  literature,  philosophy, 
art,  and  regulated  life  there  is  much  that  is  worthless,  much 
also  that  is  distinctly  unhealthy ;  yet  the  treasures  of 
knowledge,  wisdom,  and  beauty  which  they  contain  are  too 
precious  to  be  lost.  Every  citizen  of  India  needs  to  use 
them,  if  he  is  to  be  a  cultured  modern  Indian.  This  is  as 
true  of  the  Christian,  the  Muslim,  the  Zoroastrian  as  of  the 
Hindu.  But,  while  the  heritage  of  India  has  been  largely 
explored  by  scholars,  and  the  results  of  their  toil  are  laid 
out  for  us  in  their  books,  they  cannot  be  said  to  be  really 
available  for  the  ordinary  man.  The  volumes  are  in  most 
cases  expensive,  and  are  often  technical  and  difficult. 
Hence  this  series  of  cheap  books  has  been  planned  by  a 
group  of  Christian  men,  in  order  that  every  educated 
Indian,  whether  rich  or  poor,  may  be  able  to  find  his  way 
into  the  treasures  of  India's  past.  Many  Europeans,  both 
in  India  and  elsewhere,  will  doubtless  be  glad  to  use  the 
series. 

The  utmost  care  is  being  taken  by  the  General  Editors 
in  selecting  writers,  and  in  passing  manuscripts  for  the 
press.  To  every  book  two  tests  are  rigidly  applied  :  every- 
thing must  be  scholarly  and  everything  must  be  sympathetic. 
The  purpose  is  to  bring  the  best  out  of  the  ancient 
treasuries,  so  that  it  may  be  known,  enjoyed,  and  used. 


-.- 


,  rA-i 

oot  Ms  nit 

2£  ai  8iriT 

ad* ; o 

nr    ! 

fit    5 

•   . 


?1o}  .• 
•ni/i    :  b: 

Kl-5!  . 


VITHOHA    OF   PANDHARPl'R. 


r 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  INDIA 


PSALMS  OF  MARATHA 

SAINTS 

One  Hundred  and  Eight  Hymns 
translated  from  the  Marathi 


BY 


NICOL   MACNICOL,   M.A.,  D.Litt. 

Author  of  "  Indian  Theism." 


Hool  33 


ASSOCIATION    PRESS 

5,   RUSSELL  STREET,  CALCUTTA 

LONDON  :    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS 

NEW  YORK,  TORONTO,  MELBOURNE, 
BOMBAY,   AND   MADRAS 


PRINTED   AT   THE   WESLEYAN    MISSION    PRESS 
MYSORE   CITY. 


PREFACE 

This  collection  contains  translations  of  one  hundred 
and  eight  poems  by  some  of  the  chief  Vaisnavite  poets  of 
the  Maratha  country.  The  number  seemed  not  inap- 
propriate in  view  of  the  fact  that  there  are  one  hundred 
and  eight  tulsl  beads  on  the  rosary  worn  by  the  Vaisnav- 
ite devotee.  Almost  every  one  of  these  poems  is  a  prayer, 
a  cry  of  the  saint  to  the  god  of  his  worship. 

It  has  not  been  an  easy  matter  to  decide  which  poems 
should  be  selected  for  translation.  Some  have  been  chosen 
because  they  have  a  place  in  the  regular  worship  of  the 
devotees,  as  repeated  daily  by  the  Vdrkaris  or  adherents  of 
the  Pandharpur  sect  or  sung  in  their  bhajans  or  song 
services.  But  it  was  not  easy  to  make  a  selection  from  so 
immense  a  body  of  literature  as  these  poets  have  pro- 
duced. I  accordingly  applied  to  Sir  R.  G.  Bhandarkar  with 
a  request  that  he  would  assist  me  in  making  a  choice,  and 
he  most  kindly  responded  by  furnishing  me  with  a  list  of  fifty 
abhahgs  of  Tukaram  from  those  which  he  uses  for  his 
daily  and  weekly  religious  exercises.  To  anyone  who 
knows  Sir  Ramkrishna  Bhandarkar  as  not  only  a  great 
Oriental  scholar  but  the  outstanding  representative  in 
India  to-day  of  the  ancient  school  of  bhakti,  the  fact  that 
these  psalms  minister  nourishment  to  a  spiritual  life  so 
beautiful  and  so  sincere  is  in  itself  sufficient  testimony  to 
their  religious  value.  For  him,  as  for  these  saints,  the 
life  of  the  spirit  is  the  only  life  livable,  and  fellowship  with 
God  its  purpose  and  its  goal.  When  one  has  known 
Sir  Ramkrishna  Bhandarkar  the   religion   of  these  saints 


6  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

ceases  to  be  of  merely  antiquarian  interest.  He  is  one  of 
them  still  left  among  us  for  our  reverence,  and  the  strength 
and  purity  and  tenderness  of  their  devotion  live  again  in 
him. 

To  other  friends  as  well  I  have  to  acknowledge  a 
deep  debt  of  gratitude.  I  am  very  conscious  of  my  own 
limitations  as  a  student  of  the  Marithi  language.  I  know 
how  easy  it  is  to  misunderstand  an  allusion  or  to  mis- 
interpret a  phrase  in  these  poems.  Ideas  their  authors 
are  born  to,  and  live  by,  we  of  the  West  grasp  only  with 
an  effort.  For  that  reason  a  foreigner's  renderings  must 
often  be  very  imperfect.  Mine  would  be  much  more 
imperfect  even  than  they  are,  were  it  not  for  the  kindness 
of  two  friends,  Professor  W.  B.  Patwardhan,  of  the 
Fergusson  College,  Poona,  and  Dr.  V.  A.  Sukhtankar, 
of  Indore.  They  have  both  read  the  proofs  and  have  given 
me  many  criticisms  and  suggestions.  I  have  to  acknow- 
ledge with  much  gratitude  this  help.  I  have  tried  to 
improve  the  translations  in  many  instances  in  accordance 
with  their  suggestions,  but  I  am  well  aware  that  I  have  not 
by  any  means  succeeded  in  removing  all  their  defects.  If, 
however,  this  little  book  awakens  a  wider  interest  in  a 
little-known  company  of  sincere  singers  and  in  their 
religion  of  passionate  longing  for  the  divine  fellowship, 
I  shall  feel  richly  rewarded. 

Poona,  N.  M. 

August,  1919. 


CONTENTS 


page 

Introduction           ..             ..            ..            ..11 

Note            ..            ..            ..            ..            ..34 

JNANESVAR 

I. 

The  Great  Hearted             . .             . .             . .     35 

II. 

The  Rapture  of  devotion                 . .             . .     36 

III. 

Aequanimitas          . .             . .            . .            . .     37 

IV. 

Truth        . .             . .             . .             . .             . .     37 

V. 

"Cry  Hari"           ..             ..             ..             ..38 

VI. 

The  Name               ..            ..             ..             ..39 

VII. 

11  There  Needs  Not  a  Propitious  Hour  "      . .     40 

VIII. 

The  Storehouse  of  Bliss                  . .             . .     40 

MUKTA    BAI 

IX. 

The  Land  of  Topsy-turvy                . .            . .     41 

X. 

A  Remonstrance                  . .             . .             . .     41 

NAMDEV 

XI. 

*•  Gone  are  the  Saints  " 

..     42 

XII. 

The  Heart's  Desire 

..     42 

XIII. 

"0  Haste  and  Come" 

..     43 

XIV. 

A  Vow 

..     44 

XV. 

One  Thing 

..     44 

XVI. 

A  Bitter  Cry 

..     44 

XVII. 

Seeking 

..     45 

XVIII. 

11  My  Mother  Thou  " 

..     46 

XIX. 

The  Men  of  Faith 

..     46 

XX. 

The  Reign  of  Peace 

..     47 

XXI. 

' '  Who  Vasudev  in  All  Can  See  "               . .     47 

XXII. 

Illumination           . .            . .             . .             . .     48 

JANABAI 

XXIII. 

PUNDLIK      .  .                    .  .                 .  .                  .  .                  .  .       49 

XXIV. 

Grinding    . .            . .             . .             . .            . .     49 

XXV. 

The  Besetting  God 

..     50 

PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 


PAGE 


XXVI. 

God  the  Known  and  God  the  Unknown  . . 

XXVII. 

The  Ninefold  Path  of  Bhakti 

XXVIII. 

The  Scorner 

XXIX. 

Men's  Reviling 

XXX. 

* '  God  Dwells  in  All  " 

XXXI. 

The  Spiritual  Pandhari     . . 

XXXII. 

' '  Saints  Great  of  Heart  "  . . 

TUKARAM 

XXXIII. 

The  Mother's  House 

XXXIV. 

The  Suppliant 

XXXV. 

A  Beggar  for  Love 

XXXVI. 

"God  Who  is  Our  Home" 

XXXVII. 

The  Strife  of  Sense 

XXXVIII. 

Waiting 

XXXIX. 

Desolation 

XL. 

"Thee,  Lord  of  Pity,  I  Beseech" 

XLI. 

From  the  Depths 

XLII. 

Forsake  Me  Not  ! . . 

XLIII. 

Mother  Vithoba 

XLIV. 

Me  Miserable 

XLV. 

Within  My  Heart 

XLVI. 

The  Restless  Heart 

XLVII. 

' '  I  Long  to  See  Thy  Face  " 

XLVIII. 

"  Keep  Me  from  Vanity  " . . 

XLIX. 

Aspiration 

L. 

The  Only  Refuge 

LI. 

•  Desolate    . .            . .            . . 

LII. 

"O  Save  Me,  Save  Me!"  .. 

mi. 

Near  Yet  Far 

LIV. 

Beyond  the  Mountains,  God 

LV. 

"  I  Cannot  Understand:  I  Love" 

LVI. 

Not  One  But  Two 

LVII. 

Man's  Extremity  .. 

LVIII. 

Though  He  Slay  Me 

LIX. 

Pandurang 

LX. 

Complete  Surrender 

LXI. 

To  Thy  Dear  Feet  ! 

CONTENTS 

LXII. 

He  Leadeth  Me 

LXIII. 

The  Joy  of  the  Name 

LXIV 

Love's  Captive 

LXV. 

The  Bhakta's  Duty 

LXVI. 

Love  Finds  Out  God 

LXVII. 

* '  God  is  Ours  " 

LXVIII. 

' '  One  Thing  I  Do 

LXIX. 

He  Knows  Our  Needs 

LXX. 

1  •  In  Him  Abide  "  . . 

LXXI. 

The  Boldness  of  Faith 

LXXII. 

Beata  Culpa 

LXXIII. 

The  Snare  of  Pride 

LXXIV. 

I  Am  Poor  and  Needy 

LXXV. 

A  Blind  Leader  of  the  Blind 

LXXVI. 

The  Pride  of  Knowledge  . . 

LXXV1I. 

The  Unveiling  of  Love 

LXXVIII. 

The   Haven 

LXXIX. 

Weariness 

LXXX. 

God's  Counterfeit.. 

LXXXI. 

Self-Surrender 

LXXXII. 

Dying  to  Live 

LXXXIII. 

The  Root  of  Longing 

LXXXIV. 

The  Secret  of  Peace 

LXXXV. 

The  Fellowship  of  Saints 

LXXXVI. 

The  Simple  Path 

LXXXVII. 
.XXXVIII. 

The  Way  of  Love 
The  Thief 

LXXXIX. 

The  Traveller 

XC. 

By  Faith  Alone 

XCI. 

A  Steadfast  Mind 

XCII. 

The  Name  of  the  Living  One 

XCIII. 

The  Dedicated  Life 

XCIV. 

The  Inward   Purpose 

xcv. 

The  Bhakta's  Task 

XCVI. 

Maya 

XCVII. 

' '  The  World  Passeth  Away  ' ' 

XCVIII. 

The  Way  of  Death 

XCIX. 

' '  The  Night  Cometh  " 

c. 

'Tis  All  for  Naught 

10 


PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 


CI.    The  Divine  Inspiration 
CII.     Drowning  Men 
CIII.     Without  and  Within 
CIV.     "  And  Have  Not  Charity 
CV.     The  Mendicant 
CVI.    The  Proud  Advaitist 
CVII.    The  Hypocrite:  I  .. 
CVIII.     The  Hypocrite  :  II 
Bibliography 
Index  I 
Index  II 


90 
90 
91 
93 
95 


INTRODUCTION 

The  period  of  the  Maratha  renaissance,  during  which 
the  great  poets  and  saints  of  Maharastra  flourished, 
extends  from  the  thirteenth  to  the  seventeenth  century. 
This  literary  revival  found  its  impulse  in  a  religious 
awakening.  It  is  indeed  appropriate  to  call  the  poets 
of  this  period  psalmists,  because  their  most  characteristic, 
certainly  their  most  popular,  work  consisted  of  short 
lyrical  utterances,  called  abhahgs,  which  usually  express 
religious  longing  or  describe  religious  experience.  All  those 
whose  work  is  represented  in  this  volume  were  Vaisnavites, 
adherents  of  the  bhakti  sect,  whose  members,  while 
they  are  to  be  found  at  many  different  periods  and  in  many 
different  districts  of  India,  and  while  they  worshipped  a 
variety  of  deities,  are  united  in  seeking  to  reach  God  by 
the  path  of  bhakti,  or  loving  devotion.  Most  of  these  saints 
were  at  the  same  time,  according  to  the  tradition,  ardent 
devotees  of  Vithoba  of  Pandharpur.  How  the  shrine  of 
this  god  became  the  high  place  of  bhakti  worship  in  the 
Maratha  country  we  cannot  now  tell.  It  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  around  it  and  its  god,  Vithoba  or  Vitthal,  whose 
name  is  believed  by  some  scholars  to  be  a  corruption  of 
Visnu  and  who  is  identified  with  Krisna,  has  gathered  for 
many  centuries  the  devotion  of  a  great  company  of 
worshippers,  who  come  there  on  pilgrimage  singing  songs 
of  praise.  Those  saints  who  in  their  lives  centuries  ago 
had  been  devoted  to  the  god  are  still  borne  in  palankins, 
in  which  are  placed  models  of  their  holy  footprints,  to  the 
presence  of  Vithoba  in  this  village  on  the  river  Bhima. 

On  Bhima's  banks  all  gladness  is 
In  Pandhari,  abode  of  bliss. 

This  is  the  refrain  of  many  a   song  that  is   re-echoed   by 
the  choirs  of  singers  that  journey  with   eager  expectation 


^ 


12  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

year  by  year,  to  this  Deccan  village  to  look  upon  the   face 
of  the  god. 

There  is  little  outwardly  to  distinguish  the  worship  at 
this  shrine  from  that  of  a  hundred  others  throughout  the 
land.  The  image  is  rudely  fashioned  and  has  no  grace  of 
form.1  The  worship  is  that  which  is  commonly  performed 
in  any  Hindu  temple.  What  gives  it  its  distinctive  char- 
acter is  the  special  song-services,  the  kirtans  and  bhajuns 
that  are  conducted  for  the  instruction  of  pilgrims,  and  in 
which  their  deep  religious  emotion  finds  its  fullest  utterance. 
Great  numbers  of  pilgrims  sit  for  hours  at  Pandharpur  and 
the  other  village  centres  of  the  cult,  listening  to  the  exhor- 
tations of  some  famous  preacher  or  Haridas,  who  bases  his 
discourse  upon  verses  from  such  poet-saints  as  Jfiandev  or 
Ekanath  or  Tukaram.  With  the  teaching  is  skilfully 
combined  the  singing  of  a  choir.  These  kirtans  have  a 
profound  emotional  effect  upon  the  multitudes  gathered  in 
eager  expectation  at  the  holy  place.  The  songs  of  the  old 
saints  awaken,  and  in  some  degree  satisfy,  the  deep  desires 
of  their  hearts.  So  also  groups  will  gather  for  what  are 
called  bhajans,  when  there  is  no  preaching  but  they  con- 
tinue often  for  hours  singing  those  songs  of  longing  and 
of  ecstacy. 

It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  this  religious  and  intel- 
lectual awakening  was  part  of  a  movement  widely  spread 
throughout  India.  It  is,  however,  only  with  the  Maratha 
poet  saints  that  we  are  here  concerned.  In  its  influence 
upon  all  strata  of  society  this  movement,  in  the  opinion  of 
Mr.  M.  G.  Ranade,  was  far  more  powerful  than  the  corres- 
ponding movement  in  northern  and  eastern  India.  Cer- 
tainly its  leaders  were  drawn  from  every  class,  from  the 
highest  to  the  humblest.  "  Roughly  speaking,"  says  Mr. 
Ranade  in  his  Rise  of  the  Maratha  Power,  l  we  may  state 
that  the  history  of  the  religious  revival  in  Maharastra 
covers  a  period  of  nearly  five  hundred  years,  and  during 
this  period  some  fifty  saints  and  prophets  flourished  in  this 
land  who  left  their  mark  upon  the  country  and  its  people. 
A  few  of  these  saints  were  women,  a  few  were  Muham- 

1  See  frontispiece. 


/ 


INTRODUCTION  13 


madan  converts  to  Hinduism,  nearly  half  of  them  were 
Brahmans,  while  there  were  representatives  in  the  other 
half  from  among  all  the  other  castes,  Marathas,  kunbls, 
tailors,  gardeners,  potters,  goldsmiths,  repentant  prostitutes, 
and  slave  girls,  even  the  out-caste  Mahars."  From  the 
traditional  account  of  some  of  these  saints,  as  well  as 
from  a  study  of  their  voluminous  poems,  we  can  form 
some  conception  of  the  character  of  this  remarkable 
movement. 

The  earliest  of  them  all,  a  dimly  discerned  but  power- 
ful figure,  is  a  Brahman,  named  Jnanesvar,  whose  chief 
work,  the  Jndnesvari,  can  be  dated  with  certainty,  having 
been  completed  in  the  year  A.D.  1290.  "  Jnanesvar's  influ- 
ence," says  Mr.  Ranade,  "  has  been  greater  than  that  of 
any  other  Maratha  sddhu  (saint)  except  Tukaram.  ... 
Jnanesvar  appeals  to  the  pantheistic  tendencies  of  our 
people's  intellect,  while  the  charm  of  Tukaram  and 
Namdev  lies  in  their  appeal  to  the  heart  and  in  the  subjective 
truth  of  the  experiences  felt  by  them  in  common  with  all 
who  are  religious  by  nature."  To  the  common  people  the 
author  of  the  Jhanesvart  is  little  more  than  the  shadow  of 
a  great  name,  but  it  is  a  name  that  is  linked  with  that  of 
Tukaram  in  the  songs  that  they  sing  as  they  go  on  pil- 
grimage to  the  shrine  at  Pandharpur.  As  they  go  they 
chant  two  names  in  chorus,  as  the  names  of  the  chief 
prophets  of  their  faith,  "  Jnanoba,  Tukaram  ;  Jiianoba, 
Tukaram."  These  two,  the  one  in  the  thirteenth  and  the 
other  in  the  seventeenth  century,  may,  with  Namdev, 
whom  we  may  place  between  them  in  the  fourteenth 
century,  be  taken  as  representative  in  their  life  and  in  their 
influence  of  the  whole  of  this  social  and  religious  quicken- 
ing in  the  Maratha  country.  From  the  traditional 
accounts  of  these  saints — even  though  these  are  largely 
legendary  and  unreliable — as  well  as  from  the  specimens 
of  their  voluminous  poems  that  are  translated  here,  we  may 
be  able  to  form  some  conception  of  the  character  of  this 
remarkable  movement. 

The  life  of  Jnanesvar  is  surrounded  by  many  obscurities. 
Much  controversy  has  centred  round  the  question  whether 
there  were  not  really  two  Jfianesvars,  the  one  the  author 

2 


14  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

of  the  Jnanesvari  and  the  Amrit  Anubhav — both  of  them 
poems  of  a  philosophical  or  theological  character — the 
other  the  author  of  abhahgs  or  short  lyrics,  the  utterances 
of  a  much  more  popular  and  personal  religion.  The 
question  is  one  which  cannot  be  investigated  here,  but  it 
must  be  admitted  that  the  hypothesis  that  there  were 
really  two  of  the  name  resolves  some  difficulties  which  the 
traditional  history  undoubtedly  presents.  If,  however,  we 
accept  the  traditional  account,  this  Brahman  poet  belonged 
to  Alandi,  a  village  twelve  miles  north  of  Poona.  His 
father  had  come  there  when  on  pilgrimage  and  had  married 
a  woman  of  the  place,  but,  presently,  he  resumed  his 
wandering,  and  proceeded  to  Benares.  He  spent  some 
time  there  under  the  instruction  of  a  guru,  or  spiritual  teacher, 
but  presently  the  sannydsi,  in  defiance  of  religious  law  and 
usage,  resumed  his  family  duties  and  returned  to  Alandi. 
Three  sons  and  a  daughter  were  born  to  him,  but  when 
this  grave  irregularity  of  conduct  was  known  he  was 
excommunicated.  The  persecution  that  he  and  his  wife 
had  to  endure  is  said  to  have  caused  them  to  commit 
suicide,  but  their  inheritance  of  trouble  passed  to  the 
children,  who  suffered  much  at  the  hands  of  the 
Brahmans. 

Jnanesvar's  two  brothers,  Nivrittinath,  who  was  the 
eldest  of  the  family,  and  Sopandev,  and  his  sister, 
Muktabai,  are  all  said  to  have  been,  like  himself,  saints 
and  poets.  Some  of  the  legendary  tales  that  have  been 
handed  down  furnish  indications  of  the  conflict  with 
Brahmanical  authority  and  orthodoxy,  which  evidently 
centred  around  these  " sannyasVs  children."  Jnanesvar  is 
said  to  have  confounded  his  Brahman  persecutors  by 
causing  a  buffalo  to  recite  the  Vedas,  though  these  are 
scriptures  that  only  the  twice-born  may  read.  He  is 
alleged,  on  another  occasion,  to  have  gone  riding  on  a  wall 
to  meet  a  famous  Brahman  yogi  and  miracle-worker,  who, 
to  impress  young  heretics,  was  approaching  him  riding  on 
a  tiger  with  a  snake  for  a  whip. 

The  work  upon  which  JnaneAvar's  fame  chiefly  rests 
is  the  Jnanesvari,  a  free  and  copious  paraphrase  in  Marathi 
verse  of  the  Bhagavadgita.      The  seven  hundred  slokas  of 


INTRODUCTION  15 

the  Gltd  are  here  expanded  into  ten  thousand  verses. 
This  poem  forms,  perhaps,  the  most  important  work  in  all 
Marathi  literature,  and  has  exercised  a  unique  influence 
both  upon  the  thought  and  upon  the  language  of  Maha- 
rastra.  The  fact  that  Jnanesvar  used  the  people's  language 
to  convey  thoughts  hitherto  concealed  in  Sanskrit  and  so 
reserved  for  the  learned,  was  in  itself  an  indication  that  a 
new  religious  spirit  was  abroad.  What  he  did  for  Marathi 
has  been  compared  to  what  Dante  did  for  Italian.  He 
loved  the  "  national  Marathi  speech,"  and  showed  how  it 
could  convey  sweet  sounds  and  "  clear  thoughts  like  moon- 
light," and  how  in  his  verse  "  lotus  flowers  spring  up  in 
such  abundance."  "All  the  weight  and  distinction  that 
the  Marathi  language  possesses,"  says  Mr.  M.  G.  Ranade, 
"  it  owes  to  Jnanesvar.  .  . .  To  realize  the  depth  of  meaning 
that  is  contained  in  the  language  one  must  study  the 
JndneSvarV 

The  tradition  affirms  that  Jnanesvar,  like  most  of  the 
Marathi  school  of  bhakti,  was  a  devotee  of  Vithoba.  of 
Pandharpur.  It  is  strange,  therefore,  to  find  no  mention 
of  this  god  in  either  the  Jndnesvari,  or  his  other  philo- 
sophical poem,  the  Amrit  Anubhav.  Perhaps  it  may  have 
been  another  and  later  poet  of  the  same  name  who  is  the 
author  of  these  shorter  songs  or  psalms,  and  who  is  linked 
in  the  legend  with  the  next  notable  saint  of  the  succession. 
This  is  Namdev,  the  author  of  many  simple  and  passionate 
lyrics  that  give  expression  to  varying  phases  of  an  ardent 
devotion  to  the  god  of  Pandharpur.  The  language  of 
Namdev's  verses  is  much  more  modern  than  that  of  the 
Jnane&vari,  so  that,  though  the  tradition  gives  his  date  as 
from  1270  to  1350,  the  probabilities  are  that  Sir  R.  G. 
Bhandarkar  is  right  in  placing  him  a  century  later.  He 
was  born  in  a  village  near  Karhad,  in  the  Satara  District. 
How  it  came  about  that  Namdev's  heart  turned  with  such 
passionate  adoration  to  Vithoba  is  somewhat  obscure. 
According  to  one  account  he  bore,  like  many  other  saints, 
from  his  infancy  the  marks  of  sainthood.  The  first  word 
he  spoke  was  "  Sri  Vitthal  "  ;  he  learned  nothing  at  school, 
for  he  cared  for  nothing  but  kirtans  (services  of  song). 
That  is  one  way  in  which  saints  are  made,  but  another  is 


16  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

the  way  of  conversion,  and  there  seems  to  be  more  authority 
for  the  story  that  Namdev  was  converted  from  an  evil  life 
to  service  of  Vithoba.1  Several  abhangs — among  others 
one  said  to  be  by  his  wife — refer  to  an  early  career  of 
lawlessness  brought  to  a  sudden  end  by  his  contrition  at 
the  tears  shed  by  a  woman  whom  he  had  made  a  widow. 
In  his  remorse  he  would  have  taken  his  own  life  in  the 
temple  of  Nagnath,  but  he  found  comfort  and  forgiveness 
when  he  sought  instead  the  presence  of  the  more  gracious 
Vithoba,  and  from  that  day  onward  he  gave  himself  with 
complete  devotion  to  the  worship  of  this  god. 

The  chief  religious  interest  in  Namdev's  life  lies  in 
tracing  a  change  or  development  in  his  thought  which  his 
abhangs  reveal.  At  first  he  is  the  purely  emotional  bhakta, 
all  tears  and  cries  and  raptures.  Later  in  his  life,  however, 
he  seems  to  have  passed  through  an  experience  which 
greatly  altered  his  outlook  on  the  world.  In  the  first  stage 
of  his  experience  Vithoba  of  Pandharl  is  the  sole  object  of 
his  devotion ;  he  can  scarcely  tear  himself  away  from  the 
precincts  of  his  temple.  At  a  later  period  Vithoba  has 
become  for  him  no  more  than  a  symbol  of  the  supreme 
soul  that  pervades  the  universe.  He  is  still  a  bhakta,  but 
he  is  no  longer  visited  by  the  gusts  of  passion  that  had 
once  shaken  his  soul.  An  attitude  of  spiritual  indifference 
is  now  his  supreme  attainment.  His  faith  rests  upon  a 
philosophical  interpretation  of  the  universe,  which  blunts 
the  sensations  which  formerly  harassed  him  and  brings 
him,  if  not  peace,  at  least  passivity.  This  change,  or 
growth,  is  reflected  in  his  abhangs,  which  have  not,  of 
course,  come  down  to  us  in  their  historical  setting  or  in 
the  order  of  their  composition. 

One  of  the  members  of  Namdev's  household  has  also 
a  place  among  the  Maratha  poet  saints.  This  is  a  &udra 
woman,  named  Janabai,  who,  according  to  the  story,  became 
a  domestic  slave  of  the  poet  because  of  her  admiration  of 
his  devotion.  She  spent  her  whole  life  in  his  service  and 
Vithoba's.     The  god  is  declared  in  the  legend  to  have  been 

1  There  is  curious  confirmation  of  this  in  the  recently  discovered 
and  very  early  book  Lila  Cariira,  a  scripture  of  the  interesting  sect  of 
Mfinbhaus 


INTRODUCTION  17 

constantly  in  her  company,  grinding  corn  for  her,  drawing 
water,  helping  her  to  wash  the  clothes.  It  is  not  always  clear, 
however,  whether  the  abhahgs  do  not  really  describe,  not 
a  personal  relationship  of  communion,  but  a  recognition 
of  the  divine  immanence  in  all  things.  When  she  says 
that,  "  in  the  inner  shrine  of  contemplation  Pandurang 
comes  to  meet  us  and  clasps  us  to  his  breast,"  it  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  she  is  not  describing  an  experience  of 
spiritual  fellowship.  But  when  she  says,  referring  to  the 
household  occupations, 

Grinding,  pounding — this  our  game, 
Burn  we  up  all  sin  and  shame, 

there  is  here  more  than  a  suspicion  of  advaita  doctrine. 
She  is  reaching  beyond  the  may  a,  the  M  sport,"  of  life  and 
its  duties  to  an  identity  with  Brahman  beyond  the  distinc- 
tion of  good  and  evil.  This  is  fully  unveiled  in  another 
abkahg,1  which,  after  expressing  a  feeling  that  has  all  the 
appearance  of  being  parallel  to  that  daily  comradeship 
with  Christ  which  Christian  saints  have  ever  sought, 
betrays  itself  in  its  conclusion  as  no  more  than  a  meta- 
physical affirmation  of  identity  with  the  All. 

The  new  knowledge  that  he  attained  and  the  changed 
outlook  that  it  brought  to  him  are  expressed  in  his  prayer 
to  Vithoba:  "  Let  me  see  thy  face  with  my  eyes  every- 
where and  let  all  creatures  be  my  friends."  He  has  not 
ceased  to  follow  bhakti,  but  it  is  no  longer  with  the  simpli- 
city of  his  early  love.  Far  more  difficult  than  to  empty 
the  sea  or  to  measure  the  sky  is  "  the  bhakti  of  KeSav,"  for 
it  requires  that  all  sense  of  "  I  "  and  w  thou  "  shall  utterly 
disappear.  "  Ah,  God,  a  single  atom  of  distinction  is  huge 
as  Mount  Meru."  So  also  the  bhakta  must  realize  that 
God  is  in  all  creatures  ;  there  must  be  no  love  of  the  flesh, 
no  attachment  to  the  things  of  sense.  He  must  pass  beyond 
good  and  evil,  beyond  love  and  hate,  beyond  all  storms  and 
tempests  into  the  quiet  of  passivity.  Vithoba  is  now  the 
one  real  God  to  him,  but  not  in  the  sense,  as  formerly  he 
had  thought,  that  all  other  gods  are  false  and  that  he  dare 
not    look    upon    them  but  only   on  the  idol  of  Vithoba. 

"  No.  XXIV,  on  pp.  49f. 


18  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

He  is  the  sole-existent  Brahman  with  "  thousands  of  worlds 
in  every  hair."  Namdev's  denunciations  of  idolatry  in  his 
abhahgs  may  be  as  much  inspired  by  the  contempt  of  the 
philosopher  as  by  the  theistic  temper  that  Muhammadan- 
ism  was  beginning  at  this  time  to  introduce  to  India.  Not 
only,  however,  does  he  denounce  idolatry  and,  like 
Jnanesvar,  the  gross",  popular  worships.  He  brushes  aside, 
in  a  fashion  that  would  hardly  be  possible  had  he  come 
under  the  influence  of  the  author  of  the  JiianeSvari,  the 
authority  of  the  sacred  scriptures.  '*  Do  not  study 
the  Vedas,"  he  says,  "  needless  is  scriptural  instruction. 
Repeat  the  praises  of  the  Name." 

Namdev  obtained  samddhi  at  the  age  of  eighty,  and  is 
buried  at  the  great  door  of  the  temple  of  Vithoba  at 
Pandharpur.  Whoever  enters  to  look  upon  the  face  of 
the  god,  to  whom  he  rendered  such  intense  devotion,  must 
step  across  the  place  where  the  saint  lies  buried.  Thus 
he  remains  still,  as  it  were,  a  stepping  stone  to  the 
presence  of  Vithoba. 

But  of  all  the  Maratha  bhaktas  the  greatest  in  the 
popular  estimation,  certainly  the  widest  in  the  extent  of 
his  influence,  is  Tukaram.  He  was  a  contemporary  of 
the  Maratha  national  hero,  Sivaji,  and  it  can  scarcely  be 
questioned  that,  by  the  work  that  he  accomplished  in 
drawing  together  by  means  of  a  common  religious 
enthusiasm  all  classes  of  the  community,  he  contributed 
to  the  formation  under  that  leader  of  a  Maratha  kingdom 
sufficiently  strong  and  united  to  resist  with  success  the 
power  of  the  Mogul  Empire.  The  popularity  of  his 
verses  has  continued  undiminished  until  to-day,  and  they 
are  so  widely  known  among  all  classes  of  Marathis  that 
many  of  them  have  almost  come  to  have  the  vogue  and 
authority  of  proverbs.  They  are  more  familiar  throughout 
Maharastra  than  are  (or  were)  in  Scotland  "  the  psalms  of 
David  or  the  songs  of  Burns."  Not  only  are  they  prized 
by  the  most  illiterate  worshipper  of  Vithoba  as  the  "  Veda  " 
of  their  sect,  but  they  furnish  a  large  portion  of  the 
psalmody  of  the  reforming  Prarthana  Samaj,  while  some 
of  the  greatest  of  modern  Indians,  such  as  M.  G.  Ranade 
and  Sir  R.  G.  Bhandarkar,  have  found  in  them,  perhaps 


more    ths 


INTRODUCTION  19 


more  than  in  the  ancient  scriptures,  nourishment  for 
their  own  religious  life. 

Tukaram  was  a  Sudra  grain-seller  and  was  born  in 
1608  at  Dehu,  a  village  about  eighteen  miles  north-west 
of  Poona.  He  had  an  inherited  interest  in  the  god, 
Vithoba,  for  his  family  for  at  least  seven  generations  had 
been  devout  worshippers  of  the  god  and  had  regularly 
visited  hir  shrine  at  Pandharpur.  One  of  his  abhahgs 
gives  an  account  of  the  process  by  which  he  was  drawn 
from  occupation  with  the  world  to  "  lay  hold  in  his  heart 
of  the  feet  of  Vithoba."  It  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  one  of 
those  periods  of  famine  that  must  have  been  frequent  and 
terrible  in  these  days.  It  brought  him,  he  says,  to  poverty 
and  shame  and  sorrow.  One  of  his  two  wives  perished, 
and  he  lets  us  hear  her  dying  cry,  "Food,  food."  This 
experience  appears  to  have  been  what  made  him  give 
himself  with  complete  devotion  to  the  service  of  the  god. 
In  another  abhang  he  tells  us  how  a  "  king  of  gurus  "  came 
to  him  in  a  dream,  and,  giving  him  the  mantra  or  sacred 
formula,  "  Ram,  Krisna,  Hari,"  pointed  him  to  "the  ship 
of  Pandurang."  This  mysterious  teacher  is  called  Babaji, 
and  he  was  of  the  spiritual  line  of  Raghav  Caitanya  and 
Kesav  Caitanya.  This  may  possibly  indicate  that  Tukaram 
came  at  some  time  under  the  influence  of  teachers  belonging 
to  the  Vaisnavite  sect  founded  by  Caitanya  in  Bengal  at  the 
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century. 

The  story  of  Tukaram  shows  us  a  man  possessing 
much  unworldly  charm  of  character.  His  occupation 
with  religion  is,  indeed,  as  in  the  case  of  Namdev,  a  cause 
of  bitter  complaint  by  his  wife.  His  children  can  get 
nothing  to  eat  for  their  father  lives  at  the  temple.  There 
are  many  tales  of  his  unworldliness,  such  as  how  the 
compassion  of  the  saint — in  this  respect  one  of  the  kin  of 
St.  Francis  of  Assisi — for  "  his  little  sisters,  the  birds,"  made 
him  allow  them  to  have  their  will  of  the  grain  in  the  corn 
fields  that  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  by  the  farmer  who 
owned  them.  Another  story  tells  how  the  birds,  recogniz- 
ing him  as  "a  friend  of  all  the  world,"  perched  fearlessly 
upon  him  in  the  temple  court.  He  does  not  appear  to 
have  gone  on  pilgrimage,  reckoning  such  religious  practices 


20  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

as  of  no  value  for  the  making  of  men  better.  JiianeSvar 
also  had  condemned  them,  but  he  is  said,  nevertheless,  as 
we  have  seen,  to  have  conformed  in  this  matter  to  the 
established  custom.  According  to  a  familiar  story, 
Tukaram  refused  to  travel  to  Benares,  but  gave  those  who 
were  going  there  and  would  have  him  join  them  an 
unripe  gourd,  bidding  them  dip  it  in  the  sacred  waters  of 
the  Ganges  and  see  if  thereby  it  would  become  sweet  to 
taste. 

Tukaram  is  said  to  have  suffered  much  persecution 
from  Brahmans,  who  saw  in  this  Sudra's  popularity  as  a 
religious  teacher  an  infringement  of  their  prerogative. 
Their  opposition  is  said  to  have  culminated  in  a  command 
to  him  to  cast  his  poems  into  the  river  Indrayani,  on  the 
bank  of  which  Dehu  stands.  He  obeyed,  but  his  god 
himself  intervened  and  saved  them  from  destruction. 
Another  story,  which  appears  to  be  of  doubtful  authen- 
ticity and  may  have  been  invented  to  exalt  the  poet, 
represents  Sivaji  as  in  vain  inviting  the  humble  saint  to 
visit  his  court,  and  even,  under  the  spell  of  Tukaram,  as 
proposing  himself  to  quit  his  kingdom  and  give  himself  up 
to  a  life  of  contemplation.  Tukaram  is  believed  to  have 
been  miraculously  translated  to  Vaikuntha — the  heaven  of 
Visnu — in  the  year  1649.  Several  early  manuscripts  of  his 
poems,  however,  have  simply  the  statement  noted  on 
them  that  in  that  year  on  a  certain  day  he  ''disappeared,"  or, 
according  to  one  of  them,  "  he  set  out  for  a  holy  place." 

The  most  authoritative  collection  of  Tukaram's  abhaiigs 
contains  over  4,600  of  these  poems.  This  is  far  short, 
however,  of  the  number  that  he  is  credited  with  having 
composed.  Namdev  is  said  to  have  enjoined  upon  him  in 
a  dream  to  produce  enough  to  realize  the  earlier  poet's 
ambition  that  the  world  should  possess  a  hundred  crores 
or  one  billion  abhahgs.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  many  even  of 
those  that  are  attributed  to  him  are  in  all  probability  for- 
geries for  which  popularity  and  authority  have  been  sought 
by  (the  help  of  a  great  name.  This,  no  doubt,  has  helped 
to  make  still  more  bewildering  the  inconsistencies  of 
thought  that  appear  in  Tukaram's  work,  as  in  all  the  work 
of  these  far  from  logical  or  systematic  thinkers.     Nor  are 


the    nnem 


INTRODUCTION  21 


the  poems  arranged  in  any  chronological  order.  Any 
attempt  to  trace  a  process  of  development  in  the  religious 
ideas  they  present  must  accordingly  be  largely  conjectural. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  like  so  many  other  Hindu  teachers 
from  the  days  of  the  risis  of  the  Upanisads,  Tukaram  is 
claimed  by  various  religious  schools — by  theists  and  by 
pantheistic  monists — as  an  adherent  of  their  views.  To 
explain  his  inconsistency,  however,  it  is  perhaps  sufficient 
to  say  that  he  was  a  poet  and  that  he  was  a  Hindu. 

When  we  turn  to  consider  the  character  of  the  teach- 
ing of  these  poet-saints  and  of  the  influence  that  by  work 
so  widely  popular  they  exerted  and  still  exert,  the  first 
difficulty  that  presents  itself  is  this  inconsistency,  which  is 
written  upon  every  page  of  their  work.  No  doubt  the 
fact  that  they  were  Hindus  and  therefore  inheritors  in 
their  blood  and  in  the  texture  of  their  thought  of  that 
Hinduism  which  is  as  much  a  spirit,  a  temperament,  as  a 
system,  goes  far  to  explain  their  mental  adjustment  to 
what  appear  to  us  irreconcilable  explanations  of  life  and 
destiny.  Advaita  (non-duality)  and  bhakti  are  not  so 
much,  we  may  say,  contradictory  theories  of  the  universe 
as  varying  moods  of  the  Hindu  mind.  Certainly  bhakti  in 
large  measure  was  a  mood.  It  was  the  other  half  of 
advaita,  a  reaction  of  the  soul,  a  feast  of  that  heart  which 
advaita  had  starved.  It  is  the  deliberate  choice,  after  long 
loneliness,  of  the  companionship  of  God  and  the  saints; 
after  silence,  of  song ;  after  bareness  and  intellectual 
austerity,  of  the  rich  colours  of  affection.  And  yet,  be- 
cause it  is  a  reaction  and  not  the  result  of  a  reasoned 
development,  it  is  apt  to  lapse  back  to  what  it  has  rebelled 
against.  It  is  not  intellectually  convinced.  It  represents 
a  part  only  of  the  man  and  that  the  part  most  liable  to 
fluctuations — his  emotional  life.  Advaita  is  equally  partial, 
and  hence,  perhaps,  the  oscillations  to  and  fro  that  mark 
their  thinking.  It  would  be  foolish  to  labour  to  reduce 
their  teaching  to  logical  consistency.  The  bhakta  has  his 
seasons  of  warmth  and  exaltation  when  the  supreme 
bliss  is  to  have  fellowship  with  the  god  of  his  devotion 
and    to   be  conscious  of    his   love,  while   at    other  times 


22  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

in  colder  mood  he  is  content  to  follow  the  philosophic 
path  that  leads  to  Nirvana  and  to  nothingness.  But 
the  value  and  significance  of  this  movement  lie  in  its 
affirmation  of  the  claims  of  the  human  heart  and  in 
the  moral  and  religious  consequences  that  follow  from 
that  affirmation.  These  are  the  elements  in  it  that  gave 
it  its  power  and  enabled  it  to  make  an  appeal  so  far  reach- 
ing and  so  profound.  It  was,  if  we  may  say  so,  a  splendid 
effort  of  the  Hindu  soul  to  break  the  bondage  under  which 
it  had  lain  so  long.  It  at  least  stirred  in  its  long  sleep,  and 
turned  its  drowsy  eyes  towards  the  dawn. 

If  there  was  in  it  this  rebel  spirit,  then  there  was  no 
tyranny  within  Hinduism  that  would  so  challenge  it  as  the 
long-established  and  powerful  dominance  of  caste.  A 
fervent  spirit  of  devotion  is  inevitably  democratic,  just  as  a 
"way  of  knowledge"  is  a  way  reserved  for  an  intellectual 
minority  while  a  ceremonial  religion  strengthens  the 
power  and  the  pride  of  a  priestly  order.  The  heart  and  its 
emotions  are  much  the  same  in  all  men,  high  or  low,  and 
the  road  to  God  along  which  the  affections  lead  the  way 
is  an  open  road.  It  is  accordingly  to  be  expected  that  the 
bhakti  movement,  in  so  far  as  it  was  earnest  and  sincere, 
would  oppose  Brahman  pretentions  and  caste  contempt. 
We  find  this  to  have  been  in  large  measure  the  case.  The 
sect  of  Caitanya  admitted  to  its  ranks  even  Sudras  and 
Muhammadans  and  they  are  said  to  sing  of  the  saint  him- 
self in  Bengal:  "Come  see  the  godman  who  does  not 
believe  in  caste."  Kabir  is  said  to  have  been  himself  by 
birth  a  Muhammadan  who  succeeded  by  strategy  in 
obtaining  admission  to  the  number  of  Ramananda's 
disciples.  The  Maratha,  saints  were  of  all  castes,  from 
Brahmans  to  out-castes.  The  stories  that  are  told  of  them, 
mingled  with  legend  as  they  are,  reveal  a  continual 
struggle  against  injustice.  We  see  it  in  the  story  of 
JnaneSvar's  parents  and  of  the  saint's  own  experience 
and  that  of  his  brothers  and  sisters.  It  seems  as  if 
Jfianesvar  may  have  been  the  centre  of  a  struggle  between 
the  old  orthodoxy,  entrenched  within  its  caste  privileges 
and  buttressed  by  its  claims  to  magic  powers,  and  the 
new  and  more   living  and  spiritual   faith.     We  see   indi- 


INTRODUCTION  25 

cations  of  the  same  conflict  in  the  case  of  nearly 
every  one  of  Jnanesvar's  successors  in  the  bhakti  line. 
There  is  evidence,  too,  both  in  the  traditions  of  Namdev's 
life  and  in  his  verses,  that  as  a  Sudra  he  had  to  face  Brahman 
contempt,  but  was  sustained  by  the  sympathy  of  Vithoba. 
Ekanath,  too,  who  lived  at  Paithan  towards  the  close  of 
the  sixteenth  century  and  was  himself  a  De§asth  Brahman, 
continued  the  struggle  and  opposed  caste  both  by  precept 
and  example.  As  a  consequence  he  is  said  to  have  been 
out-casted  and  his  poems  publicly  thrown  into  the  river 
Godaveri.  Tukaram,  as  we  have  seen,  was  punished  in  the 
same  way,  according  to  the  story,  and  he  certainly  had  to 
endure  much  petty  persecution  because  of  his  denunciation 
of  caste-exclusiveness.  Again,  another  of  the  saints  of 
Pandharpur  was  a  member  of  the  out-caste  community 
of  Mahars.  This  man,  Coka  Mela,  whose  samadhi 
(memorial)  is  opposite  to  the  entrance  to  the  great  temple 
of  Vithoba,  once,  it  is  said,  crossed  the  threshold  of  the 
temple  and  was  cast  out  for  his  impiety.  He  pled  in 
excuse  that  he  had  been  borne  in  by  a  divinely  created 
impulse  that  he  could  not  resist,  and  reproached  his 
enemies  in  pathetic  words  for  their  harshness  and 
contempt.  On  another  occasion  Vithoba  himself  is  said 
to  have  helped  him  to  carry  off  the  carcass  of  a  cow,  that 
being  one  of  the  perquisites  permitted  to  this  out-caste 
community.  These  are  some  indications  of  what  was, 
we  may  conjecture,  a  continuous  struggle  throughout 
this  whole  period  between  the  divisive  forces  of  Brahman 
exclusiveness  and  the  sense  of  kinship  and  unity  that  the 
new  religion  of  faith  and  fellowship  with  God  inspired. 

The  message  of  these  poets  was  opposed  to  a  gross 
idolatry  ;  it  frequently  denounced  immorality  and  supersti- 
tion ;  it  was  generally  sincere  and  earnest  and  spiritual.  No- 
doubt  there  are  qualifications  that  have  to  be  added  to 
each  of  these  statements  if  we  are  to  avoid  misunder- 
standing. Most  of  these  saints  were  worshippers  of  the 
idol,  Vithoba,  but  they  distinguished  between  their  attitude 
to  this  god  and  that  of  the  superstitious  multitude. 

A  stone  with  red-lead  painted  o'er 
Brats  and  women  bow  before. 


24  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

When  Tukaram  says  this  he  implies  that  he  and  those  like 
him  looked  beyond  the  idol — Vithoba,  "  standing  on  the 
brick,"  as  he  so  often  describes  him — to  something 
greater  that  the  idol  symbolized  and  signified.  So  Namdev 
repeatedly  denounces  idolatry.  M  No  guru  can  show  me 
God :  wherever  I  go  there  are  stone  gods  painted  red. 
How  can  a  stone  god  speak  ?  When  will  he  ever  utter 
speech  ?  My  mind  is  weary  of  those  who  say,  '  God  ;  god.' 
Everywhere  I  go  they  say,  'Worship  a  stone.'  He  is 
God  whom  Nama  beholds  in  his  heart.  Nama  will  never 
forsake  the  feet  of  Krisna."  They  also  will  make  no 
terms  with  the  impure  and  degrading  worships  that  they 
see  around  them.  The  evil  cult  of  Khandoba,  the  greedy 
mendicant,  the  formal  and  hypocritical  priest,  the  magic 
worker,  all  these  they  deal  with  in  much  the  same  fashion 
as  did  Luther  and  Erasmus  with  their  counterparts  in  the 
Christian  Church  of  Europe. 

As  theists  the  Maratha  psalmists  oppose  what  a  South 
Indian  follower  of  bhakti calls  "the  haughty  Vedant  creed." 
Sometimes  they  admit  that  the  "way  of  knowledge"  is 
higher  than  the  way  of  faith,  but  that  the  heart  has  its 
reasons,  to  which  they  feel  they  must  give  heed.  Sometimes 
they  go  further,  and  claim  their  way  as  the  highest. 
Tukaram  in  one  of  his  poems  describes  how  those  who 
had  chosen  the  path  of  Brahma  knowledge  and  looked 
forward  to  deliverance  from  re-birth  and  to  final  absorption 
turn  back  under  his  guidance  to  the  bondage  of  life,  because 
with  it  they  can  experience  a  fellowship  with  God  of  which 
they  can  have  conscious  experience.1  He  does  not  wish  to 
be  merged  in  the  unconsciousness  of  Brahman, "  like  the 
•dew  drop  in  the  silent  sea."  This  goal,  that  so  fascinates 
the  Brahman  philosopher  wearied  with  the  sorrows  of 
existence,  has  no  charm  for  him.  Perhaps  this  is  an 
indication  that  life  had  gained  a  new  interest  for  the 
people  of  that  age,  with  the  awakening  of  some  sense  of 
brotherhood  among  men  and  some  hope  that  there  was 
love  for  them  in  the  heart  of  God.  They  want  to  know, 
as  Jfianesvar  says  (Jfl.  VI,  113),  u  the  bliss  of   affection." 

■  See  No.  LXXXVII. 


INTRODUCTION  25 

They  do  not  desire  even  the  joys  of  heaven.  Best  of  all  it 
seems  to  them  to  be  to  remain  on  earth,  in  the  fellowship  of 
the  saints,  singing  the  praises  of  the  god  of  their  devotion. 
Jnane§var  in  one  passage  describes  such  a  bhakta  and  his 
supreme  desire.  Tukaram  is  no  less  emphatic  in  his 
rejection  of  a  union  that  means  unconsciousness  and  an 
end  to  the  joy  of  serving  and  praising  his  divine  Master : 
"  Advait,"  he  says,  "contents  me  not."1 

But  in  the  case  of  every  one  of  these  poets,  as  we  have 
seen,  there  is  a  hesitation  and  ambiguity  when  they 
compare  these  rival  blessednesses.  "Knowledge"  and 
Brahman  have  a  prestige  in  India  that  even  Tukaram 
cannot  forget,  though  he  knows  by  his  own  experience 
that  knowledge  is,  as  he  says,  "  a  stringless  lute."  It  is, 
in  fact,  as  a  Christian  bhakta  had  long-before  declared, 
"  like  sounding  brass  and  a  clanging  cymbal."  And  yet, 
Tukaram  can  hear  what  Kabir  calls  the  V  unstruck  music," 
and  sometimes  yields  to  its  subtle  fascination.  "  There," 
says  Kabir,  who  has  praised  the  "  bliss  of  affection  "  with 
as  rapturous  a  delight  as  any  Maratha  saint,  "the  whole 
sky  is  filled  with  sound,  and  there  that  music  is  made  without 
fingers  and  without  strings"2  In  fact,  they  all  want  both  to 
have  and  have  not.  The  unitive  life  draws  them  with  a 
desire  that  so  many  mystical  spirits,  East  and  West  alike, 
have  felt.  Not  in  the  monism  of  Sankaracarya,  nor  in  the 
dualism  that  is  quite  satisfied  to  remain  two,  but  in  a 
spiritual  experience  that  transcends  and  includes  both  is 
peace  to  be  found. 

For  only  where  the  one  is  twain, 
And  where  the  two  are  one  again 
Will  truth  no  more  be  sought  in  vain. 

Hence  the  instability,  the  alternate  raptures  and  des- 
pairs of  these,  as  of  other,  mystic  seekers.  Love  alone — 
a  love  that  is  not  a  blind  rapture  but  is  knowledge  too — 
solves  the  insoluble  problem.  M  In  the  contact  of  the 
embrace,"  says  JnaneSvar,  "  the  two  become  one  naturally  " 
(Jn.  V,  133),  but  they  must  remain  one,  not  subject  to 
the  vacillations  of  what  is  a  mere  sentiment.     Sometimes 

1  No.  LVI.        2  Tagore's  Hundred  Poems  of  Kabir.  p.  22. 


26  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

they  persuade  themselves  that  even  in  the  silence  of  the 
ultimate  unity  they  will  be  able  to  hear  what  one  of  them, 
Kablr,  calls  4<  the  music  of  the  forgetting  of  sorrows." 

When  one  reviews  the  work  of  these  poets  it  becomes 
evident  that  the  scope  of  the  thought  and  the  desires  they 
express  is   not  wide,  nor  is  there  a  rich   variety   in   their 
music.     It  is  not  quite  a  symphony  "  on  a  penny  whistle," 
but  it  has  much  of  the  simplicity  and  monotony,  as  well 
as  of  the  freshness   and  sincerity,  that   George  Meredith 
suggests  when  he  takes  that  as  the  symbol  of  the  first  love 
of  youth  and  the  springtime.     There  are  no  organ  notes 
here,  no  full  volume  of  harmonious  sound.     The  favourite 
and  most  characteristic  poetic  form   made  use  of  by   this 
group  of  singers  is  the  abhahg,  a  brief  utterance  of  usually 
from   ten   to   thirty   lines,  a   true  cry  of  the   heart.     The 
poems  of  Kabir  and  of  Sir  Rabindranath  Tagore  appear  to 
be  of  much  the  same  character.     They  seem  to  proceed  in 
most   cases  from   some   inward   experience   and    are   vivid 
with    emotion.     Whether    they    are   cries    of   longing,  or 
utterances  of  love  and  devotion,  or  endeavours  to  under- 
stand and  explain  life  and  destiny,  they  are  never  merely 
decorative  in  their  purpose.     They  are  primarily  religious 
and  only  secondarily  and  accidentally  works  of  art.     They 
are  psalms — meant  to  be  sung,  not  said,   and  inseparable, 
for  a  full   appreciation,    from    their    music.      No    doubt 
the  music  helps  to   make  up   for   an    occasional    poverty 
of   thought    and    bareness    of    language,    but    it    enables 
them  also  to  mount  and  soar,  and   carries  their  message 
more    surely    to    its    lodgment    in    the     hearer's     heart. 
They    are    thus    true    lyrics,  and  their  melancholy   music 
makes  more    touching  still    the   simple    appeal    in    many 
of  them,  of  which  we  might  almost  say  that  they  "have 
no  language  but  a  cry."    Their  most  frequently  expressed 
desire  is  that  they  may  reach  and  rest  upon   the  breast  of 
God.     They  express    this    longing    by    means    of    a    rich 
variety   of  comparisons,  of  which  the  most  frequent   and 
most  touching  is  that  of  a  child  longing  for   his    mother. 
It  is,  perhaps,  significant  that  this  relationship  is  used  by  the 
Hebrew   saints    as  a  symbol,  not  of  the  soul's  yearning  for 
God,  but  of  God's  yearning  over  His  children.     "Can  a 


INTRODUCTION  27 

woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not 
have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  Yea,  these 
may  forget,  yet  will  not  I  forget  thee."1  "As  one  whom 
his  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort  you."2 

It  is  in  these  cries  of  desire  that  the  Maratha  singers 
come  nearest  to  the  Hebrew  psalmists.  It  may,  perhaps, 
be  maintained  with  truth  that  their  longing  has  not  the 
depth  and  urgency  that  characterise  Hebrew  poetry — a 
depth  and  urgency  that  are  due  to  a  deeper  sense  of  need. 
The  Hebrew  cry  is  "out  of  the  depths."  These  Hindu 
saints  frequently  express  a  sense  of  desolation,  of  weariness 
in  a  world  of  change  and  sorrow,  of  loneliness  in  separation 
from  God.  They  say,  even  as  the  Hebrew  does,  "Like 
as  the  hart  panteth  for  the  water-brooks,  so  panteth  my 
soul  after  thee,  O  God,"3  but  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to 
know  what  he  experiences  when  he  goes  on  to  say,  "All 
thy  waves  and  thy  billows  have  gone  over  me."  For 
the  same  reason,  while  there  are  professions  of  fervent 
devotion  and  affection,  while  occasional  experiences  of 
inward  bliss  in  the  divine  fellowship  are  described,  there  is 
not  the  deep  note  of  gratitude  which  is  often  sounded  in 
the  music  of  Hebrew  psalmists.  They  knew  little  of  such 
an  experience  as  that  which  is  described  in  the  words,  "  He 
brought  me  up  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay; 
and  he  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock  and  established  my  goings. 
And  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth."4  The 
resonant  note  of  thankfulness  which  throbs  in  the  103rd 
Psalm  is  outside  of  their  knowledge.  They  can  venture, 
on  the  contrary,  to  say  of  these  who  love  God,  "  God  is 
their  debtor  now."5  Such  an  audacity  is  beyond  the  reach 
of  the  Hebrew  or  the  Christian  penitent,  unless  his 
conscience  of  sin  and  of  unworthiness  is  overlaid  with 
pantheistic  speculation  as  was  that  of  the  mediaeval  mystic, 
Eckhart,  who  says  of  God,  "  He  can  as  little  do  without 
me  as  I  can  do  without  Him." 

It  is,  perhaps,  on  the  whole  true  to  say  that  the  Hindu 
psalmists  give  expression  to  a  more  purely  natural  affection, 

1  Isaiah,  XLIX,  15.  2  Isaiah,  LXVI,  12.  3  Ps.  XLII,  1.  *  Ps. 
XL,  2,  3.     *  No.  LXXXVII,  p.  81. 


28  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

one  less  suffused  with  moral  meaning,  than  that  which  we 
find  in  the  Hebrew  psalms.  They  feel  in  fellowship  with 
God  the  instinctive  satisfaction,  as  they  so  often  describe 
it,  that  a  babe  feels  on  his  mother's  breast.  Nearness  to 
God  is  simply  their  proper  element,  as  water  is  to  a  fish. 
If  it  is  the  case  that  the  sense  of  sin  is  a  morbid  growth  in 
man's  experience,  if  there  is  no  ground  in  the  truth  of 
things  to  justify  the  feeling  of  separation  on  the  part  of  a 
sinful  man  from  a  holy  God  and  the  demand  for  a  mediator, 
then  these  Indian  saints  have  found  a  nearer  and  a  directer 
way  to  God  than  the  Hebrew  and  Christian  penitents. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  no  one  can  question  the  claim 
that  the  Hebrews,  and  far  more,  of  course,  the  Christians, 
have  from  the  dark  places  of  their  experience  described 
a  more  gracious  and  tender  aspect  of  God  and  are  far 
more  sure  of  His  love.  The  god  the  Hindu  aspires 
towards  is  capricious  in  his  affection  ;  the  relation  of  love 
between  him  and  his  worshipper  is  not  based  on  a  strong 
assurance  of  his  unwavering  righteousness.  This  marks 
a  profound  difference  of  tone  between  the  religious 
experience  of  the  saints  of  India  and  of  Judea,  a  difference 
which  really  denotes  the  distinction  that  formerly  was 
made  between  natural  and  revealed  religion.  There  is 
a  strength,  a  depth,  an  assurance  in  the  one — in  spite  of 
many  tremors — that  is  not  in  the  other.  The  beauty, 
the  pathos,  the  charm  of  Hindu  piety,  as « here  expressed, 
consists  in  the  very  earthliness  and  uncertainty  of  its  eager 
hopes.  Hebrew  aspiration  has  its  roots  in  darker  depths, 
but  it  is  met  by  a  revelation — an  assurance,  that  is,  that 
comes  to  the  desiring  heart — of  God's  moral  majesty  as 
well  as  of  His  grace,  which  gives  it  quietness  and 
confidence  and  strength.  This  assurance — which  rises  to 
rapture  and  triumph  in  the  New  Testament — is  already 
present  in  the  psalmists  and  prophets  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment with  a  richness  far  beyond  anything  within  the 
compass  of  the  music  of  these  Indian  singers.  At  the 
same  time  it  would  be  untrue  to  say  that  there  are  not 
a  certain  number  of  expressions  of  content  and  of  satisfied 
affection  in  their  songs,  or  that  they  have  no  experience  of 
peace  in  the  divine  fellowship.     Examples  of  such  joy  and 


INTRODUCTION  29 

satisfaction  are  to  be  found  especially  among  the  psalms 
of  Tukaram,1 

There  are  other  respects,  in  addition  to  those  which 
have  been  noted,  in  which  the  deep  division  between  the 
Hindu  and  Hebrew  psalmists  reveals  itself,  hidden  as  it  is 
beneath  the  common  need  of  hearts  that  are  at  one  in 
their  longing  to  find  rest  in  God.  As  the  one  conceives 
of  God  as  being  beyond  everything  else  a  moral  Being, 
while  to  the  other  He  is  still  not  much  more  than 
a  pervading  presence  in  nature,  without  clearly  defined 
moral  characteristics,  their  ideals  of  the  holy  life  are 
fundamentally  divergent.  "Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill 
of  the  Lord ?  "  says  the  Hebrew,  "Or  who  shall  stand  in  his 
holy  place  ?  He  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart ; 
who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity  nor  sworn 
deceitfully.  He  that  walketh  uprightly  and  worketh 
righteousness  and  speaketh  truth  in  his  heart.  ...  In 
whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  condemned ;  but  he  honoureth 
them  that  fear  the  Lord.  He  that  sweareth  to  his  hurt 
and  changeth  not.  He  that  putteth  not  out  his  money  to 
usury,  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  innocent.  He  that 
doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  moved."2  Such  passages 
as  these  describe  an  attitude  of  practical  philanthropy;  they 
recognise  the  supremacy  of  moral  demands  and  the  claims 
of  duty  to  one's  neighbour.  The  religion  of  the  Hebrew 
psalmists  is,  no  doubt,  predominantly  personal  and  indivi- 
dual, but  the  needs  of  others  and  responsibility  for  others 
are  never  far  from  the  worshipper's  thoughts.  God  is  for  him 
the  God  not  merely  of  the  individual  worshipper  but  of  at 
least  the  nation.  He  is  also  often  recognised  as  the  King 
over  the  whole  earth,  the  Judge  who  will  judge  the  world 
with  righteousness  and  the  people  with  equity.  These 
things  belong  to  a  conception  of  God  and  of  His  relations 
with  men  completely  different  from  that  of  the  Indian 
devotees.  For  them  the  ideal  man  is  one  who  has  reached 
a  haven  of  tranquillity. 

No  wind  of  good  or  ill 
Shall  enter  there, 

1  See  Nos.  LXII,  LXIII  and  LXXXII.        2  Ps.  XV. 

3 


30  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

But  peace,  supremely  still, 
Supremely  fair.1 

Equanimity  is  his  supreme  quality.  He  looks  with  an 
equal  mind  upon  "  a  very  courteous  Brahman,  a  dog  or  an 
out-caste  man  "  (Bhagavadglta,  v.  18).  His  compassion  is 
measured  and  controlled,  and  strong  feeling  never  agitates 
his  soul.  In  Tukaram's  description  of  the  man  who  is 
"God's  own  counterfeit  "2  we  have  the  Indian  ideal  at 
its  very  best,  one  conscious  of  duty  to  others  but  not 
urgently  or  passionately  moved  to  discharge  it,  more 
concerned  with  the  cultivation  of  a  placid  temper  in 
himself  than  with  the  wrongs  and  sorrows  of  other  men. 
There  is  much  that  is  singularly  attractive  in  this  picture, 
especially  to  those  who  suffer  from  the  fever  and  the  fret 
of  modern  Western  life.  As  described  by  one  who  was 
deeply  distressed  by  the  futile  agitations  of  our  pursuits,  we 

Glance  and  nod  and  bustle  by, 
And  never  once  possess  our  souls 
Before  we  die. 

The  surge  of  all  anger  and  passion  is  to  be  by  the  Indian 
saint  most  anxiously  avoided. 

Thou  pervading  Brahman  art, 
How  should  anger  fill  thy  heart  ?8 

11  Calm  is  life's  crown,"   says   Tukaram,  contradicting    by 
anticipation  Matthew  Arnold. 

It  follows  inevitably  from  this  difference  in  the  ideal  of 
the  holy  life  and  in  the  conception  of  the  character  of  God 
that  the  Indian  saints  have  no  vision  of  a  world  judged  or 
a  world  redeemed.  Their  horizon  is  very  narrow  and 
limited,  and  their  god  is  their  own  personal  god— not  the 
nation's  or  the  world's.  He  is  with  them  most  often  as  a 
mother  with  her  child  or  as  a  bridegroom  with  the  bride 
— never  as  a  King  ruling  a  people  in  righteousness,  or  as  a 
Judge,  M  the  Most  High  over  all  the  earth."  The  choice 
for  the  Hindu  religion  seems  to  lie  between  a  provincial 
or  village  deity,  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  Brahman,  on  the 
other,  whose  rule,  if  it  can  be  called  rule,  may  extend  more 

1  No.  LXXVIII.         *  No.  LXXX,  p.  79.        »  No.  X. 


INTRODUCTION  31 

widely,  but  extends  over  an  empty  and  silent  land,  a  M  wide, 
grey,  lampless,  deep,  unpeopled  world." 

One  most  noticeable  difference  between  the  Indian 
and  the  Hebrew  psalmists  is  that  the  former  betray  scarcely 
a  trace  of  the  fierce,  Hebrew  passion  of  revenge,  of  the 
spirit  of  vindictiveness,  the  cry  for  vengeance,  that  deforms 
so  many  of  the  Biblical  psalms.  There  is  nothing  in  this 
Indian  sacred  poetry  to  correspond  to  the  prayer,  "  Pour 
out  thy  wrath  upon  the  heathen  that  have  not  known 
thee,  and  upon  the  kingdoms  that  have  not  called  upon 
thy  name."  Though  about  the  time  when  these  worshippers 
of  Vithoba  sang  their  songs  the  Muhammadans  were 
invading  the  land,  breaking  in  pieces  their  gods  and 
committing,  we  may  be  sure,  many  a  crime,  there  is 
no  cry  to  God  in  these  poems  for  vengeance  upon 
them.  Namdev  refers  to  these  things,  but  with  no 
anger :  he  has  reached  a  region  of  indifference  to 
such  matters.  "  A  god  of  stone,"  he  says  contemptuously, 
"  and  a  worshipper  who  is  deceived.  .  .  .  Such  gods  were 
broken  in  pieces  by  the  Turks.  They  threw  them 
into  the  river,  as  all  men  know."  No  doubt  they  would 
say  to  the  Muhammadan  marauder,  as  a  "  holy  man"  is 
said  to  have  said  to  a  British  soldier  who  stabbed  him 
in  the  days  of  the  Mutiny,  M  And  thou,  too,  art  He."  All 
feelings  are  diluted  and  all  differences,  even  the  difference 
of  right  and  wrong,  are  harmonised  in  a  world  pervaded 
by  an  impersonal,  unmoral  spirit,  likeness  to  whom — or 
which — is  the  highest  attainment.  This  doctrine,  we 
must  remember,  is  behind  even  the  theism  of  these  saints, 
emptying  their  hearts  of  strong  passions, — whether  the 
desire  for  vengeance  or  the  desire  for  justice,  whether  the 
desire  to  punish  evil-doers  or  to  save  the  perishing.  Occa- 
sionally Tukaram's  heart, — for  it  certainly  is  a  very  tender 
heart, — feels  and  recognises  the  claim  that  human  need 
makes  upon  him — 

Can  my  heart  unmoved  be, 
When  before  my  eyes  I  see 
Drowning  men  ? — ■ 

1  No.  CII. 


32  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

but  this  is  a  rare  mood  and  very  seldom  expressed  in  his 
poems.  His  own  need  and  his  own  concerns  absorb  him, 
and  it  is  not  his  business  to  call  down  vengeance  upon  evil 
doers  or  to  right  the  world's  injustices. 

What,  then,  is  the  essential  difference  between  the 
religious  contribution  of  the  Hebrew  and  of  the  Hindu 
psalmists  ?  The  answer  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  greater 
intensity  of  the  desire  for  God  or  the  subtler  intellectual 
insight  of  the  one  group  of  saints  or  of  the  other.  It  is 
something  that  reaches  deeper  in  what  is  beyond  all  else  a 
moral  universe.  The  Hebrew  saints  and  prophets  realised 
earlier  and  with  a  profounder  grasp  than  any  other  people 
that  it  is  only  the  pure  in  heart  that  can  truly  see  God, 
that  it  is  in  "  mortal,  moral  strife "  that  He  is  alone 
aright  revealed.  The  way  of  moral  progress,  of  the 
purging  of  the  eye  of  the  soul  that  can  see  God,  is  not  the 
way  of  the  conscience  dulled  and  deadened  and  of  the 
heart  emptied  of  feeling.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  by 
reinforcing  the  power  in  man  to  love  righteousness  and 
hate  iniquity  and  by  drawing  his  heart  towards  holiness 
that  he  is  brought  into  any  real  divine  fellowship.  The 
conscience  of  the  Hebrew  psalmist  is  far  from  being  fully 
enlightened:  his  personal  enemies  are  often  reckoned  as 
God's  enemies  and  his  private  vendetta  given  a  divine 
sanction.  But  the  Jew  is  more  deeply  right  than  any  other 
people  in  building  everything  ultimate  in  his  universe  upon 
the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong.  "There  is 
nothing  in  the  world  or  out  of  it  that  is  good  except  a  good 
will."  The  Hebrew  saints  built  all  their  dreams  and  hopes 
of  God  and  of  the  eternal  world  of  "  stuff  o'  the  conscience," 
and  for  that  reason  they  built  what  has  endured. 

The  saints  of  bhakti  not  infrequently  indeed  make 
moral  affirmations  that  prove  them  to  have  had  visions  of 
this  highway  to  the  presence  of  God.  Especially  is  this 
true  of  Tukaram.  One  couplet  of  his  has  acquired  the 
familiarity  of  a  proverb  among  Marathas,  and  must  have 
taught  them  many  a  lesson  of  sincerity  and  straight- 
forwardness. 

He  whose  words  and  acts  agree, 
Let  his  footsteps  praised  be. 


INTRODUCTION  33 

Still  more  striking  is  another  passage  in  which  he 
describes  the  heart  to  which  God  makes  Himself  known: 
"  Pity,  patience,  calm — that  is  God's  dwelling-place." 
There  is,  no  doubt,  more  breadth  and  exaltation,  as  well 
as  a  profounder  sense  of  human  sin  and  the  alienation 
that  it  brings,  in  the  Hebrew  prophet's  declaration,  "Thus 
saith  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity, whose 
name  is  Holy.  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place,  with 
him  also  who  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,  to  revive 
the  spirit  of  the  humble  and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the 
contrite  one."1  For  he  knows,  as  Tukaram  scarcely  does, 
that  "  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  heart."  It  is  the 
tears  of  penitence,  through  whose  veil  alone  a  sinful  man 
discerns  the  face  of  God. 

1  Isaiah  LVII,  15. 


NOTE 

The  titles  of  the  selections  are  in  all  cases  due  to  the 
translator.  Selections  I-IV,  XXVI  and  XXVIII  are 
portions  extracted  from  long  expository  or  narrative  poems, 
the  names  of  which  are  given  in  the  notes.  All  the  other 
selections  are  short  lyrical  poems,  called  abhahgs,  bearing 
no  title  but  usually  referred  to  by  their  opening  words. 
There  are  various  kinds  of  abhahgs,  some  having  two  lines 
to  a  verse,  some  four.  One  of  the  commonest  rhymes  and 
divides  its  verse  somewhat  as  is  done  in  No.  XCVI. 
Another  very  simple  form  is  almost  exactly  reproduced  in 
translation  No.  XLIV.  The  six  selections  mentioned 
above,  which  are  not  abhangs,  are  in  the  ovi  metre,  which 
has  usually  a  triple  rhyme.  This  has  been  followed  in  the 
translations. 

The  last  verse  of  an  abhahg  opens  usually  with  the 
name  of  the  author — "Tuka  says,"  or  "Nama  says,"  or 
some  similar  phrase.  This  has  frequently  been  followed 
in  the  translations,  but  not  always. 

For  purposes  of  reference  the  opening  words  of  each 
abhahg  are  given  under  the  title,  the  words  being 
transliterated  from  the  MarathI  in  accordance  with  the 
scheme  of  transliteration  shown  below.  At  the  same  time 
a  reference  is  given  in  the  case  of  the  abhahgs  of  Namdev 
and  of  one  or  two  others  to  Avate's  edition  of  these  poets, 
and  in  the  case  of  Tukaram  to  the  Indu  Prakash  edition 
of  his  works  published  in  Bombay  (referred  to  as  LP.). 

SYSTEM  OF  TRANSLITERATION 
31  a,  3fT  a,  f  i,  §  i,  3  u,  5  u,  3?  r,  q  e,  i£  ai,  aft  o,  3ft  au, 
q>  k,  ^  kh,  i\  g,  E[  gh,  ^  n  ;  tJ  c,  3  ch,  5f  j,  u  jh,  3f  n  ;  it, 
Z  th,  s  d,  Z  dh,  o[  n  ;  ff  t,  *J  th,  \  d,  q  dh,  ^  n  ;  q  p,  <$  ph, 
1  b,  y  bh,  IT  m  ;  q  y,  (  r,  c*  1,  cf  v,  51  s,  q  s,  fl  s,  ^  h,  55 1  ; 
visarga  h,  nasalised  ^  as  in  ^?rq  rh. 


JNANESVAR1 

(13th  Century) 

I.     THE  GREAT  HEARTED 

(JnaneSvari  IX,  188 ff.) 

Who  day  and  night  are  from  all  passion  free, — 
Within  their  holy  hearts  I  love  to  be, 
Dwelling  in  sanctity. 

Hearts  of  a  fervent  faith  to  them  belong, 

Where  Dharma2  reigns  ;  in  them  that  power  is  strong 

That  knows  or  right  or  wrong. 

They  bathe  in  Wisdom  ;  then  their  hunger  stay 
With  Perfectness  ;  lo,  all  in  green  array, 
The  leaves  of  Peace  are  they. 

Buds  of  Attainment  these  ;  columns  they  are 
In  Valour's  hall :   of  joy  fetched  from  afar 
Each  a  full  water-jar. 

So  dear  the  path  of  bhakti,  they  despise 

The  great  Release  ;3  e'en  in  their  sport  there  lies 

The  Wisdom  of  the  wise. 

With  pearls  of  Peace  their  limbs  they  beautify  ; 
Within  their  minds  as  in  a  scabbard  I, 
The  All-indweller,4  lie. 

Therefore  their  love  waxes  unceasingly, — 
These  greatsouled  ones  ;  not  the  least  rift  can  be 
Between  their  hearts  and  me. 

1  For  some  account  of  this  poet  and  the  poem  from  which  selections 
I-IV  are  taken,  see  pp.  13ff. 

2  Dharma,  the  whole  body  of  moral  and  religious  law  by  which  the 
social  structure,  connoted  by  the  term  caste,  is  maintained  in  Hinduism. 

8  The  Great  Release,  mukti,  or  moksa,  that  is,  absorption  in  the 
Supreme  Spirit,  which  brings  deliverance  from  rebirth.  The  saint  who 
follows  bhakti  prefers  to  live  on  earth,  in  the  fellowship  of  the  saints, 
singing  the  praises  of  his  God.  Cf.  Nos.  LXXXVII,  XCII. 

4  The  All-indweller,  that  is,  Kri^na,  who  is  the  speaker. 


36  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

II.     THE    RAPTURE   OF    DEVOTION 

(Jn&neSvarilX,  197  ff.) 

Dancing  they  sing  my  praises  j1  surely  not 
For  them  rites  of  atonement, — nay,  I  wot, 
Sin's  very  name's  forgot. 

The  mind  and  heart  ask,  "  What  shall  we  restrain  ?  " 
The  sacred  stream  cries,  H  All  my  cleansing's  vain, 
Since  here  there  is  no  stain." 

Thus  by  the  praises  of  my  name  they  slay 
The  world's  distress  ;  hark,  how  it  echoes  gay 
With  happy  holiday. 

The  same  to  them  the  monarch  or  his  thrall, 
The  high  or  low, — themselves  alike  to  all 
A  place  of  festival. 

To  heaven  they  seldom  go,2  but  earth  they  fill 
Brim  full  of  heaven,  chanting  my  name  until 
The  world  is  cleansed  from  ill. 

For  not  in  heaven  I  dwell  ;  nor  in  the  sky 
In  the  sun's  orb  ;  than  yogi's*  visions  high 
Far  higher  still  am  I. 

Not  in  such  places,  Pandav,4  I  abide, 

But  those  who  sing  my  praises  far  and  wide, 

Within  their  hearts  I  hide. 

How  glad  of  heart  are  they  beholding  me. 
Forgot  are  time  and  place ;  where'er  they  be, 
There  sing  they  joyfully. 

And  they,  the  while  my  name  they  celebrate 
In  endless  song,  with  limpid  thought  debate 
Upon  the  soul's  estate. 

1  My  praises.     Kri§na  is  the  speaker. 

*  To  heaven  they  seldom  go.     Compare  Note  3  on  p.  35. 

•  Yogi,  one  who  seeks  absorption  in  the  Supreme  Spirit  by  mental 
exercises  and  concentration. 

4  Pdndav,  that  is,  Arjuna,  to  whom  Kri?na  is  speaking. 


JNANESVAR  37 

III.     AEQUANIMITAS 

(JnaneSvariXII,  197 '//.) 

His  heart,  O  Arjuna,  no  bias  knows : 
On  all  an  equal  aspect  he  bestows, 
Friends  let  them  be  or  foes. 

A  lamp  is  he,  shining  with  steadfast  light, 
Not  shining  to  the  stranger  dark  as  night, 
While  to  the  household  bright. 

As  trees  whose  shadows  on  their  planter  fall 
Or  on  who  hews  them  down, — so  he  to  all 
Alike  impartial. 

Sweet  to  its  tender  is  the  cane  ;  nor  less 
To  him  who  crushed  it  in  the  cruel  press, — 
Sweet  with  no  bitterness ; 

So  he  who  deems  a  friend  or  foe  the  same, 
Alike  unmoved  though  the  world  should  blame, 
Or  though  it  grant  him  fame. 

Lo,  as  the  unperturbed  skies  enfold 

The  changing  seasons,  does  this  one  behold 

Or  scorching  heat  or  cold. 

Whether  a  north  wind  or  a  south  wind  blow 
It  matters  not  to  Meru,1 — even  so 
To  him  is  joy  or  woe. 

Ah,  sweetly,  sweetly  does  the  moonlight  fall 
Alike  upon  the  monarch  and  the  thrall, — 
So  he  the  same  to  all. 

IV.     TRUTH. 

(JMneSvari  XVI,  115ff.) 

How  tender  is  the  bud,  yet  mark  aright 

How  sharp  it  thrusts ;  and  how  the  moon  is  bright 

Though  gently  falls  its  light. 

1  Meru,  the  central   mountain  of  the   universe,  round    which   the 
planets  revolve. 


38  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Or  of  what  medicine  can  any  tell 

But  bitter  is,  that  makes  the  sick  man  well  ? 

(Dost  mark  my  parallel  ?) 

Soft  as  the  water  'tis,  that  gives  no  pain 
E'en  to  the  eyeball,  but  that  sweeps  amain 
And  rends  the  earth  in  twain. 

To  pierce  our  doubts  it's  sharper  than  a  spear, — 
And  yet  than  sweetness  self  how  much  more  dear 
To  the  attentive  ear. 

The  ear  receives  it  with  a  deep  delight, 
And  on  it  travels  till  by  truth's  own  might 
It  climbs  to  Brahma's  height.1 

Ah,  who  by  love  of  truth  was  e'er  deceived  ? 
Or  who,  when  truth  he  rightly  has  received, 
Has  e'er  by  her  been  grieved  ? 


V.     "CRY  HARI  "• 

(Devaciye  dvari  ubhd  ksanabhari) 

Stand  at  the  door  of  God 

One  moment  nigh, — 
Thou  hast  the  fourfold  bliss 

Obtained  thereby. 

Cry  n  Hari,"  cry  aloud, — 

Let  the  name  ring ; 
So  thou  shalt  merit  gain 

Past  reckoning. 

Dwell  in  the  world,  but  still 

Cry  out  amain, — 
Witness  the  ancient  saints, — 

Thou  shalt  attain. 

*  Brahma's  height,  the  final  goal  of  Hinduism  is  the  realisation  of 
identity  with  Brahma. 

»  Hari,  one  of  the  name?  of  Vi$nu  or  Kri§na,  popularly  interpreted 
to  mean  "  the  remover  of  sin." 


JNANESVAR  39 

Yea  (hark  to  Jfianadev1) 

Vyasa2  has  told 
How  to  the  Pandavs'  house 

God  came  of  old. 


VI.     THE  NAME 

(Santdce  sahgati,  manomargagatl) 

To  the  dwelling  of  the  saints 

Take  thy  way  ; 
There  the  Lord  himself  shall  not 

Say  thee  nay. 

Cry  "  Ramkrisna", — 'tis  the  path 

To  life's  goal. 
Worship  Rama, — he  who  is 

Siva's  soul. 

Him  whose  name  is  unity, 

Whoso  find, 
Fetters  of  duality 

Cannot  bind. 

All  the  lustre  and  the  glow 

Yogis3  gain 
By  this  name  so  honey-sweet 

We  attain. 

On  Pralhada's4  childish  lips 

Dwelt  the  name, 
While  to  Uddav  bringing  gifts 

Krisna  came. 

Easy  'tis  to  utter  it 

(Is't  not  true  ?) 
Yet  who  use  it  anywhere 

Ah,  how  few. 

1  Jndnadev,  a  variant  of  the  author's  name,  Jnanesvar. 

'  Vyasa,  the  traditional  author  of  the  great  epic,  the  Mahabharata, 
the  theme  of  which  is  the  fortunes  of  five  brothers,  the  Pandavas. 

8  Yogis,  see  above,  p.  36. 

*  Pralhada  and  Uddhav,  famous  Vai§nava  devotees  of  ancient 
legend. 


40  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

VII.     "THERE  NEEDS  NOT  AN  APPOINTED  HOUR' 

(Kalavela  ndvia  uccariti  nahl) 

There  needs  not  a  propitious  hour 

This  name  to  cry. 
Lo,  both  who  speaks  it  and  who  hears 

Are  saved  thereby. 

This  holy  name  bears  quite  away 

All  man's  offence, — 
Hari,  the  saviour  e'en  of  men 

Of  little  sense. 

Who  speak  this  name,  the  soul  of  all, 

O  happy  they  ! 
Plain  for  their  fathers'  feet  they  make 

The  heavenward  way. 

VIII.     THE  STOREHOUSE  OF  BLISS 
(Rupa  pahata  locani) 

When  thy  visage  I  descry, 
O  how  glad,  how  glad  am  I ! 

Vitthal2  'tis,  the  good  the  fair, — 
Madhav,  good  beyond  compare. 

Many  blessings  gather  here, — 
How  can  Vitthal  but  be  dear  ? 

Every  joy  is  found  in  thee, 
Father,  Lord  of  Rukmini. 

1  This  is  the  first  abhang  sung  in  every  bhajan.     See  p.  12. 

*  Vitthal,  one  of  the  names  of  Vithoba,  the  form  of  Kri§na,  wor- 
shipped at  Pandharpur.  Madhav  is  another  name  of  Kri§na,  whose 
wife  is  Rukmini. 


MUKTABAI 

(13th  Century) 

IX.     THE   LAND   OF  TOPSY-TURVY1 

(Mungi  udali  dkdsl) 

An  ant  has  leapt  up  to  the  sky 
And  swallowed  up  the  sun  on  high  ! 
A  marvel  this  that  I  declare, — 
That  barren  wife  a  son  should  bear. 
A  scorpion  plumbs  the  nether  Pit, 
And  Visnu's  snake  bows  down  to  it. 
A  fly  an  eagle  brings  to  birth. 
Mukta,  beholding,  laughs  with  mirth. 

X.     A  REMONSTRANCE1 

(Majavari  dayd  hard) 

Graciously  thy  heart  incline  : — 
Open  to  me,  brother  mine  ! 
He's  a  saint  who  knoweth  how 
To  the  world's  abuse  to  bow. 
Great  of  soul  indeed  is  he, — 
Wholly  purged  of  vanity. 
Surely  he  whose  soul  is  great 
Is  to  all  compassionate. 
Thou  pervading  Brahman  art. 
How  should  anger  fill  thy  heart  ? 
Such  a  poised  soul  be  thine. 
Open  to  me,  brother  mine  ! 

1  This  Land  of  Topsy-turvy  is  the  land  of  the  enlightened  soul, 
where  all  is  One. 

2  This  Abhang  is  said  to  have  been  addressed  by  Muktabal  to  her 
brother  Jnanve§var  on  an  occasion  when  the  door  of  his  hut  was  closed 
against  her  and  she  supposed  him  to  be  angry. 


NAMDEV 

(14th  Century) 

XI.     "GONE   ARE  THE   SAINTS" 

(Avate,  938.     Gele  digambara  iSvaravibhuti) 

Gone  are  the  saints,  passed  to  the  heavenly  sphere ; 
Only  their  fame  tarries  behind  them  here. 

Our  ears  have  heard  of  their  unworldly  ways, — 
But  there  are  no  saints  like  them  nowadays. 

Men  talk  of  knowledge, — say,  "It's  this  and  this," 
But  still  NivrittiV  way  to  truth  they  miss. 

They'll  show  us  Parabrahm,2  they  say ;  but,  ah, 
There's  no  one  has  the  skill  of  Jfianoba. 

They  talk  of  bliss  of  earth  and  bliss  divine, 
But  only  Sopandev  can  say,  "  'Tis  mine." 

Ah,  God,  says  Namdev,  say  we  what  we  will, 
Thy  secret,  Muktabai,  escapes  us  still. 


XII.     THE    HEART'S    DESIRE 

(Kiti,  deva,  tuhma  y'eu  kdkulatt) 

O  God,  my  cry  comes  up  to  thee, 

How  sad  a  cry  is  it ! 
What  is  this  tragic  destiny 

That  fate  for  me  has  writ  ? 


1  On  Nivritti,  Sopandev  and  Muktabai,  9ee  p.  14. 
*  Parabrahm,  the  supreme  Brahman. 


NAMDEV  43 

Wherefore,  O  Hrislkes,1  dost  thou 

So  lightly  pass  me  by  ? 
To  whom,  to  whom  but  to  thee  now 

Can  I  lift  up  my  cry  ? 

As  chiming  anklets  sweetly  ring 

So  rings  thy  name  abroad  ; 
To  human  spirits  hungering 

Thou  givest  peace  with  God. 

Thou  on  thy  shoulders  carrying 

All  the  world's  load  of  care, — 
To  thee  'tis  such  a  little  thing 

My  trouble  too  to  bear ! 

O  Mother  Pandurang,2  I  cry, 

Drive  thou  me  not  away. 
At  Hari's  feet  I,  Nama,  lie  ; 

He  will  not  say  me  nay. 


XIII.     "0  HASTE  AND  COME" 

(Avate,  1482 .     Kaya  majha  ata  pdhdtosi  anta) 

Dost  thou  behold  me  perishing  ? 

0  haste  and  come,  my  God  and  king. 

1  die  unless  thou  succour  bring, 

O  haste  and  come,  my  God  and  king. 

To  help  me  is  a  trifling  thing  ; 

Yet  thou  must  haste,  my  God  and  king. 

O  come  (how  Nama's  clamours  ring) 
O  haste  and  come,  my  God  and  king. 


1  HrisikeS,  one  of  the  names  of  Kri§na. 

2  Pdnduranga  is  one  of  the  most  popular  names  of  Vithoba  of  Pan- 
dharpvir,  and  so  is  equivalent  to  Kri§na  or  Hari.  Here,  as  in  many 
of  the  poems  that  follow,  the  god  is  addressed  as  a  mother, 


44  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

XIV.    A  VOW 

(Avate,  333.     Dtha  jdvo  athavd  rdho) 

Whether  I  live  or  perish,  yet 
On  Pandurang1  my  faith  is  set. 

Thy  feet,  Lord,  I  will  ne'er  forsake, — 
To  thee  this  solemn  vow  I  make. 

Thy  holy  name  my  lips  shall  tell ; 
Within  my  heart  thy  love  shall  dwell. 

This,  Kesav,1  is  thy  Nama's  vow. 
O  aid  me  to  fulfil  it,  thou  ! 

XV.     ONE  THING 

(Avate,  501.    Heci  devd  pai  mdgata) 

One  thing  I  of  my  Lord  entreat, 
That  I  may  ever  serve  his  feet. 

That  I  in  Pandhari2  abide, 
Always  his  holy  saints  beside. 

Or  high  or  low  my  birth  may  be  ; 
Still,  Hari,  I  would  worship  thee ! 

Lord  of  Kamala,3  Nama  prays,  . 

O  grant  me  this  through  all  my  days. 

XVI.     A  BITTER  CRY 

(Avate,  351.     Mdjhl  kona  gatt  sdngd) 

When  will  the  end  of  these  things  be  ? 
Ah,  tell  me,  Lord  of  Pandhari.4 
When  wilt  thou  save  unhappy  me  ? 

O  tell  me,  tell  me  true,  for  I 
Cry  to  thee  with  a  bitter  cry. 

1  Pandurang  and  KeSav,  names  of  Kri§naor  Vithoba. 
a  Pandhari,  Pandharpur,  see  p.  11. 

*  Lord  of  Kamala,  Vi$nu  or  Kri§na,   Kamala  being  a  name  of 
Lak^ml,  his  wife. 

4  Lord  of  Pandhari,  Vithoba.     See  p.  11. 


NAMDEV  45 

Why  speakest  thou  not  ?     Ah,  Vitthal,  why 
Thus  silent  ?     Whither  shall  I  fly'? 

Who  else  will  bear  my  sore  distress  ? 
Smite  me  not  in  my  helplessness. 

As  to  the  child  is  wholly  sweet 
His  mother, — so  to  me  thy  feet. 

Thou  gracious  Lord  of  Rakhumai,1 
Friend  of  the  poor,  hear  Nama's  cry. 


XVII.     SEEKING 

{Avate,  391.    Tatva  pusavayd  gelo  vedajn&sl) 

From  Vedic  students  first  the  truth  I  sought, 

And  found  them  full  of  "Thou  shalt,"  "Thou  shalt  not." 

Never  shall  they  possess  tranquillity, 

For  mighty  in  them  is  the  power  of  "  me."2 

From  Scripture  scholars  sought  I  once  again 
The  form  divine,  but  found  them  rent  in  twain. 
Not  one  agrees  with  what  the  others  say, 
But  pride  and  error  lead  them  all  astray. 

Next  in  Purans3  I  sought  that  form  so  fair, 
But  still,  alas,  no  place  of  rest  was  there. 
The  preachers  preach  of  Brahm  but  set  their  mind 
On  lust,  and  so  true  peace  they  never  find. 

Ask  of  the  Haridas4  the  way  devout ; 
You'll  find  in  him  no  faith  at  all  but  doubt. 
He  tells  in  words  the  Name's  high  excellence, 
While  all  the  time  engrossed  with  things  of  sense. 

1  Rakhumai,  Rukmini,  the  wife  of  Kri§na. 

2  The  power  of  "me,"  of  egoism,  which  holds  one  in  bondage  by 
preventing  identification  with  the  Supreme  Spirit.  How  far  here  and 
elsewhere  the  idea  has  an  ethical  implication  and  approximates  to 
1  selfishness  '  it  is  not  easy  to  judge.     Cf.  pp.  47,  78,  80,  etc. 

8  Purans,  collections  of  legendary  stories  of  the  gods,  which  are 
expounded  in  the  temples  by  Puraniks  or  preachers. 

*  Haridas,  a  devotee  of  Kri§na.  Praise  of  the  Name  of  Kri§na  is 
one  of  the  ways  of  devotion.     See  Nos,  II  and  V  above. 

4 


46  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Weary  with  seeking,  here  at  last  am  I. 
Low  at  thy  feet,  O  Pandurang  I  lie. 
My  worldly  life  is  full  of  fears,  but  thou 
('Tis  Nama  cries),  O  save  me,  save  me  now. 


XVIII.     "MY   MOTHER   THOU" 

(Avate,  270.     Tu  majhi  ni&uli) 

My  Mother  thou;  thy  sucking  babe  am  I : 
Feed  me  with  love,  my  Pandurang,1  I  cry. 

I  am  the  calf  with  thee  the  mother  cow  ; 
Thy  milk,  my  Pandurang,  withold  not  now. 

I  am  thy  fawn,  the  mother  doe  thou  art ; 
Rend  the  world's  snare,  my  Pandurang,  apart. 

Thou  mother  bird  and  I  among  thy  brood  ; 
O  fly,  my  Pandurang,  and  bring  me  food. 

Ah,  heart's  beloved,  hear  thy  Nama  say, 
On  every  side  thou  hedgest  up  my  way. 


XIX.     THE  MEN  OF  FAITH2 

(Avate,  1449.    Akalpa  dyusya) 

Long  may  that  happy  household  live 
Who  service  to  my  Hari  give. 

May  no  temptation  bring  distress 
But  all  their  lives  be  blessedness  ; 

No  wind  of  self  e'er  cause  them  scathe, 
My  loved  ones,  Visnu's  men  of  faith. 

Blessings  be  theirs  whose  lips  have  sung 
The  name  of  Nama's  Pandurang. 

1  The  name  of  Pandurang  throughout  this  abhang  is  used  in  a 
feminine  form.     Cf.  Nos'.  XII  and  XLIII. 

•  This  is  sung  as  the  closing  song  in  every  bhajan.     See  p.  13. 


NAMDEV  47 

XX.     THE  REIGN  OF  PEACE 

(Avate,  583.     Avagha  samsdra  sukhacd  karma) 

Now  all  my  days  with  joy  I'll  fill 

Full  to  the  brim, 
With  all  my  heart  to  Vitthal  cling 

And  only  him. 

He  will  sweep  utterly  away 

All  dole  and  care  ; 
And  all  in  sunder  shall  I  rend 

Illusion's  snare. 

O  altogether  dear  is  he 

And  he  alone, 
For  all  my  burden  he  will  take 

To  be  his  own. 

Lo,  all  the  sorrow  of  the  world 

Will  straightway  cease, 
And  all  unending  now  shall  be 

The  reign  of  peace. 

For  all  the  bondage  he  will  break 

Of  worldly  care, 
And  all  in  sunder  will  he  rend 

Illusion's  snare. 

From  all  my  foolish  fancies  now 

Let  me  be  free. 
In  Vitthal,  Vitthal  only  is 

Tranquillity. 

XXI.      "WHO  VASUDEV  IN  ALL  CAN  SEE" 

(Avate,  1416.     Sarvabhutl  pdhe  eka  V&sudeva) 

Who  Vasudev1  in  all  can  see, 

Cleansed  from  the  thought  of  "I," 

Know  that  a  saint  indeed  is  he ; 
The  rest  in  bondage  lie. 

1  Vasudev,  Vi§nu-Kri§na.     For  the  next  line  see  Note  on  p.  45, 
and  cf.  Nos,  XVII,  LXXVlil,  LXXXII. 


48  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Wealth  to  his  eyes  is  only  dust : 
Jewels  as  stones  he  sees  ; 

Gone  from  his  heart  is  rage  and  lust  ; 
Pardon  dwells  there,  and  peace. 

He  will  not  for  an  instant  rest 
(Hear  what  I,  Nama,  say), 

But  Govind's1  name — of  all  the  best — 
He  utters  night  and  day. 


XXII.     ILLUMINATION 

(Avate,  586.     Nidristdce  seje  sarpa) 

One  fast  asleep  can  never  know 
That  to  his  chamber  crawling  in 

There  comes  the  snake, — and  heedless  so 
Am  I  to  lure  of  sense  or  sin, 

Since  inward  vision  to  bestow, 
My  Kesav  has  so  gracious  been. 

Alike  are  gold  and  dross  to  me  ; 

Jewel  and  common  stone,  the  same. 
Now  ne'er  my  soul  can  harmed  be, 

Walk  I  in  heaven  or  in  the  flame. 
Since  one  with  final  bliss  are  we, 

Then  what  is  either  praise  or  blame  ? 

1  Govind,  Kri§na. 


JANABAI1 

(14th  Century) 

XXIII.  PUNDLIK 

(Avate,  172.     Bhaktd  map  agragani) 

To  holy  Pundlik2  give 

The  highest  place. 
Sages  and  saints  he  saved, — 

Saved  by  his  grace. 

Thou,  standing  on  the  brick,* 

That  grace  give  me, 
Who,  Pundlik,  clasp  thy  feet, 

So  lowlily. 

XXIV.  GRINDING 

(Avate,  188.     Vairagya  abhimane) 

Dispassion's  mill,  with  earnest  mind, 

Lo,  here  grind  I, — 
While  for  a  handle  faith  I  find 

To  turn  it  by. 

A  handful  of  past  deeds  I  deem 

Grist  for  the  mill, 
And  grind  in  the  one  Soul  supreme 

My  good  or  ill. 

1  On  Janabai,  see  p.  16f. 

*  Pundlik  is  a  saint  who  is  specially  associated  with  the  origin  of 
the  worship  of  Vithoba  at  Pandharpur. 

8  He  who  stands  on  the  brick  is  Vithoba,  who,  according  to  the 
legend,  stood  patiently  waiting  while  Pundlik  attended  to  his  parents 
needs. 


50  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

All  outward  form  to  dust  is  ground, 

Ail  eyes  can  see, 
For  'tis  the  Lord  himself,  I've  found, 

Who  grinds  for  me. 

Strange  that  this  god  should  come  and  sit. 

His  servant  nigh; 
For  I've  had  nought  to  do  with  it, 

Says  Janabai. 


XXV.     THE  BESETTING  GOD 

(Avate,  198.     Deva  khate  deva  pite) 

Of  God  my  meat  and  drink  I  make, 

God  is  the  bed  on  which  I  lie. 
God  is  whate'er  I  give  or  take ; 

God's  constant  fellowship  have  I 
For  God  is  here  and  God  is  there, — 

No  place  that  empty  is  of  him. 
Yea,  lady  Vitha,1  I  declare, 

I  fill  the  world  up  to  the  brim.2 

1  Lady  Vithd,  Vithoba  in  a  feminine  form.     Compare  Pandurarig 
in  Nos.  XII  and  XVIII. 

2  For  the  last  line  see  p.  17. 


EKANATH 

(1548-99) 

XXVI.     GOD  THE   KNOWN   AND   GOD    THE    UNKNOWN1 

(Bhdgavat,  XI,  1458ff) 

How  sweet  the  melted  ghee  when  it  congeals. 
So,  when  the  Hidden  One  his  form  reveals, 
How  glad  the  seeker  feels. 

Dark,  dark  the  far  Unknown  and  closed  the  way 
To  thought  and  speech  ;  silent  the  scriptures ;  yea, 
No  word  the  Vedas  say. 

Not  thus  the  Manifest.     How  fair!  How  near! 
Gone  is  our  thirst  if  only  he  appear, — 
He,  to  the  heart  so  dear. 

The  ever  perfect,  Bliss  eternally, 

Being  and  thought, — lo,  Govind  now  is  he, 

Spring  of  all  sport  and  glee. 

Strength,  courage,  fame,  the  lofty  spirit, — lo, 
All  these  we  see  my  lower  God  bestow, 
This,  Uddhav,2  thou  must  know. 

My  eyes,  if  but  a  glimpse  of  God  I  get, 

Are  healed ;  escaped  am  I  from  out  life's  net  ; 

Cancelled  my  sensual  debt. 

In  the  lamp's  light  all  hidden  things  appear ; 
So  when  I  think  upon  my  God  so  dear 
The  far-off  God  is  here. 

1  This  selection  is  taken  from  Ekanath's  commentary  on  the  11th 
chapter  of  the  Bhdgavata  Purdna.    For  this  poet  see  Introduction,  p.  23. 

*  Uddhav,  the  friend  of  Krisna  to  whom  the  11th  chapter  of  the 
Bhdgavata  Purdna  is  addressed  by  Kri?na. 


52  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

XXVII.     THE  NINEFOLD  PATH  OF  BHAKTI 

{Navavidha  bhakti  nava  dcarati) 

Now  hearken  while  we  sing  their  praise 
Who  follow  bhaktVs  ninefold  ways. 
But  name  them  with  the  rising  sun, — 
Thy  sins  are  burned  up  everyone. 

The  hearing  ear  saved  Bhupati  ; 
In  seven  days  was  he  set  free. 
The  mighty  Bhagavat  to  hear 
He  made  himself  one  listening  ear. 

Sri  Suka  tried  the  ktrtan, — so   ' 
He,  too,  was  saved,  as  all  men  know. 

The  name  was  chanted  by  Pralhad 
Till  truth  shone  forth  and  made  him  glad. 
Hari  himself  came  down  to  men 
And  slew  the  demon,  Daitya,  then. 

Rama  was  dear  unto  the  Lord, 

For  she  the  feet  divine  adored. 

Her  soft  hands  tend  with  ceaseless  care 

Those  lotus  feet,  so  fine,  so  fair. 

When  he  the  Cowherd's  footprints  sees 
Akrura  falls  upon  his  knees, 
And  prostrate  thus  he  sings  his  praise, 
Lost  in  a  rapture  of  amaze. 

SIta  exalted  Maruti, 
Serving  his  master  lowlily. 
The  humble  service  of  a  slave 
To  Sita's  lord  he  gladly  gave. 

Next  Arjun,  of  the  Lord's  own  kin, 
Whom  to  his  heart  he  gathered  in 
And  taught  the  GIta's  way  of  peace, 
To  find  from  birth  and  death  release. 

Krisna, — himself  when  Bali  gave, — 
Before  his  door  served  as  a  slave  ; 
Three  paces  all  the  land  he  sought, 
Contented  with  a  beggar's  lot. 


EKANATH  53 


Now  Bhakti's  ninefold1  path  behold, 
By  which  nine  saints  attained  of  old. 
Say  I, — to  render  up  the  soul, 
Yea  that  is  bhakti's  highest  goal. 


XXVIII.     THE  SCORNER* 

(Bhavdrtha  Ramdyana,  Chap.  I) 

Who  praises  and  who  scorns  me  too, 
Both  are  my  mother.      Ay,  I  view 
My  scorners  as  my  mother  true. 

For  such  are  kind  to  me.  They  say 
Hard  words  that  wash  my  soil  away, 
As  does  a  mother's  bathing.     They 

Are  friends  indeed  and  strength  supply 
To  me.  Were  I  to  blame  them,  why, 
The  guilty  one  would  then  be  I. 

O  sweet  is  scorning,  setting  free 
From  bondage  of  duality. 
A  gracious  benefactor  he. 

Before  the  scorner  bow  we  low. 
Blest  be  his  mother;  for  I  know 
Who  suffer  scorn  to  Freedom  go. 

1  The  nine  ways  of  bhakti,  enumerated  (with  one  omission)  above, 
are  as  follows  : 

(1)  Sravana,  or  hearing,  illustrated  by  Bhupatl. 

(2)  The  Kirtan,  or  singing  of  sacred  songs,   illustrated   by  &rl 

Suka. 

(3)  Ndma  Smarana,  repetition  of  the  divine  name,  illustrated 

by  Pralhad.' 

(4)  Padasevana,  worshipping  the  feet,  illustrated  by  Rama. 

(5)  Arcana,  worship  of  an  image,    is  omitted   from   Ekanath's 

enumeration. 

(6)  Vandana,  reverential  adoration,  illustrated  by  Akrura. 

(7)  Ddsya,  the  service  of  a  slave,  illustrated  by  Marutl. 

(8)  Sakhya,  friendship,  illustrated  by  Arjuna. 

(9)  Atmanivedana,  self  surrender,  illustrated  by  Bali. 

2  This  is  from  another  work  of  Ekanath,  his  Bhavdrtha  Ramdyana. 


54  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

XXIX.     MEN'S    REVILING 

(Nindaka  kamaca  kamacd) 

Vile,  vile  of  conduct  me  they  call, 
Me,  servant  of  the  soul  of  all. 

Vile  is  my  Ganga1  next  they  say, 
Which  sweeps  my  sins  all,  all  away. 

Vile  is  my  friend  who  all  for  nought 
Cleanses  my  robe  of  every  spot. 

Yea,  vile  my  guru,2  he  who  hath 
Made  great  Janardan's  Ekanath. 


XXX.     "GOD    DWELLS    IN    ALL" 

(Deva  sarvathayi  vase) 

God  dwells  in  all,  and  yet  we  find, 
To  him  the  faithless  man  is  blind. 

Water  or  stones  or  what  you  will, — 
What  is  it  that  he  does  not  fill  ? 

Lo,  God  is  present  everywhere, 
Yet  faithless  eyes  see  nothing  there. 

If  Ekanath  unfaithful  be, 
Then  God  he  also  shall  not  see. 


XXXI.     THE   SPIRITUAL   PANDHARl. 

The  body's  Pandharl  and,  dwelling  there, 
Vitthal,  the  soul,  that  being  past  compare; 

While  Bhima's3  waters  flow  with  faith  and  love, 
And  over  all  shines  Pandurang4  the  fair. 

1  Gahga,  the  sacred  river  Ganges. 

2  Guru,  spiritual  preceptor,  who  in  Ekanath's  case  was  Janardan 
8  Bhimd,  the  river  upon  which  Pandhari  or  Pandharpur  stands. 

*  Pandurang,  see  Note  on  p.  43  above. 


EKANATH  55 

And  mercy,  patience,  peace  are  Bhlma's  sand, 
Where,  rank  on  rank,  the  Vaisnav  pilgrims  stand. 

Ah,  listen  how  the  music  sweetly  sounds, — 
Joy,  worship,  truth,  and  hearts  that  understand. 

My  senses  form  a  single  company 

Of  festal  worshippers  ;  and  lo,  I  see, — 

I,  Ekanath,  the  pilgrim, — everywhere, 
In  crowds,  in  solitude,  my  Pandhari. 


XXXII.     "SAINTS   GREAT   OF   HEART" 

{JJdar  tuhml  santa) 

Saints  great  of  heart  and  kind  are  ye, 
Fathers  and  mothers  unto  me. 

So  great  the  blessings  you  bestow, 
How  can  I  praise  you,  I  so  low  ? 

For  you  have  saved  us,  you  have  showed 
To  us,  dull  men,  the  proper  road. 

My  debt,  I,  Sena  barber,1  say, 
Ah,  never,  never  can  I  pay. 

1  Send,  a  barber  by  caste,  was  one   of    Ramananda's  disciples. 
Some  Marathi  abhangs  are  attributed  to  him. 


TUKARAM1 

(1608-49) 

XXXIII.     THE   MOTHER'S    HOUSE* 

(I. P.  266.     KanyS  sdsurydsi  jaye) 

As  the  bride  looks  back  to  her  mother's  house, 

And  goes,  but  with  dragging  feet  ; 
So  my  soul  looks  up  unto  thee  and  longs, 

That  thou  and  I  may  meet. 

As  a  child  cries  out  and  is  sore  distressed, 

When  its  mother  it  cannot  see, 
As  a  fish  that  is  taken  from  out  the  wave, 

So  'tis,  says  Tuka,  with  me. 

XXXIV.     THE   SUPPLIANT 

{I. P.  530.     Ucita  te  kaya) 

How  can  I  know  the  right, — 

So  helpless  I — 
Since  thou  thy  face  hast  hid  from  me, 

O  thou  most  high  !3 

I  call  and  call  again 

At  thy  high  gate. 
None  hears  me ;  empty  is  the  house 

And  desolate. 

1  For  some  account  of  Tukaram  see  pp.  18ff. 

"  Here  Tukaram  compares  himself  in  this  samsQra,  thia  condition 
of  "  wandering"  and  exile,  which  is  life  in  its  repeated  forms,  to  the 
child-bride  going  to  live  with  her  husband  and  looking  back  with 
longing  to  her  mother's  house.  The  mother's  house,  mdherghar,  round 
which  in  India  so  many  happy  associations  cluster,  is  for  the  soul  the 
breast  of  God.  The  exiled  spirit  looks  back  "to  God,  who  is  his 
home." 

*  Another  and  perhaps  better  authenticated  interpretation  would  be  : 

How  can  I  know  the  right, — 

I,  helpless  one  ! 
Of  pride  of  knowledge,  lo,  O  God, 

I  now  have  none  ! 


TUKARAM  57 

If  but  before  thy  door 

A  guest  appear, 
Thou'lt  speak  to  him  some  fitting  word, 

Some  word  of  cheer. 

Such  courtesy,  O  Lord, 

Becometh  thee, 
And  we, — ah,  we're  not  lost  to  sense 

So  utterly. 


XXXV.     A  BEGGAR  FOR  LOVE 

(I. P.  1502.     Thakalose  dvari) 

A  beggar  at  thy  door, 

Pleading  I  stand  ; 
Give  me  an  alms,  O  God, 

Love  from  thy  loving  hand. 

Spare  me  the  barren  task, 

To  come,  and  come  for  nought. 

A  gift  poor  Tuka  craves, 
Unmerited,  unbought. 

XXXVI.     "GOD  WHO  IS  OUR  HOME" 

(I. P.  1820.     Matevina  bald) 

To  the  child  how  dull  the  Fair 
If  his  mother  be  not  there  ! 

So  my  heart  apart  from  thee, 
O  thou  Lord  of  Pandhari  I1 

Chatak2  turns  from  stream  and  lake, 
Only  rain  his  thirst  can  slake. 

How  the  lotus  all  the  night 
Dreameth,  dreameth  of  the  light  ! 

Lord  of  Pandhari,  that  is,   Vithoba,  whose  central  shrine   is   a 
Pandharpur. 

a  Chatak,  a  species  of  cuckoo,  often  called  the  brain  fever  bird.  It 
is  popularly  believed  to  be  able  to  drink  only  rain  water,  and  hence  its 
agonised  cry  for  rain, 


58  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

As  the  stream  to  fishes  thou, 
As  is  to  the  calf  the  cow. 
To  a  faithful  wife  how  dear 
Tidings  of  her  Lord  to  hear ! 
How  a  miser's  heart  is  set 
On  the  wealth  he  hopes  to  get ! 
Such,  says  Tuka,  such  am  I ! 
But  for  thee  I'd  surely  die. 

XXXVII.     THE   STRIFE   OF   SENSE 
(I.P .  827 .     Avagha  vencalo) 

Wearied  by  strife  of  sense, 

By  call  and  counter-call, 
To  thee  I  hie  me  thence, 

And  tell  thee  all. 
Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest  this ; 

I've  brought  my  life  to  thee. 
Cast  down  my  burden  is 

And  I  am  free  ! 
Now  all  my  being  yearns, 

Yearns  with  a  strong  desire, 
My  love  within  me  burns, 

A  wasting  fire. 
If  thou  canst  help  indeed — 

(Hear  what  I,  Tuka,  say) — 
Narayan,1  help  with  speed, 

Make  no  delay  ! 

XXXVIII.     WAITING 
(I.P.  469.     V&ta  pake  b&he) 

With  head  on  hand  before  my  door, 

I  sit  and  wait  in  vain. 
Along  the  road  to  Pandhari 

My  heart  and  eyes  I  strain. 

1  N&r&yan,  that  is,  Vi§nu.  The  name  probably  retains  a  general 
suggestion  as  describing  the  Supreme  Being,  though  it  was  appro- 
priated by  the  Vai^navas  as  a  name  of  Vijnu. 


TUKARAM  59 

When  shall  I  look  upon  my  Lord  ? 

When  shall  I  see  him  come  ? 
Of  all  the  passing  days  and  hours 

I  count  the  heavy  sum. 

With  watching  long  my  eyelids  throb, 

My  limbs  with  sore  distress, 
But  my  impatient  heart  forgets 

My  body's  weariness. 

Sleep  is  no  longer  sweet  to  me  ; 

I  care  not  for  my  bed  ; 
Forgotten  are  my  house  and  home, 

All  thirst  and  hunger  fled. 

Says  Tuka,  Blest  shall  be  the  day, — 

Ah,  soon  may  it  betide  ! — 
When  one  shall  come  from    Pandhari1 

To  summon  back  the  bride. 


XXXIX.     DESOLATION 

(I. P.  1836.     Doliyd  pajhar  kantha  majha  date) 

Sobs  choke  my  throat ;  my  eyes 

Are  wet  with  tears, — 
Still  waiting  for  my  Pandurang, 

Till  he  appears. 

So  long  cast  off  by  thee, 

My  heart  despairs. 
Ah,  whither  hast  thou  gone,  absorbed 

In  other  cares  ? 

So  many  tasks  and  cares 

Are  thine,  while  I — 
I  am  forgotten  thus,  alas, 

And  left  to  die. 

1  Tukaram  lived  in  the  village  of  Dehu,  while  Vithoba,  whom  he 
worshipped,  had  his  temple  at  Pandharpur.  In  this  abhang,  as  in 
No.  XXXIII,  he  is  {he  phild-bride,  longing  to  return  to  his  mother's 
house. 


60  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Pilgrims  and  saints  go  past 

To  Pandhari, 
And  many  messages  they  bear 

From  me  to  thee. 

Who  else  but  thee  would  run 

To  help  my  need  ? 
O  come  to  me,  my  Panduraiig, 

O  come  with  speed. 

How  long  still  must  I  wait, 

To  see  thy  face  ? 
Thou  hast  forgot  thy  trembling  child, 

Thou  full  of  grace. 

Once  more  remember  me, 

I,  Tuka,  pray. 
O  come  to  fetch  thy  darling  home, 

Make  no  delay. 


XL.     "THEE,    LORD   OF    PITY,    I    BESEECH" 

(I. P.  2824 .     A ga  karunakard . ) 

Thee,  Lord  of  Pity,  I  beseech, 

Come  speedily  and  set  me  free. 
Yea,  when  he  hears  my  piteous  speech, 

All  eager  should  Narayan1  be. 

Lo,  in  the  empty  world  apart 

I  hearken,  waiting  thy  footfall  : 
Vitthal,2  thou  father,  mother  art, 

Thou  must  not  loiter  at  my  call. 

Thou,  thou  alone  art  left  to  me 

All  else  when  weighed  is  vanity. 

Now,  Tuka  pleads,  thy  gift  of  grace  complete  ; 

Now  let  mine  eyes  behold  thy  equal  feet. 


*  Narayan,  see  Note  on  p.  58  above. 

8  Vitthal,  one  of  the  names  of  Vithoba  or  Pandurang  or  Kri?na. 


TUKARAM  61 

XLI.     FROM   THE   DEPTHS 

(I. P.  3653.     Aike  Panduranga  vaccina) 

O  Pandurang,  this  once 

Hark  to  my  cry, 
For  I  thy  servant  am, 

Thine  only  I. 

Save  me  by  whatso  means 

Thou  best  may'st  deem  ; 
No  longer  now  I  make 

Or  plan  or  scheme. 

How  carefully  my  plans 

And  schemes  I  wrought ! 
My  falsehood  and  my  pride 

Bring  all  to  nought. 

One  dull  of  wit  am  I, 

Of  low  degree, 
By  selfishness  possessed 

And  vanity. 

An  instant  and  on  me 

Ruin  may  fall. 
Come  to  my  help,  O  God, 

Come  to  my  call. 


XLII.     FORSAKE  ME  NOT  ! 

(I. P.  4381.     Kurangi  pddasa  cukalese) 

If  far  from  home  the  poor  faun  roam, 
With  grief  its  heart  will  break. 

Thus  lonely  I  with  thee  not  nigh 
O  do  not  me  forsake  ! 

Thy  heart  within,  all,  all  my  sin 
Ah,  hide  ;  make  no  delay. 

Eternal  thou  —  look  on  me  now 
In  love,  I,  Tuka,  pray. 


62  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

XLIII.     MOTHER  VITHOBA 

(I. P.  1540.     Tuja  mhanatila  kripeca  sagara ) 

Ah,  Pandurang,  if,  as  men  say, 

A  sea  of  love  thou  art, 
Then  wherefore  dost  thou  so  delay? 

O  take  me  to  thy  heart  ! 

I  cry  for  thee  as  for  the  hind 
The  faun  makes  sore  lament. 

Nowhere  its  mother  it  can  find, 
With  thirst  and  hunger  spent. 

With  milk  of  love,  ah,  suckle  me 

At  thy  abounding  breast, 
O  Mother,  haste. — In  thee,  in  thee 

My  sad  heart  findeth  rest. 

XLIV.     ME   MISERABLE 

(LP.  806.     Alpa  mdjhi  matt) 

Since  little  wit  have  I, 

0  hear  my  mournful  cry. 

Grant  now,  O  grant  to  me 
That  I  thy  feet  may  see. 

1  have  no  steadfastness, 
Narayan,2  I  confess. 

Have  mercy,  Tuka  prays, 
On  my  unhappy  case. 

XLV.     WITHIN   MY    HEART 

(I. P.  868.     Nakalatakaya) 

I  know  no  way  by  which 
My  faith  thy  feet  can  reach 
Nor  e'er  depart. 

1  In  this  abhahg  the  conception  of  Vithoba  or  Pandurang  at  a 
mother,  which  we  have  already  met  with  (see  Note  on  p.  43  above),  is 
elaborated. 

*  Narayan,  see  Note  on  p.  58  above. 


TUKARAM  63 

How,  how  can  I  attain 
That  thou,  O  Lord,  shalt  reign 
Within  my  heart  ? 

Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  hear 
And  grant  to  faith  sincere, 

My  heart  within, 
Thy  gracious  face  to  see, 
Driving  afar  from  me 

Deceit  and  sin. 

O  come,  I,  Tuka,  pray, 
And  ever  with  me  stay, 

Mine,  mine  to  be. 
Thy  mighty  hand  outstretch 
And  save  a  fallen  wretch, 

Yea,  even  me. 


XLVI.     THE  RESTLESS  HEART 

(I. P.  1031.     Jxvanavacuni  talamall  masa) 

As  on  the  bank  the  poor  fish  lies 
And  gasps  and  writhes  in  pain, 

Or  as  a  man  with  anxious  eyes 
Seeks  hidden  gold  in  vain, — 

So  is  my  heart  distressed  and  cries 
To  come  to  thee  again. 

Thou  knowest,  Lord,  the  agony 

Of  the  lost  infant's  wail, 
Yearning  his  mother's  face  to  see. 

(How  oft  I  tell  this  tale !) 
O  at  thy  feet  the  mystery 

Of  the  dark  world  unveil ! 

The  fire  of  this  harassing  thought 

Upon  my  bosom  preys. 
Why  is  it  I  am  thus  forgot  ? 

(O,  who  can  know  thy  ways?) 
Nay,  Lord,  thou  seest  my  hapless  lot  ; 

Have  mercy,  Tuka  says. 


64  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

XLVII.     "I   LONG   TO   SEE   THY    FACE" 

(I.P.2672.     Tuja  pdhdve  he  dharito  vdsand) 

I  long  to  see  thy  face, 

But  ah,  in  me  hath  holiness  no  place. 

By  thy  strength  succour  me, 

So  only,  only  I  thy  feet  may  see  ! 

Though  Sadhu's1  robes  I've  worn, 

Within  I'm  all  unshaven  and  unshorn. 

Lost,  lost,  O  God,  am  I, 

Unless  thou  help  me,  Tuka, — me  who  cry  ! 

XLVIII.     "  KEEP  ME  FROM  VANITY" 

(I. P.  3443.     Nako  maja  tdthd,  nako  abhimdna) 

Keep  me  from  vanity 

Keep  me  from  pride, 
For  sure  I  perish  if 

I  quit  thy  side. 
From  this  deceiving  world 

How  hard  to  flee  ! 
Ah,  thou,  Vaikuntha's2  Lord, 

Deliver  me  ! 
If  once  thy  gracious  face 

I  look  upon, 
The  world's  enticement  then 

Is  past  and  gone. 

XLIX.     ASPIRATION 
(I. P.  1996.     Devd  dtd  aisd  kar'%  upakdra) 

One  favour  grant,  O  God, — that  now  by  me 

My  flesh  may  be  forgot  ; 
So  shall  I  have  (for  I  at  last  have  learned) 

Bliss  for  my  lot. 

1  Sddhu,  an  ascetic  who,  as  9uch,  wears  a  yellow  robe   and   shaves 
his  head. 

2  Vaikuntha,  the  heaven  of  Vi§nu,  or  Kri§na  or  Vithobi. 


TUKARAM  65 

Give  to  my  heart  and  all  its  moods  a  place 

Close  by  thy  side  ; 
Break,  break  the  bond  that  binds  me  to  desire, 

To  passion,  shame  and  pride. 

Thy  name  to  utter  and  the  saints  to  know, — 

I  beg  but  this  of  thee. 
Here  is  no  feigning,  Lord  ;  my  service  take 

Of  faith  and  purity  ! 

L.     THE  ONLY  REFUGE 

(I. P.  4004.     Avaghyd  pdtakaiici  mi  eka  r&si) 

I  am  a  mass  of  sin ; 

Thou  art  all  purity  ; 
Yet  thou  must  take  me  as  I  am 

And  bear  my  load  for  me. 
Me  Death  has  all  consumed  ; 

In  thee  all  power  abides. 
All  else  forsaking,  at  thy  feet 

Thy  servant  Tuka  hides. 

LI.     DESOLATE 

(I. P.  3695.     Konacecintana  kara  ai$a  kale) 

When  thought  of  all  but  thee 

Has  from  me  gone, 
Still  by  thy  strength  upheld 

I  struggle  on. 

Come  to  me,  Vitthal,1  come  ! 

For  thee  I  wait. 
O,  wherefore  hast  thou  me 

Left  desolate. 

Many  oppress  me  sore 

With  cruel  might  ; 
My  very  enemies 

Are  day  and  night. 

1  Vitthal,  see  Note  on  p.  40  above. 


66  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Ah  come  and  take  thy  place 

At  my  heart's  core  ; 
Then  shall  the  net  of  ill 

Snare  me  no  more. 

LII.     ««0   SAVE   ME,    SAVE   ME!" 
(I. P.  3837.     Trahe,  trahe,  trdhe,  sodavi  anantd) 

O  save  me,  save  me,  Mightiest, 

Save  me  and  set  me  free. 
O  let  the  love  that  fills  my  breast 

Cling  to  thee  lovingly. 

Grant  me  to  taste  how  sweet  thou  art  ; 

Grant  me  but  this,  I  pray, 
And  never  shall  my  love  depart 

Or  turn  from  thee  away. 

Then  I  thy  name  shall  magnify 

And  tell  thy  praise  abroad, 
For  very  love  and  gladness  I 

Shall  dance  before  my  God. 

Grant  to  me,  Vitthal,1  that  I  rest 

Thy  blessed  feet  beside  ; 
Ah,  give  me  this,  the  dearest,  best, 

And  I  am  satisfied. 

LIII.     NEAR    YET   FAR 
(I. P.  4419.     Tujavina  txlabharl) 

There  is  no  place,  small  as  a  sesamum, 

But  thou,  they  say,  art  there. 
That  deep  in  all  this  universe  thou  dwelPst 

Sages  and  saints  declare. 

So,  I,  of  old  thy  child,  in  faith  of  this 

Come  seeking  help  from  thee. 
Thou  overflow'st  the  world,  and  yet,  and  yet, 

Thy  face  I  cannot  see. 

1   Vitthal,  aee  Note  on  p.  40  above. 


TUKARAM  67 

1  Why  should  I  meet  this  abject — I  to  whom 

There  is  nor  bound  nor  end  ?  " 
Is  it  with  such  a  thought  thou  comest  not, 

My  father  and  my  friend  ? 
Ah,  what  shall  Tuka  do  that  he  thy  feet 

May  touch  and  tend  ? 

LIV.     BEYOND   THE   MOUNTAINS,    GOD 

(LP.  4420.     Kama  krodha  ada) 

Here  tower  the  hills  of  passion  and  of  lust, — 

Far  off  the  Infinite  ! 
No  path  I  find  and  all  impassable 

Fronts  me  the  hostile  height. 

Ah,  God  is  lost,  my  friend.     Narayan1  now 

How  can  I  e'er  attain  ? 
Thus  it  appears  that  all  my  life,  so  dear, 

I've  spent,  alas,  in  vain. 

LV.     "I   CANNOT    UNDERSTAND:    I   LOVE" 

(I. P.  4361.     Na  kale  mahima) 

Thy  greatness  none  can  comprehend  * 

All  dumb  the  Vedas  are. 
Forspent  the  powers  of  mortal  mind  ; 

They  cannot  climb  so  far. 
How  can  I  compass  him  whose  light 

Illumes  both  sun  and  star  ? 

The  serpent  of  a  thousand  tongues2 

Cannot  tell  all  thy  praise ; 
Then  how,  poor  I  ?     Thy  children  we, 

Mother  of  loving  ways  ! 
Within  the  shadow  of  thy  grace, 

Ah,  hide  me,  Tuka  says. 

1  N&r&yan,  see  Note  on  p.  58  above.  The  name  appears  to  be  used 
here  to  suggest  the  Supreme  Being,  above  man's  reach. 

3  The  serpent  of  a  thousand  tongues,  3e§a,  the  thousand-headed 
snake  which  is  at  once  the  couch  and  canopy  of  Vi?nu  and  which  up- 
holds the  world. 


68  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

LVI.     NOT  ONE    BUT  TWO 
(I.P.  3753.     Advaiti  to  majhe  n&hi  samadh&na) 

Advait1  contents  me  not,  but  dear  to  me 

The  service  of  thy  feet. 
O  grant  me  this  reward  !     To  sing  of  the« 

To  me  how  sweet  ! 

Setting  us  twain,  lover  and  Lord,  apart, 

This  joy  to  me  display. 
Grant  it  to  Tuka — Lord  of  all  thou  art — 

Some  day,  some  day. 


LVII.     MAN'S    EXTREMITY1 
(I.P.  648.     Majha  tava  khuntala  up&va) 

Ah,  then,  O  God,  the  efforts  all  are  vain 

By  which  I've  sought  thy  blessed  feet  to  gain. 

First  there  was  loving  faith,  but  faith  I've  none; 
Nowise  my  restless  soul  can  I  restrain. 

Then  pious  deeds,  but  no  good  will  have  I 

For  these  ;  nor  wealth  to  help  the  poor  thereby  ; 

I  know  not  how  to  honour  Brahman  guests ; 
Alas !  the  springs  of  love  in  me  are  dry. 

I  cannot  serve  the  guru  or  the  saint ; 
Not  mine  to  chant  the  name,  with  toil  to  faint, 
Perform  the  sacred  rites,  renounce  the  world. 
I  cannot  hold  my  senses  in  restraint. 

1  Advait,  the  philosophical  doctrine  of  non-duality,  that  is,  of  the 
ultimate  identity  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  Supreme  Soul. 
Tuk&ram  prefers  "  the  bliss  of  duality." 

3  The  poet  here  enumerates  various  means  by  which  the  divine 
favour  is  sought  or  by  which  men  endeavour  to  obtain  Release.  These 
vary  from  the  feeding  of  Brahmans  to  attainment  of  a  condition  of 
unity  with  Brahman  beyond  all  distinctions.  He  finds  himself  unequal 
to  any  of  them  and  finally  casts  himself  upon  God's  mercy.  For  a 
s  imilar  testimony  on  the  part  of  Namdev  see  No.  XVII  above. 


TUKARAM  69 

My  heart  has  never  trod  the  pilgrim's  way  ; 
The  vows  I  make  I  know  not  how  to  pay. 

"  Ah,  God  is  here,"  I  cry.     Not  so,  not  so.1 
For  me  distinctions  have  not  passed  away. 

Therefore,  I  come,  O  God,  to  plead  for  grace, 
I,  worthy  only  of  a  servant's  place. 

No  store  of  merit  such  an  one  requires. 
My  firm  resolve  is  taken,  Tuka  says. 


LVIII.     THOUGH  HE  SLAY  ME 

(I. P.  626.     Ata  tuja  kalela  te  kari) 

Now  I  submit  me  to  thy  will, 
Whether  thou  save  or  whether  kill ; 
Keep  thou  me  near  or  send  me  hence, 
Or  plunge  me  in  the  war  of  sense.2 

Thee  in  my  ignorance  I  sought, 
Of  true  devotion  knowing  nought. 
Little  could  I,  a  dullard,  know, 
Myself  the  lowest  of  the  low. 

My  mind  I  cannot  steadfast  hold  ; 
My  senses  wander  uncontrolled. 
Ah,  I  have  sought  and  sought  for  peace. 
In  vain  ;  for  me  there's  no  release. 

Now  bring  I  thee  a  faith  complete 
And  lay  my  life  before  thy  feet. 
Do  thou,  O  God,  what  seemeth  best ; 
In  thee,  in  thee  alone  is  rest. 

In  thee  I  trust,  and,  hapless  wight, 
Cling  to  thy  skirts  with  all  my  might. 
My  strength  is  spent,  I,  Tuka  say  ; 
Now  upon  thee  this  task  I  lay. 

1  "Ah  God  is  here."  He  has  not  attained  to  a  realisation  of  his 
identity  with  the  Supreme  Spirit,  or,  perhaps,  he  has  not  realised  God's 
presence. 

s  "War  of  sense,  samsara,  "  wandering,"  rebirth  again  and  again 
in  the  body. 


70  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

LIX.     PANDURANG 
(I.P.  1033.     Kona  ahma  puse) 

Who  asks  if  spent  and  weary  we  ? 
Who  else,  O  Pandurang,  but  thee  ? 

Whom  shall  we  tell  our  joy  or  grief  ? 
Who  to  our  thirst  will  bring  relief  ? 

Who  else  this  fever  will  assuage  ? 
Who  bear  us  o'er  the  ocean's  rage  ? 

Who  will  our  heart's  desire  impart 
And  clasp  us  to  his  loving  heart  ? 

What  other  master  shall  we  own  ? 
What  helper  else  but  thee  alone  ? 

Ah,  Tuka  says,  thou  knowest  all, 
Prostrate  before  thy  feet  I  fall. 

LX.     COMPLETE  SURRENDER 

(I. P.  702.     Anika  dusare  maja  nahi) 

Now  Pandurang  I've  chosen  for  my  part, 

None,  none  but  his  to  be. 
In  all  my  thoughts  he  dwells,  dwells  in  my  heart, 

Sleeping  and  waking  he. 

Yea,  all  my  being's  powers  before  him  bow ; 

None  other  faith  is  aught. 
See,  Tuka  says,  mine  eyes  behold  him  now, 

Standing  all  wrapt  in  thought.1 

LXI.     TO  THY  DEAR  FEET! 
( 7 . P.  4161.     Prema  jadalc ) 

To  thy  dear  feet  my  love  I  bind : 
No  other  longing  stirs  my  mind. 

1  Standing  all  wrapt  in  thought.      Compare  the  description  on 
p.  49  above,  of  this  god  as  "standing  on  the  brick." 


TUKARAM  71 

I  think  of  thee  through  days  and  nights, 
And  so  discharge  my  holy  rites. 

Nought  know  I  but  thy  name  alone : — 
Thus  to  myself  myself  am  known. 

When  comes  at  last  the  hour  of  death 
O  save  me,  save  me,  Tuka  saith. 

LXII.     HE  LEADETH  ME 

(/.P.  2000.    Jethe  jdto  tethe  tu) 

Holding  my  hand  thou  leadest  me, 

My  comrade  everywhere. 
As  I  go  on  and  lean  on  thee, 

My  burden  thou  dost  bear. 

If,  as  I  go,  in  my  distress 

I  frantic  words  should  say, 
Thou  settest  right  my  foolishness 

And  tak'st  my  shame  away. 

Thus  thou  to  me  new  hope  dost  send, 

A  new  world  bnngest  in  ; 
Now  know  I  every  man  a  friend 

And  all  I  meet  my  kin. 

So  like  a  happy  child  I  play 

In  thy  dear  world,  O  God, 
And  everywhere — I,  Tuka,  say — 

Thy  bliss  is  spread  abroad. 

LXIII.     THE  JOY   OF   THE   NAME 
(I.P.  818.    Ndmd  dthavitd) 

Lord,  let  it  be  that  when  thy  name 

Into  my  thoughts  shall  come, 
My  love  to  thee  shall  mount  like  flame, 

My  lips  with  joy  be  dumb. 

Filled  are  my  eyes  with  happy  tears, 

With  rapture  every  limb  ; 
Yea,  with  thy  love  my  frame  appears 

Filled  to  the  very  brim. 


72  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

Thus  all  my  body's  strength  I'll  spend 
In  hymns  of  joyful  praise  ; 

Thy  name  I'll  sing  nor  ever  end 
Through  all  the  nights  and  days. 

Yea,  Tuka  says,  for  ever  so 

I'll  do,  for  this  is  best, 
Since  at  the  feet  of  saints,  I  know, 

Is  found  eternal  rest. 

LXIV.     LOVE'S  CAPTIVE 

(I.P.  783.     Premasutra  dori) 

Bound  with  cords  of  love  I  go, 

By  Hari1  captive  led, 
Mind  and  speech  and  body,  lo, 

To  him  surrendered. 

He  shall  rule  my  life  for  he 

Is  all  compassionate. 
His  is  sole  authority, 

And  we  his  will  await. 


LXV.     THE    BHAKTA'S    DUTY 

(I.P.  1437.     NisthavantS.  bhdvay 

The  duty  of  the  man  of  faith 

Is  trust  and  loyalty, 
A  purpose  hid  within  his  heart 

That  cannot  moved  be. 

A  steadfast  faith  and  passionless 

In  Vitthal  that  abides, 
A  faith  that  not  an  instant  strays 

To  any  god  besides. 

Who  that  is  such  a  one  as  that 

Was  ever  cast  away  ? 
Never  has  such  a  tale  been  told, 

Never,  I,  Tuka,  say. 

1  Hari,  that  is,  Kri?na. 


TUKARAM  73 

LXVI.     LOVE   FINDS   OUT   GOD 
(I.P.  810.     Manavacatita  tujhe  he  svariipa) 

Thy  nature  is  beyond  the  grasp 

Of  human  speech  or  thought. 
So  love1  I've  made  the  measure-rod, 

By  which  I  can  be  taught. 

Thus  with  the  measure-rod  of  love 

I  mete  the  Infinite. 
In  sooth,  to  measure  him  there  is 

None  other  means  so  fit. 

Not  Yoga's2  power,  nor  sacrifice, 

Nor  fierce  austerity, 
Nor  yet  the  strength  of  thought  profound 

Hath  ever  found  out  thee. 

And  so,  says  Tuka,  graciously, 

Oh  Kesav,3  take,  we  pray 
Love's  service  that  with  simple  hearts 

Before  thy  feet  we  lay. 


LXVII.     "GOD    IS   OURS" 

(I.P.  1870.     Deva  amaca  amaca) 

God  is  ours,  yea,  ours  is  he, 
Soul  of  all  the  souls  that  be. 

God  is  nigh  without  a  doubt, 
Nigh  to  all,  within,  without. 

God  is  gracious,  gracious  still; 
Every  longing  he'll  fulfil. 

God  protects,  protects  his  own; 
Strife  and  death  he  casteth  down. 

Kind  is  God,  ah,  kind  indeed; 
Tuka  he  will  guard  and  lead. 

1  Love,  bhakti  or  loving  devotion.     See  Introduction,  p.  11. 

2  Yoga,  see  note  on  p.  36  above.  8  KeSav,  Krisna. 


74  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

LXVIII.     "ONE  THING    I    DO" 

(I. P.  2638.     Laukikd  puratl  nahve  mdjhl  seva) 

I  serve  thee,  not  because 

Honour  I  crave ; 
Nay,  Ke&av,1  for  I  am 

Thy  slave. 

Therefore  to  serve  thy  feet, — 

For  this  I  cry  ; 
For  naught,  for  naught  but  this 

Crave  I. 

To  my  Lord's  service,  see, 
One  heart  I've  brought, 

Ever, — without,  within, — 
One  thought. 

Thus  mine  appointed  task 

Do  I  somehow ; 
Whether  'tis  wrong  or  right 

Judge  thou. 


LXIX.     HE    KNOWS   OUR    NEEDS 

(I. P.  602.     Trailokya  palitd ) 

Unwearied  he  bears  up  the  universe; 

How  light  a  burden  I ! 
Does  not  his  care  the  frog  within  the  stone 

With  food  supply  ? 

The  bird,  the  creeping  thing,  lays  up  no  store ; 

This  great  One  knows  their  need. 
And  if  I,  Tuka,  cast  on  him  my  load, 

Will  not  his  mercy  heed  ? 

1  KeSav,  one  of  the  names  of  Kri^na. 


TUKARAM  75 

LXX.     "IN  HIM  ABIDE" 
(I. P.  819.     Janani  he  jane  bdlakace  varma) 

The  mother  knows  her  child, — his  secret  heart, 

His  joy  or  woe. 
Who  holds  the  blind  man's  hand  alone  can  tell 

Where  he  desires  to  go. 
The  timid  suppliant  at  his  champion's  back 

Can  safely  hide. 
Who  only  clings,  see,  the  strong  swimmer  bears 

To  the  stream's  further  side. 
Vitthal,  says  Tuka,  knows  our  every  need  ; 

Only  in  him  abide. 

LXXI.     THE  BOLDNESS  OF  FAITH 

(I. P.  716.     Bhavasindhuce  kdya  kode) 

Launch  upon  the  sea  of  life  ; 

Fear  not  aught  that  thou  mayst  meet. 
Stout  the  ship  of  Pandurang  ; 

Not  a  wave  shall  wet  thy  feet. 
Many  saints  await  thee  there, 

Standing  on  the  further  shore  : 
Haste,  says  Tuka,  haste  away, 

Follow  those  who've  gone  before. 

LXXII.     BEATA   CULPA 

{I. P.  758.     Jari  ml  nahvto  patita) 

How  couldst  thou  e'er  have  cleansed  me, 

But  for  my  sinful  plight  ? 
So  first  come  I,  and  then  thy  grace, 

O  mercy  infinite. 
The  magic  stone1  was  nothing  worth, 

Till  iron  brought  it  fame. 
Did  no  one  by  the  Wish  Tree2  wish, 

Whence  would  it  get  its  name  ? 

1  The  magic  stone,  parisa,  which  turns  iron  into  gold. 

2  The  Wish  Tree,  kalpataru,  a  tree  in  Indra's  heaven,  supposed 
to  grant  every  desire.  Compare  the  kamadhenu,  the  cow  of  plenty, 
which  has  a  similar  property. 


76  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

LXXIII.     THE  SNARE  OF  PRIDE 

(I.P.  1779       Vacecyd  cdpalye) 

None  skilled  as  I  in  craft  of  subtle  speech  ; 
But,  ah,  the  root  of  things  I  cannot  reach. 

Therefore,  O  Lord  of  Pandhari,  my  heart 

Is  sore  distressed.     Who  knows  my  inward  part  ? 

I  proud  became  from  honour  that  men  paid 

To  me, — and  thus  my  upward  growth  was  stayed. 

Alas  !  The  way  of  truth  I  cannot  see, 
Held  fast  by  Self  in  dark  captivity. 


LXXIV.     I  AM  POOR  AND  NEEDY 

(I.P.  764.     Kriyamatihina) 

No  deeds  I've  done  nor  thoughts  I've  thought 
Save  as  thy  servant,  I  am  nought. 

Guard  me,  O  God,  and  O,  control 
The  tumult  of  my  restless  soul. 

Ah,  do  not,  do  not  cast  on  me 
The  guilt  of  mine  iniquity. 

My  countless  sins,  I,  Tuka,  say, 
Upon  thy  loving  heart  I  lay. 


LXXV.     A    BLIND    LEADER   OF   THE    BLIND 

(I.P.  1001.     Catura  ml  jalo) 

I  have  grown  very  wise 
In  mine  own  foolish  eyes, 

But  faith  has  fled. 
My  life  is  vain  indeed  ; 
But  worse  that  rage  and  greed 

Dwell  in  faith's  stead. 


TUKARAM  77 

The  world's  possessed  by  sin 
And  envy  reigns  within 

The  human  breast ; 
And  I  shall  teach  mankind, 
Though  I'm  myself  as  blind 

As  all  the  rest. 

LXXVI.     THE   PRIDE  OF    KNOWLEDGE 

(I. P.  2849.     Ulna  majhl  yatl) 

Though  I'm  a  man  of  lowly  birth 
The  saints  have  magnified  my  worth. 

And  so  within  my  heart  to  hide 
Has  come  the  great  destroyer,  pride. 

In  my  fond  heart  the  fancy  dwells 
That  I  am  wise  and  no  one  else. 

O,  save  me,  save  me,  Tuka  prays ; 
Spent  like  the  wind  are  all  my  days. 

LXXVII.     THE  UNVEILING  OF  LOVE 

(I. P.  2966.     Janoni  nenate  kari  mdjhe  mana) 

Enlighten  thou  mine  eyes 
Making  me  lowly  wise  ; 

Thy  love  to  me  unveil. 
Then  in  the  world  I'll  be 
As,  from  all  soilure  free, 

The  lotus  pure  and  pale. 

Whether  men  praise  or  jeer, 
Hearing  I  shall  not  hear  ; 

Like  the  rapt  yogi1  I. 
To  me  the  world  shall  seem 
Like  visions  of  a  dream 

That,  with  our  waking,  fly. 

Till  we  that  state  attain 
All,  all  our  toil  is  vain, 
I,  Tuka,  testify. 

1  Yogi,  see  Note  on  p.  36  above. 


J 

I 


78  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

LXXVIII.     THE   HAVEN 
(I.P.  3696.     Kaji  tuhml  aise  nahva  krip&vanta) 

Ah,  wherefore  so  unkind  ? 

Let  my  sad  breast 
At  the  hid  centre  find 

It's  place  of  rest. 

No  wind  of  good  or  ill 

Shall  enter  there, 
But  peace,  supremely  still, 

Supremely  fair. 

To  me  the  flux  of  things 

Brings  sore  distress  ; 
The  world's  mutation  brings 

But  heaviness. 

Therefore  I,  Tuka,  cry, 

Clinging  thy  feet, 
M  Break,  break  my  'me'  and  '  my,'1 

My  vain  conceit." 


LXXIX.     WEARINESS 

(I.P.  977.     Kay  a  &ta  Shmi  pota  ci  bhardve) 

Shall  we,  sham  saints,  the  world  beguile 
Glutting  our  belly's  greed  the  while  ? 

O  tell  thy  thought,  if  this  it  be, 
For  I  am  weary  utterly. 

Shall  we  the  poet's  mood  rehearse 
And  string  together  endless  verse  ? 

Shall  Tuka  ope  his  shop2  again 
And,  O  Narayan,  ruin  men  ? 

1  My  "me  "  and  "  my,"  see  Note  on  p.  45  above. 
•  His  shop.     Tulcarim  was  a  seller  of  grain. 


TUKARAM  79 

LXXX.     GOD'S  COUNTERFEIT 

(I. P.  347.     Je  ka  ranjale  gdnjale) 

Is  there  a  man  who  says  of  all, 

Whether  upon  them  sorrow  fall, 

Or  whether  joy — V  These,  these  are  mine  "  ? 

That  is  the  saint :  mark  well  the  sign. 

God  dwells  in  him.     The  good  man's  breast 

Is  of  all  men's  the  tenderest. 

Is  any  helpless  or  undone  ? 

Be  he  a  slave,  be  he  a  son  : — 

On  all  alike  he  mercy  shows, 

On  all  an  equal  love  bestows. 

How  oft  must  I  this  tale  repeat  ! 
That  man  is  God's  own  counterfeit. 


LXXXI.     SELF-SURRENDER  tj/ 

V 

(LP.  3474.     Dila  jlvabhava) 

My  self  I've  rendered  up  to  thee  ; 
I've  cast  it  from  me  utterly. 

Now  here  before  thee,  Lord,  I  stand, 
Attentive  to  thy  least  command. 

The  self  within  me  now  is  dead, 
And  thou  enthroned  in  its  stead. 

Yea,  this  I,  Tuka,  testify, 

No  longer  now  is  "me"  or  "my." 

LXXXII.     DYING    TO   LIVE1 

(I. P.  2668.     A  pule  mar  ana  pahile  my  5,  dold) 

Before  my  eyes  my  dead  self  lies  ; 

O,  bliss  beyond  compare  ! 
Joy  fills  the  worlds,  and  I  rejoice, 

The  soul  of  all  things  there. 

1  This  is  one  of  Tukaram's  abhangs  which  is  interpreted  differently 
by  those  who  claim  him  as  a  theist   and  those  who  claim   him  as  a 


80  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

My  selfish  bonds  are  loosed,  and  now 

I  reach  forth  far  and  free. 
Gone  is  the  soil  of  birth  and  death, 

The  petty  sense  of  "  me." 

Narayan's  grace  gave  me  this  place, 

Where  I  in  faith  abide. 
Now,  Tuka  says,  my  task  I've  done 

And  spread  the  message  wide. 

LXXXIII.     THE  ROOT  OF  LONGING 

(I. P.  1436.     Aid.  he  samula  khanoni  kadhdvi) 

Who  is  he  would  act  the  true  gosavi's1  part  ? 
Let  him  dig  the  root  of  longing  from  his  heart. 
If  he  dare  not,  in  his  pleasures  let  him  stay — 
Folly  were  it  should  he  choose  another  way. 
For  when  longing  he  hath  slain  victoriously, 
Only  then  shall  he  from  all  come  forth  set  free. 
Yea,  says  Tuka,  does  thy  heart  for  union  thirst  ? 
Crush — be  sure! — the  seed  of  longing  in  thee  first. 

LXXXIV.     THE   SECRET   OF    PEACE 

(I.P.  580.     Santiparate  nahl  sukha) 

Calm2  is  life's  crown  ;   all  other  joy  beside 
^  Is  only  pain. 

Hold  thou  it  fast,  thou  shalt,  whate'er  betide, 
The  further  shore  attain. 

When  passions  rage  and  we  are  wrung  with  woe 

And  sore  distress, 
Comes  calm,  and  then — yea,  Tuka  knows  it — lo  ! 

The  fever  vanishes. 

follower  of  advaita  pantheism.  To  the  former  it  seems  that  the  bliss 
he  describes  is  that  which  comes  from  the  death  of  the  lower  self  and 
the  presence  of  God  in  his  heart.  To  the  latter  the  bliss  is  that  which 
is  produced  by  the  realisation  of  his  identity  with  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
and  the  "  self-naughting  "  is  the  disappearance  of  personality  itself. 

1  Gosavi,  a    holy    man,  usually    of    the    Sudra    class,  who    has 
renounced  the  world,  *  Ca'»».  Santi. 


TUKARAM  81 

LXXXV.     THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  SAINTS 

(I. P.  2051.    Agnimdji  gele) 

What  enters  fire,  its  former  nature  lost, 

Fire  to  itself  transforms. 
Touched  by  the  magic  stone,  lo,  iron  now 

Gold  that  the  world  adorns. 
Into  the  Ganga1  flow  the  little  streams, 

With  the  great  Ganga  blent. 
Nay,  e'en  its  neighbour  trees  the  sandal  tree 

Infects  with  its  sweet  scent. 
So  to  the  feet  of  saints  is  Tuka  bound, 

Linked  in  a  blest  content. 

LXXXVI.     THE  SIMPLE  PATH 

(I. P.  2341.     Bahuta  chanddce  bahu  vase  jana) 

Diverse  men's  thoughts  as  are  their  vanities, 
Distract  not  thou  thy  mind  to  follow  these. 
Cling  to  the  faith  that  thou  hast  learned,  the  love 
That,  coming,  filled  thee  with  its  fragrances. 

For  Hari's  worship  is  a  mother, — rest 
It  is  and  peace,  shade  for  the  weariest. 
Why,  then,  who  ties  a  stone  about  his  neck 
And  drowns  himself,  is  but  a  fool  confessed. 

LXXXVII.     THE   WAY   OF   LOVE 

(I.P.1589.     Ghotavina  lala) 

The  learned  in  Brahma  I  shall  make  to  long 
With  new  desire  ;  those  once  so  safe  and  strong, 
Set  free,  I  bring  back  glad  to  bondage.     So, 
They  are  made  one  with  Brahma  by  a  song.2 

1  Ganga,  the  river  Ganges. 

2  By  a  song,  that  is,  by  the  ktrtan,  the  method  of  celebrating  the 
praise  of  the  god  by  music  and  singing.  This  is  one  of  the  chief 
methods  of  bhakti,  as  followed  by  Tukaram,  and  he  praises  it  as  more 
effective  than  the  way  of  knowledge  followed  by  the  philosopher  or 
than  any  other  way.     See  Introduction,  p.  24. 

7 


82  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

God  is  their  debtor1  now,  O  glad  release. 
I'll  bid  the  weary  pilgrim  take  his  ease. 
The  proud  ascetic  may  forsake  his  pride. 
Away  with  offerings  and  charities  ! 
By  love  and  true  devotion  life's  high  goal 
I'll  help  men  to  attain — yea,  Brahma's  soul.2 
11  O,  happy  we,  who  Tuka's  face  have  seen  " — 
So  men  will  say  and  Tuka  they'll  extol. 

lxxxviii.   the;  thief 

(I. P.  4265.     Jalo  balivanta  hbuniya  Saran&gata) 

I  came  to  him  in  woful  plight  ; 
He,  gracious,  girded  me  with  might. 
His  house  I  entered  unaware 
And  stole  the  treasure  hidden  there. 
So  I  have  wrought  a  deep  design 
That  all  his  riches  shall  be  mine. 
I  kissed  his  feet  and  then  by  stealth 
I,  Tuka,  robbed  him  of  his  wealth. 

LXXXIX.     THE   TRAVELLER 

(I. P.  3189.     Ksanaksana  haci  karava  vic&ra) 

Let  thy  thought  at  all  times  be, — 
Over  life's  tempestuous  sea 

We  must  fare. 
Soon  the  body  perisheth  ; 
Life  is  swallowed  up  of  Death. 

O  beware ! 
Seek  the  fellowship  of  saints  ; 
Seek,  until  thy  spirit  faints, 

Heaven's  ways  ! 
Let  not  dust  make  blind  thine  eyes, 
Dust  of  worldly  enterprise, 

Tuka  says. 

1  God  is  their  debtor,  because  he  desires,  and  gets  from  them,  love. 
8  Brahma's  soul,  the  real  essence  of  Brahma,  which  is  the  goal  of 
all  Hindu  religious  effort. 


TUKARAM  83 

XC.     BY  FAITH  ALONE 

(I. P.  949      Athave  deva) 

In  God,  in  God — forget  him  not ! — 

Do  thou  thy  refuge  find. 
Let  every  other  plan  or  plot 

Go  with  the  wind  ! 

Why  toil  for  nought  ?     Wake,  wake  from  sleep  ! 

By  learning's  load  weighed  down, 
Thou  in  the  world's  abysses  deep 

Art  like  to  drown. 

O,  flee  from  thence.     Only  by  faith 

Canst  thou  to  God  attain. 
And  all  thy  knowledge,  Tuka  saith, 

Will  prove  in  vain. 


XCI.     A  STEADFAST  MIND 
(I.P.  109.     Mina  apam&na  gove) 

Honour,  dishonour  that  men  may  pay, 
Bundle  them  up  and  throw  them  away. 

Where  there  is  ever  a  steadfast  mind, 
There  thou  the  vision  of  God  shalt  find. 

Whereso  the  fountains  of  peace  abide, 
Stayed  is  the  passage  of  time  and  tide. 

Calm  thou  the  impulse  that  stirs  thy  breast ; 
Surely,  says  Tuka,  a  small  request. 

XCII.     THE  NAME  OF  THE  LIVING   ONE 
(I.P.  1462.     Devi  aike  he  vinanti) 

Hear,  O  God,  my  supplication, — 
Do  not  grant  me  Liberation.1 

1  Liberation,  moksa,  mukti,  absorption  in  the  Supreme  Spirit  with 
its  consequence  that  he  will  not  be  reborn.  He  does  not  wish  this  gift, 
but  desires  to  live  in  the  world,  experiencing  the  love  of  devotion  as  a 
Vai^navite,  a  follower  of  bhakti.     Cf.  Note  on  p.  35  above. 


84  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

'Tis  what  men  so  much  desire  ; 
Yet  how  much  this  joy  is  higher ! 

Home  of  every  Vaisnavite, 
See,  with  glow  of  love  alight  ! 

By  their  door  with  folded  hands 
Full  Attainment  waiting  stands. 

Heavenly  joy  is  not  for  me, 
For  it  passeth  speedily  ; 

But  that  name  how  strangely  dear 
That  in  songs  of  praise  we  hear ! 

Yea,  thou,  dark  as  clouds1  that  lower, 
Knowest  not  thine  own  name's  power. 

Ah,  says  Tuka,  it  is  this 
Makes  our  lives  so  full  of  bliss. 


XCIII.     THE  DEDICATED  LIFE 
(/.P.  1368.     Nako  sodu  anna) 

Ah,  wherefore  fast  or  wherefore  go 

To  solitude   apart? 
Whether  thou  joy  or  sorrow  know 

Have  God  within  thy  heart. 

If  in  his  mother's  arms  he  be 
The  child  knows  nought  amiss. 

Cast  out,  yea,  cast  out  utterly 
All  other  thought  than  this. 

Love  not  the  world  nor  yet  forsake 

Its  gifts  in  fear  and  hate. 
Thy  life  to  God  an  offering  make 

And  to  him  dedicate. 

Nay,  Tuka  says,  ask  not  again, 

Waking  old  doubts  anew. 
Whatever  else  is  taught  by  men, 

None  other  word  is  true. 

1  Dark  as  clouds,  that  is,  Kri?na,  called  here  MeghaSami. 


TUKARAM  85 

XCIV.     THE   INWARD    PURPOSE 

(I. P.  260.     Dharma  raksavayds&thi.) 

To  keep  the  Holy  Order1  pure, — 
This  ever  is  my  purpose  sure. 

The  Vedic  statutes  I  proclaim  ; 
To  imitate  the  saints  my  aim. 

For,  with  no  firm  resolve  within, 
To  quit  the  world  is  deadly  sin. 

Vile  he  who  does  so,  Tuka  says,— 
Evil  the  worship  that  he  pays. 

XCV.     THE   BHAKTA'S    TASK 
(I. P.  520.     Ahml  V  aikunthavasi) 

When  from  Vaikuntha2  forth  we  came 

This  of  our  coming  was  the  aim — 

That  what  the  sages  taught  we  by  our  lives  proclaim. 

Since  filled  the  world  with  sedge  and  weed, 

To  sweep  the  paths  our  lowly  meed, 

Trod  by  the  saints,  and  on  their  sacred  scraps3  to  feed. 

Gone  the  old  wisdom,  and  instead 

Mere  words  that  wide  have  ruin  spread. 

Lustful  men's  minds,  the  way  to  God  quite  vanished. 

Beat  we  the  drum  of  Love,  whose  din 

Brings  terror  to  this  age  of  sin. 

Hail,  Tuka  bids,  with  joy  the  victory  we  win. 

XCVI.     MAYA 
(I. P.  300.     Mrigajala  kaya  karfiva  utdra) 

If  the  river  be  a  mirage  that  I  see 
Then  what  need  for  me 
Of  a  ford  ? 

■  The  Holy  Order,  the  Dharma,  the  divine  society  held  together  by 
religious  law  and  by  the  system  of  caste.     Cf.  Note  on  p.  35  above. 

2  Vaikuntha,  the  heaven  of  Vi§nu. 
'  'Sacred   scraps,    the  remains  of   the  sacrifice,   or  sacred    meal, 
which  are  consumed  by  the  worshipper  or  the  ministrant. 


86  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

If  the  children  buy  and  sell  in  make-believe, 
Who  should  joy  or  grieve, 
Gain  or  lose  ? 

Are  not  maidens  still  in  kinship  just  the  same, 
Though  they  wedded  in  a  game, 
Girl  with  girl  ? 

Joy  or  sorrow  that  we  meet  with  in  our  dreams 
To  us  waking  seems 
Nothing  real. 

So,  says  Tuka,  births  and  dying, — nought  is  true. 
Bondage,  freedom  too, 
Weary  me. 

XCVII.     "THE  WORLD  PASSETH  AWAY" 
(I. P.  2811.     Gele  palile  divasa  roza) 

Who  dares  call  aught  his  own 

As  swiftly  speed  the  days  ? 
Time  keeps  the  fatal  score, 

And  not  a  moment  strays. 

Hair,  ears,  and  eyes  grow  old, 

As,  dullard,  grow  they  must ; 
The  best  is  nigh  thee,  yet 

Thou  fill'st  thy  mouth  with  dust. 

Dying  and  yet  thou  buildst 

As  for  eternity  ! 
Nay,  haste  to  Pandurang  ! 

'Tis  Tuka  says  it :  flee  ! 

XCVIII.     THE  WAY  OF  DEATH. 

(I. P.  1562.     Eka  p&h&tasd  ekicl  dahane) 

Ah,  friend,  beware ;  see  how  they  bear 

The  dead  men  to  the  ghaut.1 
To  God  on  high  with  agony 

Call  and  cease  not. 

1  The  ghaut,  the  burning  ghaut  where  the  bodies  of  the  dead  are 
cremated. 


TUKARAM  87 

Though  'mong  the  dead  not  numbered, 

Within  thy  scrip  is  death. 
Fill  up,  fill  up  with  good  thy  cup, 

While  thou  hast  breath. 

List  what  I  say  ; — the  narrow  way 

Is  dense  with  dying  men  ; 
'Mong  them  at  last  thy  lot  is  cast. 

No  succour  then. 


XCIX.     "THE   NIGHT   COMETH" 
(I.P.  2693.     N ene  japatapa  anusthana  y&ga) 

Lo,  Death  draws  nigh  ;  and  what  know  I 

Of  rite,  or  vow,  or  prayer  ? 
To  God  alone  who  guards  his  own 

I  flee  and  hide  me  there. 

The  tally's1  score  grows  more  and  more, — 

Then  night  and  all  is  done. 
Hear  Tuka  say, — dear  every  day 

From  that  grim  robber  won. 

C.    'TIS   ALL   FOR   NAUGHT 

(Caturyace  yoge  kavitva  kariti) 

With  whatso  skill  he  may  his  verse  refine, 
'Tis  all  for  naught  without  the  breath  divine. 

Let  him  put  on  the  holy  beggar's  dress  ; 
'Tis  all  for  naught  without  unworldliness. 

He  paints  the  sun  or  moon  upon  a  wall ; 
'Tis  all  for  naught  without  the  light  of  all. 

O,  he  may  play,  of  course,  a  soldier's  part ; 
'Tis  all  for  naught  without  a  warrior  heart. 

So,  Tuka  says,  they've  danced  and  songs  they've  sung, 
'Tis  naught  without  the  love  ofjPandurang. 

1  The  tally.  In  counting  it  is  often  the  custom  in  India  to  put  aside 
a  piece  of  wood  or  other  article  for  each  quantity  counted,  so  as  to  keep 
the  score. 


88  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

CI.     THE    DIVINE   INSPIRATION 

(I. P.  2949.    IpuliyS  bale) 

'Tis  not  I  who  speak  so  featly  ; 

All  my  words  my  Lover's  are. 
Hark,  Salunki1  singing  sweetly, 

Taught,  as  I,  by  One  afar. 
How  could  I,  abject,  achieve  it  ? 

'Tis  the  all-upholding  One. 
Deep  his  skill,  who  can  conceive  it  ? 

He  can  make  the  lame  to  run. 

CII.     DROWNING   MEN 
(I. P.  948.     Upakardsathl  bolo  he  uptya) 

For  men's  saving  I  make  known 

These  devices — this  alone 

My  desire. 

Can  my  heart  unmoved  be 

When  before  my  eyes  I  see 

Drowning  men  ? 

I  shall  see  them  with  my  eyes 

When  their  plight  they  realise 

At  the  last. 

CIII.     WITHOUT  AND  WITHIN 

(I. P.  2869.     All  simhasthparvanl) 

Soon  as  the  season  of  Simhasth2  comes  in, 

The  barber  and  the  priest — what  wealth  they  win ! 

Thousands  of  sins  may  lurk  within  his  heart, 

If  only  he  will  shave  his  head  and  chin  ! 

What  is  shaved  off  is  gone,  but  what  else,  pray  ? 

What  sign  that  sin  is  gone  ?     His  evil  way 

Is  still  unchanged.     Yea,  without  faith  and  love 

All  is  but  vanity,  I,  Tuka,  say. 

1  S&lunki,  a  common  Indian  bird,  gracula  religiosa. 

*  The  season  ofSvhhasth,  the  period  during  which  the  planet  Jupi- 
ter is  in  the  constellation  Leo.  "The  period  is  considered  favourable 
for  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  Hindus  go  to  holy  places,  such  as 
Nasik,  shave  their  heads  and  moustaches  and  bathe  in  the  river." — 
Bhandarkar's  Voisnavism,  p.  94,  Note. 


TUKARAM  89 


CIV.     "AND    HAVE   NOT   CHARITY" 

(I. P.  90.     Tila  jdlile  tandula ) 

Your  heart  from  rage  and  lust  has  nowise  turned 

For  all  the  rice  and  sesamum1  you've  burned. 

You've  toiled  for  naught  with  learned  words  whose  fruit 

Is  vain  display — and  Pandurang  you've  spurned. 

By  pilgrimage  and  grim  austerity 
Only  your  pride  has  grown  ;  your  V  I  "  and  "  me  "2 
Swell  with  your  alms  ;  the  secret,  Tuka  says, 
You've  missed  :  your  acts  are  sinful  utterly. 

CV.     THE  MENDICANT 

(I.P.  679.     ASabaddha  vakta) 

Lust  binds  the  preacher,  fear 
The  doubting  hearts  of  those  his  words  who  hear. 

He  knows  not  what  he  sings  : 
His  mouth  he  opes  for  what  each  comer  brings. 

A  greedy  cat,  he  steals 
From  door  to  door,  begging  from  men  his  meals. 

What  Tuka  says  is  true  ; 
The  sack  is  empty  and  the  measure3  too. 

CVI.     THE    PROUD    ADVAITIST 

(I.P.  1471.     Natkdve  kdnl) 

To  such  pay  thou  no  heed:  the  words  he  saith 
Are  only  chaff,  empty  of  loving  faith. 
He  praises  high  Advait*  which  only  brings 
To  speaker  and  to  hearer  pain  and  scaithe. 

1  Rice  and  sesamum,  offerings  given  to  gods. 

2  Your  "  I  "  and  llme."     See  Note  on  p.  45  above. 

3  The  measure  is  a  vessel  by  means  of  which  grain  is  measured  from 
the  heap  into  the  sack. 

*  Advait,  the  doctrine  of  the  identity  of  the  individual  soul  and  the 
Supreme  Soul,  which  is  expressed  in  the  Sanscrit  phrase,  "  Brahm- 
asmi,"  "  I  am  Brahm." 

The  saints  are  the  adherents  of  the  bhakti  doctrine,  which  is  not,  of 
course,  monistic. 


90  PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 

He  fills  his  belly  saying,  V  I  am  Brahm." 
Waste  not  thy  words  upon  him  ;  shamed  and  dumb 
Is  he,  blasphemer,  when  he  meets  the  saints. 
Who  scorns  God's  love  Tuka.  calls  vilest  scum. 


CVII.     THE    HYPOCRITE:    I 

(LP.  603.     Boll  meindacl) 

His  speech — the  hypocrite's — is  well  and  fair, 
But  all  his  thought  is  how  he  can  ensnare. 

He  outwardly  appears  a  godly  man  ; 
In  truth  he  is  a  very  ruffian. 

His  forehead-mark,1  his  beads,  a  saint  denote, 
But  in  the  darkness  he  would  cut  your  throat. 

Ay,  Tuka  says,  a  very  scoundrel  he  ; 
The  pains  of  Yama2  wait  him  certainly. 

CVIII.     THE  HYPOCRITE:  II 

(I. P.  776.     Doi  vadhavuni  keia) 

Possessed  with  devils  they  grow  long  their  hair. 
No  saints  are  they,  nor  trace  of  God4they  bear. 

They  tell  of  omens  to  a  gaping  crowd. 
Rogues  are  they,  Tuka.  says;  Govind's3  not  there. 

1  The  forehead-mark  indicates  the  sect  to  which  he  belongs,  while 
a  rosary  of  beads  is  worn  round  the  neck. 

'  Yama,  the  god  of  the  under-world,  who  punishes  the  wi.krd. 
'  Govind,  Kri§na. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The  most  recent  and  most  authoritative  account  in 
English  of  the  Maratha  poets  is  to  be  found  in  the  Wilson 
Philological  Lectures  (1917)  of  Professor  W.  B.  Patwar- 
dhan,  of  the  Fergusson,  College,  Poona.  These  have  been 
printed  in  the  Fergusson  College  Magazine,  Vol.  VIII, 
Nos.  3  and  4,  and  Vol.  IX,  Nos.  1-4.  An  earlier  lecture 
by  Professor  Patwardhan,  on  "  Some  Abhangs  of  Namdev," 
appeared  in  the  same  Magazine,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  4.  An 
article  by  Professor  Patwardhan,  on  "  Tukaram's  Doctrine 
of  Bhakti,"  was  published  in  the  Indian  Interpreter,  Vol. 
VII,  No.  1 ;  and  in  the  same  magazine,  Vol.  VII,  No.  4, 
Rev.  D.  Mackichan,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  writes  on  "The 
Marathas  and  Their  Literature."  A  chapter  of  Sir 
R.  G.  Bhandarkar's  Vaisndvism,  Saivism,  and  Minor 
Religious  Systems  (Encyclopaedia  of  Indo-Aryan  Research) 
is  devoted  to  Namdev  and  Tukaram,  and  gives  a  number 
of  translations  of  their  abhangs.  Reference  may  also  be 
made  to  the  "  Notes"  prefixed  to  Molesworth's  MarathI 
Dictionary  by  Dr.  John  Wilson,  and  to  contributions  by 
Dr.  Murray  Mitchell  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Bombay 
Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Vol.  Ill  (1849)  and 
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Congress  of  Orientalists,  1892. 

For  an  account  of  these  saints  in  their  relation  to  the 
historical  situation  of  their  times,  see  M.  G.  Ramade's 
Rise  of  the  Maratha  Power,  Chapter  VIII.  See  also  Tales 
of  the  Saints  of  Pandharpur,  by  C.  A.  Kincard,  (Oxford 
University  Press,  1919). 

The  poems  of  Tukaram  have  been  translated  into 
English  prose  by  J.  Nelson  Fraser  and  K.  B.  Marathe,  3 
Vols.,  Christian  Literature  Society,  Madras  (1909-15). 


INDEX 


A  BHANG  11,  14,  16,  26,  34 
Advaita21,25,  26,68,  80,89 
Akrura  52,  53 
Alandl  14 

Amrit  Anubhav  14,  15 
Arjtina  52,  53 
Arnold,  Matthew  30 

D  ALI  52,  53 
P     Benares  20 
Bhagavadgita  14 
Bhagvata  Purana  51 
Bhajan  12,  40  " 

Bhakti  21,  24,  32,  52,  53,  81,  89 
Bhandarkar,  Sir  R.  G.  15,  18 
Bhavartha  Ramayana  53 
Bhima  11,  54 
BhupatI  52,  53 

Brahman  17,  24,  25,  30,  38,  42, 
68,  82,  89 

CAITANYA  19,  22 
Coka  Mela  23 


f\EHtJ  19,  20,  59 
M     Dharma  35,  85 


ECKHART  27 
Ekanath  12,  23,  51-55 


RANGES  20,  54, 
>*    Godaverl  23 
Govind  48,  90 


81 


HARI  38,  72 
Haridas  12,  45 
Hebrew  Psalmists  27,  28,  29,  31, 

32 
HrisikeSa  43 


NDRAYANI  20 


TANABAI  16,  17,  49,  50 

J     Janardan  54 

Jnandev     )  12,  13-15,  19,  22,  24 

Jnane^var  j      25,  35-40,  41 

Jnane§vari  13,  14,  15,  35-38 


26 


l^ABIR  22,  25, 

rVk     Kamala  44 

Karhad  15 

Ke&av  17,  44,  73,  74 

Ke§av  Caitanya  19 

Kirtan  12,  81 

Kri§na  11,  24,  35,  44,  45,  84 

MADHAV  40 
Mahar  23 
Maruti  52,  53 
Maya  17 

Mount  Meru  17,  37 
Muhammadanism  18,  31 
Muktabal  14,  41,  42 
Mukti,  Mok§a  35,  83 
Mutiny  31 

MAGNATH  16 
x>l     Namdev  13,  15-18,  24,  42-48 
Narayana  58,  60,  62,  67,  80 
Nivrittinath  14,  42 

PAITHAN  23 
Pandav  36 
PandharV     1  11,  18,  23,  44,  57, 
Pandharpur )      76 
Prah'lad  39,  52,  53 
Pundlik  49 
Puranas  45 


94 


PSALMS  OF  MARATHA  SAINTS 


DAGHAV  Caitanya  19 

1A     Rama  52,  53 

Ranade,  M.  G.  12,  15,  18 

Ramananda  22 

Release  35,  68,  69 

RukminI, 

Rakhumai 


}40,  45 


CANKARACARYA  25 

°     Sena  55 

Simhasth  88 

Sivajl  18 

Sopandev  14,  42 

Sri  Suka  52,  53 

TAGORE,      Sir    Rabindranath 
26 


Tukaram  12,  13,  18-21,  23,  25, 
28,  30,  31,  32,  33,  56-90 


U 


DDHAV  39,  51 


\7AIKUNTHA  20,  64,  85 
v      Vasudev  47 


Vedant  24 

Vi?nu  11 

Vithoba  I".  .15,16,  19,  23    40, 

Vitthal 


Vyasa  39 


44,   49,  50,  57,    60, 
62,  65,  66,  72 


VAMA  90 
1      Yoga,  Yogi  36,  39,  73,  77 


II 


INDEX   OF  TRANSLATIONS 


jnaneSvar 

Jnane§vari  ix,  188ff.,  p.  35 
Do.  ix,  197ff.,  p.  36 
Do.  xii,  197ff.,  p.  37 
Do.     xvi,  114ff.,  p.  37 

Abhangs,  pp.  38-40 

MUKTABAI 

Abhangs,  p.  41 

NAMDEV 

Abhangs  : 

Avate  198,  p.  50;  do.  207,   p. 

46;  do.  333,  p.  44;  do.  351, 

p.  44;  do.  358,  p.  42;  do. 

391,  p.  45  ;   do.  501,  p.  44  ; 

do.    583,    p.    47;    do.    586; 

p.  48;  do.  938,   p.  42  ;  do, 

416,  p.  47  ;  do.  1449,  p.  46 . 

do.  1482,  p.  43 

EKANATH 
Bhagavat,  xi,  1458ff.,  p.  51 
Bhavartha  Ramayana,  Chap,  i, 

p.  53 
Abhangs,  pp.  52,  54-55 

SENA 
Abhang,  p.  55. 

TUKARAM 
Abhangs:  LP.  90,  p.  89  ;  do. 
109,  p.  83  ;  do.  260,  p.  85 
do.  266,  p.  56  ;  do.  300,  p 
85  ;  do.  347,  p.  79 ;  do.  469 
p.  58;  do.  502,  p.  57;  do 
520,  p.  85  ;  do.  530,  p.  56 
do.  580,  p.  80;  do.  602,  p 
74;  do.  603,  p.  90  ;  do.  626, 
p.  69  ;  do.  648,  p.  68  ;  do 


702,  p.  70;  do.  716,  p.  75 
do.  758,  p.  75;  do.  764 
p.  76  ;  do.  776,  p.  90  ;  do 
783,  p.  72;  do.  806,  p.  62 
do.  801,  p.  73;  do.  818 
p.  71 ;  do.  819,  p.  75  ;  do 
827,  p.  58;  do.  868,  p.  62 
do.  948,  p.  88;  do.  949 
p.  83;  do.  977,  p.  78;  do 
1001,  p.  76;  do.  1031 
p.  63  ;  do.  1033,  p.  70  ;  do 
1368,  p.  84;  do.  1436 
p.  80;  do.  1437,  p.  72;  do 
1462,  p.  83;  do.  1471 
p.  89;  do.  1482,  p.  89;  do 
1540,  p.  62;  do.  1562,  p.  86 
do.  1589,  p.  81 ;  do.  1779 
p.  76  ;  do.  1820,  p.  57  ;  do 
1836,  p.  59;  do.  1870,  p.  73 
do.  1996,  p.  64  ;  do.  2000 
p.  71  ;  do.  2051,  p.  81  ;  do 
2341,  p.  81  ;  do.  2638,  p.  74 
do.  2668,  p.  79;  do.  2672 
p.  64;  do.  2693,  p.  87  ;  do 
2811,  p.  86;  do.  2824,  p.  60 
do.  2849,  p.  77  ;  do.  2869 
p.  88;  do.  2949,  p.  88 
do.  2966,  p.  77  ;  do.  3189 
p.  82;  do.  3443,  p.  64 
do.  3474,  p.  79 ;  do.  3653 
p.  61 ;  do.  3695,  p.  65 
do.  3696,  p.  78;  do.  3753, 
p.  68;  do.  3837,  p.  66 
do.  4004,  p.  65  ;  do.  4161 
p.  70;  do.  4265,  p.  82;  do 
4361,  p.  67:  do.  4381,  p.  61 
do.  4419,  p.  66 ;  do.  4420, 
p.  67 
An  abhang  not  in  the  Indu 
Prakas  collection  is  translated 
on  p.  87 


By  the  same  Author 

INDIAN  THEISM  FROM  THE  VEDIC  TO  THE 
MUHAMMADAN  PERIOD.  (The  Religious  Quest 
of  India  Series.)  Pp.  xvi,  292.  Price6s.net.  (Oxford 
University  Press.) 

THE  RELIGION  OF  JESUS.  Pp.  271.  Price  Re.  1  and 
Annas  12.  (New  Edition  in  the  Press.)  (Christian 
Literature  Society,  Madras.) 


*■*      CA. 

«j  or 


4 


a* 

M 


*    3 


s 


o 
o 

BQ 

O 

w 
53 

< 


te 


CrJ 


Sl^J 


^ 


"•? 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


V 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref.  Index  File" 

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


