Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


IGVEDA 

I  COMMENTARY 


.,  C.  I.  B. 


VBD  lATB  DIBCCTOR 
ODB 


'*  CO. 


THE 


HYMNS  OF  THE  RIGVEDA 


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  POPULAR  COMMENTARY 


BT 


RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH,  M.A,C.I.B. 

FORMER  PRINCIPAL  OF  THV  BENARES  COLLEGE,  AND  LATE  DIBVCTOR 
PUBUC  1N8TBU0TI0N  N.-W.  P.  AND  OUDH 


Sectxnd  Edition. 

COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


BENARES : 


PR^R^'AND  PUBUSHED  BT  B.  J.  LAlARUS  AND  CO. 


1897. 
All  rights  restrved. 


? 


^^^4. 

■^■"^^^K^ 


'^/^RABN^^ 


THE 


HYMNS  OF  THE  RIGVEDA 


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  POPULAR  (COMMENTARY 


BT 


BALPH  T.  H.  GBIFFITH,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  B. 

FORMER  PRINCIPAL  OF  THV  BENARES  COLLEGE,  AND  LATE  DIBVCTOR 
PUBUC  INBTRUOTION  N.-W.  P.  AND  OUDH 


Second  Edition. 

COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  II. 


BENARES : 


PRiP^n^'AND  PUBU8HBD  BT  B.  J.  LAlARUS  AND  C0« 


»'  *'v:sf 


1897. 
All  rights  reserved. 


4  TEE  UYMXS  OF  [BOOK  VIT. 

5  With  holy  thoughts  the  pious  have  thrown  open  Doors  fain  for 

chariots  in  the  Gods'  assembly. 
Like  two  full  mother  cows  who  lick  their  youngling,  like  maid- 
ens for  the  gathering,  they  adorn  them. 

6  And  let  the  two  exalted  Heavenly  Ladies,  Morning  and  Nighty 

like  a  cow  good  at  milking. 
Come,    much-invoked,    and  on  our   grass  be  seated,   wealthy, 
deserving  worship,  for  our  welfare. 

7  You,  Bards  an  I  Singers  at  men's  sacrifices,  both  filled  with 

wisdom,  I  incline  to  worship. 
Send  up  our  offerings  when  we  call  upon  you,  and  so  among 
the  Gods  obtain  us  treasures. 

8  May  Bharati  with  all  her  Sisters,  l\k  accordant  with  the  Gods, 

with  mortals  Agni, 
Sarasvati  with  all  her  kindred    Rivers,  come   to  this  gmss. 
Three  Goddesses,  and  seat  them. 

9  Well  pleased  with  us  do  thou,  0  God,  0  Tvashtar,  give  ready 

issue  to  our  procreant  vigour, 
Whence  springs  the  hero,  powerful,  skilled  in  action,  lover 
of  Gods,  adjuster  of  the  press-stones. 

10  Send  to  the   Gods  the   oblation.  Lord  of  Forests,  and   let  the 

Immolator,  Agni,  dress  it. 
He  as  the  truer  Priest  shall  offer  worship,  for  the  Gods'  gene- 
rations .well  he  knoweth. 

11  Come  thou   to   us,  0  Agni,  duly  kindled,  together  with  the 

potent  Grods  and  Indra. 
On  this  our  grass  sit  Aditi,  happy   Mother,  and  let  our  Hall  | 
delight  the  Gods  Immortal. 

HYMN    in.  •  Agni. 

Associate  with  fires,  make  your  God  Agni  envoy  at  sacrifice, 
'    best  skilled  in  worship, 

Established  firm  among   mankind,   the  Holy,   flame-crowned 
and  fed  with  oil,  the  Purifier. 

5  DoQTi :  the  deified  doors  of  the  ball  of  saciifine  where  the  Godd  assemble. 
Fain  for  chariots :  welcoming  the  approach  of  the  cars  in  which  the  priests 
come  to  the  ceremony.  The  latter  half  of  the  stanza  is  obscure  ;  '(the  ladies) 
placed  to  the  east  are  plyiug  the  fire  with  ghi  at  sacrifices,  as  the  mother 
p*W3  lick  the  calf,  or  as  rivers  (water  the  fields).' — Wilson. 

6  LU'e  a  eow :  the  dual  dhen'A,  two  cows,  iiistead  of  dhenuhf  would,  as  Lud- 
wig  suggests,  seem  to  us  to  be  preferable. 

7  Bardf  and  Singers:  the  hdtdrdj  or  'two  Invokers*  of  I.  13.  8 ;  perhaps 
Agni  and  Varuna,  or  Varuna  and  Aditya. 

8  Stanzas  8-^11  are  identioal  with  stanzas  8 — 11  of  Book  III.  4. 

-  J  Jssoaiatet  sajdihdtk  being  a  shortened  form  of  sajdahasahy  the  nominative  ^  ' 
planJ,     aAymmt  fixplnJoB  it  as  «Q  acc\isattY«  singuW,  c^uiM'jVfti^  ^S^v  V 


TBS  BYMNS  OP  {BOOK  Vlt. 

HYMN  IV.  Agni. 

Bring  forth  your  gifts  to  his  refulgent  splendour,  your  hymn 

as  purest  offering  to  Agni, 
To  him  who  goes  as  messenger  with  knowledge   between  all 

sons  of  men  aikl  Gods  in  beayen. 

2  Wise  must  this  Agni  be,  though  young  and   tender,  since  he 

was  bom,  Most  Youthful,  of  his  Mother ; 
He  who   with  bright  teeth  seizeth   fast  the  forests,   and  eats 
bis  food,  though  plenteous,  in  a  moment. 

3  Before  his   presence  must  we  all   assemble,  this   God's  whom 

men  have  seized  in  his  white  splendour. 
This  Agni  who  hath  brooked  that  men  should  seize  him  hath 
shone  for  man  with  glow  insufferable. 

4  Far-seeing   hath  this   Agni  been   established,    deathless    mid 

mortals,  wise  among  the  foolish. 
Here,  O  victorious  Ood,  forbear  to  harm  us :  may  we  for  ever 
share  thy  gracious  favour.  , 

5  He  who  hath  occupied  his  God- made  dwelling,  Agni,  in  wisdom 

hath  surpassed  Immortals. 
A  Babe   unborn,  the   plants  and  trees  support  him,  and   the 
earth  beareth  him  tha  All-sustainer. 

6  Agni  is  Lord  of  Amrit  in  abundance.  Lord  of  the  gift  of  wealth 

and  hero  valour. 
Victorious  God,  let  us  not  sit  about   thee  like  men   devoid  of 
strength,  beauty,  and  worship. 

7  The  foeman's  treasure  may  be  won  with   labour :  may   we  be 

masters  of  our  own  possessions. 
Agni,  no  son  is  he  who  springs  from  others :  lengthen  not  out 
the  pathways  of  the  foolish. 

S  Unwelcome  for  adoption  is  the  stranger,  one  to  be  though  of 
as  another's  offspring. 
Though  grown  familiar  by  continual  presence.   May  our  strong 
hero  come,  freshly  triumphant. 


5  Mutt  we  all  assemble :  I  follow  Ludwfg  in  his  interpy^ation  el  sams^di  ,- 
as  we  are  forsakeo,  ftnd  our  protector  is  far  away  (st.  6,  7,  8),  we  must  crowd 
to  the  God  of  Fire  for  defence. 

6  lu  the  second  line  I  have  borrowed  from  Prof.  Max  Milller,  Vedic  Hymns, 
I.  p.  80. 

7  Let  us  remain  in  undisturbed  possession  of  our  own  property,  and  let  ub 
hl^ye  sons  of  our  own  begetting  and  not  the  adopted  children  of  others. 

8  Men  do  not  look  with  pleastire  and  affBctioo  od  adopted  sons  ;  but  we  are 
knglng  to  see  our  absent  protector  return  to  us. — Ludwig.  Others  explain 
ilielftsi^halfverae  differently  :  *  therefore  let  there  come  to  us  (aeoo)  new-bora, 

poggeased  of  food,  victorious  over  foe*.' — Wilioiv^ 


BTMi^  5.1  TSS  RtOVEDI.  7 

8  Guard  us  from  bim  who  would  assail  us,  Agni ;  preserve  ub 

O  thou  Victor,  from  dishonour. 
Here  let  the  place  of  darkening  come  upon  thee :  maj  wealth 
be  ours,  desirable,  in  thousands. 

10  Shine  this  felicity   on  us,  O  Agni :   may  we  attain  to  perfect 
understanding. 
All  happiness  be  theirs  who  sing  and  praise  thee.     Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  V.  Agni 

Bring  forth  your  song  of  praise  to  mighty  Agni,   the  speedy 

messenger  of  earth  and  heaven, 
Vaisv^nara,  who,  with  those  wh(5  wake,  hath  waxen   great  in 

the  lap  of  "all  the  Gods  Immortal. 

2  Sought  in  the  heavens,  on  earth  is^Agni  stablished,   leader  of 

rivers.  Bull  of  standing  waters. 
Vaisvanara,  when  he  hath  grown  in  glory,  shines  on  the  tribes 
of  men  with  light  and  treasure. 

3  For  fear  of  thee   forth  fled  the  dark-hued  races,   scattered 

abroad,  deserting  their  possessions. 
When,  glowing,  O  Vaisv&nara,    for  Puru,  thou,  Agni,   didst 
light  up  and  rend  their  castles. 

4  Agni  Vaisvanara,   both   Earth  and   Heaven  submit   them  to 

thy  threefold  jurisdiction. 
Refulgent  in  thine  undecaying  lustre  thou  hast  invested  both 
the  worlds  with  splendour. 

5  Agni,  the  tawny  horses,  loudly  neighing,  our  resonant  hymns 

that  drop  with  oil,  attend  thee ; 
Lord  of  the  tribes,  our  Charioteer  of  riches.   Ensign  of  days, 

VaisvS.nara  of  mornings. 

-»-.      .       .        ....  I —  ■■' 

9  This  stanza  is  a  repetition  of  VI.  l5,  12,  where  see  note. 

10  Repeated  from  stanza  10  of  the  preceding  hymn. 

The  hymn  is  addressed  to  Agni  as  Yaisv&nara,  the  God  who  is  present  with, 
and  b^iefits,  all  Aryan  men. 

1  With  thxfse  who  loake :  tended  by  the  priests.  According  to  SAyana  '  as- 
sociated with  the  wakened  Gods.' 

2  BuU  of  standing  waters  :  the  meaning  of  ttiyindm  is  uncertain.  Perhaps, 
as  Ludwig  suggests,  plants  and  bushes  are  intended  which  Agni  like  a  bull 
levels  with  the  ground. 

3  The  dark-hued  races :  according  to  von  Roth,  the  spirits  of  darkness.  For 
•  PHru  :  or,  for  man. 

4  Threefold  jurisdiction  :  in  heaven,  mid-air,  and  earth. 

6  The  tatonif  Iwrses :  the  hymns  that  hasten  to  Agni  like  eager  horses. 
Ludwig  tran:ilates  the  haritu^  of  the  text  by  *  gold-yellow,'  c^UTJJdYvtt\t^^l"'KB.v> 
that  la,  hjrwns  with  libationa  of  yellow  Soma  juice. 

f 


TfiE  nrum  or  [book  vn. 

6  In  thee,  O  bright  ns  Mitra,  Vasus  seated  the  might  of  Asuras, 

for  they  loved  thy  spirit. 
Thou  dravest  Dasyus  from  their  home,  0  Agni,  and  brought- 
est  forth  broad  light  to  light  the  Arya. 

7  Bom  in  the  loftiest  heaven  thou  in  a  moment  reachest,  like 

wind,  the  place  where  Gods  inhabit. 
Thou,   favouring  thine  offspring,  roaredst  loudly  when  giving 
life  to  creatures,  J^tavedas. 

B  Send   us   that    strength,    Vaisvinara,    send    it,    Agni,    that 
strength,  0  JUtavedas,  full  of  splendour, 
Wherewith,  all-bounteous  God,   thou  pourest  riches,  as  fame 
wide-spreading,  on  the  man  who  offers. 

9  Agni,  bestow  upon  our  chiefs  and  nobles  that  famous  power, 
that  wealth  which  feedeth  many. 
Accordant  with  the  Vasus  and  the  Rudras,  Agni,  Vaisvanara, 
give  us  sure  protection. 

HYMN  VI.  Agni. 

Praise  of  the  Asura,   high  imperial  Ruler,  the  Manly  One  in 

whom  the  folk  shall  triumph — 
I  laud  his  deeds  who  is  as  strong  as  Indra,  and  lauding  celebrate 

the  Fort-destroyer. 

2  Sage,  Sign,  Food,  Light,— they  bring  him  from  the  mountain, 

the  blessM  Sovran  of  the  earth  and  heaven. 
I  decorate  with  songs  the  mighty  actions  which  Agni,  Fort- 
destroyer,  did  aforetime. 

3  The  foolish,  faithless,  rudely-speaking  niggards,  without  belief 

or  sacrifice  or  worship, — 
Far,  far  away  hath  Agni  chased  those  Dasyus,  and,  in  the 
east,  hath  turned  the  godless  westward. 

4  Him  who  brought  eastward,  manliest  with  his  prowess,  the 

Maids  rejoicing  in  the  western  darkness, 
That   Agni  I  extol,    the  Lord  of  riches,  unyielding  tamer  of 
assailing  foemen. 

5  Him   who  brake   down  the   walls  with   deadly  weapons,  and 

gave  the  Mornings  to  a  noble  Husband, 

6  Thxm  dravest:  cf.  I.  117.  21. 


1  FoH-destroyer :  demoUrther  of  the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  of  drought, 
or  of  the  strongholds  of  the  non- Aryan  tiibes. 

2  Prom  the  mountain  :  from  the  cloud,  as  lightning. 
S  Westioard :  into  the  darkness  of  night. 

4  Who  brought  eastward :  brought  back  the  vanished  lights  of  dawn. 

B  To  a  noble  Hutiband  :  the  Sun,  or  Agni  himself.  Tiie  tribes  of  Nahus :  or, 
Mccording  to  von  Both,  ne^hbouring  peopU. 


RYMff  1,]  TBS  kWtEDA,  f 

Young   Agni,  who  with  conquering   strength  subduing   the 
tribes  of  NahuG(  made  them  bring  their  tribute. 

6  In  whose  protection  all  then  rest  by  nature,  desiring  to  enjoy 

his  gracious  favour — 
Agni  VaisvUnara  in  his  Parents'  bosom  hath  found  the  choic- 
est seat  in  earth  atid  heaven. 

7  Vaisv^nara   the    God,   at  the   sun's   setting,    hath   taken  Us 

himself  deep-hidden  treasures : 
Agni  hath  taken  them  from  earth  and  heaven,  from  the  sea 
under  and  the  sea  above  usi 

HYMN  VII.  Agtfi. 

I  SEND  forth  even  yotir  God,  victorious  Agni,  like  a  strong 

courser,  with  mine  adoration. 
Herald  of  sacrifice  be  he  who  knoweth  :  he  hath  reached  Gods, 

himself,  with  measured  motion. 

2  By  paths  that  are  thine  own  come  hither,  Agni,  joyous,  delight^ 

ing  in  the  Gods'  alliance, 
Making  the  heights  of  earth  roar  with  thy  fury,  burning  with 
eager  teeth  the  woods  and  forests. 

3  The  grass  is  strewn ;  the  sacrifice  advances  :  adored  as  Priest^ 

Agni  is  made  propitious, 
Invoking  both   All-boon-bestowing   Mothers  of  whom.  Most 
Youthful !  thou  wast  bom  to  help  us. 

4  Forthwith  the  men,  the  best  of  these  for  wisdom,  have  made 

him  leader  in  the  solemn  worship. 
As  Lord  in  homes  of  men  is  Agni  stablished,   the  Holy  One, 
the  joyous,"  sweetly  speaking. 

5  He  hath  come,  chosen  bearer,  and  is  seated  in  man's  home, 

Brahman,  Agni,  the  Supporter, 
He  whom  both    Heaven  and  Earth  exalt   and    strengthen, 
whom,  Giver  of  all  boons,  the  Hotar  worships. 

6  These  have  passed  all  in  glory,  who,  the  manly,  have  wrought 

with  skill  the  hymn  of  adoration ; 


7  Agni  becomes  the  representative  of  the  Sun,   and  in  his   absence  gives 
light  and  other  blessings  to  man.     The  sea  above  us  :  the  ocean  of  air. 


1  Like  a  strong  courser  :  glorified  with  my  praises,  like  a  horse  that  has 
been  groomed  and  adorned.  Or,  perhaps,  merely,  rapid  as  a  horse.  ^  With 
measured  motion  :  or,  a  speedy  runner.  SAyana  explains  the  word  mitddruh 
in  this  place  as  'consumer  of  trees/  but  in  XY.  6.  5  »» parimitagatihf  *  with 
ipeasured  motion.* 

5  ^B^ Mo^Aet-t;  Heaven  and  Earth. 


10  ^ffs  ffYMj^s  oiP  [600K  vn. 

Who,  listening,  have  advanced  the  people's  welfare,  and  set 
their  thoughts  on  this  my  holy  statute. 
7  We,   the   Vasishthas,   now   implore    thee,    Agni,    0   Son   of 
Strength,  the  Lord  of  wealth  and  treasure. 
Thou  hast  brought  food  to  singers  and  to  nobles.     Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  VIII.  Agni. 

The  King  whose  face  is  decked  with  oil  is  kindled  with  homage 

offered  by  his  faithful  servant. 
The  men,  the  priests  adore    him  with  oblations.     Agni  hath 

shone  forth  when  the  dawn  is  breaking. 

2  Yea,  he  hath  been  acknowledged  as  most  mighty,  the  joyous 
Priest  of  men,  the  youthful  Agni. 
He,  spreading  o'er  the  earth,  made  light  around  him,  and 
grew  among  the  plants  with  blackened  fellies. 

S  How  dost  thou  decorate  our  hymn,  0  Agni  ?     What  power 
dost  thou  exert  when  thou  art  lauded  ? 
When,  Bounteous  God,  may  we  be  lords  of  riches,  winners  of 
precious  wealth  which  none  may  conquer  ? 

4  Far  famed  is  this  the  Bharata's  own  Agni :  he  shineth   like 

the  Sun  with  lofty  splendour. 
He  who  hath  vanquished   Puru  in  the  battle,   the  heavenly 
guest  hath  glowed  in  full  refulgence. 

5  Full   many   oblations   are  in  thee   collected :  with   all  thine 

aspects  thou  hast  waxen  gracious. 
Thou  art  already    famed  as  praised  and  lauded,  yet  still,  O 
nobly  bom,  increase  thy  body. 

6  Be  this  my  song,  that  winneth  countless  treasure,  engendered 

with  redoubled  force  for  Agni, 
That,    splendid,    chasing    sickness,    slaying    demons,    it  may 
delight  our  friend  and  bless  the  singers. 

7  We,    the   Vasishthas,    now   implore  thee,   Agni,    0    Son   of 

Strength,  the  Lord  of  wealth  and  riches. 
Thou  hast  brought  food  to  singers  and  to  nobles.     Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

■- —  —     —       - 

6  Who  set  their  thoughts  on  this  my  holy  statute:  that  is,  apparently,  who 
duly  observe  the  law  which  requires  us  to  worship  Agni  *  Who  are  glorifiere 
of  this  truthful  (deity).' — Wilson. 

2  With  hUtckened  fellies :  leaving  black  tracks  behind  him:  *  dark-pathed. ' — 
Wilson. 

4  The  Bharata :  Vasishtha,  the  purohita  of  the  Bharatas.  PHim :  the 
Pftrus,  (one  of  the  Five  Aryan  Tribes)  who  opposed  the  Bharatas. 

6  Countless  treasure:  literally,  hundreds,  thousands.  Our  friend:  th^ 
Inetitutor  of  the  BOcriMoe, 


HYMN    IX.  AgnL 

RousBD  from  their  bosom  is  the  Dawns'  belovkl,  the  joyous 

Priest,  most  sapient,  Purifier. 
He  gives  a  signal  both  to  Gods  and  mortals,  to  Gods  oblations, 

riches  to  the  pious. 

2  Most  incise  is  he  who,   forcing  doors  of  Panis,   brought  the 

bright  Sun  to  us  who  feedetn  many. 
The   cheerful    Priest,    men's    Friend    and  home-companion^ 
through  still  night's  darkness  he  is  made  apparent. 

3  Wise,  ne'er  deceived,  uncircumscribed,  refulgent,  our  gracious 

guest,  a  Friend  with  good  attendants, 
Shines  forth  with  wondrous  light  before  the  Mornings :  the 
young  plants  hath  he  entered.  Child  of  Waters. 

4  Seeking  our  gatherings,  he,  your  J4tavedas,  hath  shone  ador- 

able through  human  ages, 
Who  gleams  refulgent  with  his  lovely  lustre :  the  kine  have 
waked  to  meet  him  when  enkindled. 

5  Go  on  thy  message  to  the  Gods,  and  fail  not,  0  Agni,  with 

their  band  who  pray  and  worship. 
Bring  all  the  Gods  that  they  may  give  us  riches,   Sarasvatf, 
the  Maruts,  As v  ins,  Waters. 

6  Vasishtha,  when  enkindling  thee,  0  Agni,  hath  slain  Jar&tha. 

Give  us  wealth  in  plenty. 
Sing  praise  in  choral  song,  0  Jatavedas.     Ye  Gods,  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  X.  Agni 

Hb  bath  sent  forth,  bright,  radiant,  and  refulgent,  like  the 

Dawn's  Lover,  his  far-spreading  lustre. 
Pure  m  his  splendour  shines  the  goLien  Hero  :  our  longing 

thoughts  hath  he  aroused  and  wakened. 

S  He,   like  the   Sun,  bath   shone  while   Mom  is  breaking,  and 
priests  who  weave  the  sacrifice  sing  praises, 
Agniy  the  God,  who  knows  their  generations  and  visits  Gods, 
most  bounteous,  rapid  envoy. 


Tht  J)awn$*  beloved :  Agni,  as  lighted  np  at  day-break.  A  ngnal :  of 
■acrifice,  which  men  are  to  offer  and  Qods  are  to  receive. 

6  j€nrdt?M  :  see  VII.  1.7,  where  the  destruction  of  Jarfltha  is  ascribed  to 
Agni  himself.  Jaruthtt,  said  by  Sftyapa  to  have  been  a  lidkshasa  or  demon, 
was  probably  an  enemy  who  was  slain  in  a  battle  at  which  Vasishtha  was 
present  as  purohita, — Ludwig. 

1  Uh€  tU.Dawh't  Lover  :  the  &un.    See  I.  69. 1. 

1  J/tJpriesis.'  I  adopt  SAyaaa^s  interpretation  of  thla  b«k\i-\vaft. 


\i  TffS  BYMN8  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

^    Our  songs  and  holy  hymns  go  fortli  to  Agni,  seeking  the  God 
and  asking  him  for  riches. 
Him  fair  to  see,  of  goodly  aspect^  mighty,  men's  messengei? 
trho  carries  their  oblations. 

4  Joined   with  the  Vasus,  Agni,  bi*lng  thou  Indra,  bring  hither 
mighty  Rudra  with  the  RudraSj 
Aditi  good  to  all  men  with  Adityas,  Brihaspati  All-bouiltecWg<< 
with  the  Singers* 

6  Men  eagerly  implore  at  sacrifices  Agni,  Most  Youthful  God, 
the  joyous  Herald, 
ti'or  he  is  Lord  and  Ruler  over  riches,  and  foi*  Gods*  worship 
an  unwearied  envoy. 

HYMN  XI.  Agni. 

Great  art  thou,  Agni,  sacrifice's  Herald  :  ndt  without  thee  are 

deathless  Gods  made  joyful. 
Come  hitber  With  all  Deities  about  thee :  here  take  thy  seat, 

the  first,  as  Priest,  0  Agni. 

2  Men  with  oblations  evermore  entreat  thee,  the  swift,  to  under- 

take an  envoy's  duty. 
He  oh   whose  sacred   grass  with   Gods  thou   sittest,  to  him, 
0  Agni,  are  the  days  propitious. 

3  Three  times  a  day  in  thee  are  shown  the  treasures  sent  for 

the  mortal  who  presents  oblation. 
Bring  the  Gods  hither  like  a  man,  0  Agni :  be  thou  our  envoy, 
guarding  us  from  curses. 

4  iiOixl  of  the  lofty  sacrifice  is  Agni,  Agni  is  Lord  of  every  gift 

presented. 
The  Vasus  were  contented  with  his  wisdom,  so  the  Gods  made 
him  their  oblation-bearer. 

5  0  Agni,  briag   the  Gods  to  taste  our  presents :  with  Indra 

leading,  here  let  them  be  joyful. 
Convey  this  sacrifice  to  Gods  in  heaven.     Ye  Gods,  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

4  Singers  :  or  Uikvana,  deities  who  attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  some 
God  :  *  the  adorable  (Angirasas).*—- Wilson. 

V  8  Three  times  a  day :  at  the  morning,  the  noon,  and  the  evening  libation. 
Or  the  meaning  may  be,  in  the  three  fire-receptacles.     Like  a  man  :  acting 
like  a  human  priest.    The  Commentators  explain  nianu8hvdt  by  '  as  (at  the 
mHfrjdce)  ofManu,  * 


BTMN 14.]  TRE  RIGVEDA,  18 

HYMN  XII.  Agni. 

Wb  with  great  reverence  have  approached  The  Youngest  who 
hath  shone  forth  well-kindled  in  his  dwelling, 

With  wondrous  light  between  wide  earth  and  heaven>  well- 
worshipped,  looking  forth  in  all  directions. 

2  Through  bis  great  might  overcoming  all  misfortunes,  praised 

in  the  house  is  Agni  Jd^t^avedas. 
May  he  protect  us  from   disgrace  and   trouble,   both   us  who 
laud  bim  and  our  noble  patrons. 

3  O  Agni,   thou  art  Varuna  and  Mitra :   Yasishthas  with  their 

holy  hymns  exalt  thee. 
With   thee  be  most  abundant  gain  of  treasure.     Ye   Grods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XIII.  Agni. 

Bring  song  and  hymn   to  Agni,    Asura-slayer,    enlightener  of 

all  and  thought-bestower. 
Like  an  oblation  on  the  grass,  to  please  himi  I  bring  this  to 

Vaisv^nara,  hymn-inspirer. 

2  Thou  with   thy  flame,  0  Agni,   brightly  glowing,  hast  at  thy 
birth  filled  full  the  earth  and  heaven. 
Thou  with  thy  might,  Vaisvanara  Jatavedas,  settest  the  Gods 
free  from  the  curse  that  bound  them. 

.  3  Agni,  when  born,  thou  lookedst  on  all  creatures,   like  a  brisk 
herdsman  moving  round  his  cattle. 
The  path    to  prayer,    Vaisv4nai  a,   thou   foundest.     Ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XIV,  Agni. 

WiTP  reverence  and  with  offered  gifts  serve  we  the  God  whose 

flame  is  bright  % 
Let  us  bring  Jatavedas  fuej,   mA  adore  Agni  when  we   invoke 

the  Gods. 

9  Agni,  may  we  perform  thy  rites  with  fuel,  and  honour  thee, 
O  Holy  One,  with  praises  ; 
Honour   thee,  Priest  of  sacrifice !   with  butter,   thee,  God   of 
blessM  light !  with  our  oblation. 


M  The  Youngest :  Agni,   roost  youthful  of  the  Gods,   ^  being  continually 

Mroduoed. 

r2  The  eurte  that  bound  them :  tbe  Gods  Beam  to  have  befell  SMVi^etV.  \»  Vsa 
'-'  hfimiiiies  of  o)d  age  until  Jndra,  or,  as  is  here  said,  Agu'i,  it«^  V^«\ii«    ^^^ 
"^"  ^.  19,  a, 

r 


14  Tff^  ffYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vtt. 

3  Come,  Agni,  with  the  Gods  to  our  invoking,  come,    pleased,  to 
offerings  sanctified  with  Vashat. 
May  we  be   his  who  pays  thee,   i&od,  dtie   honour.     Ye  Gods, 
preserve  ns  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XV.  Agni. 

OffeK  oblations  in  his  mouthy  the  bounteotifl  Grod's   whom  we 

must  serve, 
His  who  is  nearest  kin  to  us : 

2  Who  for  the  Fivefold  People's  sake  bath  seated  him  in  everjF 

home. 
Wise,  Youthful,  Master  of  the  house. 

3  On  all  sides  may  that  Agni   g^ard  our   household   folk  and 

property ; 
May  he  deliver  us  from  woe* 

4  I  have  begotten  this  new  hymn  for  Agni,  Falcon  of  the  sky  ? 
Will  he  not  give  us  of  his  wealth  % 

6  Whose  glories   when  he   glows  in   front  of  sacrifice   are   fau 
to  see. 
Like  wealth  of  one  with  hero  soni?. 

6  May  he  enjoy  this  hallowed  gift,  Agni  accept  our  songs,  who 

bears 
Oblations,  best  of  worshippers* 

7  Lord  of  the  bouse,  whom  men  must  seek,  we  aret  thee  down^ 

0  Worshipped  One  ! 
Bright,  rich  in  heroes^  Agni  I  God  I 

8  Shine  forth  at  night  and   morn :  through   thee  with  fires  ar« 

we  provided  well. 
Thou,  rich  in  heroes,  art  our  Friend. 

9  The  men  come  near  thee  for  their  gain,  the  singers  with  theii 

songs  of  praise : 
Speech,  thousandfold,  comes  near  to  thee. 

10  Bright,   Purifier,   meet   for  praise^   Imemortal   with   refulgeii^ 

glow, 
Agni  drives  Elbkshasas  away. 

11  As  such,  bring  us  abundant  wealth,  young  Child  of  Strength 

for  this  thou  canst : 
May  Bhaga  give  us  what  i»  choice. 


J  3  San^tijkd  with  Vaihat :  Yaskat  (may  he  bear  it  to  the  Gods)  is  th< 
exclamation  used  at  the  moment  of  pouring  the  sacrificial  oil  or  darifiec 
butter  on  the  fire. 

P  Speeekj  dZsAard,  the  imperiBhable  *,  heve  a^^eekii^  the  shape  ol  pri^uic 


^TMN  16  ]  THE  RIOVEDA,  II 

2  Thou,  Agni,  givest  hero  fame :  Bbaga  and  Savitar  the  God, 
And  Diti  give  ub  what  is  good. 

3  Agni,  preserve  us  from  distress :  consume  our  enemies,  0  God, 
Eternal,  with  thy  hottest  flames. 

4  And,  irresistible,  be  thou  a  mighty  iron  fort  to  us, 
With  hundred  walls  for  man's  defence. 

5  Do  thou  preserve  us,  eve  and   mom,   from  sorrow,   from  the 

wicked  men, 
Infallible  !  by  day  and  night. 

HYMN  XVL  Agni. 

With  this  my  reverent  hymn  I  call  Agni  for  you,  the  Son  of 

Strength, 
Dear,   wisest  envoy,   served   with   noble   sacrifice,    immortal 

messenger  of  all. 

2  His  two   red  horses,   all-supporting,  let  him   yoke  :  let  him, 

well-worshipped,  urge  them  fast. 
Then   hath  the   sacrifice  good   prayers  and    happy   end,  and 
heavenly  gift  of  wealth  to  men. 

3  The  flame  of  him   the    Bountiful,    the   Much-invoked,   hath 

mounted  up. 
And  his  red-coloured  smoke-clouds  reach   and  touch   the  sky  : 
the  men  are  kindling  Agni  well. 

4  Thee,  thee  Most  Glorious  One  we  make  our  messenger.     Bring 

the  Gods  hither  to  the  feast. 
Give  us,  0  Son  of  Strength,  all  food   that  feedeth  man  :   give 
that  for  which  we  pray  to  thee. 

5  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  homestead's  Lord,  our   Herald   at  the 

sacrifice. 
Lord  of  all  boons,   thou   art  the   Cleanser  and  a  Sage.     Pay 
worship,  and  enjoy  the  good. 

o  Give  riches  to   the   sacrificer,  O  Most   Wise,  for  thou  art  he 
who  granteth  wealth. 
Inspire  with  zeal  each  priest  at   this  our  solemn   rite,  all  who 
are  skilled  in  singing  praise. 

^  O  Agni  who  art  worshipped  well,  dear  let  our  princes  be  to  thee, 
Our  wealthy  patrons  who  are  governors  of  men,  who  part,  as 
gifts,  their  stalls  of  kine. 


12  Diti :  generally  regarded  as  the  opposite  of  Aditi,  which  may  have  been 
iw  word  used  by  the  poet,  changed  by  later  reciters,  who  considered  the 
irregulur,  into  Diti.     See  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  p.  256. 


S  Herald.'  Zfotar,  or  inroking  priest.  Cleanser:  Potar,  or  pwT\€LW»BXkC\V)ttAr 
f  the  oMciatiag  pneaU.     Agni  performs  the  dutiea  of  all  Vium«Xk  ^\\ft»k\i^,    \ 


16  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

8  They  in  whose  home,  her  hand  bearing  the  sacred  oil,  l\k  sita 
down  well-satisfied — 
Guard  them,  Victorious  God,  from  slander  and  from  harm : 
give  us  a  refuge  famed  afar. 

9  Do  thou,  a  Priest  with  pleasant  tongue,  most  wise,  and  very- 
near  to  us, 
Agni,  bring  riches  hither  to  our   liberal  chiefs,  and   speed  the 
offering  oiF  our  gifts. 

10  They  who  bestow  as  bounty  plenteous  wealth  of  steeds,  moved 

by  desire  of  great  renown — 
Do  thou  with  saving  help  preserve   them  from  distress.  Most 
Youthful !  with  a  hundred  forts. 

11  The  God  who  gives  your  wealth  demands  a  full  libation  poured 

to  him. 
Pour  ye  it  forth,  then  fill  the  vessel  full  again :   then  doth  the 
God  pay  heed  to  you. 

12  Him  have  the  Gods   appointed   Priest  of  sacrifice,    oblation- 

bearer,  passing  wise. 
Agni  gives  wealth   and  valour  to  the   worshipper,  to  folk  who 
offer  up  their  gifts. 

HYMN  XVII.  Agni. 

Agni,  be  kindled  well  with  proper  fuel,  and  let  the  grass  be 
scattered  wide  about  thee. 

2  Let  the  impatient  Portals  be  thrown  open :  bring  thou  the 

Gods  impatient  to  come  hither. 

3  Taste,  Agni :  serve  the  Gods  with  our  oblation.     Offer  good 

sacrifices,  J^tavedas  ! 

4  Let  J^tavedas  pay  fair  sacrifices,  worship  and  gratify  the 

Gods  Immortal. 
6  Wise  God,  win  for  us  things  that  are  all-goodly,  and  let  th|^ 
prayers  we  pray  to-day  be  fruitful. 

6  Thee,   even  thee,   the  Son  of  Strength,  0  Agni,  those  Gods 

have  made  the  bearer  of  oblations. 

7  To   thee  the   God  may  we  perform   our  worship:    do  thoi^ 

besought,  grant  us  abundant  riches. 

8  Tld :  the  Goddess  who  is  regarded  as  the  Bacrificial  food  or  if^Iation  per- 
flonified  :  annariH/ipd  havirlakskand  devt.  --Sftyai^a. 

2  The  impatient  Portals :  the  doors  of  the  sacrificial  chaml>«r  which  long 
^  bear  their  part  in  the  holy  ceremony. 

^  ^!&ose  ^odf.-  the  famovkB  Gods. 


BTMN  18]  THE  RIQVEDA.  17 

HYMN    XVIII.  Indra.  ^^ 

All  is  with  thee,  0  Indra,  all  the  treasures  which  erst  our 
fathers  won  who  sang  thy  praises. 

With  thee  are  milch-kine  good  to  milk,  and  horses :  hest  win- 
ner thou  of  riches  for  the  pious. 

2  For  like  a  King  among  his  wives  thou  dwellest :  with  glories, 

as  a  Sage,  surround  and  help  us. 
Make  us,    thy  servants,   strong  for  wealth,  and   honour  our 
songs  with  kine  and  steeds  and  decoration. 

3  Here  these  our  holy  hymns   with  joy  and  gladness  in  pious 

emulation  have  approached  thee. 
Hitherward  come  thy  path  that  leads  to  riches :  may  we  find 
shelter  in  thy  favour,  Indra. 

4  Yasishtha  hath  poured  iorth  his  prayers,  desiring  to  milk  thee 

like  a  cow  in  goodly  pasture. 
All  these  my  people  call  thee  Lord  of  cattle :  may  Indra  come 
unto  the  prayer  we  offer. 

5  What  though   the   floods  spread   widely,    Indra  made  them 

shallow  and  easy  for  Sudels  to  traverse. 
He,  worthy  of  our  praises,  caused  the  Simyu,  foe  of  our  hymn, 
to  curse  the  rivers'  fury. 

6  Eager  for  spoil  wfiw  Turvasa  PurodA.8,  fain  to  win  wealth,  like 

fishes  urged  by  hunger. 
The  Bhrigus  and  the  Druhyus  quickly  listened  :  friend  rescued 
friend  mid  the  two  distant  peoples. 


The  hymn  glorifies  Indra  as  the  protector  of  SudAs,  the  King  of  the  Tritsus, 
and  praises  the  liberality  of  that  prince.  See  VedU  India  (Story  of  the 
Nations  Series),  pp.  819—832. 

4  VcuishJtha:  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn,  and  the  chief  priest  who  had 
accompanied  the  warlike  expedition  of  Sud&s.  To  milk  thee:  to  obtain 
riches  through  thy  favour  by  means  of  my  hymn,  as  men  milk  the  cow  at 
Mcrifioe  for  the  milk  which  is  required  for  libations. 

5  The  poet  begins  to  recount  the  events  of  Sud&s's  victorious  expedition. 
These  are  not  always  intelligible  partly  on  account  of  the  obscure  phraseology 
employed,  and  partly  on  account  of  our  ignorance  of  details  which  are  vaguely 
allud^  to.  In  this  stanza  SudAs,  king  or  chief  of  the  Tritsu  tribe,  has,  with 
the  aid  of  Indra,  crossed  a  deep  river  (the  Parushnt  which  is  now  called  the 
KAvt),  and  put  the  Simyus  to  flight,  some  of  the  fugitives  being  drowned  in 
its  waters.  The  Simyus  are  mentioned  together  with  the  Dasyus,  in  I.  1 00. 
18,  as  hostile  barbarians  slain  by  Indra.  The  second  half  of  the  stanza  is 
difficult,  the  meaning  of  two  of  the  words  being  uncertain. 

6  Turvasa  PantdU :  Turvasa  appears  here  as  one  of  the  enemies  of  Sud&s. 
I  follow,  with  much  hesitation,  Lutlwig  in  taking  Purod^H  as  an  api>ellative  of 
Turvasa:  'Turvasa,  who  was  preceding  (at  solemn  rites).* —Wiltjon.  The 
BhriguB  and  theBruhyus:  here,  apparently,  alliett  of  Turvasa.  FUht^x 
aoooi'ding  to  othent,  Mateyaa,  a  people, 

2 


18  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VII. 

7   Together  came  the  Pakthas,   the  BhalS.nas,  the  Alinas,  the 
Sivas,  the  Vishanins. 

Yet  to  the  Tritsus  came  the  Aryans  Comrade,  through  love  of 
spoil  and  heroes'  war,  to  lead  them. 

8  Fools,  in  their  folly  fain  to  waste  her  waters,  they  parted  in- 

exhaustible Parushni. 

Lord  of  the  Earth,  he  with  his  might  repressed  them :  still  lay 
the  herd  and  the  affrighted  herdsman. 

9  As  to  their  goal  they  sped  to  their  destruction  :  they  sought 

Parushni ;  e'en  the  swift  returned  not. 

Indra  abandoned,  to  Sud^s  the  manly,  the  swiftly  flying  foes, 
unmanly  babblers. 

10  They  went  like  kine  unherded  from  the  pasture,  each  cling- 

ing to  a  friend  as  chance  directed. 

They  who  drive  spotted  steeds,   sent  down  by  Prisni,   gave 
ear,  the  Warriors  and  the  harnessed  horses. 

11  Tlie   King   who   scattered    one-and -twenty   people   of    bott 

Vaikarna  tribes  through  lust  of  glory  — 

As  the  skilled  priest  clips  grass  within  the  chamber,  so  hatl 
the  Hero  Indra  wrought  their  downfall. 


7  The  PaktkaSf  and  the  rest  mentioned  in  the  firat  line  of  the  stanzi 
appear  to  have  been  non- Aryan  tribes  opposed  to  the  Tritsus.  According  t* 
the  Scholiast  these  names  are  the  denominations  of  various  ministers  a 
religious  rites,  and  following  this  interpretation  Wilson  translates  the  stanzi 
as  follows  :  •  Those  who  dress  the  oblation,  those  who  pronounce  auspiciou 
words,  those  who  abstain  from  penance,  those  who  bear  horns  (iu  their  hands) 
those  who  bestow  happiness  (on  the^world  by  sacrifice),  glorify  that  Indn 
who  recovered  the  cattle^  of  the  i4rya  from  the  plunderers,  who  slew  th 
enemies  m  battle.'  The  Arya's  Comrade :  Indra,  the  ally  of  Tritsu  agains 
the  non- Aryan  confederacy, 

8  The  confederates,  who  were  on  the  right  or  farther  bank  of  the  Parushni 
intending  to  attack  Sudfts  and  the  Tritsus,  appear  to  have  attempted  to  mak 
the  river  fordable  by  digging  channels  and  so  diverting  the  water,  which,  i 
BCf'ms,  rushed  back  into  its  natural  bed  and  drowned  th6  men  who  were  cross 
ing  the  stream.  The  second  line  of  the  stanza  is  obscure  and  the  translatio 
is  conjectural.  Wilson  translates :  *  but  he  by  his  greatness  pervades  th 
earth,  Kavi,  the  sou  of  Chayamina,  like  a  falling  victim,  sleeps  (in  death) 
The  herd  and  the  herdsman  are,  of  coiirse,  the  hostile  band  and  its  leader. 

10  They  went:  the  fugitives  who  escaped  drowning.  They  who  drive  spotte 
steeds  :  the  Maruts,  sent  down  by  their  mother  Prisni  to  aid  Sud4s. 

11  People  :  or,  houses,  i.  e.  families.  Both  Vaikarnia  tribes :  perhaps  som^ 
allies  of  the  Druhyus  ;  but  the  meaning  of  vaiharndyoh  is  uncertain.  Se 
Zimmer,  AUlndUches  Leben,  p.  103.    Ludwig  thinks  that  the  reference  is  t< 

M  mjrtbic   battle  at  some  place   called  Vaikarnau   between  Indra  (the  Kinf 
»ad  the  M»rata  (the  one-and -twenty  people).  Clips  growa  :  mXXi  o\ia  ^V».\w^>i! 


ffTMN  18.]  TBE  RIO  VEDA.  1 9 

12  Thou,   thunder-armed,   o'erwhelmedst  in  the   waters   famed 

ancient  Kavasba  and  then  the  Druhyu. 
Others  here  claiming  friendship  to  their  friendship,  devoted 
unto  thee,  in  thee  were  joyful. 

13  Indra  at  once  with  conquering  might  demolished  all  their 

strong  places  and  their  seven  castles. 
The  goods  of  Ann's  son  he  gave  to  Tritsu.     May  we  in  sacrifice 
conquer  scornful  Piiru. 

14  The  Anavas  and  Druhyiis,  seeking  booty,  have  slept,  the  sixty 

hundred,  yea,  six  thousand. 
And  six-and-sixty  heroes.     For  the  pious  were  all  these  mighty 
exploits  done  by  Indra. 

15  These  Tritsus  under  Indra's  careful  guidance  came  speeding 

like  loosed  waters  rushing  downward. 
The  foemen,  measuring  exceeding  closely,  abandoned  to  Sudas 
all  their  provisions. 

1 6  The  hero's  side  who  drank  the  dressed  oblation,  ludra's  denier, 

far  o'er  earth  he  scattered. 
Indra  brought  down  the  fierce  destroyer's  fury.     He  gave 
them  various  roads,  the  path's  Controller. 

17  E'en  with  the  weak  he  wrought  this  matchless  exploit:  e'en 
with  a  goat  he  did  to  death  a  lion. 
He  pared   the  pillar's   angles  with  a  needle.     Thus  to  Sudas 
Indra  gave  all  provisions. 


12  Kavaaha :  perhaps  the  priest  of  one  of  the  two  Vaikarna  tribes  which 
Zimmer  is  inclined  to  identify  with  the  Kuru-Krivis.  See  Altindisrhes  Lef>fiiy 
p.  127.  Others  here:  *for  they,  Indra,  who  are  devoted  to  thee  and  glority 
thee,  preferring  thy  friendship,  enjoy  it.'— Wilson.  The  exact  meaning  is 
uncertain. 

18  To  Trittu :  to  Sudfts,  the  King  of  the  Tritsus. 

14  The  Anavas :  men  of  the  Ann  tribe.  The  sixty  hundred  :  *  The  enu- 
meration is  very  obscurely  expressed,  shashtih  §atd  shot  sahasrd  shashtir  cuihi 
thai,  literally,  sixty  hundreds,  six  thousands,  sixty,  with  six  more  :  S&yana 
undenstande  by  satdni,  thousands,  snhasi'dnUyartha^. ' — Wilson.  *  Sixty- 
six  thousand  six  hundred  and  six.'  Ludwig  suggests  that  dusd  should  be  read 
instead  of  ja<^,  which  would  make  the  number  6666.  See*  Benfey,  Vedica 
ttnd  Linguistica,  pp.  139 — 162. 

15  Measuring  exceeding  closdy :  \ho\i^  taking  great  care  of  their  goods 
and  reluctantly  giving  them  up. 

16  The  heroes  side :  the  party  of  the  hostile  leader,  the  non- Aryans  who 
denied  Indra,  and  themselves  devoured  the  oblations  that  should  have  been 
presented  to  him.  He  gave  them  various  roads :  made  them  fly  in  all  direc- 
tions. 

17  ^en  vfiih  affocU:  impo»8ible  deeds  mentioned  eiA  \\\ustT«AAOXi%  cA\\ATi:% 
miraculous  power. 


^  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIL 

13  To   thoe  have   all  thine   enemies  submitted:  e'en  the   fierce 
Bheda  hast  thou  made  thy  subject. 
Cast  down  thy  sharpened  thunderbolt,  0  Indra,  on  him  who 
harms  the  men  who  sing  thy  praises. 

19  Yamun^   and  the  Tritsus   aided  Indra.     There   he  stripped 
Bheda  bare  of  all  his  treasures. 
The  Ajas  and  the  Sigrus  and  the  Yakshus  brought  in  to  him 
as  tribute  heads  of  horses. 

50  Not  to  be  scorned,  but  like  Dawns  past  and  recent,  0  Indra^ 
are  thy  favours  and  thy  riches, 
Devaka,  Manyamana's  son,  thou  slowest,  and  smotest  Sambara 
from  the  lofty  mountain. 

21  They  who,  from   home,  have  gladdened  thee,  thy  servants 

Par&sara,  Vasishtha,  Satay&tu, 
Will  not  forget  thy  friendship,  liberal  Giver.     So  shall  the 
days  dawn  prosperous  for  the  princes. 

22  Priest-like,    with   praise,  I  move   around  the   altar,   earning 

Paijavana's  reward,  0  A^ni, 
Two  hundred  cows  from  DevavSn's  descendant,  two  chariot^ 
from  Sudas  with  mares  to  draw  them.  * 

23  Gift  of   Paijavana,  four   horses  bear   me  in  foremost  place, 

trained  steeds  with  pearl  to  deck  them. 
Sud^s's  brown  steeds,  firmly-stepping,  carry  me  and  my  son 
for  progeny  and  glory. 

24  Him  whose  fame  spreads  between  wide  earth  and  heaven,  who, 

as  dispenser,  gives  each  chief  his  portion. 
Seven  flowing  Rivers  glorify  like  Indra.     He  slew  Yudhy^ 
madhi  in  close  encounter. 

18  Bheda  :  an  enemy  of  Sudds,  or  an  unbeliever,  says  S&yana. 

19  Yamund :  the  Jumna.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  expedition 
reached  so  far.  The  Ajas,  Sigrus.  and  Yakshus  were  perhaps  subject  to  Bheda, 
but  nothing  is  known  regarding  them.  Heads  of  horses  •'  which  had  been 
killed  in  battle. 

20  Like  Dawns :  renewed  every  day.     Devaha :  not  mentioned  elsewhere. 
Aocording  to  Grassmann  (UvdkMn  mdnyamAndm  refers  to  Sambara,  '  thinking 
himself  a  God.' 

21  Pard^ara  is  said  by  one  authority  to  have  been  the  son,  and  by  another  the 
grandson  of  the  llishi  Vasishtha.  Sutaydta  is  said  to  be  Sakti,   Vsisishtha's  son, 

22  Here  begins  the  ddnastati  or  praise  of  the  prince's  liberality.  Paija- 
vana :  Sud4s.  descendant  of  Pijavana.  Devavdii's  descendant :  Sud&s,  Deva? 
v&u  being  either  the  same  as  Divod&sa,  the  father  of  Sud&s  or  one  of  his 
foi-efathers. 

24    Seven  Jlowing  Rivers  gloiify :  the  seven  chief  rivers  of  the  Panj&b 
glorify  him  as  they  glorify  Indra.     Or,  they   (men)   praise  him  as   the  seven, 
rivers  praise  Indra.     *  The  seven  rivers  bear  his  glory  fai'  and  wide'  (I,  102-2). 
/^ae/A^iimid/ii :  not  luentioucd  elsewhere. 


StMI^  19.]  THS  RtGVEDA.  21 

25  Attend  on  Wm  Oye  heroic   Maruts   as  on   Sud&g's   father 
Divod^sa. 
Further  Paijavana's  desire   with  favour.     Guard   faithfully 
his  lasting  firm  dominion. 

HYMN  XIX.  Indra. 

He  like  a  bull  with  sharpened  horns,   terrific,  singly  excites 

and  agitates  all  the  people : 
Thou  givest  him  who  largely  pours  libations  his  goods  who 

pours  not,  for  his  own  possession. 

5  Thou,  rerily,  Indra,  gavest  help  to  Kutsa,   willingly  giving 

ear  to  him  in  battle. 
When,  aiding  Arjuneya-t  thou  subduedst  to  him  both  Kuyava 

and  the  DUsa  Sushna. 

•        • 

3  O  Bold  One,  thou  with  all  thine  aids  hast  boldly  holpen  Sud&s 

whose  o3erings  were  accepted, 
Puru  in  winning  land  and  slaying  foemen,  and  Trasadasyu 
.  son  of  Purukutsa. 

4  At  the  Gods'  banquet,  hero-souled  !  with  Heroes,  Lord  of  Bay 
.'       Steeds,  thou  slewest  many  foemen. 

Thou  sentest  in  swift  death  to  sleep  the  Dasyu,  both  Chumuri 
and  Dhuni,  for  Dabhiti. 

6  These  were  thy  mighty  powers  that,  Thundcr-wielder,  thou 

swiftly  crushedfit  nine-and-ninety  castles : 
Thou   capturedst   the  hundredth   in   thine  onslaught ;  thou 
slewest  Namuchi,  thou  slewest  Vf  itra. 

6  Old  are  the  blessings,  Indra,   which  thou  gavest  Sudas  the 
worshipper  who  brought  oblations. 
For  thee,  the  Strong,  I  yoke  thy  strong  Bay  Horses :  may  our 
prayers  reach  thee  and  win  strength,  Most  Mighty ! 

T  Give  us  not  up,  Lord  of  Bay  Horses,  Victor,  in  this  thine  own 
assembly,  to  the  wicked. 
Deliver  xxs  with  true  nnd  faithful  succours  :  dear  may  we  be 
to  thee  among  the  princes. 

25  Maruts  :  here,  perhaps,  the  Maghavans  or  wealthy  nobles  are  intended 
who  stand  in  theaajne  relation  to  Sud&s  as  the  Maruts  to  Indra. 


1  Exeiim  and  opiates:  as  Gk>d  of  battles.     Thou:   Indra.    This  abrupt 
change  from  the  third  person  to  the  uecond  is  not  unusual  iu  the  Veda. 

2  Arjuneya:    Kutsa,   descendant  of  Arjuna.     See  I.  112.  23.  Kuyava:  see 
I.  103.  8. 

4  For  Chumuri,  Dhuni,  and  Dahhiti  ,  see  Vol.  I.  Index. 

5  Namuchi :  another  demon  of  drought.    See  I.  53.  7.    In  thine  onslaught ; 
according  to  S^yana,  for  thy  dwelling  :     '  thou  hast  occupied  tU«  Vv\3L\i'^t^\]^ 
M  a  place  of  abed©.' — Wilnon. 

e  SitdOs.'  the  King  of  the  TritauB,  celebrated  in  the  precadVa^  V^mTL. 


22  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

8  May  we  men,  Maghavan,  the  friends  thou  lovest,  near  thee  be 

joyful  under  thy  protection. 
Fain  to  fulfil  the  wish  of  Atithigva  humble  the  pride  of  Tur- 
vasa  and  Yadva. 

9  Swiftly,   in    truth,  0  Maghavan,    about  thee   men   skilled  in 

hymning  sing  their  songs  and  praises. 
Elect  us  also  into  their  assembly  who  by  their  calls  on  thee 
despoiled  the  niggards. 

10  Thine   are   these   lauds,  0  manliest  of  heroes,   lauds  "which 

revert  to  us  and  give  us  riches. 
Favour  these,  Indra,  when  they  fight  with  foemen,  as  Friend 
and  Hero  and  the  heroes'  Helper. 

1 1  Now,  lauded  for  thine  aid.  Heroic  Indra,  sped  by  our  prayer, 

wax  mighty  in  thy  body. 
Apportion  to  us  stiength  and  habitations.  Ye  Gods,  protect  us 
evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XX.  Indra. 

Strong,  Godly-natured,  bom  for  hero  exploit,  man's  Friend, 

he  doth  whatever  deed  he  willeth. 
Saving  us  e'en  from  great  transgression,  Indra,  the  Youthful, 

visiteth  man's  home  with  favour. 

2  Waxing  in  greatness  Indra  slayeth  Vritra :  the  Hero  with  his 

aid  hath  helped  the  singer. 
He  gave  Sudas  wide  room  and  space,  and  often  hath  granted 
wealth  to  him  who  brought  oblations. 

3  Soldier  unchecked,  war-rousing,  battling  Hero,  unconquered 

from  of  old,  victorious  ever, 
Indra   the  very   strong  hath  scattered  armies ;   yea,   he   hath 
slain  each  foe  who  fought  against  him. 

4  Thou  with  thy   greatness  hast  filled   full,  0  Indra,   even  both 

the  worlds  with  might,  0  thou  Most  Mighty. 
Lord  of  Bays,  Indra,  brandishing  bis  thunder,  is  gratified  with 
Soma  at  the  banquet. 

5  A  Bull  begat  the  Bull   for  joy  of  battle,   and  a  strong  Mother. 

brought  forth  him  the  manly. 

8  A  tithigva :  probably  a  descendant  of  SudAs  who  must  have  lived  loog 
before  the  composition  of  this  hymn,  as  the  favour  bestowed  upcxi  him  bj 
Indra  is  spoken  of  as  old  in  stanza  6.   Yddva :  or  Yadu's  son. 

9  Elect  U8  also :  that  is,  let  us  share  the  blessings  which  thou  withholdM 
from  the  illiberal  churls  who  offer  uo  oblations  and  givest  to  those  who  cidl 
upon  thee  and  worship  thee. 

5  A  Bull  begat  the  Ball :  *  A  vigorous  (god)  begot  a  vigorous  (son)/ — Muir.- 
Tlie  father  of  Indra  is  Kasyapa,  according  to  Sdyana  ;  but  probably   Dyaus  iB 
j'ntenJed,     A  stroncf  Mother  :  Aditi. 


BYMN  21.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  23 

He  who  is  Chief  of  men,  their  armies'  Leader,  is  a  strong  Hero, 
bold,  and  fain  for  booty. 

6  The  people  falter  not,  nor  suffer  sorrow,  who  win   themselves 

this  God's  terrific  spirit. 
He  who  with  sacrifices  worships   Indra  is  lord  of  wealth,   law- 
bom  and  law's  protector. 

7  Whene'er  the  elder  fain  would  help  the  younger,  the   greater 

Cometh  to  the  lesser's  present. 
Shall  the   Immortal   sit  aloof  inactive?  0  Wondrous  Indra, 
bring  us  wondrous  riches. 

8  Thy  dear  folk,  Indra,    who   present   oblations,    are,  in   chief 

place,  thy  friends,  0  Thunder-wielder. 
May  we  be  best  content  in  this  thy  favour,   sheltered  by  One 
who  slays  not,  but  preserves  us. 

9  To   thee   the   mighty   hymn    hath   clamoured  loudly,   and, 

Maghavan,  the  eloquent  hath  besought  thee. 
Desire   of  wealth  hath   come  upon  thy  singer :    help  us  then, 
Sakra,  to  our  share  of  riches. 

10  Place  us  by  food  which  thou   hast  given,  0  Indra,  us  and  the 
wealthy  patrons  who  command  us. 
Let  thy  great   power  bring  good  to  him  who  lauds  thee.     Ye 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXI.  Indra. 

Pressed  is  the  juice  divine   with  milk   commingled :   thereto 

hath  Indra  ever  been  accustomed. 
We  wake  thee,  Lord  of   Bays,  with   sacrifices :  mark  this  our 

laud  in  the  wild  joy  of  Soma. 

2  On  to  the  rite  they  move,  the  grass  they  scatter,  these  Soma- 
drinkers  eloquent  in  synod. 
Hither,  for  men  to  grasp,  are  brought  the  press-stones,  far- thun- 
dering, famous,  strong,  that  wait  on  heroes. 


6  Law-horn :  bom  in  accordance  with  the  law. 

7  The  relations  between  Gods  and  men  resemble  those  between  elders  and 
juniors,  superiors  and  inferiors  among  men.  The  inferior  comes  to  his  superior 
with  some  offering  in  his  hand  and  is  assisted  by  him  in  return.  So  Indra 
should  accept  our  oblations,  and  reward  us  with  wealth. 

9  The  eloquent:    atdmiih ;    according  to  Ludwig,  the  Greek    (TTiOjUivAog 
(from  <n'6fJLaj  mouth),  mouthy,  talkative,  and,  in  a  good  sense,  fluent,  eloquent. 
The  Commentators  explain  the  word  as  '  praiser.' 


1   We  wake  thee  :  or,  we  think  of  theC;  serve  thee. 


24  TBS  H7MN8  OP  [BOOK  Vlt. 

3  Indra,  thou  settest  free  the  many  waters  that  were  encompassed, 

Hero,  by  the  Dragon. 
Down  rolled,  as  if  on  chariots  borne,  the  rivers :  through  fear 
of  thee  all  things  created  tremble. 

4  Skilled   in  all  manly  deeds   the  God  terrific  hath    with  his 

weapons  mastered  these  opponents. 
Indra  in    rapturous  joy   shook  down   their  castles :  he   slew 
them  in  his  might,  the  Thunder^wielder. 

6  No  evil  spirits  have  impelled  us,  Indra,  nor  fiends,  O  Mightiest 
God.  with  their  devices. 
Let  our  true  €k)d  subdue  the  hostile  rabbk  :  let  not  the  lewd 
approach  our  holy  worship. 

6  Thou  in   thy   strength   surpassest  Earth   and   Heaven :  the 

regions  comprehend  not  all  thy  greatness. 
With  thine  own  power  and  might  thou  slewest  Vritra :  no  foe 
hath  foimd  the  end  of  thee  in  battle. 

7  Even  the  earlier  Deities  submitted  their  powers  to  thy  supreme 

divine  dominion. 
Indra  wins  wealth  and  deals  it  out  to  others  :   men  in  the  strife 
for  booty  call  on  Indra. 

8  The  humble  hath  invoked  thee  for  protection,  thee,   Lord  of 

great  felicity,  O  Indra. 
Thou  with  a  hundred  aids  hast  been  our  Helper :  one  who  brings 
gifts  like  thee  hath  his  defender. 

9  May  we,  O  Indra,  be  thy  friends  for  ever,  eagerly.  Conqueror, 

yielding  greater  homage. 
May,  through  thy  grace,  the  strength  of  us  who  battle   quell 
in  the  shock  the  onset  of  the  foeman. 

10  Place  us  by  food  which  thou  hast  given,  0  Indra,  us  and  the 
wealthy  patrons  who  command  us. 
Let  thy  great  power  bring  good  to  him  who  lauds  thee.     Ye 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXII.  ,  Indra. 

Drink  Soma,  Lord  of  Bays,  and   let  it  cheer  thee  :  Indra,  the 

stone,  like  a  well  guided  courser. 
Directed  by  the  presser's  arms  hath  pressei  it. 

4  These  opponents :  according  to  S&yana,  the  demons  of  the  air.  The  text 
has  no  noun  for  *  these.* 

5  The  lewd :  those  who  do  not  follow  Vedic  observances,  according  to 
T&ska.  For  a  full  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  slsnddevdh  see  Muir,  O.  S. 
Texts,  IV.  406—411. 

8  One  who  hi'vngs  gifts  like  thee :   SAyana  interprets  differently  :  *  be  our 
deader  against  every  overpowering  (assailant^  Aik©  Ui  tki^.' — Wilaon.* 


ffYMN2X]  THE  RIOVBDA.  2« 

2  So  let  the  draught  of  joy,   thy  dear  companion,  by  which,  O 

Lord  of  Hays,  thou  slayest  foemen, 
Delight  thee,  Indra,  Lord  of  princely  treaBiirea. 

3  Mark   closely,    Maghavan,  the  words  I  utter,    this    eulogy 

recited  by  Vasishtha : 
Accept  the  prayers  I  ofier  at  thy  banquet. 

4  Hear  thou  the  call  of  the  juice-drinking  press-stone :  hear  thou 

the  Brahman's  hymn  who  sings  and  lauds  thee. 
Take  to  thine  inmost  self  these  adorations. 

6  I  know  and  ne'er  forget  the  hymus  and  praises  of  thee,  the 
Conqueror,  and  thy  strength  immortal. 
Thy  name  I  ever  utter,  Self-Refulgent  1 

6  Among  mankind  many  are  thy  libations,  and  many  a  time  the 

pious  sage  invokes  thee. 
O  Maghavan,  be  not  long  distant  from  us. 

7  All  these  libations  are  for  thee,  0  Hero :  to  thee  I  offer  these 

my  prayers  that  strengthen. 
Ever,  in  every  place,  must  men  invoke  thee. 

8  Never  do  men  attain,  0  Wonder-Worker,  thy  greatness,  Mighty 

One,  who  must  be  lauded, 
Nor,  Indra,  thine  heroic  power  and  bounty. 

9  Among  all  Bishis,  Indra,  old  and  recent,  who  have  engender- 

ed hymns  as  sacred  singers, 
Even   with   us  be   thine   auspicious   friendships.     Ye   Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXIII.  Inclra. 

Praters  have  been  offered  up  through  love  of  glory :  Vasishtha, 

honour  Indva  in  the  battle. 
He  who  with  mi.^ht  extends  through  all  existence  hears  words 

which  I,  his  faithful  servant,  utter. 

2  A  cry  was   raised  which   reached  the   Gods,  0  Indra,  a  cry  to 

them  to  send  us  strength  in  combat. 
None  among  men  knows  his  own  life's  duration :  bear  us  in 
safety  over  these  our  troubles. 

3  The  Bays,  the  booty-seeking  car  I  hfimcss :  my  prayers  have 

reached  him  who  accepts  them  gladly. 

4  Juice-drinking  :  that  presses  out  the  juice  of  the  platit,  and  so  may  be 
said  to  drink  it.  The  Scholinst  inserts  viama.  of  me  :  *  Hear  the  invocation  of 
the  (grinding)  stone  (of  me)  repeatedly  drinking  (the  Soma).' — Wilson. 

2  A  cry  was  raised :  I  follow  Pischel's  interpretation  ot  t\iva  "^W^  ^vffivfSoXfc 
gUuusa.    See  VediscAe  /8iu€U€n,  1,  pp.  34 — 36. 


26  THM  HYMNS  OP  *        [BOOK  VIL 

Indra,   when  he  had  slain  resistless  foemen,  forced  with  his 
might  the  two  world-halves  asunder. 

4  Like  barren  cows,    moreover,  swelled  the   waters  :  the   singers 
sought  thy  holy  rite,  0  Indra. 
Come  unto  us   as  with  his   team  comes  V&yu :  thou,  through 
our  solemn  hymns  bestowest  booty. 

6  So  may  these  gladdening  draughts  rejoice  thee,  Indra,  the 
Mighty,  very  bounteous  to  the  singer. 
Alone  among  the  Gods  thou  pitiest  mortals :  0  Hero,  make 
thee  glad  at  this  libation. 

6  Thus  the  Vasishthas  glorify  with  praises  Indra  the  Powerful 
whose  arm  wields  thunder. 
Praised,    may  he   guard  our   wealth  in  kine  and  heroes.  Ye 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYNM  XXI Y.  Indra. 

A  HOME  is  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in,  Indra :  0  Much  invoked, 

go  thither  with  the  heroes. 
That  thou,  to  prosper  us,  mayst  be  our  Helper,  vouchsafe  us 

wealth,  rejoice  with  draughts  of  Soma. 

2  Indra,  thy  wish,   twice-strong,  is   comprehended :   pressed  is 

the  Soma,  poured  are  pleasant  juices. 
This  hymn  of  praise,  from   loosened  tonguCj    made  perfect, 
draws  Indra  to  itself  with  loud  invoking. 

3  Come,  thou  Impetuous  God,  from  earth  or  heaven  come  to  our 

holy  grass  to  drink  the  Soma. 
Hither  to  me  let  thy  Bay  Horses  bring  thee  to  listen  to  our 
hymns  and  make  thee  joyful. 

4  Come  unto  us  with  all  thine  aids,  accordant.   Lord  of  Bay 

Steeds,  accepting  our  devotions, 
Fair-helmeted,  overcoming  with  the  mighty,  and  lending  us 
the  strength  of  bulls,  0  Indra. 

5  As  to  the  chariot  pole  a  vigorous  courser,  this  laud  is  brought 

to  the  great  strong  Upholder. 
This  hymn  solicits  wealth  of  thee :  in  heaven,  as  'twere  above 
the  sky,  set  thou  our  glory. 

6  With  precious  things.  0  Indra,  thus  content  us :  may  we  attain 

to  thine  exalted  favour. 
Send  our  chiefs  plenteous  food  wi+h  hero  children.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Go  is,  with  blessings. 

4  Barren  cows  :  which  are  fatter  than  others. 

1  A  home  :  in  the  sacrificial  chamber.     Heroes  :  or.  men  ;  the  priests. 
4  ^au'-Zuh/t^ted :  or  fair-oheckecl,  or  handsome  cUiuaed. 


BYMN  26.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  27 

HYMN   XXV.  Indra. 

Whbn  with  thy  mighty  help,  0  potent  Indra,  the  armies  rush 

together  in  their  fury, 
When  from  the  strong  man's  arm  the  lightning  flieth ,  let  not 

thy  mind  go  forth  to  side  with  others. 

2  O  Indra,  where  the  ground  is  hard  to  traverse,   smite  down 

our  foes,  the  mortals  who  assail  us. 
Keep  far  from  us  the  curse  of  the  reviler  ;  hring  us  accumulat- 
ed store  of  treasures. 

3  God   of  the   fair    helm,    give   Sudas  a  hundred   succours,    a 

thousand  blessings,  and  thy  bounty. 
Strike  down  the  weapon  of  our  mortal   foeman :  bestow  upon 
us  splendid  fame  and  riches. 

4  I  wait  the  power  of  one  like  thee,  0  Indra,  gifts  of  a  Helper 

such  as  thou  art.  Hero. 
Strong,  Mighty  God,  dwell  with  me  now  and  ever :  Lord  of 
Bay  Horses,  do  not  thou  desert  us. 

5  Here  are  the  Kutsas  supplicating  Indra  for  might,  the  Lord 

of  Bays  for  God-sent  conquest. 
Make  our  foes  ever  easy  to  be  vanquished  :  may  we,  victorious, 
win  the  spoil,  0  Hero. 

6  With  precious  things,  0  Indra,  thus   content   us :  may   we 

attain  to  thine  exalted  favour. 
Send  our  chiefs  plenteous  food  with  hero  children.     Preserve 

us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Indra. 

Soma   impressed   ne'er  gladdened   liberal   Indra,    no   juices 

pressed  without  a  prayer  have  pleased  him. 
I  generate  a  laud  that  shall  delight  him,  new  and  heroic, 

so  that  he  may  hear  us. 

2  At  every  laud  the  Soma  gladdens  Indra  :  pressed  juices  please 

him  as  each  psalm  is  chanted, 
What  time  the  priests  with  one  united  effort  call  him  to  aid, 
as  sons  invoke  their  father. 

3  These  deeds  he  did;  let  him  achieve  new  exploits,  such  as  the 

priests  declare  at  their  libations. 

The  battle  has  begun,  and  the  siuger  prays  to  Indra  for  aid. 

1   The  lightning  :  the  swift  and  flashing  arrow.     Others  :  the  enemy. 

3  Svdds  :  according  to  S4yana,  '  the  liberal  donor  (of  oblations).' — Wilson, 

The  Kutsas  :  apparently  tbe  priests  of  the  hostile  party. 

1  Soma  wtpressed:  cp.  VI.  41.  4,  Soma  when  (properly)  pressed  excels  the 
unpressed  (^r  ill-pressed)  Som»,     Not  only  must  the  ^uicftbft  ^\3\^  ^^^\^asR.'i.^ 
hut  it  must  be  expressed  and  offered  with  prayer. 


^  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOR  Vtt. 

Indra  hath   taken  and  possessed  all  castles,  like  as  one  com- 
mon husband  doth  his  spouses. 

4  Even  thus  have  they  declared  him.     Famed  is  tndra  a&  Con- 

queror, sole  distributer  of  treasures ; 
Whose   many   succours   come  in  close  succession.     May  dear 
delightful  benefits  attend  us. 

5  Thus,   to  bring  help  to  men,   Vasishtha  laudeth  tndra,   the 

peoples*  Hero,  at  libation. 
Bestow  upon  us  strength  and  wealth  in  thousands.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVII.  Indra. 

Men  call  on  Indra  in  the  armed  encounter  that  he  may  make 

the  hymns  they  sing  decisive. 
Hero,  rejoicing  in  thy  might,  in  combat  give  us  a  portion  of 

the  stall  of  cattle. 

2  Grant,  Indra  Maghavan,  invoked  of  many,  to  these  my  friends 

the  strength  which  thou  possessest. 
Thou,   Maghavan,  hast  rent  strong  places  open :  unclose  for 
us.  Wise  €rod,  thy  hidden  bounty. 

3  King  of  the  living  world,  of  men,  is  Indra,  of  all  in  varied 

form  that  earth  containeth. 
Thence  to  the  worshipper  he  giveth  riches :  may  he  enrich  ua 
also  when  we  laud  him. 

4  Maghavan   Indra,  when   we  all   invoke  him,   bountiful  ever 

sendeth  strength  to  aid  us : 
Whose  perfect  guerdon,  never  failing,  bringeth  wealth  to  the 
men,  to  friends  the  thing  they  covet. 

5  Quick,    Indra,   give  us  room   and  way  to   riches,  and   let  ua 

bring  thy  mind  to  grant  us  treasures. 
That  we  may  win  us  cars  and  steeds  and  cattle.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gk)ds,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXVIII.  Indra. 

Comb  to  our  prayers,  O  Indra,  thou  who  knowest :  let  thy 

Bay  Steeds  be  yoked  and  guided  hither. 
Thous^h  mortal  men  on  every  side  invoke  thee,  still  give  thine 

ear  to  us,  0  All-impeller. 


3  All  castles  :  all  the  strongholds  of  the  demons  of  drought,  tbe  cloud-cas- 
tles in  which  the  rain  is  imprisoned. 

^  (?ipe  us  aportionj  etc  :  aid  us  to  capture  and  carry  off  the  cattle  of  the 


HYMN  29.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  29 

2  Thy  greatness  reacheth  to  our  invocation,   the  sages'  prayer 

which,  Potent  God,  thou  gnardest. 
What  time  thy  hand,  0  Mighty,  holds  the  thunder,  awful  in 
strength  thou  hast  become  resistless. 

3  What   time  thou   drewest  both   world  halves   together,  like 

heroes  led  by  thee  who  call  each  other — 
For  thou  wast  bom  for  strength   and  high  dominion — then 
e'en  the  active  overthrew  the  sluggish. 

4  Honour  us  in  these  present  days,  0  Indra,  for  hostile  men  are 

making  wtpiation. 
Our  sin  that  sinless  Varuria  discovered,  the  Wondrous-Wise 
hath  long  ago  forgiven. 

5  We  will  address  this   liberal  Lord,   this  Indra,   that  he  may 

grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches, 
Best  favourer  of  the  singer's  prayer  and  praises.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Indm. 

This  Soma  hath  been  pressed  for  thee,  O  Indra :  come  hither, 

Lord  of  Bays,  for  this  thou  lovest. 
Drink  of  this  fair,  this  well  effused  libation  :    Maghavan,   give 

us  wealth  when  we  implore  thee. 

2  Come  to  us  quickly  with  thy  Bay    Steeds,  Hero,  come  to  our 

prayer,  accepting  our  devotion. 
Enjoy  thyself  aright  at  this  libatioU;  and  listen  thou  unto  the 
prayers  we  offer. 

3  What  satisfaction  do  our  hymns  afford  thee  ?     When,   Magha- 

van 1   Now  let  us  do  thee  service. 
Hymns,  only  hymns,   with  love  for  thee,  I  weave  thee ;  then 
hear,  O  Indra,  these  mine  invocations. 


2  Thy  greatness  reacheth  to  our  invocation :  thou  hast  the  power  to  come 
to  our  call  if  thou  wilt. 

3  Drewetft  both  world-halves  together :  settest  heaven  and  earth  opposite  to 
each  other,  like  armies  arrayed  for  battle.  E*en  the  active :  the  meaning  of 
^he  half-line  is  doubtful,  and  chit,  even,  seems  to  be  out  of  place.  Wilson 
trHUslates,  after  S^yana  :  *  whence  the  presenter  of  offerings  overcomes  him 
who  offers  them  not.'  According  to  Professor  Grassmann,  'the  active'  is  Indra, 
»nd  *  the  inaotive  *  is  the  sluggish  demon.  Ludwig  suggests  an  alteration  of 
the  text. 

4i  Are  making  expiation :  or,  possibly,  set  themselves  in  order,  that  is, 
equip  and  prepare  themselves  for  battle.    The  Wondrous-Wise :  mdyt;  Varuna. 


8  Now  let  us  do  thee  service  :  nUndm  ;  *  no  time  like  the  pf  eaeut?  -— YKxJ^-m^, 


30  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  VIL 

4  They,  verily,  were  also  human  beings  whom  thou  wast  wont 

to  hear,  those  earlier  sages. 
Hence  I,  0  Indra  Maghavan,  invoke  thee  :  thou  art  our  Pro- 
vidence, even  as  a  Father. 

5  We  will  address  this  liberal  Lord,   this  Indra,   that  he  may 

grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches, 
Best  favourer  of  the  singer's  prayer  and  praises.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXX.  Indra. 

With  power  and  strength,  0  Mighty  God,  approach  us  ;  be 

the  augmenter,  Indra,  of  these  riches  ; 
Strong  Thunderer,  Lord  of  men,  for  potent  valour,  for   manly 

exploit  and  for  high  dominion. 

2  Thee,  worth  invoking,  in  the  din  of  battle,    heroes   invoke   in 

fray  for  life  and  sunlight. 
Among  all   people   thou   art  foremost  fighter :  give  up   our 
enemies  to  easy  slaughter. 

3  When  fair  bright  days  shall  dawn  on  us,    0    Indra,  and   thou 

shalt  bring  thy  banner  near  in  battle, 
Agni  the  Asura  shall  sit  as   Herald,    calling  Gods   hither  for 
our  great  good  fortune. 

4  Tiiine  are  we,  Indra,  thine,  both  these  who  praise  thee,  and 

those  who  give  rich  gifts,  0  God  and  Hero. 
Grant  to  our  princes  excellent  protection  :  may  they  wax   old 
and  still  be  strong  and  happy. 

5  We  will   address   this  liberal   Lord,  this   Indra,  that  he  may 

grant  us  gifts  of  ample  riches. 
Best  favourer  of  the  singer's  prayer  and  praises.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXI.  Indra. 

Sing  ye  a  song,  to  make  him  glad,  to  Indra,  Lord  of   Tawny 

Steeds, 
The  Soraa-drinker,  0  my  friends. 

2  To  him  the  Bounteous  say  the  laud,  and  let  us  glorify,  as  men 

May  do,  the  Giver  of  true  gifts. 

3  O  Indra,  Lord  of  boundless  might,  for  us  thou  winnest  strength 

and  kine, 
Thou  winnest  gold  for  us,  Good  Lord. 


1  For  potent  valour  :  that  i**,  to  give  us  potent  valour. 

2  ^oremosi  JiffACer  :  caeter  of  the   spear,  warrior,  «bCcot(3L\w^  to  -^oxv  ^otVi ; 
ifut  the  meaning  of  s^nyah  ia  somewhat  uncertain. 


« 


HYMN  32.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  81 

4  Faithful  to  thee  we  loudly  sing,  heroic  Indra,  songs  to  thee  : 
Mark,  0  Good  Lord,  this  act  of  ours. 

5  Give  us  not  up  to  man's  reproach,  to  foeman's  hateful  calumny  : 
In  thee  alone  is  all  my  strength. 

6  Thou  art  mine  ample  coat  of  mail,  my  Champion,  Vritra-slayer, 

thou : 
With  thee  for  Friend  I  brave  the  foe. 

7  Yea,  great  art  thou  whose  conquering  might  two  independent 

Powers  confess, 
The  Heaven,  O  Indra,  and  the  Earth. 

8  So  let  the  voice  surround  thee,  which  attends  the  Maruts  on 

their  way. 
Reaching  thee  with  the  rays  of  light. 

9  Let  the  ascending  drops  attain  to  thee,  the  Wondrous  God,  in 

heaven : 
Let  all  the  folk  bow  down  to  thee. 

10  Bring  to  the  Wise,  the  Great,  who  waxeth  mighty,  your  offer- 

ings, and  make  ready  your*  devotion  : 
To  many  clans  he  goeth,  man's  Controller. 

11  For  Indra,  the  sublime,  the  far-pervading,  have  singers  gener- 

ated prayer  and  praises : 
The  sages  never  violate  his  statutes. 

12  The  choirs  have  stablished  Indra  King  for  ever,  for  victory, 

him  whose  anger  is  resistless  ; 
And,  for  the  Bays'  Lord,  strengthened  those  he  loveth. 

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra. 

Let  none,  no,  not  thy  worshippers,  delay  thee  far  away  from  us. 
Even  from  far  away  come  thou  unto  our  feast,  or  listen  if  al- 
ready here. 

2  For  here,  like  flies  on  honey,  these  who  pray  to  thee  sit  by  the 
juice  that  they  have  poured. 
Wealth-craving  singers  have  on  Indra  set  their  hope,  as  men 
set  foot  upon  a  car. 

7  Independent :  svadMvart  j  'abounding  in  food.' — Wilson. 

8  l%e  voice  :  *the  praises  of  thine  adorers.' — Wilson. 

12  Strengthened :  *  barhay& :  for  abarhayan,  as  is  clear  from  what  pre- 
cedes.*— Ludwig.  S4yana  takes  barhayd  as  the  imperative  :  *  urge  thy  kinsmen, 
(wonhipper,  to  glorify)  the  lord  of  bay  steeds.' — Wilson. 

lam  indebted  to  Max 7^ iiUer^a  translation  of   thiah^mn  \ti\v\ft  Ancxet^ 
Btuukri^  Ztiet'oture  for  many  oi  the  renderings  which  1  \ia\e  acdo^Xi^^i. 


S3  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  YIL 

3  Longing  for  wealth  I  call  on  him,  the  Thunderer  with  the 

strong  right  hand, 
As  a  son  calleth  on  his  sire. 

4  These  Soma  juices,  mixed  with  curd,  have  been  expressed  for 

Indra  here. 
Come  with  thy  Bay  Steeds,  Thunder-wielder,  to  our  home,  to 
drink  them  till  they  make  thee  glad. 

5  May  he  whose  ear  is  open  hear  us.     He  is  asked  for  wealth  : 

will  he  despise  our  prayer  1 
Him  who  bestows  at  once  a  hundred  thousand  gifts  none  shall 
restrain  when  he  would  give. 

6  The  hero  never  checked  by  men  hath  gained  his  strength 

through  Indra,  he 
Who  presses  out  and  pours  his  deep  libations  forth,  O  V|itra- 
slayer,  unto  thee. 

7  When  thou  dost  drive  the  fighting  men  together  be,   thou 

Mighty  One,  the  mighty's  shield. 
May  we  divide  the  wealth  of  him  whom  thou  hast  slain :  bring 
us,  Unreachable,  his  goods. 

8  For  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  press  the  Soma 

juice. 
Make  ready  your  dressed  meats :  cause  him  to  favour  us.     The 
Giver  blesses  him  who  gives. 

9  Grudge  not,  ye  Soma-pourers ;  stir  you,  pay   the  rites,   for 

wealth,  to  the  great  Conqueror. 
Only  the  active  conquers,  dwells  in  peace,  and  thrives  :  not  for 
the  niggard  are  the  Gods. 

10  No  one  hath  overturned  or  stayed  the  car  of  him  who  freely  gives. 
The  man  whom  Indra  and  the  Marut  host  defend  comes  to  a 

stable  full  of  kine. 

11  Indra,  that  man  when  fighting  shall  obtain  the  spoil,  whose 

strong  defender  thou  wilt  be. 
Be  thou  the  gracious  helper.  Hero !  of  our  oars,  be  thou  the 
helper  of  our  men. 

12  His  portion  is  exceeding  great  like  a  victorious  soldier's  spoil. 
Him  who  is  Indra,  Lord  of  Bays,  no  foes  subdue.     He  gives 

the  Soma-pourer  strength. 


3  W\Jt,h  the  strong  right  hand :  or,  giver  of  good  gifts. 

7  The  mighty* 8  shield  :  *  the  shield  of  the  mighty  (VasishthRs).* — M.  M.  ; 
*  a  protection  of  the  Maghavans,'  i.  e.  the  institutors  of  the  saclifice. — Ludwig. 

8  The  Giver  blesses  him  who  gives  :  Indra  rewards  the  liberal  worshipper. 
JO  Conies  to  a  stable  full  of  kine :  carries  off  rich  booty. 


f 


BTMN  32.]  TBE  RIOVEDA.  38 

13  Make  for  the  Holy  Gods  a  hymn  that  is  not  mean,  but  well- 

arranged  and  fair  of  form. 
Eyen  many  snares  and  bonds  subdue  not  him  who  dwells  with 
Indra  through  his  sacrifice. 

14  Indra,  what  mortal  will  attack  the  man  who  hath  his  wealth 

in  thee? 
The  strong  will  win  the  spoil  on  the  decisive  day  through  faith 
in  thee,  O  Maghayan. 

15  In  battles  with  the  foe  urge  on  our  mighty  ones  who  give  the 

treasures  dear  to  thee, 
And  may  we  with  our  princes,  Lord  of  Tawny  Steeds !  pass 
through  all  peril,  led  by  thee. 

16  Thine,  Indra,  is  the  lowest  wealth,  thou  cherishest  the  mid- 

most wealth. 
Thou  ever  rulest  all  the  highest :  in  the  fray  for  cattle  none 
resisteth  thee. 

17  Thou  art  renowned  as  giving  wealth  to  every  one  in  all  the 

battles  that  are  fought. 
Craving  pirotection,  all  these  people  of  the  earth,   0   Much- 
invoked,  implore  thy  name. 

18  If  I,  0  Indra,  were  the  Lord  of  riches  ample  as  thine  own, 

I  should  support  the  singer,  God  who  givest  wealth  !  and  not 
abandon  him  to  woe. 

19  Each  day  would  I  enrich  the  man  who  sang  my  praise,  in 

whatsoever  place  he  were. 
No  kinship  is  there  better,  Maghavan,  than  thine  :  a  father 
even  is  no  more. 

20  With  Plenty  for  his  true  ally  the  active  man  will  gain  the 

spoil. 
Your   Indra,   Much-invoked,    I   bend   with   song,  as  bends  a 
Wright  his  wheel  of  solid  wood. 

21  A  mortal  wins  no  riches  by  unworthy  praise  :  wealth  comes 

not  to  the  niggard  churl. 
Light  is  the  task  to  give,  0  Maghavan,  to  one  like  me  on  the 
decisive  day. 

22  Like  kine  unmilked   we  call   aloud,  Hero,  to  thee,  and   sing 

thy  praise. 
Looker  on  heavenly  light,  Lord  of  this  moving  world.  Lord, 
Indra,  of  what  moveth  not. 


20  J^lenfy .-  or,  Spirit,  Boldness, 
3 


84  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VTL 

28  None  other  like  to  thee,  of  earth  or  of  the  heavens,  hath  been 

or  ever  will  be  bom. 
'     Desiring  horses,  Indra  Maghavan  !  and  kine,  as  men  of  might 
we  call  on  thee. 

24  Bring,  Indra,  the  Victorious  Ones;    bring,   elder    thou,   the 

younger  host. 
For,   Maghavan,  thou  art  rich  in  treasures  from  of  old,  and 
must  be  called  in  every  fight. 

25  Drive  thou  away  our  enemies,  0  Maghavan  :  make  riches  easy 

to  be  won. 
Be  thou  our  good  Protector  in  the  strife  for  spoil :  Cherisher 
of  our  friends  be  thou. 

26  0  Indra,  give  us  wisdom  as  a  sire  gives  wisdom  to  his  sons. 
Guide  us,  0  Much-invoked,  in  this  our  way :  may  we  still  live 

and  look  upon  the  light. 

27  Grant  that  no  mighty  foes,  unknown,  malevolent,  unhallowed, 

tread  us  to  the  ground. 
With  thine  assistance,  Hero,  may  we  pass  through  all  the 
waters  that  are  rushing  down. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Vasishtha. 

Thbsb  who  wear  hair-knots  on  the  right,  the  movers  of  holy- 
thought,  white-robed,  have  won  me  over. 

I  warned  the  men,  when  from  the  grass  I  raised  me.  Not  from 
afar  can  my  Vasishthas  help  you. 

2  With  Soma  they  brought  Indra  from  a  distance,  over  Vaisanta, 
from  the  strong  libation. 
Indra  preferred  Vasishthas  to  the  Soma  pressed  by  the  son  of 
Vayata,  Pasadyumna. 

524  Bring,  Indray  the  Victorious  Ones  :  these  would  be  the  Maruts.  *  Elder 
Indra,  bring  that  (wealth  to  me)  being  the  junior.' — Wilson.  '  Bring  all  this 
to  those  who  are  go<Ki,  O  Indra,  be  they  old  or  young.* — M.  MUller. 

The  hymn  is  a  glorification  of  Yasibhtha  and  his  family,  the  latter  part 
relating  his  birth  and  the  earlier  verses  referring  to  his  connexion  with  King 
Sud&s. 

1  Hair-knots  :  kaparda  is  the  ehw^  or  single  lock  of  hair  left  on  the  head 
at  tonsure,  which,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  it  was  characteristic  of  the 
Vasishthas  to  wear  on  the  right  of  the  crown  of  the  head.  White-robed  : 
white-coloured,  according  to  S&yana.  Me  :  Vasishtha,  who  is  the  speaker  of 
stanzas  1 — 6.  *  Von  Roth  (under  the  word  av)  regaids  Indra  as  the  speaker. 
May  it  not  be  Sudas?'— Muir,  0.  S,  Texts,  I.  319,  320,  where  stanzas  1  —13 
are  translated.  From  the  grass :  the  sacred  grass  laid  on  the  floor  of  the  sacri- 
£c}m}  chnmher, 

2  rai'it  enia  /  probably  the  name  of  a  river.  PdsadnumTva ;  «Siothfir  king  who 
^  BMcriaoing  to  Indra  &t  the  same  time  aa  Sud&s. 


BYMN  3S.]  THE  RIG  VEDA .  $5 

3  So,  verily,  with  these  he  crossed  the  river,  in  company  with 

these  he  slaughtered  Bhcda. 
So  iu  the  fight  with  the  Ten  Kings,  Vasishthas !  did  ludra 
help  Sudals  through  your  devotions. 

4  I  gladly,  men !  with  prayer  prayed  by  our  fathers  have  fired 

your  axle :  ye  shall  not  be  injured  : 
Since,  when  ye  sai^g  aloud  the  Sakvari  verses,  Vasishthas  !  ye 
inyigorated  Indra. 

5  Like  thirsty  men  they  looked  to  heaven,  in  battle  with  the 

Ten  Kings,  svirrounded  and  imploring. 
.    Then  Indra  heard  Vasishtha  as  he  praised  him,  and  gave  the 
Tritsus  ample  room  and  freedom. 

6  Like  sticks  and  staves  wherewith  they  drive  the  cattle,  strip- . 

ped  bare,  the  Bharatas  were  found  defenceless : 
Vasishtha  then  became  their  chief  and  leader:  then  widely 
were  the  Tritsus'  clans  extended. 

7  Three  fertilize  the  worlds  with  genial  moisture :   three  noble 

Creatures  cast  a  light  before  them. 
Three  that  give  warmth  to  all  attend  the  Morning.     All  these 
have  they  discovered,  these  Vasishthas. 

8  Like  the  Sun's  growing  glory  is  their  splendour,  and  like  the 

sea's  is  their  unfathomed  greatness. 
Their  course  is  like  the  wind's.     Your  laud,  Vasishthas,  can 
never  be  attained  by  any  other. 

9  They  with  perbeptions  of  the  heai*t  in  secret  resort  to  that 

which  spreads  a  thousand  branches. 
The  Apsaras  brought  hither  the  Vasishthas  wearing  the  vesture 
spun  for  them  by  Yama. 

8  The  river :  Yamun^.  See  VII.  1 8.  19.  Ten  Kingt :  of  the  confederate 
tribeci  who  opposed  Sud&4.     See  VII.  18. 

4  Sakvari  veraes :  hymns  of  praise  in  the  Sakvart  metre  (14  x  4). 

6  Trit$tt8 :  the  tribe  of  which  Sudfts  was  King.  Bharataa  :  apparently  tlie 
same  as'the  Tritsus. 

7  Indra  is  the  speaker  of  the  rest  of  the  hymn.  *  In  explanation  of  this, 
SAyana  quotes  a  passage  from  the  Silty&yana  Bi-fthmana  :  (1 )  Agni  prrxluces  a 
fertilizing  fluid  on  the  earth,  VAyu  in  the  air,  the  Sun^in  the  sky.  (2)  The 
*  three  noble  creatures'  are  the  Vasus,  Rudras,  and  Adityas.  The  Sun  is 
their  light.  (3)  Agni,  VAyu,  and  the  Sun  each  attend  the  Dawn.'— Muir, 
O.  A  TexU,  1.  920. 

9  That  which  spreads  a  thousand  branches :  according  to  Ludwig's  Trans- 
lation, the  Sun-Gkni  is  meant ;  according  to  his  later  view,  the  reference  is  to 
the  mystio  tree  sustained  by  Varuna  in  the  baseless  region  (I.  24.  7). 
The  vesture :  the  body.  The  stanza  is  very  obscure,  and  S^ya^ii^'**  ex.^VKft».- 
■tion.  which  overrides  ^Tammar*  w  not  satisfactory:  *By  tYie  Vi^doTO-^^^Xft^ViSL 
the  heart  the  VasisAikas  trn  verse  the  hidden  thouaMid-\>Yat\c\iftd  -wcvrVA.,  ^Tvdk 

the  J/>taratas  »U  down,  weariug  the  vesture  spread  outr\>7  XamaJ  — ^i2ia»^» 


36  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

10  A  form  of  lustre  springing  from  the  lightning  wast  thou,  when 

Varuna  and  Mitra  saw  thee. 
Thy  one  and  only  birth  was  then,  Vasishtha,  when  from  thy 
stock  Agastya  brought  thee  hither. 

11  Bom  of  their  love  for  Urvas^,  Vasishtha,  thou,  priest,  art  son 

of  Varuna  and  Mitra ; 
And  as  a  fallen  drop,  in  heavenly  fervour,  all   the   Gods  laid 
thee  on  a  lotus-blossom. 

12  He,  thinker,  knower  both  of  earth  and  heaven,  endowed  with 

many  a  gift,  bestowing  thousands. 
Destined  to  wear  the  vesture  spun  by  Yama,  sprang  from  the 
Apsaras  to  life,  Vasishtha. 

13  Born  at  the  sacrifice,   urged  by   adorations,  both  with  a  com- 

mon flow  bedewed  the  pitcher. 
Then  from  the  midst  thereof  there  rose  up  Mana,  and  thenoe 
they  say  was  bora  the  sage  Vasishtha. 

14  He  brings  the  bearer  of  the  laud  and  Saman :  first  shall  he 

speak  bringing  the  stone  for  pressing. 
With  grateful  hearts  in   reverence  approach  him  :  to  you,  O 
Pratridas,  Vasishtha  cometh. 

HYMN  XXXIV.  Visvedevas, 

May  our  divine   and  brilliant  hymn  go   forth,  like  a   swift 
chariot  wrought  and  fashioned  well. 

2  The  waters  listen  as  they  flow  along :  they  know  the  origin  of 
heaven  and  earth. 

10  Vasishtha  appears  here  as  an  embodiment  of  lightning,  light,  or  fire, 
and  to  have  been  brought  down  to  men  by  Agastya  who  was  bom  in  the  same 
way  as  Vasishtha. 

1 1  Urvast ;  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Apsarases  or  nymphs  of  heaven  On 
a  lotus-ido88om :  or,  according  to  others,  '  in  the  sacred  pitcher,'  or  water-jar 
used  iu  sacrifice.     '  In  the  lake.'— Wilson. 

For  a  full  account  of  this  production  of  Vasishtha,  the  curious  reader  is 
referred  to  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  321.  See  M.  Muller,  ChipSj  IV.  108,  109,  and 
Hillebraudt,  Varuaa  und  Mitra,  148,  149. 

12  7%€  Apsaras  :  UrvasJ. 

1 3  Mdna  :  said  to  be  another  name  of  Agastya. 

14  The  bearei'  of  the  laud  and  Siman :  the  pressing-stone,  which  was  worked 
during  the  recitation  of  sacred  verses.  Pratridas :  a  name  used  here  to 
designate  the  Ti  itsus. 

This  difficult  and  obscure  hymn  has  been  translated  and  thoroughly  dis- 
cussed by   Qeldner  {VediscJie    Studien,  II.  pp.  129—156,   criticized  by  Prof, 
Ludwig,  Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  auf  dem  Oebiete  der  Rgveda-forachuna 
pp.  163— 167).  '  ^ 

2,'fAn  .Hllusionf  perhaps,  to  the  subsequently  Teceived  ^io^vftog^ou'j',  as  in 
-^^/fu,  that  water  was  the  first  of  created  thing»:— WviBoii, 


BY  MS  84.]  TBE  RIG  VEDA.  87 

3  Yea»  the  broad  waters  swell  their  flood  fot  him  :  of  him  strong 

heroes  think  amid  their  foes* 

4  Set  ye  fdr  hinl  the  couiSseiSs  to  the  pole :  like  Indra  Thundere)r 

is  the  Grolden-armed. 

5  Arouse  you,  like  the  days,  to  saorifice  :  speed  gladly   like  a 

travelleif  on  ihe  way. 

6  Gro  swift  to  battles,  to  the  saorifio^  :  set  up  a  flag,  a  heto  for 

the- folk. 

7  Up   from   hid   strettgth  hath  risen  as  'twere  a  light :  it  bears 

the  load  as  earth  bears  living  things. 

8  Agni,  no  demon  I  invoke  the   Gods :  by  law   completing  it,  I 

form  a  hymn, 

9  Closely  about  you  lay  yout  heavenly  song,  and  send  youlr 

voice  to  where  the  Gods  abide. 

20  Yaruna,  Mighty,  with  a   thousand   eyes,   beholds   the   paths 
wherein  these  rivers  fUn. 

11  He,  King  of  kings,  the  glory  of  the  floods,  o'er  all  that  liveth 

hath  resistless  sway. 

12  May  he  assist  us  among  all  the  tribes,  and  make  the  envier's 

praise  devoid  of  light. 

13  May  the  foes'  threatening  arrow  pass  us  by  :  may  he  put  far 

from  us  our  bodies'  sin. 

14  Agni,  oblation-eater,  through  our  prayers  aid  us  :  to  him  our 

dearest  laud  is  brought. 

15  Accordant  with  the  Gods  choose  for  our  Friend  the  Waters' 

Child  :  may  he  be  good  to  us. 

16  With  lauds  I  sing  the  Dragon  born  of  floods  :  he  sits  beneath 

the  streams  in  middle  air. 

17  Ne'er  may   the  Dragon  of  the  Deep   harm  us  :  ne'er  fail  this 

&ithful  servant's  sacrifice. 

18  To  theoe  our  heroes  may  they  grant  renown  :  may  pious  men 

march  boldly  on  to  wealth. 

19  Leading  great  hosts,  with  fierce  attacks   of  these,  they  burn 

their  foes  as  the  Sun  burns  the  earth. 

3  For  him :  Indra. 

4  The  Oolden-aitned  :  Savitar. 

6  A  hero  :  a  sort  of  ^rsouificittion  of  the  sacrifice.     '  An  expiatory  sacrifice 
for  (the  good  of)  mankind.' — Wilson. 

16  The  Dragon  bom  of  Jloods  :  Ahibudhnya,  or  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep  of 
the  following  staqza  ;  the  r^ent  of  the  sea  of  air. 
18  They  /  the  Ooda. 

19  O/iAese:  Qoda,  orMaruta,  according  to  the  ScVioWaat. 


I.J 


^S  TffE  ITYMXS  OF  [BOOK  T/J 

20  What  time  our' wives  draw  near  to   us,    may  he,   deft-handec 

Tvashtar,  give  us  hero  sons. 

21  May  Tvashtar  find   our  hymn   acceptable,  and  may  Aramati 

seeking  wealth,  be  ours. 

22  May   they   who   lavish   gifts   bestow   those   treasures :  ma] 

Rodasi  and  Varun^ni  listen. 
May  he,  with  the   VarCitrta,    be   our  refuge,   may  bountiful 
Tvashtar  give  us  store  of  riches. 

23  So  may  rich  Mountains  and  the  liberal  Waters,   so   may   id! 

Herbs  that  grow  on  ground,  and  Heaven, 
And  Earth  accordant   with   the  Forest-Sovrans,  and  both  i,h 
World-halves  round  about  protect  us. 

24  To  this  may  both  the  wide  Worlds  lend  approval,  and  Varu^j 

in  heaven,  whose  Friend  is  Indra. 
May  all   the  Maruts  give  consent,  the   Victors,  that   we  ma; 
hold  great  wealth  in  firm  possession. 

25  May  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Agni,    Waters,    Herbs,   Tree 

accept  the  praise  we  offer. 
May  we  find  refuge  in  the  Maruts'  bosom.     Protect  us  evei 

more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Viflvedevai 

Befriend    us  with   their    aids   Indra  and  Agni,  Indra   an< 

Varuna  who  receive  oblations  ! 
Indra   and  Soma   give  health,   strength  and    comfort,  Indr 

and  Pushan  be  our  help  in  .battle. 

2  Auspicious   Friends   to  us   be    Bhaga,    Sansa,   auspicious   b 

Purandhi  and  all  Riches ; 
The  blessing  of  the  true  and  well-conducted,  and  Aryaman  i 
many  forms  apparent. 

3  Kind  unto  us  be  Maker  and  Sustainer,   and   the   far-reachiD; 

Pair  with  Godlike  natures. 
Auspicious  unto  us  be  Earth  and  Heaven,  the  Mountain,  an^ 
the  Gods'  fair  invocations. 


21  Ararnati :  the  Genius  of  Devotion  and  active  piety. 

22  Vai^trU  :  protecting  Goddesses. 

23  Forest'SovraiM :  tall  timber  trees. 


1  Befriend  us :  sdm  no  bhavatdm.  The  indeclinable  word  fdm,  signify! n 
happy,  auspicious,  pleasant,  sweet,  kind,  agreeable,  etc.,  etc.,  is  ti^ed  with  ( 
without  the  verb  bhUf  in  the  first  thirteen  stanzas.  I  have  varied  the  expre 
sion  here  and  there. 
^  S^nsa:  Prayer  or  Wish  personified.  Or  it  miy  be  Narftsansa,  Ago 
^arandAi:  Plenty ,  or  Spirit,  Boldness  personi&ed. 
S  J^UrreacMnff  Pair :  Heaven  and  Earth. 


SYMN  86.]  T£tE  RIGVEDA.  89 

4  Favour  us  Agni  with  his  face  of  splendour,  and  Yaruna  and 

Mitra  and  the  Asvins. 
Favour  us  noble  actions  of  the  pious,  impetuous  Y&ta  blow  on 
us  with  favour. 

5  Early  invoked,  may  Heaven  and  Earth  be  friendly,  and  Air's 

mid-region  good  for  us  to  look  on. 
To  us  may  Herbs  and  Forest-Trees  be  gracious,  gracious  the 
Lord  Victorious  of  the  region. 

6  Be  the  Grod  Indra  with  the  Vasus  friendly,  and,  with  Adityas, 

Varuna  who  blesseth. 
Kind,  with  the  Rudras,  be  the  Healer  Eudra,  and,  with  the 
Dames,  may  Tvashtar  kindly  listen. 

7  Blest  unto  us  be  Soma,  and  devotions,  blest  be  the   Sacrifice, 

the  Stones  for  pressing. 
Blest  be  the  fixing  of  the  sacred  Pillars,  blest  be  the  tender 
Grass,  and  blest  the  Altar. 

8  May  the   far-seeing   Sun   rise   up   to  bless   us :  be  the  four 

Quarters  of  the  sky  auspicious. 
Auspicious  be  the  firmly-seated  Mountains,  auspicious  be  the 
Rivers  and  the  Waters. 

9  May  Aditi  through  holy   works  be   gracious,   and   may   the 

Maruts,  loud  in  song,  be  friendly. 
May  Vishnu  give  felicity,  and  Pushan,  the  Air  that  cherisheth 
our  life,  and  Vayu. 

10  Prosper  us  Savitar,  the  Grod  who  rescues,  and  let   the   radiant 

Mornings  be  propitious. 
Auspicious   to  all   creatures  be   Parjanya,   auspicious  be  the 
field's  benign  Protector. 

11  May  all  the  fellowship  of  Gods  befriend  us,  Sarasvatt,    with 

Holy  Thoughts,  be  gracious. 
Friendly  be  they,  the  Liberal  Ones  who  seek   us,   yea,    those 
who  dwell  in  heaven,  on  earth,  in  waters. 

12  May  the  great  Lords  of  Truth  protect  and  aid  us  :  blest  to  us 

be  our  horses  and  our  cattle. 
Kind  be  the  pious  skilful-handed  Ribhus,  kind  be  the  Fathers 
at  our  invocations. 

13  May  Aja-Ekapad,  the  God,   be  gracious,  gracious  the  Dragon 

of  the  Deep,  and  Ocean. 

5  The  Lord  Victorious :  Indra. 

10  The  field' 8  benign  Protector :  Agni,  or  ^ndra.     See  IV.  67.  1. 

13  Aja-Ekapdd :.  the  Sun.     See  VI.  50.  14,  and  footnote. 

TAe  Drajon  of  Che  Deep :  Ahibudhnya,  regent  oi  \,\ie  d^v^Xi-a  ol  HJci^  ^rfifiJk- 
ment. 


ASP  THE  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI L 

Gracious  be  he,  the  swelling  Child  of  Waters,  gracious  be 
Prisni  who  hath  Gods  to  guard  her. 

1 4  So  may  the  Rudras,  Vasus,  and  K  dityas  accept  the  new  hymn 

which  we  now  are  making. 
May  all  the  Holy   Ones  of  earth  and  heaven,  and  the  Cow's 
offspring  hear  our  invocation, 

15  They  who  of  Holy  Gk)ds  are  very  holy.  Immortal,   knowing 

Law,  whom  man  must  worship, — 
May  these  to-day  give  us  broad  paths  to  travel.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN     XXXVI.  Visvedevas. 

Let  the  prayer  issue  from  the  seat  of  Order,   for  Surya  with 

his  beams  hath  loosed  the  cattle. 
With  lofty  ridges  earth  is  far  extended,  and  Agni's  flame  hath 

lit  the  spacious  surface. 

2  0  Asuras,  O  Varuiia  and  Mitra,  this  hymn  to  you,  like  food, 
anew  I  offer. 
One  of  you  is  a  strong  unerring  Leader,  and  Mitra,  speaking, 
stirreth  men  to  labour. 

.  3  The  movements  of  the  gliding  wind  come   hither  :  like   cows, 
the  springs  are  filled  to  overflowing. 
Born  in  the  station  e'en  of  lofty  heaven  the  Bull  hath  loudly 
bellowed  in  this  region. 

4  May  I  bring  hither  with  my   song.   O   Indra,    wise   Aryaman 
who  yokes  thy  dear  Bay  Horses, 

14  Cow* 8  offspring :  the  Maruts.  According  to  von  Roth  those  who  are  bom 
and  live  in  radiant  heaven. 

15  Broad  paths  to  travel :  perhaps,  generally,  an  easy  road  to  prosperity. 


1  The  seat  of  Order :  *  the  hall  of  the  sacrifice.' — Wilson.  The  cattle :  rays 
of  light. 

2  *  One  of  you  (Varuna)  is  the  lord  and  unassailable  guide,  and  he  who  is 
called  Mitra,  {i.  e.  the  friend)  calls  men  to  activity.  Hera  so  much  at  least  is 
declared  (and  the  same  thing  is  expressed  in  nearly  the  same  words  in  other 
places),  that  the  light  of  day,  which  awakens  life,  and  brings  joy  and  activity 
into  the  world,  is  the  narrower  sphere  of  Mitra's  power  ;  though,  however, 
Varuna  is  not  relegated  to  the  night  alone,  for  he  continues  to  be  the  lord 
and  the  first.'— -Von  Roth,  quoted  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Text»,  V.  70.  The  meaning 
of  imdh  translated  by  *  lord  *  in  this  extract,  is,  in  the  Veda,  rather  '  strong,* 
'  energetic,'  and  is  so  given  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  the  meaning  *  lord ' 
belonging  to  later  literature.  The  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  repeated, 
with  a  variation,  from  III.  59.  1. 

S  rAesprinffs:  the  fountains  of  rain;  the  clouds.     The  Bull:   Parjanya, 
^M  of  the  rain-cloud.     This  region :  literally,  tUia  uOid^i  *,  \\i<6  ^\aa.m«fc\it. 


HYMN  87.]  TEE  RIOVEDA.  41 

Voracious,  with  thy  noble  car,  0  Hero,  him  who  defeats  the 
wrath  of  the  malicious. 

5  In  their  own  place  of  sacrifice  adorers  worship  to  gain  long 

life  and  win  his  friendship. 
He  hath  poured  food  on  men  when  they  have  praised  him ; 
be  this,  the  dearest  reverence,  paid  to  Rudra« 

6  Coming  together,  glorious,  loudly  roaring — Sarasvati,  Mother 

of  Floods,  the  seventh — 
With  copious  milk,  with  fair  streams,   strongly  flowing,  full 
swelling  with  the  volume  of  their  water ; 

7  And  may  the  mighty  Maruts,  too,  rejoicing,  aid  our  devotion 

and  protect  our  offspring. 
Let  ndt  swift-rooving  Akshard.  neglect  us  :  they  have   increas- 
ed our  own  appropriate  riches. 

8  Bring  ye  the   great   Aramati   before   you,  and  Pushan  as  the 

Hero  of  the  synod, 
Bhaga  who  looks  upon  this  hymn   with   favour,   and,   as  our 
strength,  the  bountiful  Purandhi. 

9  May  this  our  song  of  praise  reach  you,  O  Maruts,  and  Vishnu 

guardian  of  the  future  infant. 
May  they  vouchsafe  the  singer  strength  for  offspring.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXVII.  Visvedevaa. 

Lbt  your  best-bearing  car  that  must  be  lauded,  ne*er  injured, 

bring  you  Vajas  and  Hibhukshans. 
Fill  you,    fair-helm eted  !  with  mighty  Soma,  thrice-mixed,  at 

our  libations,  to  delight  you. 


4  Vorctcious :  epithet  of  horses  ;  but  the  meaning  of  dfidytt  is  uncertain. 
Acocn-ding  to  S&yana,  it  means  *  holding/  '  vigorous  ;'  according  to  Ludwig, 
'pouring  forth  nun  ;*  according  to  Grassmann,  *  thirsty/ 

5  Bis  friendship  :  Budra's. 

6  The  seventh :  with  the  six  other  celebrated  rivers.    See  I.  32.  12. 

7  Atshard :  VAk,  or  Voice  ;  *  the  imperishable  goddess  of  speech.' — Wilson. 
Cf.  VII.  15.  9. 

8  Aramati :  the  personification  of  religious  worship,  or  active  piety.  See 
VII.  84.  21.  According  to  S&yana,  ardmatim  here  is  an  epithet  of  maAfm, 
*  the  never-resting  Earth.'  For  the  various  meanings  assigned  by  S&yana  to 
this  word  in  the  various  places  in  which  it  occurs,  see  Muir,  0.  S,  texts, 
IV.  817.  t  7  9 

i   Vishnu :  cf.  X.  184.  1. 

1   Vdjas  and  Ribhukshans :    that  is,  Ilibhukshan  or  Ribhu,    Vibhvan,   and 
VAja,  commonly  called  the  Ribhus  from  the  name  of  the  first  of  the  three. 
Fair-kelmeted :      *  handsome'-chiDned.'— Wilson  ;  '   *  StronR-\vw^'  — \mA.^\%. 
Tkrice-rnksed:  with  milk,  curds,  and  meal. 


42  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  VtL 

2  Ye  who  behold  the  light  of  heaven,  Hibhukshans,  give  our  rich 

patrons  unmolested  riches. 
Drink,  heavenly-natured,  at  our  sacrifices,  and  give  us  bouat- 
ies  for  the  hymns  we  sing  you. 

3  For  thou,  0  Bounteous   One,  art  used  to  giving,  at  parting 

treasure  whether  small  or  ample. 
Filled  full  are  both  thine  arms   with  great  possessions  :   thy 
goodness  keeps  thee  not  from  granting  riches. 

4  Indra,  high-famed,  as  V^ja  and  Ribhukshan,  thou  goest  work- 

ing,   singing  to  the  dwelling. 
Lord  of  Bay   Steeds,   this  day   may  we  Vasishthas  oflfer  our 
prayers  to  thee  and  bring  oblations. 

5  Thou  winnest  swift  advancement  for  thy  servant,   through 

hymns.  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  which  thou  hast  favoured. 
For  thee  with  friendly  succour  have  we  battled,  and  when,  O 
Indra,  wilt  thou  grant  us  riches  ? 

6  To  us  thy  priests  a  home,  as  'twere,  thou  givest :  when,  Indra, 

wilt  thou  recognize  our  praises  % 
May  thy  strong   Steed,  through   our  ancestral   worship,  bring 
food  and  wealth  with  heroes  to  our  dwelling. 

7  Though  Nirriti   the   Goddess  reigneth   round  him.    Autumns 

with  food  in  plenty  come  to  Indra. 
With  three  close   Friends  to   length  of  days  he  cometh,  he 
whom  men  let  not  rest  at  home  in  quiet. 

8  Promise   us   gifts,    0   Savitar :  may  riches  come   unto  us  in 

Parvata's  full  bounty. 
May  the  Celestial  Guardian  still  attend  us.     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Savitar. 

On  high  hath  Savitar,   this  God,   extended  the  golden   lustre 

which  he  spreads  around  him. 
Now,  now  must  Bhaga   be  invoked  by  mortals.    Lord  of  great 

riches  who  distributes  treasures. 


3  Bouvteous  One :  Maghavan  ;  Indra. 

4  Woi'king :  *  the  fulfiller  ( of  wishes ).'— Wilson.  The  first  line  is  somewhat 
obscure. 

7  Nirriti :  the  Goddess  of  Death  and  Destruction,  who  has  no  power  over 
Indra.  Three  close  Friends :  the  Ribhus,  who  represent  the  year,  the  annual 
course  of  Indra  as  the  Sun.  S&yaua's  explanation  is  different :  *  Indra,  the 
upliolder  of  the  three  regions,  whom  the  divine  Nirriti  acknowledges  as  ruler, 
whom  abundant  years  ))ass  over,  whom  mortals  detain  from  his  own  abodo^ 
approaches  to  ( recruit )  his  decaying  strength.' — Wilson  ;  who  observes  :  *  the 
explanation  is  not  very  clea^.* 

^  -Parvata's  full  bowUij  :  the  Genius  of  movintaiu  wid  c\o\i^. 


BTMN  Sa]  TffE  RIG  VEDA,  43 

2  Rise  up,  0  Savitar  whose  hands  are  golden,  and  hear  this  man 
while  sacrifice  is  offered. 
Spreading  afar  thy  broad  and  wide  effulgence,  and  bringing 
mortal  men  the  food  that  feeds  them. 

8  Let  Savitar  the  God  be  hymned  with  praises,  to  whom  the 
Vasus,  even,  all  sing  glory. 
Sweet  be  our  lauds  to  him  whose  due  is  worship  :  may  he  with 
all  protection  guard  our  princes. 

4  £ven  he  whom  Aditi  the  Goddess  praises,  rejoicing  in  God 

Savitar's  incitement : 
Even  he  whose  praise  tlie  high  imperial  Rulers,  Varuna,  Mitra, 
Aryaman,  sing  in  concert. 

5  They  who  come  emulous  to  our  oblation,  dispensing  bounty, 

from  the  earth  and  heaven. 
May  they  and  Ahibudhnya  hear  our  calling  :  guard  us  Yar&tri 
with  the  Ekadhenus. 

6  This  may  the  Jliord  of  Life,  entreated,  grant  us, — the  wealth 

which  Savitar  the  God  possesses. 
The  mighty  calls  on  Bhaga  for  protection,  on  Bhaga  calls  the 
weak  to  give  him  riches. 

7  Bless  us  the  Vajins  when  we  call,  while  slowly  they  move, 

strong  Singers,  to  the  Gods'  assembly. 
Crushing  the  wolf,  the  serpent,  and  the  demons,  may  they 
completely  banish  all  affliction. 

8  Deep-skilled  in  Law  eternal,  deathless,  Singers,  0  Vfijins,  help 

us  in  each  fray  for  booty. 
Drink  of  this  meath,  be  satisfied,  be  joyful :  then  go  on  paths 
which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Viavedevaa. 

Agni,  erect,  hath  shown  enriching  favour :  the  flame  goes  for- 
ward to  the  Gods'  assembly. 

Like  car-borne  men  the  stones  their  path  have  chosen  :  let  the 
priest,  quickened,  celebrate  our  worship. 


S  The  Vcuus :  the  Gods  in  general,  according  to  S&yana. 

5  VariUri:  *the  protectress  (the  goddess  of  speech).' — Wilson.  Fkadhenut : 
the  Waters  are  probably  meant :  *  excellent  cattle.* — Wilson. 

7  Vdjins :  a  class  of  divinities  so  named,  according  to  S&yana  ;  but,  accord- 
ing to  Mahtdhara.  horses,  i.  e.  the  teams  which  draw  the  chariots  of  the  Gods. 
The  wolf,  or  the  robber.  The  serpent :  or  the  assassin.  The  demons :  the 
lUkshasas.  See  Satapatha- Brdhmana,  V.  1.  5.  21—24,  (S.  Books  of  the  East, 
XLI.  27;  for  a  different  version  of  stanzas  6  and  7. 


J  TAg8Um€s:  the presaing  stones  have  begun  tl;xeir  course 


44  TBE  HtMNS  OP  .       [BOOR  VII. 

2  Soft  to  the  tread,  their  sacred  grass  is  scattered ;  these  go  like 

Kings  amid  the  band  around  them, 
At  the  folk's  early  call  on  Ni^ht  and  Morning, — Vayilj  and 
Pudh^H  with  his  t^ani)  to  blesd  Us. 

3  Here  on  their  path  the  nobld  Gods  proceeded :  in  the  wide 

firmament  the  Beauteous  decked  them. 
Bend  your  way  hither,  ye  who  travel  widely :  hear  this  our 
envoy  who  hath  gone  to  meet  you. 

4  For  they  are  holy  aids  at  sacrifices :  all  (jrods  approach  the 

place  of  congregation. 
Bring  these,    desirous,  to  our  worship,  Agni,  swift  the  Nslaa* 
tyas,  Bhaga,  and  Purandhi. 

5  Agni,  to  these  men's  hymns,  from  earth,  from  heaven,  bring 

Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  and  Agni, 
And  Aryaman,  and  Aditi,  and  Vishnu.     Sarasvatl  be  joyful, 
and  the  Maruts. 

6  Even  as  the  holy  wish,  the  gift  is  ofltered :  may  he,  unsated, 

come  when  men  desire  him. 
Give  never-failing  ever-conquering  riches :  with  Gods  for  our 
allies  may  we  be  victors. 

7  Now  have  both  Worlds  been  praised  by  the  Vasishthas,  and 

holy  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni. 
May  they,  bright  Deities,  make  our  song  supremest.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XL.  Viavedevaa. 

Be  gathered  all  the  audience  of  the  synod :  let  us  begin  their 

praise  whose  course  is  rapid. 
Whatever  God  Savitar  this  day  produces,  may  we  be  where 

the  Wealthy  One  distributes. 

2  This,  dealt  from  heaven,  may  both  the  Worlds  vouchsafe  us, 

and  Varuna,  Indra,  Aryaman,  and  Mitra. 
May  Goddess  Aditi  assign  us  riches,  Vslyu  and  Bhaga  make 
them  ours  for  ever. 

3  Strong  be  the  man  and  full  of  power,  0  Maruts,  whom  ye^ 

borne  on  by  spotted  coursers,  favour, 

2  These  go  like  Kings :  according  to  SAyana, '  may  the  two  lords  of  people 
(V&yu  and  Piishan)  ....  appear  now.* 

3  Our  envoy :  Agni. 

5  Agni  :  in  his  own  form  as  a  celestial  God,  not  in  that  of  terrestrial  fire. 

6  He,  unsated:  Agni. 

/  I%eir praise:  praiae  of  the  Gods. 
^  MeaUJrom  heaven  :  or^  distributed  by  Dyu  ox  Dy  w». 


H7MN  41.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  45 

Him,  too,  Sarasvatt  and  Agni  further,  and  there  is  none  to  rob 
him  of  his  riches. 

4  This  Varuna  is  guide  of  Law,  he,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman,  the 

Kings,  our  work  have  finished. 
Divine  and  foeless  Aditi  quickly  listens.     May  these  deliver 
us  unharmed  from  trouble. 

5  With  oflPerings  I  propitiate  the  branches  of  this  swift-moving 

God,  the  bounteous  Vibhnu. 
Hence  Rudra  gained  his  Ru'dm-strength :  0  Asvins,  ye  sought 
the  house  that  hath  celestial  viands. 

6  Be  not  thou  angry  here,  0  glowing  Pushan,  for  what  Varutri 

and  the  Bounteous  gave  us. 
May  the  swift-moving  Gods  protect  and  bless  us,  and  V&ta  send 
us  rain,  who  wanders  round  u& 

7  Now  have  both  worlds  been  praised  by  the  Vasishthas,  and  holy 

Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni. 
May  they,  bright  Deities,  make  our  song  supremest.  Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings.  - 

HYMN  XLI.  Bhaga. 

AoNi  at  dawn,  and  Indra  we  invoke  at  dawn,  and  Varuna  and 

Mitra,  and  the  Asvins  twain : 
Bhaga  at  dawn,  Pushan,  and  Brahmanaspati,  Soma  at  dawn, 

Rudra  we  will  invoke  at  dawn. 

2  We  will  invoke  strong,   early-conquering  Bhaga,  the  Son  of 

Aditi,  the  great  supporter : 
Thinking  of  whom,  the  poor,  yea,  even  the  mighty,  even  the 
King  himself  says,  Give  me  Bhaga. 

3  Bhaga  our  guide,  Bhaga  whose  gifts  are  faithful,  favour  this 

song,  and  give  us  wealth,  0  Bhaga. 
Bhaga,  augment  our  store  of  kine  and  horses,  Bhaga,  may  wo 
be  rich  in  men  and  heroes. 

■ ■        —  .  -    -     -  .-  Lllll  IJI  I ^__^^^^— ^^_ 

4  Our  work :  the  sacrifice. 

5  The  branches :  *  vayah,  branches :  all  other  deities  are,  ar  it  were,  branches 
of  Vishnu,  anye  devah,  sakha  iva  bhavanti :  as  by  a  text  cited  by  the  scholiast, 
Vishnu  is  all  divinities,  Vishnuh  sarvd  devatd  iti  sruteh.' — Wilson.  This, 
Ludwig  remarks,  gives  no  satisfactory  interpretation  ;  but  I  am  unable  to 
offer  any  thing  better  at  present.  Grassmaun  alters  vaydk  into  vaydma  :  *  w« 
with  our  offerings  approach  the  banquet  of  this  swift-moving  God,  the  boun- 
teous Vish.u  ;  i.  e.  come  to  offer  him  sacrificial  food.' 

The  bymn  is  addressed  chiefly  to  Bhaga  the  bountiful,  whose  name,  slightly 
corrupted,  survives  in  the  Slavonic  languages  as  a  general  name  for  God  ;  but 
the  Gods  mentioned  in  stanza  1,  anrl  Ushas,  Dmwu  or  Movumg,  dxe  ^^Q  x^^^x^* 
ed  as  the  deities  of  the  verses  in  wliich  their  names  occur. 
^  ^«f  «?^  ^Aa^a  :  or  n'chea. 


THE  BYMS'S  OP  [BOOK  Vtl 

4  So  may  felicity  be  oars  at  present,  and  when  the  day  approachesi 

and  at  noontide ; 
And  may  we  still,  0  Bounteous  One,  at  sunset  be  happy  in  the 
Deities*  loving-kindness. 

5  May  Bhaga  verily  be  bliss-bestower,  and  through  him,  Gods  I 

may  happiness  attend  us. 
As  such,  0  Bhaga,  all  with  might  invoke  thee ;  as  such  be 
thou  our  Champion  here,  0  Bhaga. 

6  To  this  our  worship  may  all  Dawns  incline  them,  and  come  to 

the  pure  place  like  DadhikrHvan. 
As  strong  steeds  draw  a  chariot  may  they  bring  us  hitherward 
Bhaga  who  discovers  treasure. 

7  May  blessM  Mornings  dawn  on  us  for  ever,   with  wealth  of 

kine,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes. 
Streaming  with  all  abundance,   pouring  fatness.     Preserve  ufl 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLII.  Visvedevas. 

m 

Lbt  Brahmans  and  Angirases  come  forward,  and  let  the  roar 

of  cloudy  heaven  surround  us. 
Loud  low  the  Milch-kine  swimming  in  the  waters :  set  be  the 

stones  that  grace  our  holy  service. 

2  Fair,  Agni,  is  thy  long-known  path  to  travel :  yoke  for  the 

juice  thy  bay,  thy  ruddy  horses, 
Or  red  steeds,  Hero-bearing,  for  the  chamber.     Seated,  I  call 
the  Deities'  generations. 

3  They  glorify  your  sacrifice  with  worship,  yet  the  glad  Priest 

near  them  is  left  unequalled. 
Bring  the  Gods  hither,  thou  of  many  aspects :  turn  hither- 
ward  Aramati  the  Holy. 


6  The  pure  place :  the  chamber  of  sacrifice.     Like  Dadkikrdvan  :  swift  as 
Dadhikr&van,  the  famous  horse,  the  type  and  model  of  racers.    See  IV.  89.  8; 
40.  1—3. 

1  Angirases:  Ilishis  so  named,  accordinor  to  Sdyana.  The  Milch-hine :  the 
clouds  in  the  watery  firmament,  with  allusion  also  to  the  milk  and  water  mixed 
with  the  Soma  juice.  The  atones :  the  press^stones.  SA,yana's  explanation  is 
different :  *  may  the  pious  couple,  (the  Yajamdna  and  his  wife)  conjointly 
appreciate  the  beauty  of  the  sacrifice.' — Wilson. 

2  7%y  hay,  thy  ruddy  horses  :  or  the  Harits  and  the  Rohits.  Red  steeds  :  or 
Arushas.  He^'O-bearing :  carrying  the  Hero  Agni.  For  the  chamber:  the 
aacrificial  hall ;  '  in  thy  stable.'— M.  Miiller. 

S  The  human  prieata  cannot  equal  Agni  in  efficiency.    Aramati :  the  Geniut 
or  nevotiou.    See  VII.  36.  8. 


HYMN  48.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  47 

4  What  time  the  Guest  hath  made  himself  apparent,  at  ease 

reclining  in  the  rich  man's  dwelling, 

Agni,  veil-pleased,  well-placed  within  the  chamber  gives  to  a 
house  like  this  wealth  worth  the  choosing. 

5  Accept  this  sacrifice  of  ours,   0  Agni ;  glorify  it  with  Indra 

and  the  Maruts. 

Here  on  our  grass  let  Night  and  Dawn  be  seated  :  bring  long- 
ing Yaruna  and  Mitra  hither. 

6  Thus  hath  Vasishtha  praised  victorious  Agni,  yearning  for 

wealth  that  giveth  all  subsistence. 

May  he  bestow  on  us  food,  strength,  and  riches.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLIII.  Visvedevas. 

SiNO  out  the  pious  at  your  sacrifices  to  move  with  adorations 

Earth  and  Heaven — 
The  Holy  Singers,   whose  unmatched  devotions,  like  a  tree's 

branches,  part  in  all  directions. 

2  Let  sacrifice  proceed  like  some  fleet  courser :  with  one  accord 

lift  ye  on  high  the  ladles. 
Strew  sacred  grass  meet  for  the  solemn  service :  bright  flames 
that  love  the  Gods  have  mounted  upward. 

3  Like  babes  in  arms  reposing  on  their  mother,  let  the  Gods  sit 

upon  the  grass's  summit. 
Let  general  tire  make  bright  the  flame  of  worship :  scorn  us 
not,  Agni,  in  the  Gods'  assembly. 

4  Gladly  the  Oods  have  let  themselves  be  honoured,  milking 

the  copious  streams  of  holy  Order. 
The  highest  might  to-day  is  yours,  the  Yasus' :  come  ye,  as 
many  as  ye  are,  one-minded. 

5  So,    Agni,   send  us  wealth   among  the   people :   may  we   be 

closely  knit  to  thee,  O  Yictor, 
Unharmed,  and  rich,  and  taking  joy  together.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  w^ith  blessings. 

4  The  Quest :  Agni. 

8  Let  general  fire :  or,  according  to  S&yana,  'Let  the  full  ladle  balm  the 
fire  of  worship.'     The  exact  meaning  is  uncertain  as  both  subject  and  object 
adjectives  without  substantiyes. 


4  MifHnp  the  eophus  streams  :  enjoying  tho  libations  oi  IftiW-otO^SAXi^  «aLa\v 
Aee.     'Who  are  the  bestowers  of  water,  t£e  ahedders  oi  sYioYiexa' — ^V\&o^» 


48  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

HYMN  XLIV.  Dadhikrfts. 

I  CALL  on  Dadhikras,  the  first,  to  give  you  aid,   the   Asvins, 

Bhaga,  Dawn,  and  Agni  kindled  well, 
Indra,  ftnd  Vishnu,  Pashan,   Brahmanaspati,  Adityas,  Heaven 

and  Earth,  the  Waters,  and  the  Light. 

2  When,  rising,  to  the  sacrifice  we  hasten,  awaking  DadhikdLs 

with  adoiations, 
Seating  on  sacred  grass  the  Goddess  I1&,  let  us  invoke  the 
sage  swift-hearing  Asvins. 

3  Wliile  I  am  thus   arousing   Dadhikravan  I  speak   to   Agni, 

Earth,  and  Dawn,  and  Surya, 
The  red,  the  brown  of  Varuna  ever  mindful :  may  they  ward 
off  from  us  all  grief  and  trouble. 

4  Foremost  is  Dadhikravan,  vigorous  courser ;  in  forefront  of 

the  cars,  his  way  he  knoweth, 
Closely  allied   with  Surya  and  with  Morning,   Adityas,  and 
Angirases,  and  Vasus. 

5  May  Dadhikras  prepare  the  way  we  travel  that  we  may  pass 

along  the  path  of  Order. 
May  Agni  hear  us,  and  the  Heavenly  Army:  hear  us  all  Mighty 
Ones  whom  none  deceiveth. 

HYMN  XLV.  Savitar. 

May  the  God  Savitar,   rich  in  goodly  treasures,   filling  the 

region,  borne  by  steeds,  come  hither, 
In  his  hand  holding  much  that  makes  men  happy,  lulling  to 

slumber  and  arotising  creatures. 

2  Golden,  sublime,  and  easy  in  their  motion,  his  arms  extend 
unto  the  bounds  of  heaven. 


1  Dadhikrda :  see.  IV.  38.  1. 

3  Dadkihrdoan :  a  lengthened  form  of  Dadhikr&s.  See  IV.  39.  2,  and  40. 
The  redf  the  brovm :  apparently  the  horse  of  Varuna,  that  U.  the  Sun,  i<s  in- 
tended.    Ever  mindful :  *  who  is  mindful  of  his  adorers.*— Wilson.  The  mean- 

ng  of  the  word  mahgchatdh,  or  mdhschatdh,  is  uncertain.  Von  Roth  thinks 
that  a  colour,  dun  or  yellow,  is  meant.  Ludwig  would  explain  it  as  *  knotting 
snares  or  nooses.'  Grassmann  translates  it  by,  *des  Mondverscheuchers,' 
*  who  scares  away  the  Moon.' 

4  In  forefront  of  the  cars :  according  to  S&yana,  the  chariots  of  the  Ghds 
are  intended.  But,  as  Pischel  observes  {Vedisohe  Studien,  I.  124),  Dadhik- 
rAvan,  the  famous  race-horse,  was  for  *  the  gentlemen  of  the  turf '  in  King 
Trasadasyu's  time  what  the  matchless  English  horse  Eclipse  was  in  recent 
days.  It  seems  probable  that  Dahhikr&van  may  have  been  originally  only  a 
moat  distinguished  racer,  glorified  and  deified  by  the  exaggerated  praised  of 

lAe  bards  of  a  people  who  were  passionately  iond  oi  c^aadoVTraftm^. 


BYMN  46  ]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  49 

Now  shall  tbat  mightiness  of  his  be  lauded  :  even  Sdra  yields 
to  him  in  active  vigour. 

3  May  this  God  Savitar,  the  Strong  and  Mighty,  the  Lord  of 

precious  wealth,  vouchsafe  us  treasures. 
May  he,  advancing  his  far-spreading  lustre,  bestow  on  us  the 
food  that  feedeth  mortals. 

4  These  songs  praise  Savitar  whose  tongue  is  pleasant,  praise 

him  whose  arms  are  full,  whose  hands  are  lovely. 
High  vital  strength,  and  manifold,  may  he  grant  us.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLVL  Rudra.>^ 

To  Rudra  bring  these  songs,  whose  bow  is  firm  and  strong,  the 
self-dependent  God  with  swiftly-flying  shafts, 

The  Wise,  the  Conqueror  whom  none  may  overcome,  armed 
with  sharp-pointed  weapons :  may  he  hear  our  call. 

2  He  through  his  lordship  thinks  on  beings  of  the  earth,  on 

heavenly  beings  through  his  high  imperial  sway. 
Come  willingly  to  our  doors  that  gladly  welcome  thee,  and  heal 
all  sickness,  Rudra,  in  our  families. 

3  May  thy  bright  arrow  which,  shot  down  by  thee  from  heaven, 

flieth  upon  the  earth,  pass  us  uninjured  by. 
Thou,  very  gracious  God,  hast  thousand  medicines  :  inflict  no 
evil  on  our  sons  or  progeny. 

"4  Slay  us  not,  nor  abandon  us,  0  Rudra :  let  not  thy  noose,  when 
thou  art  angry,  seize  us. 
Give  us  trimmed  grass  and  fame  among  the  living.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


2  Sii/ra :  the  Sun  as  distinguiBhed  from,  or  a  different  form  of,  Savitar  who 
is  said  by  SAya^a  to  be  the  Sun  before  his  rising. 


8  Very  gfraeiout  Ood :  svapivdta.  'This  word  is  not  explained  in  the 
printed  text  of  S&yana,  although  in  the  "  Varietaa  Lectionis,"  appended  to 
^s  preface,  Prof .  M,uller  notes  that  in  one  MS.,  B.  4,  tvapivdta  is  rendered 
hjjUapr&na,  *'he  by  whom  life  (or  breath)  is  conquered."  In  the  Nirukta, 
X.  7.  it  is  explained  by  tvdpta-vachanaf  "  thou  whose  words  are  very  suitable 
or  authoritative."' — Muir,  0.  S,  TextSy  IV,  314,  where  an  exhaustive  note  on 
the  word  will  be  found.  Wilson  renders  svapivdta  by  *  wind-appeaser,'  and 
Grassmann  by  '  vielbegehrter,'  *  much-desired.' 

-  4  Gitfe  ui  trimmed  grata :  let  us  share  in  sacri^ce.  Fame  among  the  living: 
tlie  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  jtvaaansi  to  mean  rule  over  the  living. 
Others  take  the  word  as  qualifying  barhiithi,  trimmed  grass,  i.  e.  sacrifice,  and 
signifying  *  desired  by  the  living,*  *  to  be  praised  among  men,'  *  T^xomVam^^QTv^ 
life.'  See  Vedie  Hymns,  Part  L  p.  4S9, 
4 


50  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VII. 

HYMN  XLVII.  Water-. 

May  we  obtain  this  day  from  you,  O  Waters,  that  wave  of 

pare  refreshment,  which  the  pious 
Made  erst  the  special  beverage  of  Indra,  bright,  stainless,  rich 

in  sweets  and  dropping  fatness. 

2  May  the  Floods'  Offspring,  he  whose  course  is  rapid,  protect 

that  wave  most  rich  in  sweets,  O  Waters, 
That  shall  make  Indra  and  the  Vasus  joyful.     This  may  we 
gain  from  you  to-day,  we  pious. 

3  All-purifying,  joying  in  their  nature,  to  paths  of  Gods  the 

Goddesses  move  onward. 
They  never  violate  the  laws  of  Indra.     Present  the  oil-rich 
offering  to  the  Rivers. 

4  Whom  Sdrya  with  his  bright  beams  hath  attracted,  and  Indra 

dug  the  path  for  them  to  travel. 
May  these  Streams  give  us  ample  room  and  freedom.     Pre- 
serve us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XLVIII.  RibhuB. 

Ye  liberal  Heroes,  Ydjas  and  Bibhukshans,  come  and  delight 
you  with  our  flowing  Soma. 

May  your  strength,  Vibhus,  as  ye  come  to  meet  us,  turn  hither- 
ward  your  car  that  brings  men  profit. 

2  May  we  as  Ribhu  with  your  Ribhus  conquer  strength  with  our 

strength,  as  Vibhus  with  the  Vibhus. 
May  Vaja  aid  us  in  the  fight  for  booty,  and  helped  by  Indra 
may  we  quell  the  foeman. 

3  For  they  rule  many  tribes  with  high  dominion,  and  conquer 

all  their  foes  in  close  encounter. 
May  Indra,  Vibhvan,  Vaja,  and  Ribhukshan  destroy  by  turns 
the  wicked  foeman*s  valour. 

4  Now,  Deities,  give  us  ample  room  and  freedom :  be  all  of  you, 

one-minded,  our  protection. 
So  let  the  Vasus  grant  us  strength  and  vigour.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


1  Wave  of  pure  refreshment :  *  sweet  essence  of  the  earth  ;  *  Urmi  is  said 
here  to  imply  the  Soma  juice  produced  from  the  earth.* — Wilson. 

.3  All-purifying :  satdpavitrdh ;  literally,  with  a  hundred,  that  is,  countless, 
means  of  purification.     The  Goddesses :  the  divine  Waters. 

1  Vdjas  and  Ribhukshans :  ye  three,  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and  V&ja. 

2  The  meaning  is,  may  we  be  as  powerful  as  Ribhu,  as  mighty  as  the  com- 
pany of  the  Vibhus  (another  name  of  the  Bibhus).  Sdyana  explains  rihh'A  as 
great,  and  vibhvah  as  powerful.  In  the  fight  for  booty  :  v&jasdtau  /  a  play  on 
the  word  and  name  v^ja» 

4  7%e  Fasus:   according  to  Sdyana,  vdsavah  here  is  an  epithet  of  Ribhdva^ 
understood ;' the  exalted (nihhvLB):'---W\\&o\i', 


MtMN  50.1  '^BS  niGVEDA,  51 

HYMN  XLIX.  Watew. 

Forth  from  the  middle  of  the  flood  the  Waters — their  chief 
the  Sea — flow  cleansing,  never  sleeping. 
Indra,  the  Bull,  the  Thunderer,  dug  their  channels :  here  let 
those  Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

2  Waters  which  come  from  heaven,  or  those  that  wander  dug 

from  the  earth,  or  flowing  free  by  nature. 
Bright,   purifying,   speeding  to  the   Ocean,   here    let  those 
Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

3  Those  amid  whom  goes  Varuna  the  Sovran,  he  who  discri- 

minates men's  truth  and  falsehood — 
Distilling  meath,   the  bright,   the  purifying,  here  let  those 
Waters,  Goddesses,  protect  me. 

4  They  from  whom  Varuna  the  King,  and  Soma,  and  all  the 

Deities  drink  strength  and  vigour, 
They  into   whom  Yaisvanara   Agni  entered,   here  let  those 
Waters,  Croddesses,  protect  me. 

HYMN  L,  Various  Deities. 

0  Mitra-Varusta,  guard  and  protect  me  here :  let  not  that 
come  to  me  which  nests  within  and  swells. 

1  drive  afar  the  scorpion  hateful  to  the  sight :  let  not  the 

winding  worm  touch  me  and  wound  my  foot. 

2  Eruption   that  appears   upon  the   twofold   joints,   and  that 

which  overspreads  the  ancles  and  the  knees, 
May  the  refulgent  Agni  banish  far  away :  let  not  the  winding 
worm  touch  mo  and  wound  my  foot. 

3  The  poison  that  is  formed  upon  the  Salmali,  that  which  is 

found  in  streams,  that  which  the  plants  produce, 
All  this  may  all  the  Gods  banish  and  drive  away  :  let  not  the 
winding  worm  touch  me  and  wound  my  foot. 


1  Tkejlood :  the  oeean  of  air,  the  firmament. 

The  deities  are  (1)  Mitra  and  Varuna,  (2)  Agni,  (3)  Visve  Dev4h,  (4)  Praise 
of  the  Bivers.  Each  stanza  of  the  hymn  is  to  be  repeated  a  as  an  antidote  to 
tlie  poison  or  disease  which  it  specifies. 

1  That  which  nest9  within  and  sieeUi :  *  the  insidious  and  spreading  (poison)* 
— Wilson.  Siyana  supplies  the  substantive  visTiam,  The  scorpion  :  ajakd- 
wam  ;  the  exact  meaning  is  uncertain. 

3  Twofold  joints :  of  the  arms  and  legs.  S&yan%*s  interpretation  is  different: 
'  thepoieon  which  is  generated  in  the  manifold  knots  (of  trees).' — Wilson. 

8  2%el^mali:  the  silk-cotton  tree.    All  the  Qod^  :   ot,  l\i^  XXi-Qio^t^  crt 
YiBTedevas. 


«2  THE  UYMys  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

4  The  steep  declivities,  the   valleys,  and  the  heights,  the  chan- 
nels full  of  water,  and  the  waterless — 

May  those  who  swell  with  water,  gracious  Goddesses,  never 
afflict  us  with  the  Sipada  disease,  may  all  the  rivers  keep 
us  free  from  Simida. 

•  HYMN  LI.  Adityas. 

Through  the  Adityas'  most  auspicious  shelter,  through  their 
most  recent  succour  may  we  conquer. 

May  they,  the  Mighty,  giving  ear,  establish  this  sacrifice,  to 
make  us  free  and  sinless. 

2  Let  Aditi  rejoice  and  the  Adityas,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 

most  righteous. 
May  they,   the  Guardians  of  the  world,   protect  us,   and,  to 
show  favour,  drink  this  day  our  Soma. 

3  All  Universal  Deities,  the  Maruts,  all   the  Adityas,  yea,  and 

all  the  Kibhus, 
Indra,  and  Agni,  and  the  Asvins,  lauded*     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LIT.  Adityas. 

May  we  bo  free  from  every  bond,  Adityas!  a  castle  among  Gods 

and  men,  ye  Vasus. 
Winning,  may  we  win  Varuna  and  Mitra,  and,  being,  may  we 

be,  0  Earth  and  Hoaven. 

2  May  Varuna  and  Mitra  grant  this  blessing,  our  Guardians, 

shelter  to  our  seed  and  oflfepring. 
Let  us  not  suffer  for  another's  trespass,   nor  do  the  thing  that 
yc,  0  Vasus,  punish. 

3  The  ever-prompt  Angirases,  imploring  riches  from  Savitar  the 

God,  obtained  them. 
So  may  our  Father  who  is  great  and  holy,  and   all  the  Gods, 
accordant,  grant  this  favour. 

HYMN   Lin.  Heaven  and  Earth. 

As  priest  with  solemn  rites  and  adorations  I  worship  Heaven 

and  Earth,  the  High  and  Holy. 
To  them,   great  Parents  of  the  Gods,   have  sages  of  ancient 

time,  singing,  assigned  precedence. 


4  The  S'pada  disease :  *  perhaps  the  Vaidik  form  of  Slipad^a,  the  Cochin 
leg.' — Wilbun.  Simidd  :  appareutly  a  female  demon,  or  a  disease  attributed 
to  her  malevolence.  

3  Universal  Deities  :  visve  dev^h  ;  the  All-Gods.  Lauded  :  the  sentence  is 
incomplete,  the  substantives  in  the  nominative  case  having  no  verb. 

1    Being  :  really  and  truly  being,  rich,  powerful,  and  distinguished. 
8  Our  Pathtr :  Varuna,   the  father  of  Vasishtha  ;  or  Savitur,  or  PrajApati 
'OtJt^  be  Intended. 


BTMN  65.]  THE  RIG  I  ^EDA.  53 

2  With  newest  hymns  set  in  the  seat  of  Order,  those  the  Two 

Parents,  born  before  all  others, 
Come,  Heaven  and  Earth,  with  the  Celestial  People,  hither  to 
us,  for  strong  is  your  protection. 

3  Yea,  Heaven  and  Earth,  ye  hold  in  your  possession  full  many 

a  treasure  for  the  liberal  giver. 
Grant  us  that  wealth  which  comes  in  free  abundance.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LTV.  V&8toBhpati. 

AcKNOWLBDGS  US,  O  Guardian  of  the  Homestead  :   bring  no 

disease,  and  give  us  happy  entrance. 
Whatever  we  ask  of  thee,  be  pleased  to  grant  it,  and  prosper 

thou  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

2  Protector  of  the  Home,  be  our  promoter  :  increase  our  wealth 

in  kine  and  steeds,  0  Indu. 
May  we  be  ever-youthful  in  thy  friendship  :  be  pleased  in  us 
as  in  his  sons  a  father. 

3  Through  thy  dear  fellowship  that  bringeth  welfare,  may  we  be 

victors.  Guardian  of  the  Dwelling  ! 
Protect   our    happiness   in   rest    and    labour.     Preserve    us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN    LV.  VA«toshpati. 

VAstoshpati,  who  killest  all  disease  and  wearest  every  form. 
Be  an  auspicious  Friend  to  us. 

2  When,  0  bright  Son  of  Sarami,  thou  showest,  tawny-hued  ! 

thy  teeth, 
They  gleam  like  lances'  points   within  thy  mouth   when  thou 
wouldst  bite :  go  thou  to  sleep. 

3  Sarama's  Son,  retrace  thy  way:  bark  at  the  robber  and  the 

thief. 
At  Indra's  singers  barkest  thou  ?  Why  dost  thou  seek  to  ter- 
rify us  ?  Go  to  sleep. 

3  For  the  liberal  giver :  or,  for  Sudfts. 


Yistoshpati  is  the  Gknius  or  tutelary  God  of  the  house.  la  this  hymn 
he  is  addre<)8ed  also  as  Indu,  another  name  of  Soma  the  Moon-God. 

V&sfcnshpati  is  the  deity  of  the  first  stanza,  and  Tndra  of  the  rest. 

The  metre  is  G^yatrl  in  stanza  1,  Uparishiftdbrihat?  (8x3  +  12)  in  2-4, 
and  Anushtup  in  5-8,  and  the  hymn  appears  to  be  made  up  of  three  corres- 
ponding pieces  unconnected  by  their  subjects. 

2  Son  of  Sara7nd ;  Saramft.  the  hound  of  Indra,  is  mother  of  the  two 
fiftramejas,  the  brindled  watch-dogs  of  Yama,  God  of  the  Dead.  This  stanza 
and  the  two  following  appear  to  be  addressed  by  the  spirits  of  Indra's  worship- 
pers to  one  of  the  dogs  who  would  present  their  entering  tliQ  Ixom^  ol  i\i^ 
pious. 


^*  TME  BYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI/. 

4  Be  on  thy  guard  against  the  boar,  and  let   the  boar  beware  of 

thee. 
At  Indra's  singers  barkest  thou  ?    Whj   dost  thou   seek  to 
terrify  us  ?  Go  to  sleep, 

5  Sleep  mother,  let  the  father  sleep,  sleep  dog  and  master  of  the 

house. 

Let  all  the  kinsmen  sleep,  sleep  all  the  people  who  are  round 
about. 

6  The  man  who  sits,  the  man   who  walks,  and   whosoever  looks 

on  us, 
Of  these  we  closely  shut  the  eyes,  even  as  we  closely  shut  this 
house.  \ 

7  The  Bull  who  hath  a  thousand  horns,  who  rises  up  from   out 

the  sea, — 
By  him  the  Strong  and  Mighty  One  we  lull  and  make  the 
people  sleep. 

8  The  women  sleeping  in  the  court,  lying  without,  or  stretched 

on  beds, 
The  matrons  with  their  odorous  sweets — these,  one  and  aD, 

we  lull  to  sleep. 

HYMN  LVI.  Marotfc 

Who  are  these  radiant  men  in   serried   rank,    Kudra's   young 

heroes  borne  by  noble  steeds  ? 

2  Verily  no  one  knoweth  whence  they  sprang  :  they,  and  they 

only,  know  each  other's  birth. 

3  They  strew  each  other  with  their  blasts,   these  Hawks  :  they 

strove  together,  roaring  like  the  wind. 

5  This  and  the  three  foUowing  stanzas  form  a  lullaby  or  sleep-soag,  pro- 
bably sung  as  a  charm  by  a  loTer  on  a  secret  visit  to  his  love. 

7  The  Bull  who  hcUh  a  thoumiid  hyiihs :  the  Sun,  whose  setting  brings  thtt 
time  of  rest  and  sleep  ;  or  perhaps  the  starry  heaven  is  intended 

S  With  their  odorous  tweets  :  wearing  garlands  of  fragiant  flowers  on  festive 
occasions,  according  to  S&yapa  :  'decorated  with  holiday  perfumes.' — Wilaon. 
According  to  a  legend  mentioned  by  Sftyana,  Vasishtha.  having  fasted  for  three 
days  was  entering  the  house  of  Yaruua  in  hope  of  food,  when  the  watch-dog 
set  upon  him  and  was  put  to  sleep  by  the  repetition  of  the  last  four  verses, 
which  are  to  be  recited  on  similar  oocasions  by  thieves  and  house-breakera. 
See  Wilson's  note.  The  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  Aufrecht,  Judueh€ 
Studien,  IV.  337f,  and  by  Lanman,  SamkHt  Bmder,  p.  370. 

3  They  strew  each  other  with  their  blasts  :  the  meaning  of  svapShhik  is 
uncertain.  *  They  go  together  by  their  own  pure  paths.*  — WilsMi  *  They 
plucked  each  other  with  their  beakai?)* — M.  Miiller.  *  They  bestrew  eadb 
other  with  light.* — Grassmann.  *  They  scatter  dust  over  each  other  with 
besoms.*— Roth.  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig.  The  meaning  appears  to  be  tbal 
the  Hawks  or  rapid  Maruts  are  so  crowded  in  their  onward  sweep  that  Htkom 
in  front  feel  the  quick  breath  of  those  who  follow.  Similarly  (YIII.  SO.  %i\ 
the  crorFdedMarutBurelik^^ed  to  cattle  who  liok  each  other*8  heads  or  humft. 


SYMN  51]  TBE  HIOVEDA.  «5 

4  A  sage  was  he  wh6  knew  these  mysteries,  what  m  her   udder 

mighty  Prisni  bore. 

5  Ever  victorious,  through  the  Maruts,  be  this  band  of  Heroes, 

nursing  manly  strength, 

6  Most  bright  in  splendour,  fleetest  on  their  way,    close-knit  to 

glory,  strong  with  varied  power. 

7  Yea,   mighty   is  your  power  and   firm   your   strength  :  so, 

potent,  with  the  Maruts,  be  the  band. 

8  Bright  is  your  spirit,    wrathful   are  your  minds  :  your  bold 

troop's  minstrel  is  like  one  inspired. 

9  Ever  avert  your  blazing  shaft  from  us,  and   let  not  your  dis- 

pleasure reach  us  here. 

10  Your  dear  names,  conquering  Maruts,  we  invoke,  calling  aloud 

till  we  are  satisfied. 

1 1  Well-armed,   impetuous  in  their  haste,  they  deck  themselves, 

their  forms,  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

12  Pure,  Maruts,  pure  3^ ourselves,  are  your  oblations  :  to  you,  the 

pure,  pure  sacrifice  I  offer. 
By  Law  they  came  to  truth,  the  Law's  observers,  bright  by 
their  birth,  and  pure,  and  sanctifying. 

13  Your  rings,  0  Maruts,  rest  upon  your  shoulders,  and  chains 

of  gold  are  twined  upon  your  bosoms. 
Gleaming  with  drops  of  rain,  like  lightning-flashes,  after  your 
wont  ye  whirl  about  your  weapons. 

14  Wide  in  the  depth  of  air  spread  forth  your  glories,  far,  most 

adorable,  ye  bear  your  titles. 
Maruts,   accept   this   thousandfold  allotment   of    household 
sacrifice  and  'household  treasure. 

15  If,  Marats,  ye  regard  the  praise  recited  here   at  this  mighty 

singer's  invocation. 
Vouchsafe  us  quickly  wealth  with  noble  heroes,  wealth  which 
no  man  who  hateth  us  may  injure. 


4  What  in  her  udder:  according  to  Sftyana,  what  beinga  (Maruts,  etc.) 
mighty  Prisni  bore  at  her  udder  or  in  the  firmament. 

8  Your  hold  troop's  minstrel:  the  leader  of  the  Maruts'  thunder- psalm.  Like 
ams  intpired  :  m-dniriva,  like  a  Muni  or  inspired  saint  '  The  soundu  produced 
by  the  shaking  of  the  trees  are  like  the  varied  intonations  of  a  reciter  of  praises, 
is  S&yana*s  explanation.* —Wilson.  Lanman  translates  diflferently:  Clear  is 
your  whistling.  Your  hearts  are  wrathful  as  the  wild  onward-rush  of  a  doughty 
troop.' 

14  Ye  hear  your  titles :  you  make  yourselves  known.  *  You  send  down 
(the  waters)  that  beat  down  (the  dust).' — Wilson.  Nitvidni,  names,  according 
to  SAyaaa,  means  wutera,  hecaaae  they  bend  down  the  du«t,  pdu%'d.n  UQ/taa>)aul\. 


B6  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI i 

16  Tha  Maruts,  fleet   as   coursers,   while   they   deck   them  lik 
youths  spectators  of  a  festal  meeting, 

Linger,  like  beauteous  colts,  about  the  dwelling,  like   frisking 
calves,  these  who  pour  down  the  water. 

17  So  may  the  Maruts  help  us    and   be   gracious,    bringmg    fre« 
room  to  lovely  Earth  and  Heaven. 

Far  be  your  bolt  that   slayeth    men   and   cattle.     Ye   Yasue 
turn  yourselves  to  us  with  blessings. 

18  The  priest,  when  seated,  loudly  calls  you,  Maruts,  praising  ii 
song  your  universal  bounty. 

He,  Bulls  !  who  hath  so  much  in  his  possession,  free  frou 
duplicity,  with  hymns  invokes  you. 

19  These    Maruts   bring   the   swift   man   to   a   stand-still,    an< 
stren*^th  with  mightier  strength  they  break  and  humble. 

These  guard  the  singer  from  the  man  who  hates  him  and  la; 
their  sore  displeasure  on  the  wicked. 

j  20  These  Maruts  rouse  even  the  poor  and  needy  :  the  Yasus  lov 

;  him  as  an  active  champion. 

Drive  to  a  distance,  O  ye  Bulls,    the   darkness :  give   us   fu] 
store  of  children  and  descendants. 

!  21  Never,  0  Maruts,  may  we  lose   your   bounty,   nor,    car-bom 

•  Lords  !  be  hindmost  when  ye  deal  it. 

I  Give  us   a   share   in   that   delightful   treasure,    the   genuin 

wealth  that.  Bulls  !  is  your  possession. 

«  22  What  time  the  men  in  fury  rush  together  for  running  streams 

for  pastures,  and  for  houses, 
Then,  O  ye  Maruts,  ye  who  spring  from  Rudra,  be  our  prote< 
tors  in  the  strife  with  foemen. 

23  Full  many  a  deed  ye  did  for  our  forefathers  worthy  of  laud 

which,  even  of  old,  they  sang  you. 
The  strong  man,  with  the  Maruts,  wins  in  battle,  the  chargei 
■  with  the  Maruts,  gains  the  booty. 

24  Ours,  0  ye  Maruts,  be  the  vigorous  Hero,  the  Lord  Divine  o 

men,  the  strong  Sustainer, 
With  whom  to  fair  lands  we  may  cross  the   waters,  and  dwe 
in  our  own  home  with  you  beside  us. 

25  May  Indra,  Mitra,  Yaruna  and  Agni,  Waters,  and  Plants,  an 

Trees  accept  our  praises. 
May  we  find  shelter  in  the  Maruts'  bosom.     Preserve  us  evei 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

24  The  Lord  Divine :  literally,  the  Asura.     We  may  cross  the  icaters  :   tl 
I  Maruts  are  besought  to  favour  an  expedition  for  the  acquisition  of  new  se* 

y  t)em»ntB  on  the  further  side  of  a  river. 


B7MS  68.]  THE  RIQ  VEDA,  fSI 

HYMN   LVII.  Marutn. 

Yka,  throngh  the  power  of  your   sweet  juice,   ye   Holy  !  the 

Marut  host  is  glad  at  sacrifices. 
They  cause  even  spacious  heaven  and  earth    to  tremble,  they 

make  the  spring  flow  wheu  they  come,  the  Mighty. 

2  The  Maruts  watch  the  man  who  sings  their  praises,  promoters 

of  the  thought  of  him  who  worships. 
Seat  you  on  sacred   grass    in   our  assembly,    this  day,    with 
friendly  minds,  to  share  the  banquet. 

3  No  others  gleam  so  brightly  as  these  Maruts  with   their  own 

forms,  their  golden  gauds,  their  weapons. 
With  all  adornments,  decking  earth  and  heaven,  they  heighten, 
for  bright  show,  their  common  splendour. 

4  Far  from    us   be   your   blazing   dart,    0    Maruts,    when   we, 

through  human  frailty,  sin  against  you. 
Let  us  not  be  exposed  to  that,  ye  Holy  !  May  your  most   lov- 
ing favour  still  attend  us. 

5  May  even  what  we  have  done  delight  the   Manits,  the   blame- 

•  less  Ones,  the  bright,  the  purifying. 
Further  us,    0   ye    Holy,    with   your   kindness :  advance    us 
.  mightily  that  we  may  prosper. 

6  And  may  the  Maruts,  praised  by  all  their  titles,  Heroes,  enjoy 

the  taste  of  our  oblations. 
Give  us  of  Amrit  for  the  sake  of  offspring  :  awake   the   excel- 
lent fair  stores  of  riches. 

7  Hither,  ye   Maruts,  praised,   with  all   your  succours,  with  all 

felicity  come  to  our  princes, 
Who,  of  themselves,  a  hundredfold  increase   us.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LVIII.  Manifg. 

Sing  to  the   troop   that  pours   down  rain   in   common,   the 
Mighty  Company  of  celestial  nature. 


1  Ye  Holy :  according  to  S&yana,  the  Maruts  are  addressed.  The  Marut 
host :  n^ma  Mirutam  :  the  Marut  name,  t.  e.  those  who  are  called  Maruts. 

This  hymn,  and  .all  the  hymns  to  the  Maruts  have  been  translated  and 
explained  in  Max  Miiller's  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Vol. 
XXXII) 

6  Oive  us  of  Amrit :  the  secret  essence  which  pervades  the  world  and  nour- 
ishes and  sustains  all  must  naturally  also  be  the  element  that  promotes  re- 
production.— Ludwig.  Von  Both  explains  the  passage  differently:  *  Add  us  to 
(the  number  of)  the  people  of  eternity,  t.  e.  to  the  blessed.'  *  Vouchsafe  our 
children  long  life,' — (^assmann.  'Bestow  water  upon  our  pro^eo^  %  — '^'^^^■^» 


I 


B8  THB  BTMtra  OP  [BOOS  ' 

They  make  the  world-halves  tremble    with  their   greatiM 
from  depths  of  earth  and  sky  they  reach  to  heaTen. 

2  Yea,  your  birth,  Manite,  waa    with  wild  commotion,  ye  i 

move  swiftly,  tierce  in  wrath,  terrific. 
Te  all-eurpasaing  in  your  might  and  vigour,  each  looker  on 
light  fears  at  your  coming. 

3  Give  ample  vital  power  unto  oor^prinoes :  let  our  fair  prai 

gratify  the  Maruts. 
As  the  way  travelled   helpeth   people   onward,  ao  further 
with  your  delightful  succours. 
i  Your  favoured  singer  counts  his  wealth  by  hundreda : 
strong  steed  whom  ye  favour  wins  a  thousand. 
The  Strvran  whom  ye   aid   destroys   the   foeman.     Hay  i 
your  gift,  ye  Shakers,  be  distinguished. 
6  I  call,  as  such,  the  Sons   of  bounteous    Rudra  :  will   not 
Maruts  turn  again  to  us-ward  1 
What  secret  sin  or  open  stirs  their  anger,  that  wo  implore 
Swift  Ones  to  forgive  us. 
6  This  eulogy  of  the  Bounteous  hath  been   apoken  :  accept, 
Maruts,  this  our  hymn  of  praises. 
Ye  Bulls,  keep  those  who  hate  us  at  a  distance.     Preserve 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings, 

HYMN  LIX.  H>r 

Whomso  ye  rescue  here  and  there,  whomso  ye  guide,  0  Deiti 
To  him  give  shelter,    Agni,    Mitra,    Varuija,   ye   Maruts,  ( 
thou  Aryaman. 

2  Through  your  kind  favour,  Gods,  on  some  auspicious  day, 

worshipper  subdues  his  foes. 
That  man  increases  home  and  strengthening  ample  food  n 
brings  you  offerings  as  ye  list. 

3  Vasishtha  will  not  overlook  the  lowliest  one  among  you  all 
0  Maruts,  of  our  Soma  juice  effused  to^ay  drink  sJI  of  j 

with  eager  haste. 

4  Your  succour  in  the  battle  injures  not  the  man  to  whom 

Heroes,  grant  your  gifts, 

I  From  deptkt  of  earth  and  iky :  ntrriti  han  a  nid  to  ba  BynooymouB  is 
tAtlmi,  earth,  and  avanfd,  the  uneupported,  with  aniaritiha,  firmameDt,  J 
nirriti,  Death,  Deetructiun,  as  identified  with  bkUmi,  may  be  the  Prithiv; 
the  atmoephere  (see  V.  84.),  which  must  oritfimiUf  huve  been  con^dered  to 
the  place  of  departed  Bpirita. 

S  Madt  loottr  on  (A«  Ughl:  vifva^  tvardfU::  occi^iiig  to  Siyana,  every  b 

^  ^jj^irei  tiof :  »  Utote»  tor,  i*  of  thegrmt«st  tdvantage  to. 


BTMN  51]  THB  RtO  VEDA .  59 

May  your  most  recent  favour  turn  to  us  again.  Come  quickly, 
ye  who  fain  would  drink. 

5  €k)me  hitherward  to  drink  the  juice,  0  ye  whose  bounties  give 

you  joy. 
These  ofierings  are  for  you,  these,  Maruts,  I  present.     Go  not 
to  any  plekce  but  this. 

6  Sit  on  our  sacred  grass,  be  graciously  inclined  to  give   the 

wealth  for  which  we  long. 
To  take  delight,  ye   Maruts,   Friends  of  all,   with  Svllhll,  in 
sweet  Soma  juice. 

7  Decking  the  beauty  of  their  forms  in  secret  the  Swans  with 

purple  backs  have  flown  down  hither. 
Around  me  all  the  Company  hath  settled,  like  joyous  Heroes 
glad  in  our  libation. 

8  Maruts,  the  man  whose  wrath  is  hard  to  master,  he  who  would 

slay  us  ere  we  think,  0  Vasus, 
May  he  be  tangled  in   the   toils   of   mischief ;  smite  ye  him 
down  with  your  most  flaming  weapon. 

9  0  Maruts,  ye  consuming  Gods,  enjoy  this  offering  brought  for 

you. 
To  help  us,  ye  who  slay  the  foe. 

10  Sharers  of  household  sacrifice,  come,  Maruts,  stay  not  far  away. 
That  ye  may  help  us.  Bounteous  Ones. 

11  Here,  Self-strong  Maruts,  yea,  even  here,  ye  Sages  with  your 

sunbright  skins ! 
I  dedicate  your  sacrifice. 

12  Tryambaka  we  worship,  sweet  augmenter  of  prosperity. 

As  from  its  stem  the  cucumber,  so  may  I  be  released   from 
death,  not  reft  of  immortality. 


6  Whose  hourUies  give  you  joy :  or  follow  each  other  closely,  and  are  ever 
freah  and  ready. 

6  Svdhd :  an  exclamation,  like  Ave  !  or  Hail !  used  in  making  oblations  to 
the  Gods. 

7  WUh  purple  6adb ;  nflaprishthih :  of.  Horace's  *  pnrpurei  olores.' 

8  Mischief:  or  one  of  the  malicious  spirits  called  Drubs. 

12  Trynmbaha  :  a  name  of  Rudra.  Sioeet :  according  to  S&yana,  sugandhim, 
sweet-smelling,  means  here,  *  whose  fame  is  fragrant.*  *  The  verse  occurs  in  the 
Yajur-Veda,  6.  30,  and  is,  in  some  instances,  differently  interpreted  ;  Tryam- 
haka  is  termed  netratrayopetam  Hudram,  the  triocular  Rudra :  tugandhim, 
divyctgandhopetam,  of  celestial  fragrance  :  the  urvdruha  is  said  to  mean  the 
karkandhu  [fruit  of  the  jujube-tree],  which;  when  ripe,  falls  of  itself  from  itA 
stAlk.'— Wilson. 


60  TBS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VtL 

HYMN  LX.  Mitra-Varuna. 

When  thou,  0  Sun,  this  day,  arising  sinless,  shalt  speak  the 

truth  to  Varuna  and  Mitra, 
O  Aditi,  may  all  the  Deities  love  us,  and  thou,  O  Aryaman, 

while  we  are  singing* 

2  Looking  on  man,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  this  Sun  ascendeth  up 

by  both  the  pathways, 
Guardian   of  all  things  fixt,   of  all  that  moveth,   beholding 
good  and  evil  acts  of  mortals. 

3  He  from  their  home  hath  yoked  the  Seven  gold  Coursers  who, 

dropping  oil  and  fatness,  carry  Surya. 
Yours,  Yaruaa  and  Mitra,  he  surveyeth  the  worlds  and  living 
creatures  like  a  herdsman. 

4  Your  coursers  rich   in  store  of  sweets  have  mounted :  to  the 

bright  ocean  Surya  hath  ascended, 
For  whom  the  Adityas  make  his  pathway  ready,  Aryaman, 
Mitra,  Varuna,  accordant. 

5  For  these,  even  Aryaman,  Varuna,  and  Mitra,  are  the  chas- 

tisers  of  all  guile  and  falsehood. 
These,  Aditi's  Sons,  infallible  and  mighty,  have  waxen  in  the 
home  of  Law  Eternal. 

6  These,  Mitra,  Varuna,  whom  none  deceiveth,  with  great  power 

quicken  even  the  fool  to  wisdom, 
And,  wakening,  moreover,  thoughtful  insight,  lead  it  by  easy 
paths  o'er  grief  and  trouble. 

7  They  ever  vigilant,  with  eyes  that  close  not,  caring  for  heaven 

and  earth,  lead  on  the  thoughtless. 
Even  in  the  river's  bed  there  is  a  shallow  :  across  this  broad 
expanse  may  they  conduct  us. 

8  When  Aditi  and  Varuna  and  Mitra,  like  guardians,  give  SudSii 

their  friendly  shelter. 
Granting  him  sons  and  lineal  succession,  let  us  not,  bold  ones ! 
move  the  Gods  to  anger. 

The  hymn  is  addressed  chiefly  to  Mitra  and  Varuna,  but  Surya  or  the  Sun 
is  the  deity  of  the  first  stanza. 

1  Sinless :  Sftyana  makes  dn^gdh  -andgasah  :  *  declare  the  truth... that  we 
are  void  of  sin.* — Wilson.  But  this  seems  forced,  and  the  implied  meaning  of 
the  poet  is  clear  enough  if  the  word  is  tAken  in  its  usual  signification. 

2  Both  the  pathways :  near  the  earth  and  high  in  the  firmament. 

6  Mitra,  Varvna :  and  Aryaman,  understood  :  the  verbs  are  in  the  plural. 

8  Bold  ones :  the  warning  is  addressed  to  the  people  of  SudAs,  who  has  been 
frequently  mentioned  in  preceding  hymns. 


JBTMN  61.1  THE  RIO  VEDA.  CI 

9  May  he  with  offerings   purify  the  altar  from  any  stains  of 
Varuna's  reviler. 
Aryaiuan  save  us  from  all  those  who  hate  us :  give  room  and 
freedom  to  Sudas,  ye  Mighty. 

10  Hid   from   our  eyes  is   their  resplendent  meeting :  by  their 

mysterious  might  they  hold  dominion. 
Heroes  !  we  cry  trembling  in  fear  before  you,  even  in  the  great- 
ness of  your  power  have  mercy. 

1 1  He  who  wins   favour  for  his   prayer  by  worship,    that  he  may 

gain  him  strength  and  highest  riches, 
That  good  man's  mind  the  Mighty  Ones  will  follow  :  they  have 
brought  comfort  to  his  spacious  dwelling. 

12  This  priestly  task,  Gods  !   Varuna  and  Mitra  !   hath  been  par- 

formed  for  you  at  sacrifices. 
Convey  us  safely  over  Q^erj  peril.     Preserve  us  evermore,  ye 
Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN   LXI.  Mitra-Varuna.  ^ 

O  Varuna  and  Mitra,  Sfirya  spreading  the  beauteous  light  of 
you  Twain  Gods  ariseth. 
He  who  beholdeth  all  existing  creatures  observeth  well  the  zeal 
that  is  in  mortals. 

2  The  holy  sage,  renowned  afar,  directeth  his   hymns  to  you,  O 

Varuna  and  Mitra,  — 
He  whose  devotions,  sapient  Gods,  ye  favour  so  that  ye  fill,  as 
'twere,  with  power  his  autumns. 

3  From  the   wide  earth,    0   Varuna  and   Mitra,  from   the  great 

lofty  heaven,  ye.  Bounteous  Givers, 
Have  in  the  fields  and  houses  set  your  warders  who  visit  every 
spot  and  watch  unceasing. 

4  I  praise  the  strength  of  Varuna  and  Mitra :   that  strength,  by 

mightiness,  keeps  both  worlds  asunder. 
Heroless  pass  the  months  of  the  ungodly  :  he  who  loves  sacri- 
fice makes  his  home  enduring. 


9  May  he :  Agni  may  be  intended.     Varvnn*»  reviler :  those  who  speak  evil 
of  princes  like  SudAs,  Varuna  being  the  king's  prototype.— Lud wig. 

10  TTieir  resplendent  meeting :  that  of  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman. 

1 1  Have  brotiffht  comfort  to  his  spacious  dwelling :  *  bestow  a  spacious  man- 
sion for  a  dwelling  upon  him.' — Wilson. 

2  Autumn  J.'  years  o£  hie  life. 


et  Tss  BYiim  OP  [nooK  viL 

5  Steers,  all  infallible  are  these  your  people  in  whom  no  wondrous 

thing  is  seen,  no  worship. 
Guile  follows  close  the   men  who  are   untruthful :  no  secrets 
may  be  hidden  from  your  knowledge. 

6  I  will  exalt  your  sacrifice   with   homage :  as  priest,  I,  Mitra- 

Varupa,  invoke  jou. 
May   these  new  hymns   and  prayers  that  I  have  fashioned 
delight  you  to  the  profit  of  the  singer. 

7  This  priestly  task,   Gods  !  Varui^a  and   Mitra !  hath   been  per- 

formed for  you  at  sacrifices. 
Convey  us  safely  over  every  peril.    Preserve  us  evermore,  ye 
Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXII.         «  Mitra-Vanira. 

S^RTA  hath   sent  aloft  his   beams  of  splendour  o'er  all  the 

tribes  of  men  in  countless  places. 
Together  with  the  heaven  he  shines  apparent,   formed  by  his 

Makers  well  with  power  and  wisdom. 

2  So  hast  thou  mounted  up  before  us,  SArya,  through  these  our 

praises,  with  fleet  dappled  horses. 
Declare   us  free  from  all  offence   to   Mitra,  and  Varuna,   and 
Aryamau,  and  Agni. 

3  May  holy  Agni,   Varuna,  and  Mitra  send  down  their  riches 

upon  us  in  thousands. 
May  they,  the  Bright  Ones,  make  our  praise-song  perfect,  and, 
when  we  laud  them,  grant  us  all  our  wishes. 

4  0  undivided  Heaven  and  Earth,  preserve  us,  us,  Lofty  Ones ! 

your  nobly-born  descendants. 
Let  us  not  anger   Varuna,  nor  Valyu,   nor  him,  the   dearest 
Friend  of  mortals,  Mitra. 

5  Stretch   forth  your   arms  and   let   our   lives  be  lengthened  : 

with  fatness  dew  the  pastures  of  our  cattle. 
Ye  Youthful,  make  us  famed  among   the  people :  hear,  Mitra- 
Varuna,  these  mine  invocations. 


5  This  stanza  is  difficult.  Sftyana's  interpretation  as  given  by  Wilson  is  : 
'  Unperplexed,  all-pervading  showerers  (of  benefits),  these  praises  are  for  you, 
in  which  nothing  surprising,  no  adoration  (worthy  of  you),  is  beheld:  the  in- 
sincere commendations  of  men  serve  as  offences  :  eulogies  of  you,  although 
offered  in  secret  are  not  unappreciated/  The  version  of  the  Seventy  JSymm  is 
somewhat  as  follows  :  *  All  your  avenging  spirits,  O  ye  Mighty,  foUow  unerr- 
iJ9gly  tihe  sinner's  traces.  They  have  no  bign  that  men  may  mark,  no  figure. 
Naught  is  so  secret  that  ye  fail  to  know  it.'  This  latter  involves  a  slight 
alteration  of  the  text.  I  prefer  Ludwig's  interpretation,  although  it  ia  not 
absolutely  convincing. 

d  To  tAe pro^e  of  the  Hnger :  see  Fcdi«c?ie  Sttuiien,  I,  4S. 


BYMN  64 1  THE  RIQVEDA.  dt 

%  Now  Mitra,  VaruI^^  Aryaman  vouchsafe  ua  freedom  and  lOom, 
for  us  and  for  our  children. 
May  we  find  paths  all  Ibat  and  good  to  trayeL     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXIII.  Mitra-Varupft. 

CoMitoi^  to  all  mankind,  auspicious  Sdrya,  he  who  beholdeth  all, 
is  mounting  upward ; 

The  God,  the  eye  of  Varuna  and  Mitra,  who  rolled  up  dark- 
ness like  a  piece  of  leather. 

2  Sdrya's  great  ensign,  restless  as  the  billow,  that  urgeth  men 

to  action,  is  advancing ; 
Onward   he  still   would  roll  the   wheel   well-rounded,    which 
Etasa,  harnessed  to  the  car-pole,  moveth. 

3  Refulgent  from  the  bosom  of  the  Mornings,  he  in  whom  singers 

take  delight  ascendeth. 
This  Savitar,  God,  is  my  chief  joy  and  pleasure,  who  break eth 
not  the  universal  statute. 

4  Golden,  far-seeing,  from  the  heaven  he  riseth :  far  is  his  goal, 

he  hasteth  on  resplendent. 
Men,   verily,  inspirited  by  Surya  speed  to  their  aims  and  do 
the  work  assigned  them. 

6  Where  the   Immortals  have   prepared  his   pathway  he  flieth 
through  the  region  like  a  falcon. 
With  homage  and  oblations  will  we  serve  you,  O  Mitra- Varuna, 
when  tbe  Sun  hath  risen. 

6  Now  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  freedom  and  room, 
for  us  and  for  our  children. 
May  we  find  paths  all  fair  and  good  to  travel.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN   LXIV.  Mitra-Varu^a. 

Yb  Twain  who  rule,  in  heaven  and  earth,  the  region,  clothed 

be  your  clouds  in  robes  of  oil  and  fatness. 
May  the  imperial  Varnna,  and  Mitra,  and  high-bom  Aryaman 

accept  our  presents. 

2  Kings,  guards  of  mighty  everlasting  Order,  come  hitherward, 
ye  Princes,  Lords  of  Rivers. 
Send  us  from  heaven,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  rain  and  sweet 
food,  ye  who  pour  down  your  bounties. 


2  Et€L9a :  or,  the  bright  or  dappled  steed  ;  one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sua. 

3  Breaketh  not :  faithfully  observes  and  supports. 

1  Clothed  he  your  clouds:  *A  covering  cloud  of  nacTod  o\\  «AX«ivd^  '^qksl 
fV,  62.  4).     'Impelled  by  you,  (the  clouds)  assume  the  iorui  ol  twv' — ^'^•^►'^u 


64  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vll. 

3  May  the  dear  God,  and  Varuna,  and  Mitra  conduct  us  by  the 
most  effective  pathways, 
That  foes  may  say  unto  Sud\s  our  chieftain,  May  we,  too,  joy 
in  food  with  Gods  to  guard  us. 

.4  Him  who  hath  wrought  for  you  this  car  in  spirit,   who  makes 
the  song  rise  upward  and  sustains  it. 
Bedew  with  fatness,  Varuna  and  Mitra :  ye  Kings,  make  glad 
the  pleasant  dwelling-places. 

5  To  you  this  laud,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  is  offered  like  bright 
Soma  juice  to  Vayu. 
Favour  our  songs  of  praise,  wake  thought  and  spirit.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN   LXV.  Mitia-Varuna. 

With  hymns  I  call  you,  when  the  Sun  hath  risen,  Mitra,  and 

Varuna  whose  thoughts  are  holy. 
Whose  Power  Divine,  supreme  and  everlasting,  comes  with  good 

heed  at  each  man's  supplication. 

.2  For  they  are  Asuras  of  Go  Is,  the  friendly  :  make,  both  of  you, 
our  lands  exceeding  fruitful. 
May  we  obtain  you,   Varuna  and  Mitra,  wherever  Heaven  and 
Earth  and  days  may  bless  us. 

3  Bonds  of  the  sinner,  they  bear  many  nooses  :  the  wicked  mortal 

hardly  may  escape  them. 
Varuna-Mitra,  may  your  path  of  Order  bear  us  o'er  trouble  as 
a  boat  o'er  waters. 

4  Come,  taste  our  offering,  Varuna  and  Mitra ;  bedew  our  pasture 

with  sweet  food  and  fatness. 
Pour  down  in  plenty  hero  upon  the  people  the  choicest  of  your 
fair  celestial  water. 


8  The  second  half  of  the  stanza  is  obscure.  The  meanin.';  appears  to  be 
that  even  our  foes,  the  godless  who  offer  no  sacrifices,  shall  envy  the  pros- 
perity  which  we  enjoy  through  the  liberality  of  Sudds,  and  shall  wish  to  fol- 
low our  example,  to  sacrifice  to  the  Gods  and  to  enjoy  their  pioteotion  and 
the  ble<>8iugs  which  they  send. 

4  Thii  c%r  :■  this  carefully-formed  hymn  which  goes,  like  a  chariot,  to  the 
Qods. 

5  To  Vdyii :  who  receives  the  first  draught  of  Soma  juice  at  the  morning 
libation.  

The  hymn  appears  to  be  composed  of  fragments  of  other  hymns  with  a 
few  original  additions.  Cf.  VII.  63.  5;  66.  7.  12;  VI.  68.  8;  VII.  62.  5;  III. 
62.  16.     See  von  Bradke,  Dyaus  Asura,  3 — 5. 

1  Poioer  Divine :  aaurydm  :  Asurahood.   WJiose :  refers  to  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

2  Asuras  of  Gods :  the  high  or  ruling  Gods  of  all  the  deities. 

3  Bonds :  binders.    Many  nooses :  *  Your  guiles,  ye  Holy  Ones,  to  quell  op- 
prffSBors,  your  snares  spread  out  against  the  foe,  Adityas'  (II.  27.  16). 


BTMN  6d.]  THE  RIGVEDA,  "eS 

5  To  you  this  laud,  0  Varuna  and   Mitra,  is  offered,  like   bright 
Soma  juice  to  V^yu. 
Favour  our  songs  of  praise,  wake  thought  and  spirit.  Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXVL  Mitra-Vamna. 

Let  our  strong  hymn  of  praise  go  forth,  the  laud  of  Mitra- 

Varuna, 
With  homage  to  that  high-born  Pair  ; 

2  The  Two  exceeding  wise,  the  Sons  of  Daksha,  whom  the  Grods 
ordained 
For  lorddhip,  excellently  great. 

8  Such,  Guardians  of  our  homes  and  us,  0  Mitra- Varuna,  fulfil 
The  thoughts  of  those  who  sing  your  praise. 

4  So  when  the  Sun  hath  risen  to-day,  may  sinless  Mitra,  Arya- 

man, 
Bhaga,  and  Savitar  send  us  forth. 

5  May  this  our  home  be  guarded  well :  forward,  ye  Bounteous, 

on  the  way, 
Who  bear  us  safely  o'er  distress. 

6  And  those  Self-reigning,  Aditi,  whose  statute  is  inviolate, 
The  Kings  who  rule  a  vast  domain. 

7  Soon  as  the  Sun  hath  risen,  to  you,  to  Mitra- Varuna,  I  sing. 
And  Aryaman  who  slays  the  foe. 

8  With   wealth  of  gold   may  this  my   song  bring   unmolested 

power  and  might, 
And,  Brahmans,  gain  the  sacrifice. 

9  May  we  be  thine,  God  Varuna,  and  with  our  princes,  Mitra, 

thine : 
Food  and  Heaven's  light  will  we  obtain. 

10  Many  are  they  who  strengthen  Law,  Sun-eyed,  with  Agni  for 
their  tongue, 


2  SoM  of  Bakika:  see  VI.  50.  2,     For  lordship  :  literally  for  Asiirahood. 

4  Sinless:  S&yana  here,  as  in  VII.  60.  1,  takes  dndf/dh  us  =  andgasah,  bo 
that,  according  to  his  interpretation,  the  translation  would  be  :  may  Savitar, 
Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Bhaga  send  us  sinless  forth. 

6  Aditi  is  out  of  place  here,  as  there  is  no  copulative  in  the  text :  whose 
mother  is  Aditi,  seems  to  ba  intended. 

8  Andf  Brahmans,  gain  the  sacrifice  :  the  exact  meaning  is  uncertain  :  *  May 
it  (be  effective),  sagea,  for  the  fulfilment  of  (the  objects  of)  the  sucriEce.'— > 
Yfilaon. 


««  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

They    Trho  direct    the   three    great  gatherings    with    their 
thoughts,  yea,  all  things  with  surpassing  might. 

11  They  who  have  stablished  year  and  month  and  then  the  day, 

night,  sacrifice  and  holy  verse, 

Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  Kings,  have  won  dominion  which 
none  else  may  gain. 

12  So  at   the  rising  of  the   Sun   we  think  of  you  with   hymns 

to-day, 

Even  as  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  deserve :  ye  are  the  chariot- 
eers of  Law. 

13  True  to  Law,  born  in  Law,  the  strengtheners  of  Law,  terrible, 

haters  of  the  false. 

In  their  felicity  which  gives  the  best  defence  may  we  men  and 
our  princes  dwell. 

14  Uprises,  on  the  slope  of  heaven,  that  marvel  that  attracts  the 

sight. 

As  swift  celestial  Etasa  bears  it  away,  prepared  for  every  eye 
to  see. 

15  Lord  of  each  single  head,  of  fixt  and  moving  things,  equally 

through  the  whole  expanse. 

The   Seven  sister   Bays  bear  Surya  on  his  car,  to  bring  xib 
wealth  and  happiness. 

16  A  hundred  autumns  may  we  see  that  bright  Eye,  God-ordain- 

ed, arise : 
A  hundred  autumns  may  we  live. 

17  Infallible   through  your  wisdom,    come   hither,    resplendent 

Varuna, 
And  Mitra,  to  the  Soma  draught. 

18  Come  as  the  laws  of  Heaven  ordain,    Varuna,   Mitra,  void  of 

guile  : 
Press  near  and  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

19  Come,  Mitra,  Varuna,  accept,  Heroes,  our  sacrificial  gift : 
Drink  Soma,  ye  who  strengthen  Law. 


1 0  The  three  great  gatherings:  or  three  assemblies.     The  meaning  is  not  clear. 
Ludwig  is  of  opinion  that  the  three  castes  are  intended. 

The  meaning  of  stanzas  10   and  11  is  that  although  there  be  many  deities 
Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Axyaman  are  supreme. 

15  Sisiei'  Bays:  the  Hants.    See  IV.  6.  9;  13.  3. 

X8  C)me  as  the  laws  of  Heaven  ordain  :   *  Come  with  your  glories  from  the 
sijr.  '^^Sijrana.     *  Come  hither  with  the  hosts  of  heaven.* — Gra^smami. 


S7MN  67.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  67 

HYMN  LXVII.  Asvins. 

I  WITH  a  holy  heart  that  brings  oblation  will  sing  forth  praise 

to  meet  your  car,  ye  Princes, 
Which,  Much-desired  !  hath  wakened  as  your  envoy.     I  call 

you  hither  as  a  son  his  parents. 

2  Brightly  hath  Agni  shone  by  us  enkindled  :  the  limits  even 
of  darkness  were  apparent. 
Eastward  is  seen  the  Banner  of  the  Morning,  the  Banner  bom 
to  give  Heaven's  Daughter  glory. 

^  With  hymns  the  deft  priest  is  about  you,  Asy^ins,  the  eloquent 
priest  attends  you  now,  NA.satyas. 
Come  by  the  paths  that  ye  are  wont  to   travel,    on   car   that 
finds  the  light,  laden  with  treasure. 

4  When,  suppliant  for  your  help,  Lovers  of  Sweetness  !  I  seek- 

ing wealth  call  you  to  our  libation, 
Hitherward  let  your  vigorous  horses  bear  you  :  drink  ye  with 
us  the  well-pressed  Soma  juices. 

5  Bring  forward,  Asvins,  Gods,  to  its  fulfilment  my  never-weari- 

ed prayer  that  asks  for  riches. 
Vouchsafe  us  all  high  spirit  in   the   combat,    and   with   your 
powers,  0  Lords  of  Power,  assist  us. 

6  Favour  us  in  these  prayers  of  ours,   0  As\4ns.     May  we  hare 

genial  vigour,  ne'er  to  fail  us. 
So  may  we,  strong  in  children  and  descendants,   go,    wealthy, 
to  the  banquet  that  awaits  you. 

7  Lovers  of  Sweetness,  we  have  brought    this  treasure  to  you  as 

'twere  an  envoy  sent  for  friendship. 
Come  unto  us  with  spirits  free  from  anger,  in  homes   of   men 
enjoying  our  oblation. 

8  With  one,  the  same,  intention,  ye  swift  movers,  o'er  the  Seven 

Rivers  hath  your  chariot  travelled. 
Yoked  by  the  Gods,  your   strong   steeds   never   weary   while 
speeding  forward  at  the  pole  they  bear  you. 

9  Exhaustless   be   your   bounty   to   our  princes  who  with  their 

wealth  incite  the  gift  of  riches. 
Who  further  friendship  with  their   noble   natures,   combining 
wealth  in  kine  with  wealth  in  horses. 


1  Much-desired:   ' adorable.*— Wilson. 

9  Incite  the  gift  of  riches :  move  the  Gods  to  give  riches  in  return. 

Friendthijp :  or,  a  kinsman,  meaning,  apparently,  the  priest 


«8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIL 

10  Now  hear,  0  Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation:  come,  Asvins, 
to  the  home  where  food  aboundeth. 
Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  do  honour  to  our  nobles.     Preserve   us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXVIII.  Asvins. 

• 

Come,  radiant  Asvins,  with   your  noble  horses  :  accept  your 

servant's  hymns,  ye  Wonder- Workers  : 
Enjoy  oblations  which  we  bring  to  greet  you. 

2  The  gladdening  juices  stand  prepared  before  you :  come  quick- 

ly and  partake  of  mine  oblation. 
Pass  by  the  calling  of  our  foe  and  hear  us. 

3  Your  chariot  with  a  hundred  aids,  0  Asvins,  beareth  you  swift 

as  thought  across  the  regions, 
Speeding  to  us,  0  ye  whose  wealth  is  Surylk. 

4  What  time  this  stone  of  yours,    the   Gods'   adorer,    upraised,. 

sounds  forth  for  you  as  Soma-presser, 
Let  the  priest  bring  you,  Fair  Ones,  through  oblations. 

5  The  nourishment  ye  have  is,  truly,  wondrous  :  ye  gave  there- 

of a  quickening  store  to  Atri, 
Who,  being  dear  to  you,  receives  your  favour. 

6  That  gift,  which  all  may   gain,  ye   gave  Chyavana,  when   he 

g'-ew  old,  who  offered  you  oblations. 
When  ye  bestowed  on  him  enduring  beauty. 

7  What  time  his  wicked  friends  abandoned  Bhujyu,  0  Asvins, 

in  the  middle  of  the  ocean. 
Your  horse  delivered  him,  your  faithful  servant. 


3  Whose  wealth  is  SHi'y^ :  having  SiiryA  for  your  possession  or  treasure. 
Suryft,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.  is  the  consort  of  the  Asvins.     See  I.  1X6.  X7. 

4  The  Gods*  adorer:  devay^h :  literally,  turning  or  going  to  the  Gods,  in- 
asmuch as  it  is  employed  in  preparing  the  Soma  juice.  The  priest :  here» 
perhaps,  the  pressing-stone. 

5  A  quickening  store  :  the  meaning  of  mdhishvantanif  which  does  not  occu'^ 
elsewhere,  is  uncertain.  According  to  S^yar^a  it  means  a  pit  or  cavern  :  ye 
liberated  Atri  from  the  cavern,  or,  literally,  ye  separated  the  cavern  from  Atri. 
For  the  legend,  see  I.  116.  12. 

6  Which  aU  may  gain :  which  you  Asvins  are  ready  to  grant  to  every 
worshipper  who  needs  it.  For  the  atory  of  Chyav4na  seel.  U6.  10;  117. 
13;  118.6, 

7  Bhujyu:  see  Vol.  I.,  Index,  Your  horse:  this  meaning  is  suggested  by 
von  Roth  for  the  uncertain  word  driivdy  which  ganerally  appears  to  mean 
hostile  or  illiberal  \  ut  may  perhaps  stand  in  this  passage  for  arvdf  a  common 
wori\  signifying  hor.  e.     S.*e  I.  117.  14  : — 'With  horses  brown  of  hue  that  flew 

H^ith  swift  Wiuga  ye  I  roii^ht  back  Bhuiyufrom  the  sea  of  billows.'  See  also 
VJl  69,  7. 


HtitN  69  J  Tffi  RIO  VEDA.  6d 

8  Ye  lent  your  aid  to  Vrika  when  exhausted,  and  listened  when 

invoked  to  Sayu's  calling. 
Ye  made  the  cow  pour  forth  her  milk  like  water,  and,  Asvins, 
strengthened  with  your  strength  the  barren. 

9  With  his  fair  hymns  this  singer,  too,  extols  you,  waking  with 

glad  thoughts  at  the  break  of  morning. 
May  the  cow  nourish  him  with  milk  to  feed  him.    Preserve  us 
tevermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXIX.  Asvins. 

May  your  gold  chariot,  dra\^n  by  vigorous  horses,  come  ta  us, 

blocking  up  the  earth  and  heaven, 
Bright  with  its  fellies  while  its  Way  drops  fatness,    food-laden, 

rich  in  coursers,  man's  protector. 

2  Let  it  approach,  yoked  by  the  will,  three-seate  i,  extending  far 

and  wide  o^er  fivefold  beings. 
Whereon  ye   visit   God-adoring   races,    bending   your    course 
whither  ye  will,  0  Asvins. 

3  Renowned,  with  noble  horses,  come  ye  hither  :  drink.    Wond- 

rous Pair,  the  cup  that  holds  sweet  juices. 
Your  car  whereon  your  Spouse  is  wont  to  travel    marks    with 
its  track  the  farthest  ends  of  heaven. 

4  When  night  was  turning  to  the  grey  of  morning  the  Maiden, 

Surya's  Daughter,  chose  your  splendour. 
When  with  your  power  and  might  ye  aid  the  pious    he   comes 
through  heat  to  life  by  your  assistance. 

5  0  Chariot-borne,  this  car  of  yours  invested  with  rays  of   light 

comes  harnessed  to  our  dwelling. 
Herewith,  0  Asvins,  while  the  dawn  is   breaking,  to   this   our 
sacrifice  bring  peace  and  blessing. 

6  Like  the  wild  cattle   thirsty   for  the  lightning.  Heroes,  come 

nigh  this  day  to  our  libations. 
Men  call  on  you  with  hymns  in  many  places,  but  let  not  other 
worshippers  detain  you, 

8  Vrika  :  literally  wolf,  or  robber.    Some  man  so  named  seems  to  be  meant. 
Suyu:  see  I.  118.  8;  VI.  13.  5. 

9  This  singer :  the  Rishi  Vasishtha.     The  cow :   that  is   brought  to  supply 
the  milk  required  for  libations. 

2  Fivefold  beings:  *  sai'vaprdnhah'  all  living  beings,  says  SAyanik 

3  Your  Spouse  :  Suryi,  daughter  of  the  Sun. 

4  Chose  your  splendour :  seel.  116.  17. 

6  Thirsty  for  the  lightnivff :    which  immediately  pT%ced«i,OT  vitWK^wivJM^^ 
the  rain  tbey  long  for. 


k 


70  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlt 

7  Bhujyu,  abandoned  in  the  midst  of  ocean,  ye  raised  from  out 

the  water  with  your  iiorses, 
Uninjured,    wingM,  flagging  not>    undaunted,  with  deeds   of 
wonder  saving  him,  O  Asvins. 

8  Now  hear,  0  Youthful  Twain,  mine  invocation  :  come,  Asvins, 

to  the  home  where  food  aboundeth. 
Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  do  honour  to  our  nobles.    Preserve   us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXX.  Asvins. 

Rich  in  all  blessings,  Aeivins,  come  ye   hither :  this  place  on 

earth  is  called  your  own  possession, 
Like  a  strong  horse  with  a  fair  back  it   standeth,   whereon,  as 

in  a  lap,  ye  seat  you  firmly. 

2  This  most  delightful  eulogy  awaits  you :  in  the  man's  house 

drink-offering  bath  been  heated. 
Which  bringeth  you  over  the  seas  and  rivers,  yoking  as  'twere 
two  well-matched  shining  horses, 

3  Whatever  dwellings  ye  possess,  0  Asvins,  in  fields  of  men  or 

in  the  streams  of  heaven. 
Resting  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  or  bringing  food 
to  him  who  gives  oblation, 

4  Delight  yourselves,  ye  Gods,  in  plants  and  waters  when  Rishis 

give  them  and  ye  find  they  suit  you. 
Enriching  us  with  treasures  in  abundance  ye  have  looked  back 
to  former  generations. 

6  Asvins,  though  ye  have  heard  them  oft  aforetime,  regard  the 
many  prayers  which  Rishis  offer. 
Come  to  the  man  even  as  bis  heart  desire th :  may  we  enjoy 
your  most  delightful  favour. 

6  Come  to  the  sacrifice  offered  you,  Nllsatyas,  with  men,  obIa> 
tions,  and  prayer  duly  uttered. 
Come  to  Vasishtha  as  his  heart  desireth,   for  unto  you  these 
holy  hymns  are  chanted 

7  Horses  :  not  in  the  text,  but  supplied  by  Sftyana  and  obviously  understood. 
See  preceding  hymn,  7,  note. 

1  This  place:  the  altar. 

2  Drink-offering :  ghartaa :  the  libation  of  hot  milk  ;  or,  the  caldron  in  which 
it  is  prepared. 

4  Ye  have  looked  bach  to  former  generations  :  S&yana  explains  yug^ni  diffe- 
rently :  *  (favour  u4)  as  you  have  favoured  former  couples  [t.  e.  sacrificers  and 
their  w/VasJ.'— Wilson. 

/^  TAemam  the  inatitator  of  the  Bacnfic*» 


MJMN  72.]  THE  RlQVEDA.  71 

7  This  is  the  thought,   this  is  the  song,   0  As  vine  :  accept  this 
hymn  of  ours,  ye  Steers,  with  favour. 
May  these  our  prayers  addressed  to   you   come   nigh  you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXI.  Asvins. 

The  Night  retireth  from  the  Dawn  her  Sister;  the  Dark  one 

yieldeth  to  the  Red  her  pathway. 
Let  us  invoke  you  rich  in  steeds  and  cattle :  by  day  and  night 

keep  far  from  us  the  arrow. 
3  Bearing  rich  treasure  in  your  car,   0  Asvins,  come  to  the 

mortal  who  presents  oblation. 
Keep  at  a  distance  penury  and  sickness ;  Lovers  of  Sweetness, 

day  and  night  preserve  us. 

3  May  your  strong  horses,   seeking   bliss,  bring    hither  your 

chariot  at  the  earliest  flush  of  morning. 
With  coursers  yoked  by  Law   drive  hither,   Asvins,  your  car 
whose  reins  are  light,  laden  with  treasure. 

4  The  chariot.   Princes,  that  conveys  you,  moving  at  daylight, 

triple-seated,  fraught  with  riches. 
Even  with  this  come  unto  us,   Nasatyas,   that  laden  with  all 
food  it  may  approach  us. 

5  Ye  freed  Chyavana  from  old  age  and  weakness :  ye  brought 

the  courser  fleet  of  foot  to  Pedu. 
Ye  rescued  Atri  from  distress  aud  darkness,  and  loosed  for 
Jahusha  the  bonds  that  bound  him. 

6  This  is  the  thought,  this  is  the  song,  0  Asvins  :  accept  this 

hymn  of  ours,  ye  Steers,  with  favour. 
May   these    our   prayers   addressed    to   you   come   nigh  you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with'  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXII.  ABving. 

Comb,  0  Nasatyas,  on  your  car  resplendent,  rich  in  abundant 

wealth  of  kine  and  horses. 
As  harnessed  steeds,  all  our  laudations  follow  you  whose  forms 

shine  with  most  delightful  beauty. 

2  Come  with  the  Gods  associate,  come  ye  hither  to  us,  Nasatyas, 
with  your  car  accordant. 
'Twixt  you  and  us  there  is  ancestral  friendship  and  common 
kin  :  remember  and  regard  it. 

1   The  Red  :  the  Sun.     The  airow  :  of  disease  and  death. 

3  Seeking  bliss :  for  men. 

5  For  Chyavdna,  Pedu,  Atri,  and  Jdhusha,  see  Vol.  I.  Index.  There-ap- 
pearance, heralded  by  the  Asvins  or  Gods  of  Twilight,  of  the  departed  Sun 
Appeaiv  to  he  BjrmboUzed  in  all  these  legends. 


7%  TffS  ffYMJ^S  OF  [BOOK  VII. 

3  Awakened  are  the  songs  that  praise  the  Afvins,  the  kindred 

prayers  and  the  Celestial  Mornings. 
Inviting  those  we  long  for,  Earth  and   Heaven,  the  singer 
calleth  these  Nasatjas  hither. 

4  What  time  the  Dawns  break  forth  in  light,  O  Asvins,  to  you 

the  poets  offer  their  devotions. 
God  Savitar  hath  sent  aloft  his  splendour,  and  fires  sing  praises 
with  the  kindled  fuel. 

5  Come  from  the  West,  come  from  the  east,  Nasatyas,  come,  As- 

vins, from  below  and  from  above  us. 
Bring  wealth  from  all  sides  for  the  Fivefold  People.     Preserve 
.us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings* 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Asvins. 

Wb  have  overpassed  the  limit  of  this  darkness  while,  worship- 
ping the  Gods,  we  sang  their  praises. 

The  song  invoketh  both  Immortal  Asvins,  far-reaching,  bom 
of  old,  great  Wonder-Workers. 

2  And,  0  Nasatyas,  man's  dear  Priest  is  seated,  who  brings  to 

sacrifice  and  offers  worship. 
Be  near  and  taste  the  pleasant  juice,  0  Asvins :  with  food, 
I  call  you  to  the  sacrifices. 

3  We  choosing  you,  have  let  our  worship  follow  its  course :  ye 

Steers,  accept  this  hymn  with  favour. 
Obeying  you  as  your  appointed  servant,  Vasishtha   singing 
hath  with  lauds  aroused  you. 

4  And  these  Two  Priests  come  nigh  unto  our  people,  united, 

demon-slayers,  mighty-handed. 
The  juices  that  exhilarate  are  mingled.     Injure  us  not,  but 
come  with  happy  fortune. 

5  Come  from  the  west,  come  from  the  east,  Nslsatyas,  come,  As- 

vins, from  below  and  from  above  us. 
Bring  wealth  from  all  sides  for  the  Fivefold  People.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXIV.  Asvins. 

Thesb  morning  sacrifices  call  you.  Asvins,  at  the  break  of  day. 
For  help  have  I  invoked  you  rich  in  power  and  might :  for, 
house  by  house,  ye  visit  alL 

-  -        -  — -■■-- -     ■■■■— ^■■-■-- 

5  TJie  Fivefold  People :  the  five  Aryan  tribes.     See  I.  7.  9. 

1  The  first  half-line  has  occurred  before  in  I.  92.  6,  and  183.  (J. 

2  Man's  dear  Priest :  Agni. 

^  -^<Kftf  Tiffo Priests/  the  Aevins.    Demori'slayers :  slayers  of  Rftkshasas  and 
^rilspirita  of  the  night  which  disappear  at  the  cotnm^  oi  tVie  Vievilda  a£  day. 


SYMN  75;]  TBE  RIOVEDA,  78 

2  O  Heroes,  ye  bestow  wonderful  nourishment :  send  it  to  him 

whose  songs  ate  sweet. 
Accordant,  both  of  you,  drive  your  car  down  to  us,  and  drink 
the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

3  Approach  ye  and  be  near  to  us :  drink,  0  ye  Asvins,  of  the 

meath. 
Draw  forth  the  milk,  ye  Mighty,  rich  in  genuine  wealth  :  in- 
jure us  not,  and  come  to  us. 

4  The  horses  that  convey  you  in  their  rapid  flight  down  to  the 

worshipper's  abode, 
With  these  your  speedy  coursers.  Heroes,  Asvins,  come,  ye 
Gods,  come  well-inclined  to  us. 

6  Yea,  verily,  our  princes  seek  the  Asvins  in  pursuit  of  food. 
These  shall  give  lasting  glory  to  our  liberal  lords,  and,  both 
N^satyas,  shelter  us. 

6  Those  who  have  led  the  way,  like  cars,  offending  none,  those 
who  are  guardians  of  the  men — 
Also  through  their  own  might  the  heroes  have  grown  strong, 
and  dwell  in  safe  and  happy  liomes. 

HYMN  LXXV.  Dawn. 

Born  in  the  heavens  the  Dawn  hath  flushed,  and  showing  her 

majesty  is  come  as  Law  ordaineth. 
She  hath  uncovered  fiends  and   hateful   darkness ;  best   of 

Angirases,  hath  waked  the  pathways. 

2  Rouse  us  this  day  to  high  and  happy  fortune  :  to  great  felicity, 

0  Dawn,  promote  us. 
Vouchsafe  us  manifold  and  splendid  riches,  famed  among  mor- 
tals, man-befriending  Goddess ! 

3  See,  lovely  Morning's  everlasting  splendours,  bright  with  their 

varied  colours,  have  approached  us. 
Filling  the  region  of  mid-air,  producing  the  rites  of  holy  wor- 
ship, they  have  mounted. 

4  She  yokes  her  chariot  far  away,  and  swiftly  visits  the  lands 

where  the  Five  Tribes  are  settled. 
Looking  upon  the  works  and  ways  of  mortals,  Daughter  of 
Heaven,  the  world's  Imperial  Lady. 

3  Draw  forth  the  milk :  milk  the  sweet  rain  from  the  firmament. 

6  W/fo  have  led  the  way,  like  can :  wealthy  nobles  or  princea,  *the  heroes'  of 
the  second  line. 

1   Be8t  of  Anf/lraset :   endowed  With  the  noblest  chara'^teristics  of  the  holy 
Angirasea      Wa^ed  the pathwapt  i  Jiglited  thetn  iov  meii  to  u^fe. 

i 


74  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  YIL 

5  She  who  is  rich   in  spoil,  the  Spouse  of  Sarya,  wondrously 

opulent,  rules  all  wealth  and  treasures. 
Consumer  of  our  youth,  the  seers  extol  her  :  lauded  by  priests 
ricii  Dawn  shines  out  refulgent. 

6  Apparent  are  the  steeds  of  varied  colour,  the  red  steeds  car- 

rying resplendent  Morning. 
On  her  all-lovely  car  she  comes,  the  Fair  One,  and  brings  rich 
treasure  for  her  faithful  servant 

7  True  with  the  True  and  Mighty  with  the  Mighty,  with  Gods 

a  Goddess,  Holy  with  the  Holy, 
She  brake  strong  fences  down  and  gave  the  cattle :  the  kine 
were  lowing  as  they  greeted  Morning. 

8  0  Dawn,  now  give  us  wealth   in  kine  and  heroes,  and  horses, 

fraught  with  manifold  enjoyment. 
Protect  our  sacred  grass  from  man's  reproaches.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXVI.  Dawn. 

Savitar  God  of  all  men  hath  sent  upward  his  light,  designed 

for  all  mankind,  immortal. 
Through  the  Gods'  power  that  Eye  was  first  created.     Dawn 

hath  made  all  the  universe  apparent. 

2  I  see  the  paths  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel,  innocuous  paths 
/  made  ready  by  the  Vasus. 

^/Eastward  the  flag  of  Dawn  hath  been  uplifted;  she  hath  come 
i»ither  o'er  the  tops  of  houses. 

3  Great  is,  in  truth,   the  number  of  the  Mornings  which   were 

aforetime  at  the  Sun's  uprising, 
Since  thou,  0  Dawn,  hast  been  beheld  repairing  as  to  thy  love, 
as  one  no  more  to  leave  him. 

4  They  were  the  Gods'  companions  at  the  banquet,  the  ancient 
sages  true  to  Law  Eternal. 

The  Fathers  found  the  light  that  lay  in  darkness,  and  with 
effectual  words  begat  the  Morning. 


7  Gave  the  cattle :  restored  the  rays  of  light  that  had  beeu  imprisoned  by 
the  demons  of  darkness. 


Z  As  to  thy  love:  to  the  Sun,   who  is  sometimes  called  the  lover  and  some- 
times the  husband  of  Ushas  or  Dawn. 

^  4  The  Fathers :  the  ancestors  of  the  Rishis  in  the  spirit- world  are  Associated 
wfeh  the  Oitds  aa  companions,  friends,  and  aaaiatauts.    See  M.  Muller,  India, 
frAafean  it  Teach  uat  pp.  223,  224. 


HYMN  77.]  THE  RJQVEDA.  75 

^-*0  Meet  ug  togetlier  in  the  same  enclosure,  they  strive  not,  of  one 
mind,  one  with  another. 
Tliey  never  break  the  Gods'  eternal  statutes,  and  injure  none, 
in  rivalry  with  Vasus. 

6  Extolling  thee,  Blest  Goddess,   the  Vasishthas,  awake  at  early 

morn,  with  lauds  implore  thee. 
Leader  of  kine  and  Queen  of  all  that  strengthens,  shine,  come 
as  first  to  us,  0  high-born  Morning. 

7  She  bringeth  bounty  and  sweet  charm  of  voices.     The  flush- 
V     ing  Dawn  is  sung  by  the  Vasishthas, 

j^  Giving  us  riches  famed  to  distant  places.     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN    LXXVII.  Dawn. 

\^  She  hath  shone  brightly  like  a  youthful  woman,   stirring  to 
motion  every  living  creature. 
Agni    hath  come  to   feed  on   mortals'   fuel.     She  hath  made 
^  light  and  chased  away  the  darkness. 

\{r  Turned  to  this  All,  far-spreading,  she  hath  risen  and  shone  in 
brightness  with  white  robes  about  her. 
She  hath  beamed  forth  lovely  with  golden  colours.  Mother  of 
kine,  Guide  of  the  days  she  bringeth. 

3  Bearing   the   Gods'  own  Eye,   auspicious   Lady,  leading  her 

Courser  white  and  fair  to  look  on. 
Distinguished   by  her  beams  Dawn   shines  apparent,    come 
fortli  to  all  the  world  with  wondrous  treasure. 

4  Draw  nigh  with  wealth  and  dawn  away  the  foeman  :  prepare 

for  us  wide  pasture  free  from  danger. 
Drive  away  those  who  hate  us,  bring  u:^  riches :  pour  bounty, 
opulent  Lady,  on  the  singer. 

6  Send  thy  most  excellent  beams  to  shine  and  light  us,  giving 
us  lengthened  days,  0  Dawn,  0  Goddess, 
Granting   us  food,   thou  who   hast   all  things   precious,    and 
bounty  rich  in  chariots,  kine,  and  horses. 

6  0  Ushas,  nobly-born.  Daughter  of  Heaven,  whom  the  Vasish- 
thas with  their  hymns  make  mighty. 
Bestow   thou   on   us  vast  and   glorious   riches.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

5  In  the  iame  enclosure:  the  vast  aerial  hall  in  which  the  Qods  a&semble. 

1  Agni  hath  come  to  feed  on  mortaW  fuel :  *  Agni  is  to  be  kindled  for  the 
good  of  men.* — Wilson. 

2  Kine :  rays  of  light. 

3  T^fi  C^ods*  own  JS'ye,  and  Dawn'a  white  Cournr  are  tbft  ^mxi. 


\A: 


76  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  ViL 

HYMN  LXXViri.  Da^d, 

B  have   beheld  her   earliest  lights   approaching  :  her   many 
glories  part,  on  high,  asunder. 

On  car  sublime,  refulgent,  wending  hither,  0  Ushas,  bring  the 
wealth  that  makes  us  happy. 

i2/The  fire  well-kindled  sings  aloud  to  greet  her,  and  with  their 
hymns  the  priests  are  chanting  w*elcome. 

Ushas  approaches  in  her  splendour,  driving  all  evil  darkness 
far  away,  the  Goddess. 

3  Apparent  eastward  are  those  lights  of  Morning,  sending  out 

lustre,  as  they  rise,  around  them. 

She  hath  brought  forth  Sun,  sacrifice,  and  Agni,  and  far  away 
hath  fled  detested  darktiess. 

4  Rich  Daughter  of  the  Sky,   we  all  behold  her,  yea,  all  men 

look  on  Dawn  as  she  is  breaking. 

Her  car  that  moves  self-harnessed  hath  she  mounted,  the  car 
drawn  onward  by  her  well-yoked  horses. 

5  Inspired  with  loving  thoughts  this  day  to  greet  thee;  we  and 

our  wealthy  nobles  have  awakened. 

Show  yourselves  fruitful,  Dawns,  as  ye  are  rising*     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  Dawn. 

Rousing  the  lands  where  men's  Five  Tribes  are  settled,  Dawn 

hath  disclosed  the  pathways  of  the  people. 
Si»e  hath  sent  out  her  sheen  with  beauteous  oxen.     The  Sun 

with  light  hath  opened  earth  and  heaven. 

2  They   paint  their   bright  rays   on  the   sky's  far   limits :  the 

Dawns  come  on  like  tribes  arrayed  for  battle. 

Thy  cattle,  closely  shutting  up  the  darkness,  as  Savitar  spreads 
his  arms,  give  forth  their  lustre. 

3  Wealthy,  most  like  to   Indra,  Dawn  hath   risen,  and    brought 

forth  lauds  that  shall  promote  our  welfare. 

Daughter  of  Heaven,  a  Goddess,  she  distributes,  best  of  Angi- 
rases,  treasures  to  the  pious. 

1  Five  Tribes :  of  Aryans.  Pathways :  pathy'd  here  has  apparently  the 
same  meaning  as  in  VII.  75.  1.  But  according  to  the  Pada  text  and  S&yana 
it  is  an  adjective  agreeing  with  UsMh  (Dawn),  and  signifying  beneficiaL 

2  They :  the  Dawns.     For  battle :  supplied  by  S&yana. 
S  Best  of  Angira$e»  :  see  VII.  75.  1. 


BYMN  81.]  THE  RIGVEDA,  77 

4  Bestow  on  us,  0  Dawn,  that  ample  bounty  which   thou  didst 

send  to  those  who  sang  thy  praises ; 
Thou  whom  with   bellowings  of  a  bull   they  quickened  :    thou 
didst  uubar  the  firm-set  mountain's  portals. 

5  Impelling   every  God  to   grant  his  bounty,   sending  to  us  the 

charm  of  pleasant  voices, 
Vouchsafe  us  thoughts,  for  profit,  as  thou  breakest.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXX,  Dawn. 

The  priests,   Vasishthas,  are  the   first  awakened   to   welcome 

Ushas  with  their  songs  and  praises, 
Who  makes  surrounding  regions  pari  asunder,  and  shows  ap- 

psxrent  all  existing  creatures. 

2  Giving  fresh  life  when  she  hath  hid  the  darkness,  this  Dawn 

hath  wakened  there  with  new-born  lustre. 
Youthful    and   unrestrained    she   cometh   forward :   she  hath 
turned  thoughts  to  Sun  and  fire  and  worship. 

3  May  blessid  Mornini^s  shine  on    us  for   ever,  with   wealth  of 

/  kine,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes, 

Streaming  with  all  abundance,  pouring  fatness.     Preserve  us 
\/     evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Dawn. 

Advancing,  sending  forth  her  rays,  the  Daughter  of  the  Sky 

is  seen. 
Uncovering,  that  we  may  see,  the  mighty  gloom,  the  friendly 

Lady  makes  the  light. 

2  The  Sun  ascending,  the  refulgent  Star,  pours  down  his  beams 

tojSjether  wTth  the  Dawn. 
O  Dawn,  at^  thine  arising,    and  the   Sun's,  may   we  attain  the 
share  allotted  us. 

3  Promptly  we   woke  to  welcome   thee,    0  Ushas,    Daughter  of 

the  Sky, 
Thee,  Bounteous  One,  who  bringest  all  we  long  to  have,  and  to 
the  offerer  health  and  wealth. 


4  The  second  line  is  translated  by  Prof.  Wilson  :  *  tbou  whom  (thy  worship- 
pers) welcomed  with  clamour  (loud  as  the  bellowing)  of  a  bull.' 

Portals:  the  doors  of  the  mountain  or  cloud  in  which  the  cows  or  rays  of 
light  wei-e  imprisoned.  Ushas  ia  by  implication  entreated  to  open  these  doors 
now  for  the  singer  of  the  hymn, 

2  She  hath  turned  thoughts :  or,  with  S&yaua,  '  she  hath  made  manifest 
sacrifice,  Sun,  and  Agni.'  Cf.  VII.  78.  3. 

3  This  Btanm  ia  repeated  from  YIL  41.  7. 


7a  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

4  Thon,   dawning,  workest   fain  to  light  the  great  world,   yea, 

heaven,  Goddess  !  that  it  may  be  seen. 
We   yearn  to  be  thine  own,   Dealer  of  Wealth :  may  we  be  to 
this  Mother  like  her  sons. 

5  Bring   us  that   wondrous  bounty.    Dawn,  that  shall  be  famed 

most  far  away.  '' 

What,    Child  of   Heaven,  thou   hast  of  nourishment  for  man, 
bestow  thou  on  us  to  enjoy. 

6  Give  to  onr  princes  opulence  and  immortal  fame,  and  strength 

in  herds  of  kine  to  us. 
May  she  who  prompts  the  wealthy,  Lady  of  sweet  strains,  may 
Ushas  dawn  our  foes  away. 

HYMN  LXXXir.  Indra-Varuna. 

• 

Grant  us  your  strong  protection,   Indra-Varuna,  our  people, 

and  our  family,  for  sacrifice. 
May  we  subdue  in  fight  our  evil-hearted  foes,  him  who  attacks 

the  man  stedfast  in  lengthened  rites. 

2  0  Indra-Varuna,  mighty  and  very  rich  !  One  of  you  is  called 

Monarch  and  One  Autocrat. 
All  Gods  in  the  most  lofty  region  of  the  air  have,  0  ye  Steers, 
combined  all  power  and  might  in  you. 

3  Ye  with  3'our  strength  hive  pierced  tl»e  fountains  of  the  floods: 

the  Sun  have  ye  brought  forward  as  the  Lord  in  heaven. 
Cheered  by  this  magic  draught  ye,  Indra-Varnna,  made  the  dry 
places  stream,  made  songs  of  piaise  flow  forth. 

4  In  battles  and  in  frays  we  ministering  priests,  kneeling  upon 

our  knees  for  furtherance  of  onr  weal. 
Invoke  yon,  only  yon,  the  Lords  of  twofold  wealth,  you  prompt 
to  hear,  we  bards,  0  Indra-Varnna. 

5  0  Indra-Varnna,  as  ye  created  all  these  creatnres  of  the  world 

by  your  surpassing  might, 
In  peace  and  quiet  Mitra  waits  on  Varuna,   the  Other,  awful, 
with  the  Marnts  seeks  renown. 


6  Lady  of  sweet  strains :  sUnrltdvatt :  according  to  S&yana,  '  speaker  of 
truth.*     *  Possessing  all  that  is  excellent.* — Ludwig. 

2  One  of  you:  Varuna  is  called  samr&j  or  universal  ruler  (thoroughly  re- 
Bplendent,  according  to  Silyana),  and  Indra  svardj,  independent  ruler,  or, 
according  to  S&yana,  self-resplendent. 

4   Twofold  wealth  :  celestial  and  terrestrial. 
5  TTaUs  on  Varuna:   and  so   acknowledges   his  supremacy.     The   Other: 


UYMN  88 J  THE  RIGVEDA,  79 

6  That  Vanina's  high  worth  may  shine  prefe'minent,  these  Twain 

have  measured  each  his  proper  power  and  might. 
The  One  subdiieth   the  destructive  enemy ;  the  Other  with  a 
few  fnrthereth  many  a  man, 

7  No  trouble,  no  misfortune,    Indra-Varuna,  no   woe  from  any 

side  assails  the  mortal  man 
"Whose  sacrifice,  0  Gods,  ye  visit  and  enjoy  :  ne'er  doth  the 
crafty  guile  of  mortal  injure  him. 

8  With  your  divine  protection,   Heroes,  come  to  us  :  mine  invo- 

cation hear,  if  ye  be  pleased  therewith. 
Bestow  ye  upon  us,  0  Indra-Varuna,  your  friendship  and  your 
kinship  and  your  favouring  grace. 

9  In  battle  after  battle,  Indra-Varuna,  be  ye  our  Champions,  ye 

wlio  are  the  peoples'  strength. 
When  both  opposing  bands  invoke  you  for  the  fight,  and  men 
that  they  may  gain  offspring  and  progeny. 

10  May  Indm,  Varuna,   Mitra,  and  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  glory 
and  j^reat  shelter  spreading  far. 
We  think  of  the  beneficent  light  of  Aditi,  and  Savitar's  song 
of  praise,  the  God  who  strengthens  Law. 

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Indra-Varuna. 

Looking  to  you   and  your  alliance,   0  ye  Men,  armed  with 

broad  axes  they  went  forward,  fain  for  spoil. 
Ye  smote  and  slew  his  Ddsaand  his  Aryan  enemies,  and  helped 

Sudas  with  favour,  Indra-Varuna. 

2  Where  heroes  come  together  with  their  banners  raised,  in  the 

encounter  where  is  naught  for  us^to  love, 
Where  all  things  that  behold  the  light  are  terrified,  there  did 
ye  comfort  us,  0  I udra- Varuna. 

3  The   boundaries   of   earth    were   seen    all    dark    with   dust : 

O  Indra-Varuna,  the  shout  went  up  to  heaven. 
The   enmities  of  the  people  compassed  me  about.     Ye  heard 
my  calling  and  ye  came  to  me  with  help. 

6  The  One :  Varuna. 


ladra  and  Varupa  are  praised  by  the  Vaslshthas,  the  family  priests  of  Sud&s, 
King  of  the  Tiitsus,  for  having  given  him  the  victory  over  the  ten  confederate 
Kings.     See  V'll.  3^.  3. 

1  0  ye  Men:  or  Heroes;  Indra  and  Varuna.  Armed  with  h^oad  axes: 
'armed  with  large  sickles.* — Wilson.  Ludwig  maintains  th^t  the  former 
meaning  is  perfectly  impossible,  and  argues  that  prithupdraavah  must  mean 
*  the  Prithus  and  the  Parsus.' 

•  • 

2  Where  is  naught  for  us  to  love :  Prof.  Qrasamann,  whom  Prof.  Peterson 
follows,  explains  differently  :  '  where  all  that  is  dear  is  at  stake.' 


80         ^  TEE  ETMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlt 

4  With   your  resistless   weapons,    Indra-Varuna,  ye  conquered 

Bheda  and  ye  gave  Sud^s  your  aid. 
Ye  heard  the  prayers  of  these  amid  the  cries  of  war :  effectual 
was  the  service  of  the  Tritsus'  priest. 

5  0  ludra-Varuna,  the  wickedness  of  foes  and  mine  assailants' 

hatred  sorely  trouble  me. 
Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  riches  both  of  earth  and  heaven :  so 
grant  to  us  your  aid  on  the  decisive  day. 

6  The  men  of  both  the  hosts  invoked  you  in  the  fight,   Indra 

and  Varuna,  that  they  might  win  the  wealth, 
What  time  ye  helped  Sudas,  with  all  the  Tritsu  folk,  when  the 
Ten  Kings  had  pressed  him  down  in  their  attack. 

7  Ten  Kings  who  worshipped  not,  0  Indra-Varuna,  confederate, 

in  war  prevailed  not  o'er  Sud&s. 
True  was  the  boast  of  heroes  sitting  at  the  feast :  so  at  their 
invocations  Gods  were  on  their  side. 

8  0  Indra-Varuna,  ye  gave  Sudas  your  aid  when  the  Ten  Kings 

in  battle  compassed  him  about, 
There  where  the  white-robed  Tritsus  with  their  braided  hair, 
skilled  in  song  worshipped  you  with  homage  and  with  hymn, 

9  One  of  you  Twain  destroys  the  Vritras  in  the  fight,  the  Other 

evermore  maintains  his  holy  Laws. 
We  call  on  you,  ye  Mighty,  with  our  hymns  of  praise.  Vouch- 
safe us  your  protection,  Indra-Varuna. 

10  May  Indra,  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  glory 
and  great  shelter  spreading  far. 
We  think  of  the  beneficent  light  of  Aditi,  and  Savitar's  song 
of  praise,  the  God  who  strengthens  Law, 

HYMN  LXXXIV.  Indra-Varuna. 

Kings,    Indra-Varu^ia,  I  would    turn  you   hither  to    this  our 

sacrifice  with  gifts  and  homage. 
Held  in  both  arms  the  ladle,  dropping  fatness,  goes  of  itself 

to  you  whose  forms  are  varied, 

2  Djaus  quickens  and  promotes  your  high  dominion  who  bind 
with  bonds  not  wrought  of  rope  or  cordage. 
Far  from  us  still  be  Varuna's  displeasure  :  may  Indm  give  us 
spacious  room  to  dwell  in. 

4  Bheda:  see  VII.  18.  X9. 

6  Both  of  earth  and  heaven :  or,  perhaps,  belonging  to  both  sides. 

8   With  their  braided  hair:  see  VII.  33.  1. 

10  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  the  preceding  hymn, 

2  I?yatts:  ct  VI.  62.  9.    Not  wrought  of  rop^:  moral  and  figurative,  no 
loater/aJ, 


BTMN  85.1  THE  RIOVEDA.  81 

3  Make  ye  our  sacrifice  fair  amid  the  assemblies  :  make  ye  our 

prayers  approved  among  our  priuces. 

May   God-sent  riches   come  for  our  possession  :   further  ye  us 
with  your  delightful  succours. 

4  O  Indra-Varuna,   vouchsafe  us  riches  with  store  of   treasure, 

food,  and  every  blessing; 
For     the    Aditya,   baiiisher  of  falsehood,    the   Hero,    dealetU 
wealth  in  boundless  plenty. 

5  May  this  my   song   reach   Varuna  and    Indra,  and,    strongly 

urging,  win  me  sons  and  offspring. 

To  the   Gods*  banquet   may  we  go    with  riches.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN   LXXXV.  Indra-Varuna. 

For  you  I  deck  a  harmless  hymn,  presenting  the  Soma  juice 

to  Varuna  and  Indra — 
A  hymn  that  shines  like  heavenly  Dawn  with  fatness.     May 

y/  they  be  near  us  on  the  march  and  guard  us. 
Here  where  the  arrows  fall  amid  the  banners  both  hosts  invoke 

the  Gods  in  emulation. 
O  Indra-Varuna,  smite  back  those  our  foemen,  yea,  smite  them 
with  your  shaft  to  every  quarter. 

3  Self-lucid  in  their  seats,  e'en  heavenly  Waters  endowed  with 

Godhead  Varuna  and  Indra. 
One  of  these  holds  the  folk  distinct  and  sundered,  the  Other 
smites  and  slays  resistless  foemen. 

4  Wise  be  the  priest  and  skilled  in  Law  Eternal,  who  with  his 

sacred  gifts  and  adoration 
Brings  you  to  aid  us  with  your  might,  Adityas :  let  him  have 
viands  to  promote  his  w^elfare. 

5  May  this  my  song  reach  Varuna  and   Indra,  and,  strongly 

urging,  win  me  sons  and  offspring. 
To  the  Gods'  banquet  may  we  go  with  riches.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

4  Hie  Aditya :  Varuna. 


1  On  the  mareh :  the  Rishi  prays  for  aid  in  an  expected  battle. 

3  With  Oodhead :  libations  of  Soma  juice,  with  which  water  is  mingled, 
support  the  Gods  in  their  several  stations  :  somendpydi/itd  hi  devat^h  sve  sve 
sthdne  'vatishthante. — S&yana.  Distinct  and  sundered :  differently  treated,  re- 
warded or  punished  in  accordance  with  their  deserts.  'The  other  sustains 
the  separate  creatures.' — Muir.  *  The  one  protects  the  tribes  which  are  scat- 
tered abroad.' — Grassmann. 

4  Wise  he  the  priest:  or,  wise  must  the  priest  be,  Bk\\\e^,  ^to..    He*.  NJaa 
Jastitutor  of  eacriBce,     Viands  :  sacrificial  food  to  be  oSexfcd  \.o  Wi^  <^vi^^. 

6 


S2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIL 

HYMN  LXXXVI.  Varuna. 

Wise,  verily,  are  creatures  through  his  greatness  who  stayed 

even  spacious  heaven  and  earth  asunder ; 
Who  urged  the  high  and  mighty  sky  to  motion,  the  Star  of 

old,  and  spread  the  earth  before  him. 

2  With  mine  own  heart  I  commune  on  the  question  how  Varuna 

and  I  may  be  united. 
What  gift  of  mine  will  he  accept  unangered  ?     When  may  I 
calmly  look  and  find  him  gracious  1 

3  Fain  to  know  this  my  sin  I  question  others  :  I  seek  the  wise, 

0  Varuna,  and  ask  them. 
This  one  same  answer  even  the  sages  gave  me.  Surely  this 
Varuna  is  angry  with  thee. 

4  What,  Varima,  hath  been  my  chief  transgression,  that  thou 

wonldst  slay  the  friend  who  sings  thy  praises  ? 
Tell  me,  Unconquerable  Lord,  and  quickly  sinless  will  I  ap- 
proach thee  with  mine  homage. 

5  Free  us  Jrom  sins  committed  by  our  fathers,  from  those  where- 

in we  have  ourselves  offended. 
O  King,  loose,  like  a  thief  who  feeds  the  cattle,  as  from  the 
cord  a  calf,  set  free  Vasisbtha. 

6  Not  our  own  will  betrayed  us,  but  seduction,  thoughtlessness, 

Varuna  !  wine,  dice,  or  anger. 
The  old  is  near  to  lead  astray  the  younger:  even  sleep  removeth 
not  all  evil-doing. 

7  Slavelike  may  1  do  service  to  the  Bounteous,  serve,  free  from 

sin,  the  God  inclined  to  anger. 
This  gentle  Lord  gives  wisdom  to  the  simple  :  the  wiser  God 
leads  on  the  wise  to  riches. 

8  0  Lord,  0  Varuna,  may  this  laudation  come  close  to  tUee  and 

lie  within  thy  spirit. 
May  it  be  well  with  us  in  rest  and  labour.     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


1  The  Star :  the  Sun. 

5  Like  a  thief  who  feeds  the  cattle :  who  has  performed  penance  for  his  theft, 
and,  at  the  completion  of  the  service,  oflfered  fodder  to  the  stolen  animal :  *  who 
has  feasted  on  stolen  cattle.' — M.  MuUer.  But  see  Pischel,  Vediiche  Studien, 
I.  p.  106. 

6  Seduction :  or,  as  Sdyana  explains,  *  the  settled  course  of  fate.* 

i^/  a/af  13  near:  '  T)iq  stronger  perverts  the  weaker.' — Muir.     *  There  U  a 
senior  [God]  in  the  proximity  of  the  junior  tmanV—^^^^^ 


J^fM^  87.1  5r^^  RIGVEDA,  88 

HYMN   LXXXVII.  Varuna. 

Varusta  cat  a  pathway  out  for  Sdrya,  and  led  the  watery  floods 

of  rivers  onward. 
The  Mares,  as  in  a  race,  speed  on  in  order.     He  made  great 

channels  for  the  days  to  follow. 

"2  The  wind,  thy  breath,  hath  sounded  through  the  region  like 
a  wild  beast  that  seeks  his  food  in  pastures. 
Within  these  two,  exalted  Earth  and  Heaven,  0  Varuna,  are 
all  th«  forms  thou  lovest. 

3  Var ana's  spies,  sent  forth  upon  their  errand,  survey  the  two 

world-halves  well  formed  and  fashioned. 
Wise  are  they,  holy,  skilled  in  sacrifice>i,  the  furtherers  of  the 
praise-songs  of  the  prudent. 

4  To  me  who  understand  hath  Varuna  spoken,  the  names  borne 

by  the  Cow  are  three  times  seven. 
The  sapient  God,  knowing  the  place's  secret,  shall  speak  as 
'twere  to  teach  the  race  that  cometh. 

5  On  him  three  heavens  rest  and  are  supported,  and  the  three 

earti^s  are  there  in  sixfold  order. 
The  wise  King  Varnna  hath  made  in  heaven  that  Golden  Swing 
to  cover  it  with  glory, 

6  Like  Varuna  from  heaven  he  sinks  in  Sindhu,  like  a  white- 

shining  spark,  a  strong  wild  creature. 
Ruling  in  depths  and  meting   out  the  region,  great  saving 
power  hath  he,  this  world's  Controller. 

1  2*Ag  Jfarg«;  the  swift  rivers.  The  half -line  is  difficult.  *  Hastening  (to 
his  task)  «s  a  hurse  let  loo^  rushes  to  (a  flock  of)  mares,  he  divided  the  great 
nights  from  the  days.' — Wilson.  *  Like  a  troop  (of  horses)  let  loose,  following 
the  mares,  he  has  made  great  channels  for  the  days' — Muir. 

8   Va/rand^B  spies  :  the  oth«r  Adityas,  or  perhaps  the  Fathers, 

4  The  Cow :  according  to  Slyana,  VAk  or  Speech  in  the  form  of  a  cow 
having  twenty-one  metres  attached  to  her  breast,  throat,  and  head,  or  holding 
the  names  of  twenty-one  kinds  of  sacrifice.  Aditi  may  be  intended,  or  Prisni 
with  the  tbrice-seven  Maruts. 

The  8apieut,God:  *  The  wise  god.  though  he  knows  them,  has  not  revealed 
the  mysteries  of  (her)  place,  which  he  desires  to  grant  to  a  future  generation.' — 
Muir.     According  to  S&yana,  nd  in  this  line  is  not  negative. 

5  For  the  three  hecivent  and  three  earths  see  Vol.  I.,  Index.  In  sixfold  order : 
perhaps  referring  to  the  heavens  and  earths,  or  else  the  three  earths  arbitrarily 
d<Mibled.  *  The  three  earths  with  their  six  seasons.' — Wilson.  That  Oolden 
Swing :  the  Sun. 

6  He:  the  Sun.  Sindhn:  or  the  sea.  Ruling  in  depths:  referring  to 
Varuna  whose  dominion,  following  the  setting  sun,  reaches  to  the  depths  of 
the  ocean.  Meting  ont  the  region :  or,  who  measured  ©ut  the  firmament. 
S?ly ana's  interpretation  of  this  stanza  is  different:  '(Radiant)  as  the  sun, 
Varuna  placed  th«  ocean  (in  its  bed),  white  as  a  drop  (of  water),  vigorous  as 
an  antelope,  object  of  profound  praise,  distributor  oi  w«A«t  »  V\vfc  ^Q7^^"t\.\aX 
innaporter  bejond  Bin,  the  ruler  of  this  existing  (woTldV**  — '^vV&'Mi. 


84  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VII, 

7  Before  this  Varuna  may  we  be  sinless — him  who  shows  mercy 
even  to  the  sinner — 
While  we  are  keeping  Aditi's  ordinances.     Preserve  us  ever^ 
more,  ye  Gods,  with  blesainga. . 

HYMN   LXXXVIII.  Varuna, 

Present  to  Varuna  thine  hymn,  Vasishtha,  bright,  most  de- 
lightful to  the  Bounteous  Giver, 

Who  bringeth  on  to  us  the  Bull,  the  lofty,  the  Holy,  laden 
with  a  thousand  treasures. 

2  And  now,  as  I  am  come  before  his  presence,  I  take  the  face  of 

Varuna  for  Agni's. 
So  might  he  bring — Lord  also  of  the  darkness — the  light  in 
hieaven  that  I  may  see  its  beauty ! 

3  When  Varuna  and  I  embark  together  and  urge  our  boat  into 

the  midst  of  ocean. 
We,  when  we  ride  o'er  ridges  of  the  waters,  will  swing  within 
that  swing  and  there  be  happy, 

4  Varuna  placed  Vasishtha  in  the  vessel,   and  deftly  with  hia 

might  made  him  a  Rishi. 
When  days  shone  bright  the  Sage  made   him  a  singer,  while 
the  heavens  broadened  and  the  Dawns  were  lengthened. 

5  What  hath  become  of  those  our  ancient  friendships,  when 

without  enmity  we  walked  together  ? 
I,  Varuna,  thou  glorious  Lord,  have  entered  thy  lofty  home, 
thine  house  with  thousand  portals. 

6  If  he,  thy  true  ally,  hath  sinned  against  thee,  still,   Varuna, 

he  is  the  fiiend  thou  lovedst. 
Let  us  not,   Living  One,  as  sinners,   know  thee  ;  give  shelter, 
as  a  Sage,  to  him  who  lauds  tbeCf 


7  Aditia  ordinances:  according  to  S&ya9a,  Aditi  here  paeans  *the  Mighty,*' 
that  is,  Varuna. 

1   The  Bull :  the  Sun, 
•  2  For  Agni'a :  that  ia,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  flaming  with  anger. 

3  *  The  kernel  of  the  hymn  lies  in  verses  3  to  6.  The  singer  believes  that 
he  has  been  forsaken  by  his  helper  Varuna ;  with  anguish  he  remembers  hia 
communion  with  the  God  in  former  times.  In  a  vision  he  sees  himself  transr 
lated  into  Varurja's  realm,  he  goes  sailing  with  the  God,  is  called  to  be  Rishi 
or  holy  singer  to  the  God,  and  is  in  bis  palnce  with  hiw.  Now,  Varuna'  has 
withdrawn  his  favour,  yet  let  him  have  mercy  on  his  singer,  and  not  puniaU 
hiVn  so  grievously  for  his  sin.  The  hymn  perhaps  originally  closed  with  vers* 
^-'—Prof.  von  Roth*8  note  in  the  Siebenzig  Lieder^  translated  by  J*r(^ 
retertpn.    But  see  HiJiebrandt,  Varuna  und  MUra,  ^^.  ^b,  *i,^. 


ftrahv  90.i  tirjs  rig^edl  85 

7  While  we  abide  in  these  fixed  habitations,  and  from  the  lap  of 
Aditi  win  favour, 
May  Varuna  untie  the  bond  that  binds  us.     Preserve  ua  ever- 
more, ye  Godsj  with  blessings. 

^  HYMN  LXXXIX.  Varu-a.  v 

Lbt  me  not  yet.  King  Vanma,  enter  into  the  house  of  clay  : 
Have  mercy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord. 

^  2  When,  Thunderer !  I  move  along  tremulous  like  a  wind-blown 
skin. 
Have  mercy,  spare  me,  Mighty  Lord. 

3  0  Bright  and  Powerful  God,  through  want  of  strength  I  erred 

and  went  astray : 
Have  mercy,  spare  me.  Mighty  Lord. 

4  Thirst  found  thy  worshipper  though  he  stood  in  the  midst  of 

water-floods  : 
Have  mercy,  spate  me.  Mighty  Lord. 

5  0  Varuna,  whatever  the  offence  may  be  which  we  as  men  com- 

mit against  the  heavenly  host. 
When  through  our  want  of  thought  we   violate  thy  laws, 
punish  us  not,  0  God,  for  that  iniquity. 

HYMN  XC.  Vdyu. 

•To  you  pure  juices,  rich  in  meath,  are  offered  by  priests  through 

longing  for  the  Pair  of  Heroes, 
Drive,  Vayu,  bring  thine  harnessed  horses  hither ;  drink  the 

pressed  Soma  till  it  make  thee  joyful. 

— ' ' — '■■■^    ■  ■  ■ "'  ■-■  -'-■ 

^  Aditi:  here  said  to  miBan  earth. 


The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  67,  Prof.  M. 
{fuller,  Anc  S^^nsk.  Lit.,  540,  the  authors  of  SUbenzig  Lieder,  p.  12,  and  Prof, 
Peterson,  Hymiitfrom  the  Migveda,  p  287. 

1  The  koute  o/  day :  the  grave.  Cf.  Atharva-veda,  V.  30.  14. 

2  Thundet'er :  adrivah.  Caster  of  the  Stone,  a  common  epithet  cf  Indra, 
but  not  Buit-'^ble  to  Varuna.  Tremulovs:  Silyana  adds  aaiti/ena,  with  cold; 
and  Prof.  Wilson  observes  tJiat  *  the  VarimapdBat  a  kind  of  dropsy,  seems  to 
be  referred  to.'     Cf.  Atharva-veda,  IV.  16.  7. 

.  4  7 hirst:  avarice.  In  the  midst  «/  v>aterfioods :  when  surrounded  by 
abundant  Wealth.  According  to  the  Commentator,  the  allusion  is  to  Vasit^h- 
Uia's  sea- voyage  ;  or  perhaps  the  perpetual  thirst  of  dropsy  may  be  intended. 


The  last  three  Btanzaa  are  addressed  to  Indra  awdNltyu  «A  «.  ^\3Lsi\"^€\\:S» 
2  TAePatrof  iferaes:  Indn  and  Vdyu. 


8«  TEE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  T/I 

2  Whoso  to  thee,  the  Mighty,  brings  oblation,  pure   Soma  unto 

thee,  pure-driuking  Vayu, 
That  mau  thou  makest  famous  among  mortals  :  to  him  strong 
sons  are  born  in  quick  succession. 

3  The  God    whom  both   these  worlds   brought   forth   for  riches, 

whom  heavenly  Dhishana  for  our    wealth  appointeth,     , 
His  team  of  harnessed  horses  waits  on  Vayu,  and,  foremost,  on 
the  radiant  Treasure^bearer, 

4  The  spotless  Dawns  with  lair  bright  days  have  broken ;  they 

found  the  spacious  light  when  they  were  shining.. 
Eagerly  they  disclosed  the  stall  of  cattle  :  floods  streamed  ior 
them  as  in  the  days  aforetime. 

5  These  with  their  truthful  spirit,    shining  brightly,  move  on 

provided  with  their  natural  insight. 
Viands  attend  the  car  that  beareth  Heroes,  your  car,  ye  Sovran 
Pair,  Indra  and  V&yu. 

6  May  these  who  give  us  heavenly  light,  these  rulers,  with  gifts 

of  kiue  and  horses,  gold  and  treasures. 
These  priuces,    through  full  life,  Indra  and    Vayu !  o'ercome 
in  battle  with  their  steeds  and  heroes. 

7  Like  coursers  seeking  fume  will  we  Vasishthas,  0  Indra- Vayu, 

with  our  fair  laudations, 
Exerting  all  our  power  call  you  to  aid  us.     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessiugd. 

HYMN  XCI.  VAyu. 

Were  not,   in  sooth,    the   Gods   aforetime   blameless,  whose 

pleasure  was  increased  by  adoration  1 
For  Vayu  and  fur  mau  in  his  affiction  they  caused  the  Morning 

to  arise  with  SClrya. 

3  TheQod:  apparently,  Indra.  Dltiskand:  a  Goddess  of  proBperity  and 
gain.     ITie  radiant  Treasure-bearer:  perhaps  Soma. 

4  They  found:  the  Angiraees.  'They  are  not  named  in  the  text,  but 
SAyana  refers  the  whole  to  them  ;  by  their  prai»e  of  Vdyu  the  dawn  broke, 
the  stolen  cattle  were  rescued,  and  the  obstructed  rain  set  at  liberty.' — 

Wilson. 

6  These:  the  instl tutors  of  sacrifice. 

6  The$e  rulers,  these  pn^ices,  are  the  wealthy  nobles  who  defray  the  expenses 
and  reward  the  priests. 

Indra  la  associated  with  Vdyu  in  almost  every  stanza. 

I  j^/'  f^djfu:  I  translate  the  vdyave  oi  the  text,  Wt  \t  is  evident  tfiat 
^^^^4  for  Ajruj  or  the  living  one,  should  be  read  Vu  *\U  sV^eA. 


MTMir  92.1  TEE  HIOVEDA.  8T 

2  Guardians  infallible,  eager  as  envoys,  preserve  us  safe  through 

many  mouths  and  autumns. 
Addressed  to  you^  our  fair  praise,  Indra-Vayu,  implores  your 
favour  and  renewed  well-being. 

3  Wise,  bright,  arranger  of  his  teams,  he  seeketh  men  >vith  rich 

food  whose  treasures  are  abundant. 
They  have   arranged  them  of  one   mind  with  Vayu  :  the  men 
have  wrought  all  noble  operations. 

.  4  So  far  as  native  power  and  strength  permit  you,  so  far  as  men 
behold  whose  eyes  have  vision, 
O  ye  pure-drinkers,  drink  with  us  pure  Soma :  sit  on   this 
sacred  grass,  ludra  and  Vayu. 

5  Driving  down  teams  that  bear  the  lovely  Heroes,  hitherward, 
ludni-Vjlyu,  come  together. 
Tp  you  this  prime  of  savoury  juice  is  offered  :  here  loose  your 
yy  horses  and  be  fri«ndly-minded. 

(5  Your  hundred  and  your  thousand  teams,  0  Indra  and  Vayu, 
all-munificent,  which  attend  you, 
With  these  most  gracious-minded  come  ye  hither,  and  drink, 
O  Heroes,  of  the  meath  we  offer. 

7  Like  coursers  seeking  fame  will  we  Vasishthas,  0  Indra-Vayi>» 
with  our  fair  laudations. 
Exerting   all   our  power,   call   you  to   aid   us.     Preserve  ns 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCII.  V&yu. 

O  VAyu,  drinker  of  the  pure,  be  near  us  :  a  thousand  teams 

are  thine,  All-bounteous  Giver. 
To   thee   the   rapture-bringing  juice  is   offered,    whose   first 

draught,  God,  thou  takest  as  thy  portion. 

2  Prompt  at  the  holy  rites  forth  came  the  presser  with  Soma- 

draughts  for  ludra  and  for  Vaju, 
When   nnui8tering  priests   with  strong  devotion  bring  to  you 
Twaiu  the  first  taste  of  the  Soma. 

3  The  teams  wherewith  thou  seekest  him  who  offers,  within  his 
'    home,  0  Vayu,  to  direct  him, 

Therewith  send  wealtli  to  us  with  full  enjoyment,  a  hero  son 
and  gifts  of  kine  and  horses. 


3  He  teeketh :  V&j^u.    The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  obscure. 
5  The  lovely  Heroet :  ludra  and  V4yu. 


J  J>rinl'ej'o/  thepure:  or  bright,  Soma. 


88  TBh  HYMNS  OP  (BOOK  Vtt. 

4  Near  to  the  Grods  and  making  ludra  joyful,  devout  and  oflTer- 

ing  precious  gifts  to  Vayu, 
Allied  with   princes,  smiting   down  the   hostile,  may  we  with 
heroes  conquer  foes  in  battle. 

5  With  thy  yoked  teams  in  hundreds  and  in  thousands  come  to 

onr  sacrifice  and  solo  run  worship. 
Come,   Vayu,    make  thee   glad  at   this  libation.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings?, 

HYMN  XCIII.  Indra-Agni. 

SlayeIrs  of  enemies,  Indra  and  Agni,  accept  this  day  our  new- 
born pure  laudation. 

Again,  again  I  call  you  prompt  to  listen,  best  to  give  quickly 
strength  to  him  who  craves  it. 

2  For  ye  were  strong  to  gain,  exceeding  mighty,  growing  toge* 

ther,  waxing  in  your  vigour. 
Lords  of  the  pasture  filled  with  ample  riches,  bestow  upon  us 
strength  both  fresh  and  lasting. 

3  Yea  when  the  strong  have  entered  our  assembly,  and  singers 

seeking  with  their  hymns  your  favour, 
They   are  like   steeds  who   come  into   the  race-course,    those 
men  who  call  aloud  on  Indra-Agui. 

4  The  singer,  seeking  with  his  hymns  your  favour,  begs  splen- 
did riches  of  their  first  possessor. 

urther  us  with  new  bountiies,  Indra-Agni,  armed  with  strong 
thunder,  slayers  of  the  foeman. 

5  When   two  gieat   hosts,    arrayed    against  each    other,   meet 
/  clothed  with  brightness,  in  the  fierce  encounter 

viStand  ye  beside  the  godly,  smite  the  godless;  and  still  assist 
the  men  who  press  the  Soma. 

6  To  this   our  Soma^pressing,    Indra-Agni,  come  ye  prepared  to 

show  your  loving-kindness, 
For  not  at  any  time  have  ye  despised  us.     So  may   I  draw 
you  with  all  strengthenings  hither. 

7  So   Agni,    kindled    mid   this   adoration,    invite   thou   Mitra, 

Varuna,  and  Indra. 

4  Allied:  the  priests  are  the  allies  and  moral  supporters  of  the  princes 
ill  war. 

5  In  hundreds  and  in  thouaanda  :  of.  I.  135.  3. 


3  The  strong :  the  nobles  who  institute  sacrifices. 

4  TAeir ^rst  possessor :  each  God  who  is  invoked. 

5  G^reat  hosts :  *  hosts  *  must  be  Bupp\ied.    TL\ift  lQm\xivaft  d.>ial  adjectives 
'lave  no  subatangre  in  the  text. 


MTMN  94. J  iPffE  R 10  VEDA .  8» 

Forgive  whatever  sin  we  have  committed  :  may  Aryaman  and 
Aditi  remove  it. 

8  While  we  accelerate  these  our  sacrifices,  may  we  win  strength 
from  both  of  you,  0  A^rni  : 
Ne'er  may  the  Maruts,  India,  Vishnu  slight  us.     Preserve  us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blesssngs. 

HYMN    XCIV.  Indra-Agni. 

As  I'atn  from  out  the  cloud,  for  you,  Indra  and  Agiii,  from 

my  soul 
This  noblest  praise  hath  beeil  produced. 

2  Do  ye,  0  Indra-Agni,  hear  the  singer's  call :  accept  his  songs. 
Ye  Rulers,  grant  his  heart's  desire. 

3  Give  us  not  up  to  poverty,  ye  Heroes,  Indra-Agni,  nor 
To  slander  and  reproach  of  men. 

4  To  Indra  and  to  Agni  we  bring  reverence,  high  and  holy  hymn. 
And,  craving  help,  soft  words  with  prayer. 

5  For  all  these  holy  singers  here  implore  these  Twain  to  succour 

them, 
Ajad  priests.that  they  may  win  them  strength. 

6  Eager  to  laud  you,  we  with  songs  invoke  you,  beariugsacred  food* 
Eain  for  sucqess  in  sacrifice. 

7  Indra  and  Agni,  come  to  us  with  favour,  ye  who  conquer  men  : 
Let  not  the  wicked  master  us. 

8  At  no  time  let  the  injurious  blow  of  hostile  mortal  fall  on  us  : 
O  Indra-Agni,  shelter  us. 

9  Whatever  wealth  we  crave  of  you,  in  gold,  iu  cattle,  or  in 

steeds, 
That,  Indra-Agni,  let  us  gain ; 

10  When  heroes  prompt  iu  worship  call  Indra  and  Agni,    Lords 

of  steeds. 
Beside  the  Soma  juice  effused. 

11  Call  hither  with  the  song  and  lauds  those  who  beet  slay  the 

foe  men,  those 
Who  take  delight  in  hymns  of  praise. 

7  Ai'yaman  and  Aditi  :  Mitra  and  others  being  understood,  as  the  verb  i» 
plut-al 

8  0  Agni  :  that  is,  Indra  and  Agni. 

I  As  rain :  the  hymn  of  praise  is  copious  in  its  flow,  and  is  doubly  bene- 
ficial, gratifying  the  Gods  and  bringing  blessings  to  the  worshipper.  From  my 
Boul :  mdnmanak :  explained  by  the  Commentator  here  and  in  the  correspond- 
ing passage  of  the  Sftmaveda  by  stotuh,  praiser  or  worshipper. 

II  Gallhith^.'  I  follow  Prof.  Ludwig   in  reading  WtvA^ata,  VclsXr."^^  ^1 
^ptvdseOah  which  Inrolvea  a  very  liareh"  construction. 


|10  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VII 

12  Slay  ye  the  wicked  man  whose  thought  is  evil,  of  the  demon 
kind. 
Slay  him  who  stays  the  waters,  slay  the  Serpent  with  your 
deadly  dart. 

HYMN  XCV.  Sanwratt. 

This  stream  Sarasvati  with  fostering  current  comes  forth,  our 

sure  defence,  our  fort  of  iron. 
As  on  a  car,  the  flood  flows  on,  surpassing  in  majesty  and 

might  all  other  waters. 

2  Pure  in  her  course  from  mountains  to  the  ocean,  alone  of 

streams  Sarasvati  hath  listened. 
Thinking  of  wealth  and  the  great  world  of   creatures,    she 
poured  for  Nahusha  her  milk  and  fatness. 

3  Friendly  to  man  he  grew  among  the  women,  a  strong  young 

Steer  amid  the  Holy  Ladies. 
He  gives  the  fleet  steed  to  our  wealthy  princes,  and  decks 
their  bodies  for  success  in  battle. 

4  May  this  Sarasvati  be  pleased  and  listen  at  this  our  sacriflce, 

auspicious  Lady, 
When  we  with  reverence,  on  our  knees,  implore  her  close-knit 
to  wealth,  most  kind  to  those  she  loveth. 

5  These  ofi\}rings  have  ye  made  with  adoration  :  say  this,  Saras- 

vati, and  accept  our  praises; 
And,  placing  us  under  thy  dear  protection,  may  we  approach 
thee,  as  a  tree,  for  shelter. 

6  For  thee,  0  Blest  Sarasvati,  Vasishtha  hath  here  unbarred  the 

doors  of  sacred  Order. 
Wax,  Bright  One,  and  give  strength  to  him  who  lauds  thee. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Oods,  with  blessings. 

12  Him  who  stays  the  waters:  udadhim:  according  to  S&yana,  like  ati 
ttdadhih,  water-holder  or  pitcher.  The  Serpent :  dbhogam,  *  the  coiler,'  explained 
differently  by  Sdyana,  as  'one  who  enjoys  good  things  taken  from  the 
worehippers.* 

1  Sarasvati :  Sindhu  or  Indus  appears  to  be  intended  under  this  name. 
See  VI.  61.  2,  and  Vedic  HymnSf  I.  p.  60, 

2  Ndhmsha :  according  to  the  legend,  a  King  who  prayed  to  Sarasvati  who 
gave  him  butter  and  milk  sufficient  for  the  thousand-year  sacrifice  which  he 
was  about  to  perform.  The  Nahushas,  the  people  living  on  the  banks  of  the 
river,  are  probably  intended. 

3  He  grew :  Sarasv4n,  the  consort  of  Sarasvati. 

5  These  offerings :  this  half-line  is  very  obscure.     Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that 

these  words  may  be  supposed  to  be  spoken  by  Sarasvati  to  her  worshippers, 

but  he  18  not  satuihed  of    the  correctness  of  his  conjecture.     *  Presenting  to 

thee.  S.,  these  oblutiona  with  reverence  ^ma^  'wftxe<ittv«^ivotsi>iJasfc^^Mftnce).* 


MTMN97.1  THE  RIGVBDA.  ^^ 

HYMN  XCVI.  Sftrasvfttl. 

I  SING  a  lofty  song,  for  she  is  mightiest,  most  divine  of  Streams. 
Sarasvati  will  I  exalt  with  hymus  and  lands,  and,  0  Vasishtha, 
Heaven  and  Earth. 

2  When  in  the  fulness  of  their  strength  the  Poms  dwell,  Beau- 

teous One,  on  thy  two  grassy  banks, 
Favour  us  thou  who  hast  the  Maruts  for  thy  li-iends  :   stir  up 
the  bounty  of  our  chiefs. 

3  So  may  Sarasvati  auspicious  send  good  luck ;  she,  rich  in  spc^, 

is  never  niggardly  in  thought, 
When  praised  in  Jamadagui's  way  and  lauded  as  Vasishtha 

lauds. 
4t  We  call  upon  Sarasvan,  as  unmarried  men  who  long  for  wives, 
As  liberal  men  who  yearn  for  sons. 

5  Be  thou  our  kind  protector,  O  Sarasv&n,  with  those  waves  of 

thine 
Laden  with  sweets  and  dropping  oil. 

6  May  we  eujoy  Sarasvan's  breast,  all- beautiful,  that  swells  with 

streams, 
May  we  gain  food  and  progeny. 

HYMN  XCVII.  Brihaspati. 

Where  Heaven  and  Earth  combine  in  men's  assembly,  and 

those  who  love  the  Gods  delight  in  worship, 
Where  the  libations  are  effused  for  Indra,  may  he  come  first 

to  drink  and  make  him  stronger. 

2  We  crave  the  heavenly  grace  of  Gods  to  guard  us — so  may 
Brihaspati,  O  friends,  exalt  us — 
That  he,  the  Bounteous  God,  may  find  us  sinless,  who  giveth 
from  a  distance  like  a  father. 

1  Heaven  and  Earth  :  heaven  as  the  home  of  the  Goddess,  and  earth  where 
she  flows  as  a  river. 

2  The  PHLrus:  an  Aryan  tribe  settled  on  both  hanks  of  the  Sarasvati  or 
Indus  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Grassy  banks  :  this,  as  von  Roth  has  suggested, 
seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  dndhasij  hut  the  expression  is  difficult.  See 
HiUebrandt,  VecUsche  Mythologiey  p.  254. 

3  Jamadagni  :  a  celebratea  ancient  Ilishi. 

Indra  is  the  deity  of  stanza  1,  Indra  and  Brahmanaspati  are  the  deities  of 
3  and  9,  Indra  and  Brihaspati  of  10,  and  the  rest  of  the  hymn  is  addressed  to 
Brihaspati.  Brihaspati  and  Brahmayaspati  are  one  and  the  same  God,  the 
Lord  of  Prayer.     See  I,  14.  3. 

1  Where  Heaven  and  Earth  combine :  where  Gods  and  men  meet  at  the  place 
of  sacrifice.  And  make  him  stronger :  Sft\aDa  explains  vdyascha  differently  i 
•  (may  his)  swift  (horses  approach}.*— Wilson' 

2  Like  a  father:  although  he  is  far  away  he   gi^eB  ua  wW^.  ^^  %s&.\^'fe^ 
lather  who  ia  neur  at  hand, — LudwiQ, 


92  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIL 

3  That  Brahmanaspati,  most  High  and  Gracious,  I  glorify  with 

offerings  and  with  homage. 
May  the  great  song  of  praise,  divine,  reach  Indra  who  is  the 
King  of  prayer  the  Gods'  creation. 

4  May  that  Brihaspati  \vho  brings  all  blessings,    most   dearly 

loved,  be  seated  by  our  altar. 
Heroes  and  wealth  we  crave ;  may  he   bestow  them,  and  bear 

us  safe  bevoud  the  men  who  vex  us. 

ft 

5  To  lis  these  Deathless  Ones,  erst  born,  have  granted  this  laud 

of  ours  which  give^  the  Immortal  pleasure. 
Let  us  invoke  Brihaspati,  the  foelesSj  the  clear-voiced  God,  the 
Holy  One  of  households. 

6  Him,  this  Brihaspati,  his  red-hued   horses,  drawing  together, 

full  of  strength,  bring  hither. 
Robed  in   red   colour   like   thq  cloudy  they  carry  the  Lord  of 
Might  whose  friendship  gives  a  dwelling. 

7  l?or  he  is  pure,  with  hundred  wingSj  refulgent,  with   sword  of 

gold,  impetuous,  winning  sunlight. 
Sublime  Bi'lhaspati,  easy  of  aoceiBS,  granteth  his  friends  most 
bountiful  refreshment. 

8  Both  Heaven  and   Earth,  divine,  the   Deity's    Parents,    have 

made  Brihaspati  increase  in  grandeur. 
Glorify  him,  0  friends,  who  merits  ^ory  :  may  he  give  prayer 
fair  wisiy  and  easy  passage. 

9  This,  Btahmanaspati,  is   your   laudation  :  prayer   hath   been 

made  to  thunder-wielding  Indra. 
Favour  our  songs,  wake  up  our  thought    and    spirit :  destroy 
the  godless  and  our  foemen's  malice. 

10  Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  wealth  in   earth  and   heaven,  thou,  0 
Brihaspati,  and  thou,  0  Indra. 
Mean  though  he.  be,    give   wealth   to   him    who    lauds   you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings* 


3  The  Gods'  creation :  devakritasya :  inspired,  or,  literally,  made,  by  the 
Gods, 

6  Our  hymns  of  praise  which  are  acceptable  to  the  immortal  Grod  have 
been  g^ven  to  us  by  the  everlasting  deities  themselves.  Sdyana's  explanation 
is  different :  '  may  the  first-born  immortals  (by  his  command)  bestow  upon  111 
the  food  that  is  necessary  for  existence.' — Wilson. 

6  Whose  friendship  gives  a  dwelling :  I  adopt  the  interpretation  given  by 
Professor  Cowell  in  his  note  on  the  passage  in  Wilson's  translation. 

Z  Witk  hundred  wings  t  '  borne  by  numerous  conveyances,* — Wilson* 

S  Zn  grandeur :  or,  by  their  might. 

10  Mean  :  or,  j^oor. 


^TM^99.]  TffE  JtlOVEDA.  93 

HYMN  XCVIII,  Indra. 

Priests,  offer  to  the  Lord  of  all   the    people   the   milked-out 

stalk  of  8oma,  radiant-coloured. 
No  wild-bull  knows  his  drinking-place   like   Indra  who  ever 

seeks  him  who  hath  pressed  the  Soma. 

2  Thou  dost  desire  to  drink,  each  day  that  passes,  the  pleasant 

food  which  thou  hast  had  aforetime. 
0  Indra,  gratified  in  heart  and  spirit,  drii)k  eagerly  the  Soma 
set  before  theo. 

3  Thou,  newly-born,  for   strength   didst   drink   the   Soma  ;  the 

Mother  told  thee  of  thy  future  greatness. 
0  Indra,  thou  hast  filled  mid-air's  wide   region,  and  given  the 
Gods  by  battle  room  and  freedom, 

4  When  thou  hast  urged  the  arrogant  to  combat,  proud  in  their 

streugth  of  arm,  we  will  subdue  them. 
Or,  Indra,  when  thou  tightest  girt  by  heroes,  we  in  the    glori- 
ous fray  with  thee  will  conquer, 

5  I  will  declare  the  earliest    deeds    of  Indra,    and   recent    acts 

which  Maghavau  h^th  accomplished. 
When  he  had  conquered  godless    wiles   and    magic,    Soma  be- 
came his  own  entire  possession. 

6  Thine  is  this  world  of  flocks   and    herds   around    thee,    which 

with  the  eye  of  Sdrya  thou  beholdest. 
Thou,  Indra,  art  alone  the  Lord  of  cattle  ;  may  we  enjoy  the 
treasure  which  thou  givest. 

7  Ye  Twain  are  Lords  of  wealth    in  earth   and   heaven,  thou,  0 

Brihaspati,  and  thou,  0  Indra. 
Mean  though   he    be,    give    wealth   to   him    who   lauds   you. 
Preserve  us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  XCIX.  Vishnu.  nX 

JlEif  come  not  nigh  thy  majesty  who  gFowest  beyond  all  bound 

and  measure  with  thy  body. 
Both  thy  two  regions  of  the  earth,  0  Vishnu,  we  know  ;  thou, 

God,  knowest  the  highest  also. 


1  Radiant'coloured :  arun^Mj  recj,    ruddy,   here  explained  by  the  Gom- 
inentator  as  drochanidnam,  shining. 

3  Thy  future  greiftness ;  see  IV.  18.  4,  where  Aditi   says:— 'No  peer  hati; 
he  among  those  born  already,  nor  among  those  who  shall  be  bom  hereafter. 

1  Two  regions  of  the  earth :  that  is,  the  earth  and  the  firmament.     *  The 
two  lower  regions  are  within  the  range  of  our  perception  *,  iVe  t)Q\\A  \ife\ciW%%  \.^ 

V\fi\\m\,  yfhither  he  stepped  with  the  thirdioi  his   aacendijig  atn^^^l— N^^^^^i 
C'</sfffo^$^$^  qf  t^  JR^veda,  ,p,  115, 


•4  TAe  EtMNS  OP  [^DOR  Vlii 

2  None  wlio  is  born  or  being  born,  God  Vish^iu,    hath   reached 

the  utmost  limit  of  thy  grandeur. 
The  vast  high  vault  of  heaven  hast  thou  supported,  and  fixed 
earth's  eastern  pinnacle  securely. 

3  Rich  in  sweet  food  be  ye,  and  rich  in   mllch*kine,  with    fertile 

pastures,  fain  to  do  men  service. 
Both  these  worlds,    Vishnu,    hast   thou    stayed   asunder,  and 
firmly  fixed  the  earth  with  pegs  around  it. 

4  Ye  have  made  spacious   room    for   sacrificing    by   generating 

Sikrya,  Dawn,  and  Agni. 

0  Heroes,  ye  have  conquered  in  your  battles    even    the    bull- 
jawed  Dasa's  wiles  and  magic. 

5  Ye  have  destroyed,  thou,  Indra,  and   thou,  Vishnu,  Sambara*s 

nine^andninety  fenced  castles. 
Ye  Twain  smote  down  a  hundred  times  a    thousand   resistless 
heroes  of  the  royal  Varchin, 

6  This  is  the  lofty  hymn  of  praise,  exalting  the  Lords  of  Mighty 

Stride,  the  strong  and  lofty. 

1  laud  you  in  the  solemn  synods,  Vishnu  :  pour  ye  food  on  us 

in  our  camps,  0  Indra. 

7  0  Vishnu,  unto  thee  my  lips  cry  Vashat  !  Let  this  mine  offer- 

ing, Sipivishta,  please  thee. 
May  these  my  songs  of  eulogy  exalt   thee.     Preserve  us  ever- 
more, ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN  C.  Vishniu 

• 

Ne'er  doth  the  man  repent,  who,  seeking  profit,  bringeth  his 

gift  to  the  far-striding  Vishnu. 
He  who  adoreth  him  with  all  his   spirit  winneth  himself  so 

great  a  benefactor. 

2  Thou,  Vishnu,  constant  in  thy  courses,  gavest   good-will  to  all 
men,  and  a  hymn  that  lasteth. 
That  thou  mightst    move  us   to  abundant   comfort    of  very 
splendid  wealth  with  store  of  horses. 


3  The  first  line  appears  to  be  Vishnu's  blessing  on  heaven  and  earth  whea 
he  parted  and  supported  them. 

4  Bxdl'jawed  :  or  Vrlahasipra  may  be  the  name  of  the  D4sa. 

5  Royal  Varchin:  see  II.  14.  6. 

7   Vashat :  the  exclamation  used  on  making  an  oblation.  Sipwithta :  a  name 
«/  Vishnu  of  uncertain  etymology  and  meaning.    *  Invested  with  rays  of  lighV 
^(ycorcUug  to  SAyana.    See  Muir,  0.  8,  Texts,  IV.  87,  88,  note, 

^  A  Ay/nn  that  lasteth  :  continually  recvirrVng  occmQU  Vi  ^xwafe  ^^a«.  . 


BYMN  lOl.I  TBE  RIQVEDA.  95 

^3  Three  times  strode  forth  this  God  iu  all  his  grandeur  over  this 
earth  bright  with  a  hundred  splendonrs. 
Foremost  he  Vishnu,  stronger  than  the  strongest :  for  glorious 
is  his  name  who  lives  for  ever. 

4:  Over  this  earth  with    mighty   step  strode   Vishnu,   ready   to 
give  it  for  a  home  to  Maun. 
In  him  the  humble  people  trust    for   safety  :  he,  nobly  born, 
hath  made  them  spacious  dwellings. 

5  To-day  I  laud   this  name,  0  Sipivishta,  I,  skilled  in  rules,  the 

name  of  thee  the  Noble. 
Yea,  I  the  poor  and  weak  praise  thee  the  Mighty  who  dwellest 
in  the  realm  beyond  this  region. 

6  What  was  there  to  be  blamed  in  thee,  0  Vishnu,  when  thou 

declaredst,  I  am  Sipivishta] 
Hide  not  this  form  from  us,  nor  keep  it  secret,  since  thou  didst 
vear  apother  shape  in  battle. 

7  0  Vishnu,  unto  thee  my  lips  cry  Vashat !  Let  this  mine  offer- 

ing, Sipivishta,  please  thee. 
May   these   my    songs   of  eulogy   exalt   thee.     Preserve   us 
evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYUN  CI.  Parjanya. 

Speak  forth  three  words,  the  words   which  light  precedeth, 

which  milk  this  udder  that  produceth  nectar. 
Quickly  made  manifest,  the  Bull  hath  bellowed,  engendering 
the  germ  of  plants,  the  Infant. 
2  Giver  of  growth  to  plants,  the  God  who  rulethover  the  waters 
and  all  moving  creatures. 
Vouchsafe  us  triple  shelter  for  our  refuge,  and  threefoldjight 
to  succour  and  befriend  us. 


3  This  earth:  meaning,  says  the  Commentator,  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 

6  This  stanza  is  unintelligible.  The  Commentator  on  the  corresponding 
pflseage  of  the  Sftmaveda  says  :  *  Vishnu  formerly  abHudoning  his  own  form, 
and  assuming  another  artificial  shape,  succoured  Vnsishiha  in  battle.  Recog- 
nizing the  god,  the  llishi  addresses  him  with  the  verse'  Sipivishta  is  said  to 
be  a  word  of  equivocal  meaning,  *  clothed  with  rays  of  light,'  and  *  denuded.' 
See  Wilson's  note,  and  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  87,  88,  note.  The  passage  looks  like 
the  germ  of  the  later  incarnations  of  the  Qod  which  occur  in  the  Sjtapatha- 
Brdhmana  and  the  Purdnaa.  

«  • 

1  Three  worcU :  or  texts  of  the  three  Vedas.  Which  light  precedeth :  intro- 
duced by  the  s»cred  syllable  Om.  More  probably  Parjanya  is  addressed,  the 
three  words  being  his  voiee,  the  thunder  (V.  63.  6),  heard  in  heaven,  air,  and 
earth,  and  preceded  by  the  lightning-flash.  See  Bergaigne,  Quarante  Hyfiinet 
du  Rig-veda,  p.  79.  Muk  this  udder :  draw  down  the  sweet  mm  ivoxw  \>\^  OiwaA. 
The  Bull :  T^rjuajrB.     The  Infa/nt:  Agni  in  the  form  oi  WgYvtmiv^s 

2  TAre^oldlisfAt:  mth  reference  to  the  divisions  oi  tk©  d*^^  Mid  t\ift  ^fcw^croA. 


9a  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  TIL 

3  Now  he  is  sterile,  now  begetteth  offspring,  even  as  he  willeth 

doth  he  chauge  his  figure. 
The  Father's  genial  flow  bedews  the  Mother;  therewith  the 
Sire,  therewith  the  son  is  nourished. 

4  In   hiiri  all  living  creatures  have  their  being,  and  the  three 

heavens  with  triply  flowing  waters. 
Three  reservoirs  that  sprinkle  down  their  treasure  shed  their 
sweet  streams  around  him  with  a  murmur. 

5  May  this  my  song  to  Sovran  Lord  Parjanya  come  near  unto 

his  heart  and  give  him  pleasure. 
May  we  obtain  the  showers  that  bring  enjoyment,  and  God' 
protected  plants  with  goodly  fruitage. 
G  He  is  the  Bull  of  all,   and  their   impregner  :  he  holds  the  life 
of  all  things  fixed  and  moving. 
May  this  rite  save  me  till  my  hundredth  autumn.     Preserve 
us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 

HYMN     CII.  Parjanya. 

SjNG  forth  and  laud  Parjanya,  Son  of  Heaven,  who  sends  the 

gift  of  rain  : 
May  he  provide  our  pasturage. 

2  Parjanya  is  the  God   who  forms  in  kine,  in  mares,   in  plants 

of  earth. 
And  womankind,  the  germ  of  life. 

3  Offer  and  pour  into  his  month  oblation  rich  in  savoury  juice  : 
May  he  for  ever  give  us  food. 

HYMN  cm.  Frogs. 

They  who  lay  quiet  for  a  year,  the  Brah  mans  who  fulfil  their  vows, 
The  Frogs  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  the  voice  Parjanya  hath 
inspired. 


3  He  is  sterile :  sends  no  rain,  like  a  barren  cow  that  gives  no  milk. 

The  Fathers  genial  fiow ;  *  The  father  is  the  sky,  earth  the  mother,  who  re- 
ceives the  rain  fiom  the  former,  which,  producing  the  means  of  offering  liba- 
tions and  oblations,  returns  again  to  the  parent  heaven,  as  well  as  supports  his 
offspring — all  living  oreatuies.' — Wilson. 

4  Three  reservoirs:  according  to  SAyana,  clouds  in  the  east,  west,  and  north, 
6  The  B\M  of  ail :  the  plants,  ujiderstood. 

3  Into  his  mouth :  that  is,  Agni,  who  is  the  mouth  by  which  the  othor  Gods 
consume  the  offerings  that  are  made  to  them. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S  Texts,  V.  430,  and  by  Pro- 
fessor   F.  Max  MuUer  in   his  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,   pp.    494f,  who 
remarks ;  'The  hymn...  .  which  is  called  a  panegyric  of  the  frogs,  is  cleariy 
a  satire  on  the  priests  ;  and  it  is  curious  to   observe  that  the  same  animal 
should  have  been  chosen  by  the  Vedic  satirist  to  represent  the  priests,  whicfai 
hjr  the  earliest  satirist  of  Greece,  was  selected  as  the  representative  of  the. 
Home rw  heroes.*    But  see  Oldenberg,  Die  Religion,  de%  Ytda,  ^.  70.    The 
Af^»o  evidently  belongs  to*  late  period  oi  Nedvc  vo^\.t^. 


HYMN  108.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  97 

2  What  time  on  these,  as  on  a  dry  skiu  lying  in  the  pool's  bed, 

the  floods  of  heaven  descended, 
The  music  of  the  Frogs  comes  forth  in  concert  like  the  cows' 
lowing  with  their  calves  beside  them. 

3  When  at  the  coming  of  the  Rains  the  water  has  poured  upon 

them  as  they  yearned  and  thirsted, 
One  seeks  another  as  he  talks  and  greets  him  with  cries  of 
pleasure  as  a  son  his  father. 

4t  Each  of  these  twain  receives  the  other  kindly,  while  they  are 
revelling  in  the  flow  of  waters. 
When  the  Frog   moistened  by  the   rain  springs'  forward,  and 
Green  and  Spotty  both  combine  their  voices. 

5  When  one  of    these  repeats   the  other's   language,  as  he  who 

learns  the  lesson  of  the  teacher. 
Your  every  limb  seems  to  be   growing  larger   as  yo   converse 
with  eloquence  on  the  waters. 

6  One  is  Cow-bellow  and  Goat-bleat  the  other,  one  Frog  is  Green 

and  one  of  them  is  Spotty. 
They  bear  one  common  name,  and  j^t  they  vary,  and,  talking, 
modulate  the  voice  diversely. 

7  As  Brahmans,    sitting  roun^   the  brimful   vessel,  talk   at  the 

Somarite  of  Atir^tra, 
So,  Frogs,  ye  gather  ^jund  the  pool  to  honour  this  day  of  all 
the  year,  the  firp^  of  Rain-time. 

8  These  Brllhma«<*   with  the  Soma  juice,  performing  their  year- 

long rite  ^^^^  lifted  up  their  voices ; 
And  th^®  Adhvaryus,  sweating  with  their  kettles,  come  forth 
a«ni  show  themselves,  and  none  are  hidden. 

9  rhey  keep  the  twelvemonth's  God-appointed  order,  and  never 

do  the  men  neglect  the  season. 


3  With  O'ies^  pleasure :  akhkhaltkritya :  uttering  the  imitative  exclama- 
tion akhkhaXa, 

5  Your  every  limh :  this  abrupt  change  of  person  is  not  unf i  equent  in  the 
Veda. 

7  Atirdtra:'2k  ceremony  accompanied  by  three  nocturnal  recitations. 

8  Year-long  rite :  *  S&yana  makes  it  refer  to  Gavdm  ayanam,  a  sacrificial 
session,  which  commences  and  ends  with  the  atirdtra^  and  lasts  a  whole  year.' — 
Cowell,  in  Wilson's  Translation.  Sweating  with  their  kettles :  '  There  ia  a 
quibble  on  the  word  gharminahf  having  or  bearing  the  vessel,  or  perforuiiu 
the  rite  so  termed  ;  or,  suffering  from  gkannaj  heat,  or  the  hot  season.' — 
Wilson.  Avd  none  are  hidden :  gtihyd  nd  ki  chit :  some  take  nd  here  as'  like ': 
'  issue  forth  like  persons  who  have  been  hidden.* — Muir.  *  Pop  out  like  her- 
mits.'—M.  Muller. 

9  The  men :  the  priestlike  frogs.  These  who  were  heated  kettles :  the  frogs 
who  had  been  burnt  and  scorched  by  the  hot  weather. 


^  THE  HYMNS  OP  .     [BOOK  VII. 

Soon  as  the   Rain-tirae  in  the  year  returaeth,    these  who  were 
heated  kettles  gain  their  freedom. 

10  Cow-bellow  and  Goat-bleat  have  granted  riches,  and  Green  and 
Spotty  have  vouchsafed  us  treasure. 
The  Frogs  who  give  us  cows  in  hundreds  lengthen  our  lives 
in  this  most  fertilizing  season. 

HYMN  CIV.  Indra-Soma. 

Indra  and  Soma,  burn,  destroy  the  demon  foe,  send  downward, 

0  ye  Bulls,  those  who  add  gloom  to  gloom. 
Annihilate  the  fools,  slay  them  and  burn  them  up  :  chase  them 

away  from  us,  pierce  the  voracious  ones. 

2  Indra  and  Soma,  let  sin  round  the  wicked  boil  like  as  a  caldron 

set  amid  the  flames  of  fire. 
Against  the  foe  of  prayer,  devourer  of  raw  flesh,  the  vile  flend 
fierce  of  <^ye,  keep  ye  perpetual  hate. 

3  Indra  and  Somtt>  plunge  the   wicked  in   the  depth,   yea,  cast 

them  into  darknb^  that  hath  no  support, 
So  that  not  one  of  thertv^nay  ever  thence  return  :  so  may  your 
wrathful  might  prevail  a^d  conquer  them. 

4  Indra  and  Soma,  hurl  your  db^dly  crushing  bolt  down  on  the 

wicked  fiend  from  heaven  and  Koai  the  earth. 
Yea,  forge  out  of  the  mountains  yobr  celestial  dart  wherewith 
ye  burn  to  death  the  waxing  demon  ^qq^ 


10  Have  granted  i-ickes :  as  the  earliest  proclaimers  of  si^e  advent  of  the 
Bains  which  revive  and  fertilize  the  earth. 

*  It  is  possibly  an  echo  of  this  production  that  we  find  in  a  desu^jp^ion  of 
autumn  in  the  Harivamsa,  V.  8803,  where  the  poet  compares  the  noise  made 
by  a  frog,  after  his  rest  of  sixteen  half  months,   along  with  his  wives,  to  *^q 

recitation  of  the  Rig- veda  by  a  Brahman  surrounded  by  his  pupils  Oi* 

this  verse  the  late  M.  Langlois  somewhat  naively  remarks  as  follows  :  Dana 
nos  moeurs  rien  n'  ^galerait  1'  impertinence  d'  une  comparaison  dans  laquelle 
une  grenouille  serait  assimil^  k  uu  respectable  eccl^siastique.  Les  Indiens, 
k  ce  qu'  il  parait,  ne  voyaient  daus  telle  esp^ce  de  rapprochement  aucune 
teinte  d'  impi^t^.* — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  438.  But  see  Bergaigue,  La  Religion 
V^dique,  I.  292. 


The  hymn  consists  chiefly  of  imprecations  directed  against  demons  and 
evil  spirits,  R&ksbasas  and  Y^tudh&nas.    The  deities  are  various. 

1  The  demon  foe :  rdhihah  :  the  lUkshasas,  fiends,  demons,  goblins,  going 
about  at  night,  disturbing  sacrifices  and  devout  men,  ensnaring  and  even 
devouring  human  beings,  and  generally  hostile  to  the  huuian  race. 

a  The  vile  fiend  :  kimidine  :  explained  by  the  Commentator  as  one  who 
^oes  about  saying,  Kimidinim  or  What  now?  A  quidnunc,  a  vile  and 
treacherous  spy  and  informer.  The  word  in  used  as  the  name  of  a  class  U 
€viJ  apirits. 


iXTMN  104.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  0» 

5  Indra  and  Soma,  cast  ye  downward  out  of  heaven  your  deadly 

darts  cf  stone  burning  with  fiery  flame, 
Eternal,  scorching  darts;  phmge  the  voracious  ones  within  the 
depth,  and  let  them  sink  without  a  sound. 

6  Indra  and  Soma,  let  this  hymn  control  you  both,  even  as  tha 

girth  encompasses  two  vigorous  steeds — 
The  song  of  praise  which  I  with    wisdom  offer   you  :  do  ye,  as 
Lords  of  men,  animate  these  my  prayers. 

7  In  your  impetuous   manner  think   ye  both   thereon  :  destroy 

these  evil  beings,  slay  the  treacherous  fiends. 
Indra  and  Soma,  let  the  wicked  have  no    bliss  who   evermore 
assails  us  with  malignity. 

8  Whoso  accuses  me  with  words  of  falsehood  when  I  pursue  my 

way  with  guileless  spirit, 
May  he,  the  speaker  of  untruth,  be,  Indra,  like  water  which 
the  hollowed  hand  compresses. 

9  Those  who  destroy,  as  is  their  wont,  the  simple,  and  with  their 

evil  natures  harm  the  righteous, 
May  Soma  give  them   over  to   the  serpent,   or  to   the  lap  of 
Nirriti  consign  them. 

10  The  fiend,  0  Agni,  who  designs   to  injure  the  essence  of  our 

food,  kine,  steeds,  or  hodies, 
May  he,  the  adversary,  thief,  and  robber,  sink  to  destruction^ 
both  himself  and  offspring. 

11  May  he   be  swept   away,  himself  and  children  :   may  all   the 

three  earths  press  him  down  beneath  them. 
May  his  fair  glory,  O  ye  Gods,  be  blighted,  who  in  the  day  or 
night  would  fain  destroy  us. 

12  The  prudent  finds  it  easy  to   distinguish  the   true   and  false  : 

their  words  oppose  each  other. 
Of  these  two  that  which  is  the  true  and  honest,  Soma  protects, 
and  brings  the  false  to  nothing. 

13  Never  doth  Soma  aid  and  guide  the  wicked  or  him  irho  falsely 

claims  the  Warrior's  title. 
He  slays  the  fiend  and  him  who  speaks  untruly :  both  lie  en- 
tangled in  the  noose  of  Indra. 
... f         

5  Without  a  sound :  bo  Buddenly  that  they  have  <iot  time  to  cry  out> 
9  To  the  sei'pent :  or  to  death  by  serpente'  biteo.    Nirriti :  Death  and 
Destruction. 

13  The  Warrior's  title :  the  rank  of  a  Kahatriya  or  prince  of  the  militar.7 
order. 

The  first  eleven  stanzas   '  are   considered   to  be   a   malediction  upon   tha 
R&kshasas  by  the  Riihi.     To  account   for  the  change  ol  \jo\i^  Vya.  VL— \^, 
Sdpana  gives  an  unutual  version  of  the  legend  told  in  ttx^   Mdh.a\)l\.wo.\o.  q.1 


IQO  TffE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  Vlh 

14  As  if  I  worshipped   deities  of  falsehood,    or   thought    vain 

thoughts  about  the  Gods,  0  Agni. 
Why  art  thou  angry  with  us,  Jatavedas  1     Destruction  fall  on 
those  who  lie  against  thee  ! 

15  So  raay  I  die  this  day  if  I  have  harassed  any  man's  life  or  if 

I  be  a  demon. 
Yea,  may  he  lose  all  his  ten  sous  together  who  with   false 
tougue  hath  called  me  Yatudhaua. 

16  May  Indra  slay  him  with  a  mighty  weapon,  and  let  the  vilest 

of  all  creatures  perish, 
The  fiend  who  says  that  he  is  pure,  who  calls  me  a  demon 
though  devoid  of  demon  nature. 

17  She  too  who  wanders  like  an  owl  at  night-time,  hiding  her 

body  in  her  guile  and  malice, 
May  she  fall  downward  into  endless  caverns.     May  press-stones 
with  loud  ring  destroy  the  demons. 

18  Spread  out,  ye  Maruts,  search  among  the  people  :  seize  ye  and 

grind  the  Rslkshasas  to  pieces, 
Who  fly  abroad,  transformed  to  birds,  at  night-time,  or  sully 
and  pollute  our  holy  worship. 

19  Hurl  down  from  heaven  thy  bolt  of  stone,  0  Indra:  sharpen 

it,  Maghavan,  made  keen  by  Soma. 
Forward,  behind,  and  from  above  and  under,  smite  down  the 
demons  with  thy  rocky  weapon. 

20  They  fly,  the  demon  dogs,  and,  bent  on  mischief,  fain  would. 

they  harm  indomitable  Indra. 
Sakra  makes  sharp  his  weapon  for  the  wicked :  now  let  him 
cast  his  bolt  at  fiendish  wizards. 

21  Indra  hath  ever  been  the  fiends*  destroyer  who  spoil  oblations 

of  the  Gods'  invokeis  : 
Yea,  Sakra,  like  an  axe  that  splits  the  timber,  attacks  and 
smashes  them  like  earthen  vessels. 

W^^^»^—  ■  ■■-■■  ■  ■  !■■■■■■    —  — M     ■  -I  -       —-  I      l.^-i^^^  ■■         ■  ^™^^^^^M^—i ^i^—^M 

king  Kalmashapdda  being  transformed  to  a  Rakahasa^  and  devouring  the  100 
sons  of  Vasi^^ha  :  here  it   is  said   that  a  Rakshasa^   having  devoured   the 
Rishi's  sons,  assamed  his  shape,  and  said  to  him,   "  I  am  Vasishtha,  thou  art 
the  Rdkshaaa  y*  to  which  Vaaishtha  replied  by  repeating  this  verse  [stanza 
12J,  declaratory  of  hkj  discriminating  between  truth  and  falsehood".' — Wilson. 
'  The  verses  may,  as  Professor  Max   MuUer  supposes,   have   arisen  out  of. 
Vasishtha's  contest  with  VisvSmitra  [see  III.  53.   21,  note],  and  it  may  have 
been  the  latter  personage  who  brought  those  charges  of  heresy,  and  of  murder- 
ous and  demoniacal  character  against  his  rival '— Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  327, 828. 
15   F<i<«rfAd»a;  explained  by  Sfiiyana  as- Rakshasa.     The  Yatudhana  pro- 
:  l^bly  was  rather  the  goblin  or  sorcerer  while  the  RAkshasa  was  the   violent 
-  and  voracious  ogre. 

^^  Here  the  lualediction  on  evil  spirits  in  general  is  resumed  and  continu« 
ed  to  the  end  of  the  hymn.    She  too :  the  ildkalicwt,  ot  ftVi^^etvd, 


HYMN  104.]  THE  RIGVEDA,  101 

23  Destroy  the  fiend  shaped  like  ati  owl  or  owlet,  destroy  him  ia 
the  form  of  dog  or  cuckoo. 
Destroy  him  shaped  as  eagle  or  as  vulture  :  as  with  a  stone, 
O  Indra,  crush  the  demon. 

23  Let  not  the  fiend  of  witchcraft-workers  reach  us :  may  Dawn 

drive  oflf  the  couples  of  Kiratdins. 
Earth  keep  us  safe  from  earthly  woe  and  trouble  :  from  grief 
that  comes  from  heaven  mid-air  preserve  us. 

24  Slay  the  male  demon,   Indra !    slay  the  female,  joying  and 

triumphing  in  arts  of  magic. 
-  Let  the  fools'  gods  with  bent  necks  fall  and  perish,  and  see  no 
more  the  Sun  when  he  arises. 

25  Look  each  one  hither,  look  around  :   Indra  and  Soma,  watch 

ye  well. 
Cast  forth  your  weapon  at  the  fiends;  against  the  sorcerers 
hurl  your  bolt. 

—  .. < 

23  Kimidins :  or  vile  spirits.     See  note  on  stanza  2. 

24  Pools*  gods :  mitradevdh :  explained  by  S&yana  ei^^mAranakridAh,  *  those 
who  make  killing  their  sport.'  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon, 
mUmdevdh  =  mUladevdhj  a  species  of  demons  or  goblins. 


BOOK  THE  EIGHTH. 


HYMN  I.  Indm. 

Globify  naught  besides,  0  friends;  so  shall  no  sorrow  troubI« 

you. 
Praisd  only  mighty  Indra  when  the  juice  is  shed,  and  say  your 

lauds  repeatedly  : 

2  Even  him,  eternal,  like  a  bull  who  rushes  down,    men's   Con- 

queror, bounteous  like  a  cow  ; 
Him  who  is  cause  of  both,  of  enmity  and  peace,  to   both  sidei 
most  munificent. 

3  Although  these  men  in  sundry   ways   invoke  thee  to  obtain 

thine  aid. 
Be  this  our  prayer,  addressed,  0  Indra,  untc>  thee,  thine  exal- 
tation every  day. 

4  Those  skilled  in  song,  0  Maghavan,  ^mong  these  men  o'er- 

come  with  might  the  foeman's  scxigs. 
Come  hither,  bring  us  strength  M  many  a   varied  form    most 
near  that  it  may  succour  u*^ 

5  0  Caster  of  the  Stone,  I  ^p<rfd  not  sell  thee  for  a  mighty  price, 
Not  for   a   thousand,  ^underer !  nor    ten   thousand,    nor   a 

hundred.  Lord  or^untless  wealth  ! 

6  0  Indra,  thou  arj^ore  to  me  than  sire  or  niggard  brother  is. 
Thou  and  my  ptother,  0  Good  Lord,  appear  alike,  to  give  me 

wealth  ab^dantly. 

7  Where  ar^^thou  1     Whither   art   thou  gone  1     For   many   a 

placf  attracts  thy  mind. 
Hast^f    Warrior,  Fort-destroyer,  Lord   of  battle's   din,  haste, 
Xolj  songs  have  sounded  forth. 

8  <5ing  out  the  psalm  to  him  who  breaks   down   castles   for   his 

faithful  friend. 
Verses  to  bring  the  Thunderer  to  destroy  the  forts  and   sit  on 
Eanva's  sacred  grass. 


2  Bounteous  like  a  cow :  the  adjective  is  not  in  the  text,  but  must  be  sup- 
plied in  order  to  make  the  comparison  intelligible.  See  Vedische  Studien,  I. 
103.     To  both  sides :  to  the  singers  and  the  institutors  of  sacrifice. 

5  A  hundred :  meaning  *  infinite,'  according  to  the  Commentator . 

8  Foi"  his  faithful  friend  :  Ludwig  takes  Vftvfttar  to  be  the  name  of  a  king 
who  has  been  deserted  by  Indra  and  consequently  defeated  in  battle.  Kdnva's 
sacred  grass :  trimmed  and  prepared  by  Medb^tithi  and  Medby&lvtVd)  «at$:,b^  «i 
whom  w  a  mod  of  Kanva. 


104  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

9  The  Horses  which  are  thine   ia  tens,  in  hundreds,  yea,    in 
thousands  thine. 
Even  those  vigorous  Steeds,  fleet-footed   in  the   course,    with 
those  come  qnickly  near  to  us. 

10  This  day  I  call  Sabardughll  who  animates  the  holy  song, 
Indra  the   richly-yielding   Milch-cow  who    provides   unfailing 

food  in  ample  stream. 

1 1  When  Sura  wounded  Etasa,  with  Vita's  rolling  wingM  car 
Indra  bore  Kutsa  Arjuneya  off,  and   mocked   Gandharva  the 

nnconquered  One. 

12  He  without  ligature,  before  making  incision  in  the  neck, 
Closed  up  the  wound   again,    most   wealthy   Maghavan,    who 

maketh  whole  the  injured  part. 

13  May  w«  be  never  cast  aside,  and  strangers,  as  it  were,  to  thee. 
We,  Thunder-wielding  Indra,  count  ourselves  as  trees  rejected 

and  unfit  to  burn. 

14  0  Vritra-slayer,  \?e  were  thought  slow  and  unready  for  the  fray. 
Yet  once  in  thy  gfreiit  bounty  may  we  have   delight,  0   Hero, 

after  praising  thee. 

16  If  he  will  listen  to  my  latui,  then  may   our   Soma-drops  that 
flow 
Rapidly  through  the  strainer  gladden  Indra,  drops  due  to  the 
Tugryas*  Strength ener. 

16  Come  now  unto  the  common  laud  of  vJiee  and  of  thy   faithful 

friend. 
So  may  our  wealthy   nobles'  praise  give  ^y  to   thee.     Fain 
would  I  sing  thine  eulogy. 

17  Press  out  the  Soma  with  the  stones,  and  in  the  -vaters  wash  it 

clean. 


10  Sdbardughd :  the  general  name  of  cows  which  supply  the  milk  required 
for  sacrificial  purposes.  See  YI.  48.  11,  note.  Here  Indra  himself  is  inteiiied, 
as  is  shown  in  the  following  line. 

11  SHra:  SOrya,  the  Sun-God.  Wounded:  'harassed. '---Wilson.  Eta^a:  a 
protigi  of  Indra.  See  Vol.  I ,  Index.  Vdta:  the  Wind-Ood.  Kutsa :  see  Vol.  I., 
Index.  Oandhai'va:  the  Sun.  The  meaning  of  ^he  stanza  is  somewhat  obscure. 

12  Closed  up  the  wound  again :  healed  Etasa  who  had  been  wounded  by 
Surya. 

13  Count  ourselves  as  trees :  or,  *  count  us  not  as  trees,'  the  meaning  of  no, 
*  not '  and  '  like  '  being  ambiguous. 

15  Due  to  the  Tugryas^  Strengthener :  that  belong  to  Indra  the  protector  of 
the  chiefs  of  the  race  of  Tugra,  who  appear  to  have  been  the  patrons  of  the 
Jiishis  ofKapva'8  family. 

J^  -^aM/ul/rlend :  see  stanza  8. 


STMN 1.]  THE  RIQ  VEDA.  106 

The  men  investing  it  with  raiment  made  of  milk  shall  milk  it 
forth  from  out  the  stems. 

18  Whether  thou  come  from  earth  or  from  the  lustre  of  the  lofty 

heaven, 
Wax  stronger  in  thy  body  through  my  song  of  praise  :  fill  full 
all  creatures,  0  Most  Wise. 

19  For  Indra  press  the  Soma   out,    most   gladdening   and    most 

excellent. 
May  Sakra  make  it  swell  sent  forth  with  every  prayer  and  ask- 
ing] as  it  were,  for  strength. 

20  Let  me  not,  still  beseeching  thee  with  earnest  song  at  Soma 

rites, 
Anger  thee  like  some  wild   beast.     Who   would   not   beseech 
him  who  hath  power  to  grant  his  prayer  ? 

21  The  draught  made  swift  with  rapturous  joy,  effectual   with  its 

mighty  strength, 
All-conquering,  distilling  transport,  let  him  drink  :  for  he  in 
ectstasy  gives  us  gifts. 

22  Where  bliss  is  not,  may  he.  All-praised,  God  whom  the   pious 

glorify, 
Bestow  great  wealth  upon  the  mortal  worshipper  who  sheds 
the  juice'  and  praises  him. 

23  Come,  Indra,  and  rejoice  thyself,  0  God,  in  manifold  affluence. 
Thou  fiUest  like  a  lake  thy  vast  capacious  bulk  with  Soma 

and  with  draughts  besides. 

24  A  thousand  and  a  hundred  Steeds  are  harnessed  to  thy  golden 

car. 
So  may  the  long-maned  Bays,  yoked  by  devotion,  bring  Indra 
to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

2b  Yoked  to  thy  chariot  wrought  of  gold,  may  thy  two  Bays 
with  peacock  tails. 
Convey  thee  hither,  Steeds  with  their  white  backs,   to  quaff 
sweet  juice  that  makes  us  eloquent. 


17  Fism  out  the  stems  /.see  Vedische  Studim,  I.  133,  178.  Sftyana  explains 
the  second  line  diflferently  :  *  (f<jrT)y  so  doing)  the  leaders  (of  the  rain,  the 
Maruta)  clothing  (the  sky  with  clouds)  as  with  a  vesture  of  the  hide  of  the 
cow,  milk  forth  (the  water)  for  the  rivers.' — Wilson. 

21  Let  him  drink:  pibatu :  supplied  by  the  Scholiast  ;  there  being  no  verb 
in  the  text. 

22  Where  bliss  is  not :  that  is,  in  defeat  and  trouble.  But  the  meaning  of 
^ivdre  is  uncertain.  '  At  the  sacrifice,'  is  Sftyana's  explanation.  Von  Roth  sug- 
gests *  in  the  treasure- chamber.*    I  adopt  Ludwig's  interpreUtion. 

23  With  draughts  besides:    with  thy  fellow- topeiB  (the  'ilLatuX.^Y'  — "^'^^^"Q^^ 


106  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VlII, 

26  So  drink,  thoa  Lover  of  the  Song,  as  the  first  drinker,  of  this 

juice. 
This  the  outpouring  of  the  savoury  sap  prepared  is  good  and 
meet  to  gladden  thee. 

27  He  who  alone  by  wondrous  deed  is  Mighty,   Strong   by  holy 

works, 
May  he  come,  fair  of  cheek;  may  he  not  stay   afar,  but  come 
and  turn  not  from  our  call. 

28  Sushna's  quick  moving  castle  thou  hast  crushed  to  pieces  with 

thy  bolts. 
Thou,  ladra,  from  of  old,  hast  followed  after  light,  since  we 
have  had  thee  to  invoke. 

29  My  praises  when  the  Sun  hath  risen,   my  praises  at  the  time 

of  noon. 
My  praises  at  the  coming  of  the  gloom  of  night,  0  Vasu,  have 
gone  forth  to  thee. 

30  Praise,  yea,  praise  him.     Of  princes  these  are  the  most  liberal 

of  their  gifts, 
These,   Paramajy^,  Ninditllsva,  Prapathi,   most  bounteous,  O 
Medhyatithi. 

31  When  to  the  car,  by  faith,  I  yoked  the  horses  longing  for  the 

way— 
For  skilled  is  Yadu's  son  in  dealing  precious  wealth,  he  who 
is  rich  in  herds  of  kine. 

32  May  he  who  gave  me  two  brown  steeds  together  with   their 

cloths  of  gold. 
May  he,   Asanga's  son  Svanadratha,  obtain   all  joy  and  high 
felicities. 


2Q  As  the  first  dnnker :  *  According  to  the  scholiast,  pui'vapah  means  Vdyu, 
who,  having  arrived  first  in  the  race,  drank  the  Soma  before  the  other  gods. 
The  aUnsion  is  to  the  principal  graha  libation,  called  A  indravdyava,  which 
Indra  and  Vdyu  share  together.'  —Wilson. 

28  Castle :  of  cloud.     Followed  aftei*  light :  to  find  and  bring  it  back. 

30  Praise  him :  Indra.  Paramajyft,  Nindit&sva,  and  Prapathi  appear  to  be 
the  names  of  the  chiefs  who  are  praised  for  their  liberality.  Selyaaa  makes 
Asanga  the  speaker :  *  Praise  me,  for  we  are  the  most  liberal  givers  :  (praise 
me  as  one)  who  bears  the  best  arms  (paramajyd),  follows  the  right  path  (pra- 
patht),  and  outstrips  a  horse  in  speed  (ninditdsva).' 

31  The  horses :  presented  by  the  prince.  The  sentence  is  incomplete.  The 
Scholiast  supplies  at  the  end  of  the  line  taddntm  evammdm  stuhi^  tben  praise 
me  thus.  Yadu*s  son:  Asanga,  descendant  of  the  ancient  eponymous  hero 
Yadu.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  J^ich  in  herds  of  kine:  pasuh  which  appears  to  be 
in  apposition  with  yStdvah,  is  hardly  intelligible  here.     Sdyana  explains  it  as 

paaumdn,  having  beasts  or  cattle,  or  as  a  derivative  of  pas,  to   see,  and  mean' 
fa^  one  who  aeea  w)jB,t  is  subtile,  sUkshmasya  drashJtd.     Neither   of  these  ex- 
planatione  has  Anything  but  Sdyana*s  name  V>  Tecommeud  it^  but    I  adopt  the 
former  M  a  makeshift. 


SYMN  2.]  THE  RIO  VEDA .  107 

33  Playoga's  son  Asanga,  by  ten  thousand,  0  Agni,  hath  surpass- 

ed the  rest  in  giving. 
For  me  ten  bright-hued  oxen  have  come  forward  like  lotus- 
stalks  from  out  a  lake  upstanding^ 

34  What   time   her  husband's   perfect   restoration   to   his    lost 

streugth  and  manhood  was  apparent, 
His  cousort  Sasvati  with  joy  addressed  him,    Now  art   thou 
well,  my  lord,  and  shalt  be  happy. 

HYMN  II.  Indra. 

Here  is  the  Soma  juice  expressed ;  0  Vasu,  drink  till  thou  art 

full: 
Undaunted  God,  we  give  it  thee. 

2  Washed  by  the  men,  pressed  out  with  stones,  strained  through 

the  filter  made  of  wool, 
'Tis  like  a  courser  bathed  in  streams. 

3  This  juice  have  we  made  sweet  for  thee  like  barley,  blending 

it  with  milk. 
Indra,  I  call  thee  to  our  feast. 

4  Beloved  of  all,  Indra  alone  drinks  up  the  flowing  Soma  juice 
Among  the  Gods  and  mortal  men. 

5  The  Friend,  whom  not  the  brilliaut-hued,  the  badly-mixt  or 

bitter  draught 
Repels,  the  far  extending  God ; 

6  While  other  men  than  we   with  milk  chase  him  as  hunters 

chase  a  deer, 
And  with  their  kine  inveigle  him. 

33  Ten  bright-hued  oxen :  meaning  ten  thousand,  according  to  Sftyana. 

34  Asanga.,  the  King  whose  liberality,  with  that  of  his  son  (32),  and  perhaps 
his  grandsons  (30),  has  been  eulogized  in  the  four  preceding  stanzas,  had,  the 
legend  says,  been  changed  to  a  woman  by  the  imprecation  of  the  Gods  and 
afterwards  restored  to  bis  manhood  in  consequence  of  his  repentance  and  the 
intercession  of  Medh&tithi  and  Medhv&tithi  whom  he  richly  rewarded.  In  this 
stanza  Sasvatt  congratulates  him  on  his  restoration.  Professors  Ludwig  and 
Orassmanu  have  translated  the  stanza  more  literally. 

1  0  Vasu :  or,  Good  Lord.  *  Giver  of  dwellings,*  according  to  Sftyana. 

2  Strained  through  the  JiUer  made  of  wool :  more  literally,  'cleansed  by  the. 
tail-wool  of  the  sheep,'  the  material  of  which  the  sieve,  strainer,  or  filter  used 
for  clearing  and  purifying  the  Soma  juice  was  made. 

3  LiJce  barley  :  or,  like  the  sacrificial  cake  made  of  barley-meal. 

4  Alone  dHnks  up :  he  alone  is  to  receive  the  entire  libation,  which  other 
Gods  only  share  among  them. 

5  Brilliant-hued :  without  sufficient  mixture  with  milk  to  thicken  it  and 
change  its  colour.     The  meaning  of  this  and  the  following  stanza  is  :  Indrs. 
prefers  our  libations,  imperfectly  prepared  as  they  maybe,  V)V\ift  mi^-o'iftTO.^ 
with  which  other  men  endeavour  to  attract  him. 


108  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

7  For  hitn,  for  Indra,  for  the  God,  be  pressed  three  draughts  of 

Some  juice 
In  the  Juice-drinker's  own  abode. 

8  Three  reservoirs  exude  their  drops,  filled  are  three  beakers  to 

the  brini, 
All  for  one  offeriug  to  the  God. 

9  Pure  art  thou,  set  in  many  a  place,  and  blended  in  the  midst 

with  milk 
And  curd,  to  cheer  the  Hero  best. 

10  Here,  Indra,  are  thy  Soma-draughts  pressed  out  by  us,  the 
strong,  the  pure  : 
They  crave  admixture  of  the  milk. 

110  Indra,  pour  in  milk,  prepare  the  cake,  and  mix  the  Soma- 
draught : 
I  hear  them  say  that  thou  art  rich. 

12  Quaffed  juices  fight  within  the  breast.     The  drunken  praise 

not  by  their  wine, 
The  naked  praise  not  v^hen  it  rains. 

13  Rich  be  the  praiser  of  one  rich,  munificent  and  famed  like  thee  : 
High  rank  be  his,  0  Lord  of  Bays. 

14  Foe  of  the  man  who  adds  no  milk,  he  heeds  not  any  chanted 

hymn 
Or  holy  psalm  that  may  be  sung. 

15  Give  us  not,  Indra,  as  a  prey  unto  the  scornful  or  the  proud  : 
Help,  Mighty  One,  with  power  and  might. 

16  This,  even  this,  0  Indra,  we  implore  :  as  thy  devoted  friends, 
The  Kanvas  praise  thee  with  their  hymns. 

8  Three  reservoirs :  or  troughs  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma-libations. 
They  are  called  severally,  dronakalasay  pHtabhrit,  and  ddhavantya, 

9  In  the  midst :  *  in  the  middle  (of  the  day  ? ).' — Hillebrandb. 

12  This  stanza  breaks  the  connexion  between  stanzas  11  and  13,  and  is  in 
itself  almost  unintelligible.  Wilson  paraphrases,  after  S4yana :  *  The  potations 
(of  Soma)  contend  in  thy  interior  (for  thine  exhilaration)  like  the  ebriety 
caused  by  wine  :  thy  worshippers  praise  thee  (filled  full  of  Soma)  like  the 
udder  (of  a  cow  with  milk).'  Sftyana's  explanation  of  nagn^hj  naked  men, 
as  worshippers,  utotdjvih,  *  who  do  not  desert  the  verses  of  the  Veda, '  is  obvi- 
ously impossible.  Udhah,  udder,  frequently  means  the  rainy  sky,  and  it  may 
have  this  meaning  here ;  so  that  the  sense  of  the  passage  may  possibly  be,  as 
Ludwig  suggests,  that  neither  great  wealth  nor  abject  poverty  tends  to  make 
a  man  devout.  The  rich  man  when  he  drinks  his  wine  at  home  and  the  ill- 
clad  wretch  exposed  to  the  drenching  rain  are  equally  regardless  of  the  Gods. 

IB  Jtieh  he  the praisei' of  the  rich :  this  appears   to   be  the  continuation  o£ 
'  ^oa  art  rich  '  of  atanza  1 1 . 

J^  Indra  will  not  aoeept  wonihip  wiihoui  o\A«A.iou» 


STifN2.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  109 

17  Naught  else,  0  Thunderer,  have  I  praised  in  the  skilled  singer's 

eulogy : 
On  thy  laud  only  have  I  thought. 

18  The  Gods  seek  him  who  presses  out  the  Soma;  they  desire 

not  sleep  : 
They  punish  sloth  unweariedly. 

19  Come  hither  swift  with  gifts  of  wealth — be  not  thou  angry 

with  us — like 
A  great  man  with  a  youthful  bride. 

20  Let  him  not,  wrathful  with  us,  spend  the  evening  far  from 

us  to-day, 
Like  some  unpleasant  son-in-law. 

21  For  well  we  know  this  Hero's  love,  most  liberal  of  the  boons 

he  gives. 
His  plans  whom  the  three  worlds  display. 

22  Pour  forth  the  gift  which  Kanvas  bring,  for  none  more  glorious 

do  we  know 
Thau  the  Strong  Lord  with  countless  aids. 

23  O  pressor,  offer  Soma  first  to  Indra,  Hero,  Sakra,  him 
The  Friend  of  man,  that  he  may  drink ; 

24  Who,  in  untroubled  ways,  is  best  provider,  for  his  worshippers. 
Of  strength  in  horses  and  in  kine. 

25  Pressors,  for  him  blend  Soma  juice,  each  draught  most  excel- 

lent, for  him 
The  Brave,  the  Hero,  for  his  joy, 

26  The  Vritra-slayer  drinks  the  juice.     May  he  who  gives  a  hun- 

dred aids 
Approach,  nor  stay  afar  from  us. 

27  May  the  strong   Bay  Steeds,  yoked  by  prayer,   bring   hither 

unto  us  our  Friend, 
Lover  of  Song,  renowned  by  songs. 

28  Sweet  are  the  Soma  juices,  come  !  Blent  are  the  Soma  juices, 

come ! 
Rishi-like,  mighty,  fair  of  cheek,  come  hither  quickly  to  the 
feast. 


19-4  gi*eat  man :  the  exact  meaning  of  maMuy  great,  is  not  certain.  SAyana 
explains  it.  by  gunairadhika^,  eminent  on  account  of  his  good  qualities.  '  Be 
not  bashful,  like  Ihe  ardent  husband  of  a  new  bride.' — Wilson.  *  Like  a  rich 
mail)  newly  married.* — Grassmann. 

20  Lifre  some  unpleasant  son-in-law :  who  sees  that  his  company  is  unwel- 
come and  consequently  stays  at  home. 

23  First  to  Jndra:  see  VIII  i.  26.  Sakra :  Indra,  the  M^x^Vt^  On^, 


110  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

29  And  lauds  which  strengthen  thee  for  great  bounty  and  valour, 

and  exalt 
Indra  who  doeth  glorious  deeds, 

30  And  sougs  to  thee  who  lovest  song,   and  all  those  hymns 

addressed  to  thee — 
These  evermore  confirm  thy  might. 

31  Thus  he,  sole  doer  of  great  deeds  whose  hand  holds  thunder, 

gives  us  strength. 
He  who  hath  never  been  subdued. 

32  Vritra  he  slays  with  his  right   hand,  even  Indra,  great  with 

mighty  power, 
And  much-invoked  in  many  a  place. 

33  He  upon  whom  all  men  depend,  all  regions,  all  achievements,  he 
Takes  pleasure  in  our  wealthy  chiefs. 

3:1  All  this  hath  he  accomplished,  yea,  Indra,   most  gloriously 
renowned, 
Who  gives  our  wealthy  princes  strength. 

35  Who  drives  his  chariot  seeking  spoil,  even  from  afar,  to  him 

he  loves : 
For  swift  is  he  to  bring  men  wealth. 

36  The  Sage  who,  winning  spoil  with  steeds,  slays  Vritra,  Hero 

with  the  men. 
His  servant's  faithful  succourer. 

37  0  Priyamedhas,  worship  with  collected  mind  this  Indra  whom 
The  Soma  hath  full  well  inspired. 

38  Ye  Kanvas,   sing  the  Mighty  One,  Lord   of  the  Brave,  who 

loves  renown, 
All-present,  glorified  by  song. 

39  Strong  Friend,  who,  with  no  trace  of  feet,  restores  the  cattle 

to  the  men 
Who  rest  their  wish  and  hope  on  him. 

40  Shaped  as  a  Ram,  Stone-hurler !  once  thou  camest  hither  to 

the  son 
Of  Kanva,  wise  Medhyatithi. 


34  All  this  hath  he  accomplished:  the  slaughter  of  Vritra   and  other  great 
deeds  ;  or,  he  made  all  these  creatures. 

36  The  Sage :  Indra.   With  the  men  :  accompanied  by  the  Marut». 

37  Priyamedhas :  members  of  the  family  of  one  of  the  Rishis. 

39  With  no  trace  of  feet :  without  tracking  the  lost  cattle  (the  rays  of  light) 
bjr  their  footatepa. 
40  Shaped  as  a  Ram;  see  I.  51. 1.    T\ie  legend  ia  told  in  the  ShadnnM 
^rdAmana,  LI, 


Mtmnz.]  the  RIQVEDA.  Ill 

41  Vibhindu,  thou  hast  helped   this  man,  giviug  him  thousands 

four  times  ten, 
And  afterward  eight  thousand  more. 

42  And  these  twain  pouring  sti earns  of  milk,  creative,    daughters 

of  delight, 
For  wedlock  sake  I  glorify. 

HYMN  III.  Indr«. 

Drink,  Indra,  of  the  savoury  juice,   and  cheer  thee  with  our 

milky  draught. 
Be,  for  our  weal,  our  Friend  and  sharer  of  the  feast,  and  let 

thy  wisdom  guard  us  well. 

2  In  thy  kind  grace  and  favour  may  we  still  be    strong  :  expose 

us  not  to  foe's  attack. 
With  manifold  assistance  guard  and  succour  us,  and  bring  us 
to  felicity. 

3  May  these   my  songs   of  praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,    who  hast 

abundant  wealth. 
Men  skilled  m  holy  hymns,   pure,  with  the  hues  of  fire,  have 
sung  them  with  their  lauds  to  thee. 

4  He,  with  his  might  enhanced  by  Kishis  thousandfold,   hath 

like  an  ocean  spread  himself. 
His  majesty  is  praised  as  true  at  solemn  rites,  his  power  where 
holy  singers  rule. 

5  Indra  for  worship  of  the  Gods,  Indra   while  sacrifice  proceeds, 
Indra,  as  worshippers  in   battle-shock,   we  call,    Indra  that  we 

may  win  the  spoil. 

6  With  might  hath  Indra  spread  out  heaven  and  earth,  with 

power  hath  Indra  lighted  up  the  Sun. 
In  ludra  are   all   creatures  closely   held;  in  him  meet  the 
distilling  Soma-drops. 

7  Men  with  their  lauds  are  urging  thee,  Indra,  to  drink  the 

Soma  first. 
The  Ribhus  in  accord  have  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  Rudraa 
sung  thee  as  the  first. 

41  Vibhindu :  the  prince,  the  insti tutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

42  The  stanza  is  obscure,  the  meaning  of  mikty  a  feminine  dual  which  S&yana 
explains  by  nirmdtryau,  makers  or  creators,  i.  e.  heaven  and  earth,  being  un- 
certain. Slyana's  paraphrase  of  the  stanza  is  :  *  I  glorify  these  two  (heaven  and 
iearth),  the  augmenters  of  water,  the  originators  (of  beings),  the  benefactors  of 
t*ie  worshipper,  on  account  of  their  generation  (of  the  wealth  so  given  to  me).' 
— Wilson.  — 

3   With  the  hties  of  fire :  or,  radiant  as  Agni. 

7  The  Ribhus :  as  deities  connected  with  the  seasons  Yihic^L  w*  \%^go\*X«dLV5 
the  Sua  whom  Indra  Um  cauaed  to  ahine. 


112  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

8  Indra  increased  his  manly  strength  at  sacrifice,  in  the  wild 

rapture  of  this  juice. 
And  living  men  to-day,  even  as  of  old,  sing  forth  their  praises 
to  his  majesty. 

9  I  crave  of  thee  that   hero  strength,    that  thou   mayst   first 

regard  this  prayer, 
Wherewith  thou  holpest  Bhrigu  and  the  Yatis  and  Praskanva 
when  the  prize  was  staked. 

10  Wherewith  thou  sentest  mighty  waters  to  the  sea,  that,  Indra, 

is  thy  manly  strength. 
For  ever  unattainable  is  this  power  of  him  to  whom  the  worlds 
have  cried  aloud. 

1 1  Help  us,  0  Indra,  when  we  pray  to  thee  for  wealth  and   hero 

might. 
First  help  thou  on  to   strength  the  man   who  strives  to  win, 
and  aid  our  laud,  0  Ancient  One. 

12  Help  for  us,  Indra,  as  thou  holpest  Paura  once,  this  man's 

devotions  bent  on  gain. 
Help,  as  thou  gavest  Rusama  and  Syavaka  and  Svarnara  and 
Kripa  aid. 

13  What  newest  of  imploring  prayers  shall,   then,  the  zealous 

mortal  sing  1 
For  have  not  they  who  laud  his  might,  and  Indra-power   won 
for  themselves  the  light  of  heaven  ? 

14  When  shall  they  keep  the  Law  and  praise  thee  mid  the  Gods  ? 

Who  counts  as  Rishi  and  as  sage  ? 
When  ever  wilt  thou,  Indra  Maghavan,  come  nigh  to  presser's 
or  to  praiser'd  call  ? 

1 5  These  songs  of  ours  exceeding  sweet,    these   hymns   of  praise 

ascend  to  thee. 
Like  ever-conquering   chariots    that   display   their    strength, 
gain  wealth,  and  give  unfailing  aid. 

16  The  Bhrigus  are  like  Suns,  like  Kanvas,  and  have   gained   all 

that  their  thoughts  were  bent  upon. 
The  living  men  of  Priyamedha's  race  have  sung  exalting  Indra 
with  their  lauds. 


9  BhrigH  :  see  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Yatis  :  an  ancient  race  of  ascetics  copnected 
with  the  Bhrigus,  and,  according  to  one  legend,  said  to  have  taken  p*rt  in  the 
creation  of  the  world.  Praskanva :  a  Ilishi,  son  of  Kanva,  the  seer  of  some 
hymna  of  Book  I.  '       '  * 

10  The  vxyrlds :  all  men,  or  all  living  creatures. 

J 2  Paura :  the  son  of  King  Purn.  Rvmma,  S'/dvaht,  Svarnara,  and  Kripa 
fppe.ir  to  bnve  been  yvinctia  especially  favoured  by  ladra.  Cf.*  stanza  2  of  the 
toJIowiug  hymn. 


BTM^  4.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  118 

17  Best  slayer  of  the  Vritras,  yoke  thy  Bay   Steeds,  Indra,    from 
afar. 
Gome  with  the  High  Ones  hither,  Maghavau,  to  us,  Mighty,  to 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

IS  For  these,  the  bards  aud  singers,  have  cried  out  to  thee  with 
prayer,  to  gain  the  sacrifice. 
As  such,  O  Miighavan,  Indra,  who  lovest  song,  even  as  a  lover 
hear  my  calL 

19  Thou  from  the  lofty  plaius  above,   O   Indra,   hurledst   Vf  itra 

down. 
Thou  dravest  forth  the  kine  of  guileful   Mfigaya  and   Arbuda 
from  the  mountain's  hold. 

20  Bright  were  the  flaming  fires,  the  Sun   gave  forth  his   shine, 

and  Soma,  ludra's  juice,  shone  clear. 
Indra,  thou  blewest  the  great  Dragon  from  the  air :  men  must 
regard  that  valorous  deed. 

21  The  fairest  courser  of  them  all,  who  runneth  on  as   'twere   to 

heaven. 
Wliich  Indra  and  the  Maruts  gave,  and  P&kastb&man  Eaura- 

22  To  me  hath  Pakasth4man  given,  a  ruddy  horse,  good   at  the 

pole. 
Filling  his  girth  and  rousing  wealth ; 

23  Compared  with  whom  no  other  ten  strong  coursers,  harnessed 

to  the  pole. 
Bear  Tugrya  to  his  dwelling  place. 

24  Raiment  is  body,  food  is   life,    and   healing  ointment   giveth 

strength. 
As  the  freehanded  giver  of  the  ruddy  steed,  I  have  named 

Pakastbaman  fourth. 

HYMN  IV.  Indra. 

Though,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  eastward  and  westward^ 

north  and  south. 
Thou  chiefly  art  with  Anava  and  Tui*vasa,  brave  Champion  I 

urged  by  men  to  come. 

17  High  Ones:  the  Maruts. 

18  To  gcUn  the  sacrifice :  to  ensure  its  proper  performance  and  the  blessings 
which  flow  from  it. 

19  Mrigaya:  see  IV.  16.  13.    Arhuda:  see  Tol.  I.,  Index. 

20  Tlie  great  Jh'ogon :  or  Serpent,  Ahi. 

21  Kauraydn :  Eauray&na,  the  son  of    Kuniydna.      PAkasth&man,  whose 
liberality  is  praised  iu  stanzas  21 — 2i,  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere. 

23    Tugrya :  Bhujyu,  son  of  Tugra.    See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

1  Anatfa:  deeoendant  of  the  eponymous  Anu.   Turvafa:  inb'^<;\A<^\^^^»s.> 


THi  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

Or,  Indra,  when  with   Rama,  Rasama,  Sy^vaka,  and  Kripa 

thou  rejoicest  thee, 
Still  do   the  Kanvas,   bringing  praises,    with   their   prayers, 

0  Indra,  draw  thee  hither :  come. 

Even  as  the  wild-bull,  when  he  thirsts,  goes  to  the  desert's 

watery  pool, 
Come  hither  quickly  both  at  morning  and  at  eve,  and  with  the 

Kanvas  driuk  thy  fill. 

May  the  drops  gladden  thee,  rich  Indra,  and  obtain  bounty 

for  him  who  pours  the  juice. 
Soma<  pressed  in  the  mortar  didst  thou  take  and  drink,  and 

hence  hast  won  surpassing  might. 

With  mightier  strength  he  conquered  strength,  with  energy 

he  crushed  their  wrath. 
0  Indra,  Strong  in  youth,  all  those  who  sought  the  fray  bent 

and  bowed  down  to  thee  like  trees. 

He  who  wins  promise  of  thine  aid  goes  girt  as  with  a  thou- 
sand mighty  men  of  war. 

He  makes  his  son  preeminent  in  hero  might :  he  serves  with 
reverential  prayer. 

With  thee,  the  Mighty,  for  our  Friend,  we  will  not  fear  or  feel 

fatigue. 
May  we  see  Turvasa  and  Yadu  :  thy  great  deed,  0  Hero,  must 

be  glorified. 

On  his  left  hip  the  Hero  hath  reclined  himself;  the  proffered 

feast  offends  him  not. 
The  milk  is  blended  with  the  honey  of  the  bee  :  quickly  come 

hither,  haste,  and  drink. 

India,  thy  friend  is  fair  of  form  and  rich  in  horses,  cars,  and  kine. 
He  evermore  hath  food  accompanied  by  wealth,  and  radian 
joins  the  company. 

Come  like  a  thirsty  antelope  to  the  drinking-place  :  drink 

Soma  to  thy  heart's  desire. 
Raining  it  down,  0  Maghavan,  day  after  day,  thou  gainest  thy 

surpassing  might. 


\  Rusama,  Sydvaka^  and  Kripa  have  been  mentioned  in  stanza  12  of  the 
seeding  hymn.     Ruma  was  another  of  Indra's  favourites. 
\  The  wild-hull:  or  Gaura  (Bos  Gaums),. a  kind  of  buffalo. 
'  May  we  see  Turvasa  and  Yadu :  enjoying  happiness  through  thy  favour. — 
yana. 

)  Thy  fnend :  the  man  whom  thou  f avourest.     Joins  the  company :  tha 
3mbly  of  hia  equals, 

'  /^atm'nff  t£  down  :  poMTva^  down  the  trwxaioxm^  ^OTaa,  m  the  shape  of 
i>ee  Vedische  Studien,  I.  88.  . 


BTMN  4.]  TEE  RIGVEDA,  115 

11  Priest,  let  the  Soma  juice  flow  forth,  for  Indra  longs  to  drink 

thereof. 
He  even  now  hath  yoked  his  vigorous  Bay  Steeds ;  the  Vritra- 
slayer  hath  come  near. 

12  The  man  with  whom  tiiou  fiUetst  thee  with  Soma  deems  him- 

self a  pious  worshipper. 
This  thine  appropriate  food  is  here  poured  out  for  thee  ;  come, 
hasten  forward,  drink  of  it. 

13  Press  out  the  Soma  j  uice,  ye  priests,  for  Indra  borne  upon  his 

ear. 
The  pressing-stones  speak  load  of  Indra,  while  they  shed  the 
juice  which,  offered,  houours  him. 

14  To  the  brown  juice  may  his  dear  vigorous  Bay  Steeds  bring 

Indra,  to  our  holy  task. 
Hither  let  thy  Car-steeds  who  seek  the  sacrifice  bring  thee  to 
our  drink-offerings. 

15  Puahau,  the  Lord  of  ample  wealth,  for  firm  alliance  we  elect. 
May  he  with   wisdom,   Sakra !  Looser !  Much-invoked !  aid  us 

to  riches  and  to  seed. 

16  Sharpen  us  like  a  razor  in  the  barber's  hands;  send  riches 

thou  who  settest  free. 
Easy  to  find  with  thee  are   treasures  of  the  Dawn  for  mortal 
man  whom  thou  dost  speed. 

17  Pushan,  I  long  to  win  thy  love,  I  long  to  praise  thee,  Radiant 

God, 
Excellent  Lord,  *tis  strange  to  roe,  no  wish  have  I  to  sing  the 
psalm  that  Pajra  sings. 

18  My  kine,  0    Radiaut  God,  seek  pasture  where  they  will,  my 

during  wealth.  Immortal  One. 
Be  our  protector,  Piishan  !  be,  most  liberal  Lord,  propitious  to 
our  gathering  strength. 

19  Rich  was  the  gift  Kurunga  gave,  a  hundred  steeds  at  morning 

rites. 
Among  the  gifts  of  Turvasas  we  thought  of  him,  the  opulent, 
the  splendid  King. 

20  What  by  his  morning  songs  Kdnva,   the  powerful,  hath,  with 

the  Priyamedhas,  gained — 


15  PtUhan  :  may  here  be  a  name  of  Indra.     Looser :  of  the  chariot-horses 
when  thou  comest  to  sacrifices  ;  or,  according  to  Sd>yana,  liberator  (from  sin). 

17  Pajra :  one  of  the  Pajras,  a  celebrated  priestly  family,  with  whom  the 
Kanvas  appear  to  have  been  on  hostile  terms. 

29  J^urun^a;  tbia  prince's  name  does  not  occur  ag«a\i« 


«►  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

The  herds  of  sixty  thousand  pure  and  spotless   kine,   have    I, 
the  Bishi,  driven  away. 

!il  The  very  trees  were  joyful  at  my  coming  :  kine  they  obtained 
in  plenty,  steeds  in  plenty. 

HYMN  V.  Asvin.. 

When,  even  as  she  were   present  here,  red  Dawn   hath   shone 

from  fur  awav, 
She  spreadeth  light  on  every  side. 

2  Like   Heroes   on   your  will-yoked    car   far-shining,   Wonder- 

Workers  !  ye 
Attend,  0  Asvins,  on  the  Dawn. 

3  By  you,  0  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  our   songs    of  praise   have 

been  observed  : 
As  envoy  have  I  brought  the  prayer. 

4  Eanvas  must  praise  the  Asvins  dear  to    many,  making   many 

glad. 
Most  rich,  that  they  may  succour  us. 

5  Most  liberal,   best  at   winning   strength,   inciters,   Lords   of 

splendour  who 
Visit  the  worshipper's  abode. 

6  So  for  devout  Sudeva  dew  with  fatness  his  unfailing  mead, 
And  make  it  rich  for  sacrifice. 

7  Hitherward  running  speedily  with  horaes,  as  with  rapid  hawks, 
Come,  Asvins,  to  our  song  of  praise  : 

8  Wherewith  the  three  wide  distances,  and  all   the  lights   that 

are  in  heaven 
Ye  traverse,  and  three  times  of  night. 

9  0  Finders  of  the  Day,  that  we  may  win   us  food   of  kine  and 

wealth, 
Open  the  paths  for  us  to  tread. 

10  0  Asvins,  bring  us  wealth  in  kine,  in  noble  heroes,  and  in  cars: 
Bring  us  the  strength  that  horses  give. 

11  Ye  Lords  of  splendour,  glorified,  ye  Wonder- Workers  borae  on 

paths 
Of  gold,  drink  sweets  with  Soma  juice. 


20  Pure  and  Bpotless :  I  follow  SAyana's  intei-pretation  of  ntrmajdmy  but  its 
•nrrectness  is  at  least  doubtful.  Von  Roth  suggests  *  to  the  watering-place ' 
M  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and  Ludwig  '  so  that  none  remained  behmd.' 

S  Lordi  of  ample  wealth :    *  affluent  in  sacrifices.' — Wilson.    See  V.  74.  7. 
jis  envo^:  aa  the  messenger  of  the  patron  of  the  sacrifice. 

S  Times  of  night :  yimas^  night-watches  oi  tViree  hovira  each. 

11  Sweets  :  or  meAth,  f/iddhu  ;  here,  perba^pa,  tVi*  "dmMl.— \*u^\^. 


BTMN  6.]  THE  RtGVEDA.  117 

12  To  US)  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  and   to   our   wealthy  chiefs 

extend 
Wide  shelter,  ne'er  to  be  assailed. 

13  Come  quickly  downward  to   the   prayer  of  people    whom   ye 

favour  most : 
Approach  not  unto  other  folk. 

14  Ye  Asvins  whom  our   minds   perceive,    drink   of  this   lovely 

gladdening  draught, 
The  mejith  which  we  present  to  you. 

15  Bring  riches  hither  unto  us   iu   huudreds  and   in   thousands, 

source 
Of  plenteous  food,  sustaining  all. 

16  Verily  sages  call  on  yon,  ye  Heroes,  in  full  many  a  place. 
Moved  by  the  priests,  O  Asvins,  come. 

17  Men  who  have  trimmed  the  sacred   grass,   bringing  oblations 

and  prepared, 
0  Asvins,  are  invoking  you. 

18  May  this  our  hymn  of  praise  to-day,  most  powerful  to  bring 

you,  be, 
O  Asvins,  nearest  to  your  hearts. 

19  The  skin  filled  full  of  savoury  meath,  laid  iu  the  pathway  of 

your  oar — 
O  Asvins,  drink  ye  both  therefrom. 

2D  For  this,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  bring  blessing  for  our  herd, 
our  kiue. 
Our  progeny,  and  plenteous  food. 

21  Ye  too  unclose  to  us  like  doors  the  strengthening  waters  of  the 

sky, 
And  rivers,  ye  who  find  the  day. 

22  When  did  the  sou  of  Tugra  serve   you,  Men  ?    Abandoned  ia 

the  sea, 
That  with  winged  steeds  your  car  might  fly. 

23  Ye,  0   N^satyas,  ministered   to    Kanva   with   repeated    aid, 
When  cast  into  the  heated  pit. 


\Q  By  the  priests:  vdghddbhih:  accordiDg  to  S&yana,  *with  horses.* 

19  The  Asvins  appear  to  be  invit«d  to  halt  and  driuk  the  libations  prepared 
for  them  by  their  worshippers,  and  not,  as  S^yana  explains,  to  drink  from  th« 
skin  suspended  in  their  own  car.  -— Ludwig. 

22  The  ion  of  Tugra :  Bhujyu,  whose  rescue  by  the  Aavins  has  frequently 
been  related  and  referred  to.  The  meaning  is,  I  do  not  honour  you  only  whea 
I  am  in  distress,  as  others  whom  you  have  aided  have  dorv.^. 

23  Mtniseered  eo  ICanva:  see  I,  112,  5,  and  118.  7» 


118  TEE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  VIIL 

24  Come  near  with  those  most  recent  aids  of  yours  which  merit 

eulogy, 
When  I  invoke  you,  Wealthy  Gods. 

25  As  ye  protected  Kanva  erst,  Priyamedha  and  Upastuta, 
Atri,  Sinjara,  Asvins  Twain  ! 

26  And  Ansu  in  decisive  fight,  Agastya  in  the  fray  for  kine, 
And,  in  hiff  battles,  Sobhari. 

27  For  so  much  bliss,  or  even  more,   0  Asvins,   Wealthy  Gods, 

than  this, 
We  pray  while  singing  hymns  to  you. 

28  Ascend  your  car  with  golden  seat,  0  Asvins,  and  with  reins 

of  gold. 
That  reaches  even  to  the  sky. 

29  Golden   is  its  supporting  shaft,   the  axle  also  is  of  gold, 
And  both  the  wheels  are  made  of  gold. 

30  Thereon,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  come  to  us  even  from  afar. 
Come  ye  to  this  mine  eulogy. 

31  From  far  away  ye  come  to  us,  Asvins,  enjoying  plenteous  food 
Of  Dasas,  0  Immortal  Ones. 

32  With  splendour,  riches,  and  renown,  0  Asvins,  hither  come 

to  us, 
N^satyas,  shining  brilliantly. 

33  May  dappled  horses,  steeds  who  fly  with  pinions,  bring  you 

hitherward 
To  people  skilled  in  sacrifice. 

34  The  wheel   delayeth  not   that  car  of  yours  accompanied  by 

song, 
That  Cometh  with  a  store  of  food. 

35  Borne  on  that  chariot  wrought  of  gold,  with  coursers  very 

fleet  of  foot, 
Come,  0  N^satyas,  swift  as  thought. 


24  Wealthy  Oods:  the  meaning  of  vrtshanvasH  is  uncertain :  '  rich  in  showers* 
is  S^yana's  explanation,  and  *  excellent  as  steers '  Prof.  Ludwig's.  I  follow 
von  Roth,  but  his  interpretation  is  conjectural. 

25  Kanva^  PHyamedha,  Upastuta  and  Atri  have  been  mentioned  in  Book  I. 
Sftyana  takes  aifijStram  to  be  an  epithet  of  Atri,  *  repeating  praises.' 

26  Ansu:  a  worshipper  so  named. — S&yana.  Agastya:  appears  in  I.  117.  11, 
where  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  family-priest  of  Khela.  *  The  great  Ilishi 
Agastya  is  the  seer  of  Hymns  166—191  of  Book  I.  See  also  VII.  33.10. 
SobhaH:  a  Rishi,  the  seer  of  Hymns  19 — 22  of  this  Book. 

31  Plenteous  food  of  Ddsas :  the  meaning  appears  to  be  that  even  far  away 
/a  the  ea^t  the  D&sas  or  non- Aryan  inhabitants  sacrifice  to  the  Asvins.    S^yana 
explains  the  stanza  differently :  *  Immortal  Asvins,  d^atroyers  of  the  citios  ef 
^Ae  ^asas,  ye  bring  to  ua  food  from  afar.'  — V7i\aou» 


BTMl^  6]  THE  RIOVEDA.  \n 

36  O  Wealthy  Gods,  ye  taste  and  find  the  brisk  and  watchful  ^ild 

beast  good. 
Associate  wealth  with  food  for  us. 

37  As  such,  0  Asvins,  fiud  for  me  my  share  of  new-presented 

gifts, 

As  Kasa,  Chedi's  son,  gave  me  a  hundred  head  of  buflfaloes, 
and  ten  thousand  kine. 

38  He  who  hath  given  me  for  mine  own  ten  Kings  like  gold  to 

look  upon. 
At  Chaidya's  feet  are  all  the  people  round  about,  all  those 
who  think  upon  the  shield. 

39  No  man,  not  any,  goes  upon  the  path  on  which  the  Chedis 

walk. 
No  other  prince,  no  folk  is  held  more  liberal  of  gifts  than  they. 

HYMN  VI.  Inditu 

Indra,  great  in  his  power  and  might,  and  like  Parjanya  rich 

in  rain, 
Is  magnified  by  Vatsa's  lauds. 

2  When  the  priests,  strengthening  the  Son  of  Holy  Law,  present 

their  gifts. 
Singers  with  Order's  hymn  of  praise. 

3  Since  Eanvas  with  their  lauds  have  made  Indra  complete  the 

sacrifice. 
Words  are  their  own  appropriate  arms. 

4  Before  his  hot  displeasure  all  the  peoples,  all  the  men,   bow 

down, 
As  rivers  bow  them  to  the  sea. 

5  This  power  of  his  shone  brightly  forth  when  ludra  brought 

together,  like 
A  skin,  the  worlds  of  heaven  and  earth. 

36  According  to  S&yana  the  watchful  wild  beast  is  the  the  Soma  which  must 
be  chased  or  sought  after  by  the  Gods.  Ludwig  would  read  svapatho,  with  a 
transitive  and  causal  meaning,  instead  of  svddatho,  i.  e  ,  ye  when  ye  appear 
in  the  morning  send  to  sleep  the  wild  beasts  that  have  been  awake  all  night. 
The  stanza  is  obscure. 

37  Bvffaloea :  or  camels. 

38  This  stanza  appears  to  be  spoken  by  Kasu  who  is  called  Chaidya  or  son 
of  ChedL  Who  think  upon  tlie  shield :  who  are  practised  in  wearing  armour 
of  leather,  according  to  S&yaua. 

3  Words   are   theh*   own   appropriate  arms:    Hhey  d^cAax^  iJ\  ^^sk^ta 
needJaaft ' —  WUsod. 


1«0  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

6  The  fiercely-moving  Vfitra's  head  he  severed  with  his  thunder- 

bolt, 
His  mighty  huudred-kuotted  bolt. 

7  Here  are — we  sing  them  loudly  forth— our  thoughts  among 

the  best  of  song.4, 
Even  Irghtnings  like  the  blaze  of  fire. 

8  When  hidden  thoughts,  spontaneously   advancing,   glow,  and 

with  tlie  stream 
Of  sacrifice  the  Ranvas  shine. 

9  Indra,  may  we  obtain  that  wealth  in  horses  and  in  herds  of 

cows, 
And  prayer  that  may  be  noticed  first. 

10  I  from  my  Father  have  received  deep  knowledge  of  the  Holj 
Law : 
I  was  born  like  unto  the  Sun. 

^^  After  the  lore  of  ancient  time  I  make,  like  Kanva,  beauteous 
songs, 
And  Indra's  self  gains  strength  thereby. 

12  Whatever  Rishis  have  not  praised  thee,  Indra,  or  have  lauded 

thee, 
By  me  exalted  wax  thou  strong. 

13  When  his  wraih  thundered,   when  he  rent  Yritra  to  pieces^ 

limb  by  limb, 
He  sent  the  waters  to  the  sea. 

14  Against  the  Dasyu  Sushna  thou,  Indra,  didst  hurl  thy  during 

bolt: 
Thou,  Dread  One,  hast  a  hero's  fame. 

15  Neither  the  heavens  nor  firmaments  nor  regions  of  the  earth 

contain 
Indra,  the  Thunderer  with  his  might. 

16  0  Indra  him  who  lay  at  length  staying  thy  copious   waters 

thou. 
In  his  own  footsteps,  smoteut  down. 

17  Thou  hiddest  deep  in  darkness  him,  0  Indra,  who  had  set  his 

grasp 
On  spacious  heaven  and  earth  conjoined. 


10  From  my  Father :  *  from  Indra,  the  true  protector,'  according  to  SAyana. 

12  Have  not  praited  thee :  have  not  praised  thee  yet,  that  is,  will  praia« 
thee  hereafter. — Ludwig. 

16  Jn  his  own  footsteps :  or,  in  the  (waters)  at  his  feet.    '  Into  the  rushing 
tireama. ' — Wilson. 

2Z  Conjoined:  like  two  bowls  turned  towarda  e«hc\v  ol\i«5» 


BYMN  6.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  121 

18  Indra,  whatever  Yatla  and  Bhrigus  have  offered  praise  to  thee. 
Listen,  thou  Mighty,  to  my  call. 

19  ludm,  these  spotted  cows  yield  thee  their  butter  and  the 

milky  draught, 
Aiders,  thereby,  of  sacrifice ; 

20  Which,  teeming,  have  received  thee  as  a  life-germ,  Indra,  with 

their  mouth, 
Like  Surya  who  sustaineth  all. 

21  O  Lord  of  Might,   with   hymns  of  praise  the  Kanvas  havt 

increased  thy  power, 
The  drops  poured  forth  have  strengthened  thee. 

22  Under  thy  guidance,  Indra,  mid  thy  praises.  Lord  of  Thunder, 

shall 
The  sacrifice  be  snoo  performed. 

23  Indra,  disclose  much  food  for  us,  like  a  stronghold  with  store 

of  kine : 
Give  progeny  and  heroic  strength. 

24  And,    Indra,  grant   us  all   that  wealth   of  fleet  steeds   which 

shone  bright  of  old 
Among  the  tribes  of  Nahushas. 

25  Hither  thou  seemest  to  attract  heaven's  fold  which  shines  be- 

fore our  eyes. 
When,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

26  Yea,  when  thou  puttest  forth  thy  power,  Indra,  thou  governest 

the  folk, 
Mighty,  unlimited   in  strength. 

27  The  tribes  who  bring  oblations  call  to  thee,  to  thee  to  give 

them  help. 
With  drops  to  thee  who  spreadest  far. 

28  There  where  the  mountains  downward  slope,  there  by  the 

meeting  of  the  streams 
The  Sage  was  manifest  with  song. 

29  Thence,    marking,  from   his  lofty  place  downward  he  looks 

upon  the  sea, 
And  thence  with  rapid  stir  he  moves. 

.18  TatU:  'pious  sages/ — Wilson.     Angirases,  according  to  S&yana. 

20  The  stanza  is  unintelligible  to  me.  Sayana  says  that  *  thee'  means  Indra 
in  the  shape  of  the  grass  which  his  fertilizing  energy  causes  to  grow,  and  by 
feeding  on  which  the  cows  multiply.  This  energy  of  Indra's  is  all-supporting 
like  the  sun.     See  Wilson's  note.     Ludwig  proposes  an  alteration  of  the  text. 

24  THbes  of  Nahuahas :  or,  perhaps,  the  neighbouring  tribes. 

28  TA«  Sctge :  Indra.  *  Sftyana's  conclusiou  of  the  purport  of  the  verse  is, 
that  men  ought  to  sacrifice  in  those  places  where  Indra  is  said  to  be  mauit^^ 
•d.*— Wilson. 

29  TAe  sea.'  the  reservoir  qf  Soma  Juice. 


122  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

30  Then,  verily,  they  see  the  light  refulgent  of  primeval  seed, 
Kiudled  on  yonder  side  of  heaven. 

31  Indra,  the    Kanvas   all   exalt   thy    wisdom   and   thy   manly 

power, 
And,  Mightiest !  thine  heroic  strength, 

32  Accept  this  eulogy  of  mine,  Indra,  and  guard  me  carefully : 
Strengthen  my  thought  and  prosper  it. 

33  For  thee,  0  Mighty,  Thunder-armed,  we  singers  through  devo- 

tion have 
Fashioned  the  hymn  that  we  may  live. 

34  To  Indra  have  the   Kaiivas  sung,   like  waters   speeding  down 

a  slope : 
The  song  is  fain  to  go  to  him. 

35  As  rivers  swell  the  ocean,  so  our  hymns  of  praise  make  Indra 

strong, 
Eternal,  of  resistless  wrath. 

36  Come  with  thy  lovely  Bay  Steeds,  come  to  us  from  regions  far 

away  : 
0  Indra,  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

37  Best  slayer  of  the  Vritras,  men  whose  sacred  grass  is    ready 

trimmed 
Invoke  thee  for  the  gain  of  spoil. 

38  The   heavens  and   earth  come  after  thee  as  the  wheel   follows 

Etasa : 
To  thee  flow  Soma-drops  effused. 

39  Rejoice,  0  Indra,  in  the  light,  rejoice  in  SaryanavHn,  be 
Glad  in  the  sacrificer's  hymn. 

40  Grown   strong  in   heaven,  the   Thunder-armed  hath  bellowed, 

Vritraslayer,  Bull, 
Chief  drinker  of  the  Soma  juice. 

41  Thou  art  a  Kishi  born  of  old,  sole  Ruler  over  all  by  might : 
'J'hou,  Indra,  guardest  well  our  wealth.  ^JJ^ 

42  May  thy  Bay  Steeds  with  beauteous  backs,  a  hundj^^Tbring 

thee  to  the  feast,  .'■^^ 

Bring  thee  to  these  our  Soma-draughts. 

43  The  Kaijivas  with  their   hymns  of  praise  have   magnified  this 

ancient  thought 
That  swells  with  streams  of  meath  and  oil. 

30  The  light :  the  Sun  which  is  lighted  up  beyond  the  range  of  men's  sight. 
38-4*  the  wheel  follows  Etasa:  as  the  chariot  of  the  Sun  follows  the  horse 
iAat  draws  it.  ^^^ 

39  Saryanivdn  said  to  be  a  lake  and  diatnct  in  Kutukshetra.   'ftee  I.  84» 
14,  note. 


STMN  7.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  103 

44  Mid   mightiest  Gods   let   mortal   man   choose   Indra   at  the 

sacrifice, 
Indra,  whoe'er  would  win,  for  help. 

45  Thy   steeds,  by    Priyamedhas  praised,    shall  bring   thee,  God 

whom  all  invoke, 
Hither  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

46  A    hundred    thousand     have   I   gained    from    Parsu,    from 

Tirindira, 
And  presents  of  the  Y4davas. 

47  Ten  thousand  head  of  kine,  and  steeds  three  times  a  hundred 

they  bestowed 
Ou  Pajra  for  the  S&ma-song. 

48  Kakuha  hath  reached  up  to  heaven,  bestowing  buffaloes  yoked 

in  fours. 
And  matched  in  fame  the  Y&davas. 

HYMN  VII.  Manits. 

O  Maruts,   when  the  sage   hath  poured  the  Trishtup  fortb  as 

food  for  you, 
Ye  shine  amid  the  mountain-clouds. 

2  When,  Bright  Ones,  fain  to  show  your  might   ye  have   deter- 

mined on  your  course,. 
The  mountain-clouds  have  bent  them  down. 

3  Loud  roaring  with  the  winds  the  Sous  of  Prisni  have  upraised 

themselves  : 
They  have  poured  out  the  streaming  food. 

4  The  Maruts  spread  the  mist  abroad  and  make   the  mountains 

rock  and  reel. 
When  with  the  winds  they  go  their  way ; 

5  What  time  the  rivers  and  the  hills  before  your  coming  bowed 

them  down, 
So  to  sustain  your  mighty  force. 


46  Prom  Parsu,  from  Tirindira:  *from  Tirindira  the  eon  of  Parsu'  — 
"Wilsou.  Both  names  are  Iranian  (cf.  Tiridates,  Persa).  See  Weber's  ^j[>wc/i6« 
im  Vedischen  RO/ualy  pp.  36—38  (Sitzungsberichte  der  K.  P.  Akademie  der 
Wisseuschaften,  1891,  XXXVIII). 

Yddavas :  or  Tadus,  descendants  of  the  hero  Yadu . 

47  Pajra:  see  VIII.  4.  17. 

48  Kahvha :  or,  the  lofty  one,  meaning  Tirindira.     Buffaloes  :  or  camels. 

1  The  Trishtup:  according  to  one  of  SHyana's  three  interpretations,  the 
Soma  offeryig  at  the  midday  libation  accompanied  by  hyuoiXH  uv  \\i<^  Txvi^\.>^ 
metre.  ♦ 


134  TSB  SYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

6  We  call  on  you  for  aid  by  night,  on  you  for  succour  in  the  day. 
On  you  while  sacrifice  proceeds. 

7  These,  verily,  wondrous,  red  of  hue,   speed   on   their  coursts 

with  a  roar 
Over  the  ridges  of  the  sky. 

8  With  might  they  drop  the  loosened   rein  so  that  the  Sun  may 

run  his  course, 
And  spread  themselves  with  beams  of  light. 

9  Accept,  ye  Maruts,  this  my  song,  accept  ye  thi^i    mine   hymn 

of  praise, 
Accept,  Kibhukshans,  this  my  call. 

10  The  dappled  Cows  have  poured   three   lakes,    meath   for   the 
Thunder-wielding  God, 
From  the  great  cask,  the  watery  cloud. 

110  Maruts,  quickly  come  to  us  when,  longing  for  felicity. 
We  call  you  hither  from  the  sky. 

1  %  For,  Rudras  aud  Ribhukshaus,  ye,  Most  Bountiful,  are  in  the 
house, 
Wise  when  the  gladdening  draught  is  drunk. 

13  0  Maruts,  send  us  down  from  heaven  riches  distilling   raptur- 

ousjoy, 
With  plenteous  food,  sustaining  all. 

14  When,  Bright  Ones,  hither  from  the  hills  ye  have   resolved  to 

take  your  way. 
Ye  revel  in  the  drops  effused. 

15  Man  should  solicit  with  his  lauds   happiness  which  belongs  to 

them, 
So  great  a  band  invincible. 

16  They  who  like  fiery  sparks  with  showers  of  rain  blow   through 

the  heaven  aud  earth. 
Milking  the  spring  that  never  fails. 

17  With  chariots  and  tumultuous  roar,  with   tempests  and   with 

hymns  of  praise 
The  Sons  of  Prisni  hurry  forth. 

18  For  wealth,  we  think  of  that  whereby  ye  aided  Yadu,  Turvaaa, 
And  Kanva  who  obtained  the  spoil. 

8  They  drop  the  loosened  rein :  they  speed  forward  to  prepare  the  way  for 
the  Sun. 

9  Ribhukshans :  Mighty  Ones,   according  to  S&yana. 

JO  TAe  dappled  Cows:  the  ^Maruts.     Three  lakes:  three  large  Soma  recep- 
tacles,  the  DrofjakcUaBa,  the  J(2^van%a,  and  tVi.^  P'Clta6^ri^    Tho  meaning  l|» 
the  MaiuU  have  poured  down  abundant  "water  ixoxo.  X\ia  x^u-^avjA» 


BTMN  7]  TEB  RIQVBDA.  12« 

19  May  these  our  viands  Bounteous  Ones  !  that  flow   in   streams 

like  holy  oil, 
With  K^nva'a  hymns,  increase  your  might. 

20  Where,  Bounteous  Lords  for  whom  the  grass   is   trimmed,  art 

ye  rejoicing  now  ? 
What  Brahman  is  adoring  you  ? 

31   Is  it  not  there  where  ye  of  old,   supplied   with  saored   grass, 
for  lauds 
Inspired  the  strong  in  sacrifice  % 

22  They  brought  together  both  the  worlds,   the  mighty   waters, 

and  the  Sun, 
And,  joint  by  joint,  the  thunderbolt. 

23  They  sundered  Vritra  limb  from  limb  and  split  the  gloomj 

mountain-clouds. 
Performing  an  heroic  deed. 

24  They  reinforced  the4)ower  and  strength  of  Trita  as  he  fought, 

and  helped 
Indra  in  battle  with  the  foe. 

25  They  deck  themselves  for  glory,  bright,  celestial,  lightning  in 

their  hands, 
And  helms  of  .gold  upon  their  heads. 

26  When  eagerly  ye  from  far  away  came  to  the  oavem  of  the  Bull, 
He  bellowed  in  his  fear  like  Heaven. 

27  Borne  by  your  golden -footed  steeds,  0  Gods,  come   hither  to 

receive 
The  sacrifice  we  oflFer  you. 

28  When  the  red  leader  draws  along  their  spotted  deer  yoked  to 

the  car. 
The  Bright  Ones  come,  and  shed  the  rain. 

29  Sushoma,  Saryan^vsln,  and  Arjlka  full  of  homes,  have  they, 
These  Heroes,  sought  with  downward  car. 

19  With  Kdnva's  hymns:  hymns  of  the  Rishi  Punarvatea,  a  descendant  of 
Kanva. 

21  The  Bti^ong  in  sctcHJloe :  the  Maghavant^  wealthy  worshippers. 

24  Trita :  a  Yedic  deity,  perhaps  Agni  in  his  third  form,  generally  associated 
with  Indra,  V&yti,  and  the  Maruts.  See.  YoL  I.,  Index.  In  battle  loith  the 
foe :  or,  to  overcome  Vritra. 

26  The  cavern  of  the  Bull :  perhaps,  the  hollow  of  the  rain-cloud  ;  '  the 
opening  of  the  rainy  (firmament).' — Wilson. 

28  Leader :  or  side-horse. 

29  Sail/and vdn  .'^has  occurred  before  (soe  I.  84.  14,  and  YIII  6.  39)  as  the 
name  of  a  lake.     Arjlka  is  said  by  Sftyaua  to  be  the  name  of   «b  d\%tT\<^\«^  vql<\ 
be  takes  tush&ma  (eontainiDg  excellent  Soma)  to  be  an  ad^eclvv^  q\iii^l>jvsv^>^, 
SeaZImmer,  AUindiscAe*  Lebenf  p.  IP. 


126  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

30  When,  Maruts,  will  ye  come  to  him,    the  singer  who  invokes 

you  thus, 
With  favours  to  your  suppliant  ? 

31  What  now  ?  where  have  ye  still  a  friend  since  ye  left  Indra  all 

alone  ? 
Who  couateth  on  your  friendship  now  ? 

32  The   Kanvas   sing   forth     Agni*s   praise   together   with,   our 

Maruts'  who 
Wield  thunder  and  wear  swords  of  gold. 

33  Hither  for  new  felicity  may  I  attract  the  Impetuous  Ones, 
The  Heroes  with  their  wondrous  strength. 

34  Before  them  sink  the  very  hills  deeming  themselves  abysses : 

yea, 
Even  the  mountains  bend  them  down. 

35  Steeds  flying  on  their  tortuous  path  through  mid-air  carry 
,  them,  and  give  . 

The  man  who  lauds  them  strength  and  life. 

36  A.gni  was  born  the  first  of  all,  like  Surya  lovely  with  bis  light: 
With  lustre  these  have  spread  abroad. 

HYMN  VIII.  Asvins. 

With  all  the  succours  that  are  yours,  0  Asvins,  hither  come 

to  us  : 
Wonderful,  borne  on  paths  of  gold,  drink  ye  the  meath  with 

Soma  juice. 

2  Come  now,  ye  Asvins,  on  your  car  decked  with  a  sun-bright 

canopy. 
Bountiful,  with    your  golden    forms.    Sages  with  depth  of 
intellect. 

3  Come  hither  from  the  Nahushas,  come,  drawn  by  pure  hymns, 

from  mid-air. 
0  Asvins,    drink   the    savoury   juice    shed   in   the    Kanvas' 
sacrifice. 


31  Left  Indra  all  alone  ? ;  This  is  merely  a  rhetorical  question  meaning,  ye 
never  did  desert  him.     The  Maruts  alone  stood  by  him  when  he  fought  with 

Vritra. 

36  With  lustre  these  have  spread  abroad :  *  then  they  (the  Maruts)  stood 
round  in  their  radiance.^  *  The  Scholiast  intimates  that  this  verse  refers  to 
the  ceremony  called  Agnimdruta,  when  Agni  ia  first  worshipped,  then  the 
Maruts.*-  -Wilson . 


S  J^rom .  the  Nafi,Mha8 :  or,  according  to  ot\iei&,  Irom  the  neighbouring 


MiMN  8.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  127 

4  Come  to  us  hither  from  the  heavens,  come  from  mid-air,  well- 

loved  by  us  : 
Here  Kanva's  son  hath  pressed  for  you  the  pleasant  meath  of 
Soma  juice. 

5  Come,  Asvins,  to  give  ear  to  us,  to  drink  the  Soma,  Asyins, 

come. 
Hail,  Strengtheners  of    the  praise-song !    speed  onward,  ye 
Heroes,  with  your  thoughts. 

6  As,  Heroes,  in  the  olden  time  the  Rishis  called  you  to  their 

aid. 
So  now,  0  Asvins,  come  to  us,  come  near  to  this  mine  eulogy. 

'  7  Even  from  the  luminous  sphere  of  heaven  come  to  us,  ye  who 
find  the  light. 
Carers  for  Vatsa,   through  our  prayers  and  lauds,   0  ye  who 
hear  our  call. 

8  Do  others  more  than  we  adore  the  Asvins  with  their  hymns 

of  praise? 
The  Kishi  Vatsa,  Kanva's  son,  hath  magnified  you  with  his 
songs. 

9  The  holy  singer  with  his  hymns  hath  called  you,  Asvins,  hither- 

ward; 
:    Best  Vritra-slayers,  free  from  stain,  as  such  bring  us  felicity. 

10  What  time,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  the  Lady  mounted  on 

your  car. 
Then,   O  ye  Asvins,   ye  attained  all  wishes  that  your  hearts 
desired. 

11  Come  thence,   0  Asvins,  on  your  car  that  hath  a  thousand 

ornaments : 
Vatsa  the  sage,  the  sage's  son,  hath  sung  a  song  of  sweets  to 
you. 

12  Cheerers  of  many,  rich  in  goods,  discoverers  of  opulence, 
The  Asvins,  Riders  through  the  sky,  have  welcomed  this  my 

song  of  praise. 

13  0  Asvins,  grant  us  all    rich  gifts   wherewith  no   man   may 

interfere. 
Make  us  observe  the  stated  times  :  give  us  not  over  to  reproach. 

14  Whether,  N^satyas,  ye  be  nigh,  or  whether  ye  be  far  away, 
Come  thence,   0  Asvins,  on  your  car  that  hath  a  thousand 

ornaments. 


7  Carers  for  Vatsa :  ye  who  favour  and  provide  for  Vatsa,  the  Rishi  of 
Hymn  VL  of  this  Book. 

J 0  TA€  lady.  SHryA,  Daughter  of  the  Sun.    S«e.  1.  W^.  \T . 


128  THB  HYMNS  OP  {BOOR  VIIL 

15  Vatsa  the  Bishi  with  his  songs,  N&satyas,  hath  exalted  you : 
Grant  him  rich  food  distilling  oil,  graced  with  a  thousand 

ornaments. 

16  Bestow   on  him,  0  Asvins,   food  that  strengthens,  and  that 

drops  with  oil. 
On  him  who  praises  you  for  bliss,  and,  Lords  of  bounty,  prays 
for  wealth. 

1 7  Come  to  us,  ye  who  slay  the   foe.  Lords  of  rich   treasure,  to 

this  hymn. 
0  Heroes,  give  us  high  renown  and  these  good  things  of  earth 
for  help. 

1 8  The  Priyamedhaa  have  invoked  you  with  all  succours  that 

are  yours, 
Yoii,  Asvins,  Lords  of  solemn  rites,  with  calls  entreating  you 
to  come. 

19  Come  to  us,  Asvins,  ye  who  bring  felicity,  auspicious  Ones, 
To  Vatsa  who  with  prayer  and  hymn,  lovers  of  song,  hath 

honoured  you. 

20  Aid   us,  0  Heroes,    for   those   hymns  for   which  ye   helped 

Gosarya  erst. 
Gave  Vasa,  Dasavraja  aid,  and  Kanva  and  Medh&tithi ; 

21  And  favoured  Trasadasyu,  ye  Heroes,  in  spoil-deciding  fray : 
For  these,  0  Asvins,  graciously  assist  us  in  acquiring  strength* 

22  0  Asvins,  may  pure  hymns  of  ours,  and  songs  and  praises, 

honour  you : 
Best  slayers  everywhere  of  foes,  as  such   we  fondly   yearn 
for  you. 

23  Three  places  of  the  Asvins,  erst  concealed,  are  made  apparent 

now. 
Both  Sages,    with  the  flight  of  Law  come  hither  unto  those 
who  live. 

HYMN  IX.  Asvms. 

To  help  and  favour  Vatsa  now,  0  Asvins,  come  ye  hitherward. 
Bestow   on  him  a  dwelling  spacious  and    secure,   and  keep 
malignities  away. 

20  Oosarya :  said  by  Sdyana  to  be  a  name  of  S.\yu.  See  I.  116,  22.  Fafa 
and  Dasavraja  are  known  only  as  prot6g^  of  the  Asvins. 

21  TrasacUtayu :  see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

23  Three  places:  according  to  S&yana,  the  three  wheels  of  the  Asvins' 
ehariot  are  intended.  The  three  places  can  only  be  heaven,  firmament,  and 
earth,  hidden  during  the  darkness  of  night  and  made  visible  by  the  coming 

#/  the  Aavina  and  Dawn.  " 

1   Fatsa:    apparently  another  name  oi  Saad^kar^a,  colled  also  KAnra  at 
^^oeadnat  of  Kanva,  the  Rishi  of  the  hyum. 


HYMN  ».]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  1S9 

9  All  manlineas  that  is  iu  heaveD,  with  the  Five  Tribes,  or  in 
mid-€tir, 
Bestow,  ye  Asvins,  upon  us. 

3  Remember  Elinva  first  of  all  among  the  singers,  Afvins,  who 
Have  thought  upon  your  wondrous  deeds. 

4  Asvins,  for  you  with  song  of  praise  this  hot  oblation  is  effused. 
This  your  sweet  Soma  juice,  ye  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  through 

which  ye  think  upon  the  foe. 

5  Whatever  ye  have  done  in  floods,  in  the  tree.  Wonder- Wor- 

kers, and  in  growing  plants, 
Therewith,  O  Asvins,  succour  me. 

6  What  force,  N&satyas,  ye  exert,  whatever,  Gods,  ye  tend  and 

heal, 
This  yQur  own  Yatsa  gains  not  by  his  hymns  alone :  ye  visit 
him  who  offers  gifts. 

7  Now  hath  the   Bishi  splendidly   thought  out  the  Asvins' 

hyjnn  of  praise. 
Let  the  Atharvan  pour  the  warm  oblation  forth,  and   Soma 
very  rich  in  sweets. 

8  Ye  Asvins,  now  ascend  your  car  that  lightly  rolls  upon  its 

way. 
May  these  my  praises  make  you  speed  hitherward  like  a  cloud 
of  heaven. 

9  When,  0  N&jatyas,  we  this  day  make  you  speed  hither  with 

our  hymns. 
Or,   Asvins,   with  our    songs   of  praise,    remember  E&nva 
specially. 

10  As  erst  KakshivStU  and  the  Bishi  Vyasva,  as  erst  Dtrghatamas 
invoked  your  presence. 
Or,  in  the  sacrificial  chambers,  Vainya  Pfithi,  so  be  ye  mind- 
ful of  us  here,  0  Asvins. 


3  Thought  upon :  or  touched  upon,  handled. 

4  Think  upon  the  foe:  plan  the  destruction  of  the  demon  of  darknesB. 

5  Whatever  ye  have  done :  Professor  Wilson  paraphrases  after  SAyana : 
*  pieeenre  me  with  that  (healing  virtue)  deposited  by  you  in  the  waters/  in 
the  trees,  in  the  herbs.' 

7  The  A  tharvan :  the  priest  who  has  special  charge  of  the  fire  and  the  Soma. 
I  follow  Ludwig  in  taking  dtharvani  as  a  nominative  and  not  as  a  locative  as 
SAyana  does :  '  he  will  sprinkle  the  sweet-flavoured  Soma  and  the  gharma 
(oblation)  on  the  Atharvan  fire/ — Wilson. 

10  Kdkthtv^n:  see  I.  18.  1.  Vyafva:  see  I.  112. 15.  Dlrghatamae:  see  Vol. 
L,  Index.     Vaiaya:  eon  of  Vena.    Pnthi:  the  first  auoiaUd  \dii%, 

9 


130  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VIJL 

1 1  Come  aa  home-guardians,  saving  iis  from  foemen,   guarding 

our  living  creatures  and  our  bodies, 
Come  to  the  house  to  give  us  seed  and  oflspring, 

12  Whether  with  Indra  ye  be  faring,  Asvins,  or  resting  in  one 

dwelling-place  with  Vayu, 
In  concord  with  the  Ribhus  or   Adityas,  or  standing  still  in 
Vishnu's  striding-places. 

13  When   I,  0  Asvins,    call   on   you  to-day   that  I  may  gather 

strength. 
Or  as  all-conquering  might  in  war,  be  that  the  Asvins'  noblest 
grace. 

14  Now   come,  ye   Asvins,   hitherward:  here  are  oblations  set 

for  you ; 
These  Soma-draughts  to  aid  Yadu  and  Turvasa,  these  offered 
you  mid  Kanva's  sons. 

Ip  Whatever  healing  balm  is  yours,  Nasatyas,  near  or  far  away, 
Therewith,  great  Sages,  grant  a  home  to  Vatsa  and  to  Vimada. 

16  Together  with  the  Goddess,  with  the  Asvins'  Speech  have  I 
awoke. 
Thou,  Goddess,  hast  disclosed  the  hymn,  and  holy  gift  from 
mortal  men. 

17  Awake  the  Asvins,  Goddess  Dawn  !  TJ]^  Mighty  Lady  of  sweet 

strains ! 
Rise,    straightway,    priest    of   sacrifice !    fiigh   glory   to   the 
gladdening  draught ! 

18  Thou,    Dawn,    approaching   with   thy  light   shin^st  together 

with  the  Sun, 
And  to  this  man-protecting  home  the  chariot  of  the  Asvins  comes. 

19  When  yellow  stalks  give  forth  the  juice,  as  cows  from  udders 

pour  their  milk, 
And  voices  sound  the  song  of  praise,  the  Asvins*  worshippers 
show  first. 

20  Forward   for  glory  and  for   strength,  protection   that  shall 

conquer  men, 
And  power  and  skill,  most  sapient  Ones  ! 


11  Our  living  ci'eatures:  our  dependents  and  our  cattle. 

12  Vishnu's  striding-places :  from  which  he  made  his  three  great  strides 
through  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 

13  That :  the  granting  of  my  request. 

16  And  to  Viinada:  as  ye  did  to  Vimada.-r-Sftyana.    See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 
16  The  Goddess :  Dawn.     The  Asvins'  Speech:  V&k  or  Speech  who  glorifies 
the  Asvins  ;  i.  e.  the  hymn  that  praises  them. 
JP  Teltow  stalks  :  of  Soma  plants. 
20  J^of-^tmrd for  gloi-y :  advance  and  come  to  gj.^^  ms  ^lory^  etc. 


mrmif  ii.]  tns  rigveda.  isi 

31   When,*  Advins,  worthy  of  our  lauds,  ye  seat  you  in  the  father's 
house. 
With  wisdom  or  the  bliss  ye  bring. 

HYMN  X.  Asvins. 

WaBTHBR  ye   travel   far  away   or  dwell   in   yonder  light  of 
heaven, 
Or  in  a  mansion  that  is  built  above  the  sea,  come  thence,  ye 
Asvins,  hitherward. 

%  Or  if  for  Manu  ye  prepared  the  sacrifice,  remember  also  Kanva's 
son. 
I  call  Brihaspati,  Indra,  Vishnu,  all  the  Gods,  the  Asvins  borne 
by  rapid  steeds. 

3  Those   Asvins  I  invoke    who   work   marvels,    brought   hither 

to  receive, 
With  whom  our  friendship  is  most  famed,  and  kinship  passing 
that  of  Gods. 

4  On  whom   the  solemn  rites  depend,    whose    worshippers   rise 

without  the  Sun : 
These  who  foreknow  the  holy   work  of  sacrifice,  and  by  their 
Godhead  drink  the  sweets  of  Soma  juice. 

5  Whether   ye,  Lords  of  ample   wealth,  now  linger  in  the  east 

or  west. 
With  Druhyu,  or  with  Anu,  Yadu,  Turvsa,  I  call  you  hither ; 
come  to  me. 

6  Lords  of  great  riches,  whether   through   the  firmament  ye  fly 

or  speed  through  heaven  and  earth. 
Or  with   your   Godlike   natures   stand  upon  your   cars,  come 
thence,  0  Asvins,  hitherward. 

HYMN  XL  Agni. 

TnoUy  Agni,  God  mid  mortal  men,  art  guard  of  sacred  rites, 
thou  art 

To  be  adored  at  sacrifice. 

■  ■  ■  I.I  , '  ■  ■      1 

21  In  the  father's  house:  in  the  sacrificial  hall  of  the  father  of  the  family, 
the  wealthy  householder  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.  This  stanza  is  a  conti- 
nuation of  19,  although  the  connexion  is  interrupted  by  the  intervening  stanza. 

1  Above  the  sea:  above  the  ocean  of  air. 

3  To  receive :  our  oblations. 

-4  Without  the  sun :  S-^yana  explains  asUr^  diflterently,  connecting  in  with 
siiri  instead  of  sUtra :  *  o£  whom  there  are  worshippers  in  a  l)lace  where  there 
is  no  worship.'—  Wilson. 

5  Druhyu  and  the  other  names  stand  for  the  tribes  called  after  these 
ancient  chieftains.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 


The  hymn  is  translated  in  Max  MiiUer'a  iTutor]/  of    AucietiV  ^gc(v%V.YV.^ 
Litfraturg, 


182  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VUl. 

2  0  Mighty  Agni,  thou  must  be  glorified  at  our  festivalBy 
Bearing  our  offerings  to  the  Gods. 

3  0  J&tavedas  Agni,  fight  and  drive  our  foes  afar  from  us. 
Them  and  their  godless  enmities. 

4  Thou,  J^tavedas,  seekest  not  the  worship  of  a  hostile  man. 
However  nigh  it  be  to  thee. 

6  We  sages,  mortals  as  we  are,  "adore  the  mighty  name  of  thee, 
Immortal  JSitavedas*  name. 

6  Sages,  we  call  the  Sage  to  help,  mortals,  we  call  the  Gk)d  to  aid  : 
We  call  on  Agni  with  our  songs. 

7  May  Vatsa  draw  thy  mind  away  even  from  thy  loftiest  dwel- 

ling-place, 
Agni,  with  song  that  yearns  for  thee. 

8  Thou  art  the  same  in  many  a  place  :  mid  all  the  people  thou 

art  Lord.  « 

In  fray  and  fight  we  call  on  thee.  ^ 

9  When  we  are   seeking  strength  we  call  Agni  to  help  us  in 

the  strife. 
The  giver  of  rich  gifts  in  war. 

10  Ancient,  adorable  at  sacrifices,  Priest  from  of  old,  meet  for  our 
praise,  thou  sittest. 
Fill  full  and  satisfy  thy  body,   Agni,  and  win  ^s  happiness  by 
offering  worship. 

HYMN  XII.  I^dra. 

Jot,  Mightiest  Indra,  known  and  marked,  sprung  most  irom 

Soma^raughts,  wherewith 
Thou  smitest  down  the  greedy  fiend,  for  that  we  long. 

2  Wherewith  thou  holpest  Adhrigu,  the   great  Dasagva,   and 

the  God 
Who  stirs  the  sunlight,  and  the  sea,  for  that  we  long. 

3  Wherewith   thou  dravest  forth  like   cars  Sindhu   and  all  the 

mighty  floods 
To  go  the  way  ordained  by  Law,  for  that  we  long. 


2  Bearing  owr  offerings  to  ike  Goda:  literally, '  the  charioteer  of  solemn  rites.' 

1  Joy  J  mddah :  the  rapturous  exhilaration  produced  in  Indra  by  drinking 
the  Soma  juice.  For  that  we  long :  the  short  refrain  or  burden  which 
generally  concludes  each  stanza  of  each  triplet  of  this  hymn  is  sometimes 
rather  loosely  attached  and  cannot  always  be  clearly  jbroughtout  in  the  proper 
place  in  translation. 

2  Adhrigu:  according  to  S&ya^a  a  Rishi  so  named.  Seel.ll2.20.Dafagva: 
one  of  the  priestly  family  connected  with,  or  identical  with,  the  Angirases^ 
•  the  accomplisher  of  the  ten  (months*  rite).* — Wilson.     Ludwig  thinks  that 

Maf{fa^a  hem  may  mean  the  iSun.     The  sea :  of  air. 


BTMN 12.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  18S 

4  Accept  this  laud  for  aid,  made  pure  like  oil,  thou  Caster  of 

the  Stone, 
Whereby  even  in  a  moment  thou  hast  waxen  great. 

5  Be   pleased,  Song-lover,  with   this   song :  it  flows  abundant 

like  the  sea. 
Indra,  with  all  thy  succours  thou  hast  waxen  great. 

6  The   Qod   who  from  afar  hath  sent  gifts  to  maintain  our 

friendship's  bond, 
Thou,  spreading  them  like  rain  from  heaven,  hast  waxen  great. 

7  The  beams  that  mark  him  have  grown  strong,  the  thunder 

rests  between  his  arms, 
When,  like  the  Sun,  he  hath  increased  both  Heaven  and  Earth. 

8  When,   Mighty  Lord  of  Heroes,   thou  didst  eat  a  thousand 

buffaloes. 
Then  grew  and  waxed  exceeding  great  thine  Indra-power. 

9  Indra  consumeth  with  the  rays  of  Siirya  the  malicious  man : 
Like  Agni  conquering  the  woods,  he  hath  grown  strong. 

10  This  newest   thought  of  ours  that  suits  the  time  approaches 

unto  thee : 
Serving,  beloved  in  many  a  place,  it  metes  and  marks. 

11  The  pious  germ  of  sacrifice  directly  purifies  the  soul. 
By  Indra's  lauds  it  waxes  great,  it  metes  and  marks. 

12  Indra  who  wins  the  friend  hath  spread  himself  to  drink  the 

Soma-draught : 
Like  worshipper's  dilating  praise  ;  it  metes  and  marks. 

13  He  whom  the  sages,  living  men,  have  gladdened,  offering  up 

their  hymns, 
Hath  swelled  like  oil  of  sacrifice  in  Agni's  mouth. 


8  Didst  eat  a  thousand  buffaloes :  the  buffaloes  probably  represent  the  clouds 
which  the  Sun  dissipates  or  consumes. — Ludwig.  'When  thou  hast  slain 
thousands  of  mighty  foes.' — ^Wilson. 

10  It  metes  and  ma/rhs:  defines  and  discriminates  Indra's  good  qualities. — 
SAya^a. 

11  The  germ  of  sacr\fiee  is  probably  the  wish  that  prompts  the  offering. 

Sftyana  explains  differently :  '  The  devout  praiser  of  the  adorable  (Indra) 
purifies  in  due  succession  the  offering  (of  the  Soma) ;  with  sacred  hymns  he 
magniBte  (the  might  of  Indra;  he  verily  proclaims  the  measure  (of  his  merits).' 

12  Worshipper*s  dilating  praise :  I  follow  SAyana :  but  the  stanza  is  unin- 
telligible to  me.  '  Indra,  the  benefactor  of  his  friend  (the  worshipper) »  has 
enlarged  himself  to  drink  the  Soma,  in  like  manner  as  the  pious  praise  dilates 
and  proclaims  the  measure  of  his  merits.' — Wilson.  The  meaning  of  vdffi 
(praise,  according  to  S^yana)  is  uncertain.  Yon  Roth  thinks  that  the  two 
press-stones  are  meant^  and  others  e:(plain  it  as  the  aYrQ!td,\uiLl&iQ\  ^sj^^^sn^ 
in  BBcriMoa, 


134  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

J 4  Aditi  also  hath  brought  forth  a  hymn  for  Indra,  Sovran  Lord: 

The  work  of  sacrifice  for  help  is  glorified. 

1 5  The  ministering  priests  have  sungtheir  songs  for  aid  and  eulogy: 
iGrod,  thy  Bays  turn  not  from  thi  rite  which  Law  ordains. 

16  If,  Indra,  thou  drink  Soma  by  Vishnu's  or  Trita  Aptya's  side* 
Or  with  the  Maruts  take  delight  in  flowing  drops ; 

17  Or,  Sakra,  if  thou  gladden  thee  afar  or  in  the  sea  of  air, 
Rejoice  thee  in  this  juice  of  ours,  in  flowing  drops. 

18  Or,  Lord  of  Heroes,  if  thou  aid  the  worshipper  who  sheds  the 

juice, 
Or  him  whose  laud  delights  thee,  and  his  flowing  drops. 

19  To  magnify  the  God,  the  God,  Indra,  yea,  Indra  for  your  help, 
And  promptly  end  the  sacrifice — this  have  they  gained. 

20  With  worship,  him  whom  men  adore,  with  Soma,  him  who 

drinks  it  most, 
Indra  with  lauds  have  they  increased — this  have  they  gained. 

21  His  leadings  are  with  power  and  might  and  his  instructions 

manifold : 
He  gives  the  worshipper  all  wealth  :  this  have  they  gained. 

22  For  slaying  Vritra  have  the  Gods  set  Indra  in  the  foremost 

place. 
Indra  the  choral  bands  have  sung,  for  vigorous  strength. 

28  We  to  the  Mighty  with  our  might,  with  lauds  to  him  who 
hears  our  call, 
With  holy  hymns  have  sung  aloud,  for  vigorous  strength. 

24  Not  earth,  nor  heaven,  nor  firmaments  contain  the  Thunder- 

wielding  God : 
They  shake  before  his  violent  rush  and  vigorous  strength. 

25  What  time  the  Gods,  0  Indra,  set  thee  foremost  in  the  furious 

fight, 
Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  on. 

26  When  Vritra,  stayer  of  the  floods,   thou  -slewest,  Thunderer 

with  might. 
Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  cm. 

27  When  Vishnu,  through  thine  energy,  strode  wide  those  three 

great  steps  of  his. 
Then  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  carried  thee  on. 

28  When  thy  two  beautiful  Bay  Steeds  grew  great  and  greater 

day  by  day, 

Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee. 

-^ • —  ■ — ■ ■ 

3^  Trie^  4piya:  see  VIII.  7.  24,  note.    Here  h«  ap^^eors  as  the  preparer  of 
celestial  Soma  for  Indra* 


JTYMN  IZ,}  THE  RIO  VEDA,  135 

29  When,  Indra,  all  theMarut  folk  humbly  submitted  them  to  th^e, 
Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee. 

30  When  yonder  Sun,  that  brilliant  light,  thou  settest  in  the 

heaven  above, 
Even  then  all  creatures  that  had  life  bowed  down  to  thee. 

31  To  thee,  OIndra,  with  this  thought  the  sage  lifts  up  this  eulogy, 
Akin  and  leading  as  on  foot  to  sacrifice. 

32  When  in  thine  own  dear  dwelling  all  gathered  have  lifted  up 

the  voice 
Milk-streams  at  worship's  central  spot,  for  sacrifice, 

33  As  Priest,  O  Indra,  give  us  wealth  in  brave  men  and  good 

steeds  and  kine 
That  we  may  first  remember  thee  for  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XIII.  Indra. 

Indra,  when  Soma  juices  flow,  makes  his  mind  pure  and  meet 

for  lauds. 
He  gains  the  power  that  brings  success,  for  great  is  he. 

2  In  heaven's  first  region,  in  the  seat  of  Gods,   is  he  who  brings 

success, 
Most  glorious,  prompt  to  save,  who  wins  the  water-floods. 

3  Him,  to  win  strength,  have  I  invoked,  even  Indra  mighty  for 

the  fray. 
Be  thou  most  near  to  us  for  bliss,  a  Friend  to  aid. 

4  Indra,  Song-lover,  here  for  thee  the  worshipper's  libation  flows 
Rejoicing  in  this  sacred  grass  thou  shinest  forth. 

5  Even  now,  0  Indraj  give  us  that  which,  pressing  juice,  we 

crave  of  thee. 
Bring  us  wealth  manifold  which  finds  the  light  of  heaven. 

6  What  time  the  zealous  worshipper  hath  boldly  sung  his  songs 

to  thee, 
Like  branches  of  a  tree  up-grows  what  they  desire. 

7  Generate  songs  even  as  of  old,  give  ear  unto  the  singer's  call : 
Thou  for  the  pious  hast  grown  great  at  each  carouse. 

^am^mt^m^^^^  **^    m  ■  ■  ■— ^^—  i         ■■!■■■  ,i^  ■—    ».imii  <m  iiiim^  iim  ■■■■!■■■■»■■  ^.i^.        mi     ^  ^— ^m^^i^— ^^^ 

31  The  Becond  line  is  difl&cult.  Wilson,  following  SAyava,  paraphrases  the 
stanza:  *The  wise  (worehipper),  India,  ofifers  thee  this  gratifying  sincere 
praise  along  with  pious  rites  at  the  sacrifice,  as  (a  man  places)  a  kinsman  in 
(a  prominent)  position.' 

32  Milk-streams :  the  sweetly- flowing  hymns. 

Wilson  remarks  :  *  This  is  probably  an  ancient  hymn,  both  by  its  rcpetitioo* 
and  oombiuatu>n  of  simplicity  und  obscurity.' 

7  Generate  aon^s;  by  grBrUting  the  prayers  of  the  aVu^^ta, 


ia«  3} BE  HYMNS  OP  IMOOR  VIM. 

8  Sweet  strains  that  glorify  him  play  like  waters  speeding  down 

a  slope, 
Yea,  him  who  in  this  song  is  called  the  Lord  of  Heaven ; 

9  Yea,  who  alone  is  called  the  Lord,  the  single  Ruler  of  the  folky 
By  worshippers  seeking  aid ;  may  he  joy  in  the  draught. 

10  Praise  him,  the  Glorious,  skilled  in  song.  Lord  of  the  two 

victorious  Bays : 
They  seek  the  worshipper's  abode  who  bows  in  prayer. 

11  Put  forth  thy  strength:  with  dappled  Steeds  come,  thou  of 

mighty  intellect, 
With  swift  Steeds  to  the  sacrifice,  for  'tis  thy  joy. 

12  Grant  wealth  to   those  who    praise  thee,  Lord  of    Heroes, 

Mightiest  Indra :  give 
Our  princes  everlasting  fame  and  opulence. 

13  1  call  thee  when  the  Sun  is  risen,  I  call  thee  at  the  noon  of  day  : 
With  thy  car-horses,  Indra,  come  well-pleased  to  us. 

14  Speed  forward  hither,  come  to  us,  rejoice  thee  in  the  milky 

draught : 
Spin  out  the  thread  of  ancient  time,  as  well  is  known. 

15  If,  Sakra,  Viitra-slayer,  thou  be  far  away  or  near  to  us. 
Or  in  the  sea,  thou  art  the  guard  of  Soma  juice. 

16  Let  songs  we  sing  and   Soma-drops  expressed   by   us   make 

Indra  strong : 
The  tribes  who  bring  oblations  find  deliglit  in  him. 

17  Him  sages  longing  for  his  aid,  with  offerings  brought  in  eager 

haste. 
Him,  even  as  branches,  all  mankind  have  made  to  grow. 

18  At  theTrikadrukas  the  Gods  span  sacrifice  that  stirred  the  mind: 
May  our  songs  strengthen  him  who  still  hath  strengthened  us. 

19  When,  true  to  duty,  at  due  times  the  worshipper   offers  lauds 

to  thee, 

They  call  him  Purifier,  Pure,  and  Wonderful. 

»— » 

14  Spin  out  the  thread  of  aneUnt  times :     *  extend  the  ancient  sacrifice.* — 

The  dae  performance  of  sacrifice  is  regarded  as  an  unbroken  thread  reaching 
through  a  Buccesnion  of  Kishis  from  ancient  to  modem  times. 

15  /n  the  sea:  in  the  firmament,  or  ocean  of  air. 

17  All  mankind:  kshonfh.    But  see  M.  Miiller,  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  810. 

18  At  the  Tnhadrukas :  according  to  SAyana  these  are  the  first  three  days 
of  the  Abhiplava  ceremony.  According  to  some  modem  scholars  they  are 
probably  three  peculiar  Soma-vessels,  or  an  oblation  consisting  of  three  ofiPer- 
ings  of  Soma.     Span  sacrHice :  see  above  note  on  14.     That  stilted  the  mind: 

that  utiged  others  to  follow  the  example. 
JP  j¥fm  :  a  change  of  pereon,  Indra  being  xaessxt. 


STMH  1S.1  TBE  RIOVEDA.  M7 

SO  'Hiat  mind  of  Rudn,  fresh  and  strong,  moves  conscious  in  the 
ancient  ways, 
With  reference  whereto  the  wise  have  ordered  this. 

21  If  thou  elect  to  be  my  Friend  drink  of  this  sacrificial  juiCe, 
By  help  whereof  we  may  subdue  all  enemies. 

22  O  Indra,  Lover  of  the  song,  when  shall  thy  praiser  be  most  blesti 
When  wilt  thou  grant  us  wealth  in  herds  of  kine  and  steeds  ? 

23  And  thy  two  highly-lauded  Bays,  strong  stallions,   draw  thy 

car  who  art 
Untouched  by  age,  most  gladdening  car  for  which  we  pray. 

24  With  ancient  offerings   we  implore  the  Young  and  Strong 

whom  many  praise. 
He  from  of  old  hath  sat  upon  dear  sacred  grass. 

25  Wax  mighty,  thou  whom  many   laud  for  aids   which  Bishis 

have  extolled. 
Pour  down  for  us  abundant  food  and  guard  us  well. 

26  O  Indra,  Caster  of  the  Stone,  thou  helpest  him  who  praises  thee: 
From  sacrifice  I  send  to  thee  a  mind- yoked  hymn. 

27  Here,  yoking  for  the  Soma^raught  these    Horses,  sharers  of 

tliy  feast. 
Thy  Bay  Steeds,  Indra,  fraught  with  wealth,  consent  to  come. 

28  Attendants  on  thy  glory,  let  the  Rudras  roar  assent  to  thee. 
And  all  the  Marut  companies  come  to  the  feast. 

29  These  his  victorious  followers  hold  in  the  heavens  the  place 

they  love. 
Leagued  in  the  heart  of  sacrifice,  as  well  we  know. 

30  That  we  may  long  behold  the  light,  what  time   the   ordered 

rite  proceeds. 
He  duly  measures,  as  he  views,  the  sacrifice. 

31  O  Indra,  strong  is  this  thy  car,   and   strong  are  these   Bay 

Steeds  of  thine  : 
O  Satakratu,  thou  art  strong,  strong  is  our  call. 

20  Have  ordered  this :  song  of  praise,  or  holy  ceremony. — Ludwig. 

26  Mind-yohed  :  made  ready  by  the  poet'8  mind,  as  a  chariot — to  which  the 
hymn  is  frequently  compared — is  equipped  for  a  journey. 

28  The  Rudras :  the  sons  of  Rudra,  the  Maruts. 

29  The  hearty  literally  navel,  that  is  the  central   point,  of  sacrificef  is  the 
receptacle  on  which  oblations  are  placed,  or  the  uttaravedt  or  north  altar. 

31   Strong :  vrishA  .'  as  has  been  noticed  before  (see  I.  177.    2.  3.)   some  of 
the  Vedic  poets  delight  in  the  repetition  of  this  word  and  derivatives  from  the 
Bame  root.    S4yana  explains  vrte^ ;  as  'showerer  of   benefits/  and   Ludwig 
translates  it  by  '  stierkraftig/  strong  as  a  bulL    The  otl^m^  \Xied.\i\\i^  q'I  "^^^^ 
word  is  male,  maacvJiae,  and,  hence,  strong. 


^8  TBE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VTIL 

I  Strong  is  the  press-stone,  strong  thy  joy,  strong  is  the  flowing 
Soma  juice: 
Strong  is  the  rite  thou  furtherest,  strong  is  our  call. 

\  As  strong  I  call  on  thee  the  Strong,   0  Thunderer  with  thy 
thousand  aids  : 
For  thou  hast  won  the  hymn  of  praise.     Strong  is  our  call. 

HYMN   XIV.  Indra. 

If  I,  0  Indra,  were,  like  thee,  the  single  Sovran  of  all  wealth, 
My  worshipper  should  be  rich  in  kine. 

I  I  e-hould  be  fain,  0  Lord  of  Power,  to  strengthen   and   enrich 
the  sage, 
Were  I  the  Lord  of  herds  of  kine. 

•  To  worshippers  who  press  the  juice  thy  goodness,  Indra,  is  a 
cow 
Yielding  in  plenty  kine  and  steeds. 

None  is  there,  Indra,  God  or  man,  to  hinder  thy  munificence, 
The  wealth  which,  lauded,  thou  wilt  give. 

'  The  sacrifice  made  Indra  strong  when  he  unrolled  the   earth, 
and  made 
Himself  a  diadem  in  heaven. 

Thine  aid  we  claim,  0  Indra,  thine  who  after  thou  hast  waxen 

great 
Hast  won  all  treasures  for  thine  own. 

In  Soma's  ecstasy  Indra  spread  the  firmament   and   realms  of 

light. 
When  he  cleft  Vala  limb  from  limb. 

Showing  the  hidden  he  drave  forth  the  cows  for  the  Angirases, 
And  Vala  he  cast  headlong  down. 

By  Indra   were  the  luminous  realms   of   heaven   established 

and  secured, 
Firm  and  immovable  from  their  place. 

Indra,  thy  laud  moves  quickly  like  a  joyous    wave  of  water- 
floods  : 
Bright  shine  the  drops  that  gladden  thee. 

For  thou,  0  Indra,  art   the   God   whom   hymns   and   praises 

magnify  : 
Thou  blessest  those  who  worship  thee. 

Let  the  two  long-maned  Bay  Steeds  bring  Indra   to  drink  the 
Soma  juice, 
Vbe  Bountiful  to  our  sacrifice. 


MYMN  lfi.l  TBE  RIO  VEDA,  189 

13  With  waters'  fo*m  thou  torest  off,  Indra,  the  head  of  Namuchi, 
Subduing  all  conteuding  hosts. 

14  The  Dasyus,  when  they  fain  would  climb  by  magic   arts   and 

mount  to  heaven, 
Thou,  Indra,  castest  down  to  earth. 

15  As  Soma-drinker  conquering  all,  thou  scatteredst  to  every  side 
Their  settlement  who  poured  no  gifts. 

HYMN   XV.  Indra. 

Sing  forth  to  him  whom   many   men   invoke,    to  him   whom 

many  laud : 
Invite  the  powerful  Indra  with  your  songs  of  praise. 

2  Whose  lofty  might — for  doubly   strong   is   he — supports   the 

heavens  and  earth, 
And  hills  and  plains  and  floods  and  light  with  manly  power. 

3  Such,  Praised  by  many  !  thou  art  King :  alone    thou    smitest 

Vritras  dead. 
To  gain,  0  Indra,  spoils  of  war  and  high  renown. 

4  We  sing  this  strong  and  wild  delight  of  thine  which  conquers 

in  the  fray. 
Which,  Caster  of  the  Stone  !  gives  room  and  shines  like  gold. 

5  Wherewith  thou  also  foundest  lights  for  Ayu  and  for   Manu's 

sake  : 
Now  joying  in  this  sacred  grass  thou  beamest  forth. 

6  This  day  too  singers  of  the  hymn  praise,  as  of  old,  this  might 

of  thine  ; 
Win  thou  the  waters  day  by  day,  thralls  of  the  strong. 

7  That  lofty    Indra-power  of   thine,    thy    strength   and   thine 

intelligence, 
Thy  thunderbolt  for  which  we  long,  the  wish  makes  keen. 

8  O  Indra,  Heaven   and  Earth  augment  thy  manly  power  and 

thy  renown  : 
The  waters  and  the  mountains  stir  and  urge  thee  on. 

'  9  Vishnu  the  lofty  ruling  Power,  Varuna,  Mitra  sing  thy  praise  : 
In  thee  the  Maruts'  company  have  great  delight. 

13  With  watei'8\  foam :  with  a  tlmiiderbolt  in  the  form  of  foam,  according 
to  a  later  legend.  See  Lanmau,  Sanskrit  Readei;  p.  375,  who  takes  Namuchi 
to  be  a  waterspout  in  a  lake,  and  *  with  foam  '  to  mean  '  accompanied  hy  foam.' 

4  Wild  delight :  Soma  juice,  the  cause  of  tliy  rapture. 

5  For  Ayu  and  for  Manu's  sake :  that  is  for  man.     Ayu  was  the  soa  ol 
Pnrdi-avas  and  Urvasl. 

6  7h»'all8  of  tlie  Hronp:  controlled  and  imprisoned  \>^  VrvfeWb. 
r  r^  mtk .'  oar  wisbea  expnased  iu  prayer  and  peaiae,  ' 


140  TBS  HYMS8  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

,10  0  Indra,  thou  wast  bom  the  Lord  of  men,  most  liberal  of  thy 
gifts : 
Excellent  deeds  for  evermore  are  all  thine  own. 

11  Ever,  alone,  O  highly-praised,  thou  sendest  Vritras   to   their 

rest: 
None  else  than  Indra  executes  the  mighty  deed. 

12  Though  here  and  there,  in  varied  hymns,  Indra,  men   call  on 

thee  for  aid. 
Still  with  our  heroes  fight  and  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

13  Already  have  all  forms  of  him  entered  our  spacious  dwelling- 

place: 
For  victory  stir  thou  Indra,  up,  the  Lord  of  Might. 

HYMN  XVI.  Indra. 

Praisb  Indra  whom  our  songs  must  laud,  sole   Sovran  of 

mankind,  the  Chief 
Most  liberal  who  controUeth  men. 

2  In  whom  the  hymns  of  praise  delight,  and  all  the  glory-giving 

songs, 
Like  the  floods'  longing  for  the  tsea. 

3  Him  I  invite  with  eulogy,  best  King,  effective  in  the  fight, 
Strong  for  the  gain  of  mighty  spoil. 

4  Whose  perfect  ecstasies  are  wide,  profoimd,  victorious,  and 

give 
Joy  in  the  field  where  heroes  win. 

5  Him,  when  the  spoils  of  war  are  staked,  men  call  to  be  their 

advocate : 
They  who  have  Indra  win  the  day. 

6  Men  honour  him  with  stirring  songs,  and  magnify  with  solemn 

rites: 
Indra  is  he  who  giveth  ease. 

7  Indra  is  Priest  and  Kishi,  he  is  much  invoked  by  many  men, 
And  mighty  by  his  mighty  powers. 

8  Meet  to  be  lauded  and  invoked,  true  Hero  with  his  deeds  of 

might, 
Victorious  even  when  alone. 

13  All  forma  of  him:  the  various  qualities  of  Indra  have  been  celebrated. 

Stir  thou :  the  Rishi  addresses  himself.  Lwd  of  Might :  sacMpatim :  in 
later  literature,  lord  or  husband  of  Sacht  or  his  might  personified  and  regarded 
•a  his  consort. 

7  Priest:  hrahmU,  meaning,  according  to  SAyana,  greater  than  all.    See  VI. 
4S.  7,  'The  Bnbman  who  accepts  the  pTa^fer,'  tht^t  is,  Indra  regarded  as  a 
priemt,    ^ishi:  according  to  SAyana,  '  the  bcihoVdet  oi  «k)\VXi«  krsv&^x^is^* 


BYMN  17.]  TBB  RIQVEDA.  141 

9  The  men,  the  people  magnify  that  Indra  with  their  S&ma  songSi 
With  hymns  and  sacred  eulogies : 

10  Him  who  advances  them  to  wealth,  sends  light  to  lead  them 

in  the  war, 
And  quells  their  fopmen  in  the  fray. 

11  May  he,  the  saviour  much-invoked,  may  Indra  bear  us  in  a 

ship 
Safely  beyond  all  enemies. 

12  As  such,  O  Indra,  honour  us  with  gifts  of  booty,  further  us, 
*  And  lead  us  to  felicity. 

HYMN  XVII.  Indra. 

Comb,  we  have  pressed  the  juice  for  thee ;  0  Indra,  drink 

this  Soma  here : 
Sit  thou  on  this  my  sacred  grass. 

2  O  Indra,  let  thy  long-maned  Bays,  yoked  by  prayer,  bring 

thee  hitherward : 
Give  ear  and  listen  to  our  prayers. 

3  We  Somarbearing  Brahmans  call  thee  Soma-drinker  with  thy 

friend. 
We,  Indra,  bringing  Soma  juice. 

4  Come  imto  us  who  bring  the  juice,  come  unto  this  our  eulogy, 
Fair-visored  !  drink  thou  of  the  juice. 

5  I  pour  it  down  within  thee,  so  through  all  thy  members  let  it 

spread : 
-     Take  with  thy  tongue  the  pleasant  drink. 

6  Sweet  to  thy  body  let  it  be,  delicious  be  the  savoury  juice : 
Sweet  be  the  Soma  to  thine  heart. 

7  Like  women,  let  this  Soma-draught,  invested  with  its  robe, 

approach, 
O  active  Indra,  close  to  thee. 

8  Indra,  transported  with  the  juice,  vast  in  his  bulk,  strong  in 

his  neck 
And  stout  arms,  smites  the  Vritras  down. 

9  O  Indra,  go  thou  forward,  thou  who  rulest  over  all  by  might : 
Thou  Vritra-slayer  slay  the  fiends. 

10  Long  be  thy  grasping-hook  wherewith  thou  givest  ample  wealth 

to  him 
Who  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  thee. 

■ . 

8  With  thy  friend:  ludra's  companion,  the  thunderbolt.     *With  suitable 
praise.' — Wilson* 

7  Like  women:  dressed  in  white  garments  and  moving  ^Ass^Vj*    IUto^*. 
the  milk  that  colourer  it. 


142  TME  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VUL 

\  1  Here,  India,  is  thy  Soma-draught,  made  pure  upon  the  sacred 
grass : 
Run  hither,  come  and  drink  thereof. 

12  Famed  for  thy  radiance,  worshipped  well !  this  juice  is  shed 

for  thy  delight :  ^ 
Thou  art  invoked,  Akhandala ! 

13  To  Kundapayya,  grandson's  son,  grandson  of  Sringavrish !  to 

thee, 
To  him  have  I  addressed  my  thought. 

14  Strong  pillar  thou,  Lord  of  the  home  !  armour  of  Soma*ofFerers  : 
The  drop   of  Soma  breaketh  all  the  strongholds  down,   and 

Indra  is  the  Kishis'  Friend. 

•    • 

15  Holy  Pridakus^nu,  winner  of  the  spoil,  one  eminent  o'er  many 

men, 
Lead  on  the  wild  horse  Indra  with  his  vigorous  grasp  forward 
to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

HYMN  XVIII.  Adityae. 

Now  let  the  mortal  offer  prayer  to  win  the  unexampled  grace 
Of  these  Adityas  and  their  aid  to  cherish  life. 

12  Famed  for  thy  radiance^  teorshipped  well:  ihe  words  thus  rendered, 
8(!tckigo  and  sStchipHjanay  have  not  been  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  Com- 

?ientator,  and  their  meaning  is  still  uncertain.  According  to  S&yana,  the 
ormer  may  mean  *  thou  whose  cattle  are  strong,'  or  *  thou  whose  radiance 
is  renowned,*  and  the  latter  'thou  of  renowned  ad(  (ration'  or  'whose  hymns 
are  renowned '  See  Wilson's  note.  Thou  art  invoked^  Akhandala  I :  or,  *Thou, 
O  Destroj^er,  art  invoked.'  This  appellation  of  Indra  does  not  occur  again  in 
the  iligveda.     See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  190. 

13  Kvndapiyi/a  and  Sringavrish  appear  here  to  be  names  of  men.  Acoord- 
mg  to  S&yk\itk,  kit  ndapiXyi/ce  is  the  name  of  a  particular  Soma  ceremony,  and 
the  offspring  of  Sringavrish  is  Indra  himself.  '  (InHra),  who  wast  the  off- 
spring of  Sringavrish,  of  whom  the  kur^dapdyya  rite  was  the  protector,  (the 
sages)  have  fixed  (of  old)  their  minds  upon  this  ceremony.*  See  Wilson's 
note  who  observes  that  *  the  construction  is  loose,  and  the  explanation  not 
very  satisfactory.' 

14  Lord  of  the  home  :  apparently  the  householder  who  institutes  the  sacri- 
fice is  addressed,  he  vdstoshpate  grihapate. — S&yana.  The  Risthis'  Friend: 
mUnindm  sakhd,  the  friend  of  the  Munis,  sages,  saintly  men  or  ascetics ;  of  us 
Kishis,  according  to  S&yana. 

15  Priddkusdnu :  I  follow  Ludwig  in  taking  this  to  be  the  name  of  the 
institutor  of  the  sacrifice.  According  to  S^yana  who  explains  it  as  '  lifting 
up  the  head  or  back  like  a  serpent,'  or  '  to  be  propitiated,  as  a  serpent  is,  with 
gems,  charms,  medicaments,  etc.,'  it  is  an  epithet  of  Indra  ;  and  the  leader 
forwafd  of  Indra  in  the  second  line  is  the  wor-shipper,  understood.  Qrass- 
ttaann  banishes  the  last  three  stanzas  to  his  Appendix  as  not  originally  form- 
ing  part  oi  the  hymn. 

i  Adieyas:  aee  I.  14.  3. 


HTMS^  18.1  ^BE  RIO  VEDA.  '  UZ 

2  For  not  an  enemy  molests  the  paths  which  these  Adityaa  trea"d : 
Infallible  guards,  they  strengthen  us  in  happiness. 

3  Now  soon  may  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman 
Give  ns  the  shelter  widely  spread  which  we  implore. 

4  With  Gods  come  thou  whose  fostering  care  none  chocks,  O 

Goddess  Aditi : 
Come,  dear  to  many,  with  the  Lords  who  guard  lis  well. 

5  For  well  these  Sons  of  Aditi  know  to  keep  enmities  aloof : 
Unrivalled,  giving  ample  room,  they  save  from  woe. 

6  Aditi  guard  our  herd  by  day,  Aditi,  free  from  guile,  by  night, 
Aditi,  ever  strengthening,  save  us  from  grief ! 

7  And  in  the  day  our  hymn  is  this :  May  Aditi  come  nigh  to  help, 
With  loving-kindness  bring  us  weal  and  chase  our  foes. 

8  And  may  the  Asvins,  the  divine   Pair  of   Pbysieiaus,  send  us 

health : 
May  they  remove  iniquity  and  chase  our  foes. 

9  May   Agni   bless  us   with   his     fires,   and   Surya   warm  us 

pleasantly : 
May  the  pure  Wind  breathe  sweet  on  us,  and  chase  our  foes. 

10  Drive  ye  disease  and  strife  away,  drive  ye  away  malignity : 
Adityas,  keep  us  ever  far  from  sore  distress. 

1 1  Remove  from  us  the  arrow,  keep  famine,  Adityas  !  far  away  : 
Keep  enmities  afar  from  us.  Lords  of  all  wealth  ! 

12  Now,  0  Adityas,  grant  to  us  the  shelter  that  lets  man  go  free. 
Yea,  even  the  sinner  from  his  sin,  ye  Bounteous  Gods ! 

13  Whatever   mortal   with  the   power  of     demons   fain   would 

injure  us, 
May  he,  impetuous,  suffer  harm  by  his  own  deeds. 

14  May  sin  overtake  our  human  foe,  the  man  who  speaketh  evil 

things. 
Him  who  would  cause  our  misery,  whose  heart  is  false. 

15  Gods,  ye  are  with  the  simple  ones,  ye   know   eaeh   mortal   in 

your  hearts : 
Ye,  Vasus,  well  discriminate  the  false  and  true. 

16  Fain  would  we  have  the  sheltering  aid  of  mountains   and   of 

water-floods  : 
Keep  far  from  us  iniquity,  0  Heaven  and  Earth. 

17  So  with  auspicious  sheltering  aid  do  ye,  0  Vasus,  carry  us 
Beyond  all  trouble  and  distress,  borne  in  your  ship. 


4  With  the  Lords :  sHribMh  ;  that  is,  the  Gods. 

13   With  the  power  of  demons :  '  from  his  diabolical  tnLt.\iT^'  — N^>\^otk.» 


114  TBB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

18  'Adityas,  ye  Most  Mighty  Ones,  grant  to  our  children  and 

their  seed 
Extended  term  of  life  that  they  may  live  long  days. 

19  Sacrifice,  O  Adityas,  is  your  inward  monitor  :  be  kind. 
For  in  the  bond  of  kindred  we  are  bound  to  you. 

20  The  Maruts'  high  protecting  aid,   the  Asvins,   and   the   God 

who  saves, 
Mitra  and  Yaruna  for  weal  we  supplicate. 

21  Grant  us  a  home  with  triple  guard,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Yaruna  ! 
Unthreatened,  Maruts !  meet  for  praise,  and  filled  with  men. 

22  And  as  we  human  beings,  0  Adityas,  are  akin  to  death, 
Graciously  lengthen  ye  our  lives  that  we  may  live. 

HYMN  XIX.  Agni. 

Sing  praise  to  him,  the  Lord  of  Light.     The  Gods  have  m£uie 

the  God  to  be  their  messenger, 
And  sent  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

2  Agni,  the  Bounteous  Giver,  bright  with  varied  flames,  laud 

thou,  O  singer  Sobhari — 
Him  who  controls  this  sacred  food  with  Soma  blent,  who  hath 
first  claim  to  sacrifice. 

3  Thee  have  we  chosen  skilfullest  in  sacrifice.  Immortal  Priest 

among  the  Gods, 
Wise  finisher  of  this  holy  rite : 

4  The  Son  of  Strength,  the  blessed,  brightly-shining  One,  Agni 

whose  light  is  excellent. 
May  he  by  sacrifice   win   us  in  heaven   the  grace  of  Mitra, 
Yaruna,  and  the  Floods. 

5  The  mortal  who  hath  ministered  to  Agni  with  oblation,  fuel, 

ritual  lore, 
And  reverence,  skilled  in  sacrifice, 

19  You,r  inward  monitor :  or  near  remembraacer,  not  suffering  you  to  rest 
until  you  have  rewarded  men  for  their  devotions.  Ludwig  says  that  the 
htldh  of  the  text  is  really  hi  Uah :  For  sacrifice,  Adityas,  is  your  nearest 
dwelling-place. 

20  The  God  who  saves :  Indra,  who  is  especially  the  tutelary  Qod  of  Aryans. 

21  With  triple  guard:  or,  triply  defending  or  defended.  According  to 
SAyana,  protecting  from  heat,  cold,  and  wet ;  or  three-storeyed. 

22  Akin  to  death :  bom  subject  to  death. 

1  7*he  Gods:  in  the  first  line  are,  according  to  S&ysna,  the  priests,  t.  e,  those 
who  praise  :  divyanti  sUivantUi  devd  ritvijo ;  but  the  word  may  be  taken  in 
its  ordinary  signification. 

5  Ritual  lore :  v4dena  here  can  hardly  mean,  as  S&yana  explains  it,  '  by 
studying  the  Veda.'     It  may  perhaps  mean  *  by  knowledge  of  the  proper  use 
of  the  sacred  formulaa,*  or  as  M.  MiUler  says,  ^by  the  bundle  of  grass  *  used 
in  aacri&ce.    See  Ane.  S,  Literature,  p.  28,  note,  wiA  ^,  ^Q5, 


BTMN  19.]  THE  RTG  VEDA.  1 45 

6  Verily  swift  to  run  are  his  fleet-footed  steeds,  and  most  re- 

splendent fame  is  his. 
No  trouble  caused  by  Gods  or  wrought  by  mortal  man  from 
any  side  o'ertaketh  him. 

7  May  we  by  thine  own  fires  be  well  supplied  with  fire,  O  Sou 

of  Strength,  0  Lord  of  Might : 
Thou  as  our  Friend  hast  worthy  men. 

8  Agni,  who  praises  like  a  guest  of  friendly  mind,  is  as  a  car 

that  brings  us  gear. 
Also  in  thee  is  foimd  perfect  security :  thou  art  the  Sovran 
Lord  of  wealth. 

9  That  man,   moreover,  merits   praise   who  brings,  auspicious 

Agni,  sacrificial  gifts : 
May  he  win  riches  by  his  thoughts. 

10  He  for  whose  sacrifice  thou  standest  up  erect  is  prosperous 

and  rules  o'er  men. 
He  wins  with  coursers  and  with  singers  skilled  in   song  :  with 
heroes  he  obtains  the  prize. 

1 1  He  in  whose  dwelling  Agni  is  chief  ornament,  and,  all-desired, 

loves  his  laud  well, 
And  zealously  tends  his  offerings — 

12  His,  or  the  lauding  sage's  word,  his.  Son  of  Strength  !  who  is 

most  prompt  with  sacred  gifts, 
Set  thou  beneath  the  Gk)ds,  Vasu,  above  mankind,  the  speech 
of  the  intelligent. 

13  He  who  with  sacrificial  gifts  or  homage  bringeth  very  skilful 

Agni  nigh. 
Or  him  who  flashes  fast  with  song, 

14  The  mortal   who   with  blazing   fuel,  as  his  laws  command, 

adores  the  Perfect  God, 
Blest  with  his  tlioughts  in  splendour  shall  exceed  all  men,  as 
though  he  overpassed  the  floods. 

15  Give  us   the  splendour,   Agni,   which    may  overcome  each 

greedy  fiend  in  our  abode. 
The  wrath  of  evil-hearted  folk. 


7  Hti$t  woi'thy  men :  in  us  thy  worshipers. 

1 0  With  eourten  and  with  singers :  is  successful  in  chariot-races  and  is 
rewarded  by  the  Gods  for  his  sacrifices. 

12  Set  thou  beneath  the  Gods  and  above  mankind^  is  said  to  mean  'spread 
through  all  the  sky.'  The  meaning  of  this  and  the  preceding  stanza  is  some- 
what obscurely  expressed. 

^4  TAg  Per/er:e  Ood :   dditim,   explained  by  BSLyo^Q^  aa  aTcKaiw^auV.^ja-i*^ 
indiviaible,  complete. 

10 


146  THE  HYMNS  OF  *  [BOOK  VIIL 

16  That,  wherewith  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  the  Aevins, 

Bhaga  give  us  light, 
That  may  we,  by  thy  power  finding  best  furtherance,  worship, 
0  Indra,  helped  by  thee. 

17  0  Agni,  most  devou-t  are  they,  the  sages  who  have   set  thee 

Sage  exceeding  wise, 
O  God,  for  men  to  look  upon  : 

18  Who  have  arranged  thine  altar.  BlessM  God,  at  mom,  brought 

thine  oblation,  pressed  the  juice. 
They  by  their  deeds  of    strength  have  won  them  mighty 
wealth,  who  have  set  all  their  hope  in  thee. 

19  May  Agni  i worshipped  bring  us  bliss,  may  the  gift.   Blessed 

One,  and  sacrifice  bring  bliss  : 
Yea,  may  our  praises  bring  us  bliss. 

20  Show  forth  the  mind  that  brings  success  in  war  with  fiends, 

wherewith  thou  conquerest  in  fight. 
Bring  down  the  many  firm  hopes  of  our  enemies,  and  let  us 
vanquish  with  thine  aid. 

211  praise  with  song  the  Friend  of  man,  whom  Gods  sent  down 
to  be  herald  aud  messenger. 
Best  worshipper,  bearer  of  our  gifts. 

22  Thou   unto  sharp-toothed  Agni,  Young   and   Radiant    God, 

proclaimest  with  thy  song  the  feast — 
Agni,  who  for  our  sweet  strains  moulds  heroic  strength  when 
sacred  oil  is  offered  him, 

23  While,  served  with  sacrificial  oil,  now  upward  and  now  dow]> 

ward  Agni  moves  his  sword. 
As  doth  the  Asura  his  robe. 

24  The  God,  the  Friend  of  man,  who  bears  our  gifts  to  heaven, 

the  God  with  his  sweet-smelling  mouth. 
Distributes,  skilled  in  sacrifice,  his  precious  things,  Invoking 
Priest,  Immortal  God. 

3&  Son  of  Strength,  Agni,  if  thou  wert  the  mortal,  bright  as 
Mitra  !  worshipped  with  our  gifts  ! 
And  I  were  the  Immortal  God, 


16  Thai  :  radiance  or  splendour. 

20  Bring  down  the  many  firm  hopes :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  tezt» 
and  hopes,  resolves,  thoughts  or  something  similar  must  be  supplied. 

21  The  Friend  of  man :  or  mdnurhUam  may  mean  '  him  who  was  establish- 
ed  jbjr  Ifanus/ 

23  ^ig  stoord:  the  flashing  flame.    The  A«w*a :  \itL^  ^\«i^  wiWit^asi^  to 
»trap«.     ^o3e,'  outward  form. 


ffTMNl^.}  THE  RTGVEDA.  Ul 

26  I  would   not  give  thee  up,   Vasu,  to  calumny  or  mi^ry,  O 

Bounteous  One. 
My  worshipper  should  feel  no  hunger  or  distress,  nor»  Agni, 
should  he  live  in  sin. 

27  Like  a  son  cherished  in  his  father's  house,  let  our  oblation 

rise  unto  the  Gods. 

28  With  thine  immediate  aid  may  I,  excellent  Agni,  ever  gain 

my  wish, 
A  mortal  with  a  Grod  to  help. 

29  O  Agni.  by  thy  wisdom,  by  thy  bounties,  by  thy  leading  m«iy 

I  gather  wealth. 
Excellent  Agni,  thou  art  called  my  Providence  :  delight  thou 
to  be  liberal. 

30  Agni,  he  conquers  by  thine  aid  that  brings  him  store  of  noble 

heroes  and  great  strength. 
Whose  bond  of  friendship  is  thy  choice. 

31  Thy   spark  is  black   and   crackling,   kindled   in   due   time, 

0  Bounteous,  it  is  taken  up. 

Thou   art  the   dear  Friend  of  the  mighty  Mornings :  thou 
shinest  in  glimmerings  of  the  night. 

32  We  Sobharis  have  come  to  him,  for  succour,  who  is  good  to  help 

with  thousand  powers. 
The  Sovran,  Trasadasyu's  Friend. 

33  O  Agni,  thou  on  whom  all  other  fires  depend,  as  branches  on 

the  parent  stem, 
I  make  the  treasures  of  the  folk,  like  songs,  mine  own,  while 

1  exalt  thy  sovran  might 

34  The  mortal  whom,  Adityas,  ye,  Guileless,  lead  to  the  farther  bank 
Of  all  the  princes,  Bounteous  Ones  ! — 

35  Whoe'er  he  be,  Man-ruling  Kings !  the  Kegent  of  the  race  of 

men-;- 
May  we,  0  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman,  like  him  be  further- 
ers  of  your  law. 

36  A  gift  of  fifty  female  slaves  hath  Trasadasyu  given  me,  Puru- 

kutsa's  son, 
Most  liberal,  kind,  lord  of  the  brave. 

26  In  3i» ;  such  as  neglect  of  the  Gods  in  consequence  of  poverty. 

33  The  meaning  of  the  second  line  appears  to  be  :  'I  praise  Agni  better 
than  other  men.  I  overpower  their  hymns  and  secure  for  myself  the  rewards 
which  they  were  intended  to  obtain.' 

86  Fetnale  ilaveB :  vadMtndm :  vadhU  means  usually  a  bride,  a  wife,  &  woman 
in  general,  and  here  handmaids  or  female  slaves,  the  wi^M  ox  ^^^Mk2^\/^x^  qV 
conguerod!  l^Aaae^  appear  to  be  meant.     Accordine  W  "f  on  ^"Q^iilft.^  xn&SVS^  ^x 
oiAer /emaJe  dnught-aninuds  are  intended. 


148  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

37  And  Syslva   too  for  me  led  forth  a  strong  steed  at  Suv^stu's 
ford  : 
A  herd  of  three  times  seventy  kiue,  good  lord  of  gifts,  he  gave 
to  me. 

HYMN  XX.  Maruta. 

Let  none,  Swift  Travellers !   check  you :  come  hither,  like- 
spirited,  stay  not  far  away, 
Ye  benders  even  of  what  is  firm. 

2  Maruts,  Ribhukshans,  Rudras,  come  ye  with  your  cars  strong- 

fellied  and  exceeding  bright. 
Come,  ye  for  whom  we  long,  with  food,  to  sacrifice,  come  ye 
with  love  to  Sobhari. 

3  For  well  w^e  know  the  vigorous  might  of  Rudra's  Sons,  the 

Maruts,  who  are  passing  strong, 
Swift  Vishnu's  band,  who  send  the  rain. 

4  Islands  are  bursting  forth  and  misery  is  stayed :  the  heaven 

and  earth  are  joined  in  one. 
Decked  with  bright  rings,  ye  spread  the  broad  expanses  out, 
when  ye.  Self-luminous,  stirred  yourselves. 

5  Even  things  immovable  shake  and  reel,  the  mountains  and  the 

forest  trees  at  your  approach, 
And  the  earth  trembles  as  ye  come. 

6  To  lend  free  course,  0  Maruts,  to  youir  furious  rush,  heaven 

high  and  higher  still  gives  way. 
Where  they,  the  Heroes  mighty  with  their  arms,  display  their 
gleaming  ornaments  on  their  forms. 

7  After  their  Godlike  nature  they,  the  bull-like  Heroes,  dazzling 

and  impetuous,  wear 
Great  splendour  as  they  show  erect. 


37  SuvStstu  is  in  all  probability  the  Soastos  of  Arrian  (Suwad  or  Swat)  near 
the  K6ph§n  or  K4bul  river.  Kine :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  The 
stanza,  which  has  no  comment  in  the  printed  edition,  is  very  obscure  and  can 
be  only  conjecturaily  translated.  See  Ludwig's  Translation  and  Commentary, 
I.  427)  and  IV.  380. 

4  Sftyana  seems  to  explain  this  verse,  *  The  islands  fall  asunder,  the  firmest 
(trees)  experience  distress  ;  they  (the  winds)  distress  heaven  and  earth  ;  the 
waters  hurry  onward,  0  bright  weaponed,  self-shining  ones,  when  you  agitate 
them.*— E.  B.  C.'s  note  in  Wilson's  Translation.  The  stanza  is  difficult. 
I- have  followed,  generally,  Ludwig's  version.  Islands:  the  higher  unsub- 
merged  grounds.  Misery :  caused  by  the  preceding  hot  and  dry  weather. 
Are  joined  in  one:  as  the  heavy  rain  obscures  the  horizon.  Bright  rings  : 
worn  on  the  arms  or  the  ankles  or  carried  by  the  Maruts  on  their  shoulders. 
Ssrt  I.  166.  9. 
7  Mul/-like:  tlie  exact  meaning  of  rrUJiapsa'oaK \& uii^iwWva.*  Skow  erect: 
-^^rutapsavah  ia  conjecturaily  translated. 


MTMN  20.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  149 

8  The  pivot  of  the  Sohharis'  chariot  within  the  golden  box  is 

balmed  with  milk. 
May  they  the  Well-born,  Mighty,  kindred  of  the  Cow,  aid  us 
to  food  and  to  delight. 

9  Bring,  ye  who  sprinkle  balmy  drops,  oblations  to  your  vigorous 

Marut  company, 
To  those  whose  leader  is  the  Bull. 

10  Come  hither,  0  ye  Maruts,  ou  your  strong-horsed  car,  solid  in 

look,  with  solid  naves. 
Lightly  like  wingM  falcons,  0  ye  Heroes,  come,  come  to  enjoy 
our  offerings. 

11  Their  decoration  is  the  same:  their  ornaments  of  gold  are 

bright  upon  their  arms ; 
Their  lances  glitter  splendidly. 

12  They  toil  not  to  defend  their  bodies  from  attack,  strong  He- 

roes with  their  mighty  arms. 
Strong  are  your  bows  and  strong  the  weapons  in  your  cars, 
and  glory  sits  on  every  face. 

13  Whose  name  extendeth  like  a  sea,  alone,    resplendent,  so  that 

all  have  joy  in  it, 
And  life-power  like  ancestral  might. 

14  Pay  honour  to  these  Maruts  and  fcing  praise  to  them,  for  of 

the  wheel-spokes  of  the  car 
Of  these  loud  roarers  none  is  last :  this  is  their  power,  this 
moves  them  to  give  mighty  gifts. 

15  Blest  by  your  favouring  help  was  he,  0  Maruts,  at  the  earlier 

flushings  of  the  morn, 
And  even  now  shall  he  be  blest. 

16  The  strong  man  to  whose  sacrifice,   0  Heroes,  ye  approach 

that  ye  may  taste  thereof, 
With  glories  and  with  war  that  winneth  spoil  shall  gain  great 
bliss,  ye  Shakers  of  the  world. 

17  Even  as  Rudra's  Sous,  the  brood  of  the  Creator  Dyaus,    the 

Asura,  desire, 
0  Youthful  Ones,  so  shall  it  be : 

8  Box:  the  interior  of  the  chariot.  With  milk:  with  fertilizing  rain  seut 
by  the  Marute.     The  Cow :  Prisni. 

9  Ye  who  ipHnhU  balmy  drops :  priests  who  offer  libations.  Whose  leader 
is  the  Bull :  whom  Indra  leads.  Or,  it  may  be,  whose  chariot  is  drawn  by 
bulls,  as  in  the  following  stanza. 

10  Solid  in  look:  or  with  bull-like,  or  strong  look. 

14  None  is  last:  no  part  of  their  chariot  wheel  is  behind  the  rest  in  speed. 
This  moves  them  to  give  mighty  gifts ;  or,  this  (characterifitic  b^lou^  \si  XXikSai^ 
through  grefttnesB  of  their  gifts, 

J^  ITe:  your  worshipper. 


150  TUB  BYMN8  OP  [BOGS'  Vllh 

18  And  these  the  bounteous,  worthy  of  the  Maruts  who  move 

onward  pouring  down  the  rain — 
Even  for  their  sake,  0  Youthful  Ones,  with  kindest  heart  take 
us  to  you  to  be  your  own. 

19  O  Sobhari,  with  newest  song  sing  out  unto  the  youthful  puri- 

fying Bulls, 
Even  as  a  plougher  to  his  steers. 

20  Who/  like  a  celebrated  boxer,  overcome  the  challengers  in  every 

fight : 
They  who,  like  shining  bulls,  are  most  illustrious — honour 
those  Maruts  with  thy  song. 

21  Allied  by  common  aneestiy,  ye  Maruts,  even  the  Cows,  alike 

in  energy. 
Lick,  all  by  turns,  each  other's  head. 

22  Even  mortal  man,  ye  Dancers  breast-adorned  with  gold,  attains 

to  brotherhood  with  you. 
Mark  ye  and  notice  us,  0  Maruts ;  evermore  your  friendship 
is  secured  to  us. 

23  0  Maruts,  rich  in  noble  gifts,  bring  us  a  portion  of  the  Maruts' 

medicine, 
Ye  Coursers  who  are  Friends  to  us. 

24  Haters  of  those  who  serve  you  not,  bliss-bringers,  bring  us 

bliss  with  those  auspicious  aids 
Wherewith  ye  are  victorious  and  guard  Sindhu  well,  and  suc- 
cour Krivi  in  his  need. 

25  Maruts,  who  rest  on  fair  trimmed  grass,  what  balm  soever 

Sindhu  or  Asikni  hath. 
Or  mountains  or  the  seas  contain, 

26  ye  carry  on  your  bodies,  ye  who  see  it  all :  so  bless  us  graciously 

therewith. 
Cast,  Maruts,  to  the  ground  our  sick  man's  malady :  replace 
the  dislocated  limb. 

18  The  bounteous:  the  liberal  institutors  of  sacrifice. 

19  Punfying  bulU :  the  strong  Maruts  who  send  the  sweet  rain. 

21  Allied  by  common  aneestiy :  as  the  offspring  of  PrisnL  The  Cows :  the 
Maruts.  Lick.... each  othei'*s  head:  as  they  crowd  together  in  their  course. 
According  to  Sdyana,  *the  cows  severally  lick  up  the  quarters  of  the  sky.' 

22  Ye  Dancei'S :  ye  who  dance  through  the  air. 

24  Krivi :  the  eponymus  of  a  warrior  tribe  in  the  Panjftb,  in  later  times 

combined  with,  or  identical  with  the  PanchAlas.     SAyana  takes  Mvim  here 

to  mean  a  well :  '  with  which  you  provided  a  well  (for  Gotama). '-^Wilson. 

^^  Js^/hnt,'  the  Aoesines  of  Quintus  Ourtius,  the  Vedic  name  of  the  Chandra* 

bbAgd,  the  modern  Chenfih. 

26  Jieplace  ihe  dislocated  limb :  '  re-estabUaii  \i\a  «ute>ft>ttVA  tcwsi^:  T-T^K'-^aKatv* 


MTMN  21.]  THE  RIO  VEDA  151 

HYMN  XXI.  Indra, 

Wb  call  on  thee,  0  Matchless  One !  We  seeking  help,  posses- 
sing nothing  firm  ourselves, 
Call  on  thee  wonderful  in  fight : 

2  On  thee  for  aid  in  sacrifice.     This  youth  of  ours,  the  bold, 

the  mighty,  hath  gone  forth. 
We  therefore,  we  thy  friends,  Indra,  have  chosen  thee,  free- 
giver,  as  our  Guardian  God. 

3  Come  hither,   for  the  drops  are  here,   O  Lord  of  corn-lands. 

Lord  of  horses.  Lord  of  kine : 
Drink  thou  the  Soma,  Soma's  Lord ! 

4  For  we  the  kinless  singers  have  drawn  hither  thee,  0  Indra, 

who  hast  numerous  kin. 
With  all  the  forms  thou  hast,  come  thou  of  bull-like  strength, 
come  near  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

5  Sitting  like  birds  beside  thy  meath,  mingled  with  milk,  that 

gladdeneth  and  exalteth  thee, 
Indra,  to  thee  we  sing  aloud. 

6  We  speak  to  thee  with  this  our  reverential   prayer.     Why 

art  thou  pondering  yet  awhile  f 
Here  are  our  wishes ;  thou  art  liberal,  Lord  of  Bays  :  we  and 
our  hymns  are  present  here. 

7  For  not  in  recent  times  alone,  0  Indra,  Thunder-armed,  have 

we  obtained  thine  aid. 
Of  old  we  knew  thy  plenteous  wealth. 

8  Hero,  we  knew  thy  friendship  and  thy  rich   rewards:  these, 

Thunderer,  now  we  crave  of  thee. 
O  Vasu,  for  all  wealth  that  cometh  of  the  kine,  sharpen  our 
powers,  fair-visored  God. 

9  Him  who  of  old  hath  brought  to  us  this  and  that   blessing, 

him  I  magnify  for  you, 
Even  Indra,  0  my  friends,  for  help : 

10  Borne  by  Bay  Steeds,  the  Lord  of  heroes,  ruling  men,  for  it 

is  he  who  takes  delight. 
May  Maghavan  bestow  on  us  his  worshippers  hundreds  of 
cattle  and  of  steeds. 

1 1  Hero,  may  we,  with  thee  for  Friend,  withstand  the  man  who 

pants  against  us  in  his  wrath, 
In  fight  with  people  rich  in  kine. 

1 2  May  we  be  victors  in  the  singer's  battle-song,  and  meet  the 

wicked,  Much-invoked ! 


S  TAityouiA  of  ours:  the  noble  who  has  instituted  t\x&  aaw\Si<c». 


152  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VJIL 

With  heroes  smite  the  foeman  and  show  forth  our  strength. 
0  Indra,  further  thou  our  thoughts. 

13  0  Indra,  from  all  ancient  time  rivalless  ever  and  compani- 

onless  art  thou : 
Thou  seekest  comradeship  in  war. 

14  Thou  findest  not  the  wealthy  man  to  be  thy  friend :  those 

scorn  thee  who  are  flown  with  wine. 
What  time  thou  thunderest  and  gatherest,  then  thou,  even  as 
a  Father,  art  invoked. 

15  0  Indra,  let  us  not,  like  fools  who  waste  their  lives  at  home, 

with  friendship  such  as  thine 
Sit  idly  by  the  poured-out  juice. 

16  Giver  of  kine,  may  we  not  miss  thy  gracious  gifts  ^  let  us  not 

rob  thee  of  thine  own. 
Strip  even  the  strong  places  of  the  foe,  and  bring  :  thy  gifts 
can  never  be  made  vain. 

17  Indra  or  blest  Sarasvati  alone  bostows  such  wealth,  treasure 

so  great,  or  thou, 
O  Chitra,  on  the  worshipper. 

18  Chitra  is  King,  and  only  kinglings  are  the  rest  who  dwell 

beside  Sarasvati. 
He,   like  Parjanya  with  his  rain,   hath  spread  himself  with 
thousand,  yea,  with  myriad  gifts. 

HYMN  XXIL  Asvins. 

HiTHBRWARD  havc  I  Called  to-day,   for  succour,    that  most 

wondrous  car 
Which  ye  ascended,  Asvins,  ye  whose  paths  are  red,  swift  to 
give  ear,  for  SuryS,'s  sake. 
2  Gar  ever  young,  much  longed-for,  easily  invoked,  soon  guided, 
first  in  deeds  of  might, 
Which  waits  and  serves,  0  Sobhari,  with  benevolence,  without 
a  rival  or  a  foe. 

1 3  Them  seekest  comradeship  in  war :    bef riendest  thy  worshippers  when 
they  need  thine  assistance  in  battle. 

14  Oatherest :  the  clouds.  —  M.  Miiller. 

17  Chitra  :  the  name  of  this  king  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Rigveda. 

18  King:  rStji.     Kinglings:   rdjaMh.     Parjanya:  God  of  the  rain-cloud, 
regarded  as  the  type  of  liberal  betieficence. 

1    Ye  whose  paths  are  red :    rudrctvartani :   thin  epithet  of    the  Asvins  Is 

variously   explained  ;    *  having  a  path  which  causes  weeping  iu  battle,'  or 

*  whose  paths  are  praised/ — S?lyana  ;  *  advancing  on  the  path   to  battle' — 

Wilson;  *  proceeding  on  terrible  roads/ — Muir  ;  'going  on  Jiudra's  path.* — 

Z^udwig ;  'on  your  lifiht  path.* — Grassmann  ;  '  going  on  a  reddish  path.' — 

Pfaobel.     See  redische  Studien,  I.,  pp.  15  and  55—^0.     For  S4t*)|d:  %  vik^ ;  Yfhd 

56a^©  tho  Aavma  aa  her  Imabands.    See  1. 11^.  17 . 


HYMN  22.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  IM 

3  These   Asvins  with   our  homage,   these     Two    Oninipreseut 

Deities 
Hitherward  will  we  bring  for   kind  help,  these  who  seek  the 
dwelling  of  the  worshipper. 

4  One   of  your  chariot   wheels  is  moving   swiftly   round,    oae 

speeds  for  you  its  onward  course. 
Like  a  milch-cow,  0  Lords  of  splendour,  and  with  haste  let 
your  benevolence  come  to  us. 

5  That  chariot  of  yours  which  hath  a  triple  seat  and   reins  of 

gold, 
The  famous  car  that  traverseth  the  heaven  and  earth,  thereon 
Nasatyas,  Asvins,  come. 

6  Ye  with  your  plough,  when  favouring  Manu  with  your  help, 

ploughed  the  first  harvest  in  the  sky. 
As  such  will  we  exalt  you,  Lords  of  splendour,  now,  0  Asvins, 
with  our  prayer  and  praise. 

7  Come  to  us,  Lords  of  ample  wealth,  by  paths  of  everlasting  Law, 
Whereby   to  high  dominion  ye  with  mighty  sti^ength  raised 

Trikshi,  Trasadasyu's  son. 

8  This  Soma  pressed  with  stones  is  yours,  ye  Heroes,  Lords  of 

plenteous  wealth. 
Approach  to  drink  the  Soma,  come,  drink  in  the  worshipper's 
abode. 

9  O  Asvins,  mount  the  chariot,  mount  the  golden  seat,  ye  who 

are  Lords  of  plenteous  wealth. 
And  bring  to  us  abundant  food. 

10  The   aids   wherewith   ye   helped   Paktha  and  Adhrigu,  and 

Babhru  severed  from  his  friends, — 
With  those,  0   Asvins,  come  hither  with  speed  and  soon,  and 
heal  whatever  is  diseased. 

11  When  we  continually  invoke  the  Asvins,  the  resistless,  at  this 

time  of  day, 
W^e  lovers  of  the  song,  with  songs. 


4  The  movements  of  the  two  wheels  are  not  veiy  intelligibly  described.  See 
I.  ?0.  19,  and  V.  73.  3      Like  a  milch-cow :  a  common  type  of  liberality. 

6  Ploughed  the  first  harvest:  first  plouu;hed  the  ground  and  sowe<l  and 
reaped:  that  is,  taught,  by  example,  men  to  do  so.  Cp.  I.  117.  21 :  '  Ploughing 
and  sowing  barley,  O  ye  Asvins.  milking  out  food  for  men,  ye  wonder-workers, 
Blasting  away  the  Dasyu  with  your  trumpet,  ye  have  bestowed  wide  light 
upon  the  Arya.' 

7  Trikshi :  see  VI  46.  8. 

20  /'iU^Aa,  AOAriyu,  md  Babhru  are  said  to  have  \)^ix^iia^%t 


164  THE  H7MNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

12  Through  these,  ye  Mighty  Ones,  come  hither  to  my  call  which 

brings  all  blessings,  wears  all  forms, — 
Through   wiiich,    All-present   Heroes,    lavishest  of    food  ye 
strengthened  Krivi,  come  through  these. 

13  I  speak  to  both  of  these  as  such,  these  Asvins  whom  I  rever- 

ence at  this  time  of  day  : 
With  homage  we  entreat  them  both. 

14  Ye  who  are   Lords  of  splendour,  ye  whose  paths   are  red,  at 

eve,  at  mom,  at  sacrifice. 
Give  us  not  utterly  as  prey  to  mortal  foe,  ye  Rudras,    Lords 
of  ample  wealth. 

15  For  bliss  I  call  the  blissful  car,  at  morn  the  inseparable  AsviQS 

with  their  car 
I  call,  like  Sobhari  our  sire. 

16  Rapid  as  thought,  and  strong,  and  speeding  to  the  joy,  bring- 

ing your  swiftly-coming  help. 
Be  to  us  a  protection  even  from  far  away,  Lords  of  great  wealth, 
with  many  aids. 

17  Come,   Wonder-Workers,  to  our  home,   our  home*  0  Asvins, 

rich  in  cattle,  steeds,  and  gold, 
Chief  drinkers  of  the  Soma's  juice  ! 

18  Choice-worthy  strength,  heroic,  firm  and  excellent,  uninjured 

by  the  Rakshas  foe, 
At  this  your  coming  nigh,  ye  Lords  of   ample  wealth   and  all 
good  things,  may  we  obtain. 

HYMN  XXIII.  Agni. 

Worship  thou  Jiltavedas,  pray  to  him  who  willingly  accepts. 
Whose  smoke  wanders  at  will,  and  none  may  grasp  his  flame. 

2  Thou,   all   men's  friend,   Visvamanas,  exaltest   Agni  with  thy 

song, 
The  Giver,  and  his  flames  with  which  no  cars  contend. 

3  Whose  resolute  assault,  to  win  vigour  and  food,  deserves  our 

praise, — 

12  Krivi:  see  VIII.  20.  24. 

14   ye  Rvdras :  ye  red-hued  or  bright  Gods. 

17  Rich  in  cattle:  proleptic  ;  which  your  coming  will  make  rich. 

The  Rishi  is  Visvamanas  the  son  of  Vyasva. 

1  Who  willingly  accepts :  prattvydm :    according  to  S&yana,  *  disposed  to 
encounter  enemies ' 
£  The  second  line  is  difficult,  as  the  adjective  vishpardhasah  stands  without 
a  substantive  and  may  b«  either  the  accuftaUve  •'plural  or  the  genitive  uiugular : 
'nrho  fa  the  giver  of  chariots  to  the  unenviovia  (^oraVv^^et^' — ^'^^ora., 
S  Assault :  od  the  ablations  which  the^  ^le  conftuvjMa. 


arru^  23.]  the  riqveda.  155 

Through    whose  discovering    power    the    priest  obtaineth 
wealth. 

4  Up  springs  the  imperishable  flame,  the  flame  of  the   Reful- 

gent C^e 
Most  bright,  with  glowing  jaws  and  glory  in  his  train. 

5  Skilled  in  fair  sacrifice,  extolled;  arise  in  Godlike  loveliness, 
Shining  with  loftj  splendour,  with  eflulgent  light. 

6  Galled  straight  to  our  oblations,   come,  O  Agni,  through  our 

eulogies, 
As  thou  hast  been  our  envoy  bearing  up  our  gifts. 

7  I  call  your  Agni,  from  of  old  Invoking  Priest  of  living  men  : 
Him  with  this  song  I  laud  and  magnify  for  you. 

8  Whom,  wondrous  wise,   they  animate    with  solemn   rites  and 

his  fair  form, 
Kind  as  a  friend  to  men  who  keep  the  holy  Law. 

9  Him,  true  to  Law,  who  perfecteth  the  sacrifice.  Law-loving 

ones ! 
Ye  with  your  song  have  gratified  in  the  place  of  prayer. 

10  May  all  our  sacrifices  go  to  him  the  truest  Angiras, 
Who  is  among  mankind  the  most  illustrious  Priest. 

11  Imperishable  Agni,  thine  are  all  these  high  enkindled  lights, 
Like  horses  and  like  stallions  showing  forth  their  strength. 

12  So  give  us.  Lord  of  Power  and  Might,  riches  combined  with 

hero  strength, 
And  guard  us  with  our  sons  and  grandsons  in  our  frays. 

1 3  Soon  as  the  eager  Lord  of  men  is  friendly  unto  Manu's  race, 
Agni  averteth  from  us  all  the  demon  host. 

14  0  Hero  Agni,  Lord  of  men,  on  hearing  this  new  laud  of  mine. 
Bum  down  the  Rtlkshasas,  enchanters,  with  thy  flame. 

15  No  mortal  foe  can  e'er  prevail  by  arts  of  magic  over  him 
Who  serveth  Agni  well  with  sacrificial  gifts. 

16  Yyasva  the  sage,  who  sought  the  Bull,  hath  won  thee,  finder 

of  good  things : 
As  such  may  we  enkindle  thee  for  ample  wealth. 

17  Usan^  K&vya  stablished  thee,  0  Agni,  as  Invoking  Priest : 
Thee,  Jatavedas,  Sacrificing  Priest  for  man. 


9  Law-loving  onei :    *  pious  worshippers,* — Wilson.      Have  gi'atified :   or 
must  gratify. 

16  Who  sought  the  Bull:  tho  strong  Agui.    Aooordm^  to  ^^^Ti-^^  ^'Cqa 
showerasr  (ol  rain). ' 

JZ  l^fand  JTdvifa :  see  Vol  L,  Index. 


156  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VJIL 

18  All  Deities  of  one  accord  appointed  thee  their  messenger: 
Thou,  God,  through  hearing,  hadst  first  claim  to  sacrifice. 

19  Him  may  the  mortal  hero  make  his  own  immortal  messenger, 
Far-spreading,  Purifier,  him  whose  path  is  black. 

20  With  lifted  ladles  let  us  call  him  splendid  with  his  brilliant 

flame, 
Men*s  ancient  Agni,  wasting  not,  adorable. 

21  The  man  who  pays  the  worship  due  to  him  with  sacrificial  gifts 
Obtains  both  plenteous  nourishment  and  hero  fame. 

22  To  Jatavedas  Agni,  chief  in  sacrifices,  first  of  all 
With  homage  goes  the  ladle  rich  with  sacred  gifts. 

23  Even  as  Vyasva  did,  may  we  with  these  most  high  and  liberal 

hymns 
Pay  worship  unto  Agni  of  the  splendid  flame. 

24  Now  sing,  as  Sth^raydpa  sang,  with  lauds  to  him  who  spread- 

eth  far. 
To  Agni  of  the  home,  0  Eishi,  Vyasva's  son. 

25  As  welcome  guest  of  human  kind,  as  ofl^spring  of  the  forest 

kings. 
The  sages  worship  ancient  Agni  for  his  aid. 

26  For  men's  oblations  brought  to  him  who  is  the  mighty  Lord 

of  all. 
Sit,  Agni,  mid  our  homage,  on  the  sacred  grass. 

27  Grant  us  abundant  treasures,  grant  the  opulence  which  many 

crave. 
With  store  of  heroes,  progeny,  and  high  renown. 

28  Agni,  Most  Youthful  of  the  Gods,  send  evermore   the   gift   of 

wealth 
Unto  Varosush&man  and  to  all  his  folk. 

29  A  mighty  Conqueror  art  thou,  0  Agni,  so  disclose  to  us 
Food  in  our  herds  of  kine  and  gain  of  ample  wealth. 

30  Thou,  Agni,  art  a  glorious  God  :  bring  hitlier   Mitra,  Varuna, 
Imperial  Sovrans,  holy-minded,  true  to  Law. 

18  Through  heaHng :  and,  by  causing  the  Gods  to  hear,  men*s  prayers. 

24  SthHrayUpa :  said  by  Sftyana  to  be  the  name  of  a  Rishi. 

25  Forest  kings  :  tall  trees,  or  trees  in  general. 

28   Varosushdman :  I  follow  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  in  joining  varo  to 

sush^mne  and  taking  the  whole  as  one  word  and  the  name  of  a  chief.    Ludwig 

translates  somewhat  as  follows  :  '  Agni,  send  quickly  to  the  folk   who   know 

the  goodly  S4man  well,  the  gift  of  wealth,  for  ever,   Youngeat   God  !  to  all* 

Ifut  in  a  later  volume  of  his  work  (III.  p.  162)  he   comes   to   the  conclusion 

that  SushAman  is  a  proper  name,  and  that  uaro  (;w\ii.<i\i  xq».^  jV'i^Jcdjaks,  be  an 

'o^rjectioaj  must  not  be  combined  with  it. 


BTMN  24.]  THE  RIOYEDA.  157 

HYMN  XXIV.  Indra. 

Companions,  let  us  learn  a  prayer  to  Indra  whom  the  thunder 

arms, 
To  glorify  your  bold  and  most  heroic  Friend. 

2  For  thou  by  slaying  Vritra  art  the   Vritra-slayer,   famed   for 

might. 
Thou,  Hero,  in  rich  gifts  surpassest  wealthy  chiefs. 

3  As  such,  when  glorified,  bring   us   riches  of   very   wondrous 

fame, 
Set  in  the  highest  rank,  Wealth-giver,  Lord  of  Bays  ! 

4  Yea,  Indra,  thou  disclosest  that  preeminent  dear  wealth    of 

men  : 
Boldly,  0  Bold  One,  glorified,  bring  it  to  us. 

5  The  workers  of  destruction  stay  neither  thy   right   hand    nor 

thy  left : 
Nor  hosts  that  press  about  thee,  Lord  of  Bays,  in  fight. 

6  0  Thunder-armed,  I  come  with  songs  to   thee   as   to   a    stall 

with  kine : 
Fulfil  the  wish  and  thought  of  him  who  sings  thy  praise. 

7  Chief  Vritra-slayer,  through  the  hymn  of   Visvamanas   think 

of  all, 
All  that  concemeth  us,  Excellent,  Mighty  Guide. 

8  May  we,  O  Vritra-slayer,  O  Hero,  find  this  thy  newest  boon, 
Longed-for,  and  excellent,  thou  who  art  much  invoked  ! 

9  0  Indra,  Dancer,  Much-invoked  !  as  thy  great   power   is   un- 

surpassed. 
So  be  thy  bounty  to  the  worshipper  unchecked. 

10  Most  Mighty,  most  heroic  One,  for  mighty  bounty  fill  thee  full. 
Though  strong,  strengthen  thyself  to  win  wealth,  Magha\an  ! 

110  Thunderer,  never  have  our  prayers  gone  forth  to  any  God 
but  thee  : 
So  help  us,  Maghavan,  with  thine  assistance  now. 

12  For,  Dancer,  verily  I  find  none  else  for  bounty,  saving  thee, 
For  splendid  wealth  and  power,  thou  Lover  of  the  Song. 

13  For  Indra  pour  ye  out  the  drops  ;  meath  blent  with  Soma  let 

him  drink  : 
With  bounty  and  with  majesty  will  he  further  us. 


9  Dancer :  of  the  dance  of  war.    According  to    S4yana,   *  dancer,   or  who 
cause?  to  dance^  i.  e.  Agitator,  e-xciter,  from  Indra' B  iacvxU^  olm\AT\i"a\.\\£k:^>aNs«k 
in  all  heingfi, '—  Wilson, 


158  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI fh 

14  I  spake  to  the  Bay  Coursers'  Lord,  to  him  who  gives  ability: 
Now  hear  the  son  of  Asva  as  he  praises  thee. 

15  Never  was  any  Hero  born  before  thee  mightier  than  thou : 
None  certainly  like  thee  in  goodness  and  in  wealth. 

16  0  ministering  priest,  pour  out  of  the  sweet  juice  what  glad- 

dens most : 
So  is  the  Hero  praised  who  ever  prospers  us. 

17  Indra,    whom  Tawny  Coursers  bear,  praise   such   as  thine, 

preeminent, 
None  by  his  power  or  by  his  goodness  hath  attained. 

18  We,  seeking  glory,  have  invoked  this  Master  of  all  power  and 

might 
Who  must  be  glorified  by  constant  sacrifice. 

19  Come,  sing  we  praise  to  Indra,  friends,  the  Hero  who  deserves 

the  laud, 
Him  who  with  none  to  aid  overcomes  all  tribes  of  men. 

20  To  him  who  wins  the  kine,  who  keeps  no  cattle  back,   Celes- 

tial God, 
Speak  wondrous   speech   more   sweet  than   butter  and   than 
meath. 

21  Whose  hero  powers  are  measureless,  whose  bounty  ne'er  may 

be  surpassed, 
Whose  liberality,  like  light,  is  over  all. 

22  As  Vyasva  did,  praise  Indra,  praise  the  Strong  unfluctuating 

Guide, 
Who  gives  the  foe's  possessions  to  the  worshipper. 

23  Now,  son  of  Vyasva,  praise   thou  him  who  to  the  tenth  time 

still  is  new, 
The  very  Wise,  whom  living  men  must  glorify. 

24  Thou  knowest,  Indra,  Thunder-armed,  how  to  avoid  destructive 

powers, 
As  one  secure  from  pitfalls  each  returning  day. 


14  Son  of  Asva:  i.  e.  of  Vyasva,  the  Rishi  Visvamauas. 

20  Who  keeps  no  caitle  hcveh  :  either  literally  who  aids  his  worshippers  to 
win  cattle  in  their  raids  and  gives  them  all  the  booty  ;  or,  who  sends  forth  all 
the  kine  or  rays  of  light  that  he  has  recovered  from  the  powers  of  darkness. 
According  to  Sdyana,  '  who  rejects  no  praise.' 

28  Who  to  the  tenth  time  still  is  new :  continually  renews  his  liberality  to 
us.     This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  dasamdm  ndvam  (tenth  new)  of  the 
.  text.     S&yana  explains  differently  :  *  who  is  the  tenth  (of  the  pervading  vital 
princfplea),  the  adorable.* 

24  Z>estrtict{ve poioer8 :   the  plural  of  "NirTiW,  T)Qak\^i  ox  X^^txuotioii.     I 
^opt  Ludwig'a  /nteipretation  of  the  second  Une. 


BTUN  26.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  159 

25  O  Indra,  bring  that  aid   wherewith  of  old,  Most  Wondrous ! 

thou  didst  slay 
His  foes  for  active  Kutsa :  send  it  down  to  us. 

26  So  now  we  seek   thee  fresh  in  might,  Most   Wonderful  in  act ! 

for  gain : 
For  thou  art  he  who  conquers  all  our  foes  for  us. 

27  Who  will  set  free   from  ruinous   woe,  or   Arya  on   the  Seven 

Streams : 

0  valiant  Hero,  bend  the  Dasa's  weapon  down. 

28  As  to   Yarosushslman  thou   broughtest  great   riches,  for  their 

gain, 
To  Vyasva's  sons,  Blest  Lady,  rich  in  ample  wealth ! 

29  Let  Narya's  sacrificial  meed  reach  Vyasva's  Soma-beariug  sons  : 
In  hundreds  and  in  thousands  be  the  great  reward. 

30  If  one  should  ask  thee.  Where  is  he  who  sacrificed  ?     Whither 

lookest  thou  ? 
Like  Yala  he  hath  passed  away  and  dwelleth  now  on  Gomatu 

HYMN   XXY.  Mitra-Vanina. 

1  WORSHIP  you  who  guard  this  AU,  Gods  holiest  among  the 
Gods, 

You,  faithful  to  the  Law,  whose  power  is  sanctified. 

2  So,  too,  like  charioteers  are  they,  Mitra  and  sapient  Yaruna, 
Sons  high-bom  from  of  old,  whose  holy  laws  stand  fast. 

3  These  Twain,    possessors  of  all   wealth,   most   glorious,    for 

supremest  sway 
Aditi,  Mighty  Mother,  true  to  Law,  brought  forth. 

27  Ainfa  on  the  Seven  Streams :  from  any  Aryan  enemy  in  the  land  of  the 
Seven  Rivers,  probably  the  Indus,  the  five  rivers  of  the  Paiij&b,  and  the 
KubhA. 

23  VarosusMman :  see  VIII.  23.  28.  Blest  Lady:  Ushas  or  Dawn  is 
addressed. 

29  Ndrya*s  saa^iflcial  meed :  N&rya  appears  to  be  the  name  of  the  institutor 
of  the  sacrifice. 

30  Ludwig  observes :  *  This  stanza  clearly  refers  to  the  greatness  of  the 
reward  given  by  N4rya,  and  its  meaning  is  :  here  are  so  many  cows  (presented 
by  N&rya)  that  one  might  think  that,  in  consequence  of  the  sacrifice,  Vala  had 
giveti  up  his  cows  [which  he  had  stolen  from  the  Gods,  and  hidden  In  a  cave], 
and  taken  his  departure.'  Ushae  says  also,  *  my  cows  are  quite  superfluous 
here,  and  I  will  drive  them  away  to  some  other  place.'  The  stanza  is  addressed 
to  Ushas,  and  the  second  line  is  the  answer  she  is  to  give  to  the  question 
contained  in  the  first.  GomoUt :  some  affluent  of  the  Indus,  which  in  later 
times  lent  its  name  to  the  Gomati,  or  Gumti,  whieh  flows  through  Oudh  and 
falls  into  the  Ganges. 

2  CAarioieera :  furtberen  of  eterual  Law.     See  TLl.  ^^.  1*3^ 


160  THE  H7MNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

4  Great  Varuna  and  Mitra,  Gods,  Asuras  and  imperial  Lords, 
True  to  Eternal  Law  proclaim  the  high  decree. 

5  The  offspring  of  a  lofty  Power,  Daksha's  Two  Sons   exceeding 

strong, 
Who,  Lords  of  flowing  rain,  dwell  in  the  place  of  food. 

6  Ye  wIjo  have  gathered  up  your  gifts,  celestial  and  terrestrial 

food, 
Let  your  rain  come  to  us  fraught  with  the  mist  of  heaven. 

7  The  Twain,   who  from  the  lofty  sky  seem  to  look  down  on 

herds  below. 
Holy,  imperial  Lords,  are  set  to  be  revered. 

8  They,   true  to  Law,  exceeding  strong,  have  sat  them  down 

for  sovran  rule : 
Princes  whose  laws  stand  fast,  they  have  obtained  their  sway, 

9  Pathfinders  even  better  than  the  eye,  with  unobstructed  sight, 
Even  when  they  close  their  lids,  observant,  they  perceive. 

10  So  may  the  Goddess  Aditi,  may  the  Nasatyas  guard  us  well, 
The  Maruts  guard  us  well,  endowed  with  mighty  strength. 

11  Do  ye,  0  Bounteous  Gods,  protect  our  dwelling-place  by  day 

and  night : 
With  you  for  our  defenders  may  we  go  unharmed. 

12  May  we,  unharmed,   serve  bountiful  Vishiiu,   the  God   who 

slayeth  none : 
Self-moving  Sindhu  hear  and  be  the  first  to  mark. 

13  This  sure  protection  we  elect,  desirable  and  reaching  far. 
Which  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  afford. 

14  And  may  the  Sindhu  of  the  floods,  the  Maruts,  and  the  Asvin 

Pair, 
Boon  Indra,  and  boon  Vishnu  have  one  mind  with  us. 

15  Because  these  warring  Heroes  stay  the  enmity  of  every  foe, 
As  the  fierce  water-flood  repels  the  furious  ones. 

1 6  Here  this  one  God,  the  Lord  of  men,  looks  forth  exceeding  far 

and  wide : 
And  we,  for  your  advantage,  keep  his  holy  laws. 

17  We  keep  the  old  accustomed  laws,  the  statutes  of  supremacy. 
The  long-known  laws  of  Mitra  and  of  Varuna. 


5  Daksha's  Two  Sons :  or  sons  of  power  or  energy,  according  to  Sftyana. 
I^aksLa.  Hs a  cre&the  pov/evj  is  frequently  associated  with  Aditi.    Place' rf 
ybod .■  heaven  from  which,  the  food-producing  vam  cornea. 

12  Sit/dku  :  the  Indus.     According  to  SfiLyskAa,  WaWu  \?\va  <:a.\v»R&  ^«i&i^ 
9  £ow  to  his  worshippers. 


MTMIfU.}  MB  RtOVSDA.  lU 

18  Ue  who  hath  measured  with  his  ray  the  boundaries  of  heaven 

and  earth. 
And  with  his  majesty  hath  filled  the  two  worlds  full, 

19  S4rya  hath  spread  his  light  aloft  up  to  the  region  of  the  sky, 
Like  Agni  all  aflame  when  gifts  are  offered  him. 

20  With  him  who  sits  afar  the  word  is  lord  of  food  that  comes 

from  kine, 
Ck>ntroller  of  the  gift  of  unempoisoned  food. 

21  So  unto  Sarya,  Heaven,  and  Earth  at  morning  and  at  eve  1 

speak. 
Bringing  enjoyments  ever  rise  thou  up  for  us. 

22  From  Ukshany&yana  a  bay,  from  Harayana  a  white  steed. 
And  from  SusMman  we  obtained  a  harnessed  car. 

23  These  two  shall  bring  me  further  gain  of  troops  of  tawny- 

coloured  steeds, 
The  carriers  shall  they  be  of  active  men  of  war. 

24  And  the  two  sages  have  I  gained  who  hold  the  reins  and  bear 

the  whip, 
And  the  two  great  strong  coursers,  with  my  newest  song. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Asvms. 

I   CALL  your  chariot  to  receive  united  praise  mid  princely 

men. 
Strong  Gods  who  pour    down  wealth,   of  never  vanquished 

might) 

2  Ye  to  VarosushUman  come,  Nslsatyas,  for  this  glorious  rite. 
With  your  protecting  aid,  Strong  Gods,  who  pour  down  wealth. 

20  Yanina  has  only  to  command  and  men  have  milk  and  wholesome  food. 
SAyana  explains  differeutly  :  '  Raise  your  voice  in  the  spacious  hall  of  sacrifice 
to  him  who  is  lord  over  food  derived  from  cattle.' — Wilson. 

21  Tliou :  SQrya,  that  is,  according  to  SAya.ia,  Mitra  and  Varuna  in  Siirya's 
shape. 

22  Swhdifum :  here  without  VarOy  the  prefix  or  interjection  or  whatever  it 
may  be.    See  VIII.  23.  28. 

23  These  two  :  horses. 

24  Two  sages  :  vtprd :  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  According  to  Sftyana  th« 
word  is  an  epithet  of  '  coursers ' :  *  sagacious.' — Wilson.  Ludwig  thinks  that 
the  grooms  (probably  enslaved  enemies)  are  ironically  called  sages,  or  as  he 
translates,  Brfthmans.  Dr.  Muir  translates  the  stanza  differently  :  '  I  have 
celebrated  at  the  same  time  with  a  new  hymn,  these  two  sages  and  mighty 
[princes],  strong,  swift,  and  carrying  whips.'  But  this  rendering  has  little  to 
recommend  it.  

1  Princely  men :  the  S4ris  or  institutors  of  the  sacrifice. 

2  Varosfishdman  :  see  YIII.  23.  28.  Who  pour  down  wealth :  vrisKanvat^  ; 
•ee  IV.  50.  10^  note, 

11 


Tag  ETMHS  or  [BOOK  VHL 

\^ 

3  So  with  oblations  W0  inyoke  yo«i,  fich  in  ampl9  wealth,  to-4a7« 
When  night  hath  passed,  0  ye  who  send  us  plenteous  food. 

4  O  Asvins,  Heroes,  let  your  car,  famed,  best  to  travel,  come  to  us, 
And,  for  his  glory,  mark  your  zealous  seryant's  lauds. 

5  Asvins,  who  send  us  precious  gifts,  eren  when  offended,  think 

of  him : 
For  ye,  0  Rudras,  lead  us  safe  beyond  our  foes* 

6  For,  Wonder-Workers,  with  fleet  steeds  ye  fly   completely 

round  this  All, 
Stirring  our  thoughts,  ye  Lords  of  splendour,  honey-hued. 

7  With  all-sustaining  c^ulence,  Asvins,  ooine  hitberward  to  us, 
Ye  rich  and  noble  Heroes,  ne'er  to  be  overthrown. 

8  To  welcome  this  mine  offering,  0  ye  Indralike  NlUuityas,  oome 
As  Gods  of  best  accord  this  day  with  other  €k)ds. 

9  For  we,  like  Yyasva,  lifting  up  our  voice  like  oxen,  call  on  you  : 
With  all  your  loving  kindness,  Sages,  come  to  us. 

10  0  Bishi,  laud  the  Asvins  well.     Will  they  not  listen  to  thy  cal}  t 
Will  they  not  bum  the  Panis  who  are  nearer  them  t 

110  Heroes,  listen  to  the  son  of  Yyafva,  and  regard  me  here, 
Yaruna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  of  one  accord. 

12  Gods  whom  we  yearn  for,  of  your  gifts,  of  what  ye  bring   to 

us,  bestow 
By  princes'  bands  on  me,  ye  Mighty,  day  by  day. 

1 3  Him  whom  your  sacrifices  clothe,  even  as  a  woman  with  her  robe, 
The  Asvins  help  to  glory  honouring  him  well. 

14  Whoso  regards  your  care  of  men  as  succour  widest  in  its  reach. 
About  his  dwelling  go,  ye  Asvins,  loving  us. 

15  Come  to  us  ye  who  pour  down  wealth,   oome  to   the   home 

which  men  must  guard  : 
Like  shafts,  ye  are  made  meet  for  sacrifice  by  song. 

16  Most  fetching  of  all  calls,  the  laud,  as  envoy,   Heroes,    called 

to  you : 
Be  it  your  own,  0  Asvin  Pair. 

17  Be  ye  in  yonder  sea  of  heaven,  or  joying  ii^  the  home  of  food. 
Listen  to  me,  Immortal  Ones. 


5  Rudrcu :  bright  Gods. 

6  Soney-hued :  madhuvamd :  '  of  fascinating  complexion.'—  Wilsoii. 

15  Like  shafU :  as  arrows  are  sharpened  for  their  work,  so  the  Asyina   are 
prepared  for  the  sacrifice  by  the  Rishi's  hymn.    The  wprd  viihwiriSM,  ex- 
pMwud  bj^  SAyai^  M  two  arrows,  is  difficult,  and  other  readings  and  explana- 
i/oof  n»v9  be^n  guggegted. 


jmr/f  tr.]  nw  mo  vjsda,  la 


li  Tb0  river  with  his  lucid  flow  attracU  jou*  moro  than  all  the 
BtreamSy — 
Even  SiocLhu  with  his  path  of  gold. 

19  0  Ajsvins,  with  that  glorious  fame  oome  hither,   through  our 
briUiMit  song) 
CoBOB  ye  whose  ways  are  marked  with  light. 

80  Harness  the  steeds  who  draw  the  car,  0  Vasii,  hring  the  well- 
fed  pair« 
0  V&yu,  drink  thou  of  our  meath :  oome  unto^  our  drink- 
offbrings. 

21   Wonderful  V&yu,  Lord  of  Right,  thou  who  art  Tvashtur's  son- 
in-law. 
Thy  saving  succour  we  elect. 

tS  To  Tvashtar^s  son-in-law  we  pray  for  wealth  whereof  he  hath 
control : 
For  glory  we  seek  Ykju^  men  with  juice  effused. 

23  From  heaven,  auspicioujB  Y&yu,  come  ;  drive  hither   with  thy 

noble  steeds : 
Come  on  thy  mighty  car  with  wide-extending  seat. 

24  We  call  thee  to  the  homes  of  men,  thee  wealthiest  in  noble 

food, 
And  liberal  as  a  press-stone  with  a  home's  bkck. 

25  So,  glad  and  joyful  in  thine  heart,  do  thou,  Qod,  V&yu,  first 

of  all 
Vouchsafe  us  water,  strength,  imd  tiiought. 

HYMN  XXVII.  VifTedevM. 

Cfiipp  FHest  is  Agni  at  the  laud,  as  stones  an4  grass  at  saori- 

Scec 
With  song  I  seek  the  Maruts,  Brahma^aspati,  Qods  for  help 

iQUch  to  be  desired. 


-a:^ 


18  WUh  hU  lucid  fow:  §vekqf^vart:  taken  by  SftjasAas  theaaiiieof  ariver. 

2l  Tv<ukiar*8  ton-in-taw :  the  Commentatoul  ^vetio  Miis^torjesroianation. 
6aMLSy1i,  Trtohtar**  daiigfaier,  WAs  the  wife  of  Viyai^rSh,  who  canfaoi  m  i^mtti- 
tsd  witii  YSytt.'  860  Hmsbraadt,  Vwditehe  MptkoUtgU,  I.  p.  S21. 

24  The  seocmd  line  is  difficult.  The  pr««l>-gtene  whibh  prediieei  tSe  Soma 
iiiiee  which  makes  tlie  Qods  bountiful  is  regarded  as  a  type  el  liberality  ; 
it  may  be  iaUled  tf fw^itAfAaiii,  litisrally,  hcnne-baeked,  because  i^  bsiri  its 
load  of  Soma  ati&s  like  a  horse.  *  Sharp-backed^  '  with  sharp  ri4gi|B^  as 
suggested  by  t*isch^,  gi?ss  a  better  meaning. 

1  Chief  FHett:  aoeording  to  Sftyana,  wttr6hUa^  here  ii  it^kiA  hi  iU  ^rittarr 
sense  ci  <plaeed  in  front,'  that  ia,  set  by  the  prieAs  bk  thS  ^UktmOf^lS'^ 
BMHisra lUtBt sr  fire-receptacle.    TkeUund:  «iHXd:Sk&d^  rSUAaSii^^^ 
toDnating  of  the  r^eiUUon  of  certain  eulogisUc  TST«ea. 


lei  TBS  HTMNS  OP  [BOOK  Till. 

2  I  sing  to  cattle  and  to  Earth,  to  trees,  to  Dawns,  to  Night,  to 

plants. 
0  all  ye  Vasus,  ye  possessors  of  all  wealth,  be  ye  the  further- 
ers  of  our  thoughts. 

3  Forth  go.  with  Agni,  to  the  Gods  our  sacrifice  of  ancient  use. 
To  the  Adityas,  Varuna  whose  Law  stands  fast,  and  the  all- 
lightening  Marut  troop. 

4  Lords  of  all  wealth,   may  they  be  strengtheners  of  man,  de- 

stroyers of  his  enemies. 
Lords  of  all  wealth,  do  ye,  with  guards  which  none  may  harm, 
preserve  our  dwelling  free  from  foes. 

5  Come  to  us  with  one  mind  to-day,  come  to  us  all  with  one 

accord, 
Maruts  with  holy  song,  and,  Goddess  Aditi,  Mighty  One,  to  our 
house  and  home. 

6  Send  us  delightful  things,  ye  Maruts,  on  your  steeds :  come 

ye,  0  Mitra,  to  our  gifts. 
Let  Indra,  Varuna,  and  the  Adityas  sit,  swift  Heroes,  on  our 
sacred  grass. 

7  We  who  have  trimmed  the  grass  for  you,  and  set  the  banquet 

in  array. 
And  pressed  the  Soma,  call  you,  Yaruna,  like  men,  with  sacri- 
ficial fires  aflame. 

8  0  Maruts,  Vishnu,  Asvins,  Piishan,  haste  away  with  minds 

turned  hitherward  to  me. 
Let  the  Strong  Indra,  famed  as  Vritra's  slayer,  come  first  with 
the  winners  of  the  spoil. 

9  Ye  Guileless  Gods,  bestow  on  us  a  refuge  strong  on  every  side, 
A  sure  protection,  Vasus,  unassailable  from  near  at  hand  or 

from  afar. 

10  Kinship  have  I  with  you,  and  close  alliance,  0  ye  Gods,  de- 

stroyers of  our  foes. 
Call  us  to  our  prosperity  of  former  days,  and  soon  to  new  felicity. 

11  For  now  have  I  sent  forth  to  you,  that  I  may  win  a  fair  reward, 
Lords  of  all  wealth,  with  homage,  this  my  song  of  praise  like 

a  milch-cow  that  faileth  not. 


2  / ting  to:  or  I  glorify,  in  order  that  I  may  win  or  propitiate  them. 
■    6  Com€  ye,  0  Miira :  Yaruna  and  Aiyaman  being  understood. 
7  Like  men :  manuehvdt :  or  after  the  manner  of  Manus. 

.11  Ziiee  a  nUUk-eow  thatfkUeth  not :  the  meaning  of  dnydm  here  is  aome^ 

.whAt  uncertain.    SAya^a  ezplains  it  by  adriehtapiirviim,  unprecedented,  and 

^^nueauuw  bjr  *M  airetkm  tout  never  dries  up.*    I  have  adopted  Ludwig'n 


ETMN  «7.1  TBS  niQVSDA.  IM 

1%  Excellent  Savitar  hath  mounted  up  on  high  for  you,  je  sure 
and  careful  Guides. 
Bipeds  and  quadrupeds,  with  several  hopes  and  aims,  and 
birds  have  settled  to  their  tasks. 

IS  Singing  their  praise  with  Grodlike  thought  let  us  inyoke  each 
God  for  grace, 
Each  God  to  bring  you  help,  each  God  to  strengthen  you. 

14  For  of  one  spirit  are  the  Gods  with  mortal  man,  coHsharers  all 

of  gracious  gifts. 
May  they  increase  our  strength  hereafter  and  to-day,  provid- 
ing ease  and  ample  room. 

15  1  laud  you,  0  ye  Guileless  Gods,  here  where  we  meet  to  render 

praise. 
None,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  harms  the  mortal  man  who  honours 
and  obeys  your  laws. 

16  He  makes  his  house  endure,  he  gathers  plenteous  food  who 

pays  obedience  to  your  will. 
Bom  in  his  sons  anew  he  spreads  as  Law  commands,  and  pros- 
pers every  way  unharmed. 

17  E'en  without  war  he  gathers  wealth,  and  goes  his  way  on 

pleasant  paths, 
Whom  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman  protect,  sharing  the  gift, 
of  one  accord. 

Id  E'en  on  the  plain  for  him  ye  make  a  sloping  path,  an  easy 
way  where  road  is  none  : 
And  far  away  from  him  the  ineffectual  shaft  must  vanish, 
shot  at  him  in  vain. 

19  If  ye  appoint  the  rite  to-day,  kind  Rulers,  when  the  Sun  as- 
.     cends, 

Lords  of  all  wealth,  at  sunset  or  at  waking-time,  or  be  it  at 
the  noon  of  day,  ' 

20  Or,  Asuras,  when  ye  have  sheltered  the  worshipper  who  goes 

to  sacrifice,  at  eve. 
May  we,  0  Vasus,  ye  possessors  of  all  wealth,  come  then  into 
the  midst  of  you. 

21  If  ye  to-day  at  sunrise,  or  at  noon,  or  in  the  gloom  of  eve. 
Lords  of  all  riches,  give  fair  treasure  to  the  man,  the  wise 

man  who  hath  sacrificed, 

22  Then  we,  imperial  Rulers,  claim  of  you  this  boon,  your  wide 

protection,  as  a  son. 

May  we,  Adityas,  offering  holy  gifts,  o\>\;8ATi  \)aaX,  ^qVvfiti'^^SMSw 
bring  u8  greater  blm. 


IH  *   TMS  STMirS  OF  [SOCJt  Yltl 

HYMN  XXVIir.  Vl»i^yvt. 

Thb  Thirty  Gods  and  Three  besidesi  whose  seat  hath  be^ik  the 

sacred  grass, 
From  time  of  old  have  found  and  gained. 

2  Varuria,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Agnis,  with  Consorts^  sending  boons, 
To  whom  our  Vasha^  !  is  addressed : 

S  These  are  our  guardians  in  the  west^  and  northward  here,  and 
in  the  south, 
And  on  the  east,  with  all  the  tribe. 

4  Even  as  the  Gods  desire  so  verily  shall  it  be.  None  minisheth 

this  power  of  theirs, 
No  demon,  and  no  mortal  man. 

5  The  Seven  carry  seven  spears ;  seven  are  the  splendours  they 

possess, 
And  seven  the  glories  they  assume. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Y\»f^eym. 

Oiris  is  a  ytntl^  brown,  active,  manifold :  he  decks  the  golden 
one  with  ornament. 

3  Anotfaer,^  InmisMw,  oocuptes  the  place  of  sacrifioe^  ^*%%  among 

the  Gods. 

3  One  blandishes  in  his  hand  an  iron  knife,   firm,  in  his  seat 

amid  the  Deities. 

4  Another  holds  the  thunderbolt,  wherewith  he  slays  the  Y^itras^ 

resting  in  his  band. 


1  Tkirly  Ood»  and  Three :  see  I.  139.  11. 

2  Jt^ftm :  Agiii  in  hia  vartom  toma  mad  under  different  a«in«6.  With  (7oi»> 
forte ;  wifch  the  Qnfts,  Oelostial  Dames,  wives  of  the  Qods.  Va$htU/:  the  ex- 
iUmatioii  made  whea  the  oblation  k  offiiBred. 

4  iVb  demon  and  no  mortal  man :  or  no  mortal  who  prMonta  no  offering* 
to  the  Qods. 

5  l%e  Seven;  ^6  Maruttf,  seven,  or  seven  times  nine,  or  seven  tames  sevae 
in  number.  Sftyapa  mentions  the  legend  of  their  Mrtb,  whiob  wUl  be  found 
in  the  Mdmdipxna,  Bftok  L,  Cantos  4&,  47.  The  meaning  is  merely  that  the 
Haruts  oarry  lances,  that  is,  their  lightnings,  and  are  spleadidlj  adorned. 
See  I*  87*    The  connexion  of  this  stansa  with  the  preceding  is  not  obvious. 

1  One  :  Soma. '  The  yeUow  Soma  juiee  ia  itself  an  emament  to  the  gold  on 
the  finger  (Atharvaveda,  XVIII.  3.  18,  hira^yapiivfi^)  of  the  priest.'— Lud wig. 
According  to  others,  Soma  as  the  Bloon  is  intended,  who  '  decorates  (himself) 
With  gel&n  craamento.'-'WilBoii. 

^  jinather,  luminous :  Agni. 

^  Ojte  iramdi$he$  :  TvMhtar^  as  thft  ArU&Mie  cd  ^«  CMmu 

4  Mnoe^er  >|^<^  the  (Aun4crbolt :  Indra. 


5  Anolher  bean  &  pointed  weapon :  bright  is  he,  and  strong, 

with  healing  medicines. 

6  Another,  thieMike,  watches  well  the  ways,   and  knows  the 

places  where  the  treasures  lie. 

7  Another  with  his  mighty  stride  hath  made  his   three  steps 

thither  where  tibe  Gk)ds  rejoice. 

8  Two  with  one  Dame  ride  on  with  wingM  steeds^  and  journey 

forth  like  travellers  on  their  way. 

9  Two,  highest)  in  the  heavens  have  set  their  seat,   worshipped 

with  holy  oil.  Imperial  Kings. 

10  Some,  singing  lauds,  conceived  the  S&mahymn,   great   hymn 
^Thereby  they  caused  the  San  to  shine. 

HYMN  XXX.  YiflTedeTM. 

Not  one  of  you,  ye  Gods,  is  small,  none  of  you  is  a  feeble 

child : 
All  of  you,  verily,  are  great. 

:^  Thus  be  ye  lauded,  ye  destroyers  of  the  foe^   ye   Three-and- 
Thirty  Deities, 
The  Grods  of  man,  the  Holy  Ones. 

3  As  such  defend  and  suecoor  us,  with  benedictions  speak  to  us  : 
Lead  us  not  from  our  fathers'  and  from  Manu's  path  into  the 

distance  far  away. 

4  Ye  Deities  who  stay  with  us,  and  all  ye  Gods  of  all  mankind, 
Give  us  your  wide  protection,  give  shelter  for  cattle  and  for 

steed 

HYMN  XXXI.  Various  Deitie.. 

That  Brahman  pleases  Indra  well,  who  worships,  sacrifices,  pours 
Libation,  and  prepares  the  meal. 

i  Another  :  Rudra.  See  I.  43.  4. 
e  Another  :  POsban.     See  I.  42. 

7  Another  vilh  hU  migktaf.  etride :  Vishnu.  Thither :  to  his  station  in  the 
lieigbt  of  kearea. 

8  Two  with  one  Dame :  the  AsvhM  with  Sfiry&v  See  I.  119.  17. 

9  Two,  higher :  Mitra  and  Varunaw 

10  Some,  $inging  laude:  the  Angirases,  or,  according  to  Sftyana,  the  Atrfs. 

2  Three-etnd-Thirty  Ddties :  see  I.  139.  11.  The  Cfods  of  man:  or,  God 
whom  Mann  wonfaipped,  which  interpretation  is  supported  by  stanza  3. 

'    4  Who  stay  with  ut :  Or  are  present  at  this  saerifice. 

1  Brahman  :  here  any  jnours  worshipper,  not  one  of  the  regular  professional 
priests,  but  the  iustitutor  of  sacrifice  who  during  the  ceremony  may  be  re- 
p^fded  as  their  chief.  Frepare*  the  wual:  pofupurod^fidikampaehaH:  SAyana; 
'  cooks  the  cake  wbSeh  ia  an  essential  pMrt.ei  tk«  aautt^  tMcV&M,  %W 


16«  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vltt. 

2  Sakra  protects  from  woe  the  man  who  givee  him  sacrificial 

cake 
And  oflfers  Soma  blent  with  milk. 

3  His  chariot  shall  be  glorious,  sped  by  €k)ds,  and  mighty  shall 

he  be, 
Subduing  all  hostilities. 

4  Each  day  that  passes,  in  his  house  flows  his  libation,  rich  in 

milk, 
Exhaustless,  bringing  progeny. 

5  0  Gods,  with  constant  draught  of  milk,  husband  and  wife 

with  one  accord 
Press  out  and  wash  the  Soma  juice. 

6  They  gain  sufficient  food :  they  come  united  to  the  sacred  grass, 
And  never  do  they  fail  in  strength. 

7  Never  do  they  deny  or  seek  to  hide  the  favour  of  the  Crods  : 
They  win  high  glory  for  themselves. 

8  With  sons  and  daughters  by  their  side  they  reach  their  full 

extent  of  life, 
Both  decked  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

9  Serving  the  Immortal  One  with  gifts  of  sacrificial  meal  and 

wealth. 
They  satisfy  the  claims  of  love  and  pay  due  honour  to  the  Gods. 

10  We  claim  protection  from  the  Hills,  we  claim  protection  of 

the  Floods, 
Of  him  who  stands  by  Vishpu's  side. 

1 1  May  Pushan  come,  and  Bhaga,  Lord  of  wealth,  All-bounteous, 

for  our  weal : 
Broad  be  the  path  that  leads  to  bliss  : 

1 2  Aramati,  and,  free  from  foes,  Visva  with  spirit  of  a  Grod, 
And  the  Adityas'  peerless  might. 

1 3  Seeing  that  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Varuna  are  guarding  us, 
The  paths  of  Law  are  fair  to  tread. 

■      -        —  ■  -■■■  —      ■  —  -- « 

9  The  Immortal  One :  amritdya  :  Agni,  or  the  Immortal  (host),  that  is,  the 
Gkxis  in  general.  According  to  S&y;ina,  *  that  they  may  obtain  immortality 
(in  their  sons  and  descendants).'  They  aatufy :  this  plULa  is  considered  by 
some,  on  metrical  and  other  grounds,  to  be  an  interpolation.  According  to 
Pischel  {VedUehe  Studien,  I.  p.  178),  the  half -line  refers  to  the  beating  and 
preparation  of  the  rough  stalks  of  the  Soma  plant. 

10  0/  him  who  itands  by  Vishnu*  8  tide :  of  Vishnu  and  his  associate  Indra. 
— Ludwig. 

12  Aramati:  the  Genius  of    Devotion.     Visva:   Dyaus!^ — Ludwig.    *AH 
i/ie  worabippera/  according  to  S&ya^a« 


mrUN  St.]  TBB  RIOVBDA.  let 

14  I  glorify  with  song,   for  wealth,  Agni   the   God,   the    first 

of  you. 
We  honour  as  a  well-loved   Friend   the  God  who  proepereth 
our  fields. 

15  As  in  all  frays  the   hero,  so  swift  moves  his  car  whom  Gods 

attend. 
The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

16  Ne'er  are  ye  injured,  worshipper,  presser  of  juice,  or  pious  man. 
The  man  who,  sacrificing,   strives  to  win  the  heart  of  Deities 

will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

17  None  in  his  action  equals  him,   none  holds  him  far  or  keeps 

him  off. 
'Tii^  mail  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win   the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

18  Such   strength  of  heroes   shall  be  his,    such  mastery  of  fleet- 

foot  steeds. 
The  man  who,  sacrificing,  strives  to  win   the  heart  of  Deities 
will  conquer  those  who  worship  not. 

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra. 

Eanvas,  tell   forth  with   song  the   deeds  of   Indra,   the  Im- 
petuous, 
Wrought  in  the  Soma's  wild  delight. 

2  Strong  God,  he  slew  Anarsani,  Sribinda,  Pipru,  and  the  fiend 
Ahisuva,  and  loosed  the  floods. 

3  Thou  broughtest  down  the  dwelling-place,  the  height  of  lofty 

Arbuda. 
That  exploit,  Indra,  must  be  famed. 

4  Bold,  to  your  famous  Soma  I  call  the  fair-visored  God  for  aid, 
Down  like  a  torrent  from  the  hill. 

5  Rejoicing  in  the  Soma-draughts,  Hero,  burst  open,  like  a  fort, 
The  stall  of  horses  and  of  kine. 

6  If  my  libation  gladdens,  if  thou  takest  pleasure  in  my  laud, 
Come  with  thy  Godhead  from  afar. 

14  Wlw  proapereth  our  fields:  kshetrctsSdhasam :  S4yana  explains  kaketra 
(ibe  moderD  Hiudt  khet,  a  field),  as  sacrifice  :  '  the  bouutiful  perfecter  of  th« 
sacrifice.* — Wilson. 

1  The  Impetuous :  rijUhinaK :  *  the  drinker  of  the  stale  Soma,* —WiIboti. 

2  The  fiend  :  the  DAsa,  or  savage.  All  the  uames  are  names  of  demons  of 
drought,  of  whom  Pipru  has  been  mentioned  frequently  in  preceding  Books. 

3  Jrbuda:  see  I.  51.  6  ;  II.  11.  20;  14.  4. 

4  Like  a  torrent  from  the  hill :  *afl(a  traveller  iu\okea^  \,\Dkft  "vt^^wt'lt^TSW^ 
cloud.  * —  WJJaou, 


170  TBE  Brum  OF  [BOOB  Yin. 

7  O  Indra,  TiOver  of  the  Scmg,  the  singeim  of  tby  pimiM  Bte  we : 
O  Soma-drinker,  quicken  us. 

8  And,  taking  thy  delight  with  us,  bring  us  still  undiminshed 

food: 
Great  is  thy  wealth,  O  Maghavan. 

9  Make  thou  us   rich  in  herds  of  kine»  in  steeds,  in  gold :  let 

us  exert 
Our  strength  in  sacrificial  gifts. 

10  Let  us  call  him  to  aid  whose  hands  stretch  far,  to  whom  high 

laud  is  due, 
Who  worketh  well  to  succour  us! 

1 1  He,  Satakratu,  eren  in  fight  acts  as  a  Vritra-stayer  still : 
He  gives  his  worshippers  much  wealth. 

12  May  he,  this  Sakra,   strengthen  us,  Boon  Qod  who  satisfies 

our  needs, 
Indra,  with  all  his  saving  helps. 

13  To  him»  the  mighty  stream   of  wealth,   the   Soma-pres^er^s 

rescuing  Friend, 
To  Indra  sing  your  song  of  praise ; 

14  Who  bringeth  what  is  great  and  firm,  who  winneth  gloxy  in 

his  wars, 
Lord  of  vast  wealth  through  power  and  might. 

15  There  liveth  none  to  check  or  stay  his  energies  and  gracious 

deeds : 
None  who  can  say.  He  giveth  not. 

16  No  debt  is  due  by  Brahmans  now,  by  aotiye  men  who  press 

the  juice : 
Well  hath  each  Soma-draught  been  paid. 

17  Sing  ye  to  him  who  must  be  praised,  say  lauds  to  him  who 

must  be  praised, 
Bring  prayer  to  him  who  must  be  praised. 

18  May  he,  unchecked,  strong,  meet  for  praise,  bring  hundreds, 

thousands  forth  to  light, 
Indra  who  aids  the  worshipper. 

19  Go   with  thy  Godlike  nature  forth,  go  where  the  folk  are 

calling  thee : 
Drink,  Indra,  of  the  drops  we  pour. 

11  Batakratu:  Lord  off  a  Hundred  Powers. 

12  Sakra:  the  Migfaty. 

16  The  Brahmans  or  worshippej-s  hat^e.  by  ofFering  libaetiont,  di8chat)sed 
their  obligations  to  the  Qods,  and  the  Gkids  have  repaid  thc^,  or  wiU  soon 
*ep»jr  them  tor  their  oSenngn. 
18  JTundrecU,  thousand* :  countless  treaaurea  tot  u%Va  «cl\o7« 


MTMItU.}  TBMMQTSDA.  171 

20  Drink  ndUiy  dtMighUi  whieh  are  Uune  own,  thia  too  which 

was  with  Tugrya  once, 
Thia  is  lit  Indray  that  is  thine. 

21  Pass  him  who  pours  libations  out  m  angty  mood  or  after  sin  : 
Here  drink  the  juiee  we  ofkit  thee. 

22  Over  the  three  great  distances,  past  the  five  Peoples  g^  thj  waj, 
O  Indra,  no^ioing  oar  voice. 

23  Send  forth  thy  ray  like  Sdrya :  let  mj  songs  attract  thee 

hithenmrd 
Like  w»t€ffs  galhm&g  to  the  Tale. 

24  Now  to  the  Hero  fair  of  cheek,  Adhvaiyu,  ponr  the  Soma  forth  : 
Bring  of  the  juice  that  he  may  drink  : 

25  Who  cleft  the  water-cloud  in  twain,  loosed  rivers  for  their 

downvrard  flow, 
And  set  the  ripe  milk  in  the  kine. 

26  He,  meet  for  praise,  slew  Vritra,  slew  Ahfsuva,  Ornav&bha's  son, 
And  pierced  through  Arbuda  with  frost. 

iS7  To  him  your  matchless  Mighty  One,  unconquerable  Conqueror, 
Sing  forth,  the  prayo:  which  Gods  have  given : 

28  Indra,  who  in  the  wild  delight  of  Soma  juice  considers  '  e 
All  holy  Laws  among  the  Gods. 

29  Hither  let  these  thy  Bays  who  share  tiiy  banquet,  Steeds  with 

golden  mane% 
Convey  thee  to  the  feast  prepared. 

80  Hither,  O  thou  whom  many  laud,  the  Bays  whom  Prijamedha 
praised 
Shall  bring  thee  to  the  Soma^raugbt. 

HYMN  XXXIIL  Indra. 

Ws  compass  thee  like  waters,  we  whose  grass  is  trimmed  and 

Soma  pressed. 
Here   where  the  filter  pours  its  stream,  thy  worshippers  round 

thee,  0  Vritra-slayer,  sit. 


20  Whieh  wot  with  Tugrya :  like  that  which  thy  favourite  Bhajyu  (see  Yol. 
I.,  Index)  formerly  offered  thee. 

S2  The  three  great  distances:  the  space  in  front  of  thee,  behind  thee,  and 
at  thy  side.  Noticing  our  voice :  hearing  and  attending  to  our  invocations. 
Come  to  us  who  are  tbj  true  worshippers,  and  pass  by  others  who  worship 
thee  in  the  hope  of  being  avenged  upon  their  enemies  or  of  obtaining  pardon 
for  some  sin. 

26  Ui'navdbha*s  §on :  Aurnav&bha:  a  demon  of  droug;ht.  Sea  II.  11.  18. 
With  frost :  making  the  piercing  ooid  of  winter  his  weapon. 

.    I  The  fiU^r;  or  wooUeu  »Urunw  througjb  wluchVbA  ^otoAiVxvsAS&x>)Xk\A 
purl/f  it. 


171  TBB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VtIL 

2  Men,  Yasu !  by  the  Soma,  with  lauds  call  thee  to  the  fore- 

most place : 
When  comest  thou  athirst  unto  the  juice  as  home,  0  Indra, 
like  a  bellowing  bull  ? 

3  Boldly,  Bold  Hero,  bring  us  spoil  in  thousands  for  the  Kanvas' 

sake: 
O  active  Maghavan,  with   eager  prayer  we  crave   the  yellow- 
hued  with  store  of  kine. 

4  MedbyS.tithi,  to  Indra  sing,  drink  of  the  juice  to  make  thee  glad. 
Close-knit  to   Ids  Bay  Steeds,   bolt-armed,  beside  the  juice  is 

he :  his  chariot  is  of  gold. 

5  He  who  is  praised  as  stropg  of  hand  both  right  and  left^  most 

wise  and  bold : 
Indra  who,  rich  in  hundreds,  gathers  thousands  up,  honoured 
as  breaker-down  of  forts. 

6  The  bold  of  heart  whom  none  provokes,  who  stands  in  bearded 

confidence ;  >.  ; 

Much-lauded,  very  glorious,  overthrowing  foes,  stfcng  Helper, 
like  a  bull  with  might.  ' 

7  Who  knows  what  vital  power  he   wins,  drinking  besfde  the 

>  flowing  juice  ? 
This  is  the  fair-cheeked   God   who,   joying  in   the   draughty 
breaks  down  the  castles  in  his  strength. 

8  As  a  wild  elephant  rushes  on,  this  way  and  that  way,  mad 

with  heat, 
None  may  compel  thee,  yet  come  hither  to  the  draught :  thoi^ 
movest  mighty  in  thy  power. 

9  When  he,  the  Mighty,_ne'er  overthrown,  stedfast,  made  ready 

for  the  fight. 
When  Indra  Maghavan  lists  to  his  praiser^s  call,  he  will  not 
stand  aloof,  but  come. 
10  Yea,  verily,  thou  art  a  Bull,  with  a  bull's  rush,  whom  none 
may  stay : 


2  As  home:  as  familiar  to  thee  as  thine  owd  home. 

3  The  yellow-hued :  there  is  no  substantive,  but  gold  must  be  intended. 

6  In  bearded  confidence :  a  conjectural  paraphrase.  Smdfi'uthu  (m  (his) 
beard)  is  said  by  Sftyana  to  mean  here  *  m  combats,'  that  is,  perhaps,  as  Ludwig 
suggests,  among  ranks  of  men  bristling  with  spears.  But  this  can  hardly  be 
the  meaning  of  the  word  which  *  is  probably  an  idiomatic  expression  for  the 
fierce  look  of  a  warrior  who  challenges  the  foe.' — Ludwig.  So,  in  the  Edda, 
Thdrr,  when  about  to  meet  a  foe,  is  said  to  have  *  raised  his  beard's  voice.' 
See  Grimm,  Teutonic  Mythology ^  I.  177  (English  TranslHtion). 

8  Mad  with  heat :  that  is,  maaty  or  as  phonetically  spelt,  must. 

2  0  Thou  art  a  Bull :  vrishd :  or  strong  and  mighty.  As  has  been  observed 
before  (VIII.  13.  31,  note),  some  of  the  \edic  ^o^^  d^li^ht  in  the  repetition 
of  tbia  word  and  ita  denvatives. 


JmnrSS.]  THE  MOVE  DA.  lit 

Thou,  Mighty  Ooe,  art  celebrated  as  a  Bull,  &imed  as  a  Bull 
both  near  and  far. 

11  Thy  reins  are  very  bulls  in  strength,  bulls'  strength  is  in  thy 

golden  whip. 
Thy  oar,  O  Maghavan,  thy  Bays  are  strong  as  bulls :  thou, 
Satakrattt,  art  a  Bull. 

12  Let  the  strong  presser  press  for  thee.     Bring  hither,  thou 

straight-rushing  Bull. 
The  mighty  makes  the  mighty  run  in  flowing  streams  for  thee 
whom  thy  Bay  Horses  bear. 

13  Come,  thou  most  potent  Indra,  come  to  drink  the  savoury 

Soma  juice. 
Maghavan,  very  wise,  will  quickly  come  to  hear  the  songs,  the 
prayer,  the  hymns  of  praise. 

14  When  thou  hast  mounted  on  thy  car  let  thy  joked  Bay  Steeds 

carry  thee 
Past  other  mens'  libations,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,   thee, 
Vritranslayer,  thee  our  Friend. 

15  O  thou  Most  Lofty  One,  accept  our  laud  as  nearest  to  thine 

heart. 
May  our  libations  be  most  sweet  to  make  thee  glad,  O  Soma- 
drinker.  Heavenly  Lord. 

16  Neither  in  thy  decree  nor  mine,  but  in  another's  he  delights, — 
The  man  who  brought  us  unto  this. 

17  Indra  himself  hath  said.  The  mind  of  woman  brooks  not  dis- 

cipline, 
Her  intellect  hath  little  weight. 

18  His  pair  of  horses,  rushing  on  in  their  wild  transport,  draw 

his  car : 
High-lifted  is  the  stallion's  yoke. 

19  Oast  down  thine  eyes  and  look  not  up.     More  closely  set  thy 

feet.     Let  none 
See  what  thy  garment  veils,  for  thou,  a  Brahman,  hast  become 
a  dame. 


11  QohUn  whip :  the  lightning,  with  which  Indra  Iftshes  the  clouds,  his 
bomeB. 

12  The  mighty  makea  the  mighty  run :  the  priest  makes  the  Soma  juice  flow. 

16  The  last  four  stanzas  of  the  hymn  are  not  very  intelligible,  nor  is  their 
eoqnexion  with  the  preceding  verses  obvious.  Stanzas  16  and  18  appear  to 
be  spoken  by  a  woman  and  17  by  a  man.  Stanza  19  is  said  to  be  addressed 
by  Indra  to  Aaanga  son  of  Play  oga  who  had  been  changed  to  «k  '^lotoasv  b^  tbft 
impreoution  of  the  Oode,  and  wii6  was  afterwaxda  TeatoT«^  V>  isAK^^cyA. 


HYMN  XXXIV.  ladrt. 

Come  hither,  Indra,  with  thy  Bays,  oozd«  thou  to   Kan^a's 

eulogy. 
Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by  day !  have 

gone  to  heaven. 

2  May  the  stone  draw  thee  as  it  spedcs^  th«  Sk>Q»BHitoi|e  with 

ringing  voice. 
Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyans,  etc* 

3  The  stones'  rim  shakes  the  Soma  here  like  a  wolf  wcMrryiAg  a 

sheep. 
Ye,  etc 

4  The  Kaifvas  call  thee  hitherward  for  succour  and  to  win  the 

spoil. 
Ye,  etc. 

5  I  set  for  thoC)  as  for  th^  Strong,  the  first  dmught  of  the  juicel 

shed. 

6  Come  with  abundant  blessings,  oome  with  perfect  care  to  suc- 

cour us. 

7  Come,  Lord  of  lofty  thought»  who  hast  iii(init0  wealth  and 

countless  aids. 

8  Adorable  mid  Gods,  the  Priest  good  to  mankind  siuill  bring 

thee  near. 

9  As  wiiigs  the  falcon,  so  thy  Bays  rushing  in  joy  shall  carry 

thee. 

10  Come  from  the  enemy  to  us,  to  Svah&  1  and  the  SomHrdftiught, 

1 1  Come  hither  with  thine  ear  inclined  to  hear,  take  pleMure  in 

our  lauds. 

12  Lord  of  weil-nourished  Horses,  oome  with  well-fed  Steeds  alik4 

in  hue. 

13  Come  hither  from  the  mountains^  come  fh>m  regions  of  the 

sea  of  air. 


The  Kishi  is  Kip&tithi  of  the  family  of  Kativa,  but  stabzlul  l6— 18  ar* 
aAcribed  in  the  Index  to  the  thousand  Vasurochishas  who  are  said  io  have 
been  a  division  of  ^e  family  of  Angiras. 

1  The  exact  meaning  of  the  second  line,  which  is  thd  burden  qI  the  first 
fifteen  stanzas,  is  obscure.  Ye  probably  means  Indra's  horses,  and  Ood  kriffiil^ 
by  day  /  (divdvcuoj  Indra  himself j  that  is,  ye,  horses,  and  thou,  Inflr^k,  hl^ve 
gone  to  heaven.  The  Scholiast  offers  two  dmerent  eiplanatiOiiB,  in  olte  a^e 
boldly  altering  two  words  of  the  text.    See  Wilson's  Tra&slatio&,  adtS< 

8  The  Pi-Ust  good  to  fAanJcind:  or,  the  Invoking  M«it,  Invokef  Or  8enj4 
^stahymhed  by  Mana,  namely  AgnL 

JO  Sv4Ad:  «o  ex0lsx]aat|9n  used  in  saien^os ',  ^^%\  ^i  ^«i]L  I 


14  Disdose  to  oa,  O  Hero,  wealth  in  thousands  both  of  kine  and 

steeds 

15  Bring  riches  hitherward  to  us  in  hundreds,  thousands,  myriads. 
Ye  by  command  of  yonder  Dyaus,  God  bright  by  day  !   have 

gone  to  hearen. 

16  The  thousand  steedn,  the  mightiest  troop,  which  we  and  Indra 

have  received  • 

From  Yasurochis  as  a  gift, 

17  The  brown  that  match  the  wind  in  speed,  and  bright  bay 

coursers  fleet  c^  foot, 
Like  Suns,  resplendent  are  they  all. 

18  Mid  the  P4r4vata's  rich  gifts,  swift  steeds  whose  wheels  run 

rapidly, 
I  seemed  to  stand  amid  a  wood. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Asvin.. 

With  Agni  and  vith  Indra,  Yishnu,  Varuna,  with  the  Adityas, 

Rudras,  Vasus,  closely  leagued ; 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sdrya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvibs, 

drink  the  Soma  juice. 

2  With  all  the  Holy  Thoughts,  all  being.  Mighty  Ones !  in  close 

alliance  with  the  Mountains,  Heaven,  and  Earth  ; 
Accordant^  of  one  mind  with  S^rya  and  with  Dawn,  O  Afiyins, 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

3  With  all  the  Deities,  three  times  eleven,  here,  in  close  alliance 

with  the  Maruts,  Bhrigus,  Floods; 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sdrya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
drink  the  Soma  juice. 

4  Accept  the  sacrifice,  attend  to  this  my   call :  come  nigh,  0  ye 

Twain  Gods,  to  all  libations  here. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

5  Accept  our  praise-song  as  a  youth  accepts  a  maid.     Come  nigh, 

O  ye  Twain  Grods,  to  all  libations  here. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sikrya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

16  VaauroehU :  vdturockishal^  is  probably  the  ablative  singular,  and  not  thf 
nominatiye  plural,  of  the  name  of  the  inatitutor  ot  the  saerifioe.  Wilson* 
following  S&yana,  translates  :  *  We,  the  thousand  Vasuroohisha*,  and  Indra 
(our  le^er),  when  we  obtain  vigorouB  herds  of  horses,—.* 

18  The  Pdrdvaia  ia  Yasurochis.  The  P^fAva^s  are  probably  the  w^PV1lTai 
•f  Ptolemy,  who  were  settled  northwards  of  Arachosia. — Ludwig. 

5  A  youth :  literally  two  youths.     '  As  youths  aitt  4ftV\^\k\A^  ^^  VXx*  ^^v^m^ 
of  maidMw.' — Wikon. 


17tf  TBJS  ffFMNS  CtP  ^         .  [ROOK  V III 

6  Accept  the  songs  we  sing,  accept  the  solemn  rite.   Come  nigh, 

O  ye  Twain  Gods,  to  all  libations  here. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
bring  us  strengthening  food. 

7  Ye  fly  as  starlings  fly  unto  the  forest  trees ;  like  buffaloes  ye 

seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with   Surysb  and  with   Dawn,   come 
thrice,  0  Asvins,  to  our  home. 

8  Ye  fly  like  swans,  like  those  who  travel  on   their   way ;  like 

buffaloes  ye  seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Sdrya  and   with  Dawn,   come 
thrice,  0  Asvins,  to  our  home. 

9  Ye  fly  to  our  oblation  like  a  pair  of  hawks ;  like  buffaloes  ye 

seek  the  Soma  we  have  shed. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with   Sarya  and   with   Dawn,   come 
thrice,  0  Asvins,  to  our  home. 

10  Coxne  hitherward  and  drink   and   satisfy   yourselves,    bestow 

upon  us  progeny  and  affluence. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  S&rya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

11  Conquer  your  foes,  protect  us,  praise  your  worshippers ;  bestow 

upon  us  progeny  and  affluence. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

12  Slay  enemies,  animate  men  whom  ye  befriend;  bestow   upon 

us  progeny  and  affluence. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  0  Asvins, 
grant  us  vigorous  strength. 

13  With  Mitra,  Varuna,  Dharms^  and  the  Maruts   in  your   com- 

pany approach  unto  your  praiser's  call. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  and  with 
the  Adityas,  Asvins  !  come. 

14  With  Vishnu  and  the  Angirases  attending  you,  and  with   the 

Maruts  come  unto  your  praiser's  call. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Siirya  and  with  Dawn,  and  with 
the  Adityas,  Asvins  !  come. 

15  With  Kibhus  and  with  Vajas,  0  ye  Mighty  Ones,  leagued  with 

the  Maruts  come  ye  to  your  praiser's  call. 
Accordant,  of  one   mind  with   Surya  and   with   Dawn,   and 
with  the  Adityas,  Asvins !  come. 

S  Ye  come  eagerly  to  the  Soma  as  thirsty  hansat  (swans,  geese,   or  flamiii' 
£'oegJ  traveuerBf  And  buboes  hasten  to  t^«  -wat^er. 
IS  ^Aanna  :  Right^  Justice,  Law,  Virtue  ox  I>utj  T^wwn&ftft., 


STMN  85.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  177 

\%  Give  spirit  to  our  prayer  and  animate  our  thoughts  ;  slay  ye 
the.  RS.kshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 
Accordant,  of  one   mind   with   Siirya  and   with   Dawn,    the 
presser's  Soma,  A§vins  !  drink. 

17  Strengthen  the  Ruling  Power,  strengthen   the   men   of  war; 

slay  ye  the  Rslkshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,  the   pres- 
ser's Soma,  Asvins !  drink. 

18  Give  strength  unto  the  milch-kine,  give  the  people   strength, 

slay  ye  the  Rakshasas  and  drive  away  disease. 
Accordant,  of  one   mind   with   SArya   and   with   Dawn,    the 
presser's  Soma,  Asvins  !  drink. 

19  As  ye  heard  Atri's  earliest  eulogy,  so   hear  Sy&visva,  Somia- 

presser,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 
Accordant,  of  one  niind  with  Surya   and    with   Dawn,    drink 
juice,  0  Asvins,  three  days  old. 

20  Further  like  running  streams  Sy&vasva's  eulogies  who  presses 

out  the  Soma,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 
Accordant,  of  one  mind  with  Surya   and    with   Dawn,    drink 
juice,  0  Asvins,  three  days  old. 

21  Seize,  as  ye  grasp  the  reins,  Syav^sva's  solemn  rites  who  pres- 

ses out  the  Soma,  ye  who  reel  in  joy. 
Accordant,   of  one  mind  with  Surya  and  with  Dawn,    drink 
juice,  O  Asvins,  three  days  old. 

22  Drive  down  your  chariot  hitherward  :  drink  ye  the  Soma's 

savoury  juice. 
Appro&rch,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  us :  I  call  you,  eager  for  your 
aid.     Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper, 

23  When  sacrifice  which  tells  our  reverence  hath  begun.  Heroes ! 

to  drink  the  gushing  juice, 
Approach,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  us :  I  call  you,  eager  for  your 
aid.     Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

24  Sate  you  with  consecrated  drink,  with  juice  effused,  ye  Deities. 
Approach,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  us :  I  call  you,  eager  for  your 

aid.     Grant  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

17  The  Ruling  Power :  hshatrdm  :  hence  Kahatriya,  a  man  of  the  princely 
or  military  order. 

13  The  people :  vlfoe :  hence  Vaisya,  a  man  of  the  mercantile  class  or  order. 
'  19  AtrTs :  as  he  was  the  progenitor  of  the  Rishi  of  the  Hymn.  See  Vol.  I., 
Index. 

21  Solemn  rites :  that  ia,  the  oblations  presented  thetesA*. 

,     J24  Comecraeed  drink:  libations   offered    with  the  Bacr\^cvai\   «xA^W£k»X}va\jL 
SvAhd !  Ave !  or  Hail !  ^ 

12 


178  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VITJ. 

HYMN   XXXVI.  Indra. 

Thou  helpest  him  whose  grass  is  trimmed,  who  sheds  the 
juice,  0  Satakratu,  drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

The  share  which  they  have  fixed  for  thee,  thoUf  Indra,  Victor 
o'er  all  hosts  and  space^  begirt  with  Maruts,  Lord  of  Heroes, 
winner  of  the  floods. 

2  Maghavan,  help  thy  worshipper :  let  him  help  thee.     0  Sata- 
kratu, drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 
The  share  which  they  have  fixed  for  thee,  etc. 

'  3  Thou  aidest  Gods  with  food,  and  that  with  might  aids  thee. 
0  Satakratu,  drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

•  4  Creator  of  the  heaven,  creator  of  the   earth,  O  Satakratu, 
drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

5  Father  of  cattle,  father  of  all  steeds  art  thou.     O  Satakratu, 

drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

6  Stone-hurler,  glorify  the  Atris'  hymn  of  praise.     0  Satakratu, 

drink  Soma  to  make  thee  glad. 

7  Hear  thou  Sy^vasva  while  he  pours  to  thee,  as  erst  thou 

heardeat  Atri  when  he  wrought  his  holy  rites. 
Indra,   thou  only  gavest  Trasadasyu  aid  in  the  fierce  fight 
with  heroes,  strengthening  his  prayers. 

HYMN  XXXVII.  Indra. 

This  prayer,  and  those  who  shed  the  juice,  in  wars  with 
Vritra  thou  holpest,  Indrs^  Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy 
succouis. 

0  Vritra-slayer,  from  libation  poured  at  noon,  drink  of  the 
Soma  juice,  thou  blameless  Thunderer. 

2  Thou  mighty  Conqueror  of  hostile  armaments,  O  Indra,  Lord 
of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help. 


1  Which  they  have  fixed :  which  all  the  (Jods  have  assigned.  This  half- verse 
is  the  refrain  of  stanzas  1 — 6.  And  space,  begirt :  or,  and  wide  space,  girt.  The 
floods :  the  waters  of  heaven,  the  rain. 

2  Let  him  help  thee :  according  to  S&yana,  *  protect  thyself  (by  drinking 
the  Soma).'  *The  mutual  relation  between  the  God  and  his  worshipper  is 
expressed,  and  the  translation  *  help  thyself  '  is  ridiculous.'— Ludwig. 

S  Food :  sacrificial  food.    That :  food,  especially  in  the  shape  of  Soma. 

7  Trasadasyu :  an  especial  favourite  of  Indra  and  the  Asvins,  celebrated 
far  bis  rictories  and  liberality.     See  Index. 

I  O  Vr/ti'a'slayer,  etc:  this  half -verse  \b  repeats  Wb  ^  t^^iwsxYDL'Osskfe  ^^^^ 
'lowiDg  8i»nza8, 


BTMN  S8.]  TSK  RIQVRDA .  179 

3  Sole  Ruler,  thou  art  Sovran  of  this  world  of  life,  O  Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help. 

4  Thou  only  sunderest  these  two  consistent  worlds,  O  Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help. 

5  Thou  art  the  Lord  supreme  o'er  rest  and  energy,  O  Indra, 

Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  help  . 

6  Thou  helpest  one  to  power,  and  one  thou  hast  not  helped,  O 

Indra,  Lord  of  Strength,  with  all  thy  saving  aid. 

7  Hear   thou  Syslvsisva   while   he  sings  to  thee,    as  erst  thou 

heardest  Atri  when  he  wrought  his  holy  rites. 
Indra,   thou  only  gavest  Trasadasyu  aid  in  the  fierce  fight 
with  heroes,  strengthening  his  powers. 

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra-Agni. 

Ye  Twain  are  Priests  of  sacrifice,  winners  in  war  and  holy 

works : 
Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

2  Ye  bounteous  riders  on  the  car,  ye  Vritra-slayers  unsubdued  : 
Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

2  The   men  with   pressing-stones  have   pressed  this   meath  of 
yours  which  gives  delight : 
Indra  and  Agni,  mark  this  well. 

4  Accept   our  sacrifice  for   weal,   sharers  of  praise  !  the   Soma 

shed : 
Indra  and  Agni,  Heroes,  come. 

5  Be   pleased  with   these  libations   which  attract   you  to  our 

sacred  gifts  : 
Indra  and  Agni,  Heroes,  come. 

6  Accept  this  eulogy  of  mine  whose  model  is  the  G&yatrl :  Indra 

and  Agni,  Heroes,  come. 


4  Consistent  worlds :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text>  and  hhau  (worlcU) 
is  supplied  by  S&jana. 

5  Rest  and  energy :  or  peace  and  war.     '  Prosperity  and  gains.*— -Wilson. 

0  To  power  :  hsatrSya :  the  rule  exercised  by  princes. 

7  Repeated  from  the  preceding  hymn  with  the  alteration  of  two  words — 
r^bhatahf  singing,  instead  of  sunvatdK^  pouring  (libations),  and  kshatrlXni 
(princely)  powers  instead  of  h'dhmdni^  prayers,  *as  if/  observes  Dr.  Miiir, 
'  the  former  (brahmdni,)  contained  a  reference  to  the  functions  of  the  priest, 
and  the  latter  to  those  of  the  prince.' —  0.  S,  Texts,  I.  268. 

1  Mark  this  well:  *  hear  (the  praise)  of  this  (thy  wot«\\V^'^tV~-^''^^3wai« 
^  Smtnie^iut :  iotStgd  :  according  to  SAyana,  *  destvoyerft  (ol  lowC^C 

^  /f^Aose  modd  is  the  Odyatri :  composedin  QAy«ktrt  m^tx^. 


lao  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VITL 

7  Come  with  the  early-faring  Gods,  ye  who  are  Lords  of  genuine 

wealth  : 
Indra-Agni,  to  the  Soma-draught  ! 

8  Hear  ye  the  call   of  Atris,   hear  Syavasva  as   he  sheds  the 

juice  : 
Indra-Agni  to  the  Soma-draught ! 

:  9  Thus  have  I  called  you  to  our  aid  as  sages  called  on  you  of 
old  : 
Indra-Agni  to  the  Soma  draught ! 

10  ludra's  and  Agni's  grace  I  claim,  Sarasvati's  associates 
To  whom  this  psalm  of  praise  is  sung. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  AgnL 

The  glorious  Agni  have  I  praised,  and  worshipped  with  the 
sacred  food. 

May  Agni  deck  the  Gods  for  us.  Between  both  gathering- 
places  he  goes  on  his  embassy,  the  Sage.  May  all  the  others 
die  away. 

2  Agni,  bum  down  the  word  within  their  bodies  through  our        I 
newest  speech,  | 

All  hatreds  of  the  godless,  all  the  wicked  man's  malignities. 
Away  let  the  destroyers  go.     May  all  the  others  die  away. 

.  3  Agnij  I  offer  hymns  to  thee,  like  holy  oil  within  thy  mouth. 
Acknowledge  them  among  the  Gods,  for  thou  art  the  most 
excellent,  the  worshipper's  blissful  messenger.     Let  all  the 
others  die  away. 

» 

'  4  Agni  bestows  all  vital  power  even  as  each  man  supplicates. 
He  brings  the  Vasus  strengthening  gifts,  and  grants  delight, 
in  rest  and  stir,  for  every  calling  on  the  Gods.     Let  all  the 
others  die  away. 

5  Agni  hath  made  himself  renowned  by  wonderful  victorious  act. 
He  is  the  Priest  of  all  the  tribes,  chosen  with  sacrificial  meeds. 
He  urges  Deities  to  receive*     Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

I    I     «■    « ■■  ■       '     ■    I  ■  ■  .      __-^ —  __ 

7  Early-faring  Gods:  *But  Thou  wast  up  at  break  of  day,' — George  Herbert. 
XO  Sara8vat^8  associates :  according  to  S4yana, '  to  whom  praise  belongs,^ 

1  Deck  the  Gods  for  us :  *  brighten  the  gods  with  the  oblations  at  our 
sacrifice.' — Wilson.  Both  gathering-places  :  heaven  and  earth.  AH  the  others : 
anyaki  same :  meaning,  according  to  S4yapa,  all  our  euemies. 

2  jiU  Aatred  of  the  godless :  ardtXr  ardvndm  must  be  read  instead  of  ardtt 
rarthmiitm. — Ludwig,  '  .       .    T 

a  WteA  sacri/teuzf  meeds :  dakskindhhx^ :  Vna  daJwKwAa  otVouwwtt.^j^'^^^ri^ 
^  the  oblations  which  he  receives'  as  a  God. 


MTMiA*  40.1  y^^  rioveda:  m 

^  Agni  knowB  all  that  springs  from  Gods,  he  Isnows  the  mystery 
of  men. 
Giver  of  wealth  is  Agni,  he  uncloses  both  the  doors  to  us  when 
worshipped  with  our  newest  gift.     Let  all  the  others  di^ 
away. 

7  Agni  inhabiteth  with  Gods  and  men  who  offer  sacrifice. 

He  cherisheth  with  great  delight  much  wisdom,  as  all  thin)9i|s 
that  be,  God  among  Gods  adorable.  May  all  the  others  die 
away. 

8  Agni  who  liveth  in  all  streams.  Lord  of  the  Sevenfold  Race  of 

men, 
Him  dweller  in  three  homes  we  seek,  best  slayer  of  the  Dasyus 
for  Mandhlitar,  first  in  sacrifice.     Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

9  Agni  the  Wise  inhabiteth  three  gathering-places,  triply  formed. 
Decked  as  our  envoy  let  the  Sage  bring  hither  and  conciliate 

the  Thrice  Eleven  Deities.     Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

10  Oar  Agni,  thou  art  first  among  the  Gods,  and  first  mid  living 
men. 
Thou  only  rulest  over  wealth.     Round  about  thee,  as  natural 
dams,  circumfluous  the  waters  run.     Let  all  the   others  die 
away. 

HYMN  XL.  Indra-Agni. 

Indra  and  Agni,  surely  ye  as  Conquerors  will  give  us  wealth, 
Wiiereby  in  fight  we  may  overcome  that  which  is  strong  and 

firmly  fixed,  as  Agni  burns  the  woods  with  wind.     Let  all 

the  others  die  away. 

2  We^et  no  snares  to  tangle  you;  Indra  we  worship  and  adore, 
Hero  of  heroes  mightiest. 
Onoe  may  he  come  unto  us  with  his  Steed,  come  unto  us  to 
win  us  strength,  and  to  complete  the  sacrifice. 

6  ThtU  springs  from  Oods :  the  past  and  the  present,  while  ike  mystery  of 
men  is  the  future. — Ludwig.  Both,  the  doors:  of  wealth,  or,  perhaps  of 
heaven  also. 

8  Lord  of  ike  Sevenfold  Race  of  men :  perhaps  meaning,  God  of  all  men, 
fike  Vaisv&nara ;  or  the  reference  may  be  to  the  seven  priests  :  '  Who  is  minis- 
tered to  by  seven  priests.' — Wilson.  *  Acting  as  seven  priests.* — M.  Miiller. 
Mandkdtar :  said  to  be  the  same  as  M&ndhfttar,  son  of  Tuvan&sva,  and  Rishi 
of  X.  134. 

9  Three  gathering -places :  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth. 

10  Round  about  thee  ..the  waters  run:  Cf.  'Him,  pure,  resplendent, 
Offspring  of  the  Waters,  the  waters  pure  have  on  all  sides  encompassed' 
(II.  35.  3).  

1  Let  all  the  others  die  atoay :  this  refrain  recuTS  Va  ^\V«\A.TiiftA  Qk\.  \)DA\ic^\ttQk 
except  the  GobI 
a  Onee:  ^adtXehit:  erpressive  of  impatience.— Lud^V^. 


182  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

3  For,  famous  Indra-Agiii,  ye  are  dwellers  in  the  midst  of  frays. 
Sages  in  wisdom,  ye  are    knit  to  him  who   seeketh  you  as 

friends.     Heroes,  bestow  on  him  his  wish. 

4  NabhS.ka-like,  with  sacred  song  Indra's  and  Agni's  praise  I  sing, 
Theirs  to  whom  all  this  world  belongs,  this  heaven  and  this 

mighty  earth  which  bear  rich  treasure  in  their  lap. 

5  To  Indra  and  to  Agni  send  your  prayers,  as  was  Nabhaka's 

wont, — 
Who  oped  with  side  way  opening  the  sea  with  its  foundations 
seven — Indra  all  powerful  in  his  might. 

6  Tear  thou  asunder,  as  of  old,  like  tangles  of  a  creeping  plant, 
Demolish  thou  the  DUsa's  might.     May  we  with  Indra's   help 

divide  the  treasure  he  hath  gathered  up. 

7  What  time  with  this  same  song  these  men  call  Indra-Agni 

sundry  ways. 
May  we  with  our  own  heroes  quell  those  who  provoke  us  to  the 
fight,  and  conquer  those  who  strive  with  us. 

8  The  Two  refulgent  with  their  beams  rise  and  come  downward 

from  the  sky. 
By  Indra's  and  by  Agni's  best,  flowing  away,  the  rivers   run 
which  they  released  from  tbeir  restraint. 

9  0  Indra,  many  are  thine  aids,  many  thy  ways  of  guiding  us, 
Lord  of  the  Bay  Steeds,  Hinva's  Son.     To  a  Good  Hero  come 

our  prayers,  which  soon  shall  have  accomplishment. 

10  Inspire  him  with  your  holy  hymns,   the  Hero  bright  and 

glorious. 
Him  who  with  might  demolisheth  even  the  brood  of  Sushna, 
and  winneth  for  us  the  heavenly  streams. 

11  Inspire  him  worshipped  with  fair  rites,   the  glorious   Hero 

truly  brave. 
He  brake  in  pieces  Sushna's  brood  who  still  expected  not  the 
stroke,  and  won  for  us  the  heavenly  streams.     Let  all  the 
others  die  away. 


4  Ndbhdka-like :  Nabh&ka  may  have  been  the  father  of  N&bh&ka  the  Hishi 
of  the  hymn. 

5  Who  oped :  *  who  overspread  (with  their  lustre).* — Wilson,  The  Commen- 
tator does  not  explain  the  passage. 

7  This  same  song :  a  hymn  like  our  own,  for  victory  in  battle. 
S  The  Two  refulgent  with  their  beams :  apparently  the  Sun  and  Moon.     Ac- 
cording to  S4yana,  Indra  and  Agni  are  intended. 

ff  JTinva's  Son  :  Hinva  (the  driver,  impeller,  instigator  of  actions),  a  father 
in  vented  for  Indra  by  the  poet.  To  a  Good  Hero  :  to  ltt.^T«b.  *  '^Vw^  TCk^Mun^  of 
f/ie  vorae,  even  with  the  help  of  the  acho\\ajBt,\alw  lto\ixVa\«^\^gWVft:  — '^'1aaRn^^ 


BTMIS  41.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  188 

\%  Thus  have  we  sung  anew  to  Indra-Agni,  as  sang  our  sires, 
Angirases,  and  Mandh^tar. 
Guard  us  with  triple  shelter  and  preserve  us :  may  we  be 
masters  of  a  store  of  riches. 

HYMN   XLI.  Varuna. 

To  make  this  Varuna  come  forth,  sing  thou  a  song   unto   tlie 

band   of  Maruts   wiser  than   thyself, — 
This  Varuna  who  guardeth   well   the  thoughts  of  men  like 

herds  of  kine. 
Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

2  Him  altogether  praise  I  with  the  song  and  hymns  our  fathers 

sang,  and  with  Nabhaka*s  eulogies, — 
Him  dwelling  at  the  rivers'  source,  surrounded  by  his   Sisters 
Seven. 

3  The  nights  he  hath  encompassed,  and   stablished   the   morns 

with  magic  art :  visible  over  all  is  he. 
His  dear  Ones,  following  his  Law,  have  prospered   the   Three 
Dawns  for  him. 

4  He,  visible  o'er  all  the  earth,  stablished  the  quarters   of  the 

sky: 
He  measured  out  the  eastern  place,  that  is  the  fold  of  Varuna : 
like  a  strong  herdsman  is  the  God. 

5  He  who  supports  the  worlds  of  life,  he  who   well   knows   the 

hidden  names  mysterious  of  ti»e  morning-beams, 
He  cherishes  much  wisdom.  Sage,  as  heaven  brings  forth  each 
varied  form. 

6  In  whom  all  wisdom  centres,  as  the   nave   is   set   within   the 

wheel. 

Haste  ye  to  honour  Trita,  as  kine  haste  to  gather  in  the  fold, 
even  as  they  muster  steeds  to  yoke. 

1  To  make  tkU  Varuna  come  forth :  Srlyana  explains  pi-abhiUaye  as  an  adjec- 
tive =  praJcrishtadkandi/a  :  '  to  that  opulent  Varuna.' — Wilson.  Wiser:  more 
skilled  m  Hinging.  The  thoughts:  holy  thoughts  and  devotions.  The  refrain, 
Let  all,  etc.,  recurs  at  the  end  of  every  stanza. 

2  Ndbfidka^s :  that  is,  mine  own  Sisters  Seven :  the  five  rivers  of  the  Panjdb, 
the  Indus,  and  perhaps  the  Kubh&.     See  I  32,  note. 

3  His  dear  Ones :  apparently  the  nights,  which  give  place  to  the  mornings. 
Three  Dawns  :  according  to  S&yana,  morning,  noon,  and  evening. 

4  The  fold  :  or,  perhaps,  the  course,  meaning  the  place  from  which  he  starts. 
6  Trita:  Varuna,  here,  apparently ^  identi&ed  with  thxa  wvd«v\X.  Qtoft.  ^\\a 

repreaentti  the  expanse  of  hea\en.  According  to  S^yatiik,  (^\  «xM\i^^  *■  ^>aa  ^v^«^ 
/a  the  three  worlda. ' 


184  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VllL 

7  He  wraps  these  regions  as  a  robe  ;  he  contemplates  the  tribes^ 

of  Gods  and  all  the  works  of  mortal  men. 
Before  the  home  of  Varuna  all  the  Gods  follow  his  decree. 

8  He  is  an  Ocean  far-removed,  yet  through  the  heaven   tb   him 

ascends  the  worship  which  these  realms  possess. 
With  his  bright  foot  he  overthrew  their  magic,  and  went  up 
to  heaven. 

< 

9  Ruler,  whose  bright  far-seeing  rays,  pervading  all  three  earths, 

have  filled  the  three  superior  realms  of  heaven. 
Firm  is  the  seat  of  Varuna  :  over  the  Seven  he  rules  as  King. 

10  Who,  after  his  decree,  o'erspread  the  Dark  Ones  with  a   robe 
of  light; 
Who  measured  out  the   ancient   seat,  who   pillared  both  the 
worlds  apart  as  the  Unborn  supported  heaven.    Let  all  the 
others  die  away. 

HYMN  XLII.  Varur^a. 

Lord  of  all  wealth,  the  Asura  propped  the  heavens,  aud  mea- 
sured out  the  broad  earth's  wide  expanses. 

He,  King  supreme,  approached  all  living  creatures.  All  thei^e 
are  Varuna's  holy  ^operations. 

:  2  So   humbly   worship  Varuna   the  Mighty;  revere   the  wise 
Guard  of  the  World  Immortal. 
May  he  vouchsafe  us  triply-barred  protection.     0   Earth   and 
Heaven,  within  your  lap  preserve  us. 


7  This  stanza  is  very  obscure,  and  my  rendering  is  conjectural.  The  com- 
mentary is  defective,  and  von  Roth  and  Ludwig  think  that  the  correctness  of 
ene  word  in  the  tez  t  is  doubtful.  According  to  the  slight  alteration  suggest- 
ed by  the  latter  scholar,  ^  under  the  lead '  would  stand  instead  of  '  before  the 
home.' 

8  The  first  line  of  this  stanza  also  is  difficult.  Wilson,  following  SAyans, 
translates  :  *  He  is  the  hidden  ocean  ;  swift  he  mounts  (the  heaven)  as  (the 
sun)  the  sky  ;  when  he  has  placed  the  sacrifice  in  those  (regions  of  the  firma- 
ment).' Ludwig's  interpretation,  which  I  follow,  requires  tirdli  to  be  read 
instead  of  turdh  (swift).   Their  magic :  the  magical  arts  of  the  fiends  of  darkness. 

9  Firm:    so  Hesiod   (Thepg.  V.  127)   calls   Ouranos=  Varuna  the  ?5oc 

a<r<fiaXiQ,  the  firm  seat  of  the  Qods.     See  M.  Miiller,  Chips  from  a  Germim 
Workshop,  IV.  XX  (new  edition).     The  Seven :  rivers,  understood. 

10  The  Dark  Ones  :  the  nights,  which  Varuna  turns  into  days.  But  see 
Chips f  IV.  xxii.  The  Unhotva :  the  primeval,  everlasting,  uncreated  Divine 
Being.   According  to  S&yana,  the  Sun. 


J  TAeJsura:  ^/le  High  God,  Varuna.    *  T\ie  ma^  ai^irit.* — M.  Miiller. 
2  OJ'iAe  World  Immortal ;    omrltosya  ;  siccotdm^  \tt  ^^wm.,  \>1  ^xoLTiX.  « 


STMN  41]  TBS  RIQVEDA.  l^ 

'.  3  Sharpen  this  song  of  him  who  strives  his  utmost,   sharpen, 
(jroid  Varuna,  his  strength  and  insight ; 
May  we  ascend  the  ship  that  bears  us  safely,  whereby  we  may 
pass  over  all  misfortune. 

4  Asvins,  with  songs  the  singer  stones  have  made   you  hasten 

hitherward, 
N&satyas,  to  the  Soma-draugbt.  Let  all  the  others   die  away. 

5  As  the  sage  Atri  with  his  hymns,  0  Asvins,  called  you  eagerly, 
NSiSatyas,  to  the  Soma-draught.  Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

6  So  have  I  called  you  to  our  aid,  even  as  the  wise  have  called 

of  old, 
Nllsatyas,  to  the  Soma-draught.  Let  all  the  others  die  away. 

HYMN  XLIIL  Agni. 

Thbsb  songs  of  mine  go  forth  as  lauds  of  Agni,  the  disposing  Sage, 
Whose  worsiiipper  is  ne'er  o'erthrown. 

2  Wise  Agni  Jtltavedas,  I  beget  a  song  of  praise  for  thee. 
Who  willingly  receivest  it. 

3  Thy  sharpened  flames,  0  Agni,  like  the  gleams  of  light   that 

glitter  through, 
Devour  the  forests  with  their  teeth. 

4  Gold-coloured,  bannered  with  the  smoke,  urged  by   the  wind, 

aloft  to  heaven 
Rise,  lightly  borne,  the  flames  of  fire. 

5  These  lightly  kindled  fiery  flames  are  all  around  made  visible. 
Even  as  the  gleamings  of  the  Dawns. 

6  As  Jatavedas  speeds  along,  the  dust  is  black  beneath  his  feet. 
When  Agni  spreads  upon  the  earth. 

7  Making  the  plants  his  nourishment,  Agni  devours  and  wearies 

not. 
Seeking  the  tender  shrubs  again. 

8  Bending  him  down  with  all  his  tongues,  he  flickers   with   his 

fiery  glow  : 
Splendid  is  Agni  in  the  woods. 

9  Agni,  thine  home    is  in  the   floods:    into  the   plants  thou 

forcest  way. 
And  as  their  Child  art  bom  anew. 

10  Worshipped   with   offerings   shines  thy  flame,  0  Agni,    from 
the  sacred  oil. 
With  kisses  on  the  ladle's  mouth. 


S  TAesMp  :  a  metaphorical  expression  lor  bymn  w\d  micn&i^^.  d,\.  ^^»^-'- 
J40,  12;  IX.  89.  2  ;  X  44.  Q  ;  63.  10  ;  101.  2  ;  \05,  %. 


186  THS  HYM^S  OF  [BOOK  VIIL 

11  Let  us  serve  Agni  with  our  hymns,  Disposer,  fed  on  ox  and 

cow, 
Who  bears  the  Soma  on  his  back. 

12  Yea,  thee,  0  Agni,  do  we  seek  with  homage  and  with    fuel, 

Priest 
Whose  wisdom  is  most  excellent.  . 

13  0  worshipped  with  oblations,  pure  Agni,  we  call  on   thee  as 

erst 
Did  Bhngu,  Manus,  Angiras. 

14  For  thou,  0  Agni,  by  the  fire,  Sage  by  the   Sage,  Good  by  the 

Good, 
Friend  by  the  Friend,  art  lighted  up. 

16  So  wealth  in  thousands,  food  with  store  of  heroes  give  thou  to 
the  sage, 
0  Agni,  to  the  worshipper. 

16  0  Agni,  Brother,  made  by  strength,  Lord  of  red  steeds  and 

brilliant  sway. 
Take  pleasure  in  this  laud  of  mine. 

17  My  praises,  Agni,  go  to  thee,  as   the  cows  seek  the  stall  to 

meet 
The  lowing  calf  that  longs  for  milk. 

18  Agni,  best  Angiras,  to  thee  all  people  who  have  pleasant  homes 
Apart,  have  turned  as  to  their  wish* 

19  The  sages  skilled  in  holy  song  and  thinkers  with  their  thoughts 

have  urged 
Agni  to  share  the  sacred  feast. 

20  So,  Agni,  unto  thee  the  Priest,  Invoker,  strong  in  forays,  pray 
Those  who  spin  out  the  sacrifice. 

21  In  many  a  place,  the  same  in  look  art  thou,  a  Prince  o'er  all 

the  tribes : 
In  battles  we  invoke  thine  aid. 


11  Fed  on  ox  and  cow:  *the  eater  of  the  ox,  the  eater  of  the  marrow.* — 
Wilaon.     Who  bears  the  Soma  on  his  back ;  s&mapriakthdya :   *  on  whose  ba^k 
the  libation  is  poured.' — Wilson. 

14  S&yana  refers  to  the  ilt^areya  Brdhmana,!.  16,  *  which  describes  how 
the  fire  produced  by  friction  from  the  two  aranis  [fire-sticks]  is  thrown  into 
the  iLhavaniya  fire,  in  the  Atitbyeshti  ceremony.  "  In  the  verse  twam  hyagne 
[For  thou,  0  Agni]  etc.,  the  one  vipra  (a  sage)  means  one  Agni,  the  other  vipra 
the  other  Agm  ;  the  one  san  (being,  existing)  means  the  one,  the  other  san 

O'n  saM)  the  other  AgnL'    (Haug'a  trana-V— -^ota  by    E.  B.  C.  in  Wilson's 

Translatiou.     Sdn  and  aatd  may  also  mean  *  good* 
'^  -^(idg  bi/  strength  :  produced  by  vioVeat  a^\aA»\oTi  ol  \3tia  ^T^-si>iKs3«.» 


HYMN  44.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  m 

22  Pray  thou  to  Agni,  pray  to  him  who  blazes  served  with  sacred 

oil: 
Let  him  give  ear  to  this  our  call. 

23  We  call  on  thee  as  such,  as  one  who  hears,  as  Jataveda^,  one, 
Agni !  who  beats  away  our  foes. 

24  I  pray  to  Agni,  King  of  men,  the  Wonderful,  the  President 
Of  holy  Laws  :  may  he  give  ear. 

25  Him  like  a  bridegroom,  him  who  stirs  all  people,  like  a  noble 

horse, 
Like  a  fleet  steed,  we  instigate. 

26  Slaying  things  deadly,  burning  up  foes,   Rakshasas,  on  every 

side, 
Shine,  Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  flame. 

27  Thou  whom  the  people  kindle  even  as  Manus  did,  best  Angiras ! 
O  Agni,  mark  thou  this  my  speech. 

28  0  Agni,  made  by  strength  !  be  thou  bom  in  the  heavens  or 

bom  in  floods. 
As  such  we  call  on  thee  with  songs. 

29  Yea,   all   the  people,   all  the   folk  who   have  good   dwellings, 

each  apart. 
Send  food  for  thee  to  eat  thereof. 

30  0  Agni,  so  may  we,  devout,  gazed  at  by  men,  throughout  our 

days 
Pass  lightly  over  all  distress. 

31  We  venerate  with  cheerful  hearts  the  cheerful  Agni,  dear  to  all, 
Burning,  with  purifying  flame. 

32  So  thou,  0  Agni  rich  in  light,  beaming  like  Surya  with  thy  rays 
Boldly  demolishest  the  gloom. 

33  We  pray  to  thee  for  this  thy  gift,  Victor !  the  gift  that  faileth 

not, 
O  Agni,  choicest  wealth  from  thee. 

HYMN  XLIV.  Agni. 

Pay  service  unto  Agni  with  your  fuel,  rouse  your  Guest  with 

oil : 
In  him  present  your  offerings. 

2  Agni,  do  thou  accept  my  laud,  be  magnified  by  this  my  song  : 
Welcome  my  sweetly-spoken  words. 

28  In  the  heavens:  as  the  Sun.    In  floods:  in  the  waters  of  the  firmament 
as  lightning. 

30  (S^ddaidy mm/ objects o£ their 9Am\r9X\(m.  *Be\io\dvsvttm<e«i?— '^'^Qsx, 
'Lfvwg  (tuaoDg  meo).  '^St.  Petersburg  Lexicoa. 


188  THk  HYMNS  OP  [JSOOK  VII I. 

3  A^ni,  envoy,  I  place  in  front ;  the  oblation-bearer  I  address  : 
Here  let  him  seat  the  Deities. 

4  Agni,the  lofty  flames  of  thee  enkindled  have  gone  up  on  high, 
Thy  bright  flames,  thou  Refulgent  One. 

5  BelovM  !  let  my  ladles  full  of  sacred  oil  come  near  to  thee  : 
Agni,  accept  our  offerings. 

6  I  worship  Agni — may  he  hear ! — the  cheerful,  the    Invoker, 

Priest 
Of  varied  splendour,  rich  in  light. 

7  Ancient  Invoker,  meet  for  praise,  belovM  Agni,  wise  and  strong, 
The  visitant  of  solemn  rites. 

8  Agni,  best  Angiras,  accept  straightway  these  offerings,  and  guide 
The  seasonable  sacrifice. 

9  Excellent   God,  with  brilliant  flames,  enkindled  bring   thou 

hitherward. 
Knowing  the  way,  the  Heavenly  Host. 

10  Him,  Sage  and  Herald,  void  of  guile,  ensign  of  sacrifices,  him 
Smoke-bannered,  rich  in  light,  we  seek. 

11  0  Agni,  be  our  Guardian  thou,  Grod,  against  thosie  who  injure  us : 
Destroy  our  foes,  thou  Son  of  Strength. 

12  Making  his  body  beautiful,  Agni  the  Sage  hath  waxen  by 
The  singer  and  his  ancient  hymn. 

13  1  invocate  the  Child  of  Strength,  Agni  with  purifying  flame. 
At  this  well-ordered  sacrifice. 

14  So  Agni,  rich  in  many  friends,  with  fiery  splendour,    seat 

thyself 
With  Gods  upon  our  sacred  grass. 

1 5  The  mortal   man  who  serves  the  God  Agni  within  his  own 

abode, 
For  him  he  causes  wealth  to  shine. 

16  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  Master  of  the  earth 

is  he  : 
He  quickeneth  the  waters'  seed. 

1 7  Upward,  0  Agni,  rise  thy  flames,  pure  and   resplendent,  blaz- 

ing high, 
Thy  lustres,  fair  effulgences. 

'  ■  ,11  , 

J  J  Hieh  in  manyfriendi:  'thou  who  hast  Mitra's  splendour.* — Ludwig. 
7ff  J^or  Aim  he  causes  wealth  to  shine  ;  or,  *  To  YiiaiYife  %\imeB  forth  opulence.' 
*To  him  he  gives  nches/— Wilson. 
I^  2'4e  zoaters*  seed  :  as  lightning,  he  impTega^ii^^a  \.\i^  ^*X»  ^a  lA  VJaa  ^* 


^  46J .  THE  RiaVEDA.  IW 

18  For,   Agni,  thou  as  Lord  of  Light  mlcst  o'er  choicest  gifts: 
may  I, 
Thy  singer,  find  defence  in  thee. 

1^  O  Agni,  they  who  understand  stir  thee  to  action  with  their 
thoughts : 
So  let  our  songs  enhance  thy  might. 

20  We  ever  claim  the  friendship  of  Agni,  the  singing  messenger, 
Of  Godlike  nature,  void  of  guile. 

24  Agni  who  bears  most  holy  sway,  the  holy  Singer,  holy  Sage, 
Shines  holy  when  we  worship  him. 

:  2S  Yea,  let  my  meditations,  let  my  songs  exalt  thee  evermore  : 
Think,  Agni,  of  our  friendly  bond. 

23  If  I  were  thou  and   thou  wert  T,  0  Agni,    every  prayer  of 

thine 
Should  have  its  due  fulfilment  here. 

24  For  Excellent  and  Lord  of  wealth  art  thou,  O  Agni,  rich  in 

light : 
May  we  enjoy  thy  favouring  grace. 

r%^  Agni,  to  thee  whose  laws  stand  fast  our  resonant  songs  of 
praise  speed  forth 
As  rivers  hasten  to  the  sea. 

26  Agni,   the  Youthful   Lord  of  men,   who  stirreth   much  and 

eateth  all, 
The  Sage,  T  glorify  with  hymns. 

27  To  Agni  let  us  haste  with  latids,  the  Guide  of  sacrificial  rites. 
Armed  with  sharp  teeth,  the  Mighty  One. 

28  And  let  this  man,  good  Agni,  be  with  thee  the  singer  of  thy 

praise : 
Be  gmcious.  Holy  One,  to  him. 

29  For  thou  art  sharer  of  our  feast,    wise,  ever  watchful  as  a 

Sage : 
Agni,  thou  shin  est  in  the  sky. 

30  0  Agni,  Sage,  before  our  foes,  before  misfortunes  fall  on  us, 
Excellent  Lord,  prolong  our  lives. 

HYMN  XLV.  Indra, 

HiTHERWARD !  they  who  light  the  flame  and  straightway   trim 

the  sacred  grass, 
Whose  Friend  is  Tndra  ever  young. 


26  Eateth  all :  oonsumes  the  entire  oblation. — S&yana.     But  the  meaning 
Ib  probably  general. 
is  TAit  man  :  the  ^Uhi  or  eioger  himself. 
SP  y»  tAe  sly;  or,  up  to  beayexi. 


1^  THE  HTSTNS  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

2  High  is  tlierr  fuel,  great  their  laud,  wide  is  their  splinter  from 

the  stake, 
Whose  Friend  is  Indra  ever  young. 

3  Unquelled  in  fight  the  hero  leads  his  army  with  the  warrior  chiefs, 
Whose  Friend  is  Indra  ever  youug. 

4  The  new-born  Vritra-slayer  asked  his  Mother,  as  he   seized 

his  shaft. 
Who  are  the  fierce  1    Who  are  renowned  ? 

5  Savasi  answered,  He  who  seeks  thine  enmity  will  battle  like 
A  stately  elephant  on  a  hill. 

6  And  hear,   0  Magbavan;  to  him  who  craves  of  thee   thou 

gran  test  all : 
Whatever  thou  makest  firm  is  firm. 

7  What  time  the  Warrior  Indra  goes  to  battle,  borne  by  noble 

steeds. 
Best  of  all  charioteers  is  he. 

8  Repel,  0  Thunder-armed,  in  all  directions  all  attacks  on  UB  : 
And  be  our  own  most  glorious  God. 

9  May  Indra  set  our  car  in  front,  in  foremost  place  to  win  the  spoik 
He  whom  the  wicked  injure  not. 

10  Thine  enmity  may  we  escape,  and,  Sakra,  for  thy  bounty,  rich 
In  kine,  may  we  come  near  to  thee  ; 

11  Softly  approaching.  Thunder  armed !  wealthy   by   hundreds, 

rich  in  steeds. 
Unrivalled,  ready  with  our  gifts. 

12  For  thine  exalted  excellence  gives  to  thy  worshippers  each  day 
Hundreds  and  thousands  of  thy  boons. 

13  Indra,   we  know  thee  breaker-down    even   of    strong   forts, 

winner  of  spoil, 
As  one  who  conquers  wealth  for  us. 

14  Though  thou  art  highest.  Sage  and  Bold  !  let  the  drops  cheer 

thee  when  we  come 
To  thee  as  to  a  trafl&cker. 


2  SpUntei^:  the  first  sbaviDg,  splinter,  or  strip  of  wood,  cut  from  the  yUpa 
or  sacrificial  post,  and  used  in  the  sacrifice. 

4  As  soon  as  he  was  born  Indra  showed  his  warlike  disposition,  and  asked 
what  worthy  opponents  he  should  have. 

5  Suvastf  or,  the  Strong  Dame  ;  his  mother  Adlti.  A  stately  elephant :  I 
follow  Sdyana  who  explains  apsah  as  darsaniyo  gajah,  a  beautiful  elephant, 
although  in  other  places  the  word  seems  t^  mean  beauty  (I.  124  7),  and  fore- 

beHd(V.  80.  6)t    The  allusion  is  to  the  size  and  strength  of  Vritra,  Indra's  fu- 
iure  antagonht, 

14^  As  to  a  trafficker  :  as  to  one  who  kno'wa  tVifc  N«X>3ift  ol  w«  \?OT^tcc^  %jb^ 
mtiona  and  will  ^ive  us  something  in  TCtuin* 


ffTMN  45.]  •  THE  RIGVEDA..  191 

15  Bring  unto  us  the  treasure  of  the  opulent  man  who,  loth  to 

give. 
Hath  slighted  thee  for  gain  of  wealth. 

16  Indra,  these  friends  of  ours,  supplied  with  Soma,  wait  and 

look  to  thee, 
As  men  with  fodder  to  the  herd. 

17  And  thee  who  art  not  deaf,  whose  ears  are  quick  to  listen,  for 

our  aid, 
We  call  to  us  from  far  away. 

18  When  thou  hast  listened,  make  our  call  one  which  thou  never 

wilt  forget. 
And  be  our  very  nearest  Friend. 

19  When  even  now,  when  we  have  been  in  trouble,   we  have 

thought  of  thee, 
O  Indra,  give  us  gifts  of  kine. 

20  O  Lord  of  Strength,  we  rest  on  thee,  as  old  men  rest  upon  a 

staff : 
We  long  to  have  thee  dwell  with  us. 

21  To  Indra  sing  a  song  of  praise.  Hero  of  mighty  valour,  him 
Whom  no  one  challenges  to  war. 

22  Hero,  the  Soma  being  shed,  I  pour  the  juice  for  thee  to  drink: 
Sate  thee  and  finish  thy  carouse. 

23  Let  not  the  fools,  or  tho:se  who  mock,  beguile  thee  when  they 

seek  thine  aid  : 
Love  not  the  enemies  of  praver. 

24  Here  let  them  with  rich  milky  draught  cheer   thee   to  great 

munificence : 
Drink  as  the  wild-bull  drinks  the  lake. 

25  Proclaim  in  our  assemblies  what  deeds,  new  and   ancient,  far 

away 
The  Vritra-slayer  hath  achieved. 

26  In  battle  of  a  thousand  arms  Indra  drank  Kadru's  Soma  juice: 
There  he  displayed  his  manly  might. 

27  True  undeniable  strength  he  found  in  Yadu  and  in  Turvasa, 
Aud  conquered  through  the  sacrifice. 


23  The  enemies  ofpi'ayer :  according  to  S&yana  those  who  bate  Brfthmana. 

24  The  wild-bull :  the  gaura, 

26  KadiiVs  Soma  juice :  Kadril  here  is  apparently  the  name  of  a  Ilishi  or 
of  one  of  the  officiating  priests.  The  St.  Petersbui^g  Lexicon  takes  it  to 
mean,  from  a  kctdi'ii  or  Soma-vessd. 


of 


27  l/ndem'able :  ahnavdyydm,  according  to  S&yanft,  \a  t\ie  UMAft  <A  V\!k&  ^sckso^ 
TurvHBa  and  Vadu  :  'be  overcame  Ahnavftyya* in  laaltle:  — N^VVaoa^ 


i9i  TH^  HYMNS  OP  'iAOOK  VIlL 

28  Him  have  I  magnified,  our  Lord  in  common,  Guardian  of  youi: 

folk,       . 
Discloser  of  great  wealth  in  kine  ; 

29  Kibhukshan,  not  to  be  restrained,  who  strengthened   Tugra'ii 

son  in  lauds, 
Indra  beside  the  flowing  juice  ; 

30  Who  for  Trisoka  clave  the  hill  that  formed  a  wide  receptacle, 
So  that  the  cows  might  issue  forth. 

31  Whatever  thy  plan  or  purpose  be,  whatever,  in  transport,  thou 

wouldst  do, 
Do  it  not,  Indra,  but  be  kind. 

32  But  little  hath  been  heard  of  done   upon   the   earth   by   one 

like  thee : 
Let  thine  heart,  Indra,  turn  to  us. 

33  Thine  then  shall  be  this  high  renown,  thine  shall   these   lofty 

praises  be, 

When,  Indra,  thou  art  kind  to  us. 

*  . 

34  Not  for  one  trespass,  riot  for  two,  0   Hero,   slay   us,    nor   for 

three. 
Nor  yet  for  many  trespasses. 

35  I  fear  one  powerful  like  thee,  the  icrusher-down  of  enemies, 
Mighty,  repelling  all  attacks. 

36  O  wealthy  God,  ne'er  may  I  live  to  see  my  friend   or   son   in 

need  : 
Hitherward  let  thy  heart  be  turned. 

37  What  friend,  0  people,  unprovoked,  hath   ever  said  unto  a 

friend. 
He  turns  and  leaves  us  in  distress ) 

38  Hero,  insatiate  enjoy  this  Soma  juice  so  near  to  thee, 

£ven  as  a  hunter  rushing  down. 
'  ' — - —  » 

-    29  jRi6^ui(;s^n ;  Indra,  Lord  of  the   Ribhus.     Tugra'a  son:  Bhujyu.     Ac- 
cording to  S&yana,  tugryavridham  means  *  augmenter  of  water.' 

30  The  hill  is  the  massive  rain-cloud,  and  the  cows  are  streams  of  water. 

31  Do  it  not :  *  Sftyana  understands  this,  "  do  it  not,  for  thou  hast  done  it 
ior  us, — only  make  us  happy,**  Could  it  be  that  the  worshipper  had  a  feeling 
of  nemesis  ?  or  would  he  monopolize  all  ?  * — Note  by  E.  B.  C.  in  Wilson's 
Translation. 

32  *  In  the  following  verses  (32 — 36)  the  poet  seems  to  express  disappoint- 
ment at  the  inadequate  manifestation  of  Indra's  power,  while  he  at  the  same 
>ijne  entreats  his  grace,  and  forgiveness.' — 0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  111. 

S/  This  stanza  is  Indra's  answer  to  the  poet's  complaint.    The  meaning 
meems  to  be:  no  friend  without  good  cause  cstWa  Vv\%  irvaw^  ^  Xst^vWc.    What 
thea  have  I  done,  or  left  undottCi  that  thou  ft\io\i\As\)  ft«^  ^i^^%.\.\\^!^N^  Vscwfiiaja^ 
^oe  /    ^ee  Lud  wig's  Commentdry  on  the  -ver^  d\?£wi\3\\.  JaWt  lc4\  at  ^oM.Va^ 


STMS  i6.]  THB  RIQVEDA.  193 

3d  Hither  I  draw  those  Bays  of  thine  yoked  by  our  hymn,  ^  ith 
splendid  car, 
That  thou  mayst  give  unto  the  priests. 

40  Drive  all  our  enemies  away,  smite  down  the  foes  who  press 

around, 
And  bring  the  wealth  for  which  we  long : 

41  O  Indra,  that  which  is  concealed  in  strong  firm  place  precipi- 

tous: 
Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  wo  long  : 

42  Great  riches  which  the  world  of  men  shall  recognize  as  sent 

by  thee : 
Bring  us  the  wealth  for  which  we  long. 

HYMN  XL VI.  Indra. 

Wb,  Indra,  Lord  of  ample  wealth,  our  Guide,   depend  on  one 

like  thee, 
Thou  driver  of  the  Tawny  Steeds. 

2  For,  Hurler  of  the  Bolt^  we  know  thee  true,  the  giver  of  our 

food. 
We  know  thee  giver  of  our  wealth. 

3  O  thou  whose  majesty  the  bards  celebrate  with  their  songs, 

thou  Lord 
Of  hundred  powers  and  hundred  aids. 

4  Fair  guidance  hath  the  mortal  man  whom  Aryaman,  the  Marut 

host, 
And  Mitra,  void  of  guile,  protect. 

5  Kine,  steeds,  and  hero  strength  he  gains,  and  prospers,  by  the 

Adityas  sped. 
Ever  in  wealth  which  all  desire. 

6  We  pray  to  Indra  for  his  gift,  to  him  the  Fearless  and  the 

Strong, 
We  pray  to  him  the  Lord  of  wealth. 

7  For  verily  combined  in  him  are  all  the  fearless  powers  of  aid. 
Him,  rich  in  wealth,  let  swift  Steeds  bring  to  us,  his  Bays,  to 

Soma  juice  for  his  carouse : 

8  Tea,  that  most  excellent  carouse,  Indra,  which  slays  most  ene- 

mies, 
With  Heroes  wins  the  light  of  heaven,  and  is  invincible  in  war  : 

The  hymn  appears  to  be  composed  of  two  or  more  originally  separate  hymns 
(see  Pischel,  Veduche  Studien,  I.  pp.  7 — 9).  There  are  seventeen  varieties  of 
metre  (see  Index  of  Hymns).  The  hymn  is  difficult  and  obscure  in  parts, 
where  only  conjectural  translations  can  be  given. 

/  Potffers  of  aid:  or,  Buccourera ;  the  MiUTuts  ma^  \a  m^AisdAdu 
J3 


194  THS  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VJII. 

9  Which  merits  fame,  all-bouutiful !  and,  unsubdued,  hath  vic- 
tory in  deeds  of  raight. 
So  come  to  our  libations,  Strongest  \  Excellent !  May  we  ob- 
tain a  stall  of  kine. 

10  Resjx>nding  to  our  wish  for  cows,  for  steeds,  and  chariots,  as 

of  old, 
Be  gracious.  Greatest  of  the  Great !    < 

1 1  For,  Hero,  nowhere  can  I  find  the  bounds  of  thy  munificence. 
Still  do  thou  favour  us,  O  Bolt-armed  Maghavan  :  with  strength 

hast  thou  rewarded  hymns. 

12  High,  glorifier  of  his  friend,  he  knows  all  generation]^  he 

whom  many  praise. 
All  races  of  mankind  with  ladles  lifted  up  invoke  that  Mighty 
Indra's  aid. 

13  Be  he  our  Champion  and  Pix>tector  in  great  deedsy  rich   in  adl 

wealth,  the  Vritranslayer,  Maghavan. 

14  In  the  wild  raptures  of  the  juice  sing  to  your  Hero  with  high 

laud,  to  Lim  the  Wise, 
To  Indra,  glorious  in  his  name,  the  Mighty   One,  even  as  the 
hymn  allow  eth  it. 

15  Thou  givest  wealth  to  me  myself,  thou   givest   treasure,    Ex- 

cellent I  and  the  strong  steed, 
0  Much-iuvoked,  in  deeds  of  might,  yea,  even  now. 

16  Him,  Sovran  Ruler   of  all   precious  things,    who  even   bath 

power  o'er  this  fair  form  of  his. 
As  now  it  taketh  shape,  and  after  ward, 

17  We  praise,  so  that  the  Mighty  One  may  speed  to  you,  Pourer 

of  bounties.  Traveller,  prepared  to  go. 
Thou  favourest  the  Maruts  known  to  all,  by  song  and  sacrifice. 
With  song  and  praise  I  sing  to  thee. 

18  We  in  the  sacrifice  perform  their  will   whose   voice  is  lifted 

high. 

The  worship  of  those  Thundering  Ones  who  o'er  the  ridges  of 
these  mountains  fly  in  troops. 


13  This  stanza  may  have  been  the  conclusion  of  one  of  the  original  hymxn^ 
\i  As  the  hymn  alloweth  it :  in  due  accordance  with  the  metre. 
16  S4yana  explains  the  latter  part  of  the  first  line  and  the   following   part 
of  the  second  as,  *  who  overcomes  this  obstructor  (the  enemy)   as  he  wages 
war.'     I  follow  Lud wig's  interpretation  who  refers  to  III.  53.  8,  *  Maghavan 
weareth  every  shape  at  pleaatire,  effecting  magic  changes  in  his  body  ;  *  aod 
VI.  47.  18,  *  ludra  moves  multiform  by  bis  \\\us.\oiaa' 
18  TAeir  tnll :  the  pleasure  ol  the  Marut*. 


ISTMK  4«.l  THE  RIQVEDA.  195 

29  OIndra,  Mightiest,  bring  us  that  which  crushes  men  of  evil  minds, 
Wealth  suited   to   our   needs,  0  Stirrer  of  the  thought,  best 
wealth,  0  thou  who  stirrest  thought. 

20  O  Winner,  noble   winner,   strong,   wondrous,   most   splendid, 

excellent, 
Sole  Lord  of  victory,  bring  all-overpowering  wealth,  joy-giving, 
chief  in  deeds  of  might. 

21  Now  let  the  godless  man  approach  who  hath   received  reward 

so  great 

As  Vasa  Asvya,  when  this  light  of  morning  dawned,  received 

from  Prithusravas,  from  Kanita's  son. 
•         .  ' 

'22  Steeds  sixty  thousand  and  ten   thousand  klne,    and   twenty 

hundred  camels  I  obtained  ; 

Ten  hundred  brown  in  hue,  and  other  ten  red  in  three  spots : 

in  ally  ten  thousand  kine. 

23  Ten  browns  that  make  my  wealth  increase,  fleet  steeds  whose 

tails  are  long  and  fair, 
Turn  with  swift  whirl  my  chariot  wheel ; 

24  The  gifts  w^hich  Prithusravas  gave,  Kanita's  son  munificent. 
He  gave  a  chariot  wrought  of  gold  :  the   prince    was   passing 

bountiful,  and  won  himself  most  lofty  fame. 

25  Come  thou  to  this  great  rite  of  ours,  Vslyu  I  to  give  us  vigor- 

ous light. 
We  have  served  thee  that  thou  miglitest  give  much  to  us,  yea, 
mightest  quickly  give  great  wealth. 

26  Who  with  thrice  seven    times   seventy   horses  comes   to  us 

invested  with  the  rays  of  morn, 
Through  these  our  Soma-draughts  and   those   who  press,  to 
give,  drinker  of  pure  bright  Soma  juice. 

27  Who   hath  inclined   this  glorious   one,  bounteous   himself,  to 

give  me  gifts. 
Borne  on  firm   chariot  with  the  prosperous  Nahusha,    wise,  to 
a  man  yet  more  devout. 

20  0  winner :  of  wealth  to  be  given  to  thy  worshippers.  *  0  bountiful, 
most  bountiful.' — Wilson. 

21  Tttaa  i4«y^a;  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.  Seel.  112.  10.  PrithufravM  : 
see  I  lie.  21* 

22  In  ally  ten  tliomand  kine  :  the  exact  meaning  is  not  very  clear.  The  last 
line  is  rendered  differently  in  Wilson's  Translation  :  *  a  thousand  brown 
mares,  —and  ten  times  ten  thousand  cows  with  three  red  patches.' 

26  Who  :  apparently  V&yu,  but,  according  to  Sftyana,  Prithusravas. 

27  On  firm  chariot:  literally,  on  a  car  made  of  the  wood  of  the  ArtvdM  tr^^ 
{CaXofmnthes  Indica).    But  S^yanA  makes  two  proper  Tvaxcie^  ol  ^Jsi^'^ot^^ 
'  w/i^  Aradra  and  Akalta. " 


19$  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIT. 

28  Sole  Lord  in  beauty  meet  for  praise,  O  VHyu,  dropping  fatness 

down, 
Hurried  along  by  steeds,  by  camels,   and  by  hounds,  spreads 
forth  thy  train :  even  this  it  is. 

29  So,  as  a  prize  dear  to  the  strong,  the  sixty  thousand  have  Igained, 
Bulls  that  resemble  vigorous  steeds. 

30  To  me  come  oxen  like  a  herd,  yea,  unto  me  the  oxen  oome. 

3 1  And  in  the  grazing  herd  he  made  a  hundred  camels  Meat  for  me« 
And  twenty  hundred  mid  the  white. 

82  A  hundred  has  the  sage  received,  Dasa  B^batha's  and  Taruk- 
sha's  gifts. 
These  are  thy  people,   V&yu,  who  rejoice  with  Indra  for  their 
guard,  rejoice  with  ,Gods  for  guards.  *• 

3S  And  now  to  Vasa  Asvya  here  this  stately  woman  is  led  forth. 
Adorned  with  ornaments  of  gold. 

HYMN  XLVIL  Adityw: 

Great  help  ye  give  the  worshipper,  Vamna,Mitra,  Mighty  Ones  ! 

No  sorrow  over  reaches  him  whom  ye,  Adityas,  keep  from  harm. 

Yours  are  incomparable  aids,  and  good  the  succour  they  afford. 

2  0  Gods,  Adityas,  well  ye  know  the  way  to  keep  all  woes  afar. 
As  the  birds  spread  their  sheltering  wings,  spread  your  protec- 
tion over  us. 

3  As  the  birds  spread  their  sheltering  wings  let  your  protection 

cover  us. 
We  mean  all   ahelter  and  defence,  ye  who  have  all  things  for 
your  own. 

4  To  whomsoever  they,   Most  Wise,   have  given  a  home  and 

means  of  life. 
O'er  the  whole  riches  of  this  man  they,  the  Adityas,  have  control. 

5  As  drivers  of  the  car  avoid  ill  roads,  let  sorrows  pass  us  by. 
May  we  be  under  Indra's  guard,  in  the  Adityas*  favouring  grace. 

6  For  verily  men  sink  and   faint  through   loss  of  wealth    which 

ye  have  given. 
Much  hath  he  gained  from  you,   0  Gods,  whom  ye,  Adityas^ 
have  approached. 

28  The  steeds,  camehy  and  hounds  are  apparently  the  fantastic  forma  of  tixe 
clouds  that  tiy  before  Vftyu  or  the  wind. 

31  Mid  the  white:  herds  of  cows. 

32  Ddsa    BalbiUha:    probably  an  aboriginal   ally   of    PrithusravaB.     See 
Weber,  Episches  im  vedisohen  Ritualf  p.  30, 

33  TAis  statdif  woman :  probably  the  wife  of  the  conquered  Kiog.-r-Ludwig. 

1  Vours  are,  etc:  the  refrain  recurs  in  o\er^  veta^  ol  V3tok»  V^xaxu 


ffTMlf  if.]  Tff^mOVEDA.  W 

•7  On  him  shall  no  fierce  anger  fall,  no  sore  distress  shall  visit 
him, 
To  whom,  Adityas,  ye  have  lent  your  shelter  that  extendeth 
£ar. 

8  Resting  in  you,  0  Gods,  we  are  like  men  who  fight  in  coats  of 

mail. 
'    Te  guard  us  from  each  great  offence,  ye  guard  us  from  each 
lighter  fault. 

9  May  Aditi  defend  us,  may  Aditi  guard  and  shelter  us, 
Mother  of  wealthy  Mitra  and  of  Aryaman  and  Varuipa.  , 

10  The  shelter,  Gods,  that  is  secure,  auspicious,  free  from  malady, 
A  sure  protection,  triply  strong,  even  that  do  ye  extend  to  us. 

11  Look  down  on  us,  Adityas,  as  a  guide  exploring  from  the 

bank. 
Lead  us  to  pleasant  ways  as  men  lead  horses  to  an  easy  ford. 

12  111  be  it  for  the  demons'  friend  to  find  us  or  come  near  to  us. 
But  for  the  milch-cow  be  it  well,  and  for  the  man  who  strives 

for  fame. 

13  £ach  evil  deed  made  manifest,  and  that  which  is  concealed, 

OGods, 
The  whole  thereof  remove  from  us  to  Trita  Aptya  far  away. 

14  Daughter  of  Heaven,  the  dream  that  bodes  evil  to  us  or  to 

our  kine, 
Remove,   O  Lady  of  the  Light,  to  Trita  Aptya  far  away. 

15  £ven  if,  0  Cbild  of  Heaven,  it  make  a  garland  or  a  chain  of 

gold, 
The  whole  bad  dream,  whatever  it  be,   to  Trita  Aptya  we 
consign. 

16  To  him  whose  food  and  work   is   this,  who   comes  to  take  his 

share  therein. 
To  Trita,  and  to  Dvita^  Dawn  !  bear  thou  the  evil  dream  away. 

IZ  To  Trita  Aptya  far  away  :  Trita  Aptya  is  a  divinity  dwelling  in  the  re- 
motest part  of  the  heavens  to  whom  it  was  customary  to  wish  away  and 
consign  any  threatened  calamity  or  unpleasantness.  As  S&yana  regards  Trita 
Aptya  as  the  Uishi  of  the  hymn,  he  is  compelled  to  force  a  diiOferent  interpre- 
tetion  on  the  first  half  of  the  second  line  :  '  (let  it  nut  be  found)  in  Trita 
Aptya^keep  it  far  from  us.' — Wilson. 

li  Daughter  of  Heaven :  Ushas  or  Dawn. 

15  '  The  sense  would  then  be  '  even  though  parts  of  it  be  pleasant,  we  put 
the  whole  of  the  evil  dream  away." — Macdonell,  Journal  of  R.  A.  S.,  July, 
1893,  p.  461. 

16  To  him :  to  Trita  wboae  business  it  is  to  receive  \)tt^eafc  <ioxi^\8KCi^'o^a'» 
!FoIHnUt:  a  aimihr  being,  sometimes  aBsociated  m\.\i1t\\iei»    ^Wk'^  *^S>*'^* 


198  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V/JL 

17  As  we  collect  the  utmost  debt,  even  the  eighth   and  sixteenth 

part,    ^ 
So  unto  Aptya  we  transfer  together  all  the  evil  dream. 

18  Now  have  we  conquered  and  obtained,  and  from   our   trespas- 

ses are  free. 
Shine  thou  away  the  evil   dream,   O   Dawn,   whereof  we   are 
afraid.     Tours  are  inco^nparable  aids,  and  good  the  succour 
they  aflford. 

HYMN  XLVIII.  Soma. 

Wisely  have  I  enjoyed  the  savoury  viand,  religious-thoughted, 

best  to  find  out  treasure. 
The  food  to  which  all  Deities  and  mortals,  calling  it  meath, 

gather  themselves  together. 

2  Thou  shalt  be  Aditi  as  thou  hast  entered  within,  appeaser  of 

celestial  anger. 
Indu,  enjoying  Indra's  friendship,  bring  us — as  a  swift  steed 
the  car — forward  to  riches. 

3  We  have  drunk  Soma  and  become  immortal ;  we  have  attained 

the  light,  the  Gods  discovered. 
y  Now  what  may  foeman's  malice  do  to  harm  us  ]  What,  0  Im- 
mortal,  mortal  man's  deception  ? 

4  Absorbed  into  the  heart,  be  sweet,  0  Indu,  ets  a  kind  father  to 

his  son,  0  Soma, 
As  a  wise  Friend  to  friend :  do  thou,  wide-ruler,   O  Soma, 
lengthen  out  our  days  for  living. 

6  These   glorious   drops   that   give   me  freedom   have  I  drunk. 
Closely  they  knit  my  joints  as  straps  secure  a  car. 
Let  them  protect  my  foot  from  slipping  on  the  way :  yea,  let 
the  drops  I  drink  preserve  me  from  disease. 

6  Make  me  shine  bright  like  fire  produced  by  friction :  give  us  a 

clearer  sight  and  make  us  better. 
For  in  carouse  I  think  of  thee,  0  Soma,  Shall  I,  as  a  rich  man, 
attain  to  comfort  1 

7  May  we  enjoy  with  an  enlivened  spirit  the  juice  thou  givest, 

like  ancestral  riches. 
0  Soma,  King,  prolong  thou  our  existence  as  Surya  makes  the 
shining  days  grow  longer. 


1  Meath :  mddhu :  or,  sweet. 

2  Within  :  within  my  heart.    Indu  :  Soma. 

S  We/iave  drunk  Soma :  see  Muir,  0.  8.  Texts,  III.  264,  265. 
S  J^rom  slipping  on  the  way :  *  may  tYi^^j  V^e^  >»  ixQm  ^  l<ioae]y-knit 
worship. '—  Wilson, 


BTMK  «.]  THE  RtQVEDA,  IM 

■ 

8  King  Soma,  favour  us  and  make  us  prosper :  we  are  thy  <le- 
YOtees  ;  of  this  be  mindful. 
Spirit  and  power  are  fresh  in  us,  0  ludu :  give  us  not  up  unto 
:  our  foeman's  pleasure. 

\      %  For  thou  hast  settled  in  eaoh  joint,  0  Soma,  aim  of  men's  eyes 
and  guardian  of  our  bodies. 
When  we  offend  against  thine  holy  statutes,  as  a  kiud  Friend, 
Grod,  best  of  all,  be  gracious. 

10  Uay  I  be  with  the  Friend  whose  heart  is  tender,  who,  Lord  of 
Bays !  when  quaffed  will  never  harm  me  — 
This  Soma  now  deposited  within  me.  For  this,  I  pray  for  longer 
life  to  [udra. 

H  Our  maladies  have  lost  their  strength  and  vanished:  they  feared, 
and  p  issed  away  into  the  darkness. 
Soma  hath   risen  in  u^,    exceeding  mighty,   and  we  are   come 
where  men  prolong  existence. 

^^  Fathers,  that  Indu  which  our  hearts  have   drunken,  Immortal 
in  himself,  hath  entered  mortals. 
So  let  us  serve  this  Soma  with  oblation,  and  rest  securely  in  his 
grace  and  favour. 

*3  Associate  with  the  Fathers  thou,  0  Soma,  hast  spread  thyself 
abroad  through  earth  an  1  heaven. 
So  with  oblation  let  us  serve  thee,  Indu,  and  so  let  us  become 
the  lords  of  riches, 

14  Give  us  your  blessing,  0  ye  Gods,  preservers.  Never  may  sleep 
or  idle  talk  control  us. 
But  evermore  may  we,  as  friends  of  Soma,  speak  to  the  synod 
with  brave  sons  around  us. 

15  On  all  sides,    Soma,  thou  art   our  life-giver :   aim  of  all  eyes, 
light-finder,  come  within  us. 
Indu,  of  one  accord  with  thy  protections  both  from  behind  and 
from  before  preserve  us. 

HYMN  XLIX.  Agni. 

Agni,  come  hither  with  thy  fires ;  we  choose  thee  as  Invoking 

Priest. 
Let  the  extended  ladle  full  of  oil  balm  thee,  best   Priest,  to 

sit  on  sacred  grass. 

9  Aim  of  men't  eyes :  or,  beholder  of  men. 

12  Immortal  in  himself:  see  note  on  I.  18.  4. 

13  Soma:  here  the  Moon-God,  whe  is  intimately  connected  with  the   Pitris 
or  Fathers.     See  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  XVIII.  4.  72. 

I  place  at  the  end  of  this  Book  the  eleven  hymns,  cfi2i\A^  \)Ei'^  '^  ^^si^-^^^^ 
wb/cA  Are  usually  inaerted  after  Hymn  XLYlll.     T\i«»  "Viqtasia  «»  ^as^ 


200  TBE  HYMNS  OP  [bOOK  Vlll 

2  For  unto  thee,  O  Angiras,  O  Son  of  Strength,  move  ladles  in 

the  sacrifice. 
To  Agni,  Child  of  Force,  Tvhose  locks  drop  oil,  we  seek,  fore- 
most in  sacrificial  rites. 

3  Agni,  thou   art  Disposer,   Sage,   Herald,   bright    God  !   and 

worshipful. 
Best  offerer,  cheerful,  to  be  praised  in  holy  rites,  pure  Lord  ! 
by  singers  with  their  hymns. 

4  Most  Youthful  and  Eternal,  bring  the  longing  Gods  to  me, 

the  guileless,  for  the  feast. 
Come,  Vasu,   to  the  banquet  that  is  well-prepared  :  rejoice 
thee,  gracious,  with  our  songs. 

5  Famed  art  thou,  Agni,  far  and  wide.  Preserver,  righteous,  and 

a  Sage. 
The  holy  singers,  0  refulgent  kindled  God  !  arrangers,  call  on 
thee  to  come. 

6  Shine,  Most  Resplendent !  blaze,  send  bliss  unto  the  folk,  and 

to  thy  worshipper  :  Great  art  thou. 
So  may  my  princes,  with  good  fires,  subduing  foes,  rest  in  the 
keeping  of  the  Gods. 

7  0  Agni,   as  thou  bumest  down  to  earth   even  high-grown 

underwood, 
So,  bright  as  Mitra  is,  bum  him  who  injures  us,  him  who  plots 
ill  against  thy  friend. 

8  Give  us  not  as  a  prey  to  mortal  enemy,  nor  to  the  wicked 

friend  of  fiends. 
With  conquering  guards,  auspicious,  unassailable,  protect  us, 
0  Most  Youthful  God. 

9  Protect  us,  Agni,   through  the  first,  protect  us  through   the 

second  hymn, 
Protect  us  through  three  hymns,  0  Lord  of  Power  and  Might, 
through  four  hymns,  Vasu,  guard  thou  us. 


reckoned  in  the  division  of  the  Rigveda  into  Maudalas  (Books)  and  Anuvftkas 
(Chapters),  and  S&yana  does  ni)t  notice  them  in  his  Commentary.  See  "Wil- 
son's Translation,  V.  p.  96,  note  by  Cowell.  See  also  Max  Miiller's  Vedie 
Hymnt  I.  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Vol.  XXXII.),  pp.  xlvi — xlviii. 

Eleven  must  be  added  to  the  number  of  this  hymn  and  of  all  that  follow 
in  this  Book  to  make  them  correspond  with  the  numbers  in  Max  Miiller's 
edition  of  the  text. 

2  Wh(y8e  locks  drop  oil :  *  butter-haired.' — Wilson. 
.  6  The  arrangers :  of  the  ritual  of  sacrifice. 

6  Princes :  wealthy  patrons.     According  to  S&yana,  the  Rishi's  own  sons 

and  others  may  be  intended. 

9  The  nambera  probably  have  reference  to  t\xe  1o>3it  <:^«c\«t^  ol  the  sky.— 
J^udwMg, 


SIMN  49.1  TffS  RTGVEDA.  201 

10  ProBerve  us  from  each  fiend  who  brings  the  Gkxls  no  gift, 

preserve  thou  us  in  deeds  of  strength  : 
For  we  possess  in  tbee  the  nearest  Friend  of  all,  for  service 
of  the  Qods  and  weal. 

11  O  Holy  Agni,  give  us  wealth  renowned  with  men  and  strength- 

ening Me. 
Bestow  on  us,  O  Helper,  that  which  many  crave,  more  glorious 

BtiU  by  righteousness ; 
It  Wherewith  we  may  overcome  our  rivals  in  the  war,  o'erpower- 

ing  the  foe's  designs. 
•     So  wax  thou  by  our  food,  O  Excellent  in  strength.     Quicken 

our  thoughts  that  find  oat  wealth. 

13  Agni  is  even  as  a  bull  who  whets  and  brandishes  his  horns. 
Well-sharpened  are  his  jaws  which  may  not  be  withstood  :  tho 

Child  of  Strength  hath  powerful  teeth. 

14  Not  to  be  stayed,  0  Bull,  O  Agni,  are  thy  teeth  when  thou 

art  spreading  far  and  wide. 
Make  our  oblations  duly  offered  up,  O  Priest,  and  give  us 
store  of  precious  things. 

15  Thou  liest  in  the  wood  :  from  both  thy  Mothers  mortals  kindle 

thee. 
Unweariedly  thou  bearest  up  the  offerer's  gifts,  then  shinest 
bright  among  the  Gods. 

16  And  so  the  seven  priests,  0  Agni,  worship  thee.  Free-giver, 

Everlasting  One. 
Thou  cleavest  through  the  rock  with  heat  and  fervent  glow. 
Agni,  rise  up  above  the  men. 

17  For  you  let  us  whose  grass  is  trimmed  call  Agni,  Agni,  rest- 

less Qod. 
Let  us  whose  food  is  offered  call  to  all  the  tribes  Agni  the 
Invoking  Priest  of  men. 

18  Agni,  with  noble  psalm  that  tells  his  wish  he  dwells,  thinking 

on  thee  who  guardest  him. 
Speedily  bring  us  strength  of  many  varied  sorts  to  be  most 
near  to  succour  us. 

19  Agni,  Praise-singer!  Lord  of  men,  God !  bumer-up  of  Rakshasas, 
Mighty  art  thou,  the  ever-present  Household-Lord,    Home- 
friend  and  Guardian  from  the  sky. 

12  Wherewith:  referring  to  the  wealth  which  Agni  is  asked  to  give.' 
15  In  the  wood:  in  the  pieces  of  wood  used  for  the  production  of  Agni. 
Itf  Seven  prieits :  minor  Hotar  priests,  such  as  the  Maitr&varuna  and  others. 
The  rock :  adrinif  explained  by  S&yana  as  meghanij  the  cloud. 
17  The  restless  (?od .'  or,  'f/ie  irresistible/ — ^Wilson. 
J 8  /Te  dn/elis:  th&t  ia,  the  pioua  institutor  oi  &acxi&co« 


a02  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

20  Let  no  fiend  come  among  us,  0  thou  rich  in   light,  no  spell  of 
those  who  deal  in  spells. 
To  distant  pastures  drive  faint  hunger :  far  away,   0   Agni, 
chase  the  demons'  friends. 

HYMN  L.  Indra. 

Both  boons, — may  Indra,  hitherward  turned,  listen  to  this 

prayer  of  ours, 
And  mightiest  Maghavan  with  thought  inclined  to  as  come 

near  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

2  For  him,  strong,  independent  Ruler,  Heaven  and  Earth  have 

fashioned  forth  for  power  and  might. 
Thou  seatest  thee  as  first  among  thy  peers  in  place,   for  thy 
soul  longs  for  Soma  juice. 

3  Fill  thyself  full,  0  Lord  of  wealth,  0  Indra,  with  the  juice  we 

shed. 
We  know  thee.  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds !  victor  in  the  fight^  van- 
quishing e'en  the  invincible. 

4  Chaugeless  in  truth,  0  Maghavan  Indra,   let  it  be  as  thou  in 

wisdom  wiliest  it. 
May  we,  0  fair  of  cheek,   win  booty  with  thine  aid,  0  Thun- 
derer, swiftly  seeking  it. 

5  Indra,  with  all  thy  saving  helps  give  us  assistance,  Lord  of 

power. 
For  after  thee  we  follow  even  as  glorious  bliss,  thee.   Hero, 
finder-out  of  wealth. 

6  Increaser  of  our  steeds  and  multiplying  kine,  a  golden  well,  O 

God,  art  thou, 
For  no  one  may  impair  the  gifts  laid  up  in  thee.     Bring  me 
whatever  thing  I  ask. 

7  For  thou, — come  to  the  worshipper ! — wilt  find  great  wealth 

to  make  us  rich. 

Fill  thyself  full,  0  Maghavan,  for  gain  of  kine,  full,  Indra, 
for  the  gain  of  steeds. 

8  Thou  as  thy  gift  bestowest  many  hundred  herds,   yea,  many 

thousands*  dost  thou  give. 

With  singers'  hymns  have  we  brought  the  Fort-render  near, 
singing  to  Indra  for  his  grace. 


20  Spell  of  those  who  deal  in  spells :  ydtHrydtumJXvatAm :  *  torment  of  the 
ep//  spirits. '—  Wilson, 

1  ^oiA  boons:  Indr^  is  asked  to  hear  tYie  ^xajet  wi^  Vi  ^ro^'Oa^^-aft., 


BYMN  50.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  20S 

9  Wliether  the  simple  or  the  sage,  Indra,  have  offered  praise  to  thee, 
He,  Satakratu !  by  his  love  hath  gladdened  thee,  ambitious ! 
ever  pressing  on  1 

10  If  he  the  Strong  of  arm,  the  hreaker-down  of  forts,  the  great 

Destroyer,  hear  my  call. 
We,  seeking  riches  cry  to  Indra,  Lord  of  wealth,  to  Satakratu 
with  our  lauds. 

1 1  We  count  not  then  as  sinners,  nor  as  niggardly  or  foolish  men. 
When  with  the  Soma  juice  which  we  have  shed  we  make  Indra, 

the  Mighty  One,  our  Friend. 

12  Him  have  we  yoked  in  fight,  the  powerful  Conqueror,  debt- 

claimer,  not  to  be  deceived. 
Best  charioteer,  the  Victor  ma»rks  each  fault,  he  knows  the 
strong  to  whom  he  will  come  near. 

13  Indra,  give  us  security  from  that  whereof  we  are  afraid. 
Help  us,  0  Maghavan,  let  thy  succour  give  us  this :   drive 

away  foes  and  enemies. 

14  For  thou,  0  liberal  Lord  of  bounty,  strengthenest  his  ample 

home  who  worships  thee. 
So  Indra,  Maghavan,  thou  Lover  of  the  Song,  we  with  pressed 
Soma  call  on  thee. 

15  Indra  is  Vritra-slayer,  guard,  our  best  defender  from  the  foe. 
May  he  preserve  our  last  and  middlemost,  and  keep  watch 

from  behind  us  and  before. 

16  Defend  us  from  behind,  below,  above,  in  front,  on  all  sides, 

Indra,  shield  us  well. 
Keep  far  away  from  us  the  terror  sent  from  heaven :   keep 
impious  weapons  far  away. 

17  Protect  us,  Indra,  each  to-day,  each  morrow,  and  each  follow- 

ing day. 
Our  singers,  through  all  days,  shalt  thou.  Lord  of  the  brave, 
keep  safely  both  by  day  and  night. 

18  A  crushing  Warrior,  passing  rich  is  Maghavan,  endowed  with 

all  heroic  might. 
Thine  arms,  0  Satakratu,  are  exceeding  strong,  arms  which 
have  grasped  the  thunderbolt. 


9  The  simple  or  the  sage :  *  the  unskilled  or  the  skilled.' — Wilson. 

12  Marks  eaeh  fault :  the  meaning  of  bhrimdm  is  uncertain  :  according  to 
Ludwig  it  is  *  his  supporter  or  feeder,'  that  is,  the  worshipper  who  presents 
hiua  with  sacrificial  food.  S&yaua  takes  it  with  v(l/mam :  *  the  stroijg  racer.' — 
Wilson.     The  strong :  the  rich  and  powerful  worshipper. 

16  Our  last  and  middlemost ;  putram,  son,  being  understood,  «AQO¥d\w%  tA 
S&5'ana.     The  expression  prob&bly  means  '  all  of  U8.' 

J^  TAe  ferivr  4ent/rom  Aeami :  *  fiupematural  alarm;  —^Waoa, 


204  THE  HYMN 8  OP  [BOOK  VI IL 

HYMN  LI.  Indra. 

Offer  ye  up  as  praise  to  him  that  wherein  Indra  take^  delight. 
The  Soma-bringers  magnify  Indra's  great  energy  with  hymns. 
Good  are  the  gifts  that  Indra  gives. 

2  Sole  among  chiefs,  companionless,  impetuous^  and  peerless,  he 
Hath  waxen  great  o'er  many  folk,  yea,  over  all  things  bom, 

.  in  might. 

3  Lord  of  swift  bounty,  he  will  win  e'en  with  a  steed  of  worth- 

less sort. 
This,  Indra,  must  be  told  of  thee  who  wilt  perform  heroic  deeds. 

4  Come  to  us  hither :  let  us  pay  devotions  that  enhance  thy 

might, 
For  which,  Most  Potent !  thou   wouldst  fain  bless  the   man 
here  who  strives  for  fame. 

5  For  thou,  0  Indra,  makest  yet  more  bold  the  spirit  of  the  bold 
Who  with  strong   Soma   serveth  thee,   stiU  ready  with   his 

reverent  prayers. 

6  Worthy  of  song,  he  looketh  down  as  a  man  looketh  into  wells. 
Pleased  with  the  Soma-bringer's  skill  he  maketh  him  his  mate 

and  friend. 

7  In  strength  and  wisdom  all  the  Gods,  Indra,  have  yielded  unta 

thee. 
Be  thou  the  Guard  of  all,  0  thou  whom  many  praise. 

8  Praised,  Indra,  is  this  might  of  thine,  best  for  the  service  of 

the  Gods, 
That  thou  with  power  dost  slay  Vritra,  0  Lord  of  Strength. 

9  He  makes  the  races  of  mankind  like  synods  of  the  Beauteous 

One. 
Indra  knows  this  his  manifest  deed,  and  is  renowned. 

10  Thy  might,  0  Indra,  at  its  birth,  thee   also,  and   thy   mental 
power, 
In  thy  care,   Maghavan   rich   in   kine !  they   have   increased 
exceedingly. 


1  Good  are,  etc :  the  refrain  is  repeated  m  each  verse. 

2  Chiefs :  nribhih :  men,  meaning  Gods,  according  to  Sftjana.     Folk :  or. 


tribes. 


3  lie  will  win  e'en  toith  a  steed  of  worthless  sort:  *  He wishes  to  bestow 

blessings  (upon  us)  with  his  unurged  courser.'— Wilson. 
3  He  looketh  down :  kindly  on  us  as  a  thirsty  man  looks  eagerly  into  a  well. 
9  ZH^e  synods  of  the  Beauteous  Qxit ;  like  aaaemblies  that   meet  to  honotur 
in*  ^"^  *^®  xneanjng  is  obscure. 
10  TAej^  :  thy  worshippers. 


jsmrar  9i]  the  rtovbda.  ^os 

11  0  Yritra-slayer,  thou  and  I  will  both  combine   for  winning 

spoil. 
Even  malignity  will  consent,  0  Bolt-armed  Hero,  unto  us. 

12  Let  us  extol  this  Indra  as  truthful  and  never  as  untrue. 

Dire  is  his  death  who  pours  no  gifts  :  great  light  hath  he  who 
offers  them.  Good  are  the  gifts  that  Indra  gives. 

HYMN  LII.  Indi*. 

With  powers  of  Mighty  Ones  hath  he,  Ancient,  Belov^,  been 

equipped, 
Through  whom  the  Father  Manu  made  prayers  efficacious 

with  the  Gods. 

2  Him,  Maker  of  the  sky,  let  stones  wet  with  the   Soma  ne'er 

forsake, 
Nor  hymns  and  prayer  that  must  be  said. 

3  Indra  who  knew  full  well  disclosed  the  kine  to  the  Angirases. 
This  his  great  deed  must  be  extolled. 

4  Indra,  promoter  of  the  song,  the  sage's  Strengthener  as  of  old. 
Shall  come  to  bless  and  succour  us  at  presentation  of  this 

laud. 

5  Now  after  their  desire's  intent  the  pious  singers  with  the  cry 
Of  Hail !  have  sung  loud  hymns  to  thee,  Indra,  to  gain  a  stall 

of  kine. 

6  With  Indra  rest  all  deeds  of  might,  deeds  done  and  yet  to  be 

performed. 
Whom  singers  know  devoid  of  guile. 

7  When  the  Five  Tribes  with  all  their  men  to  Indra  have  sent 

out  their  voice, 
And  when  the  priest  hath  strewn  much  grass,  this  is  the  Friend's 
own  dwelling-place. 

8  This  praise  is  verily  thine  own :  thou  hast  performed  these 

manly  deeds, 
And  sped  the  wheel  upon  its  way. 

11  Malignity :  or  the  malignant  man.  *  The  niggard.' — Wilson. 

12  Dire  U  his  death :  or,  great  is  Lis  destruction. 

1  This  difficult  verse  is  variously  interpreted  both  by  Indian  commentators 
and  by  European  scholars.  I  foUow  partly  Aufrecht's  translation  as  given  by 
Dr.  Muir,  and  partly  Ludwig's  Commentary.  See  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  pp.  163 — 164; 
Ludwig's  Rigveda,  V.  pp.  167 — 168  ;  and  Wilson's  Translation,  V.  p.  107. 
The  A  noient,  Beloved  appears  to  be  Soma  and  not  Indra. 

7  The  Friend's :  Indra's.  The  second  line  is  very  obscure.  See  Bergaigoa^ 
I.  vi.,  and  Vedic  Bymns,  L,  p.  226,     I  adopt  IiUd>Nig'&  *mlergi«^M\QiCu 

S  TAe  wheel:  the  Sun, 


206  TffB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vltl. 

9  At  the  o'erflpwing  of  this  Steer,  boldly  he  strode  for  life,  and 
took 
Soma  as  cattle  take  their  corn. 

10  Receiving  this  and  craving  help,  we,  who  with  you  are  Daksha's 

sons, 
Would  fain  exalt  the  Maruts'  Lord. 

11  Yea,  Hero,  with  the  singers  we  sing  to  the  duly-coming  Band* 
Allied  with  thee  may  we  prevail. 

12  With  us  are  raining  Riidras,  clouds  accordant  in  call  to  battle^ 

at  the  death  of  Vritra, 
The  strong  assigned  to  him  who  sings  and  praises.     May  Gods 
with  Indra  at  their  head  protect  us. 

HYMN  LIII.  Indra. 

May  pur  hymns  give  tbee  great  delight.     Display  thy  bounty,. 

Thunderer. 
Drive  off  the  enemies  of  prayer. 

2  Crush  with  thy  foot  the  niggard  churls  who  bring  no  gifts. 

Mighty  art  thou : 
There  is  not  one  to  equal  thee. 

3  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  Soma  pressed,  Soma  unpressed  is  alsa 

thine. 
Thou  art  the  Sovran  of  the  folk. 

4  Come,  go  thou  forth,  dwelling  in  heaven  and  listening  to  the 

prayers  of  men  : 
Thou  fillest  both  the  heavens  and  earth. 

5  Even  that  hill  with  rocky  heights,  with  hundreds,  thousands, 

held  within. 
Thou  for  thy  worsliippers  brakest  through. 

6  We  call  on  thee  both  night  and  day  to  ta^te  the  flowing  Soma 

juice : 
Do  thou  fulfil  our  heart?*'  desire. 


9  T/iisSteei':  Soma;  that  is,  when  abundant  libations  had  been   offered, 
He:  Indra. 

]  0  Daksha'»  sons  :  of  the  same  origin  with  you.     *  Lords  of  food,*  according 
to  S&>  ana. 

11  Duly-commq  Band:  of  Marnts^ledbj  Indra 

12  The  itrong :  perhaps  the  thunderbolt  with  which  Indra  aidis  the  wor- 
shipper.   

3  Unpresged  :  in  its  natural  state  in  the  stalks  of  the  piant.     Or,  as  Ludwig 
tiug^eata,  the  Soma  which  Indra  drinks  in  heaven  may   be  meant.     See  VIL 

o  TAae  hm.'  the  cloud  with  its  countleaa  tTeaaux^^  oi  tvwdl 
d  J>r^he:  juet  before  dawn. 


MYMI^Si.]    '  THE  RIGVEDA.  207 

7  Where  is  that  ever-youthful  Steer,  strong-necked  and  never 

yet  bent  down  ? 
What  Brahman  ministers  to  him  1 

8  To  whose  libation  doth  the  Steer,  betake  him  with  delight 

therein  ? 
Who  takes  delight  in  Indra  now  % 

9  Whom,  Vritra-slayer,  have  thy  gifts  and  liera  powers  accom- 

panied ? 
Who  is  thy  dearest  in  the  laud  I 

10  For  thee  among  mankind,  among  the  Par  us  is  this  Soma  shed. 
Hasten  thou  hither  :  drink  thereof. 

1 1  This,  growing  by  Sushoma  and  by  Saryanllvan,  dear  to  thee, 
In  Arjikiya,  cheers  thee  best. 

12  Hasten  thou  hitherward,  and  drink  this  iw  rnumficence  to-day, 
Delightful  for  thine  eager  draught. 

HYMN   LIV.  Indra. 

Though,  Indra,  thou  art  called  by  men  frcHxx  east  and  west, 

from  north  and  south, 
Come  hither  quickly  with  fleet  steeds ; 

2  If  in  the  effluence  of  heaven,  rich  in  its  light,  than  takest  joy, 
Or  in  the  sea  in  Soma  juice. 

3  With   songs  I   call   thee,  Great   and  Wide,   even  as  a  cow  to 

profit  us, 
Indra,  to  drink  the  Soma-draugbt. 

4  Hither,  O  ludra,  let  thy  Bay^  bear  up  and  bring  upon  thy  car 
Thy  glory,  God  1  and  majesty. 

5  Thou,  Indra.  woiildst  be   sung  and  praised  as   great,  strong, 

lordly  in  thy  deeds  : 
Come  hither,  drink  our  Soma  juice. 

6  We  whj  have  shed  the  Soma  and  prepared  the  feast  are   call- 

ing thee 
To  sit  on  this  our  sacred  grass. 


10  Among  the  PHrus :  among  men,  or  among  Kings  named  Pdnie. — Sftjana. 

1 1  Sushomd :  apparently  a  river  which  cannot  now  be  identified.  ArjtMya  : 
probably  n  country  or  district  Saryan^vdn  is  said  to  be  a  lake  in  the  district 
of  Kuruk^hetra  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  For  conjectures  regarding  Su8hoiu&  and 
Arjiktya  see  Zimmer,  Altindischet  Lebtn,  pp.  12,  13.    Cf.  VIII.  7.  S9. 

2  The  efluence  of  heaven :  or  the  place  in  heavea  from  'wYvicVi  Wi^^    KshtH^ 
Hows.     In  the  sea:  of  air  ;  the  Armament. 

3  Js  a  coto:  aa  the  most  useful  of  all  animals. 


tae  7EE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIll, 

7  As,  Indra^  thou  art  evermore  the  commoQ  Lord  of  all  alike. 
As  such  we  invocate  thee  now. 

8  The  men  with  stones  have  milked  for  thee  this  neotar   of  the 

Soma  juice : 
Indra,  be  pleased  with  it,  and  drink. 

9  Neglect  all  pious  men  with  skill  in  sacred  song :  come  hither- 

ward 
With  speed,  and  give  us  high  renown. 

10  Gods,  may  the  mighty  rest  unharmed,  the  King  who  gives  me 

spotted  kine, 
Kinc  decked  with  golden  ornaments. 

11  Beside  a  thousand  spotted  kine  I  have  received  a  gift  of  gold. 
Pure,  brilliant,  and  exceeding  great. 

12  Durgaha's  grandsons,  giving  me  a  thousand  kine,   munifioeat^ 
Have  won  renown  among  the  Gk)ds. 

HYMN  LV.  Indra. 

Loup  singing  at  the  sacred   rite  where  Soma  flows  we  priests 

invoke 
With  haste,  that  he  may  help,  as  the  bard's   Cherisher,  Indra 

who  fin^eth  wealth  for  you. 

2  Whom  with  fair  helm,  in  rapture  of  the  juice,  the  firm   resist- 
less slayers  hinder  not : 
Giver  of  glorious  wealth  to  him  who  sing  his  praise,  honouring 
him  who  toils  and  pours  : 

Z  Sakra,  who  like  a  curry-comb  for  horses  or  a  golden  goad, 
Indra,  the  Vritra-slayer,  urges   eagerly   the   opening   of  the 
stall  of  kine  : 


9  4tt  J9101W  m&n, :  all  other  worshippers. 

10  The  King :  who  instituted  the  sacrifice.  According  to  SAyana,  Indra  is 
meant ;  but  this  is  impossible. 

12  Durgaha'8  grandsons  :  Sftynna  explains  durgdhasya  by  duhkhatu  jgdha- 
mdnasya  met  o^  n^e  phmged  in  grief,  and  napitaktjxe^i^  as  araJc$hitat^ 
unprotected  :  *  Unprotected  as  I  am,  and  plunged  in  sorrow  (my  dependents) 
by  the  favour  of  the  gods  obtain  food,  and  are  blessed  with  abundance  in  a 
thousand  cattle.'    See  Wilson's  Translation,  and  Cowell's  note. 

1  We  priests  invoke :  the  construction  is  difficult.  I  follow  Ludwig,  and  taloe 
hmCf  an  infinitive,  as  equivalent  to  the  first  person  plural. 

3  Curry-comb  for  horses  :  the  purifier  of  his  worshippers  and  well-skilled  ill 
horses,  According  to  Sdyana.    GoldAn  goad:  wonderful  and    golden-bodied, 
According  to  Sdyana,     The  meaning  oi  Hja^,  aa  ^^  «a  oi  mvxk^IujLK^  U  UIIQ0^ 
^a«i/  but  both  setim  to  signify  iastrumAnta  coxmooWi  V\\Xi  Vw^^i^* 


jrr jry  55.1  tee  rjo  veda  . 

4  Who   for  the  worshipper  scatters  forth  ample  wealth,  even. 

though  buried,  piled  iu  heaps  : 
May  ludra,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  fair-helmed   Thunderer,    act 
at  his  pleasure,  as  he  lists. 

5  Hero  whom  many  praise,  what  thou  hast  longed  for,  even   of 

old,  from  meu. 
All  that  we  offer  unto  thee,  0  Indra,  now,  sacrifice,  laud,  effect- 
ual speech. 

6  To  Soma,  Much-invoked,  Bolt-armed  !  for  thy  carouse.  Celestial, 

Soma-drinker!  come. 
Thou  to  the  man  who  prays  and  pours   the   juioe   hast   been 
best  giver  of  delightful  wealth. 

7  Here,  verily,  yesterday  we  let  the  Thunder-wielder  drink  his  fill. 
So  iu  like  manner  offer  him  the  juice  to*duy.     Now  range  you 

by  the  Glorious  Que. 

8  Even  the  wolf,  the  savage  beast  that  rends  the   sheep,  follows 

the  path  of  his  decrees. 
So  graciously  accepting,  Indra,  this  our  praise,  with  wondrous 
thought  come  forth  to  us. 

9  What  manly  deed  of  vigour   now   remains   that   Indra   hath 

not  done  ? 

Who  hath  not  heard  his  glorious  title  and  his  fame,  the  Vritra- 
slayer  from  his  birth  1 

10  How  great  his  power  resistless  !  how    invincible   the   Vritra- 
slayer's  matchless  might  ! 
Indra  excels  all  usurers  who  see  the  day,  excels  all  traffickers 
in  strength. 

110  Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  we,  thy  very  constant  worshippers. 
Bring  prayers  ne'er  heard  before   to   thee,  0  Muoh-iuvoked,  O 
Thunder-armed,  to  be  thy  meed. 

12  0  thou  of  mighty  acts,  the  aids  that  are  iu  thee  call  forward 

many  an  enger  hope. 

Past   the   drink-offerings,  Vasu,  even   of  the  good,  hear   my 
call.  Strongest  God,  and  come. 

13  Verily,  Indra,  we  are  thine,  we  worshippers  depend  on  thee. 
For  there  is  none  but  only  thou  to  show  us  grace,  O  Maghavan, 

thou  much  invoked. 


4  Buried :  as  gold,  precious  stones,  etc. 

8  TAcW/;  according  to  Sftyapa,  the  robber.     The  reason   of  mentioning^ 
either  in  this  place  is  not  obvious. 

10  Who  see  the  dap :  who  live.    According  to  S&yM^i^  ^\kO  VwV  '^v^^'^ 
Sun  in  their  present  life,  but  will  he  sunk  in  darknesa  att«c  ^caXVi, 
14 


210  THE  HYMm  OP  [BOOK  Vlll. 

14  From  this  oiir  misery  and  famine  set   us  free,  from    this   dire 

curse  deliver  us. 
Succour  us  with  tliiue  help  and  with  thy    woudroas   thought. 
Most  Mighty,  finder  of  the  way. 

15  Now  let  your  Soma  juice  be  poured  :  be  not  afraid,  0  Kali^s  son9. 
This  darkening  sorrow  goes  away  ;  yea,  of  itself  it  vanishes. 

HYMN  LVI.  Adityas. 

Now  pray  we  to  these  Kshatriyas,  to  the  Adity/is  for  their  aid. 
These  who  are  gracious  to  assist. 

,2  May  Milra  hear  ns  o'er  distress,  and  Varnna  and  Aryamari, 
Yea,  the  Adityas,  as  they  know. 

3  For  wonderful  and  meet  for  praise  is  these  Adityas'  saving  help 
To  him  who  offers  and  prepares. 

4  The  mighty  aid  of  you,  the  Great,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
We  claim  to  be  our  sure^  defence. 

5  Guard  us,  Adityas.  still  alive,  before  the  deadly  weapon'strike : 
Are  ye  not  they  who  hear  our  call  ? 

6  What  sheltering  defence  ye  have  for  him  who  toils  in  pouring 

gifts, 
Graciously  bless  ye  us  therewith. 

7  Adityas,  Gods,  from  sorrow  there  is  freedom,  for   the  sinless, 

wealth, 
O  ye  in  whom  no  fault  is  seen. 

8  Let  not  this  fetter  bind  us  fast  :  may  he  release  us  for  success  ; 
For  strong  is  Indra  and  renowned. 

9  0  Gods  who  fain  would  lend  your  aid,  destroy  not    us    as   ye 

destroy 
'    Your  enemies  who  go  astray. 

10  And  thee  too,  0  Great  Aditi,  thee  also.  Goddess,  I  address. 
Thee  very  gracious  to  assist. 

11  Save  us  in  depth  and  shallow  from  the   f(^e,    thou   Mother    of 

Strong  Sons  : 
Let  no  one  of  our  seed  be  harmed. 

12  Far-spread  !  wide-ruling!  grant  thut  we,  unharmed  by  envy/ 

may  expand  : 
Grant  that  our  progeny  may  live. 

14  From  this  our  misery :  the  hymn  was  '  eeen  *  and   employed  in  a  time  of 
•dearth  and  famine.     Finder  of  the  way :  to  prosperity. 
J 5  JfTalPs  8on9  :  Kali  is  the  Rishi  or  seer  of  the  hymn. 


1  ITshcifripas :  royal  princes. 
Ji   O/ Strong  Sons :  the  Adibyaa. 


HMrV  57.]  ¥HE  RIO  tEDA . '  ill 

»l3  Those  who,  the  Princes  of  the   folk,  in  native   glory,   ne'er 
deceived, 
Maintain  their  statutes,  void  of  guile  — 
\\  As  such,  from   mouth   of  raveuiug   wolves,    0  je  Adityos, 
rescue  us, 
Like  a  bound  thief,  0  Adili. 

15  Adityas,  let  this  arrow,  yea,  let  this  malignity  depart 
From  us  or  e'er  it  strike  us  dead. 

16  For,  Bountiful  Adityas,  we  have  evermore  enjoyed  your  help. 
Both  now  and  in  the  days  of  old. 

17  To  every  one,  0  ye  Most  Wise,  who  turneth  even   from  sin  to 

you, 
Ye  Gods  vouchsafe  that  he  may  live. 

18  May  this  new  mercy  profit  us,  which,  ye  Adityas,  frees  like  one 
Bound  from  his  bonds,  0  Aditi. 

19  O  ye  Adityas,  this  your  might  is  not  to  be  despised  by  us  : 
So  be  ye  graciously  inclined. 

20  Let  not  VivasvjLn's  weapon  nor  the  shaft,  Adityas,  wrought 

with  skill. 
Destroy  us  ere  old  age  be  nigh 

21  On  every  side  dispel  all  sin,  Adityas,  all  hostility. 
Indigence,  and  combined  attack. 

HYMN  LVII.  I„dr«. 

Even  as  a  car  to  give  us  aid,  we  draw  thee  hither  for  our  bliss 
Strong  in  thy  deeds,  checking  assault,  Lord,  Mightiest  Indra, 
of  the  brave ! 

2  Great  in  thy  power  and  wisdom,  Strong,  with   thought  that 

comprehendeth  all ! 
Thou  hast  filled  full  with  majesty. 

3  Thou  very  Mighty  One,  whose  hands  by  virtue  of  thy  greatness 

grasp 
The  golden  bolt  that  breaks  its  way. 

4  Your  Lord  of  might  that  ne'er  hath  bent,  that  ruleth  over  all 

mankind, 
I  call,  that  he,  as  he  is  wont,  may  aid  the  chariots  and  the 
men. 

1 7  Who  tw*neth  even  from  sin  :  who  cornea  to  you  for  forgiveness. 

20  VivMvdn's  weapon :  the  deadly  bolt  of  the  Sun,  or  perhaps,  mefcaphpr- 
cally,  of  the  sacrificer. 

21  Combined  attack:  *  the  closely  drawn  net.'— Wilftow. 
2  T&auAati/Uledfull:   tie  umVetteT 


812  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Till. 

b  Whom,  ever  furthering,  in  frays  that  win  the  light,  in  both 
the  hosts 
Men  call  to  succour  and  to  help. 

6  Indra,  the  Strong,  the  measureless,  worthy  of  praise,   Most 

Bountiful, 

Sole  Ruler  even  over  wealth. 

» 

7  Him,    for   his   ample  bounty,    him,  this    Indra   do  I  urge  to 

drink, 
Who,  as  his  praise  was  sung  of  old,  the  Dancer,  is  the  Lord 
of  men. 

8  Thou  Mighty  One,  whose  friendship  none  of  mortals  ever  bath 

obtained  : 
None  will  attain  unto  thy  might. 

9  Aided  by  thee,  i^ith  thee  allied,  in  frays  for  water  and  for  snn, 
fiolt-armed  !  may  we  win  ample  spoil, 

10  So  seek  we  thee  with  sacrifice  and  songs,   chief  Lover  of  the 
Song, 
As,  in  our  battles,  Indra,  thou  to  Furnmajya  gavest  help.    ^ 

If  0   Thunderer,    thou    whose   friendship    and    whose    onward 
guidance  both  are  sweety 
Thy  sacrifice  must  be  prepared.  ; 

12  To  us,  ourselves,  give  ample  room,  give  for  our  dwelling  ample 

room  : 
Give  ample  room  to  us  to  live. 

13  We   count  the  banquet  of  the  Gods  a  spacious   pathway  for 

the  men. 
And  for  the  cattle,  and  the  car, 

14  Six  men,  yea,  two  and  two,  made  glad  with  Soma  juice,  come 

near  to  me 
With  ofiferings  pleasant  to  the  taste. 

15  Two  brown-hued  steeds,  Indrota's  gift,  two  bays  from  Kiksha's 

son  were  mine, 
From  Asvauiedha*s  son  two  red. 


7  The  Dancer :  in  the  dance  of  war. 

10  PWhimdyya :   ajccording  to   Say  ana,  '  me   (the  KiBhi)   the  pOBsessor  of 
much  wisdom.' 

18^  Sacrifice  to  the  Gods  procures  freedom  and  security  for  us  and  all  who 
belong  to  ur«. 

16  '  Thtise  princes  with  their  respective  fathers  are  the  six  of  V.  14.     The 

'/trous  6{  J^iifgha  aiid  Atvamedha  had  origiually  commenced   the  sacrifice,  hut 

ync^o^a  and  hia  father  Atithigvo,  <SdMk!^  \xi  aee  \^  vim^  «*i\kdfcd their  gifts.     The 

*ODB  aJone are  mentioned  I  the  son  is  t\ie  iat\iet'%  afetoxi^«.^l^'I^VlXvv«-Vv<i.^ 

^^^^^-'—CoweJre  note  in  Wilson's  TranaUtVou.  M 


iSrYAW58.1  THEJttOVSDAr  III 

16  From  Atithigva  good   car-steeds,   from  Arksha  reln-bbeying 

steeds, 

From  Asvamedha  beauteous  ones. 

17  Indrota,  Atithigva's  son,  gave  me  six  horses  matched  with 

mares : 
And  Putakratu  gave  besides. 

18  Marked  above  all,  amid  the  brown,  is  the  red  mare  V^ishanvati, 
Obedient  to  the  rein  and  whip. 

19  O  bound  to  me  by  deeds  of  might,  not  even  the  man  who  loves 

to  blame 
Hath  found  a  single  fault  in  you. 

HYMN  LVIIL  lodra. 

I  SEND  you  forth  the  song  of  praise  for  Indu,  hero-gladdener. 
With  hymn  and  plenty  he  invites  you  to  complete  the  sacrifice. 

2  Thou  wishest  for  thy  kine  a  bull,  for  those  who   long  for  his 

approach, 
For  those  who  turn  away  from  him,  lord  of  thy  cows  whom 
none  may  kill. 

3  The  dappled  kine  who  stream  with  milk  prepare  his  draught 

of  Soma  juice : 
Clans  in  the  birth-place  of  the  Gods,  in  the  three  luminous 
realms  of  heaven. 

4  Praise,  even  as  he  is  known,  with  song  Indra  the  guardian  of 

the  kine. 
The  Son  of  Truth,  Lord  of  the  brave. 


16  Arhaha:  the  son  of  Riksha.     A^vamedha:  the  son  of  Asvamedha. 

17  PiUah*atu ;  son  of  Asvamedha. 

18  Vrishanvatt :    according  to  von  Roth,  'perhaps,  that  may  be  found 
among  stallions.' 

19  0  bound  to  me :  this  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  prinees  who  instituted 
i;he  sacrifice  and  gave  the  rewards  which  have  been  mentioned. 


1  The  8ong  of  praise :  trishlfibham :  used  in  a  general  sense  for  any  hymn 
of  praise.     Indu :  Soma.     According  to  S^yana.  Indra  is  meant. 

2  The  stanza  is  difficult.    I  adopt  Pischel's  explanation  of  naddm  and 
^dadn^m. 

3  Clans :  v'sah :  possibly  the  cows  are  meant.     Egg^eling  translates :  *At 

his  birth  the  well-like  milking,  speckled  ones  mix  the  Soma  (draught),  the 

clans  of  the  gods  in  the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens'  (Sacred  Books  of  the 

East,  XLI.  p.  307).     Pischel  observes  :    *  The  connexion  of   the  first  three 

stanzas  is  probably  this :  Soma  shall  be  celebrated  by  you  in  your  song  of 

praise  in  order  that  he  may  liberally  reward  you.     What  thou  wishest  for 

thys^f  is  a  bull  for  the  cows,  in  order  that  they  may  be  propagated  «&.d 

provide  Indra  with  milk  to  be  mixed  with  his  Boma  ^uVce,  ^\o\<&  >^<&^  %«r^^ 

tke  nee  of  QodM  in  kll  the  three  realms  oi  heaivea.'-^Y«d^KiKt  8ituydM«a«\% 
p.  19T. 


tU  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vllh 

5  Hithei*  his  Bay  Steeds  have  been  set)t,  red  Steeds  are  on  the 

sacred  grass 
Where  we  in  concert  sing  our  songs« 

6  For  Indra  Thunder-armed  the  kine  have  yielded  mingled  milk 

and  mcath, 
What  time  he  found  them  in  the  vault. 

7  When  I  and  Indra  mount  on  high  up  to  the  Bright  One's  place 

and  home, 
We,  having  drunk  of  meath,  will  reach  his  seat, whose  Friend^ 
are  three  times  seven. 

8  Sing,  sing  ye  forth  your  s<M3gs  of  praise,  ye  Priyamedhag,  ung 

your  songs : 
Yea,  let  young  children  sing  their  lauds :  as  a  strong  castle 
praise  ye  him. 

9  Now  loudly  let  the  viol  sounds  the  lute  send  out  its  voice  with 

might, 
Shrill  be  the  music  of  the  string.     To  Indra  is  the  hynm  up- 
raised. 

10  When  hither  speed  the  dappled  cows,  unflinching,  easy  to  be 

milked, 
Seize  quickly,  as  it  bursts  away,  the  Soma  juice  for  Indra'a 
drink. 

1 1  Indra  hath  drunk,  Agni  hath  drunk  :  all  Deities  have  drunk 

their  fill. 
Here  Varuna  shall  have  his  home,  to  whom  the  floods  have 
sung  aloud  as  mother-kine  unto  their  calves. 

1 2  Thou,  Varuna,  to  whom  belong  Seven  Rivers,  art  a  glorious 

God. 
The  waters  flow  into  thy  throat  as  'twere  a  pipe  with  ample 
mouth. 

13  He  who  hath  made  the  fleet  steeds  spring,  well-harnessed,  to 

the  worshipper. 


6  In  the,  tranlt:  *  in  the  cavity  of  the  Soma-veasel.* — von  Roth;  'on  the  hoiizou.' 
— Ludwig  ;  *  near  at  hand.*— Sftyana. 

7  The  Bright  One*8  place :  fche  station  of  the  Sun.  Whose  Friends  art 
three  times  seven :  Indra  who  is  the  friend  of  the  Maruta.  I  follow  Ludwig 
in  combining  the  trih  saptd  sdkhyuh  of  the  tesit  into  one  compoui^d  word. 
S  lyana's  explanation  is  diflTerent :  *  let  us  be  united  in  the  twenty-first  sphere 
pf  the  (universal)  friend,* — See  note  in  Wilson's  Translation. 

9  The  viol :    gdrgarah :    *  a  kind  of  musical  instrument  *,  says    Sftyana. 
Godhuty  originally  the  leather  guard  worn  by  bowmen  on  the  left  arm,  and 
jf^n^^  {said  to  mean  bowstring)  are  also,  apparently,  names  of  musical  iiuftru- 
juenta. 

;  12  Varuna*a  throat,  or  palate,  ia  aaid  tiO  m^u  tti^  «R«^ voSo ^\^<^>(kA^fR«L 
rivers  dow,' 


BTMrr  5».]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  SIS 

He,  the  swift  Guide,  is  that  fair  form  that  loosed  the  horses 
near  at  hand. 

14  Indra,  the  very  Mighty,  holds  his  enemies  in  utter  scorn. 

He,  far  away,  and  yet  a  child,  cleft  the  cloud  smitten  by  his 
voice. 

15  He,  yet  a  boy  exceeding  small,  mounted  his  newly-fashioned 

car. 
He  for  his  Mother  and  his  Sire  cooked  the  wild  mighty  bufifalo. 

1^  Lord  of  the  home,  fair-helmeted,  ascend  thy  chariot  wrought 
gold, 
will  attend  the  Heavenly  One,  the  thousand-footed,  red  of 
iue,  matchless,  who  blesses  where  he  goes. 

th  reverence  they  come  hitherward  to  him  as  to  a  Sorran 
Lord, 

Aat  they  may  bring  him  near  for  tliis  man's  good  success,  to 
prosper  and  bestow  his  gifts. 

'he  Priyamedhas  have  observed  the  offering  of  the  men  of  old, 
>f  ancient  custom,  while  they  strewed  the  sacred  grass,  and 
spread  their  sacrificial  food, 

HYMN  LIX,  Indra. 

Hb  who,  as  Sovran  Lor  J  of  men,  moves  with  his  chariots  un- 
restrained, 

The  Vritra-slayer,  vanquisher  of  fighting  hosts,  preemiueufc, 
is  praised  with  song. 

2  Honour  that  Indra,  Puruhanman !  for  his  aid,  in  whose  sus- 
taining hand  of  oil 

The  splendid  bolt  of  thunder  was  deposited,  as  the  great  Sun 
was  set  in  heaven. 

3  No  one  by  deed  attains  to  him  who  works  and  strengthenj^ 
evermore :  ^ 

No,  not  by  sacrifice,  to  India  praised  of  all,  resistless,  daring, 
bold  ill  might 


15  His  Mother  and  his  Sire:  Earth  and  Heaven.  The  buffalo  is  the  dark 
rAin-chmd  which  Indra  pierces  with  hia  lightning,  or  peihaps  the  demon  Val* 
18  intendtid. 

16  The  Heavenly  One:  the  Sun,  which  is  Indra'a  chariot  Thousand -footed: 
bright  with  countless  rajs  of  light. 

17  This  man* 8:  who  institutes  the  sacrifice. 

2  Puruhanman :  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  addreaaea  YCvcaa^i.     Su%ta\.nvA^  t 
or  vidhartafi  m&y  (with  Ludwig)  be  taken  aa  a  nomiuaiVv^^  ^H\^i^l  tj^^vo^^  >2ftA 
boli  of  thunder  ag  a  austAiuar  (of  Order). 


816  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vlll. 

4  The  potent  Conqueror,  invincible  in  war,  him  at  whose  birth 

the  Mighty  Ones, 
The  Kine  who  spread  afar,  sent  their  loud  voices  out,  heavens, 
earths  sent  their  loud  voices  out. 

5  0  Indra,  if  a  hundred  heavens  and  if  a  hundred  earths  were 

thine — 
No,  not  a  thonHand  Suns  could  match  thee  at  thy  birth,  not 
both  the  worlds,  0  Thunderer. 

>6  Thou,  Hero,  hast  performed  thy  hero  deeds  with  might,  yea, 
all  with  strength,  0  Strongest  One. 
Maghavan,  help  us  to  a  stable  full  of  kine,  0  Thimderer,  with 
wondrous  aids. 

7  Let  not  a  godless  mortal  gain  this  food,  0  thou  whose  life  is 

long! 
But  one  who  yokes  the  bright-hued  steeds,  the  Etasas,  even 
Indra  yoker  of  the  Bays. 

8  Urge  ye  the  Conqueror  to  give,  your  Indra  greatly  to  bo 

praised. 
To  be  invoked  in  shallow  waters  and  in  depths,  to  be  invoked 
in  deeds  of  might. 

S  0  Vasu,  0  thou  Hero,  raise  us  up  to  ample  opulence. 

Kaise  us  to  gain  of  mighty  wealth,  0  Maghavan,  0  Indra,  to 
sublime  renown. 

10  Indra,  thou  justifiest  us,  and  traraplest  down  thy  slanderers. 
Guard  thyself,  valiant  Hero,  in  thy  vital  parts :  strike  down 

the  D^sa  with  thy  blows. 

11  The  man  who  brings  no  sacrifice,  inhuman,  godless,  infidel, 
Him  let  his  friend  the   mountain   cast  to  rapid  death,   the 

mountain  cast  the  Dasyu  down. 

12  0  Mightiest  Indra,  loving  us,  gather  thou  up,  as  grains  of  com 
Within  thine  hand,  of  these  their  kine,  to  give  away,  yea, 

gather  twice  as  loving  us. 

13  0  my  companions,  wish  for  power.     How  may  we  perfect  Sara's 

praise, 
The  liheral  princely  patron,  never  to  be  harmed  ? 

4  The  Kine:  the  heavens  and  tlie  earths. 
7  Etasas :  the  horses  of  the  Sun. 

10  J n  thy  vital  parts :  literally,  between  thy  thighs.     '  Shelter  us  between 
thy  thighs.* — Wilson. 

1 1  His  friend :  in  which  he  hopes  to  find  refuge :  according  to  S&yaoa, 
JParrst/i  (znouataiD)  is  a  Rishi,  the  friend  of  Indra. 

^^  TAeti'kine:  the  property  of  the  hoatWe  ft\)OT\^Tvtft. 

IS  Sara*s praUe :  Sara  must  be  the  matitutior  oi  \.\i^  %wsnS^<i^\  w^^R^gsBd^ 
^  9Ayana  he  ia  ludra,  '  the  destroyer; 


MTMS  CO.} :  THB  RIOVSDA:  til 

14  By  many  a  sage  whose  grass  is  trimmed  thou  art  continually 
praised, 
That  thou,  O  Sara,  hast  bestowed  here  one  and  here  another 
calf. 

Ill  The  noble,  S^radeva's  son,  hath  brought  a  calf,  led  by  the  ear, 
to  three  of  11  s, 
As  a  chief  brings  a  goat  to  milk. 

HYMN  LX.  Agni. 

0  AoNi,  with  thy  mighty  wealth  guard  us  from  all  malignity, 
Yea,  from  all  hate  of  mortal  man. 

2  For  over  thee,  0  Friend  from  birth,    the  wrath  of  man  hath 

no  control : 
Nay,  Guardian  of  the  earth  art  thon. 

3  As  such,   with  all  the  Gods,  0  Son  of  Strength,  auspicious  in 

thy  Am  me, 
Give  us  wealth  bringing  all  things  good. 

4  Malignities  stay  not  from  wealth  the  mortal  man  whom,  Agni, 

thou 
Protectest  while  he  offers  gifts. 

5  Sage  Agni,  he  whom  thou  dost  urge,  in  worehip  of  the  Gods, 

to  wealth, 
With  thine  assistance  winneth  kine. 

6  Riches  with  many  heroes  thou  hast  for  the  man  who  offers  gifts  : 
Lead  thou  ns  on  to  higher  bliss. 

7  Save  ns,  0  J^tavedas,  nor  abandon  us  to  him  who  sins. 
Unto  the  evil-hearted  man. 

8  O  Agni,  let  no  godless  man  avert  thy  bounty  as  a  God  : 
Over  all  treasures  thou  art  Lord. 

9  So,    Son  of  Strength,    thou  aidest   us  to  what  is  great  and 

excellent, 
Those,  Vasu  !  Friend  !  who  sing  thy  praise. 

10  Let  our  songs  come  anear  to  him  beauteous  and  bright  with 
piercing  flame, 
Our  offefinga,  with  our   homage,   to  the  Lord  of  wealth,    to 
him  whom  many  praise,  for  help  : 

14  Here  one  and  Jure  another:  4kam-ekam  :  meaning  many. 

15  Sdradeva's  8on:  Sara.  S4yana  explains  sauradevi/dh  as  cows  won  in 
battle.  *  May  Maghavan,  taking  them  by  the  ears,  lead  the  cows  with  their 
calves  from  our  three  (destructive  enemies),  as  the  owner  leads  a  goat  to 
drink,' — Wilson.  

2  Guardian  of  the  earth  :  Jeshdpdvdn :  *  Lord  of  the  Ti\g,bt.* — ^^^^ti^. 

^  WinnetA  i^ine :  literally,  ia  a  goer  among  cowb  \  ^ 'sii«S!k&  ^w^  vslcsqa 
crcfrds  0/ cattle, '—WilaoD,  ^  -%»  n        •  -^ 


«18  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VlJi' 

11  To  Agni  J4taveda8,  to  the  Son  of  Streugth,  that  he  may  giviD 

us  precious  gifts, 
Immortal,   from  of    old  Priest  among  mortal  meu,  the  most 
delightful  ill  the  house  : 

12  Agni,  made  yours  by  sacrifice,  Agni,  while  holy  rites  advance; 
Agui,  the  first  in  songs,  first  with  the  warrior  steed ;  Agni  to 

win  the  laud  for  us. 

13  May  Agni  who  is  Lord  of  wealth  vouchsafe  us  food  for  friend- 

ship sake. 
Agni   we   ever   seek  for   seed   and    progeny,    the   Vasu  who 
protects  our  lives. 

14  Solicit  with  your  chants,  for  help,  Agni  theGod  with  piercing  flame, 
For   riches  famous  Agni,   Puruuiijha  and   ye   men  !    Agni  to 

light  our  dwelling  well. 

15  Agni  we  land  that  he  may  keep  our  foes  afar,  Agni  to  give  us 

health  and  strength. 
Let  him  as  Unardian  be  invoked  in  all  the  tribes,  the  lighter- 
up  of  glowing  brands. 

HYMN  LXL  Agni. 

Prepare  oblation :  let  him  come ;  and  let  the  minister  serve  again 
Who  knows  the  ordering  thereof. 

2  Rejoicing  in  his  friendship,  let  the  priest  be  seated  over   man, 
Beside  the  shoot  of  active  power. 

3  Him,  glowing  bright  beyond  all  thought,  they  seek  among  the 

race  of  man  ;  • 

With  him  for  tongue  they  seize  the  food. 

4  He    hath    inflamed    the   twofold    plain :  life-giving,    he    hath 

climbed  the  wood, 
And  with  his  tongue  hath  struck  the  rock. 

12  With  the  wan'ior  steed :  arvati :  the  fierce  and  rapid  fire  that  clears  the 
jungle  for  the  advance  of  the  Aryan  settlerp. 

14  To  light  our  dwelling  loelt :  I  folIoW  Ludwig's  explanation.  S4yana 
tukes  tudttaye  as  a  proper  name  :  *  a  house  for  (me)  Suditi.' — Wilson. 

15  The  lighter-up  of  glowing  brands  :  vusturrishUniXni  :  according  to  Sftyana, 
'  the  giver  of  homes  to  us  Rishis.'  * 

The  language  of  the  hymn  is  intentionally  obscure,  and  much  of  my 
translation  (in  which  I  generally  follow  Ludwig)  must  be  regarded  as 
conjectural. 

1  Let  him  come:  Agni.     2'he  minister:  or,  the  Adhvaryu. 

2  T/te  shoot :  Agui,  according  to  Sdyana  :  the  stalks  of  the  Soma-plant, 
according  to  vou  Roth. 

3  TAeif  seek:  that  is,  the  Gods. 

^  yVde  two/old  plain :  the  expausea  oi  e&tOa.  wi^\ifta.N^Yv.  GlvKibed.  W  'ukkk2  ; 
forest  ooudagi-ation  is  referred  to. 


MTMN  61.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  21  f 

0  Wandoring  here  the  radiant  Calf  fiuds  none  to  fetter  him,  aud 
seeks 
The  Mother  to  declare  his  praise. 

6  And  now  that  great  aud  mighty  team,  the  toum  of  horses  that 

are  his, 
And  traces  of  his  car,  are  seeu. 

7  The  seven  milk  a  single  cow  ;  tho  two  set  other  five  to  work, 
On  the  stream's  loud*resoui)diug  bunk. 

8  Entreated  by  Vivasvau's  ten,  Indra  cast  down  the  water-jar 
With  threefold  hammer  from  the  sky. 

9  Three  times  the   newly-kiudled   flume   proceeds   arouud    the 

sacrifice  : 
The  priests  anoint  it  with  the  meath. 

10  With  reverence  they  drain  the   fount   that   circles    with    its 

wheel  above, 
Exhaustle^s,  with  the  mouth  below. 

11  The  pressing-stoues  are  set  at  work  :  the  meath  is  poured  iuto 

the  tauk. 
At  the  out-shedding  of  the  fount. 

12  Ye  cows,  protect  the  fount :  the  two  Mighty   Ones   bless    the 

sacrifice. 
The  handles  twain  are  wrought  of  gold. 

13  Pour  on  the  juice  the  ornament  which  reaches  both  the  heaven 

and  earth  : 
Supply  the  liquid  to  the  Bull. 


5  The  radiant  Calf:  Agni  in  the  form  of  lightning.  Here :  in  the  sky 
above  us.  TJu  Mother  :  the  cloud,  which  will  praise  him  with  a  thunder-psalm, 

7  The  seven  :  officiating  priests,  or  assistants.  See  II.  1.  2.  A  slngh  cow  : 
the  text  has  only  6kdM  (unam).  S&yana  supplies,  cow,  which  he  explains  as  the 
ffkarmaf  pitcher  or  caldron  used  for  heating  milk,  etc.,  in  the  Piavargya  cere- 
xuony.  Loud-resounding  bank :  with  reference  to  the  sacrificial  exclamations, 
littered  by  the  officiating  priests.  The  two  :  the  Adhvaryu  and  the  Pratipras- 
th4tar,  his  Assistant,  direct  the  five  others  in  the  performance  of  the  ceremony, 

-  8  Entreated  by  Vivaavdn's  ten :  according  to  Slyana,  the  ten  ^  fingers  »)f  the 
•worshipper.  Ten  priests  are  proba»)ly  meant.  Indra  :  Agni  or  Aditya  may  be 
meant.— Siyana.  The  water-jar  :  the  rainy  cloud.  Hummer:  meaning,  pro- 
bably, the  zigzag  lightning.    SSyana  explains  it  by  rasmind,  with  his  ray. 

10  The  fount :  avatdm  :  the  gharnia  ur  mahdvtraf  the  contents  of  which  are 
poured  into  the  fire.  Jts  wheel :  apparently,  the  ciroular  rim  on  which  it 
usuiiUy  staud-^  and  which  is  now  inverted  that  all  the  liquid  may  flow  out. 
According  to  Hillebraudt  (  VedUche  Mythologies  I.  325)  the  fount  is  the  Moon. 

12  The  two  Mighty  Ones :  Heaven  and  £arth.  But  as  the  meaning  of 
rapsitdd  is  unknown,  the  sentence  can  be  only  oonjecturally  translated  :  *  (The 
two  kinds  of  milk)  in  the  sacrifice  are  plentiful  and  fruit-giving.' — Wilson. 

JS  TAe  arnameiU :  the  milk  which  is  mlDgied  Nvit\i  lV\e  ^v^wva^.  To  \.\\a.  B\)i)i\.\ 
to  Agai, 


S^C^  TSE  STMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIII. 

14  These  know  their  own  abiding-place  :  like   calves  beside    the 

mother  cows 
They  meet  together  with  their  kin. 

15  Devouring  in  their  greedy  jaws,  they   make   sustaining   food 

in  heaven, 
To  Indra,  Agni  light  and  prayer. 

16  The  Pious  One  milked  out  rich  food,  sustenance  dealt   in  por- 

tions seven, 
Together  with  the  Sun's  seven  rays. 

17  1  took  some  Soma  when  the  Sun  rose  up,  0  Nfitra,  Varuijia, 
That  is  the  sick  man's  medicine. 

18  From  where  oblations  must  be  laid,  which  is  the  Weli-belovWs 

home. 
He  with  his  tongue  hath  compassed  heaven. 

HYMN  LXII.  A?vin«. 

Rouse  ye  for  him   who   keeps   the   Law,  yoke  your  steeds, 

Asvins,  to  your  car  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

2  Come,  Asvins,  with  your  car  more  swift  than  is  the  twinkling 

of  an  eye  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

3  Asvins,  ye  overlaid  with  cold  the  fiery  pit  for  Atri's  sake  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

4  Where  are  ye?  whither  are   ye   gone?  whither,  like  falcons, 

have  ye  flown  ? 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

5  If  ye  at  any  time  this  day  are  listening  to  this  my  call. 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

6  The  Asvins,  first  to   hear   our   prayer,   for  closest   kinship  I 

approach  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

7  For  Atri  ye,  0  Asvins,  made  a  dwelling-place  to  shield  him  well. 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 


14  These  know:  the  cowa  know,  and  come  to,  the  place   where   they  are  to 
be  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes  as  well  as  tliey  know  their  own  stable. 

15  Devouring :  perhaps  the  flames  ;  but  the  stanza  is  obscure. 

1 6  The  Pious  One  :  Agni.  Dealt  in  portions  seven :  one  for  each  priest. 

1 8  This  Well-beloved's  hom^e :  '  the  place  which  I,  the  eager  offerer,  choose.* 
^^WilaoD.     Baryatdf  *  the  well-beloved/  is  perhaps  the  Soma. 

/   JVAo  keeps  the  Law :  which  enjouiB  awiiAce.    TVifeT^v^oim^waXsaaaifiA. 
^  /^otAiri'$  sake:  see  L  116.  8. 


MTMHf  »1  THE  RIQVEDA.  221 

8  Te  warded  off  the  fervent  heat  for  Atri  when  he  sweetly  spake : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

9  Erst  Saptavadhri  by  his  prayer  obtained   the   trenchant  edge 

of  fire  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

JO  Gome  hither,  0  ye  Lords  of  wealth,  and  listen  to  this  call   of 
mine  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

11  What  is  this  praise  told  forth  of  you  as  Elders  in  the  ancient 

way  1 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

12  One  common  brotherhood  is  yours,  Asvins,  your  kindred  is  the 

same  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

13  This  is  your  chariot,  Asvins,  which  speeds  through  the  regions, 

earth  and  heaven  : 
Let  your  protecting  aid  be  near. 

14  Approach  ye  hither  ward  to  us  with  thousands  both   of  steeds 

and  kine  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

15  Pass  us  not  by,  remember  us   with  thousands    both   of  kine 

and  steeds  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

16  The  purple  tinted  Dawn  hath  risen,  and  true  to  Law  hath  made 

the  light : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

17  He  looked  upon  the  Asvins,  as  an  axe-armed  man  upon  a  tree  : 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near, 

18  By  the  black  band  encompassed  round,   break  it  down,  bold 

one,  like  a  fort. 
Let  your  protecting  help  be  near. 

9  Saptavadhri :  see  V.  78.  6.  His  reloAse  seems  to  have  been  efifeoted  by 
employing  fire.     But  see  Myriantheus,  Dit  A^vinSf  pp.  88,  90. 

11  *  Why  is  this  (repeated  invocation)  addressed  to  you  as  if  you  were 
decrepit  like  old  men  ? ' — Wilson. 

12  One  common  brotherhood :  as  twin  children  of  the  consort  of  Viyasyftn, 
the  Sun. 

17  The  meaning  is  obscure.  *  Asvins,  the  splendidly -brilliant  (sun  cleaves 
the  darkness)  as  the  woodman  with  his  axe  a  tree.' — WUson.  *  He  [the  demon] 
looked  at  the  A§vins.* — Qrassmann. 

18  The  first  line  is  said  by  Siyana  to  be  addresaed  to  ^v^lv^^Vixv.     W 

,  aeeme  to  exprosB  self-encoiirAgement  before  an  attiucV  u^Xi  «i  \^%isia.  «&sasc^< 
Bat  see  Mjrrlantheua,  Die  J^vins,  p.    90. 


t^  THE  HYMNS  OP  [^OOK  Vtll 

HYMN  LXIII.  Agni. 

Exerting  all  our  strength  with  thoughts  of  power  we  glorify 

in  speech 
Agui  your  dear  familiar  Friend,  the  darling   Guest  in  every 

home. 

2  Whom,  served  with  sacrificial  oil  like  Mitra,  men  presenting  gifts 
Eulogize  with  their  songs  of  praise ; 

3  Much -lauded  Jatavedas,  him  who  bears  oblations  up  to  heaven 

Prepared  in  service  of  the  Gods. 

4  To  noblest  Agni,  Friend  of  man,  best  Vritra-slayer,  are  we  come, 
Him  in  whose  presence  Kiksha's  son,  mighty  Srutarvan,  waxes 

great ; 

5  To  deathless  Jatavedas,  meet  for  praise,  adored  with  sacred  oil, 
Visible  through  the  gloom  of  night ; 

6  Even    Agni  whom  these  priestly  men  worship  with  sacrificial 

gifts. 
With  lifted  ladles  oflfering  them. 

7  0  Agni,  this  our  newest  hymn  hath  been  addressed  from  us  to 

thee, 
0  cheerful   Guest,  well-bom,   most  wise,  worker  of  wonders, 
ne'er  deceived. 

8  Agui,  may  it  be  dear  to  thee,  most  grateful,  and  exceeding 

sweet : 
Grow  mightier,  eulogized  therewith. 

9  Splendid  with  splendours  may  it  be,  and  in   the  battle  with 

the  foe 
Add  loftier  glory  to  thy  fame. 

10  Steed,  cow,  a  lord  of  heroes,  bright  like  Indra,    who   shall  fill 

the  car. 
Whose  high  renown  ye  celebrate,  and  people  praise  each  glo- 
rious deed, 

11  Thou  whom  Gopavana  made  glad  with  song,  0  Agni  Angiras, 
Hear  this  my  call,  thou  Holy  One. 

12  Thou  whom  the  priestly   folk  implore   to  aid  the  gathering  of 

the  spoil, 
Such  be  thou  in  the  fight  with  foes. 


1  I  follow  Ludwig  in  his  interpretation  of  this  stanza,  the  construction  of 
which  is  difficult. 

2  Lvke  Mitra  :  or  as  a  friend  ;  or  like  the  Sun. — Sftyana. 

10  Steed,  cow:  there  is  no  verb  to  govern  these  accusatives.     Perhaps,  let 
H,  that  L%  the  hymUf  give,  may  te  underatood.    ^^a\i%  ^^^Woa  g&m,  cow, 
by  n^antdranif  goer,     *  (Worship)  ye  men,  t\\ft\>T\^^  V,i^^v^  ''^^^  V^^*SS»  v 
woe  and  mia  our  chariots  (with  apoUV— \V'\\aoii. 


ATMireL]  THE  RIGVEDA,  ^ii 

13  I,  called  to  him  who  reels  with  joy,  SrutaiTiin,  Riksha's  sou, 

shall  stroke 
The  heads  of  four  presented  steeds,  like  the  long  wool  of  fleecy 
rams. 

14  Four  coursers  with  a  splendid  car,  Savisth.Vs  horses,  fleet  of  foot, 
Shall  bring  me  to  the  sacred  feast,  as  flying  steeds  brought 

Tugra's  son. 

15  The  very  truth  do  I  declare  to  thee,  Puruabn*,  mighty  flood. 
Watera !  no  man  is  there  who  gives  more  hordes  than  Savish- 

tha  gives. 

HYMN  LXIV.  Agui. 

Yoke,  Agui,  as  a  charioteer,  thy  steeds  who  best  invite  the  Gods  : 
As  ancient  Hemld  seat  thyself. 

2  And,  God,  as  skilfullest  of  all,  call  for  us  hitherward  the  Gods  : 
Give  all  our  wishes  sure  effect. 

3  For  thou,  Most  Youthful,  Son  of  Strength,  thou  to  whom 

sacrifice  is  paid. 
Art  holy,  faithful  to  the  Law. 

4  This  Agui,  Lord  of  wealth  and  spoil  hundredfold,  thousand- 

fold, is  head 
Aud  chief  of  riches  and  a  Sage. 

5  As  craftsmen  bend  the  felly,  so  bend  at  our  general  call :  come 

nigh, 
Angiras,  to  the  sacrifice. 

6  Now,  0  Virupa,  rouse  for  him,  Strong  God  who  shines  at  early 

morn, 
Fair  praise  with  voice  that  ceases  not. 

7  With  missile  of  this  Agni,  his  who  looks  afar,  will  we  lay  low 
The  thief  in  combat  fur  the  kine. 

8  Let  not  the  Companies  of  Gods  full  us,  like  Dawns  that  float 

away, 
Like  cows  who  leave  the  niggardly. 

14  Tugra's  son  :  Bhujyu.     See  Vol.  I.,  ludex. 

15  Parushni:  uow  the  RAvl,  the  river  on  whose   bank  Srutarvan  offered 
bis  sacrifice.  

1  Ancient  Herald:  or,  chief  Invoker. 

6  Vii'Upa :  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  who  addresses  himself.       Who  shines  at 
early  morn :  or,  aspiring  heavenward. 

7  The  thief:  the  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  aid  in  an  expedition  for  the  recovery 
of  stolen  cattle. 

8  Like  J)a(tns  that/ocU  away:  *  like  cows  that  bathe  \.\i«>\iv\\i  >jBft  ^Vc«^\sw; 
Mooording  to  the  explnaation  given  in  the  St.  Petersburg  \aiC\qio\:l.     VOm.  c^>n% 

m^Aa  leape  the  niggardlif  :  '  the  kine  abandon  not  a  Utt\e  VcaXiV  — "^'^aoa.* 


%U  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vim 

9  Let  not  the  sinful  tyranny  of  any  fiercely-hating  foe 
Smite  us,  as  billows  smite  a  ship. 

10  0  Agni,  God,  the  people  sing   reverent  praise   to   thee   for 

strength  : 
With  terrors  trouble  thou  the  foe. 

11  Wilt  thou  not,  Agni,  lend  us  aid  in  winning  oattle,  winning 

wealth  % 
Maker  of  room,  make  room  for  us. 

1 2  In  this  great  battle  cast  us  not  aside  as  one  who  bears  a  load  : 
Snatch  up  tbe  wealth  and  win  it  all. 

13  0  Agni,  let  this  plague  pursue  and  frii^ht  another  and  not  us  : 
Make  our  impetuous  strength  more  strong. 

14  The  reverent  or  unwearied  man  whose  holy  labour  he  accepts. 
Him  Agui  favours  with  success. 

15  Abandoning  the  foeman's  host  pass  hither  to  this  company: 
Assist  the  meu  with  whom  1  stand. 

16  As  we  have  known  thy  gracious  help,  as  of  a  Father,  long  ago, 
So  now  we  pray  to  thee  for  bliss. 

HYMN  LXV.  Indra. 

Not  to  forsake  me,  I  invoke  this  Indra  girt  by  Mafuts,  Lord 
0/  magic  power  who  rules  with  might. 

2  This  Indra  with  his  Marut  Friends  clave  into  pieces  VritraX 

head 
With  hundred-knotted  thunderbolt. 

3  Indra,  with  Marut  Friends,  grown  strong,  hath  rent  asunder 

Vritra,  and 
Released  the  waters  of  the  sea. 

4  This  is  that  Indra  who,  begirt  by  Maruts,  won  the  light  of 

heaven 
That  he  might  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

6  Mighty,  impetuous,  begirt  by  Maruts,  him  who  loudly  roars, 
Indra  we  invocate  with  songs. 

6  Indra  begirt  by  Maruts  we  invoke  after  the  ancient  plan. 
That  he  may  drink  the  Soma  juice, 

7  0  liberal  Indra,  Marut-girt,  much-lauded  Satakratu,  drink 
The  Soma  at  this  sacrifice. 

8  To  thee,  0  Indra,  Marut-girt,  these  Soma  juices,  Thunderer! 
Ate  offeved  from  the  heart  with  Uuda. 


3  O/lAe  tea  :  oi  the  firmament  or  ocean  oi  bat. 


mrmr$m  the  riqveda.  sis 

.9  Driuk,  ludra,  with  thy  Marut  Friends,  pressed  Soma  at  the 
morning  rites, 
Whetting  thy  thunderbolt  with  strength. 

10  ArUing  in  thy  might,   thyjawd  thou   shookest,  Indra,  having 

quaffed 
The  Soma  which  the  mortar  pressed. 

11  Indra,  both  worlds  complained   to  thee  when  uttering  thy 

fearful  ro^ir, 
What  time  thou  smotest  Dasjus  dead. 

12  From  Indra  have  I  measured  out  a  song  eight-footed  with  nine 

parts, 
Delicate,  faithful  to  jbhe  Law. 

HYMN  LXVI.  Indra. 

ScABGELT  was  Sata^.^ratu  born  wheu  of  his  Mother  he  inquired. 
Who  are  the  mighty  1   Who  are  famed  % 

2  Then  Savasi  declared  to   him    Aumavabha,  Ahisuva : 
Sou,  th^ue  be  they  thou  must  o'er  throw. 

3  The  Yritra-slayer  smote  them  all  as  spokes  are  hammered  in- 

to naves : 
The  Dasyu-killer  waxed  in  might. 

4  Then  Indra  at  a  single  draught  drank  the  contents  of  thirty 

pails, 
Pails  that  were  filled  with  Soma  juice. 

5  Indra  in  groundless  realms  of  space  pierced  the  Gandharva 

through,  that  he 
Might  make  the  Brahmans'  strength  increase. 


11  Complained  to  thee :  in  terror.  W/ien  uttenng  thy  fearful  roar :  the 
meaning  of  krdkshamdnam,  rendered  thus  conjecturally,  is  uncertain. 

12  Eight-footed  with  nine  parts:  the  hyiun  consists  of  triplets,  each  of 
which  contaius  nine  Pftdas,  parts  or  Iialf-liues,  of  eight  feet  or  syllables  each. 
That  is,  the  metre  is  octosyllabic  (8  x  3),  and  the  triplet  contains  three  stanzas 
in  that  metre,  or  nine  octosyllabic  P4dac>.  From  Indra :  originating  in  him 
as  its  subject  or  inspirer.  Faithful  to  the  Law:  closely  connected  with 
sacrifice.  — 

1  Cp.  VIII.  45.  4. 

2  Savast:  or,  the  Mighty  One,  Indra's  Mother.  AurnavAhha:  or  tjrnavdbha's 
son.     See  VIII.  32.  26.    These:  and  other  fiends,  as  t€y  these,  is  plural. 

4  Paila :  or  bowls  ;  literally,  lakes.  The  me ming  of  the  word  kdnuM  in 
this  istanza  is  uncertain.  It  appears  to  be  an  adjective  qualifying  sardnsi 
pails  or  lakes.     See  note  in  Wilson's  Translation. 

5  The  Gandharva :  a  heavenly  being  who  dwells  in  the  region  of  the  air 
and  guards  the  celestial  Soma,  that  is,  the  raiu.     See  I.  22.  14,  and  163.   2. 
According  to  SAyaiia,  the  Gandharva  is  the  raiQ-clovxdil&e\l)>N\i\c^l\\l•\x^HS(A^• 
tered,  and  tio  releaned  the  fertiliziDg  water. 

i5 


226  TttE  HYMS3  OP  [BOOK  VIII, 

6  Down  from  the  mountains  Indra  shot  hither  his  well-directed 

shaft : 
He  gained  the  ready  brew  of  rice. 

7  One  only  is  that  shaft  of  thine,  with  thousand  feathers,  hund- 

red barbs, 
Which,  Indra,  thou  hast  made  thy  friend. 

8  Strong  as  the   Ribhus  at   thy  birth,    therewith  to   those  who 

praise  thee,  men 
And  women,  bring  thou  food  to  eat. 

9  By   thee  these   exploits  were  achieved,  the  mightiest  deeds, 

abundantly : 
Firm  in  thy  heart  thou  settest  them. 

10  All  these   things  Vishnu   brought,  the   Lord  of  ample    stride 

whom  thou  hadst  sent — 
A  hundred   buffalo3s,    a   brew  of  rice    and  milk :   and  Indra 
slew  the  ravening  boar. 

11  Most  deadly   is  thy   bow,  successful,  fashioned  well ;   good  is 

thin  3  a -row,  decked  with  gold. 
Warlike  and   well  equipi>ed  thine   arms  are,   which  increase 
sweetness  for  him  who  drinks  the  sweet. 

HYMN   LXVII.  Indra. 

Bring  us  a   thousand,    Indra,  as  our  guerdon  for  the  Soma 

juice  : 
Hundreds  of  kine,  0  Hero,  bring. 

2  Bring  cattle,  bring  us  ornament,  bring  us    embellishment  aud 
steeds, 
Give  us,  besides,  two  rings  of  gold. 


6  The  stanza  is  similarly  explained  by  SAyana.  Intlra  smate  the  raiu  from 
the  clouds,  aud  oVjtained  food  for  Men. 

7  One  onlt/ :  Indra  alone  is  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt. 

10  All  these  things:  the  buffaloes  or  dark  clouHs,  and  the  rice  and  milk  or 
fertilizing?  rain.  Slew  :  tlie  Terb  is  supplied  by  Sdjana.  The  rareniruf  boar: 
Viitra.  Cf.  I.  61.  7,  where  tlie  deed  is  similarly  related.  See  Prof.  A.  A.  Mac- 
donell,  Journal  R.  A.  Society,  1895,  p.  186. 

11  Which  increase  sweetness  for  him  who  dHnlrs  the  sweet :  this  is  Lud wig's 
interpretation  of  two  very  difficult  words  which  mean  according  to  Wilson's 
Translation,  *  destructively  overthrowing,  destructively  piercing ; '  according 
to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  *  like  two  bees  delighting  in  sweetness  ; '  and 
according  to  Grassmann,  *  sweetness  loves  thy  two  lips.* 

7  J  thousand:  cows,  understood. 
2  2'iffo  7'inr/s :  the  meanijiof  of  niand  here  is  somewhat  uncertain.     See  Max 
Miiller.  ZnMa,  What  can  it  teach  us  1  pp  \'iiD.\'i^\  N^^Ni^v,  EpU^iXwW^tdtt- 
vJ*?/^  Hittial,  p,  30  ;  and  Ziinmer,  AUinditcliU  Lebcu,"^^.  ^^,^\. 


MtMIf  68.]  TUB  RIG  VEDA .  til 

3  And,  Bold  One,  bring  in  ample  store  rich  jewels  to  adoru  the  ear, 

For  thou,  Good  Lord,  art  far  renowned. 
4  None  other  is  there  for  the  priest.  Hero !   but  thou,  to  give 
him  gifts, 
To  win  much  spoil  and  prosper  him. 

6  India  can  never  be  brought  low,  Sakra  can  never  be  subdued : 
He  heareth  and  beholdeth  all. 

6  He  spieth  out  the  wrath  of  man,  he  who  can  never  be  deceived  : 
£re  blame  can  come  he  marketh  it. 

7  He  hath  his  stomach  full  of  might,  the  Vritra-slayer,  Conqueror, 
The  Soma-drinker,  ordering  all. 

8  In  thee  all  treasures  are  combined.   Soma !  all  blessed   things 

in  thee. 
Uninjured,  easy  to  bestow. 

9  To  thee  speeds  forth  my  hope  that  craves  the  gift  of  com,  and 

kine  and  gold, 
Yea,  craving  horses,  speeds  to  thee. 

10   Indra,  through  hope  in  thee  alone  even  this  sickle  do  I  grasp. 
Fill  my  hand,  Maghavau,   with  all  that  it  can   hold  of  barley 
cut  or  gathered  up. 

HYxMN  LXVIII.  Soma. 

This  here  is  Soma,  ne'er  restrained,  active,    all-conqueriug, 

bursting  forth, 
Rishi  and  Sage  by  sapience. 

2  All  that  is  bare  he  covers  o'er,  all  that  is  sick  he  medicines : 
The  blind  man  sees,  the  cripple  walks. 

3  Thou,  Soma,  givest  wide  defence  against  the  hate  of  alien  men, 
Hatreds  that  waste  and  weaken  us. 

4  Thou  by  thine  insight   and  thy  skill,   Impetuous  One,  from 

heaven  and  earth 
Drivest  the  sinner's  enmity, 

5  When  to  their  task  they  come  with  zeal,  may  they  obtain  the 

Giver's  grace, 
Aud  satisfy  his  wish  who  thirsts. 

8  Soma :  here  said  to  mean  Indra  himself. 

10  '  It  would  appear  as  if  the  field  were  a  b.arren  one  and  the  poet  sought 
from  Indra  a  harvest  which  he  had  not  sown.' — Wilson. 

1  Bursting  forth :  according  to  Stlya^a,  causing  (fruit)  to  spring  forth. 

4  I/npetttous  One:  rijUhin :  according  to  Sftyana,  'possessed  of  the  remains 
or  dregs  of  the  Soma  juice  offered  iu  the  third  savana.'   ' 

5  TA^fy.'  the  priests,     Tke  Oiver'9 :  bountiful  liidr&'«.     UU  uv^;  \u^2»k\ 
longing  for  iSoma-IibAtiona, 


888  THE  HYMm  OF  [BOOK  VIIl. 

6  So  may  he  Had  what  erst  was  lost,  so  may  he  speed  the  pious 

man, 
And  lengthen  his  remaining  life. 

7  Gracious,  displaying  tender  love,  unconquered,  gentle  in  thy 

thoughts. 
Be  sweet,  0  Soma,  to  our  heart. 

8  0  Soma,  terrify  us  not;  strike  us  not  with  alarm,  O  King  : 
Wound  not  our  heart  with  dazzliug  flame. 

9  When  in  my  dwelling-place  I  see  the  wicked  enemies  of  Gods, 
King,    chase  their   hatred  far   away,   thou   Bounteous   Que, 

dispel  our  foes. 

HYMN  LXIX.  Indra. 

0  Satakratd,  truly  I  have  made  none  else  my  Comforter. 
Indra,  be  gracious  unto  us. 

2  Thou  who  hast  ever  aided  us  kindly  of  old  to  win  the  spoil. 
As  such,  0  Indra,  favour  us. 

3  What  uow  1     As  proiupter  of  the  poor  thou  helpest  him  who 

sheds  the  juice. 
Wilt  thou  not,  Indra,  strengthen  us  1 

4  0  Indra,  help  our  chariot  on,  yea,  Thunderer,  though  it  lag 

behind  : 
Give  this  my  car  the  foremost  place. 

5  Ho  there  !  why  sittest  thou  at  ease  ?     Make  thou  my  chariot 

to  be  first : 
And  bring  the  fame  of  victory  near. 

6  Assist  our  car  that  seeks  the  prize.     What  can  be  easier  for 

thee? 
So  make  thou  us  victorious. 

7  Indra,   be  firm :  a  fort  art  thou.     To  thine  appointed  place 

proceeds 
The  auspicious  hymn  in  season  due. 

8  Let  not  our  portion  be  disgrace.  Broad  is  the  course,  the  prize 

is  set, 
The  barriers  are  opened  wide. 

9  This  thing  we  wish,  that   thou   mayst  take  thy  fourth,  thy 
sacrificial  name. 
So  art  thou  held  to  be  our  Lord. 


9  The  wicked  enemies :  or,  the  enmities  ;  that  is,  when  I  see  that  the  Qodi 

are  displeased  with  me.  

4  The  hymn  is  a  prajer  for  success  in  a  coming  chariot  race. 
Z  To  thine  appointed  place  :  *  to  thee  t\ie  Te^VVer  (,oi  ttuemiea).* — Wilson. 
^    9  TA2^f(^rth,  thy  saaHfifiiaLname :  the  otViex  t\itefe,  a.c<ic.\^\w^\.ci  ^W^vc^^ 
it^  oouatellation-ufime,  the  •ecret  name,  and  \\ie  Te^e%\fe^\».\sife. 


MtMbtn.)  fBSntGVEDA.  n% 

10  JSkftdyd  hath  ezaUed  you,  Immortals :  both  Goddeases  and 
Gk>d8  hath  he  delighted. 
Bestow  upon  him  bouuty  meet  for  praises.     May  he,  enriched 
with  pmyer,  come  soon  and  early. 

HYMN  LXX.  Indra. 

Indba,  Ood  of  the  mighty  arm,  gather  for  us  with  thy  right 

band 
Manifold  and  nutritious  spoil. 

2  We  know  thee  mighty  in  thy  deeds,  of  mighty  bounty,  mighty 

wealth, 
Mighty  in  measure,  prompt  to  aid. 

3  Hero,   when   thou   art  fain  to  give,  neither  may  Gods   nor 

mortal  men 
Restrain  thee  like  a  fearful  Bull. 

4  Come,   let  us  glorify  Indra,  Lord  supreme   of  wealth,  Self- 

ruling  King  : 
In  bounty  may  he  harm  us  not. 

5  Let  prelude  sound  and  following  chant :  so  let  him  hear  the 

S&inan  sung, 
And  with  his  bounty  answer  us. 

6  O  Indra,  with  thy  right  hand  bring,  and  with  thy  left  remem- 

ber us: 
Let   us  not  lose  our  share  of  wealth. 

7  Come   nigh,  0  Bold  One,   boldly  bring  hither   the  riches  of 

the  churl 
Who  giveth  least  of  all  the  folk. 

8  Indra,  the  booty  which  thou  hast  with  holy  singers  to  receive, 
Even  that  booty  win  with  us. 

9  Indra,  thy  swiftly-coming  spoil,  the  booty  which  rejoices  all, 
Souudti  quick   in  concert  with  our  hopes. 

HYMN  LXXI.  Indra. 

Hastb  forward  to   us  from  afar,  or,  Vyitra  slayer,  from  anear. 
To  meet  the  offering  of  the  meath. 


10  The  Gods  in  general  are  the  deities  of  this  stanza.  EkadyH  is  the  seer  of 
the  hymn.    He^  en'in>ched  with  prayer :  Indra,  exalted  by  our  hymn. 

5  Let  prelude  sound :  prd  stoshad  upag/isishat :  let  the  prastotar  and  the  ud' 
gAtar,  two  of  the  officiating  priests  at  the  chanting  of  a  S^man,  discharge  their 
functions  :  the  former  singing  the  prelude  and  the  latter  the  accompaniment. 

8  Win  with  U8 :  make  us  thy  allies. 

9  Sounds  in<oncert  with  our  hopes :  answeira  to  our  expectation.  Perhaps 
BB  Jjudwig  tbinka,  the  word  'sounds '  refers  to  the  herd  q1  ^\A^<ft  ^Xs^O^"^^* 

babJf  cooMtituUd  the  spoil  thtkt  iM  apok^tk  (ft 


230  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  VIIL 

2  Strong  are  the  Soma-draughta ;  come  nigh  :  the  juices  fill  thee 

with  delight : 
Drink  boldly  even  as  thou  art  wont. 

3  Joy,  Indra,  in  the  strengthening  food  :  let  it  content  thy  wish 

and  thought, 
And  be  delightful  to  thine  heart. 

4  Come  to  us  thou  who  hast  no  foe  :  we  call  thee  down  to  hymns 

of  praise, 
In  heaven's  sublirnest  realm  of  light. 

5  This  Soma  here  expressed  with  stones  and  dressed  with  milk 

for  thy  carouse, 
ludra,  is  offered  up  to  thee. 

6  Graciously,  ludra,  hear  my  call.  Come  and  obtain  the  draught, 

and  sate 
Thyself  with  juices  blent  with  milk. 

7  The  Soma,  ludra,  which  is  shed  in  chalices  and  vats  for  thee, 
Driuk  thou,  fur  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

8  Tlie  Soma  seen  within  the  vats,  as  in  the  flood  the  Moon  is  seen, 
Driuk  thou,  for  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

9  Tbat  which  the  Hawk  brought  in  his  claw,  inviolate,  through 

the  air  to  thee, 
Diink  thou,  for  thou  art  Lord  thereof. 

HYMN  LXXIL  Visvedevas. 

Wb  choose  unto  ourselves  that  high  protection  of  the  Mighty  Gods 
That  it  may  help  and  succour  us. 

2  May  they  be  ever  our  allies,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Far-seeing  Gods  who  prosper  us. 

3  Ye  furtherers  of  holy  Law,  transport  us  safe  o'er  many  woes, 
As  over  water-floods  in  ships. 

4  Dear  wealth  be  Aryaman  to  us,  Varuna  dear  wealth   meet  for 

praise  : 
Dear  wealth  we  choose  unto  ourselves. 

5  For  Sovrans  of  dear  wealth  are  ye,   Adityas,    not  of  sinner's 

wealth. 
Ye  sapient  Gods  who  slay  the  foe. 

6  We  in  our  homes,  ye  Bounteous  Ones,  and  while   we  journey 

on  the  road, 
Invoke  you,  Gods,  to  prosper  us. 


.    8  TAe  Jfoon  :  in  allusion  to  the  double  moamTi^  oi  ^oms.,  tke  ^laut  and  its 
r'alce,  aad  the  Moon. 

9  TAe  Ifawk  :  aee  I.  80.  2,  and  98.  tt. 


STMN  74.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  Ssl 

7  Regard  ns,  Indra,  Yishuu,  here,  ye  Aavios  and  the  Marut  host, 
Us  who  are  kith  and  kin  to  yon. 

8  Ye  Bounteons  Ones,  from  time  of  old  we  here  set  forth  our 

brotherhood, 
Our  kinship  in  the  Mother's  womb. 

9  Then  come  with  Indra  for  yonr  chief,  at  early  day,  ye  Boun- 

teons Gods : 
Yea,  I  address  you  now  for  this, 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Agni, 

Agni,  yonr  dearest  Guest,  I  laud,  him  who  is  loving  as  a  frienJ, 
.  Who  hrings  ns  riches  like  a  car. 

S  Wliom  as  a  far-foreseeing  Sage  the  Gods  have,  from  the  olden 
time, 
Kstablished  among  mortal  men. 

3  Do  thou,  Most  Youthful  God,  protect  the  men  who  offer,  hear 

their  songs, 
And  of  thyself  preserve  their  seed. 

4  What  is  the  praise  wherewith,  0  God,  Angiras,  Agni,  Son  of 

Strenj?th, 
We,  after  thine  own  wish  and  thou^^ht, 

5  May  serve  thee,  0  thou  Child  of  Power,  and  with  what  sacri- 

fice's phui  f 
What  pi-ayer  shall  I  now  speak  to  thee  1 

6  Our  God,  make  all  of  us  to  dwell  in  happy  habitations,  and 
Reward  our  songs  with  spoil  and  wealth. 

7  Lord  of  the  house,  what  plenty  fills  the  songs  which  thou  ins- 

pi  rest  now, 
Thou  whose  hymn  helps  to  win  the  kine  1 

8  Him  Wise  and  Strong  they  glorify,  the  foremost  Champion  iii 

the  fray. 
And  mighty  in  his  dwelling-place. 

9  Agni)  he  dwells  in  rest  and  peace  who  smites  and  no  one  smite« 

again : 
With  hero  sons  he  prospers  well. 

HYMN  LXXIV.  Jlsving. 

.  To  this  mine  invocation,  0  ye  Asvins,  ye  Nasatyas,  come, 
'io  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

8  In  the  Mother's  womb :  as  common  children  of  Aditi  tbe  General  Mother 

of  all  Hviug  beings.  

Z  Jmdo/  th//gelf preserve  their  seed :  or,  and  gaaxd  out  ofta^vm^  ^Vi^  ^>\\%i^'^«k, 
9  ^e:  the  faithful  wonhipper. 


9S2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [SOOK  VlII. 

2  This  ]aud  of  noioe,  ye  Asvius  Twain,  and  this  mine  invitatioti 

hear, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

3  Here  Krishna  is  invoking  you,  0  Asvins,  Lords  of  ample  wealth, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

4  List,  Heroes,  to  the  singer's  call,  the  call  of  Krishna  lauding 

To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

5  Chiefs,  to  the  sage  who  sings  your  praise  grant  an  inviolable 

home, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice, 

6  Come  to  the  worshipper's  abode,  Asvins,  who  here  is  lauding 

yon, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

7  Yoke  to  the  firmly  jointed  car  the  ass  which  draws  you,  Lorda 

of  wealth, 
To  driuk  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

8  Come  hither,  Asvius,  on  your  car  of  triple  form  with  triple  seat. 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

9  0  Asvius,  0  Nasatyas,  now  accept  with  favouring  grace  mj 

8ong.s, 
To  drink  the  savoury  Soma  juice. 

HYMN  LXXV.  Asvin*. 

Ye  Twain  are  wondrous  strong,  well-skilled  in  arts  that  heal, 
both  bringers  of  delight,  ye  both  won  Daksha's  praise. 

Visvaka  calls  on  yon  as  such  to  save  his  life.     Break  ye  not 
off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

2  How  shall  he  praise  you  now  who  is  distraught  in  mind?  Yo 
Twain  give  wisdom  for  the  gain  of  what  is  good. 
Visvaka  calls  on  you  as  such  to  save   his  life.     Break  ye  not 
off  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

5  To  drink :  so  tbat  ye  may  drink. 

7  TU  ass:  cf.  I.  34.  9  ;  116.  2  ;  and  162.  21. 

8  Of  triple  form  with  triple  seat:  see  I.  34.  2,  9. 


The  Rishi  is  Visvaka  son  of  Krishna. 

•  •  •  • 

1  Daksha's  praise :  on  the  occasion  mentioned  in  I.  116.  2  ;  or  when  the 
Asvins  won  Suryi  for  their  bride,  1.  116.  17.  To  save  his  life:  according  to 
Sftyana^  *for  the  sake  of  his  son.'  Come  and  set  me  free:  *  flying  loose  (your 
rains  and  gallop  hither).* — Wilson.  *  Unyoke  your  horses.* — Grassmann. 
^  Distraugiht  in  mind  :  referring  either  to  VisN^iika  himself,  or  the  man  for 
whom  be  invokes  tbe  Asvins*  aid.  AccorO^ftto  ^^.^«^^^»N*\iXi^TiSi^yV^Sa^»\»^^ 
au'adj  here  is  the  name  of  a  RUhi. 


7«.]  TBE  RIGVEDA.  »« 

3  Afready  have  ye  Twain,  possessors  of  great  wealth,  prospered 

Yitthnapu  thus  for  gain  of  what  is  good. 
Tisvaka  calls  on  you  as  such  to  save  his  life.     Break  ye  not 
off  our  friendship,  come  aud  set  me  free. 

4  Aud  that  Impetuous  Hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,  though  he  is 

far  away,  we  call  to  sitccour  ns, 
Whose  gracious  favour,  like  a  father's,  is  most  sweet.     Break 
ye  not  ofif  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

5  About  the  holy  Law  toils  Savitar  the  God :  the  horn  of  holy 

L>iw  hath  he  spread  far  and  wide. 
The  holy  Law  hath  quelled  even  mighty   men  of  war.     Break 
ye  not  otf  our  friendship,  come  and  set  me  free. 

HYMN  LXXVL  A^vins. 

Splendid,  0  Asvins,  is  your  praise.     Come,  fountain-like,  to 

pour  the  stream. 
Of  the  sweet  juice  effused — dear  is  it.  Chiefs,  in  heaven — drink 

like  two  wild  bulls  at  a  pool, 

2  Drink  the  libation  rieh  in  sweets,  0  As?ins  Twain  :  sit,  Heroes, 

on  the  sacred  grass. 
Do  ye  with  joyful  heart  in  the  abode  of  man  preserve  his  life 
by  means  of  wealth. 

3  The Priyamedhasbidyoucomewithallthesuccoursthatareyours. 
Come  to  his  house  whose  holy  grass  is  trimmed,  to  dear  sacri- 
fice at  the  morning  rites. 

4  Drink  ye  the  Soma  rich  in  nieath,  ye  Asvins  Twain  :  sit  gladly 

on  the  sacred  grass. 
So,  waxen  mighty,  to  out  eulogy  from  heaven  come  ye  as  wild- 
bulls  to  the  pool. 

5  Come  to  us,  0  ye  Asvins,  now  with  steeds  of  many  a  varied  hue. 
Ye   Lords  of  splendour,   wondrous,   borne  on   paths  of  gold, 

drink  Soma,  ye  who  strengthen  Law. 

6  For  we  the  priestly  singers,  fain  to  hymn  your  praise,  invoke 

you  for  the  gain  of  strength. 
So,   wondrous,  fair,   and  famed  for  great  deeds  come  to  us, 
through  our  hymn,  Asvins,  when  ye  hear. 

8  ViskndpH :  the  Ivishi's  son  or  grandson. 

4  That  Impetuous  Hero :  Indra.  *  These  two  verses,*  says  Grassmann,  *  are 
taken  from  another  hymn.  Verse  5  is  addressed  to  Savitar,  and  verse  4,  as 
it  appears,  to  Indra.  The  refrain,  which  is  altogether  unsuitable  here,  has 
been  added  in  order  to  connect  the  verses  with  the  preceding  hymn.' 

2  The  libation :  gharmdm :  the  heated  milk  or  other  beverage,  or  the  veea^ 
in  which  it  ia  heated, 
3  TAc  JPri^amedAoi :  Pjriyamedha  and  his  family. 


«84  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

HYMN  LXXVIL  Indra. 

Ab  cows  low  to  their  calves  in  stalls,   so  with  our  songs  we 

glorify 
This  ludra,  even  your  Wondrous  God  who  checks  attack,  who 

joys  in  the  delicious  juice. 

2  Celestial,  bounteous  Giver,  girt  about  with  might,  rich,  moun- 

tain-like, ill  precious  things, 
Him   swift  we  seek  for  foodfal  booty  rich   in  kine,  brought 
hundredfold  and  thousandfold. 

3  Indra,  the  strong  and  lofty  hills  are  powerless  to  bar  thy  way. 
None   stay  that   act  of  thine  when    thou  wouldst   fain    give 

wealth  to  one  like  me  who  sings  thy  praise. 

4  A  Warrior  thou  by  strength,  wisdom,  and   wondrous  deed,  in 

might  excellest  all  that  is. 
Hither  may  this  our  hymn  attract  thee  to  our  help,  the  hymn 
which  Gotamas  have  made. 

5  For  in  thy  might  thou   stretch  est  out  beyond  the   boundaries 

of    heaven. 
The  earthly  region,    Indra,  comprehends   thee  not.    After  thy 
Godhead  hast  thou  waxed. 

6  When,  Maghavan,  thou   honourest  the   worshipper,   no  one  is 

there  to  stay  thy  wealth. 
Most  liberal   Giver  thou,   do  thou  inspire  our  song  of  praise, 
that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Indra. 

To  Indra  sing  the  lofty  hymn,  Maruts !  that  slays  the  Vritras  best» 
Whereby  the  Holy  Ones  created  for  the  God  the  light  divine 
that  ever  wakes. 

2  Indra  who  quells  the  curse  blew  curses  far  away,  and  then  in 

splendour  came  to  us. 
Indra,  refulgent  with  thy  Marut  host !  the  Gods  strove  eagerly 
to  win  thy  l<»ve. 

3  Sing  to  your  lofty  Indra,  sing,  Maruts,  a  holy  hymn  of  praise. 
Let  Satakratu,  Vritra-slayer,  kill  the  foe  with  hundred-knotted 

thunderbolt. 


1  As  C0108 :  the  cows  who  are  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes,  whose  calvei 
are  shut  up  during  the  ceremony. 

5  The  earthly  region :  the  rajas  region,  middle  air,  or  firmament  is  frequent- 
ly divided  into  two,  one  fialf  belonging  to  the  earth  and  the  other  to  the  sky. 
See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Hiyveda,  pp.  114,  115. 

1  Jfaruts :  here  meaning  the  singers  oi  \\ie\i^'mTioi^w8e.  'Priesta.'— 
Wilson.  The  li^ht  divine  :  the  Sun,  which  the  \\sse^e;N^^  ^^u^\^\.^$y. qt  ^\i^\«A 
V  Indra, 


S7MK  7» J  MB  RIQ  VEDA .  23S 

4t  Aim  and  fetch  boldly  forth,  0  thou  whose  heart  is  bold  :  great 
glory  will  be  thine  thereby. 
In  rapid  torrent  let  the  mother  waters  spread.  Slay  Vritra,  win 
the  light  of  heaven. 

5  When  thou,  unequalled   Maghavan,  wast  born  to  smite   the 

y  Vitras  dead, 
Thou  spreadest  out  the  spacious  earth  and  didst  support  and 
prop  the  heavens. 

6  Then  was  the  sacrifice  produced   for  thee,  the  laud,  and  song 

of  joy, 
Thou   in  thy   might  surpassest  all,    all  that   now  is  and   yet 
shall  be. 

7  Raw  kine   thou  fiUedst  with  ripe  milk.     Thou  madest   Surya 

rise  to  heaven. 
Heat  him  as  milk  is  heated  with  pure  Sama  hymns,  great  joy 
to  him  who  loves  the  song. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  Indra. 

May  Indra,  who  in  every  fight  must  be  invoked,  be  near  to  us. 
May  the  most  mighty  Vritra-slayer,  meet  for  praise,  come  ta 
libations  and  to  hymns. 

2  Thou  art  the  best  of  all  in  sending  bounteous  gifts,    true   art 

thou,  lordly  in  thine  act. 
We  claim  alliance  with  the  very  Glorious  One,  yea,    with    the 
Mighty  Son  of  Strength. 

3  Prayers  unsurpassed  are  oflfered  up  to  thee  the   Lover  of   the 

Song. 
Indra,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  accept  these  fitting  hymns,  hymns 
which  we  have  thought  out  for  thee. 

4  For  thou,    0   Maghavan,   art   truthful,   ne'er  subdued,   and 

bringest  many  a  Vritra  low. 
As  such,  0  Mightiest  Lord,  Wielder  of  Thunder,  send  wealth 
hither  to  the  worshipper. 


7  Raw  kine:  cf.  I.  62  9 ;  180.  8 ;  II.  40.  2 ;  IV  3.  9 ;  VI.  72.  4  ;  17.  6 ;  44. 
24  ;  VIII.  32.  25.  Thou  madest  SHrya  me  to  heaven :  S4yana  relates  a  legend  that 
when  the  Panis  had  carried  off  the  cowa  of  the  Angirases  and  placed  them  in  a 
mountain  enveloped  in  darkness,  Indra,  at  the  prayer  of  the  Rishis,  set  the 
Bun  in  heaven  in  order  that  he  might  see  and  recover  their  cattle.  If  eat  him 
as  milk  is  heated :  this  Hue  is  difficult.  *  (PHests)  excite  (Indra)  with  your 
praises  as  men  heat  the  Qharma  with  SdrMtn-ixyvunB.* — Wildou.  Gharma 
meaus  either  the  hot  milk  or  other  beverage  offered  in  the  Pravargya  cere- 
mony, or  the  vessel  in  which  it  is  heated.  Great  joy  to  him  who  loves  the  song: 
or  perhaps  the  meaning  is,  the  Brihat-S4man  (one  of  the  most  important  Sdma 
hymns^  the  first  and  aecond  verses  of  R.  V,  YI  4ft),  ift  dew  to  V5\\sx  '^Vi  Vv*»i% 
Monff^  L. 

^  ^/;r/V  ^S^fnn^  '•  y<fjana :  see  WUson's  TranalalioTi  Wk^i  uoX.^. 


^^  fffJS  ffYMl^S  OF  [bOOR  Vttf. 

6  0  Indra,  thou  art  far-renowned,  impetuous,  0  Lord  of  Strength. 
Alone  thou  slayest  with  the   guardian   of  mankind   resistless 
never-oonquered  foes. 

6  As  such  we  seek  thee  now,  0  Asura,  thee  most  wise,   craving 
thy  bounty  as  our  share* 
Thy  sheltering  defence  is  like  a   mighty    cloak.    So  may  thy 
glories  reach  to  us. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Indra. 

Down  to  the  stream  a  maiden  came,  and  found  the  Soma  by 

the  way. 
Bearing  it  to  her  home  she  said,  For  Indra  will   I   press   thee 

out,  for  Sakra  will  I  press  thee  out 

2  Thou  roaming  yonder,  little  man,  beholding   every   house   in 

turn, 
Drink  thou  this  Soma  pressed  with  teeth,   accompanied    with 
grain  and  curds,  with  cake  of  meal  and  song  of  praise. 

3  Fain  would  we  learn  to  know  thee  well,  nor  yet  can  we  attain 

to  thee. 
Still  slowly  and  in  gradual  drops,  0  Indu,  unto  Indra  flow. 

4  Will  he  not  help  and   work   for   us  ?  Will   he   not  make    us 

wealthier  ? 
Shall  we  not,  hostile  to  our  lord,  unite  ourselves  to  Indra  now? 

0  0  Indra,  c  luse  to  sprout  again   three   places,    these   which   I 
declare, — 
My  father's  head,  his  cultured  field,  and  this  the   part   below 
my  waist. 

6  Make  all  of  these  grow  crops  of  hair,  yon  cultivated   field   of 

ours. 
My  body,  and  my  father's  head. 

7  Cleansing  Apala,  Indra  !   thrice,  thou  gavest  sunlike   skin   to 

her, 
Drawn,  Satakiatu  !  through  the  hole  of  car,  of  wagon,  and  of 
yoke. 

5  The  guardian  of  mankind  :  lodra'a  thunderbolt  with  which  he   slays  tl^o 
demous  of  drought.  

The  Ilishi  is  Ap41&  of  the  family  of  Atri. 

1  A  maiden :  Apd.l&. 

2  Little   man  :  vtrakah :  according   to   S&yaua,   hero.     Indra  is  intended, 
perhaps  as  Surya  the  Suu-God. 

3  Indu :  Soma. 

4  He :  Indra.     Hostile  to  our  lord  :  Ap&U,  it  is  said,  was  afflicted   with  t 
cutaneous  diseaae  and  was  consequently  repudiated  by  her  husband. 

7  Sunlike  :  bright  and  clear.  *  S&yana  aaya  tWV.  bxdta.  dragged  her  through 
^Ae  wide  bole  of  hia  chariot,  the  narrower  hoVe  ol  \\ie>  Ciw\.  ^xi^  >iJQft  ^tcveJ^  \it3« 
of  the  yoke,  and  ahe  cast  off  three  »kiiv9.    'I^i^  ^tuX.  ^Vm  Xwrwssa  ^  V^Ajt^os^ 


MTMN  81. J  THE  RIO  VEDA.  9Z7 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Indnu 

Invite  ye  Indra  with  a  song  to  drink  your  draught  of  Soma 

juice, 
Ali-oonquering  Satakratu,  most  munificent  of  all  who  live. 

2  Lauded  by  many,  much-invoked,  leader  of  song,   renowned 

of  old  : 
His  name  is  Indra,  tell  it  forth. 

3  Indra  the  Dancer  be  to  us  the  giver  of  abundant  strength  : 
May  he,  the  mighty,  bring  it  near. 

4  Indra  whose  jaws   are  strong   hath   drunk   of  worshipping 

Sudaksha's  draught, 
The  Soma  juice  with  barley  mixt. 

5  Call  Indra  loudly  with  your  songs  of  praise  to  drink  the  Soma 

juice. 
For  this  is  what  augments  his  strength. 

6  When  he  hath    drunk   its   gladdening  drops    the  God    with 

vigour  of  a  God 
Hath  far  surpassed  all  things  that  are. 

7  Thou  speedest  down  to  succour  us  this   ever-conquering  God 

of  yours, 
Him  who  is  drawn  to  all  our  songs ; 

8  The  Warrior  not  to  be  restrained,   the  Soma-drinker  ne'er 

overthrown, 
The  Chieftain  of  resistless  might. 

9  0  Indra,   send   us   riches,   thou  Omniscient,  worthy   of  our 

praise : 
Help  us  in  the  decisive  fray. 

-  -    -  ^  ■ 

the  second  an  alligator,  the  third  a  chameleon.  I  suppose,  with  Prof.  Aufrecht, 
that  the  hole  or  space  of  the  cliariot  and  cart  represents  the  opening  between 
the  four  wheels ;  the  hole  of   the  yoke   seems   to   me  to   mean   the  opening 

through  which  the  animars  head  passed,  corresponding  to   Homer's   ^evyX?!, 

II.  19.  406.'— Cowell. 

For  the  legend  from  the  Sityftyana  Bi&hmana,  founded  on  the  hints  con- 
tained in  this  hymn  and  re|>e<ited  by  Sdyana  iu  his  Commentary,  see  also 
Wilson's  Translation,  Vol.  V. 

Prof.  Aufrecht  has  published  the  text  and  commentary  of  this  hymn  in 
Jndiscke  Studien,  IV.  p.  1  sqq.  See  M.  Miiller's  Ilig-veda  SamhitA,  Vol.  III., 
2ud  edition,  p.  33  sqq. 

3  The  Dancer :  active  in  battle,  dancer  of  the  war  dance.  Near  :  ahhijnii  : 
or,  up  to  our  knees. 

4  Sudaksfia*8  draught :  offered  by  a  Rishi  of  that  name. 

7  According  to  Sftjana  this  stanza  is  addressed  by  tb^  YajamAtvOi  «t  %,vstv 
Scer  to  the  Siotar  or  praiaing  priest,  and  he  glvea  an  Vm^ewAlv^fe  ^^\ai^  \ft  'CtA 
indicative,  thou  speedest  down  ;  '  Bring  hither.' — ^\\i\*oii. 


^^  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vllh 

10  Even   thence,  0  Indra,  come  to  us  with   food   tha,t'giveaa 

hundred  powers, 
With  food  that  gives  a  thousand  powers. 

11  We    sought    the   wisdom   of    the   wise.      Sakra,  Kiue-giver^ 

Thunder-armed  ! 
May  we  with  steeds  o'ercome  in  fight. 

12  We  make  thee,  Satakratu,  find  enjoyment  in  the  songs  we  sing. 
Like  cattle  in  the  pasture  lands. 

13  For,   Satakratu,  Thunder-armed,  all  that  we  craved,  as   meu 

are  wont, 
All  that  we  hoped,  have  we  attained. 

14  Those,   Son  of  Strength,  are  come  to  thee  who  cherish  wishes 

in  their  hearts : 
0  Indra,  none  excelleth  thee. 

15  So,  Hero,    guard  us   with   thy   care,  with   thy  most  liberal 

providence, 
Speedy,  and  terrible  to  foes. 

16  0  Satakratu  Indra,  now  rejoice  with  that  carouse  of  thine 
Which  is  most  splendid  of  them  all; 

17  Even,  Indra,  that  carouse  which  slays  the  Vritras  best,  most 

widely  famed, 
Best  giver  of  thy  power  and  might. 

18  For   that   which    is  thy   gift   we    know,    true   Soma-driuker, 

Thunder-armed, 
Mighty  One,  amid  all  the  folk. 

19  For  Indra,  Lover  of  Carouse,   loud  be  our  songs  about  the 

juice  : 
Let  poets  sing  the  song  of  praise. 

20  We  summon  Indra  to  the  draught,  in  whom   all  glories  rest> 

in  whom 
The  seven  communities  rejoice. 

21  At  the  Trikadrukas  the  Gods  span  sacrifice  that  stira  the 

mind  : 
Let  our  soi^gs  aid  and  prosper  it. 

10  Even  thence:  from  where  thou  art ;  from  heaven. 

11  0/  the  wise:    ludra.     Kine-giver :  fjodare :  perhaps,  *  burster  open  of 
the  cow-stall ;'  *  cleaver  of  mountains.' — Wilson. 

12  Like  cattle:  as  the  cowherd  refreshes  his  cattle. — SAyapa. 

18  Thy  gift :  the  wealth  which  thou  givest.     Amid  all  the  folk :  among  all 
the  worahippeTQ  who  offer  thee  Soma. — Sftyana.  * 

20  Seven  communities :  aapta  ianzadAsiK :  ptobtibly  =  all  the  folk,  in  staiUA 
JS;  'the  seven  associated  priests.' — ^W^lVon. 

^J  At  the  Trikadruhoi  :  see  YIII.  13.  IS,  and  notfi. 


STMir  8il  THE  RIQ  VEDA.  28d 

12  Let  the  drops  pass  within  thee  as  the  rivers  flow  into  the  sea : 
O  Indra,  naught  excelleth  thee. 

23  Thou,  wakeful  Hero,  by  thy  might  hast  taken  food  of  Soma 

juice, 
Which,  Indra,  is  within  thee  now. 

24  O  Indm,  Vritra-slayer,  let  Soma  be  ready  for  thy  maw. 
The  drops  be  ready  for  thy  forms. 

25  Now  Srutakaksha  sings  his  song  that  cattle  and  the  steed  may 

come. 
That  Indra's  very  self  may  come. 

2%  Here,  Indra,  thou  art  ready  by  our  Soma  juices  shed  for  thee, 
Sakra,  at  hand  that  thou  mayst  give. 

27  Even  from  far  away  our  songs  reach  thee,   0  Caster  of  the 

Stone  : 
May  we  come  very  close  to  thee. 

28  For  so  thou  art  the  hero's  Friend,  a  Hero,  too,  art  thou,  and 

strong : 
So  may  thine  heart  be  won  to  us. 

29  So  hath  the  oflTering,   wealthiest  Lord,  been  paid  by  all  the 

worshippers : 
So  dwell  thou,  Indra,  even  with  me. 

30  Be  not  thou  like  a  slothful  priest,  0  Lord  of  spoil  and  wealth  : 

rejoice 
In  the  pressed  Soma  blent  with  milk. 

31  0  Indra,  let  not  ill  designs  surround  us  in  the  sunbeams'  light : 
This  may  we  gain  with  thee  for  Friend. 

32  With  thee  to  help  us,  ludra,  let  us  answer  all  our  enemies : 
For  thou  art  ours  and  we  are  thine. 

33  Indra,  the  poets  and  thy  friends,  faithful  to  thee,  shall  loudly  sing 
Thy  praises  as  they  follow  thee. 

HYMN  LXXXII.  ludra. 

SuRTA,  thou  mountest   up  to  meet  the  Hero  famous  for  his 

wealth, 
Who  hurls  the  bolt  and  works  for  man : 

2  Him  who  with  might  of  both  his   arms  brake  nine-aud-ninety 
castles  down, 
Slew  Vritra  and  smote  Ahi  dead. 


24  Thy  forms :  thy  various  bodies  or  splendours. — SAyana. 
^5  Srutakaksha :  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 

30  Priest :  bi'ahm^ :  Brahman  or  praying  priest. 

31  In  the  sunbeams*  light :  as  Indra  stands  in  the  closest  relationship  to 
the  Sun.  

2^rine-and-ntnetjfeastUi:  cloud-castles  of  the  demoti  ^wcB^iW%». 


240  TM£  EYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Vlif, 

3  This  Indra  ifi  our  gracious  Friend.     He  sends  us   in  a  full 

broad  stream 
Riches  in  horses,  kine,  and  com. 

4  Whatever,  Vritra-^ayer  !  thou,  Siirya,  hast  risen  upon  to-day, 
That,  ludra,  all  is  in  thy  power. 

5  When,  Mighty  One,  Lord  of  the  brave,  thou  thinkest  thus, 

I  shall  not  die, 
That  thought  of  thine  is  true  indeed. 

6  Thou,  Indra,  goest  unto  all  Soma  libations  shed  for  thee, 
Both  far  away  and  near  at  hand. 

7  We  make  this  Indra  very  strong  to  strike  the  mighty  Vritra  dead: 
A  vigorous  Hero  shall  he  be. 

8  Indra  was  made  for  giving,  set,  most  mighty,  o*er  the  joyouB 

draught, 
Bright,  meet  for  Soma,  famed  in  song. 

9  By  song  as  'twere,  the  powerful  bolt  which  none  may  parry 

was  prepared : 
Lofty,  invincible  he  grew. 

1 0  Indra,  Song-lover,  lauded;  make  even  in  the  wilds  fairways  for  us, 
Whenever,  Maghavan,  thou  wilt. 

1 1  Thou  whose  commandment  and  behest  of  sovran  sway  none 

disregards, 
Neither  audacious  man  nor  God. 

12  And  both  these  Goddesses,  Earth,  Heaven,  Lord  of  the  beau- 

teous helm !  revere 
Thy  might  which  no  one  may  resist. 

1 3  Thou  in  the  black  cows  and  the  red  and  in  the  cows  with  spot- 

ted skin 
This  white  milk  hast  deposited. 

14  When  in  their  terror  all  the  Gods  shrank  from  the  Dragon's 

furious  might, 
Fear  of  the  monster  fell  on  them. 

15  Then  he  was  my  Defender,  then,  Invincible,  whose  foe  is  not. 
The  Vritra-slayer  showed  his  might. 

16  Him  your  best  Viitra-slayer,  him  the  famous   Champion  of 

mankind 
I  urge  to  great  munificence, 


8   Was  made  :  was  created  by  PrajApafci. — SAyana. 

12  Lord  of  the  beauteous  helm:  or,  'deity  of  the  liaudsome  jaw.* — Wilson. 

13  In  the  black  cows:  cf  I.  62.  9. 

1 4  The  Ih'agons  furious  might :  the  fierce  attack  of  the  demon  Ahi.     Qf  ♦ 
Me  monster :  or,  of  the  wild  beast,  Ahi. 

16  CAampion:  Ijcdnprd  to  sdrdhami  aa  suggested  mXAi^^X)  "te^ftY^xa^ljssMfioii* 


STMS  83-1  THE  RIOVEDA.  241 

17  To  oome,  Much-lauded !  Many-named  !  with  this  same  thought 

that  longs  for  milk, 
Whene'er  the  Soma  juice  is  shed. 

18  Much-honoured  by  libations,  may  the  Yritra-slayer  wake  for  us  : 
May  Sakra  listen  to  our  prayers. 

19  O  Hero,  with  what  aid  dost  thou  delight  us,  with  what  suc- 

cour bring 
Biches  to  those  who  worship  thee  ? 

20  With  whose  libation  joys  tUe  Strong,  the  Hero  with  his  team 

who  quells 
The  foe,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice? 

21  Rejoicing  in  thy  spirit  bring  thousandfold  opulence  to  us  : 
Eiirioh  thy  votary  with  gifts. 

23  These  juices  with  their  wedded  wives  flow  to  enjoyment  lov- 
ingly : 
To  waters  speeds  the  restless  one. 

23  Presented  streugtheuing  gifts  have  sent  ludra  away  at  sacri- 

fice. 
With  might,  unto  the  cleansing  bath. 

24  These  two  who  share  his  feast,  Bay  Steeds  with  golden  manes, 

shall  bring  him  to 
The  banquet  that  is  laid  for  him. 

25  For  thee,  0  Lord  of  Light,  are  shed  these  Soma-drops,  and 

grass  is  strewn  : 
Bring  ludra  to  his  worshippers. 

26  May  Indra  give  thee  skill  and  lights  of  heaven,  wealth  to  bis 

votary 
And  priests  who  praise  him  :  laud  ye  him. 

27  0  Satakratu,  wondrous  strength  and  all  our  lauds  I  bring  to 

thee: 
Be  gracious  to  thy  worshippers. 

\T  To  come :  that  is,  that  thou,  Indra,  mayst  come.  This  abrupt  change 
of  person  is  not  uucommon  in  the  Veda. 

22  The  wedded  wives :  of  the  Soma  juices  are  said  to  be  the  two  waters 
called  vasatlvaryaK  and  ekadhandli,  used  in  the  Soma  ceremonies.  To  enjoy- 
ment :  to  be  drunk  by  Indra.  To  waiera  speeds  the  restless  one :  or,  with  Grass- 
mann,  *  The  lover  of  the  waters  speeds.'  The  exact  meaning  of  nichumpundh 
is  uncertain,  T^ska  deriving  it  from  chanty  to  eat,  and  Mahidhara  from  chup, 
to  creep  or  move  slowly.  The  meaning  of  the  sentence  is,  according  to  the 
Scholiast,  that,  at  the  time  of  the  concluding  purificatory  ceremony  which  is 
to  atone  for  errors  and  omissions  in  the  principal  sacrifice,  the  stale  Soma  is 
thrown  into  the  w&tera.    See  Cowell'a  note  in  ^\\%oiC%^^TkS^^\A!cr(x. 

£S  TAe  deaming  bath  :  the  avahhr'itha.^  here,  app&texiVX^)  \)aft\j!^'CcL  w 
MB  which  the  Soma  phuita  were  rinsed  and  purlwi. 
16 


U2  MB  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  YtlU 

28  Bring  to  ns  all  things  exoelieut,  0  Satakratu,  food  aud  Btreugtii: 
For,  ludra,  thou  art  kiud  to  us. 

29  0  SatakratU)  briug  to  us  all  blessiuga,  all  felicity  : 
For,  ludra,  thou  art  kiud  to  us. 

30  Bearing  the  Soma  juice  we  call,  best  Yfitra-slayer,  auto  tbee  ; 
For,  Indi*a,  thou  art  kiud  to  us. 

31  Come,  Lord  of  rapturous  joys,  to  our  libatioii  urith  tby  Bay 

Steeds,  come 
To  our  libation  with  thy  Steeds. 

32  Known  as  best  Vritra-slajer  erst,  as  ludra  Satakratn,  come 
With  Bay  Steeds  to  the  juice  we  shed. 

33  0  Yriti-a-slayer,  thou  art  he  who  driuks  these  drops  of  Soma : 

come 
With  Bay  Steeds  to  the  juice  we  shed. 

34  May  ludra  give,  to  aid  us,  wealth  handy  that  rulev  the  Skilful 

Ones  : 
Yea,  may  the  Stroug  give  potent  wealth. 

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Harute. 

The  Cow,  the  famous  Mother  of  the  wealthy  Maruts,  poum 

her  milk  : 
Both  horses  of  the  cars  are  yoked, — 

2  She  in  whose  bosom  all  the  Gods,  aud  Sun  and  Moou  for  nieii 

to  see, 
Maiutaia  their  everlasting  Laws. 

3  This  all  the  pious  sing  to  us,  aud  sacred  poets  evermore : 
The  Maruts  to  the  Soma-draught ! 

4  Here  is  the  Soma  ready  pi*essed  :  of  this  the  Manits  drink,  of 

this 
Self-luminous  the  Asvins  driuk. 

Zi  Handy:  rihhkm.  That  rula  ike  Skilful  Onei :  ribhukthanam»  Tk€ 
Strong :  vdjt  These  words  are  u&ed  as  plays  upon  tlir  names  of  the  Ribhua, 
ur  as  Grassruaun  saya,  the  verse  may  have  been  taken  from  a  hymn  addressed 
to  the  Ribhus.  '  May  Indra  bring  to  us  the  bounteous  Bibbu  Ribhukibapa 
to  partake  of  our  sacrificial  viands  ;  may  he,  the  mighty,'  bring  'the  mighty 
(Voja)  .* — Wilson.  Cowe.l  remarks :  *  Ribhukdha;a  was  the  eldest  andVifja 
the  youngest  of  the  three  brothers.  The  Ribhus  have  a  share  in  the  evoiin^ 
libation  between  Piaj&pati,  and  Savitri,  see  Ait.  BiiChm.  iii.  30.  This  venm 
Js  addressed  to  the  Ribhus  in  the  evening  libation  on  the  ninth  day  of  th« 
JJwddasdha  ceremony  (id.  v.  21).* 

J  TAe  Cow:  Prisni. 
^  y>i  wAoae  bosom:  *ia  whose  presence.* — "Wilsoii* 
-2%  Jfaruis:  are  to  be  invoked,  underatood. 


BTMS  8M  TBB  RIO  VEDA .  243 

-  5  Of  this,  moreover,  purified,  set  ia  three  places,  procreaut, 
Drink  Yaruna,  Mitra,  Arjamau. 

6  And  Iiidra,  like  the  Herald  Priest,  desirous  of  the  Diilky  juice, 
At  early  morn  will  quaff  thereof. 

7  When  have  the  Princes  gleamed  and  shone  through  waters  as 

through  troops  of  foes? 
When  hasten  they  whose  might  is  pure  ? 

8  Wbaft  favour  do  I  claim  this  day  of  you  great  Deities,  you 

who  are 
Wondrously  splendid  in  yourselves  ? 

9  I  call,  to  drink  the  Soma,  those  Maruts  who  spread  all  realms 

of  earth 
And  luminous  regions  of  the  sky. 

10  You,  even  such,  pure  iu  your  might,  you,  0  ye  Maruts,  I  in- 

voke 
From  heaven  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

11  The   Maruts,   those   who   have   sustained   and   propped   the 

heaveus  and  earth  apart, 
I  call  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

12  That  vigorous  baud  of  Maruts  that  abideth  in  the  mountains,  I 
Invoke  to  drink  this  Soma  juice. 

HYMN   LXXXIV.  India. 

SoNQ-LOVBB  !  like  a  charioteer  come  songs  to  thee  when  Soma 

flows. 
O  Indra,  they  have  called  to  thee  as  mother-kine  unto  their 

calves. 

3  Bright  juices  hitherward  have  sped  thee,   Indra,  Lover  of  the 
Song. 
Drink,  Indra,  of  this  flowing  sap :  in  every  house  *tis  set  for  thea 

3  Drink  Soma  to  inspirit  thee,  juice,  Indra,  which  the  Falcon 

brought : 
For  thou  art  King  and  Sovran  Lord  of  all  the  families  of  men. 

4  0  Indra,  hear  Tir;ischi's  call,  the  call  of  him  who  servetb  thee. 
Satisfy  him  with  wealth  of  kine  and  valiant  ofl'bpring :  Great 
•    art  thou. 


5  Set  in  three  places:  first,  in  a  trough  ;  then  in  a  straining-cloth  ;  then  in 
a  third  trough  or  vessel  called  PHtabhrit,    Proereant :  granting  progeny  to 

'  the  worshipper. 

6  The  Herald  Priest :  Agni. 

J  ^/ir  a  ehartoteer:  straight  and  swift  to  their  o\>^QcX. 
8  nhich  the  falcon  brought :  see  L  80.  2,  aad  ^a.  ft. 


244  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VJII. 

5  For  he,  0  Indra,  hath  produced  for  thee  the  newest  gladden- 

ing song, 
A  hymn  that  springs  from  careful  thought,  ancient,  and  full 
of  sacred  truth. 

6  That  Indra  will  we  laud  whom  songs  and  hymns  of  praise  have 

magnified. 
Striving  to  win,  we  celebrate  his  many  deeds  of  hero  might. 

7  Come  now  and  let  us  glorify  pure  Indra  with  pure  S^ma  hymn. 
Let  the  pure  milky  draught  delight  him  strengthened  by  pure 

songs  of  praise. 

8  0  Indra,  come  then  pure  to  us,  with  pure  assistance,  pure  thy- 

self. 
Pure,  send  thou  riches  down  to  us,  and,  meet  for  Soma,  pure, 
be  glad. 

9  0  Indra,  pnre,  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and,  pure,  enrich  the 

worshipper. 
Pure,  thou  dost  strike  the  Vritras  dead,  and  strivest,  pure, 
to  win  the  spoil. 

HYMN  LXXXV.  Indra. 

For  him  the  Mornings  made  their  courses  longer,  and  Nights 

with  pleasant  voices  spake  to  Indra. 
For  him  the  Floods  stood  still,  the  Seven  Mothers,  Streams 

easy  for  the  heroes  to  pass  over. 

2  The  Darter  penetrated,  though  in  trouble,  thrice-seven  close- 

pressed  ridges  of  the  mountains. 
Neither  might  God  nor  mortal  man  accomplish  what  the  Strong 
Hero  wrought  in  full-grown  vigour. 

3  The  mightiest  force  is  Indra's  bolt  of  iron  when  firmly  grasped 

in  both  the  arms  of  Indra. 
His  head  and  mouth  have  powers  that  pass  all  others,  and  all 
his  people  hasten  near  to  listen. 


5  Nevotst ancient:    recent  in  form  and  expression,  but  ancient  in 

substance.     See  Muir,  0.  S,  Texts,  III.  238,  239. 

7  Pure  Indira  with  pure  Sdma  kymna :  according  to  S&yana,  *  Indra.  purified 
iBvith  pure  S&ma-hymns/  from  the  pollution  he  had  incurred  by  killing  the 
Br&hman  Vritra.    See  Wilson's  Translation,  note. 

1  The  heroes :  perhapB  Turva^a  and  Tadu— Ludwig. 

2  The  Darter :  of  the  thunderbolt ;  Indra.  Though  in  trouble :  because  h* 
had  none  to  aid  him.  What  the  thince-aeven  close-pi'eased  ridges  of  themounUam 

Are,  ia  uncertain.  See  Wilson's  Translation,  note,    Lxidwig  thinks  that   tha 
tattle  of  the  Sun  with  the  demons  of  winteT  ma^  \>e  i£l««xl\>. 

^  To  lliten  :  to  th«  <K>mmanda  which  itaue  U*oia\n&  uiOM^. 


fffMKS$.^  THE  RIQ  VEDA.  34$ 

4t  t  ooont  thee  as  the  l^oliest  of  the  Holy,  the  caster-down  of 
what  Jiath  ne'er  been  shaken. 
I  count  thee  as  the  Banner  of  the  heroes,  I  count  thee  as  the 
Chief  of  all  men  living. 

6  What  time,  O  Indra,  in  thine  arras  thou  tookest  thy  wildly 
rushing  bolt  to  slay  the  Dragon, 
The  mountains  roared,  the  cattle  loudly  bellowed,  the  Brah- 
mans  with  their  hymns  drew  nigh  to  Indra. 

6  Let  us  praise  him  who  made  these  worlds  and  creatures,  all 

things  that  after  him  sprang  into  being. 
May  we  win  Mitra  with  our  songs,  and  Indra,  and  wait  upon 
our  Lord  with  adoration. 

7  Flying  in  terror  from  the  snort  of  Vritra,  all  Deities  who  were 
thy  friends  forsook  thee. 

So,  Indra,  be  thy  friendship  with  the  Maruts :  in  all  these 
battles  thou  shalt  be  the  victor. 

8  Thrioe-sixty  Maruts,  waxing  strong,  were  with  thee,  like  piles 
of  beaming  light,  worthy  of  worship. 

We  come  to  thee :  grant  us  a  happy  portion.     Let  us  adore 
thy  might  with  this  oblation. 

9  A  sharpened  weapon  is  the  host  of  Maruts.    Who,  Indra,  dares 
withstand  thy  bolt  of  thunder  ? 

Weaponless  are  the  Asuras,  the  godless :  scatter  them  with 
thy  wheel.  Impetuous  Hero. 

10  To  him  the  Strong  and  Mighty,  most  auspicious,  send  up  the 

beauteous  hymn  for  sake  of  cattle. 
Lay  on  his  body  many  songs  for  Indra  invoked  with  song,  for 
will  not  he  regard  them  ? 

11  To  him,  the  Mighty,  who  accepts  laudation,  send  forth  thy 

thought  as  by  a  boat  o'er  rivers, 
Stir  with  thy  hymn  the  body  of  the  Famous  and  Dearest  One, 
for  will  not  he  regard  it  % 

12  Serve  him  with  gifts  of  thine  which  Indra  welcomes :  praise 

with  fair  praise,  invite  him  with  thine  homage. 


5  Wildly  I'usking :  this  is  M.  MuUer'e  translation  of  madachyiUam.  It 
might  be  rendered  also  *  sped  in  tby  rapturous  joy.*  *  Rauschbeschleunigten.' — 
Ludwig.    The  Di-agon:  ihi. 

7  With  the  Maruts :  as  they  alone  stood  by  him  in  the  conflict. 

8  Thriee-sixty :  or  sixty-three,  according  to  Sftynna,  nine  companies  consist- 
ing of  seven  each.  See  Coweirs  note  in  Wilson's  translation.  Like  piles  of 
bediming  light :  *  like  cows  gathered  together.' — Wilson  ;  *  like  morning  stars.' 
— Oraasmaun.  J  have  ioUowed  Lndw'ifi, 

9  JFM  tAy  wAea :  or  diaeue,  a  sharp-edged  quoit  \xftWL  ui^  «b  ^Titiv^tya  «i  ^^v 


J 


d46  fm  EtTMIfS  OP  t^OOK  Vtlt. 

Draw  near,  0  singer,  and  refrain  from  outcry.  Make  thy  voice 
heard,  for  will  not  he  regard  it  ? 

13  The  Black  Drop  sank  in  Ansumati's  bosom,   advancing  with 

ten  thousand  round  about  it. 
Indra  with  might  longed  for  it  as  it  panted  :  the  hero-hearted 
laid  aside  his  weapons. 

14  1  saw  the  Drop  in  the  far  distance  moving,  on  the  slope  bank 

of  Ansumati*s  river, 
Like  a  black  cloud  that  sank  into  the  water.    Heroes,  I   send 
you  forth.     Go,  fight  in  battle. 

15  And  thou  the  Drop  in  Ansumati's  bosom,  splendid  with  light, 

assumed  its  proper  body  ; 
And  Indra,  with  Brihaspati  to  aid  him,  conquered  the  godless 
tribes  that  came  against  him. 

16  Then,  at  thy  birth,  thou  wast  the  foeman,  Indra,  of  those  the 

seven  who  ne'er  had  met  a  rival. 
The  hidden  Pair,  the  Heaven  and  Earth,  thou  foundest,  and 
to  the  mighty  worlds  thou  gavest  pleasure. 

17  So,  Thunder-armed !  thou  with   thy   bolt  of  thunder  didst 

boldly  smite  that  power  which  none  might  equal ; 
With  weapons  broughtest  low  the  might  of  Sushna,  and,  Indra, 
foundest  by  thy  strength  the  cattle. 

18  Then  wast  thou,  Chieftain   of  all   living   mortals,   the   very 

mighty  slayer  of  the  Vritras. 
Then  didst  thou   set   the   obstructed   rivers  flowing,  and  win 
the  floods  that  were  enthralled  by  Dasas. 

19  Most  wise  is  he,  rejoicing  in  libations,  splendid  as  day,  resist- 

less in  his  anger. 
He  only  doth  great  deeds,  the   only   Hero,    sole  Vritra-slayer 
he,  with  none  beside  him. 

12  Ih*aw  nea/i\  0  singer ^  and  refrain  from  outcry :  *  0  priest,  adorn  thyself 
grieve  not  (for  poverty).* — Wilson. 

13  The  Black  Drop :  the  darkened  Moon.  Amumati:  a  mystical  river  q/i 
the  air  into  which  the  Moon  dips  to  recover  its  vanished  light.  T'en  thousand  : 
probably,  demons  of  darkness  ;  the  numerals  are  without  a  substantive.  A&il 
panted :  while  striving  against  its  assailants.  Laid  aside  his  weapons :  after 
conquering  the  demons  and  restoiing  the  darkened  Moon. 

]  4  Indra  addresses  the  Maruts. 

S&yana  explains  stanzas  13 — 15  diflferently,  in  accordance  with  a  legend 
which  was  probably  suggested  by  this  passage.  He  takes  drapsah  IcrlshnaK, 
black  drop,  to  mean  *  the  swift  moving  Krishnah,'  an  Asura  or  demon  who 
with  ten  thousand  of  his  kind  had  occupied  the  banks  of  the  river  Ansumat^ 
wbhb,  he  aaya,  ia  the  Famuu^  or  Jumna,  and  was  there  defeated  by*  Indrfti 
Sfihaapati,  and  the  Maruts.  See  CowelYs  not©  m^V\ftoxi'a^tii>s»V\:vOTL, 
/»  ^^  seven  ;  KrUhna,  Vritra,  i^amuchi,  ^«km\Wit«i,  wi^  o^a\L?»t^o-^Mw^ 


MTMN.Bfi.]  THE  RIQ  VEDA,  247 

20  Indra  is  Yritra's  slayer,  man's  sustainer  :  he  must  be   called ; 
with  fair  praise  let  us  call  him. 
Maghavan  is  our  Helper,   our   Protector,  giver  of  spoil  and 
wealth  to  make  us  famous. 

81  This  Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  this  Ribhukshan,  even  at  his  birth, 
was  meet  for  invocation. 
Doer  of  many  deeds  for  man's  advautage,  like  Soma   quaffed, 
for  friends  we  must  invoke  him. 

HYMN  LXXXVI.  Indm. 

O  Indra,  Lord  of  Light,  what  joys  thou  broughtest  from  the 

Asuras, 
Prosper  therewith,  0  Maghavan,  him   who   lauds   that   deed, 

and  those  whose  grass  is  trimmed  for  thee. 

2  The  unwasting  share  of  steeds  and   kine   which,  Indra,   thou 

hast  fast  secured. 
Grant  to  the  worshipper  who  presses  Soma  and  gives  guerdon, 
not  unto  the  churl. 

3  The  riteless,  godless  man  who  sleeps,  0  Indra,  his  unbroken 

sleep, — 
May  he  by  following  his  own  devices  die.     Hide  from  him 
wealth  that  nourishes. 

4  Whether,  0  Sakra,  thou  be  far,  or,  Vritra-slayer,  near  at  hand, 
Thence  by  heaven-reaching  songs  he  who  hath  pressed   the 

juice  invites  thee  with  thy  long-maned  Steeds. 

5  Whether  thou  art  in  heaven's  bright  sphere,  or  in  the  basin  of 

the  sea ; 
Whether,  chief  Vritra-slayer,  in  some  place  on  earth,  or  in  the 
firmament,  approach. 

6  Thou  Soma-drinker,   Lord  of    Strength,   beside  our  flowing 

Soma  juice 
Delight  us  with  thy  bounty  rich  in  pleasantness,  0  Indra,  with 
abundant  wealth. 

7  0  Indra,  turn  us  not  away :  be  the  companion  of  our  feast. 
For  thou  art  our  protecticm,  yea,  thou  art  our  kin ;  0  Indra, 

turn  us  not  away. 

8  Sit  down  with  us,  0  Indra,  sit  beside  the  juice  to  drink  the  meath. 
Show  forth  great  favour  to  the  singer,  Maghavan ;  Indra,  with 

us,  beside  the  j  uice. 


21  Ribhukshan:  or,  Lord  of  Rlbhus. 

1  Joyt :  riches. — S4yana.     From  the  Asuras :  from  the  powerful  R&kehasai. 
— fiayana. 
2  c/tves  guerdon :  liberally  rewards  the  prleaii. 


248  TSE  HYMNS  OP  [SOOK  vnt. 

9  0  Caster  of  the  Stone,  nor  Gkxls  nor  mortals  have  attamed  to 
thee. 
Thou  in  thy  might  surpassest  all  that  hath  been  made  :  the 
Gods  have  not  attained  to  thee. 

10  Of  one  accord  they  made  and  formed  for  kingship  Indra,  the 

Hero  who  in  all  encounters  overcometh, 
Most  eminent  for  power,  destroyer  in  the  conflict,  fierce  and 
exceeding  strong,  stalwart  and  ful]  of  vigour. 

11  Bards  joined  in  song  to  Indra  so  that  he  might  drink  the 

Soma  juice. 
The  Lord  of  Light,  that  he  whose  laws  stand  fast  might  aid 
with  power  and  with  the  help  he  gives. 

12  The  holy  sages  form  a  ring,  looking  and  singing  to  the  Ham. 
Inciters,  full  of  vigour,  not  to  be  deceived,  are  with  the  chant^ 

ers,  nigh  to  hear. 

13  Loudly  I  call  that  Indra,  Maghavan  the  Mighty,  who  evermore 

possesses  power,  ever  resistless. 
Holy,  most  liberal,  may  he  lead  us  on  to  riches,  and.  Thunder- 
armed,  make  all  our  pathways  pleasant  for  us. 

14  Thou  knowest  well,  0  Sakra,  thou  Most  Potent,   with   thy 

strength,  Indra,  to  destroy  these  castles. 
Before  thee,  Thunder-armed  !  all  beings  tremble :  the  heavens 
and  earth  before  thee  shake  with  terror, 

1 5  May  thy  truth,  Indra,  Wondrous  Hero  1  be  ray  guard  :  bear 

me  o'er  much  woe,  Thunderer  !  as  over  floods. 
When,  Indra,  wilt  thou  honour  us  with  opulence,  all-nourish- 
ing and  much- to-be-desired,  0  King  % 

HYMN  LXXXVIT.  ludra. 

To  Indra  sing  a  S^ma  hymn,  a  lofty  song  to  Lofty  Sage, 
To  him  who  guards  the  Law,  inspired,  and  fain  for  praise. 

2  Thou,  Indra,  art  the  Conqueror:  thou  gavest  splendour   to 

the  Sun. 
Maker  of  all  things,  thou  art  Mighty  and  All-God. 

3  Radiant  with  light  thou  wentest  to  the  sky,    the  luminous 

realm  of  heaven. 
The  Deities,  Indra,  strove  to  win  thee  for  their  Friend. 

4  Cojne  unto  us,  O  Indra,  dear,  still  conquering,  unconcealable, 
Vast  as  a. mountain  spread  on  all  sides,  Lord  of  Heaven. 


12  The  Ram:  Indra.    See  I.  61.  1,  and  VIII.  2.  40.    Inciters:  apparently, 
the  Qods  themselves. 


^  J/l-^od:  vi'svadevah:  *  the  lord  of  aW  the  ^oAa"— "WWaou. 
^  lyhconcealabie :  aa  the  Sun-God. 


BtUif  88.1  THE  lttGV£l)A,  240 

6  O  tratfafal  Soma-drinker,  thou  art  mightier  than  both  the 
worlds. 
Thou  Btrengthenest  him  who  pours  libation,  Lord  of  Heaven. 

6  For  thou  art  he,  0  Indra,  who  stormeth  all  castles  of  the  foei 
.  Slayer  of  Dasyus,  man's  Supporter,  Lord  of  Heaven. 

7  Now  have  we,  Indra,  Friend  of  Song,  sent  our  great  wishes 

forth  to  thee, 
Coming  like  floods  that  follow  floods. 

8  As  rivers  swell  the  ocean,  so,  Hero,our  prayers  increase  thy  might. 
Though  of  thyself,  0  Thunderer,  waxing  day  by  day. 

9  With  holy  song  they  bind  to  the  broad  wide-yoked  car  the  Bay 

Steeds  of  the  rapid  God, 
Bearers  of  ludra,  yoked  by  word. 

10  O  ludra,  bring  great  strength  to  us,  bring  valour,  Satakratu, 

thou  most  active,  bring 
A  hero  conquering  in  war. 

1 1  For,  gracious  Satakratu,  thou  hast  ever  been  a  Mother  and  a 

Sire  to  us, 
So  now  for  bliss  we  pray  to  thee. 

.12  To  thee.  Strong,  Much-invoked,  who  showest  forth  thy  strength, 
0  Satakratu,  do  I  speak  : 
So  grant  thou  us  heroic  strength. 

HYMN  LXXXVITL  Indra. 

O  THUNDERER,  zealous  worshippers  gave  thee  drink  this  ttme 

yesterday. 
Sj,  Indra,  listen  here  to  those  who  bring  the  laud  :  come  near 

unto  our  dwelling-place. 

3  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  fair-helmed,  rejoice  thee :  this  we  crave. 
Here  the  disposers  wait  on  thee. 
Thy  loftiest  glories  claim  our  lauds  beside  the  juice,  0  ludra, 
Lover  of  the  Song. 

8  Turning,  as  'twere,  to  meet  the  Sun,  enjoy  from  ladra  all  good 
things. 
When  he  who  will  be  born  is  born  with  power  we  look  to  trea- 
sures as  our  heritage. 

7  Comintj  like  floods :  in  crowds.     But  the  half -line  is  very  obscure.     *  As 
men  going  by  water  (splash  their  friends)  with  handfuls.' — Wilson. 
10  A  hero :  an  heroic  son.  

2  Disposers  :  the  priests  who  order  religious  ceremonies. 

3  This  stanza  is  difficult  and  obscure.     Mahtdhara's  explanation  is  :  *  The 
gathering  (rays)  proceeding  to  the  sun  distribute  all  Indra's  treasures  (to 
living  beings,  sc.  as  rain,  com,  etc.)  ;  may  we  too  by  our  pov:er  le^N^  ^iW^"^ 
treasures  a^  an  inheritance  to  him  who  has  been  or  N^\\\  \)^  ^iQtt\i,*  ^%%^Q^^% 
note  in  Wilson's  Tj-anslAtioD, 


260  TBB  HTMNS  OP  [BOOK  VJIL 

4  Praise  him  who  sends  us  wealth,  whose  bounties  injure  none  : 

goud  are  the  gifts  which  Indra  grants. 
He  is  not  wroth  with  one  who  satisfies  his  wish  :  he  turns  his 
mind  to  giving  l)bons. 

5  Thou  in  thy  battles,  Indra,  art  subduer  of  all  hostile  bands. 
Father  art   thon,  all-conqaering,   cancelling  the  curse,  thou 

victor  of  the  vanqnisher. 

6  The  Earth  and  Heaven  clung  close  to  thy  victorious  might,  as 

to  their  calf  two  mother-cows. 
When  thou  attackest  Vritra  all  the  hostile  bands  shrink  and 
faint,  Indra,  at  thy  wrath. 

7  Bring  to  your  aid  the  Eternal  One,  who  shoots  and  none  may 

shoot  at  him, 
Inciter,  swift,  victorious,  best  of  Charioteers,  Tngrya*s  unvan- 
quished  Strengtheuer ; 

8  Arranger   of  things    unarrauged,    e'en    Satakratu,   source   of 

might, 
Indra,  the  Friend  of  all,  for  succour  we  invoke,  Guardian  of 
treasure,  sending  wealth. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Indra.  V4k. 

I  MOVE  before  thee  here  present  in  person,  and  all  the  Deities 

follow  behind  me. 
When,  Indra,  thou  securest  me   my   portion,    with  me   thou 

shalt  perform  heroic  actions. 

2  The  food  of  meatii  in  foremost  place  I  give   thee,    thy   Soma 

shall  be  pressed,  thy  share  appointed. 
Thou  on  my  right  shalt   be   my   friend   and   comrade  :  then 
shall  we  two  smite  dead  full  many  a  foeman. 

3  Striving  for  strength  bring  forth   a  laud  to  Indra,  a  truthful 

hymn  if  he  in  truth  existeth. 
One  and  another  say,  There  is  no  Indra.    Who   hath    beheld 
him  ?  Whom  then  shall  we  honour  1 

6  As  to  their  calf:  or  the  translation  may  be,  as  sire  and  mother  to  their 
child. 

7  Tugrya  is  Bhujyu,  the  son  of  Tngra.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

8  Arranger  of  things  unai'rangtd :  *  the  consecrator  of  others  but  himself 
consecrated  by  none.' — Wilson. 

1  This  stanza  is  spoken  by  Agni. 

2  Indra  answers. 

3  Addressed  to  the  priests.     One  and  another :    nima :    but  according  to 
Sdyaaa,  Nema  is  the  uame  of  the  Riabi.     *]Seui3k  aski^a,  "NetVVj  tAiftre  is  no 
Indra. " '—  VVilaon, 


BYMN  Stf .]  TBE  RIO  VEDA .  251 

4  Here  am  I,  look  upon  me  here,  0  singer.     All  that  existeth  I 

surpass  in  greatness. 
The  Holy  Law's  commandments  make  roe  mighty.     Rending 
with  strength  I  rend  the  worlds  asunder. 

5  When  the  Law's  lovers  mounted  and  approached  me  as  I  sate 

lone  upon  the  dear  sky's  summit, 
Then  spake  my  spirit  to  the  heart  within  me,  My  friends  have 
cried  unto  me  with  their  children. 

6  All  these  thy  deeds  must  be  declared  at  Soma-feasts,  wrought, 

Indra,  Bounteous  Lord,  for  him  who  sheds  the  juice. 
When  thou  didst  open  wealth  heaped  up   by   many,  brought 
from  far  away  to  Sarabha,  the  Rishi's  kin. 

7  Now  run  ye  forth  your  several  ways  :  he  is  not  here  who  kept 

you  back. 
For  hath  not  Indra  sunk  his  bolt  deep  down  in  Vritra's   vital 
part? 

8  On-rushing  with  the  speed  of  thought  within  the  iron  fort  he 

pressed  : 

The  Falcon  went  to  heaven  and  brought  the   Soma   to   the 
Thunderer. 

9  Deep  in  the  ocean  lies  the  bolt  with  waters  compassed  round 

about, 
And  in  continuous  onward  flow  the  floods  their  tribute  bring 
to  it. 

10  When,  uttering   words    which   no  one   comprehended,    Vslk, 
Queen  of  Gods,  the  Gladdener,  was  seated, 

The  heaven's  four  regions  drew  forth  drink  and   vigour  :  now 
whither  hath  her  noblest  portion  vanished  ? 

4  Indra  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza. 

5  The  Laio's  lovers :  the  priests  who  in  sacrifioe  ascend  to  Indra.  According 
to  Hillebrandb  (F.  Mytkoloyie^  L  354),  the  Maruts  ;  iimmantah  meaning  not 
*  with  their  children,'  but  *  with  the  Infant  (Soma).' 

6  The  priest  addresses  Indra.  Sirabha:  a  Rishi  of  that  name.— -Sftyana. 
The  original  bymn  appears  to  end  with  this  stanza. 

7  Addressed  to  the  waters  of  heaven  after  Indra's  battle  with  Vritra. 

8  Ife:  the  Falcon.  The  iron  fort :  the  stronghold  or  cloud  in  which  th* 
Soma  or  ambrosial  rain  was  imprisoned.     Of.  IV.  27.  2. 

9  In  the  ooean  :  as  produced  naturally  in  the  sea  of  air. 

10  This  and  the  following  stanza  have  no  apparent  connexion  with  what 
precedes.     Vdk :  or  V&ch,  vox,  voice,  or  Speech  personified.     Her  unintel' 
ligible  words  are  the  thunder.     Her  noblest  portion :  according  to  S&yana,  the 
rain  which  follows  thunder.     Or  the  thunder  itaeli   msiTf  Vi^  \\i\.^\3L^<5A..    %^fc 
Cowell^a  note  in  TFx/soa 's  Translation.     PFo8  seated:    «A.  \iVft  ^wscv^^  ^^Sss?^ 

to  b». 


f 


262  fBM  MYMN8  OF  [BOOK  VIII. 

11  The  Deities  generated  V&k  the  Goddess,  and  animals  of  every 

figure  speak  her. 
May  she,  the  Gladdener,  yielding  food  and  vigonri   the  Milch- 
cow  Vak,  approach  us  meetly  lauded. 

12  Step  forth  with  wider  stride,  my  comrade  Vi^h^iii^l&Bke  room, 

Dyaus,  for  the  leaping  of  the  lightuiug. 
Let  us  slay  Vritra,  let  us  free  the  rivers  :  let  them  flow  loosed 
at  the  command  of  Indra. 

HYMN  XC.  Various. 

Yea,  specially  that  mortal  roan  hath  toiled  for  service  of  the 

Gods, 
Who  quickly  hath  brought  near  Mitra  and  Varuna  to  share 

his  sacrificial  gifts. 

2  Supreme  in  sovran  power,  far-sighted,  Chiefs  and  Kings,  most 

swift  to  hear  from  far  away. 
Both,  wondrously,  set  them   in  motion  as  with  arms,  in  com- 
pany with  Siirya's  beams. 

3  The  rapid  mcRsenger  who  runs  before  you,  Mitra-Yaru^a,  with 

iron  head,  swift  to  the  draught, 

4  He  whom  no  man  may  question,  none  may  summon  back,  who 

stands  not  still  for  colloquy, — 
From  hostile  clash  with  him  keep  ye  us  safe  this  day;  keep 
us  in  safety  with  your  arms. 

5  To  Aryaman  and  Mitra  sing  a  reverent  song,  0  pious  one, 

A  pleasant  hymn  that  shall  protect  to  Yarui^a :  sing  forth  a 
laud  unto  the  Kings. 

6  The  true,  Red  Treasure  they  have  sent,  one  only  Son  bom  of 

the  Three. 

They,  the  Immortal  Ones,  never  deceived,  survey  the  families 
of  mortal  men. 

7  My  songs  are  lifted  up,  and  acts  most  splendid  are  to  be  per- 

formed. 

Come  hither,  ye  Nasatyas,  with  accordant  mind,  to  meet  and 
to  enjoy  my  gifts. 

11  Speak  her :  articulately-speakiug  men  and  lower  animals  all  derive  their 
voices  from  her. 

12  This  stanza,  which  is  out  of  place  here,  is  spoken  by  Indra  when  he  is 
about  to  attack  Vritra.     See  IV.  18.  11. 

S  TA^  rapid  messenger :  the  lightning,  aa  one  oi  t\ie  toxma  of  Agni. 
C  TAe  erue,  Hed Treasure :  the  Sun.     Tht  Three :  \ievtw,m\^-^vc,  wi^wsfCou 


MTMN  90.]  THE  RIO  VEDA .  2S8 

8  Lords  of  great  wealth,  when  we  invoke  your  bounty  which  no 

demon  checks, 
Both  of  you,  furthering  our  eastward-offered  praise,  come,  Chiefs 
whom  Jamadagni  lauds  ! 

9  Come,  V&yu,  drawn  by  fair  hymns,  to  our  sacrifice  that  reaches 

heaven. 
Poured  on  the  middle  of  the  straining-cloth,  and  cooked,  this 
bright  drink  hath  been  offered  thee. 

10  He  comes  by  straightest  paths,  as  ministering  Priest,  to  taste 

the  sacrificial  gifts. 
Then,  Lord  of  harnessed  teams  !  drink  of  the  twofold  draught, 
bright  Soma  mingled  with  the  milk. 

11  Verily,  Sdrya,  thou  art  great;  truly,  Aditya,  thou  art  great. 
As  thou  art  great  iudeed,  thy  greatness  is  admired  :  yea,  verily, 

thou,  God,  art  great. 

12  Yea,  Surya,  thou  art  great  in  fame :  thou  evermore,   0  God, 

art  great. 
Thou  by  thy  greatness  art  the  Gods'  High  Priest,  divine,  far- 
spread  unconquerable  light. 

13  She  yooder,  bending  lowly  down,  clothed  in  red  hues  and  rich 

iu  rays. 
Is  seeu,  advancing  as  it  were  with  various  tints,  amid  the  ten 
surrounding  arms. 

14  Past  and  gone  are  three  mortal  generations :  the  fourth  and 

last  into  the  Sun  hath  entered. 
He  mid  the  worlds  his  lofty  place  hath  taken.     Into  green 
plants  is  gone  the  Purifying. 

15  The  Rudras'  Mother,  Daughter  of  the  Vasus,  centre  of  nectar, 

the  Adityas'  Sister — 
To  folk  who  understand  will  I  proclaim  it — injure  not  Adit*, 
the  Cow,  the  sinless. 


13  She  yonder:  Ushaa  or  Dawn.  The  ten  surrounding  arms:  the  ten 
regions  of  the  world. 

14  Three  mortal  generations :  according  to  the  legend,  PrajApati  produced 
in  succession  three  kinds  of  creatures  who  all  died.  The  fourth  generation 
lived  and  enjoyed  the  light  and  warmth  of  the  Sun.  See  Cowell's  note  in 
Wilson's  Translation,  or  iSfotopatAo- i^rd^mana,  II.  5.  1.  1 — 4.  Into  green  plants  : 
SAyana  explains  haritah  as  the  quarters  of  the  sky,  and  pdvamdnah  (the  Puri- 
fying) as  y&yu  or  the  Wind.  Grassmann  takes  pdvamdnah  to  be  the  Soma, 
and  haritaf^  to  be  the  horses  of  the  Sun.  I  have  followed  Lud wig's  inter- 
pretation ;  but  J  find  the  stanza  almost  unintelligible. 

16  Centre  of  neotar:  or,  of   amrit,  or  immortality,  or  the  world  of   the 
immortal  Gods.     The  Cow ;  the  earthly  cow,  aa  t\xe  t^"^  ol  K'^\\I\«t\wivqvsw»iw 
Nature,  must  not  be  offended.     The  stanza  Is  awi\«iv\>^  ^'ft  Y'^v^^  ''^iV^  "^^^^ 
received  the  cow  ub  bis  reward. 


254  TBE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  W/f. 

16  Weak-minded  men  have  as  a  cow  adopted  me  who  came  hither 
from  the  Gods,  a  Goddess, 
Who,  skilled  in  eloquence,  her  voice  uplifteth,  who  staodeth 
near  at  hand  with  all  devotions. 

HYMN  XCI.  Agbi. 

Lord  of  the  house,  Sage,  ever  young,  high  power  of  life,  0 

Agni,  God, 
Thou  givest  to  thy  worshipper. 

2  So  with  our  song  that  prays  and  serves,  attentive,  Lord  of 

spreading  light, 
Agni,  bring  hitherward  the  Gods. 

3  For,  Ever- Youthful  One,  with  thee,  best  Furtherer,  as  our  ally, 
We  overcome,  to  win  the  spoil. 

4  As  Aurva  Bhrigu  used,  as  Apnavana  used,  I  call  the  pure 
Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 

5  I  call  the  Sage  who  sounds  like  wind,  the  Might  that  like 

Parjauya  roars, 
Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 

6  As  Sa vitar's  productive  Power,  as  him  who  sends  down  bliss,  I  call 
Agni  who  clothes  him  with  the  sea. 

7  Hither,  for  powerful  kinship,  I  call  Agni,  him  who  prospers  you, 
Most  frequent  at  our  solemn  rites ; 

8  That  through  this  famed  One's  power,  he  may  stand  by  us 

even  as  Tvashtar  comes 
Unto  the  forms  that  must  be  shaped. 

9  This  k^xii  is  the  Lord  supreme  aTjove  all  glories  mid  the  Gods  : 
May  he  come  nigh  to  us  with  strength. 

y)  Here  praise  ye  him  the  most  renowned  of  all  the  ministering 
Priests, 
Agni,  the  Chief  at  sacrifice ; 

1 1  Piercing,  with  purifying  flame,  enkindled  in  our  homes,  most 
high, 
Swiftest  to  hear  from  far  away. 

16  Weak-minded  men :  '  Men  are  too  feeble  in  their  intellect  to  comprehend 
me  in  my  true  form  and  my  real  nature  :  they  can  only  understand  my  worth 
iu  the  shape  of  a  cow.' — See  Ludwig,  R.  F.,  IV.  245,  246. 

The  concluding  stanza  is  spoken  by  Aditi  as  a  cow. 

4  Aui'va  Bhngu :    or,  perhaps,  Aurva  and  Bhrigu.     The  ancient  Rishi 
Aurva  is  said  to  have  been  the  grandson  of   Bhrigu.      Apnavdna:    another 
ancient  Rishi,   mentioned  in   connexion  with  Wift  'Sktv^M^  wA  \Jafc  «».\U«at 
worship  of  Agni,  in  Book  IV.  7.  1. 


ll    rarjfdl.]  THE  RIOySDA.  265 

li  Sage,  laud  the  Mighty  One  who  wins  the  spoil  of  victory  like 
a  steed, 
And,  Mitra-like,  unites  the  folk. 

}3  Still  turning  to  their  aim  in  thee,  the  oblation-bearer's  sister 
hymns 
Have  come  to  thee  before  the  wind. 

U  The  waters  find  their  place  in  him,  for  whom  the  threefold 
sacred  grass 
Is  spread  unbound,  unlimited. 

15  The  station  of  the  Bounteous  God  hath,  through  his  aid  which 
none  impair, 

A  pleasant  aspect  like  the  Sun. 

16  Blazing   with  splendour,   Agni,  God,   through  pious   gifts  of 
sacred  oil, 

Bring  thou  the  Gods  and  worship  them. 

17  The  Gods  as  mothers  brought  thee  forth,  the  Immortal  Sage, 
O  Angiras, 

The  bearer  of  our  gifts  to  heaven. 

18  Wise  Agni,  Gods  established  thee,  the  Seer,  noblest  messenger, 
As  bearer  of  our  sacred  gifts. 

19  No  cow  have  I  to  call  mine  own,  no  axe  at  hand  wherewith 
to  work, 

Yet  what  is  here  I  bring  to  thee. 

20  O  Agni,  whatsoever  be  the  fuel  that  we  lay  for  thee, 
Be  pleased  therewith,  Most  Youthful  God. 

21  That   which  the  white-ant   eats  away^  that  over  which  the 
emmet  crawls — 

May  all  of  this  be  oil  to  thee. 

22  When  he  enkindles  Agni,  man  should  with  his  heart  attend 
the  song : 

I  with  the  priests  have  kindled  him. 


12  Sage:  the  piiest  is  addressed. 

13  Before  the  wind:  or,  in  froub  of  the  wiud,  with  which  the  flame  is 
lauued. 

14  *  The  waters  rest  in  Agni,  who  abides  as  h'ghtning  in  the  firmament.' 

Note  in  Wilson's  Translation  which  I  have  followed  closely  in  this  stunza. 

15  Or,  a  comma  being  substituted  for  the  full  stop  at  the  end  of  the  preced- 
ing stanza,  and  paddm  (station)  taken  as  in  apposition  to  pcwi?rfm.( place)  in  14  : 
*  The  station  of  the  bounteous  :  he  hath,  through  hi*  aid  which  none  impair, 
A  pleasant  aspect  like  the  Sun.' 

19  AsPrayoga,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn,  has  no  cow  and  no  axe  to  cut  wood, 
Agni  is  asked  in  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  to  dispense  with  the  custom- 
ary offerings  of  milk,  and  to  accept  such  wood  aa  the  wovte\\\^>^t  <iwx  ^x^iVw:^, 
J^2  JVitA  Ais /leari  '  a  daroat  spirit  will  compeuMto  \\i^\q^uViQV\&i^%3A 
properly  prepared  fuel. 


256  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VIIL 

HYMN  XCII.  Agni. 

Thjit  noblest  Furtherer  hath  appeared,  to  whom  men  bring 

their  holy  works. 
Our  songs  of  praise  have  risen  aloft  to  Agni  who  was  bom  to 

give  the  Arya  strength. 

2  Agni  of  Divodasa  turned,  as  'twere  in  majesty,  to  the  Gods. 
Onward  he  sped  along  the  mother  earth,  and  took  his  station 

in  the  height  of  heaven. 

3  Him  before  whom  the  people  shrink  when  he  performs  his 

glorious  deeds. 
Him  who  wins  thousands  at  the  worship  of  the  Gods,  himself, 
that  Agni,  serve  with  songs. 

4  The  mortal  man  whom  thou  wouldst  lead  to  opulence,  0  Vasu, 

he  who  brings  thee  gifts. 

He,  Agni,  wius  himself  a  hero  singing  lauds,  yea,  one  who  feeds 
a  thousand  men. 

5  He  with  the  steed  wius  spoil  even  in  the  fenced  fort,  and  gains 

if n perishable  fame. 
In  thee,  0  Lord   of   wealth,    continually   we  lay  all  precious 
offeriugs  to  the  Gods. 

6  To  him  who  dealeth  out  all  wealth,  who  is  the  cheerful  Priest 

of  men. 
To  him,  like  the  first  vessels  filled  with  savoury  juice,  to  Agni 
go  the  songs  of  praise. 

7  Votaries,  richly-gifted,  deck  him  with  their  songs,  even  as  the 

steed  who  draws  the  car. 
On   both,  Strong  Lord  of  men !  on  child  and  grandson  pour 
the  bounties  which  our  nobles  give. 

8  Sing  forth  to  him,  the  Holy,  most   munificent,    sublime  with 

his  refulgent  glow, 
To  Agni,  ye  Upastutas. 

9  Worshipped  with  gifts,    enkindled,  splendid,   Maghavan  shall 

win  himself  heroic  fame. 
And  will  not  his  most    newly  shown   benevolence   come  to  us 
with  abundant  strength  ? 


I 


2  Of  Divoddia :  whom  Divod&sa  especially  worshipped  and  claimed  as  hig 
tutelary  God.  The  stanza  is  obscure,  and  my  translation  founded  on  von 
Roth's  interpretation  of  jn'd  vl  vdvrUe,  which  has  been  accepted  by  Cowell,  must 
be  regarded  as  conjectural.     See  Wilson's  Translation  and  note. 

4  A  hero :  a  brave  son. 

/  The  eecond  line  ia  obscure.  *  Qracefnl  loxd  of  men,  grant  wealth  to  us  rich 
n  cbildren  and  grandchildren.* — ^Wilson. 
S  l^pasiuta$:  singera  so  named  after  the  ■R\»Vi\\3^Mi\.>a\A.   ^^^V^^.Vi^ 


HYMN  92.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  257 

10  Pi-iest,  presser  of  the  juice !  praise  now  the   dearest  Guest  of 

all  our  friends, 
Agni,  the  driver  of  the  cars. 

11  Who,  finder-out  of  treasures  open  and  concealed,  bringeth  them 

hither,  Holy  One; 
Whose  waves,    as  in  a   cataract,   are  hard  to  pass,   when  he, 
through  song,  would  win  him  strength. 

12  Let  not  the  noble  Guest,   Agni,  be  wroth  with  us :  by  many  a 

man  his  praise  is  sung, 
Good  Herald,  skilled  in  sacrifice. 

13  0  Vasu,  Agni,  let  not  them  be  harmed  who   come  in  any  way 

with  lauds  to  thee. 
Even  the  lowly,  skilled  in  rites,  with  offered  gifts,  seeketh  th^e 
for  the  envoy's  task. 

14  Friend  of  the  Maruts,  Agni,  come  with  Rudras  to  the  Soma- 

drauglit, 
To  Sobhari's  fair  song  of  praise,  and  be  thou  joyful  in  the  light. 

10  Priest,  presser  of  the  juice :  dsdva :  stotah. — Sftyana.  *  Singer  of  hymns.' 
— Wilson. 

11  Whose  waves :  billowy  floods  of  flame  rushing  on  like  waters  falling  down 
a  precipice.  '  Whose  (flames),  as  he  hastens  to  wage  the  battle  by  means  of  our 
sacred  rite,  are  hard  to  be  passed  through  as  waves  rushing  down  a  decli- 
vity.*— Wilson.  See  also  Pischel,  Vedische  StudieUf  1,  j^.  I8i.  Through  song  : 
inspirited  and  strengthened  by  our  hymns. 

13  For  the  envoy's  task:  to  bear  his  oblations  to  the  Gods. 


17 


VALAKHILYA. 


(Book  VIIL  Hymns  49—59.    M,  MiXller) 

HYMN   I.  Indra. 

To  you  will  I  sing  Indra's  praise  who  gives  good  gifts  as  well 

we  know ; 
The  praise  of  Ma'^havan  who,  rich  iu  treasure,  aids  his  singers 

with  wealth  thousandfold. 

2  As  with  a  hundred  hosts,    he   rushes  boldly  on,  and   for  the 

offerer  slays  hii*  foes. 
As  from  a  mountain  flow  the   water-brooks,  thus  flow  his  gifts 
who  feedeth  many  a  one. 

3  The  drops  effused,  the  gladdening  draughts,  0  Indra,  Lover  of 

the  Song, 
As  waters  seek  the  lake  where  they  are  wont  to  rest,  fill  thee, 
for  bounty,  Thunderer. 

4  The  matchless  draught  that  strengthens  and  gives  eloquence, 

the  sweetest  of  the  meath  drink  thou, 
Tnat  in  thy  joy  thou  mayst  scatter   thy  gifts   o'er  us,  plente- 
ously,  even  as  the  dust. 

5  Come  quickly  to  our  laud,  urged   on  by  Soma-pressers  like  a 

horse — 
Laud,  Godlike  Indra,  which    milch-kine   make  sweet  for  thee  : 
with  Kanva's  sons  are  gifts  for  thee. 

6  With  homage  have  we  sought  thee   as  a  Hero,  stroirgj*"  pre- 

eminent, with  unfailing  wealth. 
0  Thunderer,  as  a  plenteous  spring  pours  forth  its  stream,  so, 
Indra,  flow  our  songs  to  thee. 

7  If  now  thou  art  at  sacrifice,   or  if  thou   art  upon   the  earth, 
Come  thence,  high-thonghted  !  to  our  sacrifice  with  the  Swift, 

come,  Mighty  with  the  Mighty  Ones. 


See  Book  VI II.,  Hymn  XLIX.,  note.  Professor  Cowell's  version  of  these 
eleven  hymns  will  be  found  in  Appendix  I.  of  Wilson's  Translation,  Vol.  V. 
I  am  indebted  to  him  for  some  improvements  on  the  version  which  I  had 
previously  prepared. 

2  ^8  with  a  hundred  hosts:  *like  a  weapon  witli .a  hundred" edges.' — Cowell. 

4  That... gives  eloquence:  vivdkshanam  :  from  vuch  ;  '  swelling,'  fiom  vaksh^ 
ul'sh. — von  Roth,  and  Cowell.     Plenteovtiij,  even  as  the  dtist :  the  mi^aning  of 
the  text  is  obscure     The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  tik*»s  dhri^uid  —  drishad^ 
the  nether  millstone  :  'just  as  the  mill-atone  poMiw  o\3i\.  \ii'ftoX'  — ^^'^€^, 
/  TAeSwi/e  and  the  Mighty  Ones,  are  Indra'a\iOT»fta. 


260  THE  HYMNS  OF  [VALAKHILTA. 

8  The  active,  fleet-foot,  tawny  Coursers  that  are  thine  are  swift 

to  victoi-y,  like  the  Wind, 
Wherewith  thou  goest  round  to  visit  Manus'  seed,  wherewith 
all  heaven  is  visible. 

9  Indra,  from  thee  so  great  we  crave  prosperity  in  wealth  of  kine, 
As,  Maghavan,  thou  favouredat  Medhya^tithi,  and,  in  the  fight, 

Nip&tithi. 

10  As,  Maghavan,   to  Kanva,   Trasadasyu,  and  to   Paktha  and 
Dasavraja ; 
As,  Indra,  to  Goparya  and  Rijisvau  thou   vouchsafed^st  wealth 
in  kine  and  gold. 

HYMN  II.  Indra. 

Sakra  I  praise,  to  win  his  aid,  far-famed,  exceeding  bountiful, 
Who  gives,  as  'twere   iu  thousands,  precious   wealth   to  him 
who  sheds  the  juice  and  worships  him. 

2  Arrows  with  hundred  points,  unconquerable,  are  this   Indra's 

mighty  arms  in  war. 
He  streams  on  liberal  worshippers   like   a   hill   with   springs, 
when  j  uices  poured  have  gladdened  him. 

3  What  time  the  flowing  Soma-drops  have  gladdened  with  their 

taste  the  Friend, 
Like  water,  gracious  Lord  !  were  my  libations  made,  like  milch- 
kine  to  the  worshipper. 

4  To  him  the  peerless,  who  is  calling  you  to  give  you  aid,  forth 

flow  the  drops  of  pleasant  meath. 
The  Soma-drops  which  call  on  thee,    0   gracious   Lord,    have 
brought  thee  to  our  hymns  of  praise. 

§  He  rushes  hurrying  like  a  steed  to  Soma  that  adorns  our  rite, 
Which  hymns  make  sweet  to  thee,  lover  of  pleasant  food.  The 
call  to  Paura  thou  dost  love. 

6  Praise  the  strong,  grasping  Hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,    ruling 
supreme  o'er  mighty  wealth. 
Like  a  full    spring,    0   Thunderer,  from  thy  store  hast  thou 
poured  on  the  worshipper  evermore. 

—     -  -       -^  -  

9  Medhydtithi :  a  Rishi  whose  name  h:is  frequently  occurred.  NtpdtUhi  : 
mentioned  only  here  and  V&lakhilya  Hymn  III. 

10  Trasadasyu :  see.  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Paktha :  a  favourite  of  the  Asvins. 
See  VIII.  22.  10.  Dasavraja:  see  VIII.  8.  20.  Gosarya :  see  VIII.  8.  20. 
Rijisvan :  see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 


5  2%e  call  to  Paura  :  the  invitation  to  Paura' a  Uovia^.    According  to  von 
Hoth  pauf'd  mea,na  the  &llev,  the  satisfier  :    *  tUovi  a.i^^vo\eft^  tXife  s^wvwvsiaxka  \«i 
'J4f  satiafyiag  beverage, '— Cowell.     See  Y.  7  4.  4. 


\ 


jrnnrt.]  the  riqvbda.  mi 

7  Now  whether  thou  be  far  away,  or  in  the  heavens,  or  on  the 

earth, 
O  Indra,  mighty-thoughted,  harnessing  thy  Bays,  come  Lofty 
with  the  Lofty  Ones. 

8  ^The  Bays  who  draw  thy  chariot,  Steeds  who  injure  none,  sur- 

pass the  wind's  impetuous  strength — 
With  whom  thou  silencest  the  enemy  of  man,  with  whom  thou 
goest  round  the  sky. 

9  O  gracious  Hero,  may  we  learn  anew  to  know  thee  as  thou  art : 
iis  in    decisive   fight   thou   holpest   Etasa,    or   Vasa   'gainst 

Dasavraja, 

10  As,  Maghavan,  to  Kanva  at  the  sacred   feast,  to   Dirghanitha 
thine  home-friend. 
As  to  Gosarya  thou,  Stone-darter,  gavest  wealth,  give  me  a  gold- 
bright  stall  of  kine. 

HYMN  IIL  Indra. 

As  with  Manu  Samvarani,  Indra,  thou  drankest  Soma  juice, 
And,  Maghavan,  with  Ntpatithi,  Medhy&tithi,  with   Pushtigu 
and  Srushtigu, — 

3  The  son  of  Prishadv^lna  was  Praskanva's  host,  who   lay  decre- 
pit and  forlorn. 
Aided  by  thee  the  Rishi  Dasyave-vrika  strove  to  obtain  thou- 
sands of  kine. 

3  Call  hither  with  thy  newest  song  Indra  who  lacks  not   hymns 

of  praise. 
Him  who  observes  and  knows,  inspirer  of   the  sage,  him   who 
seems  eager  to  enjoy. 

4  He  unto   whom   they   sang   the   seven-beaded  hymn,    three- 

parted,  in  the  loftiest  place, 
He  sent  his  thunder  down  on  all  these  living   things,    and   so 
displayed  heroic  might. 

7  This  stanza  is  almost  a  repetition  of  stanza  7  of  Hymn  I. 

9  Etafa:  see  I.  61.  15.  Vaaa:  mentioned  as  a  favourite  of  the  Asvins  in 
X.  40.  7.*  Dagavraja  :  said  in  stanza  10  of  Hymn  I.  to  have  been  helped  by 
Indra. 

10  Dirghanitha :  Ludwig  takes  this  word  to  be  an  adjective  qualifying 
¥nidhe  adhvari,  *  at  the  sacrificial  feast  of  long  duration.'  A  gold-hHght  stall 
of  kine :  according  to  Ludwig,  a  stall  graced  with  bay  steeds,  would  be  a 
better  translation. 


1  Sdmvarani :  son  of  the  Vedic  Rishi  Samvarana.     See  V.  33.  10.     At  the 
end  of  the  stanza,  *  so  drink  with  us,'  is  to  be  understood. 

2  Forlorn  :  rejected  and  cast  out  by  his  kindred.   Daayave-vriha  :  literally, 
the  Wolf-to-tbe-Dasyu,  that  is,  Destroyer  of  fiends  or  barbaiiaus. 

4  TAe  seven-headed :  sung  by  seven  hebveui.^  u.\x|g<sre« 


262  THE  HYMNS  OF  [vIlAKHILTA. 

5  We  invocate  that  Tndra  who  beatoweth  precious  things  on  us. 
Now  do  we  know  his  newest  favour;  may  we  gain  a  stable  that 

is  full  of  kine. 

6  He  whom  thou  aidest,  gracious  Lord,  to  give  again,  obtains 

great  wealth  to  nourish  him.        '  , 

We  with  our  Soma  ready,    Lover   of  the   Song !  call,    Indra 
Maghavan,  on  thee. 

7  Ne'er  art  thou  fruitless,  Indra ;  ne'er  dost  thou  desert  the 

worshipper : 
But  now,  0  Maghavan,  thy  bounty  as  a  God  is  poured  forth 
ever  more  and  more. 

8  He  who  hath  overtaken  Krivi  with  his  might,  and  silenced 

Sushna  with  death-bolts, — 
When  he  supported  yonder  heaven  and  spread  it  out,  then  first 

the  son  of  earth  was  born. 

• 

9  Good  Lord  of  wealth  is  he  to  whom  all  Aryas,  Dasas  here  be- 

long. 
Directly  unto  thee,  the  pious  Rusama  Paviru,   is  that  wealth 
brought  nigh. 

10  In  zealous  haste  the  singers  have  sung  forth  a   song  distilling 
oil  and  rich  in  sweets. 
Riches  have  spread  among  us  and  heroic  strength,  with  us  are 
flowing  Soma-drops. 

HYMN  IV.  Indra. 

As,  Sakra,  thou  withManu  called  Vivasvan  drankest  Soma  juice, 
As,  indra,  thou  didst  love  the  hymn  by  Trita's  side,  so  dost 
thou  joy  with  Ayu  now. 

2  As  thou  with  M^tarisvan,   Medhya,   Prishadhra,  hast  cheered 

thee,  Indra,  with  pressed  jnice, 
Drunk  Soma  with  Uijunas,  Syilniarasmi,  by   Dasonya's,  Dasa- 
sipra's  side. 

3  'Tis  he  who  made  the  lauds  his  own  and  boldly  drank  the 

Soma  juice, 


8  The  son  of  earth  :  man. 

9  Rasama  Pavtru :  the  Rusamas  are  mentioned  in  V.  30.  13 — 15.     The 
name  of  Paviru  does  not  occur  again. 


1  Vivasvdn :  or  Vivasvat,  was  the  father  of  Manu  who  is  generally  called 
Vaivasvata.     Ayu :  the  Ilishi  of  the  hymn,  or  the  sacrificer. 

2  Mdtarhvan :  the  Rishi  of  Hymn  VI.  of  the  Vdlakhilya,     Medhya :  the 
H/sIij  of  HymuB  V.  IX.  and  X.   Prishadhra :  the  Rishi  of  Hymn  VIII.  SyH- 

marosmi :  mentioDed,  as  a  favourite  of  the  A.Bv\iift,\ivl.  Wi..  ^^.    ^\v^  \i»xaLR!^ 
of  RijCmas,  Dasonjra,  and  Dasasipra  do  not  occur  «i^«i.m'm\Xi^^v^N^^^. 


JrKirW  Jk]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  268 

.    He  to  whom   Vishnu  came  striding  his  three  wide  steps,  as 
Mitra's  statutes  ordered  it. 

4  In  whose  laud  thou    didst  joy,   Indra,  at  the  great  deed,  O 

Satakratu,  Mighty  One  ! 
Seeking  reuowu  we  call  thee  as  the  milkers  call  the  cow  who 
yields  -abuudant  milk. 

5  He  is  our  Sire  who  gives  to  us,  Great,  Mighty,  ruling  as  he  wills. 
Unsought,  may  he  the  Strong,   Rich,   Lord  of  ample  wealth, 

give  us  of  horses  and  of  kiuc. 

6  He  to  whom  thou,  Good  Lord,  givest  that  he  may  give  increas- 

es wealth  that  nourishes. 
E-^ger  for  wealth  we  call  on  Indra,  Lord   of  wealth,  ou  S  ita- 
kratu  with  our  lauds. 

7  Never  art  thou  neglectful :  thou  guardest  both  races  with  thy 

care. 
The  call  on   Indra,   fourth   Aditya !  is  thine  own.     Amrit  is 
stablished  in  the  heavens. 

8  The    offerer    whom    thou,    Indra,    Lover   of  the  Song,  liberal 

Magliavan,  favourest, — 
As  at  the  call  of  Kanva  so,  0  gracious   Lord,   hear  thou  our 
songs  and  eulogy. 

9  Sung  is  the  song  of  ancient  time  :  to  Indra  have  ye  said  the 

prayer. 
They  have  sung  many  a  Brihati  of  sacrifice,  poured  forth  the 
worshipper's  many  thoughts. 

10  Indra  hath  tossed  together  mighty  stores  of  wealth,  and  both 
the  worlds,  yea,  and  the  Sun. 
Pure,  brightly-shining,  mingled  with  the  milk,  the  draughts 
of  Soma  have  made  Indra  glad. 

HYMN   V.  India. 

As  highest  of  the  Maghavans,  preeminent  among  the  Bulls, 
Best  breaker-down  of  forts,   kine-winner,   Lord  of  wealth,  we 
seek  thee,  Indra  Maghavan. 

2  Thou  who  subduedst  Ayu,  Kutsa,  Atithigva,  waxing  daily  in 
thy  might, 

5  Ruling  as  he  wilU  :  *  he  who  acts  as  the  sovereign.' — Cowell. 

7  fioth  races  :  Gods  and  men.     Fourth  Aditya :  Varu^,  Mitra,  and  Arya- 
man  being  the  other  three.     Amrit:  'ambrosia.' — Cowell. 

8  As  thou  hearest,  must  be  supplied  at  the  beginning  of  the  stanza. 

9  Brihati :  verse  io  the  Brihati  metre. 

1  Highest  •  or,  nearest.     The  Bulls :  strong  heroes, 
2  Ayu,  A'uisa,  Atlthiyva  :  see  I.  53.  10, 


264  TSE  HYMNS  OF  [VALAKffllYA^ 

As   such,  rousing   thy  power,    we    invocate  thee  now,  thee 
Satakratu,  Lord  of  Bays. 

3  The  pressing-stones  shall  pour  for  us  the  essence  of  the  meath 

of  all, 
Drop3  that  have  been  pressed  out  afar  among  the  folk,  and 
those  that  have  been  pressed  near  us. 

4  Repel   all  enmities   and  keep   them  far   away :    let   all  win 

treasure  for.  their  own. 
Even   among  Sishtas   are  the   stalks  that   make  thee   glad, 
where  thou  with  Soma  satest  thee. 

5  Come,  Indra,  very  near  to  us  with  aids  of  firmly-based  resolve ; 
Come,  most  auspicious,  with  thy  most  auspicious  help,  good 

Kinsman,  with  good  kinsmen,  come  ! 

6  Bless  thou  with  progeny  the  chief  of  men,  the  lord  of  heroes, 

victor  in  the  fray. 
Aid  with  thy  powers  the  men  who  sing  thee  lauds  and  keep 
their  spirits  ever  pure  and  bright. 

7  May  we  be  such  in  battle  as  are  surest  to  obtain  thy  grace  : 
With  holy  offerings  and  invocations  of  the  Gods,  we  mean, 

that  we  may  win  the  spoil. 

8  Thine,    Lord  of   Bays,  am  I.     Prayer  longeth  for   the  spoil. 

Still  with  thy  help  I  seek  the  fight. 
So,    at  the  raiders'   head,  I,  craving  steeds  and    kioe,   unite 
myself  with  thee  alone. 

HYMN  VI.  Indra. 

Indra,   the  poets  with  their  hymns  extol  this   hero  might  of 

thine : 
They  strengthened,  loud  in  song,  thy  power  that  droppeth  oil. 

With  hymns  the  Pauras  came  to  thee. 

2  Through   piety  they  came  to  Indra  for  his  aid,   they  whose 
libations  give  thee  joy. 
As  thou  with  Krisa  and  Samvarta  hast  rejoiced,  so,  Indra,  be 
thou  glad  with  us. 


4  SUktas:  apparently  a  tribe  of  no  great  importance.  Stalls:  of  the 
Soma-plant. 

5  At  the  raiders*  head :  at  the  head  of  the  band  who  are  going  forth  to  seize 
the  cattle  of  their  enemies.  Von  Roth  thinks  that  matin^m  should  be  read  ia 
stead  of  math^nStm,  and  Qrassroann  translates  accordingly,  '  in  Anfang  mein^r 
Bitten,'   *  at  the  beginning  of  my  prayers.' 

1  Pauras :  *  the  offerers.' — Cowell.  See  Vdlakhilya,  IT.  5. 

2  Ay-iaa -'  the  Itisbi  oi  Hymn   VII.  of  the  V&lakhilya.    Samvarta:   not 
a20ntioned  elsewhere. 


MTMN  7.]  THE  HIO  VXD  A .  255 

3  Agreeing  in  youf  spirit,  all  ye  Deities,  come  nigh  to  us. 
Yasus  and  Budras  shall  come  near  to  give  us  aid,  and   Maruts 

listen  to  our  call. 

4  May  Pushan,    Vishnn,  and  Sarasvati  befriend,   and  the  Seven 

Streams,  this  call  of  mine  : 
May  Waters,  Wind,  the  Mountains,  and  the  Forest-Lord,  and 
Earth  give  ear  unto  my  cry. 

5  Indra,   with  thine  own   bounteous   gift,  most  liberal  of  the 

Mighty  Ones, 
Be  our  boon  benefactor,  Vritra-slayer,  be  our  feast-companion 
for  our  weal. 

6  Leader  of  heroes,  Lord  of  battle,  lead  thou  us  to  oombat,  thou 

Most  Sapient  One. 
High  fame  is  theirs  who  win  by  invocations,    feasts  and  enter- 
tainment of  the  Gods. 

7  Our  hopes  rest  on  the  Faithful  One  :  in  Indra  is  the  people's  life. 
O  Maghavan,  come  nigh  that  thou  mayst  give  us  aid  :    make 

plenteous  food  stream  forth  for  us.  , 

8  Thee   would  we  worship,  Indra,  with  our  songs  of  praise :  O 

Satakratu,  be  thou  ours. 
Pour  down  upon  Praskanva  bounty  vast  and  firm,  exuberant^ 
that  shall  never  fail. 

HYMN  VIT.  Praskanva's  Gift. 

Great,  verily,  is  Indra's   might.     I  have   beheld,   and  hither 

comes 
Thy  bounty,  Dasyave-vrika  ! 

2  A  hundred   oxen  white   of  hue  are  shining   like  the   stars  in 

heaven, 
So  tall,  they  seem  to  prop  the  sky. 

3  Bamboos  a  hundred,  hundred  dogs,  a  hundred  skins  of  beasts 

well-tanned, 
A  hundred   tufts  of  Balbaja,   four  hundred   red-hued  mares 
are  mine. 


4  The  Forest  Lord :  vanaspati :  the  tall  timber  tree,  frequently  meaniDg  the 
Sacrificial  Post. 

5  Benefactor :  or  Bhaga,  the  God  who  distributes  wealth. 

1   'Great  is  Indra's  power,  and  the  gifts  which  I  have  received  from  thee,  O 
destroyer   of  the   Dasyus,  can   be  compared   only  to   his   bounty.'    Dasyave- 
vrika,  here,  is  the  name,  not  of  the  Rishi,    but  of  a  hero  who  in  alli-tnoe  with 
the  Kanvas  has   been  victorious  in  his   attack  on  the   hostile  barbarians.     See 
Ludwig,  Vol.  III.  p,  164. 

3  Balbaja  :  a  kind  of  coarse  grass  (Eleusine   liidic8k.\  "«&fe^'Ya.\^\^Qi>\^^^W^ 
mouiea,  and  for  other  parpoaea  when  plaited. 


] 


286  THE  HYMNS  OF  [VALAKHILYA. 

4c  Blest  by  the  Gods,  K&nvS-yanas !    be  ye  who  spread  through 
life  on  lif-e : 
Like  horses  have  ye  stridden  forth. 

5  Then  men  extolled  the  team  of   seven :  not  yet  full-grown,  its 
fame  is  great. 
The  dark  mares  rushed  along  the  paths,  so  that   no  eye  could 
follow  them. 

HYMN  VIIL  Praskanva's  Gift. 

Thy  bounty,  Dasyave-vrika,  exhaustless  hath  displayed  itself  : 
Its  fulness  is  as  broad  as  heaven. 

2  Ten  thousand  Dasyave-vrika,  the  son  of  Pdtakratal,  hath 
From  his  own  wealth  bestowed  on  me. 

3  A  hundred  asses  hath  he  given,  a  hundred  head  of  fleecy  sheep, 
A  hundred  slaves,  and -wreaths  besides. 

4  There  also  was  a  mare  led  forth,  picked  out  for  P&takrat^'s  sake, 
Not  of  the  horses  of  the  herd. 

5  Observant  Agni  hath  appeared,  oblation-bearer  with  his  car. 
Agiii  with  his  resplendent  flame  hath  shone  on  high  as  shines 

the  Sun,  hath  shone  like  Sdrya  in  the  heavens. 

HYMN   IX.  Aavins. 

Endowed,  0  Gods,  with  your  primeval  wisdom,  come  quickly 

with  your  chariot,  0  ye  Holy. 
Come  with  your  mighty  powers,  0  ye  Nasatyas ;  come  hither, 

drink  ve  tliis  the  third  libation. 

V 

2  Tlie  truthful  Deities,  the  Three-and-Thirty,  saw  you  approach 
before  the  Ever-Truthful. 

4  Kdnvd^athia :  descendants  of  Kanva. 

5  The  team  of  seoen  :  *  siebeugedpaiinep.' — Grassmaiin  ;  *  seven-yoked 
team.'— Cowell.  But  the  exact  meaning  here  of  siptisya  is  uncertain.  Von 
Roth  thinks  that  it  is  probably  a  proper  name.  Ludwig  takes  it  in  the  sense 
of  a  bond  of  friendship  or  alliance.  The  dark  mares :  there  is  no  substantive, 
and  'mares'  is  conjecturally  suppUed.  According  to  Ludwig,  the  dark  hosts 
of  the  Dasyus  conquered  by  Dasyave-vrika  are  intended,  and  the  whole  stanza 
would  be  mofe  correctly  translated  : 

*  Then  no  more  thought  they  of  the  great  renown  of  the  collective  bond. 
The  dark  tribes  rushed  aloig  the  paths  so  that  no  eye  could  reach  to  them.' 
See  Ludwig's  Commentary,  Vol.  V.  p.  552. 

2  The  son  of  Pdtahratd :  or,  more  probably,  called  Pautakrata  after  his 
father  Piitakratu. — Ludwig. 

3  Slaves :  d'U^n  :  conquered  barbarians. 

4  Picked  out :  or,  adorned.     Pdtakratd :  the  wife  of  Pdtakratu. 

1  NAsatyai:  'truthful  ones.' — Cowell.     See  Vol  I.^  Index. 
2  TAe  T/iree-andTkirty :    or,  T.irice-E.\eveTi.      ^^^  1.  ^^.  U.   Tht   Evev- 
TrutA/ul:  the  San,  whose  approach  is  Viera.\ded\>^  XiVva  kft^'voa. 


jyrJWll.]  THERIGVEDA.  267 

Accepting  this  our  worship  and  libation,  0  Asvins  bright  with 
fire,  drink  ye  the  Soma. 

3  Asvins,  that  work  of  yours  deserves  our  wonder, — the  Bull  of 
heaven  and  earth  and  air's  mid  region ; 
Yea,  and  your  thousand  promises  in  battle, — to  all  of  these 
come  near  and  drink  beside  us. 

4:  Ilorc  io  your  portion  laid  for  you,  ye  Holy :  come  to  those 
songs  of  ours,  0  ye  Nasatyas. 
Drink  among  us  the  Soma  full  of  sweetness,  and  with  your 
powers  assist  the  man  who  worships. 

HYMN  X.  Visvedevas. 

He  whom  the  priests  in  sundry  ways  arranging  the  sacritice, 

of  one  accord,  bring  hither. 
Who  was  appointed  as  a  learned  Brahman, — what  is  the  sacri- 

ficer's  knowledge  of  him  ? 

2  Kindled  in  many  a  spot,  still  One  is  Agni;    Sarya  is    One 

though  high  o'er  all  he  shineth. 
Illumining  this  All,   still  One  is  Ushas.     That  which  is  One 
hath  into  All  developed. 

3  The  chariot  bright  and  radiant,  treasure-laden,  three-wheeled, 

with  easy  seat,  and  lightly  rolling. 
Which  She  of  Wondrous  Wealth  was  born  to  harness, — this 
car  of  yours  I  call.     Drink  what  remaineth. 

HYMN  XL  Indra-Vanina. 

In  offerings  poured  to  you,  0  Indra-Varuna,   these  shares  of 

yours  stream  forth  to  glorify  your  state. 
Ye  haste  to  the  libations  at  each  sacrifice  when  ye  assist  the 

worshipper  who  sheds  the  juice. 

2  The  waters  and  the  plants,  0  Indra-Varuna,  had  efficacious 
vigour,  and  attained  to  might : 

3  The  Bull:  the  Sun,  whom,  as  his  heralds  and  revealers,  they  may  be  said 
to  have  created.  Thousand  promises :  *  a  characteristic  periphrasis  for  the 
Maghavans,  or  wealthy  nobles.' — Ludwig. 


1  The  hymn  appears  to  consist  of  unconnected  fragments,  and  the  purport 
of  this  stanzs)  is  not  obvious. 

3  She  of  Wondrous  Weatlh :  Ushas  or  Dawn.  Was  bo7'n  to  harness :  or,  as 
Prof.  Cowell  translates  :  *  At  whose  yoking  the  Dawn  was  born.'  The  chariot 
of  the  Asvins  precedes  that  of  the  Dawn. 

2  The  loaters  dnd  the  plants :   used  in  sacrifice  ;  the  Soma-plants  and  the 
water  employed  in  preparing  the  juice  for  libation.     The  meajiing  of   the 
stanza  seems  t«»  be  :  although  you  are  far  away  in  the  most  distant  firmament, 
our  libations  have  bad  power  to  attract  you.    Ke%«ktA.  m%  ovX^  \  xXxa  ^^^esa* 
man  is  unworthy  of  your  consideration  ©yen  da  «iiii  enftixi^* 


26S  THE  RIO  VEDA,  [  VALA  KHILYA. 

Ye  who  have  gone  beyond  the  path  of  middle  air, — no  godless 
man  is  worthy  to  be  called  your  foe. 

3  True  is  your  Krisa's  word,  Indra  and  Vanina :  The  seven  holy 

voices  pour  a  wave  of  meath. 
For  their  sake.  Lords  of  splendour !  aid  the  pious  man  who, 
unbewildered,  keeps  you  ever  in  his  thoughts. 

4  Dropping  oil,  sweet  with  Soma,  pouring  forth  their  stream, 

are  the  Seven  Sisters  in  the  seat  of  sacrifice. 
These,  dropping  oil,  are  yours,  0  Indra- Varupa :  with  these 
enrich  with  gifts  and  help  the  worshipper. 

5  To  our  great  happiness  have  we  ascribed  to  these  Two  Bright 

Ones  truthfulness,  great  strength,  and  majesty. 
0  Lords  of  splendour,  aid  us  through  the  Three-times-Seven, 
as  we  pour  holy  oil,  0  Indra- Varuna. 

6  What  ye  in  time  of  old,  Indra  and  Varuna,  gave  Rishis — re- 

velation, thought,  and  power  of  song, 
And  places  which  the  wise  made,  weaving   sacrifice, — these 
through  my  spirit's  fervid  glow  have  I  beheld. 

7  0  Indra- A^aruna,  grant  to  the  worshippers  cheerfulness  void 

of  pride,  and  wealth  to  nourish  them. 
Vouchsafe  us  food,  prosperity,  and  progeny,  and  lengthen  out 
our  days  that  we  may  see  long  life. 

3  The  seven  holy  voices:  the  voices  of  the  seven  priests  or  sacred  bards. 
SCe  IX.  103.  3.     A  wave  of  meath:  *a  stream  of  honey.* — Cowell. 

4  The  Seven  Sisters :  *  sister-streams  of  the  Soma.' — CowelL 

5  The  Three-times-Seven :   perhaps  the  Maruts,  thrice-seven  being  used  in- 
definitely for  a  larger  number  consisting  of  troops  of  seven.     See  I.  133.  6. 

6  Revelation  :  srutdm :  that  which  was  heard  (from  the  beginning) ;  sacred 
knowledge.  *  Fame.' — Cowell.  Places :  perhaps,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  homes 
in  the  world  to  come,  which  the  wise  Rishis  have  prepared  for  themselves  by 
performing  sacrifice  here  below.  Through  my  spirit's  fervid  glow :  tdpasd : 
according  to  Grassmann  and  Cowell,  this  tdpa^  means  *the  holy  austerities' 
of  the  RishiR,  and  not  the  sacred  fervour  of  the  seer  of  the  hymn.  I  have 
fallowed  Ludwig. 


BOOK  THE  NINTH. 


HYMN   I.  Soma  PavamAna. 

In  sweetest  and  most  gladdening   stream   flow   pure,  0  Soma, 
on  thy  way, 
Pressed  out  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

2  Fiend-queller,  Friend  of  all  men,  he  hath  with   the   wood    at- 

tained unto 
His  place,  his  iron-fashioned  home. 

3  Be  thou  best  Vritra-slayer,  best  grantor  of  bliss,  most  liberal  : 
Promote  our  wealthy  princes'  gifts. 

4  Flow  onward  with  thy  juice  unto  the  banquet  of  the  Mighty 

Gods : 
Flow  hither  for  our  strength  and  fame. 

5  0  Indu,  we  draw  nigh  to  thee,  with  this  one  object  day  by  day  : 
To  thee  alone  our  prayers  are  said. 

6  By  means  of  this  eternal  fleece  may  Surya's  Daughter  purify 
Thy  Soma  that  is  foaming  forth. 

7  Ten  sister  maids  of  slender  form  seize  him   within   the  press 

and  hold 
Him  firmly  on  the  final  day. 

8  The  virgins  send  him  forth  :  they   blow   the   skin   musician- 

like, and  fuse 
The  triple  foe-repelling  meath. 

Nearly  all  the  hymns  of  this  Book  are  addressed  to  the  deified  Soma  juice, 
or  to  Soma,  or  Indu,  the  Moon,  who  as  containing  the  celestial  nectar,  the  drink 
of  the  Gods,  is  identi6ed  with  the  Soma- plant  and  its  exhilarating  juice.  As 
the  Moon-God  pours  down  his  ambrosial  rain  through  the  sieve  of  heaven,  he  is 
addressed  and  worshipped  as  Pavamftna  (Self -Purifying),  represented  by  the 
Soma  juice  as  it  undergoes  purification  by  flowing  through  the  wool  which 
is  used  as  a  filter  or  strainer.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts^  V.  258  sqq.,  Hillebrandt, 
VedUche  Mythologies  I.  385  sqq.,  and  Max  Miiller,  ChipSt  lY.  353 — 367.  But  cf. 
Oldcnberg,  Eeligion  des  Veda,  599 — 612. 

1  Flow  pure  :  pdvasva :  *  purify  thyself.* — Ludwig. 

2  With  the  wood :  some  wooden  vessel  or  implement,  perhaps  the  sruva  or 
dipping-spoon.  Iron-fashioned  home :  receptacle  that  has  been  hammered  or 
formed  with  a  tool  of  dt/aSj  iron  or  other  metal.  It  is  not  clear  what  vessel  is 
intended. 

6  SHi'ya'i  Daughter :  Si*addh&  or  Faith.  See  8  itapatha-Brdhmana,  XII.  7. 
3.  11.  * 

7  Ten  sister  maids:  the  priest's  fingers.  The  final  day:  on  which  the  Soma 
is  effused. 

8  Virgins :  the  unwedded  ones  :  the  fingers.  Musician-like  '  or,  &&  m^a 
blow  a  bagpipe;  but  the  meaning  of  bdkurdm  and  the  aecoiidL  \i«M-SM3kfc\&\!kRN» 

clear.   '  Tbey  Beize  it  glittering  like  a  water-skin.* — ^WiUoti. 


270  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

9  Inviolable  milch-kine  round  about  him  blend,   for  Indra's  drinki 
The  fresh  young  Soma  with  their  milk. 

10  In  the  wild  raptures   of   this   draught,    Indra   slays    all    the 
Vritras  :  he, 

The  Hero,  pours  his  wealth  on  us. 

HYMN  II.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Soma,  flow  on,  inviting  Gods,  speed  to  the  purifying  cloth  : 
Pass  into  Indra,  as  a  Bull. 

2  As  mi'^'hty  food  speed  hitherward,  Indu,  as   a   most   splendid 
Steer : 

Sit  in  thy  place  as  one  with  strength. 

3  The  well-loved  meath  was  made  to   flow,   the   stream   of  the 
creative  juice  : 

The  Sage  drew  waters  to  himself. 

4  The  mighty  waters,  yea,  the  floods  accompany  thee  Mighty  One, 
When  thou  wilt  clothe  thee  with  the  milk. 

5  The  lake  is   brightened   in   the   floods.     Soma,    our   Friend, 
heaven's  prop  and  stay, 

i^  Falls  on  the  purifying  cloth. 

6  The  tawny  Bull  hath  bellowed,  fair  as  mighty  Mitra  to  behold : 
He  shines  together  with  the  Sun. 

7  Songs,  Indu,  active  in  their   might    are   beautified   for  thee, 
wherewith 

Thou  deck  est  thee  for  our  delight. 

8  To  thee  who  givest  ample  room  we  pray,  to    win   the   joyous 
draught : 

Great  are  the  praises  due  to  thee. 

9  Indu,  as  Indra's  Friend,  on  us  pour  with  a  stream   of   sweet- 
ness, like 

Parjanya  sender  of  the  rain. 

10  Winner  of  kine,  Indu,  art  thou,  winner  of  heroes,  steeds,   and 
strength  : 
Primeval  Soul  of  sacrifice. 


/ 


3  Tke  Sage ;  the  Soma.  Waters :  with  which   the  stalks  of  the  plant  are 
sprinkled. 

.5  The  lake :  the  Soma  juice. 

6  The  tawny  Bull :  '  the  golden-hued  showerer  of  blessings.' — Wilson.     The 

strong  greenish-yellow  Soma  j  nice.    Hath  bellowed :  an  exaggerated  expression 

for  the  sound  made  by  the  juice  as  it  drops,  but  in  keeping  with  its  represent- 

atiun  as  a  bull. 

P  Z/ie  Parjanya  :  enriching  and  ble«auig  ua  aa  l\i^  t«A\i-^<(^M^  l^ost^aJlizea  the 


HYMN  4.1  THE  RIO  VEDA.  271 

HYMN   III.  Soma  Paramana. 

Here  present  this  Immortal  God  flies,  like  a    bird    upon    her 

wings, 
To  settle  in  the  vats  of  wood. 

2  This  God,  made  ready  with  the  hymn,  runs   swiftly    through 

the  winding  ways. 
Inviolable  as  he  flows. 

3  This  God  while  flowing  is  adorned,  like  a  bay  steed   for   war^ 

by  men 
Devout  and  skilled  in  holy  songs. 

4  He,  like  a  warrior  going  forth  with  heroes,  as  he  flows  along 
Is  fain  to  win  all  pf  ecious  boons. 

5  This  God,  as  he  is  flowing  on,  speeds  like  a  car  and  gives  his  gifts  : 
He  lets  his  voice  be  heard  of  all. 

6  Praised  by  the  sacred  bards,  this  God  dives  into  waters,   and 

bestows 
Rich  gifts  upon  the  worshipper. 

7  Away  he  rushes  with   his   stream,   across   the   regions,     in  to 

heaven, 
Aild  roars  as  he  is  flow  ing  on. 

8  While  flowing,  meet  for  sacrifice,  he  hath  gone  up   to  heaven 

across 
The  regions,  irresistible. 

9  After  the  way  of   ancient  time,  this     God,     pressed   out  for 

Deities, 
Flows  tawny  to  the  strarning-cloth. 

10  This  Lord  of  many  Holy  Laws^  even  at  his  birth  engendering 
strength. 
Effused,  flows  onward  in'  a  stream. 

HYMN   IV.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

0  Soma  flowing  on  thy   way,   win  thou  and  conquer  high  re- 
nown ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 


1  The  vats  of  wood :  dr&ndni  ;  large  wooden  vessels,  tuba  or  troughs,  which 
receive  the  Soma  juice. 

2  The  winding  ways :  of  the  wool  which  forms  the  strainer. — Ludwigr 
•  Rushes  against  the  enemies,* — Wilson. 

6  Dives  into  waters  :  called  vasativaryaf^,  with  which  the  stalks  of  the  Soma- 
plant  are  sprinkled. 

9  Pressed  out  for  Deities  :  the  Soma  juice  bdlng  identified  with  the  Amrit 
or  nectar,  the  drink  of  the  Gods,  contained  in  the  Moob. 


i  jffeUer  than  tffe  are  :  or,  happier  than  we  are. 


272  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  ITL 

2  Win  thou  the  light,  win  heavenly  light,  and.  Soma,  all  feli- 

cities ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

3  Win  skilful  strength  and  mental  power.     0  Soma,  drive  away 

our  foes ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

4  Ye  purifiers,  purify  Soma  for  Indra,  for  his  drink  : 
Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are. 

5  Give  us  our  portion  in  the  Sun  through  thine  own  mental 

power  and  aids ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

6  Through  thine  own  mental  power  and  aid  long  may  we  look 

upon  the  Sun ; 
Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are. 

7  Well-weaponed  Soma,   pour  to  us  a  stream  of  riches  doubly 

great ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

8  As  one  victorious,  unsubdued  in  battle  pour  forth  wealth  to  us; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

9  By  worship,  Pavamalna  !  men  have  strengthened  thee  to  prop 

the  Law : 
Make  thou  us  better  than  we  are. 

10  0  Indu,  bring  us  wealth  in  steeds,   manifold,  quickening  all 
life ; 
And  make  us  better  than  we  are. 

HYMN  V.  Aprls. 

Enkindled,  Pavamana,  Lord,  sends  forth  his  light  on  every  side 
In  friendly  show,  the  bellowing  Bull. 

2  He,  Pavamana,  Self-produced,   speeds  onward  sharpening  hi? 

horns : 
He  glitters  through  the  firmament. 

3  Brilliant  likte  wealth,  adorable,    with  splendour    Pavamslna 

shines. 
Mightily  with  the  streams  of  meath. 


4  Purifiers:  priests  whose  business  is  to  purify  the  juice.     Make  thou  :  O 
Soma. 

9  To  prop  the  Law :  vldkarmani  .-  'for  their  own  upholding.'— Wilson 

10  Quiekening  all  life :  vitv^yum:  explained  by  SAyana  as  =  5ari;«^(Jw/nam  • 
*  all-reachiDg. — Wilson.  

In  this  Apr!  hymn  atributes  of  Agni  are  transferred  to  Soma  Pavamana 
^  /'^ff»^^^'    sdmiddhah:    properly  appUoable   to  Agni.     The  bellowing 
oe  /•       Bhowerer  of  blessings,  uttering  a  loud  «o\md:  — "^W&ovi. 
2  Self -produced :  TanHndpU  ;  properly  a  naawi  ol  k^xiV  •,  \ver^,  H-\kfc^QQti, 


Srmf  «L1  THE  RIOVEDA.  273 


i  The  tawny  Pavamina,  who  strews  from  of  old  the  grass  with 
might, 
Is  worshipped,  God  amid  the  Gods. 

5  The  golden,  the  Celestial  Doors  are  lifted  with  their  frames 
I  on  high, 

i  By  Payamd.Qa  glorified. 

*  6  With  passion  Pavam^aa  longs  for  the  great  lofty  Pair,  well- 

t  formed, 

Like  beauteous  maidens,  Night  and  Dawn. 

7  Both  Gods  who  look  on  men  I  call,  Celestial  Heralds  :  Indra's 
Self 

Is  Pavamina,  yea,  the  Bull. 

8  This,  Pavam4na*s  sacrifice,  shall  the  three  beauteous  Goddes- 
ses, 

Sarasvati  and  Bharati  and  I]&,  Mighty  One,  attend. 

9  I  summon  Tvashtar  hither,  our  protector,  champion,  earliest- 
born, 

Indu  is  Indra,  tawny  Steer;  Pavamana  is  Prajapati. 

10  O  Pavam-ina,  with  the  meath  in  streams  anoint  Vanaspati, 
The  ever-green,  the  golden-hued,  refulgent,  with  a   thousand 
boughs. 

•  1 1  Come  to  the  consecrating  rite  of  Pavamana,  all  ye  Gods, — 

V4yu,  Sarya,  Brihaspati,  Indra,  and  Agni,  in  accord. 

HYMN  VI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Soma,  flow  on  with  pleasant  stream,  a  Bull  devoted  to  the  Gods, 
Our  Friend,  unto  the  woollen  sieve. 

2  Pour  hitherward,   as   Indra's   Self,    Indu,   that    gladdening 

stream  of  thine, 
And  send  us  coursers  full  of  strength. 

3  Flow  to  the  filter  hitherward,  pouring  that   ancient   gladden-' 

ing  juice. 
Streaming  forth  power  and  high  renown. 

4  Hither  the  sparkling  drops  have  flowed,   like   waters   down  a 

steep  descent : 
They  have  reached  Indra  purified. 


6  The  Celestial  Doors :  the  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice  are  here  identified 
with  the  portals  of  the  east  through  which  light  comes  into  the  world.  See 
11.  3.  5. 

7  Celestial  Heralds :  see  I.  13.  8.  Indra* s  Self :  indrah  here  is  explained 
by  S&yana  ?A=dtptaK  ;  *  radiant.* — Wilson.; 

10  Vanaspati :  the  sacrificial  stake. 

11  The  consecrating  rite:  sv^hdkritim :  oblation  accompanied  with  th^ 
utterance  of  the  sacred  formula,  Sv^h^. 

18 


JTi  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /X 

5  Whom,  haying  passed  the  filter,  ten  dames  cleanse,  as  'twere 

a  vigorous  steed, 
While  he  disports  him  in  the  wood, — 

6  The  steer-strong  juice  with  milk   pour   forth,   for  feast   and 

service  of  the  Gods, 
To  him  who  bears  away  the  draught. 

7  Efifused,  the  God  flows  ouward  with  his  stream   to  Indra,  to 

the  God, 
So  that  his  milk  may  strengthen  him. 

8  Soul  of  the  sacrificey  the  juice  effused   flows  quickly  on  :  be 

keeps 
His  ancient  wisdom  of  a  Sage. 

9  So  pouring  forth,^  as  Indra's  Friend,  strong  drink,    best  Glad^ 

dener  !  for  the  feast, 
Thou,  even  in  secret,  storest  hymns. 

HYMN   VII.  Soma  Pavam*n*r 

Forth  on  their  way  the  glorious  drops  have  flowed  for  main- 
tenance of  Law, 
Knowing  this  sacrifice's  course. 

2  Down  in  the  mighty  waters  sinks  the  stream  of  meath,  most 

excellent, 
Oblation  best  of  all  in  worth. 

3  About  the  holy  ^lace,  the  Steer  true,    guileless,  noblest,  hath 

sent  forth 
Continuous  voices  in  the  wood. 

4  When,  clothed  in  manly  strength,  the  Sage  flows  in  celestial 

wisdom  round, 
The  Stron:^  would  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

5  When  purifiod,  he  sits  as  King  above  the  hosts,  among  his  folk, 
What  time  the  sages  bring  him  nigh. 

5  Whom :  relative  to  juice  in  the  following  stanza.     Ten  dames:  thefingera 
The  wood:  the  vat  or  trough. 

6  To  him  who  bears  away  the  draught :  to  Indra.     Others  take  hhardya  to 
mean  *  for  strength  or  prowess  in  battle.' 

9  Even  in  secret :  wisdom  lies  hidden  in  the  Soma,  and  cannot  be  recog- 
nized until  (Hie  drinks  the  juice. — Ludwig. 

2  The  mighty  waters :  the  holy  waters  called  vasatiraryah, 

3  In  the  wood :  according  to  Stlyana,  vane  here  =  udake,  in  the  water.     The 
stanza  is  very  difficult,  and  t  am  unable  to  offer  a  satisfactory  translation. 

4  The  Strong  :    Indra,     *  Then  the  mighty  (Indra)  in   heaven   is  eager  to 
repair  to  the  oblation.' — Wilson. 

S  Adove  the  hosts,   ainong  hi%  folk .'  or,  aia  pTelexYed  by  Pi-of,  Ludwig  in  hid 
Cowmeatary,  above  the  contending  tribes  ot  i^ov\fe  ^-wW^^V)' 


9TMN  8.]  TES  RIQVEDA.  27S 

6  Dear,  golden-coloured,  in  the  fleece  he  sinks,  and  settles  in 

the  wood : 
The  Singer  shows  his  zeal  in  hymns. 

7  He  goes  to  Indra,  V&yu,  to  the  Asvins,  as  his  custom  is, 
With  gladdening  juice  which  gives  them  joy. 

d  The  streams  of  pleasant  Soma  flow  to  Bhaga,  Mitra-Varuna, — 
Well-knowing  through  his  mighty  powers. 

9  Gain  for  us,  O  je  Heaven  and  £arth,  riches  of  meath  to  win 
us  wealth  : 
Gain  for  us  treasures  and  renown. 

HYMN  VIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Obbting  Indra's  dear  desire  these  Soma  juices  have  flowed 

forth, 
Increasing  his  heroic  might. 

2  Laid  in  the  bowl,  pure-flowing  on  to  Viyu  and  the  Asvins, 

may 
These  give  us  gi'eat  heroic  strength. 

3  Soma,  as  thou  art  purified,  incite  to  botinty  Indra's  heart. 
To  sit  jn  place  of  sacritice. 

4  The  ten  swift  fingers  deck  thee  forth,  seven  ministers  impel 

thee  on  : 
The  sages  have  rejoiced  in  thee. 

5  When  through  the  filter  thou  art  poured,  we  clothe  thee  with 

a  robe  of  milk 
To  be  a  gladdening  draught  for  Gods. 

6  When  purified  within  the  jars, .  Soma,  bright  red  and  golden- 

hued. 
Hath  clothed  him  with  a  robe  of  milk. 

7  Flow  on  to  us  and  make  us  rich.     Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 
0  Indu,  flow  into  thy  Friend. 

8  Send  down  the  rain  from  heaven,  a  stream  of  opulence  from 

earth.     Give  us, 
O  Soma,  victory  in  war. 

9  May   we  obtain  thee,    Indra's  drink,    who  viewest  men  and 

findest  light, 
■    Gain  thee,  and  progeny  and  food. 


8  Well-tenowing,  through  his  mighty  powers :  that  is,  the  streams  tbat, 
through  the  power  of  Soma,  know  the  way  they  should  go.  '  The  worshippers 
knowing  its  (virtues  are  rewarded)  with  happiness/ — Wilson. 

7  Flow  on  to  us  and  mdJee  us  rieh :  or,  *  Flow  to  v\%  Yi«'<dA\Ai^  >4icyni&^Y^^^^* 
TAy Friend:  Indra.     Cf.  IX,  2.  1. 


276  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  iX- 

HYMN   IX.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

The  Sage  of  Heaven  whose  heart  is  wise,  when  laid  between 

both  hands  and  pressed, 
Sends  us  delightful  powers  of  life. 

2  On,   onward  to  a  glorious  home;  dear  to  the  people  void  of 

guile. 
With  excellent  enjoyment,  flow. 

3  He,  the  bright  Son,  when  born  illumed  his  Parents  who  bad 

sprung  to  life, 
Great  Son  great  Strengtheners  of  Law. 

4  Urged  by  the  seven  devotions  he  hath  stirred  the  guileless 

rivers  which 
Have  magnified  the  Single  Eye. 

5  These  helped  to  might  the  Youthful  One,  high  over  all,  invin- 

cible. 
Even  Indu,  Indra  !  in  thy  law. 

6  The  Immortal  Courser,  good  to  draw,  looks  down  upon  the 

Seven :  the  fount 
Hath  satisfied  the  Goddesses. 

7  Aid  us  in  holy  rites,  0  Man :  0  Pavamana,  drive  away 
Dark  shades  that  must  be  met  in  fight. 

8  Make  the  paths  ready  for  a  hymn  newer  and  newer  evermore: 
Make  the  lights  shine  as  erst  they  shone. 

9  Give,  Pavamana,  high  renowu,  give  kine  and  steeds  and  hero 

sons  ; 
Win  for  us  wisdom,  win  the  light. 

HYMN  X.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Like  cars  that  thunder  on  their  way,  like  coursers  eager  for 

renown. 
Have  Soma-drops  flowed  forth  for  wealth. 

2  Forth  have   they  rushed  from  holding  hands,  like  chariots 
that  are  urged  to  speed, 
Like  joyful  songs  of  singing-men. 

1  The  Sage  of  Heaven  :  the  Soma.  Both  hands :  naptydh :  literally,  two 
granddaughtera.  Accord! Dg  to  S^yana,  two  boards  used  in  pressing  the  Soma 
are  intended.     See  Co  well's  note  in  Wilson's  Translation. 

3  His  Parents  :  rndtard  :  literally,  his  two  mothers  ;  Heaven  and  Earth. 

4  Seven  devotions :  practised  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma.  Sdyana  takes 
sapta  with  nadycih :  *  gladdens  the  seven  guileless  rivers.' — Wilson.  Single 
JPye:  Soma,  the  Moon. 

^  Coursei'.'  t/ie  ilowing  Soma.    T/i€  Sei'cn  ;  rivers.     The  fount:  'Full,  as  a 
well  be  has  eatisBed  the  divine  streama.*— "WViftoii. 
^  {?  Man  :  manly  Soma. 


BYMir  11.]  fBE  ntQVEDA.  W 

3  The  Somas  deck  themselves   with  milk,  as  Kings  are  graoed 

with  eulogies, 
And,  with  seven  priests,  the  sacrifice. 

4  Pressed  for  the  gladdening  draught,  the  drops  flow  forth  abund- 

antly with  song, 
The  Soma  juices  in  a  stream. 

5  Winning  VivasvUu's  glory  and  producing  Morning's  light,  the 

Suns 
Pass  through  the  openings  of  the  cloth. 

6  The  singing-men  of  ancient  time  open  the  doors  of  sacred 

songs, — 
Men,  for  the  mighty  to  accept. 

7  Combined  in  close  society  sit  the  seven  priests,  the  brother- 

hood. 
Filling  the  station  of  the  One. 

8  He  gives  us  kinship  with  the  Gods,  and  with  the  Sun  unites 

our  eye : 
The  Sage's  offspring  hath  appeared. 

9  The  Sun  with  his  dear  eye  beholds  that  quarter  of  the  heav- 

ens which  priests 
Have  placed  within  the  sacred  cell. 

HYMN  XI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Sing  forth  to  Indu,  0  ye  men,  to  him  who  now  is  purified, 
Fain  to  pay  worship  to  the  Gods. 


5  The  Suns :  so  called  as  being  creators  of  the  light :    '  the  sun-bright 
juices.' — Wilson.      Vivasvdn :  the  morning  Sun. 

6  Merif  for  the  mighty  to  accept :  *  men,  offerers  of  Soma,*  according  to 
Sftyana. 

7  The  seven  priests :  the  adhvaryus  who  bring  the  water  with  which  the 
stiilks  of  the  Soma-plants  are  sprinkled.     The  One :  Soma. — SAyana. 

8  He  gives  us  kinship  with  the  Oods  :  I  follow  Prof.  Pischel's  interpretation 
of  this  difficult  passage.  *  Soma  unites  our  navel  with  the  navel  of  the  Gods, 
our  eye  with  the  Sun,  that  is,  he  brings  us  into  union  with  the  Gods  in 
heaven.' —  Vedische  Studien,  I.,  p.  (59.  *  I  take  into  my  navel  the  navel  of  the 
sacrifice  [the  Soma]. ' — Wilson.  *  He  [Soma]  as  kinsman  has  brought  us  a 
kinsman  [Surya].' — Ludwig.  The  Safe's  offspring :  a  periphrasis  for  the  Sage 
himself,  that  is.  Soma. — Ludwig. 

9  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  I  have  adopted  Benfey's  explanation  who 
'  here  follows  an  occasional  interpretation  of  div  or  dyuloka,  given  by  the 
Scholiast,  which  identifies  it  with  the  dronahalasa  or  large  8oma-trough.  He 
takes  it  as  meaning  that  the  Sun  looks  towards  the  place  where  the  Soma  lies 

while  it  is  pressed Sftyana  seems  to  interpret  thi&  vex^e  Qi%  \£kft«.\ivci%^\^al 

Indra   views  the  Soma  with  direction  even   after  It  Yiaa  \>^«tt.  ^>ix^  Ns^  "'^ote 

pr/esta  f£zed  in  the  heart].' -^CoweU,  in  Wilson's  TronftXaXAfttu 


27d  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  it 

2  Together  with  thy  pleasant  juice  the  Atharvans  have  com- 

mingled milk, 
Divine,  devoted  to  the  God. 

3  Bring,   by  thy  flowing,  weal  to  kine,  weal  to  the  people,  weal 

to  steeds, 
Weal,  0  thou  King,  to  growing  plants. 

4  Sing  a  praise-song  to  Soma  brown  of  hue,  of  independent  might, 
The  Red,  who  reaches  up  to  heaven. 

5  Purify  Soma  when  effused   with  stones  which  hands  move 

rapidly. 
And  pour  the  sweet  milk  in  the  meath. 

6  With  humble  homage  draw  ye  nigh ;  blend  the  libation  with 

the  curds : 
To  Indra  offer  Indu  up. 

7  Soma,   foe-queller,  chief   o'er  men,   doing  the   will  of   Gods, 

pour  forth 
Prosperity  upon  our  kine. 

8  Heart-knower,  Sovran  of  the  heart,  thou  art  effused,  0  Soma,  that 
Indra  may  drink  thee  and  rejoice. 

9  0  Soma  Pavamana,  give  us  riches  and  heroic  strength, — 
Indu  !  with  Indra  for  ally. 

HYMN  XII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

To  Indra  have  the  Soma-drops,  exceeding  rich  in  sweets,  been 

poured, 
Shed  in  the  seat  of  sacrifice. 

2  As    mother  kine  low  to  their  calves,  to  Indra  have  the  sages 

called, 
Called  him  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

3  In  the  stream's  wave  wise  Soma  dwells,  distilling  rapture,  in 

his  seat. 
Resting  upon  a  wild-cow's  hide. 

4  Far-sighted  Soma,  Sage  and  Seer,  is  worshipped  in  the  central 

point 
Of  heaven,  the  straining-cloth  of  wool. 

-^ —  --  I  ■  ■  I  '  ~        —    •  —  '         ~   •  ~ 

2  The  Atharvans  :  the  priests,  wbo  perform  the  duties  of  the  AdbvaryuB. 

3  King :  the  usual  designation  of  Soma  in  the  Br^hmapa. 

4  The  Red :  kaddchtdarunavwrndya :     *  sometimes  red-coloured.* — Sftjana. 

8  In  the  9tream*s  toave  :  in  the  water  with  which  the  stalks  are  spnnkled. 
Upon  a  wild^ow's  hide :  this,  which  is  Benfey's  explanation  of  gauri,  seems 
to  be  borne  out  by  g6r  ddhi  tvacM,   upon  tVv^  oit'Vvvde,  of  IX.   101.    H, 
Sdjrapa'e  interpretation  is  different ;  *  to  a  chant  m  \>aft  m\^^\^  Viw^!  -\^*i^sm.\x» 
4  QfAeaven  :  dimh  :  see  IX.  10.  9,  Mxd  uote. 


Mr  MS  18  J  THE  RIOVEDA.  27» 

5  In  close  embraees  lodu  holds  Soma  when  poured  withiu  the 

jars, 
And  on  the  purifying  sieve. 

6  Indu  sends  forth  a  voice  on  high  to  regions  of  the  sea  of  air. 
Shaking  the  vase  that  drops  with  mcath. 

7  The  Tree  whose  praises  never  fail  yields  heavenly  milk  among 

our  hymuB, 
Urging  men's  generations  on. 

8  The  Wise  One,  with  the  Sage's  stream,  the  Soma  urged  to 

speed,  flows  on 
To  the  dear  places  of  the  sky. 

9  0  Pavamana,  bring  us  wealth  bright  with  a  thousand   splen- 

dours, yea, 
0  ludu,  give  us  ready  help. 

HYMN   XIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Passed  through  the  fleece  in  thousand  streams  the  Soma, 

purified,  flows- on 
To  In<1ra's,  Vayu's  special  place. 

2  Sin^  forth,  ye  men  who  long  for  help,  to  PavamA.na,  to  the  Sage, 
Effused  to  entertain  the  Gods. 

3  The  S'>ma-drop8  with  thousand  powers  are  purified  for  victory, 
Hymned  to  become  the  feast  of  Gods. 

4  Yea,  as  thou  flowest  bring  great  store  of  food  that   we  may 

win  the  spoil : 
Indu,  bring  splendid  manly  might. 

5  May  they  in  flowing  give  us  wealth  in  thousands,  and  heroic 

power, — 
These  Godlike  Soma-drops  effused. 


5  Indu,  holdt.  Soma :  'the  deity  seems  to  be  thus  opposed  to  the  mere 
plant.* — Coweir«  note.  Ludwig  snggeata  that  Indu  here  m  ly  be  the  Moon, 
as  the  time  of  important  liturgical  cerentonies  depends  upon  the  Moon's 
phases.     So  also  Hillebrandt,  F.  if.,  I.,  p.  316. 

6  To  regions  of  the  sea  of  air :  or  samudrdsya  h^re  may  mean,  of  the  sea 
or  water  into  which  the  Soma  juice  falls.  Shaking ;  or,  i»erhaps,  stirring 
(with  joy).  T/ie  vase :  kdsam  :  the  dronaJcaluita.  the  large  wooden  vessel  for 
holding  the  juice.  According  to  Sd,yana,  whose  interpretation  I  have  followed 
in  the  first  line,  kdsam  here  means  the  cloud. 

7  The  Tree:  Soma.  MerCt  generations:  sacrificial  seasons,  acc<»rding  to 
SAyana.  

1  fndra's,  V^iiu*s  specml  place :  the  vessels  especially  prepared  to  hold 
libations  intended  for  Indra  and  V4yu. 

3  For  victory :    vdjasdtaye :    *  for  the  attainment  of    food.' — Wilson.   So 
84yana  in  stanzas  3  and  4  ;  but  in  6  the  w«)rd  ia  expVamed  V>^   »m>gTA-K\A>j<i.^ 
to  battle,  in  the  drst  cMhiae  where  he  inserts  it  aitev  Kijidutt^^  ut^<&^,  %ja^  ^:" 
anna/d^jAdifo,  for  the  attainment  oi  food,  in  the  eeooi^  c\»!attfe. 


286  Tff^  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX 

6  Like  coursers  by  their  drivers  urged,  they  were  poured  forth, 

for  victory, 
Swift  through  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

7  Noisily  flow  the  Soma-drops,  like  milch-kine  lowing  to  their 

calves : 
They  have  ran  forth  from  both  the  hands. 

8  As  Gladdener  whom  Indra  loves,  0  Pavam^na,  with  a  roar 
Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 

9  0  PavamUnas,  driving  ofiF  the  godless,  looking  on  the  light, 
Sit  iu  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XIV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Reposing  on  the  river's  wave  the  Sage  hath  widely   flowed 

around, 
Bearing  the  hymn  which  many  love. 

2  When  the  Five  kindred  Companies,  active   in  duty,  with    the 

song 
Establish  him,  the  Powerful, 

3  Then  in  his  juice  whose  strength  is  great,  have  all    the   Gods 

rejoiced  themselves, 
"When  he  hath  clothed  him  in  the  milk. 

4  Freeing  himself  he  flows  away,  leaving  his  body's  severed  limbs, 
And  meets  his  own  Companion  here. 

5  He  by  the  daughters  of  the  priest,  like  a  fair  youth,  hath  been 

adorned. 
Making  the  milk,  as  'twere,  his  robe. 

6  O'er  the  fine  fingers,  through  desire  of  milk,  in  winding  course 

he  goes. 
And  utters  voice  w^hich  he  bath  found. 

7  The  nimble  fingers  have  approached,  adorning  him   the    Lord 

of  Strength  : 
They  grasp  the  vigorous  Courser's  back. 

8  With  a  roar :  making  a  loud  noise  in  dropping. 

1  On  the  river's  wave :  in  the  vasatlvari  waters,  which  are  used  to  sprinkle 
the  stalks  Bearing  the  hymn  :  Prof.  Geldaer  explains  this  as  meaning,  *  Bear- 
ing away  the  much  coveted  prize,*  Soma  being  regarded  as  a  courser  or  race- 
horse.    See  Vedische  StudieUj  I.,  p.  120. 

2  Five  kindred  Compainei  :  referriug,  probably,  to  some  sacrifice  instituted 
iu  common  by  representatives  of  the  five  Aryan  tribes. 

4  His  own  Companion  :  Indra.  He  meets  :  this  {sangato  hhavati)  is  S^yana's 
explanation  of  samjighnate  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  the  word  can  bear 
t^/i/s  aignifieation, 

6  /Muffkeers  :  or  granddaughters  ;  the  ^ngeTO. 
^  fVAlcA  ke  hath  found  ;  '  which  the  woraVup^t  Te<io^\tfi!&?  — '^'^i^w* 


St  Mir  16.1  TBS  RIOVEDA.  281 

1 8  Comprising  all  th6  treasures  that  are  in  the   heavens  and   on 
the  earth, 
Gome,  Soma,  as  our  faithful  Friend. 

HYMN  XV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Through  the  fine  fingers,  with  the  song,  this  Hero  comes  with 

rapid  cars, 
Groing  to  [ndra's  special  place. 

2  In  holy  thought  he  ponders  much  for   the   great   worship   of 

the  Gods, 
Where  the  Immortals  have  .their  seat. 

3  Like  a  good  horse  is  he  led  out,  when  on  the  path  that  shines 

with  light 
The  mettled  steeds  exert  their  strength. 

4  He  brandishes  his  horns  on  high,  and  whets   them.  Bull  who 

leads  the  herd, 
Doing  with  might  heroic  deeds. 

5  He  moves,  a  vigorous  Steed,  adorned  with  beauteous   rays   of 

shining  gold. 
Becoming  Sovran  of  the  streams. 

6  He,  over  places  rough  to  pass,  bringing  rich  treasures  closely 

packed. 
Descends  into  the  reservoirs. 

7  Men  beautify  him  in  the  vats,  him  worthy  to  be  beautified. 
Him  who  brings  forth  abundant  food. 

8  Him,  even  him,  the  fingers  ten  and   the   seven   songs   make 

beautiful, 
Well-weaponed,  best  of  gladdeners. 

HYMN  XVI.  Sonaa  Pavamftna. 

The  pressers  from   the  Soma-press   send  forth   thy  juice  for 

rapturous  joy : 
The  speckled  sap  runs  like  a  flood. 


1  Indra's  ipeciaZ  place:  '  Indra's  abode.' — -Wilson.  In  Hymn  XIII.  1, 
nishkritam  is  explained  by  SAyana  as  the  vessel  prepared  and  set  apart. 

3  Like  a  good  horse  :  the  text  has  only  hitdh  which  may  mean  either  good 
or  placed.     *  Placed  (in  the  cart)  he  is  brought.' — Wilson. 

4  ffoms :  cf .  IX.  5.  2. 

6  Rays  of  shining  gold :  as  the  Moon. 

6  Places  rough  to  pass :  the  wool  of  the  strainer.  SAyana  gives  a  totally 
different  explanation  of  this  stanza.  See  Wilson's  Translation.  I  have  follow- 
ed Prof.  Ludwig. 

8  Sefven  songs :  the  songs  of  the  seven  priests. 

1  From  the  Soma-pi'ess :  onybhy  ablative  c\ua\  oi  ont,  %\^\\fYC^%  ^^'\^««o^'' 
an  implemeut  or  a,  veasel,  consisting  of  two  ]plecea/\xft^^  m  xXi^i  ^x'S'^wa! 


282  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  IX. 

2  With  strength  we  follow   through  the  sieve   him  who  brings 

might  and  wins  the  kine, 
Enrobed  in  water  with  his  juice. 

3  Pour  on  the  sieve  the  Soma,  ne'er  subdued  in  waters,  waterless, 
And  make  it  pure  for  Indra's  drink, 

4  Moved  by  the  purifier's  thought,  the  Soma  flows  into  the  sieve  : 
By  wisdom  it  hath  gained  its  home. 

5  With  humble  homage,  Indra,  have  the  Soma-drops  flowed  forth 

to  thee. 
Contending  for  the  glorious  prize. 

6  Purified  in  his  fleecy  garb,   attaining  every  beauty,  he 
Stands,  hero-like,  amid  the  kine. 

7  Swelling,   as  'twere,   to  heights  of  heaven,  the   stream  of  the 

creative  juice 
Falls  lightly  on  the  cleansing  sieve. 

8  Thus,  Soma,  purifying  him  who  knoweth  song  mid  living  men, 
Thou  wanderest  through  the  cloth  of  wool. 

HYMN  XVII.  Soma  Pavamftiia. 

Like  rivers  down  a  steep  descent,  slaying  the  Vritras,    full 

of  zeal, 
The  rapid  Soma-streams  have  flowed. 

2  The  drops  of  Soma  juice  efl'used  fall  like  the  rain  upon   the 

earth  : 
To  Indra  flow  the  Soma-streams. 

3  With  swelling  wave   the  gladdening  drink,  the   Soma,  flows 

into  the  sieve. 
Loving  the  Gods  and  slaying  fiends. 

4  It  hastens   to  the   pitchers,  poured   upon  the   sieve  it  waxes 

strong 
At  sacrifices  through  the  lauds. 

5  Soma,  thou   shinest  mounting   heaven  as  'twere   above  light's 

triple  realm. 
And  moving  seem'st  to  speed  the  Sun. 


of  the  Soma  juice.  The  word  is  said  to  be  employed  to  denote,  metapliori- 
cally,  heaven  and  earth.  *  They  who  express  thee,  the  juice  of  heaven  and 
earth.' —  Wilson. 

3  Waterl&is :  dnaptam,  which  S^yana  explains   by  andptam^  not   reached, 
or  overtaken,   by  enemies.     The  mMaui'iig  is  not  clear. 

4  Its  home :  in  the  Uirge  wooden  vessel  called  dronakalasa. 

5  Contending  for  the  f/lonom  prize :     like  race-horses.     *' Giving  thee  vigour 
for  the  great  ooutiict,' — Wilaon. 

^  Addressed  to  Soma  as  the  M*wn. 


STMH  19.]  THE  RIQVEDA  283 

6  To  him,   the  head  of  sacrifice,  singers  and  bards  have  sung 

their  songs, 
Offering  what  he  loves  to  see. 

7  The  men,  the  sages  with  their  hymns,  eager  for  help,  deck  thee 

strong  steed, 
Deck  thee  for  service  of  the  Gods. 

8  Flow  onward  to  the   stream   of  meath :  rest  efficacious   in 

thy  home. 
Fair,  to  be  drunk  at  sacrifice. 

HYMN  XVIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Thou,  Soma,  dweller  on  the  hills,  effused,  hast   flowed  into 

the  sieve  : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

2  Thou  art  a  sacred  Bard,  a  Sage ;  the  meath  is  offspring  of 

thy  sap ; 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

3  All   Deities  of  one  accord  have   come  that  they  may    drink 

of  thee : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

4  He    who  containeth  in  his  hands   all  treasures  much  to  be 

desired : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

5  Who  milketh  out  this  mighty  Pair,  the  Earth  and  Heaven, 

like  mother  kine : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

6  Who  in  a  moment  mightily  floweth  around  these  two  world- 

halves  : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

7  The  Strong  One,  being  purified,  hath  in  the  pitchers  cried 

aloud  : 
All-bounteous  art  thou  in  carouse. 

HYMN  XIX.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

0  Soma,  being  purified  bring  us  the  wondrous  treasure,  meet 
For  lauds,  that  is  in  earth  and  heaven. 


6  7%€  head  of  BCLcHfice :  the  most  important  element  of  the  ceremony. 
According  to  S&yana,  at  the  head,  that  is,  on  the  last  and  most  important  Hay 
of  the  effusion  of  the  Soma  juice.  Offering  what  he  loves  to  see :  *  entertaining 
affection  for  bim  the  all-beholding.* — Wilscm. 

8  Meath :  or  honey.    In  thy  home :  in  the  dronafcala%a. 

1  J?welleron  the  hilU  :  'pressed, between  the  at<mea:—\^V\asiXi. 


1 

284  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

2  For  ye  Twain,  Indra,   Soma,  are  Lords  of  the  lighl^  Lords  of 

the  kine : 
Great  Rulers,  prosper  ye  our  songs. 

3  The  tawny  Steer,  while  cleansed  among  the  living,  bellowing 

on  the  grass. 
Hath  sunk  and  settled  in  his  home. 

4  Over  the    Steer's   productive    flow   the    sacred   songs   were 

resonant, 
The  mothers  of  the  darling  Son. 

5  Hath  he  not,  purified,  impregned  the  kine  who  long  to  meet 

their  Lord, 
The  kine  who  yield  the  shining  milk  ? 

6  Bring   near  us   those  who   stand  aloof :   strike  fear  into  our 

enemies : 
0  Pavam^na,  find  us  wealth. 

7  Soma,  bring  down  the  foeman's  might,  his  vigorous  strength 

and  vital  power, 
Whether  he  be  afar  or  near. 

HYMN  XX.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Forth   through  the   straining-cloth  the    Sage   flows  to   the 

banquet  of  the  Gods, 
Subduing  all  our  enemies. 

2  For  he,  as  PavamS,na,   sends   thousandfold   treasure   in    the 

shape 
Of  cattle  to  the  singing-men. 

3  Thou  graspest  all  things  with  thy  mind,  and  purifiest  thee 

with  thoughts : 
As  such,  0  Soma,  find  us  fame. 

4  Pour  lofty  glory  on  us,  send  sure  riches  to  our  liberal  lords, 
Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise. 

5  As  thou  art  cleansed,  0  Wondrous  Steed,  0  Soma,  thou  hast 

entered,  like 
A  pious  King,  into  the  songs. 

6  He,  Soma,  like  a  courser  in  the  floods  invincible,  made  clean 
With  hands,  is  resting  in  the  jars. 

4  Hymns   are  sung  over  the   Soma -stream,  and  are  called  mothers  of  the 
precious  juice  because  it  is  prepared  while  they  are  sung. 

5  The  kine :  the  vasativari  waters  which  long  to  mingle  with  the  Soma. 

^  Sfeed:  vahne:  *  bearer  (of  our  offermgaV— "VrVVftOTi. 
6  ZUe  a  courser  :  '  the  bearer  (of  oblatioxxay.— "NS^VV^otx. 


STMN  ni  THE  RIQVEDA,  281 

7  Disporting,  like  a  liberal  chief,  thon  goest)  Soma,  to  the  sieve, 
Lending  the  laud  a  Hero's  strength. 

HYMN  XXI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

To  Indra  flow  these  running  drops,  these  Somas  frolicsome  in 

mood. 
Exhilarating,  finding  light ; 

2  Driving  off  foes,  bestowing  room  upon  the  presser,  willingly 
Bringing  their  praiser  vital  force. 

3  Lightly  disporting  them,  the  drops  flow  to  one  conmion  reservoir, 
And  fall  into  the  river's  wave. 

4  These  Pavam^nas  have  obtained  all  blessings  much  to  be  desired, 
Like  coursers  harnessed  to  a  car. 

5  With  view  to  us,  0  Soma-drops,  bestow  his  manifold  desire 
On  him  who  yet  hath  given  us  naught. 

6  Bring  us  our  wish  with  this  design,  as  a  wright  brings  his  new- 

wrought  wheel : 
Flow  pure  and  shining  with  the  stream. 

7  These  drops  have  cried  with  resonant  voice  :  like  swift  steeds 

they  have  run  the  course. 
And  roused  the  good  man's  hymn  to  life. 

HYMN  XXII.  Soma  Pavamilna. 

Thbsb  rapid  Soma-streams  have  stirred  themselves  to  motion 

like  strong  steeds. 
Like  cars,  like  armies  hurried  forth. 

2  Swift  as  wide  winds  they  lightly  move,  like  rain-storms  of 

Parjanya,  like 
The  flickering  flames  of  burning  fire. 

3  These  Soma  juices,  blent  with  curds,  purified,  skilled  in  sa- 

cred hymns, 
Have  gained  by  song  their  hearts'  desire. 

4  Immortal,  cleansed,  these  drops,  since  first  they  flowed,  have 

never  wearied,  fain 
To  reach  the  region  and  their  paths. 


7  Chief:  Sftyana  explains  makkdk  by  ddnam,  gift. 

5  This  stanza  is  obscure,  and  S&yana's  commentary  is  imperfect.  It  seems 
that  the  Soma-drops  are  prayed  to  enrich  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  who 
has  not  as  yet  rewarded  the  priests. 

7  Run  the  course :  reached  the  drondkalafa. 

3  By  song :  vip^ :  by  knowledge,  according  to  S&yana.     *  The  St.  Petersb. 
Diet,  explains  vip  as  the  twigs  (cf.  vepres)  which.  ioTm.  tVva  )aot^\!CL  ol  -^Jaa 
funnel  and  support  the  iSJteriug-cloth,* — CoweW,  \Jl'^V\aatlL^'^t«Q.^^5^a"\i.. 


28^  TEE  HTUN8  OP  {JMUT  JX» 

5  Advancing  they  have  travelled  o'er  the  ridges  of  the  earth 

and  heaven, 
And  this  the  highest  realm  of  all.  • 

6  Over  the  heights  have  they  attained  the  highest  thread  that 

is  spun  out, 
Ami  this  which  must  be  deemed  most  high. 

7  Thou,  Soma,  holdest  wealth  in  kine  which  thou  hast  seized 

from  niggard  churls : 
Tliou  calledst  forth  the  outspun  thread. 

HYMN  XXrri.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Swift  Soma  drops  have  been  effused  in   stream   of  meath,  the 

gladdening  drink, 
For  sacred  lore  of  every  kind. 

2  Hither  to  newer  resting-place   the   ancient  Living   Ones   are 

come. 
They  miade  the  Sun  that  he  might  shine. 

3  0  Pavamana,  bring  to  us  the  unsacrificing  foeman's  wealth, 
And  give  us  food  with  progeny. 

4  The  living  Somas  bein?  cleansed  diffuse  exhilarating  drink, 
Turned  to  the  vat  which  drips  with  meath. 

5  Soma  flows  on  intelligent,  possessing  sap  and  mighty  strength, 
Brave  Hero  who  repels  the  curse. 

6  For  Indra,  Soma  !  thou  art  cleansed,    a   feast-companion    for 

the  Gods  : 
Indu,  thou  fain  wilt  win  us  strength. 

7  When  he  had  drunken  draughts  of   this,    Indra   smote   down 

resistless  foes  : 
Yea,  smote  them,  and  shall  smite  them  still. 

HYMN   XXIV.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

HiTHBRWARD  have  the  Somas  streamed,  the   drops  while  they 

are  purified : 
When  blent,  in  waters  they  are  rinsed. 


6  Or,  *  Streams  rushing  down  have  filled  the  threads,  most  excellent,  spread 
out  beneath ' ;  that  is,  the  threads  d  the  straining-cloth.  See  note  in  Wilson. 
According  to  SAyana  *  the  thread '  is  sacrifice  ;  and  '  this  which  must  be 
deemed  most  higii '  may  be,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the  place  of  sacrifice  which 
is  also  to  be  held  holy.  Wilson  translates  the  second  line  :— '  this  rite  is 
glorified  thereby.' 

7  Fi-om  niggard  churls :  or  from  the  Papis.  Th(m  calledst  out  the  (mtspun 
thread :  *  tb»u  hast  called  aloud  at  the  outspread  sacrifice.'— Wilson. 

2  JVewer  resting-place :   a  newly- prepared  p\«ucft  ol  ^wix\^e<i.    The  ancieni 
Zivififf  Ones:  the  SomadropB. 


SYMlfUi  THE  RIO  VEDA.  '  387 

2  The  milk  hath  run  to  meet  them  like   floods   nishing  down  a 

precipice  : 
They  come  to  Indra,  being  cleansed. 

3  0  Soma  Pavamana,  thou  art  flowing  to  be  Indra's  drink  : 
The  men  hare  seized  and  lead  thee  forth. 

4  Victorious,  to  be  hailed  with  joy,    0  Soma,  flow,  delighting 

men, 
To  him  who  ruleth  o'er  mankind. 

5  Thou,  Indu,  when,  effnsed  by   stones,   thou   runnest   to  the 

filter,  art 
Keady  for  Indra's  high  decree. 

6  Flow  on,  best  Vntra-slayer ;  flow  meet  to  be  hailed  with  joyful 

lauds. 
Pure,  purifying,  wonderful. 

7  Pure,  purifying  is  he  called,  the  Soma  of  the  meath  eff'used. 
Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods. 

HYMN   XXV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Grbbn-hued  !  as  one  who  giveth  strength  flow  on  for   Gods  to 

drink,  a  draught 
For  Vayu  and  the  Marut  host. 

2  0  Pavamana,  sent  by  song,  roaring  about  thy  dwelling-place, 
Pass  into  V4yu  as  Law  bids. 

3  The  Steer  shines  with  the  Deities,  dear  Sage  in  his  appointed 

home, 
Foe-slayer,  most  beloved  by  Gods. 

4  Taking  each  beauteous  form,  he  goes,  desirable,  while  purified, 
Thither  where  the  Immortals  sit. 

5  To  Indra  Soma  flows,  the  Red,   engendering  song,   exceeding 

wise, 
.    The  visitor  of  living  men. 

4  to  him  who  ruleth  o'er  mankind :  to  Indra. 

5  Ready  few  Indra' s  high  decree :  Wilson,  following  Sdivana,  translates  : 
'  an  amitle  portion  for  Indra's  beliy.'  See  Bergaigne,  La  Jkeligion  V6dique, 
III.  210  ff.,  for  tbe  meaning  of  dMnian  in  the  lligveda. 

2  Into  Vdyu :  into  the  vessel  appropriated  to  VAyu  — Sftyana. 

6  The  Red :  arushdh  :  here  explained  by  S&yana  as  =  drocha/mdnah,  shining 
or  radiant  The  visitor  of  litfing  men :  dyushdk :  the  meaning  of  this  word 
is  uncertain.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  explains  it  as,  conjointly  with 
men  ;  with  human  co-operation.  Ludwig  in  his  translation  renders  it  by 
•der  den  lebenden  besucht,*  who  visits  tbe  living  man  ;  but  in  his  Comment- 
ary suggests  that  it  maj  mean,  during  the  whoV«  al  Me.  ^Qj^'Cki^X.'dxCO^N^ 
Wilson. 


288  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /X 

6  Flow,  best  exhilarator,  Sage,  flow  to  the  filter  in  a  stream 
To  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

Thb  sages  with  the  fingers'  art  have  dressed  and  decked  that 

vigorous  Steed 
Upon  the  lap  of  Aditi. 

2  The  kine  have  called  aloud  to  him  exhaustless  with  a  thou- 

sand streams, 
To  Indu  who  support eth  heaven. 

3  Him,  nourisher  of  many,  Sage,  creative  Pavamana,  they 
llave  sent,  by  wisdom,  to  the  sky. 

4  Him,  dweller  with  Vivasvan,  they  with  use  of  both  arms  have 

sent  forth, 
The  Lord  of  Speech  infallible. 

5  Him,  green,  beloved,  many-eyed,  the  Sisters  with  the  pressing- 

stones 
Send  down  to  ridges  of  the  sieve. 

6  0  Pavamana,  Indu,  priests  hurry  thee  on  to  Indra,  thee 
Who  aidest  song  and  cheerest  him. 

HYMN  XXVII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

This  Sage,  exalted  by  our  lauds,  flows  to  the  purifying  cloth, 
Scattering  foes  as  he  is  cleansed. 

2  As  giving  power  and  winning  light,  for  Indra  and  for  Vayu  he 
Is  poured  upon  the  filtering-cloth. 

3  The  men  conduct  him,  Soma,  Steer,  Omniscient,  and  the  Head 

^  of  Heaven, 
Effused  into  the  vats  of  wood. 


6  Of  song :  arkdsya :  archantyasyendrasya^  of  the  adorable  Indra,  accord- 
ing to  Sdyana.  Arka  has  two  meanings  in  the  Rigveda  (1)  song  or  hyran  of 
praise  and  (2)  light  or  splendour.    See  Pischel,  Vediscfie  Studien,  1.  pp.  23—26. 

1  Aditi :  the  earth. 

2  The  kine :  who  supply  the  milk  that  is  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice. 

4  Vivasvdn :  meaning  here  the  sacrificer.  Of  both  arms :  bhuHjoh :  accord- 
ing to  Saya7a  =  6.1Ayo{i,  the  arms  of  the  body.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon 
explains  the  word  as  meaning  a  sort  of  vice  or  implement  for  holding  wood 
while  it  is  being  cut.    Lord  of  speech :  making  men  eloquent. 

5  Many-eyed:  *  far-beholding.* — Wilson.     The  Sisters:    the  fingers  of  the 

officiating  priest.  

S  O'nniscfent :  or,   all- possessing.     VaU  of   toood :    m'«**^va:  according  to 
Beafey,  into  the  streama  oi  water. 


STTMN  29.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  289 

4r  Longing  for  kine,  longing  for  gold  hath  Indu  Pavam^na  lowed, 
Still  Conqueror,  never  overcome. 

5  This  Pavam^na,  gladdening  draught,  drops  on  the  filtering - 

cloth,  and  then 
Mounts  up  with  SArya  to  the  sky. 

6  To  Indra  in  the  firmament  this  mighty  tawny  Steer  hath  flowed, 
This  Indu,  being  purified. 

HYMN  XXVIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Urged  by  the  men,  this   vigorous  Steed,  Lord  of  the  mind. 

Omniscient, 
Runs  to  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

2  Within  the  filter  hath  he   flowed,   this   Soma   for  the   Gods 

effused, 
Entering  all  their  essences. 

3  He  shines  in  beauty  there,  this  God  Immortal  in  his  dwelling- 

place. 
Foe-slayer,  dearest  to  the  Gods. 

4  Directed  by  the  Sisters  ten,  bellowing  on  his  way  this  Steer 
Runs  onward  to  the  wooden  vats. 

5  This  PavamiLna,  swift  and  strong.  Omniscient,  gave  splendour 

to 
The  Sun  and  all  his  forms  of  light. 

6  This  Soma,  being  purified,  flows  mighty  and  infallible. 
Slayer  of  sinners,  dear  to  Gods. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Forward  with  mighty  force  have  flowed  the  currents   of   this 

Steer  eff'used, 
Of  him  who  sets  him  by  the  Gods. 

2  The  singers  praise  him  with  their  song,   and  learned   priests 

adorn  the  Steed, 
Brought  forth  as  light  that  merits  laud. 

3  These  things  thou  winnest  lightly  while  purified,  Soma,  Lord 

of  wealth  : 
Fill  full  the  sea  that  claims  our  praise. 

4  Longing  for  kine :  who  supply  milk  to  mix  with  the  Soma  juice.  Gold  : 
worn  on  th«  finger  of  the  priest  who  presses  out  the  juice.  Loiced :  made 
a  noise  in  dropping. 

5  Mounts  up :  as  the  Moon. 

1  Who  sets  him  hy  the  Oods :  or,  who  decorates  the  Gk)ds.    *  "Who  ««,^"fca.  \jci 
surpass  the  goda.* — WHaon. 
3  TAesetkinffs:  for  which  we  pray.     The  <ea ;  the  ^omai-^^^  ot  xeafcT^wt* 
19 


?aa  -    ^HE  sn/j^  of  i^qok 

4  Winning  all  pirepiQu^  things  at  oaq^,  flow  on,   Q   Spn^ft^   with 

thy  stream  : 
Drive  to  one  plac^  our  enemies. 

5  Preserve  us  from  the  godless,   from  ill-omened   voice  of   qne 

and  all, 
That  so  we  may  be  freed  from  blame. 

6  0  Indu,  as  thou  flowest  on  bring  us  the  wealth  of   earth    and 

heaven, 
And  splendid  vigour,  in  thy  stream. 

HYMN  XXX.  Spmft  ?axamAna, 

Streams  of  this  Potent  One  have  flowed  easily  to    the  atTain- 

ing-cloth  : 
While  he  is  cleansed  he  lifts  his  voice. 

2  Indu,  by  pressers  urged  to  speed,,  bellowing  out  while  beautijfied, 
Sends  forth  a  very  migh^ty  sound. 

3  Pour  on  us,  Soma,  with   thy   stream   man-conquering   might 

which  many  crave, 
Accompanied  with  hero  sons. 

4  Hither  hath  Pavamana  flowed)  Soma,  flowedi  Either  i^  ^i  stream, 
To  settle  ip.  the  yats.  of  wood. 

5  To  waters  with  the  stones  they  drive  thee  tawny-hued,  most 

rich  in  sweets, 
0  Indu,  to  be  Indra's  drink, 

6  For  Indra,for  the  Thunderer  press  the  Spma  very  rich  ija  sweets, 
Lovely,  inspiritiDg,  for  strength. 

HYMN  XXXI.  Soma  Pavwdna. 

The  Soma-drops,  benevolent,  come  forth  as  tfeey  are  purified. 
Bestowing  wealth  which  all  ipay  see* 

2  O  Indu,  high  o'er  he%yen  and  earth   be  thou^  increaser  of  our 

might : 
The  Master  of  all  strength  be  thou. 

3  The  windis^  are.  gracio^i^  in  tbeir  love  to  thee,  the  riven?  flow 

to  thee : 
Soma,  they  multiply  thy  power. 

5  Ill-omened  voice :  svan^t,  explained  by  Sdyan^  ^a  ~  iah(iXnnind4r4lfpd.t^  Bapnd 
or  word  in  the  form  of  blame;  the  raging  fury  of  the  demon,  or  the  go(]Lleaa 
man,  according  to  Grassmann.  

2  A  very  mighty  sound :  or,  a  sound  which  Indra  loves. 

i  Wealih  which  all  may  8u :  *  inteUectuaV  -weakWiXi.* — ^^Usoa. 
$  TAe,  winds:  ct  '  V^u  is  S(im«^'«   guwdVwLQiQ^' ^,.^VV^, 


»JF»»  «J  TBS  JtmVJlPA.  2M 

4  Sam»^  vax  great.     Ffqih  ererj  aside  may  vigorous  powers  unite 

in  thee : 
Be  in  the  gathering-place  of  strength. 

5  For  thee,  brown-hued  !  the  kine^  hftve  poured  uaperishabto  oil 

and  milk 
Aloft  on  the  sublimest  height. 

6  Friendship,  0  Indu,  we  desire  with  thee  who  hearest  noble 

With  thee,  0  Lord  of  all  that  is. 

HYMN  XXXIL  SomaPavamftna. 

The  rapture-shedding  Soma-drops,  effused  in  our  assembly, 

have 
Flowed  forth  to  glorify  our  prince. 

2  Then  Trita's  Maidens  onward  urge  the  Tawny-coloured  with 

the  stones, 
Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

3  Now  like  a  swan  he  maketh  all  the  company  sing  each  his 

hymn : 
He,  like  a  steed,  is  bathed  in  milk. 

4  0  Soma,  viewing  heaven  and  earth,  thou  runnest  like  a  dart- 

ing deer : 
Set  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

5  The  cows  have  sung  with  joy  to  him,  even  as  a  woman  to  her 

lo:^©: 
He  came  as  to  a  settled  ra.oe. 

G  Best<>w  illustrious  fame  on  u^,  both  osn:  our  liberal  lords  and  me. 
Glory,  intelligence,  and  wealth. 


I     .K      >IJL|IP»       I  ■»»■»>  III      11        Ul.       1      II 


4  This  stanza  has  occurred  before.  See  I.  91. 16.  Be  in  the  gathering^  place 
of.  sUieng^ :  be  the  centrai'  point  and  source  of  alt  power. 

5  The  hine  :  of  the  clouds,  the  waters.  Oil  and  milk :  sweet  and  fertilizing 
rain.  Or  the  cows  who  supply  nailk  for  tb«^  lil^tio^  in^  1)9  i^1<ei^e<i;  in 
which  case  '  the  sublimest '  would  be  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

1  Our  prince :  the  noble  who  institutes  the  sacrifice. 

2  Ttita]9  3faiden8 :  the  fingers  of  the  priest.     See  IX.  88.  2. 

3  Like  a  swan:  as  a  sentinel  hansa  (swan,  wild-goose,  or  flamingo)  a^  th^ 
approach  of  danger  sounds  a  note  of  alarm  which  i9  answered  by  aljl  the 
rest.— tudwig. 

4  Darting:  S&yana  takes   taktah   with   't^QU,*   SojqoAy   t^. ei^pl^s  it  by 
gavyaih  paj/aidibhirmisritajh  san,  being  mixed,  with  milk,  curds,  etc.     ^1^- ' 
where  S&yana  explains  it  by  *  swift.* 

5  CowA :  pcaises,  a^ording  to  Siy^na.  Ajk  <o  «  setil^  fH^e:  tfi  a  l^prs^  is 
brought  to  run  a  race  that  has  been  arranged.  '  As  a  hero  hastens  to  t\x^, 
yrelcome  contest/ — Wilson, 


292  THE  HTMN8  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Like  waves  of  waters,  skilled  in  song  the  juices  of  the  Soma 

speed 
Onward,  as  buffaloes  to  woods. 

2  With  stream  of  sacrifice  the  brown  bright  drops  have  flowed 

with  strength  in  store 
Of  kine  into  the  wooden  vats. 

3  To  Indra,  V&ju,  Varuna,  to  Vishnu,  and  the  Maruts,  flow 
The  drops  of  Soma  juice  eff'used. 

4  Three  several  words  are  uttered :  kine  are  lowing,  cows  who 

give  their  milk : 
The  Tawuy-hued  goes  bellowing  on. 

5  The  young  and  sacred  mothers  of  the  holy  rite  have  uttered 

praise : 
They  decorate  the  Child  of  Heaven. 

6  From  every  side,  0  Soma,   for  our  profit,  pour  thou  forth 

four  seas 
Filled  full  of  riches  thousandfold. 

PYMN  XXXIV.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

The  drop  of  Soma  juice  effused  flows  onward  with  this  stream 

impelled, 
Eending  strong  places,  with  its  might. 

2  Poured  forth,  to  Indra,  Varuna,  to  Vayu  and  the  Marut  host, 
To  Vishnu,  flows  the  Soma  juice. 

3  With  stones  they  press  the  Soma  forth,  the  Strong  conducted 

by  the  strong : 
They  milk  the  liquor  out  with  $kill. 

4  'Tis  he  whom  Trita  must  refine,  'tis  he  who  shall  make  Indra 

glad: 
The  Tawny  One  is  decked  with  tints. 

■ — ■ I         —    --     ■ ■  -I  I  I ■  ■  _  I 

4  Three  several  words. :  accordiog  to  SAyana,  trividhd  ttutihy  praise  of  three 
kinds,  from  the  tbree  Vedas.  *  The  priests  utter  the  three  sacred  texts.' — 
Wilson.  Probably  three  triplets  chanted  during  the  ceremony.  See  Bergaigne, 
I.  288. 

5  Mothers  of  the  holy  Hte :  apparently,  the  cows  who  supply  milk  for 
libations.  The  Child  of  Heaven  :  the  Soma,  which,  according  to  a  text  quoted 
by  Sftyana,  *  was  in  the  third  heaven  from  hence.* 

6  Four  seas :  imaginary  seas,  to  correspond  with  the  four  quarters  of  heavefi. 
2  Sironff  places :  the  strongholds  of  enemies,  the  fiends  who  withhold  the 

4  Trita:  tpe prfipsurer  of  the  Celestial  Soma. 


MYMX  Mv]  THE  RIQVEDA,  29S 

5  Him  do  the  Sons  of  Pvisni  milk,  the  dwelling-place  of  sacrifice, 
Oblation  lovely  and  most  dear. 

6  To   him  in  one  united   stream  these  songs   flow  on  straight 

forward :  he, 
Loud-voiced,  hath  made  the  milch-kine  low. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Pot7R  forth  on  us  abundant   wealth,  0  Pavam&na,   with  thy 

stream, 
Wherewith  thou  mayest  find  us  light. 

2  0  Indu,  swayer  of  the  sea,  shaker  of  all  things,  flow  thou  on. 
Bearer  of  wealth  to  us  with  might. 

3  With  thee   for  Hero,  Valiant  One !   may  we  subdue  our  ene- 

mies : 
Let  what  is  precious  flow  to  us. 

4  Indu   arouses   strength,   the   Sage   who  strives  for  victory, 

winning  power, 
Discovering  holy  works  and  means. 

5  Mover  of  speech,  we  robe  him  with  our  songs  as  he  is  purified. 
Soma,  the  Guardian  of  the  folk ; 

6  On  whose  way,  Lord  of  Holy  Law,  most  rich,  as  he  is  purified, 
The  people  all  have  set  their  hearts. 

HYMN  XXXVI.  Soma  PavamAna; 

Forth  from  the  mortar  is  the  juice  sent,  like  a  car-horse,  to 

the  sieve : 
The  Steed  steps  forward  to  the  goal. 

2  Thus,  Soma,  watchful,  bearing  well,  cheering  the  Gods,  flow 
past  the  sieve. 
Turned  to  the  vat  that  drops  with  meath. 

5  The  diDdling -place  of  sacrifice  :  the  Soma-plant  contains  within  itself  the 
chief  element  of  sacrifice,  and  the  preparation  of  the  juice  is  only  the  devel- 
opment of  its  nature. — Ludwig. 

2  The  sea  :  the  reservoir  of  Soma  juice. 

4  Discovering  holy  works  and  means :  *  acquainted  with  sacred  rites  and 
arms.* — Wilson. 

6  On  whose  way  :  on  whose  statutes  or  decrees. 

1  To  the  goal :  Mrshman :  apparently,  a  line  or  furrow  drawn  across  the 
end  of  the  race-course.  In  I.  116.  17,  S&yana  explains  Mrshman  as  a  piece 
of  wood  serving  as  a  goal,  but  in  this  place  he  takes  it  to  mean,  *  the  God- 
attracting  battle-field  called  a  sacrifice/  devdndmdkarshanavati  yajndkhye  tang- 
rdme.    See  CowelFs  note  in  Wilson*^  TraiiBlatiou, 

£  The  mi;  the  dronakala^a. 


»i  THE  nTMNS  i^P  [BOOK  I^. 

3  Excellent  Pavatnftna,  make  the  lights  shine  brightly  out 

for  us : 
Speed  as  to  n^eoital  power  and  skill. 

4  He,  beautified  by  pious  men,  and  coming  from  their  liands 

adorned, 
Flows  through  the  fleecy  «trainin^-eloth. 

5  May  Soma  pour  all  treasures  of  the  heavens,   the  earth,  the 

firmament 
Upon  the  liberal  worshipper. 

6  Thou  mountest  to  the   height  of  heaven,  0  Soma,   seeking 

steeds  and  kine. 
And  seeking  heroes,  Lord  of  Strength  ! 

HYMN  XXXVri.  Soma  PKvamftna. 

Soma,  the  Steer,  effused  for  draught,  flows  to  the  purifying  sieve, 
Slaying  the  fiends,  k)vmg  the  Gods. 

2  Far-sighted,  tawny-coloured,  he  flows  to  the  sieve,  intelligent. 
Bellowing,  to  his  place  of  rest. 

3  This  vigorous  Pavamllna  runs  forth  to  the  luminous  realm  of 

heaven. 
Fiend-slayer,  through  the  fleecy  sieve. 

4  This  Pavam&na  up  above  Trita's  high  ridge  hath  mad^  the  Sun, 
Togeth^  with  the  Sisters^  shine. 

5  This  Vritra-filaying  Steer,  eff'used,  Soma,  room-giver,  ne'er 

deceived. 
Hath  gone,  as  'twere,  to  win  the  ^oil. 

6  Urged  onward  by  the  sagei,  the  God  speeds  forward   to  the 

casks  of  wood, 
Indu  to  Indra  willingly. 

HYMN  XXXYin.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

This  Steer,  this  Chariot,  rashes  through  the  woollen   Alter, 

as  he  goes 
To  war  that  wins  a  thousand  spoils. 

1  For  draught :  pttdye  :  *  for  the  drinking  (of  the  gods).' — Wilson. 

2  Intelligent :  or,  endowed  with  strength. 

4  Trita*8  high  ridye :  according  to  Siyana,  '  the  high  place  (of  the  sacrifice) 
of  Trita'  the  Rishi.  But  the  heavenly  home  of  Trita,  the  celestial  preparer  of 
the  Soma  for  Indra,  is  intended.     T7ie  Siitera :  the  Dawns. 

6    JF»i/i»^Z^;  manJMnd; 'plenteously.* — Ludwig.    *  In  his  might.* — Co  well. 

1  To  ufar  that  wins  a  thdmomd  spoils  :  mote  UV.«wX\::f  »\.^  VJidlw\«wAV^\sn»Vj^ 
or  deed  of  might. 


8  The   Dante  of  Trita  With   the  atones   onward   impel    this 
Tawny  On©, 
Indu  to  Indra  for  his  drink. 

3  Ten  active  fingers  carefully  adOm  him  here ;  they  make  him 

bright 
And  beauteous  for  the  gladdening  draught. 

4  He  like  a  fcdcon  settles  down  amid  th6  families  of  men. 
Speeding  like  lover  to  his  love. 

5  This  young  exhilarating  juice  looks  downward   from  its  place 

in  heaven, 
This  Soma-drop  that  pierced  the  sieve« 

6  Poured  for   the  draught,  this  tawny  juice   flows   forth,  intel- 

ligent, crying  out, 
Unto  the  well-belov6d  place. 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Soma  PavamAn*. 

Tlow  on,  0  thou  of  lofty  thought,  flow  swift  in  thy  beloved 

form. 
Saying,  I  go  where  dwell  the  Gods. 

2  Preparing  what  is   unprepared,    and   bringing   store  of  food 

to  man. 
Make  thou  the  rain  descend  from  heaven. 

3  With  might,  bestowing  power,  the  juice  enters   the  purifying 

sieve, 
Far-seeing,  sending  forth  its  light. 

4  This  is  it  which   in  rapid  course   hath  with   the  river's   wave 

flowed  down 
From  heaven  upon  the  straining-cloth. 

5  Inviting  him  from  far  away,  and  even  from   near  at  hand;  the 

juice 
For  Indra  is  poured  forth  as  meath. 

6  In  union  they  have  sung  the  hymn ;  with  stones  they  urge  the 

Tawny  One. 
Sit  in  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

2  The  Dames  of  Trita :  as  Trita  is  the  celestial  purifier  of  the  Soma,  the 
fingers  of  the  earthly  purifiers  are  called  hia  dames,  or  his  maidens  as  in 
IX.  32.  2. 

5  Prom  iti  place  in  heaven :  or  divdh  may  be  the  genitive  case,  taken  with 
fifuhy  the  Child  of  Heaven,  as  in  IX.  33.  />. 

6  The  well-beloved  place :  the  dronakalaga  or  vat  in  which  it  rests. 

2  Preparing  what  U  unprepared :  *  consecrating  the  unconsecrated  worship- 
per or  place,'  is  SAyapa'a  explanation. 
tf  Si^/  O  QodB.S&y&nak. 


2W  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

HYMN  XL.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

The  Very  Active  hath  assailed,  while  purified,  all  enemies  : 
They  deck  the  Sage  with  holy  songs. 

2  The  Red  hath  mounted  to  his  place ;  to  Indra  goes  the  mightj 

juice : 
He  settles  in  his  firm  abode. 

3  0  Indu,  Soma,  send  us  now  great  opulence  from  every  side, 
Pour  on  us  treasures  thousandfold. 

4  0  Soma  PavamS,na,  bring,  Indu,  all  splendours  hitherward : 
Find  for  us  food  in  boundless  store. 

5  As  thou  art  cleansed,   bring  hero   strength  and   riches  to  thy 

worshipper, 
And  prosper  thou  the  singer's  hymns. 

6  0  Indu,  Soma,  being   cleansed,  bring   hither  riches   doubly- 

piled. 
Wealth,  mighty  Indu,  meet  for  lauds, 

HYMN  XLI.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Active  aud  bright  have  they  come  forth,  impetuous  iu  speed 

like  bulls, 
Driving  the  black  skin  far  away. 

2  Quelling  the  riteless  Dasyu,  may  we   think  upon  the  bridge  of 

bliss. 
Leaving  the  bridge  of  woe  behind. 

3  The  mighty  Pavamdna'a  roar  is  heard  as  'twere  the  rush  of  rain  : 
Lightnings  are  flashing  to  the  sky. 

4  Pour  out  on  us  abundant  food,  when  thou  art  pressed,  0  Indu, 

wealth 
In  kine  and  gold  aud  steeds  and  spoil. 

5  Flow  on  thy  way,  Most  Active,  thou  :  fill  full  the  mighty  heav- 

ens and  earth, 
As  Dawn,  as  Surya  with  his  beams. 


2  The  Red :  Soma.     HU  place :   the  dronahalatdy  or  reservoir.     His  firm 
abode:  heaven. 

6  Doubly-piled :  dvibdrkasam :  according  to  S&yapa,  *  from  both  worlds, 
heaven  and  earth . '  

1  They :  the  Soma  juices.  The  black  skin :  meaning,  apparently,  both  the 
black  pall  or  covering  of  night  and  the  R&kshasas  or  dark-skinned  Dasyus  or 
hostile  aborigines. 

3  The  cleanaing  of  the  terrestrial  Soma  is  identified  with  the  puriBcation 
of  the  ceJestial  nectar  accompanied  by  raiii  ou^  U^\<Txm^.  S^q  HiUebrandt, 
y.  J/.  343,  362, 


STMm  4S.1  THE  tUQVEDA,  297 

6  Oq  every  side,  0  Soma,  flow  round  us  with  thy  protecting 
stream, 
As  Ras^  flows  around  the  world. 

HYMN  XLII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Engendering  the  Sun   in  floods,   engendering  heaven's  lights, 

greeu-hued, 
Robed  in  the  waters  and  the  milk, 

2  According  to  primeval  plan  this  Soma,  with  his  stream,  efiiised 
Flows  purely  on,  a  God  for  Gods. 

3  For  him  victorious,  waxen  great,  the  juices  with  a  thousand 

powers 
Are  purified  for  winning  spoil. 

4  Shedding  the  ancient  fluid  he  is  poured  into  the  cleansing  sieve :  • 
He,  thundering,  hath  produced  the  Gods. 

5  Soma,  while  purifying,  sends  hither  all  things  to  be  desired. 
He  sends  the  Gods  who  strengthen  Law. 

6  Soma,  efi^used,  pour  on  us  wealth  in  kine,  in  heroes,   steeds, 

and  spoil. 
Send  us  abundant  store  of  food. 

HYMN  XLIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

We  will  enrobe  with  sacred  song  the  Lovely  One  who,  as  a 

Steed, 
Is  decked  with  milk  for  rapturous  joy. 

2  All  songs  of  ours  desiring  grace  adorn  him  in  the  ancient  way, 
Indu  for  ludra,  for  his  drink. 

3  Soma  flows  on  when  purified,  beloved  and  adorned  with  songs, 
Songs  of  the  sage  Medhyatithi. 

4  0  Soma  Pavam^ua,  find  exceeding  glorious  wealth  for  us. 
Wealth,  Indu,  fraught  with  boundless  might. 

5  Like  courser  racing  to  the  prize  Indu,  the  lover  of  the  Gods, 
Roars,  as  he  passes,  in  the  sieve. 

6  Read :  a  mythical  stream  that  flows  round  the  atmosphere  and  the  earth. 
See  V.  41.  15,  and  X.  108.  1. 

1  In  floods :  in  the  waters  on  high  ;  in  the  firmament. 

4  Hath  produced  the  Gods:  yatra  so  mo  'bhishHyate  tatra  devd  niyatampr^dur- 
bhavanti;  where  Soma  is  effused,  there  the  gods  constantly  appear. — Sftyana. 

1  As  a  steed :  is  bathed  in  water.    For  rapturous  joy :  *  for  the  exhilaration 
(of  the  gods).* — Wilson. 

3  Medhydtithi :  the  Bishi  of  the  hymn. 

5  ^acin^  to  the  prize':  vdjcisrit :  'rushing  into  baUW—'^V^WMU 


%n  Tss  HYMNS  0^  [noo^  n 

6  Flow  on  thy  way  to  win  us  strength,  to  speed  the  sage  wh 
praises  thee : 
Soma,  bestow  heroic  power. 

HYMN  XLIV.  SomaPavamftn 

Indu,  to  us  for  this  great  rite,  bearing  as  'twere  thy  wave  t 

Gods, 
Unwearied,  thou  art  flowing  forth. 

2  Pleased  with  the  hymn,  impelled  by  prayer,   Soma  is  hurrie 

far  away, 
The  Wise  One  in  the  Singer's  stream. 

3  Watchful  among  the  Gods,  this  juice  advances  to  the  clean 

ing  sieve : 
Soma,  most  active,  travels  on. 

4  Flow  onward,  seeking  strength  for  us,  embellishing  the  saci 

fice  : 
The  priest  with  trimmed  grass  calleth  thee. 

6  May  Soma,  ever  bringing  power  to  Bhaga  and  to  Vjlyu,  Sage 
And  Hero,  lead  us  to  the  Gods. 

6  So,  to  increase  our  wealth  to-day,  Tnspirer,  best  of  Furtherers 
Win  for  us  strength  and  high  renown. 

HYMN   XLV.  SomaPavamftn 

Flow,  thou  who  viewest  men,  to  give  delight,  to  entertain  tl 

Gods, 
Indu,  to  Indra  for  his  drink. 

2  Stream  to  thine  embassy  for  us  :  thou  hastenest,  for  Indra,  1 
The  Gods,  0  better  than  our  friends. 

3  We  balm  thee,  red  of   hue,  with   milk  to  fit  thee  for   the  raj 

tnrous  joy  : 
Unbar  for  us  the  doors  of  wealth. 


6  Heroic  povoer :  'excellent  male  offspring.* — Wilson. 


1  For  this  great  rite :  *  to  give  us  abundant  wealth.* — Wilson.  Unweariec 
aytjtsyah :  according  to  S&yana,  this  is  the  name  of  the  Rishi  :  '  Ay&sg 
(goeth)  towards  the  gods  (in  sacrifice).' — Wilson. 

2  Thou  hastenest :  SA.jana  gives  a  different  explanation  of  this  part  of  t1 
stanza :  'thou  (who)  art  drunk  for  Indra,  (pour)  on  the  gods  wealth  for  (i 

their)  friendB. ' — Wilson.     I  have  adopted  lAid-wv^'a  interpretation. 

3   We  balm  thee,  red  of  Ime :  or,  *  Yea,  -we  a/dotn  V)aa«i,  T«i^'     ^w  \Va  t« 
eurousjo^  :  niikdiya  :  '  for  the  purpose  oi  ex\L\\Bi.TaX.vycL'  — •'^'^wx. 


MYMJft  *5.]  ^HE  RIOTED  A.  »• 

4  He  thtough  the  sieve  hath  passed,  as  comes  a  courser  to  the 

pole,  to  rim : 
Indu  belongs  unto  t^e  Gods. 

5  All  friends  have  lauded  him  as  he  sports  in  the  wood,  beyond 

the  fleece: 
Singers  have  chanted  Indu's  praise. 

6  Flow,  Indu,  with  that  stream  wherein  steeped  thou  announc- 

est  to  the  noan 
Who  worships  thee  heroic  strength. 

HYMN  XLVI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

XiEB  al)le  coursers  they  have  been  sent  forth  to  be  the  feast 

of  Gods, 
Joying  tn  mwutrtaina,  flowing  on. 

2  To   V&yu  flow   the  Soma-streams,  the   drops  of  juice   made 

beautiful 
like  a  bride  dowered  by  her  sire. 

3  Pressed  in  the  mortar,  ^ese,  the  drops  of  juice,  the  Somas 

rich  in  food. 
Give  strength  to  Indra  with  their  work. 

4  Deft-handed  men,  run  hither,  seize  the  brilliant  juices  blent 

with  meal, 
And  cook  \vith  milk  the  gladdening  draught. 

5  Thufi^  Soma,  Conqueror  of  wealth !  flow,  finding  furtherance 

for  us, 
Giver  of  ample  opulence. 

6  This  Pavam4na,  meet  to  be  adorned,  the  fingers  ten  adorn. 
The  draught  that  shall  make  Indra  glad. 

4  T^  the  pole  J  the  ineaniiig  of  dhuram  here  is  not  clear,  and  the  compari- 
son is  not  obvious.  'As  a  horse  in  ^ing  passes  tiie  shaft  (of  the  chariot).' — 
Wilson.  'As  a  horse  (presses)  through  the  yoke/ — Grassmann.  Ludwig 
suggests  *  hedge '  or  *  barrier '  as  the  probable  meaning  of  the  word  in  this 
pUce. 

5  In  the  wood,  beyond  ihefieece:  when  he  has  passed  through  the  woollen 
strsiner  and  fallen  into  tiie  wooden  trough  or  vat.  Singers  :  ndv^h :  shouts 
of  joy,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon. 

1  The^  kctue  been  tent  forth  :  atrigran  (effusi  sunt)  is  applicable  both  to  the 
effused  Soma-drops  and  to  horses  loosed  or  started  for  a  race.  Jotting  w 
mountains :  coming  from  plants  grown  on  hills. 

^  Dowered  by  her  tire :  meaning,  perhaps,  possessed  of  property  inherited 
from  her  father. 

4  Deft-handed :  suhastyafi  cannot  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for.    Suhattydy 
%  duaJ^  majr  have  been  the  orj^nnl  reading.    See  IiUdy}\^ft  QoxciXCkST^'c^^'^^- 
v.,  pp.  347,  348. 


800  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  It 

HYMN  XLVII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Great  as  he  was,  Soma  hath  gained  strength  by  this  high 

solemnity  : 
Joyous  he  riseth  like  a  bull. 

2  His   task  is  done :   his  crushings   of  the   Dasyus  are   made 

manifest : 
He  sternly  reckoneth  their  debts. 

3  Soon  as  his  song  of  praise  is  born,  the  Soma,  Indra's  juice, 

becomes 
A  thousand-winning  thunderbolt. 

4  Seer  and  Sustainer,  he  himself  desireth  riches  for  the  sage 
When  he  embellisheth  his  songs. 

5  Fain  would  they  both  win  riches  as  in  races  of  the  steeds.  In  war 
Thou  art  upon  the  conquerors'  side. 

HYMN  XLVIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

With  sacrifice  we  seek  to  thee  kind  Cherisher  of  manly  might 
In  mansions  of  the  lofty  heavens ; 

2  Gladdening,  crusher  of  the  bold,  ruling  with  very  mighty  sway, 
Destroyer  of  a  hundred  forts. 

3  Hence,  Sapient  One !  the  Falcon,  strong  of  wing,  unwearied, 

brought  thee  down. 
Lord  over  riches,  from  the  sky. 

4  That  each  may  see  the  light,  the  Bird  brought  us  the  guard 

of  Law,  the  Friend 
Of  all,  the  speeder  through  the  air. 

5  And  now,  sent  forth,  it  hath  attained  to  mighty  power  and 

majesty. 
Most  active,  ready  to  assist. 

1  Riseth :  or,  roareth.     Sabdctm  Jcaroti. — Sftyarfa. 

2  He  sternly  reckoneth  their  debts :  *  resolute  he  acquits  the  debts   (of  the 
worshi  p  per). ' — W  i  Isou . 

8  A  thousand-tDinning  thunde^'bolt :  all-powerful  to  slay  the  wicked  and  to 
reward  worshippers. 

4  Sustainer :  I  follow  Ludwig  in  taking  vidhartdri  as  a  nominative  singular. 
But  see  Cowell's  note  in  Wilson's  Translation. 

5  They  both :  Soma  and  the    sage  or  singer. — Ludwig.     S4yana  interprets 
the  stanza  dififerently  : — *  Thou   desirest  to  give  wealth  to  those  who  conquer 

•  in  combat  as  (men  offer  fodder)  to  horses  in  battle.' — Wilson. 

1  Kind  Cherisher  of  manly  might :  *  auspicious  bearing  wealth.* — Wilson. 

2  Hundred  forts :  cf.  IV.  26.  3. 

3  The  Falcon  :  see  IV.  26  and  27. 

^  4  The  Friend  of  all :  or,  the  commoxi  poBae«a\oxi.    TKt  %^^c(£cr  thnmgh  tie 
air,'  rajcut^ram:  '  the  showerex  oi  watex.*— "^VJissou* 


STMN  W.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  801 

HYMN  XLIX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

PoiJB  down  the  rain  upon  us,  pour  a  wave  of  waters  from  the 

sky, 
And  plenteous  store  of  wholesome  food. 

2  Flow  onward  with  that  stream  of  thine,  whereby  the  cows 

have  come  to  us. 
The  kine  of  strangers  to  our  home. 

3  Chief  Friend  of  Gods  in  sacred  rites,  pour  on  us  fatness  with 

thy  stream, 
Pour  down  on  us  a  flood  of  rain. 

4  To  give  us  vigour,  with  thy  stream  run  through  the  fleecy 

straining- cloth  : 
For  verily  the  Gods  will  hear. 

5  Onward  hath  Pavamana  flowed  and  beaten  off  the  Rakshasas, 
Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old. 

HYMN  L.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Loud  as  a  river's  roaring  wave  thy  powers  have  lifted  up 

themselves : 
Urge  on  thine  arrow's  sharpened  point. 

2  At  thine  effusion  upward  rise  three  voices  full  of  joy,  when  thou 
Flowest  upon  the  fleecy  ridge. 

3  On  to  the  fleece  they  urge  with  stones  the  tawny  well-beloved 

One, 
Even  Pavamslna,  dropping  meath. 

4  Flow  with  thy  current  to  the  sieve,  0  Sage  most  powerful  to 

cheer, 
To  seat  thee  in  the  place  of  song. 

5  Flow,  Most  Exhilarating !  flow  anointed  with  the   milk   for 

balm, 
Indu,  fo^  Tndra,  for  bis  drink. 

4  The  Oods  will  hear:  the  sound  that  thou  makest  in  flowing. — S&yana. 

5  Flashing  out  splendour  as  of  old  :  or,  *  Making  lights  shine  as  erst  they 
shone.*  

1  Urge  on  thine  arrow* s  sharpened  point :  vdndsya  chodayd  pavim :  apparent- 
ly a  bold  metaphorical  expression  for  '  make  a  noise  like  thnt  of  a  discharged 
arrow.*  *Emit  thy  sound  like  that  of  a  (rushiDg)  arrow.* — Wilson.  Or 
vdndsya  may  mean  of  (thy)  reed,  pipe,  flute,  or  other  musical  instrument,  and 
S4yana  explains  paviw  by  ffiftrfam.  Benfey  accordingly  (Sftmaveda,  II.  5.  1. 
6.  1.)*  renders  the  passage  :  *Erhebe  deiner  Flote  Schall,'  *  Lift  up  the  music 
of  thy  flute.'  According  to  Hillebrandt,  V.  Jf.,  I.  p.  48,  the  reed  or  arrow 
means  the  sharp-pointed  stalk  of  the  Soma-plaut. 

2  Three  voices  full  of  joy :  or,  three  several  joyful  words.  See  IX.  33.  4. 
The  fleecy  ridge :  *  the  summit  of  the  fleece.* — WUboh. 

4  In  iAe place  of  song :  see  IX.  25.  6.     *  On  lndr«fcft\«>.^'— "^'^^JMOTl, 


H^YMN  III*  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Ap^yABTU»  en  th^  M%»r  pour  %h»  Sonaa  jiuica  expre^^i^  with 

stones, 
And  make  it  pure  for  Ind?g,*s  drink. 

2  Paur  out  f^r  Indra,  Thtuad^r-armed,  the^  mUk,  ctf  beayen,  tli^ 

Soma's  juice, 
Most  excellent,  most  rich  in  sweets. 

3  These  Gods  and  all  thje  Marut  host,.  lodu !  enjoj  this  juice  of 

thine, 
This  PavamUna's  flowing  meath^ 

4  For,  Soma,  thou  hast,  been  effused,  streogthening  for  tikie  wild 

carouse, 
0  Steer,  the  singer,  for  our  help. 

5  Flow  withr  thj  stream.  Far-sighted  One,  e£[\ised,  into  the  olecinfl- 

ing  sieve : 
Flow  on  to.  give  us  strength  and  fame. 

HYMN  LII,  Soma  Pa^vamlLDs. 

Wealth- WINNER,  dwelling  in,  the  sky,  bringing  us  vigour  with 

the  juice, 
Flow  to  tlve  fitter  when  effused. 

2  So,  in  thine  anqient  ways,  may  he,   beloved,  with  a,  thousand 

streams 
Run  o'er  the  fleecy  straining-cloth. 

3  Him  wh.o  is  like  a  CH^ld^on  shake  :  0  Tndu,  shake  thy  gift  to  us 
Shake  it,  armed  Warrior  !   with  thine  arms. 

4  Indu,  invoked  with  many  a  prayer,  bring  down  the  vigoiir  of 

these  men. 
Of  him  who  threatens  us  with  war, 

5  Indu,  Wealth  giver,  with  thine  help  pour  out  few  uj  a  bujQbdX'ed, 

yea, 
A  thousand  of  thy  pure  bright  streams. 


4  For  the  wild  cearouse:  'for  ^[)eedy  exhilaration.' — Wilson* 


2  May  he :  the  juice,  regarded  as  distinct  from  Soma  who  is  addressed. 

3  J7m»  whfi  is  like  a  caldron :  beat  or  bruise  the  Soma  that  is  full  of  juicfl( 
as  a  caldron  is  of  water.  With  thine  arms :  or,  with  the  blows  (of  the  pressing- 
stones).  The  meaning  of  the  second  and  third  'shake'  seems  to  be  'send, 
rapidly.'  *  (Soma),  send  (us)  him  who  is  like  a  pot ;  Indu,  send  us  now  wealth  ; 
swift-iowing  (Soma),  send  it  with  blows  (of  the  stones).' — Wilson.  Pn^esj^or 
OrasBm&nn  sayB  that  by  '  him  who  is  lik^  Ob  Qaldron'  the  wealtl^y  en^mj  is 

intended,  wbooe  possessionB  are  to  be  ^^nx^  ou\*  m;^!!.  \X>ft  '^\o>i^v«QT«bV^'i^^(}Q|rs. 


MTMN  SB.)  T3£  RIOVEDA,  30$ 

HYMN  HU.  Sam*  Pivvamftw^. 

O  THOU  with  stones  for  arms,  thj  powers,  crushing  the  fiends, 

have  raised  themselves  ^ 
Cha§e  thou  the  foes  who  compass  us. 

2  Thou  conqnerest  thus  with  might  when  car  meets  car,  and 

when  the  prize  is  staked  : 
With  fearless  heart  will  I  sing  praise. 

3  No  one  with  evil  thought  assails  this  Payamdua's'  holy  laws  : 
Crush  him  who  fain  would  fight  with  thee. 

4  For  ludra  to  the  streams  they  drive  the  tawny  rapture-drop- 

ping Steed, 
Indu  the  bringer  of  delight. 

HYMN  LIV.  Soma  Pavamdna. 

Aftbr  his  ancient  splendour,  they,  the  bold,  have  drawn  the 

bright  milk  from 
The  Sa^e  who  wins  a  thousand  gifts. 

2  In  aspect  he  is  like  the  Sun ;  hje  runneth  forward  to  the  lakes, 
Seven  cun^ents  flowing  through  the  sky. 

^  He,^  sbining  ia  bis  9pleudour,  stands  high  aver  all  things  that 
exist — 
Soma,  a  God  as  Surya  is». 

4   Thou,  Indu,  in  thy  brilliancy,  ponr^st  on  us,  as  Indra*s  Friend, 
Wealth  from  the  kiue  to  feast  the  Gods. 

HYMN  LV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Pour  on  us  with  thy  juice  all  kinds  of  corn,  each  sort  of  nourish- 

meat, 
And,  Soma,  all  felioltiefik 

2^  As  thiue,  0  Indu,  is  tl^e  praise,  and  thine  what  springeth  from 
the  juice. 
Seat  thee  on  the  dear  sacred  grass. 


1  WUh  stones  for  arms :  adrivah:  generally  aa  appellative,  of  Indra,  the 
slinger  or  easter  of  the  stone  or  thunderbolt ;  here,  aocording  to  S4yan»,  = 
grdvavan  soma,  0  Soma,  possessor  of,  that  is,  expressed  by,  the  stoD/BS. 

2  When  car  meets  cao' :  in  battle.  When  the  prize  is^  staked :  in  the  chariot- 
race  ;  or  the  reference  may  be  also  to  battle. 

^  To  the  8ti'€am» :  the  vasaUvaA  wjaXer^. 

1  Theyt  tjie  hold  :  the  Soma-pressers.     The  Sage :  or  Rishi  ;  Soma. 

2  Hit  lakes:  of  ait.  Seven  currents:  corresponding  to  the  seven  earthly 
rivers.  *  He  uuitea  with  the  seven  dQwa-deefcei^ding  rivers  of  heaven.' — 
lyUjaon. 

4  From  ike  kine:  coDBiBting  ot  milk,  curds,  etc. 


804  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  /X 

3  And,  finding  for  us  kine  and  steeds,  O  Soma,  with  thy  juice 

flow  on 
Through  days  that  fly  most  rapidly. 

4  As  one  who  conquers,  ne'er  subdued,  attacks  and  slays  the 

enemy. 
Thus,  Vanquisher  of  thousands  !  flow. 

HYMN   LVI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Swift  to  the  purifying  sieve  flows  Soma  as  exalted  Law, 
Slaying  the  fiends,  loving  the  Gods. 

2  When  Soma  pours  the   strengthening   food  a  hundred  ever- 

active  streams 
To  Indra's  friendship  win  their  way. 

3  Ten  Dames  have  sung  to  welcome  thee,  even  as  a  maiden 

greets  her  love : 
0  Soma,  thou  art  decked  to  win. 

4  Flow  hitherward,  0  Indu,  sweet  to  Indra  and  to  Vishnu  :  guard 
The  men,  the  singers,  from  distress. 

HYMN  LVII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Thy  streams  that  never  fail  or  waste  flow  forth  like  showers 

of  rain  from  heaven. 
To  bring  a  thousand  stores  of  strength. 

2  He  flows  beholding  on  his  way  all  well-belovM  sacred  lore, 
Green-tinted,  brandishing  his  arms. 

3  He,  when  the  people  deck  him  like  a  docile  king  of  elephants, 
Sits  as  a  falcon  in  the  wood. 

4  So  bring  thou  hitherward  to  us,  Indu,  while  thou  art  purified, 
All  treasures  both  of  heaven  and  earth. 

HYMN  LVIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight,  even  the  stream  of  flowing 

juice : 
Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

4  Vanquisher  of  thousands :  or,  thou  who  winnest  thousands,  i.  e,  counties 
Bpoils  or  treasures.  • 

3  Ten  Dames  :  the  fingers,  whose  sound  is  heard  in  the  operation  of  pressing 
the  Soma  juice.  

3  Like  a  docile  king  of  elephants :  von  Roth,  in  the  St.  Petersburg 
Lexicon,  suggests  iblie  for  IbJiahj  '  like  a  pious  king  among  his  retinue  ;  *  but 
no  alteration  is  necessary,  ibhak  and  r^jd  being  taken  together  in  the  sense 
of  elephant-king  or  stately  and  noble  elephant.  See  Vedische  Stvdien,  I.  p. 
.XV.  Sits  as  a  falcon  in  the  wood:  in  the  wood,  as  referring  to  the  Soma, 
weaning  the  wooden  trough  or  vat.  *  Sita  on  tVi%  ^UiX^ra  like  a  hawk.' — 'Wilson. 

1  Swift:  tdrat:  'rescuing  (his  worshlpperB trom »xi^:  — ^V^^wi. 


MTMN ««.]  TBB  RIQYBDA.  301 

%  The  lC<Mnutig  knows  all  preoious  things,  the  Goddess  knows  her 
grace  to  man : 
Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

3  We  have  accepted  thousands  from  Dhvasra's  and  Purushanti's 

hands : 
Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

4  From  whom  we  have  accepted  thus  thousands  and  three  times 

ten  besides : 
Swift  runs  this  giver  of  delight. 

HYMN  LIX.  Soma  Favamftna. 

Flow  onward,  Soma,  winning  kine,  and   steeds,  and   all   that 

gives  delight : 
Bring  hither  wealth  with  progeny. 

2  Flow  onward  from  the  waters,  flow,  inviolable,  from  the  plants  : 
Flow  onward  from  the  pressing-boards. 

3  Soma,  as  Pavamina,  pass  over  all  trouble  and  distress  : 
Sit  on  the  sacred  grass,  a  Sage. 

4  Thou,  PavamUna,  foundest  light ;  thou  at  thy  birth  becamest 

great : 
O  Indu,  thou  art  over  all. 

HYMN  LX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

SiNO  forth  and  laud  with  sacred  song  most  active  Pavamdna, 

laud 
Indu  who  sees  with  thousand  eyes. 

3  Thee  who  hast  thousand  eyes  to  see,  bearer  of  thousand  bur- 
thens, they 
Have  filtered  through  the  fleecy  cloth. 

8  Dkvasra  and  Purushanti  were  *  two  kings  who  conferred  great  wealth  on 
Taranta  and  Purumtlha,  two  rishia  of  the  family  of  Vidadaava.  See  p. 
XXXIII.  of  Max-Muller*8  Rig-veda,  Vol.  V.'— Cowell'a  note  in  Wilson's 
Translation. 

4  Thu9  thousands  and  three  times  ten  :  Sftyana,  taking  tdnd  (thus,  in  this 
manner)  to  mean  '  garments/  mistaking  trinifdtam,  thirty,  for  trisatam,  three 
huodred,  and  neglecting  the  chxi  (and),  interprets  '  three  hundred  thousand 
garments.'  '  Thiity  robes  and  thousands.' — £.  B.  Cowell.  Grassmann  places 
this  hymn  in  his  Appendix  as  a  composition  of  fragments  and  out  of  place 
where  it  stands  in  the  text. ' 

5  The  waters :  the  vasattvart  waters.  The  pressing-hoards :  dhishandbhi/ah  : 
according  to  S&yana,  grdvdbhpdfi,  the  pressing-stones. 

1   With  sacred  s»ng :  gdyatrfyi^ :  *  with  a  Odyatri  hymtL.' — ^VT^Uqxl. 
£  Bearer  of  thousand  ourthfn$  :  or,  briugw  ot  iho>MMii^\y>\iu>A«a. 
SO 


TBE  H7MNS  OP  IBOOK  IX. 

3  He,  Pavamslns^  hath  streamed  through  the  fleece :  he  runs 

into  the  jars, 
Finding  his  way  to  Indra's  heart. 

4  That  Indra  may  be  bounteous,  flow,  most  active  Soma,  for  otir 

weal : 
Bring  genial  seed  with  progeny. 

HYMN   LXI.  Soma  PaTam&Bft. 

Flow  onward,  Indu,  with  this  food  for  him  who  in  thy  wild 

delight 
Battered  the  nine-and-ninety  down, 

2  Smote  swiftly  forts,  and  Sarobara,  then  Yadu  and  that  Turvasa, 
For  pious  DivodlLsa's  sake. 

3  Finder  of  horses,  pour  on  us  horses  and  wealth  in  kine  and 

gold, 
And,  Indii,  food  in  boundless  store. 

4  We  seek  to  win  thy  friendly  love,  even  PavamlLna's  flowiiig 

o'er 
The  limit  of  the  cleansing  sieve. 

5  With  those  same  waves  which  in  their  stream  overflow  the 

purifying  sieve, 
Soma,  be  gracious  unto  us. 

6  0  Soma,  being  purified,   bring  us  from  all  sides, — for  thou 

canst, — 
Riches  and  food  with  hero  sons. 

7  Him  here,  the  Child  whom  streams  have  borne,  the  ten  swift 

fingers  beautify : 

With  the  Adityas  is  he  seen. 

8  With  Indra  and  with  V&yu  he,  effused,  flows  onward  with  the 

beams 
Of  Surya  to  the  cleansing  sieve. 

9  Flow  rich  in  sweets  and  lovely  for  our  Bhaga,  VHyu,  Piishan, 

flow 
For  Mitra  and  for  Varuna. 

10  High  is  thy  juice's  birth :  though  set  in  heaven,  on  earth  it 
hath  obtained 
Strong  sheltering  power  and  great  renown. 


1  The  nine-and-ninety  :  *  ninety-nine  (cities  of  the  foe).' — \?il8on. 

3  In  boundless  store :  literally,  in  thousands. 

/  Whom  itreams  have  borne :    sindhumdtaram :    '  whose  parents   aj* e  the 
riverfi/ — Wilson,     Bnm  as  the  Mo^m  in  t^ie  oc«ai;x  ol  «Jix.    WUK  tfcc  Adityat 
uAe  seen  :  tiiat  h,  he  is  counted  aa  ohq  oi  ^«  kdi\i^%s^ 


jnrjr/^ei.l  the  rioveda.  sor 

11  Striving  to  win,  with  him  we  gain  all  wealth  from  the  ungodly 
man, 
Yea,  all  the  glories  of  mankind. 

IS  Finder  of  room  and  freedom,  flow  for  Iiidra  whom  we  must 
adore, 
For  Varuna  and  the  Marut  host. 

13  The  Gods  have  come  to  Indu  well-descended,  beautified  with 
milk. 
The  active  crusher  of  the  foe. 

X4c  Even  as  mother  cows  their  calf,  so  let  our  praise-songs  strength- 
en him, 

Yea,  him  who  winneth  Iudra*s  heart 

15  Soma,  pour  blessings  on   our  kine,  pour  forth  the  food  that 

streams  with  milk : 

Increase  the  sea  that  merits  laud. 

16  From  heaveu  hath  Pavam^na  made,  as  'twere,  the  marvellous 

thunder,  and 
The  lofty  light  of  all  mankind. 

17  The  gladdening  and  auspicious  juice  of  thee,  of  Pavamslua, 

King! 
Flows  o'er  the  woollen  straining-cloth. 

18  Thy  juice,  0  Pavamana,  sends  its  rays  abroad  like  splendid 

skill, 
Like  lustre,  all  heaven's  light,  to  see. 

19  Flow  onward  with  that  juice  of  thine  most   excellent,   that 

brings  delight, 
Slaying  the  wicked,  dear  to  Gods. 

20  Killing  the  foeman  and  his  hate,  and   winning  booty  every 

day. 
Gainer  art  thou  of  steeds  and  kine. 

21  Red-hued,   he  blended  with  the  milk  that  seems  to  yield  its 

lovely  breast, 
Falcon-like  resting  in  thine  home. 

13  Well-descended:  literally,  well-bom  or  well-produced;  '(who  m)  com- 
pletely generated.* — Wilson, 

15  The  tea :  tamudrdm :  according  to  S&yana,  water  generally. 

1^  *  The  purified  [Soma]  has  generated  the  great  light  which  is  comjnon  to 
nil  mankind,  like  the  wonderful  thundering  of  the  sky.'— Mair,  0,  S.  Textt, 
IV.  112.  The  great  light  common  to  all  men,  or  vaifvdnardm  or  the  lofiff 
light  of  all  mankind,  is  Agni  YaisvAnara. 

^0  The/oeman  and hi»  hate:  *  the  hostile  'Vn.ira.*— ^\V*oil. 


808  TBB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /Jf. 

22  Flow  onward  thou  who    strengthenedst  Indra  to  slaughter 

Vritra  who 
Compassed  and  stayed  the  mighty  floods. 

23  Soma  who  rainest  gifts,  may  we  win  riches  with   our   hero 

sons : 
Strengthen,  as  thou  art  cleansed,  our  hymns. 

!24  Aided  by  thee,  and  through  thy  grace,  may  we  be  slayers 
when  we  war : 
Watch,  Soma,  at  our  solenm  rites. 

25  Chasing  our  foemen,  driving  off  the  godless,  Soma  floweth  oQt 
Going  to  Indra's  special  place. 

26  0  Pavam^na,  hither  bring  great  riches,  and  destroy  our  foes  : 
0  Indu,  grant  heroic  fame. 

27  A  hundred  obstacles  have  ne'er  checked  thee  when  fain  to 

give  thy  boons. 
When,  being  cleansed,  thou  oombatest. 

28  Indu,  flow  on,  a  mighty  juice ;  glorify  us  among  the  folk  : 
Drive  all  our  enemies  away. 

29  Indu,  in  this  thy  friendship  most  lofty  and  glorious  may  we 
Subdue  all  those  who  war  with  us. 

30  Those  awful  weapons  that  thou  hast,  sharpened  at  point  to 

strike  men  down — 
Guard  us  therewith  from  every  foe. 

HYMN  LXII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

These  rapid  Soma-drops  have  been  poured  through  the  puri- 
fying sieve 

To  bring  us  all  felicities. 

2  Dispelling  manifold  mishap,  giving  the  courser's  progeny, 
Yea,  and  the  warrior  steed,  success. 


25  The  godless :  drdvndfi :  those  who  present  no  sacrificial  oflPerings  ;  '  the 
withholders  (of  wealth).' — Wilson.  Special  place:  that  is,  the  vessel  set 
apart  for  his  libations. 

26  Heroic  fame :  or,  fame  with  brave  sons. 

27  Obstacles :  or  enemies,  according  to  S&yana.  Thou  eomhcUest :  metkka- 
syase :  according  to  S&yana,  *  when  thou  wishes't  to  give  us  wealth.*  *  The 
meanings  "fight,"  "strive,"  etc.,  are  foreign  to  S&ya.a,  being  derived  from 

a  comparison  of  fia\iofiaif  macto,  etc.'~-Editor's  note  in  Wilson's  Trans- 
lation. 

SO  Weapons  :  the  Moon  being  tlie  warrior  who  overcomes  the  darkness  of 

night.     See  ffiiiebrandt,  V,  M.^  I.  840.    CI.  *T!Vi«imoo\i advances  like  an 

indignant  warridr  through  a  fleeing  arm^.* — ^^.1.  CoVervA.^^. 


9TMH  «1]  TffS  RIQVEDA.  t09 

^  Bringing  proeperitj  to  kine,  they  make  perpetual  Ili  flow 
To  us  for  noble  eulogy. 

^  Strong,   mountain-bom,   the  stalk  bath  been  pressed  in  the 
streams  for  rapturous  joy  : 
Hawk-like  he  settles  in  his  home. 

^  Fair  is  the  Qod-loved  juioe ;  the  plant  is  washed  in  waters, 
pressed  by  men : 
The  milch-kine  sweeten  it  with  milk. 

^  As  drivers  deck  a  courser,  so  have  they  adorned  the  meath's 
juice  for 
Ambrosia,  for  the  festival. 

J  2!hou,   Indii,  with  thy  streams  that  drop  sweet  juices,  which 
were  poured  for  help, 
fiast  settled  in  the  cleansing  sieve. 

^  So  flow  thou  onward  through  the  fleece,  for  Indra  flow,  to  be 
his  drink, 
Slnding  thine  home  in  vats  of  wood. 

^   As  giving  room  and  freedom,  as  most  sweet,  pour  butter  forth 
and  milk, 
O  Indu,  for  the  Angirases. 

^0  ;^Q8t  active  and  benevolent,  this  Pavam^na,  sent  to  us 
For  lofty  friendship,  meditates. 

^  ^  Queller  of  curses,  mighty,  with  strong  sway,  this  Pavam  ana 
shall 
Bring  treasures  to  the  worshipper. 

1 2  Pour  thou  upon  us  thousandfold  possessions,  both  of  kineand 

steeds, 
Exceeding  glorious,  much-desired. 

13  Wandering  far,  with  wise  designs,  the  juice  here  present   is 

effused. 

Made  beautiful  by  living  men. 


3  Ili :  here,  according  to  S4yana,  meaning '  food.*    *  Labetrank/  refreshing 
draught. — Grassmann. 

4  The  stalk :  the  Soma-plant,  which  is  said  to  have  grown  on  the  mountains. 

5  In  waters :  the  vasattvart  waters. 

6  For  ambrosia :  amfUAya :  *  for  the  sake  of  immortality.' — Wilson. 

9  For  the  Angirases :    or,   from  the  Angirases.    The  Jamadagnis  were  not 
members  of  that  family. — Ludwig. 

10  Meditates:  'is  known  (to  all).*— Wilson. 

13  Wandering  far :  urugdydh:  according  to  Sftyana,  much-lauded,  or  praised 


I 
SIO  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

14  For  Indra  flows  the   gladdening   drink^    the  measurer  of  the 

region,  Sage, 
With  countless  wealth  and  endless  help. 

15  Bom  on  the  mountain,  lauded  here,  Indu  for  Indra  is  set  down, 
As  in  her  sheltering  nest  a  bird. 

1 6  Pressed  by  the  men,  as   'twere  to  war  hath  Soma  Pavam&na 

sped, 
To  rest  with  might  within  the  vats. 

17  That  he  may  move,  they  yoke  him  to  the  three-backed  triple- 

seated  car 
By  the  Seven  Rishis'  holy  songs. 

18  Drive  ye  that  Tawny  Courser,  0  ye  pressers,  on  his  way  to  war, 
Swift  Steed  who  carries  off  the  spoil. 

19  Pouring  all  glories  hither,  he,  effused  and  entering  the  jar, 
Stands  like  a  hero  mid  the  kine. 

20  Indu,  the  living  men  milk  out  thy  juice  to  make  the  rapturous 

draught : 
Gods  for  the  Gods  milk  out  the  meath. 

21  Pour  for  the  Gods  into  the  sieve  our  Soma  very  rich  in  sweets. 
Him  whom  the  Gods  most  gladly  hear. 

22  Into  his  stream  who  gladdens  best  these  Soma  juices  have 

been  poured, 
Lauded  with  songs  for.  lofty  fame. 

23  Thou  flowest  to  enjoy  the  milk,  and  bringest  valour,   being 

cleansed  : 
Winning  the  spoil  flow  hitherward. 

24  And,  hymned  by  Jamadagnis,  let  all  nourishment  that  kine 

supply, 
And  general  praises,  flow  to  us. 

25  Soma,  as  leader  of  the  song  flow  onward  with  thy  wondrous 

aids, 
For  holy  lore  of  every  kind. 


1 4  The  measurer  of  the  region :  who  measured  out  and  made  the  firmament. 

15  Born  on  the  inountain  :  or,  perhaps,  as  S&yana  takes  it,  *  made  manifest 
by  song.' 

17  By  the  Seven  Rishia'  holy  songs:  or  *0f  Rishis,  with  seven  holy  songs'; 
the  car  being  the  sacrifice,  the  three  backs  or  ridges  being  the  three  daily 
libations,  the  three  seats  being  the  three  Vedas. 

19  Mid  the  kine :  among  the  enemy's  cattle,  for  whose  possession  he  ii 
fighting.     So,  says  S&yana,  Soma  stands  among  the  sacrifices. 

20  The  living  men  :  the  worshippers,  according  to  S4yana;  but  perhaps,  as 
Liidwig  sugge&tB,  hin  atotdrah  should  be  aotdvciK^  ^reatsers.     Gods :  devlfji :  th« 

pn'etits.  ^   •      t 


imfn.]  TBE  KiorsDA.  tii 

^  Do  thou  as  leader  of  the  song,  stirring  the  waters  of  the  sea, 
Flow  onward,  thou  who  mo  vest  all. 

27  0  Soma,  0  thou  Sage,  these  worlds  stand  ready  to  attest  thy 
might : 
For  thy  behoof  the  rivers  flow. 

25  Like  showers  of  rain  that  fall  from  heaven  thy  streams  per- 

petually flow 
To  the  bright  fleece  spread  under  them. 

^^  For  potent  Indra  purify  Indu  eflfeotual  and  strong, 
Eiijoymeiit-giver,  Mighty  Lord. 

*^  Soma,  true,  Pavamaaa,  Sage,  is  seated  in  the  cleansing  sieve, 
Giving  his  praiser  hero  strength. 

HYMN   LXIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Pour  hitherward,  0  Soma,   wealth  in  thousands  and  heroic 

strength. 
And  keep  renown  secure  for  us. 

^  Thou  makest  food  aud  vigjur   swell  for  Indra,  best  of  glad- 
deners ! 
Within  the  cups  thou  seatest  thee. 

3  For  Indra  and  for  Vishnu  poured.   Soma  hath  flowed  into 

the  jar : 
May  V&yu  find  it  rich  in  sweets. 

4  These  Somas  swift  and  brown  of  hue,  in  stream  of  solemn 

sacrifice 
Have  flowed  through  twisted  obstacles, 

5  Performing  every   noble   work,   active,    augmenting  Indra's 

strength, 
Driving  away  the  godless  ones. 

6  Brown  Soma-drops,  efl^used,  that  seek  Indra,  to  their  appro" 

priate  place 
Flow  through  the  region  hitherward. 

7  Flow  onward  with  that  stream  of  thine  wherewith  thou  gavest 

Sirya  light, 
Urging  on  waters  good  to  men. 

8  He,   Pavamana,  high  o'er  man  yoked  the  Sun's  courser  Etasa 
To  travel  through  the  realm  of  air. 

26  Waters  of  the  sea :  of  the  sea  of  air,  the  firmameDt. 

4  Twisted  obstacles  :  either  the  twigs  of  which  the  frame  of  the  filter  was 
ia«le.  or  the  rough  surface  of  the  wool  of  the  strainer.  'Are  let  looi©  upou 
be  Rikshasas.' — WilauU. 

8  Id  thi^  and  the  following  fitaiiKa  Soma  ia  idenU^ed  mOii  W^ft  ^mtu 


SM  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  /A 

9  And  those  ten  Coursers,  tawnj-hued,  he  harnessed  that  the 
Sun  might  come  : 
Indu,  he  said,  is  Indra's  self. 

iO  Hence,  singers,  pour  the  gladdening  juice  to  Viyu  and  to 
Indra,  pour 
The  drops  upon  the  fleecy  cloth. 

110  Soma  Pavamana,  find  wealth  for  us  not  to  be  assailed. 
Wealth  which  the  foeman  may  not  win. 

12  Send  ricbes  hither  with  thy  stream  in   thousanls,    both   of 

steeds  and  kine, 
Send  spoil  of  war  and  high  renown. 

13  Soma  the  God,  expressed  with  stones,  likeSurya,  floweth  on 

his  way, 
Pouring  the  juice  within  the  jar. 

14  These  brilliant  drops  have  poured  for  us,  in  stream  of  solemn 

sacrifice. 
Worshipful  laws  and  strength  in  kine. 

15  Over  the  cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the  Somas,   blent  with 

curdled  milk, 
Effused  for  Indra  Thunder-armed. 

16  Soma,  do  thou  most  rich  in  sweets,  a  gladdening  drink  most 

dear  to  Gods, 
Flow  to  the  sieve  to  bring  us  wealth. 

17  For  Indra,  living  men  adorn  the  Tawny  Courser  in  the  streams, 
Indu,  the  giver  of  delight. 

18  Pour  for  us,  Soma,  wealth  in  gold,  in  horses  and  heroic  sons, 
Bring  hither  strength  in  herds  of  kine. 

19  For  Indra  pour  ye  on  the  fleece  him  very  sweet  to  taste,  who 

longs 
For  battle  as  it  were  in  war. 

20  The  singers,  seeking  help,  adorn  the  Sage  who  must  be  decked 

with  songs : 
Loud  bellowing  the  Steer  comes  on. 

21  The  singers  with  their  thoughts  and  hymns  have,  in  the  stream 

of  sacrifice. 
Caused  Soma,  active  Steer,  to  roar. 

9  Coursers:  or  Harits.     Cf.  IV.  6.  9  and  13.  3. 

10  Hence:  from  this  vessel. 

24  Worshipful  laws  :  the  meaning  of  dMmdny^ryd  is  not  clear.    '  (Flowing) 
towards  the  dwellings  of   respectable  (^>Not«\i\^^«taV  — "^^wi.    *YeuerabIe 
might,*— Ludwig, 


STMlf  %L\  TffB  RIG  VEDA.  SIS 

32  Gody  working  with  mankind,  flow  on ;  to  Indra  go  thy  gladden- 
ing juice : 
To  V&yu  mount  as  Law  commands. 

23  O  Soma  Pavam&na,  thou  pourest  out  wealth  that  hrings  re- 

nown : 
Enter  the  lake,  as  one  we  love. 

24  Soma,  thou  flowest  chasing  foes  aud  bringing  wisdom  and  de- 

light : 
Drive  off  the  folk  who  love  not  Gods. 

25  The  Pavam&nas  have  been  poured,  the  brilliant  drops  of  Soma 

juice. 
For  holy  lore  of  every  kind. 

26  The  Pavam^nas  have  been  shed,   the  beautiful  swift  Soma- 

drops, 
Driving  all  enemies  afar. 

27  From  heaven,  from  out  the  firmament,  hath  PavamAna  been 

effused 
Upon  the  summit  of  the  earth. 

28  O  Soma,  Indii,  very  wise,  drive,  being  purified,  with  thy  stream 
All  foes,  all  EAkshasas  away. 

29  Driving  the  Rjlkshasas  afar,  0  Soma,  bellowing,  pour  for  us 
Most  excellent  and  splendid  strength. 

30  Soma,  do  thou  secure  for  us  the  treasures  of  the  earth  and 

heaven, 
Indu  !  all  boons  to  be  desired. 

HYMN  LXIV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Soma,  thou  art  a  splendid  Steer,  a  Steer,  0  God,  with  steerlike 

sway : 
Thou  as  a  Steer  ordainest  laws. 

2  Steer-strong  thy  might  is  as  a  steer's,    steer -strong  thy  wood, 

steer-like  thy  drink  : 
A  Steer  indeed,  0  Steer,  art  thou. 

3  Thou,  Indu,  as  a  vigorous  horse,  hast  neighed  together  steeds 

and  kine : 
Unbar  for  us  the  doors  to  wealth. 


23  The  lake :  the  dronakalatat  vat  or  reservoir. 
27  The  iummit  of  the  earth  :  the  raised  altar. 


1  Steer :  SAyapa,  as  usual,  explains  vrithA  by  var$haJcah  *  Sprinkler.*— -Wilson. 
8  Neighed  topether:   coiiected,  through  the  e&cacy   oi   ^i^[i&  «iQ\nA  V^^>x 
jnstkeat  in  dropping  through  the  filter,  and  enriched  >ia  ^\\\i,  %\a«^  ^VL^>KasA, 


314  THE  HTM^S  OP  [BOOK  IX, 

4  Out  of  desire  of  cows  and  steeds  and  heroes  potent  Soma-drops^ 
Brilliant  and  swift,  have  been  effused. 

5  They  purified  in  both  the  hands,  made  beautiful  by  holy  men, 
Flow  onward  to  the  fleecy  cloth. 

6  These  Soma  juices  shall  pour  forth  all    treasures  for  the  wor- 

shipper 
From  heaven  and  earth  and  firmament. 

7  The  streams  of  Pavamana,   thine.    Finder  of  all,  have  been 

effused, 
Even  as  Surya's  rays  of  light. 

8  Making  the  light    tliat  shines  from  heaven  thou  fioweston  to 

every  form  : 
Soma,  thou  swellest  like  a  sea. 

9  Urged  on  thou  sendeat  out  thy  voice,  O  Pavamana;  thou  hast 

moved, 
Like  the  Grod  Surya,  to  the  sieve. 

10  Indu,   Enlightener,  Friend,    hath  been  purified   by  the    sages* 

hymns  : 
So  starts  the  charioteer  his  steed — 

11  Thy  God-delighting  wave   which  hath   flowed  to  the  purifying 

sieve, 
Alighting  in  the  home  of  Law. 

12  Flow  to  our  sieve,  a  gladdening  draught  that  hath  most  inter- 

course with  Gods, 
Indu,  to  Indra  for  his  drink. 

13  Flow  onward  with  a  stream  for  food,  made  beautiful  by  sapient 

men : 
Indu  with  sheen  approach  the  milk. 

14  While    thou   art    cleansed,     Song-Lover,    bring   comfort  and 

vigour  to  the  folk. 
Poured,  Tuwnj'  One !  on  milk  and  curds. 

15  Purified  for  the  feast  of  GoJs,  go  thou  to  Indra*s  special  place. 
Resplendent,  guided  by  the  strong. 

16  Accelerated  by  the  hymn,  the  rapid  drops  of  Soma  juice 
Have  flowed,  urged  onward,  to  the  lake. 

17  Easily   have  the   living   drops,   made    beautiful,   approached 

the  lake. 
Yea,  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

8  To  every  form :  to  bring  us  blessings  in  every  shape. 

9  To  t?ie  sieve:  vidharmani :  '  in  observance  of  the  law,'  according  to  M. 
Bergaigne.     See  La  Religion  \idi\x^t^  111.  'il^,  xlo^^. 

itf  -^5^ /«>f^.' ^awttrfrrfw  ;  according  to ^^^«i.^«b,\\v^%%»ivA^\v,\3tw'i^x^^         | 
The  dron  akalasa,  vat  or  reservoir,  ia  probikVA^  \tv\.^Ti^ftdL. 


MTMjSf  ell  TffE  RIGVEDA.  315 

18  Compass  aboiity   our  faithful  Friend,   all  our  possess' ons   with 

thy  might : 
Guard,  hero  like,  our  sheltering  home. 

19  Loud   neighs  the  Courser  Etasa,   with  singers,   harnessed  for 

the  place. 
Guided  for  travel  to  the  lake. 

20-  What  time  the  Swift  One  resteth  in  the  golden  place  of  sacrifice, 
He  leaves  the  foolish  far  away. 

21  Tbe  friends  have  sung  in  unison,  the  prudent  wish  to  sacrifice  : 
Down  sink  the  unintelligent. 

22  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts,  flow,  thou  Indu,  very  rich  in  sweets. 
To  sit  in  place  of  sacriiice. 

23  Controlling  priests  and  sages  skilled  in  holy  song  adorn  thee 

well: 
The  living  make  thee  beautiful. 

24  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna  drink  Pavamana's  juice,  yea,  thine  : 
O  Sage,  the  Maruts  drink  thereof. 

25  O  Soma,  Indu,  thou  while  thou  art  purified  urgcst  onward 

speech 

Thousandfold,  with  the  lore  of  hymns. 

26  Yea,  Soma,  Indu,  while  thou  art  purified  do  thou  bring  to  us 
Speech  thousandfold  that  longs  for  war. 

27  0  Indu,  Much-invoked,  while  thou  art  purifying,  as  the  Friend 
Of  these  men  enter  thou  the  lake. 

28  Bright  are  these  Somas  blent  with  milk,  with  light  thnt  flashes 

brilliantly 
And  form  that  utters  loud  acclaim. 

29  Led  by  his  drivers,  and  sent  forth,  the  Strong  Steed  hath  come 

nigh  for  spoil, 
Like  warriors  when  they  stand  arrayed. 

30  Specially,  Soma,  coming  as  a  Sage  from  heaven  to  prosper  us, 
Flow  like  the  Sun  for  us  to  see. 


19  The  Courses*  Etasa :  here  meaning  Soma.     Vdhnth  (from  vak,  Lat.  veho) 
is  properly  a  horse  of  burden,  or  draught-horse. 

21  Tlieft-ienda  :  the  priests  ;  or  perhaps  the  Maruts.     Down  sink:  narake, 
into  hell,  says  S&yana. 

26  That  longs  for  war  :  mahhasyUkvam :    '  desiring  wealth.' — Wilson.     See 
IX.  61.  27,  note. 

28  Form :  krip^ :  stream,  acoording  to  S&yana. 

30  Specially :  fidhdk :  said  by  Y&ska  to  be  the  Vedic  form  of  prithaky  and 
to  be  used  in  tbe  eeaee  of  prospering.    See  WilKOQ*&*lCr«.u%\»iXi\uiX)^^v\^^^^'^'^^^« 
Orfi'dAdA  maf  mean,  lightly,  caeily,  without  efifort.' 


816  TBS  BYMNS  OF  {BOOK  it 

HYMN  LXV.  Soma  PMmiM^ 

Thb  glittering  maids  send  Sura  forth,  the  glorioas  sisters,  dose* 

allied, 
Send  Indu  foi*th,  their  mighty  Lord. 

2  Pervade,  0  Pavamana,  all  our  treasures  with  repeated  lights 
God,  coming  hither  from  the  Grods. 

3  Pour  on  us,  Pavamana,  rain,  as  service  and  fair  praise  for 

Gods : 
Pour  all  to  be  our  nourishment. 

4  Thou  art  a  Steer  by  lustre  :  we,  0  PavamsLna,  faithfully 
Call  upon  thee  the  Splendid  One. 

6  Do  thou,  rejoicing,  noblyarm6d  !  pour  upon  us  heroic  strength : 
O  Indu,  come  thou  hitherward. 

6  When  thou  art  cleansed  with  both  the  hands  and  dipped  in 

waters,  with  the  wood 
Thou  comest  to  the  gathering-place. 

7  Sing  forth  your  songs,  as  Vyasva  sang,  to  Somia  Pavamina,  to 
The  Mighty  One  with  thousand  eyes ; 

8  Whose  coloured  sap  they  drive  with  stones,  the  yellow  meath- 

distilling  juice, 
Indu  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

9  We  seek  to  guin  the  friendly  love   of  thee  that   Strong    and 

Mighty  One, 
Of  thee  the  winner  of  all  wealth, 

10  Flow  onward  with  thy  stream,  a  Steer,  inspiriting  theMaruts' 
Lord, 
Winning  all  riches  by  thy  might. 

Ill  send  thee  forth   to   battle   from    the   press,  0   PavamUna, 

Strong, 
Snstaiuer,  looker  on  the  light. 

12  Acknowledged  by  this  song   of  mine,    flow,    tawny-coloured, 

with  thy  stream  : 
Incite  to  battle  thine  ally. 

13  0  Indu,  visible  to  all  pour  out  for  us  abundant  food  : 
Soma,  be  thou  our  prosperer. 

1   The  glittering  maids:   the  fingers,  perhaps  with  reference  to  the  gold 
rings  worn  by  the  priests  when  they  press  the  Soma.     SHra :  here  said  to 
mean  Soma  ;  *  the  invigorating/ — Wilson.     The  glmHoua  iisteri :  the  fingers. 
Z  As  service :  as  the  cause  of  worship. 

6   With  the  wood :  *  (taken  up)  with  the  wooden  vessel.'— Wilson.    Ct  IX. 
1.  2. 
/  Pyffspa  :  a.  Risbi  frequently  mentioned  m  Book  VIIL 
J2  T/i'ine ally '.-  Jndra, 


MtMif  ^8.]  THE  RIOVSDA.  81f 

14  The  pitchers,  Indn,  with  thy   streams   have   sung   aloud   in 

vigorous  might  : 
Enter  them,  and  let  Indra  dtitik. 

15  O  thou  whose  potent  gladdening  juice  they  milk  out  with  the 

stones,  flow  on. 
Destroyer  of  our  enemies. 

\%  King  Pavam&na  is  implored  with  holy  songs,  on  man's  behalf, 
To  travel  through  the  firmameut. 

17  Bring   us,    0  ludu,   hundredfold  increase  of   kine,  and  noble 

steeds. 
The  gift  of  fortune  for  our  help. 

18  Pressed  for  the  banquet  of  the  Gods,  0  Soma,  bring  us  might, 

and  speed. 
Like  beauty  for  a  brilliant  show. 

19  Soma,  flow  on  exceeding  bright  with  loud  roar  to  the  wooden 

vats, 
Falcou-like  resting  in  thine  home. 

20  Soma  the  Water-winner  flows  to  Indra,  Vayu,  Varuna, 
To  Vishnu  and  the  Marut  host. 

21  Soma,  bestowing  food  upon  our  progeny,  from  every  side 
Pour  on  us  riches  thousandfold  ! 

32  The  Soma  juices  which  have  been  expressed   afar  or  near  at 
hand, 
Or  there  on  Saryanal van's  bauk, 

23  Those  pressed  among  Arjikas,  pressed  among   the  active,  in 

men's  homes. 
Or  pressed  among  the  Races  Five  — 

24  May  these  celestial  drops,  expressed,  pour  forth   upon   us,  as 

they  flow, 
Rain  from  the  heavens  and  hero  strength. 

25  Urged  forward   o'er  the   ox-hide   flows   the   Lovely   One   of 

tawny  hue. 
Lauded  by  Jamadagni's  song. 

26  Like  horses  urged  to  speed,  the  drops,    bright,    stirring    vital 

power,  when  blent 
With  milk,  are  beautified  in  streams. 


22  BaryandvdfCB  hank :  this  lake  is  said  to  be  on  the  borders  of  the  Kuru- 
kshetra  country. 

23  Arjthu :  apparently  a  non- Aryan  people  in  the  North- West,    See  VIII. 
58.  1 1. 

25  OV  i^  ox-hide  :  tjie  leather  sheet  that  receVv^  \^«  ^\qV^v&%i^  ^\  ^^ 
SomtL 


818  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  j£ 

27  So  they  who  toil  with  juices  send  thee  forward  for   the   Gk>d<' 

repast : 
So  with  this  splendour  flow  thou  on. 

28  We  choose  to-day  that  chariot-steed  of  thine,  the  Strong,  that 

brings  us  bliss, 
The  Guardian,  the  desire  of  all, 

29  The  Excelleut,  the  Gladdener,  the  Sage  with   heart   that   un- 

derstands, 
The  Guardian,  the  desire  of  all ; 

30  Who  for  ourselves,  0  thou    Most   Wise,    is   wealth   and  fair 

intelligence, 
The  Guardian,  the  desire  of  all. 

HYMN  LXVI.  Soma  ParamAnt. 

For  holy  lore  of  every  sort,  flow  onward  thou  whom  all  men  love, 
A  Friend  to  be  besought  by  friends. 

2  O'er  all  thou  rulest  with  these  Two  which,  Soma   Pavam^na, 

stand, 
Turned,  as  thy  stations,  hitherward. 

3  Wise  Soma  Pavamana,  thou  encompassest  on  every  side 
Thy  stations  as  the  seasons  come. 

4  Flow  onward,  generating  food,  for  precious  boons  of  every  kind, 
A  F«  iend  for  friends,  to  be  our  help. 

5  Upon  the  lofty  ridge  of  heaven   thy    bright    rays   with    their 

essences, 
Soma,  spread  purifying  power. 

6  0  Soma,  these   Seven    Rivers  flow,  as   being   thine,    to    give 

command  : 
The  streams  of  milk  run  forth  to  thee. 

7  Flow  onward.  Soma  in  a  stream,  efi'used  to  gladden  Tndra's  heart. 
Bringing  imperishable  fame. 

8  Drivinor  thee  in  Vivasvan's    course,   the   Seven    Sistera  with 

their  hvmns 

ft/ 

Made  melody  roimd  thee  the  Sage. 

2S  The  guardian ;  p^ntam :  according  to  Pischel,  '  den  schwellenden/ 
'  the  swelling  oue.'  See  his  exhaustive  excursus  on  the  word  in  Vedisehe 
Studien,  I.  pp.  191—194. 

The  Riahis  are  the  hundr'"^  Vaikhdnasaa,  said  to  have  been  a  race  of  sainUy 
hermits  sprung  from  tlie  naiid  of  Praj&pati. 

2   With  these  Tioo  :   probably  a  double  asterism.     See   Hillebrandt,    F.    M. 
p.  446  ;  and  Qaidicke,  Der  Accusativ  im  Veda,  p  199. 
S  The  stream  of  Soma  is  likened  to  the  couraQ  o{  Vlvasv&n  or  the  Sun. 
-^^^  Siftvn  Sislers  are  probibly   the    Seven  Rivers  ol  %Vi%v\T.<a^^.    k<»s»t^vck%io 
S4j'ana  '  the  aeveu  iiudred  (priestsy  are  luV^ended. 


AYMN  6«.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  81« 

9  The  virgins  deck  thee  o'er  fresh  streams  to  drive  thee  to   the 
sieve  when  thou, 
A  singer,  bathest  in  the  wood. 

10  The    streams   of   Pavamana,    thine,  Sage,  Mighty    One,  have 

poured  them  forth 
Like  coursers  eager  for  renown. 

1 1  They  have  been  poured  upon  the  fleece   towards   the   meath- 

distilling  vat : 
I'he  holy  songs  have  sounded  forth. 

12  Like  milch-kine  coming  home,  the  drops  of   Soma  juice  have 

reached  the  lake. 
Have  reached  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

13  0  Indu,  to  our  great  delight  the  running  waters  flow  to  us, 
When  thou  wilt  robe  thyself  in  milk. 

14  In  this  thy  friendship,  and   with    thee    to   help    us,  fain    tp 

sacrifice, 
Indu,  we  crave  thy  friendly  love. 

15  Flow  on,  0  Soma,  for  the  great  Viewer  of  men,  for  gain  of  kine 
Enter  thou  into  Indra's  throat. 

16  Best  ait  thou.  Soma,  of  the  great,  Strongest   of   strong  ones, 

Indu  :  thou 
As  Warrior  ever  hast  prevailed. 

17  Mightier  even  than  the  strong,  more    valiant   even    than   the 

brave, 
More  liberal  than  the  bountiful, 

18  Soma,  as  Sura,  bring  us  food,  win  offspring  of  our  bodies  :  we 
Ellect  thee  for  our  frieudship,  we  elect  thee  for  companionship. 

19  Agni,  thou  pourest  life;  send  down  upon  us  food  and  vigorous 

strength : 
Drive  thou  misfortune  far  away. 

20  Agni  is  Pavamana,  Sage,  Chief  Priest  of  all  the  Races  Five : 
To  hirn  whose  wealth  is  great  we  pray. 

21  Skilled  in  thy  task,  0  Agni,  pour  splendour  with  hero  strength 

on  ns, 
Granting  me  wealth  that  nourishes. 


9  The  virginn :  the  fingers. 
1^  The  lake :  the  dronakal/isd  or  reservoir. 

15  For  gain  of  kine  :  gdvishtaye:  according  to  SAyana,    'for   the  seeker  of 
the  kine  of  the  Angirases.' 

18  As  SHra :  see  IX.  65.  1.  *  Who  art  a  hero.'— Wilson.  '  Prom  the  Sun.'— 
Ludwig. 

19  Misfortune .- ducheAhAif dm :  frequently   ^^TBom^ed.  «a  vq^  ^'t\  '^^^x*^ 
'  the  JidJkthasas.  '—Wilsoa. 


«20  TSE  EYMN3  OP  [BOOK  /X 

22  Beyond  his  enemies  away  to  sweet  praise  PavamUna  flows, 
Like  Sdrya  visible  to  all. 

23  Adorned  by  living  men,  set  forth  for  entertainment,  rich  in 

food, 
Far-sighted  Indu  is  a  Steed. 

24  He,   Pavamana,  bath  produced  the  lofty  Law,  the  brilliant 

light, 
Destroying  darkness  black  of  hue. 

25  From  tawny  Pavamslna,  the  Destroyer,  radiant  streams  have 

sprung, 
Quick  streams  from  him  whose  gleams  are  swift. 

26  Best  rider  of    the  chariot,  praised  with  fairest  praise  mid 

beauteous  ones, 
Gold-gleaming  with  the  Marut  host, 

27  May  PavamAna,  best  to  win  the  booty,  penetrate  with  rays. 
Giving  the  singer  hero  strength. 

28  Over  the  fleecy  sieve  hath  flowed  the  drop  efl'used  :  to  Indra 

comes 
Indu  while  he  is  purified. 

29  This  Soma,  through  the  pressing-stones,  is  sporting  on  the  ot- 

hide,  and 
Summoning  Indra  to  the  draught. 

30  0  Pavamana,  bless  us,  so  that  we  may  live,  with  that  bright 

milk 
Of  thine  which  hath  been  brought  from  heaven. 

HYMN  LXVIL  Soma  and  Others 

Thou,  Soma,  hast  a  running  stream,  joyous,  most  strong  at 

sacrifice  : 
Flow  bounteously  bestowing  wealth. 

2  Effused  as  cheerer  of  the  men,  flowing  best  gladdener,  thou  art 
A  Prince  to  Indra  with  thy  juice. 

3  Poured  forth  by  pressing-stones,  do  thou  with  loud   roar  send 

us  in  a  stream 
Most  excellent  illustrious  might. 


23  It  a  Steed :  '  one  who  continually  goes  to  the  Gods/  ia  3Ayana*i  explana- 
tion of  dtyahf  horse  or  courser. 

26  TJie  JDestroyer  :  of  darkness.  Cf.  IX.  61.  30. 
i7  Penetrate :  the  whole  world. — SAyana. 
2P  On  the  ox-hide  •'  see  IX.  65.  25. 

S  A  Prince  :  Milfih  :  »  rich  and  liberal  v».tTOTk. 


BYMN  67.]  TffS  RIQ  VEDA .  821 

4  Inda,  urged  forward,  floweth  through  the  fleecy  cloth :  the 

Tawny  One 
With  his  loud  roar  hath  brought  us  strength. 

5  Indu,  thou  fiowest  through  the  fleece,  bringing  felicities  and 

fame, 
And,  Soma,  spoil  and  wealth  in  kine. 

6  Hither,  0  Indu,  bring  us  wealth  in  steeds  and  cattle  hundred- 

fold : 
Bring  wealth,  O  Soma,  thousandfold. 

7  In  purifying,  through  the  sieve  the  rapid  drops  of  Soma  juice 
Come  nigh  to  Indra  in  their  course. 

8  For  Indra  floweth   excellent  Indu,   the  noblest  Soma  juice. 
The  Living  for  the  Living  One. 

9  The  glittering  maids  send  Sdra  forth :  they  with  their  song 

have  sung  aloud 
To  Pavamina  dropping  meath. 

J  0  May  Piishan,  drawn  by  goats,  be  our  protector,  and  on  all  his 
paths 
Bestow  on  us  our  share  of  maids. 

1 1  This  Soma  flows  like  gladdening  oil  for  him  who  wears  the 

braided  locks : 
He  shall  give  us  our  share  of  maids. 

12  This  Soma  juice,  0  glowing  God,  flows  like  pure  oil,  efiused 

for  thee : 
He  shall  give  us  our  share  of  maids. 

13  Flow  onward.  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  begetter  of  the  sages' 

speech : 
Wealth-giver  among  Gods  art  thou. 

14  The  Falcon  dips  within  the  jars :  he  wraps  him  in  his  robe 

and  goes 
Loud  roaring  to  the  vats  of  wood. 

15  Soma,   thy  juice  hath  been   effused    and  poured   into   the 

pitcher :  like 
A  rapid  hawk  it  rushes  on. 

16  For  Indra  flow  most  rich  in   sweets,  O  Soma,   bringing  him 

delight. 

9  7*he  glittering  maids  send  SHra  forth :  repeated  from  IX.  65. 1. 

10  Our  share  cf  maids :  desirable  and  approved  wives. — SAyana. 

11  For  him  who  wears  the  braided  locks :  kapardlne  :  see  1. 11*4. 1,  and  VII. 
83.  8.    Here  Pilsbeai  is  intended. 

12  0  glovfing  Qod  :  PQshan. 

li  The  Fideim  :  the  ialcon-Uke  Soma. 


822  THE  EYMNS  OP  {BOOK  JZ 

17  They  were  sent  forth  to  feast  the  Gods,  like  chariots  that 

display  their  strength, 

18  Brilliant,  best  givers  of  delight,  these  juices  have  sent  Vayu 

forth. 

19  Bruised  by  the  press-stones  and  extolled,  Soma,  thou  goest 

to  the  sieve, 
Giving  the  worshipper  hero  strength. 

20  This  juice  bruised  by  the  pressing-stones  and  lauded  passes 

through  the  sieve, 
Slayer  of  demons,  through  the  fleece. 

210  Pavam^na,  drive  away  the  danger,  whether  near  at  hand 
Or  far  remote,  that  finds  me  here. 

22  This  day  may  Pavam^na  cleanse  us  with  his  purifying  power, 
Most  active  purifying  Priest. 

23  0  Agni,  with  the  cleansing  light  diffused  through  all  thy  fiery 

glow, 
Purify  thou  this  prayer  of  ours. 

24  Cleanse  us  with  thine  own  cleansing  power,  O  Agni,  that  is 

bright  with  flame, 
And  by  libations  poured  to  thee. 

25  Savitar,    God,   by  both  of  these,  libation,  purifying  power, 
Purify  me  on  every  side. 

26  Cleanse  us,  God  Savitar,  with  Three,  0  Soma,  with  sublimest 

forms, 

Agni,  with  forms  of  power  and  might. 

27  May  the  Gods'  company  make  me  clean,  and  Vasus  make  me 

pure  by  song. 

Purify  me,  ye  General  Gods ;  0  Jatavedas,  make  me  pure. 

28  Fill  thyself  full  of  juice,  flow  forth,  O  Soma,  thou  with  all  thy 

stalks. 
The  best  oblation  to  the  Gods. 

29  We  with  our  homage  have  approached  the  Friend  who  seeks 

our  wondering  praise, 

Young,  strengthener  of  the  solemn  rite. 

18  Have  sent  Vdyu  forth:  have  drawn  him  down  from  heayen.     'Are let 
forth  for  Vftyu.' — Wilson. 

26  The  Three  sublimest  forms  are  said  to  be  Agni,  Vftyu,  and  Sillrya,  or 
I'/re,  Wind,  and  Sun. 
2Z  TAe  Gods*  company  :  the  yajamdnas  ox  «a.cn$iR«»,  w  IVa  troop  of  Qada,   | 
ladra  and  othevB. — Sdyana.     6rcneral  God«:  m«^3ede'oA\v:  ot^^C^^^Qtaftsw         ' 


iJTiry  68.]  THE  mOVEDA.  828 

30  Lost  is  Al^yya's  axe,  0  Soma,  God :  do  thou  send  it  back  hither 

in  thy  flow 
Even,  Soma,  God,  if  'twere  a  mole. 

31  The  man  who  reads  the  essence  stored  by  saints,  the  P&vam&ni 

hymns, 
Tastes  food  completely  purified,  made  sweet  by  Matarisvan's 
touch. 

32  Whoever  reads   the  essence  stored  by  saints,   the  Pivamdnt 

hymns, 
Sarasvati  draws  forth  for  him  water  and  butter,  milk  and 
meath. 

HYMN  LXVIir.  Soma  PavamAna. 

The  drops  of  Soma  juice  like  cows  who  yield  their  milk  have 
flowed  forth,  rich  in  meath,  unto  the  Shining  One, 

And,  seated  on  the  grass,  raising  their  voice,  assimied  the  milk, 
the  covering  robe  wherewith  the  udders  stream. 

2  He  bellows  with  a  roar  around  the  highest  twigs  :  the  Tawny 

One  is  sweetened  as  he  breaks  them  up. 
Then,  passing  through  the  sieve  into  the  ample  room,  the  God 
throws  off  the  dregs  according  to  his  wish. 

3  The  gladdening  drink  that  measured  out  the  meeting  Twins 

fills  full  with  milk  the  Eternal  Ever-waxing  Pair. 
Bringing  to   light  the  Two   great  Eegions  limitless,  moving 
above  them  he  gained  sheen  that  never  fades. 

30  This  stanza  is  well-nigh  unintelligible.  Al&yya  may,  as  is  suggested 
in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  be  a  name  of  Indra,  and  the  lost  axe  may  be 
the  thunderbolt  which  the  poet  thinks  has  long  lain  idle,  and  which  Soma 
is  prayed  to  replace  in  the  hands  of  the  Thunderer,  even  though  it  were 
worthless  and  mischievous  like  a  mole.  SAyana's  interpretation  is  different : — 
'May  the  battle-axe  of  the  foe  destroy  the  foe  alone  :  flow  to  us,  bright  Soma  ; 
(slay)  the  villain  only,  bright  Soma.'— Wilson. 

Z\  By  saints :  by  the  Ilishis  to  whom  they  were  revealed.  Pdvamdnt 
hymn* :  the  hymns  in  this  Book  dedicated  to  the  purification  of  the  Soma 
juice.  By  Mdtarifvan'a  touch :  '  SAyana  says  MatanSvan  means  Vdyu  because 
It  breathes  in  the  atmosphere  antarikihe  swasiti :  the  food  is  sweetened  and 
purified  by  the  purifying  wind  and  the  man  eats  it.' — Wilson.  MAtarisvan 
probably  represents  Agni.  _ 

1  The  Shining  One :  devdm :  the  radiant  Indra.  The  second  line  is  obscure. 
According  to  S&yana,  usHyd^  here  means  *  cows'  and  not  milk  : — *  the  lowing 
kine  sitting  on  the  barhis  grass  hold  in  their  udders  the  pure  (juice)  welling 
up.* — Wilson. 

2  The  highest  twigs :  of  the  Soma-plant,  which  as  being  the  tenderest  and 
juiciest  are  crushed  first. — Ludwig.  '  He  with  a  noise  reechoes  the  principal 
(praises) :  separating  the  growing  herbs,  the  green-tinted  (Soma)  sweetens 
them. ' — Wilson. 

3  The  meeting  Twins/  Soma  ia  called  the  Creator  and  Pteaei^et  ^i  \v<e;v9«a 
j^nd  earth. 


324  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  iX. 

4  Wandering  through  the  Parents,  strengthening  the  floods, 

the  Sage  makes  his  place  swell  with  his  own  native  might. 
The   stalk  is  mixed   with  grain :  he  comes  led  by   the  men 
together  with  f  he  sisters,  and  preserves  the  Head. 

5  With  energetic  intellect  the  Sage  is  bom,  deposited  as  germ 

of  Law,  far  froin  the  Twins. 
They  being  young  at  first  showed  visibly  distinct  the  Creature 
that  is  hsJf-concealed  and  half-exposed. 

6  The  sages  knew  the  form  of  him  the  Gladdener,  what  time 

the  Falcon  brought  the  plant  from  far  away. 
Him  who  assures  success  they  beautified  in  streams,  the  stalk 
who  yearned  therefor,  mighty  and  meet  for  praise. 

7  Together  with  the  Kishis,  with  their  prayers  and  hymns  ten 

women  deck  thee.  Soma,  friendly  when  effused. 
Led  by  the  men,  with  invocations  of  the  Gods,  through  the 
fleece,  thou  hast  given  us  strength  to  win  the  spoil. 

8  Songs  resonant  with  praise  have  celebrated  him,  Soma,  Friend, 

springing  forth,  with  his  fair  company. 
Even   him   who,    rich   in   meath,   with   undulating    stream, 
Winnner  of  Wealth,  Immortal,  sends  his  voice  from  heaven. 

9  He  sends  it  into  all  the  region  forth  from  heaven.     Soma, 

while  he  is  filtered,  settles  in  the  jars. 
With  milk  and  waters  is  he  decked  when  pressed  with  stones: 
Indu,  when  purified,  shall  find  sweet  rest  and  room. 

10  Even  thus  poured  forth  flow  on  thy  way,  0  Soma,  vouchsafing 
us  most  manifold  lively  vigour. 
We  will  invoke  benevolent  Earth  and  Heaven.     Give  us,  ye 
Gods,  riches  with  noble  heroes, 

HYMN  LXIX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Laid  like  an  arrow  on  the  bow  the  hymn  hath  been   loosed 
like  a  young  calf  to  the  udder  of  its  dam. 

4  The  Parents:  heaven  and  earth.  Tkejloods  :  the  waters  of  the  firma- 
ment. Gram :  especially  barley.  Makes  his  place  swdl :  enriches  his  own 
station,  the  uttaravedi  or  northward  altar.  7%e  sisters :  the  fingers.  The 
Head :  apparently  St!trya.  '  Silyana*s  explanation  of  sirahf  viz.,  ^n$am 
hhtUajdtam  (the  withered  world  ?),  needs  explaining  more  than  the  origmal 
itself.  * — Wilson. 

5  The  Sage :  the  Sun.  Far  from  the  Twins :  rising  in  a  distant  r^jjpn 
beyond  heaven  and  earth.  The  Creature  that  is  haZf-conceaied  and  m^' 
exposed :  the  meaning  appears  to  be,  as  Ludwig  says,  that  heaven  and  ear&i 
while  they  were  yet  iinseparated,  produced  the  Moon  :  the  Sun  came  into 
being  only  when  tney  had  been  separated  through  Soma's  energetic  agency. 

7  Ten  women :  the  fingers. 

1  Math  been  loosed,  dke. :  '  is  let  \ooae  tx>  (.IndLt^b'^  ^«  iQe>\Ax«c  «a  a  calf  to  the 
udder  of  if  mother.'     *  S&yana  takea  HdKaui  \\iQ  \.\i^  \)AdLSt\Wtfi^  ^^^\ Vi 


BTMN  69.]  Tff£  niQVEDA.  325 

As  one  who  cometh  first  with  full  stream  she  is  milked  :  thus 
Soma  is  impelled  to  this  man's  holy  rites. 

S  The  thought  is  deeply  fixed ;  the  savoury  juioe  is  shed ;  the 
tongue  with  joyous  sound  is  stirring  in  the  mouth ; 
And  Pavam&na,  like  the  shout  of  combatants,  the  drop  rich 
in  sweet  juice,  is  flowing  through  the  fleeoe. 

3  He  flows  about  the  sheep-skin,  longing  for  a  bride  :  he  loosens 

Aditi's  Daughters  for  the  worshipper. 
The  sacred  drink  hath  come,  gold-tinted,  well-restrained  :  like 
a  strong  Bull  he  shines,  whetting  his  manly  might. 

4  The  Bull  is  bellowing ;  the  Cows  are  coming  nigh  :  the   Grod- 

desses  approach  the  God's  own  resting-place. 
Onward  hath  Soma  passed  through   the  sheep's  fair  bright 
fleece,  and  hath,  as  'twere,  endued  a  garment  newly  washed. 

5  The  golden«hued,  Immortal,  newly  bathed,  puts  on  a  brightly- 

shining  vesture  that  is  never  harmed. 
He  made  the  ridge  of  heaven   to  be  his  radiant  robe,  the 
sprinkling  of  the  bowls  from  moisture  of  the  sky. 

6  Even  as  the  beams  of  Surya,  urging  men  to  speed,  that  cheer  and 

send  to  sleep,  together  rush  they  forth, 

These  swift  outpourings  in   long  course  of  holy  rites  :  no 
form  save  only  Indra  shows  itself  so  pure. 

7  As  down  the  steep  slope  of  a  river  to  the   vale,  drawn  from 

the  Steer  the  swift  strong  draughts  have  found  a  way. 


ttys  it  is  used  of  /ndt'a  because  he  is  the  nourisher  of  everything.' — Wilson. 
Ai  one  uko  cometh  jflrst :  according  to  Sftyana,  as  a  cow  coming  before  her 
calf  yields  her  milk,  (so  Indra,  coming  before  hia  worshippers  pours  various 
blessings  upon  them).  First :  dgre :  at  the  head  ;  at  the  beginning  of  the 
religious  ceremony. 

2  The  tongue  wUh  joyout  sound  is  stirring  in  the  mouth :  probably  the 
priest's  tongue  influenced  by  the  exhilarating  Soma  juice.  *  The  Soma  stream, 
•mittdng  pleasant  juice  is  driven  into  (Indra's)  mouth.' — Wilson. 

8  Longing  for  a  bride :  seeking  the  waters  with  which  he  is  to  be  united. 
Aditi^s  Daughters :  probably,  the  plants,  whose  buds  Soma  as  the  Moon  opens 
and  fertilizes  with  his  nectareous  beams.  '  The  daughters  of  Infinity  [Aditi] 
•re  probably  the  quarters  of  the  sky.' — Ludwig. 

4  The  Bull :  Soma.  According  to  Sftyana,  the  Cows  are  the  propitiatory 
hymns  of  praise,  which  are  called  also  Goddesses  or  divine. 

B  Brightly -shining  vesture :  the  milk  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed. 
SAyana  explains  the  second  half  of  the  stanza  differently,  taking  charnvbh^t 
bowls  or  beakers  into  which  the  Soma  juice  is  poured,  as  meaning  metaphori- 
cally the  two  great  receptacles  of  all  living  beings,  or  heaven  and  eartb,  and 
introducing  Aditya  who  is  not  mentioned  in  the  text : — '  he  has  created  ( Aditya) 
who  stands  on  the  back  of  the  sky  for  the  destruotioii  (ot  Bvn^  ociidL  ^>]LT\&&«.\KKr(i^ 
{vid  hae  created)  Aditya'a  brUU&ace,  the  cover  o£  the  tvio  YioiVdA.'— ^'"^^"Qk. 


829  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  m 

Well  be  it  with  the  men  and  cattle  in  our  home.  May  powers, 
O  Soma,  may  the  people  stay  with  us. 

8  Pour  out  upon  us  wealth  in  goods,  in  gold,  in  steeds,  in  cattle 

and  in  com,  and  great  heroic  strength. 
Ye,  Soma,  are  my  Fathers,    lifted   up   on   high   as   heads  of 
heaven  and  makers  of  the  strength  of  life. 

9  These  Pavamslnas  here,  these  drops   of   Soma,  to   Indra    have 

sped  forth  like  cars  to  booty. 
Effused,  they  pass  the  cleansing  fleece,  while,  gold-hued,  they 
cast  their  covering  off  to  pour  the  rain  down. 

10  0  Indu,  flow  thou  on   for  lofty   Indra,  flow   blameless,    very 
gracious,  foe-destroyer. 
Bring   splendid  treasures   to  the   man  who  lauds    thee.  0 
Heaven  and  Earth,  with  all  the  Grods  protect  us. 

HYMN  LXX.  SomaPavamAM. 

The  three  times  seven  Milch-kine  in  the  eastern  heaven  have 
for  this  Soma  poured  the  genuine  milky  draught. 

Four  other  beauteous  Creatures  hath  he  made  for  his  adorn- 
ment, when  he  waxed  in  strength  through  holy  rites. 

2  Longing   for  lovely  Amrit,    by  his  wisdom  he  divided,  each 

apart  from  other,  earth  and  heaven. 
He   gladly   wrapped   himself  in  the  most  lucid   floods,  when 
through  their  glory  they  found  the  God's  resting-place. 

3  May  those  his  brilliant  rays  be  ever  free  from  death,  inviolate^ 

for  both  classes  of  created  things, — 
Rays  wherewith  powers  of  men  and  Grods  are  purified.     Yea, 
even  for  this  have  sages  welcomed  him  as  King. 

4  He,  while  he  is  adorned  by  the  ten  skilful  ones,  that  he  too  in 

the  Midmost  Mothers  may  create. 


7  Vdjdh  and  krishtdyah,  powers  and  people,  are  explained  hy  S&yana  as 
*  food  •  and  *  offspring.* 

8  Ye,  Soma  :  *  Soma  is  treated  as  plural  hy  attraction  ;  or,  as  S&yana  pute 
it,  the  plurality  of  the  pitris  is  applied  to  Soma.' —  Wilson.  Probably*  Moon 
and  Stars  are  intended.     See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  p.  398. 

10  With  all  the  Oods:  devaih:  *  $ubhagairdhanaih  with  auspicious  riches.*— 
SAyana.  

1  The  three  timet  seven  Milch -kine  are,  according  to  S&yana,  the  twelve 
months,  the  five  seasons,  the  three  worlds,  and  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  Probably, 
as  Ludwig  says,  the  seven  celestial  rivers,  multiplied  by  three  to  correspoiKl 
with  the  threefold  division  of  the  heavens,  are  intended.  These  supply  the 
genuine  draught,  in  contrast  to  the  four  other  beauteous  creatures,  the  Yasatt- 
vart  and  the  three  Ekadhanft  waters,  which  are  terrestrial  and  factitious,  made 
to  adorn  or  purify  Soma. 
S  Moth  classes  :  animate  and  inanimate.    Or  Oodi^  ^tA  mocL. 

4  TAe  ten  skilful  ones  :    the  fingers.    TKe  M.\dmw)sl  MotVw*  i  VJoa  ^tsragsa 


BTMSi  70.1  THE  RIOVSDA.  327 

While  he  is  watching  o'er  the  lovely  Amrit's  ways,   looks  on 
both  races  as  Beholder  of  mankiud. 

5  He,  while  he  is  adorned   to   stream   forth   mighty   strength, 

rejoices  in  his  place  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 

The  Steer  dispels  the   evil-hearted  with  his  might,  aiming  at 
offerings  as  an  archer  at  the  game. 

6  Beholding,  as  it  were,  Two  Mother  Cows,  the  Steer  goes  roar- 

ing on  his  way  even  as  the  Maruts  roar. 

Knowing  Eternal  Law,  the  earliest  light  of  heaven,  he,  pas- 
sing wise,  was  chosen  out  to  tell  it  forth. 

7  The  fearful   Bull  is  bellowing  with  violent  might,  far-sighted, 

sharpening  his  yellow-coloured  horns. 

Soma  assumes  his  seat  in  the  well-fashioned  place :  the  cowhide 
and  the  sheepskin  are  his  ornament. 

8  Bright,    making  pure  his  body  free  from   spot  and  stain,  on 

the  sheep's  bjick  the  Golden-coloured  hath  flowed  down. 

Acceptable  to  Mitra,  VA,yu,  Varuna,  he  is  prepared  as   three- 
fold meath  by  skilful  nien. 

9  Flow   on  for  the  Gods'  banquet,  Soma,  as  a  Steer,  and  enter 

Indra's  heart,  the  Soma's  reservoir. 

Bear  us  beyond  misfortune  ere  we  be  oppressed :  the  man  who 
knows  the  land  directs  the  man  who  asks. 

16  Urged  like  a  car-steed,  flow  to  strength,  0  Soma :  Indu,  flow 
onward  to  the  throat  of  Indra. 

Skilled,   bear  us  past,  as   in  a  boat  o'er   water :  as  battling 
Hero  save  us  from  the  foeman. 

that  hang  between  heaven  and  earth,  in  which,  perhaps,  Soma  aids  in  produc- 
ing the  rain.  But  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  S^yana  explains  prami  by 
lt£dn pranUttum,  'to  measure  out,  or  create,  the  worlds.'  Both  races  :  Qods 
and  men. 

6  Am  it  «wr«,  Two  Mother  Cows :  Heaven  and  Earth.  S4yana  explains  the 
second  P&da  of  the  second  line  differently  :—*  the  intelligent  (Pavamlna) 
chose  man  to  be  the  offerer  of  his  praise.' — Wilson. 

8  Threefold :  according  to  Sftyana,  mixed  with  the  Vasatlvarl  water,  curds, 
and  milk.  Probably,  poured  into  three  separate  vessels,  one  for  each  of  the 
three  deities  mentioned. 

9  The  man  who  knows  the  land  :  who  is  acquainted  with  the  roads  or  ways. 
'  Sftyana  completes  the  simile  :  ^'  as  by  telling  him  he  protects  (helps)  him,  so 
d<>  thou  who  knowest  the  roads  of  the  sacrifice  protect  ua  by  telling  us  the 
Baciificial  paths."  * — Wilson.  But,  of  course,  the  application  is  intr"-*-^  *- 
be  general. 

10  Bear  ti$  past :  carry  us  over  all  difficulties  and  dangers. 
fsa»/  nidah/  'from  the  reviling  {of  the  foe).* — ^WUaoUt 


328  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VL 

HYMN  LXXI.  Soma  Pavamtoa. 

The  guerdon  is  bestowed :  the  Mighty  takes  his  seat,  and,  ever- 
watchful,  guards  from  fiend  and  evil  sprite. 

Gold-hued,  he  makes  the  cloud  his  diadem,  the  milk  his  carpet 
iu  both  worlds,  and  prayer  his  robe  of  state. 

2  Strong,  bellowing,  he  goes,  like  one  who  slays  the  folk ;  he  lets 

this  hue  of  Asuras  flow  off  from  him, 
Throws  off  his  covering,  seeks  his  father's  meeting-place,   and 
thus  makes  for  himself  the  bright  robe  he  assumes. 

3  Onward   he  flows,  from   both  the   hands,  piessed   out  with 

stones ;   excited   by   the  prayer,  the  water  makes  him  wild. 
He  frolics  and  draws  near,  completes  his  work  with  song,  and 
bathes  in  streams  to  satisfy  the  worshipper. 

4  They  pour  out  meath  around  the  Master  of  the  house.  Celestial 

Strengthener  of  the  mountain  that  gives  might ; 
In  whom,  through  his  great  powers,  oblation-eating  cows  in 
their  uplifted  udder  mix  their  choicest  milk. 

5  They,  the  ten  sisters,  on  the  lap  of  Aditi,  have  sent  him  for- 

ward like  a  car  from  both  the  arms. 
He  wanders  and  comes  near  the  Cow's  mysterious  place,  even 
the  place  which  his  inventions  have  produced. 

6  Like   as  a  falcon  to  his   home,  so   speeds  the   God  to   his  own 

golden  wisely-fashioned  place  to  rest. 


1  The  guerdon :  the  honorarium  given  to  the  priests,  consisting  originally 
of  a  cow.  The  Mighty  :  Soma.  His  carpet :  upastire :  that  which  is  spread, 
scattered,  or  sprinkied.     Cp.  IX.  69.  5,  where  upattdranam  is  translated  hy 

*  sprinkling.' 

2  Hue  of  Asuras:  or,  celestial  brightness;    '  Himmelsglanz.* — Grassmann. 

*  He  puts  forth  that   ^«ira-slaying  tint  of  his'. — Wilson.     SeeJcs  his  father" » 
meeting  place  :  goes  to  meet  the  yajamdna  or  sacrificer.     According  to  S^yana  : 

*  the  food  (pitahj,  that  is,   the  Soma,  goes  to  the  prepared  reservoir.* 

3  2^e  water  makes  him  wild :  vrishdydte  ndbhasd :  ndbha^  in  the  Soma^ 
hymns  is  used  to  signify  either  the  rain-water  in  which,  or  the  cloud  from 
which,  the  Soma  flows  to  the  earth.  Here  it  means  the  water  with  which 
the  Soma-plant  is  sprinkled.  See  Vedische  Studierij  I.  p  135.  According  to 
Ludwig  :  'he  acts  like  a  bull  in  the  sea  of  cloud.'  To  satisfy  the  vforshipper  : 
I  adopt  Ludwig's  suggestion  and  take  ydjate  as  a  dative  of  the  participle. 
Wilson  translates,  after  S^yana  :— *  he  is  honoured  at  the  (god) — protected 
(sacrifice).* 

4  The  Master  of  the  house :  according  to  Sdyana,  the  conqueror  of  the  fort 
of  the  enemy.  See  IX.  78.  3.  The  mountain  that  gives  might :  the  cloud. 
In  the  second  half  of  this  stanza  I  adopt  S&yana's  interpretation  as  a  make- 
shift, although  it  seems  impossible  that  m'^rdhdrtf  *  head,'  should  here  mean 

*  uplifted.'    Ludwig  takes  itdhani,  *  udder,'  in  the  sense  of  *  behalter/   or  re- 
ceptacle into  which  the  Soma  flows. 

3  On  the  lap  of  Aditi:    on  the  earth,     'near  to  the  ground.* — Wilson 

-f%^  Crow's  mysiericus  plaoe :  or,  distant  ig»V«kW^  \^  XXx^  vadd^i;  of  heftvep,  the 
cloud. 


HYUJ^  71]  THB  RIQVEDA.  82» 

With   Bong  they  urge  the  darling  to  the  sacred  grass :  the 
Holy  One  goes  like  a  courser  to  the  Gods. 

7  From  far  away,  from  heaven,  the  red-hued  noted  Sage,  Steer 

of  the  triple  height,  hath  sung  unto  the  kine. 
With  thousand  guidings  he,  leading  this  way  and  that,  shines, 
as  a  siuger,  splendidly  through  many  a  mom. 

8  His  covering   assumes  a  radiant  hue ;   where'er  he  comes  into 

the  fight  he  drives  the  foe  afar. 
The  Winner   of  the   Floods,  with  food   he  seeks  the  host  of 
heaven,  he  comes  to  praises  glorified  with  milk. 

9  Like  a  bull  roaming  round   the  herds   he  bellows :   he  hath 

assumed  the  brilliancy  of  Siirya. 
Down  to  the   earth  hath   looked  the  heavenly  Falcon  :  Soma 
with  wisdom  views  all  living  creatures. 

HYMN  LXXII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

They  cleanse  the  Gold-hued :  like  a  red  Steed  is  he  yoked,  and 

Soma  in  the  jar  is  mingled  with  the  milk. 
He  sendeth  out  his  voice,  and  many  loving  friends  of  him  the 

highly-lauded  hasten  with  their  songs. 

2  The  many  sages  utter  words  in  unison,   while  into   Indra's 

throat  they  pour  the  Soma  juice. 
When,  with  the  ten  that  dwell  together  closely  joined,  the 
men  whose  hands  are  skilful  cleanse  the  lovely  meath. 

3  He  goes  upon  his  way,  unresting,  to  the  cows,  over  the  roaring 

sound  which  SArya's  Daughter  loves. 
The  Falcon  brought  it  to  him  for  his  own  delight :  now  with 
the  twofold  kindred  sisters  is  his  home. 

4  Washed  by  the  men,  stone-pressed,  dear  on  the  holy  grass, 

faithful  to  seasons.  Lord  of  cattle  from  of  old. 
Most  liberal,  completing  sacrifice  for  men,  0  Indraj  pure  bright 
Soma,  Indu,  flows  for  thee. 


7  Of  the  triple  height :  workiug  in  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth. — Ludwig. 
See  IX.  75.  8. 

9  The  heavenly  Falcon :  divydh  suparndh:  'celestial,  flying  gracefully.' — 
Wilson.  Soma,  says  S&yapa,  is  said  to  go  gracef uUy,  *  because  it  is  carried 
ofif  by  OAyatri  in  the  shape  of  a  hawk.' 

2  Indra*8 :    throat :    literally,  belly  ;  the  drondkalasa  or  reservoir.    The 

ten:  the  fingers. 

8  The  cows :  the  milk  and  curds.  The  roaring  sound  of  the  effused  Soma 
is  said  to  be  dear  to  Siirya's  Daughter,  Ushas  or  Dawn,  because  it  is  chiefly 
beard  in  the  early  morning.  The  Falcon :  I  adopt  Lud wig's  interpretation  of 
the  strange  word  vinamgrisdh^  as  no  other  meaning  seems  suitable  here. 
According  to  S&yana»  the  word  means  praiser,  or  wor«\i\^^x.  Th.e  l^nojoX^ 
Jfindred  sifters;  the  &n^era  of  both  hau(^. 


380  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

5  O  Indra,  urged  by  arms  of  men  and  poured  in  streams,  Soma 

flows  on  for  tliee  after  his  Godlike  kind. 
Plans  thou  fulfillest,  gatherest  thoughts  for  sacrifice :  in  the 
bowls  sits  the  Gold-bued  like  a  roosting  bird. 

6  Sages  well-skilled  in  work,  intelligent,  drain  out  the  stalk  that 

roars,  the  Sage,  the  Everlasting  One. 
The  milk,  the  hymns  unite  them  with  him  in  the  place  of 
sacrifice,  his  seat  who  is  produced  anew. 

7  Earth's  central  point,  sustainer  of  the  mighty  heavens,  distil- 

led into  the  streams,  into  the  waters'  wave, 
As  Indra's  thunderbolt.  Steer  with  far-spreading  wealth.  Soma 
is  flowing  on  to  make  the  heart  rejoice. 

8  Over  the  earthly  region  flow  thou  on  thy  way,  helping  the 

praiser  and  the  pourer,  thou  Most  Wise. 
Let  us  not  lack  rich  treasure  reaching  to  our  home,  and  may 
we  clothe  ourselves  in  manifold  bright  wealth. 

9  Hither,  0  Indu,  unto  us  a  hundred  gifts  of  steeds,  a  thousand 

gifts  of  cattle  and  of  gold, 
Measure  thou  forth,  yea,  splendid  ample  strengthening  food; 
do  thon,  0  Pavamana,  heed  this  laud  of  ours. 

HYMN  LXXIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

They  from  the  spouting  drop  have  sounded  at  the  rim  :  naves 

speed  together  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 
That  Asura  hath  formed,  to  seize,  three  lofty  heights.     The 

ships  of  truth  have  borne  the  pious  man  across. 

2  The  strong  Steers,  gathering,  have  duly  stirred  themselves, 

and  over  the  stream's   wave  the  friends  sent  forth  the  song. 
Engendering  the  hymn,  with  flowing  streams  of  meath,  Indra's 
dear  body  have  they  caused  to  wax  in  strength. 

3  With  sanctifying  gear  they  sit  around  the  song  :  their  ancient 

Father  guards  their  holy  work  from  harm. 


7  ITie  heart :  of  Indra.    As  Indra*8  thunderbolt :  cp.  IX.  77.  1. 


1  They :  the  pressing- stones,  from  whose  rim  or  edge  the  Soma-drops  fall 
noisily.  Naves :  by  synecdoche  wheels,  again  by  the  same  figure,  chariots, 
and  then  by  metaphor  the  swiftly-running  Soraa-drops.  That  Asura  :  the 
divine  Soma.  To  seize :  to  be  hel<i  and  used.  Three  lofty  heights  :  the  three 
elevated  worlds.  The  ships  of  truth :  or,  of  the  truthful  (Soma).  According 
to  Sdyana,  the  four  vessels  which  hold  the  Aditya,  Agrayana,  Ukthya,  ana 
Dhruva  libations. 

2  The  strong  Steers :  the  priests. 

3  TAeir  ancient  Father :  Soma  ;  or,  perhaps,  Agni.  Varuna :  *  Soma  tiie 
M/I-envelopper/ — Wilaon.  ITiwi;  Soma,  In  «u%tamlug  Hood* ;  m  the  Vasatt- 
rarf  waterB.—  SA^antk, 


MtM^il^  THB  RIGVSDA.  831 

Yamna  hath  o'erspread  the  mighty  sea  of  air.     Sages  had 
power  to  hold  him  in  sustaining  floods. 

4  Sweet-tongued,  exhaustless,  they  have  sent  their  voices  down 

together,  in  heaven's  vault  that  pours  a  thousand  streams. 
His  wildly-restless  warders  never  close  an  eye :  in  every  place 
are  found  the  bonds  that  bind  man  fast. 

5  O'er  Sire  and  Mother  they  have  roared  in  unison,  bright  with 

the  verse  of  praise,  burning  up  riteless  men. 
Blowing  away  with  supernatural  might  from  earth  and  from 
the  heavens  the  swarthy  skin  which  Indra  hates. 

6  Those  which,  as  guides  of  song  and  counsellors  of  speed,  were 

manifested  from  their  ancient  dwelling  place, — 
From  these  the  eyeless  and  the  deaf  have  turned  aside :  the 
wicked  travel  not  the  pathway  of  the  Law. 

7  What  time  the  filter  with  a  thousand  streams  is  stretched, 

the  thoughtful  sages  purify  their  song  therein. 
Bright-coloured  are  their  spies,  vigorous,  void  of  guile,  excel- 
lent, fair  to  see,  beholders  of  mankind. 

8  Guardian  of  Law,  most  wise,  he  may  not  be  deceived :  three 

Purifiers  hath  he  set  within  his  heart. 
With  wisdom  he  beholds  all  creatures  that  exist :  he  drives  into 
the  pit  the  hated  riteless  ones. 

9  The  thread  of  sacrifice  spun  in  the  cleansing  sieve,  on  Yaruna's 

tongue-tip,  by  supernatural  might, — 
This,  by  their  striving,  have  the  prudent  ones  attained :  he 
who  hath  not  this  power  shall  sink  into  the  pit. 

HYMN  LXXIY.  Soma  PavamAna* 

Born  like  a  youngling  he  hath  clamoured  in  the  wood,  when 
he,  the  Red,  the  Strong,  would  win  the  light  of  heaven. 

4  They :  the  beams  that  radiate  from  Soma  ;  tomarcttmayah :  Soma-rays. — 
Sftyana. 

5  Sire  and  Mother :  the  general  parents,  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  swarthy 
ihin :  *  the  black-skinned  (Rakshaxas)* — Wilson. 

6  Those:  rays.  I  follow  S&yana's  interpretation.  The  first  line  is  very 
obscure. 

7  The  filter :  the  tip  of  their  tongue.  Cf.  stanza  9,  and  hymn  76. 2.  See  Ber- 
gaigne,  La  Religion  Vidiquet  I.  283.  Bright  coloured :  mdrdsah  :  sons  of 
Rudra,  according  to  Sftyana.     But  see  Vedische  Studien,  I.  pp.  55,  56. 

,.  8  Of  Law :  of  law-ordained  sacrifice.  The  three  PuHfiers  whom  Soma  seta 
within  his  heart  and  combines  in  his  own  being  are  Agni,  Yftvu,  Surya,  the 
purifying  powers  of  fire,  wind,  and  sun. 

9  On  Varuna*8  tongue-tip:  the  Vasatlvarl  waters  in  which  Soma  dwells 
(vasati)  stand  on  the  tip  of  Varuna's  tongue. — S&yana.  ffe  who  hath  not  this 
power  :  *  he  who  is  incompetent  for  the  rite.' — Wilson. 

2  IniAe  WHKf:  in  tb^  wooden  vat.    According  to  ^^yttui^,  ^'m  >j>aft  ^^^^* 


332  TBE  MTMNS  OF  [BOOS  IX. 

He  Gomes  with  heavenly  seed  that  makes  the  water  swell :  him 
for  wide-spreading  shelter  we  implore  with  prayer. 

2  A  far-extended  pillar  that  supports  the  sky,  the  Soma-stalk, 

filled  full,  moves  itself  every  way. 
He  shall  bring  both  these  great  worlds  while  the  rite  proceeds: 
the  Sage  holds  these  who  move  together  and  all  food. 

3  Wide  space  hath  he  who  follows  Aditi's  right  path,  and  mighty, 

well-made  food,  meath  blent  with  Soma  juice ; 
He  who  from  hence  commands  the  rain.  Steer  of  the  kine, 
Leader  of  floods,  who  helps  us  hence,  who  claims  our  laud. 

4  Butter  and  milk  are  drawn   from  animated   cloud ;  thence 

Amrit  is  produced,  centre  of  sacrifice. 
Him  the  Most  Bounteous  Ones,  ever-united,  love ;  him  as  our 
Friend  the  Men  who  make  all  swell  rain  down. 

5  The    Soma-stalk  hath  roared,   following  with  the  wave  :  he 

swells  with  sap  for  man  the  skin  which  Gods  enjoy. 
Upon  the  lap  of  Aditi  he  lays  the  germ,  by  means  wherof  we 
gain  children  and  progeny. 

6  In  the  third  region  which  distils  a  thousand  streams,  may  the 

Exhaustless  Ones  descend  with  procreant  power. 
The  kindred  Four  have  been  sent  downward  from  the  heav- 
ens :  dropping  with  oil  they  bring  Amrit  and  sacred  gifts. 

7  Soma   assumes   white   colour   when   he  strives   to   gain :  the 

bounteous  Asura  knows  full  many  a  precious  boon. 
Down   the  steep   slope,  through   song,  he  comes   to  sacrifice, 
and  he  will  burst  the  water-holding  cask  of  heaven, 

2  ffe  shall  bHng  both  these  great  worlds  :  shall  bring  Heaven  and  Earth  to 
the  sacrifice. 

3  He  who  follows  AdttVs  right  path :  the  regularly  moving  moon.  S&jana 
takes  dditih  with  gavyHtth  :  *  the  way  to  earth  is  broad.' — Wilson.  Somewhat 
ftimilarly  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  860. 

4  The  Most  Bounteous  OneSf  the  Men  who  make  all  swell,  are,  probably,  the 
Maruts  who  fertilize  the  earth,  and  send  Soma  down  in  the  rain.  S&yapa's 
explanation  is  different : — *  the  assembled  liberal  givers  [the  yajamdnai  or 
Bacrificers]  delight  him  :  (the  Soma  juices)  the  leaders,  the  protectors  shower 
down  the  accumulated  (water)  ' — Wilson.  For  the  meaning  oip^ravuh.  those 
who  swell,  or  cause  to  swell,  '  protectors'  according  to  S&yana,  see  VediscKe 
StudieUf  J.  p.  85. 

6  For  man :  for  the  sacrificer.  The  shin :  his  own  body. — Sftyana.  Upon 
the  lap  of  Aditi :  of  the  earth,  according  to  S&yana.  The  meaning  is  that 
Soma  is  the  source  of  all  Nature's  productive  power. 

6  In  the  thifd  region :  dwelling  in  heaven.     The  Exhaustless  Ones :  these 

are  the  Icindred  Four  of  the  following  line,  meaning,  according  to  Sftyaua,  four 

rays  or  digits  of  Soma.     It  is  most  probable  that  the  four  Goddesses  Siniv^, 

Kuhu  or  GuugCi,  B4kA,  and  Anumati  are  meant.     Cp.  II.  32.  6,  7.' — Ludwig. 

/  Strives  to  gain:  seeks  to  enjoy  heaven.— ^^^wi«*.  TKe  \Datcr-AoWm^  coeib ; 

the  water-ladeu  cloud. 


RYHN  7^]  THE  RIG  VEDA .  888 

8  Yea,  to  the  shining  milk-anointed  beaker,  as  to  his  goal,  hath 

stepped  the  conquering  Courser. 
PiousHsouled  men  have  sent  their  gifts  of  cattle  unto  Eak- 
shiv4n  of  the  hundred  winters. 

9  Soma,   thy  juice  when  thou  art  blended  with  the  streams, 

flows,  Pavam&na,  through  the  long  wool  of  the  sheepi 
So,  cleansed  by  sages,  O  best  giver  of  delight,  grow  sweet  for 
Indra,  Pavams^na !  for  his  drink. 

HYMN  LXXV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

GRACiousLY-MmDBD  he  is  flowing  on  his  way  to  win  dear 
names  o'er  which  the  Youthful  One  grows  great. 

The  Mighty  and  Far-seing  One  hath  mounted  now  the  mighty 
SArya's  car  which  moves  to  every  side. 

2  The  Speaker,  unassailable  Master  of  this  hymn,  the  Tongue  of 

sacrifice  pours  forth  the  pleasant  meath. 
Within  the  histrous  region  of  the  heavens  the  Son  makes  the 
third  secret  name  of  Mother  and  of  Sire. 

3  Sending  forth  flashes  he  hath  bellowed  to  the  jars,  led  by  the 

men  into  the  golden  reservoir. 
The  milky  streams  of  sacrifice  have  sung  to  him :  he  of  the 
triple  height  shines  brightly  through  the  moms. 

4  Pressed  by  the  stones,  with  hymns,  and  graciously  inclined, 

illuminating  both  the  Parents,  Heaven  and  Earth, 
He  flows  in  ordered  season  onward  through  the  fleece,  a  cur- 
rent of  sweet  juice  still  swelling  day  by  day. 

5  Flow  onward.  Soma,  flow  to  bring  prosperity :  cleansed  by  the 

men,  invest  thee  with  the  milky  draught. 
What  gladdening  drinks  thou  hast,  foaming,  exceeding  strong, 
even  with  these  incite  Indra  to  give  us  wealth. 

8  The  conquering  Courier:  the  swiftly-flowing  Soma.  KaJcikivdn:  the 
Bishi  of  the  hymn. 

1  O'er  which :  that  is  the  Youthful  One*  the  fresh  and  strong  Soma, 
exceeds  in  greatness  even  the  high  titles  which  he  wins  by  his  gracious  deeds. 

2  Speaker;  Master;  Tongue  of  sacrifice:  Soma,  the  giver  of  eloquence. 
The  Son  :  Soma.  Of  if  other  and  of  Sire :  of  his  parents,  Heaven  and  Earth. 
What  the  third  secret  name,  that  is,  probably,  a  name  in  addition  to  those  of 
Heaven  and  Earth,  and  comprising  both  deities,  may  be,  does  not  appear. 
Sdyana's  explanation  is  different : — *  the  son  (the  sacrificer)  assumes  a  third 
imme  unknown  to  his  parents  ; '  that  is,  Wilson  adds,  '  a  name  not  given  at 
birth... He  [S&yana]  cites  Baudh4yana,  who  gives  Somaydjin  [Somay&ga  sacri- 
ficerj  as  an  instance  of  a  third  name.* 

8  The  milky  streami :  cf.  I.  144.  2.    Of  the  triple  height:  dwelling  in.  thr«a 
high  places,  heaven,  the  jSrmament  or  the  mountam-top,  ^n^  >^<^  ^^V!.^  ^V  var>> 
riSee.     Cf.  IX.  71.  7. 


384  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /X 

HYMN  LXXVI.  Soma  PavamAoa. 

On  flows  the  potent  juice,  sustainer  of  the  heavens,  the  strength 
of  Gods,  whom  men  must  hail  with  shouts  of  joy. 

The  Gold-hued,  started  like  a  courser  by  brave  men,  impe- 
tuously winneth  splendour  in  the  streams. 

2  He  takes  his  weapons,  like  a  hero,  in  his  hands,  fain  to  win 

light,  car-borne,  in  forays  for  the  kine. 
Indu,  while  stimulating  Indra's  might,  is  urged  forward  and 
balmed  by  sages  skilful  in  their  task. 

3  Soma,  as  thou  art  purified  with  flowing  wave,  exhibiting  thy 

strength  enter  thou  Indra's  throat. 
Make  both  worlds  stream  for  us,  as  lightning  doth  the  clouds : 
mete  out  exhaustless  powers  for  us,  as  'twere  through  song. 

4  Onward  he  flows,  the  King  of  all  that  sees  the  light :  the 

Kishis'  Lord  hath  raised  the  song  of  sacrifice ; 
Even  he  who  is  adorned  with  SArya's  arrowy  beam,  Father  of 
hymns,  whose  wisdom  is  beyond  our  reach. 

5  Like  as  a  bull  to  herds,  thou  flowest  to  the  pail,  bellowing  as 

a  steer  upon  the  waters'  lap. 
So,  best  of  Cheerers,  thou  for  Indra  flowest  on  that  we,  with 
thy  protection,  may  o'ercome  in  fight. 

HYMN  LXXVIL  Soma  Pavamftna. 

More  beauteous  than  the  beautiful,  as  Indra's  bolt,  this  Soma, 

rich  iu  sweets,  hath  clamoured  in  the  vat. 
Dropping  with  oil,  abundant,  streams  of  sacrifice  flow  unto  him 

like  milch-kine,  lowing,  with  their  milk. 

2  On  flows   that  Ancient   One  whom,    hitherward,  from  heaven, 

sped  through  the  region  of  the  air,  the  Falcon  snatched. 
He,  quivering  with    alarm  and   terrified  in  heart  before  bow- 
armed  Krisauu,  holdeth  fast  the  sweet. 

3  May  those  first  freshest  drops  of  Soma  juice  eff'used  flow  on 

their  way  to  bring  us  mighty  strength  iu  kine. 
Beauteous  as  serpents,  worthy  to  be  looked  upon,  they  whom 
each  sacred  gift  and  all  our  prayers  have  pleased. 

Z  Ai  'twere  through  song :  *now  with  the  rite,  *.  c.  at  the  very  time  the 
rite  is  being  performed.'  —Wilson. 

2  The  Falcon :  see  I.  93.  6.  He :  Soma,  according  to  Sftyana,  but  more 
probably  the  falcon.  Krhdnu :  the  archer  who  guards  the  celestial  Soma. 
Seel.  112.21. 

S  S(g/pefUg.'  the  meaning  of  ahydk  is  uncertain  here.     S&yana  explains  it 
bjr  striyah,   women  : — *  pleasing  to  look  u^on  "VSka  \>fe«oX5lul  well-adorned 
(women). '—  Wilson. 


JBTMN  78.1  THE  RIO  VEDA.  %ZS 

4  May  that  much-landed  Indu,  with  a  heart  inclined  to  us,  well- 

knowing,  fight  against  our  enemies. 
He  who  hath  brought  the   germ  beside  the  Strong  One's  seat 
moves  onward  to  the  widely-opened  stall  of  kine. 

5  The  active  potent  juice  of  heaven  is  flowing  on,  great  Varuna 

whom  the  froward  man  can  ne*er  deceive. 
Mitra,  the  Holy,  hath  been  pressed  for  troubled  times,  neigh- 
ing like  an  impatient  horse  amid  the  herd. 

HYMN  LXXVIIL  Soma  Pavam&na, 

Kaising  his  voice  the  King  hath  flowed  upon  his  way  :  invest- 
ed with  the  waters  he  would  win  the  kine. 

The  fleece  retains  his  solid  parts  as  though  impure,  and  bright 
and  cleansed  he  seeks  the  special  place  of  Gods. 

2  Thou,  Soma,  art  effused  for  Indra  by  the  men,  balmed  in  the 

wood  as  wave,  Sage,  Viewer  of  mankind. 
Full  many  are  the  paths  whereon  thou  mayest  go  :  a  thousand 
bay  steeds  hast  thou  resting  in  the  bowls. 

3  Apsarases  who  dwell  in  waters  of  the  sea,  sitting  within,  have 

flowed  to  Soma  wise  of  heart. 
They  urge  the  Master  of  the  house  upon   his   way,  and  to  the 
Eternal  Pavam&na  pray  for  bliss. 

4  Soma  flows  on  for  us  as  winner  of  the  kine,  winner  of  thousands, 

cars,  water,  and  light,  and  gold ; 
He  whom  the  Gods  have  made  a  gladdening  draught  to  drink, 
the  drop  most  sweet  to  taste,  weal-bringing,  red  of  hue. 

4  He  who  hMh  brougJit  the  germ :  here  the  sacrificer  and  not  Soma  is 
meant. — Ludwig.     The  Strong  One  :  Agni. 

5  In  this  stanza  Soma  is  compared  to,  or  mystically  identified  with,  Varuna 
and  Mitra.  S&yana  leaves  VaT^na  unexplained,  but  interprets  Mitra  by 
garveshdm  mitrcAhiltah,  *  (Soma)  the  friend  of  all.' 

1  Thejleece:  literally,  the  sheep  ;  the  filter  made  of  wool.  Solid  parts: 
tStnvd :  tbe  fragments  of  stalk  which  will  not  pass  through  the  strainer. 
According  to  Sftyana,  *  with  its  own  covering,' — *  the  sheep  with  its  fleece.' — 
Wilson.  The  special  place  of  Gods :  the  vessels  which  hold  the  libations 
asiigned  to  various  Sods. 

2  Balmed  in  the  vjood :  according  to  S&yana,  '  art  driven  into  the  water.' 
Bay  steeds :  swiftly-running  tawny  drops. 

3  Apsarases  who  dwell  in  waters  of  the  sea :  *  nymphs  of  the  firmament.' — 
Wilson.  The  mymphs  are  identified  with  their  element,  and  represent  the 
water  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  mixed.  The  Master  of  the  house:  har- 
myasya  sakshdnim :  Soma.  In  IX.  71.4,  S&yana  explains  these  words  as 
'  overpowerer,  or  stormer  of  the  fort  of  the  enemy.'  and  in  this  place  as  *  the 
sprinkler  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice.'  Sdhshdni,  from  the  root  sah,  means  over- 
powerer, and  from  the  root  sach,  connected  with,  esj^daW-^  ^  xcc^^^x  vsA 
poMBSgor, 


836  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

5  Soma,  as  Pavamslna  thou,  our  faithful  Friend,  making  for  us 
these  real  treasures,  flowest  on. 
Slay  thou  the  enemy  both  near  and  far  away :  grant  us  secur- 
ity and  ample  pasturage. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Spontaneous  let  our  drops  of  Soma  juice  flow  on,  pressed,  gol- 

den-hued,  among  the  Gods  of  lofty  heaven. 
Perish  among  us  they  who  give  no  gifts  of  food !  perish  the 
godless !  May  our  prayers  obtain  success. 

2  Forward  to  us  the  drops,  distilling  meath,  shall  flow,  like  riches 

for  whose  sake  we  urge  the  horses  on. 
Beyond  the  crafty  hindering  of  all  mortal  men  may  we  conti- 
nually bear  precious  wealth  away. 

3  Yea,  verily,  foe  of  hate  shown  to  himself  is  he,  yea,  verily,  des- 

troyer too  of  other  hate. 
As  thirst  subdueth  in  the  desert,  conquer  thou,  0  Soma  Pava- 
mana,  men  of  evil  thoughts. 

4  Near  kin  to  thee  is  he,  raised  loftiest  in  the  heavens :  upon  the 

earth's  high  ridge  thy  scions  have  grown  forth. 
The  press-stones  chew  and  crunch  thee  on  the  ox's  hide :  sages 
have  milked  thee  with  their  hands  into  the  streams. 

5  So  do  they  hurry  on  thy  strong  and  beauteous  juice,  O  Indu, 

as  the  first  ingredient  of  the  draught. 
Bring  low,  thou  Pavamana,  every  single  foe,  and  be  thy  might 
shown  forth  as  sweet  and  gladdening  drink. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

On  flows  the  stream  of  Soma  who  beholds  mankind :  by  ever- 
lasting Law  he  calls  the  Gods  from  heaven. 

He  lightens  with  the  roaring  of  Brihaspati :  the  lakes  have  not 
contained  the  pourings  of  the  juice. 


1  They  who  give  no  gifts  of  food :  I  can  find  no  satisfactory  explanation  of 
iahah  drdtiyah,  so  I  give  S&ya^a's  interpretation  as  a  makeshift.  'May  they 
be  destroyed  who  are  the  withholders  of  food  from  us.' — Wilson. 

2  Urge  the  horses  on  :  Sftyana  explains  drvatah,  horses,  by  *  strong  enemy.' 

*  By  whose  aid  we  encounter  the  powerful  (enemy).' — Wilson. 

3  *  Soma  knows  how  to  defend  not  only  himself,  but  us  also.* — Ludwig. 
Destroyer :  literally,  the  wolf. 

4  He:  *  the  Moon.' — Ludwig.  'Thy  best  juice  dwells  in  the  navel  of 
heaven,  that  which  receives  (the  oblation).' — Wilson.     On  the  ox*s  hide: 

*  Although  men  of  the  present  time  pour  out  the  Soma  upon  the  skin  of  a 
black  antelope  and  not  on  a  cowhide  or  oxhide,  still  it  is  measured  out  for 
•Hie  on  an  oxhide.' — Sftyana.  

1  The  roaring  of  Brihaspati :  that  i«i,  says  S^yana,  the  voice  or  praise  of 

the  worshipper.    Agni  may  be  intended,  as  Ludwig  suggests.     The  lalcea :  or 

geas  fsamudrSlaah )f  probably  the  BoTaa-T«a«r?ov».    ^^^ana  takes  n^  as  a 

particle  of  comparison  : — *  the  Ubation^  co^ex  (^x^iq  ^x^JdlS^^^  xv^ws^:— ^'^aMa, 


MTMJ^nJl  THE  RIOVBDA.  887 

''2  Tbouy  powerfiil  Soma,  thou  to  whom  the  cows  have  lowed,  as- 
cendest,  bright  with  sheen,  thine  iron-fashioned  home. 
Thou,  leugtheniug  our  priuoes'  life  and  high  renown,  flowest  for 
India  as  his  mighty  gladdening  drink. 

B  Best  giver  of  delight,  be  flows  to  Indra's  throat,  robing  him- 
self in  might,  Auspicious  One,  for  fame. 
He  spreads  himself  abroad  to  meet  all  things  that  be :  the 
vigorous  Tawny  Steed  flows  sporting  on  his  way. 

4  The  men,  the  ten  swift  fingers,  milk  thee  out  for  Gods,  even 

thee  most  rich  in  meath,  with  thousHnd  flowing  streams. 
Soma  who  winnest  thousands,  driven  by  the  men,  expressed 
with  stones,  bring,  as  thou  flowest,  all  the  Gods. 

5  Deft-handed  men  with  stones,  the  ten  swift  fingers,  drain  thee 

into  waters,  thee,  the  Steer  enriched  with  sweets. 
Thou,  Soma,  gladdening  Indra  and  the  Heavenly  Host,  flowest 
as  Pavamana  like  a  river's  wave. 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Onward  to  Indra's   throat  move,   beauteously  adorned,    the 

waves  of  Soma  as  lie  purifies  himself. 
When  they,  brought  forward  with  the   lovely  curd   of   kine, 

eflfused,  have  cheered  the  Hero  to  bestow  his  gifts. 

2  Hither  hath  Soma  flowed  unto   the  beakers,   like  a  chariot- 

horse,  a  stallion  swift  upon  his  way. 
Thus,  knowing  both  the  generations,  he  obtains  the  rights  and 
dues  of  Gods  from  yonder  and  from  hence. 

3  While  thou  art  cleansed,    0  Soma,   scatter  wealth   on  us ; 

Indu,  bestow  great  bounty  as  a  liberal  Prince. 
Giver  of  life,  with  wisdom  help   to   opulence ;  strew  not   our 
home  possestiions  far  away  from  us. 

4  Hither  let  Pushan  Pavamana  come  to  us,    Varuna,   Mitra, 

bountiful,  of  one  accord, 
The  Maruts,  Asvins,  Vayu,  and  Brihaspati,  Savitar,  Tvashtar, 
tractable  Sarasvati. 


2  Iron-fcahioned  home  :  see  IX.  1.  2. 

2  Both  the  generations :  of  Gods  and  men.  S4yana  takea  uhhdyatya  jdn- 
manalh  yfiith  devSln/im : — *  and  knowing  both  races  of  gods — those  who  come 
to  (the  sacrifice)  from  the  other  world  and  those  who  (come)  from  thii  world.' 
— Wilson. 

3  Help  to  opulence :  according  to  Sftyana,  '  help  Yasu  (the  Rishi  of  the 
bymn)  to  prosperity.' 

4  Tractable:  suyamd:  easily  led  (by  prayer).     Accor6ia%\o^ViMiak~%Mwv 
prakd,  beautifalin  form, 

22 


338  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX 

5  Both  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  all-invigorating  Pair,   Yidh&tar, 
Aditi,  and  Aryaman  the  God, 
Bhaga  who  blesses  men,  the  spacious   Firmament, — let  all  the 
Gods  in  Pavamana  take  delight. 

HYMN  LXXXII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Even  as  a  King  hath  Soma,  red  and  tawny  Bull,  been  pressed : 

the  Wondrous  One  hath  bellowed  to  the  kine. 
While  purified  he  passes  through  the   filtering  fleece  to   seat 

him  hawk-like  on  the  place  that  drops  with  oil. 

2  To  glory  goest  thou.  Sage  with  disposing  skill,  like  a  groomed 

steed  thou  rushest  forward  to  the  prize. 
0  Soma,  be  thou  gracious,  driving   off  distress :  thou   goest, 
clothed  in  butter,  to  a  robe  of  state. 

3  Parjanya  is  the  Father  of  the   Mighty  Bird  :  on   mountains, 

in  earth's  centre  hath  he  made  his  home. 
The  waters  too  have  flowed,  the  Sisters,  to  the  kine :  he  meets 
the  pressing-stones  at  the  beloved  rite. 

4:  Thou  givest  pleasure  as  a  wife   delights  her  lord.     Listen,  0 
Child  of  Pajra,  for  to  thee  I  speak. 
Amid  the  holy  songs  go  on   that   we   may   live ;  in   time   of 
trouble.  Soma,  watch  thou  free  from  blame. 

5  As  to   the   men   of  old   thou   earnest,   Indu,    unharmed,    to 
strengthen,  winning  hundreds,  thousands, 
So  now  for  new  felicity  flow  onward  :  the  waters  follow  as  thy 
law  ordaineth. 

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Spread  is   thy   cleansing   filter,    Brahmanaspati :    as    Prince, 
thou  entere-st  its  limbs  from  every  side. 

5  All-invigorating :  visvaminve:  *  all -pervading.' — S&yana.  VidMtar :  tbe 
Disposer,  regarded  as  a  separate  deity,  as  Dh&tar  is  the  Maker,  Ordainer,  or 
Edtiiblisher.  

1  As  a  King:  *  magnificent  as  a  king.' — Wilson.  That  drops  with  oil: 
S&yana  here  explains  ghritdvautam  by  udakavantam,  wateiy. 

2  To  a  robe  of  state  :  nirnijam:  *to  tbe  cleansing  (vessel).' — Wilson. 

3  Parjanya :  the  God  of  the  rain-cloud  and  waters  of  the  air  in  which  the 
mighty  Bird,  the  Moon,  is  born.  Jn  earth's  centre :  at  the  altar,  in  the 
oblation. 

4  Pajrd :  according  to  Sdyana,  the  earth.  The  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon 
explains  the  word  as  meaning  the  moist  fresh  Soma-plant  of  which  Soma,  the 
juice,  is  the  child.  Perhaps,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  Pajr&  may  be  the  name  of 
the  sacrificer's  wife.  

•  1  Brahmanappati's  filter  appears  to  be  the  heavenly   filter  through   which 

the  rain  descends  to  earth.     See   Bergaigne,   La  Religion  V^dique,  I.  79,  201. 

J^4^  raw  :  uncooked,  oblation.     W^icft.  hear  :  '  bearing  (the  sacrifice).' — Wilson. 

\7%M.'  according  to  S&yana,  to  tVuB  filter.    li>idm^\i^i\\i)8& %}a»X.  Mswl^x  ^^r^a 

£9  uieant  bj  *  tat/ 


B7MH  S4.J  TBB  RIGVBDA.  83» 

The  raw,  whose  mass  hath  not  been   heated,  gains   not  this  : 
they  only  which  are  dressed,  which  bear,  attain  to  it. 

2  High  in  the  seat  of  heaven  is  spread  the   Scorcher's  sieve  :  its 

threads  are  standing  separate,  glittering  with  light. 
The  Swift  Ones  favour   him   who   purifieth  this :   with   cons- 
ciousness they  stand  upon  the  height  of  heaven. 

3  The  foremost  spotted  Steer  hath   made   the   Mornings   shine, 

and  yearning  after  strength  sustains  all  tilings  that  be. 
By  his  high  wisdom  have   the   Mighty   Sages    wrought :  the 
Fathers  who  behold  mankind  laid  down  the  germ. 

4  Gandharva  verily  protects   his   dwelling-place ;  Wondrous,  he 

guards  the  generations  of  the  Gods. 
Lord  of  the  snare,  he  takes  the  foeman  with  the  snare  :  those 
who  are  most  devout  have  gained  a  share  of  meath. 

5  Rich  in  oblations  !  robed  in  clond,  thou  compassest   oblation, 

sacrifice,  the  mighty  seat  of  Gods. 
King,  on  thy  chariot-sieve  thou  goest  up  to   war,  and   with  a 
thousand  weapons  winnest  lofty  fame. 

HYMN  LXXXIV.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Flow,  cheering  Gods,  most  active,    winner  of   the   flood,   for 

Indra,  and  for  Vayu,  and  for  Varuna. 
Bestow  on  us  to-day  wide  room  with  happiness,  and   in   thine 

ample  dwelling  laud  the  Host  of  Heaven. 

2  He  who  hath  come  anear  to  creatures  that  have  life,  Immortal 
■  Soma  flows  onward  to  all  of  them. 
Eflecting,  for  our   aid,  both   union   and   release,    Indu,   like 
Surya,  follows  closely  after  Dawn. 

2  The  Searcher* s  sieve :  '  The  filter  of  the  foe-scorching  (Soma).' — Wilson. 
The  Sw^t  Ones:  *  his  swift-flowing  (juices)  protect  the  purifier  (the  worship- 
per).'—Wilson. 

3  The  Mighty  Sages :  those  who  possess  supernatural  wisdom  ;  the  Gods. 
The  Fathers :  '  The  fruitf  ulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  give  birth  to  gods 
and  men,  is  described  as  produced  by  the  fathers.' — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the 
K,   r,  \\  72.     See  X.  64.  14. 

4  Qandharva :  here,  the  Sun.     His :  Soma's. 

5  Robed  in  cloud:  ndbhah:  meaning,  water  from  the  clouds.  With  a  thou- 
sand tveapons :  more  literally,  having  a  thousand,  that  is,  countless,  sharp 
points.     *  Thousand-rayed.* — Ludwig. 

1  In  thine  ample  dwelling :  *  on  the  spacious  sacrificial  ground.' — Sdyana. 

2  The  second  line  is  obscure.     Wilson  translates,  after  Sftyana  : — *  Indu, 
binding  and  loosing,  accompanies  the  sacrifice  (for  its  protection)  as  the  sun 
the  dawn  ;'  that  is,  binding  or  connecting  the  sacrifice  with  the  gods  and  loos- 
ing or  8e)>arating  it  from  the  Asuras  or  evil  spirits.     But  this  explanatvoxi  \& 
untfatisfactoiy.    Ludwig  suggeata  that  *  union'  reiera  to  ^oxii^'*\>\\i^\v\^  \ft- 
£^ether  heaven  and  earth,  Qods  and  men,  and  fof  tbe  meAXiVEi^  oi  ^  xc\«ida>^^  ^^ 

refers  to  IX.  68.  5, 


840  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX^ 

3  He  who  ia  poured  with  milk,  he  who  within  the  plants  hastes 

bringing  treasure  for  the  happiness  of  Gods, 
He,  poured  forth  in  a  stream  flows  with  the   lightning's  flash} 
Soma  who  gladdens  Indra  and  the  Host  of  Heaven. 

4  Winner  of  thousands,  he,  this   Soma,   flows   along,   raiaiiig  a 

vigorous  voice  that  wakens  with  the  dawn. 
Indu  with  winds  drives  on   the   ocean   of   the  air,   he   sinks 
within  the  jars,  he  rests  in  Indra's  heart. 

5  The  kine  with  milk  dress  him  who  makes  the  milk  increase. 

Soma,  amid  the  songs,  who  finds  the  light  of  heaven. 
Winner  of  wealth,  the  effectual  juice  is  flowing  on,   Siqger 
and  Sage  by  wisdom,  dear  as  heaven  itself. 

HYMN   LXXXV.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Flow  on  to  Indra,  Soma,  carefully  efl'used :  let  sickness  stay 

afar  together  with  the  fiends. 
Let  not  the  double-toi^gued  delight  them  with  thy  juice  ;  here 

be  thy  flowing  drops  laden  with  opuleuce. 

2  0  Pavamslna,  urge  us  forward  in  the  fight :  thou  art  the 

vigpur  of  the  Gods,  the  well-loved  drink. 
Smite  thou  our  enemies  who  raise  the  shout  of  joy :  Indra, 
drink  Soma  juice,  and  drive  away  our  foes. 

3  Unharmed,  best  Cheerer,   thou,  0  Indu,  flowest  on :  thou, 

even  thou  thyself,  art  Indra's  noblest  food. 
Full  many  a   wise  man  lifts  to  thee  the  sonof  of  praise,  and 
hails  thee  with  a  kiss  as  Sovran  of  this  world. 

4  Wondrous,  with  hundred  streams,  hymned  in  a  thousand  songs, 

Indu  pours  out  for  Indra  his  delightful  meath. 
Winning  us  land  and  waters,  flow  thou  hitherward :  Rainer 
of  bounties,  Soma,  make  broad  way  for  us. 

5  Roaring  within  the  beaker  thou  art  balmed  with  milk  :  thou 

passest  through  the  fleecy  filter  all  at  once. 

Carefully  cleansed  and  decked  like  a  prize-winning  steed,  0 
Soma,  thou  hast  flowed  down  within  Indra's  throat. 

6  Flow   onward  sweet  of  flavour  for  the  Heavenly  Race,   for 

Indra  sweet,  whose  name  is  easily  invoked  : 
Flow  sweet  for  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  V&yu,  rich  in  meath,  in- 
violable for  Brihaspati. 

7  Ten  rapid  fingers  deck  the  Courser  in  the  jar :  with  hymns 

the  holy  singers  send  their  voices  forth. 

The  Altering  juices  hasten  to  \.\\e\x  ^vAo^-^,  iVia  dro^s  that 
gJaddea  flad  their  way  to  ludta?*\ie^x\.. 


ffTMNBe.J  THB  RIGVEDA.  S41 

8  While  thou  art  purified  pour  on  as  hero  strength,  great,  fkr- 

extended  shelter,  spaoious  pasturage. 
Let  no  oppression  master  this  our  holy  work :  may  We,  O 
Indu,  gain  all  opulence  through  thee. 

9  The  Steer  who  sees  afar  hath  risen  ahove  the  sky:  the  Sage 

hath  caused  the  lights  of  heaven  to  give  their  shine. 
The  King  is  passing  through  the  filter  with  a  roar :  they  drain 
the  milk  of  heaven  from  him  who  looks  on  men. 

10  High  in  the  vault  of  heaven,  unceasing,  honey-tongued,  the 

Loving  Ones  drain  out  the  mountain-haunting  Steer, — 
The  drop  that  hath  grown  great  in  waters,  in  the  lake,  m^ath- 
rich,  in  the  stream's  wave  and  in  the  cleansing  sieve. 

11  The  Loviug  Ones  besought  with  many  voices  the  Eagle  who 

had  flown  away  to  heaven. 
Hymns  kiss  the  Youngling  worthy  of  laudation,  resting  on 
earth,  the  Bird  of  golden  colour. 

12  High  to  heaven's  vault  hath  the  Gandharva  risen,  beholding 

all  his  varied  forms  and  figures. 
His  ray  hath  shone  abroad  with  gleaming  splendour :  pure, 
he  hath  lighted  both  the  worlds,  the  Parents^ 

HYMN  LXXXVL  Soma  Pavamtoa. 

Tht  gladdening  draughts,  0  PavamSina,  urged  by  song  flow 
swiftly  of  tnemselves  like  sons  of  fleet-foot  mares. 

The  drops  of  Soma  juice,  those  eagles  of  the  heavens,  most 
cheering,  rich  in  meath,  rest  in  the  reservoir. 

3  As  rapid  chariot-steeds,  so  turned  in  several  ways  have  thine 
exhilarating  juices  darted  forth, 
Soma-drops  rich  in  meath,  waves,  to  the  Thunder-armed,  to 
Indra,  like  milch-kine  who  seek  their  calf  with  milk. 

3  Like  a  steed   urged  to  battle,  finder  of  the  light,  speed  on- 
ward to  the  cloud-born  reservoir  of  heaven, 
A  Steer  that  o'er  the  woolly  surface  seeks  the  sieve.  Soma 
while  purified  for  Indra's  nourishment. 

9  7*he  Steer  who  sees  afar :  wise  Soma,   the  Moon. 

10  The  Loving  Ones ;  venStf^ :  the  Gods  or,  specially,  the  Maruts.  Accord- 
ing to  S&yana,  great  Risbis,  caJled  Venas.  The  mountain-kaunting  Steer  :  Soma, 
first  seen  over  the  mountain  heights.    See  Hillebrandt,  F.  M,,  I.  389. 

11  Soma  in  this  stanza  is  the  Eagle,  the  Youngling  or  in&ut,  and  the  Bird 
of  golden  colour. 

12  The  Oandharva :  here  Soma,  the  Moon.    See  Hillebrandt^  7.  i!f  .^I«  iflA. 
S  ^)eed  onward:  hasten  to  pour  down  the  rwn  Irom  t\kft  <A.Q\xdu 


842  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  IHL 

4  Fleet  as  swift  steeds,  thy  drops,  diTine,  though t-ewift,  haTe 

been,  0  Pavam&ua,  poured  with  milk  into  the  vat. 
The  Kishis  have  poured  in  continuous  Soma-drops,  ordainen 
who  adorn  thee,  Friend  whom  Bishis  love. 

5  0  thou  who  seest  all  things,  Sovran  as  thou  art  and  passing 

strong,  thy  rays  enoompass  all  abodes. 
Pervading  with  thy  natural  powers  thou  flowest  on,  and  as 
the  whole  world's  Lord,  O  Soma,  thou  art  King. 

6  The  beams  of  Pavam^na,  sent  from  earth  and   heaven,  bis 

ensigns  who  is  ever  stedfast,  travel  round. 
When   on  the  sieve  the    Golden-hued  is   cleansed,  he  rests 
within  the  vats  as  one  who  seats  him  in  his  place. 

7  Served  with  fair  rites  he  flows,  ensign  of  sacrifice :  Soma 

advances  to  the  special  place  of  Gods. 
He  speeds  with  thousand  currents  to  the  reseryoir,  and  passes 
through  the  filter  bellowing  as  a  bull. 

8  The  Sovran  dips  him  in  the  sea  and  in  the  streams,  and  set 

in  rivers  with  the  waters'  wave  moves  on. 
High  heaven's  Sustainer  at  the  central  point  of  earth,  raised 
on  the  fleecy  surface  Pavaml^na  stands. 

9  He  on  whose  high  decree  the  heavens  and  earth  depend  hath 

roared  and  thundered  like  the  summit  of  the  sky. 
Soma  flows  on  obtaining  Indra's  friendly  Wve,  and,  as  they 
purify  him,  settles  in  the  jars. 

10  He,  light  of  sacrifice,  distils  delicious  meath,  most  wealthy, 

Father  and  begetter  of  the  Gods. 
He,  gladdening,  best  of  Cheerers,  juice  that  Indra  loves,  enrich- 
es with  mysterious  treasure  earth  and  heaven. 

11  The   vigorous  and  far-seeing  one,  the  Lord  of  heaven,  flows, 

shouting  to  the  beaker,  with  his  thousand  streams. 
Coloured  like  gold  he  rests  in  seats  where  Mitra  dwells,  the 
Steer  made  beautiful  by  rivers  and  by  sheep. 

1 2  In  forefront  of  the   rivers   Pavam&na   speeds,  in  forefront  of 

the  hymn,  foremost  among  the  kiue. 

4  Fi^nd  whom  RishU  love  :  rUhishdna  :  the  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere, 
and  its  precise  meaning  is  uncertain.  *'0  ris^t-enjoyed.' — Wilaou.  *  Thou  who 
piayest  the  part  of  a  Rishi.' — Ludwig. 

8  The  sea  and  the  itreanit  are  the  firmament  and  its  waters.    Soma,  who 

is  at  the  same  time  the  God  in  heaven  and  the  earthly  beverage,  is  said  to 

combine  with  the  solar  rays   in  the   clouds,   and  thus   to  cause   the  rain  to 

descend.     See  Hillebrandt,  V,  M.,  I.  215.     Central  poirU  of  earth :  the  place 

d/sAcridce, 

J  J  By  rivcTM  and  by  »http  :  b^  t\i«  ^uutYvaV^  -^^X.w^  «sA  'Cv^fc  '^^sf^&MOk 

''trainer. 


JSTMN  S$J\  THE  RIOVEDA.  343 

He  shares  the  raighty  booty  in  the  van  of  war :  the  well-armed 
Steer  is  purified  by  worsliippers. 

13  This  heedful  PavamsLua,  like  a  bird  sent  forth,  hath  with  his 

wave  flowed  onward  to  the  fleecy  sieve. 
O  Indra,  through  thy  wisdom,  by  thy  thought,  0  Sage,  Soma 
flows  bright  aud  pure  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 

14  He,  clad  in   mail  that  reaches   heaven,  the    Holy  One,  filling 

the  firmament,  stationed  amid  the  worlds. 
Knowing  the  realm  of  light,  hatli  come  to  us  in  rain :  he  sum- 
mons to  himself  his  own   primeval  Sire. 

15  He  who  was  first  of  all  to  penetrate  hisj  form  bestowed  upon 

his  race  wide  shelter  and  defence. 
From  that  high  station  which  he  hath  in   loftiest  heaven  he 
comes  victorious  to  all  encounters  here. 

16  Indu  hath    started  forth  for  Indra's  special  place,  and  slights 

not  as  a  Friend  the  promise  of  his  Friend. 
Soma  speeds  onward  like  a  youth  to  youthful  maids,  and  gains 
the  beaker  by  a  course  of  hundred  p;iths. 

17  Your  songs,  exhilarating,  tuneful,  uttering  praise,  are  come  into 

the  places  where  the  people  meet. 
Worshippers  have  exalted  Soma  with  their  hymns,  and  milcli- 
kine  have  come  near  to  meet  him  with  their  milk. 

18  O  Soma,  In(hi,  while  they   cleanse  thee,   pour  on    us  accumu- 

lated, plentiful,  nutritious  food, 
Which,  ceaseless,  thiice  a  day  shall   yield  us  hero    power  en- 
riched with  store  of  uouris$hment,  and  strength,  and  meath. 

19  Far-seeing   Soma  flows,    the  Steer,  the   Lord  of  hymns,  the 

Furtherer  of  day,  of  morning,  and  of  heaven. 
Mixt  with  the  streams  he  c  lused   the  beakers  to  resound,  and 
with  the  singers'  aid  they  entered  Indra's  heart. 

20  On,  with  the  prudent  singers,  flows  the  ancient  Sage  and  guided 

by  the  men  hath  roared  about  the  vats. 
Producing   Trita's  name,    may  he  pour  f.)rth   the  meath,  that 
V&yu  and  that  Indra  may  become  his  Friends. 

14  HU  own  primeval  Sire :  or,  the  ancient  Father  of  this  (All).  Indra  is 
meant. 

15  He:  Soma.     His  form :  Indra*B.     His  race  :  Indra  and  the  Gods. 

16  Slights  not  as  a  Friend  the  promise  of  his  Friend:  *the  friend  leavei 
not  the  stomach  of  his  friend.*— Wilson.  SAyana  derives  samylram  from 
samyri,  to  swallow,  instead  of  from  samjfi,  to  assent.  Hundred  paths  : 
through  the  interstices  of  the  wool. 

18  Thriee  a  day :  at  the  three  appointed  sacrifices. 

20  Producinjgr  Tt'iUi'8  name  :  literally,  begetting,  tJh8Lt\%,  xasJsMi^^ia'u^-^asv.'^ 
the  oMDeof  I'tita  ;  meaning  probably,  as  Proi.  iiudwV|^B>x^t«\A,xwcMx^\Ti% 


344  THE  ETMNS  OP  [BOOK  il.- 

21  He,  being  purified,  hath  made  the  Mornings  shiDe  :  this,  even 

this  is  he  who  gave  the  rivers  room. 
He  made  the  Three  Times   Seven  pour  out  the   milky  flow: 
Soma,  the  Cheerer,  yields  whatever  the  heart  finds  sweet. 

22  Flow  onward,  Soma,  in  thine  own  celestial  forms,  flow,  ItidOi 

poured  within  the  beaker  and  the  sieve. 
Sinking  into  the  throat  of  Indra  with  a  roar,  led  by  the  men 
thou  madest  Sdrya  mount  to  heaven. 

23  Pressed  out  with  stones  thou   flowest  onward  to  the  sieve,  0 

Indu,  entering  the  depths  of  India's  throat. 
Far-sighted  SoniH,  now  thou  lookest  on  mankind:  thou  didst 
uiibar  the  cow-stall  for  the  Angirases. 

24  In  thee,  0  Soma,  while  thou  purifiedst  thee,  high-thoughted 

sages,  seeking  favour,  have  rejoiced. 
Down  from  the  heavens  the  Falcon  brought  thee  hitherward, 
even  thee,  0  Indu,  thee  whom  all  our  hymns  adorn. 

25  Seven  Milch-kin e  glorify  the  Tuwny-coloured  One  while  with 

his  wave  in  wool  he  purifies  himself. 
The  living  men,  the  mighty,  have  impelled  the  Sage  into  the 
waters*  lap,  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

26  Indu,  attaining  purity,  plunges  through  the  foe,  making  his 

ways  all  easy  for  the  pious  man. 
Mnking  the  kine  his  mantle,  he,  the  lovely  Sage,  runs  like  a 
sporting  courser  onward  through  the  fleece*. 

27  The  ceaseless  watery  fountains  with  their  hundred  streams 

sing,  as  they  hasten  near,  to  him  the  Golden-hued. 
Him,  clad  in  robes  of  milk,  swift  fingers  beautify  on  the  third 
height  and  in  the  luminous  realm  of  heaven, 

28  These  are  thy  generations  of  celestial  seed  :  thou  art  the 

Sovran  Lord  of  all  the  world  of  life. 

This  universe,  0  Pavamana,  owns  thy  sway;  thou,  Indu,  art 
the  first  establish er  of  Law. 


us  of  Trita,  with  whom  he  is  closely  connected.    *  Generating  the  water  of 
the  threefold  (Indra).' — Wilson. 

21  The  Three  Times  Seven :  the  seven  celestial  rivers,  corresponding  to  the 
rivers  of  earth,  multiplied  by  three  to  accord  with  the  threefold  division  of 
the  heavens.     According  to  Sftyana,  cows  are  meant. 

23  Thou  didst  unbar  the  cow-stall :  didst  recover  the  cattle  stolen  by  the 
Panis,  that  is  the  rays  of  light  that  the  fiends  of  darkness  had  carried  eff ; 
the  great  deed  of  Indra  being  ascribed  to  Soma  his  inspirer. 

25  Seven  Milch-Jcive :  the  celestial  rivers. 

S6  Making  the  hme  his  mantle :  he  wVio  \a  ihAXNi%x6&  ^Q^^t«i  or  mingled 
with  milk. 


HTMn  Sei]  TEE  RIO  VEDA .  845 

S9  Thoa  art  the  sea,  0  Sage  who  bringest  all  to  light :  under 
thy  Law  are  these  five  regions  of  the  world. 
Thou  reachest  out  beyond  the  earth,  beyond  the  heaTens  : 
thine  are  the  lights,  0  PavamUna,  thine  the  Sun. 

30  Thou  in   the  filter,   Soma  Pavam&na,   art  purified  to  support 

the  region  for  the  Gods. 
The  chief,  the  longing  ones  have  sought  to  hold  thee  fast, 
and  all  these  living  creatures  have  been  turned  to  thee. 

31  Onward  the  Singer  travels  o'er  the  fleecy  sieve :  the  Tawny 

.  Steer  hath  bellowed  in  the  wooden  vats. 
Hynios  have  been  sung  aloud  in  resonant  harmony,  and  holy 
songs  kiss  him,  the  Child  who  claims  our  praise. 

32  He  hath  assumed  the  rays  of  Sdrya  for  his  robe,  spinnin  g,  as 

he  knows  how,  the  triply -twisted  thread. 
He,  guiding  to  the  newest  rules  of  Holy  Law,   comes  as   the 
Women's  Consort  to  the  special  place. 

33  On  flows   the  King   of  rivers   and  the   Lord  of  heaven :  he 

follows  with  a  shout  the  paths  of  Holy  Law. 
The  Golden-hued  is  poured  forth  with  his  hundred  streams, 
Wealth-bringer,  lifting  up  his  voice  while  purified. 

34  Fain  to  be  cleansed,  thou,  Pavamana,  pourest  out,  like  wond- 

rous Sura,  through  the  fleece,  an  ample  sea. 
Purified  with  the  hands,  pressed  by  the  men  with  stones,  thou 
speedest  on  to  mighty  booty-bringing  war. 

35  Thou,  PavamsLuB,  sendest  food  and  power  in  streams :  thou 

sit  test  in  the  beakers  as  a  hawk  on  trees, 
For  Indra  poured  as  cheering  juice  to  make  him  glad,  as  near- 
est and  far-seeing  bearer-up  of  heaven. 

36  The  Sisters  Seven,  the  Mothers,  stand  around  the  Babe,  the 

noble,  new-born  Infant,  skilled  in  holy  song, 
Gandharva  of  the  floods,  divine,  beholding  men.  Soma,  that  he 
may  reign  as  King  of  all  the  world. 

29  Thou,  art  the  8ea :  Soma  and  the  sea  being  alike  producers  of  rain. 
Lights:  stars. 

30  7%e  region :  mid-air ;  the  firmament.  TJie  chief,  the  longing  oties :  the 
Venas,  the  Maruts. 

82  Spvnm,ing...the  triply-twisted  thread:  bearing  his  part  in  morning,  noon- 
day and  evening  sacrifice.  Hie  Women*8  Conswt :  Lord  and  husband  of  the 
Waters  of  heaven.     The  special  place :  *  the  consecrated  (vessel).* — Wilson. 

84  Like  vfondrous  SHra :  adorable  like  the  Sun. 

86  2%«  Sistert  Seven  :  the  great  rivers  which  may  provide  water  for  Sowa.- 
iAcrificee.    Gand?iarva:  frequeutlj  identified  wVtU  \tl^<&^u\i,\i^i^X!i^^xi^'^^vsAi« 
tbe  Moon* 


84«  THE  B7MNS  OF  {BOOK  It 

37  As  Sovran  Lord  thereof  thou  passest  through  these  worlds,  0 
Indu,  harnessing  thy  tawny  well-winged  Mares. 
May  they  pour  forth  for  thee  milk   and  oil  rich  in  sweets ;  0 
Soma,  let  the  folk  abide  in  thy  decree. 

M  0  Soma,  thou  beholdest  men  from  every  side :  O  Pavam&na, 
Steer,  thou  wanderest  through  these. 
Pour  out  upon  us  wealth   in  treasure  and  in  gold  :  may  we 
have  strength  to  live  among  the  things  that  be. 

39  Winner  of  gold  and  goods  and  cattle  flow  thou  on,  set  as  im- 

pregner,  Indu,  mid  the  worlds  of  life. 
Rich  in  brave  men  art  thou,  Soma,  who  winuest  all :  these  holy 
singers  wait  upon  thee  with  the  song. 

40  The   wave  of  flowing  meath  hath  wakened    up  desires :  the 

Steer  enrobed  in  milk  plunt^es  into  the  streams. 
Borne  on   his  chariot-sieve  the  King   hath  risen    to  war,  and 
with  a  thousand  rays  hath  won  him  high  renown. 

41  Dear  to  all  life,  he  sends  triumphant  praises  forth,  abundant) 

bringing  ofiijpring,  each  succeeding  day. 
From  Indra  crave  for  us,  Indu,  when  thou  art  quaffed,  the  bles- 
sing that  gives  children,  wealth  that  harbours  steeds. 

42  When  days  begin,  the  strong  juice,  lovely,  golden-hued,  is 
recognized  by  wisdom  more  and  more  each  day, 
He,  stirring  both  the  Rices,  goes  between  the  two,  the  bearer 
of  the  word  of  men  and  word  of  Gods. 

43  They  balm  him,  balm  him  over,  balm  him  thoroughly,  caress 
the  mighty  strength  and  balm  it  with  the  meath. 

37  Tawny.,. Mara:  haritah ;  Hants.  Cf.  IV.  6.9;  13.8;  VII.  66.15; 
IX.  63.  9. 

38  Through  these :  there  is  no  substantive.     Sdyana  supplies  apah,  waters. 

40  2)eni'«« :  the  meaning  of  vanan/lh  :  is  not  certain  ;  'voices  (of  praise).* — 
Wilson  With  a  thousand  rays :  sahasrabhrishtih  :  literally,  having  a  thousand 
edges  or  sharp  points.     Cp.  IX.  83.  5 

41  The  blessing:  this  seems  to  be  very  nearly  the  meaning  of  h^dhma  here. 
But  the  word  may  as  usual  be  rendered  by  prayer,  or  devotion.  *  Solicit 
Indra  (to  give)  us  food  productive  of  progeny.' — Wilson. 

42  When  days  begin  :  according  to  Sftyana,  early  in  the  morning.  The 
commencement  of  the  year  is  more  probably  intended.  The  second  half  of 
the  stanza  is  obscurely  expressed.  It  appears  to  mean  that  Soma  acts  as  a 
mediator  between  heaven  and  earth,  urging  men  to  ofifer,  and  the  Qods  to 
receive,  worship,  bearing  up  to  heaven  the  hymns  and  praises  of  human 
worshippers  and  bringing  back  to  them  the  assurance  that  their  petitions 
will  be  granted.  S&yana's  explanation  is  different :  '  approaching  the  two 
men  (the  praiser  aud  the  worshipper  or  secular  and  sacred  people)  he  passes 

In  the  midst  (of  heaven  and  earth,  beato^m^\  uipoii  the  upholder  (of  the 
ritej  both  human  and  divine  (richeaV*— "^NVVaon.    lioWsyw  \wLftcwS%  '^Va  takes 
dAartdri  &B  nominative  singular. 


^   '^TMN  87]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  847 

■  Hiey  seise  the  flying  Steer  at  the  stream's  breathing-place  : 

[  cleansing  with  gold  tbej  grasp  the  Animal  herein. 

[   44  Sing  forth   to   Payam4na  skilled  in   holy  song :  the  juice  is 
flowing  onward  like  a  mighty  stream. 
He  glideth   like  a  serpent   from  his  ancient  skin,  and  like  a 
playful  horse  the  Tawny  Steer  hath  run. 

45  Dweller  in  floods,  King,  foremost,   he  displays  his  might,  set 

among  living  things  as  measurer  of  days. 
Distilling  oil  he  flows,  fair,  billowy,  golden-hued,  borne  on  a 
car  of  light,  sharing  one  home  with  wealth. 

46  Loosed  is  the  heavens'  support,  the  uplifted  cheering  juice  : 

the  triply-mingled  draught  flows  round  into  the  worlds. 
The  holy  hymns  caress  the  stalk  that  claims  our  praise,  when 
singers  have  approached  his  beauteous  robe  with  song. 

47  Thy  streams  that  flow  forth  rapidly  collected  run  over  the 

fine  fleece  of  the  sheep  as  thou  art  cleansed. 
When,  Indu,  thou  art  balmed  with  milk  within  the   bowl, 
thou  sinkest  in  the  jars,  0  Soma,  when  expressed. 

48  Winner  of  power,  flow.  Soma,  worthy  of  our  laud  :  run  on- 

ward to  the  fleece  as  well-beloved  meath. 
Destroy,  0  Indu,  all  voracious  Rdkshasas.     With  brave  sons 
in  the  assembly  let  our  speech  be  bold. 

HYMN   LXXXVII.  Soma  PavamJlna. 

Bun  onward  to  the  reservoir  and  seat  thee  :  cleansed  by  the 

'men  speed  forward  to  the  battle. 
Making  thee  beauteous  like  an  able  courser,  forth   to  the 

sacred  grass  with  reins  they  lead  thee. 

2  Indu,  the  well-armed  God,  is  flowing  onward,  who  quells  the 
curse  and  guards  from  treacherous  onslaught, 
Father,  begetter  of  the   Gods,    most  skilful,  the  buttress  of 
tlie  heavens  and  earth's  supporter. 

'  3  Kishi  and  Sage,  the  Champion  of  the  people,  deft  and  sagaci- 
ous, U8an|[  in  wisdom, 


43  At  tKe»trea'nC9'bre(Uliing-^ce:  where  the  stream  seems  to  stay  still 
for  a  moment  to  recover  breath.  Cleansing  with  gold:  with  gold-ringed 
fingers.     The  Animal:  Soma. 

45  its  meaiwer  of  days:  Soma  being  identified  with  the  Moon. 

46  Triply -mingled :  or,  poured  into  three  vessels,  the  droruUcalata,  ddkava- 
ntya,  and  p^tabhrii.  Robe :  the  integuments  which  cover  the  juice  :  that  is 
the  extmor  of  the  stalk  and  shoots. 

8  Vfand in  wisdom:  aa  wise  as  the  celebraied  T^l^oxA.    ^-^^iXa^  ct^^vccsc^ 
differently,  regurding  UaanA  as  the  disooverer  ;    *  U«ancu— >aft  n«c\i  ^si^  ^«^ 


046  TEE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  BL 

He  hath  discovered  eveu  their  hidden  tiatute,  tiie  Cows*  oon- 
cealed  and  most  mysterious  title. 

4  This  thine  own  Soma  rich  in  meath,  O  Indra,  Steer  io'r  thi 
Steer,  hath  flowed  into  the  filter. 
The   strong  Free-giver,   winning   hundreds,  thousands,  hath 
reached  the  holy  grass  that  never  fails  him. 

6  These  Somas  are  for  wealth  of  countless  cattle,  renown  there- 
for, and  mighty  strength  immortal. 
These  have  been  sent  forth,  purified  by  strainers,  like  steeds 
who  rush  to  battle  fain  for  glory. 

6  He,  while  he  cleanses  him,  invoked  of  many,  hath  flowed  to 

give  the  people  all  enjoyment. 
Thou  whom  the  Falcon  brought,  bring  dainty  viands,  bestir 
thyself  and  send  us  wealth  and  booty. 

7  This  Soma,  pressed  into  the  cleansing  filter,  hath  run   as 

'twere  a  host  let  loose,  the  Courser; 
Like  a  strong  bull  who  whets  his  horns  keen-^pointed,  like  a 
brave  warrior  in  the  fray  for  cattle. 

8  He  issued  forth  from   out  the  loftiest  mountain,  and  found 

kine  hidden  somewhere  in  a  stable. 
Soma's  stream  clears  itself  for  thee,  0  Indra,  like  lightning 
thundering  through  the  clouds  of  heaven, 

9  Cleansing  thyself,  and  borne  along  with  Indra,  Soma,  thou  goest 

round  the  herd  of  cattle. 
May  thy  praise  help  us.  Mighty  One,  prompt  Giver,  to  the 
full  ample  food  which  thou  bestowest. 

HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

For  thee  this  Soma  is  effused,  0  Indra:  drink  of  this  juioe; 

for  thee  the  stream  is  flowing — 
Soma,  which  thou   thyself  hast  made  and  chosen,   even  ludu, 

for  thy  special  drink  to  cheer  thee. 

poetic  gift  discovered  the  secret  milk  of  those  cows  which  was  hidden  and 
concealed.' — Wilson.  By  tUle  or  name  of  the  Cows,  water  appears  to  be 
intended. 

4  Steer  for  the  Steer:  or,  Strong  for  the  Strong. 

6  Mighty  strength  immortal :  *  ample  food  and  ambrosia.* — "Wilson. 

8  From  out  the  loftiest  mountain :  Sftjana  makes  antdrdd/rffy  depend  upon 

kdchit,   somewhere  :  *  This  Soma  stream  has  come  from  on   high  and  has 

detected  the  cattle  which  were  in  a  stall  (hidden)  somewhere  within  the 

mountain.' — Wilson.     Grassmann  translates :  'Er  ist  entsprungen  aus  detn 

hochsten  Pressstein.'    *  He  hath  sprung  forth  from  the  most  lofty  press-atone.' 

9  The  herd  of  caJtth :  Soma  accompam^%  \titok  vci  hia  expedition  to  recover 

the  stolen  cattle.  — S&yana.     Or  the  cattVe  or  eo'vi^  \&&^  >a^>i}ti<^i£:^^^r^'«\5adbL 

Soma  is  mi^ed* 


BWmf  WJ  THE  RIOVBDA.  849 

%  liikd  a  eapacions  oar  hath  it  been  harnessed,  the  Mighty;  to 
acquire  abuodant  treasures. 
Then  in  the  sacrifice   they   celebrated  all  triumphs  won  by 
Nahus  in  the  battle. 

3  like  V&yu  with  his  team,  moving  at  pleasure,  most  gracious 
when  invoked  like  both  N^^atyas, 
Thou  art  thyself  like  the   Wealth-Giver,  Soma !  who  grants 
all  boons,  like  song-inspiring  Pushan. 

.4  Like  Indra  who  hath  done  great  deeds,  thou.  Soma,  art  slayer 
of  the  Vritras,  Fort-destroyer. 
Like  Pedu*s  horse  who  killed  the  brood  of  serpents,  thus  thou, 
0  Soma,  slay  est  every  Dasyu. 

5  Like  Agni  loosed  amid  the  forest,  fiercely  he  wiuneth   splen- 

dour in  the  running  waters. 
Like   one  who   fights,  the  roaring  of  the  mighty,  thus   Soma 
Pavam&na  sends  his  current. 

6  These  Somas  passing  through  the  fleecy  filter,  like  rain  de- 

scending from  the  clouds  of  heaven, 
Have  been   effused  and  poured    into  the  beakers,  swiftly  like 
rivers  running  lowly  seaward. 

7  Flow   onward   like  the   potent   band   of  Maruts,    like   that 

Celestial  Host  whom  none  revileth. 
Quickly  be  gracious  unto    us  like  waters,   like  sacrifice  victo- 
rious, thousand-fashioned. 

8  Thine  are   King  Varuna's    eternal  statutes,  lofty  and  deep,  0 

Soma,  is  thy  glory. 
All-pure  art  thou  like  Mitra  the  beloved,  adorable,  like  Arya- 
man,  0  Soma. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Soma  Pavamana. 

This  Chariot-horse  hath  moved  along  the  pathways,  and  Pava- 
m4na  flowed  like  rain  from  heaven. 

2  I  can  make  nothing  out  of  the  second  line  of  this  stanza.  The  version 
which  I  give  as  a  temporary  makeshift  is  founded  on  Ludwig's  remarks  in 
his  Commentary  on  the  passage,  Vol.  V.  p.  308,  of  his  Rigveda.  Wilson, 
following  Sftyana,  translates  : — *  After  this  {i.  e.  after  the  harnessing  of  tf^e 
waggon. — Note.)  may  all  the  races  of  men  expecting  our  (attack)  go  to  the 
desirable  battle.'  '  Now  let  the  races  of  all  men,  rising  up  like  trees,  come 
near  to  him  in  order  to  obtain  success.'  would,  according  to  Grassmann,  be 
nearer  the  meaning. 

4  Pedu's  horse:  given  to  him  by  the  Asvins.  See  I.  116.  6;  117.  9  ;  118. 
9  ;  119.  10. 

7  Zdke  sacrifice :  according  to  SAyana,  yajfldh,  sacrifice,  means  here,  worthy 
of  sacrifice: — '(thou  art)  of  a  thousand  shapes,  adorable  like  (Indra)  the 
victor  in  battle.' — Wilson. 

5  Thia  stanza  is  found  ako  in  Book  I.  91.  3. 


350  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOJL  tt 

With  us  hath  Soma  with  a  thousand  currents  sunk  in  the  wood^^' 
upon  his  Mother's  bosom. 

2  King,  he  hath  clothed  him  in  the  robe  of  rivers,  mounted  tin 

stiaightest-going  ship  of  Order. 
Sped  by  the  Hawk  the  drop  hath  waxed  in  waters :  the  father 
drains  it,  drains  the  Father's  offspring. 

3  They  come  to  him,  red,  tawny,  Lord  of  Heaven,  the  watchful 

Guardian  of  the  meath,  the  Lion. 
First,  Hero  in  the  fight,  he  seeks  the  cattle,  and  with  his  eye 
the  Steer  is  our  protector. 

4  They  harness  to  the  broad-wheeled  car  the  mighty  Courser 

whose  back  bears  meath.  unwearied,  awful. 
The  twins,  the  sisters  brighten  him,  and  strengthen — these 
children  of  one  dame — the  vigorous  Racer. 

5  Four  pouring  out   the  holy  oil  attend  him,  sitting   together 

in  the  same  container. 
To  him   they  flow,    when  purified,    with  homage,    and  still, 
from  every  side,  are  first  about  him. 

6  He  is  the  buttress  of  the  heavens,  supporter  of  earth,  and  in 

his  hand  are  all  the  people. 
Be  the  tentn's  Lord  a  well  to  thee  the  singer :  cleansed  is  the 
sweet  plant's  stnlk  for  deed  of  glory. 

7  Fighting,  uninjured  come  where  Gods  are  feasted ;  Soma,  as 

Vritra-slayer  flow  for  Indra. 
Vouchsafe  us  ample  riches  very  splendid :  may  we  be  masters 
of  heroic  vigour. 

HYMN   XC-  Soma  Pavamana. 

Urged  on,  the  Father  of  the  Earth  and  Heaven  hath  gone 

forth  like  a  car  to  gather  booty, 
Going  to  ludta,    sharpening  his   weapous,   and   in   his   hand 

containing  every  treasure. 


2  The  father  dr  aim  it :  '  The  scholiast  finds  it  difficult  to  make  sense  of 
this  :  pita  (palako  lokah)  he  supposes  to  mean  the  Adhvaryu,  who  extracts 
the  juice  of  the  Sorrm  which  is  born  from  the  heaven  as  from  a  father  ;  or  the 
first  milker  may  be  the  yujamdna  and  the  second  the  Adkvai'yu  ;  or  duhe 
may  be  repeated  out  of  respect.* — Wilson. 

4  Sisters children  of  one  dame:  the  priest's  fingers. 

6  Four :  the  quarters  of  the  sky.     Container :  the  firmament. 

6  The  team's  Lord:  Soma  as  resembling  V4yu.  Cp.  IX.  88.  3.  Sftyana 
explains  differently  :  *  may  (Soma)  the  fountain  (of  desires)  be  possessed  of 
horses  for  thee  (his)  adorer.' — Wilson. 


1  Fathej*:  janitd:  generator,  of  earth.  \)y  aeti^Vwi^  x^vck.^  wA  ^V\a;^n«ql  V( 
obttdniug  oblationa  lor  the  gods.— S&yau«b. 


I 


mrfm  »i.]  tbe  rioveda.  351 

#2  To  him  the  tones  of  sacred  song  have  sounded,  Steer  of  the 
triple  height,  the  Life-bestower. 
Dwelling  in  wood  as  Yaruna  in  riyers,  lavishing  treasure  he 
distributes  blessings. 

3  Great  Conqueror,  warrior-girt,   Lord  of  all  heroes,   flow   on 

thy  way  as  he  who  wiuneth  riches ; 
With  sharpened  arms,   with  swift  bow,  never  vanquished  in 
battle,  vanquishing  in  fight  the  foemen. 

4  Giving  security,  Lord  of  wide  dominion,  send  us  both  earth 

and  heaven  with  all  their  fulness. 
Striving  to  win  the  Dawns,  the  light,  the  waters,  and  cattle, 
call  to  us  abundant  vigour. 

5  0  Soma,  gladden  Yaruna  and  Mitra ;  cheer,  ludu  Pavamana  ! 

ludra,  Yishnu. 
Cheer  thou  the  Gods,  the  Company  of  Maruts :  Indu,  cheer 
mighty  Indra  to  rejoicing. 

6  Thus   like  a  wise  and  potent  King  flow   onward,  destroying 

with  thy  vigour  all  misfortunes. 
For  our  well-spoken  hymn  give  life,  0  ludu.     Do  ye  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN   XCI.  Soma  PayamAna. 

As  for  a  chariot-race,  the  skilful  Speaker,  Chief,  Sage,  In- 
ventor, hath,  with  song,  been  started. 

The  sisters  ten  upon  the  fleecy  summit  drive  on  the  Car-horse 
to  the  resting-places. 

2  The  drop  of  Soma,  pressed  by  wise  Nahushyas,  becomes  the 

banquet  of  the  Heavenly  People — 
ludu,  by  hands  of  mortal  men  made  beauteous,   immortal, 
with  the  sheep  aud  cows  aud  waters. 

3  Steer  roaring    unto  Steer,  this  Pavamslna,   this  juice  runs  to 

the  white  milk  of  the  milch-cow. 
Thrtmgh   thousand  fine   hairs   goes   the  tuneful   Singer,  like 
Sura  by  his  fair  and  open  pathways. 

2  Of  the  tHple  height:  see  IX.  71.  7. 
4  Call  to  us :  send  us  with  thy  shout  or  roar. 

6  The  hymu  euds  with  the  usual  concluding  half -line  of  the  hymns  ascribed 
to  the  Yasishthas. 

1  The  skilful  Speaker :  Soma  who  makes  us  eloquent.     The  resting-places : 
gddandni :  th«  seats,  the  reservoirs  in  which  he  settles. 

2  Nahushyas:  probably  a  neighbouring  people.    See  VI.  46.  7,  and  note  on 
^ahushas  which  hHS  the  same  meaning. 

8  Sdra :  Si^ijA,  the  Sua,    Fair  and  open :  adJivaimdblvl)^ :  *  \sa.'^x>^^i>X^^. — 
Wilaoa. 


852  TffJE  ETMyS  OP  [MOOK  /X- 

4  Break  down  the  strong  seats   even  of  the  demons :   oleawog 

thee,  Indu,  robe  thyself  in  vigour. 
Rend  with  thy  swift  bolt,  coming  from  above  them,  those  who 
are  near  and  those  who  yet  are  distant. 

5  Prepare  the  forward  paths  in  ancient  manner  for  the  new  hynm, 

thou  Giver  of  all  bounties. 
Those  which  are  high  and  hard  for  foes  to   conquer  may  we 
gain  from  thee,  Active  !  Food-bestower ! 

6  So  purifying  thee  vouchsafe  us  waters,  heaven's  light,  and  cows, 

offspring  and  many  children. 
Give  us  health,  ample  land,  and  lights,  0  Soma,  and  grant  us 
long  to  look  upon  the  sunshine. 

HYMN  XCII.  Soma  PavamAaa. 

The  gold-hued  juice,  poured  out  upon  the  filter,  is  started  like 

a  car  sent  forth  to  conquer. 
He  hath  gained  song  and  vigour  while  they  cleansed  him,  and 

hath  rejoiced  the  Gods  with  entertainments. 

2  He  who   beholdeth  man  hath  reached   the  filter :  bearing  his 

name,  the  Sage  hath  sought  his  dwelling. 
The  Rishis  came  to  him,  seven  holy  singers,  when  in  the  bowls 
he  settled  as  Invoker. 

3  Shared  by  all  Gods,  most  wise,  propitious.  Soma  goes,  while 

they  cleanse  him,  to  his  constant  station. 
Let  him  rejoice  in  all  his  lofty  wisdom  :  to  the  Five  Tribes 
the  Sage  attains  with  labour. 

4  In  thy  mysterious  place,  0  Pavamana  Soma,  are  all  the  Gods, 

the  Thrice-Eleven. 
Ten  on  the  fleecy  height,  themselves,  self-prompted,  and  seven 
fresh  rivers,  brighten  and  adorn  thee. 

5  Now  let  this  be  the  truth  of  Pavamslna,  there  where  all  singers 

gather  them  together. 
That  he  hath  given  ns  room  and  made  the  daylight,  hath  holpen 
Manu  aud  repelled  the  Dasyu. 

5  Those :  portions  of  thee,  according  to  Sdyana 

6  In  the  second  half  of  the  stanza,  instead  of  taking  ur?^,  wide,  ample, 
with  kshitramy  field,  land,  S4yana  joins  it,  as=w>tiwt,  with  jydtinahi,  lights  :— 
*  make  our  land  prosper,  diflfuse  the  luminaries  widely  (in  the  firmament).'— 
Wilson.  

2  The  Rishis:  according  to  S&yana,  Bharadvaja,  Kasyapa,  Gotama,  Atri, 
Visvftmitra,  Jamadagni,  Vasishtha. 

3  The  Five  Tribes :  the  five  Aryan  tribes.  According  to  Sftyana,  *  the  five 
claseea  of  beings,'  i.  e.,  four  castes  and  the  Nish&das. 

4  The  Thrice-Eleoen :  see  1. 1S9. 11.    Teu :  \i\i«  ^m^^t*. 
^  Jfanu :  aa  the  representative  ot  tlie  kr^^n  x^^e. 


.jErnrir94.]  the  riqveda.  353 

6  As  the  priest  seeks  the  station  rich  in  cattle,  like  a  true  Kiug 
who  goes  to  great  assemblies, 
Soma  hath  sought  the  beakers  while  they  cleansed  him,  and, 
like  a  wild  bull,  iu  the  wood  hath  settled. 

HYMN  XCIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Ten  sisters,  pouring  out  the  rain  together,  swift>moving  thiuk- 

ers  of  the  sage,  adorn  him. 
Hither  hath  run  the  gold-hued  Child  of  Sdrya  and  reached 

the  vat  like  a  fleet  vigorous  courser. 

2  Even  as  a  youngling  crying  to  his  mothers,  the   bounteous 
Steer  hath  flowed  along  to  waters. 
As  youth  to  damsel,  so  with  milk  he  hastens  ou  to  the  chosen 
meeting-place,  the  beaker. 

S  Yea,  swollen  is  the  udder  of  the  milch-cow  :  thither  in  streams 
goes  very  sapient  Indu. 
The  kiue  make  ready,  as  with  new-washed   treasures,   the 
Head  and  Chief  with  milk  within  the  vessels. 

4  With  all  the  Gods,  O  Indu  Pavant^na,  while  thou  art  roaring 

send  us  wealth  in  horses. 
Hither  upon  her  car  come  willing  Plenty,   inclined  to  us,  to 
give  us  of  her  treasures. 

5  Now  unto  us  mete  riches,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  all-glorious, 

swelling  wealth,  with  store  of  heroes. 
Long  be  his  life  who  worships  thee,  0  ludu.     May  he,  enriched 
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early. 

HYMN  XCIV.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

When  beauties  strive   for  him  as  for  a  charger,  then  strive 

the  songs  like  soldiers  for  the  sunlight. 

Acting  the  Sage,    he   flows   enrobed  in   waters  and  song  as 

'twere  a  stall  that  kine  may  prosper. 
«-  —  ■ «  ' 

6  The  ttation  rich  in  cattle :  *  the  hall  where  the  victim  is  stationed  * — 
Wilson.     To  great  assemblies  :  or,  to  war  and  battle.     The  wood :  the  wooden 

▼at  or  reservoir.  

1  Ten  sisters:  the  fingers  which  press  out  the  juice  of  the  Soma -plant. 
ninhers:  or  thoughts,  devotions.  According  to  S&ya:;a,  fingers.  ChUd  of 
SHrya :  Sftyapa  explains  ^'dfji,  ofifspring,  by  jdydh  wives,  i.  «.,  the  quarters  of 
the  heaven,  called  Siirya's  wives  because  they  are  made  manifest  by  his  rays. 

3  The  Head  and  Chief:  *the  elevated  Soma.* — Wilson. 

4  Send  us  ;  more  literally,  open  or  disclose  to  us. 

5  The  hymn  ends  with  the  half-liiie  which  w  the  special  conclusion  of  the 
hymns  ascribed  to  Nodhas.     See  Book  I.  58,  60 — 64. 

1  The  meaning  in  apparently  :  when  the  beautifying  'waters  hasten  emu- 
lonsly  to  cleanse  Soma  as  though   he  were  a  Vior&e,  \i\i<d  NCA!&«i^  c\\  ^vcv^^% 
worahlppera  vie  with  each  other  like  the  shouta  oi  mew  yi\iO  «Aft  ^^Myo%V«. 

23 


864  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IX. 

2  The  worlds  expand  to  him  ^ho  from  aforetime  fouud  light  to 

spread  the  law  of  life  eternal. 
The   swelling  songn,    like   kiue    within  the   stable,  in   deep 
devotion  call  aloud  on  Indu. 

3  When  the  Sage  bears  his  holy  wisdom  round  him,  like  a  car 

visiting  all  worlds,  the  Hero, 
Becoming  fame,  mid  Gods,   unto  the  mortal,  wealth  to  the 
skilled,  worth  praise  mid  the  Ever-present, 

4  For  glory  horn  he  hath  come  forth  to  glory :  he  giyeth  life 

and  glory  to  the  singers. 
They,  clothed  in  glory,  have  become  immortal.  He,  measured 
ill  his  course,  makes  frays  successful. 

5  Stream  to  us  food  and  vigour,  kine  and  horses  :  give  us  broad 

lights  and  fill  the  Gods  with  rapture. 
All  these  are  easy  things  for  thee  to  master :  thou,  Pavam^na 
Soma,  quellest  foemen. 

HYMN  XCV.  Soma  PavaniAna. 

Loud  neighs  the  Tawny  Steed  when  started,  settling  deep  in 

the  wooden  vessel  while  they  cleanse  him. 
Led  by  the  men  he  takes  the  mi4k  for  raiment :  then  shall  he, 

through  his  powers,  engender  praise-songs. 

2  As  one  who  rows  drives   on  his  boat,  he,   Gold-hued,   sends 

forth  his  voice,  loosed  on  the  path  of  Order. 
As  God,  the  secret  names  of  Gods  he  utters,  to  be  declared  on 
sacred  grass  more  widely. 

3  Hastening  onward  like  the  waves  of  waters,  our  holy  hymns 

are  pressing  nigh  to  Soma. 
To  him  they  come  with  lowly  adoration,  and,  longing,  enter 
him  who  longs  to  meet  them. 

4  They  drain  the  stalk,  the  Steer  who  dwells  on  mountains, 

even  as  a  Bull  who  decks  him  on  the  upland. 


light  and  life.  Soma  flows  on  in  his  wi>dom,  blent  with  the  waters,  and 
aurroutided  with  hymns  into  the  midst  of  wliich  he  enters  as  into  a  stable 
full  of  kine  in  order  to  make  them  increase  nnd  multiply. 

3  The  stanza  is  somewhat  obscure.  Worth  praise :  or.  adorable.  7%e  Ever- 
present :  the  Gods  who  come  to  help  men.  Wilson,  following  SAya*  a,  trans- 
lates the  second  line  :  '  then  desirous  of  bestowing  upon  mortals  the  wealth 
that  abides  with  the  gods,  he  (is)  to  be  glorified  in  the  many  places  of  sacrifioe 
for  the  preservation  of  the  riches  he  has  given.' 

5  All  these :  all  the  R&kshasas,  according  to  S&yana. 

J  Deep  in  the  wooden,  vessel :  litetaWy  *  m  V.\ift  Vj^W^  ot  ihe  wood. ' 
2  JSTe  utters :  reveals  to  the  prieat  wVio  \a  to  decW^  \>cifcta  %x.  ^^^tv^<;:a. 


STMN  ae.]  TBB  RIQTBDA.  855 

Hymns  follow  and  attend   him  as  he  bellows:    Trita  bears 
Varuna  aloft  in  ocean. 

6  Sending  thy  voice  out  as  Director,  loosen  the  Invoker's  thought, 
0  Indu,  as  they  cleanse  tliee. 
While  thou  and  Indra  rule  for  our   advantage,  may  we  be 
masters  of  heroic  vigour. 

HYMN  XCVI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

In  forefront  of  the  cars  forth  goes  the  Hero,  the  Leader,  win- 
ning spoil :  his  host  rejoices. 

Soma  endues  his  robes  of  lasting  colours,  and  blesses,  for  his 
fiiends,  their  calls  on  Indra. 

2  Men  decked  with  gold  adorn  his  golden  tendril,  incessantly 

with  steed-impelling  homage. 
The  Friend  of  Indra  mounts  his  car :  well-knowing,  he  comes 
thereon  to  meet  the  prayer  we  offer. 

3  O  God,  for  service  of  the  Gods  flow  onward,  for  food  sublime, 

as  Indra's  diink,  0  Soma. 
Making  the  floods,  bedewing  earth  and  heaven,  come  from  the 
vast,  comfort  us  while  we  cleanse  thee. 

4  Flow  for  prosperity  and  constant  vigour,  flow  on  for  happi- 

ness and  high  perfection. 
This  is  the  wish  of  all  these  friends  assembled :  this  is  my 
wish,  0  Soma  Pavamslna. 

5  Father  of  holy  hymns.  Soma  flows  onward,  the  Father  of  the 

earth,  Father  of  heaven  ; 
Father  of  Agui,  Sdrja's  generator,  the  Father  who  begat  Indra 
and  Vishnu. 

6  Brnhman  of  Gods,  the  Leader  of  the  poets,  Rishi  of  sages. 

Bull  of  savage  creatures. 
Falcon  amid  the  vultures,  Axe  of  forests,  over  the  cleansing 
sieve  goes  Soma  singing. 

4  Trita :  the  preparer  of  the  celestial  Soma.  Varuna :  here  meaning 
Soma  ;   *  the  defeater  of  enemies.' — Wilson.     In  ocean :  in  the  firmament. 

B  As  Director:  upavaJcUva:  upavakt^  here  appears  to  mean  Adhvaryu  : 
yaiMdJtvaryuh. — Sftyana.  Loosen  the  Invoker's  thought:  aid  the  Hotar  or 
invoking  priest  to  give  free  utterance  to  his  thought  or  hynm. 

1  Of  latting  colours :  rdbhaa^ni :  *  hastily  made.' — Wilson.  *  Brilliant.' — 
Grassmann. 

2  Steed- impelling :  urging  him  on,  as  a  whip  urges  on  a  horse. 

8  From  the  vatt :  from  the  wide  firmament.  There  is  no  substantive  in 
the  text. 

6  brahman  of  Gods :  thou  art  Brihaspati,  the  Lord  oi  Px^^et,  %.\sift\^%  Mk\^ 
QodB,  or,  chief  among  the  priests.    Axe :   the  YiandVe  oi  >^^  ^'sa  \^^\!Ck'^ 


866  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  IX, 

7  He,  Soma  Pavam&na,  like  a  river,  hath  stirred  the  wave  of 

voice,  our  songs  and  praises 
Beholding  these  inferior  powers  in  cattle,  he  rests  among  them 
as  a  Steer  well- knowing. 

8  As  Gladdener,  Warrior  never  harmed  in  battle,  with  thoasand 

genial  streams,  pour  strength  and  vigour. 
As  thoughtful  Pavam&na,  urge  0  Indu,  speeding  the  kine, 
the  plant's  wave  on  to  Indra. 

9  Dear,  grateful  to  the  Gods,  on  to  the  beaker  moves  Soma, 

sweet  to  Indra,  to  delight  him. 
With  hundred  powers,   with   thousand   currents,  Indu,    like 
a  strong  car-horse,  goes  to  the  assembly. 

10  Born  in  old  time  as  finder-out  of  treasures,  drained   with  the 

stone,  decking  himself  in  waters. 
Warding  off  curses,  Ring  of  all   existence,  he  shall  find  way 
for  prayer  the  while  they  cleanse  him. 

11  For  our  sage  fathers,  Soma   Pavamslna,  of  old  performed,  by 

thee,  their  sacred  duties. 
Fighting  unvanquished,  open  the  enclosures :  enrich  us   with 
large  gifts  of  steeds  and  heroes. 

12  As  thou   didst   flow   for  Manu   Life-bestowing,   Foe-queller, 

Comforter,  rich  in  oblations, 
Even  thus  flow  onward  now  conferring  riches  :  combine   with 
Indra,  and  bring  forth  thy  weapons. 

13  Flow  onward,  Soma,    rich    in   sweets   and   holy,   enrobed    in 

waters  on  the  fleecy  summit. 
Settle  in  vessels  that  are  full  of  fatness,  as  cheering  and  most 
gladdening  drink  for  ludra. 

14  Pour,  hundred-streamed,  winner  of  thousands,  mighty   at  the 

Gods*  banquet,  pour  the  rain  of  heaven, 
While  thou  with  rivers  roarest  in  the   beaker,  and   blent  with 
milk  prolongest  our  existence. 

15  Purified  with  our  holy  hymns,  this   Soma   overtakes   maligni- 

ties like  some  strong  charger, 

naturally  made  of  the  strongest  wood. — M.  Mtiller.  Lndwig  thinks  that 
lightning  may  be  intended.  According  to  the  St.  PetergUjrg  Lexicon, 
svadhiti^  here  means  a  tree  with  very  hard  wood.     See  V.  32   10. 

7  The  second  line  is  obscure.  Wilson  translates  :  '  the  showerer  (of  bene- 
fits) beholding  the  hidden  (treasure)  presid^JS  over  these  irresistible  powers, 
knowing  about  the  cattle.' 

9  Ooet  to  the  cusemUy :  *  proceeds  like  a  strong  horse  to  battle  ' — Wilson. 
11  The  encloMures :  the  obstructlona  viV\\cY\  V^eiip  XXv^  tvC\w  Vtowv  i&lling. 
13  I^ull  of  fatnet$:    ghrUdvAnXii    accoxdin^  ^o  ^^^«.\v^/ ^^\.'«t-\k$S^i^^%. 


STMJ^  ^\  TffE  ktOVEDA.  857 

Like  fresh  milk  poured  by  Aditi,  like  passage  in  ample  room, 
or  like  a  docile  car-horse. 

16  Cleansed  by  the  pressors,  armed  with  noble  weapons,  stream 

to  us  the  fair  secret  name  thou  bearest. 
Pour  booty,  like  a  horse,  for  love  of  gloiy  :  God,  Soma,  send 
us  kine,  and  send  us  Vayu. 

17  They  deck  him  at  his  birth,  the   lovely  Infant,  the  Maruta 

with  their  troop  adorn  the  Car-horse. 
By  songs  a  Poet  and  a  Sage  by  wisdom,  Soma  goes  singing 
through  the  cleansing  filter. 

18  Light>Winner,  ^l^ishi^minded,  ]^ishi-maker,  hymned  in  a  thou- 

sand hynms,  Leader  of  sages, 
A  Steer  who  strives  to  gain   his   third  form.   Soma  is,  like 
Viraj,  resplendent  as  a  Singer. 

19  Hawk  seated  in  the  bowls,  Bird  wide-extended,  the   Banner 

seeking  kine  and  wielding  weapons, 
Following  close  the  sea,  the  wave  of  waters,   the  great  Bull 
tells  his  fourth  form  and  declares  it. 

20  Like  a  fair  youth  who  decorates  his  body,  a  courser  rushing 

to  the  gain  of  riches, 
A  steer  to  herds,  so,  flowing  to   the  pitcher,  he  with  a  roar 
hath  passed  into  the  beakers. 

21  Flow  on  with  might  as  Pavamdna,   Indu  :  flow  loudly  roaring 

through  the  fleecy  Alter. 
Enter  the  beakers  sporting,  as  they  cleanse  thee,  and  let  thy 
gladdening  juice  make  Indra  joyful. 

22  His  streams  have  been   effused  in  all  their  fulness,  and  he 

hath  eutered,  balmed  with  milk,  the  goblets. 
Siuging  his  psalm,  well-skilled  in  song,    a  Chanter,  he   comes 
as  'twere  to  his  friend's  sister  roaring. 

23  Chasing  our  foes  thou  comest,  Pavamana !  Indu,  besung,  as 

lover  to  his  darling. 
As  a  bird  flies  and  settles  in  the  forest,  thus  Soma  settles, 
purified,  in  goblets. 

\^  By  Aditi :  regarded  as  the  Cosmic  Cow. 
16  Vdyu:  the  breath  of  life,  life.— Sdyana. 

18  His  third  form  :  the  form  that  he  wears  in  heaven  ;  *  the  third  region 
(heaven).' — Wilson.     Vir^j .-  splendid  or  most  illustrious  Indra. — SSyapa. 

19  The  banner :  drapsah :  usually  meaning,  a  drop,  or  a  spark.  See  IV.  13.  2. 
His  fourth  form  :  the  Moon.  According  to  SAyana,  the  region  of  the  Moon 
which  is  said  to  be  above  that  of  the  Sun. 

22  As  'ttoere  to  his  friend's  sister:  Sftyana  explains  jefmim,  sister^  by  jdtf^lm^ 
wife  :  *  like  (b  hbertine)  to  the  wife  of  a  friend.'— W\\ftOTi.    1\i^  y£v«w»»%  vk 
probably  no  more  than  'as  lover  to  his  darling*  m  Wi«  lo\\om\i%«\»X)3ak. 


358  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  11. 

24  With  full  stream  and  abundant  milk,  0  Soma,  thy  beams 
come,  like  a  woman,  as  they  cleanse  thee. 
He,  gold-hued,  rich  in   boons,  brought  to  the  waters,  hath 
roared  within  the  goblet  of  the  pious. 

HYMN  XCVTI.  Soma  Pavam&na. 

Made  pure  by  this  man's  urgent  zeal  and  impulse,  the  God 
hath  to  the  Gods  his  juice  imparted. 

He  goes,  effused  and  singing,  to  the  filter,  like  priest  to  mea- 
sured seats  supplied  with  cattle. 

2  Robed  in  fair  raiment  meet  to  wear  in  battle,  a  mighty  Sage 

pronouncing  invocations. 
Roll  onward  to  the  beakers  as  they  cleanse  thee,  far-seeing  at 
the  feast  of  Gods,  and  watchful. 

3  Dear,  he  is  brightened  on  the  fleecy  summit,  a  Prince  among 

us,  nobler  than  the  noble. 
Roar  out  as  thou  art  purified,  run  forward.     Do  ye  preserve 
us  evermore  with  blessings. 

4  Let  us  sing  praises  to  the  Gods :  sing  loudly,  send  ye  the 

Soma  forth  for  mighty  riches. 
Let  him  flow,  sweetly-flavourei,  through  the  filter,  and  let  our 
pious  one  rest  in  the  pitcher. 

5  Winning  the  friendship  of  the  Deities,  Indu  flows  in  a  thou- 

sand streams  to  make  them  joyful. 
Praised  by  the  men  after  the  ancient  statute,   he  hath  come 
nigh,  for  our  great  bliss,  to  Indi  a. 

6  Flow,  Gold-hued,  cleansing  thee,  to  enrich  the  singer :  let  thy 

juice  go  to  Indra  to  support  him. 
Come  nigh,  together  with  the  Gods,  for  bounty.     Do  ye  pre- 
serve us  evermore  with  blessings. 

7  The  God  declares  the  Deities'  generations,  like  Usau4,  pro- 

claiming lofty  wisdom. 
With  brilliant  kin,  far-ruling,  sanctifying,  the  Boar  advances, 
siuging,  to  the  places. 

1  Urgent  zeal  and  impulse :  hemand.  by  impulse  (from  the  root  hi)  is  said 
by  Sftyana  to  mean  *  by  gold,'  that  is,  by  the  gold-adorned  hand  of  the  priest. 
Measured  seats  supplied  vrith  cattle :  'the  halls  prepared  (for  sacrifice)  con- 
taining victims.' — Wilson.  Singing :  the  sound  of  the  flowing  juice  is  com- 
pared to  the  priest's  recitation  of  sacred  texts. 

7  The  Qod :  Soma,  who  has  been   called  the  Father  of  the  Gods.     Liht 

Ufand :  the  sound  of  the  flowing  and  dropping  Soma  juice  is  likened  to  the 

sung  of  the  famous  sage  and  sacred  poet.     The   Boar :  strong,  swift   Soma. 

Sinffinff:  waking  a  souud  with  the  descending  drops  of  jnice.  S&yana  explains 

differently: — 'making  a  noise  (as)  a  \«iid\)Odx  ^m'B^"ea^\iQ\^^'^m\Ja.vtatoot.*-^ 

Wilson.     The  places:  the  filters. 


HYMif  »7.]  THE  RI6VEDA,  859 

8  The  Swans,  the  Vrishaganas  from  anear  us  have  bronght  their 

rebtless  spirit  to  our  dwelliug. 
Friends  come  to  Pavamdna  meet  for  praises,  and  sound  in  con- 
cert their  resistless  music. 

9  He  follows  the  Wide-strider's  rapid  movement :  cows  low,  as 

'twere,  to  him  who  sports  at  pleasure. 

He  with  the  sharpened  horns  brings  forth    abundance :  the 
Silvery  shines  by  night,  by  day  the  Golden. 

10  Strong  Iiidu,  bathed  in  milk,  iSows  on  for  India,  Soma  ex- 

citing strength,  to  make  him  joyful. 
He  quells  malignities  and  slays  the  demons,  the  King  of  mighty 
power  who  brings  us  comfort. 

11  Then  in  a  stream  lie  flows,   milked   out   with   press-stones, 

mingled  with  sweetness,  through  the  fleecy  filter — 

Indu  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  Indra,  the  God  who  gladdens, 
for  the  God's  enjoyment. 

12  As  he  is  puriiied  he  pours  out  treasures,  a  God  bedewing  Gods 

with  his  own  juices. 
Indu  hath,  wearing  qualities  by  seasons,  on  the  raised  fleece 
engaged  the  ten  swift  fingers. 

13  The  Red  Bull  bellowing  to  the  kine  advances,  causing  the 

heavens  and  earth  to  roar  and  thunder. 

Well  is  he  heard  like  ludra's  shout  iu  battle  :  letting  this  voice 
be  known  he  hastens  hither. 

14  Swelling    with  milk,   abounding. iu  sweet  flavours,  urging  the 

meath-rich  plant  thou  goest  onward. 
Raising  a  shout  thou  flowest  as  they  cleanse  thee,  when  thoti, 
O  Soma,  art  effused  for  Indra. 

15  So  flow  thou  on  inspiriting,  for  rapture,  aiming  death-shafts 

at  hiu)  who  stays  the  waters. 

Flow  to  us  wearing  thy  resplendent  colour,  efliised  and  eager 
for  the  kine,  0  Soma. 


8  7%«  Swans  '  the  singers,  descendanU  of  the  Rishi  Vrishagana. 

9  The  Wide-strider'8  rapid  movement :  the  swift  course  of  the  Sun.  Cowt 
low  as 'twcfe :  Sayana  explains  gctvak.  cows,  by  avye  gantdroh.  other  goers, 
takes  nrt  AS  negative,  and  derives  mimaU  from  md,  to  measure,  instead  of 
from  md,  to  bleat  or  low  : — *  other  goers  cannot  overtake  him  (though  he  is) 
moving  easily.* — Wilson.  He  with  the  sharpened  hoi'ns :  Soma  as  the  Moon  : 
the  silvery  light  by  night  and  the  golden-cotoured  juice  by  day. 

1 2  Wearing  qualities  by  seasons :  *  clothed  iu  pleasaut  radiauce   according  to 
the  season.' — Wilsou. 
J^  J^im  who  stays  tke  toaters :  Vritra. 


360  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It 

16  Pleased  with  us,  Indu,  send  us  as  thou  flowest  good  eBSj  patis 

ill  ample  space  and  comforts. 
Dispelling,  as  'twere  with  a  club,  misfortunes,  run   o'er  the 
height,  run  o'er  the  fleecy  summit. 

17  Pour  on  us  rain  celestial,  quickly  streaming,  refreshing,  fraught 

with  health  and  ready  bounty. 
Flow,  ludu,  send  these  Winds  thy  lower  kinsmen,  setting  them 
free  like  locks  of  hair  unbraided. 

18  Part,   like  a  knotted  tangle,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  O  Soma, 

righteous  and  unrighteous  conduct. 
Neigh  like  a  tawny  courser  who  is  loosened,  come  likeayouthy 
0  God,  a  hou^e-pos8e8Sor. 

19  For  the  Gods'  service,  for  delight,  O  ludu,  run  o'er  the  height, 

run  o'er  the  fleecy  summit. 
With  thousand   streams,  inviolate,  sweet-scented,  flow  on  for 
gain  of  strength  tiiat  conquers  heroes. 

20  Without  a  car,  without  a  rein  to  guide  them,  unyoked,  like 

coursers  started  in  the  contest. 
These  brilliant  drops  of  Soma  juice  run  forward.     Do  ye,  0 
Deities,  come  nigh  to  drink  them. 

21  So  for  our  banquet  of  the  Gods,  O  Indu,  pour  down  the  rain 

of  heaven  into  the  vessels. 
May  Soma  grant  us  riches  songht  with  longing,  mighty,  ex- 
ceeding strong,   with  store  of  heroes. 

22  What  time  the  loving   spirit's  word   had  formed    him  Chief  of 

all  food,  by  statute  of  the  Higliest, 
Then  louvily  lowing  came  the  cows  to  Indu,  the  chosen,  well- 
loved  Master  in  the  beaker. 

23  The  Sage,  Celestial,  liberal,  raining  bounties,  pours  as  he  flows 

the  Genuine  for  the  Trutliful. 
The  King  shall  be  effectual  strength's  upholder :  he  by  the  ten 
bright  reins  is  mostly  guided. 

24  He  who   beholds  mankind,   made  pure   with  filters,    the  King 

supreme  of  Deities  and  mortals, 
From  days  of  old  is  Treasure-Lord  of  riches :  he,  Indu,  cheri- 
shes fair  well-kept  Order. 

17   Winds :  cf.  *  Vftyu  is  Soma's  guardian  Qad'  (X.  85.  5). 

22  S^yana's  explanation  of  the  first  line  is  extremely  laboured  :— 'When 

the  praioe  of  the  zealous  worshipper  sanctifies  liiiii  as  that  of  a  noisy  (crowd) 

In  front  (praises)  a  distinKuished^^priuce)  for  the  support  (he  affords).* — Wilson. 

23  TAe  Genuine  for  the  Truthful :  rltim  ritltya  :   \\\Ck^o\xi^  VxvsRiVvt  Isodcft. 
5%f  /tf/j  df'i^Ae  reim  :  or  raya,  i.  e.,  tUe  ^uft««A,    'tXi^XwMXvaftHa  ^\^<iN^. 


MTHN  97.]  THE  RIQVEDA,  861 

85  Haste,   like  a  steed,  to  victory   for  glory,  to  Indra's  and  to 
Vayu's  entertaiument. 
Give  ua   food  ample,  thousandfold :  be,  Soma,  the    finder-out 
of  riches  when  they  cleanse  thee. 

26  Effused  by  us  let  Grod-delightiug  Somas  bring  as  they  flow  a 

home  with  noble  heroes — 
Rich  in  all  boons  like  priests  acquiring  favour,  the  worship- 
pers of  heaven,  the  best  of  Cheerers. 

27  So,  God,  for  service  of  the  Gods  flow  onward,  flow,  drink  of 

Gods,  for  ample  food,  0  Soma. 
For  we  go  forth  to  war  against  the  mighty  :  make  heaven  and 
earth  well  stablished  by  thy  cleansing. 

28  Thou,  yoked  by  strong  men,  neighest  like  a  courser,  swifter 

than  thought  is,  like  an  awful  lion. 
By  paths  directed  hitherward,  the  straightest,  send  thou  us 
happiness,  Indu,  while  they  cleanse  thee. 

29  Sprung  from  the  Gods,  a  hundred  streams,  a  thousand,  have 

been  efl'used  :  sages  prepare  and  purge  them. 
Bring  us  from  heaven  the  means  of  winning,  Indu ;  thou  art 
forerunner  of  abundant  riches. 

30  The  streams  of  days  were  poured  as'twere  from  heaven  :  the 

wise  King  doth  not  treat  his  friend  unkindly. 
Like  a  son  following  his  father's  wishes,  grant  to  this  family 
success  and  safety. 

31  Now  are  thy  streams  poured  forth  with  all  their  sweetness, 

wlien,  purified,  thou  goest  throu.;h  the  filter. 
The  race  of   kine  is  thy  gift,   Pavamana :    when  bom   thou 
madest  SArya  rich  with  brightness. 

32  Bright,  bellowing  along  the  path  of  Order,  thou  shinest  as  the 

form  of  life  eternal. 
Thou  flowest  on  as  gladdening  drink  for  Indra,  sending  thy 
voice  out  with  the  hymns  of  sages. 

33  Pouring  out  streams  at  the  Goda*  feast  with  service,  thou, 

Soma,  lookest  down,  a  heavenly  Eagle. 
Enter  the  Soma-holding  beaker,  Indu,  and  with  a  roar  ap- 
proach the  ray  of  Surya. 

34r  Three  are  the  voices  that  the  Courser  utters :  he  speaks  the 
thought  of  prayer,  the  law  of  Order. 


30  The  streams  of  daps :  the  libations  of  Soma  juice  which  we  offered  every 
day.  Like  a  son  :  the  Soma  juice  is  regarded  as  the  son  of  the  yajamdna  oc 
sacrtficer  who  causes  it  to  be  prepared. 

34  Tha  Courser  ia  Soma,  and  the  three  voices  (r-tch.d'K)  ot  "nnot^^  vaWOck.  V^ 
utten  are  »o<n*rding  to  SAyana  praised  or  saured  texxa  m  0[i«  ioxxa  vA  \>ftft  >5>six^» 


862  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  IX 

To  the  Cow's  Master  come  the  Cows  inquiring :  the  hymn 
with  eager  longing  come  to  Soma. 

35  To  Soma  come  the  Cows,  the  Milch-kine  longing,  to   Soma 

sages  with  their  hymns  inquiring. 
Soma«  effused,  is  purified  and  blended  :  our  hymns  and  Trish- 
tup  songs  unite  in  Soma. 

36  Thus,  Soma,  as  we  pour  thee  into  vessels,  while  thou  art  puri- 

fied flow  for  our  welfare. 
Pass  into  Indra  with  a  mighty  roaring :  make  the  voice  swell, 
and  generate  abundance. 

37  Singer  of  true  songs,  ever- watchful,  Soma  hath  settled  in  the 

ladles  when  they  cleanse  him. 
Him  the  Adhvaryus,  paired  and  eager,  follow,  leaders  of  sacri- 
fice and  skilful-handed. 

38  Cleansed  near  the  Sun  as  'twere,  he  as  Creator  hath  filled  full 

heaven  anl  earth,  and  hath  disclosed  them. 
He  by  whose  dear  help  men  gain  all  tlieir  wishes  shall  yield 
the  precious  meed  as  to  a  victor. 

39  He,  being  cleansed,  the  Strength  ener  and  Increaser,  Soma  the 

Bounteous,  helped  us  with  his  lustre. 
Wherewith  our  sires  of  old  who  knew  the  footsteps   found 
light  and  stole  the  cattle  from  the  mountain. 

40  In  the  first  vault  of  heaven  loud  roared  the  Ocean,  King  of 

all  being,  generating  creatures. 
Steer,  in  the  filter,  on  the  fleecy  summit,  Soma,  the   Drop 
eff'used,  hath  waxen  mighty. 

4rl  Soma  the  Steer,  in  that  as  Child  of  Waters  he  chose  the  Gods, 
performed  that  great  achievement. 
He,  Pavamana,   granted   strength  to  ludra;  he,   ludu,  gene- 
rated light,  in  Surya. 

42  Make  Ykyxx  glad,  for  furtherance  and  bounty  :  cheer  Varuna 

and  Mitra,  as  they  cleanse  thee. 
Gladden  the  Gods,  gladden  the  host  of  Maruts  :  make  Heaven 
and  Earth  rejoice,  0  God,  0  Soma. 

43  Flow   onward  righteous  slayer  of  the  wickeJ,    driving  away 

our  enemies  and  sickness. 
Blending  thv  milk  with  milk  which  cows  aff*ord  us.     We  are 
thy  friendsi,  thou  nrt  the  Friend  of  Indra. 


Vedas.     The  three  tones,  low,  middle,  and  high,  are  probably  intended.     Or 
vdAN'h  (the  courser)  may  mean  the  bearer  of  the   oblation,  yajam^noj  as 
S&y&na  exphiina, 
40  In  the  Jirtt  vavlt :  that  is  iu  the  \i\^\ie«yi  ?lttq!wiiw^\..    TV.«.  Occnnv ;  ^\sak» 


jBTMN  97.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  863 

44  Pour  us  a  fount  of  meath,  a  spring  of  treasure  j   send  us  a 

hero  son  and  happy  fortune. 
Be  sweet  to  Indra  when  they  cleanse  thee,   Indu,  and  pour 
down  riches  on  us  from  the  ocean. 

45  Strong  Soma,  pressed,  like  an  impettious  courser,  hath  flowed 

in  stream  as  a  flood  speeding  downward. 
Cleansed,  he  hath  settled  in  his  wooden  dwelling :  ludu  hath 
flowed  with  milk  and  with  the  waters. 

46  Strong,  wise,  for  thee  who  longest  for  his  coming,  this  Soma 

here  flows  to  the  bowls,  0  Indra. 
He,  chariot-borne,  sun-bright,  and   truly  potent,   was  poured 
forth  like  the  longing  of  the  pious. 

47  He,   purified  with   ancient   vital   vigour,    pervading   all  his 

Daughter's  forms  and  figures. 
Finding  his  threefold  refuge  in  the  waters,  goes  singing,  as  a 
priest,  to  the  assemblies. 

.  48  Now,    chariot-borne,  flow   unto  us,   God   Soma,   as  thou  art 
purified  flow  to  the  saucers, 
Sweetest  in  waters,   rich  in  meath,  and  holy,  as  Savitar  the 
God  is,  truthful-minded. 

49  To  feast  him,  flow  mid  song  and  hymn,  to  V&yu,  flow  purified 

to  Varuna  and  Mitra. 
Flow  to  the  song-inspiring  car-borne  Hero,  to  mighty  Indra, 
him  who  wields  the  thunder. 

50  Pour    on  us   garments  that   shall  clothe    us  meetly,    send, 

purified,  milch-kine,  abundant  yielders. 
God   Soma,  send  us  chariot -drawing  horses  that  they  may 
bring  us  treasures  bright  and  golden. 

51  Send  to  us  in  a  stream  celestial  riches,  send  us,  when  thou 

art  cleansed,  what  earth  containeth. 

So  that  thereby  we  may  acquire  possessions  and  Kishihood  in 
Jamadagni's  manner. 

52  Pour  forth  this  wealt  h  with  this  purification  :  flow  onward  to 

the  yellow  lake,  0  Indu. 

Here,   too,  the  Ruddy,  wind-swift,  full  of  wisdom,  shall  give 
a  son  to  him  who  cometh  quickly. 


;  47  HU  Vaxighter*8  forms  and  figures  :  Soma  pervades,  and  imparts  a  share 
\^  €i  his  nutritions  power  to,  the  grass,  herbs,  and  shrubs  which  are  the  varied 
forms  assumed  by  Earth  his  daughter. 

61  RUhihood  in  Jamadagni*8  manner :  '  make  our  a&oted  ^t«.'<j«c  V^-^^^'C^  «s^ 
Jamadagni. ' — WDbob. 
49  rellow:  the  meaniDg  of  mdnschatvi  is  uncerioAU.    ^ea  N\V.  \^»^^  ^^'^ 


I 


864  TffE  EYMN8  OP  [BOOK  if, 

53  Flow  on  for  us  with  this  purification  to  the  famed  ford  of  thee 

whose  due  is  gloiy. 
May  the  Foe-queller  shake  us  down,  for  triumph,  like  a  tree's 
ripe  fruit,  sixty  thousand  treasures. 

54  Eagerly  do  we  pray  for  those  two  exploits,  at  the  blue  lake 

aChd  Prisana,  wrought  in  battle. 
He  sent  our  enemies  to  sleep  and  slew  them,  and  turned  aw»j 
the  foolish  and  unfriendly. 

55  Thou  comest   unto   three   extended   filters,   and     hasteneet 

through  each  one  as  they  cleanse  thee. 
Thou  art  the  giver  of   the   gift,    a   Bhaga,    a   Maghavan  for 
liberal  lords,  0  Indu. 

56  This  Soma  here,  the  Wise,  the  All-obtainer,  flows  on  his  way 

as  King  of  all  existence. 
Driving  the  drops  at  our  assemblies,  Indu  completely  traverses 
the  fleecy  filter. 

57  The  Great  Inviolate  are  kissing  Indu,  and  singing  in  bis  place 

like  eager  sages. 
The  wise  men  send  him  forth  with  ten  swift  fingers,  and  balm 
his  form  with  essence  of  the  waters. 

58  Soma,  may  we,  with  thee  as  Pavamana,  pile  up   together  all 

our  spoil  in  battle. 
This  boon  vouchsafe  us  Yaruna  and   Mitra,   and   Aditi  and 
Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven  ! 

HYMN  XCVIII.  Soma  Payamam. 

Stream  on  us  riches  that  are  sought  by  many,  best  at  winuiug 

strength, 
Biches,  O  Indu,  thousandfold,  glorious,  conquering  the  great 

.53  To  the  famed  ford :  possibly,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the  aid  of  Soma  it 
craved  at  some  ford  of  a  neighbouring  river,  famous  on  account  of  a  battle 
that  has  been  fought  there,  and  destined  to  be  the  scene  of  an  approaohing 
conflict. 

54  The  first  line  is  conjecturally  translated  after  Ludwig,  who  takes 
Prisana  to  be  the  name  of  a  place.  Sftyana's  elaborate  explanation  is  dif- 
ferent : — '  These  two  great  acts,  the  raining  (of  arrows)  and  the  humiliation 
(of  foes),  are  the  givers  of  happiness  ;  they  are  deadly  either  in  a  fight  on 
horseback  or  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight.' — Wilson.  Here  S4yana  explains 
mAnschatvi  (at  the  blue  or  yellow  lake  ?}  by  *  in  battle  with  horaeA/  and 
primne  (at  Prisana  ?)  by  '  in  close,  or  hand-to-hand  encounter.*  Two  victories 
appear  to  be  referred  to,  and  that  is  about  all  that  can  be  said. 

55  The  three  extended  filters  are  said  to  be  fire,  wind,  and  sun,  in  additioB 
to  the  one  artificial  filter  of  wool. 

5/  7%a  OrecU  InvioiaJU :  the  Qoda.    Kiiuing :  or  sipping. 
55  J//  our  spoil  in  battle :  yet  to  V)^  Yfou  m  \Xvft  ^^a^xq^Omsv^  CL^Ut  whireil 
we  look  to  Sotxia  for  help  and  victory. 


lYMN  98.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  865 

2  Effused,  he  hath,  as  on  a  car,  invested  him  in  fleecy  mail : 
Onward  hath  Indu  flowed  in  streams,  impelled,  surrounded  by 

the  wood. 

3  Effused,  this  Indu  hath  flowed  on,    distilling  rapture,  to   the 

fleece : 
He  goes  erect,  as  seeking  kine,  in  stream,  with  light,  to  sacrifice. 

4  For  thou  thyself,  0  Indu,  God,  to  every  mortal  worshipper 
Attractest  riches   thoustindfold,   made   manifest   in  hundred 

forms. 

5  Good  Vritra-slayer,  may  we  be  still   nearest   to  this  wqftlth  of 

thine 
Which  many  crave,  nearest  to  food  and   happiness.  Resistless 
One! 

6  Whom,  bright  with  native    splendour,   crushed  between  the 

pair  of  pressingHstones — 
The  wavy  Friend  whom   Indra  loves — the   twice-five   sisters 
dip  and  bathe, 

7  Him  with  the  fleece  they  purify,  brown,  golden-hued,  beloved 

of  all, 
Who  with  exhilarating  juice  goes  forth  to  all  the  Deities. 

8  Through  longing  for  this  sap  of  yours  ye   drink   what  brings 

ability, 
Even  him  who,  dear  as  heaven's  own  light,  gives  to  our  princes 
high  renown. 

9  Indu  at  holy  rites   produced   you,    Heaven   and   Earth,   the 

Friends  of  men, 
Hill-haunting  God  the  Goddesses.     They  bruised   him  where 
the  roar  was  loud. 

0  For  Vritranslaying  Indra,  thou,  Soma,  art  poured  that  be  may 

drink. 
Poured  for  the  guerdon-giving  man,  poured   for  the   God  who 
sitteth  there. 

1  These  ancient  Somas,  at  the  break  of  day,  have   flowed   into 

the  sieve. 
Snorting  away  at  early  mora  these  foolish  evil-hearted  ones. 


2  By  the  wood  ;  the  woodeij  vat  or  trough. 

8  Seeking  kine :  desirous  of  the  milk  which  is  to  be  mixed  with  his  iuice, 

9  This  stanza  is  difficult.  Sft3'ana  explains  it  differently  : — *  Divine  heaven 
nd  earth  the  progeny  of  Manu,  the  Soma  juice  is  generated  at  your  sacrifices, 
adiant,  abiding  in  the  griuding  stones  ;  (the  priests)  bruise  him  at  the  loud- 
ounding  ceremony.' — Wilson.     Hill-haunting:  cf.  IX.  85.  10. 

10  For  the  guerdon-giving  man:   for  the  good  of  the  luatltvitAX  q1  \}qa 
ftcriftce. 

11  Snorfin^  awai/ :  driviog  aw&y  with  the  bubbling  %o\i\i^  VYi«^  tav^«« 


866  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  11 

12  Friends,  may  the  princes,  ye  and  we,   obtain  this    Most  B» 
splendent  One, 
Gain  him  who  hath  the   smell   of   strength,   win   him   whole 
home   is  very   strength. 

HYMN  XCIX.  Soma  PavsmAni. 

They  for  the  Bold  and  Lovely  One  ply  manly  vigour  like  a  bow ; 
Joyous,  in  front  of  songs  they  weave  bright  raiment   for  the 
Lord  Divine. 

2  And  he,  made  beautiful  by   night,  dips  forward  into  strength- 

ening food. 
What  time  the  sacrificer's   thoughts   speed   on   his   way  the 
Golden-hued. 

3  We  cleanse  this  gladdening  drink  of  his,  the  juice  which  India 

chiefly  drinks, — 
That  which  kine  took  into  their   mouths,  of    old,  and  princes 
take  it  now. 

4  To  him,  while  purifying,  they  have  raised  the   ancient  psalm 

of  praise :  i 

And  sacred  songs  which  bear  the  names  of  Gods  have  suppli- 
cated him. 

5  They  purify  him  as  he  drops,  courageous,  in  the  fleecy  sieve. 
Hi  III  they  instruct  as  messenger  to  bear   the   sage's    morning 

prayer. 

6  Soma,  best  Cheerer,  takes  his  seat,  the  while  they  cleanse  him 

in  the  bowls. 
He  as  it  were  impregns  the  cow,  and  babbles  on,  the  Lord  of  Song. 

12  Who  Jiath  the  smeU  of  strength :  vHjagandhyam :  'fragrant  and  invigo- 
rating.'— Wilson.  *  Forming  or  having  a  wag'»n-load  of  goods  or  spoil.' — S.  P. 
Lexicon.  Him  whose  home  is  strength:  vdjapastyam :  'food  and  dwellings. '" 
Wilson.     '  Him  who  has  a  house  full  of  goods.' — S.  P.  Lexicon. 

1  They:  the  priests.  Ply  manly  vigour  like  a  how:  'stretch  the  bow  of 
manhood.' — WiUon.  They  exert  all  their  uianly  strength,  or  as  Benfey, 
suggests,  attack  and  storm  the  Ood  with  prayer  and  sacrifice,  '  beseeching  and 
besieging '  as  Milton  says.  The  Lord  Divine :  the  Asura  (Zend,  Ahura),  here 
meaning  Soma. 

2  By  night :  hshapd :  *  at  the  end  of  the  night.' — Wilson.  Ludwig  tran* 
slates  Icshapd  by  *  der  fiirst,'  '  the  prince.' 

3  Which  kine  took  into  their  mouths  :  in  the  form  of  the  juices  of  grass 
from  which  the  milky  portion  of  the  libation  is  evolved. 

4  Sftyaua's  explanation  of  the  second  line  of  this  stanza,  is  different : — '  and 
the  fingers  exercising  their  pressure  are  able  (to  prepare  the  oblation)  for  the 
gods.' — Wilson. 

6  He  as  it  were  impregns  the  cow :  meaning,  perhaps,  as   Ludwig   suggests, 
that  the  milk  becomes  effieaciouB  aa  &  Wbwivow  oiA:^   v^Wi  It  is   mixed   with 
Sowa  juice. 


ITMN 100.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  867 

7  He  is  effused  and  beautified,  a  God  for  Gods,  by  skilful  men. 
He  penetrates  the  mi^rtty  floods  collecting  all  he  knows  therein. 

8  Pressed,  Indu,  guided  by  the  men,  thou  art  led  to   the   clean- 

ing sieve. 
Thou,  yielding  ludra  highest  joy,  takest   thy   seat  within  the 
bowls. 

HYMN  C.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

The  Guileless  Ones  are  singing  praise  to  Indra's  well  belovM 

Friend, 
As,  in  the  morning  of  its  life,  the  motheVs  lick  the  new  bom 

calf. 

2  O  Indu,  while  they  cleanse  thee,  bring,  0  Soma,  doubly-waxing 

wealth  : 
Thou  in  the  worshipper's  abode  causest  all  treasures   to  in- 
increase. 

3  Set  free  the  song  which  mind  hath  yoked,  even  as  thunder 

frees  the  rain : 
All  treasures  of  the  earth  and  heaven,  0  Soma,  thou  dost 
multiply. 

4  Thy  stream  when  thou  art  pressed  runs  on  like  some  victorious 

warrior's  steed, 
Hastening  onward  through  the  fleece  like  a  swift  horse  who 
'  wins  the  prize. 

5  Flow  on,  Sage  Soma,  with  thy  stream  to  give  us  mental  power 

and  strength. 
Effused  for  Indra,  for  his  drink,  for  Mitra  and  for  Varuna. 

6  Flow  to  the  filter  with  thy  stream,  effused,  best  winner,  thou, 

of  spoil, 
O  Soma,  as  most  rich  in  sweets  for  Indra,   Vishnu,  and  the 
Gods. 

7  The  mothers,  void  of  guiles,  caress  thee.  Golden-coloured,  in 

the  sieve. 
As  cows,  0  Pavamslna,   lick  the  new-born  calf,   as  Law  com- 
mands. 

7  CoUeeting  all  he  knows  therein  :  the  meaning  of  this  half-line  is  not  clear  : 
-' when  he  is  recognized  amongst  these  (people)  as  the  giver  (of  riches).' 
-  Wilson. 

1   The  OuUeleii  Onei  :  the  vasctttvart  waters. 

7  As  Law  commands  :  vldhannani :   see  Bergaigne,  La   Religion    V^dlt^ty 
II.  218.   note  2.  *At  the  sacrifice.' — Wilson.     *liit\ie  xeaVm.  <A  Yi^v^viu'  — 
\tKBBmaBn. 


1 

868  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  /X 

8  Thou,  Pavam&na,  movest  on  with  woudrous  rays  to  great  re- 

nown. 
Striving  within  the  votary's  house  thou  drivest  all  the  glooms 
away. 

9  Lor»?  of  great  sway,  thou  liftest  thee  above  the  heavens,  above 

the  earth. 
Thou,  Pavamslna,  hast  assumed  thy  coat  of  mail  in  majesty. 

HYMN  CI.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

For  first  possession  of  your  juice,  for  the  exhilarating  drink. 
Drive  ye  away  the  dog,  my  friends,  drive  ye  the  long-tongued 
dog  away. 

2  He  who  with  purifying  stream,  effused,  oomes  flowing  hither- 

ward, 
Indu,  is  like  an  able  steed. 

3  The  men  with  all-pervading  song  send  unassailable  Soma  forth. 
By  pressing-stones,  to  sacrifice. 

4  The  Somas,  very  rich  in  sweets,  for  which  the  sieve  is  des- 

tined, flow. 
Effused,  the  source  of  Indra's  joy:  may  your  strong  juices 
reach  the  Grods. 

5  Indu  flows  on  for  Indra's  sake :  thus  have  the  Deities  declared. 
The  Lord  of  Speech  exerts  himself.  Ruler  of  all,  because  of 

might. 

6  Inciter  of  the  voice  of  song,  with  thousand  streams  the  ocean 

flows. 
Even  Soma,  Lord  of  opulence,  the  Friend  of  Indra,  day  by 
day. 

7  As  Pushan,  Fortune,  Bhaga,  comes  this  Soma  while  they  make 

him  pure. 
He,  Lord  of  all  the  multitude,  hath  looked  upon  the  earth 
and  heaven. 

8  The  dear  cows  lowed  in  joyful  mood  together  to  the  gladden- 

ing drink. 
The  drojte  as  they  were  purified,  the  Soma  juices,  made  them 
paths. 

9  0  Pavamltna,  bring  the  juice,  the  mightiest,  worthy  to   be 

famed, 
Which  the  Five  Tribes  have  over  them,  whereby  we  may  win 
opulence. 


9  The  coat  of  mail:  drdpim :  see  IX.  86. 14. 
1  Drive  ye  away:  prevent  dogs  or  K&k«Ai8Aaa  tcoixi  ^tvc2i^\^^«^\&a,\!JSsi]^ 


BTMN  102]  THE  RIQVEDA.  369 

10  For  us  the  Soma  juices  flow,  tbe  drops  best  furtherers  of  our 

weal, 
Effused  as  friends,  without  a  spot,  benevolent,  finders  of  tbe 
light. 

1 1  Effused  by  means  of  pressing-stones,  upon  the  ox-hide  visible, 
Th^,  treasure-finders,   have  announced  food  unto  us  from 

every  side. 

12  These  Soma  juices,  skilled  in  song,  purified,  blent  with  milk 

and  curd, 
When  moving  and  when  firmly  laid  in  oil,  resemble  lovely  Suns. 

13  Let  not  the  power  of  men  restrain  the  voice  of  the  outpour- 

ing juice : 
As  Bhrigu's  sons  chased  Makha,  so  drive  ye  the  greedy  hound 
away. 

14  The  Friend  hath  wrapped  him  in  his  robe,  as  in  his  parents' 

arms,  a  son. 
He  went,  as  lover  to  a  dame,  to  take  his  station  suitor-like. 

15  That  Hero  who  produces  strength,  he  who  hath  propped  both 

worlds  apart, 
Gold-hued,  hath  wrapped  him  in  the  sieve,  to  settle,  priest- 
like, in  his  place. 

16  Soma  upon  the  ox's  skin  through  the  sheep's  wool  flows  purified. 
Bellowing  out,  the  Tawny  Steer  goes  on  to  Indra's  special 

place. 

HYMN  CI  I.  Soma  PavamOna. 

Thb  Child,  when  blended  with  the  streams,  speeding  the  plan 

of  sacrifice, 
Surpasses  all  things  that  are  dear,  yea,  from  of  old. 

2  The  place,  near  the  two  pressing-stones  of  Trita,   hatJi   he 
occupied. 
Secret  and  dear  through  seven  lights  of  sacrifice. 


13  Makha :  appareutly,  a  demon  whose  name  does  not  occur  again  in  the 
Rigveda. 

'  16  Special  place :  '  prepared  station.*— Wilson.    The  vessel  containing  the 
libation  appropriated  to  ludra. 

1  The  streams :  literally  'the  great/  'waters'  being  understood. 

a  I  am  indebted  to  Prof.  Macdonell  (Journal  of  the  R.  A.  S.,  July,  1893, 
pp.  457-8)  for  the  translation  and  explanation  of  this  and  the  following  very 
difficult  stanzas.  The  place :  far  away  iu  heaven  where  Trita  presses  and 
prepares  the  celestial  Soma  for  Indra.  Ife :  Soma.  Dear :  to  Soma.  Seven 
lifffUe  of  saci'i^ :  probably  the  seven  rays  or  tongues  of  the  aacri^<s.\A.V  ^x^ 
with  which  Soma  Is  chsely  connected.  *  Throu^^  V^[i^  «tt')^u  ^t^cvsASi^ftsik  <A 
MS4fn£ii6g. ' — MaodtmeU, 

24 


370  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  It. 

3  Urge  to  three  courses,  on  the  heights  of  Trita,  riches  in  a 

stream : 
He  who  is  passing  wise  measures  his  courses  out. 

4  Even  at  his  birth  the  Mothers  Seven  taught  him,  for  glory, 

like  a  sage, 
So  that  he,  firm  and  sure,  hath  set  his  mind  on  wealth. 

5  Under  his  sway,  of  one  accord,  are  all  the  guileless  Deities : 
Warriors  to  be  envied,  they,  when  they  are  pleased. 

6  The  Babe  whom  they  who  strengthen  Law  have  generated, 

fair  to  see. 
Much  longed  for  at  the  sacrifice,  most  liberal  Sage, — 

7  To  him,  united,  of  themselves,  come  the  young  Parents  of  the 

rite, 
When  they  adorn  him,  duly  weaving  sacrifice. 

8  With  wisdom  and  with  radiant  eyes  unbar  to  us  the  stall  of 

heaven, 
Speeding  at  solemn  rite  the  plan  of  Holy  Law, 

HYMN  CIII.  Soma  Pavamftns. 

To  Soma  who  is  purified  as  ordering  Priest  the  song  is  raised : 
Bring  meed,  as  'twere,  to  one  who  makes  thee  glad  with  hymns. 

2  Blended  with  milk  and  curds  he  flows  on  through  the  long 

wool  of  the  sheep. 
The  Gold-hued,  purified,  makes  him  three  seats  for  rest. 

3  On  through  the  long  wool  of  the  sheep  to  the  meath-dropping 

vat  he  flows : 
The  Rishis'  sevenfold  quire  hath  sung  aloud  to  him. 

4  Shared  by  all  Gods,  Infallfble,  the  Leader  of  our  holy  hymns, 
Golden-hued  Soma,  being  cleansed,  hath  reached  the  bowls. 

3  'The  main  justification  of  my  interpretation,'  says  Prof.  Macdonell,  'is 
that  I  supply  no  extraneous  word  with  '  tifrai/  but  explain  it  by  the  third 
line.  The  meaning  of  my  translation  is  :  '  Do  thou,  Soma,  on  the  heights  of 
Trita,  direct  the  fertilizing  streams  which  produce  wealth  into  the  channels 
of  Trita,  for  thou  knowest  these  channels,  having  measured  them  out  with 
thy  streams.'  Three  courses :  or  channels,  of  Trita.  He  who  U  passing  wise : 
Soma.    His :  Trita's. 

4  The  Mothers  Seven :  the  Seven -Rivers. 

5  Wari'iors  to  he  envied :  the  meaning  of  the  line  is  uncertain. 

6  They  who  strengthen  Laio :  according  to  SAyana,  the  vasattvari  waters. 

7  The  young  Parents  of  the  rite :  ever-young,  fresh  and  strong  Heaven  and 
Earth.  

2  TAree  seats  for  rest :  three  reservoirs  in  which  he  may  settle.     The  dro- 
nakalasaj  the  ddhavantya,  and  the  pUtobTirit. 
'  3  The  JRiishW  sevenfold  qyXvt :  '  the  wveu  iiift\.T^  oi  \Xift  "R>a>\.\%:  — ^'^wirri. 


BYMN  105]  THE  RIOVBDA.  S7I 

6  After  thy  Godlike  qualities,  associate  with  Indi*a,  go, 
As  a  Priest  purified  by  priests,  Immortal  One. 

6  Like  a  carthorse  who  shows  his  strength,  a  God  effused  for 
Deities, 
The  penetrating  Payam&na  flows  along. 

HYMN  CIV.        '  Soma  Pavamlna. 

Sit  down,  0  friends,  and  sing  aloud  to  him  who  purifies  himself : 
Deck  him  for  glory,  like  a  child,  with  holy  rites. 

2  Unite  him  bringing  household  wealth,  even  as  a  calf,  with 

mother  kine, 
Hint  who  hath  double  strength,  the  God-delighting  juice. 

3  Purify  him  who  gives  us  power,  that  he,  most  BlessM  One, 

maybe 
A  banquet  for  the  Troop,  Mitra,  and  Varuna. 

4  Voices  have  sung  aloud  to  thee  as  finder-out  of  wealth  for  us  : 
We  clothe  the  hue  thou  wearest  with  a  robe  of  milk. 

5  Thou,  Inda,  art  the  food  of  Gods,  0  Sovran  of  all  gladdening 

drinks : 
As  Friend  for  friend,  be  thou  best  finder  of  success. 

6  Drive  utterly  away  from  us  each  demon,  each  voracious  fiend, 
The  godless  and  the  false  :  keep  soripw  far  away. 

HYMN   CV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

SiNO  ye  aloud,  0  friends,  to  him  who  makes  him  pure  for  glad- 
dening drink : 
They  shall  make  sweet  the  Child  with  sacrifice  and  laud. 

2  Like  as  a  calf  with  mother  cows,  so  Indu  is  urged  forth  and  sent, 
Glorified  by  our  hymns,  the  God-delighting  juice. 

3  Effectual  means  of  power  is  he,  he  is  a  banquet  for  the  Troop, 
He  who  hath  been  effused,  mosb  rich  in  meath,  for  Gods. 

4  Flow  to  us,  Indu,  passing  strong,  effused,  with  wealth  of  kine 

and  steeds  : 
I  will  spread  forth  above  the  milk  thy  radiant  hue. 

5  Lord  of  the  tawny,  Indu,  thou  who  art  the  Gods'  most  special 

food, 
As  Friend  to  friend,  for  splendour  be  thou  good  to  men. 

5  Aftei'  thy  Oodlike  qualities :  according  to  Sftyatia,  '  to  the  hosts  of  the  gods.' 

6  Penetrating :  vydnaHh :  *  spreading  widely  into  the  vessels.' — Wilson. 

2  Unite  him :  *  Associate  him  the  support  of  the  mansion  with  the  mater- 
Dal  (waters)  as  the  calf  (with  the  mother).* — Wilson 

3  The  Troop :  the  banded  Maruts. 

^  Zordof  the  tawny :  hartndm  :  S4y&na  «uppUt«  -pa^lluflLm,  ^^XiC^'^« 


972  THE  HYMNS  OF  IBOOM IX* 

6  Drive  utterly,  far  away  from  ua  each  godless,  each  Yoracious 
foe : 
0  Indu,  overcome  and  drive  the  false  i^far. 

HYMN  CVI.  Soma  PavamAna. 

To  Indra,  to  the  Mighty  Steer,  may  these  gold-coloured  juices  go, 
Drops  rapidly  produced,  that  find  the  light  of  heaven. 

2  Effused,  this  juice  victorious  flows  for  Indra,  for  bis  mainte- 

nance. 
Soma  bethinks  him  of  the  Conqueror,  as  he  knows. 

3  May  Indra  in  his  raptures  gain  from  him  the  grasp  that  gath- 

ers spoil, 
And,  winning  waters,  wield  the  steer-strong  thunderbolt. 

4  Flow  vigilant  for  Indra,  thou  Soma,  yea,  Indu,  run  thou  on : 
Bring  hither  splendid  strength  that  finds  the  light  of  heaven. 

5  Do  thou,  all-beautiful,  purify  for  Indra's  sake  the  mighty  juice. 
Path-maker  thou,  far  seeing,  with  a  thousand  ways. 

6  Best  finder  of  prosperity  for  us,  most  rich  in  sweets  for  Gods, 
Proceed  thou  loudly  roaring  on  a  thousand  paths. 

7  0  Indu,  with  thy  streams,  in  might,  flow  for  the  banquet  of 

the  Gods : 
Rich  in  raeath.  Soma,  in  our  beaker  take  thy  place. 

8  Thy  drops  that  swim  in  water  have  exalted  Indra  to  delight : 
The  Grods  have  drunk  thee  up  for  immortality, 

9  Stream  opulence  to  us,  ye  drops  of  Soma,  pressed  and  purified. 
Pouring  down  rain  from  heaven  in  floods,  and  finding  light. 

10  Soma,  while  filtered,  with  his  wave  flows  through  the  long  wool 

of  the  sheep, 
Shouting  while  purified  before  the  voice  of  song. 

11  With   songs  they  send  the  Mighty  forth,  sporting  in  wood, 

above  the  fleece : 
Our  psalms  have  glorified  him  of  the  triple  height. 

12  Into  the  jars  hath  he  been  loosed,   like  an  impetuous  steed 

for  war, 
And  lifting  up  his  voice,  while  filtered,  glided  on. 

13  Gold-hued  and  lovely  in  his  course,  through  tangles  of  the 

wool  he  flows,  . 

A.nd  pours  heroic  fame  upon  the  worshippers. 


Tbe  hymn  is  a  sort  of  rifaccimento  of  Hymn  1 04. 

2  For  his  maintenance :  bhdrdya :  or,  for  battle.     TJie  Conqueror  :  Indra. 
11  /Tim  of  the  tHple  height :  triprifhtJidm :  t\i^  tVvt^  heights  are  probably 
tbe  BrmameDt,  the  mountain,  and  the  «\lax.    *  K>o\^vvi%  \\i\i2ta«^  ^«^<^\jmSw^ 


HTMN  107.]  TBE  RIOVIEDA.  878 

14  Flow  thus,  a   faithful   votary:  the   streams   of  meath  have 
been  effused. 
Thou  comest  to  the  filter,  singing,  from  each  side. 

HYMN  CVII.  Soma  PavamAna, 

Hbnob  sprinkle  forth  the  juice  effused,  Soma,   the  best  of 

sacred  gifts. 
Who,  frieud  of  man,  hath  run  amid  the  water-streams. 

He  hath  pressed  Soma  out  with  stones. 

2  Now,  being  purified,  flow  hither  through  the  fleece  inviolate 

and  most  odorous. 

We  gladden  thee  in  waters  when  thou  art  effused,  blending 
thee  still  with  juice  and  milk. 

3  Pressed  out  for  all  to  see,  delighting  Gods,  Indu,  Far-sighted 

One,  is  mental  power. 

4  Cleansing  thee.  Soma,  in  thy  stream,  thou  flowest  in  a  eatery 

robe  : 
Giver  of  wealth,  thou  sittest  in  the  place  of  Law,  0  God,  a 
fountain  made  of  gold. 

5  Milking  the  heavenly  udder  for  dear  meath,  he  hath  sat  in 

the  ancient  gathering-place. 

Washed  by  the  men,  the  Strong,  Far-seeing  One  streams  forth 
nutritious  food  that  all  desire. 

6  0  Soma,  while  they  cleanse  thee,   dear  atid  watchful  in  the 

sheep's  long  wool. 

Thou  hast  become  a  Sinorer  most  like  Angiras  :  thou  madest 
Surya  mount  to  heaven. 

7  Bountiful,   best  of  furtherers,    Soma  floweth  on,  Rishi  and 

Singer,  k^en  of  sight. 

Thou  hast  become  a  Sage  most  welcome  to  the  Gods :  thou 
madest  Sdrja  mount  to  heaven. 

8  Pressed  out  by  pressers.  Soma  goes  over  the  fleecy  backs  of 

sheep. 

Goes,  even  as  with  a  mare,  in  tawny-coloured  stream,  goes 
in  exhilarating  stream. 

9  Down  to  the  water  Soma,  rich  in  Kine,  hath  flowed  with  cows, 

with  cows  that  have  been  milked. 

1  He :  the  priest. 

4  In  the  place  of  Law :  in  the  place  of  Law-ordained  B&crlfLcA. 

5  MiUcin^  the  heavenly  udder  for  dear  «veatK :  ex\>TTiQ.\\Tk%  V^^^  vr^rX.  «&^ 
predoas  juice  from  the  atAlk  and  tendrils  oi  tho  ^oma^  ^\wi\i. 


874  THE  ffTMNS  OF  [BOOK  IT. 

They  have  approached  the  mixing-vesseU  as  a  sea :  the  cheerer 
streams  for  the  carouse. 

10  Effused  by  stones,  0  Soma,  and  urged  through  the  long  wool 

of  the  sheep, 
Thou,  entering  the  saucers  as  a  man  the  fort,  gold-hued  hast 
settled  in  the  wood. 

11  He  beautifies  himself  through  the  sheep's  long  fine  wool,  like 

an  impetuous  stped  in  war, 
Even  Soma  Pavamana  who  shall  be  the  joy  of  sages  and  of 
holy  bards. 

12  0  Soma, — for  the  feast  of  Gods,  river-like  he  hath  swelled 

with  surge. 
With  the  stalk's  juice,  exhilarating,  resting  not,  into  the  vat 
that  drops  with  meath. 

13  Like  a  dear  son  who  must  be  decked,  the  Lovely  One  hath 

clad  him  in  a  shining  robe. 
Men  skilful  at  their  work  drive  him  forth,  like  a  car,  into  the 
rivers  from  their  hands. 

14  The  living   drops  of  Soma  juice  pour,  as  they  flow,  the  glad- 

dening drink. 
Intelligent   drops  above  the  basin  of  the  sea,  exhilarating, 
finding  light. 

15  May  Pavamana,  King  and  God,  speed  with  his  wave  over  the 

sea  the  lofty  rite  : 
May  he  by  Mitra's  and  by  Varuna's  decree  flow  furthering  the 
lofty  rite. 

16  Far-seeing,  lovely,  guided  by  the  men,  the  God  whose  home  is 

in  the  sea — 

17  Soma,  the  gladdening  juice,  flows  pressed  for. Indra  with  his 

Marut  host : 
He  hastens  o'er  the  fleece  with  all  his  thousand  streams :  men 
make  him  bright  and  beautiful. 

18  Purified  in  the  bowl  and  gendering  the  hymn,  wise  Soma  joys 

among  the  Gods. 
Robed  in  the  flood,  the  Mighty  One  hath   clad  himself   with 
milk  and  settled  in  the  vats. 

9  They  have  approached  the  mixing-vessels  like  a  sea :  samvdrandni,  from 
samvrif  to  cover,  enclose,  surround,  must,  apparently,   mean  the  vessels  that 
contain  the  juices  and  not   the  juices   themselves  as   S&yana  explains: — 'his 
enjoyable  juices  go  (to  the  pitcher  as  'watftva'^  to  th«  ocean.' — Wilson.' 

J 2  O  Soma Ke^  is  a  sort  of  periphxaaia  Iot  ^oxm»  \\i  VJtv^  xw^mvcAiCY^^  ^ma, 

1^  Of  the  sea  :  of  the  firmament,  ox  a^a  ol  wx. 


HYHK 108.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  375 

19  0  Soma,  Indu,  every  day  thy  friendship  hath  been  my  delight. 
Many  fiends  follow  me ;  help  me,  thou  Tawny-hued ;  pass  on 

beyond  these  barriers. 

20  Close  to  thy  bosom  am  I,  Soma,  day  and  night,  0  Tawny-hued, 

for  friendship  sake. 
Sdrya  himself  refulgent  with  his  glow  have  we  overtaken  in  his 
course  like  birds. 

2 1  Deft-handed  !  thou  when  purified  liftest  thy  voice  amid  the  sea. 
Thou,  Pavam^ua,  makest  riches  flow  to  us,  yellow,  abundant, 

much-desired. 

22  Making  thee  pure  and  briglit   in  the  sheep's   long  wool,  thou 

hast  bellowed,  steer-like,  in  the  wood. 
Thou  flowest.  Soma  Pavamana,  balmed  with   milk  unto   the 
special  place  of  Gods. 

23  Flow  on  to  win  us  strength,  flow  on  to  lofty  lore  of  every  kind. 
Thou,  Soma,  as  Exhilarator  wast   the   first  to  spread   the   sea 

abroad  for  Gods. 

24  Flow   to  the   realm  of  earth,  flow  to  the   realm  of  heaven,  O 

Soma,  in  thy  righteous  ways. 
Fair  art  thou  whom  the  sages,  0  Far-seeing  One,  urge  onward 
with  their  songs  and  hymns. 

25  Over  the  cleansing  sieve  have  flowed  the  Pavam&nas  in  a  stream, 
Girt  by  the  Maruts,  gladdening,  Steeds  with  Inra's  strength, 

for  wisdom  and  for  dainty  food. 

26  Urged  onward  by  the  pressers,  clad  in  watery  robes,  Indu  is 

speeding  to  the  vat. 
He  gendering  light,  hath  made  the  glad  Cows  low,  the  while 
he  takes  them  as  his  garb  of  state. 

HYMN  CVIir.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

For  Indra,   flow   thou   Soma   on,  as  gladdening  juice  most 

sweet,  intelligent. 
Great,  cheering,  dwelling  most  in  heaven. 
2  Thou,  of  whom  having  drunk    the   Steer  acts   like   a  steer : 
drinking  of  this  that  finds  the  light, 

19  Many  fiends:  the  text  has  ouly  pui-Hni,  many,  in  the  neuter  plural. 
SAyana  supplies  rakskdhsi  Hdkshasas  or  fiends.  Pass  on  beyond  these  barriers : 
'overcome  those  who  surround  me.* — Wilson. 

20  Close  to  thy  bosom  am  I:  'I  (delight)  in  thy  presence.' — Wilson. 

21  Amid  the  sea :  antarikshe  kalase  vd,  in  the  firmament  or  in  the  beaker, 
sayH  SAyana. 

25  The  Pavamdnas :  'thy  purified  juices.* — Wilson. 

2   The  Steer  acts  like  a  steer :  vrishabhd  vrtshdydte  :  *  th^  «>\\o^«t«t  IxsAx^v^ 
invigorated.' — WUson.     Etusa :  one  of  the  horaea  oi  tVi^  ^M\i\  ot  ^Vat^^  va. 
general;— *aa  a  horse  comes  to  the  battle.* — S&ya)^«b. 


876  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IX. 

He,  £xcellently  Wise,  is  come  to  strengthening  food,   to  spoil 
and  wealth  like  Etasa. 

3  For,  verily,  Pavartiatia,  thou  hast,  splendidest,  called    all   the 

generations  of 
The  Gods  to  immortality. 

4  By  whom  Dadhyach  Navagva  opens  fastened  doors,  by  whom 

the  sages  gained  their  wish. 
By  whom  they  won  the  fame  of  lovely  Amrita  in  the  felicity  of 
Gods. 

5  Effused,  he  floweth  in  a  stream,  best  rapture-giver,  in  the  long 

wool  of  the  sheep. 
Sporting,  as  'twere  the  waters*  wave. 

6  He  who  from  out  the  rocky  cavern  took  with  might   the  red- 

refulgent  watery  Cows, — 
Thou  masterest  the  stable  full  of  kine   and  steeds  :  burst  it, 
brave  Lord,  like  one  in  mail. 

7  Press  ye  and  pour  him,  like  a   steed,   laud-worthy,   speeding 

through  the  region  and  the  flood. 
Who  swims  in  water,  roars  in  wood ; 

8  Increaser  of  the  water.  Steer  with  thousand   streams,  dear,  to 

the  race  of  Deities ; 
Who  born  in  Law  hath  waxen  mighty  by  the  Law,  King,  God, 
and  lofty  Ordinance. 

9  Make  splendid  glory  shine  on  iis,  thou  Lord  of   strengthening 

food,  God,  as  the  Friend  of  Gods  : 
Unclose  the  fount  of  middle  air. 

10  Roll  onward  to  the  bowls,  0   Mighty    One,  effused,  as   Prince 

supporter  of  the  tribes. 
Pour  on  us  rain  from  heaven,  send  us  the  waters'  flow  :  incite 
our  thoughts  to  win  the  spoil. 

1 1  They  have   drained  him    the  Steer   of   heaven,    him    with  a 

thousand  streams,  distilling  rapturous  joy, 
Him  who  brings  all  thing  excellent. 

12  The  Mighty  One  was  born  Immortal,  giving   life,   lightening 

darkness  with  his  shine. 
Well-praised  by  sages  he  hath  by  his  wondrous  power  assumed 
the  Threefold  as  his  robe. 


4  Dadhj^ach  Navagva  :  Dadbyach  w«8  the  eon  of  Atharvan  tlie  priest  who 

first  obtained  fire  and  offered  Soma  and  prayer  to  the  Gods.     Here  he  i«  called 

A  NavHgya  &n(\  consequently  one  of  the  Angiraees.     See  both  names  in   Vol. 

/.,  Index.      Won  the  fame  of  lorely  Amvita  :    *  oV>\a\\i^  t.\\ft  sustenance  of  tbe 

delicious  ("Ambrosial)  water.' — ^Wilsoii. 

12  The  Threefold:  the  moruing,  uoou,  wxd  wfe\x«i\^\\>oaJw«x. 


BYMN  10^.]  TBE  RIQVEDA.  377 

13  Effused  is  he  who  brings  good  things,  who  brings  us  bounteous 

gifts  and  sweet  refreshing  food, 
Soma  who  brings  us  quiet  homes  : 

14  He  whom  our  Tndra  and  the  Marut   host   shall   drink,  Bhaga 

shall  drink  with  Aryamau, 
By  whom  we  bring  to  us  Mitra  and  Varuna  and  Indra  for  our 
great  defence. 

15  Soma,  for  Indra*8  drink  do  thou,  led  by  the  men,  well-weapon- 

ed  and  most  gladdening. 
Flow  on  with  greatest  store  of  sweets. 

1 6  Enter  the  Soma-holder,  even  Indra's  heart,  as  rivers  pass  into 

the  sea, 
Acceptable  to  Mitra,  Vayu,  Varuna,  the  noblest  Pillar  of  the 
heavens. 

HYMN  CIX.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Pleasant  to  Indra's,  Mitra's,  Piishan's   Bhaga's   taste,   speed 
onward.  Soma,  with  thy  flowing  stream. 

2  Let  Indra  drink,  O  Soma,  of  thy   juice   for  wisdom,  and   all 

Deities  for  strength. 

3  So  flow  thou  on  as  bright  celestial  juice,  flow  to   the  vast,  im- 

mortal dwelling-place. 

4  Flow  onward,  Soma,  as  a  mighty  sea,  as  Father  of   the   Gods, 

to  every  form. 

5  Flow  on,  0  Soma,  radiant  for  the  Gods  and  Heaven  and  Earth, 

and  bless  our  progeny. 

6  Thou,  bright  Juice,  art  Sustainer  of  the  sky  :  flow,  mighty,  in 

accordance  with  true  Law. 

7  Soma,  flow  splendid    with   thy   copious   stream   through   the 

great  fleece  as  in  the  olden  time. 

8  Born,  led  by  men,  joyous,  and  purified,  let  the  Light-finder 

make  all  blessings  flow. 

13  The  metre  of  this  stanza  is  Gftyatrl  YavamadhyA,  that  is  G&yatrl  haviog 
the  middle  like  a  barley-corn,  thick  in  the  middle  and  tapering  at  both  ends  : 
first  a  P&da  of  eight  syllables,  then  one  of  twelve,  and  lastly  another  of  eight. 

The  Rishis  are  the  Agnayo  DhishnyAb,  sacrifical  Agnis  or  Fires,  said  to  be 
sons  of  tsvara  the  Supreme  Deity  of  post-Vedic  times. 

3  Flow  to  the  vast  immortal  dwelling-place :  *  flow  for  immortality  and 
spacious  abode.' — Wilson. 

4  To  every  form  :  to  all  the  forms  or  essencea  ol  t\ift  Qtoda  SxiV.^  \iVv^  V^ 
enterg.  Or  to  every  power,  to  aid  us  iu  every  way^ 


1 

378  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /J&l, 

9  Indu,  while  cleansed,  keeping  the  people  safe,  shall  give  ut 
all  possessions  for  our  own. 

10  Flow  on  for  wisdom,  Soma,  and  for  power,  as  a  strong  courser 

bathed,  to  win  the  prize. 

11  The  pressers  purify  this  juice  of  thine,  the   Soma,  for   delight, 

and  lofty  fame. 

12  They  deck  the    Gold-hued   Infant,    newly-born,   even    Soma, 

Indu,  in  the  sieve  for  Gods. 

13  Fair  Indu  hath  flowed  on  for  rapturous   joy.    Sage   for    good 

fortune  in  the  waters'  lap. 

14  He  bears  the  beauteous  name  of   Indra,    that   wherewith   he 

overcame  all  demon  foes. 

15  All  Deities  are  wont  to  drink  of  him,  pressed  by  the  men  and 

blent  with  milk  and  curds. 

16  He  hath  flowed  forth  with  thousand   streams   effused,    flowed 

thiough  the  filter  and  the  sheep's  long  wool. 

17  With  endless  genial  flow  the  Strong  hath  run,  purified  by  the 

waters,  blent  with  milk. 

18  Pressed  out  with  stones,  directed  by   the   men,    go   forth,   0 

Soma,  into  India's  throat.  • 

19  The  mighty  Soma  with  a  thousand  streams  is  poured  to  Indra 

through  the  cleansing  sieve. 

20  Indu  they  balm  with  pleasant  milky  juice   for  Indra,  for   the 

Steer,  for  his  delight. 

21  Lightly,  for  sheen,  they  cleanse  thee  for  the  Gods,  gold-colour- 

ed, wearing  water  as  thy  robe. 

22  Indu  to  Indra  streams,  yea,  downward  streams.  Strong,  flow- 

ing to  the  floods,  and  mingling  there. 

HYMN  ex.  Soma  PavaraAna. 

O'erpowbring  Vritras,  forward  run  to  win  great  strength  : 
Thou  speedest  to  subdue  like  one  exacting  debts. 

2  In  thee,  effused,  0  Soma,  we    rejoice    ourselves    for   great  su- 

premacy in  fight: 
Thou,  Pavamana,  enterest  into  mighty  deeds. 

3  0  Pavamana,  thou  didst  generate  the  Sun,  and  spread  the  mois- 

ture out  with  power. 
Hasting  to  us  with  plenty  vivified  with  milk. 

14  He  bears :  according  to   S&yana,  the  translation   of   the   first    half -line 
would  be  :  Indra' s  fair  body  he  supports,  wherewith,  etc. 

3  With  plenty  vivified  with  milk:  *mt\i  «.\i>Mi^Wi^.  m^^v^m  >(}<aa.\.  ^^cvsqxm 
cattle  (for  thy  worshippers).* ^-WUaou. 


MYMN  m.]  TBE  RIQVEDA.  379 

4  Thou  didst  produce  him,   Deathless   God !  mid  mortal   men 

for  maintenance  of  Law  and  lovely  Amrita : 
Thou  evermore  hast  moved  making  strength  flow  to  us. 

5  All  round  about  hast  thou  with  glory  pierced  for  us  as  'twere 

a  never-failing  well  for  men  to  drink, 
Borne  on  thy  way  in  fragments  from  the  presser's  arms. 

6  Then,  beautifully  radiant,  certain  Heavenly  Ones,  have  sung 

to  him  their  kinship  as  they  looked  thereon, 
And  Savitar  the  Ood  opens  as  'twere  a  stall. 

7  Soma,  the  men  of  old  whose  grass  was  trimmed  addressed  the 

hymn  to  thee  for  mighty  strength  and  for  renown  : 
So,  Hero,  urge  us  onward  to  heroic  power. 

8  They  have  drained  forth  from  out  the  great  depth  of  the  sky 

the  old  primeval  milk  of  heaven  that  claims  the  laud  : 
They  lifted  up  their  voice  to  Indra  at  his  birth. 

9  As  long  as  thou,  0  Pavamana,  art  above  this  earth  and  heaven 

and  all  existence  in  thy  might. 
Thou  standest  like  a  Bull  the  chief  amid  the  herd. 

10  In  the  sheep's  wool  hath  Soma  Pavamana  flowed,  while  they 
.  cleanse  him,  like  a  playful  infant, 

Indu  with  hundred  powers  and  hundred  currents. 

11  Holy  and  sweet,  while  purified,  this  Indu  flows  on,  a  wave  of 

pleasant  taste,  to  Indra, — 
Strength- winner,  Treasure-finder,  Life-bes tower. 

12  So  flow  thou  on,  subduing  our  assailants,  chasing  the  demons 

hard  to  be  encountered. 
Well-armed  and  conquering  our  foes,  0  Soma. 

HYMN  CXI,  Soma  PavamAna. 

With  this  his  golden  splendour  purifying  him,  he  with  his 
own  allies  subdues  all  enemies,  as  Sura  with  his  own  allies. 

Cleansing  himself  with  stream  of  j  nice  he  shines  forth  yellow- 
hued  and  red,  when  with  the  praisers  he  encompasses  all 
forms,  with  praisers  having  seven  mouths. 

6  In  fragments :  in  pieces  of  the  crushed  stalk  and  shoots  of  the  Soma- plant. 

6  Beautifully  radiant :  vasui^i&ehaK :  according  to  SAyana,  a  proper  name, 
Vasuruchas,  plural  of  Vasuruch.  Opens  as  'twere  a  stall :  'drives  away  the 
obstructing  (darkness).* — Wilson. 


1  ffe :  Soma.     All  enemies  :  the  fiends  of  darkness.     As  SHra  with  his  own 
allies:  as  Sdrya  or  the  Sun  with  his  attendant  beams  of  light.     All  forms. - 
visvd  i^pdt :  all  the  lunar  mansions,  according  to  Sftyana.    Accotdiv^^  \io  ^-^'Si- 
brandt,  (assumest)  all  beauty.     With  the  prawcrs ;  Vxkvu^ln'^ :   ^etV-K^^^Cw^ 
Augiraaea  are  iDtended,     Having  seven  mouiki  :  that*\a,  OTie  xaoxxJOa.  ^^Os^^'Ottsi 
mouth  beiag  mentioned  in  reference  to  their  love  ol  ^om«.  \>xVi^- 


380  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /X 

2  That  treasure  of  the  PaQis  thou  discoveredst ;  thou  with  thy 

mothers  deckest  thee  iu  thine  abode,  with  songs  of  worship 
in  thine  home. 
As   'twere  from   far,  the  hymn  is  heard,    where  holy  songs 
resound  in  joy.     He  with   the  ruddy-hued,   threefold  hath 
won  life-power,  he,  glittering,  hath  won  life-power. 

3  He  moves  intelligent,   directed  to  the  East.     The  very  beau- 

teous car  rivals  the  beams  of  light/>  the  beautiful  celestial 
car. 
Hymns,  lauding  manly  valour,  came,  inciting  Tndra  to  success, 
that  ye  may  be  unconquered,  both  thy  bolt  and  thou,  both 
be  unconquered  in  the  war. 

HYMN  CXII.  Soma  Pavamftna. 

Ws  all  have  various  thoughts  and  plans,  and  diverse  are  the 

ways  of  men. 
The  Brahman  seeks  the  worshipper,  wright  seeks  the  cracked, 

and  leech  the  maimed.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

2  The  smith  with  ripe  aud  seasoned  plants,  with  feathers  of  the 

birds  of  air, 
With  stones,  and  with  enkindled  flames,,  seeks  him  who  hath 
a  store  of  gold.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra*s  sake. 

3  A  bard  am  I,  my  dad's  a  leech,  mammy  lays  corn  upon  the 

stones. 
Striving  for  wealth,  with  varied  plans,  we  follow  our  desires 
like  Kiiie.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

2  Treasuve  of  the  Panis :  the  rays  of  light  carried  ofif  and  concealed  by  the 
demons  of  <larkness.  Thy  Mothers:  apparently  the  Dawns.  According  to  Sftyaua 
the  vasativtirt  waters.  Threefold :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text,  and  it 
is  uncertain  what  tHdhttubhih  refers  to.  S&yana  refers  it  to  the  vasctHvart 
waters,  and  explains  it  by  '  the  supporters  of  the  three  worlds.'  GrasBmann 
thinks  that  the  beverages,  consisting  of  three  ingredients,  mixed  with  the 
Soma  juice  are  intended.  Probably  the  Dawns,  sometimes  spoken  of  as  three 
(cf.  VIII.  41.  3),  are  meant. 

3  The  very  beauteous  car :  of  Soma.    Beams  of  light :  sunbeams. 


The  hymn  app-ars  to  be  an  old  popular  Rong  transformed  into  an  address 
to  Soma  by  attaching  to  each  stanza  a  refrain  which  has  no  connexion  with 
the  subject  of  the  song.  But  see  Vedische  Studien^  I.  p.  107.  The  hymn  is 
translated  in  Muir's  0  S.  Texts,  V.  424. 

1  The  Brahman :  *  Tliis  verse  distinctly  proves  that  the  priesthood  already 
formed  a  profe^^sion.' — Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  252. 

2  plants  :  meaning  here  reeds  which  were  made  into  arrows.  With  stonest 
and  with  enkindled  fiames :  according  to  S4yana,  with  glistening  atones    to 

-  r/i2  the  heads  o(  the  arrows      Who  Ka.ih  a  store  of  gold:  and  will  be  able 

-  /)/»K  Well  for  tlie  arrows  which  U\e  «bTt\B«i.v\  Tcv«JzLft»  lot  \s\ta.. 

S  Jfy  dad:  tatah  :  a  familiar  exv^reasvon,  QOTt^aA^o^^va.^ \ja  mxvS.,\j»as«ss|. 


HYMN  118.]  TBB  RIOVSDA.  Ml 

4  The  horse  would  draw  an  easy  car,  gay  hosts  attract  the  laugh 
and  jest. 
The  male  desires  his  mate's  approach,  the  frog  is  eager  for  the 
flood.     Flow,  ludu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

HYMN   CXIII.  Soma  PavamAna. 

Let  Vritra-slaying  ludra  drink  Soma  by  Saryan&v&n's  aide, 
Storing  up  vigour  in  bis  heart,  prepared  to  do  heroic  deeds. 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

2  Lord  of  the  Quarters,  flow  thou  on,  boon  Soma,  from  Arjika  land, 
Etfused  with  ardour  and  with  faith,  and  the  true  hymn  of 

sacrifice.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

3  Hither  hath  SArya's  Daughter  brought  the  wild  Steer  whom 

Parjanya  nursed. 
Gandharvas  have  seized  hold  of  him,  and  in  the  Soma  laid 
the  juice.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

4  Splendid  by  Law  !  declaring  Law,  truth-speaking,  truthful  in 

thy  works, 
Enounciug  faith.  King  Soma  !  thou,  0  Soma,  whom  thy  maker 
decks.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

5  Together  flow  the  meeting  streams  of  him  the  Great  and  truly 

Strong. 
The  juices  of  the  juicy  meet.     Made  pure  by  prayer,  0  Golden- 
hued,  flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

6  0  Pavamana,  where  the  priest,  as  he  recites  the  rhythmic 

prayer. 
Lords  it  o'er  Soma  with  the  stone,  with  Soma  bringing  forth 
delight,  flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

7  0  PavamS,na,  place  me  in  that  deathless,  undecaying  world 
Wherein  the  light  of  heaven  is  set,  and  everlasting  lustre  shines. 

Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake, 

8  Make  me  immortal  in  that  realm  where  dwells  the  King,  Yivas- 

vILn's  Son, 
Where  is  the  secret  shrine  of  heaven,  where  are  those  waters 
young  and  fresh.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

1  Saryandvdn :  a  lake  in  the  Kurukshetra  district. 

2  Of  the  QuoHera :  of  the  f on r  regions  of  the  sky.  Arjtka  land:  accord- 
ing to  SAyana,  the  country  of  the  Rijlkas.     Cf.  VIII.  7.  29. 

3  The  vfiid  Steer  whom  Parjanya  nursed :  the  mighty  Soma-plant  whose 
growth  has  been  fostered  by  the  God  of  the  rainy  cloud.  SHryas  Daughter : 
St'oddhA  or  Faith.  Cf.  IX.  1.  6.  Oandharvas:  guardians  of  the  heavenly 
Soma.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

4  Thy  maker :  the  Soma-presser,  or  the  institutor  of  thd  sacrifice  :-^'  t^b^^^k 
upholder  (of  the  rite).* —Wilson. 

d  ThiKing:  Yama,  the  ruler  of  departed  Bpixila,  ^oti  ^i  "S  vi^ANVok.    ^sr» 
Vol  L,  Index. 


382  THE  RIOVEDA.  [BOOE  JZ 

9  Makemeimmovtuliu  that  realm  where  they  move  even  as  they  listj 
In  the  third  sphere  of  inmost  heaven  where  lucid   worlds  are 
full  of  light.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

1 0  Make  me  immortal  in  that  realm  of  eag^  wish  and  strong  desire, 
The  region  of  the  radiant  Moon,  where  food  and  full  delight 

are  found.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

1 1  Make  me  immortal  in  that  realm  where  happiness  and  tran- 

sports, where 
Joys  and  felicities  combine,  and  longing  wishes  are  fulfilled. 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

HYMN  CXIV.  Soma  PavamAna. 

The  man  who  walketh  as  the  Laws  of  Indu  Pavam&na  bid, — 
Men  call  him  rich  in  children,  him,  0  Soma,  who  hath  met  thy 
thought.    Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

2  Kasyapa,  Rishi,  lifting  up  thy  voice  with  hymn-composers'  lauds, 
Pay  reverence  to  King  Soma  born  the  Sovran  Ruler  of  the 

plants.     Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

3  Seven  regions  have  their  several  Suns ;  the  ministering  priests 

are  seven; 
Seven  are  the  Aditya  Deities,—  with  these,  0  Soma,  guard  thou 
us.     Flow,   Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

4  Guard  us  with  this  oblation  wl)ich,  King  Soma,  hath  been 

dressed  for  thee. 
Let  not  malignity  conquer  us,  let  nothing  evil  do  us   harm. 
Flow,  Indu,  flow  for  Indra's  sake. 

9  Where  they  move  even  as  they  litt :  *  where  action  is  unrestrained.* — Muir. 
*  Where  the  sun  wanders  at  will.* — Wilson. 

10  0/  the  radiant  Moon :  the  adjective  bradhndaya,  of  the  ruddy  or  brilliant, 
stands  without  a  substantive.  'Sun'  is  supplied  by  Sftyana.  '  Dea  rota- 
tralenden.* — L'ldwig.     See  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  I.,  396, 

As  regards  the  joys  of  the  departed,  referred  to  in  stanzas  7 — 12,  Professor 
von  Roth  observes  (Journ.  Amer.  Orient.  Soc.  iii.  343,  quoted  by  Dr.  Muir, 
O.  S.  Texts,  V.  307)  *  The  place  where  these  glorified  ones  are  to  live  is  heaven. 
In  order  to  show  that  not  merely  an  outer  court  of  the  divine  dwellings  is 
set  apai  t  for  them,  the  highest  heaven,  the  midst  or  innermost  part  of  heaven, 
is  expressly  spoken  of  as  their  seat.  This  is  their  place  of  rest  ;  and  its 
divine  splendour  is  not  disfigured  by  any  specification  of  particular  beauties 
or  enjoyments,  such  as  those  with  which  other  religions  have  been   wont  to 

adorn  tlie  mansions  of  the  blest There  they  are  happy  :  the  language  used 

to  describe  their  condition  is  the  same  with  which  is  denoted  the  moat  exalted 
felicity.'  

2  Kasyapa :  the  seer  of  the  hymn  addresses  himself. 

3  Seven  regions :  the  regions  of  the  sky,  the  four  quarters  with  intermediate 
points.  They  are  sometimes  said  to  be  five,  six,  or  seven  in  number,  but 
wore  frequently  eight.     Aditya  Deities:    Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Bbaga, 

Ddksba,  Ansa,  and  perhaps  Dh&.tar.    Ot\ieT  «itt\i\xiera.tion8  also  are  given,  and 
tbeir  number  is  eometimea  said  tobft  e\^\\t.    ^«ft'tt..'\Ax3^«.x,^«d.ui  H^ftiuif,  I. 
p.  2521  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXILUV 


BOOK  THE  TENTH. 


HYMN  I.  Agni. 

High  hath  the  Mighty  risen  before  the  dawning,  and  come  to 

us  with  light  from  put  the  darkness. 
Fair-shapen  Agni  with  white-shining  splendour  hath  filled  at 

birtli  all  human  Jbabitations. 

2  Thou,  being  born,  art   Child   of   Earth  and   Heaven,    parted 

among  the  plants  in  beauty,  Agni ! 
The  glooms  of  night  thou,  Brilliant  Babe,   subduest,   and   art 
come  forth,  loud  roaring,  from  thy  Mothers. 

3  Here,  being  manifested,  lofty  Vishnu,  full    wise,  protects   his 

own  supremest  station. 
When  they  have  offered  in  his    mouth   their   sweet   milk,    to 
him  with  one  accord  they  sing  forth  praises. 

4  Thence  bearing  food  the  Mothers   come   to   meet   thee,    with 

food  for  thee  who  givest  food  its  increase. 
These  in  their  altered  form   again   thou   meetest.     Thou  art 
Invoking  Priest  in  homes  of  mortals. 

5  Priest  of  the  holy  rite,  with  car  that  glitters,    refulgent  Ban- 

ner of  each  act  of  worship. 
Sharing  in  every  God  through   might   and   glory,  even   Agni 
Guest  of  men  I  summon  hither.  ^ 

6  So  Agni  stands  on  earth's   most   central   station,    invested  in 

well-decorated  garments. 
Born,  red  of  hue,  where  men  pour  out  libations,    0    King,    as 
great  High  Priest  bring  the  Gods  hither. 

7  Over  the  earth  and  over  heaven,  0  Agni,  thou,  Son,  hast  ever 

spread  above  thy  Parents. 
Come,  Youthfullest!  to  those  who   long   to   meet   thee,   and 
hither  bring  the  Gods,  0  Mighty  Victor. 

1  2'Jie  Mighty :  Agni. 

2  Among  the  plant$:  according  to  S&yana,  in  the  fire-sticks. 

3  Vithnu :  in  the  form  of  Agni  who  is  his  manifestation  on  earth.     They : 
worshippers. 

4  The  Mothers:  the  plants  which -oourish  life.     In  their  altered  form:  as 
dry  wood  which  Agni,  as  fire,  consumes. 

5  Sharing  in:  because  Agni  as  the  bearer  oi  iii^u'fi  o\^ftXivau^  %\xy^^t\a  >J^ 
other  Oodt, 


884  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1, 

HYMN  ir.  Agm. 

Gladdbn  the  yeaiiiing  Gods,  O   thou   Most  Youthful :  bring 

them,  0  Lord  of  Seasons,  knowing  seasons, 
With  all  tbe  Priests  Celestial,  0  Agni.    Best   worshipper  art 

thou  of  all  luvokers. 

2  Thine  is  the  Herald's,  thine  the  Cleanser's  office,    thinker  art 

thou,  wealtb-giver,  true  to  Order. 
Let  us  with  Svaha  offer  up  oblations,  and   Agni,  worthy  Qod, 
pay  the  Gods  worship. 

3  To  the  'Gods'  pathway  have   we   travelled,  ready   to  execute 

what  work  we  niay  accomplish. 
Let  Agni,  for  he  knows*    complete   the  worship.     He    is   the 
Priest :  let  him  fix  rites  and  seasons. 

4  When  we  most  ignorant  neglect  the  statutes  of  you,  0  Deities 

with  whom  is  knowledge, 
Wise  Agni  shall  correct   our  faults   and   failings,    skilled  to 
assign  each  God  his  fitting  season. 

5  When,  weak  in  mind,  of  feeble  understanding,  mortals  bethink 

them  not  of  saorifioiug, 
Then  shall  the  prudent  and  discerning  Agni  worship  the  Gods, 
best  worshipper,  in  season. 

6  Because  the  Father  hath   produced   thee.  Leader   of   all  our 

solemn  rites,  their  brilliant  Banner  : 
So  win  by  worship  pleasant  homes  abounding   in   heroes,  and 
rich  food  to  nourish  all  men. 

7  Thou  whom  the  Heaven  and  Earth,  thou  whom   the    Waters, 

and  Tvashtar,  maker  of  fair  things,  created. 
Well  knowing,  all  along    the    Fathers'   pathway,    shine    with 
resplendent  light,  enkindled,  Agni. 

HYMN  III.  AgnL 

0  King,  the  potent  and  terrific  envoy,  kindled  for  strength,  is 

manifest  in  beauty. 
He  shines,    all-knowing,    with  his   lofty    splendour :  chasing 

black  Night  he  comes  with  white-rayed  Morning. 

1  Seasons:  the  proper  times  of  worship.  Priests  Celestial:  Agni  being  the 
Hotar,  the  Asvins  the  Adhvaryus,  Tvashtar  the  Agntdh,  and  Mitra  the 
Upavaktar.  AsvaUyana,  as  cited  by  Sftyana,  gives  a  different  enumeration. 
See  Wilson,  note. 

2  The  Herald  i»  the  Hotar  or  invoking  priest :  the  Cleanser  is  the  Potar  ot 
Purifier,  the  assistant  of  the  Brahman.  SvAkd :  an  exclamation = Ave  !  or  Hail ! 

3  The  Gods*  pathway :  *  the  path  that  leads  to  the  gods  * — Wilson. 

(J  The  father :  PrajApati  ;  or  the  iiistibutor  of  the  sacrifice. — Sftyana. 
7  The  Fathers^  pathway  :  the  way  that  leads  to  the   home  of  the  Manee  or 
Ancestral  Spirits.  -^ — 

1  O  King :  Ludwig  takes  rdjan  here  as  the  nominative  cane.     WiJtJi  itAtte- 
rayed  dioi'niiuj :    £  follow   Ludwig  in  XA^Lvn^  rii^aXlwv  %a  VBAtcuoiontal  for 
rusatydm. 


BYMS  4.]  THE  RIOVBDA.  M* 

2  Having  overcome   the  glimmering    Black   with  beauty,   and 

bringing  forth  the  Dame,  the  Great  Sire's  Daughter, 
Holding  aloft  the  radiant  light  of  Surya,  as  messenger  of  heav 
en  he  shines  with  treasures. 

3  Attendant  on  the  BlessM  Dame  the  BlessM   hath   come  :  the 

Lover  foUoweth  his  Sister. 
Agni,  far-spreading  with  conspicuous   lustre,  hath   compassed 
Night  with  whitely-shining  garments. 

4  His  goinga-forth  kindle  as  'twere  high  voices,  thegoings  of  the 

auspicious  Friend  of  Agni. 
The  rays,  the   bright   beams   of   the  strong-jawed,    mighty, 
adorable  Steer  are  visible  as  he  cometh. 

5  Whose  radiant  splendours  flow,  like  sounds,  about  us,  his  who 

is  lofty,  brilliant,  and  effulgent, 
Who  reaches  heaven  with  best  and  brightest  lustres,  sportive 
and  piercing  even  to  the  summit. 

6  His  powers  whose  chariot  fellies  gleam  and  glitter  have  loudly 

roared  while,  as  with  teams,  he  hasted. 
He,  the  most  Godlike,  far-extending  envoy,  shines  with  flames 
ancient,  resonant,  whitely-shining. 

7  So  bring  us  ample  wealth  :  seat   thee   as   envoy  of   the   two 

youthful  Matrons*  Earth  and  Heaven. 
Let  Agni  rapid  with  his  rapid  horses,    impetuous    with   impe- 
tuous Steeds,  come  hither. 

HYMN  IV.  Agni. 

To  thee  will  I  send  praise  and  bring  oblation,   as   thou  hast 

merited  lauds  when  we  invoked  thee. 
A  fountain  in  the  desert  art  thou,  Agni,  O  Ancient    King,  to 

man  who  fain  would  worship. 

2  Thou  unto  whom  resort  the  gathered  people,  as  the  kine  seek 

the  warm  stall,  O  Most  Youthful, 
Thou  art  the  messenger  of  Gods  and  mortals,  and  goest  glori- 
ous with  thy  light  between  them. 

3  Making  thee  grow  as  'twere  some  noble  infant,  thy  Mother 

nurtures  tiiee  with  sweet  affection. 
Over  the  desert  slopes  thou  passest  longing,  and  seekest,  like 
same  beast  set  free,  thy  fodder. 


2  OlimmerUg  Black :  dark  night,  faintly  lighted  by  stars.  The  Or  eat  Sire's 
Daughter  :  (Jshas  or  Dawn,  daughter  of  Dyaus  or  Heaven. 

3  The  lover :  Agni  who  appears  together  with  Dawn. 

4  The  first  line  is  almost  unintelligible.  '  The  blazing  flames  of  thftt  mighty 
Agni  do  not  (deter)  his  adorers.' — Wilson. 

1  To  man  ■:  or,  to  Piiru. 
3  Thy  Mother  :  Earth. 

25 


886  TJIS  HYMNS  OP  IBOOX  Jt 

4r  Foolish  are  we,  0  Wise  and  free  from  error :  verily,  Agni,  ttioi 
dost  know  thy  grandeur. 
There  lies  the  form  :  he  moves,  and  licks,  and  swallourt,  and 
as  House-Lord,  kisses  the  Youthful  Maiden. 

5  He  rises  ever  fresh  in  ancient  fuel :  smoke-bannered,  gray,  hi 

makes  the  wood  his  dwelling. 
No  swimmer.  Steer,  he  presses  through  the  waters,  and  to  hii 
place  accordant  mortals  bear  him, 

6  Like  thieves  who  risk  their  lives  and  haunt  the  forest,  th< 

twain  with  their  ten  girdles  have  secured  him. 
This  is  a  new  hymn  meant  for  thee,  0  Agni :  yoke  aa  it  wer< 
thy  car  with  parts  that  glitter. 

7  Homage  and  prayer  are  thine,  O  JILtavedas,  and  this  my  aonj 

shall  evermore  exalt  thee. 
Agni,  protect  our  children  and  descendants,  and  guard  wit! 
ever-watchful  care  our  bodies. 

HYMN  V.  Agni 

Hb  only  is  the  Sea,  holder  of  trecusures :  bom  many  a  tim 

he  views  the  hearts  within  ns. 
Hd  hides  him  in  the  secret  couple's  bosom.     The  Bird  dwell 

in  the  middle  of  the  fountain. 

2  Inhabiting  one  dwelling-place  in  common,  strong  Stallions  an 

the  Mares  have  come  together. 
The  sages  guard  the  seat  of  Holy  Order,  and  keep  the  highec 
names  concealed  within  them. 

3  The  Holy  Pair,  of  wondrt)us  power,  have  coupled  :  they  forme 

the  Infant,  they  who  bred  produced  him. 
The  central  point  of  all  that  moves  and  moves  not,  the  whil 
they  wove  the  Sage's  thread  with  insight. 


4  The  form:    the  Ahavaniya  fire.     The   Youthful  Maiden:,    aocording 
Sftyana,  either  the  mixed  oblation,  or  the  young  earth  as  campared  with  h 
withered  plants. 

6  The  twain  :  the  two  arms,  with  their  grasping  fingers  which  produce  fi 
by  agitation  of  the  fire-stick. 

1  He  :  Agni  as  the  Sun.  The  secret  couplers  hotom :  the  meaning 'is  uno 
tain.  The  fire-sticks  in  which  Agni  is  latent  may  be  intended.  *  He  wa 
on  the  cloud  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  hidden  (firmament).* — ^Wilson,  fl 
Bird :  the  Sun.     The  fountain :  the  source  of  light  in  the  east. 

2  Strong  StaUiona  :  perhaps  the  flames  of  the  Sun.  Mares :  waters  of  1 
firmament.  The  highest  names :  of  Agni,  such  as  J&tavedas  and  YaiavAna 
Concealed  within  them  :  in  their  secret  hearts,  for  worship. 

3  The  Holy  Pair :  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  Infant :  Agni.  The  ukiU  li 
wove :  viyantah  in  the  text  is  unintelligible,  and  I  follow  Wallis  in  read 
vayantt  in  its  stead.     The  Sage's  thread :  the  series  of  sacrifices  to  which  A 

IB  entitled. 


BYMffr  «.i  TBS  morsDA.  Mf 

4  For  tracks  of  Order  aud  refr<»^ing  viands  attend  from  ancient 

times  the  goodly  Inft»iit. 
Wearing  him  as  »  aiantle,  Earth  and  Heaven  grow  strong  by 
food  of  pheasant  drink  and  fatness. 

5  He,  calling  loudly  to  the  Seven  red  Sisters,  hath,  skilled  in 

sweet  drink,  brought  them  to  be  looked  on. 
He,  bom  of  old,  in  middle  air  hath  halted,  and  sought  and 
found  the  covering  robe  of  Pushan. 

6  Seyea  .are  the  pathways  which  the  wise  have  fashioned;  to 

one  of  these  may  oome  the  troubled  mortal. 
He  standeth  in  the  dweUiug  of  the  Highest,  a  Pillar,  on  sure 
grouud  where  paths  are  parted. 

7  Not  Being,  Being  in  the  highest  heaven,  in  Aditi's  bosom  and 

in  Daksha's  birthplace. 
Is  Agni,  our  first-bom  of  Holy  Order,  the  Milch-cow  and  the 
Bull  in  life's  beginning. 

HYMN  VI.  Agni. 

This  is  that  Agni,  be  by  whose  protection,  favour,  and  help 
the  singer  is  successful ; 

Who  with  the  noblest  flames  of  glowing  fuel  comes  forth  en- 
compassed with  far-spreading  lustre. 


6  The  Seven  red  Sittert :  the  seven  tonguen  ^r  flames  of  Agni,  called  hdlt^ 
kardlt,  etc.— S4yana.  And  found  the  (^<>ering  robe  of  PiUkan:  and  hath 
reappeared  in  the  form  of  PQshan  or  *^^  Sun. 

6  Pathways:  long  lines  of  lij?i«c.  The  WUe:  the  Fathers.  The  troubled 
mortal :  the  man  who  is  loufn^  ^^^  daybreak  may  approach  the  pathway  of 
light.  Wallis  translates  fc^<»  second  line  diflTerently  :— *The  support  of  life  in 
the  home  of  the.highe^i  at  the  divergence  of  the  ways,  standeth  on  sure 
grouod.*  He :  app^-^ntly  Agni  as  the  Sun,  to  whom  the  troubled  or  sinful 
man  comes  for  l^ht  or  forgiveness.  Pillar :  support  and  stay  of  the  uni- 
verse, like  th*  ^kambha  of  Atharva-veda,  X.  7.  Whei^e  paths  are  parted: 
where  end^  the  dark  road  which  the  Sun  travels  by  night,  and  the  bright 
jMkth  of  ^^  daily  course  begins. 

7  Not  Being,  Being:  non-existent,  existent,  ^aaaehcha  sachcha,  *both 
ptfevolved  and  evolved,'  identifying  Agni  with  the  first  cause  and  first  effect, 
with  a  reference  to  such  texts  as  Aaad  evam  idam  agra  dsit  'the  non  existent 
existent  (ot  unevolved)  was  verily  before  this  (creation).'— Wilson,  from 
Sayana.  AdUi=OVvafiig,  Dakiha=evipyeia.  Here  Agni  is  represented  as 
Prajftpati  who  as  a  yet  undeveloped  embryo  is  at  the  same  time  both  male 
and  female.— Ludwig.  Or  Daksha  may  be  the  Sun  and  Aditi  the  Earth.  '  In 
fact  Agni  is  identified  with  all  things.  These  latter  hymns  to  Agni  are  very 
obscure  :  the  notious  are  mystical;  many  of  the  terms  are  unusual,  or  are 
unusually  applied ;  and  the  construction  is  singularly  elliptical  and  loose.'— 
Wilson. 

This  Hymn  has  been  wholly  translated,  with  comments,  by  WaUU,  ^<fe% 
Ivw  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  48—50. 


^®®  TBE  HTMIfa  OP  (bo6K  X 

2  Agni,  the  Holy  One,  the  everlasting,  who  shines  far  beaming 

with  celestial  splendours ; 
He  who   hath  come  imto  his   friends  \Kth  friendship,  like  a 
fleet  steed  who  never  trips  or  stumbles. 

3  He   who  is  Lord   of  all  divine   oblation,  shared   by  all  living 

men  at  break  of  morning, 
Agni  to  whom  our  offerings  are  devoted,  in   whom  rests  h« 
whose  car,  through  might,  is  scatheless. 

4  Increasing  by  his  strength,   while  lauds  content  him,  with 

easy  flight  unto  the  Gods  he  travels. 
Agni  the  cheerful  Priest,  best.Sacrificer,  balms  with  his  tongue 
the  Gods  with  whom  he  mingles. 

5  With  songs  and  adorations  bring  ye  hither  Agni  who  stin 

himself  at  dawn  like  Indra, 
Whom  sages  laud  with  hymns  as  Jatavedas  of  those  who  wield 
the  sacrificial  ladle. 

6  In  whom  all   goodly  treasures  meet  together,  even  as  steeds 

and  riders  for  the  booty. 
Inclining  hither  bring  us  help,  0  Agni,  even  assistance  moat 
desired  by  Indra. 

7  Yea,  at  thy  birth,  when  thou  hadst  sat  in  glory,  thou,  Agni, 

WHSt  the  aim  of  invocations. 
The  Gods  came  neat,  obedient  to  thy  summons,  and  thus  at- 
tained their  rank  as  cV^^f  Protectors. 

HYM]!^  YII.  ^^ 

0  Agni,    shared  by  all  men  liviu^  bring  us   good   luck  for 

sacrifice  from  earth  and  heaven. 
With  us  be  thine  intelligence,  Wonder-'Vf <^ker !  Protect  us, 

God,  with  thy  far-reaching  blessings. 

2  These  hymns  brought  forth  for  thee,  O  Agni,  >Hid  thee  for 
bounteous  gifts,  with  cattle  and  with  horses. 

3  The  exact  meaning  of  the  second  line  is  uncertain  : — 'and  in  whon^^the 
sacrificer),  whose  sacrifice  is  undisturbed  by  his  foes,  throws  his  choice  oW^- 

tion.* — Wilson. 

5  At  dawn  :  with  Grassmann  I  take  M«r^i»  here  to  be  a  locatiye.  SAyana 
explains  it  as  bhogdndm  uttrdvinam,  the  bestower  of  enjoyments.  According  to 
Ludwig's  interpretation,  the  translation  of  the  first  line  would  be :  *  With  aongi 
and  adorations  bring  ye  hither  the  Lord  of  morning's  kine,  the  quivering  Agni' 

6  Riders  i  sdptivantah:  the  word  properly  means  *  possessed  of  horsee,'  and 
is  applicable  to  drivers  as  well  as  riders.  For  the  booty :  to  win  the  spoil,  or 
to  guard  it  from  others. 

J  Thine  intdligenee :  the  meaning  of  jprahetaih  here  is  not  clear.     WiUnD 
trRnalHtem  it  by   'indication*  Coi  UnouiV  •,  \.\3A>«\\l^1  *  wishes' ;  and  Gn» 
mann  by  'Jighfc,' 


AyM  8.i  THE  RiQ  Veda  .  sso 

Good  Lord,  when  man  from  thee  hath  gained  enjoyment,  by 
hymns,  0  nobly-born,  hath  he  obtained  it. 

3  Agni  I  deem  my  Kinsman  and  my  Father,  count  him  my 

Brother  and  my  Friend  for  ever. 
I  honour  as  the  face  of  lofty  Agni  in  heaven  the  bright  and 
holy  light  of  Surya. 

4  Effectual,  Agni,  are  our  prayers  for  profit.     He  whom,  at  home, 

thou,  Priest  for  ever,  guardest 

Is  rich  in  food,  drawn  by  red  steeds,  and  holy :  by  day  and 
night  to  him  shall  all  be  pleasant. 

5  Men  with  their  arms  have  generated  Agni,  helpful  as  some  kind 

friend,  adorned  with  splendours. 

And  stablished  as  Invoker  mid  the  people  the  ancient  Priest^ 
the  sacrifice's  lover. 

6  Worship,  thyself,  0  God,  the  Gods  in  heaven :  what,  void  of 

knowledge,  shall  the  fool  avail  thee  % 

As  thou,  O  God,  hast  worshipped  Gods  by  seasons,  so,  nobly- 
born  !  to  thine  own  self  pay  worship. 

7  Agni,  be  thou  our  Guardian  and  Protector :  bestow  upon  us 

life  and  vital  vigour. 

Accept,  O  Mighty  One,  the  gifts  we  offer,  and  with  unceasing 
care  protect  our  bodies. 

HYMN  VIII.  Agni. 

Agni  advances  with  his  lofty  banner :  ihe  Bull  is  bellowing  to 

the  earth  and  heavens. 
He  hath  attained  the  sky's  supppmest  limits :  the  Steer  hath 

waxen  in  the  lap  of  waters. 

2  The  Bull,  the  youngling  wiKi  the  hump,  hath  frolicked,  the 
strong  and  never-ceasing  Calf  hath  bellowed. 

Bringing  our  offerings  to  the  Gods'  assembly,  he  moves  as 
Chief  in  his  own  dwelling-places. 

8  The  second  line  is  remarkable  as  a  direct  declaration  of  the  relationship 
of  Agni  and  Sdiya. — Ludwig. 

7  Be  thou  (mr  Guardian  and  Protector :  avitd,  says  S&yana,  is  a  protector 
from  obvious  dangers  and  gopd  a  preserver  from  perils  that  are  unseen. 

1  Advances:  through  the  firmament.    Hit  lofty  banner:   the  lightning. 
Waiert ;  of  the  firmament. 

2  Never-eeatinp  :*asremSl:  according  to  S&yana,  *  uiide<i«j\Ti^^    *  Qi\'at\a>aA*  ^- 
WilMon, 


SW  THE  H7MNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

3  Him  who  hath  grasped  his  Parents'  head,  they  stabliahej  aft 

sacrifice  as  a  wave  of  heavenly  lustre. 
In  his  swift  flight  the  red  Dawns  borne  by  horses  refresh  their 
bodies  in  the  home  of  Order. 

4  For,  Yasu,  thou  procedest  every  Morning,  and  still  bast  been 

the  Twins'  illuminator. 
For  sacrifice,  seven  places  thou  retainest  while  for  thine  own 
self  thou  engenderest  Mitra. 

5  Thou  art  the  Eye  and  Guard  of  mighty  Order,  and  Yarsna 

when  to  sacrifice  thou  oomest 
Thou  art  the  Waters'  Child,  O  JStavedas,  envoy  of  him  whose 
offering  thou  aoceptest. 

6  Thou  art  the  Lieader  of  the  rite  and  region,  to  which  with  thine 

auspicious  teams  thou  tendest. 
Thy  light-bestowing  head  to  heaven  thon  liftest,  makmg  thy 
tongne  the  oblation-bearer,  Agni. 

7  Through  his  wise  insight  Trita  in  the  cavern,  seeking  «»  ever' 

the  Chief  Sire's  intention, 
Carefully  tended  in  his  Parents'  bosom,  calling  the  weapons 
l^in,  goes  forth  to  combat. 

8  Well-skilled  to  use  the  weapons  of  his  Father,  Aptya,  urged 

on  by  Indra,  fought  the  battle. 
Then  Trita  slew  the  foe  seven-rayed,  three-headed,  and  freed 
the  cattle  of  the  Son  of  Tvashtar. 


3  His  Parents'  head :  thehead  or  forehead  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  or  of  the  two 
fire-sticks.  The  red  Dawn*  .'■  or  the  flames,  according  to  S&yana.  There  ie  no 
substantive  in  the  text.  The  \ome  of  Order :  probably  the  Sun,  if  the  Dawna 
are  spoken  of ;  and  the  place  of  Viw-ordained  sacrifice  according  to  S&yana's 
explanation. 

4  The  Twins*  Uluminator :  lighter-^p  of  day  and  night,  that  ib,  of  the  end 
of  night,  or  very  early  morning.  But  ^ee  Hillebrandt,  Varuna  wnd  MUra, 
p.  116.     Seoen  places :  seven  altars  for  th%  sacrificial  fire.  Mi^ra :  the  Snik 

5  Varuna :  King  and  Gkivemor. 

6  And  region:  thou  knowest,  and  canst  show^^he  way  through,  the  firmanuBnt. 

7  In  the  cavern:  in  the  secret  depth  of  the  &|tnament.    Seeking ^.ihe 

Chief  Sir^s  intention :  wishing  to  carry  out  the  de«jga  of  Indra  or  perhaps  of 
Dyaus  or  Dyu.  JSis  Parents:  *the  parental  heaven  and  earth.' — Wilson. 
Calling  the  weapons  kin :  c^ing  the  weapons,  i.  e,  the  bolts  which  are  pro- 
duced from  the  sky,  akin,  simply  means  claiming  them  as  belonging  to  hit 
father  Dyu  as  they  are  in  the  next  stanza  spoken  of  as  paternal  (pltrytol).— 
Macdonell,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  July,  1893,  p.  428.  ^     ^     ^      ^^ 

8  Of  his  Father:  belonging  to  the  Chief  Sire  of  stanza  7.  The  foe:  tht 
special  enemy  of  Trita  is  Trisiras  the  son  of  Tvashtar,  called  Visvarapa  or 
the  Multiform.  The  cattle  of  the  Son  of  Tvashtar ;  the  cows  imprisoned  l^ 
him,  the  showers  obstructed  by  the  fiend.  ^  ' 

For  the  legends  founded  on  the  last  three  stanzas  of  this  hymn,  see  Mufr, 
a  S.  Text$,  y.  pp.  229  -2W.    »Qft  «^ao  ^t^\\gaft,  Ia  ISe^igiofi  Y^diq^  U. 
329,  S30. 


BrUN  10.]  TBB  RtGVBDA.  891 

9  Lord  of  the  bifave,  Indfa  oleft  him  iu  pieces  vho  sought  to 
gain  much  strength  and  deemed  him  mighty. 
He  smote  his  three  beads  from  his  body,  seizing  the  cattle  of 
the  omniform  Son  of  Tvashtar. 


HYMN  IX.  Waters. 

Yb,  Waters,  are  beneficent :  so  help  ye  us  to  energy 
That  we  may  look  od  great  delight. 

2  Give  us  a  portion  of  the  sap,  the  most  auspicious  that  ye  have, 
Like  mothers  in  their  longing  love. 

X  To  you  we  gladly  come  for  him  to  whose  abode  ye  send  us  on  ; 
^  And,  Waters,  give  us  procreant  strength. 

4  The  Waters  be  to  us  for  drink,  Goddesses  for  our  aid  and  bliss  : 
Let  them  stream  to  us  health  and  Btrength. 

5  I  beg  the  Floods  to  give  us  balm,  these  Queens  who  rule  o'er 

precious  things. 
And  have  supreme  control  of  men. 

6  Within  the  Waters — Soma  thus  hath  told  me — dwell  all  balms 

that  heal, 
And  Agui,  he  who  blesseth  all. 

7  0  Waters,  teem  with  medicine  to  keep  my  body  safe  from  harm, 
So  that  I  long  may  see  the  Sun. 

8  Whatever  sin  is  found  in  me,  whatever  evil  I  have  wrought. 
If  I  have  lied  or  falsely  sworn.  Waters,  remove  it  far  from  me. 

9  The  Waters  I  this  day  have  sought,  and  to  their  moisture 

have  we  come : 
OAgni,rich  in  milk,  come  thou,  and  with  thy  splendour  cover  me. 

HYMN  X.  Yama.  Yaml. 

Fain  would  I  win  my  friend  to  kindly  friendship.  So  may  the 

Sage,  come  through  the  air's  wide  ocean. 
Remembering  the  earth  and  days  to  follow,  obtain  a  son,  the 

issue  of  his  father. 


1  Qrt(U  delight :  according  to  the  scholiast,  meaning  perfect  knowledge  of 
Bri^ma.     See  Wilson's  note. 

3  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  obscure.  It  appears  to  have  been  recited 
by  the  priest  at  the  consecration  of  a  new  house. 

The  first  three  stanzas  are  to  be  repeated  by  Br&hmans  at  their  morning 
Ablutions.    See  Colebrooke's  Essays,  Essay  I.  On  the  ReligiouB  Ceremonies  of 
ihe  HindviB.     See  also  Lanraan,  Sanskrit  Reader ^  p,  376. 
6  Stanzas  6—9  are  repeated  from  Book  I.  23.  20—23. 

Yama  and  Taml,  son  and  daughter  of  yivasv&a,  are  the  Ijtishis  as  well  as 
ib«  deities  of  the  hymn  which  is  a  dialogue  between  them. 

Tama  and  Yarn!  are,  says  voa  Roth,  *  as  their  names  den<)te,  twin  broth.«Y 
tod  sister^  and  are  the  &rst  human  pair,  the  origlna^iotn  ol  \))da  t%^«    Ks^ViOA 


8W  THE  HYMNS  OP  iBOOK  X 

2  Thy  friend  loves  not  the  friendship  which  oonsiders  her  who  is 

near  in  kindred  as  a  stranger. 
Sons  of  the  mighty  Asura,   the  Heroes,   supporters  of  the 
heavens,  see  far  around  them. 

3  Yea,  this  the  Immortals  seek  of  thee  with  longing,  progeny  of 

the  sole  existing  mortal. 
Then  let  thy  soul  and  mine  he  knit  together,  and  as  a  loving 
huishand  take  thy  consort. 

4  Shall  we  do  now  what  we  ne'er  did  aforetime  1  we  who  spake 

righteously  now  talk  impurely  % 
Gandharva  in  the   foods,   the  Dame  of  Waters —such  is  our 
hond,  such  our  most  lofty  kinship. 

5  Even  in  the  womh  God   Tv  ash  tar,  Vivifier,  shaping  all  forms^ 

Creator,  made  us  consorts. 
None  violates  his  holy  ordinances  :  that  we  are  his  the  heavens 
and  earth  acknowledge. 

6  Who  knows  that  earliest  day  whereof  thou  speakest  %  Who 

hath  heheld  it  ?  Who  can  here  declare  it  1 


I 


Hebrew  conception  closely  connected  the  parents  of  mankind  by  making  the 
woman  formed  from  a  portion  of  the  body  of  the  man,  so  by  the  Indian 
tradition  they  are  placed  in  the  relationship  of  twins.  This  thought  is  laid 
by  the  hymn  in  question  in  the  mouth  of  Yam!  herself,  when  she  is  made  to 
say  :  *  Even  in  the  womb  the  Creator  made  us  for  husband  and  wife.*  *  Profes- 
sor Miiller,  on  the  other  hand,  says  (Lectures  ou  the  Science  of  Language, 
second  series,  p.  510)  :  *  There  is  a  curions  dialogue  between  her  (Yami)  and 
her  brother,  where  she  (the  night)  implores  her  brother  (the  day)  to  make  her 
his  wife,  and  where  he  declines  lier  offer,  *  because,'  as  he  wvya,  *  they  have 
called  it  a  sin  that  a  brother  should  marry  his  sister."  Again,  p.  521,  'There 
is  not  a  single  word  in  the  Veda  pointing  to  Yama  and  Yami  as  the  first  couple 

of  mortals,  the  Indian  Adam  and  Eve If  Yama  bad  been  the  first  created 

of  men,  surely  the  Vedic  poets,  in  speaking  of  him,  could  not  have  passed  this 
over  in  silence.'  See,  however,  the  passage  from  the  Atharva-veda,  XVIII. 
8,  13,  to  be  quoted  further  on.  [Reverence  ye  with  an  oblation  Yama,  the  son 
of  Vivasvat,  the  assembler  of  men,  who  was  the  first  of  men  that  died,  and 
the  first  that  departed  to  this  (celeatial)  world].'  Muir,  0.  S.  Tenets,  V.  p. 
288.  Yama  as  the  first  man  may  perhaps  be,  as  Prof.  Max  Miiller  holds,  *a 
later  phase  of  religions  thought.' 

1  Yami  speaks  The  Sage :  vedhdh  :  Yama,  whom  she  wishes  to  give  hera 
son.  Come :  S^yana  explains  the  masculine  participle  jaganvSn  by  the  femi- 
nine gatavatt,  that  is,  I,  Yami.  who  have  come.  The  earth :  which,  otherwise, 
will  remain  without  human  inhabitants. 

2  Yama  replies.  A  stranger :  of  a  different  family,  and  so  a  lawful  wife.  Sont 
of  the  mighty  Atura :  the  spies  or  sentinels  spoken  of  in  stanza  8. 

3  Yami  speaks. 

4  Yama  replies.  Oandharva :  Vivasvftn  or  the  Stm.  In  the  floods :  in  the 
waters  of  the  firmament.  The  Dame  of  Waters :  SaranyQ.  *  His  aqueous  wife/ 
— Muir.  Such  in  our  bond :  these  are  our  parent:).  But  see  Ludwig,  Ueher  dk 
neuesten  ArheUen,  u.  s,  w,  p.  107. 

S  Yawi  BpeAkM, 


BYUn  101.  ^^i?  niGVEDA.  898 

Qreat  is  the  Law  of  Varuna  and  Mitra.     What,  wanton !  wilt 
thou  say  to  men  to  tempt  them  ? 

7  I,  Yamt,  am  possessed  by  love  of  Yama,  that  I  may  rest  on  the 

same  couch  beside  him. 

I  as  a  wife  would  yield  me  to  my  husband.     Like  car-wheels 
let  us  speed  to  meet  each  other. 

8  They  stand  not  still,  they  never  close   their  eyelids,  those 

sentinels  of  Gods  who  wander  round  us. 

Not  me — go  quickly,  wanton,  with  another,  and  hasten  like  a 
chariot  wheel  to  meet  him. 

9  May  Surya's  eye  with  days  and  nights  endow  him,   and  ever 

may  his  light  spread  out  before  him. 

In  heaven  and  earth  the  kindred  Pair  commingle.     On  Yarn! 
be  the  unbrotherly  act  of  Yama. 

10  Sure  there  will  come   succeeding   times   when   brothers  and 

sisters  will  do  acts  unmeet  for  kinsfolk. 

Not  me,  0  fair  one, — seek  another  husband,  and  make  thine 
arm  a  pillow  for  thy  consort. 

11  Is  he  a  brother  when  no  lord  is  left  her  %  Is  she  a  sister  when 

Destruction  cometh  1 

Forced  by  my  love  these  many  words   I   utter.     Come   near, 
and  hold  me  in  thy  close  embraces. 

12  I  will  not  fold  mine   arms   about   thy  body  :  they  call  it  sin 

when  one  comes  near  his  sister. 

Not  me, — prepare  thy  pleasures  with  another :  thy  brother 
seeks  not  this  from  thee,  0  fair  one. 

6  Tama  replies.  To  tempt  them  :  the  meaning  of  tlichyd  is  uncertain.  The 
S.  P.  Lexicon  explains  it  by  *  deceitfully.*  *  Falsely.'— Qrassmann.  *  What 
Bayest  thou,  who  punishest  men  with  hell  ?  * — Wilson. 

7  Same  e(mch :  see  Benfey,  Vedica  und  VerwandteSf  pp.  89 — 42,  for  a  difter- 
ent  explanation  of  $amdnd  ydnau. 

8  Yama  replies.  Sentinels  of  Oods:  recording  angels  who  watch  men's 
actions. 

9  Tamt  speaks.  The  meaning  seems  to  be :  if  there  be  any  guilt  let  me 
take  it  upon  myself,  and  let  not  Yama's  life  be  shortened  by  way  of  punish- 
ment.    The  kindred  Pair :  Day  and  Night. 

10  Yama  replies.*   '  Make  thine  arm  a  pillow.' — Wilson. 

11  Yaml  speaks.  Deitrttction  :  Nirriti  ;  the  utter  extinction  of  the  human 
race.  '  The  meaning  is,  a  true  brother  will  not  let  his  pinter  lack  a  huRband, 
and  a  true  sister  will  not  let  her  brother  lack  a  wife.' — Wilson's  Translation, 
Editor's  note. 

12  YzmarepUeg, 


994  THE  BYMNB  OP  [BOOK  X 

13  Alas  !  thou  art  indeed  a  weakling,  Yama ;  we   find  in  thee  no 

trace  of  heart  or  spirit. 
As  round  the  tree   the   woodbine   clings,   another  will   cling 
about  thee  girt  as  with  a  girdle. 

14  Embrace  another,  Yami ;  let  another,  eyen  aa  *the   woodbine 

rings  the  tree,  enfold  thee. 
Win  thou  his  beart  and  let  him  win  thy  fancy,  and   he    shall 
form  with  thee  a  blest  alliance. 

HYMN  XL  Agni. 

The  Bull  hath  yielded  for  the  Bull  the  milk  of  heaven  :  the 

Son  of  Aditi  can  never  be  deceived. 

According  to  his  wisdom  Varuna   knoweth  all :  may  he,   the 

Holy,  hallow  times  for  sacrifice.  I 

2  Gandharvi  spake :  may  she,  the  Lady  of  the  flood,  amid   the 

river's  roaring  leave  my  heart  untouched. 
May  Aditi  accomplish  all  that  we  desire,  and  may  our  eldest 
Brother  tell  us  this  as  Chief. 

3  Yea,  even  this  blessM  Morning,  rich  in  store  of  food,  splendid, 

with  heavenly  lustre,  hath  shone  out  for  man. 
Since  they,  as  was  the  wish  of  yearning  Gods,  brought  forth 
that  yearning  Agni  for  the  assembly  as  the  Priest. 


13  Yaml  speaks. 

S&yana's  iuterpretation  of  this  difficult  hymn  differs  ia  many  places  from 
that  which  I  have  adopted,  and  Wilson's  Translation  should  be  consulted  for 
the  views  of  the  great  Indian  Commentator  and  the  Pandits  of  his  time.  The 
hymn  has  been  tranuliterated,  translated,  and  annotated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S, 
Texts,  V.  288 — 291.  It  has  also  been  translated  by  the  authoi*8  of  the  Sie- 
benzig  Lieder,  and  fully  discussed  by  Dr.  J.  Ehni  in  Der  VedUche  Mythut  da 
Yama.    See  also  Hillebrandt,  Vedisohe  Mythologies  I.  p.  495. 


The  subject  of  the  hymn  ia  the  origin  and  institution  of  sacrifice,  first 
established  by  Agni  under  the  authority  of  Varuna,  who  must  be  regarded  as 
the  deity  of  the  first  stanza. 

1  The  Bull :  the  mighty  Soma.  For  the  Bull :  for  mighty  Varuna.  The 
milk  of  heaven :  the  divine  Soma  juice,  to  be  used  at  sacrifice.  The  Son  of 
Aditi :  Varu^.  Aceoi'ding  to  hU  wUdom :  ydthd  dhiySl :  the  two  words  taken 
together  as  an  adverbial  phrase.  According  to  Sslyana,  it  is  Agni  who  milka 
the  streams  of  prosperity  from  heaven  for  the  worshipper.  I  have  generally 
followed  Pischel*s  interpretation  of  the  first  five  stanzas  ( VedUohe  Studien,  I. 
pp.  188,  189). 

2  Oandharvt :  said  to  be  the  daughter  of  Surabhi  (one  of  the  daughters  of 
Daksha),  and  the  mother  of  the  race  of  horses.  Here  she*  appears  to  be  an 
Apsaras  or  water-nymph,  haunting  the  banks  of  rivers  and  practising  the 
■CKlnctive  arts  of  a  siren.  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  let  no  disturbing  influ- 
ence unsettle  my  devout  thoughts.  Oar  eldest  Brother :  Varuna,  regarded  as 
the  founder  ot  society  united  by  common  religious  observances. 

3  The  poet  regards  the  coming  oi  Ui^  dskVin.  aa  %i  ^xwA  Wi^a.^.  tVxa  sacrifice  ii 
euccesaiuL    Since  they :  the  prie«ila. 


BTMtr  12,]  TBM  RI07SDA.  895 

4  And  thd^  fleet  Falcon  brought  for  sacrifice  from  afar  this  flow- 

ing  Drop  most  excellent  and  keen  of  sight, 
Then  when  the  Aryan  tribes  chose  as  Invoking  Priest  Agni 
the  Wonder- Worker,  and  the  hymn  rose  up. 

5  Still  art  thou  kind  to  him  who  feeds  thee  as  with  grass,  and, 

skilled  in  sacrifice,  offers  thee  holy  gifts. 
When  thou,  having  received  the  sage's  strengthening  food 
with  lauds,  after  long  toil,  comest  with  many  more. 

6  Urge  thou  thy  Parents,  as  a  lover,  to  delight:  the  Lovely 

One  desires  and  craves  it  from  his  heart. 
The  priest  calls  out,  the  sacrificer  shows  his  skill,  the  Asura 
tries  his  strength,  and  with  the  hymn  is  stirred. 

7  Far-famed  is  he,  the  mortal  man,  O  Agni,  thou  Son  of  Strength, 

who  hath  obtained  thy  favour. 
He^  gathering  power,  borne  onward  by  his  horses,  makes  his 
days  lovely  in  his  might  and  splendour. 

8  When,  Ho!y  Agni,  the  divine  assembly,  the  sacred  synod  mid 

the  Grods,  is  gathered, 
And  when  thou,  €rodlike  One,  dealest  forth  treasures,  vouch- 
safe us,  too,  our  portion  of  the  riches. 

9  Hear  us,  O  Agni,  in  your  common  dwelling  :  harness  thy  rapid 

car,  the  car  of  Amrit. 
Bring  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Deities'  Parents,  hither :  stay 
with  us  here,  nor  from  the  Gods  be  distant. 

HYMN  XII.  Agni. 

Hbavbn  and  Earth,  first  by  everlasting  Order,  speakers  of 
truth,  are  near  enough  to  hear  us. 

When  the  €rod,  urging  men  to  worship,  sitteth  as  Priest,  as- 
suming all  his  vital  vigour. 


4  ThU  Jlovting  Drop ;  the  Soma,  brought  from  heaveo  by  the  Falcon.  See 
IV.  26  and  27. 

5  Thou :  Agni.  As  with  grass :  '  as  pasture  satisfies  (the  herds).'— Wilson. 
With  many  more :  bringing  many  other  Gods  to  the  sacrifice. 

6  As  a  lover :  woos  his  mistress.  Agni  is  called  upon  to  entreat  his  parents, 
Heaven  and  Earth,  to  reproduce  him  perpetually.  The  Lovely  One :  Agni. 
Saciificer :  makhah  ;  see  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  p.  47.  The  original  hymn  appears 
to  end  with  this  difficult  stanza. 

9  Hapid :  dravUnum :  taken  by  S4yana  with  amritasya  and  explained  by 
'distilling  the  driuk  of  Gods.*  Nor  fr<ym  the  Qods  be  distant :  *let  none  of 
the  godft  be  absent.' — Wikon. 

1  First :  most  exAlted  aa  well  as  most  ancient.  Tlie  God ;  XrcCv.  A%  PvVitxX.  \ 
«#  Hottur,  invoker,  or  herald. 


306  Tff£  BTMNS  OP  [BOOK  X, 

2  As  God  comprising  Gods  by  Law  Eternal,  bear,  as  the  Chief 

who  knoweth,  our  oblation, 
Smoke-bannered  with  the  fuel,  radiant,  joyous,  better  to  praise 
.   and  worship,  Priest  for  ever. 

3  When  the  cow's  nectar  wins  the  God  completely,  men  here 

below  are  heaven's  and  earth's  sustainers. 
All  the  Gods  came  to  this  thy  heavenly  Yajus,  which  from  the 
motley  Pair  milked  oil  and  water. 

4  I  praise  your  work  that  ye  may  make  me  prosper  :  hear,  Heaven 

and  Earth,  Twain  Worlds  that  drop  with  fatness. 
While  days  and  nights  go  to  the  world  of  spirits,  here  let  the 
Parents  with  sweet  meath  refresh  us. 

5  Hath  the  King  seized  us  1  How  have  we  offended  against  his 

holy  ordinance  ?  Who  kuoweth  ? 
For  eveu  Mitra  mid  the  Gods  is  angry :  there  are  both  song 
and  strength  for  those  who  come  not. 

6  'Tis  hard  to  understand  the  Immortal's  nature,  where  she  who 

is  akin  becomes  a  stranger. 
Guard  ceaselessly,  great  Agui,  him  who  ponders  Yama's  name, 
easy  to  be  comprehended. 

7  They  in  the  synod  where  the  Gods  rejoice  them,  where  they 

are  seated  in  Vivasv&n's  dwelling, 

Have  given  the  Moon  his  beams,   the  Sun  his  splendour  -  the 

Two  unweariedly  maintain  their  brightness. 
.^— ^— — ^■^— — — ^— ^■^— — — — — — ^_^— ^_^— _,_ ^_^^^^__^.— _— — ^__^i.^^..i^_^.^_^^__^_ 

2  Better  to  praise:  more  skilled  than  men  in  praising  the  Qods. 

3  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that,  by  poesess- 
ing  the  amrit,  ambrosia,  or  nectar  contained  in  the  milk  of  the  sacrificial  cow 
and  in  the  Soma  juice  which  wins  and  captivates  Agni,  men  are  enabled  to 
offer  acceptable  sacrifices  to  the  Qods,  and  thus  to  support  the  heavens  and 
earth.  Heavenly  Yajus :  divine  sacrificial  prayer  or  formula.  But  divydm  by 
its  position  in  the  verse  seems  rather  to  belong  to  ghritdmt  butter  or  sacri- 
ficial oiL     The  motley  Pair :  6ni :  many-coloured  heaven  and  earth. 

'  When  the  self-aggregated  ambrosia  of  the  divine  Agni  is  generated  from 
his  radiance,  then  the  products  from  it  sustain  both  heaven  and  earth,  all 
the  worshippers  glorify  this  thy  oblation,  the  celestial  nutritious  water  which 
thy  white  radiance  milks  forth.*— Wilson.  According  to  S&yana,  the  products 
from  it  are  the  plants  and  trees  which  spring  from  the  amrit  or  rain  which 
rewards  the  oblations  of  men,  and  the  uisve  devSlh  of  the  text  are  sarve 
stotdrahy  all  the  worshippers.  Some  meaning  is  apparent  in  this  paraphrase, 
but  it  cannot  be  extracted  from  the  words  of  the  text. 

5  The  King :  Varuna.  Fo^'  even  Mitra :  we  must  have  committed  some 
sin,  for  even  Mitra,  the  Friend,  the  gracious  God,  is  wroth  with  us.  Strength : 
strengthening  sacrificial  viands.  For  those  who  come  not :  for  the  Qods  who 
will  not  yet  come  to  receive  our  worship  and  oblations. 

6  This  stanza  is  apparently  a  later  addition.  The  latter  half  of  the  first  line 
is  taken  from  X.  10.  2,  but  its  application  here  is  not  obvious. 

/  /n  Fivawdn'i  dwelling :  *  on  the  a\lax  ol  t\i«  «a«sclfiGQT.' — Wilson.  Heaven 
or  the  realm  of  the  Sun  is  intended. 


BTMN 18.]  THE  RIG  VEDA .  897 

8  The  counsel  which  the  Gods  meet  to  consider,  their  secret 

plan,—  of  that  we  have  no  knowledge. 
There  let  Grod  Savitar,  Aditi,  and  Mitra  proclaim  to  Varuna 
that  we  are  sinless. 

9  Hear  us,  O  Agni,  in  your  common  dwelling  :  harness  thy  rapid 

car,  the  car  of  Amrit. 
Bring  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Deities'  Parents,  hither :  stay 
with  us  here,  nor  from  the  Gods  be  distant. 

HYMN  XIII.  Havirdbftnaa. 

I  TOKB  with  prayer  your  ancient  inspiration :  may  the  laud 
rise  as  on  the  prince's  pathway. 
All  Sons  of  Immortality  shall  hear  it,  all  the  possessors  of  ce- 
lestial natures. 

2  When  speeding  ye  came  nigh  us  like  twin  sisters,  religious- 

hearted  votaries  brought  you  forward. 
Take  your  place,  ye  who  know  your  proper  station  :  be  near, 
be  very  near  uuto  our  Soma. 

3  Five  paces  have  I  risen  from  Earth :  I  follow   her  who  hath 

four  feet  with  devout  observance. 
This  by  the  Sacred  Syllable  have  i  »\easured :  I  purify  in  the 
central  place  of  Order. 

4  He,  for  Gods'  sake,  chose  death  to  be  his  portion.     He   chose 

not,  for  men's  good,  a  life  eternal. 
They  sacrificed  Brihaspati  the  Rishi.  Yama  delivered    up  his 
own  dear  body. 


'  The  deities  are  the  two  Sahatas,  small  carts  or  barrows  used  at  sacrifices 
to  carry  the  materials,  especially  the  iSoma-pIant,  hence  called  HavirdhAnat 
q)t)lation-bearer8.' — Wilson. 

1  The  prince  is  the  noble  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.  *  Like  the  path  of 
the  worshipper.* — Wilson. 

8  This  stanza  is  most  obscure.  Wilson,  following  S&yana,  translates :  *  I 
make  ^he  five  stages  of  the  sacrifice  ascend  ;  I  take  four  steps  by  pious 
observances  ;  with  the  sacred  syllable  I  perfect  this  (adoration)  ;  I  purify 
(the  Soma)  on  the  navel  of  the  sacrifice.'  The  jive  stage*  are,  according  to 
S&yana,  the  five  elements  of  the  sacrifice,  grain,  Soma,  the  kine,  the  Purod&sa 
cake,  and  the  clarified  butter.  The  fom*  steps  are  the  metres  most  commonly  used 

The  words  as  they  stand  in  the  text  do  not  appear  to  be  susceptible  of  any 
satisfactory  explanation. 

4  He:  Yama.  See  X.  14.  1.  For  Oods'  sake:  his  death  being  the  type  of 
the  sacrifices  which  support  and  delight  the  (Jods.  For  tnen^s  good :  See  X. 
90.  8 — 14  for  the  results  of  the  sacrifice  of  Purusha,  with  whom  Yama  may  be 
identified.  Tkey :  the  Gods.  This  P4da  is  unintelligible  as  it  stands. 
Instead  of  brUmspdtim  yajfiim  akrlnvato  rishim,  Prof.  Ludwig  would  read 
Vaivasvatam  yajfiam  atanuta  rwA?7^,  the*  Uishi  performed  the  Vaivasvata, 
or  funeral,  sacrifice  (Ueber  die  neuesten,  u.' s,  w.,  p.  110).  I  have  mainly 
followed  Ehni,  Der  Vedisehe  Mythus  des  Yama,  pp,  ItJO — 162,bvxt  tAia  ^^swcX. 
meaning  of  the  stanza  ia  still  doubtful  to  me. 


*/ 


«a8  ItBM  MyM^S  op  [BOOK  t 

5  The  Seven  flow  to  the  Youth  on  whom  the  Marats   wait :  Ae 
Sons  unto  the  Father  brought  the  sacrifice. 
Both  these  are  his,  as  his  they  are  the   Lords  of   both  :  both 
toil ;  belonging  unto  both  they  prosper  well. 

HYMN  XIV.  Yama. 

Honour  the  King  with  thine  oblations,  Yama«  Viyasy&n's  Son, 

who  gathers  men  together. 
Who  travelled  to  the  lofty  heights  above  us,  who  searches  out 

and  shows  the  path  to  many. 

2  Yama  first  foilud  for  us  a  place  to  dwell  in :  this  pasture  never 
^  can  be  taken  from  us. 

Men   bom  on  earth  tread  their  own  paths  that  lead  l&em 
whither  our  ancient  Fathers  have  departed. 

3  MUtalt  prospera  there  with  Kavyas,  Yama  with  Angiracf*  sona^ 

Brihaspati  with  Rikvans : 
Exalters  of  the  Gods,  by  Gods  exalted,  ^osa^e  joy  in  praise  and 
some  iu  our  oblation. 

4  Come,  seat  thee  on  this  b*^  of  grass,  0  Yama,  in  company 

with  Angi rases  and  Puthers. 
Let  texts  recited  by  the  sages  bring  thee :  0  King,  let  this 
oblation  m»ke  thee  joyful. 

5  Come,  Yama,   with  the  Angirases  the  Holy,  rejoice  thee  here 

irith  child len  of  Viriipa. 
To  sit  on  sacred  grass  at  this  our  worship,  I  call  Vivasv&n,  too, 
thy  Father  hither. 

5  The  Seven :  rivers.  According  to  S&yana,  metres.  The  TatUh :  Indnt. 
TAe  Sons :  the  Maruts.  The  Father  :  Indra.  Both  these :  havirdhdntu.  Of 
both :  Qods  and  men.     Unto  both :  to  Gk>ds  and  men,  or  to  Heaven  and  EarUL 

The  hymn  is  a  funeral  address,  partly  to  Yama  the  Gk)d  of  the  Dead  and 
partly  to  the  soul  of  the  departed  whose  body  is  being  consumed  on  the  pile. 

1  Yam't :  the  deified  Lord  of  the  Dead  :  originally  the  first  who  died  and 
8o  showed  the  souls  of  his  successors  the  way  to  the  home  of  the  departed. 
See  X.  12.     Lofty  heights:  of  heaven,  the  abode  of  the  Blest. 

3  Mdtali :  a  divine  being,  identified  by  the  Commentators  with  Indra  whose 
charioteer  was  M&tali.  Kavyas :  a  class  of  Manes,  the  spirits  of  a  pious 
race  of  ancient  time.  Angira^'  sons :  the  Angirases,  the  typical  first  sacri- 
ficers.  See  Yol.  I.,  Index.  Rikvans :  or  singers,  a  class  of  spirits  or  deities 
who  attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  Brihaspati.  See  YII.  10.  4.  Some  joy  in 
praise :  the  Gods  delight  in  Sv&h4,  the  sacrificial  exclamation,  worship  ot 
praise.  Some  in  our  oblation:  the  Manes  delight  in  Svadh&,  the  sweet  food 
or  oblation  which  is  presented  to  them. 

4  Angirases  and  Fathers  :  or,  perhaps,  Angirases  our  Fathers. 

5  C/iUdren  of  Viriipa :  Yair^pas,  «i  auV^^naVoxk  oi  >iXx<i  K.\y^\*s#au 


nrUif  14.1  ^^B  RtGVSDA.  t»9 

6  Our  Fathers  are  Angirases,  Navagraa,  Atharvaus,  Bhfigus  who 

deserve  the  Soma. 
May  these,  the  Holy,  look  on  us  with  favour,  may  we  eujoy 
their  gracious  loviug-kindiiess. 

7  Go  forth,  go  forth  upon  the  ancieut  pathways  whereon  our 
^       sires  of  old  have  goue  before  us. 

There  shalt  thou  look  on  both  the  Kings  enjoying  their  sacred 
food,  God  Yaruna  and  Yama. 

8  Meet  Yama,  meet  the  Fathers,  meet  the  merit  of  free  or  or- 

dered acts,  in  highest  lieaven. 
^    Leave  sin  and  evil,  seek  anew  thy  dwelling,  and  bright  with 
glory  wear  another  body. 

9  Go  hence,  depart  ye,  fly  in  all  directions :  this  place  for  him 

the  Fathers  have  provided. 
^      Yama  bestows  ou   him  a  place  to  rest  in  -adorned  with  days 
and  beams  of  light  and  waters. 

10  Run  and  outspeed  the  two  dogs,  Saram&'s  offspring,  brindled,. 

•   four-eyed,  upon  thy  happy  pathway. 
*^       Draw  nigh  then  to  the  gracious-minded  Fathers  where  they 
rejoice  in  company  with  Yama. 

1 1  And  those  two  dogs  of  thine,  Yama,  the  watchers,  four-eyed, 

who  look  on  men  and  guard  the  pathway, — 
•^         £utrust  this  man,  0  King,  to  their  protection,  and  with  pros- 
perity and  health  endow  him. 

12  Dark-hued,  insatiate,  with  distended  nostrils,  Yama's  two  en- 

voys roam  among  the  people ; 
May  they  restore  to  us  a  fair  existence  here  and  to-day,  that 
we  may  see  the  sunlight. 

13  To  Yama  pour  the  Soma,  bring  to  Yama  consecrated  gifts  : 
To  Yama  sacrifice  prepared  and  heralded  by  Agni  goes. 

14  OflFer  to  Yama  holy  gifts  enriched  with  butter,  and  draw  near: 
So  ma)r  he  grant  that  we  may  live  long  days  of  life  among 

the  Gods. 


6  NavagvoBj  Atharvans^  Bhrigus :  priestly  families  of  ancient  times. 

7  This  and  the  following  stnnza  are  addressed  to  the  spirit  of  the  dead 
man  whose  funeral  rites  are  being  celebrated. 

8  Free  or  ordered  acta :  voluntary  good  works  and  prescribed  sacrifices, 
whose  merit  is  stored  up  in  heaven  to  be  enjoyed  on  arrival  by  the  spirits  of 
the  pious  who  have  performed  them. 

9  According  to  S^yana,  this  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  Pis&chas  and  other 
evil  spirits  that  haunt  the  place  of  cremation. 

10  The  spirit  of  the  departed  is  addressed.  The  two  dogs :  offspring  of 
Saramft,  the  hound  of  ludra.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

13  The  three  following  stanzas  are  addreaaed  io  t\ie  ii^x\ft«\A. 


400  THE  HYMN8  OP  {BOOK 


A 


15  Offer  to  Yama,  to  the  King,  oblation  very  rich  in  meatb  : 
Bow  down  before  tbe  Kisbiu  of  the  ancient  tiuies^  who  made 

this  path  iu  days  of  old. 

16  Into  the  six  Exjianses  flies  the  Great  One  in  Trikadrukas. 
Tbe  Glly atri,  the  Trisbtup,  ail  metres  in  Yama  are  pontaiued. 

HYMN  XV.  Fathan. 

Mat  tbey  ascend,  the  lowest,  highest,  midmost,  the  Fathers 

who  deserve  a  share  of  Soma. 
May  tbey  who  have  attained  the  life  of  spiritSi  gentle  and 

righteous,  aid  us  wben  we  call  them. 

2  Now  let  us  pay  tbis  homage  to  the  Fathers,  to  those  who 

passed  of  old  and  those  who  followed, 
Those  who  have  rested  in  the  earthly  region,  and  those  who 
dwell  among  the  Mighty  Baces. 

3  I  bave  attained  the  gracious-minded  Fathers,  I  have  gained 

son  and  progeny  from  Vishnu. 
They  who  enjoy  pressed  juices  with  oblation,  seated  on  .sacred 
grass,  come  oftenest  hither. 

4  Fathers  who  sit  on  sacred   grass,  come,  help   us  :  these  offer- 

ings have  we  made  for  you ;  accept  them. 
So  come  to  us  with  most  auspicious  favour,  and  give  us  health 
and  strength  without  a  trouble. 

5  May  they,  the  Fathers,  worthy  of  the  Soma,  invited   to  their 

favourite  oblations 

Laid  on  tbe  sacred  grass,  come  nigh  and  listen  :  may  they  be 
gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us. 

16  The  meaning  appears  to  be  that  the  Great  Unit,  Yama  as  All-Gk)d,  broad* 
ens  and  fills  the  universe  after  plentiful  libations  of  Soma  juice  in  the  Three 
Kadruka  days,  or  first  three  days  of  the  AbhipUva  festival.  See  Ebni,  Yama^ 
pp.  154 — 157.    For  different  explanations,  see  Bergaigue,  L  178;  II.  122,  127. 

This  hymn,  with  the  exception  of  the  last  stanza,  has  been  translated,  and 
annotated  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  pp.  291—295,  by  the  authors  of  Uie 
SUbemig  Lieder,  and  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  Rigveda, 

1  Ascend :  rise  to  higher  rank ;  obtain  the  best  oblation,  according  to  Sftyapt. 
Lowest,  highest,  midmost :  the  Fathers  are  classified  according  to  their  degreei 
of  merit  acquired  on  earth. 

2  The  earthly  region  :  the  firmament  nearest  to  the  earth.  See  VIII.  77.  S* 
The  Mighty  Maces:  of  the  Gods. 

3  Son  and  progeny :  ndpdtam  cha  vikrdmanam  cha :  tbe  meaning  appears  to 
be,  as  suggesited  by  Ludwig,  that  the  speaker  has  discharged  his  obligation  to 
the  Fathers  by  begetting  a  son  through  the  favour  of   Vishnu.  Still  vHcrdmO' 

Nam,  is  an  unintelligible  expresalou  vn  t\vMk  Goxwi^xioii.     See  Tlie  Hymn$  of  tkt 
Atharvaveda^  XVIII.  1.  45,  note. 


HTMir  16.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  401 

6  Bowing  your  bended  knees  and  seated  southward,  accept  this 

sacrifice  of  ours  with  favour. 

Punish  us  not   for  any  sin,  0   Fathers,   which   we   through 
human  frailty  have  committed. 

7  Lapped  in  the  bosom  of  the   purple  Mornings,  give  riches  to 

the  man  who  brings  oblations. 

Grant  to  your  sons  a  portion   of  that   treasure,  and,  present, 
give  them  energy,  ye  Fathers. 

8  Our  ancient  Fathers  who  deserve   the  Soma,  who   came,  most 

noble,  to  our  Soma-banquet, — 

With  these  let  Yama,  yearning    with   the  yearning,  rejoicing 
eat  our  offerings  at  his  pleasure. 

9  Come  to  us,  Agni,  with  the  gracious   Fathers  who  dwell   in 

glowing  light,  the  very  Kavyaa, 

Who  thirsted  mid  the   Gods,   who   hasten   hither,   oblation- 
winners,  theme  of  singers'  praises. 

10  Come,  Agni,  come  with  countless  ancient  Fathers,  dwellers  in 

light,  primeval,  God-adorers, 

Eaters  and  drinkers  of  oblations,    truthful,  who   travel    with  . 
the  Deities  and  Indra. 

11  Fathers  whom  Agni's  flames  have   tasted,  come   ye   nigh  :  ye 

kindly  leaders,  take  ye  each  your  proper  place. 

Eat  sacrificial  food  presented  on  the  grass  :  grant   riches  with 
a  multitude  of  hero  sons. 

12  Thou,  Agni  Jsltavedas,  when   entreated,  didst   bear  the  offer- 

ings which  thou  madest  fragrant. 

And  give  them  to  the  Fathers  who  did  eat  them  with  Svadhd. 
Eat,  thou  God,  the  gifts  we  bring  thee. 

13  Thou,  Jsltavedas,  knowest  well  the  number  of  Fathers  who  are 

here  and  who  are  absent. 

Of  Fathers  whom  we  know  and  whom   we   know   not :  accept 
the  sacrifice  well-prepared  with  portions. 


7  Lapped  in  the  hoaom  of  the  purple  Mornings :  *  Seated  in   the  proximity 
c^  the  ndiant  flames  (of  the  altar).' — Wilson. 

9  Kavyas:  see  X.  14.  3. 

11  Whom  Agnize  Jlamee  have  tasted  :  whose  bodies  have  been  burnt.  A  class 
of  ICanea  called  Aguishv&ttas,  according  to  Sftyana. 

12  WUhSvadhd:  with  the  sacrificial  exclamation  Svadhft,  or,  with  their 
allotted  portion. 

JS  WitA  portione :  or,  with  SvadhAs. 

^6 


402  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  JL 

14  They  who,  consumed  by  fire  or  not  cremated^  joy  in  their 
offering  in  the  midst  of  heaven, — 
Grant  them,  0  Sovran  Lord,   the  world  of  spirits  and  their 
own  body,  as  thy  pleasure  wills  it. 

^  HYMN  XVI.  AgiiL 

Burn  him  not  up,  nor  quite  consume  him,  Agni  :  'let  not  his 

body  or  his  skin  be  scattered. 
0  Jatavedas,  when  thou  hast  matured  him,  then  send  him  on 

his  way  unto  the  Fathers. 

2  When  thou  hast  made  him  ready,  Jlltavedas,   then  do  thoa 

give  him  over  to  the  Fathers. 
When  he  attains  unto  the  life  that  waits  him,  he  shall  hecome 
the  Deities'  controller. 

3  The  Sun  receive  thine  eye,  the  Wind  thy   spirit ;  go,   as  thy 

merit  is,  to  earth  or  heaven. 
Go,  if  it  be  thy  lot,  unto  the  waters  ;  go,   make   thine  home 
in  plants  with  all  thy  membcfrs. 

4  Thy  portion  is  the  goat :  with   heat  consume  him  ;  let  thy 

fierce  flame,  thy  glowing  splendour,  burn  him. 
With  thine  auspicious  forms,  0  Jitavedas,  bear  this  mah  to 
the  region  of  the  pious. 

5  Again,  0  Agni,  to  the  Fathers  send  him  who,  offered  in  thee, 

goes  with  our  oblations. 
Wearing  new   life   let   him    increase  his   offspring :  let  him 
rejoin  a  body,  J&tavedas. 

14  Tht  world  of  spirits  :  asunUim  :  a  difficult  word  whose  meaning  is  sonte 
what  uncertain.  S&yana  joins  it  with  tanvd^m,  and  Explains  the  two  Words  by 
'  the  body  that  leads  to  life»'  '  that  body  that  is  endowed  with  breath.'^ 
Wilson.  See  X.  12.  4. 

This  hymn  has  been  partially  transliterated,  translated,  and  annotated  by 
Muir,  O.  8.  Texts,  V.  pp.  295—297. 

Stanzas  1 — 6  are  to  be  repeated  while  the  body  of  the  departed  is  being 
partially  consumed  on  the  funeral  pile. 

2  T?ie  life  that  waits  him:  dsunttim:  see  X.  15. 14.  Oonttdler:  by 'winning 
their  favour. 

8  The  Sun  receive  thine  eye,  the  Wind  thy  spirit :  let  like  return  to  likt. 
See  Muir's  note,  O.  S.  Texts,  V.  298. 

4  Agni  is  addressed.  The  goat :  that  was  slaughtered  and  laid  limb  by  Bmb 
on  the  corpse. 

5  Let  him  increase  his  offspring :  when  he  becomes  one  of  the  T^then'tb 
whom  is  ascribed  the  fruitfulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  pareurts  of  Qodf 
0nd  men.  See  X,  64.  14.  Let  Kvm,  rQoin  :  ox,  \«\i  ^aki^  te\om  'hia  boAy  :  ttl 

nomin&tive  is  not  ezpreased. 


B7MN  16.]  TRB  RieVSDA.  4<4 

6  What  wound  soe'er  the  dark  bird  tath  inflicted,  the  emmet, 

or  the  serpent,  or  the  jackal, 
May  Agni  who  devoureth  all  thii^s  heal   it,  and  Soma  who 
hath  ,pa8sed  into  the  Br&hmans. 

7  Shield  thee  with  flesh  against  the  flames  of  Agni,  encompass 

thee  about  with  fat  and  marrow. 
So  will  the  Bold  One,  eager  to  attack  t^ee  with  fierce  glow 
fail  to  girdle  and  consume  thee. 

8  Forbear,  0  Agni,  to  upset  this  ladle  :  the  Gods  and  they  who 

merit  Soma  love  it. 
This  ladle,  this  which  serves  the  (rods  to  drink  from,  in  this 
the  Immortal  Deities  rejoice  them. 

9  I  send  afar  flesh-eating  Agni,  bearing  ofl'stains  may  he  depart 

to  Yama's  subjects. 
But  let  this  other  JUtavedas  carry  oblation  to  the  Gk>ds,  for 
he  is  skilful. 

10  I  choose   as  God  for  Father-worship  Agni,  flesh-eater,  who 

hath  past  within  your  dwelling. 
While  looking  on  this  other  Jfitavedas.     Let  him  light  flames 
in  the  supreme  assembly. 

11  With  offerings  meet  let  Agni  bring  the  Fathers  who  support 

the  Law. 
Let  him  announce  oblations  paid  to  Fathers  and  to  Deities. 

12  Bight  gladly  would  we  set  thee  down,  right  gladly  make  thee 

bum  and  glow. 
Gladly  bring  yearning  Fathers  nigh  to  «at  the  food  of  sacrifice. 

13  Cool,  Agni,  and    again  refresh   the   spot  which   thou  bast 

scorched  and  burnt. 
Here  let  the  water-lily  grow,  and  tender  grass  and  leafy  herb. 

14  0  full  of  coolness,   thou  cool   Plant,  full   of  fresh   moisture, 
.    freshening  Herb, 

Gome  hither  with  the  female  frog:  fill  with  delight  this  Agni 
here. 

7  The  corpse  is  addressed.  Fltth :  the  oaul  and  other  parte  of  a  slaughtered 
animal  which  covered  the  corpse  to  prevent  too  ^ick  and  complete  cremation. 

'^'BtOMM:  df  sin  or  impurity  which  «jnay  have  attached  to  the  departed, 
pp.  irtianca  6. 

10  Light  Jtamea :  typically  offer  saoHfice  in  the  assembly  of  the  Qods. 

11  With  offeringt  meet :  literally,  bearing  BLavyas  or  Kavya- worship,  that 
is,  oSbHiigs  to  the  kcwU,  sages,  or  Fathers. 

18  Thee :  Agni ;  the  fire. 

18  WaUr-lily:  kiydmbu :  Bome  kind  of  aoquatic  plant.  Tender  gran  f 
pSJuMrvd :  a  variety  of  dUrvd  grass  (Panicum  Daotylon). 

14  FiU  trith  delight:  meauiog,  euphemistically,  esXasig^iadii.    ^  MXac  ^% 
Br0  htuf  oooBumed  the  corpse,  water  is,  poured  upou  it  V>  «lXAI^s<a^V^'^^  ^t^«& 


y 


404  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  XVII.  Various  Deitio. 

TvASHTAR  prepares  the  bridal  of  his  Daughter :  all  the  world 

hears  the  tidings  and  assembles. 
But  Yanaa's  Mother,  Spouse  of  great  Vivasv4n,  vanished  as 

she  was  carried  to  her  dwelling. 

2  From  mortal  men  they  hid  the  Immortal  L^y,  made  one  like 

her  and  gave  her  to  Vivasv&n. 
Saranyd  brought  to  him  the  Asvin  brothers,  and  then  deserted 
both  twinned  pairs  of  children. 

3  Guard  of  the  world,  whose  cattle  ne'er  are  injured,  may  Pu- 

shan  bear  thee  hence,  for  he  hath  knowledge. 
May  he  consign  thee  to  these  Fathers'  keeping,  and  to  the 
gracious  Gods  let  Agni  give  thee. 

4  May  Ayu,  giver  of  all  life,  protect  thee,  and  bear  thee  forwaid 

on  the  distant  pathway. 
Thither  let  Savitar  the  God  transport  thee,  where  dwell  the 
pious  who  have  passed  before  thee. 

5  P&shan  knows  all  these  realms :  may  he  conduct  us  by  ways 

that  are  most  free  from  fear  and  danger. 
Giver  of  blessings,  glowing,  all-heroic,  may  he,  the  wise  and 
watchful,  go  before  us. 

furthermore  certain  water-plants  are  pub  there.  In  addition  to  these  a  frog— 
here  a  female,  elsewhere  a  male — is  put  upon  the  place  where  the  fire  has 
burned.  These,  as  representatives  of  life  in  the  waters,  are  symbolically 
supposed  both  to  prevent  and  extinguish  fire.'  (M.  Bloomfield,  Contribuiioia 
to  the  Interpi'etation  of  the  Veda,  Second  Series,  Baltimore  :  1890). 

Dr.  Muir's  Original  Sanskrit  TeoUa,  V.  pp.  297 — 299,  should  be  consulted 
with  regard  to  this  funeral  hymn  addressed  to  Agni,  and  much  additional 
information  on  the  subject  may  be  obtained  from  the  essays,  there  referred 
tO;  by  yon  Koth  and  Max  Miiller. 

1  The  first  two  stanzas  are  difficult,  and  appear  to  have  no  connexion  with 
the  rest  of  the  hymn.  Tvashtar :  a  Qod  often  regarded,  as  here,  as  an  agent 
in  natural  phenomena.  Hit  Daughter' :  Saranyfi,  the  stormy  cloud  ;  or,  per- 
haps, the  dawn.  Vivasvdn :  representing  the  bright  heavens,  or  the  Sun. 
Tama's  Mother :  Saranyd,  who  afterwards  gave  birth  to  Yama  and  Yaoil. 
See  X.  10,  note.  Vanished:  or  was  stolen  away.  Carried  .*  as  a  bride,  in  pro- 
cession. 

2  They :  the  Gods.  The  Immortal  Lady  :  Sarany{i.  Brought  to  him  :  under 
another  form  bore  to  Vivasv&n.  Both  twinned  pairs :  Yama  and  Yamt  and  the 
Asvins.  For  the  legend  which  has  been  formed  out  of  these  obscure  hints,  see 
Wilson's  Translation,  and  Muir,  0.  8.  TexU,  V.  228. 

3  Here  the  funeral  hymn  begins,  with  an  address  to  the  spirit  of  the  de- 
parted. PUshan  /  as  a  Sun- God  and  the  heavenly  Herdsman  who  knows  the 
path  through  the  heavens  and  is  therefore  a  good  conductor  of  the  spirit  of 
ihe  dep&rted. 

4  Ayu:  according  to  S4yana, "Vft-yw  \a Vu\ATv^^^^V>aft\«\Xi«*  ^^  N»sv\v^^4«<L 
Or  the  meaning  may  be,  life  oi  iuW  vi^Vit^ . 


HYMN  17.]  THE  RIQVEDA,  406 

6  Pdshan  was  born  to  move  on  distant  pathways,  on  the  road  far 

from  earth  and  far  from  heaven. 

To  both  most  wonted  places  of  assembly  he  travels  and  returns. 
^  with  perfect  knowledge. 

7  The  pious  call  Sarasvati,  they  worship  Sarasvati  while  sacri- 

fice proceedeth. 

The  pious  called  Sarasvati  aforetime.    Sarasvati  send  bliss  to 
him  who  giveth.  . 

8  Sarasvati,  who  camest  with  the  Fathers,  with  them  rejoicing 

thee  in  our  oblations, 

Seated  upon  this  sacred  grass  be  joyful,  and  give  us  strength- 
ening food  that  brings  no  sickness. 

9  Thou,  called  on  as  Sarasvati  by  Fathers  who  come  right  for- 

ward to  our  solemn  service, 

Give  food  and  wealth  to  present  sacrificers,  a  portion,  worth 
a  thousand,  of  refreshment. 

10  The  Mother  Floods  shall  make  us  bright  and  shining,  cleans- 

ers of  holy  oil,  with  oil  shall  cleanse  us : 

For,  Goddesses,  they  bear  off  all  defilement :  I  rise  up  from 
them  purified  and  brightened. 

11  Through  days  of  earliest  date  the  Drop  descended  on  this 

place  and  on  that  which  was  before  it. 

I  offer  up,  throughout  the  seven  oblations,  the  Drop  which 
still  to  one  same  place  is  moving. 

1 2  The  Drop  that  falls,  thy  stalk  which  arms  have  shaken,  which 

from  the  bosom  of  the  press  hath  fallen. 

Or  from  the  Adhvaryu's  purifying  filter,  I  offer  thee  with  heart 
and  cry  of  Vashat ! 

13  That  fallen  Drop  of  thine,  the  stalk  which  from  the  ladle  fell 

away. 
This  present  God  Brihaspati  shall  pour  it  forth  to  make  us  rich. 

14  The  plants  of  earth  are  rich  in  milk,  and  rich  in  milk  is  this 

my  speech; 

And  rich  in  milk  the  essence  of  the  Waters :  make  me  pure, 
therewith. 


7  Sarasvatt :  see  I.  3.  10. 

11  This  stanza  is  not  very  intelligible.  The  Drop  is  apparently  the  Soma  ; 
but  Sftyana  explains  it,  alternatively,  by  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  See  Satayaihti^ 
Brdhmana,  VII.  4.  1.  20  (Sacred  Books  of  the  Eant,  XIA,  ^^^^, 

Id  JiicA  in  mUk:  fall  of  sap,  vigour,  vital  and  viv\iym%  ^7t«t% 


40§  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOM  X 

/  HYMN  XVIII.  Varibus  im^ 

Go  hence,  0  Death,  pursue  thy  special  pathwa;)^  apart  feom 

that  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel. 
To  thee  I  say  it  who  hast  eyes  and  hearest :  Touch  not  our 

offspring,  injure  not  pur  heroes. 

2  As  ye  have  come  effacing  Mrityu's  footstep,  to  further  times 

prolonging  your  existence, 
May  ye  be  rich  in  children  and  possessions,  clieansed,  purified, 
and  meet  for  sacrificing. 

3  Divided   from  the  dead  are  these,  the  living :  now'  be  our 

calling  on  the  Gods  successful. 
We  have  gone  forth  for  dancing  and  for  laughter,  to  further 
times  prolonging  our  existence. 

4  Here  I  erect  this  rampart  for  the  living ;  let  none   of   these, 

none  other,  reach  this  limit. 
May  they  survive  a  hundred  lengthened  autmmna,   and  may 
they  bury  Death  beneath  this  mountain. 

5  As  the  days  follpw  days  in  close  siaeodssioi^  asb  with   tha  sea- 

sons duly  come  th&  seasons^. 
As  each  successor  fails  not  his  foregoes,,  so  fomx  the.  lives  of 
these,  0  great  Ordainer 

5  Live  your  full  lives  and  find  old   age   delightful,    all   of  you 
striving  one  behind  the  other. 

May  Tvashtar,  maker  of  fair  things,,  be  gracious  and  lengthen 
out  the  days  of  your  existence. 


.^— IP^M-^— ^ 


1  Dtfa^;  Mrityu,. the  God  of  Death  ;  distlnot  from  Yama  the  judge  and 
ruler  of  the  departed.  Our  offspring :  praj^m  :  meaning  here,  says  SAyana, 
female  offspring,  duhitridauhUrdtmikdm,  in  the  form  of  daughters  and  their 
dsAightera.  Our  hgroer:  sons  Mid  their  sons. — SAyaxut. 

2  Addressed  to  the  kinsmen  of  the  deceased.  Effacing  Mrityu^a  fitotUep : 
a  wisp  or  clog  was  fastened  to  the  foot  of  the  corpse  which  represented  Miptyn 
or  Death,  in  order  to  prevent  the  premature  return  of  Death  to  carry  off  the 
li^g.  See  A.  7.,  V.  19^  12.  Clecmaed:  fjaoiA  sins  of  a  former  life.  Pwi^: 
from  sins  of  the  present  life. 

8  Dancing  and  laughter :  the  enjoyments  of  ordinary  life  after  the  fulfil- 
ment of  our  dutiies  to  the  d«ad. 

4  Thii  rampoArt :  of  stone,  or  earth,  raised  by  the  AdhTaryu  as-  a  line  of 
demarcation  l>stween  the  dead  and  the  living,  and  limiting*  as  it  were,  the 
jurisdiction  of  Death  until  the  natural  time  for  his  approach.  Th%»  mountain: 
the  mound  or  bank. 

5  So  form  the  Uves :  let  them  pass  away  in  diie  order  of  seniority.  OrdavMr : 
I^kdtar:  the  name  of  &  divine  being  who  is  the  creator,  arranger,  mainteiner, 

uid  moDAger  of  all  things. 
6  One  behind  th^  oihct :  the  oldest  tWb0^han^\ifeftwA^^2a««\^^^ 


B^XS^N^  18.]  THE  UIOVEDA.  407 

7  Let  these  unwidowed  dames,  with  noble  husbands  adorn  them- 

selves with  fragrant  balm  and  unguent. 
Decked  with  fair  jewels,  tearless,  free  from  sorrow,  first  let  the 
dames  go  upi  to  where  he  lleth. 

8  Bise,  come  unto  th^  world  of  life,  0  woman :  come,  he  is  lifj9- 

less  by  whose  side  thou  liest. 
Wifehood,  with  this  thy  husband  was  thy  portion,  who  took  thy 
hand  and  wooed  thee  as  a  lover. 

9  Fi^om  his  dead  hand  I  take  the  bow  he  carried,  that  it  may  be 

our  power  and  might  and  glory. 
There  art  thou,  there ;  and  here  with  noble  heroes  may  we 
o'ercome  all  hosts  that  fight  against  us. 

10  Betake  thee  to  the  lap  of  l^arth  the  Mother,  of  Earth  far-spread- 

ing, very  kind  and  gracious. 
Youpg  Dame,  wool-soft  unto  the  guerdon-giver,  may  she  pre- 
serve thee  from  Destruction's  bosom. 

1 1  Heave  thyself,  Earth,  nor  press  thee  downward  heavily ;  afford 

him  easy  access,  gently  tending  him. 
Cover  him,  as  a  mother  wraps  her  skirt  about  her  child,  0  Earth. 

1 2  Now  let  the  heaving  earth  be  free  from  motion :  yea,  let  a  thou- 

sand clods  remain  above  him. 
Be  they  to  him  a  home  distilling  fatness,  here  let  them  ever  be 
his  place  of  refuge. 

13  1  stay  the  earth  from  thee,  while  over  thee  I  place  this  piece 

oi  earth.     May  I  be  free  from  injury. 
Here  let  the  Fathers  keep  this  pillar  firm  for  thee,  and  there 
let  Yami^  make  thee  an  abiding-place. 

14  Even  as  an  arrow's  feathers,  they  have  set  me  on  a  fitting  day. 
The  fit  word  have  I  caught  and  held  as  'twere  a  oouraer  with 

the  rein. 


7  Pint :  ogre ;  to  begin  with  ;  i.  e.  before  the  ceremonies  begin.  See  M. 
Ifiiller,  Chips,  IV.  85—39  (edition  of  1896).  On  the  whole  stanza,  see  Dr.  R 
Hall,  Journal  of  R.  A.  S.,  Vol.  III.  Part  I.,  p.  185f. 

8.  *  Tbis  yerse  ^  to  be.  spoken  by  the  husband's  brother,  etc.»  to  the  wife  of 
the  dead  man,  and  he  is  to  make  her  leave  her  husband's  body.  See  the 
AsvMlayana  Orihya  SiUreu,  IV.  2.' — Editor's  note,  in  Wilson's  Translation. 

9  "Hiis  stanza  is  applicable  only  when  the  deceased  was  a  Kshatriya  or  man 
of  the  princely  and  military  order. 

10  Addressed  to  the  body.  Ouerdon  giver :  the  liberal  rewarder  of  the 
priests.     Destruction's  bosom  :  or  the  lap  of  Nirriti. 

13  /  stay  the  earth :  *  I  keep  oflf  the  earth  above  thee  with  thy  lid.|  *  Thi^ 
&i  addressed  to  the  urn  containing  the  bones  and  ashes,  which  is  burie4  after 
tl^e  corpse  has  been  burnt.'—  Wibon.  PUlar :  perhaps  a  beam  laid  over  th^ 
FftmaJHa. 

If  This  atanza,  which  seems  to  be  a  later  addition,  ia  -no^TvcAtKoi^m^Vsvi^^ 
CommeaUwy,  uud  the  meaning  of  the  second  line  \a  no^  '^ec^  ^<^«x«   ^'W^^ 


408  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  XIX.  Watnn  or  Ckm. 

Turn,  go  not  farther  ou  your  way ;  visit  ub,  O  ye  Wealthy 

Ones. 
Agni  and  Soma,  ye  who  bring  riches  again,  secure  us  wealth. 

2  ^lake  these  return  to  us  again,  bring  them  beside  as  once 

again. 
May  Iiidra  give  them  back  to  us,  and  Agni  drive  them  hither- 
ward. 

3  Let  them  return  to  us  again  :  under  this  herdsman  let  them 

feed. 
Do  thou,  0  Agni,   keep  them   here,  and  let  the   wealth  we 
have  remain. 

4  I  call  upon  their  herdsman,  him  who  knoweth  well  their  coming 

nigh. 
Their   parting  and  their  home -return,  and   watcheth  their 
approach  and  rest. 

5  Yea,  let  the   herdsman,  too,  return,  who  marketh  well  their 

driving-forth; 
Marketh  their  wandering  away,  their  turning  back  and  eom- 
ing  home. 

6  Home-leader,  lead  them  home  to  us ;  Indra,  restore  to  us  our 

kine  : 
We  will  rejoice  in  them  alive. 


followed  Prof.  Whitney's  rendering  (Lanman,  p.  886).  The  verse,  says 
Laninan,  *  seems  to  express  the  poet's  satisfaction  at  having  made  a  good 
hymn  at  the  right  time  and  place,  and  with  as  good  skill  as  a  skilful  horse- 
man has.* 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebenzig  Lieder.    See 
Ziramer's  Altindisches  Leben,  pp.  400 — 407,  Mr.  Romesh  Chuuder   Dutt's 
Civilization  in  Ancient   India^   pp.  108,   and  278,  279,     Lanman's  SanikrilL 
Reader,  pp.  382  —  386,  and  Z^naide  Ragozin's  Vedie  India,  pp.  851—859. 
The  essays  of  von  Roth  and  Max  MuUer  have  already  been  referred  to. 

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  the  return  of  strayed  cows,  to  whom  the  first 

line  is  addressed. 

1  Ye  who  bring  riches  again  :  punai'vasH  :  *  ye  who  clothe  (your  worship- 
pers)  again.' — Wilson.     See  Hillebrandt,  V,  Af.,  I.  460. 

2  These :  cows,  or  waters. — Siyana.  Make  return  is  the  imperative  singular, 
and  Sdyana  says  that  the  seer  of  the  hymn  addresses  himself.  The  addieas 
is  to  Indra. 

4  Sflyana   explains  this    stanza   somewhat   differently  : — *  I  invoke  the 

knowledge  of  the  place,  of  their  going,  of  their  coming,  of  their  departure 

of  their   wandering,  of  their  returning  :    (I  invoke)  him  who  is  their  keeper.' 

—  Wilson.     This  is  a  more  strictly  literal  rendering  of  the  abstract  nouns  in 

the  text. 


HYMN  20.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  409 

7  I  offer  you  on  every  side  butter  and  milk  and  strengthening  food. 
May  all  the  Holy  Deities  pour  down  on  us  a  flood  of  wealth. 

8  O  thou  Home-leader,  lead  them  home,  restore  them  thou  who 

bringest  home. 
Four  are  the  quarters  of  the  earth ;  from  these  bring  back  to 

us  our  kine. 

HYMN  XX.  AgnL 

Send  unto  us  a  good  and  happy  mind. 

2  I  worship  Agni,  Youthf  ullest  of  Gods,  resistless,  Friend  of  laws; 
Under  whose  guard  and  heavenly  light  the  Spotted  seek  the 

Mother's  breast : 

3  Whom  with  their  mouth  they  magnify,  bannered  with  flame 

and  homed  in  light. 
He  glitters  with  his  row  of  teeth. 

4  Kind,  Furtherer  of  men,  he  comes,  when  he  hath  reached  the 

ends  of  heaven. 
Sage,  giving  splendour  to  the  clouds. 

5  To  teuste  man's  offerings,  he,  the  Strong,  hath  risen  erect  at 

sacrifice : 
Fixing  his  dwelling  he  proceeds. 

6  Here  are  oblation,  worship,  rest :  rapidly  comes  his  furtherance. 
To  sword-armed  Agni  come  the  Gods. 

7  With  service  for  chief  bliss  I  seek  the  Lord  of  Sacrifice,  Agni> 

whom 
They  call  the  Living,  Son  of  Cloud. 

8  Blest  evermore  be  all  the  men  who  come  from  us,  who  magnify 
Agni  with  sacrificial  gifts. 

9  The  path  he  treads  is  black  and  white  and  red,  and  striped, 

and  brown,  crimson,  and  glorious. 
His  sire  begat  him  bright  with  hues  of  gold. 

10  Thus   with  his  thoughts,  0  Son  of   Strength,  0  Agni,  hath 
Yimada,  accordant  with  the  Immortals, 
Offered  thee  hymns,  soliciting  thy  favour.     Thou  hast  brought 
all,  food,  strength,  a  prosperous  dwelling. 

2  The  Spotted :  there  ia  no  noun.  The  variegated  oblations,  as  S&yana  says, 
appear  to  be  intended ;  and  the  Mother's  breast  may  be  the  clouds  of  the 
firmament.     The  stanza  is  difficult,  and  translation  must  be  tentative. 

8  Homed  in  light:  the  meaning  of  kripantlam  is  uncei-tain.  'Pitying 
prayer,*  according  to  Ludwig.     *  Sustainer  of  pious  works.* — Wilson. 

5  He  proceeds :  is  carried  from  one  fire  receptacle  or  altar  to  another. 

6  Sword-armed  :  armed  with  his  sword  or  knife  of  piercing  flame. 

8  The  men  who  come  from  us :  sons  and  grandsons  of  the  ^orabv^^^T^* 

9  The  path  he  treads:  according  to  S&yana,  hia  chs^ot. 
JO  Fimada:  the  Biabi  of  the  hymn. 


1 


410  TUB  HYMNS  OP   .  [BOOK  Jk 

HYMN  XXI.  AgnL 

With  offerings  of  our  own  we  choose  thee,  Agni,  as  Invoking 

Priest, 
For  sacrifice  with  trimmed  grass, — at  your  glad  carouse  — 

piercing  and  brightly  shining.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

2  The  wealthy  ones  adorn  thee,  they  who  bring  us  horses  as 

their  gift : 
The  sprinkling  ladle,  Agni, — at  your  glad  carouse — and  glow- 
ing offering  taste  thee.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3  The  holy  statutes  rest  by  thee,  as  'twere  with  ladles  that  o'er- 

flow. 
Black  and  white-gleaming  colours, — ^at  your  glad  oarouse — all 
glories  thou  assumest.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

4  0  Agni,  what  thou  deemest  wealth,  Victorious  and  Immortal 

One! 
Bring  thou  to  give  us  vigour, — at  your  glad  oarouse— splendid 
at  sacrifices.     Thou  art  waxing  great.' 

5  Skilled  in  all  lore  is  Agni,  he  whom  erst  Atharvan  brought  to 

life. 
He  was  Vivasv&n's  envoy,  at  your  glad  carouse — the  well-loved 
friend  of  Yama.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

6  At  sacrifices  they  adore  thee,  Agni,  when  the  rite  proceeds. 
All  fair  and  lovely  treasures — ^at  your  glad   oarouse — thou 

givest  him  who  offers.     Thou  art  waxiug  great. 

7  Men,  Agni,  have  established  thee  as  welcome  Priest  at  holy 

rites. 
Thee  whose  face  shines  with  butter, — at  your  glad  carouse — 
bright,  with  eyes  most  observant.     Thou  art  w/a^ng  g^eat 

8  Wide  and  aloft  thou  spreadest  thee,  0  Agni,  with  thy  brilliant 

flame. 
A  Bull  art  thou  when  bellowing,— r-at  your  glad  oarouse — thou 
dost  impregn  the  Sisters.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 


1  At  your  glad  carouse:  apparently  a  Soma-drinking  refrain,  addressed  to 
the  Visvedevas  or  All- Gods.  Thou  art  waxing  great :  a  similar  refrain  or 
burden  addressed  to  Agni.  See  Wilson's  Translation,  note.  Grassmann  omits 
both  refrains,  which  he  oousiders  to  be  later  interpolations. 

2  Taste  thee :  feel  the  power  of  the  fire. 

3  The  first  line  is  difficult :— *  The  establishera  (of  the  rite)  wwship  thee 
with  their  ladles  (filled  with  the  oblation),  like  (earth—)  sprinkling  (showers).' 
— Wilson.  I  follow  Ludwig's  interpretation.  Those  who  worship  Agni  accord- 
ing to  his  Law  are  regarded  as  his  own  statutes  incarnate. 

5  A  thai'van :  the  priest  who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to  obtain  ftre 
»nd  offer  Soma  and  prayers.     Viva^vdn :  the  Soma- priest,  or  the  sacrifioer. 
^  Tyt^  SUters:  the  plants,  which  Agni,  deafteiidgkniVaTWisv,«iako9  fru^tfal. 


PTMSr  22]  TBB  RJOVE^DA.  ill 

HYMN  XXII.  Indm. 

Where  is  famed  Indra  heard  of?  With  what  folk  is  be  reoowu- 

ed  to-day  as  Mitra  is, — 
Who  ia  the  honie  of  Kishis  and  in  secret  is  extolled  with  song  ? 

2  Even  here  is  Indra  famed^  and  among  us  this  day  the  glorious 

Thunderer  is  praised. 
He  who  like  Mitra  mid  the  folk  hath  won  complete  and  full 
renown. 

3  He.  who  is  Sovran  Lord  of  great  and  perfect  strength,  exerter 

of  heroic  might, 
Who  bears  the  fearless  thunder  as  a  father  bears  his  darling 
son. 

A  Harnessing  to  thy  car,  as  God,  two  blustering  Steeds  of  the 
Wind-God,  0  Thunderer, 
That  speed  along  the  shining  path,  thou  making  ways  art 
glorified. 

5  Even  to  th^se  deak  Steeds  of  Wind  thou  of  thyself  hast  come 

to  ride. 
Of  which  no  driver  may  be  found,  none,  be  he  God  or  mortal 
matt. 

6  When  ye  approach,  men  ask  you,  thee  and  UsanH :  Why  come 

ye  to  our  dwelling-place  ? 
Why  are  ye  come  to  mprtal  man  f^om  distant  realms  of  earth 
and  heaven  ? 

7  O  Indra,  thou  shalt  speak  us  feir :  oof  holy  prayer  is  offered 

up. 
We  pray  to  thee  for  help  as  thou  didst  strike  the  monster 

Sushna  dead. 

•        • 

8  Arottnd  u»  is-  the  Dasyu,  viteless,  void  of  sense,  inhuman, 

keeping  aliea  laws. 
Baffle,,  thou  Slayer  of  the  foe,  the  weapon  which  this  Dslsa 
wields. 

9  Hero  with  Heroes,  thou  art  ours  :  yea,  strong  are  they  whom 

thou  dost  help. 
In  many  a  place  are  thy  full  gifts,  and  men,  like  vassals,  sing 
thy  praise. 


1  In.  8eere6:  in  the  forest,  aooording  ta  Sftyaaa. 

4  Making  ways  .*  as  a  Qod  of  light,  making  paths  through  the  pathless 
larkness. 
6  Ufand :  Usanft  or  Usanas  KAvya,  who  has  been  Irequently  mentionsd  aa 
fihvoored  friend  and  oompanioa  o{  Indra. 


412  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  X 

10  Urgo  thou  these  heroes  on  to  slay  the  enemy,  brave  Thunder-  * 

er !  ill  the  fight  with  swords, 
Even  when  hid  among  the  tribes  of  Sages  numerous  as  stars. 

1 1  Swift  come  those  gifts  of  thine  whose  hand  is  prompt  to  rend 

and  bum,  0  Hero  Thunder-armed  : 
As  thou  with  thy  Companions  didst  destroy  the  whole  of 
Sushna's  brood. 

■  • 

12  Let  not  thine  excellent  assistance  come  to  us,  0  Hero  Indra, 

profitless. 
May  we,  may  we  enjoy  the  bliss  of  these  thy  favours,  Thun- 
derer ! 

13  May  those  soft  impulses  of  thine,  0  Indra,  be  fruitful  and 

innocent  to  us. 
May  we  know  these  whose  treasures  are  like  those  of  milch- 
kine,  Thunderer ! 

14  That  Earth,  through  power  of  knowing  things  that  may  be 

known,  handless  and  footless  yet  might  thrive, 
Thou  slewest,  turniug  to  the  right,  Sushna  for  every  living 
man. 

15  Drink,  drink  the  Soma,  Hero  Indra;  be  not  withheld  as  thou 

art  good,  0  Treasure-giver. 
Preserve  the  singers  and  our  liberal  princes,  and  make   us 
wealthy  with  abundant  riches. 

HYMN  XXIII.  Indni. 

Indra,  whose  right  hand  wields  the  bolt,  we  worship,  driver 

of  Bay  Steeds  seeking  sundered  courses. 
Shaking  his  beard  with   might  he   hath  arisen,  casting   his 

weapons  forth  and  dealing  bounties. 

2  The  treasure  which  his  Bay  Steeds  found  at  sacrifice, — ^this 
wealth  made  opulent  Indra  slayer  of  the  foe. 

10  The  enemy  :  or  Vritra.  Hid  among  the  tHbes  of  Sages :  dwelling  among 
the  wise  Guds  and  invisible  to  men.  Numerous  as  stars :  the  meaning  of 
ndkshatrasavasdm  is  uncertain. 

1 1  Whose  hand  is  prompt  to  rend  and  bum :  1  follow  Ludwig*s  interpreta- 
tion, but  the  meaning  which  he  gives  to  dk8hdn4  is  doubtful. 

13  Soft  impulses  of  thine :  *  our  (praises)  reaching  thee.* — Wilson. 

14  For  every  living  man :  visvStyave:  according  to  S&yana,  for  the  sake  of 
VisvAyn,  a  king,  the  son  of  Urvasl,  the  Apsaras  or  nymph  of  heaven  who  be- 
came the  wife  of  Purilravas.  Turning  to  the  right :  circumambulating  Sushna 
with  the  right  hand  towards  him  for  good  luck  ;  performing  the  Gaelic  deasoL 

1  Seeking  sundered  courses :  vivratdndm :  unruly,   and  pulling  away  from 
each  other,  or  wandering.  According  to  SfiL^^^na,  having  many  functions. 
2  At  sacrifice:  S&yana  explains  ininc  \>^  '  a.t  «Mst\^cfe,  w/wi  \\a  forest.' 
The  exact  meaning  of  the  word  here  \b  not.  c^t^Va.  Of  l\*  Jo%;  w^^\^^t%^ 


nrMN  24.]  THE  RIQVBDA.  413 

Kibhu,  Bibhukshan,  V4ja, — he  is  Lord  of  Might.  The  Dasa's 
very  name  I  utterly  destroy. 

3  When,  with  the  Princes,  Maghavan,  famed  of  old,  comes  nigh 

the  thunderbolt  of  gold,  and  the  Controller's  car 
Which  his   two   Tawny   Coursera   draw,   then  .  Indra   is  the 
Sovran  Lord  of  power  whose  glory  spreads  afar. 

4  With  him  too  is  this  rain  of  his  that  comes  like  berds :  Indra 

throws  drops  of  moisture  on  his  yellow  beard. 
When  the  sweet  juice  is  shed  he  seeks  the  pleasantrplace,  and 
stirs  the  worshipper  as  wind  disturbs  the  wood. 

5  We  laud  and  praise  his  several  deeds  of  valour  who,  fatherlike, 

with  power  hath  made  ns  stronger ; 
Who  with  his  voice  slew  many  thousand  wicked  ones  who 
spake  in  varied  manners  with  contemptuous  cries. 

6  Indra,  the   Vimadas  have   formed  for  thee  a  laud,  copious, 

unparalleled,  for  thee  Most  Bountiful. 
We  know  the  good  we  gain  from  him  the  Mighty  One  when  we 
attract  him  as  a  herdsman  calls  the  kine. 

7  Ne'er  may  this  bond  of  friendship  be  dissevered,  the  Kishi 

Vimada's  and  thine,  0  Indra. 
We  know  thou  carest  for  us  as  a  brother :  with  us,  0  God,  be 
thine  auspicious  friendship. 

HYMN  XXIV.  Indra.  Asvins. 

O  Indra,  drink  this  Soma,  pressed  out  in  the  mortar,  full  of 
sweets. 

Send  down  to  us  great  riches, — at  your  glad  carouse — in  thou- 
sands, 0  Most  Wealthy.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

2  To  thee  with  sacrifices,  with  oblations,  and  with  lauds  we  come. 
Lord  of  all  strength  and  power,  grant — at  your  glad  carouse — 

the  best  choice-worthy  treasure.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3  Thou  who  art  Lord  of  precious  boons,  inciter  even  of  the  churl. 
Guardian  of   singers,    Indra, — at  your  glad  carouse — save  us 

from  woe  and  hatred.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

RibhUf  RibhuhsJian,  Vdja :  Indra,  combining  the  three  Ribhus  in  his  own 
person. 

3  With  the  PHncet :  with  the  Maruts. 

4  Drops  of  moisture :  perhaps  the  rain  which  he  pours  upon  the  lightning 
which  may  be  r^arded  as  his  beard. — Ludwig.  The  pleasant  place :  the 
chamber  of  sacrifice.  The  worshipper :  or,  according  to  S&yana,  his  own  body. 
The  text  has  no  word  to  exprebs  the  object  here. 

The  double  burden  or  refrain  of  Hymn  XXI.  is  employed  m  t^^  ^'oj^ 
ihree  stanjssaer. 

^  Of  singers  :  worsbippera  ;  *  eulogists.* — ^il&ou. 


414  TffJB  HYMNS  OP  lBOM% 

4  Strong,  Lords  of  Magic  .power,  ye  Twain  diumed  the  uttited 

worlds  apart, 
When  ye,  implored  by  Yiinada,  Ndsatyas,  foreed  apart  ihe  pak. 

5  When  the  united  pair   were  rent  asunder  all  the  Gods  com- 

plained. 
The  Gods  to  the  NAsatyas  cried,  Bring  these  together  once 
again.  * 

6  Sweet  be  my  going  forth,  and  rich  in  sweets  be  my  approach 

to  home. 

So,  through  your  Deity,  both  Qods,  enrich  us  with  all   plea- 
santness. 

HYMN  XXV.  Soma. 

Send  us  a  good  and  happy  mind,  send  energy  and  mental  power. 

Then — at  your  glrtd  catouse — let  men  joy  in  -thy   love,  Sweet 
Juice  !  as  kine  in  pasture.  Thou  art  waxidg  great. 

2  In  all  thy  forms,  0  Soma,  rest  thy  powers  that  influence  the 

heart. 
So  also  these  my  longings^ at  your  glad  earouse — iftpread 
themselves  seeking  riches.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

3  Even  if,  0  Soma,  I  neglect  thy  laws  through  my  simplicity, 
Be  gracious — at  your  glad   carouse — 'as  sire  to  son.     Pre^rvd 

us  even  from  slaughter.     Thou  art  waging  great. 

4  Our  songs  in   concert  go  to  thee   as  streams  of  water  to  the 

wells. 
Soma,  that  we  may  live,   grant— at  your  glad  carouse — full 
powers  of  mind,  like  beakers.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

5  0  Soma,  through  thy  might  who  art  skilful  and  strong,  these 

longing  men, 
These   sages,  have   thrown  dpen — at  your  glad   carouse^- the 
stall  of  kine  and  horses.     Th6u  art  waxing  great. 

6  Our  herds  thou  guardest,  Soma,  and  the  moving  world  spreafd 

far  and  wide. 
Thou  fittest  them  for  living,— at  your  glad  carouse — looking 
upon  all  beings.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 


4  Churned  .  ...ajxir^;  or  perhaps,  produced  by  churning  or  violent  |igit»tion. 
S.lyana  explains  dififerently  : — 'you  have  churned  forth  (the  fire).' — Wilson. 

1  The  first  half  line  of  this  stanza  has  occurred  before  as  the  first  line  ci 
X.  20.  The  double  burden  or  refrain  is  again  employed,  with  little  or  no 
connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  stanza. 

4  Like  beakers :  filled  full,  like  ^hdicea  ot  €iom«i  y^loe. 
6  The  longing  men:  the  priesta.    Have  tkrowa  op«w,  tte. ;  \)au«'^^\i^ ^EkS&t 
McMcea,  opened  the  way  to  Wealth. 


JBLYUN  26.]  THE  RICtVEPA.  116 

7  On  all  sides,  Soma,  be  to  us  a  Ouardian  ne^er  to  he  deceived. 
King,  drive  away  our  foemen — at  your  glad  carouse  : — let  not 

the  wicked  rule  us.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

8  Be  watchful,  Som8^  pasciing  wise,  to  give  us  store  of  vital 

strength. 
More  skilled  than  man  to  guide  us, — at  your  glad  carouse — 
save  us  from  harm  and  sorrow.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

9  Chief  slayer  of  our  foemen,  thou,  Indu,  art  Indra's  gracious 
Friend, 
"When  warriors  invoke  him — at  your  glad  carouse — in  fight, 
to  win  them  offspring.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

10  Victorious  is  this  gladdening  drink  :  to  Indra  dear  it  grows  in 

strength> 
This — at  your  glad  carouse — enhanced  the  mighty  hymn  of  the 
great  sage  Rakshtvan.     Thou  art  waxing  great.  ^ 

1 1  This  to  the  sa^e  who  offers  gifts  brings  power  that  comes  from 

wealth  in  kine. 
I'his,  better  than  the  seven,  hath — at  your  glad  carouse — fur- 
thered the  blind,  the  cripple.     Thou  art  waxing  great. 

HYMN  XXVI.  Paehan. 

Forward  upon  their  way  proceed  the  ready  teams,  the  lovely 

songs. 
•Further  them  glorious  P^ishan  with  yoked  chariot,  and  the 

Mighty  Twain ! 

2  With  sacred  hymns  let  this  man  here,  this  singer,  win  the 

God  to  whom 
Belong  this  maj  esty  and  might.  He  hath  observed  our  eulogies. 

3  Pdshan  the  Strong  hath  knowledge  of  sweet  praises  even  as 

Indu  hath. 
He  dews  our  corn  with  moisture,  he  bedews  the  pasture  of 
our  kine. 

4  We  will  bethink  Ourselves  of  thee,  0  Pdshan,  0  thou  God, 

as  One. 

10  Kctkihtydn :  a  famous  Bishi,  the  seer  of  some  hymns  of  Book  I.  See 
Index,  VoL  I. 

11  Better  them  the  seven:  more  effectually  tha;n  the  sevtin  prieetd.  S&yana 
explains  differently  : — *  it  gives  wealth  to  the  seven  (priests). — Wilson.  ITu 
blind :  the  Rishi  Dlrghatamas,  according  to  S&yana.  The  cripple :  Par&vrij. 
See  both  names  in  VoL  I.,  Index. 

1  JKecMiy^fiM;  ordered  series  of  our  words.    7ft,e  MigKty  Tuoin :  V?[i^  kv\s!ak. 
Aeoording  to  S&jrapa,  daif€=idarfan/tyah,  of  goodly  suapect,  KV^e^V.o'^^afiGAas^N 
or,  the  two  performen  of  the  rite,'  the  Yc^mdna  ind^^^  'wi<ft* 


416  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOX>K  Z 

Who  brings  fulfilment  of  our  hymns,  and  stirs  the  smger  and 
the  sage. 

5  Joint-shaier  of  each  sacrifice,  the  driver  of  the  chariot  steeds ; 

The  Rishi  who  is  good  to  man,  the  singer's  Friend  and  faith- 
ful Guard. 

6  One  who  is  Lord  of  Sucha,  Lord  of  Such&  caring  for  herself : 
Weaving  the  raiment  of  the  sheep  and  making  raiment  beau- 
tiful. 

7  The  mighty  Lord  of  spoil  and  wealth,  Strong   Friend  of  all 

prosperity ; 
He  with  light  movement  shakes  his  beard,  lovely  and  ne'er  to 
be  deceived. 

8  0  Pushan,  may   those  goats   of  thine   turn  hitherward  thy 

chariot-pole. 
Friend  of  all  suppliants  art  thou,  bom  in  old   time,  and  firm 
and  sure. 

9  May  the  majestic  Pushan  speed  our  chariot  with  his  power 

and  might. 
May  he  increase  our  store  of  wealth  and  listen  to   this  call  of 
ours. 

HYMN  XXVII.  Indm. 

This,  singer,  is  my  firm  determination,  to  aid  the  worshipper 

who  pours  the  Soma. 
I  slay  the  man  who  brings  no   milk-oblation,    unrighteous, 

powerful,  the  truth's  perverter. 

2  Then  will  I,  when  I  lead  my   friends   to   battle   against  the 
radiant  persons  of  the  godless. 
Prepare  for  thee  at  home  a  vigorous   bullock,    and   pour  for 
thee  the  fifteen  fold  strong  juices. 

6  Sucha  and  SucM :  names  of  a  man  and  woman. — Ludwig.  According  to 
Sdyana  and  Wilson,  *  the  pure  (he-goat)  and  the  pure  (she- goat).*  Weaving 
the  raiment :  *  making  woollen  cloths  such  as  the  woollen  filter,  etc/ — 'Wilson. 
And  making  rainunt  beautiful :  or,  he  hath  made  vesture  pure  and  bright; 
that  is,  says  Sdyapa,  he  hath  purified  all  around  with  his  heat  and  light. 

7  Friend :  the  augmenter.  Shakes  his  beard :  when  he  drinks  the  Soma 
juice. 

8  Those  goats :  Pdshan's  chariot  is  said  to  be  drawn  by  a  team  of  goats. 
Cf .  I.  88.  4. 


1  Indra  addrenses  the  Rishi.  Powerful :  dbhtim:  perhaps,   poeaessed  of  the 
meaoB  that  would  enable  him  to  offer  sacrifices. 
2  The  Riahi  replies.  FiftetnfQld  strotig  juices :  according  to  Sftyana,  the 
Jaicea  of  the  Soma-plant  who«e  leases  ^to^i  ^\x1a\i^^i^aft\^^\»>wb^i<5^1tha*month 
and  die  away  during  the  dark  UaVi. 


HYMN  27.]  TffP  RIQV^DA.  417 

3  I  know  not  him  who  sayeth  and  declareth  th^t  \it  hath  slain 

the  godless  in  the  battle. 
Soon  as  they  see  the  furious  combat  raging,  men  speak  forth 
praises  of  my  vigorous  horses. 

4  While  yet  my  deeds  of  might  were  unrecorded,  all  passed  for 

Maghavans  though  I  existed. 
The  potent  one  who  dwelt  in  peace  I   conquered,  grasped   by 
the  foot  and  slew  him  on  the  mountain. 

5  None  hinder  me  in  mine  heroic  exploits,   no,  not   the   moun- 

tains when  I  will  and  purpose. 
Even  the  deaf  will  tremble  at  my  roaring,  and  every  day  will 
dust  be  agitated. 

6  To  see  the  Indraless  oblation-drinkers,  mean  offerers,  o'ertijiken 

by  destruction ! 
Then  shall  the  fellies  of  my  car  pass  over  those  who  have 
blamed  my  joyous  Friend  and  scorned  him. 

7  Thou  wast,  thou  grewest  to  full  vital  vigour :  an  e^.rlier  saw, 

a  later  one  shall  see  thee. 
Two  canopies,  as  'twere,  are  round  about  him  who  reacheth  to 
the  limit  (A  this  region. 

8  The  freed  kiue  eat  the  barley  of   the  pious.     I  saw  them  as 

they  wandered  with  the  herdsman. 
The  calling  of  the  pious  rang  around  them.     What  portion, 
will  these  kine  afford  their  owner  ? 

9  When  we  who  eat  the  grass  of  men  are  gathered  I  am  with, 

barley-eaters  in  the  corn-land. 
There  shall  the  captor  yoke  the  yokeless  bullock,  an^  he  who 
hath  been  yoked  seek  one  to  loose  him. 

9  Indra  speaks,  rebuking  the  Kishi  and  ascribing  all  vipiories  to  himself. 

4  The  potent  one :  tbe  powerful  fiend  Sambara,  for  m9^^ce. 

5  Dust :  of  battle,  stirred  up  by  Indra. 

•  To  tee :  ddrsan :  according  to  S&yana,  I,  Indnw  8«e.  Obhition-dnnkei'Z  : 
who  themselves  consume  the  offerings  that  should  be  presented  to  Indra. 
Mean  offerers,  hdhuksMdah :  literally,  ftrm-cutters.  According  to  von  Roth, 
parsimonious  worshippers  who  offer  the  fore)«gs/ cr  ijiferior  parts  of  the 
■acrificial  animal.  *  Who  cut  (the  worshipper;  to  pieces  with  theii*  hands.* — 
Wilson.  Joyous  Friend:  Vishnu.—Ludwig.  Or  the  meaning  may  be,  your 
joyous  friend ;  Indra  himself,  the  friend  of  his  worshippers. 

7  The  Rishi  speaks.  An  earlier  saw :  the  meaning  of  the  half -line  is  npt 
clear.    Perhaps,  foes  have  already  felt  thy  power,  and  others  y6t  i^all  feel  ft. 

*  The  ancient  Indra  verily  destroys  (his  foe),   the  other  does  not  destroy  • 
Indra.' — Wilson.    ^i/>o  cancjpiw ;  heaven  and  earth.    JKm;  Indra.     '^       -  y  .- 

8  Indra  spcnJu,  fearing,  apparently,  that  the  worshipper  will  have  no  milk- 
to  offer  him;  ■  '•     ■      .   '  .  • 

9  'Therein no  comment  on  this  obsaure  vene,  Meo^  V7\\^i;k'^!(SQ!^ 

in  his  MB.'--Editor  of  Wilson's  TranslaUon;  Vol/ Yl.  %>»Amt^  ^K^^-'tiaS^  • 


418  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

10  There  wilt  thou  hold  as  true  my  spoken  purpose,  to  bring 

together  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 
I  "will  divide,  without  a  fight,  his  riches   who  warreth  here, 
agaiust  the  Bull,  with  women. 

11  When  a  man's  daughter  hath  been  ever  eyeless,  who,  knowing, 

will  be  wroth  with  her  for  blindness  ? 
Which  of  the  two  will  loose  on  him  his  anger — the  man  who 
leads  her  home  or  he  who  woos  iier  ? 

1 2  How   many  a  maid  is  pleasing  to  the  suitor  who  fain  would 

marry  for  her  splendid  riches  ? 
If  the  girl  be  both  good  and  fair  of  feature,  she  fiuds,  herself, 
a  friend  among  the  people. 

13  His   feet  have   grasped :  he  eats   the  man   who   meets  him. 

Arouud  his  head  he  sets  the  head  for  shelter. 
Sitting  auear  and  right  above  he  smites  us,  and  follows  earth 
that  lies  spread  out  beneath  him. 

14  High,  leafless,  shadowless,  and  swift  is  Heaven:  the  Mother 

stands,  the  Youngling,  loosed,  is  feediug. 
Loud  hath  she  lowed,  licking   Another's   offspring.     In  what 
world  hath  the  Cow  laid  down  her  udder  ? 

Indra  declares  that  he  has  brought  men  and  cattle  together  and  made  the 
latter  subject  to  the  former,  to  be  yoked  and  to  remain  yoked  when  and  aa 
long  as  their  masters  please.  According  to  this  interpretation,  the  first  half 
of  the  stanza  might  be  rendered  :  *  Grass-eating  beasts  with  men  have  I  con- 
nected, and  those  who  eat  grain  in  the  wide- spread  corn-land.' 

10  Against  the  Bull :  against  me,  the  mighty  Indra.  With  women :  with 
weak  alUes. 

11  'Hitherto,'  says  Prof.  Lud  wig,  *  it  is  possible  to  establish  a  connexion 
and  interdepenOence  of  the  separate  strophes  ;  with  strophe  11  the  difficulty 
begins.'  On  him  :  on  the  father.  Who  woos  her :  seeks  her  in  marriage  ftir 
his  friend  or  employer. 

12  Herself:  svaydm  thit :  by  her  own  worth,  independently  of  her  dowry. 

13  His  feet  have  grcuped :  Indra,  as  the  Sun,  has  seized  and  drawn  up  the 
water  of  the  rivers  with  tho  rays  which  are  his  feet.  £ats  the  man  who  meets 
him :  perhaps,  merely,  scorches  the  man  who  exposes  himself  to  his  burning 
rays.  According  to  Sftyana,  *  feeds  upon,  i.  e.  takes  into  his  orb,  the  water 
that  approaches  him.*  Anothe*  explanation  is,  that  the  pious  after  death  go 
to  the  Sun  and  become  sunbeams.— Lud  wig.  He  sets  the  head  for  shelter :  he 
takes  the  height  of  heaven  as  a  covering.  Anear  and  right  above :  in  his  meri- 
dian height.     Follows  earth :  descends  to  the  horizon  and  sets  beyond  it. 

14  Leafless f  shadoioless :  heaven  being  compared  to  a  tree  that  overshadow! 
the  earth.  According  to  S&yana,  droA  here  is  the  ever-moving  Sun.  Tks 
Mother :  Ushas  or  Dawn.  According  to  Sftyana,  mdtd  here  means  *  the  build« 
(of  the  world).'  The  Youngling :  or  Calf  ;  Agni  who  feeds  on  the  oblatioia. 
She :  Heaven,  or  the  atmospheric   Prithivi,  roaring  as  the  rain  cornea  down. 

Another's  offspring :  Indra  aa  Adit^a.  ox  tVi^  Bu.n,  the  offspring  of  Aditi.  h 
vfhat  world,  etc,  :  that  is,  who  knowa  Yi\ieTe  \^«^t^\xl  oorcckfisik  \.\Kscck.\  TKe  Q^m; 
the  Sky.     Tii«  secoiid  haU-aUuzaVna  occurv^^>tt^iw%.    ^%fc\XV.^^,\^, 


SYMN  27.)  THE  RIOVEDA.  419 

15  Seven  heroes  from  the  nether  part  ascended,  and  from   the 

upper  part  came  eight  together. 
Nine  from   behind  came  armed   with  winnowing-baskets :  ten 
from  the  front  pressed  o'er  the  rock's  high  ridges. 

16  One  of  the  ten,  the  tawny,  shared  in  common,  they  send  to 

execute  their  final  purpose. 
The  Mother  carries  on   her  breast  the   Infant  of  noble   form 
and  soothes  it  while  it  knows  not. 

1 7  The  Heroes  dressed  with  fire  the  fatted  wetter :  the  dice  were 

thrown  by  way  of  sport  and  gaming. 
Two  reach  the  plain  amid  the  heaven  ly^aters,  hallowing  and 
with  means  of  purifying. 

18  Crying  aloud  they  ran  in  all  dire^ons  :  One  half  of  them  will 

cook,  and  not  the  other. 
To  me  hath  Savitar,  this  Gp^^  declared   it :  He  will   perform, 
whose  food  is  wood  and,  Gutter. 

19  I  saw  a  troop   advancip^   from   the  distance,  moved,  not  by 

wheels  but  their  o^n  Godlike  nature. 
The  Friendly  One  >5eeks  human   generations,  destroying,  still 
new,  bands  of  evil  beings. 

20  These  my  two  Bulls,    even   Pramara's,  are   harnessed :  drive 

them  not  far ;  here  let  them  often  linger. 
The  waters  even  shall  aid  him  to  his  object,  and  the  all-cleans- 
ing Sun  who  is  above  us. 

15  Seven  heroes:  according  to  Sftyana,  VisT&mitra  and  other  Riahis,  tons  of 
Praj&pati.  Eight :  the  V&lakhilyas,  a  numerous  race  of  divine  pygmies.  Nine  : 
the  Bhrigus.  Ten :  Angirases.  Or,  alternatively,  seven  Maruts,  on  Indra's 
right,  eight  on  hi?  left,  nine  behind  him,  and  ten  in  front.  These  explanations 
by  SAyana  cannot  be  accepted  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  say  what  is  meait.  Ludwig 
thinks  that  *&e  various  classes  of  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  in^nded.  His  in- 
genious explanation  will  be  found  in  the  Preface  to  his  fourth  volume  of  the 
Rigve^^a,  pp.  xxxni.— xxxv. 

m  The  tawny :  kapildm  :  according  to  S&yana,  the  Amous  Ilishi  Kapila. 
'The  Sun  ?  *— Qrassmann.  The  Mother  :  Night  ?— <»a8smann.  The  Infant : 
tiie  young  Sun,  if  the  Mother  is  Night. 

17  The  fatted  wether:  perhaps,  the  swollen  Min -cloud.  The  dice:  the  stars. 
Two :  the  Sun  and  Moon.    These  are  LudHg's  suggestions. 

IS  They :  according  to  Sdyana,  the  Angirases.  Perhaps  the  contentious 
priests  with  whom  Agni  the  veritab'^  priest  is  contrasted.--Ludwig,  ffe : 
Agni. 

19  il  troop:  the  stars.  The  ^Priendiy  One:  Indra  as  the  Sun.  EvU  beingi: 
fifnJX :  RAkshasas  and  spirii^i  of  darkness  that  vanish  at  the  coming  of  the 
Skin. 

20  Built :  steeds  According  to  S&yana.    Pramara's :  belonging  to  me,  the 
Destroyer  or  DMith.     But  the  whole  stanza  is  obscure.    AU-cUaintxiv^  *.  «i:^ 
S4y»na  expUln»  marhd,  which  von  Roth  interprets  by  *  o\MC\iT^\*V>Ti.^    \^^Nft\s^ 
^MiJt'a  tb»t  the  Moon,  '  the  obscurer  ol  the  Sun*  ia  measxt. 


420  THE  HYMNS  OF  l^OOJf  X 

21  This  is  the  thunderbolt  which  often  vhirleth  down   from  tbo^ 

lofty  misty  realm  of  Sftrya. 
Beyond  this  realm  there  is  another  glory  :  so  through  old  age 
they  pass  and  feel  no  sorrow. 

22  Bound  fast  to  every  tree  the  cow  is  lowing,  and  thence  the  n^- 

consuming  birds  are  flying, 
Then  aU  this  world,  though  pressing  juice  for  Indr^^    find 
strengthening  the  Kisbi,  is  affrighted. 

23  In  the  Qods*  mansion  stood  the  flrst-created,   and  from  their 

separation  ca^ie  the  later. 
Three  warm  the  tarth  while  holding  stores  of  water,  and  Two 
of  these  convey  the  murmuring  moisture. 

24  This  is  thy  life  :  and  do  thou  mark  and  know  it.   As  such,  hide 

not  thyself  in  time  of  battle. 
He  manifests  the  light  and  Vides  the  vapour :  his  foot  is  never 
free  from  robes  that  veil  it. 

HYMN  XXTIIL  Indra.  Vawki*, 

Now  all  my  other  friends  are  here  assembled :  my  Sire-in-law 

alone  hath  not  come  hither. 
So  might  he  eat  the  grain  and  drink  the  Soma,  and,  satisfied, 

return  unto  his  dwelling. 

21  This  is  the  thunderbolt :  the  me^niqg,  probably  b,  *  thi^  dak^ind  or 
honorarium  given  to  the  priests  U  a  veritable  thunderbolt.* — Ludwig.  Bi|t,  as 
Wilson  observes,  the  stanza  may  be  '  intended  to  express  the  usual  theory  of 
rain  ;  the  moisture  of  the  earth  being  drawn  up  into  the  solar  region  aa  vapour, 
and  thence  descending  as  rain  by  the  action  of  the  thunderbolt  and  the  wind.* 

22  Acc<>rding  to  S&yana,  tree  here  means  ^  bow,*  cow  means  '  bowstring,* 
and  man-eonsiiming  birds  Meadly  arrows/  The  general  meaning  is  that 
Bacrificea  to  Indra  and  libeml  gifts  to  priests  wiU  not  fres  men  from  thA  iesr 
of  death. 

23  The  JtHt^reated :  the  clouds.  The  later :  the  watexq  of  the  nin. 
Three :  Parjan>a,  V&yu,  and  Aditya  or  the  Sun.  Holding  start*,  of  water : 
tmUpXh :  *  Sowing  in  suoce««ion.*— Wilson.  *  Following  the  water.*^Ludwig. 
•  Rich  in  water.* — O^ssmann.     Two  :  V&yu  and  Aditya. 

24  According  to  SA^^na,  Indra  is  addressed.  The  following  is  Wilswt's 
translation  of  Sftyana's  ^«raphrase  of  the  stanza :— '  That  thy  (divine  nature 
identified  with  the  sun)  is  t*^  cause  of  life  :  and  know  such  (solar  form)  ol 
his  (to  be  worthy  of  adoration/ ^t  the  sacrifice  ;  conceal  nothing  :  that  motion 
of  him  the  all-cleansing  (sun)  mtfkQs  manifest  the  universe  ;  it  absorbs  tbf 
moisture ;  it  is  never  discontinued.'  fhe  robes  that  veil  the  loot}  or  r»ys,  of 
the  Sun  are  the  waters  into  which  they  v>e  supposed  to  vanish. 

The  hymn  is  enigmatical  and  difficult  in  the  highest  degree,  and  notito 
8&yana  nor  later  scholars  have  succeeded  in  DCh^ng  it  intelUgible  throughout 

The  Bishi  is  Vasukra  son  of  Indra,  and  the  hyt&n  is  mainly  a  dialsgof 
between  the  Father  and  the  son.    Vasukra's  wife  is  the  ^eer  as  well  aa  tfis 
speaker  of  stanza  1. 

1 .  ThJB  stanza  is  spoken  by  VasukxW^  "sXU  Vdl  \\E,\iQt«si^,  ^^x  \^  \aiffmi% 
that  her  Father-in-law  ladsa  la  i^t«aett\»  Va  das^^Mft^ 


HTMHf  «8.]  THE  RIOVSDA.  421 

2  Load  belloweth  the  Bull  whose  horns  are  sharpened :  upon 
the  height  above  earth's  breadth  he  standeth. 

'  l*hat  man  I  guard  and  save  in  all  his  troubles  who  fills  my 
flanks  when  he  hath  shed  the  Soma. 

d  Meti  with  the  stone  press  out  for  thee,  0  tndra,  strong,  glad- 
dening Soma,  and  thereof  thou  drinkest. 
Bulls  they  dress  for  thee,  and  of  these   thou  eatest  when, 
Maghavan,  with  food  thou  art  invited. 

4  Resolve  for  me,  0  singef,  this  my  riddle :  The  rivers  send  their 
swelling  water  backward : 
The  fot  steals  up  to  the  approaching  lion :  the  jackal  drives 
the  wild-boar  from  the  brushwood. 

0  How   shall   I  solve  this  riddle,  I,  the   simple,   declare    the 
thought  of  thee  the  Wise  and  Mighty  1 
Tell  us,  well   knowing,  as  befits  the  season :  Whitherward  is 
thy  prosperous  ear  advancing? 

6  Thus  do  they  magnify  me,  me  the  tnighty  :  higher  than  even 

high  heaven  is  my  oar-pole. 
I  all  at  once  demolish  many  thousands :  my  Sire  begot  me  with 
ho  foe  to  matdh  me. 

7  Yea,  and  the  Gods  have  known  ine  also,  tndra,  a^  eighty,  fierce 

and  strong  in  every  exploit. 
Exulting  with  the  bolt  I  slaughtered  V^^'^*  ^^^  ^or  the  ojOferer 
tped  with  might  the  cow-stall. 

8  The  Deities  approached,  they  f^'^^  axes ;  splitting  the  wood 

they  came  with  their  att'*^^*"**- 
They  laid  good  timber  ir  "^^^  fire-receivers,  and  burnt  the  grass 
up  where  they  foun*  i*  growing. 

9  The  hare  hath  swp-^owed  up  the  opposing  razor :  I  sundered 

with  a  clod  the  distant  mountain. 
The  great  will  I  mfl^  subject  to  the  little :  the  calf  shall  wax 
in  strength  an^  ea*  the  bullock. 

i  Indra  speaks^    ^^  ^«W;  the  mighty  Indra. 
8  Vasukra  s^'^aks, 

4  Indra  ip^^^  ^o  the  speaker,  although  Sftja^a  gives  the  stanza  to  Vasukra. 
idra  deoUres  his  power  to  alter  the  course  of  nature.  See  Wilson's  Trans- 
tion.  Aote  by  the  Editor. 

5  Vasukra  speaks. 

^  Jadra  speaks.    My  Sire :  or,  the  general  Father  Praj4pnti.— SAyapa. 
t  Vasukra  speaks,  and  tells  what  he  has  done  with  Indra's  help. 

8  This  obscure  stanza  is  probably  an  account  of  the  Oods'  first  sacrifice.  See 
ichel,  Veditche  Studieut  I.  pp.  178—180.  According  to  SAyana,  it  refers  to 
e  eleaTing  of  the  clouds,  and  the  filling  of  the  rivers.  Ludwi^  sma  ia  vt  v 
lerence  to  the  be^mnin^  of  agriculture,     rfceir  aUendantt :  \}lcAU»xvk\A« 

9  Of,  with  gtanzB  4, 


422  TBE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  X, 

10  There  hath  the  strong- winged  eagle  left  his  talon,  as  a  snared 

lion  leaves  the  trap  that  caught  him. 
Even  the  wild  steer  in  his  thirst  is  captured  :  the  leather  strap 
still  holds  his  foot  entangled. 

11  So  may  the  leather  strap  their  foot  entangle  who  &tten  on  the 

viands  of  the  Brahman. 
They  all  devour  the  bulls  set  free  to  wander,  while  they  them- 
selves destroy  their  bodies'  vigour. 

12  They  were  well  occupied  with  holy  duties  who  sped  in  person 

with  their  lauds  to  Soma. 
Speaking  like  man,  mete  to  us  wealth  and  booty  :  in  heaven 
thou  hast  the  name  and  fame  of  Hero. 

HYMN  XXIX.  Indra. 

As  sits  the  young  bird  on  the  tree  rejoicing,  ye,  swift  Pair, 
have  been  roused  by  clear  laudation, 

Whose  Herald-Priest  through  many  days  is  Indra,  earth's  Guar- 
dian, Friend  of  men,  the  best  of  Heroes. 

2  May  we,  when  this  Dawn  and  the  next  dance  hither,  be  thy 

best  servants,  most  heroic  Hero ! 
Let  the  victorious  car  with  triple  spkndour  bring  hitherward 
the  hmvdred  chiefs  with  Kutsa. 

3  What  was  tlie^^dclening  draught  that  pleased  thee,  Indra  t 

Speed  through  <>^^  doors  to  songs,  for  thou  art  mighty. 
Why  comest  thou  to  i^  ^t^t  gift  attracts  thee  ?  Fain  would 
I  bring  thee  food  most  ^^q^  to  offer. 

4  Indra,  what  fame  hath  one  ilk:^  thee  mid  heroes?    With  what 

plan  wilt  thou  act  ?    Why  ha&v thou  sought  us? 
As  a  true  Friend,  Wide-Striderl\)  sustain  us,   since   food 
absorbs  the  thought  of  each  among  ug. 


10  The  application  of  this  stanza  is  not  apparent.  SAyana's  explanation  of 
this  and  the  following  verse  is  entirely  different  from  that  of  most  recent 
scholars. 

1  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  obscure,  and  the  text  ia  the  first  half-line 
is  unintelligible.  I  follow  the  reading  which  S&yana  gi^,^  j^  ^ig  Com- 
mentary, vdyo  instead  vd  yd,  *  As  (the  bird)  who  deposits  its  ^oung  (in  its 
nest)  in  the  tree  (is)  eagerly  looking  around.*— Wilson.     Swift  >»i^ ;  Asvins. 

2  Dance  hither :  or,  come  dancing.  Cp.  Milton's  *  Now  the  bright  TQOfning- 
star,  day's  harbinger,  Comes  dancing  from  the  east.'  THpU  splendour: 
perhaps  with  reference  to  Agni,  VAyu,  and  SArya.  -  Ludwig.  Hundred  ^Aie/a  ; 
the  Maruts  may  be  intended,  *  hundred'  being  used  indefinitely.  KtOta: 
Indra's  favourite  companion. 

4  Indra  is  reminded  that  the  protection  of  his  worshippers  is  his  special 
glory.  Wide-Sti^ider  ! :  as  identified  with  the  Sun  ;  *  widely  renowned,'  accord- 
ingtoSAyana.    Food:  the  hymn  a^p^wti  Vi  Viv?*  b^n  *  seen  *  or  revealed  in  a 
time  of  dearth  or  famine.* — ^Ludwig. 


BTMN  30.]  THE  RIO  VEDA .  4M 

5  Speed  happily  tho^e,  as  Surya  eads  hia  journey,  who  meet  his 

wish  as  bridegrooms  meet  their  spouses ; 
Men  who  present,  0  Indra  strong  by  nature,  with  food  the  many 
songs  that  tell  thy  praises. 

6  Thine  are  two  measures,  Indra,  wide,  w«Il-meted,  heaven  for 

thy  majesty,  earth  for  thy  wisdom. 
Here   for  thy   choice  are  Somas  mixed  with  butter :  may  the 
sweet  meath  be  pl«Asaut  for  thy  drinking. 

7  They  have  poured   out  a  bowl  to  him,  to  Indra,  full  of  sweet 

juice,  for  fiiithful  is  his  bounty. 
O'er  eartb'd   expanse   hath   he   grown   great   by  wisdom,  the 
Frieod  of  man,  and  by  heroic  exploits. 

8  Indivt  hath  conquered  in  his  wars,  the  Mighty :  men  strive  in 

multitudes  to  win  his  friendship. 
Ascend   thy  chariot   as  it  were  in  battle,    which    thou  shalt 
drive  to  us  with  gracious  favour. 

HYMN  XXX.  Water.. 

As  'twere  with  swift  exertion  of  the  spirit,  let  the  priest  speed 

to  the  celestial  Waters, 
The  glorious  food  of  Varuna  and  Mitra.    To  him  who  spreadeth 

far  this  laud  I  offer. 

2  Adhvai7us,  be  ye  ready  with  oblations,  and  come  with   long- 

ing to  the  longing  Waters, 
Down   on  which  looks  the   pnrple-tinted  Eagle.     Pour  ye  that 
flowing  wave  this  day,  def t-hauded. 

3  Go  to  the  reservoir,  0  ye  Ad  h  vary  us :    worship  the   Waters' 

Child  with  your  oblations. 

A  consecrated  wave  he  now  will  give  you,  so  press  for  him  the 
Soma  rich  in  sweetness. 


5  Meet  hie  wish :  satisfy  his,  Indra*s,  longing  /or  Soma-libations. 

6  Tkine  are  two  meaeuree :  Thy  majesty  or  greatness  is  vast  and  lofty  as 
heaven,  and  tby  wisdom  is  wide  as  earth  ;  oi\  '  with  confusion  of  the  measure 
and  the  thing  measured,'  thou  hast  mea^red  out  the  heaven  by  thy  greatnesf 
and  the  earth  by  thy  wisdom.     See  W*lli8,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  18. 

The  subject  is  the  ceremony  of  fetching  the  sacred  waters  required  for  the 
preparation  of  the  Soma  juice. 

1  To  him  who  spreadeth  far :  Indra,  according  to  SAyana. 

2  The  purple-tinted  Eap^ :  Soma,  the  Moon. 

3  To  the  reservoir :  to  fetch  the  holy  Waters.     The  Waters*  Child     usually 
Agni,  as  the  lightning  that  springs  from  the  clouds  or  waters  of  the  firma- 
ment, but  here  the  Deity  who  produces  the  rain,  the  Koon^    B^^  G\\!k!^\^^^\i^. 
V.  M.,  I  374. 


424  fSE  HTMrfS  OP  IBOOKl, 

4  He  who  stiines  bright  in  floods,   unfed  with   fuel,  whom  Sk^ 

worship  at  their  sacrifices : 
Give  waters  rich  in  sweets,   Child  of  the  Waters,   even  those 
which  gavo  heroic  might  to  Iiidra : 

5  Those  in   which  Sonna  joya  and  is  delighted,  as  a  young  min 

with  fair  and  pleasant  damsels. 
Go  thou  unto  those  Waters,  O  Adhir^rjru,  and  purify  with  herbs 
what  thou  infusest. 

6  So  maidens  bow  befolre  the  youthful  gallant  who  conies  with 

love  to  them  who  yearn  to  meet  him. 
In  heart  accordant  and  in  wisK  one-minded  are  tb«  Adhvalyus 
and  the  heavenly  Waters. 

7  He  who  made  room  for  you  when  fast  imprisoned,  wb«  freed 

you  from  the  mighty  imprecation, — 
Even  to  that  Indra  send  the  meath-rioh  current,  the  wave  th** 
gratifies  the  Gods,  0  Waters. 

8  Send  forth  to  him  the  meath-rich  wave,  0  Rivers,  which  is 

your  oflTspring  and  a  well  of  sweetness, 
Oil-balmed,  to  be  implored  at  sacrifices.     Ye  wealthy  Waters, 
hear  mine  invocation. 

9  Send  forth  the  rapture-giving  wave,  0  Rivers,  which  Indra 

drinks,  which  sets  the  Twain  in  motion ; 
The   well   that   spriugeth   fiom   the   clouds,    desirous,    that 
wandereth  triple-formed,  distilling  transport. 

10  These  winding  Streams  which  with  their  double  current,  like 

cattle-raiders,  seek  the  lower  pastures, — 
Waters  which  dwell  together,  thrive  together,  Queens,  Mothers 
of  the  v?orld,  these,  Rishi,  honour. 

11  Sejid  forth  our  sacrifice  with  holy  worship,  send  forth  the 

hymn  and  prayer  for  gain  of  riches. 
For  need  of  sacrifice  disclose  the  udder.     Give  gracious  hear- 
ing to  our  call,  0  'Waters. 

4  In  floods:  of  the  aerial  ocean.    Cp  II.  35.  4. 

5  With  kerbs  :  probably  Darbha  or  Kuea  grass. 

6  The  Waters  bow  to  Soma  as  maideh^'  to  their  lorers. 

9  The  Twain :  uhhi:  probably,  Heave*  and  Earth.  SHyana  explains  dif- 
ferently : — *  which  sends  us  both  (kinds  of  ftuit)*;  that  is,  'the  fruit,  whether 
reward  or  punishment,  of  the  present  life,  and  of  a  former  life* — ^  Wilson,  and 
Editor's  note.  Desirous  :  eager  to  mix  with  the  Soma,  according  to  Sftyana  ; 
but  the  meaning  of  ausinam  is  uncertain.  Ludw^  and  Hillebrandt  translate 
it  by  *  des  Usanas,'  belonging  to  Usanas  or  iTsan^,  Triple-formed :  Soma 
with  two  admixtures. ^Qrassmann. 

10  Double  current:  meaning,  probably,   the  two  kinds  of  waters  called 
regpeotivelj  Eiadhan^  And  VaaatWad. 

11  Diiciase  the  udder :  let  your  atreaxsA  ^o^r. 


MYMN  81.]  TBE  RIOVEDA.  425 

12  For,  wealthy  Waters,  ye  control   all  treasures:  ye  bring 

auspicious  intellect  and  Amrit. 
Te  are  the  Queens  of  independeut  riches.     Sarasvati  gire  full 
life  to  the  singer  ! 

13  When  I  behold  the  Waters  coming  hither,  carrying  with  them 

milk  and  meath  and  butter, 
BearinsT  the  Well-pressed  Soma  juice  to  Indra,  they  harmoniee 
in  spirit  with  Adhvaryns. 

14  Eich,  they  are  come  with  wealth  for  living  beings.    0  friends, 

Adhvaryus,  seat  them  in  their  places. 
Seat  them  on  holy  grass,  ye  Soma-bringers,  in  harmony  with 
the  Offspring  of  the  Waters. 

15  Now  to  this  grass  are  come  the  longing  Waters  :  the  Pious 

Ones  are  seated  at  our  worship. 
Adhvaryus,  press  the  Soma  juice  for  Indra :  so  will  the  service 
of  the  Gods  be  easy. 

HYMN  XXXI.  Visvedevas. 

May  benediction  of  the  Gods  approach  us,  holy,  to  aid  us  with 
all  rapid  succours. 

Therewith  may  we  be  happily  befriended,  and  pass  triumphant 
over  all  our  troubles* 
^  A  man  should  think  on  wealth  and  strive  to  win  it  by  adora- 
tion on  the  path  of  Order, 

Couiiqel  himself  with  his  own   mental  insight,  and  grasp  still 
nobles  vigour  With  his  spirit. 

3  The  hymn  is  formed,  poured  are  the  allotted  portions  :  as  to 

a  ford  friends  come  unto  the  Wondrous. 
We  have  obtained  the  power  of  ease  and  comfort,  we  have 
become  acquainted  with  Immortals. 

4  Pleased  be  the  Eternal  Lord  who  loves  the  household  with  this 

man  whom  God  Savitar  created. 
May  Bhaga  Aryaman  grace  him  with  cattle ;  may  he  appear 
to  him,  and  be,  delightful. 

5  Like  the  Dawns'  dwelling-place  be  this  assembly,  where  in 

their  might  men  ricfi  in  food  have  gathered. 


12  SarcuvuM :  as  chief  and  wisest  of  the  Water-Goddessefl. 

1  Benediction  :  or,  the  laudation;  that  is,  Ludwig  suggests,  *  May  the  power 
of  praising  the  Gods,  and  at  the  same  time  the  Gods  themselves  come  to  ua.* 

8  The  Wondrous  .•  meaning,  perhaps.  Soma. 
-  4  7%«  Eternal  Lord  :  Agni.     According  to  SAyana,  Ptfii^Tp%\.\,    TV.^a  miwv : 
the  institntor  of  the  aacriBce.    Savitar  has  giveii  *Vk\m  Wi©  w\^  w«^  \^\.  K.^E^^- 
b}M0  bim.    Bhoffa  Aryaman  :  Aryaman  as  Bhaga  wYio  OL\a\.tVS>M\j^  '?^^^J^^5^sx* 


426  THE  BTMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

Striving  to   share  the   praises  of  this   singer.     To   us   come 
strengthening  and  effectual  riches ! 

6  This  Ball's  most  gracious  far-extended  favour  existed  first  of 

all  in  full  abundance. 
By  his  support  they  are  mRintained  in  common  who  in  the 
Asura*s  mansion  dwell  together. 

7  What  was  the  tree,  what  wood,  in  sooth,  produced  it,  from 

which  they  fasbioued  forth  the  Earth  and  Heaven  ? 
These  Twain  stand  fast  and  wax  not  old  for  ever :  these  have 
sung  praise  to  many  a  day  and  morning. 

8  Not  only  here  is  this :  more  is  beyond  us.     He  is  the  Bull, 

the  Heaven's  and  Earth's  supporter. 
With  power  divine  he  makes  his  skin  a  filter,  when  the  Bay 
Coursers  bear  him  on  as  Surya. 

9  He  passes  o'er  the  broad  earth  like  a  Stega :  he  penetrates  the 

world  as  Wind  the  mist-cloud. 
He,  balmed  with  oil,  near  Yaruna  and  Mitra,  like  Agni  in  the 
wood,  hath  shot  forth  splendour. 

10  When  suddenly  calved  the  cow  that  erst  was  barren,  she, 

self-protected,  ended  all  her  troubles. 
£ai*th,  when  the  first  sou  sprang  from  sire  and  mother,  oast 
up  the  Sami,  that  which  men  were  seeking. 

11  To  Nrishad's  son  they  gave  the  name  of  Ranva,  and  he  *^^ 

brown- hued  courser  won  the  treasure. 
For  him  dark-coloured  streamed  the  shining  udde^ '    iM>ne 
made  it  swell  for  him.     Thus  Order  willed  it. 

6  This  Ball :  Agni  as  the  Sun.     The  Asura  is  Dyaus. 

8  Not  only  here :  the  first  half -line  is  obscure.  '  Not  swch  (is  their  power); 
there  is  another  greater  than  they.'— Wilson.  'There  is  no  other  thing 
besides  like  unto  him.'— Wallis.  A  filter :  pavitram :  which  purifies  the  rays 
of  light  which  stream  through  it. 

9  A  Stega :  said  to  be  a  certain  biting  or  stinging  insect.  According  to 
S&yana,  *  the  aggregation  of  rays,  the  Sun.'  Ludwig  conjectures  that  *  plough- 
share '  may  be  the  meaning.  .      l     o     • 

10  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  'The  cow  which  was  barren  is  the  9j«m 
tree,  which  brings  forth  the  Aiioattha,  and  from  the  wood  of  these  two  trees 
are  made  the  arant,  the  two  pieces  of  wood  which  are  rubbed  together  to 
produce  the  sacred  fire — the  upper  and  harder  ^iece  is  the  Sami  (the  Acacia 
Suma),  and  the  lower  and  soft  is  the  Aswatlha  (the  Ficus  religiosa).*— Wilson. 

*The  verses  [7—10]  deal  with  the  formation  of  the  three  main  components 
of  the  universe,  heaven,  earth,  and  the  sun.  Of  the  first  two  the  poet  hss 
little  to  tell  us.  aud  passes  on  at  once  to  the  third.  The  sun  is  identified 
with  the  bull,  Agni  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  earth  with  the  lower  rubbing- 
stick  anointed  with  ghee,  which  is  licked  up  ['devours*  instead  of  'oasi 
up '  ]  a%  soou  as  fire  is  struck.'  — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda^  pp   *7,  48, 

11  Thin  stanza  appears  to  have  no  connexion  with  the  hymn,  and  is  inex- 
plicahle  ae  it  stands  here.  See  1.  WT .  ^,  ^\^w^  ^Xia  ^^^  ^^  «ciahad  is  men- 
tioned  as  a  favourite  of  the  Afiviua. 


BTMN  32]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  427 

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra. 

Forth  speed  the  Pair  to  bring  the  meditating  God,  benevolent 

vith  boons  sent  in  return  for  boons. 
May  ludra  graciously  accept  both  gifts  from  us,  'when  he  hath 

knowledge  of  the  flowing  Soma  juice. 

2  Thou  wauderest  far,  0  Indra,  through  the  spheres  of  light  and 

realms  of  earth,  the  region,  thou  whom  many  praise ! 
Let  those  who  often  bring  thee  to  their  solemn  rites  conquer 
the  noisy  babblers  who  present  no  gifts. 

3  More  beautiful  than  beauty  must  this  seem  to  me,  when  the 

son  duly  careth  for  his  parents'  line. 
The  wife  attracts  the  husband  :  with  a  shout  of  joy  the  man's 
auspicious  marriage  is  performed  aright. 

4  This  beauteous  place  of  meeting  have  I  looked  upon,  where, 

like  milch-cows,  the  kine  order  the  marriage  train ; 
Where  the  Herd's  Mother  counts  as  first  and  best  of  all,  and 
round  her  are  the  seven-toued  people  of  the  choir. 

5  The  Pious  One  hath  reached  your  place  before  the  rest :  One 

only  moves  victorious  with  the  Eudras'  band. 
To  these  your  helpers  pour  out  meath.  Immortal  Grods,  with 
whom  your  song  of  praise  hath  power  to  win  their  gifts. 

6  He  who  maintains  the  Laws  of  Gods  informed  me  that  thou 

wast  lying  hidden  in  the  waters. 
Indra,  who  knoweth  well,  beheld  and  showed  thee.     By  him 
instructed  am  I  come,  0  Agni. 

7  The  stranger  asks  the  way  of  him  who  knows  it :  taught  by 

the  skilful  guide  he  travels  onward. 

1  The  meditating  God :  Indra.  My  version  of  the  first  line  follows  the 
explanation  given  by  Ludwig  in  his  Commentary.  S&yapa's  interpretation 
is  different : — *  Indra  sends  his  quick-going  horses  to  the  service  of  the 
(worshipper)  expectant  (of  his  arrival).' — Wilson.  Both  gifti :  oblation  and 
praise. 

8  Careth  for  his  parents*  line :  by  marrying  and  becoming  a  father ;  or  as 
SAyana  explains,  by  having  his  birth  proclaimed  according  to  custom  in 
sacrifices  instituted  by  him. 

4  Order  the  marriage  train:  the  meaning  of  this  half-line  is  uncertain. 
According  to  Sdyana,  the  herd  is  the  company  of  sacrificers  and  priests,  its 
m&Uier  is  Stuti  or  Praise,  the  seven-toned,  or  sevenfold,  are  the  metres,  or  the 
seasons,  or  the  Ho  tar  priests.  The  Herd^s  Mother  is  more  probably  Prisni,  the 
mother  of  the  Maruts.  The  whole  stanza  is  translated  by  Wilson  : — '  Shine, 
Indra,  upon  this  elegant  chamber  of  sacrifice,  when  our  praises  desire  (thy 
approach)  as  milch-kine  (desire)  their  stalls ;  since  the  praise  of  me  the  wor- 
shipper precedes  (the  adoration)  of  the  company,  and  this  person  accompanied 
by  the  seven  officiating  priests  is  the  offerer  of  praise.* 

5  The  Pious  One :  Agni,  the  special  worshipper  ot  (^odft.    One  oyi\'\)  :  'Vck^x^ 

6  He:  perhaps  Soma.    Thou:  Agni.  Cp.  1,  23.  20. 


42d  itSiS  AtMKS  OP  [SOOk  X 

This  is,  in  truth,  the  blessing  of  instrtiction :  he  finds  the  path 
that  leads  directlj  forward. 

8  Even  now  he  breathed  :  these  days  hath  he  remembered.    Con- 

cealed, he  sucked  the  bosom  of  his  Mother. 
Yet  in  his  youth  old  age  hath  come  upon  him :  he  hath  grown 
gracious,  good,  and  free  from  anger. 

9  0  Kalasa,  all  these  blessings  will  we  bring  them,  0  Kuinisra- 

vana,  who  give  rich  presents. 
May  he,  0  wealthy  princes,  and  this  Soma  which  I  am  bearing 
in  my  heart,  reward  you. 

HYMN  XXXIII.  VaHoiHi  DeHies. 

The  urgings  of  the  people  have  impelled  me,  and  by  the  near- 
est way  I  bring  you  Pdshan. 

The  Universal  Gods  have  brought  me  safely <  Tke  ery-  waa 
heard.  Behold,  Duhs&su  cometh ! 

2  The  ribs  that  compass  me  give  pain  and  trouble  taJe  likd  rival 

wives. 
Indigence,  nakedness,  exhaustion  press  me  sore :  my  mind  is 
fluttering  like  a  bird's. 

3  Ad  rats  eat  weavers'  threads),  cares  &te  consuming  me,  thy 

singer,  Satakratu,  me. 
Have  mercy  on  us  once,  0  Indra,  Bounteous  Lord  :  be  thou  a 
^^^    Father  unto  us. 

4  1  the  priests'  Kisbi  chose  as  prince  most  liberal  Eiirusrava^a, 
y  The  son  of  Trasadasyu's  son, 

8  Even  now  he  hreathed :  began  to  show  Bigns  of  life.  The  eonnexion  bet- 
ween stanzas  1 — 4  and  5—8  is  not  apparent.  Siicked  the  ho9(om  ofkieMothtr: 
enjoyed  oblations,  in  the  shape  of  Soma  juice,  etc.,  produced  bj  the  earth. 

9  The  meaning  of  Ealasay  literally  '  pitcher  *  or  '  beaker/  here  is  uncertain. 
'  (Indra))  the  possessor  of  the  pitchers.' — Wilson.  Ludwig  suggests  htdd^ft 
as  the  right  reading : — *  We  will  perform  these  holy  ceremonies  in  thefif 
minutest  details.'  Kurvaixivana  :  according  to  Sftyana,  '  hearer  of  the  praise 
of  priests ; '  but  probably  the  name  of  a  princoi  as  in  the  following  hyifm. 

1  Dulksdau:  literally,  'the  malevolent.*  Perhaps,  as  Ludwig  snggetts,  a 
hostile  prince  whose  victory  over  Kuru^ravapa  has  caused  the  distrew  1MB* 
iioned  in  the  following  stanza. 

2  The  first  line  is  taken  from  I.  105.  8. 

8  This  first  line  is  taken  from  I.  105.  5.  Weavers*  threadt :  threads  steeped 
in  water,  according  to  S&yana.  Onee:  'after  having  so  often  given  us  up  U 
misery.' — Ludwig. 

4  The  PrieiU*  RUhi :  higher  m  rank.  VXiWi Iha  other  priests.     Ckot:  is.  *I 
cboae  to  keep  him*  as  my  master  in  oxdet  \.o  ^o  Q\x\iV«>a^\KX»H«>S.V\3Lini.*-**LtB- 
niAa,  Sansh-it  Reader,  p.  38Q. 


MYiflf  8f  1  TBM  RIO  VEDA.  429 

5  Whoso  three  bays  harne89ed  to  the  car  bear  me  straight  on- 

ward :  I  will  laud 
The  giver  of  a  thousand  meeds, 

6  The  sire  of  Upamasravas,  even  him  whose  words  were  passing 

sweet, 
As  a  fair  field  is  to  its  lor4* 

7  Mark,  Upamafravas,  his  son,  mark,  grandson  of  Mitr&tithi : 
I  am  thy  father's  eulogist. 

S  If  I  controUed  Immortal  Gods,  yea,  even  were  I  Lord  of  men, 
My  liberal  prince  were  living  still. 

9  None  lives,  even  had  he  hundred  lives*  beyond  the  statute  of 
the  Gods  : 
So  am  I  parted  from  my  friend. 

HYMN  XXXIV.  Dice,  Etc. 

Sprukg  from  tall  trees  on  windy  heights,  these  rollers  trans- 
port me  as  they  turn  upon  the  table. 

Dearer  to  me  the  die  that  never  slumbers  than  the  deep 
draught  of  Mdjavan's  own  Soma. 

2  She  never  vexed  me  nor  was  angry  with  me,  but  to  my  friends 
and  me  was  ever  gracious. 
For  the  die's  sake,  whose  single  point  is  final,  mine  own  devot- 
ed wife  I  alienated. 

S  My  wife  holds  me  aloof,  her  mother  hates  me  :  the  wretched 
man  finds  none  to  give  him  comfort. 
As  of  a  costly  horse  grown  old  and  feeble,  I  find  not  any  pro6t 
of  the  gamester. 

4  Others  caress  the  wife  of  him  whose  riehee  the  die  hath  covet- 
ed, that  rapid  courser : 


6  This  and  the  three  following  stanzas  are  said  to  be  consolatory  verses 
addressed  by  the  Rishi  BLavasha  to  Upamasravas  on  the  death  of  his  father 
MltrAtithi. 

6  Were  I  Lord  of  men :  as  one  of  the  Qods.    My  liberal  prinee :  Mitrfttithi. 

e  Benjomd  the  etotuU  of  the  Oode :  beyond  the  time  fixed  for  the  duration 
)b|  his  life. 

This  hymo  has  been  placed  by  Grassmann  in  his  Appendix  as  a  composite 
production  consisting  of  incoherent  fragments.  See  ItaAxnan,  Sanskrit  Iteoder, 
pfft..88d,8S0. 

I  Sprung  froni  tall  treee :  the  nuts  uf  the  Vibhidaka,  or,  later,  Yibhltaka* 
tree  (Terminalia  Bellerioa)  were  used  as    dice  in  early   times.     RolUre  : 
•wifUy  rolling  dice.    Mi^avdn:  said  to  be  a  mountain  on  which  the  ^est 
Aomaj^ants  grew. 
.  ^%  Wkot^  tingle  point  itjnal:  the  speaker  has  %pigja>T«»t\j  Vm^N*  iiSV>il  *Cw«^- 


430  THE  BYMN8  OP  IBOOK:  t  | 

Of  him  speak  father,  mother,  brothers  saying,  We  know  htm   ' 
not :  bind  him  and  take  him  with  you. 

5  When  I  resolve  to  play   with  these   no  longer,   my  friends 

depart  from  me  and  leave  me  lonely. 
When  the  brown  dice,  thrown  on  the  board,  have  rattled,  like 
a  fond  girl  I  seek  the  place  of  meeting. 

6  The  gamester  seeks  the  gambling-house,  and  wonders,  his 

body  all  afire.  Shall  I  be  lucky  ? 
Still  do  the  dice  extend  his  eager  longiog,  staking  his  gains 
against  his  adversary. 

7  Dice,  verily,  are  armed  with  goads  and  driving-hooks,  deceiv- 

ing and  tormenting,  causing  grievous  woe. 
They  give  frail  gifts  and  then  destroy  the  man  who  wins, 
thickly  anointed  with  the  player's  fairest  good. 

8  Merrily  sports  their  troop,  the  three-and-fifty,  like  Savitar 

the  God  whose  ways  are  faithful. 
They  bend  not  even  to  the  mightys  anger :  the  King  himself 
pays  homage  and  reveres  them. 

9  Downward  they  roll,  and  then  spring  quickly   upward,   and, 

handless,  force  the  man  with  hands  to  serve  them. 
Cast  on  the  board,  like  lumps  of   magic  charcoal,  though  cold 
themselves  they  burn  the  heart  to  ashes. 

10  The  gambler's  wife  is  left  forlorn  nnd   wretched  :  the  mother 

mourns  the  son  who  wanders  homeless. 
In   constant  fear,  in  debt,  and   seeking  riches,  he   goes  by 
night  unto  the  home  of  others. 

1 1  Sad  is  the  gambler  when  he  sees  a  matron,  another's  wife,  and 

his  well-ordered  dwelling. 
He  yokes  the  brown  steeds  in   the  early   morning,  and   when 
the  fire  is  cold  sinks  down  an  outcast. 


4  Bind  him :  he  has  staked  his  personal  freedom,  and  lost ;  and  his  peopk 
renounce  him. 

7  Di'iving-hooha :  used  by  mahouts  or  elephant-drivers.  The  last  half-line  of 
the  stanza  is  difficult :  — *  they  appear  to  the  gambler  covered  with  honey.* — Muir. 

8  Three-aind-Jifty:  or,  perhaps,  thrice  five  in  number.  It  would  appear 
from  S&yana's  Commentary  that  fifty- three  was  the  usual  number  of  dice  eoh 
ployed  ;  and  yet  this  seems  hardly  probable.  Ludwig  suggests  '  three  ttiMi 
five*  as  the  meaning  here  of  tripanchdadh,  and  Prof.  Weber  would  resit 
tripafichasah  instead  of  tripafLchdaah{Ueber'den  R^<M^ya,  p.  72).  Lik€Sami»: 
*  [disposing  men's  destinies]  like  the  god  S.' — Muir. 

10  Riches :  wealth  gained  by  robbery,  according  to  S&yana. 

1 1  Yokes  the  hrovm  steeds :  begma  \£to^\u%  the  nut-dice.  When  the  fin  k 
cold :  *  by  the  time  when  the  ?Lt^  ^oft%  «i>4X.  \«i  \a*  »m^  \xiVa  ^  doignM 
wretch/ — Muir. 


HYMN  Sfi.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  481 

12  To  the  great  captain  of  your  mighty  array,  who  hath  become 

the  host's  imperial  leader. 
To  him  I  show  my  ten  extended  fingers  :  I   speak  the   truth. 
No  wealth  am  I  withholding. 

13  Play  not  with  dice  :  no,  cultivate  thy  corn-land.    Enjoy   the 

gain,  and  deem  that  wealth  sufficieut. 
There  are  thy  cattle,  there  thy  wife,  0  gambler.  So  this  good 
Savitar  himself  hath  told  me. 

14  Make  me  your  friend  :  show  us  some   little  mercy.    Assail  us 

not  with  your  terrific  fierceness. 
Appeased  be  your  malignity  and  anger,   and   let   the   brown 
dice  snare  some  other  captive. 

HYMN  XXXV.  Visvedeyae. 

• 

These  fires  associate  with  Indra  are   awake,    bringing   their 

light  when  first  the  Dawn  begins  to  shine. 
May  Heaven  and  Earth,  great  Pair,  observe   our  holy   work. 

We  claim  for  us  this  day  the  favour  of  the  Gods. 

2  Yea,  for  ourselves  we  claim  the  grace  of  Heaven   and   Earth, 

of  Saryan&vllu,  of  the  Hills  and  Mother  Streams. 
For  innocence  we  pray  to  Sdrya  and   to   Dawn.     So  may  the 
flowing  Soma  bring  us  bliss  to-day. 

3  May  the  great  Twain,  the  Mothers,  Heaven   and   Earth,   this 

day  preserve  us  free  from  sin  for  peace  and  happiness. 
May  Morning  sending  forth  her  light  drive  sin  afar.    We  pray 
to  kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

4  May  this.first  Dawn  bring  us  the  host  of  gracious  Gods  : 

rich,  may  it  richly  shine  for  us  who  strive  for  wealth. 
The  wrath  of  the  malignant  may  we  keep  afar.      We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

5  Dawns,  who  come  forward  with  the  bright  beams  of   the  Sun, 

and  at  your  earliest  flushing  bring  to  us  the  light, 


12  The  great  captain:  the  highest-numbered  of  all  the  dice.  Ten  finger$: 
to  show  that  I  have  nothing  left. 

14  This  stanza  is  a  farewell  address  to  the  Dice.  Some  other :  our  enemy. — 
SAyana.  

The  hymn  or  lay  has  been  transliterated,  translated  in  prose,  and  freely 
rctprodueed  in  rhymed  octosyllabic  verse,  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V. 
425 — 429.    It  has  also  been  translated  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebenzig  Lieder. 

1  With  Indra :  an  a  God  of  the  morning  light. 

2  Of  Saryandvdn,  of  the  HiUe :  according  to  S&yasia,  *  of  the  mountains  of 
l^aryanftvAn,'  a  lake  in  the  district  of  Kurukshetra.  I  follow  Ludwi^  \sl 
taking  both  parvatdn  and  faryanHlvatah  as  genitives. 

•   5   Your.'  according  to  the  text  'their,*  the  verb  m  t\iA  toi.^  \vQft  \i«v3a.^  Va. 
^e  third  person. 


4S2  THE  H7MNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

Sbiae  ye  oq  us  to-day  auspicious,   for  renowD.    We  pray  to 
kiudled  Agni  for  felicity. 

6  Free  from  all  Bickness  may  the  Mornings  come  to  ua,   and  let 

our  fires  mount  upward  witli  a  lofty  blase. 

The  Asvin  Pair  have  harnessed  their  swift-moving   ca|r.     We 
pray  to  kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

7  Send  us  to-day  a  portion  choice  and   excellent,  O  Savitar,  for 

thou  art  he  who  dealeth  wealth. 

I  cry  to  Dhishan&,  Mother  of  opulence.     We  pray  to   kindled. 
Agni  for  felicity. 

8  Further  me  this  declaring  of  Eternal  Law,  the   Law  of  Qods, 

as  we  mortals  acknowledge  it ! 

The  Sun  goes  up  beholding  all  the  rays  of  mom.    We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

9  This  day  we  pray  with  innocence  in  strewing  grass,  adjusting 

pressing-stones,  and  perfecting  the  hymn. 

Thou  in  the  Adityas'  keeping  movest  restlessly.     We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

10  To  our  great  holy  grass  I  bid  the  Grods  at  morn  to    banquet, 

and  will  seat  them  as  the  seven  priests, — 

Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra,  Bhaga  for  our  gain.   We  pray  to  kindl- 
ed Agni  for  felicity. 

1 1  Come  hither,  0  Adityas,  for  onr  perfect  weal :  accordant  help 

our  sacrifice  that  we  may  thrive. 

Piishan,  Brihaspati,  Bhaga,  both  Asvins,  and   enkindled  Agni 
we  implore  for  happiness. 

12  Adityas,  Grods,  vouchsafe  that  this  our  home  may   be   praise- 

worthy, prosperous,  our  heroes'  sure  defence, 

For  cattle,  for  our  sons,   for  progeny,  for  life.  We  pray  to 
kindled  Agni  for  felicity. 

13  This  day  may  all  the  Maruts,  all  be  near   us   with   aid  :  may 

all  our  fires  be  well  enkindled. 

May  all  Gods  come  to  us  with  gracious  favour.  May  spoil  and 
wealth  be  ours,  and  all  possessions. 


7  Dhishand :  a  GKxidess  who  presides  over  prosperity  ;  according  to  Hille- 
brandt,  the  Earth. 

8  Further  me :  *  May  that  glorification  of  the  gods  which  men  repeat  in 
connexion  with  the  rite  preserve  me.* — Wilson. 

9  Moveit  restlessly :  perform^st  thy  duties,  aocprding  to  SAya^a.    Agni  m-, 
pidly  buruiog  the  fuel  appears  to  "be  m\«>xv^Qdi. 


H  TMN  86.]  TJIE  RIG  VEDA .  438 

14  He  whom  ye  aid,  0  Deities,  ia  battle,  whom  ye   protect  and 

rescue  from  afiSictiou, 

Who  fears  no  danger  at  your  milk-libation, — such  may  we  be 
to  feast  the  Grods,  ye  Mighty. 

HYMN  XXXVI.  Visvedevai. 

There  are  the  Dawn  and  Night,   the   grand   and   beauteous 
Pair,  Earth,  Heaven,  and  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman. 

Indra  I  call,  the  Maruts,  Mountains,  and  the  Floods,  Adityas, 
Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Waters,  and  the  Sky. 

2  May  Dyaus  and  Prithivi,  wise,  true  to  Holy   Law,  keep   us  in 

safety  from  distress  and  injury. 
Let  not  malignant  Nirriti  rule  over  us.  We  crave   to-day  this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods. 

3  Mother  of  Mitra  and  of  opulent  Varuna,  may  Aditi   preserve 

us  safe  from  all  distress. 
May  we  obtain  the  light  of  heaven  without  a  foe.     We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

4  May  ringing  press-stones  keep  the  Mkshasas  afar,    ill  dream, 

and  Nirriti,  and  each  voracious  fieud. 
May  the  Adityas  and  the  Maruts  shelter  us.    We   crave   this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

5  Full  flow  libations  ;  on  our  grass  let  Indra  sit;  Brihaspati  the 

singer  laud  with  Sama  hymns  ! 
Wise  be  our  hearts'  imaginings  that  we   may  live.      We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

6  Te  Asvius,  make  our  sacrifice  ascend  to  heaven,  and   animate 

the  rite  that  it  may  send  us  bliss, 
Offered  with  holy  oil,  with  forward-speeding  rein.     We  crave 
the  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

7  Hither  I  call  the  band  of  Maruts,  swift  to  hear,  great,  purify- 

ing, bringing  bliss,  to  be  our  Friends. 
May  we  increase  our  wealth  to  glorify   our   name.     We  crave 
t^is  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

8  We  bring  the  Stay  of  Life,  who  makes  the  waters  swell,  swift- 

hearing,  Friend  of  Gods,  who  waits  on  sacrifice. 

^- I  III  I  II    ^m„^,^m^^^^^^^^^„^ 

14  Who  feart  no  danger  :  who  feela  assured  that  his  worship  of  the  Gods 
will  protect  him. 

1  The  WaterB :  of  the  firmament. 

2  Dyau$  and  Prithivi :  Heaven  and  Earth.   Nirriti :  Death  or  DestructvQT^. 

8   Who  maket  the  waiert  9weU  :  apdm  p6rum :  *  pT0t«i\<0T  o\  ^^  ^%Ni«%^  — 
SAj^Apa.     'Drinker  of  the  watera.' — Ludwig.    Som^la  m«asi\u    ^^  YS«*\^.  ^» 
^8 


434  THE  HYMNS  OP  IBOOK  X. 

May  we  control  that  Power,  Soma  whose  rays  are  bright.     We 
crave  this  gracious  favour  uf  the  Gods  to^ay. 

9  Alive  ourselves,  with  living  sons,  devoid  of  guilt,  may  we  win 
this  with  winners  by  fair  means  to  win. 
Let  the  prayer-haters  bear  our  sin  to  every  side.     We  crave 
this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

10  Hear  us,  O  ye  who  claim  the  worship  of  mankind,   and  give 

us,  0  ye  Gods,  the  gift  for  which  we  pray, 
Victorious  wisdom,  fame  with  heroes  and  with  wealth.     We 
crave  to-day  this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods. 

1 1  We  crave  the  gracious  favour  of  the  €k)ds  to-day,  great  favour 

of  great  Gods,  sublime  and  free  from  foes, 
That  we  may  gain  rich  treasure  sprung  from  hero  sons.     We 
crave  this  gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

12  In  p;reat  enkindled  Agni's  keeping,  and,  for  bliss,  free  from  all 

sin  before  Mitra  and  Varuna, 
May  we  share  Savitar's  best  animating  help.     We  crave  this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

13  All  ye,  the  Gods  whom  Savitar  the  Father  of  truth,  and  Va- 

runa and  Mitra  govern. 
Give  us  prosperity   with  hero  children,  and  opulence  in  kine 
and  various  treasure. 

14  Savitar,   Savitar  from   east   and  westward,  Savitar,  Savitar 

from  north  and  southward, 

Savitar  send  us  perfect  health  and  comfort,  Savitar  let  our 
days  of  life  be  lengthened  ! 

HYMN  XXXVII.  Sarya. 

Do  homage  unto  Varuna's  and  Mitra's  Eye  :  oflfer  this  solemn 

worship  to  the  Mighty  God, 
Who  seeth  far  away,  the  £nsign,  bom  of  Gods.     Sing  praises 

unto  Surya,  to  the  Son  of  Dyaus. 

2  May  this  my  truthful  speech  guard  me  on  every  side,  wher- 

ever heaven  and  earth  and  days  are  spread  abroad. 
All   else  that  is  in  motion  finds  a  place  of  rest :  the  waters 
ever  flow  and  ever  mounts  the  Sun. 

3  No  godless  man  from  time  remotest  draws  thee  down  when 

thou  art  driving  forth  with  winged  dappled  Steeds. 
One  lustre  waits  upon  thee  moving  to  the  east,  and,  Sdrya,  thou 
arisest  with  a  different  light. 

1    Varuna' 8  and  Mitra' 8  Eye:    Surya  or  the  Sun.     *The  eye  of    Mitrft, 
Varuna  and  Agni.'— I.  115.  1. 
3  Dappled  Steed%  :  *  with  Etaftaa.' — li>xdmg,     Ontlustrt:  by  night.     Cf .  I. 
115.  5 ;  and  Aitareya- Brdhmana^  111,  4.  44.    *  Oiifc  %.\i<sv«tv\.  T^\%si<&i^  {aUoWs 


ETMN  87.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  435 

4  0  Sdrya,  with  the  light  whereby  thou  scatterest  gloom,  and 

with  thy  ray  impellest  every  znoying  thing, 
Keep  far  from  us  all  feeble,  worthless  sacrifice,  and  drive  away 
disease  and  every  evil  dream. 

5  Sent  forth  thou  guardest  well  the  Uuiverse's  law,  and  in  thy 

wonted  way  arisest  free  from  wrath. 
When  SArya,  we  address  our  prayers  to  thee  to-day,  may  the 
Gods  favour  this  our  purpose  and  desire. 

6  This  invocation,  these  our  words  may  Heaven  and  Earth,  and 

Indra  and  the  Waters  and  the  Maruts  hear. 
Ne'er  may  we  suffer  want  in  presence  of  the  Sun,  and,  living 
happy  lives,  may  we  attain  old  age. 

7  Cheerful   in  spirit,  evermore,  and   keen  of  sight,   with  store 

of  children,  free  from  sickness  and  from  sin, 
Long-living,  may  we  look,  0  Surya,  upon  thee  uprising  day  by 
day,  thou  great  as  Mitra  is  ! 

8  Sftrya,  may  we  live  long  and  look  upon  thee  still,  thee,  0  Far- 

seeing  One,  bringing  the  glorious  light, 
The  radiant  God,  the  spinng  of  joy  to  every  eye,  as  thou  art 
mounting  up  o'er  the  high  shining  flood. 

9  Thou  by  whose  lustre  all  the  world  of  life  comes  forth,  and  by 

thy  beams  again  returns  unto  its  rest, 
O  Silrya  with  the  golden  hair,  ascend  for  us  day  after  day, 
still  bringing  purer  innocence. 

10  Bless  us  with  shine,  bless  us  with  perfect  daylight,  bless  us 

with  cold,  with  fervent  heat  and  lustre. 
Bestow  on  us,  0  Surya,  varied  riches,  to  bless  us  in  our  home 
and  when  we  travel. 

1 1  Gods,  to  our  living  creatures  of  both  kinds  vouchsafe  protection, 

both  to  bipeds  and  to  quadrupeds, 
That  they  may  drink  and  eat  invigorating  food.     So  grant  us 
health  and  strength  and  perfect  innocence. 

12  If  by  some  grievous  sin  we  have  provoked  the  Gods,  O  Deities, 

with  the  tongue  or  thoughtlessness  of  heart, 
That  guilt,  0  Vasus,  lay  upon  the  Evil  One,  on  hun  who  ever 
leads  us  into  deep  distress. 


(thee)  whilst  thou  risest  with  another.*— Wiiaon.  See  Wallis,  Comology  of 
iAe  Rigveda,  p.  117. 

5  In  thy  wonted  way :  tvadh/X  dnu :  *  after  the  iwodhd  oflTeriDgs.' — ^Wilson. 

8  Flood :  or  floor  of  heaven. 

12  The  Evil  One;  drdvd:  here  probably  a  kind  of  DvaboVoA  «  "VWx^t- 
Ludwig. 


436  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Z 

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indhu 

0  Indra,  in  this  battle  great  and  gloriouSi  in  this  loud  din  of 

war  help  us  to  victory, 
"Where  in  the  strife  for  kine   among  bold  ring-decked  men 

arrows  fly  all  around  and  heroes  are  subdued. 

2  At  home  disclose  to  us  opulence  rich  in  food,  streaming  with 

milk,  0  Indra,  meet  tolje  renowned. 
Sakra,  may  we  be  thine,  the  friendly  Conqueror's  :  even  as  we 
desire,  0  Vasu,  so  do  thou. 

3  The  godless  man,  much-lauded  Indra,  whether  he  be  Dasa  or 

be  Arya,  who  would  war  with  us, — 
Easy  to  conquer  be  for  thee,  with  us,  these  foes :  with  thee  may 
we  subdue  them  in  the  clash  of  fight. 

4  Him  who  must  be  invoked  by  many  and  by  few,  who  standeth 

nigh  with  comfort  in  the  war  of  men, 
Indra,  famed  Hero,  winner  in  the  deadly  strife,  let  us  bring 
hitherward  to-day  to  favour  us. 

5  For,  ludra,  I  have  heard  thee  called  Self-capturer,  One,  Steer  I 

who  never  yields,  who  urges  even  the  churl. 
Release  thyself  from  Eutsa  and  come  hither.     How  shall  one 
like  thee  sit  still  bound  that  he  may  not  move? 

HYMN  XXXIX.  Asvina. 

As  'twere  the  name  of  father,  easy  to  invoke,  we  all  assembled 

here  invoke  this  Car  of  yours, 
Asvius,  your  swiftly-rolling  circumambient  Car  which  he  who 

worships  must  invoke  at  eve  and  dawn. 

2  Awake  all  pleasant  strains  and  let  the  hymns  flow  forth  :  raise 
up  abundant  fulness  :  this  is  our  desire. 
Afvins,  bestow  on  us  a  glorious  heritage,  and  give  our  princes 
treasure  fair  as  Soma  is. 


1  Ring-decked :  adorned  with  armlets,  or  quoits  as  weapons. 

5  Self'Cwpturer :  it  is  difficult  to  assign  a  reasonable  and  appropriate  mean- 
ing to  ivavrijam,  S&yana  explains  it  by  avayam  eva  cfihettdraffi,  *  one  who  cuts 
himself  ;'  'self  mutilator.* — Wilson.  According  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexi- 
con, the  meaning  is  '  one  who  appropriates  or  takes  to  himself ; '  according  to 
Ludwig  '  the  self- rescuer/  and  according  to  Geldner  *  one  who  suffers  himself 
to  be  captured.*  The  poet  (>alls  on  Indra  to  tear  himself  away  from  his  favour- 
ite Eutsa  in  order  to  aid  his  ^rorshippers  in  the  coming  fight.  '  A  legend  is 
here  somewhat  obscurely  related,  that  Kutsa  and  Lu^a  having  summoned  In- 
dra at  the  same  time  to  their  respective  sacrifices,  he  went  first  to  Kutaa  who 

then  detained  him,  having  fastened  him with  a  hundred  leather  thongs. 

Tbia  vene  ia  addressed  to  Jndra  by  Luiia,  exhorting  him  to  free  himoelf.'— 

Wilaoih  

The  nUhi  is  GhoshA,  daughter  oi  IS^aV^VA^^u. 


H7MN  89.]  fHE  ttlGVEDA.  437 

3  Ye  are  the  bliss  of  her  who  groweth  old  at  home,  and  helpers 

of  the  slow  although  he  linger  last. 

Men  call  yon  too,  N^satyas,  healers  of  the  blind,  the  thin  and 
feeble,  and  the  man  with  broken  bones. 

4  Ye  made  Chyav&na,  weak   and   worn   with  length  of  days, 

young  again,  like  a  car,  that  he  had  power  to  move. 

Ye  lifted  up  the  sou  of  Tugra  from  the   floods.    At  our  liba- 
tions must  all  these  your  acts  be  praised. 

5  We  will  declare  among  the  folk  your  ancient  deeds  heroic; 

yea,  ye  were  Physicians  bringing  health. 

You,  you  who  must  be  lauded,  will  we  bring  for  aid,  so   that 
this  foe  of  ours,  0  Asvins,  may  believe, 

6  Listen  to  me,  0  Asvins ;  I  have  cried  to  you.     Give  me  your 

aid  as  sire  and  mother  aid  their  son« 

Poor,  without  kin  or  friend  or  ties  of  blood  am  I.     Save  me, 
before  it  be  too  late,  from  this  my  curse. 

7  Ye,  mounted  on  your  chariot  brought  to  Yimada  the  comely 

maid  of  Purumitra  as  a  bride. 

Ye  came  unto  the  calling  of  the  weakling's  dame,  and  granted 
noble  offspring  to  the  happy  wife. 

8  Ye  gave  again  the  vigour  of  his  youthful  life  to  the  sage  Kali 

when  old  age  was  coming  nigh. 

Ye  rescued  Yandana  and  raised  him  from  the  pit,  and  in   a 
moment  gave  Yifpala  power  to  move. 

9  Ye,  Asvins  Twain,   endowed   with   manly  strength,   brought 

forth  Rebha  when  hidden  in  the  cave  and   well-nigh  dead, 

Freed  Saptavadhri,  and  for  Atri   caused  the   pit  heated   with 
fire  to  be  a  pleasant  resting-place. 

10  On  Pedu  ye  bestowed,  Asvins,  a   courser  white,  mighty   with 
nine-and-niuety  varied  gifts  of  strength, 

A  horse  to  be  renowned,  who  bore  his  friend  at  speed,  joy-giv- 
ing, Bhaga-like  to  be  invoked  of  men. 

8  Of  her  who  groweth  old  at  home :  referring  to  Ghoshft  herself.  See  I.  17.  7. 
Healers  of  the  blind :  see  I.  112.  8. 

4  Chyavdna:  see  I.  116.  10,  and  117.  18.    Son  qf  Tugra:  Bhujyu.    See 
Vol.  I.,  Index. 

6  My  eurte :  leprosy,  which  prevented  her  marriage. 

7  Vimada:  see  I.  117.  20.     The  weakling* i  dame:  see  I.  117.  24. 

8  For  Kali,  Vandana,  and  Vifpald  in  this  stanza,  vn^  RebKa,  MtV.^  vg^^ 
Pedu  iu  9  »ad  10,  see  Voh  L,  Index.    For  Saptava^ri  {f\»xa3^%\  «ftfc"N  .1^.  ^' 


488  TBE  EYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

1 1  From  no  side,  ye  Two  Kings  whom  none  may  check   or  stay, 

doth  grief,  distress,  or  danger  come  upon  the  man 
Whom,  Asyius  swift  to  hear,  borne  on  your  glowing   path,  ye 
with  your  Consort  make  the  foremost  in  the  race. 

12  Come  on  that  Chariot  which  the  Kibhus   wrought  for  you, 

the  Chariot,  Asvins,  that  is  speedier  than  thought, 
At  harnessing  whereof  Heayen's  Daughter  springs  to  birth, 
and  from  Vivasv^n  come  auspicious  Night  and  Day. 

13  Come,  Conquerors  of  the  sundered   mountain,  to   our  home, 

Asvins  who  made  the  cow  stream  milk  for  Sayu's  sake, 
Ye  who  delivered  even  from  the  wolfs  deep  throat  and  set 
again  at  liberty  the  swallowed  quail. 

14  We  have  prepared  this  laud  for  you,  0  Asvins,  and,  like  the 

Bhrigus,  as  a  car  have  framed  it, 
Have  decked  it  as  a  maid  to  meet  the  bridegroom,  and  brought 
it  as  a  son,  our  stay  for  ever. 

HYMN  XL.  Asvins. 

• 

Your  radiant  Chariot — whither  goes  it  on  its  way  % — who  decks 

it  for  you.  Heroes,  for  its  happy  course. 
Starting  at  daybreak,  visiting  each  morning  every  house,  borne 

hitherward  through  prayer  unto  the  sacrifice  f 

2  Where  are  ye,  Asvins,  in  the  evening,  where  at  mom  ?  Where 

is  your  halting-place,  where  rest  ye  for  the  night  t 
Who  brings  you  homeward,  as  the  widow  bedward  draws  her 
husband's  brother,  as  the  bride  attracts  the  groom  ? 

3  Early  ye  sing  forth  praise  as  with  a  herald's  voice,  and,  meet 

for  worship,  go  each  morning  to  the  house. 
Whom  do  ye  ever  bring  to  ruin  ?  Unto  whose  libations  come 
ye.  Heroes,  like  two  Sons  of  Kings  ? 


11  Whom,  none  may  check  or  stay:  adite  =  adtnau. — S&yana.  Tour  Contort : 
Siiry&.   The  foremost  in  the  race  :  that  is,  generally,  preeminent. 

12  Heaven's  Daughter :  Ushas  or  Dawn.     Vivasvdn:  the  morning  Sun. 

13  Conquerors  of  the  sundered  mountain:  probably  with  referen<»  to  the 
deliverance  of  JShusha.— Ludwig.  See  I.  116.  20.  The  swallowed  qMl :  see 
I.  112.  8.  The  quail  is  probably  Dawn  delivered  from  the  jaws  of  t^  wolf 
Night  by  the  twin  Light-Gods.  \ 

14  Our  stay  for  ever :  who  will  perpetuate  our  family  ;  *  the  eternal  per- 
former o£  ritea.' — Wilson. 

11  As  the  widcm:  in  certain  circumstances  a  widow  was  bound  to  marry  her 
deceased  husband's  brother.    See  Manu  ( Mdnavadharma^dstraj,  IX.  69.  70. 
The  law  of  the  Jews  was  the  same.    See  Deuteronomy,  xxv.  5. 
3  As  with  a  herMi  voice :  lcO(pai/d  \a  \!ti>x&  eiX^^^m^^Vs  ^l^vxa^  The  hovu : 
of  the  iiaciifioer. 


SYMN  40J  TBE  RIGYEDA.  439 

4  Even  as  hunters  follow  two  wild  elephants,  we  with  oblations 

call  you  dowu  at  mom  and  eve. 
To  folk  who  pay  you  offerings  at  appointed  times,  Chiefs,  Lords 
of  splendour,  ye  bring  food  to  strengthen  them. 

5  To  you,  0  Asvins,  came  the  daughter  of  a  King,  Ghosiha,  and 

said,  0  Heroes,  this  I  beg  of  yon  : 
Be  near  me  in  the  day,  be  near  me  in  the  night :  help  me  to 
gain  a  car-borne  chieftain  rich  in  steeds. 

6  0  Asvins,  ye  are  wise  :  as  Kutsa  comes  to  men,  bring  your  car 

nigh  the  folk  of  him  who  sings  yonr  praise. 
The  bee,  0  Asvins,  bears  your  honey  in  her  mouth,  as  the 
maid  carries  it  purified  in  her  hand. 

7  To  Bhujyu  and  to  Vasa  ye  came  near  with  help,  0  Asvins,  to 

Sinjira  and  to  Usan^. 
/  Your  worshipper  secures  yonr  friendship  for  himself.     Through 
your  protection  I  desire  felicity. 

8  Krisa  and  Sayu  ye  protect,  ye  Asvins  Twain :  ye  Two  assist 

the  widow  and  the  worshipper ; 
And  ye  throw  open,  Asvins,  unto  those  who  win  the  cattle-stall 
that  thunders  with  its  sevenfold  mouth. 

9  The  Woman  hath  brought  forth,  the  Infant  hath  appeared, 

the  plants  of  wondrous  beauty  straightway  have  sprung  up. 
To  him  the  rivers  run  as  down  a  deep  descent,  and  he  this 
day  becomes  their  master  and  their  lord. 
10  They  mourn  the  living,  cry  aloud,  at  sacrifice :  the  men  have 
set  their  thoughts  upon  a  distant  cast. 
^'      A  lovely  thing  for  fathers  who  have  gathered  here, — a  joy  to 
husbands, — are  the  wives  their  arms  shall  clasp. 

5  The  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  difficult :  '  be  able  (to  grant  favour) 
to  the  son  of  mj  brother,  who  has  horses  and  a  chariot.' — Wilson. 

6  An  Kutsa  eome»  to  nun :  borne  on  Indra*s  chariot.  Beart  your  honey: 
sips  honey  when  the  Asvins  have  ushered  in  the  day.  Aa  the  maid  :  Dr. 
Muir  and  Prof.  Grassmaun  explain  this  half-line  differently,  '  as  a  maid,  or  a 
woman,  resorts  to  her  rendezvous  (with  her  lover).' 

7  Vam :  see  I.  112.  10.  Sinjdra :  see  VIII.  6.  25.  U§(i7id :  see  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

8  KrUa  :  a  Rishi  favoured  by  Indra  ;  or,  as  S&yana  explains  the  word  here, 
the  feeble  man  in  generaL  Siyu:  has  been  mentioned  frequently.  The 
eattle-stall :  the  rain-cloud  whose  waters  are  the  cows. 

9  The  Woman :  perhaps  the  water  of  the  cloud.  The  Infant :  the  lightning. 
To  him  :  the  sacrificer  may  perhaps  be  intended. 

10  T/iey  mx>urn  the  living  :  perhaps,  show  their  sorrow  for  the  widower  at 
the  funeral  of  his  wife.  See  Lanman  {Sanskrit  Reader,  p.  387)  from  whom 
I  have  borrowed.  Set  their  thoughts  upon  a  distant  cast :  of  the  noose  or 
snaring-net  i  apparently  a  periphrasis  for,  have  taken  thought  for  the  distant 
future  and  children  to  Hve  after  them. 


UO  THE  H7MNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

H  Of  this  we  have  no  knowledge.     Tell  it  forth  to  us,  how  the 
youth  rests  within  the  chambers  of  the  bride. 

Fain  would  we  reach  the  dwelling  of  the  vigorous  Steer  who 
loves  the  kine,  0  Afvins :  this  is  our  desire. 

1 2  Your  favouring  grace  hath  come,  ye  Lords  of  ample   wealth : 

Asvins,  our  longings  are  stored  up  within  your  hearts. 

Ye,  Lords  of  splendour,  have  become  our  twofold  guard  :  may 
we  as  welcome  friends  reach  Aryaman's  abode. 

13  £ven  so,  rejoicing  in  the  dwelling-place  of  man,  give  herosoni 

and  riches  to  the  eloquent. 

Make  a  ford,  Lords  of  splendour,  where  men  well  may  drink: 
remove  the  spiteful  tree-stump  standing  in  the  path. 

14  0  Asvins,  Wonder- Workers,  Lords  of  lustre,  where  and  with 

what  folk  do  ye  delight  yourselves  to-day  t 

Who  hath  detained  them  with  him?  Whither  are  they  gonef 
Unto  what  sage's  or  what  worshipper's  abode  f 

HYMN  XLL  AxnoM. 

That  general  Car  of  yours,  invoked  by  many  a  man,  that 
comes  to  our  libations,  three- wheeled,  meet  for  lauds, 

That  circumambient  Car,  worthy  of  sacri6ce,  we  call  with  our 
pure  hymns  at  earliest  flush  of  dawn. 

2  Ye,  0  N&satyas,  mount  that  early-harnessed  Car,  that  travels 

early,  laden  with  its  freight  of  balm. 

Wherewith  ye,  Heroes,  visit  clans  who  sacrifice,  even  the  poor 
man's  worship  where  the  priest  attends. 

3  If  to  the  deft  Adhvaryu  with  the  meath  in  hand,  or  to  the 

Kindler  firm  in  strength,  the  household  friend. 

Or  to  the  sage's  poured  libations  ye  approach,  come  thence,  O 
Asvins,  now  to  drink  the  offered  meath. 


11  Ghoshd  appears  to  speak  of  herself  in  the  plural  number.  She  plainly 
expresses  her  wishes  for  marriage. 

12  Aryaman's  abode :  Aryaman  is  here  used  in  the  original  sense  of  the 
word,  bosom-friend  and  companion,  especially  the  friend  who  asks  a  womaii 
in  marriage  for  another. 

Prof.  Grassmann  places  stanzas  10 — 14  in  his  Appendix  as  being  obscure 
and  in  his  opiuion  forming  no  part  of  the  original  hymn. 

J   Three-wheeled :  see  I.  34.  9. 
S  The  Kindler :  the  Aguldh,  t\^e  ]^T\eaV.^\iQ\Sai<3\«^>Xi%«Mx\^\AJLClr«. 


BYMN  42  ]  THE  RIO  VEDA .  HI 

HYMN  XLIL  Indr*. 

£vBN  as  an  archer  shoots  afar  his  arrow,  offer  the  laud  to  him 

with  meet  adornment. 
Quell  with  your  voice  the  wicked's  voice,  0  sages.     Singer, 

make  Indra  rest  beside  the  Soma. 

2  Draw  thy  Friend  to  theo  like  a  cow  at  milking :  0  Singer, 

wake  np  Indra  as  a  lover. 
Make  thou  the  Hero  hast-e  to  give  us  riches  even  as  a  vessel 
filled  brimful  with  treasure. 

3  Why,  Maghavan,  do  they  call  thee  Bounteous  Giver  1  Quicken 

me  :  thou,  I  hear,  art  he  who  quickens. 
Sakia,  let  my  intelligence  be  active,  and  bring  us  luck  that 
finds  great  wealth,  0  Indra. 

4  Standing,  in  battle  for  their  rights,  together,  the  people, 

Indra,  in  the  fray  invoke  thee. 
Him  who  brings  gifts  the  Hero  makes  his  comrade :  with  him 
who  pours  no  juice  he  seeks  not  friendship. 

5  Whoso  with  plenteous  food  for  him  expresses  strong  Somas  as 

much  quickly-coming  treasure, 
For  him  he  overthrows  in  early  morning  his  swift  well-weapon- 
ed  foes,  and  slays  the  tyrant. 

6  He  unto  whom  we  offer  praises,  Indra,  Maghavan,  who  hath 

joined  to  ours  his  wishes, — 
Before  him  even  afar  the  foe  must  tremble  :  low  before  him 
must  bow  all  human  glories. 

7  With    thy   fierce  bolt,  0  God  invoked  of  many,  drive  to  a 

distance  from  afar  the  foeman. 
O  Indra,  give  us  wealth  in  com  and  cattle,  and  make  thy 
singer's  prayer  gain  strength  and  riches. 

8  Indra,  the  swallower  of  strong  libations  rich  in  the  boons 

they  bring,  the  potent  Somas, 
He,  Maghavan,  will  not  restrict  his  bounty  :  he  brings  much 
wealth  unto  the  Soma-presser. 

9  Yea,  by  superior  play  he  wins  advantage,  when  he,  a  gambler, 

piles  his  gains  in  season. 
Celestial-natured,  he  overwhelms  with  riches  the  devotee  who 
keeps  not  back  his  treasure. 

1    The  wicked* 8  voice :  *  the  praises  of  your  adversaries.' — Wilson. 

4  The  Hero :  ludra. 

5  As  much  quickly -coming  treasure :  representing  the  wealth  which  the  ofifer- 
ing  of  the  libations  is  expected  to  produce. 

6  Unto  whom  we  offer  praises :  or,  in  whom  we  have  placed  o>xt  \ic>^^« 
9   Wfun  he,  a  ffumbler  :  cp.  X.  iZ.  5. 


442  TffJS  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  Z 

10  0  Much-invoked,  may  we  subdue  all  famine  and  evil  waut 

with  store  of  grain  and  cattle. 
May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  obtain  possessions 
by  our  own  exertion. 

11  Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  and 

from  below,  from  sinners  ! 
May  Indra  from  the  front,  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  to 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 

HYMN  XLIII.  Indra. 

In  perfect  unison  all  yearning  hymns  of  mine  that  find  the 
light  of  heaven  have  sung  forth  Indra's  praise. 

As  wives  embrace  their  lord,  the  comely  bridegroom,  bo  they 
compass  Maghavan  about  that  he  may  help. 

2  Directed  unto  thee  my  spirit  never  strays,  for  I  have  set  my 

hopes  on  thee,  0  Much-invoked  ! 
Sit,  Wonderful !  as  King  upon  the  sacred  grass,  and  let  thy 
drinking-place  be  by  the  Soma  juice. 

3  From  indigence  and  hunger  Indra  turns  away :  Maghavan 

hath  dominion  over  precious  wealth. 
These  the  Seven   Rivers  flowing  on  their  downward  path  in- 
crease the  vital  vigour  of  the  potent  Steer. 

4  As  on  the  fair-leafed  tree  rest  birds,  to  Indra  flow  the  gladden- 

ing Soma  juices  that  the  bowls  contain. 
Their  face  that  glows  with  splendour  through  their  mighty 
power  hath  found  the  shine  of  heaven  for  mau,  the  Aryas' 
light. 

5  As  in  the  game  a  gambler  piles  his  winnings,  so  Maghavan, 

sweeping  all  together,  gained  the  Sun. 
This  mighty  deed  of  thine  none  other  could  achieve,   none, 
Maghavan,  before  thee,  none  in  recent  time. 

6  Maghavan  came  by  turns  to  all  the  tribes  of  men :  the  Steer 

took  notice  of  the  people's  songs  of  praise. 
The  man  in  whose  libations  Sakra  hath  delight  by  means  of 
potent  Somas  vanquisheth  his  foes. 


10  With  princes  :  with  men  eminent  for  their  wealth  :  rdjaMiV'dktUiAnA' 
mUvaraih, — S&yana. 


8  Turns  away :  S&yana  makes  vUihuvrit  tranaitive : — '  May   Indra  1m  tiia 
remover  ot  thirst  and  hunger.' — Wilson. 
5  Gained  the  Sun :  conquers  \i\m  \>^  ^aSsMi^  wi«^  Vi»  moisture,  that  is,  tiM 
water  that  he  has  absorbed. — ^^^ausi. 


BTMN  44.]  TBB  RlOVSDA.  448 

7  When  Soma  streams  togBther  unto  Indra  flow  like  waters  to 

the  river,  rivulets  to  the  lake, 
la  place  of  sacrifice  sages  exalt  his  might,  as  the  rain  swells 
the  corn  by  moisture  sent  from  heaven. 

8  He  rushes  through  the  region  like  a  furious  Bull,  he  who  hath 

made  these  floods  the  dames  of  worthy  lords. 
This  Maghavan  hath  found  light  for  the  mau  who  biings  ob- 
lation, sheds  the  juice,  and  promptly  pours  his  gifts. 

9  Let  the  keen  axe  come  forth  together  with  the  light :  here  be, 

as  erst,  the  teeming  cow  of  sacrifice. 

Let  the  Bed  God  shine  bright  with  his  refulgent  ray,  and  let 
the  Lord  of  heroes  glow  like  heaven's  clear  sheen. 

10  0  Much-invoked,  may  we  subdue  all  famine  and  evil  want  with 

store  of  grain  and  cattle. 

May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  obtain  possessions 
by  our  own  exertion. 

1 1  Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  and 

from  below,  from  sinners. 

May  Indra  from  the  front,  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  to 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 

HYMN  XLIV.  Iiidra. 

May  Sovran  Indra  come  to  the  carousal,  he  who  by  Holy  Law 
is  strong  and  active, 

The  overcomer  of  all  conquering  forces  with  his  great  steer- 
like power  that  hath  no  limit. 

2  Firm-seated  is  thy  car,   thy  Steeds  are  docile ;  thy  hand,  0 

King,  holds,  firmly  grasped,  the  thunder. 

On  thy  fair  path,   0  Lord  of  men,  come  quickly :  we  will  in- 
crease thy  powers  when  thou  hast  drunken. 

3  Let  strong  and  mighty  Steeds  who  bear  this  Mighty  Indra,  the 

Lord  of  men,  whose  arm  wields  thunder, 

Bring  uuto  us,  as  sharers  of  our  banquet,  the  Steer  of  conquer- 
ing might,  of  real  vigour. 


8  The  dame»  of  worthy  lords :  that  is,  subjected  them  to  the  Aryans, 
whereas  they  had  been  the  thralls  of  D&sas.    See  I.  32.  11. 

9  The  keen  axe :  Agni,  who  is  frequently  likened  to  an  axe.  See  I.  127.  3, 
snd  VI.  3.  4.  The  Red  God:  arushoK:  according  to  SAyana,  'the  radiant 
Indra* ;  but  Agni  is  probably  intended,  or  perhaps  *  the  red  bolt'  as  M.  Muller 
pralers. 

10  The  two  concluding  stanzas  are  identical  in  Hymiift  5^,  ^^,  ^V. 


Hi  THE  HYMNS  OP  l^OOKl 

4  So  like  a  Bull  thou  rushest  to  the  Lord  who  loves  the  trouglii 

the  Sage,  the  prop  of  vigour,  in  the  vat. 
Prepare  thine  energies,  collect  them  in  thyself :  be  for  our 
profit  as  the  Master  of  the  wise. 

5  May  precious  treasures  come  to  us, — so  will  I  pray.     Come  to 

the  votary's  gift  offered  with  beauteous  laud. 
Thou  art  the  Lord,  as  such  sit  on  this  holy  grass  :  thy  vessels 
are  inviolate  as  Law  commands. 

6  Far  went  our  earliest  invocations  of  the  Gods,  and  won  us 

glories  that  can  never  be  surpassed. 
They  who  could  not  ascend  the  ship  of  sacrifice,  sink  down  in 
desolation,  trembling  with  alarm. 

7  So  be  the  others,  evil-hearted,  far  away,  whose  horses,  difficult 

to  harness,  have  been  yoked. 
Here  in  advance  men  stand  anear  to  offer  gifts,  by  whom  full 
many  a  work  that  brings  reward  is  done. 

8  He  firmly  fixed  the  plains  and  mountains  as  they   shooL 

Dyaus  thundered  forth  and  made  the  air's  mid-region  qoake. 
He  stays  apart  the  two  confronting  bowls ;  he  sings  lands  in 
the  potent  Soma's  joy  when  he  hath  drunk. 

9  I  bear  this  deftly-fashioned  go^i  of  thine,  wherewith  thou, 

Maghavan,  shalt  break  the  strikers  with  the  hoof. 
At  this  libation  mayst  thou  be  well  satisfied.     Partake  the 
juice,  partake  the  worship,  Maghavan. 

10  0  Much-invoked,  may  we  subdue  all  famine  and  evil   want 

with  store  of  grain  and  cattle. 
May  we  allied,  as  first  in  rank,  with  princes  obtain  possessionB 
by  our  own  exertion. 

1 1  Brihaspati  protect  us  from  the  rearward,  and  from  above,  and 

from  below,  from  sinners. 
May  Indra  from  the  front  and  from  the  centre,  as  Friend  to 
friends,  vouchsafe  us  room  and  freedom. 

4  The  Lord:  pdtim:  the  Soma.  CoUect  them  in  thytdf:  'take  us  into 
thjsalf.'— Wilflon.  Of  the  toise:  kenipXndm  is  thus  explained  by  the  Commen- 
tators, but  the  meaning  seems  doubtful.  Ludwig  thinks  that  '  the  master 
of  the  oars,'  that  is,  the  steersman,  is  intended. 

6  In  desolation :  «rw4' =  £jO?jjUO(.— Ludwig.  Trembling  in  alarm  :  or,  doen 
of  ill  deeds,  according  to  T&ska's  interpretation  of  kipayah, 

7  Whos^e  horseSf  difficult  to  harness^  have  been  yoked:  whose  ill-managed 
attempts  to  perform  acceptable  sacrifice  have  failed.  In  advance :  before 
death,  according  to  S&yana. 

8  He :  ladra.  As  they  shook :  cp.  II.  12.  2.  Two  confronting  howU:  heaves 
and  earth. 

9  Goad:  the  hymn  of  praise  which  vn^^alxidraitx)  action.    The  itriher$  wiA 
the  Aoo/.'  a  ciaas  of  YAtudhAuaa  ox  demon»,  ^^X.  ^1 .  \*I» 


BTMN  45.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  445 

HYMN  XLV.  Agni. 

First   Agai  sprang  to  life  from  out  of  Heaven :  the  second 

time  from  us  came  JS.tavedas. 
Thirdly  the  Manly-souled  was  in  the  waters.     The  pious  lauds 

aud  kindles  him  the  Eternal. 

2  Agni,  we  know  thy  three  powers  in  three  stations,  we  know 

thy  forms  in  many  a  place  divided. 
We  know  what  name  supreme  thou  hast  in  secret :  we  know 
the  source  from  which  thou  hast  proceeded. 

3  The  Mauly-souled  lit  thee  iu  sea  and  waters,   man's  Viewer 

lit  thee  iu  the  breast  of  heaven. 
There  as  thou  stoodest  in  the   third  high  region  the  Steers 
increased  thee  in  the  waters'  bosom. 

4  Agni  roared  out,  like  Dyaus  what  time  he  thunders  :  he  licked 

the  ground,  about  the  plants  he  flickered. 
At  once,  when  born,  he  looked  around  enkindled,  and  lightened 
heaven  and  earth  within  with  splendour. 

5  The  spring  of  glories  and  support  of  riches,  rouser  of  thoughts 

and  guardian  of  the  Soma, 
Good  Son  of  Strength,  a  King  amid  the   waters,  in  forefront 
of  the  Dawns  he  shines  enkindled. 

6  Germ  of  the  world,   ensign  of  all  creation,  be  sprang  to  life 

and  filled  the  earth  and  heavens. 

Even  the  firm  rock  he  cleft  when  passing  over,  when  the  Five 
Tribes  brought  sacrifice  to  Agni. 

7  So  among  mortals  was   Immortal  Agni   stablished  as  holy 

wise  and  willing  envoy. 

He  waves  the  red  smoke  that  he  lifts  above  him,  striving  to 
reach  the  heavens  with  radiant  lustre. 


1  From  out  of  Heaven :  or,  from  Dyaus  or  Heaven  his  father;  in  the  shape 
of  the  Sun.  From  tu :  produced  by  men  in  the  shape  of  sacrificial  and  do- 
mestic fire.  In  the  waters :  of  the  firmament,  in  the  shape  of  lightning,  the 
tliird  form  of  Agni. 
^  In  secret :  unknown  to  those  who  know  not  the  Veda. — Siyana. 
€r  8  The  HanlysouUd :  or,  the  Friend  of  men;  Varuna,  according  to  SAyana, 
and  PrajApati,  according  to'  Mahldhara.  Perhaps  Dyaus  (cp.  stanza  8)  may 
be  intended. — Ludwig.  Grassmann  thinks  that  Indra,  the  kindler  of  the 
lightning,  is  meant.     The  Steers :  or,  the  Mighty  Ones;  the  Maruts. 

6  The  irm  rock :  *  the  solid  cloud.* — Wilson.     Some  extraordinary  conflagra- 
tion of  jungle  may  perhaps  be  referred  to.     The  Five  Tribes :  pdflckajandh  : 
literally,  the  five  men,   meaning,  according  to  S&yana,  men  in  general,  and, 
according  to  Mahldhara,  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  aud  the  lQ>xt  ^Vxvail 
priesta* 


446  THE  HYMNS  OP  IBOOK  X 

8  Like  gold  to  look  on,  far  he  shone  refulgent,  beaming  imper- 

ishable life  for  glory, 
Agni  by  vital  powers  became  immortal  when  his  prolific  Father 
Dyaus  begat  him. 

9  Whoso  this   day,  0  God  whose  flames  are  lovely,   prepares  a 

cake,  0  Agni,  mixt  with  butter, 
Lead  thou  aud  further  him  to  higher  foiiune,  to  bliss  bestowed 
by  Gods,  0  thou  Most  Youthful. 

10  Endow    him,  Agni,  with  a  share   of  glory,  at  every    song  of 

praise  sung  forth  enrich  him. 
Dear  let  him  be  to  Siirya,  dear  to  Agni,  preeminent  with  son 
and  children's  children. 

11  While,  Agni,  day  by  day  men   pay    thee   worship   they  win 

themselves  all  treasures  worth  the  wishing. 
Allied  with  thee,  eager  and  craving  riches,  they  have   discloe- 
ed  the  stable  filled  with  cattle. 

12  Agni,  the  Friend   of  men,    the   Soma's  keeper,    VaifvllnaiA) 

hatli  been  lauded  by  the  Kishis. 
We  will  invoke   benignant   Earth   and   Heaven :  ye    Deities, 
give  us  wealth  with  hero  children. 

HYMN  XLVL  Agni. 

Stablished  for  thee,  to  lend  thee  vital  forces.  Giver  of  wealth, 

Guard  of  his  servant's  body. 
The  Great  Priest,  born,  who  knows   the   clouds,  Abider  with 

men,  is  seated  in  the  lap  of  waters. 

2  Worshipping,  seeking  him  with  adoration  like  some  lost  cr^- 

ture  followed  by  its  footprints. 
Wise  Bhrigns,  yearning  in   their   hearts,   pursued   him,   and 
found  him  lurking  where  the  floods  are  gathered. 

3  On  the  Cow's  forehead,  with   laborious   searching,  Trita,   the 

offspring  of  Vibhuvas,  found  him. 
Born  in  our  houses.  Youthful,  joy-bestower,  he   now  becomes 
the  central  point  of  brightness. 

12  Soma's  keeper:  as  identified  with  the  Moon,  the  great  receptacle  of  the 
celestial  Soma,  the  nectar  or  ambrosia  of  the  Qods.  See  Hillebrandt»  F.  M^  I. 
330—336.  

1  For  thee :  the  Rishi  addresses  himself.  Who  Jenows  the  clmtdt :  from 
which  he  (Agni)  comes  in  the  form  of  Lightning.  Of  watert:  of  the  firmft- 
ment. 

2  Wise  Bkrigus :  frequently  mentioned  as  specially  connected  with  tht 
worship  of  Agni.    Cf.  II.  4.  2.    Pursued  him ;  see  I.  65.  1. 

S  On  iAe  Cow's  forehead:  *  on  the  Yiead  ol  ih«  cloud.'    Triia:  Agni  inhii 
third  form  as  lightning.    The  ab&titaAt  -!^eT%Q!QA&fi^  ioittSL  ^\  \^^  <^<y^\a«L  Aqii 


JffYMN  ie.]  THS  RIQVEDA.  447 

4  Yearning,  with  homage,  they  have  set  and   made   him   blithe 

Priest  among  mankind,  oblation-bearer, 
Leader  of  rites  and  Purifier,  envoy  of   men,  as   sacrifice    that 
still  advances. 

5  The  foolish  brought  the  ne'er-bewildered  forward,  great,  Victor, 

Song-iuspirer,  Fort-destroyer. 
Leading  the  Youth  gold-bearded,  like  a  courser  gleaming  with 
wealth,  they  turned  their  hymn  to  profit. 

6  Holding  his  station  firmly  in  the  houses,  Trita  sat  down  within 

his  home  surrounded. 
Thence,  as  Law  bids,  departs  the  Tribes'    Companion,  having 
collected  men  with  no  compulsion. 

7  His  are  the   fires,    eternal,    purifying,  that  make  the  houses 

move,  whose  smoke  is  shining, 
White,  waxing  in  their  strength,  for  ever  stin-ing,  and  sitting 
in  the  wood ;  like  winds  are  Somas. 

8  The  tongue  of  Agni  bears  away  the  praise-song,  and,  through 

his  care  for  Earth,  her  operations. 
Him,  bright  and  radiant,  living  men  have  stablished  as  their 
blithe  Priest,  the  Chief  of  Sacrificers. 

9  That   Agni,  him  whom   Heaven  and   Earth  engendered,  the 

Waters,  Tvashtar,  and,  with  might,  the  Bhrigus, 
Him   Matarisvan  and   the  Gods   have  fashioned  holy  for  man 
and  first  to  be  entreated. 


is  heie  represented  as  endeavouring  to  find  the  lurking  fire  in  the  sky. — 
Macdonell.  Offspring  of  VibhU/vaa  :  or,  connected  with  Vibhfivasu,  the  very 
wealthy,  Soma. 

4  As  sacrijice  that  still  advances :  *  als  das  sich  vorwarts  bewegende  opfer.' 
— Ludwig  According  to  Slyana,  *the  object  of  sacrifice,  him  who  goes  forward 
[from  one  fire  receptacle  to  another].' 

5  The  foolish :  human  priests,  weak  and  foolish  in  comparison  with  the  wise 
AgnL  0 learning  with  wealth:  the  meaning  of  dhdnarcham  is  uncertain.  The 
St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  offers  dlianaijam,  *  striving  to  win  the  prize,'  as  pro- 
bably the  right  readiitg. 

6  On  stanzas  S  and  6  see  Macdonell  (J.  R.  A.  S.,  July.  1893,  pp.  450—452), 
who  translates  the  second  half  of  6  as  follows  :  From  hence  the  house-friend 
of  settlera  collecting  (them)  goes  among  men  by  distribution,  not  by  (means 
of)  bonds  ;  i  e.,  carried  from  place,  not  freshly  produced  by  cord  and  drill. 

7  That  make  the  houses  move  :  this  seems  to  be  what  the  words  dam^m 
aritrd  should  mean,  though  how  flames  can  be  thus  qualified  is  not  clear. 
•  The  rescuers  from  the  humiliated  (spirits  of  ill).* — Wilson.  *  Protectors  of 
the  houses.' — Mahidhara.  Like  winds  are  Somas :  as  winds  fan  flame,  so 
Soma- libations  increase  the  might  of  Agni.  According  to  Sftyana,  the  flames 
are  *  like  the  fast-flowing  juices  of  the  Soma.* — Wilson.  I  follow  Ludwig's 
explanation,  but  the  meaning  of  the  passage  is  doubtful. 

8  Her  operations :  holy  works  performed  by  men. 

9  Mdtarifvan:  a  divine  or  8emi*divine  being  "wYio  \>tOM\^\>   ^\Sd^  Vxcicx 
heaven, '  See  L  81.  3,  and  60,  1. 


448  TH^  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

10  Agni,  whom  Gods  have  made  oblation-bearer,  and  much-desir- 
ing men  regard  as  holy, 
Give  life  to  him  who  lauds  thee  when  he  worships,  and  thea 
shall  glorious  men  in  troops  adore  thee. 

HYMN  XLVII.  Indra  Vaikuntha. 

Tht  right  hand  have  we   grasped  in   ours,  0  ludi-a,  longing 

for  treasure,  Treasure-Lord  of  treasures ! 
Because  we  know  thee,   Hero,  Lord   of  cattle  :   vouchsafe  us 

mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

2  Wealth,  fully  armed,  good  guard  and  kind   protector,  sprang 

from  four  seas,  the  prop  and  stay  of  treasures, 
Fraught  with  great  bounties,   meet  for   praise   and    glory : 
vouchsafe  us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

3  Wealth,   with  good  Brahmans,   Indra!  God-attended,    high, 

wide,  and  deep,  and  based  on  broad  foundations. 
Strong,  with  famed  Rishis,   conquering   our   foemen  :  vouch- 
safe us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

4  Victorious,  winning  strength,  with   hero   sages,   confirmed  in 

power,  most  useful,  wealth-attracting. 
True,  ludra !  crushing  forts  and  slaying  Dasyus :  vouchsafe 
us  mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

5  Wealthy  in  heroes  and  in  cars  and  horses,  strength  hundred- 

fold and  thousandfold,  0  Indra, 
With  manly  sages,  happy  troops,  light- winning:  vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

6  To  Saptagu  the  sage,  the  holy-minded,  to  him,  Brihaspati,  the 

song  approaches, 
Angiras'  Son  who  must  be  met  with  homage :  vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

7  My  lauds,  like  envoys,  craving  loving-kindness,  go  forth  to 

Indra  with  their  strong  entreaty. 
Moving  his  heart  and  uttered  by  my  spirit :    vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 


Vaikuptha  is  said  to  mean  son  of  Vikunthft,  an  Asurl  or  female  demon  who 
was  allowed  by  Indra  to  become  his  second  mother. 

2  Wealth :  Sftyana  gives  another  interpretation  : — '  (We  know  thee  to  be) 
well  armed,'  etc. — Wilson.  Sprung  from  four  sects :  regarded  as  the  store- 
houses of  jewels.  '  (Reuowned  throughout)  the  four  oceans.' — [applied  to 
Indra]  Wilson. 

6  Brihaspati :  according  to  the  Scholiast  meaning  Saptagu,   '  the   lord  of 

much  (praise).'— Wilson.    According  to  others,  the  God  Brihaspati  oallod 

Saptagu  AB  being  drawn  by  aeveti  oxen  :  '  der  fahrt  mit  /tieben  Rindem  *— 

Ora8MmAnn.  Angims*  San:  meaning a^paLT«k\i\\^ l^riXi^Me.^^^  loved 

MDd  boDoured  by  Angiras  and  Yua  deftc«a^nX.«.   ^a«^ V*l%A. 


HYMN  48.]  TBE  RIQVEDA.  449 

8  Grant  us  the  boon  for  which  I  pray,  0  Indra,  a  spacious  home 
unmatched  among  the  people. 
To  this  may  Heaven  and  Earth  accord  approval :  vouchsafe  us 
mighty  and  resplendent  riches. 

HYMN  XLVTII.  Indra  Vaikun^ha. 

I  WAS  the  first  possessor  of  all  precious  gear :  the  wealth  of 

every  man  I  win  and  gather  up. 
On  me  as  on  a  Father  living  creatures  call :  I  deal  enjoyment 

to  the  man  who  offers  gifts. 

2  I,  Jndra,  am  Atharvan's  stay  and  firm  support :  I  brought  forth 

kine  to  Trita  from  the  Dragon's  grasp. 
I  stripped  the   Dasyus  of  their  manly  might,  and  gave   the 
cattle-stalls  toMatarisvan  and  Dadbyach. 

3  For  me  hath  Tvashtar  forged  the  iron  thunderbolt :  in  me  the 

Gods  have  centred  intellectual  power. 
My  sheen  is  like  the  Sun's  insufferably  bright :  men  honour 
me  as  Lord  for  past  and  future  deeds. 

'4  I  won  myself  these  herds  of  cattle,  steeds  and  kine,  and  gold 
in  ample  store,  with  my  destructive  bolt. 
I  give  full  many  a  thousand  to  the  worshipper,  what  time  the 
Somas  and  the  lauds  have  made  me  glad. 

5  Indra  am  I ;  none  ever  wins  my  wealth  from  me :  never  at 

any  time  am  I  a  thrall  to  death. 
Pressiug  the  Soma,  ask  riches  from  me  alone :  ye,  Piirus,  in 
my  friendship  shall  not  suffer  harm. 

6  These,  breathing  loud  in  fury,  two  and  two,  who  caused  Indr^i 

to  bring  his  bolt  of  thunder  to  the  fray. 
The    challengers,  I  struck  with   deadly  weapon  dow> :  firm 
stand  what  words  the  God  speaks  to  his  worshipj7<)ra* 

8  Unmatched :  cuamam :  *  not  held  ia  common.* — Wilso** 

Indra  Vaikuntha  is  the  Ilislii  of  this  hymn,  which  i»  a  self -laudatory  reply 
to  Saptagu  in  Hymn  XLVII. 

2  Atharvan  is  the  name  of  the  priest  who  fitist  obtained  fire  and  ofifered 
Soma  and  prayers  to  the  Gods.  See  I.  80.  16,  and  83,  5.  The  Dragon  is  ap- 
parently Ani  or  Vritra.  '  I  generated  the  waters  above  the  cloud  for  the  sake 
of  Trita.'— Wilson.  Mdtarifvan  and  Dadhyaeh :  or,  according  to  SAyaaa, 
'  HAtarisvan's  son  Dadhyaeh.' 

5  Yei Piirus:  * O  men.'— Wilson. 

6  These :  who  these  were  is  uncertain.  Two  and  two :  probabj/  the  war- 
rior who  fights  on  the  chariot  and  the  charioteer.— Lud wig.  TJxs  literal  trans- 
lation of  the  last  half-line  of  the  stanza  appears  to  be : — *  tH  non- worshipper 
speaking  firm  words  to  worshippers  ;  dnamasyu^,  he  whc>  has^  no  other  to  re- 
Terence,  being  Indra,  whose  promise  of  victory  to  h»*  worshippers  is  never 
broken.' — Ludwig. 

29 


460  TBB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

7  This  One  by  stronger  might  I  conquered  singly ;  yea,  also  two : 

shall  three  prevail  against  roe  ? 
Like  many  sheaves  upon  the  floor  I  thrash  theui.     How  can 
my  foes,  the  Indraless,  revile  roe  ? 

8  Against  the  Guugus  I  made  Atithigva  strong,   and  kept  him 

mid  the  folk  like  Vritra-conquering  strength, 
When  I  won  glory    in  the  great  foe-slaying   fight,  in  battle 
where  Karanja  fell,  and  Parnaya. 

9  With  food  for  mine  enjoyment  S^pya  Nami  came  :  he  joined 

roe  as  a  friend  of  old  in  search  of  kind. 
As  I  bestowed    on  him    an  arrow    for  the   fight  I  made   him 
worthy  of  the  song  and  hymn  of  praise. 

10  One  of  the  two  hath  Soma,  seen  within  it;  the  Herdsman  with 

the  bone  shows  forth  the  other. 
He,  fain  to  fight  the  Bull  whose  horns  were  sharpened,  stood 
fettered  in  the  demon's  ample  region. 

11  I,  as  a  God,  ne'er  violate  the  statutes  of  Gods,  of  Vasus,  Ru« 

driyas,  Adityas. 
These  Gods  have  formed  me  for  auspicious  vigour,  unoonquer- 
ed  and  invincible  for  ever. 

HYMN  XLIX.  Indra  Vaikimtha. 

I  HAVE  enriched  the  singer  with  surpassing  wealth ;  I  have  al- 
lowed the  holy  hymn  to  strengthen  me. 

I,  furtherer  of  him  who  offers  sacrifice,  have  conquered  in  each 
fight  the  men  who  worship  not. 

7  2Vti«  One  :  or,  this  one  thing,  that  is,  *  the  primordial  substance  or  unit 
out  of  whkh  the  universe  was  developed.' — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda, 
p.  58. 

8  Against  the  QungxM :  or,  to  aid  the  Gungns,  as  S4yapa  explains.  Who 
these  people  were  i6  uncertain.  A  tithigva :  Divoddsa,  son  of  Atithigu,  accord- 
ing to  Sdyana.  See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  Karanja  ..and  Parnaya:  apparently 
tree-demons  :  see  I.  53.  %. 

9  Sdpya :  a  family  name  bf  Indra's  friend  Nam!,  who  in  VI.  20.  6  is  called 
Sayya's  son. 

10  One  of  the  tivo :  the  Moon.  The  Herdsman :  Indra.  With  the  hont: 
of  Dadhyach.  See  I.  84.  13.  The  other :  Vritra.  He:  Vritra.  The  BvU: 
Ind»%.  The  demon's  ample  region :  mid-air,  which  was  then  dominated  by  th« 
Dinih  Or  malignant  spirit  of  drought.  1  follow  Prof.  Ludwig's  inter pretatiot 
of  thin  oujcure  stanza  which  is  evidently  an  interpolation  motived  by  tfc» 
mention  of  Badhyach  in  stanza  2.  For  a  somewhat  different  interpretatia^ 
see  Hillebrandt,  y,  M.,  I.  337. 

11  Rudriyas:  tht.  Maruts,  sons  of  Rudra. 


Jndru  Yaikuntha  is  the  ^lEYii  a\eo.  ^ 


SYMK  i^.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  451 

2  The  People  of  the  hearens,  the  waters,  and  the  earth  have 

stablished  me  among  the  Gods  with  Indra's  name. 

I  took  unto  myself  the  two  swift  vigorous  Bays  that  speed  on 
divers  paths,  aud  the  fierce  bolt  for  strength. 

3  With  deadly  blows  I  smote  Atka  for  Kavi's  sake  ;  I  guarded 

Katsa  well  with  these  my  saving  helps. 

As  Sushna's  slayer  I  brandished  the  dart  of  death  :  I  gave  not 
up  the  Aryan  name  to  Dasyu  foes. 

4  Smadibha,  Tugra,  and  the  Vetasus  I  gave  as  prey  to  Kutsa, 

father-like,  to  succour  him. 

I  was  a  worthy  King  to  rule  the  worshipper,  when  I  gave  Tuji 
dear  inviolable  gifts. 

5  I  gave  up  Mrigaya  to  Srutarvan  as  his  prey  because  he  ever 

followed  me  and  kept  my  laws. 

For  Ayn's  sake  I  caused  Ve9»  to  bend  and  bow,  and  into  Sa- 
vya's  hand  delivered  Pfxjgribbi. 

6  I,  I  crushed  Navava«tva  of  the   lofty  car,   the  D&sa,   as  the 

Vritra-slayer  ki2Is  the  fiends ; 
When  straightway  on  the  region's  farthest  edge  I  brought  the 
God  who  makes  the  lights  to  broaden  and  increase. 

7  I  travel  round  about  borne  onward  in  my  might  by  the  fleet- 

footed  dappled  Horses  of  the  Sun. 
When  man's  libation  calls  me  to  the  robe  of  state  I  soon  repel 
tb»  powerful  Dasyu  with  my  blows. 


3  Aika :  mentioned  again  in  Hymn  99  of  this  Book.  Kavi :  the  father  of 
Indra's  friend  Usanft. 

4  Smadibha :  or,  as  an  adjective  joined  with  Tugta,  'with  all  his  followers.' 
See  VI.  20.  8,  where  Vetava  and  Tugra  are  mentioned  as  having  been  con- 
quered by  Indra,  and  VI.  26.  4,  where  their  names  occur  again  together  with 
that  of  TujL 

5  Mrigaya:  a  demon  of  the  air.  See  IV.  16.  13,  and^VIII.  3.  19.  Srutarvan  : 
a  prince  whose  liberality  is  lauded  in  VIII.  63.  Ayu :  sometimes  spoken 
of  as  a  King  favoured  by  Indra  and  at  other  times  as  conquered  by  him.  See 
Index.  The  name  of  Vesa  does  not  occur  again.  Savya :  the  Ri»hi  of  Hymns 
5I__57  of  Book  I.  Padgribhi:  some  demon  or  savage  enemy  who  is  not 
mentioned  agedn. 

6  Navavdstva:  see  I.  86.  18,  and  VI.  20.  11.  Of  the  lofty  car:  or  Bri- 
luidratha  as  a  name  of  Navav&stva.  The  lights :  the  stars,  or  perhaps  light 
in  general.  In  the  former  case  the  God  would  be  Dyaus  or  Varuna,  and  in 
the  latter  case  SQrya  or  the  Sun.— Ludwig. 

7  The  robe  of  state:  apparently  the  milk  which  is  the  royal  mantle  where- 
with Soma  is  invested. 


4S2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  -^ 

8  Stronger  am  I  than  Nahus,  I  who  slew  the  seven  :  I  glorified 

with  might  Yadu  and  Turvasa. 
I  brought  another  low,  with  strength  I  bent  his  strength :  I 
let  the  mighty  nine-and-ninety  wax  in  power. 

9  Bull  over  all  the  streams  that  flow  along  the  earth,  I  took  the 

Seven  Eivers  as  miue  own  domain. 
I,  gifted  with  great  wisdom,  spread  the  floods  abroad  :  by  war 
I  found  for  man  the  way  to  high  success. 

10  I  set  within  these  cows  the  white  milk  which  no  Gkxl,  not  even 

Tvash tar's  self,  had  there  deposited, — 
Much-longed-for,  in  the  breasts,  the  udders  of  the  kine,  the 
savoury  sweets  of  meath,  the  milk  and  Soma  juice. 

1 1  Even  thus  hath  Indra  Maghavan,  truly  bounteous,  &ped  Gods 

and  men  with  uaighty  operation. 
The  pious  glorify  all  these  thine  exploits,  Lord  of  Bay  Cours- 
ers, Strong,  and  Self-rc«pleudent. 

HYMIS  L.  Indra  Vaikuniha. 

I  LAUD  your  Mighty  One  who  joyeth  in  the  juice,  him  who  is 

shared  by  all  men,  who  created  all ; 
Indra,  whose  conquering  strength  is  powerful  in  war,  whose 

fame  and  manly  vigour  Heaven  and  Earth  revere. 

2  He  with  his  friend  is  active,  lauded,  good  to  man,  Indra  who 

must  be  glorified  by  one  like  me. 
Hero,  Lord  of  the  brave,  all  cars  are  thy  delight,  warring  with 
Vritra,  or  for  waters,  or  for  spoil. 

3  Who  are  the  men  whom  thou  wilt  further,  Indra,  who  strive 

to  win  thy  bliss  allied  with  riches  ? 
Who  urged  thee  forward  to  exert  thy  power  divine,  to  valour, 
in  the  war  for  waters  on  their  fields  ? 


than 


8  Stronger  am  I  than  Nahua :  ndhusho  ndhuahtarah  ;  literally,  more  Nahui 
v«an  Nahus  ;  I  out-Nahus  Nahus,  a  King  who  contended  with  Indra  ;  *  I  am 
nearer  than  the  neighbour/  accordiDg  to  Koth  whom  Grassmann  followa. 
•  I  am  the  especial  bond  of  bonds.* — Wilson.  I  follow  Ludwig's  interpretation. 
/  w?io  slew  the  seven :  the  seven,  perhaps,  are  the  chief  of  the  demons  dm- 
troyed  by  Indra.  Ludwig  takes  taptahX  to  mean  *  seven  times' : — *  I  a9 
■even  times  stronger  than  Nahus.'  A  nother :  whom,  is  uncertain.  Wax  ti 
power :  until  they  became  worthy  antagonists.  *  I  have  demolished  ninety 
and-nine  powerful  (foes).' — Wilson. 

10  Milk  and  Soma  juice :  sweet  ambrosial  rain ;  the  kine  being  the  teeming 
clouds. 

11  In  this  stanza  Indra  as  Rishi  addresses  himself  as  the  deity  of  thehjrma 

2  His  friend :  his  constant  companion,  the  thunderbolt. 
S  Allied  with  richet :    the  happiness  which    Indra  sends  being  given  ii , 
return  for  costly  sacri&cial  offet*mg%. 


BYMKf  51.]  TBE  RIOVEDA.  458 

4  Thou,  Indra,   through  the  holy  prayer  art  mighty,  worthy  of 

sacrifice  at  all  libations. 
In  every  fight  thou  castest  heroes  on  the  ground  :  thou  art  the 
noblest  song,  0  Lord  of  all  the  folk, 

5  Help  now,  as  Highest,  those  who  toil  at  sacrifice :  well  do  the 

pleople  know  thy  great  protecting  might. 
Thou  shalt  be  Everlasting,  Giver  of  success  :  yea,  on  all  these 
libations  thou  bestowest  strength. 

6  AU  these  libations  thou  makest  effectual,  of  which  thou  art 

thyself  supporter.  Son  of  Power. 
TherefcMre  thy  vessel  is  to  be  esteemed  the  best,  sacrifice,  holy 
text,  prayer,  and  exalted  speech. 

7  They  who  with  flowing  Soma  pray  to  thee,  0  Sage,  to  pour  on 

them  thy  gifts  of  opulence  and  wealth, 
May  they  come  forward,  through  their  spirit,  on  tlie  path  of 
bliss,  in  the  wild  joy  of  Soma  juice  effused. 

HYMN  LI.  Agni.  Goda. 

Large  was  that  covering,  and  firm  of  texture,  folded  wherein 
thou  enteredst  the  waters. 

One  Deity  alone,  0  Jatavedas  Agni,  saw  all  thy  forms  in  sun- 
dry places. 

2  What  God  hath  seen  me  ?  Who  of  all  their  number  clearly  be- 

held my  forms  in  many  places  ? 
Where  lie,  then,  all  the  sacred  logs  of  Agni  that  l«ad  him  God- 
ward,  Varuna  and  Mitra  ? 

3  In  many  places,  Agni  J&tavedas,  we  sought  chee  hidden  in  the 

plants  and  waters. 
Then  Yama  marked  thee,  God  of  wondr/»us  splendour!  effulgent 
from  thy  tenfold  secret  dwelling. 


4  Song :  mdntrah :  subject  of  tby  worsKPpers'  songs  of  praise. 
6  Vessel  .•  pdtram :  *  protection.' — WIIp'D. 

The  legend  says  that  Agni,  fear^g  to  share  the  fate  of  his  three  elder 
brothers  who  had  perished  in  tt<*  service  of  the  Gods,  fled  away  and  hid 
himself  in  the  waters.  The  i^ods  discovered  him  and  persuaded  him  to 
return  to  his  sacred  duties* 

Stanzas  1,  3,  5,  7,  9  »fe  spoken  by  the  Gods,  and  2,  4,  6,  8  by  Agni. 

1  He  must  have  heen  very  well  wrapped  up,  the  Gods  ironically  say,  or  the 
water  would  have  extinguished  him. — Ludwig.     Forms :  literally,  *  bodies.' 

2  Sacred  logs :  pieces  of  Samt  and  Asvattha  wood,  from  which  alone  the 
sacrificial  fire  is  produced.     Others  explain  samidha}i  by  *  flames.' 

8  Thy  tenfold  secret  dwelling :  according  to  Bftyana,  *  the  three  worlds,-*- 
heaven,  mid-air,  earth  ;  three  divinities,  Agni,  Vftyu,  Aditya  ;  the  waters, 
the  shrubs,  the  trees,  and  the  bodies  of  living  beings.' — Wilson.     The  mean- 
ing appears  to  be,  as  Ludwig  conjectures,  that  Tama  knew  tbKt  k^igcA.  ^^\W 
appear  again  from  the  Bre-sticka  worked  by  the  ^n^era  ol  \)q\)[i\a.u^. 


454  THE  HYMNS  OF  IBOOK  X 

4  I  fled  in  fear  from  sacrificial  worship,  Varuna,  lest  the  Gods 

should  thus  engage  me. 
Thus  were  my  forms  laid  down  in  many  places.     This,  as  my 
goal,  I  Agni  saw  before  me. 

5  Come ;  man  is  pious  and  would  fain  do  worship ;  he  waits  pre- 

pared :  in  gloom  thou,  Agni,  dwellest. 
Make  pathways  leading  God- ward  clear  and  easy,  and  bear  ob- 
lations with  a  kindly  spirit. 

6  This  goal  mine  elder  brothers  erst  selected,  as  he  who  drives  a 

car  the  way  to  travel. 
So,  Varuna,  I  fled  afar  through  terror,  as  flies  the  wild-bull 
from  an  archer's  bowstring. 

7  We  give  thee  life  unwasting,  JS,tavedas,  so  that,^  employed, 

thou  never  shalt  be  injured. 

So,  nobly  bom  !  shalt  thou  with  kindly  spirit  bear  to  the  Gods 
their  share  of  men's  oblations. 

8  Grant  me  the  first  oblations  and  the  latter,  entire,  my  force- 

ful share  of  holy  presents. 
The  soul  of  plants,  the  fatness  of  the  waters,  and  let  there  be 
long  life,  ye  Gods,  to  Agni. 

9  Thine  be  the  first  oblations  and  the  latter,  entire,  thy  forceful 

shares  of  holy  presents. 
Let  all  this  sacrifice  be  thine,  0  Agni,  and  let  the  world's  four 
regions  \)ow  before  thee. 

/  HYMN  LII.  GodB. 

Instruct  me,  all  ^^  Gods,  how  I,  elected  your  Priest,  must 

seat  me  here,  and  Vow  address  you. 
Instruct  me  how  to  deal  to  each  his  portion,  and  by  what  path 

to  bring  you  man's  oblw^ion. 

2  I  sit  as  Priest  most  skilled  iu  sacrificing :  the  Maruts  and  all 
Deities  impel  me. 

Asvins,  each  day  yours  is  the  Adhva^yus'  duty  :  Brahman  and 
wood  are  here  :  'tis  yours  to  offer. 


8  The  first  oblations  cmd  the  latter:  or  the  Prayftjas  and  tVe  Anuy&jas,  th« 
former  being  texts  and  oblations  forming  part  of  the  introductory  cet  emooy 
at  a  Soma  sacrifice,  and  the  latter  the  secondary  or  final  offerings.  Forc^ 
share :  the  potent  concentrated  portion.  The  fatness :  ghritdm :  ghi,  clarified 
butter. 

1  Agni,  having  been  elected  0\A«L\»\oii-\i^wet^  wks  the  Gods  to  instrud 
bim  in  hia  duties. 


HYSiN  63.]  THE  filOVBDA.  465 

3  Who  is  this  Priest?  Is  he  the  Priest  of  Yama?  On  whom  is 

thrust  this  God-appointed  honour? 
He  springs  to  life  each  month,  each  day  that  passes ;  so  Gods 
have  made  him  their  oblation-bearer. 

4  The  Gods  have  made  me  bearer  of  oblations,  who  slipped  away 

and  passed  through  many  troubles. 
Wise  Agni  shall  ordain  for  us  the  worship,  whether  five-wayed, 
threefold,  or  seven-threaded. 

5  So  will  I  win  you  strength  and  life  for  ever,  O  Gods,  that  I 

may  give  you  room  and  freedom. 
To  Indra's   arms    would  I  consign  the  thunder;  in  all   these 
battles  shall  he  then  be  victor. 

6  The  Deities,  three  thousand  and  three  hundred  and  thirty- 

nine,  have  served  and  honoured  Agni, 
Strewn  sacred  grass,  anointed  him  with  butter,  and  seated 
him  as  Priest,  the  Gods'  Invoker. 

HYMN  LIII.  Agni  Sauchika.  GodB. 

Hb  hath  arrived,  he  whom  we  sought  with  longing,  who  skil- 

led  in  sacrifice  well  knows  its  courses. 
Let  him  discharge  his  sacrificial  duties :  let  him  sit  down  as 

Friend  who  was  before  «*&• 
2  Best  Priest,  he  ha^  been  won  by  being  seated,  for  he  hath 

looked  on  tbts  well-ordered  viands. 
Come,  let  us   worship  Gods    who  must    be  worshipped,  and 

pouring  oil,  laud  those  who  should  be  lauded. 


8  The  first  line  is  spoken  by  some  God  who  doubts  Agai's  competence.  li 
he  the  Priest  of  Yama  ?  :  can  he  convey  ofiferiiigs  to  the  Blest  in  the  realms  of 
the  God  of  the  departed  ?  In  the  second  half  of  tbe  firdt  line  I  follow  Lud- 
wig,  but  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Tbe  second  line  is  the  aaswer  of  another 
God.  Each  months  each  day :  the  Pitrlyaj^a^  or  sacrifice  to  the  Fathers,  is 
offered  monthly,  and  the  Agnihotra,  or  oblation  to  Agni  and  the  Gods,  daily. 
These  cumprehend  aU  other  periodical  rites. 

4  The  first  line  is  spoken  by  Agni.  Slipped  away:  see  the  preceding  hymn. 
The  second  line  i?  what  the  Godd  said.  Five-ioayed  :  consisting  of  five  courses 
or  parts,  seeX.  124.  1.  Threefold:  consisting  of  the  three  daily  Soma-libatious, 
see  X.  124.  1.     Seven-threaded:  performed  by  seven  priests.     See  X.  124.  1. 

Stanza  5  is  spoken  by  Agni.     Stanza  6  is  the  poet's  conclusion. 

For  an  explanation  of  the  number  of  the  Gods  (33  +  303  +  3003)  see  The 
jffymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  X.  7.  13,  note. 

On  Hymns  51—53  see  Macdonell,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  January,  1894,  pp.  11-— 22. 

1  The  Gods  speak.     CouvBes :  or  portions. 

2  By  being  seatel:  'by  his  seat  (at  the  altar).' — WiVboxi, 


466  THE  HYMNS  OP  IBOOK  X 

3  Now  hath  h«  made   the  feast  of  Gods  efifective  :  now  have  we 

found   the  secret  tongue  of  worship. 
Now  hath  he  come,  sweet,  robed  in  Tital  vigour,  and  made  our 
calling  on  the  Gods  efifective. 

4  This  prelude  of  my  speech  I  now  will  utter,  whereby  we  Gods 

may  quell  our  Asura  foemen. 
Eaters  of  strengthening  food  who  merit  worslup,  O  ye  Five 
Tribes,  be  pleased  with  mine  oblation. 

5  May  the  Five  Tribes  be  pleased  with  mine  oblation,  and  tkie 

Cow's  Sons  and  all  who  merit  worship. 
From  earthly  trouble  may  the  earth  protect  «s,  and  lur's  mid 
realm  from  woe  that  comes  from  heaven. 

6  Spinning  the  thread,  follow  the  region's  splendid  light :  goaid 
^  thou  the  pathways  well  which  wisdom  hath  prepared. 

Weave  ye  the  knotless  labour  of  the  bards  who  sing  :  be  Mann 
thott,  and  bring  the  Hefkvenly  People  forth. 

7  Lovers  ef  S^^toa,  bind  the  chariot  traces  fast :  set  ye  the  reins 

in  order  and  esibellish  them. 
Bring  hitherward   the  car  with  seats  where  eight  may  sit, 
whereon  the  Gods  have  brought  the  treasure  that  we  love. 

8  Here  flows  Asmauvat! :  hold  fast  each  other,  keep  yourselves 
y  up,  and  pass,  my  friends,  tVi«  river. 

There   let  us  leave  the  Powers  thiwt  brought  no  profit,  and 
cross  the  flood  to  Powers  that  are  auapicious. 

9  Tvashtar,  most  deft  of  workmen,  knew  each  magic  art,  bring- 

ing most  blessed  bowls  that  hold  the  drink  of  Gods. 
His  axe,  wrought  of  good  metal,  he  is  sharpening  iu)w,  where- 
with the  radiant  Brahmauaspati  will  cut. 

8  Tongue  of  worship :  Agni,  by  whose  fiery  tongues  the  Gods  drink  libationa. 

4  Agni  speaks.  Asura  foemen :  the  Asuras  in  the  later  hymns  of  the  Veda 
are  evil  spirits  in  perpetual  hostility  with  the  Gods,  not  to  be  confounded  with 
the  great  celestial  Asuras,  the  chiefs  of  the  Gods,  nor  with  the  R&kshaaaa,  de- 
mons  or  ogres,  who  disturb  the  sacrifices  of  men. 

5  The  Five  THbes :  according  to  some,  says  Tftska,  *  the  Gandharvas,  goda, 
Fathers,  Asuras,  and  K&kshasas/  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  177.  But  the  five 
Aryan  tribes  may  be  intended.  The  Cow's  Sons:  the  Maruts,  children  of 
Prisni.  Von  Roth  explains  g^'dtdh  as  *  born  in  the  starry  heaven.'  See  VIL 
35.14. 

6  The  Gods  speak.  The  region* s  splendid  light :  the  Sun.  Weave  ye  :  flames 
of  Agni.  Assist  the  singer  in  his  holy  task  and  let  there  be  no  difficultia 
in  his  way. 

7  This  stanza  appears  to  begin  a  new  hymn,  made  up  of  fragments.  Accord- 
ing to  Siyana  it  is  spoken  by  the  Gods  to  one  another. 

8  Asmanvatt:  or,  the  stony  stream.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda, 
XII.  2*.  26. 

9  Will  cut :  perhaps,  will  cut  and  destroy   demons  ;  but  the   meaning  if 
uncertaiu. 


SYMN  54.]  TBB  RIOVEDA.  467 

1€  Now,  O  ye  Sapient  Ones,  make  ye  the  axes  sharp  wherewith 
ye  fashion  bowls  to  hold  the  Amrita. 
Knowing  the  secret  places  make  ye  ready  that  whereby  the 
Gods  have  gotten  immortality. 

11   Ye  with  a  secret  tongue  and  dark  intention  laid  the    maiden 
deep  within,  the  calf  within  the  mouth. 
They  evermore  are  near  us  with  their  gracious  help  :  successful 
is  the  song  that  strives  for  victory. 

HYMN  LIV.  Indra. 

I  SING  thy  fame  that,  Maghavan,  through  thy  greatness  the 
heavens  and  earth  invoked  thee  in  their  terror, 

Thou,  aiding  Gods,  didst  quell  the  power  of  D4sas,  what  time 
thou  holpest  many  a  race,  0  Indra. 

2  When  thou  wast  roaming,  waxen  strong  in  body,  telling  thy 
might,  Indra,  among  the  people. 
All  that  men  called  thy  battles  was  illusion  :  no  foe  hast  thou 
to-day,  nor  erst  hast  found  one. 

3  Who  are  the  Bishis,  then,  who  comprehended  before  our  time 

the  bounds  of  all  thy  greatness  ? 
For  from  thy  body  thou  hast  generated  at  the  same  time  the 
Mother  and  the  Father. 

4  Thou,    Mighty  Steer,  hast  four   supremest  natures,    Asura 

natures  that  may  ne'er  be  injured. 
All  these,  O  Maghavan,  thou  surely  knowest,  wherewith  thou 
hast  performed  thy  great  achievements. 

5  Thou  hast  all  treasures  in  thy  sole  possession,  treasures  made 

manifest  and  treasures  hidden. 

\Q  0  ye  Sapient  Ones  :  ye  Ilibhus.  That :  perhaps  Amrita  or  celestial  Soma 
juice.     Cf.  I.  20.  6;  110.  3. 

11  The  first  line  is  obscure.  '(The  Maruts)  placed  a  female  in  the  enrelop- 
ing  hide  (of  a  dead  cow),  and  a  calf  in  the  mouth  (of  a  dead  cow).' — Wilson. 
According  to  this  interpretation  the  miracle  ascribed  to  them  would  somewhat 
resemble  that  mentioned  in  I.  110.  8.  See  Bergaigoe,  Za  ^/i(^t<m  V4diquef 
II.  27.  The  first  half  of  the  second  line  is  hard  to  construe.  Wilson  para- 
phrases the  line  : — *  daily  the  generous  (fraternity  of  the  Ribhus)  offers  suita- 
ble praises  (to  the  gods),  granting  victory  over  our  foes.*  Prof.  Geldner  takes 
Icdra,  against  the  Pada  text,  as  a  locative,  and  renders  the  last  half-line  to 
the  following  effect : — *  *May  he  (the  sacrificer),  when  he  wishes  to  win,  gain 
the  victory  in  the  race.* 

3  The  question  is  rhetorical.  The  great  Rishis  of  the  olden  time  could  not 
comprehend  thy  greatness,  much  less  can  we  comprehend  it. 

The  Mother  and  the  Father  :  Earth  and  Heaven,  parents  of  all.  See  M. 
Miiller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  ust,  p.  161. 

4  Asura:  diviue,  with  a  vague  sense  of  Bupreme  g;ra,Vid«\XT . 


458  THE  UYMXS  OF  [BOOK  1 

Defer  not  thou,  0  Maghavan,  my  longing :  thou  art  Director, 
Indra,  thou  art  Giver. 

6  To  him  who  set  the  light  in  things  of  splendour,  and  with  all 
sweetness  blent  essential  sweetness, 
To  Indi*a  hath    this  welcome   hymn  that  strengthens  been 
uttered  by  the  votary  Brihadnktha. 

HYMN  LV.  Indra. 

Far  is  that  secret  name  by  which,  in  tenor,  the  worlds  invoked 

thee  and  thou  gavest  vigour. 
The  earth  and  heaven  thou  settest  near  each  other,  and,  Ma- 

ghavan,  madest  bright  thy  Brother's  Children. 

2  Great  is  that  secret  name  and  far-extending,  whereby  thou 

madest  all  that  is  and  shall  be. 
The  Five  Tribes  whom  he  loveth  well  have  entered  the  light 
he  loveth  that  was  made  aforetime. 

3  He  filled  the  heavens  and  earth  and  all  between  them,  Gods 

five  times  sevenfold  in  their  proper  seasons. 
With  fou?-and-thirty  lights  he  looks  around  him,  lights  of  one 
colour  though  their  ways  are  divot's. 

4  As  first  among  the  lights,  0  Dawn,  thou  shonest,  whereby  thou 

brijughtest  forth  the  Stay  of  Increase, 
Great  art  thou,  matchless  is  thine  Asura  nature,  who,  high 
above,  art  kin  to  those  beneath  thee. 

5  The  old  hath  waked  the  young  Moon  from  his  slumber  who 

runs  his  circling  course  with  many  round  him. 

6  Who  set  the  light :  the  first  essential  light. 

1  Far  is  that  secret  name :  thou  art  not  present  with  us  now.  In  terror  : 
terrified  by  Vritra.  Thy  Brother's  Children:  according  to  S&yana,  Indra's 
brother  is  Parjanya,  the  God  of  the  rain-cloud,  and  his  children  are  the  gath- 
ered waters.     Varuna  and  his  stars  are  probably  intended. — Ludwig. 

3  Gods  Jive  times  sevenfold :  *  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  original  Gods 
were  the  constellations.'— Ludwig.  According  to  S&ya|ia,  the  five  orders  of 
beings  atid  the  classes  of  seven ;  that  is,  Gods,  men,  Fathers  and  RAkahasas, 
and  the  seven  troops  of  Maruts,  the  seven  rays  of  the  Sun,  the  seven  senses, 
etc.  The  four-and-thirty  llf/hts :  are  probably  the  sun,  moon,  and  five  plnnets, 
and  the  twenty-seven  lunar  asterisms  or  mansions  of  the  moon.  According 
to  SAyaia,  the  fourand  thirty  are  eight  Vasus,  eleven  Rudras,  twelve  Adityas, 
PrajApati,  VashatkAra,  and  VirAj. 

4  77t"  Stay  of  Increiise:  that  which  is  the  foundation  and  support  of  all  sub- 
sisteucc;  according  to  S:\yana,  the  Sun.  Art  kin  to  those  beneath  thee:  art 
allied  and  cotmected  with  men  as  provider  of  their  food.  The  second  Hue  is 
difficult,  and  is  diflferently  interpreted  by  others. 

5  Sdyaiia  explains  this  stanza  differently,  making  Indra,  identified  with 
Time,  the  subject.  I  follow  Lud wig's  interpretation  (Commentary,  II.  p.  203) 
which  seems  to  be  nearer  to  the  sense  of  the  words,  and  is  simpler  and  more 

rational.   WUk  many  round  hiin :  aUra  o£  the  asterisms  through  which  he  passes. 


HYMN  56.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  459 

Behold  the  Gods'  high  wisdom  in  its  greatness  :  he  who  died 
yesterday  to-day  is  living. 

6  Strong  is  the  Red  Bird  in  his  strength,  great  Hero,  who  from 

of  old  hath  had  no  nest  to  dwell  in. 
That  which  he  knows  is  truth  and  never  idle :  he  wins  and 
gives  the  wealth  desired  of  many. 

7  Through  these  the  Thunderer  gained  strong  manly  vigour, 

through  whom  he  waxed  in  power  to  smite  down  Vritra, — 
Who  through  the  might  of   Indra's  operation  came  forth  as 
Gois  in  course  of  Law  and  Order. 

8  All-strong,  performing  works  with  his  companion,  All-marking, 

rapid  Victor,  Curse-averter, 
The  Hero,  waxing,  after  draughts  of  Soma,  blew  far  from  heav- 
en the  Dasyus  with  his  weapon. 

HYMN  LVI.  Viavedevas. 

Here  is  one  light  for  thee,  another  yonder :  enter  the  third  and 

be  therewith  united. 
Uniting  with  a  body  be  thou  welcome,  dear  to  the  Gods  in  their 

sublimest  birth-place. 

2  Bearing  thy  body,  V&jin,  may  thy  body  afford  us  blessing  and 

thyself  protection. 
Unswerving,  stablish  as  it  were  in  heaven  thine  own  light  as 
the  mighty  Gods*  supporter. 

3  Strong  Steed  art  thou :  go  to  the  yearning  Maidens  with  vigour, 

happily  go  to  heaven  and  praises : 


6  The  Red  Bird :  the  Sun,  with  whom  ludra  is  identified. 

7  Through  thete:  probably  the  stars  are  intended.  '(Accompanied)  by 
these  Maruts.' — Wilson. 

8  His  companion :  the  thunderbolt. 

*  The  mystical  union  of  the  Fathers  with  the  rays  of  light  is  the  funda- 
mental idea  underlying  the  abstruse  allusions '  of  this  funeral  bymp.  '  The 
poet  bids  the  deceased  man  unite  himself  with  the  beams  of  the  heavenly 
light ;  he  takes  occasion  to  celebrate  the  power  and  greatness  of  the  Fathers, 
to  whom  the  spirit  of  the  departed  is  journeying  ;  and  ends  with  a  statement 
of  the  success  of  the  journey  for  which  he  has  prayed.'  See  Wallis,  Cos- 
mology of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  72,  73. 

1  One  light :  the  earthly  fire  of  the  funeral  pile.  Another :  in  the  firma- 
ment. The  third :  the  light  in  the  highest  region  above  the  firmament.  A 
body  :  a  new  body  after  cremation.     Their  sublimest  birth-place :  the  Sun. 

2  Vdjm :  apparently  the  name  of  the  deceased,  the  son  of  Brihaduktha 
the  Ilishi  of  the  hymn.  The  word  means  originally  '  strong,  strong  steed* 
as  in  stanza  3. 

8  The  yearning  Maidens :  perhaps  the  Dawns  ;  hut  the  meaning  of  suventh 
is  uncertain.     To  heaven  and  praises :    *  to  the  (land  of)  ^ma^^  ^u^  !<:»  ^Xil^ 
Bky/— Wallis. 


4«0  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  t 

Fly  happily  to  the  Gods  with  easy  passage,  according  to  the 
first  aud  faithful  statutes. 

4  Part  of  their  grandeur  have  the  Fathers   also  gained:  the 

Gods  have  seated  mental  power  in  them  as  Gods. 
They  have  emhraced  within  themselves  all  energies,  which, 
issuing  forth,  again  into  their  bodies  pass. 

5  They  strode  through  all  the  region  with  victorious  might,  es- 

tablishing the  old  immeasurable  laws. 
They  compassed  in  their  bodies  all  existing  things,  and  stream- 
ed forth  ofifspriog  in  many  successive  forms. 

6  In  two  ways  have  the  sons  established  in  his  place  the  Asum 

who  finds  the  light ;  by  the  third  act. 
As  fathers,  they  have  set  their  heritage  on  earth,  their  off- 
spring, as  a  thread  continuously  spun  out. 

7  As  in  a  ship  through  billows,  so  through  regions  of  air,  with 

blessings,  through  all  toils  and  troubles 
Hath  Brihaduktha  brought  his  seed  wiUi  glory,  and  placed  it 
here  and  in  the  realms  beyond  us. 

HYMN  LVII.  Vigvedevas. 

Let  us  not,  Indra,  leave  the  path,  the  Soma-preBser*s  sacrifice : 
Let  no  malignity  dwell  with  us. 

2  May  we  obtain,  completely  wrought,  the  thread  spun  out  to 
reach  the  Gods, 
That  perfecteth  the  sacrifice. 


4  Of  their  grandeur :  of  the  greatness  of  the  Gods. 

5  Establishing  the  old  imineasurahle  laws  :  or,  in  accordance  with  the  more 
generally  received  interpretation  of  dh^mdni  here,  *  measuring  ancient 
stations  never  measured  out.' 

6  In  two  ways :  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  The  sons  :  explained  by  S&yami 
as  the  Angirases,  sons  of  Aditya.  The  Fathers  in  general  appear  to  be  in- 
tended. The  Asura :  Agni.  The  third  a>ct :  or  third  sacred  duty,  that  of 
continuing  their  family ;  religious  study  and  sacrifice  being  the  first  and 
second. — Sftyana. 

7  Placed  it  here  and  in  the  realm  beyond  us :  established  his  ofifbpring  ia 
heavenly  regions  as  well  as  here  upon  earth. 

Mr  Wallis,  from  whose  translation  I  have  borrowed,  remarks  : — *  The  in- 
terpretation of  one  or  two  expressions  is  uncertain  ;  the  general  sense  is 
clear.  The  rays  of  light  are  here  the  bodies  of  the  fathers,  which  emanate 
from  the  sun,  assume  the  forms  of  all  things  on  the  earth  and  of  the  later 
sacrificers,  the  descendants  of  the  fathers,  and  again  return  to  their  birUi- 
place  in  the  sky  from  which  they  had  extended  themselves.* — Cosmology  tj 
the  Rigveda,  pp.  74,  76. 

For  Prof.  MaxMUller's  translation  of  Hymns  57 — 60,  with  the  legend  feund- 
ed  upon  them,  and  ample  elucidebtVve  m.%\>\AT,  %^%  3q>3lt\>a.I  B.  A.  S.^  VoL  IL  Pert 
//.,  1866,  pp.  426—466. 


JTMN  68.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  4«1 

3  We  call  the  spirit  hither  with  the  Soma  of  our  parted  sires, 
Yea,  with  the  Fathers'  holj  hymns. 

4  Tliy  spirit  come  to  thee  again  for  wisdom,  energy,  and  life, 
Ttiat  thou  mayst  long  behold  tKe  sun  ! 

5  0  Fathers,  may  the  Heavenly  Folk  give  us  our  spirit  once  again, 
That  we  may  be  with  those  who  live. 

6  O  SoQia,  with  the  spirit  still  within  us,  blest  with  progeny. 
May  we  be  busied  in  thy  law. 

HYMN  LVIII.  Manas  or  Spirit. 

Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  Yama,  to  Vivas  van's  Son, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

2  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  that  passed  away  to  earth  and 

heaven. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

3  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  away  to  the  four-cornered  earth. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

4  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

5  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  away  unto  the  billowy  sea. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

6  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  beams  of  light  that  flash  and 

flow. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

7  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  went  to  the  waters  and  the 

plants. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

8  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  that  visited  the  Sun  and  Dawn, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

3  The  spirit :  of  the  deceased  whose  obsequies  are  performed.  Of  our  sires : 
idrdsahsina :  explained  as  meaning,  suited  to  man ;  that  is  to  deified  men, 
he  Fathers  or  Spirits  of  the  Blest. 

The  hymn  is  an  address  to  recall  the  fleeting  spirit  of  a  man  at  the  point  of 
leath. 
7   Waters .plants:  of.  X,  16.  3. 


462  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

9  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away,  away  to  lofty  mountain  heights, 
We  cause  to  corae  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

10  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  into  this  All  that  lives  and 

moves, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

1 1  Thy  Rpirit,  that  went  far  away  to  distant  realms  beyond  our  ken, 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again  that  thou  mayst  live  and  so- 
journ here. 

12  Thy  spirit,  that  went  far  away  to  all  that  is  and  is  to  be. 
We  cause  to  come  to  thee  again   that   thou   mayst   live  and 

sojourn  here. 

I'lX.  Nirriti  and  Otieni 

His  life  hath  been  renewed  and  carried  forward  as  two  men, 

car-borne,  by  the  skilful  driver. 
One  falls,  then  seeks  the  goal    with   quickened   vigour.    Let 

Nirriti  depart  to  distant  places. 

2  Here  is  the  psalm  for  wealth,  and   food,  in   plenty  :  let  us  do 

many  deeds  to  bring  us  glory.. 
All  these  our  doings   shall   delight   the   singer.     Let   Nirriti 
depart  to  distant  places. 

3  May  we  o'ercome  our  foes  with  acts   of  valour,  as    heaven  is 

over  earth,  hills  over  lowlands. 
All  these  our  deeds  the  singer  hath    considered.     Let    Nirriti 
depart  to  distant  places. 

4  Give  us  not  up  as  prey  to  death,    0  Soma  :  still   let   us  look 

upon  the  Sun  arising. 
Let  our  old  age    with   passing    days    be   kindly.  Let    Nirtiti 
depart  to  distant  places. 

5  0  Asuntti,  keep  the  soul  within  us,  and   make    the    days  we 

have  to  live  yet  longer. 
Grant  that  we  still  may  look  upon  the    sunlight  :  strengthen 
thy  body  with  the  oil  we  bring  thee. 


1  Hi8  life  :  the  life  of  Subandhu  one  of  the  Rishis  of  the  hymn.  Accord- 
ing to  SAyana  the  first  line  is  a  prayer  :— *  May  the  life  of  Subandhu  be 
augmented  so  as  to  be  more  lasting  and  newer.  * — Wilson.  Subandhu  is  sol 
mentioned  in  the  text.  Two  men :  the  warrior  and  the  charioteer.  OntfaBM: 
SAyana  explains  differently  : — *  he  who  falls  (from  life)  increases  (his)  desire 
to  live.' — Wilson.     Nirriti :  the  Goddess  of  death  and  destruction. 

5  Asuntti:  apparently  the  personification  of  a  deity  presiding  over  fanenlii 
It  may  he  a  name  for  Yama,  or  \t  in«^  wi^wv  *  v;vx\d^  to  life,'  or  '  way  to  lilii* 
See  Muir,  0  S,  Textt,  Y.  297 ,  aud  Bftt^w^xi*,  La.  Re\^\w  Yi^.\^^^*^V<4^,    ' 


HYMN  60.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  488 

6  Give  us  our  sight  again,    O  Asuniti,  give  us  again   our  breath 

and  our  enjoyment. 
Long  may    we    look   upon    the    Sun   uprising ;  0    Anumati, 
favour  thou  and  bless  us. 

7  May  Earth  restore  to  us   our   vital    spirit,  may    Heaven    the 

Goddess  and  mid-air  restore  it. 
May  Soma  give  us  once  again   our    body,    and    Pushan    show 
the  Path  of  peace  and  comfort. 

8  May  both  Worlds  bless    Subandhu,  young   Mothers   of  ever- 

lasting Law. 
May  Heaven  and  Earth  uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame 
away  :  nor  sin  nor  sorrow  trouble  thee. 

9  Health-giving  medicines  descend  sent    dowu    from   heaven  in 

twos  and  threes, 
Or  wandering  singly  on  the  earth.    May    Heaven   and    Eai-th 

uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame  away  :  nor    bin    nor 

sorrow  trouble  thee. 
10  Drive  forward  thou    the    wagon-ox,  O    Indra,  which   brought 

Usluaralni's  wagon  hither. 
May  Heaven  and  Earth  uproot  and  sweep  iniquity  and  shame 

away  :  nor  sin  nor  sorrow  trouble  thee. 

HYMN   LX.  Asam&ti  and  Others. 

Bringing  our  homage  we  have  come   to  one  magnificent  in 

look. 
Glorified  of  the  mighty  Gods  ; 

2    To  Asamslti,  spring  of  gifts,  lord  of  the  brave,  a  radiant  car. 
The  conqueror  of  Bhajeratha  ; 


6  AnumcUi  :  a  personification  of  the  favour  with  which  the  Gods  regard 
the  sacrifices  and  prayers  of  the  pious.  'Gracious  (goddess).' — Wilson. 

8  Iniquity  and  shame  :  rdpaSj  according  to  Williams's  Dictionary  means, 
defect,  fault,  sin  ;  hurt,  injury.  In  bis  Commentary  on  I.  69.  4,  S4yana 
paraphrases  rdpdnsi,  the  plural  of  the  word,  by  hddhakdni  rdkshasddtnif  dis- 
turbing R&ksbasas,  etc. 

9  In  ttoos  and  threes  :  according  to  SAyana,  in  the  persons  of  the  two 
Asvins  and  of  the  three  Goddesses  I1&,  Sarasvati,  an^  Bbftratt 

10  Ustnardni  must  mean  the  wife  of  Uslnara,  chief  of  the  Ustuaras  who 
are  mentioned  in  later  times  as  living  in  Madhyadesa  or  the  Midland  country. 
The  meaning  of  the  line  is  not  obvious. 

Stanzas  8,  9,  10,  which  Prof.  Grassmann  places  in  his  Appendix,  are  of  a 
dififerent  character  from  that  of  the  preceding  part  of  the  hymn,  and  seem 
to  be  a  separate  song  or  fragment  of  a  song. 

2  Asamdti:  according  to  S&yana,  the  name  of  a   King.   But  the   word  is 
more  probably  an  adjective,  as  in  stanza  5,  qualifying  rdtAam,  car,  and  signi- 
fying \meq nailed.     Bhajeratha :  it  is  uncertain  whether  this  is  the  na.\si<&  ^1  «^ 
prince  or  of  a  country. 


464  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

3  Who,  when  the  spear  hath  armed  his  hand,  or  even  weaponless 

overthrows 
Men  strong  as  bufifaloes  in  fight ; 

4  Him  in  whose  service  flourishes    Ikshvaku,  rioh    and  dazzling- 

bright 
As  the  Five  Tribes  that  are  in  heaven. 

5  ludra,  support  the  princely  power  of  Rathaproshthas  matched 

by  none, 
Even  as  the  Sun  for  all  to  see. 

6  Thou  for  Agastya's  sister's  sons  yokest  thy  pair  of  ruddy 

steeds. 

Thou  troddest  niggards  under  foot,   all  those,  O  King,  who 
brought  no  gifts. 

7  This   is  the  mother,  this  the  sire,  this  one   hath  oome  to  be 

thy  life. 

What   brings  thee   forth  is  even  this.     Now  come,  Subandha, 
get  thee  forth. 

8  As  with  the  leather  thong  they  bind  the  chariot  yoke  to  hold 

it  fast, 

So   have  I  held  thy  spirit  fast,  held  it  for  life  and  not  for 
death,  held  it  for  thy  security. 

9  Even  as  this  earth,  the  mighty  earth,  holds  fast  the  monarchs 

of  the  wood, 
So  have  I  held  thy  spirit  fast,  held  it  for  life  and  not  for  deatbi 
held  it  for  thy  security. 


3  Who :  Asamati,  according  to  S&yana. 

4  IkshvAha :  a  prince  or  a  people  ;  the  name  does  not  occur  again  in  tke 
Rigveda.  The  Five  Tribes :  the  deities  regarded  as  forming  five  tribes  correspoiMt 
ing  to  the  five  tribes  on  earth,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  seven  rivers  of  tin 
land  of  the  Aryans  have  their  counterparts  in  heaven.  See  Muir,  O.  8.  Tex^ 
I.  p.  177.  Sftyana  explains  diflferently  : — *(so  that)  the  five  oriders  of  nMB 
(are  as  happy)  as  if  they  were  in  heaven.' — Wilson. 

5  Rathaproshthas :  the  family  of  the  prince,  Asam&ti  or  another,  whoeepraiMi 
the  poet  celebrates. 

6  Agastya's  sister's  sons :  Bandhu  and  his  brothers,  the  Rishis  of  the  hymn. 
Stanzas  1 — 6  have  no  apparent  connexion  with  the  six  stanzas  that  follow. 

7  This:  Agni,  according  to  Sdyana.  The  speaker  probably  means  hitt* 
Belf. — Ludwig.  Subandhu  seems  to  have  been  in  a  trance  and  appar«itly 
dead.  '  It  is  supposed  that  the  brothers  of  Subandhu  have  addressed  thiir 
supplications  to  Agni,  to  restore  him  to  life,  and  that  he  has  come  aooori* 
ingly,  being,  as  it  were,  his  parent  and  begetter.  Another  interpretaiioi 
explains  the  terms  literally  as,  Subandhu,  your  father,  mother,  and  — 
have  come  to  mourn  your  decease.' — Wilson, 

8  So  have  I  held :  *  so  haa  A.gn\  ^Xauced;  wiGox^vci^  to  SAyana. 


iV  ei.]  THE  RiaVSDI,  495 

10  Subaudha's    spirit  I  have  brought  from  Yama,  from  VivaB- 

y&a's  Son, 
Brought   it  for  life  and   not  for  death,  yea,    brought  it   for 
security. 

11  The  wind  blows  downward  from  on  high,  downward  the  Sun- 

God  seuds  his  heat, 
Downward  the  milch-oow  pours  her  milk  :  so  downward  go  thy 
pain  and  grie£ 

^12  Felicitous  is  this  mine  hand,  yet  more  felicitous  is  this. 

This  hand   coutaius  all  healing  balms,    and  this  makes  whole 
with  gentle  touch. 

HYMN  LXI.  ViBvedcvat. 

• 

Thb  welcome  speaker  in  the  storm  of  battle  uttered  with 

might  this  prayer  to  win  the  Asvins, 
When  the  most  liberal  God,  for  Paktha,  rescued  his  parents, 

and  assailed  the  seven  Hotars. 

2  Chyav&na,  purposing  deceptive  presents,  with  all  ingredients, 
made  the  altar  ready. 
Most  sweet-voiced  TdrvayHna  poured  oblations  like  floods  of 
widely  fertilizing  water. 


11  Thy  pain  and  grief:  *  thy  ein.* — Sftyana. 

12  Morefdicitou8  is  this :  my  other  hand,  probably  the  right.   With  gentle 
touch :  with  light  friction,  laying-on  of  hands,  or  hypnotizing  passes. 


This  Hymn,  as  Ludwig  observes,  belongs  to  the  most  difficult,  one  might 
almost  say  most  hopeless,  portions  of  the  Rigveda.  It  is  made  up  of  several 
parts  which  are  in  nu  intelligible  connexion  with  one  another. 

'  1  According  to  the  view  taken  by  Pischel  who  has  most  carefully  studied 
and  elaborately  discussed  the  first  three  stanzas  {Vediache  Studien,  I.  pp.  71 — 
77),  they  contain  in  brief  the  ancient  story  of  Tdrvayina,  the  young  King 
of  the.Pakthas,  and  Cbyav4na.  Chyav&na,  a  favourite  of  the  Asvins  who 
had  restored  him  to  youth  (I.  116.  10,  and  117.  13),  intended'  to  sacrifice  to 
them,  hoping  with  their  aid  to  conquer  Tfirvayft  la  and  his  parents.  But 
ludra  stays  the  sacrifice,  drives  the  priests  away,  and  enables  Tdrvayftna  who 
bad  poured  rich  libations  to  him  to  gain  the  victory  over  his  opponent. 

The  toeleome  speaker :  Tiirvayjlna,  whose  words  were  welcome  to  the  Gods. 
J^o  win  the  Afvins :  ra'&dram:  not '  addressed  to  Rudra,'  but  to  the  Asvina 
who  are  called  ra^Adrau  in  stanza  15,  and,  elsewhere,  rudrd  and  rudrdvartanU 
The  most  liberal  God:  Indra.  Paktha:  King  of  the  Pakthas  (see  Vll.  18.  7), 
that  is,  apparently,  T<irvay4na,  who  has  been  mentioned  in  I.  53.  10,  and  VI. 
lis.  13,  as  especially  aided  by  Indra.  Seven  Hotars :  the  usual  number  of 
Hotar  priests  employed  at  important  sacrifices. 

2  Deceptive  presents :  his  intended  sacrifice  was  displeasing  to  Indra,  whom, 
possibly,  Chyavftna  falsely  pretended  that  he  was  about  to  worship.      With 
all  ingredients :   required  for  the  preparation  of  the  Som^  \\\v^«.    Pouvtd. 
oblations  '  to  Jndra. 

30 


4fl6  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOS  X 

3  To  his  oblations,  swift  as  thought,  ye  hurried,  and  welcomed 

eagerly  the  prayers  he  offered. 
With  arrows  in  his  hand  the  Very  Mighty  forced  from  him  all 
obedience  of  a  servant. 

4  I  call  on  you  the  Sons  of  Dyaus,  the  Asvins,  that  a  dark  cow 

to  my  red  kine  be  added. 
Enjoy  my  sacrifice,  come  to  my  viands,  contented,  not  deceiv- 
ing expectation. 

10  Uttering  praise  to  suit  the  rite  Navagvas  came  speedily  to 

win  the  damsel's  friendship. 
They  who  approached  the  twice-strong  stable's  keeper,  meed- 
less,  would  milk  the  rocks  that  naught  had  shaken. 

1 1  Swift  was  new  friendship  with  the  maid  :  they  quickly  accept- 

ed it  as  genuine  seed  and  bounty. 
Milk  which  the  cow  Sabardughal  had  yielded  was  the  bright 
heritage  which  to  thee  they  oflfered. 

12  When  afterwards  they  woke  and  missed  the  cattle,  the  speaker 

thus  in  joyful  mood  addressed  them : 
Matchless  are  singers  through  the  Vasu's  nature ;  he  bringeth 
them  all  food  and  all  possessions. 

13  His  followers  then  who  dwelt  in  sundry  places  came  and  desired 

to  slay  the  son  of  Nrishad. 
Resistless  foe,  he  found  the  hidden  treasure  of  Sushna  multi- 
plied  in  numerous  offspring. 

3  To  his  oblations :  to  the  oflFerings  of  Chyav&na.  Ye :  Asvins.  The  Very 
Mighty:  Indra,  who  threatened  Chyav&na,  and  made  him  his  obedient 
servant. 

4  The  Uishi  now  prays  to  the  Asvins  on  his  own  account,  and  aftks  for  a 
dark-coloured  cow  as  a  reward.  SAyapa,  whom  Professors  Ludwig  and 
Grassmnnn  follow,  explains  the  second  half  of  the  fi«*st  line  more  poetically  :— 
*  When  the  dark  night  retires  before  the  purple  oxen  (of  the  chariot  of  the 
dawn).' — Wilson.  *  When  the  black  sits  among  the  red  cows  ;  that  is,  while 
it  is  still  dark,  but  the  grey  of  morning  is  beginning  to  appear.' — Ludwig. 

5  I  pass  over  stanzas  5 — 9,  which  contain  an  ancient  legend,  probably  the 
germ  of  the  later  story  of  Brahmft  or  Pr.i  jftpati  and  his  daughter,  conceming 
two  deities  or  powers  of  nature,  male  and  female.     See  Appendix. 

10  Navayvas  :  '  the  Angirasas.' — Wilson.  The  damneVs:  Sftyana  says  that 
Prisni  may  be  meant.  Perhaps  Saramft  is  intended.  The  twice-strong  stahU^t 
keeper :  the  Pani  or  Panis  who  kept  the  stolen  cows  or  vanished  rays  of  light 
concealed.  Meedless  :  as  the  Panis  refused  to  give  up  the  cows.  Would  nUk 
the  rocks :  would  force  from  the  rocky  prison  the  meed  or  honorarium  which 
they  deserved  in  the  shape  of  the  cows. 

11  Sabardughd:  *  nectar-yielding ; '  the  general  name  of  cows  milked  tt 
sacrifices.      Which  to  thee  they  offered  :  which  the  Angirases  offered  to  Indn. 

12  The  V(f8U  is  Indra. 

13  The  son  of  Nrishad:   ISfitTshada,  w^wvuW^  tw  \^^\iXwv^\fi^R  of  Kanya,  bot 
Maid  to  be  in  this  place  the  name  oi  ai  cwXami  OL^mviTi.    B,«V»\.\«%%  ^^j^ :  Xjs^^s^ 


SYiiN6t]  TME  RtQVEDA.  467 

14  Thou,  called  Effulgence,  in  whose  threefold  dwelling,  as  in  the 

light  of  heaven,  the  Gods  are  sitting, 
Thou  who  art  called  Agui  or  J&tavedas,  Priest,  hear  us,  guile- 
less Priest  of  holy  worship. 

15  And,  Indra,  bring,  that  I  may  laud  and  serve  them,  those 

Two  resplendent  glorious  N^satyas, 
Blithe,  bounteous,  man-like,  to  the  sacrificer,  honoured  among 
our  men  with  offered  viands. 

16  This  King  is  praised  and  honoured  as  Ordainer:  himself  the 

bridge,  the  Sage  speeds  o*er  the  waters. 
He  hath  stirred  up  Kakshiv&n,  stirred  up  Agui,  as  the  steed's 
swift  wheel  drives  the  felly  onward. 

17  Vaitarana,  doubly  kinsman,  sacrificer,  shall  milk  the  cow  who 

ne'er  hath  calved,  Sabardhu, 
When  I  encompass  Varuna  and  Mitra  with  lauds,  and  Arja 
man  in  safest  shelter. 

18  Their  kin,  the  Pnnce  in  heaven,  thy  nearest  kinsman,  turning 

his  thought  to  thee  thus  speaks  in  kindness : 
This  is  our  highest  bond :    I  am  his  offspring.     How  many 
others  came  ere  I  succeeded  ? 

19  Here  is  my  kinship,  here  the  place  I  dwell  in  :  these  are  my 

Gods ;  I  in  full  strength  am  present. 
Twice-born  am  I,  the  first-bom  Son  of  Order :  the  Cow  milked 
this  when  first  she  had  her  being. 

'14  Here  begins  another  part  of  the  hymn.    Agni  is  addressed.    Effvlgence : 
identified  with  the  Sun.     Threefold  dwelling :  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven. 

15  Man-like :  as  men  reward  one  who  institutes  a  sacrifice  for  their  benefit. 

16  This  King:  Sfirya,  the  Sun-God,  'This  royal  Soma.'— Wilson,  ffim- 
sdf  t?ie  bridge :  the  long  beams  of  light  form  the  bridge  by  which  SArya 
passes  over  the  waters  of  the  firmament  or  sea  of  air.  Kakshtvdn  :  the  cele- 
brated  Rishi.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

17  Vaitarana:  *  (Agni),  the  conveyer  (of  all).* — Wilson.  Agni  is  so  called, 
probably,  as  sacrificer  for  a  prince  Vitar&na.  Doubly  kintman :  closely  allied 
to  heaven  and  earth.  Sabardhu :  the  Cow  whose  milk  is  used  in  sacrifice  ; 
also  called  Sabardughft,  as  in  stanza  11.  According  to  Ludwig,  the  New  Tear 
which  has  not  yet  distributed  its  treasures  is  meant. 

18  Their  hin  :  akin  to  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Aryaman.  The  PHnee  :  sUrl : 
Siirya,  the  Sun-God.  T%y  nearest  kinsman :  Siirya.  I  adopt  Ludwig's  inter- 
pretation of  nXbhdnidishihah,  which  appears  unintelligible  as  the  name  of  the 
son  of  Manu  who  was  deprived  of  his  inheritance  by  his  father  according  to 
the  Yajur-vedttf  and  by  his  brothers  according  to  the  Aitareya-Brdhmana. 
But  see  Weber,  Episehes  im  V.  EUual,  pp.  40f .  This :  Dyaus.  ffow  many 
others :  many  Savitars  (suns  that  introduce  the  new  year)  have  been  before 
me. — Ludwig. 

19  These  are  my  Oods:  'these  are  my  resplendent  (rayaV' — ^^^V%«ti.   "^x^- 
bftbly  the  priests  are  intended. — Ludwig.     The  Goto:    K<1\^\.     M\]Ck«,d.  WVax 
milked  forth  this  univene,  * — Wilson.     Agm  IB  the  &^e«^L«t  oi  ^Xs^  fNAsoi^. 


46a  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  X 

20  So  mid  these  tribes  he  rests,  the  friendlj  envoy,  borne  on  two 

paths,  refulgent,  Lord  of  fuel. 
When,  like  a  line,  the  Babe  springs  up  erectly,  his  Mother 
.    straight  hath  borne  him  strong  to  bless  us* 

21  Then  went  the  milch-kiue  forth  to  please  the  damsel,  and  for 

the  good  of  every  man  that  liveth. 
Hear    us,  0   wealthy  Lord;  bej^in  our  worship.     Thou  hast 
grown  mighty  through  Asvaghna's  virtues. 

22  And  take  thou  notice  of  us  also,  Indra,  for  ample  riches,  King 

whose  arm  wields  thunder  1 
Protect  our  wealthy  nobles,  guard  our  princes  unmenaced  near 
thee,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers. 

23  When  he  goes  forth,-  ye  Pair  of  Kings,  for  booty,  speeding  to 

war  and  praise  to  please  the  singer, — 
I  was  the  dearest  sage  of  those  about  him, — let  him  lead  these 
away  and  bring  them  safely. 

24  Now  for  this  noble  man's  support  and  comfort,  singing  with 

easy  voice  we  thus  implore  thee : 

Impetuous  be  his  son  and  fleet  his  courser :  and  may  I  be  his 
priest  to  wiu  him  glory. 

25  If,  for  our  strength,  the  priest  with  adoration  to  win  your  friend- 

ship made  the  laud  accepted. 

That  laud  shall  be  a  branching  road  to  virtue  for  every  one  to 
whom  the  songs  are  suited. 

26  Glorified  thus,  with  holy  hymns  and  homage  : — Of  noble  race, 

with  Waters,  God-attended — 

May  he  enrich  us  for  our  prayers  and  praises  ;  now  can  the  cow 
be  milked  ;  the  path  is  open. 


20  He :  Agni.     Tiao  paths :  from  earth  to  heaven  and  from  heaven  to  earth, 

21  The  reference  in  the  first  line  is,  apparently,  to  the  imprisoned  cows  and 
Saram&  (uee  stanza  10);  but  all  explanations  of  the  allusions  in  this  hymn  are 
more  or  less  c«»njectural.  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  reference  may  be  to  the  act- 
ual milking  of  the  sacrificial  cows  at  the  ceremony  which  this  hymn  accompa- 
nied, Wilrton  translates  : — '  The  words  of  a  desirable  praise,  of^a  certain  tran- 
quil person  (N^bhAnedishtlia).  attain  the  prototype  (Indra)'  Afvagkna:  pro- 
bably the  patronymic  of  Vitarana. — Ludwig.  See  note  on  Yaitarana  ia  atann 
17. 

23  He:  Asvaghna  Vitarana.     Ye  Pair  of  Kvngs :  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

26  QloryfUd  thui :  that  is,  May  Varuna  gloi  ified  with  song  beginning,  *  Of 
noble  race,  etc.,'  enrich  us.  Noiv  can  the  cow  be  milked :  it  is  now  tinie  for 
the  morning  Agnihotram. — Ludwig. 

Prof.  Oraaam&nn  has  baniahed  this  a\moaV.\\TjixiV.€\\\^^\^  Vjxxisi  t.o  his  Appen- 
dix. 


HTMN  et]  THE  RIOVEDA,  469 

27  Be  to  us,  then,  ye  Gods  who  merit  worship,  be  ye  of  one  accord 
our  strong  protection, 
Who  went  on  various  ways  and  brought  us  vigour,  ye  who  are 
undeceivable  explorers. 

HYMN  LXII.  Vievederae,  Etc. 

Yb  who,  adorned  with  guerdon  through  the  sacrifice,  have  won 

you  Indra's  friendship  and  eternal  life, 
Even  to  you  be  hapfiincHS,  Angirases.     Welcome  the  son  of 

Manu,  ye  who  are  mo»t  wise. 

2  The  Fathers,  who  drave  forth  the  wealth  in  cattle,  have  in  the 

year's  course  cleft  Vala  by  Eternal  Law  : 
A  lengthened  life  be  yours,  0  ye  Angirases.     Welcome  the 
son  of  Manu,  ye   who  are  most  wise. 

3  Ye  raised  the  Sivi  to  heaven  by  everlasting  Law,  and  spread 

broad  earth,  the  Mother,  out  on  every  side. 
Fair  wealth  of  progeny  be  yours,  Angirases.     Welcome  the 
son  of  Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

4  This  kinsman  in  your  dwelling-place  speaks  pleasant  words  : 

give  ear  to  this,  ye  Rishis,  children  of  the  Gods. 
High  Brahman  dignity  be  yours,  Angirases.     Welcome    the 
son  of  Manu,  ye  who  are  most  wise. 

5  Distinguished  by  their  varied  form,  these  Kishis  have  been 

deeply  moved. 
These  are  the  sons  of  Angiras :  from  Agni  have  they  sprung 
to  life. 

6  Distinguished  by  their  varied  form,  they  sprang  from  Agni, 

from  the  sky. 
Navagva  and   Dasagva,  noblest  Angiras,  he  giveth  bounty 
with  the  Gods. 

7  With  Indra  for  associate  the  priests  have  cleared  the  stable 

full  of  steeds  and  kioe. 
Giving  to  me  a  thousand  with  their  eight-marked  ears,  they 
gained  renown  among  the  Gods. 

1  The  ton  of  Manu:  N&hh^nedishtha  M&nava.     See  X.  61.  18  note. 

2  The  Fathers :  the  Angiraees.  Vala :  the  demon  who  stole  the  cows  of 
the  Gods. 

3  By  everlasting  Law:  *  by  means  of  your  sacrifice.* — "Wilson. 

4  7%t«  kinsman :  or,  this  N&bh&,  that  is,  N&bh&uedislitha. 

5  Distinguished  by  their  varied  form  :  or,  Virflpas.     See  III.  63.  7. 

6  From  the  sky:  or,  from  Dyaus.  Noblest  Angiras:  Agni  himself,  accord- 
ing to  SAyana.  He  is  also  called  Navagva  and  Dasagva  as  these  priestly  names 
or  titles  belong  to  or  are  closely  connected  with  the  Angir«£e&. 

7  With  their  eiffht-marlced  ears :  having  marks  brttnd^  oti  \>a^vc  ftww^  %  ^x  "^x- 
Mpa,  with  Blit  ears.  Cf.  Hymns  of  the  il«Aan-a-reda,yi.  \4\.*I. 


470  TffE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

8  May  this  man'd  sons  be  multiplied  ;  like  springing  corn  may 

Manu  grow, 
Who   gives  at   once  in   bounteous  gift  a  thousand    kiue,  a 
hundred  steeds. 

9  No  one  attains  to  himi   as  though  a  min  would  grasp  the 

heights  of  heaven. 
Sivarnya's  saci'ifioial  meed  hath  broadened  like  an  ample  flood. 

10  Yadu  and  Turva,  too,  have  given  two  Dasas,  well-disposed,  to 

serve. 
Together  with  great  store  of  kine. 

1 1  Blest  be  the  hamlet's  chief,  most  liberal  Manu,  and  may  his 

bounty  rival  that  of  SArya. 
May  the  Gods  let  Sslvarni's  life  be  lengthened,   with  whom, 
unwearied,  we  have  lived  and  prospered. 

HYMN  LXIII.  Visvedevas. 

May  they  who  would  assume  kinship  from  far  away,  Vivasv&n*s 

generations,  dearly  loved  of  men, 
Even  the  Gods  who  sit  upon  the  sacred  grass  of  Nahusha's 

son  Yay^ti,  bless  and  comfort  us. 

2  For  worthy  of  obeisance,  Gods,  are  all  your  names,  worthy  of 

adoration  and  of  sacrifice. 
Ye  who  were  born  from  waters,  and  from  Aditi,  and  from  the 
earth,  do  ye  here  listen  to  my  call. 

3  I  will  rejoice  in  these  Adityas  for  my  weal,  for  whom  the  Mo- 

ther pours  forth  water  rich  in  balm. 
And  Dyaus  the  Infinite,  firm  as  a  rock,  sweet  milk, — Gods  act- 
ive, strong  through  lauds,  whose  might  the  Bull  upholds. 

8  Manu :  here  apparently  the  name  of  S&varni  the  prince  whose  munificence 
is  the  subject  of  stanzas  8 — 11.  A  thoiMaiid  kinCt  a  hundred  steeds :  '  kine'  is 
conjecburally  supplied.  *  A  thousand  and  a  hundred  horses.' — Wilson.  '  A 
thousand  times  a  hundred  horses.' — Ludwig. 

9  Sdvarnya  here  means  S&varni. 

10  Turva:  equivalent  to  Turvasa  ;  a  prince  of  the  clan  called  after  the 
eponymus  Turva.     Ddsas :  enslaved  natives. 

1  Kinship ;  relationship  with  us,  and  the  duties  of  protection  and  aid  which 
relationship  implies.  Cf.  I.  109.  7,  note.  VivasvdiCs  generations :  S&yana  sup- 
plies a  verb,  and  explains  differently  : — '(support)  the  generations  of  (MaDU 
the  son  of)  Vivasvat.' — Wilson.     Yaydti:  see  I.  31.  17,  and  108.  8,  note. 

2  From  vHiters  :  the  aerial  waters,  or  intermediate  region  of  air.  Aditi :  von 
Roth  understands  Aditi  here  to  mean  *  infinity,'  the  boundlessness  of 
heaven  as  opposed  to  the  limitation  of  earth.  See  Muir,  0.  ^S^.  Texts,  V.  89. 
JS4jrapa*a  ezpianation  is  similar. 

3  Tke  Mother:  Earth.     Dyaus:    Hea-yeTi.    T}\a  BxOX:  Ni;^^  ^mu.    S&yana 
explains  vrMMardn  as  *  bringera  oi  xaiu: 


BYMN  C3.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  471 

4  Looking  on  men,  ne'er  slumbering,  they  by  their  deserts  at- 

tained as  Gods  to  lofty  immortality. 
Borne  ou  refulgent  cars,  sinless,  with  serpents'  powers,  they 
robe  them,  for  our  welfare,  in  the  height  of  heaven. 

5  Great  Kiugs  who  bless  us,  who  have  come  to  saciifice,  who, 

ne'er  assailed,  have  set  their  mansiou  iu  the  sky, — 
These  I  invite  with  adoration  and  with  hymus,  mighty  Adityas, 
Aditi,  for  happiness. 

6  Who  ofiTereth  to  you  the  laud  that  ye  accept,  0  ye  All-Gods  of 

Manu,  many  ajs  ye  are  ? 
Who,  Mighty  Ones,  will  prepare  for  you  the  sacrifice  to  bear 
us  over  trouble  to  felicity  % 

7  Ye  to  whom  Manu,  by  seven  priests,  with  kindled  fire,  offered 

the  first  oblation  with  his  heart  and  soul. 
Vouchsafe  us,  ye  Adityas,  shelter  free  from  fear,  and  make  us 
good  and  easy  paths  to  happiness. 

8  Wise  Deities,  who  have  dominion  o^er  the  world,  ye  thinkers 

over  all  that  moves  not  and  that  moves, 
Save  us  from  uncommitted  and  committed  sin,  preserve  us 
from  all  sin  to-day  for  happiness. 

9  In  battles  we  invoke  Indra  still  swift  to  hear,  and  all  the  holy 

Host  of  Heaven  who  banish  grief, 
Agni,  Mitra,  and  Varuna  that  we  may  gain,   Dyaus,  Bhaga, 
Maruts,  Prithivi  for  happiness : 

10  Mightily-saving  Earth,  incomparable  Heaven,  the  good  guide 

Aditi  who  gives  secure  defence. 
The  well-oared  heavenly  Ship  that  lets  no  waters  in,  free  from 
defect,  will  we  ascend  for  happiness. 

1 1  Bless  us,  all  Holy  Ones,  that  we  may  have  your  help,  guard 

and  protect  us  from  malignant  injury. 
With  fruitful  invocation  may  we  call  on  you,  Gods,  who  give 
ear  to  us  for  grace,  for  happiness. 

1 2  Keep  all  disease  afar  and  sordid  sacrifice,  keep  off  the  wicked 

man's  malicious  enmity. 
Keep  far  away  from  us  all  hatred,  0  ye  Gods,  and  give  us 
ample  shelter  for  our  happiness. 

13  Untouched  by  any  evil,  every  mortal  thrives,  and,  following 

the  Law,  spreads  in  his  progeny. 
Whom  ye  with  your  good  guidance,  0  Adityas,  lead  safely 
through  all  his  pain  and  grief  to  happiness. 


4   With  serpents*  powers :  '  of  unsurpassable  wisdom.' — Wilson. 

10  The  heavenly  Ship :  according  to  S^yana,  a  met«^Vion&8\  «vgx«e«^c)rQL\»^ 


Boeri&ce, 


472  THE  H7MN8  OP  [BOOK'JL 

14  That  which  ye  guard  and  grace  in  battle,  O  ye  Gods,  ye  Ma- 

ruts,  where  the  prize  is  wealth,  where  heroes  win. 
That  conquering  Car,  0  Indra,   that  sets  forth  at  dawn,  that 
never  breaks,  may  we  asceud  for  happiDess. 

15  Vouchsafe  us  blessing  in  our  paths  and  desert  tracts,   blestiiiig 

in  waters  and  in  battle  for  the  light ; 
Blessing  upon  the  wombs  that  brin?  male  children  forth,  and 
blessing,  0  je  Maruts,  for  the  gain  of  wealth. 

16  The  noblest  Syasti  with  abundant  riches,   who  comes  to  what 

is  good  by  distant  pathway, — 
May  she  at  home  and  far  away  preserve  us,  and  dwell  with  us 
under  the  Gods*  protection. 

17  Thus  hath  the  thoughtful  sage,  the  son  of  Plati,  praised  you, 

0  Aditi  and  all  Adityas. 
Men  are  made  rioh  by  those  who  are  Immortal :  the  Heavenly 
Folk  have  been  extolled  by  Gaya, 

HYMN  LXIV.  Vi?vedem 

What  God,  of  those  who  hear,  is  he  whose  well-praised  name  we 

may  record  in  this  our  sacrifice  ;  and  how  f 
Who  will  be  gracious?  who  of  many  give  us   bliss  1     Who  out 

of  all  the  Host  will  come  to  lend  us  aid  ? 

2  The  will  and  thoughts  within  my  breast  exert   their   power : 

they  yearn  with  love,  and  fly  to  all  the  regions  round. 
None  other  Comforter  is  found  save  only  these  :  mj    longings 
and  ray  hopes  are  fixt  upon  the  Gods. 

3  To  Narisansa  and  to  Pfishan  I   sing   forth,   to    unconcealable 

Agni  kindled  by  the  Gods ; 
To  Sun  and  Moon,  two  Moons,  to  Yama  in  the  heavensi  to  Trita, 
V&ta,  Dawn,  Night,  and  the  Asvins  Twain. 

4  How  is  the   Sage   extolled    whom   the   loud    singers    praise  t 

What  voice,  what  hymn  is  used  to  laud  Brihaspati  ? 
May  Aja-Ekaplld  with  Kikvans  swift  to  hear,  and   Ahi  of  the 
Deep  listen  unto  our  call. 


14  For  happiness:  svastdye,  for  happiness  or  welfare,  reeurs  at  the  end  ni 
nil  the  Btarjza»  from  3  to  14  inclusive. 

16  Svaai :  Patby&  Svasti,  according  to  the  Index;  the  Goddess  of  prosperity 
an«i  happiness. 

17  2'he  son  of  Plati:   Gaya,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 


3  Unconcealable  Agni :  or,  to  the  unconcealable  (Savitar)  and  Agni     Ti0» 
iioons  :  Mew  Moon  and  Full  Moon. 

4  JJa-Ekapdd:    see  YI.    50.   14.  Rikvans'    singers;    minor  deitie*  who 
attend  and  sing  the  praises  of  some  aupenox  Qtodi.   Ala.  of  iK*  D«ep  ;  the  great 

Dii^gon  of  the  depths  of  the  aerial  oceau  \  K\ivW^>kq:^%i«    ^^^^^\,\,^\u^88u 


STMN  64.]  THE  JtlO  VEDA.  473 

5  Aditi,  to  the  birth  of  Daksha  and  the  vow  thou  suramonest  the 

Kings  Mitra  and  Yaru^ia. 
With  course  unchecked,  with  many   chariots  Arjaman  comes 
with  the  seven  priests  to  tribes  of  varied  sort. 

6  May  all  those  vigorous  Coursers  listen  to    our   cry,  hearers  of 

invocation,  speeding  ou»their  way  ; 
Winners  of  thousands  where- the  priestly  meed    is   won,    who 
gather  of  themselves  great  wealth  iu  every  race. 

7  Bring  ye  Purandhi,  bring   V&yu    who   yokes   his   steeds,    for 

friendship  bring  ye  P^shan  with  your  songs  of  praise  : 
They  with  one  mind,  one  thought  attend   the  sacrifice,  urged 
by  the  favouring  aid  of  Savitar  the  God. 

8  The   thrice-seven   wandering  Rivers,  yea,  the  mighty  floods^ 

the  forest  trees,  the  mountains,  Agui  to  our  aid, 
Eris^nu,  Tishya,  archers  to   our   gathering-place,   and  Rudra 
strong  amid  the  Rudras,  we  invoke. 

9  Let  the  great  Streams  come  hither  with   their  mighty  help, 

Sindhu,  Sarasvati,  and  Sarayu  with  waves. 
Ye  Goddess  Floods,  ye  Mothers,   animating  all,   promise   us 
water  rich  in  fatness  and  in  balm. 

10  And  let  Brihaddivsl,  the  Mother,  hear  our  call,  and  Tvashtar, 

Father,  with  the  Goddesses  and  Dames. 
Ribhukshan,   Vllja,  Bhaga,  and   Ratbaspati,  and  the  sweet 
speech  of  him  who  labours  guard  us  well ! 

1 1  Pleasant  to  look   on  as  a  dwelling  rich   in  food  is  the  blest 

favour  of  the  Maruts,  Rudra's  Sons. 
May  we  be  famed  among  the  folk  for  wealth  in  kine,  and  ever 
come  to  you,  ye  Gods,  with  sacred  food. 

5  Dakxha :  meaning  here  the  Sun,  according  to  S&jana.  Ludwig  thinks 
that  the  sacrificer,  regarded  as  Daksha  or  Praj&pati,  and  said  to  be  bom  again 
through  completion  of  his  vow,  is  intended.  In  the  second  line  also  AryavMn 
is  considered  by  Siyana  to  be  the  Sun  : — '  Aryaman,  whose  course  is  not 
hurried,  the  giver  of  delight  to  many,  having  seven  ministering  (rays)  proceeds 
in  hiH  multiform  births.' — Wilson. 

6  Counei'S  :  the  horses  which  bring  the  Gods  to  men's  sacrifices. 

7  Purandhi:  Plenty  personified  as  a  deity.  Or  pHrandhim  may  be  an  ad- 
jective *  the  spirited,  or  liberal,  Piishan.' 

8  Thrice-seven :  the  seven  rivers  of  the  land  of  the  Aryans  having  their  coun- 
terparts in  heaven  and  in  the  firmament.  Kritdnu :  the  archer  who  guards 
the  heavenly  Soma.  Tishya :  an  asterism  regarded  as  being  in  the  form  of 
an  arrow,  and  so  here  identified  with  KrisAnu. 

10  Brihaddivd:  a   Goddess   associated   with    114,   Sarasvati,   and  otbiw^, 
Damea :  the  consorts  of   the  Gods.    Rathaspati :  tV\e  QwA  yiVo  v;ct&«A*%  or^wt 
chsriot«  of  wax.    Speech :  or  prayer.     Who  labours :  «iV>  \\iA  «dAvv&^«» 


in  TBE  H7MNS  OP  [BOOKt 

12  The  thought  which  ye,  0  Maruts,  Indra,  and  ye  Gods  have 

given  to  me,  and  ye  Mitra  and  Varupa, — 
Cause  this  to  grow  and  swell  like  a  milcb>cow  with  milk.     Will 
ye  not  bear  away  my  songs  upon  your  car  ? 

13  0  Maruts,  do  ye  never,  never  recollect  and  call  again  to  mind 

this  our  relationship  ? 
Whea  next  we  meet  together  at  the  central  point,  even  there 
shall  Aditi  confirm  our  brotherhood. 

14  The    Mothers,  Heaven   and   Earth,  those  mighty  Goddesses, 

worthy  of  sacrifice,  come  with  the  race  of  Gods. 
These  Two  with  their  support  uphold  both  Gods  and  men,  and 
with  the  Fathers  pour  the  copious  genial  stream. 

15  This  invocation  wins  all  good  that  we  detiire :  Brihaspati,  highly- 

praised  Aramati,  are  here. 
Even  where  the  stone  that  presses  meath  rings  loudly  out, 
and  where  the  sages  make  their  voices  heard  with  hymns. 

16  Thus  hath  the  sage,  skilled  in  loud  singers'  duties,  desiring 

riches,  yearning  after  treasure, 
Gaya,  the  priestly  singer,  with  his  praises  and  hymns  content- 
ed the  Celestial  People. 

17  Thus  hath  the  thoughtful  sage,  the  son  of  Plati,  praised  you, 

0  Aditi  and  all  Adityas. 
Men  are  made  rich  by  tljose  who  are  Immortal :  the  Heavenly 
Folk  have  been  extolled  by  Cava. 

HYMN   LXV.  Viavedevas. 

• 

May  Agni,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna  consent,  Aryaman,  V&yu,  Push- 

an,  and  Saras vati, 
Adityas,  Maruts,  Vishnu,  Soma,  lofty  Sky,  Kudra,  and  Aditi, 

and  Brahmanaspati. 

2  Indra  and  Agni,  Hero-lords  when  Vyitra  fell,  dwelling  together, 

speeding  emulously  on. 
And   Soma  blent  with  oil,  putting  his  greatness  forth,  have 
with  their  power  filled  full  the  mighty  firmament. 

3  Skilled  in  the  Law  I  lift  the  hymn  of  praise  to  these,   Law- 

strengtheners,  unassailed,  and  great  in  majesty. 

13  At  the  central  point:  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

14  With  the  Fathers :  *  The  fruitfulness  of  heaven  and  earth,  which  give 
birth  to  gods  and  men,  is  described  as  produced  by  the  fathers.'  See  Wallis, 
Cosmology  of  the  Rigvedaf  p.  72. 

15  Aramati:  the  Genius  of  Bevotion. 
J7  The  concluding  stanza  oi  Hymn  ft^  U  T^^^.\.^>aKc^« 


HYMN  66.]  THE  JIIGVEDA.  4?5 

These  in  their  wondrous  bounty  send  the  watery  sea :  may 
they  as  kindly  Friends  send  gifts  to  make  us  great. 

4  They  with  their  might  have  stayed  Heaven,  Earth,  and  Prithi- 

VI,  the  Lord  of  Light,  the  firmament,  the  lustrous  spheres. 
Even  as  fleet-foot  steeds  who  make  their  masters  glad,  the 
princely  Gods  are  praised,  most  bountiful  to  man. 

5  Bring  gifts  to  Mitra  and  to  Varuna  who,  Lords  of  all,  in  spirit 

never  fail  the  worshipper, 
Whose  statute  shines  on  high  through  everlasting  Law,  whose 
places  of  sure  refuge  are  the  heavens  and  earth. 

6  The  cow  who  yielding  milk  goes  her  appointed  way  hither  to 

us  as  leader  of  our  holy  rites. 
Speaking  aloud  to  Varuna  and  the  worshipper,    shall  with 
oblation  serve  Vivasvlln  and  the  Gods. 

7  The  Gods  whose  tongue  is  Agni  dwell  in  heaven,  and  sit,  aid- 

ers of  Law,  reflecting,  in  the  seat  of  Law. 
They  propped  up  heaven  and  then  brou<;ht  waters  with  their 
might,  got  sacrifice  and  in  a  body  made  it  fair. 

8  Bom  in  the  oldest  time,  the  Parents  dwelling  round  are  shar- 

ers of  one  mansion  in  the  home  of  Law. 
Bound  by  their  common  vow  Dyaus,  Prithivi  stream  forth  the 
moisture  rich  in  oil  to  Varuna  the  Steer. 

9  Parjanya,  Vata,  mighty,  senders  of  the  rain,  Indra  and  Vayu, 

Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman : 
We  call  on  Aditi,  Adityas,  and  the  Gods,  those  who  are  on 
the  earth,  in  waters,  and  in  heaven. 

10  Tvashtar  and  Vdyu,  those  who  count  as  Kibhus,  both  celestial 

Hotar-priests,  and  Dawn  for  happiness. 
Winners  of  wealth,  we  call,  and  wise  Brihaspati,  destroyer  of 
our  foes,  and  Soma  Indra's  Friend. 

11  They  generated  prayer,  the  cow,  the  horse,  the  plants,  the 

forest  trees,  the  earth,  the  waters,  and  the  hills. 

3  The  watery  8ea :  the  clouds  and  rain. 

4  Prithivi :  meaning  here  the  region  of  mid-air. 

5  Places  of  sure  refuge :  S&yana  explains  nSdhast  differently  : — *  upon  whom 
the  two  solicitous  worlds  remain  dependent.' 

6  The  cow :  who  is  milked  at  sacrifice.     According  to  S&yana,  thunder  may 
be  meant,  and  by  '  milk '  strength  may  be  intended. 

7  In  a  body :  that  is,  personified.    Of.  X.  66.  9,  note. 

8  The  Parents :  Heaven  and  Earth. 
10  Celestial  Hotar-priests  :  see  L  13.  8. 


47«  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOKt 

These  very  bounteous  Gods  made  the  Sun  mount  to  Leayen, 
and  spread  the  righteous  laws  of  Aryas  o'er  the  land. 

12  0  Asvins,  ye  delivered  Bhujyu  from  distress,  ye   animated 

Syava,  Vadhrimati's  son. 
To  Vimada  ye  bi  ought  his  consort  Eamadyii,  and  gave  his 
lost  Vishnapii  back  to  Visvaka. 

13  Thunder,  the  lightning's  daughter,  AjarEkap&d,  heaven's  bear- 

er, Sindhu,  and  the  waters  of  the  sea: 
Hear  all  the  Gods  my  words,  Sarasvati  give  ear  together  with 
Purandhi  and  with  Holy  Thoughts. 

14  With  Holy  Thoughts  and  with  Purandhi  may  all  Gods,  know- 

ing the  Law  immortal,  Manu's  Holy  Ones, 
Boon-givers,  favourers,  finders  of  light,  and  Heaven,  with  gra- 
cious love  accept  my  songs,  my  prayer,  my  hymn. 

15  Immortal  Gods  have  I,  Yasishtha,  lauded,  Gods  set  on  high 

above  all  other  beings. 
May  they  this  day  grant  us  wide  space  and  freedom  :  ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXYL  Visvedem 

I  CALL  the  Gods  of  lofty  glory  for  our  weal,  the  makers  of  the 

light,  well-skilled  in  sacrifice ; 
Those  who  have  waxen  mightily,  Masters  of  all  wealth,  Im- 
mortal, strengthening  Law,  the  Gods  whom  Indra  leads. 

2  For  the  strong  band  of  Maruts  will  we  frame  a  hymn:  the  chiefis 

shall  bring  forth  sacrifice  for  Indra's  troop. 
Who,  sent  by  Indra  and  advised  by  Varuna,  have  gotten  for 
themselves  a  share  (»f  Siirya's  light. 

3  May  Indra  with  the  Yasus  keep  our  dwelling  safe,  and  Aditi 

with  Adityas  lend  us  sure  defence. 
May  the  God  Rudra  with  the  Rudras  favour  us,  and  Tvashtar 
with  the  Dames  further  us  to  success. 

4  Aditi,  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  great  eternal  Law,  Indra,  Vishnu, 

the  Maruts,  and  the  lofty  Sky. 
We  call  upon  Adityas,  on  the  Gods,  for  help,  on  Yasus,  Rudras, 
Savitar  of  wondrous  deeds. 


12  These  deeds  of  the  Asvins  are  told  in  I.  16  and  17. 

13  Aja-Ehapdd :  see  VI.  60.  14.     Holy  Thoughts:  Devotions  personified. 

14  Manilas  Holy  Ones:  deities  whom  Manu  worshipped. 

15  Vasishtha :  that  is,  a  descendant  of  the  great  Rishi  Yasishtha. 

4  The  names  in  the  first  line  are  m  tYi^  uotdmmAan^  <i^«»^  "wA\rL\\!kR«vvfc  «k  verb ! 
'are  invoked/  may  be  uuderstood. 


^TMN  66.]  THE  RIG  VEDA,  477 

5  With  Holy  Thoughts  Sarasv^n,  firm-lawed  Varuna,  great  V4yu, 

Pushan,  Vishnu,  and  the  Asvins  Twain, 
Lords  of  all  wealth,  Immortal,  furtherers  of  prayer,  grant  us 
a  triply-guarding  refuge  from  distress. 

6  Strong  be  the  sacrifice,  strong  be  the  Holy  Oues^  strong  the 

preparers  of  oblation,  strong  the  Gods. 
Mighty  be  Heaven  and  Earth,  true  to  eternal  Law,  strong  be 
Parjanya,  strong  be  they  who  laud  the  Strong. 

7  To  win   us  strength   I  glorify  the  Mighty  Twain,  Agni  and 

Soma,  Mighty  Ones  whom  many  laud. 
May  these  vouchsafe  us  shelter  with  a  triple  guard,  these 
whom  the  strong  have  served  in  worship  of  the  Goda. 

8  Potent,  with  firm-fixt  laws,  arranging  sacrifice,  visiting  solemn 

rites  in  splendour  of  the  day, 
Obeying  Order,  these  whose  priest  is  Agni,  free  from  falsehood, 
poured  the  waters  out  when  Yritra  died. 

9  The  Holy  Ones  engendered,  for  their  several  laws,  the  heavens 

and  earth,  the  waters,  and  the  plants  and  trees. 
They  filled  the   firmament  with  heavenly  light  for  help  :  the 
Gods  embodied  Wish  and  made  it  beautiful. 

* 

10  May  they  who  bear  up  heaven,  the  Ribhus  deft  of  hand,  and 

Vata  and  Parjanya  of  the  thundering  Bull, 
The  waters  and  the  plants,  promote  the  songs  we  sing :  come 
Bhaga,  Rati,  and  the  Vdjins  to  my  call. 

1 1  Sindhu,  the  sea,  the  region,  and  the  firmament,   the  thunder, 

and  the  ocean,  Aja-Ekapkd, 
The  Dragon  of  the  Deep,  shall  listen  to  my   words,   and  all 
the  Deities  and  Princes  shall  give  ear. 

12  May  we  be  yours,  we  men,   to  entertain  the  Gods  :  further 

our  sacrifice  and  give  it  full  success. 
Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  givers  of  good  gifts,  quicken  the  holy 
hymns  which  we  are  singing  now. 

6  Strong :  vHshan  repeated  in  the  way  loved  by  some  of  the  Vedic  poets  ; 
•  Bhowerer  of  benefits,'  according  to  S4yana.  Tke  Oods :  meaning,  says  SAyana, 
the  priests. 

9  Laws  :  courses  of  action.  Embodied  Wish  :  gave  a  body  to  the  wishes  and 
hopes  of  worshippers,  and  personified  them  in  the  same  manner  as  sacrifice  is 
aaid  to  have  been  embodied  and  beautified  in  X.  65.  7. 

10  Vdta  and  Parjanya  of  the  thundering  Bull :  meaning  the  wind  and  storm 
that  attend  the  thunderous  rain -cloud.  Rdti:  divine  Favour  or  Bounty. 
V^in$  :  a  class  of  divinities  according  to  S&yana.     See  VII.  88.  7. 

11  AJaEkapdd:  see  VI.  50.  14.     Dragon  of  tKt  Deep:  XXv^MjaJosi^^    ^kw^ 
YL  49.  14. 


478  THE  HYMNS  OP  IHOOK  ± 

13  1  follow  with  success  upon  the  path  of  Law  the  two  celtetial 

Hotars,  Priests  of  oldest  time. 
We  pray  to  him  who  dwelleth  near,  Guard  of  the  Field,  to  all 
Immortal  Gods  who  never  are  remiss. 

14  VasisLtha's  sons  have  raised  their  voices,  like  their  sire,  Rishi- 

like  praying  to  the  Gods  for  happiness. 
Like  friendly-minded  kinsmen,  come  at  our  desire,  O  Gods,  and 
shake  down  treasures  on  us  from  above. 

15  Immortal  Gods  have  I,  Vasishtha,  lauded,  Gods  set  on  high 

above  all  other  beings. 
May  they  this  day  grant  us  wide  space  and  freedom  :  ye  Gods, 
preserve  us  evermore  with  blessings. 

HYMN  LXVII.  BrihMpati 

This  holy  hymn,  sublime  and  seven-headed,  sprung  from  eter- 
nal Law,  our  sire  discovered. 

Ayasya,  friend  of  all  men,  hath  engendered  the  fourth  hymn 
as  he  sang  his  laud  to  Indra. 

2  Thinking  aright,  praising  eternal  Order,  the  sons  of  Dyaus  the 

Asura,  those  heroes, 
Angirases,  holding  the  rank  of  sages,  first  honoured  sacrifice's 
holy  statute. 

3  Girt  by  his  friends  who  cried  with  swan-like  voices,  bursting 

the  stony  barriers  of  the  prison, 
Brihaspati  spake  in  thunder  to  the  cattle,  and  uttered  praise 
and  song  when  he  had  found  them. 

4  Apart  from  one,  away  from  two  above  him,  he  drave  the  kine 

that  stood  in  bonds  of  falsehood. 

Brihaspati,  seeking  light  amid  the  darkness,  drave  forth  the 
bright  cows :  three  he  made  apparent. 


13  Two  cdestud  Jffotars :  Agni  and  Aditya,  according  to  S&yana.  Guard  of 
the  Field:  probably  Indra. 

15  Repeated  from  the  preceding  hymn. 

1  Seven-headed:  having  seven  divisions.  Accompanied  by  seven  bands  of 
the  Maruts,  or  having  seven  metres,  according  to  Sftyara.  Our  sire :  AngirM. 
Fourth  :  or,  extending  to  all  four  sides,  mighty. 

3  The  cattle :  the  lost  cows  of  the  Angirases,  representing  metaphoxdcally 
the  rays  of  light  which  had  been  stolen  by  the  fiends  of  darkness.   See  I.  62. 8. 

4  Apart  from  oney  away  from  two :  the  meaning  is  uncertain.  Perhaps,  at 
a  distance  from  the  earth,  down  from  heaven  and  the  firmament.  Fafsekood: 
the  wickedneaa  of  the  treachfttoua  YwAa.    Tlwee ;  >wskni^\l^  ^T\!QA.ment,  and 

earth. 


BTMN  67.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  479 

5  When  he  had  cleft  the  lairs  and  western  castle,  he  cut  off  three 

from  him  who  held  the  waters. 
Brihaspati   discovered,  while   he  thundered  like  Dyaus,    the 
dawn,  the  Sun,  the  cow,  the  lightning. 

6  As  with  a  hand,  so  with  his  roaring  Indra  cleft  Yala  through, 

the  gitardian  of  the  cattle. 
Seeking  the  milk-draught  with  sweat-shining  comrades  he  stole 
the  Panics  kine  and  left  him  weeping. 

7  He  with  bright  faithful  Friends,  winners  of  booty,  hath  rent 

the  milker  of  the  cows  asunder. 
Brihaspati  with  wild  boars  strong  and  mighty,  sweating  with 
heat,  hath  gained  a  rich  possession. 

8  They,  longing  for  the  kine,  with  faithful  spirit  incited  with 

their  hymns  the  Lord  of  cattle. 
Brihaspati  freed  the  radiant  cows  with  comrades  self-yoked, 
averting  shame  from  one  another. 

9  In  our  assembly  with  auspicious  praises  exalting  him  who 

roareth  like  a  lion. 
May  we,  in  every  fight  where  heroes  conquer,  rejoice  in  strong 
Brihaspati  the  Victor. 

1 0  When  he  had  won  him  every  sort  of  booty  and  gone  to  heaven 

and  its  most  lofty  mansions, 
Men  praised  Brihaspati  the  Mighty,  bringing  the  light  within 
their  mouths  from  sundry  places. 

1 1  Fulfil  the  prayer  that  begs  for  vital  vigour :  aid  in  your  wont- 

ed manner  even  the  humble. 
Let  all  our  foes  be  turned  and  driven  backward.     Hear  this, 
0  Heaven  and  Earth,  ye  All-producers. 

12  Tndra  with  mighty  strength  hath  cleft  asunder  the  head  of 

Arbuda  the  watery  monster, 
Slain  Ahi,  and  set  free  the  Seven  Rivers.     0  Heaven  and  Earth, 
with  all  the  Gods,  protect  us. 

5  Western  castle :  this  is  obscure.  Ludwig  suggests  that  dpdchim  may  mean 
*  hostile'  or  'detested.'  Three:  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth,  ffim  who  held 
the  mooters :  the  demon  Vala,  who  kept  the  rain,  as  well  as  the  cows  or  rays  of 
light,  imprisoned.     The  e<no  :  the  cattle  ;  the  beams  of  light. 

6  Comrades :  his  faithful  friends  the  Maruts.    Wild  boars :  the  strong  fierce 
Maruts  ;  according  to  Sftyana,  *  bearers  of  excellent  water.' 

8  The  Lord  of  cattle :  Brihaspati,  so  called  because  he  had  released  them. 

10  The  light:  that  is,  the  hymns  of  praise  which  will  bring  them  the  light 
of  help.    The  stanza  is  difficult. 

12  The  xoatery  monster :  the  fiend  who  dominated  t^Yi^  oc«a.TL^V  vJxt.     ^^^ 
or,  the  Dragon,  Vritra  or  hia  brother. 


480  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Z. 

HYMN  LXVIII.  BrihMp«tt 

Like  birds  who  keep  their  watch,  plashing  in  water,  like  the 

loud  voices  of  the  thundering  rain-cloud, 
Like  meriy  streamlets  bursting  from  the  mountain,  thus  to 

Brihaspati  our  hymns  have  sounded. 

2  The  Sou  of  Angiras,  meeting  the  cattle,  as  Bhaga,  brought  in 

Arvaman  among  us. 
As  Friend  of  meu  he  decks  the  wife  and  husband  :  as  for  the 
race,  Brihaspati,  nerve  our  coursers. 

3  Brihaspati,  having  won  them  from  the  mountains,  strewed 

down,  like  barley  out  of  winnowing-baskets. 
The  vigorous,  wamiering  oows   who  aid  the  pious,   desired  of 
all,  of  blameless  form,  well-coloured. 

4  As  the  Sun  dews  with  meath  the  seat  of  Order,  and  casts  a 

flaming  meteor  down  from  heaven, 
So  from  the  rock  Brihaspati  forced  the  cattle,  and  cleft  the 
earth's  skin  as  it  were  with  water. 

5  Forth  from  mid-air  with  light  he  drave  the  darkness,  as  the 

gale  blows  a  lily  from  the  river. 
Like  the  wind  grasping  at  the  cloud  of  Yala,  Brihaspati  ga- 
thered to  himself  the  cattle. 

6  Brihaspati,  when  he  with  fiery  lightnings  cleft  through  the 

weapon  of  reviling  Vala, 
Consumed  him  as  tongues  eat  what  teeth  have  compassed :  he 
threw  the  prisons  of  the  red  cows  open. 

7  That  secret  name  borne  by  the  lowing  cattle  within  the  cave 

Brihaspati  discovered, 
And  drave,  himself,  the  bright  kine  from  the  mountain,  like  a 
bird's  young  after  the  eggs'  disclosure. 


2  The  Son  of  Angiras :  Brihaspati,  especially  worshipped  and  cherished  by 
Angiras.  Aryaman :  the  institution  of  marriage,  represented  by  Aryaman  ; 
one  meaning  of  the  name  being  groomsman  or  matchmaker. 

3  Oat  of  winnowing -baskets :  sthivihhyah :  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word 
is  somewhat  nncertain.  but  it  is  evidently  a  measure,  basket,  or  instrument 
connected  with  corn.  Sthivlmdntah,  *  armed  with  sthivis,*  occurs  in  X.  27. 15^ 
and  is  said  by  S4yana  to  mean  *  occupants  of  stations.'  Wilson  renden 
sthivibhyah  in  this  place  by  *  from  the  granaries.'  The  cows  bestowed  by ' 
Bi  iliaspati'  are  countless  as  grains  of  barley  on  the  threshing-floor  or  winnow- 
ing-place. 

4  Cleft  the  earth's  sJcin :  or  surface,  with  the  hoofs  of  many  cattle. 

5  A  lily :  stpdla :  according  to  S&yana  the  same  as  Saivala,  the  ValHsnerii 
Octandra,  a  common  aquatic  plant. 

6  Weapon :  I  adopt  S&yana's  expVtJi&Vivoxi  ol  ^a^uxn^  ^.VtVvou^h  in  X.   89.  8 
the  same  word  means  *  exhauatiou.* 


TTMN  «9.)  THE  RIQVEDA.  481 

8  He  looked  around  on  rock-imprisoned  sweetness  as  one  who 

eyes  a  fish  in  scanty  water. 
Brihaspati,  cleaving  through  with  varied  clamour,  brought  it 
forth  like  a  bowl  from  out  the  timber. 

9  He  found  the  light  of  heaven,  and   fire,   and   Morning  :  with 

lucid  rays  he  forced  apart  the  darkness. 
As  from  a  joint,  Brihaspati   took   the   marrow  of  Vala  as  he 
gloried  in  his  cattle. 

0  As  trees  for  foliage  robbed  by  winter,  Vala  mourned   for  the 

cows  Brihaspati  had  taken. 
He  did  a  deed  ne'er  done,  ne'er  to  be    equalled,  whereby  the 
Sun  and  Moon  ascend  alternate. 

1  Like  a  dark  steed  adorned  with  pearl,  the   Fathers  have  deco- 

rated heaven  with  constellations. 
They  set  the  light  in  day,  in  night  the   darkness.     Brihaspati 
cleft  the  rock  and  found  the  cattle. 

2  This  homage  have  we  offered  to  the  Cloud-God  who   thunders 

out  to  many  in  succession. 
May  this  Brihaspati  vouchsafe  us  fulness  of  life  with  kine  and 
horses,  men,  and  heroes. 

HYMN  LXIX.  Agni. 

Auspicious  is  the  aspect  of  Vadhryasva's   fire ;  good   is   its 
guidance,  pleasant  are  its  visitings. 

When  first  the  people  of  Sumitra  kindle  it,  with   butter  pour- 
ed thereon  it  crackles  and  shines  bright. 
2  Batter  is  that  which  makes  Vadhryasva's   fire  grow   strong  : 
the  butter  is  its  food,  the  butter  makes  i*"  ^''^^» 

It  spreads  abroad  when  butter  h  ith  been  oflfered  it,  and  balm- 
ed  with  streams  of  butter  shines  fo'^'^  ^^^®  *^®  Sun. 


8  SweetneBt :  the  sweet  milk  ;  that  is,  \}f^'^^  7*^°  produced  it. 

Like  a  howl:  wbich  already  exia^  p^.^-'itially  m  the  wood  from  which  it  » 
>roduced  by  cutting.  ,  ,,  ...  , ,  .     ^    ,.,^ 

9  Wilson,  foUowing  Siyana.  p.  '*Phrases  the  second  hne  :— '  he  seized  (the 
tattlefrom  therock)of  Val*p-^"'oundedby  thekmeas  (one  extracts)  mar- 

11  The  Fathers:  '^'^^  connection  of  the  fathers  with  the  light,  of  which 
ibev  are  both  tb«»  ^^hodiments  and  the  guardians,  is  alone  sufficient  to  ex- 
>Udn  their  ac*'^^  ^^  placing  the  stars  in  the  sky.' — Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the 
^igveda  p  ^^*     ^^t  "^  Ludwig  remarks,  the  Fathers  themselves  may  be  the 

ttara. 
tM  To  many :  'cows  '  is,  apparently,  understood.    Silyana  supplies  richaa  : — 

who  recites  in  order  many  (sacred  staneas).* — Wilson. 

1  Vadhryafva  has  been  mentioned,  in  VI.  61. 1,  aa  oi  "wots^v^^T  cA.  %*.t%a- 
atf ;  b«re  he  appears  m  a  special  worshipper  of  Agni. 

SI 


48i  THE  BYMNS  OF  [BO(ft  t 

3  Still  newest  is  this  face  of  thine,  0  Agni,  which  Mann  and  Sq- 

mitra  have  enkindled. 
So  richly  shine,  accept  our  songs  with  favour,  so  give  us  strengtb* 

ening  food,  so  send  us  glory. 

4  Accept,  this  offering,  Agni,  whom  aforetime  VadhrjasTa  hath 

entreated  and  enkindled. 
Guard  well  our  homes  and  people,  guard  our  bodies,  protect 
thy  gift  to  us  which  thou  hast  granted. 

5  !6e  splendid,  guard  us,   Kinsman  of  Yadhryasva  :  let  not  the 

enmity  of  men  overcome  thee. 
Like  tljo  bold  hero  Chyavana,  I  Samitra  tell  forth   the  title  of 
Vadhryasva*8  Kinsman. 

6  All  treasures  hast  thou  won,   of  plains   and  moontains,  and 

quelled  the  Dasas'  and  the  Aryas'  hatred. 
Like  the  bold  hero  Chyavana,  0  Agni,  mayst  thou  subdue  the 
men  who  long  for  battle. 

7  Deft  Agni  hath  a   lengthened    thread,  tall   oxen,  a  thousand 

heifers,  numberless  devices. 
Decked  by   the   men,   splendid   among   the   splendid,   shine 
brightly  forth  amid  devout  Sumitras. 

8  Thine  is  the  teeming  cow,  0  Jatavedas,  who  pours  at  once  ber 

ceaseless  How,  Sabardhuk. 
Thou  art  lit  up  by  men  enriched  with  guerdon,  0  Agni,  by 
the  pious-souled  Sumitras. 

9  Even    Immortal  Gods,  0  Jatatvedas,  Vadhryasva's  Kinsman, 

have  dbolared  thy  grandeur. 
When  humati  tribes  drew  near  with  supplication  thou  conquer- 
edst  with  men  whom  thou  hadst  strengthened. 

10  Like  as  a  father  bea^  his  son,  0  Agni,  Vadhryasva  bare  thee 

in  his  lap  and  seryect<}jge^ 

Thou,  Youngest  God,  havn^  enjoved  his  fuel,  didst  vanquish 
those  of  old  though  they  Wv^  inighty. 

11  Vadhryasva's   Agni    evermore  hat^  vanquished  his   foes  with 

heroes  who  had  pressed  the  Soma. 
Lord  of  bright  rays,  thou  burntest  up  ti*x  battle,  subduing, 
as  our  help,  e^en  mighty  foemen. 


3  Sumitra :  sou  of  Vadhryasva  and  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 
5  Chyavana:  a  son  of  Bhrigu.  Or  the   word   may   mean    'conquer„^»   ^ 
Sftyana  interprets  it.       Vadhryatva'i    Kinunan :  as   having   been   especuiiy 
worsiiipped  and  cherished  by  that  Ilishi.     See  stanza  10.| 

7  A  lengthened  thread:  continual  sacrifices,  from  ancient  to  present  iamM. 
Devicet :  ways   of  attaining  h\a  oV^ec^.    Ot  tatd«itt&a  may  mean,  *  having  ft 
hundred  or  many  musical  modes  ot  B^bCx^  %o\a%%  V    «^ ^  \sttc««A. \yj  m«iy :' 
'  the  leader  of  hundreds  (of  bvxml  ott<intv\^9.Y^— ^\^aQ^cv, 


MYMN  70.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  48S 

1 2  This  Agni  of  Yadhryasva,  Yritra-slajer,  lit  from  of  old,  must 
be  invoked  with  homage. 
As  such  assail  our  enemies,  Vadhryasya,  whether  the  foes  be 
strangers  or  be  kinsmen. 

HYMN  LXX.  Aprti. 

Enjot,  0  Agni,  this  my  Fuel,  welcome  the  oil -filled  ladle  where 

we  pour  libation. 
Rise  up  for  worship  of  the  Gods,    wise   Agni,  on  the  earth's 

height,  while  days  are  bright  with  beauty. 

2  May  he  who  goes  before   the  Gods   come  hither  with  steeds 

whose  shapes  are  varied,  Narisansa. 
May  he,    most  Godlike,  speed  our  offered  viands  with  homage 
God- ward  on  the  patii  of  Order. 

3  Men  with  oblations  laud  most  constant  Agni,  and  pray  him  to 

perform  an  envoy's  duty. 
With    lightly-rolling  car  and  best  draught-horses,  bring  the 
Gods  hither  and  sit  down  as  Hotar. 

4  May  the  delight  of  Gods  spread  out  transversely  :  may  it  be 

with  us  long  in  length  and  fragrant. 
O  Holy  Grass  divine,  with  friendly  spirit  bring  thou  the  wil- 
ling Gods  whose  Chief  is  Indra. 

5  Touch  ye  the  far-extending  height  of  heaven,  or  spring  apart 

to  suit  the  wide  earth's  measure. 
Yearning,  ye  Doors,   with  those   sublime  in   greatness,    seize 
eagerly  the  heavenly  Car  that  cometh. 

6  Here  in  this  shrine  may  Dawn  and  Night,  the  Daughters  of 

Heaven,  the  skilful  Goddesses,  be  seated. 
In  your  wide  lap,  auspicious,  willing  Ladies^  may  the  Gods  seat 
them  with  a  willing  spirit. 

7  Up  stands  the  stone,  high  burns  the  ^^e  enkindled ';  Aditi's  lap 

contains  the  Friendly  Natures. 
Ye  Two  Chief  Priests  who  ser^e  at  this  our  worship,  may  ye, 
more  skilled,  win  for  us  7«ch  possessions. 


Other  Aprt  hymns  may  be  compared  ;  I.  13,  142,  and  188  ;  II.  » ;  III.  4  ; 
V.  6  ;  VII.  2,  and  IX.  5.  ^^  usual  deities  and  deified  objects,  with  th«  tr- 
ception  of  Taniinapftt,  t**^  invoked. 

3  As  Hotar:  * ap »J™ini8trant  priest' — Wilson. 

4  The  delight  '/  (^ods  :  the  sacred  grass. 

i  The  hea'^nly  Car :  which  brings  the  Gods. 

7  TJU  stone :  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  expressed.    Aditi*8  lap ;  iha 
surface  of  the  earth.     The    Friendly    Natures:  the   Gods.      According  to 
BAyana, 'the  acceptable  sacrificial  veorols.'     Two  Chief  PritsU:  ^t^K\\q.m.\ 
perhaps  A^ni  and  Aditya.    Ifoi^e  skilled  :  thun  hxxmwi  '^^^iX*. 


484  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  t 

8  On  our  wide  graj^s,  Three  Godilesses  be  seated  :  for  you  haye 

we  prepared  and  made  it  pleasant. 
May  I}&,  she  whose  foot  drops  oil,  the  Goddess,  taste,  raan-liJse, 
sacrifice  and  well-set  presents. 

9  Since  thou,  God  Tvashtar,  hast  made  beauty  perfect,  since 

thou  hast  been  the  Angirases'  Companion, 
Willing,  most  wealthy,  Giver  of  possessions,  grant  us  the  Goda* 
assembly,  thou  who  knowest. 

10  Well  knowing,  binding  with  thy  cord,  bring  hither.  Lord  of 

the  Wood,  the  Deities'  assembly. 
The  God  prepare  and  season  our  oblations :  may  Heaven  and 
Earth  be  gracious  to  my  calling. 

11  Agni,  bring  hither  Varupa  to  help  us,  Indra  from  heaven, 

from  air's  mid-realm  the  Maruts. 
On  sacred  grass  all  Holy  Ones  be  seated,  and  let  the  Immortal 
Gods  rejoice  in  SvslhC. 

HYMN  LXXI.  JflAnnm. 

Whun  men,  Brihnspati,  giving  names  to  objects,  sent  out  VILk's 

first  and  earliest  utterances. 
All  that  was  excellent  and  spotless,  treasured  within  them,  was 

disclosed  through  their  affection. 

2  Where,  like  men  cleansing  corn-flour  in  a  cribble,  the  wise  in 
spirit  have  created  language, 
Friends  see  and  recognize  the  marks  of  friendship  :  their  speech 
retains  tbe  blessM  sign  imprinted. 


8  Thru  Goddesses :  lift,  Sarasvatl,  and  BhAratt.  Taste :  the  verb  is  plural, 
meaning,  may  lid.  aud  the  others  taste.  Man-like :  as  at  the  sacrifice  of  Manu, 
according  to  S^iyana. 

9  Grant  us  the  Gods*  as&timMy :  the  Commentators  explain  pStthas  some- 
times as  *  place,'  sometimes  as '  food '  or  *  air '  or  *  water.'  Here  Wilson,  follow- 
ing Sftyana,  translates  : — *  oflfer  ttie  food  of  the  gods  (to  them).' 

10  Binding  with  thy  cord :  it  is  n^t  clear  what  is  to  be  bound,  or  ranged 
in  order.  According  to  Sftyaiia,  the  ^^thaSy  which  he  explains  as  annam 
devdndm,  food  of  the  Gods,  is  to  be  fastenyi  with  a  rope.  Lord  of  the  Wood: 
vdnaspati :  the  yUpa  or  Sacrificial  Post. 

11  Svdhd:  that  is,  in  the  sacrificial  oflFerings-jresented  with  the  exclamation 
SvihA,  Ave,  or  Hail. 

jnftnam  or  Knowledge,  the  subject  of  this  very  difficuV;  hymn,  is  said  by 
SAyana  to  mean  Paramabrahmaja^nam,  knowledge  of  the  V^ighcr  truths  of 
Religion,  which  teaches  man  his  own  nature  and  how  he  may  x,^  reunited  to 
the  Supreme  Spirit. 

1    Vdk :  Voice  or  Speech,  the  Sacred  Word.     H«'re  specially  the  Voice  of 
the  hymn  regarded  as  the  means  of  communication  between  men  and  Gods. 
JSee  Fedic  India  (Story  of  the  "Nationa  ^ftYYoa^  \>\j.  I'oi^— ail. 


ntMN  71.]  THE  niQVEDA.  485 

3  With  sacrifice  the  trace  of  Vak  they  followed,  and  found  h6r 

harbouring  within  the  Kishis. 
They  brought  her,  dealt  her  forth  in   many   places:   seven 
singers  make  her  tones  resound  in  concert* 

4  One  man  hath  ne'er  seen  Vak,  and  yet  he  seeth :  one  man 

hath  hearing  but  hath  never  heard  her. 
But  to  another  hath  she  shown  her  beauty  as  a  fond  well- 
dressed  woman  to  her  husband. 

5  One  man  they  call  a  laggard,  dull  in  friendship :  they  never 

urge  him  on  to  deeds  of  valour. 
He  wanders  on  in  profitless  illusion  :  the  Voice  he  heard  yields 
neither  fruit  nor  blossom. 

6  No  part  in  Vak  hath  he  who  hath  abandoned  his  own  deat 

friend  who  knows  the  truth  of  friendship. 
Even  if  he  hears  her  still  in  vain  he  listens :  naught  knows 
he  of  the  path  of  righteous  action. 

7  Unequal  in  the  quickness  of  their  spirit  are  friends  endowed 

alike  with  eyes  and  hearing. 
Some  look  like  tanks  that  reach  the  mouth  or  shoulder,  others 
like  pools  of  water  fit  to  bathe  in. 

8  When  friendly  Br^hmans  sacrifice  together  with  mental  im- 

pulse which  the  heart  hath  fashioned, 
They  leave  one  far  behind  through  their  attainments,  and  some 
who  count  as  Brahmans  wander  elsewhere. 

9  Those  men  who  step  not  back  ai?^  move  not  forward,  nor 

Brahmans  nor  preparers  of  lib^^ions, 
Having  attained  to  VHk  in  sipAil  fashion  spin  out  their  thread 
in  ignorance  like  spinst^s. 

10  AU  friends  are  joyiyxl  in  the  friend  who  cometh  in  triumph, 

having  conc*iered  in  assembly. 
He  is  their  i)lame-averter,  food-provider :  prepared  is  he  and 
fit  for  -i'eed  of  vigour. 


8  Mar^^ouring  within  tkt  Ritkis :  they  discovered,  in  the  course  of  sacrifice, 
that  tlie  inspired  Rishis  alone  understood  Speech  as  required  for  religioui 
purposes.  In  many  places :  among  the  Hotar-priests.  Seven  aingera :  *  the 
Mven  noisy  (birds)  meet  together.* — Wilson  :  referring,  says  SAyaya,  to  the 
aeven  metres,  the  GAyatrt,  etc. 

8  So9ne  who  eotmt  as  Brahmans  wander  elsewhere:  'others  walk  about 
boasting  to  be  brahm&ns,* — Muir. 

9  Step  not  ba/ck  and  move  not  forward :  take  no  active  part  in  religious 
ceremonies.  '  Those  who  do  not  walk  (with  the  Brahmans)  in  this  lower 
world,  nor  (with  the  gods)  in  the  upper  world,'  is  Wilson's  paraphrase  of  the 
text  which  I  have  rendered  literally.  Lihe  spinsters :  *  (like)  female  weavers. 
Such  is  the  sense  which  Prof.  Aufrecht  thinks  ma.^,  V\\.\i  "^T^XktX^'Xx^i  ^\^ 
tJuAgned  to  tirft^  a  word  which  occurs  only  here.' — M.\i\t.   . 


4S6  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  X 

1 1  One  plies  his  constant  task  reciting  verses :  one  sings  tiie  holy 
psalm  in  Sakvart  measures. 
One  more,  the  Brahman,  tells  the  lore  of  being,  and  one  I&ji 
down  the  rules  of  sacrificing. 

HYMN  LXXII.  TheGodfc 

Let  us  with  tuneful  skill  proclaim  these  generations  of  the  Gods, 
Tliat  one  may  see  them  when  these  hymns  are  chanted  in  a 
future  age. 

2  These  Brahmanaspati  produced  with  blast  and  smelting,  like 

a  smith. 
Existence,  in  an  earlier  age  of  Gods,  from  Non-existence  sprang. 

3  Existence,  in  the  earliest  age  of  Crods,  from  Non-existence  sprang. 
Thereaftdr  were  the  regions  born.    This  sprang  from  the  Pro* 

duotive  Power. 

4  Earth  sprang  from  the  Productive  Power ;  the  regions  from 

the  earth  were  bom. 
Daksha  was  bom  of  Aditi,  and  Aditi  was  Daksha's  Child* 

5  For  Aditi,  0  Daksha,  she  who  is  thy  Daughter,  was  brought 

forth. 
After  her  were  the  blessid  Gods  bom  sharers  of  immortal  life. 

6  When  ye,  0  Gods,  in  yonder  deep  close-clasping  one  another 

stood, 


11  Reciting  versa :  repeating  ricTias  or  verses  of  the  Rigveda.  Thii  is  the 
duty  of  l^e  Hotar.  Ttu  holy  pialm :  the  GAyatra  or  S&man.  The  Udg&tar 
or  Chanter,  one  of  the  four  chief  pnests  is  intended.  The  lore  of  being  .*  the 
knowledge  of  all  that  exists.  Lat/a  down  the  rules :  *  prescribes  the  order.* 
— Muir.  *  Measures  the  materials.'— WHBon.  This  is  the  duty  of  the  Adh- 
▼aryu,  another  of  the  chief  priests.  Tho  hymn  has  been  transliterated 
and  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  pp.  254  ,256.  It  has  also  been 
metrically  rendered  by  the  authors  of  the  Siebemig  Liea^  des  JRigveda,  who 
have  endeavoured,  by  transposing  some  of  the  stanzas,  to  bring  them  into 
closer  connexion.  According  to  S4yana,  the  subject  of  the  ^hole  hymn  is 
*  the  eulogy  of  the  understanding  of  the  Veda  as  essential  to  divin\  knowledge.' 

2  These :  all  beings.   Like  a  smith :  as  a  blacksmith  blows  up  his  l*^  and 

melts  metal. 

3  The  regions :  *  the  quarters  (of  the  horizon).* — Wilson.  7%«r  .•  meanii^ 
•arth.  Productive  Power:  the  meaning  of  uttdnapadah  is  uncertain.  WaHIa 
renders  it  by  'the  begetter  (the  sky)*;  Wilson  by  *  the  upward -growing  (tree).' 

^  And  Aditi  was  Daksha's  Child:  'Yaaka  remarks ....How  can  this  be 

possible  ?  They  may  have  had  the  same  origin  ;  or,  according  t<>  the  nature  of 
the  gods,  they  may  have  been  born  from  each  other, — have  derived  their  subs- 
tance from  one  another.' — 0.  S.  Texts.  IV.  13.  Aditi  is  Infinity  or  the  Infinite^ 
and  Daksha  is  Force  or  Power  personified.     See  Vedic  Hymns,  I.  p.  245. 

6  '  The  two  verses  6  and  7  are  interesting  as  containing  an  independent  stoiy 
of  the  origin  oi  the  world  :  tbe  goda  ax*  i»\3i  V>  \ia.'^«i  kicked  up  in  dancing 
tb9  atonxB  which  formed  the  eartYi.'— N^aW^a,  Co%mo\og>j  of  tU  ^\gt>t^^. «. 


MTiiN  71]  TMS  RIQVEDA.  48T 

Thence,  as  of  dancers,  from  your  feet  a  thickening  cloud  of  dust 
arose. 

7  When,  O  y«  Gods,  like  Yatis,  ye  caused  all  existing  things  to 

grow, 
Then  ye  brought  SArya  forward  who  was  lying  hidden  m 
the  sea, 

8  Eight  are  the  Sons  of  Aditi  who  from  her  body  spranpj  to  life. 
With  seven  she  went  to  meet  the  Gods :  she  cast  Mart&nda 

far  away. 

9  So  with  her  Seven  Sons  Aditi  went  forth  to  meet  the  earlier 

age. 
She  brought  Malrt&nda  thitherward  to  spring  to  life  and  die 
again. 

HYMN  LXXIIL  Indnu 

Thott  wast  bom  mighty  for  victorious  valour,  exulting,  strong- 
est, full  of  pride  and  courage. 

There,  even  there,  the  Maruts  strengthened  Indra  when  his 
most  rapid  Mother  stirred  the  Hero. 

2  There  with  fiend's  ways  e'en  Prisani  was  seated  ;  with  much 

laudation  they  exalted  Indra. 
As  if  encompassed  by  the  Mighty-footed,  ^ona  darkness,  near 
at  hand,  forth  came  the  Children. 

3  High  are  thy  feet  when  on  thy  w»v  *^^0"  g^^st :  the  strength 

thou  foundest  here^hath  leni-  ot^ee  vigour. 
Thousand  hyenas  in  thy  mo^*^^  ^^^^  boldest     O  Indra,  mayat 
thou  turn  the  Asvins  Jtither. 


7   Tatit:  deyotees. 

«  Bight  are  the  Sons  t  according  to  the^Gommentator,  Mitr*,  Varunjv,  Dhitar, 
Aryaman.  Ansa,  Bbaga,  Vivasvdn,  and  Aditya  <the  Sun).  Mdrt^nda  :  Sfirya, 
the  Sun.  His  exposure  probably  yefera  to  his  sweeping  through  the  «kj. — 
Ludwig.  But  see  Bergaigue,  La  BcUyion  Vidtqutf  IIL  107. 


1  Mother  :  AditL     Stv^^'i  the  Hero :  gave  him  free  motion  as  soon  as  he 
bom,  or  incited  him  t*  actioa  by-telling  him  of  his  future  opponent.     See  VIIL 
45.  5,  and  66.  2. 

2  This  stanza  is  unintelligible  to  me  PrUant :  meaning  perhaps  Piisni,  as 
Ludwig  couiiietures.  The  Mighty- footed :  Indra.  The  Childreu :  the  new-born 
Haruts.  Wilson  translates,  after  Sftyana  : — *  The  martial  troop  of  (indra)  the 
injurer  «ncamped  around  Indra  (accompanied)  by  the  swift-moving  (Maruns) : 
they  animated  him  with  abundant  praise;  like  (cattle)  penned  up  within  a  great 
fltaU,  the  embryonic  (waters)  issued  frum  the  (  Vritra)  who  had  arrived  iu  the 
form  of  darkness.' 

S  High  are  thy  feet :  as  travelling  through  the  heavens,  fft/enai :  4dLdvrikdn: 
jaekals.* — Wilson. 


488  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOS  t 

4  Speeding  at  once   to  sacrifice  thou  comest :  for  fiiendship 

thou  art  bringing  both  N&satyas. 
Thou  hadst  a  thousand  tresu9Ures  iu  possession.     The  AfyinBi 
0  thou  Hero,  gave  thee  riches. 

5  Olad,  for  the  race  that  rests  on  holy  Order,  with  friends  who 

hasten  to  their  gonl,  hath  Indra 
With  these  his  magic  powers  assailed  the  Dasyu :  he  cast 
away  the  gloomy  mists,  the  darkness. 

6  Two  of  like  name  for  him  didst  thou  demolish,  as  Indra  strik- 

ing  down  the  car  of  Ushas. 
With  thy  belovM  lofty  Friends  thou  earnest,  and  with  the 
assurance  of  thine  heart  thou  slewest. 

7  War-loving  Namuchi  thou  smotest,  robbing  the  Dftsa  of  his 

magic  for  the  Bishi. 
For  man  thou  madest  ready  pleasant  pathways,  paths  lead* 
ing  as  it  were  directly  God-ward. 

8  These  pames  of  thine  thou  hast  fulfilled  oompletely :  as  Lord, 

thou  Voidest  in  thine  arm,  0  Indra. 
In  thee,  tVrough  thy  great  might,  the  Gods  are  joyful :  the 
roots  of  trtQg  hast  thou  directed  upward. 

9  May  the  sweet  fc^maa  juices  make  him  happy  to  cast  his  quoit 

that  lies  in  deptt.  of  watei-s. 
Thou  from  the  udder  >^bich  o'er  earth  is  fastened  hast  poured 
the  milk  into  the  kine  ^^  herbage. 

10  When  others  call  him  offspring  of  the  Courser,  my  meaning  is 
that  Mighty  Power  produced  hv^. 
He  came  from  Manyu  and   remaineCk  in   houses  :  whence   he 
hath  sprung  is  known  to  Indra  only. 

6  Two  of  like  name :  or,  of  similar  nature;  gloomy  mists  and  darkness.  The 
car  of  Ushas:  see  IV.  30.  8 — 11.  2'he  ansuranee  of  thy  heart:  thy  trusted 
thuuderbolt. 

8  Thou  hast  f-ulfilled :  hast  acted  in  full  acc«>rdance  with  the  names  thoa 
bearest,  such  as  Vritra-slayer,  Sakra,  etc.  Thou  holdett:  the  thuuderbolt. 
The  roots  of  trees :  the  clouds  are  often  compared  to  i«ees.  The  rain  is  their 
fruit,  and  when  they  pour  it  down  their  roots  are  suppoty^d  to  be  turned  up- 
ward. 

9  Quoit :  chah'dm  :  meaning  the  thunderbolt.     The  udder :  the  firmament. 

10  The  Courser :  meaning  Heaven.  Manyu :  wrath,  passion  or  ardour, 
personified.  My  meaning  is :  the  speaker  declares  that  he  is  raised  above  tl»e 
common  mythological  explanations.  He  considers  the  God  to  have  spruug 
from  a  transcendental  Power. — Ludwig. 

Grassmanu  banishes  this  hymn  to  his  Appendix  as  being  generally  obseure 
and  iu  parts  absolutely  unintelligible.  I  have,  for  the  moat  part,  followed 
Ludwig'a  iiiterpretation. 


MTMN  74.]  tHE  JtlOVEDA.  489 

1 1  Like  birds  of  beauteous  wing   the   Priyamedhas,  Eishis,    im- 
ploring, have  come  nigh  to  Indra  : 
Dispel  the  darkness  and  fill  full  our  vision  :  deliver  us  as  men 
whom  snares  entangle. 

HYMN  LXXIV.  Indra. 

I  AM  prepared  to  laud  with  song  or  worship  the   Noble  Ones 

who  are  win  earth  and  heaven, 
Or  Coursers  who  have  triumphed  in  the  contest,  or  those  who, 

famed,  have  won  the  prize  with  glory. 

2  Their  call,  the  call  of  Gods,  went  up  to  heaven  :  they  kissed 

the  ground  with  glory-seeking  spirit. 
There    where  the   Gods  look  on  for   happy  fortune,  and   like 
the  kindly  heavens  bestow  their  bounties. 

3  This  is  the  song  of  those  Immortal  Beings  who  long  for  trea^ 

sures  in  their  full  perfection* 
May  these,  completing  prayers  and  sacrifices,  bestow  upon  us 
wealth  where  naught  is  wanting. 

4  Those  living  men  extolled  thy  deed,  0  Indra,  those  who  wpuld 

fain  burst  through  the  stall  of  cattle, 
Fain  to  milk  her  who  bare  but  once,  great,  lofty,  whose   Sons 
are  many  and  her  streams  past  number. 

5  Sachivan,  win  to  your  assistance  Indra  who  never  bends,  who 

overcomes  his  foemen, 
Ribhukshan,    Maghavan,    the  hymn's  upholder,   who,  rich  in 
food,  bears  man's  kind  friend,  the  thunder. 

6  Since  he   who  won   of  old   anew  hath   triumphed;  Indra  hath 

earned  his  name  of  Vritra-slayer. 
He  hath  appeared,  the  mighty   Lord  of  Conquest.    What  we 
would  have  him  do  let  him  accomplish* 


The  subject  of  the  hymn  is  a  coming  horse-race,  and  the  Rishi  invokes  in 
favour  of  the  Yajam&na,  the  Vasus,  racers  who  have  won  the  prize  in  former 
times,  and  the  men  who  owned  them.  Indra  also  is  appealed  to  for  help. 
See  Vediiche  Studien,  I.  p.  129. 

2  The  call  of  Gods :  the  Gods  are  imagined  as  present  and  interested  in  the 
race.  They  kUaed  the  ground :  the  horses  Ughtly  touched  the  earth  as  they 
ran. 

4  Tho$e  living  men :  the  Angirases.  ffer  who  hare  hut  once :  Heaven,  accord- 
ing to  S&yaua  ;  Earth,  according  to  Gi  assmann.  Prisni,  the  mother  of  the 
Ifaruts,  must  be  meant. — Ludwig.     See  YI.  48.  22. 

5  Sachivan:  apparently  a  man's  name.     '  Celebrator  of  holy  rites.* — Wilson. 

0  He  who  won  of  old :  the  YajamAna.    ffe  hath  appeared  :  iViA  -^^cy^X.  \\sAir 
£^ne8  Indra  himself  to  be  present. 


490  THB  HYMNS  OP  .  iBOOR  X 

HYMN  LXXV.  TheElven. 

Tab  singer,  0  ye  Waters,  in  Vivasv^n's  place,  sliall  tell  year 
grandeur  forth  that  is  beyond  compare. 
The  Riverti  have  come  forward  triply,  seven  and  seven.     Siodhu 
in  might  surpasses  all  the  streams  that  flow. 

2  Varuna   cut  the   channels  for  thy  forward  course,  O  Sindhu, 

when  thou  rannest  on  to  win  the  race. 
Thou  speedest  o'er  precipitous  ridges  of  the  earth,  when  thou 
art  Lord  and  Leader  of  these  moving  floods. 

3  His  roar  is  lifted  up  to  heaven  above  the  earth  :  he  puts  forth 

endless  vigour  with  a  flash  of  light. 
Like  floods  of  rain  that  fall  in  thunder  from  the   cloud,  so  Sin- 
dhu rushes  on  bellowing  like  a  bull. 

4  Like  mothers  to  their  calves,  like  milch-kine  with  their  milk, 

so,  Sindhu,  unto  thee  the  roaring  rivers  run. 
Thou  leadest  as  a  warrior  king  thine  army's  wings  what  time 
thou  comest  in  the  van  of  these  swift  streams. 

b  Favour  ye  this  my  land,  0  GangA,  Yamun^,  0  Sutudrt,  Para- 
shni,  and  Sarasvati : 
With   Asikni,  Vitastal,  0  Marudvridha,  0  Arj!kiy&  with  Sa- 
shoma  hear  my  call. 

6  First  with  Trishtima  thou  art  eager  to  flow  forth,  with  Rasa, 
and  Susartu,  and  with  Svetyll  here, 
With   Kubhsl ;  and  with  these,  Sindhu  !  and  Mehatnu,  thou 
seekest  in  thy  course  Krumu  and  Gomatl. 

I  0  ye  WaUn :  apparently  the  Rivers  are  adilresaed  as  representing  all  the 
diviue  Waters.  VivatvdrCs  place :  where  the  singers  stand  when  they  sing 
hymns.  Triply,  ieven  and  seven :  twenty-one  rivers  ;  two  other  sets  of  seven 
each  being  added  to  the  seven  chief  rivers  of  the  Panj&b.  S&yana  explaini 
diflferently  : — *  they  flowed  by  sevens  through  the  three  (worlds),' — Wilson. 
*  Each  set  of  seven  [streams]  has  followed  a  threefold  course.* — Muir.  *  By 
■even  and  seven in  three  courses.' — M.  Miiller. 

5  The  poet  addresses  first  the  most  distant  rivers.  Oangd :  the  Ganges  ii 
mentioned,  indirectly,  in  only  one  other  verse  of  the  Rlgveda,  and  even  there^ 
the  word  is  said  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  a  woman.  See  YI  45.  31. 
Yamund:  the  Jumna.  Situdri :  the  Sutlej  or  Satlaj.  Paruthni :  theRftvl: 
Saranatt:  see  VI.  61.  2.*  Afiknt:  the  ancient  Acesines  :  the  Vedic  name  of 
the  Chandrabh&gft,  the  present  Chen&b.  Vitastd :  probably  the  Jhelum,  the 
Hydasi)es  of  the  ^Greeks.  MarudvridM  :  meaning,  increased  by  the  Manits: 
not  identified.  Arjtktyd  and  Suskomd  are  said  by  Tilska  to  be  the  VipftB  and 
the  Sindhu  ;  but  this  is  not  possible,  and  it  is  uncertain  what  rivers  aie 
meant. 

6  Kubhdf  KrumUf  and  Oomati  have  been  mentioned  in  previous  Books. 
The  other  streams  whose  names  occur  in  this  stanza  are  probably  unimportant 

a^aenta  of  the  Indus.     All  th«kt  \a  kTiO'WTi  T^i^wcdlng  the  rivers  mentioned  in 
^tanzAM  5  and  6  may  be  fo^nd  In  Zvm.nivjT'*  AUwduoKw  Lthtu^Y^.  4.flt. 


MYMN  7e.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  4^1 

7  Flashing  aud  whitely-gleamiug  in  her  mightiness,  she  moves 

along  her  ample  volumes  through  the  realms, 
Most  active  of  the  active,  Sindhu  unrestraiued,  like  to  a  dap- 
pled mare,  beautiful,  fair  to  see. 

8  Rich  in  good  steeds  is  Sindhu,  rich  in  cars  and  robes,  rich  in 

gold,  nobly-fashioned,  rich  in  ample  wealth. 
Blest  Silamavati  and  joung  tyrndvati   invest   themselves  with 
raiment  rich  in  store  of  sweets. 

9  Sindhu  hath  yoked  her  car,   light-rolling,  drawn  by  steeds, 

and  with  that  car  shall  she  win  booty  in  this  fight. 
So   have  I  praised   its   power,   mighty   aud   unrestrained,  of 
independent  glory,  roaring  as  it  ruus. 

HYMN  LXXVL  Press-atonw. 

I  GRASP  at  you  when  power  and  strength  begin  to  dawn : 
bedew  ye,  Indra  and  the  Maruts,  Heaven  and  Earth, 

That  Day  and  Night,  in  every  hall  of  sacrifice,  may  wait  on  us 
and  bless  us  when  they  first  spring  forth. 

2  Press  the  libation  out,  m  )st  excellent  of  all :  the  Pressing- 

stone  is  grasped  like  a  hand-guided  steed. 
So  let  it  win  the  valour  that  subdues  the  foe,  and  the  fleet 
courser's  might  that  speeds  to  ample  wealth. 

3  Juice  that  this  Stone  pours  out  removes  defect  of  ours,  as  in 

old  time  it  brought  prosperity  to  man. 

7  In  her  mightiness :  in  the  preceding  stanza*  Sindhu  appears  to  be  a  River- 
God,  but  in  this  and  following  verses  the  epithets  are  feminine. 

8  SilamdvcUi  and  UrniuoUt  appear  to  be  names  of  rivers.  According  to 
SAyana,  the  words  are  epithets  of  Sindhu  and  mean  respectively  '  abounding 
in  Stlamd  plants/ ^said  to  be  used  for  cord^tge,  and  *rich  in  wool.'  The 
meaning  of  the  second  half  of  the  second  line  is  uncertain  :  — '  wears  [as  only 
one  river  is  supposed  to  be  the  subject]  honey-growing  (flowers).' — Wilson. 

9  In  this  fight:  the  hymn  may,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  be  a  prayer 
for  aid  in  a  battle  that  is  to  be  fought  on  the  banks  of  the  Sindhu  or  Indus. 
The  hymn  has  been  trausliterated  aud  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Mutr,  0.  S.  Texts, 
V.  343 — 345,  aud  a  version  of  stanzas  1 — 8  is  given  by  Prof.  Zimmer,  Altindis- 
ekes  Leben,  p.  4.  A  complete  translation,  with  full  explanatory  notes,  is  given 
in  Max  Miiller's  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us  ?,  pp.  164—168. 

I  7  grasp  at  you :  *  I  propitiate  you.' — Wilson.  Power  and  strength :  the 
morning  beams  which  bring  new  vigour.  Day  and  Night :  or,  *  both  day-halves.* 

3  Toman:  or,  to  Manu.  Tvashtar*s  milk-blent  juice:  the  Soma  juice  brewed 
by  Tvashtar  for  the  year,  which  represents  the  life-sustaining  power  of  Nature. 
— Ludwig.  Bright  with  the  hue  of  steeds :  tawny -coloured.  S&yana  interprets 
differently  : — 'when  the  son  of  Twashiri,  hidden  by  the  (stolen)  cows,  and 
assuming  the  form  of  a  horse,  (was  to  be  slaiu).' — Wilson.  Trisiras  the  son  of 
Tvashtar  was  regarded  as  an  enemy  of  th«  God«.  lu^ra  ^^'^79  \ivvsi  «>w^  \f^«:^ 
ponBesBioD  of  the  8om^ 


492  TffJS  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  t 

At  sacrifices  they  established  holy  rites  on  Tvashtar^B  milk- 
blent  juice  bright  with  the  hue  of  steeds. 

4  Drive  ye  the  treacherous  demons  far  away  frotn  us:  keep 
Nirriti  afar  aud  banish  penury. 
Pour  riches  forth  for  us  with  troops  of  hero  sonSy  and  bear  ye 
up.  0  Stones,  the  song  that  visits  Gods. 

6  To  you  who  are  more  mighty  than  the  heavens  themselveSf 
who,  finishing  your  task  with  more  than  Vibhvan's  speed, 
More  rapidly  than   V&yu  seize  the  Soma  juice,    better  tbaii 
Agni  give  us  food,  to  you  I  sing. 

6  Stirred  be  the  glorious  Stones :  let  it  press  out  the  Juice,  the 

Stone  with  heavenly  song  that  reaches  up  to  heaven. 
There  where  the  meu  draw  forth  the  meath  for  which  they 
long,  sending  their  voice  around  in  rivalry  of  speed. 

7  The  Stones  press  out  the  Soma,  swift  as  car-borne  men,  and, 

eager  for  tite  spoil,  drain  forth  the  sap  thereof. 
To  fill  the  beaker,  they  exhaust  the  udder's  store,  as  the  men 
purify  oblations  with  their  lips. 

8  Ye,  present  men,  have  been  most  skilful  in  your  work,  even 

ye,  0  Stones  who  pressed  Soma  for  Indra's  drink. 
May  all  ye  have  of  fair  go  to  the  Heavenly  Race,  and  all  your 
treasure  to  the  earthly  worabipper. 

HYMN  LXXVIL  Maruts. 

As  with  their  voice  from  cloud  they  sprinkle  treasure  so  are  the 

wise  mail's  liberal  sacrifices. 
I  praise  their  Company  that  merits  worship  as  the  good  Manits' 

priest  to  pay  them  honour. 


4  Nirfiti :  the  Goddess  of  Death  and  Destruction. 

6  Vibkvan :  one  of  the  three  Uibbus.     Vdyu :  or,  the  wind. 

6  The  men :  meaning  the  press-stones.    Gf.  stanza  8. 

7  The  udder's  store:  the  juice  contained  in  the  milky  Soma-plant.  Wiik 
tkeir  lips :  with  the  praises  that  they  utter. 

8  Wwshippcr :  SAyana  explains  sunvati  by  yajamdndyaf  to  the  YajamAna 
or  sacrificer.  The  more  literal  translation  would  be  *  to  the  presser,*  the  man 
who  presses  out  or  e£fuses  the  Soma  juice. 

1  This  stantsa  is  obscure.  According  to  Sdyana.  vijdniishaji  (the  wise  man's) 
ii  formed  from  jan,  to  generate,  and  not  from  jfidy  to  know  : — *  they  are  the 
generators  (of  the  world)  like  sacrifices  abounding  in  libation8.'~Wilson.  The 
good  MaruW  priest :  either  the  band  of  the  Maruts  themselves  regarded  at  a 
Bmbman,  or  a  Iiuman  priest  speciaW*^  ftkVWei^  va  vv^"^^^^^^^^  them.  Prof.  M. 
MuJler  tmnsliitea  differently.     See  Vedic  Uymu*,  \,  ^.  ^VL, 


HYMN  77.  ]  THE  RIG  VEDA .  493 

2  The  youths  have  wrought  their  ornaments  for  glory  through 
many  nights, — this  noble  band  of  Maruts. 

Like  stags  the  Sons  of  Dyaus  have   striven  onward,  the  Sons 
of  Aditi  grown  strong  like  pillars. 

.3  They  wlio  extend  beyond  the  earth  and  heaven,  by  their  own 
mass,  as  from  the  cloud  spreads  Sdrya ; 

Like  mighty  Heroes  covetous  of  glory,  like  heavenly  gallants 
who  destroy  the  wicked. 

4  When  ye  come  nigh,  as  in  the   depth  of  waters,  the  earth  is 

loosened,  as  it  were,  and  shaken. 

This  your  all-feeding  sacrifice  approaches :  come  all  united, 
fraught,  as  'twere,  with  viands. 

5  Ye  are  like  horses  fastened  to  the  chariot  poles,  luminous  with 

your  beams,  with  splendour  as  at  dawn  ; 
Like  self-bright  falcons,  punishers  of  wicked  men,  like  hover- 
ing birds  urged  forward,  scattering  rain  around. 

6  When  ye  come  forth,  0  Maruts,  from  the  distance,  from  the 

great  treasury  of  rich  possessions. 
Knowing,  0  Vasus,  boons  that  should  be  granted,  even  from 
afar  drive  back  the  men  who  hate  us. 

7  He  who,  engaged  in  the  rite's   final  duty,  brings,   as  a  man, 

oblation  to  the  Maruts, 
Wins  him  life's  wealthy   fulness,  blest  with  heroes :  he  shall 
be  present,  too,  where  Gods  drink  Soma. 

8  For  these  are  helps  adored  at  sacrifices,  bringing  good  fortune 

by  their  name  Adityas. 

Speeding  on  cars   let  them  protect   our  praises,   delighting  in 
our  sacrifice  and  worship. 


2  ThU  nolle  hand  of  MartUs :  Prof.  Ludwig  Buggeets  that  sum^rutam 
means  here  a  festival  held  in  honour  of  the  Maruts  at  the  end  of  the  periodi- 
cal rains,  and  that,  after  many  nights,  the  Maruts  adorn  themselves  for  this. 
PUlars  :  I  follow  Ludwig  ;  but  the  meaning  of  aJerSth  is  uncertain.  Geldner 
fakes  it  to  mean  '  horses/  a  parallelism  to  stags,  or  antelopes.  S&yana  makes 
fid,  like,  negative,  and  explains  akrSth  by  dkramanaatl^h  :—-*  the  a wiit-goin^ 
Bons  of  Aditi  do  not  increase  in  glory,* — Wilson. 

4  ThJs  your  all-feeding  sacHfice  approaches  :  *  this  manifold  sacrifice  comes 
towards  you.* — Wilson. 

7  In  the  rite's  final  duty :  S4yana  explains  tidrichi  yajfii  by  yajfie  samdpta- 
gtutUce  tampHrne  sati,  when  the  sacrifice  has  its  praise  perfected,  when  the 
sacrifice  is  complete.  As  a  man:  according  to  Ludwig,  'no  longer  a  man/ 
that  is,  not  in  his  human  character  but  having  become  divine  by  worship. 
Where  the  Oods  drink  Soma :  he,  a  God  himself,  shall  be  admitted  to  the 
Gods'  society. 


49i  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  1 

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Mtroii 

Yb  by  your  hymns  are  like  high-tboughted  Bingers,  akilfo], 

inviting  Gods  witb  saciifices; 
Fair  to  bebold,   like  Kings,  with   brigbt  adorDment,  like  spot- 
less gallants,  leaders  of  the  people : 

2  Like  fire  with  flashing  flame,  breast-bound  witb  chains  of  gold, 

like  tempest-blasts,  self-moving,  swift  to  lend  your  aid; 
As  best  of  all  f  oreknowers,  excellent  to  guide,  like  Somas,  good 
to  guard  the  man  who  follows  Law. 

3  Shakeis  of  all,  like  gales  of  wind  they  travel,  like  tongaeB ol 

burning  fires  in  their  efiiilgence. 
Mighty  are  they  as  Warriors  clad  in  armonri  and,  like  th« 
Fathers'  prayers,  Most  Bounteous  Givers. 

4  Like  spokes  of  car-wheels  in  one  nave  united,  ever  Yicioriooi 

like  heavenly  Heroes, 
Shedding  their  precious  balm  like  youthful  suitors,  they  vaiM 
their  voice  and  chant  their  psalm-  as  singers. 

5  They  who  are  fleet  to  travel   like  the  noblest  Steeds,   long  tfl 

obtain  the  prize  like  bounteous  charioteers. 
Like  waters  speeding  on  with  their  precipitous  floods,  lib 
omniform  Angirases  with  S^nria-bymns. 

6  Bom  from  the   stream,  like  press-stones  are   the  Princes,  fa 

ever  like  the  stones  that  crush  in  pieces ; 
Sons  of  a  beauteous  Dame,  like  playful  children,  like  a  grea 
hobt  upon  the  march  with  splendour. 

7  Like   ra}  s  of  Dawn,  the  visitors  of  sacrifice,    they  shine  witl 

ornaments  as  eager  to  be  bright. 
Like  rivers  hasting  on,   glittering  with  their  spears,  from  h 
away  they  measure  out  the  distances. 

8  Gods,  send  us  happiness  and  make  us  wealthy,   letting  us  sing 

ers  prosper,  0  ye  Maruts. 
Bethink  you  of  our  praise  and  of  our  friendship :  ye  from  of  oil 
have  riches  to  vouchsafe  us. 

HYMN  LXXIX.  j^ 

I  HAVE  beheld  the  might  of  this  Great  Being,  Immortal  in* 

midst  of  tribes  of  mortals. 
His  jaws  now  open  and  now  bhut  together  :  much  they  devoil 

insatiately  chewing. 

4  Shedding  their  precious  balm :  pouring  out  the  fertilizing  rain  aa  111 
aa  young  wooers  give  presents. 

6  BoiTi  from  the  itream :  from  the  sea  of  air,  or  from   Sindhu,  the 

7  They  measure  out  the  dUtarice*:    *Viv«^  traversed    leagues.' — ^ 
'They  measure  many  milea* — "M..llLvvi\ftT. 


HYMN  80.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  495 

d  His  eyes  are  turned  awaj,    his  head  is  hidden :  unsated  with 
his  tongue  he  eats  the  fuel. 
With  hands   upraised,  with    reverence  in  the  houses,  for  him 
they  quickly  bring  his  food  together. 

3  Seeking,  as  'twere,  his  Mother's  secret  bosom,  he,  like  a  child, 

creeps  on  through  wide-spread  bushes. 
One  he  finds   glowing  like   hot  food  made  ready,   and  kissing 
deep  within  the  earth's  recesses. 

4  This  holy    Law  I  tell  you,   Earth  and  Heaven  :  the  Infant   at 

his  birth  devours  his  Parents. 
No  knowledge  of  the  God  have  I,  a  mortal.    Yea,  Agni  know- 
eth  best,  for  he  hath  wisdom. 

5  This  man  who  quickly  gives  him  food,  who  offers  his  gifts  of 

oil  and  butter  and  supports  him, — 
Him  with  his  thousand  eyes  he  closely  looks  on :  thou  showest 
him  thy  face  from  all  sides,  Agni. 

6  Agni,  hast  thou  committed  sin  or  treason  among  the  Gods  ?  In 

ignorance  I  ask  thee. 
Playing,  not  playing,  he  gold-hued  and  toothless,  hath  cut  his 
food  up  as  the  knife  a  victim. 

7  He,    born  in  wood  hath  yoked  his  horses  rushing    in  all  direc- 

tions, held  with  reins  that  glitter. 
The   well-born  friend  hath  carved  his  food  with  Vasus :  in  all 
his  limbs  he  hath  increased  and  prospered. 

HYMN  LXXX.  Agni. 

Aoxi  bestows  the  fleet  prize-winning  courser ;  Agni,  the  hero 

famed  and  firm  in  duty. 
Agni  pervades  and  decks  the  earth  and  heaTen,  and  fills  the 

fruitful  dame  who  teems  with  heroes. 


2  HU  eyes :  according  to  Sftyana^  the  eyes  of  Agni  are  the  distant  Sun  and 
Hoon,  and  hia  head  is  hidden  in  mens'  stomachs,  in  the  shape  of  the  heat 
which  enables  them  to  digest  their  food.  Bis  food :  the  sticks  for  fuel,  which 
are  bound  up  into  fagots. 

8  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.     Agni,  born  from  the  wood  of  the  fire-sticks, 

f*  leems,  as  he  creeps  through  the  brushwood  that  he  is  burning,   to  seek 

entrance  again  into  his  mother's  pide.     He  then  finds  an  old  dry  tree  or  log, 

,.  which  had  been  deeply  rooted  in  the  earth,  and  feeds  on  it  as  on  food  that 

!  has  been  specially  prepared  for  him. 

4  His  Parents :  the  two  fire-sticks  from  which  he  has  been  produced. 
I       6  Mast  thou  committed  sin  ? :  Art  thou  as  voracious  and  destructive  In 
f  heaven  as  thou  art  on  earth  ?  Playing^  not  playing :  playing  about  the  fuel, 
E  snd  yet  earnestly  intent  on  devouring  his  food.   '  Sporting  (here),  not  sporting 
'  (Hiere).* — Wilson.     A  victim :  gSm :  ox  or  cow. 

7  The  vfell-bom  Friend :  Agni.     In  aU  his  limbi :  pdrvabKiK  :  * '^'\\3ci\qi^  ^"i 
wood/ — Wileon. 


496  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  X, 

2  Bldst  be  the  wood  that  feeds  the  active  Agni :  within  the  two 

great  worlds  hath  Agni  entered. 
Agni  impels  a  single  man  to  battle,  and  with  him  rends  in 
pieces  many  a  foeman. 

3  Agni  rejoiced  the  ear  of  him  who  praised  him,  and  from  the 

waters  burnt  away  Jardtha. 
Agni  saved  Atri  in  the  fiery  cavern,  and  made  Nrimedha  rich 
with  troops  of  children. 

4  Agni  hath  granted  wealth  that  decks  the  hero,  and  sent  the 

sage  who  wins  a  thousand  cattle. 
Agni  hath  made  oblations  rise  to  heaven :  to  every  place  are 
Agni's  laws  extended. 

5  With  son^s  of  praise  the  Kishis  call  on  Agni ;  on  Agni,  heroes 

worsted  in  the  foray. 
Birds  flying  in  the  region  call  on  Agni :  around  a  thousand 
cattle  Agni  wanders. 

6  Races  of  human  birth  pay  Agni  worship,  men  who  have  sprung 

from  Nahus'  line  adore  him. 
Stablished  in  holy  oil  is  Agni's  pasture,  on  the  Gandharva 
path  of  Law  and  Order. 

7  The  Ribhus  fabricated  prayer  for  Agni,  and  we  with  mighty 

hymns  have  called  on  Agni. 
Agni,  Most  Youthful  God,  protect  the  aingor :  win  us  by  wor- 
ship, Agni,  great  possessions. 

HYMN  LXXXI.  Visvakarman. 

Hs  who  sate  down  as  Hofcar-priest,  the  Rishi,  our  Father, 

offering  up  all  things  existing. — 
He,  seeking  through  his  wish  a  great  possession,  came  among 

men  on  earth  as  archetypal. 

3  JariUha:  see  VII.  1.  7,  and  9.  6.  Atri:  his  deliverance  is  ascribed  to 
the  Asvins  in  I.  112.  7,  116.  8,  117,  3,  and  118.  7. 

5  Aroand  a  thousand  cattle :  in  the  fires  lig)ited  to  keep  off  wild  beasts 
and  demon:^  of  darkness. 

6  Oandharva  path :  sublime ;  that  which  the  Gandharvas  in  heaven  use 
to  travel. 

7  The  Ribhus  :  or  ^jlisbis  skilful  as  the  Ribhus. 

Visvakarman,  the  Otuntfic,  is  reprejieuted  in  this  hymn  as  the  universal 
Father  and  Generator,  the  Creator  of  all  things  and  Architect  of  the  worlds. 

1  All  things  existing :  regarded  as  being  contained  in  the  offerings  presented 
by  Visvakarman.  Through  his  wish:  through  his  desire  to  create.  Archety- 
pal :  the  meaning  of  prathamachhad  is  uncertain.  In  Wilson's  Translation 
'inventor*  is  a  misprint  for  'investor,'  that  is,  'first  investing  Agni  with  the 

worlds/    Aocording  to   Siyana's   exy>\3kU\x\>\ou»     *  \i\t^t  a\»i?«3ariug.' — Ludwig, 

'  The  Grst  worshipper.'— Walli^i. 


HYMN  81.]  THE  RIQVEDA,  4©7 

2  What  was  the  place  whereon  he  took  his  station  1     What  was 

it  that  supported  him  1     How  was  it  ? 
Whence  Visvakarman,  seeing  all,  producing  the  earth,  with 
tnighty  power  disclosed  the  heavens. 

3  He  who  hath  eyes  on  all  sides  round  about  him,  a  mouth  on 

all  sides,  arms  and  feet  on  all  sides. 

He,  the  Sole  Gkxl,  producing  earth  and  heaven,  weldeth  them, 
with  his  arms  as  wings,  together. 

4  What  waathe  tree,  what  wood  in  sooth  produced  it,  from  which 

they  fashioned  out  the  earth  and  heaven  ? 

Ye  thoughtful  men  inquire  within  your  spirit  whereon  he  stood 
when  he  established  all  things. 

5  Thine  highest,  lowest,  sacrificial  natures,  and  these  thy  mid- 

most here,  0  Visvakarman, 

Teach  thou  thy  friends  at  sacrifice,  0  BlessM,  and  come  thy- 
self, exalted,  to  our  worship. 

6  Bring  thou  thyself,  exalted  with  oblation,    0  Visvakarman, 

£arth  and  Heaven  to  worship. 

Let  other  men  around  us  live  in  folly  :  here  let  us  have  a  rich 
and  liberal  patron. 

7  Let  us  invoke  to-day,  to  aid  our  labour,  the  Lord  of  Speech, 

the  thought-swift  Visvakarman. 
May  he  hear  kindly  all  our  invocations  who  gives  all  bliss  for 
aid,  whose  works  are  righteous. 


3  Weldeth  them:  cp.  IV.  2.  17,  and  X.  72.  2.  With  hii  arms  cu  vnngt : 
fanning  the  flame  in  which  the  matter  is  smelted.  Ludwig  thinks  that 
whirlwinds,  produced  by  the  action  of  hands,  feet,  and  wings,  are  intended. 

4  The  first  half -line  occurs  also  in  X.  81.  7.  They :  the  makers  of  the 
world  directed  by  Paramesyara. — Sftyana. 

5  Or  the  first  half -line  may  be  rendered  : — '  Thy  sacrificial  formi,  the 
highest,  lowest.*  Come  thyself,  exalted,  to  our  worship :  *  exhilarated,  thyself 
offer  up  thyself.' — Muir.  *  Do  thou  sacrifice  to  thyself  delighting  thyself.'  — 
Wallis.  '  According  to  Mahldhara  the  meaning  is  that  man  is  incompetent 
to  worship  the  creator,  that  is^  in  his  forms,  and  it  must  be  done  by 
himself.'— Wilson.  I  have  adopted  Prof.  Ludwig's  explanation  of  the  last  clause. 

6  Bring to  worship  :  or,  sacrifice  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 

7  Our  labour :  the  arduous  work  of  sacrificing.  *  In  our  conflict.' — Miuir. 
The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  pp.  6,  7,  by 
Mr.  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rlgveda,  pp.  81—83,  and,  partly,  by  Prof.  F. 
Max  Miiller  in  his  Hihhert  Lectures,  p.  293f. 

See  sleo  Mme.  Z^aaide  Kagozin,  Vedic  /ndia,  p^.  ^^\  4V^. 
32 


4W  THE  HYMSS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

HYMN   LXXXII.  Visvakarman. 

Thb  Father  of  the  eye,  the  Wise  in  spirit,  created  both  these 

worlds  submerged  in  fatness. 
Then  when  the  eastern  ends  were  firmly  fastened,  the  heavens 

and  the  eartli  were  far  extended. 

2  Mighty  in  mind  and  power  is  Visvakarman,  Maker,  Disposer, 

and  most  lofty  Presence. 
Their  offerings  joy  in  rich  juice  where  they  value  One,  only 
One,  beyond  the  Seven  Kishis. 

3  Father  who  made  ns,  he  who,  as  Disposer,  knoweth  all  raceift 

and  all  things  existing, 
Even  he  alone,  the  Deities'  name-giver, — him  other  beings 
seek  for  information. 

4  To  him  in  sacrifice  they  offered  treasures, — Kishis  of  old,  in 

numerous  troops,  as  singers, 
Who,  in  the  distant,  near,  and  lower  region,  made  ready  all 
these  things  that  have  existence. 

5  That  which  is  earlier  than  this  earth  and  heaven,  hefore  the 

Asuras  and  Gois  had  being, — 
What  was  the  germ  primeval  which  the  waters  received  where 
all  the  Gods  were  seen  together  ? 

6  The  waters,  they  received  that  germ  primeval    wherein  the 

Gods  were  gathered  all  together. 
It  rested  set  upon  the  Unbarn's  navel,  that  One  wherein  abide 
all  things  existing. 

7  Ye  will  not  find  him  who  produced  these  creatures  :  another 

thing  hath  risen  up  among  j'ou. 
Enwrapt   in   misty    cloud,    with    lips   that   stammer,  hymn- 
chanters  wander  and  are  discontented. 


1  The  PcUher  of  the  eye  :  Visvakarman,  who  made  the  light  which  enaUes 
the  eye  to  see.  Submerged  in  fatness :  S&yana  ezplaing  ghritdm  here  hy 
*  water  : ' — *  engendered  the  water,  (and  then)  tliese  two  (heayen  and  earth) 
floating  (on  the  waters).* — Wilson. 

2  Most  lofty  Presence :  literally,  the  highest  apparition  ;  the  highest  image 
or  object  of  spiritual  contemplation.  Their  offerings :  the  offerings,  or  p«r- 
haps  the  wishes,  of  the  Fathers,  semi-personified.  I%e  Seven  Rishis:  the 
constellation  Ui^sa  Major,  the  seven  stars  of  which  are  the  great  Kishis  Martchi, 
Atri,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  and  Vasishtha.  The  meaning  is  thnt 
the  spirits  of  the  blest  enjoy  the  fulfilment  of  all  their  desires  beyond  the 
starry  heavens  where  the  One  Being,  the  great  Creator,  dwells.    - 

3  For  information  :  to  learn  who  is  the  Supreme  God  ;  or  what  their  seve- 
ral functions  are. 

4  Distant,  near,  and  loioer  region :  meaning,  apparently,  the  heavenly,  the 
earthly,  and  the  intermediate  atmosphere. 

6  The  Unborn,  Aja,  seems  here  to  be  identified  with  Visyakarman.     See 
Fedic  India.,  pp.  423,  424. 
/  Another  thing :  meaning,  accordini^  to  XXv*  CiQtMOKoX».V«,  ^X\v«iiurQw& 


HYMN  83.]  THE  RIQVBDA.  499 

HYMN  LXXXIir.  Manyu. 

Hb  who  hath  reverenced  thee,  Manyu,  destructive  bolt,  breeda 
^  for  himself  forthwith  all  conquering  energy. 
Arya  aud  D&sa  will  we  conquer  with  thine  aid,  with  thee  the 
Conqueror,  with  conquest  conquest-sped. 

2  Manyu  was  Indra,   yea,    the   God    was   Manyu,   Manju   was 

Hotar,  Varuna,  J^tavedas. 
The  tribes  of  human  lineage  worship  Manyu.    Accordant  with 
thy  fervour,  Manyu,  guard  us. 

3  Come  hither,  Manyu,  mightier  than  the   mighty ;  chase,  with 

thy  fervour  for  ally,  our  foemen. 
Slayer  of  foes,  of   Vritra,  and  of   Dasyu,  bring  thou  to  us  all 
kinds  of  wealth  and  treasure. 

4  For  thou  art,  Manyu,  of  surpassing  vigour,  fierce,    queller   of 

the  foe,  and  self-existent. 
Shared    by   all   men,  victorious,   subduer :  vouchsafe   to   us 
superior  strength  in  battles. 

5  I  have  departed,  still  without  a  portion,  wise  God  !  according 

to  thy  will,  the  Mighty. 
I,  feeble  man,  was  wroth  with  thee,  0  Manyu  :  I   am  myself ; 
come  thou  to  give  me  vigour. 

6  Come  hither,  I  am  all  thine   own ;  advancing   turn  thou   to 

me.  Victorious,  All-supporter  ! 

is  a  different  entity  from  you  who  are  sentient  beings,  who  have  individual 
consciousness,  and  so  forth.'^-See  Editor's  note  in  Wilson's  translation. 
Sftyaua  '  gives  the  general  sense  of  the  last  clause  [of  the  stanza]  as  '^  You 
are  merely  anxious  for  enjoyment  in  this  world  and  in  the  next,  therefore 
you  know  nothing  of  Vi^vakarman"  taking  uhihasdsah  as  implying  singing 
hymns  with  a  view  to  gaining  felicity  in  a  future  state.  Mahtdhara  has  a 
similar  explanation  :  *^  you  who  are  engaged  in  the  enjoyments  of  this  world 
or  the  next,  being  subject  to  false  knowledge  or  ignorance,  have  no  knowledge 
of  the  Truth."  '—Wilson. 

With  regard  to  this  and  the  preceding  hymn  Mr.  Wallis  observes  that 
they  make  uo  attempt  to  explain  in  what  way  the  process  of  sacrifice  OQuld 
be  regarded  as  an  act  of  creation.  We  are  told  little  more  than  that  Visva* 
karman  was  a  primeval  sacrificer  and  also  a  creator  ;  we  hive  no  hint  how  to 
combine  the  two  ideas  into  a  harmonious  unity.  See  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda, 
pp.  83,  84,  and  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  IV.  7,  8,  where  the  hymn  is  translated  and 
some  of  its  difficulties  are  discussed.  Pruf.  Ludwig's  Commentary  is  especi- 
ally full  and  valuable,  and  should  be  consulted  by  all  students  of  the  Veda. 

1  Manyu :  Anger,  Passion,  personified. 

3  With  thy  fervour :  tdpctsd:  tdpas  means  'heat,'  'burning,'  and,  Mcondly, 
penance,  rigorous  abstraction. 

5  Withcrat  a  poHion :  without  a  share  in  thy  favours.     /  am  iiw^tclf  *.  \  ^.xgl 
just  what  I  am  ;  a  weak  mortal,  for  whose  infiLrmlty  «k\\ow%XLQ«i^v>^^\)«  \sAi^.^< 
« Beins^  (iacorporAted  with)  my  body,  approftcli  me,'— WV\s««k, 


500  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1. 

Come  to  me,  Manyu,  Wielder  of  the  Thunder  :  bethink  thee  of 
thy  friend,  and  slay  the  Dasyius. 

7  Approach,  and  on  my  right  hand  hold  thy  station  :  bo  shall  we 
slay  a  multitude  of  foemen. 
The  best  of  meath  I  offer  to  support  thee  :  may  we  be  first  to 
drink  thereof  in  quiet. 

HYMN   LXXXIV.  Manyu. 

BoBNK  on  with  thee,  0  Manyu  girt  by  Maruts,  let  our  brave 

men,  impetuous,  bursting  forward, 
March  on,  like  flames  of  fire  in  form,  exulting,    with   pointed 

arrows,  sharpening  their  weapons. 

2  Flashing  like  fire,  be  thou,  0  conquering  Manyii,  invoked,  0 

Victor,  as  our  army's  leader. 
Slay  thou  our  foes,    distribute   their  possessions  :  show  forth 
thy  vigour,  scatter  those  who  hate  us. 

3  0  Manyu,   overcome  thou  our  assailant :  on  !  breaking,  slay- 

ing, crushing  down  the  foemen. 
They  have  not  hindered   thine   impetuous   vigour  :  Mightiy, 
Sole  bom  !  thou  makest  them  thy  subjects. 

4  Alone  of  many  thou   art   worshipped,   Manyu :  sharpen   the 

spirit  of  each  clan  for  battle. 
With  thee  to  aid,  0  thou  of  perfect  splendour,  we  will  uplift  the 
glorious  shout  for  conquest. 

5  Unyielding,   bringing   victory  like   Indra,  0    Manyu,  be  thou 

here  our  Sovran  Ruler. 
To  thy  dear  name,  0  Victor,  we  sing  praises  :  we    know   the 
spring. from  which  thou  art  come  hither. 

6  Twin-born  with  power,  destructive  bolt  of  thunder,  the  highest 

conquering  might  is  thiue,  Subduer ! 
Be  friendly  to  us  in  thy  spirit,    Manyu,    0   Much-invoked,  in 
shock  of  mighty  battle. 

7  For  spoil  let  Varuna  and  Manyu  give  us  the  wealth  of   both 

sides  gathered  and  collected  ; 
And  let  our  enemies  with  stricken  spirits,   overwhelmed   with 
terror,  slink  away  defeated. 

1  Likejlames  offirt  inform:  otgnirUpdh:  Homer's  oi/iag  wvpbg  atOoiilyoca 
3  Sole  horn :  *  O  thou  who  art  without  companion- — Wilson. 
5  The  spring :  the  source. 

7  For  spoil :  the  preservation  of  their  own   property  and  the   seissure  of 
their  enemies'  goods    being  regarded   as   a  double  oonquest.     Or   dhdnam 
udJidyam  may  mean  wealth  oi  both  kmd&,  horses  and  cows. 
ThiB  by  am  and  the  preceding;  are  \ioV)«>  tei^%aX^^,^Nt»r\'^%»^%^^l^uMsrific«Bto 
ensure  ^he  destruction  ot  euemiea. 


M  ItMN  8^.]  TSE  AtQ  VSDA .  501 

HYMN  LXXXV.       *  Sdryft's  Bridal. 

TaUTd  is  the  base  that  bears  the  earth  ;  by  Sdiya  are  the  heav- 
ens sustained. 

By  Law  the  Aditjas  stand  secure,  and  Soma  holds  fails  plaoe  in 
heaven. 

2  By  Soma  are  the  Adityas  strong,  by  Soma  mighty  is  the  earth. 
Thus  Soma  in  the  midst  of  all  these  constellations  hath  his  place. 

3  One  thinks,  when  they  have  brayed  the  plant,  that  he  hath 

drunk  the  Soma's  juice ; 
Of  him  whom  Brahmans  truly  know  as  Soma  no  one  ever  tastes. 

4  Soma,  secured  by  sheltering  rules,  guarded  by  hymns  in  6^ ihatf, 
Tbou  standest  listeuing  to  the  stones  :  none  taste;s  of  thee  who 

dwells  on  earth. 

5  When  they  begin  to  drink  thee,  then,  0  God,  thou  swellest  out 

again. 
Vayu  is  Soma's  guardian  God.     The  Moon  is  that  which  shapes 
the  years. 

6  Raibhi  was  her  dear  bridal  friend,  and  Ndr&sanst  led  her  home. 
Lovely  was  Sdry^'s  robe :  she  came  to  that  which  G&thll  had 

adorned, 

7  Thought  was  the  pillow  of  her  couch,  sight  was  the  unguent 

for  her  eyes : 
Her  treasury  was  earth  and  heaven  when  Shryi  went  unto 
her  Lord. 


Tbe  main  subject  of  this  composite  hymn,  which  is  one  of  the  latest  in  the 
Rigyeda,  is  the  ceremony  of  marriage  in  general  and  more  especially  the  wed- 
ding of  Sdryft,  the  Daughter  of  the  Sun,  another  form  of  Dawn,  who  is  re- 
garded as  the  typical  bride. 

1  Tru^ :  or  reality  ;  sdtyarHf  used  interchangeably  with  f  (torn,  the  Law 
and  Ordkr  of  the  universe. 

2  B]f  Soma :  by  the  power  of  the  deified  Soma  whose  influence  perrades, 
quickens,  and  supports  all  existence.  In  the  second  line  Soma  is  the  Moon, 
but  perhaps  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  other  sense  also  of  the  word.  Thett 
eomtellations :  the  nakahatrat  or  lunar  mansions.  '  In  the  centre  of  these 
0tars.* — Muir, 

S  Know  as  Soma :  know  to  be  the  Moon,  regarded  as  the  food  of  Gods  only. 

4  By  hymvs  in  Brikatt :  that  is  by  hymns  in  that  metre.  But  the  meaning 
of  Mrhataih  is  uncertain.  According  to  SAya^a,  the  BArhatas  are  the  seven 
guardians  of  the  Soma,  Svftna,  Bhr&ja,  Anghft  ri,  and  others. 

5  They :  the  Qods.  Thee :  the  ambrosia  contained  in  thee,  which  the 
Gods  drink  during  the  waning  of  the  Moon.     0  Ood :  Soma,  the  Moon. 

tf  Soma  is  the  deity  of  the  preceding  five  stanzas.  Sury&*s  Bridal  is  th« 
subject  of  6—17.  Raibhi,  Ndt'd$an»1,  and  Odthd  are  ritual  verse,  eulogistic 
bymn,  and  non-Vedic  song  personified. 

7  Treoiury :  h5tah :  meaning,  probably,  trouMeauoT  \>tv\^o>i\&\u     k.^eft»t^- 
Jn^  to  somf  tkf  l>9S  ^l  JlHKfy  of  the  chariot  ia  mteixded. 


502  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

8  Hjmns  were  the  cross-bars  of  the  pole,  Kurira-metre  decked 
the  car : 
The  bridesmen  were  the  Asvin  Pair  :  Agni  was  leader  of  the 
train. 

d  Soma  was  he  who  wooed  the  maid  :  the  groomsmen  were  both 
Asvins,  when 
The  Sun-God  Savitar  bestowed  his  willing  Sdry&  on  her  Lord. 

10  Her  spirit   was   the   bridal   car;  the   covering   thereof  was 

heaven  : 
Bright  were  both  Steers  that  drew  it,   when  Siirjfil  approached 
her  husband's  home. 

11  T&j  Steers  were  steady,  kept  in  place  by  holy  verse  and 

Sama-hymn : 
All  ear  were  thy  two  chariot  wheels  :  thy  path  was  tremulous 
in  the  sky. 

12  Clean,  as  thou  weatest,  were  thy  wheels ;  wind  was  the  axle 

fastened  there. 
Siiry4,  proceediog  to  her  Lord,  mounted  a  spirit-fashioned  car. 

13  The  bridal  pomp   of  Siiry4,    which   Savitar  started,  moved 

aloilg. 
In  Magha  days  are  oxen  slain,  in  Arjuuis  they  wed  the  bride. 

14  When  on  your  three- wheeled    chariot,  0  Asvins,   ye  came  as 

wooers  unto  Siirya's  bridal. 
Then  all  the  Gods  agreed  to  your  proposal :  F&shan  as  Son 
elected  you  as  Fathers. 

15  0  ye  Two  Lords  of  lustre,  then  when  ye  to  Sury^^s  wooing  came, 
Where  was  one  chariot- wheel  of  yours  ?     Where  stood  ye  for 

the  Sire's  command  % 

8  Decked  her  ear :  formed  its  canopy.  But  the  meaning  of  opafd^  here  is 
uncertain.  *  Kurira  metre  was  the  thong  of  the  whip.* — Wilson.  The 
hridesmen :  in  I.  119.  7  and  elsewhere  the  Asvins  are  said  to  be  the  husbands 
of  Stiryft.  Here  they  are  represented  as  the  friends  who  had  asked  her  in 
marriage  for  Soma. 

1 1  All  ear :  the  text  has  grdtram,  an  ear,  which  S&yana  says,  means  Mrotre, 
two  ears.     *The  two  wheels  were  thy  ears.' — Wilson. 

13  /n  Magkd  days :  or  in  stricter  accordance  with  the  text,  '  In  Agha  days,' 
when  the  Moon  is  iu  the  lunar  mansion  Magh^.  See  Jacobi,  Festgruss  an  B, 
von  Roth,  p.  69,  and  Weber,  Vedische  Beitrdge,  p.  32f.  Slain :  only  on 
especially  festive  occasions,  weddings  for  instance.  '  Are  whipped  along.*— 
Wilson.  In  Arjunis :  two  asterisms  or  lunar  miuisions,  more  commonly  called 
Phalgunis.     They  wed  the  bride ;  she  ia  escorted  to  her  husband's  home. 

14  Asieooers:  on  behalf  of  Soma.  Pdshan:  here  meaning  Savitar.  S(m 
and  Fathers :  intended  to  express  close  relationship  and  Savitar 's  obligation 
to  the  Asvios  who  had  arranged  the  marriage. 

15  For  the  Sire's  command  :  to  receive  ^3bN\\.wt'^vftrj\ts.tion  to  take  part  in 
the  bridal  procession.     According  to  ^li^wi?^,  *  ^o  o^«t  ^ovw  \g>iV. 


BYMS  85.]  THE  RIG7EDA,  503 

16  The  Brahmans,  by  their  seasons,  know,  0  Suryll,  those  two 

wheels  of  thiue : 
One,  kept  coucealed,    those  only  who  are  skilled  in  highest 
truths  have  learned. 

17  To  SuryU  and  the  Deities,  to  Mitra  and  to  Yarnna, 

Who  ku  )W  aright  the  thiug  that  is,  this  adoration  have  I  paid. 

18  By  their  own  power  these  Twain  iu  close  succession  move ; 
They  go  as  playing  children  round  the  sacrifice. 

One   of   the  Pair   beholdeth  all   existing   things ;   the   other 
I        ordereth  seasons  and  i:^  bom  again. 

19  He,  bom  afresh,  is  new  and  new  for  ever :  ensign  of  days  he 

goes  before  the  Mornings. 
Coming,  he  orders  for  the  Gods  their  portion.     The  Moon  pro- 
longs the  days  of  oar  existence. 

20  Mount  this,  all-shaped,  gold-hued,  with  strong  wheels,  fash- 

ioned of  Kinsnka  and  Salmali,  light-rolling. 
Bound  for  the  world  of  life  immortal,  Siirya :  make  for  thy  lord 
a  happy  bridal  journey. 

21  Bise  up  from  hence :  this  m  liden  hath  a  husband.     I  laud 

Visvavasu  with  hymns  and  homage. 
Seek   in  her  father's  home  another  fair  one,   and  find  the 
portion  from  of  old  assigned  thee. 

22  Rise  up  from  hence,  Visvavasu :  with  reverence  we  worehip  thee. 
Seek  thou  another  willing  maid,  and  with  her  husband  leave 

the  bride. 

23  Straight  in  direction  be  the  paths,  and  thornless,  whereon 

our  fellows  travel  to  the  wooing. 
Let  Aryaman  and  Bhaga  lead  us :  perfect,  O  Goda^  the  union 
of  the  wife  and  husband. 


16  The  two  wheelt  are  probably  heaven  <ind  earth,  and  the  third,  one  kepi 
eoHceaUd,  is  the  mysterious  invisible  world  beyond  them. 

18  In  this  stanza  and  the  following  one,  which  are  but  loosely  connected 
with  the  rest  of  the  hymn,  Sdrya  represents  the  Sun,  and  Soma  is  the  Moon. 

20  Stanzas  20 — 33  contain  a  collection  of  formulas  repeated  when  the  bride 
ii|Ounts  her  chariot,  while  she  is  travelling  to  her  husband's  house,  when  she 
arrives  there,  and  on  the  following  miming.  This :  chariot.  Kintuka  :  the 
wood  of  the  Butea  frondosa.  SUmali :  the  silk-cotton  tree  ;  Salmalia  mala- 
b>4rica.  SHryd:  the  girl  is  addressed  by  the  name  of  Saryft,  the  typical 
bride. 

21  Vifvivatu :  one  of  the  Gandharvas,  the  protector  of  virgins.  He  is  told 
to  leave  the  bride  who  no  longer  needs  his  care,  and  to  transfer  his  guardian- 
ship to  some  marriageable  maiden  who  has  not  yet  found  a  husband.  Fair 
0ne:  vydMdm:  *  decorated  with  ornaments.' — Wilson 

23  To  the  wooing  :  to  the  father,  to  whom  the  intevc^'dex^  w«i  \«k  ^^^"^  Vjx 
Lis  dAugbter'B  hand  on  behalf  of  their  friend,  accordm^  Iv)  ^^^^x^^. 


604  Tff£  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

^4  Now  from  the  noose  of  Varuna  I  free  thee,  wherewith  Moit 
BlessM  Savitar  l)ath  bound  thee. 
In  Law's  seat,  to  the  world  of  virtuous  action,  I  give  thee  up 
uninjured  with  thy  consort. 

25  Hence,  and  not  thence,  I  send  thee  free.     I  make  thee  softly 
v^  fettered  there, 

That,  Bounteous  ludra,  she  may  live  blest  in  her  fortune  and 

her  sons. 

26  Let  Piirjhan  take  thy  hand  and  hence  conduct  thee ;  may  the 

two  Asvins  on  their  car  transport  thee. 
^^     Go  to  the  house  to  be  the  household's  mistress  and  apeak  as 
lady  to  thy  gathered  people. 

27  Happy  be  thou  and  prosper  with   thy  children  here :  be  vigi* 
^  y  lant  to  rule  thy  household  in  this  home. 

Closely  unite  thy  body  with  this  man,  thy  lord.     So  shall  ye, 
full  of  years,  address  your  company. 

28  Her   hue  is   blue  and   red :  the  fiend  who  clingeth  close  is 

driven  off. 
Well  thrive  the  kinsmen  of  this  bride  :  the  husband  is  bound 
fast  in  bonds. 

29  Give  thou  the  woollen  robe  away  :  deal  treasure  to  the  Brah- 

man priests. 

This  female   fiend  bath   got  her  feet,   and  as  a  wife   attends 
her  lord. 

30  Unlovely  is  his  body  when  it  glistens  with  this  wicked  fiend, 
What  time  the  husband  wraps  about  his   limbs  the   garment 

of  his  wife. 

24  The  noose  of  Vai'una :  the  girdle  with  which  the  bride  is  girded  affer 
she  has  been  bathed,  combed,  and  dressed  for  the  marriage  ceremony.  See 
Prof.  Max  Miiller's  Rigveda-SanhUd,  Vol.  VI.,  Preface,  p  14.  Or,  as  Lanman 
suggests,  the  noose  may  mean  the  tie  by  which  a  girl  is  bound  to  her  lather 
till  marriage.     Law*»  seat :  the  place  of  sacrifice,  the  altar. 

Stanzas  24 — 26  and  32,  33  are  spoken  just  before  the  bride's  departure 
from  her  father's  house. 

25  Hence  and  not  thence :  from  thy  father's  house  and  not  from  thy 
husband's. 

27  Be  vigilant  to  rule  thy  household :  this  is  S&yana's  explanation.  *  Be 
watchful  over  the  domestic  fire.' — Wilson.  The  yerse  is  addressed  to  the 
bride,  and  to  the  newly- wedded  pair  on  arrival  at  the  bridegroom's  house. 

28  Her  hue :  the  colour  of  Krityd,  Magic  personified,  a  female  deity  or 
fiend. 

29  TAe  woollen  robe :  *  the  garment  waVcA  \>^  \.\v«i  WL^,' — Wilson.    AUendt 
Aer  lord:  the  m«gic,  or  evil  speW,  retiUTii&  to  Vtfi  qx'\^\\v^V«.— Yiax^-vvst- 


MYM^  85.]  !tHE  RIOfEbA.  505 

31  Consumptions,   from  her  people,  which  follow  the  bride's  re- 

splendent train, — 
These  let  the  Holy  Gfods  again  bear  to  the  place  from  which 
they  came. 

32  Let  not  the  highway  thieves  who  lie  in  ambush  find  the  wed-^ 

ded  pair. 
By  pleasant    ways  let  them   escape  the    danger,  and  let  foes 
"^  depart* 

33  Signs  of  good  foftune  mark  the  bride  '.  come  all  of  you  and 

look  at  her. 
^^^    Wish  her  prosperity,  and  then  return  unto  your  hotnes  again. 

34  Pungent  is  this,  and  bitter  this,  filled^  as  it  were,  with  arrow- 

barbs,  Empoisoned  and  not  fit  for  use« 
The  Brahman  who  knows  "Sdrysl  well  deserves  the  garment  of 
the  bride. 

35  The  fringe,  the  cloth  that  decks  her  head,  and  then  the  triply 

parted  robe,  — 
Behold  the  hues  which  S&ry&  wears  :  these  doth  the  Brahman 
purify. 

36  I  take  thy  hand  in  mine  for  happy  fortune   that  thou    mayst 
J  .  reach  old  age  with  me  thy  husband* 

Gods,  Arjaman,  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Purandhi,  have  given  thee  to 
be  my  household's  mistress. 

37  0  Pushan,  send  her  on  as  most  auapicious,  her  who  shall  be  the 

sharer  of  my  pleasures ; 
Her  who  shall  twine  her  loving  arms  about  me,  and  welcome  all 
my  love  and  mine  embraces. 

38  For  thee,  with  bridal  train,  they,  first,  escorted  Sdiy^  to  her 

home. 
Give  to  the  husband  in  return,  Agni,  the  wife  with  progeny. 


31  Prom  her  people :  'a  most  remarkable  and  direct  assumption  of  ''here- 
dity" as  a  lurking  danger.' — Mme.  Z^naide  Ragozin,  Vedic  India,  p.  371. 

33  Perhaps  spoken,  on  the  way,  to  the  speoratora  of  the  procession. 

34  Tkit:  the  bride's  garment.  SHryd:  meaning  here  the  song  of  Siiry&'s 
Bridal. 

35  The  meaning  of  /fsdsanam,  vifatanam,  and  adhivikartanam  is  uncertain. 
Prof.  Wilson  renders  tliese  words  by  *  border-cloth,'  *  head-cloth,'  and  *  divided 
skirt.'  Prof.  Weber  and  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  explain  the  passage  as  refer- 
ring to  the  preparation  of  the  carcass  of  the  animal  that  has  been  slaughtered 
for  the  festivity.  According  to  this  riew  the  first  line  might  be  rendered  : — 
'  The  butchering,  the  cutting  up,  the  severing  of  limb  and  joint '  ;  and  fur 
'  hues '  '  forms '  might  be  substituted. 

36  The  bridegroom  add  leases  the  bride. 

38  Ti^e,-  Agai.     They:  (he  QandharvM,  accov^n^  \.o  ^^«.uii« 


506  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

39  Agni  hath  given  the  bride  again  with  splendour  and  with 

ample  life. 
Long-lived  be  he  who  is  her  lord ;  a  hundred  autumns  let  him 
live. 

40  Soma  obtained  her  first  of  all ;  next  the  Gandharva  was  her 

lord. 
Agni  was  thy  third  husband :  now  one  born  of  woman  is  thy 
fourth. 

41  Soma  to  the  Gandharva,  and  to  Agni  the  Gandharva  gave  : 
And  Agni  hath  bestowed  on  me  riches  and  sons  and  this  my 

spouse. 

42  Be  je  not  parted ;  dwell  ye  here ;  reach  the  full  time  of  human 

life. 
With  sons  and  grandsons  sport  and  play,  rejoicing  in  your 
own  abode. 

43  So  may  PrajsLpati  bring  children  forth  to  us ;  may  Aryaman 

adorn  us  till  old  age  come  nigh. 
Not  inauspicious  enter  thou  thy  husband's  house :  bring  bless- 
ing to  our  bipeds  and  our  quadrupeds. 

44  Not  evil -eyed,  no  slayer  of  thy  husband,  bring  weal  to  cattle, 

radiant,  gentle-hearted ; 
Loving  the  Gods,  delightful,  bearing  heroes,  bring  blessing  to 
our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds.  ^ 

45  0  Bounteous  Indra,  make  this  bride  blest  in  her  sons  and  for- 

tunate. 
Vouchsafe  to  her  ten  sons,  and  make  her  husband  the  eleventh 
man. 

46  Over  thy  husband's  father  and  thy  husband's  mother  bear  full 

sway. 
Over  the  sister  of  thy  lord,  over  his  brothers  rule  supreme. 

47  So  may  the  Universal  Gods,  so  may  the  Waters  join  our  hearts. 
V       May  M^tarisvan,  Dhatar,  and  Deshtrt  together  bind  us  close. 


40  As  the  typical  bride  SCiryft  was  first  married  to  Soma,  so  the  youug  maid 
originally  belongs  to  him,  then  to  the  Gandharva,  as  the  guardian  of  virginity, 
then  to  Agni  as  the  sacred  fire  round  which  she  walks  in  the  marriage  cere- 
mony, and  fourthly  to  her  human  husband  — Grassmann. 

42  The  formulae  contained  in  stanzas  42 — 47  are  repeated  when  the  bride* 
groom  has  returned  with  his  bride  to  his  home,  and  offers  sacrifice  with  firti 
The  wedded  pair  are  addressed  first,  and  then  the  bride  is  exhorted  and 
blessed.     Stanza  47  is  spoken  by  the  bridegroom  for  his  wife  and  himsell 

A7  Beshtri :  Instructress,  a  female  deity,  not  mentioned  elsewhere  in  tha 
Rigveda.    According  to  SfLyana,  ddtrt  ^halAadm  sarasvati  it*  meant:   'tha 
bountiful  (Saraswatl).*— W\\Bv)n. 
For  a  full  account  of  the  marriage  cei^mom^a  oi  \\vfc  '^vsA^^A^scw&.5aN«L 


HYMN  86.]  TffE  RIOVEDA.  507 

HYMN  LXXXVr.  Indra. 

Men  have  abstained  from  pouring  juice  :  they  count  not  Indra 

as  a  God 
Where  at  the  votary's  store  my  friend  Vrishakapi  hath  druuk 

his  fill.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

2  Thou,  Indra,  heedless  passest  by  the  ill  Vrish&kapi  hath  wrought; 
Yet  nowhere  else  thou  findest  place  wherein  to  driuk  the  Soma 

juice.     Supreme  is  ludra  over  all. 

3  What  hath  he  done  to  injure  thee,  this  tawny  beast  Vrishakapi, 
With  whom  thou  art  so  angry  now  1  What  is  the  votary's  food- 

ful  store  ?    Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

i  Soon  may  the  hound  who  hunts  the  boar  seize  him  and  bite 
him  in  the  ear, 
O  ludra,  that  YrishUkapi  whom  thou  protectest  as  a  friend. 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

5  Eapi  hath  marred  the  beauteous  things,  all  deftly  wrought, 

that  were  my  joy. 
In  pieces  will  I  rend  his  head ;  the  sinner's  portion  shall  be 
woe.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

6  No  Dame  hath  ampler  charms  than  I,  or  greater  wealth  of 

love's  delights. 
None  with  more  ardour  offers  all  her  beauty  to  her  lord's  em- 
brace. Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 


the  ritual  of  Br&hmans  who  use  the  S&ma-veda,  see  Colebrooke's  Miscellaneous 
Essays,  No.  III.,  and  Weber  aud  Haas,  Indisohe  Studien,  V.  pp,  177  ff.  See 
also  Hymns  of  the  Atha/rva-veda,  Book  XIV.,  and  Dr.  J.  Ehni's  paper,  Zeits- 
ehrtft  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellsckaft,  XXXIII.  pp.  166  ff.  I 
have  relied  mainly  on  Ludwig's  Commeutary.  Prof.  Qrassmann  has  banished 
the  hymn  to  his  Appendix.  

1  S&yana  ascribes  this  stanza  to  Indra  ;  others  make  Indrftnl  the  speaker. 
Vrisb&kapi  is  said  to  have  monopolized  the  offerings  that  should  have  been 
presented  to  Indjra.  Vi'ishdkapi — literally  '  the  strong  ape,'  or  '  the  male  ape' 
— appears  to  be  a  sort  of  intermediate  being  between  a  demigod  and  a  demon  ; 
but  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  his  nature.  Sftyana  calls  him  the  sou  of  Indra. 

He  is  also  said  to  be  the  setting  sun,  and  t<he  sun  who  draws  up  vapour  aud 
irrigates  with  mist.  According  to  M.  Bergaigue,  La  Religion  Vidique^  II.  270, 
he  was  a  mythical  sacrificer. 

2  Indrinf  blames  Indra  for  his  apathy. 

3  Indra  speaks.  Whxit  is  the  votai'y' a  foodful  store  J :  why  should  his  appro- 
priation of  the  worshipper's  offerings  make  thee  so  angry  ? 

i  IndrAnt  is  the  speaker  of  this  stanza  and  of  the  two,  or  three,  tbat  follow. 

5  Kapi:  the  ape;  an  abbreviation  of  Vrish&kapi.  Haih  marred  the  beau- 
teous things :  according  to  S4ya.  a,  hath  spoiled  the  oblations  prepared  for  me 
by  my  worshippers.  But  it  seems  more  probable  that  Vrisb&kapi  has  assault- 
ed Indi&  il  and  inflicted  injuries  on  her  person. 

6  IndrAnl  speaks  with  pride  of  her  voluptuouB  chaTmi^^\i\^^\Wi\'^«ftJ^vksSsxV 
kapi  to  his  amoroue  asBnult. 


508  tas  BXMi^S  OP  iMOOk  t 

7  Mother  whose  love  is  quickly  won,  I  say  what  vefily  will  bo. 
My  breast,  0  Mother,  and  my  head  and  both  my  hips  seem 

quivering.  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

8  Dame  with  the  lovely  hands  atid  arms,  Vrith  broad  hatr-jJaits 

add  ample  hipS) 
Why)  O  thou  Hero's  wife,  art  thou  angry  with  our  Vpsh&kapif 
Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

9  This  noxious  creature  looks  on  me  as  one  bereft  of  heroes  love. 
Yet  Heroes  for  my  sons  have  I,  the  Maruts'  Friend  and  Indra's 

Queen.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

10  From  olden  time  the  matron  goes  to  feast  and  general  sacrifice* 
Mother  of  Heroes,  ludra's  Queen^  the  rite's  ordainer  is  extolled* 

Supreme  is  Indra  over  alL 

1 1  So  have  I  heard  Indrant  called  most  fortunate  among  these  Damefl, 

For  never  shall  her  Consort  die  in  future  time  through  length 
of  days.     Supreme  is  Indra  ovet  all. 

12  Never,  IudrS.ni,  have  I  joyed  without  my  friend  Vrishlkapi, 
Whose  welcome  offering  here,  made  pure  with  water,  goeth  to 

the  Gods.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  al!. 

13  Wealthy  Vrishakap4ji,  blest  with  sons  and  consorts  of  thy  sons, 
Indra  will  eat  thy  bulls,  thy  dear  oblation  that  effecteth  much. 

Supreme  is  ludra  overall. 

14  Fifteen  in  number,  then,  for  me  a  score  of  bullocks  they  prepare, 
And  I  devour  the  fat  thereof:  they  fill  my  belly  full  with  foods 

Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

15  Like  as  a  bull  with  pointed  horn,  loud  bellowing  amid  the  herds, 
Sweet  to   thine  heart,  0  Indra,  is    the  brew    which  she    who 

tends  thee  pours.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

7  This  staoza  is  ascribed  by  S&yana  to  Yrish&kapi.  It  is  hardly  intelligible; 
btit,  as  Ladwig  says,  it  seems  to  be  spoken  by  IndiAni,  ezpreftsiog  ber  indigna- 
tion at  Vrish&kapi's  audacity  which  makes  all  her  body  quiver  with  rage. 

8  ludra  speaks. 

9  Indr&nt  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza.  Bwtft  of  h£rG*»  love:  who 
has  no  brave  husband  to  protect  her. 

1 0  The  matron  goes  to  feast :  Indr&nt  nieans  that  Vrish&kapi  assaulted  her 
when  she  was  on  her  way  to  a  festival,  which  women  were  accustomed  to  at* 
tend  ;  and  that  her  rank  as  Indra's  consort  did  not  preserve  her  from  insult. 

11  Indra  speaks  this  and  the  following  stanza. 

13  Spoken  by  Vrishftkapi  to  his  wife  Vrish&kap&yt  who  is  said  to  represent 
the  dawn,  or,  by  others,  the  gloaming  which  follows  the  setting  sun  VriBbftkapi. 

1 4  Indra  speaks.  Fifteen :  sacrificers  ;  probably  Yrishftkapi  and  his  wif^ 
and  their  sons  and  daughters-in-law.  Sftyana  explains  differently  : — *  Tb« 
worshippers  dress  for  me  fifteen  (and)  twenty  bulls. — Wilson. 

15  IndiUnt  speaks,  endeavouring  to  attract  him  to  her  own  libation  instetd 
of  the  offerings  of  Vrish&kapi. 

I  pass  over  stanzas  IQ  %u4  ^7»  Y{)ftW^^l^WlU^^^xw-^vV^sk\'^ 


BTMN  86.]  TEE  RIQVEDA,  509 

18  0  Indra  this  Vrish&kapi  bath  found  a  slain  wild  animal, 
Dresser,  and  new-made  pan,  and  knife,  and  wagon  with  a  load 

of  wood.     Supreme  is  Indra  over  alL 

19  Distinguishing  the  Ddaa  and  the  Arya,  viewing  all,  I  go. 

I  look  upon  the  wise,  and  drink  the  simple  votary's  Soma  juice. 
Supreme  is  ludra  over  all. 

20  The  desert   plains  and  steep  descents,  how  many  leagues  iu 

length  they  spread  ! 
Go   to  the   nearest   houses,  go  unto  thine  home,  Vrishakapi. 
Supreme  is  ludra  over  all. 

21  Turn  thee  again  Vrish&kapi ;  we  twain  will  bring  thee  happiness. 
Thou  goest  homeward  on  thy  way  along  this  path  wnich  leads 

to  sleep.     Supreme  is  ludra  over  all. 

22  When,  Indra  and  Vrish&kapi,  ye  travelled  upward  to  your  home, 
Where  was  that  noisome  beast,    to  whom   went  it,   the  beast 

that  troubles  man  ?  Supreme  is  Indra  over  all. 

23  Daughter  of  Manu,  Parsu  bare  a  score  of  children  at  a  birth. 
Her  portion  verily  was  bliss  although  her  burthen  caused  her 

grief. 

18  Indr&  il  speaUs,  but  her  speech  is  difficult  to  understand.  WUd  ani- 
mal :  Ton  Roth  conjectures  *  wild  ass  *  as  the  meaning  of  parasvantam 
here.  Dresser:  or  slaughter- hench.  *A  fire-place  (to  cook  it).' --Wilson. 
Indr&nl  seems  to  speak  depreciatingly  of  a  sacrifice  offered  by  V  tishftkapi  as 
consisting  of  an  unsuitable  victim,  prepared  with  instruments  and  means 
which  chance  bas  thrown  in  his  way.  Ludwig  thinks  that  Vrish&kapi  may 
represent  the  Moon  whose  spots  are  fancifully  ccmsidered  to  be  the  objects 
mentioned  by  Iiidr&nt. 

19  /  look :  with  favour.  The  simple  votary  is  the  worshipper  who  offers  his 
libation  in  a  sincere  spirit  of  devotion.  The  stanza  and  the  two  following 
are  spoken  by  Indra. 

20  Vrish&kapi  appears  to  meditate  flight  into  distant  deserts  to  escape 
from  the  wrathful  Indr&nt.  Indra  dissuades  him,,  and  promises  to  reconcile 
Indriot  to  him. 

22  The  two  concluding  stanzas  seem  to  be  spoken  by  Indrftni.  Stanza  22  is 
obscure,  and  stanza  23  has  no  discoverable  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  hymn. 

28  Daughter  of  Manu :  that  is,  of  the  progenitor  of  men.  Nothing  more 
i«  known  of  Par§Uy  which  means  a  rib.  Much  of  this  hymn  appears  to  be 
inexplicable.  M.  Bergaigue  thinks  that  Yrishftkapi,  Indra' s  friend,  represents 
Soma,  and  IndrAnt  the  wife  of  Indra  represents  Prayer.  'This  bizarre  myth 
would  symbolize  the  frequently  expressed  idea  that  ludra  loves  neither  the 
sacred  beverage  without  prayer  nor  prayer  without  the  sacred  beverage.  He 
wishes  therefore  his  union  with  Prayer  to  be  accompanied  by  the  union  of 
prayer  with  Soma,  and  he  neglects  sacrifice  as  long  as  this  union  of  the  two 
essential  elements  of  worship  remains  unaccomplished.' — See  La  Religion 
Vidique,  II.  270,  271. 

Prof.    Geldner  gives  a  diff'erent  interpretation  of  the  hymn^  which.  \sft  Va3^ 
translated  and  exhaustively  discussed  in    VediscKe  St\id%«n,  W.  Y^.  "^^^^ — ^« 
Bee  Mlao  OJdeaberg,  Jieliffion  des  Veda,  172 — 174. 


510  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1.    ^ 

HYMN  LXXXVII.  Agnl 

I  BALM   with   oil  the   mighty    Rakshaa-slayer  j   to  the   most 

famous  Friend  I  come  for  shelter. 
Enkindled,   sharpened  by  our  rites,   may  Agni  protect  us  in 

the  day  and  night  from  evil. 

2  0  Jatavedas  with  the  teeth  of  iron,  enkindled  with  thy  flame 

attack  the  demons. 
Seize  with  thy  tongue  the  foolish  gods'  adorers  :  rend,  put 
within  thy  mouth  the  raw-fle»h  eaters. 

3  Apply  thy  teeth,  the  upper  and  the  lower,   thou  who  hast 

both,  enkindled  and  destroying. 
Roam  also  in  the  air,  0  Ring,  around  us,  and  with  thy  jaws 
assail  the  wicked  spirits. 

4  Bending  thy  shafts  through  sacrifices,   Agni,  whetting  their 

points  with  song  as  if  with  whetstones, 
Pierce  to  the  heart  therewith  the  Yatudhinas,  and  break  their 
arms  uplifted  to  attack  thee. 

5  Pierce  through  the  Yatudhana's  skin,  0  Agni ;  let  the  destroy- 

ing dart  with  fire  consume  him. 
Rend  his  joints,  Jatavedas,  let  the  eater  of  flesh,  flesh-seeking, 
track  his  mangled  body. 

6  Where  now  thou  seest,  Agni  Jatavedas,  one  of  these  demons 

standing  still  or  roaming, 
Or  flying  on  those  paths  in  air's  mid-region,  sharpen  the  shaft 
and  as  an  archer  pierce  him. 

7  Tear  from  the  evil  spirit,  JS.tavedas,  what  he  hath  seized  and 

with  his  spears  hath  captured. 
Blazing    before  him   strike   him   down,  0  Agni ;    let  spotted 
carrion-eating  kites  devour  him. 

8  Here  tell  this  forth,  0  Agni :  whesoever  is,  he  himself,  or  acteth 

as,  a  demon, 
Him  grasp,  0  thou  Most  Youthful,  with  thy  fuel :  to  the  Man- 
seer's  eye  give  him  as  booty. 

9  With  keen  glance  guard  the  sacrifice,  0  Agni :  thou  Sage, 

conduct  it  onward  to  the  Vasus. 
Let  not  the  fiends,  0  Man-beholder,  harm  thee  burning  against 
the  Rakshasas  to  slay  them. 


2  The  demons  :  Ydtudh&nas,  explained  by  S&yana  as  =  R&kshaaas.  See  VI^ 
304.  15.  Foolish  gods'  adorei's :  mUradevdn:  according  to  SAyana,  a  apedal 
class  of  evil  spirits  called  MOrndevas  because  they  make  destruotion  their  sportt 

5  The  eater  of  flesh  :  the  wolf  or  other  carnivorous  animal. 
8  The  Man-seer  here  is  either  Agm\\\t&&^  ot  ^^x'lj^tVva  Sun, 
P  To  the  Voiut:  to  the  Goda  to  Yj\iom  VXn^  o\>\%.\:\Q\»«t^\a»d.^   ^Viv^^* 


JTYMN  S7.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  611 

10  Look  on  the  fiend  mid  men,  as  Man-beliolder :  rend  thou  his 

three  extremities  in  pieces. 
Demolish  with  thy  flame  his  ribs,  0  Agni ;  the  Yl^tudh^na's 
root  destroy  thou  triply. 

1 1  Thrice,  Agni,  let  thy  noose  surround  the  demon  who  with  his 

falsehood  injures  Holy  Order. 
Loud    roaring  >yith   thy  flame,  0  J^tavedas,    crush  him   and 
cast  him  down  before  the  singer. 

12  Lend  thou  the  worshipper  that  eye,  0  Agni,  wherewith  thou 

lookest  on  the  hoof-armed  demon. 
With  light  celestial  in  Atharvan^s  manner  burn  up  the  fool 
who  ruins  truth  with  falsehood. 

13  Agni,  what  curse  the  pair  this  day  have  uttered,  what  heated 

word  the  worshippers  have  spoken. 
Each  arrowy  taunt  sped  from  the  angry  spirit, — pierce  to  the 
heart  therewith  the  Y^tudhUnas. 

1*1  With  fervent  heat  exterminate  the  demons ;  destroy  the  fiends 
with  burning  flame,  0  Agni. 
Destroy  with  fire  the  foolish  gods*  adorers ;  blaze  and  destroy 
the  insatiable  monsters. 

15  May  Gods  destroy  this  day  the  evil-doer:  may  each  hot  curse 
of  his  return  and  blast  him. 
Let  arrows  pierce  the  liar  in  his  vitals,  and  Visva's  net  enclose 
the  Y^tudhUna. 

16  The  fiend  who  smears  himself  with  flesh  of  cattle,  with  flesh 
of  horses  and  of  human  bodies, 
Who  steals  the  milch-cow's  milk  away,  0  Agni, — ^tear  off  the 
heads  of  such  with  fiery  fury. 

17  The   cow  gives  milk  each  year,  0  Man-regarder :  let  not  the 
Y&tudhllua  ever  taste  it. 
If  one  would  ^lut  him  with  the  biestings,  Agni,  pierce  with 
thy  flame  his  vitals  as  he  meets  thee. 

plains  va$ubhyah  here  by  v<uilndvM.rtKAya : — *  to  (the  acquisition  of)  richei.' — 
Wilaon. 

10  Hli  three  extremities:  bis  three  heads,  according  to  Sftyana.  'Kopf 
und  Schultem/  head  and  shoulders. — Grassmann.  Root :  meaning  his  feet. 
Triply:  used  vaguely,  to  correspond  with  the  three  upper  extremities. 
*  Cut  off  the  triple  foot  of  the  Ydtudhdna.* — Wilson. 

12  If  oof -armed:  striking  with  the  hoof.  According  to  Sftyapa,  'having 
nails  like  hoofs.'  In  A  thar van* §  manner :  like  Atharvan,  the  ancient  priest 
who  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  obtained  fire. 

13  T?ie  pair:  the  married  pair  ;  perhaps  the  sacrifioer  and  his  wife.     The 
Bishi  prays  that  every  hasty  word  that  may  have  been  uttered  by  ^loua  ^^'^V^ 
in  their  anger  nray  be  used  as  a  weapon  to  wound  t\ie  X^W^\i^\i«i, 

13  Visra's  net :  the  nooae  of  the  all-pervading  A.^ni. 


512  THE  HYMNS  OP  IBOOK 1. 

18  Let  the  fiends  driuk  the  poison  of  the  cattle;  may  Aditi  cast 
X  off  the  evil-doers. 

May  the  God  Savitar  give  them  np  to  ruin,  and  be  their  share 
of  plants  and  herbs  denied  theui. 

19  Agni,   from  days   of  old   thou  slayest  demons:  never  shall 

Rakshasas  in  fight  overcome  thee. 
Burn  np  the  foolish  one^,  the  flesh-devoarers  :  let  none  of  them 
escape  thine  heavenly  arrow. 

20  Guard   us,  0  Agni,   from  above  and  under,   pfotect  us  from 

behind  us  and  before  us  ; 
And  may  thy  flames,  most  fierce  and  never  wasting,  glowing 
with  fervent  heat,  consume  the  sinner. 

21  From  rear,  from  front,  from  under,  from  aboYe  us,  O  King, 

protect  us  as  a  Sage  with  wisdom. 
Guard  to  old  age  thy  friend,  0  Friend,   Eternal :  O  Agni,  as 
Immortal,  guard  us  mortals. 

22  We  set  thee  round  us  as  a  fort,  victorious  Aorni,  thee  a  Sage, 
Of  hero  lineage,  day  by  day,  destroyer  of  our  treacherous  foes. 

23  Burn  with  thy  poison  turned  against  the  treacherous  brood  of 

BAikehasas, 

0  Agni,  with  thy  sharpened  glow,  with  lances  armed  with  points 
of  flame. 

24  Burn  thou  the  paired  Kimtdins,  burn,  Agni,  the  Y^tudhana  pairs. 

1  sharpen  thee,  Infallible,  with  hymns.     0  Sage,  be  vigilant. 

25  Shoot  forth,  0  Agni,  with  thy  flame :  demolish  them  on  evei*y  side. 
Bi'eak  thou  the  Yatudhana's  strength,  the  vigour  of  the  BAk- 

HYxVIN  LXXXVIII.  Agni. 

Dear,  ageless  sacrificial  drink  is  offered  in  light-discovering, 

heaven-pervading  Agni. 
The  Gods  spread  forth  through  his  Celestial  Nature,    that  he 

might  bear  the  world  up  and  sustain  it. 

2  The   world  was  swallowed  and  concealed  in  darkness  :  Agni 
was  born,  and  light  became  apparent. 
The  Deities,  the  broad  earth,  atid  the  heavens,  and  plants, 
and  waters  gloried  in  his  friendship, 

18  The  poison  of  the  cattU:  if  they  drink  milk,  let  it  poisoD  them. 
Accordiufif  to  84yana,  let  them  drink  the  poison  of  the  cattle  (which  is  kept 
in  the  house),  meauing  perhaps  sitme  poidouous  ointment  used  for  external 
application  only. 

:^4  Kimidim  :  treacherous  and  malevolent  spirits.    See  VII.  104,  2,  note, 

1  Sacrt/icial  drink  :  *  sweUitig  oUj^Woti:  ^ctoT^m^Vft^x^^.^NwSMX. 


BTMN  88.]  TBS  RIO  VEDA.  518 

3  laspired  by   Gods  who   claim  our   adoration,  I  now  will  laud 

Eternal  Lofty  Agui, 
Him  who  hath  spread  abroad  the  earth  with  lustre,  this  heaven, 
and  both  the  worlds,  and  air's  mid-region. 

4  Earliest  Priest  whom  all  the  Gods  accepted,   and  chose   him, 

and  anointed  him  with  butter, 
He  swifty  made  all  things  that  fly,  stand,  trarel,  all  that  bath 
motion,  Agui  J&tavedas. 

6  Beoauso  thou,  Agni,  J^tavedas,  stoodest  at  the    world's  head 
with  thy  refulgent  splendour, 
W(B  sent  thee  forth  with   hymns  and  songs  and  praises  :  thou 
fiUedst  heaven  and  earth,  God  meet  for  worship. 

6  Head  of  the  world  is  Agni  in  the  night-time ;  then,  as  the 

Sun,  at  mom  springs  up  and  rises. 
Then  to  his  task  goes  the  prompt  Priest  foreknowing  the 
wondrous  power  of  Gods  who  must  be  honoured. 

7  Lovely  is  he  who,  kindled  in  his  greatness,  hath  shone  forth, 

seated  in  the  heavens,  refulgent. 
With  resonant   hymns  all   Godd  who   guard  our   bodies  have 
offered  up  oblation  in  this  Agni. 

8  First  the   Gods  brought   the  hymnal   into  being ;  then  they 

engendered  Agni,  then  oblation. 
He  was  their  sacrifice  that  guards  our  bodies  :  him  the  heav- 
ens know,  the  earth,  the  waters  know  him. 

9  He,  Agni,  whom  the   Gods  have  generated,   in    whom   they 

offered  up  all  worlds  and  creatures. 
He  with  his  bright  glow  heated  earth  and  heaven,  urging  him- 
self right  onward  in  his  grandeur. 

10  Then  by  the  laud  the  Gods  engendered  Agni  in  heaven,  who 
fills  both  worlds  through  strength  and  vigour. 
They   made   him   to  appear  in  threefold  essence :  he  ripens 
plants  of  every  form  and  nature. 


5  We  sent  thee  forth :   the  Rishi  glorifies  the  power  of  the  priests  who 
'  made  Agni  their  messenger  to  the  Gods. 

^        6  Agni,  who  is  the  Moon  by  oight,  at  dawn  becomes  Sdrya  or  the  Sun-God 
\    who  when  he  sets  again  becomes  Agni. 

!'  9  All  worlds  and  creatures:  prolepticallj  :  meaning  that  the  oblation 
offered  by  the  gods  was  destined  to  produce  the  universe.—  Ludwig.  Accord- 
ing to  S&yana  : — '  in  whom  all  beings  have  offered  oblations  ; '  but  it  is  clear 
that  the  oblations  of  th^  Gods  are  intended. 

10  Thnmgh  strengih  and  vigour:  ^akthhih:  'by  his  functions  :'— Wilson. 
-    in  threefold  essence :  or  in  three  conditions,  or  places,  as  the  Sulo.^  Vv^^.^uca:^^ 
L »  and  terrestrial  fire. 

33 


614  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  t 

11  What  time  the  Gods,  whose  due  is  worship,  set  him  as  SorjA,  ^ 

Son  of  Aditi,  in  heaven, 
When  the  Pair,  ever  wandering,  sprang  to  being,  all  creatures 
that  existed  looked  upon  them. 

12  For  all  the  world   of  life  the  Gods  made  Agui   Vaisvinarato 

be  the  days'  bright  Banner,  — 
Him  who  hath  spread  abroad  the  radiant  Mornings,  and,  com- 
ing with  his  light,  unveils  the  darkness. 

13  The  wise  and  holy  Deities  engendered  Agni  Vaisvanara  whom 

age  ne'er  touches, 
Tiie  Ancient  Star  that  wanders  on  for  ever,  lofty  and  strong, 
Lord  of  the  Living  Being, 

14  We  call  upon  the  Sage  with  holy  verses,  Agni  VaisvlUuira  the 

ever-beaming. 
Who  hath  surpassed  both  heaven  and  earth  in  greatness :  he 
is  a  God  below,  a  God  above  us. 

15  1  have  heard  mention  of  two  several  pathways,  ways  of  the 

Fathers  and  of  Gods  and  mortals. 
On  these  two  paths  each  moving  creature  travels,  each  thing 
between  the  Father  and  the  Mother. 

16  These  two  united  paths  bear  him  who  journeys  bom  from  the 

head  and  pondered  with  the  spirit. 
He  stands  directed  to  all  things  existing,  hasting,  unresting 
in  his  fiery  splendour. 

17  Which  of  us  twain  knows  where  they  speak  together,  upper 

and  lower  of  the  two  rite-leaders  ? 
Our  friends  have  helped  to  gather  our  assembly.     They  came 
to  sacrifice;  who  will  announce  it? 

18  How  many  are  the  Fires  and  Suns  in  number?     What  is  the 

number  of  the  Dawns  and  Waters  ? 
Not  jestingly  I  speak  to  you,  0  Fathers.     Sages,  I  ask  yoa 
this  for  information. 

11   The  Pair  :  the  Sun  and  Moon.     Accrding  to  S&yana,  Ushas  and  Siiryii 

13  X(»*(2  of  the  Living  Being:    the  meaning  of   yaJahdtffa  is  unoertaia. 
Siyana  explains  it  by  piljyaaya  devasyaf  of  the  adorable  God.     '  The  obsnrfir  | 
of  what  is  firm.* — Ludwig.     *The  lord  of  meteors.' — Grassmann.     'Sorval-: 
lant  du  Yaksha.'— Bergaigne.  ' 

1 4  Below :  on  earth. 

15  Tioo  several  pathways :  the  way  to  the  other  world  and  the  way  baokte 
the  earth.     The  Father  and  the  Mother :  heaven  and  earth. 

16  Him  who  journeys :  Agui.    From  the  head:  of  the  world.    FromAidi^| 
the.  head  or  chief  of  all  existence,  according  to  Sftyana.  1 

\i  Us  twain :  Agni  and  the  Ilishi.  Upper  and  lower :  according  to Sijifib! 
the  upper  fire  is  Vftyu  and  theWw  \%  tAxtoRtrial  Agni.  Who  will  anmwm 
it  ?  :  Agni  alone  will  make  the  aaciV^^i^  Vu^i^u  'Wi  "Caft  ^^:^  I 


HTMS  89.1  ^^^  RIOVEDA.  615 

19  As  great  as  is  the  fair-winged  Morning's  presence  to  him  who 
dwells  beside  us,  Matarisvan  1 
Is  what  the  Br&hman  does  when  he  approaches  to  sacrifice 
and  sits  below  the  Hotar. 

HYMN  LXXXIX.  Indra. 

I  WILL  extol  the  most  heroic  Indra  who  with  his  might  forced 

earth  and  sky  asunder ; 
Who  hath  filled  all  with  width  as  man's  Upholder,  surpassing 

floods  and  rivers  in  his  greatness. 

2  Stiryais  he:  throughout  the  wide  expanses  shall  Indra  turn 

him,  swift  as  car-wheels,  hither, 
Like  a  stream  resting  not  but  ever  active  :  he  hath  destroyed, 
with  light,  the  black-hued  darkness. 

3  To  him  I  sing  a  holy  prayer,  incessant,  new,  matchless,  common 

to  the  earth  and  heaven, 
Who  marks,  as  they  were   backs,  all  living  creatures :  ne'er 
doth  he  fail  a  friend,  the  noble  Indra. 

4  I  will  send  forth  my  songs  in  flow  unceasing,  like  water  from 

the  ocean's  depth,  to  Indra 
Who  to  his  car  on  both  its  sides  securely  hath  fixed  the  earth 
and  heaven  as  with  an  axle. 

5  Rousing  with   draughts,  the  Shaker,   rushing  onward,    im- 

petuous, very  strong,  armed  as  with  arrows 
Is  Soma ;   forest  trees  and  all  the  bushes   deceive  not  Indra 
with  their  offered  likeness. 


19  Morning**  pre*enee:  the  light  of  Dawn  which  spreads  over  heaven  and 
«iarth.  ffim  wAo  divells  betide  U8:  the  Tajam&na,  or  institutor  of  the 
.^«acrifioe. — Ludwig.  Below  the  Hotar:  below  the  regular  Hotar-priest. 
S4yana  explains  this  stanza  differently  : — '  As  long,  Matarisvan,  as  the  swiftly^ 
moving  (nights)  cover  the  face  of  the  dawn,  (so  long) '  the  Jirdhman,  the 
inferior  sitting  down  (to  perform  the  work)  of  the  Motfri,  approaching  the 
sacrifice  supports  (the  ceremony).'— Wilson. 

•  1  With  width:  with  his  own  extended  magnitude.    'With  radiance.' 

Wilson. 

2  Sdrya  is  he :  Indra  is  identified  with  the  Sun  whose  course  he  directs. 
According  to  S&yana,  sttryafk  here  ^  suvtryafi,  heroic. 

3  Incessant :  or  unerring,  that  is,   in  strict  accordance  with  the  rules  of 
the  ritual.    A  s  they  were  hacks :  as  if  they  were  horses  or  oxen,  the  length 
i^d  shape  of  whose  backs  must  be  carefully  considered  in  forming  a  judgment 
*<rf  their  worth. 

5  Prof.  Wilson  observes  : — '  This  verse  is  obscure,  partly  because  the  words 
[«re  unusual,  partly  because  there  is  a  confusion  between  Indra  and-^xMh! 
Deceive  not  Indra:  he  will  not  accept  any  BubaUtulM  \  Yva  ^VSl^k^^ '^<c^'Cb2a% 
but  the  genuine  Soma-pUmt  and  ita  jttiot. 


51B  THE  HYMNS  OF  [nOOK  1   * 

6  Soma  hath  flowed  to  him  whom  naught  can  equal,  the  eartb,    < 

the  heavens,  the  firmament,  the  mountains, — 

When  heightened  in  his  ire  his  indignation  shatters  the  firm 
and  breaks  the  strong  iu  pieces. 

7  As  an  axe  fells  the  tree  so  he  slew  Vfitra,  brake  down  the 

stroDgholda  and  dug  out  the  rivers. 

He  cleft  the  mountain  like  a  new  made  pitcher.  ludra  brought 
forth  the  kine  with  his  Companions. 

8  Wise  art  thou,  Punisher  of  guilt,  O  Indra.     The  sword  lops 

limbs,  thou  smitest  down  the  sinner. 

The  men  who  injure,  as  it  were  a  comrade,  the  lofty  Law  of  Va« 
ruiria  and  Mitra. 

9  Men  who  lead   evil  lives,  who  break  agreements,  and  injure 

Varui^,  Aryaman,  and  Mitra,— ^ 

Against  these  foes,  0  Mighty  Indra,  sharpen,  as  furious  death 
thy  Bull  of  fiery  colour. 

10  Indra  is  Sovran   Lord  of  Earth  and  Hearen,  Indra  is  Lord  of 

waters  apd  of  mountains. 

Indra  is  Lord  of  prosperers  and  sages  :  Indra  must  be  invoked 
in  rest  and  effort. 

11  Vaster  than  days  and  nights,  Giver  of  increase,  raster  than 

firmament  and  flood  of  ocean, 

Vaster  than  bounds  of  earth  and  wind's  extension,    raster 
than  rivers  and  our  lands  is  Indra. 

12  Forward,  as  herald  of  refulgent  Morning,  let  thine  insatiate 

arrow  fly,  O  Indra, 

And  pierce,  as  'twere  a  stone  launched  forth  from  heaven,  with 
hottest  blaze  the  men  who  love  deception. 

1 3  Him,  verily,  the  moons,  the  mountains  followed,  the  tall  trees 

followed  and  the  plants  and  herbage. 

Yearning  with  love  both  Worlds  approached,  the  Waters  wait- 
ed on  Indra  when  he  first  bad  being. 


7  HU  Companions  :  the  Maruta,  who  assisted  him  in  performing  his  exploit 

8  Punisher  of  guili :  here  Indra  is  said  to  discharge  the  duties  wkich  il 
more  ancient  hymns  are  ascribed  to  Agni  and  to  Mitra  and  VarunA. 

.  9  Thy  Bidl:    thy   thunderbolt.     *The  heavy  strong  red   weapon.'— X. 

Miiller. 

10  Invest  and  effort:    '  for  the  acquirement  and  preMrvation  of  weslthw— 
Wilson. 

IS  Th$  moons :  or,  the  mouth«.    Waited  on  Indra :  as  the  repx^sentaliil 
o#  the  Sun,  the  originator  ol  aWWie.— \aw^^\V 


HYMN  90.)  THE  RIQVEDA.  517 

14  Where  was  the  vengeful  dart  wheu  thou,  0  Indra,  clavest  the 
demon  ever  bent  oa  outrage  ? 
When  fiends  lay  there  upon  the  ground  extended  like  cattle  in 
the  place  of  immolation  ? 

16  Those  who  are  set  in  enmity  against  us,  the  Ogai^as,  0  Indra, 
waxen  mighty, — 
Let  blinding  darkness  follow  those  our  foeraen,  while  these 
shall  have  bright  shining  nights  to  light  them. 

16  May  plentiful  libations  of  the  people,  and  singing  Rishis'  holy 

prayers  rejoice  thee. 
Hearing  with  love  this  common  invocation,  come  unto  us,  pass 
by   all  those  who  praise  thee. 

17  0  Indra,  thus  may  we  be  made  partakers  of  thy  new  favours 

that  shall  bring  us  profit. 
Singing  with  love,  may  we  the  VisYsLmitras  win  daylight  even 
now  through  thee,  0  Indra. 

18  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  the  fight 

where  spoil  is  gathered, 
The  Strong  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays 
the  Yritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches. 

HYMN  XC.  Puruiha. 

A  THOUSAND  heads  hath  Purusha,  a  thousand  eyes,  a  thousand 

feet. 
On  every  side  pervading  earth  he  fills  a  space  ten  fingers  wide. 
2  This  Purusha  is  all  that  yet  hath  been  and  all  that  is  to  be ; 
The  Lord  of  Immortality  which  waxes  greater  still  by  food. 

■iiBii.»»i«  I  ■  .  ■  ..■■■iiai         ■■■■■»■  ■■■■■■I  ■■■^■■«  ■■■■■       ■i^.»^.   —  ■   m  Mw^— — 

14  Fiends  i  mitrakr&vah :  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  uncertain. 
Prof.  Lud wig  takes  it  as  a  genitive  case :  '  What  time  they  lay  there  on  the 
earth  extended  like  oxen  in  a  demon's  place  of  slaughter.' 

15  OganoB :  probably  the  name  of  some  hostile  clan.  According  to  Sftyana, 
enemies  assembled  in  numbers.     These :  us  and  our  friends  here. 

16  AU  those  who  praise  thee:  all  other  worshippers. 

18  This  is  the  concluding  stanza  of  several  hymns  of  the  Visv&mitras. 
See  IIL  30.  22  ;  81.  22  ;  82.  17  ;  84.  11 ;  35. 11  ;  36.  11. 

1  Purusha,  embodied  spirit,  or  Man  personified  and  regarded  as  the  soul 
and  original  source  of  the  universe,  the  personal  and  life-giving  principle  in 
•11  animated  beings,  is  said  to  have  a  thousand,  that  is,  innumerable,  head*^ 
eyeSy  and  feetysa  being  one  with  all  created  life.  A  space  ten  fingers  wide : 
the  region  of  the  heart  of  man,  wherein  the  soul  was  supposed  to  reside. 
Although  as  the  Universal  Soul  he  pervades  the  universe,  a^^  the  Individual 
Soul  he  is  enclosed  in  a  space  of  narrow  dimensions.  See.  Hymns  of  the 
Atharva-veda,  XIX.  6.  1,  note. 

2  The  second  line  is  explained  in  various  ways.     The  meaning  of  the  words 
leenuht^  be :  he  is  lord  of  immortality  or  the  immortal  world  oi  ^Vsa  C^<^^« 
which  gTQWB  groHter  by  food,  that  is,  by  the  MbCx'\&Qvs\  oSstvc^^  ^1  \&»&% 

/ 


518  TBB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

3  So  mighty  is  his  greatness ;  yea,  greater  than  this  is  Purushft. 
All  creatures  are  one-fourth  of  him,  three-fourths  eternal  life 

in  heaven. 

4  With  three-fourths  Purusha  went  up  :  one-fourth  of  him  again 

was  here. 
Thence  he  strode  out  to  every  side  over  what  eats  not  and  what 
eats. 

5  From  him  Yirij  was  bom ;  again  Purusha  from  Vir&j  was  horn. 
As  soon  as  he  was  bom  he  spread  eastward  and  westward  o'er 

the  earth. 

6  When  Grods  prepared  the  sacrifice   with  Purusha  as  their 

offering, 
Its  oil  was  spring,  the  holy  gift  was  autumn ;  summer  was 
the  wood. 

7  They  balmed  as  victimon  the  grass  Purushabom  in  earliest  time. 
With  him  the  Deities  and  all  S&dhyas  and  Bisbis  sacrificed. 

According  to  S&yana  :  he  is  the  lord  or  distribufcer  of  immortaliij  because 
he  becomes  the  visible  world  in  order  that  living  beings  may  obtain  the  fraits 
of  their  actions  and  gain  moksha  or  final  liberation  from  their  bonds,  '  he  k 
also  the  lord  of  immortality ;  for  he  mounts  beyond  (his  own  oonditioa) 
for  the  food  (of  living  beings).*— Wilson.  Colebrooke  traoalates  the  line:— 
'  he  is  that  which  gprows  by  nourishmeat,  and  he  is  the  distributer  of  immor- 
tality.' Dr.  Muir  renders  it  by  : — '  He  ia  also  the  lord  of  immortality,  cunoe 
by  food  he  expands.'  According  to  the  paraphrase  in  the  BkdgavtUa'Purdna, 
the  meaning  of  the  last  clause  is :  '  since  he  hath  transcended  mortal 
nutriment.'  Prof.  Lud  wig's  version  is  :  ^  auch  fiber  die  unsterblichkeit 
gebietend,  [da  er,]  was  durch  speise  [ist,]  weit  iiberragty'  ruling  also  over 
immortality,  [since  he]  far  transcends  what  [exists]  through  food  ;  but  in  his 
Commentary  a  somewhat  different  explanation  is  g^iven.  '  Ruling  over  im- 
mortality, he  was  all  that  grows  by  food.' — Peterson. 

3  Eternal  life  :  4imritam :  immortality,  or  the  immortal  Qods. 

4  Over  what  eats  not  and  what  eatg :  over  animate  and  inanimate  ereation. 
According  to  S&jana  and  Mahtdhara,  over  both  classes  of  created  things, 

.  those  capable  of  enjoyment,  that  is,  who  can  taste  the  reward  and  puniw- 
ment  of  good  and  evil  actions,  such  as  Gk>ds,  men,  and  lower  animals,  and 
those  who  are  incapable  thereof,  such  as  mountains  and  rivers — ehetanamf  or 
conscious,  achetananif  or  unconscious,  creation. 

5  Fi'om  him :  or,  from  that,  the  *  one-fourth  '  mentioned  in  stansaa  8  and 
4.  Virdj,  or,  in  the  nominative  form,  Vir&t,  is  said  to  have  come,  in  the  form 
of  the  mundane  egg,  from  Adi-Purusha,  the  primeval  Purusha,  or  presiding 
Male  or  Spirit,  '  who  then  entered  into  this  egg,  which  he  animates  as  its 
vital  soul  or  divine  principle.'  Or  Y ir&j  may  *  be  the  female  counterpart  of 
Purusha  as  Aditi  of  Daksha  in  X.  72.  4,  5.'  See  Dr.  Muir*s  exhaustive  Note 
on  this  passage,  0.  S.  TeaAs,  Y.  pp.  869,  370;  and  Wallis,  Chtmology  of  tki 
Rigveda,  p.  87.    Eastward  and  westward :  or,  before  and  behind. 

6  The  sacrifice :  mdruisam  yajfianiy  a  mental  or  imaginary  sacrifice,  aecord- 
ing  to  Siyana.  Summer :  gi^hmd  does  not  occur  in  any  other  R.  Y.  hyma. 
Spring  :  vasantd  occurs  in  only  one  other  R.  Y.  hymn. 

/  On  the  groM:  on  the  sacred  is;raaa  \k%^d  \\i  «wst\^Qfta«    S4c?Ayat ;  s  div 
ot  oeleatdal  beings,  probably  ancieixV.  dv^Va^  «aft.x>fiL^««» 

\ 


37 MN  dC]  THS  niOVEDA.  510 

8  From  that  great  general  sacrifice  the  dripping  fat  was  gather- 

ed up. 
He  formed  the  creatures  of  the  air,  and  animals  both  wild  and 
tame. 

9  From   that  great  general  sacrifice  Kichas  and  Sama-hjmns 

were  bom : 
Therefrom  were  spells  and  charms  produced ;  the  Yajus  bad 
its  birth  from  it. 

10  From  it  were  horses  born,  from  it  all  cattle  with  two  rows  of 

teeth : 
From  it  were  generated  kine,  from  it  the  goats  and  sheep  were 
bom. 

1 1  When  they  divided  Purusha  how  many  portions  did  they  make  t 
What  do  they  call  his  mouth,  his  arms }  What  do  they  call  his 

thighs  and  feet } 

12  The  Brilbman  was  his  mouth,  of  both  his  arms  was  the  Raljanya 

made. 
His  thighs  became  the  Vaisya,  from  his  feet  the  Sikdra  was 
produced. 

13  The  Moon  was  gendered  from  his  mind,  and  from  his  eye  the 

Sun  had  birth ; 
Indra  and  Agui  from  his  mouth  were  born,  and  Vslyu  from 
his  breath. 

14  Forth  from  his  navel  came  mid-air;  the  sky  was  fashioned 

from  his  head ; 
Earth  from  his  feet,  and  from  his  ear  the  regions.     Thus  they 
formed  the  worlds. 


S  The  dnppiTtff^^^fiU :  '  the  mixture  of  curds  and  butter,' — Wikon.  Re  .- 
or,  it ;  the  sacrifio^ihvictiin  Purusha,  or  the  sacred  clarified  butter.  The  erea- 
tures  of  the  air:  *  those^inials  over  whom  V&yu  presides.* — Wilson. 

9  Spellt  €md  charms:  probably  those  of  the  later  collection  of  the  Atharva- 
veda.     The  Yajui:  the  Tajur-veda. 

12  R^anya:  the  second  or  Kshatriya  caste,  the  regal  and  military  class. 
Vaisya :  the  husbandman  ;  he  whose  business  is  agriculture  and  trade,  ^^ra  : 
the  labourer.  The  Brfthman  is  called  the  mouth  of  Purusha,  as  having  the 
special  privilege,  as  a  priest,  of  addresnug  the  Gods  in  prayer.  The  arms  of 
Purusha  became  the  R&janya,  the  prince  and  soldier  who  wields  the  sword 
and  spear.  His  thighs*  the  strongst  parts  of  his  body,  became  the  agricul- 
turist and  tradesman,  tiiie  chief  support  of  society ;  and  his  feet,  the  emblems 
of  vigour  and  activity,  became  the  ijlidra  or  labouring  man  on  whose  toil  and 
industry  all  ultimately  rests.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  the  Rigveda  which 
enumerates  the  four  castes. 

14  Cf.  the  creation  myth  of  the  world-giant  Tmir  or  Hymir  in  old  Northern 
poetry.    The  hills  are  his  bones,  the  vault  of  the  sky  h.\«  «k\)J\^  >i)(i<^  «ra.  \£s»k 
bloody  and  the  eloudg  his  br<ii9i. — Corpus  Poetiftun^  Boredle,"^^-  W^.  ^R»^' 


620  TBE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

16  Seven  fencing-gticks  had  he,  thiioe  seven  layers  of  fuel  were 
prepared, - 

When  the  Gods,  offering  sacrifice,  bound,  as  their  victim, 
Purusha. 

16  Gods,  sacrificing,  sacrificed  the  victim :  these  were  the  eariiett 
holy  ordinances. 
The  Mighty  Ones  attained  the  height  of  heaven,  there  where 
the  SAdhyas,  Gods  of  old,  are  dwelling. 

HYMN  XCI.  AgnL 

Brisk,  at  the  place  of  IM,  hymned  by  men  who  wake,  our 
own  familiar  Friend  is  kindled  in  the  house ; 

Hotar  of  all  oblation,  worthy  of  our  choice.  Lord,  beaming, 
trusty  friend  to  cme  who  loveth  him. 

2  He,  excellent  in  glory,  guest  in  every  house,  finds  like  a  swift- 

winged  bird  a  home  in  every  tree. 
Benevolent  to  men,  he  scorns  no  living  man :  Friend  to  the 
tribes  of  men  he  dwells  with  every  tribe. 

3  Most  sage  with  insight,  passing  skilful  with  thy  powers  art 

thou,  0  Agni,  wise  with  wisdom,  knowing  alL 
As  Vasu,   thou  alone  art  Lord  of  all  good  things,  oi  all  the 
treasures  that  the  heavens  and  earth  produce. 

4  Foreknowing  well,  0  Agni,  thou  in  I}4's  place  hast  occupied 

thy  regular  station  balmed  with  oil. 
Marked  are  thy  comings  like  the  comings  of  the  Dawns,  the 
rays  of  him  who  sbineth  spotless  as  the  Sun. 

16  Fencing-siick$ :  guards,  or  pieces  of  wood  laid  round  the  sacrificial  fire 
to  enclose  it.  Sfty  ana  explains  paridhdyah  as  the  seven  metres,  or  as  six  shallow 
trenches  dug  round  the  fire,  and  an  imaginary  one  round  the  Sun.  Mahldhara 
says  that  the  seven  oceans  may  be  intended. 

This  pantheistic  hymn,  which  is  generally  called  the  Purushastkkta,  is  of 
comparatively  recent  origin,  and  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  harmonize  the 
two  ideas  of  sacrifice  and  cr^itinn.  For  further  information  regarding  it,  see 
Muir,  O  S.  Texts,  I.  pp.  6—11,  and  V.  368— S77,  Prof.  Max  Muller,  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,  pp.  570f,  and  Dr.  Scherman,  Philosophiseke  Hjfwtnen  atit 
der  Rig-und  Atkarva-veda-Sanhitd,  pp.  11 — 23.  The  hymn  has  also  been  trans- 
lated by  Colebrooke,  Miscellaneous  Essays,  pp,  167,  158;  by  Wallis,  Cos- 
mology of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  87,  88;  and  by  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  Rigveda, 
pp.  289,  290;  also  by  Burnouf,  BMgavata  Purdna,  Preface  to  Vol.  I.,  and  by 
Weber,  Indisehe  Stvdien,  IX.  p.  5.  Grassmann's  Translation  in  his  Appendix 
to  Vol.  II.,  and  Ludwig*s  Translation  and  Commentary  should  be  consulted. 
See  also  Hymns  of  the  Atfiarva-veda,  XIX.  6,  which  is  a  reproduction  of 
this  hymn  with  transpositions  and  variations. 

1  The  place  of  ltd :  thft  shrine  where  clarified  butter  is  poured  upon  tiM 
fire.     Our  oivn  familiar  Friend:  Agni,  the  Friend  of  the  house. 

2  Swift-willed  bird :  or,  bir<\  oi  pv^y .    '  auutwr/  according  to  Ludwig. 

3  Fatu  •  the  word  meaning  aiso  good  mv^  IveoiuTe^ 


JiYMN  91.]  ^HB  RIQVSDA.  521 

5  Thy  glories  are,  as  lightnings  from  the  rainy  cloud,  marked, 

many-hued,  like  heralds  of  the  Dawns'  approach, 
When,  loosed  to  wander  over  plants  and  forest  trees,  thou 
crammest  by  thyself  thy  food  into  thy  mouth. 

6  Him,  duly  coming  as  their  germ,  have  plants  received :  this 

Agni  have  maternal  Waters  brought  to  life. 
So  in  like  manner  do  the  forest   trees  and  plants  bear  him 
within  them  and  produce  him  evermore. 

7  When,  sped  and  urged  by  wind,  thou  spreadest  thee  abroad, ' 

swift  piercing  through  thy  food  according  to  thy  will. 
Thy  never-ceasing  blazes,    longing  to  consume,  like   men  on 
chariots,  Agni,  strive  on  every  side. 

8  Agni,  the  Hotar-priest  who  fills  the  assembly  full,  Waker  of 

knowledge,  chief  Controller  of  the  thought, — 
Him,  yea,   none  other  than  thyself,  doth  man  elect  at  sacri- 
ficial offerings  great  and  small  alike. 

9  Here,  Agni,  the  arrangers,  those  attached  to  thee,  elect  thee 

as  their  Priest  in  sacred  gatherings, 
When  men  with  strewn  dipt  grass  and  sacrificial  gifts  offer 
thee  entertainment,  piously  inclined. 

10  Thine  is  the  Herald's  task  and  Cleanser's  duly  timed;  Leader 

art  thou,  and  Kindler  for  the  pious  man. 
Thou  art  Director,  thou  the  ministering  Priest :  thou  art  the 
Brahman,  Lord  and  Master  in  our  home. 

11  When  mortal   man  presents  to  thee  Immortal  God,  Agni,  his 

fuel  or  his  sacrificial  gift. 

Then  thou  art  his  Adhvaryu,  Hotar,  messsenger,  callest  th« 
Gods  and  orderest  the  sacrifice. 

12  From  us  these  hymns  in  concert  have  gone  forth  to  him,  these 

holy  words,  these  Kichas,  songs  and  eulogies. 

Eager  for  wealth,  to  J&tavedas  fain  for  wealth  :  when  they 
have  waxen  strong  they  please  their  Strengthener. 

6  Agni  is  produced  in  the  form  of  lightning  by  the  waters  of  the  firma> 
ment,  or  the  clouds,  and  descends  with  the  rain  into  plants  and  trees,  from 
the  wood  of  which  he  is  brought  forth  by  attrition. 

8  Qreat  and  snail :  with  Soma  or  withoi:^  it. 

9  The  ai^angerg :  priests  who  order  and  conduct  the  sacrificial  ceremonies.    • 

10  Agni  discharges  the  duties  of  the  seven  chief  priests,  officiating  as 
Hotar,  Potar,  Nesh^,  Agnldh,  Pras&star,  Adhvaryu,  and  Brahmao.  See  II. 
I.  2,  where  this  stanza  originally  occurs. 

11  CalUtt  the  Qodt:  'sayest  the  formulae.' — Ludwig. 

1 2  Richas :  yeraes  of  praise. 


522  THE  H7MN8  OF  IBOOK  X 

13  This  newest  eulogy  will  I  speak  forth  to  him,  the  Ancient  Que 

who  loves  it.     May  he  hear  oar  voice. 
May  it  come  near  his  heart  and  make  it  stir  with  love,  as  a 
fond  well-dressed  matron  clings  about  her  lord. 

14  He  in  whom  horses,  bulls,  oxen,  and  barren  cows,  and  rams, 

when  duly  set  apart,  are  offered  up, — 
To  Agui,  Soma-sprinkled,  drinker  of  sweet  juice,  Disposer,  with 
my  heart  I  briug  a  fair  hymn  forth. 

15  Into  thy  mouth  is  poured  the  offering,  Agni,  as  Soma  into 

cup,  oil  into  ladle. 
Vouchsafe   us  wealth,   strength-winning,   blest    with  heroes, 
wealth  lofty,  praised  by  men,  and  full  of  splendour. 

HYMN  XCII.  ViaredeTas. 

I  PRAISE  your  Charioteer  of  sacri6ce,  the  Lord  of  men.  Priest 
of  the  tribes,  refulgent,  Guest  of  night. 

Blazing  amid  dry  plauts,  snatching  amid  the  green,  the  Strong, 
the  Holy  Herald  hath  attained  to  heaven. 

2  Him,  Agui,  Gods  aud  men  have  made  their  chief  support,  who 

drinks  the  fatness  and  completes  the  sacrifice. 
With  kisses  they  caress  the  Grandson  of  the  Red,  like   the 
swift  ray  of  light,  the  Household  Priest  of  Dawn. 

3  Yea,  we  discriminate  his  and  the  niggard's  ways :  his  branches 

evermore  are  sent  forth  to  consume. 

When  his  terrific  flames  have  reached  the  Immortals'  world, 
then  men  remember  and  extol  the  Heavenly  Folk. 

4  For  then  the  net  of  Law,  Dyaus,  and  the  wide  expanse,  Earth, 

Worship,  aud  Devotion  meet  for  highest  praise, 

Varuna,  Indra,  Mitra  were  of  one  accord,   and  Savitar  and 
Bhaga,  Lords  of  holy  might. 

5  Onward,  with  ever-roaming  Rudra,  speed  the  floods :  over  Ara- 

mati  the  Mighty  have  they  run. 

With  them  Parijman,  moving  round  his  vast  domain,  loud 
bellowing,  bedews  all  things  that  are  within. 

2  Computes  the  sacrifice :  or,  fills  the  assembly  full.  Grandson  of  the  Red  : 
*  son  of  the  brilliant  Vayu.*— Wilson.  Sprung  from  his  own  red  glow,  cue  fire 
being  kindled  f lom  another. 

3  Men  remember :  because  then  their  prayers  are  granted. 

5  ArariMii:  the  earth. — Siyana.  Armaiti,  of  the  Avesta,  also  means  Earth 
personified  as  well  as  Devotion  or  Piety.  Parijman:  'the  circumambient  (ludra),' 
—  Wilson. 

€  Tke  Asura  :  Dyaus  himaelt. 


ffYMir92.]  THE  RIQVBDA,  523 

6  Straightway  the  Rudras,  Maruts  visiting  all  men,  Falcons  of 

DyauSy  home-dwellerd  with  the  Asura, — 
Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  look  on  with  these,  and  the  swift- 
moving  Indra  with  swift-moving  Gods. 

7  With  Indra  have  they  found  enjoyment,  they  who  toil,  in  the 

light*s  beauty,  in  the  very  Strong  One's  strength ; 
The  singers  who  iq  men's  assemblies  forged  for  him,  according 
to  his  due,  his  friend  the  thunderbolt. 

8  Even  the  Sun's  Bay  Coursers  hath  he  held  in  check  :  each  one 

fears  Indra  as  the  mightiest  of  all. 

Unhindered,  from  the  air's  vault  thunders  day  by  day  the  loud 
triumphant  breathing  of  the  fearful  Bull. 

9  With  humble  adoration  show  this  day  your  song  of  praise  to 

mighty  Rudra,  Ruler  of  the  brave  : 

With  whom,  the  Eager  Ones,  going  their  ordered  course,  he 
comes  from  heaven  Self-bright,  auspicious,  strong  to  guard. 

10  For  these  have  spread  abroad  the  fame  of  human  kind,  the 

Bull  Brihaspati  and  Soma's  brotherhood. 

Atharvan  first  by  sacrifices  made  men  sure :  through  skill  the 
Bbrigus  were  esteemed  of  all  as  Gods. 

1 1  For  these,  the  Earth  and  Heaven  with  their  abundant  seed, 

four-bodied  Nar&sansa,  Yama,  Aditi, 

God  Tvashtar  Wealth-bestower,  the  Ribhukshanas,   Rodasi 
Maruts,  Vishnu,  claim  and  merit  praise. 

12  And  may  he  too  give  ear,  the  Sage,  from  far  away,  the  Dragon 

of  the  Deep,  to  this  our  yearning  call. 

Ye  Sun  and  Moon  who  dwell  in  heaven  and  move  in  turn,  and 
with  your  thought,  0  Earth  and  Sky,  observe  this  well. 

13  Dear  to  all  Gods,  may  Pdshan  guard  the  ways  we  go,  the 

Waters'  Child  and  V&yu  help  us  to  success. 

Sing  lauds  for  your  great  bliss  to  Wind,  the  breath  of  all :  ye 
Asvins  prompt  to  hear,  hear  this  upon  your  way. 

7  Worshippers  are  rewarded  in  heaven  for  the  hymns  and   prayers  with 
which  they  have  strengthened  and  armed  Indra  for  his  great  deeds. 

9  WUk  whom  :  the  Maruts. 

10  Soma* 8  brotherhood:  all  Gods  who  are  entitled  to  drink  Soma   juice. 
Mcuie  men  ture :  gave  them  assurance  of  obtaining  what  tbey  asked. 

11  Four-bodied  Nardfama:  Agni  provided  with  four  fires,  or  complete  in 
all  his  parts.    RU>huk8han(U :  Ribhus.    JRodatt :  consort  of  the  Maruts. 

12  The  Dragon  of  the  Deep:  Ahibudhnya,  regent  of  the  «A«k ^1^yc« 

13  T^g  Waten*  ChUd :  Agni,  bom  aa  lightuva^  Itom  >i3aft  ^<Ji\sA»« 


524  THE  BTMNS  OP  [BOOK  Jt 

14  With  hymns  of  praise  we  sing  him  who  is  throned  as  Lord 

over  these  fearless  tribes,  the  Self-resplendent  One. 
We  praise  Night's  youthful  Lord  benevolent  to  men,  the  foeless 
One,  the  free,  with  all  celestial  Dames. 

15  By  reason  o£  his  birth  here  Augiras  first  sang :  the  pressing- 

stones  upraised  beheld  the  &) orifice — 
The  stones  through  which  the  Sage  became  exceeding  vast,  and 
the  sharp  axe  obtains  in  fight  the  beauteous  place. 

HYMN  XCIII.  VisvedeTM. 

Mighty  are  ye,  and  far-extended,  Heaven  and  Earth  r  both 
Worlds  are  evermore  to  us  like  two  young  Dames. 

Guard  us  thereby  from  stronger  foe ;  guard  us  hereby  to  give 
us  strength. 

2  In  each  succeeding  sacrifice  that  mortal  honoureth  the  Gods, 
He  who,  most  widely  known  and  famed  for  happiness,  inviteth 

them. 

3  Ye  who  are  Rulers  over  all,  great  is  your  sovran  power  as  Gods. 
Ye  all  possess  all  majesty  :  all  must  be  served  in  sacrifice. 

4  These  are  the  joyous  Kings  of  Immortality,  Parijman,  Mitra, 

Aryaman,  and  Yaruna. 
What  else  is  Rudra,  praised  of  men  1  the   Maruts,   Bhaga, 
PAsha^ja? 

5  Come  also  to  our  dwelling,  Lords  of  ample  wealth,   common 

partakers  of  our  waters,  Sun  and  Moon, 
When  the  great  Dragon  of  the  Deep  hath  settled  down  upon 
their  floors. 

6  And  let  the  Asvins,  Lords  of  splendour,  set  us  free, — both 

Gods,  and,  with  their  Laws,  Mitra  and  Yaruna. 
Through  woes,  as  over  desert  lands,  he  speeds  to  ample  opulence. 

#■  -I  ■'  ■  ■■■■■■.  -■■■!  -  ■  ■  —  ■  ■ ——--■■■  ■  ■      ■■  ^'t 

14  The  Self- resplendent  One:  Agni,  Night* »  youthful  Lord:  the  Moon. 
Celestial  Dames :  the  lunar  asterisms. 

15  The  Sage:  Indra,  according  to  S&yana.  Sharp  axe:  the  thunderbolt. 
The  meaning  of  thia  stauza  is  obscure. 

1  The-rehy hereby:  literally  'by  those'...  .  'by  these.*     Sftyana  suppjies 

pdlanaih,  protections,  in  Xyoth  cases.    The  former  may  refer  to  the  Maghavans, 
and  tbe* latter  to  the  people  in  general. 

4  Immortality  :  or,  the  immortal  world.  Parijman:  Koamer  round  ;  V&yu. 
What  else :  that  is,  Rudra  is  also  one  of  these  Kings.  PUshana :  a  lengthened 
form  of  the  usual  POshan. 

5  Waters :  libations  of  Soma  juice.  Sdyana  explains  ndktam  by  rdtrau 
*  by  night.'  It  is,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  has  pointed  out,  a  shortened  form  of 
nakshtamy  *  come  ye.'     Upon  their  floors  :    *  in  their  company  in  the   firms- 

men tal  ("ciouds). '— Wilson.    The  meaiiYQ|^  v&  obwinvev 
^  JS^e/  the  Mcrificer  whom  thea«  Ooda  ^xoiXAct., 


H  TMN  93.]  THE  RIQ  VEDA .  525 

7  Yea,  let  the  ;Vsvins  Twain  be  gracious  unto  us,  even  Rudras, 

and  all  Gods,  Bhaga,  Rathaspati ; 
Parijman,  Ribha,  V&ja,  0  Lords  of  all  wealth  Ribhukshanas. 

8  Prompt  is  Ribhukshan,  prompt  the  worshipper's  strong  drink  : 

may  thy  fleet  Bay  Steeds,  thine  who  speedest  on,  approach. 
Not  man's  but  God's  is  sacrifice  whose  psalm  is  unassailable. 

9  0  God  Savitar,  harmed  by  none,  lauded,  give  us  a  place  among 

wealthy  princes. 
With  his  Car-steeds  at  once  hath  our  Indra  guided  the  reins 
and  the  car  of  these  men. 

10  To  these  men  present  here,  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  to  us  grant 

lofty  fame  extending  over  all  mankind. 
Give  us  a  steed  to  win  us  strength,  a  steed  with  wealth  for 
victory. 

11  This  speaker,  Indra — for  thou  art  our  Friend— wherever  he 

may  be,  guard  thou,  Victor  !     for  help,  ever  for  help  : 
Thy  wisdom,  Vasu  I  prosper  him. 

12  So  have  they  strengthened  this  mine  hymn  which  seems  to 

take  its  bright  path  to  the  Sun,  and  reconciles  the  men  : 
Thus  forms  a  c  irpenter  the  yoke  of  horses,  not  to  be  displaced. 

13  Whose  chariot-seat  hath  come  again  laden  with  wealth  and 

bright  with  gold, 
Lightly,  with  piercing  ends,  as  'twere  two  ranks  of  heroes 
ranged  for  fight. 

14  This  Vj  Duhsima  Prithav^na  have  I  sung,  to  Vena,  R^ma,  to 

the  noV>les,  and  the  King. 
They  yoked  five  hundred,  and  their  love  of  us  was  famed 
upon  their  waiy, 

15  Besides,  they  showed  us  seven-and-seventy  horses  here. 
T^nva  at  once  displayed  his  gift,   P&rthya  at  once  displayed 

his  gift,  and  straightway  Mayava  showed  his. 


7  JRatkaapati :  the  guardian  of  wav-ohariots.  Of.  X.  64.  10.  RiblMktkai^ciM : 
]BLibhu8. 

8  ^ibhuktkan  :  *  the  mighty  ( Indra).* — ^Wilson. 

9  With  his  Oar-ateede :  with  us  prieats,  who  draw  the  chariot  of  saonfioe. 

12  So  have  they  strengthened:  'May  (the  priests)  strengthen.' — Wilson. 
The  yoke :  as  the  yoke  keeps  a  pair  of  horses  together  so  the  hymn  addressed 
to  the  Gods  reconciles  worshippers  and  fills  them  with  like,  feelings  of 
devotion. 

13  Piereing  ends :  of  the  axle,  which  pass  through  the  naves. 

14  Duhsima  Prithavdna,  Vena^  and  JRdma  were  Maghavans  or  wealthy 
institiitors  of  sacrifices.  To  the  King :  dsure :  to  the  Asura,  lord  or  chief. 
Five  hundred :  horses  or  chariots.  •  ' 

15  Horses;  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  t%xt.    ^Vjw\«^  %">r^^^OK'^  ^'Ax^ 


626  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  XCIV.  FreaBBtonei. 

Let  these  speak  loudly  forth ;  let  us  speak  out  aloud  :  to  the 
loud  speaking  Pressing-stones  address  the  speech  ; 

When,  rich  with  Soma  juice,  Stones  of  the  mountain,  je, 
united,  swift  to  Indra  bring  the  sound  of  praise. 

2  They  speak  out  like  a  hundred,  like  a  thousand  men  :  they 

cry  aloud  to  us  with  their  green-tinted  months, 
While,  pious  Stones,  they  ply  their  task  with  piety,  and,  even 
before  the  Hotar,  taste  the  offered  food. 

3  Loudly  they  speak,  for  they  have  found  the  savoury  meath  : 

they  make  a  humming  sound  over  the  meat  prepar^. 
As  they  devour  the  branch  of  the  Red-coloured  Tree,  these, 
the  well-pastured  Bulls,  have  uttered  bellowings. 

4  They  cry  aloud,  with  strong  exhilarating  drink,  calling  on 

Indra  now,  for  they  have  found  the  meath. 
Bold,  with  the  sisters  they  hnve  danced,  embraced  by  them, 
making  the  earth  re(Scho  with  their  ringing  sound. 

5  The  Eagles  have  sent  forth  their  cry  aloft  in  heaven ;  in  the 

sky's  vault  the  dark  impetuous  ones  have  danced. 
Then  downward  to  the  nether  stone's  fixt  place  they  sink, 
and,  splendid  as  the  Sun,  effuse  their  copious  stream. 

6  Like  strong  ones  drawing,    they   have   put   forth  all   their 

strength :  the  Bulls,  harnessed  together,  bear  the  chariot-pWes. 
When  they  have  bellowed,  panting,   swallowing  their  food, 
the  sound  of  their  loud  snorting  is  like  that  of  steeds. 

7  To  these  who  have  ten  workers  and  a  tenfold  g^'rth,  to  these 

who  have  ten  yoke-straps  and  ten  binding  >2kongs, 
To  these  who  bear  ten  reins,  the  eternal  sing  ye  praise,  to 
these  who  bear  ten  car-poles,  ten  when  they  are  yoked. 


cowB.  These  horses,  or  cows,  were  presented  \o  the  priests.  Tdnva,  PdrthyUf 
and  Mdyava  are  patronymics  which  do  not  occur  again  in  the  Rigveda. 

Ludwig  thinks  that  a  quarrel  had  arisen  between  the  Maghavans  or  nobles 
(stanza  14)  and  the  Visas  or  people  (stansa  9),  and  that  the  priests,  who  had 
reconciled  the  two  parties,  were  presented  with  the  chariots  which  had  been 
prepared  for  battle.  See  stanza  1?,  in  which,  according  to  this  explanation, 
nd  should  be  rendered  by  'and  not '  instead  of  'as  'twere.'  The  hymn,  which 
is  difficult  and  in  parts  almost  unintelligible,  is  placed  by  Grassmann  in  bis 
Appendix.  

Hotar :  *  (Agni)  the  invoker  (of  the  gods).' — Wilson.  Or  the  human  Hotar* 
priest  may  be  intended. 

3  Red-coloured  Tree:  the  Soma- plant.  Well-p<ntur€d :  the  meaning  of 
sUbkarvd  is  obncure.    See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  18. 

4  The  sUUrt :  the  fingers. 

5  The  Faglen  :  the  rapidly  moving  ce\e«.\.\&\  ^T«««-%tQn«a« 
7  Ten  Vforkera:  the  fingers  ot  botVi  YiwaAa. 


HYMN  95]  THE  RJOVEDA.  52T 

8  These  Stones  with  ten  conductors,  rapid  in  their  course,  with 

lovely  revolution  travel  round  ftwd  round. 
The  J  have  been  iirst  to  drink  the  flowing  Soma  juice,  first  to 
enjoy  the  milky  fluid  of  the  stalk. 

9  These  Soma-eaters  kiss  Indra's  Bay-coloured  Steeds  :  draining 

the  stalk  they  sit  upon  the  ox's  hide. 
Indra,  when  he  hath  drunk  Soma-meath  drawn  by  them,  waxes 
in  strength,  is  famed,  is  mighty  as  a  Bull. 

10  Strong  is  your  stalk  ;  ye,  verily,  never  shall  be  harmed  :  ye 

have  refreshment,  ye  are  ever  satisfied. 
Fair  are  ye,  as  it  were,  through  splendour  of  his  wealth,  his 
in  whose  sacrifice,  0  Stones,  ye  find  delight. 

11  Bored  deep,  but  not  pierced  through  with   holes,  are  ye,  O 

Stones,  not  looseued,  never  weary,  and  exempt  from  death, 
Eternal,  undiseased,  moving  in  sundry  ways,  uuthirsting,  full 
of  fatness,  void  of  all  desire. 

12  Your  fathers,  verily,  stand  firm  from  sge  to  age  :  they,  loving 

rest,  are  not  dissevered  from  their  seat. 
Untouched  by  time,  ne'er  lacking  green   plants  and  green 
tre^s,  they  with  their  voice  have  caused  the  heavens  and 
earth  to  hear. 

13  This,  this  the  Stones  proclaim,  what  time  they  are  disjoined, 

and  when  w^ith  ringing  sounds  they  move  and  diink  the  balm. 
Like  tillers  of  the  grouud  when  they  are  sowing  seed,  they 
mix  the  Soma,  nor,  devouring,  minish  it. 

14  They  have  raised  high  their  voice  for  juice,  for  sacrifice,  strik- 

ing the  Mother  Earth  as  though  they  danced  thereon. 
So  loose  thou  too  his  thought  who  hath  effused  the  sap,  and 
let  the  Stones  which  we  are  honouring  be  disjoined. 

HYMN  XCV.  UrvaBl.  Pururavas. 

Ho  there,  my  consort !  Stay,  thou  fierce-souled  lady,  and  let 

us  reason  for  a  while  together. 
Such  thoughts  as  these  of  ours,  while  yet  unspoken  in  days 

gone  by  have  never  brought  us  comfort. 

9  The  ox's  hide :  spre^td  underneath  to  catch  and  hold  the  droppings. 

12  Your  fathers :  the  mountains  from  which  you  came. 

14  Striking  the  Mother  Earth:  *  Earth '  is  not  in  the  text :—  'they  made  a 
noise  like  (children)  at  play,  stiiking  their  mother.* — Wilson.  I  have  followed 
Prof.  Ludwig's  explanation. 

The  hymn  is  a  dialogue  between  Purftravas  and  Urrasl,  and  they  are 
severally  the  Uishis  of  the  stanzas  which  they  speak.     The  dialogue,  which 

15  sometimes  almost  uninteliigible,  contains  the  germs  of  a  leeend  -sxVa^V:^  \^ 
related  in  the  Satapathch£rdhmana,  reappoata  Vn  \^<b    llw<^V^va\a  ^s^ 


528  TffE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1.^ 

2  What  am  I  now  to  do  with  this  thy  saying  I     I  have  gone 

from  thee  like  the  first  of  Mornings. 
Puriiravas,  return  thou  to  thy  dwelling :  I,  like  the  wind,  am 
diflScult  to  capture. 

3  Like  a  shaft  sent  for  glory  from  the  quiver,  or  swift  steed 

winning  cattle,  wimiing  hundreds, 
The  light;»sring  seemed  to  flash,  as  cowards  planned  it.     The 
minstrcfls  l^leated  like  a  lamb  in  trouble. 

4  Giving  her  husband's  father  life  and  riches,  from  the  near 

dwelling,  when  her  lover  craved  her, 
She  sought  the  home  w^herein  she  found  her  pleasure,  accept- 
ing day  and  night  her  lord's  embraces. 

5  Thrice  in  the  day  didst  thou  embrace  thy  consort,  though 

coldly  she  received  thy  fond  caresses. 
To  thy  desires,  Puriiravas,  I  yielded:  so  wast  thou  king,  0 
hero,  of  my  body. 

6  The  maids  Sujiirni,  Sreni,  Sumne-^pi,  Charanyu,  Granthint, 

and  Hradechakshus, — 
These  like  red  kine  have  hastened  forth,  the  bright  ones,  and 
like  milch-cows  Lave  lowed  in  emulation. 


Purdnca,  and  forms  the  plot  of  the  well-known  drama,  Vihramorvagt,  or  The 
Hero  and  the  Nymph,  According  to  this  legend,  Urvast,  an  Apsaraa  or 
Kymph  of  heaven,  has  been  banished  to  earth  where  she  consents  to  live 
with  King  Puriiravas  on  condition  that  he  takes  care  of  her  two  pet  rams, 
and  that  she  never  sees  him  unclothed.  She  lives  with  Puriiravas  for  four 
years,  when  the  Qandharvas  or  heaveuly  minstrels  resolve  to  bring  her  back. 
They  steal  one  of  the  rams  by  night.  Purflravas  springs  from  his  bed  ;  the 
Gandharvas  send  on  him  a  flash  of  magic  lightning,  and  Urvast  sees  her 
husband  naked.  One  of  the  conditions  of  the  continuance  of  their  union  is 
broken,  and  the  nymph  instantly  vanishes.  Puriiravas  meets  her  afterwards 
and  in  vain  implores  her  to  return.  At  last  she  relents,  and  in  due  time  a 
son  is  born  to  them.  These  are  the  main  outlines  of  a  sonaewhat  variously 
told  story. 

1  Pur^ravas  speaks,  when  he  has  met  Urvasi  again  after  her  sudden 
departure. 

2  Urvasi  replies. 

3  Pururavas  speaks,  reminding  her  of  the  circumstances  in  which  she 
vanished.  *  Yea,*  he  says,  *  thou  wen  test  from  me  with  the  speed  of  an  arrow 
or  a  racer.  The  cowardly  Qandharvas  deluded  us.  They  bleated  like  a  lamb 
to  make  us  think  that  one  of  thy  pets  was  in  pain  or  danger,  and  then,  by  a 
flash  of  factitious  lightning,  made  me  visible  to  thee  in  my  nakedness.* 

4  Life  and  riches:  meaning,  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  the 
future  grandson.  The  near  dwelling :  her  father-in-law's  house,  where  she 
spent  much  of  her  time.    Her  lover :  her  husband  Puriiravas. 

This  stanza  and  the  next  are  spoken  by  Urvst 

6  This  stanza  is  ascribed  by  Slyana  to  Pururavas,  who  mentions  the  names 
of  the  Apsarases  who  were  the  companions  of  Urvasi  after  her  flight.  They 
•  are  compared  to  red  kine,  meaning,  perhaps,  bright  flashes  of  lightning  fol- 
lowed by  the  Jowing  or  bellowing  oi  tVie  l>a,Mud«c, 


BTMN  a5.J  THE  RIGVEDA.  5» 

7  While  he  was  born  the  Dames  sate  down  together,  the  Rivers 

with  free  kindness  gave  him  nurture ; 
And  then,  Purdravas,  the  Gods  iucreased  thee  for    mighty 
battle,  to  destroy  the  Dasyus. 

8  When   I,  a  mortal,   wooed  to  mine  embraces  these  heavenly 

nymphs  who  laid  aside  their  raiment, 
Like  a  soared  snake  they  fled  from  me  in  terror,  like  chariot 
horses  wheu  the  car  has  touched  them. 

9  When,  loving  these  Immortal  Ones,  the  mortal  hath  converse 

with  the  nymphs  as  they  allow  him. 
Like  swans  they  show  the  beauty  of  their  bodies,  liie  horses 
in  their  play  they  bite  and  nibble. 

10  She  who  flashed  brilliant  as  tlie  falling  lightiung  brought  me 

delicious  presents  from  the  waters. 
Now  from  tiie  flood  be  born  a  strong  yowpg  hero  I  May  Urvasl 
prolong  her  life  for  ever  1 

11  Thy  birth  hath  made  me  drink  froi*  earthly  milch-kine:  this 

power,  Pururavas,  hast  thou  vruchsafed  me. 
I  knew,  and,  warned  thee,    on  chat  day.     Thou  wouldst  not 
hear  me.     What  sayest  thm,  when  naught  avails  thee  ? 

12  When  will  the  son  be  born<^iid  seek  his  father?  Mourner-like, 

will  he  weep  when  firp'  he  knows  him  ? 
Who  shall  divide  the  •ccordant  wife  and  husband,  while  fire 
is  shining  with  th^  consort's  parents  ? 


7  Urvast  speaks,  rem^'li^JJ  Puriiravas  of  the  favour  shown  him  at  his  birth, 
by  the  celestial  D'am<«*  who  were  present,  the  Rivers  who  nursed  him,  and 
the  Gods  who  gave  ^i^  strength.  Another  explanation  is  that  in  the  first 
half  of  the  stanza  Urvast  speaks,  by  anticipation,  of  the  son  whom  she  will 
bear  to  Puriirav*»i« 

8  Pururavas -^iitplftiiis  o^  the  shyness  of  the  nymphs  mentioned  in  stanza  6, 
L  with  whose  s^iety  he  had  sought  to  console  himself.  A  mortal :  meaning  that 
'  if  he  had  he^^  ^  God  their  behaviour  would  have  been  different.  Raitnewt  : 
^     Mam  :  e^pl^in^  by  S&yana  as  svaHyam  r^pam,  their  own  proper  form. 

9  UrMiBl  replies.  The  Apsarases,  she  says,  as  a  rule  only  coquet  with  mor- 
tal men-  As  they  allow  him  :  krdtuhhir  n&;  see  Gkldner,  F.  /S.,  I.  276.  lAke 
•aoan/.'  S4yana  explains  na  here  differently  :— 'they  (becoming)  ducks  do  not 
shoiv  their  bodies.' — Wilson. 

10  Piirdravas  speaks.    Urvast.  he  says,  did  not  treat  him  so  coldly.    Prom 
the  waters:  of  the  firmament.    Prom  the fiood :  from  UrvHSl  who  comes  from 

I  the  watery  regions  above.     S&yaoa  explains  apdk  differently  : — 'a  son  ahU  in 
tut  aud  friendly  to  man  has  been  born.' — Wilson. 

11  Urvast  speaks.  Auconliug  to  Sdyana,  whom  Wilson,  Qrasftmann,  and 
1  Qeldner  follow,  the  translation  of  the  first  half-line  would  be  : — *Tho«i  hnst 

I  l>een  born  to  give  the  eaith  protection.'     Warned  thee  on  that  day :  told  thoQ..^    . 
'  ^hen  I  agreed  to  live  with  thee  what  would  hap^u  \i  tYk^  Quii<^\ivQ!Q&  ^V  ^^\  *^ 
mgreement  were  not  strictly  observed. 
J  a  Pururavas  epe&kn,    JSCnom  him  :  *on  reoogumu^  ;^w\«Y' — ^ '^^^^^    ^'^'» 
34 


9  « 

6S0  THE  BYMNB  OP  [BOOK  I. 

13  I  will  console  him  when  his  tears  are  falling:  he  shall  not 

weep  and  cry  for  care  that  blesses. 
That  which  is  thine,   between  us,  will  I  send  thee,     (xo  home 
again,  thou  fool ;  thou  hast  not  won  me.  i 

14  Thy  lover  shall  flee  forth  this  day  for  ever,  to  seek,  vithoHt 

return,  the  farthest  distance. 
Then  let  his  bed  be  in  Destruction's   bosom,  and  there  let 
fierce  rapacious  wolves  devour  him. 

15  Nay,  do  not  die,  Pururavas,  nor  vanish :  let  not  the  evil-omened 

wolves  devour  thee. 
WitVi  women  there  can  be  no  lasting  friendship :    hearts  of 
hyenas  are  the  hearts  of  women. 

16  When  ami(L  men  in  altered  shape  I  sojourned,   and  through 

four  antunria  spent  the  nights  among  them, 
I  tasted  once  a  l^y  a  drop  of  butter ;  and  even  now  with  that 
am  I  contented. 

17  I,  her  best  love,  call  \rrvasi  to  meet  me,  her  who  fills  air  and 

measures  out  the  reg*^ 
Let  the  gift  brought  by  p^ty  approach  thee.     Turn  thou  to 
me  again  :  my  heart  is  tr(>ibled. 

18  Thus  speak  these  Gods  to  thet  Q  son  of  Ila:  As  death  hath 

verily  got  thee  for  his  subject, 
Thy  sons  shall  serve  the  Gods  witK  their  oblation,  and  thou, 
moreover,  shalt  rejoice  in  Svarga. 


wbeu  he  knows  my  story,  knows  how  his  father  has  U^n  deserted.  While  fat 
is  shining :  so  lonj;  as  the  father-in-law  and  mother-in-Kw  who  sanctioned  th« 
u  ion  live  and  maintain  their  household  fire. 

13  UrvQsi  answers.  That  which  is  thine,  between  U9 :  oui  child  our  com- 
mon treasure. 

14  Pururavas  threatens  to  destroy  himself. 

15  Urvas!  speaks  this  and  the  next  stanza. 

la  A  drop  of  butter :  one  of  the  conditions  on  which  the  conC^u&oce  of 
their  union  depended  was  that  she  should  eat  nothing  but  a  small  quanti^ 
of  ghrita  or  clarified  butter  daily.     See  stanza  11. 

17  Pururavas  speaks.  If er  beat  Jove :  vi^sUhthah  here  is  evidently,  ««  th» 
Scholiast  says,  an  epithet  and  not  a  name,  meaning  '  most  excellent/  '  i^oit 
precious.'  Fills  air :  representing  the  morning  mist,  or  the  first  flush  ol 
light,  that  spreads  over  the  heavens  before  the  rising  of  the  sun. 

18  There  is  an  hiatus  between  this  stanza  and  17,  an  entire  break  of  coi* 
tinuity.  The  fragment  is  ascribed  t*)  UrvRSl,  who  consoles  Purdravat  Ijy 
telling  him  of  the  promise  of  the  deities  that  after  his  death  his  sons  shall 
offer  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  and  he  himself  shall  be  blest  in  heaven.  Soi^  €f 
Ud :  Purftravas,  called  Aila  or  son  of  lift  who  was  the  daughter  of  Manu. 

Some  of  the  stanzas  should  be  tTausposed,  and  their  order  should  be,  1,  S^ 
5,  4.  6,  1«,  6,  7,  8.  9, 11,  \%  n,\4\^,\^--^^^'^'^%- 
Of  this  very  difficult  hymn  tViwe  \ft  ?>>  ^iom^VX.^  \.T«a!^>asst^,  ^\>Qb,  v'«V 
fuU  ai  d  generally  convinciug  coijamtiViV^rs  '^XoXioKXx  ^1  ^\^^  \  to.  \\A.^*J 


HYMN  96.]  TBE  RIGYEDA.  631 

HYMN  XCVI.  Indra. 

In  the  great  synod  will  I  laud  thy  two  Bay  Steeds  :  I  prize 
the  sweet  strong  drink  of  thee  the  Warrior-God, 

His  who  pours  lovely  oil  as  'twere  with  yellow  drops.  Let 
my  songs  enter  thee  whose  form  hath  golden  tints. 

2  Ye  who  in  concert  sing  unto  the  gold-hued  place,  like  Bay 

Steeds  driving  onward  to  the  heavenly  seat, 
For  Indra  laud  ye  strength  allied  with  Tawny  Steeds,  laud 
him  whom  cows  content  as  'twere  with  yellow  drops. 

3  His  is  that  thunderbolt,  of  iron,  golden-hued,  gold-coloured, 

very  dear,  and  yellow  in  his  arms ; 
Bright  with  strong  teeth,  destroying  with  its  tawny  rage.    In 
Indra  are  set  fast  all  forms  of  golden  hue. 

4  As  if  a  lovely  ray  were  laid  upon  the  sky,  the  golden  thunder- 

bolt spread  out  as  in  a  race. 
That  iron  bolt  with  yellow  jaw  smote  Ahi  down.     A  thousand 
flames  had  he  who  bore  the  tawny-hued. 

5  Thou,  thou,  when  praised  by  men  who  sacrificed  of  old,  hadst 

pleasure  in  their  lauds,  0  Indra  golden-haired. 
All  that  befits  thy  song  of  praise  thou  welcomest,  the  perfect 
pleasant  gift,  0  Golden-hued  from  birth. 

6  These  two  dear  Bays  bring  hither  Indra  on  his  car,  Thunder- 

armed,  joyous,  meet  for  laud,  to  drink  his  fill. 
Many  libations  flow  for  him  who  loveth  them :  to  Indra  have 
the  gold-hued  Soma  juices  run. 


lor  much  assistance),  by  Prof.  Geldner,  VedH^che  Studien,  I.  pp.  243—295. 
The  myth  has  been  discussed  by  von  Rotfi,  JllustratioiM  of  the  Niruhta,  and 
JndUeke  Studien,  I.  196  ;  by  Prof  Max  Muller,  Oxford  Etaays  {Chipt,  IV. 
109f.) ;  by  Prof.  Adalbert  Kuhn,  Die  Herahhmft  des  Feuers,  pp.  86  ff;  and 
by  Professors  Holtzmann  and  OMenberg  in  more  recent  days.  Professor 
Max  Muller  considers  the  story  to  be  *  one  of  the  myths  of  the  Vedas  which 
expresses  the  correlation  of  th«  dawn  and  the  snn.'  According  to  Dr.  Gold- 
atticker,  Urvast  is  the  morning  mi£iV which  vanishes  away  as  soon  as  Purdravas 
the  Sun  displays  himself.    See  Chambers's  Encyelopcedia,  Ut  edition,  under 

Pn&dBAvAs.  

Throughout  the  hymn  the  poet  rings  the  chaiiges  on  words  said  to  b« 
derivatives  of  the  rbot  An,  to  take,  as  haryatdj  delightsome,  harydn,  k)ving, 
kuri,  bay  or  tawny,  hdrit,  green,  yellow,  or  gold-coloured.  Cp.  III.  44. 
These  words  are  conjecturaUy  explained  by  the  Commentator,  and  are 
«ru8ceptible  of  various  renderings. 

1  Oil :  or  fatness,  fertilizing  rain. 

2  Cows :  milked  for  sacrificial  purpones. 

3  Tawny  rage:  perhaps  with  reference  to  the  effect  oi  ^tl:|^^^'!^^^%  W^r— 
Jjudwig. 

.   4  TAe  tawny-hued:  the  thunderbolt  wielded  by  liidx«» 


182  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

7  The  gold-hued  drops  have  flowed  to  gratify  his  wish:  the 

yellow  drops  have  urged  the  swift  Bays  to  the  Strong. 

He  who  speeds  on  with  Bay  Steeds  even  as  he  lists  hath  satis- 
fied his  longing  for  the  golden  drops. 

8  At  the  swift  draught  the  Somadrinker  waxed  in  mighty  the 

Iron  One  with  yellow  beard  and  yellow  hair. 

He,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers,  Lord  of  fleet-foot  Mares,  will 
bear  his  Bay  Steeds  safely  over  all  distress. 

9  His  yellow-coloured  jaws,  like  ladles,  move  apart,  what  time, 

for  strength,  he  makes  the  yellow-tinted  stir, 

When,  while  the  bowl  stands  there,  he  grooms  bis  Tawny 
Steeds,  when  he  hath  drunk  strong  drink,  the  sweet  jaioe 
that  he  loves. 

10  Yea,  to  the  Dear  One's  seat  in  homes  of  heaven  and  earth  the 

Bay  Steeds'  Lord  hath  whinnied  like  a  horse  for  food. 

Then  the  great  wish  hath  seized  upon  him  mightily,  and  the 
BelovM  One  hath  gained  high  power  of  life. 

11  Thou,  comprehending  with  thy  might  the  earth  and  heaven, 

acceptest  the  dear  hymn  for  ever  new  and  new. 

0  Asura,  disclose  thou  and  make  visible  the  Cow's  belovM 
home  to  the  bright  golden  Sun. 

12  0  Indra,  let  the  eager  wishes  of  the  folk  bring  thee,  delightful, 

golden-visored,  on  thy  car, 

That,  pleased  witli  sacrifice  wherein  ten  fingers  toil,  thou 
mayest,  at  the  feast,  drink  of  our  offered  meath. 

13  Juices  aforetime,  Lprd  of  Bays,  thou  drankest;  and  thine 

especially  is  this  libation. 

Gladden  thee,  Indra,  with  the  meath-rich  Soma :  pour  it  dovn 
ever,  Mighty  One !  within  thee. 


7  To  ike  Strong :  to  Indra ;  that  they  may  be  harnessed  and  come  to  the 
Bftcrifioe. 

8  The  Iron  One :  *  iron-hearted  Indra.* — ^Wilson. 

9  For  strength :  for  strengthening  food.   The  yeUow-tinted :  his  yellow  jawi. 

10  The  Dear  One  must  be  the  Soma,  found  both  in  heaven  and  earth,  tbt 
homes  of  Qods  and  men.  According  to  S&yana,  Indra  himself  is  meant.  The 
Belov^  One :  Indra,  whose  vital  vigour  is  increased  by  Soma-draughts. 

11  T'e  Cow*8  beloved  home:  the  Cow  may  be  the  Sun  whose  home  istht 
ODJvtrsa  which  Indra  will  allow  Surya  to  illumine. 

12  Saerifice  :  according  to  Sfik^^^n^^  VJci©  ^^wV^cvv^  ^^TMb.*'^^'^  '^Vuch  is  prti- 
ted  and  prepared  by  the  fingers  ol  t\i^  ^T\^?k\.. 


HYMlf  97.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  581 

HYMN  XC VII.  Praise  of  Herbs. 

Herbs  that  sprang  up  in  time  of  old,  three  ages  earlier  than 

the  Gods, — 
Of  these,  whose  hue  is  brown,  will  I  declare  the  hundred 

powers  and  seven. 

2  Ye,  Mothers,  have  a  hundred  homes,  yea,  and  a  thousand  are 
your  growths. 
Do  ye  who  have  a  thousand  powers  free  this  my  patient  from 
disease. 

Z  Be  glad  and  jojf  ul  in  the  Plants,  both  blossoming  and  bearing 
fruit. 
Plants  that  will  lead  us  to  success  like  mares  who  conquer  ipi 
the  race. 

4  Plants,  by  this  name  I  speak  to  you.  Mothers,  to  you  the 

Goddesses : 
Steed,  cow,  and  garment  may  I  win,  win  back  thy  very  self, 
0  man. 

5  The  Holy  Fig  tree  is  your  home,  your  mansion  is  the  Parna  tree : 
Wiuners  of  cattle  shall  ye  be  if  ye  regain  for  me  this  man. 

6  He  who  hath  store  of  Herbs  at  hand  like  Kings  amid  a  crrwd 

of  men, — 
Physician  is  that  sage's  name,  fiend-slayer,  chaser  of  ^^^sease, 

7  Herbs  rich  in  Soma,  rich  in  steeds,  in  nourishment*  *^  strength- 

ening power, — 
All  these  have  I  provided  here,  that  this  man  r^l  ^®  ^bo^e  again. 

S  The  healing  virtues  of  the  Plants  str^"^  ^^^"^  ^^^^  cattle 
from  the  stall, — 
Plants  that  shall  win  me  store  o^^®**^^»  *^^  8*ve  thy  vital 
breath,  0  man. 
9  Reliever  is  your  mother's  •^"^®'  ^^^  \^QncQ  Restorers  are  ye 
called. 
Rivera  are  ye  with  wi**^^  *^*^  ^^  •  ^®®P  ^**^  whatever  brings 
disease. 
10  Over  all  feuces  ha  "*  ^^^^  passed,  as  steals  a  thief  into  the  fold. 
The  Plants  hav^^^®"^  ^^'^^  *^®  frame  whatever  malady  was 
there. 


1  Three  age.^^"^*^  ^^^^^  ***  Ood$:  *  for  the  goda  before  the  three  ages.*— 
Wilson.    s^SatapathaBrdhfoana,  VII.  2.  4.  26  (5.  B.  E,,  XLI.  p.  839). 

4  Steed  ^^*  *"^  garment :  as  my  fee  for  curing  you. 

5  Jlf^y  Fig-tree :  the  Asvattha,  or  Ficua  Relig>M&.    Ponva  tree ;  VS^j^^^VMb.^ 
Sut^  FrondoBA.     Sacriiioia]   vessels  are  made  oi  iVke  ^oo^  ^1  >^«ia  \sc«^ 
witicb  are  therefore  nid  to  he  the  home  of  p\auta  \i««dL  VattVi^Sks^'^A  Qec^i&snAM 


BU  THB  STUNS  OF  [BOOK  1 

1 1  When,  bringing  back  the  vanished  strength,  I  hold  these  herbs 
within  my  band, 
The  spirit  of  disease  departs  ere  he  can  seize  upon  the  life. 

13  He  through  whose  frame,  0  Plants,   ye  creep  member  by 
member,  joint  by  joint, — 
From  him  ye  drive  away  disease  like  some  strong  arbiter  of  strife. 

1 3  Fly,  Spirit  of  Disease,  begone,  with  the  blue  jay  and  kingfisher. 
Fly  with  the  wind's  impetuous  speed,  vanish  together  with 

the  storm. 

14  Help  every  one  the  other,  lend  assistance  each  of  you  to  each, 
All  of  you  be  accordant,  give  furtherance  to  this  speech  of  mine. 

15  Let  fruitful  Plants,  and  fruitless,  those  that  blossom^  ajod  the 

blossomless, 
Urged  onward  by  Brihaspati,  release  us  from  our  pain  and  grief ; 

16  Release  me  from  the  curse's  plague  and  woe  that  comes  firoiu 

Varuna; 
Free  mefrom  Yama's  fetter,  fromsinand  offence  against  the  Gods. 

1 7  What  time,  descending  from  the  sky,  the  Plants  flew  earth- 

ward, thus  they  spake : 
No  evil  shall  befall  the  man  whom  while  he  liveth  we  pervade. 

18  W  all  the  many  Plants  whose  King  is  Soma,  Plants  of  hundred 

^^^'qns. 
Thou  h,^  the  Plant  most  excellent,  prompt  to  the  wish,  sweet 
to  the  \o^rt. 

19  0  all  ye  variu^  jjerbs  whose  King  is  Soma,  that  o'erspread 

the  earth. 

Urged  onward  by  i^^aspati,  combine  your  virtue  in  this  Plant. 

20  Unharmed  be  he  wboH^^g  ^^^  ^p^   unharmed  the  man  for 

whom  I  dig : 
And  let  no  malady  attack  b^^  ^^  quadruped  of  ours. 

21  All  Plants  that  hear  this  speecv  ^nd  those  that  have  depart- 

ed far  away,  \^ 

Come  all  assembled  and  confer  youi^ealing  power  upon  this 
Herb. 


12  Like  some  strong  arhiter  of  strife:  Mike  a  inighty<^j.jjj^j  stationed  in 
the  midst  of  his  hoat.* — Wilaon. 

13  With  the  blue  jay  and  kingfisher :  with  the  speed  of  tu  g^ftest  birds. 
Together  with  the  storm :  according  to  SAyana,  *  perish  along  w\^  ^j^^  iguana.' 

15  Urged  onward :  Brihaspati,  says  S&yana,  is  the  deity  who  ^^gides  over 
mantras  or  spells  and  charms. 
19  This  Plant :  the  medic(in«\  Vi«t\i  7?\s\<i\i\,VJQft  ^iwaasi^  «xx  vx^v^sij;,  tA 
make  use  of. 


ffYMim.]  THE  RIOVSDA,  535 

32  With  Soma  as  their  Sovran  Lord  the  Plants  hold  colloquy 
and  say : 
0  King,  we  save  from  death  the  man  whose  cure  a  Brahman 
undertakes. 

23  Most  excellent  of  all  art  thou,  0  Plant :  thy  vassals  are  the  trees. 
Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks  to  in- 
jure us. 

HYMN  XCVIIL  The  Gods. 

Comb,  be  thou  Mitra,  Varuna,  or  Pushan,  come,  0  Brihaspati, 

to  mine  oblation : 
With  Maruts,  Vasus,  or  Adityas,  make  thou  Parjanya  pour 

for  Santanu  his  rain-drops. 

2  The  Gk>d,  intelligent,  the  speedy  envoy  whom  thou  hast  sent 

hath  come  to  me,  Devalpi : 
Address  thyself  to  me  and  tarn  thee  hither :  within  thy  lips 
will  I  put  brilliant  language, 

3  Within  my  mouth,  Brihaspati,  deposit  speech  lucid,  vigorous, 

and  free  from  weakness, 

Thereby  to  win  for  Santanu  the  rain-fall.     The  meath-rich 
drop  from  heaven  hath  passed  within  it. 

4  Let  the  sweet  drops  descend  on  us,  0  Indra  :  give  us  enough 

to  lade  a  thousand  wagons. 

Sit  to  thy  Hotar  task ;  pay  worship  duly,  and  serve  the  Gods, 
Devipi,  with  oblation. 

5  Knowing  the  Gods'  good-will,  Devalpi,  Rishi,  the  son  of  Rish- 

tisheua,  sate  as  Hotar. 

He  hath  brought  down  from  heaven's  most  lofty  summit  the 
ocean  of  the  rain,  celestial  waters. 

*  This  Stikta  is  remarkable  as  representiog  one  of  two  brothers,  both  of  the 
Kshatriya  caete,  becoming  the  Purohita^  or  family  priest,  and  Hotri  or  sacritic- 
iug  priest,  of  the  other  who  is  the  R^j^.' — Wilson. 

1  Devftpi  addresses  Brihaspati,  who  is  identifiable  with  Mitra,  Varuiia, 
POshan  and  others,  in  his  special  character  of  Purohita,  or  family  Priest,  of 
t<be  Gods,  and  as  the  prototype  of  all  human  Purohitas.  With  Marutt : 
whether  thou  be  attended  by  Maruts,  Vasus,  or,  Adityas.  For  Santanu :  the 
brother  of  Devipi. 

2  Brihaspati  replies.     Brilliant  language :  a  *  brilliant  hymn.' — Muir. 

3  Dev4pi  s|)eaks,  praying  Brihaspati,  as  Lord  of  Speech  (cp.  X.  71.  1.),  to 
inspire  him  with  eloquence  that  he  may  address  the  Gods  effectually.  Tht 
meath-rich  drop:  the  8w*»et  eloquence  for  which  he  has  prayed. 

4  The  nmet  drops:  ni  r»'m.    Thifi  stanza  ia  Bp6keii\>^  ^%.\i\AX!L\)L. 
^  J^tiouuiff:  how  10  vfiu. 


5M  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOKZ 

%  Gathered  together  in  that  highest  ocean,  the  waters  stood,  by 
deities  obstructed. 

They  hurried  down  set  free  by  Artihtishena,  in  gaping  clefts,   ] 
urged  onward  by  Dev&pi. 

7  When  as  ohief  priest  for  Santanu,  Devipi,  chosen  for  Hotar's 

duty,  prayed  beseeching, 

Graciously  pleased  Bf'ihaspati  rouohsafed  him  a  voice  that 
reached  the  Gods  and  won  the  waters. 

8  0  Agni  whom  Dev^pi  Arshtishena,  the  mortal  man,  hath 

kindled  in  his  glory. 

Joying  in  him  with  aU  the  Gods  together,  urge  on  the  sender 
of  the  rain,  Parjanya. 

9  All  ancient  Rishis  with  their  songs  approached  thee,  even  • 

thee,  0  Much-invoked,  at  sacrifices. 

We  have  provided   wagon-loads  in  thousands :  come  to  the 
solemn  rite,  Lord  of  Red  Horses. 

10  The    wagon-loads,  the  nine-and-ninety  thousand,  these  have 

been  offered  up  to  thee,  0  Agni. 

Hero,  with  these  increase  thy   many  bodies,  and,  stimulated, 
send  us  raiti  from  heaven. 

11  Give  thou  these  ninety  thousand  loads,  0  Agni,  to  Indra,  to 

the  Bull,  to  be  his  portion. 

Knowing  the  paths  which  Deities  duly  travel,  set  mid  the 
Gods  in  heaven  Aulana  also. 

12  0  Aiini,  drive  afar  our  foes,  onr  troubles;  chase  malady  away 

and  wicked  demons. 

From  this  air-ocean,  from  the  loftj  heavens,  send  down  on  us 
a  mighty  flood  of  waters. 


6  Arshtishena:  patronymic,  bod  of  Rishtisheoa ;  DevApi. 

7  Chief  priest :  or  family  or  household  priest ;  Purohita. 

9  Wagon-loadi :  an  extraordinary  quantity  of  fuel  for  the  sacrifice,  ai  tb* 
occasion  was  one  of  the  greatest  importance. 

\l  A  uldna :  Santanu,  as  a  descendant  of  Ula,  appears  to  He  meant.  Accord* 
inpr  t'>  some  scholars,  aMnam  means  oblation  or  sacrificial  oflfering.  •  The 
fact  of  Devftpi  being  reputed  as  the  author  of  this  hymn,  and  as  the  purohita 
and  hotri  of  his  brother  seems  to  have  led  the  legendary  writers  to  invent 
the  story  of  his  becoming  a  Br&hman,  which  (as  mentioned  by  Professor 
Weber,  Jndische  Studien,  i.  p.  208)  is  recorded  in  the  ^ilya-parvan  of  the 
Mah&bhSrati,  verses  2281  ff,  where  he  is  said  tp  have  attained  this  distinctioii 
at  a  certain  place  of  pilgrimage  called  Prithadaka  ;  where  Sindhiidvlpa  and 
ViBvimitn  also  were  received  into  tVi^  vA^Vvw  GaAt«.' — Muir,  0.  S   Textt,  I. 

f /(?  ff.    For  the  legend  on  wh\cb  tVi^i  \i^mx\  \%  *«iA  \ft  \«  \mm&^  ^)^^\mL  Vi 

/ttrana  from  the  Nirukta,  m  ^ilaonT  %  Tl waAaJ^ou, 


B7MN  99.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  687 

HYMN  XCIX.  Indra. 

What  Splendid  On«,  Loud-voiced,  Far-striding,  dost  thou,  well 

knowing,  urge  us  to  exalt  with  praises? 
What  give  we  him  ?   When  his  might  dawned,  he  fashioned 

the  Vritra-slayingbolt,  and  sent  us  waters. 

2  He  goes  to  end  his  vork  with  lightning  flashes  :  wide  is  the 

seat  his  Asura  glory  gives  him. 
With  his  CompaniotB,  not  without  his  Brother,  he  quells  this 
Saptntha's  magic  devices. 

3  On  most  auspicious  jath  he  goes  to  battle  ;  he  toiled  to  win 

heaven's  light,  full  fain  to  gain  it; 
He  seized  the  huudrd-gated  castle^s  treasure  by  craft,  un- 
checked, aad  slew  tiie  lustful  demous. 

4  Fighting  for  kine,  the  prize  of  war,  and  roaming  among  the 

herd  he  brings  the  joung  streams  hither, 
Where,  footless,  joinec,  without  a  car  to  bear  them,  with  jars 
for  steeds,  they  pour  their  flood  like  butter. 

5  Bold,  unsolicited  for  wealth,  with  Rudras  he  came,  the  Blame- 

less, having  left  lis  dwelling. 
Came,  seized  the  fo)d  of  Vamra  and  his  consort,  and  left  the 
couple  >veeping  aid  unsheltered. 

6  Lord  of  the  dwelling,  he  subdued  the  demon  who  roared  aloud, 

six-eyed  and  tripb-headed. 
Trita,  made  stronger  by  the  mi^ht  he  lent  him,  struck  down 
the  boar  with  shafc  whose  point  was  iron. 

7  He  raised  himself  on  iiigh  and  shot  his  arrow  against  the  guileful 

and  oppressive  foeman. 
Strong,  gloriouB,  manliest,  for  us  he  shattered  the  forts  of 
Nahus  when  be  slew  the  Dasyus. 


1  The  question  in  the  first  line  is  a  rhetorical  figure,  the  meaning  being, 
How  splendid  is  ha  (Indn)  whom  thou  (the  Yajamaua  ?)  urgest  us  to  exalt ! 
What  (five  we  him  f  what  (an  we  give  him  in  return  for  what  he  has  done 
for  us  ? 

2  His  Companions :  the  ilanits.  ff is  Brother :  Vishnu.  Who  Saptatha  wsiA 
is  uncertain.  The  word  m»?ins  Septimus,  the  seventh,  and  probably  some 
RAkshasa  or  demon  is  intended. 

3  The  lustfuf  demons :  the  exact  meaning  of  sisnadevdn  is  uncertain.  See 
VII.  21.  6  and  note. 

6  I  can  make  nothing  intelligible  of  the  second  line.  *  I  think  of  the  two 
(parents)  of  Vamra,  who  are  free  from  fever.  Having:  obtained  (the  enemy's) 
food,  he  called  aloud  whilst  stealing  it.' — Wilson.  Vamra  is  mentioned  in  I. 
51.9;  112.  16. 

6  Lord  of  the  dwelling:   or,  with  Ludwlg,  TVve  \aOT^  wA  CVv^«.     tV* 
^dem'm:  or  DisM  VisvturUpa,  son  of  Tvashtar.    Sw  X  %.  %.  TKt  Vwar ;  ^-^Jmcw* 
C/,  I.  61,  7. 


538  THE  H7MNS  OP  IBOOK  X 

8  He,  like  a  cloud  that  rains  upon  the  pasture,  hath  found  for 

us  the  way  to  dwell  in  safety. 
When  the  Hawk  comes  in  body  to  the  Soma,  armed  with  his 
iron  claws  he  slays  the  Dasyus. 

9  He  with  his  potent  Friends  gave  up  tte  mighty,  gave  Sushna 

up  to  Kutsa  for  affliction. 
He  led  the  lauded  Kavi,  he  delivered  i.tka  as  prey  to  him  and 
to  his  heroes. 

10  He,  with  his  Gods  who  love  mankind  the  Wondrous,  givbg 

like  Varuna  who  works  with  magic. 
Was  known,  yet  young,  as  guardian  of  the  seasons ;  and  he 
quelled  Araru,  four-footed  demon. 

11  Through  lauds  of  him  hath  Ausija  Rijisvan  burst,  with  the 

Mighty 's  aid,  the  stall  of  Pipru. 
When  the  tsaint  pressed  the  juice  and  shone  as  singer,  he  seized 
the  forts  and  with  his  craft  subdued  them. 

12  So,  swiftly  Asura,  for  exaltation,  hatt  the  great  Yamraka  come 

nigh  to  Indra. 
He  will,  when  supplicated,  bring  him  blessing :  he  hath  brought 
all,  food,  strength,  a  happy  dwelling. 

HYMN  C.  VisvedevM. 

Be,  like  thyself,  0  Indra,  strong  for  ou:  delight :  here  lauded, 

aid  us,  Maghavun,  drinker  of  the  juiee. 
Savitar  with  the  Gods  protect  us  :  hear  ye  Twain.  We  ask  for 

freedom  and  complete  felicity. 


8  The  Haiok  :  the  fierce  aud  swift  Indra. 

9  Kavi:  according  to  S&yana,  Usani  KAvya  or  son  of  Kavi  is  intended. 
Atka:  see  X.  49.  3. 

10  His  Gods:  theMariite.  Amru  :  I  follow  S4yam.  Ct  Satapatfia-Brdh- 
nana,  I.  2.  4.  17  (S.  B.  E.  XII.  57)  According  to  Piof  Ludwig's  conjectural 
explanation  the  traoBlation  would  be: — 'he  meaaired  out  the  year  in  four 
divisions.' 

11  At'sija  :  son  of  Usij.  But  as  this  patronymic  does  not  properly  belong 
to  Rijisvan,  the  word  hero  may  perhaps  mean,  ' venement,'  'eagerly  desirous.' 
Pipru :  one  of  the  demons  of  drought. 

12  Asura:  0  divine  and  mighty  Indra.  Por  exaltation:  of  Indra. 
Vamraka :  a  lengthened  form  of  Varnra,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.  The  last 
clause  of  the  stanza  is  borrowed  from  X.  20.  10. 

This  hymn,  which  is  obscure  and  in  some  places  unintelligible,  is  placed  by 
Prof.  Grassmann  in  his  Appendix.  Dr.  Muir  has  translated  stanzas  1—7  iu 
0.  5.  Texts,  IV.  pp.  408,  409  (2nd  edition). 

1   Ye  Twain:    Indra  and  Sav\Xa.T.    PTeedftm :    ad.\t\.m,  ^^toJu  >&.. ^^iisa. 
-uialatts  differently  :  'We  Implore  KdSJOviox  \^\Ca^v.5.^^\C^. 


HYMN  100.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  689 

2  Bring  swift,  for  ofifering,  the  share  that  suits  the  time,  to  the 

pure-drinker  V&yu,  roaring  as  he  goes, 
To  him  who  hath  approached  the  draught  of  shining  milk. 
We  ask  for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

3  May  Savitar  the  God  send  us  full  life,  to  each  who  sacrifices, 

lives  aright  and  pours  the  juice; 
That  we  with  simple  hearts  may  wait  upon  the  Gods.  We  ask 
for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

4  May  Indra  evermore  be  gracious  unto  us,  and  may  King  Soma 

meditate  our  happiness, 
Even  as  men  secure  the  comfort  of  a  friend.    We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

5  Indra  hath  given  the  body  with  its  song  and  strength :  Brihas- 

pati,  thou  art  the  length ener  of  life. 
The   sacrifice  is  Manu,  Providence,  our  Sire.     We  ask  for 
freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

6  Indra  possesseth  might  celestial  nobly  formed :  the  singer  in 

the  house  is  Agni,  prudent  Sage. 
He  is  the  sacrifice  in  synod,  fair,  most  near.    We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

7  Not  often  have  we  sinned  against  you  secretly,  nor,  Vasus, 

have  we  openly  provoked  the  Gods. 
Not  one  of  us,  ye  Gods,  hath  worn  an  alien  shape.     We  ask 
for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

8  May  Savitar  remove  from  us  our  malady,  and  may  the  Moun- 

tains keep  it  far  away  from  where 
The  press-stone  as  it  sheds  the  meath  rings  loudly  forth.    We 
ask  for  freedom  and  complete  felicity. 

9  Ye  Vasus,  let  the  stone,  the  presser,  stand  erect :  avert  all 

enmities  and  keep  them  far  remote. 
Our  guard  to  be  adored  is  Savitar  this  God.     We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 
10  Eat  strength  and  fatness  in  the  pasture,  kine,  who  arebalmed 
at  the  reservoir  and  at  the  seat  of  La.w. 
So  let  your  body  be  our  body's  medicine.     We  ask  for  freedom 
and  complete  felicity. 

2  Pure-drinker :  drinker  of  pure  Soma  juice. 

5  The  sacrifice  is  Manu :  we  owe  our  existence  and  preservation  to  sacrifice, 
which  is  to  us  another  Manu,  the  father  of  Aryan  men. 

6  The  s(ia*ifice  in  synod :  *  worthy  of  sacrifice  at  the  altar.' — Wilson. 

7  An  alien  shape :  as  sorcerers  are  accustomed  to  do. 

10  Balmed  at  the  reservoir :  anointed  before  bein^  tdX&aA..    %^i^"^  ««-- 
piaiDB  hfse  by  goshlJie,  'in  the  cowatall.*  Let  ^ow  hod-y :  tqa^  ^^  \£S^>'<>is» 
produce  ot  your  bodiea,  offered  in  libation,  koop  out  Xio^'^Ssi  V«s^Na^^    ^^ 


540  TEE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X, 

1 1  The  singer  fills  the  spirit :  all  mens'  love  hath  he.    Indra  takes 

kindly  care  of  those  who  pour  the  juice. 
For  his  libation  is  the  licaveuly  udder  full.     We  ask  for  free- 
dom and  complete  felicity. 

12  Wondrous  thy  spirit-filling  light,  triumphaDt;  thy  bests  save 

from  decay  and  are  resistless. 
The  pious  votary  by  straightest  pathway  speeds  to  posseas 
the  best  of  all  the  cattle. 

HYMN  CI.  Visvedevai. 

Wake  with  one  mind,  my  friends,  and  kindle  Agni,  ye  who 

are  many  and  who  dwell  together. 
Agni  and  Dadhikr&s  and  Dawn  the  Goddess,  you,  Gods  with 

Indra,  I  call  down  to  help  us. 

2  Make  pleasant  hymns,  spin  out  your  songs  and  praises :  build 

ye  a  ship  equipped  with  oars  for  transport. 
Prepare  the  implements,   make  all  things   ready,  and  let  the 
sacrifice,  my  friends,  go  forward. 

3  Lay  on  the  yokes,  and  fasten  well  the  traces :  fonned  is  the 

furrow,  sow  the  seed  within  it. 
Through  song  may  we  find  hearing  fraught  with  plenty  :  near 
to  the  ripened  grain  approach  the  sickle. 

4  Wise,  through  desire   of  bliss  from  Gods,  the  skilful  bind 

the  traces  fast, 
And  lay  the  yokes  on  either  side. 

5  Arrange   the  buckets   in  their  place :  securely  fasten  on  the 

straps. 
We  will  ponr  forth  the  well  that  hath  a  copious  stream,  fair- 
flowing  well  that  never  fails. 

•  may  the  body  of  the  cow  offered  in  sacrifice  be  the  expiation  for  the  body  of 
the  sacrificer,  enabling  him  to  attain  swarga.  Or  may  the  milk  be  the  cor- 
rective of  the  Soma.' — Wilson. 

11  The  heavenly  udder -'  the  clouds  of  the  firmament. 

12  Save  from  decay :  this  is  Prof.  Ludwiy's  interpretation  of  ^he  obscure 
word  jaraniprSfJk,  which  means,  according  to  Sdyana,  replenishing  the  wealth 
of  thy  worshippers.  The  last  line  is  exfJained  differently  by  S&yana. — *  (there- 
fore) Duvasyu  hastens  in  front  of  the  victim  cow,  (leading  it)  with  a  straight 
cord.' — Wilson.  According  to  the  same  authority-the  meaning  of  the  refrain 
of  stanzas  1 — 11  is  : — 'We  long  for  the  universal  Aditi.' 


1  Dadhikrds :  probably  a  personification  of    the  Morning  Sun.     See  IIL 
20  1  ;  IV.  38.  2  ;  40.  6  note. 

2  Ship :  sacrifice,  represented  under  this  figure. 

3  In  this  and  the  following  stanzas  sacrifice  is  figuratively  spoken  of  as 
plougbing,  sowing  and  reaping,  ^ee  Sata-poiKA-BTQLUtwMwji,  Vll»  %s  2,  4,  (S. 
B  E  XLL  820). 

^  The  flowing  Soma  ia  an  iuex\nLViB^v\>\ft  >w^» 


B7MN 101.]  THE  ItlGVEDA,  541 

6  I  pour  the  water  from  the  well  with  pails  prepared  and  goodly 

straps, 
Unfailing,  full,  with  plenteous  stream. 

7  Refresh  the  horses,  win  the  prize  before  you  :  equip  a  chariot 

fraught  with  happy  fortune. 
Pour  forth  the  well  with  stone  wheel,   wooden  buckets,  the 
drink  of  heroes,  with  the  trough  for  armour. 

8  Prepare  the  cow-stall,  for  tiiere  drink  your  heroes :  stitch  ye 

the  coats  of  armour,  wide  and  many. 
Make  iron  forts,  secure  from  all  assailants  :  let  not  your  pit- 
cher leak  :  stay  it  securely. 

9  Hither,  for  help,  I  turn  the  holy  heavenly  mind  of  you  the 

Holy  Gods,  that  longs  for  sacrifice. 
May  it  pour  milk  for  us,  even  as  a  stately  cow  who,  having 
sought  the  pasture,  yields  a  thousand  streams. 

10  Pour  golden  juice  within  the  wooden  vessel :  with  stone-made 

axes  fashion  ye  and  form  it. 

Embrace  and  compass  it  with  tenfold  girdle,  and   to  both 
chariot-poles  attach  the  car-horse. 

11  Between  both  poles  the  car-horse  goes  pressed  closely,  as  in 

his  dwelling  moves  the  doubly- wedded. 

Lay  in  the  wood  the  Sovran  of  the  Forest,  and  sink  the  well 
although  ye  do  not  dig  ifr. 

12  Indra  is  he,  0  men,  who  gives  us  happiness :  sport,  urge  the 

giver  of  delight  to  win  us  strength. 

Bring  quickly  down,  0  priests,  hither  to  give  us  aid,  to  drink 
the  Soma,  Indra  Son  of  Nishtigri. 


7  The  sacrifice  is  a  chariot ;  and  the  ritual  is  a  race.  The  well :  the  stream 
of  Soma  juice.    Stone  wheel :  with  allusion  to  the  press-stones. 

8  The  cow-stall :  figuratively,  for  the  place  where  the  Soma  is  pressed. 
CoaU  of  armour:  the  filters  for  straining  the  juice.  Iron  forts:  the 
safeguards  obtained  by  sacrificing. 

9  Milk:  abundant  Messing. 

10  Stone-made:  with  allusion  to  the'press-stones.  Tenfold  girdle:  the  fingers 
of  both  hands.  Both  eharlot-'polee :  the  arms.  The  earhoree:  the  upper 
presB-stoue  ;  or  the  pestle. 

1 1  The  doubly -wedded :  the  man  who  has  two  wives.  The  comparison  is 
not  clear.  The  Sovran  of  the  Forest :  the  Soma  plant.  Sink  the  weU :  *  store 
up  the  juice.'— Wilson. 

12  I  follow  Sslyana  in  his  interpretation  of  the  first  line.  Von  Roth. 
liUdwig,  and  Qrassmann  explain  it  differently.  Nishtigri  :  meaning  according 
to  SAyapa,  *flhe  who  swalJows  up  her  rival  wile  'K\fiS[i\A,  v  t.\>\XAi  Sj^  wii'^XftNs^ 

Aditi,  the  mother  of  lodra. 


542  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  CII.  Indnt 

For  thee  may  Indra  boldly  speed  the  car  that  works  on  either 

side. 
Favour  us,  Much-invoked  !  in  this  most  glorious  fight  against 

the  raiders  of  our  wealth. 

2  Loose  in  the  wind  the  woman's  robe  was  streaming  what  time 

she  won  a  car-load  worth  a  thousand. 
The  charioteer  in  fight  was  Mudgal4ni :  she,  Indra's  dart,  heap- 
ed up  the  prize  of  battle. 

3  0  Indra,  cast  thy  bolt  among  assailants  who  would  slaughter 

us : 
The  weapon  both  of  D4sa  and  of  Arya  foe  keep  far  away,  0 
Maghavan. 

4  The  bull  in  joy  had  drunk  a  lake  of  water.     His  shattering 

horn  encountered  an  opponent. 
Swiftly,  in  vigorous  strength,  eager  for  glory,  he  stretched  his 
forefeet,  fain  to  win  and  triumph. 

5  They  came  anear  the  bull ;  they  made  him  thunder,  made  him 

pour  rain  down  ere  the  fight  was  ended. 
And  Mudgala  thereby  won  in  the  contest  well-pastured  kine 
in  hundreds  and  in  thousands. 

6  In  hope  of  victory  that  bull  was  harnessed :  Kesi  the  driver 

urged  him  on  with  shouting. 
As  he  ran  swiftly  with  the  car  behind  him  his  lifted  heels  press- 
ed close  on  Mudgalani. 


The  deified  subject  of  the  hymn  is  said  to  be,  alternatively,  Drughana  (Mace, 
Club  or  Hammer.     See  stanza  9).     The  Rishi  is  Mudgala. 

According  to  the  legend  quoted  by  S&yana,  all  Mudgala's  cattle  had  been 
stolen  except  an  old  ox  which  he  harnessed  to  his  wagon  and  went  in  pursuit 
of  the  robbers.  He  threw  his  club  or  mace  before  him,  which  showed  him  the 
way  to  the  thieves,  and  thus  recovered  his  property. 

1  For  thee :  0  Mudgala.  ThaJt  works  on  either  aide :  mithUhritam :  accord- 
ing to  Sftyana= afa^yom,  'that  has  no  companion.'  The  meaning  ia  uncer- 
tain. 

2  Mudgaldni :  Mudgala's  wife.  lndra*8  dart :  sped  swiftly  on  her  way  by 
Indra. 

3  This  stanza,  seems  to  be  an  interpolation. 

4  The  bull :  apparently  one  of  the  buffaloes  which  drew  the  chariot  of  Mud- 
gal&nt's  chief  opponent.  Bad  drunk :  just  before  the  fight  began.  Bneovn- 
tered  an  opponent :  meaning,  perhaps,  that  feeling  un&isy  he  hung  his  head 
and  struck  the  ground  with  his  horns.  *  He  cleft  the  mountain  peak,  he  went 
a^gainat  the  enemy.' — Wilson. 

6  In  hope  of  victory  :  fcafcdrdavc :  V^^  Ttt%«iivj^\&\«\RKiNs£«v\  v^satding  to 
Siyana,  '  for  the  destruction  oi  t\i^  ett^im^ .'    \nA^\^'OwsJ»&  xX».\.\ittfc  Wi^ms. 
«nd  of  the  chariot-pole  ia  intended. 


HYMN  102]  THE  KIOVEDA.  543 

7  Deftly  for  him  he  stretched  the  car-pole  forward,  guided  the 

bull  thereto  and  firmly  yoked  him. 
Indra  vouchsafed  the  lord  of  cows  his  favour :  with  mighty 
steps  the  buffalo  ran  onward. 

8  Touched  by  the  goad  the  shaggy  beast  went  nobly,  bound  to 

the  pole  by  the  yoke's  thong  of  leather. 
Performing  deeds  of  might  for  many  people,  he,  looking  on  the 
cgws,  gained  strength  and  vigour. 

9  Here  look  upon  this  mace,  this  bulFs  companion,  now  lying 

midway  on  the  field  of  battle. 
Therewith  hath  Mudgda  in  ordered  contest  won  for  cattle  for 
himself,  a  hundred  thousand. 

10  Far  is  the  evil :  who  hjith  here  beheld  it?  Hither  they  bring 

the  bull  whom  they  are  yoking. 
To  this  they  give  not  either  food  or  water.     Reaching  beyond 
the  pole  it  gives  direction s. 

1 1  Like  one  forsaken,  she  hath  found  a  husband,  and  teemed  as 

if  her  breast  were  fill  and  flowing. 
With  swiftly-racing  cbariot  may  we  conquer,   and  rich  and 
blessM  be  our  gains'n  battle. 

12  Thon,  Indra,  art  the  msrk  whereon  the   eyes  of  all  life  rest, 

when  thou, 
A  Bull  who  drivest  with  \hy  bull,  wilt  win  the  race  together 
with  thy  weakling  irieid. 

7  Mudgala's  better  fortune  is  noT\  related.  For  him  :  for  his  own  buffalo. 
He  :  Mudgala.  Car-pole  :  I  follow  ludwig's  conjecDure  ;  but  it  is  uncertain 
wbat  part  of  the  chariot  the  pradhi  wis  ;  *  the  periphery  of  the  wheel,*  accord- 
ing to  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon;  *the  frame  of  the  waggon.' — Wilson. 
SAyana's  explanation  is  not  very  clear,  '?ut  he  seems  to  think  that  the  linchpin 
is  intended.  None  of  these'three  explakatiens  seems  suitable  here.  The  lord 
of  cows  .♦  the  bull  buffalo. 

9  Mace:  drughandm:  according  to  Slynna,  the  club  which  Mudgala  had 
carried  with  him  on  his  expedition,  and  waich,  together  with  the  ox  that  drew 
his  car  had  enabled  him  to  recover  his  cattle.  Lying  midway :  after  the  vic- 
tory, the  King  had  thrown  down  his  mace  upon  the  field  of  battle. — Ludwig. 

10  I  find  tills  stanza  unintelligible.  Perhaps  the  second  line  contains  the 
germ  of  that  part  of  the  legend  which  mentions  the  club  thrown  in  front  of 
the  chariot  to  point  out  the  way  that  the  robbers  had  taken. 

1 1  JAke  one  forsaken :  parivrikteva :  *  Apparently  Mudgal&nt  was  a  pari- 
vriktd  [a  wife  lightly  esteemed  in  comparison  with  the  favourite  wife]  who 
made  amendn  for  her  sterility  by  driving  her  husband's  chariot  to  battle  and 
bringing  him  back  victorious,  with  the  booty  which  she  had  helped  him  to 
gain  instead  of  the  children  that  she  had  not  borne  him.' — Ludwig. 

12  With  thy  bull :  thy  fierce  and  strong  thunderbolt.     With  th^i  vstakliv^ 
friend :  with  the  mortal  man  whom  thou  protecY^at,  ttaiQi  "vVo  \s»  'wwi*.  "w^^ 
effemiBnte  in  comparison  with  thee. 

The  hymn  ia  fragmentary,  and  it  seema  im^^oa&V!b\Q  \ftSxi\.«tV^'^'^^^''^ 


644  TBB  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK 

HYMN  cm.  .  Ind 

Swift,  rapidly  Btritcing,  like  a  bull  who  sharpens  his   hon 

terrific,  stirring  up  the  people, 
With  eyes  that  close  not,  bellowing,  Sole  Hero,  Indrasubdai 

at  once  a  hundred  armies. 

2  With  him  lou<l -roaring,  ever  watchful,  Victor,  bold,  hard  1 

overthrow,  Rouser  of  battle, 
Indra  the   Strong,   whose   hand   bears  arrows,   conquer,  3 
warriors,  now,  now  vanquish  in  the  combat. 

3  He  rules  with  those  who  carry  shafts  and   quivers,  Indra  wh 

with  his  band  brings  hosts  together, 
Foe  conquering,  strong  of  arm,  the  Soma-drinker,  with  mighty 
bow,  shooting  with  well-laid  arrows. 

4  Brihaspati,  fly  with  thy   chariot  hither,   slayer  of  demoni 

driving  off  our  foemen. 

Be  thou  protector  of  our  cars,   destioyer,   victor   in  battle 
breaker-up  of  armies. 

6  Conspicuous  by  thy   strength,  firm,  foremost  fighter,  might] 

and  fierce,  victorious,  all-subduiiij, 

The  Son  of  Conquest,  passing  men  and   heroes,   kine-winner, 
mount  thy  conquering  car,  0  In4ra. 

6  Cleaver  of  stalls,  kiue  winner,  aroed  with  thunder,  who  quella 

an  army  and  with  might  destr^a  it, — 

Follow  him,  brothers !  quit   yoirselves  like  heroes,    and  like 
this  Indra  show  your  zeal  am  courage. 

7  Piercing  the  cow-stalls  with    lurpassing   vigour,    Indra,    the 

pitiless  Hero,  wild  with  angar, 

Victor  in  fight,  unshaken  and  resistless, — may  he  protect  our 
armies  in  our  battles. 

8  Indra  guide   these :  Briha^nti   precede   them,  the   guerdon, 

and  the  sacrifice,  and  Sonaa ; 

And  let  the  banded  Maruts  march  in  forefront  of  heavenly 
hosts  that  conquer  and  demolish. 


Eatisfactorily.  I  have  followed  in  some  stanzas  the  interpretations  of  the 
authors  of  Vcdbche  Studie^y,  I.  pp.  124  and  138.  But  see  the  later  translation 
and  exhaustive  di.-^ciu^sion  by  Prof.  Geldner  in  Part  II.  pp.  1 — 22,  and  Prof. 
Ludwig's  remarks  thereon  in  Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  aw/  dem  Oebiete  der 

Egveda-furschnng.  — — 

The  hjmu  is  a  prayer  for  aid  and  victory  in  battle. 

8  Guide  these:  be  the  leader  oi  out  \,too^^.    The  gutrdou:  dj6LVx.V.\<ivd  •.  ^<i 
feward  of  the  priests  who  perlovm  tViC  a«kCv'\^<:%  oS^v^^\>feiQ\^\i».\.\^^, 


n YMN  1 04.]  THE  RIQVEDA .  545 

9  Ours  be  the  potent  host  of  mighty  Indra,  King  Varuna,  and 

Maruts,  and  Adityas. 
Uplifted  is  the  shout  of  Gods  who  conquer  high-minded  Gods 
who  cause  the  worlds  to 'tremble. 

10  Bristle  thou  up,  0  Maghavan,  our  weapons  :  excite  the  spirits 

of  my  warring  heroes. 
Urge  on  the  strong  steeds'  might,  0  Vritra-slayer,  and  let  the 
din  of  conquering  cars  go  upward. 

1 1  May  Indra  aid  us  when  our  flags  are  gathered  :  victorious  be 

the  arrows  of  our  army. 
May  our  brave  men  of  war  prevail  in  battle.  Ye  Gods,  protect 
us  in  the  shout  of  onset. 

1 2  Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemen,  seize  thou  their  bodies 

and  depart,  0  Apva. 
Attack  tliem,  set  their  hearfs  on  fire  and  burn   them  :  so  1^ 
our  foes  abide  in  utter  darkness. 

1 3  Advance,  0  heroes,  win  the  day.    May   Indra   be   your   sure 

defence. 
Exceeding  mighty  be  your  arms,  that  none  may  wound  or   in- 
jure you. 

HYMN  CIV.  Indra. 

Soma  hath  flowed  for  thee,    Invoked   of   many  !  Speed   to   our 
sacrifice  with  both  thy  Coursers. 
To  thee  have  streamed  the  songs  of  mighty  singers,  imploring. 
Indra,  drink  of  our  libation. 

2  Drink  of  the  juice  which  men  have  washed  in  waters,  and  fill 

thee  full,  0  Lord  of  Tawny  Horses.  ' 

0  Indra,  hearer  of  the  laud,    with   Soma  which   stones   have 
mixed  for  thee  enhance  thy  rapture. 

3  To  make  thee  start,  a  stronj^  true  draught  I  offer   to  thee,  the 

Bull,  0  thou  whom  Bay  Steeds  carry. 
Here  take  delight,  0   Indra,  in   our   voices   while   thou   art 
hymned  with  power  and  all  our  spirit. 

4  0  Mighty  Indra,  through  thine   aid,   thy   prowess,   obtaining 

life,  zealous,  and  skilled  in  Order, 

11  When  our fiagi  are  gathered:  'apparently  comparable  with  the  aigiiis 
collatis  of  the  Romans.' — Ludwig, 

12  Apvd :  according  to  SAyana,  a  female  deity  "wlio  presides  over  ain  ; 
according  to  Mahtdhara,  sickness,  or  fear.  Apparently  ApvA  was  a  sort  of 
colic,  or  dysentery,  likely  to  attack  soldiers  in  the  field.  And  depart :  or^  !2»i»% 
us  by  ;  do  not  attack  us.  

3  True:  which  produces  the  results  expoctod  iii  Wie  «kYk»iV^  ^1  W'^ovvx. 
55 


54o  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOS  X 

Men  in  the  house  who  share  the  sacred  banquet  stand  sioging 
praise  that  briugs  them  store  of  children. 

5  Through  thy  directions,  Lord  of  Tawny   Coursers,  thine   who 

art  tirm,  splendid,  and  blest,  the  people 

Obtain  most  liberal  aid  for  their  salvation,    and   praise  thee,    k 

Indra,  through  thine  excellencies.  ' 

t)  L('rd  of  the  Bays,  come  with  thy  two  Bay  Horses,  eome  to 
our  prayers,  to  drink  the  juice  of  Soma. 
To  thee  comes  sacrifice  which  thou   acceptest ;  thou,   skilled 
in  holy  rites,  art  he  who  giveth. 

7   Him  of  a  thousand  powers,  subduing  foemen,  Maghavan  prais- 
ed with  hymns  and  pleased  with  Sonia, — 
I>en  him  our  songs  approach,  resistless  Indra  :  the  adorations 
of  the  singer  laud  him. 

"  8  The  way  to  bliss  for  Gods  and   man   thoa   foundest,   Indra, 
seven  lovely  floods,  divine,  untroubled, 
Wherewith  thou,  rendmg  forts,  didst  move  the  ocean,  and 
nine-and-ninety  flowing  streams  of  water. 

9  Thou  from   the  curse  didst  free  the  mighty  Waters,   and  as 
their  only  God  didst  watch  and  guard  them. 
0  Indra,  cherish  evermore  thy  body  with  those  which  thou 
hast  won  in  quelling  Vritra. 

10  Heroic  power  and  noble  praise  is  Indra  :» yea,  the  song  wor- 

ships him  invoked  of  m  aiy. 
Vritra  he  quelled,  and  gave  men  room  and  freedom :  Sakra, 
victorious,  hath  conquered  armies. 

11  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  this 

fight  where  spoil  is  gathered, 
The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays 
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches. 

HYMN   CV.  iDdra. 

Wi[ftN,  Vasu,  wilt  thou  love  the  laud  1  Now  let  the  channel 

bring  the  stream. 
The  juice  is  ready  to  ferment. 


S  Didst  move  the  ocean :  didst  bring  the  sea  of  rain  from  heaven. 
9  These:  waters. 

1 1  This  is  the  concluding  verse  of  several  hymns  of  the  Visvftmitras  in 
Book  III.  — - 

1    Vasu:    Indra.     Let  the  channel  bring  the  stream:  to  the  Soma   juice 
wliich  has  stood  long  enough  for  fermentation  — Ludwig.     The  phraseology 
in  very  obscure,  and  S^yaua  gives  a.  totally  diflTereut  explanation. — *  When 
vriW  he,  (like)  a  dam,  obstruct  ai\(V  \ft\.  \o^%^  \iJafc  \Q.\i%-^t^\.wiv»d.  libation  fori 
the  sake  of  wind-driven  (,va\nV  V  — ^h'A^o^.  % 


HYMN  105.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  647 

s 

2  He  whose  two  Bay  Steeds  harnessed  well,  swerving,  pursue 

the  Bird's  tail-plumes, 
With  flowing  manes,  like  heaven  and  earth,  he  is  the   Lord 
with  power  to  give. 

3  Bereft  of  skill  is  Indra,  if,  like  some  out-wearied  man  he  fears 
The  sinner,  when  the  Mighty  hath  prepared  himself  for  ?ictory. 

4  Indra  with  these  drives  round,  until  he  meets  with  one  to  wor- 

ship him  : 
Indra  is  Master  of  the  pair  who  snort  and  swerve  upon  their  way. 

5  Borne  onward  by  the  long-maned  Steeds  who  stretch  them- 

selves as  'twere  for  food, 
The  God  who  wears  the  helm  defends  them  with  his  jaws. 

6  The  Mighty  sang  with  Lofty  Ones :  the  Hero  fashioned  with 

his  strength. 
Like  skilful  M^tarisvan  with  his  power  and  might, 

7  The  bolt,  which  pierced  at  once  the  vitals  of  the  Dasyu  easy 

to  be  slain. 
With  jaw  uninjured  like  the  wondrous  firmament. 

8  Grind  ofl*  our  sins :   with  song  will  we  conquer  the  men  who 

sing  no  hymns : 
Not  easily  art  thou  pleased  with  prayerless  sacrifice. 

9  When  threefold  flame  bums  high  for  thee,  to  rest  on  poles  of 

sacrifice. 
Thou  with  the  living  joyest  in  the  self-bright  Ship. 

2  The  Bird :  the  allusion  seems  to  be  to  a  race  between  the  horses  of  Indra 
and  those  of  Surya  or  the  Sun  who  is  the  Bird  of  the  heavens. — Liidwig.  Like 
heaven  and  earth :  the  meaning  of  rajt  is  unknown.  S^yana  explains  the  word 
by  *  heaven  and  earth,'  or  '  sun  and  moon  ;  *  but  these  are  mere  guesses.  Prof. 
Ludwig  thinks  that  two  animals  of  some  kind  ('rajitiere,'  *  raji-beasts  *)  are 
meant.    In  VI.  26.  6,  Raji  is  said  by  S&yana  to  be  the  name  of  a  maiden. 

3  The  sinners  :  Vritra,  the  chief  of  sinners,  according  to  Sftyana.  Or  pipaje 
may  be  a  verb,  and  the  stanza  may  be  rendered  : — *  Without  them  Indrs  holds 
him  still,  like  a  man  weary  and  alarmed,  When  he  hath  made  himself  ready 
for  noble  deed.' — See  Pischel,   Vedische  StudUrif  I.  p.  198. 

4  Is  Master :  literally  *  hero.*  The  meaning  apparently  is  th»t  when  Indra 
meets  with  a  worshipper  he  stops  his  horses  and  attends  the  dacrifice. 

6  Who  wears  the  helm:  siprintvdn  ;  *  possessing  mighty  jaws.' — Wilson.  With 
his  jaws :  with  his  roar,  the  thunder. 

6  Lofty  Ones :  the  Maruts. 

7  The  stanza  is  obscure.  I  follow  Prof.  Ludwig's  interpretation  of  hirU 
mas6  hirtmdny  which  mean,  according  to  SAyana,  '  gold-bearded '  and  *  lord  of 
bay  horses.' 

8  Grind  off:  remove  them  by  whetting.     'Comminute.' — Wilson. 

9  Threefold  flame:  of  the  three  aacred  &rea.     Tkc  Imtvg :  ^^  %w^T\&.^^it« 
7'4^  self-bright  Ship  :  the  sacrifice  ;  *  the  veaael  oi  \i\i^  ^w^  ^  — ^'^csu.^ 


•1 
548  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

1 0  Thy  glory  was  the  speckled  cup,  thy  glory  was  the  flawless  scoop 
Wherewith  thou  pourest  into  thy  receptacle. 

1 1  As  hundreds,  0  Immortal  God,  have  sung  to  thee,  so  hath 

Sumitra,  yea,  Durmitra  praised  thee  here, 
What  time  thou  holpest  Kutsa's  son,  ^i-hen  Dasyus  fell,  yea, 
holpest  Kutsa's  darling  when  the  Dasyus  died. 

HYMN  CVI.  A8vin«. 

■ 

This  very  thing  ye  Twain  hold  as  your  object :  ye  weave  your 

songs  as  skilful  men  weave  garments. 
That  ye  may  come  united  have  I  waked  you :  ye  spread  out 

food  like  days  of  lovely  weather. 

2  Like  two  plough-bulls  ye  move  along  in  traces,  and  seek  like 

eager  guests  your  bidder's  banquet. 
Ye  are  like  glorious   envojs   mid   the  people  :  like  bulls,  ap- 
proach the  place  where  ye  are  watered. 

3  Like  the  two  pinions  of  a  bird,  connected,  like  two  choice  ani- 

mals, ye  have  sought  our  worship. 
Bright  as  the  fire  the  votary  hath  kindled,  je  sacrifice  in 
many  a  spot  as  reamers. 

4  Ye  are  our  kinsmen,  like  two  sons,  two  fathers,  strong  in 

your  splendour  and  like  kings  for  conquest ; 
Like  rays  for  our  enjoyment.  Lords  to  feed  us,  ye,  like  quick 
hearers,  have  obeyed  our  calling. 

9  Like  giants,  ye  will  find  firm  ground  to  stand  on  in  depths, 
like  feet  for  one  who  fords  a  shallow. 
Like  ears  ye  will  attend  to  him  who  orders  :  ye  Two   enjoy 
our  wondrous  work  as  sharers. 

Like  toiling  bees  ye  bring  to  us  your  honey,  as  bees  into  the 
hide  that  opens  downward. 


10  Cup:  upas4chant:  a  ladle  or  cup  used  for  sprinkling.  Thy  receptacle: 
drinki^ag-vesael,  or  perhaps  Agni,  that  is,  the  fire,  may  be  intended. 

11  Siimitra  and  Durmitra  are  alternative  names  of  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn. 
KutscCs  «on ;  Durmitra  himself,  according  to  SAyana. 

The  metrts  in  some  places  are  somewhat  irregular,  the  meanings  of  somp 
words  are  uncertain,  and  the  hymn  generally  is  obscure.  Prof.  Grassmann 
has  placed  the  h>mn  in  his  Appendix. 

4  Like  rays  for  our  enjoyment :  *  like  brooms  to  sweep  with/  according  to 
Prof.  Ludwig. 

I  do  not  attempt  the  hopeless  task  of  translating  stanzas  5,  6  7  8  in 
which  nearly  every  word  is  a  difficult  riddle.     See  Appendix.  '    »    »    ' 

\^  The  hide  that  opens  doionward :  the  honey-comb  is  compared  to  a  water- 

skin  inverted.     I  cannot  tTOns\a.tft  mte\\\^V>Vs  tlxe  second  line  : *  like  two 

Jabourers  you  are  dripping  'witYv  Tper«^\Ta.\.\ow,\OB.fe  ^  'Cvt<i^  ^*:s'«  ^^s^xsv^  'sj^^t, 
herbage,  you  attend  (the  aacvi^ceV'— ^^^a^^ 


HYMN  107.]  THE  RIQVEDA,  649 

1 1  May  we  increase  the  laud  and  gain  us  vigour :  come  to  our 
song,  ye  whom  one  chariot  carries. 
Filled  be  our  kine  with  ripened  meath  like  'glory  :  Bhutansa 
hath  fulfilled  the  Asvins'  longing. 

HYMN  CVII.  DakshinA. 

These  men's  great  bounty  hath  been  manifested,  and  the 
whole  world  of  life  set  free  from  darkness. 

Great  light  hath  come,  vouchsafed  us  by  the  Fathers :  ap- 
parent is  the  spacious  path  of  Guerdon. 

2  High  up  in  heaven  abide  the  Guerdon-givers  :  they   who  give 

steeds  dwell  with  the  Sun  for  ever. 
They  who  give  gold  are  blest  with  life  eternal ;  they  who  give 
robes  prolong  their  lives,  0  Soma. 

3  Not  from  the  niggards — for  they  give  not  freely — comes  Meed 

at  sacrifice,  Gods'  satisfaction  : 
Yea,    many   men   with   hands   stretched   out  with  Guerdon 
present  their  gifts  because  they  dread  dishonour. 

4  These  who  observe  mankind  regard  oblation  as  streamy  Vslyu 

and  light-finding  Arka. 
They  satisfy  and  give  their  gifts  in  synod,  and  pour  in  streams 
the  seveu-mothered  Guerdon. 

5  He  who  brings  Guerdon  comes  as  first  invited  :  chief  of  the 

hamlet  comes  the  Guerdou-bearer. 
Him  I  account  the  ruler  of  the  people  who  was  the   first  to 
introduce  the  Guerdon. 

6  They  call  him  Eishi,  Brahman,  Sama-chanter,  reciter  of  the 

laud,  leader  of  worship. 

The  brightly-shining  God's  three  forms  he  knoweth  who  first 
bestowed  the  sacrificial  Guerdon. 

The  hymn  eulogizes  Dakshipi,  the  largess,  guerdon,  or  honorarium  present- 
ed by  the  in sti tutors  of  the  sacrifices  to  the  priests  who  perform  the  cere- 
monies. The  yajamdnas  who  give  this  guerdon  liberally  are  alternatively 
the  deified  subjects  of  the  hymn. 

1  Tliese  men :  the  wealthy  institutors  of  the  sacrifice.  Fatkei'8 :  who  are 
the  embodiments  and  guardians  of  the  light. 

4  Theie  who  observe  mankind :  the  Maghavans  or  wealthy  nobles,  who  do 
not  consider  the  cost  of  sacrifice,  but  regard  it  as  an  occasion  that  enables 
them  to  show  their  liberality,  and  to  gain  the  favour  of  V&yu,  the  "Wind-God 
who  brings  countless  showers  of  rain,  and  Arka  or  the  Sun  who  brings  the 
light.  Seven-mothered:  originating  in,  and  accomp«Si^m^,  ^fe'q^XilQt.xB&^\>i»Rxv- 
£ce;  or,  regulated  by  the  seven  priests. 

^  TArccformi  rAgni  as  the  Sun,  Ughtmng,  ati^L  ^i^ 


550  TBE  HYMNS  OP  [JBOOX^ 

7  Guerdon  bestows  the  horse,  bestows  the  bullock,  Guerdi 

bestows,  moreover,  gold  that  glisters. 
Guerdon  gives  food  which  is  our  life  and  spirit.     He  who 
wise  takes  Guerdon  for  his  armour. 

8  The  liberal  die  not,  never  are  they  ruined :  the  liberal  sufl 

neither  harm  nor  trouble. 
The  light  of  heaven,  the  universe  about  us, — all  this  do 
sacrificial  Guerdon  give  them. 

9  First  have  the  liberal  gained  a  fragrant  dwelling,  and  g 

themselves  a  bride  in  fair  apparel. 
The  liberal  have  obtained  their  draught  of  liquor,  and  cc 
quered  those  who,unprovoked,  assailed  them. 

10  They  deck  the  fleet  steed  for  the  bounteous  giver:  the  ma 

adorns  herself  and  waits  to  meet  him. 
His  home  is  like  a  lake  with  lotus-blossoms,  like  the  Go( 
palaces  adorned  and  splendid. 

11  Steeds  g9od  at  draught  convey  the  liberal  giver,  and  lighl 

rolling  moves  the  car  of  Guerdon. 
Assist,  ye  Gods,  the  liberal  man  in  battles :  the  liberal  gii 
conquers  foes  in  combat. 

HYMN  CVIII.  SaramA.  Pai 

WiiAT  wish  of  Sarama  hath  brought  her  hither  ?  The  pa 

leads  far  away  to  distant  places. 
What  charge  hast  thou  for  us  ?  Where  turns  thy  journey  ?  H< 

hast  thou  made  thy  way  o'er  Rasa's  waters. 

2  I  come  appointed  messenger  of  Indra,  seeking  your  am] 
stores  of  wealth,  0  Panis. 
This  hath  preserved  me  from  the  fear  of  crossing  :  thus  ha 
I  made  my  way  o'er  Ras&'s  waters. 

9  Draught  of  liquor:  antahp^yam  sHrdydh :  *  deep  potations  of  wine.' — Wila 

10  The  maid  adorns  herself;  *  he  obtains  a  brilliant  damsel  for  his  porti* 
— Muir. 

11  Car  of  Guerdon:  cf  I.  123.  1. 


The  hymn  is  a  colloquy' between  Sarama,  the  messenger  of  the  Gods  or 
Indra  (see  I.  62.  3,  note  ;  72.  8  ;  III.  31.  6;  V.  45.  8),  and  the  Panis  or  envi( 
demons  who  have  carried  off  the  cows  or  rays  of  light  which  Indra  wishes 
recover.     Saram4  and  the  Panis  are  alternately  subject  and  Rishi. 

1  The  Panis  address  Saram4  who  has  found  her  way  to  the  rocky  stroi 
hold  in  which  the  stolen  cows  are  imprisoned.     The  Panis  speak  the  unei 
stanzas,  with  the  exception  of  stanza  11,  and  Saram&  the  even.     JRasd  is 
this  place  a  mythical  stream  t\iat  ^o^g^^  towtkd  the  atmosphere  and  the  ear 
See  V.  41,  15.    In  I.  112. 12,  andN.  ?>^.  ^,^feaa^  %.^^^t^  \a\itotw  T««t  ^si 
Pan  jab,  probably  an  affluent  oi  ^\ie  lu^M-a.    "S>«>^  TAmxoKt^  AAx\u^wi\^»»  \i^ 
PP'  25,  16. 


HYMN  108.]  THE  RIQVEDl.  551 

3  What  is  that  Indra  like,  what  is  his  aspect  whose  envoy,  Sarama, 

from  afar  thou  comest  ] 
Let  him  approach,  and  we  will  show  him  friendship  :  he  shall 
be  made  the  herdsman  of  our  cattle. 

4  I  know  him  safe  from  harm :  but  he  can  punish  who  sent  roe 

hither  from  afar  as  envoy. 
Him  rivers  flowing  with  deep  waters  hide  not.     Low  will  ye  lie, 
0  Panis,  slain  by  Indra. 

5  These  are  the  kine  which,  Sarama,  thou  seekest,  flying,  0  Blest 

One,  to  the  ends  of  heaven. 
Who  will  loose  these  for  thee  without  a  battle  ?  Yea,  and  sharp- 
pointed  are  our  warlike  ^capons. 

6  Even  if  your  wicked  bodies,  0  ye  Panis,  were  arrow-proof,  your 

words  are  weak  for  wounding ; 
And  were  the  path  to  you  as  yet  unmastered,  Brihaspati  in 
neither  case  will  spare  you. 

7  Paved  with  the  rock  is  this  our  treasure-chamber ;  filled  full 

of  precious  things,  of  kine,  and  horses. 
These  Panis  who  are  watchful  keepers  guard  it.     In  vain  hast 
thou  approached  this  lonely  station. 

8  Rishis  will  come  inspirited  with  Soma,  Angirases  unwearied, 

and  Navagvas. 
This  stall  of  cattle  will  they  part  among  them :  then  will  the 
Panis  wish  these  words  unspoken. 

9  Even  thus,  0  Saramll,  hast  thou  come  hither,  forced  by  celest- 

ial might  to  make  the  journey. 
Turn  thee  not  back,  for  thou  shalt  be  our  sister :  0  Blest  One, 
we  will  give  thee  of  the  cattle. 

10  Brotherhood,  sisterhood,  I  know  not  either:  the  dread  Angi- 

rases and  Indra  know  them. 
They  seemed  to  long  for  kine  when  I  departed.     Hence,  into 
distance,  be  ye  gone,  O  Panis. 

1 1  Hence,  far  away,  ye  Panis !  Let  the  cattle  lowing  come  forth 

as  holy  Law  commandeth, 
Kiue  which  Brihaspati,  and  Soma,  Bishis,  sages,  and  pressing- 
stones  have  found  when  hidden. 


6   Weak  for  wou»dmg :  *  not  in  the  place  of  armies.' — Wilson.   Brihaspati  : 
as  Indra's  companion  and  ally  in  battle. 

3  Navagvas :  members  of  a  mythological  family,  forming  a  division  of  the 
Angirases  or  closely  connected  with  them.     WUk  thent  words  nnspoken  :  mure 
literally,  reject  them  from  their  mouths ;  retract  their  threats. 
10  Know  them:  are  allied  by  such  ties  of  kinship. 

J 1  It  ia  uncertain  to  whom  this  stanza  is  to  \>e  ft»crVc»^.    ^^^«v^  ^a»iviBS^^\^» 
to  SaramA.    Prof.  Lndwig  thinks  that  Briha^p&ti  may  \>^  tV^^  «^%^«t.    l?v<*%- 
insfttonet :  wbiet  prepare  the  Soma  juice  that  \iia^\n.\»  \\i^t».. 


552  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

HYMN  CIX.  Vwvcdevas. 

TuKSE  first,  the  boundless  Sea,  and  Matarisvan,  fierce-glowing 

Fire,  the  Strong,  the  Bliss-bestower, 
And   heavenly  Floods,  first-born   by  holy  Order,  exclaimed 

against  the  outrage  on  a  Brahman. 

2  King  Soma  first  of  all,  without  reluctance,  made  restitution  of 

the  Brahman's  consort. 
!Mitra  and  Varuna  were  the  inviters :  Agni  as  Hotar  took  her 
hand  and  led  her. 

3  The  man,  her  pledge,  must  by  her  hand  be  taken  when  they 

have  cried.  She  is  a  Brahman's  consort 

She  stayed  not  for  a  herald  to  conduct  her :  thus  is  the  king- 
dom of  a  ruler  guarded. 

4  Thus  spake  of  her  those  Gods  of  old,  Seven  Kishis  who  sate 

them  down  to  their  austere  devotion  : 

Dire  is  a  Brahman's  wife  led  home  by  others :  in  the  suprem- 
est  heaven  she  plants  confusion. 

5  The  BrahmachS-ri  goes  engaged  in  duty:  he  is  a  member  of 

the  Gods'  own  body. 

Through  him  Brihaspati   obtained  his  consort,   as  the  Gods 
gained  the  ladle  brought  by  Soma. 

C  So  then  the  Gods  restored  her,  so  men  gave  the  woman  back 


again. 


The  Kings  who  kept  their  promises  restored  the  Brahman's 
wedded  wiife. 

7  Having  restored  the  Brahman's  wife,  and  freed  them,  with  Gods' 
aid,  from  sin, 
They  shared  the   fulness  of  the   earth,   and  won   themselves 
extended  swnv. 


Tite  hymn  has  l^een  translated  l>y  tho  authors  of  Siehevzig  Lieder  des  Rig- 
xi'da.     See  also  Mme.  Zenaide  Ragozin,  Vedic  India,  p.  256. 

1   Outrage  on  a  Brahman  :  '  Brahma's  sin,'  according  to  Sjlyana. 

ft  Ih'ahnuichirt :  a  religious  student.  For  his  glorificrttion,  see  Flumns  of 
the  Atkarxa-veda.  XI.  5.  The  ladle:  jukvdm:  Prof  Ludwig  takea  it  to  be  a 
j>rv^}>or  name  : — *  Juhu,  0  Gods,  conducted  home  by  Soma.' 

The  wife  of  a  Brahman  appears  to  have  been  taken  to  his  home  by  a  Ksha- 

triy^,  a^d  then  restored.     A  lejrend  quoted  by  S^yana  says  that  Juhft  or  Vftk, 

the  wifo  of  Brihaspati  wlio  is  identified   with  Brahmft,  had  been  deserted  by 

}ier  husb  'nd.     The  Gods  then  consulted  together  as  to  the  means  of  expiating 

bin  sin.  and  restored  her  to  \u«i.    ^ft^'^\V«.oxi'^TTa.\v^"fc.\A!Ott.. 

The  hymn  is  an  aliuoat  uultiUYWgJXiVft  it^.'scsifeu'v.  *sA^\  wjrax^ya.'^Slv^^  >aj^fc. 

origin. 


HYMN  no.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  553 

HYMN  ex.  Apiis. 

Thou  in  the  house  of  man  this  day  ■  enkindled  worsiippest 

Gods  as  God,  0  Jatavedas. 
Observant,  bright  as  Mitra,  bring  them  hither :  thoi  art  a 

sapient  and  foreknowing  envoy. 

2  Taniinapat,  fair-tongued,  with  sweet  meath  balming  the  paths 

and  ways  of  Order,  make  them  pleasant. 
Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven,  exalting  with  holy  tloughts 
our  hymns  of  praise  and  worship. 

3  Invoked,  deserving  prayer  and  adoration,  0  Agni,  <ome  ac- 

cordant with  the  Vasus. 
Thou  art,  0  Youthful  Lord,  the  Gods'  Invoker,  so,  best  of 
Sacrificer^,  bring  them  quickly. 

4  By  rule  the  Sacred  Grass  is  scattered  eastward,  a  robe  to 

clothe  this  earth  when  dawns  are  breaking. 
Widely  it  spreads  around  and  far-extended,  fair  for  the  Gods 
and  bringing  peace  and  freedom. 

5  Let  the  expansive  Doors  be  widely  opened,   like  vives  who 

deck  their  beauty  for  their  husbands. 
Lofty,   celestial,  all-impelling  Portals,   admit  the  Gods  and 
give  them  easy  entrance. 

6  Pouring  sweet  dews  let  holy  Night  and  Morning,  each  close 

to  each,  be  seated  at  their  station, — 
Lofty,  celestial  Dames  with  gold  to  deck  them,  assuming  all 
their  fair  and  radiant  beauty. 

7  Come  the  two  first  celestial  sweet-voiced   Hotars,  arranging 

sacrifice  for  man  to  worship. 
As  singers  who  inspire  us  in  assemblies,  showing  the  eastward 
light  with  their  direction. 

8  Let  Bh&rati  come  quickly  to  our  worship,  and  I]^  showing  like 

a  human  being. 
So  let  Sarasvati  and  both  her  fellows,  deft  Goddesses,  on  this 
fair  grass  be  seated. 

9  Hotar  more  skilled  in  sacrifice,  bring  hither  with  speed  to-day 

God  Tvashtar,  thou  who  knowest, 
Even  him  who  formed  these  two,  the  Earth  and  Heaven,  the 
Parents,  with  their  forms,  and  every  creature. 

See  preceding  hymns  addressed  to  the  same  deities  and  deified  objects : 
I.  13  ;  142, 188  ;  IL  8  ;  IIL  4  ;  V.  5 ;  VII.  2  ;  and  IX.  6. 

1  jdtavedas  and  TanHnapdt  are  names  oi  Ag\»\.  T!\ie  Boovs  o\  >tj£vft  ^wa^<iN.^ 
chamber  represent  the  portals   of  the  eaaterti  \ifi8b\«a.     Yaua%i^tA.  Sa  "^^aa 
eacridcial  poat  to  which  the  victim  is  tied. 


554  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  X. 

10  Said  to  our  offerings  which  thyself  thou  balmest  the  Com- 

panies  of  Gods  in  ordered  season. 
Ajni,  Vanaspati  the  Immolator  sweeten  our  offered  gift  with 
meath  and  butter. 

1 1  A^ni,  as  soon  as  he  w^s  born,  made  ready  the   sacrifice,  and 

was  the  Gods'  preceder. 
Miy  the  Gods  eat  our  offering   consecrated   according  to  this 
}rue  Priest's  voice  and  guidance. 

HYMN  CXI.  Indra. 

Brkq  forth  your  sacred  song  ye  prudent  singers,  even  as  are 
tie  thoughts  of  human  beings. 

Let  us  draw  Indra  with  true  deeds   anear   us :  he    loves  our 
scngs,  the  Hero,  and  is  potent. 

2  The  hymn  shone  brightly  from  the   seat   of   worship  :  to  the 
kkie  came  the  Bull,  the  Heifer's  Offspring. 

Witk  mighty  bellowing  hath  he   arisen,   and   hath   pervaded 
e^n  the  spacious  regions. 

f3  Indri  knows,  verily,  how  to  hear  our  singing,  for   he,  victori- 
ous, made  a  path  for  Surya. 

He  made  the  Cow,  and   he   became   the  Sovran   of  Heaven, 
primeval,  matchless,  and  unshaken. 

4  Praised  by  Angirases,  Indra  demolished  with  might  the  works 

of  the  great  watery  monster. 

Full  many  regions,  too,  hath   he  pervaded,  and  by   his  truth 
supported  earth's  foundation. 

5  The  counterpart  of  heaven  and    earth  is    Indra  :  he    knoweth 

all  libations,  slayeth  Sushna. 

The  vast  sky  with  the  Sun  hath  he    extended,    and,    best    of 
pillars,  stayed  it  with  a  pillar. 

6  The  Vritra-slayer  with  his  bolt  felled   Vritra :  the    magic   of 

the  godless,  waxen  mighty, 
Here  hast  thou,  Bold  Assailant,  boldly  conquered.    Yea,    then 
thine  arms,  0  Maghvan,  were  potent. 


2  The  Jcine :  who  are  milked  for  sacrificial  purposes.  The  Bull :  Indra.  The 
Heifer's  Offering :  cp.  IV.  18.  10  :  '  The  Heifer  hath  brought  forth  the  strong, 
the  mighty,  the  unconquerable  Bull,  the  furious  Indra '     The  Heifer  is  Aditl 

3  He  mode  the  Cow  :  the  n^ot^l^  m^udm g<SK,  the  cow,   *  the    female  of 

the    bull.'— Muir;   *  Des  ^Uexea  \\e\\i;— <^^?>^'©»^a.^^^^~^^  ^MSwsvA^.      Proi 

Ludwig  suggests  that  the  e%.Tt.\i  ma.^  Xi^  VoX^^TAfe^^. 


HYMN  112.]  THE  HIGVEDA.  555 

7  When  the  Dawns  come  attendant  upon  Surya   their  rays  dis- 

cover wealth  of  divers  colours. 
The  Star  of  heaven   is   seen  as   'twere   approaching :  none 
knoweth  aught  of  it  as  it  departeth. 

8  Far  have  they  gone,  the  first  of  all  these   waters,  the   waters 

that  flowed  forth  when  Indra  sent  them. 
Where  is  their  spring,  and  where  is  their  foundation  1  Where 
now,  ye  Waters,  is  your  inmost  centre  1 

9  Thou  didst  free  rivers  swallowed  by  the  Dragon  ;  and  rapidly 

they  set  themselves  in  motion, 
Those  that  were  loosed  aud  those   that   longed   for   freedom. 
Excited  now  to  speed  they  run  unresting. 

10  Yearning  together  they  have  sped   to  Sindhu  :  the   Fort-des- 
troyer, praised,  of  old,  hath  loved  them. 
Indra,    may  thy   terrestrial  treasures   reach  us,  and  our  full 
songs  of  joy  approach  thy  dwelling. 

HYMN  CXII  Indra. 

Drink  of  the  juice,  0  Indra,  at  thy  pleasure,   for  thy   first 

draught  is  early  morn's  libation. 
Rejoice,  that  thou  mayst  slay  our  foes,  0  Hero,  and    we  with 

lauds  will  tell  thy  mighty  exploits. 

2  Thou  hast  a  car  more  swift  than   thought,  0   Indra ;  thereon 

come  hither,  come  to  drink  the  Soma. 
Let  thy  Bay  Steeds,  thy  Stallions,  hasten   hither,  with  whom 
thou  comest  nigh  and  art  delighted. 

3  Deck  out  thy  body  with  the  fairest  colours,  with  golden  splend- 

our of  the  Sun  adorn  it. 
0  Indra,  turn  thee  hither  ward  invited  by  us  thy  friends ;  be 
seated  and  be  joyful. 

4  0  thou  whose  grandeur  in  thy  festive  transports  not  even  these 

two  great  worlds  have  comprehended. 
Come,  Indra,  with  thy  dear  Bay  Horses  harnessed,  come  to  our 
dwelling  and  the  food  thou  lovest. 

5  Pressed  for  thy  joyous  banquet  is  the  Soma,  Soma  whereof 

thou,  Indra,  ever  drinking. 
Hast  waged  unequalled  battles  with  thy  foemen,  which  prompts 
the  mighty  flow  of  thine  abundance. 


7  The  Star  of  heaven :  the  Sun.    Departeth:  on  ita  nightl'j  Y^vrraK^  ^isvs^. 
west  to  east. 

9  27te  Dragon  :  Ahi ;  Vritn  or  his  brotlieT-&eTid. 


556  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

6  Found  from  of  old  is  this  thy  cup,  0  Indra ;  0  Satakratu, 

drink  therefrom  the  Soma. 
Filled  is  the  beaker  with  the  meath  that  gladdens,  the  beaker 
which  all  Deities  delight  in. 

7  From  many  a  side  with  proffered  entertainment  the  folk  are 

calling  thee,  0  Mighty  Indra. 
These  our  libations  shall  for  thee  be  richest  in  sweet  meath : 
drink  thereof  and  find  them  pleasant. 

8  I  will  declare  thy  deeds  of  old,  0  Indra,  the  mighty  acts  which 

thou  hast  first  accomplished. 
In  genuine  wrath  thou  loosenedst  the  mountain  so  that  the 
Brahman  easily  found  the  cattle. 

9  Lord  of  the  hosts,  amid  our  bands  be  seated :  they  call  thee 

greatest  Sage  among  the  sages. 
Nothing  is  done,  even  far  away,  without  thee :  great,  wondrous, 
Maghavan,  is  the  hymn  I  sing  thee. 

10  Aim  of  our  eyes  be  thou,  for  we  implore  thee,  0  Maghavan, 
Friend  of  friends  and  Lord  of  treasures. 
Fight,  Warrior  strong  in  truth,  fight  thou  the  battle  :  give  us 
our  share  of  undivided  riches. 

HYMN  CXIII.  Indra. 

The  Heavens  and  the  Earth  accordant  with  all  Gods  encour- 

nged  graciously  that  vigorous  might  of  his. 
When  he  came  showing  forth  his  majesty  and  power,  he  drank 

of  Soma  juice  and  waxed  exceeding  strong. 

2  This  majesty  of  his  Vishnu  extols  and  lauds,  making  the  stalk 

that  gives  the  meath  flow  forth  with  might. 
Wiien  Indra  Maghavan  with  those  who  followed  him  had  smit- 
ten Vritra  he  deserved  the  choice  of  Gods. 

• 

3  When,  bearing  warlike  weapons,  fain  to  win  thee  praise,  thou 

mettest  Vritra,  yea,  the  Dragon,  for  the  fight, 
Then  all  the  Maruts  who  were  gathered  with  thee  there  ex- 
tolled, 0  Mighty  One,  thy  powerful  majesty. 

4  Soon  as  he  sprang  to  life  he  forced  asunder  hosts  :  forward  the 

Hero  looked  to  manly  deed  and  war. 
He  cleft  the  rock,  he  let  concurrent  streams  flow  forth,  and 
with  his  skilful  art  stablished  the  heavens*  wide  vault. 

5  Indra  hath  evermore  possessed  surpassing  power :  he  forced, 

far  from  each  other,  heaven  and  earth  apart. 
He  hurled  impetuous  down  his  iron  thunderbolt,  a  joy  to  Varu- 
iia's  and  Mitra'a  woTaYiV^^et. 

'~S~¥hiBrahman :  according  to  S>e.^^x>TJ., ^x^Vm^^W\^«^^^^^ 
ha.^p^ti,  the  owner  of  the  co^a  vj\iic\it\t^^v:^^^^^^^'^^^^^^ 


JffTMN  IIL]  THE  RIQVEDA.  557 

6  Then  to  the  mighty  powers  of  Indra,  to  his  wrath,  his  the  fierce 

Stormer,  loud  of  voice,  they  came  with  speed ; 
What  time  the  Potent  One  rent  Vritra  with  his  strength,  who 
held  the  waters  back,  whom  darkness  compassed  round. 

7  Even  in  the  first  of  those  heroic  acts  which  they  who  strove 

together  came  with  might  to  execute. 
Deep  darkness  fell  upon  the  slain,  and  Indra  won  by  victory 
the  right  of  being  first  invoked. 

8  Then  all  the  Gods  extolled,  with  eloquence  inspired  by  draughts 

of  Soma  juice,  thy  deeds  of  manly  might. 
As  Agni  eats  the  dry  food  with  his  teeth,  he  ate  Vritra,  the 
Dragon,  maimed  by  Indra's  deadly  dart. 

9  Proclaim  his  many  friendships,  met  with  friendship,  made 

with  singers,  with  the  skilful  and  the  eloquent. 
Indra,  when  he  subdues  Dhuni  and  Chumuri,  lists  to  Dabhiti 
for  his  faithful  spirit's  sake. 

10  Give  riches  manifold  with  noble  horses,  to  be  remembered 
while  my  songs  address  thee. 
May  we  by  easy  paths  pass  all  our  troubles :  find  us  this  day 
a  ford  wide  and  extensive. 

HYMN  CXIV.  Visvedevas. 

• 

Two  perfect  springs  of  heat  pervade  the  Threefold,  and  come 

for  their  delight  is  Matarisvan. 
Craving  the  milk  of  heaven  the  Gods  are  present :  well  do 

they  know  the  praise-song  and  the  Saman. 

2  The  priests  heard  far  away,  as  they  are  ordered,  serve  the 
three  Nirritis,  for  well  they  know  them. 
Sages  have  traced  the  cause  that  first  produced  them,  dwelling 
in  distant  and  mysterious  chambers. 


6  They  eame :  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  Gbds,  or  the  Maruts,  or  thr  waters 
are  the  understood  subject. 

7  Deep  darkness  fell  upon  the  slam:  '  Vritra  being  slain,  the  thick  darkness 
was  destroyed.* — Wilson. 

8  He  ate :  Indra  utterly  destroyed  him.  S4yana  explains  in  a  more  matter- 
of-fact  way  :  people  devoured  Vritra,  that  is,  the  food  produced  by  the  waters 
which  were  no  longer  obstructed  by  him. 

9  Dhuni  and  Ohumuri  were  demons  and  enemies  of  Indra's  friend  Dabhiti. 
See  Vol.  I.,  Index.  •  

1  Springs  of  heat :  gharmd :  Agni  and  S(irya.  The  Threefold :  the  universe, 
sky,  firmament,  and  earth.  Mdtari§van :  Vftyu,  according  to  S&yana.  *  Thus 
we  have  here  the  well-known  triad,  Agni,  Vftyu,  Sdrya.'— Ludwig. 

2  Three  Nirfitis :  according  to  Sftyana,  heaven,  mid-air,   and  earthy  or  th^ 
deities  that  control  them.     Prof.   Ludwlg  thiuka  V.\i«A,\Jtvft'^-dNi\i5^  w^  \3aR«cw\.^ 
which  by  their  regular  appearance  bring  meu  ixe«x«i  Xa  ^«»JOtv*     ^\i»  t^csw:^ 

appears  in  one  other  place,  VIII.  24.  24. 


558  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  X 

3  The  Youthful  One,  well-shaped,  with  four  locks  braided, bright- 

ened with  oil,  puts  on  the  ordinances. 
Two  Birds  of  mighty  power  are  seated  near  her,  there  ^here 
the  Deities  receive  their  portion. 

4  One  of  these  Birds  hath  passed  into  the  sea  of  air  :  thence  he 

looks  round  and  views  this  universal  world. 
With  simple  heart  I  have  beheld  him  from  auear  :  his  Mother 
kisses  him  and  he  returns  her  kiss. 

5  Him  with  fair  wings  though  only  One  in  nature,  wise  singers 

shape,  with  songs,  in  many  figures. 
While   they   at  sacrifices  fix   the   metres,  they  measure  out 
twelve  chalices  of  Soma. 

6  While  they   arrange  the   four   and   six-and-thirty,    and   duly 

order,  up  to  twelve,  the  measures, 
Having   disposed  the  sacrifice  thoughtful  snges  send  the  Car 
forward  with  the  Rich  and  Saman. 

7  The  Chariot's  majesties  are  fourteen  others  :  seven  sages  lead 

it  onward  witli  their  voices. 
Who  will  declare  to  us  the  ford  Apn^na,  the  path  whereby 
they  drink  first  draughts  of  Soma? 

8  The  fifteen  lauds  are  in  a  thousand  places :  that  is  as  vast  as 

heaven  and  earth  in  measure. 
A  thousand  spots  contain  the  mighty  thousand.     Vak  spread- 
eth  forth  as  far  as  Prayer  extendeth. 


3  The  Youthful  One:  the  altar,  represented  as  a  woman.  With  four  loch 
braided :  quadrangular,  according  to  Sftyana.  Pttts  on  the  ordinaneex :  i» 
dressed  or  arranged  in  the  manner  prescribed  for  sacrifice.  Ttoo  Birds : 
probably  Asni  and  Soma.  According  to  S&yana,  the  husband  and  his  wife, 
or  the  Yajamdua  and  the  Brahman. 

4  One :  Agni  as  the  Sun.     Bis  mother :    perhaps,  as   Prof.   Ludwig    says. 

Dawn. 

6  Thir^-six  fjrahas,  chalices,  or  saucers  for  Soma  juice  or  other  libations, 
are  to  be  used  at  the  Agnishtoma,  and  four  in  addition  at  the  AtyagniBhtomt 
sacrifice,  l^he  measures :  the  proper  metres  for  particular  rites  or  parts  of 
the  service.  The  Car ;  the  sacrifice.  Rich :  the  holy  verse  that  is  recited. 
Siman :  the  psalm  that  is  sung  or  chanted. 

7  Majesties :  the  abstract  used  for  the  concrete,  the  mighty  ones,  probably 
the  priests.  The  ford  Apndna :  the  passage  leading  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 
TAe?/ ;  the  Gods. 

8  That :  meaning  the   fifteen   lauds  regarded  as  a  whole.      7*he   mightf 
thousand :  the  meaning  is  uncertain  :  *  the  thousand  great   (functions)  are  in  - 
a  thousand  places.* — Wilson.     This  means,  according  to  S&yana,   that  every  I 

function  of  the  body  baa  \ta  «t^T^To^x\si.\,^  ciVi\^<it.    Dr.   Muir  translates :-  ' 

'  There  are  a  thousand  times  Mteew  uktKoa k  ^'s^xasccA'Cxtasia  g^  thou«-  J 

and  are  their  glorious  iiiaiiiieat».t\viii^:     Vdlc:  qx^^^^Ovi.   '^^^^.•\\^^>K^\ 


HYMN  115.]  THE  RIQ7EDA.  m 

9  What  sage  hath  learned  the  metres'  application  1    Who  hati 
gained  Vak,  the  spirit's  aim  and  object? 
Which  ministering  priest  is  called  eighth  Hero  ?    Who  thei 
hath  tracked  the  two  Bay  Steeds  of  Indra? 

10  Yoked  to  his  chariot-pole  there  stood  the  Coursers  :  they  onl} 
travel  round  earth's  farthest  limits.    . 
These,   when  their  driver  in  his  home  is  settled,   receive  the 
allotted  meed  of  their  exertion. 

HYMN  CXV.  Agni. 

Verily  wondrous  is  the  tender  Youngling's  growth  who  never 

draweth  nigh  to  drink  his  Mothers'  milk. 
As  soon  as  she  who  hath  no  udder  bore  him,  he,  faring  on  his 

great  errand,  suddenly  grew  strong. 

2  Then  Agni  was  his  name,  most  active  ta  bestow,  gathering  up 

the  trees  with  his  consuming  tooth ; 
Skilled  in  fair  sacrifice,  armed  with  destroying  tongue,  im- 
petuous as  a  bull  that  snorteth  in  the  mead. 

3  Praise  him,  your  God  who,  bird-like,  rests  upon  a  tree,  scatter- 

ing drops  of  juice  and  pouring  forth  his  flood. 
Speaking  aloud  with  flame  as  with  his  lips  a  priest,  and  broad- 
ening his  paths  like  ane  of  high  command. 

4  Thou  Everlasting,  whom,  far-striding  fain  to  bum,  the  winds, 

uninterrupted,  never  overcome, 
They  have  approached,  as  warriors  eager  for  the  fight,  heroic 
Trita,  guiiiing  him  to  gain  his  wish. 

5  This  Agni  is  the  best  of  Kanvas,  Kanvas'  Friend,  Conqueror 

of  the  foe  whether  afar  or  near. 
May  Agni  guard  the  singers,  guard  the  princes  well :  may 
Agni  grant  to  ns  our  princes'  gracious  help^ 

6  Do  thou,  Supitrya,  swiftly  following,  make  thyself  the  lord  of 

Jaltavedas,  mightiest  of  all. 


9  Eighth  Hero :  Agni  is  meant,  as  presiding  over  the  seven  ritvijas  or 
ministering  priests.  

1  If  is  Mothers  are  the  two  fire-sticks,  the  lower  of  which,  in  which  the  spark 
is  produced,  heing  she  who  hath  no  udder, 

4  Trita :  accoi^ing  to  S&yana,  him  who  is  stationed  in  the  three  fire- 
receptacles,  that  is,  Agni. 

5  Kanvas:  a  well-known  family  with  which  Upastuta  was  connected. 
According  to  S^yana,  worshippers  in  general  are  meant :— *the  most  earnest 
of  eulogists,  the  friend  of  those  who  praise  him.' — Wilson, 

d  Supitrya  ('  who  hast  fair  ancestors.' — Wilson)  seems  to  be  an  epithet  of 
the  Ilishi  as  addressed  by  himself.    S&yana  applies  it  to  Agni.     The  con- 
htruction  of  the  stanza  is  difficult,  and  the  translation  of  the  first  half  viVvvsifcL 
follows  Prof.  Ludwig,  is  somewhat  conjectuial.    TKirrtij  lairvd :  k-gcCv  V^  V>sw 
interceasioD  caudee  raia  to  fall* 


56)  THE  BTMN8  OP  [BOOK  X 

Who  surely  gives  a  boon  even  in  thirsty  land,  most  powerful, 
prepared  to  aid  us  in  the  wilds. 

'  Thus  noble  Agni  with  princes  and  mortal  men  is  lauded,  ex- 
cellent for  conquering  strength  with  chiefs, 
Men  who  are  well-disposed  as  friends  and  true  to  Law,  even 
as  the  heavens  in  majesty  surpass  mankind. 

8  0  Son  of  Strength,  Victorious,  with  this  title  Upastuta's  most 

potent  voice  reveres  thee. 
Blest  with  brave  sons  by  thee  we  will  extol  thee,  and  lengthen 
out  the  days  of  our  existence. 

9  Thus,  Agni,  have  the  sons  of  Vrishtihavja,  the  Kishis,  the 

Upastutas  invoked  thee. 
Protect   them,   guard   the   singers   and    the    princes.     With 
Vashat !   have  they  come,  with  hands  uplifted,  with  their 
uplifted  hands  and  cries  of  Glory  ! 

HYMN  CXVI.  Indra. 

Drink  Soma  juice  for  mighty  power  and  vigour,  drink.  Strong- 
est One,  that  thou  mayst  smite  down  Vritra. 

Drink  thou,  invoked,  for  strength,  and  riches  :  drink  .thou  thy 
fill  of  meath  and  pour  it  down,  0  Indra. 

2  Drink  of  the  foodful  juice  stirred  into  motion,  drink  what  tliou 

chooses t  of  the  flowing  Soma. 
Giver  of  weal,  be  joyful  in  thy  spirit,  and  turn  thee  hither- 
ward  to  bless  and  prosper. 

3  Let  heavenly  Soma  gladden  thee,  0  Indra,  let  that  efFused 

among  mankind  delight  thee. 
Rejoice  in  that  whereby  thou  gavest  freedom,  and  that  whereby 
thou  couquerest  thy  foemen. 

4  Let  Indra  come,  impetuous,  doubly  mighty,  to   the  poured 

juice,  the  Bull,  with  two  Bay  Coursers. 
With  juices  pressed  in  milk,  with  meath  presented,  glut  ever- 
more thy  bolt,  0  Foe-destroyer. 

5  Dash  down,  outflaming  their  sharp  flaming  weapons,  the  strong- 

holds of  the  men  urofed  on  by  demons. 
I  give  thee,  Mighty  One,  great  strength  and  conquest :  go, 
meet  thy  foes  and  rend  them  in  the  battle. 


Prof.    Grassraann  observes  :    *Das  Lied  enthalt,  namentlich  in  Vers  3 — 6, 
manches  Dunkle,  sodasa  hier  die  Auslegung  zweifelhaft  bleibt.' 


1  Pour  it  down:  *  shower  down  (blessings).* — Wilson. 
3  (I'tvest  freedom, :  by  ala^iw^  VtltvA ;  or,  riches,  accordinj?  to  Sftyana. 
4  Foe-deatroyer  :  ixvu%(M  :  accov^\xi^^\K\^^\.'^^'^T>^>«^\Ax.\<son,  ^striker 
of  the  red  clouds '  ( aruVji  =  <*''i^*ku  1  ).  1  ^o^^  ^\^-^\v^^«.>^^n^^v:x^. 


1 


BYMN  117.]  THE  RIG  VEDA . 

6  Extend  afar  the  votary's  fame  and  glory,  as  the  firm  archer's 

strength  drives  off  t)>e  foeman. 
Ranged  on  our  side,  grown  strong   in  might   that   conquers, 
never  defeated,  still  increase  thy  b<»dy. 

7  To  thee  have  we  presented   this  oblatiun :  accept   it,   Sovran 

Ruler,  free  from  anger. 
Juice,  Maghavan,  for  thee  is  pressed  and  ripened  :  eat,  Indra, 
drink  of  that  which  stirs  to  meet  thee. 

8  Eat,  Indi-a,  these  oblations  which  approach   thee :  be  pleased 

with  food  made  ready  and  with  Soma. 
With  entertainment   we   receive   thee  friendly :  effectual    be 
the  sacrificer's  wishes. 

9  I  send  sweet  speech  to   Indra  and   to   Agni :  with   hymns    I 

speed  it  like  a  boat  through  waters. 
Even  thus,  the  Gods  seem  nioving  round  about  me,  the  foun- 
tains and  bestowers  of  our  riches. 

HYMN  CXVIL  Liberality. 

The  Gods  have  not  ordained  huiiger  to  be  onr  death  :  even  to 
the  well-fed  man  comes  death  in  varied  shape. 

The  riches  of  the  liberal  never  waste  away,  while  he  who  will 
not  give  tinds  none  to  comfort  him. 

2  The  man  with  food  in  store  who,  when  the   needy  comes  in 

miserable  case  begging  for  bread  to  eat, 
Hardens  his  heart  against  him — even  when  of  old  he  did  him 
service — finds  not  one  to  comfort  him. 

3  Bounteous  is  he  who  gives  unto  the  beggar  who  comes  to  him 

in  want  of  food  and  feeble. 
Success  attends  him  in  the  shout  of  battle.   He  makes  a  friend 
of  him  in  future  troubles. 

4  No  friend  is  he  who  to  his  friend  and  comrade  who  comes  im- 

ploring food,  will  offer  nothing. 
Let  him  depart — no  home  is  that  to  rest  in — ,  and  mther  seek 
a  stranger  to  support  him. 

5  Let  the  rich  satisfy  the  poor  implorer,  and  bend  his  eye  upon 

a  longer  pathway. 

6  A i  the  firm  archer* i  strength:    the  construction  is  obscure: — '(stretch 
oat)  thy  strength  like  strong  bows  against  our  enemies/ — Wilson. 

The  hymn  eulogixes  Liberality  or  Bounty  in  the  shape  of  gifts  of  wealth 
and  food. 

1  To  he  our  death  :  men  must  not  attempt  to  juptify  their  refusal  of  fo-  d 
to  the  hungry  by  Maying  that  the  Gods  send  hunger  an  a  punishment  for  aiiu 
"'*  upon  a  ionger  pathway :  caTi"{v\\W  ca^tvkvAct  N\v^  \>aL\.>M^  *»n> 

--U  niiiv  need  the  aaixvfe  «A%\%\««ic^>Ei«c«*XNA^ 


•  1 


562  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  i 

Riches  come  now  to  one,  now  to  another,  and  like  the  wheels 
of  cars  are  ever  rolling. 

6  Tlicj  foolish  mail  wins  food  with  fruitless  labour:  that  food — 

[  speak  the  truth — shall  be  his  ruin. 
He   feeds  no  trusty  friend,  no  man  to  love  him.     All  guilt  is 
he  who  eats  with  no  partaker. 

7  The  ploughshare  ploughing  makes  the  food  that  feeds  us^  and 

with  its  feet  cuts  through  the  path  it  follows. 
Better  the  speaking  than  the  silent  Brahman :  the  liberal  fnend 
outvalues  him  who  gives  not. 

8  He  with  one  foot  hath  far  outrun  the  biped,  and  the  two-footed 

catches  the  three-footed. 
Four-footed  creatures  come  when  bipeds  call  them,  and  stand 
and  look  where  five  are  met  together. 

9  The  hands  are  both  alike :  their  labour  differs.     The  yield  of 

sister  niilch-kine  is  unequal. 
Twins  even  differ  in  their  strength  and  vigour  :  twov  even  kins- 
men, differ  in  their  bounty. 

HYMN  CXVIIL  Agni. 

AoNj,  refulgent  among  men  thou  slayest  the  devouring  fiend. 
Bright  Ruler  in  thine  own  abode. 

2  Tliou  springest  up  when  worshipped  well :  the  drops  of  butter 
are  thy  joy 
When  ladles  are  brought  near  to  thee. 

:5  Honoured  with  p^ifts  he  shines  afar,  Agni  adorable  with  song: 
Tlie  dripping  ladle  balms  his  face. 


6  Shall  he  his  miv  :  with  reference  ta  stanza  I. 

7  Active  exertion  is  necessary  for  success.  The  speaJnng  Brahman  :  the 
pi  i<*pi  who  duly  discharges  the  task  of  recitation  for  which  he  is  eng-iged. 
*  A  Brahman  expounding  (the  Veda).'— Wilson. 

8  The  victory  is  not  always  theirs  who  appear  to  be  more  richly  endowed 
than  (Others.  Bt  with  one  foot :  iJcapM .  the  Sun  appears  to  be  meant, 
elsewhere  called  Aja-EkapAd.  See  VI.  50.  14.  The  biped  is  man.  The  three- 
footed  is  the  old  man  who  walks  with  a  staflF  and  is  overtaken  by  one  who 
does  not  require  such  assistance.  Four-footed  creatures :  dogs.  Five :  several 
men  together  ;  the  dogs  being  at  first  uncertain  whether  their  masters  are 
amons^  them  or  not.  Pahktthj  sets  of  five,  is  apparently  used  with  refer<*nee 
to  the  one,  two,  three,  and  four  in  the  preceding  compound  words.  Others 
explain  panktth  by  *  steps  *  or  '  traces.* 

I  have  adopted  the  explanation  given  by  the  authora  of  the  Si^enzig 
Licder. 

9  All  men  should  be  liberal ;  but  we  must  not  ezpeet  all  to  be  equally 
g^nen  us 

Tue  hymn  haa  been  tratta\ated\>y 'Dx.'NLxxvc,  0,  a.T«»u,^  .\^.  «;v— >k^ 


HYMN  119.]  TBE  RIGVSDA.  663 

4  Agni  with  honey  in  his  mouth,  honoured  with  gifts,  is  balmed 

with  oil, 
Refulgent  in  his  wealth  of  light. 

5  Praised  by  our  hymns  thou  kindlest  thee,  Oblation-bearer,  foir 

the  Gods : 
As  such  do  mortals  call  on  thee. 

6  To  that  Immortal  Agni  pay  worship  with  oil,  ye  mortal  men, — 
Lord  of  the  house,  whom  none  deceive. 

7  0  Agni,  bum  the  R^kshasas  with  thine  unconquerable  flame : 
Shine  guardian  of  Eternal  Law. 

8  So,  Agni,  with  thy  glowing  face  bum  fierce  against  the  female 

fiends, 
Shining  among  Urukshayas. 

9  Urukshayas  have  kindled  thee.   Oblation-bearer,  thee,  with 

hymns, 
Best  Worshipper  among  mankind. 

HYMN  CXIX.  Indra. 

This,  even  this  was  my  resolve,  to  win  a  cow,  to  win  a  steed  : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

2  Like  violent  gusts  of  wind  the  draughts  that  I  have  drunk 

have  lifted  me : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

3  The  draughts  I  drank  have  borne  me  up,  as  fleet-foot  horses 

draw  a  car : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

4  The  hymn  hath  reached  me,  like  a  cow  who  lows  to  meet  her 

darling  calf : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  jtfice  ? 

5  As  a  Wright  bends  a  ch9,riot-seat  so  round  my  heart  I  bend  the 

hymn : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  1 

6  Not  as  a  mote  within  the  eye  count  the  Five  Tribes  of  men 
^  with  me : 

Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

8  Ui-uhshayoi :  members  of  the  Rishi's  family. 

I       The  Rishi  is  Indra  himself  in  the  form  of  Lava.    He  describes  his  sensa- 
tions after  drinking  Soma  juice.    But  see  Bergaigne,  1. 151,  who  oonsiders  it 
,    to  be  the  utterance  of  an  exhilarated  mortoJL 

i       \   To  win  a  cow :  to  strengthen  and  inapirit  VumaeM  lot  \»iti<\'%)  v&i^  ^^  V^ 
1   win  kJne  &nd  honea  far  Mb  wonbippen, 

J      6  SAyanA  explains  differently :— *  The  five  cutea  Yttiro  iLot  fSiwAw^ VSafe  >^wm^ 
ofmyeyeZ—Wilaon, 


564  THB  H7MN8  OP  [BOOK  X 

7  The  heavens  and  earth  themselves  have  not  grown  equal  to  one 

half  of  me : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

8  I  in  my  grandeur  have  surpassed  the  heavens  and  all  this 

spacious  earth  : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  1 

9  Aha !  this  spacious  earth  will  I  deposit  either   here  or  there  : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

10  In  one  short  moment  will  I  smite  the  earth  in  fury  here  or 

there : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  1 

11  One  of  my  flanks  is  in  the  sky ;  I  let  the  other  trail  below  : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

12  1,  greatest  of  the  Mighty  Ones,  am  lifted  to  the  firmament : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice  ? 

13  1  seek  the  worshipper's   abode  ;  oblation-bearer  to  the  Gods  : 
Have  I  not  drunk  of  Soma  juice? 

HYMN  CXX.  Indra. 

In  all  the  worlds  That  was  the  Best  and  Highest  whence  sprang 

the  Mighty  Gods,  of  splendid  valour. 
As  soon  as  born  he  overcomes  his  foemen,  he  in  whom  all  who 

lend  him  aid  are  joyful. 

2  Grown  mighty  in  his  strength,  with  ample  vigour,  he  as  a  foe 

strikes  fear  into  the  Dasa, 
Eager  to  win  the  breathing  and  the  breathless^    All  sang  thy 
praise  at  banquet  and  oblation. 

3  All  concentrate  on  thee  their  mental  vigour,  what  time  these, 

twice  or  thrice,  are  thine  assistants. 


11  Cp.  HI.  32.  11. 

13  This  stanza  is  difficult.  The  word  grihd  is  unintelligible,  and  ^rt'Aaoi, 
as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  should,  perhaps,  be  read  instead.  Oblation-bearer : 
Indra,  in  his  excitement,  fancies  that  he  is  Agni.  Prof.  Qrassmaun,  who  with 
Dr.  Muir,  considers  grikd  to  mean  servant  or  minister,  places  the  stanza  in 
his  Appendix  as  a  fragment  from  a  hymn  to  Agni. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  hy  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S  Textt,  V.  p.  91,  by  the 
authors  of  the  Siebemig  LiedeVy  and  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  Rigveda 
(Bombay  Sanskrit  Series). 

1  That :  meaning,  according  to  S&yana,  Brahma  the  original  cause  of  the 
universe. 

2  Eayer  to  win :  Prof.  Ludwig  makes  sasni  an  infinitive.  Sdtnih  may  be 
the  correct  reading.    See  QraA^mtiiyQ)  WGvterbuch  zum  Rigveda.    The  hreatk- 

ing  and  the  breathless :  the  animate  wi^  \J«v«>  vii^Tvva^^x.^^  ^  w\^ 

S  Mental  vigour:    ikrotum  :    '  aAoxafcioii:  — "^W^wi     T\a»fc:  ^^\a.x  \!xv«<«^ 
I^ice  or  thrice :  with  reference,  petW^a,  Vi  Ocv^  ^X«%fe  ^<^i  \&»s«w^xc^   ^Noa 


ffYMN  120.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  665 

Blend  what  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet  with  sweetness :  win 
quickly  with  our  meath  that  meath  in  battle. 

4  Therefore  in  thee  too,  thou  who  winnest  riches,  at  every  ban- 

quet are  the  sages  joyful. 
With  mightier  power,  Bold  God,  extend  thy  firmness :  let  not 
malignant  Y^tudhslnas  harm  thee. 

5  Proudly  we  put  our  trust  in  thee  in  battles,  when  we  behold 

great  wealth  the  prize  of  combat. 
I  with  my  words  impel  thy  weapons  onward,    and  sharpen 
with  my  prayer  thy  vital  vigour. 

6  Worthy  of  praises,  many-shaped,  most  skilful,  most  energetic, 

Aptya  of  the  Aptyas  : 
He  with  his  might  destroys  the  seven  Danus,  subduing  many 
who  were  deemed  his  equals. 

7  Thou  in  that  house  which  thy  protection  guardeth  bestowest 

wealth,  the  higher  and  the  lower. 
Thou  stablishest  the  two  much-wandering  Mothers,  and  bring- 
est  many  deeds  to  their  completion. 

8  Brihaddiva,  the  foremost  of  light-winners,  repeats  these  holy 

prayers,  this  strength  to  Indra. 
He  rules  the  great  self-luminous  fold  of  cattle,  and  all   the 
doors  of  light  hath  he  thrown  open. 

9  Thus  hath  Brihaddiva,   the  great  Atharvan,  spoken  to  Indra 

as  himself  in  person. 
The   spotless  Sisters,    they  who   are  his  Mothers,  with  power 
exalt  him  and  impel  him  onward. 

U  sweeter  than  the  sweet:  thine  own  celestial  Soma.  Sftyana  explains  the 
stanza  differently  : — '  To  thee  all  (worshippers)  offer  adoration,  whether  those 
propitiators  be  two  or  three.  Combine  that  which  is  sweeter  than  the  sweet 
with  sweetness,  unite  that  honey  with  honey.* — Wilson.  The  *  two  or  three/ 
according  to  S&yana,  are  the  sacrificer  and  his  wife  and  child,  and  the  second 
half  of  the  stanza  contains  a  reference  to  the  propagation  of  children. 

6  Aptya :  the  name  of  a  class  of  deities,  of  which  Trita  Aptya  is  the  chief. 
*  Most  accessible  of  the  accessible.* — Wilson.  The  first  line  is  without  a  verb  : 
1  praise  him,  may  be  understood.     Ddnut :  a  class  of  demons. 

7  Thehigherandthelower:  heavenly  and  earthly.  Mothers:  Heaven  and  Earth. 

8  Foremost  of  light-winners :  according  to  S&yana,  *  chief  of  Rishis,  and 
enjoyer  of  heaven,  or  servant  of  Aditya,  the  Sun,  Indra.*  Fold  of  cattle : 
the  region  of  light. 

9  The  great  Atharvan:   'the  great  priest' — Grassmann.    As  himself:  he 
identifies  himself  with  the  Gk>d  whom  he  worships.    The  spotless  Sisters,  they 
who  are  his  Mothers :  according  to  S&yana,  the  sister  rivers  which  abide  in  the 
mother  earth.    Von  Roth  adopts  the  reading  oi  AA)h»rw^«dAi^  .*L.^«  itv^a^ 
Hsvari,  iiutead  of  the  mdtaribkvatilji  of  the  ^ext.    IL«a.^«[i  vckd^^^sc^Co.  v^'^ft^ 
^i»  be  intended. 


566  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

HYMN  CXXI.  Ka. 

In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  bom  Only   Lord  of  all 

created  beings. 
He  fixed  and  holdeth  up  this  earth  and  heaven.     What  God 

shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

2  Giver  of  vital  breath,  of  power  and  vigour,  he  whose  command- 

ments all  tl^e  Gods  acknowledge  : 
The  Lord  of  death,  whose  shade  is  life  immortal.     What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation ) 

3  Who  by  his  grandeur  hath  become  Sole  Ruler  of  all  the 

moving  world  that  breathes  and  slumbers ; 
He  who  is  Lord  of  men  and  Lord  of  cattle.  What   God   shall 
we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

4  His,  through  his  might,  are   these  snow-covered    mountains, 

and  men  call  sea  and  Rassl  his  possession  : 
His  arms  are  these,  his  are  these  heavenly  regions.   What  Grod 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

5  By  him  the  heavens  are  strong  and  earth  is   stedfast,  by  him 

light's  realm  and  sky-vault  are  supported  : 
By  him  the  regions   in  mid-air  were   measured.     What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

6  To  him,  supported  by  his  help,  two  armies  embattled  look 

while  trembling  in  their  spirit. 
When  over  them  the  risen  Sun  is  shining.  What  God  shall  we 
adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

7  What  time  the  mighty  waters  came,  containing  the  universal 

germ,  producing  Agni, 
Thence  sprang  the  Gods'  one   spirit   into  being.     What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

Ka,  kah,  (quis)  meaning  Who  ?  that  is,  the  Unknown  God,  has  been  applied 
as  a  name  to  Praj&pati,  and  to  other  Gods,  from  a  forced  interpretation  of  the 
interrogative  pronoun  which  occurs  in  the  refrain  of  each  verae  of  the  hymn. 

1  ffiranyagarbha :  literally  *  the  gold-germ  ; '  *  source  of  golden-light ; ' 
the  Sun-god  '  as  the  great  power  of  the  universe,  from  which  all  other  powers 
and  existences,  divine  and  earthly,  are  derived,  a  conception  which  is  the 
nearest  approach  to  the  later  mystical  conception  of  Brahmft,  the  creator  of 
the  world/ — Wallis.  What  God :  kdsmai  devSya:  cui  deo?  According  to  others : 
*  Worship  we  Ka  the  God  with  our  oblation.*  According  to  Lad  wig,  the  mean- 
ing is  ^  What  other  God  than  Praj&pati  shall  we  worship  ? ' 

3  Breathes  and  tiumhers :  that  is  of  Gods  and  men.   Of  men  cmd  .  ... cattle : 
JiterAlly, '  ot  quadruped  and  \AipeA.* 
4  Sea  :  air.  Ra*A  :  the  myt\i\ca\  ti'vw  ol  VJti^  ^TtaasoKc^.  t^^*"^  Vi%.  t, 
7  Tkenee:  from  the  coming  oi  t\ie 'waXat^.   Oi^  «pi.T\fc:  0Bd\^,  ^Xifc^ '\a.  Sia». 
text  given  two  superfluous  syWaXAeajMia  va  «vis^v5tfi>aa. 


BTMN  122.]  TBE  RIOVEDA.  567 

%  He  in  his  might  surveyed   the  floods  containing   productive 
force  and  generating  Worship. 
He  is  the  God  of  gods,  and  none  beside  him.    What  God  shall 
we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

9  Ne'er  may  he  harm  us  who  is  earth's  Begetter,  nor  he  wliose 
laws  are  sure,  the  heavens'  Creator, 
He  who  brought  forth  the  great  and  lucid  waters.     What  God 
,^-        shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  ? 

^  10  Prajapati!  thou  only  comprehendest  all  these  created  things, 
{  aiid  'hbne  beside  thee. 

\        Grant  us  our  hearts*  desire   when  we   invoke   thee  :  may  we 
\^        i^ave  store  of  riches  in  po^isession.  ' 

HYMN  CXXII.  Agni. 

I  PRAiSB  the  God  of  wondrous  might  like  Indra,  the  lovely 

pleasant  Guest  whom  all  must  welcome. 
May  Agni,  Priest  and  Master  of   the  household,   give  hero 

strength  and  all-sustaining  riches. 

2  0  Agni,  graciously  accept  this  song  of  mine,  thou  passing 

wise  who  knowest  every  ordinance. 
Enwrapped  in  holy  oil  further  the  course  of  prayer :  the  Oods 
bestow  according  to  thy  holy  law. 

3  Immortal,  wandering  round  the  seven  stations,  give,  a  liberal 

Giver,  to  the  pious  worshipper. 
Wealth,  Agni,  with  brave  sons  and  ready  for  his  use  :  welcome 
the  man  who  comes  with  fuel  unto  thee. 

4  The  seven  who  bring  oblations  worship  thee,  the  Strong,  the 

first,  the  Great  Chief  Priest,  Ensign  of  sacrifice. 
The  oil-anointed  Bull,  Agni  who  hears,  who  sends  as  God  full 
hero  strength  to  him  who  freely  gives. 

8  OmertUing  Worship :  *  giving  birth  to  sacrifice.* — Wilson. 

10  Prajd-pati :  Lord  of  life,  creatures  or  creation.  Savitar  the  SunGo<l 
is  so  called  in  IV.  53.  2,  and  Soma  Pavam&ua  in  IX.  5.  9.  Praj&pati  was  after- 
wards the  uame  of  a  separate  God.  the  bestower  of  progeny  and  cat  tie,  and 
fiometimes  invoked  as  the  Creator. 

The  hynm  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S.  Textt,  IV.,  pp.  16,  17  ; 
by  Prof.  Max  Miiller,  A.  S.  Lit.,  p.  569,  and  Vedie  Hymns^  Part  I.  (Sacre<i 
Books  of  the  East.  XXXII)  p.  1.;  by  Mr.  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Riyveda, 
p  60f;  by  Prof.  Peterson,  aymnafrom  theRigveda  ;  and  by  Dr.  L.  ScheriUHi), 
Philosopkische  Hymnen  Aus  der  Rig-und  Atharva-veda-Saiikitd,  p.  24. 

1  Like  fndra  :  vdium  na :  like  the  Vasu,  or  chief  VaaM.    *  \iJiA  \X\^  ^^<«w'  -^ 
Wilson.    Jtitrhet:  or  Wnnds. 
3  .*9even  staticni:  ragioos  of  the  uuiverae,  accotdm^  V>  ^Vs^^"^- 
4  TAe  seven  :  the  priifgta. 


»• 


5f?8  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  1. 

f)  Fi'-st  messenger  art  thou,  meet  for  election  :  drink  thou  thy 
hi)  iuvireti  to  the  Amrit. 
The  Mai  ufca  in  the  votary's  house  aiiorned  thee  >  with  lauds 
the  Bhrigus  gave  thee  light  and  glory. 

<>  Milking  the  teeming  Cow  for  a1l-su^staiuiug  food,  O  Wise  One, 
I'or  the  worship-loving  worshipper, 
Tfioii,  Agui>  liropping  oil,  thrice  lighting  works  of  Law,  show- 
est  thy  wisdom  circling  home  and  sacrihce. 

7  They  who  at  flushing  of  this  dawn  appointed  thee  their  mes- 

Kenger,  these  meti  have  paid  thee  reverence. 
Gods  strengthened  thee  for  work  that  must  he  glorified,  Agni, 
while  they  made  butter  pure  for  sacrifice. 

8  Arrangers  in  our  synods,  Agni,  while  they  sang,  Vasishtha's 

sons  have  called  thee  down,  the  Potent  One. 
Maintain  the  growth  of  wealth  with  men  who  saciifice.     Ye 
Gud^i,  prcderve  U4  with  your  blessings  evermore. 

HYMN  CXXIII.  Vent. 

;^EE,  Vena,  bom  in  light,  hath  driven  hither,  on  chariot  of  the 

air,  the  Calves  of  Pri  ni. 
Singers  with  hynmn  caress  him  as  an  infant  there  where  the 

waters  and  the  sunlight  mingle. 

"1  Vena  draws  up  his  wave  from  out  the  ocean  :  miat-born,  the 
fair  one's  back  is  made  apparent. 
Brightly  he  shone  aloft  on  Order's  summit:  the  hosts  sang 
glory  to  their  common  birthplace. 

3  Full  many,  lowing  to  their  joint-posaeasion,  dwelling  together 
stood  the  Darling's  Mothers. 
Ascending  to  the  lofty  height  of  Order,  the  bands  of  singers 
sip  the  sweets  of  Amrit. 


(rods:  here  meaning  piieats.  'Verily  there  are  two  kinds  of  gods  ;  ioTj 
iudeed,  the  gods  are  the  gada,  and  the  Br&hmana  who  have  studied  and  te^ch 
h'Ay  lore  are  the  human  gods*  {S  Uapatha- fir'^kmanay  II.  2.  2.  (J  ;  S.  B.  K. 

XI  I.  309).  '       

Venn,  '  the  loving  Sun '  of  I.  83.  6,  Kdvta  or  '  the  beloved,*  is  said  by  the 
S  holiast.  in  this  place  to  be  mudhyaxthdno  d^vah  'the  God  of  the  middle 
K^iou.*  He  is,  apparently,  the  Sun  h.^  he  rises  in  the  luist  and  dew  of  the 
morning. 

1  Pri^ni,  the  Speckled  Cow,  is  the  variegated  cloud,  and  her  Cahfet  are  the 
masses  uf  mist  which  the  Sun  dispels. 

2  Ocean:  the  sea  of  air.  On  Order*8  tummit :  'on  the  summit  of  nature*s 
coune.' — Wallis.     Order^  here  and  m  tVi'^  loWo'vihi^  stanea,  ia  Kosmos,   the 

ordered  or  law- regulated  univera©.     Commora  bwtX-pUiw :  ^Qa.*.^"^. 
3  Joint  potsettion :  the  child  ^Vi\c\x  tVi«>}  Vwj«i  \«vA>^^e^  \ti  wassasa*..    TV* 
Darling' t  Mothtrt :  the  Dawna,  ox  tVi^^tCcOT,  ot  \\ift  w^^ 


IIYMX  123.]  THE  HTOVEDA.  569 

4  Knowing  his  form,  the  sa^es  yearned  to  meet  him  ;  they  have 

come  nigh  to  hear  the  wild  BulFs  bellow. 

Performing  sacrifice  they  reached  the  river :  for  the  Gandbarva 
found  the  immortal  waters. 

5  The  Apsaras,  the  Lady,  sweetly  smiling,  supports  her  Lover 

in  sublimest  heaveu. 

Ill  his  FrieiidV  dwelling  as  a  Friend  he  wanders :  he,  Vena, 
rests  him  on  his  golden  pinion. 

6  They  gaze  on  thee  with  longing  in  their  spirit,  as  on  a  strong- 

winged  bird  that  mounteth  sky-ward  ; 

On  thee  with  winjrs  of  gold,  Varuna's  envoy,  the  Bird  that 
hasteneth  to  the  home  of  Yama. 

7  Erect,  to  heaven  hath  the  Gandharva  mounted,  pointing  at 

us  his  many-coloured  weapons ; 

Clad  in  sweet  raiment  beautiful  to  look  on,  for  he,  as  light, 
produceth  forms  that  please  us. 

8  When  as  a  spark  he  cometh  near  the  ocean,  still  looking  with 

a  vulture's  eye  to  heaven. 

His  lustre,  joying  in  its  own  bright  splendour,  maketh  dear 
glories  in  the  lowest  region. 


4  The  wild  BulVs  helhw:  the  sound  ma<le  by  the  dropping.  Soma  juice. 
■The  Gandharva :  Vena,  the  rising  Sun. 

5  The  Apsaras:  the  celestial  nymph  who  symbolizes  the  waters  of  heaven. 
Her  Lover :  Vena,  the  Gandharva,  Surya.  '  Our  hymn  illuntrates  the  two 
senses  in  which  the  sun  is  brought,  into  connection  with  the  waters  ;  first,  us 
penetrHting  with  his  beams  the  watery  masses  of  the  sky,  and  secondly  in  the 
assimilation  of  his  light  to  the  waters,  as  soma  or  ambrottia,  whence  the  depths 
of  light  become  the  aerial  ocean.  This  association  is  stereotyped  in  the  union 
of  the  Gandharvas  and  the  Apsarases.'—Wallis.  Hit  Friend's  dwellihg :  the 
mansion  of  his  father  Heaven. 

6  Varuna*8  envoy :  the  setting  sun.  Cf.  VII.  87.  6.  Yama:  Cf.  X.  14.  7. 

7  Clad  in  sweet  raiment :  surabhlf  sweet,  may,  as  Mr.  Wallis  coujecture6,  be 
a  play  on  the  word  gandha^  occurring  in  the  name  Gandharva.  Stanzas  7 
and  8  merely  recapitulate,  as  Ludwig  observes,  the  deeds  of  Surra,  first  as 
the  light  of  living  men  and  then  as  the  illuminator  of  the  regions  below  the 
earth. 

The  hymn  is  one  of  the  obscurest  in  the  whole  Rigveda.  Mahtdhara  inter- 
prets Vena  by  Chandra^  the  Moon.  Wilson  says  :  *  The  general  purport  of  the 
SAl'ta  makes  it  [Vena]  equiTaleut  to  the  thunder-cloud  '  Von  Both,  whom 
GraJ«sniann  follows,  identifies  Vena  Gandharva  with  the  Rainbow.  According 
to  Ludwig  Vena  is  the  Moon  and  the  Gandharva  is  the  Sun.  Mr.  Wallis  hns 
translati'd  and  explained  the  hymn  in  his  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda.^  V^.  %4  «. 
For  a  different  interpretation  see  Hillebraudt,  V.  M.,V  \'iVNS..  KtAYkxA-m^^ 
critjciam/i  therein  {Ueber  die  neuesten  ir6«tten,  u.  «.  V).,  'd.  \^^l^. ^^^ i2»»^^^- 


570  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK'  1. 

HYMN  CXXIV.  Agnl,  Ete. 

Comb  to  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  0  Agni,  threefold^  with  seven 

threads  and  five  divisions. 
Be  our  oblation-bearer  and  preceder:    thou   hast  lain  long 

enough  in  during  darkness. 

2  I  come  a  God  foreseeing  from  the  godless  to  immortality  by 

secret  pathways, 
While  I,  ungracious  one,  desert  the  gracious,  leave  mine  own 
friends  and  seek  the  kin  of  strangers. 

3  I,  looking  to  the  guest  of  other  lineage,  have  founded  many  a 

rule  of  Law  and  Order. 
I  bid  farewell  to  the  Great  God,  the  Father,  and,  for  neglect, 
obtain  my  share  of  worship. 

4  I  tarried  many  a  year  within  this  altar :  I  leave  the  Father, 

for  my  choice  is  Itidra. 
Away  pass  Agni,  Yaruna,  and  Soma.     Rule  ever  changes  :  this 
I  come  to  favour. 

5  These  A  suras  have  lost  their  powers  of  magic.     But  thou,  0 

Yaruna,  if  thou  dost  love  me, 
0  King,  discerning  truth  and  right  from  falsehood,  come  and 
be  Lord  and  Ruler  of   my  kingdom. 

6  Here  is  the  light  of  heaven,  here  all  is  lovely ;  here  there  is 

radiance,  here  is  air's  wide  region. 
Let  us  two  slaughter  Yritra.     Forth,  0  Soma  !  Thou  art  obla- 
tion :  we  therewith  will  serve  thee. 

1  Indra  speaks.  Threefold  :  performed  with  three  daily  libations  ;  or  com- 
prising the  pdkayajnaj  the  haviryajnaj  and  the  somayajfla,  the  simple  domes- 
tic oblation,  the  oblation  of  clarified  butter,  etc.,  and  the  offering  of  Soma 
juice.  With  seven  threads :  conducted  by  the  seven  chief  priests.  With  five 
dlvmons :  with  five  oblations,  or  regulated  by  the  Yajamftna  and  four  of  the 
chief  priests,  according  to  S^yana.     The  exact  meaning  is  uncertaiu 

2  As:ui  speaks.  He  has  left  Varuna,  originally  the  Supreme  Deity,  whose 
power  was  waning,  and  associated  himself  with  Indra  who  has  superseded 
that  God.  From  the  godless  :  from  Varuna  who  in  the  decline  of  his  supre- 
macy has  neglected  Agni  and  sacrifice.  Siyana  interprets  the  first  line  dif- 
ferently : — '  From  being  no  divinity  I  issue  a  divinity  from  the  cave  at  the 
solicitation  (of  the  gods),  and  being  manifest  I  attain  immortality.' — Wilson. 
Seek  the  kin  of  strangers :  come  to  be  born  and  domesticated  in  a  new  place, 
with  Indra. 

3  Of  other  lineage :  of  the  other  branch  ;  terrestrial  fire.     Father :  Varuna. 

4  Withi)i  this  altar :  or,  close  to  this  Varuna.  This :  the  supremacy  of 
Indra. 

5  Indra  speaks.  These  Asuras :  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Soma.  Come  and  be 
Lord:  Indra  offers  Varuna  apirituiiiV  ai\id  uiv>t^  viON«t^\^o*.^  aa  compensation 
for  his  loss  of  general  supremacy. 

Kg^rded  aa  in  league  with  Varvin*.  t\vft^«uA«Vev.*>m^  v<l^i!^x*>!cv»^^^VN«N.^ 


HYMN  126.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  571 

7  The  Sage  hath  fixed  his  form  by  wisdom  in  the  heavens  :  Va- 

runa  with  no  violence  let  the  waters  flow. 
Like  women-folk,  the  floods  that  bring  prosperity  have  caught 
his  hue  and  colour  as  they  gleamed  and  shone. 

8  These  wait  upon  his  loftiest  power  and  vigour :  he  dwells  in 

these  who  triumph  in  their  Godhead  ; 
And  they,  like  people  who  elect  their  ruler,  have  in  abhor- 
rence turned  away  from  Vritra. 

9  They  call  him  Swan,  the  abhorrent  floods'  Companion,  moving 

in  friendship  with  celestial  Waters. 
The  poets  in  their  thought  have  looked  on  Indra  swiftly  ap- 
proaching when  Anushtup  calls  him. 

HYMN  CXXV.  Vftk. 

I  TRAVBL  with  the  Kudras  and  the  Vasus,  with  the  Adityas 

and  All-Gods  I  wander. 
I  hold  aloft  both  Varuua  and  Mitra,  Indra  and  Agni,  and  the 

Pair  of  Asvins. 

• 

2  I  cherish  and  sustain  high-swelling  Soma,  and  Tvashtar  I  sup- 

port, P^sban,  and  Bhaga. 
I  load  with  wealth  the  zealous  sacrificer  who  pours  the  juice 
and  oflers  his  oblation. 

3  I  am  the  Queen,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasures,  most  thoughtful, 

first  of  those  who  merit  worship. 
Thus  Crods  have  stablished  me  in  many  places  with  many 
homes  to  enter  and  abide  in. 

4  Through  me  ak>Qe  all  eat  the  food  that  feeds  them, — each 

man  who  sees,  breathes,  hears  the  word  outspoken. 
They  know  it  not,  but  yet  they  dwell  beside  me.     Hear,  one 

and  all,  the  truth  as  I  declare  it. 

„_ «« 

7  The  Sage :  perhaps  Soma,  in  answer  to  Indra's  appeal ;  Mitra,  according 
to  Sftyana. 

8  ffis  loftiest  power :  the  supreme  might  of  Indra. 

9  This  stanza  appears  to  have  been  added  on  account  of  the  occurrence  of 
the  word  btbhatgC^tiim  (abhorrentium)  which  seems  to  connect  it  with  the 
preceding  stanza  where  btbhattHvah  (abhorrentea)  occurs.  Swan:  liansa: 
Sfirya  the  Sun-GU)d  is  sometimes  so  called.  Cf.  IV.  40.  5.  Swiftly  approach- 
ing when  Anushtup  caUs  him :  *  or  the  ceaselessly  moving  Indra,  who  is  worthy 
to  be  praised  with  an  AnushiubV—V^Uaon.  Or,  *  dancing  the  Anushtup,' 
according  to  Prof.  Max  Muller's  interpretation. 

M.  Bergaigne  has  translated  and  explained  this  hymn.  See  La  Religion 
VMqueyfll.  pp.  145—149.  See  also  Book  IV.  42,  for  hints  of  the  rivalry 
between  Varu^  and  Indra. 

VAk  is  Speech  personified^  the  Word,  the  first  cte^\.\oTi  wA  x^^vc^MsoJwjiCv^'s^ 
of  Spirit,  and  the  means  oi  communicatioii  between  tasii  ^vA  QiQ^*.    '^'^x^ 
she  IB  said  to  be  the  daughter  of  the  Rmhl  ilmV)hrviBK 


572  TBB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

5  I,  verily,  myKelf  announce  and  utter  the  word  that  Goda  and 

men  alike  shall  welcome. 
I  n)ake  the  man  I  love  exceeding  mighty,  make  him  a  sage,  a 
Rishi,  and  a  Brahman. 

6  I  bend  the  bow  for  Kudra  that  his  arrow  may  strike  and  slay 

the  hater  of  devotion. 
I  rouse  and  order  battle  for  the  people,  and  I  have  penetrated 
Earth  and  Heaven. 

7  On  the  world's  summit  I  bring  forth  the  Father :  my  home  is 

in  the  waters,  in  the  ocean. 
Thence  I  extend  o'er  ail  existing  creatures,  and  touch  even 
yonder  heaven  with  my  forehead. 

8  I  bieathe  a  strong  breath  like  the  wind  and  tempest,  the  while 

I  hold  together  all  existence. 
Beyond  this  wide  earth  and  beyond  the  heavens  I  have  become 
80  mighty  in  my  grandeur. 

HYMN  CXXVI.  Visvedevas. 

• 

No  peril,  no  severe  distress,  ye  Gods,  aflfects  the  mortal  man 
W  horn  Aryaman  and  Mitra  lead,  and  Varuna,  of  one  accord, 
beyond  his  foes. 

2  This  very  thing  do  we  desire,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
Whereby  ye  guard  the  mortal  man  from  sore  distress,  and  lead 

him  safe  beyond  his  foes. 

3  These  are,  each  one,  our  present  helps,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Arya- 

mun, 
Best  leaders,  best  deliverers  to  lead  us  on  and  bear  us  safe 
beyond  our  foes. 

7  The  Father :  Heaven  or  Sky,  produced  from  V&k  identified  with  Para- 
m&tmd,  the  Huprenie  and  universal  Soul. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Colebrooke,  Miscellaneous  Essays,  I.  32  ; 
by  the  authors  of  the  SUhenzig  Lieder ;  by  Prof.  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the 
lilgveda  (Bombay  Sanskrit  Series) ;  and  by  Prof.  Whitney,  Notes  to  Cole- 
biooke's  Essay  on  the  VedaSy  p.  113. 

Mr.  Wallij*  observes :    *  VSc,   '  Speech '   is  celebrated  alone  in  two  whole 
hymns,  X.  71.  and  X.  125.,  of  which  the  former  shows  that  the  primary 
application  of  the  name  was  to  the  voice  of  the  hymn,  the  means  of  com- 
munication between  heaven  and  earth  at  the  sacrifice.     The  other  hymn 
iUuHtiaces  thf,  constant  assimilation  of  the  varied  phenomena  of  nature  to 
the  sacrifice  ;  a11  that  has  a  voice  in  nature,  the  thunder  of  the  storm,  the 
rcawaking  of  life  at  dawn,  with  songs  of  rejoicing  over  the  new  birth  of  the 
world.  Hre  embodied  in  this  Vftc  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  said  of  Brihaspati, 
that  he  embraces  all  things  that  are.     It  is  thus  another  expression  for  that 
idea  oi  the  unity  of  the  world,  which  we  have  seen  crowning  the  mystical 
Bpeculntioaa  ot  all  the  more  abaUwitVstmaQl  VJaa  wJ\ft5i\.v«3L; — Cosmology  of 
t/te  Rigveda,  p.  85.     See  aAao  We\>eT,  N^c  \3lxA  \^oq,  It^^u^^  ^\mA\ww^^S3w, 
4/3-^480 ;  and  Max  MuUw,  TKc  VedAnt*  PXUo^apK.^A'^'^— '^'^^ 


BTMN  127.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  573 

4  Ye  compass  round  and  guard  each  man,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Arya- 

man : 
In  your  dear  keeping  may  we  be,  ye  who*  are  excellent  as 
guides  beyond  our  foes. 

5  Adityas  are  beyond  all  foes, — Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  : 
Strong  Rudra  with  the  Marut  host,  Indra,  Agni  let  us  call  for 

weal  beyond  our  foes. 

6  These  lead  us  safely  over  all,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman, 
These  who  are  Kings  of  liviug  men,  over  all  troubles  far  away 

beyond  our  foes. 

7  May  they  give  bliss  to  aid  us  well,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman  : 
May  the  Adityas,  when  we  pray,  grant  us  wide  shelter  and 

defence  beyond  our  foes. 

8  As  in  this  place,  0  Holy  Ones,  ye  Vasus  freed  even  the  Gauri 

when  her  feet  were  fettered, 
So  free  us  now  from  trouble  and  affliction  :  and  let  our  life  be 
lengthened  still,  0  Agni. 

HYMN  CXXVII.  Night. 

With  all  her  eyes  the  Goddess  Night  looks  forth  approaching 

many  a  spot : 
She  hath  put  all  her  glories  on. 

2  Immortal,  she  hath  filled  the  waste,  the  Goddess  hath  filled 

height  and  depth : 
She  conquers  darkness  with_her  light. 

3  The  Groddess  as  she  eomes  hath  set  the  Dawn  her  Sister  in  her 

place  : 
And  then  the  darkness  vanishes. 

4  So  favour  us  this  night,  0  thou  whose  pathways  we  have  visited 
As  birds  their  uest  upon  the  tree.' 

5  The  villagers  have  sought  their  homes,  and  all  that  walks 

and  all  that  flies, 
Even  the  falcons  fain  for  prey. 

6  Keep  off  the  she-wolf  and  the  wolf ;  0  Ormyi,  keep  the  thief 

away : 
Easy  be  thou  for  us  to  pass. 


8  Oaurt;  the  wild-cow,  the  female  of  the  Oaura  or  Bos  Oaurui.     The 
Tasua  are  said  to  have  delivered  her  from  Visv&vasu  the  Qandharva, 

2  Thewoite:  the  expanded  (firmament).*— V7V!L«0Ti. 
6  t^rmyd:  'unduUtmg  * ;  Night. 


674  THE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  X. 

7  Clearly  bath  bhe  come  nigh  to  me  who  decks  the  dark  with 

richest  hues : 
0  Morning,  cancel  it  like  debts. 

8  These  have  I  brought  to  thee  like  kine.     0  Night,  thou  Child 

of  Heaven,  accept 
This  laud  as  for  a  conqueror. 

HYMN  CXXVIII.  Visvedevas. 

Let  me  win  glory,  Agni,  in  our  battles :  enkindling  thee,  may 
we  support  our  bodies. 

May  the  four  regions  bend  and  bow  before  me :  with  thee  for 
guardian  may  we  win  in  combat. 

2  May  all  the  Gods  be  on  my  side  in  battle,  the  Maruts  led  by 

ludra,  Vishnu,  Agni. 

Mine  be  the  middle  air's  extended  region,  and  may  the  wind 
blow  favouring  these  my  wishes. 

3  May  the  Gods  grant  me  riches ;  may  the  blessing  and  invoca- 

tion of  the  Gods  assist  me. 

Foremost  in  fight  be  the  divine  Invokers  :  may  we,  unwounded, 
have  brave  heroes  round  us. 

4  Fur  me  let  them  present  all  mine  oblations,  and  let  my  mind's 

intention  be  accomplished. 

May  I  be  guiltless  of  the  least  transgression  :  and,  all  ye  Gods, 
do  ye  combine  to  bless  us. 

5  Ye  si«  divine  Expanses,  grant  us  freedom :  here,  all  ye  Gods, 

acquit  yourselves  like  heroes. 

Let  us  not  lose  our  children  or  our  bodies :  let  ue  not  benefit 
the  foe,  King  Soma  ! 

6  Baffling   the  wrath  of  our  opponents,  Agni,  guard  us   as  our 

infallible  Protector. 

Let  these  thy  foes  turn  back  and  seek  their  houses,  and  let 
their  thought  who  watch  at  home  be  ruined. 


8  These:  verses. 


1  The  four  regions:  the  King  who  is  praying  for  aseiskance  is  about  to  un- 
dertake a  Digvijaya,  the  subjugation  of  all  neighbouring  countries  in  all 
directions. 

3  Divine  Invohers :  the  Hotar-priests  of  the  Gods.     Sftyana  explains  dif- 
ferently :— '  may  my  invokers  of  the  gods  be  the  first  to  propitiate   them  '— 
Wilson, 
5  Six  divine  Expanses  :  the  fouTcaT3Jm^'^<i\ti>»«tv^\i^>5i«  vci^^ 
or,  according  to  Sdy ana,  Hea>?en,"Eaxt\^,T>^l,'^\^'^.^^'^x^  iwA^\t>as^^ 


HYMN  129.]  THE  RIOVEDA,  575 

7  Lord  of  tbe  worU,  Creator  of  creates  :  the  savicmr  (5od  who 

overcomes  the  foenian. 
May  Gods,  Brihaspati,  both  Asvins  shelter  from  ill   this  sacri- 
fice and  sacrificer. 

8  Foodful,  and  mnch-invoked,  at  this  onr  calling  may  the  great 

Bull  vouchsafe  us  wide  protection. 
Lord  of  Bay  Coursers,  Indra,  bless  our  children  :  harm  us  not, 
give  us  not  as  prey  to  others. 

9  Let  those  who  are  our  foemen  stay  afar  from  us  :  with  Indra 

and  with  Agni  we  will  drive  them  off. 
Yasus,  Adityas,  Rudias  have  exalted  me,  made  me   far-reach- 
ing, mighty,  thinker,  sovran  lord. 

HYMN  CXXIX.  Creatiaa 

Then  was  not  non-existent  nor  existent :  there  was  no  realm 

of  air,  no  sky  bejoud  it. 
What  covered  in,  and  where  ?  and  what  gave  shelter  ?  Was 

v/ater  there,  unfathomed  depth  of  water  ? 

2  Death  was  not  then,  nor  was  there  aught   immortal :  no  sign 

was  there,  the  day's  and  night's  divider. 
That  One  Thing,  breathless,  breathed  by  its  own  nature  :  apart 
from  it  was  nothing  whatsoever. 

3  Darkness  there  was  :  at  first  concealed  in   darkness   this   All 

was  indiscriminated  chaos. 
All  that  existed  then  was  void  and   formless :  by   the   great 
power  of  Warmth  was  bom  that  Unit. 

4  Thereafter  rose  Desire  in  the   beginning.  Desire,   the   primal 

seed  and  germ  of  Spirit. 
Sages  who  searched  with  their  heart's  thought  discovered  the 
existent's  kinship  in  the  non-existent. 


7  After  Creator  of  ermtws  Sftyana  supplies  tcun  devam  staumi,  *  that  God  I 
praise.'     Indra  or  Savitar  iu  intended. 

8  The  great  Bull :  Indra.  -: — 

1  Tken :  in  the  beginning.  Non-esdstent :  dsat :  that  doea  not  yet  actually 
exist,  but  which  has  in  itaelf  the  latent  potentiality  of  existence.  '  There  was 
a  certain  unapparent  condition/  says  an  Indian  Commentator,  '  which,  from 
the  abt»ence  ot  distinctness,  was  not  an  '  entity/  while  from  its  being  the 
instrument  of  the  world's  production,  it  was  not  a  *  non-entity.' ' 

2  ThcU  One  Thing :  the  single  primordial  substance,  the  unit  out  of  which 
the  universe  was  developed.     Cp.  I.  164.  6  and  46. 

3  Warmth  :  Prof.  Wilson,  following  S&yavA,  translates  tdpasah  by  *  austeri- 
ty.' meaning  the  contemplation  of  the  things  that  were  to  be  created.  M. 
Burntmf,  in  La  S<f^ence  des  ReligionSt  pp.  207ff,  has  shown  how  warmth  wa% 
regarded  by  the  Aryas  as  the  principle  explainmytxiiO'^feTSi'WiXi^Yv^^i^'cA^^'^"^^' 

4  Desire:  Kdma,  Eros,  or  Love.     Sagt9  :  anc\eTxV"B.\R\sSa, 


575  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

5  Transversely  was  their  severing  line  extended:  what  was 

above  it  then,  and  what  below  it  ? 
There  were  begetters,  there  were  mighty  forces,  free  action  here 
and  energy  up  yonder. 

6  Who  verily  knows  and  who  can  here  declare  it,  whence  it  was 

born  and  whence  comes  this  creation  ? 
The  Gods  are  later  than  this  world's  production.     Who  knows 
then  whence  it  first  came  into  being  ? 

7  He,  the  first  origin  of  this  creation,  whether  he  formed  it  all  or 

did  not  form  it, 
Whose  eye  controls  this  world  in   highest  heaven,    he   verily, 
knows  it,  or  perhaps  he  knows  not. 

HYMN  CXXX.  Creation. 

The  sacrifice  drawn  out  with  threads  on   every  side,  stretched 

by  a  hundred  sacred  ministers  and  one, — 
This  do  these  Fathers  weave  who  hitherward  are  come  :  thev 

sit  beside  the  warp  and  cry,  Weave  forth,  weave  back. 

2  The  Man  extends  it  and  the  Man   unbinds  it :  even  to  this 

vault  of  heaven  hath  he  outsptin  it. 
These  pegs  are  fastened  to  the  seat  of  worship :  they   made 
the  Sama-hymns  their  weaving-shuttles. 

3  What   were  the  rule,  the  order  and  the  model  ?     What  were 

the  wooden  fender  and  tlie  butter? 
What  were  the  hymn,  the  chant,  the  recitation,   when    to  the 
God  all  Deities  paid  worship  ? 

5  Ltiie :  a  line  drawn  by  the  ancient  Rishis  to  make  a  division  between  the 
upper  world  and  the  lower,  and  to  bring  duality  out  of  unity.  Beffettert  : 
the  Fathers  may  be  meant.  Free  action :  the  happiness  of  the  Father ji. 
The  stanza  is  obscure,  and  its  connexion  with  stanza  4  is  not  obvious.  An  in- 
tervening stanza  may,  perhaps,  have  been  lost. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Colebrooke,  Afiscellaneous  SgsavA,  I.  pj». 
33,  34  ;  by  Dr.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  356,  357  ;  by  the  authors  of  the  Sieb^n 
iig  Lieder,  and  by  Mr.  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  pp.  59  flF.  '  The  lat»-st 
of  the  many  Commentators  on  this  hymn  are  Professor  Whitney  in  the 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  vol.  xi.  p.  cix,  and  Dr.  Scherman. 
PhiloHophiscbeHymnen  aus  der  Kig-undAtharva-veda3»mh»ta.l887.' — Walli-*. 

See  Prof.  Max  Miiller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature^  pp.  559 — 563. 

Ab  the  subject  of  the  hymn  is  creation  typified  and  originated  by  the  mys- 
terious primeval  sacrifice  (cp.  X.  90),  Praj&pati  the  Creator  is  said  by  S4y«Da 
to  be  th*-  deity.     The  Riahi  is  Yaj&a  (Sacriftce)  Praj&pati's  son. 

1    The  saci'ifine :  sarg/ttmako  i/ajfinh  ;  the  SHcrifice  wliich  constitutes  creation. 
— S&yana.  A  hundred  and  one :  meaning  an  iudennitely  largo  number.  Fathers  : 
Sftya^ia explains  pitdrak  here  by  p^lakdh. \)rote.ctors^  the  Gods. 
2  The  Man  :  the  fiitt  Man  or  Hale  •,  V\iTu*ha,  Adipunisha,  Prajipati,  accord - 

iDg  to  SAyAns^ 
S  Wooden  fender :  the  encloam^aticka  v^\vc^TiiuxA>J^^wa^^>»i.'LT^. 


HYMN  181.  ]  THE  RIG  VEDA .  577 

4  Closely  was  G&yatr!  conjoined  with  Agni,  and  closely  Savitar 

combined  with  Ushnih. 
Brilliant  with  Ukthas,  Soma  joined  Anushtup:  Brihaspati's 
voice  by  Brihati  was  aided. 

5  Viraj  adhered  to  Varur^a  and  Mitra :  here  Trishtup  day  by  day 

was  Indra's  portion. 
Jagati  entered  all  the  Gods  together ;  so  by  this  knowledge  men 
were  raised  to  Rishis. 

• 

€  So  by  this  knowledge  men  were  raised  to  Rishis,  when  ancient 
sacrifice  sprang  up,  our  Fathers, 
With  the  mind's  eye  I  tbink  that  I  behold  them  who  first  per- 
formed this  sacrificial  worship. 

7  .They  who  were  versed  in  ritual  and  metre,  in  hymns  and  rules, 
were  the  Seven  Godlike  IBLishis. 
Viewing  the  path  of  those  of  old,  the  sages  have  taken  up  the 
reius  like  chariot-drivers. 

HYMN  CXXXI.  Indra. 

DwYE  all  our  enemies  away,   0  Indra,   the  western,  mighty 

Conqueror,  and  the  eastern. 
Hero,  drive  otf  our  northern  foes  and  southern,  that  we  in  thy 
wide  shelter  may  be  joyful. 

2  What  then  ?     As  men  whose  fields  are  full  of  barley  reap  the 

ripe  corn  removing  it  in  order, 
So  bring  the  food  of  those  men,  bring  it  hither,  who  went  not 
to  prepare  the  grass  for  worship. 

3  Men  come  not  with  one  horse  at  sacred  seasons ;  thus  they 

obtain  no  honour  in  assemblies. 
Sages  desiring  herds  of  kine  and  horses  strengthen  the  mighty 
Indra  for  his  friendship. 

4  BriUiant  with  Ukthas:  'gladdening  (us)  tbroagh  hymus  (ukthas).' — 
Mutr.  Brihaspati's  voice :  because  his  duty  was  to  speak  as  Priest.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Aitureya- Brdhmana,  III.  13,  PraJILpatI  'allotted  to  the  deities 
their  (different)  parts  in  the  sacrifice  and  metres.' 

5  Day  by  day :  was  lodra's  portion  of  the  mid -day  (oblation).' — Wilson. 

6  /  behM  them :  or,  according  to  Prof.  Lud wig's  interpretation  : — *  These 
with  the  eyes  of  mind,  I  think,  beheld  them.' 

7  *  The  seven  llishis  here  are  not  the  Angirases,  but  Bharadv&ja,  Kssyapa, 
Qotama,  Atri,  Vasishtha,  Visv^mitra,  and  Jamadagni,  The  knowledge  of 
the  ritual  is  derived  from  ih*t  divine  priests  ;  the  sages  or  Rishis  have  followed 
them  in  sacrificiugt  and  modem  priests  are  only  in^tators  of  those  who 
preceded  them.' — Ludwig. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  0  S.  Texts,  III.  pp.  278,  279. 
and  by  Prof.  Whitney,  Notes  to  Colebrooke's  Essay  on  the  Vedas,  p.  114. 

3  With  one  horse  :  it  seems  to  have  been  considrtred  \ind\^\^'eA.  «sA  ^x-^- 
reputable  for  a  wealthy  man  to  come  to  the  fiacriiice  m  «k  oxxft-\kw%fe  ^ax  \  ^v>N. 
the  preciae  moAuiug  oi  tiiQ  drtt,  iioe  ia  soxaewUat  uvi^Mit^Vxv* 
37 


678  THE  HYMN8  OF  [BOOK  X. 

4  Ye,  Asvins,  Lirds  of  Splendoor.  drank  full  draaghts  of  grate- 

ful Soma  juice, 
And  aided  Itidra  in  bis  work  with  Namuohi  of  Asura  birth. 

5  As  parents  aid  a  son,  both  Aavins,  Indra,  aided  thee  with  their 

wondrous  powers  and  wisdom. 
When  thou,  with  mighty  hadst  drunk  the  draught  that  glad- 
dens, Sarasvati,  O  Magfaavan,  refreshed  thee. 

6  Indra  is  strong  to  save^  rich  in  assistance  :  may  be^  possessing 

all,  be  kind  and  gracious. 
May  be  disperse  our  foes  aAd  give  us  safety,  and  may  we  be 
the  lords  of  hero  vigour. 

7  May  we  enjoy  bis  favour,  hia  the  Holy :  may  we  enjoy  his 

blesski  loving-kindness. 
May  this  rich  Indra,  as  our  good  Pi-oteotor;  drive  off  and  keep 
ufar  all  those  who  hate  us. 

HYMN  CXXXII.  Mitnu    Vanma. 

Mat  Dyaus  the  Lord  of  lauded  wealth,  and  £artb  stand  by 
the  man  who  offers  sacrifice, 

And  may  the  Asvins,  both  the  Gods,  strengthen  the  worship- 
per with  bliss. 

2  As  such  we  honour  you,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  with  hasty  zeal, 

most  blest,  you  who  sustain  the  folk. 
So  may  we,  through  ywir  friensjhip  for  the  worshipper,  subdue 
the  fiends. 

3  And  when  we  seek  to  win  your  love  and  friendship^  we  who 

have  precious  wealth  in  our  possession, 

Or  when  the  worshipper  augments  his  riches>  let  not  bis  trea- 
sures be  shut  up. 

4  That  other,  Asura  !  too  was  bom  of  Heaven  :  thoiik  art,  O  Va- 

runa, the  King  of  all  men. 

The  chariot's  Lord  was  well  content,  forbearing  to  anger  Death 
by  sin  so  great. 


4  Hillebrandt,  V.  M.,  I.  146,  and  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  Beat,  XL  I. 
135,  interpret  differently.  The  niyth  referred  to  in  the  following,  stiuiea  hat 
not  been  preserved.     See  Weber j  U^eber  den  RdjasHya^  pp.  9^,  101. 

4  That  other:  Mitra.     The  chariot's  Lord :  literally,  *  head  of  the  chariot/ 

The  meaning  is  uncertain.     I  find  the  rest  of  the-  hymn  unintelligible.     Prof. 

Judw^ig  conjectures  that  two  brothers.  Nrimedhas  and  Sumedhas,    had    con- 

tended  for  sovereignty,  and  t\ia.t  t\ve  «k^\i«fev\\A  oi  wia  had  wished  to  put  the 

other  brother  to   death,  but  bad  liofe  c«mfe^  ouX.  VJcl^vc  \.\«v*-^^«   %^*s^  \ 

ikbsolve   s^d  purifiea  the  iotmet*  aiuA  \.\v<i\>tv>'OaK»  ^^  \%Rawais^. 


TiTi^  1«.]  THE  RIGVSDA.  579 

5  This  sin  hath  Sakaputa  here  committed.     Heroes  who  fled  to 

their  dear  friend  he  slayeth, 
When  the  Steed  bringeth  down  your  grace  and  favour  in 
bodies  dear  and  worshipful. 

6  Your  Mother  Aditi,  ye  wise,  was  purified  with  water  even  as 

earth  is  purified  from  heaven. 
Show  love  and  kindness  here  below:  wash  her  in  rays  of 
heavenly  light. 

7  Ye  Twain  have  seated  you  as  Lords  of  Wealth,   as  oue  who 

mounts  a  car  to  him  who  sits  upon  the  pole,  upon  the  wood. 
These  our  disheartened  tribes  Nfimedhas  saved  from  woe, 
Sumedhas  saved  from  woe. 

HYMN  CXXXIII.  Indra. 

Sing  strength  to  Indra  that  shall  set  his  chariot  in  the  fore- 
most place. 

Giver  of  room  in  dlosest  fight,  slayer  of  foes  in  shock  of  war, 
be  thou  our  great  encourager.  Let  the  weak  bowatnngs 
break  upon  the  bows  of  feeble  enemies. 

2  Thou  didst  destroy  the  Dragon :  thou  sentest  the  rivers  down 

to  earth. 
Foeless,  0  Indra,  wast  thou  bom.     Thou  tendest  well  each 
choicest  thing.    Therefore  we  draw  us  close  to  thee.     Let 
the  weak  bowstrings,  etc. 

3  Destroyed  be  all  malignities  and  all  our  enemy's  designs. 
Thy  bolt  thou  castest  at  the  foe,  0  Indra,  who  wotdd  smite  us 

dead  :  thy  liberal  bounty  gives  us  wealth. 

4  The  robber  people  round  about,  Indra,  who  watch  and  aim  at 

us, — 
Trample  them  down  beneath  thy  foot ;  a  conquering  scatterer 
art  thou. 

5  Whoso  assails  us,  Indra,  be  the  man  a  stranger  or  akin, 
Bring  down,  thyself,  his  strength  although  it  be  as  vast  as  are 

the  heavens. 

6  Close  to  thy  friendship  do  we  cling,  0  Indra,  and  depend  on 

thee.    • 
Lead  us  beyond  all  pain  and  grief  along  the  path  of  holy  Law. 


5  The  Steed :  the  Sun. — Ludwig.     Tour  grace :  Mitra*8  and  Yaruna's. 

6  Your  Mother  Aditi  :  perhaps  the  mother  of  the  two  brothers  is  intended. — 
Ludwig.  

2  Let  the  weak  bowttringt^  etc:  the  refrMii  is  T«geB^AdL\n.  ii!^.^SoA  ifi(»»»» 
zcept  the  la»t. 


5«0  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

7  Do  thou  bestow  upon  us  her,  0  Indra,  who  yields  aooording  to 
the  singer's  longing, 
That  the  great  Cow  may,  with  exhaustless  udder,  pouring  a 
thousand  streams,  give  milk  to  feed  us. 

HYMN  CXXXIV.  Indra. 

As,  like  the  Morning,  thou  hast  filled,  0  Indra,  both  the  earth 

and  heaven. 
So  as  the  Mighty  One,  qreat  King  of  all  the  mighty  world  of 

men,  the  Goddess  Mother  brought  thee  forth,  the  BlessM 

Mother  gave  thee  life. 

2  Relax  that  mortal's  stubborn  strength  whose  heart  is  bent  on 

wickedness. 
Trample  him  down  beneath  thy  feet  who  watches  for  and  aims 
at  us.     The  Goddess  Mother  brought  thee  forth,  eta 

3  Shake  down,  0  Slayer  of  the  foe,  those  great  all-splendid  enei^ies. 
With  all  thy  powers,  0  Sakra,  all  thine  helps,  0  Indra,  shake 

them  down ; 

4  As  thou,  0  Satakratu,  thou,  0  Indra,  shakest  all  things  down 
As  wealth  for  him  who  sheds  the  juice,  with  thine  assistance 

thousandfold. 

5  Around,  on  every  side  like  drops  of  sweat  let  lightning-flashes 

fall. 
Let  all  malevolence  pass  away  from  us  like  threads  of  Durva 
grass. 

6  Thou  bearest  in  thine  hand  a  lance  like  a  long  hook,  great 

Counsellor  ! 

As  with  his  foremost   foot  a  goat,  draw  down  the   branch,  0 
Maghavan. 

7  Never,  0  Gods,  do  we  offend,  nor  are  we  ever  obstinate :  we 

walk  as  holy  texts  command. 
Closely  we  clasp  and  cling  to  you,  cling  to  your  sides,  beneath 
your  arms. 

7  The  great  Cow :  probably  the  Earth.  ^ 

1  The  Ooddeas  Motlier :  Aditu    The  refrain  is  repeated  in  all  the  stansu 
except  the  last. 

3  Bnergies :  influences  in  the  shape  of  rain  and  sunlight. 

4  Satahratu :  or,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers. 

5  J)drvd grass:  Pan\cumI>act3\oii\  t^a^^\««^l  \)«at^ass  whose  filaQenti  t 
$irQt4:h  horizoutally  away  irom  t^ie  a\Am,  i 

6  l%e  branch:  that  ia  loaded mVii ItuVc iot  >sa. 


BTMN  135.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  681 

HYMN  CXXXV.  Yama. 

In  the  Tree  clothed  with  goodly  leaves  where  Yama  drinketh 

with  the  Gods, 
The  Father,  Master  of  the  house,  tendeth  with  love  our  an-* 

cient  Sires. 

2  I  looked  reluctantly  on  him  who  cherishes  those  men  of  old, 
On  him  who  treads  that  evil  path,  and  then  I  yearned  for 

this  again. 

3  Thou  mountest,  though  thou  dost  not  see,  0  Child,  the  new  / 

and  wheel-less  car 
Which  thou  hast  fashioned  mentally,  one-poled  but  turning 
every  way. 

4  The  car  which  thou  ha^t  made  to  roll  hitherward  from  the 

Sages,  Child ! 
This  hath  the  Salman  followed  close,  hence,  laid  together  on  a  ship. 

5  Who  was  the  father  of  the  child  ?  Who  made  the  chariot  roll 

away? 
Who  will  this  day  declare  to  us  how  the  funereal  gift  was  made  1 

6  When  the  funereal  gift  was  placed,  straightway  the  point  of 

flame  appeared. 
A  depth  extended  in  the  front :  a  passage  out  was  made  behind 

7  Here  is  the  seat  where  Yama  dwells,  that  which  is  called  the 

Home  of  Gods : 
Here  minstrels  blow  the  flute  for  him :  here  he  is  glorified 
with  songs. 


1  The  Tree :  where  the  spirits  of  the  pious  dead  rest  after  their  labours. 
The  Foither :  Tama. 

2  The  spirit  of  the  dead  child  speaks.  /  yearned  for  this :  to  return  to 
the  world  of  life. 

3  Yama  speaks.  Ftuhioned  mentally :  figuratively  prepared  by  being  burnt 
on  the  funeral  pile. 

5  Ship:  meaning,  apparently,  the  funeral  pile.  The  funereal  gift:  the 
meaning  of  anud&yi  is  uncertain.  *  Restitution  .'—Wilson.  *  Surrender*  or 
*  delivery/  according  to  Prof.  Zimmer.     Stanzas  5 — 7  are  spoken  by  t  he  poet. 

6  A  depth :  the  meaning  is  obscure.  Passage  out :  probably  for  the  removal 
of  the  ashes. 

The  subject  of  the  hymn  appears  to  be  the  funeral  ctremony  of  a  boy 
{kwmdra,  said  by  some  to  be  the  name  of  a  man).  According  to  the  legend 
cited  by  Sftyana  a  youth  named  Nachiketas  was  sent  by  his  father  to  the 
kingdom  of  Tama  who  treated  him  kindly  and  allowed  ^him  to  return  to  this 
world.  '  The  hymn  is  made  throughout  applicable  \^Aditya  as  well  as  to 
Yama,  with,  if  possible,  a  still  greater  degree  of  obscurity.  It  seems  to  have 
been  the  basis  of  the  discussion  in  the  Taittiriya  Br&hmana  (J.II,lt«%N^!c^^ 
in  the  Kathd  Up&niabad,  respecting  what  becomes  ol\^i<&  VQviX^l&X'^  ^^iRl^>\&^ 
di»loguea  between  JfacAikeUu  and  Yama.*— ^i\bou» 


582  TffE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  CXXXVI.  Ke«in». 

He  with  the  long  loose  locks  supports  Agni,  and  moisture, 

heaven,  and  earth : 
He  18  all  skjr  to  look  upon  :  he  with  long  hair  is  called  this 

light. 

2  The  Munis,  girdled  with  the  wind,  wear  garments  soiled  of 

yellow  hue. 
They,  following  the  wind's  swift  course  go  where  the  Gods 
have  gone  before. 

3  Transported  with  our  Munihood  we  have  pressed  on  into  the 

winds: 
You  therefore,  mortal  men,  behold  our  natural  bodies  and 
no  more. 

4  The  Muni,  made  associate  in  the  holy  work  of  every  Grod, 
Looking  apon  all  varied  forms  flies  through  the  region  of  the  air. 

5  The  Steed  of  V4ta,  Y^yu's  friend,  the  Muni^  by  the  Gods 

impelled^ 
In  both  the  oceans  hath  his  home,  ia  eastern  and  in  western  sea. 

6  Treading  the  path  of  sylvan  beasts^  Gandharvas,  and  Ap* 

sarases, 
He  with  long  locks,  who  knows  the  wish,  is  a  sweet  most 
delightful  friend. 

7  Vayu  hath  churned  for  him:  for  him  he  poundeth  things 

most  hard  to  bend, 
When  he  with  long  loose  locks  hath  drunk,  with  Rudra,  water 
from  the  cup. 


The  Kesins,  Jcefinah,  wearers  of  long  loose  hair,  are  Agoi,  V&yu,  and  SArya. 
Each  stanza  has  for  its  Rishi  one  of  the  seren  sous  of  V&tarasana.    See  Index  ' 
of  Hymns. 

1  He  with  the  long  loote  locht :  probably  the  ascetic,  the  Muni  or  Yogi. 
According  to  S&yana,  the  radiant  Sun.  Moiiture :  visham,  usually  meaniug 
*  poison '  is  so  explained  in  this  place. 

2  Munis :  ascetics  inspired  or  in  a  state  of  ecstasy.  Girdled  with  the  wind : 
exposed  without  girdles  to  the  wind.  According  to  SAyana,  sons  of  Vita- 
rasana,  or  Wind-Girdled. 

5  In  both  the  oceans :  everywhere  in  the  firmament  from  its  eastern  to  its 
western  extremity. 

'  The  hymn  shows  the  conception  that  by  a  life  of  sanctity  the  Muni  can 
attain  to  the  fellowship  of  the  deities  of  the  air,  the  V&yus,  the  Rudras,  the 
Apsarasas,  and  the  Gandharvas  ;  and,  furnished  like  them  with   wonderful 

powers,  can  travel  along  with  them  on  their  course The  beautiful-haired, 

the  long-haired,  that  is  to  say,  the  Muni,  who  daring  the  time  of  his  austeri- 
ties does  not  shave  his  hair,  upholds  fire,  moisture,   heaven,  and  earth,  and 
reaemhleB  the  world  ot  light,  \deaa  "w\»<i\i  \Ai«W«£\\\fsci^siax^vk  Vaae^«lY   coo- 
teins.  '—Von  Roth,  quoted  by  Br.  ^fijoir,  0.  S.  TtxU,\^ .  ^\^^^5iBAM\ssQ.\^«c8^^ 
tnoBliterAted  and  translated  on  i^^«  V^^* 


BYMN 138.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  588 

^  HYMN  CXXXVII,  ViBvedevae. 

Yb  Gods,  raise  up  oiice  mor«  the  man  whom  ye  have  humbled 
and  brought  low. 

0  Gods,  restore  to  life  again  the  man  who  hath  committed  sin. 

2  Two  several  winds  are  blowing  here,  from  Siiidhu,   from  a 

distant  land. 
May  one  breathe  energy  to  thee,  the  other  blow  disease  away. 

3  Hither,  0  Wind,  blow  healing  balm,   blow  all  disease  away, 

thou  Wind; 
For  thou  who  hast  all  medicine  com  est  as  envoy  of  the  Gods. 

4  I  am  come  nigh  to  thee  with  balms  to  give  thee  re:it  and  keep 

thee  safe. 

1  bring  thee  blessM  strength,  I  drive  thy  weakening  malady  away. 

•5  Here  let  the  Gods  deliver  him,  the  Maruts'  band  deliver  him  : 
All  things  that  be  deliver  him  that  he  be  freed  from  his  disease. 

4  The  Waters  have  their  healing  power,  the  Waters  diive  disease 
away. 
The  Waters  have  a  balm  for  all :  let  them  make  medicine  for  thee. 

7  The  tongue  that  leads  the  voice  precedes.    Then  with  our  ten- 
fold-branching hands, 
With  these  two  chasers  of  disease  we  stroke  thee  with  a  gentle 
touch. 

HYMN  CXXXVIIL  Indra. 

Allied  with  thee  in  friendship,  Indra,  these  thy  priests,  re- 
membering Holy  Law,  rent  Vritra  limb  from  limb, 

When  they  bestowed  the  Dawns  and  let  the  waters  flow,  and 
when  thou  didst  chastise  dragons  at  Kutsa's  call. 

2  Thou  seutest  forth  productive  powers,  clavest  the  hills,  thou 
dravest  forth  the  kiue,  thou  drankest  pleasant  meath. 
Thou  gavest  increase  through  this  Tree's  surpassing  might. 
The  Sun  shone  by  the  hymn  that  sprang  from  Holy  Law. 

Each  «taii2*  is  ascribed  to  one  of  the  seven  great  Rishis.  See  Index  of 
Hymns.  The  hymn  is  a  charm  to  restore  a  sick  man  to  health.  Cf.  Hymns  of 
4ht  Aiharva-vtddf  IV.  13. 

1  Who  hath  eetnmitted  sin :  sickness  and  death  being  regarded  as  the  conse- 
quence of  sin. 

2  Sindhu :  or,  ocean. 

4  The  Wind  speaks.  Weakening  malady :  yakshma  may  he  sickness  in  gene- 
ral, or  the  name  of  a  large  class  of  diseases,  probably  of  a  consumptive  nature. 

7  The  stanza  is  important  as  showing  that  the  Indians  employed  touches 
or  laying-oo  of  hands  to  relieve  suffering  or  to  restore  health.    Cp.  X.  60.  12. 

1  Thypritstt:  the  Angirases.    But  see  Vedie  Hymns,  I.   p.   44.     Didst 
^hcutite:  this  clause  ia  very  difficult.  I  adopt  P  rot.  QttQAaxxi^\iv^^\^!^J«t^Ts^a^^^^ 
j2  Tkit  Tree's  eurpamng  mighX :  the  power  ol  \.\ift  Va^csfc  ^i  \iXv^^swaa»^^^ 


5S4  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

3  III  the  mid- way  of  heaven  the  Sun  unyoked  his  car :  the  Arya 

found  a  lUMtch  to  meet  his  DsUa  foe. 
Aiisiociate'  with  Rijisvan  India  overthrew  the  solid  forts  of 
Pipru,  conjuriijg  Aiiura. 

4  He  boldly  cast  down    forts  which   none  had  e'er  assailed  :   un- 

wearied he  destroyed  the  godless  treasure-stores. 
Like  Sun  and  Moon  he  took  the  stronghold's  wealth  away,  aud, 
praised  in  song,  demolished  foes  with  flashing  dart. 

5  Armed  with  resistless  weopons,   with  vast  power  to  cleave,  the 

Vritra-slayer  whets  hia  darts  and  deals  forth  wounds. 
Bright  Ushas  was  afraid  of  Indra's  slaughtering  bolt  :  she  went 
upon  her  way  and  left  her  chariot  there. 

6  These  are  thy  famous  exploits,  only  thine,  when  thou  alone 

hast  left  the  other  reft  of  sacrifice. 

Thou  in  the  heavens  hast  set  the  ordering  of  the  Moons  ;  the 
Father  bears  the  felly  portioned  out  by  thee. 

HYMN  CXXXIX.  SaTitar. 

Savitar,  golden-haired,  hath  lifted  eastward,  bright  with  the 
sunbeams,  his  eternal  lustre; 

He  in  whose  energy  wise  Pushan  marches,  surveying  all  exist- 
ence like  a  herdsman. 

2  Beholding  men  he  sits  amid  the  heavens,  filling  the  two  world- 

halves  and  air's  wide  region. 
He  looks  upon  the  rich  far-spreading  pastures  between  the 
eastern  and  the  western  limit. 

3  He,  root  of  wealth,  the  gatherer-up  of  treasures,  looks  with 

his  might  on  eserj  form  and  figure. 
S.ivitar,  like  a  God  whose  Law  is  constant,  stands  in  the  battle 
for  the  spoil  like  Indra. 

4  Waters  from  sacrifice  came  to  the  Gandharva  Visvavasu,  O 

Soma,  when  they  saw  him. 
Indra,  approaching  quickly,  marked  their  going,  and  looked 
around  upon  the  Sun's  enclosures. 

o  Unyoked  kU  ciir :  the  allu-im  in.  perhaps,  t,o  an  eclipse,  or  a  detention 
of  the  Sun  to  enable  the  Aryan-*  to  complere  the  overthrow  of  their  eneruiej*. 
Bijuran :  a  pious  worshipper  befriended  by  Indra,  Pipru:  a  demon  of 
drought.     See  Vol.  I.,  Index. 

5  Hright  Uekas  was  afraid:  see  II.  15.  6,  IV.  30.  8 — 11,  and  X.  78.  6. 

t)  The  other:  thy  foe,  the  demon  or  RAkshnsa.  The  Father:  Dyaua  or 
Heaven.  The  felly  portioned  oat  by  thee :  the  course  of  the  Moon  through 
the  asterisms,  which  thou  hast  arianged. 

ti  Pastures :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.     Sftyana  supplies  *  quarters 
of  Hpflce  ; '  Ludwig  *  ladles  ; '  and  Qrassraann  *  pastures.' 
4  Waters  :  used  in  the  prepar&txoTi  ol  \.\v«i  ^xaa.  V»s»«    Tk*  Gan<^arva  : 
reffarded  as  the  custodian  oi  t\ie  ce\ea\-U\  ^oxq»..    Tlw.  ^>».\C  %  t^vd^«v».Y^  .  *  Six^ 
rima  of  the  sun/ — 'Wilaou. 


HYMN  140.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  585 

5  This  son?  Visvavasu  shall  sing  us,  meter  of  air's  mid-realm, 

celestial  (^andharva, 
That  we  may  know  aright  both  truth  and  falsehood  :  may  he 
inspire  our  thoughts  and  help  our  praises. 

6  In  the  floods*  track  he  found  the   booty-seeker:    the  rocky 

cow-pen's  doors  he  threw  wide  open. 
These,  the  Gandharva  told  him,  flowed  with  Amrit.     Indra 
knew  well  the  puissance  of  the  dragons. 

HYMN  CXL.  Agni. 

Agni,  life-power  and  fame  are  thine  :  thy  fires  blaze  mightily, 

thou  rich  in  wealth  of  beams ! 
Sajie,  passing  bright,  thou  givest  to  the  worshipper,  with 

strength,  the  food  that  merits  laud. 

2  With  brilliant,  purifying  sheen,  with  perfect  sheen  thou  liftest 

up  thyself  in  light. 
Thou,  visiting  both  thy  Mothers,  aidest  them  as  Son :  thou 
joinest  close  the  earth  and  heaven. 

3  0  JUtavedas,  Son  of  Strength,  rejoice  thyself,  gracious,  in  our 

fair  hymns  and  songs. 
In  thee  are  treasured  various  forms  of  strengthening   food, 
born  nobly  and  of  wondrous  help. 

4  Agni,  spread  forth,  as  Ruler,  over  living  things:  give  wealth 

to  us.  Immortal  God. 
Thou  shinest  out  from  beauty  fair  to  look  upon :  thou  leadest 
us  to  conquering  power. 

5  To  him,  the  wise,  who  orders  sacrifice,  who  hath  great  riches 

under  his  control, 
Thou  givest  blest  award  of  good,  and  plenteous  food,  givest 
him  wealth  that  conquers  all. 

6  The  men  have  set  before  them  for  their  welfare  Agni,  strong, 

visible  to  all,  the  Holy. 
Thee,  Godlike  One,  with  ears  to   hear,    most   famous,   men's 
generations  magnify  with  praise-songs. 

<—  - _  -  -■  ■  -  - 

5  ViivAvam :  the  celestial  Gandharva,  here  the  Sun-God.  He :  Visvavasu. 
The  hooty-ieeker :  Indra  who  sought  to  win  the  waters.  Of  the  aragout  *  the 
serpent-demons  who  obstructed  the  floods  of  heaven.  The  last  three  stanzas 
are  very  difficult  and  obscure.  See  Hillebrandt,  V.  M,,  I.  pp.  436,  437,  and 
Ludwig,  Ueberdie  neuesten  A,  u.  9.  to.,  p.  101. 

2  Thy  Mothers :  Heaven  and  Earth.     Joinest  close  :  or,  fillest  full. 
5  To  him :  to  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice. 

See  the  expoaition  of  the  hymn  in   SiitapothA  Brd1wwxua,NW.^%'V»*i^— ^^ 
{Sacred  £ook9  of  the  £aat,  XH  349—351). 


S8€  TSE  STMNS  OF  IBOOK  X 

HYMN  CXLI.  Visved^vas. 

• 

TuKN  hither,  Agni,  speak  to  us :  come  to   us  with  a  gracious 

tnind. 
Eurich  us,  Master  of  the  house  ?  thou  art  the  Giver  of  our 

wealth. 

2  Let  Aryaman  vouchsafe  as  wealth,  and  Bhaga,  and  Brihaspati. 
Let  the  Gods  give  their  gifts,  and  let  Sduritll,  Goddess,   grant 
us  wealth. 

Z  We  eall  King  Soma  to  our  aid,  and  Agni  with  our  songs  and 
hymns, 
Adityas,  Vishnu,  Siirya,  and  the  Brahman  Priest  BrihaspatL 

4  Indra,  Vayu,  Brihaspati,  Gods  swift  to  listen,  we  invoke, 
That  in  the  synod  all  th«  folk  may  be  benevolent  to  us. 

5  Urge  Aryaman  to  send  us  gifts,  and  Indra,  and  Brihaspati, 
Vslta,  Visiinu,  Sarasvati  and  the  Strong  Courser  Savitar. 

6  Do  thou,  0  Agai,  with  thy  fires  strengthen  our  prayer  and 

sacrifice : 
Urge  givers  to  bestow  their  wealth  to  aid  our  senriee  'of  the 
Gods.  X 

HYMN  CXLIL  Agni. 

With  thee,  0  Agni,  was  this  singer  of  the  laud  :  he  hath  no 

other  kinship,  0  thou  Son  of  Strength. 
Thou  givest  blessed  shelter  with   a  triple  guard.     Keep  the 

destructive  lightning  far  away  from  u& 

2  Thy  birth  who  seekest  food  is  in  the  falling  flood,    Agni ;  as 

Comrade  thou  win  nest  all  living  things. 
Our  coursers  and  our  songs  shall  be  victorious :  they  of  them- 
selves advance  like  one  who  guards  the  herd. 

3  And  thou,  0  Agni,  thou  of  Godlike  nature,  sparest  the  stones, 

while  eating  up  the  brushwood. 
Then  are  thy  tracks  like  deserts  in  the  corn -lands.  Let  us  not 
stir  to  wrath  thy  mighty  arrow. 

4  O'er  hills,  through  vales  devouring  as  thou  goest,  thou  partest 

like  an  army  fain  for  booty. 
As  when  a  barber  shaves  a  beard,    thou  shavest  earth  when 
the  wind  blows  on  thy  flame  and  fans  it. 

5  Apparent  are  his  lines  as  he  approaches :  the  course  is  single, 

but  the  cars  are  many. 


2  SdnriCd  :  Pleaaantneaa  *,  Ci:\«A\i«aa,  -^etwyoS.^^.  CI*  L  40.  3. 
3  Sparest  the  atone*  ;  see  Piac\ie\,  VeducKeSVttA^etvA.^^^^.^^.V^V'^^  ^ 


S7MN  148.]  TEE  RIQVEDA.  587 

When,  Agni,  thou,  making  thine  arms  respleident,  advancest 
o'er  the  land  spread  out  beneath  thee. 

6  Now  let  thy  strength,  thy  burning  flames  fly  upward,   thine 

energies,  0  Agni,  as  thou  toilest. 
Gape  widely,  bend  thee,  waziug   in  thy  yigcur :  let  all   the 
VasuB  sit  this  day  beside  thee. 

7  This  is  the  waters*  reservoir,  the  great  abode  of  gathered  streams. 
Take  thou  another  path  than  this,  and  as  ^ou  listest  walk 

thereon. 

8  On  thy  way  hith^rward  and  henoe  let  flowery  DurvH   grass 

spring  up. 
Let  there  be  lakes  with  lotas  blooms.  These  are  the  mansions 
of  the  flood. 

HYMN  CXLin.  Asvins. 

Ye  made  that  Atri,  worn  with  eld,  free  as  a  hcrse  to  win  the  goal. 
When  ye  restored  to  youth  and  strength  Eikshivsln  like  a  car 
renewed, 

2  Ye  freed  that  Atri  like  a  horse,  and  brought  him  newly-born 

to  earth. 
Ye  loosed  him  like  a  firm-tied  knot  whicti  Gods  unsoiled  by 
dust  had  bound. 

3  Heroes  who  showed  mtost  wondrous  pover  to  Atri,  strive  to 

win  fair  songs; 
For  then,  0  Heroes  of  the  sky,  your  hymn  of  praise  shall 
eease  no  more. 

4  This  claims  your  notice.  Bounteous  Gods ! — oblation,  Asvins  ! 

and  our  love, 
That  ye,  0  Heroes,  in  the  fight  may  bring  us  safe  to  ample  room. 

5  Ye  Twain  to  Bhujyu  tossed  about  in  ocean  at  the  region's  end, 
Nasatyas,  with  your  wingM  steeds  came  nigh,  and  gave  him 

strength  to  win. 

6  Come  with  your  joys,  most  liberal  Gods,  Lords  of  all  treasures, 

bringing  weal. 
Like  fresh  full  waters  to  a  well,  so.  Heroes,  come  and  be  with  us. 

8  Stanzas  7  and  8  seem  to  belong  to  some  other  hymn,  being  a  prayer  to  Agni 
that  he  may  spare  the  speaker's  house  where,  he  says,  there  is  nothing  to  invite 
the  devonring  God.    See  Hymn»  of  the  Athairin-'Hdaj  VI.  106. 

1  Atri:  see  1. 112.  7.  Kakshtvdn:  the  Scholiast  says  that  this  Rishi  was 
originally  dull  of  underatandinr  and  tiiatthe  Asvins  endowed  him  with  know- 
le(^.    Prof.  Ludwig  takes  kcMMvantam  to  be  tsi  %i64«c^'s^  %jigc«AscQS^  ^w^fi^ 
ratkam  :  *Agunye  nmde  him  youthful likea  eYkaaiot\^ka.\^a>it\o^^^^^'<)A^^^ 
^  Bhfvyu:  see  Vol.  L,  ladex. 


588  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

HYMN  CXLIV.  Indra, 

This  deathltss  IndU)  like  a  steed,  strong  and  of  full  vitality, 
Belongs  to  taee,  the  Orderer. 

2  Here,  by  us.  for  the  worshipper,  is  the  wise  bolt  that  works 

with  skill. 
It  brings  the  bubbling  beverage  as  a  dexterous  man  brings  the 
effectual  sTOug  driuk. 

3  Inipetuous  Aiisuva,  a  bull  among  these  cows  of  his, 
Looked  down  upon  the  restless  Hawk. 

4  That  the  stnng'^pinioned  Bird  hath  brought,  Child  of  the 

Falcon,  fran  afar, 
What  moves  ipou  a  hundred  wheels  along  the  female  Dragon's 
path. 

6  Which,  fair,  inrobbed,  the  Falcon  brought  thee  in  his  foot, 
the  red-huec  dwelling  of  the  juice  ; 
Through  this  (ame  vital  power  which  lengthens  out  our  days, 
and  kinship  through  its  help  awoke. 
6  So  Indra  is  by  Indu's  power  :  e*en  among  Gods  will  it  repel 
great  treachery. 
Wisdom,  Most  Sapient  One,  brings  force  that  lengthens  life. 
May  wisdom  bring  the  juice  to  us. 

HYMN  CXLV.  SapatnlbAdhanam. 

From  out  the  earth  I  dig  this  plant,  an  herb  of  most  effectual 

power, 
Wherewith  one  quells  the  rival  wife  and  gains  the  husband 

for  oneself. 


1  Indu :  Soma.     Tkt  Orderer :  disposer  and  arranger  of  the  universe. 

2  Bolt :  the  Vashatkftra,  or  sacrificial  exclamation,  i»  to  the  priests  what 
the  thunderbolt  is  to  Indra. 

3  I  find  this  and  the  following  stanza  unintelligible.  Ahtiuva  in  other 
placHs  is  the  name  of  a  demon  ;  but  the  meaning  here  is  uncertain.  Cows  : 
there  is  no  substantive  to  dsu  sv^su,  *  these  his  own,'  in  the  feminine  gender. 

4  Wh'tt  moves  upon  a  hundred  wheels:  fatdchakram:  *the  beetower  of 
many  boons' — Wilson. 

5  Dwelling  of  the  juice:  the  Soma-plant,  which  the  Falcon  brought  from 
heaven.     See  IV.  26  and  27. 

6  It :  or  he  ;  Indu  or  the  Soma  juice. 

Prof.  Grassmann  places  this  hymn  in  his  Appendix  as  being  in  his  opinion 
made  up  of  fragments.  He  considers  Ahisuva  (stanza  3)  to  be  *  the  aroher 
KrisAnu,'  of  IV.  27.  3  and  other  places,  who  guards  the  celestial  Soma,  and  in- 
stead of  ^ cows'  he  understands  ^ wives.' 

The  hymn  is  a  spell  to  rid  a  jealous  wife  of  a  more  favoured  rivaL    The 
Jiishi  is  Indr&nt,  the  Consort  ot  Indtat. 

*  1  This  plant:  said  to  be  the  PfiitfiL,  ^To\>«.\iVs  \^«^Mvi^  ^v^  "^WQo^  v^Scj^j^^ 
Ht:rnandifoliA),  a  climbing  plant  ^^aaeaam^  n w^xva  m'^^^miJw^x^^ji.^^ 


HYMN  146.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  589 

2  Aaspicious,  with  expanded  leaves,  sent  by  the  Gods,  yictorious 

plant, 
Blow  thou  the  rival  wife  away,  and  make  mj  husband  only  mine. 

3  Stronger  am  I,  0  Stronger  One,  yea,  mightier  than  the  mightier; 
And  she  who  is  my  rival  wife  is  lower  than  the  lowest  dames. 

4  Her  very  name  I  utter  not :  she  takes  no  pleasure  in  this  man. 
Far  into  distance  most  remote  drive  we  the  rival  wife  away. 

5  I  am  the  conqueror,  and  thou,  thou  also  art  victorious : 
As  victory  attends  us  both  we  will  subdue  my  fellow-wife. 

6  I  have  gained  thee  for  vanquisher,  have  grasped  thee  with  a 

stronger  spell. 
As  a  cow  hastens  to  her  calf,  so  let  thy  spirit  speed  to  me, 

hasten  like  water  on  its  way. 

HYMN  CXLVI.  AranyAnl. 

GoDDBSS  of  wild  and  forest  who  seemest  to  vanish  from  the  sight, 
How  is  it  that  thou  seekest  not  the  village?  Art  thou  not  afraid? 

2  What  time  the  grasshopper  replies  and  swells  the  shrill  cicala's 

voice, 
Seeming  to  sound  with  tinkling  bells,  theLady  of  the  Wood  exults. 

3  And,  yonder,  cattle  seem  to  graze,  what  seems  a  dwelling-place 

appears : 
Or  else  at  eve  the  Lady  of  the  Forest  seems  to  free  the  wains. 

4  Here  one  is  calling  to  his  cow,  another  there  hath  felled  a  tree  : 
At  eve  the  dweller  in  the  wood  fancies  that  somebody  hath 

screamed. 

5  The  Goddess  never  slays,  unless  some  murderous  enemy  ap- 

proach. 
Maneatsof  savoury  fruit  and  then  takes,  even  as  he  wills,  his  rest. 

6  Thy  spirit :  the  hasband'a. 

The  deity,  Aranyftnl,  is  the  tutelary  Goddess  of  the  fore**  and  wilderness. 

^  Oratahopper eieala :  the  ehichckikd  is  said  to  be  a  little  creature  that 

eries  ektchi:  and  the  vrishdravd  is  said  to  be  a  sort  of  cricket.  Others  take 
them  to  be  birds  of  some  unascertained  kind. 

3  Cattle  seem  to  graze :  deer  feeding  in  the  glades.  What  teems  a  dwelling- 
place  :  a  natural  bower  of  branches  and  creepers. 

4  Sounds  are  heard  as  of  a  cowman  calling  his  cattle,  or  of  a  woodman  at 
work.  '  We  must  imagine  the  thousund  strange  sounds  and  delusions  which 
seem  to  encompass  the  solitary  listener  of  an  evening  in  the  darkening  forest.' — 
Mme.  Z^naide  Ragosdn,  Vedie  India  (Story  of  the  Nations),  p.  272. 

5  Murderous  enemy :  the  text  has  only  anydh,  *  another,'  by  which,  accord^ 
ing  to  S&yana,  a  tiger  or  robber  is  meant.    Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  th« 
reading  should  be  kanyuh,  '  one  who  is  destined  to  b«  kiUfid.'    Tt^^^X^xs^sO^^^w^ 
been  iraaaUted  by  Dr.  jrfuir,  0,  5.  TexU,  'V.  p.  43^  \  vA.  \s%  '^'^x  "bXiSiQiW^  ^   j 

tlie  Skbingig  I4ed$r  dts  Rignda.  ^ 


590  TffS  BYMNS  OP  [MOOM  X. 

6  Now  have  I  praised  the  Forest  Queen,  sweet-scented,  reddest 
of  balm, 
The  Mother  of  all  sylvan  things,  wiio  tills  not  bnt  hath  stores 
of  food. 

HYMN  CXLVIL  Indn. 

I  TRUST  in  thy  first  wrathful  deed,  0  Indra,  when  thou  slowest 

Vritra  and  didst  work  to  profit  man  ; 
What  tim3  the  two  world-halves  fell  short  of  thee  in  might, 

and  the  earth  trembled  at  thy  force,  0  Thunder-armed. 

2  Thou  with  thy  magic  powers  didst  rend  the  conjurer  Vritra, 

0  Blameless  One,  with  heart  that  Icmged  for  fame. 
Heroes  elect  thee  when  they  battle  for  the  prey,   thee  in  all 
sacrifices  worthy  of  renown. 

3  God  Much-inyoked,  take  pleasure  in  these  princes  here,  who, 

thine  exalters,  Maghavan,  have  come  to  wealth. 
In  synods,  when  the  rite  succeeds,  they  hymn  the  Strong  for 
sons  and  progeny  and  riches  undisturbed. 

4  That  man  shall  find  delight  in  well-protected  wealth   whose 

care  provides  for  him  the  quick-sought  joyous  draught. 
Bringing  oblations,  strengthened,  Maghavan,  by  thee,  he  swift- 
ly wins  the  spoil  with  heroes  in  the  fight. 

5  Now  for  our  band,  0  Maghavan,   when  lauded,  make  ample 

room  with  might,  and  gr^int  us  riches. 
Magician  thou,  our  Varuna  and  Mitra,   deal  food  to  us,  0 
Wondrous,  as  Dispenser. 

HYMN  CXLVIII.  Indra. 

When  we  have  pressed  the  juice  we  laud  thee,  Indra,  and 
when,  Most  Valorous !  we  have  won  the  booty. 

Bring  us  prosperity,  as  each  desires  it :  under  thine  own  pro- 
tection may  we  conquer. 

2  Sublime  from  birth,  mayst  thou  0  Indra,   Hero,  with  Siirya 

overcome  the  Dasa  races. 
As  by  a  fountain's  side,  we  bring  the  Soma  that  lay  concealed, 
close-hidden  in  the  waters. 

3  Answer  the  votary's  hymns,  for  these  thou  knowest,    craving 

the  Rishis'  prayer,  thyself  a  Singer. 
May  we  be  they  who  take  delight  in  Somas  :  these  with  sweet 
food  for  thee,  0  Chariot-rider. 


3  Princes :  the  S{iris,  the  wealthy  institutors  of  the  sacrifice.    The  Strong  : 
thee,  the  mighty  Indra. 

3  TAete  with  stoeet  food :  '  iheee  ^^maoA  «x^  (^^«s«.^^\^  ^.^.^xS&Kv^^fvua&ih, 
—WilsoD, 


HYMN  149.]  TBZ  RIGVEDA.  5W 

4  These  boly  prayers,  0  Indra,  have  I  sung  tfiee :  grant  to  the 

men  the*  strength  of  ni^n,  thou  Hero. 
Be  of  one  mind  with  those  in  whom  thou  joyest :  keep  thow 
the  singers  safe  and  their  companions. 

5  Listen  to^  Pritbl's  call,  heroic  Indra,  and  be  thou  lauded  by 

the  hymns  of  Venya, 

Him  who  bath  sung  thee  to  thine  oil-^ich  dwelling,  whose  roir 
ling  soQgs  have  sped  thee  like  a  torrent. 

HYMN  CXLIX.  Sayitar; 

Savitar  filed  the  earth  with  bands  to  bind  it,  and  made  heayen 
stedfast  where  no  prop  supported. 

Savitar  milked,  as  'twere  a  restless  courser,  air,  sea  bound  fast 
to  what  no  foot  had  trodden. 

2  Well  knoweth  Savitary  0  Child  of  Waters,  where-  ocean,  firmly 

fixt,  overflowed  its  limit. 

Thence  sprang  the  world,  from  that  uprose  the  region :  thence- 
beaven  spread  out  and  the  wide  earth  expanded. 

5  Then»  with  a  full  crowd  of  Immortal  Beings,  this  other  realm 
came  later,  high  and  holy^ 

First,  verily,  Savitar^s  strong-pinioned   £agle  was  born  r  and 
he  obeys  his  law  for  ever. 

4  As  warriors  to  their  steeds,  kine  to  their  village,  as  fond  milk- 

giving  cows  approach  their  youngling. 

As  man  to  wife,  let  Savitar  come  downwaid   to  us,    heaven's 
bearer,  Lord  of  every  blessing. 

5  Like  the  A  ngirasa  Hiranyastiipa,  I  call  thee,  Savitar,   to  this 

achievement : 

So  worshipping  and  lauding  thee  for  favour  I  watch  for  thee 
as  for  the  stalk  of  Soma. 

4  Companions :  or,  dependents. 

5  PrithVt  call:  the  invocation  of  Prithn,  tbe  Bisbi  of  the  hymn,  according 
to  Sftyana.  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  that  Prithu's  wife  is  intended.  Vtnya : 
Prithi,  son  of  Vena. 

1  To  what  no  foot  had  trodden  :  atttrte :  *  to  the  indestructible  (ether).' — 
Wilson. 

3  Eagle :  identified  by  Sftyana  with  Tftrkshya,  brother  of  Garuda,  who  brought 
the  Soma  from  the  Moon  at  Savitar's  command. 

5  Angirata :    a  descendant  of  the  Angirases.    Achievement:  vdje:  food, 
according  to  Sftjana,  i.  e,  •blatioa*    Xaiiding :  drcKan  :  ox, \^  (ixOcAsoL^Vtsusraot* 
lag  thee  to  win  thy  favour. 


6^2  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I. 

HYMN  CL.  Agnl 

Thou,  bearer  of  oblations,  though  kindled,  art  kindled  for  the 
Gods. 

With  the  Aditjas,  Budras,  Yasus,  come  to  us ;  to  show  us  fif^ 
vour  come  to  us. 

2  Come  hither  and  accept  with  joy  this  sacrifice  and  hymn  of  onrs. 
0  kiniiled  God,  we  mortals  are  iavoking  thee,  calling   on  thee 

to  show  us  grace. 

3  I  laud  thee  Jatavedas,  thee  Lord  of  .all  blessings,  with  my  song. 
Agni,  bring  hitherward  the  Gods  whose  Laws  we  love,  whose 

Laws  we  love,  to  show  us  grace. 

4  Agiii  the  God  was  made  the  great  High-Priest  of  Gods,  Rishis 

have  kindled  Agai,  men  of  mortal  mould. 
Agiii  I  invocate  for  wiuuiug  ample  wealth,  kindly  disposed  for 
winning  wealth. 

5  Atri  and  Bharadv&ja  and  Gavisbthira,  Kai^iva  and  Trasadasyu, 

in  our  fight  he  helped. 
On  Agni  calls  Vasishtha,  even  the  household  priest,  the  house- 
hold priest  to  win  his  grace. 

HYMN  CLI.  Faith, 

By  Faith  is  Agni  kindled,  throngh  Faith  is  oblation  offered  up. 
We  celebrate  with  praises  Faith  upon  tbe  height  of  happiness. 

2  Bless  thou  the  man  who  gives,  0  Faith ;  Faith,  bless  the  man 

who  fain  would  give. 
Bless  thou  the  liberal  worshippers  :  bless  thou  the  word    that 
1  have  said. 

3  Kven  as  the  Deities  maintained  Faith  in  the  mighty  Asuras, 
So  make  this  uttered  wish  of  mine  true  for   the   liberal    wor- 
shippers. 

4  Guarded  by  Vayu,  Gods  and  men  who  sacrifice  draw  near  to 

Faith. 
Man  winneth  Faith  by  yearnings  of  the  heart,   and  opulence 
by  Faith. 

1  Though  kindled :  although  thou  art  already  bnruing  fresh  fire  is  added  to 
thee.  To  show  us  favour:  mriltkStya:  thia  play  upon  the  Rishi's  name  Mrillk* 
is  repeated  in  each  stanza. 

The  Rishi  is  Sraddh4  (Faith)  of  the  family  of  Kftma  (Love). 

1  Upon  the  height  of  happiness  :  *  (who  is  seated)  on  Bhaga's  head.— 
Wilson. 

3  Asuras:  the  primeval  Aryan  Gods,  Dyaua,  Varuna,  and  some  others,  who 
were  venerated  by  Indra  and  otVifttltiOlo-Kx'swi  ^^^\«a  i;A.^\bNA\:  ^^^a^iaw. 
4  Cfuarded  by  Vdyu :  the  mefioom^  \a  uox.  <i\w«. 


MTilN  154.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  ,  593 

5  Faith  in  the  early  morning,  Faith  at  noonday  will  we  invocate, 
Faith  at  the  setting  of  the  Sun.   O  Faith,  endow  us  with  belief. 

HYM>^   CLII.  Indra. 

A  MIGHTY  Governor  art  thou,  Wondrous,  Destroyer  of  the  foe, 
Whose  frieni  is  never  done  to  death,  and  never,  never  overcome. 

2  Lord  of  the  clan,  who  brings  us  bliss.  Strong,  Warrior,  Slayer 

of  the  fiend, 
May  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  go  before  us,  Bull  who  gives  uspeace. 

3  Drive  R&kshasas  and  foes  away,  break  thou  in  pieces  Vritra's jaws: 
O  Vritra-slaying  Indra,  quell  the  foeman's  wrath  who  threat- 
ens us. 

4  O  Indra^  beat  our  foes  away,  humble  the  men  who  challenge  us  : 
Send  dowu  to  nether  darkness  him  who  seeks  to  do  us  injury. 

5  Baffle  the  foeman's  plan,  ward  off  his  weapon  who  would  con- 

quer us. 
Give  shelter  from  his  furious  wrath,  and  keep  his  murdering 

dart  afar. 

HYMN  CLIII.  Indra. 

SwATiNG  about,  the  Active  Ones  came  nigh  to  Indra  at  his  birth. 
And  shared  his  great  heroic  might. 

2  Based  upon  strength  and  victory  and  power,  0  Indra  is  thy  birth  : 
Thou,  Mighty  One,  art  strong  indeed. 

3  Thou  art  the  Vritra-slayer,  thou,  Indra,  hast  spread  the  firma- 

ment : 
Thou  hast  with  might  upheld  the  heavens. 

4  Thou,  Indra,  bearest  in  thine  arms  the  lightning  that  accords 

with  thee, 
Whetting  thy  thunderbolt  with  might. 

5  Thou,  Indra,  art  preeminent  over  all  creatures  in  thy  might : 
Thou  hast  pervaded  every  place. 

/  HYMN  CLIV.  New  Life. 

For  some  is  Soma  purified,  some  sit  by  sacrificial  oil : 
To  those  for  whom  the  meath  flows  forth,  even  to  those  let 
him  depart. 

1  The  Active  Ones :  the  Water-GkxidesseB  may  be  meant.     The  CooBorts  of 
the  Gods,  accordiniif  to  Sftyana. 

2  Thou,  Mighty  One :  or.  '*  0  Bull,  tbou  art  a  Bull  indeed.'  *Thou,  0  hero, 
art  indeed  a  hero*. — Max  Mtiller. 

4  Lightning:  or,  praise-song.  hymn.    S&yaita  explains  aribam  hereby  ttu- 
tyam  •*  thy  laudable  or  adorable  thunderbolt. 

The  Rishi  of  this  luneral  hymn  la  Yamt«  sister  oi  Yaii&i.. 

i  To  thoie  let  him  depart :  let  the  spirit  oi  tVie  d^udi  ^q  \.o  VXi<^  "tv^fitx^  tK.*<^^ 

38 


694  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X 

2  lavincible  throngh   Fervour,  those  wIkhh  Fervour  hath  ad- 
vanced to  heaven. 
Who  showed  great  Fervour  in  their  lives, — even  to  those  lelf 
liim  depart. 
'6  The  heroes  who  contend  in  war  and  boldly  cast  their  lives  awaj, 
Or  who  give  guerdon  thousandfold, — even  to  those  let  him 
depart. 

4  Yea,  the  first  followers  of  Law,  Law*s  pure  and  holy  strengtheners, 
The  Fathers,  Yama  1  Fervour-moved, — even  to  those  let  him 

depart. 

5  Skilled  in  a  thousand  ways  and  means,  the  sage»  who  protect 

the  Sun, 
The  Rishis,  Yama  I    Fervour-moved, — even  to  those  let  him 
depart. 

HYMN  CLV.  VariouB. 

ArayJ,  one-eyed  limping  hag,  fly,  ever-sereecbing,  to  the  hill. 
We  frighten  thee  away  with  these,  the  heroes  of  Sirimbitha. 

2  Scared  from  this  place  and  that  is  she,  destroyer  of  each  germ 

unborn. 
Go,  sharp-homed  Brahmanaspati  and  drive  Ai*&yi  far  away. 

3  Yon  log  that  floats  without  a  man  to  guide  it  on  the  rivers 

edge,— 
Seize  it,  thou  thing  with  hideous  jaws,  and  go  thou  far  away 
thereon. 

4  When,  foul  with  secret  stain  and  spot,  ye  hastened  onward  to 

the  breast. 
All  Indra's  enemies  were  slain  and  passed  away  like  froth 
and  foam. 


blesBe<l,  to  the  Father*  who  receive  offerings  of  Soma  juice  and  clarified  bat- 
ter. Meath :  according  to  S4yana,  honey,  wWch  la  offered  to  the  spirits  of  their 
ancestors  by  students  of  the  Atharva-veda,  Soma  juice  and  ghritdm  or  clarified 
butter  (sacrificial  oil)  being  offered,  respectively,  by  students  of  the  SAmaveda 
and  Yjijurveda. 

2  Fervour:  tdpas:  literally,  warmth,  heat;  religious  ferrour,  asceticism, 
austerity,  self-denial  and  abstracted  meditation. 

4  Fei^our-moved :  or,  Penance-rich ;  filled  full  of  religious  austerity. 

5  Who  protect  the  Sun  :  see  Muir  0.  S.  T.,  V.  319. 

The  hymn  has  been  translated  by  Dr.  J.  Muir,  0.  S,  Textt,  V.  p.  310,  and 
by  Prof.  Zimmer,  AUindisches  Xe5en,  p.  4Id. 

The  subject  or  object  of  the  hymn  is  the  averting  or  removal  of  misfortune. 

1  Ardyt :  *  the  stingy;  *  one  of  a  class  of  malevolent  she-fiends.  Evtr'8crtech- 
ing  :  according  to  S^yana'a  explanation  of  saddnve  ;  according  to  others  '  alli- 
ed with  DAnns,  D&navas,  or  demona.'     Sirimbitha :  the  Rishi  of  tha  hymn. 

2  Sharp-hm-ned :  armed  with  piercing  rays  of  light. 

4  The  meaning  of  this  atania  \a  eot  c\ew.    Manv4<^T«^fcAjw^\\  kdA  h^by/k- 
daf/rfajiv^h  are  difficult  worda  that  do  not  ow>w  i^b»s^ 


BTMN 157.]  TEB  RIGVEDA.  696 

5  These  men  have  led  about  the  cow,  have  duly  carried  Agni 
^      round, 

And  raised  their  glory  to  the  Gods.     Who  will  attack  them 
with  success  ? 

HYMN  CLVI.  Agni. 

Let  songs  of  ours  speed  Agni  forth  like  a  fleet  courser  in  the  race, 
V    Aud  we  will  win  each  prize  through  him. 

2  Agni,  the  dart  whereby  we  gain  kine  for  ourselves  with  help 

from  thee, — 
That  send  us  for  the  gain  of  wealth. 

3  0  Agni,  bring  us  wealth  secure,  vast  wealth  in  horses  and  in  kine: 
Oil  thou  the  socket,  turn  the  wheel. 

4  0  Agni,  thou  hast  made  the  Sun,  Eternal  Star,  to  mount  the 

sky. 
Bestowing  light  on  living  men. 

5  Thou,  Agni,  art  the  people's  light,  best,  dearest,  seated  in 

thy  shrine  : 
Watch  for  the  singer,  give  him  life. 

HYMN  CLVII.  Visvedevas. 

Wb  will,  with  Indra  and  all  Gods  to  aid  us,  bring  these   exist- 
ing worlds  into  subjection. 

2  Our  sacrifice,  our  bodies,  and  our  offspring,  let  Indra  form  to- 

gether with  Adityas. 

3  With  the  Adityas,  with  the  band  of  Maruts,  may   Indra  be 

Protector  of  our  bodies. 

4  As  when  the   Gods   came,  after   they  had   slaughtered   the 

Asuras,  keeping  safe  their  Godlike  nature, 

5  Brought  the  Sun  hither  ward  with  mighty  powers,  and  looked 

about  them  on  their  vigorous  Godhead. 

5  These  men :  the  text  has  only  imS^  '  these.'  According  to  Sftyana,  the 
Visvedevas  are  meant,  who  have  brought  back  the  stolen  cattle.  But  the 
reference  is  probably  to  the  sacrifice  which  the  priests  are  performing. 

2  The  dart :  '  that  army.*— Wilson. 

3  Turn  the  wheel :  I  adopt  the  reading  of  the  Simaveda,  pavim,  instead  of 
panim.  According  to  the  text,  the  rendering  would  be :  '  Balm  heaven  and 
drive  the  Pani  hence.  

The  first  three  verses  of  this  hymn  were  recited  at  the  Asvamedha  or  Hone- 
Sacrifice. 

5  Sftyana  explains  the  second  half  of  the  st&taa  diffecoQlVj  \— ^  >^t«3iLV;fiRc^v 
beheld  around  them  the  swift  desoen^ng  rua,*-— ^i^aoiu 


8^a  THB  H7MN8  OF  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  CLVIII.  Sflryi. 

MATSarya  guard  us  out  of  heaven,  and  YUta  from  the  firmament, 
And  Agni  from  terrestrial  spots. 

2  Thou  Savitar  whose  flame  deserves  hundred  libations,  be  thou 

pleased : 
From  falling  lightning  keep  us  safe. 

3  May  Savitar  the  God,  and  may  Parvata  also  give  us  sight : 
May  the  Creator  give  us  sight. 

4  Give  sight  unto  our  eye,  give  thou  our  bodies  sight  that  they 

may  see  : 
May  we  survey,  discern  this  world. 

5  Thus,  S^rya,  may  we  look  on  thee,  on  thee  most  lovely  to  behold, 
See  clearly  with  the  eyes  of  men. 

HYMN  CLIX.  Sachl  Pauloml. 

Yon  Sun  hath  mounted  up,   and  this   my   happy   fate   hath 

mounted  high. 
I  knowing  this,  as  conqueror  have  won  my  husband  for  mine  own. 

2  I  am  the  banner  and  the  head,  a  mighty  arbitress  am  I : 

I  am  victorious,  and  my  Lord  shall  be  submissive  to  my  will. 

3  My  Sons  are  slayers  of  the  foe,  my  Daughter  is  a  ruling  Queen  : 
I  am  victorious  :  o'er  my  Lord  my  song  of  triumph  is  supreme. 

4  Oblation,  that  which  Indra  gave  and  thus   grew  glorious  and 

most  high, — 
This  have  I  offered,  0  ye  Gods,  and  rid  me  of  each  rival  wife. 

5  Destroyer  of  the  rival  wife.  Sole  Spouse,  victorious,  conqueror, 
The  others'  glory  have  I  seized  as  'twere  the  wealth  of  weaker 

Dames. 

6  I  have  subdued  as  conqueror  these  rivals,  these  my  fellow- wives. 
That  I  may  hold  imperial  sway  over  this  Hero  and  the  folk. 

HYMN  CLX.  Indra. 

Taste  this  strong  draught  enriched  with  offered  viands  ;  with 

all  thy  chariot  here  unyoke  thy  Coursers. 
Let  not  those  other  sacrificers  stay  thee,    Indra  :  these   juices 

shed  for  thee  are  ready. 

r   I  w        —     --■ I ■ ■ — •_ 

1  Out  of  heaven :  *  from  (foes  dwelling  in)  heaven.* — Wilson. 
3  Tke  Creator :  Dhfttar. 


Sachl  Paulom!,  called  also  Indrftpt,  the  Consort  of  Indra,  is  also  the   Rishi 
of  the  hymn.     '  Literally,  this  is  a  song  of  exultation  by  Sachi  over   her   rival 
wives  ;  but  faeht  means  alao  au  "  aat"  "  ftx^\o\x^''  «b\idi  ^(JELv^\!i'^\s«l  v*  xa^taphori* 
caUjr  the  praise  of  Indra' $  glorioua  WiU.'— ^NvVaoii. 


STMN  161.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  697 

flS  Thine  is  the  juice  effused,  thine  are  the  juices  yet  to  be  pressed  : 
our  resonant  songs  invite  thee. 
O  Indra,  pleased  to-day  with  this  libation,  come,  thou  who 
knowest  all  and  drink  the  Soma. 

Z  Whoso,  devoted  to  the  God,  effuses  Soma  for  him  with  yearn- 
ing heart  and  spirit, — 
Never  doth  Indra  give  away  his  cattle :  for  him  he  makes  the 
lovely  Soma  famous. 

4  He  looks  with  loving  favour  on  the  mortal  who,  like  a  rich 

man,  pours  for  him  the  Soma. 
Maghavan  in  his  bended  arm  supports  him :  he  slays,  unasked, 
the  men  who  hate  devotion. 

5  We  call  on  thee  to  come  to  us,  desirous  of  goods  and  spoil,  of 

cattle,  and  of  horses. 
For  thy  new   love  and  favour  are   we  present :  let   us  invoke 
thee,  Indra,  as  our  welfare. 

HYMN  CLXI.  Indra. 

For  life  I  set  thee  free  by  this  oblation  from  the  unknown 

decline  and  from  Consumption  ; 
Or,  if  the  grasping  demon  have  possessed  him,  free  him  from 

her,  0  Indra,  thou  and  Agni. 

2  Be  his  days  ended,  be  he  now  departed,  be  he   brought  very 

near  to  death  already. 
Out  of  Destruction's  lap  again  I  bring  him,  save  him  for  life 
to  last  a  hundred  autumns. 

3  With  hundred-eyed  oblation,  hundred-autumned,  bringing  a 

hundred  lives,  have  I  restored  him. 
That  Indra  for  a  hundred  years  may  lead  him  safe   to   the 
farther  shore  of  all  misfortune. 

4  Live,  waxing  in  thy  strength,  a  hundred  autumns,  live  through 

a  hundred  springs,  a  hundred  winters. 
Through  hundred-lived  oblation  Indra,  Agni,  Brihaspati,  Savi- 
tar  yield  him  for  a  hundred  ! 

4  Dr.  Gaedicke  [AeeutaUv  toi  Veda,  p.  127)  translates  PAdas  1—8  of  the 
stanza  differently  :  der  wird  von  ihm  erspaht,  der,  obvohl  reioh,  ihm  keinen 
Soma  preset,  den  holt  der  machtige  heraus  aus  dem  Winkel  (Versteck). 

According  to  the  Index  the  subject  of  the  hymn  is  the  cure  of  the  disease 
called  R&jayakshma  (Consumption  or  Atrophy). 

1  Unknown  decline :  some  insidious  disease,  differing  from  RAjayakshma. 
Perhape,  as  Prof.  Zimmer  suggests,  hypertrophy  and  atrophy  are  the  two 
diseaees  intended.    See  AUindUehes  Ltbtn,  p.  S77.    TKe  ^toai^^'^^  d«c^^\ 
^f€hi:  from  grak,  to  seise ;  a  female  spirit  "wYio  iwiea  m«u  wAYS^^'^^s^* 
^  ^or  a  Aundred:  years,  understood. 


598       •  THE  EYMNS  OF  {BOOR  X, 

5  So  have  I  found  and  rescued  thee :  thou  hast  returned  with 
youth  renewed. 
Whole  in  thy  members !  I  have  found  thy  sight  and  all  thy 
life  for  thee. 

HYMN  CLXIV.  Dwam-diam. 

AvAUNT,  thou  Master  of  the  mind  !  Depart,  and  vanish  far  away. 
Look  on  Destruction  far  from  hence.    The  live  man's  mmd  is 
manifold. 

2  A  happy  boon  do  men  elect,  a  mighty  blessing  they  obtain. 
Bliss  with  Vaivasvata  they  see.      The  live  man's  mind  seeks 

many  a  place. 

3  If  by  address,  by  blame,  by  imprecation  we  have  committed 

sin,  awake  or  sleeping, 
All  hateful  acts  of  ours,  all  evil  doings  may  Agni  bear  away  to 
distant  places. 

4  When,  Indra,  Brahmanaspati,  our  deeds  are  wrongful  and 

unjust. 
May  provident  Angirasa  prevent  our  foes  from  troubling  us. 

5  We  have  prevailed  this  day  and  won  :  we  are  made  free  from 

sin  and  guilt 
111  thoughts,  that  visit  us  awake  or  sleeping,  seize  the  man 
we  hate,  yea,  seize  the  man  who  hateth  us. 

HYMN  CLXV.  Visve<JeYM. 

GrODS,  whatsoe'er  the  Dove  came  hither  seeking,  sent  to  us  as 

the  envoy  of  Destruction, 
For  that  let  us  sing  hymns  and  make  atonement.     Well  be 

it  with  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

2  Auspicious  be  the  Dove  that  hath  been  sent  us,  a  harmless 
bird,  ye  Gods,  within  our  dwelling. 
May  Agni,  Sage,  be  pleased  with  our  oblation,  and  may  the 
Missile  borne  on  wings  avoid  us. 

For  Hymns  CLXIL,  CLXIIL,  and  CLXXXIV.  see  Appendix. 

1  Master  of  the  mind:  the  spirit  of  evil  dreams  is  addres«?ed.  Destmc- 
tion :  the  Goddess  Nirriti.  Manifold:  *  attentive  to  various  objects,  and 
soon  diverted  from  any  regard  to  evil  dreams.* — Wilson. 

2  Vaivasvata :  Yama,  the  son  of  Vivasv&n,  who  presides  over  evil  dreams. — 
Sayan  a. 

4  Angirasa:  according  to  Siyana,  Varuna,  the  wipe  God  who  is  especially 
connected  with  his  worishippers  the  Angira^ea,  may  be  intended.     Gf.  Hymns 

of  the  Atharva-veda^  VI.  45.  3.  

1  A  dove,  regarded  as  an  ill-omened  bird  and  the  messenger  of  Death,  has 
f  own  into  the  house.    Similarly,  in  North-Lincolnshire,  *  If  a  pigeon  is  seen 
Bitting  on  a  tree,  or  cornea  into  ttie  \xovx%ft,  ox  itQi«i\«ca^  ^iJA  ^M^ddQuly  be- 
comeB  tame,  it  is  a  sign  of  deatV— Note*  o,tA  Q.\MT\Aa,Ni*\a.  v^'^'^* 
2  Missile  borne  on  wings  ;  the  \\\-omftrLe^\j>Vc^- 


HYMN  166.)  THE  RIOVEDA,  599 

3  Let  not  the  Arrow  that  hath  wings  distract  us :  beside  the 
fire-place,  on  the  hearth  it  settles. 
May  it  bring  welfare  to  our  men  and  cattle :  here  let  the 
Dove,  ye  Gods,  forbear  to  harm  us. 

4c  The  screeching  of  the  owl  is  ineffective ;  and  when  beside  the 
fire  the  Dove  hath  settled, 
To  him  who  sent  it  hither  as  an  envoy,  to  him  be  reverence 
paid,  to  Death,  to  Yama. 

'    5  Drive  forth  the  Dove,  chase  it  with  holy  verses :  rejoicing, 
bring  ye  hither  food  and  cattle. 
Barring  the  way  against  all  grief  and  trouble.     Let  the  swift 
bird  fly  forth  and  leave  us  vigour. 

HYMN  CLXVL  Sapatnan4sanam. 

Make  me  a  bull  among  my  peers,  make  me  my  rivals'  con- 
queror : 
Make  me  the  slayer  of  my  foes,  a  sovran  ruler,  lord  of  kine. 

"2  I  am  my  rivals'  slayer,  like  Indra  unwounded  and  unhurt. 
And  all  these  enemies  of  mine  are  vanquished  and  beneath 
my  feet. 

3  Here,  verily,  I  bind  you  fast^  as  the  two  bow-ends  with  the  string. 
Press  down  these  men,  0  Lord  of  Speech,  that  they  may 

humbly  speak  to  me. 

4  Hither  I  came  as  conqueror  with  mighty  all-effecting  power, 
And  I  have  mastered  all  your  thought,  your  synod,  and  your 

holy  work. 

5  May  I  be  highest,  having  gained  your  strength  in  war,  your 

skill  in  peace :  my  feet  have  trodden  on  your  heads. 
Speak  to  me  from  beneath  my  feet,  as  frogs  from  out  the 
water  croak,  as  frogs  from  out  the  water  croak. 

HYMN  CLXVIL  Indra. 

This  pleasant  meath,  O  Indra,  is  effused  for  thee  :  thou  art 

the  ruling  Lord  of  beaker  and  of  juice. 
Bestow  upon  us  wealth  with  many  hero  sons  :  thou,  having 

glowed  with  Fervour,  wonnest  heavenly  light. 

5   With  holy  verses  •'  S^yana  takes  richU  with  ttHyamdndh,  understood  :— 
(Praised)  by  our  hymn  (0  Gods). 

The  subject  is  the  Destruction  of  Rivals. 

The  Bishis  are  Visy&mitra  and  Jamadagni.    Stanzas  1 — 3  are  spoken  by  the 
Rishis,  and  4  by  Indra. 

1  Having  glowed  with  Fervour  :  *  performing  arduous  penance.' — Wilson. 
3  Anumati :  Divine  Favour  personi&ed. 
^  Thepnze :  tiie  wealth  won  for  you. 


«00  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

2  Lot  us  oall  Sakra  %o  libations  here  effused,  winner  of  light  who 

joyeih  ill  the  potent  juice. 
Mark  well  this  sactiBco  of  ours  and  come  to  us :  we  pray  to 
Ma;;liavau  the  Vanquisher  of  hosts. 

3  By  royal  Soma's  and  by  Varuna's  decree,  under  firihaspati's 

jind  Anumati's  guard, 
Th's  tiay  by  thine  authority,  0  Maghavau,  Maker,  Disposer 
th(»u  !  have  I  enjoyed  the  jars. 

4  I,  t  >o,  urged  on,  have  had  my  portion,  in  the  bowl,  and  as  first 

Prince  I  drew  forth  this  my  hymn  of  praise, 
When  with  the  prize  I  came  unto  the  flowiug  juice,  O  Visvi- 
mitra,  Jamadagui,  to  your  home. 

HYMN  CLXVIII,  VAyu. 

0  THE  Wind's  chariot,  0  its  power  and  glory  !  Crashing  it  goes 

and  bath  a  voice  of  thunder. 
It  makes  the  regions  red  and  touches  heaven,  and  as  it  moves 

the  dust  of  earth  is  scattered. 

2  Along  the  traces  of  the  Wind  they  hurry,  they  come  to  him  as 

dames  to  an  assembly. 
Borne  on  his  car  with  these  for  his  attendants,  the  God  speeds 
forth,  the  universe's  Monarch. 

3  Travelling  on  the  paths  of  air's  mid-region,  no  single  day  doth 

he  take  rest  or  slumber. 
Holy  and  earliest-born,  Friend  of  the  waters,  where  did  he 
spring  and  from  what  region  came  he? 

4  Germ  of  the  world,  the  Deities*  vital  spirit,  this  God  moves  ever 

as  his  will  inclines  him. 
His  voice  is  heard,  his  shape  is  ever  viewless.     Let  us  adore 
this  Wind  with  our  oblation. 

HYMN  CLXIX.  Cowa. 

May  the  wind  blow  upon  our  Cows  with  healing:  may  tht*y 

eat  herbage  full  of  vigorous  juices. 
May  they  drink  waters  rich  in  life  and  fatness  :  to  food  that 

moves  on  feet  be  gracious,  Rudra. 

2  Like-coloured,  varions-hued,  or  siuirle-coloured,  whose  names 
through  sacrifice  are  known  to  Agni, 


2  They :  the  Waters.     Prof.  Max  Muller  interprets  differently.     See  hia 
translation,  Vedic  Ht/mis,  I.  449. 

1  Food  that  mav€3  on  feet :  the  waudetm^  tdSVrV-w^v   '&>aX.^^^^x^\>eift, 

UI,  159, 


HYMN  171.]  THE  BIGVELA.  601 

Whom  the   Angirases  produced  by  Fervour,— vouchsafe   to 
these,  Parjanj  a,  great  protection. 

3  Those  who  have  offered  to  the  Gods  their  bodies,  whose  varied 

forms  are  all  well  known  to  Soma, — 

Those  grant  us  in  our  cattle-pen,  0  Indra,  with  their  full  streams 
of  milk  and  plenteous  offspring. 

4  Prajapati,  bestowing  these  upon  me,  one  minded  with  all  Gods 

and  with  the  Fathers, 

Hnth  to  our  cow-pen  brought  auspicious  cattle  :  so  may  we  own 
the  offapiiug  they  will  bear  us. 

HYMN  CLXX.  SOrya. 

May  the  Bright  God  drink  glorious  Soma-mingled   meath, 
giving  the  sacrifice's  lord  uninjured  life ; 

He  who,  wind-urged,  in  person  guards  our  offspring  well,  hath 
nourished  them  with  food  and  shines  o'er  many  a  land. 

2  Radiant,  as  high  Truth,  cherished,  best  at  winning  strength, 

Truth  based  upon  the  statute  that  supports  the  heavens, 

He  rose,  a  light,  that  kills  Yritras  and  enemies,  best  slayer 
of  the  Dasyus,  Asuras,  and  foes. 

3  This  light,  the  best  of  lights,  supreme,  all-conquering,  winner 

of  riches,  is  exalted  with  high  laud. 

All-lighting,  radiant,  mighty  as  the  Sun  to  see,  he  spreadeth 
wide  unfailing  victory  and  strength. 

4  Beaming  forth  splendour  with  thy  light,  thou  hast  attained 

heaven's  lustrous  realm. 

By  thee  were  brought  together  all  existing  things,  possessor 
'  of  all  Godhead,  All-eflfecting  God. 

HYMN  CLXXI.  Indra. 

For  Ita's  sake  who  pressed  the  juice,  thou,  Indra,  didst  protect 

his  car, 
And  hear  the  Soma-giver's  call. 

2  Thou  from  his  skin  bast  borne  the  head  of  the  swift-moving 
combatant, 
And  sought  the  Soma-pourer's  home. 

4  Prajdpati —  hath  brought:  'may  Praj&pati  briag,'  according  to  Sdyana 

2  SHn:  here  metkning  'body.'     Combatant:    malchdwia:  wiwst^\\i^  \ft'<i«»«» 
Jee^end  cited  by  SHyapn.  Sacrifice  perBonified,  Y;\ioae  Vi%»A,  %a\i^  ^\\«as^\^^N» 
a»ca/w  iu  humnn  Unix  from  the  Quda,  waa  cut  oft  \>'S  \\i^x»K    ^^»"^'^»ss^* 


«02  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  X. 

3  Venya,  that  mortal  man,  hast  thou,  for  Astrabudhna  the 

devout, 
O  Indra,  mauy  a  time  set  free. 

4  Bring,  Indra,  to  the  east  again  that  Sun  who  now  is  in  the 

west, 
Even  against  the  will  of  Gods. 

HYMN  CLXXII.  Bawi. 

With  all  thy  beauty  come :  the  kine  approaching  with  fu!l 
udders  follow  on  thy  path. 

2  Come  with  kind  thoughts,  most  liberal,  rousing  the  warrioi's 

hymn  of  praise,  with  bounteous  ones. 

3  As  nourishers  we  tie  the  thread,  and,  liberal  with  our  bounty, 

offer  sacrifice. 

4  Dawn  drives  away  her  Sister's  gloom,  and,  through   her  ex- 

cellence, makes  heir  retrace  her  path. 

HYMN  CLXXIII.  The  King. 

Bs   with   us ;  I  have   chosen  thee :  stand  stedfast   and   im- 
movable. 
Let  all  the  people  wish  for  thee  :  let  not  thy  kingship  fall  away. 

2  Be  even  here ;  fall  not  away  ;  be  like  a  mountain  unremoved. 
Stand  stedfast  here  like  Indra's  self,  and  hold  the  kingship  in 

thy  grasp. 

3  This  man  hath  Indra  stablished,  made  secure  by  strong  obla- 

tion's power. 
May  Soma  speak  a  benisoo,  and  Brahmanaspati,  on  him. 

4  Firm  is  the  sky  and  firm  the  earth,  and  stedfast  also  are  these 

hills. 
Stedfast  is  all  this  living  world,  and  stedfast  is  this  King  of  men. 

5  Stedfast,  may  Varuna  the  Kin$r,  stedfast,  the  God  Brihaspatp 
Stedfast,  may  Indra,  stedfast,  too,  may  Agni  keep    thy   sted 

fast  reign. 

3  Venya :  said  to  be  Prithu,  the  son  of  Vena.  See  X.  148.  5.  Astrabudktia  : 
the  name  of  a  man  not  mentioned  eUewhere,  the  son  of  Astrabudhna.  Set 
free:  Cp.  I.  24.  15. 


2  Most  liberal :  Surya  appears  to  be  meant.  Rousing  the  wan'ioi''8  hymn 
of  pvdise:  jdraydiimakhah  :  the  meaning  is  uncertain: — *  bringing  the 
sacrifice  to  completion,'  according  to  Sftyana. 

3  As  nourishers :  because  tiacrifice  brings  the  food  that  nourishes  life.  The 
thread:  of  sacrifice. 

4  B'er  Sister's  gloom :  the  davknea^  oi  'SK^V.. 

The  aubject  ia  the  beuedictioa  ol  a  ueM^-«>\fec\A^>5^^^^- 


ffTMN  17Q.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  «08 

6  On  constant  Soma  let  us  think  with  constant  sacrificial  gift. 
And  then  may  ludra  make  the  clans  bring  tribute  unto  thee 
alone. 

HYMN  CLXXIV.  The  King. 

With  ofifering  for  success  in  fight  whence  Indra  was  victorious. 
With  this,  0  Brahmanaspati,  let  us  attain  to  royal  sway. 

2  Subduing  those  who  rival  us,  subduing  all  malignities, 
Withstand  the  man  who  menaces,  withstand  the   man  who 

angers  us. 

3  Soma  and  Savitar  the  God  have  made  thee  a  victorious  King  : 
All  elements  have  aided  thee,  to  make  thee  general  conqueror. 

4  Oblation,  that  which  Indra  gave  and  thus  grew  glorious  and 

most  high, — 
This  have  1  offered,  Gods  !  and  hence  now,  verily,  am  rivalless. 

5  Slayer  of  rivals,  rivalless,  victorious,  with  royal  sway, 
Over  these  beings  may  I  rule,  may  I  be  Sovran  of  the  folk. 

HYMN  CLXXV.  PresB-Btones. 

Mat  Savitar  the  Crod,  0  Stones,  stir  you  according  to   the 

Law : 
Be  harnessed  to  the  shafts,  and  press. 

2  Stones,  drive  calamity  away,  jirive  ye  away  malevolence  : 
Make  ye  the  Cows  our  medicine. 

3  Of  one  accord  the  upper  Stones,  giving  the  Bull  his  bull-like 

strength. 
Look  down  with  pride  on  those  below. 

4  May  Savitar  the  God,  0  Stones,  stir  you  as  Law  commands 

for  him 
Who  sacrifices,  pouring  juice. 

HYMN  CLXXVL  Agni. 

With  hymns  of  praise  their  sons  have  told  aloud  the  Ribhus' 
mighty  deeds 

Who,  all-supporting,  have  enjoyed  the  earth  as  'twere  a  mo- 
ther cow. 


1   With  offering  for  tuceest :  *  By  the  dbkivatia  oblatiou.*— Wilson. 
4  Cp.  X.  159.  4. 

1  The  thafU :  or  chariot-poles ;  here  meaning  the  guiding  arms  of  the 
Soma-press.  "^ 

2  The  Cows :  or,  the  rays  of  morniDg,  at  whoae  oi^T^toafih.  t<iVi\a«£%  taoA^ 
wooM  Sy, 

3  TheBtdl:  Somtk. 


604  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

2  Bring  forth  the  God  with  song  divine,  bring  J&tavedas  hither- 

ward, 
To  bear  our  gifts  at  once  to  heaven. 

3  He  here,  a  God-devoted  Priest,  led  forward  comes  to  sacrifice* 
Like  a  car  covered  for  the  road,  he,  glowing,  kuows^  himself, 

the  way. 

4  ThisAgni  rescues  from  distress,  as 'twere  from  the  Immortal  Race^ 
A  God  yet  mightier  than  strength,  a  God  who  hath  been  made 

for  life. 

HYMN  CLXXVIL  M&y&bbeda. 

The  sa[)ient  with  their  spirit  and  their  mind  behold  the  Bird 
adorned  with  all  an  Asura*s  magic  might. 

Sages  observe  him  in  the  ocean's  inmost  depth  :  the  wise  dis- 
posers seek  the  station  of  his  rays. 

2  The  flying  Bird  bears  Speech  within  his  spirit :  erst  the  Gan- 

dharva  iu  the  womb  pronounced  it : 
And  at  the  seat  of  sacrifice  the  sages  cherish  this  radiant, 
heavenly-bright  invention. 

3  I  saw  the  Herdsman,  him  who  never  resteth,  approaching  and 

departing  on  his  pathways. 
He,  clothed  in  gathered  and  diflPusive  splendour,  within  the 
worlds  continually  travels. 

HYMN  CLXXVIII.  Tftrkshya. 

This  very  mighty  one  whom  Gods  commission,  the  Conqueror 

of  cars,  ever  triumphant. 
Swift,  fleet  to  battle,  with  uninjured  fellies,  even  Tarkshya 

for  our  weal  will  we  call  hither. 

3  Like  a  car :  perhaps,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  like  a  chariot  which,  as 
the  driver  is  eoncealed  from  sight  by  the  canopy,  seems  to  find  its  way  with- 
out a  g\iide. 

4  Ai  'twere  from  the  Immortal  Race :  *as  (well  as)  from  peril  caused  by  the 
immortals  .'—Wilson.  Stanzas  2—4  are  recited  at  the  Agni-pranayana,  the 
ceremony  of  carrying  the  sacrificial  fire  to  the  altar  used  for  animal  and 
Soma  sacrifices.     See  Haug's  AUareya  Brdhm^nam,  II.  60,  61. 

The  subject  is  M&y&bheda,  *the  discernment  of  Mdyd,  or  illusion  (the 
cause  of  material  creation).' — Wilaon. 

1  The  Bird :  the  Sun.  In  the  ocearCs  inmost  depth :  in  the  solar  orb, 
according  to  Sftyana.     Wise  disposers :  *  ordainers  (of  solar  worship).' — Wilson. 

2  Speech:  or  song  ;  the  morning  song  of  the  Sun-Bird.  The  Oandharva : 
the  breath  of  life,  according  to  SAyana.    The  ray  of  the  Sun  is  probably  meant. 

8  This  stanza  has  occurred  before.  Seel.  164.  31.  The  Herdsman:  the  Sun. 
Hesteth  :  or,  stumbleth  ;  literally,  Emk«  oi;  tulla  down, 

7  Tdrkshya:    a  personification  oi   t\i^  ^un,  m&wsSVi  5L'8«ax^o«A.^^^M^vs«. 
Aonst?.     Cp.  I.  h^.  6. 


HYMN  180.]  THE  RIQVEDA,  605 

2  As  though  we  offered  up  our  gifts  to  Indra,  may  we  ascend 

hiui  as  a  ship  for  safety. 

Like  the  two  wide  worlds,  broad,  deep,  far-extended,  may  we 
be  safe  both  when  he  comes  and  leaves  you. 

3  He  who  with  might  the  Five  Land^  hath  pervaded,  like  Surya 

with  his  lustre,  and  the  waters, — 

His  strength  wins  hundreds,  thousands :  none  arert  it,  as  the 
young  maid  repelleth*  not  her  lover. 

HYMN  CLXXIX.  I^dra. 

Now  lift  ye  up  yourselves  and  look  on  Indra's  seasonable  share. 
If  it  be  ready,  offer  it ;  unready,  ye  have  been  remiss. 

2  Oblation  is  prepared  :  come  to  us,  Indra;  the  Sun  hath  travel- 

led over  half  his  journey. 

Friends  with  their  stores  are  sitting  round  Ihee  waiting  like 
lords  of  clans  for  the  tribe's  wandering  chisftain. 

3  Dressed  in  the  udder  and  on  fire,  I  fancy ;    well-dressed,  I 

fancy,  is  this  recent  present. 

Drink,  Indra,   of  the  curd  of  noon's  libation  with   favour, 
Thunderer,  thou  whose  deeds  are  mighty. 

HYMN  CLXXX.  Indra. 

O  MUGH-iNVOKBD,  thou  hast  subdued  thy  foemen  :  thy  might  is 
loftiest ;  here  display  thy  bounty. 

In  thy  right  hand,  0  Indra,  bring  us  treasures  :  thou  art  the 
Lord  of  rivers  filled  with  riches. 

2  Like  a  dread  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain  thou  hast 

approached  us  from  the  farthest  distance. 

Whetting  thy  bolt  and  thy  sharp  blade,  0  Indra,  crush  thou 
the  foe  and  scatter  those  who  bate  us. 

3  Thou,  mighty  Indra,  sprangest  into  being  as  strength  for 

lovely  lordship  o'er  the  people. 

Thou  drovest  off  the  folk  who  were  unfriendly,  and  to  the 
Gods  thou  gavest  room  and  freedom. 


8  Her  lover :  I  adopt,  with  a  modification,  Professor  Pischel's  iDterpretation 
of  the  difficult  words  yuvatim  nd  sdrydm.     See  Vedische  Stvdieny  I.  p.  106. 

3  The  milk  is  twice  cooked ;  first  matured  in  the  cow*8  udder  and  then 
heated  on  the  fire.     Cvrd:   the  hymn  was  employed  in  the  Dadhigharma 
ceremony  when  Soma  juice  was  offered  mixt  'm\iVi,  cvix^  c^t  v^wx  \\2)%^\!»»i(j^ 
milk.    CL  Yin.  2.  9,  and  IX.  11.  6.    dee  H\W<\>t%M\.,^.  M  A^^^* 


60«  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X 

HYMN  CLXXXI.  Visvedeva*. 

Vasishtha    mastered  the  Rathantara,  took   it  from  radiant 
Dh&tar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu, 

Oblaticn,  portion  of  fourfold  oblation,  known  by  the  nanaes  of 
Sapr&thas  and  Prathas. 

2  These  sages  found  what  laj  remote  and  hidden,  the  sacrifice's 

loftiest  secret  essence.  , 

From  radiant  Dhatar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu,  from  Agni,  Bharad- 
vaja  brought  the  Brihat. 

3  They  found  with  mental  eyes  the  earliest  Yajus,  a  pathway  to 

the  Gods,  that  had  descended. 

From  radiant  Dhatar,  Savitar,  and  Vishnu,  from  Surya  did 
these  sageg  bring  the  Gharma. 

HYMN  CLXXXII.  Brihaspati. 

Brihaspati  lead  us  safely  over  troubles,  and  turn  his  evil 
thought  against  the  sinner; 

Repel  the  cuise,  and  drive  away  ill-feeling,  and  give  the  sacri- 
ficer  peace  and  comfort ! 

2  May  Narasansa  aid  us  at  Prayaja  :  blest  be  our  Anuyaja  at 

invokings. 

May  he  repel  the  curse,  and  chase  ill- feeling,   and  give  the 
sacrificer  peace  and  comfort. 

3  May  he  whose  head  is  flaming  burn   the  demons,  haters  of 

prayer,  so  that  the  arrow  slay  them. 

May  he  repel  the  curse  and  chase  ill-feeling,  and  give  the  sacri- 
ficer peace  and  comfort. 


1  Rathantara :  one  of  the  moat  important  S^raa-hymna,  consisting  of  verses 
22  and  23  of  Rigveda  VII.  32  =  Sftmaveda  II.  i.  i.  13.  The  meaning  here  is 
uncertain,  and  the  whole  stanza  is  obscure.  Saprathas  and  Prathas:  mean- 
ing, apparently,  *  far-extending '  and  *  extending,'  the  former  referring  to 
the  Rathantara  and  the  latter  to  the  Brihat,  which  is  also  one  of  the  most 
important  Sftmans  (Rigveda  VI.  46.  3,  2  =  SAmaveda  II.  ii.  1.  12). 

3  Yajus :  sacrificial  prayers  and  formulas  of  the  Yajurveda.  Gharma  : 
warm  libation  of  milk  or  other  beverage. 

*  The  Siikta  refers  evidently  to  technical  ritual  to  which  no  key  is  given  by 
the   commentary.' — Wilson.  See  Mme.  Z^naide  Ragozin's  Vedic  India^  p.  398. 

2  Nardi^ansa :  Agni.  Praydja :.  part  of  the  introductory  ceremony  at  a 
Soma  sacrifice.    Anuydja :  a  secondary  or  final  sacrifice. 

3  ffe  whose  head    w   gaming ;    tapuvmUvdTittti ;  'ftrCftaK^^.VK  ort   Aw%tii    as 
Lightuin^, 


B  YMN  187.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  m7 

HYMN  CLXXXIII.  The  Sacrificer,  Etc. 

I  SAW  thee  meditating  in  thy  spirit  what  sprang  from  Fervour 
and  hath  tiience  developed. 

Bestowing  offspring  here,  bestowing  richea,  spread  in  thine  off- 
spring, thou  who  Gravest  children. 

2  I  saw  thee  pondering  in  thine  heart,  and  praying  that  in  due- 

time  thy  body  might  be  fruitful. 
Come  as  a  youthful  woman,  rise  to  meet  me  :  spread  in  thine 
offspring,  thou  who  era  vest  children. 

3  In  plants  and  herbs,  in  all  existent  beings  I  have  deposited  the 

germ  of  increase. 
All  progeny  on  earth  have  I  engendered,  and  sons  in  women 
who  will  be  hereafter. 

HYMN  CLXXXV.  Aditi 

Great,  unassailable  must  be  the  heavenly  favour  of  Three  Gods, 
Varuna,  Mitra,  Arj'aman. 

2  Oer  these,  neither  at  home  nor  yet  abroad  on  pathways  that 

are  strange, 
The  evil-miuded  foe  hath  power  : 

3  Nor  over  him,  the  man  on  whom  the  Sons  of  Aditi  bestow 
Eternal  light  that  he  may  live. 

HYMN  CLXXXVI.  V4yu. 

Filling  our  hearts  with  health  and  joy,  may  Vata  breathe  his 

italm  on  us  : 
May  he  prolong  our  days  of  life. 

2  Thou  art  our  Father,  Vata.  yea^  jbhou  art  a  Brother  and  a  friend: 
So  give  us  strength  that  we  may  live. 

3  The  store  of  Amrit  laid  away  yonder,  0  Vdta,  in  thine  home, — 
Give  us  thereof  that  we  may  live. 

HYMN  CLXXXVII.  Agni 

To  Agni  send  I  forth  my  song,  to  him  the  Bull  of  all  the  folk  : 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 


The  deities  are  the  Sacrificer,  big  Wife,  and  the  Hotar-priest. 

1  According  to  Sftyana,  the  wife  is  the  speaker  of  the  first  stanza,  the 
Yajam&na  or  sacrificer  of  the  second,  and  the  Hotar-priest  of  the  third, 
Ludwig  considers  Agni  to  be  the  speaker  of  the  whole  hymn,  Wkai  sprang 
from  Fervour  :  the  results  of  ardent  devotion  or  tdpas. 

3  The  Hotar-priest  regards  himself  as  the  procreator  of  all  living  beings 
through  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifices  which  he  performs  :  matsddhyena  ydgena 
tarva$yotpatteraham  aarvajanaheturbhavdmi. — S&yana. 

1  Bull:  chief  and  lord,  as  the  indispenBt^YAe  \io>3L««^icAdL  ^t^ 


608  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  X. 

2  Who  from  the  distance  far  away  shines  brilliantly  across  the 

wastes  : 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

3  The  Bull  with  brightly -gleamiug  flame  who  utterly  consumes 

the  fiends : 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

4  Who  looks  on  all  existing  things  and  comprehends  them  with 

his  view  : 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

5  Resplendent  Agni,  who  was  born  in  farthest  region  of  the  air: 
So  may  he  bear  us  past  our  foes. 

HYMN  CLXXXVIII.  Agni. 

Now  send  ye  Jatavedas  forth,  send  hither  ward  the  vigorous 

Steed 
To  seat  him  on  our  sacred  grass. 

2  I  raise  the  lofty  eulogy  of  J&tavedas,  raining  boons, 
With  sages  for  his  hero  band. 

3  With  flames  of  Jjltavedas  which  carry  oblation  to  the  Gods, 
May  he  promote  our  sacrifice. 

HYMN  CLXXXIX.  SQrya. 

This  spotted  Bull  hath  come,  and  sat  before  the  Mother  in 

the  east, 
Advancing  to  his  Father  heaven. 

2  Expiring  when  he  draws  his  breath,  she  moves  along  the  lucid 

spheres  : 
The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky. 

3  Song  is  bestowed  upon  the  Bird :  it  rules  supreme  through 

thirty  realms 
Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn. 


2  A  cross  the  wastes :  as  the  fire  that  burns  the  jungle  and  prepares  the 
ground  for  cultivation. 

5  Jn  farthest  region  of  the  air :  or  beyond  the  firmament,  as  the  Sun. 

The  deity  is  alternatively  Sdrpar^jfil,  the  Serpent-Queen,  Kadru,  who  i« 
also  the  Riehi  of  the  hymn. 
1  This  spotted  Bull :  the  Sun.     The  Mother:  Datm. 

3  The  Bird :  the  Sun.  His  morning  song,  representing  prayer,  is  supreme 
thtough  all  the  divisions  of  the  world,  the  number  thirty  being  used  indefi- 
niiely.     Cf.  I.  123.  8. 

1  From  Fervour :  from  the  tcpas,  deNotv^T»»l  «kvdouT  or  asceticism  of  Brahm4, 
according  to  SAjana.     But  the  meamx\v;\kWfe  m».i  \^  *  Vtorai^^NcsaJCa.     ^<«»  X. 
129.  3  HDd  note.     Thence :  irom  tViu^i  tw^oxw,  ox  ^wxaJOa.. 


JSYMNin.]  TBE  JtI(7£DA.  609 

HYMN  JXC.  Creation. 

From  Fervour  kindled  to  its  )eight  Eternal  Law  and  Truth 

were  bom : 
Thence  was  the  Night  prodiced,  and  thence  the  billowy  flood 

of  sea  arose. 

2  From  that  same  billowy  fbod  of  sea  the  Year  was  afterwards 

produced, 
Ordaiuer  of  the  days  ard  nights,  Lord  over  all  who  close  the 

eye. 

3  Dh&tar,  the  great  Cr«.tor,  then  formed  in  due  order  Sun  and 

Moon. 
He  formed  in  order  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  regions  of  the  air, 

and  light. 

HYMN  CXCL  Agni. 

Thoxt,  migkty  Agni,  gatherest  up  all  that  is  precious  for  thy 

friend. 
Bring  us  ail  treasures  as  thou  art  enkindled  in  libation's  place. 

2  Assemble,  speak  together  :  let  your  minds  be  all  of  one  accord, 
As  ancient  Gods  unauinitous  sit  down  to  their  appointed  share. 

3  The  place  is  common,  common  the  assembly,  common  the 

mind,  so  be  their  thought  united. 
A  common  purpose  do  I  lay  before   you,  and  worship  with 
your  general  oblation. 

4  One  and  the  same  be  your  resolve,  and  be  your  minds  of  one 

accord. 
United  be  the  thoughts  of  all  that  all  may  happily  agree. 

.______^ —  - 

The  deity  or  subject  of  stanzas  2  -4  is  Saibj^dnam,  Agreement  or  Unani- 
mity  in  assembly. 

3  Common  the  cLStemhly :  this  9dmiti  appears  to  have  been  a  general  assem- 
bly of  the  people  on  some  important  occasion,  such  as  the  election  of  a  King. 
Cf.  ffymm  of  t?u  Atharva-veda,  VI.  64. 


I 


I 


\  ;j 


I  ; ; 


I      I 


1-  , 


APiPENDIX. 

Page  466,  Hymn  LXL 

I  subjoin  a  Latin  version  of  stanzas  5 — 8,  and  borrow  Wilson's 
nslation  of  stanza  9. 

Membrum  suum  vinle,  quod  protentum  fuerat,  mas  ille  re- 
traxit. Rursus  illud  quod  in  juvenem  filiam  sublatum  fuerat, 
non  aggresBurus,  ad  se  retrahit. 

Quum  jam  in  medio  congressu,  semiperfecto  opere,  amorem  in 
puellam  pater  impleverat,  ambo  discedentes  seminis  paulum 
in  terrae  superficie  in  sacrorum  sede  effusum  emiserunt. 

Quum  pater  suam  filiam  adiverat,  cum  e&  congressus  suum 
semen  supra  terram  effudit.  Tun  Dii  benigni,  precem 
(brahma)  progenuerunt,  et  Vastoskpatim,  legum  sacrarum 
custodem,  formaverunt. 

Ille  tauro  similis  spumam  in  certamine  jactavit ;  tunc  discedens 
pusillanimis  hue  profectus  est.  Quasi  dextro  pede  daudus 
processit,  "  inutiles  fuerunt  illi  mei  complexus,"  ita  locutus. 

'  The  fire,  burning  the  people,  does  not  approach  quickly  (by 
day) :  the  naked  {Rdkshasas  approach)  not  Agni  by  night ; 
the  giver  of  fuel,  and  the  giver  of  food,  he,  the  upholder 
(  of  the  rite),  is  born,  overcoming  enemies  by  his  might.' 


lie  whole  passage  is  difficult  and  obscure,  and  stanza  9  is  unintelligible. 
:h  regard  to  the  myth  of  Praj&pati  and  his  daughter,  Prof.  Max  Muller 
) : — *  When  Eum&rila  is  hard  pressed  by  his  opponents  about  the  immoral- 
)  of  his  gods,  he  answers  with  all  the  freedom  of  a  comparative  my- 
ogist :  "  It  is  fabled  that  Prajftpati,  the  Lord  of  Creation,  did  violence  to 
daughter.  But  what  does  it  mean  ?  Praj&pati,  the  Lord  of  Creation,  is 
\jne  of  the  sun,  and  he  is  called  so,  because  he  protects  all  creatures, 
daughter  Ushas  is  the  dawn.  And  when  it  is  said  that  he  was  in  love 
1  her,  this  only  means  that,  at  sunrise,  the  sun  runs  after  the  dawn,  the 
u  being  at  the  same  time  called  the  daughter  of  the  sun,  because  she 
s  when  he  approaches  '*.*— History  of  Anc  Scms,' Literature,  pp.  529, 530. 
Muir,  0.  S,  Texts,  IV.  pp.  46,  47,  where  stanzas  4 — 7  are  translated. 

Vastoshpatim :  V&stoshpati,  the  guardian  of  the  house  ;  'the  locdol  t\iA 
*th  (of  BacnBoey—WUaon.    The  word  may  be  m  vQ;9Q«^i<(]i^'«nd^Vr^^ 
er. 

"^Jire:  aocordiDg  to  Sdyacia,  B&kBhaaaB  wbo  goosoxgaVSu^^^* 


612 


APPENDIX. 


Page  548,  Hymn  CVI. 
I  borrow  Wilson's  translation  of  the  omitted  stanzas. 

5  '  You  are  like  two  pleasantly  moving  well-fed  (hills)  like  Mitra 

and  Varuna,  the  two  bestowers  of  felicity,  veracious,  pos- 
sessors of  infinite  wealth,  happy,  like  two  horses  plump  with 
fodder,  abiding  in  the  firmament,  like  two  rams  (are  you)  to 
be  nourished  with  sacrificial  food,  to  be  cherished  (with 
oblations). 

6  '  You  are  like  two  mad  elephants  bending  their  forequarters 

and  smiting  the  foe,  like  the  two  sons  of  Nitosa  destroying 
(foes),  and  cherishing  (friends) ;  you  are  bright  as  two  water- 
bom  (jewels),  do  you,  who  are  victorious,  (render)  my  decay- 
ing mortal  body  free  from  decay. 

7  '  Fierce  (Aswins),  like  two  powerful  (heroes),  you  enable  this 

moving,  perishable  mortal  (frame)  to  cross  over  to  the  ob- 
jects (of  its  destination)  as  over  water ;  extremely  strong, 
like  the  Bibhus,  your  chariot  attained  its  destination  swift 
as  the  wind,  it  pervaded  (everywhere),  it  dispensed  riches. 

8  *  With  your  bellies  full  of  the  Soma^  like  two  saucepans,  preserv- 

ers of  wealth,  destroyers  of  enemies,  (you  are)  armed  with 
hatchets,  moving  like  two  flying  (birds)  with  forms  like  the 
moon,  attaining  success  through  the  mind,  like  two  laudable 
beings,  (you  are)  approaching  (the  sacrifice).* 

Page  598,  Hymn  CLXII. 

May  Agni,  yielding  to  our  prayer,  the  Rakshas-slayer,  drive 

away 
The  malady  of  evil  name  that  hath  beset  thy  labouring  womb. 

2  Agni,  concurring  in  the  prayer,  drite  off  the  eater  of  thy  flesh. 
The  malady  of  evil  name  that  hath  attacked  thy  babe  and 

womb. 

3  That  which  destroys  the  sinking  germ,  the  settled,   moving 

embryo. 
That  which  will  kill  the  babe  at  birth,— even  this  will  we  drive 

far  away. 

4  That  which  divides  thy  legs  that  it  may  lie  between  the  mar- 

ried pair. 
That  penetrates  and  licks  thy  side,— tven  this  will  we  exter- 
minate. 


The  subject  is  the  Preveutiou  oi  Abottion.    The  Rishi  is  Rakshoha  (Slayer 

of  BAkahaABA),  son  of  Brahmfil.  , ,.     o       •    >.     -x    •  -w     x.-  v 

SfaTDRW  1,  2  are  directed  against  A\t««a»,«^a.*-%  ^«i«!<.^-,v\.^V^v*^Vx^ 

atUusk  womeu  who  are  about  to  Y)ftoon»  mo\.\x«t». 


APPBNDIX.  613 

5  What  rests  by  thee  in  borrowed  form  of  brother,  lover,  or  of  lord , 
And  would  destroy  thy  progeny, — even  this  will  we  exterminate. 

6  That  which  through  sleep  or  darkness  hath  deceived  thee  and 

lies  down  by  thee, 
And  will  destroy  thy  progeny, — even  this  will  we  exterminate. 

Pagj  598,  Hymn  CLXIII. 
From  both  thy  nostrils,  from  thine  eyes,  from  both  thine  ears 

and  from  thy  chn, 
forth  from  thy  h«ad  and  brain  and  tongue  I  drive  thy  malady 

away. 

2  From  the  nec):-tendons  and  the  neck,  from  the  breast-bones 

and  from  tie  spine, 
From  shoulders,  upper,  lower  arms,  I  drive  thy  malady  away. 

3  From  visce"^  and  all  within,  forth  from  the  rectum,  from  the 

heart. 
From  kidieys,  liver,  and  from  spleen,  I  drive  thy  malady  away. 

4  From  tUghs,  from  kneecaps,  and  from  heels,  and  from  the 

foreptrt  of  the  feet. 
From  iiips,  from  stomach,  and  from  groin,  I  drive  thy  malady 
away. 

5  From  what  is  voided  from  within,  and  from  thy  hair,  and  from 

thy  nails. 
From  all  thyself  from  top  to  toe,  I  drive  thy  malady  away. 

6  From  every  member,  every  hair,  disease  that  comes  in  everyjoint, 
From  all  thyself,  from  top  to  toe,  I  drive  thy  malady  away. 

Pagb  607,  Hymn  CLXXXIV. 

May  Vishnu  form  and  mould  the  womb,  may  Tvashtar  duly 

shape  the  forms, 
Praj^pati  infuse  the  stream,  and  Dh&tar  lay  the  germ  for  thee. 

2  0  Sin!v41t,  set  the  germ,  set  thou  the  germ,  Sarasvatt : 

May  the  Twain  Gods  bestow  the  germ,  the  Asvins  crowned 
with  lotuses. 

3  That  which  the  Asvins  Twain  rub  forth  with  the  attrition- 

sticks  of  gold, — 
That  germ  of  thine  we  invocate,  that  in  the  tenth  month  thou 
mayst  bear. 

The  deity  or  subject  is  the  cure  of  Yakahma  or  phthisis  or  consumption. 

2  Sintvdli :  t  lunar  Gk>dde88,  who  aids  the  birth  of  children.    Cp.  II.  82. 6. 
'  Verses  1  and  2  are  incorporated  in  Atharva-veda,  V.  25,  which  is  a  charm 
to  Bcoompuiy  the  GarbhAdhAna  ceremony  to  tiurax^  qt  Uis^Xii^  v^^  N^vkm^ 
conceptum. 


INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 
BOCK  VII. 


1         Rishl 

1  Vasishtha  Mai 

trftvaruni. 

2  The  same 
8  

4 

ZkUu 

•  Agni 

Aprls. 

Agni. 

The  same. 

Vaiflvftnara  JignL 

The  same. 

Agni 

The  same. 

Mttre. 

riritj.  19-25  Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 
The  same. 

5  

6  

7  

9    

./*•••••• 

10  

11  

12  

13  

VatBinbiara  Agni. 

Agni. 
Thisame. 

--                                       4 

14  

15  

16  

1  Brihatt  2,  S  Triahtap. 

GAyatrt. 

Bfihatt  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately. 

DvipadA  Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

The  same. 

17  

18  

Indra.  Munificence  of. 
SttdAs  (22.25). 

Indra. 
The  same. 

19  

21  

22  

Virftj.  9  Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

23  

24  

The  same. 

25  

27  

28  

29  

• 

SJ  The  same. 

Indra. 
The  same. 

616 


INDEX  OF  HTMNB. 


S  Rishi. 


Deity, 


Metre, 


32  Va8i8hth».Sakti  Indni. 

Brihatl  and  Satobrihat! 

Vftsishtha. 

alternately.  3  Dvipadft 
ViiAj. 

33  Tasishtha.  His 

Tasishtha's   sons. 

Trishtup. 

sons  (10-14). 

Vasishtha  (10-14; 

34  Vasiahtha. 

Yisvedevas.  AhL  ihi- 

Dvipadft.  22-25  Trishtup. 

budhnya. 

35  The  same. 

YisvedeTas. 

Trishtup. 

36  .. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

37 

Savitar.  Savitar  or 

38  ., 

Bhaga.  Vftjins  0-\). 

39  . 

•  • • • ■ ••  • 

VisvedeTas. 

The  same. 

Various  (1).  Bhaga.  Usbs. 

40  . 

41  . 

Trishtup.  1  Jagatt. 

42  .. 

' • • • •    •• 

VisvedeTas. 

Trishtup. 

43  . 

The  flame. 

The  same. 

44  . 

Various  (1).  Dadhikrfts. 

Trishtup.  1  Jagatt. 

45  . 

Savitar. 

Trishtup. 

46  . 

Rudra. 

Jagati.  4  Trishtup. 

47 

Ribhus.  Ribhus  or 

Trishtup. 
Tie  same. 

48  . 

Visvedevas. 

• 

49 

Waters. 

•  •••«•  ••• 

50  , 

Mitra  and  Varuna.  Agni.  Jagafci.  4  AtijagatS  or 
Visvedevas.  Praise  of  Rivers.    Sakvart 

51  , 

^dityas.^ 

Trishlup. 

52 

The  same. 

J^ip^same. 

53 

Heaven  and  Earth. 

54 

V&stoshpati 
Vftstoshpatl  Indra. 

55 

1  Gayatrt.  2-4  Uparishi 

brihatt.  5-8  Anushtup. 

56 

1-11  Dvipadft  Virftj.   15 
Trishtup. 

57 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

58 

The  same. 

5^ 

Maruts.  Rudra  (12). 

1,  3,  5  Brihat!.  2,  4,  6   S 
brihati.  7,  8 Trishtup.! 

Gftyatrt.  12  Anusbtup 

60 

Surya.  Mitra  and  Varupa 

t.    Trishtup. 

61 

«  •          9  4    •  9  • 

Mitra  and  Varuna, 

The  same. 

62  . 

^S^S^  mt.T%  «^Ii^^  vc^T 

kflk ,-,.. 

• 

63  . 

Tlie  auae. 

i           Rishi. 

64  Vasishtha. 

• 

65  The  same. 

66  

67  

68  

69  

INDEX  OF  HTHNS. 

Deity. 

Mitra  and  Vanma. 

The  same. 

Mitra  and  Varuna. 
Adityas.  Sttrya. 

Asvios. 
The  same. 

ox/ 

Metre. 

Trishtup. 
The  same. 

G&yatrl.  10-15  Brihati  and 
Satobrihatt  alternately. 
16  Pura-ushnih. 

Trishtup. 

Virftj.  8, 9  Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

70  

The  same. 

71  

72  

73  

74  

Brihatt  and  Satobrihatt 

75  

76  

tJshas  or  Dawn. 
The  same. 

alternately. 
Trishtup. 
The  same. 

77  

78  

79  

80  

81  

Brihati  and  Satobrihatt 

82  

83  

84    

85  

Indra  and  Varuna. 
The  same. 

••    •••••• 

alternately. 
Jagatt. 
The  same. 
Trishtup. 
The  same. 

86    

The  same. 

87  

88  

89  

90  

91  

Vayu.  Indra  and  VAyu. 
The  same. 

Gftyatrt  5  Jagatt. 
Trishtup. 
The  same. 

92    

93  

Indra  and  Agni. 
The  same. 
Sarasvat!.  Sarasv&n. 
The  same. 

Indra.  Brihaspati.  Indra 
andBrahmanaspati.  Indi 
and  Brihaapati. 

Indra.  Indra  and  BrVbiai^ 

94  

Oftyatrt.  12  Anushtup. 

95  

96  

97  

Trishtup. 

1  Brihatt.  2  Satobrihatt.  3 
Pi^stftrapankti  4-6  Qftytrt 

Trishtup. 
ra 

618 


QffDKX  OF  HTlCNS. 


I  Riihi. 

99  Vasishtha. 

100  The  same. 

101  

102  

103  

104  


Deity,  Metre. 

^ishnu.  Indra  and  Vishnu.  Trisfatup. 

">^nir"  The  same. 

garjanya.  

Sesame. 

Frogs. 

Indra  and  Soma.  Indra. 
Soma  Agni.  The  Gkxla. 
Press-stooes.  Marats. 
Vasishtha's  Prayer.  Earth 
and  Firmament. 


1,8  GAyatrl.  2  Pftdanichrit. 

Trishtup.  1  Anushtup. 

Trishtup.  1-6,   18,' 21,  23 
Jagatt.  7  Jagatt  or  Trish- 
tup. 25  Anushtup. 


BOOK  VIII. 

1  Pragfttha  Kftnva  Indra.  Asanga's  Manifi- 

(1, 2),  Medhiiti-     cence.  Asanga. 
thi  and  Medh> 
y&tithi   (3-29), 
A8anga(30-83), 
Sasvati  (34). 

2  Medhfttithi  and  Indra.  Vibhindhu's 

Priyamedha.       Munificence. 

Medh&tithi 

(41-42). 

3  Medby4tithi.       Indra.  P^kasth&man's 

Munificence. 


BrihaU.  2,  4  Satobrihatl. 
*  33,  34  Trishtup.' 


4  Devatithi. 


5  Brahm4tithi. 


Indra.   Indra  or    Pilshan. 
Kurunga's  Munificence. 

Asvins.  Kasu's  Munificence. 


Gftyatrt.  28  Anushtup. 


Brihati   and  Satobribati 
alternately.  21  Anushtup. 
22,23  GAyatri.  24  Brihati. 

Brihatt  and  Satobrihat!   al- 
ternately. 21  Pura-ushpih. 

G4yatr!.  37,  38  Brihati.    35 
Anushtup.  G&yatrf. 


6  Vat^. 

Indra.  Tirindira's 
Munificence. 

Gftyatri. 

7  Punarvatsa. 

Maruts. 

The  same. 

8  Sadhvanaa. 

Asvins. 

• 

Anushtup. 

9  Sasakarna. 
«   .         • 

The  same. 

1,  4,  6,*  14,  15,  Brihati.  2, 
3,  20,  21,  Oayatrt.  5  Ka- 
kup.  7,9,13,16. 19.  Anu- 
sbtup.  10  Trishtup.  11 
Virdj.  12  Jagat!.  ' 

10  Pragatha. 

1, 5  Brihati.  2  Madhyejyotis. 
3  Anushtup.  4  Astara- 
pankti.  6  Satobribati. 

11  Vatsa. 

Agni. 

GAyatri.  1  Pratishthd.  2  Var- 
dham4n&.  10  Trishtup. 

12  ParvaU. 

Indra. 

* 

23  mnda. 

The  same. 

^\i<&  «wax<^. 

INDKX  OF  H7MN8. 


019 


I  Rithi. 

li  Qoshdktin  and    Indra. 
Asvafiiiktin. 

15  The  same. 

16  Irimbithi. 

17  The  same. 


Deiiy. 


MHrt, 


GAyatrt. 


The  same. 


18  

19  Sobhari. 


20  The  same. 


Adityas.  Afvins.  Agni. 
Sarya,  Vftta  or  Wind. 

Agni.  Adityas.  Trasa- 
dasyu's  Munificence. 


llaruts. 


Ushnih. 

Q&yatrt. 

G&yatrt.   14  Brihati. 
15  Satobrihaii. 

Ushnih. 

ft 

1-26,  28-33  Eakup  and  Sato- 
brihatt  alternately.  27 
Dvipad&  Virftj.  34  Ushnih. 
35  Satobrihatl.  36  Eakup. 
37  Pankti. 


21 
22 


Eakup  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately. 

Indra.  Chitra's  Munificence.  The  same. 


Aavins. 


23  Viavamanas. 

24  O^iesame. 


25 
26 


Agni. 

Indra.  A  Prince's 
Munificence. 

Mitra  and  Varu^a. 
VisvedevaB. 

Asvins.  Yftyu. 


The  same. 


27  ManuYaivas-     ViBYedeyas. 

vata. 

28  The  same. 

29  Manu,  or  Eas 

yapa. 

30  Manu. 


1-7  Brihatt  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately.  8  AnusLtup. 
9, 10,  13-18  Eakap  and 
Satobrihatt  alternately.  11 
Eakup.  12Madhyejyoti8. 

Ushnih. 

Ushnik.  30  Anushtup. 

Ushnih.  23  Ushniggarbhf. 

Ushnih.  16,19,21,25Qlya- 
trt.  20  Anushtup. 

Brihati  and  Satobrihait 
alternately. 

Gftyatri.  4  Pura-ush^ih. 
Dvipad&  Virftj. 


34  NlpfttithL 

The  1000  Vasu- 
rochishas. 


1  Gftyatri.    2   Pura-ushnih. 
3  Brihati.  4  Anushtup. 

Gftyatri.  9, 14  Anushtup.  10 
Wife'.  Their  Benediction.    Pftdanichpt.  15-18  Pankti. 

Indra.  Gftyatri. 

The  same.  Brihatt.  16-18  Gftyatri.  19 

'Anushtup. 

Anushtup.  16-18  Gftyatri. 


31  The  same.  The  Tajamftna  and  his 

82  Medhfttithi 
33  Medhyfttithi. 


35  Sy&vftsva. 


Asvins. 


UparishtAuyotaa^  2^-^^ 


620 


INDEX  OF  HTHK8. 


> 
^ 


I  RUki.  DeUy, 

36  Sy&v&BVik.  Indra. 

87  The  same. 

38  Indra  and  Agni. 

39  N4bh&ka.  Agni. 

40  The  8am&  lodra  and  Agni. 

41  Varuna. 

42  Archan&nas,  or    Varunai  Asvins. 

N&bhftka. 

43  Virupa.  Agni. 

44  The  same.  The  same 

45  Trisoka.  Agni  and  Indra.  Indra. 

46  Vaea  Asvya.  Indra.    Munificence   of 

Prithusravas.     V&yu. 


Metre, 

SakvarL  7  Mah&panktL 

Mah&pankti.  I  AtijagatS. 

G&yatrt. 

Mah&pankii. 

Mahftpankti.    2  Sakvart. 
12  Trishtup. 

MahftpanktL 

1-3  Trishtup.  4-6  Anush^p. 

G&yaid. 
The  same. 


1  P&danighrit.    2-4,  6, 10, 
23,  29,  38,  G4yatrt.    5 
Kakup.  7,11,19,25,27 
Brihatt.    SAnushtup.  9, 
2i,28Satobnhatt.  12Vi- 
parltft.    13  Ghaturvinsa- 
tikft  DnpadA.  14  Piplli- 
kamadhyft  Brihatt  15  Ka- 
kup Nyankusirft.  16  Virftj. 
17  Jagatl.  18  Uparishtdd- 
brihatt.  20  Vishamapadft. 
21,  22,  24,  32  PanktL  30 
Dvipadft  Vkftj.  31  Ush^ih. 


^    Trita  Aptya.         Adityas.  Adityas  and 

Ushas. 

Mah&pankti. 

48    Pragfttha.              Soma. 

Trishtup.  5  Jagati. 

49*  Bharga.                 Agni. 

Brihatt  and  Satobrihatl 
alternately. 

50    The  same.             Indra. 

The  same. 

51     Pragfttha.              The  same. 

Pankti.  7, 9  Brihatl. 

52    The  same.             Indra.    The  Gods. 

GAyatrt.  1, 4, 6,  7  Anushtup. 
12  Trishtup. 

53  Indra. 

G&yatri. 

54  The  same. 

The  same. 

55  Kali.                       

Brihatfand  Satobrihatt 

alternately.  15  Anushtup. 

56  MatsyaorMftnya.Adityas. 

57  Priyamedha.       Indra.  Munificence  of 

two  Princes. 

Gayatrt. 

Gftyatrt.  1,4, 7, 10  Anushtup. 

*  Eleven  must  be  added  to  the  numbers  of  this  and  of  all  that  follow  in 
this  Book  to  make  them  correspond  with  the  numbers  in  Prof.  Max  MuUer'a 
editioBB  of  the  text.    See  note  i^.  1^1 . 


INDSX  OF  HTUN8. 


621 


SX3 


Rishi, 


Deity. 


Metre, 


58  The  same. 

Indra.  Visvedevas. 

Varuna.  Anushtup.   2  Ushnih.   4-6 

GAyatrt.  11,  16'Pankti. 
17,  18  Brihatt. 

59  Puruhanman. 

Indra. 

Brihatt  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately.  7-12  Brihatl. 
13  Ushnih.  14  Anushtup. 
16  Pura-ushnih. 

60  SudltiandPuru-  Agai. 

Gftyatrt.  10-15  Brihatt  and 

milha,or  either 

Satobrihatt  alternately. 

of  them. 

n  Haryata. 

The  same. 

Gftyatii. 

$2  Gopavana,  or 

Asvins. 

The  same. 

Saptavadhri. 

C3  Oopavana. 

Agni-Srutarvan'a 

GAyatrt.  1,  4,  7,  10,   13-15 

Munificence. 

Anushtup. 

64  Viriipa. 

Agni. 

G&yatri. 

65  Eurusuti. 

Indra. 

The  same. 

66  The  same. 

The  same. 

Gftyatrt  10  Brihati.   11 
Satobrihatt.' 

67  

G/lyatrl.  10  Brihatt. 

^S  Kritnu. 

Soma. 

Gftyatrl.  9  Anushtup 

69  Ekadyd. 

Indra.  The  Gods. 

GAyatrl.  10  Trishtup. 

70  KiiRldin. 

Indra. 

G&yatH. 

71  The  same. 

The  same. 

The  same. 

72  

Visvedevas. 
Agni. 

73  Usanft  E&yya. 

74  Krishna. 

Asvins. 

• 

The  same. 

75  Visvaka. 

Jagatt. 

76  Dyumntka  or 
Priyamedha 

Brihatt  and  Satobrihatt 

alternately. 

or  Krishna. 

77  Nodhas.  Indra. 

78  Nrimedha  and    The  same. 

Purumedha. 

79  The  same.  

80  Ap&lft.  

81  Srutakaksha,  or 

Sukaksha. 

82  Sukaksha.  Indra.  Indra  and  Ribhus. 

83  Vindu,  or  Piita-  Maruts. 

daksha. 

84  Tiraschl.  Indra. 

Indra.  Maruts.  Indra 

and  BcJihaspaU. 


85  Pyut&na,or 
TirMcbt. 


The  same. 

1,  3,  7  Brihatt.  2,  4  Satobri- 
hatt.  5,  6  Anushtup. 

Pragfttha. 

Anushtup.  1^  2  Pankti. 

G&yatrt.  1  Anushtup. 

Gftyatrt. 
The  same. 

Anushtup. 
TriBhtaiig.  4.  Vvdv 


«22 


INDIX  OF  HTXNS. 


RUhi. 


I 

86  Rebha. 


87  Nrfanedha.  The  same. 


LeUy, 


Metre, 


88  The  same. 

89  Nema.  Indra 

(46). 

90  Jamadagni. 


91  Prayoga,  or 

Agni  Bftrhae- 
patya,  or  Agni 
Orihapati,  or 
Tavishtha. 

92  Sobhari. 


Indra.  Brihat^.  10, 1 3  Atijagatl .  II , 

'12  Upariaht&dbrihatl.    14 
Trishtup.  1*5  Jagati. 

Uehnih.  7,  10, 11  Eakup.  9, 

1%  Pura-ushnih. 
Pr&g&tha. 

Trishtup.  6  Jagati.  7-9 

Anushtup. 
l,6,7,9Jl,13Brihatl.  2,4, 
tya8.'ABvin8. V4yu.  Surya.      6,  8, 10, 12  Satbbrihati.  3 
Ushas. 'Pavam&na.  Cow.       Gayatrt.  14-16  Trishtup 
Agni.  Gftyatrl. 


Indra.  V&k. 

Mitra  and  Varuna.  Adi 


Agni.  Agni  and  Manits. 


1  Praskanva. 

2  Pushtigu. 

3  Srushtigu. 

4  Ayu. 

5  Medhya. 

6  M&tarisvan. 

7  Krisa 

8  Prishadra. 

9  Medhya. 

10  The  same. 

11  Suparna. 


vAlakhilya  hymns.* 

Indra. 
The  same. 


Brihati  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately. 

The  same. 


Indra.  Visvedevas.  

Praskanva's  Munificence.      G&yatri.  3-5  Anushtup. 
The  same.  Agni  and  Sdrya.  G&yatri.  5  Pankti. 
Asvins.  Trishtup. 

Visvedevas. The  Priests      .  The  same. 
Indra  and  Varuna.  Jagati. 


BOOK  IX. 

1  Madhuchchhan-  Soma  Pavam^na. 

das. 

2  Medhfttithi.        The  same. 

3  Sunahsepa.         

4  Hiranyast^pa 

5  Asita,orDeyala.  Apris. 

6  The  same.  Soma  Pavamdna. 
7-24  The  same. 


Gftyatri. 
The  same. 


Gftyatri.  8-11  Anushtup. 

Gayatrt. 

The  same. 


*  These  eleven  hjmna  axe  ii\xm>w5«»^  ^^— ^^  \^^xq\.^'«s.^^^'«^^k 
editioQB  of  the  text. 


IKD8X  OF  HTMV8. 


«23 


^lishi. 


Deity, 


Soma  Pavam^ft* 


Hieire, 


GAyatarl. 


•  r. ■*•••• 


ft 

I 

25  Drilhachyuta. 

26  Idhmavftha. 

27  Nrimedha. 

28  Priyamedha. 

29  Nrimedha. 

30  Viudu. 

31  Gotama. 

32  Syftvftava. 
83  Trita  Aptya. 
S4  The  same. 
36  Prabhfiyasu. 

36  The  same. 

37  Bah%apa 

38  The  sam«. 

39  firihanzaati. 
4}  The  same. 

41  Medhy&tithi. 

42  The  same. 

43  

44  Aydsya. 
i5  The  same. 

46  

47  Kavi. 

48  The  same 

49  .« 

50  Uchathya.  

&1  The  same.  

52  

53-60  Avatsftra.  

61  Amahiyu.  

62  Jamadagni.  

63  NidhruvL  

64  Elasyapa.  •• 

66  Bhrigu  or  

Jamadagni. 

66  The  Vaikh&nasas.  Soma  Pavam&na.  Agni.  Gftyatrt.  18  Anushtup, 

67  Bharadv&ja.  Pavam&na  Soma.  Pavam&na  QAyatrt.  16-18  Dvipad4G4< 

Easyapa.  Gota-    Pilshan.  Agni.  Savitar.  All-      yatri.  27,31,  32  Anush- 
ma.'Atri.yi8v&-    Gods.  Praise  of  Students.      tup.  30  Pura-ushoih. 
mitra.      Jama- 
dagni Yasish- 
tba,  Pavitra, 


»  •  •      9%  t  •  • 


624 


INSBX  OF  HYMNS. 


5      ^iki.                 ^^y- 

68    Vatsaprt.           Soma  Pavam&na. 
59    Hiranyasttipa.    The  same. 

70  Benu.                

71  Rishabha.          

Metre, 

Ji^tl.  10  Trishtup. 
Jagatl.  9,  10  Trishtup. 
Jagatl  10  Trishtup. 
jagatl.  9  Trishtup. 

^^ti. 

TLj  same. 

Jagai.  8  Trishtup. 

Jagatl. 

The  sane. 

72    Harimanta.        

73  Pavitra.              

74  Kakshlvftn 

75    Kavi.                  

76  The  same.           

77     

78    

79          .                    

f  47          ...  *•• ...                                      •• 

80     Vasu.                     

81     The  aame.            

Jagatl.  5  Trish«;up. 
The  same. 
Jagatt. 
The  same. 

82     

88    Pavitra.              

84    Prai&oati.            

85  Vena.                  

86  The  Akriahta     

Maahas.     The 
Sikata  Niv&va- 
ria.  The  Prisni 
Ajaa.     Atri. 
Gritsamada. 

R7     TTsanft.                    

Jagatl.  11,  12  Trishtup. 
Jagatt. 

Trishtup. 
The  same. 

• 

8S    The  same.            

90    Vasishtha. 

92    The  same.           -  -  -  

94    Kanva.                 

95     Praskanva.           

96    Pratardana.         

97     Vasishtha.  In-     

drapramati. 
Manyu.  Upa- 
manyu.  Vyft- 
ghrapftd.  Sakti 
Karnasriit. 
Mrilika.  Vasu- 
kra.  Par&saia. 

• 

Kutaa. 

INDEX  OF   H7MN8. 


625 


98 


Rishi. 


Deity. 


\ 


i 


Ambarfaha  and    Soma  Pavam&na. 
Rijisvan. 

99    TheRebhasfinuB.  The  same. 

100  The  same 

101  Andhlgu.  Yaya-  

ti.     Nahusha. 
Manu.  Praj&pati. 

102  TritaAptya 

103  DvitaAptya 

104  Parvata    and       

N4rada,  or  the 
Sikhandinls. 

•  •   • 

(Apsaras). 

105  Parvafca  and        

Ndrada. 

106  Agni.  Chakshus  

Manu. 

107  Seven  Rishis 


108  Gaurivlbi.  Sak- 
ti.  Oru.  Rijis- 
van. Ordhva- 
sadman.  Kri- 
tayas4.  Rinau- 
chaya. 


Metre. 

Anushtup,  11  Brihati. 

Anushtup.  1  Brihatt. 

Anushtup. 

Anushtup.  2,  5  G&yatri. 


Ushnih. 
The  same. 


Prftgitha.  3,  16  Dvipadi  Vi- 
r4j.  8,  10  Brihati. 

1-12  Kakup  and  Satobrihatt 
alternately.  13  Q&yatrt 
Yavamadhy&.  14, 16  Sato- 
bdhati.  15  Kakup. 


109    Agnis  of  Saen 
fice. 

•*       •••*•      ••• 

Dvipada  Virftj. 

110    Tryaruna  and 

Trasadasyu. 

1 

•  •  •  1  v«      •• 

1-3  Anushtup  Piptlikamadh 
y&.     4-9     Crdhvabrihati 
10-12  Viraj. 

111     An4nata. 

Atyashti. 
Pankti. 

112     Sisu. 

113  Kasyapa. 

114  The  same. 

The  same. 

BOOK  X. 

1  Trita  Aptya. 

Agni. 

Trishtup. 

2  The  Same. 

3  

4  

5 

The  same. 

The  same 

• 

6  

7    

••••••    •• 

Agni.  Indra. 

40 

626 


INDEX   OF    HTMNS. 


i  BUhi. 

9  Tri8ira8,or  Sin-  Waters, 
dhudvtpa. 

10  Tama.  Tamt. 

11  Havirdh&Da 

Angi. 


Deity. 


Yaraa.  Yami. 
Agni. 


Metre. 

G&yatrl.  6  Vardhaniftn&.  7 
Pratinhthft.  8, 9  Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

Jagatl.  7-9  Trishtup. 


12  The  same. 

13  Vivasv&Q. 

14  Yama. 


The  same. 
The  Two  Carts. 


Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  5  Jagatt. 

Yama.  The  Deities  men-       Trishtup.  13,  14.  16  Anush- 
tioned.  The  Fathers.  The       tup.  15  Brihatt. 
Huunds,  sons  of  Saram&. 

The  Fathers.  Trishtup.  11  Jagatl. 

Agni.  Trishtup.  11-14  Anushtup. 

Saranyfl.  Pushan.  Sarasvatt.Trishtup  14  Anushtup.    13 
Waters.  Soma.  Anushtup    or    Purast&d- 

brihati. 

Mrityn.  DbAtar.  Tvaahtar.    Trishtup.  11  Prastftrapankti. 
The  Pitrimedha.PraJ!ipati.      13  Jagatl.  14.  Anushtup. 

19  Mathita.Bhrigu,  Waters,  or  Cows.  Agni  Anushtup.  6  G&yatri, 

or  Chyavana.       and  Soma. 


15  Sankha. 

16  Damana. 

17  Devasravas. 

18  Sankusuka. 


20  VimadaorVa-    Agni. 
Bukrit. 


21  The  same. 

22  


23 


24  

25  

26  

27  Vasukra. 

28  Vasukra's  Wife.  Indra.  Vasukra. 
Indra.  Vasukra. 


The  same. 
Indra. 

The  same. 

ludra.  Asvins., 
Soma. 
Pdahan.' 
Indra. 


G&yatrl.  1  Ekapadft  Virftj. 
"2  Anushtup.  9  Virftj.  10 
Trishtup. 

Ast&rapankti. 

Purastadbi  ihati.  5,  7,  9  Anu- 
slitup.  15  Trishtup. 

Jngati.   1,  7  Trishtup.   5 
Abhis&riDi. 

A8tdrapankti.4-6  Anushtup. 

Astirapankti. 

Anushtup.  1,  4  Ushnih. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 


29  Vasukra. 
SO  Kayasha. 

3 1  The  same. 

32  

33  

34  Kavasha,  or 

Aksha. 

35  Lnsa. 

• 

36  The  same. 

37  Abhitapl 


Indra. 

Waters,  or  Child  of  Waters, 

Visvedevas. 

Indra. 

Visvedevas.  Indra.  Kuru- 
sravana.  Upam^isravas. 

Dice.  Agriculture. 

Visvedevas. 
The  same. 
Surya. 


1-5  Jagatl.  6-9  Trishtup. 

1  Trishtup.  2  Brihati. 3  Sato 
brihati.  4-9  GAyatr  . 

Trishtup.  7  Jagatl. 
Jagatl.  13,  14  Trishtup. 


INDEX   OV   HYMNS. 


«27 


J5 

S  Rlshi.  Deity.  Metre, 

38     IndraMushka-     Indra.  Jagati. 

y%n, 

89  Gho8h&.  Asvins.  Jagati.  14  Trishtup. 

40  The  same.  The  same.  Jagat!. 

41  Suhastya.  The  same. 

42  Krishna.  Indra.  Trishtup. 

4^    The  same.  The  same.  Jagatt.  10,  11  Trishtup. 

44     Jagat!.  1-3,10, 11  Trishtup. 

45  Vatsapr!.  Agni.  Trishtup. 

46  The  same.  The  same.  The  same. 

47  Saptagu.  Indra  Yaikuntha.  

48  Indra  Vaikun-     The  same.  Jagati.  7,  10,  11  Trishtup. 

tha. 

49  The  same.  Jagatt.  2,  1 1  Trishtup, 

50     1,  2.  6,  7  Jagati.  3,  4  Abhi- 

s&rini.  5  Trishtup. 

51  Agni  Sauchtka.    Agni.  Gods.  Trishtup. 

52  The  same.  Gods.  The  same. 

53  Agni  Sauchtka.    Agni.  Gods.  Trishtup.  6,  7,  9-11  Jagat!. 

Gods. 

54  Brihaduktha.      Indra.  Trishtup. 

55  The  same.  The  same.  The  same. 

56     Visvedevas.  Trishtup.  4, 6  Jagatt. 

57  Bandhu,  Sruta-    The  same.  Gftyatrl. 

bandhu,    Vi- 
prabandhu. 

58  The  same.  The  Spirit.  Anushtup. 

59     Nirriti.  Soma.  Asuniti.  The  Trishtup.   8  Pankti.  9  Ma- 

Deities  mentioned.  Heav-    h&pankti.lOPanktyuttarA 
en  and  Earth.  Indra. 

60  The   GaupAya-    Asamftti.  Indra.  Subandhu's  Anushtup.  1-6  Gftyatrt.  8* 

nas  and  their       Recall  to  Life.  The  Hands.       9  Pankti. 
Mother. 

61  Nftbh&nedishtha.Vi8vedeva«.  Trishtup. 

62  The  same.  Visvedevas,    or  Angirases.  1-4  Jagatt.    5,  8,  9  Anush- 

Visvedevas.  S&varni's  tup.  6  Brihail.   7   Sato- 

Liberality,  brihatt.  10  Gdyatrt.   11 

Trishtup. 

63  Gaya.  Visvedevas.  Pathy&  Svasti.  Jagatt.  16, 17  Trishtup.  15 

Trishtup  or  Jagati. 

64  The  same.  Visvedevas.  Jagatt.  12, 16, 17  Trishtup, 

65  Vasukarna.  The  same.  Jagatt.  15  Trishtup. 

66  The  same.  The  same, 

dZ    AyAayA.  Brihaspati.  Ti\»\iVr^. 


628 


1^*DEX   OP   HYMNS 


S  RUhi. 

§     ■ 

€8  Ay&sya. 

69  Sumitra. 

70  The  same. 

71  Brihaspati. 

72  Brihaspati,  or 

Aditi. 

73  GauiivTti. 

74  The  same. 

75  Sindhukshit. 

76  Jaratkarna. 

• 

77  Syumarasmi. 

78  The  same. 


Deity. 

Brihaspati. 
Agni. 
Aprls. 
Jfi^nam. 
Gods. 

Indra. 
The  same. 
The  Rivers. 
The  Press- stones. 
Maruts. 
The  same. 


79  Agni,  or  Sapti.    Agni. 

80  Agni.  The  same. 

81  Yisvakarman.     Visvakarman. 


Metrt. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  1,2  Jagati. 

Trishtup. 

Tiishtup.  9  Jagati. 

Anubhtup. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Jngatt. 

The  siime. 

Trishtup.  5  Jagati. 

1,  3,  4,  8   Trishtup.  2,  5-7 
Jagati. 

Trishtup. 
The  same. 


82  The  same. 

83  Manyu. 

84  The  same. 

85  Surya. 


Trishtup.  1  Jagati. 

1-3  Ti-ishtup.  4-7  Jagati. 


The  same. 

Manyu. 

The  same. 

Soma.  Suryjl's  Bridal.  Gods.  Anushtup.  l4,  19-21  23, 
Somaaud  Arka.TheMoon.  24,  26,  36,  37,  44  Trish- 
Benedictions.  Suryii.  tup.   18,   37,   43   Jagati. 

34  Urobrihatl. 

86     Indra.  Indrftnl.  Indra.  IndM.;!.  Vrishdkapi.  Tankti. 
Vrishakapi. 


I 


87  Payu. 

88  Miirdhanvan. 

89  Renu. 

90  Nardyaria. 

91  Aruva. 

92  Sarv&ta. 

93  Tanva. 


Agni  Rakshoha. 

Siirya  and  Vaisvdnara. 

Indra  and  Soma. 

Pufusha. 

Agni. 

Visvedevas. 

The  same. 


9i     Arbuda. 

95  Puniravaa. 

UrvaPl. 

96  Barn,  or 

Sarvahari. 

97  Bhishaj. 

98  PevApi. 
90    Vamra, 


The  Press-stones. 
UiTiVFi.  Pururavas. 

Indra's  Horses. 

Medicinal  Herbs. 

Gods. 

Indra. 


Trishtup.  22, 25  Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Anushtup.  16  Trishtup. 

Jagati.  15  Trishtup. 

Jagati. 

Prastdrapankti .  2. 3, 1 3  Anu- 
shtup. 9  Pankti.  11  Nyan- 
kupdrini.   15  Purastadbri- 
hati. 

Jagati.  5,  7,  14  Trishtup. 
Trishtup. 

Jagati.  32,  13  Trii^htup. 

Anushtup. 
Trishtup). 


INDEX   OF   HYMNS. 


629 


t  Rithi 

100  Duvasyu. 

101  Budha. 

302  Murlgala. 

103  Apratiratha. 


Deity. 
Visvedevas. 

« 

Visvedevas,  or  Priests. 

Indra,  or  the  Mace. 

Indra.  Brihaspati.  Apvji. 
Maruts. 

Indra. 

The  same. 


104  Abhtakn. 

• 

105  Durmitra  or 

Sumitra. 

1C6     Bhfitdnsa.  Apvins. 

•  • 

107  Divya,  or  Dak-  Guerdon. 

shii.ii. 

108  Saramd.   Panis.  SaramA.  Pain's. 

109  Juhu.  Visvedevas. 

110  Jr.madagni  or      Apiis. 

R&ma. 

111  Ashtradanshtra.  ludra. 

•  • 

112  Nabhabprabbe-  The  same. 

dana. 

113  Sataprabhedana 

114  Sfvdhri  or  Ghar-  Visvedevas. 

ma. 

115  Upastuta.  Agiii. 


116 

Agiiiyuta  or 
Agniyfipa. 

Indra. 

117 

Bhikshu. 

Liberality. 

118 

Urukshnya. 

Agni  Rakshohd. 

119 

Lava. 

Indra,  as  Lava. 

120 

Brihaddiva. 

ludra. 

121 

Hiranyagarbha. 

Ka. 

122 

Chitramahil. 

Agui. 

123 

Vena. 

Vena. 

124 

Agni.  Agni,  Va-  Agui.  Indra. 
runa,  and  Soma. 

125 

V&k*. 

Vak. 

126 

Kulmalabarbi- 
nha,  or  Anho- 
much. 

Visvedevas. 

• 

127 

Kusika  or  Ratri 

• 

L  Nigbt. 

128 

Vihavya. 

Visvedevas. 

129 

Prajdpati  Para- 
mesh  thin. 

Creation. 

tso 

Vajtia. 

The  same. 

Metre. 

Jagatf.  12  Trishtup. 

Trisbtup.   4,  6  Qiyatrt. 
5  Brihati  9,  12  Jagati. 

Trishtup,  1,  3, 12  Brihatt. 

Trishtup.  13  Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

Ushriih.  2,  7  Pipilikamadh- 
yA.  11  Trishtup. 

Trishtup, 

Trishtup.  4  Jagati. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  6,  7  Anushtup. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 


Jagati.  10  Trishtup. 
Trishtup.  4  Jagati. 

Jagati.  8  Trishtup. 
Sakvart. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  1,  2  Jagatf. 

G&yatrt. 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

The  same. 

Jagati.  1,  5  Trishtup. 

Trishtup. 

Trishtup.  7  Jagatf. 

Trisbtup.  2  Jagati. 

Up.nrish  tldbrihatf . 
8  Trishtup! 

G4yatrt. 

Trishtup.  9  Jagatf. 
Trishtup. 


680 


INDKX  OF  BTMN8. 


I 

t 

( 


i 


i 

«5* 

nuki. 

• 

Deiiy. 

Metre,  si 

131 

SuktrU. 

Indra.  AbtIiis. 

Ti-ishtup.  4  Abi 

132 

Sftkapau. 

Heaven  and  Earth,  Asyins. 

1  Nyankusftrinl 

Mitra  and  Varuria. 

tftrapankti.  8« 
pA.  7MahA8«l 

133 

SudAs. 

Indra. 

1-3  Sakvan.  4^ 
ti.  7  Triahtup 

134 

lUn<1hAtAr. 

The  same. 

Mahftpankti.  7  I 

QodhA.  . 

135  KumAra.  Tama.    ^ 

136  Seven  Munis :    The  Kesins. 

jatLVAUjiUi. 
Viprajati.Vri- 
shAnaka.  EtsM. 
Risyasringa.  * 


Anushtup. 
The  same. 


137 

The  Seven 

Visvedevas. 

Anushtup. 

Rishis. 

• 

»■ 

138 

Anga. 

Indnu 

Jagatt. 

139 

VisvAvasu. 

Sflrya.  VisvAvasu. 

Trishtup. 

140 

Agni  PAvaka. 

Agoi. 

1  VishtArapank« 
tobrihati.  6  C 
jyotis.  6  Trislr 

141 

Agni  TApasa. 

Visvedevas. 

Anushtup. 

142 

Jaritar.  Drona. 

Agni. 

Trishtup.  1,  2  Ja 

SArisrikva. 

Anushtup. 

Stambamitra. 

143 

Atri. 

AsviDB. 

Anushtup. 

144 

Suparva,  Ordh- 

Indra. 

1,  3.  4  GAyatri.  ' 

yakxisana. 

•    • 

5  Satobrihati.  6 
pankti. 

145 

Indrftni. 

Removal  of  Rival. 

Anushtup.  6  Pan! 

146 

Devamuni. 

AranyAnt. 

Anushtup. 

147 

Suvedas. 

Indra. 

Jagat!.  6  Trishtu] 

148 

Prithu  Vainya. 

The  same. 

Trishtup. 

149 

Archan. 

Savitar. 

The  same. 

150 

Mrilika. 

Agui. 

1-3  Brihati.  4  U 
jyotis  or  Jagati 
rishtajjyotis. 

151 

Sraddha. 

• 

Sraddha  (Faith). 

Anushtup. 

152 

SAsa. 

• 

Indra. 

The  same. 

153 

Indra's  Mothers 

.  The  same. 

GAyatil. 

154 

Yaml. 

New  Life. 

Anushtup. 

155 

Sirimbitha. 

Averting  of  Misfortune. 

The  same. 

Brahmana6\>ati.  Visve- 
devas. 

156 

Ketii. 

Agm. 

^^>S^V\\. 

?«Ai. 


Daly. 


167  Bhuvans,  or        Visvedev»a. 

SddhoQa. 

15S  ChalcBhus.  SOrya. 

I5S  ^Hcbl  Pauloml.  3wbl  Paulomt. 

160  ParaiifL.  Indra. 

161  YafcahmanArana,  Romoial  of  PhtUisw. 
182  Bak«faohlk.  Ag&iaat  UiBuarrit^«, 
163  Vivrihit.  Removal  of  Phlhiaia. 

161  PriicIieUs.  Uisaipatiou  of  Bod  Dreams. 


Dvipadt  Tiishtup. 

O&yatrl. 

An  mil  tup. 
Trtehtup. 

Truh^up.  5  Anuthtup. 

AnualiCup. 

Tbe  uuie. 


165 

Kipota. 

V[*yedeTaf 

166 

Rishabha. 

Hemoval  ol 

167 

168 
169 

ViB.imitra  ( 
Jaraadigni. 
Anil.. 
Sabsj*. 

ind  ludra. 

Vayu. 
Conn. 

170 

m 

Vibh,-4j. 
Ita. 

Indra. 

172 

Samvarta. 

Uabai. 

173 

Dhva^A. 

Tba  King. 

174 

Abblvarta. 

The  aame. 

175  Crdhvagrdvan.    The  Prew-atoneg. 

176  SQnu.  lUbhus.  Agiii. 

177  Pntanga.  Miyibhedi.. 

178  Atiablanemi.       Titkshya. 
178    Sibi.  PraUida-  Indra. 

oa.  V.auuiaaas. 

150  Jays.  The  same. 

151  Piacha.  Sapra-  Visvedevai. 

tha.  IJharuia, 


TiUhiup. 

Auusbtup.  £  MabtpanktL 

J*i;»'l. 

Triahtup. 

The  Mma. 

Jagatl.  1  AatlrapaaktL 

Oiyatil. 

Dvipadi  Virlj. 

ADusb(up. 

The  same. 

Gjyatri. 

Auuahtup.  2  Olyatrt. 

1  JagatL  2,  3  Triahtup, 

Trigbcup. 

1  Anuabtup.  2,  3  Triahtup. 

Triablup. 


182    Tapiirm  rdbii 

183    PrajirJn. 

Tile  Sacriticer.  Hia  Wife. 

The  Hatar. 

184     TvaahLir  or 

Benedicdaii  ai  the  Embryo. 

Anuahtup, 

Vishnu. 

185    Srityadhriti. 

Aditi. 

Glyatrt. 

186     Ula. 

Vivu, 

Tbe  aama. 

187    Vatsa. 

Agni. 

188  Sjena. 

189  SirpailjBI. 

190  AghamaKhan; 

Agni  Jaidvedaa. 
Sitparij&i,  or  Siirya. 
1.  C.eatioii. 

AuiiadtJi^. 

JSi     Surai-anaua. 

Agai.     Unanimity. 

k'i>MkVa?.^'^^\**i*V 

;  J 


I. 


M. 


.  •] 


1 

.1 

* 

i 
t  • 

■r 
.1 

* 

\ 

i  I   ■  I 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  HYMNS. 


ACCORDING  TO  DEITIES  AND  SUBJECTS.* 


DEITIES  OF  DAWN. 
Ushas,  Dawn.  Morning. — I.  48. 49.  92. 

113.  123.  124.  III.  61.  IV.  51.  52.  V. 

79.  80.  VI.  64. 65.  VII.  75-81.  X.  172. 
The  Asviiis.— I.  34.  46.  47.   112.  116- 


COSMIC  DEITIES. 
Ribhus.— I.  20.  110.  111.  III.  60.  IV 

33-37.  VII.  48. 
Heaven  and  Earth.— I.  159.  160.  185 

IV.  56.  VI.  70.  VII.  58. 


120.  157. 158.  181)^84. 11.39.  III.  58.     Prithivl.— V.  84, 


IV.  43-4.5.  V.  73-77.  VT.  62.  63.  VII. 

67-74.  VIII.  5.  8-10.  22.  26.  35.  02. 

74.  76.     Vaiakhilya  Hymns,  at  the 

end  of  VIII.  9.  X.  39-41.  106.  143. 
Dadhikravan,  DadhikrAs.— IV.  38  40. 

VII.  44. 
Agui  as  a  God  of  Morning. — IV.  13.14. 


Sarasvatl.--VI.  61.  VII.  95-96. 
Waters.— VII.  47.   49.  X.  9.  Waters, 

or  Cows. — X.  19. 
Son  of  Waters,  Apftranapftt. — IT.  35. 
Soma.— I.  91.  VIII.  48.  68.  X.  26. 


VARUNA  AND  SUN-GODS. 
Varuna.— I.  24.  25. 11.  28.  V.  85.  VII. 

86.  89.  VIII.  41.  42. 
Mitra.-III.  59.  VII.  41. 
Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman. — I.  41. 
Mitra  and  Varuna.— I.  136.  137.  151- 

153.  V.  62-72.  VI.  67.   VII.   60-66. 

VIII.  25.  X.  132.  185. 
AdityaR.-II.  27.    VII.  51.  52.  VIII. 

18.  47.  56. 
SCirya.— 1.  50.  115.  X.  37.  158. 


COLLECTIVE  AND  MISCELLA- 
NEOUS  DEITIES. 

Visvedevas,  All-Gods.— I.  14.  89.  90. 
106.  107.  122.  139.  186.  IL  29.  31. 
III.  54-57.  IV.  55.  V.  41-51.  VL 
49-52.  VII.  34.  36.  37.  89.  40.  42. 
43.  VIII.  27-30.  72.  X.  31.  35.  36. 
63-66.  92.  93.  100. 

Asvins,  Savitar,  Agni,  Heaven  and 
E;.rth,  Vishnu.— I.  22. 

V^yu,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Visve- 
devas. P.ibhan, Waters,  Agni. — I.  23. 

Heaven  and  Earth,  Indra,  Tvashtar, 
Rftka,  Sinivalt— II.  32. 


Savitar.— I.  35.  II.  38.  IV.  53. 54.  V.  81. 

82.  VI.  71.  VII.  88.  45.  X.  139.  149.     Indra,  Vdyu,  Mitra,   Varuna,  Asvins, 
PAshan.— I.  42.    138.  VI.   53-56.   58.         Visvedevas,  Sarasvati,    Dyaus,  Pri- 

thivi.— II.  41. 


X  26. 

Vishnu.— L  154-156.  VII.  99.  100. 
Visvakarmnn. — X.  81.  82. 
Vt.na    -X.  123. 
Vibhraj.-X.  170 
TArksliya.— X.  178. 
Sari>arajiiir  or  Surya  — X.  189. 


Indra,  Varuna,    Brihaspati,    Piiahau, 

Savitar,  Soma,  Mitra,  Varuna. — III. 

62. 
Mitr.u  Vrirunri,  Adityas,  Asvins,  Vityu, 

Surya,  Pavamdua,  the  Cow. — VIII. 

90. 


*   1  follow  the  classification  iind  jirrangenient.  adopted  by  Professor  Lnd- 
wi^  in  his  Trunylation.     The  names  of  many  ot"  (lie  doities  are  repeated  in 
other  Section!!!  in  accordance  with  the  subjects  of  the  hymns  addressed  to 
thi-m.     For  iiL^taucti.  tlie  <*veni  deeds  of  ludva  av^  \<6\^\,fe«\\\i\v^\xvVkss x^^^iv^Wx*. 
the  Cohinoguuical  and  Mvtliical  Section. 


634 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF   HYMNS. 


AGNI  (JATAVEDAS  AND 
VA18VANARA). 
I.  1.  12.  26.  27.  31.  36.  44.  45.  58-60. 
65-79.  94-99.  127.  128.  140.  141. 
143.150.  189.  II.  1.  2.  4-10.  III.  1- 
3.5-7.  9-11.  13-28.  IV.  M2.  15. 
V.  1-4.  6-11.  13-28.  VI.  1-16.  48. 
VII.  1.  3.  4-17.  VIII.  11.  19.  23. 
39,  43.  44.  49.  60.  61.  63.  64.  73. 
91.  92.  X.  1-8.  11.  12.  20.  21.  45. 
46.  79.  80.  87.  88.  91.  115.  118. 122. 
140.  142.  150.  156.  176.  187.  188. 


INDRA  (SATAKRATU,   SAKRA, 

MANYU.) 
I.  4-11.  16.  30.  54-57.  61-63.  80-84. 
100-104.  121.  129-133.  135.  169. 
173-178.  11.  11-22.  30.  III.  30-32. 
34-52.  IV.  16.  17.  19.  25.  29.  31. 
32.  46.  V.  29-39.  VI.  17-26.  28-47. 
VII.  19-32.  VIII.  1-4.  6,  12-17.  21. 
24.  32-34.  36.  37.  45.  46.  50-65.  57. 
59.65-67.69.71.77-79.    81.82.84- 

88.  VAlakhilya,  1-6.  X.  22-24.  29. 
32.  42-44.  47.  50.  54.    55.    73.    74. 

89.  96.  104.  105.  112.  113. 116.  120. 
131.  133.  134.  138.  144.  147.  148. 
352.  153.  160. 171-179. 180.  Mauyu. 
X.  83  84. 


GODS   OF  STORM,  WIND, 
AND  RAIN. 
Maruts.— I.  37-39.  64.  85-88.  166-168. 
171.  II.  34.  V.  52-60.  87.  VI.  66.  VII. 
56-59.  VIII.  7.  20.  83.  X.  77.  78. 
Rudra.— I.  43.  114.  II.  33.  VII.  46. 
Vdyu.— 1.  2.  134.  IV.    47.   48.   VII. 

90-92.  X.  168.  186. 
Parjanya.— V.  83.  VII.  101.  102. 


LORD  OF  PRAYER. 
Brahmanaspati  or  Bribaspati. — I.  18. 
40.  190.  IL  28-26.  IV.  50.  VV.  7^. 
Vll  97.  98.  X.  182. 
Ittdt'ii  and  Brahmanaspati. — IV.  4^. 


DUAL  DEITIES. 
Indra-Varuna.— L  17.  IV.  41.  VI.  68. 

VII.  82.  84.  85.  VAlakhilya,  11. 
Indra-Pushan.— VL  57. 
Indra- Vishnu.— VI.  69. 
Indra-Agni— L  21.  108.  109.  IIL  12. 

V.  86.  VI.  69.  60.  VII.  93.  94.  VIIL 

88.  40. 
Agni-Maruts. — I.  19. 
Indra-Soma  — VI.  72.  VII.  104. 
Agni-Soma. — I.  93? 
Soma- Rudra.— VI.  74. 
Soma-Pusban. — II.  40. 


LITURGICAL  HYMNS.  PRAYERS. 
CHARMS. 

Visvedevas — X.  114.    Sacred  Metres- 
— X.   130.    Praise  of  the  Angira- 
ses.— X.  62.   The  Sacrificer  and  his 
Wife.— VIII.   31.    The  Sacrificer, 
Wife,  and  Hotar.— X.  183  Faith.— 
X.  151.  Visvedevas.— X.  157.  State 
of   the  Dead.— X.   154.     Dakshin^ 
(Priests'  Guerdon).— X.  107.  Ritvi- 
jas   (Priests). — Valakhilya.    10.   X. 
101.    Apris.— I.  13.  142.  188.  II.  3. 
IIL  4.  V.  5.  VII.  2.  IX.  5.  X.  70. 
110.    Productiou  of  Sacrificial  Fire. 
—IIL  29.    Sacrificial  Stake.— III. 
8.  Pestle  and  Mortar.— I.  28.  Press- 
stones.— X.  76.  94.  175.    Havirdh4- 
nas. — X.  13.  Ritus   (Seasons). — II. 
36.  37.  Soma  PavamAna. — IX.  1-4. 
6-114.     Praise    of    the    Horse.— I. 
162. 163.  Waters,  or  Son  of  Waters. 
—X.  30.    Saranyfl,  PAshan,  Saras- 
vati,  Waters,  Soma.— X.  17.  Sury&'s 
Bridal— X.  85.  Vftstoshpati  (Guar- 
dian of   the  House).— VII.  54.  55. 
Kshetrapati   (Lord   of   the  Field) 
and  Sita  (Furrow).— IV.  57.    Praise 
of  Food.— I.  187.    Aranyaui  (God- 
^^*«,  oi  -Ocv^  VQte&M .— X .  146.  Night. 


QENEBAL   INDEX   OF   HYMNS. 


635 


—  X.  187.  Against  MiBcarriage.— 
X.  162.  Asvins.— V.  78.  Maruts.— 
I.  172.  Soma  Pavam&na. — IX.  114. 
Visvedevas.— X.  137.  Cows.— X. 
169.  Water,  Grass,  Silrya.— I.  191. 
Indra.— VIII.  80.  Mitra,  Varuna, 
Agni,  Visvedevas,  Praise  of  Rivers. 
—VII.  50.  Visvedevas.— X.  126. 
Charm  against  Phthisis. — X.  161. 
163.  Charm  against  Evil  Dreams. — 
X.  164.  Indra.— I.  29.  The  Bird 
of  Good  Omen.— II.  42.  43.  The 
Bird  of  111  Omen.— X.  165.  Charm 
against  a  rival  Wife.— X.  145.  Sachl 
Pauloml— X.  159.  Visvedevas. — 
X.  128.  141.  Removal  of  a  Rival— 
X.  166.  Benediction  of  the  King. — 
X.  173. 174.  Unanimity.— X.  191. 
Yama,  the  Fathers,  the  Dogs. — X. 
14.  The  Fathers.— X.  15.  Agni.— 
X.  16.  Mrityu,  Dh&tar,  Tvashtar, 
the  Pitrimedha,  Prajipati. — X.  18. 
Visvedevas.— X.  56.  Pavam4ua 
Soma.— IX.  1-4.  6-114. 


HYMNS  RELATING  TO  COSMO- 

GONY,  MYTHS,  HISTORY,  AND 

CIVILIZATION. 

Creation  of  the  World.— X.  129.  190. 
Creation  by  Sacrifice  of  Purusha. — 
X.  90.  Ka.— X.  121.  The  Goda.— 
X.  52.  72.  Visvedevas.— I.  105.  164. 
181.  M4y4bheda.— X.  177.  Agni, 
Surya,  Waters,  the  Cow,  Ghrita. — 
IV.  58.  Rivalry  of  Indra  and 
Varuna.— IV.  42.  X.  124.  Indra's 
Birth.— IV.  18.  Indra.  Praise  of 
the  Falcon.— IV.  26.  Praise  of  the 
Falcon. — IV.  27.  Indra  and  Soma. 
—IV.  28.     Indra  and  Ushas.— IV. 


30.  Indra.— I.  32.  33.  51.  53.  X.  27. 
48.  49.  67.  68.  99. 102.  111.  119. 167. 
Indra.  Vasukra.- X.  28.  Indra. 
Maruts.  Agastya. — X.  165.  170 
Maruts.— V.  61.  Indra.  V4k  — VIII. 
89.  Agni.  The  Gods.- X.  51.  Agni 
Sauchlka.  The  Gods.— X.  53.  Indra. 
Surya.  Atri.— V.  40.  Vrishikapi. 
Indrinl.  Indra.— X.  86.  Urvasi. 
Purdravas.— X  95.  Saraml  Panis. 
—X  108.  Visvedevas.— X.  57.  Re- 
call  of  the  Spirit.— X.  58.  Nirriti. 
Soma.  Asunlti.  Earth.  Heaven  and 
Earth.— X.  59.  Asamiti.  Indra- 
Subandhu's  Recall  to  Life.  The 
Hands.— X.  60.  V4k  Ambhrini.- X. 
125.  Jfi4nam— X.  71.  Yama.— X. 
135.  Praise  of  the  Rivers. — X.  75. 
Vasishtha  and  the  Rivers. — III.  33. 
Indra  and  Parvata,  Indra,  Vak  Sa- 
saipart.  Praise  of  the  Chariot. — 
III.  53.  Indra,  Ch&yam&na's  Muni- 
ficence.— V.  27.  Indra.  Sudfts's 
Munificence. — VII.  18.  Vasishtha's 
Sons.  Vasishtha.— VII.  33.  fndra 
and  Varuna. — VII.  83.  Dadhikr&van. 
—IV.  38.  Agni.— V.  12.  Savanaya's 
Munificence. — I.  125.  Bh&vayavya 
and  Romas&. — I.  126.  Lop&mudr& 
and  Agastya. — 1. 179.  Asvins. — VIII. 
75.  Agni.— X.  69.  The  Gods.— X. 
98.  Visvedevas.  Kurusravana's  Mu- 

•  •  • 

nificence. — X.33.  Praskanva's  Muni- 
ficence. — Vftlakhilya.  7.  8.  Kesins. 
— X.  136.  Visvedevas.— X.  109. 
The  Frogs.— VII.  103.  Weapons  of 
War.— VI.  75.  Indra.— X.  38.  105. 
Soma  Pavamana.— IX.  112.  Medi- 
cinal  Herbs.- X.  97.  The  Dice.— 
X.  34.  Liberality.— X  117. 


I/. 
I 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

Abhiplava,  a  certain  So-  486,  487,  493,  512,  514,  182,  185-189,  199-202, 
ma  ceremony,  136,  400  523,  538, 510,  541, 554,  217-220,  222-^4,^231, 
notesi.  579,  607.  250, 254-257,  266,  267. 

Abhivarta,  a  hymn  or  of-  Aditi  =  Agni,  145.  272,  273, 309,  319,  322, 

323,331,  349, 355,!383- 

391,394,395,397,401- 

404,  408-410,  419,  422, 

425-427,  432,  434,  445- 

448,  453-456,  460,  464, 

407-469,471-475,477, 

478,481-484,492,494- 

496,502,505,506,510- 

514,519-522,536,639, 

540,  549,  552-55i,  657, 

659,  560-564,  566-568, 

570,571,573,574,577, 

582,585-587,592,595- 

598, 600,  602-604, 606- 

609,  611,  612. 


fering  for  success,  603 

note. 
Abortion,  charm  against, 

612,  613. 
AcesineB,  Latin  name  of 

the  Asiknt,  the  river 

Chenab,  150,  490  note. 
Adam  and  Eve,  the    In- 
dian, 392  note.  514,  665,  681. 
Adhavaniya,  one  of  the  Adityas,  Gods,  seven  or 

three  large  Soma  re-      eight  in  number,   12, 


=  the  Earth,  288. 

=  the  Cosmic  Cow, 

357. 

Aditya,  son  of  Aditi,  es- 
pecially Varuna  and 
the  Sun,4,  81,  219,253, 
263,  326,330,  405,  418, 
453,  460,  478,  483,487, 


35,  39,  40,  48,  52,  60, 
64,81,83,130,142-144, 
147,164,165,168,175, 


472,  474-477,  487,  501, 
535,  545, 571, 573,  575, 

.  586,  592,  595. 

the  eight  names  of. 


ceptacles,  108,124,347, 
370  notes, 
Adhrigu,    a  Rishi   or  a 

prince,  132,  153. 
Adhvaryu(s)  priest, 

priests  who  perform 
the  practical  work  of 
sacrifice,  3,  97,  171, 
219,277,278,302,350, 
355,  362,  384,  405,406, 
414,423-425,440,454,  487. 
486,  521.  Adoption  of  children,  6. 

Adi-Purusha,  the  Prime-  Agastya,   a    great  Vedic 
val  Presiding  Male  or      Rishi,  36,  118,  464. 
Embodied  Spirit,  518,  Agh4  days,     when    the 

576  notes.  moon  is  in  the  constel- 

Aditi,   Infinity,  Infinite      lation  Magh&,  502. 

Nature,  the  Mother  of  Agni,  God  of   Fire  and 

the  Gods,  4,  12, 15,  22,      Light,    1-16,    20,    30, 

39,  43-45.  52,   60,   65, 

79,  80,  83-85,   89,  134, 

1-43,160,164,390,197, 
•198,1210,253,254,288, 

315,  328,  332,  338,  357, 

.364,  387,  394,  397,418, 

133,  467,  470-470,  483, 


176,  193,  196,197, 210, 

211,230,253,306,382,  Agni,   Lord  of   Heaven 

432,  433, 450,  458,  470-      and  Earth,  8 ;  Lord  of 


35,  37-40,  43-48,  51, 
52,  56,  58,  61,  65,  72, 
75,  76,  84,  88,  89,  94. 
96,  99,  100,  125,  126, 
131-133,  143-147,  154- 
156, 161, 163, 164,  \^S, 
108,  169,■l74,175>n^- 


Light,  144,  189  ;  iden- 
tified  with   the   Sun, 
9,  187,  386,426,  467, 
513,  514;  the  Moon  at 
night,  613  ;  identified 
with  Varuna,  390;  witli 
Varuna  and  Mitra,  13  ; 
created  by  the  Sods, 
513,514;  Sonof  Dyaus, 
445,  446  ;  son  of  Dawn, 
558  ;  of   Earth,    385  ; 
of  Heaven   and  Earth, 
9,  383,  390,  395,   447, 
585  ;  of    Heaven  and 
Earth,  Waters,  Tvash- 
tar,  Brigus,  447  ;  com- 
prising   other     Gods, 
396  ;  produced  by  at- 
ItWaotv,  \,  ^^\,  %^^^ 


^ 


C'^S  INDEX   OK   NAMES,   ETC. 

father  k  brother,  389;      Agni,  a  religions  cere-  Ajas,  a  non- Aryan   tribe, 
head    and    height    of      mony,  558.  20. 

heaven,  188;  born  from  Agnishvftttas,  a  class  of  Akhandala,  Destroyer,  a 
the  mouth  of  Purusha,      Manes,  401  note,  name  of  Indra,  142. 

519 ;  spiritual  husband  Agraya^a,  a  certain  Soma  Aksha,  said  to  be  a  man's 
of  maidens,  506  ;  con-      libation,  330  note.  name,  195  note. 

secrator   of  marriage,  Agriculture,  519  ;  the  be-  Akshar&,   Speech,    V4k, 
506  ;  giver  of  children     iginning  of,  421   note  ;       14,  41. 
495  ;  invoked  in  battle,      ploughing,    150,    153,  AUyya,  perhaps  a    name 
132,  222, 224, 482, 496 ;      548, 563  ;  sowing,  527  ;      of  Indra,  323. 
jungle-clearing       fire,      reaping,152, 577; sickle,  All-God,     Indra,      248; 
218,  586,  608  ;  slayer      227;    threshing,    450;      Yama  400  no^e. 
of    fiends,     510-512;      winnowing,  419,  480;  All-Gods,  51,  52,  410,571. 
punisher    of      sin,  3  ;      barley,  grain,  480, 577.      See  Visvedevas. 
ripener  of  plants,  513;  Ahavanlya,  one    of   the  Amrit,  Amrita,    nectar 
his      installation      as      three  sacrificial    fires,      ambrosia,    rain,    milk, 
Priest    of  Gods,   454,       186,  386  notes.  6,  57,  207,  253,  263, 

455  ;  his  flight    from  Ahi,  the  Dragon  or  Ser-       271,  326,  327,  332, 376, 
his  duties,    446,  453,      pent-demon  who  with-      379,  395, 425,  457, 568, 
454;    Priest,   Messen-      holds    the    rain,    113,       585,607. 
ger,      oblation-bearer,      239,  240, 245, 449,  472,  Anava,  Anavas,   descen- 
146,    447,     483;    his      479,555.  dants    of  the    epony- 

divine  functions,    146,  Ahibudhnya,  the  Dragon       mous  chief  Anu. 
512;  his  three   births,       of  the  Deep,  regent  of  Ancestral  spirits,  74.  See 
445  ;  three  forms,  513,       of  the  sea   of  air,    37,       Fathers. 
549  ;  three  homes^  467 ;       39,  43,  472,  477,  523.     Anghari,  one  of  the  guar- 
three     powers,     445;   Ahtsuva,  a  demon  of  the      diansof  Soma,  501  not^. 
three  stations,  445.  air,  169,  l7l,  225,  588.  Angiras,    a    semi-divine 

Agnldh,   kindler,   priest  Ahnavftyya,  said   to  be  a      patriarchal  Rishi ;  also 
who   kindles,   the  sa-       man's  name,  191  note.        a  name  of   Agni,    135, 
crificial  fire,  384,  440,  Ahura,     Zend    form   of       174,  186188,200,222, 
521.  Asura,  High  God,  366      223,  231,  255,  373,  398, 

Agnihotra,  daily  oblation      note.  448,  469,  478,  480,  498, 

to  Agni  and  Gods,  455  Aila,   Pururavas   son   of       524. 
note.  114.  530  note.  Angiras«s,     descendants 

AgnimAruta,  a  ceremony  Aindravftyava,  a  libation  of  Angiras,  46,  48,  52, 
in  which  Agni  is  wor-  to  Indra  and  Vftyu,  73,  76,  86,  121,  138, 
shipped  first  and  then       106  note.  167,  176,  183,  205,  235 

the  Maruts,  126  note.     Aitareya-Brjlhmana,  186,       309,  344,  376,  379,  398, 
Agni-pranayana,  ceremo-      242,  434,  467,  577,  604.       399,  419,  460,  466,  469 
ny  of  carrying  fire  to  Aja,    the     Unborn,     the       478,  484,  489,  494,  551, 
the  altar,  604  note.  Birthless,  498.  554,  583,  591,  598, 601. 

Agnis,  Agni    in   various  A^a-'EV^t^fiL^,  ^\i«i  \^\:^ot\v  kvv^vt'&aa.^  *.  descendant 
forms    166  337  One-iooVeA,   \-Ve  ^mt\,      c>\,Q.x\s^^\y^\s.^^\a,S>^^ 

4^msi](oma/  Praise     of       S9,  W,  ^1^,  '^"'i/^^^-       N.x.iv.^^^^,^V.,^^V 


INDEX  OF   NAMES,    ETC. 


63(> 


Animala,  tame  and  wild,       crifice,  558.  Arjlkas,  name  of  a  people, 

hor8e,bull,  cow,  pasi/m;  Apnavftna,     an     ancient       317. 
goat,  19,  321,402,  41ff  ;       Rishi,  254.  Arjiklya,  «  Arjika,   207, 

ass,  232,  266 ;  dog,  63,  Apil,   Aprts,   a  class   of      490. 
54,  101,  26&,  368  ;  lion       propitiatory  hymns,  3,  Arjuna,a  man'8name,21. 
19,  361,  421,  422,  479  ;      272,  483,  653.  Arjuneya,  Kutsa  descen- 

elephant,  172, 190,304;  Apaaras,    a    celestial      dant   of    Arjana,    21, 
buffalo,  119,  123,   176,       nymph,  394,  528,  669.       104. 

292  ;  Qaura,  114,  191,  the,  the  chief,  Ur-  Arjunls,  two  hinar  man- 

673  ;  antelope,     114  ;      yaaf,  36,  36,  412.  sions,  502. 

deer,    107,    291  ;   ape,  Apsarases,  335,  628,  529,  Arka,  the  Sun,  549. 

507 ;   wild-boar,     226,       582.  Arksha,  patronymic,  son 

421,   479  ;   wolf,   174,  names  of  six,  528.        of  Riksha,  213. 

209,  211,261,630,573,'  Aptya,  Aptyas,  dwelling  Armaiti,  in  the  Ave8ta  = 

jackal,     421  ;    hyena,       in    water,   a  class    of      earth,  522  note. 

487;  fox,  421  ;  serpent,       deities,  134,  197,  198,  Armour,    31,    119,    197, 

99,  471  ;  emmet,  403  ;      390,.665..  -  '  343,  365, 36«,  376,  494,. 

vulture,  101,  355,  569  ;  Apvd,^^lic    personified,       541. 

owl,    160,    101;  swan,     ^^.  Arrian,  148. 

176,  291  ;   dove,   698,  Arachosia,  175  note.  Arrow,  the  stroke  of  dis- 

599  ;     cuckoo,      101  ;  Ara^u,.  a  kind  of  tree,      ease  or  death,  71,  143* 

starling,  176;  king-fish-       195.  the    thunderbolt,. 

er,  534  ;  blue  jay,  634.  Aradva,saidtobea  man's       226. 

A  A 

Ansa,  one  of  the  Adityas,       name,  195  tvote.  Arshtishena,  son  of  Rish> 

382,  487  notes,  Aramati,  the  Groddess  of       tishena,  636. 

Ansa,   a  'jprottgi  of   the      Devotion,  38,   41,   46,  Artificer  of   Gods  ;    set 

Asvins,  118.                         68,  474,  522.  Tvashtar. 

Ansumat!,     a     mystical  =  Earth,  522.  Arushah,  the  Red,   Agni 

river  of  air,  246,  463.     Aranis,   fire-sticks,    186,       or    the     thunderbolt, 
Anu,  the   eponymus   of       426  iwtez.  443  noic. 

an    Aryan    tribe,    19,  Aranydnl,  Goddess  of  the  Arushas,    Agni's   horses^ 

113,  131.  Wood,  589, 590.  46  note. 

Anumati,  Divine  Favour  Araru,  name  of  a  fiend,  Arya,   Aryan,   Aryas,   8^ 

personified,  599,  600  ;       538.  48,  72,  79,  91, 144, 16?,. 

a  Lunar  Goddess,  332.   Ar^yi,   a  witch   or   she-       159,  266,  262,  362,  395, 
Anushtup,  a  Vedic   and       fiend,  694.  436,  442,  461,  464,  473^, 

classical  metre,  63,671,  Arbuda,   name  of  a  de-      476, 482,  499,.  509,  539, 

577.  mon,  113, 169,171,479,      684,592. 

Anuyftja,    after-sacrifice,      654.  Aryaman,  one  of  the  chief 

final  sacrifice,  606.  Archan,  said  to  be  a  Ri-       Adityas,  38,  40,  43-46, 

Apal&,  a  girl  healed  by       shi's  name,  691  note.  52,   68,  60-63,  65,  66, 

Indra,  236.  Architect  of  the  worlds,       78,   80,  89,   143,   146, 

Ape,  607.  ^  497  n/oU,  147,  160, 1 62, 164-l^ft., 

Apnftna,  the  passage  le&d-  Arjfka,  a  district  \n"N..\s\      \^^,V^'^A^'^  .*L\^^'iS»^, 
lag  to  the  place  of  sa-       India,  125,  S81.  ^I^^^'iVL,  ^^^i^.^V^.^^'^* 


C40 


INDEX    OF   NAMES,   ETC. 


349, 377, 3S2.  425,  433,  Aavalayana,  a  famous  507,  519,  520,  552,  565, 
440,  407,  473, 474,  480,  writer  on  ritual,  384,  583,  587,  594,  598,  609, 
487,  503,  505,  506,  516,      407  notes.  613. 

523,  624,  572, 573, 586,  Asvamedha,  Horee-sacri-  Atiratra,  a  certain  Soma 
606.  fice,  595  note.  ceremony,  97. 

Ayam&ti,  said  to  be  the  Asvamedha,    a    man's  Atithigu,   said    t-o  be  a 
name  of  a  king,   463,      name,  212,  213.  man's  name,  450  note. 

464  notes.  Asvamedha,  son  of  Asva-  Atithigva,  a  name  of  Di- 

Asanga,  the  name  of  a      medha,  213.  vod^a.  22,   212,   213, 

chieftain,  106, 107, 173.  Asvattha,  a  sacred  tree,      263,450. 
Asikni,  the  river  Cheuftb,       426,  453,  533.  Atithyeshti,  a  certain  re- 

Asvins,    the  Horsemen,       ligious  ceremony,  186 
Twin  heraMs  of  Dawn,      note. 
11,  39,  45,  48,  52,  67-  Atka,  a  man's  name,  451, 
73,   116-119,   126-131,      538. 
143,  144, 146,  152-154,  Atmospheres,  three,  498. 
160-164,  167,  175-177,  Atri,   an  ancient  Rishi, 
185,220,221,231-233,      68,71,    118,   177-179, 
242,  261,  266,  267, 275,      220,  221,  352, 437,  496,  • 
337,  349,  384,  404,  413,       498,  577,  587,  592. 
415,  422,  426,  432,  436-  Atris,  167,  178,  180. 
440,  454,  463,  465,  4«)6,  Atyaguishtoma,  a  religi- 
472,  476,  477,  496,  502,       ous  ceremony,  the  se- 
504,  523-525,  548,  549,       cond  part  of   the   Jyo- 
571,  575,  578,  587,  613.       tishtoma,  558  twte. 

their   Consort,    69,  Aufrecht,  Prof.  Th.,   54, 

43S  ;   their  character,       205,  237,  485. 


150,  490. 
Asmanvatl,    Stony,    the 

name  of  a  stream,  456. 
Ass,  the  steed  of  the  As- 

vins,  232. 
Asses,       presented      to 

priests,  266. 
Asterism(8),     318,     458, 

473,  524  notes. 
Astrabudhna,    a    man's 

name,  602  note, 

A 

Astrabudhna,  son  of  As- 

tnibudhna,  602. 
Anuniti,       Spirit- world  ; 

deity  of  funerals,  402, 

462,  463. 
Asuru,  High  God,  3,8,30, 

56,  146,  14»,  184,  236, 

330,  360,  392,  395,  426, 

457,460,478,522,523, 

532.537,538,578,604. 

lord,  king,  525  note. 

Asuras,   5,   8,    498,  570, 

592. 
Asura,  a  demon,  246,  456, 

578,  584. 
Asuras,  40,  61,  1«G,  245, 

247,32S,45rt,  595,601. 
Asura-slayer,  Agni,  13. 
Asuri,  a  female  tiend,  448 

note. 
Asva,  a  Rishi,  158. 
Asviighrici,   the   patnmy 
mic  of  Si  i^riucc,  4GS. 


437  ;    their    miracles,  Auldua,  sotn  of  Ula,  536. 

220,     221,     437-439  ;  Aurnavabha,  son  of   Ur- 

physiciaus,    129,    143,       navabha,  a   demon   of 

232,  437  ;  first  teachers       drought,  171,  225. 

of    agriculture,    153  ;  Aurva,  an  ancieut  Rishi, 

their     chariot,    67-69,       254. 

71,  118,  152,  153,  220,  Ausija,  Kakshiv^n  son  of 

232,  267,  436,  438,  440,      Usij,  538. 

502.  Autooiat,  Varuna,  78. 

Asvya,   a   family   name.  Autumn,  518. 

195,  196.  Autumns,  42,  61. 

Atharvau,    a    fire-prie-st,  Avabhritha,   a   bath   for 

129,  376,  410,  449,  511,       cleansing  Soma  plants, 

523,  565.  241. 

Atharvans,  278,  399.  Axe,  5,  79,  100,  221,  355, 

Al"haY\?y.-\ed'v3t,Tl\eH\frans       456,  457,  541. 

oit\\e,%^,\^^,^'^'^-;^'^'^^ ^'^^^^    ^^^\     the 

'd9'2.  4QQ,  45"^,  Vt)*^^,  ^'^^ ^      'Ocom^^x^^v^H.^VL^. 


INDEX  OF  KAMBS,  ETC.  $41 

Ayftsya,  a  Rishi's  name,      Name,  463.  Bradke,  P.  von,  64. 

278  fUfU,  478.  Bhalftnaa,    a  non- Aryan  Brahma,  391,  664  notes, 

Ayu,    a  Proper  Name  ;      tribe,  18.  BrahmA,  466,  552,  656, 

man;  living  being,  86,  Bharadvftja,  agreatRishi,      566  notes. 
189, 262, 263, 404, 461.      352,  577.  592,  606!         Brahmachir!,  a  reUgioua 

Bharata,  Warrior;  a  name,      student,  652. 

Babb,  the,  Agni,  468.  See      10.  Brahman,  9,  25, 125, 140, 

Infant.  Bharatas,  10,  35.  167,  173,  207,  239,355, 

Babhru,akingoraRi8hi,  Bhftratt,    a    Goddess  of      380,384,422,454,469, 

153.  Speech,    4,   273,   463,      486,492,505,515,521, 

Balbaja,  a  kind  of  coarse      484,  553.  549, 552, 556, 558,  562, 

grass,  265.  Bheda,  a  non- Aryan  king,       572,586. 

BalbAtha,  a   non- Aryan      20,  80.  Brahmans,  46,   65,  170, 

chief,  196.  Bhr^ja,  a  guard  of  Soma,      225,    245,    448,    485, 

Bandhu,  a  Rishi,  464.  501  note,  501,  503. 

Barber,  115,  586.  Blirigu,  an  ancient  Rishi,  Bifthman,  98,   244,   267, 

BArhatas,guardsof  Soma,      112,  186,  254,  482.  519,  535,  536. 

*  601  note,  Bhrigus,  17, 112, 121, 175,  Brfthmans,*96,   97,   191, 

BArhia,  altar  or  seat  of      254, 369,  399, 419,  438,      391,  403,  485. 
^        sacred  grass,  323  note,       446,  447,  523,  568.         Brahmanaspati,  Lord  of 
\   Barley,  5, 107,  227,  237,  Bhujyu,  a  protig^  of  the      Prayer,  46,  48,  91,  92, 
417,677.  Asvins,  68,    70.   113,      163,    338,    456,    474, 

Battle,  486,  465.  117, 171,  192,  223, 250      486,  594,  598, 602,603. 

Beard,  171, 536;  of  Indra,     437,  439,  476,  587.         Bridal, of  Sflryft,  501,502. 
412,  413,  532.  Bhiitftnsa,  a  Rishi,  549.    —^-ceremonies,  503-506, 

Bee,  439,  548.  Bird,  Soma,  341,  357  ;—  Bride,  benediction  on  a, 

Benfey,    Prof.,  19,  277,      the,  the  Sun,  386, 459,      606. 
278,  288,  301, 366, 393.      547, 557, 569, 604,  608;  Bridge,  296. 
'    Bergaigne,  Prof.  A.,  95,      the  Moon,  338.  Brihaddiva,  a  Rishi,  565. 

98,  205,  287,  292,  314,  Birds,  Agni  and  Soma,  358.  BrihaddivA,    a    Goddess 

331, 338^  367,  390, 400,  See  Animals.  connected  with  lift  and 

457, 482,  487, 507, 509,  Black  Drop,  the  darken-      Sarasvatl,  473. 
514,  563,  571,  600.  ed  Moon,  246.  Brihadratha,  name  of  a 

Bhaga,  an  Aditya,  God  of  Black  skin,  aborigines,296.    chief,  45 1 . 
Good  Fortune,  14, 15,  Bloomfield,  Prof.  M„  404.  Brihaduktha,     a    Rishi, 
38,  41-46,  48,  65, 143,  Boar,  54,    226,  537  ;  =      458-460. 
146,  265, 275,  298,306,      Soma,  358.  Brihaspati  =  Brahmanas- 

338,' 364, 368, 377, 382,  Boat,  64,   84,  245,   327,      pati,    12,   91-93,   131, 
425, 432,  471, 473, 477,      354,  561.  See  Ship.  246,  273,  336,  337,340, 

480,'  487, 503,  505,522,  Body,  parts  of  the,  613.        355,    397,    398,    405, 
524,'  525.  571,  586.         Boldness,  personified,  38.      432,  433,  442-444,  472, 
Bh^avata-Purftna,    520.  Bowls,  the  two,  heaven      474,  475,  478-481, 523, 
Bb&jeratha,    a     Proper      and  earth,  444.  S^V^^^,t>^^,t>^V,^V^^ 

4  J 


642  IITDIX  OF  NAMBS;  BTC. 

552, 575,  677,  5S6, 597,      Varuna,  62 ;  strong  he-  Children,     prayer    for  ; 

600, 602,  606.                    roes,  263.                           tee  Prayer. 
Brihaspati  =  the  Cloud-  Burial  of  ashes  of  the  the  gift  of  Agni,  2, 

God,  481.  dead,  407.  496  ;    of  the   Asvins, 

Brihat,  great,  important  Bumouf,  Prof.   E.   520,      67 ;  of  the  Maruts,  56; 

SAman,  606.  575.  of  Tvashtar,  88. 

Brihat-SAman,  235.  Chitra,  a  liberal  princ 

Brihatt,  a  Vedic  metre,  Calf,  Agni,  219, 889, 418.      152. 

263,  501,  577.  Camels,   119,   123,    195,  Chumuri,  a  fiend  or  sav- 

Buffalo  a  Cloud,  215.  196.  age,  21,  557. 

Buffaloes,  119,  123,  176,  Car  =  hymn  or  sacrifice,  Chyayana,  a  son  of  Bhri- 

292.  64,  810,  558.  gu,  482. 

s  Clouds,  138,226.  Carpenter,  223,  380,525,  Chyavftna,  a  proUg4  of 

Bull,  strong,  mighty  one,      563.  the  Asvins,  68, 71,  487, 

hero,  Agni,  5,  7,  155,  Cask  ==  cloud,  382.  465,  466. 

219,  385-387,  889,  410,  Castes,  the  four,  519.        Circumambulation.  412. 

567,  607,  608.  Castles,  19, 21, 23, 28, 94,  Clay,  house  of  c=grave,85. 
Indra,  22,  51,  122,      106,  249.  Cleanser,  Potar,  one  of 

149, 172, 173, 207, 848,  Cattle  «  rays  of  light,  40,      the  priests,  15,384,|521. 

372,375,378,418,421,      74,  76,  86,  110,  246,  Clouds « trees,  488. 

436,  441,  448, 450,  523,      361,  478,  556.  Coiebrooke,391, 507,518, 

536,  543,  645, 654, 560,  Cattle-raiders,  264.  520,  572,  576,  577. 

576,  593.  Cattle-stealing,  223.  Coleridge,  308. 

^— -  Par janya,  40, 95,96.  Centre  of  earth,  the  altar.  Consorts  of  the    Qods, 

Rain  cloud,  125,477.        342.  116,693. 

Brihaspati,  523.         Chaidya,sonof  Chedi,119.  Constellations,  501. 

Soma,  206, 270, 272-  Chambers's    Encyclopee-  Consumption,  505,   597, 

274,  281,  284,  288,  289,      dia,  531.  613. 

294, 302,  312,  313,  316,  Chandrabhagft,  the  river  Corpus,  Poeticum  Bore- 

325,  327,  329, 330, 332,       Chenab,  490  note.  ale,  519. 

337-339,  341,  343,346-  Chanter,  Udgfttar,  one  of  Courser,  the  Sun,  Hea- 

348,  350,  363-355,  357,       the  priests,  486  note.         ven,  75,  488,  586. 

859,362,369,376,394,  Charanyu,   name  of  an  Soma,276,340,350, 

603.  Apsaras,  528.  361. 
the  Sun,  58, 84, 267,  Chariot  =  sacrifice,  658.      Coursers  of  the  Qods, 478. 

470,  608.  Chariot-race,   228,    303,  Cow,  the   Cosmic,   357  ; 

Dyaus,  22.  851,  360.  type  of  Aditi   or   Na- 

Varuna,  394,  475.     Chayamftna,  said  to  be  a      ture,   253  ;  Adibi,   83, 

thethuiiderbolt,516.      man's  name,  18  wote.  467;    Prisni,    40,83, 

Bulls,  Maruts,  56,68,150,  Chedi,    the   name  of  a       149,   242,    456,   668  ; 

445;  Prea8-fitones,626  ;      prince,  119.    '  Earth,  554, 680 ;  heav- 

Aavina,  71,  72 ;  Indra-  Chedla, «.  tribe,  119.  en,    328,     418  ;    the 

Som^,      98  ;      Indra-  Clien^V),  %i  rv^ec  oi  •Om^     '^>Mi\^%^\^«E.,ai3eech, 
Varuna,    78;    Mitm-      Y«in^»)»U^A^^^'>^^-    '^^^  ^VLn  ^^^\.   v.N*.' 


niDIX  OF  NAVIS,  RC.  643 

offended,  253  ;  type  362-,  Maruts,  125,  243.  Dtoaatuti,  eulogy  of  a 
of  munificence,  207  ;  Creation  mytb,  Soandi-  prince's  liberality,  20 ; 
the  priest's  guerdon,  navian,  519  ;  creation  «?« Liberality  topriests. 
828  ;8s  cloud,  446.  connected  with  sacri-  Dancer  (in  war),  Indra, 

Cows,  subject  of  hymns,      fioe,  513,  576.  157,  212,  237. 

408,  600  ;  s  Heaven  &  Creator,  the.  Soma,  362;  Dancers, the  Maruts,  150. 
Earth,  327;  WatenB  of      Visvakarman,  497,498;  Dancing,  406,  422,  486, 
heaven,   348  ;  rays  of      Dyaus,  149;  Prajftpati,      487,  526,  527. 
light,  876,  480,  550,      566,  567,  576  ;  Tvash-  Dftnus,  a  class  of  fiends, 
551, 603  ;  the  Maruts,      tar,  392  ;  Dbfttar,  596,      565,^594. 
124,150;   streams  of      609.  Darbha  grass,  424  no<«. 

rain,  192 ;  hymns,  325 ; of  Creators,  Indra  Dark  One,  the.  Night,  71. 

raw,  ripe  milk  set  in,      or  Savitar,  575.  Dark  races,  7.  .       ^ 

171,    235  ;  black  and  Cuckoo,  101.  DAsa,  hostile  native,^  sa- 

white,  white  milk  set  Cucumber,  59.  vage,d6mon,2l,  79, 94, 

in,  240.  159,  169, 182, 196, 216, 

Cowell,  Pro!  E.  B.,  92,  DABH!n,a|)roft!f^of  In-      221,411,418,436,451, 
97, 148, 186,  192,  200,      dra,  21,  557.  488,    499,    537,    564, 

208,    212,    237,    241,  Dadhigbarma, an  offering      584,590. 
242, 245, 246,  249,251,      of   warm    inspisteted  D&sas,    118,    147,    246, 
258,  256,  259, 260,268,      milk,  605  noU,  262,  457,  470,  482. 

264,  266-268,  276, 279,  Dadhikrds,  a  famous  ra-  Dasagva,  one  of  an  anci- 
285,  293,  294, 300, 305.     cer   or    war-horse ;  a      ent    priestly    family. 
Creation,  375,  376,  591,      personification  of  the      132,  469. 
609.  Sun,  48, 540.  Dasa8ipra,aProperName, 

origin  unknown,576.  Dadhikr&van   =  Dadhi-      262. 

various  accounts  of,      kr&s,  46,  48.  Dasavraja,  a  Proper  Name, 

ascribed  to  Indra,  111,  Dadhyach,     a     son    of      128,260,261. 
138,178,285,245,262,      Atharvan,    376,    449,  Dasonya,  a  man's  name, 
268,   458;   to    Visva-      450.  262. 

karman,     497,      498  ;  Daksha,  Creative  Power,  Dasyave-vrika,   Wolf- to- 
Agni,    513  ;    Varui^a,      Strength,  65, 160,  206,      the-Dasyu,  name  of  4 
188,     184 ;    Hiranya-      282,    382,    387,    894,      man,  261,  265,  266. 
garbha,  566  ;  Brahma-      473,  486.  Dasyu(s),   savage  foe(8), 

naspati,  486  ;  the  Un-  Dakshicft,  priests*  guer-      demon(8),  8,   21,  120, 
bom,  the   Sun,    184  ;      don,  180,  644,  549.  189, 153, 181, 216, 225, 

the Asvins, 414; Tvash-  Dame,  wifeof  aGkxi,  507.      249, 261,  265,266,  296, 

tar,    553,    892  ;  Gods  Prisni,  494.  300,352,411,448,451, 

raising  the  cosmic  dust  the.  Dawn,  385.  459, 488, 499, 500,  529, 

by  dancing,  486,  487  ;  Dames    of     Trita  ;    see      587, 538, 547, 548,  601. 
Gods  in  general,  475.      Trita's  dames.  Dasyu-slayer,  the,  Indra, 

477  ;  the  sacrifice  of ten,   the  fingers  of      225. 

Purusha,  519  ;  Indra-      the  priest,  804.  Dawn,  11,  35,  45,  48,  71^ 

Vanina,  78 ;   Vishnu,  Dames,   Celeitial,  luu«x      n-1ft,^l,^^:A^\^\Vb^ 
P4;  ahrym,  601 ;  Soma,       asterisms,  524,  \\^,  \^^  A^"^  ,Yl^-W\  > 


644  IKDEX  OF  NAMX8,  XTC. 

197,198,221,253,267,  Destructive  powers,  158.  Disposer,  the,   186,  498, 

296, 329, 339, 885, 422,  Deuteronomy,  438.  600. 

431, 438,  458, 472, 475,  Devaka,  a  fiend  or  savage,  Disposers,  priests,  249. 

494,501,515,522,540,      20.  Diti,    the    antithesis  of 

558,  573,  602,  608.        Devftpi,  a  Kshatriya  who      Aditi,  15,  541. 
Dawn  and  Night,  433,      actedasHotar,  535,536.  DivodAsa,  a  liberal  prince, 

483.  Devav4n,  father  or  an-      20,  21,  256,  306,  450. 

Dawns,  11, 20, 46, 72, 76,      castor  of  Sudfts,  20.       Dog,  101,368, 562;  house- 

84,  86, 164,  185,  223,  Devil,  435.  dog,  54  ;  boar-hound, 

294,    351,    380,    390,  Devotion,  168 ;    Genius      54  ;  hound  of   Indra, 

425,431,445,459,514,      of,  38,  46,  168,    474,      63  ;  figurative,  100. 

520,  521,  555,  557.  522  ;  blessings  of,  168,  Dogs,  of  Yama,  58,  399. 

——husband     of      the,      169,  205.  —  given  to  priests,265. 

Agni  or  the  Sun,  8.  Devout  spirit  makes  hum-  Doors,  divine,  of  sacrifi- 
Day  and  Night,  393,  491.  ble  offering  acceptable,  cial  enclosure,  4,  16, 
Deasil,  the  Gaelic,  412.         255.  273,  483,  557. 

Death,  42,  58,  99,  158,  Dharma,  duty    personi-  Dove,  598,  599. 

406,    419,    462,    492,      fied,  176.  Dragon,  the,  great  cloud- 

578,  599.  Dh&tar,  Maker,  Creator,  serpent,  24,  113,  240, 
the  punishment  of      338,    382,    406,    487,      245,  (49,  479,  555,557, 

Bin,  583.  506, 606,  609,  613.  579. 

—return    to     earthly  Dhishan&,  a  Goddess  of  —  female,  588. 

life  after,  581.  prosperity,  86,  432.        of  the  Deep,  regent 

Deer,  107,  294.  Dhishnydh    ( Agnayah),      of  air-sea,  37,  39,  472, 
spotted,  of  the  Ma-      sacrificial  Fires,  377.         477,  523,  524. 

ruts,  125.  Dhuni,  a  demon,  21,  557.  DragonSjSerpent-demons, 

Demons,  forms  assumed  Dhruva,  a  special  Soma      533,  585. 

by,  100,  101.  libation,  330  note.  Dream,  evil,  197,  198, 
imprecation  on,  98-  Dhvasra,  the  name  of  a      445,  598. 

101.  king,  305.  Dronakalasa,a  large  Soma 

Demon-slayers,   the  As-  Diabolus,  435  note.  reservoir,  108,124,277, 

vins,  72.  Dice,  429-431 ;  the  stars  ?      279, 282, 285, 293, 296, 

Departed,  home  and  bliss       419.  313, 314, 319,  329, 347, 

of  the,  381,  382,  498,  Digvijaya,    conquest    of      370  notes. 

694.  neighbouring     count-  Drop,   the    Moon,   246  ; 

. King  of    the,   381  ;      ries,  574  note.  Soma,  405. 

see  Yama.  Director,     one     of     the  Druh(s),  8pirit(8)  of  mis- 

Deshtrt,  Instructress,   a      priests,  355,  521.  chief,  59,  450. 

Goddess,  506.  Disease,  the  Spiritof, 534.  Druhyu  (s)  eponymus  and 

Desire,  575  ;  see  K4ma.     Diseases,  colic,  545  ;  con-       men  of   a  Vedic  tribe, 
Destroyer,    the,     India,       sumption,     583,     597,       17-19,  131. 

114;  Death,  419  notes.       613  ;  dropsy,  85  ;   ph-  DubsAsu,  the  name  of  a 
Destruction,  42,   58,  99,      i\i\s\a,    613  •,    Simid^,      prince,  428. 
158,  393,  407, 462,  492,       5*2  •,  ^V^«.A^,  ^=1.  ^viJcs^W-j^.Tv^Tafc  ^i  a.^  in- 

330,597,598,  DVsi[\eiifeeT,\w^tTd.,^'^^.  ^v;\V>\Vq\^V^*.^x>S\^^ 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

Durgaha,  a  chief,  208.  Eggeling,  Dr.  J., 21J3,578. 
Burmitra,  a  Rishi,  548.  Ehni,  Dr.  J.,  894,  897, 
DdrvA  grass,  580,  687.  400, 507. 

Dutt,  R.  Ch.,  408.  Eight  sons  of  Aditi,  487. 

Duty,  Right,  Law,  Virtue,  Eight-footed  metre,  225. 

personified,  176.  Ekadhan&h,     waters  in 

Dvita,    Second,  perhaps      Soma  ceremonies,  241, 

a  form  of  Agni,  197.         326,  424  notes. 
Dwftdaf&ha,    a     twelve-  Ekadhenus,       sacrificial 

day  sacrifice,  242  note,      waters,  43. 
Dyaufl,  Heaven,  the  aanEkadyfi,  the  name  of  a 


dent  Aryan  Qod— the 
Greek  Zeus,  44, 80,149, 
168, 174, 175,  $85, 390, 
426,438,444,445,451, 
466, 467,  469-471,  476, 
478,  479,  493,  522, 523, 
578,  584,  592. 


Rishi,  229. 
Elephant,  172,  190,  304, 

612. 
Eros,  Kftma,  Desire,  575 
note. 
,  .Etasa,  the  horse  of  the 
I    Sun  ;  a  man's  name. 


I)yu=Dyaus,     44,    390      63,66,104,122,261, 
notes.  311,  315,  375,  376. 

Etasas,  216,  434. 

Eagle,  101,  422.  Evil-eyed,  506. 

—  the     Moon,    423;  Existence,  sprung  from 
Soma,  341  361 ;  Savi-      non-existence,  486. 
tar*s»Tftrkshya,  591.    Expanses,  the  six,  400, 

Eagles,    Celestial   press-      574. 
stones,     626  ;    Soma-  Eye,  of  the  dead  goes  to 
drops,  341.  the  Sun,  402  ;  of  Va- 

£aiM>maments,  227.  nina   and  Mitra,  the 

Earth,  38,  48,  164,  265,      Sun,  63,  434  ;  of  the 


863,  383, 385, 387, 407, 
426, 433, 447, 468, 470, 


Gods,  75;    of   Order, 
Agni,  390. 


471,495,522,578,580.  Eye,  the,  the  Sun;  the 

son  of,  man,  262.  single,  the  Moon,  276. 

—  sprung  from  Puru- 

sha's  feet,  519.  Faith,    269,    381,  592, 

Earth  and  Heaven,   88,  593. 

47,  52,  56,  72,  83, 184,  Falcon  (s),  63,  149,  174, 

215, 240, 250, 324, 364,  220,   295,  g  304,  |  307, 


885, 426, 446. 497, 513. 
Earths,  216. 
Eclipse,  of  Sun,  584. 
Edda,  172  note. 
Egg,  the  Mundane.  518 
note. 


809,817,328,493,678. 
Falcon,  Agni,  14  ;  Soma, 

321,  829,  356. 
bringer  of  the  Soma, 

243,    251,   300,    S^4, 

334,344,348,39&,&%S. 


645 

Falcons,  the  Maruts,  528. 
Falsehood,  punishersof, 

60,  ^^,  81,  99. 
False-swearing,     prayer 

for  removal  of  sin  of, 

391. 
Famine,  143,  210,  442. 
Father,  the.  Heaven,  96, 

514,572,  584;  Indra, 

843;Visvakarman,496; 

Yama,581;Manu,205. 
Father,  Agni,  466 ;  In- 

dra,    250;    Prajftpati, 

384;    Soma  or  Agni, 

830;    Tvashtar,  473; 

Vftyu,  607  ;  the  Yaja- 

mftna,  384. 
Father  and  Mother,Heav- 

en  and  Earth,  331, 888, 

457. 

Fathers,  Manes,  S^nrits  of 
the  Departed,  39,  74, 
83,  199,  339,  384, 
387,  398-405,  407,  458- 
461,  469, 474, 481, 494, 
498, 514,  549,  576,  577, 
581,  594,  601. 

ssMoon  and  stars? 

326  ;  stars  ?  481. 

— ^three  classes  of, 
dwelling  in  heaven, 
firmament,  lower  fir- 
mament, 408 ;  created 
light,  74  ;  produce  the 
fruitfulness  of  heaven 
and  earth,  474 ;  their 
home,  581. 

Fencing  or  enclosing 
sticks  round  the  sacri- 
ficial fire,  620,  576. 

Fervour,  religious  au- 
sterity, penance,  694, 
599,  601,  606,  608. 


646  INDBX  OF  NAMIS;   BTC. 

Fiends,  prayer  for  det-  Forest-Trees,  89.  Gangft,  the  river  Granges, 

traction   of,    98-101  ;  Foi-ests,  Lord  of,  Vanas-      490. 

forms  assumed  by,  100.      pati,     the     sacrificial  Ganges,  159,  490. 

See  Rftkflhasas,  Y&tu-      stake,  4.  Qarbh^h&na,  a  ceremony 

dh&nas.  Fort-destroyer,  Agni,    8,      to  facilitate  and  bless 

Fig-tree,  the  Holy,  Me  447;  Indra,  103,   172,      conception,  613  note. 

Asvattha.  190,202,203,263,555;  Qaruda,  the  name  of  a 

Filter,    for  Soma  juice.      Soma,  300,  349.  mythical  bird,  591  note. 

107,  171,269,275,278,  Forts,    cloud  castles    of  G4thft,  non-Vedic  song, 

280,    2S5.    287,    289,      fiends,  584 ;    of  abori-      501. 

S02, 331, 335, 338,  340,      gines,    256  ;    of  iron,  Gaura,  Bos  Gavaeus,  114, 

342, 348,  862,  426.  251, 540.  191,  573. 

Fire,  322,  552.  Fortune,  368.  Gauri,  278,  572. 

Fire-sticks,  5,   186,390,  Four,  the.  Lunar  Goddes-  Gavishthita,  a  Uishi,  592. 

426.                                    ses,  332.  Gaya,  a  man's  name,  472, 

Firmament,   personified,  Beauteous  creatures,      474. 

338  ;  two  divisions  of      326  ;  quarters    of  the  Gftyatra,  a  hymn,   305, 

the,  234  note.  sky,    292  ;  seas,    292,      486. 

Fish,  481.  448.  G&yatrl,  a  Vedic  metre. 

Five  races,  tribes,  10, 14,  Fox,  421.  53,  179,  305.  400, 677. 

72,   73,  76,  129,   171,  Friend,  the,  Mitra,  396  Geldner,   Prof.    K..    36, 

205, 280, 317,  319,  352,      note.  280, 436,  457, 509, 529, 

368, 445, 456, 458, 563;  Friendship,  485  ;  Rishi's       531,  544. 

tribes  of  heaven,  461  ;      with  Varuna,  84.  Gharma,a  warm  libation, 

rivers,     floods,      159,  Frog,  an  emblem  of  cool-       70,  97,  219,  233,  235, 

183  ;  courses   or  divi-      ness,  403.  606. 

eions  of  sacrifice,  570  ;  Frogs,  96-98,  599.  Ghoshs,  a  woman's  name, 

companies,  280  ;    ele-  Fruit,  680,  588.  436,  439. 

mentsof  sacrifice,  397  Funeral  hymns,  398-407,  Ghrita(m),  clarified  but- 

note  ;  lands  or  settle-      459-461,  581,  593,  594.       ter,  3,  594. 

ments,   605  ;    regions  Funerals,   deity  of,   462  Gn&s,  Consorts  of  Gods, 

of  the  world,  345.  note.  166.  , 

Fivefold     beings,      69  ;  Funereal  gift,  581.  Goal,  293. 

people,  72.  Goat(8),  19,  321  ;  at  fu- 

Flesh-eater,  Agni,  403.      Gaidicke,  Prof., 318, 597.       uerals,    402;  team   of 
,  Floods,  rivers,   168, 175,  Gambler,  429-431,    441,      Pushan,  321,  416. 

405,   433,    473,    552 ;       442.  God,  One  Supreme,  498. 

waters  of  the  air,  187.  Gambling-house,  430.       of  Gods,  567  ;  the 

Floods'    (waters'  of  air)  Gamester,  430.  Unknown,  566. 

offspring,  Agni,  50.  Gandharva,  104,225,339,  Goddess,  43,  74-76.78, 
Force,  personified,  486.  341,  345, 392,  496,  506,  91,  130,  143,  252,  253, 
Forest-Loid,2G5  ; Forest-       569,  573, 584,  585,  604.       305,  463,  540,  573,  580, 

Sovran,  38;  Sovran  ol  GaivdWT^a.^,   ^^\,    ^.^^>     5^6,588. 

the  Forest,  Soma.  541  •,      4^^,  ?>^t>,  ^^%.  ^^^.        ^c.^.^^^^.^'^  A^^^^.^^-. 

Forest-Queen, 589, 590.  QatvdWA^^^.  ^^^^m.^m.^A^.^^^ 


INOKX  OF  KAMSS,   KTO.  647 

385, 391, 405,  473,  474^  of  Savitar,  48  ;  paths  Quest  of  men,  Agni,  5, 
663,598.  oftheA8vin8,116,128;      10,  11,  47,  187,  222, 

Goddesses,  Three,  4,  484.      reins  of    the  'Asvins,      257,  383,  620. 

Oods,  passim;  hymn  to,      163  ;  Hero,  Agni,  11 ;  Gumti,  a  river,  159  note, 
486  ;  all  invoked,  470.      ornaments  of  the  Ma-  Gungii,  a  lunar  Goddess, 
478  ;  primeval  Aryan,      ruts,  57 ;  sword  of  Bri-      332. 
692;  number,  167,455;      haspati,  92  ;  thunder-  Gungus,    a    non-Aryan 
origin,  52, 92, 395,  897,      bolt,  211,  531.  people,  450. 

470,    486  ;    immortal,  Goldstticker,   Prof.  Th., 
4,  7,  12,  63,  92,  472,      531.  Haas,  Prof.,  507. 

476-478,482,486,522;  Gomatl,  the  name  of  a  Hair,  briided,  34,  80, 321. 
born  immortal,   486  ;      river,  169,  490.  Hall,  Dr.  F.,  407. 

made    immortal  by  Good  Works,  399.  Hammer  =  lightning,21 9. 

Agni,  13  ;  by  Soma,  Gopavana,  a  Rishi,  222.  Hands,  joined  in  msrri- 
372, 376, 457;  by  their  Gosarya,  a  prot4g4  of  the      age,  407,  605. 

merits,  471 ;  produced      Asvins,  128,  260,  261.    healing  by  touch  of, 

after  the  world,  576;  Gotama,  an  ancient  Rishi,      465,583. 
earlier,   24  ;    General,      852,  679.  Hansa,  the  Sun,  571  note, 

322;  of  heaven,  waters,  Grfthi,  Grasper,  a  deadly  Haray&^a,  a  chief,  161. 
earth,  39,  476  ;  omni-      female  fiend,  597  note.  Harits,  horses  of  Agni, 
potent,  166 ;    reward  Granthint,  the  name  of      46 ;    of  the  Sun,  66^ 
the  pious,  165 ;  punish      an  Apsaras,  628.  253, 312;  of  Soma,  846. 

exn,  516  ;  punish  the  Grass,  Sacred,  3,  16,  18,  Harivansa,  98. 
undevoat,  32, 109, 169,      34,39,  44,  47,  67,  74,  Ha virdh&nas.  Soma  carts. 
464;    Priests  of  the,      117,126,137,139,142,      397,  898  no$M. 
384;  Queen  of  the,  251.      191,  205,  215,  233, 247,  Haviryajtla,  oblation  of 

Gods  e  priests,  3, 310,568.      278,303,805,348,400,      clariBed    butter,    670 

Gold,  5,  30,  65, 166, 168,      488, 653.  note. 

170, 172, 196, 197,  208,  Grassmann,  Prof.,  20,  29,  Haug,  Prof.  M.,  186,604. 
226, 296, 312, 330,  346,  41,  46,  48,  49,  54,  67,  Hawk,  176, 230,  346,860, 
880,  449, 625, 531, 549,      66, 79, 81, 107, 142, 162,      688.  Su  Falcon. 

650,   653;    chariot      226,232,233,241,242,  Indra,  538  ;  Soma, 

wrought  of  or  decked      245,  253,264,  266,  268,      857. 
with,  69,  118, 196  ;  on      290, 299, 302, 806,  309,  Hawks,  the  Maruts.   64. 
priest's  finger,  166,289,      328, 348, 349,  855, 380,  Healer,  Rudra,  39,   49; 
816,    347,    355.^358;      388,393,410,419,420,       Vdstoshpati,  53. 
gold-bearded,    Agni,      424,  429, 439,  440,  445,  Heaven,  a  Goddess,  463. 

447;  gold  coursers  of      448,452,468,489,511,  Dyaus,    6,  33,  66, 

the  Sun,  60;  gold  614,520,629,638,641,  67,78,78,96,125,197, 
helms  of  Maruts,  126  ;  660, 564, 665,  569,  683.  433,  438,  445, 470,  471 
gold  swords  of  Maruta,  Great  One,  the,  Yama,  476,  483,"  614,  669, 
126.  400.  672, 678. 

Golden,  Savitar,  63;  arms  Grimm,  Jacob,  172.  home  of  the  Blest, 

ofSAvitar,  B7, 48;  hair  Guerdon, prioite'  iee,^4T ,      ^%\,%VL,%*^'^>»^^'i».^^. 
o/Ssritar,  435 ;  hands       323,  544,  549.  Vi^- 


648  INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

Heaveu    and  Earth,    9,  Hiranyagarbha,       Qold-  Hunter,  192. 

31,  38,  39,  48,  62,  53,  germ,  SunQod,  566.  Hunting,  deer,  107  ;  ele- 
62,  64,  91,  92,133,139,  Hiranyasiupa,  a  RUhi,  phants,  439;  boar,  507; 
148, 161, 175, 219,246,      591.  *  wild  bull,  454. 

275,  326,331-383,  338,  Holtzmann.  Prof.,  531.    Husband  and  wife,  hap- 
362, 365, 370,  377,  334,  Holy  Ladies,  the  Rivers,      piness  of  thepiou8,168. 
386,390,395,424,431,      90.  Husbandman,    519 ;  <ee 

433,  435, 447,  449,462,  Homer,  500.  Vaisya. 

463,  474,  477,  479,484,  Homestead,  Guardian  of  Hydaspes,  Qreek  name 
491,  524, 525,  556, 565,      the,  53.  of  the  Jhelum,  490. 

585,  609.  Hoof-armed  demons,  511.  Hyena,  487. 

—  separated   by  the  Horace,  59.  Hymir,       Scandinavian 

Asvins,  414;  by  Indra  Horse  Sacrifice,  595.  World -giant,  519. 

179,  515,  556,  593  ;  by  Horses = flames  of  Agni,  Hymn  scar,  64  ;  gene- 
Savitar,  591  ;  by  Va-  2  ;  =  hynms,  7  ;  of  the  rated  or  begotten  by 
runa,82,l84;byVi8h.  Asvins,  69, 70,73,  118;  the  bard,  10,  13,  25; 
9U,  94.  of  firihaspati,  92;  of      new,   13,  27,   40,  62, 

Heaven's  Daughter,Ushas,  Dawn,  74,  76  ;  of  the  133, 150,  155,  222,244, 
Dawn,  67,  73,  76,  76,  Sun,  216,312,  451,523.  261,  296,  352,  386  ; 
197,438.  Hotar,  9,  201,  355,  384,      made,  formed,  fashion- 

Heaven's  Child,  Soma,  395,465,483,485,486,  ed,  33, 37, 40, 120, 122; 
292,  295;  Night,  674.        499,  515,  520,  526,535,      wrought  with  skill,  9  ; 

Heifer,  the,  Aditi,  664.         552,  607.  thought  out,  129,  235, 

Hell,  315  note.  Hotars,  the  Celestial,  4,       244. 

Herald,  Hotar,    lavoker,       475,  478,  483,  563,674.  Hymns  =  milk-streams, 
Agni.  15,  30,  174,  384,  Hound,  507.  135. 

395,  521,  522,et passim.  Hounds  =  clouds,  196.        Hypnotism,  583  note. 

Herald8,twocelestial,273.  Househuld   Lord,    Agni, 

Herbert,  George,  1 80.  201;— Priest, Agni,522.  Ikshvaku,  the  name  of 

Herbs,  38,  39,  533-636.      Hradechakshus,  the  name       a  prince,  464. 

Herd,  the,  the  Maruts,  of  an  Apsaras,  528.  Ill,  a  Goddess  of  Prayer, 
427.  Humble  offering,  255.  4, 16,  48, 273, 309  463, 

Herdsman,   the,     Indra,  Hundred    autumns,  na-       484,  620,  653. 

450;  the  Suu,  604.  tural  duration  of  hu-  lU's  place,  where  butter  is 

Hesiod,  184.  man  life,  66,   96,   406,       poured  on  the  fire,  520. 

Hillebrandt,  Prof.  A.,  36,       506,  597  ;  springs,  dit-  Immolator,  the,  Agni,  4, 
84,91,108,  163,  219,      to,  697 ;  winters,  ditto,       654. 
251, 269,  279, 296, 301,       333,  697.  Immortality,  after  death, 

308,318,326,332,341,  Hundred      Chiefs,     the      59,  168,253;  in  one's 
342,  379, 382, 390,  394,       Maruts?,  422.  children,  168  ;  prayer 

408,  423,  424,  450,  526,  Hundred    Powers,   Lord       for,   59  ;  the    gift    of 
569,  578,  585,  605.  of,  170, 173  ;  see  Sata-      Soma,  372  ;    Lord    of, 

Hilla,  163,  431.  kratu.  Purusha,  617  ;    Kings 

Hinva,  Ben ef actor, a  title  HuTvger,   de^xt^^.V»ftdL^  %     ^1,  VL^  \  >s5wfe  -^^xldof 
of  Indra,  1 82.  ^n.  "^"^^  ^^^^ A^^,  ^W , 


INDEX  OF   NAMES,  ETC. 


649 


Incantation,  against  an 
ill-omeued  bird,  598 ; 
against  miscarriage, 
612,618;  against  phthi- 
sis, 613;  against  poison, 
51  ;  against  a  rival 
wife,  688. 

Indigence,  3,  438. 

Indigenous  races,  see  D&- 
sas,  Dasyus,  Dark  races. 

Indra,  4,  8,  12,  17-35. 
37-40,  44,  47,  48,  50- 
54,  56,  76,  78,  80,  81, 
85-89,  91-94,  98-101, 
103-115,  119-123,  125, 
126,  130,132-142,146, 
151, 152, 157-160,  164, 
167-175,  178-180,  189- 
196,  198, 199,  202-209, 
211-216,219,220,  224, 
231.234-252,259,265, 
269,  270,  273-275,  278, 
279,281,282,286,287, 
292,296,297-299,  301- 
308,  310-316,318-321, 
323,325,327,329,330, 
333-335,  387,  339,  340, 
342-346,  348,  350,  351, 
355-363,  3H5  369.  371, 
372,374,  375,  377-382, 
388,390,391,898,408, 

^      411-413,416,417,420, 

V  423, 425,  427.431-436, 
l^l-444,  448-453,  457, 
458,460,463,464-467, 
469,471,474,476,478, 
479,483,484,487,489, 
491.499,500,501,504, 
607-509,  515-517,  522, 
627,531,532,535.537- 
547,  550,  554-557,  560, 
661,563-665,570,571, 
673-580,  583-586, 588, 
590, 591,  593-697,  599, 
60 J,  603,  605. 


Indra, his  parents,  Heaven  Indra-Agni,  88,  89, 178- 
aud  Earth,  202.  215  ;      180  ;  Indra-Soma,  98  ; 
his  father,  22 ;  his  mo-      Indra- Varuna,    78-81, 
ther,  22,  190,  225, 487,      267,  268  ;  Indra-V&yu, 
580  ;  bom  from  Puru-      85-89. 
sha's  mouth,  619  ;  his  Indr&nl,  Indra's  Consort, 
wife,     507-509;     his      507-509,588,696. 
greatness,     120,     134,  Indrota,aprince,212,213. 
234,249,417,423,449,  Indu,  drop,=3Soma,  198, 
615,  516,  564,  590;  his      199,    213,     236,    and 
battles  with  demons.      Book  IX.  passim, 
120, 134, 138,  171,516,  Indus,  the  river,  90, 159, 
517  ;  Lord  of  Heaven,      160, 183,491, 494, 550. 
248,    654 ;    Chief    of  Infant,     the,     Agni    aa 

Gods,  134,    204;  Ma-      lightning,  95,  439; ■ 

ker  of  all  things,  452,      Agni,  386,   387,  468, 

458  ;    identified    with      495  ;  the  young  Sun, 

Sun,  133,  240, 419, 422.      419. 

426,    451,    515,    516  ;  Infinity,  470,  488. 

supersedes       Varuna,  Inspiration,  92,  231, 397. 

570  ;  punisher  of  sin,    InspirerCs),    3,  13,  261, 

516;    Warrior     God,      298,349,354,447. 

21,  22,  34,   103.   141,  Instructress,  the,DeshtH, 

190,202,203,216,237,      606. 

250,266,417,441,531,  Invoker,  355,  395. 

544;  tutelary   God  of  Invokers,  Hotara,  thetwo 

Aryans,  18, 144,   190;      Celestial,  4,  574. 

his     attributes     and  Iron,  or  other  metal,  5, 

deeds,   120,    449-452  ;      15,  90,   244,  251,  26», 

his  love  of  Soma,  122,      337, 449,  510, 531, 532, 

202 ;  his  rapture  after      637,  540. 

drinking,     132,     138,  is  vara.    Lord,    Supreme 

139,    171,   563,    564 ;      Deity     of    post-Vedic 

aided  by  the  Maruts,       time,  377  note. 

126,  245  ;  priest,  I40jj[ta.  a  Riahi,  601. 

his  chariot,  172.  413, 

423  ;    his  horses,   see  Jackal.  421. 

Horses  ;  his  existence  Jacobi,  Dr.  H.,  502. 

doubted,  250.  Jagatt,    a  Vedic    metre, 

and  Agni,  38, 88.  89 ;      677. 

and  PQslian,   38;  J^husha,  a^^ro^^j^^  of  the 

and  Soma,  38,  98,      Asvins,  71. 

99,  101,  284  ; and  Jamadagni,    a    famous 

Varuna,     38  ; and      ancleivt  UvBfc\,*i\^*L^^^ 

VAyui  106.  %\n  ,m,Vl*l  .'^^^  .'^'^^ 


650 


INDKX  OF  NAMB8,    ETC. 


Jamadagnu,  309, 31 0, 363. 

Jardtha,  name  of  a  fiend 
or  savage,  1,  11,  496. 

J&tavedas,  the  Omnis- 
cieDt>  Agni,  5,  8,  11. 
18, 16,  100,  132,  154- 
166, 186, 187, 217, 218, 
222,322,386,888,.390, 
401-403,445,453,454, 
467,482,499,510,513, 
521, 553, 559, 585,  592, 
604,  608. 

Jhelum,  the  river,  490  note 

Jlk&nam,  knowledge,  484. 

JuhQ,  a  sacrificial  ladle  ; 
possibly  aProperName, 
552  note, 

Jumna,  the  modern  name 
of  the  river  Yamunft, 
20,  246,  490. 

Ka,  Who?,  the  God  Pra- 

j4pati,  566  note. 
K&bul,    the    river,    148 

note. 
Kadrd,  apparently  a  Ri- 

shi,  191 ;  Queen  of  Ser- 
pents, 608  note. 
Kadruka  days,day8  of  the 

Abhiplava  festival,  400. 
Kakshlv&n,     an   ancient 

sage,   129,     333,   415, 

436,  467,  587. 
Kakuha,  the  name  of  a 

prince,  123. 
Kalasa,      of      uncertain 

meaning,  428. 
Kali,  a  Riehi,  210,  437, 
Kftii,  name  of  a  flame  of 

Agni,  387  note. 
Ealm4shap4da,   name  of 

a  King,  1 00  note. 
K&ma.,  Lore,  Desire,  575 
note;  said  to  be  a  Kl- 
Bhi'8  name,  592. 


Kamadyii,    the  wife  of'  Kine,  rays  of  light,   74, 


Yimada,  476. 
Kanlba,  the  name  of  a 

chief,  195. 
Kanva,  an  ancient  llishi, 

103,  no;  112, 117, 118, 

120,124,127,128,130, 


75,  208,  848,  376,  516, 
583  ;  heavens  &.  earths, 
216;  waters,  449;  milk, 
284,  344,  359,  565; 
rain-clouds,  291,  452 ; 
sacrificial  waters,  871. 


131,174,259,261,263,  King,  benediction   of  a. 


266,  426,  466.  592. 

Kanvas,  108-110,  112, 
114-116,  119-122,  126, 
169,172,174,265,559. 

.ElAnva,  a  descendant  of 
Kanva,  103, 115,  125, 
128,  129. 

K&nvftyanas,'de8cendants 
of  Kanva,  266. 

Kapardin,  wearing  braid- 
ed hair,  821  note, 

Kapi,  an  ape,  507  note. 


602,603  ; Indra,31, 

140, 229,  243, 248, 442, 

443,464,468,580; 

Agni,    10,    187,    883- 

885,445,510,512; 

Soma,   198,  199,  228, 

Book  IX.  passim  ; 

the  Sun,  467  ; Va- 

runa,37, 51, 82, 83,184, 

396,  545,  602  ; Ya- 

ma,  381.  398-400  ; 

of  Kings,  Varuna,  37. 


Kapila,  a  famous  Rishi,  Kings,  the.  Yarn  pa,  A.rya- 


419. 
Kar&lt,  name  of  a  flame 

of  Agni,  387  note, 
Karanja,  a  demon,  450. 
Kasu,  a  pnnce,  119. 
Kasyapa,  a  famous  Rishi, 

22,  352,  382,  577. 


man,Mitra,45,  66; 

the  Ten,  36, 79, 80; 

Varuna,  and  Mitra,  63- 
65,  167.  252,  468,  473  ; 

Varuna,       Mitra, 

Aryaman,    147,    573  ; 

the  Asvins,  438. 

Katha  Upaniahad,  581.      Kinsuka,  a  tree,  503. 
KaurayAna,    patronymic  K6phSn,  Greek   name  of 
of  a  prince,  113.  the  K&bul  river,  148. 

Kavasha,  the  name  of  a  Kratu,  one  of  the  Seven 

priest,  19,  429.  Rishis,  498. 

Kavi,  the  father  of  Usa-  Kripa,  a  prince,  112,114. 
n&,  18,  451,  538.  Kri8a,aRishi,264,268,439. 

Kavis,  403  note.  KrieAnu,  a  guardian   of 

Kavyas,  a  class  of  Manes,       the  Celestial  Soma,  334, 

398,  401,  403.  473,688. 

Resins,  long-haired,  Agni  Krishna,  a  Rishi,  232  ;  a 

Vayu,  SHrya,  582.  demon,  246. 

Khela,  a  king,  118  note.     Krityd,  Magic  personified, 
Kioildins,      mischievous       505  note. 

^enda,^^,\^\,^Vi».      '^xvq\,\X\ft  QTjonymus   of 

BacrV?ic\^\  «vte,  V'^^  .^^\ .      ^^^  A'^^^ 


INDBX  OF  NAMES,    ETC. 


651 


the  name  of  a 
490. 

ID,  the  Ruling 
r,  the  military 
princely  order, 
ote.  , 

jra,  99,   177,407, 
>52. 


73  ;  Lady  of  the  world  Life,  duration  of  human, 
— 73;  Lady  of  sweet  see  Hundred  Autumns; 
strains— 78, 130;  Lady  appointed  by  Ckxls,  429. 
of  the  Wood,  Arany&-  Light*  48. 


nl,  589. 
Lakes,  Soma  receptacles, 

124. 
Lances,  149,  166. 
7as,    raised     to  Langlois,  Prof.,  98. 
nan    rank,     536  Language,  484. 

Lanman,    Prof.     C.  R., 
64,  55,  139,  391,  408, 
428,  429,  439,  604. 
Law,  Moral  and  Cosmic, 


lityas,  210. 

a  river,  159,  188, 


Lightning,  252 ;  Vasishtha 
an  embodiment  of,  36. 

Lion,  19,  361,  421,  422, 
479 ;  trap  for,  422  ; 
Soma,  350. 

Lord  of  Heaven,  Indra, 
248,  249  ;  of  Light, 
Indra,  241,  247,  248. 

Lotus,  36, 107,  550,  587, 


?rof.  A.,  531. 
I  lunar  Goddess, 

b,  said  to  be  a 
)r  Name,  581  note. 
la,  a  celebrated 
jopher,  611  note. 
>ayya,  a  Proper 
3,  142. 


613. 

43,  46,  55,  60,   65,  66,  Ludwig,   Prof.    A.,   Der 
71,  73,  74,  79-81,  112,      Rigveda,  5   Vols.,  and 


119,  120, 128, 132, 134, 
155,  156, 159,  160, 165, 
168,  220,  221, 230, 283, 
248,  274  276,  293,  297, 


Ueber  die  neuesten 
Arbeiten  im  Gebiete 
der  Rgveda-forschung, 
passim. 


300,  304, 313, 320,  324,  Lusa,  a  favourite  of  Indra, 

3  i7, 344, 345, 370,  377,      436  note. 

379,  381, 396, 403, 432,  Lying,  prayer  for  remov- 


na,  a  Proper  Name,     433,  445,447,  459,  469,       al  of  sin  of,  391. 


474-478, 494,  496,  622, 

551,  560,563,  679,  583,  Macdonbll,  Prof.  A.  A., 
609.  197,  226, 369,  870, 392, 

— ,  sacrifice,  155,  225,       447,  455. 


251, 31 4, 331, 345,  373,  Madhyadesa,       Midland 
504, 639,  568,  570,  594,      country,  463  note. 


603. 


lote. 

a  kind  of  metre, 

rivis,  the  name  of 

)e,  19  note. 

hetra,    a  district 

L'W.  India,   122, 

317,  381  notes.       Leader,  Neshtar,  one  of 

51,  a  prince,  115.        the  priests,  621. 

avaaa,  a  prince.      Leather,  63. 

a    favourite    of  Leech,   physician,    380  ; 
1, 21, 104, 159,263,       see  Physician. 
486,    439,     451,  Liberal  Ones,  Gods,  39. 
548,  583.  Liberality,  561 ;  to  priests,     32,  125,  267,  524,  626, 

,27.  20,  106,107,  111,113,      549. 

116,  119,123, 147,  148,  Magic,  personified,     504 

169,  161,  176,  195,196,      note  ;  of  Gods,  183,224, 

208,  212,  213, 223,266, 

266,305,429.470,625; 

heavenly  and  eariYA^ 

rewards  of,  54^,  b5Q. 


Magh&,  a  lunar  mansion, 
502. 

Maghavan,  Lord  of  Boun- 
ty, a  title  of    Indra, 
passim. 

Maghavans,   nobles,  ins- 
titutors  of  sacrifice,21, 


k,     a     demon 
5ht,21. 


of 


,  the  Holy,  Rivers, 
the  Light,  Dawn, 


436,690,604;  of  fiends, 
1,  2,  93,  94,  101,   139, 


652 


INDBX   OF  NAMBS,    ETC. 


Mahabhdrata,    99,     527,  Mann,    Man,    father    of 


536. 

Mah&vtra,  a  sacrificial  cal- 
dron, 219  note, 

Mahtdhara,  a  celebrated 
Commentator  on  the 
V&ja8aneyi-Sanhitft,43, 
241,  249,  445. 447,497, 
499,  518, 520,  545,569. 

Maiden,  the,  SfLryft,  69 ; 


mankind,  3,  12,  181, 
139, 153, 155, 167, 174, 
205, 261,  262, 352,  356, 
471,  476,  482,  484, 609, 
530,  539. 

—  Laws  of,  36,  438. 

—  the  father  of  Nd- 


450,  456-458,  471-474, 
476, 479,  484,  487, 491- 
494,500,508,516,528, 
524, 535,  537,  538, 544, 
545, 547,  556,  557, 568, 
573,  574,  583,  595. 

• 

—  as    healers,    150; 
their  number,  245  note. 


447,449,506,515,547, 

552,  557  ;  the  name  of 

aRishi,  262. 
Match-makers,  418,  502, 

503  notet. 
Matrons,    Heaven    and 

Earth,  385. 


bhAnedishtha,  456,467,  M&tali,  the  charioteer  of 

469,  470.  Indra,  898  note, 

earth  or  the  oblation,  Manus-Manu,  146,  164,  M&talt,  said  to  be  Indra, 

386.  186,  187,  260.  398. 

Maidens,  the  Dawns,  459.  Manyamfma,    a    Proper  M&tarisyan,  Y&yu,  or  Ag- 

Maids,  the    Dawns,   8  ;      Name,  20.  ni,  or  the  brihger  of 

fingers  of  the  priest,  Manyu,  Passion  person!-      Agni  from  heaven,  323, 

316.  fied,  488-500. 

Maker,  88.  Mares,  swift  rivers,  83 

Makha,  apparently  a  de-      watera  of   the  firma- 

mon,  369.  ment,  386. 

Male,  the  presiding,  518  Marichi,  one  of  the  Seven 
note  ;   the    first,   576      Rishis,  498. 
note.  Marriage  and    marriage 

Man,  the  first,  576  ;per-      ceremonies,  501-506.     Matsyas,  fishes  ;  said  to 

sonified,   the  Soul  of  presiding  deities  of,       be  the  name  of  a  tribe, 

the  universe,  517  note;      505,  506.  17. 

son    of    Heaven    and  Mdrt&nda,  a  name  of  the  M&y&,  Illusion,  the  cause 
Eurth,    62 ;    akin    to      Sun,  487.  of    material    creation, 

Gods,   71,    131,    144,  Marudvridhft,    name   or      604  note, 
164,  186,  206,231,247,       epithet  of  a  river,  490.  M&yAbheda,  Discernment 
264,    470,    474,    548,  Maruts,  Storm-Gods,  11,      of    Mfty&  or   Illusion, 
607.  18,  21,  31,  32,  34,  37-       604. 

Mana,  said  to  be  a  name      41,  44,  47,  52,  54-59,  M&yava,  the  name  of  a 

78,   89,   91,100,   110,      liberal  noble,  525,  526 
113,  123-126,  134,  135,  Medh&tithi,  a  Rishi,  103, 
137, 139,  144,  148-1.50,      107,  128. 
160, 163,  164, 166,  175,  Medhya,  a  Rishi,  262. 
176,178,183,  193,194,  Medhyatithi,a  Rishi,  108, 
206,  214,  224,  225,  231,       106,  107, 110,  172,  260, 
234,  242,  243,  245, 246,      261,  297. 
265,  268,  287,  292,  302,  Medicine,  Soma,  220  ;  of 
307, 315-317,  320,  332,      the  Maruts,  150,   583; 
337,  341,  345, 349, 351,      of  Rudra,  49,   167  ;  of 
^ST^^^'i^^ll^STi^STS,      the  Waters,  391,    583; 

4^7  ,  ^"i'i,  \"i'i,  ^'i^>  '^'^'^^  "^OevSxXxiM^^  xv^'ec  ^  «^^, 


of  Agastya,  36. 

Mauftjtwo  chains  or  rings?, 
226  note. 

Manas,  Spirit,  461. 

Manava,  son  of  Manu, 
469  note. 

Mandh4tar,  M4ndhatar, 
names  of  a  Rishi,  181, 
183. 

Manes,  398,  401 ;  see  Fa- 
thers. 
Manaions  of  the  Moon, 

458  note. 


INDEX  OF   NAMES,    ETC.  653 

Merit,  rewarded  in  hea-  Monotheism,  498.  and  cloud,  Genius 

ven,  399.  Moon,    Moon-God,    166,       of,  42. 

Metal,  tee  Gold,  Iron.  199,  219,  230,  246,269,  Mountains,  38,  39,    175, 

Metres,  558,  559  ;  aUot-      271,272, 279,  2S1,  282,      265,  433,  539. 

ted  to  various  Gods,  289,306,308,324,325,  Mrigaya,  a  fiend  or  hos- 
577.  332,336,338,  341, 345,      tile  savage,  113,  451. 

Milch-cow,  Indra,   104  ;      347,  357,  359,382,  419,  Mrilika,  the  name  of  a 
the  type  of  beneficence,     423, 450, 458,  501,  503,       Rishi,  592. 
153  ;  Agni,  387.  519, 525,  569, 584, 591.  Mrityu,  Death,  406. 

Milch-kine,  clouds,   46  ;  the  food  of  Gods,  Mudgala,  a  Rishi,    542, 

rivers,  326,  344.  501  rwU ;  sprung  from      543. 

Milk,  rain,  149,  291,452;  Purusha's  mind,  519.  Mudgal&nt,  Mudgala's 
sap,  vigour,   105  ;  of  Moon  and  stars,  326.  wife,  542,  543. 

heaven,  Soma  juice.  Moons,  two.  New  and  Muir,  Dr.  J.,  22,  34,  36, 
394,    557 ;    white    in      Full,  472.  40,  41,  49,   81-83,  85, 

coloured  cows,  452.       =  months,  616.  94-98,  100,   142,    152, 

Milton,  366,  422.  Morning,  personified,  35,       161,  179, 192, 198,205, 

Mitra,  8,  13,  36,  38-40,  45,  48,  67,  73-76,  86,  244,  269,  307,  380, 
43-45.  47,  52,  6066,  305,  384,  394,  431,  382,  390,  392,  394, 
78-80,  88,  89, 139,143,      515,  580  ;  tee  Dawn.         400,402,  430,  439,462, 

144, 146, 147, 156, 159-  and  Night,  4.  464, 470,  485,486,  490, 

162,  164-168, 176, 188,  Mornings,  11,  39,  46,  491,497,499,601,518, 
193,196,197,200,210,  63,  72,  74,  77,  147,  520,535,536,538,550, 
220,222,230,243,245,  244,  339,  344,  401,  658,562,564,567,576, 
252, 255, 257, 263, 270,      432,  502.  677,582,  589,  694,  611. 

306,315,335,337,340,  Mother,  Aditi,  4,  93,  M<ljav4n,a mountain  f am- 
342,349,351,362-364,  159,  231  ;  Dawn,  78,  edforSomaplanbs,429. 
867,371,374,377,882,  418,  608  ;  Earth,  96,  MuUer,  Prof.  F.  Max,  6, 
384,390,398,396,897,  407,  469,  614,  527;  16,  31,  32,  34,  36, 
411,423,426,  432.435,  of  Floods,  Sarasvatf,  46,  49,  64,  67,  74,  82, 
453,467,468,471,473-  41  ;  of  ktne  (rays  of  85,90,  96,  97,  100, 
475,487,503,616,  522-      light).  Dawn,  75.  131,136,144, 152, 181, 

524, 535, 552,553,  556,  Mothers,  Rivers,  244,  184,  200,  226,  226,237, 
571-573,578,590,607,  345,  370,  405,  431,  245,259,269,305,366, 
612.  473;  the  Waters,  235,       382,  392,  404,  407,408, 

Mitra- Varuna,  51,  60-65,  425  ;  Heaven  &  Earth,  443,  457,  460,  490-492, 
159,  252,  275.  431,  463,    474,    565  ;      494,  497,504,  516,520, 

Mitrfttithi,  the  name  of  Plants,  383,  533  ;  of  531,538, 567,  571,  572, 
a  prince,  429.  Law  (Heaven &  Earth),       576,  593,  600. 

Moksha,  final  liberation,  463;  of  Agni  (Dawns),  Mundane  Egg,  the,  518 
salvation,  518  note.  380.  note. 

Mole,  323.  —  midmost,     clouds  ?  Muni,    Munis,    inspired 

Monarch,  Indra,  78.  326.  saintfs),  55,  142,  582. 

Monogamy,     indication«  Mountain,     38  ;=- cloud,  M<\t^dw^,  vai.\»\^^^;cs«:Qk. 
of,  506.  8,  77,123,125,32^,^^^.       ot  ^-wxiQTiV  ^^^ .  VwS^- 


654  INDEX  OF  MAVIS,   BTC. 

Muaic,   214,   269,    581;      252,  266, 267. 349. 41 4,  Nodhaa,  a  Righi,  353  no6r. 

of  the  Maruts,  55.  487, 440, 447,  448, 587.  Noose  (for  catching  sin- 

MyriautheuB,  Prof.,  221.    Nature,  2.'?3  noU.  ners),  of  Agni,  511 ;  of 

Naragva,    member  of  a      Rudra,  49;  of  Varuoa, 
NABHX=Nftbhftnedi8h.        mythical  priestly  504 ;  of    VJsva,  511. 

tha,  469.  ^amQy,  376,  469.  Nooses  of  iDdra-Vani^a, 

Nabh&ka,  a  nishi,  182.     Navavftstva,  the  name  of      80  ;  of  Mitra  and  Va« 
Nftbbftka,  the  son  of  Na-      a  chief,  451.    >  lUna,  64. 

bhftka,  182, 183.  Nectar,  253, 269,  271.       North    altar.    137,    183 

N&bh&nediahtha,  son  of  Nema,  said  to  be  a  $i-      noteg. 

Manu,  467,  468.  shi,  250  note.  Notes  and  Queries,  598. 

Nachiketas,  a  Proper        Neshtar,  oneof  thepriests,  Nrimedha,  a  pnxUgi  of 

Name,  581  noU,  521  note.  Agni,  496. 

Nahus,  a  Proper  Name,  New  Year,  467  note.         Nrimedhas,      a     man's 

8,9,349,452,496,537.  Night,    164,    384,   385,      name,  578,  579. 
Nahusha,  a  Pr  oper  Name,     419, 438, 472, 578, 574,  Nrishad,  a  Proper  Name^ 

195,  470.  602,  609.  426,  466. 

N&husha,  said  to  be  the  —  and  dawn  or  morn< 

name  of  a  king,  90.  ing,  44,  47,  278,  553.    Oceak,  89,  51,  70,  84, 

Nahuflhas,  a  people,  90,   -^   and  day,  438.  Ill,  122, 184,  249,  569, 

121,  126,  351.  Lord  of,  the  Moon,       583,  591. 

Nahushyas,  apeople,351.      524.  of  air,  251,  355,  391, 

Nakshatras,  lunar  man-  Nights,  244.  477,536,568,572,604. 

aions,  501  note.  Nine,  theBhrigus?  419.  Varuna,  184  ;Soma, 

Names,  four,  of  a  deity,  Ninety,    indefinite    for      362. 

223.  many,  536.  Oceana,  seven,  520  note. 

Namt,  a  friend  of  Indra,  Ninety-nine,     ditto,        Oganas,    men    of    some 

450.  rivers,  546;  caatles,  hostile  tribe,  517. 

Namuchi,    a    demon  of      21,  94,  239,  306  ;        Old  age,  406,  462. 

drought,  21,  139,  246,       fiends,  452  ;  loads        Oldenberg,  Prof.  H.,  96, 

488,  578.  of  fuel,  536.  269,  509,  531. 

NarAsansa,    a    tiHe  of    Ntpfttithi,  a  Rishi,   174,  Om,  95. 

Agni,  3,    4,   72,    483,       260,  261.  Omen,  bird  of  ill,    598, 

523,  606.  Nirriti,  Goddess  of  des-      699. 

Narftsanst, eulogistic  song,     truction,   42,  58,   99,  Omnific,    Visvakarman, 

501.  158,    893,   407,    433,       496  no^. 

NArshada,  said  to  be  the      462,  492,  598.  Omniscient,   Soma,  288, 

name  of  a  fiend,   466  Nirritis,    destructive  289. 

note.  powers,  567.  Onb,  498  ;  One  All,  267; 

NArya,  a  liberal  prince,  Nirukta,  49.  One  Supreme,  498. 

159.  Nishti,   said  to  be  Diti,  One-horse  car,  577  ;  One- 

N/toatyas,  a  name  of  the      541  note.  footed,  the  Sun  ;    au 

AsviuSj  44,  67,  70-7S,  15\BVi\Agc\,\^^^'^'cao\Ja«t,      A^a-ekap4d. 
117  118  127-130,153,       5U.  Qi\^/\mT^axaKQK.\cs«'^x^- 

JdO-162,'l85,  231, 232,  l^Vtosa,aTn^Ti'*^^^^.^^^-      ivx.^^.^^-..^^^  -.te. 


INDEX   OF  NAMBS,    BTC.  61 

Ordainer,    the,    Dhfttar,  P&kayajfia, simple  domes-  Parna,  the   Paldsa  tree; 
406  ;  the  Sim,  467.  tic  oblation,    570  note.      Butea  Frondosa,  533.   . 

Order,  Cosmic  and  Mo-  Paktha,  a  king,  153,260,  Parnaya,atree-demoa,450 
ral,  48,   63,   64,    384,       465.  Parsu,  Rib,   daughter  of  \ 

386,   390,    395,    459,  Pakthas,  18,  465.  Manu,  509. 

467,    478,   480,    488,  Palftsa,    a    tree,    Butea name  of  a  chief,  123, 

496,  552.    See  Law.  Frondosa,  533  note.       Parsus,  79. 

—sacrifice,  40,  47,  90,  Panch&las,  a  tribe  in  the  Pftrthya,  a  liberal  chief, 

119,    850,    354.    360,      Paojftb,  150  note.  525,  526. 

361,    887,   390,    397,  Pani,  a  demon  of  dark-  Parushnl,  the  river  R&vf, 
425,    511,   545,    553,      neas,  466,  479,  595.  17,  18,  223,  490. 

570.    See  Law.  Papis,  11, 162,  235,  286,  Parvata,   the   Genius  of 

Kosmoa,    the    Uni-      344,    380,    466,    478,       Mountain  and  Cloud, 

verse,  568.  550,  551,  556.  42,  596. 

Orderer,  disposer  of  the  Panj4b,    20,    150,   159,  P&sadyumna,  a  king,  34. 

Universe,  Indra,  588,        490,  550  notee.  PAt&,  P4thft,  a  medicinal 

Ornaments,  of  the  Ma-  Pantheism,  517-520.  plant,  588  note. 

ruts,  148-150,  494;  of  Paramabrahmajft&uam,     Pauloml,  Indrdpt,  596. 

women,  196  ;  of  men,      knowledge  of  the  hi-  Paura,  son  of  King  Pura, 

208,    226;    of    cows,      gher  truths  of  roligion,       112,260. 

208.  484  noU  Pauras,  264. 

Ouranos  =:  Varu^a,     184  Paramajyft,  a  liberal  chief,  Pautakratu,  son  of  Pdta- 

note.  ]06.  krata    or    PAtakratu, 

Owl,  100, 101;  owlet,  101.  Param&tm&,  thesupreme      266  note. 
Oxhide,  278,  317,   320,      soul  or  self,  572  note.    Pavam&na,    269,     27$  ; 

336,  369.  Paramesvara,    the   sup-      Agni,  253  note ;  Soma, 

reme  God,  497  note.  272,  and  Book  IX.  pat- 

Paj^ribhi,  a  demon  or  Par^sara,  a  Rishi,  20.  eim  ;  POshan,  337. 

savage,  451.  PftrAvata  (s),   name  of  a  Pavamftnaa,  Soma  juices 

Paijavana,  patronymic  of      distant  tribe,  176.  or  drops,  285. 

King  Sudfts,  20,  21.      Parftvrij,     the    cripple,  P^vamftni,  verse  dedicat- 
Pair,  the, Earth  and  Hea-      il5  note,  ed  to  the  purifiication 

ven,  38,  283,  386,  396;  Parents,    the.     Heaven      of  Soma,  323. 

Day  and  Night,  398  ;      and  Earth,  52,  53,  62,  Pavlru,  chief  of  the  Ru- 

Night  and  Dawn,  273,       92,    324,    341.     396,      samas,  262. 

433  ;  Sun  and  Moon,      475,  553.  Pearl,  pearls,  20,  481. 

514.  Parijman,    the    Roamer  Pedu,  a  prot6g6   of  the 

Pajra,  a  woman's  name  ?      round,    Indra   as  the      Asvins,  71,  849,    437. 

338.  Sun,  522;  VAyu,  Wind,  Penury,  prayer  against, 

Pajra,   a  Proper  Name,       524,  525.  71,  492. 

115.  123.  Parjanya,    God    of   the  Peterson,   Prof.  P.,    79, 

Pajras,  a  priestly  family,       Rain-cloud,  39,  95,  96,       84,  85,  400,  518,  520, 

115.  119, 152, 254, 270, 285,      564,  567,  572. 

PakasthAman,   a  liberal      338,  381,  458,475»4'n:,  YViaX^xAa,^  ^'ts^^we.X^^- 
prince,  113.  535,    536,  001.  uw  \SL"Wiivs«k>^^'^^^**' 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,    ETC. 


hthisis,  613  note.  Potar,  Cleaoser,   one  of 

hysician,  380,  533  ;  his      the  priests,   15,    384, 


fee.  533. 


421. 


PbysiciaoM,  Waters,  143,  Poverty,  deprecated,  2, 

437.  89,  192. 

Piety,  the  blessings  of,  Praiseof  Men,  Narftsansa, 

165,  522  ;  see  Devotion,      a  title  of  Agni,  3. 
Pijavana,  father  or  an-  PrajApati,  Lord  of  Crea- 

cestorof  EangSudAs,20.    tion  or  Creatures,  52, 
Pillar  of  the  Universe,      240,    242,    253,    273, 


Agni,  387. 

Pillars,  sacrificial,  39. 

Pipru,  a  demon  of  dro- 
ught, 538,  584. 


318,    387,    419,  421, 

425,    445,    458,  466, 

473,   506,    566,  567, 
576,  611,  613. 


PisAchas,    demons,    399  Pramara,         Destroyer, 

note.  Death,  419. 

Pischel,  Prof.  R.,  25,  48,  Prapathi,  a  liberal  chief, 
82,  152,  163, 168,  193,  106. 
213,  257,  277,  288,  Prasftstar,  one  of  the 
318,  394,  421,  465,  chief  priests,  521  note. 
512,  547,  586,  605.  Praskanva,  a  Rishi,  112, 
Pitaras,  Pitris,  199  ;  tee      261,  265,  266. 

Fathers.  Prastotar,     one    of    the 

Pitriyajfta,    sacrifice    to      priests,  229  note. 

the  Fathers,  455  note.  Prathas,  extending,   the 
Planets,  458  note.  name  of  an  oblation. 

Plants,  56  ;  descended  606. 
from  heaven,  534 ;  me-  Pratiprasthtor,  the  de- 
dicinal,  533-535  ;  po-  signation  of  one  of  the 
isonous,  51 ;  king  of,  assistant  priests,  219 
Soma,  382,  534,  535.  note. 
Plati,  a  Rishi,  472,  474.  Pratridas,  a  name  of  the 
Playoga,    the  father  of      Tritsus,  36. 

King  Asanga,  107, 173.  Pravargya,  an  introduc- 
Pleasantness, personified,       tory   Soma  ceremony, 

586.  219  note. 

Plenty,    personified,   33,  Pray4j a, fore-offering,  606. 
38,  353,  473.  Prayer,    personified,    38, 


Plough,  153,  563. 


558 ;  Lord  of,  91,  92  ; 


Poison,  charm  against, 5] .      made,  inspired, by  Gods, 
Poisonous  reptiles,  charm       92  ;  for  health,  wealth 


against,  5. 
Polygamy,  17,   28,    428, 
442,    641,    588,    589  •, 
troubles  of,  428. 


and  happiness,   3,  53, 

SOI,    \Z\,   ^'^X    ^*l'^^ 
5S8,   5^0  \  lot  V«.^\>1 


homes,  231,  431 ;  for 
long  life,  59,  66, 
75,96,144,189,  198, 
199,  211,  268,  272, 
352,  406,  435,  462, 
607  ;  for  safety,  37, 
79,  89,  110,  117,  154- 
160,    164,    165,    196, 

197,  200,    210,    841, 
361,  471 ;  for  goodness, 

198,  271,  272  ;  for  in- 
nocence, 143,  431,435, 
471,  574  ;  for  mercy, 
85, 192 ;  for  purification, 
322,  391;  for  forgive- 
ness of  sins,    37,   58, 
82,  84,   85,  89,    199  ; 
for  freedom  from  sin, 
431,   435,   471,   598; 
for  immortal    life  in 
heaven,  381,  382,399; 
for  wisdom,  1,  5,    34, 
198,   291,     367,   878, 
414,     434 ;  for    fame, 
27,  80,  156,  276,  284, 
291,    302,    308,     311, 
312,    432,    434,     462, 
525  ;  for  wives,   321  ; 
for  children,  1,   2,  6, 
57,  67,  87,  91,  92,  121, 
166,    176,    268,    306, 
346,    352,    361,   391, 
446,  567  ;  for  aid  iu 
battle,  24,  27,  30,  56, 
79-81,  93,    111,    140, 
146,    151,    190,    201, 
212,224,264,364,436, 
544,  590 ;  for  victory 
in  a  race,    228,    525  ; 
for  clothes,    363  ;  for 
rain,  63,    64,    73,    96^ 
124,    160,    275,    295, 
SQl,   316,    317,     356, 

^«^^,  ^1%  ^•\'q^  ^^^^ 


INDEX  OF  KAMES,  ETa  657 

turage,  841,  352 ;  for  58,  438,  471,  475.  Purohita,  a  family  or 
eloqueBee,535;  agaiiut  Prithu,  a  RUhi,  591,602.  tribal  priest,  10,  11, 
peQury  and   sickneas,  Prithua,  79.  163,  535. 

71,  143,  210,  432,471;  FrithusraTae,    a   liberal of  Qods,  Bsihaspati, 

for  freedom  from  evil      prince,  195,  196.  535. 

dreams,  445  ;  for  re-  Priyamedha,    a   famous  Puru,  a  King,  112. 
moval  of  the  sin  of      Rishi,  112,  118,   171|  Pfiru,  the  eponymus  of 
lying  and  false  swear-      233.  a  Vedic  tribe,  7,  10, 

ing»  891 ;  for  the  de-  Priyamedhas,  110,  115,      19,  21,  385. 
struction  of  fiends,  90,      123,  128,  215,233,489.  POrus,  10,  91,  449. 
98-101,  852.  Productive  Power,  486.    Puruhanman,    a   ]^hi, 

Prayoga,   a  poor  J^ishi,  ProfeBsionB,crafts,trades,      215. 

255  note,  indications  of,  agricul-  Purukutsa,  a  prince,  21, 

Press-stones,  43,  46,491,      ture,   150,   158,   157,      147. 

492,  526,  527,  603.  519,  563  ;  barb«r,115,  Purum&yya,  aKi8hi,212. 

Pridftkusftnu,    a  Proper      586;  bard,  380;  boat-  Purumqha,  aBishi,  218, 

Name,  142.  builder,     230,     327 ;      305. 

Priesthood,  a  profession,      carpenter,  wright,  285,  Purumitra,  a  Rishi,  437. 
380  note.  380 ;  currier,  63,  265;  Pur^ravas,    an    ancient 

Priest's  daughters,  fingers,    rope-making,  80;  phy-      King,  139,  412,  527- 

280.  sician,  380, 528;  smelt-      531. 

Pijests,  modem,  imita-      er,  486,  497 ;  smith,  Pfirus,  men  of  a  Vedic 
tors  of  divine,  577.  380,    486  ;    trafficker,      tribe,  207. 

of  the  Gods,  483;      merchant,    190,  209 ;  Purusha,  Embodied  Spirit, 

seeHotars,  Celestial.        usurer,   209;  weaver,      Man,     397,    517-520, 

called  Gods,  8,  144,      416.  576. 

310,  568.  Protecting     Goddesses,  Purushanti,     a    liberal 

liberality    to,  ue      38 ;  see  Variltrts.  prince,  305. 

Liberality  to  Priests.    Protectress,  the,  43  ;  see  PQshan,  a  Sun-GM,  39, 
Prishadhra,  a  Rishi,  262.      Variitrl.  41,  44,   45,   48,    115, 

Prifihadvftna,    a    Proper  Providence,  30, 147, 539.      164,    167,    168,    265, 
Name,  261.  Ptolemy,  175.  806,    321,   337,    349, 

Prisana,  the  name  of  a  Pulaha,  one  of  the  Seven      368,    377,   387,    404, 
place  ?  364.  Rishis,  498  note.  405,    415,    416,    428, 

PriBani=Pri8ni,  487.        Puiastya,  ditto,  498  note.     432,      463,     472-474, 
Prisni,    mother   of  the  Punarvatsa,  a  l^shi,  125.      502,    504,   523,    535, 
Maruts,  18,  40,  55,88,  Pur&nas,  95,  528.  571,  534. 

123,124,149,150,242,  Purandhi,  Plenty  or  Bold-  Pa8ha]gA=Piishan,  524. 
293,427,456,466,487,      ness   personified,    38,  Pushtigu,  a  Proper  Name, 
489,  568.  41,  44,  473,  476,  505.       261. 

Prithavftna,  the  name  of  Purifying,  the,  253.  Pfitabhrit,  a  Soma  reser- 

a  noble,  525.  PurodAs,  a  Proper  Name?      voir,    108,124,    243, 

Prith!,  the  first  anoint-      17."  347,  370. 

edkiDg,  129,  591.        PurodAsa,  aacrificisaca^,  Y^U\x»Xi^»,i^^\Kt^«ft.V 
'ritbivt,  Earth,  Mid-ur,      897  note,  ^'^^v 

42 


i 


658  INDEX  OF  VAXES,  BTC. 

Patakratu,     a     Proper      201,247,296,301,313,  Ribhus,  three  deities  of 

Name,  213,  266.  331,847,368,375,419,    '  mid-air,  39,  41,50,52, 

433,456, 458, 463,  510,       111,  130, 176,192,226, 
Quail = Dawn,  438.  512,  563,  593.  242,247,413,  438, 457, 

Quarters  of  the  sky,  39.  R&kshasi,  a  female  fiend,      475,  477,  492,496,523, 
Queen,   the,   Vftk,  571  ;      100.  603,  612. 

of  Gods,  VAk,  261.       Ram,  the  Warrior  Indra,  Rich,  richas,    sacred 
Queens,  the  Waters,  391,      110,  243.  Terse(8)  for  recitation, 

424,  425.  Rftma,   the  name  of   a      586,  519,  521,  558. 

Questionings    regarding      noble,  525.  Riches  personified,  38 ; 

Nature,     Oods,     and  R4m&yana,  166.  like  chariot- wheels, 

Man,   497,   514,   555,  Rasft,    a    semi-mythical      562. 

600.  river,297,490,550,566.  Rijika8,nameof  apeople, 

Quintus  Curtius,  150.        Rathantara,  an  import*      381  note. 
Quoit,  245,  436,  488.  ant  S&man,  606.  Rijisvan,  a  proUgi  of 

Rathaproshthas,  men  of  Indra,  260,  538,  584.  • 
Race,  291,  300,  480,  489.  a  regal  family,  464.  Rijdnas,  a  man's  name,  } 
Race-course,  88.  Rathaspati,  God  of  war-      262. 

Racers,  46,  282  note.  chariots,  473,  525.         Riksha,   a  prince,   212, 

Ragozin,  Mme.  Z.,  408,  R&ti,   Divine  Favour  or      213,  222,  223. 

497,505,552,589,606;       Bounty,  477.  Rikvans,  divine  singers, 

see  Vedic  India.  R4vl,  a  river  in  the  Pan-       12,  398,  472. 

Raibhi,  ritual  verse,  501.      jAb,  17, 223,  490  noies.    Rishi,   84,    112,    572; 
Rain,  89  ;  produced  by  Razor,  115,  421.  Indra,  122,  140. 

the  Moon,    423,    424  Rebha,  a  prot^g6  of  the  Rishis,  70,  74,  111,  120, 

notes;  Lords  of,  160  ;       Asvins,  437.  127, 218,  235, 268,  323, 

prayerfor,  63,  64, 160,  Red,  the,  the  Sun,  76;      352,469,385.518,594; 

275.  Red  Bird,  the  Sun,  459 ;       old  and  recent,  25 ;  an- 

Rains,  the,  97,  98,  148.    Red  Treasure,   the,    the       cient,  400, 577  ;  raised 
Rdjanya,    a    Kshatriya,       Sun,  252.  to  their  rank  by  know- 

519.  Regal  Class,    the,    519  ;      ledge,  577 ;   childlike 

Rajas,    the    firmament,      see  Kshatriyas.  questions      of,      514: 

234.  Resuscitation  of  Suban-       childlike  address  to  a 

Rajayakshma,  Consump-      dhu,  461-465.  God,  33, 138,  146, 147, 

tion,  597.  Revelation,  268.  189;  the  Seven,  498, 

Raji,  a  word  of  unknown  Ribhu,  the  eldest  of  the      552,  577,  583. 

meaning,  547.  Ribhus,  41,  242,  413,  Rishtishena,    a    prince, 

R&kft,  a  lunar  Goddess,       525.  535,  536. 

332.  ^    Ribhukshan  =  Ribhu  ;  a  Rivers,  4,  39,  490,  529  ; 

Rakshas,  the  demon  race,       title  of  Indra  ;  41,  42,       the  Seven,  20,  41,  67,    ^ 
154.  50,  192,  247,  413,  473,       214;  twenty-one,  490  :    | 

R&kshasa,    a    nocturnal      489,  525.  Lords  of,  63. 

iSend,  1,  11,  100.  B.\\>\iMVa\i%.Tia,    ^\Vcv>xV-  ^bber,53,  99;  seeThiet 

B^Jcshasas,   14,  43,    72,      BYiaxvaa='»:\\Av>i%A'^A'^>'^^^'«^'^V  ^^  ^^-s^asstN.  ^\ 
98il00,  155,  117   1S7,       50,'l^^,^^^,  ^^^^^'"-^^     "Ccv^^^xxx\^.^'5j,,-fv%. 


1 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


659 


Rohitas^  the  horses   of      43,  57,  213,  405,  667,      109,  115,134,136,168, 
Agni,  46  note,  578,  585.  170, 190,  227, 236,238, 

Roth,  Prof,  von,  8,  34,  Sacred  Grass,  $ee  Grass,      239,  2tl,  247,  248,262, 
40,  48,  54,  57,  68,  84,.     Sacred.  441,  442,546,  580,600. 

91, 105, 116,  118, 147,  Sacred  syllable,  397.         Sakti,  a  son  of  Vasishtha, 
184,  214,  218, 256,269,  Sacrifice,  219,  540,  541 ;  *  20. 
260,  264,  266,304,382,      personified,   576,    601  Sakvart,  a  Vedic  metre, 

notes;  as  an  act  of  crea-       35,  486. 

tion,  499,513,520,576;  Salmali,  the  silk-cotton 

morning  and  evening,      tree,  51,  503. 

14,  15;  morning,  noon.  Salt,  not  mentioned. 

and  evening,  165,  345,  SAma,  S&man,  song,  chant 

376;  priest  of,  Agni,      ed  hymn,  36, 123,  141, 

13,16 ;  herald  of,  Agni, 

poimn  ;  a  web,  woven, 

11,    268,    370,    675; 

a  thread,   spun,   136, 


391,392,404,408,452, 
456,  470,509,531,  541, 
565,  569,  582. 

Rudra,  the  Tempest- 
God,  12,  39,  41,  45, 
49,54,56,58,137,149, 
167,331,450,473,474, 
522-525, 572, 573,  582, 
600. 

Rudras,  sons  of  Rudra, 
the  Maruts,  8,  12,  35, 
39,  40,  124,  137,  148, 
206,253,265,427,468, 
473, 476,  477, 625, 637, 
571, 675, 582, 592 ;  the 
Asvins,  154,  162. 

Rudriya8= Rudras,  450. 

Ruma,  a  favourite  of 
Indra,  114. 

Rusama,  a  prince,  112, 
114,  262. 

Rusamas,  a  people,  262. 

Sabardhu,  name  of  the 


156, 167,  229,  235,  244, 
248,  433,  486,  494,  502, 

519,  557,558,576,581, 
606. 


186, 238, 345, 456,482,  Sftma-chanter,  one  of  the 
602  ;  a  ship,  444,  540,      priests,  486,  549. 
547 ;    a  chariot,  525,  S&maveda,   594,  595,  60 
540;  ploughing,  sow-      notes. 
ing,  reaping,  540 ;  with  Sambara,    a    demon    or 
the  heart,  255;  head      savage,    20,    94,    239, 
of.    Soma,    283 ;   the      246,  306. 
Gods'  first,  421 ;  three-  Saml,  a  tree,  Acacia  Su- 
fold,  455,  570 ;  seven-      ma,  426,  453. 
threaded,    455,    570 ;  SamjMnam,  Agreement, 
with  five  divisions,  570;      609. 
unpleasing    without     Samvarana,  a  Rishi,  261. 
prayer,   547 ;  sordid,    S&mvarani,  son  of  Samva- 
prayer  against,  471.  rana,  261. 

cow  milked  at  sacrifice,  Sacrificer,  the,  607;  su  Samvarta,  a  man's  name. 


Tajam^na.  264. 

the  first,  Atharvan,  Sanaa,  Prayer,  Wish,  per- 

523 ;  wife  of,  associat-      sonified,  38. 
ed    in    worship,   168,  Santanu,  a  prince,  535, 
415,  607.  636. 

Sddhyas,  a  class  of  Gods,  Saprathas,    Far-eztend- 
518,  520.  ing,  the  name  of  an 

meaning,  142  note.        SakapfLta,  a  Proper  Name,      oblation,  606. 
S&chip&jana,  ditto,  142      578,  679.  Sapatnlb&dhanam,    spell 

note,  Sakatas,  carts  for  Soma      to  remove  a  rival  wife, 

6achivan,  a  man's  name,      plants,  397  note,  588. 

489,  Sakra,themigKty,aiiMXi^^«^\»ei,^xaraifc  ^\'^^- 

Sacred Bookaof  the  East,       of  Indra,  22,  \00,\^S,     \««^v2C\^  ^H^^ 


467. 
Sabardhuk,  ditto,  482. 
Sabardughft,   ditto,  104, 

466,  467. 
Sachi,     power,     Indra's 

Consort,  140,  596. 
S&chigo,     of     uncertain 


660 


INDSX  OP  NAHES,  ITC. 


Saptavadhri,  SkproUg4  of  Sauchlka,  »  title  of  Agni,  Serpents,  99,  471. 

the  Asvins,  221,  437.         456.  Seven,  the,  the  Marots, 

Sara,  the  name  of  a  man,  S&varni,  a  liberal  prince,      166. 

216,217.  470.  Seven,    Adityas,     382; 

Sarabha,  the  name  of  a  S4varnya=S&varni,  470.      castles,    19;    commu- 

Risbi,  251.  Savast,  the  Mighty  Dame, 

Saramft,  Indra's  meesen*      Aditi»  190,  225. 


nities,     2S8 ;    fiends, 
246;    flames  of  Agni, 


ger,  53,  399,  466,  466,  Savish|ha,aliberalprince,     370,  387  ;  glories,166; 


550, 551.  223. 

S&rameya8,Yama*8  watch  Savitar,  the  Sun  as  Im- 
dogs,  sons  of  Saramfl,      peller,  Yivifier,  15,  37, 


53  note. 

SaranyQ,  the  mother  of 
Tama,  163,  404. 

Sarasv&D,  the  Consort  of 
Sarasvatl,  90,  477. 

Sarasvati,  River  an  d  God- 
dess, 4,  11,  39,  41,  44, 
45,  90,  91,  152,  180, 
265,  273,  323,337,405, 


Guards  of  Soma,  501 ; 
heavenly  singers,  261  ; 
heroes,  419  ;  horses  of 
the  Sun,  60,  ^6;  hotars 
427;  465;  lights  of 
sacrifice,  S70 ;  metres, 
870,  427,  478,  520 
notei;  mothers  (rivers), 
244,  345,  870 ;  obla- 
tions,  405 ;  oceans^ 
520  Mtt;  prieets,I8l, 


39,  42-44,  48,  49,  52, 
63,  65,  74,  76,  79,  80, 
143,  165,  233,254,322, 
837,368,  379,  897,404, 
419,  425,430-432,434, 
467,  472,  473,  476, 
502,  505,  512,522,525, 
538, 539,  567,575,584, 

586,  591,  597,  603,606.    201,  219,  238,268,275, 

425,463,473,474,476,    Savitri » Savitar,  242no<e.    277,   281,   310,    352, 

484,490, 553,575,586,  Sftya^,AchArya,thegreat    370,   382,     415,    432, 

613.  Commentator,  passim.      455,471,  473,  559,567. 

Sarayu,  a  river,  473.         Sayu,  a  proUg6  of  the 

Sarpai^jat,  Kadra,   Ser-      Asvins,  69,  438,  439. 

peut- Queen,  608.  Scherman,  Dr.  520,  567, 

Saryanilv&n,    a  lake  and      576. 

district,  122,  125,207,  Scorpion?,  51. 

317,  381,  431.  Sea,9,35, 51, 117,119,120, 

Sasakarna,  a  Rishi,  128.       149,   239,    307,    345, 

Sasvati,  the  wife  of  386,  476,  477,552,566, 

Asanga,  107.  582;  of  air,  9,  131,132, 

Satakratu,    Lord    of    a      134,    136,    162,    207, 

Hundred  Powers,  Indra,     224,   247,    264,    279, 

137,170,173,178,203,      307,    311,    331.    374, 

375,  487,  494,  609 ;  a 
Soma  reservoir,    121, 


224,225,228,234,236- 
238.241,242,249,250, 
263, 264, 423, 556,  580. 
Satapatha-Bi-&bmana,  43, 
'  95,  253,  269,  405,627, 
533,  538,  540, 568,585. 


570 ;  regions;  382,567; 
ridges  o£  OKHintains, 
244  ;  Rishis  498,  652  ; 
see  Rishis,  Seven ;  ri- 
vers,*20,  41,  67,  159, 
183,  184,  214,  266, 
303,  318,  344,  345, 
362,   370,    442,    452, 

479;  546;  rivers  of 
air,  303  ;  singers,  485; 
sisters,  183,  268,  318, 
345,  387  ;  sons  of  Adi- 
ti,  487 ;  spears  of  the 
Maruts,    166  ;    splen- 


289,  293  ;  water  into      dours,   166 ;   stations, 
which  the  Soma  juice      567  ;  Sun's  rays,  220, 


468  ;  threads  of  sacri- 
fice, 570 ;  tones,  427  ; 
troops  of  Maruts,  458, 


falls,  279  ;  cloud  and 
rain,  476. 
3atay&tu=Sakti,yasish-  Seas,  four,  292,  448. 
tha'sson,20.  SerpetiY.,  \iV'ft,  ^,  \\^\     4U. 


\^\, 


INDEX  OF  NAMKS,  ETC. 


661 


Seven-beaded,1iymn,261;      to  Brfthman  rank,  536      154,  257. 

sacrifice,  478.  note,  Sobharis,  147,  149. 

'Seventy  Hyrana,  the,  62  ;  Singers*  Rikvana,  12.        Sole  bom,  Manyu,  '500. 

see  Siebenzig  Lieden    Sioiv&U,  a  lunar  Goddess,  Sole  God,  497. 
8hadvin8aBrfthmana,110.     332,  613.  Soma,  the  God,  88,  45, 

iShip,  143,  224,  230,330,  Sinj&ra,  taproUgi  of  the      53,  98-101,    166,  269, 

359,  605  ;  hymn,  185;      Asvins,  118,  439.  325,  391,  414,  415,474. 

sacrifice,  185, 350, 444,  Sipaida,  a  kind  of  disease,  52.    477,  501,  515,  534,535, 

471,  540, 547, = funeral  Sipivishta,  a  title  of  Vishnu,    639,  570,  571,  574,577, 

pile,  581.  94,  95.  586,  600-603;  the  plant, 

Sickle,  227,  540.  SIrimbitha,  a  Bishi,  594.      habitat  of,   283,  309; 

Sickness,  71;  9fe  Disease.  Sishtas,  an  unimportant      310,  354,  preparation 
Siebenzig  Lieder  des  Rig-      tribe,  264. 

7eda    (Geldner     and  Sifin^^B&kshasas,    etc., 

Kaegi),  7,  62,  84,  85,      419  note. 

Z9i,  400,    408,    431,  Sisnadev&b,  lewd  savages, 

486,    552,  562,    572,  '   24, 537  notes. 

576,  589.  Sisters,  fingers,  288,289, 

Sigrus,  anon- Aryan  tribe     316, 324, 323, 329, 350, 

351,  353,    365,  526; 
rivers,  345;  plants,  410; 
Heaven  and  Earth,  565; 
Dawns,  294  ;  flames  of 
Agni,  387. 
Simyus,  a  savage  tribe,  Sivas, anon- Aryan  tribe, 

17.  18. 

Sin,  the  bonds  of,  82,85,  Six  Expanses,  400,  574. 

210,   211  ;  prayer  for  Skambha,  Pillar    of   the 

removal  or  foi*givenes8      Universe,  387  note, 

of,  82,   89,  210,  211,  Sky,  personified,  76,  77, 

431 ;  of  others,  prayer      433,  474,  476  ;  sprung 

for  freedom  from,  52,      from  Purusha's  head, 

82 ;  punisher  of,  64, 82,       519. 

362,  493.  516  ;  punish-  Slaves,  147,  266. 

ment  of,  583 ;  sinless,  Sleep  song,  54. 

60,  62,  65,  82,  210;  Smadibha,  a  Proper  l!7ame, 

sinner,  576.  451. 

Sindhu,  the  Indus,  river,  Smelting  of  metals,  486, 

sea,  83,  90,  132,  150,      497. 

160,163,  364,473,477,  Smith,  380,  486,  497. 

490,   494,    555,   583,  Snowy  Mountains,  566. 

chief  of  rivers,    4^0;  Soastos,  Arrian*s  name    Somayajfia,    an  offering 

feminine,  491.  of  Suv^tu,  148.  of  Soma  juice,  570  note. 

SJndhudvipB,  the  same  Sobhari,  a  Vedic  B.\ab\,  Soxk    c^l   ^\xwi<^^    «* 

of  »  Ksbatriya,  raised      118,  144, 148, 151i,  \Xi%     ^\j£«tt%^^^^^  ^^» 


20. 

Stlamftvatl,  name  or  epi- 
thet of  a  river,  491. 

Simid4,  a  kind  of  disease, 
52. 


of,  107,  270,  309;  rap- 
ture produced  by, 169, 
194,   198  ;  powers  of, 
193,    198,    199;   elo- 
quence  produced    by, 
259,288,293,315,321, 
325,  333,  351  356,368; 
Pavamftna    (in    course 
of   purification),  269- 
382,  667;  deified,  198, 
199,  227,  269,  271,273, 
374,    376,  601 ;  celes- 
tial, 134,  206,  207,292, 
296,    369,  381,    560; 
Guard  of,Kri8anu,473; 
guards  of,  501 ;  Father 
of  Gods,  842,  347,  355, 
377;  Father  of  Heaven 
and  Earth,   350,   855  ; 
identified  with  the  Sun, 
811  ;  with  the  Moon, 
806,  501;  omniscient, 
288,  289 ;  producer  of 
the  Gods,  297 ;  maker 
of  the  firmament,  310; 
giver  of  rain,  295,  801; 
slayer  of  sinners,  289, 
300 ;  healer  of  the  sick 
and  ^verof  sight,227. 


I 


662  INDEX  OF  NAltES,  ETC. 

iSorcerer(a),  sorcery,  100,  Stallions,  flames  of  the  Sumne4pi,  the  name  of 
101.  Sun,  386.  an  Apsaras,  528. 

Soul,Individual,517»o«e  ;  Star,  the  Sun,  77, 82, 555,Sun,  Sun-God,  8,  9,85,89, 

Univer8al,517,572  notes.    595  ;  the  ancient, Agni      60,  68,  74,  77,  78,  82, 

Soul    of    the    Universe,      as  the  Sun,  514.  111,113,124,133,146, 

Man,  Embodied  Spirit,  Starlings,  176.  221,  234,  239,244,  270, 

517  noU.  Steed,  the,  the  Sun,  579.      286,  289,  297,311,  322, 

Speech,   130,  251,  484,  Steeds' Lord,  Agni,  2.  339,378,386,387,390, 

485,   458,     571.   604 ;  Steer,  Steers,  see  Bull,      392,405,418-420,431, 
Lord    of,    Bfihaspati,      Bulls.  434,451,458,465,467, 

535  note;  Soma,  288,  Stega,  a  word  of  uncertam     473,487,501,502,514, 
368;  Visvakarman,  497.      meaning,  426.  519, 520,525,  547,  554, 

Spies  of  Varuna,  83 ;  of  Stotar,  a  praising  priest,      562, 565, 566,  569, 571, 
the  Gods,  392,  393.  237.  584, 585, 601, 604,  608; 

Spinsters,  485.  Streams,  50,  431,   472  ;      sprung  from  Purusha'a 

Spirit,  Boldness,  personi-      see  Rivers.  eye,  519;  the  daughter 

fled,  38.  Strength,  Son  of,  Agni,      of,  Siiryft,  501;  protec- 

the  Supreme,  484      2,  3,  5, 10,  14, 15, 188,      tors  of,  594. 

note  ;— sprung  from  200, 201, 217, 218,  223,  Sun  and  Moon,  182,  242, 
Desire  or  Love,  575 ;  231, 395, 409, 445,  585,  419,  472,  481,  495,503, 
the  Embodied,  Purusha,  586;  Indra,  235,  238.  514,  523,  524,  584,609; 
.^)17 ;  the  presiding,  Stuti,  Praise,  427  note.  the  eyes  of  Agni,  495 
618  ;  human,  goes  to  Subandhu,  a  Rishi,  462-  note. 
the  wind  at  death, 402  ;      465.  Silnrita,  Plea8antness,586. 

recall  of  the  departed,  Sucha,     Such4,     Proper  Supitrya,    epithet   of    a 
461,  462.  Names,  416.  Rishi,  559. 

Spirits,  the  world  of,402.  Sudaksha,  a  Rishi,  237.     Supporter,  Indra,  249. 

Spring,  618,  697.  Sud^,  King  of  the  Trit-  Supreme  Deity,  original- 

SraddhA,  Faith,  528.  ■^.  sue,  17-22,  27,  34,  35,      ly  Varuna,  570;— God, 

Srenf,  the    name    of   an      63,  60,  61,  64,  79,  80.        377  note ;— Soul,  672. 
Apsaras,  628.  Sudeva,  a  Proper  Name,  Silra,  the  Sun,   49,   104, 

Sribinda,    a    demon     of      116.  316,  319,  321,346,351, 

drought,  169.  Sudlti,  said  to  be  a  Pro-       379. 

Siingavrish,     a    Proper       per  Name,  218.  Surabhi,  the  daughter  of 

Name,  142.  Sadra,    a    man    of    the      Daksha,  394. 

Srutakaksha,     a    Vedic      fourth  class,  619.  SAradeva,  a  prince,  21 7. 

Rishi,  239.  Suj<irni,  the  name  of  an  Surgery,  104. 

Srutarvan,  a  prince,  222,      Apsaras,  528.  Suris,  priuces,institutors 

223,  461.  Sum&rutam,  the  band  of      of  sacrifice,  161,  590. 

St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,       Maruts,  493.  Surya,  the  Sun,   3,    40, 

40,  49,  101,  166,   187,  Sumedhas,  a  ProperName,    48,  50,  60-63,   66,  69, 

191,  223,226, 240,  259,      678,  679.  74,  83,  86,  93,  94, 104, 

285,  287, 288,  299, 323,  Sumitia,  ?>.mfe\C\,\.^^,^'A.   Vi\,Vi«'^^^^■'^52, 161, 

338,  356,  366,  393,436.  SumV\.raB,  m,  \1\,VlVVa  .X'SX  ,^5^^ 

447,  605,  543,  560.         Sumxa.x,  ^\^.  ^^^  A^^.^^^.^*-^.^ 


INDEX  OF  KAllBS,  BTC.  663 

253,  266,  267,  269,273,  Sv4na,   the    name  of  a  Ten,  the,  the  fiDgen,329; 

289,296,303,306,311,      guard  of    Soma,    501      arms = regions,     253; 

812,  314,  320,  322,325,      note,  confederate  kings,  85, 

329,  331,  333,  334,339,  Svanadratha,  a  prince,  106.    79,  80 ;  dames,  women, 

344,  345,  351,  353,355,  Svarga,  heaven,  530.  the  fingers,  274,   304, 

361,  362,  373,  375,381,  Svarnara,  a  prince,  112.        324,  326;  fingers*  space, 

389,  393,  420,  422,423,  Svasti,  Prosperity,  472.        the  region  of  the  heart, 

4£6,  431,  434,  435,446,  Svetyft,  a  river,  490.  517;  horses  of  the  Sun, 

451,  467,  470,476,  487,  Swan,  176, 291 ;  the  Sun,      312 ;     priests,     219  ; 

493,501,510,514.515,      671.  regions,  253;   sisters, 

547,  554,  555,  557,569,  Swans,  bards,  359  ;  the      the  fingers,  269  ;  289; 

571,  582,  586,  590,596,      Maruts,  69.  Angirases,  419. 

601,    605,    606,  608;  Swarthy  skin,  the  abori-  Tenfold  dwelliug  of  Agni, 

High  Priest  of  Gods,      gin6s,  331.  453. 

253.  Swat,  148  note.  Thief,  thieves,  58, 82, 99, 

Surya's  Daughter,  Faith,  Swing,  boat,  84;  golden,      223,  386,  505. 

381.  the  Sun,  83.  Thirty-four  lights,  458. 

Siiry&,Sunlight,Daughter  Sword,orknife^of  Agni,    Thirty-three  Gods,  166, 

of  Sarya,  68,  69,    127,      flame,  409.  167,  175,  181,  265,352. 

152, 167,  232,438,501-  Sy&va,  a  prot4g4  of  the  Thirty-six   chalices    for 

505;  the  typical  bride,      Asvins,  476.  Soma  libations,  558. 

501-505.  Syftvaka,  a  favourite  of  Thousand,  branches,  of 

Surya's  Bridal,  501-503.        Indra,  112,  114.  the  Sun-God    or   the 

Susartu,  a  river,  490.        Sy&v&Bva,a  Proper  Name,     World-Tree,  35;  eyes 
Sush&man,  the  name   of      177-180.  of  Yaruna,  37. 

a  prince,  156,  161.  Syumarasmi,  a  favourite  Thdrr,  172  note, 

Sushna,     a     demon    of      of  the  Asvins,  262.         Thread  of  sacrifice,  136, 

drought,  21,  106,  120,  *  286,  345,  482,  485,482, 

182, 246, 262, 411,  412,  TaittirIya    BbAhmana,       485,  576,  602. 

451,  466,  538, 554.  581.  Three,  the,  heaven,  air, 

Sashoma,  a  district  fam-  Taniina  p&t.  Son  of  Him-      earth,     252  ;      Y^yu, 

ed  for  Soma,  125.  self,  Agni,  272, 483,  553.    Parjanya,  Aditya,  420; 

Sushom&,  a   river,    207,  T&nva,   a   liberal    noble,      attendants  on  Dawn, 

490.  525,526.  .35;  backs    or    ridges, 

Sustainer,  38,  56.  Tapas,  Austerity,  Fervour,    31 0  ;  beakers,  1 08, 136 ; 

Sutlej,  493  note.  Penance,  499,  594,  607.      daily  libations,  12, 376, 

Sutudri,  the  Sutlej,  490.  Tapurmurdhan,    Flame-       570  ;  Dawns,  183,  dis- 
Suv^stu,  the  name  of  a      headed,  Brihaspati    or      tanceB,l  16,171;  earths, 

district,  148.  Agni,  606!  83,  99,  184;  fertilizing 

Suwad,  148.'  Taranta,  a  liberal  prince,      deities,  35;  filters,  364; 

Svadb4,  oblation  to  305.  fire  receptacles,12, 559 ; 

Manes,  398,  401.  T&rkshya,a  personification    friends  of  Indra,  42; 

Sv&h4,  Ave  !   HaU !    59,      of  the  Sun,  591,  604.        gatherings,  66;  gather- 

174^  177,273, 384,  898,  Taruksha,   a  non-Aryan      ing-places,  181 ;  ^ene- 
4S4,  chief,  196.  x^NhssoaA^^N^^'^^'*'" 


664  INDBX  OV  HAKtS^  ITO. 

MS,  4 ;    Gods,     ^07 ;  Time,  458  note,  Tritra,   BvMa,   Idn^  of 

he^hts,    8S0;     holy  Times  (watohes)  of  night,     Tntsos. 
words,  292, 861 ;  hxmi-      116.  Tritsas,  a  tribe,  17-21, 35, 

nous  nahns  of  heaTen,  tirascht,  a  Ri^^  24S.  86,  79,  80. 

213,  282;  noble  erea-  Tirindira,  a  liberal  prinoe,Troop,  the,  the  Manats, 
tares,  85  ;  plaoee  of  the  123.  871 ;— a,  stars,  419. 
ABTins,  128  ;  plaees  of  Tiahya,  an  asterism,  473.  Truth,  the  Law  of  the 
Soma,  248  ;  Purifiers,  Trafficker,  190,  209.  Umwse,  501,  601, 
881;  reservoirs,  96, 108,  Trap,  for  lions,  422  ;  for  609;  Lords  ot,  the 
870 ;   sacrificial  fires,      wild  bulls,  422.  Gods,  89. 

547;  seats,  810;  spheres  Trasadaayu,    Terror    of  Tryambaka,  a  name  of 

of  light,  282  ;  steps  of      Dasyus,  the  name  of  a      Rudra,  59. 

Vishnu,  98,  95,   130,      priBce,21, 128, 147, 153,  Tugra,  a  prince,  104,118, 

334, 167,  263 ;  subUm-      178, 179, 260.  428, 592.      117, 192, 223, 250, 437, 

est  forms,  322  ;  times  Tree,  the   Soma   plant,      451. 

(watches)     of    night,      583 ;  the  home  of  the  Togrya,  ^ujyu  son  of 

316  ;  tones,  862  ;  Ve-      Blest,  581.  Tugra,  113,  171,  260. 

das,  810  noH;  voices,  Tree^  8$^56;oloads,488.  Tugryas,  104. 

361 ;  wheels  of  Sdry&*8  Trikadrukas,  Uiree  Soma  Tuji,  a  prince  aided  by 

car,  503;  Worlds,  109,      vessels,   or  first  three      Indra,  451. 

478.  days  of  the  AbUplava  Turva  a  Turvasa. 

Threefold,  the,  the  Uni-  ceremony,  136,  238,  Turvasa,  th3  eponymus 
verse,  657;  the  three      400.  of  a  Vedic  tribe,  17,  22, 

daUy  sacrifices,  376  ;—  Ttikahi,  a  prince,  163.  113, 114, 124, 130, 131 ; 

light,  96  ;   grass    (in  Triocular,  Rudra  59  note,     191,  306,  452. 
three    layers),     255  ;  Triple,  height,  329,  333,  Turvasas,  115. 
wealth,  33.  351,   372;  splendour,  T4rvay4aa,  a  King  aided 

Three-footed,  old    man      422.  by  Indra,  465. 

with  staff,  562.  TrishtlmA,  a  river,  490.    Tvashtar,  the  Divine  Ar- 

Thrice,  in  connexion  Trishtup,  one  of  the  chief  tificer,  4,  38,  89,  163, 
with  the  Asvins,  176.  Vedic  metrea,123,362,  166,  254, 273,  337, 384, 
Thrice-Eleven,    Gods,      400,  577.  890-392.  404,  406, 447, 

352;  see  Thirty-three  Trisiras,    Three-headed,      449,452,466,473,475, 
Gods.  son  of  Tvashtar,  890,      476,484,491,492,523, 

Thrice-seven,  Manits,83,      491  notes,  537, 558, 571, 613;  giver 

214,  268;  metres,  83;  TnaokA,2i proUgi  ot  Indra,     of  children,  38. 
rivers,  326, 344, 473, 490;    192.  Twain,  the.  Heaven  and 
sorts  of  sacrifice,  83.      Trita,  a  Vedic  deity,  125,      Earth,  424. 

Thunderbolt,of  iron,244,  134,  183,  197,  262,292,  Twins,  the.  Heaven  and 

449,  531 ;  of  gold,  211,  294,  295,  343,  355,369,      Earth,  323,  324  ;  day 

413,  531  ;  =  sacrifice,  370,  390,  446,  447,449,      and  night,  390. 
211  ;  =:  priest's    fee,      472,  637,  659,  665. 

420 ;  s  the  sacrificial  Trita's  maidens,  dames,  Udder,  the  Soma  plant, 

exdamaUoD,    588.;  the    TpT\ea\?a    %si^t^^     ^^^\N\ifc>as!Sfi^«^^^%^- 

Jfldra's  friend,  152.  291,^^5.  xmj.,^1V,  O^^x^^^,^'^^ 


sriax  OP  ifAifBS,  bto.  665 

Udgfttaf,  the  Chanter  of  Uihas,  Dawn,  45,  74-77,      41,  42.  50,  242,  413, 

Sftmans,  1 29,  486.  159, 197, 253, 2^7, 829,      478,  625. 

Uiahanyftyana,  a  Proper      8»5, 438, 488^  514, 584,  VAjas,  V^ja  and  his  bro- 

Name,  161.  611;   iee  Dawn;  her      thers,  the  Bibhus,  41, 

Uktha,  a  hymn  of  praise,      chariot   shattered    by      50, 176.  • 

163, 677.  Indra,  488,  584.  Vajins,  a  class  of  divine 

Ukihya,  the  name  of  a  Usfanih,  a  Yedic  metre,      beings,  43,  477. 

Soma  Ubatlon,330  note.      577.  V&k,  Speech,  the  Word 

Ula,  a  Proper  Name,  536  Usi],  motiier  of  Kakshi-      personified,  41, 83, 130, 

note.  v&n,  588  note.  250-252, 484, 485, 552, 

Unborn,  Birthleas,   the,  UgitnarayUstnaras,  names      558,559,571. 

the  Sun,  184 ;  Visva-      of  a  chief  and  his  peo-  Vala,   the    imprisoning 

karman,  498.  pte,  463  note,  cloud,    a    demon    of 

Unit,the,whence  the  uni-  UslnarinljWifeof  Usioara,    drought,  138, 159,469, 

verse  was  evolved,  575.      463.  479,  481. 

Universal  Gods,  52,  tee  Usurers,  209.  V&lakhUya,  the  title  of 

Visvedevas.  eleven  hymns  of  Book 

Upamasravas,  a   prince,  VAOHBiUATt,  a   woman      VIII,  199,  259-268. 

429.  aided  by  the  Asvins,  V&lakhilyas,   a   race  of 

Uparisht&dbrihatt,  a  Ye-      476.  pygmies,  419  note, 

die  metre,  53  note,        Yadhryasva,     a   famous  Yamra,  a  Rishi,  537,538. 
Upastuta,  a  Rishi,  116,      Bishi,  481.483.  Yamraka= Yamra,  538. 

560.  Yaikarna,  the  name  of  a  Yanaspati,  the  Sacrificial 

Upastutas,  singers,  wor-      tribe,  18, 19.  Post,  265,  273,  553,554. 

shippers,  256.  Yaikh&nasas,    a  race  of  Yandana,  a  prot^  of  the 

Upavaktar      (upavaktft),      hermits,  818.  Asvins,  437. 

Director,    one  of  the  Yaikuntha,  a    title    of  Yarchin,     a    non-Aryan 

priests,  355,  384  notes,      Indra,  448-450,  452.  prince  rogarded  as  a 

tTrmyft,  a  name  of  Night,  Yainya,  son  of  Yena,  129.      fiend,  94. 

573.  Yalrdpas,  a  priestly  fami-  Yarosush&man,  a  Proper 

Ornavftbha,  a  demon  of      ly,  393  note.  Name,  15*5, 159, 161. 

drought,  171,  225  notes.  Yaisanta,    probably  the  Yaruna,  the  Enoompasser, 
tyrnfivat!.  Fleecy,  name      name  of  a  river,  34.  God    of    the    Starry 

or  epithet  of  a  river,  Yaisv&nara,  Dear  to  All      Heaven,  4,  13,  29,  35- 

491.  lieu,  Agni,  7-9, 13,  51,      40,43-45,47,  48,  51, 

Ursa  Major,  498.  181,807,386,446,614.      62,54,56,  58,   60-66, 

Urukshayas,  members  of      Yaisya,  a  man  of  the      78-85,  88,    139,  343, 

a  Rishi's  family,  563.        agricultural  and    mer-      144,   146,    147,    156, 
Urvasl,  a  celebrated  Ap-      cantile  class,  177,  519.      159-162,  164-168, 175, 

saras,  36, 139,  412, 527-  Yaitarana,  a  title  of  Agni,    176,  183-185,  196,  197, 

531.  467.  *  210,  214,  220,  230,  243 

Usan&  Kftvya,  a  Rishi,  Yaivasvata,    Tama,  son      252,263,292,306,307, 

son  of  Kavi  and  friend      of  YivasvAn,  261,  397,      815,  317,  327,  831,335, 

oflDdra,  155, 847, 358,      598.  ^^l^l^'^^^NSi.^^^^^^'V. 

^IJ,  424, 439, 451,  §38.  VAja,  one  ot  tlie  Bi\)\i\)»,     ^^^»  ^^.^^«^,^'SV  >^V, 


666  I2^1)SX  OF  NAltfiS,  BTO. 

374, 377, 382,  898, 894,  100, 852,  476. 478, 498,  195,  196,  203,  273,275, 
423,  426,  432-434, 445,  668, 577, 592,  606;  the  279,  287,  288,  290,292, 
451, 453, 454. 458, 467,  embodiment  of  light-  298,  ^99,  306,  311-313, 
468, 471,  473-477,  484,  ning,  36 ;  the  birth  of,  817.  322,  323,327,331, 
487,  490, 499, 500, 503,      36.  337,339,  340, 343,349. 

504,516,522,624,534,  Vasishthas,  10,  13,  26,  350,367,360-363,377, 
535,  688, 545,  552, 656,  34,  35,  42,  44,  45,  75,  404,  420,  422,  453,473- 
569-573,  577.  690,  592.  77,  79,  86,  357,  478.  475,  477,  492,  501,514, 
598,600,602,607,612;  VAstoshpati,  the  Genius  519,  522,  523,  539.557, 
the  Supreme  Deity,  of  Home,  53,  611  note,  582.  586,  592,  600,607; 
670 ;  discoverer  of  sin,  Vasu,  Good  Lord,  106,  sprung  from  Purusha's 
29  ;  discriminator  of  107, 145, 147, 161, 163,  navel.  619  ;  Tvashtar's 
truth  and  falsehood,  172,200,209,217,218,  son-in-law,  163. 
51 ;  forgiver  of  sin,  29,  256, 257, 390, 436, 466,  V&yus,  582  note. 
83, 84;  type  of  royalty,      520,  525,  646.  Veda,  144  note ;  the  bunch 

61 ;  ruler  of  the  depths  Yasus,  a  class  of  Gods,      of  grass  used  as  sacrifice, 
of  the  sea,  83 ;  identi-      1,  8,  12, 36,  39,  40,  43,      144  note. 
fied  with  Soma,   355 ;      47,  48,  60,  52,  66,  59,  Yedas,  three,  95  note. 
brother  of  man,  894;      74,  75,  143,  164,  165,  Vedic  Hymns   (Part  I), 
founder  of  society,  394      175, 180, 253, 265, 322.      90, 136,  205,  395,  486. 
note;    superseded    by      436,450,458,476,477,      492,  567,  583;  see  Miil- 
Indra,  670.  493,  610, 535, 539,  553,      ler.  Prof.  Max. 

Varundnf,  Consort  of  571, 573, 575, 581,  592.  Vedic    India    (Mme.  Z. 

Varuna,  38.  Vasukra,  a  son  of  Indra,      Ragozin),  17,  408.  484, 

Varuna-p48a,  dropsy,  86      420, 421.  497,  498,  522,  689,606. 

note.  Vasurochis,     a     Proper  Vedische  Studien  (Geld- 

Varfitri,    Protectress,    a      Name,  175.  ner  and  Pischel),    36, 

Goddess,  43,  46.  Vasurochisas,  174,  175.        48,  62,   82,   103,   105, 

Varatrls,  38.  Vasuruch,     Vasuruchas,      114,  152,  168, 193,213. 

Vasatfvart  waters,   used      said     to    be     Proper      257,    277,    280,     288, 
in  preparing  Soma,241,     Names,  379  note.  304,  318,  328, 332,380, 

274, 280, 284, 303, 309,  VatT,  the  Wind-God,  39,       421,  465,  489,  531, 644, 
326,  327.  331, 370, 380,      45,  104,  472,  475,  477.      647,  686,  605. 
424  notes.  582,  686, 596,  607.        Vena,   the     loving   Sun, 

Vashat,    a  sacrificial  ex-  Vdtarasana,  Wind-girdled,     668,569;  a  ProperName, 
elamation,  14,  94,  166,      the  name  of  a  hermit,      129.  525,  591,  602. 
405,  460.  582  note.  Venas,  the  Gods,  or  the 

Vashatkdra,  theexclama-  Vatsa,  a  Vedic  Rishi,  119,     Maruts,  341,  345. 
tion*  deified,  468,  488      127-130,  132.  Venya,  son  of  Vena,  691, 

notes.  V4v4tar,  said    to    be    a      602. 

Vasishtha,  a  famous  Ri-       King,  103  note.  Vesa,  a  demon  or  savage, 

shi,  seer  of  Book  VII.,  Vayata,  a  prince,  34.  451. 

1,  iO,  II,  17,  20, 25, 28,  Y&.yvi,  \^ift\^V\i^-C^o^?»'^r^^^%avi,  Vetasus,   Proper 

34,  36,  47,  52,54,58,69,      ^5,  Z^,  U,  ^%  ^*^.  ^^-     ^^^'^'^^  ^^^^ 

70,  52,54,87,90,91,95,      SS,  10^,  1*2.5, m^^'^."^'^'^^^^^^^'^^^'^^ 


INDEX   OP  NAMES,   ETC.  667 

tree  whose  nuts   were  Vishnu,    Pervader,     or      52,  163,  166,  167,  230, 

used  as  dice,  429  note.  Active  Worker  ;  a  per-       234,  267,  410,  425, 431, 

Vibhindu,  a  pfiqce,  111.  Bonification  of  the  Sun,       433,  459,  460,  465,  468, 

Vibhus,  a  uauke  of  the  39,  41,  44.  45,  48,  89,      470,  472,  476,  522, 524 

Ribhus,  50.  93-95,  130,   131,   134,     638.  540,  552,  557,  574 

Vibhiivae,  father  of  Trita,  139,  148,  160,  164,167,      583,  586,  595,  598,606. 

446.  168,  175,  176,  226,231,  Vitarana,  the  name  of  a 

Vibhuvasu,     the      very  252,  263,  265,  292,304,      prince,  467,  468  notes. 

wealthy,perhap8  Soma,  311,  317,  351, 355,367,  Vitaatft,  a  river,  probab- 

447  note.  383,  400,  474,  476,477,      ly  the  Jhelum,  490. 
Vibhvan,     one    of   the  523, 537, 556,  574,586,  Vivasv&n,  the  Sun;  a  sa- 

Ribhus,  41,  50,  492.  606,  613;  Guardian  of      crificer,  163,  211,  219, 

Vidadasva,  a  Rishi,  305      the  unborn   babe,  41;      221,262,277,288,318, 

note.  three  strides    of,  93,       381,391,392,398,404, 

Vidhatar,   the  Disposer,      167,     263  ;    Vishnu's      410,  438, 461, 465, 475, 

338.  band,  the  Maruts,  148.       487,  490,  598. 

Vikramorvasl,  the    title  Vispalft,  a  woman  warrior  Voice,    Speech,    Sacred 

of  a  celebrated  drama,       aided  by  the  Asvins,      Word,    484,  435  ;  <e6 

528  note.  437.  Vftk. 

VikunthA,  an  Asurl,  In-  Visva,  Dyaus,  168;  Agni,  Vrika,  wolf,  probably  a 

dra's    second  mother,      511.  man's  name,  69. 

448  note.  Visv^devah,  All-God,  248  Vrishft,  strong,  maIe,BuIlf 
ViUage,  589,  591.  note.      '  137,  3  72,  31 3  notes. 
Vimada,  a  proti^i  of  the  Visvaka,  a  Rishi,232,233,  Vrishagana,  Vrishaganas, 

Asvius,  130,  409,  413,      476.  a  Rishi  and  his  famUy, 

414,  437,  476.  Visvakarman,  Omnific,  the    859. 

Vimadas,  413.  Creator  of  the  Universe, Vrish&kap&yl,  the  wife  of 

Vimandb,  said  to  be  a      496-499.  Vrishakapi,  508. 

Rishi,  432.  Visvamanas,  a  Rishi,  154,  Vrishdkapi,  Strong  Ape, 

Vipas,  a  river,  the  Be&s,       157,158.  a  being  between  a  demi- 

490  note.  Visvamitra,  100,  352,419,      god  and  a  demon,  507- 

Viraj,  a  divine  being,  357,     536,  677,  699,  600.  609. 

458, 5  l^a  metre,  577.  Visvftmitras,  517.  Vrishan,  strong,  play  on, 

Virgins,  priest's  fingers,  Visvarfipa,  Omniform,  son      or   repetition    of    the 

319  ;  see  Maids.  of  Tvashtar,  390,  537.        word,  477. 

Viriipa,  a  Rishi,  223,  398.Vi8v&va8u,  the  chief  Gan-  Vrishan  vati,  the  name  of 
Virupas,  469  note.  dharva,  603,  573,  584,      a  mare,  213. 

Visas,  the  people,  as  dis-      585.  Vrishasipra,  BuU-jawed, 

tinct  from  the  priestly  Visv&yu,  said  to   be  the      a  savage,  94. 

and  princely    classes,       name  of  Urvasl's  son,  Vri8htihavya,a  Rishi,  560. 

177,  526  notes,    ^  412  note.  Vritra,  Encloser,  the  chief 

Vishftnins,  a  non-Aryan  Visvedevas,       All-Gods,      cloud-demon,    21,   22, 

tribe,  18.  Universal  Gods;  a  class     24, 110, 113,  120,  126, 

VJ8bn4pn,  a  Proper  Name,    of  deities,  ^6,  ^%,  \^,     Vlft,\^«tA^'^A'^'^^^'^'^ 
^^^f  ^76.  41,  43,  44, 4G,  41,  &\,     Vl\Al^A^^^•^^^^'^'^- 


668  INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

224,226,235,239,240,  Waters,  11, 38, 39,  43,48,  114,  191,  233,  422, 
245-247,  250-252,  307,  50,  61,  66,  81,265, 884,  454 ;  trap  for,  422  ;= 
308,  359, 412,  421,449,      891,  405,  423,  433, 435,      8k)ma  juice,  569. 

450, 452, 459,  474, 477,      447,  490,506,  614, 516,  WilUams,  Prof. Sir M., 463. 

.479,  516,  537,  546,554-     521, 546, 571, 683, 600;  Wilson,Prof.  H.U.,pa8tm. 

557,560,570,571,583,      Mothers,  Queeo8»  424,  Wind,  143,  265,  322,523, 

590,  593  ;  said  to  have     426  ;    their     healing       583, 600  <e£  V&yu,  Vata. 
been  a  Br&hman,  244      power,  391 ;  removers  Wind-girdled,  582  note. 

note.  of  sin,  391 ;  405;  cere-  Wine,  108,  650. 

Vritras,  fiends,  enemies,      mony  of  fetching  the  Winter,  481 ;  demons  of, 

80,113,122,   139-141,      sacrificial,  423;   Dame      2U  note, 

166,    284,   235,    238,      of,  Saranya,  392  ;  Son  Winters,    hundred,     eee 

244,246,270,282,349,   .  of  the,  11,  37,  40,  50,      Hundred  winters. 

878,  517,  546,  601.  181,  362,  390,  523,591.  Wish,  personified,  38, 4 77. 

Vritra-slayer  (s) ;  Indra,  Watery  monster,  Arbu-  Wizard,  100. 

'31,  32,  104,   109, 113,      da,  554.  Wolf,  wolves,   174,  209, 

115,  122, 136, 141,157,  Wealth,  lowest,midmo8t,      21,1,  261,  530,  573. 

164,170,171,173,178,      highest,  of  eanh,  air.  Wolf  ^robber,  43,   209; 

190, 191, 194,  203,205,      heaven,  33.  =  Night,  488. 

207,  209,  215,225,227,  Weaver's  web,  485.  Women,  censured,    173, 

229, 234, 235,  239-242,  Weaving,  416,  576.  530,  prize  of  war,  196; 

246,  247,  265,365,381,  Weber,  Prof.  A.,  123,196,      attend  festivals,   508, 

451,  458,  489,  499,545,      226,  430,  467,  502,505,      600  ;  take  part   in  sa- 

584,   593;  Agni,  222,      507,620,536,572,578.      orifice,  168,  415,   558, 

482  ;  Soma,  269,  287,  Webster,  W.F.,  393, 407,      607. 

294,  350,  365;  Manyu,      421,  424,  499.  Wood,  Lord  of  the,  the 

499;  Aavins,  127;  In-  Wheel,  the  Sun,  206.  Sacrificial  Post,.   484  ; 

dra-Agni,  179.                Whip,    Indra's    golden,      see  Vanaspati. 
Vyasva,    a   Rishi,    129,      lightning,  173.  Lady  of  the,  Arany- 

154-153,158,159,162,  Whitney,  Prof.   W.  D.,      ftni,  589. 

316.  408,  572,  676,  577.        Word,  the  Sacred,   484  ; 

Widow,  407;  re-marriage      V4k,  571  note, 
Wallis,  H.  W.,  93,  234,      of,  438.  Words,  play  upon,  541. 

339,386,387,  423,  426,  Wife,  her  position  in  the  Worship, personified,522. 

435,450,459,460,471      household,   504,   506 ;  Wright,    380;    see  Car- 

481,  486,  496,  497,499,      chosen  for  her  goodness      penter.  Smith. 

518,  520,  56d-569,  572,      and  beauty,  418  ;  pa- 

576.  tient  and  gentle,   506 ;  Yadavas,  descendants  of 

Warmth,  creative,  575,       adoruR  herself  for  her      Yadu. 

609.  husband,   553 ;    takes  Yadu,  the  eponymus  of 

Warrior*: Kshatriy a,  99.      part  in  sacrifice,   164,      a  Vedic  tribe,  22,   106 
Warriors,  the  Marut8,18.      415,  558,  607.  114,  123,  124, 130,131, 

Watches  of  night,  UQ,     "Wild  a&a,    SQ^  \— \iotcT,     1^1,^06,452,470. 
Water,   first  of  created      4^\  •,— \>oaiaA^^  "^*'- ^^'^^"^•' ^^^* 
thiugs,  S6  note.  ruU,    m  \-\>y^  ^^.  ^^^^^>  ^^^  ^ix^^xv,^^. 


INDEX  OF  KAHB8,  ETC.  669 

Yajamana,        sacrificer,      461,462,  466,  472, 528,  Year,  the,  609. 

householder,  237,  322,      534,569,  581,593,594,  Tmir,  a  mythio  Scandi- 

328,  362,  415,  489,  492,     598,  599 ;  his  dogs,  53,      navian     World-giaDt, 

515,  549,    558,    607;      399.  519. 

his  wife,  415.  YSmas,  night-watches  of  Yog!,  a  devotee,  582  note. 

Yajna  (Sacrifice),  said  to      about  three  hours  each,  Young,  youthf  ullest,  Agni 

be  a  Rishi's  uame,576.      US  note.  1,5,6,9,10,   12,18,' 

Yajurveda,  the  Veda  of  Yami,  Yama's  8i8ter.391.      16, 156,  223,  255,.  384, 

sacrificial  texts  and  for.     394,404,593.  385,409,446,482,496, 

mulas,  59,  467, 519,606.Yamuna,  the  river  now      510,  553. 
Yajus,  sacrificial  text  and     called  Jumoa,  20,  35,  Youthful  One,  the  altar, 

formula,  396,  519,606.      246,  490.  558. 

Yaksha,  meaning  uncer-  Y4ska,  an  ancient  Com-  Yudhyftmadhi,  a  Proper 

tain,  514  note.  mentator,  24,  241,315,      Name,  20, 

Yakshnia,     consumptive      444,  456,  486,  490.        Yupa,  190,  484  ;  see  Sa- 

disease,  583  Tiote,  613.  Yatis,  an  ancient  race  of      ciificial  Post. 
Yakshus,    a   non-Aryan      hermits,  112, 121,  487.  Yuvan&sva,  a  Rishi,  181 

tiibe,  20.  Y&tudk&aas,     sorcerers,      note, 

Yama,  King  of  the  Dead,      demons,  93,  100,  444, 

35,  36,  53,    381,   391-      510-512, 565.  Zimmbb,  Prof.  H.,  18,  19, 

394,  396.401,  403,404,  Yay&ti,  an  ancient  patri*      125,  207,  226,  408,490, 

406,  407,  410,453,455,      arch,  470.  491,  650,  681,  594,  597. 


;i 


I  : 


CORRIGENDA. 


VOL  I.  (Additional). 
9  line  7  Ttadhoaoura  (i.  e.  Bong honours) /or  honour 
0     •     9  from  below  nod  Hera,  Inilr*,  girt  by  Maruta,  drink  thou 

Soma,  /or  Hare,  Indra,  drink  thou  Soma  with  the  Xante, 
i     •     17  from  bebw  of  middle  column  rtad  HoUr,  chief  prioet  fitr 

HoUr,  thief  prieet 


VOL.  II. 
line  2  from  below  read  2  for  I 
2  read  HYMN  tor  irYMN 
8  from  below  rtad  >  comma  afttr  you  for  the  broken  atop 

6  from  below  read  pathy'd  (or  pathi/'d 

8  rtad  blBBoinga  far  bleaaaogs 

7  from  below  nod  performing  for  perf ormin 
18  read  ecataay  /or  ectstaey 

2  of  Torae  9  read  radiant  for  radian 

3  of  Terse  22  nod  soon  for  snoo 

3  of  verse  B  read  turvaaa  fur  TurvBa 

1  of  Terse  i  iiuert  a  full  stop  after  flowa 
last  of  note*  read  of  for  a 

2  from  below  read  in  for  n 

16  from  below  rtoii  ua.  far  us 

2  of  note  1  read  a  comma  for  the  broken  atop  after  here 

2  from  below  iiiscrl  a  hyphen  after  foe 
S  of  note  1  read  sprinkled  for  sprinkled 

3  of  notes  tnsen  a  comma  after  is 
last  of  notes  nod  BBcrifioe  for  sacrificpa 

2  of  veiw  25  read  Indra's  for  Inra'a 

t  of  notes  r<iid  aaerificial  for  sacrifical 
1  of  notes  insert  a  hyphen  ofier  anme 

9  of  notes  read  aquatic  for  atquatic 

4  of  verse  £  insert  a  full  stop  after  Ordaioer 

3  of  verse  17  insn-e  -a  hyphen  oflw  Arye 

1  of  note  23  read  Anaghiu  far  AsTaghna 
last  of  notes  read  The  Bymm  tor  ffymnt 
1  iaial  a  comma  a,fter  Goddeuu 


•  672 


CORBIGXNDA, 


Page  490  line  7  from  below  read  Vipte  for  Vipte 

fi08  •  5  rmd  and  far  add 

520  ■  6  read  The  Hymm  for  Sj/mni 

...  ■  9  from  below  read  Piirtfna  for  PurAna 

588  f  1  of  TerM  12  intert  a  comma  a^ler  swiftly 

545  ■  8  tnwrf  a  comma  afUr  conquer 

548  •  last  but  one  of  text  frtfix  the  numeral  10 

549  •  1  of  Terae  4  read  VAyu  for  VAyd 

550  ■  4  of  Yttse  1  read  waters  ?  /or  waters. 
552  ■  4  of  Terse  1  Th€  Hywuu  for  ifyfoms 
557  ■  1  of  notes  rfod  the  for  thr 
588  •  2  of  notes  read  The  Hymne  for  iTymns 
587  »  8  of  notes  make  the  same  correction 

597  V  2  of  notes  read  obwobl  for  obvohl 

598  »  2  of  note  read  The  Hywne  for  Hymns 
602  ■  2  of  verse  5  inurt  a  hyphen  after  sted 
609  »  last  of  notes  read  Thi  ffymnt  for  Bymn^ 


AUG  I  6   1910 


^rinud  JkpMUhed  69  K.  i.  i^aMMft  &  <».,  at  Vlvt  Mtdi*oX  H<iB.  Vv«v^ 


^' 


'^w. 


0^ 


Mifil 


DO  NOT  REMOVE 

OR 
MUTILATE  CARD 


( 


