९ 
~ 


~^ 
fe Sh 


THE 


SANKHYA KARIKA, 


oR 


MEMORIAL VERSES ON THE SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY, 


BY 
ISWARA KRISHNA; 
TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSCRIT 
। BY 


HENRY THOMAS COLEBROOKE, ESQ. 
~~~ ` 


ALSO 
THE BHASHYA OR COMMENTARY OF 
GAURAPADA; 
TRANSLATED, AND ILLUSTRATED BY AN ORIGINAL COMMENT, 
BY 
HORACE HAYMAN WILSON, M.A. F.R.S. 


MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, AND OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETIES OF PARIS 
AND caLcoTTA, &e, &c. ; 
AND BODEN PROFESSOR OF SANSCEIT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. 





OXFORD, 
PRINTED कन्ठ THE ORIENTAL ZRANSLATION FUND OF GREAT BRITAIN 
ARD IRELAND, 
ara, cOLLINGwoop, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY. 

PUBLMHED AND SOLD BY A. J. VALPY, A. M., LONDON. 
1837, 


TO 
SIR GRAVES CHAMNEY HAUGHTON, M.A. F.R.S. 
AS TO ONE 
WHO WAS THE FRIEND AND ADMIRER 
OF THE LATE 
HENRY THOMAS COLEBROOKE; 


WHO 1५ QUALIFIED, 
५ 


BY HIS CONVERSANCY WITH THE SANSCRIT LANGUAGE 
AND METAPITYSICAT. INQUIRIES, 
TO APPRECIATE THE CORRECTNESS WITIT WHICH 
‘THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS 
Is REPRESENTED IN THE FOLLOWING PAGES, 
AND 
WHO ITAS FOR MANY YEARS BEEN UNITED WITH THEIR AUTHOR 
IN STUDIES, SENTIMENTS, AND FRIENDSHIP, 
THE PRESENT WORK IS INSCRIBED, 
AS A PUBLIC TESTIMONY OF ESTEEM AND REGARD, 
BY 


HORACE HAYMAN WILSON. 


PREFACE. 


ONE of the works earliest announced for publication by the Oriental 
Translation Fund Committee was the Sdénkhyu Kdrikd, a text book 
of that system of Hindu philosophy to which the term Sdnkhya is 
applicd, and which had been translated from Sanscrit into English 
by that eminent Sanscrit scholar the late Henry Thomas Colebrooke. 
The accession of the lingering illness which finally terminated in his 
decease prevented Mr. Colebrooke from conducting his work through 
the press, and from adding to the translation those explanations and 
illustrations which the text required, and which he was most compe- 
tent to supply. Upon my return to England from India, therefore, 
in the beginning of 1833, I found that no progress had been made 
in the publication, and that the Trauslation of the text alone was in 
the possession of the Committee. 

Being desirous of redeeming the pledge which they had publicly 
given, and of accomplishing the purpose which they had announced, 
the Committee thought it desirable that the Translation, in its then 
existing form, should be printed ; and conceived that, as its extent was 
insufficient to constitute a separate work, it would be advisable to print 
it in the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society. With this view 
the manuscript was placed in my hands, that I should render such 
assistance as I might be able to afford in the correction of the press. 

Conceiving that the appearance of the Translation in the pages 
of the Transactions would be equally incompatible with the views of 
the Translator and the original intention of the Committee, I ven- 
tured to recommend that their purpose should be adhered to, and 

b 


vi PREFACE. 


that the Translation should be printed, as at first designed, as a 
separate work ; offering at the same time to supply such annotations 
as the text might seem to require, to be rendered sufficiently intelli- 
gible and explicit. The Committee approved of the suggestion, and 
Mr. Colebrooke’s concurrence was readily obtained. 

In the meantime, in the interval that had clapsed since the work 
was announced, other translations of the Sdukhya Kdrikd had ap- 
peared. The Sanscrit text, and a version of it in Latin by Professor 
Lassen, had been printed at Bonn*; and the text in Roman cha- 
racters, with a French translation, had been published at Paris by 
Mons. Pauthiert. Many of the verses of the translation had been 
also embodied in Mr. Colebrooke’s general view of the Sankhya phi- 
losophy ; and it appeared to me expedient, therefore, to make some 
such addition to the work as should give it at least more novelty 
than it was otherwise likely to possess. It seemed alyo to be a 
favourable occasion for offering to Sanscrit students an exemplifica- 
tion of the mode in which philosophical works are illustrated by 
native commentators; and I accordingly procured the consent of the 
Translation Committee to print, not only the text and translation of 
the Sdnkhya Kdrikd, but the text and a translation of the oldest, 
and perhaps the best, commentary upon the Adrikd, the Bhdshya of 
Gaurardpa. In order likewise to fulfil the object of attempting to 
render the doctrines of both text and comment as clear and explicit 
as it was in my power to represent them, I further added to the 
translation of the Bhishya a comment of my own, deriving my elu- 
cidations however, to a very great extent, from the works of native 
scholiasts, and giving the original passages at the foot of the page. 

The scholia which have been used for this purpose are the 


* Gymnovophusta: sive Indice Philosophie: documenta, Vol. 1. Iswara Crishna: San- 
khya-Caricam tenens. Bonne ad Rhenum, 1832, 

+ Essais sur la Philosophie des Hindous, traduits de 'Anglas, et augmentds de textes 
Sansknts, &c.; par G. Pauthier. Paris, 1888. 


PREFACE. vii 


Sdnkhya Tatwa Kaumudi of Vacnespat: Misxa, and the Stnkhya 
Chandrikd of Narayana Tintna. The Sdnkhya Kaumudi of Rama 
Karsmwa has been also consulted, but it is almost word for word the 
same as the S. Chandrikd, and is therefore in most instances super- 
fluous. I have occasionally referred to the Sénkhya Sdra, a separate 
tract on the doctrines of this school by Visnana Burksnu; but an- 
other work by the same scholiast, the Stinkhya Pravuchana Bhishya, 
a commentary on the Siitras or aphorisms of Karra, the first teacher 
of the Sankhya, according to tradition, has been of particular service, 
and will be found often cited. Copies of these different commenta- 
ries, as well as of the text, exist in the library of the East India 
Company, and the Sdnkhya Pravachana Bhishya was printed at 
Serampore in 1821. ] have, however, followed a manuscript copy, 
as I did not obtain a copy of the printed work until my translation 
was finished. 

There was little need of the labour of collation, after the very 
accurate text of Professor Lassen. I have not failed, however, tu 
compare the reading of the different copics, and have noticed a few 
of the variations: none of them are of any great importance. Where 
collation was most wanted, it was unfortunately not practicable, 
there being but a single copy of the Bhéshya of Gaurarapa in my 
possession. The manuscript was luckily tolerably correct, but it 
was doubtful in some places, and clearly faulty in others; and I may 
not have always succeeded in rightly correcting, or in accurately 
interpreting it. With regard to typographical errors in the present 
edition of text and comment, I trust they will not be found very 
inexcusable, especially when it is known that the work was for the 
greater part necessarily carried on at a distance from me, during my 
absence in London, and that it is the first publication in Sanscrit 
printed at the Press of the University of Oxford. 

Not having made the Sinkhya philosophy a subject of study in 
India, I have executed my task without the advantage of previous 


viii PREFACE. 


preparation. The subject indeed is but little cultivated by the Pan- 
dits, and during the whole of my intercourse with learned natives 
I met with but one Brahman who professed to be acquainted with 
the writings of this school. Opportunity was wanting to benefit by 
his instructions, and I cannot therefore venture to claim exemption 
from those liabilities to error to which the unassisted study of San- 
scrit literature in Europe is exposed, especially when directed to 
topics sufficiently obscure and difficult in themselves, and rendered 
still more so by the sententious and elliptical style in which they 
are treated, It is the fashion with some of the most distinguished 
Sanscrit scholars on the continent to speak slightingly of native 
scholiasts and Pandits, but this is the consequence of measuring 
their merits by a wrong scale, and censuring them for venial inac- 
curacies which often proceed from too entire a familiarity with their 
subject. In all studies which native scholars professedly pursue, they 
have the advantage of traditional tuition, of a course of instruction, 
coming down, through successive generations, from the founder of a 
system, or the author of a book, to the individual who explains the 
onc or illustrates the other, and from whose interpretation we may 
therefore reasonably expect to learn what it was originally meant to 
teach. There are also in all philosophical works, especially, brief 
hints and conventional allusions, which without such aid it is not 
possible to decipher, and for the proper understanding of which a 
native explanation is indispensable. Without therefore in the least 
degree undervaluing European industry and ability, I cannot consent 
to hold in less esteem the attainments of my former masters and 
friends, the Sanscrit learning of learned Brahmans. 

The translations to which I have above referred are highly credit- 
able to the translators. That of Professor Lassen in particular is of 
great merit and accuracy, and is illustrated by annotations, in which 
he has successfully cleared up many of the obscurities of the original 
text. I have taken the plan of his notes as in some degree the 


PREPACE. ix 


model of my comment; and although I do not always concur in his 
interpretations or explanations, I have found them always entitled 
to attention and respect. In one or two instances, and especially in 
regard to the first stanza, where I have most widely differed from 
him, I have sought rather to vindicate the accuracy of Mr. Cole- 
brooke, than to impugn that of Professor Lassen. Variety of inter- 
pretation in such a case as that of a difficult work, on an abstruse 
subject, is no more than may be expected from different interpreters ; 
and occasional misapprehension implies no want of either compe- 
tency or care. 

In the course of my attempts to elucidate the text, 1 have in a 
few instances pointed out what seemed to me to offer remarkable 
coincidences with the doctrines of classical philosophers. That an 
intimate connection exists between the metaphysical systems of the 
Hindus and. those of the Greeks is generally admitted, although its 
extent has not yet been fully made out. We are scarcely yet indeed in 
possession of the means of instituting an accurate comparison, as the 
text books of the Hindus have not been printed or translated, and 
general dissertations, however comprehensive or profound, are insuf- 
ficient for the purpose. The present publication will go some way, 
perhaps, towards supplying the deficiency, and may afford, as far as 
it extends, authentic materials for the use of those better qualified 
classical scholars who may be curious to ascertain in what degree the 
speculations of Plato and Aristotle correspond with those of Kapila 
and Gautama, or how far the teachers of one school may have been 
indebted to those of another. That the Hindus derived any of their 
philosophical ideas from the Greeks seems very improbable; and if 
there is any borrowing in the case, the latter were most probably 
indebted to the former. It has been objected to this conjecture, 
that the total want of chronology in Hindu writings renders it im- 
possible to pronounce upon their date, and that it is probable that 
many works regarded as ancient are really very modern, as they may 


x PREFACE, 


have been composed long after the wra of Christianity; the notions 
which they inculcate being in fact acquired from the Greeks of 
Alexandria, through the intercourse between India and Egypt. That 
this intercourse may have exercised a mutual influence upon some 
parts of the philosophy of both countries in the first ages of Chris- 
tianity—that resemblances, respectively interchanged, may he de- 
tected in the notions of the new Platonists or Platonic Christians 
and of the more modern Védantis, or in the cclectic panthcism of 
the Pauraniks—is not impossible; but the Greek philosophy of that 
period can scarcely have suggested the severer abstractions of the 
Sinkhya, apd we must go back to a remoter age for the origin of the 
dogmas of Kariia. In truth, the more remote the period, the closer 
the affinity that seems to prevail; and as far as we are acquainted 
with the tenets of the lonic and Italic schools, it is with them that 
Hindu philosophy, unalloyed with pantheism, seems to claim kin- 
dred, rather than with the mysticism of Plato, or the subtleties of 
Aristotle. The metempsychosis itself is an important feature in this 
similitude: for this belief is not to be looked upon as a mere popular 
superstition ; it is the main principle of all Hindu metaphysics; it 
is the foundation of all Hindu philosophy. The great object of their 
philosophical research in every system, Brahmanical or Buddhist, is 
the discovery of the means of putting a stop to further transmigra- 
tion; the discontinuance of corporeal being; the liberation of soul 
from body. That such was the leading principle of the philosophy 
of Pythagoras we learn from ancient testimony, and it essentially 
influences the speculations of Plato. Concurrence in this principle 
involves agreement in all the most important deductions from it, and 
establishes, if not a mutual interchange, at least a common origin, 
for much of the oldest philosophy of the Grecks and the Hindus. 
This is a subject, however, to which I can here but thus briefly 
allude, and to which I would rather invite the attention of some of 
the eminent scholars of whom the University of Oxford has reason 


PREFACE. xi 


to be proud, than impair its interest by my own less competent 
attempts at its elucidation. 

The whole scope and leading tenets of the Sinkhya philosophy 
have been most accurately described by the late Mr. Colebrooke, in 
the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, from various original 
authorities, including that now published, the Kérikd, or rather 
Kérikds, of the Sankhya system; the term designating a collection 
of memorial verses, of apothegimatical stanzas, in which the chief 
tenets of the school are textually and dogmatically stated. The 
Sankhya philosophy is so termed, as Mr. Colebrooke has mentioned, 
because it observes precision of reckoning in the enumeration of its 
principles, Sdnkhya being understood to signify ‘numeral,’ agreeably 
to the usual acceptation of Sunkhyd, ‘number ;’ “and hence its 
analogy to the Pythagorean philosophy has been presumed.” The 
term is also explained, however, as Mr. Colebrooke proceeds to men- 
tion, to denote the result of deliberation or judgment, such being 
one sense of the word Sankhyd, from which Siinkhya is derived. 

Agreeably to the purport of the word Adrikd, ‘a technical or 
memorial verse,’ the following work consists of a series of stanzas 
systematically arranged, though not always obviously connected ; and 
asserting principles, rather than discussing arguments. The tract 
opens with an explanation of the object of this and of all philosophy, 
ascertainment of the means by which the pain of corporeal existence 
may be finally and absolutely remedied, and the soul freed for ever 
from body: this is declared alone to be philosophy, or the knowledge 
of the real nature of all that is, agreeably to the Sdénkhya enumera- 
tion of things. These things, in number twenty-five, are briefly 
indicated with reference to their relative character, as producing or 
produced; and the work then pauses to explain the means by which 
they may be known, or perception, inference, and authority. Re- 
verting then to such of the twenty-five things or principles as are 
imperceptible, especially to the first material cause, and to soul, 


xii PREFACE. 


logical proofs of their actual existence are adduced, and the points 
in which they agree or differ with other things, and with each other, 
are described. We have then an explanation of the three essential 
qualities of things; purity or goodness; imperfection, foulness, or 
passion ; and indifference, stupidity, or darkness. The existence of 
a general, imperceptible, unseparated, universal cause, the substance 
of which all is made, the eternal matter of the Greek cosmogonies, is 
then argued; and, as a conscquence of its existence, that also of a 
spiritual nature, or soul, is asserted. ‘The properties of soul are then 
detailed. We have next the twenty-five Tutwas, ‘categories or prin- 
ciples,’ of tthe Sankhya philosophy severally described. These all 
resolve themselves, as may be inferred from what has preceded, into 
but two, matter and spirit, nature and soul; the rest are all the 
progeny or products of nature, evolved spontaneously through the 
necessity of nature’s providing for the two purposes of soul, fruition 
and liberation. These products are, intelligence ; egotism or indivi- 
duality ; eleven senses, ten external and one internal, or mind; five 
rudimental elements, or elements of clements; and five gross or per- 
ceptible elements, ether, air, water, fire or light, and carth. The 
description of these different categories, of their mode and objects of 
acting, of their modifications, and of their effects, occupies a con- 
siderable number of Kdrikds. We have then a general account of bo- 
dily condition of two kinds, subtile and gross; the latter perishing at 
death, the former accompanying and investing soul through all the 
migrations to which the various conditions of the intellectual faculty, 
or virtue and vice, subject it. Those conditions are then detailed at 
length, and in all their modifications, constituting what is called 
intellectual creation, or life, consequent upon conduct, originating 
with the intellect. But, to give effect to these modifications, form, 
as well as life, is said to be necessary; and hence results personal or 
bodily creation of various descriptions. Bodily existence, however, 
is described as confinement and pain, from which soul is anxious to 


PREFACE. xiii 


be exempted. Nature is said to labour also for soul’s liberation, and 
to supply the means, in the display which it makes of its products, 
until soul, fully possessed of their real character and tendency, is 
represented as casting away all notions of individuality and self, and 
is no more condemned to bodily incarceration. The work closes 
with stating that these truths were taught originally by Karita 
to Asuni, and by him to Pancuasixua, from whom it descended, 
through repeated generations of disciples, to Iswara Krisnna, the 
author of the Kdrikds. The date of this writer is not known, but 
Mr. Colebrooke considers GavurarApa, the scholiast on the Kdrikd, 
to be the same as the preceptor of the celebrated teacher Sankara 
AcnAnya, whom there is reason to place in the eighth century. 
How long anterior to this the Kdrikds existed in their present form, 
we have no means of knowing, but they were avowcdly subsequent 
to other standard compositions of the school, and evidently repre- 
sent doctrines of high antiquity, doctrines exhibiting profound re- 
flection and subtle reasoning ; although, like all the efforts of human 
intellect to penetrate unaided the mysteries of existence, wholly 
unavailing, and too often ending, as Cicero complains, in doubt 
and impiety: “Cogimur dissensione sapientum Dominum nostrum 
ignorare, 

Some excuse is perhaps necessary for having delayed to publish 
the present work so long after the Cominittee of the Oriental ‘T'rans- 
lation Fund had sanctioned its publication. The work, as it is now 
offered to the public, was ready for press in the course of the year 
following that in which it was undertaken. Being desirous, however, 
of printing it at Oxford, where the University had liberally resolved 
to provide its Press with two new founts of Devanagari letters, I was 
under the necessity of awaiting the completion of the types. As 
soon as one fount was supplied, the text was printed. It was my 
wish to have employed the other and smaller fount for the citations 


which accompany my Comment; but that fount being not yet cast, 
प्‌ 


xiv PREFACE. 


I have thought it preferable to incur no further delay. It is scarcely 
doing justice to types of the size here employed to place them in 
juxtaposition with characters so much smaller as those of the English 
alphabet; but looking at them by themselves, in the pages of the 
text, I think they will be found to wear a more genuinely Oriental 
aspect than any that have yet been fabricated in Europe. 


Oxvorp, 
July 1. 1837. 


SANKHYA KARIKA 


SANKHYA KARIKA. 


L 


THE inquiry is into the means of precluding the three sorts of 
pain; for pain is embarrassment: nor is the inquiry superfluous 
because obvious means of alleviation exist, for absolute and final 
relief is not thereby accomplished. 


BHASHYA. 


Salutation to that Karrua by whom the S&énkhya philosophy was com- 
passionately imparted, to serve as a boat for the purpose of crossing the 
ocean of ignorance in which the world was immersed. 

1 will declare compendiously the doctrine, for the benefit of students ; 
a short casy work, resting on authority, and establishing certain results. 

Three soris of pain.—The explanation of this Arya stanza is as 
follows: 

The divine Karrxa, the son of BranmA indecd : as it is said, “ Sanaxa, 
Sawanpana, and Sandtana the third; Asvrt, Kariza, Bornv, and Pan- 
cHasikHa: these seven sons of Brahma were termed great sages.” To- 
gether with Karina were born Virtue, Knowledge, Dispassion, and 
Power: for he being born, and observing the world plunged in profound 
darkness by the succecding serics of worldly revolutions, was filled with 
compassion ; and to his kinsman, the Brahman Asuni, he communicated 
a knowledge of the TWENTY-FIVE PRINCIPLES; from which knowledge the 
destruction of pain proceeds. As it is said ; “‘ He who knows the twenty- 
“ five principles, whatever order of life he may have cntered, and whether 
“he wear braided hair, a top-knot only, or be shaven, he is liberated 
“(from existence): of this there is no doubt.” 

The inquiry is in consequence of the embarrassment of the three sorts 

B 


2 


of pain. In this place the three sorts of pain are, 1. (ddhydtmika) natural 
and inseparable; 2. (¢dhibhautika) natural and extrinsic; and 3. (édhi- 
daivika) non-natural or superhuman. The first is of two kinds, corporcal 
and mental: corporeal is flux, fever, or the like, arising from disorder of 
the wind, bile, or phlegm: mental is privation of what is liked, approxi- 
mation of what is disliked. Extrinsic but natural pain is fourfold, ac- 
cording to the aggregation of elementary matter whence it originates ; that 
is, it is produced by any created beings, whether viviparous, oviparous, 
generated by heat and moisture, or springing from the soil; or in short, 
by men, beasts, tame or wild birds, reptiles, guats, musquitoes, lice, bugs, 
fish, alligators, sharks, trees, stones, &c. The third kind of pain may 
be called seperhuman, daivika meaning either divine or atmospheric: 
in the latter case it means pain which proceeds from cold, heat, wind, 
rain, thunderbolts, and the like. 

Where then, or into what, is inquiry, in consequence of the embar- 
rassment of the three kinds of pain, to be made? nto the means of 
precluding them. This is the inquiry. Nor is the inquiry superfluous. 
That is; if this inquiry be (regarded as) superfluous, the means of pre- 
cluding the three sorts of pain being obvious (seen); as for example; 
the internal means of alleviating the two inseparable kinds of pain are 
obvious, through the application of medical science, as by pungent, bitter, 
and astringent decoctions, or through the removal of those objects that 
are disliked, and accession of those that are liked; so the obvious ob- 
struction of pain from natural causes is protection and the like; and 
these means being obvious, any (farther) inquiry is superfluous: if you 
think in this manner, it is not so; for absolute, certain, final, permanent, 
obstruction (of pain) is not (to be effected) by obvious means. Therefore 
inquiry is to be made by the wise elsewhere, or into means of prevention 
which are absolute and final. 


COMMENT. 


The first verse of the Kériké proposes the subject of the work, and 
not only of that, but of the system to which it belongs; and of every 
philosophical system studied by the Hindus; the common end of which 


3 


is, ascertainment of the means by which perpetual exemption from the 
metempsychosis, or from the necessity of repeated births, may be at- 
tained: for life is uniformly regarded by the Hindus as a condition of 
pain and suffering, as a state of bondage and evil; escape from which 
finally and for ever is 2 consummation devoutly to be wished. 

The liberation thus proposed as the object of rational existence cannot 
be attained as long as man is subject to the ordinary infirmitics of his 
nature, and the accidents of his condition: and the primary object of 
philosophical inquiry therefore is, the means by which the imperfections 
flesh is heir to may be obviated or removed. As preparatory then to 
their right determination, it is first shewn in the text what means are not 
conducive to this end; such, namely, as obvious but temporary expe- 
dients, whether physical or moral. 

Of this introductory stanza Professor Lassen, in the first number of 
his Gymnosophista, containing the translation of the Kérikd, has given a 
version differing in some respects from Mr. Colebrooke’s. He thus ren- 
ders it: “ E tergeminorum dolorum impetu oritur desiderium cogno- 
scend# rationis, qua ii depellantur. Quod cognoscendi desideriuin licet 
in visibilibus rebus infructuose versetur, non est (infructuosum) propter 
absentiam absoluti, et omni #vo superstitis remedii.” 

In the first member of this sentence, the translation of abhighita by 
‘ impetus’ is irreconcilable with the context. The sense required by the 
doctrine laid down is ‘impediment, embarrassment, the prevention of 
liberation by worldly cares and sufferings.’ So the same word abhighdtak« 
is immediately used to mean ‘ preventing, removing,’ ‘ depellens,’ Pro- 
fessor Lassen’s text, it is true, reads apaghdtaka, but this is not the reading 
followed by Mr. Colcbrooke, nor that of the citation of the text given in 
the S. Bhéshya or S. Kaumudi ; it is that of the S. Tatwa Kaumudi and 
S. Chandrikd, and although in itself unobjectionable, yet is not a neces- 
sary nor preferable variation. At any rate there can be no question that 
the word abhighdta may be used in the sense of ‘depellere,’ and that 
sense therefore equally attaches to it in the prior member of the hemi- 
stich. So in the Bhdshya of Gavrariva we have ddhibhautikasya rakshd- 
dina abkighdtah ; ‘The prevention of extrinsic pain is by protection and 


4 


the like.’ It would not be possible herc to render abhighdta by ‘impetus.’ 
By VAcuzspati the term abhighdta is defined ‘the confinement of the 
sentient faculty (explained to mean here ‘ life’), through the impediment 
opposed by threefold distress abiding in spirit*.’ NarAvana interprets it 
more concisely asahya sambandhat, ‘intolerable restraint. ‘ Embarrass- 
ment’ therefore sufficiently well expresses the purport of these defini- 
tions, or the obstructions offered by worldly sufferings to the spirit anxious 
to be free. ue 

This variation, however, is of no great consequence: the morc im- 
portant difference is in the second portion of the stanza; and as Professor 
Lassen has deviated advisedly from Mr. Colebrooke, it is necessary to 
examine the passage more in detail. The following are his reasons for 
the version he has made: 

“ Hee posterioris versus (drishéé etc.) interpretatio, sicuti scholiastarum 
suffragiis probatur, a grammatica postulatur. Quod idco moneo, ne levi- 
ter rationem, a Colebrookio, V. summo, in hoc versu enarrando initam 
deseruisse censear. Is enim: ‘nor is the inquiry superfluous, because 
obvious means of alleviation exist: for absolute and final relief is not 
thereby accomplished.’ Sed vereor, ne vir summus constructionem par- 
ticule chét sententiam claudentis et a negatione excepte male intellex- 
erit. De qua re dixi ad Hitop. procem. d. 28. Ex interpret. Colebrook. 
construendum esset: drishié ac. sati (i. e. yadyapi drishiam vidya tt) sé 
(jijndsd) apdrthd na ékdnt—abhdvdi{. Sed ut omittam, particule chét 
nullum omnino relinqui locum in sententia, xa inopportuno versus loco 
collocatum esse, non potes quin concedas. Male omnino se habet tota 
sententia et claudicat. Equidem construo: drishié sd (jijndsd) updrthd 
(bhavati) chét (tathdpi) na (apdrthé bhavati) ékénta—abhdvdt|. Prorsus 
similiter dicitur ndbhdvdt infr. v.8. Ablativum igitur ekdntyatyantoh 





दुःखचयेणांतःकरणव्तिना urge चेतनाशक्तेरभिसंबन्धोऽभि 
घातः। † असद्यसंबन्धः। ` इष्टे सतति (यद्यपि षटं विद्यते) सा (जि्तासा) 
अपाथा न एङा-भावात्‌। । ee सा (जिन्षासा) अथाथा (भवति) चेत्‌ 
(तथाऽपि) न (sandr मवति) रकाम- भावात्‌ | 


5 


abhdvdt, non ad drishéé refero cum Colebrookio, sed ad negationem, quer 
cum supplementis suis apodosin constituit. Nam que post chénna se- 
quuntur verba, ad apodosin pertinere semper observavi. Quam gram- 
matica postulare videtur, patitur preterea loci tenor enarrationem, imo 
melior evadit sententia. Ad drishéé enim relatis istis verbis, id tantum 
dicitur, rerum visibilium cognitione non attingi posse philosophie finem, 
liberationem absolutam et perpetuam a doloribus; mea posita enarra- 
tione non id tantum docetur, sed additur etiam hoc: finem istum posse 
attingi, licet alio cognitionis genere. Tres omnino positiones altero he- 
mistichii versu continentur: philosophia (id enim valet gigndsd, i. ९. 
cognitionis desiderium) finem esse emancipationem a doloribus certam 
ct omne tempus transgredicntem; dcinde ad eum non perveniri ca via 
que primum initur, quia obvia quasi sit, i. e. remediorum a sensibili- 
bus rebus petitorum ope; denique ea remedia cognoscendi desiderium 
posse expleri. Sed aliter atque Colcbrookius hasce sententins inter se 
conjungit noster, et per conditionem effert, quod ille per negationem 
enuntiat.” 

In this view of the meaning of the verse, there is a refinement that 
does not belong to it, and which is not Indian: arguments are often 
elliptically and obscurely stated in Sanscrit dialectics, but one position 
at a time is usually sufficient for even Brahmanical subtlety. The only 
position here advanced is, that the cure of worldly evil is not to be effected 
by such remedies as are of obvious and ordinary application, as they can 
only afford temporary relief. Death itself is no exemption from calamity, 
if it involves the obligation of being born again. 

The version proposed by Professor Lassen rests upon his notion of the 
grammatical force of the expression chéuna or chét, ‘if,’ na, ‘not:’ the 
former he would refer to the prior member of the sentence, the latter to 
the subsequent expressions. But this division of the compound is not 
that which is most usual in argumentative writings. The phrase is an 
elliptical negation of a preceding assertion, chét referring to what has 
been said, implying, ‘if you assert or believe this;’ and xa meeting it 
with a negaiur, ‘it is not so:’ then follows the rcason or argument of 
the denial. Thus in the Muktdvali: ^ But why should not Darkness be 


6 


called a tenth thing, for itis apprehended by perception? If this be said, 
it is not 80 (itt chén-na) ; for it is the consequence of the non-existence of 
absolute light, and it would be illogical to enumerate it amongst things*.’ 
So in the Nydya Sitra Vritti: ‘If by a disturbance in the assembly 
there be no subsequent speech, and through the want of a reply there be 
defeat ; if this be urged, it is not so (éti chén-na), because there has been 
no opportunity for an answer.’ Again in the Séxkhya Pravachana 
Bhishya. Shtra:—‘ If it be said that Prakriti is the cause of bondage, it 
is not so, from its dependent state.’ Comment :—‘ But bondage may be 
occasioned by Prakriti. If this be asserted, it is not so. Why? Because 
in the relation of bondage, Prakriti is dependent upon conjunction, as will 
be explained in the following precept | Also in the Vedduta Stra 
Vivriti: ‘1f in consequence of such texts of the Védas as “let sacrifice 
be performed as long as life endures” their performance is indispensable, 
and constant and occasional rites must be celebrated by those engaged in 
the attainment of true knowledge; and if, on the other hand, the attain- 
ment of true knowledge is distinct from the observance of cercmonies ; 
then a double duty is incumbent on those wishing to eschew the world, 
If this be asserted, it is not so (at chén-na), from the compatibility of 
severalty with union, as in the case of articles of khayar or other wood §:’ 
that is, where there are several obligations, that which is most cssential 





“aq ewe दर्यं तमः कुततो ate तदि प्रत्यसेण गृद्यत इति Sa ara 
चयक्तेजोऽभावेनोपयन्लौ दष्यान्तरकस्यनाया खन्याग्यलात्‌ । 1 सभाक्षो 
भारिना चेदननुभाषणमेव उक्तराप्रतिपस्या चेदप्रतिभेति चेन उत्तरावस्ण 
भावात्‌ । ` प्रकृतिनिवन्धाच्चेन्र तस्या अपि पारतंच्ं! ।॥ ननु प्रकृ 
तिनिभिचवादन्धो भविति चेर यतस्तस्या अपि zara संयोगपारतंश्य 
सुरसने वष्यमाणमस्ति | १ ननु यज्ञादीनां यावज्जीवं वाक्येनाव 
श्यक्तेव्यतमा प्राप्रानां विविदिषाथेत्े नित्यानित्यसंयोगः प्रसज्येत यदि च 
विविदिषां यज्ञाद्यनुष्टानमपरभिधेत ततः संसारष्वावृत्सूनां िरनुष्ठानं 
स्यादितिचेन्न खादिरादिवत्‌ संयोगपृथक्कोपपर्ेः । 


7 


may be selected from the rest. In the same work we have an analogous 
form used affirmatively ; as, ‘ But how by the efficacy of knowledge, after 
the dissipation of ignorance, in regard to the object (of philosophy), can 
the true ature of the essentially happy (being) be attained? for as he is 
eternally existent, knowledge is not necessary to establish his existence. 
If this be asserted, it is true (iti chét; satyam). Brahme, one essentially 
with felicity, is admitted to be eternal, but in a state of ignorance he is 
not obtained ; like a piece of gold which is forgotten (and sought for), 
whilst it is hanging round the neck*.’ Here it would be impossible to 
refer satyam to the succceding member of the sentence, as the apodosis 
being separated from it, not only by the sense, but by the particle api. 
Passages of this description might be indefinitely multiplicd, but these 
are sufficient to shew that the construction in the sense adopted by 
Mr. Colebrooke is common and correct. 

Accordingly his version is uniformly supported scholiastarum suffra- 
giis. Thus in the S. Bhdshya, as we have secn, the passage is explained, 
drishié sé apdrthd chét évam manyasé na ékdnta, &९.; ‘If by reason of 
there being obvious remedies, you think indeed the inquiry superfluous, 
no (it is not so), from their not being absolute and permanent.’ So in the 
S. Tatwa Kaumudi, after stating the objection at length, the commentator 
adds, nirdkaroti, na ite; ‘(the author) refutes it (by saying), no, not so: 
kutah, ‘why? ékdntatyantatoh abhdvdt+. The S. Chandrikd is to the 
same effect, or still more explicit: ‘There being obvious means, the 
inquiry is superfluous, the conclusion being otherwise attained: if (this 
be urged) such is the meaning (of the text), (the author) contradicts it; 
no, it is not so}. This commentator giving the very reading, drishié sati, 
which Professor Lassen argues Mr. Colebrooke’s version would errone- 


a 
तस्म नत्यप्राप्त्वेन 'वद्यासाष्यत्वाभावादात SV सत्य Ti प्राप्तम 


नराक्रोति नेति । कृतः । एकान्त-- 


8 


ously require. The remaining scholiast, Rima Krisuna, adopts the com- 
ment of the Chandriké word for word, and consequently the commentators 
are unanimous in support of the translation of Mr. Colebrooke. 

With respect to the passages referred to by Professor Lassen as esta- 
blishing the connexion of the negative with the latter member of the 
sentence, instead of its being absolute, it will be seen at once that they 
are not at all analogous to the passage in our text. They are declaratory, 
not argumentative; and the terms following the negative particle are the 
parts or circumstances of the negative, not the reasons on which it is 
grounded. Thus in the Hitopadesa : ‘What will not be, will not be; if it 
will be, it will not be otherwise *.’ So in v. 8. of the Kiérikd: ‘The non- 
apprehension of nature is from its subtlety, not from its nonentity+.’ In 
neither of these is there any reference to a foregone position which must 
be admitted or denied, nor is the negative followed by the reasons for 
denial, ag is the case in our text. 

These considerations are more than sufficient to vindicate, what it was 
scarcely perhaps necessary to have asserted, Mr. Colebrooke’s accuracy ; 
and they are now also somewhat superfiuous, as 1 have been given to 
understand that Professor Lassen acknowledges the correctness of his 
interpretation. The commentary of Gaunarapa distinctly shews that 
nothing more is intended by the text, than the unprofitableness of recourse 
to visible or worldly expedients for the relief or removal of worldly pain. 
In subjoining therefore the gloss of VAcnzsrati Misra, with a translation, 
it is intended rather to illustrate the doctrines of the text, and the mode 
of their development by native scholiasts, than further to vindicate the 
correctness of the translation. 

^ {But verily the object of the science may not need inquiry, 1. if there 
be no pain in the world; 2. if there be no desire to avoid it; 3. if there 
be no means of extirpating it. The impossibility of extirpating it is 





* यदभावि न तज्ञावि भाविचेन्रतदन्यथा =f सोष्छ्याचदनुपत्ग्धि 
arena! ‡ एवं हि न शास्लविषयो तिज्ञास्येत यरि दुःखं नाम 
जगति न स्यात्‌ । सचा न जिहासितं । जिहासितं erated समुख्धेदं | 


9 


twofold ; either from the eternity of pain, or from ignorance of the mean: 
of alleviation: or, though it be possible to extirpate pain, yet that know- 
ledge which philosophy treats of may not be the means of its removal ; 
or again, there may be some other and more ready means. In the text, 
however, it is not said that pain does not exist, nor that there is no wish 
to avoid it. From the embarrassment of the three kinds of pain.—A triad 
of pain, three kinds: they are the ddhydtmika, ‘natural; ddhibhau- 
tika, ‘extrinsic ;’ and ddhidaivika, ‘superhuman.’ The first is of two 
kinds, bodily and mental: bodily is caused by disorder of the humours, 
wind, bile, and phlegm; mental is occasioned by desire, wrath, covetous- 
ness, fear, envy, grief, and want of discrimination. These various kinds 
of pain are called inseparable, from their admitting of internal remedies. 
The pain that requires external remedies is also twofold, ddhibautike and 
ddhidaivika. The first has for its cause, man, beasts, decr, birds, reptiles, 
and inanimate things; the sccond arises from the cvil influence of the 
planets, or possession by impure spirits (Yakshas, Rakshasas, Vindyakas, 
wc.). These kinds of pain, depending upon the vicissitudes arising 
from the quality of foulness, are to be experienced by cvery indivi- 
dual, and cannot be prevented. Through the obstruction occasioned 
by the three kinds of pain abiding in spirit, arises embarrassment, or 





अशक्यसमुक्छेदता च दधा । दुःखस्यनित्यत्वाहया तदुच्छेदोपायापरिज्लानाञ्वा । 
werent च शासख्रविषयस्य ज्ञानस्यानुपायत्वाहा । सुकरोपाया 
न्तरस्य सद्नावाक्षा । तज न तावहुःखं नास्ति नाष्यजिहासिततमित्यु्ं । दुः 
खचयाभिधातादिति । दुःखानां भयं दुःल भयं | तत्सस्वाप्यात्मिकमापिभो 
तिकमाधिदेविकं देहि । तजाध्या्मिकं धिविधं शारीरं मानसं च । शरीरं 
वातपिघेष्पणां वैषम्यनिमिचं । मानसं कामक्रोधललोभमोहभयेष्याचिषा 
द्विभेषदशेननिबन्धनं । dd चेतदन्तरोपायसाध्यत्वादाध्यान्मिकं दुःखं । बा 
द्ोपायसाध्यं च दुःखं हेधा । छाधिभोतिकमाधिदेविकं च । तभाधिभोततिकं 
मानुषपश्ुमृगपश्षि सरीसृपस्थावरनिमिहं । आधिदैविकं यक्षराखषसविना 
यकूयहाद्चावेशनिबन्धनं | तदेतत्‌ प्रत्यात्मवेदनीयं दुःखं रजःपरिशामभेदो 


10 


confinement of the sentient faculty. The capability of knowing the 
impediment occasioned by such pain, is considered the cause of the 
desire to avoid it; for though pain may not be prevented, yet it is pos- 
sible to overcome it, as will be subsequently explained. Pain then being 
generated, inquiry is to be made into the means of its removal. Tad 
apaghdtaké: tad refers here to the three kinds of pain, tad having the 
relation dependent upon its being used as a subordinate (relative) term. 
The means (hetu) of removing.—These are to be derived from philosophy, 
not from any other source: this is the position (of the text). To this a 
doubt is objected ; As there are obvious means, the inquiry is superfluous ; 
if so—. The sense is this: Be it admitted that there are three kinds of 
pain; that the rational being wishes to escape from them ; that escape is 
practicable ; and that means attainable through philosophy are adequate 
to their extirpation; still any investigation by those who look into the 
subject is necdicss; for there do exist obvious (visible) means of extirpa- 
tion, which are easily attainable, whilst the knowledge of philosophical 
principles is difficult of attainment, and to be acquired only by long 
study, and traditional tuition through many generations. Therefore, 





न शक्यं प्रत्याख्यातुं । तदनेन टुःखणयेणान्तः कर णव्तिना प्रतिक्ूलत्तमा 
चेतनाशक्तेरभिसम्बन्धोऽभिधातः । एतावता प्रतिकूतवेद्नीयत्रं जिहासाहि 
gee: । यद्यपि न सन्निरुध्यते दुःखं पथापि तदभिभवः शक्यः agfing 
परिषटानिवेद्यिष्यते ¦ तथा arora wares हेताविति । तस्य दुःख 
यस्मापधात्तकस्वट्पघात्तकः | उपसज्जेनस्यापि वुध्यानिःकृष्य तदापरमशेः ॥ 
ARTA हेतुः MTNA नान्य इत्याशयः ॥ तथ शंकते । हृष्टे सा 
पाथा चेत्‌ । अयमभेः। अस्तु दुःखभयं जिहासतु wat भवतु च तच्छ 
Wert सहतां च शस्गम्य STATA Ay TATE जिज्ञासा ्रेश्वता 
ager । हष्टस्येवोपायस्य तदु्धेदकस्य सुकरस्य विद्यमानत्वात्‌ | तलना 
नस्म त्वनेक्जन्माभ्यास्तपरम्यरायास साप्यत्तयाऽतिदुष्करवात्‌ | तथा च त्की 
किकानामाभाणकः | at चेन्मधु विन्देत किमथे पेतं वजेत्‌ इष्टस्यार्थस्य 


11 


according to the popular saying, “Why should a man who may find 
honey in the arkka flower, go for it to the mountain?” so what wise man 
will give himeelf unnecessary trouble, when he has attained the object of 
his wishes. Hundreds of remedies for bodily affections are indicated by 
eminent physicians. The pleasures of sense, women, wine, luxuries, 
unguents, dress, ornaments, are the easy means of obviating mental 
distress. So in regard to extrinsic pain, easy means of obviating it exist 
in the skill acquired by acquaintance with moral and political science, 
and by residing in safe and healthy places, and the like; whilst the 
employment of gems and charms readily counteracts the evils induced 
by superhuman agency. This is the objection. (The author) refutes 
it; it is not so. Why? From thesc means not being absolute or final. 
Ekdnta means the certainty of the cessation of pain; atyanta, the non- 
recurrence of pain that has ccased. (In obvious means of relicf there is) 
the non-existence of both these properties; the affix fasi, which may be 
substituted for all inflexions, being here put for the sixth case dual ;—as 
it is said; “From not observing the (invariable) cessation of pain of 
various kinds, in consequence of the employment of ceremonies, drugs, 
women, moral and political studies, charms, and the like, their want of 
certain operation (is predicated); so is their temporary influence, from 


सम्प्राप्रो को विद्वान्‌ यत्नमाचरेदिति । सन्ति चोपायाः शत्तशः शारीरटु 
खग्रतौकारायेषत्करा भिषजां वरेरूपदिष्टाः । मानसस्यापि तापस्य प्रती 
काराय मनोज्ञस्लीपानभोजनवित्तेपनवस्तात्म ङ्कारादिविषयसम्प्ाप्निरुपाय 
ईषत्करः । एवमाधिभोततिकस्यापि दुःखस्य नीतिशासराभ्यासङुशत्तानिर 
त्ययस्थानाध्यासनादिः प्रतीकारहेतुरीषत्करः। तथाधिदेविकस्य दुःखस्य मणि 
मन्त्राद्युपयोगः सुकरः प्रतीकारोपाय इति । निराकरोति । नेति । कुतः । 
एकामात्यन्ततोऽभावात्‌ | Carat दुःखनिवृक्रवश्यं भावः । aera दुः 
खस्यनिवृश्षस्य पुमरनुत्पादः। तयोरेकान्तात्यन्तयोरभावात्‌ । एकान्तात्यन्त 
ज्षोऽभाव इति षष्ठी हिवचनस्याने साहेविभक्तिक्स्तसि । एतदुक्तं भवति । 
यथा विधिरसायनकामिनी नीति्णस्वाभ्यासमन््राद्युपयोगेऽपि ततस्य तस्या 


12 


observing the recurrence of pain that had been suppressed. Although 
available, therefore, the obvious means of putting a stop to pain are 
neither absolute nor final, and consequently this inquiry (into other 
means) is not superfluous.” This is the purport (of the text).’ 

The Sdukhya Chandriké and $. Kaumudt are both to the same effect, 
and it is unnecessary to cite them. The original Séras of Karina, 
as collected in the S. Pravachana, and commented on by VisenyANa 
Butksuv, confirm the view taken by the scholiasts. 

Satra:—‘ The fival cessation of the three kinds of pain is the final 
object of soul *.’ 

Comment :—‘ The final cessation of these three kinds of pain, the 
total cessation of universal pain, whether gross or subtle (present or to 
come), is the final, supreme object of soul t.’ 

Sftra:—‘The accomplishment of that cessation is not from obvious 
means, from the evident recurrence (of pain) after suppression }.’ 

Comment :— The accomplishment of the final cessation of pain is not 
(to be effected) by worldly means, as wealth, and the like. Whence is 
this? Because that pain of which the cessation is procured by wealth 
and the like is seen to occur again, when that wealth and the rest are 
exhausted |.’ 





श्यान्मिकादेदःखस्य fargaratarevattared | निवृ्तस्यापि पुनस्न्पतषि 
दशेनाद्नात्यन्तिकू्मिति | सुक्रोऽधथकान्तिकात्यन्तिकटुःखनिवृकषेने ष्ट 
उपाय इति नापाथा जिज्ञासेति ॥ * अभ चिविधदुःखात्यनानिवृ 
लिरत्यन्तपुरूषाथेः। t एषां चिविधटुः लानां यात्यन्तनिवृतिः स्थूलसू 
छलसाधारण्येन निःशेषो fagie: सोऽत्यन्तः परमःपुरूषाथेः; 1 नह 
हालत्ति्धिनिवृेरनुवृिद्शेनात्‌ | | लौकिकादुपायादनदेरत्यन्तदुः 
खनिवृकिसिद्धिनोास्ति । कुतः । धनादिना gage: wena पुनर 
पिदुःखानुवृिदशेनात्‌ । 





13 


I. 


Tue revealed mode is like the temporal one, ineffectual, for it is 
impure; and it is defective in some respects, as well as excessive in 
others. A method different from both is preferable, consisting in a 
discriminative knowledge of perceptible principles, and of the imper- 
ceptible one, and of the thinking soul. 


BHASHYA. 


Although the inquiry is to be directed to other than to obvious remedies, 
yet it 18 not to be directed to such as are derivable from revelation, as 
means of removing the three kinds of pain. Anusravati, ‘what man suc- 
cessively hears ;’ duusravika, ‘that which is thence produced, revealed 
mode;’ that is, established by the Védas: as it is said; “We drank the 
juice of the acid asclepias; we became immortal; we attained effulgence; 
we know divine things. What harm can a foe inflict on ०6? How can 
decay affect an immortal?” (This text of the Véda refers to) a discussion 
amongst Indra and other gods, as to how they became immortal. In 
explanation it was said, “We were drinkers of soma juice, and thence 
became immortal,” that is, gods: further, “We ascended to, or attained, 
effulgence, or heaven; we knew divine, celestial, things. Hence then, 
assuredly, what can an enemy do to us? What decay can affect an im- 
mortal?” dhurtti meaning ‘decay’ or ‘injury :’ ‘What can it do to an 
immortal being? 

It is also said in the Védas, that final recompense is obtained by 
animal sacrifice: ‘He who offers the aswamédha conquers all worlds, 
overcomes death, and expiates all sin, even the murder of a Brahman.” 
As, therefore, final and absolute consequence is prescribed in the Védas, 
inquiry (elsewhere) should be superfluous; but this is not the case. 
The text says, the revealed mode is like the temporal one—drishiavat ; 
‘like, same as the temporal,’ drishiéna tulya. What is that revealed 
mode, and whence is it (ineffectual)? 2 is impure, defective in some 

z 


14 


respects, and excessive in others. It is impure from (enjoining) animal 
sacrifices; as, “according to the ritual of the aswamédha, six hundred 
horses, minus three, are offered at midday.” For though that is virtue 
which is enjoined by the Védas and laws, yet, from its miscellaneous 
character, it may be affected by impurity. It is also said; “ Many thou- 
sands of Indras and other gods have passed away in successive ages, 
overcome by time; for time is hard to overcome.” Hence therefore, as 
even Indra and the gods perish, the revealed mode involves defective 
cessation of pain. Excess is also one of its properties, and pain is pro- 
duced by obscrving the superior advantages of others. Here, therefore, 
by excess, atisaya, is understood the unequal distribution of temporal 
rewards, as the consequence of sacrifice; the object of the ritual of the 
Védas being in fact in all cases temporal good. Therefore the revealed 
mode is like the temporal one. What then is the preferable mode? If this 
he asked, it is replied, One different from both. A mode different from 
both the temporal and revealed is preferable, being free from impurity, 
excess, or deficiency. How is this? It is explained (in the text: Jt 
consists tu a discriminative knowledge, &c. Here, by perceptible princi- 
ples, are intended Mahat and the rest, or Intellect, Egotism, the five 
subtile rudiments, the eleven organs (of perception and action), and the 
five gross elements. The imperceptible one is Pradhdna (the chief or 
great one). The thinking soul, Purusha (the incorporeal). These twenty- 
five principles are intended by the (three) terms vyakta, avyakta, and 
१५. In discriminative knowledge of these consists the preferable mode ; 
and he who knows them knows the twenty-five principles (he has perfect 
knowledge). 

The difference between the perceptible, and imperceptible, and think- 
ing principles, is next explained. 8 


COMMENT. 


Having taught that worldly means of overcoming worldly evil are 
ineffectual, it is next asserted that devotional remedies, such as the rites 
enjoined by the Védas, are equally unavailing; and knowledge of the 


15 


three parts or divisions of existence material and spiritual, is the only 
mode by which exemption from the infirmities of corporeal being can be 
attained. 

The Védas are inefficient, from their inhumanity in prescribing the 
shedding of blood: the rewards which they propose, are also but tempo- 
rary, as the gods themselves are finite beings, perishing in each periodical 
revolution. The immortality spoken of in the Védas is merely a long 
duration, or until a dissolution of the existent forms of things*. The 
Védas also cause, instead of curing, pain, as the blessings they promise 
to one man over another are sources of envy and misery to those who do 
not possess them, Such is the sense given by Gauravapa to atisaya, and 
the 8. Tatwa Kaumudi understands it also to imply the unequal appor- 
tionment of rewards by the Védas themselves: ‘The jyotishtoma and 
other rites secure simply heaven; the vdjapéya and others confer the 
sovereignty of heaven: this is being possessed of the property of excess 
(inequality) t.’ 

In like manner, the original aphorism of Kariua affirms of these two 
modes, the temporal and revealed, that there ‘is no difference between 
them},’ and that ‘escape from pain is not the consequence of the latter jj," 
because ‘ recurrence is nevertheless the result of that immunity which is 
attainable by acts (of devotion) §,’ as ‘the consequences of acts are not 
eternal **.’ Here however a dilemma occurs, for the Véda also says, ‘'There 
is no return (regeneration) of one who has attained the sphere of Brahma 
by acts (of devotion) {t.’ This is explained away by a Sdtra of Kapila, 
which declares that the Véda limits the non-regeneration of one who has 





* ऋमृततवाभिधानं चिरस्ये मानमुपलक्षयति यदाह ्ाभूतसम्युवं स्था 
aaa भाष्यते ॥ विष्णु पुराणं ॥ 1 ज्योतिष्टोमाट्यः स्व्गमाच 
साधनं वाजपेमादयः स्वराज्यस्येत्यतिशययुक्कां । { अविशेषश्चोभ 
योः। ॥ नानुच्रविकाट्पि तत्‌ सिद्धिः | $ कम्मसाध्यत्वेन 
पुनरावृत्तिः । “ कम्मेसाध्यस्य चानित्यतवे। tt कम्मे est 
कणतस्यानावृ्िः | 


16 


attained the region of छो to him who, when there, acquires discri- 
minative wisdom +. 

This discriminative wisdom is the accurate discrimination of those 
principles into which all that exists is distributed by the Sénkhya philo- 
sophy. Vyakta, ‘that which is perceived, sensible, discrete; Avyakta, 
‘that which is unperceived, indiscrete ;’ and Jna, ‘that which knows, or 
discriminates :’ the first is matter in its perceptible modifications; the 
second is crude, unmodified matter; and the third is soul. The object of 
the $, Kdrikd is to define and explain these three things, the correct 
knowledge of which is of itself release from worldly bondage, and ex- 
emption from exposure to human ills, by the final separation of soul 
from body. 


Til. 


Narwre, the root (of all), is no production. Seven principles, the 
Great or intellectual one, &c., are productions and productive. Six- 
teen are productions (unproductive). Soul is neither a production 


nor productive. 
BHASHYA. 


Mida (the root) prakriti (nature) is pradhdna (chief), from its being the 
root of the seven principles which are productions and productive; such 
nature is the root. No production.—It is not produced from another: 
on that account nature (prakriti) is no product of any other thing. Seven 
principles —Mahat and the rest; from its being the great (mahat) element; 
this is Intellect (Buddhi). Intellect and the rest—The seven principles 
are, 1. Intellect; 2. Egotism; 3—7. The five subtile rudiments. These seven 
are productions and productive: in this manner: Intellect is produced 
from the chief one (nature). That again produces Egotism, whence it is 
productive (prakriti). Egotism, as derived from Intellect, is a produc- 





“ तथ प्राप्रविवेकस्यानावृ्िथुतिः । 


17 


tion; but as it gives origin to the five subtile rudiments, it is productive. 
The subtile rudiment of sound is derived from Egotism, and is therefore 
a production; but as causing the production of ether, it is productive. 
The subtile rudiment of touch, as generated from Egotism, is a produc- 
tion ; as giving origin to air, it is productive. The subtile rudiment of 
smell is derived from Egotism, and is therefore a production; it gives 
origin to earth, and is therefore productive. The subtile rudiment of 
form is a production from Egotism ; as generating light, it is productive. 
The subtile rudiment of flavour, as derived from Egotism, is a production; 
it is productive, as giving origin to water. In this manner the Great 
principle and the rest are productions and productive. Sixteen are pro- 
ductions ; that is, the five organs of perception, the five orgarts of action, 
with mind, making the eleventh, and the five elements: these form a 
class of sixteen which are productions, the term vikdra being the same as 
vikriti, Soul is neither a production nor productive. These (principles) 
being thus classed, it is next to be considered by what and how many 
kinds of proof, and by what proof severally applied, the demonstration of 
these three (classes of) principles, the perceptible, the imperceptible, and 
the thinking soul, can be effected. For in this world a probable thing is 
established by proof, in the same mode as (a quantity of) grain by a 
prastha (a ccrtain measure), and the like, or sandal and other things by 
weight. On this account what proof is, is next to be defined. 


COMMENT. 

In this stanza the three principal categories of the Sinkhya system 
are briefly defined, chiefly with regard to their relative characters. 

Existent things, according to one classification, are said to be fourfold : 
1. prakriti; 2. vikriti; 3. prakriti-vikriti; and anubhaya ripa, neither pra- 
kriti nor vikriti, Prakriti, according to its ordinary use, and its ctymo- 
logical sense, means that which is primary, that which precedes what is 
made; from pra, pre, and kri,‘to make. This, however, is further dis- 
tinguished in the text into the mdéla prakriti; the prakriti which is the 
root and substance of all things except soul, matter or nature; and 
secondary, special, or relative prakriti, or every production that in its 

F 


18 


turn becomes primary to some other derived from it. By prakriti may 
therefore be understood the matter of which every substance primarily or 
secondarily is composed, and from which it proceeds, the primary, or, as 
Mr. Colebrooke renders it, ‘ productive’ principle of some secondary sub- 
stance or production. This subsequent product is termed vikriti, from the 
same root, #ri,‘to make, with vi, implying ‘variation,’ prefixed. Vikriti does 
not mean a product, or thing brought primarily into existence, but merely 
a modification of a state of being, a new development or form of some- 
thing previously extant. We might therefore consider it as best rendered 
by the term ‘development,’ but there is no objection to the equivalent in 
the text, or ‘ product.’ In this way, then, the different substances of the 
universe aré respectively nature, or matter, and form. Crude or radical 
matter is without form. Intellect is its first form, and Intellect is the 
matter of Egotism. Egotism is a form of Intellect, and the matter of 
which the senses and the rudimental elements are formed: the senses 
are forms of Egotism. The gross elements are forms of the rudimental 
elemeuts. We are not to extend the materiality of the grosser clements 
to the forms of visible things, for visible things are compounds, not simple 
developments of a simple base. Soul comes under the fourth class; it is 
neither matter nor form, production nor productive. More particular 
definitions of each category subsequently occur. 


IV. 

Pencerrion, inference, and right affirmation, are admitted to be 
threefold proof; for they (are by all acknowledged, and) comprise 
every mode of demonstration. It is from proof that belief of that 
which is to be proven results. 


BHASHYA. 


Perception ;—as, the ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue, the nose, are the 
five organs of sense ; and their five objects are respectively, sound, feel, 


19 


form, flavour, and odour: the ear apprehends sound ; the skin, feel; the 
eye, form; the tongue, taste ; the nose, smell. This proof is called, (that 
which is) seen (or perception). That object which is not ascertainable 
either by its being present, or by inference, is to be apprelicnded from 
right affirmation; such as, Ixvra, the king of the gods; the northern 
Kurus; the nymphs of heaven; and the like. That which is not ascer- 
tainable by perception or inference, is derived from apt (or sufficient) 
authority. It is also said ; “ They cull scripture, right affirmation ; right, 
as free from error. Let not oue exempt from fault affirm a falsehood 
without adequate reason. He who in his appointed office is free from 
partiality or enmity, and is ever respected by persons of the same cha- 
racter, such a man is to be regarded as apt (fit or worthy). In these 
three are comprised all kinds of proof. Jaiunx describes six sorts of 
proof. Which of those then are not proofs? They arc, presumption 
(arthdpatti), proportion (sumbhava), privation (abhdva), comprehension 
(pratibhd), oral communication (aitihya), and comparison (upamdua). 
Thus: “Presumption” is twofold, ‘seen’ and ‘heard.’ ‘Scen’ is where in 
oue case the existence of spirit is admitted, and it is presumed that it 
exists in another. ‘Heard; Devaparta does not cat by day, and yet 
grows fat: it is presumed then that he eats by night. “ Proportion 3" By 
the term onc prastha, four kuravas are equally designated. “ Privation” is 
fourfold ; prior, mutual, constant, and total. ‘Prior;’ as, Devapatra in 
childhood, youth, &c. ‘Mutual ;’ as, Water jar in cloth. ‘Constant; as, 
The horns of an ass; the son of a barren woman; the flowers of the 
sky. ‘Total’ privation, or destruction ; as when cloth is burnt, or as from 
contemplating withered grain, want of rain is ascertained. In this manner 
privation is manifold. ‘Comprehension ;” as, The part of the country 
that lies between the Vindhya mountains on the north and Sahya moun- 
tains on the south, extending to the sea, is pleasant. By this sentence it 
is intended to express that there are many agreeable circumstances com- 
prehended in that country, the name of the site indicating its several 
products. ‘Oral communication ;” as, When people report there is a 
fiend in the fig-tree. = ^ Comparison ;" The Gavaya is like a cow; a lake 
is like a sea. These are the six kinds of proof; but they are comprised 


20 


in the three; for presumption is included in inference, and proportion, 
privation, comprehension, oral communication, and comparison, are com- 
hended in right affirmation. Therefore from the expressions (in the text), 
they comprise every mode of demonstration, and are admitted to be threefold 
proof, it is said, that by these three kinds of proof, proof is established. 
Belief of that which is to be proven results from proof—The things to be 
proven are, Nature, Intellect, Egotism, the five subtile rudiments, the 
eleven organs, the five gross elements, and Soul. These five and twenty 
principles are classed as the perceptible, the imperceptible, and the per- 
cipient; and some are verifiable by perception, some by inference, and 
some by authority ; which is the threefold proof. 
The definition of cach kind (of proof) is next given. 


COMMENT. 


The work pauses in its enumeration of the physical and metaphysical 
principles of the system, to define its dialectical portion, or the proofs 
which may be urged in support of its principles. 

The doctrine that there are but three kinds of proof, is said to be sup- 
ported by a text of the Védas: ‘Soul is either to be perceived, to be 
learned from authority, or to be inferred from reasoning *.’ It is opposed 
to the tenets of the Naiydyikas and Mimdnsakas, the former of whom 
describe four kinds, and the latter six kinds of proof. The proofs of the 
logicians are, pratyakshat, ‘perception; anumdnc}, ‘inference; upamdne|l, 
‘comparison ;’ and sabda, ‘ verbal authority.’ Of these, comparison and 
verbal authority are included by the Sdéxéhyas under right affirmation ; 
the term dpta** meaning ‘fit, right,’ and being applied either to the 
Védas {t, or to inspired teachers {{, as subsequently explained. The 
Miménsukas do recognise six kinds of proof; but GavrarApa has either 
stated them incorrectly, or refers to a system different from that now 
found in the best authorities of this school. KumArina Buatta alludes 





* आत्मा वा wee: Set मन्तष्यः। 1 प्रत्यक्षं । 1 अनुमानं । 
॥ उपमानं। fee, “arm 1! आ्आगमं। fer 


21 


to the sixfold proof of an older scholiast or Vrittikdra, but those six 
proofs are, as Mr. Colebrooke states, perception, inference, comparison, 
presumption, authority, and privation; and the author of the Séstra 
dipiké excludes expressly sambhava, pratibhd, and aitihya from the cha- 
racter of proofs. With regard to the éerms specified, it may be doubted 
if exact equivalents can be devised. Arthdpati: is literally, ‘ attainment 
of meaning ;’ conjecture or presumption, ‘ inference ;’ from which it dif- 
fers only in the absence of the predicate or sign from which the subject 
is inferred. The illustrations of the commentator do not very clearly 
explain the purport of the two kinds of this proof, ‘seen’ and ‘heard.’ In 
the Sdstra dipike the first is exemplified by the sentence, “ Devavatra is 
alive, but not in his house; it is presumed therefore that he is abroad.” 
‘Heard,’ srutu, is referred to the Védas, and applies to the interpretation 
of precepts by the spirit as well as the letter, as in a direction to offer 
any particular article, it may be presumed, that should that not be pro- 
curable, something similar may be substituted. VAcuespati also con- 
siders arthdpatti to be comprised in inference, as well as sambhavn, ‘iden- 
tity’ or ‘proportion.’ Privation, he argues, is only a modification of per- 
ception; and aitihya, or ‘report,’ is no proof at all, the person with whom 
it originates being undetermined. Pratibhd he does not mention. The 
concluding expressions of GaurapdAps, Pratijdncdsa sanjndnam, are of 

* questionable import, and there is possibly some error in the copy. The 
‘objects of proof,’ prameya, are, according to the Sankhyé, all the princi- 
ples of existence. Siddhi, ‘ accomplishment, determination,’ in the last 
hemistich, is explained by pratiééi, ‹ trust, belief.’ 


Vv. 


Pencertion is ascertainment of particular objects. Inference, 
which is of three sorts, premises an argument, and (deduces) that 
which is argued by it. Right affirmation is true revelation. 


22 


BHASHYA. 


Drishia ‘seen,’ or pratyaksha, ‘ perception,’ is application or exertion 
of the senses in regard to their several objects, as of the ear, and the rest, 
to sound, &c. Inference is of three kinds, subsequent, antecedent, analo- 
gous. Inference antecedent is that which has been previously deduced ; 
as, rain is inferred from the rising of a cloud, because formerly rain had 
been the consequence. Subsequent; as, having found a drop of water 
taken from the sea to be salt, the saltness of the rest also is inferred. 
Analogous ; 98, having observed their change of place, it is concluded 
that the moon and stars are locomotive, like Cuarrra: that is, having 
seen a person named Cuarrra transfer his position from one place to 
another, and thence known that he was locomotive, it is inferred that the 
moon and stars also have motion (because it is seen that they change 
their places). So observing one mango tree in blossom, it is inferred 
that other mango trees also are in flower. This is inference from 
analogy. 

Again; premises an argument, and (deduces) that which is argued by १८. 
That inference. Premises a prior argument; that is, the thing which 
has a predicate is inferred from the predicate, as, a mendicant (is known) 
by his staff; or it premises the subject of the argument, when the predi- 
cate is deduced from that of which it is predicated, as, having seen a 
mendicant, you say, this is his triple staff. Right affirmation is true 
revelation.— Apta means dchdryas, ‘holy teachers,’ as Brahmé and the 
test. Sruéi means ‘the Védas.’ ‘Teachers and Védas’ is the import of 
the compound, and that which is declared by them is true revelation. 

In this manner threefold proof has been described. It is next ex- 
plained by what sort of proof ascertainment is to be effected, and of what 
objects. 


COMMENT. 
The three kinds of proof, perception, inference, and right affirmation, 


are here more particularly explained. 
The first is defined, ‘ what severally relates to, or is engaged in, an 


23 


object of sense*. Adhyavasdya is explained by VAcuesrari, ‘ Know- 
ledge, which is the exercise of the intellectual faculty.’ Nardvana 
explains it, ‘That by which certainty is obtained{.’ The organs do not of 
themselves apprehend objects, but are merely the instruments by which 
they are approximated to the intellect : ‘neither does intellect apprehend 
them (rationally), being, as derived from (prakriti) matter, incapable of 
sense; but the unconscious impressions or modifications of intellect, de- 
rived through the senscs, are communicated to soul, which, reflecting 
them whilst they are present in the intellect, appears by that reflection 
actually affected by wisdom, pleasure, and the like §.’ 

The explanation given by Gaurardpa of the three kinds of inference 
is not exactly conformable to the definitions of the logicians, although the 
same technical terms are employed. Thus in the Nydya Sitra Vritti, in 
the comment on the Sitra of Gautama ¶, we have the following: ‘'Three- 
fold inference. Prior, that is, cause; characterized by, or having, that 
(cause); a8 inference of rain from the gathering of clouds. Posterior, 
cffect; characterized by it, as inference of rain from the swelling of a 
river. Analogous (or generic); characterized as distinct from both effect 
and cause, as the inference of any thing being a substance from its being 
earthy **.’ Here then we have inference a priori, or of effect from cause ; 


* प्रतिविषयाध्यवसायः--विषयं प्रति Tae ! 1 अध्यवसायो 
बुद्धिष्यापारो ज्ञानं । { सथ्यवसीयते निषखीयतेऽनेन । + बुद्धि 
we हि प्राकृतत्वाटचे्तनमिति तदीयोऽध्यवसाय)ऽणचेतनो घटादि वत्‌ । 
एवं बुद्धितत्वस्य सुखादयीऽपि परिणामभेदा अचेतनाः । पुरुषस्तु सुखा 
ननुषद्गी चेतनः । सोऽयं नुद्धितत्वव्तिनाज्ञानसुखादिना wire 
हायापप्याज्ञानसुलादिमानिव भवत्तीति । ‘ चिविधमनुमानं wa 
छेषवत्‌ सामान्यतोष्टं च! *“ जिविधमिति पूष कारणं तहत्‌ तिं 
मकं यथा मेधोन्रतिविश्षेण वृ्पनुमानं । शेषः काम्ये तलिंगकं शेषवत्‌ 
यथा नदीवृद्या वृश्नुमानं । सामान्यतो दृष्टं waaay Ts 
मथा पृथिवीत्रेन CRA 1 


24 


inference a posteriori, or of cause from effect ; and inference from analogy, 
or community of sensible properties; for samdnyato drishiam is ‘that 
which is recognised from generic properties, its own specific properties 
being unnoticed *.”. The S. Chandrikd gives a similar, or logical, expla- 
nation of the three kinds of inference, 

The definition of inference in general is the subject of the first 
meniber of the sccond hemistich. The expressions linga{ and ling?{ 
are analogous to ^ predicate and subject,’ or the mark, sign, or accident 
by which any thing is characterized, and the thing having such cha- 
racteristic mark and sign. Thus /inga is explained by logicians by 
the term tydpya ||. and Jing? by vydpaka§; a3 in the proposition, There 
is fire, because there is smoke, the latter is the Tinga, vydpya, ‘major 
or predicate ; and fire the lingt or vydpaka, the ‘minor or subject,’ or 
thing of which the presence is denoted by its characteristic. Inference, 
then, is n conclusion derived from previous determination of predicate 
and subject; or it is knowledge of the points of an argument depend- 
ing on the relation between subject and predicate; that is, ‘Unless it 
were previously known that smoke indicated fire, the presence of the 
Jattcr could not be inferred from the appearance of the former.’ This is 
what the logicians term paramersha, ‘ observation or experience.’ Apla**, 
according to Gavravdpa, means fcharya ; and dpta sruti{+} implies ‘holy 
teachers and holy writ.’ NArdyana expounds it in a similar manner{f, 
and adds, that dpta means Iswara, or ^ god,’ according to the theistical 
Scukhya ||. VAcuesvati explains the terms similarly, though more ob- 
scurely. Apta is equivalent with him to prépta, ‘obtained,’ and yukta, 
^ proper, right ;’ and क sruéi is ‘both that which is right and traditional, 
holy knowledge §§; for sruti is defined to be ‘knowledge of the pur- 


* MEY AMAT सामान्यदशेनमनुमानमित्यपेः । † लिगं 
lista i ॥ व्याणं । $ ष्यापकं। ¶ तश्चाणव्यापकप 
धम्मेता ज्ञानपूङघंकमनुमानमित्यनुमानसामान्यं ल श्त । “SIH | 
11 ज्प्ुती । of वाक्याथेगोचरयथा्थेानवानाप्नः। ॥ सेश्व 


रमते ईष्वर एव स्आप्रः। + आप्तश्चासौ aft सेत्याप्रयुततिः । 


25 


port of texts derived from holy writ; which knowledge is of itself proof, 
as obtained from the Védas, which are not of human origin, and fit to 
exempt from all fear of error*.’ The first term, vdiya, is explained to 
signify, ‘the Véda is the teacher of religion{;’ and the expression 
udkydrtha is equivalent to dherma, ‘religion or virtue.’ ‘ Religion is heard 
by it; as, “ Let one desirous of heaven perform the jyotishioma sacrifice 
such is a text (of scripture) {.’ The texts of the Védas and of other 
inspired works are authority, as having been handed down through suc- 
cessive births by the same teachers as Jaivisuavya says, ‘By me living 
repeatedly in ten different great creations || So ‘the Véda was remem- 
bered by Kapria from a former state of being§.’ The Mfmdusakas dis- 
tinguish between dpta vdkya and véda vdkya: the former is human, the 
latter inspired, authority. 


VI. 

SrnsisLE objects become known by perception ; but it is by infer- 
ence (or reasoning) that acquaintance with things transcending the 
senses is obtained: and a truth which is neither to be directly per- 
ceived, nor to be inferred from reasoning, is deduced from revelation. 


BHASHYA. 


By inference from analogy ; of things beyond the senses—the ascertain- 
ment of existing things which transcend the senses. Nature and soul are 





* श्युर्तिवाक्यजनिततं aruniad wa स्वतः प्रमाणमपौसषेयवेद्जनित 
विन सकलदोषशंकाविनिमुकषेयुक्ं। † धम्मेबोधकः श्ुतिः। | fat 
धम्मोऽनेन यथा ज्योतिष्टोमेन स्वर्गकामो यजेतेति वाक्यं । ॥ दशम 
हासर्गषु विपरिवल्लेमानेन मया । ऽ आदिविटुष्चकषितृस्य कस्यादौ 
कल्यान राधीतश्युततिस्मरणसम्भवः । 


26 


not objects of sense, and are to be known only by reasoning from analogy. 
For as the predicates Muhat and the rest have the three qualities, 80 
must that of which they are effects, the chief one (nature), have the three 
qualities; and as that which is irrational appears as if it was rational, it 
must have a guide and superintendent, which is soul. That which is 
perceptible is known by perception; but that which is imperceptible, 
and which is not to be inferred from analogy, must be learnt from revela- 
tion, as, Ivvra, the king of the gods; the northern Kurus; the nymphs 
of heaven: these depend upon sacred authority. Here some onc objects, 
Nature or soul is not apprehended, and what is not apprehended in this 
world docs not exist; therefore these two are not, any more than a second 
head, or a third arm. In reply it is stated, that there are eight causes 
which prevent the apprehension of existing things. 


COMMENT. 


In this verse, according to the translation followed, the application of 
the three different kinds of proof to thrce different objects is described : 
according to a different version, only one class of objects is referred to, 
those which transcend the senses, and of which a knowledge is uttainable 
only by inference from analogy, or by revelation. 

The S. Tatwa Kaumudi concurs with the S. Bhdshya in understanding 
the terms of the text, sémdnyato drishidt*, to refer to anundndt +, iutend- 
ing ‘inference from aualogy}.’ A similar explanation occurs in the 
S. Pravachana Bhishya: * Thence, from reasoning by analogy, the deter- 
mination of both, of nature and soul, is effected |.’ It appears therefore 
that in this place the text does not refer cither to perception or to infer- 
ence in general, as evidence of perceptible things, but solely to inference 


* सामान्यतो rent † अनुमानात्‌ । {तु we प्रत्यक्ष 
gic विशिनष्टि | सामान्यतो दृष्टादनुमानादष्यवस्तायादत्रीन्दियाणां । 
। सामान्यतो हष्टादुभयसिष्धिः- तथ सामान्यतो दषटादनुमानात्‌ | सच प्रकृ 
तिपुरूषयोः सिदिरित्यथेः | 


27 


from analogy, as proof of imperceptible objects. For inference a priori 
or @ posteriori regards things not necessarily beyond the cognizance of 
the senses, like nature and soul, but those only which are not at the 
moment perceptible, as fire from smoke, rain from floods or clouds, and 
the like. It might be preferable, therefore, to render the verse somewhat 
differently from the text, or, ‘It is by reasoning from analogy that belicf 
in things beyond the senses is attained; and imperceptible things, not 
thereby determined, are to be known only from revelation.’ The version 
of Mr. Colebrooke, in which he is followed by Professor Lassen (“ रवण 
litatis intellectus est per perceptionem : rerum que supra scnsus sunt per 
demonstrationem vel hac non evictum, quod preter sensus est, probatur 
reyclatione”), rests apparently upon the authority of the 9. Chandrikd and 
$. Kaunudi. ‘ Sdmdnyatns has the affix tasi in the sense of the sixth 
(possessive) case. The ascertainment of all objects appreciable by the 
senses, whether actually perccived or not, is by perception: therefore 
knowledge of earth and the other clements is by sense; but knowledge 
of things beyond the senses, as nature and the rest, is from inference *.’ 

When inference from analogy fails, then, according to all the authori- 
ties, the remaining proof, or revelation, must be had recourse 10, agree- 
ably to the Sfitras; ‘Oral proof is fit instruction,’ and ‘ fit instruction is 
communication of the proofs by which the nature of both prakriti and 
purusha may be discriminated +. 





Vit. 


From various causes things may be imperceptible (or unperceived); 
excessive distance, (extreme) nearness, defect of the organs, inatten- 





* सामान्यत इति wcaqarrefa त्तथा चेन्द्रियमोग्यस्य सत्रस्यापेखितत 
स्यानपेश्ठितस्य च हटात्‌ meres सिदिस्तेन पृथिव्यादीनां प्रत्यकषाटेव 
सिद्धिरिति भावोऽतीद्धियाणां प्रकृत्यादीनां सिद्धिरनुमानात्‌। 1 न्ना 
Whe: शब्द्‌ः-उभयसिद्धिः प्रमाणात्तटुपदेशः । 


28 


tion, minuteness, interposition of objects, predominance of other mat- 
ters, and intermixture with the like. 


BHASHYA. 


Non-perception of things here existing may proceed from, their re- 
moteness, as of Vishnumitra, Maitra, and Chaitra, dwelling in different 
countries; or their propinguity, as the eye does not see the collyrium 
applied to the eyelids; from defect of the organs, as sound and form are 
undiscernible by the deaf and the blind; from inattention, as a person 
whose thonghts are distracted does not apprehend what is said to him, 
however intelligibly ; from miauteness, as the small particles of frost, 
vapour, and smoke in the atmosphere are not perceived ; from interpost- 
faon, as a thing hidden by a wall; from predominance of others, as the 
planets, asterisms, and stars are invisiblé when their rays are overpowered 
by those of the sun; from intermixture with the like, as a bean in a heap 
of beans, a lotus amongst lotuses, a myrobalan amongst myrobalans, a 
pigeon in a flock of pigeons, cannot be perceived, being confounded in 
the midst of similar objects. In this way non-perception of actually 
existing things is eightfold. 

Be it granted, that whatever is to be ascertained (by any means) is ; 
by what canse is apprehension of nature and soul prevented, and how is 
it to he effected” 

COMMENT. 

Reasons are here assigned why things may not be perceived, although 
they actually exist. 

The terms of the text, as iHustrated by the comment, are easily under- 
stood: the particle cha, in connexion with the last, is considered to imply 
the, existence of other impediments besides those enumerated, such as 
non-production, as of curds from milk*. But these circumstances, for 





* चकारोऽनुक्षसमुञ्चमाथेः तेनानुद्गवोऽपि संगृहीत मथा TTT 
यां दध्यनुद्धवान्नर हश्यते | 


29 


the most part, account for the non-perception of perceptible things, and 
it is still to be considered why nature and soul, which are not amongst 
things ordinarily perceptible, are not perceived *. 


भा 


Ir is owing to the subtilty (of nature), not to the non-existence of 
this original principle, that it is not apprehended by the senses, but 
inferred from its effects. Intellect and the rest of the derivative 
principles are effects; (whence it is concluded as their cause) in 
some respects analogous, but in others dissimilar. 


BHASHYA. 


From subtilty the non-perception of that nature. Nature is not appre- 
hended (by the senses) on account of its subtilty, like the particles of 
smoke, vapour, and frost, which are in the atmosphere, although not per- 
ceived there. How then is it to be apprehended? fis perception is from 
its effects. Having observed the effects, the cause is inferred. Nature 
is the cause, of which such is the effect. Intellect, egotism, the five 
subtile rudiments, the eleven organs, the five gross elements, are its 
effects, That effect may be dissimilar from nature: ‘nature,’ prakriti ; 
‘the chief one,’ pradhdna; dissimilar from it: or it may be analogous, of 
similar character; as in the world a son may be like or unlike his father. 
From what cause this similarity or dissimilarity proceeds, we shall here- 
after explain. 

Here a doubt arises, from the conflicting opinions of teachers, whether 
intellect and other effects be or be not already in nature. According 
to the Sénkhya doctrine, the effects are in nature; according to the 





* ननुनिदूरत्वादिषु मध्ये प्रकृत्यादयुपलम्मे किं प्रतिबन्धकं | 


30 


Bauddhas and others, they are not; for that which is, cannot cease to 
be; and that which is not, can by no means be: this is a contradiction. 
Therefore, it is said— 


COMMENT. 


Nature is said to be imperceptible, from its subtilty: it must be there- 
fore inferred from its effects. 

The effects are the products of nature, or intellect, egotism, and the 
rest ; some of which are of a similar, and some of a dissimilar character, 
as subsequently explained. 

Effect, aecording to the Sankhya system, necessarily implies cause, a8 
it could not cxist without it*: but on this topic there are different opin- 
ions, thus particularized by VAcuespati: ‘1. Some say, that that which 
is may proceed from that which is not. 2. Some say, that effect is not a 
separately existent thing, but the revolution of an existent thing. 3. Some 
say, that that which is not may proceed from that which is. 4. The 
ancients assert, that that which is comes from that which is (or ens from 
ens). By the three first propositions the existence of nature would not be 
proved ; for, 

‘1, The materiality of the cause of the world, of which the qualities 
goodness, foulness, and darkness are the natural properties, comprises 
sound and other changes of its natural condition, and is diversified by 
pleasure, pain, and inscnsibility ; but if that which is, is born from that 
which is not, how can that insubstantial cause which is not, comprebend 
pleasure, pain, form, sound, and the like? for there cannot be identity of 
nature between what is and what is not. 

५2. If sound, and other diversified existences, were but revolutions of 
one existent thing, yet that which is could not proceed from such a 
source, for the property of manifold existence cannot belong to that 
which is not twofold: the notion of that which is not manifold through 
its comprising manifold existence is an obvious error. 





* काम्योत्कारणमां गम्यते । 


31 


«3. The notion of the. Kanabhakshas, Akshacharanas, and others, that 
that which is not may proceed from that which is, excludes the compre- 
hension of effect in cause, as that which is and that which is not cannot 
have community: consequently the existence of nature is not proved; 
and in order to establish its existence, the existence of effect in it must 
first be determined *.’ 

Of the doctrines here alluded to, the first is said to be that of some of 
the Buddhists, who deny the existence of prakriti, or any universal cause, 
or of any thing which they cannot verify by perception. The second is 
that of the Véd4ntis, who maintain that all that exists is but the vivarttas, 
literally the ‘ revolutions’—the emanations from, or manifestations of, one 
only universal spirit. It might be said that the Sinkhya seems to teach 
a similar doctrine, in as far as it refers all that exists, exclusive of spirit, 
to one common source, and makes all else identical with prakriti. Jt 
differs however in this, that it regards the substances evolved from the 
radical prakriti as substantial existences, as effects or products of a cause 
which exists no longer except in its effects. The Védantis, on the other 
hand, maintain that it is cause which is eternal, and that effects are 


* केचिदाहुरसतः सज्जायत इति 1 एकस्य सतो fart: ated न 
वस्वित्यपरे | अन्ये तु सतोऽसञ्जायत इति । सतः सज्जायत ईति ET: 
तम पूर्ेस्मिन्‌ कत्यचये प्रधानं न सिष्यति सुखदुःखमोहभेदवत्‌ स्वरूपपरि 
णामश्षग्डाद्यात्मकं हि जगत्‌ कारणस्य प्रधानं सवरजस्तमः स्वभावत । 
यदि पुनरसतः सञ्नायेत wafer’ कारणं कथं सुलादिरूपशब्टा 
द्यात्मकं स्यात्‌ सदसतोस्तादाल्यानुपपशेः ॥ चथेकस्य सतो frat: शष्डा 
दिप्रपंचस्तथापिसतः सञ्जायत इति न स्यात्‌ नास्याचयस्य प्रपं चात्मकं । 
ऋपित्वघ्रपंचस्य प्रपंचात्मकतया witha खव ॥ येषामपि swe 
छचरणादीनां सत्त एव कारणादसततो जन्म तेषामपि सदसत्तोरिकवानुष 
पतेन काग्योत्मकं कारणमिति न प्रधानसिद्धिः ॥ सत्तः प्रधानसिद्यधे प्रथमं 
तावत्‌ सत्कार्यं प्रतिजानीते ॥ 


32 


only its present operations. The popular form of Véddntism asserts, 
indeed, that nothing exists but cause, and that its effects, or all that 
appears to exist, are unrealities, illusions, the phantoms of a dream: but 
the commentator on the Séxkhya Pravachana declares, that the doctrine 
of mdyd, or ‘illusion,’ is modern, and is contrary to the Védas, and that 
those who advocate it are nothing but disguised Bauddhas: ‘The cause 
of the bondage of soul asserted by those concealed Bauddhas, the modern 
advocates of mdyd, is here refuted*.’ In the third case we have the 
authors specified as Kanabhakshas, ‘ Feeders upon little,’ or upon atoms, 
perhaps; and Akshacharanas, ‘Followers of controversy }' contémptuous 
terms for the Vaiséshikas, who maintain the origin of all things from 
primeval atoms, or monads; and who may therefore be said to deduce 
what is not—the insubstantial forms of things—from actual corpuscular 
substance. 

The fourth or ancient doctrine, that that which is comes from that 
which is, ens from ens, 3 dv from 70 dy, is the converse of the celebrated 
dogma of antiquity, ex nihilo, nihil fit; and although in this place it is 
especially restricted to the relation of certain effects to a certain cause, 
yet it comes to the same thing as regards the world in gencral, the things 
of which cannot be derived from no primary existent thing; agreeably to 
the Sitra of Kapiza; ‘The production of a thing cannot be from no- 
thing}; Ovdey yiverar ex rod wy Gyros: not only according to Democritus 
and Epicurus, but according to all the ancient philosophers, who, Ari- 
stotle states, agreed universally in the physical doctrine, that it was 
impossible for any thing to be produced from nothing: Tovruy ठ 70 piv éx 
my Grav ryiverBar adivarov' wept yup Tavrys Suoryveudvoust Tis कटुक दग्न्त of 
शरणे pices. Phys. I. 4. 





* नवीनामपि raster मायावादिनां areas निराकृतं । 
1 नावस्तुनो वस्तुसिद्धिः । 


83 


IX. 

Errecr subsists (antecedently to the operation of cause); for what 
exists not, can by no operation of cause be brought into existence. 
Materials, too, are selected which are fit for the purpose: every thing 
is not by every means possible: what is capable, does that to which 
it is competent; and like is produced from like. 


BHASHYA. 


From there being no instrumental cause of what exists nol—non-exist- 
ent, what is not—there is no making what is not: therefore offect is. In 
this world there is no making of what is not; as, the production of oil 
from sand: therefore the instrumental cause produces what is, from its 
having been formerly implanted. Hence perceptible principles, which 
are effects, exist in nature. 

Further, from selection of materials—Updddna is ‘ (material) cause,’ 
from the selection of it: thus, in life, a man who desires a thing, selects 
that by which it may be produced; as he who wishes for curds, takes 
milk, not water (for their material cause). Thence effect is. 

Aguin, every thing is not by every means possible, The universal possi- 
bility of every thing is not; as of gold in silver, &c. or in grass, dust, or 
sand. Therefore, from the non-universality of every thing in every thing, 
effect is. 

Again, what is capable does that to which it is competent; os, 9 potter 
is the capable agent; the implements, the lump of clay, the wheel, rag, 
Tope, water, &c. (are capable), by which he makes the jar, which is 
capable of being so made from earth. Thence effect is. 

Lastly; like is produced from like. Such as is the character of cause, 
in which effect exists, such also is the character of effect; as, barley is 
produced from barley, rice from rice. If cffect was not (did not pre-exist), 
then rice might grow from pease; but it does not, and therefore effect is. 

By these five arguments, then, it is proved that intellect and the other 

K 


84 


characteristics do (pre)exist in nature; and therefore production is of 
that which is, and not of that which is not. 


COMMENT. 


Arguments are here adduced to shew that the effects or products of 
nature are comprised in, and coexistent with, their cause or source; con- 
sequently they are proofs of the existence of that primary cause or 
source. 

It is laid down as a general principle, that cause and effect are in all 
cases coexistent, or that effect exists anteriorly to its manifestation ; set- 
kdryyam* in the text meaning ‘existent effect prior to the excrcise of 
(efficient) cause +;' or, as the phrase also of the text asudakarandt} is 
explaincd, ‘If effect prior to the exercise of (efficient) cause does not 
exist, its existence cannot by any means be effected |.’ The expression 
sat-kéryyam, therefore, is to be understood throughout as meaning ‘cx- 
istent effect,’ not the effect of that which exists: and the object of the 
stanza is to establish the existence of causc from its effects, and vot of 
effects from the existence of cause, as Professor Lassen has explained it : 
^ Quenam sint rationcs docetur quibus evincatur mentem ceteraque prin- 
cipia effecta csse a 1 dvr.” Mons. Pauthier (Traduction de la Sinkhya 
Kérikd, 105) is more correct in his view of the general purport of the 
verse; “Ce qui n’existe pas ne peut arriver a l'état d'effet ;” but he has 
mistaken the particulars—the reasons why that which is not can never 
be, for the means which would be fruitlessly exercised for its production : 
it is not that such cxistence cannot be effected “ par la co-opération 
d’aucune cause matérielle,” &c., but because an effect requires an adequate 
material cause, and the like. 


“ सत्कासै। 1 arava प्राक्‌ कारणव्यापारादितिशेषः। fara 
दकरणात्‌। । असचेत्‌ कारणव्यापारात्‌ Ot काये नास्य सङ्खं केनापि 


कंसं शक्यं । 


35 


Not only has the meaning of this verse been misapprchended by its 
translators, but the doctrine which it conveys seems to have becn some- 
what misconceived by high authority. M. Cousin, referring to this pas- 
sage, observes, “ L'argumentation de Kapila est, dans l'histoire de philo- 
sophie, l'antécédent de celle d’nésidéme et Hume. Selon Kapila il n'y a 
pas de notion propre de cause, et ce que nous appelons une cause n'est 
qu’une cause apparente relativement ३ l’effet qui la suit, mais c’cst aussi 
un effet relativement a la cause qui la précéde, laquelle est encore un effet 
par la méme raison, et toujours de méme, de manitre que tout est un 
enchainement necessaire d’effets sans cause v¢ritable et indépendente.” 
M. Cousin then supports his view of the doctrine by selecting some of 
the arguments contained in the text ; as, ^ That which does not exist can- 
not be made to exist ;” and, “ Cause and cffect are of the same nature :” 
and he adds, as a third, that “il ne faut pas s’occuper des causes, mais 
des effets, car I’existence de l'effet mesure l’énergie de Ja cause; donc 
Veffet équivaut la cause.” In this instance, however, he is scarcely justi- 
fied by his authority, whose object is not to dispense with the considera- 
tion of cause altogether, but to prove its existence from that of its effects. 
Kapila, therefore, is far from asserting that “il n'y a pus de cause,” 
although he may so far agree with the philosophers referred to, in recog- 
nising no differcuce between material cause and material effects: for it 
must be remembered, that it is of material effects, of substances, that he 
is speaking. His doctrine is, in fact, that on which Brown enlarges in 
his lectures on power, cause, and effect—that “the forms of a body are 
the body itself; and that all the substances which exist in the universe 
are every thing which truly exists in the universe, to which nothing can 
be added which is not itself a new substance: that there can be nothing 
in the events of nature, therefore, but the antecedents and conscquents 
which are present in them; and that these accordingly, or nothing, are 
the very causes and effects which we are desirous of investigating.” Lect. 
on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, p.175. Kaviza, however, has 
not asserted a series of antecedents and consequents without beginning ; 
and whatever we may conceive of his méla-prakriti, his original and un- 
originated substance whence all substances proceed, it is a fixed point 


36 


from which he starts, and the existence of which he deduces from its 
effects: the mutual and correlative existence of which, with their cause, 
he endeavours to establish by arguments, which, as regarding a curious 
and not uninteresting part of the Sankhya philosophy. it may be allow- 
able to recapitulate a little more in detail. 

1. Asadakarandt ; ‘Because efficient or instrumental cause cannot 
make or produce that which is not.’ Professor Lassen renders this, ‘ E 
nulle nonentis efficacitate, nonens nil efficit. Asat in this passage, how- 
ever, is the object, not the agent; and £arana is employed technically to 
denote the efficicut or operative cause, the energy of which would be 
exerted in vain, unless applied to materials that existed: that which does 
not exist cannot be brought into existence by any agent. It would be 
useless to grind the sesamum for oil, unless the oil existed in it: the same 
force applied to sand or sugar-cane would not express oil. The appear- 
ance or manifestation of the oil is a proof that it was contained in the 
sesamum, and consequently is a proof of the existence of the source 
whence it is derived. This dogma, in its most comprehensive application, 
is of course the same with that of the Grecks, that nothing can come from 
nothing, and makes the creation of the universe dependent upon pre- 
existing materials. Here, however, the application is limited and specific, 
and as Sir Graves Haughton, in his vindication of Mr. Colcbrooke’s ex- 
position of the Védanta philosophy, has justly observed, it means no 
more than that things proceed from their respective sources, and from 
those sources alone; or that certain sequents follow certain antecedents, 
and indicate consequently their existence. 

2. Updddna grahandt; * From taking an adequate material cause: 
a fit material cause must be selected for any given effect or product.’ 
Therc is no difference of opinion as to the purport of upiiddna; ‘Such as 
the substance evolved, such is that from which it is evolved;’ or as 
illustrated by Gavurardpa, ‘He who wishes to make curds will employ 
milk, not water: but this being the case, the effects which we behold, or 
infer, must procecd from something similar to themselves, and conse- 
quently prove the existence of that substance. ‘The relation between 
cause and effect is the generation of effect; but there can be no relation 


37 


(between cause and) a non-existent effect, and therefore effect is*,” and 
consequently so is cause. 

3. ‘From the unfitness of all causes for every effect ;’ sarva sambha- 
vdbhdvdt, There must be an identity of character between the sequent 
and its antecedent, and the existence of one indicates that of the other: 
a jar is made with clay, cloth with yarn; the latter material could not be 
used to fabricate a water-pot, nor clay to weave a garment. If this was 
not the case, all things would be equally fit for all purposes, 

. + ex omnibus rebus 
Ome genus nasci possit. 
It is not, however, here intended to assert, that “idonea causa on est ulla 
quam sed, 76 év,” but that the effect must have a determinate existence 
in that cause, and can be the only effect which it can produce; as in the 
commentary on this expression in the क, Pravachana Bhdshya: ^ य effect 
prior to production do not exist in cause, there would be no rcason why 
cause should not produce one non-existent effect, and not another |.” 

4. Saklasya sakydkarandt; ‘From the execution of that which the 
agent is able to do.’ Active or efficient causes can do only that to which 
they are competent: the potter and his implements fabricate a water-jar, 
not a piece of cloth; they arc not competent to the latter, they are 
capable of the former. If effect did not pre-exist, if it were not insepa- 
table from cause, power, or the exertions of an agent, and the employ- 
ment of means, might derive from any antecedent onc consequence as 
well as another. 

5. Kdranabhdvat ; ‘ From the nature of cause ;’ that is, from its being 
of the same nature or character with effect, and consequently produciug 
its like; or, according to VAcHespatTi, ‘from the identity of cause with 
effect {:’ ‘Cloth is not different from the threads of which it is woven, 


* Sad संबद्धं कारणं काय्येस्य जनकं संबन्धश्च काय्येस्यासतो न सम्भ 
वत्ति तस्मात्सदिति। 1 उत्यते प्राक्‌ कारणे काग्योसन्तायां हि न कोऽ 
पि विशेषोऽस्ति येन कंचिदसनतं जनयेजेतरमिति । 1 साम्यस्य कार 
WAT । 





38 


for it is made up of them*,’ Here, then, we have precisely the discovery 
of modern philosophy, “ that the form of a body is only another name for 
the relative position of the parts that constitute it; and that the forms of 
a body are nothing but the body itself :” (Brown’s Lectures :) a discovery 
which, simple as it may appear to be, dissipated but recently the illusion 
of ‘ substantial forms,’ which had prevailed for ages in Europe. 11 secms, 
however, to have been familiar to Hindu speculation from the remotest 
periods, as the commentator on the S. Pravachana, and the author of the 
S. Chandrika, cite the Védas in its confirmation: ‘Before production 
there is no difference between cause and effect +.’ There is good reason, 
however, to think that the conclusion drawn from the doctrine by the 
Védas was very different from that of the Sankhyas, being the basis of 
Pantheism, and implying that before creation the great First Cause com- 
prehended both cause and effect: the texts illustrating the dogma being 
such as, ‘The existent ri év verily was unevolved{—This, the Existent, 
was, oh pupil, before all things|—The Unborn was verily before all§.’ 
The Sankhyas, like some of the old Grecian philosophers, choose to 
understand by ¢ad, idum, 7 dv, 76 2५, ‘the comprehensive, eternal, mate- 
tial cause." 

From the arguments thus adduced, then, it is concluded that effect is, 
sal kdryam‘; that is, that it exists in, and is the same with, cause; or, as 
Gaurapdpa has it, mahat and the other characteristics of pradhdna are in 
pradhina. Sat kéryam is therefore neither ‘ ponendum est existens (sad) 
emphatice ita dictum 70 éyrws év, per se ens,’ nor ‘cffectus existentis, ab 
existente effectum, effectum a 79 évr::’ the question is, whether effect 
exists or not before production; and not whether it is produced ‘a 76 
Gyr: an 8 76 wy Sve.” It is the production, or appearance, or that which is 
or is not; not the production of any thing sy that which is or is not; 
agreeably to the Sitra of Kaprua: ‘There is no production of that which 


* न पटस्तन्तुभ्यो भिद्यते were) † उत्पततः प्रागपि कार्यस्य 
were: श्रूयते fae द्येवमब्याकृतमासीत्‌ । । सदेव सौम्ये 
दमयासीत्‌ ।  { अजमेवेदममास । ^ सत्‌ काभ्ये । 


89 


is not, as of a man’s horn*—-The production of that which is not is im- 
possible, as would be that of a human horn.’ Agreeably to the same 
doctrine also is the reply made in the Sitras to the objection, that if 
effoct exists already, existence is superfluously given to it; ‘It is absurd 
to produce what is already extantj.’ The answer is, ‘It is not 80; for 
the actual occurrence or non-occurrence of production depends upon 
manifestation |:’ that is, the present existence of an effect is not the pro- 
duction of any thing new, but the actual manifestation of a change of 
form of that which previously existed: something like the notions which 
Aristotle ascribes to ancient philosophers, that all things were together, 
and that their generation was merely a change of condition : {Hy éuoi ra 
mavra kai 7d १८५९०6०८ Tordvde xabérryxey 20०००6०४ : and it is curious cnough 
to find the doctrine illustrated almost in the words of Hobbes: “ Facien- 
dum est quod faciunt statuarii, qui materiam exculpentes, supervacaneam 
imaginem nou faciunt sed inveniunt;” or as Visnydna Buixsnv has it, 
‘The active excrtion of the sculptor produces merely the manifestation 
of the image which was in the stone §.” 

Although however, as identical with cause, and regarded as proofs of 
its existence ; effects or products, in their separated or manifested condi- 
tion regarded as forms only, possess properties different from those of 
their source or cause: these differences are detailed in the next stanza. 


X. 
A piscrete principle is causable, it is inconstant, unpervading, 


mutable, multitudinous, supporting, mergent, conjunct, governed. 
The undiserete one is the reverse. 





* नासटुत्पादो नरणुंगवत्‌ । † नरभृङ्खतुस्यस्यासत उत्यादो न सम्भ 
वति। { नभावि भावयोगश्चेत्‌ । । नाभिष्यक्तिनिवन्धनौ व्यवहारा 
ष्यवहारौ। § शित्वामध्यस्थपरतिमाया लेङ्धिक्ष्यापरेशामिष्यक्तिमाणं | 


40 


BHASHYA. 


Discrete; intellect and the other effects. Causable; that of which 
there is cause; the term कर meaning ‘cause,’ as synonymous with 
updddna, kdrana, and nimitta. Nature is the cause of a discrete prin- 
ciple; therefore discrete principles, as far as the gross elements inclu- 
sive, have cause: thus, the principle intcllect has cause by nature; 
egotism by intellect ; the five rudiments and cleven organs by egotism ; 
ether by the rudiment of sound; air by that of touch; light by that of 
form; water by that of taste; and earth by that of smell. In this way, 
to the gross elements inclusive, a discrete principle hus cause. Again, it 
is tuconstant, because it is produced from another; as a water-jar, which 
is produced from a lump of clay, is not constant. Again, ét is unpervad- 
tng, not going every where: a discrete principle is not like nature and 
soul, omnipresent. Again, ४ mutable; it is subject to the changes 
which the world undergocs: combined with the thirteen instruments, and 
incorporated in the subtile frame, it undergoes worldly vicissitudes, and 
hence is mutable. Jt is multitudinous; it is intellect, egotism, the five 
rudiments, and cleven organs; and the five gross elements are supported 
by the five rudiments. Jé ts mergent ; subject to resolution ; for at the 
period of (general) dissolution, the five gross elements merge into the 
five rudiments ; they, with the eleven organs, into egotism ; egotism into 
intellect ; and intellect merges into nature. Conjunet; conjoined, made 
up of parts, as sound, touch, taste, form, and smell. Governed ; not self- 
dependent ; for intellect is dependent on nature, egotism on intellect, the 
rudiments and organs on egotism, and the gross elements on the rudi- 
ments. In this way the governed or subject discrete principle is ex- 
plained: we now explain the undiscrete. 

The undiscrete one 1s the reverse. An undiscrete principle is the con- 
trary in respect to the properties attributed to the discrete: that, is 
causable; but there is nothing prior to nature, whence follows its non- 
production, and therefore it is without cause. A discrete principle is 
inconstant ; an undiscrete is eternal, as it is not produced. The primary 
elements are not produced from any where; that is, nature. A discrete 


41 


principle is unpervading; nature is pervading, going every where. A 
discrete principle is mutable; nature immutable, from the same omni- 
presence. Discrete principles are multitudinous; nature is single, from 
its causality: ‘Nature is the one cause of the three worlds ;” thence 
nature is single. Discrete principles are dependent; the undiscrete one 
is independent, from its not being an cffect: there is nothing beyond 
nature of which it can be the effect. A discrete principle is mergent; 
the undiscrete immergent (indissoluble), being eternal: intellect and the 
rest, at the period of general dissolution, merge respectively into one 
another ; not so nature; and that therefore is immergent (indissoluble). 
A discrete principle is conjunct (or compound, made up of parts); nature 
is uncompounded, for sound, touch, flavour, form, und odour, are not in 
(crude) nature. Discrete principles are governed ; the undiscrete is inde- 
pendent, it presides over itself. These are the properties in which discrete 
and undiscrete principles are dissimilar: those in which they are similar 
are next described. 


COMMENT. 


It was stated in the eighth stanza, that intellect and the other effects 
of nature werc in some respects similar, and in others dissimilar, to their 
cause: the properties in which the dissimilarity consists are here enu- 
merated. 

The generic term used for the effects or products of primeval nature 
(vyakta*) means, in its ctymological and commonly reccived senses, that 
which is evident or manifest, or that which is individual or specific; 
from vi, distributive particle, and axja, ‘to make cleur or distinct.’ The 
purport is therefore sufficiently well expressed by the equivalent Mr. Cole- 
brooke has selected, ‘ discrete,’ detached from its cause, and having a 
separate and distinct existence. Nature (or primary matter) is the reverse 
of this, or avyakta +, ‘ undiscrete, unseparated, indistinct.’ If natura were 
substituted for ¢ellus, these lines of Lucretius would illustrate the appli- 
cation of the terms in question : 


* व्यक्त ¦ 1 ere । 


42 


Multa modis multis multarum semina rerum 
Quod permixta gerit tellus discretaque tradit. 

Discrete or separated effect or principle (meaning by principle a tatwa, 
or category, according to the Sinkhya classification of the elements of 
existent things) is described by its properties, and they are the same 
which are specified in the original Satra. 1. Hétumat*, ‘having cause, 
or origin ; Aet« implying ‘ material, efficient, and occasional cause ;’ 
2, Anitya}, ‘temporary; for whatever has cause has beginning, and 
whatever has a beginning must have an end. At the same time this is 
to be understood of them in their actual or present form or condition: 
‘Of their own nature (or as one with their cause) they are eternal, but 
they are perishable by their separate conditions}.’ So in the Sétras 
‘destruction’ is explained ‘ resolution into cause |’ 3.‘ Unpervading §:’ 
‘Every one of the effects of nature is not observable in every thing, they 
are dispersed as different modifications’.’ Vydpti is the essential and 
inherent presence of one thing in another, as of heat in fire, oil in 
sesamum, &¢. 4, Sakriya**, ‘ mutable,’ or ‘having action :’ perhaps 
‘movable’ or ‘migratory’ would perfectly express the sensc; for the 
phrase is explained to signify that the effects of nature migrate from one 
substance to another: ‘Intellect and the rest leave one body in which 
they were combined, and enter into the composition of another: this is 
their transition: the transition of the gross clements carth and the rest, 
composing body, is well known t+.’ 5.‘ Multitudinous:’ many, (१८/८८ tf 
being repeated in various objects and persons, as ‘the faculties in dif- 
ferent individuals, and the elements in different forms.’ 6. Supported 


* हेतुमत्‌। † अनित्य, 1 सद्ेकाग्याणां @arat नित्यत्वम्‌ 
वस्याभिविनाश्ित्वं च ¦ ॥ नाशः कारणत्ययः | $ ऋअष्यापि । 
¶ arafcanfa न anni | * सक्रियं । if gerea sort 
देहं त्यजन्ति देहान्तरं्ोपाद्द्त efit तेषां afters: शरीरपृथिव्यादीनां 
च परिस्पन्दः प्रसिङः। Herat ॥ प्रतिपुरुषं बुद्धादीनां भेदात्‌ 
पृथिव्याद्यपि शरीरघटादिभेदेन | 


43 


by, referable to, dsrita*; as an effect may be considered to be upheld by 
its cause, or an individual referable to a species; as trees form a wood. 
7. ‘Mergent,’ linga{; that which merges into, or is lost or resolved into, 
its primary elements, as subsequently explained. Intellect and the rest 
are the Hingas, signs, marks, or characteristic circumstances of nature: 
and when they lose their individuality, or discrete existence, they may 
be said to have becn absorbed by, or to have fused or merged into, their 
original source. Although, therefore, the application of dimga as an attri- 
butive in this sense is technical, the import is not so widely different from 
that of the substantive as might at first be imagined. VAcnyspatt, ex- 
plaining the term, has, ‘ Linga, the characteristic of pradhdna, for these 
principles, buddhi and the rest, are its characteristics, as will be here- 
after explained {:’ and the author of the S. Chandrika has, ‘ Linga is 
that which characterizes, or causes to be known |; it is the anumdpaka §, 
‘the basis of the infcrence:’ ‘For this effect (of nature) is the parent 
of the inference that an undiscrete cause exists{.’ (Sce also Com. on 
ए. 6. p.24.) According to these interpretations, ‘ predicative’ or ‘ charac- 
teristic’ would perhaps be a preferable equivalent ; but ‘ mergent’ or ‘ dis- 
soluble**’ is conformable to the S. Bhdshya. The commentator on the 
S. Pravachaua explains it by both terms ‘inferential’ or ‘ resolvable :’ 
‘ Effect is termed linga, cithcr from its being the ground of inference of 
cause, or from its progress to resolution {{. 8. ‘ Combined, conjunct,’ 
sdvayava {{; explained by VAcuespazt, ‘mixing,’ misrana|||, or ‘junction,’ 
samyoga §§, as the elements combine with one another. It might be said, 
then, that nature is a compound, as its products combine with it; but this 
is not so, for their union with nature is not mere ‘ mixture or conjunction, 





“enfin 1 fei ‡ लिंगं प्रभानस्य यथा चेते genes: 
प्रधानस्य क्ििगमुपरिष्टाच््यति। ॥ लिंगं क्किगयति ज्ञापयति । 
१ अनुमापकं। + भवतिं हि काग्येमिदं कारणस्याग्यकस्यानुमिति 
जनकं । * Saye । 11 कारणानुमापक्त्वाह्लयगमनादाज 
लिगं काम्ये जातं। + सावयव। ॥ मिश्रण! ¢ संयोगः। 


44 


but identification from the sameness of the cause and effect *;’ a notion 
which distinguishes the pradhdua of the Sankhyas from the first princi- 
ples of those Grecian philosophers, who, if their doctrines have been 
rightly represented, taught that substances existed cithcr as distinct par- 
ticles of an aggregate, or component parts of a mixture, in their original 
form. In the Sdnkhya they separate or reunite as onc and the same. 
10. ‘Governed {:’ the effects of nature depend upon its existence, and 
each in its turn produces its peculiar effect or product, in furtherance of 
the influence of nature, or in consequence of its existence, without which 
they would cease to be, and their effects would be null; as, ‘In the effect 
of egotism, which intellect has to produce, the fulfilment of nature is 
regarded ; otherwise intellect, being ineffective, would not be able to 
produce cgotism }.’ 

The properties of nature, or the undiscrete principle, are the reverse 
of these ; it has no cause; it has no end; it is omnipresent; it is immu- 
table; it is single; it is self-sustained; it is the subject, not the predi- 
cate; it is entire, or one whole; it is supreme. 

Although the especial object of the text here is the dissimilarity 
between the effects of nature and their material cause, yet the term 
avyakta applies equally to purusha, or ‘soul,’ also an invisible or undiscrete 
principle; and accordingly soul differs from discrete principles in the 
same circumstances as nature. In the properties, therefore, of non-caus- 
ability, constancy, omnipresence, immutability, singleness, self-support, 
substantiveness, cntircness, and supremacy, soul and nature correspond. 
They differ, however, in other respects, and particularly in those in 
which nature and its effects assimilate, as enumerated in the succeeding 
stanza. 


* न तु mie वुद्यादिभिः संयोसस्तादास्यात्‌ । † परतन्ते | 
i बुद्धा हि स्वस््येऽहंकारे जनयितय्ये प्रकृत्यापूरोऽपेष्यतत अन्यथा efter 
सती नालमहंकारं जनयितुमिति । 


45 


XI. 


A piscrere principle, as well as the chief (or undiscrete) one, has 
the three qualities: it is indiscriminative, objective, common, irra- 
tional, prolific. Soul is in these respects, as in those, the reverse. 


BHASHYA. 


Hus the three qualities: it is that of which goodness, foulness, and 
darkness are the three properties. A discrete principle is indiscrimina- 
tive; discrimination does not beloug to it: that is, it cannot distinguish 
which is a discrete principle and which are propertics, or that this is an 
ox, that is a horse: such as the properties are, such is the principle; such 
as is the principle such are the properties; and the like. Odjectire; 
a discrete principle is 10 be enjoyed (made use of), from its being an 
object to all men. Common; from being the common possession of all. 
like a harlot. Irrational; it docs not comprehend pain, pleasure, or 
dulness. Profific; thus, egotism is the progeny of intellect; the five 
rudiments and eleven organs of egotism; and the five gross elements of 
the five rudiments. These propertics, to prolific inclusive, are specified 
as those of 9 disercte principle; and it is in them that the chief (or undis- 
crete) one is similar: “Such as is a discrete principle, such is the chief 
(or undiscrete) oue.” Therefore as a discrete principle has three quali- 
ties, so has the undiscrete, or that of which intellect and the rest, having 
the three qualities, are the effects: so in this world effect is of the like 
quality with cause, as black cloth is fabricated with black threads. A 
discrete principle is indiscriminative ; so is the chief one, it cannot discern 
that qualities are distinct from nature, that qualities are onc thing, und 
that nature is another; therefore the chief one is indiscriminative. A 
discrete principle is objective; so is the chief one, from its being the 
object of all men. A discrete principle is common ; so is the chief one, 
being common to all things. A discrete principle is irrational ; so is the 
chief one, as it is not conscious of pain, or pleasure, or dulness. Whence 
is this inferred? From the irrationality of its effects; from an irrational 


46 


lump of clay proceeds an irrational water-pot. Thus has (nature) the 
chief one been explained. Soul is in these respects, as in those, the reverse: 
this is now explained. 

Reverse of both the discrete and undiscrete principles. Soul is the 
reverse of both, thus: Discrete and undiscrete have (the three) qualities ; 
soul is devoid of qualities: they are indiscriminative; soul has discrimi- 
nation: they are objects (of sense or fruition); soul is not an object (of 
sense or fruition): they are common; soul is specific: they are irrational; 
soul is rational; for inasmuch as it comprehends, or perfectly knows, 
pleasure, pain, and dulness, it is rational: they are prolific; soul is 
unprolific; nothing is produced from soul. On these grounds soul is said 
to be the reverse of both the discrete and undiscrete principles. 

It is also said, as in thase, referring to the preceding verse ; for as the 
chief (or undiserete) principle is there said to be without cause, &c. such 
is the soul. It is there stated that a discrete principle is causable, incon- 
stant, and the like; and that the undiscrete one is the reverse; that is, it 
has no cause, &c.; 80 soul is without cause, being no production. A 
discrete principle is inconstant; the discrete one is constant; so is soul; 
and it is immutable also, from its omnipresence. A discrete principle is 
iultitudinous ; the undiscrete is single; so is soul. A discrete principle 
is supported ; the undiscrete is unsupported ; so is soul. A discrete prin- 
ciple is mergent ; the undiscrete immergent (indissoluble) ; so is soul ; it 
is not in any way decomposed. A discrete principle is conjunct; the 
undiscrete one uncombined ; so is soul; for there are no (component) 
parts, such as sound, &e., in soul. Finally, discrete principles ure go- 
verned; the undiscrete one is independent; so is soul, governing (or 
presiding over) itself. In this way the common properties of soul and 
nature were described in the preceding stanza; whilst those in which 
they differ, as possession of the three qualities, and the like, are speci- 
fied in this verse. Next follows more particular mention of these three 
qualities, with which both discrete principles and the undiserete one are 
endowed. 

COMMENT. 


In this verse the properties common to crude nature and to its products 


‘ 47 


are specified, continuing the reference to the eighth verse, in which it was 
asserted, that in some respects the effects of nature and nature itself were 
analogous. This being effected, the text proceeds to state that soul has 
not the properties which are common to nature and its products, but 
possesses those which are peculiar to the former; agreeing therefore in 
some respects with crude nature, but dissimilar in every respect to its 
effects or products. 

The three qualities*, or satwa{, ‘ goodness,’ rajast, ‘foulness,’ and 
tamas|, ‘darkness,’ which arg familiar to‘all the systems of Hindu specu- 
lation, are more particularly described in the next verse; soul has them 
not. Pradhéna, ‘ the chief one,’ crude nature, and its products, have not 
discrimination, viveka §, the faculty of discerning the real and cssential 
differences of things, of ‘distinguishing between matter and spirit, of 
knowing self; the exercise of which is the source of final liberation (from 
existence) 4. By the term ‘ objective**’ is intended that which may be 
used or enjoyed, such as the faculties of the mind, and the organs of 
sense; or such as may be perceived by observation, rijuduatt: such 
nature, or pradhdua, may also be considered as the origin of all things 
inferable by reason. Soul, on the contrary, is the observer or enjoyer, as 
afterwards explained. Achétana}f, ‘irrational ; that which does not think 
or feel, unconscious, non-sentient ; as in the Meghudita; ‘ Those afflicted 
by desire seek relief both from rational and irrational objccts|{j;’ explained 
either ‘living and lifeless}§, or ‘knowing and ignorant’; chétund*** 
being defined ‘knowledge of right and wrong,’ or ‘ of what ought, and 
what ought not, to be done t}t.’ 

The general position, that the properties of soul are the reverse of 


“qari † सत्व! 1 रजस्‌ । । तमस्‌ । 5 विवेक। 
‘amen विवेकसानं तथाप्यात्मचिशेष्यकमेव तन्मोरकारणं 
भवतति । “विषय! 1 विज्ञान। ‡ सचेत्तन। ` ॥का 
माज्ञोहि पृकृत्तिकृपणाश्चेतनाचेत्तनेषु 1 $ प्रार्यप्राणिषु। "वि 
वेचकाविवेचकेषु । “““ चेतना । 11 काग्यकाम्विवेचना । 


48 


those of the products of nature, requires, however, some modification in 
one instance. A discrete principle is said to be multitudinous, many, 
aneka*; consequently soul should be single, eka {; and it is so, accord- 
ing to the $. Bhdshyaj. On the other hand, the S$. Tatwa Kaumudi 
makes soul agree with discrete principles, in being multitudinous: ‘ The 
properties of non-causability, constancy, and the rest, are common to 
soul and nature; multitudinousness is a property common to (soul and) 
an undiscrete principle|.’ The $, Chandriké confirms the interpretation, 
‘The phrase tathé cha implies that (soul) is analogous to the undiscrete 
principle in nou-causulity and the rest, and analogous to disercte princi- 
ples in manifold enumeration {= This is, in fact, the Sankhya doctrine, 
as subseqacutly laid down by the text, ver. 18, and is conformable to the 
Sitra of Kariva; ‘ Multitude of souls is proved by variety of condition? ;’ 
that is, ‘the virtuous are born again in heaven, the wicked are regenc- 
rated in hell; the fool wanders in error, the wise man is set free **.’ 
Either, therefore, GaurarAva has made a mistake, or by his ¢ka is to be 
understood, not that soul in gencral is one only, but that it is single, or 
several, in its different migrations; or, as Mr. Colcbrooke renders it 
(R. A. 8. Trans. vol. I. p. 31), ‘individual. So in the Sétras it is said, 
‘that there may be various unions of one soul, according to difference of 
receptacle, as the etherial element may be confined in a varicty of ves- 
sels{t. This singleness of soul applies therefore to that particular soul 
which is subjected to its own varied course of birth, death, bondage, and 
liberation ; for, as the commentator observes, ‘ one soul is born, not 


* अनेक । 1 क । laa व्यक्षमेकमव्यक्तं तणा पुमा 
नेकः । ll अहेतुमक्वनित्यत्वादि प्रधानसाधम्म्येमस्ि पुरुषस्य एवम 
नेकत्वे व्यक्तसाधम्म्यं | ९ तथा चाव्यक्तसरूपोऽप्यहेतुमन्वादिना एवं 


श्यक्तसरूपोऽप्यनेकसं स्येति । + जन्मादि व्यवस्यातः पुरुष बहुं । 
** पुण्यवान्‌ स्वर्गे जायते पापी नरके अल्लो अम्यते जानी मुच्यते । 
11 उपाधिमेदेऽथेङ्स्य नानायोग आकाशस्य घटादिभिः | 


49 


another (in a regenerated body)*.’ The singleness of soul therefore, as 
asserted by Gaurapdna, is no doubt to be understood in this sense. 


Xi. 


Tue qualities respectively consist in pleasure, pain, and dulness; 
are adapted to manifestation, activity, and restraint; mutually domi- 
neer; rest on each other; produce each other; consort together; 
and are reciprocally present. ‘ 


BHASHYA. 


The qualities goodness, foulness, and darkness, are severally the same 
as what is agreeable, what is disagreeable, and what is indifferent: thus 
goodness is all that is pleasure, priti meaning ‘ pleasure ;’ being one with 
(or consisting of) that (pleasure): foulness is one with, or consists of, 
disagreeableness (apriti): darkness consists of, or is the same with, dul- 
ness; vishdda meaning méha, ‘ dulness, stupidity.’ Next, are adapted 
to manifestation, &c.; artha signifying ‘ competency’ or ‘fitness.’ Good- 
ness, then, is for the sake of manifestation ; it is fit for, or adapted to it: 
foulness is for activity; darkness for restraint: that is, the qualities are 
connected with, or possessed of, manifestation, action, and inertia. They 
mutually domineer: they are mutually paramount, sustaining, productive, 
cooperative, and coexistent. Thus, they are said to domineer mutually ; 
that is, they severally prevail or predominate over each other, or they are 
displayed by the properties of pleasure, pain, or dulness. When good- 
ness is dominant, it overpowers foulness and darkness by its own proper- 
ties, and is exhibited or identified with light and joy. When foulness 
predominates, it overpowers goodness and darkness, and exists in pain 
and action. When darkness triumphs, it suppresses goodness aud foul- 





* टकः Gen जायते नापरः । 


50 


ness, and is supreme as one with insensibility and inaction. So they rest 
on each other : the qualities combine with one another, like binary atoms. 
They produce each other, as the lump of clay generates the carthen jar. 
They consort together, as males and females cohabit : as it is said, “ Good- 
ness is the consort of foulness, foulness of goodness; darkness is called 
the consort of both :” that is, they are respectively associates. They are 
reciprocally present: they abide or exist reciprocally, according to the 
text, “qualities abide in qualities” (that is, the same qualities may be 
regarded as different, according to their different effects): thus, a beauti- 
ful and amiable woman, who is a source of delight to every one else, is 
the causc.of misery to the other wives of her husband, and of bewilder- 
ment (insensibility) to the dissolute: and in this manner she is the cause 
of the influence of all three qualities. Thus also, a king, assiduous in 
protecting his people, and curbing the profligate, is the cause of happi- 
ness to the good, of misery and mortification to the bad: here foulness 
(activity) produces the effects of goodness and darkness. So darkness, 
by its investing nature, produces the effects of goodness and foulness, as 
clouds, overshadowing the heavens, cause delight upon earth, animate by 
their rain the active labours of the husbandman, and overwhelm absent 
lovers with despair. In this manner the three qualities are reciprocally 
present (or perform the functions of one another). 


COMMENT. 

The three qualities are here described, by their effects and relations ; 
by the production of pleasure, pain, and indifference; and by the man- 
ner in which they are detached or combined in their operations and 
influence. 

The terms priti and apriti are here used as synonymes of sukha, ^ plea- 
sure,’ and dukha, ‘ pain ;’ vishdda as a synonyme of moha, ^ bewilderment, 
stupefaction, dullness, or insensibility.’ The composition of dima with 
these terms, pritydtmaka, implies ‘essential or inseparable presence,’ like 
that of life or soul in the living body. An exact equivalent for such a 
compound can scarcely perhaps be supplied, but the sense may be con- 
veyed by such expressions as ‘ consists of, comprehends, is one or iden- 


51 


tical with,’ and the like. Atma is here used also to shew that the proper- 
ties have positive existence ; that is, pleasure is not the mere absence of 
pain; pain is not the mere absence of pleasure; as, ‘ Negatives could not 
be essential ingredients in any thing: pleasure, pain, and insensibility 
are therefore entities ; the word déma implying being, existence, existent 
nature, or property *. 

The absolute and relative influence of the several qualities is suffi- 
ciently illustrated by Gaurapdpa; but VAcnespati understands the text 
as in some respects differently constructed. Instead of considering the 
last term, vritiaya}, as a distinct condition, anyonyavrittayat, expounded 
in the S. Bhdshya, parasparam varltanté |, they are reciprocally present,” 
he interprets vritti by kriyd, ‘act, operation, function,’ and compounds it 
with each of the foregoing terms ९. In all other respects’ his explanation 
of the terms coincides with that of the elder commentator. The passage 
quoted by Gaurardoa is cited by Vachesrati, with some difference, from 
the Védas: ‘As it is said in the dgama, all universally present are the 
associates of cach other: goodness is the partner of foulness, foulness of 
goodness; both are the companions of darkness, and darkness is said to 
be the associate of both. Their original connexion, or disjunction, is 
never observed.’ The Chandriké concurs with the S. Tatwa Kaumudi 
in the explanation of vritéé**. This commentary likewise offers some 
additional interpretation of the terms priti, &c. Thus priti is said to 


* नेत्तरेतराभावाः सुलादयोऽपि हु भावाः । आत्मशष्टस्य भाववच 
नात्‌। 1 faqaqere । { अन्योन्यवृ्षयः । ॥ परस्परं 
wea ९ सा च (gf) प्र्येकमभिसब्ष्यते यथान्योन्याभिभववृक्षयो 
$न्योन्याश्रयवृहयोऽन्योन्यजननवृज्चयोऽन्योन्यमिधुनवृहयः। » भवति चा 
गमे । न्योन्यमिधुनाः स्र सक्रैवगामिनश्चवै रजसो fag ad सत्रस्य 
मिधुनं रजः तमसश्चापि मिथुने ते सत्वरजसी उभे उभयोः सत्वरजसोभिं 
शुनं तम उच्यते मैषामादिः संप्रयोगो विप्रयोगो वोपलभ्यते। wT 
न्यपदं वृक्िपदं च चतुुन्वेति । 


52 


comprise ‘rectitude, gentleness, modesty, faith, patience, clemency, wis- 
dom :’ apriti, besides ‘ misery,’ implies ‘ hatred, violence, envy, abuse, 
wickedness :’ and vishdda is not only ‘insensibility,’ but ‘ tardiness, fear, 
infidelity, dishonesty, avarice, and ignorance. Whencver either of these 
is observed, it is referable to the corresponding quality *.’ 

In speaking of qualities, however, the term guna is not to be regarded 
as an insubstantial or accidental attribute, but as a substance discernible 
by soul through the medium of the faculties. It is, in fact, nature, or 
prakriti, in one of its three constituent parts or conditions, unduly promi- 
nent; nature entire, or unmodified, being nothing more than the three 
qualities in equipoise, according to the Sitra, ^ Prakriti is the equal state 
of goodness, foulness, and darkness † २ on which the commentator re- 
marks, ^ Sa/wa and the rest are “things,” not specific properties, from 
their being subject to combination or disjunction, and from their having 
the propertics of lightness, heaviness, and strength {:’ and again, ‘ From 
the construction of intellect and the rest endowed with the three proper- 
ties, like cords wherewith to bind the victim the soul ||.’ So in the 6. Sdra, 
“Goodness and the rest are not the faculties of that (prakriti), being of 
the same nature ^ Such expressions as “ qualities of nature” are to be 
understood (in the same sense) as (the term) “the trees of a forest”";’ 
that is, the forest is nothing different from the trees of which it is the 
aggregate, although particular trees or clumps may sometimes be indivi- 





* अच प्रीतिः सुखमुपलष्षणएमाजवमादेवहीशडा छमानुकम्याज्ञाना 
दीनां । अप्रीतिटुःखमुपत्षणं प्र्ेषदरोहमतसरनिन्दानिकृतीनां | विषादो 
मोह उपल्णं विप्रलम्भभयनालिक्य कोटिस्यकाप्येण्याज्ञानाटीनां यथे 
तदुपलभ्यते तथ ताहग्गुणः परत्येतश्य इति भावः । 1 सत्बजस्तमसां 
साम्यावस्था प्रकृतिः । ! सत्वादीनि द्ष्याणि न वैशेषिका गुणाः संयो 
गवियोगव्ात्‌ तपुत्ववत्तत्गुरू्वादिधम्मेतवाञ्च । । पुरुषपशु बन्धकनि 
गुणात्मकमहदादि रब्ुनिम्मातृतवाञ्च। ^ सत्वादीनामततद्वम्मेतवं तदूपत्वात्‌। 
१ प्रकुतेगुणा इत्यादि वाक्यं तु वनस्य Gat इति वोध्यं । 


58 


dualized. In like manner nature is not different from the qualities, but 
is the aggregate of them. ‘Ingredients or constituents of nature,’ there- 
fore, would be a preferable term perhaps to ‘quality ` but ‘quality’ is the 
more ordinary acceptation of the word guna, and it may therctore be 
used, remembering only the distinction made by the Sankhyas of its 
materiality, as a constituent part of nature itself; the qualitics being, in 
fact, only the conditions of things, and therefore not separable from the 
things themselves. It may be thought possible that there is some con- 
nection between the gunas which are the constituents of prakriti, and the 
qualitics, passions, or affections of primary matter of the older philoso- 
phers, alluded to by Aristotle; from the changes produced by which on 
one unaltered substance all things originated : Tis pty णोप trronevotons, 
roig Je mdBere perafaddodmys, Todo aTuyeiov 1. 1111111. 111 
eva. Mctaph. 1. 3. Another analogy inay be conjectured in the identifi- 
cation of the two ganas, sata and rajas, with priti, ‘affection, aud apriti, 
‘aversion,’ as they thus correspond with the gaia and vcicos, the ^ love” 
and ‘strife’ of Empedocles, as the principles of creation; respectively 
the source of what is good or evil. 

The sense in which the several terms for the three gunas is employed 
is sufficiently clear from the explanation given of them in the text; and 
the meaning of the equivalents which Mr. Colebrooke has assigned them 
must be understood according to the same interpretation. Prof. Lassen 
renders thein essentia, impetus, and caligo; which, similarly understood, 
are equally unobjectionable: but as the name of a ‘ quality,’ safwa, is not 
perhaps well rendered by ‘ essence,’ or even by ‘existence, which is its 
literal purport, ‘ goodness,’ denoting exemption from all imperfection, 
seems to be preferable. Jmpetus is rather the effect of rajas, than the 
quality ; and the term ‘ foulness,’ derived from its etymology from ray, 
‘to colour or stain,’ will better comprehend its characteristic results. The 
quality bears a striking analogy to the perturbatio of the Stuics, and 
might be rendered by that word, or by ‘ passion,’ in its generic accepta- 
tion. ‘ Darkness,’ or caligo, expresses both the literal and technical 
signification of tamas. 


54 


XI. 


Goopness is considered to be alleviating and enlightening: foul- 
ness, urgent and versatile: darkness, heavy and enveloping. Like a 
lamp, they cooperate for a purpose (by union of contraries). 


BHASHYA. 


Goodness is alleviating, &c.—When goodness predominates, the frame 
is light, the intellect is luminous, and the senscs arc acute. Foulness is 
urgent and versatile.—What urges, urgent, exciting : as a bull, upon secing 
another bull, exhibits vehement excitement; that is the effect of foulness. 
Foulness is also seen to be versatile ; that is, a person under its influence 
is capricious. Darkness is heavy and enveloping —Where darkness pre- 
vails, the members of the body are heavy, the senses obtuse, or inade- 
quate to the performance of their functions. But here it may be said, If 
these qualities are contrarics to one another, what effect can they produce 
by their several purposes, and how therefore can it be said, ‘dey cooperate, 
like a lamp, for a (common purpose). Like a lamp, their operation is for a 
(common) purpose: as a lamp, which is composed of the opposites, a 
wick, oil, and flame, illuminates objects, so the qualities of goodness, 
foulness, and darkness, although contrary to one another, effect a (com- 
mon) purpose. 

This question involves another. It was said (in ver. 11) that a discrete 
principle, as well as the chief onc, has the three qualities, and is indis- 
criminative, objective, and the like. Admitting this to be true of the 
chief one (or nature), how is it ascertained that intellect and the rest have 
also the three qualities, and are indiscriminative, and the like?’ This is 
next explained. 

COMMENT. 

The description of the three qualities is continued in this verse. 

Goodness is ulleviating ; laghu, ‘light ; it is matter, elastic and clevat- 
ing, generating upward and lateral motion, as in the ascent of flame, and 
the currents of the air. It is the cavfeé of‘active and perfect functionality 


55 


also in the instruments of vitality*; enlightening, prakdsakam, ‘ making 
manifest,’ the objects of the senses. The term ishiam, meaning ordinarily 
+ wished, desired,’ imports in the text merely drishiam, ‘seen, regarded, 
considered’— by the Sankhya teachers +.’ Foulness is urgent and versa- 
tile—The qualities of goodness and darkness are both inert and inopera- 
tive, even with regard to their own peculiar consequences ; and it is only 
by the restless activity and stimulating agency of the quality of foulness 
that they arc roused to action; upashtambhakam being here explained 
to signify ‘stimulating, impelling,’ udyotakam, prédakam I, contrary to its 
usual sense of ‘opposing, hindering.’ It might be supposed to imply 
some relation to the primitive shiabhé§, ‘stop, hinder, oppose, be stupid ;’ 
inasmuch as the idea appears to be that of action consequent upon 
obstruction, or txertia, ‘reaction.’ Thus, as illustrated in the 9, Bhdshya, 
a bull displays excitement on beholding, or being opposed by, another. 
The $, Tatwa Kaumudi has, ‘The qualities goodness and darkness, on 
account of their own inertia, are inoperative, in regard to the exercise of 
their own effects, until excited by foulness. Having been roused from 
inactivity, they are made to put forth vigour and energy; and therefore 
foulness is said to be urgent{.’ The Chandrikd is to the same effect: 
‘The meaning is this: From the production of combination and activity 
by foulness, the definition of that quality is excitement and versatility **.” 
1t is not necessary, however, to take into consideration the sense of the 
primitive shiabhi, for upashiambhaka is not derived from that root, but 
from stambhu}}, a Sautra root ; which therefore, although the meanings of 


* करणानां वृ्तिपटुत्वहेतुतमोघवं । 1 सांख्याचभ्पिः । ¡उप 
ware! । sere bees ऽ टमि । " सत्वतमसी स्वयम 
कियता स्वकाम्यप्वृ्चिं प्रत्यवसीदततो Greatest | खवसादात्‌ Weary 
Sere प्रयत्नं कार्ते | तदिदमुक्तमुपष्टम्भकं रज इति 1 *” रजसेव 
dae क्रिययोरूपल्कम्भात्‌ प्रेडकतवं ce लक्षणमितिभावः 
tt स्तम्भु । 


56 


shtabhi are usually also assigned to it, may take the import required by 
the text, of ‘ urging’ or ‘exciting.’ 

The quality of darkness is ‘heavy, gurv, causing sluggishness of body 
and dulncss of mind. It is also varanaka, ‘ surrounding, enveloping,’ so 
as to obstruct light, retard motion, &c. 

But these qualities, although contraries, cooperate for a common pur- 
pose; as the cotton, the oil, and the flame, although mutually destruc- 
tive, combine in a lamp to give light. The common object of the qualities 
is the fulfilment of the purpose of soul, as is subsequently explained. 


XIV. 

Inpiscromnarivensss and the rest (of the properties of a discrete 
principle) are proved by the influence of the three qualities, and the 
absence thereof in the reverse. The undiscrete principle, moreover, 
(as well as the influence of the three qualities,) is demonstrated by 
effect possessing the properties of its cause (and by the absence of 


contraricty ). 5 
BHASHYA. 

That which is the property of indiscriminativeness and the rest is 
proved froin the influence of the three qualities in mahat and the other 
discrete principles: but this is not proved in the undiscrete ; therefore it 
is said, by the absence the reverse of it: the reverse of it; the absence; the 
non-existence of the reverse of that: theuce the undiscrete principle is 
established ; as, where there are threads, there is cloth; the threads are 
not one thing, and the cloth another. Why so? From the absence of the 
reverse (they are not contraries to each other). In this manner the dis- 
crete and undiserete principles are established. The latter is remote, the 
former is near: but he who perceives discrete principles, perceives the 
undiscrete one also, as there is no contraricty between them. Hence also 
the undiscrete one is proved by effect possessing the properties of cause in 
this world: such as is the nature of thé cause, such is that of the effect ; 


57 


thus, from black threads black cloth is made. In the same manner, as 
the characteristics of intellect and the rest are their being indiscrimina- 
tive, objective, common, irrational, prolific, such as they are, such the 
undiserete is proved essentially to be. From the influence of the three 
qualities, indiscriminativeness and the rest are proved to be in discrete 
principles; and from there being no difference between them (and the 
undiscrete), and from essential identity of the properties of cause and 
effect, the undiscrete principle also is demonstrated. 

But it is replied, this cannot he truc ; for in this world that which is not 
apprehended is not ; but the undiscrete one is, although not applicable. 


COMMENT. ५ 


It was stated in ver. 8, that mahat and the other effects of prakrai 
were in some respects like, and in others unlike, to their original. The 
circumstances in which they were dissimilar were specified in ver. 10, 
and those in which they agreed in ver. 11. In the latter stanza, the first 
of the concurrent properties that was named was that of their possessing 
the threc qualities; and in verses 12 and 13 it was explained what was 
meant by the three qualities. In the present stanza it is asserted, that as 
the effects of prakriti have the three qualities, thcy must have, as a neces- 
sary consequence, the other properties, want of discrimination and the 
rest, cnumerated in ver. 11; and that as they have them, their origin, or 
prakriti, most have them also, as there is no essential difference between 
the properties of cause and effect. 

The influence of goodness, foulncss, and darkness, or the varied affec- 
tions und conditions of all substances, is the obvious cause of perplexity, 
or want of discrimination, &c.; being, in fact, the same state or condition. 
Traigunya is the influence or any consequence of the three gunas. The 
next expression is variously interpreted. 

Mr. Colebrooke renders tad viparyaya abdodt*, ‘and from the absence 
thereof in the reverse ;’ that is, the absence of want of discrimination, &c. 


* त््िपग्येयानावात्‌ | 


58 


in that subject which is the reverse of the material products of nature, 
as, for instance, soul, is a negative proof of their existence in the former. 
The properties of contraries are contrary. Soul and matter are contra- 
ries, and consequently their properties are mutually the reverse of each 
other: but one property of soul is freedom from the three qualities, whilst 
that of matter, or any material product of prakriti, is their possession ; 
consequently the former must be capable, and the latter incapable, of 
discrimination. The same may be said of the other properties of mahat 
and the rest. Thus Vacuespati observes: ‘It (the assertion) is first 
plainly or affirmatively expressed in the natural order: it is then put 
negatively, or in the inverted order; from the absence thereof in the reverse; 
from the ‘absence of the three qualities in soul, as the reverse of the pro- 
ducts of prakriti, in regard to want of discrimination and the like *.’ The 
S. Chandrikd las a similar explanation : ‘ The reverse of that want of 
discrimination ; where that is that is the reverse (of mahat, &c.), or soul: 
for in soul there are not the three qualities; or, where there is not want 
of discrimination there arc not the three qualitics, as in soul+:’ inti- 
mating, therefore, that tad, न thercof, may refer cither to the three quali- 
ties tratgunya, or to want of discrimination, &c. 

There is, however, another sense attached to the expression ; and the 
reverse is understood not to signify soul, or any thing contrary to mahat 
and the rest, but to imply contrariety or incompatibility in the properties 
of their origin, or prakriti: that is, indiscriminativencss and the rest are 
the properties of muhat, Kc. not only from their possessing the three 
qualitics, but because there is nothing contrary to indiscriminativeness, 
xc. in prakriti. This proposition is indicated by Vacnesrats, who, after 
explaining the passage as above, adds, ‘Or it may be understood as 








* स्फुटत्वाटन्वयेनोक्ं | ्यतिरेकेणाह । तद्िपय्येयाभावाद्वियेक्धाटिवि 
पर्यये पुरूषे चेगुरयाभावात्‌ | † तस्याविवेकिवस्य विषम्येयो यज 
सस्तदिपग्येय आत्मा तज pera च यज्ाविवेकितवाभावस्तथ 
pana आत्मवदिति | 


59 


taking for its two subjects vyakia and avyakta (discrete and undiscrete 
matter), and by the inverted proposition (or negatively) asserting that 
there is no reason (to the contrary) arising from one being exempt from 
the three qualities*.’ The same is more explicitly stated by GaurarApa. 
The absence of indiscriminativeness, he observes, as deduced from the 
influence of the three qualities, relates in the first instance to vyakta, 
‘discrete matter,’ not to avyakta, or ‘indiscrete:’ but the same must 
apply to the latter also, because there is no property belonging to it 
which is incompatible with, or the reverse of, the properties of the vyakta, 
or ‘discrete matter,’ mahat, &c.; as in the case of the cloth and the 
threads of which it is woven, there is no incompatibility between them. 

The first portion of the stanza having shewn, then, either sitnply that 
discrete matter is possessed of indiscriminativeness, &c. or that both it and 
indiscrete matter are equally devoid of discrimination, proceeds to draw 
the conclusion that such an indiscrete cause must exist, endowed with 
properties similar to those of its indiscrete effects, because there is no 
difference of property between cause and effect; agreeably to the Siitra, 
‘The three qualities, insensibility and the rest, belong to both (prakrite 
and its products)+:' and VAcuespati observes, ‘ Effect is secn to be the 
same in its properties with cause. As the properties of the threads, &c. 
are identical with those of cloth and the like, so the attributes of pleasure, 
pain, and insensibility, evidenced in the effects, which are distinguished 
as mahat and the rest, are proofs that similar conditions must belong to 
their cause: the existence of pradhdna or uvyakta, as 2 cause, of which 
pleasure, pain, and insensibility are the conditions, is consequently esta- 
blished {.’ 





* छथ वा व्यक्ताव्यक्ते weg खन्वयाभावेन चैगुणुयावीत ण्व देतु 
वैक्षव्यः । 1 चिगुणाचेत्तनावादिदयोः। tf ard हि कारणगुणात्मकं 
हृष्टं । यथा तंवादिगुणात्मकं पटादि तथा महदारिल्लक्षशेनापि कर्ण 
मुखदुःखमोहरूपेण स्वकारणगतसुखदुःखमोहात्मना भवितव्यं तथा च तत्‌ 
कारणं सुखटुःखमोहातङं प्रधानमव्यक्ं सिद्धं भवति । 


60 


XV. 


Since specific objects are finite; since there is homogeneousness ; 
since effects exist through energy; since there is a parting (or issue) 
of effects from cause, and a reunion of the universe,— 


BHASHYA. 

The undiscrete principle is cause: this is the completion of the con- 
struction of the sentence. Since specific objects are finite: as in the world, 
wherever the agent is, his limits are observed: thus, a potter makes 
certain jats with certain portions of clay ; so with intellect: intellect and 
the other characteristics (of nature) are finite, as specific effects of it. 
Intellect is onc, egotism is one, the subtile rudiments are five, the organs 
eleven, the gross elements five: from the limitation of these species 
nature is their cause, which produces finite discrete principles. If nature 
were not the cause, then discrete principles would have no limit: from 
the measure (or limit) of specific objects, therefore, nature exists, whence 
disercte principles are produced. Since there is homogencousness : as in 
the world. that which is notorious is observed ; for having seen a religious 
student engaged in sacred study, it follows that his parents were assuredly 
of the Brahmanical tribe: so having observed that mahat and the other 
characteristics have the three qualitics, we conclude what their cause 
must be; aud in this way from homogeneousness the chicf one cxists. 
Since effects exist through energy: in life, that which is effective in any 
thing is active in the same: a potter is able to make a jar, therefore he 
makes a jar, not a piece of cloth. Since there is a parting of effect from 
cause: the chief one is cause; that which makes is cause, that which is 
made is effect: the separation of cause and effect: thus; a jar is compe- 
tent to hold curds, honey, water, milk ; not so is its cause, or the lump of 
clay; but the lump of clay produces the jar, the jar does not produce the 
lump of clay. So having observed intellect and the other effects, it is 
inferred that cause must have been separated, of which these discrete 
principles are detached portions. Again, since there is a reunion of the 


81 


universe (vaiswartpa). Viswa here means ‘the world;’ ripa, ‘ indivi- 
dualization’ (or specific form): the abstract condition of the form of the 
world is the universe : from its reunion, nature exists (as cause); whence 
there is no mutual separation of the five gross elements, earth &c., com- 
posing the three worlds; or, the three worlds are comprised in the gross 
elements. The five gross elements are earth, water, fire, air, ether; which 
at the season of general dissolution return in the order of creation to a 
state of non-separation, or into the modified five subtile rudiments: they 
and the eleven organs reunite in egotism; egotism resolves into intellect ; 
and intellect into nature. Thus the three worlds, at the period of general 
dissolution, reunite in nature; and from such reunion of the discrete and 
undiscrete principles, like that of curds and milk, it follows that the 
undiscrete principle is cause. 


COMMENT. 


The sentence is incomplete, the government being in the first member 
of the following verse; kdranam asti-avyaktam, ‘There is (a general) 
cause (which is undiscrete).’ Hitherto the subjects discussed have been 
the existence of effects, and their correspondence or disagreement with 
their cause. It is now shewn that cause exists imperceptible, or un- 
discrete. 

From specific effects being finite: from the certain or definite measure 
of the varieties of discrete principles, a8 one intellect, one egotism, five 
rudiments, and the like. If there were no certain and defined cause, the 
effects would be indefinite and unlimited: the water-jar, however, must 
be limited by the earth of which it consists, and which, as a distinct body, 
is no longer extant. ‘ Homogencousness,’ samanwcya, is defined ‘the com- 
mon nature of different things*,’ as the property of generating pain, plea- 
sure, and dulness, which is possessed by intellect and the rest. Effects 
exist through energy: ‘through the energy, ability, or power of cause they 





* भिजानां समान रूपता | 


62 


become active*:' A parting, or issue, of effect from cause, and final 
reunion of the separated cffect. Vatswariépa is merely a synonyme of 
kérya, ‘ effect; that which is of various, or every, sort of form, or nature. 
The evolution of effect from unscparated cause is illustrated by comparing 
nature to a tortoise, the limbs of which are at one time protruded, and at 
another retracted within the shell: ‘As when the limbs which are in the 
body of the tortoise protrude, then they are distinguished, or (it is said) 
this is the body, those are thc limbs: so when they are withdrawn into it 
they are undistinguished (from the body)}.' S. Tatwa Kaumudi. In like 
manner the water-jar or the diadem exist in the lump of clay or of gold, 
but are distinguished from it only when individually manifested ; they 
become mere clay or gold again on losing their detached condition: thus 
carth and the rest exist in the subtile rudiments; those and the organs of 
sense and action in egotism; cgotism in intellect; and intellect in nature: 
when manifested or put forth they arc separated or distinguished from 
their several sources, but at the period of universal dissolution lose their 
distinct form, and become progressively one with their common original: 
the existence of which therefore, as their undiscrete cause, is proved both 
by their appearance or separation, and disappearance or reunion. 





शशा. 

Tuene is a general cause, which is undiscrete. It operates by 
means of the three qualities, and by mixture, by modification, as 
water; for different objects are diversified by influence of the several 
qualities respectively. 


* कारणक्रक्षितः काय्य प्रवेते । fan कृम्मशरीरे ware 
निःसरन्ति विभज्य इदं कृम्मैशरीरमेतान्यस्याङ्कानीति | एवं निविश्मा 
नानि तस्मिजऽव्यक्तीभवन्ति | ~ 


68 


BHASHYA. 

That which is known as the undiscrete principle is the cause; whence 
intellect and the other effects proceed. Jt operates by means of the three 
qualities That in which are the three qualities, goodness, foulness, and 
darkness, is the (aggregate of the) three qualities. What then is that? 
The equipoised condition of goodness, foulness, and darkness, is the chief 
one (nature). Also, from mixture.—In like manner as the Ganges unites 
into one river the three streams that descend upon the head of Raddra, so 
the (aggregate of the) three qualities, the undiscrete, produces a single 
discrete principle; or, as many threads combined form one piece of 
cloth, so the undiscrete gencrates intellect and the rest from ‘the inter- 
weaving of the three qualities: and thus from the influence of the three 
qualities and their aggregation the discrete world proceeds. But if discrete 
principles proceed from one undiscrete, then one form should be common 
10 8]. This objection is invalid ; for it is by modification, like water, from 
a variety in the receptacles of the several qualities, that the three worlds, 
derived from one undiscrete principle, assume different conditions of 
being. The gods are united with pleasure, mankind with pain, animals 
with dulness; so that a discrete principle, emanating from one nature, 
becomes modified, like water, according to the diversified receptacles of 
the qualities. Prati prati implies ‘ several order:’ gund sraya, ‘a recep- 
tacle of the qualities,’ by the difference of that receptacle (according to 
that several receptacle) in which it is lodged. Discrete principles are 
varied from modification ; as the simple element water, when fallen from 
the atmosphere, is diversely modified as various fluids, according to its 
various combinations, so from one pradhdra proceed the three worlds. 
which are no longer of one (uniform) character. In the divinities the 
quality of goodness predominates, foulness and darkness are inert; there- 
fore they are supremely happy. In men the quality of foulness abounds, 
and goodness and darkness are incrt; therefore they are supremely mi- 
serable. In animals goodness and foulness are inactive, and darkness 
prevails; and therefore they are supremely insensible. 

In these two stanzas the existence of nature (pradhdua) has been deter- 
mined: in the next place, that of soul is to be established. 


64 


COMMENT. 


Jn this verse, besides the conclusion drawn from the arguments in the 
preceding stanza, it is here explained how nature, which is one, produces 
diversificd effects. This is said to be through the influence of the three 
qualities, the combination or several predominance of which in various 
objects is attended with a modification and diversity of that which is 
essentially one and the same. 

‘Modified condition,’ according to Vacnesrati, ‘is the character of the 
three qualities, which are never for a moment stationary*,’ except when 
creation is not: and from this constant vicissitude ensues combination 
in different proportions, or the predominance of one or other in different 
objects ; for they are always combined, or mixed, in different proportions. 
This is the mixture, the blending, or contention of the qualities which the 
text intends. Hence proceeds the modification of the original matter ; as 
rain water, falling upon different trees, is modified as the juice of their 
different fruits. ‘As simple water shed by the clouds, coming into con- 
tact with various situations, is modified as sweet, sour, bitter, pungent, 
or astringent, in the character of the juice of the cocoa-nut, palm, bél 
karanja, and wood-apple t.’ S. Tutwa Kaumudi. So, according to Cud- 
worth, the Italic philosophers maintained that the forms and qualities of 
bodies were only different modifications of primary matter. “The same 
numerical matter,” he observes, ‘ differently modified, causing different 
phantasms in us, which are therefore vulgarly supposed to be forms and 
qualities in the things, as when the sume water is successively changed and 
transformed into vapour, snow, hail, and ice.” Intellect. System, IIT. 426, 

It may be doubted if the latter portion of the verse should not be 


* परिणामस्वभावा fey नापरिणम्य छणमवतिष्न्ते। 1 यथा 
वारिदमुक्तमुद्कमेकरसमपि तच्ङ्रूभिविकरानासाद्च तारिकेलतात्टीविस्व 
चिरविस्वामत्क कपित्थफत्करसत्तया परिणतमपि मधुरामुतिक्षक्टु कषाय 
त्रया विकल्यते | 


65 


preferably rendered, ‘ By modification, like water, according to the recep- 
tacle, or subject, of the qualities + Such is evidently the sense in which 
the $. Bhdshya understands it, and such appears to be that of the above 
illustration ; the simple water being modified, as sweet, sour, &c., accord- 
ing to the tree by which it is absorbed, and the fruit of which it consti- 
tutes the juice. So certain objects are fitted for certain qualities; as the 
gods for goodness, men for foulness, animals for darkness; and nature is 
modified in them accordingly ; that quality predominating which is con- 
formable to the receptacle: the question here being, not the origin of 
things, but of their different properties. VAcuespati, however, seems to 
make the diversity of objects depend upon the qualities, not the differ- 
ence of qualities upon the subject; explaining the phrase prati gundsraya 
vishéshdat, ‘The difference which is produced by the recipience of cach 
several quality ; thence, &c.f’ The Chandrikd has the same explanation, 
adding, ‘ Diversity is from diversity (different ratio) of qualities {.’ There 
is no incompatibility, indeed, in the two views of the meaning of the text, 
as the variety of things depends upon the difference or disproportion of 
the three primary qualities, whether those qualities modify, or be modi- 
fied by, the subject to which they belong: in either case the variety is not 
a different thing, it is only a modification of the same thing, pradhdna. 


XVII. 


Since the assemblage of sensible objects is for another's use; since 
the converse of that which has the three qualities, with other pro- 
perties (before mentioned), must exist ; since there must be superin- 
tendence ; since there must be one to enjoy; since there is a tendency 
to abstraction; therefore, soul is. 





* प्रतिप्रतिगुणाश्चयविशेषात्‌। 1 एकैकगुणाश्चयेण यो विशेषस्त 
स्मात्‌ । ` गुणविषम्याचैषम्यं । 


66 


BHASBYA. 


As it is said, “ Liberation is obtained by discriminative knowledge of 
discrete and undiscrete principles ;” and whereas the undiscrete has been 
shewn to be distinct from the discrete by five arguments (ver. 9), 80 
soul being, like the undiscrete principle, subtile (not cognizable by the 
senses), its existence is now established by inference. Soud is.-Why? 
Because the assemblage of objects is for another's use—The assemblage of 
intellect and the rest is for the use of soul: this is inferred from the irra- 
tionality (of nature and its effects), like a bed. In like manner as a bed, 
which is an assemblage of bedding, props, cords, cotton, coverlid, and 
pillows, is for another's use, not for its own; and its several component 
parts render no mutual service; thence it is concluded that there is a 
man who sleeps upon the bed, and for whose use it was made: so this 
body, which is an assemblage of the five elements, is for another’s use ; 
or, there is soul, for whose enjoyment this enjoyable body, consisting of 
an aggregate of intellect and the rest, has been produced. 

Again, soul is, because the reverse of that which has the three qualities 
has been declared: as it was stated in a former verse (11), ‘A discrete 
principle has the three qualities, is indiscriminative, objective, &c.;” and 
it is added, “ Soul is in these respects the reverse.” 

Again, soul is, because there must be superintendence.—As a charioteer 
guides a chariot drawn by horses able to curvet, to prance, to gallop, so 
the soul guides the body: as it is said in the Shashihi Tantra, “ Nature, 
directed by soul, proceeds.” 

Soul is, because there must be an enjoyer-—In like manner as there must 
be some one to partake of food flavoured with sweet, sour, salt, pungent, 
bitter, and astringent flavours, so, as there is no capability of fruition in 
intellect and the other products of nature, there must be soul, by which 
this body is to be enjoyed. 

Again, soul is, becuuse there is a tendency to abstraction —Kaivalya is 
the abstract noun, derived from kevala, ‘sole, only'—for, on account of, 
that (abstraction); the practice of it: from the exercise of (or tendency 
to) abstraction (for the sake of its own separation or detachment) it is 


67 


inferred that soul is. That is, Every one, whether wise or unwise, equally 
desires imperishable release from succession of worldly existence. 

It is next to be determined whether this soul be but onc superin- 
tendent over all bodies, like the string that supports al) the gems of a 
necklace ; or whether there be many souls presiding severally over indi- 
vidual bodies. 

COMMENT. 

Arguments for the existence of soul as a distinct principle are here 
adduced. 

The existence of soul is established by inference: a bed implies a 
sleeper; nature, made up of its effects, is for the production of pain, 
pleasure, and insensibility, of which soul alone is conscious*. But ad- 
mitting that the assemblage is for the benefit of another, why should that 
other be soul? because soul is not a similar aggregate ; it is not made up 
of qualities and the like, but is the reverse of nature in these respects, as 
was explained in verse 11: or, as the commentator on the Sitra, Sanhata 
pardrthatwdtt, observes, because the property of pain or pleasure, which 
is identical with body, must be different from that which enjoys the one, 
or suffers the other. Because there must be an enjoyer—The existence 
of an enjoyer implies the existence of both pleasure and pain; election 
between which cannot be made by intellect and the rest, which are inse- 
parable from them, and it must be the act of something else, which is 
soul. ‘Intellect and the rest are the things to be used (bhogya) or per- 
ceived (करण), and consequently imply one who perceives}.’ $, Tuten 
Kaumudi. 

The term aivalya, rendered ‘ abstraction,’ signifies ‘detachment from 
the world ;’ or, as it is explained, ‘absolute suppression of the three kinds 
of pain, as a property of sacred writ, holy sages, and inspired teachers or 
prophets. It must therefore be something different from intellect and the 





सुखदुःखमोहातमकतया व्यक्तादयः स संघाताः 1 संहतपराथे 
त्बात्‌। ‡ भोग्या हश्या बुद्धयादयो न च द्ृष्टारमनरेण हश्यता युक्ता 
तेषां तस्मादस्ति cet ह्यनुद्याद्यतिरिक्ः स चाह्मेति | 


68 


rest, which are the same thing as pain, and cannot effect a separation from 
their own essence*.’ S. Tatwa Kaumudi. So Viswdwa Burxsuv explains 
kaivalya, ‘ absolute extirpation of pain +.’ 

The arguments in the text for the existence of soul are so many 
original aphorisms of Kapria; as, 1. ‘Soul is distinct from body, &c.{:’ 
2.‘ From an aggregate being for another's use||:’ 3. ‘From (the proper- 
ties of) soul being the converse of the three qualities, &c.§:’ 4. ‘From 
superintendence %:’ 5. ‘From the tendency to abstraction **,’ The com- 
mentator notices a different reading of the last Stra ‘From nature 
not being competent to abstraction:’ but this he considers erroneous tt. 
The fifth book of the S. Pravackana contains other Sitras affirmative of 
the separate existence of soul. 





XVIII. 
Since birth, death, and the instruments of life are allotted seve- 


rally ; since occupations are not at once universal; and since quali- 
ties affect variously ; multitude of souls is demonstrated. 


BHASHYA. 


Life and death, and the instruments (of life) —From the several allotment 
of these: this is the meaning of the text. Thus, if there was but one soul, 


* शास्ताणां महर्षीणां दिष्यतोचनानां च । Sarat चात्यन्तिकदुः खण 
waaay न बुद्धादीनां सम्भवति ते हि दुःलात्मकाः कथं स्वभावा 
मोचयितुं शक्यन्ते। 1 दुःखात्यनोच्छेट्‌ः। { शरीरादिष्यतिरिक्तः 
पुमान्‌) । संहतपराथेबात्‌। 5 भिगुखादिविपम्यैयात्‌। + अधि 
हानाञ्ेति | “ Saeed ware | 11 ञ्जङेवरयाधे प्रकृतेः । 
इति सूजपाटः प्रामादिकलाटुपेश्णीयः | 


69 


then when one was born, all would be born; when one died, all would 
die; if there was any defect in the vital instruments of one, such as 
deafness, blindness, dumbness, mutilation, or lameness, then all would be 
blind, deaf, dumb, maimed, and halt: but this is not the case; and there- 
fore, from the several apportionment of death, birth, and instruments of 
life, multiplicity of soul is demonstrated. Since occupations ure not at 
once universul.— Yugapat means, ‘at one time.’ Not at once; or, at one 
time. Occupation: as engaging in acts of virtue and the like are not 
observed to occur at one moment; but some are busy with virtuous, 
others with vicious, actions; some cultivate indifference to the world, and 
some acquire true wisdom: therefore, from the non-contemporaneousness 
of occupation, multitude of souls is concluded. Also, since qualities affect 
variously —From the contrary nature of the qualities multitude of souls 
is proved ; as, in birth in general, one endowed with the quality of good- 
ness is happy; another with that of foulness is wretched; and a third 
having that of darkness is apathetic: hence, therefore, multitude of souls 
is proved. 
Soul is not agent: this is next declared. 


COMMENT. 


The multitudinous existence of soul, or the individual incorporation of 
soul in different bodies, is here maintained. 

Birth is defined to be the association of soul with body; death, its 
detachment: soul being always existent, and not in itself subject to birth 
or death; as in the $. Pravachana Bhdshya*: also the S. Vatwa Kau- 
mudé; * Life is the combination of soul with the pains incident to body, 
&c.; not any modification of soul. Death is the abandonment of those 
bodies, &c.; not the destruction of soul+.’ The instruments of life are 





* जन्ममरणे चा नोत्यत्तिविनाशौ पुरूषनिष्ठत्वाभावात्‌ 1 देहेन्दि 


यादिवेदनाभिः TART जन्म न तु पुरूषस्यपरिणामः | तेषामेव 
देहादीनां परित्यागो मरणं न ret विनाशः । 


70 


the organs of perception and action, with egotism and intellect. < Allot- 
ment,’ xiyama, properly ‘rule, regulation,’ is explained by vyavasthd, 
which may import ‘distribution ;’ as, ‘ The distribution is in regard to dif- 
ferent souls in several bodies *:’ so also the Sftra of Kariia; ‘ From the 
distribution of life, &c. follows the multitudinousness of soul ¢.’ The term 
is especially understood, however, of the distribution which is laid down 
by religious and Icgal authorities, ‘a prescribed distribution or allotment,’ 
as the commentator on the Sfitra observes, after stating, ‘The virtuous 
man is happy in heaven,’ &c. (see p. 48), ‘Souls are many, as otherwise 
there would not be the occurrence of such division, or appointinent of 
conditions, as is laid down in the Véda and the law {` [1 soul were one, 
all the accidents, vicissitudes, and interests of existence would simulta- 
neously affect all individuals. 

But though manifold, as individualized, this individual soul is one and 
unchanged, through all its migrations into various forms, until its final 
liberation. It is the disguise which is changed, not that which wears it, 
as has becn before explained (p. 48). 

The multiplied existence of soul is in cspecial contradiction to the 
doctrine of the Védéutis, of the universality of one supreme soul of the 
world, from which all human souls are derived, as in such texts as this; 
«One only existent soul is distributed in all beings; it is beheld collect- 
ively or dispersedly, like the reflection of the moon in still or troubled 
water. Soul, eterual, omnipresent, undisturbed, pure, one, is multiplied 
by the power of delusion, not of its own nature]. This is undoubtedly 
the doctrine of the Védas, and the Sinkhya teachers, who profess to 
receive those works as authority, arc obliged to interpret the texts 


* प्रतिषे पुरुषभेदे भवति ween: | t जन्मादिव्यवस्यात्तः पुरुष 
aga) } इत्यादेः शयुतिस्मृतिव्यवस्याया विभागस्यान्यथानुपपत्या पुरूषा 
बहवः । lee एव हि भूतात्मा भूते भूते व्यवस्थितः । एकधा बहुधा 
चैव हश्यते जलतः चन्द्रवत्‌ | नित्यः सदेगतोद्यात्मा कूटस्थो टोषवज्जितः | 
एकः स भिद्यते शक्ष्या मायया न स्वभावात्‌ | 


7 


unfavourable to their dogmas in a peculiar manner. Thus the Siitra of 
Kariza asserts, ‘There is no contradiction (to the doctrine of many souls) 
in the unity of the Védas, from its reference to the comprehensiveuess of 
genus*:’ that is, Sou}, considered as genus, is but one; its nature and 
properties are common to all souls, individualized and manifold in con- 
nection with individual aggregates of the products of nature. ‘Genus 
here means community, unity of nature; such is the purport of the 
unity of the Védas; not indivisibility, from the absence of any motive 
(for its continuing undivided). This is the meaning of the Sitrat.’ The 
subject is discussed at cousidcrable length by Visndna Buixsuv; but, 
notwithstanding his arguments, it is clear that the Sankhya doctrine is 
contradictory to that of the Védas. 

The doctrines of those Grecian philosophers, who maintained the im- 
materiality and eternity of soul, conformed to that of the Vidas. As fur 
as we are able to Jearn of the doctrines of Pythagoras, he taught that 
human souls were portions of one supreme soul. Plato held the souls of 
men to be emanations from God, through the soul of the world. Souls 
and bodies were both portions of the 7é 2» the ‘one existent, of the Stoics; 
and even Aristotle appears to have conceived the human soul to be an 
intellectual encrgy, derived from an eternal intelligence. Cudworth as- 
serts that none of the ancient philosophers maintained the Sankhya notion 
of the eternity of individual souls. “It doth not follow,” he remarks, 
“because they held souls 10 be ingenerable, that therefore they supposed 
souls to have existed from all eternity of themselves unmade. This was 
never asserted by theist or atheist. The philosophic theists, who main- 
tained @lernitatem aximorum, did, notwithstanding, assert their essential 
dependence upon the Deity, like that of the lights upon the sun, as if 
they were a kind of eternal effulgency, emanation, or eradiation, from an 
eternal Sun.” Intell. Syst. III. 429. 


* नाचित्तुतिविरोधो जातिपरत्वात्‌ | जातिः सामान्यमेकरूपल्वं 
तचैवचित्तशयुतीनां medrese प्रयोजनाभावादित्यपेः | 


72 


XIX. 


And from that contrast (before set forth) it follows, that soul is 
witness, solitary, bystander, spectator, and passive. 


BHASHYA. 


And from that contrast: the contrast of the possession of the three 
qualities. Contrast: reverse. Soul is void of qualities, is discriminative, 
enjoyer, &c. The contrast is that presented by these attributes of soul ; 
and thence, the qualities of goodness, fonlness, and darkness being agents 
(active), चै follows that soul is (passive) witness. This sentence is syntac- 
tically connected with the preceding, regarding the multitudinousness of 
soul. The qualities, as agents, act; a witness neither acts nor desists 
from action. Again, abstraction (detachment) is an attribute (of soul); 
the property of being sole is detachment or abstraction, difference or 
distinctness (from all others); that is, it is distinct, or separate, from the 
three qualities. Next, being a bystander {is an attribute of soul): the 
condition of a middle man (or looker-on, or neutral). Soul is a bystander, 
like a wandering mendicant: as a vagrant ascetic is lonely and uncon- 
cerned, whilst the villagers are busily engaged in agriculture, so soul does 
not act where the qualities are present. Hence also proceed the proper- 
ties of being a spectator and passive. From being a bystander, soul is a 
spectator, and is not a performer of those acts (which it contemplates). 
The three qualities, goodness, foulness, and darkness, engage in acts in 
the relation of agent and act; not soul: and in this manner the existence 
of soul is demonstrated. 

But if soul is a non-agent, how does it exercise volition? as, I will 
practise virtue, I will not commit crime: here soul must be the agent; 
for if soul is not the agent (then these purposes cannot be entertained). 
This is a dilemma: to explain which it is said— 


COMMENT. 


In the preceding verse it was stated that soul was many; in this, its 
other attributes are enumerated. 


73 


The conjunction cha, in the term tasmdt-cha, connects the sentence 
with the preceding, or with dahutwam, ‘ multitudinousness.’ The contrast 
alluded to is that intimated in ver. 14, and is this: Soul has not the three 
qualities, it is discriminative, it is perceptive, it is specific, it is rational, 
it is unprolific; being the reverse, in these respects, of nature and its 
effects. Not being an object of sense, but percipient of such objects, it 
observes and testifies to the existence of nature and its products, like an 
evidence in a lawsuit being plaintiff and defendant. ‘That which is 
irrational cannot observe, and that to which an object is apparent is a 
witness*.’ Solitariness is ‘exemption from the three kinds of pain t;" 
or, in fact, total abstraction from the world: this is the necessary conse- 
quence of being devoid of the three qualities, which are essentially the 
same with pleasure, pain, and dulness; and from them, therefore, soul is 
equally free. From the same cause, absence of qualities and insuscepti- 
bility of agreeable or disagrecable emotions, proceeds the next property of 
soul, that of being a bystander; madhyastha, ‘ neutral, indifferent, uncon- 
cerned ;’ wddsina, ‘neither rejoicing in pleasure, nor sorrowing in pain. 
Qualities, and particularly foulness, are indispensable to activity; and: 
being without them, soul is consequently inert: the same is considered 
to be also the necessary result of its being ‘ discriminative and unprolific, 
or unproductive |" Viundna Buixsnv restricts the term sdééshi, ^ witness,’ 
to the sense of ‘ beholder,’ distinguishing it from the other term, to which 
such a translation is more applicable, drushéri, 98 importing one who has 
the object near to, or before, his eyes ; the latter implies seeing in general : 
hence he says, ‘Soul witnesses or contemplates éuddhi (intellect), and 
sees the other principles ||.’ 





* चेतनोहि get भवति नाचेतनः साक्षी च टभ्ितविषयो भवति । 
1 आत्यन्तिकटुःखभयाभावः केवस्यं । ¦ विवेक्िवादप्रसवधम्मितयाश्चा 
कर्तेति सिद्धं । । बुद्धेरेव सारी पुरुवोऽन्येषां तु द्रष्माभमिति । 


u 


74 


XX. 


Tuereronre, by reason of union with it, insensible body seems 
sensible; and though the qualities be active, the stranger (soul) 


appears as the agent. 
BHASHYA. 


Here soul is said to be possessed of sensation ; and in connection with 
it, intellect and the other predicates of nature assuming the appcarance 
of sense seem sentient: as in life, a jar with cold water appears to be 
cold, with warm watcr seems to be warm; so intellect and the rest, from 
union with it, with soul, seem sensible. But the qualitics perform the 
active application (of sense), not the soul: for although in common it 18 
said, soul is the doer, the goer, yet soul is not the agent. How so? 
Though the quatities be active, (soul) the stranger appears as the agent. 
There being activity of the qualities, soul, which is indifferent, or in- 
active, appears as if it was the agent; which it is not. Here is an illus- 
‘tration: as a man who is not a thief, being taken up along with thieves, 
is suspected to be a thief also; so soul, being connected with the three 
active qualitics, is supposed, though inert, to be active also. 

In this manner the distinction of the perceptible, imperceptible, and 
thinking principles (ver. 2. p. 13) has been explained ; from the discrimi- 
nation of which liberation is obtained. It is next expounded why the 
union of the two (chief) principles, nature and soul, takes place. 


COMMENT. 


It is here taught that the sentient faculty resides in soul, and not, as it 
appears to do, in the products of nature; and that activity resides in the 
qualities, not, as it appears to do, in soul. 

The term chétand, from chit, ‘to reflect,’ means in general ‘ reason, 
intelligence; but it is here applied to the possession or exercise of every 
faculty proper to a sentient and thinking being. It is the attribute of 
soul only, as will be more distinctly made clear when the functions of the 
senses, of consciousness, and intellect are explained, and they are shewn 


75 


to be merely the vehicles or instruments through which ideas and notions 
are conveyed. They seem, however, to act independently, but this is 
merely from their uxion with, or, more correctly, proximity to, sou); 
samyoga being explained by the commentators to mean here mercly 
sannidhdna, ‘approximation.’ In like manner, soul, which is contem- 
plative, not active, mover, though itself unmoved, appears to be active 
through a similar contiguity. ‘I am sentient; wishing to do, I do: here 
a common origin or subject of action and reflection is apprehended*.’ 
S. Tatwa Kaumudi. But this is an error, as the site or subject of action 
and reflection is distinct t+. The term linga in the first linc is explained 
to denote mahat and the subtile products of pradhdina. Uddstya, ‘ indif- 
ferent,’ is said also to mean ‘ inert ` 

But it appears that there are passages in the Védas and in the law- 
books which attribute agency to soul, and knowledge to buddh: |; and to 
meet this is supposed to be the purpose of the aphorism, ‘Agency from 
affection, intelligence from propinquity §;’ that is, ‘The apparent agency 
of soul is from the affection (or operation) of buddhi; the apparent intel- 
ligence of buddhi (understanding) is from the proximity of soul; neither 
is actual. Their mutual transfer of properties is like that of fire and iron 
in a heated bar, or of the sun and water, in the reflected rays of the 
former from the latter 1.’ $. Prav. 9. In like manner the S. Chandriké 
exemplifies the doctrine by reference to buddhi, the organ of the under- 
standing; and furnishes also an cxample of the sense in which chétand, 


* चेतनोऽहं चिकीषेन्‌ करोमीति कृतिचेतन्ययोः सामान्याधिकरण्यमनु 
wafer । 1 यत्ेतन्यकरचते भिजाधिकरणे युक्तितः सिद्धे तस्माद्गान्ति 
रिति। ` ्रीदासीन्यमकरववं। । पुरुषस्य क्तव gaa चेतन्यं च श्रुति 
स्मृत्योरुच्यमानं। ^ उपरागात्‌ wie चित्सान्निध्यात्‌ । " पुरुषस्य 
यत्‌ कैतवं WAIT बुद्धेया चिल्ला सा पुरूषसान्निष्याद्‌ एतदुभयं 
न बाद्मवमित्यथेः। यथाग्न्ययसोयेणा वा जलमूष्यैयोः परस्यरं संयोगवि 
शेषात्‌ परस्परेकधम्मेष्यवहारः | 


76 


^ intelligence,’ is to be understood : ‘Thence the effect (of pradhdna), the 
category buddh:, which is unintelligent, is as it were intelligent, (seems to 
be that which says) I know, becomes as it were endowed with know- 
ledge *:' that is, it is not the understanding, but soul, that knows. This, 
however, applics equally to all the other products of nature, as far as to 
the subtile rudiments, whether individually considered, or as composing 
subtile body t. They are all non-sentient, or irrational and inert. Their 
activity depends on combination with the qualities; their sentient power 
on proximity to soul: and the conjoint presence of these two properties 
leads to the erroncous belief that soul is agent, as well as sentient. 


XXI. 


For the soul’s contemplation of nature, and for its abstraction, 
the union of both takes place, as of the halt and blind. By that 
union a creation is framed. 


BHASHYA. 


The union of soul with nature is for its contemplation (of nature) ; 
that is, soul contemplates nature (in the state of) intellect and the other 
effects to the gross elements inclusive. For that object is the union of 
nature with soul; and the same union, which is also for the abstraction 
(of the latter), 28 ake the association of the halt and blind. As, a lame man 
and a blind man, deserted by their fellow-travellers, who in making their 
way with difficulty through a forest had been dispersed by robbers, hap- 
pening to encounter each other, and entering into conversation so as to 
inspire mutual confidence, agreed to divide between them the duties of 
walking and of seeing; accordingly the lame man was mounted on the 


* तस्माद्चेततनमपि लि द्धं बुद्धित्वं चे्तनावदिव जानामीति arava 
वति । † लिङ्गं महदादि सूषपपय्येन्तं | 


7 


blind man’s shoulders, and was thus carried on his journey, whilst the 
blind man was enabled to pursue his route by the directions of his com- 
panion. In the same manner the faculty of seeing is in soul, not that of 
moving; it is like the lame man: the faculty of moving, but not of seeing, 
18 in nature; which resembles, therefore, the blind man. Further, asa 
separation takes place between the lame man and the blind man, when 
their mutual object is accomplished, and they have reached their journey’s 
end, so nature, having effected the liberation of soul, ceases to act; and 
soul, having contemplated nature, obtains abstractedness ; and conse- 
quently, their respective purposes being effected, the connexion between 
them is dissolved. ६ 

Again, By that, by that union, a creation is framed.—As the birth of a 
child proceeds from the union of male and female, 80 the production of 
creation results from the connection of nature and soul. 

The text next describes the particulars of all the products of nature. 


COMMENT. 


The object of the union of soul and nature, or the final liberation of 
the former by its knowledge of the latter, is here explained. 

‘ Contemplation,’ darsana, is considered to comprise ‘ fruition,’ bhoga. 
As nature is devoid of sensibility and reflection, it can neither enjoy nor 
observe ; and its existence would be therefore without an object, unless 
there were some other one capable both of observation and fruition *. 
This other one is soul. But, again, as pain is inseparable from nature, 
80 enjoyed soul desires, after a season, to be loosed from the combination ; 
and this detachment, or the liberation of purified soul, necessarily re- 
quires some one from which to be liberated: that some one is nature: 
consequently, for the fulfilment of their respective ends—the fruition of 
nature, and liberation of soul—their mutual cooperation and combination 
are essential. ‘Abstraction,’ £aivalya, is explained by Vacuzspati, ‘ The 
cause of the attribution of separation to purified soul, which cannot be 





* भोग्यं प्रभानं भोक्षारमन्तरेख न सम्भवति । 


78 


without previous union with nature*.’ But these results cannot be at- 
tained without the evolution of the products of nature, and consequently 
they assume their several developments, or, in other words, a creation is 
framed ; as it is only in the state of discrete principles that nature is to 
be contemplated by soul, and it is only by the exact appreciation of the 
same, and of their source, that soul can detach itself from nature. For 
both purposes, therefore, the world must exist, as developed from its 
material cause. 

There are passages in the Védas, however, attributing creation to soul; 
as, ‘That was from it—From this soul was ether produced ft.’ To this it 
is replied, that all that is herein intended is the attribution of the act of 
the inferior, or nature, to the superior, soul: ‘ As in the world it is said 
that a king triumphs or is defeated, when it is not he, but his army, that 
suffers a defeat or achieves a victory.’ 9. Prav. Sdra. 





XXII. 


From nature issues the great one; thence egotism; and from 
this the sixteenfold set: from five among the sixteen proceed five 
elements. 

BHASHYA. 

Nature (prakriti) is also termed ‘the chief one’ (pradhdna), ‘the su- 
preme’ (brahme), ‘the undistinguished’ (avyaktam), ‘the multi-compre- 
hending’ (bahudhdndka) and mdyd. Such are its synonymes. From that 
which is devoid of characteristic attributes, or from (crude) nature, the 
great one (mahat) is produced : this is also termed ‘intellect’ (buddhi); it 
is also called dsuri, or ‘demoniac ;’ mati, or ‘ understanding ;’ ‘ notoriety’ 





* सत्वपुरूषधान्यताख्यातिनिवन्धनं न च सतवपुरषान्यताख्यातिः प्रपान 
Te ति | † तत्‌ WATT एतसादात्मन आकाशः सम्भूतः । 
† यथा लोके स्वकशक्तिषु योधेषु वच्ैेमानौ जयपराजयौ रासि उपयेति । 


79 


(khydti), ‘knowledge’ (jndna), ‘ wisdom’ (prajnd). From thence proceeds 
egotiam, also called ‘ the origin of the elements,’ &c. (bhutddi), ‘ the lumi- 
nous’ (taijasa), ‘the modified’ (vaikrita), ‘conscience’ (abhimdna). From 
this the sivteenfold set—From this, from egotism, the class of sixteen is 
derived. This consists of the five subtile elements, or the archetypes of 
sound, touch, form, flavour, and odour: the synonymes of ian-mdtra are 
all words denoting ‘subtile’ (sukshma): also the eleven organs, the ear, 
the skin, the eye, the tongue, the nose, which are the five organs of per- 
ception; the voice, the hand, the foot, and the organs of excretion and 
generation, which are the five organs of action ; and, besides these, mind, 
making the eleventh, and being an organ of both action and sensation.” 
These constitute the class of sixteen produced from egotism. From five 
mong’ the sixteen—From the five subtile elements proceed the five gross 
elements: as it is said, “From the archetype sound, ether is produced ; 
from touch, air; from form, light (or fire); from flavour, water; from 
odour, earth: and thus from these five rudiments the five gross elements 
proceed.” As also it is said, “ From discriminative knowledge of percep- 
tible and imperceptible principles and the thinking soul (see ver. 2) 
liberation is obtained.” Now, therefore, intellect and the rest, to the 
gross elements inclusive, forming twenty-three categories, have been spe- 
cified (in the text); the undiscrete principle has been described (see 
ver. 15, 16); and soul has been explained (ver. 18, 19); and these con- 
stitute the twenty-five tatwas (physical and metaphysical categories of the 
Sankhya system of philosophy). He who knows the universe to be com- 
posed of these principles—called tatewas, from the abstract of tad, ‘ that,’ 
implying the abstract existence of those principles—as it is said, “ He 
who knows the twenty-five principles, whatever order of life he may have 
entered, and whether he wear braided hair, a top-knot only, or be shaven, 
he is liberated: of this there is no doubt.” (See p.1.) The twenty-five 
categories are, nature, soul, intellect, egotism, the five subtile (or rudi- 
mental) elements, the eleven organs of sensation and of action, and the 
five gross elements. 

It is stated in this stanza, from nature issues the great one. What is 
meant by that great one is next defined. 


80 


COMMENT. 


The categories of the Sénkhya system have been before alluded to 
(ver. 3. p. 16), in explanation of their mutual relations, and of the proper- 
ties which they have in common, or by which they are discriminated 
from one another; but we have them here enumerated in the order of 
their production, as prefatory to a detailed description of them and of 
their functions contained in the following stanzas. 

The generic term for the twenty-five principles, ¢attwa, or as usually 
and with equal correctness written éatwa, is explained by Gavrapdpa to 
“mean ‘tke abstract existence,’ astifwa*, णद, essentia, of tat}, THAT; that 
thing, which is the object of philosophical investigation, or which has a 
real existence, and must be known. The more common etymology, tat, 
‘ that,’ and tam, ‘ thou,’ belongs to the Véddnta system; as in the Ma- 
Advékya, iat-twam asi, ‘ that (supreme soul) thou art,’ implies the identity 
of universal and individualized spirit. 

We have in the scholia of Gavrapdpa on this stanza some synonymes 
of nature and the two first principles, the analysis of which elucidates 
the ideas entertained of them by the Sankhyas. The succeeding stanzas 
will afford an opportunity of adverting to the terms used for intellect and 
egotism, and we may here confine the inquiry to the synonymes of 
nature, or matter. 

Prakriti, 98 has been previously mentioned (p. 17), intimates, that 
which precedes, or is prior to, making; that which is not made from any 
thing else. It is also used relatively, to signify thet which is the source 
from which a product is derived ; so that mahat is the prakriti of ahankdra, 
&c. (see p. 18). Here, however, our business is with the primary source 
of all material products, and the term indicates merely that which pre- 
ceded (pra) production (क्ल); what that may have been is left wholly 
undefined or unimplied by the particular term. The same may be said 
of it agreeably to another etymology given in the Sdnkhya Séra, where 





* असितत्वं । 1† तत्‌ । 


81 


pra is interpreted by prakrishta, ‘ principal, chicf, best,’ analogously to 
its other denomination, pradhdna, ‘the chief.’ Pradhéna is derived from 
pra, ‘principal,’ and dhd, ‘to hold:’ ‘that in which all generated effect 
is comprehended*.’ The next synonyme, avyakta, ‘the unseparated, 
the undistinguished, the unperceived,’ has been also previously noticed 
(p. 41) as derived from anja, ‘ to make clear,’ with vi, separative preposi- 
tion, and the negative ¢ prefixed: the term is of as frequent occurrence 
as either of the preceding, and is constantly used as a synonyme of pra- 
kriti in the Puranas and in Manu. Brakme, which is to be carefully 
distinguished from Brakmd, the personified creative power, is ordinarily 
applied either to the Védas or supreme spirit, and is an uncomyion syno- 
nyme of prakriti; but as derived froin vriha, ‘to increase, it implics 
the first principle of which the expansion becomes all perceptible objects. 
Bahudhinaka is derived, like pradhina, from dhd, ‘to hold; dhénaka, 
‘the holder’ or ‘comprehender’ of baku, ‘much’, of all things. Mdyd, in 
its ordinary sense of ‘ illusion,’ is applied to prakriti, not by the Sinkhyas, 
for they maintain the reality of existing things, but by the Védintis and 
Pauranikas, who regard creation as a delusion or as a sport of the Creator: 
it is derived from the root md, ‘to measure,’ and nay here perhaps imply 
either ‘comprehension,’ like pradiina, or ‘extension.’ There is no ex- 
planation of the term by any of the Scholiasts. Visndna Burxsnu quotes 
the Védas to shew that it is synonymous with prufriftit. In the Sdukhya 
Sdra we have other synonymes, as, sakti, ‘ power,’ Sivayis ; ad, ‘the un- 
born, the unproduced ;’ éamas, ‘ darkness ;’ and avidyd, ‘ignorance |." 
Now what is to be considered as the sense of these words? By what 
equivalent is prakriti to be best rendered? Professor Lassen translates 
it procreatrix, but this seems to convey too much the idea of personality, 
and therefore, although very well agreeing with the original term as used 
by the Pauraniks, where prakriti is commonly personified, yet it can 


प्रपीयतेऽस्मिन्‌ काग्येजातमिति प्रधानमुच्यते । 1 मायां तु प्रकृ 
तिं विद्यादिति apt । ‡ प्रकृतिः शक्तिरज्ा प्रधानमष्यं तमो मा 
याऽचिचयेत्याद्यः प्रकृतेः पम्पायाः | 


Y 


82 


scarcely be considered as indicative of that which not only produces, but 
is the thing produced, being at once the origin and substance of all 
things. Mr. Colebrooke has rendered the term sometimes by ‘nature,’ 
and sometimes by ‘matter :’ the former expresses both tlic parent and the 
progeny, and agrees in being also the constant subject of prosopopeia. 
It is therefore preferable to perhaps any synonyme that the English lan- 
guage can offer. At the same time the correct equivalent is ‘ matter,’ 
materia, quasi mater, ‘the substance and source of material things;’ not, 
however, crude, visible, or divisible matter, but thut first principle of the 
Pythagoreans and Platonists, and of Aristotle, which having neither 
parts, nox form, nor sense, nor quantity, nor any of the properties of 
body, was yet the one universal, incorporeal, invisible substance from 
which all bodies were derived. Aud 4 tiv Tod -yeyovsros éparod Kal गरदन 
aieOqrod prrépa Kal drodoxgy ware yay mire dpa wire wip प्र 00 Acryouev, wire 
Goa ९6 Tovrey pire cE dv rubra ryéyover. GAN’ avdparov द Te Kal ४०/०० क 
Sexés. Timeeus. Sec also the Physics, b. III. ९.6. That we are to under- 
stand this of the prakriti of the Sankhyas is evident from the meaning of 
its several appellations. It is also said by Viswdwa Burxsnv, that ‘the 
world ig merely modification of form, of which prakriti is the materi- 
ality +. ‘It is not individual or formal, but universal material t.’ §. Pr. 
Bhdshya. Its invisibility 18, as we have seen (ver.8. p. 21), attributed, not to 
its non-existence, but to its subtilty (saukshmya). Prakriti is also defined 
‘the equilibrium of the three qualities{;’ and here it differs from the 
subject matter of Aristotle in having qualities. These qualities, however, 
whilst prakriti is yet unevolved, neutralize each other, and are scarcely 
qualities as regards primary nature, because their loss of equilibrium, or 
their activity, is concurrent with the discontinuance of prakriti as separate 
from its products. So far, however, prakriti may be considered as differ- 
ent from the brute matter of the ancient physiologists, that it produces 


* परिणामरूपं जगटुपारानकलं तु प्रकृतिः | † oneal न 
सोपादानं-स्ोपादानं प्रधानं न परिहिजं ष्यापकमित्यधेः | पचि 
गुणसाम्यं | 





83 


products of its own energy or power for a special cause, and is therefore 
more akin to the ^ plastic nature that acts, évexe rod, for the sake of some- 
thing.” In the Sénkhya system, however, such nature is not distinct 
from matter itself, whilst it appears to be a different principle in the 
writings of the Greek philosophers, although not always very intelligibly 
described ; for, as Cudworth observes of Aristotle, “ he nowhere declares of 
this nature of his, whether it be corporeal or incorporeal, substantial or 
accidental.” To conclude, we are to understand of the prakriti of the 
S4nkhyas, primary, subtile, universal substance, undergoing modification 
through its own energy, and for a special motive, by which it is manifest 
as individual and formal substance, varied according to the predaminance 
of qualities, which are equipoised and inert in the parent, and unequal 
and active in the progeny. 


XXII. 

AscertarnmenT is intellect. Virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and 
power are its faculties, partaking of goodness. Those partaking of 
darkness are the reverse. 

BHASHYA. 


The definition of intellect is ascertainment. Ascertaining (discerning, 
determining) is ascertainment: as in the seed the future germinating 
shoot is contained, so is determination (in intellect). This is a jar, this is 
cloth: that intellect which will so determine is so defined. This intellect 
has eight members, according to the twofold affection of goodness and 
darkness. The first kind, or intellect, partaking of goodness, is of four 
kinds, virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power. Virtue comprises humanity, 
benevolence, and acts of restraint (yama) and of obligation (niyama). The 
former are said in the Pdtanjala to be, restraint of cruelty, of falsehood, 
of dishonesty, of incontinence, and of avarice: the latter are the obliga- 
tions of purification, contentment, religious austerity, sacred study, and 
worship of God. Knowledge has for its synonymes, manifestation, cer- 


84 


tainty, light. It is of two kinds, external and internal. The former is 
(knowledge of) the Védas and their six subordinate branches, recitation, 
ritual, grammar, glossary, prosody, and astronomy ; also (of) the purdnas, 
and of logic, theology, and law. Internal knowledge is that of nature 
and soul, or (the discrimination that) this is nature, the equipoised condi- 
tion of goodness, foulness, and darkness: this is soul, perfect, devoid of 
qualities, pervading, and sentient. By external knowledge worldly dis- 
tinction or admiration is acquired; by internal knowledge, liberation. 
Dispassion is also of two kinds, external and internal. The former is the 
indifference of one who contemns sensible objects from observing their 
defects, or the trouble of acquiring and preserving them; the inconveni- 
ence of attachment to them; their liability to decay; and the injustice 
they cause. The latter is the indifference of one who is desirous of libe- 
ration, and looks upon nature as if it was a piece of witchcraft or a dream. 
Power is the abstract property of a superior (or divine) being: it is 
eightfold, (the capacity of) minuteness, magnitude, heuviness, lightness, 
reach, gratification of will, dominion, subjugation, and irresistible purpose. 
Atomic existence is meant by ‘ minuteness; so that a person becoming 
atomically subtile or minute may traverse the world : ‘ magnitude’ is said 
of one who may make himself a giant: ‘lightness’ is having limbs like 
the fibres of the lotus stalk, or like cotton, so ६8 to be able to stand upon 
the tops of the filaments of a flower: ‘reacl is attainment of a desired 
object by going to the place where it is situated, wherever that may be: 
* gratification of will’ is obtaining or effecting whatever is desired: ‘do- 
minion’ is governing the three worlds, as a king: ‘subjugation’ is having 
all things subject : ‘irresistible purpose’ is compelling the site, rest, and 
motion of all things, from Brahm4 to a block, agreeably to the will of the 
person endowed with this faculty. These are the four propertics of intel- 
lect which soul obtains when the qualitics of foulness and darkness are 
overcome by that of goodness. 

But those.partaking of darkness are the reverse —When intellect is influ- 
enced by the quality of darkness, then its four properties are the reverse 
of the above; they are, vice, ignorance, passion, and weakness. In this 
manner intellect having eight members, as it is affected by goodness or 


85 


foulness, is produced from the undiscrete principle having the three 
qualities. 
Intellect has thus been explained. Egotism is next deacribed. 


COMMENT. 


The first product of nature, or intellect, is here described by its 
properties. 

Tntellect (6uddhi) is adhyavusdya*. It is not easy to offer a satisfactory 
equivalent for this word, nor to understand precisely what is meant by it. 
In the Amera Kosha it occurs as a synonyme of uésdéhat, ‘ effort, strenu- 
ous and continued effort, perseverance ;’ according to RamAsrama, ‘pos- 
sessing great power [.' He derives it from sho antakarmmani || ‘ finishing, 
making end of,’ with adhi§, ‘over,’ and ava‘, ‘ off; that is, entirely or 
absolutely ending or effecting; as in the Hitopadésa: ‘The precepts of 
knowledge confer not the least benefit on one who is afraid of exertion : 
of what use is a lamp to a blind man, though it be within his reach **,’ 
In the Mitdékshara, utséha is explained, ‘ Effort (or perseverance) in the 
performance of acts accomplishing the objects of man {t.’ In the Bhatti 
Kédvya we have the word used in the sense of ‘ wish, purpose, determina- 
tion:’ ‘ The bird said to the monkeys, You have not studied the law, if at 
such a season you wish (or resolve) to die tf.” 

In a preceding passage (ver. 5) the phrase prati vishaya adhyavasdya ||| 
“ascertainment of several objects,’ was given as the definition of drishia, 


*eoraa! ofvere. ‡ अतिश्क्तिभाक्‌ । । षो अना 
कम्मैणि। Safir ^ श्व । a स्वस्यमघ्यध्यवसायभीरोः 
करोति विज्ञानविर्धिगुणं हि 1 अन्धस्य रिं हस्वतत्स्थिक्नोऽपि प्रकाशयत्यथे 
मिह प्रदीपः। 11 पुरूषा्थ॑सापनकम्मीरम्भोऽष्यवसायः। ere 
वानरान्‌ पक्षी नाध्यगीषवं स्मृतीः | यूयं संकुटितुं यस्मात्‌ काततेऽस्मिनभ्य 
वंस्यथं । ॥ प्रतिविषयाध्यवसायः | 


86 


‘perception;’ and the explanation of the Scholiast, buddhivydpdra jndnam*, 
‘knowledge, which is the exercise of the intellectual faculty,’ was cited 
(p.23). The same commentator, Vacuespami, here defines it, ‘ the specific 
function of intellect, not differing from intellect itself ;’ or, to quote the pas- 
sage at length, ‘Ascertainment is intellect, from the identity of the act and 
the agent, as will be explained. Every one who engages in any matter first 
observes, or considers; he next reflects, it is I who am concerned in this; 
and then determines, this is to be done by me; thence he proceeds to act : 
this is familiar to every one. Thence this ascertainment that such act is 
to be done is the determination of intellect, which is as it were endowed 
with reagon, from the proximity of the sentient principle. This is the 
specific function of intellect, not differing from intellect itself; and the 
definition of intellect is ascertainment, as that comprchends both its 
generic and specific distinctions 1. 

The explanation of the $. Chandrikd is to the same effect: ‘Adhya- 
vasdya is a sort of modified condition of intellect, as flame is of a lamp; 
it is certainty in this form, such an act is to be done by me}. 

These explanations, however, would rather seem to intimate intention, 
or volition, or, at least, the determination to act after reflection; but the 
determination or conclusion that such an act should be done, does not 
necessarily signify that it shall be done: it is only the conclusion or 
ascertainment of its fitness. This function of the intellect, also, is not 
indispensably connected with the notion of will; as in the example given 


* नुषिव्यापारज्ञानं । 1 srerqerat बुद्धिः । क्रिया क्रिमावतोरभे 
दविवक्षया | संबो व्यवहा ्ालोध्य मत्वाहमधिकृत्त इत्यभिमाय wea 
तन्मयेत्यध्यवस्यति ततशचप्रवेत इत्ति लोकसिद्धं । तच योऽयं कतेव्यमित्ति 
विनिश्वयश्िल्िसन्िधानादापन्रचैतन्याया बुद्धैः योऽध्यवसायो FRAT 
WITCH बुधिः स च asad समानासमानजातीयव्यवद्छेट्‌ 
कात्‌ | ‡ ञ्ध्यवसायो मयेदं कलव्यमित्याकारनिशयो टीपशिसेव 
बुद्धिपरिणामावस्याविशेषः | 


87 


by Gaurapdpa; where, in the simple conclusion after consideration, “ this 
object is a jar; that, is a piece of cloth,” no wish, or will, is indicated ; no 
act follows. It is clear also that he considers adhyavasdya merely as the 
functions of intellect in exercise: they are in intellect, and part of it, as 
the germ is in the seed, until brought into activity. Intellect is only an 
instrument; that which, having reccived the ideas or images conveyed 
through the organs of sense, and the mind, constructs them into a con- 
clusive idea, which it presents to soul. Its function in exercise, there- 
fore, is ascertainment or certainty, as described in the S. Pravachanu 
Bluishya, which explains adhyavasdya, ‘the synonyme, as well as buddhi, 
of the great principle (mahat), and its specific function devominated 
ascertainment *.’ 

The other synonymes of this principle are, buddhi, derived from 
budh, ‘to know,’ ‘ knowing, intellect.’ Muhut, ‘ great, the great princi- 
ple;’ ‘ The first and most important of the products of nature, and presid- 
ing over and pervading the कोमल, Asuré{: this is a very unusual and 
questionable denomination. It occurs only in the 8. Bhdshya, and may 
be an error, perhaps for semushi, one of the synonymes of buddhi in the 
Amera kosha, It cannot be connected with asura, ‘a demon,’ as if the 
faculty were incompetent to convey divine knowledge; for one of its pro- 
perties, in connexion with the quality of goodness, is jnydua, ‘ truce know- 
ledge.’ There is no good reason why it should bo derived from Asuri, 
the pupil of Karta, unless allusion is made to some personification of 
intellect, as the bride of the sage. No explanation of the word is given 
in the Bhdshya, and I must confess my inability to suggest one entitled 
to any confidence. Mati means ‘understanding :’ munyalé anayd, that 
by which any thing is understood. कः properly signifies ‘fame,’ 
but here means ‘ notoriety, notion, familiar knowledge ;’ as in the Siwriti, 


“wee पम्योयो वुद्धिरत्य्यवसायश्च नि्याख्यस्तस्यासाधारणी 
वृ्षिरित्यथः | tae स्वेतरसकत् काम्ये व्यापकवान्महेश्व्यो चच 
मन्तव्यं । ‡ ज्ासुरी । 


88 


‘The great one it is, whence the familiar notions of the universe are 
always produced *.’ Jnydna is usually the term for ‘true or divine know- 
ledge ;’ knowledge of matter and spirit leading to liberation; but it is 
here employed in its generic purport, ‘that by which things are known.’ 
The same may be said of prajnd, which is also commonly used in the 
sense of ‘true wisdom,’ but here implies merely, ‘that by which know- 
ledge is obtained,’ prajndyaté anayd, as RamAsrama expounds it. Several 
of these terms, in their technical, as well as literal application, bear an 
analogy to the ४०५ of Aristotle, and the pdms of Plato. M. Cousin 
considers the category to be ‘ une sorte d'ame du monde.’ It is, however, 
the instrament most proximate to soul, by which the latter perceives, 
wills, and acts. 

Intellect is of two kinds, or has two sets of properties, as it is influ- 
enced or affected by the opposite qualities, goodness and darkness. The 
former are, ‘virtue,’ dherma; ‘knowledge,’ juydna; ‘ dispassion,’ vairdgya; 
and ‘ power,’ aiswaryya. The latter are their negatives, ‘vice,’ adherma; 
‘ignorance,’ ajnydua ; ^ passion,’ avairdgya; and ‘ weakness,’ anaiswaryya. 
These again comprehend specific varieties. 

Dherma, ‘virtue,’ according to the $, Bhdshya, comprehends morality 
and religion. The $. Tatwa Kaumudi explains it, ‘The cause of happi- 
ness and liberation |. As the source of prosperity and happiness in life, 
it is the discharge of religious and moral obligations}; as the means of 
liberation, it is the observance of the eightfold yoga, or eight modes of 
contemplative devotion |. Jnydua, or ‘knowledge,’ is defined by the 
same Scholiast to be, ‘ distinct notion of the difference between the three 
qualities and soul§.’ ‘ Dispassion,’ vairdgya, is the extinction of rdga, 
‘colour,’ or passion, which like dyes of various hues tinctures the soul.’ 


* महानिति यतः ख्वातिलोकानां जायते सदा । 1 घम्मोभ्युद्‌ 
यनिःजेयसहेहुः | † यागदानादिः | ॥ अष्टाङ्कयोगानुं्ानं | 
९ गुणपुरूषान्यताख्यातिङ्धानं । "रागादयः कषायाधिहव्षिनल्तेषा 
मनावो वैराग्यं | 


89 


* Power,’ aiswaryya, is the possession of superhuman faculties. It is 
always termed eightfold, even in the 5. Bhdshya, although nine varieties 
are there named: one of them, however, ‘ heaviness,’ gariman, finds no 
place among the definitions given there, any more than in other authori- 
ties. It may be supposed to be included under the faculty of magnitude. 

The four first faculties, ‘ minuteness,’ animé; ‘lightness,’ laghimd ; 
‘reach,’ prépti; and ‘magnitude,’ mahimd; are explained and illustrated 
every where much in the same way. According to VAcHeEspat, the 
person endowed with the first can make his way into a solid rock: with 
the second, he may ascend to the solar sphere upon a sunbeam; or, as 
Moore has it, ^ may dance on a beam of the sun:” with the thir, he can 
touch the moon with the tip of his finger: and with the fourth, he may 
expand himself so as to occupy all space. The latter four facultics are 
less distinctly defined, and are sometimes confounded: the shades of dif- 
ference are indeed so slight, that they may all be resolved into one, ‘ ab- 
solute power over matter.’ ‘ Gratification of will,’ prékdmya, is generally 
defined by ichchhdnabhighdta*, ‘ unobstruction of wish ;’ or, as explained 
by Hémacuanpra, in his commentary on his own Lexicon, ‘ The wishes 
of a person possessing this faculty are unimpeded by the properties of 
material nature, such as form and the like; so that he can swim, dive, 
or float in carth as readily as in water}. This is sometimes adduced in 
illustration of the meaning of the next faculty, but less accurately. That, 
is termed vasitd, which Vacuespati defines, ‘ absolute subjugation of the 
elements and elementary beings}.’ The Chandrikd makes it ‘independ- 
ance on matter |i,’ which is much the same as prékdmya; and a similar 
confusion occurs in RAmAskaMa’s commentary on Amena, for he illustrates 
it by ‘ swimming or diving on dry land §.’ ‘ Subjugation of nature’ is the 
usually accepted import; as Himacnanpara, ‘ Thus as (with this faculty) 





* इच्छानभिधातः । t नास्य भूतस्वसूपेमेल्यादिभिरिद्धाऽभिहन्यते 
भूमावुन्मज्ञति निमज्जति यथोट्के। र भूतभोतिकं वशी भवत्यवश्यं । 
+ गुणभूतादनधीनता । °» भूमावण्ुन्मज्जनिमञ्जने | 


90 


any one determines the elements shall be, ६० they remain*.’ The next 
faculty is ‘dominion, षद According to VAcuEspatt, it is ‘ disposition 
at will of the production, arrangement, and expenditure of the elements 
and elementary beings {. NArAvana explains it, ‘directing or impelling 
them at will}. Ramdsrama interprets it prabhutwa, ‘dominion, sove- 
reignty; under which inanimate things obey command|.’ The last 
faculty is termed yatrakdémdvasdyitd. In RAmAsrama's commentary he 
reads the word kémdvasdyité §; and the only varicty he notices is that of 
the sibilant, which is sometimes, he observes, the dental, instead of the 
palatal letter§. According to the latter reading it is derived from ई **, 
‘to sleep,; to the former, from sid ff, ‘to destroy:’ in either, with ava 
prefixed, meaning, as RAmAsrama explains it, ‘he who tranquillizes or 
destroys (that is, accomplishes) his desires{{.' The reading of Gavra- 
papa is, however, yatrakamdvusdyttd, ४8 one compound ; and the common 
definition of the term is ‘ truc (infallible) purposel|ll,’ wherever exercised : 
‘Whatever the person having this faculty intends or proposes must be 
complied with by that which is the subject of his purpose; the clements 
themselves must conform to his designs ९९. (06 Chandrikd has, ‘ What- 
ever the will proposes, that it obtains™.’ Himacnanpra, in his text, 
gives the word as in the Bhdshya, yatrakdmdvasdyttwam ; and explains it, 
‘he who accomplishes his desires, to whatever they may be directed ***:° 
and he illustrates it by saying that ‘an arkat, or Bauddha saint, can, by 


* तेन यथा तानि (पृथिव्यादीनि) यथावस्थापयति तथावर्तिष्ठनो । 
1 भूतभोतिकानां प्रसवब्यूहव्ययानामीषे । ` भूनमतिकानां संकस्पमा 
waited: । प्रभुत्वं येनस्यावराप्याज्ञाकारिणः। ९ ईशित्ना वशि 
ता चैव तथा कामावश्णयिता | ¶ कामावसायिता | ** श्री । 
Tt ah il कामानवशेते-खवस्यत्तिवा । ॥ सत्यसंकत्यत्ता । 
0 यथास्य संक्योभवति भूतेषु तथेव भूतानि भवन्ति। oR 
स्तट्वस्यति तत्ाप्रोति । ”* यजकामस्तजावश्यतीति । 


91 


virtue of this faculty, convert poison into ambrosia, and administer it as 
means of vitality *.’ 





XXIV. 


Consciousness is egotism. Thence proceeds a twofold creation. 
The elevenfold set is one: the five clemental rudiments are the 


BHASHYA. 


The elevenfold set: the eleven organs. The five elemental rediments: 
elementary matter of five kinds, or the rudiments, sound, touch, form, 
flavour, and odour. What sort of creation proceeds from that which is 
thus defined is next explained. 


other. 


COMMENT. 


The third category is here specified, and described as the source of 
the senses and their respective objects. 

The term here given as the synonyme and definition of ‘ egotisin,’ 
ahankdérat, is abhimdna}, translated ‘consciousness.’ The ordinary sense 
of both words is pride, and the technical import is ‘the pride or conceit 
of individuality ;* ‘ self-sufficiency ;’ the notion that ‘1 do, 1 त्ति, I think, 
T am,’ as explained by Vacuzspari: ‘I alone preside and have power 
over all that is perccived and known, and all these objects of sense are 
for my use. There is no other supreme except I; I am. This pride. 
from its exclusive (selfish) application, is egotism |.’ The principle, there- 
fore, is something more in Hindu metaphysics than mere consciousness, 


* विषमष्यमृतकाय्यै संकत्यतो भोजयं जीवयततीति। 1 अहंकारः । 
† अभिमानः 1 ॥ यत्‌ खस्वालोचितं मतं च तबाहमधिकृततः शकः 
wart wet एवामी विषयाः wat नान्योचाधिकृतः shearer 
fr योऽभिमानः सोऽसाधारणष्यवहारात्वादहंकारः । 


92 


or conscience. It might be better expressed, perhaps, by ‘le moi,’ as it 
adds to the simple conception of individuality the notion of self-property, 
the concentration of all objects and interests and feelings in the in- 
dividual. 

The other synonymes of this category express rather modifications of 
it, as the next stanza intimates. Tnijasa, ‘the active’ or ‘the ardent,’ 
from téas*, ‘light, splendour, ardour,’ refers to its animating or exciting 
influence on human actions, in connection with the quality of foulness. 
Bhitddit, ‘ primitive element,’ and vatkritat, ‘ the modified,’ as explained 
in the Bhdshya, on the next verse, regard its being, in connection with 
darkness.and goodness, the principle from which the organs and. objects 
of sense proceed: for it must not be forgotten, that this category of 
egotism or consciousness has 8 physical, not a metaphysical character, 
according to the Sinkhya philosophy, being the organ or instrument by 
which the impression of individuality is conveyed to soul. It is in this 
capacity that it may be considered the primary element, the parent of 
the rudiments of the elements, or the objects of sense, and of the organs 
by which they are perceived. It is, in fact, the same with both these, as 
it is only by the application of our own senses to the objects of sense that 
we can become conscious of individual existence. 


XXV. 
From consciousness, affected by goodness, proceeds the good 


elevenfold set: from it, as a dark origin of being, come elementary 
particles: both issue from that principle affected by foulness, 


BHASHYA. 


When goodness predominates in egotism over darkness and foulness, 
that egotism is of the pure kind; the name of which, according to ancient 





“Fert भूतादिः । ‡ वैकृतः । 


98 


teachers, was vaikrita, ‘ the modified.’ From this modified egotism the 
class of eleven organs is produced. 7८ guod set: perfect organs; ade- 
quate to their functions: the set is thence called good. Again; from it, 
as a dark origin of beings, §c—When darkness predominates in egotism 
over goodness and foulness, that egotism is called dark, or, as it was 
named by the old masters, ‘ primitive element,’ bhuiddi. From tt come 
elementary particles ; the fivefold set. The first element of the elements 
ig darkness; therefore it is usually called the dark: from that primitive 
element the fivefold rudimental set proceed. Both issue from that prin- 
ciple affected by foulness: that is, the egotism in which foulness predomi- 
nates over goodness and darkness tukes the denomination éuijusa, ‘ the 
active ;’ and from that both proceed; both the eleven organs and five 
rudiments. For the pure egotism, which is vatkrita, ‘the modified,’ be- 
coming so modified, produces the eleven organs: but to do this it takes 
active egotism for its assistant; for pure (sritwika) egotisin is inert, and ix 
only able to produce the organs when combined with the active. In like 
manner the dark egotism, or that which is called ‘ primitive element,’ is 
inert, and becomes active only in union with the active, when it produces 
the five rudiments. Therefore it is said, both the organs of sense and 
their objects issue from the modification of egotism affected by foulness. 
The good elevenfold set proceeds from modified egotism, or that which ix 
affected by the quality of goodness. They are next particularized. 


COMMENT. 


The products of egotism are here described as proceeding from three 
modifications of that principle, varied by the influence of the three 
qualities. 

The terms used to designate the ‘pure,’ or sétwika principle; the 
‘dark,’ or tdémasa; and the ‘foul, or rdjasa; ‘variety of egotism,’ or 
vaikrita, bhdtddi, and taijasa; have been explained. According to our 
text, as understood by the Scholiasts, the eleven organs of sense issue 
from pure or modified egotism, and the five rudiments from elemental 
egotism ; both being influenced by ardent or active egotism.’ The 
commentator on the S. Pravacharza has a rather different explanation, 

Bb 


94 


interpreting ékddasaka, ‘eleventh,’ not ‘elevenfold:’ according to him, 
this eleventh, which is mind, proceeds from the first kind of egotism; the 
other ten from the second kind ; and the clements from the third. “Sutra: 
The pure eleventh (organ) proceeds from modified egotism. Comment : 
Eleventh, is mind, which in the class of sixteen organs and rudiments is 
of the quality of goodness ; therefore it is born from egotism, affected by 
goodness, called vatkrifa. This is the sense. Hence it follows, that from 
egotism, affected by foulness, proceed the other ten organs of sense; and 
from egotism, affected by darkness, proceed the rudiments*.” This inter- 
pretation he defends by the authority of the law-books and Puranas ; 
and he gives ४ similar turn, although rather indistinctly expressed, to the 
text of the Kdrikd. In the stanzas subsequent to this, to ver. 37, the 
organs of sense are fully described, and in ver. 38. the text returns to the 
elements. It is not necessary, therefore, to enter upon any explanation 
of them in this place. There is a remarkable expression in the Bhdshya, 
which presents a notion familiar to all ancient cosmogonics. GaurapAva 
says, ‘the first of the elements was darkness.’ It is the first of the 
‘elements, not the first of ‘things; for it was preceded by unevolved 
nature, and intellect, and it is itself a modified form of individuality. It 
therefore harmonizes perfectly well with the prevailing ideas in the an- 
cient world, of the state of things anterior to elementary or visible crea- 
tion, when “ chaos was, and night,” and when 
Nullus adhue mundo prebebat Jumina Titan, 
Nec nova ercscendo reparabat cornua Phabe. 

In the influence of the quality of foulness, or passion, for the word rajas 
has both senses, may be suspected an affinity to the doctrine of an active 
principle, the moving mind, the eros, that set inert matter into motion, and 
produced created things. 


* सा्िकमेकाट्शकं प्रवते वेकृताद्हंकारात्‌ ॥ काद्णनांपूरणभेका 
दशकं मनः घोडशषात्मगखमध्ये सालिकमतस्तकृतात्‌ सात्विकाहंसाराज्जायत 
इत्यथः । अतश्चराजसाहंकारादशेन्दरियाखि तामसाहंकाराश्च तन्माषाणीत्यपि 
गन्त्यं । 1 भूतानामादिभूतस्वमः | 


95 


XXVI. 


InreLecTuaL organs are, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, 
and the skin: those of action are, the voice, hands, feet, the excretory 
organ, and that of generation. 


BHASHYA. 


Reckoning from the eye to the organ of touch, the organs are called 
‘intellectual.’ Touched by it, the organ of touch, which is the skin: thence 
the term for the skin which is used (in the text), ‘that which touches,’ 
sparsanaka, Intellectual organs are five, as they ascertain or know (seve- 
rally) five objects, or sound, touch, form, flavour, and smell. Those of 
action, &¢.—They perform acts, whence they are called ‘ organs of action :’ 
thus, the voice articulates; the hands variously manipulate; the feet 
effect motion; the excretory organ, excretion; and the scxual organ, 
generation. Thus are enumerated ten organs, five of intellect and five 
of action. The character and nature of the eleventh, or mind, is next 
described. 

COMMENT. 

The five instruments or means of perception and five of action, pro- 
ducts of egotism, are enumerated in this stanza. 

The term ‘organs’ is correctly applicable to the material instruments 
by which perception is cxercised ; but it is not to be understood of the 
gross corporeal bodies, the visible eye, ear, hand, &c., which are parts of 
gross body. The word ‘senses’ would therefore be a less equivocal term, 
only that it does not so distinctly convey the idea of an instrument which, 
though subtile, is substantial. The original word, indriya, is defined to 
mean whatever relates or belongs to indra, said to be a synonyme of soul, 
the senses being indicative, being marks or signs, of the presence of soul*: 





* इ््रस्यातमनशिहादिन्दियमुच्यते | 


96 


accordingly each is denominated a linga (see p. 24), ‘a characteristic fea- 
ture or indication *.’ 





XXVIi. 


(Iy this set is) mind, which is both (an organ of sensation and of 
action). It ponders, and it is an organ as being cognate with the 
rest. They are numerous by specific modification of qualities, and 
so are external diversities. 


BHASHYA. 


Here, as one of the class of organs, mind is said to be bok. Among 
the organs of sensation it is one of sensation, and among those of action 
it is an organ of action also. As it performs the function of the organs 
of sensation and of those of action it belongs to both. Jt ponders (or pur- 
poses); whence the term sankalpaka. It is also un organ us being cognate 
with the rest ; for such is the meaning of the word sdédhermy«. The organs 
of sensation and action being (cognate or) produced, along with mind, 
from egotism affected by goodness, have this (property, of origin) in 
common with mind; and from this common property mind is an organ 
likewise. 

Thus eleven organs are produced from egotism affected by goodness, 
What, then, is the function (vritti) of mind? Reflection (saxkalpa) is its 
function. Sound and the rest are the functions of the orgaus of sensation. 
Speech and the rest are the functions of the organs of action. Now are 
these various organs, apprehending various objects, so created by Iswara? 
or are they self-generated? since nature, intellect, and egotism, are devoid 
of sense ; and soul is devoid of action. Thence, according Yo the Sinkhya 
doctrine, a certain spontaneity is the cause (of the variety of the senses). 
Therefore it is added, They are numerous by specific modification of qualities, 
and so are eaternal diversities: that is, the several objects of these eleven 








* रूपग्रहणतिङ्खं ay: शनट्यहणलिङग श्रोषमित्यादि | 


97 


organs, or sound, touch, form, flavour, and odour, which are the objects 
of five; speech, manipulation, motion, excretion, and generation, the 
objects of other five; and reflexion, the object of mind ; these all proceed 
from specific modification of qualities. From the variety (or special dif- 
ference) of such modifications of the qualities the multifariousness of the 
organs proceeds, as well as the diversity of external objects: consequently 
this variety is not the work of Iswara, nor of egotism, nor of intellect, nor 
of nature, nor of soul; but from modification of the qualities, produced 
by spontaneity. It does not proceed designedly (it is not the result of 
a will to act), becanse the qualitics are non-sentient (unconscious or 
irrational). How then does it take place? This, as will be afterwards 
explained, is in like manner as the secretion of milk is for the growth of 
the calf, so the proceedings of nature take place for the liberation of soul, 
without soul’s being cognizant of them; so the unconscious qualities be- 
come modified by the existence of the eleven organs, and their varieties 
are thence derived. Hence the eyc is placed in its elevated orbit for the 
purpose of looking up to heaven; and in like manner the nose, the ear, 
the tongue are commodiously situated for the apprehension of their re- 
spective objects: the organs of action arc also distributed conveniently 
for the discharge of their several duties of their own nature, through the 
modification of the qualities, not as their objects; as it is elsewhere said, 
“ Qualities abide in qualities; that which is the function of the qualities 
is their object.” External diversities, therefore, are to be regarded as 
made by the qualities: this is the meaning of the text. Of which nature 
is the cause. 
The several functions of the organs are next specified. 


COMMENT. 


After defining mind as an instrument both of sensation and of action, 
this verse explains how it is that there are various organs and objects of 
sense ; and it is said to depend in both cases upon specific modifications 
of the qualities of nature. 

Mind is an instrument both of sensation and of action. Its function is 
sankalpa, 8 word that more commonly means ‘resolve, purpose, expecta- 

ce 


98 


tion; 88 in the Hitopadésa, ‘the crow, Laghupatanaka, says, ‘ All has 
been heard by me; and this is my resolve, that we must be friends *.’ 
And Menu: ‘ Desire is the root of expectation ; sacrifice is its product :’ 
or, 98 Kutuéxa Buatta explains it, ‘ Sankalpa is understanding to this 
effect, that by a certain ceremony a desired consequence is effected }. 
In both passages the notion of ‘conclusion from foregone premises’ is 
conveyed, and that seems to be its meaning here. Thus VACHESPATI 
explains it: ‘The mind carefully considers a substance perceived by an 
organ of sense, (and determines) this is simple, that is not so; or discri- 
minates them by their condition of predicate and predicable|.. Again, 
it is said, ^ First, knowledge or perception is simple (inconsiderate), like 
the knowledge of a child, a dumb man, or the like: it is produced by the 
mere thing; but when, after this, the thing, as distinguished by its pro- 
perties, by its genus, and the like, is recognised by the understanding, 
and intellect ix in accordance with perception, that period (or interval) of 
determination is the operation of the mind.” Here, then, saakalpa is the 
process of reficction, the consideration of the object of simple perception, 
so as to form a definite idea, which mind transmits, through individuality 
and intellect, to soul. In this way mind is an organ both of perception 
and action; perceiving the objects presented by the senses, and forming 
them into a positive idea. It is further identified with both classes of 
organs by originating from the same source, egotism affected by good- 
ness; and consequently it consists of the same material 4 

The second portion of the stauza conveys a doctrine that is not very 
intelligible. The variety of the senses and of the objects of the senses is 





* ae मया सतै तथापि चैतावान्‌ संकल्यस्तुया सह सौहृद्यमवश्यं कर 
शीयं । t संर्स्यमूतः कामो वै यज्ञाः संक्त्यसम्भवाः। † अनेन 
कम्मेणा इट्निष्टं फलं साध्यत इत्येव विषया वुः संक्स्यः। an 
त्लोचित्तमिन्द्रियिण वस्तिद्भिति सम्मुग्धमिदमेवं नैवमिति सम्यक्‌ कल्य 
यत्ति विरेषणविशेच्भावेन विवेचयतीति । ऽ सालिकाहंकारोपादानलं 
च साधम्म्यं। 


99 


said to arise spontaneously in them, from specific modification of the 
three qualities. VAcuespatt understands the allusion to external objects 
to be merely illustrative ; that is, the internal organs are diversified by 
modification of the qualities, in the same manner that external objects 
are varied by the same modification*:’ and the translation follows this 
explanation. In the Bhdshya a different reading in the original occurred, 
which would require the passage to be rendered, ‘and from variety of 
external objects {:’ thus ascribing the diversity of the organs, not only 
to modification of the qualities, but to the diversity of external objects. 
which require snitable, and therefore various organs for their apprehen- 
sion. The reading is, however, clearly incompatible with his argument, 
although GaurapAna is somewhat obscure; but the variety is noticed 
and admitted by the author of the Chandriké}. 

The $, Pravachana Bhishya considers the multifariousness spoken of in 
the Sdtra, which conveys apparently a similar doctrine to that of the Karikd, 
as restricted to mind: ‘ Multifariousness is from modification of qualities, 
as the variety of human condition (is from various association): that is, as 
the very same individual assumes different characters, according to the 
influence of his associations; becoming a lover with a mistress, a sage 
with sages, a different person with others; so mind, from its connection 
with the eye or any other organ, becomes identified with it, and conse- 
quently is diversified according to the function of sight and the rest of 
the organs with which it is severally associated |.’ The association of 
mind with the organs is intimated by the Védas, as in the text,‘ My mind 
was elsewhere, I did not hear {` The very illustration used by Locke : 


* बाह्ममेदाशचेति cern यथा वाह्यभेदास्तथेतदपीत्यथैः । t वा 
भेदाश्च । ; बाद्यभेदाञ्चेततिपादे तु मा्यभेदादपीन्दरियमेद्‌ छावश्यको 
बोध्य इत्यथः | ॥ गुणपरिणामभेदाज्ानात्वमवस्थावत्‌ | यथक एव 
नरः संगवशाबरानात्वं भजते कामिनीसंगात्‌ कामुको विरक्तसंगाधिरल्तोऽन्य 
संगाञ्चान्य ण्व मनोऽपि चक्ुरादिसंगात्‌ ahaa दशेनादिवृि 
विश्ि्ितया नाना भवति । + खन्यथमना अभूवं ना्नोषमिति । 


100 


“ A man whose mind is intently employed in the contemplation of some 
objects, takes no notice of impressions made by sounding bodies upon 
the organ of hearing: therefore it is evident that perception is only when 
the mind receives the impression,” says the English philosopher; and 
the Hindu infers, that ‘the mind must cooperate with the organs of sense, 
even for perception, as they would otherwise be incapable of performing 
their functions *.” 

The materiality of mind, considered as distinct from consciousness, 
intelligence, and soul, and as neither more nor Jess than an internal sense, 
४ sensorium, is much less absurd than the same character of it when con- 
sidered as part of, or identical with, soul, as was the doctrine of the Epi- 
cureans, whose description of mind, as an organ merely, agrees well 
enough with the Hindu notion: 

Primum; animum dico mentem quam sepe dicamus 
Esse hominis partem nihilo minus ac manus ac pes 
Atque oculei, partes animantes totius exstant.  _Lucurrrus, IIT, 94. 


XXVIII. 


Tue function of five, in respect to colour and the rest, is observa- 
tion only. Speech, handling, treading, excretion, and generation are 
the functions of five (other organs). 


BHASHYA. 


The term ‘ only’ (mdtra) is to be understood in the sense of specialty, 
or the exclusion of what is not specified ; as in the sentence, ^ Alms only 
are received;” that is, nothing else is received. Thus the eyes are 
observant of colour (form), not of flavour and the rest; and so of the 


च्ुरादीनां मनः संयोगं विना व्यापाराछ्षमत्बादनुसीयते । 


101 


other senses. And in this way the function of the eye is colour (vision); 
of the tonguc, taste; of the nose, smell; of the ear, sound (hearing); of 
the skin, touch: these are the functions of the intellectual organs. Specch 
and the rest (are the functions) of the five organs of action ; or, speech is 
the function of the voice (larynx, &c.); handling, of the hands; treading, 
of the feet; dejection of excrement separated from food, of the rectum; 
and generation of offspring, of the sexual organs: ‘function or object’ 
being required for each term by the grammatical construction of the 
sentence. 
The functions of intellect, egotism, and mind are next described. 


COMMENT. 


The ठ particularizes the functions of the organs of sense severally. 

The general term for the office of the senses is dlochana*, literally 
‘sceing, beholding, perceiving, observing.’ According to ancient authori- 
ties it is said to comprise both the first undeliberative, and the second 
deliberative knowledge ; or, in short, what is understood by ‘ perception ¢.” 
The commentator on the S. Pravachana, who gives this explanation, 
observes, however, that some consider deliberative perception to be the 
property of the mind only, whilst simple or undeliberative perception is 
that of the external senses; and this appears to be the doctrine of the 
Sankhyas: the senses receive simple impressions from without of their 
own nature; whether those impressions are perceived, depends upon the 
cooperation of the internal sense, or mind. The term for ‘function’ is 
vritti, explained by vydpdra, ‘active exercise or application; also by 
sdémarthyam, ‘ ability, adequacy ;’ and phala, ‘fruit, result. GavrarApa 


* आलोचनं । 1 आलोचनञ्च पूष्चीचयियव्याख्यातं । अस्तिचात्ठो 
चनं सानं प्रथमं निविकस्यकं । परपुनस्तथा वस्तुधेमेजत्यादिभिस्वथेति | 


तथाच निविकल्यकसविकस्यकषरूपदिविधमपि रेन्दरियकज्लानमालोवनमंग 
मिति। 


pd 


102 


has vishaya, ‘ object ;' and it may be said, that the function and object of 
a sense is the same thing, sight being both the function and the object of 
the eye. There is some difficulty in translating some of the terms satis- 
factorily, although there is none in understanding what is meant by them. 
Thus ripa, ‘form,’ or, as rendered in the text, ‘ colour,’ is the object and 
office of the eye; it is therefore equivalent both to visible substance and 
sight. So of sabda, ‘sound ;’ it is both hearing and that which is heard. 
‘Spersa, ‘ touch,’ is the faculty and the substance to which contact may be 
applied. In rasa, ‘ taste,’ and gandha, ‘smell,’ we have the double equi- 
valents, as both words in English, as well as in Sanscrit, express both the 
sense and the sensible property. In English, ‘ voice’ is a function ; but 
here, at least, vdch* is also the instrument of speech. In the other organs 
of action the function is more readily rendered ; but the difficulty in any 
case is only that of language, and the sense is sufficiently explicit. 


XXIX. 


Of the three (internal instruments) the functions are their re- 
spective characteristics: these are peculiar to each. The common 
function of the three instruments is breath and the rest of the five 
vital airs. 

BHASHYA. 

The natural properties, which are the several characteristics, are the 
respective characteristics (as previously defined). Ascertainment is intellect 
(ver. 23): that also is the function of intellect. Consciousness is egotism 
(ver. 24): consciousness is both its characteristic and its function. Mind 
ponders (ver. 27): such is its definition; and reflection, therefore, is the 
function of mind. Of these three, intellect, egotism, and mind, their 
respective characteristics are their specific functions. The functions of 
the intellectual organs, as before explained, are also specific (the same is 


+ वाच्‌ । 


108 


the case with the organs of action). But now their common function is 
described. The common function of the instruments.—The function of the 
instruments in common is breath and the rest of the five vital airs; the airs 
called prdna, apdna, samdna, udéna, and vydra. These are the five airs 
which are the common function of all the organs of sense. The air, for 
instance, called prdna is that which is perceptible in the mouth and 
nostrils, and its circulation is the common function of the thirteen kinds 
(of instruments): that is, where there is breath, the organs acquire (are 
connected with) soul (they become living). Breath, like a bird in a cage, 
gives motion (vitality) to the whole. It is called preéna, ‘ breath’ or ‘life,’ 
from ‘breathing.’ From carrying downwards (apanayana), the air apdina 
is so named; the circulation of which, also, is the common function of 
the organs. Samdna is so named from conducting equally (samanayana) 
the food, &c. (through the frame). It is situated in the central part of 
the body, and its circulation is the common function of the instruments. 
The air uddna is denominated from ascending, or from drawing or guiding 
best (un-nayana). It is perceptible in the space between the navel and 
the head, and the circulation that it has is the common function of the 
organs. Lastly, the air by which internal division and diffusion through 
the whole body is effected is called vydna, from its pervading (vydpti) the 
body like the etherial element. The circulation of that, also, is the com- 
mon function of the assemblage of the organs. In this manner these vital 
airs, as the common function of the instruments, are explained ; that is, 
the common function of the thirteen kinds (of organs). 


COMMENT. 


Besides the peculiar functions of the three internal instruments, mind, 
egotism, and intellect, which as the same with their definitions have 
already been specified, they have a common office in the evolution or 
circulation of the internal aerial humours which constitute vitality. 

The translation limits this community of function to the three internal 
instruments only, or to intellect, egotism, and mind; and such is the 
interpretation of Vacnesrati Misra: ‘ The five airs, or life, is the function 
of the three (internal) instruments, from being present where they are, 


104 


and absent where they are not*.” So the 8. Pravachana Bh. explains 
the Sitra Sdmdnya karana vritti +; which is also the phrase of the Kérikd, 
‘the function of the three internal instruments}. Gaurapapa, however, 
understands vitality to be the common function of all the organs, external 
and internal ; or thirtecn instruments, ten of the former, and three of the 
latter kind. The expression of the text also is general, and applicable 
either to all the organs, or to any of them, as variously understood. The 
two meanings are not irreconcilable, although, strictly spcaking, the sense 
followed in the translation is most correct; for although vitality is the 
common function of all the senses, yet it is essentially so of the internal 
senses orly: it might continue with the privation of any or all of the 
external senses, but could not, as VAcHEsvaTi states, subsist without the 
internal organs, as it depends upon their existence for its own. So also 
the $, Pravachuna Bhdshya calls the vital airs not only the ‘ functions,’ 
but ‘ modifications, of the internal instruments.’ These vital airs are not 
to be confounded with vdyz, or ‘ elemental air,’ for the Védas are authority 
for their differeut origin: ‘From him is born vital air, mind, and all the 
senses, heaven, wind, light, water, and the all-sustaining earth §.’ ‘The 
attribution of aerial operation to modification of the internal instruments 
arises from their being susceptible of a sort of motion similar to that of 
air, and from their being governed by the same deity ¶. The vital airs 
are, in fact, the vital functions of breathing, circulation, and digestion. 
That these functions, resulting from organization, should be supposed to 
partake of the nature of aerial humours, originates very possibly from 
some misapprehension of the phenomena of breathing, flatulence, and 
arterial pulsation. The term used by Gaurapdpa to designate their 





* चयाणमपिकरणानां पञ्चवायवो जीवनं gfrarara भावाक्षदभावे 
चाभावात्‌ । 1† सामान्यकरणवृ्तिः। ‡ अन्तः करणभयस्यवृक्षिः । 
॥ परिणामभेदाः। ° एतस्माज्जायते प्राणो मनः सरन्दरियाणिच । खं 
वायुज्योतिरापश्च पुधिवी विश्वधारिणी। "° अन्तः करणपरिणामेऽपि 
वायुहुस्यसंचारविशेषाश्नायुदेवताधिकाराच्च वायुष्यवहारोपयत्तिरिति | 


105 


action occurs syandana, ‘moving, circulation,’ in the copy; but spandana, 
‘throbbing, pulsation,’ were perhaps a preferable reading. The offices 
assigned to them are evidently connected with notions either of circu- 
lation or a pulse. Thus Prdua is breath, expiration and inspiration. 
Apéna is flatulence, crepitus. Samdna is eructation, supposed to be 
essential to digestion. Uddna is the pulsation of the arteries in the head, 
the neck, and temples; and Vydna is the pulsation of the rest of the 
superficial arteries, and occasional puffiness of external parts, indicating 
air in the skin. The situations assigned to the five airs by the $, Tautwa 
Kaumudi are much less consistent and intelligible. Thus Prdna is there 
said to be the function of the tip of the nostrils, head, navel, and great 
toes; Apéna, of the back of the neck, the back, the feet, and the organs 
of excretion and generation; Saména, of the heart, the navel, and the 
joints; Uddna, of the head, throat, palate, forehead, and root of the nose ; 
and Vydna, of the skin. With exception of the last, it is not easy to 
understand how such absurd situations should have been selected. The 
S. Bheshya may be taken as the expression of the earlier notions. 


XXX, 
Or all four the functions are instantaneous, as well as gradual, in 
regard to sensible objects. The function of the three (interior) is, in 
respect of an unseen one, preceded by that of the fourth. 


BHASHYA. 


Of all four the functions are instantaneous—The four are, intellect, 
egotism, and mind, in connection with any one of the organs of sense. 
Of these four the function is instantaneous in regard to perception, or in 
the ascertainment of perceptible objects. Intellect, egotism, mind, and 
the eye see form at once, in one instant, (coming instantly to the con- 
clusion) that is a post. The same three, with the tongue, at once ap- 
preciate flavour; with the nose, odour: and so with the ear and skin. 

Ee 


106 


Again ; their functions are also gradual in regard to sensible objects Ot 
that aggregate of four the function is also (occasionally) gradual (pro- 
gressive). Thus, a person going along a road sces an object at a distance, 
and is in doubt whether it be a post or a man: he then observes some 
characteristic marks upon it, or a bird perched there; and doubt being 
thus dissipated by the reflection of the mind, the understanding discri- 
minates that it is a post; and thence egotism interposes, for the sake of 
certainty, as, verily (or, I am certain) it is a post. In this way the func- 
tions of intellect, egotism, mind, and eye are (successively) discharged. 
And as in the case of a visible object, so it is as to sound and the rest of 
the objects of perception. 

But in respect of an unseen one, the functions of the three are preceded by 
that of the fourth—-Unseen implies time past, or future: for instance, in 
respect to ‘form,’ the function of the eye has preceded that of intellect, 
egotism, and mind, as has that of the skin in respect to touch; of 
the nose in regard to smell; of the car in relation to sound; and of the 
tonguc in respect to taste. The functions of intellect, egotism, and mind 
are preceded in order by those of the senses in regard to time future or 
past, whilst in regard to time present they may be either instantaneous 
or gradual. Further— 


COMMENT. 


The consentaneous or successive operation of the three internal and 
any one of the external organs in the formation of ideas is here described. 

The cooperation of the three internal organs and any organ of sense 
may be instantaneous (yugapat), like a flash of lightning, or as at the sight 
of a tiger, when the recognition of him, knowledge of his ferocity, con- 
clusion of personal peril, and determination to try to escape are the 
business of one and the same moment: or their operation may be gra- 
dual or successive (kramasas), allowing leisure, for instance, for the eye 
to see, for the mind to consider, for egotism to apply, and for intellect to 
conclude. GaurarAva rather disarranges the order of succession, and 
places the function of egotism last, assigning to it the office of belief or 
conviction. VAcHeEspatr’s illustration is more regular: ‘Thus, the ear 


10 


hears the twang of a bowstring; mind reflects that this must be for the 
flight of an arrow; egotism says, It is aimed at me; and intellect deter- 
maines, I must ron away +` Whenever the object is unseen, adrishia, not 
present, whether it be past or be to come, there must have been a prior 
perception of it; that is, as the text is explained by the commentators, 
there must have been a prior perception of it by an organ of sense. The 
expression of the text, tat pérvikd vritti, ‘their prior function,’ might be 
thonght to refer to a prior notion gained by the conjoint operation of the 
internal and external organs at some former period. This, however, 
would be recollection, the seat of which, as well as of judgment or infer- 
ence, is in buddhi, or ‘intellect,’ alone; as in the Pdtanjala Sitra, ‘ Proof, 
refutation deliberation, sleep, memory ; these are said to be the functions 
of intellect |. प्रह prior operation, therefore, is merely perception or 
observation by the external sense, alochanam (see ver. 28), conveying 
simple ideas to the mind. Taking, then, this prior simple idea acquired 
through an external organ, any further consideration of it is the gradual 
operation of the three internal instruments. Where the object is present, 
conviction may be either momentary or successive: the Sankhyas main- 
taining the possibility of consentaneous operation of the organs of sense 
and mind, egotism and intellect, in opposition to the doctrine of the 
Vaiséshikas, that the formation of ideas is in all cases a graduated pro- 
cess: Where the object is absent, the idea must be formed by the 
internal organs so far in successive order that they must be consequent 
upon a former impression received by an external sense; but as concerns 
themselves, their action may be either simultaneous or successive}. The 





* ऋअधप्रणिहितमनाः रुणोन्ताकृष्टसशरशिश्िनीमररत्द़ी कृतकोट्एः 
Teen पाटञ्चरोयमिति निशिनोति अथ च मां प्र्येतीत्यभिमन्यत 
सअथाध्यवस्यत्यपसरामीतः स्थानादिति । † प्रमाणविपम्ेयविक्स्य 
निनदरास्मृतय इति । एतत्‌ सै पातज्ञले Alea या एता नु्िवृत्तय उक्ता 
इति । ‡ अन्तः ररणएनयस्य युगपत्‌ ऋमेण च वृततिदैष्टपू्दिका-यथा 
हे तथाऽहरेऽपीति योजना । 


108 


illustration which occurs in the Bhdshya and other commentaries, of the 
course of reasoning by which the nature of a distant object is determined, 
is something like that with which, in the Philebus, the formation of 
opinion is elucidated. 


XXXI. 


Tue instruments perform their respective functions, incited by 
mutual invitation. The soul’s purpose is the motive: an instrument 


BHASHYA. 


Swam is repeated, implying ‘several ordcr:’ that is, intellect, egotism, 
mind, perform their respective functions, the incitement to which is mu- 
tual invitation. Avda implies ‘respect and alertness.’ They do this for 
the accomplishment of the purpose of soul. Egotism and the rest effecting 
it through intellect: that is, intellect, knowing the wishes of egotism and 
the rest, proceeds to its own peculiar function. If it be asked, why it 
does s0? the answer is, the purpose of the soul is the motive. Soul’s pur- 
pose is to be fulfilled: for this object the activity of the qualities occurs, 
and thence these instruments make manifest the object of the soul. How 
is it that (being devoid of intelligence) they act? They act of their own 
accord. An instrument can be wrought by none—The purpose of soul 
alone causes them to act: this is the meaning of the sentence: an instru- 
meut is not made—not roused—to act by any human superior. 

It is next specified how many (instruments) intellect and the rest are. 


is wrought by none. 


COMMENT. 


The circumstances that induce the internal and external organs to 
perform their respective functions are said to be mutual incitement, and 
spontaneous disposition to effect the objects of soul. 

The organs of sense are said to act by mutual invitation or incitement. 
Their cooperation in the discharge of their respective functions is com- 
pared to that of different soldiers in an army, all engaged in a common 


109 


assault, but of whom one agrees to take a spear, another a mace, another 
a bow. It is objected, that the organs being declared non-sentient, inca- 
pable of intelligence, cannot be supposed to feel, much less to know, any 
mutual design or wish, ékita* or abhiprdyat; and the terms arc ex- 
plained to signify the insensible influence which the activity of one 
exerts upon that of another, if there be no impediment in the way; a 
sort of sympathetic or consentaneous action. ‘Akita here means incite- 
ment to activity; that is, at the time when one organ is in action, the 
activity of another, if no obstruction hinder ऋ. ‘With this view the 
several instruments are directed by a presiding power, which may be 
termed the adaptation of the mutual fitness of their natures|.’ The 
motive for this sympathetic action is the purpose of soul, fruition or 
liberation ; which purpose they of their own accord, but unconsciously, 
operate to fulfil, in the same way as the unconscious breast spontancously 
secretes milk for the nourishment of the infant; according to the Sitra, 
‘ As the cow for the calf:’ that is, as the milk of the cow of its own accord 
exudes for the use of the calf, and awaits not the effort of another, so the 
organs of their own accord perform their office for the sake of their 
master, soul [. S. Pravachana Bh. They must act of their own nature; 
it is not in the power of any one to compel them to act. GavnapAva’s 
expression is, ‘Not by any sovercign man%:’ perhaps some particle, such 
as vd, may have been omitted in the copy, making the sense, ‘ Neither 
by a deity nor 9. mortal ;’ or the phrase may imply, that they are uot 
compelled to action even by soul, as a divinity ; but fulfil soul’s purposes 
through an innate property, undirected by any external agent. 


Saga: taftre: 1 आकूलमभ प्रवृत्युनमुखत्वं wie 
TATA एवं तथा चासति वाधङेऽन्यस्यापि | | तेनैषाम 
fern करणानां स्वरूपसामष्योपयोगाभिजञेन भविततष्यं । ऽ पेनुव 
WET | यथा वासाय धेनोः स्वयमेव क्षीरं स्वति नान्ययत्नमयेक्षते तथेव 
स्वाभिनः पुरुषस्य कृते स्वयमेव करणानि प्रवन्त इत्य्थेः। a केन 


चिदीष्वरेण पुरुषेण | 
rf 


110 


XXXII. 


Instrument is of thirteen sorts. It compasses, maintains, and 
manifests: what is to be done by it is tenfold, to be compassed, to 
be maintained, to be manifested. 


BHASHYA. 


Instrument. —Intellect and the rest are three; the intellectual organs 
are five; the organs of action are five: all together thirtecn. What this 
performs is next declared : it compasses, maintains, and manifests; that is, 
the orgarfs of action compass and maintain ; those of perception manifest. 
How many kinds of action there are is next specified. Its action, that 
which is to be done by it, is éenfold; of ten kinds, as hearing, touch, &e. 
by the instruments of perception ; speech and the rest by those of action : 
and thus by the former, manifestation, and by the latter, comprehension 
and support, are effected. 


COMMENT. 


The sense of the term karanu, ‘instrument’ or ‘organ,’ is here ex- 
plained, as a generic denomination for the external and internal organs. 

The instruments or organs are thirteen; that is, three internal, intel- 
lect, egotism, and mind ; and ten external, or the organs of sensation and 
action. Their respective functions as organs have been explained: their 
effects as instruments are classed under three heads, ‘compassing,’ dha- 
rana*; ‘ maintaining,’ didrana{; and ‘ manifesting, prakdsana{. The 
first, which means, literally, ‘ taking, seizing,’ and rendered in the text 
^ compassing,’ signifies ‘ the application of an organ to the object to which 
it is adapted |,’ and is the especial function of the organs or instruments 
of action. ‘ Maintaining,’ dhdrana, ‘ supporting, upholding,’ is, according 


“दाहरणं । 1 धारणं। 1 ग्रकाश्नं। । यथा स्वमुपाददते 
स्वव्यापारेण व्याप्रवन्तीति मावत्‌ । 


111 


to the S. Bluishya, also the office of the instruments of action; but the 
authors of the S. Tatwa Kaumudi and S. Chandrikd assign it to the three 
internal instruments, intellect, egotism, and mind, as being especially the 
supporters of vitality. ‘ Buddhi, ahankdra, and mind uphold, through 
their function being designated as the production of the vital airs, &c.*’ 
The elder commentator could not, of course, admit this doctrine; for we 
have seen (ver. 29) that, according to him, all the senses or instruments 
contribute to support the vital principle. All the Scholiasts agree in 
attributing ‘ manifestation, enlightening,’ prakdsana, to the intellectual 
organs. The objects to be effected by the instruments are tenfold, re- 
ducible to the same three classes: spcech, manipulation, walking, excre- 
tion, and generation are to be compassed, to be effected, [1110 by 
the actual application of the several organs: sound, taste, touch, smell, 
form to be manifested, to be made sensible, prakdsya: and all of them, 
together with the vital airs, constituting in fact animal life, are to be 
dhdryya}, upheld or maintained. 


XXXII. 


Internat instruments are three; external ten, to make known 
objects to those three. The external organs minister at time pre- 
sent: the internal do so at any time. 


BHASHYA. 


Internal instruments Intellect, egotism, and mind are three, from the 
difference between intellect and the others. External ten.—The five 
organs of perception and five of action are the ten external instruments, 
and they are to make known objects for the fruition of intellect, cgotism, 





^ जुद्यहंकारमनांसि तु agen प्राणादितष्षशया धारयन्ति । 
† आहाग्यैः । tu 


112 


and mind. का present: that is, the ear hears a present sound, not one 
that is past, nor one that is to come: the eye sees present form, not that 
which is past, nor that which is future: the skin touches present sub- 
stance: the tongue tastes present flavour: the nose smells present odours, 
nor past nor future. It is the same with the organs of action: the voice 
articulates actual, not past nor future words: the hand takes hold of a 
present water-pot, not one that has been or is to be: the feet traverse a 
present, not a past nor a future walk: and the organs of excretion and 
generation perform present, not past nor future offices. External organs, 
therefore, minister at time present. The internal ones do so for any time.— 
Intellect, egotism, and mind regard objects of any period: thus intellect 
forms an idea, not only of a present water-jar, but of one that has been 
or will be made: so egotism exercises consciousness of an object past, 
present, or future: and mind considers the past and future, as well as the 
present. Internal instrument is, therefore, for all times. 

It is next explained which of these instruments apprehends specific, 
and which unspecific objects. 


COMMENT. 


The difference between the functions of the external and internal 
organs, as concerns time, is here explained: the action of the former 
being confined to time present; that of the latter comprehending algo the 
past and the future. 

Internal instrument is so denominated from operating within the 
body*; the external from being applied to exterior objects, making 
them known to the internal organization. The term vishaya, ‘object,’ is 
also explained by bhogya, ‘that which is to be enjoyed;’ and vydpdra, 
‘exercise; and vishaydkhya, ‘that which declares or makes objects 
known.’ It is also defined as ‘that which occasions the exercise of the 
functions of the three internal instrumentst.’ External sensation is 


* शरीराभ्यन्तरवृत्तित्वादन्तः करणं । † विषयं व्यापारमाख्याति 
जनयति | 


113 


necessarily confined to present objects, but mind, consciousness, and 
intellect apprehend from present objects those which have past, or are to 
come; as past rain from the swelling of a river; and future rain, in the 
absence of any other prognostic, from the destruction of the eggs of the 
ants*, This last phrase alludes probably to the well known destruction 
of various species of the ant tribe, which in the East takes place imme- 
diately before the setting in of the rainy season: they then take wing, 
and fly abroad in vast multitudes, of which few survive; according to the 
Hindustani proverb, iG > 45 ४ =) cee oe oS Sine “When the 
ants are about to die, their wings come forth. The ‘expression “ants 
eggs,” pipilikdida, is, however, rather questionable. It occurs in both 
copies of the S. Tuterra Kavmudi. 


XXXIV. 


Among these organs the five intellectual concern objects specific 
and unspecific. Speech concerns sound. The rest regard all five 
objects. : 
BHASHYA. 

The intellectual organs concern specific objects: they apprehend objects 
which have specific properties. The intellectual organs of men distin- 
guish sound, touch, form, taste, smell, along with objects of indifference, 
pleasure and pain. The organs of the gods apprehend objects which 
have no specific distinctions. So, amongst the five organs of action, 
speech concerns sound. Speech, whether of gods or of men, articulates 
words, recites verses, and the likc; and this instrument is the same in 
both orders of beings. The rest—ull except speech; the hand, the foot, 
and the organs of excretion and gencration—regard all five objects: that 


* यथानदीपूरणोदादभूषुटिरसत्युपधात्तके पिष्पीलिकाशसंचरणाञ्जवि 
ष्यतिवृिरिति । 


cg 


114 


is, sound and the other four objects of perception belong to all the other 
organs; for there may be sound, touch, form, taste, and smell in the 
hands; the foot treads upon the earth, of which sound and the rest may 
be characteristics; the excretory organ separates that in which the five 
objects abide ; and the generating organs produce the secretion which is 
equally characterised by the five organs of sense. 


COMMENT. 


Another distinction is made in the functions of the external instru- 
ments, as they regard objects with or without specific characteristics. 

Objects are distinguished as having specific characters or effects, savi- 
Sésha*, and as devoid of them, xirviséshat; and the instruments are dis- 
criminated according to their capability of conveying notions of cither. 
The orguns of sense in mortals can apprehend only those objects which 
have specific characters; either sensible, as colour, form, taste, &८.; or 
moral, as pleasant, painful, or indifferent. The faculties of the gods and 
of sages can apprehend objects without such characteristic properties, 
and which exercise no moral effect, producing neither pleasure, pain, nor 
indifference. The $. Tata Kuwnndi identifies ‘specific’ with ‘ gross cor- 
poreal’ objects {, and ‘ unspecific’ with न subtile aud rudimental’ objects ||; 
the latter of which are cognizable alone by the organs of holy men and 
deitics §. This distinction applies to all the external organs, except the 
voice, which in men, saints, and gods can articulate sensible, specific, or 
corporeal words alone; for it is the organ of the voice that is the origin of 
speech. Specch cannot, like sound, taste, &c., originate with any thing 
gross or subtile exterior to the speaker; it must proceed from him, 
through the agency of a gross material instrument, and must therefore 
be gross or sensible itsclf. Gross corporeal mechanism cannot be the 
source of a subtile product, and therefore with every order of beings 





$ तचोश्रोतसां योगिनां च at शब्ट॒तन्माचविषयं स्मूतविषयं च । 
wea 7 स्थूलशब्विषयमेव | 


115 


speech must be specific. ‘The rest,’ séshdni referring to the organ of 
speech, implies the other organs of action, all of which may regard the 
five objects of perception ; that is, they may comprehend them all; as 
‘from the combination (or capability) of sound, touch, colour, smell, taste, 
in objects like a water-jar and othcrs, which may be compassed or taken 
hold of by the hand, &c.*” 5. Tatwa Kaumudi. 


XXXV. 


Since intellect, with the (other twu) internal instruments, adverts 
to every object, therefore those three instruments are warders, and 
the rest are gates. 

BHASHYA. 


With the internal; that is, intellect, with egotism and mind. Adverts 
‘fo; takes, apprehends; that is, apprehonds sound and the rest at all 
three seasons. Therefore these three are warders, and the rest are gates.— 
The rest; the other instruments; instruments being understood. Fur- 
ther— 


COMMENT. 


A metaphor is employed to illustrate the functions of the external and 
internal instruments. 

The internal instruments are compared to warders, doorkeepers, ur to 
persons having charge of a door or gate; not opening and closing it 
mercly, but as taking note of all that enter: the external senses being 
the doors or gateways by which the objects of perception gain ad- 
mission. 


* पारयाद्याहायाणां घटादीनां daaegrenareenfeti । 


116 


XXXVI. 


Tuese characteristically differing from each other, and variously 
affected by qualities, present to the intellect the soul’s whole pur- 
pose, enlightening it as a lamp. 

BHASHYA. 

These, which are called instruments: they varzously affected by quali- 
ties, How affected? Like a Jamp; exhibiting objects like alamp. Cha- 
racterislically differing ; dissimilar, having different objects; that is the 
sense. Objects of the qualities is intended. Variously affected by quali- 
hes; produced or proceeding from qualities. Soul's whole purpose—The 
instruments of perception and action, egotism and mind, having illus- 
trated the object of soul (as attainable) through each respectively, present 


it to the intellect, place it in the intellect; and consequently soul obtains 
pleasure and the rest; that is, every object seated in intellect. Further— 


COMMENT. 


The process by which ideas are conveyed to soul is here described. 

Intellect (buddht or mahkat) is the instrument or organ which is the 
medium between the other instruments or organs and soul; that is, all ideas 
derived from sensation, reflection, or consciousness must be deposited in 
the chief or great instrument, intcllect or understanding, before they can 
be made known to soul, for whose use and advantage alone they have 
been assembled. They are variously affected by the qualities.—They con- 
vey impressions or ideas, with the properties or effects of pleasure, pain, 
and indifference, accordingly as they are influenced by the qualitics of 
goodness, fouJness, and darkness. In fact these organs are identified 
with the qualities by all the commentators. Gavrapdpa says, ‘they 
proceed or are born from them*:’ and in the 9. Tatwa Kaumudi and 





* गुशेभ्योजाताः । 


117 


9. Chandriké they are called also ‘ products or modifications and varieties 
of the qualities ;’ thus the former has, ‘The external organs, mind, and 
egotism are affections of qualities; they are changes of condition of the 
qualities goodness, foulness, and darkness *:’ the latter, ‘ These affections 
of the qualities are kinds (or varieties) of them +.’ It might have been 
preferable, therefore, to have rendered the expression gunavisésha, ‘ modi- 
fications or affections of the qualities.’ 

The progressive communication of impression to soul is thus illustrated 
by Vacuespatr: ‘As the head men of a village collect the taxes from the 
villagers, and pay them to the governor of the district; as the local 
governor pays the amount to the minister; and the minister receives it 
for the use of the king ; so mind, having received ideas from tht external 
organs, transfers them to egotism ; and egotism delivers them to intellect, 
which is the general superintendent, and takes charge of them for the 
use of the sovereign, soul. The same idea is more concisely expressed 
in the S. Pravachana Bh, ‘Séitra: In the common employment of the 
organs the chiefship belongs to duddhi, as in the world. Comment: As 
the function of the organs is in common, through subservience to the 
purposes of soul, so the most important is that of intelligence; like the 
office of the prime minister amongst the chiefs of villages and the rest, 
who are all alike engaged in the service of the king}.’ The cooperation 
of opposites for a common purpose has been once before (p. 54) compared 
to the light of a lamp, derived from the combination of oil, cotton, and 
flame. 





* नाद्यन्द्रिममनोऽहंकाराश्च गुखविशेषाः गुणानां सत्वरजस्तमसां वि 
काराः 1 एते गुणविरेषाः गुणानां भेदाः । ‡ समानकम्मैयोगे 
बुद्धः प्राधान्यं लोकवत्‌ । द्यपिपुरूषाथेतवेन समान एव स्वां करणानां 
स्थापारस्तथाऽपि बुद्धेरेव प्राधान्यं shea लोके हि राजाथेकवाविशेषे 
ऽपि मामाध्यक्षादिषु मघ्ये मंभिण एव प्राघान्यमित्यथेः | 


uh 


118 


XXXVIE. 


Stxcz it is intellect which accomplishes soul’s fruition of all which 
is to be enjoyed, it is that, again, which discriminates the subtle dif- 
ference between the chief principle (pradhdna) and soul. 


BHASHYA. 


All; whatever comes within the reach of the organs, and in all three 
(past, present, and future) periods, Fruition: several or respective en- 
joyment, through the instrumentality of the organs of perception and 
action, whether in gods, men, or animals. The internal instrument intel- 
lect accomplishes, completes or effects; consequently धं is that, again, 
which discriminaies, makes a distinction between the objects of nature and 
soul, (or establishes) their difference or severalty. Subtle: not to be ap- 
prehended by those who have not practised religious austerities, (or such 
distinctions) as, this is nature, the equipoised condition of the three qua- 
lities, goodness, foulness, and darkness ; this is intellect ; this is egotism ; 
these are the five subtile rudiments; these the eleven organs; these the 
five gross elements; and this, which is different from them all, is soul. 
He whose intellect explains all this obtains liberation. 

It was said above (ver. 34) that “ objects are specific and unspecific :” 
which these are respectively is next described. 


COMMENT. 


The function of discriminating between soul and nature is here also 
assigned to intellect. 

The immediate contiguity and communication of intellect with soul, as 
that of a prime minister and a sovereign, enables it to appreciate the 
latter; whilst its being the medium of conveyance to external objects 
familiarizes it with them also; and thus it is enabled to distinguish be-- 
tween both: or, as explained in the Chandrika, this discrimination is the 
necessary consequence of its relative function ; for as it conveys ideas of 
pleasure or pain to soul, and is in this way the cause of its fruition, it is 


119 


subservient to another, to something of a different nature from its own; 
and the knowledge of this is discrimination between nature and soul. 
‘All, sound and the rest, with which the preposition prati (implying 
severalty) is to be connected. The fruition is that of soul. As intellect 
accomplishes this, consequently although it be 98 it were a chief prin- 
ciple, yet it is for another's use, not its own; and as hence arises the 
purpose of liberation, this sense is accordingly intended to be expressed 
in the phrase, Jt is that again which discriminates, &c.*” 


XXXVIII. 


Tur elementary particles are unspecific: from these five proceed 
the five elements, which are termed specific; for they are soothing, 


terrific, or stupifying. 
aii BHASHYA. 


The five subtile elements, which are produced from egotism, or the 
rudiments sound, touch (substance), form, flavour, and odour, are said to 
be unspecific; they are the objects (of perception) to the gods, character- 
ised by pleasure, producing neither pain nor stupefaction. From these 
Jive proceed the five elements, called earth, water, fire, air, and ether. These 
are said to be specific. From the rudiment smell, earth proceeds; from 
the rudiment flavour, water; from form (colour), fire; from touch (sub- 
stance), air; and from the rudiment sound, proceeds ether. These gross 
elements are termed specific. They are the objects of the senses of men, 
and are soothing, causing pleasure ; terrific, causing pain; and stupz/ying, 
causing insensibility; as the ethereal element may give delight to one 





* स्र श्दादियोग्यं प्रति य उपभोगः पुरुषस्य तं यस्मात्साधयति तस्मा 
त्सा प्रधानापि पराव न स्वार्थेति भावः मोक्षहेतुजनकवादपि स तथैवा 
भिपेत्याहसैवपुनरिति | 


120 


person coming forth at once from within a house, 80 the same may be 
the source of pain to one affected by cold, or heat, or wind, or rain; and 
if he be going along a road leading through a forest, in which he loses 
his way, it may then, from the perplexity of space, occasion stupefaction : 
so the air (or wind) is agreeable to a person oppressed by heat, disagree- 
able to one feeling cold; and when tempestuous and loaded with clouds 
of sand and dust it is stupifying. The same may be said of fire and the 
rest. There are other specific varieties. 


COMMENT. 


It was intimated in ver. 34, that objects were both specific and unepe- 
cific; and it is here explained, that by the former is meant the various 
property which the same element possesses at different times, and under 
different circumstances, in regard to mortals; and by the latter, the uni- 
form and unvaried operation of the subtile rudiments in respect to the 
gods. 

The precise nature of the rudimental elements is not very intelligible, 
according to their usual identification with what we are accustomed to 
consider as qualities, not substances, or sound, tangibility, form or colour, 
flavour, and odour; sabda, sparsa, ripa, rasa, and gandha. It seems, 
however, that we should regard the rudimental elements as the imper- 
ceptible subjects of these qualities, from which the grosser and visible 
elements, ether, air, light, water, and earth, originate. So V1sNANna 
Burksuv calls them ‘subtile substances, the elements which are the 
holders (sustainers or subjects) of the species of sound, touch, colour, 
taste, and smell; but in which, as a genus, the three species of pleasur- 
able, painful, and indifferent do not occur: they are not varieties of the 
gross elements, but in each respectively the elementary property exclu- 
sively resides; whence they are said to be rudiments. In those elements 
that elementary property resides alone (without being diversified, as 
agreeable, &c.); and as there is no distinction between a property and 
its subject, that which is a rudimental substance is called a rudiment, 
tan métra; the existence of which as a cause is inferred from that of the 


181 


gross element as an effect*.’ Jax médira is a compound of tad, ‘ that,’ 
aud mdtra, ‘alone; implying, that in which its own peculiar property 
resides, without any change or variety: 80 VAcHEsPaT! explains the text, 
‘Sound and the rest; the subtile rudiments; for the properties of agree- 
able, &c. do not belong to them, they have no quality which is fit for 
(mortal) fruition. This is the meaning of the word mdtrat.—‘ These 
rudiments, though not appreciable by human sense, are said to be sensi- 
ble to sages and to gods, producing to them pleasure only, from the pre- 
dominance with them of the quality of goodness, and consequently of 
happiness }.’ 

The notion of something more subtile than the elements was not 
unknown to early Grecian philosophy, and Empedocles taught that they 
were compounded of some more minute matter, or of elements of the 
elements, कण्वो ororyewy. Plutarch and Stobreus, according to Cud- 
worth, understand by these rudiments of the elements primary atoms; but 
it may be doubted if they are to be so understood, for, according to Ari- 
stotle, Empedocles held that there were four elements, out of which all 
bodies were composed, and which were not mutually transmutable. In 
fact the doctrine of Empedocles, which was that of the school of Pytha- 
goras, offers another analogy to the Indian, in the assertion, not of four, 
but of five elements, according to Plutarch, or the author De placitis phi- 
losophorum, }. Il. ९. 6, or ether, fire, earth, water, and air. Intellect. Syst. 
1. 97. That Empedocles was not of the atomic school is evident from 


* wanna च यज्जातीये तु शन्तादिविशेषभयं न तिष्टति तज्नाती 
यानां शबष्टस्यशेरूपरसगन्धानामाधारभूतानि सृष्छद्रष्याणि स्थूत्ानामवि 
शेषाः । तस्मिन्स्तस्मिन्सतु wart तेन तन्माचता स्मृता । स्थूलभूतात्‌ 
काम्यात्‌ तत्‌ कारणत्तया तन्माचस्यानुमानेन स्थूलाात्यंचततन्माघस्य बोध 
इत्यथः । 1 शब्दादितन्माजाणि सूष्छाणि न चैषां शानात्वारिरस्त्युप 
भगयोग्यो विशेष इति aren: 1 ‡ तन्माजाणि च देवादिमा 
अभोग्यत्वेन केवकं सुखात्मकान्येव सुखाधिक्यादिति | 


122 


Lucretius, who specifies him as one of those who greatly misunderstood 
the principles of things: . 

Principiis tamen in rerum fecere ruinas 

Et graviter magnei magno cecidere ibicasu. I, 741-2. 
It may be suspected that something like the Hindu notion, that the 
senses, or their faculties, and the gross elements, partake of a common 
nature, is expressed in the celebrated, though otherwise not very intelli- 
gible verses of the same philosopher : 

Talp piv yap yaiav dndmaper, tart ठे म 

41604 8 alépa diav, drip चण rip atdndor: 
‘By the earthy element we perceive earth; by the watery, water; the 
air of heaven by the aerial element; and devouring fire by the element 
of fire.’ 

As opposed to the simple unvaricd rudiments, the derivative gross 
elements, which are sensible to men and animals, are susceptible of three 
qualities; they may have specific or varied effects, may be diversified as 
species; they are said, accordingly, to be soothing or agreeable +, terrific 
or disagreeable t, and stupifying, bewildering {; that is, they may be 
either of these, according to the different circumstances in which the 
influence of one or other of the three qualities predominates. When 
goodness prevails, whether it be in themselves or in the object affected, 
they are Sdnia, ‘tranquil or pleasant; when foulness, they are ghora, 
‘frightful, disagreeable ;’ and when darkness prevails, they arc ‘ perplex- 
ing,’ mérha: as VAcuespati; ‘In the gross elements, ether and the rest, 
some, through the predominance of goodness, are soothing, pleasant, 
agreeable, light; some, through the prevalence of foulness, are terrific, 
painful, restless; whilst others, through the influence of darkness, are 
stupifying, depressing, heavy |.” 


* शन्ताः। 1 घोराः। {मूढाः। । आङाण्णदिस्थूलेषु 
स्वप्रधानतया केचिच्छान्ताः ge प्रसन्ना wea: केचिदूजःप्रथानतया 
चोरा दुःखा अनवस्थिता केचित्तमः प्रधानतया मूढा विषखा गुरवः | 


123 


XXXIX. 


Scsriie (bodies), and such as spring from father and mother, 
together with the great elements, are three sorts of specific objects. 
Among these, the subtile bodies are lasting; such as issue from 
father and mother are perishable. 


BHASHYA. 


Subtile: the rudimental clements, that, when aggregated, form the 
rudimental or subtile body, characterised by intellect (mahat) and the 
rest, and which always exists, and undergoes successive states’of being 
(transmigration): those are subtile (bodies). Such as spring from futher 
and mother are the cementers or means of the aggregation of gross bodies, 
or by the effect of the mixture of blood and seminal secretion in sexual 
cohabitation, at fit seasons they form the envelopment of the subtile body 
in the womb ; that subtile body then is nourished, through the umbilical 
cord, by the nutriment derived from the food and drink received by the 
mother; and the (entire) body, thus commenced with the triple iugre- 
dient of the subtile rudiments, the cognate investurc, and the gross ele- 
ments, becomes furnished with back, belly, legs, neck, head, and the rest; 
is enveloped in its sixfold membranes; is provided with blood, flesh, 
tendons, semen, marrow, and bones; and is composed of the five gross 
elements; ether being supplied for its cavities (or extension), air for its 
growth, fire for its nutriment, water for its aggregation, and earth for its 
stability: and thus being equipped with ail its (component) parts, it 
comes forth from the maternal womb. In this way there are three kinds 
(of bodies): which of these is constant, and which temporary, is next 
described. The subtile bodies are lasting —Subtile; rudimental elements : 
these are lasting, constant; by them body is commenced, and migrates, 
according to the imperative iufluence of acts, through the forms of beasts, 
deer, birds, reptiles, or immovable substances; or, in consequence of 
virtue, proceeds through the heaven of Indra, and other celestial abodes. 
So the subtile body migrates until knowledge is attained; when that is 


124 


attained, the sage, abandoning all body, acquires liberation: these sorts 
of bodies, or subtile, therefore, are called lasting. Such as issue from 
Sather and mother are perishable—Having left that subtile body, the frame 
that proceeds from mother and father ceases, even here, at the time that 
the breath departs; the body born of parents ceases at the time of death, 
and merges into earth and the other gross elements. 

What subtile body is, and how it migrates, is next described. 


COMMENT. 


Objects were distinguished in the preceding verse according as they 
were with or without specific or diversified effects: they are here classi- 
fied accotding to their forms, their origin, aud duration. 

A question of some difficulty, however, arises here, as to the objects of 
the classification. Are they bodics in general? or are they gross bodies 
only! In the preceding stanza it was stated, that the subtile elements, 
the fan mdtras, were unspecific; whilst their effects, the gross elements, 
were ‘specific,’ vzsésha. 1t is now stated, that there are three kinds of 
riséshas, ° sorts, species, specific differences ;’ but it is not explicitly de- 
fined of that these are the varieties. Mr. Colebrooke, following the prin- 
cipal commentators, renders it ‘sorts of objects; that is, of bodies in 
general. Professor Lassen, carrying on the sense of vtsésha, ‘ specific,’ 
from the preceding stanza, considers the variety here spoken of to concern 
only gross or perceptible elementary bodies: ^ Distincta, elementa que 
distincta dicuntur (ver. 38). Distinctorum triplex est divisio in subtilia, 
a parentibus progenita, crassa” (ver. 39). He admits that the commenta- 
tors are against this interpretation, but concludes rather that they are in 
error, than that Iswara Keisixa should have employed the word visésha 
in a double sense. 

The interpretation of Prof. Lassen is highly creditable to his critical 
acumen and judgment, and is possibly correct, although it is scarcely 
compatible with the notions of subtilty and durability which the text 
ascribes to this branch of the triad. His view is not, as he supposes, 
wholly unsupported by the commentators; for VisnAna Buixsuv simi- 
larly explains the stanza, as will presently be noticed. The passage 


125 


is one of some importance, as it regards apparently the history of the 
S4nkhya doctrines respecting the nature of that subtile body which is the 
immediate vehicle of soul, as we shall have occasion to notice more parti- 
cularly, when we come to verse 40. If the meaning of the text be as 
Prof. Lassen renders it, it furnishes reason to suppose that the author of 
the Kérikd had introduced an innovation upon the original doctrine, as 
will be subsequently indicated. 

According to GaurapApa and NirAyana, the sorts or species intimated 
in this verse are different from those described in the preceding; the 
former calls them, as above, ‘ other varieties *;’ and the latter has, refer- 
ting to ver. 38, ‘So many are the specific varieties; but these are not 
all, there are others{.’ VAcuespati's expression, ‘A further species of 
species {, might be thought to refer to the gross elements; but, from 
the explanation that follows, it is evident he does not intend to limit 
the specific differences to gross elementary bodies. Agreeably to the 
explanation, then, in which these writers concur, bodies in general are 
threefold, subtile, generated, and elementary ; and consistently with this 
view they consider ‘subtile,’ sékshma, as cquivalent to tan-médéra, ‘rudi- 
mental :’ thus GavrapApa has, ‘ Subtile is the aggregated rudimental ele- 
ments, forming a rudimento-elemental subtile body |:' so also VAcuzs- 
pvatt; ‘Subtile means subtile bodies; subtile body is one specific object §:’ 
and the Chandrikd; ‘Subtile are what are called rudimental bodies 4.’ 
Consequently they also conceive the subtile objects spoken of in this 
verse to be something entirely different from the gross elementary viséshas, 
or ‘species,’ of the preceding verse ; not merely sub-species or varicties 
of the same: and it must be admitted that there is some inconsistency in 
the Kdrikd’s speaking of subtile bodies being a species of gross bodies; of 


* wry विशेषाः । † एतावन्त एव विशेषा इति न रिन्वन्येऽपि 
सन्तीत्याह । ‡ विशेवाणामवानरं विशेषमाह । । afd 
गृहीतं तन्माभिकं सुशषशरीर । ९ भूषाः queer: परिकत्यित्ताः । 
get शरीरभेको विशेषः । ¶ geen लिंगशरीराख्याः। 

ष 


126 


the imperceptible being a variety of the perceptible. According to VisNANA 
Buixsuv, however, the text merely intends by ‘subtile,’ si#shma, a modi- 
fication of gross elementary body; a corporeal frame, which is subtile 
only relatively, or which is more refined than the second kind of body 
specified in the text, that which is begotten: ‘The nature of that body 
which is the support of rudimental body is explained in the Kérikd, 
“gubtile, generated,” &c.: here is meant, body aggregated of the five 
elements, the (product or) effect of the rudimental elements, which is 
subtile relatively to generated body*.’ The same notion is again inti- 
mated by expressions which will be subsequently cited; and there re- 
mains no doubt that this commentator understands by the sikshma of the 
text, ‘a subtile variety of gross elementary body,’ distinctorum distinetio. 
The other commentators understand by it, ‘rudimental bodies,’ elementa 
indistincta. Either interpretation is therefore allowable: the latter agrees 
best with the philosophy, the former with the construction, of the 
original. 

In the second variety of bodies of course specific or sensible bodies 
only are intended; bodies generated or begotten are made of the gross 
elements, agreeably to the Siitra, ‘ Body consists of the five elements {:’ 
they are, however, in some degree distinguished here from the elements; 
holding, according to Gaurarana, a middle place between them, und 
rudimental bodies serving to combine them; upachdyaka causing upachuya, 
‘proximate aggregation ; the parts of the embryo being derived in the 
first instance from the parents, and their development being the result of 
the accession of the elements, for purposes which he describes. There 
is some incongruity, however, in this explanation, as it makes a distinc- 
tion where there is no essential difference; organized matter being, in 
fact, the same with elementary matter. The other commentators, there- 
fore, give a different explanation of the term ‘ great elements,’ restricting 


* तस्य च कारिकायामुक्ं gear मातापितृजा इति । अष तन्मा 
काय्यै मातापितृजशरीरपेक्षा सुखं यञ्जूतपंचकमिदि। 1 पांचभी 
तिको देहः । 


127 


it to inorganic matter. Thus VAcuespari observes, ‘ Subtile body is one 
variety of objects; generated bodies are a second ; and the great elements 
a third: water-jars and the like (inorganic bodies) are comprised in the 
class of the great elements*.’ So also the Chandrikd: ‘Subtile bodies 
are those called rudimental ; generated, are gross bodies; and the great 
elements are mountains, trees, and the like.’ 

Tn this threefold division of bodies, as explained by the Scholiasts on 
the Kérikd, we have, in fact, but two distinctions, subtile and gross; the 
latter being subdivided into organic and inorganic. The twofold distinc- 
tion is that which is especially recognised in the Siitras: thus in the 
S. Pravachana Bhdshya, the Sitra, ‘Thence (the origin) of body {,” is 
explained, ‘from the twenty-three tatwas (or categories) two kinds of 
bodies, subtile and gross, proceeded |:’ and again, ‘Gross body is for the 
most part generated (some bodies being inorganic), the other (subtile 
body) is not §.’ 

The chief object of the stanza is, however, to assert the different dura- 
tion of these three kinds of bodies; subtile are permanent: and here we 
have an argument in favour of the translation adopted; for no form of 
gross body could be considered as lasting: as composed of the elcments, 
in however delicate a form, it must resolve into them at the time of death ; 
whilst the subtile bodies, consisting of the subtile elements, endure either 
till liberation ¶, or until the great Pralaya 

Dissolvi quo queque supremo tempore possint. 





* great शरीरमेको विेषः। मातृपितजा धिततीयः। महभूतानि तृतीयः 
महाभूतव्भे घटादीनां विषेश इति। ! सूषा लिंगशरीरा्याः। मा 
त्ापितृजाः स्थूत्देहाः । प्रभूताः पक्ैतक्षादयः। 1 तस्माखरीरस्य । 
| तस्माच्तयोविंश्तिततवात्‌ स्थूलसृष्लश्रीरबयस्यारम्भ इति। + माता 
fat स्थूलं प्रायश इतरजतणा । " आचामोक्षावस्थायिनः। ^“ सा 
महाप्रलयाटवतिष्न्ते । 


128 


XL. 
(णण. body), primeval, unconfined, material, composed. of in- 
tellect, with other subtile principles, migrates, else unenjoying; in- 
vested with dispositions, mergent. 


BHASHYA. 


Primeval; whilst yet the universe is uncreated: in the first creation 
of nature, at that season subtile body is produced. Unconfined; uncom- 
bined either in the state of animals, men, or gods; and from its subtilty 
wholly ynrestrained, or passing into rocks and the like without obstruc- 
tion; it migrates; it goes. Permanent: until knowledge is attained it mi- 
grates. Composed of intellect, with other subtile principles; having mahat 
and the rest: that is, intellect in the first place, with egotism and mind, 
to the five subtile rudiments, to the subtile principles, to the rudimental 
elements. It migrates; it traverses the three worlds, as an ant the body 
of Siva. Unenjoying ; without enjoyment: that subtile body becoming 
capable of enjoyment only in consequence of acquiring the property of 
action, through its aggregation by external generated body. Invested 
with dispositions.— Dispositions, 88 virtue and the rest; which we shall 
hereafter explain (see ver. 43). Juvested with; coloured or affected by. 
Subtile body is that which, at the period of universal dissolution, pos- 
sessed of mahat, intelligence, and the other subtile principles, merges into 
the chief one (or nature), and, exempted from further revolution, remains 
extant there until creation is renewed, being bound in the bondage of the 
stolidity of nature, and thereby incompetent to the acts of migrating and 
the like. At the season of re-creation it again revolves, and is hence 
called linga, ‘ characteristic’ or ‘ mergent,’ or siikshma, ‘ subtile,’ 

From what cause the thirteen instruments (intellect, egotism, and the 
eleven organs) revolve, as has been said, is next explained. 


COMMENT. 


The condition of subtile body, in regard to commencement, duration, 
and term, is here described. 


129 


The commentators are agreed that the subtile body here spoken of is 
the linga, or the linga sarira, ‘ rudiment,’ or ‘ rudimental body ;’ ordina- 
tily, though perhaps not quite accurately, confounded: the linga con- 
sisting, as intimated in the last phrase of the Bhdshya, of thirteen compo- 
nent parts, intellect, egotism, and the organs of sense and action; whilst 
the linga sarira adds to these a bodily frame, made up of the five rudi- 
mental elements. In this form, however, they always coexist, and it is 
not necessary to consider them as distinct: thus the Sdtra of Karina 
states, ‘one finga of seventeen*;’ that is, according to the Scholiast, 
‘in the beginning, at creation: there is but one rudimental body at 
the period of creation, consisting of an aggregate of the eleven organs, 
five rudimental elements, and intellect}.’ This was at first ‘embodied 
in the person of Hiranyacarsua, or Brauma, and afterwards ‘ multiplied 
individually, according to variety of actions.’ In this enumeration 
egotism is omitted, being included, according to the commentator, in in- 
tellect. ‘Unconfined,’ asakta, means unobstructed, capable of passing 
into any bodies. The next epithet, niyata, translated ‘material,’ is ex- 
plained by GaurapApa as above, by nitya, ‘ permanent, lasting ;’ and 
Vacuespati attaches to it the same signification, ‘It endures till the 
period of universal dissolution |; and the S. Pr. Bhdshya observes, also, 
that it ceases, or is destroyed, only at the same season §: a property, of 
which it may be observed by the way, that it furnishes another reason 
for identifying the sikshma, or ‘subtile body,’ of the foregoing stanza 
with the /inga, or ‘rudimental body,’ of this verse. The Chandrika ex- 
plains niyata differently, ‘distinct in different persons *.’ The composi- 
tion of subtile body is explicitly described by VAcHEspati ; ‘Subtile body 
is an assemblage of intellect, egotism, the eleven senses, and the five 


* arene तगं ¦ 1 लिंगशरीरं सगादी समष्टिरटपमेकं भवती 
ant: । एकादशेन्द्रियाणि पंचकन्माचाणि बुद्धिश्चेतिसप्रदश । ` aie 
भेदः कम्मविशेधात्‌ | | आमहाप्रलयाट्यतिष्ठते | ९ प्रलये 
Ware: | ¶ प्रत्यात्मभिनरं । 


ul 


150 


elements*.’ He ascribes, however, to this a specific or ‘ diversified ex- 
istence, from its endowment with senses, which are the sources of plea- 
sure, pain, or indifference +.’ The commentators agree that subtile body 
is subject to enjoyment or suffering only through its connection with 
generated body; understanding apparently thereby, not its abstract capa- 
bility of either, but the actual condition in which it partakes of them; for 
it is repeatedly declared that the seat of enjoyment and suffering is 
buddhi, or ‘intellect ;’ through the presence of which as an ingredient 
in subtile body, it is immediately added, the latter is invested with ‘ dis- 
positions,’ bhdvas ; that is, with the properties of intellect enumerated in 
ver. 23, virtue, vice, knowledge, ignorance, &c. The term bhdva was 
rendered vy Mr. Colebrooke in that place by ‘sentiments,’ but in another 
(ver. 43) he expressed the same ‘dispositions,’ which, as far as relates to 
the mental bidvas, appears to be a preferable equivalent. Of the conse- 
quences of these dispositions, reward in heaven, or punishment in hell, 
dead, decomposed animal body is no longer susceptible: ‘In a dead body 
there can be no sense of pleasure or pain; this all admit{.’ In order, 
however, to be placed in circumstances leading to such enjoyment or 
suffering, generated body is necessary ; and therefore subtile body mi- 
prates, sansarati, goes from one body to another continually: hence the 
world is called saxsdra, ‘ migration’ or ‘ revolution.” ‘Through the influ- 
ence of intellect the whole of subtile body is affected by dispositions or 
conditions, in the same manner as a garment is perfumed from contact 
with a fragrant champa flower |.’ S. Tatwa Kaumudf. Subtile body is 
called dinga from its consisting of those principles which are so termed, 
either from their indicating or characterising that nature from which 
they proceed, or from their being ultimately resolvable into it. Thus the 


* महद्हंकरिकाटशेन्दरियंचतन्माजपय्यैनामेषां समुदायः सूष्छशरीरं | 
† शान्तघोरमूदेरिन्दियान्विततत्वादिगेषः। † मृतशरीरे सुखटुःखादचभा 
वस्य सद्ेसम्मतत्वात्‌ | 1 ञ्जधिवासितं यथा सुरभिचम्पकसंपञ्चाधलं 
तदामोदवासितं भवति | 


131 


Chandriké has, ‘ Linga, from designating, apprising*:’ GavrapApa, as 
above, ‘It merges into nature at the season of dissolution: and VAcuEs- 
patt, ‘ Linga is so termed because it suffers resolution (Jaya), or from its 
characteristic indication of the source from which it proceeds+.’ See 
also remarks on ver. 10. p. 43. 


XLI. 


As a painting stands not without a ground, nor a shadow without 
a stake, &c. so neither does subtile person subsist supportless, ‘without 
specific (or unspecific) particles. 


BHASHYA. 


As a picture without the support of a wall or the like does not stand ; 
as the shadow does not stand without the stake (the gnomon of a dial); 
that is, without them does not exist. The term et cetera compriscs (other 
illustrations); as, water cannot be without coldness, nor coldness without 
water; fire without heat; air without touch; ether without extension ; 
earth without smell; so by this illustration it is intimated that it, the 
Trudiment (linga), does not subsist without unspecific or rudimental parti- 
cles. Here also specific elements are implied, or body composed of the 
five gross elements; for without a body, having specific particles, where 
can the place of the finga be; which, when it abandons one corporeal 
frame, takes refuge in another. Supportless; devoid of support. Subtile 
(person) ; instrument of thirteen kinds: this is the meaning of the text. 

For what purpose (these subtile elements are embodied) is next 
described. 


* क्िगनाज्‌ ज्ञापनािंगं tl लिंगं लयं गद्छतीति लिगं हेनुम 
rare लिंगत्वमिति भावः । 


182 


COMMENT. 


In the preceding verse it was stated that subtile person migrated, or 
as soon as deprived of one body it took refuge in another. It is now 
explained why this must be; and that it proceeds from the necessity of 
something to give to subtile principles asylum and support. 

The text accordingly states, that the ‘rudiment,’ the Ainga, cannot 
exist without such support; but with regard to the support itself there is 
some difference of opinion, the passage being variously read and in- 
terpreted. 

Gavrapdpa reads the expression, aviséshair vind, ‘without unspecific 
particles;’ by which he states that he means the ‘ rudimental particles,’ 
the tan métras. He adds, that specific particles, gross elementary bodies, 
are also necessary; using the terms avisésha and visésha as they were 
before employed (ver. 38), to represent severally the rudimental and gross 
elements. Vacnespat: and NArdyana read the phrase viséshair vind, 
‘without specific particles ;’ but they use the term ‘ specific’ apparently 
in its general acceptation of ‘ specics,’ without reference to its technical 
employment in ver. 38; for they confine its purpose to that of ‘ subtile 
bodies. ‘Without specific particles; without subtile bodies: that is the 
meaning*.’ $. Tatwa Kaumudi. ‘Without specific particles; without very 
subtile bodies: the rudiment (/inga), being unsupported, does not remain; 
but being supported by subtile bodies it exists {.’ S$. Chandrikd. So far 
therefore, although the reading be different, the interpretation appears to 
be the same. The linga, or ‘rudiment’—for it is to be observed, that it is 
this which is spoken of by both text and comment, and not the linga 
sarfra, ‘radimental body’—cannot subsist without a bodily frame. Whence 
that frame is derived, GaurapAva makes sufficiently clear. The linga, 
or ‘rudiment,’ consists of but thirteen principles—the unclothed faculties 
and senses: the rudimental body, by which they are aggregated and 


* विना विशेषेरिति सृच्मशररिरित्यधः | + विरेषेरतिसूष्शरी 
ttn far fred न हिष्ठति किन्तु सूष्शरीराधितं तिष्ठति । 


158 


defended, is a tan mdtrika body, composed of the rudimental elements 
(p. 123). This again, for worldly existence, is enveloped in a bodily 
frame of gross elementary composition. 

It may, however, be suspected that the authors of the S. Tatwa Kau- 
mudi and the Chandrikdé have not attended to the distinction, and that 
they intend by their ‘specific or subtile bodies’ only one of the ‘species,’ 
or viséshas, which may be intimated in ver. 38; a modification of the 
gross elements enclosing, not the naked ‘rudiment,’ the कषठ, but the 
‘rudimental body,’ the linga sarfra. Such, at any rate, is the interpreta- 
tion of Vignana Buiksuu, who, commenting on this stanza of the Kdrikd, 
explains ‘ specific particles, those which are called subtile amongst gross ; 
a species or variety of gross elements:’ and he says, that ‘the definition 
of subtile body which is given in the preceding stanza, “composed of 
intellect with other subtile elements” (p. 128), as compared with the 
expression of the present verse, proves that there is a distinction made 
between subtile body and the specific variety of the gross elements, 
which is also called subtile *.’ 

The question then is not one merely of a difference of interpretation, 
but it is a difference of doctrine. According to Gavrardpa’s explanation, 
which appears to be the original theory, living bodics consist of two 
parts, one of a subtile, and one of a gross nature; the latter perishes or 
decomposes at death; the former may live on through the existence of 
the world: the latter gives cover to the former, which is the immediate 
vehicle of soul, and accompanies it constantly, through successive perish- 
able bodies, until soul's liberation, or until a period of universal dissolu- 
tion restore its component parts to their primitive and common parent. 
To this body the term of linga sarira, ‘rudimental body,’ is properly ap- 
plied; it is also called dtivéhika, that which is swifter than the wind in 
passing from body to body ; and, as Mr. Colebrooke observes, “it seems 





* चिरेषेः ‘erga: स्थूलावामरभेदेरिति यावदस्यां कारिकायां 
सूश्छाख्यानां स्थूलभूतानां क्िंगशरीरज्ेदावगमेन महदादिसूष्छपम्यैन्त 
मित्यादि पूोदातकारिकायां gangsta त्किंगविनेत्यथेः । 


184 


to be a compromise between an immaterial soul and the difficulty which 
४ gross understanding finds in grasping the comprehension of individual 
existence, unattached to matter.” Tr. R. As. Soc. I. 32. 

But some of the expounders of the Sankhya doctrines have not thought 
even the rudimental body sufficiently material for the purpose of inde- 
pendent existence, when separated from gross body; and a third corpo- 
real frame has been devised for its support, to which the present verse of 
the Kédrikdé and the other passages which seem to allude to a subtile 
form of specific or gross elementary matter relate, according to ViunANna 
Burxsuu : ‘Having abandoned gross body, a support is necessary for the 
passage of rudimental body to other regions, and another species of body 
is established*.’ This is more particularly explained in the same writer's 
commentary on a somewhat obscure Sitra immediately preceding: ‘In 
the body, which is the receptacle of the receptacle of that (rudimental 
body); for the denomination of body is applied to one as it is to the 
other.” That is, the receptacle or support of that rudiment, which will be 
described as composed of the five elements, is supported or contained in 
body constituted of the six organic ingredients (bones, blood, &c.); to which 
the name body is applied, from the same being applicable to the sense of 
the word adhish'héna (déha, “body,” being understood apparently in either 
case “ containing” or “ comprehending”). The corporeity of the vehicle or 
receptacle (adhishihdna) arises from its relation to the (aggregate) linga; 
the corporeity of gross body, from its being the receptacle of vehicular 
body. This is the meaning of the text. We have therefore three (kinds 
of) body established +.’ Quoting a passage which appears opposed to 





* स्थूलदेहं त्यङ्घा लोकान्तरगमनाय ल्िकिंगदेहस्याधारभूतं शरीरानोरं 
सिध्यतीति | † तदधिष्ठानाश्रये देहे तद्ठादाच्ठादः ॥ तस्य लिंगस्य 
यट्भिष्ठानमाश्चयो वश्यमाणभूतपंचकं तस्याश्चये षाट्‌ कौशिक्देहे Tara 
देहवादस्त्वादात्‌ तस्यापिष्टानशब्टोक्षस्य देहवादादित्यपैः लिंगसखन्धाद्धि 
हानस्य टेहत्मधिष्टानाच्रयाञ्च स्थूलस्य दहत्विति पम्यवसित्तार्थः । तचा 
च शरीरचयं सिद्धं । 


185 


this, and to intimate, as GaurarApa has done, a twofold distinction only 
of bodies, the same writer observes, ‘ What is said in writings, upon the 
authority of the Védas, that there are but two (kinds of) bodies, arises 
from their identifying the rudimental and vehicular bodies as one, as they 
are mutually permanent and subtile*.’ This is no doubt correct ; but it 
is very unlikely that the elder writers admitted any form of the gross 
elements to be equally permanent and subtile as the rudiments from 
which they proceeded. In the institutes of Manu, for instance, although 
the doctrine there laid down is of a different tenor from that of the 
Sankhya system, we have but two kinds of bodies, a subtile and a sub- 
stantial one, described: ‘ After death another body, composed of the five 
rudimental elements, is immediately produced, for wicked men, that may 
suffer the tortures of the infernal regions +.’ Manu, XII. 16. We have 
here, then, a body composed of the five rudimental clements. In the 
Bhagavad Gita it is intimated that soul retains the senses and mind in 
the intervals of migration: ‘ At the time that spirit obtains a body, and 
when it abandons one, it migrates, taking with it those senses, as the 
wind wafts along with it the perfume of the flowers {.’ 

If VAcuespats be correct in his interpretation of the word purusha, the 
Véda makes one kind of subtile body of the size of the thumb: ‘Yama 
drew forth violently the subtile body, as big as the thumb.”—The speci- 
fication of the size merely denotes minuteness; extraction of soul would 
be absurd ; and therefore by puruska must be meant “a subtile body,” that 
which reposes in gross body||.’ This, agreeably to the older doctrine, would 





qarey wihawargqad तद्धिंगश्रीरापिष्ठानशरीरयोर्योन्यनि 
यतेन सूषमतवेनचेकलाभिम्रायादिति। 1 संचभ्य एव माचाभ्यः Ber 
दुष्कृतिनानरृणाम्‌ | शरीरं यातना्थीयिमन्यदुत्य्ते धुवं । PEK यदा 
वाप्नोति यच्चाणुक्रामतीश्वरः। गृहीवित्तानि संयाति वायु्न्धानिवाश्रयात्‌। 
॥ ज्ागमश्चाचभवति | agra पुरुषं fread यमो यत्तदिति | अगुह 
माभवेनमूष्सततासुषलक्षयति | आत्मनो निष्कवासंभवेन सूष्छमेवशरीरं 
पुरूपस्तदटपि fe पुरि ae शरीरे रेत इति । 


186 


be rudimental body; according to later refinement, vehicular. It is 
the latter which, as Mr. Colebrooke mentions (Tr. R. As. Soc. ¥. 33) in 
Patansaii’s Yoga sdstra, is conceived to extend, like the flame of a lamp 
over its wick, to a small distance above the skull ; and which, according to 
M. Cousin, is “la fameuse pensée intracranienne, dont on a cru faire 
récemment une découverte merveilleuse.” Hist. de la Philosophie, 1.195. 

The notion of some corporeal, however subtile, envelopment of soul— 
the चमे. umbra, manes, simulacrum, spirit, or ghost—giving to invisible 
and intangible soul some visible and tangible materiality, “such,” as Good 
(Translation of Lucretius) observes, “as will at least enable the soul to 
assume some degree of material configuration, and to be capable of cor- 
poreal feelings, however spiritualized and refined, even after its separation 
from the body”—has prevailed in all times and in all ages. Nor was the 
doctrine confined to the people or the poets: such of the philosophers as 
maintained the immateriality of soul, attaching to it, until its final purifi- 
cation, some portion of corporeal substance, or some substantial, though 
subtile investure, or éxqua, or vehicle. Thus Cudworth (vol. III. 517) 
states, that ‘the ancient assertors of the soul’s immortality did not suppose 
human souls, after death, to be quite stripped stark naked from all body, 
but that the generality of souls had then a certain spirituous, vaporous, or 
airy body accompanying them; as also they conceived this spirituous 
body to hang about the soul also here in this life, before death, as its 
interior indument or vestment, which also then sticks to it when that 
other gross earthly part of the body is by death put off as an outer gar- 
ment.” It also appears, that “ besides the terrestrial body, and this spi- 
rituous body, the ancients held that there is a third kind, of a higher rank, 
peculiarly belonging to such souls, after death, as are purged and cleansed 
from corporeal affections, called by them capa abyorides, or a luciform 
body.” The authorities quoted by Cudworth for these opinions are new 
Platonists, or Christian writers of the fourth and fifth centuries; and it 
seems not unlikely that they borrowed some of their notions from the 
doctrines of Christianity. They profess, however, to repeat the tenets of 
Pythagoras and Plato; and Cudworth asserts, that the distinction of two 
interior vehicles or tunicles of the soul, besides that outer vestment of the 


187 


terrestrial body, is not a mere figment of the latter Platonists, but ४ 
tradition derived down from antiquity. Mosheim, in his translation of 
Cudworth, has entered, in a note, very fully into an inquiry as to the 
origin of the opinion of a subtile body investing soul, and concludes, 
“Vetus hec opinio aut si mavis superstitio, ab ipsis fere Grecorum 
heroicis temporibus ducta:” and Brucker, in reference to his observa- 
tions on this subject, remarks, “ Hoc vero magna doctrina et ingenio 
demonstravit Mosheimius hanc de vehiculo opinionem non demum in 
juniorum Platonicorum cerebro enatam esse sed fuisse dogma canm 
antiquitatis.” Hist. Philos. 1.714. Although, therefore, less clearly ex- 
pressed than by the Hindu writers, the early Greek philosophers en- 
tertained similar notions of the nature of the subtile body, which was 
inseparable from soul until the period of its final exemption from trans- 
migration. 


XLII. 


Fon the sake of soul’s wish, that subtile person exhibits (before 
it), like a dramatic actor, through relation of means and consequence, 
with the aid of nature’s influence. 


BHASHYA. 


The purposc of soul is to be fulfilled, therefore nature proceeds to 
action. This (purpose) is twofold, apprehension of sound and the other 
objects of sense, and apprehension of the difference between qualities 
and soul. Apprehension of sound and the other objects of sense is enjoy- 
ment of sensual gratification, as fragrance and the like in the spheres of 
Brahmd and the rest: apprehension of the difference between the quali- 
ties and soul is liberation. Therefore it is said, For the sake of soul’s wish 
subtile person is active. Through relation of means and consequences.— 
Means (or antecedents) are virtue and the like: consequences are their 
results, such as their ascending to heaven and go forth, as we shall here- 
after explain. By their relation; their connection. With the aid of 

No 


138 


nature's influence ; of the influence of the chief one, nature. As a king in 
his own kingdom does what he wishes of his own authority, so by the 
application of the supreme authority of nature, through the relation of 
means (or causes) and consequences, subtile body exhibits: that is, nature 
commands subtile body to assume different conditions, by taking differ- 
ent (gross) bodies. Subtile body is that which is aggregated of subtile 
atomic rudimental elements, and is possessed of thirteen instruments (or 
faculties and senses). It assumes various conditions, by its birth, amongst 
gods, animals and men. How does (it exhibit)? Like an actor, who when 
he enters upon the scene is a god, and when he makes his exit is again 
a mortal: or again, a buffoon. So the subtile body, through the relation 
of causee and consequences, having entered the womb, may become an 
elephant, a woman, or a man. 

It was said (ver. 40), ^ Subtile body migrates, invested with disposi- 
tions.” What those dispositions are is now described. 


COMMENT. 


The circumstances on which transmigration depends are here said to 
be the purpose of soul, enforced by the authority of nature. 

Soul’s purpose 18 either fruition or liberation ; and to accomplish one 
or other of these, subtile body passes through various conditions, assum- 
ing different exterior forms, as an actor puts on different dresses to per- 
sonate one while Rdma, another while Yudhishihira, or again, Vatse*. 
The purpose of soul is enforced by the power, authority, or influence of 
nature+. Vibhutwa, as illustrated by Gaurapdpa, means ‘kingly or 
supreme authority. VAcuesrari understands it as ‘ universality’ rather, 
as in the text of the Purdna: ‘This wonderful vicissitude is from the 
universality of nature{;’ that is, from its invariable presence and conse- 
quent influence. But besides these motives, the purpose of soul and 





* यपा हि नरस्वद्मूमिकामाधाय रामो वाऽजातशचुवा वत्सराजो वा 
भवति । † विभुत्योगात्‌ । ¦ वेष्वरूपात्‌ प्रथानस्य परिणामोय 
हुतः | 


189 


influence of nature, which may be regarded as the remote and proximate 
causes of transmigration in general, it is still necessary to have what may 
be regarded as a special, or exciting, or efficient cause; the reason of the 
particular migration ; the cause wherefore, in particular instances, subtile 
body should ascend from the exterior frame of a man to that of a god, or 
wherefore it should descend from the exterior frame of 8 man to that of a 
brute. This depends, then, upon the relation of certain occasional or 
instrumental means or causes, ximitias*, with their incidental conse- 
quences or effects, the naimittikas{; as virtue and vice, which lead seve- 
rally to reward and punishment after death; that is, to regeneration in 
an exalted or degraded condition. Thus the Chandrikd explains the 
terms: ‘ Nimitta is virtue and the rest; natmittika is the effect, having 
the nimitta for its cause, 28 gross bodies, &c. By the relation or connec- 
tion of these two, subtile body, assuming the form of gods or other beings, 
performs its part |. Professor Lassen has been needlessly perplexed by 
this verse, and has strangely rendered it as follows: “Corpusculum hocce 
propter genii causam effectum, ludionis instar se habet ad has modo ad 
illas originarias et derivatas conditiones pronum, post conjunctionem pro- 
creatricis cum potestate sua.” 


शना. 


Essent1ac dispositions are innate. Incidental, as virtue and the 
rest, are considered appurtenant to the instrument. The uterine 
germ (flesh and blood) and the rest belong to the effect (that is, to 
the body). 





* fafa † नेमित्तिकं । | निमितं धम्मादि नेमिकं 
धम्मीदिकारणकं स्थूलदेहादि तदुभयपरसगेन सखन्धेन लिगं ger शरीरं 
देवादिशरीरं परिगृह्य व्यवहरति । 


140 


BHASHYA. 

Dispositions (bhavas, ‘ conditions’) of being are considered to be three- 
fold, innate, essential, and incidental. The first, or innate, are those four 
which in the first creation were cognate with the divine sage Karta, 
or virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and power. The essential are declared ; 
these were four sons of Braumdé, Sanaka, Sananpana, SanAvana, and 
SanatxumAra; and these four dispositions were produced with them, who 
were invested with bodies of sixteen years of age (or perpetually juvenile 
bodics), in consequence of the relation of causes and effects (or in conse- 
quence of merit in a former existence): therefore these dispositions are 
called essential, Incideutal are those derived through the corporeal form 
of a holy’ teacher ; from which (in the first instance) knowledge is inci- 
dentally obtained by such as we are; from knowledge comes dispassion ; 
from dispassion, virtue; and from virtue, power. The form of a teacher 
is an incidental product (of nature), and therefore these dispositions are 
termed incidental: “ Invested by which, subtile body migrates” (ver. 40), 
These four dispositions are of the quality of goodness; those of darkness 
are their contraries: as above, “ Virtue, &c. are its faculties partaking 
of goodness ; those partaking of darkness are the reverse” (ver. 23). Con- 
sequently there are eight dispositions, or virtue, knowledge, dispassion, 
power, vice, ignorance, passion, weakness. Where do they abide? They 
are considered appurtenant to the instrument. Intellect is an instrument, 
and to that they are appurtenant; as in ver. 23, “ Ascertainment is 
intellect ; virtue, knowledge,” &c. Effect; body. The wlerine germ and 
the rest belong to it; those which are born of the mother, the germ and 
the rest, or the bubble, the flesh, the muscle, and the rest, which are 
(generated), for the development of the infant, in the union of the blood 
and the seminal fluid. Thus the conditions of infancy, youth, and old 
age are produced ; the instrumental causes of which arc food and beve- 
rage; and therefore they are said to be attributes of the effect (or of the 
body), having, as the instrumental cause, the fruition of the sensual plea- 
sures of eating and the like. 

It was said (ver. 42), “Through the relation of means and conse- 
quences :” this is next explained. 


141 


COMMENT. 


We have here an explanation of what is to be understood by the term 
dispositions, used in a former passage (ver. 40). 

The translation of एकदण्ड + adopted by Mr. Colebrooke in this place is 
‘disposition :’ in the passage referred to he had employed, as above 
remarked, ‘sentiment ;’ but it was there changed, in order to preserve 
consistency. Neither word perhaps exactly expresses the purport of the 
original, nor is it easy to find one that will precisely correspond. In some 
Tespects ‘condition,’ mode, or state of being, conditio, as rendered by 
Professor Lassen, is preferable, as better comprehending the diffprent cir- 
cumstances to which bidva is applied ; although, as he has occasion sub- 
sequently to remark, it does not very well express all the senses in which 
bhdva occurs. These circumstances or conditions, according to the ob- 
vious meaning of the text, are of two kinds, or intellectual and corporeal. 
The first comprise virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power, and their con- 
traries; the second, the different periods of life, or embryo, infancy, 
youth, and senility. They are also to be regarded as respectively cause 
and effect; virtue, &c. being the efficient cause, or nimitia; bodily con- 
dition the naimittika, or consequence ; 88 VAcuespati explains the object 
of the stanza, ‘ which,’ according to him, ‘ distinguishes incidental cause 
and consequence, the latter being the incidental conditions of body t.’ 

But besides the division of conditions or dispositions into the two 
classes of intellectual and corporeal, they are also characterised accord- 
ing to their origin, as sdusiddhika, prdkrita, and vaikrita, rendered in the 
text ‘innate, essential, and incidental.” Prof. Lassen translates them 
conditiones absolute, pendentes ab origine, pertinentes ad evoluta principia. 
Both the two first are innate, and some further distinction is necessary. 
‘ Superhuman’ or ‘transcendental’ would perhaps best explain the first, 
as they are, according to the commentator, peculiar to saints and sages. 
According to GavrarApa, they occur only in one instance as the cognate 


Sart निमितं नैमिहिकं च विभजते । Spfirer नेमिहिकाः | 





142 


conditions of the divine Kapra, the author of the Sankhya system. The 
second class, which may be rendered ‘natural,’ agreeably to his view, 
which is a little mystical, originated with the four holy and chaste sons 
of Braumd. The third class, those which are incidental or constructive, 
vaikriia, belong to mortals, as they are produced in them by instruction. 
VaAcuespati recognises but two distinctions, identifying, as in the trans- 
lation, the innate (sénsiddhika) with the essential (prdkrita) dispositions, 
they being both swabhdvika, ‘inseparable, inherent,’ not the production 
of tuition, and opposing to it the constructive or incidental (vatkritika)*. 
A similar account of their origin as in the Bhdshya is given, but under 
these two heads only : ‘ Thus in the beginning of creation the first sage, 
the venerable and great Muni Kariia, appeared, spontaneously endowed 
with virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and power. The incidental and un- 
spontaneous dispositions were produced by the cultivation of the means 
(of producing them), as (the lessons of) PrAcuerasa and other great 
Rishis+.’ These dispositions or conditions are dependent upon the in- 
strument, that is upon buddhi, or ‘intellect,’ of which they are faculties, 
as was explained in verse 23. The states or conditions of life depend 
upon the body, and are the immediate effects of generation and nutri- 
ment, the more remote effects of virtue, vice, &c. 


XLIV. 


By virtue is ascent to a region above; by vice, descent to a region 
below: by knowledge is deliverance ; by the reverse, bondage. 


* चैकृत्तिका निभिधिका- प्राकृतिका सांसिद्धिकाभावाः स्वाभाविका इति 
मावत्‌ | † भाहि सगोादावादिविद्वान्‌ ऋष भगवान्‌ रूपिललो 
महामुनिधेम्मेज्ञानवेराग्यष्व्येसम्पनः प्रादुबेभूवेति । वैकृतिकाश्च भावा 
अांसिद्धिका उपायानुष्टानोत्पन्ना यथा प्राचेत्तसप्रभृतीनां महर्षिं | 


143 


BHASHYA. 


By virtue ascent-—Having made virtue the efficient cause, it leads 
upwards. By upwards eight degrees are intended, or the regions of 
Brahmé, Praj4pati, Soma, Indra, the Gandharbas, the Yakshas, the 
Rakehasas, and Pié4chas: the subtile body goes thither. Or if vice be 
the efficient cause, it migrates into an animal, a deer, a bird, a reptile, a 
vegetable, or a mineral. Again; by knowledge, deliverance: knowledge 
of the twenty-five principles; by that efficient cause, deliverance: the 
subtile body ceases, and (soul is) called ‘supreme spirit’ (paramdtmd). 
By the reverse, bondage: ignorance is the efficient cause, and that (effect) 
bondage is natural (prdkrita), incidental (vaikdriku), or personal (ddkshina), 
as will be explained: “ He who is bound by natural, incidental, or per- 
sonal bondage is not loosed by any other (means than knowledge).” 

Next, other efficient causes are declared. 


XLV. 


By dispassion is absorption into nature; by foul passion, migra- 
tion: by power, unimpediment; by the reverse, the contrary. 


BHASHYA. 


Tf any one has dispassion without knowledge of principles, then from 
such dispassion unpreceded by knowledge occurs absorption into nature, 
or when the individual dies he is resolved into the eight primary elements, 
or nature, intellect, egotism, and the five rudiments; but there is no libe- 
ration, and therefore he migrates anew. So also by foul passion; as, I 
sacrifice, I give gifts, in order to obtain in this world divine or human 
enjoyment; from such foul passion proceeds worldly migration. By 
power, unimpediment —Where eightfold power, as minuteness, &c. is the 
efficient cause, then non-obstruction is the effect. Such power is unim- 


144 


peded in the sphere of Brahm4, or in any other. By the reverse, the 
contrary.—The contrary of unimpediment is obstruction, which proceeds 
from want of power, every where obstructed. 

Thus sixteen efficient causes and effects have been enumerated: what 
they comprehend (or amount to) is next described. 


COMMENT. 


In these two verses the efficient causes of the various conditions of 
subtile body and their effects, or its conditions, are detailed. 

These causes and effects are collectively sixteen, eight of each: the 
former are positive and negative, as diversified by the qualities of good- 
ness and foulness (ver. 23); and the effects respectively correspond. 
They are accordingly, 


Cause, Effect. 
1. Virtue. 2. Elevation in the scale of being. 
3. Vice. 4, Degradation in the scale of being. 
5. Knowledge. 6. Liberation from evistence. 
7. Ignorance. 8, Bondage or transmigration. 
9. Dispassion. 10. Dissolution of the subtile bodily form. 


11. Passion, 12. Migration. 
13. Power. 14. Unimpediment. 
15. Feebleness. 16. Obstruction. 


By ‘virtue,’ dherma, both religious and moral merit are intended. 
Ascent, going upward, is elevation to a more exalted station in another 
birth; the term sthdna implying both place and degree. According to 
Gavravina, this ascent is eightfold, and the subtile frame may after 
death assume a new body amongst the various classes of spirits, Pis4chas, 
Rékshasas, Yékshas, and Gandherbas; or may attain a place in the 
heaven of Indra; of Soma, or the moon ; of the Prajapatis, or progenitors 
of mankind; or even in the region of Brahm. It is a curious, though 
perhaps an accidental coincidence, that the Syrians and Egyptians enu- 
merated also, according to Plato (Epinomis), eight orders of heavenly 
beings: their places, however, seem to be the planets exclusively. The 


145 


author of the S. व्र दः understands by ascent, or elevation, ascent to 
the six superterrestrial regions, Dyw, or Bhuvar loka, the atmosphere; Swer 
loka, the heaven of Indra; Mahar loka, Janaloka, and Tapoloka, worlds of 
sages and saints; and Satya loka, of Brahm4. By degradation he under- 
stands descent to the subterrene regions, Pdtdla, Rasdtala, &c. These 
notions are, however, not incompatible, as rewards and punishments in 
heaven and hell are but temporary, and subtile body must even after- 
wards assume terrestrial form, and undergo a series of migrations before 
escape from the bondage of existence can be finally accomplished. 

Bondage is said by the commentators to be of three kinds, intending 
thereby three different errors or misconceptions of the character of soul 
and nature; the prevalence of which precludes all hope of final emanci- 
pation. ‘These errors or bonds are, 1. Prdkritika; the error or bondage 
of the materialists, who assert soul in nature (or matter); 2. Vaikritika; 
the error of another class of materialists, who confound soul with any of 
the products of nature, as the elements, the senses, egotism or intellect : 
and, 3. Dékshina; the error or bondage of those who, ignorant of the real 
character of soul, and blinded by the hope of advantage, engage in moral 
and religious observances :’ as VAcuEspatt®, These errors confine the 
soul to its subtile material frame for various protracted periods; as, for 
instance, in the case of those who identify soul with sense, for ten man- 
wantaras, or above three thousand millions of years (3,084,480,000). 

By dispassion occurs ‘absorption into nature,’ prakriti layat; or, as the 
Kanmudi and Chandriké express it, ‘resolution into the chief one and the 
rest {.’ Gaurardpa makes the meaning of the phrase sufficiently clear: 
according to him it signifies the resolution of even the subtile body into 





* बन्धस्िविधः प्राकृतिको Sgt दाक्षिणशचेति! तजप्रकृत्तावातमज्ञानाट्‌ ये 
waa तेषां प्राकृतो बन्धः । वैकारिको बन्धल्तेषां ये विकारानेव 
भूतेन्दियाहंकारवुद्धीः पुरुषनुद्धोपासते | इष्टापूर्ञेन af: पुरूषतत्वान 
निदो हि इष्टापूषेकारी कामोपहतमना बध्यत इति । 1 प्रकृति लयः। 
प्रधानादिषु त्यः | 

Pp 


146 


its constituent elements: but this is not in this case equivalent to libera- 
tion; it is only the term of one series of migrations, soul being immedi- 
ately reinvested with another person, and commencing ४ new career of 
migratory existence until knowledge is attained. 

The remainder of the text requires no explanation. 


XLVI. 


Tus is an intellectual creation, termed obstruction, disability, 
acquiescence, and perfectness. By disparity of influence ग qualities 
the sorts of it are fifty. ¢ 
BHASHYA. 

This aggregate of sixteen causes and effects is called an intellectual 
creation. Pratyaya means buddhi, ‘intellect.’ ^ Intellect is ascertain- 
ment,” &e. (ver. 23). This intellectual creation is of four kinds, obstruc- 
tion, disability, acquiescence, and perfectness. In this classification, doubé 
(obstruction) is ignorance; as when any one beholding a post (at a dis- 
tance) is in doubt whether it is a post or a man. Disability is when, even 
though the object be distinctly seen, the doubt cannot be dissipated. The 
third kind is called acquiescence; 98 when a person declines to doubt or 
determine whether the object be a post or not; saying, What have I to do 
with this. The fourth kind is perfectness ; as when the delighted observer 
notices a creeper twining round the object, or a bird perched upon it, and 
is certain that it is a post. By disparity of influence of qualities—By the 
unequal (or varied) influence of the qualities of goodness, foulnesa, and 
darkness, acting on this fourfold intellectual creation, there are fifty mo- 
difications of it: and these kinds in which severally goodness, foulness, 
or darkness prevails, and the other two are subordinate, are next par- 
ticularized. 

COMMENT. 

In this and the five following stanzas the modifications of the causes 

and consequences, or the conditions of existence produced by the intel- 


147 


lectual faculties, as influenced by the three qualities, are detailed and 
classified. 

By ‘intellectual creation,’ pratyaya serga*, is to be understood the 
various accidents of human life occasioned by the operations of the intel- 
lect, or the exercise of its faculties, virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power, 
and their contraries. Pratyaya properly means ‘trust,’ but is here consi- 
dered to be synonymous with buddAi. It may be understood as imply- 
ing ‘notion ;’ and pratyaya serga is the creation or existence of which we 
have a notion or belief, in contradistinction to bodily or organic existence, 
of which we have an idea or sensible perception; the bhita sergat, or 
‘elemental creation.’ $ 

Existence then, dependent on the faculties of the intellect and their 
consequences, is further distinguished as of four kinds: 1. ‘Obstruction,’ 
viparyaya, is explained by VAcuespati ‘ignorance’ (ajndna), by Gavpa- 
papa ‘ doubt’ (sausaya): 2. ‘ Disability,’ asakét, is imperfection of the in- 
struments or senses: 3. Tushéi is ‘ acquiescence’ or ‘ indifference :’ and, 
4. Siddhi is ‘complete or perfect knowledge.’ ‘In the three first are com- 
prised the seven intellectual faculties, virtue and the rest (see p. 88), all 
except knowledge, which is comprehended in perfectness|.’ $, Tatwa 
Kaumudi. This is the collective or generic division. Each genus is again 
divided go as to form fifty species, according as they are affected by the 
three qualities, or the predominance of one, and the depression of an- 
other|. The species are enumerated in the succeeding verse. 





* प्र्ययसगेः। ! भूतसमेः । { तनविपग्येयाश्ितुषटिषु 
यथायोगं सानां धम्भोदीनां ज्ञानवज्जेमन्तभोवः सिद च ्षानस्येति | 
। रएककस्याधिकवलता ward एकेकस्यनयूनबतता इयोवो । 


148 


XLVII. 


Tuenr are five distinctions of obstruction; and, from defect of 
instruments, twenty-eight of disability: acquiescence is ninefold ; 


BHASHYA. 


Five distinctions of obstruction; namely, obscurity, illusion, extreme 
illusion, gloom, and utter darkness: these will presently be explained. 
There are twenty-eight kinds of disability from defect of instruments; which 
also we shall describe. Acquéescence is ninefold, being the kinds of know- 
ledge partaking of the quality of foulness in an ascetic. Perfectness is 
eightfold, which in holy men consists also of the kinds of knowledge 
partaking of the quality of goodness. These will all be explained in 
order ; and first of obstruction. 


perfectness eightfold. 


COMMENT. 

We have here the fifty varieties of intellectual creation, or conditions 
dependent upon the faculties of intellect, simply enumerated under each 
head respectively. 

The text in each case is limited to the enumeration of the number of 
the varieties, leaving their designations and descriptions to be supplied 
by the scholia: accordingly we have in the Bhdshya the five distinctions 
of obstruction specified. They are referred to in the text, in the suc- 
ceeding stanza, for the purpose of enumerating their subdivisions, and it 
is unnecessary therefore to enter upon the detail here. 


XLVIII. 
Tue distinctions of obscurity are eightfold, as also those of illu- 
sion; extreme illusion is tenfold; gloom is eighteenfold, and so is 
utter darkness. 


149 


BHASHYA. 


Obscurity is eightfold; final dissolution being so distinguished through 
ignorance ; as when a person thinks that soul merges into the eight forms 
of prakriti, or the five rudiments, egotism, intellect, and nature, and 
thence concludes, I am liberated: this is eightfold obscurity. The same 
is the number of kinds of il/usion; in consequence of which, Indra and 
the gods, being attached to the possession of the eight kinds of super- 
human power, such as minuteness and the rest, do not obtain liberation, 
but upon the loss of their power migrate again: this is called eightfold 
illusion. Extreme illusion is of ten kinds, accordingly as the five objects 
of sense, sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, are sources of happiness to 
the gods or to men. In these ten objects (or the five objects of sense 
twice told) consists extreme illusion. Gloom is eighteenfold—The facul- 
ties of superhuman power are eight sources, and the objects of sense, 
human or divine, arc ten, making eighteen; and the feeling that makes 
men rejoice in the enjoyment of these eighteen, and grieve for the want 
of them, is gloom. Utter darkness has in like manner eighteen varieties, 
originating with the eightfold superhuman power and the ten objects of 
perception; but it applies to the profound grief felt by one who dies 
amidst the abundance of sensual delights in the season of enjoyment, or 
who falls from the command of superhuman facultics: that is utter dark- 
ness. In this manner the five varieties of obstruction, obscurity and the 
rest, are severally subdivided, making sixty-two varieties. 


COMMENT. 


The five kinds of obstruction, ignorance, or uncertainty, alluded to 
in the preceding stanza, are here specified, and their subdivisions enu- 
merated. 

‘Obstruction,’ viparyaya*, means, properly, whatever obstructs the 
soul’s object of final liberation: it is consequently any cause of bondage, 





* विपम्पेयः। 


eq 


150 


of confinement to worldly existence, or of perpetual migration, and is 
therefore one of the four elements of the creation of the world; as, if 
spirit was not so confined, created forms would never have existed. So 
the Sitra of Karrza has, ‘ Bondage is from obstruction *;’ but liberation 
depends on knowledge: bondage therefore arises from ignorance, and 
ignorance or error is obstruction. ७५९५९4०4 accordingly uses saniayat, 
‘doubt’ or ‘error,’ as the synonyme of viparyaya; and the specification of 
its sub-species confirms this sense of the term, as they are all hinderances 
to final emancipation, occasioned by ignorance of the difference between 
soul and nature, or by an erroneous estimate of the sources of happiness, 
placing it in sensual pleasure or superhuman might. 

The five varieties of obstruction or error are, ‘obscurity,’ famas ; ^ illu- 
sion,’ moka; ‘extreme illusion,’ makdmoha ; ‘gloom,’ tdmisra; ° utter dark- 
ness,’ andhatdmisra. The distinctions are more subtle than precise, but 
their general purport is sufficiently obvious; they all imply ignorance of 
sclf, and thirst of pleasure and power. Another enumeration, that of the 
Yoga, or Pdtanjala school, as repeated by Visxdna Buixsuv, calls the 
five species, ‘ignorance’ (avidyd), ‘ egoism’ (asmitd), ‘love’ (rdga), ‘ hate’ 
(dwésha), and ‘idle terror’ (abhinivésa), as fear of death and the like}. 
They are called also in the same system, ‘the five afflictions|.’” These 
are identified with the species named in the text. Odscurity is that igno- 
rance which believes sou! to be sealed in primary nature, or one of its 
first seven products; and is therefore eightfold. Zl/usion is that egoism 
that exults in the appropriation of the eight superhuman faculties; and 
is consequently eightfold also. Extreme illusion, or love, is addiction to 
sensual objects, as they are grateful respectively to gods and men: there- 
fore this class of impediments to liberation is tenfold. Gloom, or hate, is 
of eighteen kinds; ten as affecting the ten objects of sense, or the five 
divine and five human, as before distinguished, and termed by Gavura- 





* बन्धो विपग्भेयात्‌। 1 संश्यः। † सअविद्यास्मितारागदेषाभि 
निवेशः पञ्च योगोक्ता बन्धहेतुविपग्यैयस्यावान्तरमभेदा इति! । अवि 
द्यास्मितारागेषाभिनिवेशः daa इति पातक्लले । 


151 


PADA, drishtd*, ‘seen,’ perceived by men; and anusravikd +, ‘ heard tra- 
ditionally,’ by men, of the gods: and eight connected with the possession 
of the eight superhuman faculties. The mental conditions here intended 
are those of fierceness and impatience, with which sensual enjoyments 
are pursued, or superhuman powers are exercised. Utter darkness, or 
terror, is the fear of death in men; and in gods, the dread of expulsion 
from heaven by the Asuras: in either case the logs of pleasure and power 
is the thing lamented; and as their sources are eighteen, so many are the 
subdivisions of this condition. These distinctions are said to be the work 
of former teachers; as in the S. Pravachana Bhdshya: ‘The subdivisions 
are as formerly described : that is, the subdivisions of obstruction, which 
is said to be of five species, are such as were fully detailed By former 
teachers, but are in the Siitra but briefly alluded to, for fear of pro- 
lixity}.” 


XLIX. 


Dernavity of the eleven organs, together with injuries of the 
intellect, are pronounced to be disability. The injuries of intellect 
are seventeen, by inversion of acquiescence and perfectness. 


BHASHYA. 


From defect of instruments there are twenty-cight kinds of disability ; 
this has been declared (ver. 47): these are, depravity of the eleven organs, 
or deafness, blindness, paralysis, loss of taste, loss of smell, dumbness, 
mutilation, lameness, constipation, impotence, and insanity. Together 
with injuries of the intellect: as, together with these, there are twenty- 
eight kinds of disability, there are seventeen kinds of injuries of the 





यस्यावामरभेदा ये सामान्यतः पंचोक्षाल्तेपू्ेवत्‌ girs ererte 
विश्या खवधाग्या विष्लरभयाजेहोच्यते इत्यथः | 


152 


intellect. By inversion of acquiescence and perfectness: that is, there are 
nine kinds of acquiescence, and eight of perfectness; and with the cir- 
cumstances that are the reverse of these (seventeen), the eleven above 
specified, compose the twenty-eight varieties of disability. The kinds of 
injury of the intellect which are the reverse of (the sorts of) acquiescence 
and perfectness will be understood from the detail of their varieties. 

The nine kinds of acquiescence are next explained. 


COMMENT. 


The various kinds of the second class of conditions or disability are 
here enumerated. 

‘Disability,’ asakti, or incapability of the intellect to discharge its 
peculiar functions +, is the necessary result of imperfection of the senses, 
or of any of the organs of perception and of action. But besides these, 
which are sufficiently obvious, such as blindness, deafness, and any other 
organic defect, there are seventeen affections of the intellect itself equally 
injurious to its efficiency. These are described as the contraries of the 
conditions which constitute the classes acquiescence and perfectness. 
Under the former head are enumerated, dissatisfaction as to notions of 
nature, means, time, and luck, and addiction to enjoyment of the five 
objects of sense, or the pleasures of sight, hearing, touching, &c. The 
contraries of perfectness arc, want of knowledge, whether derivable from 
reflection, from tuition, or from study, endurance of the three kinds of 
pain, privation of friendly intercourse, and absence of purity or of 
liberality. 


10 


Nine sorts of acquiescence are propounded ; four internal, relat- 
ing to nature, to means, to time, and to luck ; five external, relative 
to abstinence from (enjoyment of) objects. 





* बुद्धरशक्तिः स्वव्यापारे । 


158 
BHASHYA. 


Five internal sorts of acquiescence-—Those which are in the individual 
are internal. They are said to relate to nature, to means, to time, and to 
luck. The first is, when a person understands what nature is, its being 
with or without qualities, and thence knows a principle (of existence) to 
be a product of nature ; but knows this only, and is satisfied: he does not 
obtain liberation ; this is acquiescence in regard to nature. The second 
is, when a person, ignorant of the principles (of existence), depends upon 
external means, such as the triple staff, the water-pot, and other imple- 
ments (used by ascetics): liberation is not for him: this is acquiescence 
in regard to means. Acquiescence in regard to time is when 4 person 
satisfies himself that liberation must occur in time, and that it is unne- 
ceasary to study first principles: such a one does not obtain liberation. 
And in the same way acquiescence as relates to /uck is when a person is 
content to think that by good luck liberation will be attained. These are 
four kinds of acquiescence. Five external, relative to abstinence from (en- 
joyment of objects).—The external sorts of acquiescence are five ; from ab- 
stinence from enjoyment of (five) objects of sense; that is, when a person 
abstains from gratification through sound, touch, form, flavour, and smell ; 
such abstinence proceeding from observation of (the evils of) acquiring, 
preserving, waste, attachment (to sensual pleasures), and injuriousness. 
Acquiring is pain (or trouble), for the sake of increase, by the pasturage 
of cattle, trade, acceptance of gifts, and servitude. There is pain in the 
preservation of what has been acquired ; and if they be enjoyed, they are 
wasted; and waste, again, is vexation. When attachment to sensual 
pleasures prevails, the organs have no repose: this is the fault of such at- 
tachment. Without detriment to created things there is no enjoyment (of 
sensible objects); and this is the defect of injuriousness. From observing 
then the evil consequences of acquiring and the rest, abstinence from 
enjoyment of the five objects of sense is practised ; and these are the five 
sorts of external acquiescence. From the variety of these internal and 
external kinds proceed the nine sorts of acquiescence. Their names are 
differently enumerated in other works, or ambhas, salilam, ogha, vrishti, 
sutamas, pdram, sunetram, nértkam, and anuttamdmbhasikam: and from 

Rr 


154 


the reverse of these kinds of acquiescence, constituting the varieties of 

disability, injuries of the intellect arise, named (according to the last 

Mentioned nomenclature) anambhas, asalilam, and so on. From the con- 

trariety of these, therefore, are inferred the injuries of the intellect. 
Perfectness is next described. 


COMMENT. 


The different kinds of acquiescence, apathy, or indifference, are spe- 
cificd in this verse. 

The kinds of acquicscence, content, or complacency, tushti, are of two 
descriptions ; internal or spiritual, ddiydtmika, and external or sensible, 
bahya, Gaurappa explains the former, ‘ being in self or spirit *.’ VAcnus- 
patt defines them, ‘ Those kinds of acquiescence are called internal which 
proceed from discrimination of self, as different from nature {.’ According 
to ViunAwa Burxsnv, they are those principles or sentiments which preside 
over collected or composed soul {. Of the different species, the first, or 
that which relates to nature, acknowledges it as the radical principle of all 
things, but expects that as every thing is but a modification of nature, 50 
nature will effect all that is necessary, cven liberation, for example, and 
the individual ॥ remains passive and complete |. Another person, as the 
means of liberation, adopts a religious or mendicant order, or at least bears 
the emblems, as the staff, the water-pot, and the like: the term vividrkd 
used in the Bhdshya is of doubtful import, and is perhaps an error. Others 
suppose that liberation must come in time, or at least by a long con- 
tinued course of meditation. Others imagine it may come by good luck ; 
and contenting themselves with these notions or practices, omit the only 
means of being freed from existence, discriminative meditation. The five 


* त्मनि भवाः । 1 प्रकृति व्यत्तिरिक्षमात्तत्मानमधिकृत्य यस्मात्‌ 
तास्तुशटयस्तस्मादाध्यात्मिकाः | ‡ आत्मानं संघात्तमधिकृत्य ater | 
॥ साक्षात्कारपम्येन्तः परिणामः सोऽपि प्रकृतेरेव तं (मोक्षं) च प्रकृत्तिरेव 
करोत्यहं तु कूटस्थः पूणे इति । 


155 


external kinds of acquiescence are self-denial, or abstinence from the five 
objects of sensual gratification ; not from any philosophic appreciation of 
them, but from dread of the trouble and anxiety which attends the means 
of procuring and enjoying worldly pleasures; such as acquiring wealth, 
preserving it, spending it, incessant excitement and injury or cruelty to 
others. Besides the terms ordinarily significant of these divisions of 
acquiescence, the Scholiasts specify other words, the usual sense of which 
is quite different, and which may therefore be regarded as the slang or 
mystical nomenclature of the followers of the Yoga. There is some dif- 
ference in the precise expressions, but they are of a similar purport 
in general. The first four, the synonymes of the internal modes of ac- 
quiescence, are alike in all the authorities; or, ambhas*, < water's’ salila नै, 
also ‘ water ;’ ogha }, ‘ quantity ; and णि |" ‘rain.’ 6५०१५५४५ then 
has for the five exterior modes, sutamas§, ‘great darkness;’ para, ‘shore;’ 
sunétra**, ‘a beautiful eye; ndrikatt, ‘feminine; and anuttamdmbhi- 
sika tt, ‘unsurpassed water.’ VAcuespati makes them, param, supéram|ll, 
“good shore ;’ apdram §f, ‘shoreless ;’ anuttamambhas 1%, ‘ unsurpassed 
water ;’ and wétamdmbhas ***, ‘ excellent water.’ The Chandrikd has the 
same, except in the third place, where the term is pérdpdrat{t, ‘both 
shores ;’ with which the $. Prav. Bh. agrees. No explanation of the words 
is any where given, nor is any reason assigned for their adoption. 


LL. 
Reasonine, hearing, study, prevention of pain of three sorts, in- 
tercourse of friends, and purity (or gift) are perfections (or means 
thereof). The fore-mentioned three are curbs of perfectness. 


warm! 1 सलिलं । tsi ॥ वृष्टिः। Sqm 
Tati “सुनें, 11 नारीकं। + अनुत्तमाम्भसिकः। 
॥ सुपारं। Saati " अनुत्चमाम्भस्‌। ^“ उह्षमाम्भस्‌ । 
111 पारापारं । 


156 
BHASHYA. 


Rensoning ; 98 when a person always reasons, What here is truth? 
What is the future? What is final felicity? How may I attain the object 
(of my existence)? and from reflecting in this manner, the knowledge is 
acquired that soul is different from nature; that intellect, egotism, the 
rudiments, the senses, the elements, are several and distinct. In this 
manner knowledge of the (twenty-five) principles is attained, by which 
liberation is accomplished. This is the first kind of perfectness, called 
reasoning. Next, from knowledge acquired by hearing proceeds know- 
ledge of nature, intellect, egotism, the rudiments, the senses, and the 
elements; whence liberation ensues: this is perfectness by hearing. 
When froin study, or the perusal of the Védas and other (sacred) writings, 
knowledge of the twenty-five principles is acquired; that is the third 
kind of perfectness. Prevention of the three kinds of pain.—When, for the 
purpose of preventing the three kinds of pain, internal, external, and 
superhuman, a holy teacher has been attended, and liberation is derived 
from his counsel; then this constitutes the fourth kind of perfectness. 
This is threefold, with reference to the three different sorts of pain, and 
makes, with the three preceding, six varieties of perfectness. Next, in- 
tercourse of friends; as when a friend, having acquired knowledge, obtains 
liberation: this is the seventh kind of perfectness. Gift; as when a 
person assists holy men, by donations of a dwelling, of herbs, of a staff, a 
wallet, food, or clothing ; and (in requital) receives from them knowledge, 
and thus obtains liberation: this is the eighth sort of perfectness. In 
other books these eight kinds of perfectness are termed édram, sutdram, 
tératdram, pramodam, pramoditam, pramodaménam, ramyakam, and. sadd- 
pramuditam—From contrariety to these, the injuries of intellect which 
occur, or causes of disability, are termed atdram, asutardm, &c.; thus 
completing the twenty-eight kinds of disability, as in the text (ver. 49), 
म Depravity of the eleven organs, together with injuries of the intellect,” 
&c. Thus the contraries of the sorts of acquiescence being nine, and the 
contraries of the kinds of perfectness being eight, they form seventeen 
injuries of intellect; and these, with the eleven defects of the organs, 
constitute twenty-eight kinds of disability, as previously stated. 


157 


In this way the various kinds of obstruction, disability, acquiescence, 
and perfectness, have been affirmatively and negatively described. Again, 
the forementioned three are curbs of perfectness.—Forementioned ; that is, 
obstruction, disability, and acquiescence; they are curbs of perfectness : 
threefold curbs from their severalty. As an clephant is kept in check 
when restrained by a goad (or curb), so, impeded by obstruction, dis- 
ability, and acquiescence, the world suffers ignorance: therefore aban- 
doning them, perfectness alone is to be pursued; for by a person having 
perfectness knowledge is attained, and thence liberation. 

It was stated (ver. 40) that “subtile body migrates, invested with dis- 
positions:” those dispositions were previously said to be virtuc and the 
rest, eight in number, modifications (or faculties) of intellect; which again 
have been described as modified by obstruction, disability, acquiescence, 
and perfectness. These (together) constitute intellectual creation, also 
called dispositional (or conditional): but subtitle body is called a rudi- 
mental (or personal) creation, extending throughout the fourteen sorts of 
created things. (See v. 53.) It then becomes a question, whether soul's 
purpose is accomplished by one kind of creation, or by both? This is 
next explained. 


COMMENT. 


The different kinds of perfectness are here specified. 

By ‘perfectness,’ siddhi*, is here to be understood the means of perfect- 
ing or fulfilling the purpose of soul, or the conditions essential to its 
attainment; the circumstances productive of knowledge; the necessary 
consequence of which is exemption from future transmigration. ‘+Reason- 
ing, hearing, study, intercourse of friends, and gift, are secondary kinds of 
perfectneas, as subsidiary to the prevention of the three kinds of pain, 





* fafa 1 विहन्यमानस्य दुःखस्य frerefirarrea इति । इमा 
मुष््यास्तिखः सिदयस्तदुपायतेयाविितरा गौर्यः पंच fers: | तास्ता कपि 
हेतुहेतुमहयाध्यवस्थिताः । 


158 


which constitutes a triple principal class: they are respectively distin- 
guished as objects, and the means of effecting those objects.’ S. Tatwa 
Kaumudi, Reasoning, according to Vacuesrat, is ‘ investigation of scrip- 
tural authority by dialectics which are not contrary to the scriptures:’ 
and investigation is defined, ‘refutation of dubious doctrine, and esta- 
blishment of positive conclusions *.’ ‘ Hearing is oral instruction, or 
rather the knowledge thence derived, or knowledge derived either from 
hearing another person read, or from expounding a work 1." S. Pr. Bh. 
Intercourse of friends} is explained in the $, Tatwa Kaumudi to signify 
‘dissatisfaction with solitary inquiry, and discussion with a teacher, a 
pupil, or a fellow-student|.’ Visnana Barxsuvu defines it, ‘ acquirement 
of knowledge from a benevolent visitor, who comes to give instruction §.’ 
Vacuaspati and Narayana agree in rendering ddnaS—which Gaura- 
pApA explains by ‘gift, liberality,’ particularly to religious characters 
—by suddhi**, ‘purity; meaning the purity of discriminative know- 
ledge; deriving it from the root daip{t, ‘to purify,’ and not from 
dd tj, ‘to give.’ The former cites the authority of Parangazs for this 
sense of one kind of perfectness: ‘ Undisturbedness of discriminative 
knowledge, that is, purity; which is not attained except through long 
repeated and uninterrupted practice of veneration. That is also compre- 
hended in discrimination by the term déna|\|. He also observes that 
others interpret it ‘gift, by which a sage, being propitiated, imparts 
* छआगमायिरोधन्यायेनागमापेपरीश्षणं | परीक्षणं च संशयपूङ्ेपक्षनि 
राकरणेनो्षरपक्षव्यवस्थापनं । t अन्यदीयपादमाकणएये स्वयंवा area 
ATH यज्जानं जायते तदिति | ‡ सुह्माः । ॥ सुहृदां गुर 
शिष्यसब्रसचारिणां सम्वादकानां प्राप्तिः । ° स्वयमुपदेशथं गृहागतात्‌ 
परमकारुशिकाज्छानलाभः। " दानं। “शरधिः 11 ey, 
शोधने। Ha, दाने। ॥ विवेकख्यातेरविक्षवः । अविक्लवः शुचिः 
नविनाद्रमैरन्तय्यैदीधेकात्सेवित्ताभ्यास्परिपाकाद्वत्तीति 
--सा च नविनादरनेरनय्येदीधेकालसेविताभ्यासपरिपाकाञ्नवत्तीति दा 
नेन विवेकख्मात्यां कार्मयण सोपि संगृहीतः । 





159 


knowledge*.’ The §. Prav. Bh. gives this interpretation only{. The 
term for ‘curb,’ ankusa}, is the goad or iron hook used to guide an 
elephant: it is here explained by nivdrana, ‘hindering; and ‘as ob- 
struction, disability, and acquiescence hinder perfectness, they are to be 
shunned ||.’ 


1019 


Wirnovr dispositions there would be no subtile person: without 
person there would be no pause of dispositions: wherefore a twofold 
creation is presented, one termed personal, the other intellectual. 


BHASHYA. 


Without dispositions, without intellectual creations, there would be no 
subttle person, no rudimental creation; from the non-assumption of re- 
peated successive bodily forms, without the necessary influence of ante- 
प्ण conditions (or dispositions). Without person, without rudimental 
creation, there would he no pause of dispositions ; from the indispensability 
of virtue or vice for the attainment of either subtile or gross body, and 
from the non-priority of either creation, they being mutually initiative, 
like the seed and the germ. There is no fault in this, for (the relation) 
is that of species, it does not imply the mutual relation of individuals. 
Thence proceeds a twofold creation, one termed conditional (or intellec- 
tual), the other rudimenial (or personal). Further-— 


COMMENT. 


It is here explained that a double condition of existence, a twofold 
creation, necessarily prevails ; one proceeding from the intellectual facul- 


* धनादिदानेनाराधितो खानी ज्ञानं प्रयति । † दानं च यथा 
धमादिदानेम परितोषिताञ्ज्ञानत्काम इति । ‡ अकुशः। । सिद्धि 
परिपन्मित्वाधिपम्येयाशक्तितुष्टयो हेया इत्यथः । 





160 


ties, the other from the rudimental elements; each being indispensable to 
the other. 

Tt was stated (ver. 40) that subtile body migrates, invested with dis- 
positions: and it was then explained (ver. 43, et seq.) what those disposi- 
tions or conditions were, viz. the conditions of the intellect (described in 
ver. 23), or virtue, vice, knowledge, ignorance, passion, dispassion, power, 
and debility. These were said (v. 46) to constitute an intellectual crea- 
tion, or a series of conditions originating: in affections of buddhi, or the 
intellectual principle. But the effects of these dispositions, the conse- 
quences of virtue or vice and the rest, can only be manifested in a bodily 
state, and therefore require necessarily a creation of a different character, 
personal‘ or rudimental creation, such as subtile body, investing the im- 
perceptible products of nature ; intellect and its faculties included. Nor 
is such a creation indispensable for the existence or exercise of the intel- 
lectual conditions or sentiments alone, but it is equally necessary for their 
occasional cessation: thus virtue, vice, and the rest necessarily imply and 
occasion bodily condition ; bodily condition is productive of acts of vice 
and virtue; vice and virtue, again, occasion bodily condition ; and so on: 
like the seed and the tree, each mutually generative of the other; the 
tree bears the seed; from the seed springs the tree, again to put forth 
seed; and so on for ever; neither being initiative, neither being final. 
But one result of bodily condition is knowledge; knowledge is liberation, 
when soul is disengaged: subtile body then resolves into its rudiments, 
and the dispositions or conditions of the intellect terminate. In this way 
there are two creations, the bhkdvdkhya*, that termed ‘conditional’ or 
‘ intellectual ;’ and the dingdkiya त, that called ‘rudimental’ or ‘ personal.’ 
Both these seem to be considered by the text, as well as by GaurapApa 
and VAcHeseati, as varieties of one species of the Pratyaya sarga, or 
‘intellectual creation.’ The commentator on the S. Pravachana 80 far 
agrees with them, but he seems to restrict the two kinds more closely to 
a creation of intellect, regarding the linga as buddhi itself, and the bhdva 





* भावाख्यः | t लिंगाख्यः । 


161 


as its conditions or dispositions. Thus, commenting on this verse of the 
Kadrikd, he observes, ‘ Bhéva signifies the modes of the apprehension (or 
the faculties) of intelligence, as the properties knowledge, virtue, and the 
rest. Lingua is the great principle, or intelligence *.’ He calls them both 
samashti sarga, ‘0 collective or generic creation.’ By the other commenta- 
tors, however, the finga is also called the fanmdtra, or ‘rudimental cren- 
tion {:’ and it further seems to imply ‘gross body ;’ for ‘fruition, which is 
one of soul's objects, cannot be accomplished without both bodies; with- 
out the receptacle that enjoys, and the objects to be enjoyed}.’ The 
author of the Chandrikd has accordingly adopted a totally different ver- 
sion of this passage, understanding by bidvdkhya, not any reference to 
intellectual ercation, but the creation of sensible objects, the abjécts to be 
enjoyed; hugdkhya, or ‘ personal creation, being the enjoyer: ‘ Without 
the bidvas, or present objects of seuse, the finga, or aggregate of im- 
perceptible principles, intelligence und the rest, could not be means of 
fruition ; whilst without intelligence und the rest there could be no pause, 
no cessation, of the means of enjoying sensible objects. This is the pur- 
port of the text|.’ And he defines davga to be ‘that which is ouly indi- 
cated, which is actually not visible, as intellect and the rest;’ and bhdva, 
‘that object which is perceived or apprehended by the senses, the class 
of sensible objects ई 

The succession of the two kinds of creation, as mutually cause and 
effect, is said by Vacnesvari to be eternal, und without a beginning, as 


* भावो वासनारूपा वृदधेज्ञोनादिगुणा लिंगं महसत्वं बुद्धिरिति । 
| त्िंगसिति ततन्माजसर्गमुपलक्षयति। ‡ भोगः पुरूषाथो न भोग्यान्‌ 
शब्दादीन्‌ भोगायत्तनं च शरीर्यमन्तरेण सम्भवतीति | ॥ भावैः 
परत्यक्षिवषयेर्विना fort महदाद्यतीन्दरियवृन्दं म भोगसाधनमिन्यथेः। लिंगेन 
महदारिना दिना न भावानां विषयानां निवृक्तिनेभोगसाधनवमयमभि 
प्रायः। farmed fra एव न ततु साक्षात्‌ क्रियत इति क्किगं 
महदाद्यतीन्द्रियवर्गः। भावाख्यो भूयते प्राणततेऽथोदिन्दिेशेति विषयवगैः। 

Tt 


even in the commencement of a kalpa bodily existence results from the 
conditions of similar existence in a former kalpa*. 


ना. 


Tue divine kind is of eight sorts; the grovelling is fivefold; 
mankind is single in its class. This, briefly, is the world of living 
beings. Pi 
BHASHYA. 

Divine, of eight sorts; Brahma, Préjapatya, Saumya, Aindra, Giu- 
dherba, Yaksha, Rakshasha, and Paisicha. Animals, deer, birds, reptiles, 
and immovable substances are the five grovelling kinds. Mankind ts 
sngle. In this way there are fourteen sorts of creatures, there being 
three classes in the three worlds. Which is supreme in cach is next 
explained. 

COMMENT. 

The intellectual or rudimeutal creation hitherto described has becn 
that of creation generally ; we now have an account of specific or indivi- 
dual creation, composed of fourteen classes of beings. 

The fourteen classes of beings are, first, eight superhuman, or Breda, 
that of Branmé and other supreme gods; 2. Préjaputya, that of proge- 
nitors, the Menus, the Rishis, or divine sages ; 3. Sawmya, lunar or pla- 
netary; 4. Aindra, that of Inpra and divinities of the second order; 
5. Gdndherba, that of the demigods attendant on Inpra, and of similar 
beings; 6. Rdkshasa, that of demons, foes of the gods; 7. Ydksha, that of 
the attendants of Kuvira; 8. Paisdcha, that of mischievous and cruel 
fiends. These are divine or superhuman beings. The ninth class is that 
of man, which contains but one species. We have then five classes of 


सिनानुपपनेति सक्रेमवदातं | 


168 


inferior beings; or, counting from the preceding, 10. Animals, or domestic 
animals, pau; 11. Wild animals, as deer and the like, mriga; 12. Birds; 
13. Reptiles, or creeping things, including fish sarisripa; and 14. Sthé- 
vara, fixed things, such as vegetables and minerals, These constitute the 
vyashti serga*, specific or individual creation ; or, as denominated in the 
text, the bhautika sarga, the creation of bhitas, ‘beings ;' or elemental 
creation; the forms of things requiring the combination of the gross 
elements. 


LIV. 


4४०४४, there is prevalence of goodness: below, the creation is 
full of darkness: in the midst, is the predominance of foulness, from 


Brana to a stock. 
BHASHYA. 


Above: in the eight divine regions. Prevalence of goodness: the ex- 
tensiveness or predominance of the quality of goodness. Above is good- 
ness predominant, but there are foulness and darkness also. Below, the 
creation is full of darkness—In animals and insensible things the whole 
creation is pervaded by darkness in excess, but there are goodness aud 
foulness. Ju the midst, in man, foulness predominates, although goodness 
and darkness exist; and hence men for the most part suffer pain. Such 
ig the world, from Bratma to a stock; from Brauma to immovable things. 
Thus non-elemental creation, rudimental creation, conditional and ele- 
mental creation, in beings of divine, mortal, brutal, and (immovable) 
origin, are the sixteen sorts of creation effected by nature. 


COMMENT. 


The various qualitics dominating in the different orders of beings are 
specified in this stanza. 


* व्यहिसगेः । 


164 


The coexistence of the several qualities, with the predominance of 
one or other of them, in different beings, has been previously explained 
(p. 54), as well as the different orders or states of existent beings; con- 
stituting, according to Gaurapina, sixteen forms or kinds of creation: 
that is, apparently, each of the four classes of beings proceeds from four 
modifications of nature; or, from the invisible principles, from the subtile 
rudiments, from the conditions or dispositions of intellect, and from the 
gross clemcnts. 


LY. 


Tuexe does sentient soul experience pain, arising from decay 
and death, until it be released from its person: wherefore pain is of 
the essence (of bodily existence). 


BHASHYA. 

There: in the bodies of gods, men, and animals. Pam produced by 
decay, and produced by death, Sentient soul: soul having sensibility. 
Experiences: soul experiences ; not nature, nor intellcet, nor egotism, nor 
the rudiments, senses, nor gross clements. How long does it suffer pain ? 
this (the text) discusses. Uutil vt be released from tls person. As long as 
it is in subtile body, composed of intellect and the rest, it is discrete (or 
individualized) ; and as long as migratory body does not rest, so long, in 
brief, soul suffers pain, arising from decay and death, in the three worlds. 
Until it be released from its person: until the discontinuance of subtile 
person. In the cessation of subtile body consists liberation; and when 
liberation is obtaincd, there is no more pain. By what means, then, can 
liberation be effected? Whenever knowledge of the twenty-five princi- 
ples, the characteristic of which is knowledge of the distinctness of soul 
and body, is attained ; or whenever a person knows that this is nature, 
this intellect, this egotism, these are the five rudiments, these the eleven 
senses, these the five elements, and this is soul, separate and dissimilar 


165 


from them all; then from such knowledge proceeds cessation of subtile 
person, and thence liberation. 
The object of the activity (or development of nature) is next explained. 


COMMENT. 


The presence of soul in these creations, and for what period, is here 
specified. 

Having defined the different objects which form the twenty-five cate- 
gories or tatwas of the Sénkhya philosophy, the text now comes to the 
main object of that and of al! Hindu systems, the final dissolution of the 
connection between soul and body. The rest of the Kérikd is devoted to 
the illustration of this topic. In this verse it is said that soul experiences 
pain in the different stages of existence, until its corporeal frame is dis- 
continued ; for soul itself is not susceptible of pain, or of decay, or death : 
the site of these things is nature, but nature is unconscious, insensible ; 
and the consciousness that pain exists is restricted to soul, though soul is 
not the actual seat of pain; its experience of pain depends upon its con- 
nexion with rudimental person, of the material constituents of which, 
decay, death, and pain are concomitants. ‘Pain and the rest are from 
nature, they are properties of intelligence. How do they become con- 
nected with sense? Soul (purusha) is that which reposes (४८) in body 
(puri): subtile body is immediately connected with it, and becomes 
thereby connected with sense*.’ S. Tatwa Kaumudi. When soul is re- 
leased from body, its susceptibility of pain ceases: pain is therefore of 
the essence + of its own nature; that is, it is the inseparable concomitant 
of bodily creation, according to Patangaxi, as quoted in the $, Chandrika: 
‘ All is pain to the wise, through the conflict of opposite qualities, and 
by the sufferings arising from afflicting vicissitudes };’ that is, from the 


Bares: प्राकृता बुद्धिगुणास्तत्‌ कथमेते चेतनसश्नन्धिनो भवन्तीति । 
पुरुष इति पुरि far रेते पुरुषः। लिगं च त्ासखन्धीति चेतनोऽपि तास्त 
wit भवतीत्यर्थः, 1 स्वभावेन 1! 1 परिणामतापसंस्कारटुःसेगु 
णवृिषिरोधाच्च दुःखमेव सत्रे विवेकिनां । 


166 


dread of death and the reiteration of birth ; to which even the conditions 
of spirits, sages, and gods are subject. Thus the Sdtra of Karina: ‘The 
pain of death, decay, and the rest is universal*;' as explained in the 
S. Prav. Bhishya: ‘The pain of death, decay, and the rest is the com- 
mon portion of all beings, whether above or below, from BaaumA to im- 
movable things.’ So also another Sitra: ‘It is to be shunned, from 
the connection of successive birth by the thread of regeneration ||:’ that 
is, according to the commentator, ‘ since regeneration is unavoidable, even 
after ascent to the regions above; and in consequence of the succession 
of births, that regeneration must be in an inferior condition; even the 
world above is to be shunned ||." GaurapApa and Vacnespati take no 
notice of the expression, ‘Pain is of the essence.’ The S. Chandrikd ex- 
plains it, ‘Creation is essentially of the nature of pain§.” Rama Krisuna 
calle it, ‘Former acts;’ the acts of a former life %. 


LVI. 


Tus evolution of nature, from intellect to the special elements, 
is performed for the deliverance of each soul respectively ; done for 
another's sake as for self. 

BHASHYA. 

This (or ‘thus, this,’ ityésha) implies conclusiveness and limitation 
(that is, in this way all thet has been hitherto described). Evolution of 
nature: in the instrumentality or act of nature. Whatever evolution of 


“wari जरामरणादिजं दुःखं । 1 ऊद्ाधोगतानां ब्रसादिस्यादवं 
न्तानां सर्वामेव ज्ञरामरणादिदुःखं साधारणं। Fargfeqeran 
रयोनियोगाद्ेयः। । तथापि तूर्ेगतावपि सत्यामावृ्िरस्ति त उह 
रोत्तरयोनि योगादपोयोनिस्न्धात्‌ सोऽपिलोको हेय ek 5 स्वत 
एव सगो ewe! " स्वभावं प्राक्नकम्मे । 


167 


nature, from intellect to the special elements: that is, {the evolution) of 
intellect from nature; of egotism from intellect; of the rudiments and 
senses from egotism ; and of the gross elements from the subtile. Is per- 
formed for the deliverance of each soul respectively.—This evolution is 
effected for the liberation of each individual soul which has assumed 
body, whether brute, human, or divine. How (is it effected)? It is done 
Sor another's sake as for self: as, for instance, a person neglecting his own 
objects transacts those of a friend, so does nature ; soul makes no return 
tonature. .As for self; not for self: for the sake, in fact, of another is 
the apprehension of sound and the other objects of sense, or knowledge 
of the difference between soul and qualities ; for souls are to be provided 
(by nature), in the three worlds, with objects of sense, and at last with 
liberation: such is the agency of nature ; as it is said, “ Nature is like a 
utensil, having fulfilled soul’s object it ceases.” 

It is here objected, Nature is irrational, Sou! is rational ; then how can 
nature, like a rational thing, understand that by me, soul is to be provided 
in the three worlds with the objects of sense, and at last with liberation’ 
This is true; but action and cessation of action are both observed in 
irrational things; whence it is said— 


COMMENT. 

The object of nature’s activity is here said to be the final liberation of 
individual soul. 

Nature is properly inert, and its activity, its “ motion” or evolution, 
takes place only for the purpose of soul, not for any object of its own. The 
term is drambha, ‘commencement,’ ‘ successive origin or beginning,’ as 
detailed in former passages: that is, of intellect from crude nature; of 
egotism from intellect; and so on. This is the spontaneous act of na- 
ture; it is not influenced by any external intelligent principle, such as 
the Supreme Being or a subordinate agent; as Braum, it is without 
(external) cause*.’ ‘But it is objected, Nature being eternal, her works 


* प्रकृत्यैव कृतो नेश्वरेण न बर्लोपादानेनाणकारणः। 


168 


should be so too; and forms once evolved should therefore endure for 
ever. To this it is replied, The work is done for a special purpose, the 
liberation of individual soul; and that when this is accomplished, nature 
ceases with regard to that individual, as a man boiling rice for a meal 
desists when it is dressed ¢.’ S. Tatwa Kaumudi. According to Gaura- 
pApa, and to the text of the following stanza, nature 80 acts spontane- 
ously ; but the incompetency of nature, an irrational principle, to institute 
a course of action for a definite purpose, and the unfitness of rational soul 
to regulate the acts of an agent whose character it imperfectly appre- 
hends, constitute a principal argument with the theistical Sankhyas for 
the necessity of a Providence, to whom the ends of existence are known, 
and by whom nature is guided, as stated by VActzspati: ‘ But whether 
this (evolution) be for its own purpose or that of another, it is a rational 
principle that acts. Nature cannot act without rationality, and therefore 
there must be a rcason which directs nature. Embodied souls, though 
rational, canuot direct nature, as they are ignorant of its character; 
therefore there is an omniscient Being, the director of nature, which is 
Aswara, or God ¶. This is not inconsistent with the previous doctrine, 
that creation is the evolution of nature: it is so, but under the guidance 
of a ruling Power. The atheistical Sankhyas, on the other hand, contend 
that there is no occasion for a guiding Providence, but that the activity 
of nature, for the purpose of accomplishing soul’s object, is an intuitive 
necessity, 28 illustrated in the ensuing passage. 


* यथोद्नकाम Gera प्राके प्रवृ्तिरोदनसिद्धौ निवत एवं wae 
पुरूषान्‌ मोचयितुपरवृ्ता प्रकृतये पुरषं मोचयति तं प्रति न पुनपैव्ेते। 
1 स्यादेतत्‌ स्वायं परां वा चेतनः प्रवकषेते । न च प्रकृतिरचेत्तनेव भवि 
तुमहंति तस्मादस्ति प्रकृतेरधिष्टाता चेतनः। न च BATE चेतना पि 
प्रकृतिमधिष्ठातुमेन्ति तेषां प्रकृतिस्वरूपानभिञ्ञत्वात्‌ | तस्मादस्ति सद्धं 
दशी प्रकृतेरधिषाता चेश्वर इति । 


169 


LVIL 


As it is a function of milk, an unintelligent (substance), to nourish 
the calf, so it is the office of the chief (principle) to liberate the 


soul, \ 
BHASHYA. 


As grass and water taken by the cow became eliminated into milk, 
and nourish the calf; and as (the secretion ceases) when the calf is 
grown; so nature (acts spontaneously) for the liberation of soul. This 
is the agency of an unintelligent thing. 


COMMENT. 

The intuitive or spontaneous evolution of nature, for soul’s purpose, is 
here illustrated. 

As the breast secretes milk for a purpose of which it is unconscious, 
and unconsciously stops when that purpose, the nutriment of the young 
animal, is effected ; so nature, though irrational, constructs bodily forms 
for the fruition and liberation of soul; and when the latter is accom- 
plished, ccases to evolve. The illustration is from +ला, as in the 
Satra, ‘ From irrationality the activity of nature is like (the secretion भ) 
milk *.’ 


णा. 


As people engage in acts to relieve desires, so does the undiscrete 
(principle) to liberate the soul. 


BHASHYA. 


As mankind, being influenced by desire, engage in acts of various 
kinds for its gratification or fulfilment, and desist when the object is 


* चेतनत etcrafed प्रधानस्य । 





170 


accomplished, so the Chief one, active for the purpose of liberating soul, 
desists, after having effected the twofold purpose of soul ; one, cognizance 
of enjoyment of the objects of sense; the other, cognizance of the differ- 
ence between soul and qualities. 


COMMENT. 

Another illustration is here given of the activity of nature. 

According to VAcuespati, this verse is an explanation of the phrase 
(in ver. 56), ^ For another's sake as for self*;’ assigning, in fact, an object 
to nature, the accomplishment of its own wish; autsukya being rendered 
by ichchhd, ‘ wish :’ and this wish, which is, ‘the liberation of soul, being 
gratified, nature desists ¢.’ 


LIX. 
As a dancer, having exhibited herself to the spectator, desists 
from the dance, so does nature desist, having manifested herself to 


soul. 
BHASHYA. 


As a dancer (or actress), having exhibited her performances on the 
stage in dramatic representations, rendered interesting by the display of 
love and other passions, in situations drawn from history or tradition, and 
accompanied by music and singing, desists from acting when her part is 
finished, so nature, having exhibited itself to soul, in the various charac- 
ters of intellect, egotism, the rudiments, senses, and elements, desists. 

What the cause of such cessation is, is next described. 


COMMENT. 
An illustration is here given of the discontinuance of nature's activity. 
Ranga, properly a stage or theatre, is said in the S. Taitwa Kaumudt 





* स्वाथे इव परार्थे | † सा खत्वि्यमाणपराप्रौ fade । 


171 


to imply also the audience*. A dancer is equally an actress, nurttaki, 
at least was so in ancient times. The dancing girls of Hindustan are 
rather singers, than either actresses or dancers. 


LX. 


Generous nature, endued with qualities, does by manifold means 
accomplish, without benefit (to herself’) the wish of ungrateful soul, 
devoid as he is of qualities. 

BHASHYA. . 


By manifold means.—Nature is the benefactress of soul, of unrequiting 
soul. How? By the characters of men, gods, and animals; by circum- 
stances involving pain, pleasure, and insensibility; by the properties of 
the objects of sense: in this way having by various means exhibited her- 
self to soul, and shewn that ‘I am onc; thou art another ;’ having done 
this, nature desists. Thus she accomplishes the wish of that (soul) which 
is eternal, without benefit (to herself): as a benevolent man gives assist- 
ance to all, and seeks no return for himself, so nature pursues or effects 
the purpose of soul, without deriving from it any advantage. 

Jt was said above (ver. 59), “ Having manifested herself, nature de- 
sists.” It is next shewn what she does, having desisted. 


COMMENT. 


This verse may be considered as a further explanation of the ex- 
pression in ver. 56, “‘ Nature labours for the benefit of soul as if for self, 
but not for any advantage.” 

‘Generous, benevolent }:’ ‘ Not expecting a return; for it is not true 
generosity to do good to another with the expectation of requital {." 





Graft स्थानेन स्थायिनः पारिषदानुषल्षयति। † उपका 
रिणी। पराथ प्र्युपकारसदन्धेनैव प्रवृ्षिरिति न नियमः। 


172 


S. Chandrikd, ‘Soul being devoid of qualities (ver. 19), is consequently 
devoid of action, and can therefore do nothing by way of गलप + Na- 
ture ‘ accomplishes, goes to,’ charati or dcharati, or ‘effects,’ kuruté. The 
last word of the verse is differently read. 


LXI. 


Noruine, in my opinion, is more gentle than nature; once aware 
of having been seen, she does not again expose herself to the gaze 


of soul. 
: BHASHYA. 


There is nothing in the world more soft (gentle, timid) than nature, 
in my opinion : for which reason (nature’s) opinion consults another's ad- 
vantage. Wherefore nature says to herself, “I have been beheld by that 
soul,” and does not again prescnt herself to the view of that soul; that is, 
she disappears from the presence of soul. That indicates what the text 
means by gentle. 

It (the text?) declares /swara (God) to be the cause of the world : thus; 
“ Let this ignorant, brute, godless (soul), for its own pleasure or pain, go 
to heaven or hell, sent (thither) by Iswara.” Others say, spontaneity is 
cause: “ By what (or whom) the swan is created white, the peacock of 
many colours ;” that is, they are so naturally (or spontaneously). Here, 
therefore, the Sankhya teachers have said, How can beings endowed with 
qualities proceed from Iswara, who is devoid of qualities? or how from 
soul, equally devoid of qualities? Therefore (the causality) of nature is 
tendered probable. Thus; from white threads white cloth is fabricated ; 
from black threads black cloth: and in the same manner, from nature, 
endowed with the three qualities, the three worlds, endowed with the 
three qualities also, are produced. This is determined. Jswara is without 
qualities: the origin of the three worlds endowed with qualities, from 





* 


Fare गुणातीतस्यात रएवानुपकारिण उपकारासमथेस्य | 


178 


him, would therefore be an inconsistency. By this (same reason) soul 
also cannot be cause. According to some, time is cause: ^ Time is the 
five elements; time destroys the world; time watches, when all things 
sleep ; time is not to be surpassed.” There are but three categories, the 
discrete principle, the undiscrete principle, and soul; and by one of them 
time must be comprehended. Time, then, is a discrete principle; for na- 
ture, from its universal creative power, is the cause of time; spontaneity 
merges into it (nature): and time, therefore, is not cause; neither is spon- 
taneity. Nature alone, therefore, is cause; and there is no cause of 
nature. She does not again expose herself to the gaze of soul. Therefore 
it is my opinion that there is no cause more gentle, more enjoyable, than 
nature, such as Aswara and the rest. ४ 

It is said familiarly in the stanzas of the text, “Soul is liberated ; soul 
migrates :” on this it is observed— 


COMMENT. 


Nature being once properly understood by soul ceases to act. 

Nature being once fully seen—that is, known or understood—by soul : 
disappears, goes no more into its sight; it ceases to be, with respect to 
that individual soul. Why is this? Because it is the most soft, the most 
gentle or timid, sukumdratara, of all things. The term kumdra, properly 
implying ‘soft’ or ‘young,’ is explained by the Scholiasts to signify 
‘bashful, modest, unable to bear the gaze of soul*.’ Vacuesvati. Suku- 
mdratara salajja |, Narayana and RAma Ketsuna. In the S. Bhdshya it 
is rendered by subhogyatara , ‘more fit to be enjoyed ;’ but this refers 
less to the metaphorical illustration, than to the doctrine, of the text, and 
might be rendered, ‘more plastic;’ there being nothing so suitable as nature 
(matter) for the cause or origin of sensible objects. The S. Tatwa Kaumudi 
amplifies and explains the illustration : ‘ Nature is like a woman of virtue 
and family: such a one, of retired habits and modest looks, may be, by 


* सुकुमारततरमत्िपेशत्कत्ता पुरुषदधेनासदिष्णुता। 1 qgarort 
सलज्जं । { सुभोग्यतरं । 
yy 


174 


some inadvertence, surprised in disabille by a strange man, but she takes 
good care that another shall not behold her off her guard. Nature being 
once fully seen by discrimination, has too much matronly decorum to 
allow herself to be looked at a second time*.’ The S. Chandrikd has a 
similar exposition ¶. The S. Pravachana Bh. cites this verse in explana- 
tion of the Sitra, “Upon the detection of her faults, there is no further 
approach of nature (to soul); like a woman of family{:’ that is, ‘When 
nature finds that soul has discovered it is to her that the distress, &c. of 
migration are owing, she is put to shame by the detection, and ventures 
no more near soul; as a woman of family keeps aloof from a husband by 
whom she knows her faults to have been found out. And this is consi- 
dered as ‘an additional reason for the discontinuance of the activity of 
nature |.’ This is my opinion§ refers to what has preceded, there is nothing 
more gentle, a8 is shewn by the term iti; also by the Bhdshya of Gauna- 
papa. It is clear, therefore, that the expression refers to the author ; 
such is his opinion; that is, he does not here dogmatise, and say that 
nature is actually more timid or soft than any thing else—for the phrase 
is merely a figure of speech, a metaphorical illustration—but that it seems 
so to him; the words having the force of ‘ methinks, it seems :’ ‘ Nature, 


* छमूम्यम्पश्या हि कुतवधूरतिमन्दाक्षमन्र प्रमादाहिगलितसिचया 
ला चेदात्लोक्यते परपुरुषेण तदसौ त्था प्रयतत अप्रमां Wat पुर 
घान्तराणि न पश्यन्तीति । णवं प्रकृतिरपि कुलबधूतोऽप्यधिका ष्टा वि 
We न पुनदरेष्यत्त इत्यथैः। 1 प्रकृतिः परमात्मना Ter यदा शान 
चक्षुषा दृष्टा सा पीडायमाना greta gait नोपेति। 1 रोष 
बोधेऽपि नोपलपेणं प्रधानस्य । Forays! । पुरषेण प्रकृतेः परि 
णामित्वदुःसात्मकयादिदोषदशेनादधित्नज्जितायाः प्रकृतेः पुननेपुरूषं प्रतु 
wate कुल वधूवत्‌ यथा स्वामिना मे दोषो इष्ट इत्यवधारणे लज्जिता कुले 
धून स्वामिनमुपसप्पैति तदित्यधेः । निवतो हेत्वनारमितिं। ९ इति 
मे सतिः। 


175 


it seems to me, or methinks, is the most soft, timid, retiring, of all things, 
and cannot bear to be stared at rudely: once seen, therefore, as she is, 
she takes care, like a truly modest matron, to be seen no more.’ Such is 
the obvious purport of the text, which is merely a further illustration of 
the idea conveyed in ver. 59. Gauravapa has gone out of his way rather 
to discuss the character of a first cause ; giving to sukumératara a peculiar 
import, that of ‘ enjoyable, perceptible; which nature eminently is, and 
is therefore, according to him, the most appropriate source of all percep- 
tible objects, or, in other words, of creation. 


LXII. 


Verixy not any soul is bound, nor is released, nor migrates; but 
nature alone, in relation to various beings, is bound, is released, and 


migrates. 

व BHASHYA. 

Therefore, from that cause, soul is not bound, nor indeed is loosed, nor 
migrates ; for, because, nature, in relation to various beings—in relation 
(or connection) with celestial, human, or brute forms, in the character of 
intellect, egotism, the rudiments, senses, and gross elements—is bound, is 
liberated, or migrates. For soul is of its own nature loosed, and goes 
every where, and how therefore should it migrate? migration being for 
the purpose of obtaining something not previously obtained. The phrases, 
therefore, Soul is bound, Soul is loosed or migrates, originate in igno- 
rance of the nature of migration. From knowledge, the end of soul and 
existence, the real nature of soul is attained. That being manifest, soul 
is single, pure, free, fixed in its own nature. Consequently if there is no 
bondage there can be no liberation of soul. It is therefore said (sce next 
verse), “Nature binds and liberates herself;” for where subtile body, 
composed of the rudiments, and having a triple cause, exists, such body 
is bound with triple bonds ; as it is said, “ He who is bound by the bonds 
of nature,” of nature’s products or of works, “cannot by any other be 


176 


loosed” (see Comment, ver. 45). Such a subtile body is affected by virtue, 
vice, &e. 
Nature is bound, is loosed, and migrates. How is next described. 


COMMENT. 


The subjection of nature, not of soul, to the accidents of bondage, 
liberation, and migration is asserted in this verse. 

The doctrine here laid down seems at variance with what has pre- 
ceded, and with the usual purport of the notions that attach the accidents 
of bondage and liberation to soul. Apparently, however, the difference 
is one of words only. 

Soul is incapable of action, consequently is not liable to change. It 
cannot be bound, as the consequence of acts which it does not perform ; 
and as it is never in bondage, it cannot be set free. The application of 
these terms to soul, therefore, is to be understood in a relative, not in a 
positive sense; aud their positive signification is properly restricted to 
nature. It is nature that is bound, nature that is liberated, nature that 
undergoes change or migration. When nature attaches herself to soul, 
when she separates from it, the converse is equally true, soul is attached 
to, or is separated from, nature; and is consequently said to be bound, to 
be set free, to undergo change. But soul is passive in all these things; 
it is nature that is active, that binds, loosens, or changes form. Gaura- 
pApa’s explanation of these subtleties is not very clear, but such appears 
to be his understanding of the text. So also VAcuEspati: ‘Soul is with- 
out qualities, and exempt from vicissitude. How then can it be liberated? 
To soul, not liable to change, there could apply none of the circumstances 
termed bondage, arising from acts, sufferings, or consciousness: nor could 
worldly change or migration, another name for which is death, affect soul, 
incapable of action*.’ The same commentator adds, ‘These circum- 


* पुरूषश्वेदगुणोऽपरिणामी कथमस्य मोक्षः। सवासनक्रेणकम्माशयानां 
च जन्धसक्धितानां पुरूषेऽपरिामिन्यसम्भवात्‌ अत एव आस्य पुरुषस्य न 
संसारः परेत्यभावापरनामास्ति निष्कियतवात्‌ | 





177 


stances, which are in truth the acts and conditions of nature, are ascribed 
to and affect soul as the superior, in the same manner that victory and 
defeat are attributed and relate to a king, although actually occurring to 
his generals; for they are his servants, and the gain or loss is his, not 
theirs*.’ So NArdvana explains the text: ‘ Binding is the confinement 
of nature, in the various forms of intellect, &c.; and bondage and libera- 
tion are attributed to soul only through the contiguity of intellect, to 
which they belong, and not to soul.’ It is from ignorance only that 
bondage and liberation are ascribed to soul; as by the Siitra}, as ex- 
plained by the Scholiast, ‘ Binding and liberation, or endurance, of, and 
exemption from pain, are uot (conditions) of soul in reality or absolutely, 
but (are considered as such) from ignorance ; for the binding und libera~ 
tion mentioned are (conditions) of nature||.’ So also the Stra §, ‘From 
actual pain suffered by nature proceed binding and liberation, and from 
its attachments; that is, from its being affected by virtue and the rest, 
which are the causes of pain; like an animal; that is, 98 an animal may 
be bound or loosed, when entangled in a rope.’ The distinction, after 
all, is little more than nominal, except as it is the necessary consequence 
of the inactivity attributed to the soul. 


* प्रकृतेरेव तु नानाश्रया सत्ती बध्यते च संसरति च मुच्यते च बन्धमोकष 
संसाराः पुरूष Soa यथा जयपराजयो भृत्यगत्तावपि स्वाभिन्युपचर््ति 
तदाश्रयेण भृत्यानां तदभागित्वारत्फलस्य शोकलाभादेः स्वामिसबन्धात्‌ । 
† प्रकृतिरेव नाना्या बुद्धारिङ्खारा त्ादशी तथा च बन्धादिकं बुदधिनिष्ट 
मेव पुरुषे तसम्पकतात्‌ तद्रतमारोष्यत्त एव केवलं न तु तदप्यस्तीति भावः। 
‡ निकान्ततो बन्धमोक्षौ पुरुषस्याविवेकाहते। । दुःखयोगवियोगरूपौ 
बन्धमोक्षौ पुरुषस्य नेकानातस्तत्वतः किन्वविवेकात्‌ परमाथेतस्तु TTR 
बन्धमोक्षौ प्रकृतेरेव । ९ प्रकृतेरांजस्यात्‌ ससंगत्वात्‌ पशुवत्‌ । AE 
तिरेषांजस्येन तत्वतो दुःखेन बन्धमोक्षौ ससंगलाहूःलसापनेधेम्मोदिभिलिप् 
लात्‌ पशुवद्यया पणूरज्वाल्दि्तया बन्धमोष्षमागी Tae: | 


178 


LXIII. 


By seven modes nature binds herself by herself: by one, she 
releases (herself), for the soul’s wish. 


BHASHYA. 


By seven modes.—These seven have been specified, as virtue, dispas- 
sion, power, vice, ignorance, passion, and weakness. These are the seven 
modes (or conditions) of nature by which she binds herself, of herself. 
And that same nature, having ascertained that soul's object is to be 
accomplished, liberates herself by one mode, or by knowledge. 

How is that knowledge produced ? 


COMMENT. 

Nature is bound by seven modes, and liberated by one. 

Nature binds herself by acts of whatever kind, especially by the facul- 
ties of intellect, enumerated above (ver. 23). She binds herself of her 
own accord. She frees herself by one mode, by the acquisition of philo- 
sophical knowledge. ‘Nature binds herself (in her own work), like a 
silkworm in its cocoon*.’ Siitra, Atman is here uniformly explained by 
swa, ‘own self.’ 


LXIV. 
So, through study of principles, the conclusive, incontrovertible, 
one only knowledge is attained, that neither I am, nor is aught mine, 


nor do I exist. ; 
BHASHYA. 


So, by the order explained, the study of the twenty-five principles, 
knowledge of soul, or the discriminative knowledge, ‘ this is nature, this 





* श्माह्नानं surf प्रधानं कोषकारवत्‌ | 


179 


is soul, these are the rudiments, senses, and elements,’ is acquired. Nei- 
ther Iam: Lam not. Not mine: not my body; that is, I am one (thing), 
body is another. Nor do I exist: that is, exempt from egotism. This 
is conclusive, incontrovertible: free from doubt. Viparyaya means ‘doubt,’ 
with the negative prefixed, ‘absence of doubt; and visuddha, ‘ pure; 
pure through absence of doubt. Single.—There is no other (true know- 
ledge). In this way the cause of liberation is produced, is manifested 
(individually). Knowledge means knowledge of the twenty-five princi- 
ples, or of soul. 

Knowledge being attained, what does soul? 


COMMENT. छ 


The knowledge that is essential to tiberation is here described. 

It is acquired through study of the twenty-five principles, tatwdbhycsa ; 
familiarity with them ; frequent recurrence to them: it is finite or con- 
clusive, aparisésha ; it leaves nothing to be learned: it is perfect, as being 
without doubt, avipuryayavisuddha: and single, the one thing needful, 
kévala. What sort of knowledge is this? or what is the result it teaches’ 
The absence of individuality ; the notion of the abstract existence of soul. 
Neither I am, nor is aught mine, nor do I caist: that is, there is no ac- 
tivity, nor property, nor individual agency. J an not precludes action 
only *. Indeed As, the root, together with bhé and &ri, are said to signify 
action in generalt. Nésmi therefore signifies, not ‘I am not,’ but ‘I do 
not.” The $. द्षव Kawmudi then proceeds: ‘Thus all ucts whatever, 
whether external or internal, ascertainment, consciousness, reflection. 
perception, and all others, are denied as acts of soul: consequently, there 
being no active functions in soul, it follows that neither do I (as an indi- 
vidual agent) exist. Aham here denotes “agent ;” as, 1 know, I sacrifice, 
T give, I enjoy—or 80 on, implying uniformly the notion of an agent— 
nor is aught mine: an agent implies mastership; if there be nu agent 





* नास्मीत्यात्मनि क्रियामाचरं निषेधति । 1 कृभ्वस्तयः क्रियासा 
मान्यवचना इति | 


180 


there can be no abstract mastership (or possession)*.’ The same au- 
thority gives also a different reading of the first expression, ndsmi, ex- 
plaining it nd asmi, ‘I am male; or purusha, ‘ unproductive of progeny,’ 
of actst. The S. Prav. Bh., commenting on this verse of the Kérikd, 
has, ‘ Neither I am, denies the agency of soul ; nor (is aught mine), denies 
its attachment (to any objects); nor do I exist, denies its appropriation 
(of faculties){.. The Sidtra is to the same: effect: ‘ From relinquishment 
(consequent on) study of principles; this is not, this is not|:’ that is, of 
all the objects proceeding from prakriti, not one is soul. The phraseology 
is ascribed to the Védas, and a similar passage is thence cited: ‘Hence 
comes the conclusion, it is not, it is not (soul), it is not (soul is not), from 
it: such is not so; it is different, it is supreme, it is that very thing (that 
it is). It is not, it is not, (means) soul. Such is (the phrase), It is not §,’ 
&८. And the Chandriké explains the terms similarly : + J am not means 
I am not agent; therefore I am distinct from the principle of intelli- 
gence. Not mine is pain: exemption from being the seat of pain and 
the rest is thence determined. Nor do J exist: by this, difference 
from egotism is expressed‘.’ Rama Kaisuna repeats the words of the 





* तथा चाध्यवसायाभिमानसंकस्याल्मोचनानि चानराणि TTT 
व्यापारा आत्मनि प्रतिषिद्धानि areata यत्त्ात्मनि व्यापारावेशो ना 
wan नाहम्‌ । अहमितिक्श्ेपदं | अहं जानाम्यहं जुहोम्यहं ददेऽहं भुज 
इति सेच we परामशेत्‌ । अत्त एव न मे । कञोहि स्वामितां लभति 
तदभावात्‌ कुतो भाविकी स्वामितेत्यथः। † अथवा नास्मीति पुरुषो 
स्मि न प्रसबधम्मा। 1 नास्मीत्यात्मनः कलै्निषेधो न मे इति संग 
fate: नाहं तादात्यनिषेधः। 1 तत्वाभ्यासानेति नेति त्यागात्‌ । 
$ त्था च afc) अथादेशो नेति नेति नद्येतस्मादिति नेत्यन्यत्परमस्ति स 
एष नेति नेत्यात्मा नेत्यादिरित्ति । ^ नास्मीत्यस्य न कहोस्मीत्यथेस्तेन 
जुद्धिभिनोहमिति प्रापनं न मे दुःखमितिशेषस्तेन दुःखाद्यारोपाभावो want 
नाहमित्यनेनाहंकारभेदमहः। 


181 


Chandriké, By these expressions therefore, however quaint or question- 
able, we are not to understand negation of soul. This would be a direct 
contradiction to its specification as one of the categories of the system, 
one of the twenty-five essential and existent principles. It is merely 
intended as a negation of the soul's having any active participation, any 
individual interest or property, in human pains, possessions, or feelings. 
Jam, J do, I suffer, mean that material nature, or some of her products, 
(substantially,) is, does, or suffers ; and not soul, which is unalterable and 
indifferent, susceptible of neithcr pleasure nor pain, aud only reflecting 
them, as it were, or scemingly sharing them, from the proximity of 
nature, by whom they are really experienced *: for soul, according to 
the Védas, is absolutely existent, eternal, wise, true, free, unaffected by 
passion, universal †. This verse, therefore, docs not amount, as M. Cousin 
has supposed, to “ le nihilisme absolu, dernier fruit du scepticisme.” 


LXV. 
Possrssep of this (self-knowledge), soul contemplates at leisure 


and at ease nature, (thereby) debarred from prolific change, and con- 
sequently precluded from those seven forms. 


BHASHYA. 


By that pure (absolute), single knowledge soul beholds nature, like a 
spectator, at leisure and composed ; a8 a spectator seated at a play beholds 
an actress. Composed: who stays (or is involved) in self; or staying or 
abiding in one’s own place. How is Prakriti; debarred from prolific 
change? Not producing intellect, egotism, and the other effects. Conse- 
quently precluded from those seven forms: desisting from the seven forms 


* प्रतिविशवरूपेण पुरूषेऽपि सुखदुःखे wr! 1 सन्मा्ो नित्यः 
शुद्धो FE: सत्यो मुक्तो निरञ्जनो विभुः। 
3५ 


182 


or modes by which she binds herself, or virtue, vice, and the rest, and 
which are no longer required for the use of soul, both whose objects 
(fruition and liberation) are effected. 


COMMENT. 


Soul, possessed of the knowledge described in the preceding stanza, 
or divested of all individuality, becomes indifferent to, and independent 
of, nature, which therefore ceases to act. 

Soul contemplates nature, like a spectator, prékshaka, one who beholds 
a dancer or actress; at leisure, avasthita, or without action, nishkriya ; 
and at ease, sustha. This is also read swastha, ‘calm, collected in self*; 
or nirdkula, ‘ unagitated.’ Nature consequently has nothing more to do. 
The objects of soul, fruition and liberation, having been effected, by 
knowledge, the other faculties of intellect are needless. 


LXVI. 


He desists, because he has seen her; she does so, because she has 
been seen. In their (mere) union there is no motive for creation. 


BHASHYA. 


One present at a play, as a spectator, (ceases to behold ;) so one, 
single, pure soul desists. One (nature), knowing I have been scen by 
him, stops, ceases. Nature is the one, chief cause of the three worlds; 
there is no second. Although form have terminated, yet from specific 
difference there is, even in the cessation of (the cooperation of) nature 
and soul, union, as a generic characteristic. For, if there be not union, 
whence is creation? There being union of these two; that is, of nature 
and soul; there being union from their universal diffusion: yet there is 


* स्वस्थः स्वस्मिन्‌ तिष्ठति | 


185 


no further occasion for the world; from the object of creation being ter- 
minated. The necessity for nature is twofold; apprehension of the ob- 
jects of sense, as sound, &c.; and apprehension of the difference between 
qualities and soul: when both these have been effected there is no further 
use for creation; that is, of further creation (of future regeneration); as 
in the case of a settlement of accounts between debtor and creditor, con- 
sequent on accepting what is given, when such a union is effected there 
is no further connection of object: so there is no further occasion for 
nature and soul. 

If upon soul’s acquiring knowledge liberation takes place, why १०९५ 
not my liberation (immediately) occur? To this it is observed— 


COMMENT. 


The final separation of soul from nature is here indicated, as no further 
purpose is answered by their continued union. 

The first part of this stanza repeats the illustrations given in preced- 
ing verses (61 and 65): ^ Nature, having been fully yeen or understood, 
८६४५868 to act—Soul, having seen or understood, ceases to consider ;” 
becomes regardless, upékshaka. Consequently there can be no future 
reunion, no future creation. For mere union of soul and nature is not 
the cause of the development of the latter, constituting worldly existence: 
the motive is, the fulfilment of the objects of soul. The activity of nature 
is the consequence of her subserviency to soul's purposes ; and when they 
are accomplished, all motive for action, all inducement to repeat worldly 
creatiou, ceases. ‘The two objects of soul, fruition and discrimination, 
are the excitements to the activity of nature; if they do not exist, they 
do not stimulate nature. In the text the term motive implies that by 
which nature is excited in creation (to evolve the world): which cannot 
be in the nonentity of the objects of soul*.” Vacuespatr. So also Ni- 


* gent च भोगविवेकी प्रकृत्यारम्भप्रयोजकावित्यपुरूषाधौ सनी 
न परकृतिं प्रयोजयतः | अच प्रयुज्यते सगे प्रकृतिरनेनेति प्रयोजनं तदपुर 
घाते नास्तीति । 


184 


rayana: ‘In the (mere) union of these two there is no motive for the 
production of the world*.’ With the accomplishment, therefore, of the 
objects of soul, individual existence must cease for ever. 


LXVII. 


By attainment of perfect knowledge, virtue and the rest become 
causeless; yet soul remains a while invested with body, as the potter's 
wheel continues whirling from the effect of the impulse previously 
given to it HABA. 

Though perfect knowledge, that is, knowledge of the twenty-five prin- 
ciples, be attained, yet, from the effect of previous impulse, the sage con- 
tinues in a bodily condition. How! Like the whirling of a wheel; ४७१ 
potter, having set his wheel whirling, puts on it a Imp of clay, fabricates 
a vessel, and takes it off, and leaves the wheel continuing to turn round. 
It docs so from the effect of previous unpulse—From the attainment of 
perfect knowledge, virtue and the rest have no influence upon one who is 
possessed of such knowledge. These seven kinds of bonds are cousumed 
by perfect knowledge: as seeds that have been scorched by fire are not 
able to germinate, so virtue and the rest are not able to fetter soul. 
These then, virtue and the rest, not being (in the case of the yogi) the 
causes (of continued bodily existence), body continues from the effects of 
previous impulse. Why is there rtot from knowledge destruction of’ pre- 
sent virtue and vice? Although they may be present, yct they perish the 
next moment, and knowledge destroys all future acts, as well as those 
which a man does in his present body by following instituted observ- 
ances. With the cessation of the impulse the body perishes, and then 
liberation occurs. ४ 

What liberation, is next specified. 


* ait: संयोगेऽपि सर्गस्य जनने प्रयोजनं नास्तीति । 


185 


COMMENT. 


A reason is assigned why pure soul is not at once set free from body. 

This stanza may be considered partly as an illustration of the preced- 
ing, explaining the continued union of soul and body even after know- 
ledge is attained. It is algo ४ kind of apology for the human forms of 
Kapiza and other teachers of the Sankhya doctrines, who, although in 
possession of perfect knowledge, lived and died as men. The sage, or 
Yogt, is no longer susceptible of the accidents of virtue, vice, passion, dis- 
passion, and the rest, which are the proximate causes of bodily existence ; 
and his continuance in the bodily form arises from the effects of virtue, 
&c. lasting after the cause has ceased ; like the whirl of a wheel after the 
impulse that set it going has been withdrawn. ‘As, when the potter's 
work is done, the wheel, in consequence of the impulse or momentum 
given to it, continues revolying, but stops when the period under such 
influence has expired ; 80 virtue and vice, incident to body initiative and 
mature, constitute impulse*. The effects of former acts of virtue and 
viec, then, cease when the impulse derived from them is worn out; and 
the possession of knowledge prevents all future acts. Gavrapdpa appa- 
rently suggests a difficulty with respect to acts done in the present body ; 
such as the observance of the Yoga, or performance of prescribed rites. 
These acts may be performed by a sage possessing perfect knowledge, 
and should therefore produce certain consequences, They lead, however, 
to no results; for as far as they are themselves concerned, they are but of 
brief duration, perishing as soon as performed; and with regard to any 
future effects, they are anticipated, prevented, or destroyed, by the pos- 
session of knowledge. Such seems to be the purport of the passage, but 
it is not very perspicuous. 


* मधोपरतेऽपि कुत्ालब्थापारे चक्र वेगाख्यसंस्कारवश्वाञ्नमन्‌ fee 
ति कात्दपरिपाकव्णतूपरते संस्कारे निष्कियं भवति । शरीरस्थित्तौ च 


प्राए्यपरिपाकौ धम्मोधम्भो संस्कारः | 
38 


186 


LXVIII. 


Wuen separation of the informed soul from its corporeal frame 
at length takes place, and nature in respect of it ceases, then is 
absolute and final deliverance accomplished. 


BHASHYA. 


When bodily separation is accomplished, by destruction of the effects 
of virtue, vice, and the rest. In respect of it, having accomplished its 
object, nature ceases: then absolute, certain—final, unimpeded—deliver- 
aace, liberation, consequent upon the condition of singlencss. Soul ob- 
tains singleness (separation), which is both absolute and final. 


COMMENT. 


This verse refers to the first stanza, and announces the accomplish- 
ment of what was there stated to be the object of inquiry, absolute and 
final liberation. 

When the consequences of acts cease, aud body, both gross and subtile, 
dissolves, nature, in respect to individual soul, no longer exists ; and soul 
is one, single, free, kévala, or obtains the condition called suivalyam. 
This, according to VacnEspats and NARAyANa, means ‘exemption from 
the three kinds of pain*.’ GavrapApa gives no definition of the term, 
except that it is the abstract of Aévala+. What the condition of pure 
separated soul may be in its liberated state, the Sankhya philosophy does 
not seem to hold it necessary to inquire. 


* दुःखषयविगमं दुःखविनाशं । † केवल भावात्‌ Wael । 


187 


LXIX. 


Tuis abstruse knowledge, adapted to the liberation of soul, 
wherein the origin, duration, and termination of beings are consi- 
dered, has been thoroughly expounded by the mighty saint. 


BHASHYA. 


Soul's object is liberation : for that (purpose) this abstruse, secret, know- 
ledge (has been expounded) by the mighty saint, by the divine sage Kariua. 
Wherein, in which knowledge, the origin, duration, and termination, the 
manifestation, continuance, and disappearance, of beings, of the products 
(or developments) of nature, are considered, are discussed. From which 
investigation perfect knowledge, which is the same as knowledge of the 
twenty-five principles, is produced. 

This is the Bhdshya of Gavrarapa on the Sinkhya doctrines, pro- 
pounded, for the sake of liberation from migration, by the Muni Karina; 
in which there arc these seventy stanzas. 


COMMENT. 


This verse specifies by whom the doctrines of the text were originally 
taught. 

The commentary of Gavrardna closes here in the only copy of the 
MSS. procurable; and consequently omits all notice of Iswara Krisuna, 
to whom a subsequent stanza of the text attributes the Karikd. In the 
Bhdshya it is said that the work commgnted on is the Sankhya declared 
by Kari; but that the Kérikd is not the work of Kartta, the other 
Scholiasts agree. It is also different from the Sitras of that teacher, as 
given in the Séukhya Pravachana, although it follows their purport, and 
sometimes uses the same or similar expressions. Gavrarava may there- 
fore probably only mean to intimate that its substance is conformable to 
the doctrines of the Sitras, not that it is the work of the Muni. These 
doctrines, he adds, are contained in seventy stanzas; of which, however, 
our copy has but sixty-nine. The verses of the Kériéd, as usually met 
with, are seventy-two; but there also reference occurs to seventy verses, 


188 


as comprising apparently the doctrinal and traditional part of the text, 
derived from older authorities. Either GavrapApa thought it unneces- 
sary to explain the concluding three verses of the Kédritd, or there is 
some omission in the copy, or they do not belong to the work. The con- 
cluding verse is evidently inaccurate, the metre of the third line of the 
stanza being defective. 

The Karita to whom the Sénkhya philosophy is attributed is vari- 
ously described by different authorities. In 2 verse quoted by Gaura- 
७474, in his comment upon the first stanza of the text, he is enumerated 
amongst the sons of Braumé. VisNyANA Buiksuu asserts him to have been 
an incarnation of Visunu*. He refers also to the opinion of a Védanta 
writer, that Kariua was an incarnation of Acwi, or ‘fire,’ upon the au- 
thority of the Smritit ; but denics their identity. There does not appear 
to be any good authority for the notion. Kapila is a synonyme of fire, 
as it is of a brown, dusky, or tawny colour; and this may have given rise 
to the idea of Aany and the sage being the same. The identification with 
VisHNu rests on better grounds. The popular belief of the Vaishnavas 
is, that there have been twenty-four Avaldrds of Visunv, and Kariza is 
one of them. The earliest authority for this specification is no doubt the 
Rdmdyana, in which VAsupeva or Visunu is said by Bran to assume 
the form of Karita, to protect the earth against the violence of the sons 
of Sacara, searching for the lost steed intended for their father's aswa- 
medha. ‘{Brauma having heard the words of the gods, who were bewil- 
dered with the dread of destruction, replied to them, and said, VAsupeva 


* तदिदं wre क्पिलसूद्यौ भगवान्‌ विष्णुरखित्कत्टोकहिताय प्रकाशि 
तवान्‌ । † अग्निः स कपिलो नाम सांख्यशास्त्र प्रवते इति स्मृतः । 
‡ देवतानां वचः ART भगवान्‌ वे पितामहः 
प्रत्युवाच FATA कृतानवलमोहितान्‌ 
यस्येयं वसुधा Bre वासुदेवस्य धीमत्तः 
महिषी माधवस्येष्टा स एष भगवान्‌ प्रभुः 
कापिलं रूपमास्थाय धारयत्यनिशं धरां । 


189 


is the Lord, he is Madhava, of whom the whole earth is the cherished 
bride; he, assuming the form of Karta, sustains continually the world.’ 
So 9180 the Makdbhdrata: ‘Then spake incensed, Kapiia, the best of 
sages; that Visupeva, indeed, whom the holy Munis call Kariua*.’ Ac- 
cording to the Bhdégavat, he was the fifth incarnation of Visanu: ‘ The 
fifth Avatdra was named Kara, the chief of saints, who revealed to 
Asuni the Sankhya explanation of first principles, which has been im- 
paired by time+.’ Book I. s.12. The latter half of the third book de- 
scribes him algo as an Avatdr of VAsupeva, but as the son of DevanuT, 
the daughter of Savampunuva Menu, married to the Prajapati Kerppama. 


10.९9 


Tus great purifying (doctrine) the sage compassionately im- 
parted to दकए, Asunt taught it to Pancuasrxma, by whom it was 
extensively propagated. 

COMMENT. 


Purifying ; that which purifies from the defects which are the cause 
of pain; pévana or pavitra. Great, chief, principal, agryam, mukhyam. 
This verse anticipates an objection that may be made to the authority of 
the text; as it may be said, Although the words of Kariza must com- 
mand attention, of what weight are the lessons of an uninspired teacher? 
The answer is, that they are the same which were originally taught by 
Kara himself to his pupil ङण According to the passage cited by 





* ततः Be महाराज alas मुनिसमः 
वासुदेवेति यं प्राहुः कपिलं मुनिपुंयवाः ॥ 
1 पञ्चमः कषित नाम सिद्धेशः कायेविक्नतं 
प्रोवाचासुरये सांख्यं तत्वपमामविनिशेयं ॥ 
3c 


190 


७५८११९०4 in his notes on the first stanza (p. 1), Asorr is also a son of 
Branms. He is mentioned elsewhere 28 the pupil of Karrua, and pre- 
ceptor of Pancuastxua, but there are no details of his history. Of Pan- 
cHasixua there is some account in the Mahkdbhdrat, on occasion of his 
visiting Janaxa, king of Mithild, and imparting to him the Sankhya 
philosophy. He is there also said to be named likewise Kariia*; which 
the commentator explains to mean that he was like Karina, being the 
disciple of his disciple +, .as the text proceeds to call him; ‘ He, the long- 
lived, whom they term the first disciple of रण्या }- He is also called 
Kariveya, from his being, it is said, the son of a Brébmani named 
Kaprua. ‘ ण्डा went to the sphere in which that which is Brahme, the 
mystic-named, and multiform, and eternal, is beheld. His disciple 
was Pancnasikna, nourished with human milk: for there was a certain 
Brahman matron, named +ला, of whom he became the son, and at 
whose bosom he was fed; thence he obtained the denomination of KA- 
riteya, and divine imperishable knowledge ||.’ 


LXxI. 
Recervep by tradition of pupils, it has been compendiously written 
in Arya metre by the piously disposed fewara Karsuna, having 
thoroughly investigated demonstrated truth. 





* यमाहुः wits सांख्याः प्ररमर्धिप्रजापरततिं । | fa: afore 
शिथाहशुर्यतवं | Tange: प्रथमं fire यमाहृश्िरजीविनं | 
1 यज्ञदेकाश्षरं we नानारूपं प्रहश्यते 

आसुरिमेरऽत्मे तस्मिन्‌ प्रतिपेदे weer 

तस्य Cafes: शिष्यो मानु्ययसाभृतः 

ब्राह्मणी कपिलानाम काविदासीकुटुष्डिनी 

तस्याः पु्त्वमागम्य fim: स पिवति art 

ततः स कापिले यत्य लेभे बुद्धिं च Ate । 


191 


COMMENT. 


‘Succession or tradition of pupils,’ sishyaparampard: each pupil be- 
coming teacher in his turn, as is the case with the Pandits to the present 
day. It rarely, if ever, happens that any branch of Sanscrit literature is 
acquired by independent study: every science is studied under some 
teacher of eminence, who can, not unfrequently, trace his traditionary 
instruction upwards for several generations. The interval between Pan- 
cuasixna and Iswana Kuisuna is not particularized, but was probably 
considerable, as no allusion to the author of the Kérikd occurs in the 
older writings. If his commentator Gaurapapa be, as 18 not unlikely, 
the preceptor of SanKaRA Acuirya, Iswara Kaisuwa must date anterior 
to the eighth century. 


LXXII. 


Tue subjects which are treated in seventy couplets are those of 
the whole science, comprising sixty topics, exclusive of illustrative 
tales, and omitting controversial questions. 


COMMENT. 


We have here in the text reference to seventy stanzas, as comprising 
the doctrinal part of the Sankhya. In fact, however, there are but sixty- 
nine, unless the verse containing the notice of Kariva be included in the 
enumeration; and in that case it might be asked, why should not the 
next stanza at least, making mention of the reputed author, be also 
comprehended, when there would be seventy-one verses. The Scholiasts 
offer no explanation of this difficulty. 

The sixty topics alluded to in the text are, according to the Rdja 
Varttika, as cited by VAcuespati, 1. the existence of soul; 2. the exist- 
ence of nature; 3. the singleness, 4. the objectiveness, and 5. the sub- 
servience, of nature; and 6. the multifariousness, 7. the distinctness, and 
8. the inertness, of soul; 9. the duration of subtile, and 10. that of gross, 


192 


body. These are the ten radical categories. To them are to be added, 
the five kinds of obstruction, nine of acquiescence, twenty-eight of dis- 
ability, and eight of perfectness; making altogether sixty. Another 
enumeration specifies the sixty categories or objects: 1. soul; 2. nature; 
3. intellect; 4. egotism ; 5—7. the three qualities; 8. the class of the five 
rudiments; 9. that of the eleven senses or organs; 10. that of the five 
elements. These are the ten radical paddrthas, or categories. The re- 
maining fifty are the same as those previously enumerated. In conse- 
quence of comprehending all these topics, the Kdrikd is a system, a 
sdstra; not a partial tract or treatise, or prakarana*; although it omits 
the illustrative anecdotes and controversial arguments. The Adrikd 
must consequently refer to the collection of Kapria’s aphorisms, called 
Sdnkhya Pravachana, This work is divided into six chapters, or adhydyas; 
in the three first of which are contained all the dogmas of the system 
furnishing the materials of the Kérikd; the fourth chapter is made up of 
short tales or anecdotes, dkhydytkds, illustrative of the Sankhya tenets; 
and the fifth is appropriated to the refutation, paravdda, of the doctrines 
of different schools. Exclusive of these two subjects, Iswara KrisHna 
professes, therefore, to give the substance of the 9, Pravachana, or of the 
Sdtras of Kapiia assembled in that collection. 

The Akhydyikds are in general very brief and uninteresting. The 
Sttras, in fact, supply only a subject for a story, which the Scholiasts 
may expand much after their own fancies. Thus the Satra, ‘ From in- 
struction in truth, like the king’s son}.’ On which Viswana Buixsuv 
narrates, that ‘there was a king’s son, who, being expelled in infancy 
from his native city, was brought up by a forester, and growing up to 
maturity in that state imagined himself to belong to the barbarous race 
with which he lived. One of his father’s ministers having discovered 
him, revealed to him what he was, and the misconception of his cha- 
racter was removed, and he knew himself to be a prince. So soul, from 





* सकल्णास्ा्थेकणनानेदं प्रकरणमपितु शस्रमेवेति सिद्धं । 
1 राजपुवहत्वोपदेशात्‌ | 








198 


the circumstances in which it is placed, mistakes its own character, until 
the truth is revealed to it by some holy teacher, and then it knows itself 
to be Brahme*.’ 

The controversial portion of the original Sitras is as brief as the nar- 
rative, and, from the nature of the subject, much more obscure. The 
argument is suggested, rather than advanced, and it remains for the 
Scholiast to amplify and explain it. A specimen of the mode in which 
this’ is effected will best exemplify the darkness and difficulty of this 
part of our subject. Some modern followers of the Védanta assert that 
liberation is the attainment of (pure) felicity. To this it is replied: ‘ Ma- 
nifestation of felicity is not liberation, from its not being a property +.” 
Thus explained by the Scholiast: ‘The condition of happingss, or that 
of attainment (or manifestation), is not a property of soul. The nature 
(of soul) is eternal, aud is neither an object to be attained, nor the means 
of attainment. Therefore the attainment of happiness cannot be libera- 
tion. This is the meaning (of the Sitraj). ‘ Attainment of happiness in 
the region of BranmA and the rest is a secondary (or inferior) sort of 
liberation ; as to maintain the contrary would be in opposition to the text 
of the Véda, which says that a wise man abandons both joy and sorrow ||.” 


* अभेयमाख्यायिका कश्चिटराजपुचो जन्मपुराजजिसारित्ः शवरेण केन 
चित्‌ पोषित्तोहं शवर इत्यभिमन्यमानस्तं fest ज्ञात्वा कुश्चिदमात्यः प्रवोध 
यति न त्वं श्वरोऽपिराजपुभस्वणा राजासीति स च fees चारडालाभि 
मानं A सात्विकमेवराजभावमात्रश्नते राजाहमस्मीति | एवमेवादिपुर 
षात्‌ परिपूणविन्माचतेनाभिमत्य नित्यश्ादिरूपव्रह्मभावमेवात्खते बह्मा 
हमस्मीति । † नानन्दाभिष्यक्तिमुकिनिधम्मैतवात्‌ | ‡ त्मनि 
ज्आनन्द्रूपोऽभिष्यकतिरूपष्च धम्मो नास्ति स्वरूपं च नित्यमेवेति न सा 
धनसाध्यमतो नानन्दानिष्यक्तिमोष्ष इत्यथः । ॥ आचआनन्दाभिष्यक्तिश्च 
सतो ङादौ गौणी मुलतरवेति भावः । अन्यथा विशान्‌ हषेणोकोजहाती 
ति श्ुतिविरोधात्‌ | 


3 


194 


‘Further; if attainment be a faculty of soul, what sort of faculty is it? Is 
it constant or temporary. In the first case, there may be, even in the 
state of accomplishment, still the existence of the object of soul: in the 
last, inasmuch as there is perishableness of all that is engendered (or, 
that which has a beginning must have an end), then eternal liberation is 
subject to termination: therefore the attainment (or manifestation) of 
felicity is not chief or real liberation ; and the assertion that it is so, is a 
false conclusion of the modern Védantis: this is undeniable*. 


* किंचाभिष्यक्तेरात्मभम्मेत्वे पि सा किं नित्या अनित्या वा आये सिद्धे 
वा पुरूषाय | अनये जन्यभावस्य विनाभितया मोषस्य नाशापत्चिस्तस्मादा 
नन्दाभिग्यक्तिमुख्यमो्ष इति नवीन वेदान्तिनामपसिद्धान्त waft धिक्‌ । 


शरीमदीश्वरकृष्णेन 
विरचितः 
सांख्यकारिङाख्ययन्यः 


शीगोढपादकृततभा्यसहितः 


श्रीमतां पृषदेशीयभाषात्विखितयन्थावतारप्रपाद्कानां 


सामाजिकानामनुमत्या 


उष्छहरणाभिधाननगरे विद्यामन्दिरसंस्यानमुद्रायन्त्रालये मुद्रितः 


संवत्सरे १४२७ 


सांख्यकारिका 





दुःख्रमाभिधाताज्जिज्ञासा तदभिषातके हेतौ 
दृष्टे सापाधायेजेकान्नात्यन्तोऽभावात्‌ ।१। 


~ 
सांख्यकारिका arg 


कपिलाय नमस्तस्मे येनाविच्योदधो जगति मग्ने 

eT सांख्यमयो नौरिव विहिता प्रतरणाय - 

werd स्पष्टं प्रमाणसिद्धान्तरेतुभियुंक्तं 

wre शिष्यहिताय समासतोऽहं प्रवष्यामि ॥ 
दुःखजयेति | अस्या आआग्याया saree: क्रियते ॥ इह भगवान्‌ ब्रह्मसुतः 
कपित्ो नाम तद्या | सनकश्चसनन्दनश्च तृतीयश्च सनातनः 

arg क्पित्श्चेव वोदुः पञ्चशिखस्तथा । 

इत्येते ब्रह्मणः पुषाः सप्त प्रोक्ता weds: ॥ 
कपित्स्य weet wat ज्ञानं वेराग्यमेश्वय्यष्वेति । एवं स उत्पननः 
सचन्धतमसि मज्नज्नगदात्मोक्य संसारपारम्पभ्येण सत्कारूण्यो जिज्ञास 
मानाय आसुरिसगोचाय ब्राह्यणायेदं पथ्चविंशत्तितत्वानां ज्ञानसूुक्षवान्‌ 
यस्य ज्ञानाहुःखक्षयो भवति । 

पञ्डविंशत्तितत्वज्लो यज तभाश्रमे वसेत्‌ 

जटी मुरही शिखी वापि सुध्यते नाच संशयः | 
त्दिदमाहुः । दुःखभयाभिधाताज्जिज्ञासेति । तच दुःखभयं । आध्या्भिकं । 
आधिभोतिकं । आधिदेविकंचेति ॥ तभाध्यात्मिकं fated शारीरं मा 
जसं चेति । शरीरं वात्तपि्तचेष्पविपग्येयकृतं ऋरातीसारादि । मानसं 
परियवियोगाप्रियसंयोगादि ॥ आधिभोतिकं चतुविधं भूतयामनिभिजं 
मदषपणुमृगपक्ठिसरीसृपदंश्मश्कयूकामत्ुणमत्यमकरपाहस्यावरेभ्यो ज 


{२} 


रायुजारइजस्वेदजोवि्जेभ्यः सकाशाद पजायते ॥ आधिदैविकं | देवाना 
मिदं दैविकं । दिवः प्रभवतीति वा देवं तदधिकृत्य यदुपजायते शीतो 
चशवातवधाशनिपातादिकं ॥ एवं यथा टुःखषयाभिधातान्जिज्तासा काग्यौ 
Bl तदट्मिधातके हेतौ । नस्य germ अभिघातको योऽसौ हेतु 
wate ॥ दृष्टे सापाथाचेत्‌ । ee हेतौ दुःखभरयाभिधातके सा जिला 
साऽपाभौ चेद्यदि । तथाध्यात्मिकस्य हिविधस्यापि छायुवदशासतक्रिमया 
प्रियसमागमाप्रियपरिहारकटुतिकूकषायारिक्काधादिभि्ेष्ट एव wranfia 
कोपायः.। आधिभौतिक्स्य रश्ादिनाऽभिधातो Ze: । हे साऽपाथा Ver 
मन्यसे Tol एकान्तात्यन्तततोऽभावात्‌ । यत्त एकानतोऽवश्यं अत्यमातो 
नित्यं eta हेतुनाऽभिधातो न भवेति तस्माटन्यच एकाकात्यनाभिधातके 
हेतौ जिज्ञासा विविदिषा sift | 





द्वदानुश्रविकः सद्यविभुद्धिष्षयातिशययुक्षः 
त्िपरीतः tara श्यक्ताष्यक्षजषविज्ञानात्‌ । २। 





यदि दष्टान्यभलिज्ञासा ert ततोऽपि नैव यतत आनुश्रविको हेतुः दुःख 
जयाभिषघातकः | अनुश्चवतीत्यनु्रवस्ठबभवः आनुखविकः स च आगमा 
flere: | यथा 

सधाम सोमममृता अनभूसागन्मज्योतिरविदाम देवान्‌ 

सिनूनमस्मान्‌ कृणवदरातिः किमु धू्षिरमृततमस्यस्य ॥ 
कटाचिदिन्द्रादीनां देवानां कस्य आसीत्‌ । कथं वयममृता ख्भूमेति 
विचा्योमुंयस्मायमपाम सोमं पीतवन्तः सोमं तस्मादमृता WA 
अमरा भूतवन्तं इत्यभेः किच गन्म ज्योततिः गत्तवतो लव्धवतो ज्योतिः 
स्वगेमिति । अविदाम देवान्‌ दिष्यान्‌ विदितवन्तः | wa च किनून 
मस्मान्‌ कृणवद्रातिः नूनं निधितं किं रातिः ween कृणवत्‌ 


C3] 

weft किमु भूूषिरमृतमस्यस्य ufc हिंसा वा किं करिष्यति अमृत 
Ree ॥ अन्यञ्चवेदे शूयते sahara फलं पशुक्धेन | स्ोखोकां 
जयति मृत्यं तरति पाप्मानं तरति बरहयहत्यां तरति यो योऽश्वमेधेन यजतत 
इति । एकान्तात्यन्तिके एवे वेदोक्ते अपाथेवजित्तासा इति न । TAA 
हष्टवदानुशविक इहि Cla TSN दृष्टवत्‌ | कोऽसौ BIE कस्मास 
यस्मादविकरद्धिक्षयातिशययुक्तः । अविशुदधियुक्तः पशुघातात्‌ तथाचोक्तं 

घट्‌ शतानि नियुज्यन्ते पशूनां मध्यमेऽहनि 

अश्वमेधस्य वचनादूलानि पशुभिल्िभिः ॥ 
यद्यपि शुतिस्मृतिविहितो धम्मेस्तणापि भिश्ीभावाद्विशुदियुक्षइति। यणा 

बहूनीन्दरसहस्नाणि देवानां च युगे युगे 

कालेन समतीतानि काल्मो हि दुरतिक्रमः ॥ 
एवमिन्द्रादिनाशा्क्षययुक्छः | तथाऽतिश्शयो विशेषस्तेन युक्तः । विशेष 
गुणदशेनादितरस्य दुःखं स्यादित्ति । एवमानुश्चयिकोऽपि हेतुे्टवत्‌ ॥ क 
स्वह श्रयानितिचेत्‌ । उच्यते । तहिपरीतः चयान्‌ ताभ्यां दष्टानुश्रविका 
भ्यां विपरीतः घेयान्‌ प्रशस्यतर इति | अविभुचि्छयात्िशयायुकत्वात्‌ | 
स कथमित्याह । व्यकाव्यक्तन्ञविज्ञानात्‌ तच व्यक्तं मरदादिवुिरहंकारः पश्च 
तन्माचाणि एकादशेन्द्रियाणि पश्महाभूतानि | were प्रधानं । चःपु 
रुषः । एवमेतानि पष्डविंशति तत्वानि ष्यक्ताग्यक्तञ्चानि wera cafes 
area इत्युक्तं च पथ्वविंशति mag इति ॥ अण व्यक्ताष्यक्तसानां को वि 
शेष इत्युच्यते | 


मूललप्रकृतिरविकृतिमेहदाशाः प्रकृतिविकृतयः सप 
बोडशकल्तुविकारो न प्रकृतिने विकृतिः पुरूषः । ३। 





सूलप्रकृतिः प्रधानं 1 प्रकृतिविकृतिसप्रकस्य मूलभूततवात्‌ | मूलं च सा 
प्रकृति मूत्प्रकृततिरविकृतिः । अन्धस्माननोत्यद्चते तेन प्रकृतिः कप्यचि 


{४1 


चिकारो न भवति । महदाद्ाः प्रकृतिविकृतयः सत्र । महाभूतादिति बुद्धिः 
gare: सप्त बुद्धि १ अहंकारः २ पश्चतन्माजाणि ५ रतानि सप्रपकृति 
विकृतयः । तद्यथा । प्रधानादुद्धिरूत्पद्यते तेनविकृतिः प्रधानस्य विकार 
इति । सैवाहंङारमुत्यादयति तः प्रकृतिः । अहंकारोऽपि वुदेर्न्यद्यतत 
इति विकृतिः स च पञ्चतन्माजाणयुत्याटयतीति प्रकृतिः । तथ शब्टतन्मा 
अमहंकारादुत्यद्यत sft विकृतिस्तस्मादाकाशमुत्यद्यत इति प्रकृतिः | तया 
स्यशेतन्मा्महंकाराटुल्यद्चत्त इति विकृतिस्तदेवं वायुमूत्पाट्यत्ीति प्रकृ 
तिः। गन्धतन्माभमहंकाराटुत्द्यत्त इति वि कृतिस्देवं पृथिवीमुत्पादयती 
तिप्रकृत्तिः । रूपतन्माभमहंकारादुत्यद्यत इति विकृतिस्तदेवं तेज उत्पादय 
तीतिप्रकृतिः | रसतन्माचमहंकाराटुन्पद्यत इति विकृतिस्देव आप उत्पा 
द्यतीति प्रकृतिः । एवं महदाद्याः सपि प्रकृतयो वि कृतयश्च ॥ षोडशकष्च 
विकारः पञ्चवुदेन्दरियाणि पथ्चकम्भेन्दरियाणि एकादशं मनः पष्महाभूला 
नि रष Hewat गणो विकृष्िरिव। विकारो विकृतिः ॥ न प्रकृतिने विकृ 
तिः पुरुषः ॥ रवमेषां व्यक्ताग्यक्तक्लानां याणां पदाथानां कैः कियज्निः 
प्रमाणैः केन क्स्य वा प्रमाणेन सिद्धिभैवति । इह HTH प्रमेय वस्तु प्रमा 
णेन साध्यते यथा प्रस्थादिभितीहयस्तुलया चन्दनादि | तस्मात्‌ WATE 
मभिधेयं। 

दष्टमनुमानमाप्रवचनं च सव्ैप्रमाणसि्त्वात्‌ 

जिविधं प्रमाणमिष्टं प्रमेयसिषिः प्रमाणाद्धि । ४। 





दष्टं यथा रोधं वक्‌ चुडा प्राणमिति पवुदधेन्द्रियाणि weaned 
Tern एषां पव्चानां पञ्चेवविषया यथासंख्यं शब्दं at गृहाति त्वक्‌ 
wit चदु रूपं frat रसं घ्राणं गन्धमिति । एतृष्टमिन्यु्यते प्रमाणं । 
WAAA AAA वा ASM न गृद्यते स आआाप्रवचनाट्‌ पाद्यः । यथेन्द्रो देव 


fa] 


राजः Te कुरवः स्वभऽप्सरस इत्यादि । प्रत्यस्तानुमानायाद्ममथाप्रव 
चनाद्रृद्यते | अपि चोक्षं । 

आगमो द्याप्रवचनमाप्नं दोषक्षयािदुः 

छ्ीशदोषोऽनृतं वाष्पं न ब्रूयादेत्वसम्भवात्‌ 

स्वकम्मशयभियुक्छो यः सङ्खबेषविवज्जितः 

पूजितस्तिधेनित्यमाप्रो Sa: स तादृशः ॥ 
शेषु प्रमाणेषु सत्रैप्रमाणानि सिद्धानि भवन्ति। घट्‌ प्रमाणानि जेमिनिः। 
अथ कानि तान्यप्रमाणानि। अथापरः सम्भवः अभावः प्रतिना रेति उप 
मानं चेति षट्‌ प्रमाणानि । ््ाधापि विधा हृष्टा श्रुता च । तंरा । 
कस्मिन्‌ Wa आत्मभावो गृहीतशयेदन्यस्मिन्प्यात्मभावो गृह्यत एव । 
var यणा । दिवा देवदज्ञो न भुङे खय च पीनो हश्यते खतोऽवगस्यत्त 
राजौ भुक्त इति ॥ सम्भवो यथा ! प्रस्य इत्युक्ते चत्वारः Feat: सम्भाष्यनो | 
अभावो नाम । प्रागिते्तरात्यन्तसक्गीभावत्यक्षणएः । प्रागभावो यधा देव 
दहः कौमारयीवनादिषु । इतरेतराभावः पटे घटाभावः । अत्यन्ताभावः 
खरविषाणवन्ध्यासुतखपुष्यवदिति | ania: प्रध्वंसाभावोदग्धपटवदिति । 
यथा शुष्कधान्यदग्ेनादुष्टेरभावोऽवगम्यत्ते | खवमभावोऽनेरूधा ॥ प्रतिभा 
यथा । दक्षिणेन विन्ध्यस्य सद्यस्य च यदु्षरं | पृषिष्यामासमुद्रायां स प्रदे 
शो मनोरमः | एवमुक्ते तस्मिन्‌ प्रदेशे शोभनाःगुणाः सन्तीति प्रतिभोत्प 
हते प्रतिजान्वाससंकानमिति ॥ रेतिद्यं यथा । ब्रवीति लोको यथाच 
ae य्िणी प्रवसतीति एव Ofna ॥ उपमानं यथा । गौरिव गवयः 
समुद्र इव तडागं । रतानि षट्‌ प्रमाणानि fey षषटादिषुन्तभूतानि | 
तजरानुमाने तावद्थापत्तिरन्तभूता | सम्भवाभावप्रतिभेतिद्योपमाघ्चाप्नव 
चने । तस्मान्निष्वेव सेप्रमाणसिदधत्वात्‌ भिविधं warafad तदाह तेन 
भिविषेन प्रमाणेन प्रमाणसि्िभेवतीत्ति वाक्षशेषः । प्रमेयसिथिः प्रमा 
खाज । प्रमेयं प्रधानं वु्धिरहंकारः पच्डतन्माजाणि एकादशेन्द्रियाणि पञ्च 
महाभूतानि पुरू इति रएतानिपञ्चविंशति तत्वानि व्यक्ताव्यक्लान्युध्यनो | 


{ £ 1 


तच किञ्चित्‌ प्रत्यधेण साध्यं किष्विदनुमानेन किञ्विदागमेनेपि feted 
प्रमाणमुक्षं तस्य किं तेक्षशमेनदाह | 


प्रतिविषयाध्यवसायो हृष्टं भिविधमनुमानमाखष्यातं 


तलिङ्कि ्विपू्ेरमाप्रश्ुत्तिराप्रवचनन्तु । ५। 


म्रतिविषयेषु अओभादीनां शब्टादिविषयेषु अथ्यवसायो ee परत्यक्षमित्यथः | 
जिविध्मनुमानमारष्यातं शेषवत्‌ Gad सामान्यतो हृष्टं चेति । year 
स्तीति qaag यथा Aiea वृष्टिं साधयति पूैवु्टत्वात्‌ | Pere 
समुद्रादेकं was तवणमासाद्य शेषस्याप्यस्ति warms इति ! सा 
मान्यतो दृष्टं । देशणन्तरादेशान्तरं परापरं हृष्टं । गत्िमशनद्रतारकं चैचवत्‌ 1 
यथा चेषनामानं देशान्तरादेषणन्तरं wats गतिमानयमिति तदच 
अन्दरतारकमिति तथा पुष्पित्ता्दशेनादन्यभपुष्पिताघा इति सामान्यतो 
हृष्टेन साधयति | एततसामान्यहष्टं ॥ fase तखिल्रलिक्धिपू्ैकमिति तदनु 
मानं लिङ्गपूङैकं यचलिरङ्गेन लिङ्गी अनुमीयते यथा aka यतिः । लि 
क्विपूङ्ेकं च यच लिद्धिना लिङ्घमनुमीयते यथा हष यतिमस्मेदं frau 
सिति ॥ आप्रशयुतिराप्तवचनं च । आप्रा Breet ब्रस्मादयः । श्युतिवैदः | 
ऋ्प्र्भु्तिश्च wi तदुकरूमाप्तवचनमिति ॥ णवं जिविधं प्रमाशमुकषं 
तथ केन प्रमाणेन किं साध्यमुच्यते | 








सामान्यतस्तृृ्टादतीन्दरियाणां प्रतीतिरनुमानात्‌ 
तस्मादपिचासिद्धं परोक्षमाप्रागमात्‌ सिं । ६। 





सामान्यतो हष्ादनुमानादतीद्दरियाणामिन्दरियाख्यतीत्यवहेमानानां fate: 


{ 9 1 


प्रधानपुरषावतीन्दियौ सामान्यतो RATATAT BAA यस्मान्महदादि 
forg चिगुणं । यस्येदं जिगुणं साभ्ये तत्प्रधानमिति । यत्ाचेतनं चेतनमि 
वाभाति अत्ोऽन्योऽपिष्ठाता पुरुष इति । व्यक्तं प्रत्यश्चसाध्यं | तस्मादपि 
चासिद्धं परो्माप्नागमात्‌ सिद्धं यथेन्द्रो देवराजः उक्लराःकुरवः Pica 
रस इति परोक्षमाप्वचनात्‌ सिद्धं ॥ अच कश्चिदाह प्रधानः पुरूषो वा नोप 
Mat यच्च नोपलभ्यते लोके warfer तस्मास्षावपि न स्तः । यथाच 
तीयं शिरललृत्तीयो बाहुरिति । तदुच्यते । अथ सतामष्यथानामषटधोपतव 
न्धि नै भवतति तद्यथा । 


खतिटूरात्‌ सामीष्यादिन्दरियघातान्मनोऽनवस्थानात्‌ 
सौच््याद्यवधानाटभिभवात्‌ समानाभिहारान्च । 9 । 





इह सततामष्यथानामतिदूरादनुपत्च्धिटषशा | यथा देशान्तरस्थानां Se Ae 
विष्णुमिणाणां i सामीपयादयथा चश्षुषोऽञ्नानुपलन्धिः । इन्द्रियाभिधा 
area बधिरान्धयोः शब्ट॒रूपानुपलन्धिः | मनोऽनवस्यानाद्यणा व्यम 
fre: सम्यक्कधितमपि नावधारयतिः । सीच्ू्याद्यपा भूमोष्मजल नीहारप 
रमाशवो गगनगता नोपलभ्यन्ते । व्यवधानाद्यणा कुड्येन पिहितं वस्तु 
नोपत्कभ्यते । अभिभवाद्णा सूय्येतेजसाभिभूता महनक्षभतारकादमो नो 
पलभ्यन्ते | समानाभिहाराच्यथा BRC मुद्रः fam: कुवलयामत्ठकमध्ये 
कुवत्यामलके शिप्रे कपोतमय्ये कपोतो नोपलभ्यते समानद्व्यमध्याह 
त्वात्‌ | एवमष्टधानुपलग्धिः सतामधानामिह हृष्टा । एवं चास्ति किम 
भ्युपगम्यते प्रधानपुरूषयोरथेतयो वानुपरलगन्विः केनहेतुना केन चोपल 
च्धिस्तदुच्यते । 


{¢ 1 


सौष्स्याधदनुपत्ब्धिनेभावात्‌ काग्येतस्वदुपत्ष्धिः 
महदादि तश्चकाभ्ये प्रकृतिविरूपं सरूपं च । ४। 





सीष्स्याक्तदनुपलन्धिः ग्रधानस्येत्य्थः । प्रधानं सौद्म्याजोपलभ्यते यथा 
काशे धूमोष्मजल् नीहारपरमाणवः सनोऽपि नोपलभ्यन्ते i कथं ति 
तदुपलन्िः । काग्येतस्तदुपलच्िः | काये हटा कारणमनुमीयते । अस्ति 
रधानं कारणं यस्येदं काव्ये । बुद्धिरहंकारमश्तन्मा्ाणि एकादगेन्द्रियाणि 
पञ्चमहाभूतानि एव तत्काय्ये । तञ्चकाभ्य प्रकृति विरूपं । प्रकृतिः प्रथानं 
तस्य विरूपं प्रकृतेरसहशं सरूपं च समानरूपं च यथा त्टोकेऽपि पितु 
स्तुस्य इव OM भवत्यतुस्यश्च | Aegan तुस्यमतुस्यन्तदुपरि्ाष्यामः | 
यदिदं महदादिकाग्ये त्किं प्रधाने सदुताहोस्विदसदाचाग्यैविप्रतिपक्रयंसं 
शयः | ast सांस्यदशेने सत्काभ्ये बौखादीनामसत्काभ्ये । यदि. सदस 
ज्भवत्यथाससन्नभवतीतिविप्रतिषेधस्तनाह | 


असदकरणाटुमादानयहणात्‌ स्ेसम्भवाभावात्‌ 
शस्य शक्यकरणात्‌ सारणभावाच्च AAT । ९। 





असट्करणानसदसदसत्तोऽकरणं ACT TETRA नास्ति 
यथा सिकताभ्यस्मेलोत्य्विस्ठस्मात्सतः करणादस्वि प्रागु; । प्रधानेष्य 
कमतः सत्काय्ये । fe चान्यदुपादानयहणादुपादानं कारणं त्स्ययहणा 
दिहलोके यो AAA स तटुपादानयहणं wife aah सीरस्य न तु 
जतस्य तस्मात्‌ सत्का्ये । इतश्च सेसम्भवाभावात्‌ AEST सदेवसम्भवो 
लास्वि यथा सुवणेस्य रजतारौ तृणपांशुसिकतासु तस्मात्‌ सेसम्मवाना 
वात्‌ ATES । इत्च शक्तस्य शश्यकरणात्‌ | इह कुलालः शक्तो FATE 


ce] 
चक्रचीवररञ्जुनीरादिकरएणोपकरणं वा शक्यमेव घटं मृत्पिरहादुत्मादयति 
त्स्मात्‌ सत्काय्यं । इतश्च कारणभावाश्च सत्काम्पे । कारणं TET तछ्‌ 
णमेव क्येमेव यथा यवेभ्योऽपि यवाः वीहीम्यो व्रीहयः यदाऽसत्काय्यै 
स्यात्ततः कोद्रवेभ्यः शत्यः स्युने च सन्तीणि तस्मात्‌ सत्कार्ये । एवं 
पष्चभिर्हतुभिः प्रधाने महदादिष्ि्गमस्ति तस्मात्सत उत्यततिनासत इति ॥ 
प्रकृगिविरूपं सरूपं च यदुक्तं तत्‌ कथमित्युच्यते । 


हेतुमदनित्यमष्यापि सक्रियमनेकमाथितं fsx 
सावयवं परतन्त्रं ore विघरीतमबष्थक्षं 1901 





व्यक्तं महदादिका्यं हेतुमदिति हेतुरस्यास्नि हेतुमत्‌ । उपादानं हेतुः कारणं 
निमित्तमिति प्याया । व्यक्तस्य प्रधानं हेतुरस्ति अतो हेतुमश्चक्त भूतपग्ेनतं 
हेतुमबुदितावं प्रधानेन हेतुमानरंकारो बुद्धा पञ्चतन्माचाणि caret, 
याणि हेतुमनयहंकारेण | सकाशं शब्ट्तन्माचेख हेतुमत्‌ । वायुः स्यशेत 
FATT हेतुमान्‌ | तेजो रूपतन्माभेण हेतुमत्‌ | आपो रसततन्माजेण हेतु 
मत्यः । पृथिवी गन्धतन्माभेण हेतुमती । एवं भूतपम्येनतं व्यक्तं हेतुमत्‌ ॥ 
किं चान्यदनित्यं यस्मादन्यस्मादुत्यद्चते यथा मृत्पिरडादुत्पद्यते घटः स चा 
नित्यः ॥ किं चाव्याप्यसङ्गेगभित्यथेः यथा प्रधानपुरुषौ सङ्गतौ नेव ष्यक्षं ॥ 
किंचान्यत्‌ सक्रियं dares संसरति अयोदशविधेन करणेन संयुक्त 
we शएरीरमाध्ित्य संसरति तस्मात्‌ सक्रियं ॥ किंचान्यदनेकं बुषिरहं 
कारः पण्डतन्माभारयेकादशेन्दरियाणि च पञ्चमहाभूतानि ततन्माजाधितानि॥ 
किंच लिङ्गं लययुक्षं BIA पञ्चमहाभूतानि weg wit ता 
न्येकादशेब्दिथेः सहाहंकारे स च बुद्धौ सा च प्रधाने त्यं यातीति ॥ तथा 
सावयवं अवयवाः शब्टस्यशेरसरूपगन्धाः तिः सह ॥ किंच word ना 
त्मनः प्रभवन्ति यथा प्रधानतन्ना बुद्धिः बु्धितन्त्रोऽहं कारः अहंकारतन्ताणि 


[ 9] 


wearifeante च तन्माणतन्नाणि पञ्चमहाभूतानिच । एवं परतन््ं 
परायहं ्याख्यातं व्यक्त sere व्याख्यामः। विपरीत्तमष्यक्तं । एतैरेव 
गुशेमेभोक्तेविपरीतभष्यक्षं Verge | नहिप्रधानान्‌ परं किञ्चिदस्ति 
यतः प्रधानस्यानुत्पिः तसमादहेतुमदध्यकतं । तथानित्यं च व्यक्तं नित्यमष्य 
क्रमनुत्याद्यत्वात्‌ नहि भूतानि कुतश्िटुत्यद्यन्तेति प्रधानं ॥ किं चाव्यापि ape 
च्यापि प्रधानं sierra ॥ सक्रियं erasers सद्वेगतत्वादेव ॥ 
तथाऽनेकं व्यक्तमेकं प्रधानं कारणत्वात्‌ चयाणां त्टोकानां प्रथानमेकं कारणं 
तस्मादेकं प्रधानं ॥ तथाधितं व्यक्षमनाधित्तमव्यक्तमकाग्यैत्वाबहि प्रधाना 
त्किचिदम्ति परं यस्य प्रधानं काय्यं स्यात्‌ ॥ तथा व्यक्तं लि द्गमलिि द्गमव्यक्षं 
नित्यत्वाम्महदादि लिङ्गं wares परस्परं प्रत्दरीयते मैवं प्रधानं तस्मा 
ators प्रधानं ॥ तथा सावयवं व्यक्तं निरवयवमव्यक्षं नहि शब्टस्पशेरसर 
गन्धाः प्रधाने सन्ति ॥ तथा परतन्तं व्यक स्वतन््मध्यकषं प्रभवत्या्मनः ॥ 
एवं ष्यक्षाव्यक्तयेविधम्म्येमुक्तं साधम्म्यमुच्यते यदुक्तं सरूपं च । 


चिगुणमविवेकि विषयः सामान्यमचेतनं प्रसवधम्मिं 
व्यक्त WAT प्रधानं तिपरीत्तस्तेथा च पुमान्‌ । ११। 





ford व्यक्तं स्रजस्वमांसि भयो गुणा यस्येति । अविवेकि aoe नवि 
वेकोऽस्यास्तीति | इटं ष्यक्तमिमे गुणा इति न aay याति यं गौ 
यमश्च इति यथा ये spares wane ते च गुणा इति । तथा विषयी 
व्यक्तं भोज्यभित्यथेः स्ब्ेपुरुषाणां विषयभूतलात्‌ । तथा सामान्यं ae 
मूस्यदासीवत्‌ सग्नेसाधारणत्वात्‌ ॥ अचेतनं व्यक्तं सुखटुःखलमोहान्न चेतयती 
त्यथः ॥ तरथा प्रसवधम्मि यक्तं तद्यथा FAA: प्रसूयते तस्मान्‌ पञ्चत 
न्माभाणि एकादशेन्द्रियाणि च प्रसूयनोे तन्माभेभ्यः पष्डमहाभूतानि ॥ खय 


{ ११1] 


मेते व्यक्ृधम्मोः wari उक्षा एवमेभिरणष्यक्तं wed यथा ew 
त्था प्रधानमिति । तजनिगुणं ्यक्षमष्यक्तमपि भिगुणं यस्येतन्महदादि 
ward चिगुणं । इह यदात्मकं कारणं तदात्मकं कार्यमिति यथा कृष्णतन्तु 
कृतः कृष्ण ण्व यदो भवति ॥ तथाविवेकि व्यक्तं प्रधानमपि गुणेनेभिदयते 
छऋन्येगुणा न्यत्‌ प्रधानमेव विवेक्तुं न याति wears प्रधानं ॥ तथा 
विषयो oe प्रधानमपि स्रेपुरुषविषयभूतत्वािषय इति ॥ तणा सामान्यं 
व्यक्तं प्रधानमपि सक्रैसाधारणत्वात्‌ ॥ त्तथाऽचेतनं व्यक्तं प्रधानमपि सुखदुः 
खमोहा्रचेतयतीति कथमनुमीयत्त इह खचेतनान्मृत्पिरडादवेतनो ट उत्य 
दयति ॥ एवं प्रधानमपि व्याख्यातं ॥ इदानीन्तिपरीतस्तथा पुमानित्येत 
द्याख्यायते । त्विपरीतस्ताभ्यां श्यक्ताग्यक्ताभ्यां विपरीतः पुमान्‌ | तद्या 
बिगुणं wee चागुणः पुरुशः wear श्यक्तमब्यक्तं च विवेकी 
पुरूषः । तथा विषयो व्यक्षमब्यक्तं चापिषयः पुरुषः । तथा सामान्यं TR 
AOS चासामान्यः पुरुषः । चेतनं HATA च चेतनः पुरुषः सुखदुः 
लमोहांशेतयति संजानीते तस्माश्चेतनः gee इति । प्रसवधम्मिं व्यक्तं 
प्रधानंचाप्रसवधम्मीं पुरूषो नहि fae yea प्रसूयते । तस्मादुक्त 
त्िपरीतः पुमानिति ॥ तदुक्तं तथा च पुमानिति । तत्‌ पूेस्यामाय्यामां 
प्रधानमहेतुमद्यणा व्याख्यातं तथा च पुमान्‌ तद्यथा हेतुमदनित्यभित्यादि 
wre तदिपरीतमष्यकं तभरेतुमश्यक्तमहेतुमत्‌ प्रधानं तथा च पुमानहेतु 
माननुत्पाद्यत्वात्‌ | अनित्यं व्यक्तं नित्यं प्रधानं ततया च नित्यः पुमान्‌ । 
अक्रियः स्ेगतत्वादेव | अनेकं व्यक्तमेकमष्यक्ं तथा पुमानेकः । आ 
धितं ष्यक्तमनाश्ित्तमव्यक्तं तथा च पुमाननाधितः | लिङ्खं व्यक्तमलिङ्गं 
प्रधानं तथा च पुमानणयल्विङ्घः। न कचिलीयत इति । सावयवं are नि 
aA तथा च पुमान्‌ निरवयवः । नहि qed शष्डाटयोऽवयवाः 
सन्ति । किंच cord Te स्वतन्तरमष्यक्तं तथा च एसारपि स्वतन्त्रः | 
आत्मनः प्रभवततीत्यथेः । रवमेततदव्यक्पुरुषमोः साधम्यं व्याख्यातं पूष 
स्थामग्पायां | व्यक्प्रधानयोः साधम्म्यं पुरूषस्म Suet च भिगुणमविवे 


[ १२ ] 


कीत्यादि प्रकृत्याग्योयां व्याख्यातं । mage चिगुणमिति व्यक्तमव्यक्तं च 
त्त्‌ के ते गुणा इतति तत्‌ स्वरूपग्रतिपादनायेदमाह । 


प्रीत्यप्रीणिविषादात्मकाः प्रकाशप्रवृ्तिनियमाथीः 
छन्योऽन्याभिभवाच्रयजननमिधुनवृ्चयश्चगुणाः । १२। 





प्ीत्यात्मका अप्रत्यात्मकाः विषादात्भकाश्चगुखाः सत्वरजस्तमांसीत्यर्थः । 
तथ प्रीत्यात्मकं सत्वं प्रीतिः सुखं तदात्मकमिति । खप्रीत्यात्मकं रजः। वि 
arenes तमः । विषादो मोहः । तथा प्रकाशप्रवृ्ति नियमाभाः । अरैः 
we: सामथ्येवाची प्रकाशाय सत्वं प्रकाशसमथेमित्यथेः | oped रजो 
नियमा तमः स्थितौ समधेभित्यथः प्रकाशक्रियास्थितिशीत्का गुणा इति। 
तथाऽन्योऽन्याभिवा्चयजननमिषुनवृत्तयश्च | छन्योऽन्याभिमवाः SANS AT 
याः छन्योऽन्यजननाः अन्योऽन्यमिथुनाः अन्योऽन्यवृह्ययथ्च ते तथोक्ताः | 
अन्योऽन्याभिभवा इति अन्योऽन्यं परस्यरमभिभनवन्तीति प्रीत्यप्रीत्यादिभि 
पम्मिराविभैवन्ति यथा यदा सतमुत्कटं भवति तदा रजस्तमसी अभिभूय 
स्वगुणेः प्रीनिप्रकाशात्मकेनावतिष्ठते यदा Grae सततमसी अम्रीतिप्र 
वृ्तिधर्म्मेण यदा तमस्तदा सत्वरसी विषादस्थित्यातमकेन इति । तथाऽ 
न्योऽन्या्माश्च आणुकवहुणाः | अन्योऽन्यजननाः यथा मृत्पिररी घटं 
जनयति | तथाऽन्योऽन्यमिधुनाश्च यथा स्त्रीपुंसौ अन्योऽन्यमिधुनो त्तथा 
गुणाः । उकं च 

रजसो मिथुनं सत्वं सवस्य भिधुनं रजः 

उभयोः सत्वरजसोमिथुनं तम उच्यते 
परस्परसहाया इत्यधेः । अन्योऽन्यवृह्यश्च परस्परं seat गुणाः गुेषु 
ater इति वचनात्‌ । यथा सुरूपा सुशीला स्तर स्घैमुखहेतुः सपत्नीनां 
सेव दुःखहेतुः सेव रागिणां मोहं जनयति एव सत्वरजस्तमसोवृंचिहेतु 


[3] 
या राजा were: प्रजापालने दुष्टनिपहे शिष्टानां सुखमुत्पादयति दुष्टा 
नां दुःखं मोहं च एवं रजस्सत्रमसो वृत्तिं जनयति । तथा त्तमः स्वरूपेणा 
वरणात्मकेन सवरजो वलिं जनयति यथा मेधाः खमा वृत्य जगतः सुख 
मुत्पादयन्नि ते वृष्या ajarat कषेशोद्योगं जनयन्ति विरहिणां मोहमे 
वमन्योऽन्यवृक्चयो गुणाः । किंचान्यत्‌ । 


सत्वं लषु प्रकाशकमिष्टमुपष्टम्भकं चतं च रजः 
गुरू वरणकमेव तमः म्रदीपवश्चा्थतो वृक्तिः । १३।. 





सत्वं HY प्रकाश्कंच यदा सत्वमुत्कटं भवति तदा EAA gfe 
काणश्च प्रसन्तेन्दरियाणां भवति | उपष्टम्भक चल्कं च रजः उपषश्भातीत्यु 
पष्टम्भकमुद्योतकं यथा वृषो Gaels उत्कटमुषष्टम्भं करोति एव रजो 
वुः । तथा रजश्च चत्र ee रजोवृ्षियत्चित्तो भवति । गुरूवरणकमेव 
ततमः यदा तम उत्कटं भवति तदा गुरूण्यङ्खान्यावृतानीन्दरियाणि भवन्ति 
स्वाथासमथोनि | जाह यदि गुणाः परस्परं free: स्वमतेनेव कमे 
निष्यादयन्ति तर्हिं कथं प्रदीपवश्चाथतो gfe: प्रदीपेन तुर्यं प्रदीपवदथेततः 
साधना gfefter यथा प्रदीपः परस्परविरूढतिताग्निव्तिंसंयोगादेप्र 
काशां जनयति रवं सत्वरजस्तमांसि परस्यरं frearad निष्याट्यन्ति | 
srt भवति चिगुणमविवेकिविषय इत्यादि प्रधानं ग्यक च व्याख्यातं 
तजर प्रधानसुपत्भ्यमानं महदादि च भिगुणमविवेक्यादीति च कथमव 
गम्यते तथाह । 


{ १४ 1 


attri: सिद्धसगुख्यािपम्येयाभावात्‌ 
कारणगुणात्मकल्वात्‌ काम्येस्थाष्यक्षमपिसिञ्चं । १४। 





योऽयमविवेक्यादिगुशः स चेगुणयान्महदादीऽष्यक्तेनायं सिद्धति ! अभो 
च्यते तशिपम्येयाभावाहषस्य विपम्यैयस्तचिषम्यैयस्तस्यानावस्वदिपम्ययाभाव 
स्तस्मात्‌ सिदधमष्यक्षं | यथा यभेवतनावस्तचैव पटः सन्ये तन्तवोऽन्यः पटो 
न ुत्तस्तशिपर्येयाभावात्‌ । णवं व्यक्षाव्यक्षसम्पो भवति दूरं प्रधानमा 
सनं व्यक्तं यो श्यकं पश्यति स प्रधानमपिपश्यति तदिपय्यैयाभावात्‌ । इत 
TTR सिद्धं कारणगु णात्मङवात्‌ काय्यैस्य । तीके यदात्मकं कारणं तदा 
त्मकं काम्येमपि तथा कृष्णेभ्यस्तन्तुभ्यः कृष्ण एव पटो भवति । एवं महदा 
दित्विङ्गमविवेकिविषयः सामान्यमचेतनं प्रसवधम्मि यदात्मकं लिङ्गं तदा 
त्मकमव्यक्तमयि सिद्धं । भेगुरयाटविवेक्पारिष्यक्े सिद्धस्तदिपय्येयाभावात्‌ 
एवं कारणगुखात्मकवात्‌ काय्येस्याव्यक्तमपि सिद्धमित्येतन्मिथ्या ल्लोके 
यन्ञोपत्भ्यते तन्नास्ति रवं प्रधानमण्यस्ति किं तु नोपलभ्यते | 


भेदानां परिमाणात्‌ समन्वयाच्छक्तितः प्रवृ 
कारणकाम्येविभागादविभागवैश्वरूपस्य । १५! 





कारणमस्त्यस्यक्तमितिक्रियाकारक्सब्न्धः | भेदानां परिमाणाष्ठोके TE 
tife तस्म परिमाणं ष्टं यथा gars: परिमितमृ्थिरहैः परिमितानि 
वटान्‌ करोति एवं महदपि महदादिल्किङ्कं परिमित्तं भेदतः प्रधानका्यै 
मेका बुधिरे कोऽहंकारः पञ्च तन्माचाणि एकादशेन्द्रियाणि प्रश्चमहाभूता 
नीत्येवं दानां परिमाणादस्ति प्रधानं कारणं यद्रू परिमितसमुत्पाद्यति | 
अरि प्रधानं न स्यात्तदा निःपरिमाणमिदं serait न स्यात्‌ परिमाणा 


[ Wj 


चमेदानामस्ति प्रधानं मस्माद्यक्तमुन्पनरं । तथा समन्वेमादिहत्कोके प्रसि 
fader यथा बतपारिणं वहु टा समन्वमति नूनमस्य पितरौ wear 
विति cafe चिगुणं महदादिलि ङ्गं हटा साधयामोऽस्य यत्‌ कारणं भवि 
अतीति अतः समन्वयादस्तिप्रधानं । तथा शक्तितः प्रवृते इहं मो यस्मिन्‌ 
WH: स AAA प्रवतेते यथा कुलालो घटस्य करणे समथो षटमेव 
करोति न पटं रथं वा । तथास्ति प्रभानं कारणं कुतः कारणकाम्यैविभा 
गात्‌ । करोतीतिकारणं । क्रियत इति काम्ये । कारणस्य कार्यस्य च वि 
भागो यथा घटो दधिमधूदकपयसां धारणे समथो न त्तथा तत्कारणं fia 
we । मृत्पिरुहो वा घटं निष्पादयति न चैवं घटो मृत्पिरडं । एकं महदादि 
लिङ्गं दृ्ानुमीयते । सस्ति विभक्तं तत्‌ कारणं मस्य विभाग इदं ष्यक 
मिति । इत्च अविभागवैश्वरूपस्य fied जगत्‌ तस्य रूपं व्यक्तिः । विष्व 
रूपस्य भावो वैश्वरूपं तस्याविभागादस्तिप्रधानं wees प्च 
नां पृथिव्यादीनां महाभूतानां परस्परं विभागो नास्ति महाभूतेष्वनभूता 
स्यो तोकाः इति पृथिष्यापस्तेजोवायुराकाशमिति एतानि पञ्चमहाभूता 
नि प्रलमकाले सृष्टिक्रमेणेवाविभागं यान्ति तन्माभेषु परिणामिषु तन्मा 
चाण्येकाटशेन्दरियाणि चाहंकारे अहंकारो वुद्धौ नुदधिः प्राने एवं चयो 
TE प्रलयकाले प्रकृत्ावविभागं गछन्ति तस्माद्विभागात्‌ घीरदधि 
वद्यक्ताष्यक्त योरस्त्यष्यक्तं WTS । अत्त । 


कारणमस्त्यष्यक्तं प्रवतत चिगुणखतः समुदयाञ्च 
परिणामतः afore प्रतिप्रतिगुणाश्चरयविशेषात्‌ । १६। 





अस्यत प्रख्यातं कारणमस्ति यस्मान्महदादित्िङ्गं प्रवते foyer: भि 
गुणात्‌ सत्वरजस्तमोगुणा यस्मिन्‌ ahaa तक्किमुक्तं भवति सत्वरजस्त 
मसां साम्यावस्था प्रधानं | तथा समुद्यात्‌ यथा गंगाचोतांसि चीणि ee 


{ १६ ] 


qafa पतितानि एकं चतो जनयंति शव निगुणमव्यकमेकं व्यक्तं अन 
यत्ति तथा वा तमावः समुदिताः पटं जनयन्ति एवमव्यक् गुणसमुटयान्म 
wate जनयतीति चिगुखतः समुटयाच्च STH जगत्‌ प्रवते । यस्मदिक 
स्मान्‌ UMTS तस्मादेकरूपेणभवितव्यं | नेषदोषः परिणामतः सलि 
क्वत्‌ प्रततिप्रतिगुणाश्रयविशेषादेकस्मात्‌ प्रधानात्‌ जयो लोकाः समुत्प 
व्रस्तुस्यभावा न भवनत देवाः सुखेनयुक्छा मनुष्या दुःखेन तिष्यो मोहेन 
शक्स्मात्‌ प्रधानात्‌ AGS व्यक्तं प्रततिप्रतिगुणाच्चयविशेषात्‌ परिणामतः 
सलित्ठवदङ्नवति। प्रतिप्रतीति fren | गुणानामाश्चयो गुणाश्वयस्तदिशेषस्तं 
गुणाश्रयविशेषं प्रतिनिधाय प्रतिप्रततिगुणाश्यविरशेषं परिगणमात्‌ walt 
ब्यक यथा सआकाशदेकरसं afore पतितं नानारूपात्संछेषाजनिद्यते तट्‌ 
ATTA ATH प्रधानात्‌ ATA त्मोका नेकस्वभावा भवन्ति देवेषु 
सावमुत्कटं रजस्तमसी उदासीने तेन तेऽग्य॑न्तसुखिनो मनुेषु रज उत्कटं 
भवति सत्वतमसी उदासीने तेन तेऽन्यन्तदुःखिनस्तिम्ेषषु तम उत्कटं भवति 
सत्वरजसी उदासीने तेन तेऽत्यन्तमूढाः ॥ एवमायेषयेन प्रधानस्मास्तित्व 
मयसुपगम्यते इतश्चोत्षरं पुरूषास्तित्वप्रतिपाट्नापेमाह | 


सक्घातपराथेत्वात्‌ चिगुणादिविषय्येयादषिष्ठानात्‌ 
पुरूषोऽस्तिभोक्तुभावात्‌ केवस्याथं भवृहेश्च । १७। 





यदुक्त व्यक्षाव्यक्तविज्लानान्मासः प्राप्यत इति ATTRACT पञ्च 
भिः कारणेरधिगत्तमव्यक्तवत्‌ पुरुषोऽपि सूष्सस्तस्याऽधुनानुमितास्तित्व 
प्रति क्रियते | सस्ति पुरुषः कस्मात्‌ संधातपराधेतवात्‌ | योऽयं महदादि 
संघातः सपुरूषाथे इत्यनुमीयते अचेतनत्वात्‌ wages | यथा प्यक 
We गाषोत्यत्छकपादवटनूत्कीमरदहादनपटोपधानसङ्धातः परार्थो नहि 
wart: पम्यङ्कस्य नहि किञ्िदपि गाचोत्पत्काद्यवयवानां परस्परं कृत्यमस्ति 


ca] 


छततोऽवगम्यतेऽस्ति पुरुषो यः wae शेते यस्याथे पय्यङ्स्तत्पराथमिदं 
शरीरं पश्ानां महाभूतानां सङ्घातो Tesh पुरूषो यस्थेदं भग्यशरीरं 
भोग्यं महदादिसङ्घातरूपं समुन्यजरमिति। इतश्चात्माऽस्ति जिगुणारिविपम्यं 
यत्‌ age Gerais भिगुणमविवेकिविषय इत्यादि । तस्माहि 
aerate त्िपरीतस्वथा पुमान्‌ | अधिष्ठानादययेह त्दङ्मक्षवनधाव 
meee रथः सारथिनाऽधिष्ठितः प्रवते पथात्माऽपिष्टानाच्छरी 
रमिति । तथा चोक्तं षष्ठितन्ते पुरुषाधिषटितं प्रधानं प्रवहते । सत्ोऽस्यात्मा 
भोक्कत्वात्‌ । यणा मधुरामुत्वणकटुतिक्षकषायवद्रसो पवृंहितस्य संयुक्षस्या 
जस्य साध्यते एवं महदादिलिद्धस्य भोक्ृवाभावादस्तिं स अमा यस्येदं 
भोग्यं शरीरमिति । इतश्च केवस्याथे प्रवेश केवलस्य भावः Farsi 
तज्निमिच्तं या च प्रवृिस्तस्याः स्विवस्याथे age: सकाशादनुमीयते 
स्यामेति यततो aint विश्षानविषां् संसारसन्तानखयमिच्छति | एव 
मेभिर्हतुभिरस््यात्मा शरीराद्यतिरिक्तः । अथ सः किमेकः स्ेशरीरेऽधि 
iim मणिरसनात्मकमूभवत्‌ आहोस्विद्हव आत्मानः प्रततिशरीरमधिष्ठा 
लार इत्यचोध्यते । 


जननमरणकरणानां प्रतिनियमादटयुगपत्‌ प्रवृते 
पुरुषबहुतवं सिद्धं चेगुख्यविपय्येयाचचैव । १४। 





जन्म च मरणं च करणानि च जन्ममरणकरणानि तेषां प्रतिनियमात्‌ 
प्र्ेकनियमादित्यथेः। यद्येक एव आता स्यात एकस्य जन्मनि सहे एव 
आयिरन्‌ णकस्य मरणे सर््ैऽपि fete एकस्य करणयैकल्ये जाधिब्योन्धत्व 
मूकषत्वकुणित्संजत्वत्ठ षणे सर्वेऽपि बधिरान्धकुशिखंजाःस्युने चेवं भवति 
स्माश्बन्ममरणशकरणानां प्रतिनियमात्‌ पुरूषबहुत्वं सिद्धं । इतश्वायुगपत्‌ 
पवेश Peas न युगपट्युगपत्‌ wats यस्मादयुगपदम्मोदिषु 
प्रवचिषेभ्यते रके धर्म्मे प्रवा अन्येऽधम्म वेराग्येऽन्ये सषानेऽन्ये प्रवृताः 


[ १ 1 


तस्मादयुगपतत्‌ प्रवेश बहव इति सिं ॥ किब्दान्यसगुणयविपर्ययाचैव 
निगुणभावविपम्येयाश्च पुरुषबहुतं सिं । यथा सामान्ये जन्मनि रकः सा 
लिकः सुखी । अन्यो राजसो दुःखी । अन्यस्तामसो मोहवान्‌ | एवं Hy 
छयचिपप्येयाहु्वं सिद्धमिति | अक्षो पुरूष इत्येतदुच्यते | 


तस्माश्चविपय्यासात्‌ fad afar पुरुषस्य 
` Sarai माध्यस्थ्यं दृ्लमकभावश्च । १९। 





तस्माच्चविपग्यसासस्माश्च यथोकूचैगुरयविषम्पासाधिपम्येयानिगुएः पुरु 
घो विवेकी भोक्तेत्यादिगुखानां पुरुषस्य यो विपग्योस उक्षस्तस्मात्‌ सत्वर 
जस्तमःसु RHEIN, साधितं सिद्धं पुरुषस्येति योऽयमधिकृतो age प्रति | 
गुणा एव कलीरः waa साक्षी न प्रवर्तेते नापि fata एव । किं 
चान्यत्‌ Sarat केवत्भावः केवस्यमन्यत्वमित्यथेः । भिगुशेभ्यः Bass: । 
अन्यन्माध्यस्थ्यं मध्यस्थभावः परिवाजक्वत्‌ मध्यस्थः पुरूषः | यथा कश्चित्‌ 
परिषाजको याभीणेषु wang प्रवृ्ेषु केवलो मध्यस्थः Feats 
गुणेषु TARY न WAR । ACERT TS यस्मान्मष्यस्यस्तस्मा 
दष्टा तस्मादकललो पुरुषस्तेषां कम्मेणामिति सत्वरजस्पमांसि भयो गुणाः 
कम्मेक्ेभावेन cata न पुरूष एवं पुरूषस्यास्तित्वं च सिद्धं । यस्माद्‌ 
कता पुरुषस्तत्कथमष्यवसायं करोति धम्मे करिष्याम्यधम्मे न करिष्यामीत्यतः 
कललो भवति न च क पुरूष एवमुभयथा दोषः स्मादिति । अत उच्यते । 


{ १९ ] 


तस्मात्तत्‌ संयोगादचेतनं चेतनावदिव लिङ्गं 
गुशकचत्वे च तथा कर्तेव भवतीत्युटासीनः । २०। 





इह पुरुषश्ेतनाकृत्‌ तेन चेतनावभासं युकं महदादिलिङ्खं चेतनावदिवभ 
वति यथा STS घटः शीतसंयुक्तः शीतः उष्णसंगुक्तं उष्ण एवं महदादि 
fos नस्य संयोगात्‌ पुरुषसंयोगाच्चेतनावदिवभवति तस्माद्रा wera 
सायं कुवन्ति न पुरुषः । यद्यपि तोके पुरुषः कल्लागतित्यादि प्रयुज्यते 
तथाणयक्घ्ो पुरुषः कथं TRA च तथा कर्तेव भवत्युदासीनः गुणानां 
कत्वे सि उदसीनोऽपि पुरुषः ata भवति न क्तौ । अष rere 
भवति मथाऽचौरश्ोरेः सह गृहीतश्चौर इत्यवगम्यत णवं चयो गुणाः कतो 
रैः age: पुरुधोऽकलोऽपि कक्षा भवति wedi । शवं व्यक्त्य 
कलानां विभागो विख्यात्तो यदिनागान्मो्षप्राप्तिरिति | अथैतयोः प्रधा 
नपुरूषयोः किं हेतुः संघात उच्यते | 


पुरूषस्य दशनाथ केवस्याथं तथा प्रधानस्य 
पद्ुन्धवदुभयोरपि संयोगस्तत्‌ कृतः सगः । २१। 





पुरुषस्य प्रधानेन सह संयोगो att प्रकृतिं महदादिका्ेभूतपम्येनां 
पुरूषः पश्यति एतद प्रधानस्यापि पुरुषेण संयोगः। केवतल्याथे स च संयोगः 
पंगृन्धवदुभयोरपि दर्यः यथा कः पुरेकष्चान्ध एतोहयावपि गच्छन्तो मह 
त्ासामर्ध्यनाटष्यां सार्थस्य स्तेनकृताटुपश्चवात्‌ स्वबन्धुपरित्यक्तौ दैवादिति 
wera च तौ संयोगमुपयातौ wet स्ववचसो frre 
संयोगो गमनाथे दशेनाथे च भवल्यन्धेन पंगुः स्कन्धमारोपितः एव शरी 
रारूढपंगुद्शितेन मार्भणान्धो याति पगुष्पान्धस्कन्धारूढः | एवं पुरुषे दे 


{ 20 1 


शक्तिरस्ति पंगुवजन्रिया प्रधाने च्छियाशक्तिरस्तयन्धवनदशेनशक्तिः । यथा 
वानयोः पंग्बन्धयोः कृता्थंयोविभागो भवि्यतीप्तिततस्यानप्रा्रयोरेवं प्रधा 
नमपि पुरुषस्य मोषं कृतवा fade पुरुषोऽपि प्रधानं gt केवस्यं ग्ड 
ति त्तयोः कृताधेयोविभागो भविष्यति । किं चान्यत्‌ तत्कृतः wha संयो 
गेन कृतस्तत्कृतः wate: । यथा सीपुरूषसंयोगात्‌ Yate प्रथा 
नपुरूषसंयोगात्‌ सरस्योत्पिः | इदानीं सङ्ेविभागदकशेना्थ॑माह | 


` प्रकृतेमेहान्स्ततोऽहंकारस्तस्मात्रण्वोडशकः 
तस्मादपि षोडशकात्‌ TANT: पच्बभूतानि । २२। 





प्रकृतिः प्रधानं प्रस were बहधानकं मायेति पम्पायाः | अतिगङ्गस्य प्रकृ 
तैः सकाशान्महानुत्यद्यते महान्‌ बुहिरासुरी मततिः waiter प्रज्ञापम्यो 
यैरूत्यद्यते तस्माचमहतोऽहंकार उत्यद्यतेऽहंकारो भूतादिवेकृतस्ैजसोभि 
मान इति पथ्यायाः तस्मात्रणश्चषोडशकः तस्मादहंकाराख्छोदशकःबोडशस्वं 
रूपेणगण उत्पद्यते। स यथा। पञ्बतन्माचाणि शब्टतन्माचं STATS रूप 
Tat एसतन्माभं गन्धतन्माचमिति । तन्माचसूष््पम्यायवाच्यानि। तते 
एकादशेन्द्रियाणि std चक्‌ weet frat प्राणमिति पञ्च बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि | 
वाक्‌ पाणिपादपायूपरस्थाः पथ्चकर्ममन्द्रियार्युभयात्मकमेकादशं मन एषः 
बोडशको गणोऽहंकाराटुत्यदयते | किंच पञ्चभ्यः capi तस्माद्छोदश 
WUT पञ्चभ्यस्तन्माचेम्यः TANT पञ्ड वै महाभूतान्ुन्पद्यन्ते | यदकं 
शष्टतन्माभादाकाशं स्यशेतन्माजादवायुः STATINS: रसतन्मा्ादापः 
गन्धतन्माभात्‌ पृथिवी एवं पञ्डभ्यः परमाणुभ्यः पञ्चमहाभूतान्युत्यद्यनो | 
युक्त TET satay इति तज महदादिभूतान्तं भयोविंश्तिभेदं 
व्याख्याक्तमव्यक्षमपि भेदानां परिमाणादित्यादिना व्याख्यातं पुरुबोऽपि 
संधातपरा्थेलारित्यादिमिर्हेतुभिष्या ख्यातः | एवमेतानि पञ्चविंशति तता 


- ca] 
नि eae स्वाप्नं जानाति तस्य भावोऽस्तित्वं तत्वं चोक्तं । पश्चविंशति 
Wet मभतभाच्मेरतः | जटी Beet शिली वाऽपि मुच्यते नाज संशयः । 
हानि यथा परकृतिः पुरूषो बुचिरहकारः wear एकादणेन्दरियाणि 
पष्दमहाभूतानि इत्येतानि पञ्चविंशति तत्वानि । we प्रकृतेमेहानुन्पदयते 
तस्य महतः किं लकछणमित्येतदाह | 


warrant बुदिम्भो सानं विराग Dadi 
साव्विकमेतदूपं तामसमस्माशिपम्पैस्तं | २३ | 





ऋष्यवसायो बुद्धिलक्षणं | अध्यवसनमधष्यवसायः यथा वीजे भविष्यबृ्ति 
कोऽङकरस्तदवदष्यवसायोऽयंघटोऽयंपद इत्येवं स्यति या सा बुद्धिरितितकष्यते 
सा च बुध्धिरष्टाङ्धिका साव्विकतामसरूपभेदात्‌ तज बुद्धेः साविकं रूपं चतु 
विधं भवति waht ज्ञानं वेराग्यभेश्वग्य चेति तथ धम्मो नाम दया दान 
यम नियमलषणस्सणयमानियमाश् ones shitter अहिंसा सत्यास्तेम 
प्रहमचग्भौपरिपहा यमाः शौचसंतोषत्तपः स्वाध्यायेश्वरप्रणिधानियमाः | 
ज्ञानं प्रकाशोऽवगमो भानमिति पम्योयास्तच्चिविषं बाह्ममाभ्यन्तरं चेति | 
we नाद्यं नाम वेदाः शिक्षा कस्यो व्याकरणं निरुक्त छम्दोज्योतिषाण्यष 
इज्गसहिताः पुराणानि न्यायमीमांसाधम्मेशस््ाणि चेति । आभ्यमारं प्रकु 
तिपुरूषञ्लानमियं प्रकृतिः सत्वरजस्तमसां साम्यावस्थाऽयं युरुषः सिद्धो नि 
spared चेतन इति । तच बाह्ज्ञानेन लोकपंक्तितमोकानुराग इत्यः | 
ऋआभ्यनरेण ल्ानेन मोक इत्यधेः । वैराग्यमपि विविधं गाद्यमाभ्यनारंच 
जाद्यं दष्टविषययेतृष्णयमजेनरष्टण्षयसंगदहिसादोषद्ेनात्‌ froma 
न्तरं प्रधानमण्यभस्वभेन्दजात्सष्टशमिति FACET मोधेष्सो येदुत्प्यते तदा 
wert Ford) रेश्व्येमीश्वरभावस्तश्चा्टगुखमणिमा महिमा गर्मिा ल 
fren inf: प्राकाम्यमीशित्वं वशित्वं यजथकामावसायित्वं चेति । अणोभा 


cad 


बोऽणिमा wat भूत्वा जगति विचरतीति । महिमा महान्‌ भूत्वा चिच 
रतीति । after quieras warn पुष्यकेसरासेष्यपि 
तिति । प्राप्निरभिमतं वस्तु यथ तथावस्थितः प्राप्नोति । प्राकाम्यं प्रका 
मत्तो यदेवेष्यति तदेव विदधाति । ईशित्वं प्रभुतया जैतटोख्पमपीरे । वशित्वं 
सै वशीभवि | यभैकामावसायित्वं बरहमादिस्तश्पग्येमां यथ काभसचैवास्य 
स्वेच्छया स्यानासनविहारानाचरतीति । चत्वार एतानि Te: सालिकानि 
पाणि यदा सविन रजस्तमसी aia तदा पुमान्‌ बुद्धिगुणान्‌ धम्मो 
दीनाप्नोति । किंचान्यत्‌ तामसमस्माधिपय्येस्लमस्मादम्मेदेविधरीतं ता 
मसं gfaad तजर धम्मौशिपरीतोऽधम्मै रखवमक्चानमवैराग्यमनेश्वयेमि 
ति। एवं साव्विकैस्तामसे स्वरूपैरष्टांगा बुद्धिस्िगुणादब्यक्तादुत्यदयते | एवं 
जुद्धिलक्षणमुकमहंकारल छणमुच्यते | 





अभिमानोऽहंकारस्तस्माद्िविधः मवत सगः 
एकाद्शकश्चगणस्तन्माजः TTR । २४। 





एकादशकश्चगण एकादशेन्द्रियाणि तथा तन्माचो गरः पञ्चकः Tee 
णोपेतः WENA स्यशेतन्माषरूपतन्माभरसतन्माचगन्धान्माभलक्षशो 
पेतः किं लक्षणात्‌ समे इत्येतटाह । 





सात्विक एकादशकः Hale वैकृतादहंकारात्‌ 

भूतादिस्वम्माभः सतामसक्तेजसादुभयं । २५1 
सत्वनाभिभूते यदा रजस मसी अहंकार भवतस्तदा सोऽहटंकारः सालिकस्तस्य 
च Taree संसा कृता वैकृतं इति तस्माषिकृतादहंकारादेकादशक इष्ड 


[{ २ 1 


अगण उत्पद्यते । तस्मात्‌ साविकानि विषुदधानीन्दरियाणि स्वविषयसम 
चानि तस्मादुच्यते सालिक एकादशकं इति । रिंचान्यञूलदिष्तन्माचः स 
Wee: तमसाभिभूते सत्रजसी अहंकारे यदा भवतः सोहंकारस्तामस 
wat तस्य पृदचाग्येकुता सज्ञा भूतारिष्तस्माञ्जूतादेरहंकारासन्माजः 
पशो गण उत्पद्यते भूतानामादिभूतस्तमोबहुलनल्लेनोक्षः स तामस 
इति । तस्माजजूतादिः पथ्तन्माचको गणः किंच तैजसादुभयं यदा रजसा 
fot साचतमसषी भवतस्तदा तस्मात्‌ सोऽहंकारस्तेजस इतति संसां लभते 
तस्मा्तैजसादुभयमुत्पद्ति । उभयमिति एकादशो गणस्तन्माभः Tee । 
योऽयं सालिरोऽहंकारो Spire: वैकृतो भूत्वा एकादशेन्दरियाययुत्पाद्मति 
स तिजसमहंकारं सहायं गृह्धाति साष्विको निःक्छियः स गैजसयुक्त इन्दि 
यीत्पत्तौ समथः तथा तामसोऽहंकारो भूलादिः सञ्चितो निःक्रिमलातेजसेना 
हकारेण क्रियावता युक्स्तन्माभाययुत्यादयति Ware तेजसाटुभयमिति 
एवं गजसेनाहंकरेशैन्दियाण्ये कादश पथ्डतन्माचाणि कृतानि भवन्ति सा 
लिक एकादशकं BW: यो वैकृतात्‌ साविकादहं काराटुत्यद्यते तस्य का 
Bare | 


बुद्ीन्दरियाणि चुः च्रोषघ्राणरसनस्यशेनकानि 
वाङ्पाणिपादपायूषस्यान्‌ कर्ममन्द्रियाण्याहुः । २६। 





चक्षुरादीनि स्यशेनपम्येन्तानि बुद्ीन्दियारयुध्यन्ते। स्पृश्यत अनेनेति arte 
त्वगिन्द्रियं wart सिद्धः स्यशेनशब्टोऽस्ति तेनेदं पक्यते स्यशेनकानीति 
शष्धस्यशेरूपरसगन्धान्‌ पञ्रविषयान्‌ बुध्यन्त wera पच्छ galt 
न्द्रियाणि | वाकूपाणिपादपायूपस्थान्‌ wafer: कम्मं कुेमीति 
करम्दरियाणि । तच वाग्‌वदति हस्तौ नानाब्यापारं कुरूतः पादौ गमना 
गमनं पायुस्छगे करोति उपस्थ आनन्दं प्रजोत्पत्या । एवं Tele 


{ 8] 


द्दियभेदेन दरेष्दरियाशि प्याख्यातानि मन cares किमात्मकं किं स्वर्यं 
चेति तदुच्यते । 


उनमाभक्मनमनः संकस्पकमिष्दरियं च साधब्म्यात्‌ 
गुणपरिशामविेषाजानात्वं TEATS । २७ । 


wiht मन उभयात्मक बुदीन्दरयिषु बुञीन्दरियवत्‌ कर्ममन्दरेषु कर्म 
fray कस्माह्ुखीन्दरियाणां rahe कत्ययति कर्ममन्दरियाशां च तस्मादुभ 
यार्‌ ममः संकस्ययतीति Ree! किचान्यदिन्दरियं च साधम्म्यात्‌ समा 
arabian सालिकाहंकाराबुदीष्दरियाणि कर्ममैन्दरियाणि मनसा सहोत् 
दमानानि मनसः साधम्म्य प्रति तस्मात्साध्म्योन्मनोऽपीन्दरियमेवमेत्तान्य 
काटशेन्द्रियाणि साव्िकेकृताटहंकाराटुत्यज्नानि | तभ मनसः का वृ्िरि 
ति। संकल्यो ofa: बुद्धीन्दरियाणां weet वृक्षः कर्ममन्दरियाखां वचना 
दयोऽथेतानीन्दरियाणि fret भिनाथेपाहकाणि fete स्वभा 
वेन कृतानि यतः प्रभानवुद्यहंकारा चेतना पुरूषोऽप्यकर्तैत्यजाह | इह 
सांख्यानां स्वभावो नाम कशित्कारशमस्ति | अभोध्यते गुणमरिणामविशे 
षानानाल्वं बाद्यमेदाश्च | इमान्येकादशेन्द्रियाणि शष्टस्यशरूपरसगन्धाः पश्चा 
नां वचनादानविहरणोतसगानन्दाश्च पञ्चानां dare मनस एवमेते भि 
ज्ानामेवेन्दरियाणामथोः गुपरिणामविशेषात्‌ गुणानां परिणामो गुणप 
रिणामस्हस्य विशेषादिन्द्रिपाणां नानात्वं बाद्याेभेदाश्च । attract 
FRY ACA न बुद्धा नप्रभानेन नपुरूषेण स्वभावात्कृहगुणपरि 
शामेनेति | गुणानामचेतनत्वाकप्रवकेते writ एव कथं वष्यतीहैववास 
frafatafad छीरस्य यथा परवृच्िरह्ञस्य पुरुषस्य विमोक्षार्थं तथा wy 
fe प्रधानस्य | एवमचेषना गुणा एकादशेष्डरियभावेन प्रवेशे विशेषा 
ऽपि कृत खव TAT प्रदेशे wey खलोकनायस्थिहं तथा wre तणा 
whe तणा frat स्वदेशे स्वाथेयहशाय । रवे कर्ममेद्द्रियाख्यपि यथायं 








{ रेप} 


स्वा्थसमधानि स्वदेशावस्थितानि स्वभावतो गुखपरिणामविरेषादेवं न 
त्दथो शपि यत Se शास््रानरे । गुणा Vy वनते गुणानां या वृत्तिः 
at गुणविषया wate वाह्याथा विज्ञेया गुखकृता णवेत्यधेः । प्रधानं यस्य 
कारणमिति । wafer कस्य का वृक्िरित्युध्यते । 


शब्दादिषु पञ्ानामात्ोचनमामिष्यते वृतिः 
वचनादानविहरणोत्सगोानन्दा्चपब्डानाम्‌ । २४। 





Brrr विशेषार्थः! अविशेषष्यावृत्यथो यथा भिक्षा मानं लभ्यते नान्यो 
विशेष इति । तथा we रूपमाभे न रसादिषु एवं रेषाण्यपि तद्या 
AA रूपं जिद्धाया रसो भ्राणस्य गन्धः शरोभस्य शष्ट त्वचः TE: | एव 
मेषां बुडीन्दरिाणां gfe: कथिता कर्ममन्द्रियाशां वृक्तिः कष्यते वचनादा 
नविहरणोष्सगानन्दाश्चपश्ानां कर्ममन्दरियाणामित्यथेः | वाचो वचनं हस्त 
योरादानं पादयोविहरणं पायोभुक्स्याहारस्यपरिणतो मलोत्सगैः उप 
स्यस्यानन्दः सुतोत्पकषि्विंषया वृत्तिरिति awe: । अधुना वुश्यहंकारमन 
सामुच्यते | 


स्वालक्षण्यं वृच्चिस्रयस्य सेषा भवत्यसामान्या 
सामान्यकरणवृ्धिः प्राणाद्या वायवः TT । २९1 





स्वल्णस्वभाया स्वालष्षण्या TATA यो बुद्धिरितिलक्षणमुकतं सेव 
afagte: । तथाऽभिमानोऽहंकार इत्यभिमानलक्षणोऽभिमानवृतिशच | 
संकस्यकं मन इति लक्षणमुक्तं तेन संकस्य टव मनसो gfe | भयस्य 
बुद्यहंकारमनसां स्वाल््षण्या वृ्तिरसामान्या या प्रागभिहिता बुद्धीन्द्रिय 
शां च gfe: साऽपयसामान्येवेति | इदानीं सामान्या वृ्षिराष्यायते | सा 


[ २& 1 


मान्थकरणएवृ्लिः सामान्येन करणानां Ze प्राणाद्या वायवः पंच प्रणापा 
नक्षमानोदानव्याना इति पञ्च वायवः सर्न्दरियाणां सामान्या वृियेत्तः। 
प्राणो नाम वायुमौखनासिकान्तर्मोचरस्तस्य यत्‌ स्यन्दनं कम्मं तत्‌ जयो 
दशविधस्याऽपि सामान्या ofa: सति प्राणे यस्मात्‌ करणानामात्मत्ताभ 
इति । प्राशोऽपि पञ्चरशकुनि वत्‌ सदस्य word करोतीति । प्राणनात्‌ 
प्राण इत्युच्यते | तथाऽपनयनादपानस्तज यत्यन्दनं weft सामान्यवृत्ति 
Fen तथा समानो ANT य ्ाहारादिनयनात्समं नयनात्‌ समा 
नो वायुस्त् Tera तत्‌ सामान्यकरणवृ्तिः । तथा ऊउपष्बरोहणादुत्क 
agar उदानो नाभिदेशमस्तकान्तर्गोचरस्तजोदाने werd तत्‌ 
wifearat सामान्या gfe: । किंच शरीरष्यापरिरभ्यन्तरविभागश्च येन 
क्रियतेऽसौ शरीरब्याप्याकाश्वद्यानस्तज यत्‌ स्यन्दनं तत्‌ करणजालस्य 
सामान्या वृक्लिरिति । एवमेते पञ्चवायवः सामान्यकरणवृत्तिरिति sen 
त्ता योदश्विधस्यापि करणसामान्या वृ्षिरित्य्थैः । 





युगपञ्चतुष्टयस्य तु gfe: ware तस्म निर्दिष्टा 
टे meres चयस्य ततपूर्धिंका वृक्तिः । ३०। 





युगपञ्चतुष्टयस्य बुद्यहंकारमनसाभेककेन्दरियसणन्धे सति चतुष्टयं भवति चतु 
हयस्य दृष्टे प्रतिविषयाध्यवसाये युगपशृतिवुद्यहं कारमनश्वसूंषि wae 
कात्र रूपं पश्यति स्याणुरयमिति । बुद्यहंकारमनोजिड्धा pros गृहः 
न्ति । बुद्यहंकारमनोध्राणानि युगपत्रन्धं गृह्यन्त । तथा त्वर्श्रोचे छपि । 
किंच ऋमशश्चतस्य निदा तस्येति चतुष्टयस्य कमश वृ्तिभेवतति । यथा 
कश्चित्‌ पथि गछन्‌ दूरादेव दषा aged पुरूषो वेति संश्ये सति नोप 
wai तिङ्क पश्यति शकुनिं वा ततो तस्य मनसा संकस्यिते संशये ष्यव 
खेदभूता जुद्धिभैवति स्थाणुरयमित्यतोऽदहंकारश्च निश्चयार्थः areas 


[ 29 ] 


बुद्यहंकारमनश्चल्ुषां कमशो gfeter यथा रूपे तथा शब्धादिष्वपि जो 
war हे हष्टविषये । िंचान्य्चथाऽप्यहषटे चयस्य तत्पूर्विका वृ्तिरहष्टेऽना 
गतेऽतीते च काले बुद्यहंकारमनसां रूपे we: ofan जयस्य gfe: art 
त्वङ्पूष्िका गन्धे भ्राणपूिका रसे रसनपूशिका शब्दे अवणपूर्िका qed 
कारमनसामनागते भविति कालेऽतीते च तेत्‌ gitar went वृं 
जमाने युगपत्‌ waa | किंच । 


स्वां स्वां प्रतिपद्यनो परस्पराकूतरेतुकां oft 
qed एव हेतुन केनचित्‌ कारयेत करणं । ३२। 





स्वां स्वामिति वीप्सा वुद्हंकारमनांसि ei स्वां gfe थरस्यराकूतहेतुका 
माकूत काटरसम्भम इति प्रतिपद्यनो पुरुषाथेकरणाय | वुदधेरहंकारादयी 
बुद्धिरहंकाराूतं जात्वा स्वस्वविषयं प्रतिपद्यते किमथेमिति चेत्‌ पुरुषार्थं 
एव हेतुः Jers: कव्य इत्येवमर्थं गुणानां प्रवृिस्तस्मदेततानि करणानि 
पुरुषार्थं प्रकाशयन्ति कथं स्वयं rata न केनचित्‌ weit करणं पुरु 
धा एवेकः कारयतीति वाक्याथो न केनचिदीश्वरेण पुरुषेण कार्यते प्रो 
ष्यते करणं gente कतिविधं तरित्युख्यते | 


करणं षयोटशविधं तदाहरणधारणप्रकाशकरं 
कार्ये च तस्य द्श्धाहाच्ये धाय्ये प्रकाश्यं च । ३२। 





करणं महदादि अयोदशविधं tres पंचवुद्धीन्द्रियाणि wads पंच 
कर्ममद्दरियाणि वागादीनीति चयोद्श्विधं करणं तत्कि करोती्येतदाह तदा 
हरणधारणप्रकाशकरं । TERY धारणं च कर्ममन्दरियाणि कुन्ति प्रकाशं 


{ ख 1 
बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि । कतिविधं कास्थे तस्येति तदुच्यते । काम्ये च तस्य दशभा 
तस्य करणस्य काव्ये केष्यमिति दशधा दशप्रकारं शब्डस्यशेरूपरसगन्धाख्यं 
वचनादानविहरणोत्सगौनन्दाख्यमेतदशविषं काय्यं बुदीन्दरेः प्रकाशितं 
कर्म्मैन्दरिमाणया्रन्ति धारयन्ति चेति | 





अन्तः करणं जिविधं दशधा नाद्यं जयस्य विषयाख्यं 
` साम्प्रतकात्करं are चिङालमाभ्यन्तरं करणं | ३३ | 





सन्तः करणमिति बुद्धहंकारमनांसि जिविधं महदादिभेदात्‌ | दशधा बाह्यं 
च बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि पञ्च करममन्दरियाणि पञ्च दशविधमेतत्करणं are तथय 
स्यान्तः करणस्य विषयाख्यं बुद्यहंकारमनसां भोग्यं साम्प्रतकालं चोषं 
वक्तेमानमेव we शृणोति नातीतं न च भविष्यन्तं wei stat रूपं 
पश्यि नातीतं नानागतं areata स्यशे frat ater रसं नासिका 
qa गन्धं नातीतानागतं चेति । एवं कर्म्मन्द्रियाणि वाग्वचेमानं शष्ट 
सुच्लारयति anita नानागतं पाणी ater धटमाददाते नाततीत्तमना 
मततं च पादौ वमानं पन्थानं विहरतो anit नाणनागतं पायूपस्थौ च 
वह्नेमानावुन्सगीनन्दौ Fett नातीत्तौ नानागत्तौ । णवं aT करणं साम्पर 
तकातममुक्ं भिकाल माभ्यन्तरं करणं बुद्यहंकारमनांसि जिकालविषयाणि 
बु्िवे्ेमानं घटं बुध्यत अतीतमनागतं चेति । अहंकारो वहेमानेऽभि 
मानं करोत्यतीतेऽनागते च । तथा मनो ata संकस्यं कुरुत अतीतेऽ 
जागते च एवं भिकात्छमाभ्यन्तरं करणमिति । इदानीमिन्दरियाणि कति 
सविशेषं विषयं गृहयति कानि निविंशेषमिति तटुच्यते । 





Ce] 


जुधीद्दरियाणि तेषां पञ्च विशेषाविशेषविषयाणि 
वाग्भवति शष्टविषया शेषाणि तु पञ्चविषयाणि । ३६। 





बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि तानि सविशेषं विषयं ef सविशेषविषयं मानुषाण 
शब्ट्स्पशैरूपरसगन्धान्‌ सुखटुःलमोहविषययुक्तान्‌ बुद्धीन्द्रियाणि प्राणा 
यन्ति देवानां निर्विंशेषान्विषयान्‌ प्रकाशयन्ति तथा कर्म्मेद्धरियाणां मध्ये 
वाग्भवति शब्ट्विषया देवानां मानुषाणां च वाग्वदति छोकादीनुञ्चारयति 
तस्मादेवानां मानुषाणां च वागिन्द्रियं तुस्यं शेषाण्यपि वाग्ब्यतिरिक्तानि 
पाणिपादपायूषस्थसस्ितानि पष्डविषयाणि पञ्चविषयाः शब्दादयो येषां 
तानि पथ्विषयाणि शष्दस्पशेरूपरसनन्धाः पाणौ सन्ति पश्चशब्दादिले 
छायां भुवि पादो विहरति पायिन्दियं पंचङुप्मु्सभं करोति तथोपस्थे 
feat पञ्चलक्षण शुक्रमानन्दयति | 





सान्तःकरणा जुद्धि at विषयमवगाहते यस्मात्‌ 
तस्मात्‌ जिविधं करणं हारि छाराणि शेषाणि । ३५। 





सान्तःकरणा नबुचिरहंकारमनः सहितेत्यथेः यस्मात्‌ af विषयमवगारे 
गुह्ाति चिष्वपि कालेषु शब्डादीन्‌ गुह्धाति तस्मान्िविधं करणं aft 
arora शेषाणि शेषाणि करणानीति काक्यरेषः । किंचान्यत्‌ | 





एते प्रदीपङ्स्याः परस्परविकश्षणा गुणविशेषाः 
कृतसं पुरुषस्याथे प्रकाश्य बुद्धो प्रयच्छन्ति । ३६ । 





मानि करणान्युक्तानि एते गुणविशेषाः किं fafeer प्रदीमकल्पाः प्रदीप 


{ 30 J 
वदिषयप्रकाशकाः utero ween firafnra इत्यथः । गुण 
विषया इत्यथः ¦ गुणविगेषा गुणेभ्यो जाताः । कृत्लं पुरुषस्याथ बुडीन्दरिया 
fu कर्ममन्दियाण्यहंकारो acini स्वं स्वमथे पुरुषस्य प्रकाश्य वुद्धौ 
smear तुधस्थं कुषन्तीत्यथेः । यत्तो बुद्धिस्थं af विषयं सुखादिकं पुरुष 
SAHA | ATT | 


स प्त्युपभोगं यस्मात्‌ पुरुषस्य साधयति बुद्धिः 
सैव च विशिनष्टि पुनः प्रधानपुरूषान्तरं Fe । २७ । 





सन्धिगतं frat weg af प्रत्युपभोगमुपभोगं प्रति देवमनु 
तिम्येग्‌ जुदधीन्दियकर्ममन्दरियच्ारेण सान्तः करणा बुद्धिः साधयति सम्पादयति 
यस्मात्‌ तस्मात्‌ सेव च विशिनष्टि प्रधानपुरुषयोविषयविभागं करोति 
प्रधानपुरुषानारं नानात्वमित्यथेः । सु्भित्यनधिकृततपश्चरशेरपराष्य इयं 
प्रकृतिः arora साम्यावस्था इयं बुद्धिरयमहंकार एतानि पंच 
तन्माभारयेकादशेन्दरियाणि पंचमहाभूतान्ययमन्यः पुरूष रभ्यो ष्यनिरिक्ष 
इत्येव योधयति बुद्धिर्यस्यावापाद्पवर्गो भवति । qinge चिशेषाविशेषवि 
warfa तत्‌ के विषयास्च्चदशयति । 


तन्माभाख्यविशेषास्तेभ्यो भूतानि TT पञ्चभ्यः 
रते स्मृता विशेषाः wa घोरा मूढाश्च । 3! 





यानि पंच तन्माभागयहंकाराटुत्यद्यनो ते शण्ट्लन्माचं स्यशेतन्मातं रपत 
aad रसतन्माचं गन्धतन्माचमेतान्यविशेषा उच्यन्ते देवानामेते YAS 
aa विषया eateries: areas: पञ्चमहाभूतानि 
पृथिष्यपिजावायुकाशसञ्चानि aregrrert । एते स्मृता विशेवाः। गन्धतन्मा 


Cc 34] 


जात्‌ पृथिवी रसतन्माभादापो STATA: स्यशेतम्मावाजञायुः we 
तन्माभादाकाशमित्येवमुत्यजन्यितानि महाभूतान्येते विरेषा मानुषाणां वि 
षयाः UAT सुखलश्षणा योरा SAU मूढा मोहजनका यथाकाशं 
कस्यचिदनवकाशादनगृहादेरनिगेतस्य सुखात्मकं शन्तं भवति तदेवं शी 
नोष्णवातववोभिभूलस्य दुःखात्मकं घोरं भवति तदेव पन्थानं गच्छतो वन 
apie weet fee मोहान्मूढं wafined वायुधेम्मेहेस्य शानो भवति 
शीतस्य घोरो धूलीशङ्षराविभिच्ोऽतिवान्‌ मूढ इति । णवं तेजः प्रभू 
ततिषु ह्यं । अथाऽन्ये विशेषाः । 


सूषा मातापितृजाः सहमभूतैस्िधा विरेषाः स्युः 
सूच्छाल्तेषां नियतता माक्तापितृज्ञा frat ise: 





मूच्छाल्लन्माजाणि यत्तगृहीतं तन्माभिकं सूष्छशरीरं महदादिलिङ्गं सदा 
तिष्टति संसरतिच ते मूष्मास्तथामातापितृजा स्थूल शएरीरोपचायका च्छतु 
Wer मातापितृसंयोगे शोणित्तशुक्रमिश्ीभनावेनोदरान्तः सूष्छशरीरस्योप 
चयं दुर्गति तत्‌ सूष्छश्रीरं पुनमातुरश्तिपीतनानाविधरसेन नाभीनि 
अन्धेनाप्यायते तणाप्यारन्यं शरीरं सू्मीमातापितृजेख सहमष्टाभूतिस्निधायि 
षेः पृष्टोद्रजंधाकट्मुरः शिरः प्रभृति षाट्‌ Shes पञ्चभोगिकं रूधिरमांस 
ज्लायुशुक्रास्यिमज्जसंभृतमा काणशोऽवकाशटानाायु वेदनात्‌ तेजः घाकादापः 
संयहन्पृथिवी धारणात्‌ समस्तावयवोपेततं मातुरूदराइहिभवति | एवमेते 
जिविधा विशेषा स्युः। sore के नित्याः के वाऽनित्याः सूषमास्तेषांनियताः 
सूद्छास्तन्माभससकाल्तेषां म्ये नियता feral शरीरं कम्मेवश्णत्‌ 
पषमृगपश्चिसरीसुपस्यावरजातिषु संसरति धम्मेवशारि्द्रकादिल्मोक्वुवभेत 
नियतं मूष्छशरीरं सरि यावत्‌ ज्ञानमुत्पद्यते उत्पन्ने चाने विदारीं 
ret मों गच्छति तस्मदेते विशेषा quar नित्या इति मातापितृजा 


[{ ॐ } 


निवशैनी तत्‌ quent परित्यज्येहेव प्राणत्यागवेत्वायां मात्तापितुजा नि 
ata मरणकात्ते मातापितृजं शरीरमिंहवनिवस्त्यै भूम्यादिषु प्रतीयते 
यथा तत्वं सूश्छं च कथं संसरति तदाह । 


"kiss नियतं महदादिसूष्मपम्यन्तं 
-संसरति निरूपभोगं भावैरधिवासितं fszi । ४०। 





यदा त्लोकाऽनृत्यन्नाः प्रधानादिसर्गे तदा सूष्छशरीरसुत्यन्मिति । किंचान्य 
दसकं न संयुक्तं निग्येग्योनिदेवमानुषस्यानेषु सू त्वात्‌ कुभचिदसक्तं TAT 
दिषुमतिहतम्रसरं acta गच्छति । नित्यं यावनज्ञानमुत्यद्यते तावत्‌ संसरति 
wa महदादिमूष्छपग्येन्तं महानादी यस्य तन्महदादि बुद्धिरंहकारो मन 
इति पञ्च तन्माचाणि सूष्छपम्येनं areas संसरति णूलयहपिपीलि 
कावत्‌ चीनपि लोकान्‌ | निरूपभोगं भोगरहितं तत्‌ सूच्छश्रीरं पितृमा 
तृजेन बाल्येनोपचयेन क्रियाधम्मेमहणाट्‌ भोगेषु समथ भवत्तीत्यधेः । भावै 
रधिवासितं पुरस्ताङ्ावान्‌ धम्भादीन्‌ वष्यामल्तेरधिवासितसुपरजितं लि 
गमिति । प्रलयकाले महदासूष्मपय्यन्तं करणोपेतें प्रधाने लीयत असंस 
WR सदासगकालमचवरेते प्रकृततिमोहबन्धनव्ं सत्‌ संसरणादिक्रियासुस 
मथेमिति पुनः सगकाले संसरति तस्माखिंगं qed । किं प्रयोजनेन भयो 
दशविधं करणं संसरततीत्येवं afer सत्याह । 


fat यथाश्रयमृते स्थारादिभ्यो यथा विना छाया 
त्डिना विशेेने तिति निराश्रयं fri । ४१। 





fad वचा कुढपाच्रयमृते न तिष्ठति स्यारादिभ्यः कीलकादिभ्यो विना 


{ 33 ] 

हाया न तिष्ठति तैर्विना न भवत्यादिमहणाद्यथा शेत्यं विना नापो भवन्ति 
ari वाऽजरिर्विना | अग्निरुष्णं विना वायुः स्यशेविना आका्मवकाणं 
विना पृथिवी गन्धं विना watts दष्टानोन न्यायेन विना विशेषैरविरशेषै 
waft न तिष्ठति । अथ विशेवभूतान्युच्यन्ते शरीरं पंचभूतमयं 
वैशेषिणा शरीरेण विना कु लिङ्गस्थानं चेति क एक्देहमुज्कति Wear 
समाश्रयति निरा्यमाश्वयरहितं लिङ्गं जयोदश विधं करणभित्यथेः । किं 
मथ तदुच्यते | 


पुरूषाथेेतुकमिदं निमिशनेभितिक्प्रसंगेन 
प्रकृतोर्वमुलयोगान्नटवद्यवतिष्ठते तविंगं । ४२ । 





पुरुषार्थः wie इति प्रधानं rata स च हिविधः शष्टादयुपलश्धिलषषणो 
गुणपुरषान्तरोपल्ख्खिभोष्ष इति तस्मादुक्त पुरूषाथेहेतुकमिद्‌ं सूष्खशरीरं 
प्रवे इति । निभिनेमितिकप्रसंगेन निमितं waite नैमिलिकमूर्ुग 
मनादि पुरस्तदेव व्यामः प्रसंगेन प्रसक््या प्रकृतेः प्रधानस्य विभुत्बयो 
गायथा राजा aoe विभुत्वादयदयदिव्छति त्त्‌ करोतीति तथा प्रकृतिः 
सदरेभविनुवयोगान्निमिसषमैमिचिक्परसंगेन व्यवतिष्ठते पृथक्‌ पृथग्देहधारणे 
लिङ्गस्य व्यवस्थां करोति । त्किं ger: परमाशुभिसन्माचैरूपचिततं शरीरं 
जयोटशचिधकरणोपेतं मानुषदेवततिम्येग्योनिषु व्यवतिष्ठते कथं नटवत्‌ सथा 
नटः पटान्तरेण प्रविश्य देवो भूत्वा निर्गच्छति gaan: पुनचिदुषकः । 
एवं fart निभिहनैमिसिकप्रसंगेनोदरान्तः प्रविश्य हस्ती et पुमान्‌ भव 
ति । भावैरधिवासितं लिंगं संसरतीत्युकतं तत्‌ के भावा इत्याह । 


{ ३४ 1 


सांसिदिकाशचभावाः प्राकृतिका वैकृतिकाणधम्मोचाः 
हृष्टाः करणाश्रयिणः काग्याश्चयिणद्च कललाद्याः । ४३) 





भावास्िविधाश्चित्यनते सांसिद्धिकाः प्राकृता Sarre । तच सांसिद्धिक 
यथा भगवतः कपित्यस्यादिसगे उत्पद्यमानस्य चत्वारो भावाः सरोत्पन्ना 
धर्म्मो ज्ञानं चैराग्यमेच्ग्येमिति । प्राकृताः कथ्यन्ते MATIN: पुजा 
सनक्सनंदनसनातनसनत्कुमारा बभूवुः तेषामुत्पन्रकाग्येकारणानां शरीरि 
शां षोडश्रवषाणामेते भावाश्चतारसमुन्यनास्तस्मादेते प्राकृताः । तथा 
चैकृता यथा आचाग्येमूततिनिमिरं कृतवाऽस्मदादीनां ज्ञानमत्यद्यते जान 
राग्यं वैराग्यादम्मो धम्मोदेश्ग्येभिति । आचाम्येमूललिरपि विकृतिरिति 
तस्मिकृता रुते भावा उध्यन्ते येरधिवासितं लिंगं dale चारो 
भावाः साबिकास्तामसाविपरीताः सात्विकमेतदूपं तामसमस्माधिषग्येस्त 
मित्यच व्याख्याता एवमष्टौ धम्मो ज्ञानं वेराग्यमेश्वम्येमधम्भोऽस्षानमवैरा 
ग्ममनिश्वग्येमित्य्टौ भावाः । क वर्षेन दष्टाः करणाश्रयिणो बुद्धिः करणं 
meaty: । एतदुक्षमध्यवसायो बुधिः धर्म्मो सानमिति काय्यं देहस्तदा 
याः Foon ये मातृजा we शुक्रशोणितसंयोगे विवृदिदेतुकाः 
कलत्र बु्ुदमांसपेशीप्रभृतयः तथा कीमारयोवनस्यविरत्वाटयो भावा 
ऋअनपानरसनिमिशा fort अतः काग्याश्रयिण उच्यन्त अन्नारिविषय 
भोगनिमित्ता जायनो | निमिनैमिलषिकग्रसगेनेति agra | 


धर्म्मेण गमनमू गमनमघस्ताञ्जवत्यपमम्भेण 
ज्ञानेन चापवभो विषय्यैयादिष्यते बन्धः । ४४ । 





wate गमनमू wet निमितं कृतोदधुमुपनयति agit स्थानानि 


{ ३५ } 


गृह्यन्ते तद्यथा । are प्राजापत्यं Maa गान्ध याक्षं राक्षसं पेशाच 
मिति तत्‌ सृषं शरीरं गच्छति पशुमृगपक्षिसरीसृपस्यावरानोषुभम्भौ नि 
भिरं । किंच ज्ञानेन चापवगैश्च पञ्दविंशति तत्वजषानं तेन निमिक्ेनापव 
भो Arey: ततः qed शरीरं निवत परमात्मा उच्यते । विय्येयादिष्यते 
अन्ध ward निमितं सैष Afar प्राकृतो वैकारिको दाक्िणिकश्च 
बन्ध इति वष्टयति पुरस्ताद्यदिदमुक्तं प्राकृतेन च बन्धेन तणा वैकारिकेण 
च । दष्िणाभिस्तृतीयेन बद्धो नान्येन मुच्यते । तथाऽन्यदपि निमिं । 


वैराग्यात्‌ प्रकृतिल्यः संसारो भवति राजसाद्रागात्‌ 
शेश्म्यदविधातो विपस्यैयात्‌ तिपम्योसः । ४५। 





यथा कंस्यचिैराग्यमस्ति न तलज्लानं नस्मादज्ञानपूवैचिराग्यात्‌ प्रकृति 
त्रयो मृत्तोऽष्टासु प्रकृतिषु प्रपानवुद्यहंकारतन्मिषुं तीयते न मोषः 
ततो भूयोऽपि संसरति तथा योऽयं राजसो रागः यजामि दक्षिणां ददामि 
येनामुष्मिल्लोकेऽज ake मानुषं सुखमनुभवाम्ये्तस्मादराजसाद्रागात्‌ सं 
सारो भवति । तथा रेश्रग्याद्विघात्त एतदेष््येमष्टगुणमणिमादियुकं 
तस्मादेश्वग्येनिमि्लादविधातो नेमितचिको भवतति बद्यादिषु स्यानेष्वैश्ग्ये न 
विहन्यते । किंचान्यिपग्येयाचिपय्यौसः तस्याविघाततस्यविपम्सो विघातो 
waren aie विहन्यते। एष निभितैः सह नैमिधिकः षोदश्विधो 
ष्याख्यात्तः स किमात्मकं इत्याह । 


[ 3] 


एष wee विपम्येयाशक्तितु्टिसिद्याख्यः 
गुश वैषम्यविमा्‌ तस्य च भेदास्तु Gar । ४६ । 


यथा ष शगेदशविधो निमिनैभिधभेदो व्याख्यात एष MTT उच्यते | 
wen बुिरित्युक्षाऽष्यवसायो बुचिधंम्मो ज्ञानमित्यादि a च प्रत्यय 
समेतुधा भिद्यते विपम्येयाशक्तितुिसिद्धाख्यभेदात्‌ । तथ संशयो ऽ 
ज्ञानं । यथा कस्यचित्‌ स्थाणुदशेने स्थाणुरयं पुरूषो वेति संशयः । अश 
fet | तमेवस्याणं सम्य्हघ्रा संशयं दें न शङ्गोतीत्यशक्तिः । एवं 
तृतीयस्तुश्याख्यो यथा । तमेवस्याणुं जातुं संशयितुं वा नेति किमनेना 
स्माकभित्येषा तुष्टिः । चतुथः सिद्धाख्यो यणा । आ्ानन्दितिन्दियः erg 
मारूढां वलिं पश्यति शकुनिं वा तस्य सिद्धिर्भवति स्याणुरयमिति | एव 
मस्य चतुविधस्य प्र्ययसरगेस्य गुणवैषम्यविमंद तस्यभेदास्तु पश्चाशत्‌ योऽयं 
सल्रजस्तमोगुणानां Swan fad: तेन तस्य verter wate RET 
भवन्ति तथा कापि सत्वमुत्कटं भवति रजस्तमसी उदासीने कापि रजः 
कापि wa इति भेदाः wera । 





पंच विपय्येयभेदा भवन्यशक्षि्यकरणयेकस्यात्‌ 
अष्टाविंशतिभेदास्तुटिनेवधाऽषटधा सिद्धिः । ४७ । 





चंच विपम्येयमेदाल्लेयथा तमो मोहो महामोहस्वाभिच्रौऽन्धतामिख इत्ये 
षां भेदानां नानात्वं वष्यतेऽनन्तरमेवेति | अशक्तेसतुशाविंश्ति भेदा भवन्ति 
करश्वेकस्यात्‌ तानपि वध्यामस्तथा च तुष्टिनेवधा wears राजसानि 
ज्ञानानि) तथाविधा fate: साष्विकानि aria तचैवोरेश्नोतसि। एतेत्‌ 
अमेव tera तचविपम्ययभेट्‌ा उध्यन्ते | 


[{ 39 ] 


मेदस्तमसोऽशटविधो मोहस्य च दशविधो महामोहः 
तामिश्ोऽष्टदश्धा तथा भवत्यन्धत्ताभिखः । ४८। 





त्तमसस्तावदष्टधा भेदः प्रलयोऽज्ञानादिभज्यते सोऽष्टासु प्रकृतिषु sta 
प्रधानबुद्यहंकारपंचतन्माजाष्टासु तथ त्की नमात्मानं मन्यते मुक्कोहमिति 
तमो भेदं एषोऽष्टविधस्य मोहस्य भेदोऽटविध एवेत्यथेः । यजाष्टगुशमणि 
माध्य तज संगादिनद्रादयो देवा न मोषं प्रापरुवन्ति पुनखतत्‌ षये संस 
रेत्येषोऽष्टविघो मोह इति । दशविधो महामोहः शब्दस्पशेरूपरसगन्धा 
देवानामेते पंचविषयाः सुखलक्षणः मानुषाशामघेते एव शब्दादयः TT 
विया एवमेतेषु दशसु महामोह इति । त्तामिसोऽष्टदशधाऽष्टविधभेश्व्य 
हृष्टानुधविका विषया दश एतेषामष्टादश्णनां सम्यदमनुनन्दन्ति विषदं ना 
नुमोदन्येषोऽष्टादश्विधो विक्ल्यस्ताभिसो । मथा ताभिखमषटगुशमेश्वषय 
हष्टानु्विका दशविषयास्तणान्धत्तामिखोऽणष्टादशभेदं एवं किंतु विषयस 
Brat सभ्भोगकात्के य एव भियतेऽटगुरेष्चग्या्ा स्यते ततस्तस्य AEE: 
warren सोऽन्धताभिसर इति | एवं विपम्येयभेदास्तमः प्रभृतयः पंच WAS 
भिद्यमाना दिषििदाः azar ईति । अशक्तिभेदाः कथ्यने | 


एकाटशेन्द्रियबधा सह वुकिवधेरशक्तिरहिष्टा 
सप्रदशबधा वुद्धर्विपम्येयात्‌ तुष्टिसिद्धीनाम्‌ । ४९। 





भवत्यशक्तेश्च करणवैकस्यादशाविंशतिमेदा wee तत्ेकादरेन्दरिमबभाः 
जाधिम्यैमन्धताप्रसुभिरुपजिङ्धिकाप्राणपाको मूकता कुणित्वं साज्यं गुदा 
वचैः केवयमुन्भाद इति । सह बुद्धिवधेर्क्तिरुदिष्टा ये वुद्िवधाललेः सहाश 
केरष्टाविंशतिभेदा भवन्ति सप्रदशवधा वृद्धेः RETIN aerate 
भेदवैषरीत्येन तुषटिमेदा नव सि्विभेदा ष्टौ ये ते विपरीतैः सह एकाद 


{ ३४ ] 


विधा वमष्टाविंशतिविकूत्या अशक्छिरिति विपम्येयात्‌ सि्ितुष्टीनामेव 
eA TET । तज तु्टिनेवधा कथ्यते | 


BRAT: प्रकृत्युपादानकालभाग्याख्याः 
aren विषयोपरमात्‌ पंच नव तुशट्योऽभिमताः | ५०। 





आध्यात्मिकाश्चतसर तुषटयोऽष्या्मनि भवा आध्याप्मिका ATT प्रकृत्युपादा 
ASAP: । तथ प्रकृत्याख्या यथा कञ्चित्‌ प्रकृतिं वेति तस्याः 
सगुणनिगणत्वं च तेन तत्वं तत्‌ काय्य विन्ञायेव केवल तुष्टस्तस्य नात्ति 
मोष एषा प्रकृत्याखूया | उपादानाख्या यथा कश्चिट्विसलायैव तववान्युपादान 
महणं करोि भिदरहकमर्रटुविविदिकाभ्यो ary इति तस्यापि नास्येषा 
उपादानाख्या । तथा कालाख्या कालेन मोक्षो भवित्रीति किं तत्वा 
भ्यासेनेत्येष HE तुष्टस्तस्य नास्ति मोष इति । तणा भाग्याख्या 
भाग्येनैव मोक्षो भविष्यतीति भाग्याख्या । चतुधा तुष्टिरिपि । नाष्यावि 
षयोपरमाच्च पंच । बाद्याल्नुष्टयः पश्च विषयोपरमात््‌ शण्डस्पशेरूपरस 
TAN उपरतोऽजेनरक्षणष्षयसंगरहिंसादशेनात्‌। वृहिनिमिजषं पाश्ुपास्यवा 
रिज्यप्रतियहसेवाः काम्या एतद्जेनं दुःखमजितानां रक्षणे दुःलमुपभो 
गात्‌ छी यत्त इति waged । त्था विषयोपभोगसंगे कृते नास्तीद्दरियाणा 
pera इति संगटोषः। तथा न अनुपहत्य भूतान्युपभोग शत्येषषटिंसादोषः | 
एवमञ्जेनादिटोषदशेनात्‌ यंचविषयोपरमात्‌ पंच तुष्टः । एवमाध्याप्मि 
कबाष्यभेदालव TEMA नामानि शास्वानरि प्रोक्तानि | म्भः सलिल. 
मोघो af: grat पारं gerd नारीकमनु्षमाभसिकमिति। आसां तुष्टी 
नां विषरीताश्तिभिदा्ुथिवभा भवन्ति । तद्या खनम्भोऽसलिलमनोध 
इत्यादिवैपरीत्या ुदधिबधा इति । सि्िरूध्यते 





{ ३९ 1 


अहः शच्डोऽष्ययनं टुःखविघातास्लयः सुडत्पा्िः 
दानं च सिदधयोऽद्टौ fae: पू्ोऽङ्कशस्तिविभः । ५१। 





ऊहो यथा कश्िननित्यमूहते किभिहसत्यं कि परं किं Tee किं कृताथेः 
स्यामिति चिंततयहो क्षानमुत्यदयते प्रधानाटन्य श्व पुरूष इत्यन्या बुद्धिरन्यो 
ऽहकारोऽन्यानि तन्माजाणीन्दरियाणिपंचमहाभूतानीत्येवं AAT 
Ra मोक्षो भवति एषा Seren प्रथमा fof: तथा शब्डलानात्‌ 
प्रभानपुरूषवुद्यहंकारतन्माभेन्द्रियपश्महाभूतविषयं ज्ञानं भवति ततो मोक 
इत्येषा were सिद्धिः । ध्ययनाेदादिशास्राध्ययनात्‌ पंचविंशतितितव 
ज्ञानं प्राप्य इत्येषा तृतीया fae: । दुःखविधातजयमाध्याप्मिक आआपिभी 
fire आधिदेविक दुःख्यविधात्ताय गुरं समुपगम्य तत उपेशान्मोषं 
यात्येषा wae सिद्धिः । एषैवदुःखणयभेदात्‌ भिधा कस्यनीया efit षट्‌ 
सिद्धयः | तथासुहत्प्राभ्ियेथा कशचित्‌ सुद्‌ क्षानमपिगम्य मोषं गति 
एषा सप्रमी सिद्धिः । दानं यथा कुश्िद्गगवतां प्रत्याश्रयोषधिभिदरडकुरिड 
कारीनां पासाद्ादनादीनां च दानेनोपकृत्य तेभ्यो ज्ञानमवाप्य मोक्ंयात्ये 
area fafa: | ्रासामष्टानां सिद्धीनां शस्लानरे सं्ाःकुतास्तार Fart 
wom प्रमोदं प्रमुदितं प्रमोदमानं रम्यकं सदाप्रमुदित्मिति | eet 
विपम्यैयाङुदधेबधा ये विपरीतास्त अश्ली निधिप्रा यथाऽततारमसुत्तारम 
तारतारमित्यादिदर्व्यमशक्तिमेदा अष्टाविंशतिरक्ास्ते argent 
ferent इति । तज तुष्टिविपम्येया नव fendi चिपय्येया ष्टौ एव 
मेति सप्रदवुिवथा रतैः सहेन्दरियकधा अष्टाविंशतिरशक्तिभेदाः पथात्‌ 
कणिता इति विप्येयाशक्ितुष्टिसिद्धी नामेवीदेष्णो निर्देशकृत इति । किं 
चान्यत्‌ fae: diisgefafrs सिद्धेः पूर्वी या विपय्येयाशक्तितुशटयस्वा 
एव सिञञेरंकुषस्तञेदादेवं चिचिधो यथा हर्ती गृहीतांकुषेन amt भवत्येव 
विपय्येयाशक्तितुष्टिभिगृहीतो त्लोकोऽक्ञानमाप्रोति तस्मादेताः परित्यज्य 


{ ४ 1 


सिद्धिः सेष्या स सिद्धेस्ठवज्ञानमुत्पष्यते wing इति । wer यदुक्तं भावैरपि 
वासितं fart तथ भावा भम्मोदयोऽष्टावुक्ता बु्धिपरिणामा विपम्यैयाश 
क्ितुटिसिद्धिपरिणताः स भावाख्यः प्रत्ययस्गैः लिगं च तन्माचसर्गतु 
देशभूलपम्येन्न उक्षस्तभेकेनेवसर्गेख पुरुषाथसिद्धौ किमुभयविधसगेशेत्यते 
wre | 


न विना wafer न निवा fata भावनिवृ्चिः 
लिंगाख्यो भावाख्यस्लस्मादविधः wats wt । ५२। 





भावैः प्रत्ययसे्विना त्किगं न तन्माचरसगो न पूङेपूरसंस्काराद्टकारित 
्वादु्रोषरदेहलम्भस्य fate तन्माचसर्गेण च विना भावनिवृलिन स्थूल 
quarantine सस्य वीजा कुरावन्योन्याश्चयो न दो 
षाय तत्तज्जाती यापेषि्विऽपि त्र्ष्यक्तीनां परस्परानपेकितवासस्मान्ावाख्यो 
लिंगाख्यश्चिविधः प्रवर्तेते समे इति किंचान्यत्‌ । 


अष्टविक्स्यो देवल्त्यैग्योनश्च पंचधा भवति 
मानुष्यशचैकविधः समासतो भौतिकः सर्गः । ५३1 





तभ देवमषटमकारं wre प्राजापत्यं सौम्यमेनद्रं गान्ध याक्षं राक्षसं पैशाच 
मिति । पश्मृगपधिसरीसृपस्यावराणि भूतान्येव पंज्विधललेरश्वः । मानुष 
योनिरेव इति चतुदैशभूतानि भिभ्वपि लोकेषु गुणयमस्ति तच कस्मिन्‌ 
किमधिकमुध्यति | 


{ 84] 


we सत्वविशालस्वमोकिशल् Foret: 
मध्ये रजोचिश्णत्मो werfeerauetay । ५४ । 


wifey देवस्थानेषु सत्वविशालः सत्विस्लारः adie Stee 
इति । तथापि रजस्तमसी स्तः । तमोविशाल्लो मूतः पश्वादिषुस्थाव 
नेषु सर्वैःस्ेस्तमसाधिक्येन व्याप्रस्तभापि सत्वरजसी स्तः । मध्ये मा 
qe रज उत्कटं waft सत्तमसी feta तस्माहुःखप्राया मनुषाः | 
एवं ब्रह्मादिस्रश्रपग्येन्तः बह्मारिस्यावराभ्त इत्यथः । एवमभोतिकः सभो 
क्िंगसभो भावसर्गो भूतसगो देवमानुषतैम्येग्योनय इत्येषः प्रधानकृततः 
घोडशस्गैः | 








तेभ जरामरणकृतं दुःखं प्राप्नोति चेतनः पुरूषः 
लिंगस्याविनिवुततेस्ठस्माहुःखं लभावेन । ५५। 





waft तेषु देवमानुषति्ग्योनिषु जराकृतं मरशकृतं चेव टुःखं चेतनः 
चैतन्यवान्‌ पुरुषः प्राप्नोति न प्रधानं न वुिनाहंकारो न तन्माणाणीष्दि 
याणिमहाभूतानि च । कियनकात्यं पुरुषो दुःखं प्राप्नोतीति तदिविनकति। 
किंगस्यायिनिवृकेयेहन्महदादि लिरँगश्रीरेणाविश्य we ष्यह्लीभवतिं तद्या 
वन्तिवज्ञेते संसारशरीरमिति date fey स्थानेषु पुरूषो जरामरणकृतं 
दुःखं प्राप्रोति लिरंगस्याविनिवृक्ैः लिंगस्य विनिवृिं यावत्‌ 1 fra 
वृको मोको मोक्षप्ाप्नौ नास्तिदुःखमिति । तत्पुनः केन frat यदा पंच 
विंशतितत्यञ्चानं स्यात्‌ सत्बपुरुषान्यथाख्यातिलक्षणमिदं प्रभानमियं बुद्धि 
रयमहंकार इमानि पंचतन्माचाख्येकादशेन्दरियाणि पंच महाभूतानि ये 
भ्योन्यः पुरुषो विसहश इत्येवं छानाक्िंगनिवृहिस्ततो मोक्ष इति । प्रवृत्तेः 
किं निमि्तमारम्भ इत्युच्यते । 


[ 8] 


इत्येष प्रकुतिकृतो महदादिविरेषभूततपम्येनः 
प्रतिपुरुषविमो्षथिं स्वां इव परां खरम्भः । ५६ । 


इत्येष परिसमाप्तौ FER च प्रकृततिकृतौ apiece प्रकृतिक्रियायां य 
आरम्भो महदादिविशेषमभूलपग्येन्तः प्रकृतेमहान्‌ महतोऽहंकारस्तस्मा् 
व्माभायेकादशेष्दरियाणि तन्माभेभ्यः पंचमहाभूतानीत्येषः प्रतिपुरूषविभमो 
छाथ get प्रति देवमनुष्यतिब्येग्भावं गतानां विमोकाथेमारम्भः कथं 
स्वां इव पराथ॑मारम्भः यथा कश्चित्‌ स्माथ ere भिभकाग्थौणि करोति 
एवं प्रधानं ¦ पुरूबोऽचप्रथानस्य न fafa प्रत्युपकारं करोति । स्वाथे इव 
न च art पराथ एवाथः शब्टादिविषयोपतष्टिगणपुरुषान्तरोपल 
fare fay लोकेषु शब्दादिविषयः पुरुषा योजयितव्या अन्तेच AAA 
प्रधानस्य ARTE चोक्तं । कुम्भवत्‌ प्रधानं पुरुषां कृत्वा निव्ेत इति | 
अजोच्यकेऽचेतनं प्रभानं चेत्तनः पुरुष इति मया भिषु Hag शब्दादिभि 
विषयः पुरुषो योज्योऽनो मोक्षः weet इति कथं चेक्ननवत्‌ प्रवृत्तिः । स्यं 
कित्वजेत्तनानामपि wafeter निवृ्षिश्चयस्मादित्याह | 





व्सविवृद्धिनिमिक्ं छषीरस्य यथा wafer 
पुरूषविमोकश्निमिशं तथा प्रवृक्तिः प्रधानस्य । ५७ | 





यथा तृणोदकं गवा afer सछषीरभावेन परिणम्य वत्सविवृधिं करोति पुरे 
च धत्से fata एव पुरुषविमोक्षनिभिकं प्रधानं । अहस्यप्रवृ्तिरिति ।. 
किंच । 


[ ४३ J 


अीषपुक्यनिवृत्यथे यथा क्रियासु प्रवते लोकः 
पुरुषस्य विमो्छाथे प्रवते तबदष्यल्ं । ५४ । 


यथा तलोक whee सति तस्य निवृच्यथं क्रियासु wade यमनागमन 
क्रियासु कृतकाग्यो निवर्ते तथा पुरुषस्य विमोष्षाधे शब्दादिविषयोपभो 
गोपलन्िलक्षणं गुणपुरूषानारोपलन्धिल्षणं च हिविधमपि पुरुषाधे 
कृत्वा प्रधानं निवर्ते । किंचान्यत्‌ । 





रङ्गस्य दशेयिला निवर्ते नसेकी यथा नृत्यात्‌ 
पुरुषस्य तथात्मानं प्रकाश्य निवर्ते प्रकृतिः tue! 





यभा ate णृङ्गारादिररेरितिहासादिभावैश्च निवदगीत्तवादिषवृ्ानि 
रङ्गस्य दशेयिता Free नृत्यािवर्ेते तथा प्रकृतेरपि पुरुषस्याभानं 
प्रका्य बुद्धं कारतन्माचेन्द्रियमहाभूतभेदेन निवहेते | कथं को वा स्यान्नि 
व्तैको हेतुस्वदाहं | 


नानाचिधेरुपथेरुपकारिणयनुपकारिणः पुंसः 
गुणवत्यगुणस्य सतस्तस्याथेमपाथेकं चरति | ६० । 





नानाविधिरूपायेः प्रकृतिः पुरूषस्योपकारिण्यनुपकारिणः पुंसः कथं देवमा 
नुषतिम्येगभावेन सुखदुः लमोहात्मक्भावेन शब्टादिविषयभावेन एवं नाना 
विधेरुपायेरात्मानं प्रकाश्याहमन्या त्वमन्य इति fata अतो नित्यस्य 
तस्याथेमपाथं कुरूते चरति च यथा कश्चित्‌ परोपकारी सगरस्य पकुरूते 
नात्मनः प्रत्युपकारमीहत व प्रकृतिः पुरुषाधे अरति करोत्यपाथेकं। पश्चा 
दुक्षमात्ानं प्रकाश्य fade निवृत्ता च किं करोतीत्याह । 


[ ४1 


प्रकृतेः सुङ्मारत्रं न कखिदस्तीति मे मतिभेवति 
या हृष्टास्मीति gat दशेनमुपेति पुरुषस्य । £१। 


त्कोके प्रकृतेः सुकुमारतरं न किश्विदस्तीत्येवं मे मतिभेवति येन परार्थ 
एवं मतिर्त्पन्रा कस्माटहमनेन पुरूषेण हष्टास्मीत्यस्य पुंसो yay नो 
चैि पुरुषस्यादशेनमुपयातीत्यथेः । तथ सुकुमारतरं वशेयति । fat का 
रशं A | अजो जनुरनीश्णोयमात्मा नः YAR SAT TAG Ta स्वं 
मरकमेव वा । अपरे स्वभावकारणिकां Fae । केन PATA हंसा मयूराः 
केन चिधिताः । स्वभावेनेति । सचसांख्याचाम्य eg: निगुणत्वादीच्च 
रस्य कथं सगुणतः प्रजा जायेरन्‌ कथं वा पुरूषाजिगुणदेव तस्मात्‌ प्रकृते 
सृज्यते तथा शूक्वेभ्यस्तन्तुभ्यः शुक्त श्व पटो भवति कृष्णेभ्यः कुष्ण एवेति । 
एवं जिगुणान्‌ प्रधानात्‌ चयो ल्लोकास्विगुणाः समुत्यन्ा इति गम्यते । 
fete bee सगुणानां त्मोकानां तस्मादुत्प्षिरयुक्तेति । अनेन पुरुषो ष्या 
ख्याततः । तथा केषांचित्‌ कालः कारणमित्युक्तं च । कालः पञ्वास्ति भूतानि 
कालः संहरते जगत्‌ । कालः ARG जाग काल्नो हि दुरतिक्रमः । ष्यक्त 
मब्यक्षपुरूषाखरयः पदाधास्तेन कात्मोऽन्तभूतोस्ति स व्यक्तः TATA का 
लेस्यापि प्रधानमेवकारणं स्वाभावोष्यचैवत्दीनः तस्मात्‌ कालौ न कारणं। 
नापि स्वभाव इति । तस्मात्‌ प्रकृतिरेव कारणं न प्रकृतेः कारणान्तरम 
स्तीति । न पुनदेशनमुपयाति पुरुषस्य । शक्तः प्रकृतेः FRAT सुभो 
ग्यत्तरं न किंचिदीश्वरादिकारणमस्तीति मे मतिभेवति । तथा च es 
Se पुरूषो मुक्तः पुरुषः संसारीति चोदितित्याह | | 








तस्माजबध्यते नापि मुच्यते नापि संसरति कथित्‌ 
संसरति जप्यते मुच्यते च नानाश्चया प्रकृतिः । धैरे । ` 





तस्मात्‌ कारणात्‌ पुरूषो न बध्यते नापि मुच्यते नापि संसरति यस्मात्‌ 


cs] 


कारणात्‌ प्रकृतिरेव नाना्चया देवमानुषतिम्यैगयोन्याश्या बुद्धंहकारतम्मा 
चेष्दरिभूतस्वरूपेण बध्यते मुच्यते संसरति चेति । खण AR एव स्वभा 
वात्‌ सस Pree संसरत्यप्राप्रपरापणाथं संसरणमिति तेन पुरूषो वध्यते 
पुरूषो मुच्यते संसरति व्यपदिश्यते येन संसारित्वं न विद्ते सत्पुरुषा 
ज्ञानात्‌ तत्वं पुरुषस्याभिष्वज्यते | तदभिव्यक्तौ केवलः WHY AW: स्वरूप 
प्रतिष्ठः पुरुष इति। अन यदि पुरुषस्य बन्धो नास्ति ततो मोष्ोऽपि नास्ति। 
अभोच्यते प्रकृतिरेवात्मानं बघ्नाति मोचयति च यभ सूष्मशरीरं WATTS 
जिविधकरणोपेतं तत्‌ भिविधेन बन्धेन बध्यते। उक्तं च । प्राकृतेन च बन्धेन 
तथा वेकारिकेण च । दाक्षिणेन तृतीयेन बशो नान्येन मुच्यते । तत्‌ ERA 
शरीरं धम्मोाधम्मे संयुक्तं । प्रकृतिश्च बध्यते प्रकृक्तिश्च मुध्यते संसरतीति कथं 
तदुच्यते । 





BS: सप्रभिरेववधरात्यामानमात्मना प्रकृतिः 
सेव च went प्रति विमोचयत्येकरूपेण | ६९ । 





St: सप्तभिरेवैतानि an प्रोच्यनो धम्मो वेराग्यमेष्यम्येमधम्भोऽक्ञानमवि 
राग्ममनेश्वग्ेमेततानि प्रकृतेः सष्रूपाणि तिरात्मानं स्वं बध्नाति प्रकृततिरा 
त्मानं स्वमेव सैव प्रकृतिः पुरूषस्याथेः पुरूषाः ater इति विमोचमत्या 
्मानमेकरूपेण ज्ञानेन | कथं तञ्ज्ञानमुत्यद्यते | 


शवं तत्वाभ्यासान्नास्ति न मे नाहमित्यपरिशेषं 
ऋविपग्येयाहिषरुञं केवत्ममुत्यच्चते सानं । ६४ । 





एवमुक्तेन करमेण पच्छविंशतितत्वालोचनाभ्यासादियं मकृतिरयं पुरूष एता 
नि पंचतन्माचेन्दरियमहाभूतानीति पुरुषस्य ज्ञानमुत्पद्यते नास्ति नाहमेव 


{ ४& 1 
भवानि न मे नम शरीरं तद्यतोऽहमन्यः शरीरमन्यन्नाहमित्यपरिशेषमहं 
काररहितमपरिशेषमविपय्येयादिशुञ्चं fade: संणयोऽचिपम्पेयादसंशया 
feud Fad तदेवनान्यदस्तीति मोकारणमुत्यदयतेऽभिष्यज्यते क्षानं पंच 
fafa पुरुषस्येति । art पुरूषः डं करोति । 


तेन निवृक्चपरसवामथेवशात्‌ सप्ररूपविनिवृां 
"प्रकृतिं पश्यति पुरुषः प्रक्षकवटवस्थितः सुस्थः । ६५। 





तेन fata केवल सानेन पुरूषः प्रकृतिं पश्यति Perea प्रक तुस्यम 
afer: स्वस्थो यथा रंगपरष्षकोऽवस्थितो नकीं पश्यति स्वस्थः स्वस्मि 
िद्दष्टति स्वस्थः स्वस्थानस्थित्तः । कथं भूतां प्रकृतिं निवृप्रसवां निवृ 
बुद्यंहंकारकाम्पानवशात्‌ सप्ररूपविनिवृतचां निवर्षितोभयपुरुषप्रयोजन 
वशाः सप्रभीरूपे्धम्मादिभिरात्मानं बाति तेभ्यः ama रूपेभ्यो विनि 
gfe प्रकृतिं पश्यति । किंच । 


ष्टा मयेतयुपेश्षक एको हष्टाहमित्युपरमत्यन्या 
सतति संयोगेऽपि तयोः प्रयोजनं नास्ति सर्गस्य । ६8 । 





Srey इति यधा Gre श्येवमुपेक्षक एकः aes: Ya: पुरूषस्तेनाहंहरेति 
कृत्वा उपरता निवृश्षा एका एकैव परकृतिः चैत्ोक्यस्यापि .प्रथानकारणं 
भूता न हितीया प्रकृतिरस्ति fan जातिभेदादेवं प्कृतिपुरूषयो निवा 
वपि ष्यापक्त्वात्‌ संयोगोऽस्ति न तु संयोयात्‌ कुतः सभो भवति । सति 
संयोगेऽपि तयोः प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः स्वेगतत्वात्‌ सत्यपि संयोगे प्रयोजनं ना 
fe सर्गस्य qteftrriam प्रक्तो्धिविधप्रयोजनं wefan far} 


{ ४ 1 


कपुरूवामारोपतन्धि्च | उभयजापि चरितार्थत्वात्‌ ater नास्ति प्रयोजनं 
यः चुनः सगे इति । यथा दानयहणनिमिशच werent 
सत्यपि संयोगे न कश्िदथेसद्न्धो भवति । एवं प्रकृति पुरूषयोरपि नास्ति 
प्रमोजनमिति। यदि पुरस्योत्यन्ने ar मोक्षो भवति ततो मम कस्मान भव 
तीति। सत उच्यति । 


सम्यग्न्नानाधिगमादडम्मादीनामकारणप्रापनौ 
तिति संस्कारवशाश्चक्भमव्ुतशरीरः । ६9 1 





यद्यपि पंचविंशितवक्लानं सम्यक्‌ ज्ञानं भवति तथाऽपि संस्कारवशाद्त 
शरीरो योगी तिष्ठति कथं चक्रभमवञ्चकभमेण तुस्यं यथा कुलाल 
भमयित्वा घटं करोति मृत्पिरं चक्रमारोपय पुनः कृत्वा घटं पयोमुंचति 
चक्रं भ्रमत्येव संस्कारवशदेवं सम्यग्सानाधिगमादुत्यलसम्यग््ानस्य धम्म 
Saracen एतानि सपरूपाणि बन्धनभूतानि सम्यग्ज्ञानेन दग्धा 
fa यथा नाग्निना दग्धानि वीजानि प्ररोहणसमयोन्येवमेतानि wah 
दीनि बन्धनानि न समधानि । धम्मादीनामकारणप्रापनौ संस्कारवशाचृत 
शरीरस्ति्ठति ज्ानादरेमानधम्माधम्मेक्यः कस्मान्नभवति वक्षेमाना्बादेव 
क्षणान्तरे शषयमणेति ज्ञानं त्नागतकम्मे दहति वत्तेमानरीरेण चं यत्‌ 
करोति तदपीति विचिहिक्ानुष्ठानकरशादिति संस्कारश्षयाच्छरीरपाति मोक्सः | 
स किं विशिष्टो भवतीत्युच्यते | 


प्रापे शरीरभेदे चरिताथतवात्‌ प्रथानविनिवृ्लौ 
रेकान्तिक्मात्यन्तिकमुभयं कैवस्यमाप्नोति । ६८। 





धम्मोधम्मेजनितसंस्कारक्षयात्‌ म्रपि शरीरभेदे चरिताथेतवात्‌ प्रधानस्यनि 


[ ४४ 1 


QW रेकान्तिकमवश्यमात्यन्तिकमनंतर्हितं Saal केवत्भावान्मोह् उभय 
भेकाम्तिकात्यन्तिकमित्येवविशिष्टकेवस्यमाप्नोति । 


पुरषाथेज्षानमिदं qe परमषिणा समाख्यातं 
स्थिव्युत्यतिप्रलयाध्िन्यन्ते यभ भूतानां । ६९ । 





पुरूषाधो मोधसूदथं ज्ञानमिदं गुह्यं रहस्यं परमर्षिणा श्चीकपिलर्षिणा 
समाख्यातं सम्यगुक्तं यच ज्ञाने भूतानां वैकारिणां fears सव 
ख्यानाविभावतिरोभावाश्िन्यने विचाग्येन्ते येषां विचारात्‌ सम्यक्‌ पंच 
विंशतितत्वविवेचनात्मिका सम्पद्यते संविधषिरिति 

सांख्यं कपितगमुनिना प्रोक्त संसारविमुक्षिकारणं हि 

यथेताः सप्रतिराग्यौ भाष्यं चाचगोडपाद कृतं । 





एतत्‌ पविभमम्प्रं मुनिरासुरथेऽनुकम्यया प्रददौ 
ऋछासुरिरपि पंचशिखाय तेन च बहुधा कृतं तन्त्रं । 9० । 
शष्परम्परयागतमीश्वर कृष्येन चेतदाम्याभिः 
संशिप्रमामग्यमतिना सम्यग्विज्ञाय सिद्धान्तं । 9१। 
arent सिल येऽथोस्तेऽथोः कृत्लस्यषषटिततन्नस्य । 
आख्यायिकाविरहिताः परवाटविवज्निताश्ापि | 9२। 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 





THE text of the Kérikd has been in the first instance derived from a 
copy in the handwriting of Mr. Colebrooke, which he had prepared for 
the press. I have collated this with Professor Lassen’s edition and with 
a very good manuscript in my own possession. Besides these, the differ- 
ent commentaries include the text, and the Sénkhya Pravachana Bhishya 
cites many verses of the Kérikd. Altogether, therefore, the text may be 
considered as printed upon a collation of eight copies, which may be thus 
referred to: A. Mr. Colebrooke’s transcript; ए. my MS. copy; ©. Pro- 
fessor Lassen's edition ; D. the text in Gavrarava’s commentary ; E. that 
in the Sdnkhya Tatwa Kaumudi; F. that in the Sénkhya Chandrikd ; 
©. that in the Sdnkhya Kawmudi; and H. the passages of it in the Sén- 
khya Pravachana Bhdshya. Of the Sénkhya Tatwa Kaumudt I had three 
copies, and two copics of the Sdnkhya Chandrité. I had but one copy of 
the Bhdshya of Gaurarapa. 


९.1. 1. 1. तदभिघातके 4.7. 0. तदट्पधातके B.C.E.F. 

2. 9. 1.14. हेतुः दुःख would be more correctly हेतुदुःखः Wilkins, r. 53. 
In noticing this deviation from rule, however, my chief object is to ob- 
serve, that such deviations are frequent in the MSS., and that, although 
¶ have corrected some of them, I do not regard them in all cases as errors 
or inadvertencies: they seem in general to be intentional, and to be de- 
signed for the sake of greater perspicuity. 


P.3. 1.9. For विश्ुि read विशुद्धि 
P, 5, 1.17. For तस्मिन्‌ read तस्मिन्‌ 
P. 5. 118. WAASTATAARTA As intimated in the translation (p. 21), 
these words are of questionable import, and possibly erroneous. The 
9 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


want of another copy renders their correction hazardous, but in all pro- 
bability the first term should be प्रतिना ० प्रतिमान्‌ ordinarily ‘light’ or 
‘shining,’ but perhaps here said to denote वासि ‘ abode, place;’ or the 
construction may be प्रतिना- अन्वासस्तानं implying ‘conformity, 
adaptation,’ from Sq ‘ according to,’ and BITE ‘to sit.” 

P.6.v.6. प्रतीति-प्रसिचि D. 


९.४. १.४. सरूपं _ स्वरूपं G. which Professor Lassen has followed. All 
the other copies concur in the first reading, which the sense of the verse, 
as explained by the scholiasts, requires. 


P.10. 1.11. For रपं read EG 

P.11. 1.4, 5, 7. Some blanks occur in this part of the MSS. of the 
Bhéshya, which have been conjecturally supplied ; as, PUA - - कृष्ण 

=+ द्विवेकि + 

and प्रभानमेव - - SE न या - - दविवेकि and त्था सामान्या - - प्रधानं 
How these have becn supplied may be seen in the respective passages. 

2.11. 1.11. For GRR read पुरूष 

7. 19. 1.10. For STAT and BATA read अभिभवा 

P. 13. 1. 2. For सत्वमसो read सत्वतमसो 

P. 13. v.13, Professor Lassen changes उपष्टम्भक to उपस्तभ्भकं which 
he derives from छम्‌ ‘stabilire, firmare.’ All the MSS., however, read the 
word with the cerebral, not the dental sibilant, and there is no doubt of 
their accuracy. The rule of Panini by which a radical @ is changed in 
inflexion to @, धात्वादेः षः सः not applying to this word, which is derived 
from FJ cl. 5 and 9. This root is the subject of a special rule, by 
which it is provided that after a preposition containing the vowel इ or 3 
the radical & shall be changed to ष. Of course after छै, त is changed to 
ट, making SQEAT The original rule is Panini, 6. 3. 67. RY । 
Wey | इत्येतस्य धातोरवयवस्यस्‌ ॥ इत्येतस्योपसगस्यादिण sec sea 
आदेशः स्यात्‌ । अभिष्टशनोति परिषटशाति; to which we may add SOW 
आरि, whence उपष्टम्भक 


P.16. 1.14. स्चाग्य्येन has been substituted for the WATACAA of 
the MSS., which is evidently incorrect. 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


P. 16. 1.15. For मयसुपगम्यते read मभ्युपगम्यते 

९. 16. ४.17. H, read: संहत ® संघात. The sense is the same. 
P.16. 1.18, For माक्ष read AYE 

P.17. 1. 7. For ज्जस्यात्सा read Beara 

P.17. v.18. For जनन- जन्म B.D. Either word is correct. 


P. 19. ४.20, भवत्युदासीन B.D. omitting इति. The sense is unaf- 
fected, and the metre is preserved by reading the final syllable long. 


P.19. 1.8, The third word should be उदासीनो 


P.19.119. For वचसो विश्वस्त read वचसो्विश्वस्त 
P.20. 1.9. For ऋअलिंगस्य read अल्विगस्याः 
P.21. 1.1. For TS read यथोक्तं 


P.22.v.24, The sccond line is read DHET एकादशकस्तन्माचः पण्चकश्यैव 
B. and एकाट्‌श्क्श्चगणस्तन्मानचः पंचत्क्षणोपेतः D. The sense is much 
the same, but the last is wrong as to metro. It is evident also from the 
comment that follows that it is a mistake, and that the final words should 
be पंचकथेव- पंचलक्षणोपेत being the explanation of पंचक 

P. 23, v.20. पायूपस्यानि ए. पायूपस्थाः ए. In the first line, THAT 
TITWATHA is tho reading of B.C. E. F. but D. confinns the text, not only 
by the same terms, रसनस्यशेनकानि, but by explaining the term RATT, 

1. 24. v.27, बाद्यभेदा्च AEF. QRH B.C.D. The difference 
involves a difference of interpretation, as noticed in the Comment (p. 91). 
The explanation of the Bhdshya, D, is so clearly incompatible with the 
reading TT that in the first instance I corrected it to बाह्मभेदाः 
as in the same page, 1. 15, 18, which should be read, agreeably to the MSS.. 
बाद्यभटाच्च 

P. 24. 1.23. For तत्‌ कृत Tead तत्‌ कृता, and for aq स्व read wy: a 

P. 25. v.28. warfeg B.D. faercn. The variations are immaterial. 

P.25. 112. For परिणतो मलोत्स्ैः read परिणतमलोत्सगैः 


P.26. 1.6, 7, For Gfahewed read वृक्तिरिन्द्रियस्य 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


2. 26. 1. 3, &c. स्यन्दनं ought perhaps to be MRA. See Translation, 
0. 105. 

P.26. 1.22. After WHTTEST some such word as वलिं should be in- 
serted, although it is not in the MS.: it occurs in the passage when 
repeated in p. 3& 

P. 27. 1.8. For 32 read ३१ 

ए. 28. 1. Sand 15. For गुह्न्ति-गुद्धराति read गृह्न्ति-गृह्धराति 

2. 99. 1.4. For प्रकाशयन्ति २८० प्रकाशयन्ति 

2. 30. 1.11. For प्राप्य इयं read प्राप्पमियं 

‘P. 30. 1.14. अवापात्‌ः which is the reading of the copy, should pro- 
bably be WTA ‘ after departure’ or ‘ death.’ 

ए. 30. 1.21. For WAST read प्रजो 

P. 31. 1. 6. WEST has been conjecturally supplied, the writing of the 
copy being very indistinct. 

P31. 1.16. The MS. has (Wqet which has no meaning, and has 
been therefore conjecturally changed to पृष्टोद्र 

P. 31. 1.20. Instead of Wat कम्मेवशात्‌ it is possible that the phrase 
should be आरीरमधम्मेवश्णत्‌ ‘from the influence of iniquity.’ 

P.33. 1. 11. A passage has been here omitted: it should run, TIS 


wartime । शब्टाद्युपतन्धिषसयादिषु stay गन्धादिभोगा 


वापिः | गुणपुरूषान्तरोपल्न्विभोष्‌ इति. It has been given in the 
Translation, p. 137. 


ए. 33, 1.18, For विदुषक read विदूषक 
P. 36. v.47. WA D. which is allowable. । 
2.3. 1. 4. तन्माजा्टासु was read in the MSS. तन्माजाद्यासु which 


was evidently an error. 
ए. 37. 1.18. For WRREN read तचैकादट्श 
P.38. 1.1. The MS. has विषम्येयाच्छक्तितु्टिनामेव which the sense 


shews to be erroneous. 


P. 38. 1. 11. For इत्येष read इत्येषा 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS, 


P. 38. v. 50. स्ाध्यात्मिक्यश्चतस््र E. The difference is unimportant. F. 
has भागाख्या which is incorrect; विषयोपरमाश्च D; and 1. ए. read 
अभिहिता for अभिमता 

ए. 39. 1.9. After म्रा insert Wey याति 

ए. 40. 1.9. For थयो read WTA 


P. 40. v.53. The reading of this verse is materially varied in 7, al- 
though the sense is substantially the same: 


अष्टविकल्यं दवं तैम्यग्योनं पंचधा भवति 
मानुष्यं व्वेकविधं समासतोऽयं जिधा स्मः | 
Fa 
Professor Lassen has नै्येग्योन्य, which is not warranted by any MS. and 
although perhaps a defensible, is an unusual form of the derivative. G. has 
नैगयेग्योन 
P, 42, v. 56. प्रकृतिकृतौ D; and the variation is advisedly, as appears 

by the comment. 


P. 43. v.50. आत्मानं प्रकाश्य- प्रविश्य 7. But the term of our text 
is used in the following comment. 


ए. 43, v.60. For चरति-कुरूते D. 

P. 44. v.61. प्रकृतिः सुकुमारतर C; which is manifestly wrong. 

P. 44. 1 ¢. Although suspecting some crror in this citation, I had no 
means of correcting it. Before printing the translation, however, I met 
with the passage correctly given in the commentary of Mapnusipana 
Gupta upon the Bhagavad Gita, and have rendered it accordingly in 


9. 172. Itshould be, Bat WYCHMNSTATH: सुखटुःखयोः 

P. 44. v.62. तस्मान्वध्यतेऽद्ा ए; and WET is explained BRETTUTT 
शयोः The particle is not inserted in any other copy. C. is singular in 
the order of the words, and transposing मुच्यते and बध्यते 

ए. 45. 1. 5. Instead of अभिष्वज्यतते read अभिव्यज्यते 


ए. 46. v.66. 4. 8.2. ए. 0. agree in reading उपरमत्यन्या, although, as 
Professor Lassen justly objects, “metro refragatur.” D. gives the cor- 
adi: = tos it ७। 

recter reading उपचरतेका, explaining it उपरता faget का एकैव प्रकृतिः 


+ 


VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 
This copy also varies in the beginning of the hemistich: रणस्य was 


war हशहमभित्युपरौका 


P. 47. L 4. For Tea read पुरूषस्य 


Other variations than those specified above may uo doubt be dis- 
covered in different manuscripts, and even in those which have been 
consulted; but they are in general palpable blunders of transcription, 
unworthy of the honour of being perpetuated in print. 


