A  SELECTION  FROM     ||g| 

MESSRS.  ALLEN'S  CATALOGUE 

OF  BOOKS  IN  THE  EASTERN  LANGUAGES,  dc, 


A  Dictionary  of  Urdu,  Classical  Hindi, 
and  English. 

By  JOHN  T.  PLATTS,  M.A.,  Persian  Teacher  at  the  University  of  Oxford, 
late  Inspector  of  Schools,  Central  Provinces,  India.  Super  Royal  8vo. 
£3  3s. 

A  Hindustani-English  Dictionary  in   the 
Persian  Character. 

With  the  Hindi  Words  in  Nagari  also ;  and  an  English-Hindustani  Dictionary 
in  the  Roman  Character.  By  DUNCAN  FORBES,  LL.D.  Both  in  One 
Volume.  42s. 


With  ti 
in 

A 


Dictionary :  Hindustani-English  and 


cLi.  a 


/-/<• 


Or,  "  Twenty-five  Tales  of  a  Demon,"    In  the  Nagari  Character.     With  a 
complete  Vocabulary.     Royal  8vo.     9s. 

The  Baital  Fachisi; 

Translated  into  English.     By  JOHN  T.  PLATTS,  Esq.     8vo.     8s. 

The  Tota-Kahani; 

Or,  "Tales  of  a  Parrot."     In  the  Persian  Character.      With   a  complete 
Vocabulary.     By  DUNCAN  FORBES,  LL.D.     Royal  8vo.     8s. 

The  Ikhwanu-s-Safa  ; 

Or,  "  Brothers  of  Purity."    In  the  Persian  Character.    By  DUNCAN  FORBES, 
LL.D.     Royal  8vo.     12s.  6d. 


Ikhwanu-s-Safa  ; 

Or,  "Brothers  of  Purity."  From  the  Hindustani.  By  JOHN  PLATTS,  Esq., 
Inspector  of  Public  Instruction  in  the  North  Circle,  Central  Provinces. 
8vo.  10s.  Gd. 

Taubatu-n-Nusah 

(Repentance  of  Nussooh)  of  Moulvi  Haji  Hair/,  Nazir  Ahmed  of  Delhi.  Edited, 
with  Notes  and  Index,  by  M.  KEMPSON,  Director  of  Public  Instruction  in 
N.W.  Provinces,  1862-78.  Demy  8vo.  12s.  6d. 

A  Vocabulary  for  the  Lower  Standard 
in  Hindustani. 

Containing  the  meanings  of  every  word  and  idiomatic  expression  in  "  Jarrett's 
•Hindu  Period."'  and  in  "Selections  from  the  Bagh-o-Bahar."  By  P. 
MULVIHILL.  Fcap.  3s.  6d. 

Sakuntala  in   Hindi. 

Translated  from  the  Bengali  recension  of  the  Sanscrit.  Critically  edited, 
with  Grammatical,  Idiomatical,  and  Exegetical  Notes.  By  FREDERIC 
PINCOTT,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.  &c.  4to.  12s.  6d. 

Alf  Laila,  ba-Zuban-i-TJrdu 

(The  Arabian  Nights  in  Hindustani).  Roman  Character.  By  FREDERIC 
PINCOTT,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.  &c.  Crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Oriental  Penmanship. 

Comprising  Specimens  of  Persian  Handwriting.  Illustrated  with  Facsimiles 
from  Originals  in  the  South  Kensington  Museum,  to  which  are  added 
Illustrations  of  the  Nagari  Character.  By  the  late  Professor  PALMER 
and  FREDERIC  PINCOTT.  4to.  12s.  6d. 

How  to  Speak  Hindustani. 

Being  an  Easy  Guide  to  Conversation  in  that  language,  designed  for  the  use 
of  Soldiers  proceeding  to  India.  By  E.  H.  ROGERS,  formerly  Head  Master 
of  the  Lawrence  Military  Asylum,  in  the  Himalayas.  12mo.,  sewed.  Is.  6d. 


English-Persian  Dictionary. 

Compiled  from  Original  Sources.  By  ARTHUR  N.  WOLLASTON,  H.M.'s  Indian 
(Home)  Service,  Translator  of  the  "  Anwar-i-Suhaili,"&c.  DemySvo.  25s. 

Richardson's  Dictionary,  Persian,  Arabic, 
and  English. 

Revised  by  F.  JOHNSON.     1852.     4to.     £4. 

Grammar  of  the  Persian  Language. 

To  which  is  added  a  Selection  of  Easy  Extracts  for  Reading,  together  with  a 
Vocabulary  and  Translation.  By  DUNCAN  FORBES.  LL.D.  Third  and 
much-enlarged  Edition.  1862.  Royal  8vo.  12s.  6d. 

Grammar   of  the    Persian    Language. 

With  Dialogues,  &c.     By  MIRZA  IBRAHEEM.     Royal  8vo.     12s.  6d. 

Gulistan. 

Revised  and  Corrected,  with  a  complete  Vocabulary.  By  J.  T.  PLATTS,  Esq., 
Inspector  of  Public  Instruction,  North  Circle,  Central  Provinces.  Royal 
8vo.  12s.  6d. 

Anwar-i-Soheli. 

Persian  Text,  with  a  complete  Vocabulary.     By  Capt.  OCSELEV.     4to.     30s. 

Anwar-i-Soheli. 

The  First  Book  of.     Persian  Text.     Edited  by  Rev.  H.  G.  KBESE.     8vo.    os. 

Akhlak-i-Mushini. 

Persian  Text.     Edited  by  Col.  OUSELEV.     8vo.     5s. 
Translated  into  English.     By  the  Rev.  H,  G.  KEENE.     8vo.     3s.  Gd. 


6TT  (GIF  6U  /G  fT  LLJ  (GV    IT  ^g       K  <o(fl  &  Q  &  U 


UJ 


err. 


THE    'SACRED'    KURRAL 

OF 

TIKUVALLUVA-NAYANAB. 


WITH 

INTRODUCTION,      GRAMMAR,     TRANSLATION, 

NOTES 

(IN    WHICH    ARE    REPRINTED     FR.     C.     J.     BESCHl'S     AND    F.    W.     ELLIS'     VERSIONS), 

LEXICON,  AND   CONCORDANCE. 


BY    THE 

REV.  G.  U.  POPE,  M.A.,  D.D., 

SOMETIME   FELLOW   OF    THE    MADRAS   UNIVERSITY,    MEMBER   OF   THE   ROYAL   ASIATIC 
SOCIETY,    AND   OF    THE    GERMAN   ORIENTAL   SOCIETY. 


'  Si  quisquamst,  qui  placere  se  studeat  bonis 
Quam  plurimis  et  minime  multos  laedere, 
In  his  poeta  hie  nomen  profitetur  suom.' 


LONDON: 
W.  H.  ALLEN  &  CO.,  13  WATERLOO  PLACE,  S.W. 


PUBLISHERS    TO    THE    INDIA    OFFI 


1886. 


(All  rights    reserved.}) 


SEEN  BY 

PRESERVATION 

SERVICES 


Sage  VALLUVAB,  priest  of  thy  lowly  clan, 
No  tongue  repeats,  no  speech  reveals  thy  name ; 
Yet,  all  things  changing,  dieth  not  thy  fame, 

For  thou  art  bard  of  universal  man  ; 

And  still  thy  '  book '  above  the  waters  wan, 
Virtue,  true  wealth,  and  joy,  and  being's  aim, 
In  sweetest  mystic  couplets  doth  proclaim, 

Where  winds  sea- wafted  palmy  forests  fan. 

Haply  undreamed  of  '  visions '  glad  thine  eyes 
In  realms  beyond  thy  fabled  '  seven-fold  birth,' 
And  clouds  of  darkness  from  thy  spirit  roll ; 

While  lands  far  off  have  heard  with  strange  surprise 
Faint  echoes  of  thy  song.     Through  all  the  earth 
Men  hail  thee  brother,  seer  of  spotless  soul. 


[See  Introd.  i.-iv.,  vii.,  and  the  words 
and  v.  34.] 


PREFACE. 


I  AM  thankful,  after  so  many  years,  to  see,  at  length,  the  completion  of 
this  work,  projected  at  the  very  outset  of  my  Oriental  studies — a  work 
which  has  cost  much  time  and  labour,  and  completes  the  series  of 
Tamil  books  by  which  I  have  tried  to  help  forward  the  study  of  this 
admirable  language  among  both  Europeans  and  Natives.* 

It  is  primarily  intended  to  make  classical  Tamil  easier  to  English 
students,  while  to  Native  students  it  may  afford  means  for  a  more  com- 
prehensive and  fruitful  study  of  their  greatest  classic  author,  who  has 
sung  of  so  many  topics,  Musaeo  contingens  cuncta  lepore,  l  touching  all 
things  with  poetic  grace.'  The  Grammatical  Introduction  (pp.  xv.- 
xxiv.),  together  with  the  Handbook,  and  a  careful  use  of  the  Lexicon 
and  Concordance,  aided  by  the  English  and  Latin  versions,  will  make  it 
easy  to  master  the  great  work  of  this  very  influential  teacher  of  men.f 


*  These  are— 

1.  '  A  First  Catechism  of  Tamil  Grammar.'     fin  Tamil.]     This  was  published  in 

1842.  The  0.  V.  E.  S.  alone  has  sold  350,000  copies.  The  C.  R.  S.  and 
various  Missionary  Societies,  and  the  Madras  Government  also,  have 
reprinted  it  in  very  many  editions. 

2.  «  The  Second  Catechism.'     [In  Tamil.]     Published  in  1844.     The  C.  V.  E.  S.  has 

sold  75,000,  and  it  is  very  largely  used. 

'6.  '  The  Third  Catechism,'  with  Native  Authorities,  being  a  larger  Grammar  of 
Tamil,  in  both  its  dialects.     [In  Tamil.]     2nd  Edition.     8vo.     411  pp. 

4.  '  A  Tamil  Handbook  for  English  Students,'  in  three  parts.     4th  Edition. 

5.  '  A  Tamil  Prose  Reader,'  with  references  to  the  Handbook. 

6.  '  A  Tamil  Poetical  Anthology,'  with  references  to  the  third  Grammar. 

These  works  can  be  obtained  from  the  publishers  of  this  book,  and  the  Author  will 
be  glad  to  assist  any  student  who  will  communicate  with  him,  at  the  Indian  Institute, 
Oxford. 

t  Since  this  work  was  sent  to  the  press,  I  have  seen  a  charming  little  volume  entitled, 
«  Tales  and  Poems  of  South  India,'  from  the  Tamil,  by  Rev.  E.  J.  Robinson.  (T.  Wool- 
mer,  1885.)  Had  I  known  of  this  earlier,  I  should  have  felt  it  less  necessary  to  publish 
a  translation.  I  cordially  recommend  this  interesting  and  scholarly  little  volume.  I 
have  not  seen  the  edition  edited  by  M.  Muruge^a  Mutali  and  translated  by  J.  Lazarus. 
(Madras,  1885.)  In  an  elegant  little  volume  of  translations  from  Tamil  authors,  and 
other  miscellanies,  entitled  Indische  Sinnpftanzen  und  Blumen,  by  the  late  lamented 
Dr.  Graul  (Erlangen,  1865),  the  accomplished  author  has  given  translations  in  metre 


IV  PREFACE. 

Anyone  living  in  India,  and  having  the  assistance  of  a  Munshi,  or 
Native  teacher,  should  use  also  one  of  the  editions  published  by 
<F(/5<a;68ffr  Qu^L&rrsrr  ^ajLuir.  The  verbal  commentary  and  paraphrase 
will  be  very  useful ;  yet  it  is  only  by  much  loving  thought  and  reitera- 
tion of  the  couplets  themselves  that  their  full  force  and  beauty  can  be 
apprehended.  The  Commentary  constitutes,  in  such  cases,  rather  a 
pair  of  crutches  than  a  pair  of  wings. 

It  would  have  been  possible  to  illustrate  each  chapter  with  parallel 
passages  from  Sanskrit  authors,  from  poets  of  many  languages  and 
times,  and  from  Holy  Scripture.  This  I  have  done  here  and  there, 
especially  where  it  might  seem  that  the  author  was  translating,  as  from 
Manu,  for  example;  but,  after  careful  study,  and  especially  after  compa- 
rison with  Bohtlingk's  Indische  Spriicke  (which  resembles  the  Kurral, 
though  much  of  that  collection  is  of  more  recent  date  than  our  poet), 
it  would  seem  that,  except  the  few  I  have  indicated,  it  is  not  probable 
that  Tiruvalluvar  translated  a  (^loka  from  Sanskrit. 

I  may  say  here  that  it  is  hard  to  discern  the  least  reason  to  imagine 
(with  M.  Jules  Yin  son,*  Melanges  orientaux,  Sept.  1883.  Paris  :  Leroux) 
that  we  have  not  before  us  the  original  work  of  the  poet  as  he  planned 
it.  It  is  certainly  not  an  anthology,  but  the  perfect  and  most  elaborate 
work  of  one  master.  The  third  part  might  be  deemed  separable,  but  the 
manner  even  there  is  quite  peculiar  to  our  bard.  As  one  link  in  a  chain 
of  evidence,  the  following  is  remarkable.  The  poet  uses  Qpiriy.  nine 
times  as  equivalent  to  '  lady,'  but  never  uses  the  same  epithet  twice. 
So  with  £D<55)L£.  There  is  a  studied  variety  in  epithets  throughout. 

A  brief  notice  of  Father  Beschi,  the  greatest  of  Tamil  scholars,  may 
be  of  interest.  Father  Constantius  Josephus  Beschius  (Constantio 
Josepho  Beschi)  was  an  Italian  Jesuit,  and  was  appointed  to  the  South 
Indian  Missions  in  1700,  and  died  at  Manaparai  in  1742.  He  lived  at 
Avur,  near  Trichinopoly,  assuming  the  dress,  and  conforming  to  the 
habits  of  a  Hindu  guru.  He  studied  Tamil,  Telugu,  Sanskrit,  Hindu- 
stani, and  Persian;  and  from  1736  to  1740  we  find  him  Diwan,  or  chief 
minister  (Ch.  LXIV.)  to  Chanda  Saheb.  [See  my  Text- Book  of  Indian 
History,  3rd  ed.  p.  270.] 


of  the  choicest  couplets  of  '  der  tamulische  Gnomen-Dichter  Tiruvalluvar.'  In  the 
Maximes  traduites  des  Courals  de  Tirou  Va/fouvar,  by  P.  G.  de  Dumast  (Nancy,  1854), 
the  poetry  of  the  Tamil  bard  is  somewhat  diluted  ;  but  the  pamphlet  is  interesting. 

*  Speaking  of  the  Cintamani,  he  says : — '  On  ne  pourrait  guere  regarder  comme 
anterieurs  que  le  recueils  de  sentences  morales  intitules  Rural  de  Tiruvalluva  et  Nala- 
diyar;  mais,  a  mon  avis,  ces  recueils,  sous  leur  forme  actuelle  sont  des  compilations 
relativement  re'centes.' 

In  regard  to  the  Ndladi  this  is  the  case  (Introd.  p.  xiii.) ;   but  not  as  to  the  Kurral. 


PREFACE.  V 

His  works  are  numerous. 

The  Q<&usuiT<5iJ<oGBfl,  Tembdvani,  'The  Unfading  Garland,'  is  an  epic  in 
3,615  quatrains.  It  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  summary  of  the 
Gospel  history,  and  is  full  of  legends.  In  style  it  is  thoroughly  Tamil. 
The  student  will  find  some  fine  passages ;  but,  as  a  whole,  it  is  mono- 
tonous. 

Of  his  prose  writings  the  very  admirable  Vediyar  Orukkam,  Qtoj^liun- 
$(Lp&<E5Ln,  '  The  Duties  of  Catechists,'  is  the  best.  It  is  in  part  adapted 
from  the  writings  of  S.  Gregory  the  Great ;  and  is  the  best  model  I 
know  for  the  student  of  Tamil  prose. 

His  grammars  of  high  Tamil  (Q&fifSuQip)  and  of  low  Tamil  (Q&rrQjs 
<gu$Lp)  were  written  in  Latin,  but  have  been  translated  into  English, 
the  former  by  Mr.  Babington,  M.C.S.,  and  the  latter  by  Mr.  Horst  and 
Mr.  Mahon.  He  also  wrote  or  edited  a  grammar  in  Tamil,  Qpireorgpir®) 
<s£l(3(r&<s5Ln ;  and  dictionaries  in  Tamil-French,  Tamil-Portuguese,  and 
Tamil-Latin  ;  and  one  of  the  poetical  dialect,  called  the  ^jjir^jr/r^,  '  The 
four-fold  Dictionary.' 

The  Adventures  of  Guru  Noodle  (uirin/r/r^^^^)  is  a  very  amusing 
story  in  eight  chapters,  intended  to  ridicule  the  native  Rabbis,  whom, 
however,  he  did  not  disdain  to  imitate  pretty  closely  in  many  things. 
This  is  translated  into  many  native  languages ;  and  an  edition,  with 
English  translation,  vocabulary  and  praxis,  was  published  in  London,  in 
1832,  by  Mr.  B.  G.  Babington,  of  the  Madras  Civil  Service. 

The  MS.  from  which  I  have  edited  the  Latin  translation  of  the  Kurral 
(generally  attributed  to  Beschi)  belongs  to  the  India  Office  Library,  and 
is  supposed  to  be  the  only  one  in  existence.  It  seems  to  have  been 
written  at  least  a  century  ago.  This  copy  (not  quite  perfect)  belonged 
to  Francis  Whyte  Ellis.  Some  missing  chapters  have  been  supplied  by 
Thomas  Brotherton  of  the  S.  P.  G.,  I  know  not  from  what  copy.  One 
sheet  of  the  India  Office  MS.  is  in  the  handwriting  of  William  Henry 
Drew.  Dr.  Graul  used  this  MS.  for  his  work.  Sir  Walter  Elliot  pre- 
sented it  to  the  Library  in  1877.  It  was  evidently  transcribed  by  a 
native,  and  mistakes  occur.  The  Latin,  it  will  be  seen,  is  tinged  with 
Tamil,  but  will  help  the  student  more  than  a  more  strictly  classical 
version.  The  Editor  has  had  to  amend  the  text  occasionally,  but  has 
generally  allowed  even  doubtful  things  to  appear  as  in  the  MS. 

Beschi  was  known  by  three  names  or  titles.  These  are  <s®<£ifluj  f5ir<& 
<s-<sun-uS  (S.  Dairy a-ndtha-svdmi),  isSiru^fr  (ipezsflsu/r  (S.  Vira-mahd-muni), 
and  ^5-W*—  ^3^-ac  ('Ismati  Sannydsi). 

Of  these  the  first  was  his  official  designation  as  a  Christian  priest, 
and  is  a  translation  of  '  Constantius,'  with  Ndtha  (=Lord)  and  Svdmi 
(the  usual  title  of  a  Hindu  guru).  The  second  title  was  given  him 
by  the  Hindu  literati,  and  is  also  equivalent  to  '  Constantius,'  with  the 
addition  of  the  words  '  great  devotee.'  The  third  was  given  him  by 


VI  PKEFACE. 

Chanda  Saheb,  and  signifies  *  the  Chaste  or  Noble  Ascetic,'  and  is  also 
intended,  more  or  less,  to  reproduce  his  Christian  name. 

[See  « A  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Father  Beschi,' 
by  A.  Muttusami  Pillai.  Madras  Lit.  Journal,  April  1840.] 

I  have  in  transliteration  used  rr  for  p,  and  have,  therefore,  written 
Kurral.  In  this  I  follow  the  example  of  Beschi.  But  my  chief  reason 
for  this  course  is  that  in  pronunciation  it  is  nothing  but  a  strong 
double  r.  In  common  Tamil  p  is  constantly  used  for  jr,  and  in  the 
cognate  languages  the  rough  or  double  r  is  hardly  used  at  all.  The 
very  signs  p  and  $5>  (the  Telugu  equivalent,  now  well-nigh  obsolete) 
seem  to  be  from  a  doubling  of  the  jr  and  6. 

The  kind  patronage  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  in  Council, 
and  of  the  Madras  Government,  has  enabled  me  to  publish  this  work. 

To  Dr.  E.  Bost,  Librarian  of  the  India  House,  I  am  indebted  for 
much  kindly  assistance,  without  which  this  volume  would  not  have 
been  published. 

Mr.  F.  Pincott,  M.B.A.S.,  has  rendered  me  invaluable  assistance 
throughout.  This  gentleman  has  minimised  for  me  the  confessedly 
great  labour  of  publishing  such  a  book  in  England. 

Works  of  reference  I  could  command  at  the  British  Museum,  the  India 
House  Library,  and  the  Oxford  Indian  Institute  ;  but  I  have  often  felt 
the  lack  of  the  advice  and  assistance  of  Native  scholars  which  I  en- 
joyed for  many  happy  years  in  India.  I  have  examined  and  used  most 
of  the  books,  Native  and  European,  relating  to  the  Kurral ;  but  have 
often  departed  from  traditional  renderings ;  and,  as  no  Native  eye  has 
seen  my  MS.,  I  must  bear  the  entire  responsibility  in  such  cases. 

That  this  publication  may  be  useful  in  promoting  the  real  study  of 
Tamil,  and  so  help  those  who  go  to  South  India  as  officers  of  Govern- 
ment, or  as  missionaries,  better  to  understand  the  mind  of  the  people 
among  whom  they  live  and  work,  is  my  one  desire  in  sending  it  forth. 

Quod  faxit  D.  0.  M. 

G.  U.  POPE. 

INDIAN  INSTITUTE,  OXFORD. 
Sept.  1,  1886. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACE  ....... 

INTRODUCTION — 

I.  General       ....... 

IE.  Grammar  of  the  Kurral      . 
III.  Metre  of  the  Kurral   .... 

TEXT  AND  TRANSLATION 

NOTES       ....... 

LEXICON  AND  CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  KURRAL  AND 
NALADI 

INDEX 


PAGE 

iii-vi 


i-xiv 

xv-xxiv 

xxv-xxviii 

1-182 
183-328 


[77]-[80] 


ERRATA. 


[Please  to  correct  before  using  the  book.] 


Couplet      14,  for  (GjsssrpSl  read 

70,  ,,  (o)  60  GVT  £)](&£  ,, 

91,  „  effjr  „               <s§ 

96,  GST  „  <ssr 

131,  La  „     •  ib 

190,  „  LB  SGST6SQI  „ 

207,  „  df  „             d 

209,  /D  /£ 

223,  „  tz3>eu 

265,  „  Q«UJ  „            ©<ffli 

311,  „  rr)fr  „                /D/r 

322,  „  eu/^  „             eu/r; 

346,  ,,  ($<&  ,,             (5<s 

354,  „  Q<SIJUJ 

A  O  O  f1* 

4dO,  „  ^dS57  „ 

461,  „  L^U  „                  f^LJ 

491,  „  6ST6V  „                  63T6U 

608,  „  ITS  „                   /Ttf 

Chap,  c.,  title,  „  <eo)  „            «B 


The  following  should  have  been  inserted  in  page  [56]. 


u 


a  bullock,'  624,  Nal.  2. 

[S.    Bhagavdn],     '  tlie 
revered  one,'  i. 

.  (§  68  ;  U(&,J53$  and  LJ«@, 
56  III.)  'be  divided.'  u<$ 
(§  168)  '  so  that  disunion  en- 
sues,' 187.  u&@s8(b>Lz  (§  254) 
'will  be  split,  wrecked,'  1068. 
2.  (§  64;  S.  bhaj ;  comp.  ®y@), 
'  divide,  share.'  u^jssp  '  havin  g 
shared,'  322.  (See  LJ/T^^?.) 
LJcff®^  (§  190)  'a  slice,  bit,'  889. 

LJffieu.  1.  (§  148)  '  Disunion, ' 
851,852.  2.  'Day-time,' 481, 
999.  [Comp.  Lj/reu;  S.lhaga', 
H.B.  Pt.  II.  p.  37.]  (ipfbu&eu, 
iSlrr)LJ<E56o  (§  225)  '  forenoon, 
afternoon,'  319. 

LJGX&.  1.  'Enmity,'  146, 
207,  434,  450,  861,  867,  871-80, 
995.  2.  '  Hostile  act,  provok- 


ing enmity,'  1225.      3.  'A  foe,' 
304,  674,  723,  727»  734,  744,  830, 
863,  875,  882.     gLLLu«ro<s;  'Civil 
dissension,'        735,        881-890. 
Ch.      LXXXVII. 
Ch. 

LXXXVIII.  LbL-LJ£G)<£  [tngJJCT-f 

LJSO«],  'a  potter's  knife,  the 
divider  (foe)  of  the  earthen 

vessel,'  883.  u <ss>s- <so LO  '  hosti- 
lity, 709.  LJ<58><f5-<SU/r  (§  184) 

'foes,' 465,  817,  869,  877,  878. 
U&    (§   66 ;    comp.    LJ<^),    '  grow 
sallow,  wear  a  green  and   sickly 
aspect.'        Lj&JFs?,   1232,   1278. 
uffJBjff,  1181.        LJcF^^^?,  1238. 

U&/Ff£fT<3fT,   Il88.  U&&&  'let 

.  .  .  grow  sallow,'  1189.  [Intro, 
p.  xx. ;  Opt.,  §  140.]  LJ&ULJ 
*  sallowness,'  1182-90,  1239-40. 
u<fuLjjp}U(mQjff6i),  Ch.  cxix. 
Lj^Sou  '  sallowness  from  love- 
sickness  :  green  and  yellow 
melancholy?  1183. 


E  R  E  A  T  A. 


A  L/errsffl  (  •  )  may  be  supplied  in  109  (u>),  323  («sr),  346  («),  352  (u>), 
354  (uj),  501  (car).     In  12  (uu/r). 

[Correct  these  in  text.     T^e?/  are  all  correct  in  the  Concordance.] 


Intro,  p.  iii.,  1.  37,  for  (sn^  read  sum. 
xx.,  1.  33,  read  Telugu 


Verse    13, 

26, 

74, 

135, 

273, 

279, 

287, 

313, 


for          jS 


read 


uuirir 
2nd  LS 

(Lp63)L_KJ 
ff 

Q«/r© 


1 


enn 


Q<F/T 


(urr. 


ujir. 

Q&IT®. 

&. 


0SITU. 


/IT. 
(SUIT. 


/     443, 

472, 

517, 

586, 

601,  line  2,  for      & 

605  (notes,  p.  272),  for  fir  „ 

614,  line  2,  for      Q<su  „ 

627,          for          (Lp® 

629,  „  ® 

650,  „  crojr/r  „ 

674  (p.  279),  rea^  reliquiae. 

700,          for          /D  read 

714,  „  ©@)srfl 

823,  ,,  <6G8)tr 

1103,  „  enfl 

1194,  „  ®(u 

Page  275  (notes),  1.  3,  for  etibus  read  etatibus. 


(1®. 


fcP- 


INTRODUCTION. 


I.—GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 

THE  weaver  of  Mayilapur,  known  now  only  as  Tiruvalluvar,  was  un- 
doubtedly one  of  the  great  geniuses  of  the  world ;  but  his  fame  belongs 
to  South  India  alone,  and  to  only  one  great  race  there.  He  is  the 
venerated  sage  and  lawgiver  of  the  Tamil  people,  of  whom  there  are 
about  ten  millions  inhabiting  the  Central  and  Southern  Karnatic. 

M.  Ariel,  in  a  letter  to  Burnouf  published  in  the  Journal  Asiatique 
(Nov.-Dec.  1848)  speaks  of  Tiruvalluvar' s  great  work  as  *  the  master- 
piece of  Tamil  literature — one  of  the  highest  and  purest  expressions  of 
human  thought.'  Again,  he  says  :  '  That  which  above  all  is  wonderful 
in  the  Kurral  is  the  fact  that  its  author  addresses  himself,  without 
regard  to  castes,  peoples  or  beliefs,  to  the  whole  community  of  mankind  ; 
the  fact  that  he  formulates  sovereign  morality  and  absolute  reason ;  that 
he  proclaims  in  their  very  essence,  in  their  eternal  abstractedness,  virtue 
and  truth ;  that  he  presents,  as  it  were,  in  one  group  the  highest  laws  of 
domestic  and  social  life ;  that  he  is  equally  perfect  in  thought,  in  lan- 
guage and  in  poetry,  in  the  austere  metaphysical  contemplation  of  the 
great  mysteries  of  the  Divine  Nature,  as  in  the  easy  and  graceful 
analysis  of  the  tenderest  emotions  of  the  heart.' 

It  is  strange  that  the  poet  and  his  one  great  work  are  both  without  a 
name.*  The  author  himself  is  commonly  known  as  Tiru-valluva- 
nayanar  (lit.  '  the  sacred  devotee,  priest,  or  soothsayer  of  the  Parraya 
caste ').  Tradition  says  he  was  a  weaver,  and  of  those  who  are  regarded 
as  the  refuse  of  all  the  castes — the  pariah  tribe.  Their  priests,  sooth- 
sayers, teachers,  or  '  prophets  '  are  styled  Valluvar.  But  he  does  not 

*  '  Ce  livre  sans  nom,  par  un  autre  sans  nom.' — Ariel.  Dr.  Earth,  Religions  of  India, 
translated  by  Rev.  J.  Wood,  p.  157  (Triibner's  Oriental  Series,  1882),  speaks  of  this 
work  as  '  that  admirable  collection  of  stanzas  in  the  Tamil  (stc)  language,  which  is 
instinct  with  the  purest  and  most  elevated  religious  emotion.' 


11  THE    KURRAL. 

write  as  a  priest,  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  gain  from  his  writings 
any  idea  of  the  kind  of  temple  in  which  he  lit  the  sacred  lamp  and 
presented  the  offerings  of  his  people.  It  is  strange  that  the  title  by 
which  alone  the  greatest  poet  of  South  India  is  known  should  be  one 
indicating  an  origin  most  degrading  and  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  the 
vast  multitudes  of  whom  he  has  been  for  ten  centuries  the  Oracle.  The 
last  has  indeed  become  first.  A  wild  and  utterly  incredible  tradition 
assigns  him  a  Brahman  father  and  a  no-caste  mother ;  and  represents 
the  poetess  Avvai  (  =  'old  woman' :  her  name,  too,  is  unknown)  as  his 
sister,  while  several  other  poets,  of  whom  some  fragments  remain,  were 
his  brothers.  All  that  we  certainly  know  is  that  he  was  a  pariah,  and  a 
weaver;  lived  at  S.  Thome,  or  Mayilapur,  now  a  suburb  of  Madras ;  and 
had  an  intimate  friend,  probably  a  patron,  called  £lela-9inkan  (=*Lion 
of  the  surf),  who  was  the  captain  of  a  small  vessel. 

The  poet's  home  was  a  place  around  which  there  still  lingers  a  strange 
oriental  beauty,  and  which  has  probably  not  changed  much  since  the 
time  when  the  passer-by  might  have  heard  the  click  of  the  shuttle 
mingling  with  the  low  chaunt  of  his  melodious  verse.  I  may  be  par- 
doned for  dwelling  on  my  recollections  of  this  interesting  spot,  since 
in  1840  my  missionary  life  began  there,  and  while  visiting  the  villages 
around,  that  enthusiasm  for  the  great  Tamil  poet  was  first  kindled 
which  has  been  an  important  factor  in  my  life.  Mayilapur,  or  Mayilai,  is 
'  the  town  of  peacocks,'  and  the  name  seems  to  indicate  a  place  of  groves 
and  gardens  around  old  temples.  There  is  a  sacred  tank  still,  with  a 
belt  of  cocoa-nut  palms,  and  a  square  of  old  leaf-covered  native  houses, 
in  any  one  of  which  the  poet  might  have  lived.  The  sea-shore  is  close 
by,  and  IQlela^inkan's  successors  (I  fear  much  degenerated)  dwell  there 
yet.  The  poet  could  hear  the  boom  of  the  surf-waves,  and  pondered 
often,  doubtless,  on  the  shore  of  what  he  calls  the  ndma-nw,  'the 
gruesome  wave.'  (149.) 

A  higher  interest  is  imparted  to  the  spot  and  its  neighbourhood,  at  least 
to  Christians,  by  the  tradition  (so  long  and  lightly  discredited,  but  now 
generally  acknowledged  to  be  authentic)  that  here  S.  Thomas  preached, 
and  here  met  his  death  by  a  spear  (vel)  such  as  the  poet  often  speaks 
of,  and  was  here  buried."  Mayilapur  to  us  is  better  known  as  S.  Thome. 
In  this  neighbourhood  a  Christian  community  has  existed  from  the 
earliest  times.  Here  are  fine  old  Armenian  and  Portuguese  churches  ; 
and  a  Christian  inscription  of  the  5th  century.  Here  Pantaenus  of 
Alexandria  taught ;  and  we  are  quite  warranted  in  imagining  Tiru- 
valluvar,  the  thoughtful  poet,  the  eclectic,  to  whom  the  teaching  of  the 
Jains  was  as  familiar  as  that  of  every  Hindu  sect,  who  was  not  hin- 


*  The  reader  may  find  a  full  discussion  of  this  subject  in  Dr.  German's  learned  and 
instructive  work,  Die  Kirche  der  Thomas  Christen, 


INTRODUCTION.  Ill 

dered  by  any  caste  prejudices  from  familiar  intercourse  with  foreigners, 
whose  one  thought  was  to  gather  knowledge  from  every  source,  whose 
friend  the  sea-captain  would  bring  him  tidings  of  every  stranger's 
arrival  (coming  from  Ceylon,  perhaps,  in  his  own  dhoney)  :  we  may 
fairly,  I  say,  picture  him  pacing  along  the  sea-shore  with  the  Christian 
teachers,  and  imbibing  Christian  ideas,  tinged  with  the  peculiarities  of 
the  Alexandrian  school,  and  day  by  day  working  them  into  his  own 
wonderful  Kurral. 

The  East  and  the  West  have  influenced  one  another  in  a  very  real 
and  not  yet  thoroughly  understood  way  from  the  earliest  times.  It  is 
undoubtedly  a  noteworthy  fact  that  from  this  Mayilapur,  on  which  the 
eyes  of  Christendom  have  ever  rested  as  the  one  sacred  spot  in  India  of 
Apostolic  labour,  comes  the  one  Oriental  book,  much  of  whose  teaching 
is  an  echo  of  the  *  Sermon  on  the  Mount.' 

The  name  <aj/z>0r  Kurral  is  given  par  excellence  to  this  the  poet's 
great  and  only  work  ;  which  consists  of  133  chapters,  each  containing 
10  couplets  ;  and  thus  numbers  2,660  lines. 

Kurral  means  l  anything  short  '  (  */kurr,  Sans.  </krit,  Lat.  curt-us 
Gr.  K€ip,  A.S.  sceor-t),  and  is  properly  the  name  of  the  couplet,  as  being 
the  shortest  species  of  stanza  in  the  Tamil  language  (p.  xxvi.). 

Tiruvalluvar'  s  poem  is  thus  by  no  means  a  long  one  ;  though  in  value 
it  far  outweighs  the  whole  of  the  remaining  Tamil  literature,  and  is  one 
of  the  select  number  of  great  works  which  have  entered  into  the  very 
soul  of  a  whole  people,  and  which  can  never  die.  According  to  a 
custom  not  unknown  in  Europe,  a  series  of  verses  (most  of  them  very 
modern)  bearing  the  names  of  all  the  great  Tamil  poets  is  prefixed  to  the 
Kurral,  under  the  name  of  '  The  Garland  of  Tiruvalluvar,'  and  exhausts 
the  subject  of  his  excellence  with  every  variety  of  hyperbole. 

Several  of  these  are  neat.  One,  by  ujresor/r  (Paranar),  says  that  as 
Lair®j  (Vishnu),  when  he  appeared  as  Vamana  (@ro<srr  kurral  means 
'  dwarf  '  also),  or  the  dwarf,  measured  with  two  steps  heaven  and  earth, 
so  with  the  two  lines  of  his  diminutive  Venpa-footed  kurral-verse  has 
Tiruvalluvar  measured  the  universe. 


<su  IT  <s^l  <sij  esr 


Complete  in  itself,  the  sole  work  of  its  author,  it  has  come  down 
the  stream  of  ages  absolutely  uninjured,  —  hardly  a  single  various  reading 
of  any  importance  being  found,  —  and  every  rival  sect  in  the  Tamil 
country  claims  the  Kurral  as  its  own,  and  has  furnished  it  with  com- 
mentary and  critical  apparatus  accordingly. 


IV  THE    KURRAL. 

Tradition  declares  that  Tiruvalluvar  composed  his  Kurral  at  the 
request  of  his  neighbours,  in  order  that  the  Tami]  people  might  have  a 
Vedam  of  their  own  ;  and  it  was  doubtless  intended  to  become  the  abid- 
ing authority  on  all  ethical  subjects  for  the  Tamil  country.  The  author 
must  have  already  possessed  a  great  reputation,  or  this  request  would 
not  have  been  made  ;  yet  there  are  no  traces  of  any  other  writings  of  his. 

The  Kurral,  when  finished,  is  said  to  have  been  taken  by  its  author  to 
Madura,  where  there  was  a  college  of  learned  Tamil  scholars,  supposed 
to  have  been  founded  in  the  days  of  Vamqa  Qekhara,  an  ancient  king  of 
the  Pandya  kingdom.  In  this  college  Qiva  himself  had  condescended  to 
appear  as  the  forty-ninth  professor,  especially  devoting  himself  to  the 
exposition  of  the  Tamil  language.  The  god  also  bestowed  on  the  college 
a  sacred  bench  of  solid  diamond,  on  which  no  one  could  sit  who  was 
not  a  faultless  scholar.  [See  Wilson's  Hist.  Sketch  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Pandya.']  Lists  are  given  of  the  forty-eight  members  of  this  academy, 
but  there  are  no  genuine  remains  of  their  writings.  The  result  of  the 
appearance  of  Tiruvalluvar  is  variously  stated.  The  general  idea  is  that 
the  high-caste  assembly  would  not  permit  him  to  take  his  seat  on  the 
bench  with  the  learned  pandits,  on  account  of  his  want  of  caste  ;  but 
that,  meekly  acquiescing  in  his  own  exclusion,  he  simply  requested  per- 
mission to  lay  his  book  on  the  end  of  the  seat.  On  this  being  granted, 
the  book  was  placed  where  the  poet  should  have  been  seated,  and  the 
whole  bench  at  once  disappeared,  leaving  the  learned  professors  afloat  in 
the  Lotus-tank.  This  story  is  obviously  inconsistent  with  the  idea 
which  is  equally  prevalent,  that  the  president  was  Kapilar,  himself  a 
Pariah,  and  a  brother  of  Tiruvalluvar. 

The  truth  seems  to  be  that  the  Madura  school  of  Tamil  literature, 
now  too  full  of  Sanskrit  influences,  was  supreme  till  the  advent  of 
the  S.  Thome  poet,  whose  fame  at  once  eclipsed  that  of  the  southern 
sages. 

There  are  no  data  whatever  which  may  enable  us  to  fix  with  precision 
the  period  at  which  our  poet  flourished.  I  think  between  A.D.  800  and 
1000  is  its  probable  date.  The  style  is  not  archaic — far  less  so  than  that 
of  the  Qivaga  Qintdmani.  Remembering  that  its  author  was  not  fettered 
by  caste  prejudices,  that  his  greatest  friend  was  a  sea-captain,  that  he 
lived  at  S.  Thome,  that  he  was  evidently  an  '  eclectic,'  that  Christian 
influences  were  at  the  time  at  work  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that 
many  passages  are  strikingly  Christian  in  their  spirit,  I  cannot  feel  any 
hesitation  in  saying  that  the  Christian  Scriptures  were  among  the 
sources  from  which  the  poet  derived  his  inspiration. 

Dr.  Graul,  a  devoted  student  of  Tamil  literature,  published  an  edition 
in  Leipzig  and  in  London,  in  1856,  with  German  and  Latin  transla- 
tions. It  is  very  valuable,  though  incomplete — owing  to  his  lamented 
death — and  has  serious  misprints. 


INTRODUCTION.  V 

Mr.  F.  W.  Ellis,  an  Oriental  scholar  of  extraordinary  ability,  printed 
a  small  portion  of  the  Kurral,  with  copious  notes  and  illustrations.  The 
sheets  of  this  unfinished  work  (304  pages)  can  still  be  had. 

The  Rev.  W.  H.  Drew,  a  missionary  of  the  London  Society  in  Madras, 
published  an  edition  of  63  chapters,  with  English  Translation,  and 
additional  notes  by  the  fine  old  scholar,  Raman  uja  Kavirayar,*  with 
the  Tamil  commentary  of  Parimelaragar.  This  is,  as  far  as  it  goes, 
the  best  edition. 

The  purely  native  editions,  issued  under  the  editorship  of  the  late 
learned  pandit  Qarvanaperumalaiyar  of  Madras,  are  very  correct  and 
valuable. 

Twelve  native  commentators  have  illustrated  by  verbal  commentaries 
the  whole  text ;  but  the  student  will  do  well  to  disregard  the  meanings 
read  into  the  verses  by  persons,  native  or  European,  who  are  anxious  to 
prove  that  the  Tamil  sage  taught  their  own  favourite  dogmas.  Tiru- 
valluvar is  generally  very  simple,  and  his  commentators  very  profound. 

In  regard  to  the  philosophico-theological  system  taught  in  the  Kurral 
various  opinions  have  naturally  been  held.  Every  Hindu  sect  claims 
the  great  poet,  and  strives  to  interpret  his  verses  so  as  to  favour  its  own 
dogmas.  Something  on  these  subjects  will  be  found  in  the  notes  to  each 
chapter.  The  Jains  especially  consider  him  their  own,  and  he  has 
certainly  used  several  of  their  technical  terms,  and  seems  to  have  been 
cognizant  of  the  latest  developments  of  that  system. 

There  is  one  couplet,  however,  that  is  destructive  of  the  idea  that 
Tiruvalluvar  was  a  Jain.  In  Oh.  in.,  fourth  couplet,  a  story  regarding 
Indra  is  referred  to  as  proving  that  ascetics  have  power  over  the  gods. 
The  sage  was  Gautama,  who  cursed  Indra  for  deceiving  the  sage's  wife, 
Ahalya.  Now,  according  to  Jain  ideas,  a  sage  could  have  no  wife,  nor 
could  he  feel  the  emotion  of  anger,  nor  had  he  the  power  to  inflict 
punishment.  A  Jain  would  not  believe  the  story,  and  could  scarcely 
use  it  as  the  author  of  the  Kurral  has  done.  But,  in  as  far  as  it  is 
Oriental,  Tiruvalluvar' s  teaching  is  just  such  as  the  study  of  Hinduism, 


*  With  reference  to  my  old  Pandit,  I  venture  to  quote  words  used  elsewhere : — '  In 
many  ways  we  fail  to  understand  the  people  of  India.  Hindus  are  often  spoken  of  as 
apathetic.  I  should  term  them  fervid.  My  first  teacher  of  Tamil  was  a  most  learned 
scholar,  long  dead  (peace  to  his  ashes!),  who  possessed  more  than  any  man  I  have 
known  the  ingenium  perjervidum.  He  was  a  profound  and  zealous  Vaishnavite.  I 
remarked  one  day  a  long  white  line  or  scar  on  his  neck,  where  his  rosary  of  huge 
Eleocarpus  beads  hung,  and  ventured  to  ask  him  (I  had  to  wait  on  such  occasions  for 
the  mollia  tempora  fandi  /)  its  history.  ;'  Well,"  said  he,  "  when  I  was  a  boy,  I  could 
learn  nothing.  Nothing  was  clear  to  me,  and  I  could  remember  nothing.  But  I  felt 
my  whole  soul  full  of  an  intense  love  of  learning.  So,  in  despair,  I  went  to  a  temple  of 
Sarasvati  (the  goddess  of  learning),  and,  with  a  passionate  prayer,  I  cut  my  throat  and 
fell  bleeding  at  her  feet.  In  a  vision  she  appeared  to  me,  and  promised  I  should 
become  the  greatest  of  Tamil  scholars.  I  recovered,  and  from  that  day,  by  her  grace. 
I  found  all  things  easy,  and  /  am  what  she  said  I  should  be."  I  believe  he  was  so  :  and 
from  that  noble  enthusiastic  teacher  I  learnt  to  love  Tami}  and  to  reverence  its  ancient 
professors.' 


VI  THE    KUEBAL. 

in  the  light  of  Qarikara's  reforms,  combined  with  that  of  the  Jain 
system  in  its  later  developments,  and  of  the  Bkagavadgifd,  might  have 
produced. 

There  is  no  trace  in  the  Kurral  of  many  things,  systems,  doctrines, 
and  practices,  current  in  South  India  at  different  periods,  because,  I 
suppose,  they  had  been  eliminated  from  the  sage's  own  eclectic  system 
of  faith  and  practice,  and  because  his  work  is  didactic,  and  not  con- 
troversial. 

What  philosophy  he  teaches  seems  to  be  of  the  eclectic  school  as 
represented  by  the  Bhagavadyitd.* 

Of  Bhakti — that  compound  of  TTIOTIS  and  dyaTn?,  the  introduction  of 
which  into  India  I  still  think  (with  Weber)  is  mainly  due  to  the  influence 
of  Christianity — the  first  chapter  of  the  Kurral  is  a  beautiful  exposition. 

The  Kurral  owes  much  of  its  popularity  to  its  exquisite  poetic  form. 
A  kurral  is  a  couplet  (Third  Gram.,  187)  containing  a  complete  and 
striking  idea  expressed  in  a  refined  and  intricate  metre.  No  transla- 
tion can  convey  an  idea  of  its  charming  effect.  It  is  truly  an  '  apple  of 
gold  in  a  network  of  silver.'  Something  of  the  same  kind  is  found  in 
Greek  epigrams,  in  Martial,  and  the  Latin  elegiac  verse.  There  is  a 
beauty  in  the  periodic  character  of  the  Tamil  construction  in  many  of 
these  verses  that  reminds  the  reader  of  the  happiest  efforts  of  Propertius. 
Probably  the  Tamil  sage  adopted  it  as  being  the  best  representative  in 
Tamil  of  the  Sanskrit  qloka. 

The  brevity  rendered  necessary  by  the  form  gives  an  oracular  effect 
to  the  utterances  of  the  great  Tamil  *  Master  of  the  sentences.'  They 
are  the  choicest  of  moral  epigrams. 

The  selection  of  the  most  difficult  metre  in  the  language — one  permitting 
no  deviations  from  strict  rule,  and  requiring  such  wonderful  condensa- 
tion— for  a  long  work,  showed  that  the  author  intended  to  expend  upon 
it  his  utmost  of  power,  and  to  make  it  a  '  possession  for  ever,'  a 
*  delight  of  many  generations.' 

The  laws  of  the  Venpa  metre,  in  which  the  Kurral  is  composed,  are  very 
curious,  and,  in  fact,  unique  in  prosody.  They  will  be  explained  farther 
on  ;  but  the  student  of  Tamil  is  referred  to  my  Third  Tamil  Grammar 
for  a  more  complete  exposition.  In  the  Clavis  humaniorum  litter  arum 
sublimioris  Tamulici  idiomatis,  by  the  great  Beschi,  the  whole  subject  of 
Tamil  poetry  is  discussed.  The  late  lamented  Dr.  A.  C.  Burnell,  M.C.S. 
(among  his  very  many  benefactions  to  Oriental  learning),  issued  a  re- 
print of  this  valuable  work,  which  is  most  faithful  to  its  native  sources, 
the  best  of  which  are  printed  in  my  Third  Grammar. 

The  following  is  an  analysis  of  the  whole  Kurral,  as  given  in  the 
Commentary  of  Parimelaragar. 


*  Earth,  Religions  of  India,  p.  192  (Trubner,  1882). 


INTRODUCTION.  Vll 

It  is  divided  into  three  BOOKS  treating  of  Virtue,  Wealth,  and 
Pleasure.  The  Nannul,  a  standard  Tamil  Grammar  of  much  later  date, 
has  the  rule  :  — 

'  The  benefit  derived  from  a  treatise  must  be  the  attaining  to  Virtue, 
Wealth,  Enjoyment,  Heaven  (Deliverance).'  In  the  26th  fioka  of  the 
Hitopade<;a  the  same  enumeration  is  given  : 


DharmmdrthM-kdma-mokshdndm. 

Our  author  treated  of  only  three  of  these.  Did  he  leave  his  work 
incomplete  ?  or  did  he  refrain  from  any  exposition  of  Vidu  or  Mokslia 
because  he  resolved  to  take  only  the  practical  view  of  things  ?  I  sup- 
pose he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  glimpses  he  had  obtained  of  man's 
future,  and  waited  for  light  ;  or,  perhaps,  he  thought  his  people  not 
prepared  for  higher  teaching.  Ch.  xxxv.  —  xxxvu.  give  us  his  nearest 
approach  to  the  subject. 


BOOK  I.— VIRTUE.     Ch.  i.— xxxvm. 

The  Tamil  word  is  ARRAM  [Comp.  8.  ri=ar,  from  whence  rita  and  ?v/fj  =  S.  D'HARMA, 

§  I.  INTRODUCTION.    Ch.  i. — iv. 

1.  The  praise  of  God*  4.  The  commendation  of  the  strength  of 

2.  The  excellence  of  rain.  virtue :     '  ad    virtutem     sectandum 
.-'.  The  greatness  of  those  who  have  rr-                 hortatio.' 

nounced :  Ascetics. 
[Beschi  makes  Ch.  I. — III.  the  Preface,  '  Prologus.'  and  Ch.  IV.  the  Inti-oduction.] 

§  II.  VIRTUE  IN  DOMESTIC  LIFE.     Ch.  v. — xxiv. 

5.  Domestic  life :  married  life.  14.  The   possession   of   decorous   conduct. 

6.  The  goodness  of  the  help  to  domestic  [S.  Ac  KARA.] 

life :  the  wife.  15.  Not  coveting  another's  wife. 

7.  The  gain  of  sons  :  children.  16.  The  possession  of  forbearance. 

8.  The  possession  of  affection  :    love  of      17.  Absence  of  envy. 

family.  18.  Absence  of  covet ousness. 

i).  The  cherishing  of  guests  :  hospitality.         19.  Not  speaking  evil  of  the  absent. 

10.  The   utterance    of     pleasant    things:       20.  Not  uttering  profitless  words. 

kindly  speech.  21.  Dread  of  evil  deeds. 

11.  The  recognition  of  benefits  conferred:       22.  The  recognition  of  duty. 

gratitude.  23.  Giving. 

12.  Impartial  justice.  24.  Renown. 

13.  The    possession    of     restraint:     self- 

control. 


*  Though  his  first  chapter  is  '  The  Praise  of  God,'  theology  is  no  part  of  hi.s  general  subject 
and  he  scarcely  alludes  to  a  Divine  Being  in  the  remaining  chapters. 


Vlll 


THE    KURRAL. 


§  III.  VIRTUE  IN  A  LIFE  OF  RENUNCIATION  :  ASCETIC  VIRTUE.     Ch.  xxv. — xxxvn. 


Part  i.  Religious  observances  :  (S.  VRATA) 
Ch.  xxv. — xxxin. 

25.  Possession     of     grace :      benevolence. 

[Comp.  8.] 

26.  The  refusal  of  flesh  :  abstinence  from 

animal  food. 

27.  Penitence  :  mortification. 

28.  Inconsistent      conduct  :       indecorum. 

[Opposite  of  14.] 

29.  Absence  of  fraud. 


30.  Truthfulness. 

31.  Absence  of  wrath. 

32.  Inflicting  no  wain. 

33.  Not  killing. 

Part  ii.  Wisdom.     [S.  TATVA-JNANAM.] 

34.  Instability  (of  earthly  things). 

35.  Renunciation. 

36.  Perception  of  the  true. 

37.  Extirpation  of  desire. 


§  IV.  DESTINY. 
>.  Ancient  deeds  '.fate. 


BOOK  II.— WEALTH.     Ch.  xxxix.— evm.     [PROPERTY.] 

[Beschi :  *  rerurn   proprietatos.'    Graul :  '  de  bonis  ' :  •  vom  Gute.'    Ariel :  '  la  fortune.'] 


§  I.  ROYALTY.     Ch.  xxxix. — LXIII. 


40. 
11. 
42. 
48. 

44. 

45. 
40. 

17. 

48. 

49. 
50. 
51. 


Kingly  greatness. 

Learning. 

The  absence  of  learning. 

Hearing. 

The  possession  of  knowledge :  wis- 
dom. 

Correction  of  faults. 

Seeking  the  help  of  the  great. 

Not  associating  with  the  mean. 

The  method  of  acting  after  due  con- 
sideration. 

The  recognition  of  power  (in  an  oppo- 
nent). 

The  recognition  of  opportunity. 

The  I'ecognition  of  place. 

Examination  before  reposing  confi- 
dence. 


52.  The     employment     of     duly-selected 

agents. 

53.  Cherishing  kindred. 

54.  The  absence  of  self-forgetfulness. 

55.  The  right  sceptre. 

50.  Tyranny.       (The    obliquity    of     the 
sceptre.) 

57.  The  not  acting  so  as  to  inspire  fear. 

58.  Benignity. 

59.  The  use  of  detectives. 

00.  Magnanimity :     elevation    of     mind  : 

energy. 

01.  The  absence  of  sloth. 

02.  Manly  activity. 

('»:>.  Not  despairing  in  afflictive  times. 


II.  MINISTERS  OF  STATE.     Ch.  LXIV. — LXXIII. 


04.  The  ministry. 

05.  Power  in  words. 

06.  Purity  in  deed. 

07.  Firmness  in  deed. 

08.  The  method  of  action. 

09.  The  embassy. 


70.  The  way  to  behave  in  the  presence  of 

Kings. 

71.  Reading  the  mind  :  '  recognition  of  the 

sign.' 

72.  Recognition  of  the  Council.      Tact  in 

the  Council-chamber. 

73.  Not  quailing  before  the  Council, 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


III.  ESSENTIALS  OF  A  STATE.    Ch.  LXXIV. — xcv. 


74.  The  land. 

75.  The  fort. 

76.  The  method  of  collecting  revenue. 

77.  The  excellence  of  the  army. 

78.  Military  spirit. 

79.  Friendship  :  allies. 

80.  Scrutiny  of  friendship. 

81.  Familiarity. 

82.  Evil  friendship. 

83.  Faithless  friendship. 

84.  Folly. 

85.  Unwisdom. 


86.  Hostility. 

87.  The  excellence  of  hate  :   how  to  make 

enmity  profitable. 

88.  Skill  in  the  conduct  of  quarrels. 

89.  Secret  enmity :  treachery. 

90.  Giving  no  offence  to  the  great. 

91.  Uxoriousness :  '  not  going  in  the  wife's 

way.' 

92.  Wanton  women. 

93.  Abstinence  from  '  toddy.' 

94.  Gaming. 

95.  Medical  art. 


§  IV.  APPENDIX.     Oh.  xcvi. — cvm. 


96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 


Nobility. 

Honour. 

Greatness. 

Perfect  excellence. 

Courtesy. 

Wealth  without  benefit. 

The  possession  of  shame. 


103.  The  way  to  sustain  the  family. 

104.  Agriculture. 

105.  Poverty. 

106.  Mendicancy. 

107.  The  dread  of  mendicancy. 

108.  Vileness. 


BOOK  III— LOVE.  [SEXUAL  LOVE.]     Ch.  cix.— cxxxni. 

§  I.  CONCEALED  LOVE.    Ch.  cix. — cxv.     «  The  GAND'HARVA  Marriage.' 

109.  Mental   disturbance   caused  by   the       112.  The  praise  of  her  beauty. 
Princess'  beauty.  113.  Declaration  of  love's  special  grace. 

110.  Recognition  of  the  signs  (of  mutual       114.  Abandonment  of  reserve, 
love).  115.  The  rumour. 

111.  Rejoicing  in  the  embrace. 


§  II.  WEDDED  LIFE. 

116.  Not  enduring  separation. 

117.  Complainings  of  absence. 

118.  Eyes  consumed  with  grief. 

119.  Grief 's  pallor. 

120.  Solitary  anguish. 

121.  Sad  memories. 

122.  Visions  of  the  night. 

123.  Lament  at  eventide. 

124.  Wasting  away. 


Ch.  cxvi. — cxxxin.     '  The  ACURA  Marriage.' 

125.  Soliloquies. 

126.  Reserve  overcome. 

127.  Longing  for  return. 

128.  Full  declaration. 

129.  Longing  for  re-union. 

130.  Dissatisfaction  with  herself. 

131.  Pouting. 

132.  Petty  jealousies. 

133.  The  pleasures  of  temporary  variance. 


In  the  Notes  I  have  striven  to  remove  difficulties  from  the  path  of  the 
beginner.  The  poem  will  not  at  first  reveal  all  its  beauties  to  the  student. 
The  whole  scope  and  connection  of  Chapters  v.-xxiv.  should  be  studied  to 
show  the  beauty  of  the  life  of  the  Tamil  householder  as  the  South-Indian 

b 


X  THE    KUKEAL. 

vates  sacer  contemplates  it.  The  ideal  householder  leads  on  earth  a 
consecrated  life  (50),  not  unmindful  of  any  duty  to  the  living,  or  to  the 
departed  (42).  His  wife,  the  glory  of  his  house,  is  modest  and  frugal; 
adores  her  husband  ;  guards  herself,  and  is  the  guardian  of  his  house's 
fame  (vi.).  His  children  are  his  choicest  treasures ;  their  babbling 
voices  are  his  music  ;  he  feasts  with  the  gods  when  he  eats  the  rice  their 
tiny  fingers  have  played  with ;  and  his  one  aim  is  to  make  them  worthier 
than  himself  (vn.).  Affection  is  the  very  life  of  his  soul :  of  all  his 
virtues  the  first  and  greatest.  The  sum  and  source  of  them  all  is  love 
(vin.).  His  house  is  open  to  every  guest,  whom  he  welcomes  with 
smiling  face  and  pleasant  word,  and  with  whom  he  shares  his  meal 
(ix.).  Courteous  in  speech  (x.),  grateful  for  every  kindness  (XL),  just 
in  all  his  dealings  (xn.),  master  of  himself  in  perfect  self-control  (xin.), 
strict  in  the  performance  of  every  assigned  duty  (xiv.),  pure  (xv.), 
patient  and  forbearing  (xvi.),  with  a  heart  free  from  envy  (xvn.),  mode- 
rate in  desires  (xvin.),  speaking  no  evil  of  others  (xix.),  refraining  from 
unprofitable  words  (xx.),  dreading  the  touch  of  evil  (xxi.),  diligent  in 
the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  of  his  position  (xxn.),  and  liberal  in  his 
benefactions  (xxin.),  he  is  one  whom  all  unite  to  praise  (xxiv.). 

It  is  not  irreverent  to  put  side  by  side  with  this  the  words  which  I 
feel  sure  he  had  heard,  or  at  least  the  summary  of  them  (Phil.  iv.  6-8)  : 

'  Whatsoever  things  are  pure, 
whatsoever  things  are  honourable, 
whatsoever  things  are  just, 
whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report, 
if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise, 
think  on  these  things.' 

Tradition*  (reflecting,  doubtless,  in  many  things  the  spirit  of  a  much 
later  age)  says  that  the  life  of  the  poet  in  Mayildpur,  with  his  wife 
Vd^uki,  was  in  perfect  accordance  with  these  chapters.  She  was  the 
embodiment  of  all  the  Kurral  requires  in  the  'help  to  household 
life.' 

In  his  youth,  her  father,  Mdrka-gahdyan,  struck  with  his  virtues, 
offered  the  poet  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Tiruvalluvar  was  inclined 
to  marry,  because  domestic  virtue  is  the  highest,  yet  resolved  first  to 
try  the  maiden's  temper  and  gifts  ;  and  accordingly  replied :  '  If  she 
will  take  this  sand  and  make  it  into  rice  for  me,  I  will  take  her  as  my 
wife.'  Vdquhi  meekly  took  the  basket  of  sand,  and,  feeling  sure  that 
what  the  holy  man  ordained  was  possible  and  right,  proceeded  to  boil 


*  The  Tiruvalluvar  Carittiram  ((jjl^w&r^GiilT  ^ffl^JLo)   and  the  Mahd-niti- 
gulamani  (Lb&ir'rj  SjlGKiTLzGSStl    will  satisfy  the  most  enthusiastic  lover  of  traditions. 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

it  ;  and,  as  (v.  55)  the  virtuous  woman  is  said  to  have  power  with 
the  gods,  so  it  came  to  pass  with  her  ;  a  miracle  was  wrought  on  her 
behalf,  and  she  brought  him  the  rice  for  which  he  asked.  So  she  became 
his  wife,  faithful  and  obedient. 

In  after  years,  when  the  poet's  fame  had  spread  through  all  the  Tamil 
country,  one  day  a  noble  stranger  came  to  the  weaver's  cottage,  and 
asked  the  question  (so  much  discussed  in  those  times),  *  Which  is 
greater  —  domestic  life,  or  a  life  of  asceticism  ?  '  The  sage,  while 
courteously  entertaining  the  stranger,  gave  no  reply  in  words  to  the 
question.  The  enquirer  was  left  to  see  domestic  life  in  its  perfect  grace, 
and  judge  for  himself.  What  he  saw  was  this.  One  day  when  Vdquki 
was  drawing  water  from  the  well  the  sage  suddenly  called  her,  and  the 
obedient  wife  instantly  came,  leaving  the  bucket  hanging  mid-way  in  the 
well 

Another  day,  when  the  good  housewife  brought  her  husband  his 
morning  meal  of  cold  rice,  he  complained  that  it  burnt  his  mouth  !  when 
she,  unquestioning,  and  unhesitating  in  her  attention  to  his  comfort, 
instantly  began  to  fan  it.  Another  day,  at  noon,  when  the  glaring  light 
was  everywhere,  the  sage,  who  was  at  work  at  his  loom,  let  fall  his 
shuttle,  and  called  for  a  light  to  seek  it  !  The  wife,  with  unquestioning 
obedience,  lit  a  lamp  and  brought  it  him  ! 

The  enquirer  had  learnt  his  lesson  :  '  Where  such  a  wife  is  found, 
domestic  life  is  the  best.  Where  such  a  wife  is  not,  the  life  of  the 
ascetic  is  to  be  preferred.' 

So  the  poet  and  his  Vdquki,  this  Griselda  of  the  Tamil  olden  days, 
lived,  till  the  time  that  she  must  leave  him,  and  gain  '  release.'  The 
dying  wife  looked  wistfully  at  her  husband.  '  What  is  it  ?  '  said  he. 
*  When  you  married  me,  and  on  that  day  I  stood  and  spread  the  rice 
for  you  (literally,  for  you,  my  god),  you  gave  me  a  commandment  to 
place  always,  with  your  meals,  a  cup  of  water  and  a  needle.  I  know 
not  why  it  was.'  '  It  was,'  he  replied,  '  that  if  a  grain  of  rice  were 
spilt,  I  might  pick  it  up  and  purify  it.'  Satisfied,  the  meek  Vdquki 
closed  her  eyes  for  ever. 

She  had  never  during  her  whole  married  life  questioned  her  lord's 
command  !  And  also,  it  is  clear,  no  grain  of  rice  had  ever  been  spilt  ! 

As  he  lay  that  night,  after  her  death  and  cremation,  and  pondered, 
he  was  heard  to  exclaim  (there  are  many  various  readings  of  the 
verse)  :  — 


jpj&a  Lj66)i—iLJ[T(o<srr  ! 
<r><SLi(rr?<£ 


Qu<5G)<gQ>uj  ! 

GTGST  J3fT/£/(3jUi   OT  &T  £5  GWT 


Xll  THE    KURKAL. 

'  Sweet  as  my  daily  food  !     0  full  of  love  !     O  wife, 
Obedient  ever  to  my  word !     Chafing  my  feet, 
The  last  to  sleep,  the  first  to  rise,  O  gentle  one ! 
By  night,  henceforth,  what  slumber  to  mine  eyes  ? ' 

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  these  characteristic  traditions,  it  is  the 
singular  glory  of  the  poet  to  have  drawn  this  picture  of  the  perfect 
householder;  and  it  speaks  loudly  in  favour  of  the  Tamil  race  that  these 
couplets  are  enshrined  in  the  hearts  of  the  whole  people.  Dynastic 
changes,  Muhaniinadan  raids,  and  irruptions  of  alien  races,  through  a 
dozen  centuries,  have  changed  many  things  in  the  South : 

'  Old  times  are  changed,  old  manners  gone, 
And  strangers  fill  the  Pnndyan's  throne,' 

but  the  Tamil  race  preserves  many  of  its  old  virtues,  and  has  the  pro- 
mise of  a  noble  future.  Their  English  friends,  in  teaching  them  all 
that  the  West  has  to  impart,  will  find  little  to  unteach  in  the  moral 
lessons  of  the  Kurral  rightly  understood.  Sir  A.  Grant  says  :  "  Humility, 
charity,  and  forgiveness  of  injuries,  being  Christian  qualities,  are  not 
described  by  Aristotle."  Now  these  three  are  everywhere  forcibly  incul- 
cated by  the  Tamil  moralist.  These  are  the  themes  of  his  finest  verses. 
So  far,  then,  we  may  call  this  Tamil  poet  Christian ;  and  to  understand 
him,  to  free  him  from  mistaken  glosses,  to  teach  his  works,  to  correct 
their  teaching  where  it  is  misleading,  and  to  supplement  it  where  it  is 
defective,  would  seem  to  be  the  duty  of  all  who  are  friends  of  the  race 
that  glories  in  the  possession  of  this  poetical  masterpiece.  Sir  A.  Grant 
(Aris.  Ethics,  i.  81),  treating  of  Greek  morality  '  before  the  birth  of 
Moral  Philosophy,'  says  truly :  'It  is  obvious  that  such  a  code  as  this 
could  only  arise  among  an  essentially  moral  and  noble  race.'  This  is 
precisely  what  I  claim  for  the  Tamil-speaking  peoples,  and  on  the  same 
ground.  We  shall  not  do  all  the  good  we  might  do  among  them  till  we 
more  unreservedly  recognize  this. 

No  doubt  many  couplets  in  this  remarkable  work  say  more  to  us  than 
they  did  to  those  for  whom  they  were  written.  Many  of  these  epigram- 
matic masterpieces  have  a  profound  significance,  of  which  their  author 
himself  was  hardly  conscious.  Their  resemblance  to  the  gnomic  poetry 
of  Greece  is  remarkable  as  to  their  subjects,  their  sentiments,  and  the 
state  of  society  when  they  were  uttered. 

Something  must  be  said  regarding  the  Third  Book  on  '  Love.' 

Of  this  Mr.  Drew  said,  that  '  it  could  not  be  translated  into  any 

European  language  without  exposing  the  translator  to  infamy.'      But 

this  is  only  true  in  regard  to  certain  of  the  commentaries  upon  it,  which 

are  simply  detestable,     I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  perfectly  pure  in  its 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 

tendency,  and  in  the  intention  of  its  wise  and  high-souled  composer. 
Its  title  is  Kdmattii-pdl,  '  the  division  which  treats  of  Mma,'  and  this 
means  Lust  or  Love. 

Kdman  is  the  Hindu  Cupid.  Hindu  ideas  differ  from  our  own.  This 
prejudice  kept  me  from  reading  the  third  part  of  the  Kurral  for  some 
years ;  but  the  idea  occurred  to  me  very  forcibly  that  he  who  wrote  : 

1  Spotless  be  thou  in  mind  !     This  only  merits  virtue's  name  ; 
All  else,  mere  pomp  and  idle  sound,  no  real  worth  can  claim,'  [34.] 

could  not  have  covered  himself  with  the  spotted  infamy  of  singing  a  song 
of  lust.  Thus  I  ventured  at  length  to  read  and  study  it,  rejecting  com- 
mentators, when  I  was  able  fairly  to  appreciate  its  spirit ;  and,  as  the 
result,  I  translate  it,  believing  that  I  shall  be  regarded  as  having  done 
good  service  in  doing  so.  Dr.  Graul  has  published  it  in  German  and  in 
Latin,  M.  Ariel  in  French. 

The  late  Dr.  Graul  wrote :  *  Ich  selbst  halte  mich,  fur  vollkonimen 
entschuldigt  nicht  bloss,  sondern  selbst  verbunden,  auch  das  dritte 
Buch  dem  abendlandischen  Publicum  anheimzugeben.  1st  doch  der 
Kurral  in  allem  seinen  drei  Theilen  ein  Spiegel  des  indischen,  speciell 
de  tamulischen  Yolksgeistes,  und  es  wiirde  in  der  That  etwas  fehlen, 
wenn  man  den  dritten  Theil,  der  ein  so  helles  Licht  auf  das  hausliche 
Leben  wirft,  weglassen  Wolte,  bloss  weil  ein  paar  Andriicke  darin 
vorkommen,  die  an  die  freire  Art  des  Morgenlandes  erinnern.' 

'  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.' 

I  may  add  that  many  give  to  the  whole  a  mystical  interpretation,  an 
idea  with  which  commentators  on  the  book  of  Canticles  have  made  us 
familiar.  Its  interpretation  as  an  allegory  exhibiting  the  play  [S.  Ula] 
of  the  Divine  Spirit  with  the  embodied  soul,  would  be  in  harmony  with 
much  that  is  found  in  Muhammadan  literature  as  well  as  in  Sanskrit, 
especially  in  Buddhist  writers.  Yet  I  can  hardly  think  that  Tiru- 
valluvar's  tone  of  mind  would  lead  him  to  this  method  of  teaching 
spiritual  truths. 

In  the  Notes  I  have  introduced  many  stanzas  from  the  prreuy.  (Ndladi}, 
the  work  which  stands  next  in  estimation  to  the  Kurral  among  the 
Tamil  people.  The  tradition  regarding  the  Ndladi-ndnnilrru,  or  *  400 
Quatrains,'  is  that  8,000  sages  brought  their  verses  to  the  King  of 
Madura,  who,  to  test  their  worth,  caused  the  palmyra  leaves  on  which 
they  were  written  to  be  thrown  into  the  River  Yaikai.  Those  that 
floated  against  the  current  were  to  be  preserved.  Three  collections  of 
leaves  stood  the  test ;  one  was  found  to  contain  these  400,  and  the  two 
others  consisted  of  similar  collections  of  verses,  which  are  extant  under 
the  names  of  Para-won  (LJLpQLorrL$=^'  Old  words')  and  Arra-nerri- 


XIV  THE    KURRAL. 


qdram  (^pQpj&ffirjrLo^  Essence  of  the  way  of  Virtue').  The  two 
latter  works  are  inferior. 

I  suppose  that  the  meaning  of  the  tradition  is,  that  these  are  verses 
of  various  ancient  Tamil  poets,  which  the  stream  of  time  has  not  been 
able  to  sweep  away  into  oblivion.  Since  they  were  not  allowed  to 
perish,  they  may  be  presumed  to  have  been  the  most  popular,  perhaps 
the  most  worthy,  compositions  of  those  olden  times.  The  authors  seem 
to  have  been  Jains.  Perhaps  we  may  refer  them  to  the  time  of  Kuna 
Pandya,  some  time  in  the  eleventh  century  A.D. 

They  are  of  very  unequal  value,  often  obscure,  sometimes  trivial. 
The  prevailing  tone  is  cynical,  and  we  miss  in  them  the  healthy  humanity 
of  Tiruvalluvar.  They  have  been  forced  by  a  later  native  editor  into  an 
arrangement  harmonizing  with  that  of  the  Kurral  ;  the  result  of  which 
is,  that  the  title  of  a  chapter  often  affords  no  clue  to  its  contents.  They 
are  mostly  of  much  later  date,  I  think,  than  the  Kurral,  and  often  seem 
to  indicate  an  acquaintance  with  it.  I  must  mention  that,  though  by 
different  unknown  hands,  I  feel  sure  I  can  see  the  work  of  one  principal 
writer  in  about  half  of  them.  He  was  a  Tamilian  Antisthenes. 

Though  often  very  beautiful,  these  verses  especially  lack  the  con- 
densation and  vigour  of  our  poet  ;  and  I  have  often  felt  tempted  to 
exclaim,  when  noting  how  much  less  they  are  able  to  say  in  a  quatrain 
than  Tiruvalluvar  in  a  couplet  : 

vrJTTioi,  ovSe  to-atm/,  ocra>  TrAeov  rjfJLicrv  Trai/ros  / 

The  student  of  the  Kurral  should,  however,  thoroughly  master  the 
Ndladi. 

In  regard  to  the  translation,  I  may  venture  to  say  that  it  is  faithful, 
and  that  I  have  not  read  into  the  rendering  a  single  idea  or  thought 
which  there  were  not  good  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  poet  intended 
to  convey.  I  thought  it  best  to  try  to  give  a  metrical  translation.  The 
Tamil  scholar  will  see  that  I  have  tried  to  reproduce  even  the  rhythm  in 
many  cases,  but  I  could  not  retain  the  inimitable  grace,  condensation, 
and  point  of  the  original. 

Nothing,  not  even  a  corrupt  Greek  chorus,  so  defies  the  efforts  of  the 
student  as  does  very  much  of  the  high  Tamil  poetry.  The  poetical  dialect 
of  Tamil  allows  every  kind  and  any  amount  of  ellipsis,  so  that  a  line  is 
often  little  else  than  a  string  of  crude  forms  artfully  fitted  together. 
The  best  compositions  are  quatrains  or  couplets,  each  containing  a 
complete  idea  :  a  moral  epigram.  Their  construction  resembles  that  of 
a  design  in  mosaic.  The  materials  fitted  together  are  sometimes  mere 
bits  of  coloured  glass,  but  sometimes  also  very  precious  stones  and  pure 
gold.  And  the  design  ?  Why  you  walk  round  it,  and  try  to  catch  it 
in  all  lights,  and  feel  at  first,  and  often  for  a  long  time,  as  if  it  meant 


INTRODUCTION.    .  XV 

nothing  at  all,  till  you  catch  some  hint,  and  at  once  it  lies  revealed, 
something  to  be  thought  of  again  and  again,  some  bit  of  symbolism  it 
may  be,  not  unfrequently  grotesque,  often  quaint,  but  sometimes  also 
of  rare  beauty. 

Especially  of  Tiruvalluvar  it  may  be  said,  as  Archbishop  Trench  says 
of  S.  Augustine  (S.  Augustine  as  an  Interpreter  of  Scripture,  p.  154) : 
'  He  abounds  in  short  and  memorable,  and,  if  I  might  so  call  them, 
epigrammatic  sayings,  concentrating  with  a  forceful  brevity  the  whole 
truth  which  he  desires  to  impart  into  some  single  phrase,  forging  it  into 
a  polished  shaft,  at  once  pointed  to  pierce,  and  barbed  that  it  shall  not 
lightly  drop  from,  the  mind  and  memory.' 


II.— THE  GEAMMAE  OF  THE  KUEEAL. 

§  1.  To  the  student  of  the  Handbook,  it  will  at  first  seem  as  though 
the  Kurral  were  written  in  an  entirely  different  language  from  that  to 
which  he  has  been  introduced.  The  object  of  these  sections  is  to  explain 
whatever  in  the  language  of  this  poem  differs  from  the  ordinary  spoken 
Tamil ;  and  reference  will  be  made  to  the  sections  of  the  Handbook 
(Fourth  Edition)  throughout. 

The  Tamil  word  for  grammar  is  <j£i<so<f5<£<smL&  [S.  ^"^""1  =' charac- 
teristic ']  ;  and  the  aim  of  a  Grammar  should  be  to  state  lucidly  and  in 
convenient  order  the  characteristic  PACTS  of  a  language,  and  then  to 
analyse,  classify,  and  explain  them.  Here  the  facts  can  be  verified  by 
reference  to  the  Concordance. 

§  2.  The  Kurral  is  composed  in  pure  Tamil,  that  is,  with  scarcely  any 
admixture  of  Sanskrit.  This  will  appear  from  the  Vocabulary  and  Con- 
cordance, which  will  enable  the  student  to  form  an  independent  judg- 
ment on  many  points  of  grammar.  Whatever  may  be  the  original 
connection  between  what  Tamilians  call  the  Vada-mori  (<sui—-QLairL^I= 
'northern  speech')  and  the  Ten-mori  (Q<gesr-(o)LArrL£l='  southern 
speech '),  it  is  obvious  that  Tamil  is  not  a  dialect  of  Sanskrit,  but 
an  independent  language  with  a  copious  and  original  vocabulary,  having 
a  very  clear  and  philosophical  grammatical  system,  very  highly  culti- 
vated, and  in  every  respect  equal  to  Sanskrit  itself. 

This  is  the  mother  of  the  South  Indian  languages.  To  these  lan- 
guages the  term  Drdvidian  has  been  given,  but  the  epithet  is  unsuitable, 
as  Dravidam  includes  Guzerat  and  the  Mahratta  country  also,  and  is, 
in  fact,  a  name  for  all  the  country  south  of  the  Nerbuda.  The 


XVI  THE    KURRAL. 


(Panga-Tirdvidam),  or  '  five-fold  Dravidani,'  includes 
Tamil,  Telegu,  Kanarese,  Mahratti,  and  G-uzarati.  This  inappropriate 
naine  has  been  given  to  this  family  of  languages  because  the  word  Tamil 
itself  is  supposed  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Sanskrit  drdvida.  This  idea 
is  opposed  by  Native  scholars.*  The  derivation  of  the  word  ^L^LP  is 
uncertain.  The  following  suggestions  have  been  made  :  (1)  Since  LP  is 
a  formative  of  very  common  use  ({|)«LP,  L^LP,  &c.),  it  is  suggested  that 
<£L£IL£  is  from  the  root  <SL£!  'alone,'  and  that  it  means  'the  incom- 
parable.' (2)  It  is  said  to  be=£i©Lo/rLp")  or  (o^syrQiDfrifl  'the  sweet  or 
honey  speech.'  Neither  of  these  seems  probable.  Since  the  one  native 
designation  for  the  original  language  of  the  South  was  Ten-mori 
(©(^«jr(o)/jo/rLp"')=<  southern  speech,'  may  not  the  word  Tamir  be  simply 
a  corruption  of  this  ?  [Q^esrQLo/TLpI,  Q^LoQu^rrL^,  ^L$LP.] 

Believing  this  to  be  the  true  origin  of  the  word,  I  prefer  to  call  the 
family  of  South  Indian  languages  the  Tamilian,  as  it  is  certain  that 
for  the  study  of  each  dialect  of  them  Tamil  must  be  the  language  of 
reference. 

Of  this  pure  and  primitive  Tamil  this  work  of  Tiruvalluvar  is  the  most 
finished  specimen,  and  may  fitly  be  termed  '  a  well  of  (Tamil)  undefiled.' 
The  very  few  words  introduced  from  the  Sanskrit  are  made  to  assume  a 
Tamil  garb,  under  which  it  is  hard  to  recognize  them.     Thus, 
represents  S.  *faf,  ^trtf  the  S.  ^H^T^r,  ^eoLA&fr  the  S. 
the  S.  *n"*J*^  .     Many  Sanskrit  words  in  universal  use  now,  such  as 
z,  Q&rruLn,  firiL®,  are  not  found  in  the  Kurral,  which  uses  only 
and  «ffl.    In  the  Ndladi  many  more  Sanskrit  derivatives 
are  found,  and  there  is  in  general  a  much  less  exquisite  use  of  words. 

§  3.  The  form  of  the  text  presents  a  difficulty  to  the  student.  I  have 
printed  it  as  its  author  wrote  it,  with  two  differences  only.  In  the  poet's 
time  the  mute  mark,  or  qgrrsrfl,  was  not  used:  OT^^^J  was  written 
<oT(L^^^i.  Nor  was  there  any  distinction  between  er  and  <§j,  or  between 
9  and  g&,  except  in  some  cases  a  qerrgyft  over  the  short  letter  lengthened 
it;  thus  OT,  <sr  ;  gp,  g&.  I  have  not  introduced  stops,  and  a  small  space 
is  left  between  the  metrical  feet  ;  but  as  in  Tamil  there  is  a  caesura,  in 
general,  between  every  word,  this  does  not  make  it  more  difficult  to 
construe.  The  laws  of  combination  are  mainly  those  given  in  Appendix 
VIII.  to  the  Handbook  (Part  ii.  pp.  41-44). 

In  regard  to  orthography  we  find  ^su  for  sj<srr.  See  Q<s5&r&sxsu  and 
^eusSlfSgi.  We  have  Q^IT^ILQ  and  C^/TJI/LD,  g&©  and  s&®. 

LQ  is  used  for  ear  in  terminations  ;  thus,  jy/Dssr  for 


*  The  student,  when  he  is  able,  may  study  with  advantage  the  grammar  of  Putta- 
mittirandr  (np*5L&&$ff^S)ir'),  called  the  Tfoa$6nyam(rfff($ffitr$IUlJD)t  The  preface 
by  Tamotaram  Pillai  of  Jaffna  discusses  this  subject  ably. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV11 

eu  and  esr  are  interchangeable,  with  a  preference  for  ear.  We  have 
CTSoflsar  or  srsoflev,  and  the  term,  of  the  third  case  is  in  ^eo  or  ^ear. 
Thus  <g>j6\}  for  ^OTT  is  occasionally  used  in  1st  pers.  sing,  of  verbs. 

Poetry  mostly  prefers  eor. 

Clipt  forms  are  used,  as  <5reor  for  OTsargor.  This  is  required  by  the 
need  for  condensation. 

But  this  can  all  be  best  studied  in  the  Concordance. 

§  4.  The  greatest  difficulty  to  the  learner  arises  from  Ellipsis,  which 
in  all  its  forms  rules  over  Tamil  poetry.  The  metre,  requiring  much  to 
be  compressed  into  two  lines,  having  but  seven  feet  between  them, 
renders  constant  ellipsis  indispensable.  This  is  its  difficulty,  and  this 
also  is  one  of  its  great  beauties. 

(1)  The  finite  verb  is  omitted  whenever  this  is  possible.      Couplets  1 
and  2  have  no  verb ;  and,  in  general,  words  are  omitted  whenever  (the 
author  thinks  that)  no  ambiguity  arises  from  their  omission. 

(2)  There  are  six  kinds  of  ellipsis  (Q^/rsro-s)  enumerated  by  Tamil 
authors  (Third  Gram.  151-157),  and  numerous  examples  of  all  of  these 
occur  in  the  Kurral.     These  are  : 

(a)  Ellipsis  of  casal  signs  in  nouns,  &c.  [G>6N/E>jpt6ZDa>(l£Q(#/ra3D«].  In 
the  Kurral  the  noun  itself,  or  its  inflexional  base,  is  normally  used  for 
every  case.  It  may,  indeed,  be  said  that  case-endings  are  never  used, 
except  when  hopeless  ambiguity  would  result  from  their  suppression. 
The  fourth  case  (dative)  alone  is  generally  found  in  full.  Thus  in  2 : 
GU IT eu fSlisu!5Grir)(y(o)L-[rLpn-e^jiT  =  uifl & 
®JU[r<£!5i<ss:&ofr  <si/63c5r/E/<f5/r/r.  c|$(<£0)6u.  In  14:  <^fl 

The  inflexional  base  of  nouns  in  ti  ends  in 
&(TF>&<&:£g)  (963)  are  case  vii.  [coinp.  21,  213,  161]. 

Under  this  head  may  be  included  the  ellipsis  of  the  pluralising  particle 
in  j>i&fSl%gsBi  nouns  (H.  B.  29).  &<sfr  only  occurs  a  few  times :  L£xss&<s<r 
(60,  65),  y)<gw&<sfr  (271),  Lbfb<o®fDiu<sun-&<3(T  (263),  and  one  or  two  others. 

(6)  Ellipsis  of  verbal  inflections  [eStesrfQjBireaMi].  Here  the  root  of 
the  verb  is  used  as  an  adjective. 

The  theory  is,  that  the  relative  participle  (Q&iu  Sip,  Q<FUJ  <s,  Q&iii  iqth, 
H.  B.  §  74),  drops  its  termination,  and  becomes  an  aoristic  shortened 
enlargement  of  the  noun  to  which  it  is  prefixed.  This  is  not  unknown 
in  prose  ;  thus  ^fSl-tLp&Lz  is  '  an  acquaintance.'  Thus  are  used  in  5 
(Qfffr\  6  Q£/r),  13  (afl/fl),  218  (jy/fl);  and  compare  roots  sift,  jy/rf/,  ^j&j, 
g)eu  in  Vocabulary.  «$,  QUIT,  371. 

(c)  Ellipsis  of  connecting  particle,  when  one  noun  is  used  as  an 
attribute  of  another  [uflirLj£QjflMra»6  or  ($eaarpQprmG].  This  re- 
sembles the  Sanskrit  karma-dMmya  compounds.  Thus  in  8 
216  (uiuwLGjrLfi),  198  (^O^LJOJ^T).  Comp.  H.  B.  §§  130-133. 
30.  See  346-47 


XVI 

Xviii  THE    KUERAL. 

(d)  Ellipsis  of  particle  denoting  comparison  (a-si/eroLo^Q^/rsocffi).  This 
is,  in  fact,  equal  to  what  we  call  metaphor.     Comp.  6. 

(e)  Ellipsis  of  a.ii.     [a./iero/^^Q^/rero^.]     Comp.  4,  43. 

(/)  Ellipsis  of  other  words.  [^ssrO^/rL^^Q^/reros.]  Under  this 
head  fall  most  Tamil  compounds.  Thus  in  13 
besides  aSSsor^  in  6&fl(JB]g)fir  ;  and  u<sm(-\^  in 
there  is  ^esr  .  .  Q<&rr  in  fjnrp  (^Lpuu tlt_==  'the  vast  world  surrounded 
by  the  spreading  ocean/ 

In  regard  to  the  whole  subject,  the  Virasoriyam  has  a  chapter  called 
the  Q^/rero.sLJLJL-isuLD,  in  which  an  elaborate  attempt  is  made  to  show 
that  Q<srr<sG)<ss  is  the  Sanskrit  samdsa.  It  will  appear,  I  think,  that  the 
Tamil  method  of  arrangement  is  better.  The  rule  is  simply  this  : 
When  a  noun  has  one  or  more  enlargements  of  any  kind,  these  may  be 
prefixed  to  it  without  any  inflexional  increment,  in  their  crude  form 
(root,  stem,  or  inflexional  base),  with  or  without  euphonic  insertions,  so 
as  to  form  one  compound  word.  The  expansion  of  these  is  not  easy  in 
many  cases. 

A  group  of  elegant  words  of  constant  use  in  Tamil  poetry,  which  are 
chiefly  appellations  of  females,  comes  under  this  head.  They  are  examples 
of  metonomy.  Compare  in  Concordance  e&srftoSeroLp  (1329)='  she  with 
bright  jewels' ;  <sevrisic$<ss)Lp  (1081)  =  l  she  with  ponderous  ear-rings.' 

We  may  sum  this  up  as  far  as  relates  to  the  enlargement  of  subjects 
or  objects : 

The  meaning  of  a  noun  is  extended  or  defined — 

I.  By  composition.  Noun  +  noun:  t££Br<ff4&aj&u  'mental  anxiety'; 
and  there  may  be  an  ellipsis  of  case-sign,  of  adjective  sign,  or  of  several 
words.  See  Third  Gram.  152-7.  This  is  Q<sujb^)]<50)L^^Q^[r<ss)<ES  or  uesar 


II.  By  a  relative  participle,  with  or  without  connected  words :  i.e.  a 
relative  clause.     fseoeosr^fSl  gaflsar/r^Sssur :  '  an  assistance  that  has  stood 
in  a  good  path.' 

III.  By  a  verbal  root  prefixed,  with  or  without  connected  words.  This 
is  called  <s£l$5sr<£Q<sir<5®&.     It  is  the  preceding  with  an  ellipsis  of  the 
participial  or  temporal  affixes. 

Thus  some  of  the  most  beautiful  expressions  in  the  poem  are  built 
up.     I  append  a  few  examples  : 

(1)  ®({5<sTr(2<Frfl<25s$§5BriL/Lb.     Here  <s$Ssor  is  plural,  is  enlarged  by  ^(75 
with  2.0}  =  ' the  two  kinds  of  action.'      This  is  enlarged  by  CV/r,  for 
Q&gjLz,  with  its  subject  $)($<&='  to  which  darkness  clings.' 

(2)  <s£)/fl(/f/r:a9ujjg52/6u«L£>.      Here  &.6V&L&    is   enlarged    by  <s&ujeor  and 
by  <sSrfi//r  (itself  a  com  pound)  =  ' the  broad  world,  surrounded  by  the 
wide  waters.' 


\j 

! 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

§  5.  The  Declension  of  the  Noun  in  the  Kurral  is  not  very  different 
from  H.  B.  Part  ii.  App.  ix. 

(1)  The  second  case.     With  jysar,  32. 

(2)  The  third  case,    ^eu  with  ^gyieJr,  2.  $)ssr  for  ^&o,  14.  £D(60)6u,  102, 
129.     .#«r=«geu,  24,  39,  93.     9®,  195,  236.     gj>®,  37,  73. 

(3)  The  fourth  case.  LcxSfcx^,  67.  <jy<s<5rL9/r)(3j,  71.  ^6u<s@  (=tB®)jsgi8(g), 
149.     $6v<£@,  570. 

(4)  The  fifth  case.     @6b=zQuir&>,  9.      $60  =  '  from/  16,  97.      ®«r  = 
4  than,'  31,  32,  48.     With  a.tb,  64. 

(5)  The  sixth  case.     g)sar,  80.     jysar,  257. 

(6)  The  seventh  case  (or  abl.  of  place  where)  is  formed  with  the  aid 
of  the  particles  aessr,  34,  52,  117,  135,  223.    UXTL.®  (inf.  base  of  m/r©), 

94.     SLSTT,  13,  47.     iuft  168.     a.erfi,  545.    £Dsa)t_,  7.    uflsrodF,  3. 
59.    -Lflfiar,  225.     cSL.®  (see  csssbr).     g)eu,  46.     g)ssr,  123. 

(7)  The   eighth   case.        UJT^,  1311.      Q^djs^/f-,  771. 
1291. 

<5T  is  often  inserted  when  there  is  ellipsis  of  case.  &&ttrQ)LCKHLo  (29)  = 
'  even  for  a  moment.' 

Neuter  nouns,  when  primitives,  are  used  either  as  sing,  or  plural. 
Thus  (orq£<£^i  in  1.  [Comp.  5,  4,  9.] 

Nouns  masc.  and  fern.  (a.iL//r^3sOTr)  form  their  pi.  in  (1)  <j)//r,  14.  (2) 
^/r,  911.  (3)  ®/r,  920,  Ch.  xcii.  (4)  ^/r,  18,  30,  923. 

Derivative  neuters  in  jpj  make  pi.  in  jy,  or  ^GSKSII,  157,  8. 


§  6.  Predicates,  and  the  finite  verb  in  general. 

(1)  The  ordinary  forms  of  the  present  tense  of  the  finite  verb  do  not 
occur  in  the  Kurral.    Tiruvalluvar  does  not  use  any  form  corresponding 
to  H.  B.  §  34. 

(2)  The  past  tense,  as  in  H.  B.  §  70*,  is  found,  and  sometimes  is  the 
predicate,  as  .ji/Ln/r^^ssr,  1084.     Q(f5/rsOTrt_/r/r,  1183. 

(3)  But  the  future  is  most  often  found.     This  is  used  as  a  true 
aorist,  expressing  what  belongs  to  any  time  or  all  times.     And  of  this 
(if,  indeed,  it  can  properly  be  called  future)  the  general  form  in  e_ti  is 
the  commonest  ;  Q(FtutL//i,  answering  to  Telugu  §rn>^X)f\5o  .     Comp.  166. 

(4)  Besides  these  the  negative  verb,  and  the  imperative,  optative,  and 
prohibitive  moods,  are  extensively  employed.     Comp.  33,  140,  882. 

(5)  Whenever  the  verb  '  to  be  '  is  used  with  its  complement  as  the 
predicate,   the  verb  of  incomplete  predication,  or  copulative  verb,  is 
omitted.     See  299. 

(6)  In  considering  predicative  relation  as  expressed  in  the  Kurral,  it 
is  necessary  to  examine  certain  roots  which  are  in  constant  use  ;  such  as 
@eu,  which  denies  existence  ;  ^eb,  which  excludes  a  quality  ;    ^/r  '  rare, 
hard  '  ;   15  GO  '  good  '  ;  a.  err  '  existence,  inner  being.'     From  these  nouns 
are  formed  in 


XX  THE    KURRAL. 

In  the  Concordance  the  uses  of  these  roots  are  shown.  They  occur  as 
the  (or  in  the)  predicate  of  a  very  great  number  of  these  verses. 

To  these  roots  (and  to  many  others)  personal  terminations  are  added, 
and  the  result  is  what  Tamil  grammarians  call  the  eSSteBT&^/^L/qss 
'verb-sign.'  These  seem  to  be  really  nouns,  e.g.  ^fl^i  =  ( that 
which  is  hard,'  and  by  the  omission  of  the  substantive  verb  =  ' it  is 
hard,'  7. 

§  7.  General  view  of  the  VERB  in  the  Kurral. 

1.  The  BOOT  of  a  pure  Tamil  verb  is  generally  the  most  ancient  form, 
the  philological  root,  as  far  as  Tamil  is  concerned.     It  is  used 

(1)  as  an  imperative  [thus,  QLJUJ,  55.     g)©,  552]  ; 

(2)  with  an  ellipsis  of  inflexional  particles,  as  a  kind  of  adjective,  as 
shown  above  [<sSl(faGr<i5Q<£n'm<s5 ;  thus,  301,  0<F6l>6$/_iL]  ; 

(3)  for  the  infinitive,  as  in  Telugu,  where  the  usage  is  more  general, 
[thus,  805,  Qisn-<$<&&=Qr5(T&;i51§&<95,  '  things  calculated  to  cause  pain  ']. 

2.  The  root   receives    certain   formatives  which  are  convenient   for 
euphonic  or  other  purposes.     These  are 

(a)  a_  (with  doubling  of  final  consonant  often) :  QcFeu,  Q<F6ujy/. 

(b)  @,  with  or  without  a  nasal,  for  intransitives  and   <s@  for  transi- 
tives ;  Qurr  @,  ^  @,  371.     ^  «(S>,  ^i—  w@.    To  these  are  added  particles 
by  which  new  stems  are  formed,  causals  and  others.     H.  B.  160,  &c. 

3.  An  infinitive  in  ^  is  in  constant  use.  OTSBT,  37.  «5><aj <£<£&,  50.    There 
is  nothing  remarkable  in  its  use. 

Sometimes  uu  is  inserted,  and  then  the  infin.  seems  to  be  future,  = 
'  to  be  about  to  be.'  ^QJJUU,  67.  QLarruu,  90.  An  anomaly  is  <s/rilt$LUj, 
1313,  for  «/rili_.  H.  B.  §  168-71. 

4.  The  next  is  an  aoristic  form  in  &.LQ.     a-i—^jv/i,  13.     FF^JVIJLO,  31. 
96ujy//i,  33.     OTiij^j/i,  145.      QUITWJLZ  (Qufri^)  LJ©(®@LD,  372.     This  is 
used  as  the  third  person  singular  or  plural  of  all  genders,  and  also  as  an 
aoristic  relative  participle.     H.  B.  §  74.     This  is  reckoned  as  the  future 
tense  third  person  singular  and  plural.     But  it  is  one  of  the  oldest  and 
simplest  verbal  forms,   having  no  temporal  particle,  being  root  +  ?LLz 
with  or  without  @  or  &@.     Thus  in  Telegu  we  have  £oS£;rC$D  ='he, 

she,  they  send,  will  send '  [Tel.  rCfo  =Tam.  zi], 

5.  An  optative  mood,  or  courteous  imperative,  with  a  corresponding 
prohibitive,  is  the  next  in  importance.     Of  this  we  have  the  following 
forms  : 

(i.)  Positive.  G)<FWjeu,  33.  Q&LLJ&,  36.  $$5Gr&&,  250.  G)<f5/r<sfrr0j  (for 
Q<sfl-<sir<£),  875.  <SU/TL$  (S.),  1242.  «/rsdbr<®oi  (pi.),  1301.  ^luiT&La  (pi.), 
1268. 

(ii.)  Neg.  or  Prohib.  OTeoreu,  196.  Lo^ay/r^,  106,  439.  LJf_/r^,  1210. 
Since  ^d)  added  to  a  root  makes  an  optative,  either  positive  or  nega- 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 

tive  [see  196,  where  Gr®sr&j=l  call,'  or  'do  not  call'],  it  seems  as  if 
it  were  a  verbal  noun  in  ^d>,  with  ellipsis  of  QeuasorGlLn  and  Q<su<sssn—friJct 
respectively.  The  plural  adds  L^OTT  :  {jfiinsiJcvrLiSsvr,  1067  ;  fieveveffruQesr, 
771. 

6.  The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  tense.  In  the  Kurral  there  are 
but  two  tenses,  a  past  and  a  future  or  aorist.  There  is  also  a  negative 
aoristic  form.  As  regards  these  nothing  need  be  added  to  what  is 
given  in  the  H.  B.,  except  some  forms  with  jyerrQuisroL,  or  lengthening 
of  vowels.  [§  12.] 

The  pronominal  endings  by  which  person,  number,  and  gender  are 
distinguished  are  : 

Sing.  1  pers.  (grsar,  .jysar,  .jyev.  [Comp.  lutresr.']  GTGtsrQfDGisr,  1315, 
^Lo^GW6sr,1317.  ^£#£(2^,1083.  qeuLJGueiJr,  1267.  qeuuueu, 
1259.  Qptrweo,  1236.  Lj(/5@ayear,  1266. 

Very  irregular  is  £L<5®sr<fE(&j,  1181  =  "!  shall  tell." 

Sing.  2  pers.     ^tu,  ©,  gg.     [Comp.  /.]     Q&fSl,  1292.     atrtLfl,  1246. 

©L/jy^qeu^iSB)^,  1301.     Qf(y^^iu,  1200. 
Sing.  3  pers.  was.  ^esr.  (^/r  honorific.)    [Comp.  ^a/s 

Fern,  e^srr,  .jyscrerr.   [Comp.  ^oyerr.]  e6rrL$L@)£fr,  1314. 

1315.    <oT(i£(Siy/r<srr,  55.        Neut.  ^j,  changed  into  jy.     [Comp. 
23.     <oTLUI<ssri    1240. 


Plur.  1  pers.  <5TLo,  c^/i,  s.ii,  <jy^»  ^^>'    [Comp.  UJ/TOJ.]    ^jbQrDLn,  88. 
LD,  593.     cgy^oj/r/i,  36.    <£&(STjG!<sij/i,  282.    GTsmssQKsuLn,  467. 
1328.     sv/Tfip^LD,  1193.     g)Lp^^/i,  1250.      ai/rp^ii, 
971. 

Plur.  2  pers.  0?/r,  g)/r.  [Comp.  //f.]  (^U2.a#/r,  1313.  LoezD/p^^/r,  1318. 
cgj^/r,  1319. 

Plur.  3  pers.  m./.     ^/r,  ,jy/r,  u.     [Comp.    ^SLI/T.]     ^LiiuS<g5)/r,    1312. 

a//ripca/ff  /r,  6.     fjbgjojir,  10.     OT<SW-LJ,  60.     ^(^^JLJ,  337. 
Plur.  3  pers.  wetttf.     .jy.     [Comp.  JJ/OTOQ;.]     Qpajfip,  1261.     ^/ressflsor, 

1231. 

The  temporal  middle  particles  are  as  in  common  prose  ;  but  no 
example  of  the  present  tense  is  found  in  the  Kurral.  [We  find 
,  1157,  which  is  in  form  a  rel.  part,  of  the  present,  for 
is,  in  higher  language,  a  mid.  temp,  particle  of  the  present. 
H.  B.  §  33.  It  may  be  that  @p<s^fr  is  p.  verb.  part,  and  ^OT/TD  to  be 
taken  in  its  ordinary  sense.] 

7.  The  defective  forms,  both  Quiurr  <&&&&  and  a^SsDTOT.F^ix),  are  as 
in  H.  B.  §  74-78. 

I.  <s£)2s5TOT<fF<<Fai  (H.  B.  97).  $®srg!,  11.  eiJLpiEiQ,  11.  Q^rfi^,  23. 
a9@)tu  (a9@)6$),  594.  g&jr/r,  548.  OTeofl^,  2.  ^jb&eu,  943.  QuinLuLS&ir, 
13.  ^^su,  53,  s-sabrG't-eu,  368  [see  <§reu]  ;  and  with  &.LQ  [H.  B- 


XX11  THE    KUBRAL. 


§  100].     <ssrf)£)iLa,  728.     2_iS3sr/7-^j3Lo,  417.      <#/0L$)jg2/ii,  373. 
52.     [See  ^JOZ/LD.]     uGlun-a®,  164. 

The  infin.  mood  (so  called)  is  a  a985Brsr«F<FiL. 

(1)  In  addition  to  what  is  said  in  H.  B.  regarding  the  (so  called) 
infinitive  mood,  or  adverbial  part,  in  ^,  I  may  direct  the  reader  to  the 
use  of  srsGr,  ^«,  <2/_//r6u,  @6&rrD,  ^pp,  <3rBrr&&  [see  Concordance]. 

(2)  A  future  infin.  is  found.     See  §)(t^uu,  Guuruu. 

(3)  A  form  in  LJ/T«@  is  used  in  136,  164,  1312. 

(4)  The  root  is  used  for  the  infinitive.     See  G>  siren,  Qjstr. 

(5)  sn-iLy-uj  for  amLt-.  is  an  infin.  of  purpose,  1313. 

II.  Quuufr  (ST&fiA.  The  aorist  in  S.LQ  has  been  already  explained. 
jSssrfOy  41.  ^&x&,  51.  ^GirrrsSluj,  64,  419. 

8.  The  neg.   aorist,  and  other  forms  (H.  B.  §  110-22),  are  much  as 
in  prose  ;  but  £g)<si;  and  ^eb  are  often  used.     [See  these  roots  in  Lex.] 

Sing.  1'pers.     p£Ger<3«Msr<5vr,  1311.     ^^Qtuevr,  1083. 

Sing.  2  pers.     QcF/reixsu/rdJ,  1241.     LJL_/T^,  1210. 

Sing.  3  pers.  m.  /F/r@g)ear,  1018.     a-^^ssr,  1001.    /.  Q^/r/p/rsfr,  55. 

w.  Qf&j&Jirgi,  18.     QGUGGSTL-IT,  37. 
Plur.  1  pers.     ^jfiliLKsoLa,  1257. 
Plur.  2  pers.     ^fSlufiir. 
Plur.  3  pers.  w.  /.  Q^/TLpn-^/r,   2.       ©^uj^eu/r^/r/r,    26.       GLjessreu/f, 

1016.        w.  G-^jr/r,  5. 
Adv.  part.  ^6u<«/r.^j,  17.      g)Lp<«<s/r,  35.      UL-rrzaLG,  38.      «jr<aj/r,  527. 

&<S6)<glUfTlO<80,  578. 

Rel.  part.  <a56\j&orr<&,  397.     <su<s3sr/5j<£5/r,  9. 

9.  Participial  nouns  in  great  variety  occur.     H.  B.  87-89.    It  may  be 
said  in  general  that  omi/  /orm  of  a  tense  may  be  used  as  a  noun  also  ; 
thus,  <§j£)(GO)6<Jr  =  'he  passed  over,'  or    'he  that  passed  over.'       Cornp. 

<£&&[T®T,  51.    ^L-IElSllUfrGOr,  124.    <?<F/T^/r/T,  3.    /^SST^STT,  923.   &(r6GrQ(n?6Sr, 

69.     sppap,  2.     a9<5«<so)(su,  158.     These  are  all  past. 

The  following  are  future  or  aorist  :  ©^©LJU,^?,  15.  su^ay^j,  39. 
Sfruufreor,  24.  OTssr(o£_//r/r,  30  Q^fl<sufrssr,  27.  ^efrLJSu/r,  383.  <£52srrtq^/r, 
879.  <s§Q£isn-,  1193.  Q^n-pQibuGuiT  [(^  +  g)«5r],  159,  515.  LJ©©J,  17. 
^y/zx^LJ,  333,  1232,  1233.  ^^^L^^JSST  is  unique,  727. 

The  following  are  negative  :  (o&jrtr&n'iT,  10.  (2)<ssrr/r/^<a//r,  66. 
&fT<surr<s;rr<svr,  435.  <a>st>6i;/r/r,  408. 

These  forms  resemble  Greek  participles  with  the  article. 

10.  From  these  the  transition  is  easy  to  the  (^nSui^sS'Bssr.     Any  crude 
form,  inflexional  base,  or  root,  may  be  treated  as  a  verb.     In  general  we 
find  that  the  terminations  which  mark  person  and  number  may   be 
added  to  nouns,  thus  making  derivatives  which  resemble  verbs,   and 
are  called  so  by  Tamil  grammarians. 

These  quasi-  verbal  forms  are  of  constant  use  in  poetry,  and  give  to 
it  much  of  its  terseness  and  beauty. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XX111 


Take,  for  example,  e_60)L_  '  possession.'  We  get  1  pers.  sing.  e_<sro/_C)fL/6sr 
f  I  (am)  a  possessor.'  This  may  be  used  as  a  noun,  or  as  a  finite  verb, 
active  or  passive.  [See  Concordance,  sub  voce.~\ 

(Lp<$6v  '  that  which  stands  first,'  is  used  in  the  first  couplet  in  this 
way.  It  takes  the  term,  of  the  3  pers.  sing,  and  plur.  neuter  (H.  B.  §  31), 
with  euphonic  change  making  (Lpp/bjpi=t  it  has  for  its  first'  ;  (tp^6i;  = 
1  they  have  for  their  first.'  These  are  passive  :  '  All  letters  are  A- 
firsted.' 

The  free  use  of  these  appellatives  gives  an  indescribable  life  and 
energy  to  many  verses.  Nouns  are  not  dead,  but  invested  with  powers 
of  action,  and  thus  a  vigour,  terseness  and  clearness  are  given  to  many 
verses  which  nothing  else  could  give.  A  beautiful  example  of  the 
terseness  of  this  construction  is  found  in  the  following  invocation  : 
^^Lj/r^if  iuQsor^jes)L-Lu<suuuQ6sr !  *O  Father  of  me  who  am  the 
humble  servant  of  all -that  love.'  [^etsr 
(Sesresr  '  I  who  am  a  slave,'  in  6th  case.] 


The  following  Table  exhibits  the  types  which  occur  in  the  Kurral : — 


SING.  1  pers. 

2  pers. 

3  p.  m. 

/• 

n. 


Term. 


-,  1133. 


<su6uSsv. 
1111. 


,  1221. 


,  1222. 


a-greirrsar. 


ar,  386. 


,  1098.     /Ffiueu/refr,  924,  1111. 


,  353. 


,  8.    ^sOToOTT^y,  1222. 
bg].       oupjpi,  1079.       LO/TL!©. 


PLUR.  1  pers. 

2  pers. 
3p.m./. 


h,  1204. 
n,  598. 


*,  1314. 


FFfT 


2-66)1—  U$!T. 


eu/r,  1242.   <$LAIT,  443. 
e_<air/r,  1204.  QuiflujfTiT,  444.  Q^/r 
,  914. 


^GLIIT 


n. 


,  LJ/T6U. 


Comp.  H.  B.  §  184. 


XXIV  THE    KURBAL. 

§  8.  The  derivatives  from  verbal  roots  are  very  numerous  and  varied. 
Comp.  H.  B.  §  143-9,  154,  L90.  The  following  types  are  found  in  this 
work  :  Ga/sabrS^ei;,  4.  g^jr/rsu,  153.  Lo/r/rj/peu,  7.  Q^ujeu,  26.  ^sfD&j 
,  1325.  Q&pei)  (Q^eueueu),  1256.  Q&nfDeo  (©^/reueueu),  254. 
i>,  1213.  <?«/rerr,  9,  220.  e^s^,  44.  Qujp],  60.  QtsniL,  320.  etf®, 
134.  OT(LP<^,  1.  ^@^,  111.  L$/r>a9,  10.  iLssbrif  ,  945.  ^il^,  252. 
453.  ©<£5fT6u<s$,  306.  G><aj<53srL—rr<5®LA)  4.  L_//r/r<a/6v,  1152. 
©LJ/T(77j<srr,  307.  L/<£Lp6roLo,  533.  G>  /rear  go)Lo,  48.  GUV  £<£&)&,  46. 
59.  Ou/rero^,  153.  <5ro<ayLJL/,  24.  Qfn-rre^,  56.  ^L-S&LZ,  121. 
1012.  &L~famLot  959.  [These  are  all  explained  in  the  appended 
Lexicon.] 


§  9.  Some  anomalous  forms  are  found  with  jyerrQusroL-.  This  is  really 
the  lengthening  a  long  syllable  by  writing  after  it  its  corresponding 
short  letter  ;  thus,  G^/TLP/T/T  is  written  ©^fTLprr^/r,  2.  [Comp. 
for  ^Acos.] 

A  short  syllable  is  first  lengthened,  and  then  tripled  by 
thus,  OT©LJL/jp/i  becomes  OT@LJLjjp-a.LD,  15. 

The  following  cases  require  elucidation  : 

(1)  .jySsrr®,  91  (=^^^^7).      gg  takes  as  its  short, 

1263. 

(2)  JK£®,  182  (=  jyyS^). 

(3)  iorf8®,  227  (=Lo(/5si9).     gjrf8®,  42  (=9(526)).     Q«/r0rf@,  938. 

(4)  pir^ujgi,  610  (=<sn-<s£lujg)). 

Here  it  seems  especially  to  appear  in  the  past  verb.  part. 

§  10.  Another  form  of  which  our  author  makes  constant  use,  and  which 
is  a  mark  of  his  style,  is  apparently  a  verbal  part.,  where  a  relative  might 
be  expected,  followed  by  a  ^/^uqs^SoDr,  or  an  adverbial  particle  ;  thus, 

(1)  Q&n-GtrrDGGTGGr,    109.         ^eifl/r^/pjp,    78.         sGwrL-tfasnuir,    277. 

Q<s/T£sr(w?/E(<g>,  532.     <£&<s5rri5i(&),  561. 

(2)  j£l%5i5r<!5<£&<a5rr<5v,  1296.     <s5rQrD&<55<s6)L—<j$3j]Ln,  823.    Comp.  Q&iUjgGis- 

<£<sobrjsgj/Lo,  312,  and  «/rau  ira&ireb,  301. 

(3)  In  Q<£irLU6ueor65r,  308,  and  Q.ssir&rtsuib^t  1187,  we  seem  to  have 

verbal  nouns  ($<&iriu<8y  i  as  when  they  cling,'  ©<£/r<sfr<a/    '  like 
the  seizing.' 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 


III.—  METRE  OF  THE  KURRAL. 

In  studying  the  metre  of  these  couplets  we  must  regard  — 
§  I.  ^05)<SF='  syllables,'  or  elements   of  the  metrical  foot.       These 
are  — 

(1)  flsa>jruj0s)<p,  consisting  of  two  syllables,  of  which  the  former  is 
short  by  nature  and  position,  and  the  latter  long  or  short  ;  thus,  J)eu, 

uiusvr,  are  fssjrujsoffs&fr.    In  classical  metres  it  equals  a  pyrrhic 
s  ^-s)  or  iambus  (-—  '  —  ). 

(2)  (optr.     This  is  long  by  nature,  or  by  position  (any  vowel  followed 
by  two  consonants)  ;  or  it  is  the  remaining  syllable  of  a  word,  long  or 
short  ;  thus,  su/r,  eufr^. 

But  ew/rssr  is  G^/rCo^/r,  for  SUIT  is  a  Qprr  and  esr  is  the  remaining 
syllable,  and  is  long,  as  the  last  syllable  in  a  hexameter  line,  or  a  syl- 
lable in  pausd.  ^sir  is  jSztotrQisn'  (^  ^  —  )  or  anapaest. 

§  II.  &ir  '  foot,'  or  elements  of  the  metrical  line. 

Each  word  must  form  a  foot.  This  is  the  general  rule  ;  but  words 
closely  connected,  as  in  apposition,  may  be  taken  together  as  one  foot. 
Thus,  the  first  couplet  consists  of  seven  feet,  each  a  single  word,  except 
£TQ£<5Q<&6vavtTLc>,  which  is  two  words  in  apposition.  In  the  (g^/rxsfr  these 
£/r  are  of  three  kinds  : 

(1)  c§)j0s)<BF<9:@(r,  consisting  of  a  single  —  l 

(2)  £D«J/O£F/T,  consisting  of  two 


(3)  Qeuaxsr^jr,  consisting  of  the  four  ^lup&rr  with  an  additional 


These  ten  metrical  feet  have  technical  names  : 
1.  jsrrefr  (  —  ).  2.  Laevnr  (^^-^). 

[Each  of  these  may  take  a  short  a.  at  the  end  :    <5rr<$-  (  —  ^ 
(^  ^->  ^).     They  only  occur  in  the  seventh  foot  of  a  kurral.] 

3.  Q&LAIT  (  --  ).  4.  q«rftLo/r  (>—  '  ^-^  —  ). 

5.  <sn_sj9srrai  (  —  ^^^^).  6.  <&(Tij  08  stria  (-^^  ^^'  v—  ^  s-/j. 

7.  Q<£L&friEi<&(riu  (  ---  ).  8.  nsYftia/r/5J<£5/riL'  (N^  \_^  --  ). 

9.  A.eSera«iriL  (  —  ^  >—  '  —  ).  10.  <sQ^sS&risj<siruj  (^  ^  ^  ^  —  ). 
Observe  (a)  the  long  syllable  is  marked  by  a  stress  of  the  voice,  and 
a  short  pause  ;  and  its  length  is  independent,  in  many  cases,  of  the 
actual  metrical  quantity  ;  (b)  the  last  foot  in  every  ©par  being  ignor, 
«/r(<9F),  Loeu/r  or  L${DLJ(L\),  the  effect  of  a  catalectic  syllable  is  produced. 
The  deficiency  is  compensated  for  by  the  pause,  and  a  slight  prolongation 
of  the  closing  syllable  of  the  couplet. 

d 


XXVI  THE    KUERAL. 


The  first  couplet  is  scanned  : 

( 


.  LJ&GU68T 

§  III.  ^UJL  '  line.'  The  @p&r  is  a  couplet  of  seven  feet,  divided  into 
lines  of  4  and  3  feet,  or  3  and  4  feet.  The  division  is  marked  by  the 
rhyme.  Of  the  1300  couplets,  909  have  4  and  3,  while  421  have 
3  and  4.  There  may  be  a  doubt  as  to  one  or  two  of  these. 

§  IV.  <oT^jj)<s®<as  '  rhyme.'  Rhyme  in  Tamil  is  in  the  beginning  of  the 
line,  and  is  strictly  the  identity  of  the  second  letter,  the  first  being  of  the 
same  metrical  quantity.  Six  kinds  are  enumerated.  Sometimes  there 
is  no  rhyme,  but  a  repetition  of  the  entire  foot,  201. 

(i.)  $j>)<oG)i—iL>(T(c)<g:&2QS)&  :  identity  of  2nd  letter.  As  in  1,  ^sir  rhymes 
with  u<s5@j<sor.  Here  <&  is  repeated,  the  preceding  syllable  in  both  lines 
being  short.  So  in  2,  &rb  with  pp  ;  in  6,  QurrflS  with  QJB$. 

(ii.)  <£%svLLjn-Q<sF<g)<5G)<$  :  where  the  whole  foot  is  identical,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  first  letter  (or  syllable,  as  we  should  say).  This  is  elegant, 
and  is  extended  sometimes  to  the  second  and  even  third  foot.  In  8, 
^ffxsufrtfl  rhymes  with  L^/D<sufrL^. 

(iii.)  <&ea>t—uj[TQ&t§i0s>&  :  when  the  last  syllable  of  the  foot  is  repeated. 

(iv.)  ^Q<f<^i<5S)<35  :  when  iu,  JT,  ev,  LP  are  disregarded.  Thus,  in  3,  L&GVIT 
LJ&<S®<P  rhymes  with  ^euoSezD^,  206. 

(v.)  @6BrG)<syj£j<5B><£  :  when  a  letter  of  the  same  class  is  substituted. 
(H.B.  Intro,  p.  9.)  So  112,  Q&uu  is  made  to  rhyme  with  OT<£<F,  211. 

(vi.)  oLp£sr(rr?QLa(Lg<B5  Q<&rr<sorQn)3)]<5Q<s5  :  consonance  of  third  letter,  881. 

§V.  QLAirVstr  '  alliteration.'  (Third  Gram.  183.)  The  letter  which  begins 
each  line  should  begin  at  least  one  other  foot  in  the  line.  But  it  is 
considered  sufficient  if  one  of  its  class  is  found  to  commence  one  of  the 
other  feet.  For  this  purpose  the  classes  are  : 


2.  ®,    FF,    ®,    ®. 

3.  .e.,  sac,  9,  p. 

Also  &  may  be  represented  by  p  ;   (55  by  js  and  LQ  by  <su.     Thus, 
corresponds  to  ^^,  1.       The  ujrruu^iEis&jLD    (Third  Gram,  ii.)  dis- 
tinguishes — 

(1)  ®)%sssr(oLA[r$5Gr,  consonance  in  1  and  2  C'eudbrO^eu  Q<5u<5ssrL-fr<sa>L^,  4. 

(2)  Qu/TL^LJL/G'ui/rSsor     „  1     „     3  eun-Gsftciir   ff»6U&Lz  <suLpisiSlt  11. 

(3)  s^a.^GK^/reznf-        „  1     „    4  <$]&& 

LD/T^,  1. 

(4)  &L.<SS>LP  „  123  see  19. 

(5)  QL&rb&^Guiriu  „  134  see  13. 

(6)  @Lp&&gieu[TLu  „  124  see  200. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV11 

Many  lines  in  the  @p<8fr  have  no  CWSser  ;  but  there  is  generally 
some  alliteration.     Comp.  186. 

§  VI.  j$%e(r  :  *  connection,  or  rhythmic  sequence  of  feet.'    In  the  @/r><sfr 
(and  in  the  ^/reuLp.)  the  connection  peculiar  to  the  metre,  which  is  the 
fanjiT,  is  strictly  observed.     Its  rule  is  thus  expressed  : 

La  IT  (Lp  6$T  <5afl  HS)ff  U-|  LQ 

sbl  err  (ip  GST  (21  <ssr  0  isi 


f  after  L&rr  comes  a  ^ 
after  aflsir/i  come  a 
after  <®/nu  comes  a 

cjr  here  means  *  after.')     This  provides 
(])  That  a  foot  ending  in  LQ/T  should  always  be  followed  by   one 
beginning  with  a  fltsnir  : 

(LQSU/T) 


f  (LQSU/T) 
")  \  q<srflLo/r 
j  1  SQ^^I&nJo  or 

(^  <&(njs£l<3(r[5i<s5n'uj 


or  LjeiflLQrr  SQ^^I&nJo  or 

(^  <&(njs£l<3(r[5i<s5n'u 

(2)  A  foot  ending  in  sStsrrLD  must  be  followed  by  one  beginning  with 

(ptretr) 


<3n-  sSl  <3(T  LD  7      i     J 

or  «(5^)<srrt£i  J       1  ^^^f^^^^^  or 


(3)  A  foot  ending  in  <£5/rtu    must  be  followed  by  one  beginning  with 
a  G>/r: 


Lj  f 
or 


It  will  be  seen  on  examination  that,  according  to  this  rule, 

(a)  No  (^roetr  can  consist  wholly  of  spondees; 

(fe)  A  (§ro<3rr  might  be  framed  entirely  of  molossi  or  choriambi; 

(6)  A  @/r)«5Tr  may  consist  wholly  of  anapcests,  or  of  dactyls  (excepting 
in  all  cases  the  catalectic  last  foot). 

Thus  the  variety  of  rhythms  in  the  @/D(srr  is  astonishingly  great.  The 
first  couplet  is  anapaestic  with  a  single  Ionic  a  minore  and  one  spondee  : 


§  VII.  gExan^'tone'  or  'rhythm.'  In  the  @/o<srr  (and  in  the 
in  general)  the  tone,  or  rhythm  is  called  Q^uLjG'ev/rero.F,  which  seems  to 
mean 'the  recitative  or  didactic  tone,'  from  O^LJL/  'declare.'  Three 
kinds  are  distinguished  : — 


XXV111  THE    KURRAL. 

(1)  When  only  the  feet  called  @)6®<3:<9:@rr  are  used,  it  is  called 
6B><F<FG)<£FLJLjis\j,  or  "  the  balanced  recitative."     The  following  are  all  of 
this  kind  :—  3,  23,  28,  39,  63,  80,  92,  98,  124,  131,  133,  152,  153,  188, 
193,  195,  202,  215,  224,  239,  265,  270,  280,  283,  304,  310,  341,   342, 
347,  385,  391,  418,  419,  425,  429,  431,  444,  449,  451,  457,   465,   467, 
477,  483,  488,  505,  508,  522,  531,  535,  594,  623,  625,  633,  637,   651, 
652,  664,  666,  690,  693,  703,  706,  760,  774,  783,  785,  796,  811,   847, 
856,  863,  873,  961,  975,  978,  979,  980,  1010,  1031,  1042,  1048,  1052, 
1055,  1085,  1093,  1105,  1108,  1116,  1118,  1121,  1159,  1193,  1199,  1200, 
1201,  1211,  1213,  1224,  1235,  1238,  1242,  1266,  1273,  1277,  1289,  1301, 
1309,  1322,  1324.     Here  the  rhythm  is  lively,  and  the  number  of  short 
syllables  is  generally  double  the  number  of  the  long  ;  but  the  effect  is 
somewhat  monotonous. 

(2)  When  only  the  -Qeuewr^/f  (except  in  the  seventh  foot)  are  used,  it 
is  called  <&J5Ji<o&&<5:  Q&LJU6u="  grave  recitative."  Only  one  couplet  (397) 
is  of  this  kind  : 


Here  the  effect  is  very  heavy. 

(3)  When  ^ujro&n-  and  Qsusssr^/r  are  intermingled  we  have  the 
<sn<9:&Q<9:ULj&)="  the  mixed  recitative."  All  not  mentioned  above  are 
of  this  kind.  In  this  class,  comprising  the  great  majority  of  couplets, 
the  rhythm  has  an  inexhaustible  variety.  According  to  the  number  of 
Qeu^scr^/r  introduced  is  the  gravity  of  the  tone  ;  thus,  12,  110,  758,  735 
have  but  one  ®iujb&ir9  while  the  first  couplet  has  only  one  Qey«ar0/r. 

Much  more  might  be  said  in  regard  to  the  Tamil  metres,  which  are 
entirely  different  from  the  Sanskrit  or  Telugu  metrical  systems  ;  but 
the  student  who  feels  an  interest  in  the  subject  will  find  what  is  here 
given  a  sufficient  introduction  to  the  subject,  at  least,  as  far  as  the  (§p  &r 
is  concerned. 


BOOK  L— VIKTUR 


§  I.      INTRODUCTION.     Ch.  i. — iv. 

§  II.    DOMESTIC  VIRTUE.     Ch.  v. — xxiv. 

§  III.  ASCETIC  VIRTUE.     Ch.  xxv. — xxxvn. 

i.  Religious  Observances.     Ch.  xxv. — xxxin. 
ii.  Wisdom.     Ch.  xxxiv. — xxxvn. 

§  IV.    FATE.     Ch.  xxxvm. 


THE    SACRED    KURRAL    OF    TIRTJVALLUVA- 

NAYANAR. 


BOOK    I.  —  VIKTUE. 
§  L— INTBODUCTION. 


CHAPTER    I.     ^ijjl&inrL*  &. 
<£5f_<a/<srr  <surrLp<£g}.  —  THE  PRAISE  OF  GOD. 


A,  as  its  fivst  of  !e:fc(:vvs.  e^p  •/  go-£.?h  ID  a:]i  tains; 

The  *  Piimal  De*'^  '  ^s  i7  ..s..  ubi^a^'ii  all  the  world's  domains. 

2.          &tbrD$?5G     <5\)/TUJ    LJ  UJ  Q  off  <SGI  Q  &  IT  <5\) 


No  fru'r  have  men  of  a1'  'b^'"  s-ac):ed  lore, 
Save  v'bey  the  '  J7J--21  ^  V^  se  0  ^e's  '  feet  adore. 


3.       LbGvn  L$<5v>&  (o(U$(<oo)<5vr  LD/r<53arzp_  Q  '<f  fr  /z  ^  mi' 

iS  6V  iS  (Sto  <5=    fr(bl6lJiiL       <SUTlTT 


His  fee^,  '  Who  o'e~  the  .j^-b'own  f  owe?  bath  past,'  who  gain 
Ii  b.l-'ss  lr»og  r-ire  shfil  dwe'l  above  this  ear-  i?ly  plain. 


4.       (o<siJ6ffiT®3;<sv    (o(6U0Jwrz_/r<sznLD  a9^U6\)/r  ®sr  iy-Q  &  k  fc  ^  tr  ir  & 


His  fool',  '  W'looi  wa^t  uffe«;i;s  not.,  i-'ts  rot  g?ief,'  who,  gain 
Shall  LO,,  i'b  oir,-h  eve  ^7  ',ime,  of  anvr  woes 


ir  L.J  &  Lp  LJ  ifl  /s  *>  rr  tr  LnmL®  (@) 

The  me  i,  who  on  the  '  Ei^or's  '  true  praise  delight  to  dwell, 
Affects  noc  them  the  fruit  of  deeds  done  ill  or  well. 


THE     KURRAL. 

6.       Q  u  rr  /D!  Sii  IT  uSl  $5$  rb  35  <s&l  &;  ^  n~  GVT  Qufriij^  Qjrfr(Lg<95& 


Long  live  they  blest,  who  've  stood  in  path  from  falsehood  freed  ; 
His,  *  Who  quenched  lusts  that  from  the  sense-gates  five  proceed.' 


tlSl  6V  <oV  IT  p  IT  <5tf   QYJ>  GtrQ<f  IT  15  35  fT  IT  <3S 
L£><55T<£&(o)J(&5\)    LDfT  p  p    6V  ifi  ^J  ((of) 

Unless  His  foot,  '  to  Whom  none  can  compare,'  men  gain, 
'Tis  hard  for  mind  to  find  relief  from  anxious  pain. 

8.  «jy  p  617  IT  t£l    lU/G^6m<oVr  (7tJ>  ®TT  (o  <F  IT  f5  ;£  fT  IT  <35    &  <SV  6V  fT  fi 
l^iDGUfTL^l    !§/E35    <oV  ifl  ^J 

Unless  His  feet,  '  the  Sea  of  Good,  the  Fair  and  Bountiful,'  men  gain, 
'Tis  hard  the  further  bank  of  being's  changeful  sea  to  attain. 

9.  Q  &  IT  (5$  <sv  Q  u  n-  nSl  u9l  no 


Before  His  foot,  l  the  Eight-fold  Excellence,'  with  unbent  head 
Who  stands,  like  palsied  sense,  is  to  all  living  functions  dead. 


10. 

ifie^fDtSU     <55T  L$-G>  <3F  ff  fT   j%  fT  IT 

They  swim  the  sea  of  births,  the  '  Monarch's  '  foot  who  gain  ; 
None  others  reach  the  shore  of  being's  mighty  main. 


CHAPTER  II.     ji$.  a.. 

<3U[r<oVr&lrDUL\.  -  THE    EXCELLENCE    OF    E.AIN. 


11.       <oUn~6$<5$r   ^2/(ol)<55i£)    (SULplEjSl    <SlJ  (ffj  ^  <oV  fT  {D 

(OjXoST  L&  Lp  <5    Q  Lb<S5T  £)]  <5$3T  IT  (D     L//T/DJ2/  ( 

The  world  its  course  maintains  through  life  that  rain  unfailing  gives  ; 
Thus  rain  is  known  the  true  ambrosial  food  of  all  that  lives. 

12. 


The  rain  makes  pleasant  food  for  eaters  rise  ; 
As  food  itself,  thirst-quenching  draught  supplies. 


13.       <sSl  <5m  <ot&rl  65T  £)j    Q  u  fT  ILJ  LJ  l3l  <5ST  <aSl  [fl  f£l  IT 
^  6331  Gtfjfl  6VT    tgUL—fi^ULD    LJ  &} 

If  clouds,  that  promised  rain,  deceive,  and  in  the  sky  remain, 
Famine,  sore  torment,  stalks  o'er  earth's  vast  ocean-girdled  plain. 


BOOK    I.  —  INTRODUCTION. 
14. 


If  clouds  their  wealth  of  waters  fail  on  earth  to  pour, 
The  ploughers  plough  with  oxen's  sturdy  team  no  more. 

15.       Q&(b)UUgtf'£-I5J    Q  65  zI_£_/T/f  <5K(<f7j<£F    &  fT  f'r  6U  fT  ILJ  LD/D 


'Tis  rain  works  all  :  it  ruin  spreads,  then  timely  aid  supplies  ; 
As,  in  the  happy  days  before,  it  bids  the  ruined  rise. 

16.       iaSl&lb&ltb    jrj6$6$L£!   <oGT  <5V  <6U  fT  <5ST  LD  {D    (7^>/E/(o65 


If  from  the  clouds  no  drops  of  rain  are  shed, 
'Tis  rare  to  see  green  herb  lift  up  its  head. 


17.       Q/5®/E/<5Z_J^//5   ^SJTouf/r<55)LO    (3j  GST  J2/  /5 


If  clouds  restrain  their  gifts  and  grant  no  rain, 
The  treasures  fail  in  ocean's  wide  domain. 


18.  ffirDuQurrG)  Lfr&Pttr  Q  -f  <sv  ev  rr  ^j 

<5UrD<35(^(oLL<5^  <5U  (Y  Q  (S3)  IT  <5E  (^    L%6mG) 

If  heaven  grow  dry,  with  feast  and  offering  never  more 
Will  men  on  earth  the  heavenly  ones  adore. 

19.  j5rr<5orf5  ^(SULSirsmGlfB  ^m&ir  oSl  ILJ  sgy  ev  «  is 


If  heaven  its  watery  treasures  ceases  to  dispense, 

Through  the  wide  world  cease  gifts,  and  deeds  of  '  penitence.' 


20.       l§lfl<5QT  [OGftLDlUfT    tggJ<oVQ<3B65fl<SVr   UJ  fT  IT  IU  fT  IT  <5B  (^  LD 

6ij  rr  'Ssfl  ®sr  jD6&>L£iurr  Q  <s  n~  Q£  &  r&) 

When  water  fails,  functions  of  nature  cease,  you  say  ; 

Thus  when  rain  fails,  no  men  can  walk  in  '  duty's  ordered  way.' 


CHAPTER  III.     <sn&.  IB.. 

.  —  THE  GREATNESS  OF  ASCETICS. 


21. 

<aSl  Q£>  U  U  £5gj]' 

The  settled  rule  of  every  code  requires,  as  highest  good, 

Their  greatness  who,  renouncing  all,  true  to  their  rule  have  stood. 


«'  THE    KUEEAL. 

22. 


69)<S1JUJ<5 

$  no  /E  ^  rr  <sv)  jr 


As  counting  those  1nD,fc  from  the  ear!,h  have  passed  away, 
'Tis  vain  attempt  the  might  of  holy  men  to  say. 


The;r  g'eat  IPSS  ea    h  -nun  seen  ds,  who,  way  of  bo-h  worlds  weighed^ 
In  this  woiM  tate  ibeir  sU'jd,  in  vi.Vuae:s  Vobe  an  raged. 


24.  £-jrQ<5&r<5srttiif5  Q^rrL./^.ujfr  d>  (63)  <5tn  IT  /s  ^  tsj  &  rr  u  u  rr  <svr 

6Ur>Q6STGSrgDJL£)    <5S)<5lJU  LJ  &(o  6E/T/T    <aSl  <5  3JJ 

He,  who  wi'-.b.  firmness'  curb  the  five  restrains, 
Is  seed  for  soil  of  y  jnder  happy  plains. 

25.  $DfG^<5$,5^fr   <5S)rbrD'<5V&<5V<39&LC>L     6TT  IT  IT  Q  &  IT  LD  /T 

'  (o  <53T 


Thei 
Indr 

26.     Q  <f  ILJ  fb  &  ifl  ILJ  Q<fiLj<surrir  Quifiujfr/r 


v  migh;,  who  have  destroyed  '  (he  five,'  shall  soothly  tell 
Indra,  the  J/    :i  of  those  in  heaven's  wide  realms  that  dwell. 


Things  hard  in  the  d-?<'.ig  will  great  men  do  ; 
Things  hard  in  the  d-.jiug  the  mean  eschew. 


The  might  of  men  whose  wo^d  is  ^ever  vain, 
The  '  sec-et  wo.«'d'  shall  to  the  ea  th    roclaim. 


29.       (<3j<S53TQLD<5$r  <§£)]  !51    (8j<5ttQ  [D  (B    t£l  <5$T  QTf  IT    Q  <3ll  (<5j  (oft 


The  wralh  't^s  haljd  e'en  for  an  instant  to  eo.dure 

Of  those  who  vi-  ^  lie's  hill  have  scaled,  and  stand  secure. 


30.     jjy!5£56tt(r  QjrcvrCoLjrr  irpQeurrirLD/b  Q  p  su  6t]  uSl  fr  6E 

Q  <?  IB  j£  GMT  <o2D  LD    L£  633T  Q  L_  /T 


27.  &<5V)6ijQujfr<oif)  i^tQ((rf<off><5F  IE  rr  tb  pO  Lbssr  Gin  no  &  £sl  ovr 

<5ll<o&>&Qj5>l?l<8Ufr<58T   &L—(oL-    lLI<5V('3j  (<5T\ 

Taste,  ];gh;    touch,  sound,  and  smell:  who  knows  the  way 
Of  all  the  five,  —  the  world  submissive  owns  his  sway. 

28.  rSl<5V)  no  QiCtfTLft  LDrr/B^iir 


Towards  aH  that  breathe,  with  seemly  gru,ciousness  adorned  they  live  ; 
And  thus  to  virtue's  sons  the  name  of  '  Anthanar  '  men  give. 


BOOK    I. — INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTEE  IV. 

cgj  pear  sued  (LI  £»<£<£  eu.  —  ASSERTION  OF  THE  STRENGTH  OF  VIRTUE. 

31. 


!    <35fT<95&   Q  LD  <SU  Q  (68)    ILf  llSl  IT  c5B  ( 

It  yields  distinction,  yields  prosperity  ;  what  gain 
Greater  than  virlue  can  a  living  man  obtain  ? 

32. 


No  greater  gain  than  virtue  aught)  can  cause  ; 
No  greater  loss  than  life  oblivious  of  her  laws. 

33. 


To  finish  virtue's  work  wiih  ceaseless  effort  strive, 

What  way  thou  may'st,  where'er  thuu  see'st  the  work  may  thrive. 


34. 

l§  ff 


Spotless  be  thou  in  mind  !     This  only  merits  virtue's  name  ; 
All  else,  mere  pomp  of  idle  sound,  no  real  worth  can  claim. 

». 

35.     ^°L<x&n~   D6UfrQ<siJ&<3(fl  u9  <SVT  (<o3  <?  Q  &  rr  <sor 


'Tis  virtue  when,  his  footsteps  sliding  not  through  envy,  wrath, 
Lust,  evil  speech  —  these  four,  man  onwards  moves  in  ordered  path. 


36.       *jy  <5VT  p  fSl  <SU  IT    QiZX53T(S3)   ^  fD  <6T)Q  <f  LU  <3B 


Do  deeds  of  virtue  now.     Say  not,  '  To-morrow  we  '11  be  wise  '  ; 
Thus,  when  thou  diest,  shalt  thou  find  a  help  that  never  dies. 

37. 


Needs  not  in  words  to  dwell  on  virtue's  fruits  :  compare 
The  man  in  litter  borne  with  them  that  toiling  bear  ! 

38.      <5$LpIB[T6fr  L_/L_/r«jy<5ff>LD    IGGSTQypnSl   <S8T  £vQ  <£  fT  (fjj  <S1J  <58T 


If  no  day  passing  idly,  good  to  do  each  day  you  toil, 

A  stone  't  will  be  to  block  the  way  of  future  days  of  moil. 


THE    KUERAL. 
39. 


What  from  virtue  floweth,  yieldeth  dear  delight  ; 
All  else  extern,  is  void  of  glory's  light. 


40.     Q&iu/burnoV  Qpirqt)  LD/D^SOT 

(^uj/r)/_;/r<5V  Q^trcnjLz  uifl  (tD) 

1  Virtue  '  sums  the  things  that  should  be  done  ; 
1  Vice  '  sums  the  things  that  man  should  shun. 


END    OF    INTRODUCTION. 


BOOK   I. DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  9 


§  2.    DOMESTIC  VIRTUE. 


CHAPTER  V. 

-  DOMESTIC    LlFE. 


4.  6V  611  IT  Lft  611  FT         <5GT<55TUn     tt    IU  ffO  L-f  <oft  L-  ILJ 

IB  <5V  6V  IT  fb  f£)    <5vfl<5ST  p   ^BssyT 

Qe  men  of  household  virtue,  firm  in  way  of  good,  sustain 
le  other  orders  three  that  rule  professed  maintain. 


^  <su  IT  &  (&j 

L&  p  IB  p>  rr  Or  &  (&)  L£!  ev  ®j  rr  Lp  <su  rr  Q  <5sr  GST  u  IT  <syr 

1  anchorites,  to  indigent,  to  those  who  've  passed  away, 

le  man  for  household  virtue  famed  is  needful  help  and  stay. 


4,       Q  p  6VT  LJ  <5V  {£  p  IT  IT   Q^LU<SUL^    <aQ  (£  IB  Q^  IT  &  6F 


T3  manes,  God,  guests,  kindred,  self,  in  due  degree, 
T?se  five  to  cherish  well  is  chiefest  charity. 


u  i    LU  $j     u  urr^iT  <j$yy  <o&>  L_    ^  IT  u  <ssr  <5U  rr  /.p  «  <stn  « 

eij  y$  Q  uj  (thj  <?  Qe\)(g5(g5/rs3r^2/  L&GV 
"Vio  shares  his  meal  with  others,  while  all  guilt  he  shuns, 
B  virtuous  line  unbroken  though  the  ages  runs. 


4. 

LJSmLJLD    LJUJftpj    LD^J  (@) 

Itove  and  virtue  in  the  household  reign, 
This  is  of  life  the  perfect  grace  and  gain. 

46.     ^gy  p  fs  p  rr  p>  nSl  6af?^U6if/rfp<s€ZD<z  iu  rr  p  r£l  p 


If  man  in  active  household  life  a  virtuous  soul  retain, 
What  fruit  from  other  modes  of  virtue  can  he  gain  Y 

47.       <j£)  LU  <5V  £l  (6S)    'o3$<Jl)a7/r/_p<£65)<£    6UtTLpU<Sl]    Q  <5GT  G5T  U  IT  <S3fT 


In  nature's  way  who  spends  his  calm  domestic  days, 
'Mid  all  that  strive  for  virtue's  crown  hath  foremost  place. 


48.       ^{bpSl    Q(63)(U>&{E}    UJ p  <5vf) (L£><35 <35 /T    sGl 6\) 6ll  fT Lp 

V 


Others  it  sets  upon  their  way,  itself  from  virtue  ne'er  declines ; 
'rhan  stern  ascetics'  pains  such  life  domestic  brighter  shines. 

2 


10  THE    KUEBAL. 

49. 


£5)  ffi)  <s\)  rr  ii9 

The  life  domestic  rightly  bears  true  virtue's  name  ; 
That  other  too,  if  blameless  found,  due  praise  may  claim. 


50.     <o5)6iUL)^^g]Grr  <sii  rr  Lp  eij  tr  iEi  (Vj  <su  rr  Lp  u  <su  GGT  <sn  rr  <§§}!  stn  p  ILJ  /B 

Q  £&  LU  <SU  £5  ,gjj  6TT    6V)  <5Ll  66  3>  U 


Who  shares  domestic  life,  by  household  virtues  graced, 
Shall,  mid  the  gods,  in  heaven  who  dwell,  be  placed. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

<SU[TL£<&  <SG)  <&<££}  SoOTT/FoULfl.  -  THE  GOODNESS  OF  THE  HELP  TO  DOMESTIC 

LIFE. 


51.  LbPjoVT£5<5&&    LO  IT  658T  Lf  <5V>  /_  UJ    STTfT  Sl^^B/D    Q  <3B  fT  65ST  £_  /T  65T 

<sn  <sn  £&  p  <55  6EJ  /r  srr  <su  rr  Lp  &  SJD  <s  ^  ,g]$svdr 

As  doth  the  house  beseem,  she  shows  her  wifely  dignity  ; 

As  doth  her  husband's  wealth  befit,  she  spends  :  helpmeet  is  she. 

52.  LL>'<j(5vrL£>mL&  uSt<5V<ovrr6rr<3B  etxtfl  <s\)  <so  rr  u9  ssr 


If  household  excellence  be  wanting  in  the  wife, 
Howe'er  with  splendour  lived,  all  worthless  is  the  life. 


53.  {J^GOCVQ^    <Ssfl  <5V  <o\)  611  653T    LD  fT  <SKfT  LJ  fT  (63) 

6\}j  srr  err  Q^  syfi  <sv  <sv  <su  om  LDfr<^ss)< 

There  is  no  lack  within  the  house,  where  wife  in  worth  excels, 
There  is  no  luck  within  the  house,  where  wife  dishonoured  dwells. 

54.  Q  U  <oVST  (otftfl  p    Qu(7J-jf5p<35&    LU  H  61]  STT    <55  p  Q  U  637  ftp]  f5 


If  woman  might  of  chastity  retain, 

What  choicer  treasure  doth  the  world  contain  ? 


55.     Q^iueu/B  Q  ^  rr  Lp  rr  j£j  <sfr 

QuiilQlUSSTLJ    QuUJlLJ    LCXotnLp  (©) 

No  god  adoring,  low  she  bends  before  her  lord  ; 

Then  rising,  serves  :  the  rain  falls  instant  at  her  word  ! 


56. 

Q  <p  rr/r  eSl  <oO  IT  err  Quasar 


Who  guards  herself,  for  husband's  comfort  cares,  her  household's  fame 
In  perfect  wise  with  sleepless  soul  preserves, — give  her  a  woman's  name  ! 


BOOK    I.  —  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  11 

*     57.     &)  6V)  parr  &(&)&]  &rruQu6iJ<svr 


)i  Of  what  avail  is  watch  and  ward  ? 
Ih  Honour  's  a  woman's  safest  guard. 


T    Q  U  (7?j  (GJj  &)  fD  LJ  L!  U 


If  wife  be  wholly  true  to  him  who  gained  her  as  his  bride, 
An  ^rea*  g^ry  gains  she  in  the  world  where  gods  in  bliss  abide. 

-A   59. 

tl 

\  ^^  Who  have  not  spouses  that  in  virtue's  praise  delight, 
Tl  ^'^iev  li°n-li^e  can  never  walk  in  scorners'  sight. 

60.       LDf5]<356V    Ql£><SyrU    LD  ^SST  LL  fT  L-  & 


_    Q  U  J£l 

The  house's  '  blessing,'  men  pronounce  the  house-wife  excellent 
The  gain  of  blessed  children  is  its  goodly  ornament. 


CHAPTEE  VII. 

).  —  THE  OBTAINING  OF  SONS. 

61. 


'Of  all  that  men  acquire,  we  know  not  any  greater  gain, 
Than  that  which  by  the  birth  of  learned  children  men  obtain. 


62.  <oT  (L£>  lOl  {D  LJ  Lf  fB 

U  if]  1$  {D  IE!  <35  (T  LJ    U  6S3T  L/  6V)  L-    Lb<95<3Si—     Q  U  $1  6ST 

Who  children  gain,  that  none  reproach,  of  virtuous  worth, 
No  evils  touch  them,  through  the  sev'n-fold  maze  of  birth. 

63.  ^LbQurr(7Jj  Q  <srr  <5vr  u  j5  in  tD< 


Man's  children  are  his  fortune,'  say  the  wise  ; 
From  each  one's  deeds  his  varied  fortunes  rise. 

64. 


Than  gods'  ambrosia  sweeter  far  the  food  before  men  laid, 
In  which  the  little  hands  of  children  of  their  own  have  play'd. 


12  THE    KUEEAL. 

65. 


i—  <sS  <ssr  u  (6J) 

To  parent  sweet  the  touch  of  children  dear  ; 
Their  voice  is  sweetest  music  to  his  ear. 

66. 


'  The  pipe  is  sweet,'  '  the  lute  is  sweet,'  by  them  't  will  be  averred, 
Who  music  of  their  infants'  lisping  lips  have  never  heard. 

67. 


Sire  greatest  boon  on  son  confers,  who  makes  him  meet 
In  councils  of  the  wise  to  fill  the  highest  seat. 

68.      p  Lb  uSl  {b  p  Lb   LD«<5    STT/X)?  6^  <otn  Z_  6&>  LD 


Their  children's  wisdom  greater  than  their  own  confessed, 
Through  the  wide  world  is  sweet  to  every  human  breast. 


69.     /*6vrnr>  Q  u  rr  Q£  $  p  Q  u  if)  ^j  su  &  (&j  fb 

<5<SSrLD<SB$59r3:    &  IT  <5ST  Q  ((Yj>  Q  <5ST  <55T  <95    ($< 

When  mother  hears  him  named  '  f  ulfill'd  of  wisdom's  lore,' 
Far  greater  joy  she  feels,  than  when  her  son  she  bore. 

70. 


To  sire,  what  best  requital  can  by  grateful  child  be  done  ? 

To  make  men  say,  *  What  merit  gained  the  father  such  a  son  ?  ' 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 

.  -  THE    POSSESSION    OF    LOVE. 

71. 


LJ  GST  &  GSVT  fr  ^<f  fDqrjLn  (<z 

And  is  there  bar  that  can  even  love  restrain  ? 
The  tiny  tear  shall  make  the  lover's  secret  plain. 

72.       vuGsnSlGvrr  Q  IT  <sv  6\)  rr  f5 


The  loveless  to  themselves  belong  alone  ; 
The  loviner  men  are  others'  to  the  verv  bone. 


BOOK    I.  —  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  13 

73.      ^JGSrQuiT    lp.6S)UJIE^    GULp&Q&GVTLJ    <5H  IT  (77j  llSi  IT  « 


Of  precious  soul  with  body's  flesh  and  bone, 
he  union  yields  one  fruit,  the  life  of  love  alone. 


74.    *£i<5$n$6g)}  LD/r/r<a/  (ip  ®n  L_  <sv>  LD 


From  love  fond  yearning  springs  for  union  sweet  of  minds  ; 
And  that  the  bond  of  rare  excelling  friendship  binds. 

75.       ^SSTLJlb    pidfribS    <5lJL£&Q&<sisTU 


Sweetness  on  earth  and  rarest  bliss  above, 
'These  are  the  fruits  of  tranquil  life  of  love. 

^76.     ^g)jfDfl>]5)jb(0<3B  uj  <5VT  u  <F  rr  n~  Qusvru  <su  nfil tu IT fr 


\  — (~  (~  <~"  r~  \^j  — "  "•"  f  •**" 

^he  unwise  deem  love  virtue  only  can  sustain, 
t  also  helps  the  man  who  evil  would  restrain. 


\77. 

'  LuroLD  (<sr) 


Ls  sun's  fierce  ray  dries  up  the  boneless  things, 
k>  loveless  beings  virtue's  power  to  nothing  brings. 

78. 


\  The  loveless  soul,  the  very  joys  of  life  may  know, 
When  flowers,  in  barren  soil,  on  sapless  trees,  shall  blow. 


u 


79. 


though  every  outward  part  complete,  the  body  's  fitly  framed  ; 
vVhat  good,  when  soul  within,  of  love  devoid,  lies  halt  and  maimed  ? 

l  <sv  rr  IT  & 


odies  of  loveless  men  are  bony  framework  clad  with  skin ; 
.hen  is  the  body  seat  of  life,  when  love  resides  within. 


THE   KURRAL. 

CHAPTER  IX.     jy£.  65,. 

u. — CHERISHING  GUESTS. 


81.     ^(TfjrbQ^rrLbiSjl  uSl  <sv  eu  rr  Lp  <su  Q  ^  <sv  ev  /r  LD 

(o  <S1J  <oTT  IT  6S9T  <5V)  LD 


All  household  cares  and  course  of  daily  life  have  this  in  view, 
Guests  to  receive  with  courtesy,  and  kindly  acts  to  do. 


82.  <sSl  (fjj  IE  3j] 

LOQJjfsQ^ttflttULQ    Q  <oti  <S53ri—  fO  LJ  IT  tb 

Though  food  of  immortality  should  crown  the  board, 
Feasting  alone,  the  guests  without  unfed,  is  thing  abhorred. 

83.  <5U(fFj6£l(ITjf5^J    <5V>  SU  65  Jp    Q  Lb  IT  lib  LJ  <oti  fT  <S$T    (oil  IT  Lp  -35  <S&  65 


Each  day  he  tends  the  coming  guest  with  kindly  care  ; 
Painless,  unfailing  plenty  shall  his  household  share. 

84.  ^sy&esrLairfBgjj  Q&iLiujrr  (&nj6tnrniLi 

Qp&<58TLbiriB&i  *  a)  6$  (75/5  G'^/rtiL/sy/r  Gsflev  (, 

With  smiling  face  he  entertains  each  virtuous  guest  ; 

*  Fortune  '  with  gladsome  mind  shall  in  his  dwelling  rest. 

85.  <S&<£&1  L&i—<5v(3<5iJ®i3r 

i_Q  en  <F  <sij  rr  GST 


Who  first  regales  his  guest,  and  then  himself  supplies, 
O'er  all  his  fields,  unsown,  shall  plenteous  harvests  rise. 

86.      Q  &  <5V  <aSl  (ff)  Ib    G><5ITLC>l§l   617  (77}  6$  (75/5^7    U  IT  IT  <5  $  (fJjUU  IT 

<svr  g-o  sQ  (Tjj  ts  gj]  eufrsyr^  j56Uir<&(&j 

The  guest  arrived  he  tends,  the  coming  guest  expects  to  see  ; 
To  those  in  heavenly  homes  that  dwell  a  welcome  guest  is  he. 


To  reckon  up  the  fruit  of  kindly  deeds  were  all  in  vain  ; 
Their  worth  is  as  the  worth  of  guests  you  entertain. 


88. 

euetr 


With  pain  they  guard  their  stores,  yet  '  All  forlorn  are  we,'  they  '11  cr 
Who  cherish  not  their  guests,  nor  kindly  help  supply. 

89.       2_<S3)L_<S5)££/ty    GfTlsGrGVLb    <aSl  (Tfj  IB  Q  p  IT  LD  U    Q  (5\)  /T  ££)  U  IT 


' 


To  turn  from  guests  is  penury,  though  worldly  goods  abound  ; 
'Tis  senseless  folly,  only  with  the  senseless  found. 


BOOK    I. — DOMESTIC   VIRTUE.  15 

90.       (oLDfTLJLJ<35    (ttSmLplLJ    L£>£yf)<F<f    (ip  <9S  fB  J£l  m  /5 


The  flower  of  the  '  Anicha '  withers  away, 
If  you  do  but  its  fragrance  inhale  ; 

If  the  face  of  the  host  cold  welcome  convey, 
The  guest's  heart  within  him  will  fail. 


CHAPTER  X.     jy£.  so. 
\}.  —  THE  UTTERANCE  OP  PLEASANT  WORDS. 


91.     jj£)<svrQ&rr<svrr  efPjr  Lo§brjg)LJ  u  tp.  fbl  <SD  <su  rr  45$ 
&  sm  L_  ir  IT  su  /r  uu  & 


Pleasant  words  are  words  with  all  pervading  love  that  burn  ; 
Words  from  his  guileless  mouth  who  can  the  very  truth  discern. 


92. 

iT(5    ($  6GT  Q  &  fT  <5V    (G3)<55LJ    Q  U  r$  <5$T 

A  pleasant  word  with  beaming  smile  's  preferred, 
Even  to  gifts  with  liberal  heart  conferred. 

93.         lp<5B/r    <5VT  LD  IT  IB 


With  brightly  beaming  smile,  and  kindly  light  of  loving  eye, 
And  heart  sincere,  to  utter  pleasant  words  is  charity. 


94.  ^/S^TLyj2/T2_^    ^J  617  (517  /T  <5tT>  LD    Il9  <5\)  <5V  fT  (^  LD  ILJ  IT  IT  LD  fT  L-  G) 

L&  GST  Ly  J2/T  2_    iQ  65T  Q  <f  fT    <5\)  SU  FT  <35  (^  (^ 

The  men  of  pleasant  speech  that  gladness  breathe  around, 
Through  indigence  shall  never  sorrow's  prey  be  found. 

95.  LJ<5Klfl<51]<o(nL-lU    -Ssfl  651  Q  -3F  /T  <SV    (S3)^    Q  <oV  fT  (7^  <Sti  p 

<35  totfsfl  UJ  <5V  6V    LQ/bgjJLJ    lOl  {D  (@) 

Humility  with  pleasant  speech  to  man  on  earth, 
Is  choice  adornment  ;  all  besides  is  nothing  worth. 

96. 


Who  seeks  out  good,  words  from  his  lips  of  sweetness  flow  ; 
In  him  the  power  of  vice  declines,  and  virtues  grow. 


97.       /BUJSfff  <S2rT«J2/    /56377$    LJ  UJ  <5B  (3-j 


The  words  of  sterling  sense,  to  rule  of  right  that  strict  adhere, 
To  virtuous  action  prompting,  blessings  yield  in  every  sphere. 


I  *• 

98. 


Sweet  kindly  words,  from  meanness  free,  delight  of  heart 
In  world  to  come  and  in  this  world  impart. 


99. 

euGsrQ&rrGV  <su  Lp  IHJ  (&j 

Who  sees  the  pleasure  kindly  speech  affords, 
Why  makes  he  use  of  harsh,*  repellant  words  ? 

100. 


When  pleasant  words  are  easy,  bitter  words  to  use, 
Is,  leaving  sweet  ripe  fruit,  the  sour  unripe  to  choose. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


}.  —  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OP  BENEFITS  CONFERRED: 
GRATITUDE. 


101.      Q& UJILJ /TLbfi   Q&ILJ^B    GlJ^eSlt 

<5SHolJlLl<3S(lpLC>    loll  IT  <oGT  <95  QJ1    LAfTpfD    (5D  ifl  £j]  («) 

Assistance  given  by  those  who  ne'er  received  our  aid, 
Is  debt  by  gift  of  heaven  and  earth  but  poorly  paid. 


102. 

<(5]j  tr  <sv  <s  jil  <s$r 
A  timely  benefit,  —  though  thing  of  little  worth 
The  gift  itself,  —  in  excellence  transcends  the  earth. 

108.     u  tu  &sr  gw  a  &  rr  ir 

fB  UJ  <5VT  J2/T  6B  Q 


Kindness  shown  by  those  who  weigh  not 

What  the  return  may  be  ; 
When  you  ponder  right  its  merit, 

'Tis  vaster  than  the  sea. 


104. 


Each  benefit  to  those  of  actions'  fruit  who  rightly  deenij 
Though  small  as  millet-seed,  as  palm-tree  vast  will  seem. 


BOOK   I.  -  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  17 

105. 


Q  3=  LU  LJ  U  iL.  Z_  IT  IT    &  fT  6V  l3l  &ST 

The  kindly  aid's  extent  is  of  its  worth  no  measure  true  ; 
Its  worth  is  as  the  worth  of  him  to  whom  the  act  you  do. 

106.  LD/D6U/D<35  LG  fT  &  rb  (W?  IT    (?  &6V3T  <5V)  LD 
g$CD'Stip5>    ^]  <oin~  U  ^  gtf  /_    (2)  LJ  U  fT  LU  IT  IT    IEL-LJ 

Kindness  of  men  of  stainless  soul  remember  evermore  ! 
Forsake  thou  never  friends  who  were  thy  stay  in  sorrow  sore  ! 

107.  <5T(l£)6y)LD    Q  ILJ  (L£>  iSl  p  LJ  Lf    (Lp  6TT  (^  <SU  IT 
<sSl(LgLn/G    gj]  <5V)  L—  *5  p  6U  IT    f5  1—  Lf 

Through  all  seven  worlds,  in  seven-fold  birth, 

Eemains  in  mein'ry  of  the  wise, 
Friendship  of  those  who  wiped  on  earth, 

The  tears  of  sorrow  from  their  eyes. 

108.  /563T/$    LAV)LJUgU    IB  GST  {D  <S$T  gy    f5  6VT  JD 


'Tis  never  good  to  let  the  thought  of  good  things  done  thee  pass  away  ; 
Of  things  not  good,  'tis  good  to  rid  thy  memory  that  very  day. 

109.       Q  <35  FT  <o$T  no  <SVT  6ST    <a£l  <5$T  (tSS)    Q  <f  llSl  6V)I    LO  (oil  IT  Q  <3F  LU  &> 
Q  611  [T  <S5T  <£J  [B<S$T 


Effaced  straightway  is  deadliest  injury, 
By  thought  of  one  kind  act  in  days  gone  by. 


110.       <5T  IS  IS  GST  }B    Q<fE/TS3r(V^/r<S(<9j    Op  LU  61]  6SST  l_  fT    (Lp  ILJ 


Who  every  good  have  killed,  may  yet  destruction  flee  ; 
Who  '  benefit  '  has  killed,  that  man  shall  ne'er  'scape  free  ! 


CHAPTER  XII.     ^@.  «a_. 
. — IMPARTIALITY. 


111.     ^(5,®  Qiu<s3rQ6iJ(T<svrg)/ 
u (^ £&l LU rr p  urrfiuL-  Q 

If  justice,  failing  not,  its  quality  maintain, 

Giving  to  each  his  due, — 'tis  man's  one  highest  gain. 

3 


THE    KUREAL. 


112.       Q&LJU   (Lf><5V)l_UJ<SlJ    (S3)<56(S(^7?    ^  (off)  ^  eSl  GST 
Q  UJ  <5F  <SF  ;£  $£l  p    Q&LblTLJ    LfttL-fSgU 

The  just  man's  wealth  unwasting  shall  endure, 
ind  to  his  race  a  lasting  joy  ensure. 

L13.       [5<53rG>rD   ^&lf!6g)J    (5  Gl  <aSl  &  fB  ^  fT 


.  QiunrifliL)  < 

?hough  only  good  it  seem  to  give,  yet  gain 
wrong  acquired,  not  e'en  one  day  retain  ! 


1.14. 


Who  just  or  unjust  lived  shall  soon  appear  : 
By  each  one's  offspring  shall  the  truth  be  clear. 


J  15.    (c&GlLD  Qu(7rj&&(ip  L$  ev  ev  GV  <sv  Q  is  (^  &  <&  &j  &> 

<5F  IT  6GT 


The  gain  and  loss  in  life  are  not  mere  accident  ; 
Just  mind  inflexible  is  sages'  ornament. 


116.       Q&®6lJ<5VlLirr    Q 


toSTGSTU 


If,  right  deserting,  heart  to  evil  turn, 
Let  man  impending  ruin's  sign  discern  ! 


117. 

fBG)sUfT<35    /5<SJT^)7<S<5B/_1    L_  IEI  Si  UJ  ft  <5VT    (7T?  L£>  61] 

The  man  who  justly  lives,  tenacious  of  the  right, 
In  low  estate  is  never  low  to  wise  man's  sight. 

118.  <fL£>6yrQ<3FlLJ^J    @ITgtf-&(&)!EJ    Q  <£  fT  <5V  G>  U  fT 
eVSJDLD^Q^/T'^U/r/D    G>(5E/Ti_/rS3)LD  <SF  IT  <5VT  (o  (ft?  IT  <3B    •% 

To  stand,  like  balance  rod  that  level  hangs  and  rightly  weighs, 
With  calm  unbiassed  equity  of  soul,  is  sages'  praise. 

119.  Q<f  [rrbQ<s>tTL-.L—  iSlevtoV 

L&I  6VT  €5)  LL> 


Inflexibility  in  word  is  righteousness, 
If  men  inflexibility  of  soul  possess. 

120.       fill  IT  GtKffl  &  (GJj    Q  <F  ULJ  6U  fT  IT  &  3     6)]  IT  <S83r1  &  LD 


As  thriving  trader  is  the  trader  known, 
Who  guards  another's  interests  as  his  own. 


BOOK    I.  —  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  19 

CHAPTER  XIII.     jy£.  <*/*_. 
>—6a)Lo.  —  THE  POSSESSION  OF  SELF-RESTRAINT. 


121.       ^fl—OxS    LbLbSTQJj    (&Jjll 
LOL_/S/<55/r<a3)/£>    UJ  IT  ifi  (77j 

Controul  of  self  does  man  conduct  to  bliss  th'  immortals  share  ; 
Indulgence  leads  to  deepest  night,  and  leaves  him  there. 


122.  65/T(5B<5E    Q  U  IT  (7$  <STT  IT    <5lJ  I—  <5B  &  f£  <Sff>  ^ 

Lurrss  L£{6<ot&G!£iri£-i5i  Qev'&si)  lyifil  rr  &  c&)  (a.) 

Guard  thou  as  wealth  the  power  of  self-controul  ; 
Than  this  no  greater  gain  to  living  soul  ! 

123.  0  <3F  n$  <SU 
tAflJGUJ& 

If  versed  in  wisdom's  lore  by  virtue's  law  you  self  restrain, 
Your  self  -repression  known  will  yield  you  glory's  gain. 


124. 

Lo3soo9j32/  LDfressru  Qurfi^j 

In  his  station,  all  unswerving,  if  man  self  subdue, 
Greater  he  than  mountain  proudly  rising  to  the  view. 

125.       <STffOS\)/r/f(5B(^    [ 
Q<£F<S\)<8lllTa(]><95 

To  all  humility  is  goodly  grace  ;  but  chief  to  them 
With  fortune  blessed,  —  'tis  fortune's  diadem. 


126.       6£7<S3)LD/i      <SfflT<o<S)lbQun    $Sti  f5  S  L-  &  & 


Like  tortoise,  who  the  five  restrains 

In  one,  through  seven  worlds  bliss  obtains. 


127.     tu  rr  <s  nr  su  IT  irn~u9®s)]  /5/r<5E/r<ids  &  rr  <su  rr  &  &  rr  p 


Whate'er  they  fail  to  guard,  o'er  lips  men  guard  should  keep  ; 
If  not,  through  fault  of  tongue,  they  bitter  tears  shall  weep. 


128.       6p6STQy6V)JfB     Gi&Q&n-nD    Q  U  fT  (Tfj  l_  U  UJ 

<ssr  <ssr  Qy  &  rr  ^rrSl  sSlGlLb 

Though  some  small  gain  of  good  it  seem  to  bring, 
The  evil  word  is  parent  still  of  evil  thing. 


THE    KURBAL. 

129. 


In  flesh  by  fire  inflamed,  nature  may  throughly  heal  the  sore  ; 
In  soul  by  tongue  inflamed,  the  ulcer  healeth  nevermore. 

130.      <5E  ^  IE!  <3B  [T  JB  gtf  65    &>  p  ?D  L—  /E/<£B    <5V  IT  H)  J£l  6UfT&ST    Q  &  <SU  <s9, 


Who  learns  restraint,  and  guards  his  soul  from  wrath, 
Virtue,  a  timely  aid,  attends  his  path. 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

.  —  THE  POSSESSION  OF  DECORUM 


131.      6p(Lg><95&LD    <3&l(lgLJUr6   p  IT  6V  IT 

Q 


'  Decorum  '  gives  especial  excellence  ;  with  greater  care 

*  Decorum  '  should  men  guard  than  life,  which  all  men  share. 

132.       Ulfl/b(o5rrLOL9<35    <5B/T<S6E    Q  611  fT 


Searching,  duly  watching,  learning,  —  '  decorum  '  still  we  find 
Man's  only  aid  :  toiling,  guard  thou  this  with  watchful  mind. 

133.       6p(Lg>&&    Q.p  <S5)  L-  6V)  LD 


*  Decorum  '  's  true  nobility  on  earth  ; 
'  Indecorum's  '  issue  is  ignoble  birth. 


134.     t&jDUiSjgu  QLbiT<5&]&  Q<5B/reyreu/r(^ti)  u  IT  k  u  u  IT  <ssr 


Though  he  forget,  the  Brahman  may  regain  his  Vedic  lore  ; 
Failing  in  *  decorum  due,'  birthright  's  gone  for  evermore. 


135. 

QujfT(W&&   (Lp<55)L-UJrT<S$r&    Gft)l  UJ  IT  6lJ 

The  envious  soul  in  life  no  rich  increase  of  blessing  gains, 
So  man  of  *  due  decorum  '  void  no  dignity  obtains. 


136.       6p(L£>&&^l£l    Q(S3)6\)<fl5/T    0  ff  Q  *<SU  fT 

d    U  Q  U  IT  <95  <SB 


The  strong  of  soul  no  jot  abate  of  '  strict  decorum's  '  laws, 
Knowing  that  '  due  decorum's  '  breach  foulest  disgrace  will  cause. 


BOOK    I.  —  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  21 


137.  6p  (Lg  &  <95  ^  $    Q^yTLU^jeUfT    G>  U56GT  GftLL 

Il9  (Lg  <35  X  ^  j£)    Q  SSTli)  J57  <S1J    Q  JTULJ  p  IT  LJ    U  ifl 

'Tis  source  of  dignity  when  '  true  decorum  '  is  preserved  ; 
Who  break  *  decorum's  '  rules  endure  e'en  censures  undeserved. 

138.  !E<S3Tn!)l&(&)    <s£t^^n~(ff)   IE<5vQ6Vfr('Lg3>&fB     $S  Q  UU  IT  (Lg  <55  65 


1  Decorum  true  '  observed  a  seed  of  good  will  be  ; 
'Decorum's  breach'  will  sorrow  yield  eternally. 

139.       G£(Lg5>3>    (lp<55)L-.UJ6lJir<9&    Q  <3B  FT  £0  <5U  IT  (o  <SU    J£  LU 
<S1J  (Lg  <35  £)  ILJ  LQ    <8lJn~UJrrp  Q<5F/r<5VffO 

It  cannot  be  that  they  who  '  strict  decorum's  '  law  fulfil, 
E'en  in  forgetful  mood,  should  utter  words  of  ill. 

140. 


Who  know  not  with  the  world  in  harmony  to  dwell, 
May  many  things  have  learned,  but  nothing  well. 


CHAPTEE  XV. 

.  —  NOT  COVETING  ANOTHER'S   WIFE. 


141. 


Who  laws  of  virtue  and  possession's  rights  have  known, 
Indulge  no  foolish  love  of  her  by  right  another's  own. 


142.  «jy/DS3T<35<53)i_    /$  <S3T  (#?  (77) 

l£l  p  <5GT  &  (53)  L_    1$  <SGT  Q?f  ifl  p    (oUSft^UJir    if)  6V  (a_) 

No  fools,  of  all  that  stand  from  virtue's  pale  shut  out, 
Like  those  who  longing  lurk  their  neighbour's  gate  without. 

143.  <sQ  sift  f5  ^  rr  rfi  GST  Q>  <su  p  <so  <sv  rr  fr  Lcxsvrp 

Q  p  <s&\  IB  £j  rr  if)  p  r§  <ots)Ub  L-irfl/5Q^rr(i£>(&j  eiitrfr  (ffi-) 

They  're  numbered  with  the  dead,  e'en  while  they  live,  —  how  otherwise  ? 
With  wife  of  sure  confiding  friend  who  evil  things  devise. 

144. 


How  great  soe'er  they  be,  what  gain  have  they  of  life, 
Who,  not  a  w'lit  reflecting,  seek  a  neighbour's  wife  ? 


THE    KUBEAL. 


145.       <5T<S\?lQ<5<S3T    <s9eV6QrDUUn~    Q  GST  IU  ^J  Q  LD  (SJ    (SJ  IT  <S3T  Jg)  LQ 

G&Glfl  ILJfT&J    filrb^LL    Uifl  (@) 


'  Mere  trifle  !  '  saying  thus,  invades  the  home  ;  so  he  ensures 
A  gain  of  guilt  that  deathless  aye  endures. 

146.       U6&&LJIT61)    LDcFdFLO    UL^QlLiSST 
Lf9<35  GUV  <SU  IT    LS  6V  6$  JD  LJ  U  fT  6VT 


Who  home  invades,  from  him  pass  nevermore, 
Hatred  and  sin,  fear,  foul  disgrace  :  these  four. 


147.     ^y  p  svf)  uj  6V  rr  Gvfleveurripsijrr  Qssresrurreyr 

l9  JD  <Svf)  ILJ  6V  fT  6TT    Q  U  6SST  63)  LG    /50J61//T    <56U6ST  (<Sr) 


Who  sees  the  wife,  another's  own,  with  no  desiring  eye, 
In  sure  domestic  bliss  he  dwelleth  ever  virtuously. 


148.  iQijoeyrLbBovr  Qtbirssirp  Quiriremts^u^  &  n<s®Q(nj  its, 
a£DQfo$)<ssrG>(7iy  tsuiresrrD  Q  <su  rr  (tg  &  (&j 

Manly  excellence,  that  looks  not  on  another's  wife, 
Is  not  virtue  merely,  'tis  full  '  propriety  '  of  life. 

149.  /E  6V  &  (3j  ifi  ILJ  rr  IT  LurrQfT&vfl  <s9)ic/f/f  GtrxsuuiSlrb 
t9jDjb(9jif}iLJir  (oL-rrQi—rrujfr  pirir 

Who  're  good  indeed,  on  earth  begirt  by  ocean's  gruesome  tide? 
The  men  who  touch  not  her  that  is  another's  bride. 

150.  «=gy  p  GST  eu  <sn  iruj  rr  Gsrevev 


Though  virtue's  bounds  he  pass,  and  evil  deeds  hath  wrought  ; 
At  least,  'tis  good  if  neighbour's  wife  he  covet  not. 


CHAPTER  XVI.     jv#.  a  air. 
.  —  THE  POSSESSION  OF  PATIENCE  :    FORBEARANCE. 


151.      ^l&Lp<SUIT6inff<£   plTIEl^    f§6VL[)(c  U  IT  <SV  <£ 
Gl  U 


As  earth  bears  up  the  men  who  delve  into  her  breast, 
To  bear  with  scornful  men  of  virtues  is  the  best. 

152. 


Forgiving  trespasses  is  good  always  ; 
Forgetting  them  hath  even  higher  praise. 


BOOK    T.  —  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  23 


153.  g)6ffTS5>LO/L/   &fl  GST  on  LA  e8l  ($  &Q  p  IT  jr  IT  ev 

611  SZfT  S3)  LD  ILj  STT   <S1/  657"  (off)  LD    LDL—SU/T/T    QufT<5S)^D  \fK~) 

The  sorest  poverty  is  bidding  guest  unfed  depart  ; 
The  mightiest  might  to  bear  with  men  of  foolish  heart. 

154.  /$<55>/D/L/<Sff)L_<S3)/jD    li  /E/  <55  /T  65)  LD    (o  <SU  6S8T  If-  <T) 
QLJ/r63)/D/L/Gff>L_<5ff>LO    Q  U  IT  JD  $    Q  ILJ  fT  (Lg  &  LJ  LJ®LD  (<f) 

Seek'st  thou  honour  never  tarnished  to  retain  ; 

So  must  thou  patience,  guarding  evermore,  maintain. 

155.  <?p  <gi  ^  ^  tr  <sff>  JT  Qiurrs$TQy&  GV>  su  uj  rr  Q  j  GVXSIJUUIT 

Q  LJ  IT  ^J  £B  ^  rr  ®n  IT  u  Qlurr&srQuir  p  QurT^fcjgj  (©) 

Who  wreak  their  wrath  as  worthless  are  despised  ; 
Who  patiently  forbear  as  gold  are  prized. 


156.  <sp  gu  £5  ;£  tr  fr  & 

Q  U  IT  £)J  35  ^  rr  IT  &  (&j  LJ   Qu/TS37"J2//5    ^  StSttT  ILj  LD    Lj  <9B  L£ 

Who  wreak  their  wrath  have  pleasure  for  a  day  ; 
Who  bear  have  praise  till  earth  shall  pass  away. 

157.  ^3/D«?T€0«w  jSpiSlnoir  Q  &  \Li  o9  cgM 

Q  <F  IU  ILJ  fT  <5V)  UJ 


Though  others  work  thee  ill,  thus  shalt  thou  blessing  reap  : 
Grieve  for  their  sin,  thyself  from  vicious  action  keep  ! 


158.     L$  (&)  £E)  ILJ  rr  <ssr  L$  &  a  <sv)  611  Q  &  ILJ  ^  FT  <sv>  IT  ^ 


With  overweening  pride  when  men  with  injuries  assail, 

By  thine  own  righteous  dealing  shalt  thou  mightily  prevail. 

159.  £jl  p  IB  8>  IT  ifl  p    J2yriU<oJDLD    ILJ6&L-UJ 

if)  p  f5  p  rr  IT  <su  rr  iSlissr^-fQl-aFir  Q^pSlib  ueu/r 

They  who  transgressors'  evil  words  endure 
With  patience,  are  as  stern  ascetics  pure. 

160.  Q-smttoffi)^  Q  fs  rr  no  u  rr  rr  Quifliuir  L9noirQ<ffr<5V^i 
L$<s$r(53)<3::Q<pn~  Q  (63)  purr  iflrb  i3l<5sr 

Though  «  great  '  we  deem  the  men  that  fast  and  suffer  pain, 
Who  others'  bitter  words  endure,  the  foremost  place  obtain. 


24  THE    KURBAL. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
.  —  NOT  ENVYING, 


161.     6p  (Lg  &  &  rr  (ty  &  Q<35fr<srr&  QeurrQjjeiJGvrvxovr  Q  'ear  ^  &  <& 


As  '  strict  decorum's  '  laws,  that  all  men  bind, 
Let  each  regard  unen  vying  grace  of  mind. 

162. 


If  man  can  learn  to  envy  none  on  earth, 
'Tis  richest  gift,  —  beyond  compare  its  worth. 

163.       «^y/D  (S3)  65  6B  LD    (o  <SU  <5SOT  L_  fl  ^  IT    Q  <SST  &ST  U  fT  <5ST 
<35  <X  LQ    (oUtGSS  L     <35  <35  £U  LJ 


Nor  wealth  nor  virtue  does  that  man  desire,  'tis  plain, 
Whom  others'  wealth  delights  not,  feeling  envious  pain. 

164.       <j      L     6F<5E  IT  <SWffO<S\)<Sff)<Sl/    Q  <F  LU  LU  fT 


The  wise  through  envy  break  not  virtue's  laws, 
Knowing  ill-deeds  of  foul  disgrace  the  cause. 


165.       .jy  (Lg  «  «  IT    J2/(Sff)Z_WJ/T/f<5E    <3B  gj]  <F  H~  &}]    Q  LD  IT  <55T  (S5)  /f 

€11  (Lg  ci  Si  ILj  m    Q&LSLG5T    U^J  (®) 

Envy  they  have  within  !     Enough  to  seal  their  fate  ! 
Though  foemen  fail,  envy  can  ruin  consummate. 


166.     Q&rrQuu  p>  (Lg  <35  <s  gu  u  u  rr  <5$r 


Who  scans  good  gifts  to  others  given  with  envious  eye, 
His  kin,  with  none  to  clothe  or  feed  them,  surely  die. 

167.       *gj<Sli<aSl<5    3b(Lg&3>fT    £y  <Stf>  L_  LU  IT  $53T  -f    Q  <F  LU  LU  <5U 


From  envious  man  good  fortune's  goddess  turns  away, 
Grudging  him  good,  and  points  him  out  misfortune's  prey. 

168.     «gy  (t£  &  &  n   QfD<5srQ<sijnr(ffj 


Envy,  embodied  ill,  incomparable  bane, 

Good  fortune  slays,  and  soul  consigns  to  fiery  pain. 


ROOK    I.  —  DOMESTIC    VIKTUK.  25 


169.       ^(SUsSliU    Q  IB  (&5  <5F  f£  p  IT 
Q  <?  <517  sSl  OJ  fT  65T 


To  men  of  envious  heart,  when  conies  increase  of  joy, 

Or  loss  to  blameless  men,  the  '  why  '  will  thoughtful  hearts  employ. 


170.     ^i(L£>&&ib  p)<3s<5VT(np(fTj  iSeoflsi)  tu  o°o  ^  eu  rr  IT 


No  envious  men  to  large  and  full  felicity  attain  ; 

No  men  from  envy  free  have  failed  a  sure  increase  to  gain. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

.  —  NOT  COVETING. 


iG<svrQun'Q7jffn~ 
u  rr  <5vr  n$  &  (^^bno(ip 

With  soul  unjust  to  covet  others'  well-earned  store, 
Brings  ruin  to  the  home,  to  evil  opes  the  door. 

172.  LJ®UUJ<oVr    QtSU^oSlLJ    Ui^Uu(b)<5U    Q  <f  UJ  t/J  /T  IT 
f5(£)<SlJ6isT<5V)L£    IS  fT  6ffi)i    U  6U  fT 

Through  lust  of  gain,  no  deeds  that  retribution  bring 
Do  they,  who  shrink  with  shame  from  every  unjust  thing. 

173.  QjbfSeisnjLb  Q<su°o&  uj/D6$re\)6V  Q&i'uujrrQir 

U<SUIT 


No  deeds  of  ill,  misled  by  base  desire, 
Do  they,  whose  souls  to  other  joys  aspire. 


174. 

L-j  6V  LLiQ  '<5U  <5$T  p    LJ  <5$T  <5V)  LD  «9  fb 

Men  who  have  conquered  sense,  with  sight  from  sordid  vision  freed, 
Desire  not  others'  goods,  e'en  in  the  hour  of  sorest  need. 

175. 


What  gain,  though  lore  refined  of  amplest  reach  he  learn, 
His  acts  towards  all  mankind  if  covetous  desire  to  folly  turn  ? 


176.     «jy0syrQisi7o0o^  vu  IT  p  /£l  <s$r 

Qurr(7JjGrrQ<siJ°o£)u  Q  u  rr  eu  <s\)  rr  ^ 

Though,  grace  desiring,  he  in  virtue's  way  stand  strong, 
He  's  lost  who  wealth  desires,  and  ponders  deeds  of  wrong. 

4 


THE    KUREAL. 


177.     (o<5lJ€S3n_rb&    QeUaoSlUJfT    LD/7656SLD    <aSl%SfT<3lluSl<SSr 
LD/76337Z_/D    65/f?,65/7L£    LJLLK5W 

Seek  not  increase  by  greed  of  gain  acquired  ; 
That  fruit  matured  yields  never  good  desired. 


178.     «=gy  o°o  &  IT  <s?n  LD 

iSl  p  637  <5V)  65  U 


What  saves  prosperity  from  swift  decline  ? 

Absence  of  lust  to  make  another's  cherished  riches  thine  ! 

179. 


Good  fortune  draws  anigh  in  helpful  time  of  need, 

To  him  who,  schooled  in  virtue,  guards  his  soul  from  greed. 


180.       Jj)  p  <3@  Gg)    OLD  6397^^7    Q  <SU 

6&I  fD  <3$  6g»  LD    Q<Sti<Gmi—IT<5G)LC>    QlU  6$T  Sgil  (^    Q  <5F  QTj 

From  thoughtless  lust  of  others'  goods  springs  fatal  ill  ; 
Greatness  of  soul  that  covets  not  shall  triumph  still. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

.  —  NOT  BACKBITING. 


181,       «jy/D/Ey^u(7>p    <oGT6\)t5V    Q  <F  llSl  65)J    Q  LD  IT  (TJj 


Though  virtuous  words  his  lips  speak  not,  and  all  his  deeds  are  ill, 
If  neighbour  he  defame  not,  there  's  good  within  him  still. 


182.     =gy  p  <stsi  tf  '^)  (u  e\)  e\)  63)  su  Q  <?  ILJ  ^  <s9  nr> 

I-]  £D  6GT  L^  j£)  LJ    Q  U  fTlLJ  €5  gtf    fb  ®D  -95 

Than  he  who  virtue  scorns,  and  evil  deeds  performs,  more  vile 
Is  he  that  slanders  friend,  then  meets  him  with  false  smile. 


183.      Ljnr)IE13^.n^LJ    QufTLU^^J  u9ilT    61J  fT  Lp  35  6@  fi    <F  FT  ^ 


<5V  0)  (51  <Tn.  J£I    LDrr&<35/E     <5  QJjLb 

'Tis  greater  gain  of  virtuous  good  for  man  to  die 

Than  live  to  slander  absent  friend,  and  falsely  praise  when  nigh. 

184.        666337  6337V  <53T^22/    65  6337  6337'  fD  <f    Q  <f  [f  6V  <o9  $3)1  (tt    Q  <f  fT<SV6\)  %)& 
(Lp<5tt<5$\<5tt£)]    l9  (537  Co  (^3)6565/7^    Q  <F  fT  <5V 


In  presence  though  unkindly  words  you  speak,  say  not 
In  absence  words  whose  ill  result  exceeds  your  thought. 


BOOK    1.  -  DOMESTIC    VIRTH-;.  27 

185.     «j  no  (vJTjQ  <f  rr  <s\)  s$i 


The  slanderous  meanness  that  an  absent  friend  defames, 
'  This  man  in  words  owns  virtue,  not  in  heart,'  proclaims. 

186.    iQrDGtsruifl  &>-fi£/6ijrr<ovr  p<ssruL^  /ty  err  (6/5/5 


Who  on  his  neighbours'  sins  delights  to  dwell, 

The  story  of  his  sins,  culled  out  with  care,  the  world  will  tell. 

187.    u  &  &  Q  &  rr  <sv  <s9  & 
/5  &  <?  Q  &  rr  <sv  <s9 


With  friendly  art  who  know  not  pleasant  words  to  say, 
Speak  words  that  sever  hearts,  and  drive  choice  friends  away. 

188.      &1  637"  ttfl  ILJ  fT/ir 


Whose  nature  bids  them  faults  of  closest  friends  proclaim, 
What  mercy  will  they  show  to  other  men's  good  name? 

189.     ^noQ^^Sl  lurrihgjjsEiQ&frGV  GyxsuiULb 

rr    s$i  <stn  $  u  u  rr  <5$r 


'Tis  charity,  I  ween,  that  makes  the  earth  sustain  their  load 
Who,  neighbours'  absence  watching,  tales  of  slander  tell  abroad. 


190.     sj^Sev/r/f  (3jrbfnLbG>LjrT  p  ptEJ(&jv)nDiEJ  a  rr  GMT 

jfijfieurQiL.n'  LD6m<s&pi  QpiQif&t&j  («)) 

If  each  his  own,  as  neighbours'  faults  would  scan, 
Could  any  evil  hap  to  living  man  ? 


CHAPTEE  XX. 

.  —  THE  NOT  SPEAKING  PROFITLESS  WORDS. 


191.  uevsD/r/f  QP&&IUUILJ  uaj<5sf!<oti  Q  -f  rr  '&)  spi  eu  rr 
Q  <svr  <sv  <sv  rr  (Tij  Qu^stT'snLJ  U®LD 

Words  without  sense,  while  chafe  the  wise, 
Who  babbles,  him  will  all  despise. 

192.  Lj( 

<s$r  uj 


Words  without  sense,  where  many  wise  men  hear,  to  pour 
Than  deeds  to  friends  ungracious  done  offendeth  more. 


28  THE    KURftAL. 


193.  /5(L/<53$<St>    Q  65T  65T  U  gii    Q  &  IT  gU  6$l  LG 

ULUovflGV  urrfl^s  ^lanrra^  (^penir  (/H_) 

Diffusive  speech  of  useless  words  proclaims 
A  man  who  never  righteous  wisdom  gains. 

194.  IS  (U  GST  <f  fT  IT  IT    /5<S3T<Sff>LO«9 


Unmeaning,  worthless  words,  said  to  the  multitude, 
To  none  delight  afford,  and  sever  men  from  good. 


195. 

/£/T<S3)LD    ILf  <5S)  L-  UJ  IT  fT   Q  &  .IT  <oSl  <5GT 

Gone  are  both  fame  and  boasted  excellence, 
When  men  of  worth  speak  words  devoid  of  sense. 

196. 


Who  makes  display  of  idle  words'  inanity, 
Call  him  not  man,  —  chaff  of  humanity  ! 


197.       ISlLJGsflGV    Q  <F  (T  <5\)  <o9  ttU  (57)  Q  &  fr  <oV  6$l  <3B    <5F  FT  65T  Q  QT?  IT 
UlLJ<5tif)<5\) 


Let  those  who  list  speak  things  that  no  delight  afford, 
"Tis  good  for  men  of  worth  to  speak  no  idle  word. 

198.     «jLOLJUJ  (69  £    Lnn$<sSl<<oyir  Q  <&  rr  <sv  <s\)  rr  rr 


The  wise,  who  weigh  the  worth  of  every  utterance, 
Speak  none  but  words  of  deep  significance. 


199.  Q  u  rr  Q?j  i<2.  IT  /B  j5  Q  u  rr 

LD(njl£-ITf6j£    LDfT<P£U    <S/T/_£)    LU6UIT 

The  men  of  vision  pure,  from  wildering  folly  free, 
Not  e'en  in  thoughtless  hour,  speak  words  of  vanity. 

200.  G)dc/rffUi2/<5  Q 


U 


UJ  <sof)  (5V  IT  <f 

If  speak  you  will,  speak  words  that  fruit  afford, 
If  speak  you  will,  speak  never  fruitless  word. 


BOOK    1. DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  29 


CHAPTER  XXL 

&LZ. — DREAD  OF  EVIL  DEEDS. 


201.     js  <sQ  $svr  UJ  rr  jrghj&rriT  <s£l  (Lg  L&  tu  rr  jr  <^  &  <su  ir 

jSGQP/SVr    Q  \L)  <55T  £?£]  <<5T)    Q  <F  (TFj  <95  (&j 

With  sinful  act  men  cease  to  feel  the  dread  of  ill  within  ; 
The  excellent  will  dread  the  wanton  pride  of  cherished  sin. 

202. 


Since  evils  new  from  evils  ever  grow, 
Evil  than  fire  works  out  more  dreaded  woe. 

203. 

rr  ir  & 


Even  to  those  that  hate  make  no  return  of  ill  ; 

So  shalt  thou  wisdom's  highest  law,  'tis  said,  fulfil. 

204. 


Though  good  thy  soul  forget,  plot  not  thy  neighbour's  fall, 
Thy  plans  shall  '  virtue's  Power  '  by  ruin  to  thyself  forestall. 


205.     g)(5\)Q(SWS3rj2/   tsiLJGtneiJ  Q&ujiujba 

6vfl<5V(t53)(3j 


Make  not  thy  poverty  a  plea  for  ill  ;    ' 
Thy  evil  deeds  will  make  thee  poorer  still. 

206.     ^uurrsv   <s  rr  GST  &  p  fr  &  L-.  Q  &  ILJLU  jn  & 

Q  IE  mi)  LJ  U  IT  6ti     SGGT'fo 


What  ranks  as  evil  spare  to  do,  if  thou  would'st  shun 
Affliction  sore  through  ill  to  thee  by  others  done. 


U  U  GO)  -95 


lLjr(V?(7]j 


207. 


From  every  enmity  incurred  there  is  to  'scape  a  way  ; 
The  wrath  of  evil  deeds  will  dog  men's  steps,  and  slay. 

208. 


Man's  shadow  dogs  his  steps  where'er  he  wends  ; 
Destruction  thus  on  sinful  deeds  attends. 


THE    KUBRAL. 
209. 


Beware,  if  to  thyself  thyself  is  dear, 

Lest  thoii  to  aught  that  ranks  as  ill  draw  near  ! 

210. 


The  man,  to  devious  way  of  sin  that  never  turned  aside, 
From  ruin  rests  secure,  whatever  ills  betide. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


.  a.  a.. 


M.  —  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OP  WHAT  is  BEFITTING  A  MAN'S 
POSITION. 


211.       <S$)<95L£>LCtFrj£I    Q  <Sti  6GST  L-  IT 


Duty  demands  no  recompense  ;  to  clouds  of  heaven, 
By  men  on  earth,  what  answering  gift  is  given  ? 


212.     £5  rr  <sir  IT  jb  r£l  <s 

(o  <su  err  rr  <ssyr  <5tn  LD  Q<FVU<&ib  Q  u  /r  0  L_ 

The  worthy  say,  when  wealth  rewards  their  toil-spent  hours, 
For  uses  of  beneficence  alone  'tis  ours. 


213.  L^^Q^    (&fF)<oti&ptg>l 

Gl  iu  rr  u  LI  n~  <sSl  Gvnstis 

To  '  due  beneficence  '  no  equal  good  we  know, 
Amid  the  happy  gods,  or  in  this  world  below. 

214.  <<$.&&  jSn$<sijrr  GSM  uSl  IT  su  IT  Lp  eu  rr  <svr  LD 


Who  knows  what  's  human  life's  befitting  grace, 

He  lives  ;  the  rest  'mongst  dead  men  have  their  place. 


215.  p™  (K)  naifi  iinriSGRfDiB  <£(bQfD 
(oUjr/61  si}fr<srr<55T  rSlrnj 

The  wealth  of  men  who  love  the  'fitting  way,'  the  truly  wise, 
Is  as  when  water  fills  the  lake  that  village  needs  supplies. 

216.  uiUGSTLbrr  (ipffrrfffffjir 
IK  u  t  &£}  an  i     uu  rr  <s$r  <&  L_ 

A  tree  that  fruits  in  th'  hamlet's  central  mart, 
Is  wealth  that  falls  to  men  of  liberal  heart. 


BOOK    I.  -  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  31 


217.  LDQTjfs-srrSl^  <suufT  LD  IT  p  p  p  (fy  p 

Qu  (TF)  rs  <&  <sm  -35  ujfriovr&L-  UI^-.GST  (er) 

Unfailing  tree  that  healing  balm  distils  from  every  part, 
Is  ample  wealth  that  falls  to  him  of  large  and  noble  heart. 

218.  jj£)l—G3flGV    LJQF)<8lJ^&il    Q  LD  IT  LJ  Lf  ff  <oSl  £)    Q  <5E  IT  <5ti  <5E  fT  IT 

ILKSUfT  =£ 


E'en  when  resources  fail,  they  weary  not  of  '  kindness  due,'  — 
They  to  whom  Duty's  self  appears  in  vision  true. 


219. 

Q  &  ILj  £  IT  6V)  L£> 

The  kindly-hearted  man  is  poor  in  this  alone, 

When  power  of  doing  deeds  of  goodness  he  finds  none. 

220.       <5£UL]  ITsSl    <63)<5V61/(77j/S    G>«Qt_53^    <oST  o°o  Q  ^  IT  (fF)  6U  6VT 


Though  by  *  beneficence  '  the  loss  of  all  should  come, 
'Twere  meet  man  sold  himself,  and  bought  it  with  the  sum. 


CHAPTER  XXIII.     jy$.  S./IL. 

FF<SO)<35. GIVING. 


221.  SU/D/UJ/r/f<5B<5B/r<o2fr    r)6u<£   ll<S&)<3BLC>n)  6"0  5\)  /T  fEJ 
(&j  fi$  Q  UJ  jS  IT  LJ  <SS)  U    I§JT    ^<5V>l—^&ti 

Call  that  a  gift  to  needy  men  thou  dost  dispense, 
All  else  is  void  of  good,  seeking  for  recompense. 

222.  /5<si)<oX)/r  Qp&srlttHfB  Q  &  rr  <srr  c$  ^j 


Though  men  declare  it  heavenward  path,  yet  to  receive  is  ill  ; 
Though  upper  heaven  were  not,  to  give  is  virtue  still. 


223.  ^)<5vQ<53r65r6gu  QLDSUSU 
(^  e\)  Jg27  <otn  L-  ILI  IT  <s$r  ^essr 

'  I  've  nought  '  is  ne'er  the  high-born  man's  reply  ; 
He  gives  to  those  who  raise  themselves  that  cry. 

224.  g)seFT(S3)    $ir<35&U    LJ@!^    <o9  IT  f6  <£  <81I 


The  suppliants'  cry  for  aid  yields  scant  delight, 
Until  you  see  his  face  with  grateful  gladness  bright. 


32  THE    KURRAL. 

225. 


LD  fT  nr>  £u  <5U  IT    IT  IT  rb  {D  <oQ  & 

'Mid  devotees  they  're  great  who  hunger's  pangs  sustain, 
Who  hunger's  pangs  relieve  a  higher  merit  gain. 

226.  ^P(V?    ffiflu®    J5IT<5 

Q  u  fb  (y  GST  QurrtTjjGn-GvxsLiLJ  LJL£! 

Let  man  relieve  the  wasting  hunger  men  endure  ; 

For  treasure  gained  thus  finds  he  treasure-house  secure. 

227.  urr^irsm  LD/P       IUSU^SSTU 


Whose  soul  delights  with  hungry  men  to  share  his  meal. 
The  hand  of  hunger's  sickness  sore  shall  never  feel. 

228.       FF  3b  ^fjj  (5U  <35  (ff)    L$<5VrU   LD  J&  '  UJ  fT  IT  'Q  <3S  IT    (nj>  (Lp  6$)  /_  <S5)  LD 
<o!D  SU  £B  &$  Lp  6B  (c9)  LO 


Delight  of  glad'ning  human  hearts  with  gifts  do  they  not  know, 
Men  of  unpitying  eye,  who  hoard  their  wealth,  and  lose  it  so  ? 

229. 


They  keep  their  garners  full,  for  self  alone  the  board  they  spread  ; 
'Tis  greater  pain,  be  sure,  than  begging  daily  bread  ! 

230. 


'Tis  bitter  pain  to  die  !     'Tis  worse  to  live 
For  him  who  nothing  finds  to  give  ! 


CHAPTER  XXIV.     jqfi. 
.  —  EENOWN. 


231. 


See  that  thy  life  the  praise  of  generous  gifts  obtain  ; 
Save  this  for  living  man  exists  no  real  gain. 


232. 

fleurrir  QLbG&tb^Lz  LJ&I£  (2.) 


The  speech  of  all  that  speak  agrees  to  crown 

The  men  that  give  to  those  that  ask,  with  fair  renown. 


HOOK    I.  -  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.  38 

233. 


Q  u  rr  GST  (n?  ^j  $lpLjQlt£n'<s$f  ^<s\)  \fK-J 

Save  praise  alone  that  soars  on  high, 
Nought  lives  on  earth  that  shall  not  die. 


234.  r£)  <5V  6ii  6ft  IT 

LI  <5V  6U  <sff>  IT  u  Qun  p^nf 
If  men  do  virtuous  deeds  by  world-wide  ample  glory  crowned, 
The  heavens  will  cease  to  laud  the  sage  for  other  gifts  renowned. 

235.  IB  ff>  >&  L&Q  u  tr  p  (o&®  Q-pG^^rr^^T)  &rra5&rr(f))LQ 

6$  <5  ^5  &  IT  &   <5Effl)6X>/T    6V  ifl  J£/ 

Loss  that  is  gain,  and  death  of  life's  true  bliss  fulfilled, 
Are  fruits  which  only  wisdom  rare  can  yield. 

236.  Q  <5  IT  <5QT  nSl  >T>    L/  <5B  Q  Lp  fT  (£)    Q  £,  (T  GST  J2/<5E    fill  o°o  J£l  <5V  fT  !T 
Q  *j5  fl  m  p  G$  /D    Q  Qy  651~  (Of  6V>  L£>    fbGVTgy 

If,  man  you  walk  the  stage,  appear  adorned  with  glory's  grace; 
Save  glorious  you  can  shine,  'twere  better  hide  your  face.  ' 

237.  LJ&LpUL-    611  V  Lp  FT  ^  rj  IT   ^  /5  Q  f5  fT  6ti  IT  IT    ^LD(5ZDLD 

«9  <$/_£>  <ay  /r<5tf>  a   (ofsneu  Q^<SIISST 

If  you  your  days  will  spend  devoid  of  goodly  fame, 

When  men  despise,  why  blame  them  ?     You  've  yourself  to  blame. 

238.  6U  <5tn  <f  Q  LU  sin  u  <sin  6ii  tu  &;  ^  rr  IT  & 

L&!  <SS)  <3F  Q  LU  6ST  6jg}    QibdF-SFLn    Q 


Fame  is  virtue's  child,  they  say  ;  if,  then, 
You  childless  live,  you  live  the  scorn  of  men. 

239.  61J  6V)  <?  U$  <SV  fT    (oil  <5m  U  UJ  <53T    (^S3TJ2/ 

i£l  6$)  <f  uSl  6\)  /T    UJ/T<5B<SS)<56    Q  U  IT  £y  £B  ^    1$  6\)  Lb  (  (K>  ) 

The  blameless  fruits  of  fields'  increase  will  dwindle  down, 
If  earth  the  burthen  bear  of  men  without  renown. 

240.  <oU  63)  cF  Q  UJ  IT  Lfl  LU    6U  IT  Lp  6il  fT  (D  ff    6Un~Lp6UfT 

iflGin&QiurrySuj  sn  IT  Lp  6^  rr  (o  j  <surTLptr  ^euir  (tD) 

Who  live  without  reproach,  them  living  men  we  deem  ; 

Who  live  without  renown,  live  not,  though  living  men  they  seem. 


END    OF    THE    SECTION    ON    '  DOMESTIC    VIRTUE.' 


84  THE    KURBAL. 


§   3.      ASCETIC  VIETUE. 

i.  Eeligious  Observances. 


CHAPTEE  XXV. 

.  —  THE  POSSESSION  OF  BENEVOLENCE. 


241. 

Qun~(7F)L_Q<F<5V<5tiLn    L£  iff  ILJ  fl~  IT 

Wealth  'mid  wealth  is  wealth  of  '  kindliness  '  ; 
Wealth  of  goods  the  vilest  too  possess. 

242.        /5ff06U/T/D(/7?   (G3)Z^L    iU  <7Jj  6YT  fT  6T7  6B 

LJ  6V  <sv  rr  fb  cy  no  (oinrflgyii  LD,^Q 

The  law  of  '  grace  '  fulfil,  bv  methods  good  due  trial  made, 
Though  many  systems  you  explore,  this  is  your  only  aid. 

243.  ^iJTfjGtrQ&nriBp  Q/s^^^/fi  Sieved) 

uSlfTFjGflQ'F  IT  ftp    <aGloVT(&$)    6l]<oV3>L£>    Lj  <35  6\) 

They  in  whose  breast  a  '  gracious  kindliness  '  resides, 
See  not  the  gruesome  world,  where  darkness  drear  abides. 

244.  LCxssrg&jtiS  QjririJDtQ  tucffjGrrrrffrreijrrnj 


Who  for  undying  souls  of  men  provides  with  gracious  zeal, 
In  his  own  soul  the  dreaded  guilt  of  sin  shall  never  feel. 


245.       ^<5\)<5V    <5V  (ffj  6YT  IT  GTT  (511  tr  IT  <3S    ^6X>§5\)    611  &?l  <51J  Lp  IEI  (<9) 
LD6Vff06STLDfr  ((0^  n~  <5V  IEJ   ,35  ifl 

The  teeming  earth's  vast  realm,  round  which  the  wild  winds  blow, 
Is  witness,  men  of  '  grace  '  no  woeful  want  shall  know. 


246.     Qurr(7T^<53()?iEjQu  Qufrf&friBfiir 

IT  QF)G5$  'lEI  Si    LL1  <5V  <o\)  6$)  617    Q  <f  iil  Q  &>  fT  (Lg  (&j    SI//T/T 

Gain  of  true  wealth  oblivious  they  eschew, 
Who  '  grace  '  forsake,  and  graceless  actions  do. 


247.      <=gy  QP)  <5lfi  6V  6V  IT  IT  <£5    <f5  (517  61]  <5V  <35 

Qurr(7jj<5irl<s\')<oVn~iir&  «Q  <siv  «ay  e\)  as  LB<o^<s\)rr  j®  ILJ  rr  IEI 

As  to  impoverished  men  this  present  world  is  not  ; 
The  '  graceless  '  in  yon  world  have  neither  part  nor  lot, 


BOOK    1.  -  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  35 

248. 


Who  lose  the  flower  of  wealth,  when  seasons  change,  again  may  bloom  ; 
Who  lose  '  benevolence,'  lose  all  ;  nothing  can  change  thoir  doom. 

249.     Q<5(nj<on'[r<£!T<53r  Qu^iuuQurr^&r  &  GMT  L-  fb  (y  <b 


When  souls  unwise  true  wisdom's  mystic  vision  see, 
The  '  graceless  '  man  may  work  true  works  of  charity. 

250.     (517  <o9  iu  fr  IT  (ip  [b  nD<syr?/svr  r$  8svr  &  &  35  rr  <S$T 


When  weaker  men  you  front  with  threat'ning  brow, 
Think  how  you  felt  in  presence  of  some  stronger  foe. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

<&  6v.  —  THE  RENUNCIATION  OF  FLESH. 


251. 


How  can  the  wont  of  '  kindly  grace  '  to  him  be  known, 
Who  other  creatures'  flesh  consumes  to  feed  his  own  ? 

252. 


No  use  of  wealth  have  they  who  guard  not  their  estate  ; 
No  use  of  grace  have  they  with  flesh  who  hunger  sate. 

253.     UGtnL-  Q  &  rr  <5vyr  L—  n~  rr  Q  fB  ^  &~  L&Q>  '/_/  rr  GST  &$r  £w  &  &  n'  Q  ^  rr  <SOT  p 


Like  heart  of  them  that  murderous  weapons  bear,  his  mind 
Who  eats  of  savoury  meat,  no  joy  in  good  can  find. 

254.          TTsrr^isu    sluJirQSs&ib  Q<5E/r<sx><5V/r<53)LD 


'  What  's  grace,  or  lack  of  grace  '  ?     'To  kill  '  is  this,  that  '  not  to  kill  '  ; 
To  eat  dead  flesh  can  never  worthy  end  fulfil. 

255. 


If  flesh  you  eat  not,  life's  abodes  unharmed  remain  ; 
Who  eats,  hell  swallows  him,  and  renders  not  again. 


36  THE    KUERAL. 

256.     JEl<o5r<bQurr(ir)L-i—.iTfb  Q '& rr <sn <sn IT 


tflsv  (^") 

'  We  eat  the  slain,'  you  say,  l  by  us  no  living  creatures  die  '  ; 
Who  'd  kill  and  sell,  I  pray,  if  none  came  there  the  flesh  to  buy  ? 

257.  ^<5V$r(6$3)<oV)LA    Q<SU<5ff3TG)LD    L-f  60  IT  «jy  <5\)    1§I  nfil  Q  <5  IT  <S$T  £D  <5$T 

Lf<5m<5syr  ^j  <ssyr  IT  <su  rr  IT  u  QufSl<ssr  (<oi\ 

With  other  beings'  ulcerous  wounds  their  hunger  they  appease  ; 
If  this  they  felt,  desire  to  eat  must  surely  cease. 

258.  Q<3Fu9iflp 


Whose  souls  the  vision  pure  and  passionless  perceive, 
Eat  not  the  bodies  men  of  life  bereave. 

259.    ^f  <sSl  Q  &  rr  /fl  IB 


Than  thousand  rich  oblations,  with  libations  rare, 
Better  the  flesh  of  slaughtered  beings  not  to  share. 

260.     Q  <%>  rr  <sv  6$  n~  GST 


Who  slays  nought,  —  flesh  rejects,  —  his  feet  before 
All  living  things  with  clasped  hands  adore. 


CHAPTER  XXVII.     <$$.  a_cr. 
La.  —  PENANCE. 


261.     ^-.pfoQibfrdi  QtEmssrn)  ^uSlir&giigb&ssT  Q  <F  ILIUJ  rr  6$)  LA 


To  bear  due  penitential  pains,  while  no  offence 
He  causes  others,  is  the  type  of  '  penitence.' 

262.        <5<8U(Lpfc   ^6l](Lp6&L-LUn-IT&    65/T(^ 

LO6lJLD35(JSVr    UU  o°o  j$  6U  IT  IT    0>LbtbQ&[T  GTT    6U  ^J 

To  '  penitents  '  sincere  avails  their  '  penitence  '  ; 
Where  that  is  not,  'tis  but  a  vain  pretence. 

263. 


Have  other  men  forgotten  '  penitence,'  who  strive 
To  earn  for  penitents  the  things  by  which  they  live  ? 


BOOK    I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  37 

264.       <od  <5VT  (63)  rr  3j    (ol&jiDS£l   (~Lp  617  fb  ff>  fT  65)  ff    IU  fT  <3a  <9o  G$l 


Destruction  to  his  foes,  to  friends  increase  of  joy, 
The  '  penitent  '  can  cause,  if  this  his  thoughts  employ. 

265.     (?<5i7633rz£-(u  Q  <su  em  fy  uj  IT  i5i  Q&uj^GVrrp)  Q  -f  LLJ  fB  <su 


That  what  they  wish  may,  as  they  wish,  be  won, 

By  men  on  earth  are  works  of  painful  '  penance  '  done. 


266. 

IT  rr  stn  <? 


Who  works  of  '  penance  '  do,  their  end  attain, 
Others,  in  passion's  net  ensnared,  toil  but  in  vain. 


267. 

ari—-<F&L-  Qftrrp&lp  u  <siJ  IT  &  (&j  GT 

The  hotter  glows  the  fining  fire,  the  gold  the  brighter  shines  ; 
The  pain  of  penitence,  like  fire,  the  soul  of  man  refines. 

268.     35  <svr  tjgu  u9  IT  <5n~<otrrnu  Qiup^^ssv  Q\u^ssr\n 

LDxsvr  my  uSl  Q_/r<sx>6D/r/5  Q^/r^ti  (<=i2/) 

Who  gains  himself  in  utter  self-control, 
Him  worships  every  other  living  soul. 

269. 


E'en  over  death  the  victory  he  may  gain, 
If  power  by  penance  won  his  soul  obtain. 


270.    £§)<s\)/f/_/<oU  jrrrOEluj  <sBmr<5syT  Q  rs  IT  p  u  rr  IT 
QeviruGVir  QfBfnsdrr  ^eurr 

The  many  all  things  lack  !     The  cause  is  plain  ; 
The  'penitents'  are  few.     The  many  shun  such  pain. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

<9^L-/TQ<SU(T(Lg<$<B5La.  -  INCONSISTENT  CONDUCT. 
271.       <5Uc5F    Lb<SQT<5rr<S5T    U 


Who  with  deceitful  mind  in  false  way  walks  of  covert  sin, 
The  five-fold  elements  his  frame  compose,  deride  within. 


38  THE    KURRAL. 

272.       <SU  IT  6V)J  UJ  IT    QjSfTfbfD    Q  LD  617  6GT  Q  <F  (U  (Lf  fb    ^  <5VT  Q  <SVT  (GTj  <f  fb 


What  gain,  though  virtue's  semblance  high  as  heaven  his  fame  exalt, 
If  heart  dies  down  through  sense  of  self-detected  fault  ? 

273. 


As  if  a  steer  should  graze  wrapped  round  with  tiger's  skin, 
Is  show  of  virtuous  might  when  weakness  lurks  within. 

274.       ^617LO<5tf)tf)/5   ^  <5V  6\)  <SV)  617    Q  <5F  UJ  ^  <5V 


'Tis  as  a  fowler,  silly  birds  to  snare,  in  thicket  lurks, 
When,  clad  in  stern  ascetic  garb,  one  secret  evil  works. 

275. 


1  Our  souls  are  free,'  who  say,  yet  practise  evil  secretly, 

1  What  folly  have  we  wrought  !  '  by  many  shames  o'erwhelmed,  shall  cry. 


276.      Q  IB  (g>  &  £B  J£l  p 
<SU  (&?>  &  £5  ^J 

In  mind  renouncing  nought,  in  speech  renouncing  every  tie, 
Who  guileful  live,  —  no  men  are  found  than  these  of  '  harder  eye.' 

277. 


Outward,  they  shine  as  '  kunri  '  berry's  scarlet  bright  ; 
Inward,  like  tip  of  '  kunri  '  bead,  as  black  as  night. 

278.     LDesr^j  Lbfrffrrtib  LD  rr  <sssr  z_  rr  IT 


Many  wash  in  hallowed  waters,  living  lives  of  hidden  shame  ; 
Foul  in  heart,  yet  high  upraised  of  men  in  virtuous  fame. 

279.     &8ss8rQ&irip-f£  ujirLpQ&rr®  Q  &  <su  <sSl  p  IT  IEJ 


Cruel  is  the  arrow  straight,  the  crooked  lute  is  sweet, 
Judge  by  their  deeds  the  many  forms  of  men  you  meet. 

280.       L£L<5356$]    £l^l—.6\}]LD    Q  <5U  6337  L_  /T 


What  's  the  worth  of  shaven  head  or  tresses  long, 
If  you  shun  what  all  the  world  condemns  as  wrong  ? 


BOOK    I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  39 


CHAPTER  XXIX.     ^ft.  a-  A. 

<s5&Tstrir<50Lc>.  —  THE  ABSENCE  OF  FRAUD. 

281.     <ZT  err  err  rr  en  LD  Q  su  sosr  ®  <su  rr  QstnGsrutr 


Who  seeks  heaven's  joys,  from  impious  levity  secure, 
Let  him  from  every  fraud  preserve  his  spirit  pure. 


282.  Q-errGrr^^rr  j$  GIT  <sn  ®)i  fs 
&  err  <sn  <&  <s  IT  /b  setrQe 

'Tis  sin  if  in  the  mind  man  but  the  thought  conceive  : 
'  By  fraud  I  will  my  neighbour  of  his  wealth  bereave.' 

283.  &<orr6$(6$)  <5vrr!%luj  si/A/<5Ed5 

Gtumsva  QsQus 


The  gain  that  comes  by  fraud,  although  it  seem  to  grow 
With  limitless  increase,  to  ruin  swift  shall  go. 

284. 


The  lust  inveterate  of  fraudful  gain, 
Yields  as  its  fruit  undying  pain. 


285. 

QufrQrjGfT&QjjjslLJ  Qufr<f<frruL^u  u  nr  IT  u  u  IT  fr  & 

'  Grace  '  is  not  in  their  thoughts,  nor  know  they  kind  affection's  power, 
Who  neighbour's  goods  desire,  and  watch  for  his  unguarded  hour. 


286.  *jy  fffT  <a     <5VT  <35    65v<5Vr(7)?(l£3;    <5V  fT  /D  (fl?  IT 
3>  GTT  <oSl  <5VT  <9S  Z_    &<5ftrSl(U    &  fT  <£    <5V<SlJtT 

They  cannot  walk  restrained  in  wisdom's  measured  bound, 
In  whom  inveterate  lust  of  fraudful  gain  is  found. 

287.  &6nQ<5iJ<ovr6V)j/b  &n~irnSl  <su  fr  GSVT  SJD  LD 

iu  err  Q  6ii  <svr  6g)j  LDrrp>iD<5\)  LJ  ifl  IB  ^  rr  IT  &  <5&$<s\) 

Practice  of  fraud's  dark  cunning  arts  they  shun, 
Who  long  for  power  by  '  measured  wisdom  '  won. 


288.     ^§>f  <°n  su  fSl  fb  ^  rr  IT 

«  <sn  <sa  fSt  /B  ^  rr  ir  Qfb^^p  -str 


As  virtue  dwells  in  heart  that  '  measured  wisdom  '  gains  ; 
Deceit  in  hearts  of  fraudful  men  established  reigns. 


40  THE    KURRAL. 

289.     <j  srr  <sii  GO  tsv  Q<FiU&rriEi(o<35  <sS*<siin~ 


Who  have  no  lore  save  that  which  fraudful  arts  supply, 
Acts  of  unmeasured  vice  committing  straightway  die. 


290.       &  6K  6U  ^  IT  6B  (if?)  fB   ^<5fl(&f)    gp  Il9)  IT  lQ  $Sti    <55  GfT  <off  H  IT  &  (&j  ^ 

j5  err  err  rr  gjj  L]£&Qp  (&^<s^(^  (a)) 

The  fraudful  forfeit  life  and  being  here  below  ; 
Who  fraud  eschew  the  bliss  of  heavenly  beings  know. 


CHAPTEE  XXX. 

.  —  VERACITY. 


291.     <o)imL-i<sv)LD  Qiu<o3ruuQ<su  £sl  ILJ  rr  Q  ^  <5vf1  GIST  lu  IT  Q  <s  rr  sxr  jr>]  ® 


You  ask,  in  lips  of  men  what  '  truth  '  may  be  : 
'Tis  speech  from  every  taint  of  evil  free. 

292.     QurniiLcxotnLbiLiLb  GII  rr  iu  ®n  LD  iiSli^jS^  LJ  en  IT  @  rr  fB  ^ 


Falsehood  may  take  the  place  of  truthful  word, 
If  blessing,  free  from  fault,  it  can  afford. 

293.     ^B  <5sr  Q  <ssr  (^  tFflflisi]^  Qumutuv)&  Q  u  mil  <s  <s>  iQ  <5$r 


Speak  not  a  word  which  false  thy  own  heart  knows, 
Self-kindled  fire  within  the  false  one's  spirit  glows. 


294.     s_  sir  en  ;£  ^  IT  p  Qumuujfr  Q^rr(L^Sl   eg]  GV  &  ££>  p>  n 

Q  err  <sv  sv  rr 


True  to  his  inmost  soul  who  lives,  —  enshrined 
He  lives  in  souls  of  all  mankind. 


295.  Lcxosr^Q^rrQ  SW/TUJSZOLD  Q  LZ  rr 

rD6U^Q^5frG)  ^fTSSTf^    Q  <fF  LU  Gil  fT  if)  /D  p  8o\)  (©) 

Greater  is  he  who  speaks  the  truth  with  full  consenting  mind, 
Than  men  whose  lives  have  penitence  and  charity  combined. 

296.  Q  LJ  mil  LU  IT  63)  LD    VL)<S8T<5GT    L] 

Q  LU  til  iu  rr  <stn  LD  QiLKsvevrr 


No  praise  like  that  of  words  from  falsehood  free; 
This  every  virtue  yields  spontaneously. 


BOOK   I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  41 

297.     QumuiurrstnLb  QL//TU_  j/ns5)LD  ujirppSl  esr  p  LO  L§!  ID 

Q  <F  UJ  UJ  fT  6S)  L£>    Q  &  UJ  ILJ  FT  6$)  LD    [E<5GTJ£J  (gr) 

If  all  your  life  be  utter  truth,  the  truth  alone, 

Tis  well,  though  other  virtuous  acts  be  left  undone. 


298.       Lf/D(5^inL)<oV)lJC>    Hff  IT    <53T<oinL£>lL( 


Outward  purity  the  water  will  bestow  ; 
Inward  purity  from  truth  alone  will  flow. 

299.       toTGVffOfT    <a£l&(r<35(&jLb    <s£l  <5TT  <5B  <5E  g\)  <5V    <f  fT  <56T  G>  (Hj> 


Every  lamp  is  not  a  lamp  in  wise  men's  sight  ; 
That  's  the  lamp  with  truth's  pure  radiance  bright. 


300.    /L 

61]  mil  60)  LA  Il9    GGTGVGV 

Of  all  good  things  we  've  scanned  with  studious  care, 
There  's  nought  that  can  with  truthfulness  compare. 


CHAPTER  XXXI.     ^@.  /a_«. 

.  —  THE  NOT  BEING  ANGRY. 


301.     Q<3r<s\)6$£_cd£/<55  &  rr  u  u  rr  <5vr  §)  <ssr  IEI  <s  /r  u  u  rr 

&  fl  <SU  IT  <55  <55  IT 


Where  thou  hast  power  thy  angry  will  to  work,  thy  wrath  restrain  ; 
Where  power  is  none,  what  matter  if  thou  check  or  give  it  rein  ? 

302. 


Where  power  is  none  to  wreak  thy  wrath,  wrath  impotent  is  ill  ; 
Where  thou  hast  power  thy  will  to  work,  'tis  greater  evil  still. 

303.       LD/D^^^O    Q<SU(<3j<olfl6S)lLJ    UJ  IT  IT  LCi  IT  iL  ©  IB   $  UJ 


If  any  rouse  thy  wrath,  the  trespass  straight  forget  ; 
For  wrath  an  endless  train  of  evils  will  beget. 

304. 


Wrath  robs  the  face  of  smiles,  the  heart  of  joy, 
What  other  foe  to  man  works  such  annoy  ? 

6 


42  THE    KUERAL. 

305. 


If  thou  would'  st  guard  thyself,  guard  agaiust  wrath  alway  ; 
'Gainst  wrath  who  guards  not,  him  his  wrath  shall  slay. 


306.  ^<05rQLo<sffrjxJ2/(S5  Q  &  ir  IB  ^  n~  6&>  jr  « 
u9<ssrQLc><5Qrtti]  (OLDLALJ  L/  Ssmr 

Wrath,  the  fire  that  slayeth  whoso  draweth  near, 
Will  burn  the  helpful  '  raft  '  of  kindred  dear. 

307.  &  <5$r  ]&  <5v>  <&  u  Q  u  r  (njQ  <srr  GST  £v 

iS  GV  j&  ^  <sv>  <D  /5  ^  rr  <5$r  ®n  &  t$  <ssy  Lp  tu  nr 

The  hand  that  smites  the  earth  unfailing  feels  the  sting  ; 
So  perish  they  who  nurse  their  wrath  as  noble  thing. 

308.  Jj)68afr(o)/r/$  G>  <s>  IT  ILJ  eu  ssr  <ssr  <sSl  <ssr  <6S)  Q  <F  «9  GVIJ  LO 


Though  men  should  work  thee  woe,  like  touch  of  tongues  of  fire, 
'Tis  well  if  thou  canst  save  thy  soul  from  burning  ire. 


309.     £-Gfr<oifliu  G)<a/<5i>6\)/r  (ip  /_Q  evnu  ^j 


If  man  his  soul  preserve  from  wrathful  fires, 
He  gains  with  that  whate'er  his  soul  desires. 


310.     {j£)/DfBj£rr  iflpfb^rr  rr'fasnufr  &  <s$r  ^  <stn  £&  p 


Men  of  surpassing  wrath  are  like  the  men  who  've  passed  away  ; 
Who  wrath  renounce,  equals  of  all-renouncing  sages  they  ! 


CHAPTEE  XXXII. 

.  —  NOT  DOING  EVIL. 


311.       &)  p  U  1$  6£J  (ZTj    (o)&6V<5lJLD 

iSl  no  rr  a  £)  <5vr  (63)  Q  <SF  LU  ILJ  ir  <sv>  LQ 

Though  ill  to  neighbour  wrought  should  glorious  pride  of  wealth  secure, 
No  ill  to  do  is  fixed  decree  of  men  in  spirit  pure. 


312.         .  .       „ 

Q  &  uj  uj  rr  <sv>  LA 

r       f  v x 

Though  malice  work  its  worst,  planning  no  ill  return,  to  endure, 
And  work  no  ill,  is  fixed  decree  of  men  in  spirit  pure. 


BOOK    I.  -  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  43 

313.       Q  <SF  UJ  LU  IT  (otto  LD    Q  <EF  p  (ft?  (T  IT  &  {3j    L3®ST(65)pi    Q  &  ILJ  p  l9 


Though  unprovoked  thy  soul  malicious  foes  should  sting, 
Retaliation  wrought  inevitable  woes  will  bring. 

314.       {j£)<5VT(Gff)Q<5FlLJ    <5tr<Sft!r    Q  UJ  fT  J£l  ^  <5    <5V  <SU  IT  /5  fT  633T 


To  punish  wrong,  with  kindly  benefits  the  doers  ply  ; 
Thus  shame  their  souls  ;  but  pass  the  ill  unheeded  by. 

315. 


From  wisdom's  vaunted  lore  what  doth  the  learner  gain, 
If  as  his  own  he  guard  not  others'  souls  from  pain  ? 

316.       j§)63T(S3)    Q  (517  GST  <5  ^  fT     tt)J  <533T  IT  fb  ^  65)  <SU 

Q&UJ6V 


What  his  own  soul  has  felt  as  bitter  pain, 
From  making  others  feel  should  man  abstain. 

317. 


To  work  no  wilful  woe,  in  any  wise,  through  all  the  days, 
To  any  living  soul,  is  virtue's  highest  praise. 

318.      ^  637"  Jg2/  uSl  IT  &    Q  <5ST  (S3)  <oft  LD   ^  fT  <SGT  /$  <SU  fT    Q  <oW  <53T  Q  <3B  fT  (0  6\)  FT 
35    Q<SGT(6V     Q  &  UJ  <5V 


Whose  soul  has  felt  the  bitter  smart  of  wrong,  how  can 
He  wrongs  inflict  on  ever-living  soul  of  man  ? 

319. 


If,  ere  the  noontide,  you  to  others  evil  do, 
Before  the  eventide  will  evil  visit  you. 


320. 

(J/E/ruJQdFUJtu/r/f  Q  IB  rr  uS)  <SGT  <stn  LO  (o6uoyyr(b)  ueiirr  («)) 

O'er  every  evil-doer  evil  broodeth  still  ; 
He  evil  shuns  who  freedom  seeks  from  ill. 


44  /       THE    KUERAL. 


CHAPTEE  XXXIII.     jyjg.  OLOL. 

G)cffifr<5U6L>;T6TOLQ.  -  NOT    KlLLINGr. 


321.    ^fncxsQ^oST  uu  rr  Q  ^5  sofl  fb  Q<55/r&i)<oX)/r<53)Lo 


What  is  the  work  of  virtue  ?     '  Not  to  kill 
For  *  killing  '  leads  to  every  work  of  ill. 


322.     u^^gjjesvr®!  UGV^uS)  G>frrrLDLj35 


Let  those  that  need  partake  your  meal  ;  guard  everything  that  lives  : 
This  the  chief  and  sum  of  lore  that  hoarded  wisdom  gives. 

323.       <5£<5ff(nf 

l9  <5ST  &  (T  ff  U 

Alone,  first  of  good  things,  is  '  not  to  slay  '  ; 
The  second  is,  no  untrue  word  to  say. 


324.      /56V6V/T    QnOGWLJuGltolJ   jS  UJ  fT  Q^syflsST    LU  IT  Q  ^  fT  6ST  ^J  IEJ 
Q  &  FT  6\)  6V  (T  Gift  LD 


You  ask,  What  is  the  good  and  perfect  way  ? 
'Tis  path  of  him  who  studies  nought  to  slay. 

325. 


tu 


Of  those  who  '  being  '  dread,  and  all  renounce,  the  chief  are  they, 
Who,  dreading  crime  of  slaughter,  study  nought  to  slay. 


Ev'n  death,  that  life  devours,  their  happy  days  shall  spare, 
Who  law,  '  Thou  shall  not  kill,'  uphold  with  reverent  care. 

327.       <5  GST  ®£1  uSl  fr    l§  U  1$  §§)}  dj[Jj    Q<fUJLU/D<35    <5  IT  ®fl~  l§!  /$ 


Though  thine  own  life  for  that  spared  life  the  price  must  pay, 
Take  not  from  aught  that  lives  gift  of  sweet  life  away. 


328.       /563r(fl?(cF)    LC>rr&&LQ    Q  U  iff  Q<£  <ot&  6&J  <&£    cF  /T  <S$T  (o  (Of  IT  &  (<3) 
Q  &  fT  <5VT  (ft?  (&j    LDfT<35<35[EI    c5E<53>/_ 

Though  great  the  gain  of  good  should  seem,  the  wise 
Will  any  gain  by  slaughter  won  despise. 


BOOK    I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE. 


329.  <s6/r5\)<s53TUJ   irrruj  LD  rr  &  &  err 

LJ$S\)GQ(k9rUJIT    LJ  <55T  <SS)  LD    Q  ^  ff) 

Whose  trade  is  '  killing,'  always  vile  they  show, 
To  minds  of  them  who  what  is  vileness  know. 

330.  £L.«90z_LD/^  svf&QdJir  QirssruiT 

Q<Ftt90/_LOt^</D    Q  &  6\)  60  IT  <&  $B    <5lJ  fT  Lp  &  <5tn  &    IU6UIT 

Who  lead  a  loathed  life  in  bodies  sorely  pained, 

Are  men,  the  wise  declare,  by  guilt  of  slaughter  stained. 


45 

(*) 

(0) 


LQ  . 


END    OF    *  RELIGIOUS    OBSERVANCES.' 


46  THE    KURRAL. 


§  3.     ASCETIC  VIETUE— continued. 
ii.   Wisdom. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV.     ^.  OL&. 
. — INSTABILITY. 


331.     (QeveVfT      tsiirxsnn  £l%stiu9<osr 


Lowest  and  meanest  lore,  that  bids  men  trust  secure, 
In  things  that  pass  away,  as  things  that  shall  endure  ! 

332. 


As  crowds  round  dancers  fill  the  hall,  is  wealth's  increase  ; 
Its  loss,  as  throngs  dispersing,  when  the  dances  cease. 

333.     ^yfb&n-  <s£l  LU  <sv  i9  rn  gu  <?  Q&GVGU 


Unenduring  is  all  wealth  ;  if  you  wealth  enjoy, 
Enduring  works  in  working  wealth  straightway  employ. 


334.    tBtrQeirssr  Qeurr&sr^uQufr^n 

<sufr<srr  ^j  ®MT  IT  <su  rr  IT  u  QunSlttr 

As  '  day  '  it  vaunts  itself  ;  well  understood,  'tis  '  knife,' 
That  daily  cuts  away  a  portion  from  thy  life. 


335.       IB  fT  &  Q  -f  p  J&I    6$&(<3Fj6VSr(oLD6\)    <517  IT  JT  fT  (Lp 
Q&UJILJLJ     uQlJb 


Before  the  tongue  lie  powerless,  'mid  the  gasp  of  gurgling  breath, 
Arouse  thyself,  and  do  good  deeds  beyond  the  power  of  death. 


336.  0/5(75/5    6$]6rrQ(®r)(/fjtsi]  GsflGsr^evSsti  Q  LU  <ssr  cvu  LD 

Qu(ffj<5inL£>    tLj  <5&  L—  {£  J£)  <SU    <51j<o\)(3) 

Existing  yesterday,  to-day  to  nothing  hurled  !  — 
Such  greatness  owns  this  transitory  world. 

337.  6p(fjjQurr(Lg>^£]Lc>  6un~Lp<siJ  'SpSl 

LDCVGV  uev 


Who  know  not  if  their  happy  lives  shall  last  the  day, 
In  fancies  infinite  beguile  the  hours  away  ! 


BOOK    I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  47 

338. 


I6L-LJ 

Birds  fly  away,  and  leave  the  nest  deserted  bare  ; 
Such  is  the  short-lived  friendship  soul  and  body  share. 


339.  B_£><B<S 

GJJDIEJ®  eSlL^uugji  QufrsyjLn  i^lrouLj 

Death  is  sinking  into  slumbers  deep ; 
Birth  again  is  waking  out  of  sleep. 

340.  LJ&Q  <oV<s&L£>fcQ<s$r£)]  Q<3Grr<5v(£<oVrr  &ii z_ LD L^ GVU i 


The  soul  in  fragile  shed  as  lodger  courts  repose  :— 
Is  it  because  no  home's  conclusive  rest  it  knows  ? 


CHAPTER  XXXV.     ^$.  IB. 
.  —  RENUNCIATION. 


[Beschi  introduces  this  Chapter  with  the  following  note  :  — 

"  This  should  form  the  fourth  book  of  this  work,  since  it  was  the  design  of  the 
Author  to  include  in  his  poem  the  four  most  esteemed  things,  ^fDLCt  (o)Ufr(r^&r 
£j£<o?rLJLQ  <sS®  .  But  he  has  not  assigned  to  sS1©  a  separate  Book,  because  (1)  it  is 
very  brief,  being  only  three  Chapters  ;  and  (2)  it  really  belongs  to  the  first  Book,  since 
only  by  virtues  can  '  emancipation  '  (6$©)  be  sought.  Of  these  t^cD<Si\  is  the  first." 

The  Tarn.  Com.  arranges  Ch.  xxxiv.-xxxvu.  under  the  head  of  (^rr<55TLD  or  wisdom, 
(  which  is  gained  by  obedience   to  the  laws    laid  down  in   the  section    on 
[Ch.  xxv.-xxxm.],  and  which  secures  emancipation 


341.     iLirr/sssflevr  turr^Gsf)   &/  IEI  £)  ILJ  rr 


From  whatever,  aye,  whatever,  man  gets  free, 
From  that,  aye,  from  that,  no  more  of  pain  hath  he  ! 

342,     (oGlKSfifriy-  J22/633T    i_/T<5E^ 

u<s\) 


'  Renunciation  '  made  —  ev'n  here  true  pleasures  men  acquire  ; 
*  Renounce  '  while  time  is  yet,  if  to  those  pleasures  you  aspire. 


343.       ^ 

<s£lL—<5v(o<Sli6VSr(f>)LD    G>  <8U  GSSTty-  UJ 

'  Perceptions  of  the  five  '  must  all  expire  ;  — 
Relinquished  in  its  order  each  desire. 


48  THE    KUERAL. 

344.     jj£)  ILJ  <sv  u  rr  (&j 


*  Privation  absolute  '  is  penance  true  ; 
1  Possession  '  brings  bewilderment  anew. 

345.     LJbpguiE  Q^rrL-iruurr  Q/_<si/6srQ<£B/ria)  iQmi'n  \  jntfF.fr, 


To  those  who  sev'rance  seek  from  being's  varied  strife, 
Flesh  is  burthen  sore  ;  what  then  other  bonds  of  life  ? 

34().     iuirQ<o$r<5vr  Q  t£  <s 


Who  kills  conceit  that  utters  '  I  '  and  '  mine,' 
Shall  enter  realms  above  the  powers  divine. 

347. 


Who  cling  to  things  that  cling  and  eager  clasp, 
Griefs  cling  to  them  with  unrelaxing  grasp. 


348. 

6u2stiLJUL-L-.rriT  LLxsn      iLnsuir 


Who  thoroughly  '  renounce  '  on  highest  height  are  set  : 
The  rest,  bewildered,  lie  entangled  in  the  net. 

349.     ufbfDjbfD  &€vvr(o6syr  iSl  no  u  u  jpi  &  (&j 


When  that  which  clings  falls  off,  severed  is  being's  tie  ; 
All  else  will  then  be  seen  as  instability. 


350.      /_//D^2/«5    LJ  fb  p  fb  (TT?  <55T   UpfSl^oGT    IL)  LJ  LJ  JD  65)  fD  LJ 

Uf&£U&    LJtbgil    eSlL-lDC&j  («)) 

Cling  thou  to  that  which  He,  to  Whom  nought  clings,  hath  bid  thee  cling, 
Cling  to  that  bond,  to  get  thee  free  from  every  clinging  thing. 


CHAPTEE  XXXVI. 

u.  —  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  TRUE. 


351.     Qurr(7JjGrr6V  e\)  <su  jb  <szn  no  u 


Of  things  devoid  of  truth  as  real  things  men  deem  ; 
Cause  of  degraded  birth  the  fond  delusive  dream  ! 


BOOK    I.  —  ASCETIC    VIRTUE.  49 

352. 


Darkness  departs,  and  rapture  springs  to  men  who  see 
The  mystic  vision  pure,  from  all  delusion  free. 

353.     $Qiup$  6sFiEJ&< 

65)  <SU  ILJ  5       GST  SUfTSST    IB 


When  doubts  disperse,  and  mists  of  error  roll 
Away,  nearer  is  heav'n  than  earth  to  sage's  soul. 

854.     ggiLjGssriir  Q  en  ILJ  j£)  LU  & 


Five-fold  perception  gained,  what  benefits  accrue 
To  them  whose  spirits  lack  perception  of  the  true  ? 

355.    6ruQuir(7rj 


Whatever  thing,  of  whatsoever  kind  it  be, 

'Tis  wisdom's  part  in  each  the  very  thing  to  see. 

356.     sfbtfisssT® 

tsumrrr 


Who  learn,  and  here  the  knowledge  of  the  true  obtain, 
Shall  find  the  path  that  hither  cometh  not  again. 


357.     ^  /f  <s  ^j  err  sir  (Lpfftr<srr 

Q  <su  sssr  i_  rr 


The  mind  that  knows  with  certitude  what  is,  and  ponders  well, 
Its  thoughts  on  birth  again  to  other  life  need  not  to  dwell. 

358. 


When  folly,  cause  of  births,  departs  ;  and  soul  can  view 
The  truth  of  things,  man's  dignity  —  'tis  wisdom  true. 

359.       <F  FT  IT  Lf  68ST  IT  IB  g$    <f  IT  IT  L]    Q  <£  L—  Q  6W  /T  (Lg  Si  63T   LD  pD  fD  ifi  p 


The  true  *  support  '  who  knows  —  rejects  '  supports  '  he  sought  before 
Sorrow  that  clings  and  all  destroys,  shall  cling  to  him  no  more. 


360.      «/T££LC>    Q0U(&j<olfl    LDUJ&& 

{5S)L£)IE]    Q<S/_<sQ«®    (ofBfTILI 

When  lust  and  wrath  and  error's  triple  tyranny  is  o'er, 
Their  very  names  for  aye  extinct,  then  pain  shall  be  no  more. 


50  THE    KTTERAL. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII.     ^$.  /H.OT. 

&).  —  THE  EXTIRPATION  OP  DESIRE. 


361. 


The  wise  declare,  through  all  the  days,  to  every  living  thing 

That  ceaseless  round  of  birth  from  seed  of  strong  desire  doth  spring. 


362.     d>6U<55vr(b)!Ei&rr6V  QtsiiGmrQlLD  i9p  eu  rr  63)  LD 


If  desire  you  feel,  freedom  from  changing  birth  require  ! 
'Twill  come,  if  you  desire  to  'scape,  set  free  from  all  desire. 

363.  (o  61J  6SST  L—  FT  <SS)  LD    lU<SOr<5ST    <sSl  (Lg  <3F  Q  &  <5\)  <5U    t£  6337  Z^_  6V  §50 

lurrem®!  Lb<?oQ<5iruu  ^eu 

No  glorious  wealth  is  here  like  freedom  from  desire  ; 
To  bliss  like  this  not  even  there  can  soul  aspire. 

364.  tfrs-UjeyyLn  Q 


uussru     \  eu  rr  e   GST  GV>  LD 


Desire's  decease  as  purity  men  know  ; 

That,  too,  from  yearning  search  for  truth  will  grow. 

365.          bD6u  Qirsorurr 


Men  freed  from  bonds  of  strong  desire  are  free  ; 
None  other  share  such  perfect  liberty. 

366.     «gy  <&  &  <su  Gt'SirqF)  LD/nQes 

LDGUfT 


Desire  each  soul  beguiles  ; 
True  virtue  dreads  its  wiles. 


367.    ^i&JiroB'Bosr  luirpp 

(<sr) 


Who  throughly  rids  his  life  of  passion-prompted  deed, 
Deeds  of  unfailing  worth  shall  do,  which,  as  he  plans,  succeed. 

368.     «=gy  <su  tr  eQ  ev  ex)  rr  fr  & 


Affliction  is  not  known  where  no  desires  abide  ; 
(Jfhere  these  are,  endless  rises  sorrow's  tide. 
Cause  01  * 


BOOK    I.  -  ASCETIC    VIRTUE. 


51 


369. 


gjl  &ST  U  fB  ^J  /_ 

When  dies  away  desire,  that  woe  of  woes, 
Ev'n  here  the  soul  unceasing  rapture  knows. 


370. 


UJ  <81J  fT  l§  LJ  l9    68T  f6  $  2sti  Q  UJ 


(ouirrr 


Drive  from  thy  soul  desire  insatiate  ; 
Straightway  is  gained  the  moveless  blissful  state. 


THE    END    OF    '  WISDOM.' 


THE    END    OP    THE    SECTION    ON    'ASCETIC    VIRTUE.' 


02  THE    KURRAL. 


§   4.     FATE. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
371.          ^.LO/TD  G>  (    ossr  j&i 


Wealth-giving  fate  power  of  unflinching  effort  brings  ; 
From  fate  that  takes  away  idle  remissness  springs. 


372.       G>U<SV><5LJ  uGl<95(^    L$Lpj£    Lp  $  <5U  <5B  /D  £u 


The  fate  that  loss  ordains  makes  wise  men's  wisdom  foolishness  ; 
The  fate  that  gain  bestows  with  ampler  powers  will  wisdom  bless. 


373. 

.  IfL. 


In  subtle  learning  manifold  though  versed  man  be, 
The  wisdom,  truly  his,  will  gain  supremacy. 


374. 

<5U  £»    Q  ;£  GfT  <5lf)  IL) 

Two-fold  the  fashion  of  the  world  :  some  live  in  fortune's  light  ; 
While  other  some  have  souls  in  wisdom's  radiance  bright. 

375.       /5  6\)  6ti  6V)  <8U 


All  things  that  good  appear  will  oft  have  ill  success  ; 
All  evil  things  prove  good  for  gain  of  happiness. 


376. 

Q<F/r/$tt9j22/LD  (oLJfr&tr  pus  C^ 

Things  not  your  own  will  yield  no  good,  howe'er  you  guard  with  pain  ; 
Your  own,  howe'er  you  scatter  them  abroad,  will  yours  remain. 

377. 


Save  as  the  '  sharer  '  shares  to  each  in  due  degree, 
To  those  who  millions  store  enjoyment  scarce  can  be. 


378.     gjifDuunrfrLDfb 

QinsSesr 


The  destitute  might  with  ascetics  merit  share, 
(TJ  jlate  to  visit  with  predestined  ills  would  spare. 


BOOK    I.  —  FATE. 
379.     /565Tfl/E/<95/r  GST  <sv<sv  SUITS  &ir<55vrueu 


When  good  things  come,  men  view  them  all  as  gain  ; 
When  evils  come,  why  then  should  they  complain  ? 


380.       QGELfirb    QuQJjSUeQ   UJ/TQ/SW 

(3jLfl6S)Jf6   pn-<SGT(Lp(5    &]  £»  LD  (tD) 

What  powers  so  great  as  those  of  Destiny  ?     Man's  skill 
Some  other  thing  contrives  ;  but  fate  's  beforehand  still. 


THE    END    OF    BOOK    I.    ON    VIRTUE. 


BOOK  II-WEALTH, 


§  I.        EOYALTY.       Ch.  XXXIX. — LXHI. 

§  II.    MINISTERS  OF  STATE.     Ch.  LXIV. — LXXIII. 
§  III.  ESSENTIALS  OF  A  STATE.     Ch.  LXXIV. — xcv. 
§  IV.   APPENDIX.     Ch.  xcn. — cvni. 


57 


BOOK    II.  —  WEALTH.     Quir-@tLuirco. 
§  1.— EOYALTY. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX.     jqf.  OLA. 

LBITL-&. — THE  GREATNESS  OP  A  KING. 


381. 


An  army,  people,  wealth,  a  minister,  friends,  fort  :  six  things  — 
Who  owns  them  all,  a  lion  lives  amid  the  kings. 


382. 

Q  LD  (&7j  <?  IT  63}  LD 

Courage,  a  liberal  hand,  wisdom,  and  energy  :  these  four 
Are  qualities  a  king  adorn  for  evermore. 


Where  king  is  easy  of  access,  where  no  harsh  word  repels^ 
That  land's  high  praises  every  subject  swells. 

8 


OOO.       ^jjJT IEJ <5>  IT 63)  L£>    <35  <o\)  <Sai    jgT/  <SS3rl  Gil  63)  /      (S3) LD    llQ I r> Pl(\ GftT  J%)1 

lo  IEJ<35  fT    fol  <5\)  (S3)  SYT   LJ  <5lJ  fT  <3S  (3-\  (  fH~  ) 

A  sleepless  promptitude,  knowledge,  decision  strong  : 
These  three  for  aye  to  rulers  of  the  land  belong. 

OO4.       «=y/^  'Stfli  (T-D  <3>  <3G  fT    &>  <oO  <S\)  S3)  (517    Ib  <5B  6w 

Kingship,  in  virtue  failing  not,  all  vice  restrains, 
In  courage  failing  not,  it  honour's  grace  maintains. 

( r\\ 

A  king  is  he  who  treasure  gains,  stores  up,  defends, 
And  duly  for  his  kingdom's  weal  expends. 

386.       <56/TZ_6}<55    Q  &>  ffffl  UJ  <5ST    <5B  5)  (57j  Q  &  fT  <5V  6V 


58  THE    KUERAL. 

387. 


With  pleasant  speech,  who  gives  and  guards  with  powerful  liberal  hand, 
He  sees  the  world  obedient  all  to  his  command. 


388.     (Lp<smnc>Q<FiLgji  &  rr  u  u  rr  p  jry  Lb<55r<sor<sii<s5r 

QlstntDQiuesTgu  eneu&au  uQid  («=£/) 

Who  guards  the  realm  and  justice  strict  maintains, 
That  king  as  god  o'er  subject  peoples  reigns. 


389.       Q  <3F  6$  <off)  &  U  LJ  &    Gl&irtbQufrjril&^Lb    U  <5m  LJ 


The  king  of  worth,  who  can  words  bitter  to  his  ear  endure, 
Beneath  the  shadow  of  his  power  the  world  abides  secure. 

390.       Q<35/T<Sff>L_UJ<SYf?    Q  '&  ISlQ  '&  IT  <5V    (^  U}-  Q  ILJ  FT  LQ  U    (S3)S2fT( 

Q<35fT<olfl 


Gifts,  grace,  right  sceptre,  care  of  people's  weal  : 
These  four  a  light  of  dreaded  kings  reveal. 


CHAPTEE  XL.     ^.  &>o. 
l.  —  LEARNING. 


391. 


So  learn  that  you  may  full  and  faultless  learning  gain, 
Then  in  obedience  meet  to  lessons  learnt  remain. 


392.       <5T6S8TQ6V3r®n~U    Q<SU?6ST    Q  IU  Q£>  j£  Q  ^  <oVT  U 
&<5mQ6m<S5TU    <517/T(Z£>    (ip  llS)  IT  3,  (&j 

The  twain  that  lore  of  numbers  and  of  letters  give 
Are  eyes,  the  wise  declare,  to  all  on  earth  that  live. 

393. 


Men  who  learning  gain  have  eyes,  men  say  ; 
Blockheads'  faces  pairs  of  sores  display. 

394. 


You  meet  with  joy,  with  pleasant  thought  you  part  ; 
Such  is  the  learned  scholar's  wondrous  art  ! 


BOOK    II.  —  EOYALTY. 


395.     £_<szDz_fL//r/f(7£  GsRevevrrrrQurr  Q  <sv  &&  p  jpi  im 

«  63)  L-  IU  CV    <5E  GO  <S\)  IT 


With  soul  snbmiss  they  stand,  as  paupers  front  a  rich  man's  face  ; 
Yet  learned  men  are  first  ;  th'  unlearned  stand  in  lowest  place. 

396. 


Tn  sandy  soil,  when  deep  you  delve,  you  reach  the  springs  below  ; 
The  more  you  learn,  the  freer  streams  of  wisdom  flow. 


397. 

f  FT  /B  ^gjj  Sssvr  iLf  IEJ  <356V<5vrr^  eurrjp/  (<sr) 

The  learned  make  each  land  their  own,  in  every  city  find  a  home; 
Who,  till  they  die,  learn  nought,  along  what  weary  ways  they  roam  ! 

398.  sp  (77j  63)  LD  <£<££._  i_rr<s$r&pp  aevoGl  Qiurr(7Fj<5iJ/i) 

Q&Q£61T>LblLI    G>LGL£>rrU     L]  65)  L-  <5  gil 

The  man  who  store  of  learning  gains, 

In  one,  through  seven  worlds,  bliss  attains.  [Comp.  126.] 

399.  ptTL&esr  L/j2/su  .gpeti&esr  LJ  fDa&GssrG)) 
«  /r  rip  ^u  6U  IT  &/bp)n$f5  jSrrir 

Their  joy  is  joy  of  all  the  world,  they  see  ;  thus  more 
The  learners  learn  to  love  their  cherished  lore. 

400.  Q&iy-6V    <a£l  (Lg  <F  Q  <F  GV  61]  IEJ    &6V6&I    Q  UJ  fT  (7F)6U  /D(3j 


Learning  is  excellence  of  wealth  that  none  destroy  ; 
To  man  nought  else  affords  reality  of  joy. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

>.  —  IGNORANCE. 


401. 

fQjTLdlSllLJ    J5IT  <o    <5$T 

Like  those  at  draughts  would  play  without  the  checquered  square, 
Men  void  of  ample  lore  would  counsels  of  the  learned  share. 

402.     «  <sv  <5V  nr  p  IT  <ssr  Q&rrp&rr 
1.8  ev  6\)  nr  ^  rr  err  Q  u  essr  &  IT 

Like  those  who  doat  on  hoyden's  undeveloped  charms  are  they, 
Of  learning  void,  who  eagerly  their  power  of  words  display. 


60  THE   KURRAL. 

403.       <S56V<SD/T        6UTF     IB  Svfl  fB  6\)  <S\)  fT 


The  blockheads,  too,  may  men  of  worth  appear, 

If  they  can  keep  from  speaking  where  the  learned  hear  ! 

404. 


From  blockheads'  lips,  when  words  of  wisdom  glibly  flow, 
The  wise  receive  them  not,  though  good  they  seem  to  show. 

405. 


As  worthless  shows  the  worth  of  man  unlearned, 
When  council  meets,  by  words  he  speaks  discerned. 

)  <sv>  rriu 


406.     ^-<ofrQir<ssr^]  LL>  rr  <£  j£) 


1  They  are  '  :  so  much  is  true  of  men  untaught  ; 
But,  like  a  barren  field,  they  yield  us  nought  ! 


407.       ^7633TZ^/r    6gg)/(S5)LpLy(S\)    LQ<5\)6titT    Q  <o8T  LJ3  <5$T  <SV 
LD633TLD/T633T    L  ^59T  U  fT  <5S>  6U 


Who  lack  the  power  of  subtle,  large,  and  penetrating  sense, 

Like  puppet,  decked  with  ornaments  of  clay,  their  beauty's  vain  pretence. 

408.    /5ffi)6\)/r/r<«/_  uL-L-  <siJ^y<snLnuSl  &sft  <s$r 


To  men  unlearned,  from  fortune's  favour  greater  evil  springs 
Than  poverty  to  men  of  goodly  wisdom  brings. 


409.     (oLQfDLSlpfBjSnr  jr  rr  uSl  &f)j  IEI  <$  <sv  <su  /r^  IT  fr 
£$  Lp  iSl  p  (5  gj  IEI  &<bQy  rr^ssr^^l^fr  urrG) 

Lower  are  men  unlearned,  though  noble  be  their  race, 
Than  low-born  men  adorned  with  learning's  grace. 

410. 


Learning's  irradiating  grace  who  gain, 
Others  excel,  as  men  the  bestial  train. 


BOOK    II. — ROYALTY.  61 


CHAPTER    XLII. 

(?«erra9. — HEARING. 


411.       Q<F6V<SU^^JL-    Q  &  6\)  6V  (thj    Q  <f  <aSl  <f  Q  <f  6\)  6U    LD  <f  Q  &  6\)  &J  @ 

Q  &  6V  6V  <s  ^HJ  Q  err  <sv  <sv  rr  /E 


Wealth  of  wealth  is  wealth  acquired  by  ear  atteiit  ; 
Wealth  mid  all  wealth  supremely  excellent. 

412.     Q&eSl&^svyr    6Q6V6Vrr<5  (ourrLp^j 


6V 


When  'tis  no  longer  time  the  listening  ear  to  feed, 
With  trifling  dole  of  food  supply  the  body's  need. 

413.     Q  f  sQ  (Lf  am  eSl  fb  (S&erreQ 


Who  feed  their  ear  with  learned  teachings  rare, 
Are  like  the  happy  gods  oblations  rich  who  share. 

414.       &(bp!)l6\)    <GV)u9<jS)llEl    (D&L.&    <517o°o  Q  <5  IT  (fjjl 


Though  learning  none  hath  he,  yet  let  him  hear  alway  ; 
In  weakness  this  shall  prove  a  staff  and  stay. 

415.       {j£)(L£><35<35     6£]  <o5)  L—  iLf  i£l    l^p  J2/  <56  (?<£E  /T 


Like  staff  in  hand  of  him  in  slippery  ground  who  strays, 
Are  words  from  mouth  of  those  who  walk  in  righteous  ways. 


416. 

(SU&ar^^/rjgy  LD/TSST/D 

Let  each  man  good  things  learn,  for  e'en  as  he 
Shall  learn,  he  gains  increase  of  perfect  dignity. 

417.       lQ  6$)  L£  <&  gj]  65ST  KIE  gj]  LD    Q  U  6V>  j£  <SV)  LD  Q  <f  IT  6V  6V  fT 
GMT  IT  IE     5<SSVTL-lLJ    (o<356Tr<sSl    LU  6U  IT 


Not  e'en  through  inadvertence  speak  they  foolish  word, 

With  clear  discerning  mind  who  've  leading's  ample  lessons  heard. 

418.     (o  &  i—  iSl  eg)  riv  Q&<ofrrr<5  ^<stn<35Uj(o6iJ 


Where  teaching  hath  not  oped  the  learner's  ear, 
The  man  may  listen,  but  he  scarce  can  hear. 


62  THE   KUREAL. 


419.     jfjj  sm  IEI  is)  ILJ  (o'SfffreQoj  rr<5V<sv/r/T 

<SU  658T  IE1  Q  LU    <SU  fT  Il9  <53T  IT  fT  ^    <SU  ifi  tg} 

'Tis  hard  for  mouth  to  utter  gentle,  modest  word, 
When  ears  discourse  of  lore  refined  have  never  heard. 


420.     Q&oSluQlfb  &6vxsuiLi<smirfr  <sii  rr  ILJ  <svyr  IT  <sSl  evr 
ems&l  uS)  evil  LQ  surrL^^u  QLG&ST 

His  mouth  can  taste,  but  ear  no  taste  of  joy  can  give  ! 
What  matter  if  he  die,  or  prosperous  live  ? 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

THE  POSSESSION  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 


421.        *gf  $  611  p  {D  IE1 

Q  3=  JT)J  61J  fT  IT  -35  (&j    Q.p6n~<ofTL£l<3b<3b    SU/T^E/T    <SlJ  JT  653T 

True  wisdom  wards  off  woes, 

A  circling  fortress  high  ; 
Its  inner  strength  man's  eager  foes 

Unshaken  will  defy. 


422.     Q<F<5VTpr)    <a£l  l_  *5  <&  IT  f£>    Q  &  <5\)  <aSl  L_  /T 


Wisdom  restrains,  nor  suffers  mind  to  wander  where  it  would  ; 
From  every  evil  calls  it  back,  and  guides  in  way  of  good. 

423.     <57L/Q/_//r0<srr  LU  IT  ir  lu  rr  nr  <su  mil  <ss  (o  &  L-.  i9  ^j  LOU  QUIT  QJJ  essr 


Though  things  diverse  from  divers  sages'  lips  we  learn, 
'Tis  wisdom's  part  in  each  the  true  thing  to  discern. 


424.     (orGssrQurrQijGrr  <suir<3B<3=  Q  &  <sv  &  Q  &  rr  <sv  <s®  ^5  p  rr  <ssr  iSl  p  ir  eu  rr  uj 


Wisdom  hath  use  of  lucid  speech,  words  that  acceptance  win, 
And  subtle  sense  of  other  men's  discourse  takes  in. 

425.       2_<SD6E/5 


Wisdom  embraces  frank  the  world,  to  no  caprice  exposed  ; 

Unlike  the  lotus  flower,  now  opened  wide,  now  petals  strictly  closed. 


426.       &T01J6U 

/_6U617    ^7<59)/D«U   p  fSl  6*} 

As  dwells  the  world,  so  with  the  world  to  dwell 
In  harmony  —  this  is  to  wisely  live  and  well. 


BOOK    II.— ROYALTY.  63 


427.  «jy/r9o/sy>/_uj/r  jrrren 

IT fS <sSl GV rr  rr°oj&$  &<s\)<svrr  ^<snir  (cr) 

The  wise  discern,  the  foolish  fail  to  see, 
And  minds  prepare  for  things  about  to  be. 

428.  ,=gy  (&5  <9?  <si7  p  <t5T)  &  rr  <stn  LD  G>  u  <ss)  <&  <sv>  LS 

UJ  (6~h  <3r  <5U    3>(&E<5F    <o\)  (ul  <5U  IT  fT    (Q)  &j  fT  L£y  GO 

Folly  meets  fearful  ills  with  fearless  heart ; 

To  fear  where  cause  of  fear  exists  is  wisdom's  part. 

429.  <5T$ir<5[r& 

The  wise  with  watchful  soul  who  coming  ills  foresee  ; 
From  coming  evil's  dreaded  shock  are  free. 


430. 

£T pSl <aSl <SV (T   Q  fT <5VT  <§£] <5V) L- UJ    G>  IT  63}J 

The  wise  is  rich,  with  ev'ry  blessing  blest ; 
The  fool  is  poor,  of  everything  possessed. 


CHAPTER  XLTV. 

.  —  THE  CORRECTION  OP  FAULTS. 


431.  Q-f(fF) 
QLJ0<5B<55LD    Q  U  Q^iSl  ^ 

Who  arrogance,  and  wrath,  and  littleness  of  low  desire  restrain, 
To  sure  increase  of  lofty  dignity  attain. 

432.  £g)a// 

6lf  6U  65)  (55  LLj    (oLQ3j    L$  <51T>  {D  &  (<3j 

A  niggard  hand,  o'erweening  self-regard,  and  mirth 
Unseemly,  bring  disgrace  to  men  of  kingly  birth. 

433.  jsl'&SGr-sgjitfartrujrTfEi  (<3jtb(DLb  <surfl  ew/LD 

Q  «  rr  <srr  <su  rr 


Though  small  as  millet-seed  the  fault  men  deem  ; 

As  palm-tree  vast  to  those  who  fear  disgrace  'twill  seem. 

434.       (GjprDGtUb    <9StT&<35    Q  U  fT  (7^  <5n  IT  65  6E 
U<SS)<95 


Freedom  from  faults  is  wealth  ;  watch  heedfully 
'Gainst  these,  for  fault  is  fatal  enmity. 


64  THE    KURRAL. 

435. 


His  joy  who  guards  not  'gainst  the  coming  evil  day, 
Like  straw  before  the  fire  shall  swift  consume  away. 


436.      ^<5ST(^pp    fi&tslU    £ln[)IT(&jpnr>lEl    &  fT  65ST  Q  p  l9 
Q  <55T  <S$T  (3j  (D  p    L£>n~(<3)    L/9  (55)  p  &  (<3j 

Faultless  the  king  who  first  his  own  faults  cures,  and  then 
Permits  himself  to  scan  the  faults  of  other  men. 


437.     Q&iurbunrGV  Q&ujiurr  S^  <su  nSl  ILS  rr  <5tf 

(tp  LU  p  u  rr  ffo  ^<s$T(£l£B  QaQiD  (<sr) 

Who  leaves  undone  what  should  l>e  done,  with  niggard  mind, 
His  wealth  shall  perish,  leaving  not  a  wrack  behind. 

438. 


The  greed  of  soul  that  avarice  men  call, 
When  faults  are  summed,  is  worst  of  all. 

439. 


Never  indulge  in  self  -complaisant  mood, 
Nor  deed  desire  that  yields  no  gain  of  good. 

440.     arr^sev  <sfr^s  <sv  p$  uu  rr  <stn  LA  ILJ  ILJ 
Q  <sii  iJI  <sv  IT  fr 


If,  to  ypur  foes  unknown,  you  cherish  what  you  love, 
Counsels  of  men  who  wish  you  harm  will  harmless  prove. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

QuffliLj(r<s®ir<£  giZmrsQ&ni—Go.  —  SEEKING  THE  AID  OP  GREAT  MEN. 


441.  ^frD&SrnSl^^J    QpfEp   <SU  $  61]  <SV>  L_  IU  IT  IT 
'JEipftST  $ibfftf    (o^lTfG^J    Q&rnSTTffO 

As  friends  the  men  who  virtue  know,  and  riper  wisdom  share, 
Their  worth  weighed  well,  the  kin^  should  choose  with  care. 

442.  2-.D29G?  fBITUJ    $&Q   IL    fl  ^o    <5V)  LA    rip  JD 


Cherish  the  all-accomplished  men  as  friends, 

Whose  skill  the  present  ill  removes,  from  coming  ill  defends. 


BOOK    II.  -  ROYALTY  .  65 


443.     ^f  ffl  ]iu  eu  p  gy 

Q  u  /fl  iu  rr  <ss>  jr  (ousssfl        jLornr&  Q  a  rr  <srr  <sv 


To  cherish  men  of  mighty  soul,  and  make  them  all  their  own, 
Of  kingly  treasures  rare,  as  rarest  gift  is  known. 


444.   jSLbi&rb  QuifltLimr 

6U  (537  <S&  LD  ILf    Q  STT  <5V  6V  IT  16 

To  live  with  men  of  greatness  that  their  own  excels, 

As  cherished  friends,  is  greatest  power  that  with  a  monarch  dwells 

445. 


The  king,  since  counsellors  are  monarch's  eyes5 
Should  counsellors  select  with  counsel  wise. 

446.       <£&&[T    lR<5W^^(<53)UJ.5   ^  IT  Q  (S3)  (Lg  <5F    6U  ffl)  6V  IT  %5GT  3= 


The  king,  who  knows  to  live  with  worthy  men  allied, 
Has  nought  to  fear  from  any  foeman's  pride. 

447.  /-  65  <9  /5    J5/  &SVT  ILJ  fT  65)  IT    UJ  IT  fffT  <SU  IT  <SV)  ff   UJ/r(o/7" 

ILJ  <8lJ  fT 


What  power  can  work  his  fall,  who  faithful  ministers 
Employs,  that  thunder  out  reproaches  when  he  errs. 


448.  fj£)ip-uu[r<s$)rr  uSl  <sv  <5V  rr  p 
QaQuurr  tftevfrgpusi 

The  king  with  none  to  censure  him,  bereft  of  safeguards  all, 
Though  none  his  ruin  work,  shall  surely  ruined  fall. 

449.  (lp,<£6$£D/r/fc5E    <^_^)u 

<?  IT  fr  i9  <sv  /r  /f  & 


Who  owns  no  principal,  can  have  no  gain  of  usury  ; 
Who  lacks  support  of  friends,  knows  no  stability. 


uevsvrrir 


450. 


Thau  hate  of  many  foes  incurred,  works  greater  woe 
Ten-fold,  of  worthy  men  the  friendship  to  forego. 


9 


66  THE    KUBRAL. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

. — AVOIDING  MEAN  ASSOCIATIONS. 


451.        &l<bnSl<53T    LD(g7j<3?LD    Q  /_/  (77j  63)  LO 


The  great  of  soul  will  mean  association  fear  ; 

The  mean  of  soul  regard  mean  men  as  kinsmen  dear. 

452. 


The  waters'  virtues  change  with  soil  through  which  they  flow 
As  man's  companionship  so  will  his  wisdom  show. 

453.     Ld<oyr^^fr^3) 

llSl  <55T  {£,  <&  tr  (S3) 

Perceptions  manifold  in  men  are  of  the  mind  alone  ; 
The  value  of  the  man  by  his  companionship  is  known. 


454.      Lb<oGT35f£]    (oTT^jQuil  '6\)«S    fEfTL-l^-    Q  LU  IT  QJj  <5U^D 


Man's  wisdom  seems  the  offspring  of  his  mind  ; 
'Tis  outcome  of  companionship  we  find. 

455. 


Both  purity  of  mind,  and  purity  of  action  clear, 

Leaning  on  staff  of  pure  companionship,  to  man  draw  near. 


456. 

uS  <ssr  15  &TUJ  rriir  <s  Qsvtfa)  f6  <sst  (y  <s  rr 

From  true  pure-minded  men  a  virtuous  race  proceeds  ; 
To  men  of  pure  companionship  belong  no  evil  deeds. 


457. 

L/9<65r/5<s\)  QLoevev/TLJ  Ly<5B(^/5  £5qjjLQ  (<sr) 

Goodness  of  mind  to  lives  of  men  increaseth  gain  ; 
And  good  companionship  doth  all  of  praise  obtain. 


458.       LD63T/56D    /5<S3T(c7j<S3)i_UJ    IT  IT  u9  6£]  (&£     &  ft  Stf  G>  (7f?  IT 


To  perfect  men,  though  minds  right  good  belong, 
Yet  good  companionship  is  confirmation  strong. 


BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY.  67 

459.       L£><5Srf66\)^BJ&}    (63)(i5    LD  J2/  65)  LD  LD  JD   /Do°Ol^/ 


_ 

Although  to  mental  goodness  joys  of  other  life  belong 
Yet  good  companionship  is  confirmation  strong. 


460. 


Than  good  companionship  no  surer  help  we  know  ; 
Than  bad  companionship  nought  causes  direr  woe. 


CHAPTEE  XLVIL 

Q<5[fljSglQ<a:lLJGi)<SUGG)<S5.  —  ACTING    AFTER    DUE    CONSIDERATION. 
461. 


<SU  i£l  U  UJ  &  C&J 

Expenditure,  return,  and  profit  of  the  deed 

In  time  to  come  :  weigh  these  —  then  to  the  act  proceed. 


462.     Q^rflru^  <sQ<osr^Q^[rQ  Q  ^  ir  ikQl  p  GGQT  <s®&  &  Q  &  ILJ  <su  rr  IT  & 


With  chosen  friends  deliberate  ;  next  use  thy  private  thought  ; 

Then  act.     By  those  who  thus  proceed  all  works  with  ease  are  wrought. 

463.  c^<55c5Bffiy    &(7Jj$    (Lp^<o9Lp&(3j(;5Tj    Q  <9F  ILJ  6$  2sST 

<y,«5<5B/T    JT  fS  fil)  65)  Z_    UJ/T/T  (/H-) 

To  risk  one's  all  and  lose,  aiming  at  added  gain, 
Is  rash  affair,  from  which  the  wise  abstain. 

464.  Glp<s$<5Ql  ev^Bssrp  Q^/r/_/H<5B/r 

ifl&flQ<su<oirr6yu  (OLD^LJLJ/T  L—^st-  ueuir  (&>\ 

A  work  of  which  the  issue  is  not  clear, 
Begin  not  they  reproachful  scorn  who  fear. 

465.  61J  <SS)  <35  UJ  p  <F 


U  (59)  65  611  6to  IT  LJ    U  fT       Bl  LJ    uluo^fr    JT  IT  J£U 

With  plans  not  well  matured  to  rise  against  your  foe, 
Is  way  to  plant  him  out  where  he  is  sure  to  grow  ! 

466.       Q<^(U«<55    6U6V6U    Q  <f  UJ  &  Q  &  ®  <{chj 

OJ  IT  JJQ/  lEi    Q«©LD 


'Tis  ruin  if  man  do  an  unbefitting  thing  ; 

Fit  things  to  leave  undone  will  equal  ruin  bring. 


68  THE   KUBEAL. 

467.       <5T  <55ST  (5Gt&  t£ 


Think,  and  then  dare  the  deed  !     Who  cry, 
'  Deed  dared,  we  '11  think,'  disgraced  shall  be. 

468.       ^pfSl<S5T   GlIfTfj/S^fr    <SU(7^^^LD    U  6V  fT 

(ourr  pfSl  eguLb  Qurr^^ju  uG)LQ 

On  no  right  system  if  man  toil  and  strive, 
Though  many  men  assist,  no  work  can  thrive. 

469. 


Though  well  the  work  be  done,  yet  one  mistake  is  made, 
To  habitudes  of  various  men  when  no  regard  is  paid. 


470.       <5T  6TT  6fT  IT  ^    Q  < 

Qa/nsrrsrr/r^  Q^/rsyrsrr/r  gjiGV^  (tD) 

Plan  and  perform  no  work  that  others  may  despise  ; 

What  misbeseems  a  king  the  world  will  not  approve  as  wise. 


CHAPTER  XLYIII. 

o.  —  THE   KNOWLEDGE  OF  POWER. 


471.       <oSl  (faff  6U  e9lLffb    p  SOT  <5U  6®  ILj    LO  IT  p  (Of  63T    SU  6$  ILf  fB 


The  force  the  strife  demands,  the  force  he  owns,  the  force  of  foes, 
The  force  of  friends  :  these  should  he  weigh  ere  to  the  war  he  goes. 

472. 

Who  know  what  can  be  wrought,  with  knowledge  of  tlie  means,  on  this 
Their  mind  firm  set,  go  forth,  nought  goes  with  them  amiss. 


473.  &-<SV)l—.j5^LC>    <SL1  <o9  ILJ  $  LU  fT 

u9  S5)  L_  (55  65  65ST    (lp  ifl  fB  p  fT  IT    U6\)ir 

Ill-deeming  of  their  proper  powers,  have  many  monarchs  striven, 
And  midmost  of  unequal  conflict  fallen  asunder  riven. 

474.  ^f  <5tT)  LA  fb  j&  IT  !EJ    Q  <£  fT  (L£>  <35  fT    GST  6YT  <SU  $  IL)  IT  <53T   p<SST^ST 

<sQ  uj  IB  p  rr  evr  <sGl  <5tn  rr  IB  gu  QaG)Lc> 

Who  not  agrees  with  those  around,  no  moderation  knows, 
In  self-applause  indulging,  swift  to  ruin  goes. 


.BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY.  6& 

475. 


With  peacock  feathers  light  you  load  the  wain; 
Yet,  heaped  too  high,  the  axle  snaps  in  twain. 


476.     jgi&sfl&Q&frLQU  CV/r9(S3) 


Who  daring  climbs,  and  would  himself  upraise 
Beyond  the  branch's  tip,  with  life  the  forfeit  pays. 


477. 

With  knowledge  of  the  measure  due,  as  virtue  bids  you,  give ! 
That  is  the  way  to  guard  your  wealth,  and  seemly  live. 

478.  ^<35/7"   {D <ofT oSl I— iy~     3j  fT  uSl  £B}J  IE!    (]><3Siy-6\)(feOLJ 

\oLJfT3jfT   JD<9B<5\)IT<9B    <35<5&)l i      ni  ] 

Incomings  may  be  scant ;  but  yet,  no  failure  there, 
If  in  expenditure  you  rightly  learn  to  spare. 

479.  J5V 6ft  <su  ffil IB gn  en  rr  L&  fr  *£  rr <svr  <su  IT L^  &  ®n  & 

ILJ  <ofr(ourr<5\)  <sQ <s\)  <s\)  rr  Si  ^  Q '&}  rr <syr QY?  <s  Gi&GliD  (t95j) 

Who  prosperous  lives  and  of  enjoyment  knows  no  bound, 
His  seeming  wealth,  departing,  nowhere  shall  be  found. 

4oO.       2_  <5ff  <oll  <SS)  U  £b    ^JT <3B  <3B  [T  3j    (o)  <8U  fT  LJ  LJ  J~ 

<su  <ofr  <su  <syy  jr 


Beneficence  that  measures  not  its  bound  of  means, 

Will  swiftly  bring  to  nought  the  wealth  on  which  it  leans. 


CHAPTEE  XLIX.     4  ft. 

o.  —  KNOWING  THE  PITTING  TIME. 


481. 

uSl&<5vQ<Sl]<5\)6£lLL    (D  <S1J  f5  ^  IT  &  C3j 

A  crow  will  conquer  owl  in  broad  daylight  ; 

The  king  that  foes  would  crush,  needs  fitting  time  to  fight. 

482. 


ILJ  rr  IT  &  (Vj  IEJ 

The  bond  binds  fortune  fast  is  ordered  effort  made, 
Strictly  observant  still  of  favouring  season's  aid. 


VO  THE    KURRAL. 

483. 


Can  any  work  be  hard  in  very  fact, 
If  men  use  fitting  means  in  timely  act  ? 

484.       (STj/reV/B    &  (TJj  j£! 


The  pendant  world's  dominion  may  be  won, 
In  fitting  time  and  place  by  action  done. 

485.    arrGViEi  &(njJ5l  uSl 

IE]    &ffJ    U61J/T 


Who  think  the  pendant  world  itself  to  subjugate, 
With  mind  unruffled  for  the  fitting  time  must  wait. 

486.       Seff<fB<£    QpOmL—iUlT    Q  (S3)  Q  «  <3B  /i)    Q  U  fT  (ffj  ^  &  IT 


The  men  of  mighty  power  their  hidden  energies  repress, 
As  fighting  ram  recoils  to  rush  on  foe  with  heavier  stress. 


487.  Qu  n~6rr(o)6rr<S8T  6urriEi(o<35  LJ  p  LbQ  <su  n~  rr  rr 

&jffrr(o<siJiTLJu  Q  ir  rr  GIT  <5if!  ILKSIJIT  (sr) 

The  glorious  ones  of  wrath  enkindled  make  no  outward  show, 

At  once  ;  they  bide  their  time,  while  hidden  fires  within  them  glow. 

488.  Q  <P  £V  (E  6tn  IT  & 


If  foes'  detested  form  they  see,  with  patience  let  them  bear  ; 
When  fateful  hour  at  last  they  spy,  —  the  head  lies  there. 


489. 

Q&UJ6V 


When  hardest  gain  of  opportunity  at  last  is  won, 
With  promptitude  let  hardest  deed  be  done. 

490.       Q<5/7~<5BQ<5E/T65<£    <9n-LDLJLD    LJ  (TJj  611  ^5  gjj 


As  heron  stands  with  folded  wing,  so  wait  in  waiting  hour  ; 

As  heron  snaps  its  prey,  when  fortune  smiles,  put  forth  your  power. 


BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY.  71 


CHAPTER  L. 

.  —  KNOWING  THE  PLACE. 


491. 


Begin  no  work  of  war,  despise  no  foe, 

Till  place  where  you  can  wholly  circumvent  you  know. 


492.     (Lpj<sssr(o<Ffrf5^  Q  LD  rriij  LC>  t3l  GST  eu  n~  &  (&> 


Though  skill  in  war  combine  with  courage  tried  on  battle-field, 
The  added  gain  of  fort  doth  great  advantage  yield. 


493. 

(o  '/_/  IT  p  QTj>  IT  &  /_    Q  U  IT  jb  fSl  <ST    Q<FU$I<5VT  (/TL-) 

E'en  weak  ones  mightily  prevail,  if  place  of  strong  defence 
They  find,  protect  themselves,  and  work  their  foes  offence. 


494.       <5T  683T  633$  UU  IT    Q  ff  6VVT  GftfT    L$  Lp  LJ  LJ    ffi  L_  <5GT  f$  fb  ^£J 

^i  GST  <syfi  ILJ  rr  IT  jy  <sar  <sofl  •&  Q<Fu9<svr  (& 

The  foes  who  thought  to  triumph,  find  their  thoughts  were  vain, 

If  hosts  advance,  seize  vantage  ground,  and  thence  the  fight  maintain. 

495. 


The  crocodile  prevails  in  its  own  flow  of  water  wide, 
If  this  it  leaves,  'tis  slain  by  any  thing  beside. 


496.  &  t—(o  <sv  ir  i—  rr 
<56i_(o£0/r(2>)  /B  rr  <sij  nr  ILJ 

The  lofty  car,  with  mighty  wheel,  sails  not  o'er  watery  main, 
The  boat  that  skims  the  sea,  runs  not  on  earth's  hard  plain. 

497.  =gy  (Sj  <F  IT  <sa)  us  tuffueu/r/f)  j3/.^3wG><5iys33r/_/r 

Q  6il  (GT)  <F  fT  <5S)  LA    QlLJGmGlftfl    ItSi  L_  j£  p  fT  JD   Q  &  llS)  65T  (<5T\ 

Save  their  own  fearless  might  they  need  no  other  aid, 
If  in  right  place  they  tight,  all  due  provision  made. 

498.  ®  J£J  U  <53) 


If  lord  of  army  vast  the  safe  retreat  assail 

Of  him  whose  host  is  small,  his  mightiest  efforts  fail. 


THE    KURRAL. 


499.     &<5VyrDf66\)ttlJ{5Tj    $  (ffj    iS  <S\)  Q  D'  ttfi  63)] 

QL_/T/_L_ 


Though  fort  be  none,  and  store  of  wealth  they  lack, 
'Tis  h3rd  a  people's  homesteads  to  attack  ! 

500.     <35fT<svrrLp  &<srnfl  esriflujGliEJ  &<sssT®&r<<5Tj&rr 
(oGuevrressr  (Lp&^is  &<sfi\£» 

The  jackall  slays,  in  miry  paths  of  foot-betraying  fen, 

The  elephant  of  fearless  eye  and  tusks  transfixing  armed  men. 


CHAPTER  LI. 

(o)<$ffffl<&&).  —  SELECTION  AND  CONFIDENCE. 

501.     ^g  <D  LbGl  u  IT  n    >s{£l<55ru    LuSljr&dF  is  rr  <s$r  &l  GST 


How  treats  he  virtue,  wealth  and  pleasure  ?     How,  when  life  's  at  stake, 
Comports  himself  ?  This  four-fold  test  of  man  will  full  assurance  make. 


502. 

<S1J  G)  U  U  ffl  ILf 

Of  noble  race,  of  faultless  worth,  of  generous  pride 

That  shrinks  from  shame  or  stain  ;  io  him  may  king  confide. 

503.     «jy//?uj<5E/r>  (y  <?  p  Qy  IT  <366m<s$y)i  IB 

Q  ;£  iff  (Lj  [EJ 


Though  deeply  learned,  unflecked  by  fault,  'tis  rare  to  see, 
When  closely  scanned,  a  man  from  all  unwisdom  free. 

504.     (^<5WT(C5)^L<5E  (^PPQP  fcrrip.  iu  <sii  jn  j&j  <svyr 


Weigh  well  the  good  of  each,  his  failings  closely  scan, 
As  these  or  those  prevail,  so  estimate  the  man. 

505. 


<5B(5\) 


Of  greatness  and  of  meanness  too, 
The  deeds  of  each  are  touchstone  true. 


506. 

Beware  of  trusting  men  who  have  no  kith  or  kin  ; 

No  bonds  restrain  such  men,  no  shame  deters  from  sin. 


BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY. 


507.  <$/r^<sar<53)LD  siBprr  6i7/$6i7, 
(oUsm^ftnLn  Q  uj  a)  eu  IT  IB 

By  fond  affection  led  who  trusts  in  men  of  unwise  soul, 
Yields  all  his  being  up  to  folly's  blind  control. 

508.  QpXITSGT    l^roBsW^    Q  p  5$  IB  <35  fT <5BT   eUiflrLfx 

QUIT 


Who  trusts  an  untried  stranger,  brings  disgrace, 
R-emediless,  on  all  his  race. 


,„ 


509.     Qppp&  uu  rr  an  &ILI  /G 

p^ts,  Qpjpiib  Qurr(fFjffrr 

st  no  man  whom  you  have  not  fully  tried, 
When  tested,  in  his  prudence  proved  confide. 


510.     Qpirn-Gsr  Q  p  aft  ay  IB  Q  <s  <srfl  /B  p  rr  ssr  &  8ssvr  ILJ  p  GLJ  IB 


Trust  where  you  have  not  tried,  doubt  of  a  friend  to  feel, 
Once  trusted,  wounds  inflict  that  nought  can  heal. 


CHAPTER  LII.     jy£.  ©SL. 

o.  —  SELECTION  AND  EMPLOYMENT. 


511.       /563T(SZnLDfty/5    jSiGVLDILJ    tb  IT  ty-    (5<5V 


Who  good  and  evil  scanning,  ever  makes  the  good  his  joy  ; 
Such  man  of  virtuous  mood  should  king  employ. 

512.  eurrtfl  QUQTJ&&I  suerrLCtU®^    ajjfbrDGvxsu 

iu  rr  JT  mi)  su  IT  <s$r  Q&ILJ&  tsSlffasr  (a-) 

Who  swells  the  revenues,  spreads  plenty  o'er  the  land, 
Seeks  out  what  hinders  progress,  his  the  workman's  hand. 

513.  *&i  <5ttu  f£l  <sq 


A  loyal  love  with  wisdom,  clearness,  mind  from  avarice  free  ; 
Who  hath  these  four  good  gifts  should  ever  trusted  be. 

514.     <or$svr<8U<5in<35LLjrrfb  G>£DpS!uj&  &  em  stnpi  in 

e£l%5vr<siJ<5V)<35Ujrr69r  Q>  <su  QT?  (3j  LD/T/B^/T  usvir 

Even  when  tests  of  every  kind  are  multiplied, 

Full  many  a  man  proves  otherwise,  by  action  tried  ! 

10 


(4*  THE    KTJRRAL. 


515.  ^£y  fSl  rb  &  IT  p  jfi  <sr  Q  &  vu  &)  p  u  rr  <b 
&  /£>  /5  ^  rr  Q  <ssr  svr  (o  <D  <sii  p>  u  tr  fb 

No  specious  fav'rite  should  the  king's  commission  bear, 
But  he  that  knows,  and  work  performs  wU,h  patient  care 

516.  Q  <3F  di  017  /r  $537 


Let  king  first  ask,  '  Who  shall  the  deed  perform  ?  '  and  '  What  the  deed  ?  ' 
Of  hour  befitting  both  assured,  let  every  work  proceed. 

517.       jjj)J5)(kor    119^(63)    (s9<Sll<58T(LpLy-3>(&)    Q  LD  <55T  (Of  iL  (6 

&j5(fafr    LLJ<5U<5VT  <35  653T    <a£lL-<oV  («r) 

'  This  man,  this  work  shall  thus  work  out,'  let  thoughtful  king  command  ; 
Then  leave  the  matter  wholl    in  his  servant's  hand. 


518.       <sQ  $o3T  <35  (G)  ifl 


As  each  man's  special  aptitude  is  known, 

Bid  each  man  make  that  special  work  his  own. 

519.        <sSl  §537  6B  «  68VT    <aQ  %S3T  ILJ  <5?D  L-  ILJ  fT  6VT    (o  <35  <SS5T  <oG)  LL    G>  <SU  QY? 


Fortune  deserts  the  king  who  ill  can  bear 
Informal  friendly  ways  of  men  his  toils  who  share. 


520.     / 

Q  <35  fTL-  fT  620  LD    (o^fTL-fT    ^J  <5V  (&)  («)) 

Let  king  search  out  his  servants'  deeds  each  day  ; 
When  these  do  right,  the  world  goes  rightly  on  its  way. 


CHAPTER  Lin. 

o.  —  CHERISHING  ONE'S  KINDRED. 


521.  Upppp)    &>  6MT  Gtt)!  LD    U  6$)  Lp  65)  LD  U  FT 

&r  (b  £D  p  <5  rr  IT  sernQsm  iLjerr 

When  wealth  is  fled,  old  kindness  still  to  show, 
Is  kindly  grace  that  only  kinsmen  know. 

522.  6^QF)UU(frf><f    &p{ 

GST  Qf)U  u  (Of  <surr<3B&Lo 
The  gift  of  kin's  unfailing  love  bestows 
Much  gain  of  good,  like  flower  that  fadeless  blows. 


BOOK    II. — ROYALTY. 


523.  *£/  &TT  <3U  6YT  IT    <aQ  <5V  <SV  IT  p  fT  <53T    6U  fT  LQ  & 

(^errsusYT/rdB  (o&rr  ip-Gvr^  ii  '/f  iQ  ev>  p  fb 
His  joy  of  life  who  mingles  not  with  kinsmen  gathered  round, 
Is  lake  where  streams  pour  in,  with  no  encircling  bound. 

524.  ^/D/D^^/T/D    &(i>rDU    L7Z_Q<Sl//r(^>d5ffO    Q  -f  <5V  <SU  IB  £5  IT  68T 

UlUGST 


The  profit  gained  by  wealth's  increase, 

Is  living  compassed  round  by  relatives  in  peace. 


525. 

GwQ&SlUJ    &  t   £D  35  <£  IT  < 

Who  knows  the  use  of  pleasant  words,  and  liberal  gifts  can  give, 
Connections,  heaps  of  them,  surrounding  him  shall  live. 

526. 


Than  one  who  gifts  bestows  and  wrath  restrains, 
Through  the  wide  world  none  larger  following  gains. 

527.  -35  IT  <3S  <Sff>  <5B    <Sjr&JfT    <35  6F>  IT  /5J57  GSffT  <5S3)I 
LD[TS>3>Qp    LD<oVr<SSrif!    JT  IT  IT  <S,  Q  45    ILJ  6TT 

The  crows  conceal  not,  call  their  friends  to  come,  then  eat  ; 
Increase  of  good  such  worthy  ones  shall  meet. 

528.  Q/_//r^5yG>/5/r<5B<5E/r<osr  (o6Uf5^5<5^r  <su  ifl  ezo  &  vu  nr 

<5U  fT  L)  6U  fT  IT 


Where  king  regards  not  all  alike,  but  each  in  his  degree, 
'Neath  such  discerning  rule  many  dwell  happily. 

529.     pLDjrrrQ^  p  p  £»  no  75  p  IT  IT 


Who  once  were  his,  and  then  forsook  him,  as  before 

Will  come  around,  when  cause  of  disagreement  is  no  more. 


530. 

£3fl®nLpj5$Zl(7fjf6   Q  <£  63VT  Ott    <35 

Who  causeless  went  away,  then  to  return,  for  any  cause,  ask  leave  ; 
The  king  should  sift  their  motives  well,  consider,  and  receive  ! 


fO     76  THE    KUEEAL. 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

>. — UNFORGETFULNESS. 


531. 

•      &(DKp    6ty<61/<3D<5E    LD  £l  Lp  <F  &  llS)  rb    Q  &  fT  IT  toty 

'Tis  greater  ill,  if  rapture  of  o'erweening  gladness  to  the  soul 
Bring  self-forgetfulness,  than  if  transcendent  wrath  control. 

532.       Q  U  IT  <9=  <F  IT  U  L]  <3S    Q  <35  FT  6V  J$  L£3    Lj<356S)L£    UJ 


Perpetual  poverty  is  death  to  wisdom  of  the  wise  ; 
When  man  forgets  himself  his  glory  dies  ! 


533.  Quir-ffiruuirfrs 

Q^LJUfl'6V)jr    Q  6V  HT  FT  &  (&j  f6 

'  To  self-oblivious  men  no  praise  '  ;  this  rule 
Decisive  wisdom  sums  of  every  school. 

534.  ^ 


1  To  cowards  is  no  fort's  defence  '  :  e'en  so 
The  self-oblivious  men  no  blessing  know. 

535.       (Lp<S5T6g}J£D&    &FT6iirr    jil  (l£  <95  Q  UJ  fT  &ST    V)  <SVT 


To  him  who  nought  foresees,  recks  not  of  anything, 
The  after  woe  shall  sure  repentance  bring. 


536.       g)(Z£<S<55/r63)LD    UJ  IT  IT  ££  IT  L. 

<su(ig>&<5B[r<5S)Lb  6urru9  GST  ^j  Q  <su  rr  u  u  £sl<sv 

Towards  all  unswerving,  ever  watchfulness  of  soul  retain, 
Where  this  is  found  there  is  no  greater  gain. 


537. 

3>(nj<sGluj[rib  Q  u  IT  p  fS  -f  Q&uSl&tr  (<sr) 

Though  things  are  arduous  deemed,  there  's  nought  may  not  be  won, 
When  work  with  mind's  unslumbering  energy  and  thought  is  done. 


538.     Ly<SLp/5^F65)(5U    Quffpf^fF    Q  &  UJ  6V  Q  <5U  65ST  Q  (gjj    Q<flLJUJfr 

$  <ss  Lp  f5  ^  rr  tr  &  Q&(Lg>etnLbiLj  iSlev 

Let  things  that  merit  praise  thy  watchful  soul  employ  ; 
Who  these  despise  attain  through  sevenfold  births  no  joy. 


BOOK    II. — ROYALTY. 

539.  j§)#^<F&5tt9/D    Qc5BL_L_/TS3)ZT 
LD  Q  U)  &  &  u9l  637"  €$)  LD  fb  £jj  £U  LD 

Think  on  the  men  whom  scornful  mind  hath  brought  to  nought, 
When  exultation  overwhelms  thy  wildered  thought. 

540.  a_eyr<syf?uj  Qj£iUj5  Q '<5V <sttl ^j LA 
ggu err ffifl ILJ  &jGrr<srru  Qua5)<svr 

'Tis  easy  what  thou  hast  in  mind  to  gain, 
If  what  thou  hast  in  mind  thy  mind  retain. 


CHAPTER  LV. 

.  —  THE  EIGHT  SCEPTRE. 


541.     srr(B^j<3B6yyr  G>  '<&$3  z_  rr 


Search  out,  to  no  one  favour  show,  with  heart  that  justice  loves 
Consult,  then  act  ;  this  is  the  rule  that  right  approves. 


542. 

^    61J  fT  L>  IEJ 


All  earth  looks  up  to  heav'n  whence  raindrops  fall  ; 
All  subjects  look  to  king  that  ruleth  all. 

543.     ^syiE^GsyriT  JSTT/D^  LD  p  ^  jsl  p  (&>  u^rr 


Learning  and  virtue  of  the  sages  spring, 
From  all-controlling  sceptre  of  the  king. 

544.  -^  (o^/rCoev/r^^  LD/T/^SV  LD<SVT<OST 


Whose  heart  embraces  subjects  all,  lord  over  mighty  land 
Who  rules,  the  world  his  feet  embracing  stands. 

545. 


Where  king,  who  righteous  laws  regards,  the  sceptre  wields, 
There  fall  the  showers,  there  rich  abundance  crowns  the  fields. 

546. 


Not  lance  gives  kings  the  victory, 
But  sceptre  swayed  with  equity. 


jo    /8  THE   KURRAL. 

547.     (<5)<s3)/r)<5E/r<5E;r<^L/D  <5msijuj<35  Q  in  ei)  <a) /r 


The  king  all  the  whole  realm  of  earth  protects  ; 
And  justice  guards  the  king  who  right  respects. 

£48.       <5T  653T  U  £3  j&  jS>  IT    (o  (63)  ff  fT    Q.p  68)  ff)Q  &  IL1  iLJ  IT 


Hard  of  access,  nought  searching  out,  with  partial  hand 
The  king  who  rules,  shall  sink  and  perish  from  the  land. 


549. 

<ssr 


Abroad  to  guard,  at  home  to  punish,  brings 
No  just  reproach  ;  'tis  work  assigned  to  kings. 

550. 


By  punishment  of  death  the  cruel  to  restrain, 

Is  as  when  farmer  frees  from  weeds  the  tender  grain. 


CHAPTEE    LVI. 

.  —  THE  CRUEL  SCEPTRE. 


551.       G<35/rSs\)(DLD/D(o)<35/r6TO7-    L-fTlflfb 


Than  one  who  plies  the  murderer's  trade,  more  cruel  is  the  king 
Who  all  injustice  works,  his  subjects  harassing. 


552.     QsuQsvirGl  £l<s5TQy 


As  '  Give  '  the  robber  cries  with  lance  uplift, 
So  kings  with  sceptred  hand  implore  a  gift. 

558. 


Who  makes  no  daily  search  for  wrongs,  nor  justly  rules,  that  king 
Doth  day  by  day  his  realm  to  ruin  bring. 

554.     &L-(L£>IEJ  (^^_/iy  Q  LD  rr  (fjj  IEJ  £s)  Lp  &  (&}  IE 


Whose  rod  from  right  deflects,  who  counsel  doth  refuse, 
At  once  his  wealth  and  people  utterly  shall  lose. 


BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY. 
555.     ^gysvev^uz—  i—irrbcy 


His  people's  tears  of  sorrow  past  endurance,  are  not  they 
Sharp  instruments  to  wear  the  monarch's  wealth  away  ? 

556.       LD6VT<SSrfr&(&)    LQGVrsVJJ^tS 

LAGST  GST  fr  & 


To  rulers'  rule  stability  is  sceptre  right  ; 
When  this  is  not,  quenched  is  the  rulers'  light. 


557.  «£l/  6$  uSl  GGT  <5S)  LO    (of)  IT  <5V  J5  ^  p    Ql  S>  p  p>  pQ  <D 
<S3T  6$  llSl  GST  <5V)  LQ    611  fT  (L£    Q.p  Il9  IT  <95  (&) 

As  lack  of  rain  to  thirsty  lands  beneath, 
Is  lack  of  grace  in  kings  to  all  that  breathe. 

558.  j§)G3r<Sff)LOu9    (5^o^T(S3)    ^]  <SS)  /_  <55)  LO    (If)  <SV)  {D  Q  &  LU  LU  fT 


To  poverty  it  adds  a  sharper  sting, 

To  live  beneath  the  sway  of  unjust  king. 


559.     (LpmpQ  atrip-  Loszrresrsi/sar  Q&tuuSl 

Q  uj  rr  <sv  <sv  rr  gjj  su/rewLo  QUILKSV 


Where  king  from  right  deflecting,  makes  unrighteous  gain, 
The  seasons  change,  the  clouds  pour  down  no  rain. 

560. 


Where  guardian  guardeth  not,  udder  of  kine  grows  dry, 
And  Brahmans'  sacred  lore  will  all  forgotten  lie. 


CHAPTER  LVII.     jqft.  ©OT. 

. — ABSENCE  OF  *  TERRORISM. ' 


561.  ^<x<srriEi(^  ismp-jS  js'&sti  &  Q  &  <sv  <sv  rr 
Qevrr^^rriE]  Q  &  rr  jp]  u  u  gj]  Qsufs^j 

Who  punishes,  investigation  made  in  due  degree, 
So  as  to  stay  advance  of  crime,  a  king  is  he. 

562.  «  /£.(?  p  rr  &  @  Qinevev  Q<su$& 

/f  IEJ  <3B  fT  <53)  LD    (o  <5ll  Q5ST  Gl    U  <5U  FT 


For  length  of  days  with  still  increasing  joys  on  Heav'n  who  call, 
Should  raise  the  rod  with  brow  severe,  but  let  it  gently  fall. 


'  THE    KUEEAL. 


563.  QiSlJQJjGllfB^    Q  <f  UJ  Q  ^  fT  (Lg  (&j  LD    Q  <5U  IE1  (o  &  FT  60 
Q  (S3)  (77)617/5^    QLO/revSsO^    Q&QjlLC, 

Where  subjects  dread  of  cruel  wrongs  endure, 
Ruin  to  unjust  king  is  swift  and  sure. 

564.  H£)<smnr)&iy-UJ  Q  ]G$T  '<ssr  gjj  <stn  n  &  (&j  L£)  sitr  <<o8)  f  Q  &  rrso 


'  All  !  cruel  is  our  king,'  where  subjects  sadly  say, 
His  age  shall  dwindle,  swift  his  joy  of  life  decay. 

565. 


Whom  subjects  scarce  may  see,  of  harsh  forbidding  countenance  ; 
His  ample  wealth  shall  waste,  blasted  by  demon's  glance. 

566.       <35®(SQ<Ffr6V<5V<5Vr    45  SSW  <SWjf)  <5V 


The  tyrant,  harsh  in  speech  and  hard  of  eye, 
His  ample  joy,  swift  fading,  soon  shall  die. 


567.       «(£)Q/L£>/r^9<ty/E/    <S3)<55«9«/5^   j5  653T  L—  (ip  LD 

ssrGlrLpjrem  (?L_uJ<55(^  LDITLD  (<sr) 

Harsh  words  and  punishments  severe  beyond  the  right, 
Are  file  that  wears  away  the  monarch's  conquering  might. 

568. 


Who  leaves  the  work  to  those  around,  and  thinks  of  it  no  more  ; 
If  he  in  wrathful  mood  reprove,  his  prosperous  days  are  o'er! 

569. 


Who  builds  no  fort  whence  he  may  foe  defy, 
In  time  of  war  shall  fear  and  swiftly  die. 


570.       «ffU(oO/r/7-U    1$  <5Kffl  45  (&j  IEJ    <5B  (jj)  IE1  Q&  [T 

$<5V&(3jLj  Qurre&p  (a)) 


Tyrants  with  fools  their  counsels  share  : 
Earth  can  no  heavier  burthen  bear  ! 


BOOK    II.  -  EOYALTT.  81 


CHAPTER  LVIII.     4$.  ©jy. 

<S5<558rG>(@5G)LLl—Ln.  -  BENIGNITY. 


571.       &®SSTG><<5S8)LLL_    QiDtoVrGyUtEl    <95L^lQu(7^lEJ    &  fT  ifi  65)  65 
/iy693T(55)LDUJ/r    63)]  6337  ZJL  <SU    <SlJ6V(<9) 

Since  true  benignity,  that  grace  exceeding  great,  resides 
In  kingly  souls,  the  world  in  happy  state  abides. 

572. 


The  world  goes  on  its  wonted  way,  since  grace  benign  is  there  ; 
All  other  men  are  burthen  for  the  earth  to  bear. 


573. 

<g5653rQ633T(3Sr(63)/E/    <£5633rG>  *<G&8)L-L-    L&  6V  6V  IT  <5 

Where  not  accordant  with  the  song,  what  use  of  sounding  chords  ? 
What  gain  of  eye  that  no  benignant  light  affords  ? 

574. 


The  seeming  eye  to  face  gives  no  expressive  light, 
When  not  with  duly  meted  kindness  bright. 

575. 


Benignity  is  eyes'  adorning  grace  ; 

Without  it  eyes  are  wounds  disfiguring  face. 

576.       LG653TQ  (GSti) 


Whose  eyes  'neath  brow  infixed  diffuse  no  ray 
Of  grace  ;  like  tree  in  earth  infixed  are  they. 


577.       &6ffir(o(698)L-.L—    L&I  <5V  6V  <8U  IT    <SB  6G3T  68sfl  <S\)  /T    <3B  6V9T  Gftjj  6S)  1^  IU  FT  IT 


Eyeless  are  they  whose  eyes  with  no  benignant  lustre  shine  ; 
Who  've  eyes  can  never  lack  the  light  of  grace  benign. 

578.       ^TTLQ  ^(SBUJ/TLO        <35  633T  (o  '(653)  L_    <8ll  6V  GV  fTIT  & 


Who  can  benignant  smile,  yet  leave  no  work  undone  ; 
By  them  as  very  owr-  may  all  the  earth  be  won. 

11 


82  THE    KURBAL. 

579.     QgupprrrhguLD  u  6V3r£l  <6G)  /ir 


To  smile  on  those  that  vex,  with  kindly  face, 
Enduring  long,  is  most  excelling  grace. 


580.     Quiu&aGmG)  IB  45$  &  am 

U<SIJIT 


They  drink  with  smiling  grace,  though  poison  interfused  they  see, 
Who  seek  the  praise  of  all-esteemed  courtesy. 


CHAPTEE  LIX. 

o.  —  DETECTIVES. 


581.     gp/o^2/  (LpG&rr&rresrrD 


These  two  :  the  code  renowned,  and  spies, 
In  these  let  king  confide  as  eyes. 


582.     <5T  ®)  <sv  rr  ir  &  (&j  QiDistiGvrr  $<35Lpu6tn<siJ  Q  ILI  <^  ^  rr  <sor  jry  LD 


Each  day,  of  every  subject  every  deed, 
'Tis  duty  of  the  king  to  learn  with  speed. 

583.     gp/r)/r)?(g)  QsvirfbrSlu  Q  u  fr  qjjQ  /_  iff  uj  IT  LD<5sr<ssr<su<5sr 


By  spies  who  spies,  not  weighing  things  they  bring, 
Nothing  can  victory  give  to  that  unwary  king. 


584.     <s£l$svrQ<FUJ<si]fnr  p<<jnj&pp\Jb  Q  <su  ssyr  /_  /r  p  IT 
asfaweiJistnjnLi  LnrrjrmuGLi 

His  officers,  his  friends,  his  enemies, 
All  these  who  watch  are  trusty  spies. 

585. 


Of  unsuspected  mien  and  all-unf  earing  eyes, 
Who  let  no  secret  out,  are  trusty  spies. 


586. 

uSl  p  is  <&  /r  IT  nr  ILJ  IB  Q^&frQ&uSlegtJtGT)  Q  &  rr  fr 

As  monk  or  devotee,  through  every  hindrance  making  way, 
A  spy,  whate'er  men  do,  must  watchful  mind  display. 


BOOK    II.  —  ROYALTY. 

587.       Lb<olT>/D(E<35<SS)6lJ    Q&  /_  65  SU/D    (V?  Q 


A  spy  inust  search  each  hidden  matter  out, 
And  full  report  must  render,  free  from  doubt. 

588. 


Spying  by  spies,  the  things  they  tell 
To  test  by  other  spies  is  well. 

589. 


One  spy  must  not  another  see  :  contrive  it  so  ; 
And  things  by  three  confirmed  as  truth  you  know. 

590.     &}rDUu/iSliu  Q  <su  rr  p  r£l  ] 


Reward  not  trusty  spy  in  others'  sight, 
Or  all  the  mystery  will  come  to  light. 


CHAPTER  LX. 

ENERGY. 


591. 


'Tis  energy  gives  men  o'er  that  they  own  a  true  control  ; 
They  nothing  own  who  own  not  energy  of  soul. 

592.       a_6TT(Srr    (Tp<Sff)*_63)ZD    ILj  65)  /__  69)  LD    Q  U  fT  (Tfj  (Gffj  <S5)  £_  <53)  /jD 


The  wealth  of  mind  man  owns  a  real  worth  imparts, 
Material  wealth  man  owns  endures  not,  utterly  departs. 


593.  -f$<5B<5E    L&LpfcQjSQLDeST  fD  60  60  fT  <SH  fT 
^<Z65    QiC>rr(fPj6lJf5^[EI    S3)  65  <5  #U  <5V)  L,    UJ/T/T 

'  Lost  is  our  wealth,'  they  utter  not  this  cry  distressed, 
The  men  of  firm  concentred  energy  of  soul  possessed. 

594.  <=<55<£    LC>5IT<G£l(i5SiLJ<9:    Q<f<5^^]    LD  65)  <F  <sQ  <S\)  IT 


The  man  of  energy  of  soul  inflexible, 

G-ood  fortune  seeks  him  out  and  comes  a  friend  to  dwell. 


THE   KURRAL. 


To  smile  fog  flood  the  rising  lotus  flower  its  stem  unwinds  ; 
Endurji^njty  of  men  is  measured  by  their  minds. 

596.  &-6rr(®nj6i]  Q  ^  <sv  <sv  rr  (^puj/rs^sirsyrs 

^  6TT  <olf)  Cgll  fB    <&  GIT  <51T  IT  6&  Lb    I^IT^^J 

Whate'er  you  ponder,  let  your  aim  be  lofty  still, 
Fate  cannot  hinder  always,  thwart  you  as  it  will. 

597.  &  <s&  p  <s£l  L-.  <£  Q<srr<sv<35rr  QjjffQeiirrir 

G)  <ssr  jry  IEI 


The  men  of  lofty  mind  quail  not  in  ruin's  fateful  hour, 
The  elephant  retains  his  dignity  mid  arrows'  deadly  shower. 

598. 


The  soulless  man  can  never  gain 

Th'  ennobling  sense  of  power  with  men. 


599.  urfluj^j  &>-n-iE](o&m_L_  p  IT  u$  GVU  LD 

QeiJfWjQ-Lb  LjioB^rra  f&jpSlGsr  (<55>) 

Huge  bulk  of  elephant  with  pointed  tusk  all  armed, 
When  tiger  threatens  shrinks  away  alarmed  \ 

600.  &.jrQLDfT(7^6U/ 

i£irLL)5>&  GrrrrjsQev 

Firmness  of  soul  in  man  is  real  excellence  ; 

Others  are  trees,  their  human  form  a  mere  pretence. 


CHAPTEE  LXL 

.  —  UNSLUOGISHNESS. 


601. 


Of  household  dignity  the  lustre  beaming  bright, 
Flickers  and  dies  when  sluggish  foulness  dims  its  light. 

602.       LD/£-63)UJ    LDlp-UJfT   Q  6U  IT  (Lg  <35  6V 

Q  <5ll<S®ST  Gl    U6U(T 


Let  indolence,  the  death  of  effort,  die, 
If  you  'd  uphold  your  household's  dignity 


BOOK   II.  —  ROYALTY. 

603. 


Who  fosters  indolence  within  his  breast,  the  silly  elf  ! 
The  house  from  which  he  springs  shall  perish  ere  himself. 

604.      (&)lp.LDLp-f6gjj    (&)fbrDLD    Qu(7]j(3j 

LDly-L£>Lp.f5£j[]  LD/T683T£_    61]  (oTj  <Df£l    <5V  <SU  IT  &  (&) 

His  family  decays,  and  faults  unheeded  thrive, 
Who,  sunk  in  sloth,  for  noble  objects  doth  not  strive. 

605. 


Delay,  oblivion,  sloth,  and  sleep  :  these  four 

Are  pleasure-boat  to  bear  the  doomed  to  ruin's  shore. 

606. 


Though  lords  of  earth  unearned  possessions  gain, 
The  slothful  ones  no  yield  of  good  obtain. 

607.       j|)Z£.L//fl/5 


Who  hug  their  sloth,  nor  noble  works  attempt, 
Shall  hear  reproofs  and  words  of  just  contempt. 

608.       ££Z£-<S3)ZD    (9jlp.<5y)LQ<£<3SL-    I—  W  £h  fb  {D  63T    Q  (63)  6VT  (g)  IT  & 


If  sloth  a  dwelling  find  mid  noble  family, 
Bondsmen  to  them  that  hate  them  shall  they  be. 

609.       (<9)Z£_UJ/r<S337'65)LD    /L/STT  617/5^    (&)PP    Q  LG  fT  (TJj  <8U  € 


Who  changes  slothful  habits  saves 

Himself  from  all  that  household  rule  depraves. 

610. 


The  king  whose  life  from  sluggishness  is  rid, 
Shall  rule  o'er  all  by  foot  of  mighty  god  bestrid. 


THE    KURRAL. 

CHAPTER  LXII. 

. — MANLY  EFFORT. 


611.       «=gy  (77j  <S3)  LO    tLJ6V>l_^Qj56VT  {D  <SF  fT  6U  fT  65)  LO    (o  <5U  <S5VT  (£l  LD 

<5(fF)LD 


Say  not,  '  'Tis  hard,'  in  weak,  desponding  hour, 
For  strenuous  effort  gives  prevailing  power. 


612.  <sSVT  66  <35<558T    <a       537      <55  L_     o  6V  fT  LD  U  6\) 
Q&l  $SffT  &  (&)  <5&)  JD    fE  fT  IB  £5  IT  ifl  p 

In  action  be  thou  'ware  of  act's  defeat; 

The  world  leaves  those  who  work  leave  incomplete  ! 

613.  tB  n~  err  rr  Gwrr  6tn  LD  G)  LU  sitr  6gu  IB   &j6y)&6V)i_c>&<3;L-   i    w  &>ltb  Qrp 

Q  6U  GIT  IT  653T  <5$)  LD    Q  IU  <Stf  Jg2T(5J7)    Q&QJj&tt 

In  strenuous  effort  doth  reside 

The  power  of  helping  others  :  noble  pride  ! 

614.  *E  rr  ernr  cm  ®n  LD  u9  e\)  6V  rr  <s  IT  evr  Q  <su  <srrir  6m  syy  LD 
Q  en  err  rr  essr  <s&>  LD  (oufr6^<s 


Beneficent  intent  in  men  by  whom  no  strenuous  work  is  wrought, 
Like  battle-axe  in  sexless  being's  hand  availeth  nought, 

615.       £D<o3TL-/LO    <aSl  6ff)  Lp  ILJ  [T  &ST 


Whose  heart  delighteth  not  in  pleasure,  but  in  action  finds  delight, 
He  wipes  away  his  kinsmen's  grief  and  stands  the  pillar  of  their  might. 


616.     (Lp\up&  t£l  (ffj  6$  (few 

u9l  <5$T  6V)  Lb 


Effort  brings  fortune's  sure  increase, 
Its  absence  brings  to  nothingness. 

617.     LD  i$-  ILJ  Grrrr  tostrr  LbrrQp&u^  Quj6isru 
qy  cen^err  IT  z_/rLDSZD2r 


In  sluggishness  is  seen  misfortune's  lurid  form,  the  wise  declare  ; 
Where  man  unslothful  toils,  she  of  the  lotus  flower  is  there  ! 


618.     Q  LJ  rr  fSl  uSl  ssf  6tn  LD  ILJ  rr  tr  &  (&j  LD 

p  f$  <su  pSl  IB  ^  rr  en  GGlfis&r 

'Tis  no  reproach  though  unpropitious  fate  should  ban  ; 
But  not  to  do  man's  work  is  foul  disgrace  to  man  ! 


. 


BOOK    II.  —  MINISTERS   OF    STATE. 


ar  vain  ; 

§  2.-MINISTEES  OP  STA,£ 


nfaltering  mind, 
CHAPTER  T£'  fate  behind. 

. — THE  r 


t 

7  CHAPTER  LXIII.     jjfi.  arm.. 

r 

t  $)®<!5&6t%rL$lujrr6mLn.  —  HOPEFULNESS  IN  TROUBLE. 


621.         ( 


Smile,  with!  patient,  hopeful  heart,  in  troublous  hour  ; 
Meet  and  sc|>  vanquish  grief;  nothing  hath  equal  power. 

622. 


Though  sorroi  W)  iike  a  floo^,  comes  rolling  on, 
When  wise  ma  jn»s  mina  regards  it,—  it  is  gone  ! 

623. 


Who  griefs  confront.   with  meek,  ungrieving  heart, 
From  them  griefs,  pu't*  to  griefj  depart. 

624. 


Like  bullock  struggle  on  through  each  obstructed  way  ; 
From  such  an  one  will  troubles,     troubled,  roll  away. 

625.    «=jy(£)<55£i) 


When  griefs  press  on,  but  fail  to  crush  the  patient  heart 
Then  griefs  defeated,  put  to  grief,  depart. 

626.      *gj  <bG>  'n[)Q  }Lb<58T  p<S\X5$CD 

Q  fT   ' 


Who  boasted  not  of  wealth,  nor  gaveich,  'tis  truest  tact 
Will  not  bemoan  the  loss,  v,hfTViTi  act  ^^- 


THE    KURRAL. 


6V) 


.is  frame  is  sorrow's  tarb 
A-  meets  with  troubled  mind'  ,LXII.  .  <9Pra_. 


(528.  o  _MANLY  EFPORT. 

<s9<s\)<syr 


He  seeks  not  joy,  to  sorrow  man  is  born. 
Such  man  will  walk  unharmed  by  touch  OS&LD 


Mid  /sorrows,  sorrow  cannot  touch  his  soul. 


629.       J§)  <5VT  'U  j£  ,3)]   <S$<5VrULO  6$  65)  Lp  111  ITjS  IT  <50> 

£U6vrLJ^,gj  (blsirru  (ip^/^5  <s$6V<53r 

Mid  joys  he  yields  not  heart  to  joys'  control, 
/ 

630. 

r  isSl  en  Lp  itf  (&$  &pUL] 

Who  pain  as  pleasure  takes,  he  shall  acquire 
The  bliss  to  which  his  foes  in  vain  aspire. 


T' 


THE    END    OF    THE    SECTION    ON    'ROYALTY.' 


Jli 

vun 


Broach  though  unpropitio> 
,-K''  to  do  man's  work  is  foul  disgrace  to 


BOOK    II. — MINISTERS   OF    STATE.  8 


§  2.— MINISTEES  OF  STATE. 


CHAPTEE  LXIY. 

&.  —  THE  OFFICE  OF  MINISTER  OF  STATE. 


631.  <35  (fjj  6&I  lLf  IEI   <35  fT  6\)  (Lp  (5Tj    Q  <f  ILJ  <S5)  <3S  ILJ  (*5Tj 

LD(1Tj<S$$oSriLI    /£/T633Ti_     &>  65) LD <£F 3r  (.*) 

A  minister  is  he  who  grasps,  with  wisdom  large, 

Means,  time,  work's  mode,  and  functions  rare  he  must  discharge. 

632.  <a/<S2FT<S683T   C&lSl-3>tT  &  <56V    &rDJDQ$<5    6V  fT  <5TT  <oQ '$557 (o ILJ  /T 


A  minister  must  greatness  own  of  guardian  power,  determined  mind, 
Learn'd  wisdom,  manly  effort  with  the  former  five  combined. 


633.     l$ffij5{5S£lLb    (oU<5Ssf)<35    Q  <£  (T  6TT  6£l  LQ    1$  ffi  fB  <5  fT  IT  U 


A  minister  is  he  whose  power  can  foes  divide, 

Attach  more  firmly  friends,  of  severed  ones  can  heal  the  breaches  wide. 

634.     Q  ^  tfl  ^  &21  fs  (o<5frK&n 


A  minister  has  power  to  see  the  methods  help  afford, 
To  ponder  long,  then  utter  calm  conclusive  word. 

635.       ^pXSSrnflfb    <3yIT<S5rrD<5V)Lbfo<5    Q  <3F  IT  6V  6V  IT  Q  <55T  (SJTj 


The  man  who  virtue  knows,  has  use  of  wise  and  pleasant  words, 
With  plans  for  every  season  apt,  in  counsel  aid  affords. 

636. 


When  native  subtilty  combines  with  sound  scholastic  lore, 
'Tis  subtilty  surpassing  all,  which  nothing  stands  before. 

637. 


Though  knowing  all  that  books  can  teach,  'tis  truest  tact 
To  follow  common  sensft  of  men  in  act.  •**»—• 


90  THE    KURRAL. 

638. 


'Tis  duty  of  the  man  in  place  aloud  to  say 

The  very  truth,  though  unwise  king  may  cast  his  words  away. 

639. 


A  minister  who  by  king's  side  plots  evil  things 
Worse  woes  than  countless  foemen  brings. 

640.       (Lp<S3)fDUl—<F    (cfTjLp/S^/    (7£  Z£L  <aSl  6\)  (o  6U    Q&lLKSllIT 


For  gain  of  end  desired  just  counsel  nought  avails 
To  minister,  when  tact  in  execution  fails. 


CHAPTER  LXV. 

Q&n-&u<siJ6or<5G)Lc>.  —  POWER  IN  SPEECH. 


641.       /5/T/56X)    QlAGSTtt)]    lb  6V  €£]  <3»  l_  6ZD  LD    UJ/5/5«5ViL 

ujfr/BGV^  ^j  <srr  <srr  3$  g_   uxovrgy 

A  tongue  that  rightly  speaks  the  right  is  greatest  gain, 
It  stands  alone  midst  goodly  things  that  men  obtain. 

642. 


Since  gain  and  loss  in  life  on  speech  depend, 
From  careless  slip  in  speech  thyself  defend. 


643.  G><5B/_/_/T/TLJ    l3<5$vfl  <55(<9}/5    ^  <5?D  65  UJ  <SU  fT  UJ  <35 

(o<6i7z_/_/  Q  LD  rr  L£!  <siJ  j5  rr  (&jj  Q&rrev 

'Tis  speech  that  spell-bound  holds  the  listening  ear, 
While  those  who  have  not  heard  desire  to  hear. 

644.  jslpGtsrnSltE&i  Q  &  rr  <sv  G$I  & 


Speak  words  adapted  well  to  various  hearers'  state  ; 
No  higher  virtue  lives,  no  gain  more  surely  great. 


645.     Q<y/r6\)jj2/c55  Q^/risvSsOLv  iSlpSlQ'Sn'n'Q&fr  ev  &  Q  <?  tr  6V%s\) 

(©) 


-  ,1  Tonr  speech,  when  once  'tis  past  dispute 
.proach  thou^  ,tf._TPftcl)  thaLshall  vour  speech  refute. 
>c  to  do  man  s  work  is  toui  uis^racy  to  u^ 

/I 


BOOK    11.  —  MINISTERS    OF    STATE.  91 

646. 


LD  IT  L—  &  llS)  <5ST   L&  IT  <£F  <b  (ttf  IT    (0<95/r6YT 

Charming  each  hearer's  ear,  of  others'  words  to  seize  the  sense, 
Is  method  wise  of  men  of  spotless  excellence. 

647.       Q&rT<SV6V6lJ6V6V<5$r    Q  <?  /T  /T  <aSl  SO    637  '<££  &  IT 


Mighty  in  word,  of  unforgetful  mind,  of  fearless  speech, 
Tis  hard  for  hostile  power  such  man  to  overreach. 


648.       <sSl  <5ff>  ff  /5  gj] 

Q  <f  IT  ev  6$i  p  ev  <a/6\)e\)/r/fu 

Swiftly  the  listening  world  will  gather  round, 

When  men  of  mighty  speech  the  weighty  theme  propound. 

649. 


Who  have  not  skill  ten  faultless  words  to  utter  plain, 

Their  tongues  will  itch  with  thousand  words  men's  ears  to  pain. 

650.       j§)  6S3T  (Wj  Lp  ^  gj]    IbfTQy    LD  6V  IT  BsWUU  IT    <SB^)fD 

^jeysrjr  6$  ffl  p  gjj  6<n  u  rr  jSirfr  («)) 

Like  scentless  flower  in  blooming  garland  bound 

Are  men  who  can't  their  lore  acquired  to  others'  ears  expound. 


CHAPTER  LXVI. 

.  -  PURITY    IN    ACTION. 


651. 


The  good  external  help  confers  is  worldly  gain  ; 
By  action  good  men  every  needed  gift  obtain. 


652.  GTGGTJP    QLD/r^Q/^ffU    Q  6U  653T  (£  LD 

ibesrfl  uujeurr  eQ'&ssr  (a.) 

From  action  evermore  thyself  restrain 
Of  glory  and  of  good  that  yields  no  gain. 

653.  jp6p<56\)  QisuesorG)  QL 

LD61//T 


Who  tell  themselves  that  nobler  things  shall  yet  be  won, 
All  deeds  that  dim  the  lipht.  of  qrlc-ry  must  they  shun. 


92  THE    KUBBAL. 


654.  Jj)(f»)<5E<SLl    Uiy-<jg)}    L$  Gift  611  f6  j5    QflLJUJfTIT 
16  (£)<£<£  ptD    SITL-Q    ILJ6UIT 

Though  troubles  press,  no  shameful  deed  they  do, 
Whose  eyes  the  ever-during  vision  view. 

655.  GTfbQtDGSr   $jriEJ(&)6lJ    Q  &  LLJOJ  p  <3S    Q  <SF  UJ  <5ll  IT  Q  <S5T  <S5T 

Q  < 


Do  nought  that  soul  repenting  must  deplore, 

If  thou  hast  sinned,  'tis  well  if  thou  dost  sin  no  more. 

656. 


Though  her  that  bore  thee  hung'ring  thou  behold,  no  deed 
Do  thou,  that  men  of  perfect  soul  have  crime  decreed. 

657. 


Than  store  of  wealth  guilt-laden  souls  obtain, 
The  sorest  poverty  of  perfect  soul  is  richer  gain. 

658. 


To  those  who  hate  reproof  and  do  forbidden  thing, 
What  prospers  now,  in  after  days  shall  anguish  bring. 


659. 

1.3  L£  U  lQ  6g)  LD 

What  's  gained  through  tears  with  tears  shall  go  ; 
From  loss  good  deeds  entail  harvests  of  blessings  grow. 

660. 


In  pot  of  clay  unburnt  he  water  pours  and  would  retain, 

Who  seeks  by  wrong  the  realm  in  wealth  and  safety  to  maintain. 


CHAPTER  LXVII. 

LD. — POWER  IN  ACTION. 


661.     G&%ssr<£JiliLu  QLAGSTLJ 


What  men  call  *  power  in  action  '  know  for  '  power  of  mind  '  ; 
Externe  to  man  all  other  aids  von  find  •-•««  ^-" 

«,grace  to  uu^ 


BOOK    II.  —  MINISTEES    OF    STATE.  0# 

662.  &mQ(yjrrr  gyrb/DtSl  Q$>8)6\)<3srr<5S)LD  u9  <su  <sQ  n  GMT  ip. 
(<o5)QrD6sru  JT  friu  IE  j&  eiJ  IT  Q&rrGir  (2.) 

*  Each  hindrance  shun,'  *  unyielding  onward  press,  if  obstacle  be  there,' 
These  two  define  your  way,  so  those  that  search  out  truth  declare. 

663.  <3565)L-&Q<35n'L-&<3:    Q  <SF  UJ  ^  <35  <3B  ^  IT  6337  63)  LD 
uSl<oinL_&Q&[riL.&l    Q<5$Ttb(y    <a£l  (L£>  LD  fB    <£  qfjlJb  (/&-) 

Man's  fitting  work  is  known  but  by  success  achieved  ; 

In  midst  the  plan  revealed  brings  ruin  ne'er  to  be  retrieved. 

664.  Q<3FfT6V6\}]<5<5V    LUfTir<X(^    QuKolfluJ     6U  iff  UJ  611  IT  <<5Tj 
Q<ffT6\)69iU    <SlK533r653r<t5Tj    Q  <3F  UJ  6V  (d") 

Easy  to  every  man  the  speech  that  shows  the  way  ; 
Hard  thing  to  shape  one's  life  by  words  they  say  ! 

665. 


The  power  in  act  of  men  renowned  and  great, 

With  king  acceptance  finds  and  fame  through  all  the  state. 


666.     (sremGKffluj  Q  <su  6sor  6&}fl  iu  rr  IEJ 

Q  61J  653T  6$tfR  UJ  IT  IT       1  6S3T  63sfl  ILJ  jrfT&LJ  Q  U 


Whate'er  men  think,  ev'n  as  they  think,  may  men  obtain, 
If  those  who  think  can  steadfastness  of  will  retain. 

667.       2_(77j6^<56B2rr    Q  Z_  GfT  GTT  IT  65)  LO     (o  61]  GMT  0>) 


Despise  not  men  of  modest  bearing  ; 

Look  not  at  form,  but  what  men  are  : 
For  some  there  live,  high  functions  sharing, 

Like  linch-pin  of  the  mighty  car  ! 

668.      <5B  <5V  IE1  65  fT  ^]    <3B<5G3TL-    6$  (fatT  <35  <36  ill 


What  clearly  eye  discerns  as  right,  with  steadfast  will, 
And  mind  unslumbering,  that  should  man  fulfil. 


669.      gilGSrU    (LptDGtilfl  6yU(6T)    Q&UJ&    ^J  GStff)  6U 


Though  toil  and  trouble  face  thee,  firm  resolve  hold  fast, 
And  do  the  deeds  that  pleasure  yield  at  last. 


670.       <oT^50T^^L-U    (olL£>UJ$£)UJ<3S    «£5  6SST  6$S)l  LD 
Q  6U  GSOT  /_  /T  63D  ff 


The  world  desires  not  men  of  every  power  possessed, 
Who  power  in  act  desire  not,  —  crown  of  all  the  rest. 


94  THE    KUEEAL. 


CHAPTER    LXVHL 

.  —  THE  METHOD  OP  ACTING. 

671.       C<3jLp<F&    (tpiy-61]    Jjjl  633$  Q  611  LU  ^     <SU  ^  ^7  633$  6ty 
<5  fT  Lp  &  &  ILj  L-    l—IEJ(3j<5  $  ^ 

Resolve  is  counsel's  end.     If  resolutions  halt 

In  weak  delays,  still  unfulfilled,  'tis  grievous  fault. 

672. 


Slumber  when  sleepy  work  's  in  hand  :  beware 

Thou  slumber  not  when  action  calls  for  sleepless  care  ! 


678.       <3£<5VJ$LD61//T    QlLJSVeVfTLa     6$  §537  IB  <o3T  (o/D    Q  IU  IT  6V  <Sti  (T  <55  <S  IT  f£> 


When  way  is  clear,  prompt  let  your  action  be  ; 
When  not,  watch  till  some  open  path  you  see. 


674.     <a£!<kyru6&)& 

fSl  ^oSTLLj  IEI  &  IT  p    f$  Q  UJ  &  &  LLi 

With  work  or  foe,  when  you  neglect  some  little  thing, 
If  you  reflect,  like  smouldering  fire,  'twill  ruin  bring. 


675.       QufrtTFjGfT&qjjGSl    «/T60££>    6$  ?JoVT  u9  L_  Q  (S3) 

Q  &  UJ  <5V 


Treasure  and  instrument  and  time  and  deed  and  place  of  act 
These  five,  till  every  doubt  remove,  think  o'er  with  care  exact. 


676.     (zp^-Q/  L&GnL-iL^jry  (Lpp$\uffm 
u  (b)  u  iu  ®f)j  LQ  u  IT  ir  p  gji  & 


Accomplishment,  the  hindrances,  large  profits  won 
By  effort  :  these  compare,  —  then  let  the  work  be  done  ! 


677.     Q  <F  iu  <s£l  (favr  Q&ILJ  a/  /rear 

UJ  <GU  <a£l  $53T    in}  61T  GIT  flSl  611    6£}J  GTT  6TT  IEI    Q  <35  fT  <5TT  <5ti  ((of) 

Who  would  succeed  must  thus  begin  :  first  let  him  ask 
The  thoughts  of  them  who  throughly  know  the  task. 


678. 

uurrBssrujrrGV 


By  one  thing  done  you  reach  a  second  work's  accomplishment  ; 
So  furious  elephant  to  snare  its  feljfl^brute  is  sent. 


BOOK    II. — MINISTERS    OF    STATE.  95 

679.     iBL—L—frfr^c^  fsevev  Q&ILJ\ 


Qsmsirsv 

Than  kindly  acts  to  friends  more  urgent  thing  to  do, 
Is  making  foes  to  cling  as  friends  attached  to  you. 

680. 


The  men  of  lesser  realm,  fearing  the  people's  inward  dread, 
Accepting  granted  terms,  to  mightier  ruler  bow  the  head. 


CHAPTER  LXIX. 

!.  —  THE  ENVOY. 


681.       «Jjy  6ft  U  6ff>  /__  63)  i£>    LUfT<30rnr>    (tt  ly-  U  £l  p  fB  £5  <o\)   (o6Uf5  SGUfTLD 
LJ683TLy<Sff)L_<53)/!£>   ^IT^J  <oft  IT  LJ  U  fT  <55T  U  6m  Lf 

Benevolence,  high  birth,  the  courtesy  kings  love  : — 
These  qualities  the  envoy  of  a  king  approve. 

Love,  knowledge,  power  of  chosen  words,  three  things, 
Should  he  possess  who  speaks  the  words  of  kings. 

/-»oq 

(0<S17(oU/r  (TTjGTr    Q<SU6577$    <a£l  (fatr  ILJ  <5&)  IT  U  U  fT  <SGT    LJ6mLj  ( /7L  ) 

Mighty  in  lore  amongst  the  learned  must  he  be, 

Midst  jav'lin- bearing  kings  who  speaks  the  words  of  victory. 

684.       «jy/r)?6^(77)    6U  fT  JT  fT  ILJ  fB  ^    65  <5V  oSl  Il9  L£>  ^Lp  68T $ ]  <SSf 


Sense,  goodly  grace,  and  knowledge  exquisite, 
Who  hath  these  three  for  envoy's  task  is  fit. 


685-       Q  j£  (T  <£  <f  Q  <?  IT  <5V  <o9  ^ 

f6  <35  <f  Q  &  rr  sv  <s9  tB<5Grt 

In  terms  concise,  avoiding  wrathful  speech,  who  utters  pleasant  word, 
An  envoy  he  who  gains  advantage  for  his  lord. 

686.       &rb.g)J&<35@ftr    633T  <&£  6F  fT  <SGT    Q  <f  6\)  <f  Q  <5F  fT  61)  6$  <3S   &  fT  <S\)  j5  <£  (T  JD 

fD3>&    <£  fS  <S1J  jS  IT  (6    gtfg)l  (<Xr 

An  envoy  meet  is  he,  well-learned,  of  fearless  eye, 
Who  speaks  right  home,  prepared  for  each  emergency. 


96  THE    KTJRRAL. 

687. 


ILJ  6V)  ff  U  U  IT  <5ST 

He  is  the  best  who  knows  what  's  due,  the  time  considered  well, 
The  place  selects,  then  ponders  long  ere  he  his  errand  tell. 


688.        8jff  UJ  <5y>  LD    ^SoffiTGtnLCt    gjj  693$  61]  <o2D  L_  <55)  LA    LlS)  LD  ^Lp  <Stt 

eu  nriu  <5&)  LC>  <5U  y$  iLj  6tn  IT  LJ  u  rr  <ovr  ussyrLj 

Integrity,  resources,  soul  determined,  truthfulness  ; 

Who  rightly  speaks  his  message  must  these  marks  possess. 


689.     <a£l®Lnrrd)p)Lc>  Q<suK^ir<5B  (&j  <ss)  JT  u  u 

D    <SU  IT  UJ  (o  <f  fT  JT  IT    <SlJ<5Vr<£    633T  6U  65T 


His  faltering  lips  must  utter  no  unworthy  thing, 

Who  stands,  with  steady  eye,  to  speak  the  mandates  of  his  king. 


690. 

(Qjjjjjjil  LJUJLJUjSrrfG  gurgn  («)) 

Death  to  the  faithful  one  his  embassy  may  bring  ; 
The  envoy  gains  assured  advantage  for  his  king. 


CHAPTER  LXX.     j.  no. 


Ln<ssr<5Gr<sG)ir<s:  (o&rrfiQjgrrQg&iso.  —  CONDUCT  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OF 

THE  KING. 


691. 


Who  warm  them  at  the  fire  draw  not  too  near,  nor  keep  too  much  aloof  ; 
Thus  let  them  act  who  dwell  beneath  of  warlike  kings  the  palace-roof. 

692. 


To  those  who  prize  not  state  that  kings  are  wont  to  prize, 
The  king  himself  abundant  wealth  supplies. 

693. 


Who  would  walk  warily,  let  him  of  greater  faults  beware  ; 
To  clear  suspicions  once  aroused  is  an  achievement  rare. 

694. 


All  whispered  words  and  interchange  of  smiles  repress, 
In  presence  of  the  men  who  kingly  power  possess. 


BOOK    II.  -  MINISTERS    OF    STATE.  97 


695.  (oTLjQufrqjjt&p)  (]>LQiTjrtriT  Q  p  rrt_  JT  IT  IT  LO  p 

(DLjQuiTQJj'&olT    Q9/_Z_<5B<5B/r/D 

Seek  not,  ask  not,  the  secret  of  the  king  to  hear  j 
But  if  he  lets  the  matter  forth,  give  ear  ! 

696.  (^(SluucStfcgti  <3srr<sviE)  &QJJJSI 

Q  61)  £>]  U  iSl  <5\)    (o6U<5mQu    (o6UL^U<f    Q  3=  IT  <5V  6V 

Knowing  the  signs,  waiting  for  fitting  time,  with  courteous  care, 
Things  not  displeasing,  needful  things,  declare. 

697.  G><suL-u<sGr  Q&rrevisQ  <s£l$svruSl<5V  Q  ]<su  <thj  ^5  IT  <ssr  gu  IEJ 
G>  &  L-.  iQl  6gu  ajrfj  Q  &  rr  '6\)  <sv  rr   <a£li—<5v 

Speak  pleasant  things,  but  never  utter  idle  word  ; 
Not  though  by  monarch's  ears  with  pleasure  heard. 

698.  (j£)$SirtU    iff  <59T  (Tp  68)  p  ILJ    Q  IT  <5GT  /£l  3,  L£  IT  fr    iSlGSTfD 

Q  <SU  IT  <Sifl(o  LU  IT    Q  L_  [T  (Lg  -35  LJ    uGlli) 

Say  not,  '  He  's  young,  my  kinsman,'  despising  thus  your  king  ; 
But  reverence  the  glory  kingly  state  doth  bring. 

699. 


1  We  've  gained  his  grace,  boots  nought  what  graceless  acts  we  do.' 
So  deem  not  sages  who  the  changeless  vision  view. 

700.       LJiStDpDUJ    QLL<S6r&3>QF)$£lU    U6S3TLJ6V6V    Q  <f  ILJ  IL]  Oil 


Who  think  '  We  're  ancient  friends,'  and  do  unseemly  things  ; 
To  these  familiarity  sure  ruin  brings. 


CHAPTER  LXXI.     jy@.  OT«. 

j.  —  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  INDICATIONS. 


701.  &>-.(y<o!nLb    (o  IE  IT  <5B  £D  <9S    (&j  fSl  LJ  U  J$ toll  fT    Q  <SST  (SJTj  (<o7j  fT  <5GT  ^J 

LDrr^npibfr  &f)6uuj&  &&&$  (<SE) 

Who  knows  the  sign,  and  reads  unuttered  thought,  the  gem  is  he 
Of  earth  round  traversed  by  the  changeless  sea. 

702.  gDUJLJ    LJL—fT^U    j3>&^>£>    «^57 6537 IT 6U IT <&S5T £B 


Undoubting,  who  the  minds  of  men  can  scan, 
As  deity  regard  that  gifted  man. 

13 


98  THE    KURRAL. 


703.     (&)fSu&jb  (&)  $  LJ  LJ  GMT  rr 

ILj  J£]  U  i9  6£]  fffT 


Who  by  the  sign  the  signs  interprets  plain, 
Give  any  member  up  his  aid  to  gain. 

704. 


Who  reads  what  's  shown  by  signs,  though  words  unspoken  be, 
In  form  may  seem  as  other  men,  in  function  nobler  far  is  he. 


705.     (^pSluiSlnD  (gjnSLJLjGftTjrrr  6urru9 

6gU  J>2/  LJ  iSl  CglJ    Q  61T  <55T  <o$T 


By  sign  who  knows  not  signs  to  comprehend,  what  gain, 
'Mid  all  his  members,  from  his  eyes  does  he  obtain  ? 

706. 


As  forms  around  in  crystal  mirrored  clear  we  find, 
The  face  will  show  what  's  throbbing  in  the  mind. 


707.  (Lp&<£J£l<S5T    (Lpgj]&(&)<5<nrDK.5    ^]  6531  'Q  '  l_  fl 

®j  <sii  u  iSl  eg]  IEJ  &rruSl<jgjjfB   <&  K  GST  (ip  IE  ^J^JLD 

Than  speaking  countenance  hath  aught  more  prescient  skill  ? 
E-ejoice  or  burn  with  rage,  'tis  the  first  herald  still  ! 

708.  (Lp&QlZIT&B    $lb&    SUGnLDlLf 

^j  6syr  IT  <sii  rr  IT  u 


To  see  the  face  is  quite  enough,  in  presence  brought, 
When  men  can  look  within  and  know  the  lurking  thought 

709.  LJ<S3)<5E<Sff>LD/iy/S    (o  -95  653T  <olT)  LD  IL]  lEJ    <356S&r  683)1  gg)^"<55(g  IE1 
<a7(S3)<S(S?DLD    ILf  65VT  IT  <SU  fT  IT  LJ    Q  U  fSl  <5$T 

The  eye  speaks  out  the  hate  or  friendly  soul  of  man  ; 

To  those  who  know  the  eye's  swift  varying  moods  to  scan. 

710.  JFJ]  em  6&£l  iu  Qi£<s3TLJ/r  jr&n~&(&jfE)(o&iT<5 

&<553T<S$3T(5V<oO    ££}<5V$Gti    iSl  {D 

The  men  of  keen  discerning  soul  no  other  test  apply 
(When  you  their  secret  ask)  than  man's  revealing  eye. 


BOOK    II.  -  MINISTERS    OF    STATE.  99 


CHAPTER  LXXII.     jy£.  OTS_. 
o.  —  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  COUNCIL  CHAMBER. 


711.  =gy  <ov>  su  ILJ  fS  fE  ^mrmii/E^j  Q  &  rr  <sv  6$i  &  Q  <F  ir  <sv  <sB  ssr 

Q  p  IT  65)  <3B  ILJ  $  fB  go    ^/TUJ<53)LD    (LKSUfT 

Men  pure  in  heart,  who  know  of  words  the  varied  force, 

Should  to  their  audience  known  adapt  their  well-arranged  discourse. 

712.  jj)6mi_Q^BfflfE^]    /565T(^63arr/f/5 

UJ6lJfr 


Good  men  to  whom  the  arts  of  eloquence  are  known, 

Should  seek  occasion  meet,  and  say  what  well  they  've  made  their  own. 

713. 

Unversed  in  councils,  who  essays  to  speak, 

Knows  not  the  way  of  suasive  words,  —  and  all  is  weak. 


714. 

Q6U<o$tun~iTQ.p6vr  <su  IT  <SVT  &  <5tn  <s 

Before  the  bright  ones  shine  as  doth  the  light  ! 
Before  the  dull  ones  be  as  purest  stucco  white  ! 


715.       tEGtfQfDGST  p  611  rbj£i6ff  (toff)    !B<5Sr(ofD    (Lp  gj  617  0  6S9T 

Si  <srr  <su  IT  &  Q 


Midst  all  good  things  the  best  is  modest  grace, 
That  speaks  not  first  before  the  elders'  face. 

716. 


As  in  the  way  one  tottering  falls,  is  slip  before 
The  men  whose  minds  are  filled  with  varied  lore. 


717. 

Q  &  rr  rbQ  to  fi  -s  <sv  6U6U<5Vrr  rr&p^£i  (<sr) 

The  learning  of  the  learned  sage  shines  bright 
To  those  whose  faultless  skill  can  value  it  aright. 

718. 

<si7  err  IT  <su  p  GST 

To  speak  where  understanding  hearers  you  obtain, 
Is  sprinkling  water  on  the  fields  of  growing  grain  ! 

719.     Ly  ffu  &)  S3)  6i7  (L\  /_  Q  u  tr  &  &  rr  /B  ,gj  (GTj  Q&frevevrbs 

fB  6V  6U  <5S)  6U  ILf    GS3T<5$T(gj  Q  <f  6V<F    Q  <F  fT  6V  gpj    6U  IT  IT  (&*>) 

In  councils  of  the  good,  who  speak  good  things  with  penetrating  power, 
In  councils  of  the  mean,  let  them  say  nought,  e'en  in  oblivious  hour. 


100  THE    KURRAL. 

720. 


IT  <sv  60  rr  fr  Qp  ib  Q&n~L-.q-  Q&rretrev 
Ambrosia  in  the  sewer  spilt,  is  word 
Spoken  in  presence  of  the  alien  herd. 


CHAPTER  LXXIII.      jy$.  cr/a.. 

.  —  NOT  TO  DREAD  THE  COUNCIL. 


721.     euGn&ujflflfG&j  <su  <sv  ev  <sv>  GIJ  ea  rr  (uQ  '&  rr  jr  rr  ir 


Men,  pure  in  heart,  who  know  of  words  the  varied  force, 

The  mighty  council's  moods  discern,  nor  fail  in  their  discourse. 


722. 

&p>(7)pir(Lprb  &pp  Q  <F  <sv  <?  Q  &  rr  GV  s$]  eurrir  (2.) 

Who  what  they  've  learned,  in  penetrating  words  have  learned  to  say, 
Before  the  learn'd,  among  the  learn'd  most  learn'd  are  they. 

723.  U65)«5BUJ<5Brs^<^y<F    &IT6Utr    Q  JT  Slfl  IU    JT  tf)  UJ 

rr6v>6iJiJU&<5  ^(gjj&n-  JESUIT  (/EL) 

Many  encountering  death  in  face  of  foe  will  hold  their  ground  ; 
Who  speak  undaunted  in  the  council  hall  are  rarely  found. 

724.  &bflIT)   s  Q  &  6ti  -3=  Q 


What  you  have  learned,  in  penetrating  words  speak  out  before 
The  learn'd  ;  but  learn  what  men  more  learn'd  can  teach  you  more. 


725. 

iEi  Q  &  rr 


By  rule,  to  dialectic  art  your  mind  apply, 

That  in  the  council  fearless  you  may  make  an  apt  reply. 


726. 


To  those  who  lack  the  hero's  eye  what  can  the  sword  avail  ? 
Or  science  what,  to  those  before  the  council  keen  who  quail  ? 

727.       UGftSUJ&jSgjIU    (oLJiy-<SS)<£    Q  (U  IT  6fT  6U  /T 


As  shining  sword  before  the  foe  which  '  sexless  being  '  bears, 
Is  science  learned  by  him  the  council's  face  who  fears. 


BOOK  II.  —  MINISTERS  OF  STATE.  101 

728. 


-strr 

Though  many  things  they  've  learned,  yet  useless  are  they  all, 
To  men  who  cannot  well  and  strongly  speak  in  council  hall. 

729. 


Who,  though  they  've  learned,  before  the  council  of  the  good  men  quake, 
Than  men  unlearn'd  a  lower  place  must  take. 


730.     s-errQjrssflegu  LnevevrrQirrr  QL_/TLJU/T 
&<srr68T<67j&a  sibp  G)  &  <s\)  &  'Q  &  IT  <sv  <sv  rr 

Who  what  they  Ve  learned,  in  penetrating  words  know  not  to  say, 
The  council  fearing,  though  they  live,  as  dead  are  they. 


THE    END    OF    THE    SECTION    ON    'MINISTERS    OF    STATE.' 


102  THE    KURBAL. 


§  3.   THE  ESSENTIALS  OF  A  STATE. 


CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

15  rr®.  —  THE  LAND. 


731.    ^Sfffrerrfr  6£l?<str  iLjasrrjfB  <&  &  &  rr  QJJ  IE  <£  rr  ip  <sSl 

Q<Fft>af@^£  Qfiren^j  fsrr®  («) 

Where  spreads  fertility  unfailing,  where  resides  a  band 

Of  virtuous  men,  and  those  of  ample  wealth,  call  that  a  '  land.' 


732.  Qu(/TjLn(o)Ljrr(7rj<5rrfrp  QUL-L-&& 
ujQjjfEiQ&L-i—tr  Gtixpp  <s£l  '(far  6U  fftf  fBrr® 

That  is  a  '  land  '  which  men  desire  for  wealth  's  abundant  share, 
Yielding  rich  increase,  where  calamities  are  rare. 

733.  Outran  p  QujirqjjiE)^  QLbevsiiqfjw 

our® 


When  burthens  press,  it  bears  ;  yet,  with  unfailing  hand, 
To  king  due  tribute  pays  :  that  is  the  '  land.' 

734.     2_j2/u^^  QiDrreufru  iB  emfl  ILJ  <gp 


That  is  a  '  land  '  whose  peaceful  annals  know, 

Nor  famine  fierce,  nor  wasting  plague,  nor  ravage  of  the  foe. 


735. 

IB  IT® 


From  factions  free,  and  desolating  civil  strife,  and  band 
Of  lurking  murderers  that  king  afflict,  that  is  the  '  land.' 

736. 


Chief  of  all  lands  is  that,  where  nought  disturbs  its  peace  ; 
Or,  if  invaders  come,  still  yields  its  rich  increase. 


737.      @  QP)  i-l  <5VT6\}]  LL>    eUfflLHBp    LD(fa)  ILJ  LL 

GIJ  (£  LI  GST  6$i  LD  6iJeV6\)ir§$jp/  fBrrL-tp-p}   r^gvuLf  («sr) 

Waters  from  rains  and  springs,  a  mountain  near,  and  waters  thence  ; 
These  make  a  land,  with  fortress'  sure  defence. 


BOOK    II.  -  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  1  Oo 

738. 


LD  68oR  Q  LU  <5ST  U 


<SLl 


A  country's  jewels  are  these  five  :  unfailing  health, 
Fertility,  and  joy,  a  sure  defence,  and  wealth. 


739.  /Brri—iovru  /5/rz_/r 

/5/TL_6\)6X)    IBfTL-    6U  6TT  fB  <5  (ffj'  fb  fT  @) 

That  is  a  land  that  yields  increase  unsought, 
That  is  no  land  whose  gifts  with  toil  are  bought. 

740.  c|^/ZZ/<5E(S3)LO    Q  617  ILJ  jsl  ILJ  <£    <35  QStt  6ggQ/LQ    U  ILJ  L&  6VT  (o  JD 
Co  611  fb  ^  6tn  LD    6&1  <5\)  ®)  fT  j&    f5fr(b) 

Though  blest  with  all  these  varied  gifts'  increase, 

A  land  gains  nought  that  is  not  with  its  king  at  peace. 


CHAPTER  LXXV.     jqQ.  <sr®. 
m.  —  THE  FORTIFICATION. 


741.     <^/o^2/  u  <su  rir  «  (^ 


A  fort  is  wealth  to  those  who  act  against  their  foes  ; 

Is  wealth  to  them  who,  fearing,  guard  themselves  from  woes. 

742.       LbSSffdiQfj    L06337Sp/ 


A  fort  is  that  which  owns  a  fount  of  waters  crystal  clear, 
An  open  space,  a  hill,  and  shade  of  beauteous  forest  near. 

743.       &-OJIT<51J&<5Vf6     j?l65Sr<SinLD    \UJ6mLD     u9  fB  IB  (T  <SST  Q 


Height,  breadth,  strength,  difficult  access  : 
Science  declares  a  fort  must  these  possess. 


744. 

lLjgUU<5V)<3B    ^,««    LDLfluU   ^  ff  6S8T 

A.  fort  must  need  but  slight  defence,  yet  ample  be, 
Defying  all  the  foeman's  energy. 

745.     Q<35rr<5rrp)<£flj£mLJ& 
ifilBsti&Q&isifljSrr  I§JT 

Impregnable,  containing  ample  stores  of  food, 

A.  fort,  for  those  within,  must  be  a  warlike  station  good 


104  THE    KURRAL. 

746.     <or  <sv  <sv  rr  LJ  Q  u  rr 


A.  fort,  witli  all  munitions  amply  stored, 

In  time  of  need  should  good  reserves  afford. 

747. 


A  fort  should  be  impregnable  to  foes  who  gird  it  round, 
Or  aim  there  darts  from  far,  or  mine  beneath  the  ground. 


748.       (Lp  p  (ffj>  p  fSl    Q^ptSl     IU  6U  <S5)  JT  ILj  LL> 

up^ypfBu  uppStiurriT  Q<su<s\)<su 

Howe'er  the  circling  foe  may  strive  access  to  win, 

A  fort  should  give  the  victory  to  those  who  guard  within. 


749. 

<S$'')f55T(Lp8>^a$    <oS*QpVLl^5l    LD/T633T/_     p  ff  <553T 

At  outset  of  the  strife  a,  fort  should  foes  dismay  ; 
And  greatness  gain  by  deeds  in  every  glorious  day. 

750.     srSssTLD/rLL^^  ^irQius 
uSl  <sv  <5V  rr  lir  & 


Howe'er  majestic  castled  walls  may  rise, 

To  craven  souls  no  fortress  strength  supplies. 


CHAPTER  LXXVI. 

QuiT(rrj<sfrQ<9:iu®J<sij<oS)&.  —  WAY  OF  ACCUMULATING  WEALTH. 

751.     Q 


Qurr(7rj<srr<5V<5V 

Nothing  exists,  save  wealth,  that  can 
Change  man  of  nought  to  worthy  man. 

752.  g)  <sv  <sv  rr  <sv>  jr  Qu_/a)6U/r(/5  QLD&f 

Q&6V<su<sv>jr  QttJ«)6U/r0@  Q&iLiisiJir  &PLJLJ  (a..) 

Those  who  have  nought  all  will  despise  ; 
All  raise  the  wealthy  to  the  skies. 

753.  Q  LJ  H'  QF)Q  <oTT  <StfT  6VU  LD    Q  U  fTUJ  UJ  IT     6$  <STT  <35  & 

L3(/Fj<5rrjrU&(&)    QLCxSSSTGtfsfllLl    Q  £5  UJ  f£  ^J  <f   Q  <SF  <5VT  J£U  (/H~) 

Wealth,  the  lamp  unfailing,  speeds  to  every  land, 
Dispersing  darkness  at  its  lord's  command. 


HOOK    IT.  -  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  105 

754. 


Their  wealth,  who  blameless  means  can  use  aright, 
Is  source  of  virtue  and  of  choice  delight. 

755.     ^/(fjjQerrrr®  uxssr  QUIT  Glib 


Wealth  gained  by  loss  of  love  and  grace, 
Let  man  cast  off  from  his  embrace. 

756. 


Wealth  that  falls  to  him  as  heir,  wealth  from  the  kingdom's  dues, 
The  spoils  of  slaughtered  foes  :  these  are  the  royal  revenues. 


757. 

Q  U  FT  0Q  6TT  <5$T  6glJ  (&TJ    Q<F<SV<51J&    Q  <f  <aSl  c9  tU  IT 

'Tis  love  that  kindliness  as  offspring  bears  ; 
And  wealth  as  bounteous  nurse  the  infant  rears. 


758. 

rDGtfGn&jsQaiiTssr  jpi  <sm  i—  IT  &  &      &  LLJ  <su  rr  <ssr 

As  one  to  view  the  strife  of  elephants  who  takes  his  stand, 
On  hill  he  's  climbed,  is  he  who  works  with  money  in  his  hand. 

759.       Q&LU&    Q/_//r0^5YTdF    Q<F£Uf5ir    Q  cF  (77,  <S  <£5  J2/  &  (^ 


Make  money  !  Foeman's  insolence  o'er  grown 
To  lop  away  no  keener  steel  is  known. 

760.     6p<5fflQurr(rjj<5rr  &rrLpuu  <sSl  LU  p  fS  LU  n~  IT  & 


Who  plenteous  store  of  glorious  wealth  have  gained, 
By  them  the  other  two  are  easily  obtained. 


CHAPTER  LXXYII.     jq@.  OTOT. 

^.  —  THE  EXCELLENCE  OF  AN  ARMY. 


761. 

Q  <8U  £»  <5B  60)  <5B  ILf    Q  6TT  60  60  fT  IB 

A  conquering  host,  complete  in  all  its  limbs,  that  fears  no  wound, 
Mid  treasures  of  the  king  is  chiefest  found. 

14 


106  THE    KUBEAL. 

762. 


Q  ^  rr  6\)  u  <sv) 

In  adverse  hour,  to  face  undaunted  might  of  conquering  foe, 
Is  bravery  that  only  veteran  host  can  show. 

763.  6£69<5<5&&fr    Q<5V<55Tt<oS)     rLpSllfl 

Q  ILI  <s9  u  u  <5tn  <as  /5/r<55  (ip  u9  IT  u  u  &  Q<5E©LD 

Though,  like  the  sea,  the  angry  mice  send  forth  their  battle  cry  ; 
What  then  ?     The  dragon  breathes  upon  them,  and  they  die  ! 

764.  JDJ  L£)  <sSl  <s$r  p  GtnjD  (ourr&rr  35irQ 

611  ifsl  617  fE  ^  <5U<S5T&    €53T^]Q<oU    U<SV)L- 

That  is  a  host,  by  no  defeats,  by  no  desertions  shamed, 
For  old  hereditary  courage  famed. 

765. 


That  is  a  '  host  '  that  joins  its  ranks,  and  mightily  withstands, 
Though  death  with  sudden  wrath  should  fall  upon  its  bands. 

766.       LDnOLDIT<o$r    LDfTOmL-    6U  ifl  <5~  Q  <F  <o\)  <Slj 


Valour  with  honour,  sure  advance  in  glory's  path,  with  confidence 
To  warlike  host  these  four  are  sure  defence. 


767.  fb  rr  IT  ^  rr  EI  Si  &  Q  &  ev  eu  ^j  ^ir'Bosr  <5%sd  <su  IB  p 
Q  u  IT  fr  p  rriEJ  (&j  IB  ^earstnLD  UJ/fliBgj) 

A  valiant  army  bears  the  onslaught,  onward  goes, 

Well  taught  with  marshalled  ranks  to  meet  their  coming  foes. 

768.  ^$fl—  .jbfD  05)45  U-l    LOrrjBfDSgl 

n)    UK® 


Though  not  in  war  offensive  or  defensive  skilled  ; 

An  army  gains  applause  when  well  equipped  and  drilled. 


769.      &£y<5V)LDtLJ<&T>    Q<5T&06V/r^    ^J  Ssfl  ILj  LD 

617J2/(oJDLfi//Ly    LJ$  <5V  6V  FT  U$  <5VT    Q  <5)J  6\)  ®}1  Lb    U  <53)  L_ 

Where  weakness,  clinging  fear  and  poverty 
Are  not,  the  host  will  gain  the  victory. 

770. 


Though  men  abound,  all  ready  for  the  war, 
No  army  is  where  no  fit  leaders  are. 


BOOK    II.  -  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  107 


CHAPTEE  LXXVIII. 

frQ  &(£)<!£(&).  —  MILITARY  SPIRIT. 


771  . 

(Lp<5QT<53Tl<5Gr£)]    <9B  <oVT 

Ye  foes  !  stand  not  before  my  lord  !  for  many  a  one 
Who  did  my  lord  withstand,  now  stands  in  stone  ! 

772. 


Who  aims  at  elephant,  though  dart  should  fail,  has  greater  praise 
Than  he  who  woodland  hare  with  winged  arrow  slays. 

773.     Q  u  &  rr  <sm  <5&>  LD 


Fierceness  in  hour  of  strife  heroic  greatness  shows  ; 
Its  edge  is  kindness  to  our  suffering  foes. 

774. 


At  elephant  he  hurls  the  dart  in  hand  ;  for  weapon  pressed, 
He  laughs  and  plucks  the  javelin  from  his  wounded  breast. 


775. 

<suL^^^I/sy)LDUi3  (£(tt)LLi—<GvrQ(y  <su  GST  &  sstn  <sm  <sn  IT  &  (&j 

To  hero  fearless  must  it  not  defeat  appear, 

If  he  but  wink  his  eye  when  foeman  hurls  his  spear. 

776. 


6U(Lg&Gn)<Sfr    65)617,55(^/5    ,<£  6ffT  (63)    STT         lLl 

The  heroes,  counting  up  their  days,  set  down  as  vain 
Each  day  when  they  no  glorious  wound  sustain. 


777.       &LG$l    LS<5V><f(o<5lJ63SrL-    Q  611  6VOT  l_  fT 


ff  /T  /T 


Who  seek  for  world-  wide  fame,  regardless  of  their  life, 
The  glorious  clasp  adorns,  sign  of  heroic  strife. 

778. 


Fearless  they  rush  where'er  '  the  tide  of  battle  rolls  '  ; 

The  king's  reproof  damps  not  the  ardour  of  their  eager  souls. 


108  THE    KURRAL. 

779.         < 


Q  p.  rr  gu  a  Q  p  ueuir 

Who  says  they  err,  and  visits  them  with  scorn, 
Who  die  and  faithful  guard  the  vow  they  've  sworn  ? 

780.     L/./r/5^/r 
qt-  JT  /G  giJ  Q> 

If  monarch's  eyes  o'erflow  with  tears  for  hero  slain, 
Who  would  not  beg  such  boon  of  glorious  death  to  gain  ? 


CHAPTEE  LXXIX. 

L-L-.  —  FRIENDSHIP. 


781.     Q  &  ILJ  p  &  ifi  ILJ  Lurreyerr  f5L—i3  <ssr  ^  Q  u  rr  <sv 
<sfi!  (fatr  &  &  rfl  ILJ 


What  so  hard  for  men  to  gain  as  friendship  true  ? 
What  so  sure  defence  'gainst  all  that  foe  can  do  ? 


782.  iQ  (szn  p  i§  n  riireurr 

iQlGvpLbtslu  i$<5$r<s$jr  (oU6n<5iurriT  fBi—Lj  (a.) 

Friendship  with  men  fulfilled  of  good 

Waxes  like  the  crescent  moon  ; 
Friendship  with  men  of  foolish  mood, 

Like  the  full  orb,  waneth  soon. 

783.  /B  <sQ  'Q  QTJ>  £u  ^yr<s5TUJLD  QuireyiLci 

ILJ  (T  <S1T  fT 


Learned  scroll  the  more  you  ponder, 
Sweeter  grows  the  mental  food  ; 

So  the  heart  by  use  grows  fonder, 
Bound  in  friendship  with  the  good. 

784. 


Not  for  laughter  only  friendship  all  the  pleasant  day, 

But  for  strokes  of  sharp  reproving,  when  from  right  you  stray. 

785. 


Not  association  constant,  not  affection's  token  bind  ; 
'Tis  the  unison  of  feeling  friends  unites  of  kindred  mind. 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  109 

786. 


Not  the  face's  smile  of  welcome  shows  the  friend  sincere, 
But  the  heart's  rejoicing  gladness  when  the  friend  is  near. 

787. 

<55T  & 


Friendship  from  ruin  saves,  in  way  of  virtue  keeps  ; 
In  troublous  time,  it  weeps  with  him  who  weeps. 


788.       £_(£)#  65)  <5E    U$  Lp  K£<5li<SSr    63)  <35  Qu  /T  <5V 


As  hand  of  him  whose  vesture  slips  away, 
Friendship  at  once  the  coming  grief  will  stay. 

789. 


And  where  is  friendship's  royal  seat  ?     In  stable  mind, 
Where  friend  in  every  time  of  need  support  may  find. 


790.     {j£)$svriu  tfl  en  QITLQ& 

L]  $S9T  Il9  GSM  L£    Lj<5v(o)<5V<oisT6ffy    15  /_  LJ 

Mean  is  the  friendship  that  men  blazon  forth, 
'  He  's  thus  to  me,'  and  '  such  to  him  my  worth.' 


CHAPTEE  LXXX. 

o.  —  INVESTIGATION  IN  FORMING  FRIENDSHIPS. 


791. 

6^/^LffoSso  fGi—urrerr  u  eu  ir  &  (&j 

To  make  an  untried  man  your  friend  is  ruin  sure  ; 
For  friendship  formed  unbroken  must  endure. 

792.  ^iLJfBjsmufcgj]  Q  &  rr  err  err  n~  j5  rr  <5vr 

P  tT  <55T  <F  /T  (6    ^JUJJTfB   ^(ffjLQ  (a_) 

Alliance  with  the  man  you  have  not  proved  and  proved  again, 
In  length  of  days  will  give  you  mortal  pain. 

793.  (GjGmttUfEJ  (3jq.6V)LDlLIIE]  (&j  <D  fD  (Lp  IEJ 


Temper,  descent,  defects,  associations  free 

From  blame  :  know  these,  then  let  the  man  be  friend  to  thee. 


110  THE    KUEKAL. 

794. 


E/  Q  <35fr  err  s\)  QeiKoGyrQl  tbL-Lf  (<f>) 

Who,  born  of  noble  race,  from  guilt  would  shrink  with  shame, 
Pay  any  price,  so  you  as  friend  that  man  may  claim. 

795.  <jy  LP  &  Q <F rr 6ti  <s9  ujeveti  ^li^-^^i 

Make  them  your  chosen  friends  whose  words  repentance  move, 
With  power  prescription's  path  to  show,  while  evil  they  reprove. 

796.  Q&L-ty-Ggu  Qp6ssiQi^_ir  qjjjryjS  Sl&oiraojjGinir 

ujerruuQjSrrir  Qstrev 


Ruin  itself  one  blessing  lends  : 

Tis  staff  that  measures  out  one's  friends. 

797.     &msliu 


'Tis  gain  to  any  man,  the  sages  say, 
Friendship  of  fools  to  put  away. 


798. 

Q  &  nr  <srr  err  fb  &  <siJ6V<oVff)&  <<58S)  jb  no  jpj  u  [u  rr  FT 

Think  not  the  thoughts  that  dwarf  the  soul  ;  nor  take 
For  friends  the  men  who  friends  in  time  of  grief  forsake. 

799.       Q#(£)/5y<55/rSs06B    <5S)  <35  6$  Gl  <5U  rr  IT 


Of  friends  deserting  us  on  ruin's  brink, 
'Tis  torture  e'en  in  life's  last  hour  to  think. 


800. 

G)  <5U  fT  U  1$  <oti  II  IT    fBL-Lf 

Cling  to  the  friendship  of  the  spotless  ones  ;  whate'er  you  pay, 
Eenounce  alliance  with  the  men  of  evil  way. 


CHAPTER  LXXXI. 

.  —  FAMILIARITY. 


801.       U  65)  Lp  <5V)  LD    QtUeSTLJuGleil    £S  ILJ  IT  Q^  <osfl  <Stf  ILJ  fT  ^J  IEJ 
£)Lp6V)LD<5$HU<95    Si  Lp  f5  $  I—  fT    fb  L-  Lf 

Familiarity  is  friendship's  silent  pact, 
That  puts  restraint  on  no  familiar  act. 


BOOK  II.  —  THE  ESSENTIALS  OP  A  STATE.       Ill 

802. 


r 

Familiar  freedom  friendship's  very  frame  supplies  ; 
To  be  its  savour  sweet  is  duty  of  the  wise. 


803.  ULpQuJ    f6l^QuSU<50T 

Q&fLD  &>  <5S)  <95  <off)  LD    G)  <f  LU  -5  fT  fEU    6E  68)  L£>  ILJ  fT  65 

vxl^>    (  * 

When  to  familiar  acts  men  kind  response  refuse, 
What  fruit  from  ancient  friendship's  use  ? 

804.  <a£l  <o&  LTJ  <&  60)  &  ILJ  IT  SSf 


When  friends  unbidden  do  familiar  acts  with  loving  heart, 
iends  take  the  kindly  deed  in  friendly  part. 

5.      Qu<SV)<S5<5miL>    QlUfT<5$r(oQy    Q  U  (TIj  (El  &)  Lp  <5S)  LD    QlLl  <5ST  J2/  6337  /f  <35 


ot  folly  merely,  but  familiar  carelessness, 
steem  it,  when  your  friends  cause  you  distress. 


806.  <oT(oD§Sl)6Ec5B    633$  S5T  (77?  IT    ^JpSUH'/T    Q  ^  fT 
Q  <5  IT  <5V'&Si)  &  3>    €$?$  <55T  Qy  IT  Q  ^  fT  L-  IT  Lf 

Who  stand  within  the  bounds  quit  not,  though  loss  impends, 
Association  with  the  old  familiar  friends. 

807.  L^SUfB^    Q  <F  UJ  llSl  tjy)J    LD<5GTU(7r?    IT  <5GT  1$  <5VT 

HJ6UIT 


True  friends,  well  versed  in  loving  ways, 

Cease  not  to  love,  when  friend  their  loVe  betrays. 


808.         a<35Girrii<35<35IEJ         <5E6Yr/r<5E         <55  (Lg<56V)3>  CJJDLD    <5U  <5\)  (50  IT  IT  <35 
/5/_L_/T/f    Q  <f  ItSl  <5VT 


In  strength  of  friendship  rare  of  friend's  disgrace  who  will  not  hear, 
The  day  his  friend  offends  will  day  of  grace  to  him  appear. 


809.     Q&i—nr^sy  <su  iff  611  is  ^ 


Friendship  of  old  and  faithful  friends, 
Who  ne'er  forsake,  the  world  commends. 

810.       eSl  63)  LD  UJ  IT  IT    <oQ  63)  LD  UJ  LJ    Lj(b)u 
<^  G^ 

/-/<53)^PULJ/T/f<5BZ_    U<5S3Tl5lp)   p  §5\)  U  l9  ifi  UJ  IT   p  IT  fT  (tD) 

Ill-wishers  even  wish  them  well,  who  guard, 
For  ancient  friends,  their  wonted  kind  regard. 


794.    <? 

/- 

W1     112  THE    KURRAL. 


CHAPTER  LXXXII. 

j$i5L-L\.  —  EVIL  FRIENDSHIP. 

811.       LJ(77j(c9)<a7/r/f    (o  U  fT  to9  GgM  LQ    LJ  <S53T  1$  <SV  IT  IT    Q  <S>  SSST  <5ff)  LD 


Though  evil  men  should  all-absorbing  friendship  show, 
THeir  love  had  better  die  away  than  grow. 


812.       £_/$63TZ_    Z_/^Q(S5)^2_    Q  LD  IT  LJ  1$  6V  IT  IT    Q  &  633T  65)  LO 

QupSggti  L&LpuiSlcg)]  QLDGVT 

What  though  you  gain  or  lose  friendship  of  men  of  alien  heart, 
Who  when  you  thrive  are  friends,  and  when  you  fail  depart  ? 


813. 

Qu^su^j  Q  -3B  rr  err  en  tr  qjj  IEJ  &6rr<su(7Fj  (ofBir 

These  are  alike  :  the  friends  who  ponder  friendship's  gain, 
Those  who  accept  whate'er  you  give,  and  all  the  plundering  train. 


814.      ^LbJT&tB   j£tTfbpJplG(8)Sa    <5E<S\)a)/TLO/r    61J  <53T  (68) 

no  ssfl  en  LD 


A  steed  untrained  will  leave  you  in  the  tug  of  war  ; 
Than  friends  like  that  to  dwell  alone  is  better  far. 


815.. 

Q  <SGT  lil  <5  IT  <S5)  L£ 


'Tis  better  not  to  gain  than  gain  the  friendship  profitless 

Of  men  of  little  minds,  whose  succour  fails  when  dangers  press. 

816.       (oU<SV)<5   QulEjQ&L-f          fEL-l$    63T  n$  ®   <S&  1—  UJ  fT 


Better  ten  million  times  incur  the  wise  man's  hate, 
Than  form  with  foolish  men  a  friendship  intimate. 


817.      f6€G)<356lJ<5S)&UJ 

u  65)  as  <su  JT  rr  p  u^^G)^^  (o&my-  iLjguLo  (<sr) 

From  foes  ten  million  fold  a  greater  good  you  gain, 
Than  friendship  yields  that  's  formed  with  laughers  vain. 

818. 

Those  men  who  make  a  grievous  toil  of  what  they  do 
On  your  behalf,  their  friendship  silently  eschew. 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  113 

819.      S  38T  6&  gVjj    l£l  GST  (GS)  gtf 


E'en  in  a  drearn  the  intercourse  is  bitterness 

With  men  whose  deeds  are  other  than  their  words  profess. 

820.      6r$SBr<£&]IEJ    (&)&)I(3)P    (oGVrrLQUSST 

LD3s3r«Q<56/^g)  Ln<5sr/$rb  uifluumr  Qprri—frLj 

Iii  anywise  maintain  not  intercourse  with  those, 

Who  in  the  house  are  friends,  in  hall  are  slandering  foes. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIII.     jy£.  jy/s.. 
&-L-irrBL-L\.  —  UNREAL  FRIENDSHIP. 


821. 

(o/SJTfT   fQjT/B-SGlJIT    /51—LJ 

Anvil  where  thou  shalt  smitten  be,  when  men  occasion  find, 
Is  friendship's  form  without  consenting  mind. 

822. 


Friendship  of  those  who  seem  our  kin,  but  are  not  really  kind, 
Will  change  from  hour  to  hour  like  woman's  mind. 

823. 


To  heartfelt  goodness  men  ignoble  hardly  may  attain, 
Although  abundant  stores  of  goodly  lore  they  gain. 

824. 


'Tis  fitting  you  should  dread  dissemblers'  guile, 
Whose  hearts  are  bitter  while  their  faces  smile. 

825.       LCKSSrl    GSTGnLCHLJfr 


When  minds  are  not  in  unison,  'tis  never  just, 
In  any  words  men  speak  to  put  your  trust. 

826. 


Though  many  goodly  words  they  speak  in  friendly  tone, 
The  words  of  foes  will  speedily  be  known. 

15 


114  THE  KURRAL. 

827.       Q&n~<5V6lJ  639765 &    Q LD IT <55T (C3) IT <35 /_    Q <£E  /T QT 6TT/D <5B 

UJ/TS3T 


To  pliant  speech  from  hostile  lips  give  thou  no  ear 
Tis  pliant  bow  that  shows  the  deadly  peril  near  ! 


828.  Qj5[r(Lg<<35<5F>&  iLj<srr((orfjLb  u<5^L^QiUfr(bliEir^  Q  LD  rr  <5$r  (53) 

JT(L£>^    &  <553T  ®SQT  QJj    LD^fT^^J 

In  hands  that  worship  weapon  often  hidden  lies  ; 
Such  are  the  tears  that  fall  from  foeman's  eyes. 

829.  L$  &  &  Q  •?  LLJ  ,£]  ^LCiQLosrr^  (SiifTGinrr 

fBS&Q'FUJgjJ    fB  L_  iSl  Jg27  L_    &  fT  U  LJ  <o\)<5V/D    UfTp^i 

'Tis  just,  when  men  make  much  of  you,  and  then  despise, 
To  make  them  smile,  and  slay  in  friendship's  guise. 

830.  US^fEfBL-UfTlEI    <35fT<5VLD    <SU  (77j  IE1  <3B  fT  <5Sf 
Z_<55/5L_ 


When  time  shall  come  that  foes  as  friends  appear, 

Then  thou,  to  hide  a  hostile  heart,  a  smiling  face  may'st  wear. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. 

.  —  FOLLY. 


831.       Q>U65)j5<S5)LD    Q  UJ  <5VT  U  Q  j5  ft  6VT    ($  ILJ  fT  Q  ^  <5vf) 

Q  U  IT  &    <oSl 


What  one  thing  merits  folly's  special  name  ? 
Letting  gain  go,  loss  for  one's  own  to  claim  ! 

832.  (o  U  <SV)  ^  <5V)  LD  ILJ    Q<Syr6V(oU/rLD    (oU<S5)a5  <53)LD 
&  IT  ^5  <5VT  65)  LB    <53)<5U_/a)<oV    ^69T(£5Ll    Q&ILJ6V 

'Mid  follies  chief  est  folly  is  to  fix  your  love 

On  deeds  which  to  your  station  unbefitting  prove. 

833.  /5/T(G3<3)6S>LO    IB  fT  £_  fT  (53)  LD    fB  fT  iff  <S3T  65)  LD    LU  IT  Q  £>  fT  <S6T  £11  LD 
(0LJ(<583)  <320  LD    Q  '/_/  <53)  <5    Q^/TL^SD 

x^sbamed  of  nothing,  searching  nothing  out,  of  loveless  heart, 
Nought  cherishing,  'tis  thus  the  fool  will  play  his  part. 

834.  <j£JBl    U-l  6337  /f  fS  ^J  LD    LQ/D  /f  <5E  (^  &D  IT  3b  ^f]  IE    <5  fT  <5$T  L-  IEJ<35fTLJ 


The  sacred  law  he  reads  and  learns,  to  other  men  expounds,  — 
Himself  obeys  not  :  where  can  greater  fool  be  found  ? 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF   A    STATE.  115 

835. 


Q  LU  (Lg  (oft  LD  ILf  /5 

The  fool  will  merit  hell  in  one  brief  life  on  earth, 

In  which  he  entering  sinks  through  sevenfold  round  of  birth. 

836.     QumuuQ  QLDirssrQ(y  Lj'fosr  L£  <ssvi  IE) 

b  Q  &  IT  &fl  <ssi 


When  fool  some  task  attempts  with  uninstructed  pains, 
It  fails  ;  nor  that  alone,  himself  he  binds  with  chains. 

837.    (oj^toV/r  jrrrjr<s 


len  fools  are  blessed  with  fortune's  bounteous  store, 
leir  foes  feed  full,  their  friends  are  prey  to  hunger  sore. 


838.  GtDLDUJ    Q<5V/T0<Sl/e2fT  <35  <S$  <5  <5  fD  Qy  p    Q  U  65)  <5  ;5  <53 
<53)<sG)uj/r<S3r    J2/  (55)  I—  <55)  LD    Q  U  /$  <S$T 

When  folly's  hand  grasps  wealth's  increase,  'twill  be 
As  when  a  madman  raves  in  drunken  glee. 

839.  Q  u  ifi  jsl  •svf)  ^j  Q  u  6V)  ^>  uj  tr  fr  (o  a  <ssyr  <syy  LD 


Friendship  of  fools  is  very  pleasant  thing  ; 
Parting  with  them  will  leave  behind  no  sting. 

840.     dBLp/r.jy.sEcSE/rex)  LJerr^iiyerr  <S5)<sti<5<5(D(nj'rb  4F  /rear  (?(#? 

U 


Like  him  who  seeks  his  couch  with  unwashed  feet, 
Is  fool  whose  foot  intrudes  where  wise  men  meet. 


CHAPTER  LXXXV. 

.  —  IGNORANCE. 


841.      c=gy  fSl  6$  ®tf  <o&>  LD    llSl  <5ST  <5V)  LD  ILj    Glfi  <5ST  (SO  LD 


Want  of  knowledge,  'mid  all  wants  the  sorest  want  we  deem  ; 
Want  of  other  things  the  world  will  not  as  want  esteem. 


842.       *°y  $  <aQ  <5V  IT 

t9  fS  $1  uj  IT  gu  LD}<SV'(>JS$  Q  u  jpj  <su  rr  GOT  roeuLD  (2.) 

The  gift  of  foolish  man,  with  willing  heart  bestowed,  is  nought 
But  blessing  by  receiver's  penance  bought. 


116  THE    KU.RRAL. 


843.  vgf  pSl  <aSl  6V  IT  fr 

Q  &  jpj  <sij  rr  IT  &  (&j  (thj 

With  keener  anguish  foolish  men  their  own  hearts  wring, 
Than  aught  that  even  malice  of  their  foes  can  bring. 

844.  Q  61I68&T  65)  Lb    Q  LU  <53T  LJ  U  (b)  6U   jil  ILJ  IT  Q  £b  ®ffl 


What  is  stupidity  ?     The  arrogance  that  cries, 
*  Behold,  we  claim  the  glory  of  the  wise.' 

845.     <z  6\)  <5V  n~£5  (oLb/bQ&n~65yr  Q 


If  men  what  they  have  never  learned  assume  to  know, 
Upon  their  real  learning's  power  a  doubt  'twill  throw. 

846.      c=Sy/D/0    LD<5V)fDj5^(o<oVir    Lj  6V  <5D  fSl  <S^    ;5  ££>  <5U  uSl  rr) 


Fools  are  they  who  their  nakedness  conceal, 
And  yet  their  faults  unveiled  reveal. 

847.      =gy  QJjLbGS)  fD    (o<FfT(7f)    LD  J$  <s£l  6V  fT  <5ST    Q  &  UJ  IL]  i£) 


From  out  his  soul  who  lets  the  mystic  teachings  die, 
Entails  upon  himself  abiding  misery. 


848.     <sra7a/@j  Q&uj&6V(r<55T  (nj><5$fQp(y  <s$r  eu  a/  uS) 


Advised,  he  heeds  not  ;  of  himself  knows  nothing  wise  ; 
This  man's  whole  life  is  all  one  plague  until  he  dies. 

849. 


That  man  is  blind  to  eyes  that  will  not  see  who  knowledge  shows  ; 
The  blind  man  still  in  his  blind  fashion  knows. 

850.     2-eVcS^^/r  (7^6syr 

6V)<S1J<35<£BLJ 


Who  what  the  world  affirms  as  false  proclaim, 
O'er  all  the  earth  receive  a  demon's  name. 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OP    A    STATE. 


IT 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 

§}<£6i>.  —  HOSTILITY. 


£)    U  6m  iSl  <5ST  65)  LD 


Q  ' 


Ib  H  UJ 


851. 


Hostility  disunion's  plague  will  bring, 
That  evil  quality,  to  every  living  thing. 


852. 


Though  men  disunion  plan,  and  do  thee  much  despite, 
'Tis  best  no  enmity  to  plan,  nor  evil  deeds  requite. 

853.       H£)<35Q<oV<5Vr6S)J    QubGJlSllQfBrrUJ 


If  enmity,  that  grievous  plague,  you  a. 
Endless  undyiog  praises  shall  be  won. 


shun, 


854. 


Joy  of  joys  abundant  grows, 

When  malice  dies,  that  woe  of  woes. 


855. 


ILJ  SlJ  IT 


If  men  from  enmity  can  keep  their  spirits  free, 
Who  over  them  shall  gain  the  victory  ? 


Q  <5  <5ST  U  6U  <5GT 


856. 


The  life  of  those  who  cherished  enmity  hold  dear, 
To  grievous  fault  and  utter  death  is  near. 

857. 


The  very  truth  that  greatness  gives  their  eyes  can  never  see, 
Who  only  know  to  work  men  woe,  fulfilled  of  enmity. 

858. 


'Tis  gain  to  turn  the  soul  from  enmity  ; 
Euin  reigns  where  this  hath  mastery. 


118  THE    KUERAL. 

859.    jj£)  &  <sv  &  nr  asm)  ( 


<su  J  IEI  &  rr 


Men  think  not  hostile  thought  in  fortune's  favouring  hour, 
They  cherish  enmity  when  in  misfortune's  power. 


860.       j§)<5E<SX)/r(G<J)    L^<o3T(^3)^     Q  <SLl  6\)  <S\)  fT 

f5<£6\)fr(63)    f5<5Vr<aSTU.J    QL£<5VT€gU((thj    Q  <3F  (TJj  &  (^ 

From  enmity  do  all  afflictive  evils  flow  ; 

But  friendliness  doth  wealth  of  kindly  good  bestow. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVIL 

U<56)<£LCtrTL-&l.  -  THE    MlGHT   OF    HATRED. 


861.       <S1J  6$  UJ  IT  IT  &  (8j    LbirQfDnDp    (o  <5V  FT  L£>  LJ  <35 


With  stronger  than  thyself,  turn  from  the  strife  away  ; 
With  weaker  shun  not,  rather  court  the  fray. 


862.     ^oy  sisr  i$  6V  ^<ssrfD  ^jjj  (fasvruSi  GV  GVT  (nf  <ssr  jry  <su  eu  /r 
QesrsyruifiLLf  ^LD^Ssv/reor  ^ILJLJ 

No  kinsman's  love,  no  strength  of  friends  has  he  ; 
How  can  he  bear  his  foeinan's  enmity  ? 

863. 


A  craven  thing  !  knows  nought,  accords  with  none,  gives  nought  away  ; 
To  wrath  of  any  foe  he  falls  an  easy  prey. 


864. 

LU  fT  IT  <5> 


His  wrath  still  blazes,  every  secret  told  ;  each  day 
This  man  's  in  every  place  to  every  foe  an  easy  prey. 

865.     GULQ  &  n~  &  &  tr  <oifl~  <sti  rnu  u  u  6W  Q  &  LU  ILJ  n~  ®sr 


No  way  of  right  he  scans,  no  precepts  bind,  no  crimes  affright, 
No  grace  of  good  he  owns  ;  such  man  's  his  foes'  delight. 


866.      <£/T(033)<6F    ^60r^^5fr<o^r  <SL^lQu(7^lEJ    &  IT  LD  po  ^  IT  <SVT 
(oU6S3TU 


Blind  in  his  rage,  his  lustful  passions  rage  and  swell  ; 
If  such  a  man  mislikes  you,  like  it  well. 


BOOK    II. — THE    ESSENTIALS    OP    A    STATE.  IISK. 

867.  G/<2>/7~©  3j  £)]  151    G/(9>/7"6YT<o\)(0  61/6337  (w     L&68T  QD 

(oil  \ol  3Js£l  (TF)  fB  ^jtf    LD/T(tS<Rn  <3>    G/  <f  UJ  SU  fT  <5ST   /_/S5)<55  f®^) 

Unseemly  are  his  deeds,  yet,  proffering  aid,  the  man  draws  nigh  ; 
His  hate — 'tis  cheap  at  any  price — be  sure  to  buy  ! 

868.  (#)6SOT<Sff$!a>(S3)UJ<5B    (<9j/T)/DLC>    U  6V  loll  fT  uQl  <S3T    LD  IT  p  Qy  IT  <5B 

No  gracious  gifts  he  owns,  faults  many  cloud  his  fame ; 
His  foes  rejoice,  for  none  with  him  will  kindred  claim. 

869. 


fr    6U  (      SF  LD    LJ6S)&<51J1TLJ 

The  joy  of  victory  is  never  far  removed  from  those 
Who  've  luck  to  meet  with  ignorant  and  timid  foes. 

870.     &<sv6vrr<5vr  Qsu<^(&^^  QguQufTq?)  Q  'err  (thj  <^  rr  <ssr 


The  task  of  angry  war  with  men  unlearned  in  virtue's  lore 
Who  will  not  meet,  glory  shall  meet  him  never  more. 


CHAPTEE    LXXXVIII. 

u.  —  KNOWING  THE  QUALITY  OF  HATE. 

871. 


<SVr<SV)<9s(]>UJlLJLD    Q  6U  6337  /_  p  U  IT  <D 

For  Hate,  that  ill-conditioned  thing,  not  e'en  in  jest, 
Let  any  evil  longing  rule  your  breast. 

872.     eSlevQto 

Q  &  fT  <5VQ  <5V 


Although  you  hate  incur  of  those  whose  ploughs  are  bows, 
Make  not  the  men  whose  ploughs  are  words  your  foes  ! 

873. 

u  <sv  ev  rr  rr 

Than  men  of  mind  diseased,  a  wretch  more  utterly  forlorn, 
Is  he  who  stands  alone,  object  of  many  foeman's  scorn. 

874. 


U  6V)  <£E  /5  I—  U  fT  <35          (5E/r6w/_/7"(I£>(<9)L      LJ683TI  j 


The  world  secure  on  his  dexterity  depends, 
Whose  worthy  rule  can  change  his  foes  to  friends. 


120  THE    KURRAL. 


875.     ^  <5yr  £v  flstnrr  o9  <5$r  (nj>  p  u  63>  a  uSl  ir  sazrr 

Q  &  fT  6fT  &  <SU  JD  /$ 


Without  ally,  who  fights  with  twofold  enemy  o'ermatched, 
Must  render  one  of  these  a  friend  attached. 

876. 


Whether  you  trust  or  not,  in  time  of  sore  distress, 
Questions  of  difference  or  agreement  cease  to  press. 

877.       (ofBfTSU/b 


(<Sr) 

To  those  who  know  them  not,  complain  not  of  your  woes  ; 
Nor  to  your  foeman's  eyes  infirmities  disclose. 

878. 


Know  thou  the  way,  then  do  thy  part,  thyself  defend  ; 
Thus  shall  the  pride  of  those  that  hate  thee  have  an  end. 

879. 

Destroy  the  thorn,  while  tender  point  can  work  thee  no  offence  ; 
Matured  by  time,  'twill  pierce  the  hand  that  plucks  it  thence. 

880.       S-llSlfTLJU    <51J  <SrrjJ  6\)  GV  IT    LD63T/D 

Q  <F  Il9  IT  U  U  <SU  IT    Q-FLDLD6V    &63)^&  65  6\)  fT   ^  fT  /T  (tD) 

But  breathe  upon  them,  and  they  surely  die, 
Who  fail  to  tame  the  pride  of  angry  enemy. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. 

.  —  ENMITY  WITHIN. 


881.       /$/jp6tff(75   1-8  <SST  '(S3)  p  tiSl  <S5T  (!o5) 


Water  and  shade,  if  they  unwholesome  prove,  will  bring  you  pain  ; 
And  qualities  of  friends,  who  treacherous  act,  will  be  your  bane. 

882.     su  IT  <sn  QUIT  ev  u<sn&6ij<ss)rr  uj(6Tj<F<b&  <su<5j)&& 

(o&Gfrdtufrisv  uem&eijrr  Q^m—ri~L]  C2-) 

Dread  not  the  foes  that  as  drawn  swords  appear  ; 
Friendship  of  foes,  who  seem  like  kinsmen,  fear  ! 


BOOK   II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF   A    STATE.  121 

883. 


Of  hidden  hate  beware,  and  guard  thy  life  ; 

In  troublous  time  'twill  deeper  wound  than  potter's  knife. 

884.       LLXoSTU^rr^SS)    <S^  L—  U  63)  <5 


If  secret  enmities  arise  that  minds  pervert, 

Then  even  kin  unkind  will  work  thee  grievous  hurt. 

885.     Q-rD6sr(Lp<oS)(Diurr  6gijL-U<sin&  Q>  ;£  n~  <s$r  fSl 


Amid  one's  relatives  if  hidden  hate  arise, 
'Twill  hurt  inflict  in  deadly  wise. 


886.       6p<53T(7)p€V)LD  Q  ID  (T  68T  pSl  (LI  IT  fT    &L—UIS)-    Q  6VT  ( 

Q  u  rr  GST  (y  <5&>  LA  Gliuir^rp    &oifi^j 

If  discord  finds  a  place  midst  those  who  dwelt  at  one  before, 
'Tis  ever  hard  to  keep  destruction  from  the  door. 

887. 


As  casket  with  its  cover,  though  in  one  they  live  alway, 
No  union  to  the  house  where  hate  concealed  hath  sway. 

888. 


As  gold  with  which  the  file  contends  is  worn  away, 

So  strength  of  house  declines  where  hate  concealed  hath  sway. 


889.  <oTI—U<35    6U68T6GT    &)  £U  <5V)  LD  j£  (o  ^    LU  fT  u9  6V}J 

QpL-.u<5s>&  ILJ  &rr  err  j&  rr  IEI  (o&G) 

Though  slight  as  shred  of  '  sesame  '  seed  it  be, 
Destruction  lurks  in  hidden  enmity. 

890.  2-*_LD/_//rZ£L    <5V  fT  <£  611  IT     6U  fT  L£  <35  6®  <5 


Domestic  life  with  those  who  don't  agree, 

Is  dwelling  in  a  shed  with  snake  for  company. 


16 


122  THE    KUEEAL. 


CHAPTER  XC. 

.  —  NOT  OFFENDING  THE  GREAT. 


891. 

(o  U  IT  p  gJJ  <5U  IT  IT    G)  U  (T  (D  p  6£J    Q  6TT  <5V  61)  IT  f5 

The  chiefest  care  of  those  who  guard  themselves  from  ill, 

Is  not  to  slight  the  powers  of  those  who  work  their  mighty  will. 


892.       Q  U  ifl  UJ  IT  G5>  JT  U 

Quifliufrinrjb  G>uinr  <oQGlL^<5y>u  pqrjiz  (a.) 

If  men  will  lead  their  lives  reckless  of  great  men's  will, 

Such  life,  through  great  men's  powers,  will  bring  perpetual  ill. 


893. 

<5UL-<5V(o6U6$3Tlp_    (GSjfbgL'    LJ<Sl//r<5E    <5&$  (Lg  <35  (3j 

Who  ruin  covet,  let  them  shut  their  ears,  and  do  despite 
To  those  who,  where  they  list,  to  ruin  have  the  might. 

894. 

(ol)  fT  p  £»  611  (T  IT  <35    &  IT 

When  powerless  men  'gainst  men  of  power  will  evil  deeds  essay, 
'Tis  beck'ning  with  the  hand  for  Death  to  seize  them  for  its  prey. 

895.       lUfT653l(S>Gi<5F&ST   fSl  UJ  fT  6S3T  (Bl    Qfi  6TT  IT  fT  &  (T  IT    Q  <oll  fB  ^J  U  l9  <5Sf 


Who  dare  the  fiery  wrath  of  monarchs  dread, 
Where'er  they  flee,  are  numbered  with  the  dead. 


896. 

QuifllLJITITU    l3<5S)L<£    Q-5irL>(3    6U  fT  IT 


Though  in  the  conflagration  caught,  he  may  escape  from  thence  ; 
He  'scapes  not  who  in  life  to  great  ones  gives  offence. 

897.       <SU<5S)<35LDfT650rL-    <SU  fT  Lp  &  <o$)  <5E  ILJ  /i    <SU  IT  GST  Q  U  fT  (TJj  (<Gffj    QLD<5VT(<55)f5 

T  ((57") 


Though  every  royal  gift,  and  stores  of  wealth  your  life  should  crown, 
What  are  they,  ft  the  worthy  men  of  mighty  virtue  frown  ? 


898.      (&j<oGT{D<5VT<®S)IT    (3J65T  {D    Lbj$LJl9p>    (^  l$-(oUJ  IT® 
/$  637^0  63T  (63)  /T    LAITUJ61JIT   £l<oV<5&] 

If  they,  whose  virtues  like  a  mountain  rise,  are  light  esteemed  ; 
They  die  from  earth  who,  with  their  households,  ever-during  seemed. 


BOOK    II.  -  THE    ESSENTIALS    OP   A    STATE.  123 

899t 


When  blazes  forth  the  wrath  of  men  of  lofty  fame, 
Kings  even  fall  from  high  estate  and  perish  in  the  flame. 

900.      @  *D  fb  ^  <5&  LL>  IB  ^    &  FT  IT  L]  €5)  /_  UJ    IT  IT  u9  6VM 
@  JT  fT  IT    Q&GSr 


Though  all-  surpassing  wealth  of  aid  they  boast, 

If  men  in  glorious  virtue  great  are  wrath,  they  're  lost. 


CHAPTEE  XCI.     «jy,a 

o. — BEING  LED  BY  WOMEN. 


901. 

6£)$58r@Sl5tnLp<aLin~l7'    Q (oil 633T L_ fT U    Q U FT (TJj (6TFJ 

Who  give  their  soul  to  love  of  wife  acquire  not  nobler  gain ; 
Who  give  their  soul  to  strenuous  deeds  such  meaner  joys  disdain. 

902. 


Who  gives  himself  to  love  of  wife,  careless  of  noble  name, 
His  wealth  will  clothe  him  with  o'erwhelming  shame. 

903.       ^)<5\)6\)/T6rT<5BL_    I fTLftfB^    <sQ  UJ  <S\)  l3  &5T  65)  LO    Q IU  (CT>  (5Tj  IT  <5ST  ^1 


Who  to  his  wife  submits,  his  strange,  unmanly  mood 
Will  daily  bring  him  shame  among  the  good. 


904. 

<s&!  §5ar  LU  rr  eabr  6&>  LD 

No  glory  crowns  e'en  manly  actions  wrought 

By  him  who  dreads  his  wife,  nor  gives  the  other  world  a  thought. 


Who  quakes  before  his  wife  will  ever  tremble  too, 
Good  deeds  to  men  of  good  deserts  to  do. 

906.       {j£)<5ff)LC>LU  mflioVr    611  fT iQ  &&}] LCi    LJrriD-6\)(ol 
6YT  <3tQ  LD  LU  IT  fT  (0  £&  fT    <ofT(t5~fj&T    LJ<SUfT 

Though,  like  the  demi-gods,  in  bliss  they  dwell  secure  from  harm, 
Those  have  no  dignity  who  fear  the  housewife's  slender  arm. 


124  THE    KTTftRAL, 

907.     Qu®syrQ<oSsr<sii<5ti  Q<FiL)Q^rr(L£>(&j  LD/TSB&TSOTLDU^  (tgr)  ega?/  sin  /_  u 


Tlie  dignity  of  modest  womanhood  excels 

His  manliness,  obedient  to  a  woman's  law  who  dwells. 

908.  /5/_L/_/r/f  (<5j<sv)rr)Q.piy_ujrnr  K&r^pQy 

QuL-L-fTI5J    Q&fTQglWj    U  <SlJ  IT  («=£/) 

Who  to  the  will  of  her  with  beauteous  brow  their  lives  conform, 
Aid  not  their  friends  in  need,  nor  acts  of  charity  perform. 

909.  ^oypxaSlBovriLi  LDfTGsrrD  Qurrqrj^LD 

Ln  Qu<5m(o6ftrr6i]6V  Q  <?  tu  eii  rr  IT  & 


No  virtuous  deed,  no  seemly  wealth,  no  pleasure,  rests 
With  them  who  live  obedient  to  their  wives'  behests. 

910.       <oT<5SSr(odFITf5^    QfB(SJ)<3F<5    $  L-  tt»  S3)  L-  ILI  fT  IT  &    Q&(5T>  (6J  (T  GST  £}l  LD 

<o®  LO 


Where  pleasures  of  the  mind,  that  dwell  in  realms  of  thought,  abound, 
Folly,  that  springs  from  overweening  woman's  love,  is  never  found. 


CHAPTEE  XCII. 

<su<5®jr<sQ&trL&<B5<3iflir.  —  WANTON  WOMEN. 


911.       JDjGSTlSlGST    <oGl  &D  Lf)  UJ  IT  IT    Q  U  fT  (^  QT  sSl  <5&)  Lf)  tLj 


Those  that  choice  armlets  wear,  who  seek  not  thee  with  love, 
But  seek  thy  wealth,  their  pleasant  words  will  ruin  prove. 


912.     u  ILJ  <5$r  ^ar  a  Q  u  u  <syyr  LJ  <syy  JT  &  (&j  LD 

(6  LU  <stt  ^IT  &  Q  fs^fTGrrnr  oQz_<o\; 

Who  weigh  the  gain,  and  utter  virtuous  words  with  vicious  heart, 
Weighing  such  women's  worth,  from  their  society  depart. 

913. 


As  one  in  darkened  room,  some  stranger  corpse  inarms, 
Is  he  who  seeks  delight  in  mercenary  women's  charms. 

914.     QLJfTQjjiLQurTQfjerrrTiT  LJ  <ssi  <SST  <sv  fs 


Their  worthless  charms,  whose  only  weal  is  wealth  of  gain, 

From  touch  of  these  the  wise,  who  seek  the  wealth  of  grace,  abstain. 


BOOK    T.I.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATR.  125 

915.       Q  U  IT  gj]  IE  6V  <£  <£  FT  IT    /_/  &ST  SOT  <S\)  fb 


From  contact  with  their  worthless  charms,  whose  charms  to  all  are  free, 
The  men  with  sense  of  good  and  lofty  wisdom  blest  will  flee. 


916.  35(5(b6VLD    UfTifiuUfTfT    (2  tb  fT  LU  fT  //'    ^  6&  <£E  Q  <3F  (£  #  Si  U 

i_l  <5vr  <5$r  <sv  LQ  urrifluufriT  (o^rr&r  {<9f 

From  touch  of  those  who  worthless  charms,  with  wanton  arts,  display, 
The  men  who  would  their  own  true  good  maintain  will  turn  away. 

917.  $®DpjQ/5(5Tj&    L$6V<5V61J(r    Q^fTlLKSUIT 

i5fyoQ/5@^/D    d>LJGKfflu    L!  <558T  IT  U  <SU  IT    Q^fYGiT  (fi 

Who  cherish  alien  thoughts  while  folding  in  their  feigned  embrace, 
These  none  approach  save  those  devoid  of  virtue's  grace. 

918.  H|^/L/  u*$dQ&F  ^<5V(5D/r/r<5E  &<5mtEiQ&<s$ru 

LD/TUJ    Ld<3B€iflir  QplU<S(^ 

As  demoness  who%lures  to  ruin,  woman's  treacherous  love 
To  men  devoid  of  wisdom's  searching  power  will  prove. 

919.  6ii  <sin  ir  oSl  6V  rr  /j^/rs^s^Lpuj/r/f  OLDEST  (?(/)?  sir 
/_/  <s&  JT  u9  a)  /r  u  L£tflujiT&  <srrrr(L£  Lzerrgv 

The  wanton's  tender  arm,  with  gleaming  jewels  decked, 
Is  hell,  where  sink  degraded  souls  of  men  abject. 

920.  @(77jL0637~LJ    Q  LJ  6WT  Z£_  (77j  /£/    <£5  GTT  (<ofJj  IEI    -35SU^/f5 
(£l(/F)$&&U    LJ/_Z_/7"/T  (oljStTL..  IT  Lf 

Women  of  double  minds,  strong  drink,  and  dice  :  to  these  giv'n  o'er 
Are  those  on  whom  the  light  of  Fortune  shines  no  more. 


CHAPTER  XCIII.     jy£.  *OL. 

.  —  NOT  DRINKING  PALM-  WINE. 


921.     a_L_<su  ui—ir^j  Q  jr  rr  &fl  u9  Lp  u  u  0  IT  @>  ^5  n  <5$r  jpi  iw 


<SU  fT  IT 


Who  love  the  palm's  intoxicating  juice,  each  day, 
No  rev'rence  they  command,  their  glory  fades  away. 


922.       2_S32fTS33r/D6B    <55  erT&YT    ILj  6Syfl  ^]  633T  4B    <5F  IT  ®SrQ>  (ft?  IT  IT 


Drink  not  inebriating  draught.     Let  him  count  well  the  cost 
Who  drinks.     By  drinking,  all  good  men's  esteem  is  lost. 


126  THE    KUEEAL. 

923.     FF  <ssr  (tr?  €svr  Q-p-s^Q^u^  L&  <SGT  <®f)  p  IT 


The  drunkard's  joy  is  sorrow  to  his  mother's  eyes  ; 
What  must  it  be  in  presence  of  the  truly  wise  ? 

924. 


Shame,  goodly  maid,  will  turn  her  back  for  aye  on  them 
Who  sin  the  drunkard's  grievous  sin,  that  all  condemn. 

925.     (otn&iunfl  LurrstnLD 


With  gift  of  goods  who  self-oblivion  buys, 
Is  ignorant  of  all  that  man  should  prize. 


926.      ^  @j  £)  (S3)  /f    Q  &  j35  ^  IT  if)  <5WT   G*617/D(5X)(5\)    Q  IT  tfhj  «olj 
&  6SST  U  IT  IT    <3BGfT  61T<5m   U  <SU  IT 


Sleepers  are  as  the  dead,  no  otherwise  they  seem  ; 

Who  drink  intoxicating  draughts,  they  poison  quaff,  we  deem. 


927.  2_<syrQ<srr  //•/£>/$  iLi&r^s^fr  IB  <SB  u  u  Q  <su  Q  IT  (5Tj  (&jj 
&GtrQ<5inribflSl&  sessr&mu  U<SUIT 

Who  turn  aside  to  drink,  and  droop  their  heavy  eye, 
Shall  be  their  townsmen's  jest,  when  they  the  fault  espy. 

928.  &<ofij5^nSlQuJ 
Q  j£  IT  <SJtl  <£  ^  <£& 

No  more  in  secret  drink,  and  then  deny  thy  bidden  fraud  ; 
What  in  thy  mind  lies  hid  shall  soon  be  known  abroad. 

929. 


Like  him  who,  lamp  in  hand,  would  seek  one  sunk  beneath  the  wave, 
Is  he  who  strives  to  sober  drunken  man  with  reasonings  grave. 

930.     ^GfT(&^<5ssr(^3)LJ  QurrLpjslrb  <sB<oi<tl<5<5rr'(>/ovr 
<^/err<srr/r(o9rQ<5E/7'  ^GsyrL-^Gvr   Q&rrfrtsq 

When  one,  in  sober  interval,  a  drunken  man  espies, 
Does  he  not  think,  '  Such  is  my  folly  in  my  revelries  '  ? 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF   A    STATE. 


127 


CHAPTEE  XCIV. 

i.  —  GAMING. 


sr  i£  <s$r  <sSl  (tg  IEJ  S>  uj 


931. 


Seek  not  the  gamester's  play  ;  though  you  should  win, 
Your  gain  is  as  the  baited  hook  the  fish  takes  in. 

932. 


(Q-) 


Is  there  for  gamblers,  too,  that  gaining  one  a  hundred  lose,  some  way 
That  they  may  good  obtain,  and  see  a  prosperous  day  ? 

933.     2_0srr/r«j  (o  LD  fr  <su  fr  ^j  3^.rSlp 

(olurrfTfjGrrmuLD  Quir^iuu  i^pQu^  uQtJo 

If  prince  unceasing  speak  of  nought  but  play, 
Treasure  and  revenue  will  pass  from  him  away. 

934. 


Gaming  brings  many  woes,  and  ruins  fair  renown  ; 
Nothing  to  want  brings  men  so  surely  down. 

935. 


The  dice,  and  gaming-hall,  and  gamester's  art,  they  eager  sought, 
Thirsting  for  gain  —  the  men  in  other  days  who  came  to  nought. 

936.     jsy&t—frrrrr  ff<506\) 


z_/r/ 


Gambling  's  Misfortune's  other  name  :  o'er  whom  she  casts  her  veil, 
They  suffer  grievous  want,  and  sorrows  sore  bewail. 

937.       ULpSiUJ    Q  <?  (5V  6U  Q.p  LD    USmLflEI    Q  <5B  Q  &>  (^  El 


Ancestral  wealth  and  noble  fame  to  ruin  haste, 

If  men  in  gambler's  halls  their  precious  moments  waste. 

938. 


Gambling  wastes  wealth,  to  falsehood  bends  the  soul  ;  it  drives  away 
All  grace,  and  leaves  the  man  to  utter  misery  a  prey. 


128  THE    KUEEAL. 


939.       £_63)i_Q<Fff06U    (2pQ(632p6$    &  <5V  <aQ  Q  ILJ  <5ST 
LDfTUJIEl    Q  <5B  fT  fflfl  <5ST 


Clothes,  wealth,  food,  praise,  and  learning,  all  depart 
From  him  on  gambler's  gain  who  sets  his  heart. 


940. 

Qpyt^QjSir^pirQ-nii  &n~j£{b  jp/uSlir  (tD) 

Howe'er  he  lose,  the  gambler's  heart  is  ever  in  the  play  ; 
E'en  so  the  soul,  despite  its  griefs,  would  live  on  earth  alway. 


CHAPTER  XCV. 

j.  —  MEDICINE. 


941.  L$  63  6gu  IEI  cgjetn/nuSlGvii  Q  rs  rriLi  Q  <?  uj  ILJ 
<siJ<oifl(Lp^6vn-  Q  en  em  <ssdfl  uj  (vp<5$r£u 

The  learned  books  count  three,  with  wind  as  first  ;  of  these, 
As  any  one  prevail,  or  fail,  'twill  cause  disease. 

942.  LD(7Jjf6Q^®Sr    (o  '6U  6S3T  /_  /T  <517  fT  LD    LU  fT  <&  <55)  <£E  <3S 
<5B  0  IB  J£l  ILJ    GS/bnr)^    QuiT^nSl    ILJ  <5®£l  <5tiT 

No  need  of  medicine  to  heal  your  body's  pain, 

If,  what  you  ate  before  digested  well,  you  eat  again. 

943. 


Who  has  a  body  gained  may  long  the  gift  retain, 
If,  food  digested  well,  in  measure  due  he  eat  again. 


944. 


Knowing  the  food  digested  well,  when  hunger  prompteth  thee, 
With  constant  care,  the  viands  choose  that  well  agree. 

945. 


With  self-denial  take  the  well-selected  meal  ; 
So  shall  thy  frame  no  sudden  sickness  feel. 


946.       £§)        <oti  $  /B    gjl  685T  LJ  tT  6ST  &    Gtfffl  6$r  U  Lb(o  U  II 


On  modest  temperance  as  pleasures  pure, 
So  pain  attends  the  greedy  epicure. 


BOOK    II.  —  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.  129 

947.     ££iLJ<srr  eiiGsrpSlp  Q^ifliLirr<svT  Q  u  rfi  &  GMT  swfl 


Who  largely  feeds,  nor  measure  of  the  fire  within  maintains, 
That  thoughtless  man  shall  feel  unmeasured  pains. 


948.  (£  /6  mil  f5  fT  Ip. 

<SU  mil  (B  FT  l$-    6UmL]LJU<F    Q&ILJGV 

Disease,  its  cause,  what  may  abate  the  ill  : 
Let  leech  examine  these,  then  use  his  skill. 

949.  &-fb((rp  esrerrs^LD  iSl  <sssf)  (U  sir  <sq  IEJ 


The  habitudes  of  patient  and  disease,  the  crises  of  the  ill  : 
These  must  the  learned  leech  think  over  well,  then  use  his  skill. 


950.       £-/brD6U65r    rSfTUU!T<5Sf   LD  0  /5  ^]  <5V)  Lp  <3F    Q  <f  <5V  6U  IT  Q  ]  <53T  <5$T 

rDUurr^tb  3h.fbG>p)  LD^/BJS/  (tD) 

For  patient,  leech,  and  remedies,  and  him  who  waits  by  patient's  side, 
The  art  of  medicine  must  fourfold  code  of  laws  provide. 


THE    END    OF    THE    SECTION    ON    '  THE    ESSENTIALS    OF    A    STATE.' 


17 


128 

l3t  THE    KUBRAL. 


§  4.   APPENDIX. 


CHAPTER  XCVI. 

<a$  if  6c>  LQ.  —  NOBILITY. 


951.  jD/Dt9/D/5^/r/r  &e$sr<55yr<sv<5\)  tilevBsti  u9  uj  <sv  u  IT  &  & 

Q<3FUU(Lp    lbIT6$3)l     Q  LO  fT  (77)  IEJ  (3j 

Save  in  the  scions  of  a  noble  house,  you  never  find 
Instinctive  sense  of  right  and  virtuous  shame  combined. 

952.  6p(L£><95<95rLpLD    6U  fT  ILJ  <o&  LD  ILf    /5  IT  6g33/  iS  LD    Qp<55T  J£l 

L£I  Q£  <&  &  rr  fr  (^L^.ui3lfDK  jStrfr 

In  these  three  things  the  men  of  noble  birth  fail  not  : 

In  virtuous  deed,  and  truthful  word,  and  chastened  thought. 

953.  IB  <SV)  <55  iff  <5V)  &    uSltoVrOffT   e9  &  L£  IT  65)  LD 


The  smile,  the  gift,  the  pleasant  word,  unfailing  courtesy  : 
These  are  the  signs,  they  say,  of  true  nobility. 

954.    <^y(£)&Quj  Q&iny.  Qu  fSlGsiiiEi 

617    Q  <EF  UJ  ^     <o9  €V  IT  («JP 


Millions  on  millions  piled  would  never  win 
The  men  of  noble  race  to  soul-  degrading  sin. 


955.  61J(L£>!E1(&)61J    e&U6rr6t?l£/5^<35    6B  638T  6<ft)l  Lb 
LJ  L£  IEJ  (3j  l$-    U68Vn9p>    (D$S\)U  iSl  if)  p 

Though  stores  for  charity  should  fail  within,  the  ancient  race 
Will  never  lose  its  old  ancestral  grace. 

956.  &<s\)LbLJ<bpSl<3:  <y/r^OL9<5\)  Q  &  uj  uj  tr  IT  LA  rr  &pp 

(WjioVLDLJrb^   WrTLpcglQLD'SVr   UfTir  (c95i-) 

Whose  minds  are  set  to  live  as  fits  their  sire's  unspotted  fame, 
Stooping  to  low  deceit,  commit  no  deeds  that  gender  shame. 

957.  (9jlp-LJt9plBjt6ffir    <5E  6VST  <aSl  6TT  IEJ  (3j  IEJ    (Gj/D/DLD   <a£l  &  Lb  iSi!  GST 


The  faults  of  men  of  noble  race  are  seen  by  every  eye, 

As  spots  on  her  bright  orb  that  walks  sublime  the  evening  sky. 


BOOK    II.  -  APPENDIX.  131 

958.       f56V^{$<SOr&  (633)  ifl  <SVT  <SV)  LD    Q  <5  IT  <58T  $  <5ST  6lJ  %o$T  & 


If  lack  of  love  appear  in  those  who  bear  some  goodly  name, 
'Twill  make  men  doubt  the  ancestry  they  claim. 


959.  f£l<svp$p>  Qi—(Ef£<5&LA  &  rr  <5ti  &  rr  L—@)  IEJ 

(3j<5V  j3s  JEl  P    l9  p  fB  j5  fT  IT  617  IT  ILJ  <f    G)<5F/T£U 

Of  soil  the  plants  that  spring  thereout  will  show  the  worth  ; 
The  words  they  speak  declare  the  men  of  noble  birth. 

960.  fBCVLsQeiJ  <svyr  ly.  (6$)  <S$G)I  <s&  L—  <Q®LQ  Q  '<su  <sssi  Q  IEJ 

Q>  <SU  6SST  (b)  <36    UJ/r/T«Lb    LJ 


Who  seek  for  good  the  grace  of  virtuous  shame  must  know  ; 
Who  seek  for  noble  name  to  all  must  reverence  show. 


CHAPTER  XCVIL     j/£.  ACT. 
HONOUR. 


961.       ^)<S3T//r)7    lL/<5S)LD(U/TdF    ^roUl3<SST   6U  IT  llSl  6£U  IHJ 


Though  linked  to  splendours  man  no  otherwise  may  gain, 
Reject  each  act  that  may  thine  honour's  clearness  stain. 


962.     £F/f?c32/        $irev<sv  Q  <?  iLuu  ir.Q  IT 

u<siiir 


Who  seek  with  glory  to  combine  honour's  untarnished  fame, 
Do  no  inglorious  deeds,  though  men  accord  them  glory's  name. 

963. 


Bow  down  thy  soul,  with  increase  blest,  in  happy  hour  ; 
Lift  up  thy  heart,  when  stript  of  all  by  fortune's  power. 

964. 


Like  hairs  from  off  the  head  that  fall  to  earth, 
When  fall'n  from  high  estate  are  men  of  noble  birth. 

965.     (8)6377$ 


If  meanness,  slight  as  '  abrus  '  grain,  by  men  be  wrought, 
Though  like  a  hill  their  high  estate,  they  sink  to  nought. 


132  THE    KUERAL. 

966.       L-j  &  ifl  <5$T  (ftf  ID    LJ  j5  (o  ^  (683)  L-    Q  ILI  ILJ  fT  ^  fT    Q(SV  (S3TLD/D 


It  yields  no  praise,  nor  to  the  land  of  gods  throws  wide  the  gate 
Why  follow  men  who  scorn,  and  at  their  bidding  wait  ? 


967.     6p/_*_/r/f/^6sr  Q&<5vrQ(y(7rj<8iJ®sr  <sii  rr  ip  <£  <sB 


Better  'twere  said,  '  He  's  perished  !  '  than  to  gain 
The  means  to  live,  following  in  foeman's  train. 

968. 


When  high  estate  has  lost  its  pride  of  honour  meet, 
Is  life,  that  nurses  this  poor  flesh,  as  nectar  sweet  ? 


969. 

(7Jju9iri§LJUir   LDfTtoSTLb    <SU  if)  <5$T 

Like  the  wild  ox  that,  of  its  tuft  bereft,  will  pine  away, 

Are  those  who,  of  their  honour  shorn,  will  quit  the  light  of  day. 

970.       j§)  <5lf)  <5U  ifl  6GT   <5U  fT  L£  fT  <35  LDfTSOT    Q.p  S3)  A_  (U  IT 

Q  JT  FT  (Slfl  Q  j5  fT  (Lg  QjSjS&J    (lp6X)(^  («)) 

Who,  when  dishonour  comes,  refuse  to  live,  their  honoured  memory 
Will  live  in  worship  and  applause  of  all  the  world  for  aye  ! 


CHAPTER  XCVIII. 

Qu(tij<s®Ln.  —  GREATNESS. 

971. 


light  of  life  is  mental  energy  ;  disgrace  is  his 
says,  '  I  '11  lead  a  happy  life  devoid  of  this.' 


The 
Who 

972.  L§)rDLjQurr<35(<3j    QlAffOGOlT    6lj  (L$l  IT  <£  (&)  <6Jj 

@  p  u  Q  u  rr  <sii  <su  IT  Q  &  vu  Q  j&  rr  L£)  <s 

All  men  that  live  are  one  in  circumstance  of  birth  ; 
Diversities  of  works  give  each  his  special  worth. 

973.  (oLD6@fJfG,gJ    (oLOeVeVSV/T/f    Q  IA6V6V6V  FT 


The  nKen  of  \Q^  iin6j  whose  souls  are  mean,  are  never  great  ; 
The  meriv  Of  lowly  birth,  when  high  of  soul,  are  not  of  low  estate. 


BOOK    II.  —  APPENDIX.  133 

974.       GJG&LG    LD&6lfl(ojr    (a  LI  fT  <5V  LJ 

®  (<SP) 


Like  single-hearted  women,  greatness  too, 
Exists  while  to  itself  itself  is  true. 


975.  Qu(77)<Sff)LO    lLj6y)l_LU6U    JT  IT  {D  J£l  <Sti  IT   JTIT  p  fSl 
<53T(7^<Sy>L^    ILf  <S5)  L-.  ILJ    Q&UJ6V 

The  man  endowed  with  greatness  true, 
Bare  deeds  in  perfect  wise  will  do. 

976.  QfSujfr  (7F><s5vr/r<F&)iLi  <oif)<sv(fa)LJ 
Q  u  tfl  m  n  S3)  ff  u  Qu®&fl&Q&rrGfr 


'  As  votaries  of  the  truly  great  we  will  ourselves  enroll,' 
Is  thought  that  enters  not  the  mind  of  men  of  little  soul. 


977.      j^jpuQu    Lflfllbp 

&  p  u  LJ  /5  <&  rr  <5v 

Whene'er  distinction  lights  on  some  unworthy  head, 
Then  deeds  of  haughty  insolence  are  bred. 


978.       UGwfllLJLDfr    Q  LD6VT  J£l  Lb 
UJ  <SKff)  IL  Lb  fT  IB    <5<55T<&5 


Greatness  humbly  bends,  but  littleness  always 
Spreads  out  its  plumes,  and  loads  itself  with  praise. 

979.       QuTF<5inLb    QupL&5    L£/  <oifl~  <5S)  LD 


Greatness  is  absence  of  conceit  ;   meanness,  we  deem, 
Biding  on  car  of  vanity  supreme. 

980.    =°y/h/ 

ah- 


Greatness  will  hide  a  neighbour's  shame  ; 
Meanness  his  faults  to  all  the  world  proclaim. 


CHAPTER  XCIX. 

.  -  PfiRFECTNESS. 


981.      &i—Q<5Gr<ssru  /5ffO<su0?n<si/  Q  ID  <sv  ev  msi 

<5L_<ojr^/5J5/    &  fT  63T  (Of  6S8T  <5ff>  LD    (o  LD  p  Q  <9B  fT  GfT    U  &U  (T  <5B 

All  goodly  things  are  duties  to  the  men,  they  say, 
Who  set  themselves  to  walk  in  virtue's  perfect  way. 


134  THE    KURRAL. 

982. 


The  good  of  inward  excellence  they  claim, 

The  perfect  men  ;  all  other  good  is  only  good  in  name. 

983.  ^gysarz-y/s/r  Q  (683)  u  LJ  IT  ay  <5B03brG>(633)/_z_/i  <5>j  rriij  <5&>  LQ(O  ILJ  rr 
<5ff)  L-  IB  &ji  &  rr  <s\)  L^tovrnSluj  ^irom 

Love,  modesty,  beneficence,  benignant  grace, 

With  truth,  are  pillars  five  of  perfect  virtue's  resting-place. 

984.  Q&rr<sv<5Vfr  recv^-s^  (o/B/rssrsznLo  i9  no  ir 
Q  &  tr  <s\)  eu  rr  iE<5V&>j5gi)  <f  n  <a)  z_y 


The  type  of  '  penitence  '  is  virtuous  good  that  nothing  slays  ; 
To  speak  no  ill  of  other  men  is  perfect  virtue's  praise. 

985.  ^/Dj2/<a//r  rrrrtbpxoti  ussof)^  ^^^/rssrC^/r 
Lbn-pqy&^ir  LDrrpgiiLn  UG&L-  (@) 

Submission  is  the  might  of  men  of«  mighty  acts  ;  the  sage 
With  that  same  weapon  stills  his  foeman's  rage. 

986.  <Frr6Vi£lrb(<9j<35  <5ELLz_3srr  lurrQ^Gsfi^b 

(o  j5  nr  <5V  6$   ^73oD(/J<5\)<5\)/r/f    <566MT6232//E/    Q  65  fT  6TT  <5\)  C6^") 

What  is  perfection's  test  ?     The  equal  mind, 
To  bear  repulse  from  even  meaner  men  resigned. 

987.  <o^r  (65Q  &  (LJ   srriT&t&   LS<syfiaj(o<siJ  Q  &  ILJUJ  rr  &  &  nr 


What  fruit  doth  your  perfection  yield  you,  say  ! 
Unless  to  men  who  work  you  ill  you  good  repay  ? 


988. 

J5l<5$vr<siniJb  (LI  em  L_  rr  &  u  Qu/iSlesr 

To  soul  with  perfect  virtue's  strength  endued, 
Brings  no  disgrace  the  lack  of  every  earthly  good. 

989.  osiLLf}  Q  u  ID  ift  eg]  /6  jsrrLaQuuJirrnT 

SfTlfl    QlUGSTLJuGl     (SlJrriT  (<9S>) 

Call  them  of  perfect  virtue's  sea  the  shore, 

Who,  though  the  fates  should  fail,  fail  not  for  evermore. 

990.  &  fr&srpsuir  <5Ffr<5sr(Y]p6Krr<5V)Lc>  (^6377$  <s$fl  QJJ  £l  <sv  fB 
prnEi&rrgj  u^GsrQ^)  QufnsvrD  («)) 

The  mighty  earth  its  burthen  to  sustain  must  cease, 
If  perfect  virtue  of  the  perfect  men  decrease. 


BOOK    IT. — APPENDIX.  135 


CHAPTER  C.     jy£.  soo. 
.  —  COURTESY. 


991.     <oT6yyru^^^fr  QovdjjS  Q  ev  &fl  Q  ^  <svr  u 

Q  ID  <5GT  <§&}]  Lb     <5lJ  L£  <35  (<5 


Who  easy  access  give  to  every  man,  they  say, 
Of  kindly  courtesy  will  learn  with  ease  the  way. 

992.       «jy  637  Lj  65)  /_  <5tT>  LD    LU  fT  <S$T  p    (3J  Lty.  LJ  l9l  (D  <5  -3,    6$  <SU  <5&l  IT  6V3T  G)  LD 
U  6337  L!  6V)  L_  63}  LD    Q  ILJ  <5ST  JgZ/  LD    617  Lp  -35  (&j 

Benevolence  and  high-born  dignity, 
These  two  are  beaten  paths  of  courtesy. 


993.  2_j2//-jQ/_y/rr<2^<ssr  L£&<35Q<5rrn~u  u  < 

QGU^J  ^^<9sa  u®ftrQun-<5^  Q  <5\)  tr  u  u  ^  rr  QiAiruLj  (r 

Men  are  not  one  because  their  members  seem  alike  to  outward  view  ; 
Similitude  of  kindred  quality  makes  likeness  true. 

994.  fGiuQ{5&)(b)  rsevrnft  Lf£)(Gj5 

u  ILJ  Ggu  09)  /_  ILI  rr  n~  UGmruurr  jrn~L_(b)  (~Lp<o\)(&j  C 

Of  men  of  fruitful  life,  who  kindly  benefits  dispense, 
The  world  unites  to  praise  the  '  noble  excellence.' 

995.  &  <5®  &  u_f  err  (<srfj 


Contempt  is  evil  though  in  sport.     They  who  man's  nature  know, 
E'en  in  their  wrath,  a  courteous  mind  will  show. 


996.       LJS2OTL/S5)i__(L//r/f    LJL10633T    ®<8\)<3B    LD  gj]  <oSl  <5GT  CD  p  <S3T 


The  world  abides  ;  for  '  worthy  '  men  its  weight  sustain. 
Were  it  not  so,  'twould  fall  to  dust  again. 

997.      <°)f  IT  LbQ  LJ  (T  G£l  151    <5fc_  fT  <Sff>  LA  LU    Q  IT  6£J 

LDJTLD(oUfr<5V<5UIT    LD  <5B  <5B  L_  U  6V3T    l^6\)(5\)fr    <5<8UIT 

Though  sharp  their  wit  as  file,  as  blocks  they  must  remain, 
Whose  souls  are  void  of  '  courtesy  humane.' 


998.     fE6murrp)(7)p  irirQ  /GLUL£I<SV  Q  &  LU  eu  rr  IT  <s  (&)  LD 

U  63OT  U  fT  fb  (fy    JTfT<£6V 


Though  men  with  all  unfriendly  acts  and  wrongs  assail, 
'Tis  uttermost  disgrace  in  '  courtesy  '  to  fail. 


'136  THE    KURRAL. 

999.      /6<356V6l]<Sti<5V    ff  <5V  (5X)  fT  IT  <35  (Gj    LD/7~u9(77j 


To  him  who  knows  not  how  to  smile  in  kindly  mirth, 
Darkness  in  daytime  broods  o'er  all  the  vast  and  mighty  earth. 


1000. 

f6  <svr  u  rr  <5V  &  <s\)  /5  $s  <om  LL>  uu  tr  rh  fS  'if)  IB 

Like  sweet  milk  soured  because  in  filthy  vessel  poured, 
Is  ample  wealth  in  churlish  man's  unopened  coffers  stored. 


CHAPTEE  CI. 

.  —  WEALTH  WITHOUT  BENEFACTION. 


1001.  ®D6ii^<35n-<svr<sijrrLLi.  tfrrdrp  Q  u  (TTjLoQ  u  IT  Q^ 

Q  <3F  <£  <5  [T  <5$T    Q  <f  UJ  <5B  Q  /_  IB  ^    ]S  6V 

Who  fills  his  house  with  ample  store,  enjoying  none, 
Is  dead.     Nought  with  the  useless  heap  is  done. 

1002.  QurrQjjffrnrttoS)  Qt£>eU6\)/rQ/LO63T  nffiunr 


Who  giving  nought,  opines  from  wealth  all  blessing  springs, 
Degraded  birth  that  doting  miser's  folly  brings. 

1003.     IT-l^L-    iBeUSl    u9  65)^(0  <617  6337  L_/T    (517  IT  I—  617  IT 


Who  lust  to  heap  up  wealth,  but  glory  hold  not  dear, 

It  burthens  earth  when  on  the  stage  of  being  they  appear. 

1004. 


Whom  no  one  loves,  when  he  shall  pass  away, 
What  doth  he  look  to  leave  behind,  I  pray  ? 


1005. 

<35®<3S^lLU    (o  <35  IT  ip-  ILJ  6S3T 

Amid  accumulated  millions  they  are  poor, 

Who  nothing  give  and  nought  enjoy  of  all  they  store. 

1006.      (5T35LD   Qu^^7)Q-3F6\)<SUfb    <5  IT  <S$T  £)1  <5lJ  <oti  IT  <5$T   fD  <3S  &  IT  IT  <35  Q  <5B  /T  €ST 


Their  ample  wealth  is  misery  to  men  of  churlish  heart, 

Who  nought  themselves  enjoy,  and  nought  to  worthy  men  impart, 


BOOK    II.  —  APPENDIX.  137 

1007. 


iS  LU  6 

Like  woman  fair  in  lonelihood  who  aged  grows, 

Is  wealth  of  him  on  needy  men  who  nought  bestows. 

1008.     (6<f<fLJ    U  I—  fT  <£  <SU  65T 


When  he  whom  no  man  loves  exults  in  great  prosperity, 

Tis  as  when  fruits  in  midmost  of  the  town  some  poisonous  tree. 


1009.  ^jGsrQurrf^jS  ^pQl&rD  p  rnQ  '/5  rr  a  &  rr   £si 
Q<sijrr6ftfrQufr(7jj<srr  Q  &  rr  <sn  eu  IT  IT  iSlfDir  (^») 

Who  love  abandon,  self  afflict,  and  virtue's  way  forsake 

To  heap  up  glittering  wealth,  their  hoards  shall  others  take. 

1010.  @(fT)<5ni—<F    Q<SFGV<8ufr    Qgu^vvfl 

LDirifl  Slipway  frit  ^^syruj  ^J&DI_^^J  (id) 

'Tis  as  when  rain-cloud  in  the  heaven  grows  dry, 
When  generous  wealthy  man  endures  brief  poverty. 


CHAPTER  GIL 

.  —  SHAME. 


1011. 


To  shrink  abashed  from  evil  deed  is  '  generous  shame  ' 
Other  is  that  of  bright-browed  ones  of  virtuous  fame. 


1012. 

/5/r^2/<S3)Z_S2)LD    LDfTfB^IT   &/DLJLJ 

Food,  clothes,  and  other  things  alike  all  beings  own  ; 
By  sense  of  shame  the  excellence  of  men  is  known. 

1013.  £M$5W<£    (^(Bpp    S^u9Q^T6l)(5\)/r 
/5/rOs33T(S5rOT27    tEGGTG&LDi    (&)$<5<5g>l    <f  IT  <S\)  LJ 

All  spirits  homes  of  flesh  as  habitation  claim, 
And  perfect  virtue  ever  dwells  with  shame. 

1014.  «jy633$/L/6Sr(o(/7p    IB  IT  gfjpl  <5»  l_  <5S>  LD 


Vnd  is  not  shame  an  ornament  to  men  of  dignity  ? 
Vithout  it  step  of  stately  pride  is  piteous  thing  to  see. 

18 


138  THE    KTJRRAL. 

1015.      &  fD  IT  U  LJ3  It.}  IB    ^LDUifHtLJ    IE  fT  Gffll  6U  fT  IT    fE  FT  <Sffi)l  & 


As  home  of  virtuous  shame  by  all  the  world  the  men  are  known, 
Who  feel  ashamed  for  others'  guilt  as  for  their  own. 


1016.  (BfT6yyr(o<5UG9  Q^/rsyrar/r^y  i&esrG^B)   <sSl  iu  ®tr  <sj 

(D  U  6&fT  (oO  IT    (oLCXoVfr    UJ  <5U  IT 

Unless  the  hedge  of  shame  inviolate  remain, 

For  men  of  lofty  soul  the  earth's  vast  realms  no  charms  retain. 

1017.  IBfT^SS)     6$1  Il9  <SS)  JT  f&    ^JfDLJU    QJj  (l9  IT  Q  U  IT  Q7j  Z_l  L_  /T 


The  men  of  modest  soul  for  shame  would  life  an  offering  make, 
But  ne'er  abandon  virtuous  shame  for  life's  dear  sake. 


1018.  t3  nr)  IT  fB  fT  SSffT  ^ 

<s$r  ro  r5  rr  <ssvr  j& 

Thou  know'st  no  shame,  while  all  around  ashamed  must  be  : 
Virtue  will  shrink  away  ashamed  of  thee  ! 

1019.  (^  a)  (ZTj&QlEJ    Q<S5rr&r<5®& 


'Twill  race  consume  if  right  observance  fail  ; 
'Twill  every  good  consume  if  shanielessness  prevail. 

1020.      [brr<oG3T&<5    ^SiSVtoD/T    /$UJ<556E    LD  JT  U  U  fT  (Sff)  <SU 


'Tis  as  with  strings  a  wooden  puppet  apes  life's  functions,  when 
Those  void  of  shame  within  hold  intercourse  with  men. 


CHAPTER  CHI.     jy£.  &OOL. 

.  —  THE  WAY  OF  MAINTAINING  THE  FAMILY. 


1021. 


Who  says  '  I  '11  do  my  work,  nor  slack  my  hand,' 

His  greatness,  clothed  with  dignity  supreme,  shall  stand. 

1022.     <MGfT<s£l$oVnLI    LbfT<S5TrD    617  fS  <51J    Q  LD  <SST  <aSl  IT  63ST  Lp_ 


The  manly  act  and  knowledge  full,  when  these  combine 
In  deed  prolonged,  then  lengthens  out  the  race's  line, 


BOOK    II.  -  APPENDIX.  139 

1023. 


p  n  <5sr  (Lp  IB  gjjguLD  (/H-) 

1  1  '11  make  my  race  renowned,'  if  man  shall  say, 
With  vest  succinct  the  goddess  leads  the  way. 

1024.  (cffijLp/TLO/D    (yQ<5Sr   (Lp  iy-Q  6UUJ  &1  IB    <35  IK1  (3j  1$.  <5S)  LU  t£ 
jSfTLpfT    gtf  <*oT)  p  <£U    U  <S1J  IT  <£  (3j 

Who  labours  for  his  race  with  unremitting  pain, 
Without  a  thought,  spontaneously,  his  end  will  gain. 

1025.  (&)PP    L$<o\)(G3)(L/<£E    (&jlp.Q<FLUgtf    <51J  fT  L£  <8lJ  fT  %5ST  & 


With  blameless  life  who  seeks  to  build  his  race's  fame, 
The  world  shall  circle  him,  and  kindred  claim. 


1026.      /56X>6D/r632rT<S3)LO    QlLKoSTU    Q  ^  FT  (7fj  <SU  p  (^  ££   ;£  IT  GSTlSl  {D  IB  <& 

<s9  <5\)  <sv  rr  cm  <5tn  LD  uj/r«^6G  Q  &  ir  err  <sv 


Of  virtuous  manliness  the  world  accords  the  praise 

To  him  who  gives  his  powers,  the  house  from  which  he  sprang  to  raise. 


1027.     «jy  LD  IT  <5B  35  ^J     QJ  6GT  <35  <5m  65VT  IT 

&LDjr&^f£fjj  LD  rr  rb  j£i  <su  IT  IT 

The  fearless  hero  bears  the  brunt  amid  the  warrior  throng  ; 
Amid  his  kindred  so  the  burthen  rests  upon  the  strong. 

1028. 


Wait  for  no  season,  when  you  would  your  house  uprear  ; 
'Twill  perish,  if  you  wait  supine,  or  hold  your  honour  dear. 

1029.        ©iiisjnLJ^Co^  Q(55/reyrc55(SVJE/  Q 


Is  not  his  body  vase  that  various  sorrows  fill, 
Who  would  his  household  screen  from  every  ill  ? 


1030. 

LD<S)  €B  gjff  <S$T  £)i    (B<5V®)fT    <olfl  <5V  FT  ^ 

When  trouble  the  foundation  saps  the  house  must  fall, 
If  no  strong  hand  be  nigh  to  prop  the  tottering  wall. 


140  THE    KURKAL. 


CHAPTER  CIV. 

a.Lp<m/.  —  AGRICULTURE. 

1031. 


Howe'er  they  roam,  the  world  must  follow  still  the  plougher's  team  ; 
Though  toilsome,  culture  of  the  ground  as  noblest  toil  esteem. 

1032.    s-(7£6U/r  0<o\)<s^^/7-/fei  s 
QiuGvevrrLD 


The  plough  ers  are  the  linch-pin  of  the  world  ;  they  bear 
Them  up  who  other  works  perform,  too  weak  its  toils  to  share. 

1033.    ^-(Lg^Gm®  6i]rrLp6iirr(oj 

ueuir 


Who  ploughing  eat  their  food,  they  truly  live  ; 

The  rest  to  others  bend  subservient,  eating  what  they  give. 

1034. 


O'er  many  a  land  they  '11  see  their  monarch  reign, 
Whose  fields  are  shaded  by  the  waving  grain. 

1035.    (j£)rr<siirr  ifi  JT  u  u  fr  ITT  <s  Q  &  n~  <ssr  rff  <su  rr 


They  nothing  ask  from  others,  but  to  askers  give, 

Who  raise  with  their  own  hands  the  food  on  which  they  live. 

1036.     2_  Lp  <aQ  (63)  IT 


For  those  who  've  left  what  all  men  love  no  place  is  found, 
When  they  with  folded  hands  remain  who  till  the  ground. 

1037. 


Eeduce  your  soil  to  that  dry  state 
When  ounce  is  quarter-ounce's  weight  ; 
Without  one  handful  of  manure, 
Abundant  crops  you  thus  secure. 

1038. 


To  cast  manure  is  better  than  to  plough  ; 

Weed  well  ;  to  guard  is  more  than  watering  now. 


BOOK    II.  —  APPENDIX.  141 

1039. 


Wheu  master  from  the  field  aloof  hath  stood  ; 
Then  land  will  sulk,  like  wife  in  angry  mood. 

1040. 


The  earth,  that  kindly  dame,  will  laugh  to  see, 
Men  seated  idle  pleading  poverty. 


CHAPTER    CV.     jy#.  so®. 
.  —  POVERTY. 


1041.    £g)<s2rr<sff>LD«9  ®&  <s$r  $5$)  £5 


You  ask  what  sharper  pain  than  poverty  is  known  ; 
Nothing  pains  more  than  poverty,  save  poverty  alone. 

1042.     ^)S3T6?DLD    QlLKoSrQeUfrQJj    U  IT  <oQ    LD  £JJ  tiff)  LD  IL] 


Malefactor  matchless  !  poverty  destroys 
This  world's  and  the  next  world's  joys. 


1043.     Q  p  tT  <5V  6U  IT  Q/  IB    (o^fT^JEI    Q«©<5F(^/5    Q<5  fT  <55)  «  (U  FT  c55 


Importunate  desire,  which  poverty  men  name, 
Destroys  both  old  descent  and  goodly  fame. 


1044.    £§)  p  &  <D  (B  p  rr  IT  &6md>6S3rtLi  /./9isar<s?nLD  u9  6if)  <su  IB  ^ 


From  penury  will  spring,  'mid  even  those  of  noble  race, 
Oblivion  that  gives  birth  to  words  that  bring  disgrace. 

1045.  IB6V(&)rr    Q  611  6ST  ®£)    tS  (£)  LD  63)  U  tLf  /_ 
U6V(&j<5tn4  '  <&    ^1  <58T  U  IEI  <35  <5tT    Q<F<5VrgU    U®LC> 

From  poverty,  that  grievous  woe, 
Attendant  sorrows  plenteous  grow. 

1046.  GjbQuiT(TJj     6S8T<S$Tr&)€®tTir  IB&]   Q  ]<f  IT  6V  6@  €g}) 

Q<f  rrpQurrQFjGrr  (?«y/r/fay  U(J>!LC>  C** 

Though  deepest  sense,  well  understood,  the  poor  man's  words  convey, 
Their  sense  from  memory  of  mankind  will  fade  away. 


142  THE  KURRAL. 

1047.    *gj  p  @j  &  rr  ff  IT  f5GV(3jjr  sff'ssrv)  p  ITVLS  IT  GQI  LZ 


From  indigence  devoid  of  virtue's  grace, 

The  mother  e'en  that  bare,  estranged,  will  turn  her  face. 


1048.  jj£)  <oifl~  J£U  LD    SlIQ^SU^J    Q  <35  /ra)(06V/r    Q  /5  (77j  IS  6£J  IEi 

Q  &  ir  GST  p  gn  Quirsgi  iflrruLf 

And  will  it  come  to  day  as  yesterday, 
The  grief  of  want  that  eats  my  soul  away  ? 

1049.  QlB(IT)LJl3l^]l—    Ql  <^Jj  <F  6£1    LD/T0 

18  IT  u  &  <jgii  6tr  ujrrQ^fTGvr^pJiEi  ^sssrur 

Amid  the  flames  sleep  may  men's  eyelids  close, 
In  poverty  the  eye  knows  no  repose. 

1050. 


Unless  the  destitute  will  utterly  themselves  deny, 
They  cause  their  neighbour's  salt  and  vinegar  to  die. 


CHAPTEE  CVL 

I . — MENDICANCY. 


1051. 


When  those  you  find  from  whom  'tis  meet  to  ask,  —  for  aid  apply  ; 
Theirs  is  the  sin,  not  yours,  if  they  the  gift  deny. 

1052. 


Even  to  ask  an  alms  may  pleasure  give, 

If  what  you  ask  without  annoyance  you  receive. 


1053.  &rru\9l<oV[r  Q/5(&5$/D  a  i—.<ssr  $  <sii  rr  fr 

J$JTLJLj(oLDrr    QlT<oT  QT)<5S>l—pgi] 

The  men  who  nought  deny,  but  know  what  's  due,  before  their  face 
To  stand  as  suppliants  affords  especial  grace. 

1054.  j&3~pj56£l   l£j£(o6V    Q  U  IT  6$j  Kl 
&IT^f5<Sti    &6W6£lgplf6    Co  ^  p  (Of  p  IT  IT   LdfTL—Q 

Like  giving  alms,  may  even  asking  pleasant  seem, 
From  men  who  of  denial  never  even  dream. 


BOOK    IT.  -  APPENDIX.  143 

1055.     &  ff  U  iSl  6U  /T  ir    <5S)6ULU<3S^  ,£]  6VST  <5S)  LD  UJ  fT  JD 


Because  on  earth  the  men  exist,  who  never  say  them  nay, 
Men  bear  to  stand  before  their  eyes  for  help  to  pray. 

1056.     &  IT  U  i9  Q  L0  S3)  U    u5l  6\)  6\)  fT  68)  ff  <56    <95  /7 


If  those  you  find  from  evil  of  '  denial  '  free, 
At  once  all  plague  of  poverty  will  flee. 

1057.        &)ibQ£6ff&rff   £B  <su  nr  6in  IT  & 


If  men  are  found  who  give  and  no  harsh  words  of  scorn  employ, 
The  minds  of  askers,  through  and  through,  will  thrill  with  joy. 


1058. 

LD  ff  LJ  U  tr  <5&  6U    Q  <?  <5VT  J£J  <51J  IB 

If  askers  cease,  the  mighty  earth,  where  cooling  fountains  flow, 
Will  be  a  stage  where  wooden  puppets  come  and  go. 

1059.    FF  'su  rr  IT  «  Q<stsyr<s5r  63)1  @s3ri_—  iris 


What  glory  will  there  be  to  men  of  generous  soul, 
When  none  are  found  to  love  the  askers'  role  ? 

1060.    j§)  a~  u  u  rr  GST  Q  eu  (^  err  rr  G&>  LD  Q<su<5ssr(b) 

fBiTLJi3Qu^sy)u  ^  rr  (o  &sr  ILJ  (&£  -ffr^jtsj  <si 

Askers  refused  from  wrath  must  stand  aloof  ; 
The  plague  of  poverty  itself  is  ample  proof. 


CHAPTER  CVII.     jy£.  «OOT. 
ffu^.  —  THE  DREAD  OP  MENDICANCY. 


1061. 

L$  ir  <siJ  rr  6V)  LD 

Ten  million-fold  'tis  greater  gain,  asking  no  alms  to  live, 

Even  from  those,  like  eyes  in  worth,  who  nought  concealing  gladly  give. 

1062.    Jj)i7-/5j5/  (LpiiSlireufrLp^ev  Q  'en  6ssr  iy.  p 


If  he  that  shaped  the  world  desires  that  men  should  begging  go, 
Through  life's  long  course,  let  him  a  wanderer  be  and  perish  so. 


144  THE    KURRAL. 

1063.      (j£)  6ST  <o&)  Lfi    1$  ®  LC>  15$)  LJ    Il9  ff  /B  gU  J£  IT    617  FT  Q  LA  <5ST  &£]  L£> 

&J  <5sr  u  rr  L!  z_i)<&o 


Nothing  is  harder  than  the  hardness  that  will  say, 

'  The  plague  of  penury  by  asking  alms  we  '11  drive  away.' 


1064.     @L_G)LO<S\)6\)/r/S    Q  &  IT  6K  GfT  K  £5 

$JJ  Q  <su  rr  <5V  6V  /r  <F 


Who  ne'er  consent  to  beg  in  utmost  need,  their  worth 
Has  excellence  of  greatness  that  transcends  the  earth. 


1065.    (o)  £B  <sy&r  <o$vr  jj  (£)  LJ  nr) 


Nothing  is  sweeter  than  to  taste  the  toil-  won  cheer, 
Though  mess  of  pottage  as  tasteless  as  the  water  clear. 

1066. 


E'en  if  a  draught  of  water  for  a  cow  you  ask, 
Nought's  so  distasteful  to  the  tongue  as  begger's  task. 


1067.    ^jiruu  <svfl  jr  u  u  rr  en  IT  Qtusvevir 

•SBrruuir  rf)  jr  <siJ  <svr  L&  Ql  <sist  <ssr  jry  (<or) 

One  thing  I  beg  of  beggars  all,  '  If  beg  ye  may, 
Of  those  who  hide  their  wealth,  beg  not,  I  pray.' 


1068.    ^ 

•35  U  Q  <SiJ  m  6£J  LD    U/T/f^/T6B«LJ    U  & 


The  fragile  bark  of  beggary 
Wrecked  on  denial's  rock  will  lie. 

1069.  j§)  JT  ®]  fffr  err  s^srrsyr 

<35  $  <sy  err  err  <ai]  err  err  gsr  £- 

The  heart  will  melt  away  at  thought  of  beggary  ; 
With  thought  of  stern  repulse  'twill  perish  utterly. 

1070.  <£  JT  u  u  6U  IT  6E  £)uj[r!EjQ&rr<otf)&(&jtEJ  Q&n~<sv(]>6\)fr 
<o£l  jr  u  u  <su  IT  Q&rrGVGVrrL-U  QutrGp  QptiSliT 

E'en  as  he  asks,  the  shamefaced  asker  dies  ; 
Where  shall  his  spirit  hide  who  help  denies  ? 


BOOK    II. — APPENDIX.  145 


OHAPTEE  CVIII. 

BASENESS. 


1071.  LD&,&G>6ir    Q  U  IT  6V  611  IT    <9BtU6ti    IT  611  JT  €ST  €GT 
epUUlTlfi    UJ/T65T  .356337    L—J£l6V 

The  base  resemble  men  in  outward  form,  I  ween  ; 
But  counterpart  exact  to  them  I  've  never  seen. 

1072.  iBGsrrDSl  surrtfirb  aiueuir       /TJQSB)  /_UJ/T 


Than  those  of  grateful  heart  the  base  must  luckier  be, 
Their  minds  from  every  anxious  thought  are  free  ! 


1073. 

G?LD<S1/<S5T   Q  <f  ILJ  Q  ^5  fT  (L£> 

The  base  are  as  the  gods  ;  they  too 
Do  ever  what  they  list  to  do  ! 

1074.    =gy  <s  u  u  L—  i3-  uj  n~  6U  rr  em  IT  & 

I_S  <55  LJ  U  L-®  <f    Q&LCtLOrr&t 

When  base  men  those  behold  of  conduct  vile, 
They  straight  surpass  them,  and  exulting  smile. 

1075. 


Fear  is  the  base  man's  virtue  ;  if  that  fail, 
Intense  desire  some  little  may  avail. 


1076.  ^l<S^pU<5!^rD    \U6ST6Srfr    &UJ61JIT 
L£><5S)(DlSl<I)IT<35    (^  UJ  <5  gjl  <5ft  IT  &  & 

The  base  are  like  the  beaten  drum  ;  for,  when  they  hear, 
They  sound  the  secret  out  in  every  neighbour's  ear. 

1077.  /=F/r/B7€5)6B    6$  $  JT  IT  IT    atLKSUIT    Q  <5B  IT  Z£_  JTJJ  £& 


From  off  their  moistened  hands  no  clinging  grain  they  shake, 
Unless  to  those  with  clenched  fist  their  jaws  who  break. 

1078.     Q&IT6\)6\)LJ    UUJ6SrU®6llir    &  fT  <5VT  (0  (7T?  IT    <9B  (TJj  LC>  L]  (o  LJ  IT  & 


The  good  to  those  will  profit  yield  fair  words  who  use  ; 
The  base,  like  sugar-cane,  will  profit  those  who  bruise. 

19 


146  THE    KUREAL. 

1079.     2_®  U  U  glf  'Q- 


If  neighbours  clothed  and  fed  he  see,  the  base 
Is  mighty  man  some  hidden  fault  to  trace  ? 

1080. 


For  what  is  base  man  fit,  if  griefs  assail  ? 
Himself  to  offer,  there  and  then,  for  sale  ! 


CP  iff  iS  ILJ  6VT  (Lp  f()tt$  LA  . 
THE    END    OF    THE    APPENDIX. 


THE    END    OF    BOOK    II.    ON    WEALTH. 


BOOK  III.-LOVE. 


§  I.     FURTIVE  LOVE.     Ch.  cix.— cxv. 

§  II.    WEDDED  LOVE.     Ch.  cxvi. — cxxxin. 


149 


BOOK    III.— LOVE.      *iru>p&uuireo. 
§  1.— THE  GANDHAEVA  MAEKIAGE.     *arsBiu&>. 


CHAPTER  CIX. 


U.  —  MENTAL  DISTURBANCE  CAUSED  BY  THE 
BEAUTY  OF  THE  PRINCESS. 


1081,    «=gy  68sriEJ  (&)Q  '&  rr 

&ssTiEi(<5j<5&>Lp  Lc>rr^ir(o)<95rr<svr  LorrsyQiDssr  Q  <ssr  (JTJ  & 

Goddess  ?  or  peafowl  rare  ? 
She  whose  ears  rich  jewels  wear, 
Is  she  a  maid  of  human  kind  ? 

All  wildered  is  my  mind  ! 

1082. 


She  of  the  beaming  eyes, 
To  my  rash  look  her  glance  replies, 
As  if  the  matchless  goddess'  hand 

Led  forth  an  armed  band. 


1083. 

Qu&KrrL-.Gn&iLin'fb  (o  u  IT  LD  iir  &    <ssi_Gl 

Death's  form  I  formerly 
Knew  not  ;  but  now  'tis  plain  to  me  : 
He  comes  in  lovely  maiden's  guise, 

With  soul-subduing  eyes. 


1084.     <3B6SyJL-fT    (^u906OTT^2//5    Q  <5  FT  /D  fD  j£  ^  FT  fi 

-3B  LD  IT  <£  f&  65T 


In  sweet  simplicity, 
A  woman's  gracious  form  hath  she  ; 
But  yet  those  eyes,  that  drink  my  life, 

Are  with  the  form  at  strife  ! 


150  THE   KTTRRAL. 

1085.     <3n-0)'D(oLDfr    <35&Rfr(o(6S8)    l$l$a&r(oUJ  IT   LOL-6U1T 
r    r  x__x 


1090. 


The  light  that  on  me  gleams, 
Is  it  death's  dart  ?  or  eye's  bright  beams  ? 
Or  fawn's  shy  glance  ?     All  three  appear 

In  form  of  maiden  here. 


1086. 

LD  <55T  <53#  <Sll  6YT 

If  cruel  eye-brow's  bow, 
Unbent,  would  veil  those  glances  now  ; 
The  shafts  that  wound  this  trembling  heart 

Her  eyes  no  more  would  dart. 

1087.     Sl—fTS    SfofilSlGSfQlbrD    <5B/_LJL_/T 


As  veil  o'er  angry  eyes 
Of  raging  elephant  that  lies, 
The  silken  cincture's  folds  invest 

This  maiden's  panting  breast. 


1088. 

(633)0    (Lp  /_  (^  Q  LD  <SSf 

Ah  !  woe  is  me  !  my  might, 
That  awed  my  foemen  in  the  fight, 
By  lustre  of  that  beaming  brow 

Borne  down,  lies  broken  now  ! 


1089.    i^Ssyyr(otuir  LD/_(?/5/r<55(^  /5/rggg?/  (ip  6v>  /_  iu  IT  L! 


Like  tender  fawn's  her  eye  ; 
Clothed  on  is  she  with  modesty  ; 
What  added  beauty  can  be  lent 

By  alien  ornament  ? 


The  palm-tree's  fragrant  wine, 
To  those  who  taste  yields  joys  divine  ; 
But  love  hath  rare  felicity 

For  those  that  only  see  ! 


BOOK    III. THE    GANDHARVA    MARRIAGE.  151 


CHAPTER  CX. 

).  —  RECOGNITION  OP  THE  SIGNS  (OP  MUTUAL  LOVE). 


1091.    @(?/5/T6B  ^0i/^eabr<£B   egg?/  <sn  err 


A  double  witchery  have  glances  of  her  liquid  eye ; 

One  glance  is  glance  that  brings  me  pain  ;  the  other  heals  again. 

1092.     <5E 6337 <5E 6TT <51J    Q <£ /T 6H" (<o, 

)uifl^j 


The  furtive  glance,  that  gleams  one  instant  bright, 
Is  more  than  half  of  love's  supreme  delight. 

1093. 


She  looked,  and  looking  drooped  her  head  : 
On  springing  shoot  of  love  'tis  water  shed  ! 

1094.     U 


I  look  on  her  :  her  eyes  are  on  the  ground  the  while  ; 
I  look  away  :  she  looks  on  me  with  timid  smile. 

1095.    (Gflfl&Gl&n-esyrG)  G>f5rr<35&rr6S)L&  iLHSvevrr 


She  seemed  to  see  me  not  ;  but  yet  the  maid 
Her  love,  by  smiling  side-long  glance,  betrayed. 

1096.    2_(tfp«jy  ^surrQurrp)  Q  &  rr  s9  cgy  ^ 

Q&Qy^yirQ&rr  QgD/rgvSso  (L^&ssrrru  uQiJo  (<9ir) 

Though  with  their  lips  affection  they  disown, 
Yet,  when  they  hate  us  not,  'tis  quickly  known. 


1097. 

(Lp(y^jn-G>u[r<sisr  ^ip^yfr  (^fSluLj  (OT) 

The  slighting  words  that  anger  feign,  while  eyes  their  love  reveal, 
Are  signs  of  those  that  love,  but  would  their  love  conceal. 


1098.    «jy  <s&>  &  uSl  ILJ  fb  (<9)63ar/_/r633rG>i_/r  Q  'IT  <sr  IT  uu  IT  (o(G&)<35<9&Lj 
ue^<SFu9<5srevr  emuiu  /B^LD 

I  gaze,  the  tender  maid  relents  the  while  ; 
And,  oh  the  matchless  grace  of  that  soft  smile  ! 


152  THE    KURRAL. 

1099.     67  j£l  6\)  FT  IT    (aUfTGVU    Q  U  IT  gjj  G?  fB  IT  <5  (<9j    Q  IB  fT  <SK  (^  ^  £0 

&  rr  ^  <5V  rr  IT  &6ssr(o63yr  lyerr 

The  look  indifferent,  that  would  its  love  disguise, 
Is  only  read  aright  by  lovers'  eyes. 

1100. 


When  eye  to  answering  eye  reveals  the  tale  of  love, 
All  words  that  lips  can  say  must  useless  prove. 


CHAPTEE  CXI. 

.  —  EEJOICING  IN  THE  EMBRACE. 


1101. 


All  joys  that  senses  five  —  sight,  hearing,  taste,  smell,  touch  —  can  give, 
In  this  resplendent  armlet-bearing  damsel  live  ! 

1102.  l968S?l&(G)    LD0/5^/    iSlfDLD 

<5$r  68sf)  u9l  <an  tp  ^e^Q^iu^^^  ^[rQesr  LL>Q^IB^J  (SL) 

Disease  and  medicine  antagonists  we  surely  see  ; 
This  maid,  to  pain  she  gives,  herself  is  remedy. 

1103.  <£tr 


Than  rest  in  her  soft  arms  to  whom  the  soul  is  giv'n, 
Is  any  sweeter  joy  in  his,  the  Lotus-eyed-one's  heaven  ? 


1104. 

<sif)  eu  <srr 


Withdraw,  it  burns  ;  approach,  it  soothes  the  pain  ; 
Whence  did  the  maid  this  wondrous  fire  obtain? 

1105. 


In  her  embrace,  whose  locks  with  flowery  wreaths  are  bound, 
Each  varied  form  of  joy  the  soul  can  wish  is  found. 


1106. 

(SL^Lp^S    oU^(L/<53T(2)(S3r    Q  <5  IT  6TT 

Ambrosia  are  the  simple  maiden's  arms  ;  when  I  attain 
Their  touch,  my  withered  life  puts  forth  its  buds  again  ! 


BOOK    III.  —  THE    GANDHARVA    MARRIAGE.  153 

1107. 


GVLDLDfT    617/$6ff)617    (LpaJ^(Gj  (<Sr) 

A.S  when  one  eats  from  household  store,  with  kindly  grace 
Sharing  his  meal  :  such  is  this  golden  maid's  embrace. 

1108. 


Sweet  is  the  strict  embrace  of  those  whom  fond  affection  binds, 
Where  no  dissevering  breath  of  discord  entrance  finds. 

1109.    £M/_  j^saarr/f^fsv  L/eaar/f^ 

UUJ53T 


The  jealous  variance,  the  healing  of  the  strife,  reunion  gained  : 
These  are  the  fruits  from  wedded  love  obtained. 


1110. 

Q&  fflGtprrj&KST)    Q  <f  llSl  <S&  /.p    LD/TLlO  (tD) 

The  more  men  learn,  the  more  their  lack  of  learning  they  detect  ; 
'Tis  so  when  I  approach  the  maid  with  gleaming  jewels  decked. 


CHAPTEE  CXII. 

i;.  —  THE  PRAISE  OF  HER  BEAUTY. 


1111.     f568T<ovF6y)jr    617/T          UJ  <Svfl  <£F  <5F  (o  L£> 


O  flower  of  the  sensitive  plant  !  than  thee 
More  tender  's  the  maiden  beloved  by  me. 

1112.     t£6U/f<£/r<S33$6Sr    SZDLDUJ/T^          Q(5(&T(o<F    Il9  61J  GTT  &  68ST 

<SU  fT  6G 


You  deemed,  as  you  saw  the  flowers,  her  eyes  were  as  flowers,  my  soul, 
That  many  may  see  ;  it  was  surely  some  folly  that  over  you  stole  ! 


1113. 

Q  61J  (Si  f5  IT  p  p  /i 

As  tender  shoot  her  frame  ;  teeth,  pearls  ;  around  her  odours  blend  ; 
Darts  are  the  eyes  of  her  whose  shoulders  like  the  bambu  bend. 

1114. 


The  lotus,  seeing  her,  with  head  demiss,  the  ground  would  eye, 
And  say,  *  With  eyes  of  her,  rich  gems  who  wears,  we  cannot  vie.' 

20 


154  THE   KUEEAL. 

1115. 


The  flowers  of  the  sensitive  plant  as  a  girdle  around  her  she  placed  ; 
The  stems  she  forgot  to  nip  off  ;  they  '11  weigh  down  the  delicate  waist. 

1116. 


The  stars  perplexed  are  rushing  wildly  from  their  spheres  ; 
For  like  another  moon  this  maiden's  face  appears. 


1117.  *£f  gu  <su  rnu 
/Lo«^2/6ty63arr(0i_/r  LD/T^/T 

In  moon,  that  waxing  waning  shines,  as  spots  appear, 
Are  any  spots  discerned  in  face  of  maiden  here  ? 

1118.  Lbfrir       &LLQufr  Q  <sv  rr  ffif)  efil  L- 


Farewell,  O  moon  !     If  that  thine  orb  could  shine 
Bright  as  her  face,  thou  shouldst  be  love  of  mine. 

1119.   iA6Vjr0n~6sr  sesyr^&kfr  ap& 

UGViranresvr^  Q  p  IT  <s$r  p  GST  ubs  ^1 

If  as  her  face,  whose  eyes  are  flowers,  thou  wouldst  have  charms  for  me, 
Shine  for  my  eyes  alone,  O  moon,  shine  not  for  all  to  see  ! 

1120. 


The  flower  of  the  sensitive  plant,  and  the  down  on  the  swan's  white  breast, 
As  the  thorn  are  harsh,  by  the  delicate  feet  of  this  maiden  pressed. 


CHAPTEE  CXIII.     j.  &SOL. 


u. — DECLARATION  OF  LOVE'S  SPECIAL 
EXCELLENCE. 

I.— He. 
1121*   urrQevrrG)  (ojSeisr&sv/B  ^pQp  U6&jf)QL£>rry3 

The  dew  on  her  white  teeth,  whose  voice  is  soft  and  low, 
Is  as  when  milk  and  honey  mingled  flow. 

1122.     £_L_L£>(oL-//r  ® Il9 ff) 69) L_    Q ILJ <5GT <S$T LQJD 


Between  this  maid  and  me  the  friendship  kind 
Is  as  the  bonds  that  soul  and  body  bind. 


BOOK    III.  —  THE    GANDHARVA    MARRIAGE.  155 

1123.   «0LosOT0u9D  urreurriu 


For  her  with  beauteous  brow,  the  maid  I  love,  there  place  is  none  ; 
To  give  her  image  room,  O  pupil  of  mine  eye,  begone  ! 

1124.    eufTLpjS  gaf&Jr&SGsrGff  GIT  /r«9  syy  Lp 


Life  is  she  to  my  very  soul  when  she  draws  nigh  ; 
Dissevered  from  the  maid  with  jewels  rare,  I  die  ! 

1125. 


I  might  recall,  if  I  could  once  forget  ;  but  from  my  heart 
Her  charms  fade  not,  whose  eyes  gleam  like  the  warrior's  dart. 

IL—  She. 

1126.  &QMrGrt)i6tT<sirlrb  Quir&rr  rftevyLnuiSlp  u^euiririr 

Jfj]  GStST  6Kff)  LU  Q  JT  {51   SfTjS     GVGUfT 

My  loved  one's  subtle  form  departs  not  from  my  eyes  ; 
I  wink  them  not,  lest  I  should  pain  him  where  he  lies. 

1127.  &  683T  <ssy)i  Gtr  err  rrir  os/r 


My  love  doth  ever  in  my  eyes  reside  ; 

I  stain  them  not,  fearing  his  form  to  hide. 

1128.    Qfb<^<f^^frir  <3srrj5  eveufrrrs  Q  6U  LU  gji 


Within  my  heart  my  lover  dwells  ;  from  food  I  turn 
That  smacks  of  heat,  lest  he  should  feel  it  burn. 

1129. 


I  fear  his  form  to  hide,  nor  close  my  eyes  : 

'  Her  love  estranged  is  gone  !  '  the  village  cries. 


1130.     2-<SlJf5^$l6S)nC)6lJ 

Rejoicing  in  my  very  soul  he  ever  lies ; 

'  Her  love  estranged  is  gone  far  off  ! '  the  village 


cries. 


156 


THE    KUEEAL. 


CHAPTER  CXIV. 

.  —  THE  ABANDONMENT  OP  RESERVE. 
[This  Chapter  has  its  special  difficulties,  see  Notes.     I  give  a  literal  rendering.] 

I.—  He. 

1131.     <5E/TLD    (Lpy)/5^J    611  (    fB  $  (63)  IT  & 
Q&LD 


To  those  who  've  proved  love's  joy,  and  now  afflicted  mourn, 
Except  the  helpful  *  horse  of  palm,'  no  other  strength  remains. 

1132. 


My  body  and  my  soul,  that  can  no  more  endure, 
Will  lay  reserve  aside,  and  mount  the  '  horse  of  palm.' 

1133.     /5 


I  once  retained  reserve  and  seemly  manliness  ; 
To-day  I  nought  possess  but  lovers'  '  horse  of  palm.1 

1134.     <fB/TLD<5    &(&LDL-l6$r   ££]  (LI  &  (3j  G>  Lb 


Love's  rushing  tide  will  sweep  away  the  raft 
Of  seemly  manliness  and  shame  combined. 

1135.    Q  ^  rr 


The  maid  that  slender  armlets  wears,  like  flowers  entwined, 
Has  brought  me  *  horse  of  palm,'  and  pangs  of  eventide  ! 


1136.  LL  L-.  gy/T  IT  ;£  <5\)    UJfTLD^^J    (Lp  GfT  (Off)  Q  ®J  6GT 
LJ  /_Q  }6V  IT  6V  <5\)  IT  LJ    (o  U  <SV)  j5  <35  Q  <3B  <5VT   &659T 

Of  climbing  '  horse  of  palm  '  in  midnight  hour,  I  think  ; 
My  eyes  know  no  repose  for  that  same  simple  maid. 

1137.  &l—<5V<55r65T   SfTLD    (LpLplEgi 

L£>t-($6V(7)?LJ  Qu6ssr<ssvr}tb  Qu(iTj/5.£&&  $ev  (er) 

There  's  nought  of  greater  worth  than  woman's  long-enduring  soul, 
Who,  vexed  by  love  like  ocean  waves,  climbs  not  the  '  horse  of  palm.' 

IL—  She. 

1138.  1$  <°V>  P  U-f  ifi  IL!  IT    LCXoST'oSTGllfluJ    Q  ff  <SGT  (65)  gj]    6E/TLD 


In  virtue  hard  to  move,  yet  very  tender,  too,  are  we  ; 
Love  deems  not  so,  would  rend  the  veil,  and  court  publicity 


BOOK    III. — THE    GANDFTARVA    MARRIAGE.  157 

1139.   J/f&QfOff  Q  ir  6V  6V  rr  (£  Q 


'  There  's  no  one  knows  my  heart,'  so  says  my  love, 
And  thus,  in  public  ways,  perturbed  will  rove. 


1140.    ujnrihj&sm 

Before  my  eyes  the  foolish  make  a  mock  of  me, 
Because  they  ne'er  endured  the  pangs  I  now  must  drie. 


CHAPTER  CXV. 

u.  —  THE  ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  RUMOUE. 
[See  note  to  last  Chapter.] 


I.—  He. 
1141.     ^fS^QlTLp    SUfTfT^uSllT    l8jb(&j 


ILJ  rr  IT 


By  this  same  rumour's  rise,  my  precious  life  stands  fast  ; 
Good  fortune  grant  the  many  know  this  not  ! 

1142.     LbSVlTGSrSSr    <5B69afr^33)    <57T(77}S3)LD    UJ  pSl  LU  fT 


The  village  hath  to  us  this  rumour  giv'n,  that  makes  her  mine  ; 
Unweeting  all  the  rareness  of  the  maid  with  flower-like  eyne. 


1143. 

Q  U  <D  p  65T  <S5T 

The  rumour  spread  within  the  town,  is  it  not  gain  to  me? 
It  is  as  though  that  were  obtained  that  may  not  be. 

1144. 


The  rumour  rising  makes  my  love  to  rise  ; 

My  love  would  lose  its  power  and  languish  otherwise. 


1145. 

Q<8Li<sifluu(f>lf6 

The  more  man  drinks,  the  more  he  ever  drunk  would  be  ; 
The  more  my  love  's  revealed,  the  sweeter  'tis  to  me  ! 


158  THE    KURRAL. 

II.—  She. 

114G.     a6GSTl_&]    LD6V1J6V}]    Q  LO  /T  (77J  /5  /T    GTTeti  IT  LD63T  63)]  15 
!SlEJ<35$SfrLJ    U  fT  Lb  LJ  Q  &  fT  6S8T    L_p^l 

I  saw  him  but  one  single  day  :  rumour  spreads  soon 
As  darkness,  when  the  dragon  seizes  on  the  moon. 

1147.    ^mireuiT  Q  &  <srr  <ss>  eiJ  Qliuj  6urr&  <su<5or^ssrQ<f  /rear 


My  anguish  grows  apace  :  the  town's  report 
Manures  it  ;  my  mother's  word  doth  water  it. 


1148.  QreuJUJtr 

Q&6TT  <59)6l]UJrrp    <3BfTLD   JFjJgjlLjQu    QLLXSST6V 

With  butter-oil  extinguish  fire  !     'Twill  prove 
Harder  by  scandal  to  extinguish  love. 

1149.  *^  6\)  ir  /E  rr  am  Q6unr<^)6u(orr  eu  <h  &  Q  cv  rr  LL> 


When  he  who  said  *  Fear  not  !  '  hath  left  me  blamed, 
While  many  shrink,  can  I  from  rumour  hide  ashamed  ? 


1150.     j5  [I  LbQ  611  GS3T  ty. 

Q  <S5  6TT  65)  (517    Q  (LI  Q  <35  (^  LJ3  <5U 


If  we  desire,  who  loves  will  grant  what  we  require  ; 
This  town  sends  forth  the  rumour  we  desire  ! 


END    OF    THE    SECTION    ON    'THE    GANDHARVA   MARRIAGE.' 


159 


§  2.   WEDDED  LOVE, 


CHAPTER  CXVI. 

L$ifl<sijfrrb(y<Ga)L&.  —  SEPARATION  UNENDURABLE. 


1151. 

6ii  6V  SUIT®]  <surri)<oUfrr& 

If  you  will  say,  '  I  leave  thee  not,'  then  tell  me  so  ; 
Of  quick  return  tell  those  that  can  survive  this  woe. 

1152.  £§)6ST<5E    ®ft)l<5tnL-pp<5lllT    U  fT  IT  6U  ffl)    1$  ffl  <8lJ  (&£  &  Lb 
L-I<5ST&    <j$3)l  68)  l_  <5  -5  !T  £D    LJ  6ffl  IT  61J 

It  once  was  perfect  joy  to  look  upon  his  face  ; 
But  now  the  fear  of  parting  saddens  each  embrace. 

1153.  ^g  ft  <&Q  IT  IT 


To  trust  henceforth  is  hard,  if  ever  he  depart, 

E'en  he,  who  knows  his  promise  and  my  breaking  heart. 

1154.  «=gy  GttliBp}  (Qj  <f     Q  <SV  <5VT  fD  <8U  IT    !§ 

Qpxsifl^fsQ&rrp)  Q  (D  n$  uj  IT  IT  <s> 

If  he  depart,  who  fondly  said,  '  Fear  not,'  what  blame  's  incurred 
By  those  who  trusted  to  his  reassuring  word  ? 

1155.  gpLDi^  63T65)LD/5^/T/f    lOl  $  Q  6U  FT  LD  U  <5$T   LbjbfD<5UIT 

t§E]£)  GST  ifl  ^  rr  p  Ljesyririoii  (©) 

If  you  would  guard  my  life,  from  going  him  restrain 
Who  fills  my  life  !     If  he  depart,  hardly  we  meet  again. 

1156.  t^/$6SS)./r<55<9/i)    61J  6VT  <5B  <S33T  <333T    IT  fT  Il9 


To  cherish  longing  hope  that  he  should  ever  gracious  be, 
Is  hard,  when  he  could  stand,  and  of  departure  speak  to  me. 

1157. 


The  bracelet  slipping  from  my  wrist  announced  before 
Departure  of  the  Prince  that  rules  the  ocean  shore. 


160  THE    KURRAL. 

1158. 


jsl  <svfl  LU  rr  IT  u  i^ltfley 

Tis  sad  to  sojourn  in  the  town  where  no  kind  kinsmen  dwell  ; 
'Tis  sadder  still  to  bid  a  friend  beloved  farewell. 

1159.     Ql  ^  IT  ty-  p  &  iy_    <5Br<5\)6Vgj]    3>  fT  Lti(o  /5  fTlLJ    (o  U  fT  6\) 


Fire  burns  the  hands  that  touch  ;  but  smart  of  love 
Will  burn  in  hearts  that  far  away  remove. 


1160. 

&  ffl  <5U  IT  p  f$  U    lOleST  <5of)  (Tfj  (5  ^£1    <SU  /TL£)  SU/T/T    U6\)IT 

Sorrow's  sadness  meek  sustaining, 

Driving  sore  distress  away, 
Separation  uncomplaining 

Many  bear  the  livelong  day  ! 


CHAPTER  CXVII.     jy£.  sser. 
UL_IT(O)L£)  GQEsljrtsj&ev.  —  COMPLAININGS. 


1161.     Lb<5V>puQu<S5TLb<5Gr   ID  IT  S&  <?oQ  <5  (T 

Quirsv 


I  would  my  pain  conceal,  but  see  !  it  surging  swells, 

As  streams  to  those  that  draw  from  ever-springing  wells. 

1162. 


I  cannot  hide  this  pain  of  mine,  yet  shame  restrains 
When  1  would  tell  it  out  to  him  who  caused  my  pains. 


1163.  &rrLb(Lp  /Err  ami  (LpuStrran-6ijrr<5 

(o{otr)(53)    eyL-LQlSl     GVT&^gjl 

My  soul,  like  porter's  pole,  within  my  wearied  frame, 
Sustains  a  two-fold  burthen  poised,  of  love  and  shame. 

1164.  <5E/TLO<£5    <5E£_65rLD6aTJJ>/    (^Lp<5mQ  l_    LU  gjl  !§  IS  ^J 

i£l  6V 


A  sea  of  love,  'tis  true,  I  see  stretched  out  before, 
But  not  the  trusty  bark  that  wafts  to  yonder  shore. 


1165. 

Grrrrjb^a  ueuir  (  ©) 

Who  work  us  woe  in  friendship's  trustful  hour, 
What  will  they  prove  when  angry  tempests  lower  Y 


BOOK   III.  —  WEDDED    LOVE.  161 

1166.     {jfteVTUIE]  <95L—68TLC>p)g)J<35    <S5/TLD    LD  o°o  p  Q  IE1  &  IT  p 


A  happy  love  's  a  sea  of  joy  ;  but  mightier  sorrows  roll 
From  unpropitious  love  athwart  the  troubled  soul. 

1167.     &fTLD&    <SE©/i)L/6Sr    StfP  75^65    <35  <5G)  IT  &  IT  Q  <S53T  68T 

iurr(o<ssr  ILJ  (o  <srr  <5sr  (<sr) 


I  swim  the  cruel  tide  of  love,  and  can  no  shore  descry, 
In  watches  of  the  night,  too,  'mid  the  waters,  only  I  ! 

1168.    LCKovrevyuSl  Q  JT  <sv  <s\)  rr  IB  gjiuQlppSl  lu  <sif)  ^  £3  JT  IT 


All  living  souls  in  slumber  soft  she  steeps  ; 

But  me  alone  kind  night  for  her  companion  keeps  ! 

1169.  Q<5B/rzp_uj/r/f  Q&rrQs&LDuSljb  (npiEjQ&rrtp-U 
Qssyr^-iLi  &L£IILI  iSirrr 

More  cruel  than  the  cruelty  of  him,  the  cruel  one, 

In  these  sad  times  are  lengthening  hours  of  night  I  watch  alone. 

1170.  £-Grr6rrLD(ourr<ovr  gu  err  <su  L£)  &  Q  &  ev  B  p  i9  <s$r 

<oV  Lo&ar^Qsue^r  asm 


When  eye  of  mine  would  as  my  soul  go  forth  to  him, 

It  knows  not  how  through  floods  of  its  own  tears  to  swim. 


CHAPTER  CXVin. 

J.  -  EYES    CONSUMED    WITH    GRIEF. 


1171.  <5BSg3T/_/T/B    <£6£]1£<51]    Q  ^  <SU  <5VT  Q  &  fT  (o  <5V  fT 

j5<5Km_rrG>fEn~uj   <s  rr  IEJ  &  IT  z_L  L-  ILI  rr  IEI  a  <SVVT 

They  showed  me  him,  and  then  my  endless  pain 
I  saw  :  why  then  should  weeping  eyes  complain  ? 

1172.  Q  ^  if)  IB  gjj  <5$vr  n  rr  Q  /5  rr  &  £l  tu 

U  if)  /5  J57  6m  IT  IT  LJ    <5V>Uf5     6\}]LpUU 

How  glancing  eyes,  that  rash  unweeting  looked  that  day, 
With  sorrow  measureless  are  wasting  now  away  ! 

1173. 


The  eyes  that  threw  such  eager  glances  round  ere  while 
Are  weeping  now.     Such  folly  surely  claims  a  smile  ! 

21 


162  THE    KUEEAL. 

1174. 


tl 


Those  eyes  have  wept  till  all  the  fount  of  tears  is  dry, 
That  brought  upon  me  pain  that  knows  no  remedy. 

1175.  LJl—<5Vfr«)(yLJ    <5VU<5    GpJLfi&^lEJ 

<35L-<5V[rjb(7)p&  &  nr  LD(£  /5  n~  LLJ 

The  eye  that  wrought  me  more  than  sea  could  hold  of  woes, 
Is  suffering  pangs  that  banish  all  repose. 

1176.  g£££    <aSl<S&G)f£    QlULD^StfsCo/BfrUJ    Q  <f  UJ  ^  <3B  6MT 
i_/T«jy    iSlfSpUL-    l—gjl 

Oho  !  how  sweet  a  thing  to  see  !  the  eye 

That  wrought  this  pain,  in  the  same  gulf  doth  lie. 

1177.  £-Lpf5^£JLpf6     ££]®5yT<5®ST    JT^tt 

<aSl  <55)  Lp  IB  J£l  65)  L£  IB  gtf    G><SU<omL^.    UJ  6U  IT  <5E  65  653T  L_ 

Aching,  aching,  let  those  exhaust  their  stream, 
That  melting,  melting,  that  day  gazed  on  him. 

1178. 


Who  loved  me  once,  unloving  now  doth  here  remain  ; 
Not  seeing  him,  my  eye  no  rest  can  gain. 

1179.     <SU  fT  JT  fT  <5B  <5E  IT  p    ^K^-ffT    611  £}  {D  ,£]  (^Jj  &  IT    617  /T  ff9  63)  Z_ 


656397 


When  he  comes  not,  all  slumber  flies  ;  no  sleep  when  he  is  there  ; 
Thus  every  way  my  eyes  have  troubles  hard  to  bear. 


1180.     LDGVLpQup     6£H  If  IT  IT  <35    &  ifl  <5  <SVT  (ft? 


It  is  not  hard  for  all  the  town  the  knowledge  to  obtain, 

When  eyes,  as  mine,  like  beaten  tambours,  make  the  mystery  plain. 


CHAPTER  CXIX. 

i. — THE  PALLID  HUE. 


1181. 

LJ  <3F  /B^B  G)  6U  <5BT    LJ  6937"  l3l  ILJ  fT  fT  <35 

I  willed  my  lover  absent  should  remain ; 

Of  pining's  sickly  hue  to  whom  shall  I  complain? 


BOOK    III.  -  WEDDED    LOVE.  163 

1182.    «j  <su  IT    fs  p  IT  Q  jr  <5vr  ®nj  IB 


U  &  U  L/ 

'  He  gave  '  :  this  sickly  hue  thus  proudly  speaks, 
Then  climbs,  and  all  my  frame  its  chariot  makes. 

1183. 


Of  comeliness  and  shame  he  me  bereft, 

While  pain  and  sickly  hue,  in  recompense,  he  left. 


1184.    &-6rr(ffffj<8iJ<5vr  tzxsaruj/r   GtpjGtnjrLJU  ^  <sii  ir  ]S  fo  LA  rr  p 
&Gfr6rrLa  iStroQetitr   U&ULJ 

I  meditate  his  words,  his  worth  is  theme  of  all  I  say, 
This  sickly  hue  is  false  that  would  my  trust  betray. 

1185. 


My  lover  there  went  forth  to  roam  ; 

This  pallor  of  my  frame  usurps  his  place  at  home. 

1186.  (sStfffr<35<95/bnDLD  urriT<35(&j  i^^QerrQurrp 

(LpUJ&&p)JDLC>    LJ/T/Tci^/i    U  &  U  Lf 

As  darkness  waits  till  lamp  expires,  to  fill  the  place, 
This  pallor  waits  till  I  enjoy  no  more  my  lord's  embrace. 

1187.  LjG\)<5$<35    $L-lbQ>j5<S$r    L]  GftL-Qu  UJ  IT  IbQjS    <o$T  <5U  <SU  <5TT  oQ 

6\)<arr<oiflaQ<35n~6rr  eupQp  LJ&LJLJ 

I  lay  in  his  embrace,  I  turned  unwittingly  ; 

Forthwith  this  hue,  as  you  might  grasp  it,  came  on  me. 

1188. 


On  me,  because  I  pine,  they  cast  a  slur  ; 
But  no  one  says,  '  He  first  deserted  her/ 

1189.     U<F<3B<35LDfb    U  L—  L—  IT  151  Q  &  <55T    QiQ 


Well  !  let  my  frame,  as  now,  be  sicklied  o'er  with  pain, 
If  he  who  won  my  heart's  consent,  in  good  estate  remain  ! 


1190.     U<fuQu<53TLJ    G>LjfrQugll<5 

Ib  UU  LJ  t9  f£  ^  IT  IT    /5<JO<5E/T635LD    ^jtfT{b(y    Q  JT  <5vfl  <5$T 

'Tis  well,  though  men  deride  me  for  my  sickly  hue  of  pain  ; 
If  they  from  calling  him  unkind,  who  won  my  love,  refrain. 


164  THE    KUERAL. 


CHAPTEE  CXX. 

<$  soft  u  u  i—  iruS  (&)!$.  —  THE  SOLITARY  ANGUISH. 

1191.   ^[rLbe^Lpeurrir  jSLCtetftpu  Quppenfr 


The  bliss  to  be  beloved  by  those  they  love  who  gains, 
Of  love  the  stoneless,  luscious  fruit  obtains. 


1192. 

(2.) 

As  heaven  on  living  men  showers  blessings  from  above, 
Is  tender  grace  by  lovers  shown  to  those  they  love. 

1193. 


Who  love  and  are  beloved,  to  them  alone 

Belongs  the  boast,  *  We  've  made  life's  very  joys  our  own.' 


1194.  <af?£pLJ  uQeumir  Q  a  L[?  jjfi  ILJ  <sv  IT 

G^^LJ    UL-fT^I    QjT<oS<5ST 

Those  well-beloved  will  luckless  prove, 
Unless  beloved  by  those  they  love. 

1195.  /B  rr  IEI  &  rr  j&  GV  Q<s/T633r/_/r/f  /ELD&Q&euesr 
j&  rr  IEI  &  rr  f&  <sv  Q<9Sfr6rr<srrrr<35  <5E6B)/_ 

From  him  I  love  to  me  what  gain  can  be, 
Unless,  as  I  love  him,  he  loveth  me  ? 

1196. 


Love  on  one  side  is  bad  ;  like  balanced  load 
By  porter  borne,  love  on  both  sides  is  good. 

1197.  U(7fj<Sl]jrg$lLD    <SV)U<£6$]IE]    <5/T(632r)6i3rQ<55/r<5V    &fTLD 

Q(6S)(/7j<5iJir&  <s5$<5GTQ(n/?(Lg(&j  <5urr&fr  (<sr) 

While  Kaman  rushes  straight  at  me  alone, 
Is  all  my  pain  and  wasting  grief  unknown  ? 

1198.  G^Lpsumfl  zvfl<s3rQ<5Frrp> 


Who  hear  from  lover's  lips  no  pleasant  word  from  day  to  day, 
Yet  in  the  world  live  out  their  life,—  no  braver  souls  than  they  ! 


BOOK    III.  —  WEDDED   LOVE.  165 


1199.     /565)<F^)UJ/r/r    /5£0<S6/T    Q  IT  ttf)  GgU    LQ  <5U  IT  LD  IT  I— 
Z£.  <5ff>  <F  /L/    ifilusfllL]    Q  <3F  toQ  &>  (<3j 

Though  he  my  heart  desires  no  grace  accords  to  me, 
Yet  every  accent  of  his  voice  is  melody. 


1200.    &-(np*0yir<35  <^j2/(o/5/r  (Lf  6tn  IT  u  u  rr  ILJ 

Q  <£F  (Vj>  «^y  ^1  UJ    61//TL$UJ    Q/5(^5<» 

Tell  him  thy  pain  that  loves  not  thee  ? 
Farewell,  my  soul,  fill  up  the  sea  ! 


CHAPTER  CXXI. 

b.  —  SAD   MEMORIES. 


I.—  He. 


1201.    £-.<srr<sif)6j£]f5  jjirn~LJ  QuqjjLbQlLp  Q  &  ILJ  ^  a)  fr  p 

&  GfT  <5lfl  &£]  IEJ 


From  thought  of  her  unfailing  gladness  springs, 
Sweeter  than  palm-tree  wine  the  joy  love  brings. 

1202.    <or^ssr^Q^fr<5sr  r£l  '<svf)(o  ^  &  n  'sssr  &  rr  LA  /b  ^  IT  <syr 


How  great  is  love  !     Behold  its  sweetness  past  belief  ! 
Think  on  the  lover,  and  the  spirit  knows  no  grief. 

II.—  She. 
1203.   [flBssruutsiiir  QurrGsrjpi  iQ'fasnuFriTQ& 

Q^ssruu^i  G>  u  rr  GST  £11  Q&GliD  (/&_) 

A  fit  of  sneezing  threatened,  but  it  passed  away  : 
He  seemed  to  think  of  me,  but  do  his  fancies  stray  ? 


1204. 

(ojSrrep  eyerrGtjr  lueuir 

Have  I  a  place  within  his  heart  ? 
From  mine,  alas  !  he  never  doth  depart. 


1205.     jSfoQlbi^Jj&'S    Qj£LCXotoLb<!k    <£BZ^_Q<5B/TS33TZ_/r/f    /5  /T  <<5$$)  IT  Q 


Me  from  his  heart  he  jealously  excludes  : 

Hath  he  no  shame  who  ceaseless  on  my  heart  intrudes  r* 


166  THE    KTTRRAL. 

1206. 


(6fl)6rr6Yr 

How  live  I  yet  ?     I  live  to  ponder  o'er 

The  days  of  bliss  with  him  that  are  no  more. 

1207.     LtifDUlQ    Q<5VT6lJ<<53)6lJ<5Vr   LD  /D  Q  -35  FT  <55T 


If  I  remembered  not,  what  were  I  then  ?     And  yet, 
The  fiery  smart  of  what  my  spirit  knows  not  to  forget  ! 

1208.    <oT(fcyTj5gjj  $  (few  u  t$  egy  tin  <$/riL//r 


My  frequent  thought  no  wrath  excites.     Is  it  not  so  ? 
This  honour  doth  my  love  on  me  bestow. 

1209.     6$  <olfl  ILj  Q  LQ    (Syfl  68T  6VU  liS)  IT    Q  <8U  fD  <S\)  6\) 


Dear  life  departs,  when  his  ungracious  deeds  I  ponder  o'er, 
Who  said  erewhile,  '  We  're  one  for  evermore.' 


1210. 

UL-fT^^I    (SlJfTL^    LD^  (tD) 

Set  not,  so  may'st  thou  prosper,  moon  !  that  eyes  may  see 
My  love  who  went  away,  but  ever  bides  with  me. 


CHAPTER  CXXII.     ^.  «a_a.. 

i).  —  THE  VISIONS  OP  THE  NIGHT. 


1211.  <5B/r 

&)  ILJ  tr  ^j£i  Q  &  ILJ 

It  came  and  brought  to  me,  that  nightly  vision  rare, 
A  message  from  my  love,  —  what  feast  shall  I  prepare  ? 

1212.  &uJ6£j6vvr&65yr  uj  ir  <5vfl  IT  u  u  p  ^Kthj&p  &<5Vfc 

(&jlLJ6$l6Krr<SS)lJb    &  IT  jb  £1J  Q  <5lJ  <5GT    LD6ST 

If  my  dark,  carp-like  eye  will  close  in  sleep,  as  I  implore, 
The  tale  of  my  long-suffering  life  I'll  tell  my  loved  one  o'er. 

1213.  /5<S3r<a$(ts<3)  6srei)<£/r  j5  <si]  ®n  jr  a 

<35  IT  6937  L_  <a9     6$}J  <5G8T  Q  Z_  <5GT    €&)J  Il9  IT 


Him,  who  in  waking  hour  no  kindness  shows, 
In  dreams  I  see  :  and  so  my  lifetime  goes  ! 


BOOK    III.  —  WEDDED    LOVE.  167 

1214. 


'SOT  6V  .55  IT  <SB)  IT 


Some  pleasure  I  enjoy  when  him  who  loves  not  me 

In  waking  hours,  the  vision  searches  out  and  makes  me  see. 


1215. 

35  <S$T  Q/  fB  -5  IT  <o3T    *6S3TL_         LJ  IT 

As  what  I  then  beheld  in  waking  hour  was  sweet, 
So  pleasant  dreams  in  hour  of  sleep  my  spirit  greet. 

1216.     fb<59rQ<SU<50T   Q  611  IT  <5ST  fSl  'tfO&D 


And  if  there  were  no  waking  hour,  my  love 
In  dreams  would  never  from  my  side  remove. 


1217.    /B  <ssr  eSl  (63)  637<a)«/r<i 

Q  <oGT  <5VT  Q  <55T  L£>  <Sy)  LD  LJ    L$  il  LJ 


The  cruel  one,  in  waking  hour,  who  all  ungracious  seems, 
Why  should  he  thus  torment  my  soul  in  nightly  dreams  ? 

1218. 


And  when  I  sleep  he  holds  my  form  embraced  ; 
And  when  I  wake  to  fill  my  heart  makes  haste  ! 

1219.  /5<o3T6$(63)    <SST  6V  <3S  fT  63)  IT    (ofSfTGUIT 

&<5Gr<sSl(toG)p  &  rr  ^  6V  IT  &  <srr^)  ^eiiir 

In  dreams  who  ne'er  their  lover's  form  perceive, 

For  those  in  waking  hours  who  show  no  love  will  grieve. 

1220.  /563TS$(63)    <53T  fB  £  <5  <5  fT    QjfeSfuk 

<5B  63T  (aSl    3          <55/T633/fQ<5B/r    &9  <5ll  Q      ff  <5U  IT 


They  say,  that  he  in  waking  hours  has  left  me  lone  ; 

In  dreams  they  surely  see  him  not,  —  these  people  of  the  town  ! 


CHAPTER  CXXIII.     jy£.  SS.IB.. 

).  —  LAMENTATIONS  AT  EVENTIDE. 


1221.    L£>fT%sti(oiLirr  <sii  Gv'&sti  Lnsyyrfh^fT  (ffjuSlrffj  GMT  ggzp/  LD 


Thou  art  not  evening,  but  a  spear  that  doth  devour 
The  souls  of  brides  :  farewell,  thou  evening  hour  ! 


168  THE    KURRAL. 

1222.    LfGvr&Gyyrckvyr 


Q>  <&  IT  £l  <S5 

Thine  eye  is  sad  ;  Hail,  doubtful  liour  of  eventide  ! 
Of  cruel  eye,  as  is  my  spouse,  is  too  thy  bride  ? 

1223.  Uttf)iLJ(fjjLb£lu  eyyu^GvQ&rrssyj  i^/rSsi) 
^jtotsfliuqjjLCiiSlfS  ^GVTLJLD  <su<srnr  (SUQjjLn 

With  buds  of  chilly  dew  wan  evening's  shade  enclose 
My  anguish  buds  apace,  and  all  my  sorrow  grows. 

1224.  &rr<56V  ffteveutfl  Lo/rS 

G>urr<sv  GIJ 


When  absent  is  my  love,  the  evening  hour  descends, 
As  when  an  alien  host  to  field  of  battle  wends. 

1225.     <5E/r3s\)<fB(<9)<F   Q&liljSilEGSr    Q  fD  <5$T  Q  <5E  fT   Q  <5\)  (517  <5tf  Q  <5B  IT  6\)  ILJ  fT  6ST 


O  morn,  how  have  I  won  thy  grace  ?  thou  bring'  st  relief  ! 
O  eve,  why  art  thou  foe  ?  thou  dost  renew  my  grief. 

1226.     LD/r$S\)(o/5/rUJ    Q<FlLlj5G5r   LC><5miE35nr    rr 
cSB/rSsi)    ILJ/$f5p    J5lG><5V<55T 

The  pangs  that  evening  brings  I  never  knew, 
Till  he,  my  wedded  spouse,  from  me  withdrew 


1227. 

iDir'fa)  LDtoVQ^iElfB  QtsiTUJ  (<sr) 

My  grief  at  morn  a  bud,  all  day  an  opening  flower, 
Full-blown  expands  in  evening  hour. 

1228.    *°yy)<5\)G>urr6£i 

(&jLp<5ti(oUrr<jl£l[EI    Q  <35  IT  <5\)  6£1  LD 

The  shepherd's  pipe  is  like  a  murderous  weapon,  to  my  ear, 
For  it  proclaims  the  hour  of  ev'ning's  fiery  anguish  near. 

1229. 


If  evening's  shades,  that  dai'ken  all  my  soul,  extend  ; 
From  this  afflicted  town  will  sound  of  grief  ascend. 

1230.    QiJ/regafrLD/rSsO  LU  IT  err  <s$)  IT 


This  darkening  eve,  my  darkling  soul  must  perish  utterly  ; 
Eemembering  him  who  seeks  for  wealth,  but  seeks  not  me. 


BOOK    III.  —  WEDDED    LOVE.  169 

CHAPTER  CXXIV.     jy£.  &a-&. 
a.,/p/L/q  ^6U£37-L$;#6i>.  —  WASTING  AWAY. 
I.—  She. 


1231. 


Thine  eyes  grown  dim  are  now  ashamed  the  fragrant  flow'rs  to  see, 
Thinking  on  him,  who  wand'ring  far,  leaves  us  in  misery. 

1232. 


The  eye,  with  sorrow  wan,  all  wet  with  dew  of  tears, 
As  witness  of  the  lover's  lack  of  love  appears. 

1233.    p  63VT  15  £5  <5S)  LG 


These  withered  arms,  desertion's  pangs  abundantly  display, 
That  swelled  with  joy  on  that  glad  nuptial  day. 

1234. 


When  lover  went,  then  faded  all  their  wonted  charms, 

And  armlets'  golden  round  slips  off  from  these  poor  wasted  arms. 


1235.  Q<5E/r/£-(L//r/r  Q&n~®<sv)LD  ILJ  Gin  u  a  (&j  IB 
Q<smp-Qujrr(b)  Q  <&  IT  <sv  &  <sSl  <ssr  eum^u 

These  wasted  arms,  the  bracelet  with  their  wonted  beauty  gone, 
The  cruelty  declare  of  that  most  cruel  one. 

1236.  Q^rriy-Qujrr®  Q^n-QlssyrQip  QiBrrsu  <5V6ii<5v>fr& 


I  grieve,  'tis  pain  to  me  to  hear  him  cruel  chid, 
Because  the  armlet  from  my  wasted  arm  has  slid 

1237.   urr®  QugujSQuJtr 


<surrQ(o^n:L-  L^^   6$}  <5tn  IT  *s  ^j 

My  heart  !  say  ought  of  glory  wilt  thou  gain, 

If  to  that  cruel  one  thou  of  thy  wasted  arms  complain  ? 

— 


II.—  He. 

1238. 


One  day  the  fervent  pressure  of  embracing  arms  I  checked, 
Grew  wan  the  forehead  of  the  maid  with  golden  armlet  decked. 

22 


170  THE    KURRAL. 

1239. 


LJ  <3T  U  Lf  D  fD 

As  we  embraced  a  breath  of  wind  found  entrance  there  ; 
The  maid's  large  liquid  eyes  were  dimmed  with  care. 

1240.     «  633T633$63r   U<fLj(oUfT   LJ  (TFJ6U  IT    Q  <5V  UJ  J£l  <5VT  (o  /D 

QujireosrggpijSG)  Q&ujjS^  s,om®  (id) 

The  dimness  of  her  eye  felt  sorrow  now, 
Beholding  what  was  done  by  that  bright  brow. 


CHAPTER  CXXV.     jy£.  «a_®. 
Qp^Q&frGl  iJsrr^eu.  —  SOLILOQUY. 

1241.   iSl'fasrQStrGsrjr)]  Q&iTGuevrrQujrr 


My  heart,  canst  thou  not  thinking  of  some  med'cine  tell, 
Not  any  one,  to  drive  away  this  grief  incurable  ? 


1242.  &rr^  Gveuiftcv  irrr&ri 

G>LJ65)f356V)Lb    <SlJ  IT  i£l  Q  U 

Since  he  loves  not,  thy  smart 

Is  folly,  fare  thee  well,  my  heart  ! 

1243.  @  (77j  f6  ^J  Sir  <5tf)    QlLJGSTUlfl 

U  if)  IB  gjj  GfT  6TT  <5\)    GftLJGoQ  (63)UJ    Q  &  LU  ^  IT  IT  -ft    683^61)  ( 

What  comes  of  sitting  here  in  pining  thought,  O  heart  ?    He  knows 
No  pitying  thought,  the  cause  of  all  these  wasting  woes. 

1244.  <5,<St53T6SS)][51   Q&fTGfT&Q  fr  $    Q  16  @>G>  *  &    ifil  <5V><SljQlU<5$r(kyr  ,35 

LD6UIT&  arrow 


mrr 


O  rid  me  of  these  eyes/  my  heart  ;  for  they, 
Longing  to  see  him,  wear  my  life  away. 

1245. 


O  heart,  as  a  foe,  can  I  abandon  utterly 

Him  who,  though  I  long  for  him,  longs  not  for  me  ? 

1246.     <95  <5V  /5  gil  GMT  IT  /B  gil  IEJ    <3S  fT  ^ 


My  heart,  false  is  the  fire  that  burns  ;  thou  canst  not  wrath  maintain, 
If  thou  thy  love  behold,  embracing,  soothing  all  thy  pain. 


BOOK   III.  -  WEDDED   LOVE.  171 

1247.     <S/TLD££)    <sSl®Q<SUrr<5SrQflf>    (5  fT  <583T  < 


Or  bid  thy  love,  or  bid  thy  shame  depart  ; 

For  me,  I  cannot  bear  them  both,  my  worthy  heart  ! 

1248. 


Thou  art  befooled,  my  heart,  thou  folio  west  him  who  flees  from  thee  ; 
And  still  thou  yearning  criest  :  '  He  will  nor  pity  show  nor  love  to  me.' 


1249. 

a/Gyrsrft/f  lurrq^  snipe  Q&fdQuJGff  Q  <ssr  (&$  &  (05>) 

My  heart  !   my  lover  lives  within  my  rnind  ; 
Eoaming,  whom  dost  thou  think  to  find  ? 

1250.     .gU  62FT  (5x3)  j£   ^  fD  f5  ^  FT  6V)  JT    GlfB^^^    ^J  <S3)  L_  (o  ILJ  LD  IT 

<aSl<5$Ttt)]    LQip^^jlEl    SOSICST  ((D) 

If  I  should  keep  in  mind  the  man  who  utterly  renounces  me, 
My  soul  must  suffer  further  loss  of  dignity. 


CHAPTEE    CXXVT 

b.  —  RESERVE  OVERCOME. 


1251.     <35fTLD<S    3,®K$<3:&    ILf  <5V)  L-  <£  (3J    $  <5S)  £>  Q  tU  GOT  6g] 

IB  IT  6&pi  <5  <&  rr  LQ 


The  princess  has  long  repressed  her  feelings.    She  resolves  to  implore 

s 


his  return,  and 

Of  womanly  reserve  love's  axe  breaks  through  the  door, 
Barred  by  the  bolt  of  shame  before. 

1252.     45/TLO    QLD<SVrQ6Un~<5Vr(o(7)p    &6 
ILJ  rrUbjS^&jJ    LD  /7~  (GTTj  /5    Q  8j  IT  LJ3  <S\) 

What  men  call  love  is  the  one  thing  of  merciless  power  ; 
It  gives  my  soul  no  rest,  e'en  in  the  midnight  hour. 

1253. 

LJ 


I  would  my  love  conceal,  but  like  a  sneeze 
It  shows  itself,  and  gives  no  warning  sign. 


1254.     r®<5VfDlL<5ni—(aUJ    Q<53T<50r(oU  63TLA6GT   ILJ  ff  Q  '(G^Q  <SU  &ST  SfTLD 


In  womanly  reserve  I  deemed  myself  beyond  assail  ; 
But  love  will  come  abroad,  and  casts  away  the  veil. 


172  THE   KtTRRAL. 

1255. 


GST  roesrgu  (©) 

The  dignity  that  seeks  not  him  who  acts  as  foe, 
Is  the  one  thing  that  loving  heart  can  never  know. 

1256.    Q&ppxsiifr 


My  grief  how  full  of  grace,  I  pray  you  see  ! 
It  seeks  to  follow  him  that  hateth  me. 


1257.  IB  (r  (ol  <ssyr  <5sr  (o)eiJrr<5vr(o(7K>  GIJ  ^  ILJ  <sv  IEI 

(o  U  GStffl  ILJ  FT  IT    QuL-U    Q<Fu3l<5GT  (<S7~) 

No  sense  of  shame  my  gladdened  mind  shall  prove, 
When  he  returns  my  longing  heart  to  bless  with  love. 

1258.  u  <ssr  LD  rruj  &  &  err  eu  <ssf  u  stssfl  Q  LD  rr  L$ 

LU<5yrQ(yf5LCi    Q  U  688T  <5S)  LQ    ILj  (59)  Z_  65  (^  L£)     U  <5V)  L- 

The  words  of  that  deceiver,  versed  in  every  wily  art, 

Are  instruments  that  break  through  every  guard  of  woman's  heart  ! 

1259.  Lfeouu  Q<s^ssr<fQ<3:(5srQp'5sr 


'  I  '11  shun  his  greeting  '  ;  saying  thus  with  pride  away  I  went  : 
I  held  him  in  my  arms,  for  straight  I  felt  my  heart  relent. 


1260. 

LJ  6V9T  IT  fB  &tf  If-    JjjbQu    GlLbGSTGV  ((D) 

*  We  '11  stand  aloof  and  then  embrace  '  :  is  this  for  them  to  say, 
Whose  hearts  are  as  the  fat  that  in  the  blaze  dissolves  away  ? 


CHAPTER  CXXVII. 

6u.  —  MUTUAL  DESIRE. 

I.—  She. 


1261. 


My  eyes  have  lost  their  brightness,  sight  is  dimmed,  my  fingers  worn, 
With  noting  on  the  wall  the  days  since  I  was  left  forlorn. 


1262.     jjg)  6V  IE]  £l  Lp  FT    uQl<53T£)l    Lb  {D  U  1§I  Q  <SVT  <5VT   Q  ((Yj><5®nQ 


O  thou  with  gleaming  jewels  decked,  could  I  forget  for  this  one  day, 
Henceforth  these  bracelets  from  my  arms  will  slip,  my  beauty  worn  away. 


BOOK    III.  —  WEDDED    LOVE.  173 

1263,    &-ffv8r<stn<F{j£)  /tysrreyr/5  gjj  Ssovr  LU  rr  <s  &  Q  &  <5$r  QY?  fr 


On  victory  intent, 
His  mind  sole  company  he  went  ; 

And  I  yet  life  sustain, 
And  long  to  see  his  face  again  ! 


1264.     '9^-i^-LU    <S/TLDLD   L$  iff  fB  ^  fT  IT    S1J  IT  61j  <5YT  &Fl  <£5 

(o  <x  fr  (b>  Q  <s  nr  (o 


1  He  conies  again,  who  left  my  side,  and  I  shall  taste  love's  joy,'— 

My  heart  with  rapture  swells,  when  thoughts  like  these  niy  mind  employ. 


1265. 

6$  151  (3jQ  Lb<5ST    QL£>6VrQ(7)?L.    LJ&LJLf 

O  let  me  see  my  spouse  again  and  sate  these  longing  eyes  ! 
That  instant  from  my  wasted  frame  all  pallor  flies. 

1266.     <SU(l7j<3$LDjb    Q<£5/rS9ZKT<55    Q  (63)  (TJj  IB  IT  Z_L 

Q  ILI  6\)  <ol)  /T  IEJ 


0  let  my  spouse  but  come  again  to  me  one  day  ! 

1  '11  drink  that  nectar  :  wasting  grief  shall  flee  away. 

1267. 


Shall  I  draw  back,  or  yield  myself,  or  shall  both  mingled  be, 
When  he  returns,  my  spouse,  dear  as  these  eyes  to  me. 

II.—  He. 

1268.     6$&97(5E<5\)/5J57    Q  617  <5VT  [S  < 

LQ$SST  <£  <o\)  fB  gjj    LD/rSoO    ILJ  UJ  IT  <35  LD 

O  would  my  king  would  fight,  o'ercome,  divide  the  spoil  ; 
At  home,  to-night,  the  banquet  spread  should  crown  the  toil. 


1269.  ^0/5/r  Q<ofT(Lg[5!r<5frG>urrrb  Q  &  so  6$  (jnjQ 

<81J  (7F)  fB  fT  GfT  <5V)  ®J  j£    G>  ;5  IEJ  (&j  U  <5ll  fr  &  (<3j 

One  day  will  seem  like  seven,  to  those  who  watch  and  yearn 
For  that  glad  day  when  wanderers  from  afar  return. 

1270.  QunSlQ<5$T<5ST{5S)Lb    Q  U  p  f>  <55  <5  fT 

Q-p  $  Q  GST  <ssr  <<5S)  (Ypeyrsr 

What  's  my  return,  the  meeting  hour,  the  wished-for  greeting  worth, 
If  she  heart-broken  lie,  with  all  her  life  poured  forth  ? 


174  THE    KUERAL. 


CHAPTER  CXXVIII. 

urSl(s^^j^^&o. — THE  READING  OP  THE  SIGNS. 

1271.    <s IT u i3l zgti w  6v>&ii$&rB  Q^/ra)eu/r/^s3r 


She  cannot  hide  her  dread  of  his  departure. 
He  reads  the  sign,  and  says  : 

Thou  liid'st  it,  yet  thine  eye,  disdaining  all  restraint, 
Something,  I  know  not  what,  would  utter  of  'complaint. 


1272.     aQRTGRfle&plBp    c5E/7-/fl<53)<3<55    <5E  fT  LbQ  U  IT  Q  ^  IT  I—    (o  U  6V)  JB  &  (&j  U 


The  simple  one  whose  beauty  fills  mine  eye,  whose  shoulders  curve 
Like  bambil  stem,  hath  all  a  woman's  modest  sweet  reserve. 

1273.     LD<5tfsflu9rh   pfil&LpjSQPj    JgfT  <5V  (oUfTOVT    LD  t—  /B  <ofo  ^ 


As  through  the  crystal  beads  is  seen  the  thread  on  which  they  're  strung, 
So  in  her  beauty  gleams  some  thought  that  cannot  find  a  tongue. 

1274.       7<S5)<£G)LO/7~<5E<5F     (gflj  6tT  6TT  ^J    (5  fT  {D 


As  fragrance  in  the  opening  bud,  some  secret  lies 
Concealed  in  budding  smile  of  this  dear  damsel's  eyes. 


1275.  Q&nSlQ^rrq-  Q  <?  iu  jil  rn  ft  <s 

(Lp  &/  <#>]  UJ  IT   (fi?/f<fl5(<5    LD  QJj  fb 

The  secret  wiles  of  her  with  thronging  armlets  decked, 
Are  medicines  by  which  my  rising  grief  is  checked. 

1276.  Q  U  £l  <5  IT  p  t£l  U 

evfajSirpfS  iu 

He  cannot  hide  the  sadness  he  feels  as  he  departs. 
She  reads  the  sign,  and  says  : 

While  lovingly  embracing  me,  his  heart  is  only  grieved  : 
It  makes  me  think  that  I  again  shall  live  of  love  bereaved. 

1277.  r«633T633T/5    £jj  <5&  [D  6U  <5$T   JD  GffiT  fB  ^  63)  LD 


My  severance  from  the  lord  of  this  cool  shore, 
My  very  armlets  told  me  long  before. 


1278. 

Quxsstl  U-F/B^J 

My  loved  one  left  me,  was  it  yesterday  ? 
Days  seven  my  pallid  body  wastes  away  ! 


BOOK    III.  —  WEDDED    LOVE.  175 

1279. 


She  would  join  him,  but  shrinks  from  proposing  it. 
Her  companion  reads  the  sign,  and  says  : 

She  viewed  her  tender  arms,  she  viewed  the  armlets  from  them  slid  ; 
She  viewed  her  feet  :  all  this  the  lady  did. 

1280.     QLJ6Kfr68dfl(<o3)/b    Q/_/633T6S)LD    ILJ  5V  l__  <£  Q  <£  <55T  U 
a6SSratafl^8)rb    65/TLDG>/5/TUJ    Q  &  IT  6V  6®    llSl  JT  6l\ 

He  is  overcome. 

To  show  by  eye  the  pain  of  love,  and  for  relief  to  pray, 
Is  womanhood's  most  womanly  device,  men  say. 


CHAPTER  CXXIX. 

xj.  —  DESIRE  FOE  REUNION. 


1281.     2_<Syr6TT<55    <55  <5$  £B  j£  6£]  IE]    &  fT  6G3T    LA  £l  Lp  (<5  6£J  1EJ 


She  answers  the  question  —  Why  are  you  not  angry  with  him  who, 
unmindful  of  you,  is  preparing  for  departure  : 

Gladness  at  the  thought,  rejoicing  at  the  sight, 
Not  palm-tree  wine,  but  love,  yields  such  delight. 


1282.  (S^jarr^e^y^rr/ty  ^  i—  IT  <sy>  LD 

U^r^^jSotfSnLjlEJ    <5E/T£jQ    /^SJD^UJ    <SU  ffi  <S5T 

When  as  palmyra  tall,  fulness  of  perfect  love  we  gain, 
Distrust  can  find  no  place  small  as  the  millet  grain. 

1283.  QU(SS^1    QuL_LjQ><5ll    Q  &  UJ 


Although,  his  will  his  only  law,  he  lightly  value  me, 

My  heart  knows  no  repose  unless  my  lord  I  see. 

f 

1284.  <£®fLL—tn&L—  Q&6vr(£>nr)®irLDp> 

3h-L—>D&L_    Q&<58rp)Q<5<53r    Q 

My  friend,  I  went  prepared  to  show  a  cool  disdain  ; 
My  heart,  forgetting  all,  could  not  its  love  restrain. 

1285.  er  c/t£  ^/  IEI  <&  IT  p 

Ui£!&rT(o<5KfT<5Gr    <356$yJl_ 

The  eye  sees  not  the  rod  that  paints  it  ;  nor  can  I 
See  any  fault,  when  I  behold  my  husband  nigh. 


176  THE    KURBAL. 

1286.    «g  IT  egg?/  f5i  &  rr  p  &n~(]>6syr<o3r 


When  him  I  see,  to  all  his  faults  I  'm  blind  ; 

But  when  I  see  him  not,  nothing  but  faults  I  find. 

1287. 


As  those  of  rescue  sure,  who  plunge  into  the  stream, 
So  did  I  anger  feign,  though  it  must  falsehood  seem  ? 


1288.     §)  <5lf)  j5  ^5  &  &    <aQ<53T(S3)    Q  <5F  Il9  <jj£)  IEJ 

&  err  ea  $  <ssr 


Though  shameful  ill  it  works,  dear  is  the  palm-tree  wine 
To  drunkards  ;  traitor,  so  to  me  that  breast  of  thine  ! 

1289. 


He  muses  : 

Love  is  tender  as  an  opening  flower.     In  season  due 
To  gain  its  perfect  bliss  is  rapture  known  to  few. 


1290.    aeswessflfb  gysSjsQjS  &  <s$  w  Q  ^  err 

QG\)<5vr<5vfl6y)ji5  p  rr  ®ST  <sQ  ^j  u  L-jfb^pi  (tD) 

Her  eye,  as  I  drew  nigh  one  day,  with  anger  shone  ; 
By  love  o'erpowered,  her  tenderness  surpassed  my  own. 
[Comp.  1284.] 


CHAPTER  CXXX.     ^r@.  SOLO. 

Bei).  —  EXPOSTULATION  WITH  ONESELF. 


1291. 


You  see  his  heart  is  his  alone  : 
O  heart,  why  not  be  all  my  own  ? 

1292.     £-fl?«=J      ^(Sy/r«6B633TL_    <S5  699763^7    L£  <oti  <SG)  IT  <3F 


'Tis  plain,  my  heart,  that  he  's  estranged  from  thee  ; 
Why  go  to  him  as  though  he  were  not  enemy  ? 


BOOK    III.  -  WEDDED    LOVE.  177 

1293. 


1  The  ruined  have  no  friends,'  they  say  ;  and  so,  my  heart, 
To  follow  him,  at  thy  desire,  from  me  thou  dost  depart. 


1294.  (jg)  6$  UJ  sin  ®$r  iQ 

^J  <S$  Q  &  ILJ  ^J    ^J  <SU  <51J  [TlLl  <X  (T  633T 

1  See,  thou  first  show  offended  pride,  and  then  submit,'  I  bade  ; 
Henceforth  such  council  who  will  share  with  thee,  my  heart? 

1295.  Q  U  (iy  ^1  S3)  LD    UJ(g5<3?LD    Q  U  pSl  {D  1§I  fl 


I  fear  I  shall  not  gain,  I  fear  to  lose  him  when  I  gain  ; 
And  thus  my  heart  endures  unceasing  pain. 

1296.     j5<S$Q>(U    U$(I7j/E^j    fQ  '$58T  fB  ^  6G  <5  /T 


My  heart  consumes  me  when  I  ponder  lone, 
And  all  my  lover's  cruelty  bemoan. 

1297.     /5/T62P    LbDfoQS    <5Sr<SUirLDD<35    <5E  <5\)  6U  IT  Q  <5lJ  <5ST 


Fall'n  neath  the  sway  of  this  ignoble  foolish  heart, 
Which  will  not  him  forget,  I  have  forgotten  shame. 

1298.      OT  GIT  <S$    <5vf)  &f)  <51J  fT    Q/£6arQ<D  633(7  633$    ILJ  toll  IT 


If  I  contemn  him,  then  disgrace  awaits  me  evermore  ; 
My  soul  that  seeks  to  live  his  virtues  numbers  o'er. 

1299.   gjiGsrusI      QliuirQir  ^  $sw  ILI  rr  eu  rrtr 
ILJ  <5\)  euil 


And  who  will  aid  me  in  my  hour  of  grief, 
If  my  own  heart  comes  not  to  my  relief  ? 

1300. 


A  trifle  is  unfriendliness  by  aliens  shown, 
When  our  own  heart  itself  is  not  our  own  ! 


23 


178  THE    KURBAL. 


CHAPTEE  CXXXI.     jy£.  GOLB. 
.  —  POUTING. 


1301.   L/^USV/T  tSjrn-.jyu  Lj<sv<5<5&^ 


Be  still  reserved,  decline  his  preferred  love  ; 
A  little  while  his  sore  distress  we  '11  prove. 

1302. 


A  cool  reserve  is  like  the  salt  that  seasons  well  the  mess, 
Too  long  maintained,  'tis  like  the  salt's  excess. 

1303. 


'Tis  heaping  griefs  on  those  whose  hearts  are  grieved  ; 
To  leave  the  grieving  one  without  a  fond  embrace. 

1304.     £MZ£_    LU<8lJ<5V)jr    ILJ  <5SST  IT  f£  ^  fT  53)  LD 

eilGTTGlfl 


To  use  no  kind  conciliating  art  when  lover  grieves, 

Is  cutting  out  the  root  of  tender  winding  plant  that  droops. 

1305.     r56V<5<5<S®&    fB  6V  6V  611  IT  <3B    (o<96<oTIT 


Even  to  men  of  good  and  worthy  mind,  the  petulance 
Of  wives  with  flowery  eyes  lacks  not  a  lovely  grace. 

1306.  ^/os#/L/i 

<3B  Stsf)  ILJ  [El 

Love  without  hatred  is  as  ripened  fruit  ; 
Without  some  lesser  strife,  fruit  immature. 

1307.  QM.L-.6®   egii  <syyr  z_  rr  IEJ  Q  a  n~  IT  ^gj  cisr  u  LG  LJ  G&rr  IT  su  ^ 


A  lovers'  quarrel  brings  its  pain,  when  mind  afraid 
Asks  doubtful,  *  Will  reunion  sweet  be  long  delayed  ? 

1308.     QfBITjS    Q<oV6U6VTLn«)£U    QfSfT^^fT  Q  U  <S5T  p 


What  good  can  grieving  do,  when  none  who  love 
Are  there  to  know  the  grief  thy  soul  endures  ? 


BOOK   I]  I.  —  WEDDED    LOVE. 

ILf  LD 


179 


1309. 


Water  is  pleasant  in  the  cooling  shade  ; 
So  coolness  for  a  time  with  those  we  love. 


1310. 


<oQ  Q  6U  /T  (o  IT  /T  Q 
QiCXoSTU 


<5VT  Q  <S$T  (GJj  &  IE1 


Of  her  who  leaves  me  thus  in  variance  languishing, 
To  think  within  my  heart  with  love  is  fond  desire. 


CHAPTER  CXXXII. 


i.  -  FEIGNED   ANGER. 


I.—  She. 


1311.    Q  u  csyr  <syyf!  iu  a)  /r 


o65yr&sr  u  IT  SB  £B  r$  ^<ss 

From  thy  regard  all  womankind 
Enjoys  an  equal  grace  ; 

O  thou  of  wandering  fickle  mind, 
I  shrink  from  thine  embrace  ! 


1312. 


One  day  we  silent  sulked  ;  he  sneezed  : 

The  reason  well  I  knew  ; 
He  thought  that  I,  to  speak  well  pleased, 

Would  say,  'Long  life  to  you  !  ' 


II.—  He. 


1313. 


6B/T/L/    Q  LA  fT  QTj  £5  J£l  65)  ILS  & 


<5B  IT  L_  ty-  IU    (ZJjLp-<5V?    Q  ff  <5GT  £# 

I  wreathed  with  flowers  one  day  my  brow, 
The  angry  tempest  lowers  ; 

She  cries,  *  Pray,  for  what  woman  now 
Do  you  put  on  your  flowers  ? 

1314.    m  rr  fl  eg]  IEJ  <5G/r^<5uQL062Fr 

ILJ  IT  £)  <53)l  LQ    UJfTffl^J 


'I  love  you  more  than  all  beside,' 

'Twas  thus  I  gently  spoke  ; 
'  What  all,  what  all  ?  '  she  instant  cried, 

And  all  her  anger  woke. 


180  THE    KUHRAL. 

1315.      (jg)Lb<oV>LDLJ    iSlfDULStp    £l  ifl  UU  6V    Q  <SCT  6ST  (o  {D  (GV)  & 


4  While  here  I  live,  I  leave  you  not,' 

I  said  to  calm  her  fears. 
She  cried,  '  There,  then,  I  read  your  thought  '  ; 

And  straight  dissolved  in  tears. 


1316. 


*  Each  day  I  called  to  mind  your  charms. 

'  O,  then,  you  had  forgot,' 
She  cried,  and  then  her  opened  arms, 

Forthwith  embraced  me  not. 


1317. 

j5  Q£  p  rr  orr  (u  IT 

She  hailed  me  when  I  sneezed  one  day  ; 

But  straight  with  anger  seized, 
She  cried,  *  Who  was  the  woman,  pray, 

Thinking  of  whom  you  sneezed  ?  ' 

1318.  ^ILbQ-ptF    Q&£UUU    <5U(L£>^n~    <f*ft)l  LD  0  (aJT  6YT 

QevLbe&LD  Lb<5&rDj£JBlQirir  QISU^T^/ 

And  so  next  time  I  checked  my  sneeze  ; 

She  forthwith  wept  and  cried, 
(That  woman  difficult  to  please,) 

*  Your  thoughts  from  me  you  hide.' 

1319.  f565T<&56T    ILJ  639T  IT  j&  £&)  6&)J  IEJ    <5B  fT  ILj  t£>    lOl  fB  IT  <95 


I  then  began  to  soothe  and  coax, 
To  calm  her  jealous  mind  ; 

*  I  see,'  quoth  she,  l  to  other  folks 
How  you  are  wondrous  kind.' 


1320.     ^^37^^0/5^7    Q  IB  IT  <3>  $  6327  IEI    &  fTtLj 

17    ILI  IT    T61T  (offl    Q  15  /T  <55  Q  ®sf    Q  ff  <oi)l  jry 


I  silent  sat,  but  thought  the  more, 
And  gazed  on  her.     Then  she 

Cried  out,  '  While  thus  you  eye  me  o'er, 
Tell  me  whose  form  you  see.' 


BOOK    III. — WEDDED    LOVE.  181 


CHAPTER  CXXXIII.     ^.  SOLOS.. 

.  —  THE  PLEASURES  OF  *  TEMPORARY  VARIANCE.' 


I.  —  She,  in  answer  to  the  question,  Why  do  you  pout  ? 

1321.  (|)a)<:fco  ^  sup  6iJ  IT  a  <sB/ra9jgy  (^LpGl^GV 

<S17<5\)6\)   ^  61J  IT  Glfl  <95  (&j    LD/TJ2/ 

Although  there  be  no  fault  in  him,  the  sweetness  of  his  love 
Hath  power  in  me  a  fretful  jealousy  to  move. 

1322.  QmL—<s9rb  G>  (y  <s$r  £)]  05T)  &  jpi  ^j  <ssf)  f56V6V<sifl 

<SU  IT  Z£_  Jg2/  L£>    Uir®  Qu^fLD 

My  '  anger  feigned  '  gives  but  a  little  pain  ; 

And  when  affection  droops,  it  makes  it  bloom  again. 


1323. 

iQ  <s\)  fb  Q  p  rr  (bl  rfliRstnujfB  ^&sr<^)  jr&jS^  (/H-) 

Is  there  a  bliss  in  any  world  more  utterly  divine, 

Than  '  coyness  '  gives,  when  hearts  as  earth  and  water  join? 

1324. 


Within  the  '  anger  feigned,'  that  close  love's  tie  doth  bind, 
A  weapon  lurks,  which  quite  breaks  down  my  mind. 

II.  —  He  consoles  himself,  since  reconciliation  makes  amends. 
1325.    <56DpSlev  tr  fr  u9  6gu  fb  <^// 


Though  free  from  fault,  from  loved  one's  tender  arms 
To  be  estranged  awhile  hath  its  own  special  charms. 


1326. 

Lf  6S3T  IT  i£  6§l 

'Tis  sweeter  to  digest  your  food  than  'tis  to  eat  ; 

In  love,  than  union's  self  is  anger  feigned  more  sweet. 

1327. 


In  lovers'  quarrels,  'tis  the  one  that  first  gives  way, 
That  in  re-union's  joy  is  seen  to  win  the  day. 


182  THE    KUKRAL. 

1328.     2MZ£LL7    Qu^i/(^6UlEI    Q&n~6\)Gfco\)rr   JZJJ  j5  6V  <a£l  UJ  IT  LJ  LJ  & 


And  shall  we  ever  more  the  sweetness  know  of  that  embrace 
With  dewy  brow  ;  to  which  '  feigned  anger  '  lent  its  piquant  grace. 


1329.    &m®&  LD6sr(o<G3)  Q  6ii  rr  <s$  uSl  6tn  Lp 


Let  her,  whose  jewels  brightly  shine,  aversion  feign  ! 
That  I  may  still  plead  on,  0  night,  prolong  thy  reign  ! 

1330.    £ 


A  '  feigned  aversion  '  coy  to  pleasure  gives  a  zest  ; 

The  pleasure  's  crowned  when  breast  is  clasped  to  breast. 


THE  END  OP  THE  SECTION  ON  '  WEDDED  LOVE. 


THE  END  OF  BOOK  III.  ON  LOVE. 


THE  END  OF  THE  KURRAL. 


183 


NOTES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ALL  Tamil  compositions  must  begin  with  an  invocation.  Here  the 
invocation  is  a  whole  decade,  and  forms  a  main  topic  of  the  work — its 
creed. 

The  following  is  a  summary  of  this  chapter,  according  to  the  Com- 
mentary : — 

I. — 1.  God  is  first  in  the  world. 

II. — 2.  The  end  of  learning  is  the  worship  of  the  only  Wise. 

[This  also  satisfies  the  condition  that  an  author  should  state  in  the 
beginning  of  a  book  the  benefit  to  be  gained  by  its  study.] 

III. — The  benefits  of  true  devotion  : 

3.  The  devout  worshipper  shall  enjoy  prolonged  felicity  in  some 
higher  sphere  ; 

4.  He  shall  be  delivered  from  all  evil ; 

5.  He  shall  escape  from  the  results  of  action,  good  and  bad ; 

6.  He  shall  enjoy  prolonged  felicity  in  this  world. 
IV. — The  evil  results  of  ungodliness  : 

7.  The  undevout  man  has  no  relief  from  heart-sorrow  ; 

8.  He  has  no  aid  in  the  midst  of  the  sea  of  evil ; 

9.  His  whole  existence  is  null  and  void. 
V. — The  devout  and  undevout  contrasted : 

10.  These  shall  escape  from  endless  transmigrations  :  those  shall 
not. 

Verse  1.  Comp.  Bhagavatgitd,  x.  33,  akshardndm  akaro'smi:  'inter 
elementa  sum  littera  A.'  u-sssumr  —  S.  bhagavdn,  occurs  in  Manu,  i.  6, 
with  swayambhu,  '  self-existent,'  as  its  attribute.  ^j&  implies  this. 
The  rnasc.  term,  brings  out  the  Personality  of  the  Deity,  which  <si_<a/ en- 
does  not. 


184  THE    KURRAL. 

Ellis  translates : 

*  As  ranked  in  every  alphabet  the  first, 
The  self-same  vowel  stands,  so  in  all  worlds 
Th'  eternal  God  is  chief/ 

Beschi :     '  Literae  omnes  principium  habent  literam  A : 
Mundus  principium  habet  numen  primordiale.' 

Graul :  '  A  als  Erstes  haben  alle  Buchstaben  ; 

Den  Urseligen  als  Erstes  hat  die  Welt.* 

In  the  Nannill,  i.  73,  76,  it  is  said  that  jy  is  first  of  letters  by  '  emi- 
nence and  affinity';  and  the  explanation  given  is  that  it  is  'mere 
sound,  piTjBLQirjBJiG&jriuirtlj,  and  the  first  sound  uttered  by  infants 
when  they  are  born.  It  is  produced  by  the  mere  opening  of  the 
mouth  and  expiration.  All  other  vowels  are  modifications  of  it ;  it  is 
the  first  cause  of  all  others.'  The  Com.  says  that,  from  the  visible  world 
comes  the  knowledge  of  the  invisible  God,  and  this  by  intuition,  not  by 
any  artificial  means.  He  seems  to  interpret  the  latter  clause  thus:  'the 
idea  of  the  Supreme  is  the  first  impression  the  world  produces  in  the 
reflecting  mind.' 

2.  '  The  purely  wise  One.'     This  euir&j  =  S.  paramdrthatas.    [Comp. 
Wilson's  Vishnu  Pur  ana,  bk.  I.  ch.  ii.  p.  8.]     His  knowledge  is  of  the 
actual  truth,  not  tinged  by  any  medium  of  transmission,  immediately 
His  own. 

Ellis  :     '  What  is  the  fruit  that  human  knowledge  gives, 
If  at  the  feet  of  Him  who  is  pure  knowledge 
Due  reverence  be  not  paid?' 

Beschi :  '  Plurima  didicisse  quid,  amice,  proderit,  nisi  verearis  bonos 
ejus  pedes,  qui  puram  scientiam  habet;  i.e.  sc.  ab  omni  err  ore  defae- 
catum.' 

3.  The  Jain  deity  Arugan  is  represented  as  standing  on  a  lotus  flower. 
Perhaps  the  main  idea  here  is  the  Omnipresence  of  the  Deity  (Psa. 
cxxxix.).     It  is  a  poet — a  true  poet — that  speaks,  and  he  seems  to  say  : 
'  It  is  the  foot-fall  of  God  that  makes  His  creation  rejoice  and  put 
forth  its  flowers,  as  It  rests  on  each  "  spirit's  folded  bloom." ' 

'  Above  the  earth '  may  be  '  on  the  earth  ' ;  the  Tamil  admits  of 
either.  Beschi  says  :  '  Qui  adhaerent  venerabilibus  pedibus  illius  qui 
supra  flores  graditur  in  loco  terrae  superior!  diu  vivet ;  id  est,  qui  veretur 
eum  qui  floribus  venustatem  tribuit  in  caelo  aeternum  beabitur.' 

Graul  interprets :  '  Supra  terrain  diu  vivent  (anteq-uam  novam  sus- 
cipient  migrationem).'  Each  has  read  something  into  the  text.  The 
most  ancient  Tamil  commentator  says :  *  Without  decay  in  the  world 
of  relinquishment,  above  all  worlds,  he  shall  flourish.' 


NOTES.  185 

Ellis  translates,  or  paraphrases  and  adapts,  the  whole  couplet 
thus : — 

'  They  who  adore  His  sacred  feet,  whose  grace 
Gladdens  with  sudden  thrill  the  fervent  heart, 
High  o'er  the  earth  shall  soar  to  endless  joy.' 

There  is  an  inconsistency  in  the  Tamil  poet's  conception  of  the 
invisible  world,  much  the  same  as  that  which  meets  us  in  Vergil's  Sixth 
Mneid.  The  '  Pythagorean  '  philosophy  of  transmigration  *  is  a  sub- 
lime one,  and  well  adapted  for  poetry  ;  but  it  is  quite  incompatible  with 
the  conception  that  pervades  the  rest  of  the  description  of  the  lower 
(upper)  world.'  See  Conmgton's  Introduction. 

Nor  must  we  expect  consistency  and  firm  treatment  of  such  subjects 
in  a  *  seeker  after  truth  ' — a  poet,  too.  The  poet  wanders  '  in  shadowy 
thoroughfares  of  thought,'  and  tells  us  of  his  visions  as  they  appear. 
There  is  a  mania  for  classification,  as  if  human  souls — and  especially 
the  souls  of  true  poets,  to  whom  God  has  given  the  *  vision  and  the 
faculty  divine ' — could  all  be  arranged  in  genus  and  species  like  so  many 
shells ! 

Our  poet  seizes  upon  each  form  and  phrase  that  has  anything  of 
truth  and  beauty ;  but  the  life  he  breathes  into  it  is  his  own :  the  harp 
may  be  the  old  one  of  '  ten  strings ' ;  the  song  is  a  '  new  song.' 

4.  Lit.  '  Sorrow  never  assails  those  who  have  drawn  nigh  to  the  foot 
of  Him  who  is  free  from  desire  and  aversion.' 

He  desires  not,  for  there  is  no  want  to  be  supplied.  He  has  no 
aversion,  for  nothing  can  enter  the  sphere  of  His  Being  that  troubles. 

If  from  his  Christian  friends  the  sage  had  obtained  any  knowledge 
of  the  life  of  Christ,  we  might  imagine  him  referring  to  her  who  chose 
the  '  better  part '  sitting  at  the  Master's  feet ;  and  to  that  other  (if 
indeed  another)  who  would  have  touched  His  feet ;  and  to  the  many 
who  found  help  and  healing  there. 

Ellis :         c  To  Him,  whom  no  affection  moves,  nor  hate, 
Those  constant  in  obedience,  from  all  ill 
In  this  world  and  the  next  are  free.' 

The  Com.  says:  'The  sorrows  of  birth.'  These  are  threefold:  (1) 
from  oneself  ;  (2)  from  others ;  (3)  from  God. 

Beschi :  '  Qui  adhaeserit  pedibus  illius  in  quo  cupiditas  et  aversio 
locum  non  habent,  perpetuo  ab  hujus  mundi  malis  immunis  erit.' 

5.  Ellis  :    *  Those  who  delight  with  fervent  mind  to  praise 

The  true  and  only  Lord  of  heav'n  and  earth, 
No  false  ideas  of  right  and  wrong  can  cloud.' 

24 


186  THE    KUBRAL. 

Beschi :  '  Mala  opera  cuin  bonis  mixta  qua  inducit  falsa  rerum  appre- 
hensio,  non  adhaerebunt  ei,  qui  cupiscit  laudem  cum  vera  Dei  notione 
connexam ;  i.e.  qui  veram  habet  Dei  notionem  plurimas  falsas  idaeas 
corriget,  ex  quibus  mala  opera  sequi  solent.' 

Every  form  of  Hindu  faith — orthodox  and  unorthodox — regards 
action  as  evil.  The  word  molcsha,  and  its  equivalent  Tamil  vidu,  and 
the  specially  Buddhist  nirvana,  point  to  the  same  thing,  though  with 
characteristic  differences. 

We,  too,  regarding  life  as  a  probation,  contemplating  the  coming 
judgment  to  be  passed  upon  all  actions,  l  whether  they  be  good,  or 
whether  they  be  evil/  feeling  how  we  see  all  things,  duties  among  the 
rest,  as  *  through  a  glass  darkly,*  and  anticipating  the  time  when  we 
hope  we  shall  see  '  the  King  in  His  beauty,  and  behold  the  land  of 
far-off  places' — we,  I  say,  can  understand  that  the  poet  may  have 
risen  in  thought  above  the  mere  technicalities  of  any  of  the  systems, 
into  the  heart  of  which  his  poet's  eye  penetrated. 

Two  kinds  of  action,  good  deeds  and  evil  deeds. 

'  Darkness,'  for  they  are  the  results  of  ignorance :  all  action  is  blind. 

True,  since  men  define  God  and  praise  Him  erroneously.  The  devout 
are  '  those  who  desire  the  praise  ' — who  with  hearty  desire  offer  praise — 
*  which  is  connected  with  reality.'  This  may  mean  true  notions  of  God, 
or  *  a  true  and  sincere  mind.'  It  is  the  '  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth ' 
of  a  greater  Master. 

6.  Ellis :    '  Those  who  pursue  the  path  of  His  true  law, 

Who  is  of  sensual  organs  void,  in  Heav'n 
Shall  dwell  in  never-ending  bliss.' 

Beschi :  (  Qui  non  aberrat  a  recto  et  error!  non  obnoxio  tramite,  i.e. 
doctrina  illius,  qui  caret  quinque  iis  affectibus,  qui  quinque  sensuum 
via  in  animum  irrepere  solent,  aeternum  beatus  erit.' 

The  five  organs  of  sense.     Comp.  7. 

The  Jain  deity  Arugan,  called  $inendra='  Lord  of  wrath,'  may  be 
referred  to.  It  may  be  *  who  has  extinguished  them  in  himself  (see 
25)  ;  or,  '  who  extinguishes  them  in  others  ' :  *  whose  grace  extinguishes 
in  others  the  fires  of  sensual  passion.' 

7.  The  phrase-epithet '  to  whom  none  is  like,'  relates,  as  Ellis  says  (as 
do  all  others  in  this  Chap.),  to  the  ^flu^tsuesr  of  the  first  couplet : 
'  the  Eternal,  Adorable  One,  whom  no  symbol  can  express  and  no  form 
design.' 

Horace,  Odes,  Book  I.  xii.  18 : 

'Necviget  quidquam  simile  aut  secundum.' 


NOTES.  187 


Comp.  Aeschy.  Agam.  163-66  : 

OVK  e^w  7rpos€iKacrat  TTOVT 

IIArjv  AIDS,  €i  TO  poLTav  O.TTO  <J>povTi&o<s 


Ellis  :         *  The  anxious  mind  against  corroding  thought 
No  refuge  hath,  save  at  the  sacred  feet 

Of  Him  to  whom  no  refuge  is.' 

Beschi  :  c  Non  adhaeseris  pedibus  illius,  qui  sibi  similem  non  habet, 
difficile  erit  animi  anxietatern  sedare.' 

Ellis  says  rightly  similem  should  be  similitudinem. 

8.  Ellis  :    '  Hard  is  the  transit  of  this  sea  of  vice, 

Save  by  that  Being's  gracious  aid,  who  is 
Himself  a  sea  of  virtue.' 

Beschi  :  '  Nisi  adhaeseris  pedibus  illius,  qui  mare  virtutum  est,  diffi- 
cile erit  aliud  mare,  quod  extra  ilium  est  (nempe  hoc  miserum  pelagus) 
trajicere.' 

The  word  ^L$  dri,  '  sea,'  is  also  translated  '  circle  '  :  '  ocean  mirrours 
rounded  large.'  The  idea  may  be  here  the  '  whole  round  of  existence.' 
Moore's  poem  is  quite  in  the  spirit  of  South  Indian  poetry  : 

*  Poor  wanderers  of  a  stormy  day 
From  wave  to  wave  we  're  driven.' 

Comp.  Dante,  Paradiso,  i.  : 

'  Per  lo  gran  mar  dell'  essere.' 

The  periphrasis  for  God  here  is  especially  fine  :  jy/rJeu  TLJ^UJ^^  awei 
'  arravdriyantanan  '  = 

*  Virtue's  sea,  the  fair  and  loving  one.' 

It  seems  to  be  a  near  approach  to  the  Christian  announcement,  l  God 
is  Love  '  ;  and  then  '  drawing  near  to  His  feet  '  must  mean  a  lowly  love 
of  Him. 

Thus  Tiruvalluvar  founds  his  system  on  Love.  In  speaking  of  the 
householder,  he  insists  (Ch.  vm.)  on  heartfelt  affection  as  the  very 
life  of  man.  The  ascetic,  too,  must  have  a  benevolent  love  of  all  men 
(Ch.  xxv.)  as  the  foundation  of  all.  The  poet  approaches  the  subject 
of  man's  duty  in  many  ways  : 

'  But  love  is  the  fountain  of  all.' 

9.  Ellis  :    '  Of  virtue  void,  as  is  the  palsied  sense, 

The  head  must  be,  that  bows  not  at  His  feet, 
Whose  eight-fold  attributes  pervade  the  world.' 
Beschi  :  '  Nullius  est  emolumentum  caput  non  venerans  Deum  ;  non 


188  THE    KURRAL. 

secus  ac  sensus  suum  objectuin  non  percipiens.  (Caput  non  venerans 
Deum,  perinde  est  ut  oculus  caecus.)' 

It  is  impossible  to  decide  what  '  eight  qualities  '  or  attributes  the 
poet  refers  to.  The  Com.  says :  (1)  self-existence  ;  (2)  essential  purity  ; 
(3)  intuitive  wisdom ;  (4)  infinite  intelligence  ;  (5)  essential  freedom 
from  all  bonds  ;  (6)  infinite  grace  ;  (7)  omnipotence  ;  (8)  infinite  en- 
joyment. 

It  is  significant,  as  Ellis  remarks,  that  every  Hindu  enumeration 
omits  justice  as  one  of  the  attributes  of  God. 

It  has  not  been  noticed  that  eight  '  qualities '  of  the  Supreme  have 
been  in  some  way  mentioned  or  referred  to  by  the  poet  in  the  eight 
preceding  couplets.  I  conclude  that  these  may  be  the  eight  to  which 
he  now  refers.  They  are :  (1)  eternity  (at  least  aparte  ante) ;  (2)  wisdom  ; 
(3)  omnipresence  ;  (4)  happiness ;  (5)  power  (the  King)  ;  (6)  purity ; 
(7)  immateriality ;  (8)  love. 

10.  Ellis :  '  Of  those  who  swim  the  wide  extended  sea 
Of  mortal  birth,  none  ever  can  escape, 
But  those  who  to  the  feet  of  God  adhere.' 

Beschi:    'Hoc  vastum   iniseriarum  pelagus  in   quo   nati  sumus   in 
illud  natantes  non  trajicient,  nisi  qui  Dei  pedibus  adhaeserint.' 
Here  we  have  the  doctrine  of  the  metempsychosis : 
'  Eternal  process  moving  on, 

From  state  to  state  the  spirit  walks.' 

The  end  is  absorption  into  the  Divine  Essence.     This  seems,  here,  at 
least,  to  be  the  poet's  'further  bank,'  to  which  he  attains  after  swimming 
over  the  '  sea  of  birth.'     Our  English  poet's  instinct  is  truer : — 
'  That  each,  who  seems  a  separate  whole, 
Should  move  his  rounds,  and  fusing  all 
The  skirts  of  self  again,  should  fall 
Eemerging  in  the  general  soul, 
Is  faith  as  vague  as  all  unsweet ; 
Eternal  form  shall  still  divide 
The  eternal  soul  from  all  beside ; 
And  I  shall  know  him  when  we  meet.' 

In  Memoriam,  XLXI. 

The  epithets  applied  to  God  in  Ch.  i.  are  various.     These  are : — 

(i.)  '  The  eternal  (first)  adorable  one ' ;  <%,$  u<s<su6or. 

(ii.)  '  He  who  hath  pure  knowledge  ' ;  enireb  ^fSeuesr. 

(iii.)  '  He  who  hath  moved  (as  a  breath  of  air)  over  the  flower  (of  the 
expanded  soul)  ' ;  Loeu/ft/Sero^  (g-Q^tssr. 

(iv.)  '  He  to  whom  is  neither  desire  nor  aversion  '  [qy.  Lucretius : 
'  Deos  secure  agere  aevom  ']  ;  Q<sii<5m(±>)<£i8o 


NOTES.  189 

(v.)  and  (x.)  *  The  Lord  '  ;  jgsD/0  sugar. 

(vi.)  '  He  who  has  destroyed  the  gates  of  the  five  senses  '  [?  'without 
parts  or  passions']  ;  Qun-$  su/roSex;  ffifipeSp-siresr. 

(vii.)  '  He  to  whom  no  likeness  is  '  ['  nee  viget  quidquam  simile  aut 
secundum  ']  ;  ^<5sr<so@<su<ss)Lc>  @6U6U/r^/r«r. 

(viii.)  *  The  ocean  of  virtue,  beautiful  and  gracious  one  '  ; 


(ix.)  '  He  who  possesses  eight  attributes.' 

The  eclectic  poet  has  selected,  I  suppose,  the  choicest  epithets  existing 
in  the  language,  and  several  which  admit  of  being  explained  in  various 
senses. 

There  is  —  and  the  poet  intended  this  —  ample  room  for  men  of  many 
systems  to  import  into  these  verses,  under  the  guise  of  commentaries, 
their  own  dogmas.  The  ten  great  Tamil  commentators,  belonging  to  as 
many  systems,  have  done  this  with  much  ingenuity. 

Ellis  sees  in  them  an  enlightened  and  sublime  monotheism.  To 
Beschi  they  were  exponents  of  the  Christian  theology  ;  and,  without 
doubt,  Christian  influences  most  affected  him. 

The  Jains,  delighted  with  his  skilful  appropriation  of  one  or  two 
beautiful  terms  from  their  writings,  claim  him  as  their  own. 

It  may  be  allowable  to  say  that  we  see  in  Tiruvalluvar  a  noble,  truth- 
loving,  and  devout  man,  feeling  in  the  darkness  after  Godj  if  haply  he 
might  find  Him. 

The  language  in  which  alone  the  poet  expresses  the  mental  attitude 
of  the  true  worshipper  is  worthy  of  all  consideration.  In  2-]0  the 
same  idea  is  expressed  —  that  of  drawing  near  to,  or  worshipping  at,  the 
foot  of  God,  the  idea  being  that  of  profoundest,  most  loving,  clinging 
humility. 


CHAPTEE  II. 

IT  seems  strange  to  European  readers  that  the  introductory  chapter  on 
God  should  be  followed  by  one  on  Eain.  This  is  very  usual,  however, 
in  Tamil  compositions,  the  idea  being  (as  the  Com.  says)  that  neither 
virtue,  wealth,  nor  pleasure  could  exist  without  rain.  The  connection  is 
seen  in  Acts  xiv.  17  :  '  Nevertheless  He  left  not  Himself  without  a 
witness,  in  that  He  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 
seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.'  In  Bhagavatgitd, 
in.  14,  it  is  said :  '  All  things  which  have  life  are  produced  from  bread 
which  they  eat  j  bread  is  produced  from  rain ;  rain  from  divine  worship, 
and  divine  worship  from  good  works.'  [Tarn,  trans,  in.  9.] 


190      '  THE    KURRAL. 

The  word  van  or  vin  (which  in  Tamil  signifies  '  sky,'  '  rain  ')  may  be  a 
corruption  of  varuna,  l  the  investing  .sky  '  in  the  old  Aryan  mythology. 

11.  Ellis  :      '  As  by  abundant  rain  the  world  subsists, 

Life's  sole  elixir  in  this  fluid  know.' 

Beschi :  '  Cum  pluvia  indeficienter  pluens  faciat  mundum  subsistere, 
putandum  est  earn  orbi  esse  vitale  pharmacum.  Mundi  subsistantia 
est  hominum  vitae,  quae  sine  pluvia  servari  nequit.' 

The  idea  of  this  couplet  is  an  obvious  one  :  '  rain  gives  life  to  all 
creation,  revives  the  dying  vegetation,  restores  life  to  what  seems  dead.' 
Anyone  who  has  seen  an  Indian  district  suffering  from  drought,  and 
noted  the  instantaneous  change  in  the  aspect  of  all  living  things  when 
the  long-expected  rain  has  fallen,  will  understand  the  poet's  feeling . 
*  rain  is  the  elixir  of  immortality  to  the  whole  earth.'  (See  Ellis.) 

12.  '  It  slakes  men's  thirst,  and  it  causes  food  to  spring  from  the 
earth.' 

Beschi :  *  Pluvia  non  modo  pluit  ut  comedentibus  varia  alimenta 
subministret,  sed  etiain  ut  ipsa  comedentibus  alimentum  est.  Pluviam 
namque  aquam  bibimus.' 

13.  Ellis :  '  When  clouds,  deceiving  hope,  withhold  their  stores, 

Around  the  sea-girt  earth  gaunt  famine  stalks.' 

Beschi :  '  Si  pluvia  sistendo,  spem  fallat ;  fames  in  mundo  sistens 
vexabit  vastam  hanc  terram  quam  mare  alluit.' 

Lit.  '  If  the  cloud  standing  (in  the  sky)  deceive  (by  not  falling  in  rain 
to  the  earth),  hunger  will  afflict,  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  wide- 
spread earth,  though  (this  earth  is)  surrounded  by  an  expanse  of 
waters.' 

The  clouds  charged  with  moisture  stand  over  the  hills,  big  with  the 
promise  of  fertilizing  showers.  If  they  remain  there,  and  do  not  fulfil 
their  promise,  the  earth,  though  surrounded  by  vast  oceans  of  water, 
must  fall  a  prey  to  all  the  miseries  of  famine. 

During  the  disastrous  droughts  in  1880,  each  day  heavy  clouds  col- 
lected and  hung  over  the  Maisiir  province  ;  but  strong  winds  from  the 
west  arose  and  bore  them  away  in  the  direction  of  the  sea,  leaving  the 
broad  fields  dry  and  parched,  and  abandoning  multitudes  to  misery  and 
death  by  famine.  Those  who  have  seen  something  like  this  can  under- 
stand the  force  of  this  couplet. 

In  the  Ndladi  (269)  the  poet  thus  applies  the  idea  of  this  sad  waste  of 
rain : — 

'  While  in  th'  unripened  ear  the  golden  grain  is  parched, 
The  heavens  with  lightnings  gleaming  pour  their  treasures  forth 
Upon  the  sea !     When  silly  men  gain  ample  wealth, 
So  are  their  liberal  gifts  bestowed  !  ' 


NOTES.  191 

b  QuirjslQiLHT® 


As  in  As  you  like  it  : 

'  Thou  mak'st  a  testament, 
As  worldlings  do,  giving  thy  sum  of  more 
To  that  which  had  too  much.' 

14.  Agriculture  is  the  great  employment  of  the  Tamil  people  ;   it 
ceases  when  rains  fail.     Comp.  Ch.  civ. 

Ellis  :      '  The  fruitful  toil  of  men  and  steers  must  cease, 

If  cease  the  flow  of  waters  from  the  clouds.' 

Beschi  :  *  Neque  agricolae  bobus  arabunt  terram  si  minuatur  subsi- 
dium  aquae,  quam  dat  pluvia.' 

15.  Lit.  '  That  which  will  ruin  ;  that  which  will   uplift,  becoming  a 
help  to  the  ruined  :  all  is  rain.' 

The  destructive  violence  of  tropical  storms,  and  the  life-giving  effects 
of  the  first  burst  of  the  monsoons  in  India,  are  referred  to  here. 

Ellis  :         '  It  spreads  destruction  round  ;  its  genial  aid 
Again  revives,  restores  all  it  destroys  ; 
Such  is  the  power  of  rain.' 

Beschi  :  '  Miseros  f  acere,  et  quos  miseros  fecit,  iisdem  f  avendo,  iterum 
sublevare,  id  omne  potest  pluvia.' 

16.  Beschi  :  (  Nisi  pluvia  a  nubibus  ceciderit,  tune  haud  facile  esset 
cernere  viventis  herbae  colorem.' 

17.  Com.  :  '  Eain  is  necessary  to  the  sea  too,  which  itself  is  the  source 
of  the  rain.' 

Beschi  :    '  Et   ipsum  spatiosum  mare  suam  conditionem  minuet,    si 
nubes  illud   minuendo  illi  aquam  non  dederint.' 

18.  '  Without  rain  no  produce  ;  without  produce  no  worship.' 
Beschi  :  Et  ipsis  Deis,  qui  coelum  exsiccant  in  hac  terra  non  persol- 

ventur  festivae  solennitates  et  sacrificia,' 

19.  Beschi  :  '  Non  poterunt  in  hoc  spatioso  orbe  morari  eleemosina  et 
poenitentia,  si  pluvia  desit.' 

20.  Beschi  ;    '  Sine   pluvia   celsitudinem   nequit   quis   obtinere,    nee 
poterit    quis    qualiscunque    ille    sit    (quantumvis    celsus    sit)    absque 
pluvia  obtinere  ejusdern  conservationem  ;    si    pluvia  desit,    ob  famam 
quae  inde  sequitur  nee  divitiae,  nee  deliciae,  nee  scientiae  acquiri  pos- 
sunt,  et  si  acquisitae  fuerint,  non  possunt  servari.' 


192  THE    KUBRAL. 

The  Com.  thus  analyses  the  chapter  : — 

I.  1-7.  Rain  is  the  cause  of  the  affairs  of  the  world  going  on  their 

wonted  way. 

II.  8-10.  Rain  is  the  cause  of  the  continued  existence  of  virtue,  wealth, 

and  pleasure  on  earth. 


CHAPTEE  III. 

WITH  this  compare  Ch.  xxv.-xxxvii.,  where  the  whole  subject  of 
Asceticism  is  dealt  with.  It  is  evident  that  our  author  did  not — at 
least,  exclusively — contemplate  in  this  chapter  a  Jain  saint,  as  has  been 
supposed.  In  Jain  works  this  latter  is  (1)  *  lord  of  the  world.'  (This 
might  seem  to  be  pointed  to  in  couplet  5.)  He  is  (2)  '  free  from  bodily 
and  ceremonial  acts  ' ;  (3)  l  omniscient ' ;  (4)  '.supreme  lord  ' ;  (5)  '  god 
of  gods ' ;  (6)  '  one  who  has  crossed  over  the  world '  (tirihan-kdra)  ;  (7) 
'  possessor  of  a  spiritual  nature,  free  from  investing  sources  of  error  ' ; 
(8)  '  one  entitled  to  the  homage  of  gods  and  of  men ' ;  (9)  '  victor  over 
all  human  infirmities.'  (See  Wilson's  Hindu  Sects,  p.  187.) 

But  a  Jain  saint  could  not  have  '  wrath,'  as  in  couplet  9 ;  nor  is 
couplet  5  quite  consistent  with  Jain  doctrines,  though  the  poet  may  refer 
to  a  current  story,  without  accepting  it.  .Nowhere  is  the  eclecticism  of 
Tiruvalluvar  more  conspicuous  than  in  this  chapter.  Every  system  has 
its  ascetics,  and  self-denial  is  everywhere  mighty.  There  is  much  here 
which  may  be  compared  with  the  teaching  of  the  Christian  Scriptures, 
and  we  can  fancy  in  the  Tamil  verses  an  echo  of  such  words  as  these  : 
*  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill ' ;  '  Kiss  the  Son  lest  He  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  His  wrath  is  kindled  but  a 
little  ' ;  '  I  have  overcome  the  world  ' ;  '  This  is  the  victory  which  over- 
cometh  the  world,  even  your  faith ' ;  '  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  Grod 
abideth  for  ever.'  Comp.  also  Rev.  ii.  26,  27 ;  vi.  17. 

The  poet's  knowledge  and  experience  would  extend  to  the  Christian 
establishments  in  Mayilapur,  to  the  Buddhist  works  in  the  Vihara  Eath 
of  Mahamallaipura  (Foulkes  in  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vii.  p.  7)  ;  to  Dandis  and 
Tridandis,  Yogis — probably  to  the  Madhavacharis — with  their  adapta- 
tions of  Christian  doctrines  and  institutions  ;  and  to  the  Jain  monas- 
teries. These  had  different  institutions  (oruJcJcam)  and  reverenced 
different  sacred  books  (panuval)-,  while  all  appealing  to  a  mysterious 
'  word '  or  scripture  (marrai-mori).  The  worth  and  power  of  the  whole 
is  summed  up  in  couplet  30. 


NOTES.  193 

Com.  analysis:  — 

I.  1-3.  The  greatness  of  the  '  renounced '  exceeds  all  other  greatness. 

II.  4-7.  The  sources  of  this  greatness  :  (i.)  restraint  of  senses  (4,  5)  ; 

(ii.)  ascetic  practices  [S.  yoga],  (6)  ;    (iii.)  true  knowledge  (7). 
[Ch.  xxxvi.] 

III.  8,  9.  The  might  of  their  words. 

IV.  10.  Their  gracious  disposition.     [Ch.  xxv.] 

21.  Ellis:  'A  strict  adherence  to  the  rule  professed, 

Than  do  all  other  virtues,  the  devout 
Exalteth  more ;  this  every  code  ordains.' 

Beschi :  '  Nulla  ex  scientiis  dubitat  concupiscere  ut  omnium  maximum 
decus  religiosorum  a  suo  instituto  non  aberrantium.' 

The  Com.  says :  '  A  strict  adherence  to  the  proper  rule  is  true 
devotion  (renunciation).  By  thus  adhering  to  the  rules  of  their  respec- 
tive castes,  or  positions,  virtue  increases  ;  by  increase  of  virtue  sin  is  worn 
away ;  by  wearing  away  of  sin  ignorance  departs  ;  by  departure  of  igno- 
rance the  perception  of  the  difference  between  things  temporal  and 
things  eternal  is  gained,  and  with  it  a  disgust  at  the  transient  pleasures 
of  this  world  and  the  next,  and  a  feeling  of  the  affliction  of  successive 
births  is  conceived ;  thence  comes  an  eager  desire  for  vidu  (release)  ; 
thence  comes  abandonment  of  fruitless  effort,  which  is  cause  of  births, 
with  the  practice  of  meditation  (yoga)  ;  from  this  true  knowledge  pro- 
ceeds ;  the  external  bond,  which  is  "  mine,"  and  the  internal  bond,  which 
is  "  I,"  are  loosed,  and  these  two  bonds  are  renounced  with  abhorrence.' 
[Ch.  xxxv .-xxxvii.] 

22.  Ellis :  *  To  count  the  virtues  holy  men  attain, 

Were  as  to  count  the  ghosts  that  from  this  world 

Have  taken  flight.' 

Beschi :  '  Si  numeres  religiosorum  decora  perinde  erit,  ac  si  numeres 
mortuos  ab  initio  mundi  ad  hunc  diem.' 

23.  The  two  ways  of  '  renewed  birth  '  and  '  deliverance.' 

Beschi:  ' Considerando  hujus  et  alterius  vitae  varias  qualitates  in 
mundo,  celsissimum  decus  illorum,  qui  in  hac  vita  ornantur  virtute 
religiosorum  propria.' 

24.  Here,  in  somewhat  obscure  language,  is  set  forth  the  idea  of  the 
development  in  the  '  better  world '  of  the  virtuous  soul.     It  is  a  seed 
which,  planted  in  that  better  soil,  shall  grow  and  yield  immortal  fruit. 
The  mixture  of  metaphor  is  remarkable.     Comp.  Ndladi,  183 : 

*  See  ye  sow  seed  whose  yield  in  other  world  survives ; 
From  earth's  bewilderment  and  meanness  free  your  lives ; 
Stand  in  your  lot  as  wise  men  should ;  the  changing  hue 
Of  things  shall  causeless  fade,  and  many  things  be  new.' 

25 


194  THE    KURRAL. 


<%  tr  IT  emr  LQ 


Ellis  :  '  As  the  hook  rules  the  elephant,  so  he 

In  wisdom  firm  his  sensual  organs  rules, 
*  Who  hopes  to  flourish  in  the  soil  of  heaven.' 

Beschi  :  '  Qui  harpagone,  qui  dicitur  auimi  robur,  suos  quinque  sensus 
fraenat,  semen  est  pro  agro  qui  dicitur  coelum  [i.e.  qui  utitur  ad 
suorum  sensuum  fraenationem  animi  robore,  sicuti  harpagone  utimur 
ad  fraenandos  elephantes,  semen  est  in  terra  custoditum,  ut  suo  tempore 
in  coeli  agro  seratur  ;  hoc  est,  coelum  assequatur].' 

25.  The  story  of   the   curse   pronounced   on   Indra  by  the   ascetic, 
referred   to   in  this   couplet,   may  be  read   by  the   Tamil   scholar  in 
Kamban's   Rdmdyanam,    Bdla-Kdndam,   xth  Padalam,  Agaliyaippada- 
lam,  72,  &c.,  where  the  beauty  of  the  verse  contrasts  with  the  uncouth- 
ness  of  the  story. 

Ellis  :         *  Let  Indren  say,  the  king  who  all  controls 

Within  the  expanse  of  heav'n,  how  great  his  power, 

Who  his  five  senses  in  subjection  holds.' 

Beschi  :  '  Decus  illius  qui  quinque  affectus  ex  quinque  sensibus 
emanantes  extinxit  (i.e.  mortificavit),  pro  se  habet  testimonium  Indi- 
renis  coelitum  regis.' 

26.  The  Com.  says  the  difficult  things  are  powers  acquired  by  the 
yogi,   something   like    those  which  so-called    *  spiritualists  '  claim.      I 
suppose  the  poet  means  the  harder  conquest  of  self  and  attainment  of 
virtue. 

Beschi  :  '  Sublimes  tantum  homines  difficilia  (uti  est  sui  fmenatio) 
operantur  ;  infimi  homines  ardua  operari  nequeunt.' 

27.  Comp.  Ndladi,  59  : 

'  Who  undisturbed,  in  "way  of  right  ordained,"  has  might 
To  guard  and  guide  desires  and  lusts  that  entrance  find 
By  sense-gates  five,  called  "  body,  mouth,  eye,  nose,  and  ear  "- 
Unfailing  he  "  release  "  shall  gain.' 


The  five.     See  6,  25,  343,  361-70. 


NOTES.  195 

The  Com.  enters  into  a  long  explanation  of  the  sdnkhya  doctrine 
regarding  the  five,  a  knowledge  of  which  puts  the  whole  world  into  the 
power  of  the  ascetic.  All  this  is  quite  foreign  to  the  poet's  object. 

Ellis  has  a  long  discussion  of  this  couplet.  He  says :  '  The  simple 
meaning  of  the  author  in  this  verse  is,  that,  as  it  is  by  the  senses  only 
that  the  mind  can  derive  knowledge,  human  knowledge  of  all  kinds  must 
be  connected  with  (or  must  be  according  to  the  way  of),  the  objects 
of  sense  here  enumerated ;  he,  therefore,  who  has  a  clear  understanding 
of  them,  of  their  powers  and  effects,  is  alone  complete  in  knowledge. 
Such  is  the  contemplative  sage,  who,  having  reduced  his  sensual  organs 
to  entire  subjection,  must,  beyond  all  others,  have  acquired  a  more 
perfect  comprehension  of  the  senses  and  their  operations/ 

Beschi's  translation  is :  '  Qui  quinque  ilia,  nempe,  saporem,  lucem, 
quantitatem,  sonum  et  odorem,  cum  eorum  proprietatibus  ac  relationibus 
attente  considerat,  totum  in  se  nmndum  habet  (i.e.  mundum  totum 
in  se  comprehendit,  cum  nil  sensibile  sit  in  mundo  quod  in  illis 
quinque  non  contineatur.' 

He  adds :  '  Exaltat  hie  religiosos  ob  contempJationem,  quam  mortifi- 
cationi  jungunt,  quaque  ex  rerum  naturalium  attenta  consideratione 
veri  notitiam  assequendo  ad  Deurn  facilius  diriguntur.' 

Ellis  :     *  Taste,  light,  touch,  sound,  and  smell,  if  these  be  known 
And  with  them  all  connected,  of  the  world 
The  whole  is  known.' 

28.  Their  words  of  benediction  or  of  malediction  are  fulfilled. 
Beschi:  'Decus    hominum    indeficientia  verba    habentium   (nempe, 

religiosorum)  ostendit  spiritualis  doctrina,  quam  in  terra  decent  (ait, 
verba  religiosorum  non  deficere,  quia  cui  benedicunt  felix  est ;  cui 
maledicunt,  indubitanter  infelix  invadit).' 

29.  Com.:  ' Their  excellence  is  a  hill,  for  it  is  exalted  and  immoveable.' 
Beschi :  '  Neque  per  unam  temporis  instans  (?)  facile  erit  retardare 

effectus  maledictionum  illius  qui  virtutum  montem  ascendens  in  culmine 
perseverat.' 

30.  For  the  epithet  Anthanar  see  8.     It  is  applied  to  God,  and  to 
Brahmans  also.      There  is   (Graul  thinks)  a  hit  at  these  latter,  who 
relied  more  on  birth  than  on  *  fair  and  loving '  grace  of  character. 

The  poet  shows  how  men  are  to  deserve  a  title  which  is  given  to  the 
Supreme  Himself. 

Beschi :  '  Eeligiosi  vocantur  andaner  (quod  est  pulchre  ornati)  qui 
ornati  incedunt  affabilitate,  quae  omnibus  pulchra  est.' 


196  THE    KUEBAL. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

THIS  is  the  special  introduction  to  Book  I.  The  invocation,  the  praise 
of  rain,  and  the  declaration  of  the  virtues  of  '  the  renouncers,'  introduce 
the  whole  work. 

God's  grace,  rain  which  alone  renders  life  on  earth  possible,  and  the 
existence  of  saintly  sages,  are  as  the  postulates  of  his  system. 

He  now  asserts  the  value  of  virtue,  or  arram.  The  word,  as  Ellis  says, 
has  *  great  latitude  of  meaning.'  It  denotes : 

(i.)  VIRTUE  in  general. 

(ii.)  Eight  as  opposed  to  wrong.    . 

(iii.)  Religious  righteousness  and  merit  accruing  from  religious  acts. 

(iv.)  Positive  rights,  as  defined  by  law  and  custom,  and  their  main- 
tenance: justice. 

(v.)  Charity  in  the  abstract,  and  charitable  acts. 

(vi.)  The  goddess  or  guardian  genius  of  virtue  (verse  77). 

It  is  divided  (taken  in  meaning  i.)  into  The  virtue  of  the  householder 
(Ch.  v.-xxiv.)  and  The  virtue  of  the  ascetic  (Oh.  xxv.-xxxvu.). 

As  to  the  teaching  of  this  chapter,  comp.  the  GUd  (Ch.  xvin.).  Action 
is  not  to  be  forsaken.  Ascetics  are  great ;  but  in  the  performance  of 
virtuous  deeds  men  obtain  their  highest  enjoyments  and  merit  the 
greatest  rewards.  This  chapter  contains  a  loftier  moral  than  any 
Hindu  composition — at  least,  of  earlier  date.  Ch.  iv.  of  the  Ndladi 
bears  the  same  title. 

The  following  is  the  Com.  analysis  of  the  chapter  : — 

I.  1.  No  strength  like  that  which  virtue  gives. 

II.  2.  Ruin  from  its  neglect. 

III.  3.  The  way  it  must  be  cultivated. 

IV.  4,  5.  Its  true  nature. 

V.  6-8.  It  affords  unfailing  assistance  in  other  life  if  practised  in 

this  life. 

VI.  9.  It  brings  present  rewards. 

VII.  What  to  do  and  what  to  shun. 

31.  The  Com.  thinks  'final  release  '  and  the  temporary  pleasures  of 
svarga  are  meant. 

Beschi  says  :  '  Quodnam  est  homini  emolumentum  virtute  majus,  quae 
et  eternam  et  temporalem  felicitatem  parit.'  Ariel :  '  Grandeur  et  f eli- 
cite.'  Graul :  '  Glorie — gliick.' 

Ellis  :         '  What  more  doth  profit  man  than  virtue  doth, 
By  which  felicity  is  given,  and  whence 
Eternal  bliss  ensues  ? ' 


NOTES.  197 

32.  Ellis  :  *  No  greater  gain  than  virtue  canst  thou  know, 

Than  virtue  to  forget  no  greater  loss.' 

Beschi  :  '  Virtute  majus  emolumentum  non  est,  nee  majus  damnum 
ejus  oblivione.' 

33.  Com.  :  '  With  the  mind,  by  thinking  good  thoughts  ;  with  the 
mouth,  by  speaking  good  words  ;    with  the  body,  by  doing  good  acts.' 
[Eccles.  ix.  10.] 

Beschi  :  '  Quocunque  potes  modo  virtuosa  opera  sine  intermissione,  in 
omni  occasione  quae  se  offerat,  operari  debes.' 

34.  Com.  :  *  Sound  —  made  to  attract  the  notice  of  others.'     [Matt. 
vi.  2  ;  v.  8.]     Comp.  Critd,  xvi.  1. 

Ellis  :  '  That  which  is  spotless  purity  preserves 

The  mind  in  real  virtue  ;  all  besides 
Is  evanescent  sound.' 

Beschi  :  '  Ex  immunitate  a  culpa  in  animo  metienda  est  virtus,  caetera 
omnia  conditionem  habent  strepitus.' 

35.  Gitd,  xvi.  21.     Comp.  Ch.  xvn.,  xxxvu.,  xxxr.,  x. 

Beschi  :  *  Virtutis  proprietas  est  non  errare  in  his  quatuor,  nenipe, 
invidia,  cupiditate,  ira  et  malis  verbis.' 

36.  Com.  :  *  When  the  body  dies  virtue  will  join  itself  to  the  soul  and 
accompany  it  into  another  body.' 

It  is  the  belief  of  nearly  all  Hindus  that  a  man's  good  and  evil  deeds 
determine  the  state  into  which  he  passes  at  death,  and  accompany  him  into 
that  new  state,  and  influence  his  character  and  fortunes  therein. 

This  is  'destiny,'  or  esmipur  (which  means  simply  'antiquity'  —  the  'old 
things  '  which  have  not  passed  away)  ;  and  Tiruvalluvar,  in  Ch.  xxxvm. 
[^.v.],  teaches  that  this  presides  over  all  action;  yet,  in  a  sense,  as  we 
shall  see,  man  is  yet  man,  and  '  master  of  his  fate.' 

It  is  only  when  a  human  body  is  reached  in  the  round  of  births,  that 
the  '  virtue  '  whose  fruit  is  '  final  release  '  can  be  practised  ;  hence  this 
mortal  life  is  the  time  for  prompt  virtuous  effort. 

I  add  three  verses,  selected  from  many  beautiful  ones  of  similar  import, 
out  of  the  Ndladi,  where  procrastination  is  on  this  ground  deprecated  : 

(36)  '  This  day  ?     That  day  ?     What  day  ?     0  question  not  the  time. 
Bethink  thee  death  behind  thee  waiting  ever  stands  ? 
Put  from  you  every  evil  thing  ;  with  all  your  powers 
Embrace  the  virtue  sages  teach.' 


<Bh-rroLQ<oT<zvr 


198  THE    KUBRAL. 

(34)  '  As  gain  from  mortal  frame  now  reached  —  so  hard  to  reach 
With  all  thy  might  lay  hold  of  virtue's  lasting  good. 
As  juice  from  cane  expressed  'twill  after  be  thine  aid, 
When  body  goes  like  refuse  flung  away.' 

u_//Tc<E60)<®(SO)WJLJ   Qurbp 

Gl<S!T<3(Y<5  ! 


(19)  '  Say  not  "  In  after  time  we  '11  virtue  learn;  we  're  young.' 
While  wealth  is  yours,  conceal  it  not  ;  do  virtuous  deeds. 
When  evil  tempests  rage,  not  ripened  fruit  alone, 
But  unripe  fruit's  fair  promise  falls.' 

iurru3%sfriLiLn  ' 


Ellis  :  '  Refer  not  virtue  to  another  day  ; 

Receive  her  now,  and  at  thy  dying  hour 
She  '11  prove  thy  never-dying  friend.' 

Beschi  :  '  Ad  mortis  horam  non  differendo  virtutem  instanter  operare, 
dum  moriens  ilia  tibi  comes  immortalis  erit.' 

37.  This  seems  to  mean  that  their  respective  positions  are  the  result 
of  deeds  —  good  or  evil  —  done  in  a  former  birth.    The  Jews  seem  to  have 
had  such  a  notion.     [S.  John  ix.  2.] 

Beschi  :  '  Quonam  modo  se  gerat  virtus,  ne  nmltuin  scruteris,  illud 
enim  clare  videre  poteris,  in  eo  qui  per  bajulos  in  lectica  deferfrur.' 

He  adds:  'It  maybe  explained,  "  You  need  not  doubt  about  the 
way  of  virtue  :  as  the  bearers  do  not  desert  the  man  they  carry,  so  virtue 
is  the  immortal  companion  of  the  virtuous  man."  ' 

But  he  prefers  this  :  '  Don't  say  the  way  of  virtue  is  like  that  of 
bearers,  who  can  only  bear  you  to  the  grave,  and  must  leave  you 
there.' 

38.  'Virtue  prevents  a  man  from  passing  through  other  forms  of 
being  '  :  procures  him  *  release.' 

Comp.  Browning,  Old  Pictures  in  Florence,  xxi.  : 

'  There  's  a  fancy  some  lean  to  and  others  hate  — 

That,  when  this  life  is  ended,  begins 
New  work  for  the  soul  in  another  state, 

Where  it  strives  and  gets  weary,  loses  and  wins  : 


NOTES.  199 

Where  the  strong  and  the  weak,  this  world's  congeries, 
Repeat  in  large  what  they  practised  in  small, 

Through  life  after  life  in  unlimited  series  ; 
Only  the  scale  's  to  be  changed,  that 's  all. 

***** 

'  Yet  I  hardly  know  .... 
Why,  the  child  grown  man,  you  burn  the  rod, 

The  uses  of  labour  are  surely  done ; 
There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God : 

And  I  have  had  trouble  enough,  for  one.' 

Beschi :  c  Si  nullam  diem  sine  virtuosis  operibus  abire  sinas,  ilia 
erunt  veluti  lapis  occludens  viam  miserae  vitae  quae  mortem  sequitur.' 

39.  Nothing  but  virtue  can  give  real  enjoyment. 

Ellis  :         '  Pleasure  from  virtue  springs  ;  from  all  but  this 

No  real  virtue  e'er  ensues,  nor  praise.' 

Beschi :  *  A  virtute  venit  dulcedo,  caetera  omnia,  nee  dulcia,  nee 
laudabilia  sunt.' 

40.  This  seems  to  suppose  a  natural  sense  of  right  and  wrong  in 
human  minds. 

In  Hindu  minds  this  sense  is  supposed  to  be  affected  by  '  destiny  ' 
(note  on  36),  but,  on  the  whole,  is  a  safe  guide.  [Comp.  293.]  The 
poet  believes  in  Natural  Conscience. 

Ellis :         '  Know  that  is  virtue  which  each  ought  to  do  ; 
What  each  should  shun  is  vice.' 

Beschi  :  '  Virtus  est  quam  quisque  sectari  debet,  vitium  quod  cuique 
vitandum.' 


CHAPTER  V. 


THE  title  is  explained  by  the  Com. 
ffirnun  f  the  excellence  of  living  in  union  with  a  wife.' 
Com.  analysis  :  — 

I.  1,  2.  In  domestic  life  lies  the  power  of  bestowing  all  benefits. 

II.  3-5.  The  way  in  which  the  householder  fulfils  virtue. 

III.  6-9.  Its  fruits  of  virtue  and  excellence. 

IV.  10.  Its  crown  in  the  future  life. 

The  difference  between  the  Kurral  and  the  Ndladi  is  nowhere  more 
evident  than  in  the  way  in  which  this  subject  is  treated.  The  Ndladi 
discourages  and  mocks  at  marriage.  Comp.  56,  364. 


200  THE     KURKAL. 

'  Though  wife  possess  no  excellence  and  bear  no  child, 
'Tis  hard  to  rid  one  of  the  marriage  bond.     For  this, 
Since  he  who  weds  puts  sorrow  on,  in  olden  days 
The  learned  men  made  marriage  synonym  of  dread.' 
[A  play  on  sy.,  which  means,  among  many  other  things,  <  marriage  ' 
and  'dread.'] 


He  hears  that  marriage  is  another  name  for  dread, 
Yet  dreads  it  not  !     The  fearful  marriage  drum  gives  him 
No  sense  !     To  dwell  bewildered  mid  domestic  joys 
Is  fault  that  merits  stoning,  say  the  wise.' 


G><£L-(!))LC> 


Indeed,  1-60  of  these  quatrains  are  intended  to  exalt  asceticism  at 
the  expense  of  domestic  life.  The  tone  of  the  Ndladi  is  morbidly  ascetic, 
while  the  Kurral,  as  we  should  expect  from  the  tradition  of  its  author's 
life  (see  Intro,  pp.  x.,  xi.,  and  the  notes  to  next  chapter),  heartily  praises, 
and  exhibits  in  the  most  attractive  light  every  human  and  social 
virtue.  Ch.  xxxv.  gives  the  other  side  of  the  question. 

41.  Ellis  :  '  He  for  domestic  virtues  is  esteemed, 

Who,  firm  in  virtue's  path,  the  virtuous  aids 
In  life's  three  orders  found.' 

Beschi:  *Conjugatus  debet  esse  auxiliator  in  via  virtutis  triplici 
hominum  generi,  qui  virtuti  addicti  sunt.' 

The  three  are  the  LSirLA&rrifl  or  'student';  the  eufr&ffUiSir&u/g&f 
or  '  eremite,'  *  the  dweller  in  the  wilderness  ' ;  and  the  &p$ujn-&l  l  the 
absolute  ascetic.'  The  householder  (Sljr&du^Gsr)  is  the  fourth.  Manu 
has  given  a  full  exposition  of  the  duties  of  each  of  these  states.  The 
Jains  have  only  two  classes,  and  thus  the  poet  was  not  a  teacher  of  their 
system.  Manu,  iii.  78. 

The  householder  is  a  help  (jpSswr)  to  them,  by  assisting  them  with 
food,  medicine,  and  other  things,  relieving  them  from  hunger,  pain,  and 
cold  (Com.). 

refers  to  the  idea  of  Ch.  xiv. 


NOTES.  201 

42.  Ellis  :  '  Domestic  virtue  is  to  him  ascribed 

Whose  care  befriends  the  pious  and  the  poor, 

And  aids  departed  souls.' 

Beschi :  '  Praetera  conjugatus  auxiliari  debet  iis  qui  omnibus  renun- 
ciarunt,  pauperibus,  et  animabus  defunctorum,  qui  apud  se  obierint.' 

To  the  dead  the  householder  is  a  help  by  performance  of  funeral 
rites,  especially  the  sprinkling  with  water  (tgrr&t-esr).  Manu,  iii.  80. 

The  Hindus,  in  common  with  the  ancient  nations  of  Europe,  attach 
great  importance  to  this.  [Hor.  Odes,  I.  xxvii.  30-34.]  '  Confucianism 
inculcates  the  worship  of  the  dead  as  a  part  of  filial  piety.'  (Legge.) 

43.  Ellis  :  '  Thine  ancestors  deceased,  thy  God,  thy  guest, 

Thy  relatives,  thyself  ;  these  cherished,  know 

Of  life  the  five  great  duties  are  fulfilled.' 

Beschi :  '  Insuper  praecipuum  conjugati  debitum  est  virtutem  exercere 
in  hos  quinque,  nempe,  in  majores  vita  defunctos,  in  Deum,  in  hospites, 
in  consanguineos,  et  in  se  ipsum,  in  modo  superius  dicto.' 

This  is  almost  a  translation  of  Manu,  iii.  72.  The  feriae  novemdiales, 
the  feralia,  or  parentalia  of  the  Romans,  and  the  offerings  to  the  Manes 
attest  the  universality  of  the  sentiment. 

The  Q<3<ovrL-iev<g<f&[rir  '  those  who  have  their  dwelling  in  the  south,'  the 
Manes.  Manu,  iii.  91. 

Pitribhobaliseshantu  sarvam  dakshinato  haret,  l  with  his  face  towards 
the  south.'  The  pitris  are  the  dwellers  in  the  south.  (See  Wilson's 
Vishnu  Purdna,  p.  320  note.)  They  include  collectively  a  man's  ances- 
tors. Their  '  path  '  is  among  the  asterisms,  south  of  the  line  of  the 
goat,  and  north  of  Agastya  or  Canopus. 

The  duties  of  the  Tamil  householder,  as  contemplated  by  the  poet, 
are  of  no  trivial  or  degrading  character.  What  Manu  enjoins  on  the 
Brahman  householder  Tiruvalluvar  takes  for  granted  as  the  duty  of 
all,  but  with  a  wider  interpretation  than  would  be  put  upon  the  precepts 
by  any  modern  Hindu  sect.  The  Smriti  or  traditional  usage,  and  the 
Dharma$dstras,  especially  Manu,  which  is  a  resume  of  the  Smriti,  are 
the  foundations  of  the  law  laid  down  by  the  poet.  (Barth,  Religions  of 
India,  p.  53.) 

44.  Beschi:  'In  conjugio  quod  morem  habeat  partiendi  cum  caeteris 
cibum,   cum  peccati    tiniore  acquisitum,   progeniei  defectus  nunquam 
erit.' 

No  merit  could  be  gained  by  sharing  with  others  what  had  been 
obtained  by  injustice,  says  the  Com. ;  but  the  text  says  simply  '  shunning 
guilt,'  and  this  may  mean  the  guilt  of  inhospitality.  Dr.  Graul's  German 
is  more  exact :  '  Hiitet  sich  ein  Hauswesen  vor  Unrecht  und  giebt  gern 
von  seiner  Nahrung,  so  wird's  an  Nachkommenschaft  nie  fehlen.' 

Comp.  Manu,  iii.  118. 

26 


202  THE    KTTRRAL. 

45.  Ellis  :  *  If  love  and  virtue  be  thy  constant  guests, 

Domestic  life  is  blest,  and  finds  in  these 

Its  object  and  reward.' 

Beschi  :  '  Si  conjugiuin  possideat  amorem  inter  conjuges  mutuum,  et 
virtutum  exercitum,  hoc  et  conjugii  debitum  erit,  et  ejusdem  emolu- 
mentum.' 

Love  is  the  essence,  quality,  perfect  grace  (LJSOTTL^),  and  virtue  the 
profit,  crown,  reward  (UILKSOT)  of  wedlock. 

46.  Wanting  in  MS.  of  Beschi,  and  not  given  by  Ellis.      The  Poet 
here  distinctly  declares  the  sufficiency  and  superiority  of  household  life. 
The  tone  of  Ndladi  is  far  different. 

Thus,  again  and  again,  in  energetic  but  sad  verse,  they  urge  :  — 

(53)  '  The  chief  of  men  in  quiet  thought  discern  how  house, 

And  youth,  and  beauty's  grace,  and  high  estate,  and  wealth, 
And  strength  —  all  pass  away  ;  and  thus  to  save  themselves 
Prolonging  not  the  time,  they  all  renounce.' 

(54)  '  Though  wretched  men  afflictions  suffer  many  a  day, 

One  day's  delight  they  eagerly  desire.     The  men 
Of  wisdom  calm  and  full,  in  pleasure's  core  see  pain, 
And  quit  the  pleasant  household  paths.' 

(55)  '  Spent  is  my  youth  in  vain.     E'en  now  diseases  wait, 

And  death  will  come.     O  soul  !  be  bold  ;  wrangle  no  more 
With  me,  but  rise  !     Wilt  thou  not  go  where  virtue's  path 

Both  thou  and  I  may  gain  ?  ' 

(60)  '  Though  wretched  men  behold  afflictions  urge  and  press, 
Eenunciation  is  not  in  their  thoughts.     Delight 
They  eagerly  desire.     The  great  in  every  joy 

Behold  its  pain,  and  seek  it  not.' 
[(54)  and  (60)  seem  two  versions  of  one  original.] 

47.  Beschi:  'Qui   in   conjugio  vivit,   cum  virtute  conjugii   propria, 
omnes  qui  mundo  renunciarunt  excellit  ;  quia  difficilius  est  inter  mundi 
illecebras  quam  extra  illas  virtuosum  esse.' 

The  idea  in  this  and  in  46,  mutatis  mutandis,  is  almost  that  of 
Keble  : 

'  We  need  not  bid,  for  cloistered  cell, 
Our  neighbour  and  our  work  farewell  ; 
The  trivial  round,  the  common  task, 
Will  furnish  all  we  need  to  ask.' 


'  In  nature's  way  ' 

*  And  I  could  wish  my  days  to  be 
Bound  each  to  each  by  natural  piety.'  —  Wordsworth, 


NOTES.  203 

48.  Ellis  :  '  He  who  from  virtue  swerves  not,  but  her  path 

To  others  shows,  gained  in  domestic  life, 

More  merit  hath  than  the  recluse  can  boast.' 

Beschi :  '  Conjugium  quod  caeteros  ad  virtutem  promovendo  a  sua 
virtute  numquam  aberrat,  habet  quemdam  poenitentiae  speciem,  quae 
eos  poenitentes  superat.' 

Manu,  iii.  78 :  '  Because  men  of  the  three  (other)  orders  are  daily 
supported  by  the  householder  alone  with  knowledge  and  food,  therefore 
the  householder  (is)  of  the  chief  order.' 

49.  Beschi:  'Quae  autonomastice  dicitur  virtus  est  conjugium ;  ilia 
verb  nempe  virtus  renunciandi  nrundo,  et  ipsa  aestimabilis  erit,  si  non 
sit  in  ea  quod  caeteri  censurare  possint.'     He  adds,  '  Si  legatur  @«5r(n? 
uSssr  erit  idem.' 

Tiruvalluvar  hints  at  the  notorious  hypocrisy  and  scandalous  lives  of 
many  professed  ascetics,  who,  as  Sannyasis,  Jogis,  Fakirs,  &c.,  have 
ever  been,  and  are,  the  bane  of  India. 

Comp.  Ch.  xxvni. 

50.  Ellis :  '  Who  in  domestic  joys  thus  lives  on  earth, 

May  with  the  gods,  heaven's  denizens,  be  ranked.' 
Beschi :  '  Qui  modo  dicto  conjugatus  vixit  in  terra,  adscribendus  erit 
inter  numina,  quae  in  coelo  vivunt.' 

The  Com.  says,  '  he  will  certainly  be  born  again  as  a  god.' 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

ELLIS    renders   ^'Ssssr   'protection';    and   thinks 

'  she  to  whose  safeguard  domestic   happiness  is  entrusted.'     It  means, 

'  she  by  whose  assistance.'     See  giVsssr. 

51.  Ellis  :  '  To  every  household  duty  fitly  trained, 

The  wife  should  to  her  husband  be  in  all 
A  help-mate  meet.' 

Beschi:  'Uxor  debet  habere  virtutem  conjugio  debitam,  et  debet 
viam  sui  conjugis  calcare  ;  i.e.  suo  conjugi  in  omnibus  obedire.' 

Here  LJS3srq  =  ' duty,'  virtus-,  it  means  'all  that  befits  her  station.' 
The  Com.  says,  it  includes  (1)  qualities,  such  as  reverence  to  ascetics, 
hospitality,  kindness  to  the  poor,  &c. ;  (2)  acts,  such  as  due  provision 
for  household  needs,  skill  in  cookery,  attention  to  the  duties  of  her 
station,  &c. 

Beschi  translates  GUGITLO  by  '  via.'  It  means  <suir<sy  '  income.'  The 
Com.  '  she  who  adapts  her  expenditure  to  her  husband's  income.' 


204  THE    KUEJIAL. 

52.  Ellis :  *  The  wife  maintains  the  glory  of  the  house  ; 

All  other  glory,  if  she  fail  in  this, 

As  if  it  were  not,  is.' 

Beschi:  'Si  in  uxore  desit  praerogativa  conjugii  propria,  nempe 
fides  conjugalis,  quotcumque  alias  praerogativas  habeat,  perinde  est 
ac  si  non  haberet.' 

53.  Ellis  :  '  What  is  deficient  with  a  virtuous  wife  ? 

If  in  the  wife  defect,  then  what  is  all 

This  world  can  give  ?  ' 

Beschi :  *  Si  uxor  dictam  conditionem  habeat,  quid  tibi  deerit  ?     Si 
uxor  non  f uerit  virtuosa  quid  possidebis  ?  ' 
Manu,  ix.  26. 

54.  Ellis  :  '  Than  virtuous  woman  what  more  excellent, 

Who,  firm  in  mind,  her  wedded  faith  maintains  ? ' 
Beschi :  '  Quid  est  quod  dici  debeat  praestantius  muliere,  si  obtinuerit 
ut  sibi  insit  robur,  quod  dicitur  fides  conjugalis  ?  ' 

55.  Beschi :  '  Mulier  quae  speciale  Diis  obsequium  non  praestet  sed 
suo  conjugi  obsequendo  fidem  ei   servet,   statim  ac  imperabit  coelo  ut 
pluviam  det,  pluvia  cadet.' 

'  Even  the  gods  obey  her,'  says  the  Com. 

56.  Beschi :  '  Mulier  in  sui  custodia,  in  mariti  amore,  in  laude  ser- 
vanda  numquam  remissa  omnes  excellit.' 

57.  Beschi:  'Custodia  quam  faciunt  obseratae  januae  quid  proderit? 
Praecipua  custodia  debet  esse  ea  qua  uxor  suum  honorem  custodiat.' 

Manu,  ix.  12.  See  Ndl.  (362)  on  the  uselessness  of  restraint  to  a 
shameless  woman. 

'  Though  compassed  round  as  though  with  faultless  guard  of  swords, 
When  once  they  freedom  gain,  'tis  but  a  little  time 
Ere  they  are  stained  with  every  fault ;  and  long  the  time 

Those  women,  soft  of  speech,  spurn  every  law  of  right.' 

58.  Ellis :  '  Women  all  happiness  from  wedded  love 

Derive,  and  by  it  blest  foretaste  on  earth 
The  joys  of  heaven.' 

Beschi :  Si  mulier  obtinuerit  talem,  conjugem  qui  dici  possit,  quod 
earn  obtinuerit  (quod  non  fit,  nisi  ilia  fidem  servet  suo  conjugi)  obtinebit 
magnam  gloriam  in  mundo  ubi  Deae  regnant.'  He  regards  i^^Q^&fiir 
as  fern. 

The  meaning  turns  upon  the  ellipsis  with  QufSl&j.  The  Com.  says 
«u«»rEJ(j>fi/^p  (or  <5L/L$Lj/r©)  is  understood:  'attain  to  the  due  reve- 
rencing of.' 

Ellis  supplies  FFSSST®  '  in  this  world  ' :  '  If  women  obtain  one  who  has 


NOTES.  205 

obtained  them  in  marriage,  they  shall  here  obtain  the  joys  of  the  divine 
world.'  I  prefer  Beschi's  :  '  if  she  really  gain  him  by  being  his  true 
spouse.'  So,  in  effect,  Graul. 

59.  Ellis  :  '  Before  their  scornful  foes, 

Bold  as  a  lion  those  dare  never  walk, 

Whose  fame  is  sullied  by  their  wives'  base  deeds.' 

Beschi :  '  Qui  non  habet  uxorem  quae  laudem  satagat,  non  poterit  uti 
leo  magnanime  incedere  corani  suis  hostibus.' 

In  Beschi's  MS.  the  text  of  this  chapter  is  not  given,  but  in  his 
interpretation  he  has  '  @6u®8  pro  £§)6i>,  uxor.'  For  this  word  there  is 
no  authority.  He  seems  to  have  read :  q^L^qff)^^  sSldxsSuSleoQGuirn 
uS*.  q/fl/j^J  for  qrffyjr^,  or  final  ^  is  elided. 

The  history  of  the  poet's  wife  Va^ugi  illustrates  this  chapter.  (Intro, 
p.  xi.)  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  verses  may  have  given  rise  to  the 
legends. 

60.  Beschi :  '  Magnum  emolumentum  esse  dicuut  sapientes,  uxorem 
conjugati  fide  praeditam,  quod  verb  illi  majus  ornamentum  addit,  ajunt 
esse  bonorum  gnatorum  procreationem.' 

This  couplet  prepares  the  way  for  the  next  chapter.  With  OTSSTL/ 
understand  .jyn^eroL-CW/r. 

L&isj&euLct  [S.]  is  the  one  word  for  any  auspicious  event,  and  is  espe- 
cially used  of  everything  connected  with  marriage. 

The  following  from  Vemana,  who  in  Telugu  ranks  with  our  Tamil 
bard,  has  a  touch  of  nature  that  makes  all  the  world  kin  (II.  202)  > 
'  Is  wealth  to  wife  or  husband  wealth  ? 

Wealth  of  sons  on  earth  is  best. 
'Tis  wealth  of  wealth  to  live  and  side  by  side  grow  old.' 

Vemana  enjoys  the  advantage  of  matchless  rhythm  and  flexibility ; 
but,  as  an  artist,  not  less  than  as  a  teacher,  he  is  far  inferior  to  Tiru- 
valluvar. 

The  Com.'s  analysis  of  this  chapter  is  : 

I.  1.  The  two  special  gifts  of  a  wife  :  tact  and  economy. 

II.  2,  3.  They  ensure  the  welfare  of  the  house. 

III.  4.  The  excellence  of  chastity. 

IV.  5.  Its  power. 

V.  6.  Her  prudent,  guarded  life. 

VI.  7.  The  good  housewife's  praise. 

VII.  8.  The  reward  in  the  world  to  come. 

VIII.  9.  Evil  resulting  from  lack  of  wifely  virtues. 

IX.  10.  An  ornament  of  domestic  life.  A  link  between  this  chapter 
and  the  next. 


206  THE    KURKAL. 

The   following    from    the  Ndladi  illustrate  this  and  the  foregoing 
chapter : — 
(361)  '  The  mansion  meets  the  clouds.     Around  a  stately  band 

Of  warders  watch.    There  glisten  gems  as  lamps.    What  then  ? 
Where  owner  has  not  wife  of  dainty  excellence, 

The  house  within  is  desert  hard  to  be  explored.' 

(363)  '  Death  is  the  wife  that  stands  and  dares  her  spouse  to  strike ! 
Disease  is  she  who  kitchen  enters  not  betimes ! 
Demon  domestic  she  who  cooks  and  gives  no  alms  ! 
These  three  are  swords  to  slay  their  lords ! ' 

(381)  '  Though  women  live  for  rarest  gift  of  chastity 
As  Ayirani  famed,  absence  of  men  who  stand 
Enamoured  of  their  charms  is  help  in  way  of  good 

To  those  of  fragrant  brow  who  guard  themselves.' 
[Ayirani,  the  virtuous  wife  of  Indra.] 

(382)  '  When  in  the  straitened  time, 'one  pot  of  water  set 

On  hearth,  she  cooks, — if  relatives  arrive  enough 
The  sea  to  drain,  each  seemly  duty  well  fulfils 

The  soft- voiced  dame,  the  glory  of  her  home.' 

(383)  '  On  every  side  the  narrow  dwelling  open  lies, 

On  every  part  the  rain  drips  down  ;  yet,  if  the  dame 
Have  noble  gifts,  by  townsfolk  praised  for  modest  worth, 
Call  such  a  housewife's  blest  abode  a  home.' 

(384)  '  Sweet  to  the  eye,  adorned  in  way  that  lover  loves, 

Enforces  awe,  her  virtue  shames  the  village  folk, 
Submiss,  in  fitting  place  is  stern,  but  sweet  relents ; 
Call  such  a  soft-voiced  dame  a  wife.' 

All  Tamil  poets  regard  it  as  an  accomplishment  in  a  woman  to  know 
how  and  when  to  assume  an  offended  air  (ecu:©,  qeu.  L^&SSYISI^)  and  when 
to  lay  it  aside  (a-issar^). 

The  idea  is  that  of  Terence : 

'  Amantium  irae  amoris  integratio  est.' 
Comp.  Ch.  cxxxi. 

(386)  '  Like  learned  scroll  to  him  of  understanding  heart 

Is  glorious  wealth  to  men  adorned  with  liberal  grace ; 
Like  javelin  keen  in  dauntless  hero's  hand  is  gift 
Of  beauty  gained  by  her  of  modest  mind.' 


NOTES.  207 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  title  is  '  the  procreation  of  sons  '  :  but  some  parts  of  the  chapter 
refer  to  children  in  general. 
The  Com.'s  analysis  is  : 

I.  1.  The  distinguished  excellence  of  the  gain  of  children. 

II.  2,  3.  The  benefit  obtained  in  the  next  world. 

III.  4-6.  Benefits  obtained  in  this  world. 

IV.  7.  The  father's  duty. 

V.  8.  The  joy  of  the  world. 

VI.  9.  The  mother's  delight. 

VII.  10,  The  son's  duty. 

61.  Beschi  :  'Inter  bona  quae  quis  obtinere  hie  potest,  ego  nullum 
aliud  scio,  quod  adeo  jucundum  sit,  uti  procreasse  filios  qui  sapientes 
evaserint.' 

Ellis  :         '  Of  all  the  world  calls  good,  no  good  exists 

Like  that  which  wise  and  virtuous  offspring  give  ; 
I  know  no  greater  good.' 

The  Com.  says  :  '  This  verse  refers  to  sons  only,  for  daughters  cannot 
be  described  as  ^fSeujflpp  :  can  never  be  learned.' 

Everything  depends  upon  a  man's  having  a  son  to  maintain  the 
household  fire,  to  discharge  the  duties  of  hospitality,  and  to  perform 
the  ceremonies  which  secure  the  welfare  of  the  departed.  A  man  must 
have  a  son  or  adopt  one. 

The  S.  putra=^1  deliverer  from  hell.'  Of  this  Lfpeoeussr  is  probably  a 
corruption.  A  man  who  dies  without  a  son  must  suffer  in  one  of  the 
hells  prepared  for  such  ill-fated  persons.  The  sentiment  is  very  power- 
ful amongst  all  classes  of  men  in  India. 

62.  Beschi  :  '  Neque  post  mortem  te  mala  tangent  si   genueris  filios 
qui  indoleni  habeant  quae  malum  de  se  rumorem  non  edat  ;  i.e.  si  filios 
incensurabiles  habueris,  etiam  post  mortem  ex  iis  emolumentum  capies  ; 
nam  illi  suis  orationibus,   eleemosynis  ac  jejuniis,  tibi  suffragabunt. 
[Est  inter  gentiles  hujus  regionis  mos  jejunandi  in  quolibet  plenilunio 
animabus  genitorum  decessorum.]  '     This  is  at  the  Amdvdsi. 

The  seven  births  are  :  (1)  gods,  (2)  men,  (3)  quadrupeds,  (4)  birds, 
(5)  reptiles,  (6)  fish,  and  (7)  things  without  motion: 


63.  Beschi  :  '  Sapientes  suos  filios  suos  fructus  vocabuut,  quia  eorum 
qualitas  ex  ipsorum,  nempe  parentum,  operibus  pendet.  [Hie  versus 
fundatur  in  persuasione  quae  inter  gentiles  communis  est,  quod  ob  bona 


208  THE    KURBAL. 

opera  parentum  boni  filii ;  et  ob  niala  mali  nascantur ;  ob  quam  per- 
suasionem  solent  plurimi  ante  quam  uxor  filium  pariat,  toto  eo  tempore 
quo  gravida  est,  aliquod  genus  poenitentiae  exercere,  ut  bonos  filios  ex 
partu  assequantur.]  ' 

Ellis  :         '  Children  are  offspring  called,  and  justly  so, 
For  from  their  parents'  deeds,  or  good  or  ill, 
Their  disposition  springs.' 

Not  so  the  Com.  ^*L  L/^eua/GDjr^  ^Lc^Quir^tsfr  eresrjpiQfireuGyieujr : 
<qjQsor<5afl6\)  LSerr'SsrrG'^if  tu  Qurr(nj<5rr  LSjBiT6&jb(g)6U(TijLa  '  Man's  children 
are  his  wealth,  for  the  wealth  the  children  acquire  is  for  the  father ' ; 
i.e.  they  employ  it  in  performing  acts  of  piety  for  the  benefit  of  their 
deceased  parent :  thus,  children  constitute  the  only  possession  or  wealth 
that  aids  man  after  death. 

I  have  translated  it  literally,  preserving  the  ambiguity. 

64.  Beschi :  '  Cibus  infantium  manibus  versatus  eorum  parenti  dulcior 
est  ipsa  Ambrosia.' 

65.  Beschi :  '  Filium  corpus  tangere  tactui  dulce,  et  ipsorum  verba 
audire,  parentibus  auribus  jucundum  est.' 

Ellis :         '  Sweet  the  sensation  to  the  parent's  breast, 

His  child's  soft  touch  imparts ;  'tis  real  bliss 
Which  others  hear  of,  fathers  only  know.' 

66.  Beschi :  '  Fistulam  et  citharam  dulces  vocabunt,   qui  non  audie- 
runt  suorum  infantium  imperfecta  verba ;     i.e.  infantes   balbutientes 
audire,  parentibus  dulcius  esse,  quam  fistulae  and  citharae  sonum.' 

Ellis  :         *  Sweet  is  the  pipe  and  sweet  the  lute  they  say, 

They  who  have  never  heard  their  children's  tongues 
In  infant  prattle  lisp.' 

67.  Beschi :  '  Favor  quern  pater  debet  filio  praestare  est  facere  ut 
ille  in  sapientium  coetu  primum  locum  habeat ;  i.e.  ita  ilium  instruere 
ut  inter  sapientes  primo  loco  dignus  sit.' 

68.  Beschi:  'Omnibus    hominibus  in    hac  vasta  terra  existentibus, 
dulce  est  habero  filios,  qui  se  sapientiores  sint.' 

The  Com.  says  :  'The  world  will  rejoice  more  than  the  parent  when 
children  are  wise  ! '  This  seems  a  slip.  Comp.  Ndl. 

(197)  '  If  banyan's  trunk  be  eaten  by  the  gnawing  ant, 
Its  offshoot  bears  it  up,  like  buttress ;  even  so 
When  in  the  sire  decay  appears,  the  son  he  gained 

Shall  hide  it  straight,  and  weakness  is  no  more.' 

69.  Beschi :  '  Mater  qui  audit  suum   filium  sapientem  vocari,  magis 
gaudet  quam  gavisa  fuit  cum  ilium  peperit.' 

The  Com.  says:  'The  mother  must  hear  of  her  son's  proficiency, 
being  naturally  incapable  of  judging  for  herself.' 


NOTES.  209 

70.  Beschi :  *  Filius  quam  retributionem  dabit  patri,  causare  debet 
verba  quae  dicant,  istius  pater  quanam  ardua  poenitentia  talein  filium 
obtinuit? — [Sensus  est,  retributionem  a  filiis  patri  dandam  esse,  ita 
procedere  ut  qui  eum  viderint,  illius  patrem,  valde  felicem  dicant,  quod 
ilium  obtinuerit.]' 

Ellis  :         '  When  men  shall  say,  "  By  what  infliction  hard 

In  penance  borne  gained  he  this  child?  "  the  word 
Requiteth  all  a  father's  pains.' 

Man}  pilgrimages  are  performed  in  India,  as  they  have  been  in  other 
lands,  and  many  vows  are  made  at  various  shrines,  by  childless  parents. 
At  Tirv/pati  or  Tiru-vengadam  is  a  renowned  temple  where  this  boon  is 
sought.  Hindu  stories  abound  in  which  penance  has  extorted  from  the 
gods  the  gift  of  male  offspring. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  Com.'s  analysis  is  : — 

I.  1.  The  reality  of  love.     [Sympathy.] 

II.  2-6.  Its  excellence. 

III.  7-10.  The  evils  of  an  absence  of  it. 

'  ^1 esr q  is  the  affection  a  man  feels  for  wife,  children,  and  all  con- 
nected with  him.  Its  fruit  is  the  pleasant  discharge  of  all  household 
duties,  and  benevolence  towards  all  living  beings  :  ^eueu/ozi  £D<soflj5j 
pi—jsfSQXLz  LSlpr)<snuSltT&<5ifi6Br(0Lc>GO  ^(^etriSp^^^iu^  ^eBTiSlsyr  ULueor.' 
This  ^(Tjefr  alone  is  to  be  cultivated  by  ascetics.  See  Ch.  xxv. 

71.  '  Estne  etiam  amori  sera?  qua  occultentur  amantium  oculi  plu- 
viam  lachrymarum  dabunt.     [Sensus  est,  arnorem  occultari  non  posse, 
quia  lachrymae  aut  alius  affectus  in  vultu  amantis  apparens  occultum 
amorem  detegit.]' 

Ellis  :         '  What  bolt  can  love  restrain  ?  what  veil  conceal  ? 
One  tear-drop  in  the  eye  of  those  thou  lov'st 
Will  draw  a  flood  from  thine/ 

72.  '  Qui  amorem  non   habent  omnia  possident   sibi ;    qui  amorem 
habent,  et  ipsum  corpus  possident  caeteris.' 

73.  '  Sapientes  dicent  viani,  seu  causam,  cur  humanus  spiritus  corpori 
amicabiliter  uniatur  esse  amorem,  quo  inter  se  juuguntur.    [Sensus  est, 

27 


210  THE    KURRAL. 

quod  sicuti  in  natural!  amore  quo  corpus  et  spiritus  se  invicem  prose- 
quuntur,  ita  amicabiliter  uniuntur,  ut  corpus  spiritum  et  spiritus  corpus 
foveat,  ita  qui  amorem  habent  debent  sibi  invicein  praesto  esse.]' 

74.  '  Tuus  amor  in  caeteros  in  iis  tui  desiderium  causabit,  illud  vero 
pariet  tibi  incomprehensible  decus,  quod  est  omnium  amicitia.' 

75.  '  Sapientes  ajunt  viam  qua  conjugati  dulcem  hie  vitam  ducendo 
aeternam  felicitatem  assequentur,  esse  inter  se  junctos  esse  mutuum 
amorem  obtinendo.' 

76.  'Aliquid  dicunt  amorem   ad   virtutis   exercitium   prodesse,   sed 
errant   quia   ille  ipse    ad   peccatum  avertenduni   prodest    (quod   usu 
venit  cum  quis  ei  a  quo  injuriam  accepit  benefecerit,  nam  tune  praeter 
bonum  quod  illi  fit  avertitur  etiam  malum  odii  et  caetera  mala  quae 
inde  sequuntur,  unde  infertur  quod  amor  non  modo  virtutis  exercitium 
promo  vet  sed  etiam  ea  quae  virtuti  contraria  sunt  avertit).' 

So  the  Com.,  in  effect,  says,  *  Love  conquers  evil.' 

But  Ellis :  '  The  ignorant  say  that  love  is  virtue's  friend  ; 

But  know  that  love  the  wicked  aideth  more.' 

He  explains  :  '  Virtue  requires  no  external  assistance,  being  all- 
sufficient  to  herself;  to  vice,  however  degraded  and  despised,  the 
consoling  protection  of  love  or  friendship  is  most  beneficial.' 

Dr.  G-raul  says:  'Amorem  clementiae  adjutorem  dicunt  imperiti: 
etiam  irae  (in  amicis  corrigendis)  adjutor  est.'  This  is  hardly  a  trans- 
lation. 

See  Oldenburg's  Life  of  Buddha. 

77.  '  Sicuti  sol  adurit  quod  non  est  corpus  vivum,  ita  Deus  destruet 
id  quod  amorem  non  habet.' 

He  renders  OTSSTL/  by  '  corpus,'  interpolating  '  vivum.' 

The  idea  is,  that  as  insects  are  melted  away  by  the  sun's  heat,  as 

Hindus  imagine,  so  the  deity  that  presides  over  virtue  consumes  those 

who  have  no  affection. 

78.  '  Vita    conjugalis,   quae  in  animo  amorem   non   habet,   perinde 
est  ac  si  in  sicca  terra  sicca  arbor  revivesceret.' 

Ellis :         '  As  in  a  barren  soil  a  sapless  tree, 

So  flourish  those  in  wedded  bliss,  whose  souls 
Know  not  the  sweets  of  love.' 

79.  '  Ei,  qui  caret  amore,  quod  est  animi  membrum,  caetera  omnia 
corporis  membra  quid  proderunt  ad  vitam  conjugalem  ? ' 

Ellis  :        .'  What  though  the  body  each  perfection  own, 
If  in  the  breast,  the  beauty  of  the  mind, 
Sweet  love  exist  not  ? ' 

80.  '  Quod  amoris  viam  tenet,  hoc  est,  quod  amorem  habet,  vivum 
corpus  est ;  ii  qui  eo  carent  corpus  habent  ex  ossibus  pelle  co-opertis 


NOTES.  211 

conflatum  (i.e.  praeter  hoc  quod  habeant  apparentiam  sen  figuram 
corporis,  in  iis  vita  non  residet,  quia  in  iis  non  deprehenditur,  quod 
est  homini  vivo  naturale,  nempe  auiare).' 

Ellis :         '  That  breast  alone  contains  a  living  soul, 

Which  love  inspires  ;  void  of  this  genial  warmth, 
'Tis  bone  o'erlaid  with  skin.' 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

Beschi:  Hospitalitas. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1,  2.  Its  special  excellence. 

II.  3-5.  Its  benefits  in  this  life. 
in.  6.  In  the  other  life. 

IV.  7.  In  both. 

Y.  8,  9.  Evils  of  its  neglect. 

VI.  10.  It  must  be  exercised  with  cheerfulness. 

1  Hospitality  '  here  is  not  entertainment  of  friends,  but  the  affording 
of  food  and  shelter  to  wayfarers,  mendicants,  and  ascetics.  In  v.  43  five 
classes  of  duties  are  mentioned :  to  manes,  gods,  guests,  relatives  and  self. 
The  first  and  second  are  to  invisible  beings,  while  the  fourth  and  fifth 
involve  no  exercise  of  charity  ;  the  third,  then,  is  treated  of  here  as  a 
work  of  cgysirq.  It  can  only  be  exercised  where  the  householder  and 
his  wife  live  in  harmony.  Hence  its  place  in  this  work.  It  has  now 
degenerated  into  the  feeding  of  promiscuous  multitudes  in  various 
charitable  foundations. 

81.  '  Quare  quis  posthabitis  silvis  in  urbem  sedem  figendo,  et   for- 
tunae  bona  quaerendo   et   custodiendo   conjugium  exercet,  nisi  causa 
praestandi  favorem  hospitibus,  eos  affectuose  tractando  ?  ' 

Ellis  :         '  To  honour  guests  with  hospitable  rite, 
Domestic  life  and  all  its  various  joys 
To  man  was  given.' 

82.  'Hospite    excluso,    quidquam,    etiain  si  sit  vitale    pharmacum 
solus  si  comedas,  id  non  est  laude  dignum.' 

83.  *  Qui  continenter  affectuose  excipit  ad  se  venientes  hospites,  non 
videbit  suum  conjugium  a  paupertate  ruinam  pati.' 

84.  *  Lacscimi  (sic)  Dea   felicitatis  laeto  animo  sedem  figet  in  ejus 
domo,  qui  laeto  vultu  hospites  affectuose  excipit.' 


212  THE    KURBAL. 

Ellis  :         '  He  who  with  smiles  receives  a  virtuous  guest, 
Shall  see  prosperity,  with  joyful  mind, 
Make  his  abode  her  home.' 

85.  'Numquid  opus  erit,  ut  seratur  ager  illius  qui   hospitem  bene 
tractando,  si  quid  supersit,  coinedit  ?  ' 

86.  '  Qui  venientes  hospites  affectuose  excipiendo,  deinceps  ventures 
hospites  cum  desiderio  praestolatur,  coelitibus  valde  gratus  hospes  erit.' 

Comp.  Ovid,  Met.  viii.  620-724  : 

*  Cura  pii  dis  sunt,  et  qui  coluere,  coluntur.' 
Ellis  :         '  He  who,  while  one  rejoiceth  in  his  cheer, 

Awaits  with  anxious  mind  a  coming  guest, 
Will  be  a  welcome  guest  to  gods.' 

87.  '  Nihil  est   de  quo  dici  possit  :    hanc   mensuram   habet  fructus 
hospitalitatis  :   fructus    sacrificii,    quod   est   hospitalitas,  mensura    est 
mensura  hospitis.' 

He  explains  it  thus  :  not  the  amount  of  your  aid,  but  the  necessities 
of  the  guest,  measure  the  merit  of  your  kindness.  The  Com.  more 
naturally  refers  it  to  the  worthiness  (p@$)  of  the  guest. 

See  Q<su<sfr<s£l. 

88.  '  Qui  dicunt  se  dimississe  desiderium   multo  labore  quaerendi  et 
custodiendi  fortunae  bona,  non  obtinebunt  fructum  sacrificii,  quod  fit 
hospitem  bene  tractando.' 

This  would  seem  to  have  no  meaning. 

89.  '  Stultitia  non  custodiens  (i.e.  despiciens),  hospitalitatem,  quae 
idem  est  ac  paupertas  inter  divitias,  in  insipientibus  reperitur.' 

Even  wise  men  have  their  follies  ;  this  is  not  one  of  them. 

90.  '  Naribus  admotus  macescit  fios  anicciam  dictus  ;  hospes  macescet 
si  euni  aspiciens  vultum  ab  eo  averteris.' 

A  guest  is  more  sensitive  than  the  .jyeoflcFcFLn  flower. 
Ellis  :         *  As  that  sweet  flower  which  droops  its  head  and  dies, 
When  once  its  fragrant  odour  is  inhaled, 

From  an  averted  face  so  shrinks  the  guest.' 


Some  take  sSl^^^i  here  by  metonomy  for  '  banquet  '  :  the  feast  loses 
its  charm  where  its  giver  lacks  courtesy.  The  beautiful  word  (LP&LZ 
eu/r«F$  is  used  for  'cheerfulness.'  Comp.  Heb.  xiii.  2;  Kom.  xii.  13; 
S.  Luke  xiv.  12-14. 


NOTES. 


213 


CHAPTER  X. 

Beschi :  Dulcia,  verba  loqui :  A/abilitas.     Ellis :  *  Courtesy  or 
affability.'     Ch.  c.  may  be  compared. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1.  What  are  pleasant  words  ? 

II.  2,  3.  More  excellent  than  even  charity. 
in.  4,  5.  Their  benefit  in  this  world. 

IV.  6.  In  the  next. 

V.  7,  8.  In  both. 

VI.  9,  10.  Evil  of  harsh  words. 

This  is  essential  to  hospitality,  so  follows  it. 

91.  '  Non  nisi  dulcia  erunt  verba,  quae  ore  profert,  qui  norit  virtutis 
conditionem,  ex  amore  compactam,  et  ab  omni  fraude  alienum.     [Sensus 
est,  virtuosos  affabiles  esse.]' 

Ellis  :         '  Fair  are  the  words  of  those,  but  void  of  guile, 
Who  know  that  sterner  virtue  should  be  joined 
To  mild  affection.' 

92.  '  Si  valeas  esse  dulciuin  verborum  locutor,  laeto  cum  vultu,  id  tibi 
melius  erit  quam  laeto  animo  tua  largiri.' 

Ellis  :         '  Though  bounty  may  rejoice  the  heart,  yet  words 
Of  courtesy,  which  dress  the  face  in  smiles, 

Will  more  avail.' 
This  is  within  the  reach  even  of  the  poor. 

93.  '  Si  laeto  vultu  et  hilari  obtutu  ex  intimo  pectoris  eruta  dulcia 
verba  loquaris,  ilia  sane  virtus  erit.' 

In  the  Ethics  of  Aristotle,  Book  IV.  chap,  vi.,  the  courtesy  in  speech 
here  inculcated  is  said  to  be  the  mean  between  the  habit  of  the  dis- 
putatious and  surly  (SucrepiSes,  SvovcoXoi)  and  the  (apeo-Kog,  /coAaQ  assentor 
or  flatterer.  It  has  no  name  in  Greek,  though  it  is  said  to  be  nearest 
to  faXta,  and  is  called  so  in  Book  II.  chap.  vii.  In  Tamil  uajsrq 
expresses  the  general  character.  (Ch.  c.) 

94.  '  Paupertas,  quae  maestitiam  affert,  non  erit  ei,  qui  cum  omnibus 
dulcia  et  laetitiam  afferentia  verba  loquitur.' 

95.  '  Esse  humilem  et  dulcia  loquentem,  verum  est  cujusvis  orna- 
mentum  :  caetera  omnia  praeter  hoc  non  sunt  ornamenta.' 

Ellis  :         *  The  grace  of  fair  humility,  the  grace 

Of  courteous  words,  do  all  far  more  adorn 
Than  do  all  other  ornament.' 


214  THE    KUERAL 

96.  '  Si  verba  investigando  caeteris  bonum  causantia,  dulcia  semper 
loquaris,  vitia  minuentur,  virtus  crescet.' 

97.  '  Yerba  quae  junctam  habent  conditionem  creandi,  caeteris  emolu- 
mentum,  et  gaudium  pro  hac  vita  et  virtutern.  pro  alia  vita  profiturain 
tibi  parient.' 

98.  'Dulcia  et  a  proxiini  malo  sejuncta  verba  et  in  hac  vita,  et  post 
mortem  gaudium  causabunt.' 

99.  'Qui  recte  novit  dulcia  verba  dulcedinem   parere,    cur   quaeso 
aspera  verba  loquitur  ?  ' 

Ellis  :     '  O,  wherefore  useth  he  discourteous  words, 

Who  knows  full  well  the  sweets  of  courteous  speech  ? ' 

100.  '  Cum  bona  praesto  sunt,  mala  verba  loqui  perinde  est  ac  acerba 
porna  comedere,  cum  praesto  sunt  rnatura.' 

Ellis  :         '  Discourteous  speech  when  courteous  may  be  used, 
Is  like  the  sickly  appetite  which  culls 

Fruit  immature,  leaving  the  ripe  untouched.' 

The  careful  use  of  honorincs  is  much  neglected  by  foreigners  in  their 
intercourse  with  Orientals,  although  courtesy  costs  little  and  goes  far  ! 
[Comp.  Tamil  Handbook,  Pt.  II.  p.  104.] 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Beschi  :  Grati  animi  virtus. 

COM.'S  analysis  :  — 

I.  1-3.  The  infinite  value  of  benefits  (1)  unmerited,  (2)  seasonable 

(3)  disinterested. 

II.  4,  5.  Due  estimation  of  benefits  by  the  wise. 

III.  6,  7.  Gratitude  enjoined. 

IV.  8.  Benefit  v.  injury. 

V.  9.  How  memory  of  wrongs  is  to  be  effaced. 

VI.  10.  Evil  of  ingratitude. 

The  title   is  written  often  Qffajispeor^.     Beschi  and  Ellis  do  not 
double  the  p,  nor  is  there  any  rule  requiring  it.       Qffiii  is 


101.  '  Ei  qui  tibi  praesto  fuit,  quin  tu  illi  profueris,  etiam  si  coelum 
et  terram  dederis,  par  pari  ref  erre  difficile  sit.  ' 

Ellis  :         '  Though  earth  and  heaven  could  in  return  be  given, 
A  benefit  received  when  none  was  due 
They  would  not  recompense/ 


NOTES.  215 


The  construction  is  difficult  :  *  It  is  hard,  impossible  (jyfl^j),  to  make 
the  gift  of  earth  and  heaven  an  equal  return  (0sxsuuj<s(LpLc  <sun-<5Gr<£(LpLn 
L&(rir)£D®o)  for  the  help  (^.^sSls©)  which  one  has  rendered  you  (Qfvbp) 
when  you  have  done  him  no  previous  assistance  (Q&  LULU  n-Loev).' 

Q<f{L>(U!TL^Go  =  Q<g:\LujfT^i(^s<s.  This  is  the  emphatic  word.  The 
spontaneity  of  the  favour  gives  it  its  value. 

102.  '  Opportune  collatum  beneficium,  quamvis  parvum  sit,  mundo 
ipso  majus  erit.' 

As  in  101  and  103,  the  first  word  is  the  emphatic  one.  A  timely 
benefit  is  of  infinite  value.  'A  friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed.'  -sir 
6u^^)@)eu  is  2-(i$LjLnLu&<35La  :  III.  Grr.  135*,  4th  case  for  7th. 

103.  '  Fructus  beneficii  sine  retributionis  ponderatione  collati,  si  pon- 
deretur  ipso  pelago  major  erit.' 

^p-«<s/r  in  Beschi.  The  first  phrase  is  the  important  one  :  disinte- 
rested kindness  is  of  inestimable  value. 

104.  '  Quamvis    milii  grano   parem  favorem  praestiteris,   qui   illius 
fructum  noscunt,  ilium  palmae  arbori  parem  judicabunt.' 

105.  '  Beneficium  non  est  dimetiendum  a  mensura  favoris  praestiti, 
sed  a  magnitudine  illius,  qui  beneficium  accepit.'     (Comp.  87.) 

Ellis  :         *  The  exalted  mind  no  benefit  esteems 

By  mere  return  repaid,  but  by  the  scale 

Of  its  own  greatness  measures  each.' 

106.  *  Noli  oblivisci  amicitiae  inculpabilium  vivorum  ;    noli  rejicere 
amicitiam  eorum,  qui  in  adversitate  sunt  tibi  baculus.' 

So  ^ei/erofflj  in  ^<£$jl(&ji$-  has  fffffSiofl)Qsiw$  forget  no  benefit  conferred. 
Since  our  Eastern  fellow-subjects  have  often  been  accused  (I  think, 
unjustly)  of  ingratitude,  a  quotation  from  Vemana  is  added  (v.  514  ; 
comp.  v.  262)  : 

'  Forget  the  faults  of  others  ; 
But,  Vema,  ne'er  on  earth  forget  a  benefit  conferred.' 

107.  '  G-ratus  homo  etiam  post  mortem  recordabitur  amoris,  quo  quis 
in  eo  haerentem  afflictionem  abstersit.' 

Beschi  reads  .S£I(L£L&LA  =  I  afflictio,  dolor':  and  not  sSl(L^iJc>  ^LD  as 
Com.  Comp.  Ndl.  356  :— 

'  The  hill-man  thinks  upon  the  beauty  of  his  hills  ; 
The  farmer  thinks  upon  the  fruits  his  fields  have  borne  ; 
The  good  think  on  the  boon  by  worthy  men  bestowed  ; 

The  base  men's  thoughts  are  centred  all  in  self.' 

There  is  a  v.r.  grooj^sra^  for  sveisi  e^oifsQfii  'the  base  remember 
only  how  they  abused  him.' 

108.  *  Bonum  non  est  oblivisci  beueficii  accepti  ;  sed  quod  maleficium 
est  eo  ipso  die,  quo  tibi  fit,  ex  memoria  delere  optimum  est.' 


216  THE    KURBAL. 

109.  '  G-ratus  homo,  qui  unumtantum  ab  aliquo  beneficium  receperit, 
si  deinde  ab  hoc  afficiatur  malo,  quod  sit  par  homicidio,  in  memoriain 
revocando  illud  unum  beneficium,  maleficii  accepti  memoriain  delebit.' 

Ellis  ;         '  To  one  small  favour  though  there  may  succeed 

Deadly  offence ;  the  grateful  from  the  mind  will  rase 

For  that  all  memory  of  this.' 
Comp.  Ndl.  357 : 

'  The  good  attach  themselves  to  those  who  do  one  act 
Of  kindness,  and  forgive  a  hundred  wrongs  that 
Rise.     The  base  receive  seven  hundred  benefits, — 
One  wrong  will  turn  them  all  to  ill ! ' 

110.  '  Qualemcunque  virtutem  caedentibus,  id  est,  quocunque  crinien 
patrantibus  ad  remissionem  via  invenietur,  sed  ad  illam  via  non  inve- 
nietur  hominibus,   qui  acceptum  beneficium  caedunt    (i.e.   pro   bono 
malum  reddunt).' 

Ellis :        *  Though  every  virtue  by  his  hand  expire, 

Yet  may  he  live ;  but  by  the  stroke  he  dies 

When  murdered  gratitude  before  him  falls.' 


CHAPTER  XH. 

Beschi :  Equitas. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1.  Its  excellence. 

II.  2,  3.  It  yields  lasting  prosperity ;    its  transgression  can  only 

yield  prosperity  that  ruins. 

III.  4.  How  the  just  and  unjust  are  discerned. 
IY.  5-7.  Ruin  the  true  result  of  injustice. 

Y.  8,  9.  In  council  a  just  mind  to  be  preserved. 

YI.  10.  In  trade  to  regard  others'  interests  as  your  own. 

It  is  to  be  exercised  in  the  treatment  of  (1)  foes,  (2)  strangers, 
(3)  friends.  [(jco>«a/jr,  ^wjeu/r,  p iLiS ssr Or .] 

This  is  not  political  justice.     See  Ch.  LV.-LVII. 

The  virtue  here  inculcated  is  probity,  fairness.  The  poet  passes  from 
the  sphere  of  the  family,  where  domestic  affection  reigns,  to  the  world, 
in  which  the  householder  is  to  learn  to  treat  all  men  with  equity.  The 
standard  of  this  is  shown  in  120,  where  the  trader  is  to  regard  all  men's 
interest  as  his  own.  This  alone  secures  the  welfare  of  himself,  and  of  his 
family. 


NOTES.  217 

This  virtuous  habit  is  called  :  — 

(1)  pf&jfsl  (81*07,  Sucaioowiy,  eiriciMia  [Ar.  Eth.  V.  x.]),  'fitness,  what  is 
due':  patsy.     Those  who  possess  it  are  ;#«<s/r/r.     Those  without  it  are 


(2)  Q&LJULQ  (opOorrjs).  This  is  defined  in  119:  'unswerving  rectitude 
in  word  and  mind/ 

(3)  (2&irL-ir03>u*  :  '  like  the  evenly-poised  balance,  inclined  to  neither 
side,'  118. 

(4)  /fr©<a//#3a>60)La    '  impartial  justice.'     p®,  ^©<a/,  113,  116,  117. 

111.  '  Est  quaedam   virtus  aequitas  dicta,  quae  tune  optima  erit  si 
valuerit  procedere  servando  suaui  proprietatem  in  coinplexu  amicoruni, 
inimicorum,    et   extraneorum,   seu   indifferentium,  qui  nee   amici   nee 
inimici  sunt.' 

Ellis  :         '  That  virtue  which  in  all  relations  holds 
Unchangeably  its  nature,  that  alone 
Deserves  the  name  of  justice.' 

This  is  almost  the  idea  of  Theognis  (Aris.  Eth.  V.  i.  15)  : 

iv  Se  SiKdLocrvvy  cruXXril3$r]v  TTO.CT  aperr)  <EVL. 

Aristotle  says  :   avrrj  /xev  ovv  rj  SiKCtiocrvi/??  aperr]  /xeV  eort  TeXci'a,  dXA'  ov^ 
aTrXws  dAAa  Trpos  erepov. 

112.  *  Divitiae  cumulatae  ab  eo,  qui  aequitatem  possidet,  sine  destruc- 
tione  vigorern,  id  est,  consistentiam  habebunt,  etiam  in  ejus  progenitis.' 

Ellis  :         '  By  justice  do  the  just  their  wealth  uphold, 
And  confirmation,  strong  as  virtue's  self, 
Bequeath  their  heirs.' 

113.  '  Divitias   aequitatem   transgrediendo  partas,  licet  bonum  tibi 
offerant,  eo  ipso  die  (quo  tibi  obveniunt)  abjiciendo  desere.' 

114.  *  Aequus  ne,  an  aequitate  carens,  quis  fuerit  ex  ejus  progenitis 
dignoscetur.' 

Ellis  :         '  Unerringly  the  just  and  unjust  shows 

The  state  in  which  their  progeny  is  found.' 

115.  '  Einolumenti  et  damni  gressum  in  aequo  pectore  non  torqueri 
sapientium  ornamentum  est.' 

The  MS.  is  not  clear,  and  the  interpretation  is  strange.  It  is  thus  :  — 
Q&(b)=  damnum  ;  Qu(tTj&<gsLc>  =  emolumentum  ;  ^eueuei;  =  gressus  (?)  ; 
^  <sv  in  =  c§>]<o®Ln  <5ii  =  conformity  (?)  ;  Q>&n®<56o  =  torqiieri. 

1  ^(stiQ/F^^LL^pectus  quod  se  accomodat  alteri,  i.e.  se  rationi  con- 
format.'  0^@cF^^  =  O^©^6u.  B.  adds:  'Emolumenti  gressus  est 
exoririex  peccato,  torquetur  amborum  gressus  quando  quis  ex  aequitate 
sibi  damnum  ne  immineat  timet,  aut  ex  iniquitate  sibi  emolumentum 
proventururn  sperat.' 

The  Com.  says  :  '  Loss  and  gain  come  from  actions  done  in  a  former 

28 


218  THE     KURRAL. 


state  (<4faii>jp£(§£  sirirtissrLz  uipsSl'BssrQiLi}  ;  so  the  wise  should  not  be 

diverted  by  them  from  right  action.' 

Graul  says  :  '  Unheil  und  Heil  kommt  nicht  fur  nichts.' 

I  think  the  idea  is  :  '  Joy  and  sorrow  are  common  to  men  ;  a  wise 

man  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  influenced  too  much  by  hopes  or 

fears.' 

116.  '  Si  quis   ex  corde  (i.e.   volens  ac  sciens)   justitiam  deserendo, 
aequum  quod  non  est  fecerit,  sciat  id  idem  esse  ac  dicere,  volo  meam 
ruinam.' 

117.  '  Damnum  illius  qui,  ut  aequitas  fiat,  in  virtute  sistit  (hoc  est, 
aequitatis   virtutem  constanter  servat),   sapientes  damnum  non   aesti- 
mant.' 

118.  '  Ad  instar  librae,  quae  aequalitatem  faciendo  quod  justum  est 
librat,  conformando   se  rationi  in  unam  ex  partibus  non  propendere, 
sapientium  ornamentum  est.' 

Ellis  :         '  It  is  the  glory  of  the  just  to  stand 

Like  the  adjusted  balance  duly  poised, 
Nor  swerve  to  either  side.' 

119.  '  In  verbis  tortuositate  carere   (i.e.  proferre  verba  a  ratione  non 
deflectentia)  aequitas  est  ;  si  obtinueris,  ut  animus  constauter  tortuo- 
sitate careat  (i.e.    si   constantem   animi   ab   aequitate    inflexibilitatem 
obtinueris).' 

120.  'Illi   qui   lucrandi   officio   incumbunt,  valde   lucrosum  officium 
exercebunt,  si  aliorum  bonum  ita  procuraverint,  uti  suum  procurant.' 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Beschi :  Sensuum  fraenatio.      Graul :  Continentia,  Selbstzucht. 
Ellis  :  Subjection,  restraint. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1-5.  Its  excellence. 

II.  6.  Control  of  body  :   snujiz. 

III.  7-9.  Restraint  of  tongue :  <surr&(gj. 

IV.  10.  Government  of  mind :  Lossr/i. 
This  seems  best  expressed  by  croxj>poo-vvr). 

121.  '  Sensuum   fraeoatio  ad  coelites  conducit.   eorum   relaxatio   ad 
inferos.' 


NOTES.  219 

Ellis  :         '  To  intercourse  with  gods 

Forbearance  leads  ;  but  passion  unrestrained 

Its  victims,  plunged  in  darkness,  leaves.' 

Coinp.  Ndl.  74  : 

'  Who  know  what  should  be  known,  and  rule  themselves  thereby ; 
Who  fear  what  should  be  feared  ;  who  use  all  faculties 
To  bless  the  world ;  whose  nature  joys  in  all  good  gains  ; 
For  ever  free  from  woes  are  they  ! ' 

122.  '  Ut  pretiosum  quid  fraenationem  sensuum  custodi,  nam  nullum 
est  homini  emolumentum  ea  majus.' 

arras  an  optative. 

123.  'Si  fraenationis  scientiam  discendo  in  virtutis  via  te  continere 
valueris,  id  tibi  apud  eos  qui  fraenationis  notitiam  habent,  magnum 
decus  pariet.' 

G)  &rSl  <sy  =  compressio. 

124.  '  Montium  celsitudine  valde  major  est  celsitudo  illius  qui  a  suo 
statu  non  aberrando  suos  sensus  fraenat.' 

125.  '  Omnibus  bona  est  (i.e.  utilis  est)  submissio  ;  sed  inter  eos,  qui 
sublimes  ac  divites  sunt,  valde  sublimium  opum  conditionem  habet.' 

Ellis  :         '  Though  self-control  be  excellent  in  all, 
It  most  befits  the  envied  state  of  those 
That  fortune  smiles  upon.' 

126.  '  Si  in  hac  vita  ad  instar  testitudinis  quinque  sua  membra  com- 
primentis,   tuos  quinque  sensus  comprimi   feceris,  etiam  post  mortem 
tibi  celsitudinem  affert ;  ob  id  enim  in  coelo  beaberis.' 

Shag.  Gitd,  ii.  58. 

127.  '  Etsi  omnia  non  custodias,  linguam  custodi ;  nisi  custodieris, 
in  verbis  errando  minime  fies.' 

Ellis  :         '  Though  unrestrained  all  else,  restrain  thy  tongue  ; 
For  those  degraded  by  licentious  speech 
Will  rue  their  tongue's  offence.' 

128.  'Ex   malorum   verborum    prosectione   proximo   unum    tantum 
malum    sequatur    (nempe    dehonoratio),  ei  tamen   qui  ilia  proferendi 
indolem  habet,  facit  haec  ut  caetera  bona  quae  habet,  bona  non  sunt.' 

But  he  adds  that  the  literal  sense  is  better :  '  Divitias  proximo  damnosis 
verbis  acquisitas  male  cedere,  pessumire.' 

129.  '  Vulnus  quod  alteri  infligas  ignis  adustione,  in  animo  delebitur  ; 
non  delebitur  vulnus  linguae  adustione  inflictum.' 

Ellis  :         '  The  wound  may  heal,  though  from  a  burning  brand, 
And  be  forgotten  ;  but  the  wound  ne'er  heals 
A  burning  tongue  inflicts.' 


220  THE    KT7RRAL. 

Comp.  Ndl.  63,  words  that  burn : 

1  Who  opes  his  mouth  and  speaks  unguarded  words,  his  words 
Will  ceaseless  burn  his  soul.     The  wise  who  ceaseless  hear 
And  ponder  well  and  calmly,  never  in  their  wrath 

Give  utterance  to  words  of  fire.' 

130.  '  Deus  ipse  conspicatum  accurret  pulchritudinem  illius,  qui 
scientias  cum  didicerit,  iram  fraenando  suum  animum  intra  virtutis 
viam  continere  valuerit.' 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

Beschi :  Bene  moratum  esse. 

1  Decorous  life  according  to  the  laws  of  caste  and  order.' 
G-raul:  Sitte. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1,  2.  Its  excellence. 

II.  3-7.  Good  from  its  observance,  evils  from  its  neglect. 

III.  8.  Its  consequences. 

IV.  9,  10.  Summary  of  '  decorum  '  in  word  and  deed. 

The  S.  word  is  ^rr^TT  dchdra,  '  prescription.'  Without  self-restraint 
it  is  impossible,  hence  the  order  of  subjects. 

Comp.  Barth,  Religions  of  India,  pp.  267,  268.  Custom  or  Lafr^Lpd) 
governs  the  world. 

131.  '  Cum  boni  mores  homini  celsitudinem  afferant,  boni  mores  plus 
quam  vita  ipsa  sunt  caute  custodiendi.' 

132.  '  Omni  labore  et  conatu  morum  bonitatem  custodi,  nam  si  caetera 
omnia  attente  et  studiose  inspicias,  nil  praeter  illam  invenies  quod  tibi 
majus  auxilium  affere  possit.' 

133.  '  Morum   rectitudo  etiam  vilium  prosapiam  nobilitat ;  si  mores 
a  rectitudine  deficiant,  etiam  nobilium  prosapiam  vilescere  facient.' 

This  seems  to  say  that  to  be  strict  in  the  performance  of  your  assigned 
duty  is  true  nobility.  Comp.  Shag.  Gitd,  iii.  35,  xviii.  47. 

Here  IJT^T  =  §&(i£ &&LQ.  See  Graul,  in  loco.  In  India  the  men  of  lowest 
caste  are  as  tenacious  of  their  dignity  and  privilege  as  the  highest.  The 
one  thing  is  strong  regard  to  ^fmrLa,  ^(^<ffi<£5/i>,  @GD^^ITLOLO. 

134.  '  Si  Brachman  obliviscatur  eorum,  quae  didicit,  ea  iterum  discere 
poterit ;  si  vero  in  morum  bonitate  deficiat,  ejus  prosapia  destruetur, 
id  est  abjectus  evadet.' 

135.  '  Sicuti  invidiam   habentibus    non   fit    opum   incrementum,  ita 
morum  bonitate  carentibus  non  fit  celsitudo.' 


NOTES.  221 

136.  '  In  morum  integritate  non  relaxantur  sapientes,  sciendo  passuros 
se  esse  damnum  abjectionis  (i.e.  se  minimi  esse  faciendos).' 

137.  'Ex    morum  integritate   celsitudinem   assequentur,    ex   morum 
integritatis  defectu  homines  intolerable  vituperium  referent.' 

138.  '  Virtutis  semina    sunt  boni  mores :  mali  mores  omni  tempore 
malum  parient.' 

139.  '  Morum  integritatem  possidenti  non  convenit  mala  verba,  licet 
indeliberate  suo  ore  proferre.' 

140.  '  Qui,    multa    postquam   didiceriut,    sapientum    nioribus    suos 
conforniare  nesciunt  igorantes  dicendi.' 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Beschi:  Alienam  uxorem  non  concupiscere. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1-6.  The  evils  of  coveting  another's  wife. 

II.  7-10.  The  virtue  of  not  doing  so. 

The  terms  for  a  neighbour's  wife  are   LS/Dsoflsv,  Lfl/D 
Loto,    LSrD(b(3)iRuj[r&r,    L£p€ara*€BUTiU/r6£r,    LS/DssrQutr^sfriTefr.        Add  to 
these  in  Ndladi,    LStrosvr&jrLn,  (Qj-^scrLa^oorujmsfr,  suLnuisvzyrQuioSGr. 

Comp.  Ndl.  Ch.  ix.,  L9/r)/rL£>§5&r//5-tf-/aj/r6B)Lo,  81-87. 

141.  '  Stultitia,  quae  morem  habet  concupiscendi  nmlierem  alterius 
propriam  non  reperietur  in  eo  qui  in  orbe  virtutem  et  divitias  novit.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  81  : 

'  The  fear  it  brings  is  great.     Its  joy  is  brief.     Each  day 
If  'tis  divulged,  death  threatens  by  the  King's  decree. 
And  ever  'tis  a  deed  that  ends  in  pains  of  hell. 
O  shamefaced  men,  desire  not  neighbour's  wife  ! ' 

142.  '  Inter  omnes,  qui  extra  virtutem  manent  (i.e.  qui  vitia  sectantur), 
non  est  stultior  illo,  qui  in  alterius  domo  sistit  (i.e.  alienam  uxorein 
concupiscit).' 

The  Com.  says, '  Fools,  because  they  not  only  sacrifice  virtue  and  wealth 
as  other  libertines ;  but,  through  fear  of  detection,  lose  even  the  pleasure 
they  sought.' 

143.  '  Qui  procedit  concupiscendo  malum  cum  uxore  illius  qui  ei  fidit, 
procul  dubio  non  differt  a  mortuis.' 

144.  '  Quantumcunque  magnitudinem  habeas,  quid  tibi  proderit,  si 
nee  tantum,   quantum  milii  granum   (i.e.  nee  minimum)   considerando, 
alienam  uxorem  adeas.' 


222  THE   KURBAL. 

145.  '  Qui  peccandi  facilitate  allectus  in  aliena  uxore  honestatis 
limites  transilierit,  nunquam  moriturum  (i.e.  nunquam  desiturum) 
vituperium  referet.' 

GTiu^Lb  for  GTUJgjGaiT&r.  The  third  person  in  a_ii  is  one  of  the  oldest 
forms  in  the  language  (see  Intro,  p.  xx.  §  7),  and  is  used  for  both 
^sOTTLj/reu  and  QuGmurreo.  [Comp.  50,  69.] 

146. '  Ab  eo,qui  in  aliena  conjuge  honestatis  liniites  praeterierit,  inse- 
parabilia  sunt  haec  quatuor,  nempe  odium,  peccatum,  metus  et  infamia.' 
@<S<SUT  is  neg.  adv.  part.  §  121  =  @<£5<swLo6v. 
Comp.  Ndl.  82 : 

'  Virtue,  praise,  friendship,  greatness,  all  these  four  draw  not 
Anigh  the  men  who  covet  neighbour's  wife.     Hatred, 
Disgrace,  and  sin  with  fear,  these  four  possessions  dire, 
Abide  with  men  who  covet  neighbour's  wife.' 

147.  '  Ille  dicetur  juxta  virtutis  proprietatem  conjugatus  vivere,  qui 
non  desiderat  corpus  mulieris  quae  est  alterius  propria.' 

^/Desfliuevfrssr  (Nannul,  29 7)= together  with  what  is  true  virtue,  in  an 
essentially  virtuous  manner. 

148.  '  Magnanimitas  non  respiciendi  (i.e.  non  concupiscendi),  alieuam 
uxorem  magno  in  viro  et  virtus  et  sublime  decus  est.' 

G263rQ(y.  Beschi :  '  solumne  ?  '  Com.  says  &  is  er<sssresi^&si—ffQfir&). 
Edmdnuja  has  §>6sr£u<s;iTQ(®s),  as  Beschi.  Graul  thinks  it  is  emphatic, 
but  this  is  not  Tamil  idiom. 

149.  '  Si  quaeras  quisnam  sit  in  hoc  maris  habitaculo  (i.e.  in  hoc  orbe 
terraqueo),  qui  boni  sit  proprietarius  (i.e.  jus  habeat  ad  bonum  assequen- 
dum  ;  est  ille  qui  se  non  miscet  corpori  mulieris  alterius  propriae.' 

150.  'Quamvis  virtutem  non  metiens  (i.e.  virtuti  non  se  conformant), 
ei   contraria   facias,  semper  tamen   tibi  bonum  erit   non   concupiscere 
mulierem  quae  est  intra  alterius  limites  (i.e.  alieni  est  juris).' 

Graul :  '  Sich  Tugend  nicht  aneignend ' ;  but  in  note  he  says,  '  not 
wedding.'  The  meaning  seems  to  be  'not  making  virtue  his  limit,  so  as 
not  to  transgress.' 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Beschi :  Patientia. 

COM.'S  analysis  : — 

I.  1-4.  Its  excellence. 

II.  5-8.  Bearing  with  evil  deeds. 

III.  9,  10.  Bearing  with  evil  words. 


NOTES.  223 

150.  *  Sufferre  eos,  qui  te  despiciunt,  instar  terrae,  quae  sustinet  eos, 
qui  earn  calcant,  praestans  est  virtus.' 

152.  '  Injuria  quae  tibi    fit,  quocumque    terapore   (i.e.  etiam  cum  id 
ulcisci  possis)   [so  also  Com.]   patienter  toleranda  est,   sed  isto  melius 
erit  illius  omnino  oblivisci.' 

Coinp.  Ndl.  65 : 

'  The  young  man's  self-restraint  is  self-restraint.     The  gift 
Of  him  who  owns  no  stores  of  wealth  is  gift  indeed. 
When  man  has  means  and  might  to  punish  every  fault, 
If  he  forbear,  call  him  the  patient  man.' 

153.  'Sicuti  inter  miserias  ea  est  praestantior  miseria,  quae  hospitem 
non  excipit,  ita  inter  decora  illud  est  praestantius  decus,  quod  insipientium 
culpas  sufferet  ?  ' 

This  is  called  <sT©^^<&<£/rLL©<aj<58)L£»aj<o5sfl  :  'As  to  cease  to  entertain 
guests  is  the  lowest  depths  of  poverty,  so  to  bear  with  foolish  men  the 
highest  virtue.'  (III.  Gr.  204.) 

154.  '  Si  tuum  honorem  a  te  inseparabilem  optas,  procedendum  tibi  est 
caute  patientiam  custodiendo.' 

155.  '  Sapientes  non  aestimant  ut  quid  pretiosum  impatientes ;  aesti- 
inant  vero  ut  aurum  patientes,  eos  caute  custodiendo  (i.e.  cavendo,   ne 
quid  indecorum  iis  fiat).' 

156.  '  Qui  de  injuria  sibi  illata  ulciscuntur,  unius  diei  gaudium  referent, 
qui  vero  earn  patienter  sufferunt,  usque  ad  mortem  laudabuntur.' 

157.  '  Quanivis  tuus  proximus  tibi    injustum  quid  fecerit  optimum 
tibi  erit  nil  facere  contrarium  virtuti,  commiserans  ilium  ob  dainnum 
quod  in  altera  vita  ei  paratum  est.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  221,  223 : 

'  When  those  to  whom  as  good  with  strong  desire  we  clung, 
Prove  otherwise  ;  keep  the  sad  secret  undivulged  ! 
The  growing  grain  hath  husk ;  the  water  hath  its  foam  ; 
And  flowers  have  outer  sheath  of  leaves' 

1  Lord  of  the  lofty  hilly  land,  where  hum  the  bees 
Through  all  the  flowery  Gongu  glade  !     Though   friends 

should  work 

Ills  passing  thought,  to  bear  is  only  thing  that 's  meet : 
Patience  of  one  is  friendship  of  the  twain.' 

158.  *  Eos  qui  obanimi  elationem  faciunt  quod  minium  (i.e.  injustum) 
est,  tu  tua  aequinimitate  victos  dimitte.' 

The  verse  seems  to  embody  the  idea  of  S.  Paul's  injunction,  '  Be  not 
overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good.' — Bom.  xii.  21. 

159.  '  Ipsis   qui  omnibus  renunciarunt,   majorem  munditionem  (i.e. 
splendorem  seu  perfectionem)  habebunt  conjugati,  qui  patienter  suf- 


224  THE    KUBEAL. 

ferunt  mala  verba  quae  ore  proferunt  qui  limites  transiliunt  (i.e.  qui 
nimis  elati  sunt).' 

160.  '  Qui  poenitentiam  agunt   jejunando  magiii  quidem  fient,   sed 
posteriores  iis  qui  aliorum  injuriosa  verba  patienter  sufferunt.' 
Comp.  Ndl.  58  : 

'  To  bear  with  those  that  speak  despiteful  words  ;  yea,  more, 
To  say,  "Ah,  will  they  sink  in  other  world  to  hell, 
The  place  of  fire,  as  fruit  of  their  despiteful  words," 
And  grieve,  is  duty  of  the  perfect  men.' 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Beschi  :   Invidid  non  Affici. 


THE  last  Chapter  treated  of  Qufrsoro  or  QLJ/T^S^LO,  while  the  common 
word  for  envy  is  Q/J/T^STOLD  '  the  not  enduring.' 
Coin.'s  analysis  :  — 

I.  1,  2.  Its  absence  is  excellent. 

II.  3-8.  The  evils  of  this  temper. 

III.  9,  10.  Contrasted  in  effects. 

161.  '  Proprietatem  non  habendi  invidiam  in  suo  pectore  viam  cui'que 
esse  ad  celsitudinem  assequendam,  quisque  secum  statuat.' 

The  order  is  much  inverted  :  '  Let  (any)  one  (epQjjGueor)  esteem  (Qa<3rr&) 
the  quality  which  is  free  from  envy  in  its  soul  (<&£&  —  sSliu<s\jLj)  as  the 
way  of  decorum  (&Qf4S6irj(ya).i  See  131,  where  g&(Lp<ffi«ti>  is  to  be 
cherished  more  than  life. 

162.  '  Si  valueris  erga  omnes  (i.e.  etiain  erga  hostes),  ab  invidm  imniunis 
esse,  hoc  inter  onmia  decora  par  non  habebit.' 

163.  'Qui  aliorum  emolumentum  non  desiderando,  illud  iis  invidet, 
dicetur  nolle  emolumentum  a  virtute  profluens.' 

164.  *  Ex  invidiu  inalum  alteri  non  inferunt  sapientes  sciendo  damnum 
quod  ob  id  experientur  (proprie,  quod  patieuter  in  ilia  mala  via).' 

165.  '  Invidus,  quamvis  omnes  suos  hostes  destruat,  ruinani  patietur, 
quia  ad  eum  destruendum  ipsa  sua  invidia  satis  superque  est.' 

166.  'Ejus  qui  invidis  oculis  aspicit  ea,  quae  caeteris  dantur,  familia 
ad  vestitus  ac  cibi  inopiam  redigetur.' 

167.  'Dea  felicitatis  invido  irata,  suae  sorori,  (quae  est  dea  miseriae) 
eum  prodet.' 

168.  'Crudelis   ilia,   quae   dicitur  invidia,   hujus   mundi    felicitatem 
destruit,  et  postremb  ad  inferos  perducit.' 


NOTES.  225 

169.  *  Invidi    hominis   felicitas,   et   recti   hominis   infelicitas   attente 
consideranda  est.' 

Prosperity  cannot  proceed  from  envy,  nor  ruin  from  its  opposite.  If, 
then,  an  envious  man  be  prosperous,  or  an  unenvious  person  suffer  loss, 
the  wise  will  ponder  the  mystery.  Com.  says,  *  old  deeds '  are  the  cause. 
The  idea  is  expanded  in  Psa.  Ixxiii. 

1 70.  '  Nemo  per  invidiam  dives  evasit ; 

Nemo  ob  invidiae  carentiam  evasit  pauper.' 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Beschi :  Non  inhiare  alienis  bonis. 

COM.'S  analysis:  — 

I.  1-7.  Evils  of  coveting  other  men's  goods. 

II.  8,  9.  Excellence  of  not  coveting. 

III.  10.  The  two  contrasted. 

171.  '  Si,  sine  ullo  jure,  alienis  bonis  inhiaveris,  id  tibi  et  fainiliae 
destructionem,  et  varia  eo  ipso  tempore  detriinenta  causabit.' 

172.  *  Qui  injusti  vocari  erubescunt,  ob  desiderium  emolumenti,  quod 
aliena  bona  afferunt,  nonfaciunt  quid,  quod  aequi  censurare  possint.' 

173.  '  Ob  desiderium  instantanei  gaudii,  quod  affert  alienorum  bonorum 
possessio,  virtuti  contraria  non  facit,  qni  alia  (nempe  in  aeternum  dura- 
tura)  gaudia  desiderat.' 

174.  *  Qui  sensus  devictos,  et  ab  omni  deceptione  imniunem  scientiain 
habent,  aliena  non  concupiscent,  neque  in  suae  paupertatis  remedium.' 

175.  '  Quidnam  tibi  proderit  acutum  et  vasta  eruditione  praeditum 
ingenium,  si  aliena  concupiscendo,  apud  omnes  stulta  opereris.' 

176.  '  Qui  ob  desiderium  ch'aritatem  erga  proximos  exercendi,  statuui 
conjugalem,  qui   via  est  ad  illis  subveniendum,  amplexus  est,  aliena 
concupiscendo,  sola  fraudulentorum  ad   ilia   assequenda  niediorum  in- 
vestigatione,  suum  propositum    destruet    (quia   fraus   omnis   charitati 
adversatur).' 

177.  *  Noli  appetere  emolumentum  aliena  concupiscendo  partum,  quia 
dum  illud  fructicaverit,  difficile  erit,  ut  ex  illo  bonum  fructum  referas.' 

178.  'Si  quaeras  quidnani  sit  unde   tua  felicitas  inimunita  consistere 
possit,  opus  est  ut  lion  concupiscas  quae  alius  coucupiscit  fortunae  bona.' 

179.  *  Dea  felicitatis  apud  eos,  qui  scientiam  habent  non  concupiscen- 

29 


226  THE    KUERAL. 

tern  aliena  bona,  ex  eo  quod  noscant,  id  esse  virtuti  consentaneum,  sedem 
figet,  sciens  ilium  locum  suae  mantione  consonum  esse.' 

180.  '  Si  non  praevidendo  mala,  quae  inde  sequuntur,  aliena  concu- 
piscas,  id  tibi  ruinam  pariet ;  elevatus  verb  animus,  quo  tale  desiderium 
a  te  distinueris,  tibi  decus  pariet.' 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

Beschi:  Non  detrahere. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1.  Benefit  of  the  virtue  of  abstaining  from  backbiting. 

II.  2-4.  Detraction  a  cruel  evil. 

III.  5-9.  Faults  resulting  from  it. 

181.  '  Quamvis  nee  virtutem  sectaris,  et  ei  contraria  facias,  semper 
tainen  tibi  decorosum  erit  dici,  quod  detrahere  nescis.' 

182.  '  Virtutem  exterminando  vitia  sectari  malum  est,  sed  eo  pejus  erit 
proximo  praesenti  fictam  laetitiam  ostendere  et  absenti  detrahere.' 

183.  '  Ad   assequendum   fructum  de  quo   virtutis   scientia   loquitur 
melius  est  mori,  quam  vivere  proximo  absenti  detrahendo  et  praesenti 
falsam  amicitiam  ostendendo.' 

184.  '  Quamvis  aliquis  corain  te  sine  ulla  commiseratione  asperrima  in 
te  verba  proferat,  tu  noli    unquam  post  ejus  tergum  verba  loqui  quae 
futurum  non  respicient   (i.e.  quae  non  attendant  ad   mala  quae  inde 
sequentur).' 

185.  'Detractor,  qui  virtutem  laudat,   quod  ex  corde  id  non  faciat, 
dignosci  potest,  ex  vili  officio  detrahendi,  cui  se  manciparit.' 

186.  '  Si  tu  alicujus  vitium  manifestaveris,  ille  inter  omnia  tua  vitia, 
ex  quae  majora  sunt  seligendo  manifestabit.' 

<56sr  =  &-<5G)L-uj  'the  chief  faults,  culled  out,  of  him  who  .  .  .' 

187.  '  Detractores,    nescientes    laetis   verbis   amicitiam   fovere,   suis 
odiosis  verbis  et  ipsos  sibi  amicitia  junctos  a  se  alienabunt.' 

188.  '  Qui  indolem  habent  detrahendi  ipsis  suis  amicis,  quid,  quaeso, 
f  acient  suis  inimicis  ? ' 

189.  '  Nonne  ex  mero  virtutis  inotivo  tellus  sustinet  eos,  qui  proximo 
detrahendi  vile  munus  exercent  ? ' 

190.  *  Si  quisque  eo  modo,  quo  censurat  inimicorum  vitia  censuraret 
suum  detrahendi  vitium,  esset  ne  inter  homines  detractionis  inalum  ?  ' 


NOTES.  227 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Beschi :  Otiosa  verba  non  loqui. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1-6.  The  evil  of  using  idle  words. 

II.  7-9.  The  virtue  of  eschewing  them. 

III.  10.  What  to  speak,  and  what  not  to  speak. 

191.  '  Qai   audientibus    stomacum     causando     inutilia    loquitur    ab 
omnibus  contemnetur.' 

Beschi  reads  <5r<5V6u/r.£r/rjg2/u},  which  destroys  metre.      It  is  Qeu.  Q^/r. 
(§  270). 

192.  'Coram    multis    vana    loqui   pejus   est,  quam  amico   injuriam 
facere.' 

193.  '  In  utilia  verba  quae  diffuse  profers,  te  fatuum  praedicant.' 

194.  *  Si  in   coetu  infructuosos  ac   vanos  sermones   institueris,   nee 
laetitia  audientes  afficies,  et  probi  nomen  amittes.' 

He   reads   ^^<5a>Loiq<5B3f/5/(;s>  ££>==' ex   probitate    alienabuntur.'     Comp. 
Ndl  71  :— 

*  Lord  of  the  pleasant  land,  where  down  the  mountains  cool 
The  streams  as  garlands  fall !  with  fools  no  converse  hold. 
The  fool  will  speak  all  words  that  hurt.     As  best  you  can 
To  slip  away  from  him  is  good.' 

195.  *  Si  praestans  vir  f utilia  loquatur,  statim  suam  magnitudiuem 
atque  aestimationem  amittet.' 

196.  '  Eum   qui  in  futilibus  sermonibus  tempus  terit,  hominem   ne 
vocato,  hominum  scoriam  voca.' 

197.  '  Praestanti  viro  non  adeo  nocet  irrationabilia  loqui,  uti  nocet 
loqui  f  utilia.' 

198.  '  Qui  ingenio  pollent  difficilia  quaeque  perscrutante,  verba,  quae 
notabilem  fructum  non  habeant,  proferre  non  audent.' 

199.  'Qui  ab  erroribus  defaecatum  et  perfectam  scientiain  habent, 
neque  per  oblivionem  infructuosa  loquuntur.' 

200.  '  Ex  quae  loqui  vis,  ea  quae  alicujus  moment!  sunt,  loquere;  ©a 
quae  nullius  moment!  sunt,  silentio  involve.' 


228  THE    KUERAL. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Beschi :  Peccati  metus. 
COM.'S  analysis  : — 

I.  1-3.  Evil  deeds  to  be  dreaded. 

II.  4-9.  Evil  done  to  others  brings  evil  on  oneself. 

III.  10.  He  who  does  no  evil,  suffers  none. 

201.  '  Qui  peccata  patrarunt  peccatuin  non  timent,  qui  vero  probi  sunt 
valde  timent  peccati  fascinum.' 

202.  '  Cum   ignis  quandoque  bonum,  peccatum  vero  semper  malum 
afferat,  plusquam  ignem  peccatum  time.' 

203.  'Inter  omnes  scientias  earn  praestantissimam  dicent,  quae  etiain 
cum  occasio  se  affert  faciendi  hostibus  quidquam  quod  peccaminosum 
sit,  scit  ab  eo  abstinere.' 

204.  'Neque   per   oblivionem   aliorum   damnum   excogites  ;  si   enim 
excogitaveris,  excogitantis  ruinam  Deus  excogitabit.' 

205.  '  Etiam  nullum  aliud  tuae  ruinae  remedium  adsit,  peccare  noli ; 
si  peccaveris,  nee  novas  divitias  assequeris,  et  caetera,  quae  ante  possi- 
debas,  amittes.' 

206.  '  Qui  non  vult  a  malis  perimi,  nolit  ipse  caeteris  malum  facere.' 

207.  '  A  quovis  potenti  hoste  evadere  poteris  ;  qui  est  peccatum  per- 
petuo  te  insequendo,  tandem  te  perimet.' 

208.  *  Peccatoris  ruina  ab  eo  inseparabilis  est,  non  secus  ac  umbra  a 
corpore.' 

209.  '  Si  teipsum  amas,  nil  quod  malum  sit,  quantumvis  minimum, 
facere  audeas.' 

210.  '  Si  dixeris,   quod  quis  a  recta  via  aberrendo  malum  facere  non 
audet,  scito  quod  ille  difficulter  ruinam  patietur.' 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Beschi :  Munificum  esse  cum  Us,  cum  quibus  mundi  mos  id  postulat, 
pitta  cum  templis,  cum  pauperibus,  cum  propinquis,  cum  amicis,  cum 
hospitibus.  A.  :  Jlienfaisance  eclairee.  Drew :  The  knowing  and 
discharging  of  those  acts  of  benevolence,  which  are  approved  by 
the  world. 

COM.'S  analysis : — 

I.  1-3.  The  excellence  of  due  beneficence. 

II.  4.  Neglect  is  death. 

III.  5-7.  Wealth  is  thus  of  value. 

IV.  8,  9.  Poverty  should  not  hinder  it. 

V.  10.  Real  loss  cannot  accrue  from  it. 


NOTES.  229 

Com. :  *  He  has  spoken  of  evils  from  which  mind,  tongue,  and  body 
are  to  be  guarded,  now  he  speaks  of  good  things  to  be  done.' 

211.  '  Sicuti  pluvia  suo  tenipore  non  desinit  pluere,  licet  nullum  a 
terra  retributionem  ferat,  ita   non   debet   munificentia  omitti,  etiamsi 
nulla  sit  retributio.' 

212.  'Omnia  quae  quis  sua  industria  cumulat,  ad  quid  ei   dantur, 
nisi  ut  munificus  sit  cum  iis,  cum  quibus  mos  id  postulat  ? ' 

213.  '  Neque  in  coelo,  neque  in  hac  terra,  facile  erit  adipisci  bonuin 
quod  majus  sit  munificentia  in  eos,  in  quos  par  est  earn  exercere.' 

214.  'Qui  in  munificentia  morem  servat  vivus  dicendus  est;  caeteri, 
licet  vivant,  inter  mortuos  sunt  recensendi.' 

215.  'Divitiae  illius,  qui  erga  eos,  quos  mundi  mos  postulat,  munifi- 
centiam  exercet,  simile  sunt  lacui  aqua  pleno  juxta  oppidum.' 

216.  '  Divitiae,   si   possideantur   ab   eo,  qui    munificentiam   exercere 
gestit,  perinde  se  habet,  ac  si  arbor  fructifera  in  medio  oppidi  fruc- 
tibus  referta  sit.' 

217.  '  Divitiae  illius,  qui  habet  praestans  illud  decus  munificentiam 
exercendi,  similes  eruiit  arbori  medicinali,  quae  sit  omnibus  obvia.' 

218.  '  Qui  scientiani  habent  gnaram  obligationis,  quam  quisque  habet 
morem  servandi,  etiam  cum  divitiis  carent,  munificentiam  totaliter  non 
deserunt,  sed  pro  viribus  illam  exercent.' 

219.  '  Munificum  virum  pauperem  evadere  non  adeo  ilium  vexat,  uti 
displicentia,   quam    habet,    quod   nequeat   exercere    munificentiam    ut 
aequum  est.' 

220.  '  Si   ex   munificentia   inopiarn   gigni   dixeris,   ego   dicam    taleni 
inopiam  adeo  pretiosam  esse,  ut  quovis  pretio  emi  debeat,  etiamsi  te 
ipsum  vendere  opus  sit.' 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Beschi  :  Eleemosinae  largitio. 


is  the  S.  ^T«T  fSircffLo.  The  Com.  says  :  '  The  last  chapter  refers 
to  this  world  ;  this  to  the  next  world.  There  charity  is  inculcated  as  due 
to  a  man's  position,  here  as  necessary  to  the  obtaining  of  vidu.'  &<&>& 
*  act  of  giving  '  ;  FFG^  '  gift  '  ;  §  143. 

221.  *  Iis  qui  omnino  pauperes  sunt,  aliquid  largiri  virtuosa  largitio 
erit,  nam  caeterae  omnes  largitiones  conditionem  habent  retributionis  ; 
quia  vel  factae  in  retributionem,  vel  ob  spem  retributionis,' 

The  real  nature  of  charity  :  it  seeks  no  return, 


230  THE    KUBBAL. 

222.  '  Quamvis  tibi  suadeant  optimam  ad  coelum  viam  esse  divitias 
cumulare,   semper   nialum   puta ;    quamvis  tibi  suadeant   sua  erogan- 
tibus  aditum  in  coelo  non  esse,  tu  semper  id  optumum  puta.' 

&  soft  ££»&  =  '  though  it  were  possible  for  them  to  say  this,  which  it  is 
not,' 

223.  '  Pauperi  stipem  petenti,  non  profitendo  abjectum  ilium  verbuni, 
"  nil  habeo,"  statim  stipem  erogare,  vivorum  nobilium  conditio  est.' 

Since  s.<srr   is  plural,  we  must   supply   a.fi    twice:    e.«s>jruj/raB>uiiL/ii 
FFfS^Lz  (Intro,  p.  xviii.  e). 

224.  'Malum   est  a  inendico  rogari  quousque  ejus   vultuin    laetum 
aspexeris.' 

The  use  of  LJ©  is  noteworthy. 

225.  *  Decus  est  poenitentium  famem  tolerare,  sed  hoc  inferius  est 
decore  eorum,  qui  caeterorum  fanii  consulunt.' 

'  Charitas  perfectior  est  poenitentia.' 

226.  '  Qui  pauperum  fami  consulit,  aliquid  erogando,  hoc  non  amittit ; 
sed  in  manu  pauperis  deponit,  deinceps  sibi  profuturum.' 

227.  '  Difficile  est  ut  pessimus  morbus  famis  aggrediatur  eum   qui 
didicit  suum  cibuin  cum  caeteris  partiri.' 

msissGr  from  a.63cr.     Intro,  p.  xxiv.  §  8. 

228.  '  Immisericors  ille,  qui  suas  divitias  caeteris  non  elargitas  in 
morte  amittere,  quam  caeteris  distribuere  mavult,  nonne  ignorare  videtur 
quale  gaudium  afferat  caeteros  suis  largitionibus  laetificare  ?  ' 

229.  *  Plusquam  ipsum  mendicandi  officium  indecorum  sane  est  sua, 
usque  ad  fastidium,  sine  socio  (i.e.  exclusis  pauperibus)  comedere  ?  ' 

230.  'Morte  pej us  nullum  est  malum;  sed  ubi  largitio  non  jungitur, 
bonum  erit  mori  (quia  cessat  terrae  illud  inutile  pond  us).' 

,jy^  +  2_iii   'even   that '= j^a/di,  but  ^<snQu<ss)L.  takes  the   place 
of  <aj. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Beschi  :  Laus,  i.e.  laudabiliter  vivere.      Gr.  :  Ruhm. 
Renown.'      The  word  L/<SL£  =  '  praise,  fame,  glory.'      A.  :  Honneur. 


THE  Com.  says  it  is  '  the  reward  that  comes  to  the  householder  in 
this  life,  who  obeys  the  precepts  contained  in  the  foregoing  chapters. 
It  is  chiefly  bestowed  on  those  who  give.  Hence  its  place  after  the 
chapter  on  giving.' 


NOTES.  231 

I.  The  special  excellence  of  it  (3). 

1.  Man's  greatest  gain  on  earth. 

2.  The  theme  of  those  who  talk— not  of  poets  only.     His  name 
becomes  a  '  household  world.' 

3.  Spontaneously — by  the  world's  consent — it  ever  rises. 

II.  The  excellence  of  those  who  gain  it  (2). 

4.  They  gain  in  both  worlds. 

5.  They  turn  all  to  gain. 

III.  The  inferiority  of  those  who  gain  it  not  (4). 

6.  Their  life  a  failure. 

7.  They  bring  reproach  on  themselves. 

8.  A  good  name  is  the  best  thing  he  can  leave  behind.     This  he 
forfeits. 

9.  They   bring  a  curse  on  the  earth :    mere  cumberers   of  the 
ground. 

IV.  The  contrast :  living  and  dead  (1). 

10.  Fame  is  life:  its  absence,  death. 

The  picture  of  the  life  of  the  virtuous  Tamil  householder,  as  drawn 
(in  Ch.  v.-xxiv.)  by  the  Pariah  weaver-priest  of  Mayilapur  a  thousand 
years  ago,  is,  it  will  be  admitted,  a  very  attractive  one ;  and  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  the  villages  of  the  Karnatic  still  contain 
many  worthy  householders  whose  life  is  governed  by  the  rules  here 
prescribed. 

231.  'Ita  vive  ut  munifici  laudem   assequaris,  nam   nihil  est  hoinmi 
quod  in  hac  vita  magis  profectum  sit.' 

232.  *  Quidquid  homines  dixerint,  vera  laus  in  eum  cadet  qui  paupe- 
ribus  necessaria  largitur' ;  or,  'Quotquot  poetae  intexunt  laudes  oinnes 
in  eum  cadent,  qui  pauperibus  aliquid  largitur.' 

233.  'TJnam  si  excipias  laudem,  nil  aliud  est  in  mundo  quod  immortale 
sit.' 

234.  'Si  iiitra  terrae  fines  immortalem  assequaris  laudem,  mundus 
deorum  suos  cives  non  curabit ;  i.e.  suorum  civium  oblitus  in  te  oculos 
convertet.' 

235.  '  Damnum  emolumento  esse,  et  mortem  vitam  esse,  non  facile 
invenies,  nisi  apud  magica  prodigia  monstrantes.' 

He  explains:  'Glory  is  like  magic,  which  exhibits  gain  in  loss  and 
death  in  life ;  for  it  makes  poor  men  happy,  and  causes  the  dead  to  live 
in  the  memory  of  men.' 

236.  '  Si  nascaris,  cum  dotibus   laudabilibus    nascere,    qui  has    non 
habent,  melius  est  si  non  nascantur,  quarn  si  nascantur  ?  ' 

237  (240).  *  Dedecus  est  homini  non  assequi  id  per  quod  non  toti 
morimur,  sed  pars  nostri  in  terris  rernanet,  nempe  laudem.' 
[237  and  240  are  interchanged  in  Beschi.] 


232  THE    KUEBAL. 

238.  '  Terra  quae  sustinet  homines  laude  carentes  suam  foecunditatem 
in  sterilitatem  vertet.' 

239.  '  Qui  sine  nota  vivunt,  ii  sunt  vivi ;  qui  sine  laude  vivunt,  ii  sunt 
mortui.' 

240(237).  'Qui  absque  laude  vivit,  si  a  caeteris  despiciatur,  cur  de 
illis  queritur,  de  se  ipso  queri  debet.' 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Beschi :  l  Virtutes  religiosorum, 

i.e.  de  virtutibus  eorum  propriis,  qui  omnibus  renunciarunt,  ne  affectus 
ad  aliquod  sensibile  impediments  sit  ad  aeternam  gloriam  assequendam.' 

c^(/5<sfr=<amor  proximi,  seu  commiseratio  in  ilium.'     1  Cor.  xiii. 

This  is  the  beginning  of  the  section  of  gipxsu/DLD,  or  '  the  virtue  of 
renunciation  ' :  ascetic  virtue.  The  praises  of  ascetics  have  already  been 
celebrated  in  Ch.  in.  This  section  is  divided  into  two  parts — 

Ch.  xxv.-xxxm.,  sSljr^iJD  [S.  vrata],  'religious  observances;' 
Ch.  xxxiv.-xxxvn.,  (sj/resr/i  '  wisdom ' ; 
to  which  is  added  a  chapter  on  ecrrip  '  fate,  destiny.' 

I  feel  a  doubt  as  to  the  authority  for  the  divisions  and  titles  through- 
out the  work. 

^(ffjiofr  is  defined  by  Com.  as  'the  tenderness  (<SQ^^SSST)  which,  without 
any  association  or  connection  with  them,  naturally  is  felt  for  all  that 
live.'  What  ^zeri-i  'special  affection'  (Ch.  vin.)  is  to  the  house- 
holder, that  ^(5 err  '  general  tender  regard'  is  to  the  ascetic. 

Com.'s  analysis : — 

I.  Its  special  excellence  (2). 

1.  It  belongs  only  to  the  good. 

2.  It  is  the  outcome  of  all  teaching. 

II.  It  removes  affliction  in  both  worlds  (3^. 

3.  Gracious  men  escape  the  '  evil  world.' 

4.  It  saves  from  vice. 

5.  The  testimony  of  universal  experience. 

III.  The  evils  of  the  absence  of  '  grace  '  (4). 

6.  Oblivion  of  higher  things. 

7.  No  future  bliss. 

8.  Irreparable  loss. 

9.  No  virtue  without  it. 

IV.  How  to  cultivate  it  (1). 

10.  Put  yourself  in  their  place. 


NOTES.  233 

The  'methods,'  ^jv,  in  242,  are  said  by  Com.  to  be  :— (1)  SITL.& 
1  perception  by  the  senses';  (2)  ^gguLnnGXLn  'inference'  ;  and(3)  ^<SLDLD 
1  authority.'  This  differs  somewhat  from  the  Nyaya.  See  TarJca- 
sangraha,  p.  40. 

241.  'Inter  omnes  felicitates,  ilia  est  praestans  felicitas  quae  deri- 
vatur  ex  amore  proximi ;  nam  quae  derivator  ex  divitiis  vilibus  etiam 
vilibus  hominibus  communis  est.' 

Ellis  :  '  The  highest  felicity  is  that  which  proceeds  from  universal 
ben&volence ;  the  felicity  proceeding  from  wealth  is  enjoyed  even  by  the 
vilest  of  mankind.' 

242.  '  Mature   omnia   considerando    proximi   amorein    assequi   cura ; 
nam  si  consideres  omnes  diversas   sectas,  quae  inter  homines  vigent, 
videbis  hunc  ab  omnibus  tanquum  socium  admitti,' 

Ellis :  '  On  due  consideration  it  will  be  found,  that  all  sects  maintain 
that  the  aid  of  charity  is  necessary  to  obtain  felicity  ;  reflect  carefully, 
therefore,  and  cherish  the  benevolent  affections.' 

243.  '  Qui  in  suo  pectore  proximi  amorem  fovent,  non  intrabunt  in 
mundum  afflictionis,  ubi  tenebrae  regnant.' 

EHis :  '  They  enter  not  the  world,  where  darkness  reigns 

And  where  affliction  howls,  whose  bosoms  glow 
With  love  for  all  their  kind.' 

244.  '  Qui  homines  in  mundo  existentes  a  malis  def endendo  erga  ipsos 
charitatem  fovent,  his,  ex  unaniini  sapientum  voce,  nil  est,  unde  sibi 
malum  timere  possint.' 

Ellis  :  '  Those  who  in  their  hearts  cherish  charity  towards  all  existent 
beings,  they  truly  say,  need  not  fear  any  mischief  to  themselves.' 

245.  '  Quod  iis,  qui  erga  proximum  amorem  servant,  nullum  rnalum 
obveniat,  testis  est  vasta  haec  terra,  in  qua  venti  spirant  (quae  nescit 
exemplum  in  contrariuin).' 

Ellis  :  '  Witnesses  the  mighty  earth,  where'er  the  winds 

Send  forth  their  blasts,  that  evil  cannot  reach 
The  charitable  man.' 

246.  '  Sapientes  dicent,  illos  qui  amorem  proximi  a  se  alienando,  con- 
traria  facieudo  procedunt,  oblitos  esse  malorum,  in  quae  incidunt,  qui  a 
virtute  deficiunt.' 

247.  '  Eodem  modo  quo  divitiis  carentes  frui  nequeunt  hujus  mundi 
gaudiis,  amore  proximi  carentes  frui  nequeunt  alterius  mundi  gloria.' 

Ellis :  '  The  other  world  (i.e.  its  joys)  belongeth  not  to  those  who  are 
devoid  of  charity,  as  this  world  belongeth  not  to  those  who  are  devoid 
of  wealth.' 

248.  '  Qui  divitias  amiserunt  poterunt  aliquando  florescere  uti  prius  ; 

30 


234  THE    KUERAL. 

qui  vero  amorem  proximi  dimisit,  difficile  est  ut  iterum  vere  virtuosus 
sit.' 

Ellis  :  *  Those  now  devoid  of  wealth  may  hereafter  flourish  in  happi- 
ness ;  but  those  devoid  of  charity  cannot  be  free  from  offence.' 

249.  '  Virtutes  omnes,  quas  exercet,  qui  amore  proximi  caret,  si  bene 
consideres,  perinde  se  habent  ac  Dei  notitia  in  mente  capto.' 

He  adds  :  '  Both  things  are  impossible.' 

Ellis :  *  As  the  comprehension  of  the  true  God,  without  clearness  of 
understanding  is  impossible  ;  so,  also,  is  the  practice  of  virtue  without 
charity.' 

250.  '  Dum  in  proximum  qui  te  debilior  est,  absque  pietate  inveheris, 
memento,  qualis  tu  sis,  quuin  coram  caeteris  te  potentioribus  adstas.' 

Ellis :  '  Imagine  thyself  before  those  more  powerful  than  thou  art, 
when  about  to  treat  harshly  those  more  weak  than  thyself.' 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Beschi :  Abstinentia  a  carnibus. 

251.  '  Qui  ut  sua  caro  pinguescat,  alienas  carnes  comedit  quinam  eum 
viventibus  lenitatem  et  clementiam  exercere  dicetur  ?  ' 

252.  *  Sicuti  qui  suas  divitias  custodire  nescit,  illarum  possessionem 
non  habet  (quia  illas  amittet)  ;  ita  qui  carnes  comedit,  lenitatis  posses- 
sionem non  habet.' 

253.  'In  quonam  differt  animus  illius,  qui  ob  solum  gustum  carnes 
viventium  comedit,  ab  animo  illius  qui  ob  solum  gustum  arma  capit  ad 
viventium   necem  ?      (Nil  inter  se  differunt,  cum  uterque  ad  illorum 
necem  dirigatur.) ' 

254.  '  Si  quaeras  quid  sit  lenitas,  quid  ejus  contrarium,  scito  esse 
haec  duo,  nempe  viventia  non  mactare,  et  ea  mactare ;  quapropter  vir- 
tuosa  esse  nequit  illorum  carnium  comestio.' 

255.  '  Ab  abstinentia  a  carnibus  viventium  vita  servatur,  quapropter 
eos  qui  viventium  carnes  comedunt,  infernus  iterum  non  evomet  (i.e. 
diu  in  inferno  cruciabuntur).' 

256.  '  Si  dicas  non  mactari  in  mundo  viventia  ad  finem  comestionis, 
jam  nullus  erit,  qui  carnes  ob  pretium  det.' 

This  points  to  the  controversy  between  the  Buddhists  and  the  Jains. 
The  former  might  not  slay,  but  might  eat  the  slain.  The  latter,  with 
more  consistency,  were  forbidden  to  eat  or  slay.  Comp.  Manu,  v.  51. 


NOTES.  285 

257.  '  Illi  quibus    cadavera   nauseam    causant,   qui    poterunt   sine 
stomacho  carnibus  vesci,  si  considerent  eas  ex  alterius  viventis  cadavere 
refectas  esse  ? ' 

Here  B.  takes  Lj®ssr=l  cadaver,'  as  though  it  were  LStmnJo. 

258.  '  Qui  scientiam  habent  ab  omni  deceptione  immunem  non  ves- 
centur  carnibus,  quae  non  sunt  nisi  cadavera.' 

259.  '  Melius  est  non  comedere  carnes  damnificando  alicujus  viventis 
vitam,  quam  mille  victimas  immolare  butyrum  fundendo  super  illas.' 

260.  '  Eum  qui  viventes  non  mactat,  et  carnes  respuit,  viventia  omnia 
junctis  manibus  venerabuntur.' 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Beschi:  Poenitentia. 

261.  *  Ex  vitae  austeritate  provenientia  incommoda  patienter  ferre  ac 
ne  caeteris  molestiam  aut  dolorem  afferat,  sui  depressionem  et  mortifi- 
cationem  aequo  animo  tolerare,  duo  sunt,  quae  poenitentiae  forinam 
constituunt.' 

262.  *  lis  qui  supradictam  poenitentiam  possident,  praeter  meritum, 
quod  illis  obvenit,  poenitentiae  quoque  virtus  oritur ;  qui  vero  supra- 
dictam poenitentiam   non   habent   infructuose  in   poenitentiae   virtute 
acquirenda  laborant.' 

263.  '  Sub  praetextu  subveniendi  Religiosis  nonne  caeteri  obliti  videntur 
poenitentiae,  quam  agere  debent  ?  '      B.  adds  :  '  Sensus  est,  falsum  esse, 
quod  plurimi  putant,  Poenitentiae  virtutem  propriam  esse  status  reli- 
giosi,  non  vero  conjugalis,  et  sufficere  si  conjugatus  Religioso  succurrat, 
ut  in  suo   statu  poenitenti  vivat,  nam   poenitentia  est  cuilibet  statui 
necessaria.' 

Dr.  Graul  more  exactly  translates  :  '  Ceteri  studiosi  poenitentibus  sub- 
veniendi— num  forte  poenitentiae  obliti  sunt  ? '  This  seems  to  be 
correct.  But  in  his  German  version  he  says :  '  Die  Andern,  den 
Andern  beizuspringen  willens,  haben  wohl  der  Busse  vergessen ' ;  and 
explains  substantially  as  F.  Beschi.  The  Com.  says  the  meaning  is 
'  Penitence  is  more  than  gifts.'  The  sense  seems  to  be,  '  The  house- 
holder, though  he  perform  no  penance  himself,  is  not  unmindful  of 
it ;  since  he  supplies  to  penitents  the  means  by  which  they  live  to  per- 
form their  penitential  acts ;  and  so  he  shares  in  the  reward  and  merit 
of  those  acts.'  Comp.  41,  46,  and  the  whole  scope  of  Ch.  v. 


236  THE   KUERAL. 

264.  '  Virtutis  hostium  destructio,  et  virtutis  fautorum  cumulatio,  si 
bene  consideres,  per  poenitentiam  obtinentur.' 

B.   read  s&cw-@)6B>.0-  ;  but  says  the  metre  requires  ^sar^/r,  which  is 
the  text  of  the  Madras  editions. 

265.  '  Cum  per  ilium  obtinere  possis  omnia,  quae  in  futuro  seculo 
cupis  bona,  poenitentiam  in  hoc  mundo  exercere  debes.' 

266.  '  Qui  poenitentiam  agunt  sibi  emolumentum  parant  ;  caeteri  qui, 
concupiscentiae  laqueis  irretiti,  earn  non  agunt,  damnum  sibi  parant.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  51  :— 

'  As  when  lamp  enters  darkness  flies,  so  sin  stands  not 
Before  man's  penitence.     As  when  in  lamp  the  oil 
Wastes,  darkness  rushes  in,  so  evil  takes  its  place 
Where  deeds  of  virtue  cease.' 

267.  '  Sicuti  aurum   in  igne  lucidum  evadit,  ita  corporis  afflictatio 
poenitentiuni  aninmni  nitidum  reddit.' 

268.  Beschi  :    '  Eum   qui  perfectam  sui  animi  possessionem  obtinuit, 
caeteri  mortales,  qui  tale  decus  not  lidbent,  venerabuntur  '  ;  adding,  '  per- 
fecte  autem  suum  animum  possidet,  qui  eum  non  dividit  cum  concupis- 
centiis  suis,  a  quibus  per  poenitentiam  emancipaverit  sese.' 

He   explains   prrmp  by  perfecte.      The    Veddnta   philosophy  would 
interpret  j&n  <3®p  by  ^seJsrrjru^jD  l  so  that  the  J,  the  sense  of  self  may 


Comp.  M.  Arnold  :  — 

*  We  see  all  sights  from  pole  to  pole, 
And  glance,  and  rush,  and  bustle  by, 
And  never  once  possess  our  soul, 
Before  we  die.' 

269.  *  Qui   poenitentiae    decus   obtinuerunt,    et   ipsius    "  Yanmis  " 
qui  deus   est  mortis,  poterunt  manus  effugere    (hoc    est,    im  mortales 
evadere).' 

270.  '  Causa  cur  plurimi  vera  virtute  careant,  est  quia  poenitentiam 
agunt  pauci,  plurimi  eum  non  agunt.' 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Beschi :    Hipocrisis ;    i.e.  virtutis  species,  cui  animus  non  jungitur,  sed 
exterius  tantum  demonstratur.       A. :  Feinte  moralite. 

271.  'Eum,  qui  animo  fraudulento  virtuteni  qua  caret  exterius 
fingit,  quinque  elementa,  quae  ejus  corpori  mixta  sunt,  interius  deri- 
debunt,' 


NOTES.  237 

The  Sanskrit  Tarka  Sangraha  (Ballantyne),  p.  3,  gives  nine  cate- 
gories :  '  earth,  water,  light,  air,  ether,  time,  place,  soul  and  mind.' 

Beschi  interprets :  '  Hippocrita  ab  ipsa  sua  conscientia  (qui  per 
eleinenta  sibi  admixta  designatur)  quae  suae  fictionis  testis  est,  deri- 
debatur.' 

A. :  '  Les  cinq  elements  (de  son  etre).' 

272.  '  Talem  virtutis  speciem  fingas,  quae  coelum  ipsum  aequet ; — 
quid  tibi  proderit,  si  tuae  cum  conscientiae  testimonio  pravus  f ueris  ?  * 

273.  '  Virtutis  larva,  quam  in  exteriori  habitu  prae  se  fert  qui  virtute 
vacuus  suis  concupiscentiis  habenas  laxat,  est  sicuti  larva  bovis,  qui 
tigridi  pelle  coopertus  segetes  depascitur.' 

274.  '  Poenitentiam  fingendo  poenitentiae  dissona  facere,  perinde  est 
ac  venatoris  officium,  qui  post  arbustum  se  celando,  aves  decipit.' 

275.  *  Ficta  virtus  eorum   qui   se   dicunt  affectibus  orbos,  ut  mag- 
nifiunt,  multa  ac  talia  danina  affert,  ut  dicere  cogantur,  eheu  !  quid 
feci.' 

276.  '  Nemo  est  in  mundo  inclementior  (vel  saevior)  iis,  qui  interius 
affectibus  non  renuntiando,  sed  exterius  quasi  affectibus  orbos  se  prae- 
bendo  vivunt,  decipiendo  eos,  a  quibus  vitae  subsidia  extorquent.' 

277.  '  Aliqui  sunt  in  mundo,  quid  quoad  exteriorem  habitum  spectati 
similes  videntur  semini  (gjsisrj&L&Gsvfl  dicto ;  in  interiore  vero  statu,  nigriores 
sunt  apice  ejusdem  seminis  ?  ' 

278.  '  Multi   homines    interiorem  animi  nequitiam  lavacris   aliisque 
actionibus  exterioribus  virtutem  redolentibus  celando  procedunt.' 

279.  '  Sagitta  quamvis  recta  sit  crudelis  est ;  cithara  licet  tortuosa 
dulcis  est  (idque  ob  affectus  quos  causant) ;  eodem  prorsus  modo  homines 
non  sun  aestimandi  ex  aspectu,  sed  ex  operum  qualitate.' 

280.  '  Nee  capitis  rasio  nee  longa  caesaries  opus  tibi  erit,  si  abstinueris 
ab  iis,  quae  sapientes  reprobant.' 

This  alludes  to  the  diverse  practices  of  Qaivas,  of  whom  the  Panddrams 
shave  the  head,  and  the  Tambirdns,  with  Yogis  in  general,  allow  the  hair 
to  grow. 

The  poet's  idea  as  to  the  standard  of  moral  excellence  is  that  of 
Aristotle  (Ethics,  II.  vi.  15,  Sir  A.  Grant's  ed.,  vol.  i.  p.  499)  who  speaks 
of  aperrj  (^rDLs)  as  wptcr/Ao^  Xo-yw  KOL  ws  av  6  </>povi/u,o?  opiVetcv,  '  determined 
by  a  standard  according  as  the  thoughtful  man  would  determine.'  Sir 
A.  Grant  adds :  '  The  thoughtful  man  stands  as  the  representative  of  the 
absolute  reason  of  man,  manifested  in  the  individual  consciousness.' 
The  <^poVt/>tos  in  the  (§ro®r  is  variously  named  as  &prD<su®sr, 
fffTGsrrosussr,  and  collectively 

Comp.  140,  280,  Ch.  XLIII. 


238  THE    KURRAL. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Beschi :  Nullum  defraudare. 

281.  '  Qui  dicitur  coelestem  gloriam  sine  contemptu  assequi  deside- 
rans,  cavere  debet,  ne  caeteros  in  aliquo,  quant ulum  cunque  illud  sit, 
defraudet.' 

282.  *  Cum  ipsa  peccandi  intentio  peccatum  sit,  noli  unquam  dicere, 
seu  cogitare  dicendo,  aliena  bona  per  fraudem  rapiam.' 

283.  '  Fraude   partum   emolumentum,   quasi   limites   transgrediendo 
ruinam  afferet.' 

284.  '  Aliquem  defraudandi  cupiditas,  quamvis  duni  nascitur  parva 
quaedam   culpa   videatur,   cum    tamen   fructificat,   immortalia   danina 
affert.' 

285.  '  In  iis  qui  obtutum  figunt  (i.e.  animum  intendunt)  in  vile  officium 
defraudandi  caeteros,  reperiri  nequit  possessio  amoris  erga  proximum 
necessarii  cuique  qui  statum  religiosum  intendit.' 

286.  '  Qui  nimiam  cupiditatem  habent  caeteros  defraudendi  non  pos- 
sunt  procedere  conformiter  perfectioni  in  qua  sistunt.' 

287.  '  Tenebrosum  consilium  defraudandi  caeteros  non  invenitur  in 
eo  qui  ambit  decus  ex  justitia  proveniens.' 

288.  '  Sicuti  ab  eorurn  animo,  qui  justitiam  servare  sciunt,  insepara- 
bilis  est  virtus  ;  ita  ab  eo,  qui  aliena  rapere  didicit,  inseparabilis  est 
fraus.' 

289.  '  Eo  ipso  tempore  in  quo  mensuram  non  servant,  sibi   ruinam 
parant  ii,  qui  nil  aliud  scire  videntur  nisi  aliena  rapiendi  officium  ? ' 

290.  '  Qui  proximum  defraud  ant  incerti  sunt  de  vitfi  temporali ;  qui 
vero  neminem  defraudant  certi  sunt  etiarn  de  eterna.' 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

Beschi:  Oris  integritas.     Com.: 


291.  *  Si  quaeras,  quid  sit  quod  dicitur  oris  integritas,  scito  esse  non 
loqui  nisi  talia,  quae  nullum  in  se  malum  contineant.' 

292.  '  Et  ipsum  loqui  falsa  in  oris  integritate  locum  habebit,  sine 
culpa  proximo  bonum  afferat.'     He  adds  :  '  Sermo  est  de  falsitate  sine 
mendacio  prolatd.' 


NOTES.  239 

'  S.  Paul's  position  appears  to  be  that  the  duty  of  truth- speaking  is 
an  offshoot  of  the  ordinary  relations  of  man  to  man,  and  that  it  is  a  con- 
sequence of  men  being  members  one  of  another.  The  ground  for  the 
duty  is  the  relation  of  charity  in  which  we  stand  to  each  other,  of  the 
unity,  moral  and  social,  by  which  we  are  connected  with  each  other. 
Eph.  iv.  25.'  Compare  the  whole  passage,  pp.  155-160,  in  Mozley's 
Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages. 

293.  'Noli  unquam  sciens   ac   prudens  mentiri   quia  post  prolatum 
mendacium  tuamet  te  conscientia  vexabit.' 

^esrQtssr^-SFfSltsu^i  is  nom.  of  respect.  *  Lie  not  in  regard  to  that 
of  which  thy  mind  is  conscious.' 

294.  *  Si  in  loquendo  nunquam  contra  tuam  mentem  ieris  (proces- 
seris)  in  mente  sapientum  omnia  possidebis  decora/ 

295.  '  Si  animum  habeas  a  quovis  rnendacio  refugientem,  et  os  huic 
animo    conformiter   loquens,    ipsos  poenitentes,    atque   eleemosinarios 
superabis.' 

He  adds  :  '  It  is  easier  to  afflict  the  body  and  to  give  alms  than  to 
guard  oneself  from  every  falsehood.' 

296.  '  Nil  est  ita  laudabile  uti  oris  integritas,   cum  per  ipsum  sine 
labore  ac  molestia  adipisci  possis  bonum  quod  tibi  afferrent  caeterae 
virtutes  onmes.' 

But  comp.  323. 

297.  *  Si  constanter  oris  integritatem  servaveris,  bonum  est  caeteras 
virtutes  exercere.' 

Beschi  thinks  QuirujujiT66)Lb  =  (l)  oris  integritatem;  (2)  constanter. 
In  Q<ffLuujn-<s®Lc>Q<piLjiLJ[T66)Ln  he  sees  a  double  negative='non  facere 
omissionem.'  The  absence  of  truthfulness  would  invalidate  every 
virtue  :  *  First  secure  truth,  and  then  do  not  omit  the  practice  of  any 
virtue.'  The  repetition  («^®«<^,  III.  Gram.  200)  is  for  emphasis. 

298.  '  Corporis  munditiem    par  it  aqua,  animi  munditiem   parit   oris 
integritas.' 

299.  '  Non  omnis  splendor  proprius  est  sapientis  splendor ;  proprius 
ejus  splendor  est  in  oris  integritate  splendere.' 

A, :  '  (Test  la  lumiere  (d'une  louche)  qui  ne  ment  pas.1 

300.  '  In  omnibus  scientiis,   quas  veridicas    ego  novi,   nil  est  quod 
superat  veracitatis  decus.' 


240  THE    KUEBAL. 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Beschi :  Non  irasci. 

THE    commonest  word  for  this,  the  S.  Q&iruiJb,    is  not  found  in  the 

(gj/D6rr.     We  have  Qeut^sifi,  £)SOTLO,  spin,  q.v. 

301.  '  Si  irasci  caveas  in  eum,  qui  id  meretur,  dici  poteris  irae  frae- 
nator ;  nam  in  eum,  qui  id  non  meretur,  quid  si  irascaris,  quid  si  non 
irascaris  ? ' 

Q&eo  gives  another  idea :  *  Where  your  anger  can  make  itself  felt.' 
I  see  no  reference  to  merit. 

302.  *  Insuper  irasci  in  te  potentiores  malum  est ;  sed  multo  pejus  erit 
irasci  in  tibi  inferiores.' 

In  one  case  you  hurt  yourself,  in  the  other  both  your  foe  and  your- 
self. 

303.  '  Cum  ex  eo  semper  tibi  malum  obveniat,  noli  alicui  irasci,  sive 
te  major  sit,  sive  minor,  sive  aequalis.' 

iLjn-frL£>n~LL®Ln  includes  <su <sS ILI IT /r ,  Greiflujn'n  and  g&LJLJ/r/r. 

304.  *  Est  ne  hostis  tarn    noxius  uti  interior  hie  hostis  neinpe  ira, 
quae  vultus  laetitiam  et  cordis  serenitatem  destruit  ? ' 

305.  '  Si  teipsum  a  malis  defendere  cupis,  ab  ira  cave,  nam  nisi  caveris, 
tu  aniet  ira  te  cruciabit.' 

306.  '  Irae  ignis  non  modo  eos,  in  quibus  gignitur,  adierit ;  sed  etiain 
tabulam   securitatis   quain   in   hoc  miseriarum  pelago   habent,   nempe 
consanguineos,  et  amicos  absuniit/ 

307.  *  Ejus  qui  iram  sibi  proficuam  putando  earn  sibi  comitem  ad- 
sciscit,  ruina  ita  infallibilis  est  uti  infallibilis  est   ictus  manu  terram 
pereutientis.' 

308.  '  Etiam   ei,  qui   tibi  tale  malum    fecit,   ut  aequet    splendorein 
plurium   ignium   sinul   junctorum,   si    possibile  tibi    erit,   non   irasci 
optimum  erit  ? ' 

309.  '  Si  quis  neque  irasceudi  cogitationem  iii  corde  admiserit,  onmia 
quae  cogitaverit  bona  sinml  obtinebit.' 

310.  '  In  ira  exorbitautes  sunt  mortuis  similes  ;  qui  iram  fraenant, 
similes  sunt  iis,  qui  in  coelo  felicitur  vivunt.' 


NOTES.  241 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Beschi :  Nemini  malefacere. 

[I  have  refrained  from  references  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  the  reader  can 
readily  supply.] 

311.  *  Inculpatorum   virorum    conditio    est    nemini    malum    facere, 
etiam  si  inde  talem  felicitatem  obtenturi  sint,  quae  ipsis  celsitudinem 
pariat.' 

Com.  says :  '  Neither  for  your  own  profit,  nor  from  malice,  nor  from 
heedlessness.' 

Q<F6uajii  is  interpreted  to  be  the  'mystic  powers'  which  a  yogi 
acquires.  The  obvious  meaning  is  '  wealth  which  confers  distinction/ 

312.  '  Inculpatorum  virorum  conditio  est,  etiam  si  quis  ex  odio  ipsis 
malefaciat  ei  malum  non  referre.' 

313.  *  Et  ipsis  hostibus  non  sunt  facienda  mala ;   nam  postquam  ilia 
feceris,  tibi  inevitable  damnuni  afferent.' 

Q<5:iLiLU[T<s®Lc>  =  Q<ff:i'uujirL&6\j  used  abs.  =  'even  when  you  have  done  no 
wrong  to  them.' 

314.  '  Tibi  malum  facientes  plectendi  optimus  modus  est,  beneficium 
ipsis  faciendo  pudore  affectos  eos  dimittere.' 

This  is  in  effect  the  saying  ascribed  to  Buddha :  '  Enmity  never  comes 
to  an  end  through  enmity  here  below  ;  it  come  to  an  end  by  non-enmity.' 
(Oldenberg's  Buddha,  p.  293.)  See  the  story  of  Long-grief  and  Long- 
life.  Comp.  Dhamma-pada,  222,  223,  translated  by  F.  Max  Miiller. 

315.  '  Quid  tibi  spirituales  ac  divinae  scientiae  proderunt,  si  alienum 
malum  perinde  ac  proprium  cave  re  nescias  ?  ' 

316.  '  Quod  tu  nosti  malum  esse,  ne  concupiscas  alteri  facere.' 

317.  '  Quovis  tempore,  cuicumque,  quantulum-cumque  illud  sit,  volens 
ac  prudens,  malum  [ne  facias]  cavere  optimum  est.' 

[The  rest  of  the  Chapter  and  verses  to  326  (inclusive)  are  missing  in 
the  India  House  MS.  of  Beschi's  Kurral.] 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Beschi  :  Non  occidere. 
1-6.  In  Beschi  missing. 


This  chapter  inculcates  the  virtue  of  i^far  ahimsd,  or  '  respect  for 
all  that  has  life.'  The  Com.  says  this  subject  is  treated  last  because  this 
virtue  is  the  highest.  Manu,  v.  43  seq.,  x.  63,  xi.  23. 

322.  LJ6vjy/u3/r  *  the  manifold  life  of  other  creatures.'  —  Drew.     It  is 

31 


242  THE 

not  only  abstinence  from  animal  food  that  is  inculcated,  but  cherishing 
d^/iq^eu)  all  the  inferior  creation. 

All  the  negative  commands,  obedience  to  which  confers  on  man  <  the 
five-fold  uprightness,'  are  reiterated   by   Tiruvaljuvar,  though   not  in 
order.     (See  Oldenberg's  Buddha,  p.  290.) 
These  are — 

1.  To  kill  no  living  thing:  QsirevevrreoLz. 

2.  Not  to  lay  hands  on  another's  property  : 

Ch.  xxix. 

3.  Not  to  touch  another's  wife: 

Ch.  xv. 

4.  Not  to  speak  what  is  untrue  :  <sumu6s>LQ.     Ch.  xxx. 

5.  Not  to  drink  intoxicating  drinks:  ^srr^odbr^sroLQ. 

Ch.  xcin. 

324.  It  requires  care  to  avoid  injury  to  living  beings.     Hence  ^^= 
<  study.' 

325.  '  Permanence.'       Dreading    a    continuance   of    this    embodied 
existence,  and  renouncing  all  in  order  to  gain  <sS(£).     Comp.  Ch.  xxxv. 

327.  '  Quamvis  tua  ipsius  vita  a  te  separatur,  tu  noli  facere  malum 
separans  alterius  dulcem  vitam.' 

A   man   may   not    kill,    even    in    self-defence.      The    reasoning    in 
BTiag.  Gttd,  ii.  is  adverse  to  this. 

328.  '  Quamvis  et  bonum  et  magna  felicitas  sequatur  ex  viventium 
occisione   (uti  contingit  in  victimarum  immolatione),  tamen  sapientes 
abhorrent  ab  emolumento  proprio  aliorum  nece  comparato.' 

Even  sacrifices  are  forbidden. 

329.  '  Qui  munere  f unguntur  necandi  viventia,  minimae  notae  sunt  in 
aestimatione  eoruni  qui  talis  officii  vilitatem  agnoscunt.' 

Sacrificing  priests,  and  soldiers,  are  not  to  be  honoured. 

330.  'Non   desunt,   qui    videntes    aliquem    obesa   membra   prae   se 
ferentem,  et  valde  infelicem  vitam  ducentem,  dicant  eum  alicujus  necis 
reum  esse.' 

Comp.  Ndl  122,  123  : 

1  Their  legs  in  iron  bound,  as  slaves  to  alien  lords, 
They  '11  till  the  black  and  barren  soil,  who  snared  and  kept 
In  cages  partridges  and  quails,  that  dwell  in  wilds 

Where  beetles  hum  amid  the  flowers.' 
'  Who  loved  in  other  time  on  crabs  to  feed,  and  broke  • 
Their  joints,  what  time  the  guilt  of  olden  deeds  comes  home, 
Like  fire  their  palms  shall  glow,  their  fingers  rot  away, 
When  direful  leprosy's  fierce  pangs  arise.' 


NOTES.  243 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

Beschi :  Mundanarum  rerum  instabilitas. 

COM.  :  Only  by  knowledge  of  this  does  a  man  learn  to  relax  his  hold  on 
visible  things,  and  so  attain  to  the  gip®\  of  the  next  chapter. 
Analysis : — 

I.  1.  Ignorance  of  it  is  folly. 

II.  2,  3.  Instability  of  prosperity. 

III.  4-10.  Time  hurries  us  away. 

Decay  and  death. 

Life's  brevity. 

Body's  instability. 

The  teaching  of  the  four  chapters  (XXXIV.-XXXVH.)  to  which  commen- 
tators (but  not  the  poet)  give  the  title  (SF,tT6vrLc>,  is  much  the  same  as 
that  of  the  following  extract : — 

'  The  separated  condition  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  cause  of  mental 
error  (z^^err),  is  also  the  cause  of  moral  evil.  Ignorant  of  its  true 
nature,  the  soul  attaches  itself  to  objects  unworthy  of  it  (Qu0s>pea>Lo). 
Every  act  which  it  performs  to  gratify  this  attachment  (u/bg)),  entangles 
it  deeper  in  the  perishable  world;  and,  as  it  is  itself  imperishable,  it  is 
condemned  to  a  perpetual  series  of  changes  (fJ/rjuq).  Once  dragged 
into  the  samsdra,  into  the  vortex  of  life,  it  passes  from  one  existence 
into  another,  without  respite  and  without  rest.  This  is  the  twofold 
doctrine  of  the  Karma,  i.e.  the  act  (s^Sssr)  by  which  the  soul  determines 
its  own  destiny  (sezEip) ;  and  of  the  Punarbhava,  i.e.  the  successive  re- 
births in  which  it  undergoes  it.'  (Barth,  pp.  77,  78.) 

331.  'Quod  caducum   est   stabile   esse  opinari  inscitia   est  religioso 
valde  noxia.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  52 : 

'  The  chief  of  men  reflect  on  change,  disease,  old  age, 
And  death,  and  do  their  needful  work.     The  endless  round 
Of  sevenfold  science,  lore  of  stars,  who  raving  teach, 
Are  maddest  of  the  foolish  throng.' 

332.  '  Divitiarum  adventus  est  uti  adventus  spectatorum  ad  publicum 
ludum ;  abeunt  vero  eodem  modo,  quo  dissolvitur  spectatorum  coetus 
absolute  ludo.' 

Drew  says  :  *  the  one  is  by  slow  degrees  ;  the  other  is  rapid — in  a 
moment.' 

333.  '  Divitiae  instabilis  conditionis  sunt,  quapropter  si  eas  obtineas 
statim  iis  utere  ;  ad  virtutum   exercitium,  quae  unice  stabilem  tibi  fruc- 
tum  affere  possunt.' 

334.  '  Quod  a  nobis  dies  dicitur  ostendit  se  tanquam  temporis  men- 


244  THE    KURBAL. 

suram  quamdam ;  sed  ilium  rite  percipientibus,  non  est  nisi  gladius  vitain 
secans.' 

335.  *  Antequam  linguae  loquela  desit,  et  singultus  guttur  intercipiat, 
bona  opera  festinanter  operare.' 

See  Ndl  332  ('Rusticus  expectat,'  &c.) : 

1  In  the  great  sea  to  bathe  they  went,  but  cried,  "  We  '11  wait 
Till  all  its  roar  is  still,  then  bathe."     Such  is  their  worth 
Who  say,  "  We  '11  practise  virtue  and  be  wise  when  all 
Our  household  toils  and  cares  have  end." 

336.  *  Frequent issimum  in  hoc  mundo  est  dici  de  aliquo,  quod  heri 
exstitit,  et  hodie  non  est.' 

Coinp.  Ndl.  27-29 : 

*  Like  bubble  that,  when  rain  falls,  oftentimes  appears 
And  disappears,  is  this  our  frame.     The  steadfast  wise 
Resolve  to  rid  themselves  of  this  perplexity. 

In  the  wide  world,  who  can  compare  with  these  ? 
'  Those  who  have  gained  this  well-knit  frame  should  seize  the  gain 
The  body  yields.     For,  like  a  cloud  upon  the  hills 
That  casts  its  shadow,  nor  abides,  but  thence  departs, 

The  body  leaves  no  trace  behind. 
*  The  body's  transient  state  is  as  the  dew-drop  hangs 
On  grassy  tufts.     This  very  hour  do  virtuous  deeds  ! 
E'en  now  Tie  stood,  he  sat,  he  fell,  while  friends  bewailed 
He  died ;  such  is  man's  history  ! ' 

337.  '  Qui  nee  sciunt  an  per  unum  iustans  victuri  sint,  innumera 
mente  moliuntur  futuro  tenipore  agenda.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  359  (vain  dreams)  : 

'  To-day,  at  once,  a  little  hence,  our  joys  are  crowned  ! 
And  so  men  think,  and  tell  their  friends  with  hearts  full  glad ; 
But  soon  their  eager  minds  are  changed  ;  and  many  men 
Have  faded  like  a  lotus'  leaf  ! ' 

338.  '  Aviis   ovum  deserendo  volans   symboluin  est  unionis  animae 
cum  corpore.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  30  : 

'  Unasked  men  come,  as  kinsmen  in  the  home  appear, 
Then  silent  go.     As  silently  the  bird  deserts 
The  tree  where  nest  remains,  and  go  far  off,  so  these 
Leave  but  the  body  to  their  friends.' 

339.  'Generatio  et  interitus  sunt  veluti  somnus  et  vigilia.' 

340.  '  Si  anima  tanquam   hospes  in  corpore  moratur,  nonne  certum 
est  corpus  non  esse  propriam  animae  domum.' 


NOTES.  245 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Beschi :  Omnibus  mundanis  rebus  renunciare,  atque  ab  iis 
affectum  divellere. 

THE  second  chapter  of  the  Gitd  should  be  compared  with  this. 
Com.'s  analysis  : — 

I.  1-4.  Relinquishment  of  all  external  bonds  :   q/rx-jLj/r?^. 

II.  5.  Of  internal  bonds  :  ^suunj^. 

III.  6.  Reward  of  renouncing  both. 

IV.  7.  Sorrows  to  those  who  renounce  not. 

V.  8,  9.  Both  combined. 

VI.  10.  The  means. 

341.  '  Qui  ab  omnibus  mundanis  rebus  se  disjungit,   non   experietur 
afflictiones,  quae  ob  iis  proveniunt.' 

The  repetition  gives  emphasis. 

342.  'Si  desideras   frui    gaudiis,  quae   in   hac  etiam  vita    omnium 
renunciatio  affert,  cito  renuntia,  ut  illis  diu  frui  possis.' 

Oomp.  Ndl.  11 : 

' "  Hoar  age  will  come,"  thus  think  the  men  of  knowledge  good, 
And  have  from  earliest  years  all  ties  renounced.     Who  joy 
In  youth,  unstable,  never  free  from  fault,  with  pain 
Leaning  upon  a  staff,  erewhile  will  rise.' 

343.  '  Qui  ad  caelum  anhelant,  opus  est  ut  eodem  tempore,  et  suos 
sensus  mortificent,  et  omnia  quae  possidunt,  relinquant.' 

gg/Fj^  Qu[r$&<t3£<£(3j(fl6a)Lauj[rQuj  §3/5-^4 6vs3r<£ err.  Comp.  QurrfSI 
in  Vocab. 

344.  'Perfecti  poenitentis  est   nihil    possidere  ;    alicujus  enim  boni 
teinporalis  possessio,  cum  caussa  sit,   ut  animus  illaqueetur,  poeniten- 
tiam  quoque  destruet.' 

All  possessions  must  be  abandoned. 

345.  '  Si  nostrum  corpus  intolerabile  pondus  est  nos  retardans  ne  ad 
coelum  festinemur,  quid  quaeso  erit,  si  supra  hoc  pondus  adjecerimus 
pondus  affectuum  ad  caetera  nobis  extrinseca  ?  ' 

346.  '  Qui   a   se   removet    fascinum,    quo    amor  proprius,    et    amor 
eorum  quae  possidemus  nos  fascinat,  gloriam  assequetur  quam  ipsorum 
caelicolarum  plurimi  adepti  non  sunt.' 

egjsisi&rnrLG  and  L&Lc>Lb'S®<5  (aharikdra,  mammatd)  are  continually 
denounced.  The  one  asserts  the  reality  of  self,  and  the  other  thinks 
external  things  are  its  own. 

<s§6)  is  beyond  the  various  '  heavens '  assigned  to  (Jiva,  Brahma,  &c. 

347.  Qui  nunquarn  deserunt  affectum  bonorum  sentibilium,  nunquain 
desinent  ab  iis  cruciari.' 


246  THE     KUKBAL. 

348.  '  Qui  perfecte  omnibus  renunciant,  aeternam  beatitatem  obtinent ; 
caeteri  omnes,  a  suorum  affectuum   rete  illaqueati,  et  a  suis  desideriis 
fascinati,  a  caelo  distinebuntur.' 

•5%svuuLLi—rrJT :  the  past  tense  denoting  certainty.     See  Ndl.  331 : 
'  The  turtle's  murderers  have  put  it  in  the  pot, 
Set  fire  beneath ;  it  sports,  unconscious  of  its  fate. 
Such  is  their  worth  who  joy  entangled  in  life's  net, 

While  death,  the  mighty  slayer,  waits  to  seize.' 

349.  '  Si  affiectus  omnes  obtruncaveris,  ab  alterius  vitae  suppliciis  liber 
evadens,  ad  caelum  festinabis ;  si  secus  feceris,  ab  aeterna  beitate  diu 
distentus,  variis  cruciatibus  obnoxius  eris.' 

My  version  varies. 

350.  '  Dei   amorem   tenaciter   prehende,   et   ut    sensibilium   amorem 
extinguas,  ilium  ipsum  Dei  amorem  quotidie  tenacius  prehendere,  atque 
augere  stude.' 

Beschi  quotes   S.   Augustine:    'Crescente  charitate  decrescit   cupi- 
ditas.' 


CHAPTEE  XXXVI. 

Beschi  :   Verum  assequi  conari. 

351.  '  Fascinatio  qua  quis  sibi  suadet,  verum  esse,  quod  verum  non 
est,  infelix  vitae  genus  in  altero  mundo  causabit.' 

352.  '  Tenebris  (nempe   infernalibus),   amotis,   suavitas   (i.e.  beatitas 
nempe  aeterna)  obveniet  illi,  qui  a  fascinatione  liberam  et  purani  ab 
erroribus  scientiam  acquisivit.' 

353.  '  Qui  omne  dubium  a  se  alienando,  verum  assequi  conatur,  quam- 
vis  in  terra  existat,  caelo  valde  proximus  erit.' 

354.  '  Quidtibi  proderit  scientia  omnium  quae  quinque  sensibus  obji- 
ciuntur,  si  veri  scientiam  non  assequaris.' 

355.  'Veri  assecutio  in  eo   consistit,  ut  cujuscunque  rei,    cujusvis 
conditionis   sit,  non  quas  primo  obtutui  objiciuntur,  sed  proprias  ac 
veras  ejusdem  qualitates,  causas  et  effectus  assequaris.' 

It  seems  that  the  poet  must  mean,  to  see  God  in  everything  is  true 
"knowledge.  He  (or  it)  is  the  QmujQij/r^efr  or  ^^^i<suu^. 

The  teaching  of  the  Chdndogya  upanishad,  vi.  15  :  T^  ^  ^ff% 
*  thou  art  it,'  on  which  the  Tamil  sectarian  poets  have  written  volumes, 
is  that  which  the  poet  has  adopted  ;  but  it  is  somewhat  vaguely 
expressed,  and  there  is  a  manifest  avoiding  of  Sanskrit  formulas.  He 
so  teaches  the  doctrine  of  the  Upanishads  as  to  avoid  anything  that 
could  mark  him  as  a  follower  of  any  sectarian  teacher.  Comp.  423. 


NOTES.  247 

356.  '  Qui  in  hoc  mundo  apud  sapientes  discendo  veri  Dei  notitiam 
assequuntur,  viam  iiigredientur,  quae  non  est  iterum  in  mundum  illos 
ductura.' 

357.  '  Si  tua  mens  attente  omnia  considerando  veram   Deum  asse- 
quatur,    procul   dubio   noli   cogitare   quod    aeternain   vitam    non    sis 
assequuturus.' 

358.  'Veri  assecutio  ilia  est  quae  talem  obtinet  veri  Dei  notionem, 
ut  fugando  inscitiam,  quae  post   mortem  miseram  vitam  causat,   ad 
aeternam  beatitatem  perducat.' 

359.  '  Si    assequendo   veram   notionem    illius,    qui    rebus   omnibus 
adhaeret  (nempe  Dei),  ita  vivas  ut  in  te  omnino  pereat  mundanis  rebus 
adhaesio,  tibi  non  adhaerebunt  mala,  quae   adhaererent,  si  illam  vivendi 
rationem  infringeres.' 

360.  '  A  malis  oinnino  immunis  non  eris,  nisi  illorum  trium,  nempe, 
cupidatis,   aversionis,   et  veri   ignoratiae   ipsum  quoque    nomen  in  te 
extinguatur.' 

See  Bhag.  Gitd,  ii.  62,  63.  The  Tamil  scholar  will  derive  much  infor- 
mation (together  with  a  little  wholesome  mental  discipline),  from  a 
study  of  the 


CHAPTEE  XXXVII. 

Beschi :  A  sensibilibus  ipsa  quoque  desideria  divellere. 

361.  '  Desiderium    sensibilium  a   sapientibus   vocatur    semen,  quod 
omnibus  nullo  unquam  tempore  desituram  infelicem  vitam  post  mortem 
parit.' 

362.  '  Si  aliquid  desiderare  vis,  desideraate  abigere  infelicitatem,  quae 
post  mortem  sequitur  :  id  vero  non  assequeris,  nisi  desiderando  omnium 
desideriorum  carentiam.' 

363.  '  Immunitas  ab  omui  sensibilium  desiderio  adeo  magna  felicitas 
est,  ut  in  hoc  mundo  et  in  altero  similem  non  habeat.' 

364.  '  Omni  desiderio  carere  ab  omni  labe  immunitatem  parit ;  illud 
verb  assequeris,  si  verum  assequi  studueris.' 

365.  *  Ab  omni  malo  immunes  dicentur  ii  qui  omne  desiderium  abege- 
runt;  caeteri,  licet  aliqua  hujus  mundi  mala  effugiant,  ab  alterius  vitae 
malis  iininunes  non  erunt.' 

366.  '  Religiosi  propria  virtus  est  cavere  a  desideriis  sensibilium,  quae 
homines  decipiimt  illaqueautque.' 

367.  '  Desideriis  carentes  omni  malo  carebunt ;  si  desideria  adsint, 
nulla  licet  sit  alia  caussa,  mala  indesinentia  incessenter  venient.' 


248  THE    KUERAL. 

368.  'Si  desideriis,  quae  inter  omnia  mala  pessima  mala  sunt,  ex- 
tinxeris,  in  hac  quoque  vita  indesinentem  felicitatem  assequeris.' 

369.  '  Si  desideria  superando  extinxeris,  ea  ipsa,  quam  cogitas,  via 
opera  assequeris,  quae  tibi  ab  omnibus  malis  immunitatem  afferant.' 

370.  '  Si  a  te  elongaveris  desideria,  quae  insatiabilis  conditionis  sunt, 
eo  ipso  instanti  meritum  assequeris  ad  id  quod  immutabilis  conditionis 
est  (nempe  ad  beatitatem).' 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
Beschi:  Divinorum  Decretorum  irrefrayabilitas. 

BESCHI   prefixes  to   the  chapter :    '  Caput   unicum    et   ab  anterioribus 
materiis  avulsum.' 

371.  *  Si  divitias  lucrandi  statutum  tempus  adveniat,   statim  indus- 
triosus  evades  ;  si  illas  amittendi  tempus  adveniat,  statim  ad  laborandum 
piger,  et  ad  divitias  servandas  ineptus  evades.' 

Ellis  has  given  a  version  of  seven  couplets  in  this  chapter. 

'  By  the  decreed  effect  of  the  works  of  former  births,  industry  is 
excited  and  wealth  accrues  ;  and  by  the  same,  indolence  prevails  and 
wealth  departs.' 

372.  '  Quamvis  valde  solers  quis  sit,  si  ei  divitias  amittendi  statutum 
tempus  adveniat,  statim  insipiens  evadit ;  quamvis  valde  insipiens  quis 
sit,  si  divitias  lucrandi  statutum  tempus  advenerit,  solers  evadit.' 

373.  '  Licet  quis  multas  ac  subtiles   scientias   sua   ingenii  subtilitate 
didicerit,  insipientia  quam  affert  divitias  amittendi  statutum  tempus, 
ejus  ingenii  subtilitatem  superabit.' 

Ellis  :  l  Although  he  have  obtained  various  and  profound  learning, 
his  natural  disposition  will  overcome  his  knowledge.' 

See  Ndl.  108  (Infatuation,  result  of  deeds  in  a  former  birth)  : 
*  Not  ignorant  are  they  ;  but,  though  what  man  should  know 
They  know,  yet  deeds  that  bring  guilt  to  their  souls  they  do. — 
Lord  of  the  wide  sea's  pleasant  shore,  where  breezes  breathe 
The  lily's  fragrance  round! — This  comes  from  former  deeds.' 

374.  '  Duplex  in  rnundo  proprietas,  nempe  divitem  esse  et  sapientem  ; 
valde  latani  differential!!  patiuntur ;    nam  alia    via  quis  dives  evadit ; 
alia  sapiens.' 

375.  '  Si   divitias    lucrandi    statutum    tempus   advenerit,   omnes   a:l 
felicitatem    et    divitias  assequendas    ineptae  occasiones   opportunae  et 
aptae  evadent ;  si  illud  non  advenerit,  omnes  lucrandi  opportunitates 
ineptae  evadent.'  ' 


NOTES.  249 

376.  '  Quod  ex  divine  statute  non  habet  conditionem  ut  sit  tuum, 
tuum  non   erit,  quamvis   multum   labores  in   eo  custodiendo  ;  quod  ex 
clivino  statuto  tuum  est,  etiamsi  illud  procul  a  te  projicias,  a  te  procul 
non  ibit.' 

Hitop.  Intro.  28,  29. 

Ellis  :  '  That  which  is  not  by  nature  theirs,  no  labour  can  obtain  ,  and 
that  which  is,  though  they  reject  it,  will  not  quit  them.'     See  Ndl.  101  : 
'  Though  you  send  forth  the  tender  calf  midst  many  cows, 
It  hath  unerring  skill  its  mother  to  find  out ; 
Deeds  of  old  days  have  even  so  the  power  to  search 
Him  out  to  whom  their  fruit  pertains.' 

377.  *  Etiamsi  immensas  divitias  curnulaveris,  non  erit  tibi  possibile 
iis  frui  supra  mensuram  quam  Deus  tibi  praefinivit.' 

Ellis:  '  Those  who  have  accumulated  millions  can  enjoy  nothing  but 
what  the  apportions!  has  apportioned  to  them.' 

As  B.  says  in  the  note  given  below,  this  couplet  changes  the  whole 
aspect  of  the  chapter.  This  idea  of  the  Personal  Apportioner — Judge, 
Administrator  of  the  World, — *  Who  by  His  Providence  governs  all 
things,'  is  to  be  noted. 

378.  '  Etiamsi,    qui    pauperrimi    sunt,    non    concipient   propositum 
reuunciandi   omnibus,    nisi    Deus    avertat    impedimenta   quae    adesse 
statuit.' 

379.  '  Si  scis  quod  tu  cupis  fieri  non  posse,  nisi  cum  ad  id  praefinituni 
tempus  advenerit,  quando  illud  non  fit,  quare  quaeso  tristaris.' 

Ellis :  '  Why  should  those  who  see  that  good  only  happens  in  the 
destined  season  of  prosperity  be  grieved  in  the  season  of  adversity  ?  ' 

380.  '  Quidquid  excogitaveris  ut  divina  decreta  retardes,  ilia  semper 
tuas  industrias   omnes     praeibunt ;    quid    in    mundo    divinis    decretis 
potentius.' 

Ellis :  '  What  is  more  powerful  than  the  destined  effect  of  former 
works  ?  It  anticipates  even  thy  thoughts  while  considering  how  to 
avoid  it.'  Hitop.  Intro.  33. 

NOTE  BY  B. 

'  Non  me  latet  vocem  SSELP,  cui  ego  divinorum  decretorum  significa- 
tionem  tribuo,  ab  aliis  usurpari  pro  ULpsSl'Bssr  quod  significat  opera 
antiquitus  facta,  neque  ignore  eosdem  humanarum  rerum  vices  tribuere 
operibus  antiquitus  factis,  sive  bonis,  sive  malis,  pro  effectuum  diversi- 
tate ;  dicuut  enim,  virum  probum  pauperem  esse,  ob  peccata  quae 
antiquitus  patravit  (sive  antequam  nasceretur  in  alia  generatione,  uti 
Tamulenses  stulte  putant,  sive  postquam  natus  est,  in  adolescentia  vel 
pueritia),  quaeque  adhucnon  luit  ferendo  supplicium  iis  debitum  ;  virum 
vero  improbum  feliceui  esse,  ob  virtutes  quas  antiquitus  exercuit,  et  pro 

32 


250  THE    KURRAL. 

quibus,  adhuc  praenrium  iis  debituni  non  retulit  ;  atque,  eodem  modo 
virum  industrium  ac  indefesse  laborantem  pro  divitiis  acquirendis  nil 
acquirere  in  poenam  peccatorum  veterum  ;  virum  vero  omnino  ineptum 
atque  pigrum  sine  ullo  labore  divitem  evadere  in  praemiuin  veterum 
virtutum  ;  ita  ut  quidquid  vulgus  malam  fortunam,  aut  bonam  fortunam 
appellat,  id  ipsi  refundant  in  opera  antiquitus  facta.  In  hoc  vero 
capitulo  dictain  vocem  melius  explicari  et  proprius  significare  divina 
decreta,  patet,  turn  ex  serie  tota  sententiarum  in  hoc  capitulo  conten- 
tarum,  turn  ex  illo  versu  speciatim  — 


in  quo  ne  per  sonmium  quidem  Auctor  meminit  operum  antiquitus 
factorum,  sed  solum  divini  statuti,  quod  nemo  praeterire  potest  :  et 
quamvis  detur  quod  opera  antiquitus  facta  suum  locum  habeant  in  hu- 
manarum  rerum  vicibus,  quarum  causam  ignoramus,  cum  tamen  dicta 
opera  antiquitus  facta,  sive  bona,  sive  mala,  hie  et  nunc,  et  non  antea 
neque  postea  suum  sortiri  effectum,  sive  bonum,  sive  malum,  non 
dependeat,  nisi  a  divina  voluntate,  quae  statuit  tempus  in  quo  alicujus 
virtus  praemiari,  peccatum  puniri  debeat  ;  cumque  omnis  vis  operum 
antiquitus  factorum  ad  divinorum  decretorum  virtuti  praemium,  peccato 
poenam  statuentiurn  irrefragabilitatem  reducatur,  recte  voci  ^err/p 
divinorum  decretorum  significatio  tributa  est  ;  eo  vel  magis,  quod  vox 
esr/p  ex  sua  natura  nil  significat  nisi  antiquum  quid,  quod  aeque,  corn- 
petit  operibus  antiquitus  factis,  quorum  vim  nunc  quis  experitur,  ac 
divino  statuto  decernenti,  ut  dicta  opera  nunc  suam  vim  exerceant,  nam 
nil  est  divinis  decretis  antiquius.' 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Beschi :  Regis  magnitudo. 

THIS  chapter   speaks   of    the    king ;    but   in   the   following   chapters, 
though  the  title  is  .jyjr^ujeu,  the  verses  apply  to  men  in  general. 

381.  'Qui  validuni  exerciturn,   copiam  subditorum,  auri  vim,  rectos 
consiliarios,  vicinorum  regum  foedus,  et  fortem  arcem   (quae  sex  sunt 
regi  necessaria)  possidet,  caeteros  inter  reges  erit  veluti  inter  caetera 
animantia  leo.' 

Manu,  vi.  160. 

382.  '  Proprium  regum  est,  in  his  quatuor,  nempe  imperturbabilitate, 
liberalitate,  prudentia,  et  animi  robore  nunquam  deficere.' 

383.  '  Ab  eo  qui  terram  gubernat,  dissociabilia  sunt  ista  tria,  nempe 
in  suo  munere  sollicitudo,  ejusdem  peritia,  et  animi  firmitas.' 

384.  *  Rex  debet  a  virtute  nunquam  aberrando,  et  vitiosum  quod  est  a 


NOTES.  251 

suo  regno  eliminando,  sublimem  aniinum  a  generositate  non  aberrantem 
possidere.' 

385.  '  Rex  tails    sit  ut  valeat  divitias   cuinulare,  cumulatas   absque 
detrimento    in    suo    thesauro    congerere,   congestas   ne    ab    hostibus 
rapiantur  custodire,  custoditas  pro  virtutis  exercitio,  pro  aerarii  incre- 
niento,  et  magnified  sui  sustentatione  prudenter  distribuere.' 

This  is  Manu,  vii.  99,  100. 

386.  '  Orbis  regem  qui  suis  subditis  facile   se   praebeat  visendum, 
iisque  dura  non  loquatur  verba,  laudibus  extollet.' 

387.  '  Regibus  qui    suavibus  verbis  et  regali   munificentia  subditos 
amanter  defendere  valeat,  hie  orbis  suis  laudibus  tantus  erit  quantum 
ipsi  cogitaverint   (i.e.  ob  laudes,  quas  in  orbe  referent,  dicti  reges  tot 
regnis  dominabuntur,  quot  ipsi  voluerint).' 

388.  '  Rex  qui  justitiam   servando   subditorum   defensionem  curat, 
aestimabitur  tanquam  hominuni  Deus.' 

389.  '  Totus  orbis  habitationem  figet  sub  throno  regis  qui  indolem 
habet   sufferentem   verba  suorum   consiliariorum,  utut  auribus  amara 
sint.' 

390.  '  Rex  qui  liberalitatem  amorem  in  subditos,  justitiam,  et  suorurn 
subditorum  curam  habet,  erit  regum  coetui  splendor.' 

[Manu,  vii.  may  with  advantage  be  compared  throughout.] 


CHAPTER  XL. 

Beschi :  Scientia  sui  muneris  regi  necessaria. 

THE  distinction  between  seusSl  [see  .seu]  « learning'  and  ^jtflcsij  (Ch.  XLIII.) 
must  be  observed.  The  poet  does  not  use  the  S.  ndnam.  From  a&usS 
'  the  study  of  books,'  and  (o<s5<sijsSl '  oral  instruction,'  comes  .jy^a/. 

391.  '  Quod  discendum  est,   perfecte  disoe  ;  postquam  didiceris,  ad 
normam  praeceptorum,  quae  didicisti,  perniane.' 

392.  '  Illae   duae .  scientiae   quarum    unain    arithmeticam,     alterain 
scribendi  et  iegendi  artem  appellant,  homini  sunt  duo  veluti  oculi.' 

So   Avvai    says:    &<3scTQ<sm(Lg£5J$&G;Lp®o,   'despise    not    number  and 
letter.'     Hitop.  Intro.  12. 

393.  '  Illi  oculos  habere  dici  possunt,  qui  scientias  didicerunt ;  qui 
verb  nil  didicerunt,  non  oculos,  sed  duo  in  fronte  ulcera  habere  dicendi. 

394.  '  Doctorum  vivorum  officium  in  eo  consistit,  ut  ita  inculpabiliter 
vivaiit,    ut  omnes  laeto    animo  eos  sibi  superiores  profiteantur ;  adeo 
suaviter  caeteros  ad  virtutem  incitent,  ut  qui  eoruin    meminerint,  de 
eorumdem  absentia  tristentur.' 

395.  '  Qui  ante  magistros  humiliter  stant  ad  finem  discendi,  perinde 
ac  pauper  ante  divitem,  sublimes  evadent ;  qui   dictae   humilitati  non 
consentiendo  nil  discunt,  semper  infimi  erunt.' 


252  THE    KUERAL. 

396.  *  Sicuti  in  puteo,  ad  mensuram  qua  arena  extrahitur,  aqua  surgit  ; 
ita  in  hominibus,  ad  mensuram  qua  discunt,  scientia  crescit.' 

397.  '  Si  docto  viro  quaelibet  niundi  provincia  sua  provincia  est,  quae- 
libet  urbs  patria  est,  cur,  quaeso,   plurimi  usque  ad  mortem  indocti 
vivere  malunt  ?  ' 

This  is  the  only  example  of  ^j^^&^ff  Q&LJUGO,  Intro,  p.  xxviii. 

398.  '  Scientia  quam  quis  in  hoc  mundo   assequitur,   etiain   in    alio 
mundo  ei  proficua  erit,  quia  adjuniento  est  ad  beatitatem  assequendam.' 

399.  '  Docti  viri,  videntes,  ex  scientia  et  sibi  et  mundo  dulcedinem 
pari,  magis  magisque  scire  desiderant.' 

400.  *  Incorruptibiles   et  sublimes    divitiae  sunt  scientiae,  non  verb 
aurum  et  caetera  quae  quis  possidet.' 

Cornp.  Ndl.  135  (discriminating  study)  : 


(  Learning  's  a  shoreless  sea  ;  the  learner's  days  are  few  ; 
Think  calmly.     Lo,  diseases  many  wait  around  ! 
With  clear  discrimination  learn  what's  meet  for  you, 

Like  swan  that  leaves  the  water,  drinks  the  milk.' 


bird,  here  the  hamsa,  that  can  drink  the  milk,  and  leave 
the  water  mingled  with  it.     @ev=c  like.' 


CHAPTER  XLI. 
Beschi :  Ignorantia,  a  rege  vitanda. 

401.  *  Absque  scientia  necessaria  in  coetu  doctorum  loqui,  perinde  est 
ac  in  tabula  nullis  lineis  obsignata  globum  projiciendo  ludere.' 

402.  '  Qui   sine   debita   scientia   in  coetu  loqui  affectat,    perinde  se 
habet,  ac  qui  affectat  corpus  mulieris  cui  ubera  desunt.' 

The  construction  is  ambiguous.  Make  «6ueu/r(^ff'6or  =  <£E6u<5u/r(^<su^2/ 
6roi_wj,  and  ©eueu/r^/rar  also  the  6th  case.  Qu<5Qor=Qusssj<5G)Lo€S)iLi, 
Supply  cpQijGii&ir.  '  For  anyone  to  desire  to  listen  to  an  unlearned 
man's  words,  would  be  like  desiring,  &c.' 

403.  '  Etiam  qui  penitus  indocti  sunt,  valde  docti   evadent,  si  conti- 
nere  se  poteriut  quin  ante  doctos  loquantur.' 

QufSI&v  :  *if  they  only  could  gain  the  grace  of  modest  self-effacement ! ' 

404.  '  Ei,  qui  nihil  didicit,  quantumvis  magnum  ingenium  sit,  illud   a 
sapientibus  nihili  fit.' 


NOTES.  253 

405.  '  Qui  cum  indoctus  sit,  se  doctum  praesumit,  si  ante  doctos  loqui 
contigerit,  dictam  praesumptionem  amittet.' 

406.  *  Indocti  viri  hoc  tautum  habent,  quod  dicuntur  in  mundo  existere ; 
caeterum  sterili  agro  similes  sunt.' 

'They  have  the  measurement  of  living  beings.'  In  common  speech 
LCXT g $5) IT !.£>  =  '  only.'  Beschi  reads  Ln/r(s&(@«n./r«J6U6U'r6u=='hoc  tantum 
praeter.' 

407.  '  Qui  decus  non  habet  res  subtiliter  inquirendi,  et  latam  erudi- 
tionem  non  possideat,  ejus  decora  omnia,  ex  luto  affabre  elaboratae  et 
pulchre  ornatae  statuae  decora  imitantur.' 

408.  *  Pejus   est   indoctos   viros   esse    divites    quam    sapientes    esse 
pauperes.' 

409.  '  Qui  indocti  sunt,  quamvis   nobili  loco  nati,  nunquam  posside- 
bunt  decus  par  decori  eorum,  qui  licet  iiifimi  siut,  docti  tamen  sunt.' 

uir®  '  in  respect  to  dignity.'     UIT®  is  norn.  of  'respect.'     See  293. 

410.  '  Quantum  distat  inter  hominem   et  brutum,  tantum  distat  inter 
doctum  et  indoctum.' 

In  the  comparison  there  is  an  inversion.     It  should  be — 

as  Brutes  :  men  :  :  unlearned  :  learned  men. 

But  the  order   is    sSle^isi^,  LQ<fE<sefr,  &p(yK,  (gj^osrujtsuir.     This    is   called 
LA ILJ &&$ jr eofl <5S> puQ UfrQ^en Q '<B5fr<sfr= confused  arrangement. 


CHAPTEE  XLII. 

Beschi :  Doctos  inter  homines  versando  ab  iis  discere. 

THE  word  Q<sm<sSl  reminds  us  that  teaching  in  Ancient  India  was 
always  oral.  The  learner  must  attach  himself  to  a  (§0$  or  ^^lifliLKssr. 
The  Nannul,  26-46,  will  illustrate  this  chapter. 

Comp.  S.  qru,  qruti,  qrdvana.     Avvai  says  ($&&r<88(LpsLJ€v  '  Give  dili- 
gence to  hearing.' 

411.  *  Divitiae,  quae  per  aufes,  id  est  per  doctorum  conversationem 
acquiruntur,  praecipuae  divitiae  dici  debent,  cum  sint  caeteris  omnibus 
divitiis  praestantiores.' 

412.  '  Si  auribus  suus  cibus  desit,  tune  et  ventri  aliquen^  cibum  dare 
oportebit.' 

413.  '  Qui  doctorum   conversationem,   quae    est  veluti  aurium  cibus 
quaeritant,  terrigenae  licet  sint,  pares  eruut  caelicolis,  qui  sacrificiorum 
odore  pascuntur.' 

414.  '  Qaamvis  indoctus  omnino  sis,  doctorum  sermones  audi,  id  enim 
in  adversitatibus  baculus  tibi  erit,  cui  innitaris,  quin  animo  decidas. 

415.  '  Verba  eorum  qui  bene  morati,  ac  docti  sunt,  ab  indoctis  audita 


254  THE    KtJBRAL. 

idem  istis  emolumentum   afferunt,  quod  affert    baculus  in  lubrico  loco 
gradient!.' 

416.  *  Quantulumcunque    sit    quod     doctus    profert    scitu    dignum 
libenter  audi ;  nam  licet  id   minimum  quid   videatur,   deinde  magnum 
tibi  decus  afferet.' 

417.  '  Vitiose  quamvis  didiceris,  sitamen  praeter  attentum  in  discendo 
studium,  frequentem  etiam  cum  doctis  collationem  habueris,  tails  evades, 
ut  possis  sine  erroris  nota  loqui.' 

418.  '  Aures  in  quas  penetrare  non   possunt  doctorum   vivoruni  collo- 
quia,    quamvis   sonum   audiant,    ejusdem   conditionis    sunt    ac    aures 
surdae.' 

419.  'Qui  cum   doctis  viris  versando  subtilem  rerum  notitiam  non 
assequuntur  difficile  est  ut  submisse  loquantur.' 

The  (2«£56rraS)ttj/r  =  S.  Qrdvcuka.     The  Savaka  of  the  Buddhist  books. 

420.  '  li  qui  non  norunt  auribus  gratum  cibum,  et   solum  noscunt 
quid  ori  sit  gratum,  quid  ingratum,  quodnam   erit  orbi   emolumentum 
si  vixerint,  quodnam  erit  orbi  darnnum  si  moriantur  ?  ' 

Beschi  says  '  puto  legendum  &-®s3r(rfjLarr <£<&<&  ';  but  why? 


CHAPTEE  XLIH. 
Beschi :  Prudentia. 

THIS  is  </>ponj(ris   and   o-o^ta.     The  inimitable  practical  wisdom  of  the 
author  is  especially  seen  in  these  chapters. 

421.  '  Prudentia  quoddam  armorum  genus  est  ad   mala  avertenda,  et 
arx  est  ab  ipsis  hostibus  inexpugnabilis,  quia  ipsis  inaccessibilis.' 

422.  'Prudentiae  proprium  est  non  sinere  ut   voluntas  feratur  quo 
suapte  natura  fertur,  sed  attente  considerando  objectum  a  voluntate 
concupitum,  bonum  ne  an  malum  sit,  a  malo  earn  revocare  et  ad  bonuin 
impellere.' 

423.  '  Prudentiae  debituin  est,  ea  quidquid  audieris  ex  cujus  vis  ore 
audieris,  illius  veram  signification  em  percipere.' 

Comp.,  however,  355. 

424.  *  Prudentiae  debitum  est,  ea  quae  loquitur  quamvis  captu  dif- 
ficilia  audientibus  facilia  reddere,  et  ea  quae  caeteri  loquantur,  quamvis 
subtilia  sint  percipere.'  w 

425.  '  Prudentium  est  cum  sapientibus  amicitiam  mire,  sed  in  ea  non 
sequi  conditionem  quorundam  florum,  qui  aperiuntur,  et  postea  clau- 
duntur  (h.e.  post  contractam  amicitiam  earn  dimittere).' 

Comp.  Ndl.  215. 


NOTES.  255 

426.  '  Prudentis  regis  debitum  est  eo  modo  vivere,  quo  vivit  orbis, 
cum  eo  se  conformando.' 

427.  '  Prudentes  quod  futurum  est  aDtequam  eveniat  noscunt,  impru- 
dentes  vero  futura  priusquam  eveniant  percipere  nesciunt.' 

428.  '  Stultorum  est  non  metuere  quae  metuenda  sunt,  prudentium 
est  timere,  ubi  timendum  est.' 

429.  '  Ei  qui  prudentiam  habet  praevisa  mala  praecavendi  iis  occur- 
rendo,  nullum  venturuni  est  malum  quod  ilium  consternat.' 

430.  *  Prudentes   in  prude ntia   omnia   bona   possident,  imprudentes 
quid  possident,  nil  omnino  possident.' 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

Beschi :   Vitia  dbigere. 

THE  Com.   says,  '  Only  the  wise  discern  and  correct  their  own  faults, 
hence  this  chapter  follows  that  on  ^^^SOL-SOLO.' 

431.  '  Felicitas  ejus  regis  qui  de  sua  felicitate    non  fit   ebrius,  nee 
effraenam  irani,  nee  luxuriam  sectatur,  sublimis  conditionis  est.' 

The  six  faults  enumerated  in  this  verse  and  the  next  are  (1)  arrogance, 
(2)  wrath,  (3)  lust,  (4)  avarice,  (5)  overweening  pride,  and  (6)  unseemly 
mirth.  This  last  is  also  explained  as  indiscriminating  kindness. 

432.  '  Nimia    auri     cupiditas,    aequum    transiliens    magnitude    (i.e. 
superbia),et  non  bona  vultus  laetitia  (i.e.  omnes  etiani  sontes  laeto  vultu 
aspicere),  vitia  sunt  a  rege  vitanda.' 

433.  '  Quamvis  milii  grano  par  culpa  sit,  earn  palmae   arbori  parem 
judicabunt  qui  a  vitiis  abhorrent.' 

434.  '  Cum  vitium  hostis  sit  valde  exitialis,   vitium  cave,  intuendo 
emolumentum,  quod  ex  hac  cautela  referes.' 

435.  '  Felicitas  regis  qui  vitia  non  praecavet,  destruetur  perinde  ac 
palearum  fasciculus  ante  ignem.' 

436.  '  Felicitas   regis,   qui  ab   nimiam  auri   cupiditatem,   illud    non 
impend  it    in    ea,    quae   opus   fuerint,    diu    durare    nou    poterit   quin 
destruatur.' 

437.  '  Si  rex  a  se  vitia  abigendo  deiiide   subditorum.  vitia  insequatur, 
quidnam  ultra  erit,  quod  tanquam  vitiosum  cavere  debeat  ?  ' 

438.  *  Nimia  cupiditas,  quo  nomine  vocatur   nimius  auri  amor,  qui 
illud  impendere  non  sinit,  cum  oportet,  caetera  vitia  ita  superat,  ut  prae 
ilia  nil  sit,  quod  tarn  deforrne  videatur.' 

439.  '  Quovis  tempore  (h.e.  etiam  eo  tempore,  quo  magnus  es),  noli  te 
extollere ;  ea  quae  utilitatem  non  afferunt,  noli  concupiscere.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  340. 


256  THE    KUBBAL. 

440.  '  Si  rex  iis,  quae  in  deliciis  habet,  ita  frui  valeat  ut  sua  in  ilia 
propensio  non  percipiatur,  inutilis  evadet  omnis  hostium  scientia  (i.e. 
hostes  non  poterunt  nosse,  quid  ipsi  carum  sit,  nee  media  adhibere  ad 
illud  prohibendum).' 

A  king  should  at  least  avoid  the  appearance  of  evil ;  and  if  he  indulge 
himself,  let  it  be  secretly. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

Beschi:  Magnos  sibi  viros  associare. 

COM.  :  '  The  getting  assistance  of  superior  men  as  ministers  and  spiritual 
guides:  ^miA&<3:n-  and  q(2jr/r£)^/r.' 

Among  Eastern  sovereigns  Akbar  was  famous  for  the  men  he  gathered 
around  him,  as  were  his  contemporaries  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Henri 
Quatre.  [See  Pope's  Text-look  of  Indian  History,  3rd.  Ed.  pp.  101, 102.] 

441.  'Eexeos,  qui  virtutes  exercere  sciunt,  ac  maturam  prudentiam 
habent,  attente  illorum  celsitudinem  considerando,  et  modos,  quibus  eos 
sibi  amicos  reddat  investigando  sibi  associet.' 

{jlrD<oGrrSl{5a2  is  variously  taken.  ^I/DSST  =  I  their  worth,'  or  'the  methods 
by  which  their  friendship  may  be  secured.' 

442.  '  Eegno  advenientia  mala  abigendi,  et  ne  in  posterum  adveniant 
praecavendi  indolem  habentes  rex  amicos  habere  debet.' 

Com. :  '  Evils  come  from  gods  (droughts,  excessive  rains,  winds,  fire, 
disease:  L£<5B)Le>i$)ss7-<sroL£>,  ^(^LQOTILO,  sn-pgi,  ji,  L^essfi) ;  or  from  men 
(enemies,  thieves,  kindred,  servants :  uen&euir,  .ssfroj/r,  ^jb/D^^frir, 
Q/s^ffL$6uQ<£Fuj(2)<sy/r/r).  To  remove  the  former,  <f[r^^<s<s\T  (atonements) 
must  be  used.  For  the  latter,  the  four  methods  (cF/rL^G'u^^/rsor^sOTr 
L-IEJ&®])  of  pacification,  disruption,  gift,  and  punishment  must  be  used.' 
See  Panchatantra. 

443.  '  Inter  omnia  difficilia  difiicillimum  est  niagnos  viros,  amice  illos 
tractando,  suos  facere.' 

444.  '  E-egem  cum  iis,  qui  se  majores  sunt,   ita  procedere  ut  suos 
reddat,  est  quid  qufilibet  potentia  validius.' 

445.  '  Cum  boni  ac   prudentes   ministri   regi   instar  oculorum  sint, 
quibus  ad  recte  procedendum   dirigatur,  quos  tales  attenta  considera- 
tione  deprehenderit,  rex  sibi  associet.' 

(gjLp  'use  circumspection.' 

446.  '  Nullum  est  malum  quod  hostes  inferre  possint  regi,  qui  proce- 
dere valeat  uti  proborum  ministrorum  amicum  decet.' 


NOTES.  257 

447.  '  Quisnam  valeat  ruiuam   inferre   regi,   qui   eos   sibi   adsciscit 
socios,  qui  non  dubitent,  cum  opus  fuerit,  eum  arguere.' 

448.  '  Rex  cujus  custodia  iis  caret  qui  euni  arguere  audeant,  quamvis 
nullus  sit  hostis,  qui  ejus  ruinam  moliatur,  ex  se  destruetur.' 

$)GO  and  ^&o  have  many  peculiarities.  H.B.  §  202.  Here  $)<s\j 
governs  2nd  case,  and  is  the  neg.  mode  of  a  verb  itself  signifying 
negation. 

449.  '  Sicuti  mercator,  qui  non  habet  capitale  nil  lucrari  potest,  ita 
rex  carens  sociis,  qui  ilium  arguendo  substentent,  stare  nequit  quin 
mat.' 

450.  '  Regi  decies  pejus  est  non  curare  amicitiam  proboruui  ac  pru- 
dentium  hominum,  quam  multorum  hostiuni  in  se  odium  procreare.' 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

Beschi  :  Ab  eorum  qui  infimae  conditionis  sunt,  nempe  improborum, 
atque  adulatorum  societati  cavere. 

La  =  (  little,  i.e.  low  and  mean  association.' 
451.  '  Magnus  vir  metuit  infimorum  societatem,  infimi  viri  proprium 
est  ejusmodi  homines  tanquam  consanguineos  sibi  associare.' 
Comp.  Ndl.  171  (good  and  bad  associations)  : 


Q  15  nfl  uj  ei;  <so 

0  15  fStu  r$l  'fa  -p 


1  In  youth  unwise,  though  men  with  lawless  ones  consort, 
And  walk  in  ways  of  sin  ;  yet,  if  they  join  the  band 
That  knows  the  righteous  path,  their  faults  shall  melt  away 

As  dew  from  off  the  grass  when  sunbeams  scorch.' 

jjyeroLD,  abstract  for  concrete. 

452.  '  Sicuti  aqua  ob  terrae,  per  quam  transit,  qualitatem  alia  fit,  et 
terrae    qualitatem    induit,   ita    hominum   ingenium    induit   qualitates 
eorum  quibuscum  degunt.' 

453.  '  Intellectus  nascitur  ex   propria  hominis  natura  cujusque  animo 
insita  ;  sed  aliquem  talem  aut   talem  dici  id  ex  societorum  qualitate 
provenit.' 

'  Noscitur  a  sociis.' 

• 

454.  '  Specialia  quaedam  judicia  videntur  esse  cuique  naturalia  ;  sed 
non  proveniunt  nisi  ex  societate.' 

33 


258  THE    KTJRBAL. 

455.  '  Societatis  munditiem  tanquam  forcipem   habendo,  mentis   et 
operis  nmnditiem  conservabis.' 

B.  says  ^<si/  =  <  forceps.'     But  qy.     See  jar. 

456.  '  Qui  animum  habet  a  culpa  depuratum  bonos  filios  procreabit : 
qui  societatem  habet  a  vitiis  depuratum,  non  procreabit  actiones  quae 
bonae  non  sint.' 

457.  'Animi   bonitas  hominibus   in  mundo  existentibus  felicitatem 
affert :  sociorum  bonitas  ad  omne  laudum  genus  assequendum  prodest.' 

458.  'Magna  licet  sit  animi  bonitas,  cordato  tamen  viro  sociorum 
bonitas  fructuosior  erit.' 

459.  '  Aeterna  beatitas  ob  uniuscuj usque  animi  probitatem  obvenit ; 
attamen  in  ea  assequenda  sociorum  bonitas  maximam  par  tern  habet.' 

*  Bonitas  sociorum  servat  ac  promovet  animi  probitatem.' 

460.  *  Nil  est  quod  majus  emolumentum  afferat,  quam  bona  societas  : 
nil  quod  magis  noxium  sit  quam  mala  societas.' 

Comp.  Ndl  171-180. 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

Beschi :  Non  nisi  post  maturam  considerationem  agere. 

COM.  :  *  This   would  result  from  Ch.  XLV.,  XLVI.     He  who  avoids  low 
company,  and  has  worthy  counsellors,  will  act  after  due  deliberation.' 

461.  '  Rex  facinus  ullum  non  debet  aggredi,  nisi  prius  mature  con- 
sideravit,  quid  ad  ilium  conficiendum  impendendum  sit,  quinam  effectus 
ex  eo  proveniat,  et  quidnam  emolument!  dicti  effectus  allaturi  sint.' 

462.  '  Ei,  qui  et  selectos  consiliarios  adhibendo,  et  mature  considerando 
operatur,  nullum  facinus  difficile  erit.' 

463.  *  Prudens  vir  non  aggreditur  facinus,  quod  ob  spein  lucri  caussa 
sit  amittendi  sortem  principalem.' 

464.  '  Incertum  finem  habens  facinus  non  incipit,  qui  nietuit  aliorum 
subsannationem,  si  forte  illud  non  conficiat,  aut  malum  exitum  habeat.' 

465.  '  R-egem  in  hostem  ferri  quin  prius  mature  consideraverit  non 
solum  aliqua  sed  omnia,   neque  confuse  sed  clare,  idem  erit  ac  hostem 
fortiorem  reddere  in  loco,  quern  occupat.' 

466.  '  Non   modo   facere,   quod  faciendum   non  est,  sed  etiain   non 
facere  quod  faciendum  est,  ruinain  affert.' 

467.  '  Non  nisi   post  maturam  reflexionein  aliquod  facinus  aggredi 
statuas,  nam  non  levis  culpa  erit  illud  aggredi  dicendo,  postea  consi- 
derabo.' 

468.  '  Quantumcumque  pro  aliqua  re  conficienda  labores,  ni  labora- 
veres   in   matura   consideratione   viarum,   quae  ad   illain   perficiendam 


NOTES.  259 

conducunt,  et   si  multi  coeuntes  tuus  labor  ne   incassum  eat  cavere 
conentur,  inutilis  erit.' 

469.  '  Etiamsi  ad  quid  perficiendum  omnia  bene  feceris,  tamen  inter 
ilia  error  obveniet,  nisi  cuj  usque  indolem  noscendo,  eidem  te  accomo- 
dando  rem  gesseris.' 

470.  '  Si  rex  suo  statui  indecora  fecerit,  mundus  ilia  non  probabit ; 
propterea  non  omnia  quae  proficua  sunt,  sed  ea  tantum,  quae  mundus 
non  contemnat,  media  eligere  debet  ad  quid  perficiendum.' 

^LnQLo/r®,   ellipsis    of  ifj)<faj(<o5)L&)  :    ^LQ    ffovQiurr 
1  what  is  inconsistent  with  his  (the  king's)  position.' 


CHAPTER  XLYIII. 

Beschi :  Suam  cum  hostis  potentid  comparare,  ac  caetera,  quae  ipse  et 
hostis  habent  media,  quantum  valeant,  ponderare.  [He  reads 
Qjedoj^fgev  as  though  from  <sueSl<s^.'] 

471.  'Bex    antequam    in    hostem    agat,   ponderare    debet   vigorem 
actionum,  quas  ipse  et  hostis  facere  possunt,  suain  et  hostis  potentiam, 
nee  non  robur  auxiliorum  quae  ipse  et  hostis  habent.' 

472.  *  Nil  erit  inassequibile  iis,  qui  perscrutando  quid  sibi  possibile 
sit,  caeteraque,  quae    scire    oportet   sciendo,  iisque  omni  contentione 
animum  applicando,  in  hostem  ferantur.' 

473.  '  Multi   suarn   invalidam   potentiam   non   considerantes,    animi 
elevatione   ducti,   se    potentiores    aggrediendo,    ante    finem   destructi 
perierunt.' 

e.«»L_  either  from  v. '  be  broken,'  <sSl.  Q<sir.=.1  which  will  be  broken,  is 
weak';  or  from  n.  *  possession,'  in  which  case  it  strengthens  <§L&  = 
*  their  possession.' 

474.  '  Qui  nee  vicinis  regibus  morem  gerendo  procedit,  nee  se  metiri 
scit,  et  iis,  qui  sibi  morem  gerunt  elatum  se  praebet,  festine  ruinam 
patietur.' 

475.  '  Etiam  axis  currus,   qui   plumis   oneratus   sit,    effringetur,   si 
nimium  oneres,  ita  ut  plumae  vim  currus  superent.' 

'  The  last  straw  that  breaks  the  camel's  back.' 

476.  '  Qui  usque  ad  rami  apicem  ascendit,  si  ad  apicem  transilienduin 
animum  elevet,  ilia  animi  elevatio  ei  vitae  finem  adducet.' 

477.  '  Largiri  pecuniam  considerando  ejus  mensuram,  via  est  quae  ad 
divitiarum  conservationem  ducit.' 

478.  'Quamvis  mensura  viae  per  quam  pecunia  venit  angusta  sit, 
nullum  erit  detrimentum,  dummodo  via  per  quam  abit,  non  sit  latior.' 


260  THE   KUEEAL. 

479.  '  Felicitas  ejus,  qui  vixit  non  considerando  mensuram  suorum 
reddituum,  fingendo  se  existere,  et  revera  non  existendo,  evanescendo 
peribit.' 

480.  *  Si  rex  munificentiam  ostentare  velit,  quae  non  ponderet  limites 
divitiarum  quas  habet,  brevi  tempore  ejus  operum  limites  breviabuntur.' 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

Beschi :  Facinori  aggrediendo  opportunum  tempus  noscere. 

481.  '  Cornix   cuculum,   a   quo    nocturno    tempore   vineitur,   diurno 
tempore   vincit :  regibus  ad   hostes  vincendos,  necessaria  est  temporis 
opportunitas.' 

<or®<i5s$<£&{TLL®<an<56)Lz,  or  simile.     III.  Gram.  204. 

482.  ;  Procedere   accoinodando   se   temporis   opportunitati   est  funis 
alligans  regi  felicitatem,  ut  numquam  ab  eo  discedat.' 

488.  *  Si  rex  necessariis  cum  instrumentis  ad  finem  assequendum, 
opportunum  ad  id  tempus  noscendo  operetur,  eritne  quidquam  ei 
difficile  ?  ' 

484.  *  Quamvis  totum  orbem  subjugare  cogites,  id  assequeris,  si  ad  id 
opportunum  tempus,  et  locum  seligendo  opereris.' 

485.  *  Reges  qui   cogitant   orbem  subjugare,   quamvis   indubitanter 
sibi  subditum  iri  videatur,  non  agunt  quidquam  priusquam  opportunum 
tempus  adveniat.' 

486.  '  Begem  animo  elevatum,  expectando  opportunum  tempus,  nil 
agere,  eandem  nobilem  conditionem  habet,  quam  in  pugna  (dum  manus 
miscere  non  convenit),  retrocedere,  ut  validius  pugnatur.' 

He  reads  pair^z*  unfit/  for  p&ir  '  a  ram.' 

Ariel :  '  L'abstention  de  qui  est  energetique  a  la  merite  de  faire  place 
au  bond  du  belier  luttant.' 

487.  *  Bex,  qui  prudens  sit,  statim  ac  ab  hostibus  injuriam  acceperit, 
non  manifestat  exterius  iram,  sed  etiam  intus  fovet,  opportunum  tempus 
expectando.' 

Graul :  '  Ein  kluger  Konig  grollt  nicht  sogleich  "  Hui,  hui !  " 
Nach  aussen  hin, — nein  innerlich — die  Zeit  ersehend.' 

488.  '  Si  hostem  videris  ad  quern  subjugandum  opportunum  tempus 
deest,  eum  suffer :  nam  cum  ejus  ruinae,  tempus  opportunum  videris, 
infra  tuum  caput  decidet.' 

Drew:  'If  a  king  meets  his  enemy,  let  him  show  him  all  respect, 
until  the  time  for  his  destruction  is  come ;  when  that  is  come,  his  head 
will  be  easily  brought  low.' 

Graul :  '  So  kommt  sein  Haupt  herab.' 


NOTES.  261 

489.  '  Dum  assecutus  fueris  quod  est  obtentu  difficillimum,  nempe 
temporis  opportunitatem,  eo  ipso  temporis  momento  aggredere  ea  quae 
prius  aggredi  difficile  erat.' 

490.  '  Ardeain    imitare   teinpore    quo   immota    manet,    et    eamdera 
imitare   quae   rostro    piscem    ferit,    statim    ac    opportunum    tempus 
advenerit.' 

Graul :        '  Den  Eeiger  nimm  zur  Eegel  zur  Wartezeit ! 
Zur  rechten  Zeit  sein  Zufahren.' 


CHAPTEE  L. 

Beschi :  In  proelio  locum  sibi  faventem,  et  Tiosti  noxium  seligere. 

491.  '  Antequam   videris   locum   aptum   ad   hostis   obsidionem,   noli 
quidquam  aggredi ;  noli  hostem  contemnere.' 

492.  'Etiam   iis,  qui  cum   odio   in  hostem   multam   potentiam  con- 
junctam  habent,  favor  arcis  propinquae  in  proelio  multa  afferet  emolu- 
menta.' 

493.  '  Etiam  ii  qui  viribus  carent,  vires  acquirendo  hostem  subjicient, 
si  eligendo  locum  sibi  faventem,  loci  favore   se  tuendo,  in  hostem  proe- 
lientur.' 

494.  '  Si  rex  non  se  approximet  hosti,  nisi  in  loco  sibi  favente,  hostis 
qui  venerat  cum  spe  ilium  vincendi,  earn  spem  amittet.' 

495.  '  Crocodillus  in  prof unda  aqua  omnes  vincet,  omnes  eum  vincent 
si  ex  aqua  egrediatur.' 

496.  '  Magnus  currus,  qui  in  rotis  vim  habet  pedibus  parem,  in  rnari 
non  currit,  et  navis,  quae  in  mari  currit,  in  terra  non  currit.' 

497.  '  Si  in  hostem  feratis  omnia  considerando,  et  faventem  tibi  locum 
eligendo,  nullus   tibi   auxiliator  necessarius   erit  praeterquam  timoris 
expulsio.' 

498.  '  Si  qui  parvum  habet  exercitum  ad  locum  sibi  faventem  eum 
ducat,  utut  magno  cum  exercitu  advenientium  hostium  fiducia  infrin- 
gatur.' 

499.  'Valde   arduum   est   aggredi   homines  in  sua  propria   statione 
degentes,   licet  arcem   non    habeant,   nee   in   militandi   arte   magnum 
nomen.' 

500.  '  Elephas,  qui  faciem  habet  penetrantem  lanceatorum  aciem,  et 
non  pavet  suum  frenatorem,  in  luto  ubi  pedes  penetrent,  a  quavis  vulpe 
necatur.' 

The  sense  of  (o<su60[r<smr(Lp&<51&<£<oiflj!)]  is  doubtful. 


262  THE   KURRAL. 


The  Com.  says  (Lp&Lo  is  by  meton.  for  Q«/ra3L/,  tusk  :    '  tusks  that 
impale  armed  men.' 

It  seems  to  mean  '  a  face  mighty  as  a  host  of  javelin-bearers.' 
Drew  :  '  Warrior-faced.' 


CHAPTER  LI. 

Beschi :  In  ministrorum  electione  de  ipsorum  aptitudine  se  certificare. 

501.  *  Dum  quis  ad  ministerium  eligitur,  debet  rex  indubitanter 
certificari  post  maturum  examen  quasnam  inclinationes  habeat  circa 
haec  quatuor,  nempe  virtutem,  divitias,  mulieres,  et  vitae  amittendae 


The  candidate  for  office  must  be  tested  as  to  his  strength  of  virtue, 
and  power  to  resist  temptations  of  avarice,  lust,  and  fear. 

502.  '  Qui  nobili  genere  natus ;  vitiis  infensus,  inf amiam  metuit,  ac 
vilia  facere  erubescit,  indubitanter  eligendus  est.' 

Birth,  unstained  character,  sensitive  honour,  and  conscientious  virtue 
are  needed  in  a  Minister. 

503.  '  Etiam  in  iis,  qui  difficiles  scientias  didicerunt,  et  nullum  habent 
ex  supradictis  defectibus,  si  attente  consideratur,  difficile  est  non  inveniri 
ignorantiam.' 

None  are  quite  perfect. 

504  '  Rex  ministerium  eligendo,  bonas  ac  malas  qualitates  conside- 
rando,  et  inter  illas  praesertim  praeponderantem  mature  examinando, 
juxta  id  quae  praeponderat,  eum  aptum  vel  ineptuni  judicet.' 

Take  the  best. 

505.  '  Lapis  Lydius,  quo  dignoscitur,  sitne  quis  magnus  an  vilis,  sunt 
cujusque  actiones.' 

Ariel :  '  La  pierre  de  touche  pour  la  grandeur  ou  la  bassesse,  c'est 
1'oeuvre  de  1'une  et  de  1'autre.' 

506.  '  Cave  ne  eligas,  qui  nil  habent ;  quia  hujusmodi  homines,  cum 
adhaesiones  non  habeant,  culpas  non  erubescunt  adniittere.' 

Needy  adventurers. 

507.  '  Eligere  ad  ministerium  eos,  qui  quae  scienda  sunt  ignorant,  ob 
specialem  affectum,  seu  propensionem  in  illos,  caussa  erit  in  quamvis 
stultitiam  ineundi.' 

Ruin  from  partiality  and  prejudice  in  the  selection. 

508.  'Eligere  ad  ministerium   ignotos,   quin   mature   considerentur 
eorum  indoles,  damna  afferet  ab  ipsa  regis  posteritate  inseparabilia.' 

No  untried  stranger  to  be  chosen. 


NOTES.  263 

509.  '  Sine   matura  discussione,  quemvis  eligere  noli ;    et  postquam 
eligendum  mature  consideraveris  de  ejus  qualitatibus  quas  certo  bonas 
nosti,  noli  suspicionena  sine  caussa  admittere.' 

Slow  in  choice,  generous  in  confidence. 

510.  '  Electio  sine  consideratione,  et  suspicio  circa  eum,  quum  probe 
noscendo  rex  elegerit,  irreparabile  damnuin  afferunt.' 

Manu,  vii.  141. 


CHAPTER  LII. 

Beschi :  Quomodo  debeat  rex  eos,  quos  elegit,  ad  officii 
exercitium  adhibere. 

THIS  refers  to  the  allotment  of  offices  and  tasks  among  those  whom 
the  king  has,  according  to  Ch.  LI.,  chosen :  employment  and  promotion. 

511.  '  Ille  ad  sublimia  munia  eligendus  est,  qui  bona  et  mala  con- 
siderans,  indolem  habet  non  gaudentem  nisi  de  bonis,  hoc  est,  honestis 
mediis.' 

512.  'Ille  ministerium  exerceat,  qui  regis  aerarium  augendo  ej usque 
felicitatem   procurando,  aerario  ac  felicitati  obvenientia   impedimenta 
mature  praevenire  sciat.' 

513.  'Ille  ad  ministerium  indubitanter  adhibendus  est,  qui  regem 
amet,  qui  sciat  quae  sui  muneris   sunt,  qui  in  deliberando  animo  non 
vacillet,  qui  divitias  et  voluptates  non  affectet,  ita  ut  nil  ex  his  quatuor 
desit.' 

f5<zsr@  may  be  taken  as  noun  or  adv. 

514.  '  Plurimi  qui  in  quovis  modo  considerati  indubitantem  ad  minis- 
terium apti  apparent,  in  agendo  alii  evadunt,  ac  apparebant.' 

515.  'Magni  momenti  facinora  injungenda  sunt  iis,  qui  opportuna 
media  eligere  sciendo,  iisque  obvenientia  impedimenta  sufferando,  ad 
finem  ilia  perducere  valeant,  non  vero  aliis  hac  qualitate  carentibus, 
quamvis  regi  sint  cari.' 

Comp.  159.     $j)svr  is  a  tfiriflmiu  :   G)ffiLi-\-^  +  ^esr  +  U[rsyr-\-@. 

516.  '  Rex  agentis  indolem  et  actionis  qualitatem  mature  considerando, 
si  haec  et  illam  cum  temporis  opportunitate  coiijungi  viderit,  earn  illi 
injungat.' 

517.  'Actionem  intentam,   instrumenta  ad  earn  perficiendam  neces- 
saria,  et  personam,  quae  ad  earn  couficiendam  eligilur,  mature  conside- 
rando, si  noveris  earn  actionem  ab  eo,  iis  cum  instruments  perfici  posse, 
et  actionem  et  instrumenta  in  cjus  manu  relinque.' 

518.  'Postquain    rex    alicujus   aptitudinem  ad   actionem   intentam 


264  THE    KUREAL. 

mature  consideraverit,  debet  ilium  ad  earn  perficiendam  aptum  facere, 
(h.e.,  ei  suppeditando  instrumenta,  quibus  perficere  illam  valeat).' 

519.  'Felicitas  deseret   regem  qui   aegre   fert,   quod    secum    fami- 
liariter  se  gerat  minister,  qui  semper  est  in  ministerio  occupatus,  ilium 
que  officium  tanquam  proprium  possidet.' 

520.  '  Si  regii  ministri  recti  sint,  omnia  recte  precedent,  ideo  reges 
quotidie  suorum  ministrorum  actiones  attente  explorare  debent.' 


CHAPTEE  Lin. 

Beschi :  Gonsanguineos  complecti,  i.e.  facere  ne  a  rege  divellantur. 
Drew :   '  On  kindness  to  relatives.'      G-raul :  Die  Angehorigen  umfassen. 

THIS  refers  to  the  kingly  '  circle '  (<s?/r)/r>Lo),  the  ring  of  courtiers,  inti- 
mate friends,  the  unofficial  society  of  the  palace,  and  in  this,  the  Eoyal 
family,  often  large.  In  Indian  history  the  king's  foes  have  been  often 
of  his  own  household. 

521.  '  Etiam  cum  pauper  evaseris,  antiquam  felicitatem  eoque  tempore 
accepta  beneficia  commemorare  non  nisi  consanguinei  solent.' 

The  urnrn-L-(S)sjGi>  is  in  a  series  of  acts ;  thus  2_ar  is  plural. 
Ariel   says  curiously  *.  '  C'est   au   sein  de  la  famille  qu'existe,   sans 
interet  quelconque,  le  culte  du  passe.' 

522.  '  Si  rex  consanguineos  sortiatur,  a  quibus  indesinenter  ametur, 
hi  regi  felicitatem  afferent  numquam  pullulare  desinentem ;    quia  si 
consanguinei  nunquam  a  rege  divellantur,  nova  semper  germina  pro- 
creabunt,  quae  regis  tutelam  et  felicitatem  augebunt.' 

523.  '  Felicitas  regis,  qui  non  habet  mensuram  commixtionis  (supple, 
cum  consanguineis),  similis  est  lacui  aqua  repleto  sine  profunditate  et 
sine  aggere  :  [quia  sicuti  hujus  modi  lacus,  quamvis  aqua  repletur,  cum 
ilium  detinere  nequeat,  statim  exsiccatur;  ita  rex,  qui  non  metitur  con- 
sauguineos  eadem  mensura  qua  se  metitur,  sed  eos  ut  extraneos  tractat, 
quamvis  aliquam  diu  felix  sit,  a  felicitate  deseretur  ;  quia  a  consanguineis, 
qui  regis  tutela  sunt,  derelinquetur].' 

524.  '  Fructus,  quern  rex  percipere  debet  ex  divitiis  sibi  obvenientibus 
est,  ita  se  gerere  cum  suis  consanguineis,  ut  ab  iis  semper  ambiatur 
(eos  nempe  paiticipes  faciendo  suarum  divitiarum).' 

525.  *  Si    rex   quae  consanguineis  opus  est,  liberaliter  dare,  iisque 
sese  affabilem  praebere  valeat,  a  confer taconsanguineorum  turba  circum- 
dabitur.' 

526.  '  In  magno  hoc  terrarum  orbe  nemo  plures  consanguineos  habet 
quam  ille,  qui  liberalis  est,  et  iram  non  servat.' 

527.  '  Cornix  inventum  cibum  non  occultando,   sed  caeteras  convo- 


MOTES.  265 

cando  comedit ;  similem  conditionem  habentes,  habebunt  etiam  emolu- 
ment urn,  quo  cornix  fruitur.' 

528.  '  Si  rex  non  omnes  aequaliter  respiciat,   sed  ad  unius  cuj  usque 
qualitatem  attendat,  hanc  in  eo  praerogativam  aspiciendo  plures  apud 
eum  rnantionem  facient.' 

529.  '  Consanguineorum,  qui  regem   deseruerunt,   amicitiam  iterum 
ut  conciliet,  satis  erit  tollere  caussam,  ob  quam  discordes  abierunt.' 

530.  *  Eum,  qui  sine  caussa  regem  deserit,   cum  ob  aliquam  caussam 
redit,  rex  prudens  admittere  in  suum  consortium  debet.' 


CHAPTEE  LIV. 

Beschi :  Non  esse  in  regimine  desidiosum. 

It  is  the  Apramdda  of  the  Dhamma- 


pada.  See  the  trans,  of  this  by  F.  Max  Miiller,  p.  9.  *  The  absence 
of  that  giddiness  or  thoughtlessness  which  characterizes  the  state  of 
mind  of  worldly  people.' 

531.  '  Ex  nimia  gaudiorum  et  deliciorum  exuberantia,  animi  relaxatio 
magis  regi  nocet,  quam  nimia  ira.' 

Drew  :  '  The  thoughtlessness  which  springs  from  the  intoxication  of 
great  joy.' 

532.  'Regi  desidia,  atque  oblivio  ejus  laudem  destruet,  non  secus  ac 
quotidie  mendicando  ventrem  replere  scientiam  destruit.' 

533.  '  Eegi  desidioso  modus  non  est  laudem  assequendi,  in  hoc  omnis 
generis  scientifici,  qui  in  mundo  sunt,  conveniunt.' 

534.  '  Meticulosis  arx  non   suffragatur :    ita   sane  desidiosis   eorum 
felicitas  nihil  prodest.' 

535.  '  Venientia  non  carendo  desidiosus  qui  vivit,  cum  ilia  obvenerint, 
facient  ut  suum  errorem  doleat.' 

536.  '  Si  rex  erga  omnes,  quovis   tempore,  sine  intermissione  soler- 
titer  se  gerendi  indolem  sortiatur,  nullum  erit  bonum  huic  simile.' 

537.  '  Nil  eorum,  quae  ardua  sunt,  inassequibile  erit,  se  omnia  solicito 
animo  caute  feceris.' 

538.  '  Quae  regem  laudabilem  faciunt  caveat  ne  omittat ;  nam  omis- 
sionem  conteninentibus  neque  post  mortem  bonum  obveniet.' 

Rather,  '  what  (wise  men)  have  (ever)  praised.'  If  these  words  and 
teachings  have  failed  to  impress  them  now,  even  successive  births  in 
seven  worlds  would  not  avail. 

539.  '  Cum  rex   suae  felicitatis  ebrius  desidia  corripitur,  meminerit 
eorum  qui  ob  suam  desidiam  misere  perierunt.' 

Ariel's  is  neat :  *  Songez  a  ceux  qui  perdirent  dans  V insouciance,  quand 
vous  vous  laisserez  enivrer  dans  les  delices.' 

34 


266  THE   KUEEAL. 

540.  '  Facile  erit  omnia,  quae  intenduntur  assequi,  si  mens  semper 
intenta  sit  in  iis,  quae  assequi  cogitarit.' 

Ariel :  '  Une  pensee  est  facile  a  realiser,  si  Foil  s'attache  iterativement 
a  penser  a  cette  pensee.' 


CHAPTEE  LY. 

Beschi :  Recti  sceptri  conditio ;    i.e.  justitia.      Ellis  :  '  The 
uprightness  of  the  sceptre.'    (Manu,  vii.  102,  103.) 

541.  'Equitatis  conditio  est  subditorum  culpas  considerando  absque 
nirnia  indulgentia,  erga  omne  personarum  genus  integritatein  affectando, 
et  a  legibus  statuta  supplicia  considerando,   his  et  non  majoribus  illas 
castigare.' 

Ellis :  '  Carefully  considering  the  facts,  without  yielding  to  feelings 
of  compassion,  acting  with  integrity  towards  all,  and  deciding  according 
to  law :  so  to  act  is  to  administer  justice.' 

542.  '  Quamvis  mundus  totus  pluviam  intuendo  vivat,  subditi  tamen 
nonnisi  regis  justitiam  intuendo  vivunt.' 

Ariel :         '  Grace  a  la  pluie  le  monde  entier  prospere  ; 

Grace  au  sceptre  du  prince  prospere  un  peuple.' 

543.  *  Etiam    divinarum    legum    et    virtutum    caussa    f uit    reguin 
justitia.' 

Ellis:  *  The  sceptre  of  a  king  (i.e.  the  administration  of  justice)  was 
the  cause  of  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  of  the  observance  of  the  law  of 
the  sacred  teachers.' 

544.  '  Totus  orbis  complectitur  pedes  regis,  qui   subditos  amando, 
justitiam  exercet,  eumque  vastissimae  ditionis  regem  efficiet.' 

Ellis:  'The  whole  world  embraceth  the  feet  of  the  monarch  of 
extended  dominion,  who,  in  administering  justice  (lit.  in  directing  his 
sceptre),  embraceth  all  his  subjects.' 

545.  '  In  regno  regis,  qui  suum  sceptrum  ad  debitum  locum  dirigit 
(hoc  est  justitiae  legibus  conformat),  opportunarn  pluviam  felix  messis 
sequetur.' 

Comp.  ver.  55. 

Ellis  :  '  In  the  country  of  which  the  sovereign  duly  administereth 
justice  (lit.  directeth  his  sceptre  to  the  right  place),  both  the  rain  falleth 
in  its  season,  and  the  harvest  is  abundant.' 

546.  '  Non  lancea  (i.e.  non  arma  bellica)  regi  victoriam  tribuunt,  sed 
ejus  sceptrum  ;  si  tortuosum  illud  non  sit  (i.e.  si  rex  Justus  sit).' 

Ellis  :  'It  is  not  the  lance  which  giveth  victory  to  a  king,  but  his 
sceptre  (the  symbol  of  justice)  if  it  never  deviate  from  right.' 


NOTES.  267 

547.  '  Eex  defendit  totum  orbem.     Eegem  verb  defendit  aequitas,  si 
nunquam  ei  contraria  faciat.' 

Ellis  :  '  A  king  defeudeth  the  whole  world  ;  and  justice  (if  strictly 
administered),  defendeth  the  king.' 

548.  '  Eex,  qui  nee  affabilitatis  decus  habet,  nee  justitiae  leges  con- 
siderat,  neque  quod  aequum  est  facit,  ob  vituperio  dignum   hujusinodi 
statum,  ipsemet  se  destruet,  quin  hostes  opus   sint   ad   eum  destru- 
endum.' 

549.  'Eegi,  qui  subditos  ab  exteris  hostibus  defendendo,  eorumque 
sollicitani  curam  gerendo,  ipsorum  crimina  plectit,  id  vitio  verti  non 
debet :  est  ejus  officium.' 

550.  *  Homicidas,  eisque  similes  facinorosos  cum  rex  plectit,  perinde 
facit,  ac  qui  inter  segetes  nascentia  lollia  evellit.' 

Ellis  :  *  The  act  of  the  king  in  punishing  those  guilty  of  murder 
resembleth  the  weeding  of  green  corn.'     Manu,  vii.  10. 


CHAPTEE  LVI. 

Beschi :  Sceptri  Tortuositas ;  i.e.  injusta  g-ubernatio. 
Ellis  :  '  The  obliquity  of  the  sceptre.' 

551.  '  Eo,   qui   homicidae   officium   exercet,   crudelior   est    rex,   qui 
exercet    officium    vexandi   subditos,    et    aequitati    contraria    faciendo 
procedit.' 

552.  '  Eum  qui  sceptrum   obtinet,  praeter  consueta  tributa,  subdi- 
torum  bona  petere,  perinde  est  ac  latronein  armatum  viatori  dicere  : 
da  tuarn  pecuniam.' 

Ariel :     '  "  Donne  "  dit  le  (brigand)  appuye  sur  sa  lance  : 
Ainsi  niendie  le  (roi)  appuye  sur  son  sceptre.' 

553.  '  Eegis,  qui  quotidie  subditorum   facinora  inquirendo,  eos  juxta 
leges  non  punit,  regnum  quotidie  majorem  in  ruinam  verget.' 

Ellis  :  '  If  a  king  enquiring  day  by  day  administer  not  justice,  day 
by  day  will  his  kingdom  fall  to  ruin.'     Manu,  vii.  16,  &c. 

554.  'Eex,  qui  tortuosum  sceptrum  obtinet   non  considerando  jus- 
titiae leges,  et  adeptum  aurum  et  (qui  novum  daturi  sunt),  subditos 
simul  amittet.' 

Ellis :  '  The  king  who  inconsiderately  neglecteth  the  administration 
of  justice,  will  lose  both  his  wealth  and  his  subjects.' 

555.  '  Lacrimae  quas  subditi  fundunt  tolerando  impares  vexationem 
quam  a  rege  patiuntur,  limae  sunt  quae  eo  ipso  die  regis  felicitatem 
minuunt.' 


268  THE   KtTREAL. 

Ellis :  '  The  tears  of  those  who  suffer  from  the  injustice  of  the  prince 
are  files  by  which  his  felicity  is  worn  away.' 

556.  '  Begis  perpetuatio  fit  a  sceptri  rectitudine ;  haec  si  desit,  quae- 
cunque  sit  regi  laus,  perpetua  non  erit.' 

Ellis:  'From  the  uprightness  of  the  sceptre  (from  their  justice) 
princes  obtain  immortal  renown ;  if  deficient  in  this  respect  the  glory 
of  princes  cannot  last.' 

557.  '  Qualis  est  pluviae  carentia  respectu  terrae,  talis  est  clementiae 
carentia  in  rege  respectu  suorum  subditorum.' 

558.  '  Ei,  qui  regi  injusto  subditus  est,  praestat  pauperem  esse  quam 
divitem.' 

Ellis :  '  It  is  worse  than  poverty,  to  be  subject  to  the  sceptre  (sway) 
of  an  unjust  prince.' 

559.  '  Si  rex   a  justicia  deflectendo  operetur,  pluvia  ab   ejus   regno 
deflectendo,  coelum  pluere  non  sinet.' 

560.  '  Si  qui  subditorum  servator  est,  eos  non  tutetur,  in  ejus  regno 
vaccae  lac  non  dabunt,  et  Brachmanes  sua  rnunia  deserent.' 


CHAPTER  LVII. 

Beschi :  Subditos  non  terrificare. 

Ariel :  Eloignement  de  causer  la  terreur. 

Drew :  '  Against  acting  with  cruelty  :  against  a  reign  of  terror.' 

THIS  is  closely  allied  to  the  subject  of  the  last  chapter:  that  regards 
injustice,  this  specially  forbids  harshness. 

561.  '  Rex  absque  passione  subditorum  culpas  examinare,  et  ne  iterum 
eas  committant,  aequa,  et  non  majori,  paena  castigare  debet.' 

562.  'Reges,  qui  diu  duraturain  felicitatem  a  se  inseparabilem  cupiunt, 
debent  in  plectendis  subditis  cum  magna  ira  manum  extollere,  sed  leniter 
percutere.'     Manu,  vii.  140. 

Ariel :         '  Poursuivez  rudement  et  frappez  mollement, 

Si  vous  desirez  1'ininterruption  d'une  longue  prosperite.' 

563.  '  Si  rex  tortuosum  sceptrum  obtineat,  subditisque  terrifica  faciat, 
procul  dubio  festine  ruinam  patietur.' 

564.  '  Eex,  de  quo  fama  est,  quod  sit  subditis  terrificus,  aevi  diminu- 
tionem  patiendo,  festine  peribit.' 

565.  '  Quantumcunque  magna  sit  felicitas  regis,  qui  subditis  difficilem 
aurem  praebet,  eosque  terrifico  vultu  aspicit,  perinde  erit  ac  si  daemon 
aspexerit  (i.e.  evanesce t).' 

What  the  daemon  has  looked  on,  is  said  to  be  useless. 


NOTES.  269 

566.  'Regis    dura  subditis   verba   loquentis,    clementiaque   carentis, 
quantumcunque   magna  felicitas,   quin   diu   duret,    eo    ipso    tempore 
destruetur.' 

567.  'Dura  verba,  et  aequum  transiliens   nmlcta,   sunt   veluti    lima 
quae  minuit  in  rege  fortitudinem  qua  hostes  vincat.' 

568.  '  Eegis,  qui  ministris  negotia  committendo,  cum  iis  ea  non  con- 
siderat,  si  dum  male  succedunt  iis  irascatur,   felicitas  minuetur  (quia 
ab  iis,  qui  eum  juvare  possunt,  deseretur).' 

569.  '  Eex,  qui  sibi  non  construxerit  arcem  antequam  ab  hoste  aggre- 
diatur,  ad  hujus  adventum  timore  correptus,  statim  corruet.' 

Drew  says  '  a  defence  in  the  love  of  his  subjects.' 

570.  'Plus    aequo    rigidus    rex    nonnisi    regni    leges-  ignorantibus 
adhaeret :    sed  quodnam  est  praeter  hoc  hominum    genus   quod   orbi 
gravius  ?     Nil  sane.' 

But  he  explains  L3<ossft&(§LG  by  '  sibi  sociat.' 


CHAPTER  LVIIL 

Beschi :  dementia. 

THIS  Ch.  insists  on  the  same  subject ;  but  states  positively  what  the 
last  inculcates  negatively.  Here  benignity,  the  reverse  of  harshness,  is 
enjoined. 

571.  '  Hie  mundus  non  subsistit,  nisi  quia  in  regibus  invenitur  valde 
pulchra  indoles,  quae  dicitur  dementia.' 

572.  '  Propter  clementiam  viget  mundi  cursus  (si   quidem  sine  mutua 
sufferentia  necnon  mutua  charitate  in  subveniendo  egenis,  qui  effectus 
clementiae  sunt,  mundus  non  subsisteret)  :  quid  ergo  praestat  esse  in 
niundo,  qui  dementia  carent,  nisi  ut  terrae  grave  pondus  afferant  ? ' 

573.  '  Musicalia  instrumenta  quid  juvant,  nisi  musicas  voces  edant ; 
eodem  modo  oculi  quid  juvant,  nisi  clementiam  habeant?  ' 

Graul:  '  Das  Auge  soil  gleichsam  das  ganze  Thun  des  Menschen  har- 
monisch  accompagniren.  Ein  huldloses  Auge  bei  dem  besten  Thun  ist 
wie  disharmonische  Musik  bei  dem  besten  Gesange.' 

574.  'Quarnvis  in  fronte  adesse  videantur,  quid   prosunt  oculi,  qui 
aequum  non  transiliente  carentia  carent  ?  ' 

575.  '  Oculorum  propria  pulchritudo  est  dementia:  si  ista  non  adsit, 
non  oculi,  sed  foramina  vocandi  sunt  ?  ' 

576.  '  Terra  infixis  arboribus  similes  sunt  ii,  quibus  quainvis  oculi  in 
fronte  infixi  sint,  dementia  carent.' 

577.  '  Qui  dementia   carent,   orbi   sunt ;    qui    orbi  non    sunt,   nee 
dementia  carent.' 


270  THE    KUEEAL. 

578.  '  li,  qui  clementiam  exercere  valent,  quin  justitiae  legibus  dero- 
gatur,  quandem  proprietatem  habent  in  hunc  orbem.     [Sensus  est :  quod 
orbis  regimen  Us  debetur,  qui  cum  justitid  clementiam  sociare  valent.~]' 

579.  '  Etiam  in  eos,  qui    iram  concitandi  conditionem   habent  (h.e. 
etiam   in  reos),  clementer   se   habendo,  iis  ignoscere  optima  qualitas 
est.' 

580.  '  Qui,  etiamsi  videant  sibi  venenum  porrigi,  illud  sumant,  nee 
irritentur,  clementiae  inhiant  ab  omnibus  celebrandae.' 


CHAPTEE  LIX. 

Beschi :  Exploratoris  officium.      Ariel :  Espionnage. 
Graul :    Auskundschaftung. 

SPIES,  or  scouts.     The  Com.  says :  '  Enemies,  strangers,  and  friends 
alike  must  be  watched.'     Manu,  vii.  122,  153, 154. 

581.  '  Exploratores  habere,  et  regni  jura  callere,  certus  esto :  quod 
regi  sunt  instar  duorum  oculorum :  [quia  per  exploratores   scit,   qui 
subditi  aut  hostes  agunt :  per  leges  scit,  quid  cum  iis  agendum] .' 

582.  '  Eegis  officium  est  (i.e.  regis  interest)  quotidie  omnia,  quae  ab 
omnibus  fiunt,  statim  scire.' 

583.  *  Eegi,  qui  nescit,  quanti  intersit  per  exploratores  omnia  scire, 
nulla  ad  hostes  vincendos  patet  via.' 

584.  *  Ministros  regis,  ejus  conjunctos,  ejus  hostes,  hos  omnes,  attente 
inspicere  debet  exploratory 

585.  'Quihabitum  (seufiguram)  sumendo,quae  exploratis  suspicionem 
non  afferat,  quamvis  ab  iis  dignoscatur,  sine  tiniore  quaelibet  tormenta 
potius  patiatur  quam  se  prodat,  ille  sane  optimus  erit  explorator.' 

586.  '  Eeligiosorum,  aut  peregrinantium  personam  simulando,  impene- 
trabilia  loca  penetrando,  omnia  attente  explorando,   quoquomodo  tor- 
quatur,  titubare  non  debet  explorator. ,' 

587.  '  Hostiam  secreta  audire  ut  valeat  nitendo,  ea  quae  scivit,  sine 
dubitatione  referre  debet  explorator.1 

588.  '  Quae  explorator  explorando  rettulit  secreta,  iterum  per  alium 
exploratorem  exploranda  sunt.' 

589.  '  Kex  plures  habeat  exploratores^  sed  ita  ut  unus  de  alio  nesciat, 
omnesque  ad  explorandum  mittat :    si   omnium  verba  consentiant,  de 
exploratis  securus  erit,' 

590.  '  Exploratori  ne  quid  speciale  feceris,  quod  caeteri  sciant ;  nam 
si  feceris,  statim  publicum  net  officium,  quod  ille  secrete  exercebat.' 


NOTES.  271 

CHAPTER  LX. 

Beschi  :  Animositas.    Ariel  :  Force  d'dme.    G-raul  :  Geistes-starke. 

THE  etymology  suggests  *  elevation  of  mind.'  —  See  Vocab. 

591.  '  Qui  animum  habent,  proprie  dici  potest,  quod  quid  possideant  ; 
qui  animo  carent,  quod  possident,  non  possident   (quia  suam  propter 
inertiam  illud  amittent).' 

592.  '  Animum,  qui  ab  homine  inauferabilis  est,  possidere,  vere  divitem 
facit  ;    nam   divitiarum  possessio  neque  constans  est,  et  possessorem 
relinquit.' 

593.  '  Qui    animo    decidere    nescit,    etiamsi    divitias    amittat,    non 
affligitur  ;  quia  iterum  eas  acquirendi  remedium  habet,  nempe  animosi- 
tatem.' 

594.  '  Divitiae  ipsae  viam   percunctando  apud  ilium   accurrent,  qui 
constantem  animositatem  habet,' 

595.  '  Flores,  qui  in  aqua  nascuntur,  crescunt  tantum  quantum  aqua 
crescit  ;  eodem  modo  hominum  celsitudo  crescet  ad  mensuram  animosi- 


The  lotus  in  the  tank,  with  its  long,  flexible,  winding  stem  is  always 
on  the  surface,  rising  or  falling  with  the  depth  of  the  water,  unaffected 
by  any  vicissitude.     So  '  Man  is  man  and  master  of  his  fate/ 
Robinson's  is  neat  : 

'  The  water's  depth  's  the  lily's  length  : 

The  height  of  man  's  his  mental  strength/ 
Comp.  Ndl  245. 

1  Though  by  the  briny  sea,  sweet  waters  spring  ;  by  hill, 
Bitter  with  salt  the  waters  gush.     Thus  as  their  race 
Are  not  the  men,  —  Lord  of  the  dashing  sea's  cool  shore  !  — 
The  men  are  as  their  minds  !  ' 

596.  '  Quidquid   (rex)  cogitet,  sublimia  semper  cogitet,  quod  si  ilia 
non  successerint,  saltern  cogitatus  ille  animositatis  conditioiiein  habebit, 
ac  proinde  regem  sublimem  faciet.' 

597.  '  Si  damna  obveniant  animo  non  decidunt  animosi  viri,  sicut 
elephas,  licet  a  sagittarum  fasce  feriatur,  non  retrocedit.' 

598.  *  Animo  carens  (rex)  nunquam  obtinebit  hanc  gloriam,  ut  dicere 
possit  :  ego  in  hoc  mundo  potens  sum.' 

599.  '  Quanivis   magnitudine   atque   acutis    dentibus    superior   sit, 
elephas  timidus  net  si  a  tigre  invadatur.' 

600.  '  Animus  ratiocinii  sedes  est  ;  qui  ergo  animum   non  habet,  non 
pro  nomine,  sed   pro  quadam  arboris   specie  hominis  figura  praeditae, 
habendus  est.' 


272  THE    KURRAL. 


CHAPTER  LXI. 

Beschi :  Solertia,  h.e.  impigrum  esse. 

601.  '  Nobilitatis  splendor,  qui  in  familia  nunquam  defecit,  pigritiae 
tenebris  si  locum  dederit   [adhaeserit,  irrepserit],  tenebrescendo  extin- 
guetur.' 

Here  Lo/rds^irTTO.  See  SdnJchya  KdriM,  xxv.,  xxxvi.  (H.H.Wilson's 
ed.)  Comp.  Gitd,  xiv. 

602.  '  Stude  ut  pigritia  in  te  extinguatur,  si  tuam  familiam  nobilitare 
desideras,' 

G-raul :  '  Wer  will  dass  sein  Stamm  stammig  werde, 

Der  wandle  so,  dass  die  Lassigkeit  von  ihin  lasse.' 

603.  '  Insipientis  illius,  qui  quam  vitare  debet  pigritiam  sibi  adopta- 
verit,  nobilitati  in  qua  natus  est,  finis  obveniet  omnes  ej  us  in  contrarium 
conatus  praeveuiendo.' 

604.  '  Prosapiae  splendor  extinguetur,  plurimaque  insurgent  damna 
in  iis,  qui   nee  pigritiam  vitant,  neque  assiduum  laborandi  exercitium 
habent.' 

605.  '  Procrastinatio,  oblivio,  segnities,  somnus  :  quatuor  haec  orna- 
menta  sunt,  quibus  se  exornare  avent  ii,  qui  suae  ruinae  student.' 

See  swan-  and  jiv.  There  seems  to  be  a  double  meaning,  or  £)C)6u«j>i_. 
Q<s(5)^?jr/r/r  =  ' those  pertaining  to  the  waters  of  destruction,'  or  'those 
whose  fate  is  destruction.'  Comp.  Gitd,  xiv.  8. 

606.  '  Etiamsi  omnium  potentissimi  regis  divitiae,  eos  insectentur 
(hoc  est  absque  ullo  labore  iis  obveniant)  difficilimum  est,  ut  ex  iis 
magnarn  utilitatem  percipiant  qui  pigri  sunt.' 

607.  '  Eorum  qui  bona  concilia  dandi  omcium  exercent,  reprehensiones 
quin  mussitet   audire   cogetur,   qui   segnitiei    amore   captus,   laudabile 
assidue  laborandi  exercitum  non  habet.' 

608.  '  Si  rex  in  sua  familia  segnitiei  locum  dederit,  haec  efficiet  ut 
suis  hostibus  servus  evadet ;   quia  quum  iis  resistendi  vim  non  habeat, 
iis  obternperare  oportebit.' 

609.  '  Quisque  in  sua  familia  oborta  damna  reparabit,  si  se  a  segnitie 
sectanda  averteret.' 

610.  '  Impiger  rex  sine  intermissione  assequetur  totam  terram,  quam 
caeteri  reges  nonnisi  suis  pedibus  dimetiendo  assecuti  sunt  (i.e.  absque 
mora  dominus  evadet  regnorum,  qui  caeteri  reges  nonnisi  multo  labore, 
ac  tempore  adepti  sunt).' 

This  may  refer  to  Vishnu,  who  was  said  to  have  measured  the 
universe  with  three  steps. 


NOTES.  278 

CHAPTER  LX1L 

Beschi :  Assidue  laborare. 

may  be  '  the  work  of  a  man  ' :  c$@5«(3jffl<uaS186Br,  or  ^^LnsSfocr 
(atf.  Qpir.)  '  the  work  which  rules,  exerts  itself' 

611.  '  Assiduus  labor  magnum  cuique  spiritum  dabit,  qui  affectet  non 
decidere  animo,  quum  quid  difficile  videtur.' 

He  makes  <F/rffl//r6a>tn  =  <  aniinum  non  despondere,'  and  reads  ^(njtsoLa 
iLi<5G>t—<£Q<g6Br  n$  ;  but  is  evidently  at  a  loss. 

612.  '  Quum  quid  incoeperis,  cave  ne  illud  destruas  non  perficiendo  ; 
ii   enim   qui   ad   finern   perducunt    quod   in   actione    deest,   nunquam 
sapientum  aestimationem  amittent.' 

The  idea  is,  '  Nothing  succeeds  like  success.' 

613.  '  Plurimis  liberaliter  largiendi  gloria  nonnisi  in  assidue  laborente 
indole  residet ;    (quia   qui   assidue   non   laborant,  nee  quid  largiantur 
habent).'  ' 

614.  'Sicuti  timidi  alicujus  brachium   quemvis   ferire   velit,   ensem 
vibrare  nescit ;  is  qui  assidue  non  laborat,  quamvis  liberalis  esse  velit, 
ob  suam  paupertatem  liberalitatem  exercere  non  poterit.' 

Comp.  727. 

615.  '  Qui   non  delicias  sed  laboriosam  vitain   optat,  hie  sane  suae 
familiae  fulcrum  erit,  earn  ab  omni  dainno  liberare  valens.' 

616.  '  Assiduus  labor  divitias  affert ;  assidui  laboris  defectus  nonnisi 
paupertatem  inducit.' 

617.  '  Apud  pigros  residere  infelicitatis  Deam,  quam  Mudevi  vocant, 
in  impigri  assiduo  labore  Deam  felicitatis,  quam  LaJcshmi  vocant,  suam 
sedem  figere,  aiunt  sapientes.' 

^/rtusrojruS(SO)srr=Padma= Lakshmi,  '  goddess  of  good  fortune.'  See 
Dowson's  Class.  Diet,  of  Hindu  Myth.,  sub  voce.  {LpQjseQ^'  ancient 
goddess '  ;  S.  Mahamaya. 

618.  '  Non  est  vitio  vertendum  alicui,  si  minus  sapiens  sit ;  sed  ei  qui 
quid   utile  sit,  et  qua  via  assequi  possit  optime   sciendo,  segnitie  victo 
illud  omittere  magnum  est  vitium.' 

So  Ariel :  '  Le  manque  de  sens  a  mil  nest  reprochable.'     See  QufrfSl. 

619.  '  Quamvis  ob  contrarium    fatum  non   assequaris  id   quod   tuo 
labore    assequi   intendis,    nihilominus   tuus   labor   nunquam   tibi    non 
afferet  salarium  tui  corporis  fatigationi  debitum  (i.e.  nunquam  omnino 

\    incassum  ibit).' 

In  this  and  the  following  couplet  Tiruv.  strongly  asserts  that  *  man  is 
master  of  his  fate.'  This  is  hardly  consistent  with  Ch.  xxxvin. 

620.  'Ipsum  removeri  fatum   videbunt,  qui   animo   non   deficientes, 
'      sine  intermissione  assidue  laborant.' 


35 


274  THE    KURRAL. 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 

Beschi  :  In  adversis  non  turbari.      Ariel  :  Impassibilite  dans  le  malheur. 
Drew  :  '  Against  losing  energy  in  difficulty.'      Com.  :  §) 


621.  *  Cum  adversitas  venerit,  laetus  te  ostende  ;  nam  nullum  aliud 
est  medium  utilius  quam  cum  ea  associatum  incederas.' 

Beschi  quotes  a  passage  in  illustration  from  Seneca  :  '  Adversa  ad- 
versis adversa  non  sunt,  sed  aversis  ;  nempe  si  ab  adversitate  f  ugias, 
et  ob  ejus  adventum  tristeris,  adversitas  erit  ;  si  neque  tristeris,  neque 
ob  ejus  adventum  a  tuo  itinere  dinaovearis,  sed  una  cum  ilia  coeptum 
iter  confeceris,  adversitas  non  erit.' 

Com.  says  :  201/7-  <a/^  ^Qiu  .jyju.  Supply  &.&&LQLQ  :  '  that  is  the  best  : 
nothing  can  compare  with  that.' 

622.  '  Pelago  ipsi  pares  adversitates,  si  tales  aestimes  quales  sapien- 
tibus  videntur,  adversitates  non  erunt.' 

The  meaning  is  :  '  Troubles  are  imaginary  ;  try  to  grasp  them  in 
thought,  and  they  vanish.'  The  Vedanta  regards  all  as  delusion  :  ponder 
this,  and  sorrow  disappears.  Gitd,  xviii.  70-74. 

623.  '  Qui  ex  adversitate  non  affligitur,  ipsi  adversitati  afflictionem 
causabit.' 

624.  'Qui  bovi  similis  est  (Ti.e.  qui  boveui  imitatur),  per  cuncta  sale- 
brosa  loca,  quin  desistat,  carrum  trahentem,  hie  adversitatibus  quoddam 
genus  adversitatis  est.' 

625.  '  Plurimae  adversitates,  aliae  aliis   supervenientes,  licet  obviam 
fiant  ;   ab  eo,  qui  suam  constantiam  non  deseret,  adversitatem  patiendo, 
victas  manus  dabunt.' 

626.  '  Num  afflictionem  patietur,  si  pauper  fiat,  qui  cum  dives  est, 
extollere  se  nescit.' 

627.  '  Sapientes  propter  adversa  non  turban  tur,   scientes  propriam 
esse  humani  corporis  conditionem  scopum  esse  adversitatis  ictibus.' 

628.  '  Qui  delicias  nonquaerit,  et  secum  statuit,  prospera  cum  adversis^ 
mixta  habere,   naturalem  esse  hujus  mundi  conditionem,  in  adversis 
animo  non  corruet.' 

629.  '  Qui  inter  prospera  de  prosperitate  non  gaudet,  nee  inter  adversa 
de  adversitate  tristabitur.' 

630.  '  In  rege  cujus  actionibus  adversitates  obveniunt,  eas  tamquam 
favores    aestimare,    quia    gloriosiorem    reddunt    actionem,    quam  -iis 
superatis  conficere  debet,   praerogativa  est  ab  ipsis  suis  hostibus 
aestimabilis.' 


\ 


NOTES.  275 


PARS  II. 


Beschi:  ^]iEJsshluJ6v  =  Status  regii  proprietates. 
o=.De  conciliariorum  proprietibus. 


CHAPTEE  LXIY. 

De  ministro  regie.     Manu,  vii.  58  et  seq. 

631.  '  Eegius  Minister  in  agendo,  ad  id  uecessaria  instrumenta,  tempus, 
agendi  modum,  necnon  actionis  difficultates  in  praeveniendo  exinrius 
ease  debet.' 

Ariel  translates  u^trsssn-.^  '  font  la  grandeur  d'un  .  .  .'  ;  Graul  :  '  haec 
esse  eximia,'  '  dass  ist  Ministerschaf  t,  wenn  .  .  .  vortreffiich  sind.' 

632.  '  Cum   quinque  supradictis   qualitatibus   debet  insuper  regius 
minister  in  animi  firmitate,  in  amore  erga  subditos,  in  juris  peritia,  et 
in  indefesse  laborando  eximius  esse.' 

The  <$QT)oB  or  cF/r^sBr/s^sfr  in  631  are  twofold:  money  and  men  — 
G^Soor,  Qun-(^(srr  (Ch.  LXXVI.,  LXXVII.).     Thus  there  are  five. 

633.  '  Inter  regis  hostes  in  regem  confoederatos  discidium  inducere, 
regis  amicos  ac   fautores  ne  amicitiam  deserant  amice  tractare,  et  qui 
regem   deseruerunt   ut   iteruin    regi    foederentur   obtinere,   qui   valet, 
optimus  Minister  est.' 

634.  '  Negotia  mature  considerare,  ad  ea  conficienda,  quae  magis  apta 
sunt  media  adhibere,  et  ita  loqui  ut  omnes  in  suam  sententiam  trahat, 
qui  valet,  optimus  Minister  erit.' 

635.  '  Insuper  Minister  debet  plene  imbutus  esse  notitia  virtutum  regi 
convenientium,  affabilem  se  praebere,  callere  modum  agendi  diversum 
pro  temporum  diversitate,  ac  ingenii  subtilitatem  habere.' 

636.  *  lis,  qui  cum  naturali  ingenii  subtilitate  scientias  quoque  acqui- 
sitas  habeant,  quidnam  est  utut  subtilissimum,  imperceptibile.' 

637.  '  Etiamsi  agendi  modum  ex  scientiis  didiceris,  attamen  mundi 
mores  discendo,  juxta  illos  age.' 

638.  '  Quamvis  rex  nee  gnaris  obaudiat,  et  ipse  nescius  est,  tamen 
apud  ipsum  Ministri  officiuin  exercens  obligationem  habet  eum  hortandi, 
ne  agat,  quae  agenda  non  sunt.' 

639.  '  Melius  est  regi  a  septuaginta  millionibus  hostium  oppugnari, 
quam  Ministrum  habere  contrarium.' 

The  other  reading  is  Co  airy.  Lq^p/i  (as  in  1061)='  will  be   700  million- 
fold  great.' 

640.  '  Quamvis  Minister,  quae  agenda  sunt,  eo  quo  decet  modo,  mature 
consideret,  nunquam   tamen  ea    perficiet,  si  dexteritatem  pariter  non 
habeat.' 

Tact  must  accompany  caution. 


276  THE    KUEBAL. 

CHAPTER  LXV. 

Beschi :   Verborum  efficacia,  i.e.  suadendi  vim  habem  locutio. 

THIS  amplifies  633-35. 

.  641.  '  Linguae  bonitas  (hoc  est  verborum  vis  suasiva),  in  sapientuin 
aestimatione  Minis trum  bonum  facit,  nam  hujusmodi  bonitas  caeteras 
omnes  bonitates  antecellit.' 

642.  '  Cum  ex  Ministri  verbis  summurn  regi  bonum,  ac  sumnium  oriri 
possit  malum,  debet  Minister  in  suis  verbis  valde  circumspectus  esse.' 

643.  '  Ministri  verba  talia  esse  debent,  ut  amicos  in  ainicitia  magisque 
confirment,  et  in  adversariis  amicitiae  desiderium  creent.' 

Graul  says  c^<s^n-uj  =  c^<surr<s^ ;  but  <£6G)<suj  ^tu(^S))  is  better. 

644.  *  Minister  in  loquendo  respectum  habeat  ad  statum,  seu  condi- 
tionem  eorum,  quibus  cum  loquitur ;  nam  nil  est  quod  sit  hoc  virtuti 
magis  consonum,  nil  quo<J  majus  emolumentum  afferat.' 

Speech  to  be  adapted  to  the  audience. 

645.  '  Minister   verbum   non   proferat   nisi   postquam  sciverit   (seu 
noverit),  nulluni  aliud  esse  verbuin  quod  suum  verbum  viiicere  possit.' 

646.  '  Qui  in  praeclaro  Ministri  officio  perfectus  est,  is  loqui  debet  ita, 
ut  cum  desiderio  audiatur ;  cum  verb  caeteri  loquuntur,  non  ad  eorum 
loquendi  modum,  sed  ad  negotium  quod  afferunt,  animum  intendere.' 

647.  '  Euni  qui  in  loquendo  suasivam   vim  habet,  oblivioni  obnoxius 
non  est,  nee  auditorium  timet,  quisnam  in  oppositione  vincere  poterit  ? 
Nemo  sane.' 

648.  'Orbis   celeriter    se   subjiciet  illis,  si  in  loquendo   ordinate   ac 
suaviter  loqui  valentes  habuerit.' 

649.  '  Asiatice  loqui  affectant,  qui  pure  et  laconice  loqui  nesciunt.' 

650.  '  Qui   quod  didicerunt  clare  et  perspicue  caeteris  conimunicare 
nesciunt,  similes  sunt   floribus,  qui  ramo  adhaerent,  sed  odorem  non 
reddunt.' 


CHAPTEE  LXYI. 

Beschi :  Puritas  actionum. 

NOT  good  words  only,  but  pure  actions  are  necessary. 

651.  '  Bonum    auxiliatorem   habere,  temporale    modo    emolumentum 
dabit ;    sed   puritas   actionum,   cum   temporal!   emoluinento,   virtutem 
quoque,  eique  subsequens  in  coelo  premium  dabit.' 

652.  '  Semper  vitandae   sunt   actiones,   qui   nee   agenti  laudem    nee 
caeteris  bonum  afferunt.' 


NOTES.  277 

653.  '  Vitare  omnino  debet  laudem  destruentes  actiones,  qui  in  mundo 
praeclarus  esse  vult.' 

^  ^j  LD  :  this  is  an  obsolete  form.  Comp.  Tel.  Avu  \  du  \  mu.  The 
uiid.  particle  ^3=  Tel.  du.  (Intro,  p.  xxi.) 

654.  'Neque   ut   aliquod   damnum  effugiant,    indecora   faciunt    qui 
firmam  mentem  habet.' 

The  use  of  atrtL&  by  Tiruv.,  with  its  various  epithets,  must  be 
studied.  It  is  more  than  the  *  poet's  vision  and  faculty  divine  ';  being 
the  intuitive  knowledge  of  invisible  things  given  to  the  pure  alone. 
The  following  verse  (cii.)  of  the  /!>$5lQ/Hl[6ls£l<3fr<&&Ln  *  beautifully  illus- 
trates this  significant  word  :  — 

<3fT  15  jj  j&  Sjgl  tl3  jbQ  JD  Gift  jjj  &$ 


<B5tr<oQ3TUo<£  fSlTL-       ;    <£5<o5T(Slj  f5  SOT  <3U  fT  <&  U 

ysxruQjS  {jjirfifS  ©ufr(7jj<srr. 

*  Nought  doubting,  wav'ring  not,  sages  explore  till  all  grows  clear 
By  reason's  aid  ;  with  eye  of  apprehension  true  op'd  wide, 
They  sleep,  and  see  the  vision  clear.     In  that  pure  mystic  light 
When  waking  life  arrays  itself,  'tis  being's  perfect  gain.' 

How  far  Tiruv.  and  the  gnomic  bards  of  Southern  India  can  be 
classed  as  votaries  of  any  sect,  or  darsana,  may  be  seen  by  an  examina- 
tion of  the  Sarva-darc/ma-sangraha  by  Professors  Cowell  and  Gough. 
Especially  the  Arhata  (or  Jain)  system,  while  presenting  some  analogies, 
is  evidently  very  different  from  that  of  the  author  of  the  Kurral. 

655.  '  Aut  noli  facere  unquam  id,  de  quo  postea  conquerendum  tibi 
sit  ;  aut  si  aliquando  feceris,  querelas  omitte.' 

656.  *  Etiamsi  tuam  matrem  fame  mori  videris,  noli  facere  quod  a 
sapientibus  viturabile  sit.' 

657.  '  Sapientibus   melius   est    summam    paupertatem   pati,   quam 
divites  fieri  collum  subdendo  sapientum  vituperio  (i.e.  vituperio  dignis 
actionibus).' 

Comp.  Ndl  275. 

658.  *  Qui  aliquid  vituperabile  non  vituperando  inconsiderate  fecerit, 
quamvis  illud  ad  finein  perducat,  postea  tamen  afflictionein  patietur.' 

Beschi:  g^j-/r=<  sine  consideration.  '  e^jr/r/r=sp0<a;/r(^!a/jr/r<s=:<  not 
shunning.' 

659.  *  Quod  cum  (exterorum)  luctu   (i.e.  caeteros  opprimendo)  cumu- 
laveris,   cum   (tuo)  luctu   peribit  ;    si   vero   propter   justitiam  aliquod 
damnum  patiaris,  postea  multa  tibi  afferet  bona.' 


*  The  very  complete  edition  of  this  exquisite  work,  issued  by  H*  Stokes,  Esq., 
should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Tamil  student. 


278  THE    KURKAL. 

660.  '  Per  nefas  divitias  cumulando  regem  in  solio  firmare  velle,  idem 
est  ac  velle  firmuin  reddere  ex  cruda  argilla  fictum  vas  aquam  ei 
infundendo.' 

But  g)®^^/  is  not  '  making  firm,'  but  *  putting,  keeping.' 
Graul :  '  in  neuen  Erdkrug  Wasser  und  wahren  wollen.' 


CHAPTER  LXVIT. 

Beschi  :  Firmitas  in  agenda. 

661.  'Quod   facit   actionum   firmitatem   est  animi   firmitas  ;  caetera 
omnia  ad  id  non  prosunt.' 

662.  '  Perfecti  ministri  conditio  est  inter  haec   duo  viam  tenere,  ut 
neque  aggrediatur  ea,  quibus  insuperabilem  obicein  venturum  praevidet, 
et  si  obex  advenerit  non  retrocedat.' 

663.  '  Fort-is  in  agendo  minister,  quod  in  hostem  intentat,  ita  exsequi 
debet,  ut  nonuisi  finis  actionis  hosti  notus  sit,  quod  si  ante  finem  hosti 
innotuerit  diu  lugendam  afflictionem  patietur.' 

664.  '  Regulas  agendi  dare,  seu  praescribere,  omnibus  facile  est  ;  sed 
difficillimum  est  juxta  praescriptas  regulas  agere.' 

This  idea  has  been  expressed  in  most  languages.  This  couplet  seems 
to  be  a  translation  of  the  9loka  in  Hitopadeqa,  III.  107.  The  com- 
parison will  illustrate  the  relative  powers  of  the  languages,  and  the 
merit  of  a  Kurral  couplet  as  compared  with  a  Sanskrit  yloka. 


T  If  ^ 

B.  says  ^sm^j=t  refluentia.'     See  Lex. 

665.  c  Eorum,  qui  praecelsum  ministri  ofilcium  obtinendo  clari  sunt, 
in  gens  firmitas  quum  redundet  in  regem,  ab  ipso  magni  fiet.' 

666.  '  Omnia  quae  intentaverint,  eo  quo  cogitaverunt  modo  obtinebunt 
ii,  qui  cum  consideratione  agendi  firmitatem  quoque  possident.' 

667.  '  Despicabilis  licet  figurae  sit,  noli  quemquam  despicere  ;  sunt 
enim  qui  similes  sunt  axe  magni  currus,  firmanti  clavo.' 

Ariel  :  *  A  la  vue  de  Tapparence  il  ne  faut  pas  dedaigner  ;  il  est  de 
(gens)  tels  que  la  cheville  d'essieu  d'un  grand  char  qui  roule.' 

668.  '  Actio  quam,  mature  considerando,  faciendam  esse  perspexisti, 
sine  titubatione,  procrastinationem  vitando,  perficienda  est.' 

669.  'Quamvis  plurimo  labore,  et  aiiimi  contentione  conficiendum  sit, 


NOTES.  279 

animi  firinitatem  sustentaudo  perfice  opus,  quod    postea  magnatn   tibi 
dulcedinem  pariet.' 

670.    '  Caeteras    omnes    firmitatas   licet   ob tineas ;    si   tamen   animi 
firmitatem  non  aveas,  a  sapientibus  non  magni  fies.' 


£71 


CHAPTER  LXYIH. 

Beschi :  Modus  agendi.         Gj-raul :  Die  Art  des  Handelns. 


671.  '  Mature  considerandum,  quousque  certitude  oriatur,  quod  ad 
finem  opus  perduci  possit ;  taleni  autem  certitudinem  habens  opus  cras- 
tinum  differre  magnus  error  erit.' 

672.  '  In  iis  quae  inoram  exigunt,  moratus  sis  ;  in  eis  verb  quae  moram 
non  sufferunt,  moratus  ne  sis.' 

673.  '  Quotiescunque  vires   suppetunt,   in   hostem  agere   debes  ;     si 
viribus  inferior  sis,  aliquam  viam  excogitando  opereris  (sensus  est,  ubi 
vires  desunt  astutid  utendum).' 

674.  '  Inchoatae  et  non  perfectae  actiones,   inchoatum  et  non   per- 
fectum  bellum  ;    si  rite  consideres,  easdern  (quia  semper  nialum  sub- 
sequetur),  consequentias  liabere  nosces.' 

In  the  Com.,  Beschi  says  ji=(  ignis  reliquae  '  ;  but  in  this  rendering 
he  makes  kj=$j<o®La. 

Ariel :  '  Comme  une  reste  de  feu.' 

675.  '  Quid  impendendum  ?  quae  adsint  instrumenta  ?  aptum  ne  sit 
tempus  ?  quasnam  actiones  facere  possit  ?  opportunus  an  faveat  locus  ? 
haec  quinque  sine  allucinatione  considerando,  ad  aliquem  actionem  pro- 
cedendum.' 

676.  '  Antequam  aliquid  aggrediaris, — "  ad  id  perficiendum,  quanto 
labore  opus  sit  ? — quaenam  impedimenta  obvenire   possint  ? — his  supe- 
ratis,  et  re  ad  finem  perducta,  quodnam  emolumentum  sit  obventurum  ?  " 
— aequa  lance  vibrando,  agere  debes.' 

677.  '  Praeterea  ab  opus  perficere  volente  haec  servanda  lex  est,  ut  ab 
iis  notitiam  acquirat  qui  opere  in  illo  praxim  habent.' 

678.  '  Ex  una  actione  feliciter  confecta  gradus  est  faciendus  ad  aliam 
similem    actionem,    non    secus    ac    per    domesticum   elephantem   alii 
elephantes  capientur.' 

679.  '  Expedit   citius   hostium   fautores   sibi  amicos    reddere,  quam 
amicos  gratificare.' 

680.  '  Minister  regis,  qui  exiguum  habet  regnuin,  timens  ostendere 
panicum    quo   capietur  metum,  si  forte   a  fortiori   oppugnetur,  si  se 


280  THE    KURRAL. 

vincere  poterit,  non  debet   inique    ferre    aliquam  depressioneni,   quae 
fortiori  assequendo,  sibi  proveniat.' 

This  is  a  perplexing  couplet :  <  Kings  of  small  states,  fearing  the 
inward  weakness  of  their  own  people,  must  pay  homage  to  greater 
rulers  in  order  to  obtain  the  needful  assistance :  it  is  no  disgrace  to 
seek  the  friendship  and  protection  of  mightier  states.' 


CHAPTEE  LXIX. 

Beschi  :  Legatio,  i.e.  legati  officium. 

THE    character    of    the    accomplished   ambassador,    or    resident  at   a 
foreign  court,  is  admirably  drawn. 

681.  *  Legati  dotes  esse  debent  sequentes  ;  nimirum  ut  sit  (suis  con- 
sanguineis)  bene  affectus  ;  ut  sit  optimo  loco  natus  ;  ut  regis  personam 
affect  are  sciat.' 

@<s3J5TLci  =  '  quality,  'especially  good  quality,  intrinsic  excellence. 
here  '  a  benevolent  mind.' 


682  (683  in  B.).  '  Amor  (in  regem),  quaeregi  convenientia  sunt  probe 
scire,   et   in   loquendo    consideratio  et   verborum   efficacia  :    tres   sunt 
qualitates  quae  nonnisi  in  legatis  reperiuntur.' 

.jyssrq,  here  '  special  attachment  to  the  king.' 

683  (684  in  B.).  '  Inter  regia  jura  callentes  versando,  in  dicta  scientia 
valde  peritus  esse  debet  ;  qui  inter  armatos   reges  suis  verbis  suo  regi 
victoriam  obtinendi  officium  sustinent,  nempe  legatus.' 

684  (682  in  B.).  '  Ingenii  sublimitas,  venerabilis  aut  arnabilis  prae- 
sentia,  magno  studio  ac  praxi  comparata  scientia:    qui  horum  trium 
unionern  habet,  ad  legati  officiuui  prodeat.' 

685.  '  Si  plurima    sint  proferenda,  ordinate  ac  concise  id  faciendo  ; 
si  displicentia  sint  repraesentaiida  ab  odium  concitantibus  verbis  absti- 
nendo  ;  amicabilibus  verbis  id  faciendo,  suo  regi  emolumentum  procurare 
debet  legatus.' 

686.  'Necessariam   scientiam    habendo,    si    torvis   oculis    aspiciatur 
metuni  non  ostendendo,  rem  ita  ut  ab  audiente  bene  intelligatur  expo- 
nendo,  si  tempus  sibi  non  faveat,  quamnam  tune   industriam  adhibere 
debeat,  scire  debet  legatus.' 

687.  '  Quomodo  se  gerere  debeat  noscendo,  ad  alloquendum   regem 
tempus  aptum  et  locum  opportunum  procurando,  omnia  cum  niatura 
consideration  faciendo,  legationem  qui  absolvit  optimus  legatus  erit.' 

688.  '  Illibatos  mores,  aulicorum  f  avorem,  et   intrepidum  animum,  et 
cum  his  tribus  in  loquendo  sinceritatem  possidere  boni  legati  conditio 
est.' 


NOTES.  281 

689.  '  Qui  verba  a  suo  rege   prolata  ad  alios   reges   ferendi  officio 
funguntur,  debent  ita  intrepide  loqui,  ut  nunquam  ob  metum  aliquod 
ex  suo  ore  effluat  verbum,  quod  suo  regi  indecorum  sit.' 

690.  '  Qui  etiamsi  sibi  damnum  imminere  videat,  nil  timendo  apud 
caeteros  reges  suo  regi  exaltationem,  non  depressionem  afferentia  verba 
proferre  valet,  optinius  legatus  est.' 

Beschi  reads  cgy^^/r^j  'unfearing '  for  OT^^/T^  'unfailing.' 


CHAPTEE  LXX. 

Beschi :  Quomodo  legatus  cum  regibus  versari  debeat.  So  also  G-raul ; 
but  the  subject  seems  to  be  more  general:  conduct  in  a  court, 
courtiership,  the  way  of  pleasing  a  king.  Ariel :  Conduite  aupres 
des  princes. 

691.  'Nee  prope  nee  procul,  non  secus  ac  qui  ad  ignem  calefit,  cum 
exteris  regibus  versandum.' 

$j)<$6\jQ<sufi<$JT  is  not  'exteris  regibus,'  surely.  Ariel :  ' rois puissants.' 
Neither  making  himself  too  prominent,  nor  relegating  himself  to 
obscurity. 

692.  '  Non  appetere  quae  reges  tanquain  sibi  propria  appetunt,  via 
est  assequendi  ab  ipsis  regibus  diu  permansura  emolumenta.' 

It  is  not  safe  to  seem  to  be  the  King's  rival. 

693.  '  Si  cautus  esse  vis,  cave  ab  iis,  quae  difficulter  tolerantur  ;  nam 
postquam    regum  animum  aversum  senseris,  difficile  erit  ilium  bene- 
volum  reddere.' 

694.  'Coram  regibus  cave  ne  quidquain  secrete  cum  alio  confabuleris, 
aut  alium  intuendo  mutuum  risum  edas,  quia  haec  et  similia  suspi- 
cionem  inducunt.' 

695.  '  Quidquid  rex  alicui  secrete  loquatur,  neque   ut  audias  aurem 
admoveas,   neque   quid   dixerit   statim   interroges,    neque   cures   illud 
secretum  scire,  nisi  quum  ille  tibi  sponte  patefecerit.' 

696.  '  Regis  intentum  percipere  studens,  ad  ei  loquendum  opportunum 
ternpus  eligendo,  sive  odiosa,   sive    grata  sint,  quae  loqui  debes,  ita 
loquaris  ut  grate  audiaris.' 

697.  '  Grata  loquendo  futilia  nunquam  loquaris,  licet  alii  coram  te  ac 
rege  loquantur.' 

698.  '  Quamvis  rex  aetate  tibi  inferior  sit,  et  in  eo  consanguinitatis 
gradu,  ut  tibi  reverentiam  debeat,  ne  istani  praesumas,  sed   precede 
attendendo  ad  supremam  quam  gerit  dignitatem.' 

36 


282  THE   KUREAL. 

699.  '  Qui  sanam  inentem  habent,  quamvis  se  videant  a  rege,  plurimi 
fieri,  nunquam  audent  ea  facere  quae  regi  non  placent.' 

700.  '  In  regis  familiaritate  veteranus  licet  sis,  cave  ruinam  afferet.' 


CHAPTER  LXXI. 

Beschi :  Regis  intentum  percipere,  quin  illud  rex  patefaciat. 
Graul :  Mentem  percipere.     Die  Absicht  merken. 

THE  tact  required  alike  by  envoy  and  by  courtier,  that  reads  the  coun- 
tenance, takes  note  of  the  subtlest  indications  of  the  ruler's  will. 

701.  '  Qui,  quin  rex  loquatur,  ab  ejus  vultu  ejus  intentum  percipere 
valet,  huic  mundo,  quae  nunquam  siccatur  aqua  circumfuso,  ornamentum 
erit.' 

702.  '  Eos,  qui  valent  sine  dubitatione  alicujus  intima  penetrare,  diis 
similes  aestima.' 

703.  '  Eum,  qui  ex  eo,  quod  in  suo  interiori  experitur  aliorum  inte- 
riora    noscere   valet,   etiam    ei   dando    aliquid    ex   iis,    quae    regium 
statum  conficiunt  inembris,  debet  rex  ad  servitium  suum  attrahere.' 

A  king  should  even  sacrifice  an  angam  (^IEI&LD,  a-jj/uq)  of  his  state 
to  win  such  a  servant.  These  '  essential  members  '  are  <j£inr  <&&<&,  3$s&u 
(c^/r(i)<£5(srr=G'(^/rtffiiflLJff)«/r6u/rLL<5(ofr=' chariots,  elephants,  horses,  andfoot- 
soldiers.' 

704.  '  Ab  iis   qui  alicujus  intimum   animum,  quin  ab  isto  patefiet, 
penetrare  valent,  caeteri  (qui  id  nequeunt)  multum  diver  si  sunt,  quamvis 
quoad  membra  similes  sint.' 

2_j?;uL/  nom.  of  respect :  '  as  regards  members.' 

705.  '  Si  ex   similibus  quae   in  se   videt  signis,  caeteroruin    intima 
penetrare  nesciant,  quamnam  quaeso  supra  caetera  membra  specialitatem 
habebunt  oculi  ? ' 

706.  '  Sicuti  speculum  repraesentat  quidquid  ei  objicitur,  ita  vultus 
repraesentat  quae  in  pectore  latet  iram  !  ' 

707.  '  Quid  est  ad  intima  dignoscenda  aptius,  quam  vultus,  si  quidem 
statim  ac  in  animo  laetitia  oritur,  aut  ira,  ipse  caeteris  praenuntiat  ? ' 

708.  '  Si  sit,  qui  suum  aniinum  intuendo  quidni  his  vel  illis  affec- 
tibus   expertus   scrutari   valeat :    huic   ut  caeterorum   animum    noscat 
sufficit,  si  eorum  vultum  intuendo  insistat.' 

709.  '  Internum  odium  et  amicitiam  oculi  manifestabunt  iis  qui  sciri 
valent  diversos  oculorum  motus  pro  affectuum  diversitate.' 

710.  *  Etsi   acutissimus  quis  sit,  ad  animum  diinetiendum,  nulla   ei 
suppetet  melior  ulna  quam  oculi.' 


NOTES.  283 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 

Beschi :  Auditorium  (Gr.  coetum)  discernere. 

A  MINISTER  must  know  the  tone  and  temper  of  the  council  before  whom 
he  must  discuss  affairs  of  state. 

711.  'Doctum  auditorium  si  habeat,  mature  considerando  loqui  debet, 
qui  verboruni  selectionem  et  linguae  puritatem  possidet.' 

712.  '  Loco  in  quo  loquitur  se  accomodando  nonnisi  docte  loquatur, 
qui  in  verborum  qualitate  discernenda  peritiam  habet.' 

713.  '  Qui  auditorium  non  discernendo  in  publico  loquendi  cacoethem 
habent,  nee  loqui  sciunt,  neque  ad  quidquam  valent.' 

714.  '  Coram   doctis   docte   loquaris,   coram   albis  (h.e.  nesciis)   albi 
stipitis  colorem  indue.' 

He  makes  <R6®<5='  stipes.9     But? 

Graul :  '  Vor  gelehrten  rede  man  gelehrt,  vor  Ungelehrten  ungelekrt.' 

715.  '  Inter  omnes  bonas  qualitates  optima  est  in  seniorum  coetu  non 
esse  primum  ad  loquendurn.' 

716.  '  Coram  doctis  latam  eruditioneni  ostendere  cupiens  inscie  loqui, 
idem  est  ac  religiosum  statuin  profitendo  ab  eo  desciscere.' 

717.  '  Doctrina  eorum  qui  scientiarum  studio  incubuerunt,  in  coetu 
eorum  qui  sine  errore  et  considerate  loquendi  peritiam  habent,  inno- 
tescet.' 

718.  '  Coram   doctis  loqui   idem  est   ac  crescentium   florum   areolis 
aquara  infundere.' 

When  a  man  finds  '  fit  audience,'  his  words  distil  as  the  fertilizing 
dew.     There  may  be  the  idea  of  gain  to  the  speaker :  docendo  discitur. 

719.  '  Qui  coram  doctis  subtilia  quaeque  cum  laude  loquuntur,  ea 
neque  per  oblivionem  coram  nesciis  loquantur.' 

720.  '  Noli  subtilia  loqui  inter  eos  qui  infra  tuum  coetum  sunt ;   nam 
id  idem  erit  ac  pretiosum  pharmacuni  in  luto  projicere.' 


CHAPTER  LXXIII. 

Beschi :  Coetum  non  timere. 

THE  Minister  requires  nerve  and  courage,  to  face  the  council,  often 
packed,  full  of  favourites,  intriguers,  and  time-servers.  Comp.  the 
Book  of  Daniel. 

721.  'Qui  verborum  selectu  gaudentem  sermonis  puritatem  habet, 
coetuum  diversitatem  noscendo>  ob  docti  coetus  metum  errare  non 
debet.' 


284  THE   KtJBBAL. 

722.  '  A  doctis  docti  dicentur,  qui  inter  doctos  absque  metu  et  con- 
fusione  quae  didicerint,  aliis  communicare  sciunt.' 

723.  '  Plurimi  sunt  qui  in  proelio  niori  non  timent  ;  pauci  sunt  qui  in 
coetu  doctorum  loqui  non  timeant.' 

724.  'Quae  tu  didicisti,   ita   inter  doctos   loquere,   ut   et  ii  discere 
possint  ;  quae   tu   non  didicisti,   ab  iis  qui   plus  quam  tu  didicerunt, 
disce.' 

725.  '  Ita  disce  ut  viae  quae  ad  scientiam  ducit  limites  omnes  attingas  ; 
ut  sine  timore  ad  quamcumque  interrogationem  in  ea  materia  responsum 
dare  queas.' 


726.  *  Sicuti  nil  prodest  ensis  in  ejus  nianu  qui  timidus   est,  ita  nil 
prodest  scientia  ei  qui  doc  turn  coetuin  pavet.' 

727.  '  Scientia  ejus  qui  doctum  coetum  timet,   similis  est  ensi  quern 
in  proelio  vibrat  timida  manus.' 

1  Timida  manus  '  euphemistically  for  QuL^.<5o<ist  q.v. 

728.  *  Plurima  quamvis  didicerunt  nullum  exinde  fructuin  capient, 
qui  inter  doctos  docte  et  clare  loqui  nesciunt.' 

729.  '  Eos  qui  scientias  didicerunt  sed  prae  auditorum  metu  ea  pate- 
facere  nesciunt,  pejores  esse  iis  qui  non  didicerunt,  sapientes  ajunt.' 

730.  'Qui,   quae    didicerunt   ob    metum   clare   patefacere    nesciunt, 
quamvis  vivi  sint,  tanti  aestimantur,  quanti  fiunt  mortui.' 


PARS  III. 

De  membris,  quae  regium  statum  conflant. 

CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

Beschi :  Ditio,  seu  regnum.     Graul :  Territorium. 

THERE  are  no  addresses  to  kings  or  wealthy  landowners  in  the  Kurraf, 
such  as  give  a  peculiar  charm  to  many  of  the  quatrains  in  the  Ndladi. 
In  1277  only,  the  princess  speaks  of  her  beloved  as  '  lord  of  the  cool 
shore.'  In  Ndl.  the  king  is  addressed  as  '  pin- '  lord  of  the  land.  In 
the  South  a  landed  proprietor,  even  of  the  humblest  class,  is  a  jsirL-n-svr. 
The  country  has  a  sea-board,  and  chains  of  hills,  with  forests,  and 
streams  flowing  down  to  irrigate  the  fields  below.  Ndl.  10,  71,  142, 
146,  161,  166,  186,  194,  211,  212,  &c. 

In   the  pn-L-®uui-evLD,   or  chapter  describing  the  Tamil   land,   in 
Kamban's  Rdmdyanam,  and  in  the  Naishadam,  the  poets  have  exhausted 


NOTES.  285 

the  resources  of  the  language  in  elaborate  descriptions  of  the  /SIT®. 
Comp.  Manu,  vii.  69. 

731.  'Illudest  (optimum)   regnum,  quod  in  se  continet  indefessos 
agricultores,  virtuosos  viros,  et  indeficientem  pecuniam  habentes.' 

732.  '  (Optimum)  est  regnum,  in  quo  talis  sit  rerum  abundantia  ut  a 
caeteris  regnicolis  ibi  desideretur  incolatus,  expers  sit  infirmitatibus  et 
animalculis,   quae   ruinam   segetibus   aft'erant,    et   copiosum   a   segete 
fructum  percipiat.' 

733.  '  Regnum  adeo  opulentum  esse  debet,  ut  tempore  f  amis  sustentare 
etiam  possit  eos,  qui  a  caeteris  regnis  illuc  confugiunt,  et  tempore  belli 
possit  una  vice  solvere  regi  tantum  tributum,  quod  per  multas  vices 
annuatim  solvitur.' 

734.  '  Boni  regni  qualitas  esse  debet   egestati  obnoxium   non   esse, 
insalubre  non  esse,  nee  hostium  incursionibus  expositum  esse.' 

735.  '  In  bono  regno  non  debent  inveniri  seditiosi  coetus,   intestini 
hostes,  regem  affligentia  homicidia.' 

In  (&,g]Lz\-i  there  may  be  a  reference  to  the  Kurrambar  (Marravar), 
wild,  predatory  bands  ;  but  I  think  it  simply  means  lawlessness  and 
plundering  in  general. 

736.  'Inter  regna  optimum  dicetur  quod  neque  frequenter  ruinam 
pati  videmus  ;    et,  si  ruinam  patiatur,  statim  illam  copioso  agrorum 
fructu  reparet.' 

737.  '  Puteorum  et  lacuum  aqua,  fructuosi  montes,  flumina,  et  inex- 
pugnabilis  regia,  membra  sunt,  quae  optimum  regnum  conflant.' 

The  limits  of  the  Tamil  country,  as  assigned  by  the  Nannulj  ®rou 
a,  8,  9,  are  : 

(o  QJ  IE1  <35  L-.  LQ 


The   eastern   sea,   Cape   Kumari,   Kudagam  (Coorg),   and    Vengadam 
(Tripety). 

This  '  Tamil-land  '  has  rain  ;  springs  that  send  their  waters  down  the 
hills  ;  a  fine  chain  of  hills  as  its  western  frontier,  down  which  flow  the 
Palarru,  the  Pennarru,  the  Kaveri,  the  Yaigai,  and  the  Tambarapurni, 
with  many  tributaries  ;  and  mountain  heights  which  a  little  effort  can 
convert  into  strong  places  of  defence. 

738.  '  Salubritatem,  acres  divites  incolas,  copiosum  agrorum  fructum, 
vitam  suaviter  ducendi  facilitatem,  nee  non  securitatem  ab  hostibus  : 
ornamenta  quae  bonum   regnum  efficiunt    haec  quinque   dicunt   sapi- 
entes.' 

739.  '  Illud  regni  nomen  meretur,   in  quo  annona  facile  invenitur  ; 
regni  nomen  non  meretur,  si  annonam  multo  labore  investigare  opus 
sit.' 


286  THE    KUREAL. 

740.  '  Quamvis  omnia,  quae  superius  dicta  sunt,  in  regno  reperiautur, 
nil  prosunt,  si  pariter  in  eo  non  inveniatur  unio  inter  regem  et 
subditos.' 


CHAPTEE  LXXV. 

Beschi:  Arces. 

THOUGH  not  as  important  in  the  history  of  Southern  India  as  in  the 
annals  of  Sivaji  and  his  Mahrattas,  forts  of  considerable  celebrity 
existed  in  the  Carnatic,  and  are  still  to  be  seen  in  all  stages  of  dila- 
pidation. The  pages  of  Orme's  narrative  abound  in  illustrations  of  the 
importance  of  these  in  South  India.  Comp.  Manu,  vii.  71-76. 

741.  '  Et  iis,  qui  hostem  offendere  volunt,   maxinio  praesidio    sunt 
arces  ;  it  iis,  qui  timendo  ab  hoste  se  defendere  volunt,  optimum  sunt 
asylum.' 

Necessary  both  for  offensive  and  defensive  wars. 

742.  '  Arx  debet  habere  aquam,  uti  gemmae   (incorruptibilem),  spati- 
osum  campum,  montem  arduum,  confertum  sed  ordinatum  nenius,  ut 
fortis  dici  possit.' 

Compare   the   descriptions   of    Hill-forts   in   Captain   Grant   Duff's 
History  of  the  Mahrattas. 

743.  'Quod   murorum   altitudinem.    spatii   latitudineni,    bellicoruna 
instrumentorum   copiam,   et  loci   inaccessibilitatem,   junctim  possidet, 
arcem  vocat  bellica  scientia.' 

744.  '  Quamvis  parva  sit  tamen  talis  esse  debet  arx,  ut  in  fortitudine 
magnas  aequiparando,  ad  earn  expugnandum  advenientem  hostem  animo 
decide  re  faciat.' 

745.  'Arx  talis  conditionis  esse   debet,   ut  sit  expugnatu   difficilis, 
commeatu   referta  sit,   et  qui  earn   custodiunt  facile   possint  in  ejus 
defensione  consistere.' 

746.  '  Arx  non  solum  debet  iis  omnibus,  quae  ad  vigilum  subsisten- 
tiam  opus  sunt,  abundare,  sed  insuper  habere  debet  bonos  milites,  qui 
in  loco  ei  praesto  sint  (nempe  earn  defendant).' 

747.  '  Arx  talis  esse  debet,  ut  difficilis  expugnatu  sit,   sive  per  obsi- 
dionem,  sive  per  aggressionem,  sive  per  proditionem.' 

Beschi  says:  cgy6D)/r)uu©(^<^}='divisiones  inducere.' 

748.  '  Arx  talis  esse  debet  ut  qui  illam  defendunt,  earn  non  deserendo, 
ex  ilia  obsidione,  earn  vallantes  vincere  possint.' 

749.  'Arx  ejusmodi  esse  debet,  ut  in  ipso  aggressionis  initio,  ejus 


NOTES.  287 

defensorum  in  proeliando  superioritatem  videntes,  animum  despondendo 
hostes  terga  vertant.' 

750.  'Quascunque  ex  supradictis  excellentias  arx  habeat,  idem  est 
ac  si  non  haberet,  si  earn  qui  defendant  in  pugnando  excellentes  non 
sint.' 


CHAPTER  LXXYI. 

Beschi  :  Modus  aerarium  regium  ditandi.      Ariel  :  Maniere 
d'acquerir  la  fortune. 

751.  '  Nulla  res  ei  rei  similis,  quae  facit  esse  aliquid,  eos  qui  nihil 
sunt.' 

A  play  upon  the  different  uses  of  the  word  QLJ/T^STT. 
Ariel  :  '  Pour  faire  quelque  chose  de  celui  qui  n'est  rien,  il  est  rien 
que  la  Fortune.' 

752.  *  Pecunia  qui  carent  a  cunctis  despiciuutur  ;  divitiis  qui  affluunt 
a  cunctis  honorantur.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  281,  283,  284  : 

*  Though  rags  he  wrap  around  his  loins,  a  dozen  coins 
Or  so,  will  gain  the  wretch  respect  'mid  many  men  ! 
The  man  devoid  of  wealth,  though  born  of  noble  race, 
Is  viler  than  the  lifeless  corpse  !  ' 

'  When  on  the  high  hill's  crags  the  Kandal  blooms  no  more, 
The  crimson-spotted  beetle  tribe  seek  not  its  boughs.  — 
Lord  of  the  glades  where  from  the  crofts  they  parrots  scare,  — 
The  pauper  has  no  friends.' 


'  When  wealth  is  there,  like  crows  around  the  fallen  corpse 
Obsequious  myriads  gather  round.     When  wealth  is  gone, 
As  wheels  the  beetle's  flight,  —  no  one  in  all  the  world 
Will  ask,  "  Is  't  well  with  you  ?  "  ' 

753.  '  Splendor  divitiarum  nunquam  deficientum  ad  quod  tibi  libet 
regnum  perveniens  tuorum  hostium  tenebrosum  odium  affugabit.' 

Simply,  '  Money  will  help  you  in  any  region  of  the  earth.'  This 
reminds  us  of  the  favourite  saying  of  Nero  (Suet.  Nero,  cap.  xi.),  TO 
rcxyiav  Tracra  yata  rpc'^ei  :  artificem  omnis  alit  terra.  Comp.  397. 

754.  '  Divitiae,  quas  quis  honeste  cumulat  modum  sciens  eas  pro- 
curandi,  et  virtutes  exercendi  occasionern,  et  inde  subsequentes  felici- 
tates illi  parient.' 


288  THE    KUERAL. 

755.  '  Abhorrendum  est  et   conteinnendum  divitias  cumulare  quae 
non  obveniant  cum  dementia  (regis  in  subditos)  et  amore  (subditorum 
in  regem).' 

756.  '  Divitiae,  quae  regii  juris  sunt,  quae  sponte  obveniunt,  quae  ex 
vectigalium    tributis    colliguntur,    et   quae   hostes   destruendo   repor- 
tantur.' 

His  text  and  com.  have  a.6u@,  but  this  the  metre  forbids. 
This  is  the  only  couplet  that  alludes  to  royal  revenues  ;  the  other 
nine  are  quite  general. 

757.  '  dementia  (regis  in  subditos)  quae  filia  est  ainoris  subditorum 
in  regem  nutriri  debet  a  divite  nu trice,  quae  dicitur  pecunia.' 

He  who  has  nothing  can  bestow  nothing  on  others. 

758.  '  (Reges)  tractatus  inire  unde  sibi  absque  labore  pecunia  pro- 
veniat,  perinde  est  ac  ex  eminenti  loco  elephantum  pugnam  spectare.' 

He  looks  down  in  safety  upon  the  combatants.     He  can,  moreover, 
hire  others  to  fight  his  battles. 

759.  '  Divitias  cumula,  nam  non  est  illis  validior  ensis,  qui  hostium 
audaciam  infringat.' 

760.  '  Divitiis   juste  et   honeste   cumulatis   amuenti   faciles  evadent 
caeterae  duae  res,  (nempe  virtus  et  gaudium).' 

The  three  topics  of  the  book  are  '  Virtue,  Wealth,  and  Enjoyment.' 
Intro,  p.  vii. 


CHAPTEE  LXXYII. 

Beschi :  Quae  possidere  debet  exercitus  decora.      Graul :  Heeres- 
herrlichkeit.     Ariel :   Grandeur  militaire. 

761.  'Inter  omnes  regias  felicitates  primaria  esse  debet  talein  habere 
exercitum,  qui  omnia  quibus  construitur  habeat  membra ;  et  imperter- 
ritus  hostem  in  proelio  vincere  valeat.' 

The  cgjisi&LG  or  S-JJ/LJL^  of  an  army  is  fourfold:  ^n^sf^s-fBu^n- 
$&<8rr.     To  these  are  added  banners,  musical  instruments,  &c. 

762.  '  Etiam  si  viribus  inferior  evasit,  iutrepidam  in  proeliando  con- 
stantiain  exhibere  non  nisi  in  veterana  militia  reperitur.' 

763.  '  Quid    faciet   muriuni    multitudo,   qui    ipsum    mare   cum   suo 
strepitu   aequent  ?      Si   ipsorum   hostis   coluber   sibilum   edat,   omnes 
peribunt.' 

764.  '  Hie  verb  exercitus  dicitur,  in  quo  reperitur  nativa  generositas, 
quae  nee  sui  destructionem,  nee  sui  divisionem  patitur.' 

765.  '  Exercitus  talis  esse  debet  fortitudinis,  ut  milites  etianisi  videant 
sibi  mortem  imminere,  ad  illi  resistenduni  conflagrent.' 


NOTES.  289 

766.  'Quatuor    sunt    quae    exercitum    servant,    militum    fortitude, 
honoris  tenacitas,  antiquorum  fortium  aemulatio,  et  in  ducem  fidelis 
obedientia.' 

767.  '  Exercitus  callendo  modum  sustinendi  primae  aciei  invasionem, 
et  prohibendo  equitatum,  ne  in  se  ruat,  debet  ipsum  hostem  invadere.' 

768.  '  Si  exercitui  nee  animositas  ad  hostem  caedendum,  nee  robur 
eum  sustentauduni  insit,  debet  saltern  in  numero,  ordine  et  apparatu 
talis  esse,  ut  solo  ejus  aspectu  hostes  terrificet.' 

769.  '  Ut  hostis  hosti  vincendo  par  sit,  abesse  ab  eo  debent  desertiones 
quibus  exercitus  minuitur,  effenrinatio  quae  proeliandi  indesinens  tae- 
dium  causat,  et  paupertas  quae  milites  reddit  tristes.' 

770.  '  Quamvis  in  exercitu  multi  fortesque  sint   inilites,    si   tamen 
desinit  duces,  quibus  subordinentur,  perinde  est  ac  si  non  essent.' 

Ariel :  '  Fut-elle  pleine  d' homines  resolus,  une  arinee,  si  elle  n'a  des 
chefs,  n'existe.' 


CHAPTER   LXXYIII. 

Beschi :  Spiritus  martialis.     Ariel :  Enthousiasme  militaire. 
Graul :  Heeres-selbstgefukl. 

THE  author  understood  the  feelings  of  a  soldier.  Madras  Sepoys  have, 
by  their  bravery,  illustrated  these  two  chapters.  They  need  good 
leaders,  770. 

771.  '  Verba  sunt   ducis  a  proelio   revertentis,  qui    refert  quod  sui 
milites,  quos  in  arcis  muro  relinquerat,  cum  ipse  in  adversas  acies  rueret, 
clamabant  hostem  hortando,  ne  ante  ducem  suum  consisterent,  si  vivere 
vellent :  ante   me    (i.e.    ante  nostrum   ducem)  consistere  nolite !  quidam 
fortes  non   ante  me    (i.e.   post   meum   tergum),   in  arcis  muro   stantes 
(dicebant).' 

Either  OTOTT  +  ^  =  {  my  leader' :  or  OT«5r3s5r='  me.'  This  is  a  doubtful 
couplet. 

Ariel :  '  Devant  moi  ne  demeurez,  ennemis !  Bien  (d'autres)  qui 
demeuraient  devant  moi,  demeurent  sous  la  pierre.'  A  European  turn  of 
thought. 

772.  '  G-loriosius  est  manu  gestare  lanceam,  qui  irrito  jactu  in  ele- 
phante  in  campo  proeliante  missa  fuit,  quam  sagittam  jactam  in  leporem 
in  neraore  quamvis  illico  eum  confixerit.'     See  NiU.  152. 

773.  '  Martialem  in  hostem  ferociam  sapientes  magnaniraitatem  appel- 
lant ;  sed  cum  victis  clenienter  se  habere  magnanimitatis  apicem  esse 
dicunt.' 

Comp.  Verg.  Aen.  vi.  853  :  '  Parcere  subjectis  et  debellare  superbos.' 

37 


290  THE    KURRAL. 

774.  '  Martialem  spirituin  habens,  postquam  in  proelio  cum  elephante 
lanceas   omnes  quas  manu    gestabat    consumpserat,  ad   continue ndum 
proeliuni  alias  quaerens,  lanceani  ab  hoste  suo  corpore  infixam  videns, 
sumrna  cum  laetitia  earn  eripiet  jaculabitque.' 

775.  '  Si  in  kostem  feroci  vultu  ruens,  .cum  ille  te  in  armis  impetit, 
priorem  destruendo  trepidum  vultum  ostenderis,  nonne  locum  erit  dare 
hosti  ad  te  destruendum?  ' 

776.  '  Martialis  vir  quum   suos  dies  numerat,  infructuose  transactos 
inter  dies  computabit  omnes  eos  dies  in  quibus  speciale  ac  notabile 
aliquod  vulnus  non  retulit.' 

777.  '  Catena  quam  cruri  alligant  ii,  qui  ut  immortale  nomen  referant 
vitam  spernunt,  valde  pulchrum  ipsis  est  ornamentum.' 

Q<su<oGsri-rr<smi3jrrriT.  A  kind  of  Bahu-vrihi  compound.  See  Monier- 
Williams,  Sans.  Gram.  767. 

Among  the  Mahrattas  a  hero  ~so  distinguished  was  called  PMkre. 
(See  my  Ind.  Hist.  §  97.) 

778.  '  Cum  martialis  furor  eos  qui  pro  gloria  mori  non  timent  invadit, 
etiam  si  a  duce  revocentur,  suam  indolem  non  minuunt  (i.e.  prceliari  non 
desinunt),  donee  hostem  subjiciant.' 

779.  '  Quisnam    vituperare    audeat    eos,   qui   ne    suum   proposituni 
transiliant,  generose  quamvis  in  hoste  ruant,  in  bello  moriuntur?  ' 

(Comp.  my  Ind.  Hist.  p.  86,  3rd.  ed.) 

780.  '  Mori  extra  domuni  (i.e.  in  proelio),  sed  ita  ut  rex  plurimas  ob 
tuarn   mortem   lacrimas   fundat,  adeo   pretiosum  est,  ut   similis   mors 
quocunque  pretio  emenda  sit,  etiamsi  ad  id  mendicare  oporteat.' 


CHAPTER  LXXIX. 

Beschi :  Amicitia. 

THE  subject  of  friendship  is  treated  in  five  chapters.      These  have  no 
especial  reference  to  kings.     Coinp.  Ndl.  xxii. 

781.  'Quid  est  tarn  factu  difficile  uti  amicitia?  sed  quid  est  quod 
hac  validius  te  defendat  ab  hostibus,  cum  iis   impenetrabilis  arx  ilia 
sit?' 

Perhaps  alliances,  as  necessary  to  a  king,  are  primarily  intended. 

782.  '  Amicitia  sapientimi  novam  lunam  imitatur,  qui  in  dies  crescit ; 
stultorum  verb  amicitia  lunam  plenam  imitatur,  quae  quotidie  decrescit.' 

Ellis  :  '  The  friendship  of  the  wise  is  like  the  moon  in  its  increase ; 
The  friendship  of  fools  like  the  moon  in  its  decrease.' 

783.  '  Inter  probos  amicos  quaevis  collocutio  novum  gaudium  affert ; 


NOTES.  291 

sicuti   scientias   discentibus,    quaevis    nova   notio   novam   dulcedinem 
affert.' 

Ellis  :  '  As  the  pleasures  of  learning  increase  by  constant  application; 
So  the  friendship  of  the  worthy  increaseth  by  constant  inter- 
course.' 

784.  '  Amicitia  non  instituitur  ad  jocandum  et  ridendum,  sed  ut  amicus 
amici  errata  videus,  in  eum  feratur  eumque  corripiat.' 

785.  '  Ad  amicitiam  nee  eodem  in  loco  esse,  nee  jugiter  conversari 
opus  est,  sed  mentis  ac  indolis  similitude  amici tiae  causandae  satis  est.' 

Ariel :  '  C'est  la  (communaute  de)  pensee  qui  lui  donne  son  merited 

786.  '  Amicitia  quae  solam  vultus  laetitiani  prae  se  fert,  vera  non  est ; 
ilia  vera  est,  quae  cordis  et  animi  laetitiani  secum  fert.' 

Ellis  :  '  True  friendship  is  not  that  which  dimpleth  the  face  with 
smiles,  but  that  which  maketh  the  heart  rejoice.' 

787.  '  Ab  amico  ea  quae  perniciem"*afferunt  removere,  eum  per  virtutis 
semitas   manuducere,  et  si  quid  infortunium  accidat,   quod   removeri 
nequeat,  illud  una  cum  amico  portare,  amicitiae  proprium  est.' 

Ellis:  'Friendship  should  repel  all  injuries,  should  take  the  lead  in 
the  path  of  virtue  ;  and,  in  unavoidable  misfortune,  should  share  the 
adversity  it  causeth.' 

788.  'Amicitiae   proprium  est  amico  in  infortuniis  praesto  esse   ea 
celeritate,  qua  manus  accurrit  ad  vestern  quae  dilabitur,  ne  in  coetu 
nudus  appareas.' 

789.  '  Si  quaeras,  ubinam  sit  amicitiae  sedes  regia,  dicam  ibi  esse  ubi 
sine   tergiversatione,   quovis   tempore  quolibet  modo   amici  virtus   et 
fortuna  subtentantur  ne  decidant.' 

790.  '  Ejus  qui  quantum  ab  amico  ametur,  et  quantum  ipse  eum  amet 
computat,  quarnvis  ornatus  amore  nulla  differentia  appareat,  ridicula 
tamen  aniicitia  est  (quia  vera  amicitia  in  amore  limites  non  habet) .' 

Ellis :  '  Vain  is  the  fragile  friendship,  however  specious,  which  saith, 
"  Even  as  they  are  to  us,  so  will  we  be  to  them. " 
L£>,  Intro,  p.  xxiii. 


CHAPTEE  LXXX. 

Beschi :  Quocum  amicitiam  ineae,  attente  considerandum. 
Graul :  Prufung  in  der  Freundschaft. 

THIS  and  the  following  chapters  (LXXX.-LXXXIII.)  may  be  compared  with 
Ndl  211-240. 

791.  'Cum  post  initam  amicitiam  difficilis  sit  separatio,  iis  qui  amici  - 
tias  ineunt,  nil  adeo  periculosum  est,  quainsine  consideratione  amicitiam 
inire.' 


292 

IT iv        'Nothing   is   more   hurtij   than   friendship   inconsiderately 
"    ,.      aff ,  ^  nath  once  been  contracted,  it  is  difficult  for  those 

formed ;  tjjj  .^  friendghi    to  separate>>     NdL  220. 

sincere) 

Amicitia  cum  aliquo  inita,  diu  multumque  non   considerando 

ndolem  et  actiones,  in  finem  tibi  talem,  ut  vitam  auferre  valeat 
eilam  afferet.'     Ndl.  224. 

^93.  *  Noli  cum  aliquo  amicitiam  inire,  nisi  postquam  noveris  ejus 
idolem,  prosapiam,  vitia  et  consanguineos  defectu  carentes.' 
Ellis  :  '  Friendship  should  be  contracted  only  after  having  ascertained 
the  disposition,  lineage,  and  faults  of  the  party,  and  that  his  connections 
are  honourable.'     Ndl.  212. 
For  the  v.  ULKT  comp.  Ndl.  214 : 

'  Though  side  by  side  for  many  days  men  dwell,  when  souls 
Cling  not,  not  few  days  even  men  in  friendship  cling. 
And  who  lets  go  attachment's  well-knit  ties,  though  those 
To  whom  his  soul  is  knit  dwell  many  days  afar  ? ' 

794.  '  Ejus   amicitiam   qui,     honesta   prosapia   ortus,   culpam    in   se 
admittere  erubescit,  etiam  si  pretium  dare  opus  sit,  em  ere  debes.' 

795.  '  Ei  qui  scire  valet,  quid  juxta  proborum  morem  agendum  sit,  et, 
quum  amicus  quid  mori  contrarium  agere  cogitat,  ea  ei  dicere,  quae  ab 
eo   fletum  eliciant,  si  vero  gesserit,  euin    corripere   ne   iteruin   faciat, 
mature  considerando,  hujusmodi  amicitiae  emolumentum,  amicus  fias.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  73,  222,  226  : 

*  Lord  of  the  swelling  sea's  cool  shore,  where  in  each  flower 
Bright  insects  hum !     Are  words  severe  from  loving  lips 
Harder  to  bear,  if  duly  their  result  you  scan, 

Than  pleasant  words  that  strangers  speak  ?  ' 

'  If,  though  they  dam  it  up,  the  fresh  flood  burst  its  bonds, 
They  straight  imprison  it  again,  nor  feel  agrieved  ; 
For  by  the  precious  stream  they  live  :  when  friends  offend 

Men  bear  with  those  whose  friendship 's  dear.' 
'  Though  those,  from  whom  you  may  not  part,  do  grievous  things, 
O  golden  maid  !  you  still  must  cherish  chosen  friends ; — 
The  fire  destroys  men's  wealth  and  happy  homes,  yet  there 
'Tis  sought  and  kindled  every  day.' 

796.  *  Ad  amicos  seligendos  in  ipsa  infelicitate  documentum  invenies, 
quaedam  enim  mensura  infelicitas   est,  quae  superabundanter  amicos 
dimetitur.'     Ndl.  283,  284,  290,  337. 

797.  '  Stultorum   amicitiam    relinquere,   ab   iis    se    distinendo,   non 
danmum  sed  lucrum  puta.' 

Ellis :  '  To  separate  from  the  society  of  fools  is  the  most  profitable 
thing  a  man  can  do.' 


NOTES.  293 

798.  *  Noli  mente  versari,   quae   animuni   despondere    faciant ;    noli 
amicitiam  inire  cum  eo,  qui  in  adversis  amicum  deserit.' 

Ellis :  '  Ponder   not   on   what   depresseth  the  mind,   and  form  not 
friendship  with  those  who  forsake  their  friends  in  adversity.' 

799.  '  Amicitiam  ejus,  qui  te  in  adversis  deseruit,  etiamsi  dum  infe- 
licitas  te  maxime  vexat  mente  revolvas,  haec  recordatio,  magisquam  ipsa 
infelicitas,  te  affliget.' 

Graul :  '  Der  Gedanke  an  treulose  Freundschaft  verliert 

Selbst  iin  Augesichte  der  Todesnoth  seinen  Stachel  nicht,' 

800.  *  Inculpabilium  viroruin  amicitiam  compara  ;  eorum  qui  probis  se 
non  conformant  amicitiam  desere,  etiamsi  aliquid  dare  opus  sit,  ut  ab 
iis  te  liberes.' 


CHAPTER  LXXXI. 

Beschi:  Ab  antiquo  tempore  continuata  familiaritas. 

THE  idea  of  the  chapter  is,  the  kindly  indulgence  due  to  old  and  tried 
friends. 

Ariel  translates  U<S®L£<SG)L&  in  the  title  '  vieille  amitie,'  and  in  ver.  801, 
'  1'intimite.' 

801.  '  Si  quaeras,  quidnain  sit  vetusta  familiaritas,  est  amicitia  quae 
in  aiuico  non  prohibet   ullum  actum  ex  iis,  quae  amicorum   intinioruin 
sunt  proprii,  neque  ob  illos  indignatur   [tales  actus  sunt  sine  reverentia 
conversari,  uti  bonis  amici  tamquam  propriis,  aliqua  facere  ad  amicum 
spectantia,  eo  inconsulto,  et  similia].' 

802.  '  Amicorum,  qui   sunt  amicitiae  veluti  membra,  adeoque  inter  se 
unurn  quid  sunt,  quamdam   nimiam  familiaritatem  non   dedignari  pru- 
dentium  conditio  est.' 

Ellis  :  '  The  prudent  bear  complacently  even  the  undue  familiarity  of 
those  friends,  with  whom  they  are  as  intimately  united  in  friendship  as 
the  limbs  with  the  body.' 

803.  '  Quidnam  erit  in  vetusta  amicitia  emolumentum,  si  lion  valeat 
displicentiam  non  ostendere  de  iis,  quae  amicus  cum  nimia  familiaritate 
f  acit  ? ' 

804.  '  Si  amicus  ob  intiniam  familiaritatem,  amico  inconsulto,  quid- 
quam  ad  eum  spectans  fecerit,  sapientes  id  aeque  ferent  ob  optabilem 
quamdam  proprietatem  quam  id  secum  fert.' 

'  Nimium  amorem  denotat.' 

So  Shelley,  '  Familiar  acts  are  beautiful  through  love.' 

805.  *  Si  amicus  quid  fecerit,  quod  tibi  displiceat,  scito  id  fecisse  aut 
ex  judicii  defectu,  aut  ex  nimia  familiaritate.' 

Ellis  :  '  If  thy  friends  do  anything  to  offend  thee,  consider  it  the 
effect  either  of  thoughtlessness,  or  of  too  great  familiarity.' 


294  THE     KURRAL. 

806.  '  Qui  in  amicitia  constans  est,  noil  deserit  ejus  amicitiam,  qui 
nunquam  a  vetusta  familiaritate  aberravit,  etiainsi  in  aliqua  occasione 
aliquod  ei  darniiuin  afferat.' 

Ellis :  *  Those  constant  in  friendship  will  not  forsake  the  society  of 
those,  who  from  old  time  have  been  faithful  to  them,  even  when  they 
are  injured  by  the  connexion.' 

807.  '  Qui  ab  amore  or  tarn  vetustam  fainiliaritatem  habent,  nunquam 
amorem   minuunt,   etiamsi  amicus   quid   fecerit    unde   ipsis   damnum 
obveniat.' 

808.  *  lis  qui  scire  valent  amicitiae  indolem,  quae  non  audit  (seu  uon 
curat)  amici  culpam,  fortunatus  est  dies,  in  quo  amicus  culpam  admi- 
serit  [quia  in  eo  elucescet  magis  ejus  amor,  libenter  condonando  earn 
culpam] .' 

Ellis :  '  Those  confirmed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of 
friendship  listen  not  to  the  faults  of  their  friends,  although  daily  guilty 
of  them,' 

809.  '  Totus   mundus   optabit   amicurn   habere    euin,   qui   nunquam 
deserit  amicitiam  illorum,  qui  in  vetusta  familiaritate  nunquam  decre- 
verunt,  quamvis  ipsi  displicentia  faciant.'* 

810.  *  Qui  nescit  antiquam  conditionem  mutare  erga  vetustos  amicos, 
etiamsi  quid  culpabile  fecerint,  ejus  amicitiam  ipsi  hostes  desiderabunt.' 

Ellis :  '  Even  their  enemies  will  desire  the  love  of  those,  who  on 
account  of  ancient  friendship,  separate  not  from  their  friends,  however 
culpable  they  may  be.' 


CHAPTER  LXXXII. 

Beschi :  Damnosa  amicitia.         Graul :  Amicitia  cum  malis. 

811.  '  Melius   est   decrescere   quam   crescere  in   amicitia   eorum  qui 
bona  indole  carent,  licet  in  tui  amore  ita  ebrii  videantur,  uti  qui  vinum 
biberunt.' 

812.  '  Eorum   qui   uniformitatem   non    servantes,   in   affluentia  tibi 
amici  sunt,  in  inopia  te  deserunt,  amicitiam  si  obtineas  quid  boni  ;  si 
perdas,  quid  mali  tibi  erit  ?  ' 

Ellis  :  *  Of  what  consequence  is  it  whether  the  friendship  of  the  incon- 

*  Comp.  Dionysii  Catonis  disticha,  de  moribus,  iv.  41  (Amstel.  1754) : — 
'  Damnaris  nunquam,  post  longum  tempus  amicum. 
Mutavit  mores  ;  sed  pignora  prima  memento.' 

These  disticha,  145  in  number,  more    resemble  the  Kurral  than   anything  else   I 
have  found.     Comp.  the  following  (iv.  19)  with  400  : — 

'  Disce  aliquid  ;  nam  quum  subito  f ortuna  recessit, 
Ars  remanet,  vitamque  hominis  non  deserit  unquam.' 


NOTES.  295 

stant,  who  attach  themselves  to  thee  in  prosperity,  but  forsake  thee  in 
adversity,  be  gained  or  lost?  ' 

813.  '  Amicus,  qui  amat  ad  mensuram  sui   emolumenti ;    meretrix, 
quae  amat  pretium,  uon  pretium    dantem ;    et  latro,  qui  unice  suum 
lucruni  respicit :  nil  inter  se  differunt.' 

Ellis  :  *  The  friend  who  considereth  only  his  advantage  is  on  a  level 
with  mercenary  harlots  and  robbers.' 

814.  '  Melius  est  oinni  amico  eavere,  quam  amicum  qui  stultain  in- 
dolem  habet,  ei  similem  qui  in  pugna  se  auxiliaturum  promittit,  sed 
quum  pugnandum  est  fugit.' 

Instead  of  LQ/T  he  reads  LZSKSH  ;  but  this  is  against  metre  :  u>jra/fiar@/r 
(H&fiLQrrisi&irtu)  would  require  a  G/F/T  in  the  beginning  of  the  next 
foot.  (Intro,  p.  xxvii.  §  vi.) 

815.  '  Melius  est  non  obtinere  quam  obtinere  amicitiam  vilium  illorum 
qui  in  pugna  arcern  deserunt,  quam  sibi  construxerant.' 

816.  'Decies  centies  millies  majus  bonum  affert   odium  sapientum, 
quam  sunima  amicitia  stultorum.' 

Ellis  :  '  Ten  million  of  times  better  is  the  enmity  of  the  wise,  than 
the  most  devoted  attachment  of  fools.' 

817.  'Deceis  centies   millies   majora    tibi  bona   obvenient   ab   ipsis 
hostibus,  quam  ex  amicitia  illorum,  qui  amicum  deridere  solent.' 

818.  '  Ab  ejus  generis  amicis,  qui  non  perficiunt  quod  coeperunt,  nee 
valedicendo,  longe  recede.' 

819.  '  Neque  somniando  optare  debes  amicitiam  ejus,  cujus  alia  sunt 
verba,  alia  sunt  opera.' 

Ellis :  '  It  is  unpleasant  even  to  dream  of  the  friendship  of  those 
whose  words  and  whose  deeds  are  at  variance.' 

820.  '  Nee  minimum  tibi  approximate  sine,  qui  domi  se  tibi  amicum 
ostendit,  foris  vero  tibi  detrahit.' 


CHAPTER  LXXXIII. 

Beschi :    Amicitia    simulata,   sen  quae  non  est  conjuncta  cum   animo. 
Ellis  :  *  On  improper  friendship.'     Graul :  Heuchel-Freundschaft. 

COMP.  Ndl.  231-240. 

821.  'Amicitia  eorum  qui  se  amicos  praebent,  ut  data  occasione 
amicum  securius  laedant,  similis  est  incudi  quae  ferrum  sustentat,  ut 
fortius  malleo  percutiatur.' 

Ellis  :  '  The  friendship  of  those  who  dissemble  attachment,  while 
they  seek  occasion  to  betray  thee,  is  like  an  anvil  (which  supports  the 
metal  while  the  hammer  beats  it).' 


296  THE   KTTBRAL. 

822.  '  Non  fidendum  amicitiae  eorum,  qui  quum  sint  animo  extranei 
se  familiares  ostendunt;  uti  non  fidendum  est  amori  mulieris.' 

823.  '  Qui   hostes   sunt,   quamvis    plures   egregias    artes    didicerint, 
difficile  est  ut  ad  veram  amicitiam  transeant.' 

824.  '  Cavere   oportet  ab   iis,  qui  intus  odium   tegunt,  sed  in  vultu 
laetitiani  et  risum  ostendunt.' 

Ellis  :  '  Mischief  should   be  feared  from   the  deceitful,  whose  coun- 
tenances are  pleasant,  but  their  hearts  filled  with  malice.' 

825.  '  Qui  interius  amorem  non  habent,   eorum  dulcibus  verbis  nee 
minimum  fidendum  est.' 

826.  '  Hostium  verba  statim  dignoscuntur  quamvis  valde  bona  verba, 
uti  verus  amicus  loquatur.' 

Ellis :  '  Although  they  assume  the  courteous   address  of  friends,  the 
words  of  foes  will  soon  be  known  for  what  they  are.' 

827.  '  Qui  intestinum  odium  fovet,  si  huniilia  et  arnica  verba  loquatur, 
non   est   ei   fidendum ;    exemplo  arcus,    qui   dum  inclinatur,  non  nisi 
damnum  illius  erga  quern  inclinatur  intendit.' 

828.  '  Hostes  dum  amoris  in  signum  lachrymas  fundunt  similes  sunt 
iis,   qui   subjectionem   aut   venerationem   fingunt,    ut   arma  occultent, 
quibus  alicujus  vitae  insidiantur.' 

[Comp.  my  Ind.  Hist.,  p.  165,  3rd  ed.] 

829.  t  Rex  cum  iis  hostibus  qui  exterius  nimiam  amicitiam  ostendunt, 
sed  intus   odium  fovent,  et   ipse   tali    amicitia   utens,   laetum  vultum 
ostendendo  cum  iis  ad  eos  interficiendos  jungi  debet  (nam.  fraudem 
fraude  repellere,  aequum  est).' 

830.  '  Quando  venerit  tempus  in  quo  qui  hostes  sunt  amicos  se  fingunt, 
tune  et  tu  in  vultu  amicitiam  ostendendo,  interius  illorum  amicitiam 
aversari  debes.' 

Ellis  :  '  When  the  time  arrives  for  enmity  to  become  amity,  let  your 
countenance  be  friendly  ^  but  carefully  recede  from  such  friendship.' 


CHAPTEE  LXXXIV. 

Beschi :  Insipientia. 

THE  Com.  regards  these  chapters,  to  xciv.,  as  pointing  out  those  whose 
friendship  is  to  be  shunned.     Comp.  Ndl.  331-340. 

831.  '  Est  quid,  quod  insipientia  dicitur ;  si  quaeras,  quidnam  sit,  est 
ea  quae  damnosa  sunt  sectari,  quae  vero  utilia  rejicere.' 

832.  '  Insipientia    quae    omnes    insipientias  vincit,   est  id    studiose 


NOTES.  297 

sectari,  quod  neque  in  hoc  neque  in  altero  mundo  profuturum  est,  quia 
iuordinatum  est.' 

833.  *  Culpam  non  erubescere,  futura  non  considerare,  sine  affabilitate 
rustice  loqui,  et  suum  honorem,  doctrinam,  ac  familiae  splendorem  non 
custodire,  sunt  insipientis  officia.' 

834.  '  Quisnam  erit  eo  insipieutior,  qui  ad  se  domandum  convenientes 
scientias  discendo,  quantum  id  prosit  noscendo,  et  caeteris  ad  id  con- 
ducentia  consilia  dan  do,  se  tamen  domare  nescit.' 

835.  '  Insipiens  capax  est  sibi  in  hoc  mundo  parandi  infernum  in  quo 
post  mortem  demergatur.' 

In  another  place  Beschi  says,  as  to  <5iQ£i.3rDUL\,  '  et  revera  si  bene  con- 
sideretur,  non  sunt  nisi  diversi  modi  animam  torquendi  ob  peccata 
patrata,  atque  ab  iis  earn  purgandi,  si  purgabilia  sunt.' 

836.  'Cum    ad    id    par    non    sit,    aliquod     facinus     perficiendum 
suscipiens  insipiens  ;  aut  id  non  perficiet,  aut  illaqueabitur.' 

837.  '  Si   insipienti    divitiae   affluant,   eas   ita   distribuet   ut   hostes 
ventrem  repleant,  amici  fame  pereant.' 

838.  'Si   insipienti    divitiae    obvenerint    perinde    erit,    ac    si    qui 
vertiginem  patitur,  vinum   bibendo  ebrius  quoque  fiat  [insania  dupli- 
cMtur].' 

839.  '  Valde  dulcis  est  quam  ^insipientes  inter  se  conflant  amicitia, — 
quia  cum  separantur,  nullam  afflictionem  patiuntur.' 

Irony.     LziTgiu®L\&Lp<55$fl.     III.  Gram.  210. 

840.  *  Si  insipiens  in  sapientum  coetum  pedem  inferat,  perinde  est  ac 
si  quis  lutulentis  pedibus  pretiosuni  peristroma  calcet  \hic  peristroma, 
ille  coetum  conspurcaf].' 


CHAPTER  LXXXV. 

Beschi :  Inscitia. 

COMP.  Ndl  321-330. 

841.  'Inter  omnes  defectus,  scientiae  defectus  maximus  est  defectus, 
nam  si  caetera  oinnia  desint,  id  a  scientibus  non  reputatur  defectus.' 

842.  '  Si  inscio  caeteris  aliquid  largiendi  voluntas   obvenerit,  ad  id 
agendum  nulla  alia  est  caussa,  quani  fortuna  illius  qui  recipit.' 

843.  '  Inscitia  praeditumnec  ipsi  ejus  hostes  poterunttotafflictionibus 
affligere,  quod  ipsemet  sibi  causat.' 

844.  '  Si    quaeras,    quid    sit    totalis    inscitia,    est    quaedani    stulta 
persuasio,  qua  quis  quum  nil  aut  parum  sciat,  omnia   tamen  se  scire 
putat.' 

845.  '  Qui   de   iis  quae   nescit  loqui  praesumit,  etiam  quum  de  iis 
loquitur  de  quibus  sine  errore  loqui  potest,  diibitandi  locum  dabit.' 

38 


298  THE    KURRAL. 

846.  *  Ad  quid  inscius  sua  verenda  contegit,  si  tegere  nescit  culpas 
quas  in  se  videt.' 

847.  '  Inscius  qui  alicujus  momenti  secretum  servare  nescit,  ipsemet 
sibi  valde  magnum  damnum  creat.' 

848.  '  Qui  nil  facit,  quod  caeteri  ei  faciendum  insinuant,  neque  ipse 
ex  se  scit,  quid  sibi  conveniat  facere,  est  inorbus  munduin  quousque 
vixerit,  insectans.' 

849.  '  Si  inscio,  quum  quid  facere  ignorat,  modum  id  faciendi  quis 
monstret,   ipse    inscius     reputabitur;    ille    vero,   qui    ignorat,    sciens 
aestimabitur,  eo  modo  quo  quum  nil  sciat,  omnia  se  scire  putat.' 

850.  '  Qui  negat  quod  sapientes   affirmant,  habendus  est  uti  daemon 
qui  terrain  lustrat  ut  hominibus  illudat.' 

Com.  thinks  that  the  existence  of  God,  of  a  future  life  and  retribu- 
tion, are  the  things  which  the  common  sense  of  the  world  affirms  ;  and 
that  he  who  would  rob  men  of  these  beliefs  is  as  a  demon. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 

Beschi :  Animi  aversio,  vel  oppositio. 

851.  c  Animi  aversio  est  quidam  morbus  qui  in  omnes  diffundi  facit 
malam   illam    qualitatem,   quae   divisio   appellatur     (h.e.    socialitatem 
destruens  morbus) .' 

852.  '  Si  quis  a  te  dividi  volens,  hostilitatem  ostenderit,  quum  tamen 
animum  non  avertendo  illi  malum  si  non  faceris,  optimum  erit.' 

853.  '  Si  ex  animo  molestissimum  morburn,  qui  aversio  dicitur  abje- 
ceris,  absque  ulla  unquam  diminutione  nunquam   desituram    gloriam 
adipisceris.' 

854.  '  Si  in   te   destruxeris   malorum   maximum,   quod    est   aversio, 
omnibus  gaudiis  majus  gaudium  obtinebis.' 

855.  '  Qui  quum  animi  aversio  sese  objicit,  earn  declinando  procedere 
valent,  quisnam  est,  qui  ad  eos  destruendos  animum  adjicere  possit  ?  ' 

856.  *  Qui  gloriosum  putat  eos  a  quibus  aversus  est   superare,   aut 
humiliare,  ejus  felicitas  ut  minuatur  et  omnino  destruatur,  nonnisi  unico 
momento  indiget.' 

857.  '  Caeteras  scientias  praecellentem  veri  scientiam  non  assequitur 
(non  percipit)  qui  adeo  insana  mente  praeditus  est,  ut  aversioni  nianus 
det.' 

858.  '  Aversionem  declinare  emolumentum  affert ;    si    verb  animum 
adjicias  ad  ejus  cui  aversus  es  humiliationem,  infelicitas  ad  te  aggredien- 
dum  animum  concipiet.' 

859.  '  Quamvis  emolumentum  ex  aversione  obventurum  sit,  aversionem 


NOTES.  299 

non   cogitat ;    quamvis    dam  num.   obventurum   sit,    aversionem   magis 
inagisque  fovet  animus  humanus.'     (860  in  B.) 

The  disposition  to  hate  shows  that  the   man  is  marked  out  for  mis- 
fortune: *  Quern  Deus  perdere  vult,  prius  dementat.' 

860.  'Ex   animi    aversione    omnia   mala   proveniunt,   animi    autem 
adhaesio  secum  fert  gloriam  omnes  laetificandi.'     (This  is  859  in  B.) 


CHAPTER  LXXXVH. 

Beschi :  Odium  prudens.         '  Might  in  enmity.' 

861.  '  Eex  caveat  hostibus  adversari  se  potentioribus :  non  cavendum, 
imrno  curandum  iis  adversari  quum  infirmiores  sunt.' 

With  the  strong,  guard  against  accepting  dissension. 
With  the  weak,  guarding  not  against  (it),  court  enmity. 

LArrjp]  is  a  weaker  word  than  u<s6)&  :  you  must  not  willingly  accept  a 
difference  with  the  strong,  though  forced  upon  you ;  you  may  court 
even  enmity  with  the  weak.  <gj/bfO^  is  opposed  to  QL&GUGO. 

The  rhythm  is  ge^SlerooF  ;  almost  <gs^^ies)f.  The  ergjena  is  the  best. 
Intro,  p.  xxvi.  The  figure  ^jsptrfi  (III.  Gram.  199).  There  is  also 
C'su/D^eroLoojisEffi  (III.  Gram.  206).  The  fourth  case  is  used  in  UGOS 
(III.  Gram.  60).  The  optatives  (III.  Gram.  85).  (@>Laun-,  III.  Gram.  90.) 

862.  '  Si  quis  consanguineos  non  amando  eos  a  se  distineat,  auxiliares 
non   habeat,   neque   ipse   vires   habeat,   qua   ratione   infringetur   ejus 
hostium  odium  ?  ' 

The  loveless  one,  the  man  devoid  of  strong  allies,  the  man  himself 
indigent, — how  can  he  cut  down  the  foemen's  strength  ? 

For  changes  of  $  into  /D,  see  III.  Gram.  38. 

The  advice  is  two  edged :  '  If  this  is  your  picture,  do  not  hope  to  pre- 
vail ;  if  your  foe  is  such,  you  may  confidently  attack  him.' 

863.  *  Qui  non  metuenda  metuit,  quae  scienda  sunt  nescit,  cum  caeteris 
sociabilis  non  est,  neque  quidquam   suis  largitur,  valde  facilis  est  suis 
hostibus  (i.e.  faciliter  ab  iis  subjugatur) .' 

The  fearful,  the  ignorant,  the  unconciliating,  the  illiberal — 
Is  an  utterly  easy  (prey)  to  his  enemies. 
c$>l@&Lz  =  <s)j<&j<3rLa  Lmssflpasr.     The  rhythm  is  ^r/E/Qsro^. 

864.  '  Qui  nee  occultare,  nee  secretum  custodire  scit,  quovis  tempore, 
quovis  in  loco,  cuivis  hosti,  superatu  facilis  est.' 

One  who  ceases  not  from  wrath,  has  no  self-command — 
Always,  everywhere,  and  to  all,  is  an  easy  (prey). 

865.  *  Qui  nee  jura  discit,  neque  iis  conformiter  agit,  neque  curat  si 


800  THE    KUEEAL. 

vituperetur,  neque  bonam  indolem  habet :  huic  adversari  valde  jucundum 

est  (i.e.  facile,  ejus  hostibus).' 

He  who  regards  not  prescription,  he  who  does  not  actions  suitable, 
He  who  regards  not  guilt,  he  who  is  without  innate  goodness — is  a 
pleasure  to  his  enemies. 

866.  '  Desiderabile  est  odium  fovere    (seu  adversari)  ei,  qui  caecam 
iram  sequitur,  et  valde  luxuriosus  est.' 

867.  '  Etiarn  si  quid  dare  debeas,  emendum  est  odium  illius,  qui  in 
suis  actionibus,  quum  fini  appropinquant,  eas  pessum  ire  facit.' 

868.  '  Qui  nullam  bonam  indolem  (seu  qualitatem)  habet,  si  plurima 
habeat  vitia,  et   socios    (seu   auxiliatores)  non   habeat,   suis   hostibus 
magnam  laetitiam  affert.' 

869.  '  Qui  meticulosus  est,  neque  callet  strategemata  quibus  virium 
defectum  suppleat,  hunc  si  adversarius   sortiatur,  suis   hostibus  longo 
tempore  non  desituram  laetitiam  afferet.' 

870.  'Nunquam  gloriam  assequetur,  qui  quotidie  animurn  non  adjicit 
huic  facillimae  rei,  qualis  est  adversari  iis,  qui  justitiae  leges  ignorant.' 


CHAPTER  LXXXVin. 

Beschi :  Juxta  hostium  diversitatem  diverse  se  gerere  cum  illis. 

871.  'In  eo,  quod  dicitur   odium,  indiscretionem    neque   per  jocum 
affectare  debes.' 

872.  '  Si  malum  est  in  te  concitare  gladiatoris  odium,  pessimum  est 
in  te  concitare  regii  ministri  odium.' 

873.  '  Eo,  qui  vertigine  laborat,  insipientior  est,  qui  solus  quum  sit, 
multorum  odium  in  se  concitat.' 

874.  '  Totus  se  mundus  subdet  magnitudini  ejus  regis,  qui  indolem 
habeat  sibi  conciliandi  amicitiam  suorum  hostium.' 

875.  *  Qui  solus  est  auxiliatorem  non  habens,  et   duos  hostes  habeat, 
unum  ex  his  dulciter  pacificando  sibi  confoederare  debet.' 

876.  '  Si  aliquem  hostem  pacaveris,  sive  non  pacaveris,  quum   tibi 
aliunde    ruina   obvenerit,  neque   cum   illo  foedus  in  eas,  neque   ilium 
rejicias  (tanquam  hostem).' 

877.  '  Iis,  qui  tuam  afflictionem  non  ignorant,  noli  earn  manifestare 
coram  tuis  hostibus  noli  unquam  tuam  debilitatem  prodere.' 

878.  '  Si  res  gerendi  modurn  discendo  tu  ipse  eas  perfeceris,  quin  aliis 
illas   committas,   teque  ipsum  semper   caveris,   laetitia   quam   de   tua 
debilitate  hostes  conceperant  peribit.' 

879.  '  Spinosam  arborem  quum  parva  est  explanta ;  nam  postquam 
creverit,  ipsa  nocebit  manui  earn  explantare  volentis.' 


NOTES.  301 

880.  '  Si  rex,  opportunitatem  habens  deprimendi  audaciam  sui 
adversarii,  earn  despiciendo,  id  non  fecerit,  non  erit,  ubique  in  mundo 
ut  diu  vivat.' 

Beschi  reads      eoeo  for 


CHAPTER  LXXXIX. 

Beschi :  Inimicitia  occulta. 

881.  *  Amici  sunt  ejusdem  conditionis  ac  umbra  et  aqua,  quibus  cum 
voluptate  utimur,  quum  persaepe  damuum  afferant  ob  aliquam  qualita- 
tem  nobis  ignotam,  amicos  etiam  peramanter  excipimus,  quum  interius  et 
occulte  hostes  nobis  sint.' 

For  @sar@)  he  reads  $£cr<5sr  =  l  ad  instar.' 

Water  and   shade   are   most  useful   and  pleasant ;    but   may  prove 
hurtful :  so  friendships. 

882.  '  Noli  ita  metuere  hostes  (gladio)  evaginato  similes,  uti  rnetuere 
debes  hostes,  qui  se  amicos  ostendunt.' 

883.  '  Ab  hoste  occulto  semper  metuendo  cave ;  ni  caveris,  in  occa- 
sione   tibi   ad  versa   te  pejus    diffindet,    quam   figuli  paxillus   argillam 
findit.' 

884.  '  Si  in   te   oriatur  internum   odium   erga  consanguineos,  quod 
probum    animum    dedecet,   illud   tibi   plurima   et    indecorosa   damna 
causabit.' 

885.  *  Si  rex  in  consanguineos  internum  odium  foveat,  illud  ei  plurima 
ruinam  afferentia  mala  causabit.' 

886.  '  Si  ii  qui  cum  rege  unum   sunt,  nempe   consanguinei,  internum 
odium  fovent,  huic  quovis  tempore,  etiam  quum  potens  est,  difficile  erit 
suam  perditionern  declinare.' 

887.  '  Familia  in  qua  interna  odia  regnant,  quainvis  exterius  unionem 
obtendat,  interius  tamen  divisa  est,  non  secus  ac  capsula,  quae  videtur 
unum  lignum  esse,  sed  revera  ex  duobus  lignis  constat.' 


].  ( Familia  in  qua  interna  odia  vigent,  ex  animorum  contrietate 
pugna  teritur  non  secus  ac  teritur  ferrum  cum  lima  pugnans.' 

889.  '  Quamvis  internum  odium  sit  adeo  exiguum,  uti  divisio  quae 
apparet  in  semine  sesamae  nihilominus  semper  noxium  erit.' 

'  The  little  rift  within  the  lute  ! ' 

890.  '  Vita  illorum,  qui  in  eadem  domo  viventes  interno  se  odio  prose- 
quuntur,   similis  est  vitae  illius  qui  in  parva  domuncula  simul  cum 
serpente  vitam  ducat.' 


302  THE    KUBRAL. 

CHAPTER  XC. 

Beschi :  Magnos  viros,  puta  sacerdotes,  religiosos,  hisque  similes  laedere. 

891.  '  Qui  sibi  cavet  ne  a  mails  opprimatur,  nullam  meliorem  cautionem 
adhibebit,  quam  cavendo  ne  despiceat  magnitudinem  eorum,  qui  (vel  ob 
dignitatem,  vel  ob  spiritualitatem,  vel  ob  scientiam,  vel  ob  dexteritatem 
venerandi  sunt,  vel)  capaces  sunt  quidquid  intentant  perficiendi,' 

892.  '  Si  magnos  viros  non  verendo  processeris,  id  per  ipsosrnet  tibi 
nunquam  desiturum  damnum  causabit.' 

893.  '  Si  cupis  tuam  ruinam,  justitiae  legibus  auditum  ne  praebe  ;  si 
cupis  tuam  internecionem  majoribus  injuriani  facito.' 

894.  '  Debilior  aut  inferior  quum  sis,  noli  potentioribus  aut  superiori- 
bus  injuriam  facere,  quia  id  idem  erit  ac  manu  vocare  deum  mortis,  ut 
te  impetat  sua  falce.' 

895.  '  Eex  qui  ab  alio  rege  potentiore  invaditur,  ubinam  gentium  tutus 
erit?     Nullibi  mortem  effugiet.' 

896.  ( Quamvis  igne  cremeris  vivere  poteris ;  nullo   modo  vivent  qui 
majoribus  injuriam  faciunt.' 

897.  '  Ob  membrorum,  quae  regnum  constituunt  praestantiam  insigne 
licet  regnum  obtineas,  plurimisque  divitiis  affluas,  quid  tibi  proderimt, 
si  insignes  in  virtute  viri  tibi  irascantur.' 

898.  '  Si  iis  qui  ob  virtutum  celsitudinem  monti  sunt  similes  defectum 
venerationis  exhibeant,  etiam  ii,  qui  in  mundo  videntur  cum  sua  familia 
diuturnam  stabilitatem  habit uri,  peribunt.' 

Ascetics  are  (gen-pear^n;  '  like  hills/  in  elevation ;  and  also,  they 
stand  unmoved  in  shine  and  storm. 

899.  '  Si  qui   sublimi  virtute  pollet  irascatur,  et  ipse   deorum    rex 
Devendiran  (in  suis  verendis  figuram  amittendo  !)  damnum  sentiet.' 

In  Beschi,  898.  He  reads  GeuJBpGBt&GsuJBgi,  '  King  of  Kings = 
Indra.'  Nahusha  (Manu,  vii.  41)  had  obtained  sovreignty  of  the  three 
worlds,  but,  for  an  intentional  insult  to  Agastya,  was  changed  into  a 
serpent.  B.  has  in  mind  25.  See  note  on  25. 

900.  '  Etiam  ii,  qui  nimiam  potentiam  habent,  cum  vita  non  evadent, 
si  ipsis,  ii  qui  singularibus  virtutibus  praediti  sunt,  irascantur.' 


NOTES.  303 


CHAPTER  XCI. 

Beschi :  Non  sinere  se  ab  uxore  regi.       G-raul :  Den    Weg  der 
Frau  gehen. 

EASTERN  kings  have  often  done  great  injustice  to  worthy  councillors. 
Their  courts  are  often  disturbed  by  intrigues  which  have  their  origin 
in  the  zenana.  Hence  this  chapter  naturally  follows  the  last.  It  also 
connects  itself  with  '  enmity ' :  for  nothing  generates  such  deadly 
hate. 

901.  '  Qui  nimis  uxorii  sunt  nee  virtutem  consequentur,  nee  fortunae 
bona ;  qui  enim  ad  haec  acquirenda  incumbunt,  veluti  maximum  impedi- 
mentum  uxoriam  delectationem  despiciunt.' 

The  idea  of  polygamy  is  not  suggested, — and  is,  in  fact,  rendered 
impossible  by  the  tenor  of  Ch.  iv.,  &c. ;  yet  it  found  place  among  the 
Rajas  whom  Tiruvalluvar  contemplates.  The  practical  value  of  the 
chapter  is  thus  evident. 

902.  *  Felicitas  illius,  qui  sui  virilitatis  oblitus  minium  uxori  deditus 
est,  quum  magnum  dedecus  afferat,  valde  indecora  est.' 

903.  'In  uxore   viro  se  subjicientis  conditionis  defectus  efficiet,  ut 
quoties  ejus  vir  ante  probos  viros  appareat  erubefiat.' 

Ariel :  '  Manquer  de  personalite  en  se  soumettant  a  une  epouse  donne 
toujours  honte  parmi  les  sages.' 

904.  '  Qui  uxorem  suam  timet,  et  pro  altera  vita  virtute  vacuus  erit, 
et  in  hac  vita  etiamsi  in  familia  augenda  virilitatem  ostendat,   haec  a 
nemine  celebrabitur.' 

905.  '  Qui  uxorem  timet,  timebit  etiam  quovis  tempore  probis  viris 
benefacere.' 

906.  '  Quamvis  (destructis  omnibus  tuis  hostibus)  ex  pace  fruaris, 
quam  Beati  fruuntur,  nunquam  vir  dici  poteris,   si  tuae  uxoris  manus, 
quae  arundinis  munghil  dictae  nitorem  equant,  pertimesces.' 

Comp.  Catullus,  li. : — 

'  Ille  mi  par  esse  deo  videtur, 

Otium  et  reges  prius  et  beatas 
Perdidit  urbes.' 

This  is  not  to  be  taken  literally ;  yet,  I  think,  there  is  possibly  a 
play  on  words.  She  might  speak  '  bambus,'  though  she  used  none. 

907.  *  Valde  aestimabilior  erit  verecunda  muliercula,  quam  magnus 
vir,  qui  uxori  se  subdit.' 

908.  '  Qui  juxta  voluntatem  uxoris  in  agendo  procedit,  neque  ami- 
corum  necessitatibus  succurret,  neque  sibi  pro  altera  vita  bona  curnu- 
labit.' 


304  THE   KURKAL. 

909.  '  Neque  virtutes,  nee  bene  partae  divitiae,  neque  caeterae  actiones 
quibus  hujus  vitae  gaudia  comparare  possit,  locum  habent  in  eo,  qui 
suae  uxori  subditus  est.' 

In  the  enjoyment  of  ^GSTULQ  he  forgets  ^rou^  and  Qu/r^sfr.     (Intro, 
p.  vii.) 

910.  '  Insipientia  se  suae  uxori  subdendi  nunquam  invenietur  in  illo, 
qui  negotiis  aniinum  applicat,  iis  que  parta  felicitate  fruitur.' 

The  emphatic  directness  of  this  chapter  is  noteworthy.     Many  native 
states  have  perished  through  the  effeminacy  here  so  forcibly  denounced. 


CHAPTER  XCII. 

Beschi :  Mulier  quae  in  suo  corporetradendo  limites  non  habet,  i.e.  meretrix. 
Graul :  Freche  Dirnen.     Ariel :  Femmes  sans  retenue. 

THIS  points  to  a  still  more  frequent  cause  of  ruin.      Coinp.  Ndl.  371-80. 

911.  '  Yalde  noxium  est  seduci  a  dulcibus  verbis  mulieris,  quae  te  non 
desiderat  ex  tui  amore,  sed  tuam  pecuniam  desiderat.' 

912.  '  Sapientes  bene  ponderando  dulcedinem  qua  meretrix  tui  amorem 
non  habens,  ex  emolument!  amore  amantia  verba  profert,  ab  ea  f ugere 
debent  tanquam  ab  hoste.' 

913.  '  Meretrix,  in  suis  fallacibus  amplexibus,  perinde  se  habet,  ac  si 
qui  mercede  conductus  ad  sepulturam  ut  deferat,  cadaver  extranei   ali- 
cujus  hominis  amplectitur.' 

This  seems  quite  wrong.  Com.  also  is  far-fetched  and  obscure, 
imagining  a  scavenger  carrying  a  corpse.  Far  better  is  Graul :  '  Wer 
sich  mit  einer  feilen  Dime  abgiebt,  der  giebt  sich  mit  einem  Leichnam 
ab,  denn  sie  giebt  eben  nur  ihren  Leib  hin — ohne  alle  Seele.'  So  also 
Ariel. 

914.  '  Vilem  gustum  ab  ea  illatum,  quae  unice  optat  tuam  pecuniam 
propriam  facere,  non  tangunt  qui  attente  considerare  valent  veri  amoris 
proprietatem.' 

Alb.  Tib.  iii.  49 :  '  Heu  heu  divitibus  video  gaudere  puellas.' 

915.  '  Qui   in   prudentia  et  sapientia   excellunt,  non  tangunt  vilern 
gustum  ab  illis  illatum,  quae  communem  amorem  habent  (i.e.  omnibus 
pecuniam  dantibus  amorem  ostendunt).' 

916.  '  Qui  suam  laudam  per  orbem  diffundunt,  non  tangunt  corpus 
earum,  quae  venustatem  et  laetitiam  ostendendo  vilem  sui  corporis  usum 
in  omnes,  qui  pecuniam  dant,  diffundunt.' 

917.  'Corpus  earum  quae  aliud  quam   coeuntem   animo  affectando 


NOTES.  305 

(nempe  pecuniam)  coeunt,  ii  solum   tangunt  qui  vili  animo  praediti 
sunt.' 

918.  '  Sapientes  fallaces  meretricis  amplexus  vocant  pestem  illorum 
qui  non  habent  adeo  sanam  mentem,   ut  valeant  considerare  illarum 
deceptionem.' 

A  kind  of  Lamia. 

919.  '  Delicata  cutis  meretricum,  quae  limites  non  habent,  sed  omnibus 
pecuniam  dantibus  se  tradunt,  infernus  est  in  quo  merguntur  viles  atque 
infimae  notae  homines.' 

Beschi  translates  Qptreo  for  Q^ir&r :  yet  his  text  is  right. 

920.  '  Meretrices,  inebrians  liquor,  et  ludus,  nonnisi  cum  iis  a  quibus 
felicitas  recessit,  amicitiam  ineunt.' 

See  Ch.  xcui.,  xciv. 


CHAPTER  XCIII. 

Beschi :  Alstinere  ab  inebriantibus. 

ANOTHER  enemy  to  the  state  of  kings. 

<ffi«n  =S.  surd  ;  but  is  restricted  in  use  to  toddy,  the  fermented  juice  of 
the  LjSocr,  Borassus  flabelli/ormis. 

In  Kamban's  Tamil  version  of  the  Bamayanam,  I.  Edndam,  xviii. 
Padalam,  entitled  Q-tsmri—frLLQuui—evLD,  or  '  The  drinking  revels,'  the  poet 
describes,  with  evident  sympathy,  in  sixty-seven  quatrains,  the  wild 
Bacchanalian  orgies  in  which  King  Da9arathan,  his  wives  and  all  his 
court — all  drunk  together,  it  would  seem — indulge  for  a  week  in  a  palm- 
tree  grove  on  their  journey  to  Mithila. 

921.  *  Beges  qui  semper  dediti  sunt  potationi  liquorum  inebriantium, 
nee  ab  hostibus  metuentur,  et  partas  laudes  omnes  oinittent.' 

922.  '  Nemo  inebriantia  bibat ;  si  quis  bibere  velit,  ille  bibat,  qui  non 
curat  a  sapientibus  aestimari.' 

923.  '  Si  ebrietas  et  ipsis  tuae  matris  oculis   turpis   videtur,  qualis 
videbitur  oculis  sapientum.' 

924.  'Mulier   quae   dicitur    verecundia   dorsum   vertet   iis,  qui  non 
cavent  ab  niaximo  hoc  vitio  potandi  inebriantia.' 

925.  '  Nonne  quid   sit   opprobrium   ignorari   videtur,  qui  pretio  sui 
oblivionem  emit.' 

926.  '  Qui  dormiunt,  quamdiu  dormiunt  mortuis  sunt  similes ;  qui 
vero  inebriantia  bibunt,  quovis  tempore,  sunt  similes  iis  qui  venenum 
sumpserunt.' 

39 


306  THE    KURBAL. 

927.  '  Qui  semper  inebriation!  dediti,  dum  bibunt  a  caeterorum  oculis 
se  abscondunt,  non  evitabunt  subsannationem  suorum  concivium  quibus 
secreta  potatio  ab  ebrietate  manifesta  sit.' 

928.  *  Desine  dicere  quod  non  bibere  soleas,  nam  tua  culpa  in  tuo 
pectore  abscondita,  statim  ac  bibisti,  se  prodet.' 

929.  '  Ebrium  velle  rationibus  ad  bonam  frugem  reducere,  idem  est  ac 
cum  lucerna  quaerere  velle  eum  qui  subtus  aquam  est.' 

930.  '  Qui  se  inebriare  solet,  dum  ebrius  non  est,  et  alium  ebrium 
videt,  nonne  considerat  qualis  sua  fuerit  deformitas  cum  ebrius  fuit  ? ' 


CHAPTER  XCIV. 

Beschi  :  Ludus. 

GAMBLING  and  disease  are  both  hindrances. 
Com.  Analysis  :  — 

I.  1-5.     It  brings  loss. 

II.  6-9.     It  entails  many  degradations. 

III.  10.     Hard  to  cure. 

93  1  .  '  Noli  ludum  appetere,  quamvis  tibi  victoriam  det  ;  quia  sicuti 
piscis  hamum  deglutiens  decipitur,  ita  ludus  victoriam  veluti  hamum 
extendendo,  tuam  pecuniam  omnem  surripiendo  te  fallet.' 

See 


6lJQ2LQ<£fB(bl  (Lp<5W<5G)<SlJ  Q  UU  fT  fr  Si  GO  (T  LJ 


'  Gaming  despise  !     Ev'n  when  you  strive  and  overcome, 
Tis  as  when  fowler,  mind  on  fraudful  scheme  intent, 
His  net  conceals,  and  places  dainty  food  within, 
And  winged  tribes  unweeting  haste  to  eat/  they  cried. 

The  whole  passage,  11-28,  is  a  commentary  on  this  chapter. 

932.  '  Est  ne  in  ludo,  ubi  si  semel  vincas,  centies   perdes,  via  ad  vir- 
tutum  et  deliciarum  consequutionum  ?  ' 

933.  *  Si  rex  semper  in  ore  habeat  lucrum  ludo  partum  (i.e.  si  inces- 
santer  ludat),  in  aerario  congesta  pecunia,  et  ex   tributis  congerenda, 
ipsum  destituens  ad  hostes  perveniet.' 

934.  '  Nil  est   quod   paupertatem   inducat,   uti  ludus,   qui  et  varias 
angustias  affert,  et  felicitatem  destruit.' 


NOTES.  307 

935.  ['Keges,  qui  aleam,  et  ludi  locum,  et  ludendi  exercitium,  magno 
cum  gaudio,  nimium  sectati  fuere,  esse  desierunt.'] 

So  especially  the  Pandavas,  and  Naja.  See  Dowson's  Classical  Diet. 
1  Qakuni '  is  synonymous  with  '  cheat.'  Manu  forbids  dice,  iv.  74. 

936.  'Nunquam  ventrem  implebunt,  ac  iniseriam  patientur,  qui  ab 
infelicitatis  dea,  cui  nomen  ludus,  occupati  sunt.' 

937.  '  Si  tempus  in  ludo  teras>  et  ab  atavis  haereditate  acceptam  feli- 
citatem,  et  bonas  animi  quas  habes  conditiones  amittes.' 

Manu  repeatedly  forbids  gambling.  In  II.  179,  it  is  associated  with 
'disputes.'  So  Avvai  says:  (ajjjjii  euirgiLc*  (oGUjsVssrQ&LinuLa  'gaming 
and  disputation  bring  distress.' 

938.  '  Ludus    ludentis    pecuuiaui    destruendo,    et    eum    mendaciis 
addictum   faciendo,   virtuosas  largitiones  amandando,  et  in  hac  et  in 
altera  vita  miseriam  affert.' 

In  Manu  again,  gambling  and  prize-fighting  are  classed  together  as 
things  a  king  should  exclude  from  his  kingdom,  ix.  221-28. 

939.  '  Qui   ludo    deditus    est,   nunquam    assequetur    haec   quinque, 
nempe  divitias,  felicitatem,  lauteni  cibum,  laudem  et  scientiam.' 

940.  '  Sicuti  quamvis  valde  afflictus  quis  vivat,  semper  vivere  desi- 
derat,  ita  qui  ludo  deditus  est,  quamvis  saepissime  perdat,  semper  ludere 
desiderat.' 

The  climate  and  the  conditions  of  Eastern  court  life  have  always  pre- 
disposed Oriental  kings  to  this  exciting  pursuit ;  hence  stories  of  rulers 
ruined  by  gambling  are  many ;  and  denunciations  of  the  vice  abound, 
the  vehemence  of  which  shows  the  greatness  of  the  evil. 


CHAPTER  XOV. 

Beschi :  Medicina. 

DISEASES,  according  to  C.,  are  partly  from  deeds  done  in  a  former  birth 
(Manu,  xi.  48),  and  so  are  fated  (378)  ;  partly  from  mistakes  in  diet 
and  other  things.  These  last  only  are  here  contemplated. 

The  Hindu  idea  is  closely  connected  with  that  of  heredity,  which  is 
justly  regarded  as  so  important  in  these  days.     [Comp.  S.  John  ix.  2.] 

941.  '  Sive   excessum  sive   diminutionem   patiantur,   tria   ilia,   quae 
medicinae  professores  enumerant,  nempe  melancolia,  bilis  et  phlegrna, 
aegritudinem  afferent.' 

942.  *  Corpori  nulla  erit  necessaria  rnedicina,  si  caute  servaveris  cibi 
uiensuram,  quam  tibi  proficuam  expertus  es  in  coinedendo.' 


308  THE    KURRAL. 

943.  '  Cibum  sume  servando  mensurain  diminutiouis  quam  proficuam 
expertus  es ;  quia  iis  qui  corpus  obtinuerunt  (i.e.  morti  obnoxii  sunt) 
haec  est  via  ad  diii  vivendum.' 

944.  '  Quam  tibi  praefixisti,  neque  comedas  ea,  quae  dissontiam  habent 
vel  inter  se,  vel  cum  tuo  corpore,  vel  cum  tempore.' 

945.  '  Nulla  erit  homini  aegritudo,  si  comedat  ea,  quae  diversitatem 
(seu  dissontiam  quam  supra  diximus)   non  habeant,  et  fraenet  deside- 
rium  plus  aequo  comedendi.' 

946.  '  Sicuti  bona  valetudo  semper  erit  ei  qui  comedit,  servando  dimi- 
nutionern  sibi  necessarian! ;  ita  aegritudines  nunquani  destituent  eum 
qui  excessive  comedit.' 

947.  'Qui  non  considerando  quid  ferre  possit   sui   stomachi    calor, 
cibum  qui  calorem  excedat  sumpserit,  innumeras  aegritudines  patietur.' 

948.  'Medicus     debet     considerare    aegritudinis     qualitatein,    ejus 
originem  (seu  caussam),  et  hanc   ablegandi  viam,  et  debet  remedium 
applicare,  quod  ex  circumstantiis  inefficax  non  evadat.' 

949.  '  Qui  medicam  artem  callet  (quuni  earn   in  praxin  redigit),  debet 
remedia   applicare   attendendo    ad    aegri   qualitatein,   ad   aegritudinis 
statum,  et  ad  tempus  in  quo  medetur.' 

950.  '  Medicina  ut  efficax  sit,  quatuor  pati  debet  divisiones  ;  nempe, 
qualitates  aegri,  medici,  remedii,  et  remedium  praeparantis.' 


PARS  IV. 

Proprietaries  intermissae ;  i.e.  appendix,  in  qua  agitur  de  iis,  quae  in 
tribus  praecedentibus  partibus  non  continentur. 

CHAPTER  XCVI. 

Beschi :  Prosapiae  nobilitas.     Ariel :  Noblesse. 

COMP.  Ndl.  141-50. 
Com.'s  analysis : — 
I.  1-3.  Its  nature. 
H.  4-6.  Nothing  unworthy. 
IH.  7,  8.  Disgrace  of  derogation. 
IV.  9,  10.  Essentials :  truth  and  humanity. 

951.  '  Non  nisi  in  nobili  loco  natis,  tarn  quam  sui  generis  propriae, 
aequitas  et  erubescentia  reperiuntur.' 

952.  '  Nobili  loco  nati  nunquarn  deficiunt  in  his  tribus,  nempe  in  pro- 
cedendo  conformiter  suo  statui,  in  sinceritate  locutionis,  et  in  erubescendo 
de  his  quae  mundus  reprobat.' 


NOTES.  309 

953.  '  Sapientes  asserunt  esse  partes  proprias  eorum,  qui  vere  nobiles 
sunt,  vultus  hilaritatem,  manus  largitatem,  oris  affabilitatem,  et  neminem 
despicere.' 

954.  '  Nobili  loco  nati,  etiamsi  multos  nuinmorum  milliones  lucrari 
possint,  numquam  talia  facient  unde  suo  generi  decus  minuatur.' 

955.  '  Quamvis   pristinae    opes   minuantur,   qui    ex    antiqua   familia 
oriuntur,  nunquam  a  sua  magnifica  conditione  degenerant.' 

956.  '  Vitia  eorum  qui  sublimi  loco  nati  sunt,  non  secus  ac  in  acre 
lunae  maculae  ;    quuin  luna  sublimis  exstat,   omnibus  patent,  adeoque 
inagisquam  ab  iis  cavere  debent.' 

957.  'Qui   omni   defectu  carenti   prosapiae  conformiter  vivere  vult, 
etiamsi  paupertati  prematur,  non  faciet  quid  sibi  indecorum.' 

958.  '  Nobili  loco  licet  natus,  si  affabilitatem  non  prae  se  fert,  de  suae 
prosapiae  nobilitate  dubitationein  inducet.' 

959.  '  Sicuti  germina  quae  producit/soli  qualitatem  indicant ;  ita  verba 
quae  loquuntur,  prosapiae  qualitatem  in  horninibus  ostendunt.' 

960.  '  Si  laudem  optas,  erubescentia  tibi  necessaria  est,  quae  te  ab 
omnibus   quae  vituperabilia  sunt  distrahat;    si  prosapiae  nobilitatem 
servare  optas,  omnibus  te  submittere  affecta.' 


CHAPTEE  XCVII. 

Beschi :  Honoris  tenacitas.     Graul :  Honestas.     Ariel :  Dignite. 

THIS  is  the  first  essential  of  Nobility.      It  must  suffer  no  disgrace. 
Eather  voluntary  death  than  dishonour.     Suicide  seems  sanctioned. 
Comp.  Ndl.  291-300. 

961.  '  Etiamsi  quid  faciendo  maximum  emolumentum,  quod  alia  via 
obtineri  nequit,  obtineas,  noli  illud  facere,  si  tale  sit,  unde  honor  tuus 
minuatur.' 

962.  '  Quantumvis  laudabilia  feceris,  nil  facere  debes,  quod  vitup  era- 
bile  sit,  si  tuam  laudem  et  honorem  servare  desideras.' 

963.  '  Quando  divitiis  affluis,  necessaria  tibi  est  anirni  submissio  erga 
caeteros ;  quando  paupertate  angustiaris,  necessaria  tibi  est  aninii  ele- 
vatio,  ne  ob  paupertatern  vile  quid  facias.' 

964.  'Nobiles  viri   si  a  suo  honoroso  statu  decidant,    similes    sunt 
capillis  qui  e  capite  deciderunt.' 

965.  'Etiam  ii,  qui  ita  sublimes  sunt,  ut  monti  pares  videantur,  infimi 
evadent,  si  suum  honorem  minuens  quid  fecerint,  licet  id  parvo  semini 
(gearfSI  dicto  aequale  sit  (i.e.  si  vel  minimum  quid  sit).' 

Comp.  277. 

966.  '  Si  neque  ad  laudem  assequendam,  nee  ad  coelitum  regnuin  te 


310  THE     KUREAL. 

ducendum  prodest,  ad  quid  quaeso  permanes  in  eos  sectaudo,  qui  te 
conteinnant  (nempe  indecora  faciendo).' 

967.  '  Melius  est  dici  quod  quia  indecorum  quid  facere  noluisti,  in 
illo  ipso  momento  periisti,  quam  opipare  vivere,  eundo  post  eos  qui  te 
vituperent.' 

^fifiZsvQuj  'there  and  then, — not  leaving  his  proper  position.' 

968.  '  Si  sublimi  loco  natus  suum  robur  (nempe  honorem)  amiserit, 
corpus  cum  vita  servare  eritne  suo  malo  remedium  ? ' 

969.  '  Sublimi    loco  nati    similes  animali  >ss<sufl  dicto,   quod    statim 
moritur,  si  vel  unus  ex  pilis  illi  auferatur :  si  vita  cum  honore  contendat, 
vitam  abjiciant,  ne  honorem  amittant.' 

970.  '  Mundus  laudibus  efferet  ejus  gloriam,  qui  honorem  itaservavit, 
ut  in  occasione  indecorum  quid  faciendi,  vitam  honori  postposuerit.' 


CHAPTEE  XCYIII. 

Beschi:   (Vera)  magnitude. 

G-REATNESS  of  mind.     Conduct  worthy  of  a  man's  name  and  station. 

971.  'Verus  cujusque  splendor  est  animi  elevatio  (nempe  ad  ardua 
conspirare)  ;  sine  hac  sibi  qui  praetigit  vitam  ducere,  indecoram  ducet 
vitam/ 

972.  '  Cunctis   hominibus   aequalis  est  ortus,    diversitas  inter  ipsos 
nonnisi  ex  officiorum  diversitate  manat.' 

973.  '  Quam  vis  sublimi  loco  natus  sis,  aut  sublimi  munere  fungeris, 
nisi  sublimia  habeas  opera,  sublimis  non  eris ;    infimo  loco  natus,    si 
infima  non  habeat  opera,  infimus  non  erit.' 

974.  '  Sicuti  in  muliere  honos  non  persistet,  nisi  ilia,  unicam  habens 
voluntatein,  caute  ilium  custodiat ;  ita  magnitude  non  persistet  nisi  in  eo 
qui  illam  custodierit,  cavendo  ab  iis,  qui  vilia  sunt.' 

975.  '  Qui  vera  magnitudine  praediti  sunt,  non  modo  ardua  audere, 
sed  et  ea  debito  inodo  (h.e.  honestis  mediis)  perficere  debent.' 

976.  'Intuitus   procedendi  cum  veneratione  erga  majores  ita  mag- 
norum  vivorum  est  proprius,   ut   ne   in  cogitationem  quidem   incidat 
innmorum.' 

977.  'Si  dotes,  quas  magnus  vir  habet,  in  eo  reperiantur,  qui  magnis 
viris  aequalem  conditioneui   non   habet,  ad   superbiam  et  caeterorum 
depressionem  ei  inservient.' 

978.  '  Qui  vere  magnus  est,  semper  (i.e.  sive  pauper,  sive  dives  sit) 
humilis  est ;  qui  vilis  est,  etiamsi  dives  non  sit,  ex  se  sibi  ornamentum 
facit,  caeteris  se  praeferendo.' 


NOTES.  311 

979.  *  Magni  viri  conditio  est  non  inflari ;  vilis  viri  conditio  est  usque 
ad  excessum  inflari.' 

980.  'Proprium  est  magnorum  vivorum  occultare  (i.e.  excusare),  quae 
caeteris   indecora   sunt;    vilium    proprietas  est,   nescire  loqui  nisi  de 
aliorum  vitiis.' 

Comp.  Oh.  xix. 


CHAPTEE  XCIX. 

Beschi :  Omnes  probitatis  conditiones  (sen  qualitates)  possidere. 
Graul :  Vollkommenheit ;  perfectio. 

FULNESS  of  excellence  (^freu)  :  reXeio-nys. 

This  noble   chapter  might  be   illustrated   by   quotations   from   all 
quarters. 

981.  '  Sapientes  asserunt  eum  qui  praetigit  probum  esse  velle,  pro- 
bitatis   debitum    sciendo,     ad    omnes    bonas    qualitates    possidendas 
obligari.'     ['  =Bonum  ex  integra  caussa.'] 

Comp.  *  Integer  vitae,  scelerisque  purus.' 

982.  '  Bonum  virum  bonae  qualitates  faciunt ;  caetera  omnia  qualis- 
cunque  bonitatis  sint,  probum  non  faciunt.' 

983.  '  Columnae,   quae  probitatem   sustentant,    sunt   h^ec  quinque  : 
amor  in  omnes,  culpam  erubescere,  egenis  succurere,  clementiam  habere, 
et  sincerum  esse  in  loquendo.' 

984.  '  Poenitentium   decus   est   non   interficere   viventia ;    proborum 
decus  est  non  loqui  de  caeterorum  defectibus.' 

985.  *  Eeligiosorum  decus  estdemissio:  his  armis  probus  vir  hostes 
suos  superabit.' 

986.  *  Si    quaeras   quinam   sit   Lydius   lapis   probitatem    explorans, 
dicam  esse,  si  sciat  non  modo  se  potentioribus,  sed  etiam  iis  qui  sibi 
inferiores  sunt  victas  dare  manus.' 

987.  '  Ad   quid   utilis   erit   probitas,   si   nesciat   etiam   male  meritis 
benef  acere  ? ' 

988.  '  Viro,   qui  possederit   robur,  quod   dicitur   probitas,   non   erit 
dedecus  esse  pauperem.' 

989.  'Qui  non  mutantur,  etiamsi  tempus  mutetur   (h.e.  qui  nee  pau- 
pertatis  tempore  probitatem  destituunt)  probitatis  litus  vocabuntur. 

But  compare  e@Ei.j5L 

990.  '  Si  probi  probitatem  non  sustentando,  ab  ilia  deficiant,  tune  nee 
infernus  suum  pondus  sustentare  poterit.' 

He  reads 


312  THE    KUBEAL. 

CHAPTER  C. 

Beschi :  Bona  indoles  :  ingenuitas. 
Graul :  Boni  mores ;  yute  Art.  Ariel :   Courtoisie. 

THIS  is  the  crown  of  perfectness  :  a  mingling  of  unaffected  kindness 
with  consummate  tact.  See  Ch.  vin.,  xxv.  It  is  from  u®xr  (vide  sub 
loco)  '  harmony '  ;  and  harmonizes  all  things,  while  it  is  the  result  of  a 
happy  and  harmonious  combination  of  good  qualities. 

991.  '  Sapientes  aiunt   facile   esse  cuivis  assequi  optirnam   semitam 
quae  dicitur  ingenuitas,  facilem  se  atque  affabilem  praebendo.' 

992.  '  Amor  in  omnes  et  prosapiae   nobilitas  duo  sunt,  quae  ad  inge- 
nuitatem  viam  sternunt.' 

993.  '  Quoniam  per  membrorum  similitudinem  non  fit  hominis  cum 
probro  homine  similitudo ;  superest  ut  fiat  per  similitudinem  indolis, 
quae  patitur  reformationem,  quam  membra  non  patiuntur.' 

Gi en £)}<£  <&•&&•=•'  quae  reformari  potest ' :  as  though  from  (oeujj/.     See 
Concordance,  sub  voce. 

This  hints  that  ($y.ui$ppp&  is  not  mere  purity  of  caste  or  family. 

994.  '  Mundus  laudibus  efferet  ejus  indolem,  qui  justitiae  et  virtutis 
cupidum  emolumentum  possidet  (Ji.e.  qui  justitiam  et  virtutem  sectando 
sibi  emolumentum  comparavit).' 

995.  '  Ingenuitatis  naturam  scientibus,  neque  per  jocum  permittitur 
subsannare  vel  ipsos  suos  hostes.' 

Ariel.  'Le  dedain  en   plaisanterie  meme,  est  inal  pour  qui  connait 
1'importance  de  la  courtoisie  envers  un  ennemi  meme.' 

996.  '  Ideo  mundi  mos  adhuc  perdurat,  quia  incidit  in  bonae  indolis 
homines ;  nam  si  ita  non  esset,  jam  intus  terram  abiens  periisset.' 

Courtesy  enables  the  world's  work  to  get  done. 

997.  'Qui  hominum  propriam  indolem  non  habent,  quamvis  limae 
acumini   parem    ingenii,    subtilitatem    possideant,    arboribus    similes 
dicendi  sunt.' 

Against  those  who  say  sharp  unpleasant  things. 

998.  'Dedecus  est  ab   humanitate   deficere  etiam  cum  iis,  qui  ex  odio 
tibi  malefecerint.' 

Courtesy  towards  opponents. 

999.  '  Qui  nesciunt  cum  caeteris  amicabiliter  vivere,  his  diurna  etiam 
lux  tenebrae  sunt.' 

Malvolio  ? 

1000.  '  Divitiae,  quae  malae  indolis  homini  obveniunt,  nialae  evadunt ; 
non  secus  ac  bonum  lac  malum  evadit,  si  in  malum  vas  infundatur.' 

A  discourteous  wealthy  man  is  like  sour  milk. 


NOTES.  313 


CHAPTER  01. 

Beschi :  Divitiae  infructuosae,  i.e.  Avaritia. 
Graul :  Opulentia  inutilis. 

THIS  is  the  reverse  of  the  picture  presented  in  Ch.  xxin.     It  is  a  very 
favourite  topic  with  Tamil  poets.     Comp.  Ndl.  261-70,  276,  296,  328. 

1001.  '  Qui  amplam  domum  divitiis  replet,  iisque  non  fruitur,  vivus 
licet  sit,  respectu  divitiarum  jam  mortuus  est,  cum  ei  nulla  circa  illis 
actio  supersit.' 

Comp.  214. 

1002.  '  Ex  eo,  quod  divitias  obtinendo,  omnia  bona  obtinere  poteris, 
illas  cumulare,  sed  postea  in  stultitia  incidere  ita  illas  affectandi,  nt  nil 
caeteris  largiaris,  haud  bonum  post  mortem  tibi  staturn  causabit.' 

1003.  '  Homines,    qui    solam   divitiarum   cumulationem   affectando, 
laudem  ex  largitione  profluentem  non  affectant,  ad  quid  nascuntur,  nisi 
ut  terrae  pondus  augeant.' 

1004.  '  Qui  nil  largiendo,  a  nemine  desiderari  se  facit,  quid  quaeso 
relinquere  meditatur,  quod  post  mortem  remansurum  sibi  sit  ?  ' 

1005.  '  Ei,  qui  nee  divitiis  fruitur,  nee  caeteris  eas  largitur,  quamvis 
multi  divitiarum  milliones  sint,  idem  erit  ac  si  non  essent.' 

1006.  '  Ei,  qui  nee  ipse  fruitur,  nee  iis,  qui  bus  largiri  debent,  divitias 
largiendi  indolem  habet,  quid  remanent,  nisi  pura  afflictio  et  labor  in  iis 
cuniulandis  atque  servandis  ?  ' 

1007.  '  Divitiae  illius,  qui  egentibus  eas  non  largitur,  sed  frustra  sub 
clavi  putrescere  sinit,  ea  sunt  commiseratione  dignae,  qua  nmlier  prae- 
clarae  formae,  quae  usque  ad  senium  innupta  manere  cogitur.' 

1008.  '  Ilium,  qui  ob   suam  avaritiam   a   nullo   desideratur,    divitiis 
plenum  esse,  perinde  est  ac  arborem  venenosam  in  medio  urbis  pulcher- 
rimis  fructibus  onustam  esse.' 

Comp.  216,  217. 

1009.  '  Divitiis   illius,  qui   neque   ex   amore   parentibus   aut    amicis 
subvenit,   et   ipse   fame   perit,   nee  eleemosinae  virtutem  affectat,  alii 
fruentur.' 

1010.  '  Si  is,  qui  divitias  cum  laude  possidet  (h.e.  laudabilitur  elar- 
gitur),  in  aliquantam  egestatem  incidat,  haec  similis  erit  nubium  siccitati 
(i.e.  diuturna  non  erit).' 


40 


314  THE   KUEEAL. 

CHAPTER  OH. 

Beschi :  Erubescentia.         Graul :  Pudor.         AiSws. 

THE  idea  is  much  that  of  conscience.     Comp.  Ch.  xxi. 

1011.  '  Erubescere  de  indecoris  actionibus  est  virilis  erubescentia ;   de 
caeteris  erubescere  est  erubescentia  muliebris.' 

1012.  '  Coinestio   et  reliquae  corporis  passiones  (puta  somuus,  pul- 
chritudo,  etc.),  sunt  homini  cuni  belluis  comniunia :     erubescentia  est 
quae  hominem  a  belluis  specificat.' 

1013.  '  Omnia  viventia  corpus  respiciunt   uti   vitae   sustentaculum  ; 
probitas  erubescentiam  respicit  uti  suum  sustentaculum.' 

iSlrDLJLj  '  embodiment,'  according  to  the  Vedanta,  is  an  evil,  stf© 
1  relinquishment '  of  all  corporeal  bonds  is  to  be  sought.  Here  the  idea 
is,  '  Souls  require  bodies  here,  so  virtue  requires  a  sense  of  shame.' 

1014.  '  Nonne  probis  ornamentum  est   verecundia  ?     Haec  si   desit, 
nonne  morbus  est  inflatum  incedere  ?  ' 

1015.  ( Ilium,  qui  de  caeterorum  perinde  ac  de  suo  vituperia  erubescit, 
erubescentiae  regiam  vocabunt  sapientes.' 

1016.  •'  Sublimes  homines  vastam  hanc  terram  ideo  non  magni  faciunt, 
quia  intra  erubescentiae  sepem  non  se  cohibet.' 

1017.  '  Qui  erubescentiam  possident,  propter  hanc  vitae  renunciabunt ; 
nunquam  vero  propter  vitam  erubescentiae  renunciabunt.' 

1018.  '  Si  tu   non   erubescis  facere,   quae  caeteri   audire   aut  videre 
erubescunt-,  virtus,  quod  ejus  assecla  dicaris,  erubescet.' 

1019.  '  Si  tuo  statui  non  convenientia  facias,  tuae  tantuin  prosapiae 
dedecus  afferes;  si  vero  permanenter   sine   erubescentia  vixeris,  omnia 
quae  in  te  sunt  bona  pessum  ibunt.' 

1020.  '  Qui  interius  erubescentia  carent,  quamvis  inter  homines  degant, 
similes   sunt  pupae,   quae    funiculis    agitata    oculos   fallit   vivam   se 
ostendendo.' 


CHAPTER  CHI. 

Beschi :  Modus  familiam  exaltandi.     Ariel :  Maniere  de  servir  sa  famille. 

1021.  *  Nullum  est  majus  decus  quam  illud  dicere  valentis,  "  ego  nun- 
quam ab  industria  cesso,  ut  familiam  exaltem."  ' 

1022.  '  Assidua  contentione  illius  qui  haec  duo,  nempe  industriam  et 
rerum  experientiam  possidet,  familia  dilatabitur.' 


NOTES.  315 

1023.  « Ei  qui  ad  suae  fainiliae  dilatationem  assidue  laborare  sibi  pro- 
posuit,  Deus  Ipse  lumbos  praecingens,  ad  laborandum  comes  accurret.' 

An  idea  familiar  to  all  races. 

1024.  '  Qui  impigre  et  assidue  laborat,  ne  familia  detrimentum  capiat, 
non  opus  est,  ut  consideret  quonam  modo  id  assequetur,  nam  ipsamet 
quam  adhibet  industria  propositum  perficiet.' 

Comp.  594. 

1025.  '  Eum,  qui  inculpatam  vitam  ducens,  ad  suam  familiam  exal- 
tandam  laborat,  totus  mundus,  ei  se  consanguineum  profitendo,  vallabit.' 

See  the  play  on  words,  &jbpLz,  frrbj^Lz  'the  circle  of  kindred  will 
encircle.' 

1026.  '  Yirilem  animum  ei  inesse  dicetur,  qui  sibi  familiae   in  qua 
natus  est  gubernationem  assumit,  ad  earn  exaltandam.' 

1027.  '  Sicuti  in  campo,  quamvis  multi  proelientur,  iis  laus  defertur, 
qui  forti  animo  proelium  sustinuerunt ;  ita  quamvis  familiam  multi  con- 
flent,  illi  laus  danda,  qui  familiae  pondus  sustinet.' 

Comp.  777. 

A  man  must  not  shrink  from  homely  duties.  There  is  heroism  here 
also.  Duty  makes  '  drudgery  divine.' 

1028.  '  Qui  familiam  exaltare  vult,  nullam  respicere  debet  temporis 
importunitatem ;    quodsi    gloriosis   cogitationibus   locum   dando  piger 
evadat,  familia  in  ruinam  verget.' 

See  L_/(2)<suL£>. 

He  must  make  his  own  opportunities ;  also  he  must  be  instant  '  in 
season  and  out  of  season.1 

1029.  '  Amara  ne  an  dulcis  dicenda  est  vita  illius,  qui  suo  assiduo 
labore  suos  felices  reddi  videt  ?  ' 

The  poet  seems  to  say,  '  Is  it  not  so,  that  all  sufferings  must  be 
endured  by  him  ?  '  Yet  comparing  Oh.  v.,  we  should  feel  sure  he  rather 
felt  with  the  reverend  Father,  that  the  bread-winner  must  be  content 
to  bear  the  burthen :  '  The  labour  we  delight  in  physicks  pain.' 

1030.  '  Familiae  arbor,  cum  paupertas  ejus  radices  caedere  conatur, 
procul  dubio  decidet,  nisi  industriosus  homo,  ei  humeros  supponendo, 
illam  sustentet.' 


316  THE    KUBBAL. 


CHAPTEE  CIV. 

Beschi  :  Agricultura. 

THIS  is  the  main  support  of  the  family.     Hence  the  sequence. 

Cultivation  is  the  work  of  the  Vai$ya,  and  is  said  to  be  degrading  to 
Brahmans  :  Manu,  i.  90  ;  iii.  64,  165  ;  x.  83,  84,  116. 

1031.  '  Cum  totus  inundus  quanturavis  circurneat,  tandem  ad  agricul- 
tores  recurrere  debeat,  dicendum  quod  inter  caetera  munia  principem 
locum  habeat  laboriosa  agricultural 

1032.  '  Agricultura  licet  parvi  fiat,  tanien  quuni  sustentet  caeteros 
omnes,  qui  hoc  ofiicium  negligunt,  eandem  habet  vim  in  mundo  quam 
clavus  axem  firmans  in  curru,  quo  ablato  cursus  omnis  deficit.' 

Not  much  esteemed,  yet  indispensable. 

1033.  '  Qui  agros  colendo  victum  sibi  comparat,  suam  vitam  vivere 
dicendus  ;    nam  caeteri  omnes,  qui  serviendo  vivunt,  ab  aliis  pendent 
ut  vivant.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  365  (The  three  modes  of  life)  :— 


HOST  jrffQjS  fir  QjDe&TGafiu 


1  The  best  is  life  in  penitential  practice  spent  ; 
The  middle  course  to  live  with  dear  ones  round.      The  worst 
With  restless  thought  desiring  wealth,  subservient 
To  follow  those  who  understand  us  not.' 

1034.  '  Qui  frurnentum  possidentes  eo  egentibus   umbraculum  sunt, 
videbunt  sub  uinbraculo  sui  reges  concurrere  gentes,  quae  sub  variorum 
regum  umbraculo  manent.' 

1035.  '  Qui  propriuni  officium  habent  comedendi  quod  suus  labor  in 
agricultura  peperit,  nee  mendicationi  obnoxius  erit,  et  ipse  mendican- 
tibus  nil  abscondendo  necessaria  suppeditabit.' 

The  poet  would  not  approve  of  imported  rice. 

1036.  '  Si  agricultorum  manus  a  labore  desistat,  jam  nee  poenitentiain 
iis,  qui  dicunt  se  renunciasse  omnibus,  quae  caeteri  appetunt,  exercendi 
locus  erit.' 

1037.  '  Si  terrae  unciam  iterum  iterumque  arando  ita  exsiccari  facias, 
ut   ad   quartam  unciae   parteni  reducatur,  nee  tantum   fiini,  quantum 
manus  capere  potest  necessariuni  erit,  ut  ager  fructi  fleet.' 

This   and   the   following  seem  to  be  rustic  saws,   such  as  occur  in 
Vergil's  Georyics. 


NOTES.  317 

1038.  '  Agro  magis  proficit  fimi  projectio,  quam  aratio  et  postquam 
segetes   mundaveris;    aquae  irrigatio  non   tarn   fructuosa   erit,   quam 
illarum  defensio  (ab  avibus  et  latronibus).' 

1039.  '  Si  agri  dominus  quotidie  ilium  non  visitando  procul  absit ; 
ager  ei  irascens  uti  mulier  diu  a  viro  derelicta,  adliaesionem  negabit 
(i.e.  fructum  optatum  non  dab  it  V 

Comp.  Ch.  cxxxi.,  cxxxn. 

1040.  '  Mulier,  quae  terra  dicitur,  si  viderit  aliquem  qui  ob  pigritiam 
agros  non  colat,  et  de  paupertate  doleat,  ilium  subsannabit.' 


CHAPTEE  CV. 

Beschi :  Paupertas. 

THERE  is  a  certain  intensity  about  this  chapter  which  seems  to  indicate 
personal  experience  of  the  evils  of  poverty.     Comp.  Ndl.  281,  283,  285. 
1041.    '  Si  quaeras,  quodnam  sit   malum   paupertate   majus,    dicam 
paupertate  pejorem  solam  esse  pauper tatem.' 
Comp.  Ndl.  285  : 

'  Lord  of  the  pleasant  land  of  clustered  hills  whose  crags 
By  sounding  waterfalls  are  washed  ! — Their  race  is  nought, 
Their  manly  prowess  nought ;  their  learning  rare  is  nought ; 
When  men  are  held  in  poverty's  embrace.' 


1042.  '  Malefactor  ille  qui  dicitur  paupertas,  et  hujus  et  alterius  vitae 
gaudia  homini  surripit.' 

Personification.  Poverty  deprives  a  man  of  the  means  of  enjoyment 
in  this  life,  and  of  securing  happiness  in  the  next  world  by  liberal  alms- 
giving. 

1043.  'AfEectus  erga  paupertatem,   et   quam   quis    suis  facinoribus 
acquisivit  amplitudinem  fainarnque  junctim  destruet.' 

1044.  '  Paupertas  talem   affert   vilitatem,    et   cum    contemptu  loqui 
faciat  etiam  de  iis,  qui  sublimi  loco  nati  sunt.' 

1045.  '  In  uno  malo  paupertatis  multa  ac  diversa  mala  coadunantur.' 

1046.  '  Pauper  quamvis  optimas  quasque    scientias  perfecte  callens 
doctissime  loquatur,  ejus  tamen  verbis  fructus  deerit.' 

Comp.  Ndl.  115. 


318  THE    KUKRAL. 

1047.  '  Paupertas  virtuti  non  arnica,  quia  iinpedit  illius  exercitium ;  et 
facit  lit  quis  suam  ipsam  matrem  tanquam  extraneam  respiciat.'     (?) 

Comp.  Ndl.  290. 

1048.  '  Numquid  et  hodie  veniet  paupertas,  quae  heri  quasi  me  intere- 
mit?' 

1049.  '  Ipso  in  igne   (aut  amuleti  aut  praestigiae   ope)  somnus  capi 
potest,  at  in  paupertate  nee  minimum  oculos  claudendi  locus  est.' 

1050.  '  Qui  nil  habendo  quod   comedant,  neque  totaliter  gulam  abne- 
gando,    ventrem   implere   volunt,   sunt    daemones,   qui   aliorum    cibos 
infestant.' 

<s>/ri£-=the  sour,  stale '  conjee- water,'  or  rice-gruel,  which  is  the  beggar's 
portion.  If  beggars  will  not  be  so  considerate  as  to  renounce  the  world 
and  die,  'tis  death  to  the  stores  of  those  who  must  feed  them  !  The 
poet  says  this  bitterly :  '  So  are  the  poor  regarded.' 


CHAPTER  CVI. 

Beschi:  Mendicatio. 

IN  this  and  the  following  chapter  there  seems  to  be  no  reference  to  the 
'  religious '  beggars,  Fakirs  and  others,  that  infest  Indian  towns  and 
villages :  he  contemplates  those  who  are  suffering  misfortune. 

1051.  '  Eleemosinam  pete  ab  iis,  quos  earn  dare  posse  noveris  ;    si 
negaverint,  illis,  non  tibi,  vitio  tribuetur.' 

1052.  '  DuJce  est  mendicare,  si  quod  petitur,  absque  poena  veniat.' 
If  a  man's  self-respect  is  not  wounded. 

1053.  'Mendico,   qui   scit   ab   eis   petere,   qui    debitum   sciunt    non 
fallacis  et  avari  animi,  sua  mendicatio  quandem  habet  dulcedinem.' 

1054.  '  Si   non   petas,  nisi   ab  iis,  que   neque   per  somnium   negare 
sciuut,  quod  mendicus  petit,  hujusmodi  mendicatio  cum  ipsa  largitione 
quandam  siniilitudinern  habet.' 

1055.  '  Cur  aliorum  oculis  se  sistendo  mendicat  pauper,  nisi  quia  sunt 
in  mundo  qui  negare  nesciunt  quod  caeteris  deest  ?  ' 

1056.  '  Si  tales  inveneris,  qui  non  habeant  malam  indolem  sua  pau- 
peribus    occultandi    (ac     negandi),    paupertatis     mala     omnia    finem 
habebunt.' 

Were  kindly  liberality  the  rule,  poverty  would  no  longer  be  an  evil. 

1057.  '  Si  tales  inveniantur,  qui  nee  despiciendo,  nee  erubescentiam 
causando,  sua  dent  egeno^hic  inveniat  unde  animus  suus  intus  et  intime 
laetificetur.' 


NOTES.  319 

1058.  '  Si  in  mundo  non  essent,  qui  mendicarent,  quid  aliud  essent, 
nisi  tot  pupae  ligueae  sine  vita  ambulantes  ? ' 

1059.  '  Quaenam  esset  laus  iis  qui  nunc  sua  largiuntur,  si  deesset  qui 
aliena  mendicandi  officium  exerceret  ?  ' 

1060.  '  Si  inendicus  quod  petit  non  inveniet,  neganti  non  debet  irasci, 
quia  ipsa  sua  paupertas  satis  illi  testificatur.' 

This  is  ambiguous.  It  seems  to  mean :  '  Be  not  angry  with  and 
reproach  the  man  who  refuses  to  relieve  you:  your  sufferings  are  a 
sufficient  evidence  against  him.' 


CHAPTER  CYII. 

Beschi  :  Mendicatio  vitanda.         Graul  :  Sclieu  vor  Betteln. 

COMP.  Ndl.  301-10. 

The  last  chapter  sanctions  a  modest  medicancy,  in  time  of  necessity. 
This  denounces  it  as  a  profession. 

1061.  'Centies  millies  melius  est  tuo  labore  paupertati  occurrere  quam 
mendicare  etiam  ab  iis,  qui  tibi  cari  sunt  ut  oculi,  et  sine  ulla  occulta- 
tione  tibi  necessaria  daturi  sint.' 

Com  p.  Ndl.  287  (Beggary)  :— 

1  O  thou  whose  teeth  in  sharpness  vie  with  jasmine  buds  !  — 
Man's  attributes  of  goodness  all  are  lost,  at  once,  — 
With  mind's  acuteness  gained  from  wisdom's  ample  store,— 
When  sharp  distress  of  beggary  assails.' 


1062.  '  Si  hominibus    ad   vitam   sustentandum    ab   eo    qui    orbem 
condidit,  indicta  f  uit  mendicatio,  talis  illi  ruina  (seu  damnum)  obveniat, 
ut  hoc  fecisse  poeniteat.' 

The  idea  is  '  Brahma,  the  creator,  never  made  men  to  be  beggars.     It 
cannot  be  a  part  of  religion.' 

1063.  '  Non  est  in  mundo  pectus  adeo  ferreum,  uti  pectus  illius  qui 
suae  paupertati  succurrere  sibi   proponit,  non   suo  labore   sed  niendi- 
catione.' 

1064.  '  Magnanimitas,  quae  etiam  in  extrema  penuria  non  se  inducit 
ad  mendicandum,  sed  suo  sibi  labore  consulit,  adeo  magnum  decus  habet, 
ut  mundi  totius  limites  trausiliat.' 


320  THE    KUERAL. 

1065.  '  Nil  esfc  dulcius  quam  comedere  quod  sibi  suus  labor  peperit, 
etiamsi  jusculum  sit  adeo  rarum,  ut  aqua  clara  videatur.' 

1066.  '  Nulla   est  linguae   vilior  vox   quam   quae  aliquid  mendicat, 
etiamsi  nihil  aliud  petat  quam  puram  aquam  ad  consulendum  ejus  vitae 
qui  siti  perit.' 

He  says  C^s5/r)@=<  vitae  necessariam ! ' 

1067.  '  Mendicare  volo  ab  ipsis  medicantibus  ;  sed  quid  ab  iis  petam  ? 
Petam,  ut  si  mendicare  volunt,  non  mendicent  ab  iis,  qui  sua  pauperibus 
occultant.' 

1068.  'Indecora  navis   mendicatio  dicta,   quam   quis  conscendit,  ut 
egestatis  mare  trajiciat ;  si  in  scopulum  qui  negatio  dicitur  incident, 
diffringetur.' 

1069.  '  Mendici  animus  dum  suam  paupertatem  cogitat,  prae  dolore 
liquescit ;  sed  quum  ei  negatur  quod  petit,  prae  pudore  adeo  magna 
poena  afficitur,  ut  paupertatis  dolorem  absorbeat.' 

1070.  '  Ubinam,  quaeso,  se  abscondit  vita  illius,  qui  sua  negat,  dum 
videt   mendicurn  adeo   flebiles    voces   emittere,  ut   prae   pudore   mori 
videatur  ? ' 


CHAPTER  CVIII. 

Beschi  :   Vilium  hominum  conditio.         Graul  :   Qemeiriheit. 
Ariel  :  Infamie. 

THE  connection  is  not  clear. 

Comp.  Ndl.  361-60  (Wealth  without  heart)  :— 

'  Though  in  the  water  born,  and  green  its  hue  appear, 
The  Netti's  pith  no  moisture  knows  ;  so  in  the  world 
Are  men  of  amplest  wealth  whose  hearts  are  hard  as  stones 
"Upon  the  rocky  mountain  fell  !  ' 


FFJTIS1   Q<55)L-.IU<S5<5  ^<S 


Netti  (Q^ilif  ,  &6&L-,  &6®L-)  =  '  aischynomene.' 

1071.  'Viles    sunt   similes   hominibus,  —  neque    ego    quidquam   vidi 
homini  adeo  simile  !  * 

He  takes  it  :  '  They  really  look  very  like  men  ;  but  are  not  so.' 


NOTES.  321 

1072.  '  Viles  feliciores  sunt  sapientibus,  quum  nullum  animi  afflic- 
tionem  patiantur.' 

Irony.     III.  Gram.  210.     Destitute  of  feeling  and  sympathy. 

1073.  '  Diis  ipsis  similes  sunt  viles  homines,  quum  et  ipsi,  uti  Divi, 
omnia  juxta  suam  voluntatem  faciant.' 

Irony.     Entirely  given  up  to  arrogance  and  self-will. 

1074.  '  Viles,  si  quern  videant,  qui  juxta  morem  eorum  qui  non  in 
urbe,  sed  in  pago  degunt,  paucis  contenti  parce  vivant,  statim  se  majores 
aestimando  valde  inflati  incedunt.' 

He  makes  ^j<3SLJuil.L^.ujn'iT=l  qui  ad  pagorum  morem  vivunt ! ' 
Their  ambition  is  to  surpass  the  wicked  in  their  wickedness. 

1075.  '  Vilium  est  semper  timere   (regis,  aut  nobilium,  vexationem)  ; 
praeter  hoc  siquid  concupiscunt,  nonnisi  idundeaut  nullum  aut  parvum 
emolumentum  obveniat,  concupiscere  sciunt.'   (?) 

Governed  entirely  by  fear  or  selfishness. 

1076.  '  Similes   tympano   pulsato    sunt   viles,  quia  secretum  eorum 
auribus  commissum  statim  ad  caeterorum  aures  deferunt.' 

Cannot  keep  a  secret. 

1077.  '  Viles  homines  iis,  qui  inanum  non  curvant  ad  eorum  comam 
succutiendam,  etiamsi  ita  fit  ut  grana  succutiant,  quae  humidae  manui 
adhaerent,  post  orizae  comestionem,  non  dabunt.' 

They  grudge  another  any  good,  even  when  it  costs  them  nothing. 

1078.  '  Sublimes  homines  statim  ac  quis  suam  necessitatem  exponit, 
necessaria  dabunt ;  vilia  sua  non  dabunt,  nisi  torqueantur,  uti  torquetur 
arundo  saccarea,  ut  suum  liquorem  fundat.' 

Cowardly  bullies.     Comp.  Ndl.  355. 

1079.  '  Si  vilis  homo  videat  aliorum  vestes  ac  cibum  meliores  esse 
quam  suum  cibum  ac  vestes,  capax  est  invenire  defectus  quamvis  defectu 
careant  (ob  invidiam).' 

Envy  a  proof  of  worthies sness. 

1080.  *  Quodnam  est   officiuni  proprium   vilium  ?    omnes  despicere  ; 
sed  quantamvis  parvam  ob  angustiam,  statim  currere  ad  se  veudendum 
ac  caeteris  raancipandum.' 

In  any  distress,  craven-hearted,  slavish. 


41 


322  THE    KUERAL. 

BOOK  III. 

CHAPTER  CIX. 

Comp.  Intro,  p.  xii.,  xiii. 

THESE  last  chapters  must  be  considered  as  an  Eastern  romance  not 
fully  told,  but  indicated  in  a  number  of  beautiful  verses,  which  leave 
much  to  the  imagination  of  the  reader,  and  the  ingenuity  of  the  inter- 
preter. The  verses  are  deserving  of  study,  but  such  commentaries  as  I 
have  seen  are  simply  disgusting,  and  utterly  misrepresent  the  writer. 
Taken  as  they  are,  these  chapters  are  worthy  of  Theocritus,  and  much 
less  open  to  objection  than  parts  of  his  writings.  Like  the  verses  of 
Bhartrihari  and  other  Sanskrit  writers,  these  Kurrals  '  merely  portray 
isolated  situations,  without  any  connection  as  a  whole.'  * 

On  the  Gandharva  marriage,  see  Ellis,  p.  156,  &c.     The  following 
verse  from  the  Tolkdppiyam,  Qun-(^&r^l<ssiTjrL^  will  suffice  :  — 

'  Fearless,  when  maids  with  golden  jewels  decked,  and  youths 
Meet,  see  and  love,  they  call  it  still  Gandharva  marriage-bond. 
Thus  once  the  pairs  of  these,  of  blameless  vision  fair,  who  tuned 
The  lute,  all  gold  and  radiant,  used  to  join.' 


<oT6STU 


Comp.  Manu,  iii.  20,  21,  32. 

The  drama  of  (Jakuntala  will  illustrate  the  general  idea  of  the 
verses.  See  Monier-  William's  edition,  1876,  p.  127. 

1081.  The  prince  sees  the  princess  in  the  grove,  and  doubts. 

Ariel  :  '  L'indication  des  personages  de  ce  petit  drame  lyrique  ne  se 
trouve  pas  dans  le  texte.' 

1082-89.  He  sees  her  to  be  human,  and  describes  the  impression  her 
beauty  makes  upon  him. 

1090.  He  sees  love  in  her  glance. 

*  Weber,  Hist,  of  Indian  Lit.,  p.  210.     Triibner  &  Co.,  1882 


NOTES.  323 


CHAPTEE  CX. 

HERE  Com.  says  there  are  three  present,  the  prince  who  observes  the 
princess,  the  princess  who  stealthily  observes  the  prince,  and  the  hand- 
maiden who  observes  them  both.  It  would  seem  as  if  all  the  couplets 
were  his. 


CHAPTEE  CXI. 

Graul :  Freude  ub&r  die  Verbindung. 
HE  is  the  sole  speaker. 


CHAPTEE  CXII. 

HE  is  still  the  sole  speaker.     Much  of  this  greatly  resembles  Qakun- 
tala. 


CHAPTEE  CXin. 

Graul :  Die  ausserordentliche  Liebe  sagen. 
Ariel :  Exaltation  de  la  passion. 

HEBE  seem  to  be  two  speakers.     They  are  separated,  and  soliloquize. 


CHAPTEE  CXIV. 

THERE  is  no  way  for  their  reunion,  but  to  acknowledge  the  marriage, 
and  obtain  its  confirmation  by  parents  and  friends. 
To   effect    this    the  lover,  bestriding  a  palmyra    stem  for  a  horse 
u,  L£>L_637tafr),  is  carried  into  the   village  in  the  night,  and  aloud 


324  THE  KURRAL. 

bewails  his  separation  from  his  bride,  avows  the  union,  proclaims  his 
love,  and  defies  all  rivals.  This  is  done  with  doleful  love-ditties ;  and 
hence  is  called  LjeuiJzufuz=(  wailing.' 

This  is  '  abandonment  of  reserve,'  or  shame,  or  concealment ;  the  town 
or  village  is  full  of  the  '  rumour,'  which  is  ended  by  a  homely,  unro- 
mantic  wedding,  more  conventional,  but  not,  according  to  ancient  Hindu 
laws  and  sentiments,  more  binding  and  lawful  than  the  romantic  Gan- 
dharva  union. 

1131,  &c.  The  only  way,  as  suspicion  is  aroused,  is  to  claim  my  bride. 
1138.  She  dreads,  yet  desires,  the  publicity  which  will  sanction  and 
renew  their  union. 


CHAPTEE  CXY. 

THIS  is  the  day  of  excitement,  after  the  public  announcement.  It  seems 
that  we  have  two  soliloquies,  in  which  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride 
express  their  anxiety  ;  while  satisfied  that  all  the  hubbub  will  in  time 
subside,  and  their  nuptials  be  sanctioned. 


CHAPTER  CXVL 

THE  public  marriage  has  taken  place ;  and  now  the  poet  makes  the 
incidents  of  married  life  the  theme  of  17  chapters.  These  are  mainly 
three : — 

(1)  Separation  (necessary,  and,  it  would   seem,  sometimes  unneces- 
sary).    Ch.  cxvi.-cxxx. 

(2)  Petulant,  capricious,  feigned  anger  ;  ecrrL_6u,  qeua9.     Ch.  cxxxi. 

(3)  Jealousy,  Ch.  cxxxn. 

The  Com.  distinguishes  here  and  elsewhere  the  words  of  the  husband 
and  his  companion,  and  of  the  wife  and  her  maid  ;  and  the  native  gram- 
marians in  the  third  part  of  grammar,  called  Quir(^<str^l<!EfrirL^  '  Chapter 
on  Topics,'  lay  down  rules  for  each  sentiment  and  situation.  Tantum 
ad  nauseam  profuse  exponunt,  says  Beschi. 

These  rules  are  founded  on  the  usage  of  the  poets,  and  nothing  is 
gained  by  employing  them  to  explain  our  author.  Each  couplet  must 


NOTES. 


325 


l.ell  its  own  story.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Hindu  lady  was  not 
supposed  to  possess  any  resources,  in  times  of  separation,  such  as  educa- 
tion gives. 

1151.  He  announces  his  departure  and  promises  speedy  return.  She 
says,  '  I  cannot  survive  the  separation.' 

The  whole  chapter  I  take  as  spoken  by  her. 


CHAPTER  CXVII. 

STILL  her  words.  It  seems  as  if  jealousy  mingles  with  sorrow.  Is  his 
absence  not  in  some  degree  voluntary  ?  Can  she  bring  herself  to  send 
a  messenger  to  beg  him  to  return  ? 


CHAPTER  CXVIII. 

HER  words.     The  eyes  are  dim  with  watching  and  weeping. 


CHAPTER  CXIX. 

HER  words.    The  yellow  sickly  hue  of  pining  anguish.    Comp.  Ndl.  893 

LQ[T<E<S5<3fr  &(W)'S 

Lb<80!Tn'ljilftsjl 

'  6vn~tr<& 


'  At  wildering  eventide,  when  workmen  all  put  by 
Their  tools,  she  culled  choice  flowers  and  wove  a  garland  gay 
Then  from  her  hands  let  fall,  and  wailed,  "What  can  this  wreat 
Avail  to  me  who  weep  alone  ?  " 


326  THE    KUBBAL. 

CHAPTER  CXX. 

HER  words.     The  agony  of  suspense. 


CHAPTEE  CXXI. 

His  thoughts  and  hers,  while  severed. 
1203.  Comp.  Catullus,  xlv.     Acme  and  Septumius.     Also  1317,  1318. 


CHAPTERS  CXXIL,  CXXIII. 

SHE  speaks  throughout. 

This  last  chapter  seems  to  me  full   of  beauty.      Comp.   Ndl.    397, 
where  there  is  much  pathos. 

*  When  those  who  read  the  palm-leaf  scrolls  had  ceased, 
In  eve's  dim  light,  she  thought  of  absent  spouse  and  wept  ; 
And  weeping  pluckt  the  flowers  from  out  her  wreath,  and  brushed 
The  odorous  sandal  from  her  lovel    breast.' 


J  Qu[r(Lpf£l<sor  LOSSOT  J5  $5  rr  fr 


CHAPTER  CXXIV. 

EYES  are  dimmed  and  arms  wasted.     The  brow  is  a  sickly  yellow. 
1231-37.  She  or  her  companion  speaks. 

1238.  His  soliloquy. 

1239.  Comp.  1108. 

1240.  Ariel :  '  Oh !  ces  yeux  palis   ont  eu  de  la  peine,  voyant  ce  que 
faisait  le  front  brillant.' 

The  bright  brow  is  sicklied  over  with  yellow  now  (1238),  and  eye 
must  weep  for  this  ! 


NOTES.  327 


CHAPTERS  CXXY.,  CXXVI. 

SHE  strives  to  reason  herself  into  composure ;  but  loses  all  self-control, 
and  speaks  of  nothing  but  of  seeing  him  again. 


CHAPTER  CXXVII. 

THE  time  of  his  return  draws  near.  It  would  seem  as  if  these  words 
were  uttered  on  the  morning  of  the  day  when  the  King  permits  him  to 
return. 

There  is  a  ring  of  the  old  song  about  it :  '  And  are  ye  sure  the  news 
is  true  ? '  &c. 

1270.  The  natural  anxiety  of  one  to  whom  it  seems  too  much  joy  to 
return,  and  find  all  well. 


CHAPTER  CXXVIII. 

ANOTHER  absence  is  contemplated. 


CHAPTER  CXXIX. 

RECONCILIATION  after  some  lovers'  quarrel. 


CHAPTER  CXXX. 

SHE  soliloquizes,  1291-98. 

He  utters  1299,  1300. 

So  says  Com.     Each  tries  to  cherish  unyielding  resentment  in  the 
mind ;  but  nature  is  too  strong. 


328  THE    KUERAL. 

CHAPTER  CXXXL 
Gr.  Schmollen. 

1301-4.  She  pouts. 

1305-10.  He  ponders  her  perversity. 


CHAPTER  CXXXII. 

'  REFINED  petulance.'  Sulking  when  ingenuity  must  be  used  to  find  a 
pretext.  The  Prince  might  have  taken  the  poet's  words  as  his  motto 
(Sex.  Propertius,  iv.  2)  :  *  Stant  mihi  cum  domina  proelia  dura  mea.' 


LEXICON  AND  CONCORDANCE 


TO    THE 


KURRAL  AND  NALADI. 


[The  Concordance  to  K.  is  complete;  that  to  N.  partial.     §  refers  to  the 
Tamil  Handbook.] 


1.  'the  first  letter,'  i 
(H.B.  Intro,  p.  16).  2.  A  de- 
monstrative :  '  that  '  (§25; 
comp.  g),  e_  and  OT),  225,  247, 
254,  35°>  355»  370,  411,  423,  426, 
475,  489,  641,  671,  677,  695,  848, 
950,  967,  1091.  Prefixed  to  nouns 
it  doubles  the  initial  consonant. 
See  ^eueyr,  &c., 


y°°°(5  (§  62),  'diminish,  grow 
refined'  [S.  aq;  Lat.  ac-us]. 
^0°cS>ujffesrro<sij^(s^  '  minute  and 
comprehensive,'  175.  ^JesireBu* 
'  undiminishing  permanence,' 
178,  Nal.  12. 

y&G)  'the  belly,'  936  [jy«/i]  ; 
'  the  centre,'  Nal.  2. 


(Opp.  L//D/A  and  to 
[In  Nigandu,       ^  LTKSCT 


F'I');2, 

.gy<f&6)S£_Lo;  5,2-<srr. 
Add  6,  depth,  the  earth  (-gnrcr)  5 
7,  a  tree  (S.  ^JT)  ;  8,  grain, 
^oeo«Lb.]  1.  '  Place,'  in  comp.  | 

547,    1055,  Nal.   80.       @eu6i>«ii    j 
'house,'  Nal.  361.       2.  'Mind,   j 


internal  being,'  93,  277,  298, 
708,  830.  Also  ^asor,  84,  92. 
Qrs^ff^^-sLB  'the  innermost 
soul,  heart  and  soul,'  786. 
^a^gi  inf.  base,  used  with  n. 
as  a  prep,  phrase  =  '  in  the  midst 
of,'  194,  694,  717,  723,  727,  814, 
877,  1027,  1163^  1  1  80,  1305, 
1323;  'in  the  mind,'  'within,' 

78,  271,  329,  824,  1024  ;  'inner,' 

79.  <°>]<ss^<g3j]  '  what  is  in  the 
mind,'     702.         ^a  parr  IT     '  in- 
dwellers,'  745,  Nal.  31. 

sin,'  1074.     [See 

See        1 


(§  70,  as  Q<su&o)  'ex- 
pand, grow  wide  ;  recede.' 

I.  v.  intr.  (1)  <s9^5sr^Q^fr<5o<£5. 
,_g)/<£6\;<5$<sLbq  'the  spacious  fir- 
mament,' 25.  (2)  <sSl%EBruQuujiT 
(§  148),  Nal.  i5i,B  354,  37V 
^l-speo  for  ^  &d>f&  ev  =  <£]<£  ev  ®j 
'a  receding  from,'  1325.  (3) 
past.  rel.  part,  and  n.  (§  74,  87). 
contr.  eorp,  q.v.  ^0*0 
175  [eSyo°«>@]. 
'  men  who  have  grown 
great,'  170.  (4)  neg.  (§  121). 
^•sevrr^i  (opp.  to  .JB/^gp/.g/r^) 
'not  withdrawing  too  far,'  691. 

fg>j&6VlT&<55eD;L-    '  when      (it) 

not  enlarge   itself,'  478. 


[2] 


THE    KUERAL. 


'ere  (he)  went  away/ 
1226. 

H.  ^spgi  (v.  causal.,  §  160, 
ii.  g).  ^spgiLz  '  (it)  will  en- 
large/ 372. 

HI.  cgy^emi  (noun,  §  190), 
'  expansion,  roominess,  breadth.' 
By  met.  '  a  broad  breast,'  Ml. 
389;  392- 

<*!£    (§   57)  'dig  into.'     jqaip 
eu/r/r,  151  (§  87). 
<&(&)  'fire'  [S.  agni],  Ml.  123. 
iEJ<sy>&  =  e°)i<B5iEi6®<a5  'the  palm  of 
the  hand.'     Ml.  122. 
iEi&evsrLb  'a  gutter,  sewer'   [S. 
angano],  720,  Ml.  175. 
&freiifrGinLC)     [from    v.    ^l&iTGq 
(§  62),  from  ^  <F  ir=t  languor  '], 
'absence    of    languor,    energy,' 
6  1  1,  Ml.  201. 

(§57)  '  waver,  shake,  move  ; 
grow  feeble.' 

I.  (ffl9358Br^Q^/r«J>«).     ^eO&vS 

(L/eu      '  she    of    flexible    form,' 
1098. 

II.  (part.,  §  77)  ^ero<F@=^/ 

Instead  of  15     we  have 


'  those  who  sit  feebly  trembling,' 
1040. 

III.  cgygro^ca/  (v.  noun,  §  190), 
'  agitation,  a  yielding  to  indo- 
lence, weariness,  failure.'  ^sntp 
<a9<s3T60Lo  '  unwearied  effort,'  371. 
[Opp.  to  (c&irLnu®)  or  L£>f£.  wh.= 


'  unwavering  energy,'  594. 
See  £{<&&. 

'an  axle'   [S.  akshi],  475. 

rGBsfl  '  the  pin  of  the  axle, 
linch-pin,'  667. 

[S.  aghas;  Lat.  angr-], 
'  severe  pain,  agony,'  1086,  1179. 
(§  62),  'dread.'  [Comp. 
S.  yaj;  Gr.  ^-.]  [Syn.  S.L_@, 
jBirfgp.']  ^^frLz  (§  72)='  it 
will  dread,  shrink  from,'  451, 

863,      905,      1295      (cgy@  &LD<SlJ60r  = 

,      727,      Ml.     297. 
(§     74),     '  those    who 


dread,'  869,  1152,  904,  244. 
cgy^cSF^j/i  (III.  Gr. 81),  'we  will 
fear,'  1128.  ^^ffr  (III.  Gr. 
90),  'not  fearing,'  725;  500= 
jp/^/r^,  761,  762,  778.  ,j>/(£5 
<sF<su/r63r  (§  87),  'he  who  will 
dread,'  905,  729.  ^(^^uisuir 
'  those  who  will  dread,'  464, 
906,  726.  jy^dF/rssr  (§  121), 
'the  fearless,'  647,686. 
*<*(§  140), 'fear!'  882. 
MuQesr,  Ml.  172. 
(III.  Gr.  92),  'fear  not!' 
882.  ^(Gij&d)  'fear,  fearing,' 
1149,  428.  ^ojij&Go  (III.  Gr. 
92)  'fear  not!'  1154.  ^(^5^ 
(§  77),  '  having  feared,'  680,  44, 
325>  883>  73°>  74i,  Ml.  74,  87, 

88,   256,   297,  396.       ^(Glj&LJuGHLCi 

(§92),  'should  be  feared,'  202, 
824  [LJ©],  Ml.  89.  ^(^.SFSU^J 
'  what  (men)  shall  fear,  respect,' 
428,  366,  Ml.  74.  ^(gjcF/rsro/LD 
(§  154),  'the  not  fearing,'  428, 
382,  497.  ,-gy<5B)<sutfj(g;<F/r<5B)i£>, 
Ch.  LXXIII.  ^©^/r^j,  585. 
egy^^/r/r  (§  110),  '  they  dread 
not,'  201.  ^(gjcSGu/f  '  they  will 
dread,'  201.  ^(^<9:n'^<suiT 

'  those  who  dread  not,'  723. 
^<P&LZ  (§  190),  '  dread '  [in  the 
stem  cgy@<sF,  the  nasal  @  is 
merely  a  euphonic  insertion, 
as  n  in  tango-,  the  root  is  AJ. 
In  forming  a  noun,  the  stem  is 
changed  to  ACH  (<F<F  being  a 
clumsy  way  of  expressing  the 
S.  ^)  :  the  media  to  the  tennis. 
See  Table  in  H.B.  Intro,  p.  10], 
1075,  J46,  5OI»  534,  Ml.  81, 
82,  83,  84,  i45»  299-  ch-  XXI- 
fietiSasruj&fiD  '  dread  of  evil 
action,'  Ml.  Ch.  xin.  Ch. 
cvu.  ^)jra7cF<£FLD  '  dread  of  men- 
dicancy,' Nal.  Ch.  xxxi. 
yL_-fi»<g,  jy^-A^  (§  62,  162), 
[Comp.  S.  adha],  '  submit,  re- 
strain.' [See  note  to  ^@<BT. 
IEI  is  a  euphonic  insertion.  The 
intrans.  has  the  media,  a  and 
the  trans,  the  tennis  K.]  ^L-ISI 
(§  87),  '  he  who  has 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[3J 


restrained  himself,'  124,  Nal.  74. 
^L-isia,  123,  Nal.  397. 

<£&/T60)i£J     (§      154),       121. 

cgy i—  <&«U3.]  C$IU.IE}<$&)  (§  148), 
130.  ^L-ISI&IT  (§  121),  834, 
Nal.  171.  ,j>//_<&c56u  (§  148), 
126,  Nal.  196,  351.  ^L-JS&LZ 
(§  190),  <  (self)-restraint,'  121, 

122,  Nal.  65.         tglL-<SG<gS(LpSB)L-<50)Ln 

Ch.  xui.       ^i—sQ,  Nal.  105. 

(§  64),  '  strike.'  Nal.  279. 
[Comp.  S.  adTiasJ]  n.  '  foot ' 
=  <$rr6tr,  3,  4,  10,  544,  610,  1120, 
1279  ;  *  the  footsteps,'  208,  Nal. 
62,  391,  388.  <°m$-<oG)L&  l  ser- 
vitude,' 608. 

I.  (§  56,  II.),  'destroy, 
defeat,  torment  (boil,  cook)  '  ; 
intr.  'die.'  ^®(Lprr^ssr  'victo- 
rious might,'  567.  ^ji—&}  'de- 
struction,' 893  ;  'vexation,'  206  ; 
'conquest,'  343.  ^L./D/OSBX® 
'bravery,'  768.  ^iL®,  Nal. 
382.  ^j®u  'will  defeat  with 
slaughter,'  493.  ^©LD  'will 
destroy,  defeat,'  207,  495,  500. 
^©/s-s/rSsu  'in  the  hour  of 
death,'  799  ;  '  cooking  time,'  Nal. 
68;  'when  it  torments,'  1166. 
cjyd)  '  boiled,'  1065,  1090,  Nal. 
363.  ^LLu?-®}  'a  cook-room,' 
Nal.  363. 

II.  (§  64)  '  approach,  accumu- 
late, attack.'  c5y®4^»  621, 
867,  1030.  ^®^^^i  '  that 
which  has  approached  (it),'  706. 

'ten-fold,'  450,  817. 
(§  62),  '  heap   up,   accu- 
mulate.'  [Comp.  .jy®,  II.]   ^©cffi 
Situ  (si-rbpLci)  '  heaps  of  clients,' 
526,     1005.  jsjQ&QGuftgniLb 

'  though  they  come   in   shoals,' 
625. 

(§  57),  'draw  near,'  Nal. 
123.  ^mL-iun-GurrLJa  'will  not 
draw  near,'  939;  (§  64) 'close 
up,  shut  in.'  .jyero <_<& @ti  '  that 
which  will  close  up,'  38,  71. 
il®  (§  62),  '  pour.'  ^ 
'  water  poured  forth,'  1093. 

(from    ^essr).       1.   A 


goddess,     1 08 1. 

'  Lakshmi,'  '  the  overpowering 
goddess,'  1082.  2.  'Destruction 
(as from  fascination  of  a  Lamia),' 
918.  3.  'Fear,'  'fascination.' 
^sTOcffiiUtoBsr/Q^^^j^eu,  Ch.  cix. 
«-gyiS33r/5/<5jr/r  '  Ragu :  the  serpent 
that  swallows  the  moon,'  Nal. 
241. 

^fssyfl    (n.)   'ornament,'    95,  115, 
118,  701,^738,  1014,  1089,  1273. 

§  57)  .ji/issafliL/Lfl  *  will  adorn,  trick 
itself  out,'  978.  c^ycBsft^Lp/D^fl"© 
'  a  forest  with  beauteous  shade,' 
742.  egysBsfiu^eoLp,  see 


fear,' 
(See 


(§      62)     '  approach.' 
'  not    approaching,' 
691. 

jf«r@)  (§  64), '  open  the  mouth, 

as    in     electing:.'         [^asssrsisorLci 

i  4,    n  •         .      . 

palate.  J       ,jy  joar^)^^<suj  255. 

T  'way,'  594. 
[S.]  'exceedingly.' 

"to  §57)>  'tremble.' 
'  causing    to   shake   with 
429. 

'  it,  that,  this.' 
cSYi  @»  OT-  Comp.  .jysusar.) 
is  written  also  ^0*0^7. 

SING. — C.  i.:  egy^j,  45,  36,74, 
23^  362,  364,  165,  332,  477,  533, 
536»  546,  781,  596,  901,  985,  996, 
1144,  1164,  1302,  Nal.  276; 
jH),jj7,  37>  IJ73i  I327«  ^^jrs-Lo 
'  even  that,'  230.  ^gyc&^y,  38,  49, 
76,  80,  162,  170,  132,  220,  226, 
236,  242,  262,  414,  427,  363,368, 
459>  476,  556>  572,  59r>  600,943, 
971,  1001,  1014,  1032,  1093, 
1166,1279.  C.  II. :  ^^Sscr  (^^? 
byGW  Q<g?/r.),32,  152,  262,  495, 
517,  621,  858,  859,  948,  1284, 
1143,  1164,  Nal.  276; 
517.  C.  in.  : 
(ssr),  3^3'  642,  1031 ; 
517.  C.  iv.:  .Jfcff/D®,  391,  518, 
802,  1124,  1330.  C.  v.: 
(sofl^r,  122,  152,  302,  341, 
759,  IX58,  1166.  C.  vi. : 


1141 


644, 


[4] 


THE    KURKAL. 


60,323,490,1289;  @.ff«r,  1176; 
.j^sar.ssffjr,  472. 

PLUR.  —  C.  I.:  ^soxa./,  658; 
,  581,  1109,  1244.  C.  ii.: 
'  each  one  (imagin- 
able) thing,'  1105.  C.  v.  : 
^eutbf&esr,  875.  C.  VII.  :  cgysu/r) 
^jyefr,  61,  504.  jj/oyau^  *  each 
mode,'  426. 

KpewrexT.  lt  The  Supreme 
Being,  8.  <&L_<a/<5rr.  2.  Asce- 
tics (in  pi.),  30.  ^roQeufrir 
(evidently  from  cgy/L£>  =  G)<flc/i  + 
3.  Sages,  543.  OLJ 


will  rest  content,'  580. 


[S.  ;    in    comp.] 
&(ri51&Lc>  'mental  concen- 
tration,' 593;  'utterly,'  563. 

(S.)  'immortals,'  121. 

I.  (§  57),  [Comp.  JJ/SDLO], 
'acquiesce  in,'  '  join,'  'harmonize 
with,'  'be  complaisant,'  'join 
battle,'  Nal.  383.  _  ^tu/r^ 
6^Le*@,  75,  'harmonious  com- 
bination.' g\&GSfL&frJBgl)  (Lf) 

<s5<55TLn[Ti5^i  'with  complaisant 
heart,  face,'  92,  93,  84,  Nal.  i. 
^LboiTistoLb  '  dissatisfaction,'  529. 

II.  n.  (as  Quirfr  from  OLJ/T^) 
'  battle,'  814,   1027,    1083,   1125. 

III.  v.   c§){LBiT<g<$<oGr<s53SGr  '  have 
been  at  variance   with  '    (§  64), 
1084. 

«jy  iEl  Lp  ^  LD  ,  ^L^LP^J  'ambrosia' 
[S.amrito],  702  ;  applied  to  rain, 
ii;  to  food  handled  by  one's 
children,  64  ;  to  the  touch  of 
the  beloved,  1  106.  [This  word 
is  variously  spelt,  ^uSn-fSLz, 

^(LpfgLD,  <*>](Lpg).          LQ(75^^J   IS  a 

corruption  of  it,  968.  In  82 
<&rr<sijir  Ln^js^i  is  given  as  its 
equivalent.] 

(§57),  'be  composed,' 
'  satisfied,'  '  fit.'  [Comp.  ^Lo/r, 
^LTILD^.]  ^GQiAiuir^jH  '  goes  not 
on  its  way,'  20. 
'  discontent,'  219. 
'know  no  content,'  1283. 
^(oKLzpg}  (=  Gun-  (5  /£,$),  474, 
118,761,340.  ^<soLD<suir  '  they 


,   803. 

635;  '  abounding,'  900. 

'  will  suffice,  be  fitting/  708, 


298,  1193, 


'  quiet,' 


contentment,'  '  unon,  740,  743, 
1178.  .jyeroLfltfj/r^ia/s^.fr  'those 
with  whom  you  are  not  in  com- 
plete accord,'  825.  a-LJusoLo^ 
^/DJJ;  'as  when  (it)  is  suffi- 
ciently salt,'  I3O2. 
'my  beloved,'  1155. 
'  one  of  inharmonious  disposi- 

tion,'    863.  ^GSr/r^iLKoTOLDUJ/r^ 

'  indispensable,'  682  ;'  not  to  be 
obtained  otherwise,'  961  -,  =  Q<sudj 
'  bambu,'  906  [from  its  smooth- 
ness ?]. 

[S.  amdtya;  syn.  L&JB 
the  ofiice  of  a  chief 
minister  of  state,'  or  '  the  minis- 
ter '  himself.  Ch.  LXIV.,  631, 
632.>  633,  634,  381.  j>!6®Ln<F® 
tu&jj  the  part  from  Ch.  LXIV. 

to  LXXIII. 

LD.  1.  (=/ir),  'a  tear.'  s3(Lp 
LQLQ  '  the  tear  that  falls,'  107.  [Cp. 
however  s£)<ip^/i).]  2.  (—  < 
'beauty,'  1107.  In  comp. 
^<smssry  q.v.,  Nal.  151.  3. 
used  in  forming  nouns,  as 
^JB&IA.  4.  Term,  of  1st  pers. 
pi.  of  verbs,  for  com.  g&th.  See 


'arrow,'  597,  772. 
tu/f  'do,  perform,  celebrate' 
(connected  with  something  joy- 
ous), 1268.  ^jiLiirsL^  =  Qfujius 
[III.  Grr.  85,  'sStL'iEj 
Comp.  <£5tr<s8Br 


[S.    ranga],  'a   square, 
chess-board  with  squares,'  401. 

«  king,     kingdom,    kingly 
rule.'     [S.  rdjan.']      [Syn.   03  ear 


ir  '  kings,'  381. 
Ch.  XXXIX.-LXIII. 
JU^ST  'fort,'  381,421,  492>  534, 
737,  741-75°- 


LXXV- 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[5] 


a  file,'  567,  888. 
-jy/0  (§  57),  'nip  off.'    ejy/fl^/D<p 
'is   like  the  nipping  off,'    1304. 


beautiful 

damsel,'  1107. 

_    (§  62),  'eat.' 

'  what  one  has  eaten,'  942. 

(§   62).       [See    ^(75= 
''tender.']         ^(njizLSI    'having 
appeared  as  a  tender  blossom,' 
1223,    1227.      [Here  ^(^LC^\-\= 
'  tender     blossom ' ;      Qutrgi  = 
'  fully  -  formed   bud ' ; 
'  the  full-blown  flower.'] 
(for  eg)/  (7H  LQ  LJ  ,  by 
III.    Gr.     41)  =  'flower- 
bud.'       ^(njuuQr?    '  whose  bud 
falls  not,'  522. 

'  benevolence.' 

SL<Sn".          So      Q  LJ  IT  QTj  <8fT , 

(Tjjisrr.     Comp.  jysarq]. 
176,  285,  755>   757,938, 

20,      27,     321 

Ch.  xxv.      ^(TTji—wefFeuisi/Lo,  241. 

(see  c^srr),  242,  244, 
245,  251,  252.  ^(f^&rQfirj^^ 
'  which  is  the  abode  of  grace,' 
243.  ^(?Kwir/r/£/r«Br  (from  <jy0@5 
S  121)  ==  ^(YKsrr/r^si/car  '  he  who 
performs  no  gracious  acts,'  249. 
^(njfstnsueojiji  'that  which  is  de- 
void of  grace,'  254. 
^gy/Tj  jiyQjj,  J£] m 9  ^QTJLG,  JJQIT 
(§  184)  '  rare,  difficult.'  [Comp. 

^ffltooeiy.]  c^/0  '  difficult  to 
do,'  483,  631;  'rare,  precious,' 
847.  jP/(/5<-o  'difficult,'  462, 
565  ;  with  (o&i—issr  '  one  whose 
ruin  can  hardly  be  effected,' 
210,  732  ;  '  hard  to  comprehend,' 
198.  cSyfl,£7»  pred.  with  ^LZ 

ex.  or  und.  177,  7,  8,  29,  503, 
693,  419'  443'  377'  886,  101,  213, 
227,  235  ;  with  or  without  <§j, 
248,  1155,  1156,  419,  1153,  823, 
843,  1 1 80,  1049,  647,  499,  606, 
16;  (obj.  or  sub.)  1160,  745, 


1276,  762.  ^fflwj^j  'hard  to 
attain,'  489,  747  (in  dat.).  ^ifliu 
'difficult  to  effect,'  26,  489,  503, 
537,  664,  781  (opposed  to  OTsrfiuj). 
jyifJoj/r  (iflonpujifituiT)  '  hard  to 
assail,'  1138;  'hard  to  find,' 


723. 


serious,  hard 


to  pardon,'  443,  693.  cgj/r  with 
2.u5/r  '  the  precious  life,'  73, 
1141;  'terrible,'  1179;  with 
£D(Y5<sfr  'thick,  gross  darkness,' 
121.  ^(nj-GtVLa  'difficulty,' 

6n,  975;  'rare  value,'  1142; 
'  of  approach,'  743  (comp.  1138). 
j<5V(&)  'grains  of  paddy,  food, 
corn,'  1034. 

'a    daemon'     (Qu\L)t 
850. 

a  crab,'  Nal.  123. 

'  a  full  -  blown 
flower  '  ;  hence,  '  a  wide-spread 
rumour.'  0«®rrso)aj,  1141,  1142, 
1146,  1149-  Jiaijrf&*iJDip0G>t 
Ch.  cxv. 

'oppression,  affliction,'  551  ; 
(§  64)  '  afflict,'  753. 
sveuev  (§  148;  =g]™ruLz), 
'privation,  affliction.'  (1)  Simply, 
245,  798  (7th  case).  (2)  Comp. 
with  Qptruj  '  the  pain  of  pri- 
vation,' 1  1  60,  1301,  1303  [with 
r]  ;  (3)  with  2_Lp  and 
,  936,  938  ;  (4)  with  u© 
and  u®J5g},  379,  555,  626,  460. 

su  (§  66),  'suffer  privation, 
perish.'  ^evfi^rriT  (87),  1303. 
^sbevrrGun-iT  '  they  are  not  dis- 
quieted,' 593.  An  irreg.  form  ; 
perhaps  for  <&eoffa®jff  ^<suirir 
(§  121). 

<5\>  [comp.  @eu,  §  44],  a  root 
denoting  the  non-existence  of  a 
quality  or  attribute.  .jyeii 
(Intro,  p.  §  4  (2)  b).  ^eosS 
L—fS&i  '  where  (or  when)  it  is  not 
so  '  =  <_gy6U6u/r(<^,  301.  ^SUSL/L^, 
1299,  1300.  This  root  takes 
inflections  as  a  (^nfluqaScfcor 
(§  184).  ^eo&j&ir,  3rd  sing. 

masc.,  '  he  who  is  not  —  ,'  386. 


THE    KURRAL. 


/r,  3rd  pi.  com.,  143,  926, 
880,  973,  1300.  <jy6u<su<su/r, 
973*  977,  751-  jya«w/r/r,  973, 
720,  726,  822,  918,  986,  999, 
419;  with  noun  und.,  266. 
^Qo<son-^<snn-  [a  double  neg., 
§  124  (5)],  1077.  ^Goeog) 
or  ^CTTJJ/,  3rd  s.  neut.,  (1)  as 
part,  noun,  795,  254,  108,  379, 
825,  1051,  618,  1 1 80,  784. 

(2)  as  finite  verb  [this  is  then 
contracted    into    jys»r«p],     105, 
370,  982,  988,  1092,  993,   1255, 
82,    786,    438,    871,    549,    546, 
641.       (3)    as   particle =  '  other- 
wise, but,  except,'     1090,  1131, 
231*  57o>  951*  751*  7*o  (§  202), 
491,1159.        (oT<ssr<oGT6\j&j^i  '  save 
myself,'   1168.        ^^rQ(y  'is  it 
not  so?'  1208,  1258,  775,  1014. 

is  it  not  so?'  555. 
)  '(or)  will  it  not?  ' 
1307.  ^eueu,  3rd  pi.  neut., 
(1)  part.,  61,  with  L$ p  :  'other 
things  which  are  not  — ,'  289. 
&<dfT6u&>6VL&fl)es>jDUJ  Bother  things 
which  are  not  fraud.'  (2) 
[where  no  name  of  quality  is 
expressed,  we  may  understand 
^(fDLd  or  QufrQj)®r  :  thus,  gj®) 
<si}0s)<su  =  '  sins,  evils,  unreal 
things'],  as  noun:  'things 
which  are  not  — ,'  157,  962, 
466,  337,  116,  182,  246,  274, 
551,  384,  1286,  150,  173,  289, 
700,  944,  164,  376,  96,  351. 

(3)  as  finite  verb  :  '  (they)   are 
not  — ,'     95,     115,     299,     400. 
jyevSsv,    2nd    sing.,    *  thou    art 
not  — ,'    1221.        ..gyeuisuLfl,    1st 
pi.,     '  we    are    not    — ,'     1209. 
cgyeueu/rcu,  with  tsStflsor  '  unless,' 
16;  with  noun,   1095,  'besides, 
but,    except,'     1188,    406,    233, 
377,  497,  jtfal.  105  ;    with  a  dat. 
'save   to   these,'     7,    235,    515, 
762.       Equiv.  to    .jyeueuj^    and 
^GO<O\)[TLZ®O  ;  perhaps  a  kind  of 
subjunctive:      'if     it    is    not.' 
^svrpSl    '  without,  the  attribute 
not    existing.' 

of     non-existent     verb 


§  62,    77],    437 
abs.   noun 


§  184], 

'  the  absence,  non-existence  of 
anything,'  with  oblique  case, 
162  ;  in  comp.  172  ;  with  noun 
und.  185. 

,  S.  '  vanity,  nothingness.' 


[S.  a  +  bala],     'sympa- 
thetic sorrow,'   1072. 

siyssr  (see  ,jy,  £§),  <sr),  'he,  that 
man,  this  man.'  .jysuerr,  ^QJSTT 
'  she,  that  woman,  this  woman.' 
[Comp.  =9/^7.]  63,  70  (ellipsis 
of  6th  case),  517,  1182,  1204, 
1155,  1156,  1321,  109,  790, 
1152,  1154  (ellipsis  of  2nd 
case),  1178,  1244,  65,314,  506, 
1051,  1188,  1301,  1297,  1298, 
1291,  1183,  1184,  1261.  ^<sijssr 
&<5GGr  (7th  case),  517.  ^ew  (5  err, 
125.  ^eiJiTLSssr,  1293.  ,.gy<su/r<f&(<g>, 
1321.  @<su<firr,  jya/err,  1188,  1086, 
1093,1091,1104,1112.  ^)QjSsrJ-, 
1188.  ^^§5or,  518,  547,  647, 
958.  cgysuooflssr,  526.  ^ouiflssr 
(5th  case),  1074.  ,j>/<a/<so./r,  1292, 
1236.  ^GjQirn-G),  1206.  ^<sufr 
LainL®,  1199.  c^<su  ff  '<SLI  IT  'each 
one's/  114,  469.  ^(suirsmiSlisor 

GUGO,  Ch.  cxxvii. 

'  desire  '=^60^,  35,  361- 
370,  1075,  I3I°-  ^(suireu 

Ch.     XXXVII.  ^fiUfl- 

'  indifference,'      364, 


(§  62),  '  desire.' 

LQ,  §  74),  '  which 
(the 'world,  the  king)  will  de- 
sire,' 215,  681.  JPJGIJITIU  (=cjy 
<a//rs$)  '  having  desired,'  643. 

[S.  havis].  1.  Q&LU  '  melted 
butter,'  259.  2.  Q®J®r<sSl  'a 
sacrifice,'  413. 

(§    57),    'be  extinguished, 

<  if6' (they)  die/  42O;"(§  64) 
'  extinguish,  destroy,  quench,  re- 
press.' ^sSlsj^i  '  having  re- 
pressed,' 694.  ^e&jSjSirGorzss 

^<2SI^^<su<oisrt  6,  25. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[7] 


IT  (§  60,  HI.),  'glisten' 
,  III.  Gr.  153),  1117. 
1.  See  under  ^^j.  2. 
'  an  assembly  '  [from  S. 
sabhd;  so  ^JSTIT,  s\s,  ^ITGIJLZ  for 
dF/ruL/ui],  711,  713,  725,  727; 
332,  'an  assembly  of  dancers.' 
[Syn.  Q&tTL-Uf-,  &<on<sisr,  ^SOXSULULO 
a  variation  of  ^eaeu  with  .F/rrfl 
caxu,  «$yu>],  67.  t£ieB>euujfSI<$6i)iC'h. 
LXXII.,  '  Knowing  the  (methods) 
of  the  assembly  of  councillors.' 
.-gyerotsuyj^j^/reoLfi,  Ch.  LXXIII., 
'  Not  dreading  the  assembly.' 
qeveuezjxa/,  719,  'The  assembly 
of  the  mean.'  ^eueusma;,  719, 
'  The  assembly  of  the  good,'  728. 

729. 


721,    'The    assembly    of    those 


mighty  in  learning,' 

€®<sij,  726,  '  The  assembly  of  the 

men  of  subtle  learning.' 

<su<oSl  [gpcwoS/].       ^(Sij'sSliuLz    [or 

S'    en-fifluJLb],  '  envy.'     ^(Lp&sirgy, 
uir(y<36)L£>,  169.     ^GusSiLtQp® 
tf^ptrevr     '  the  man  of    envious 

SOUl.'       ^tj<3UsSl    (§   64),   <£j<SiJsSl<££] 

'  having  been  envious  of,'  167. 
(§  66),  '  measure,'  Nal.  103. 


.  103. 
,   III. 


Gr.  41),  '  he  who  measured,'  610. 
^<5rr<ffi@/ii  '  which  will  measure,' 
710.  ^effuu^i  'that  which 
will  measure,'  796. 

o  =  '  lo 


ic    and 

dialectics,'  725.  2.  'Measure, 
due  (just  or  denned)  measure  or 
limit  '  ;  *  justitia  quae  sua  quid- 
libet  mensura  metitur,'  B.,  283, 
286,  287,  288,  289,474,  477>478, 

479>  574,  943)  947,  949-  .  3.  As 
adv.  <35[Tfj%)jL£><3fr<5ijLo  'until,'  22*4, 
848.  ^tsusutsfrsSlev  '  at  that 

exact  moment,'  1187. 


occurs  in  (III.  Gr.  14)  :—  v.  2, 
^  becomes  ^  ^,  14,  653,  1301  ; 
v.  182,  4£00«JftA*^i  v.  12, 

s.  is  first  lengthened  :  @«a:a.,  15, 
460,  461  ;  v.  31,  ssc  becomes 
sen  a.,  32  ;  v.  653,  g&(5<a/  be- 


comes gE>$>,  797,  929; 
becomes  ^£®,  544,  425,  913; 
v.  1040,  &&>f$)~£i€s>fjbgit  91. 
Comp.  Nal.  6,  201. 
jjy  err  /TO/  (§  64),  ^y&rr  (§  57), 
'  mingle,  mix  up,'  64 ;  and  with 
reduplication.  ^i<sir<sii<3ffiT  ('sSl<s\j 
<si}[r<&n-<svr)  'he  who  does  not  mix 
on  terms  of  intimacy,'  523. 
^^rr^)  =  ^Ssrj^^j  'having 
mingled  with  tenderness,'  91. 

'mire,  hell'    [comp.  ^{(Lg, 
gyorr :  the  idea  is  '  depth  '], 
255,835,919. 

(§  64),  jyerfl^ffeu,  387,  'de- 
fend.' ^<offi^^i  '  having  shown 
affection,'  1154,  1168,  1256. 
,j)/6Yfl<£E@;L£><sYft,  'the  love,  lovingly 
shown,'  1192,  1321.  (noun, 
=  cgy(/5isrr,  ^carq),  'kindness,' 
390,  557,  1192.  1209,  1321. 
,-gj/syfluj/r  '  full  of  tenderness,' 
1138. 

'take  in  handfuls.' 

9,  1187. 

'a  glowing  fire,'  1228. 
Lpeu]  (?  from 
'beauty,'  Nal. 

131.  Not  in  K.,  where  OTL^ei;, 
^r/r  are  found,  which,  perhaps, 
have  the  same  root. 

(§  57),  'perish,  498, 
105;  (§  64)  'destroy.' 
(<sSl.  Q^/r.),«j)/L^)Lj^  'hungerthat 
destroys,'  226  (III.  Gr.  153). 
'ruinous  things,'  807 
,  comp.  968).  egjifluj,  968. 
LJL^l^eu,  Ch. 
cxvni.,  'being  consumed,  wasting 
away.'  [Comp.  Psa.  xxxi.  9.] 
Ch.  cxxiv. 
u,  Ch.  cxxvi.,  '  re- 
serve overcome.'  ^L^&SGO 
'  destruction,'  421.  ^L£l<sy  '  de- 
spair,' 625;  'ruin,  defeat,'  764, 

787,       876.  ^L^)WJ/T6TOLD,       Ch. 

LXIII.          $)(i))<£<55<ot5BrL£!lU(T6®LD  '  not 

despairing  in  adversity,'  Ch. 
LXIII.  ^iflfgg]  'having wrought 
destruction,'  359;  'having 
abated  the  keenness  of  its  glance,' 


[8] 


THE    KURRAL. 


775  ;     '  having   changed    it,  de- 

stroyed its  effect/  1317. 

(III.   Gr.   86),    182,    = 

(see    ^<srrQu<soi—'). 

'  expenditure,  what  will    be  ex- 

pended,' 461.       ^L$uug)  'that 

which       will       destroy,'       744. 

^L$&@LZ  '  which  will*  destroy,' 

934- 

'weep'  (§  60).  [Comp.  S. 
asrw.  ^eug))  seems  another 
form.]  ^  ,=gy<z£.fl>  'wept,'  555,  828. 
.JJ/LP  '  with  weeping,  at  the  cost 
of  tears,'  659;  'so  as  to  draw 
tears,'  659.  ^(ip^/rerr  'she 
wept,'  1317,1318. 

(§  62),  'rot  away,'  Ml. 
123. 

<•  envy  '  (=<s>]&J38tULa 
n').  The  deriv.  is 
'  foulness,'  and  ^«p 
'  way.'  The  three  verbs  under 
are  formed  by  a  poetic  license. 
^Qp&atrgi,  35,  135,  161,  162, 
164,  165,  167,  168.  ^(L^&sfrny 
(§  62)  ;  <9iQ£&&n'(y6®Lb  'absence 
of  envy,'  Ch.  xvn.  ^(L^&S^I 
(§  64)  ;  ^(Lg&<s5guuuiTesr  '  he 
who  will  be  envious,'  163,  166. 
^(L£&&£»  (56,  II.)  ; 
'  having  envied,'  170. 

ag/B&j  'will  sink  down,'    835. 
(Connected  with  «$<£.) 

,  See  Notes,  p.  186.  (1)  One 
of  the  four  objects  of  study  and 
pursuit  (S.  dharma).  (2)  It  is 
the  general  subject  of  Ch.  i.- 
xxxvin.  ^puufYGo.  (3.)  It  is 
divided  into  eveopLa,  Ch.  v.- 


xxiv.,      'The  virtue     of     the 

house  ;  '     and  ^fD<sufDLc>,      Ch. 

xxv.-xxxvm.,  '  The    virtue     of 

renunciation.'  76,     543,     32, 

3J,  35>  36»  39»  l8l>  l83>  l855 
93,  96,  501,  23,  141,  296, 
297,  249,  288,  1047,  1009,  1018. 
(=jflD««L-a/6?r),  77,  130,  204, 
personification.  ^{D&sr  \_t5&T 
^/reu,  122],  Ch.  iv.,  34,  40,  45, 
48,  49,  441,  189,  182,  179,  384, 
147,  148,  150,  644,  754,  173, 


635>  366.  ^rDtsyrev&j  'vices, 
vicious  acts,'  157.  ^/D^r-sero/— 
'  the  outside  of  virtue  =  vice,' 
142.  (See  ««j>t_.)  ^jrxsufTL^I 
'  the  round  sea  of  virtue,'  8. 
^/DsS^sor  '  virtuous  action,'  33, 
321,  909.  ^fD^^n^u  '  the  way 
of  virtue,'  37,  46.  Cgyn9<eo)«s«/.o 
'  the  increase,  wealth  of  virtue,' 
163.  ^roQeurrir  '  virtuous  per- 
sons,' 30. 

(§  57),  'know  (as  result 
of  study),  be  wise,  be  able.' 
[Syn.  Q^/fl  '  perceive  '  ;  Gpjpi 
'  perceive  clearly  '  (strengthened 
form  of  Q^ffl)  ;  ^.esor^  (a.  err) 
'  understand  and  feel.'  Often 
combined  with  <«6u,  of  which  it 
is  the  result.  Comp.  396. 
Connected  with 


new  gan 


Ellis  says,  'In  Tamil 
the  more  frequent  acceptations 
of  «jy/$@/r  the  learned,  and 
^fSliufTir  the  ignorant,  are  the 
virtuous  and  the  vicious. 

I.  Root        (sD/So&r^Q^f/rsro.ifi). 
.jy/rfl-G^/rjj/  (see  C^/rjj/), '  when- 
ever one  obtains  some 

of  knowledge,'  mo. 
@ pop  ia  '  a  fault  of  which  one  is 
conscious,  a  wilful  fault,'  272. 
^nS-  (o) <ss IT enr £)]  '  having  mur- 
dered (set  at  nought)  the  lessons 
of  wisdom,'  638.  si—eBrfSainl.® 
ujeufr  'those  whose  mental  vision 
perceives  duty,'  218  [comp. 
981]. 

II.  Past  tense,  part,  adv.,  and 
adj.,  and  nouns  (§  77,  74,  87). 
[With  jjf/rf/ey,  123,  &c.]        ^fSl- 
fs&  123,  136,  164,  179,  441,469, 

472,483,  477,  479>  493>494,  5*5  > 
'having  known,  knowing,'  635, 
637,  644,  645,  687,  696,711,721, 

725,  729,  754,  767,  793>  878,  943» 
944,  946,  947,  981,  1127,  1128, 
1287,  1312.  <gifSl-j$<$  'which 
has  known,  knows,'  637,  711, 
721,  1143.  ^nSl-jF^GSHau  'things 
that  have  been  ascertained,'  587, 
^f&-pQp€ix  '  I  have  known,  I 
know,  novi,'  1083. 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[9] 


r)t    288, 
293, 


399>  635>  7i7- 
472,686,  1255. 

III.  Fut.    tense,     part.,    and 
nouns.     (Intro,  xxi.) 

(  =  ^n5K$<su6ir,  III.  Or.  81), 
shall  know,  I  know,'  1129. 
eufTLa  (  =  cgi//$G><a//rLD,  III.  Gr. 
77),  'we  will  know,'  36.  <=£/£$?- 
eurrir  'they  will  know,'  427. 
^flsurrevr,  ^fr  'those  who  (will) 
know,'  318,  428,  677,  701,  995, 
,1053,  1072.  jy^-iLjti  'that  will 
know,'  1308. 

IV.  Inf.    and     verb,     noun 
(§  168,  148).     ^/$-uj  '  to  know, 
so  as  to  know,  in  order  to  knotv,' 
590,  795.      ^f5l-^&j  '  the  know- 
ing, knowledge  of,'  582. 
un5)<s6v,  Ch.  LXXI.,  ex. 

n5l<$6lJ,  Ch.   XLVIII. 
j£lUjrfJI<$GO,  Ch.  XI. 

Ch.  XLIX.  <QULjir<sijn5l&eo,  Ch. 
xxn.  <s)i—m  $<$&),  Ch.  L. 

^tsfrsuajfSltSGo,  Ch.  LXXII.  sp 
prSl^Go  (&"}£)]),  '  the  faculty  of 
learning,'  632. 

Y.  Optative  (§  140).  ^$-& 
'(he)  should  know,'  116,  210. 
(Intro,  xx.) 

VI.  Negative  (§  110,  121). 
^rSl-Qiudr  '  I  know  not,  can- 
not,' 928,  1083,  1125,  1207. 
Lz  'we  know  not,'  1257 


'  we  know  not  '  (§  114), 
6  1.  cgy/zflaSou/r  '  which  is  devoid 
of  knowledge,'  869.  ^"SliLi/revr, 
^tr  (n.),  'they  who  know  not,' 
76,  337>  473>  474,  638,  713,  863, 
877.  ^nSlLurriir  (fin.  v.),  '  they 
know  not/  228,  1141,  Nal.  108. 
'not  knowing,'  1142. 
(=^fSlLUjLo<sv),  1116. 
'that  knows  not,'  736, 
836.  Poetic,  ^^^eueu/r^oj/r  ((^ 
inserted  +  ^©veu/T-^su/r)  'men 
without  knowledge,'  427;  j)/^ 
©eu/r/r  '  they  know  not'  (@jj  ins. 


knew     not,'     1226,    lit.    'I    was 
not  that  which  knew.' 


VII.  Nouns.     ^/Sltsy    '  know- 
ledge,' (§  190a),   123,   175,203, 

^5t355»358,372,  373>382>396, 
421-426,  452,  454, 513,  532,  682, 
684,  1022.  c2/a5?<si/<a3)t_6roL£>,  Ch. 
XLIII.  68.  L^eu6\j,o5 

Ch.   LXXXV.    287,  331. 

o,  Ch.  cxv. 
o,  Ch.  cxxvm. 

215      [^srri 

.«»f_),  179,  404,  427, 
430,  441,  463,  622,  816,  1153. 
(§  184)  ^/fisSlfMiT,  918;  jqfSaQ 
@)/r,  198,  429  ;  ^/6lsSls6reuiTt  914, 

9T5».  857-         ( 

©J/TJT,  427,  430  ; 

140.       ^^(sujSujn-ir,   507; 

GufSjsp,    61,     123,    618 

used  as  ace.  of  cognate  signif.], 

Nal.  1 08.       ^n5)uj[r£®La  (§  154), 

'  ignorance,'  440,  925,  mo. 

VIII.  Causal    (§    160,   I.  6). 
^/tfisQuu    'they   will   cause   to 
be      known  '     (= 

I233- 

I.    ^^jy,  adj.    (see 
'  six,'  Nal.  i. 

II.  ^&  (§  56,  II.),  'be  cut 
off,  cease,  be  digested.'  jy/r> 
Qpi*  (III.  Gr.  79),  'we  are  de- 
prived of,  free  from,'  88,  275 
[comp.  505],  626.  jyrb(yiT  (§  87), 
'  those  who  are  without,  freed 
from,'  503  ;  =  '  less '  in  com- 
pounds, 311,  312,  646,  106,  800. 
'  The  destitute,'  226,  248,  365, 
506,  1007.  ^/b&izr,  350. 
euir  'those  set  free,'  365. 

654,  649,  699,  956. 

Qsm  '  where  (bonds)  have  been 
severed,'  349,  521;  '  where  all 
support  has  failed.'  ^/b/D^i 
'  that  which  is  freed,  carried  off, 
digested,'  365,  942,  944. 
1261.  ^ 

199,  352  =  'less,'  1117. 
'  thoroughly,  absolutely,  so  as  to 
be  free  from  all  conditions,' 
268,  391,  465,  845,  717,  184; 
'  without.'  (jg)6a>[_)uj (yg!  '  fails 
not,' 369.  ^(7^,1295.  ^{Slsisr 
(opp.  to  s-^csr),  '  if  it  is  not,' 

B 


[10] 

8 1 2.       4ip&o  'digestion.' 
(y6o  'if  it  digest  easily,'  943. 

III.  4j  gn    (§   64),    'cut    off.' 

xxxvn.  e$M£N£@t£)  349?  814 
[see  ^jj/],  753>  759-  cgyj)>iJ 
ufreoTj  346,  '  he  who  will  free 
himself  from,'  798,  163  [see 

let  them  consume  away,' 
1177.  4i  (y  'unfailing,'  522. 
4KS?(r  '  cease  not  (to  love),'  807. 

IV.  (Intro.      xxiv.)      ^e®/D 
'  chamber  (cut  off)  ;  a  mine,'  747, 

'destruction,'  434,  421  ;  'cessa- 
tion,' 1 1 86;  'shame,'  980,  846. 

(§  57),  '  beat  (as  a  drum),' 
1076.  [aSfer^Q^/reD-s],  1 1 80. 
cgl<sG)rDjp<&[TS3r  '  (of)  him  who  has 
struck,'  307. 

(§64;  =  j$fa>),  'endure.' 
riot  enduring '  (§  121), 
333-  <£>IPr$u  *  things  that  will 
endure'  (III.  Gr.  95),  333. 
[LJ  added  to  a  root  forms  an 
aoristic  part,  noun  plur.  neut.] 

«jy  6sf)  <£F  &  is t  an  imaginary  (?) 
flower,  the  poet's  commonplace 
for  anything  peculiarly  delicate 
or  sensitive,  90,  mi,  1115, 
1 1 20. 

(see    41),  '  such.'       [Comp. 
The   difference   is  that 
between  talis  and  tantus.       ^<sor 
is  '  such  in  quality,'  ^m  '  such 
in     magnitude     or     number.'] 

^/£CT(CO)0",    !O6l,   8l4  ;   J5l<o$r  fD6&  joQIT 

for  $GorrD   ^ssTf^fr  (see  4{£Djpi)) 
'they   who    are    as,'    898,    969. 
jpi  six  <56f  fr ,  1076,  1323-      ^ssr^yjSsr 
'  he  is  as,'  624.       jp/cjjrsorerr    '  she 
is    as,'    1124.       ^eorsyr^i     'that 
which  is  as,'   565,    1082    [comp. 
ffljgjjrgcr  (1)  for    cg^£3T 
,  or  rel.  part,  in  agreement 
with   g&uLj/r/fi,    1071,   2961  889, 

308,   363,    527,   109; 

Tl42,  1143,  1260,  655,  1305, 
1119,  1137.   (2)  'things  that 


THE    KURRAL. 


are  so,'  279,  1122,  1294,  Nal. 
101,  104. 

y<5vr.  lt  As  '  •firtfls^LU  '  or  inserted 
particle  ;  <s/j>/Dj3  +  ^eijr  +  ^eij,  2. 
2.  As  '  sSl^jgl '  or  termination 
forming  a  masc.  noun  sing. 

'  such.'  See  41 .  [Comp. 
;  and  cgy«Jr,  which 
has  nearly  the  same  force. 
These  forms  all  belong  to  the 
@/$LJqs$2o5r,  Intro,  p.  xxii.  10. 
They  govern  a  gen.  oblique 

L-'Sssnurr.  ^'BsGnu  ^      'it     is 

(such)  as,'  595  [comp.  4^ps^\- 
^Ssor^^LD,  '  all  over,'  1320. 
^cteor^^j  '  it  is  thus  (much),'  34, 
387,  394,  828,  1208.  ^i^osr^^l 
<SVIT  'are  not  of  this  much,  of 
equal  value,'  409.  (1)  pred. 
^ftsGriuiT  '  they  are  (such)  as,' 
595,  Nal.  104 ;  (2)  rel.  part., 
622  ;  (3)  noun,  965,  964,  410, 
406,  310,  576  [comp.  4f63T(^)ir'], 
IO73>  65°?  704.  ^^osrujiriT 
'those  who  are  as — ,'  965. 
<=gycii5Br<5u<so).rnqLb  'all  sorts  of  per- 
sons,' 5^4'  cgySoQT  J5 3>  [T £G)}  LD , 

'  thus  much  even,'  416.  -sxsmi- 
VSGTUJIT  '  as  those  whom  (one)  has 
seen.'  (tfeabr®  for  <S^TL-  • 
comp.  mi <svr po'cor (G£)iT  and  ^V'DJQy.) 
Cgj((te5r<£j£ljb(o&  '  to  such  an  ex- 
tent,' 1129.  Q^fTLLl—  $oGT<5g,, 

<s p  rD$55T  si ^  '  in  proportion  as,' 
396- 

'affection,'  513.  .jysijrq 
,  Ch.  viii.,  862,  911,  992, 
1009,  45,  71-80,  681,  682,  285, 
807,  1276,  757.  [Comp. 


(see  41),  'that  day,  to- 
morrow,' 36  ;  with  <gr,  1 08  ;  '  that 
very  day,'  113.  [Comp.  §}ssrjp, 

[S.  han<;a], '  swan,'  1 120. 
'mother':  pni ',  H47- 
like,  it  is  like,  it  is  such 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[11] 


as.'       (_Comp.  GTjbjrii.      See  ^svr, 


1.  It  is  added  to  past  adv.  part, 
where    we    should    expect    rel. 
part.         (Intro,      xxiv.     §    10.) 
<s<suiTjij££fl)jY)j    '  it   is   like    grasp- 
ing at,'    22,   100,   78,  401,  402, 
208,  274,   338,    215,    216,  1007, 
1008,  452,   1058,  931,678,758, 
1302,  1303,  1304,  838,  913,  1020, 

1107,  IIIO,  890,  332,  1192,  II2I, 

1145,  "46,  307,  1148,  718,  894. 

2.  It  is  added  to    nouns    (inf. 
base),      Larrd5jgrQ<£],     217,     332. 

3.  It  is  added  to  nouns,  simply, 
1306,    261  ;    almost   redundant, 

720,  407,^  415,   1288. 
O  <&  n~  <8fT 2u  nQ rr) ,  1187 
Q-sfT&vtsu^^       4.  Corr.  to 
'  such  as  is  ...  so  is.' 
4  so,'  365. 


/)  is  a  demonstrative,  a  stronger 
form  of      .      See 


.     1.  'Ox,  cow,'   560,  1066,  Ml. 
101,    115,    118.       2.   See  under 


4  confusion,  turbulence/  34, 

>  -SftO  (§  58>  136-14 

(§  64).         4g(a$    (root    used    in 

SS.    Q0II.),  371,  478.       «$,  «^«  = 

'when,'  1312,1315,1317;  ='as,' 
850,  841,  874,  1163,  104,  117, 
122,  433,  434,  424,  443,  444,  445, 
507,  751,  1263,  1147  ;  =«  while, 
is,'  82,278,1127,1128;  =  'to 
be,'  666,  92  ;  adverbial,  119,357, 
1043.  ^«eu,  372;  =4£  in 
371,  'favouring  fate.'  =g^6u 
34,  95,  285,  219,  374,  419,  714, 
80  1,  998,  600,  1291  [as  optative 
mood  we  must  suppose  ellipsis 
of  (?a/ear®Lb.]  ^O^eu,  683, 
823.  «${u,  ^£),  form,  adv.,  543, 
479,  T5,  J7,  586,  587»  998,  51* 
217,868,  133,  461,446,  529,744, 
745,764,910,1218,  1227,  1228, 


630,  476.  c$£,  c^^ti,  375, 
368,  590,  1002,  379,  993,  897, 
868,978,  146,  573,  138,175,858, 
889,  397,  436,  449,  939,  556,685, 
763,  1298,  1270,  942,  1079,  93» 
94,  125,  205,  134,  144,  860,  113, 
328,  456,  459>  492,  787,  788, 
1049,  514,  320,  433,  344,  452_- 
&@PJr  'you  are,'  1319. 
'  thou  didst  become,'  1112. 

we     shall    prosper,'  — 


750,817.  c^u3«5>L_  '  therefore,' 
1179.  C^«L/,  2,  12.  c^uj^j'what 
has  become,'  12.  ^ujirir  '  those 
who  have  been,'  106. 
'  those  who  are,'  101  6. 
'  what  will  accrue,'  283,  427,  461  ; 
^@o;^,  315.  ^07/r  'they 
will  be,  become,'  1165,  1189, 
1218,  1207.  coj/r/r  'those 


(that)  will  become,'  1074,  1299. 
^utissr  'if  (it  become),'  44,45, 
52,  49,  209,  868,  1156,  1306, 

566,   I0l8,   III9,   I2l6. 

'if  (be),'  53.  ^u3^2/ 
'  although,  whatsoever,'  355,  478, 
656,  889,  900,  599,  52,  127,  144, 
458,  961,  128,  397,  317,  416, 

1321,  1325,  Io65,  404,  409,  414, 
705.  Neg.  forms:  — 


1291;    dg«jr>ftr,  ia8  ; 

619;  ^SfTGuiTLz,  376  ; 
421,  456.  With  e_<>3br©, 
and  ^yeu  :  —  a-errjr/r^/r/r,  895  ; 
$)6oirir<5S,  1242  ; 
1005;  s.s?R5r/_/r<s,  54, 
err^/TLD,  889;  a-sjar^/ros,  no, 
896,  1059;  Q-<srr&r6uir<£,  100; 
e-grrsrr^/r^LD,  454  ; 
128;  ^)6\J6u/r^,  479; 
593  ; 

91  ;  g)6u6u/r@ai,  368,94; 
r,  49,  52,  769,  1058; 
uSsu,  '  nothing  which 
may  not  come  about,'  537. 
<^&Q  '  having  caused  to  become,' 
678,  1026.  ^&&&o  'a  causing 
to  prosper,'  264.  c^«0Lb,  616. 
^•s&Lb  (opp.  to  (?«©),  'increase, 
wealth,  prosperity,'  31,  32,112, 
113,  122,  135,  163,  169,  177,183, 


[12] 


THE    KUBRAL. 


283,  328,  457,  463,  492,  522,  526, 
562>  593,  594,  642,  651,  657,692, 
755,  858,859,  902. 


1. 


[comp. 

,      and      «^,         ILHTI 
'So,'    252,  740,  'as  above'; 

'  with  such  persons,'  474, 
534,  279,  803.  2.  'As,'  532,  666, 
1189;  Lj/li_/r/B^  '  as  it  suffers,' 
247,  265,  279,  561,  908;  £><£ 
f5irBJ(&),  561  ;  c^/E/<«cifc5r<si/6B)jriqJi 
'and  all  such  persons,'  584; 
'  closing  and  summing-up/  43  ; 
'  as  is  fit,'  50.  3. 
'again,'  15,  16.  4. 
it  is,  at  once,'  179,  171289,333, 
487,  566,  788,  1307,  928,  1215; 
'  when,'  676,  1325. 

'stain,'  503. 

[S.  dchdra],  1075  5  'Pr°- 
priety  of  conduct,  rule  of  life  :' 


.  d$a],  'desire,'  266. 
(§  62),  '  move,  play  '  [comp. 
^t^iUflQfl)  'like  play- 
ng ;  see  ^IJD^}.  Q«F/T6W6i>/rL_ 
'use  words,'  405,  1070.  ©<F/r6u 
6u/rt_/r/r  '  they  speak  not,  inter- 
change no  words,'  818.  cf$<— 
6L//r=ijQ<£5<£56rr  'men,'  1003  [comp. 


'  employment  '  ;    Ch.  LII. 


'the  exercise  of  friendship,'  187. 
the  use  of  detectives.' 
'  swimming,'  278. 

62).  Lj/rjr/rLL©ii,  994, 
521  (see  LJ/T/T).      U(TjrirLL(deu[resrt 

196,     (a9.  Qj 

'  the  assembly  of  dancers.' 

.     See  ^  err. 

^    nail'     [S. 
1032. 

63^(5)    (see    ^),     'there,'     363, 
1098.     [Comp. 

See 

@U<$GU60T       I. 

source,'  543. 
'tortoise,'  126. 


667, 


strong 
bear.' 


I.     'Six,'      38l.         (§p   I(72.) 

men  of  six  works,'  560,  Nal.  i. 

II.  «f$jy   (§  62),  '  grow  cool, 
heal  up.'        ^jpjLz,  129. 

Gj£t   129. 

III.  (See  jyjy,  cut.) 

way,'    37,    43,    161,     219"    465, 
478,  787,   849,    i321,  397, 
943,  662,  Nal.  97.  Mfl 

'  in  the  (right)  way,'  468, 
975,  130,  46,  123,  176,  48, 
716,  725,  477,  Nal.  103;  with 
41,222,242,324. 
1140.  In  comp.  see 
fyap&sirjpi,  164; 
161  ;  <5ro<£WJ/T(7)j»,  627; 
'forsake,'  814,798; 

,  367- 

§62).  (l)'do,"be 
(2)  '  endure,  undergo, 
[Comp.  <sfTuun-ir>^]  (see 
cf^/opeu,  469,  287, 
891,  985,  225,  765,  25,  269,  768. 
>^/b(y,  469,  1174,  II75t  -^P(y 
^(fP^j  555, 1032-  f&PQyn't  493, 
998,  286,  908.  cfjfpGfyD«r,  1162. 
^jbjS,  493,  5J5»  568,  669,  212, 
1 1 60,  1276,  748.  Mjbjti&r,  525, 
46,  126,  234,  297,  38.  <3J>P£U 
ueufr  '  those  who  wage  offensive 
war,'  741,  893,  1165.  (v.  and 
n.)  ^jbjpaifrjr '  the  men  of  active 
energy,'  1027,  891,  894,  985,  975 
130,  225.  c$/b<2^/T6sr,  1007, 
894.  (p.  and  f.v.)  c$/b^p/ii,  67, 
70,  189,  211,  1159,  579,  835. 
,  Ch.  cxvi.  iStrflojirn) 
^pfD  (=^/«),  64,  367, 
732,  1209. 

§  56,  III.),  'govern,  act, 
employ.'  [Comp.  «=f$©.]  ^GK  'a 
person  ;  servant,  slave,'  1030,  746. 
GpQjeufrisir,  500,  Nal.  122. 
a/err,  *  a  lady,'  1279. 
Ch.  LXII.  ;  ='(Lpoj/D^),'  618,  632, 
1022.  ^<sff<s  'manage!'  589, 
242;  'exercise,'  '  rege,  i.e.  tibi 
associa,'  B.  ^<sh  ueuir,  1017, 
383,  791'  ^srr <sij rr IT ,  447,  244, 
245  ;  in  comp.  ^/rSa^wj/rerr/r, 
1230;  Lojp;60)^u5eun'<5rre<jr,  904; 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[13J 


will  be 
'will 


215; 

<sfr^r)  783- 
employed,'  511. 
exercise,'  251,  1252. 
663,  907.  /ff/Tflir/r&braDLQ,  613, 
614;  ^eueu/rsssreoLn,  1026,  1133, 
/rsabr<SB>Lo,  1026. 
613,  81,  212  ; 
,  287,  331,  Ch. 
LXXXV.  Gu/rsYr/rsabrsoLD,  614; 

480.  (OJLJL 

,    609  ;     (oLJ/r/r.osbr60)LD, 

773,     148,     962.  LO£jLiL//r®Jbr68>LO 


609 


,   773  ; 


933 


904. 

Ch.    xcix.,  981,  989,  990. 
252,    comp. 


,  'gain.' 


'  a  herdsman,'   1228. 

>     'a    thousand'     [S.    sa- 

259- 

£/?"  (see  ,j)/(/5  ;  the  idea  seems  to 
be  '  excellence,  fulness  ').  ^IT 
<ajLo,  74, '  =  ^<5G><p,  or  the  quality 
which  excites  it.'  ^rrsusu/r, 

71,    '  =<J^SSrLJSO)L_iL/(SlJ/7'.'  ef$fl"> 

..gi/sro/jiaj/r/rG'^/risfr  'shoulder  like 
a  bambu,'  906.  ^  (§  57), 
'fill.'  c^F/r  'insatiable,'  370. 
^ir  '  to  be  satisfied,  filled,'  837. 
^aL-rrrrrrir  'they  fill  not  their 
bellies,'  936.  Q^fnL 


1265.  ^n-  (§  64),  'bind.' 
^fr<{E(&)[5j<$uSl£)],  482  ;  Nal.  122, 
'bind;  hum.'  iurT$5Grujn-iT<£ 

,  678. 

1.  993-  (^6®&)  'redun- 
dant,' 216,  217,  397,  894,  875, 
1155,  758,  838,  1145,  1148,  923, 
840,  1152,  1 1 80,  1184,  1192; 
with  ^ssr^i,  cgytbtgUi  *%j>L°i  IO38j 
966.  2.  Sign  of  third  case,  2. 
3.  For  cgj@)su,  704  (so  B.  in 
397,  '  if  it  be  so  '). 

'deep.'       «=^i^  (=«L_ GO),  8 
(tig.).  (=«6»jr),  989  (fig.).    *&£ 

(§  57).  <as!reurrL£<s5<sfriT  'mire  in 
which  the  foot  sinks,'  500. 


'  the  hell   in  which 
they  sink  down,'  919. 
for   ^Qjcar,    3. 


[='  jDj&svrrD  '  (see 
or   from    -fireyrp   (see  tfireo)   as 
jj/groa;  from  <F6rou],    ^full,  per- 
fect, complete,'  416 
681,  922  (@tf),  694 
1022  (^fflsy)' 

635  (©<ff/r6b),  909"  ^  _ 
862  (^jSszj^r),  148  («£(y>«(3j))  NaL 
106.  ^losr (y  fr  '  the  gods,  the 
perfect  ones,  those  of  good 
fulfilled,'  413- 

£UJ    (§  57),  '  examine.'     Oftener 
written  ^IT/TUJ  (with  ^/r  '  fully '). 


'explore,  search  out,'   584. 
586,  711.      3£fftrdfJB0 

,  682  ;  <ss&0's£l,  684. 
512. 

792 

795. 

662.    '  Exquisite,  recherche,' 
Q<£iru?-ujirfr,    911. 
1081.      ^'i3sD)Lp,  1124.      c^qti, 
914,  918.     (^fl<sSl<5GT<suir),  198. 


demonstrative.     [Comp.  jy,  «sr, 
csr      )Ssor.     Be- 


fore nouns,  247,  382,  383,  392, 
336,  98>  5J3>  571,  578,  738,  662, 
743,  952,  992,  1042,  1085,  1129, 
1130,  1142,  1162,  1227,  1247, 

1220,  1315,  I3I9>  1169.     @oo 

G>/r  'Lo!  '  1161. 
)<£  (§  66),  'pass  beyond  the 
bounds  of.'  [Comp.  @/r>  ;  S.  i.] 
$j)<5jB3>i<s®no<siJiT  '  he  dwells  apart, 
afar,'  1130.  @«M  '  unre- 
st rainable,'  567  ;  (with  fiDff) 
'immoderate,'  113.  @  ^su/rsoLn 
'  not  transgressing,'  779.  $&<sijn- 
'  do  not  pass  away  from,'  146, 
869. 


[14J 


THE    KUEKAL. 


'hostility.'        [From 
B.    animi   aversio. 

(Nig.       $j)<$<S:UU<5m&6lJ( 
6B)LOiq^LD.]        Ch.   LXXXVT.    851- 
86O,  647,  481,  '  L-/6B)<£&<2L'/r.'        <j$&60 

QeuJBjfsfr  '  warlike  kings,'  691. 
)#/_£  (§  57),  «  despise,  scorn.' 
[Opp.  i^«<£  and  Ln%p.  Comp. 
with  srcrr.]  $)<a5L£p<$n-nr,  538. 
g)«Lp,T/r,698.  ©«<£<£&>  5  39»995» 
'  scorn  '  [comp.  GUGS><P~\.  <g>«Lpfff 
^>  IO57-  JD«LP/T«DLO  *  the  ab- 
sence of  a  scornful  spirit,'  891, 
953.  £D«L£<su/Tfr,  966,  59,  151, 

237,  Ml.  117. 

)®n&'  =L]<B5L£.  [Opp.  to  euss)<f. 
Comp.  @)<S®ILI.'},  231,  238,  239, 
240;  'praise,'  777;  'renown,' 
1003;  'word,  speech,'  1199.  As 
verb,  Nal.  in  ;  'suit,  fit,'  152. 

)/_LD,  @L.  ear  (@eroL_).  1.  '  Place,' 
1064,1123;  '  room,'  422,  Nal.  1  16. 

2.  'Fitting  place,'  484,  491,  493, 
4)94,  497,  498,  675,  687  ;     with 
£/r,  821.        lj£.L-<5&(£l!Bi®j  'know- 
ledge of  the  right  place,    Ch.  L. 

3.  '"Ease,  prosperity.'      @L_«jfl/D 
LiQfjSijJs^La,  '  when  in  straight- 
ened circumstances,'   218,   1064. 
®i—ppgi  '  what  possesses  space,' 
744.       $)i—f5f&  *  things  that  take 
the   place    of,'    292.         g)/_^^ 
iuflex.  base   used   adv.,  '  when  ' 
or    '  where  '  ;     'in   the   nick   of 
time,'  746  ;    with  ©u.  <5i<f.  879, 
968,   1124,  302,  490,   1285,736; 
with   aS).   Qpir.   301,  302;    with 
num.   @iftt—<£gi,   JiSS;     si 

7th  case,  806,  883,  597,  762. 
)i—ir  <  affliction.'      [Comp. 


<_/r,  801. 


[see 


)L_(7-ULJ/7©,   624    (UfT®). 

)z^_  (§  64),  'thunder,  reprove 
with  earnestness,'  447,  448,  784, 
795.  i).  *  a  forcible  word,'  607. 

)(£)(§  68),  '  give.'    [Comp.  S.  da. 

Q&ir®,  &($,  FF.~\       @©   'give!' 

552.  @i-6V,   85.  @)LLt-6ffr<SGT 

4  as  though  (it;  were  thrown 
into,'  1260.  $u]Lg$jLB  [aux. 
strengthening  meaning],  931 


dukh  ; 

go  us], 


(§  263). 

1030. 

Comp. 

.       S. 

syn.  zpeoTULz,  ^)ssr@) 
narrowness,  straitened 
circumstances,  affliction,'  Ch. 
LXIII.  ^®<$&£ttnt£iujir<5®Lc>  '  not 
despairing  in  adversity,'  621, 
624,  625,  654,  788,  1030. 

'pain,  evil,'  138,  508, 
622,  623,  627,  628,  1045,  I05^» 
1060,  1063,  1295.  It  is  used 
for  @©<£5<£(S25sr.  ^)©ii<srotj  is 
rather  an  effect  of  @©<ffi«s3br. 
Nal.  107. 

(seems  another  form  of 
,  '  position,  middle,'  663, 
1108.  1.  ^coi-^ff)^^,  899, 
'fall  from  high  estate,'  ex- 
plained by  473,  p) 
2.  @)<o®L-UJ£u  '  fail,'  369. 
jpj  '  hindrance'  (fi-J3/),  676.  [Ram. 
I.  XXIIT.  5.  ...  @«DL-  @®@ 
(SfrJsiGmi—iLfrQrossrpL—tsun'issr  '  He 
stopped,  saying  there  is  here  in 
the  way  a  hindrance  (a  bad 
omen).']  3.  jDeroLQ^ff)  '  discern 
the  fitting  place  and  time,'  712. 
4.  Sign  of  7th  case  (§  251),  37, 
338,1122,2239.  ^ii9<oOTL_  '  be- 
cause '  =  ^wiusSlt-fSftei),  1179- 
ll©  '  smallness,'  478.  ©ilifjjj 
'  small,  narrow.' 

<  a  cluster,'  308,  360. 
'a  pair.' 
jssr  [S.]  'Indra,'  25. 

(§  64),  'wink,  close  the 
eyes,'  1129,  775,  1126.  @<5e>Lo 
wj/rrr  (§  121),  '  the  heavenly  ones, 
who  do  not  close  their  eyes,'  906  ; 
Nal.  146,  'twinkle,  glisten,'  361. 

[(gj  0  LCKoOsf?        uSl'S®Ln&(&jd;><3fT<&>-<SVLC> 

'  The  long  shore  where  the  bright 
pearls  twinkle.'  £g)<6C)Lpa9<5rr<£E(3j 
$68rj6i<s®LbULS!<5or  '  Though  jewels 
sparkle  like  lamps  standing 
there.'] 

See  @  and 

motion,'  1  020. 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE . 


[15] 


One 
'na- 


(n.).     1.  'Nature.' 
whose  nature  is  —  ,'   1098; 
tural  course,'  572. 

iir  '  women,'  1311. 

'  she  who  belongs  to 
another,'  147.  ^pa&iueotT&sr 
'  one  who  has  made  virtue  his 
very  own,'  147.  2.  (56,  III.), 
*  proceed,  be,  coine  about  in 
a  natural  way.'  $)uj<s\ju[T6o 
(a9.  0^/r.),  '  things  which  will 
become  one's  own,'  342.  $j)uj6sr 
rogi  '  that  which  has  proceeded 
naturally,'  35.  @ujeua;^j  '  what 
naturally  is  so,'  734.  {DiOe&rpSBT 
'they  naturally  are,'  1106. 
{jftiujbjpi  (v.  caus.  §  62),  '  make 
or  bring  about  '  (§  161).  ®ujrQj£l 
lUfTGor  'the  Creator,'  1062.  @ 
ujpj&ujirn-  '  those  who  have  made, 
acquired,'  760.  $iujbiD&)  '  ac- 
quisition.' $)uj6VL-i  (strength- 
ened form  of  $)iu®o),  '  nature,' 
41,  47,  161,  333,  344,  382, 
452,  545,  628,  903,  951,  1006. 
$)tujb6®&  'natural  course,'  370, 
374,  637.  3.  '  A  section.' 

$®nuj  [Com  p.  ^S.  yd]  (§  57), 
combine,  'join,  harmonize.' 
[Coinp.  ^sm-P,  eriiigi.]  ^oniufc^ 
'  having  been  joined  with,  pos- 
sessed of,'  576.  ^csuusf.^  com- 
posed of,'  576;  'joined  (with),' 
73,  489,  1323.  ^soujitiw  'if 
(it)  attach  itself,'  522.  '^&s)uu- 
ILJII  &&®s>i—  '  when  (it)  canuot  be,' 
230.  gjj):5B>iijq  '  harmony,'  573. 

\)jr  (§  66),  '  beg,  excite,  compas- 
sion.' [Used  with  «F.]  ^nts,^ 
'having  begged,'  780,  1059, 
1063.  gDjj-jsa^Lci  '  though  they 
beg,'  1062.  $)!r®JiJtr  '  they  beg 
not,'  1035.  ^[TuuiTir  'sup- 
pliants,' 1035,  1058,  232,  1060, 
1067.  @)ITUUSVIT,  1055,  1070, 
Nfil.  307.  (uj/r)v5ofljrLJLj  '  that  I 
may  ask,'  1212,  1329.  ^ussu 
u®<£<3o  'the  being  asked  from,' 
224.  ^ir^fsiinr,  224.  ^sr^jS&o 
'  begging,'  229,  1052,  1054. 
!  'beg  thou,'  1051. 


<5<gssn-fr  l  people  from  whom  it  is 
meet  to  ask,'  1051.  ©jr^aosu 
'what  he  has  asked,'  1052. 
jDiruq  =  ®F<a/,  1053.  ^oeun- 
SOLO  '  refraining  from  mendi- 
cancy,' 1061.  §)iruLSl^uLCi 

'though  you  beg,'  1066.  ^}iru 
sr  «  if  you  beg,'  1067.  g)]T 
'beg  not,'  1067.  @ 
(@)!ruQu68r)  '  I  pray,' 
1067.  @ir-^  (§  190,  a),  '  begging,' 
552.  Ch.  cvi.,  'mendicancy,' 
1064,  1066,  1069,  1280.  g)firajcF 
<Fii,  Ch.  cvn.,  '  the  dread  of 
mendicancy,'  Nal.  301.  $)rr- 
/E'@  (§  62),  '  feel  sorrow,  com- 
passion.' @jnB&sSJ®ti  '  will  be 
sorry  for,'  535.  ^ffrs^sij 

'  which   (you)  will  be  sorry  for,' 

^SS-  @JTffif«6U,      Ch.      CXXIII. 

'  heaviness  at  eventide.'  LJL_/T 
QLGsSlr&jidirfSjaev,  Ch.  cxvu. 
'  wasting  and  weeping.' 

1.  adj.  form  of  ^irsssr® 
'two.'  (§  172.)  5,  374,  737, 
620,1091,1196.  @jrswr©  '  two,' 
J9>  392'  393'  402,  581,  875,  760, 

662,  992,   IO22,   I247-          g)r/7jSS>0} 

'  both  states  or  worlds  —  this  and 
the  next,'  23.  £D(ffja;/r  'two 

persons,'  1108.  Another  form 
of  ^)^5  is  FFH~J  not  found  in 
Kurral.  2.  adj.  'great,  strong,' 
990,  999  (in  reference  to  earth). 
3.  (v.)  '  be,  remain,  sit.'  (§  60.) 
[S.  as,  in  meaning.]  It  occurs 
as  auxiliary  (§  79),  as  well  as 
in  its  primary  meaning. 
403.  £§)(<5LJLJ,  67,  loo. 


1301.  g(5#j?,  81,  530,  1  1  60, 
1243,  ^96,  1320,  867;  with£g)su, 
a  sign  of  5th  case,  1107. 
/ff^i,  '  it  was,'  1296. 

638.  J§)(/5,£<2^,  13  12- 
34°-  ®O^^*jb  'though  (they) 
are,'  973.  gD^uufr  '  they  will 
be,'  485,  804.  ^(tfjLJLJ/Tsar,  86, 
1040.  gbyuiSm,  1039.  g>/f@ 
=@©^j9,  from  @(5^^i  (§  62, 
causal.  §  161),  '  place,  put,  cause 
to  be.' 


[16] 


THE    KURRAL. 


g)(5srr    'darkness.'        [-\/ 

pluralising  particle,  the  Telugu 
lu.  Coinp.  Qun-QTj<cir,  ^/0<srr, 
and  many  others.]  5,  121,  243, 
352,  675,  753,  999,  1186. 
_  adj.  ^'dark,'  913. 
iron,'  Nal.  122. 

^r/r     [from     S.     rdtri],    'night,' 
1168,  1169,  1329. 

food,  fodder,'  946.      Guifi 
'  a  glutton.' 

'target,    mark,'    627. 
[S.  Msfta.] 

(§    64),   '  shine.'         [S. 
gj)sviEi(3j^ireo  (aS).  Qpir.) 
resplendent       science,'       410. 
@)  en  isj  Slip  IT  LLJ  \  '  thou  with  glisten- 
ing jewels  !  '  1262.     [See@so>Lp.] 
)sb.  I.  '  In,'  sign  of  7th  case,  or 
local  ablative,  1322,  1327,  1328. 
II.  (n.)  '  a  house  ;  housewife  ;' 
(in  conip.),  '  family  or  clan  ';   as 
^(gQuiufr    for    gJeueu/Dtfl     (in 
some  compounds).         l.=Ln8sBr 
'house,'  84  (7th  case),  Nal.  383. 
Lb=@a>,  N&l.  361.       cgy^. 
'  cook-house,'     Nal.     363. 
2.    Meton.  =   Lz%5Grs£l      'house- 
wife,' 59,  i44,Nal.  83.     3,  Deri- 
vatives.     g)€W-6U«u6rr,    53    (bis). 
£§)6U6u<SL//r£rr,    52,    903,    905,  906, 
1039,    Nal.    i,    86,    383.       [=LD 
Ssoroj/rerr,      G)LJ/rf/5<srr/r<srr,       141.] 
4.  Compounds  :  —  @cw-6upLb  '  vir- 
tue in  domestic  life.'    This  is  the 
title  of  the  first  portion  of  the 
yr,  Ch.  v.-xxiv.     ^<so-<sotT®&r 
'family  management,'  1026 
[see 


Q&&i>syiG;<5iiiTtti)  'he  who 
by  transgression  draws  near  to 
(his  neighbour's)  wife,'  145,  146 
(§  8S  =  gjj)puu<su£sr).  §)&}LSfl)JB 
•striT,  951  [  =  @if,  952;  @SULD 
956],  'those  born  of  noble 
family,  the  scions  of  a  noble 

llOUSe,'     IO44.  @)&D-®jn-L£<rEG6)& 

'  the    life    of    domestic   virtue,' 

Ch.  V.  45—49.     $jb\J-lalJITLJJ<5U[T£8r(  = 


'  the  man  who  lives  a  life  of 
domestic  virtue,'  41,  42,  147. 
^^}-<sun'i^<ouQ^&j<o[jn'Lc>  'the 

'whole    of     domestic    life,'    81. 

L5)rt96^6V-s£)<5G)LpttJfl-<5B)L£i,      Ch.    XV. 

'  The  not  desiring  another's 
wife.' 

III.  'Not.'  This  root,  sig. 
'  in,'  curiously  expresses  non- 
existence  (§  44.  Com  p.  .gi/gu). 
[Seems  to  govern  an  accusative 
in  some  places  ;  but  perhaps 
it  is  <§r  emphatic  changed  to 
gg,  448.]  1.  g)eu.  The  root 
is  used  for  '  (it,  they,  there)  is 
(are)  not,'  =  Ji)6uS5u,  44,  233,  52, 
276,  909,  910,  583,  1063,  1065, 
577,  621,  839,  363,  170,  1243, 
222,  141,  142,  287,285,462,  538, 
850,  460,  244,  934,  770,  302, 
1005,  1001.  Forms  a  neg.  uuirm 
<sssGTL-fl&o  '  we  have  not  seen,' 
1071,  1066,  446.  2.  j§)6u3a>  is 
probably  a  corruption,  £§)a;  +  <gr 
emphatic,  363,  170,  570,  456, 
463,  478,  534,  533,  230,  231, 
336,  243,  245,  252,  945,  32, 

537'  75X>  59'  247>  J35>  791*  l62» 
842,  976,  87,  no,  710,  1028, 

1036,  449,  951,  300,  296,  122, 
1123,  H3I,  1321.  <£lfS)QJ$&)$60 

'we  know  not/  61.  3.  @^u  is 
used  by  z&%ssrpQpires>&  [Intro, 
p.  xvii/§  4,  6.]  for  ^Guevrr^,  770, 
'  when  (or  where)  it  is  not,'  9, 
400,  912,  1068,  853,  174,  194,  *96- 
4.  As  conjugated  appellative. 
(1)  @eusar  (1st  pers.  sing.), '  I  am 
destitute,'  223  [su/r^G'ajgar,  n^iresr 
ptflp^jresr],  205  ;  (2)  £§)SVLD 
(1st  pers.  plur.),  '  we  are  desti- 
tute,' 174,  1040  [a/^CJoj/i,  pirJB 
^fl^^lirfr]  ;  (3)  3rd  pers.  m.  f. 
n.  sing.  plur.  ^Goevrr^r,  {jjjevrTesr, 
135,  847,  4,  617,  625,  842,  1000, 
407.  g)ci>«jr,  34,  205,  341,  566, 
628,  629,  862-8,  193.  £g)6W*yr 
'  she  who  is  without  — ,'  56, 
1194,  499,  506,  1325,270,  906, 
1129,  1130.  ©SUIT,  577,  365, 
114,  1242,  954,  43°>  1072,778, 
499  ;  opposed  to  e_<so><_<L/rr. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[17] 


170,  449,  43°»  8o» 
800,  811,  812,  236,  72,  1055,^843, 
449,  427,  572,  generally  with  a 
noun;  sometimes  absolutely  = 
destitute  ;  sometimes  as  a  predi- 
cate. g)eu6u/r/r,  431,  591,  378, 
600,  1050,  1056,  1005,  750,  752, 
730,  368,  247,  395,  1020.  @ 
QevrriT,  59."  j§)6UGUfr,  $j)<s\)6v<surr 

577,   79,  917.  g)6U^f,    g)6U6XJ^ 

4  that  which  is  not,  or  without  '  ; 
sometimes  =j|)eu2fcu,  750,  53,  77, 
119,  586,  587,  750,  425,735,871. 
g)sorjy  [Comp.  @«rj*J,  354, 
740,  966,  1252,  875,  83,  340,  955, 
904,  1090.  ^jeorQpGo  'if  —  is 
wanting,'  575,  1014,  1144,  996, 
556>  573-  S«»»  g)6ueu  '  (they) 
are  not.'  Ch.  xx.  uuj^ofl&j 
'  things  without  profit,'  191-197, 
640,  4,  9,  39,  1  100.  pujL&eu 
1  things  not  right,'  998,  956,  91. 
(4)  Compounded  :  —  ^}6U6u/ra5sar 
'if  (it)  is  not,'  52,  1058,  49, 
1306,769.  £D<su/r©fr£sr  (see  ^  <sfr)  . 
£g)6U6V6ueu  '  are  not  things  which 
have  no  real  existence,'  115. 
{j)d>®)irQ  'having  come  to 

llOUght,'   479.  Cp6XjQ6D6gfijg7/Lb 

'  though  it  were  non-existent,' 
222,768.  gleueu/rdiu/nr  'those 

who  came  to  nought,'  935.  ^)eu 
i  'it  will  not  exist,'  368. 
L  '  though  there  be 
none,'  448.  Q&'Jj^eQevfr  *  are 
men  who  (will)  not  do,'  954 


(for  cgyav/r  <s/r^6<a>/r,  1242. 
<srb<(£)6U68r  =  <g5<s\J6V[T<5<siJ£3r)  414. 
5.  With  double  neg.  :  ^eijsu/r^, 
<jgS6o<so(TJ5lujihr§  '  as  it  exists  not 
to  —  ,'  247.  @(«w)6u/r^,  198, 
448,  '  who  suffer  lack  of  '  (with 
2nd  case),  412,  573,  574,  740, 
945,  161,  1030.  £§)(6u)isu/r,  239, 
853,  200,  869,  1053,  1059,  594, 
919,  610,  731,  1064,  78,  1308. 
@)(eo)6virpiT£or,  7,  523,  614, 
1006.  g)6U6u/r^/T6rr  '  she  who  is 
without  —  ,'  4O*^tfi^)6U6un"(^ajn', 
®eu/r.s6u/r,  997^^4,  890,  598, 
640.  g)eu/r/F/r<r,  140.  6.  $)ssrf5l 
[as  though  from  @cwjj;,  g)e<jr 


fSQearear  (§  64). 
'without,'  523,  1253,"  1 12,  166, 
754,  1069,  789,  1042,  401,  529, 
Q47*  @68r  rni  \  oSi'^05r(oi(jLJ<s:<fu^  as 
irom  @/<o&r\£>  nsor  1  rz:  (S) gu 6\J /r LO 6u 
'  without,'  2O,  184,  764.  'j&zvrrSi 
lUGOLzvuiT  '  which  without  (it) 
(otherwise)  is  not  gained,' 
961  ;'  essentially  necessary,'  682. 

7.    {jj)SVr66)LQ    [^)6U-j-SD)LQ.        Comp. 

<3)[f3r@G)Lb~^.  (1)  In  comp.  with  a 
noun=  -lessness,  577,  841,  119, 
3,  616,  618,  557,  344,  979, 
!,  32°5  364»  513,  958,  371, 
1209,  1276,  738,  833,  1019. 
/LOip.aSssr.oroLo,  Ch.  LXI.  '  activity.' 
(2)  Absolutely,  '  destitution,' 
841,  1041,  1042,  1044,  616,  558, 

1063,  9^8,  89  (Opp.  tO  £_60<_<33iL£)), 

61J-& arrow-    Mo,    here!'    1185. 
Oomp.  2_6i/    i5)  1 

L  i  '    &ol  *  J 

<5un~£>(/7j    l  rise,    climb.'      [^)ay/r 
(§  57)  with  ,^(/5,  q.v.]  $)<si]it 

climbed.' 


(§64),  'covet,  lust  after.' 
432. 

(§  S'7)^    437»'    935- 
(§.74),    1002.          0«VDf|   1003. 
covetousness.'    [@ 
,  §  74.] 
(§    66),    '  lose,'    opp.    QUJJ/. 

-,     788     (§  ).          g) 

932,  228,  463 
(§74).  ^)Lp^0^/r^ra.t£>,  940. 
[v.  Q^/rjpii].  ©y>«>,  II44- 
g)Lp^Le  '  destiny  entailing  loss,' 

372-C~    ®tP^®^^»  593- 

LJ/T,  494,  921. 

Le>LJLJ/rs3r),  554. 

659,  812.       g)i-p^j/i  'we  shall 

lose,'    1250.     [Old 


(§  57),  'slip,  fall  down,  be- 
come vile.'  ®^^,  964,  133  ; 
B.  '  vilis.'  @y?64  '  diminution,' 
946. 

(§  62),  'slip.'     [Comp. 
<««6i;   '  sli 


ppermess, 


415 


952. 


[18] 


THE    KUKRAL. 


535'        ®(L£a&lT<SS>LD,  536.     j 

'a  slip,'  893,   127,   164, 
467,  7*6,   911.        £i)(Lp<®'5/7(<^>J!)> 
35,48,384.        g)<ip«s;d>ii  'igno-   I 
r,'  133,  808,  137,  136. 

(§  64),  'determine,  do 
carefully.' 
'with  careful  investigation,'  417. 
^j0j)fD^^lQ^^Q^<sm<ssS,  530.  @ 
6®Lp,§f5ij;!<£(3ijn'<5G)Lct  '  what  was  re- 
solved on,'  779,  Nal.  6.  [g) 

days  allotted  to  man   pass  not 
their  bounds.'     Comment. 


'not  transgressing  their  fixed  re- 
solve.'   Comment. 


the  Asuras  who  caused 
affliction  to  the  immortals,' 
Ram.  I.  vi.  64.]  u.  '  a  jewel  '; 
by  meton.  'a  lady,'  Nal.  361. 
$j)Lprruj  !  (voc.  case),  1262. 

£D<STOLp,     I  102,    I  I  10,    III4,    1124, 

1329,  with   different  epithet  in 

&, 


each : 

LO/TS3OT 

'  those  adorned  with  jewels,'  919. 
(§  57),  'grow  soft,'  [Comp. 
@«r.]  ©(SrotP/^«^j  XI77- 

disgrace.'  [Comp.  g)L$  ; 
opp.  6£<syfl.]  @<syfi,  971,  970. 
,654,  (<sw®)  1044,  1066. 
'disgraceful,'  1288. 
£§)eyft<5^,  1298,  988,  464. 

'  young.'       [Comp. 
£s)<ofr.~]       Sj'&SYrujfr,  698. 

870.          (§)<J(5T!  COLD,  NA.1.  (£| 

II,  17,  102.  ^SsrrujLb  (§  184; 
Intro,  xxiii.),  'we  are  young,' 
Nal.  19. 

(§  66),  '  pass  away.'     [Comp. 

having  passed  over.'     '=e£L$/F 
£j,'  971.        '  =  &i—J5gi,'  283?  476> 


beyond  bounds,'  900. 
'slipping     off,' 


1157. 

'  excess,'  977  ;    '  injury,1 
152,      11.99,38.      Q*iL$fl)jbfi9 

1275.         ®p*J5&nK    'those    who 
have    passed    away,'      22,    42 


'  transgressors,'  159; 
310,  both  meanings.  ®eoe& 
puuireisr  '  he  who  invades  the 
sanctity  of  his  neighbour's 
house,'  145,  146  ;  B. '  Exorbitare, 
limites  praeterire.' 

(§  68),  '  break   (int.),'    475. 
sygrojr    '  the   time   of    ruin,' 

488.  $ji)<£yj$i  {  Q-Pty-^J)'  476, 
690. 

1 80.          [©.p.] 
'  allied  to  ruin, 
ruinous,'  885. 

(§  62),  '  @6cfl.'  g) 

err   '  she    hung    down 
her  head.' 

(§   64),     '  irrigate,     draw 
water,'   1161. 

1.  '  cSyjr^cjJr,'      432,     436, 

547,  564,  778-  2. '/W  54i. 
3.  'A joint,'  1157.  4.  'Revenue,' 
733.  5. '  & ($ <&&&,'  847.  6.  'A 
god,'  388.  @6ro/D€U6ar,  5,  10, 
690,  733-  £g)<5D>/r)LQfl"Ll.^,  Ch. 

XXXIX. 

ls^r'  1.  Sign  °f  case  an(l  ^^ 
ffleicaj  or  euphonic  insertion. 
2.  In  comp.  and  deriv.  from 

@)6o  as  £§)ssr<oO)Lo.      3.  *  Pleasant, 


sweet,'  91-99,  224,327,387,525, 
911,  953.  Chiefly  in  comp.  with 
and  fc.uS/r.  Used  as 
;§  184),  Nal.  146. 
_  '  it  is  sweet,'  93,  64,  66, 

68,  181,  230,  648,  772,  839,  865, 
866,  811,  1103,  1108,  1145,  1176, 
1196,  1201,  1202,  1215,  1309, 
1326.  $/6sflujgi  '  that  which  is 
sweet,'  1065.  @sofliL/,  96,  100, 

824,   987,     H99.  ^)<Ssf/£L/6TOiaj^- 

'  kindly    speech,'     Ch.    x. 
dear  ones,'  1158,  Nal. 
365.  $)<5VT(<cG)     '  unpleasant,' 

(§  121),  35,  109,  159,  1 60,  243, 
308,  311,  312,  3i4»3l6»3l8>3I9i 
564,  565,  824,  852,  857,  881,  894, 
987,  1288.  $)£or(6U)<5U)Lc>  'evil,' 
318,  630.  ©cw©^'»  224,  408, 
558,  819,  923,  995,  1158,  1196. 
@&a^G)^^j  230,  1041.  ^ssr 
&)jB,  100,313,860,881.  @sar 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[19] 


ULZ  'pleasure,'  39,  65,  98,  156,   i 
228,  173,  352,  369,50*1,615,628,   | 
629,  630,  669,  738,  754,  854,  869,   ! 
946,  1052,  1166,  1330.       ®^H, 
75,   94,  399.         (jjGsr&Gim,  1152. 
4.  'Such.'       [See  g)   and  g}2s5r. 
Comp.  ^jesr,  ^)25or  talis,  tantus.] 

i    '  we    are    such,'    790. 

&r  *  he  is  such,'  453. 

*  kindred,  affinity,  com- 
pany.' (@)w)  Nal.  171-180, 
146,  306,  45I"59>  46o,  462,  568, 

o22,   Oo4«  ^' f£) /D/£9r(CTGj  c(Fjr/T6S)LO 

'  not  joining  with  low  persons,' 
v>n«  xijVi,  {^/^yr^jT.  ^QQ^^^C3)i52jr/-D 
'  one  who  is  allied,'  868,  1158. 
$jj)6GTdi;<56ffr  '  one  who  is  allied,' 
446. 

[comp.  ^Ssor,   torSoor,   sr8sjr]. 

UJ/T  '  they  are  such,  tanti,' 
790-  ^^or^^Sssw^^j  '  it  is  of 
this  value,  measure,r87. 

'yet,  still,'  1250.     [®.] 

now,  hereafter  '  [@],  1083, 
1294,  Nal.  29. 

'to-day'  [comp.  <jygarjj/, 
OTgw-jy],  336,  1048,  1133,  1262, 
Nal.  36. 


FT- 


'here,  in  this  world  or 
birth,'  18,  23,  213,  265,  356, 
363,  369.  [Comp.  C^SSJT®,  lurrssor 
©  strengthened  dem.  from  g).] 
3br®  (§  62),  int.,  /^^O,  (§  160), 
tr.,  '  collect,  accumulate.'  FFSSST 

UjLUJ,        417.  FFt-UJLUU,         1009. 

FFiLi—Gd  *  accumulation,'  385. 
FFiLi-Lz  'wealth,'  1003,  Nal.  109. 
(§  57),  'give.'  [Syn.  Q<s,r®, 
<§J0.]  /.F^ex;  'giving,'  92,222, 
223,  230,  231,  842,  1006,  1054. 
FFiuuuGtLz  *  (it)  should  be  given.' 
!*i§g)  (for  FFJsgi  by  <su6^^^e\j)t 
228,  387,  800.  /=r^^j  'it  has 


given,'     1142. 


that 


which  will  give,'  221. 
1  that  will  give,'   1061. 
'givers,'   232,  1057-59. 
'  they  will  give,'   1035.          FF&! 
'let     him     give,'      477,     1268. 
FFtun-gi  'not  giving,'  1002.       FF<SS 
euir&n-     'one    who     gives     not,' 
(jyeu),    863.         FF<S®&    '  a    gift, 
giving,'    Ch.    xxiii.,    221,    382, 
953- 

l§  'Moisture,'  1077,  1058. 
2.  Hence =,ji/<S(3rq  'benevolence, 
love,'  91. 

(§   57),    'saw   asunder,'    334. 
[®G5>  ^^  two.'] 
fr.     See 


(§  56,  III.),  '  yean.'  [Comp. 
FF.~\  FFSST  (Qeu.  Q^/T.),  757. 
FF^ILQ  '(it)  will  produce,'  31, 
74,  1 80,  754;  'which  will  pro- 
duce,' 311,  361.  FFearfD  'which 
brought  forth,'  69,  1047. 
'  having  produced,' 97. 

99.  FFSSTU^j,   165. 

'  she  who  bare,  a  mother,'  656, 
923- 


,  a  dem.  letter.       See 


(§  56,  II.),  'spill,  drip  away.' 

&<s  'spilt,'   720,  1270.        a_«ffi/r 
'  secresy,   letting    nothing 
ooze  out,'  585. 

(§  62),  'use  effort.' 
r  '  those  who  make 
strenuous  efforts,'  620,  1024  ; 
n.  'effort,'  604,  607.  ZL^pfSl 
<5u<a//r,  reverse  of  the  above. 

(§  56,  III.),  '  be  fierce,'  765. 
b£iJ  (§  62),  '  plague.'      ©_/_"> 
'r    'those   who    are   angry 
or  worry    about,'  818. 
'  will  torment,'   13. 
'body,'  65,    253. 


[20] 


THE    KURRAL. 


2-/—LOL/  (2_t_6U-fL/),  '  body  '  [U_//T<£ 

ero«],  80,  330,  338,  340,  345, 
627,  943,  1029,  1122,  1132,  1163, 
Nal.  37-40,  102. 

2_i_6ar  'together  with,  at  once.' 
[SLL_;  comp.  O^/r©.]  A  sign 
of  3rd  ease=g>®,  $>©,  (§  239), 
309,  589,  632,  890.  2_L_/iLJ/r© 
(=2_{_<sarLJ/r©),  'agreement' 
>©]. 

(§  64),  'put  on  clothes.' 
'what  one  puts  on, 
clothes,'  1 66,  1079. 
'garments,'  939,  1012. 
dress,'  788. 

1.  See  a.©.  2.  (§  64), 
'break'  [comp.  @if,  ^^-~\ ; 
(§  57),  'be  broken,'  473. 
fsL6roi_djr<s>L£6y6i$ :  three  inter- 
pretations are  possible :  e_«5o>/_ 
strengthens  ^ti>='  own ' ;  or  as 

prevailing  power ' ;  or  <s£).  Q^/r. 
of  s.6TOL_  (§  57),  'which  will 
be  broken'  =  'weak,  fragile.' 
These  are  Graul's,  the  Com.  and 
Beschi's  respectively.  Comp. 
Nal.  368,  and  render  '  their 
strength  of  possessions, 
resources.1^ 
will  break,' 

1324.  SLeoi—jspsn  'has  been 
broken,'  1088,  1270.  3. 'Pos- 
session'; con.  with  s_  err  and  ep© 
[a  <a93o5r«(Sj,fl5?LJq,  §  184].  Its 
opposite  is  ^}eu.  It  simply  con- 
nects two  nouns:  389,  415,  907, 
1010,  1034.  &-<8®L-Quj68r '  I  (am) 
a  possessor  of,'  1133.  e_60)L_ 
ujireor,  s_6Oi_uje<;r  '  he  who  is 
possessed,'  390,  486,  381.  e_<so)i_ 
luirrr  abs.  for  '  possessors  of 
wealth,'  395,  718;  with  nouns, 
593'  594,  5J3»  5X9»  112,622,219, 
502,  684,  165,  167,  526,  866, 

577,  9IO»  970,   JI53>    72,    994, 

996,   404,  441,   413,   415,   430, 

636,   606,  534,    135,   463,   427, 

223,  262.  a.6o>/_uj/r,  591,  1072, 

9°°>  393>  43°>  95,  45g 
fflj/r,  139,  179,  285, 
opposed 


1077, 


their 
'  which 

1258, 


159,    975 


tL//r<5jrfr=e_<55)/_(L//r/r  [comp.^grr]. 

a-grot-uj^,  384,  591,  742,  746, 
1 02 1,  'that  which  (one)  pos- 
sesses.' &-6G)L—4i>gi  '  it  is  pos- 
sessed of '  [it  is  often  redundant 
and  sometimes ='  it  is '  ;  always 
a  predicate],  45,  48,  126,  112, 
220,  221,  277,  336,  353,  398,  578, 
565,  611,  667,  624,  770,  746,  907, 
925,  1010,  1018,  1053,  1057, 
1082,  1085,  1173,  IJ52,  1275, 
1276,  1280,  1325. 

2_6roi_<L/  (it  often  connects  two 
nouns,  and  makes  a  kind  of 
possessive  case),  '  things  pos- 
sessed of  [opp.  to  g)eu],  41, 
200,  975,  1299,  1300.  e_<55>£_ 
iDLb  'we  possess,'  844.  (Intro, 
xxiii.)  &.<5D)L_G)iL/L£),  1250. 

e_6B)L_<58)Lo  '  possession  of  pro- 
perty ' ;  in  comp.  it  is  almost 
redundant ;  opp.  ^SOT-SOLD  ;  89, 
228,^344,  558,  592,  641,  838. 

c§yt—<£<£5(Lp<5®L-<5S)LCt,          Ch.         XIII. 

^(^(CffjeroL—STOLo,  Ch.  xxv.  jplflfl 
<m/6B>i_(sroLo,  Ch.  XLIII.,  68.  ^evr 

Lj®S>L-SG)LG,     Ch.     VIII.     68l,      992. 

»L_eo)/j3,  74. 

5,  Ch.    LXII. 

592- 

6TOi£»,     Ch.      LX. 
6TOL£>,  Ch.  XIV.,  133. 

•SOLD,  688,  383.  _ 

Ch.   Oil.    IOI2,  960.         ]B<o5)fD(L\<5VL 
CT)LD,         I54'  LJ5SS7"L^SD)£_6Z3)LO, 

On.    C.,  99^'         ©LJ/T(75^T5|SO)L_60)LO, 

592.  ©/-//reo^/DtLjeroi—CTOLo,  Ch. 
xvi.,  154. 


'grow 


(§  62),  'stand  in  awe  of, 
reverence,  feel  modest  shame.' 
a_Ll<£ELJL/i_/r^/r,  921. 
1088,  Ml.  102,  384. 

2_68ar  <i(<5  'dry'; 
dry,  languish.' 
1037.  a-sacr/Qc®,  1310. 

&-683T/T  (§  57),  'feel,   understand, 
perceive,  conceive.'  [Comp.  a.  err.] 

Ch.          XXXVI. 

Lz  'conceive  of,'  331,  351. 
what  (you)  have 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[21J 


felt,'  316.  2.6337IT/7,  420,  705, 
1172.  2. 6337/7/76001,  589  (2.6337 

JTfTLQ6\}).      2-S337frl6!Jr,  357.     e.€SCTJTJ5 

gjLo,    417,    834.         ft.«r/ra0«r, 

420.  2_6337/7/£(<^,  1277  =  2.6337/7^ 
^637.  2.6337/7(£<^),4i7,  516,  712, 
1046,  359.  2.6337/7<f5,  805. 
2-6537./r,  650.  2.5337jruLJ©/i, 

575,  826,  1096.  2. 6337/7  a/ ff  car, 
702,  703,  708,  709,  716,  257,  334- 
e.ti0nrcv(£},  718.  a. <sssrni^e\j  're- 
conciliation,' 1109.  2-63S7ir/7(u, 
1246.  2.6337/7  <£OT  'perception,' 
976,  453,  785.  2.6337/7<a/  'feel- 
ing,' 354,  420.  e.68Br/iv£j5 
(§§  62,  160),  'cause  to  under- 
stand, explain  away  misunder- 
standings.' C-SBr/r^p/stf/r^eu/r, 
1246.  &-683rir<5j5[r0s)LQt  1304. 
1319. 


eat'  (2.6T7)   [«eaar],   used 

aS  =  jgi)<o3r,     L/§60)<>F.  2.6337,     109!) 

1172,  12 1 2,  1174,  1113  [with 
,55337.  <s&.  Qpir.  '  the  eye  that 
eats,  absorbs  the  pigment '  = 
'black';  but  comp.  1084]. 

2.S337LJ/7/7,  926,  251,  946.  2.6337 
LJOJ/7,  926.  2.6337J332/LO,  527, 

1084,        1221,         326.  2.6337© 

'  having  eaten,'  580,  1033,  no  i, 

522.  2.6337/_«7,       1326,      930. 

•  *       ~VT A 1  O  «-^ 

922.          2-<533floU,  922,  942.         2.6337 

ewflsar,  945,  947.  2.6337«,  922, 

943,  Nal.    2.  <S(5T7(Gftj 5337 (G3^) SOLD, 

Ch.  XCIII.,   255,  257,  259.  2.6337 

(^3)_^J,     l6o.  2.6337(633),       93^* 

2.6337@)/7,       258,      IOOI,        Nal.       9. 

2_&3S7<_/7/r,  1090,  253,  Nal.  i. 
2. 6337 L-pg)],  1107  (see  *9\pg)i)' 

2.63376U,    229,    1326,    1065.  2.6337 

i— 6V,   82,    1128,    II45-  2.63376337, 

255.  2.6337U^?,       l66,       IO79. 

'food,'     945,    Nal.      i. 

412,        413.  ^6337. 

/r  'food'    (Intro, 
xxiii.),    1035,44,1012,227,939. 

("§  62),  'S.'  '  ^^378, 
Nal.  i.  (§  160.) 

2_6BaT63)LD.       See  2.6T7. 


(§  62),  '  help.'      (0u.  OT«F.) 
746.         2.^2)9   'assist- 

ance,'   70,    101,    103,    105.         2.LJ 

Lj<5<£££>,  620  (2.),  '  on  that  side, 
behind.  [Comp.  .jy,  @,  er.] 
2.eu«<«/r<o3S7,  1185  (a.),  'there, 
behold.'  (See 


«  salt,  flavour,  zest,'  802,  1050, 
1302,  1328.     [Comp.  s.Q/rf?.] 

'And,  also,'  12,  15. 
2.  'Even,'  17,  1  8,  987,  995, 
1069.  3.  In  summing  up,  581, 
19.  4.  Converts  inter,  into 
universal,  20,  991.  (§  126.) 
5.  In  verbal  forms='  although,' 
989.  6.  Forms  3rd  pers.  plur. 
fut.  and  fut.  rel.  part.,  17,  as 
OTggV^jgp/LD,  passim. 

i>_uj/f    (§   57),   <be   high'    [s_<u]. 

<SU/7J32/tL//7  (o^fTlbfDLO  (s&T.  Q^F/T.), 
272.  2.^/7^^,  957.  2_ttJ/7/£i<5, 

233,  246.  s-UJ/rffl/  'elevation, 
dignity,'  135,  595,  596,  743,  963. 

SL.UJ  (§  57),  'go  off,  avoid,  escape, 
survive.'  s_£L/6u,  1212,  40,  437, 
1174.  2_(L/su/7  'may  escape,' 
207.  2-uj£L/fl-f7  'they  cannot 
escape,'  896,  900.  ^.tuiutr  '  in- 
evitable,' 313.  2.  (u  (my  '  escape,' 
896,  no,  1174. 

2_tu  (§  64),  '  send  off,  or  away  ; 
destroy,  preserve.'        2_tL'<ffi@/i, 

121,1134,943.  2_OJLJLJ^7,  422. 
&.tU<£<56V,  1287.  2-UJ^^J,  IO76, 

376,  787,  168,  121,  Nal.  101. 
Q-iu&Qfb  ((_9«<J7),  440.  2.aj(L//7^j, 
996. 

a_u9/r  'life,  breath,  soul'  [s.iu  = 
emit],  78,  131,  183,  214,  244, 
258,  259,  268,  318,  326,  327, 
33°>  334,  338,  34°>  47^,  5OI» 
557,  778,  848,  940,  945,  969» 
1017,  1020,  1062,  1070,  1106, 

1122,   1124,   1132,   1163,  1213, 

1230,  1298;  'a  living  being,' 
30,  31,  122,  231,  260,  261,  361, 
322,  392,  851,  972,  1012,  1013. 
'dear  life,'  73,  1141. 
'sweet  life,'  327, 
1209.  LA&orgsiiuSliT  'life,  or  living 


[22] 


THE    KUKRAL. 


being  that  abides,'  68,  244,  268, 
318,  457.  LD£3rj32/(ip(i9/r,  190, 
1  1  68.  "  s.u5/r^Ssu  '  seat  of  life, 
body,'  80,  255,  290.  G><su®son-.iT 
<a/u5jr/r/r  '  heroes  who  make  light 
of  their  lives,'  777. 

/r  (§  64),  '  smell,  breathe/ 
'having  inhaled,  so 
smelt,'  1101.  2_(i9/TLJLj  'when 
it  will  breathe  ;  at  the  breath 
of  its  nostrils/  763  ;  '  for  the 
purpose  of  breathing,'  880. 


9L.JTLD,  g-ir<5vr  'strength,'  24,  600, 
888,  1263.  [Comp.  S.  uru, 
urns."]  Q-ffGeufrrr  '  the  brave,' 
136,  597- 

a.6»/r  (§  64),  'speak  out,  declare.' 
Imp.  1151.  Noun,  'a  word,'  581, 
193.  K-cauTiff^?,  1237.  a.6rojr^ 
giLa,  834.  £-6®jr&(3jLa  '  which 
(he)  will  utter,'  193,  564,  912, 
1156;  '(it)  will  say,'  709, 

743,     1235.  ^-<5U)ITLJUn-LUj     I2OO. 

2-<SS>jrLJLJ/T£3r,   IT,    189,    232,   681-9. 

a-erojrULJjTD,  1  184. 

232.       &.<SG)rnu[r<£rnT,  650. 
GW  '  shall  I  tell  ?  '  1  1  8  1  . 
uj/r<so)Lo,  223.     a,  <as)n<&&  &o  ' 
ing,'  1076,  1271. 

o,  Ch.  cxin.,  1162.  ,/F/T 
Ch.  cxiv. 
u,  Ch.  cxn. 

a_/0.  iLffleroLo  'fitness,'  518,  578. 
2_/flujs3r  'one  fit  for,  master  of 
anything,'  72,  149,  518,  1080. 
2-iftiuir<s(r  '  she  who  belongs  to,' 
149. 

a.  (35  'form,  type,'  261.     [S. 
Comp.     OTL^lei;,    e.0j_/zi, 
a.  (5  a/,    s.®.]         2L(/5<s^    'form, 
shape,  ^rnien,  beauty,'   585,   667, 
684,  !Nal.  101.     2_(/5Q7Lo,  273. 


(§     62),    'melt,'     1069. 
'the    heart    will 


melt.' 


(§  66),  or  2L-6V0  (§  57)?  *  be 
destroyed,  fail,  be  dried  up.'  [S. 
IT^T.]  /QT)6up<£<s56Gor  '  an  eye 
that  can  weep  no  more,'  1174. 
(e-eoirjbjS).  (The  spelling  is 
doubtful.) 
6U«u>  [S.  Zd&a].  [Comp.  (gj/r 

6ULD,      <SG)€lJUJLn,     68)  /JJ.]          1.  '  The 

world,'  n,  13,  374,  996. 
2.  'People,'  1  1  7.  3.  'A  world,' 
247,  346.  4.  'The  wise'  (?), 
280,  140,  426,  425. 

s.6U(Sj.    1.  'This  world,  course 
of  things,  universe,'  i,  20,  23,  27, 

211,336,  387*389,  52^542,544, 
57i,  572,  578,  612,  874,  1062. 

2.  '  A  world,'  58,  234,  290,  1103. 

3.  'The   people   of    the   world,' 
215*  256,  399,  470,  670,  809,  841, 

994,   970,    1015,    1025.  £-&)<$<£ 

pirn,  1032,  850,  294.  s.eudSc^ 
'in  or  of  the  world,'  213,  233, 

533*    598,    1198.  QLZ&U60&LD 

'  the  higher  world,'  222.        g)s<jr 
'the   world   of  woe,' 


1130. 


),  III.). 

Qpir  '  the   huge  rolling  chariot '  &-&£ 

[•a9.  Q^/r.],  667,  933, 'gain  got  1031 

by  the  rolling  dice.'  ^-W  ' 


243- 

Sso «^     'irresolution,    weakness,' 

620,  883,  762.     [Comp. 

tax,'  756. 

66),   'rejoice.' 
'joyously,'    842,    1061, 
&.6UUU     '  so     as    to 
gladden,'    394.          e^euuiS^iLa 
'whether      it      rejoices,'      707. 

cLQJLJLJ  ^5J,    IO^7*          S-fil/cC^LD,  60. 

228.       S-fii/^^/r/r  (opp.  6p6Wti&D)/r), 
264.  a_si760)<£5,  304,  432,  531. 

,  Ch.  cxxxni. 

[S.],  'comparison,'  7. 
'  the  (salt)  sea,'  763.  [Comp. 
£.uqj 

(§  66);  '  suffer.'     It  is  used 
absolutely  and  with  &tTL&L&,  ^eu 
and  60 u& GO  [comp.  a.68Brjr]. 
*,      1175,      1135,    1229. 
,  787,  1172.       S.LPLJLJ/T, 
936.     2-tp/?^1,  1131,  H77,  II37- 


though  they  suffer,' 

Z,  938   (§   160). 


plough'  (§  60). 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[23] 


'they  plough  not/  14.  2-Lp<a/tr 
'  ploughers/  14,  872.  a-Lpeu/r/r, 

IO32.          2LLpS$@5)J7",    1036.        e_Lp<3ty 

'  ploughing,  agriculture,  Ch.  civ. 

1031.        2.(l£Ji?,  1033. 

65)  Lp.     lt  Sign   of    7th   case  = 
@L_J&$)  ;    qy.    a   form   of    a_<srr,   i 
594,    1249.  2.    '  Place'  :    a.   i 

£5irsor,  638. 

950. 

$.    1.  Sign  of  7th  case.  (§  251.) 

^LL/L^I,  1 68.   [Comp.  a. err, 

2.  ®t-ii,     415- 
'storehouse/  226. 

.       [Comp.  2.L-62 

2_6B>Lp,  2_L$,  a_srfl.]  1.  Sign  of 
case,  '  within/  13,  995,  890,  98, 
1049,  50,  106,  126,  469,  718,  61, 
1165,  495,  186,  715,  828,  703, 
705,  1130,  153,  241;  equal  to 
gen.  of  thing  distrib.,  891, 
411,  47,  89,  438,  444,  with 

,   making   super.;  see 

,  203,  1324,  715. 

iu  '  from  the  inner  part   ' 

of  (my)  eye/  1126.      2.  Adverb, 
129.         &-<snm(Tg)!Lb    'will    heal  j 
within,    thoroughly/    487,    927,   ! 
421.  2-<ofV<5rrL$<s<s6u,        677. 

3.  Noun,   a-err^jsfr,  1057.     2_<srfl 
(sign  of  7th  case),  545.      4.  As 
a  verb,  root  it  is  a  @/]5?LJL/a9S5cr 
(§184).       2_<s?r<a/i.$,  1170.      2-eir 
orr/rrr,     1127.  2-<srr/rerr,     617. 
S-Gerrssr,      1167,       1206,       1263. 

^(oOfT/i,    I2O4.  2.S33TLJ/T,    13!!. 

2-srr  'are,  exist,  have  place/  995, 
574,  54,  380,  223,  241,  479,  483,  | 
480,    521,   527,   636,  781,    1099,   | 
noi.         2_srr<s<jr,  2_<orrrr  'persons 
who  are/    895,    406,    336,    880,   j 
294,  25,  1204,  1178.     2-((ofr)<srr^}    j 
(opp.  jjjevev^),  'it  exists,  what   ! 
exists,  what  is  true,  real/  with   ; 
c^ii,  889,    572,    53,   235,    1274,  ! 
2,  255,  641,  357,  1069,   1091.    ! 

,  1098,  1281,  571,  190, 
128,  996,  974,  89,  71,  315,  1245, 
1260,  1164,  1307,  1323,  1271, 
1273,  1274,  469,  707,  757,  796, 
1117,  1154, 1213 


896,110,932,1075,1214.       2.6WT 

i—tTuS^gvLD,  1005.  a.  <sfr  orr  'which 
is  within,  internal,'  971,  600. 
2-63brL_/r«  'that  (it)  may  be/ 
342  ;'  in  tempore,  festinanter,  et 
inipsa  adolescentia'  (B.),  988,  54, 
758.  gLsrorG)/_6L>,  'if  (it)  exists,' 

368,1075,1151.          ZLG38T0S)LZ  '  the 

fact  of  the  existence  of  (any- 
thing)/ 1055,  57i,  572,  1153. 
[The  7th  case  is  made  into  an 
abstr.  noun.]  s_<s3sr<5B)aiuj/)$<si/ 
'  one's  real  wisdom/  373  ;  '  reality, 
real  method/  1  2  12.  Incomp.  a.tl 

LJSTOdS,  Ch.  LXXXIX.,  883,  885,  887, 

888,  889,  884,  735.  sLilQff/ril 
I—LO,  119.  ^.tsrr^ir,  216.  Q.SSST 
<oSffr®Kis6v}  680.  a.efr0rrai  'the 
mind/  294,  592,  595,  598,  1207, 
677,  357,  622,  798,  799,  I263» 
438,  1170,  282,  309,  1057,  1130, 
971,  1324,  1270,  1069.  2_6fr<5rrs£ 
<sr/r/r,  1249.  a.<srr«^  (§  62), 

'  think,  call  to  mind,  remember/ 
'  recordari.'  [Cornp.  e_swr/r.] 
a-sfr^oj^,  596.  a-srrsrrei;,  596, 
282,  I3J8,  1243.  ^-<sfr«w/r«^r,  930. 
2.  err  err  '  while  (I)  think  of/  1206, 
357,  540,  622,  665,  109,  394, 
1069,  1281.  a_isfr<syfiG>(5sr<s<Jr  'I 
remembered/  1316.  a.<sfrsYf? 

£SU  us,   1207,  1201,  799.  a_grr 

etnreBr,  309.  2.0^(65^,539.  ^-^ 
Gtrrbs,  798.  2.<srr6yflwj^7,  540. 

2.efrsrfl,  1264,  1230,  1317,  1320, 
1249,  1231,  1243.  a-ssfr^swcw-, 
1184,  1125.  S-errtgTjsu/r,  107. 
a.sfr^G'fQusar,  1136.  S-efrsrfiwj, 
309.  a-srr^LD,  1298.  a.  err  forms 
nouns  with  prim,  roots.  [This 


qerr,  545. 

(§  62),  'sleep.' 
(§  88).       S./DA®  (§  77). 
339- 

(§  57),  '  dwell,  live.'    [a.^u, 
B-GB>rD6uir  '  he  will  dwell/ 

II3O.        S-ero^lL/LD,  50,  84.         2.60/0 

eu^j  '  that  which  will  dwell,  the 
dwelling/  426.  s-e&roJE-Sfbj!)) 
'as  (it)  attends  the  steps/  208, 


[24] 

8oo. 


THE    KURRAL. 


499.       S-sro/DLJ^/,  1015. 

&-<ss)p    n.    1.  '  Life  on  earth,' 
564.  2.    'Dwelling-place,' 

680.  3.  'Seasons,  rain,'  559. 
4.  '  Curdle,  congeal.' 

(§  1),  '  feel,  be  ' :  sometimes 
redundant,  a  pass.  aux.  An  el- 
lipsis often  occurs  ;  thence = 
'  gain,  suffer,  be  great,'  &c.  As  eSl. 

Qpir.,  498>  734,  744,  756»  Ilo6» 
1200,  1275.  zL£u<$<sser  'trouble'; 
see  &<558r,  261.  &-PGO,  378,  Nal. 
104.  &-  psor(Lp  GO  p  ILJ  rr  sir  '  a  rela- 
tive,' 885.  z-gipeo  'the  feeling 
of,'  402,  628,  629.  With  df/Tiis 
and  jpejjnjii  : —  &-jg]eurr  (with 
cs/rii),  399,649 ;  '  ascetics '(?  e_jr 
<a//r),  Nal.  104.  a_^;ti>,  539, 
(with  (SOLD^^j)  649,  (with  |«/rzi) 
380,  ((Lp/ifjs)  1023,  707,  816,  817. 
(G)<s/r/4L)  1061,  (with  .jye^e^ex;) 

I3OI.  2-^pSl/^J     (with  ^)£3TL^) 

'what  (they)  delight  in,'  399, 
813  (abs.).  S./D  (with  @«5rq), 
390,  (with  ^js<3TLJL£))  699.  (Lpesr 
^jfD  'beforehand,'  535.  a.^car 
(with  ^rr<ffi@),  599,  (abs.)  778, 
(opp.  to  ^fSlssr)  8 1 2,  (opp.  to 
1270.  s-fbgu  (with 
75,  (with  ff/rii)  402, 
.='felt')  iioi,  1244,1290. 
'-POP PI  Q-ppeueor  (with 
5,  949,  950,  207,  (with 
873,  1097,  (with  <S5/r/i) 
1133,  (with  &mc>G>p[ruj)  1255. 
&-PP,  261,  442,  624,  625,  662, 
1206,  1239,  1256  (OT63r2oor);  (with 
«/reu,  «6TOL_)  372,  773,  837, 1080. 

s^ppeer  '  they  have  endured,' 
1179.  &-p(y&>,  1245.  Neg.  :— 
gLc/y^,  1052  (  •"•  &-t£)i£j£>n'  ?)• 
&-(S?F9  1097*  SL. (y t& <sii fr  '  un- 
sympathetic persons,'  1096, 
1245,  1290.  ^-(y^j  'is  it 

(not)  of  good  omen?'  1143. 
s_(/>f60)Lo,  442.  s_p<oij  (ved.), 
c i o ~=- <SD uj LD .  jComp.  2_ir<sij  in 

ggLJL^F<S^,  &C.]          2.^^,638,690, 

796.  [Comp.  a_jrth.]  ©CIEJJ/ 
'  suffering;  sense  of  touch,'  535, 


[Comp. 


'  hin- 
(§ 62), 


662,  665,  761,  762,  27. 
iioi  ;  = 

945    (LJ©). 
drance,'  676. 

'  cause  to  feel.'  s.,fiws_z  = 
a.  jjy^^jLb  '  which  will  affect 
with,'  94.  a-jy^^eij,  Oh.  iv., 
cix.,  cxv.,  cxxvin.  It  seems  to 
mean  '  declare  '  =  ^.groir^^ei;. 
2~£)jLJLj  (  member,  essential  part,' 
Ch.  cxxiv.  s.jpLjq^ev^w^^eu 
'  the  wasting  away  of  the  frame.' 
q/E^^puq,  ^apgtjpun  'ex- 
ternal and  internal  members,'  79, 
703,  704,  705,  761,  802,  903. 


Lz  (§  62),  'greater.' 
[Comp.  g&/E@.]  =*  which  will 
rise  higher,'  31,  32,  122,  460, 
644,  1065.  mm&@  (§  62), 

'  ascend,  lift  up,  struggle  up, 
strive,  endeavour  '  =  Lat.  nitor. 

e<I!r<£(3jii,      855,      858. 

1238.  &XL&Q,    473. 

476.         ecrr«<s/r/r,  463. 

<E5IT^},    253.  e§sr&&L&    (§   190), 

59Ji  593*594,  382>  486,498,744. 
2_<s«(ip<sz3)/_<50)LQ  '  energy,  strenu- 
ous effort,'  Ch.  LX. 

(§  62),  'pout,    sulk,  feign 
aversion.'  [qeu,  L^sacr/E/^,  ^xsofl.] 

1039,  1260,  1312,  1328. 
1329.  2e*r^L@)tofr,  1314. 
SSTT©^^,  1321,  I33O, 
1109,  1322,  1326,  1327,  1307, 
1310,1284.  m<LL-62)<3U<SG><&  '  the 

Sleasure  derived  from  sulking,' 
h.  cxxxin.  9Gn:^LUJ<a//r,  1304. 
1282. 


.     See 

'gain,'    231,    449,    461, 
797,831.     [Comp.  ^«J/i.] 
aai/r.     1.  'A  town,'  216,  397,  927, 
1008,    1129,    1142,    1143,    1150, 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[25] 


11^8.  &ennr[rs5sr<oG)LQ  '  humanity, 
magnanimity  '  [^^fr],  773.  e^£ 
(YTjocafi  'a  village  tank,  215.  £££ 
jrirrr,  mmir<sunr  'townsfolk/  1147, 
1 1 80,  1220.  2.  (§  57)  'creep, 
spread  over,  mount,  rise  above, 
ride  on.'  [Comp.  erjj/r 
1182.  esE/r,  601. 

1136.  QGrrfrjij^,    979- 

'the  rider  in/  37. 

'^7,   621,   1185. 

&™ip.  1.  'Antiquity,  destiny/ 
Ch.  xxxviii.,  Nal.  101-110, 
37i>  372,  38o>  620.  ^  [Comp. 
LJL£.]  ecrr^]  «  eternity,  des- 
tiny/>989.  2.  (§  64),  '  bloom.' 
u&ip&giLQ  '  though  ifc  has 
bloomed/  650  [t-/(tf]. 

1.  See   e.jy.        2.  (§  62), 
'  gush      forth ;      yield      water.' 

SGYT^LO,     396.  &s£.cfiluj    '  which 

has  yielded  water.'        e^r^jjy^,! 
'water    from    a   spring/      1161 


f)jj/.     1.  'A  spring/    1161    j 
2.  'A  prop,  staff/  414, 


415 


r^2/  (§  62),  (1)  '4ean  upon ' ; 
(2)  'support'  (int.  and  trans.). 

esrrssr^/i,   597,    615,    789,    1030.    ' 
mniGsrpSluj,  983. 

^ffe^r  'flesh.'  L/Gu/reu  'body/  j 
968;  'any  organism/  251-58,  ! 
1013. 


<S7~,  an  initial  interrog.  letter ; 
often  with  e.Lh.  [§  25,  126. 
Comp.  ^j  g),  and  tu/r.]  With 
nouns:  30,  no,  355,  361,  423, 
49T>  533>  695>  982.  <oi<su<su^] 

'how? '426.        6T  IE)  Kl  SGT  LZ   '  how  ?  ' 

251.  OT^JJ;     'what?'     275, 

557)  655,  438,  1080.  er(65(gj/r6ar 
^jyii  'always';  see  (^/rasr^. 
OTSCT-  'how?'  862,  1243,  1217. 
[Comp.  @si5r,  cgycar.]  'What- 


ever/ 586,430,  573,  1059;  with 
Q&neo  '  what?  '  2,  70,  211,  318, 
1004,  812,  923;  'what?'  53, 
301,  897,  144,  420,  1225,  1270, 
r75>  436>  726,  763,  1195,  1172; 
'why?1  397,  1287,  966.  OTSOTSOT 
(adj.),  987>  705,  i ioo,  1 122. 
188.  <or<aus^r 

^jiw,      379;         (with 
99,    237,     1291,     1171; 
'  =  OT^,    46,   57,  79,   272, 
1308,  574,  803,  1225,  1207,  1165. 

6Tfil/<5@),       31,       1089.  OT§50r=: 

<or<zisr<o5r  foil,  by  &.LQ  'whatever'  ; 
with  nouns  'however  much/  52, 
207,  209,  514,  670.  [Comp. 
jp/fa,  g/gfew.]  <sr$ssr£ gi,  1208, 
820.  6t$SBr(jisgi$eai:)t  144,  750. 
sr^ssr^^rr^jLo,  317,416.  OT^T^ 
O^/rgsr^/Lb,  209,  281,  300,  1202, 
825,  1241.  (oTssrjruLn  'always/ 
978»  i38>  i523  652,  536>  I][30- 

<5To°o(^  'weapon/  759,  773. 

<sr($J7)<9F  (§  62),  'fail;  remain, 
survive.'  OT^cFeu,  44.  OT@ 
&[r^i,  690.  (oT^fir&^Lo,  382, 

497.  OT^^LD.  1.  '  Posterity/ 
112,  114,  456,  238.  2.  'Rem- 
nant/ 674,  1004.  3.  'Et  cetera/ 
1012.  4.  'As  for  the  rest/  1075. 

<zr®  (§  64),  '  take  up.'  [Comp. 
OT(t£>.]  <oT®uu£2  '  what  will  re- 
store/ 15.  OT©^  'having 
summed  up/  776.  OT©<S(^L£I 

'  will  excite/  1 1 50. 

<&T633T.  1.  '  Eight/  9.  [OTL!  ;  S. 
ashtan.~]  2.  'Number,  arith- 
metic/ 392.  [S.  gana.]  3.  (§  62), 
'  count,  think,  reflect,  design, 
esteem.'  OTowGVrr;^  '  thought- 
ful'  [G»<ffr].  OT^dbr^iyLb 
'will  think,  plan/  639,  1004, 

OT^53T<S5ofi,  22,  462,    467,    470,    497, 

530,  666,  687,  699,  1298.  STSSJT 
essflu-'/rn'  494,  666.  <oTS5sr<ssisflosrJ 
264.  er-swrszjar,  438,  922.  CTSOT 
,  666,  753,  941.  OTsabrjp/ 
467.  OTvodbr^oo)  t^7,  180. 

568. 

'  design/  494.       4.  See 

'  opposite,     future,    over 
D 


[26] 


THE    KURRAL. 


against.'  srjsln-Qpir  &(&><£  GO 

'regard,'  1082.  erfilrr  $£)(§&, 
765  [>£fiu].  erfirrffirdjisg},  855, 
859  jWiL/].  (§  64) 
4  recompense,'  221. 
'what  is  future,'  429. 


'tooth,'    II2I. 

(§    58),    «  shoot   an   arrow.' 


^«  <ST  iu  ILJ  (r  €G)  LA  :  com. 
says  =  <su(tfji5^tTLb6o  '  without 
trouble,'  296  ;  B.  thinks  it= 
c§>ll[6)ujiT<oG)La  '  without  your  know- 
ledge.' 


(§  62),  'obtain;  fit,  suit.' 
J^eu,  265,  606,  671,  815,  904, 

991,          489.  (oTLU^SUJT,        137. 

<oTLLJ<Sn<56)Ln,     815.  GTlUJSl,      665, 

749,  932.       CTUJ^  '  so  as  to  suit,' 
516.  (oTiu^ssr^tJ    (=  ^tonL-fi 

^js),    1240.        OTUj^ftL,   75,   145, 

309,     6lO,    676,    1024.          OTOJJ5JLJ, 

666.  eriLJBluj,  354,  657,  670, 

740.       OTtL/^/r/r,  598,  901.       OTIU 
137. 

fire,'    308,   435,   896,    1148 

manure,'  1037,  1038,  1147. 
a  rat,'  763. 
'limit,'  806. 

(§126),  'all,  every,  whole.' 

1.  In  app.  to  a  noun,  1,33,68,79, 
81,  212,  232,  238,  294,  375,  624, 
268,  320,  321,  507,    542,  547;  in 
any  case,  1012,  1013,  1064,  1067, 
1056,     1168,    1227,    1266,    673, 
776,  582,   981,    860,   596,  1032. 

2.  Summing  up  :  '  all  these,'  15. 

3.  Noun  :  '  all  things  or  persons  ; 
the  whole,'  430,  309,  610,  343, 
951,  659,   661,    1002,    1033,    72 
(='  wholly  ')  ;    with    LD/DJO/,  39, 
221.       4.  With    a.  err    making  a 
superlative,    47,   142,    203,    322, 
325,    411,^  443>    444,    761,     832, 
891.      (srevew,  prefixed  to  noun, 
followed  by   &.L£>,  361,  296,  299, 
260,  457,  746,  851,  972.          CT6U 

,  582,    125,   191,  752, 


<5Tsu<siJLb     'affliction,'     223,      853, 
1241. 

t     See  OT. 

fr.      1.  'Rape-seed.'       [Comp. 
@srr.]  <oTiLu<£s<sii    'a   split 

in    a    grain   of     sesame,'    889. 
2.    '  Slight,  easy  '  ;    used  as   s$ 


'  by  easiness  of  access,'  991,  548, 

424.    <0T68GrQun~((Tj£Vr,   760.      (oT&fl^l 

'  (it  is)  easy'  [opp.  cgyffl^j],  991, 
745,  540,  864,  145.  OT0yf)uj,  664. 
-,  723,  863,  386. 

62),  'despise.'  [Comp. 

©LP,  £D<£Lp.]          (oTftreiflttr,   1298. 
(oT<5Tnsrr,  191.  OTisrrsrr^^,    491. 

(STefr^ii,  607.  <oT(sfr@5<sijn"/r, 

829,    752.          67<srr<5/r/r<5B>La,    667, 
281.          (5T<sfr<3friT<s,    470.         erefr 

IO57. 

(§  57),  '  rise.'  [OT^  ;  conip. 
<oT(Lp<si][T®r  '  rise  (from 
a  seat),'  55.  OT^^  'rise  (in 
arms),'  465.  OT^su/r/r  'rise 

(up  to  labour),'  1032.       OTLP  '  rise 
(as  a  rumour),'  1141. 

C(?LO«LO,J     17.         OTLfSleb 
407. 

(§  62),  'write,  paint.' 
Q  'we  paint  not,'  1127. 
when  (one) 

paints,'  1285.         OT(LP-<£^'    'let- 

ter ;  reading,'  392. 

.          See 


,^  (§  57).  OT^^  'let  (them) 
strike,'  562.  OT/^^^LD  'whe- 
ther (they)  hurl  missiles,'  747. 
GifSliu  'when  hurling,'  775. 
er  fSlfSp^  '  for  the  purpose  of 
striking,'  821. 

(§    62),    '  destroy,'     663. 
<s\rr,(y  '  unending.'     erpjpi,  1256. 
See  <sr. 
^sr.     See  OT. 

.  1.  See  OT.  2.  '  Say  '  (§  70, 
82).  6T«r(2/D£Br,  1314,  1315, 
1316.  6T33T(yir  '  he  (who) 
said,'  1149.  <oT<osrfo^i  '  the  say- 
ing,' 552.  (oT&rrs  'say  thou  !  ' 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[27J 


with  noun  Qpfbjpt,  q.v. 
[the  use  is  remarkable].  1.  '  To 
say,'  37  ;  '  when  —  says,'  55,  69, 
145,  1245,  I259>  I292»  63°- 
2.  With  u®,  q.v.  3.  '  Empha- 
sizes and  specializes  a  noun — is 
almost  like  an  article,  in,  168, 
316,  334,  942.  It  almost  is= 
marks  of  quotation,  1236,  1252, 
1257.  4.  Sums  up='  these,'  146, 
1022,  766. 

<5T<scr£)j  '  having  said '  (see 
§  82,  83),  593,  626,  627,  1139, 
1002,  1313-20,  174,  205,  611, 
1067,  1 1 12,  1114.  1.  'As 
being,'  u,  307,  331,  351,  537. 

2,  In    summing   up,    as    OTsor  = 
'these,'    27,   43,  674,   939,  950. 

3.  Serves  to   specialize  a  state- 
ment, and  almost  equal  to  quo- 
tation marks,   1307,   1308,    388, 
575,  805,  699,  1298,  1248,  1154, 

IOO4,      517,      IO66.  6TG3TJD&Jjb 

£y®T  (7th  case  pi.),  715.  OTSST 
rod)  'the  saying,  the  fact,'  181. 
OT<5or<su,  282,  971,  1148,  1260. 
Imp.  reg.  and  pos.,  196.  (Intro. 

p.  XX.)  <5T  SOT  jog?/  LA       (§    132), 

=appositive  '  of  ' ;  joins  two 
words,  phrases,  or  even  clauses, 
which  are  in  apposition  or  very 
closely  connected,  14,  1040,  790, 
571,  369,  641,  306,  1013,  753, 
336,  924,  936,  24,  29,  54,  70,  74, 
180,988,  223,  227,  991,  992,287, 
464,  844,  601,  790,  1251,  1043, 
1045,  1068,  1182,  1156,  1134. 
'It  or  which  will  say,'  1015, 
1130,  1129,  1023,  1021,  976,  598, 

1063,    346,  406,   438,    1193.          OT.^ 

Queor,  1254.      (5i<oisrLJn&(3j  (Intro, 
p.  xxii.),  'which  will  say,'  1312. 
OTSJJTLJ/T   'they  will  say,  will   be 
called,'  88,  246,  336,   662,  1220. 
<5T<cvrurr<sor,    /r,    1036,   41,   42,   47,    i 
147,    163,  ^275,    281,   628,   850;   ! 
'  he  who  will  say,  will  be  called ' 
(§  151),   365,  956;       (pi.)   <or«r 
(oun-fr,  30.      (orsorusijfr,  393,  856. 

<a//r).     <oT6oru  '  they  will  say,'  60, 
63>  66,  73,75,  76,  203,  238,  244,   ! 
361,392,483,617,729,736,738,   , 


739>  773>  851,981,  991,  918,953, 
1280.  <oT£yrutgj  (an  aoristic 
form  of  (orsar^,  §  82),  87,  114, 
116,  193,  210,  364,  467,  661, 
797,  831,  850,  928,  1026,  1083, 
1188,  1293.  <5T<sofl6vr  'if  you 
say,  if,'  2,  19,  20,  178,  220,  254, 
256,  2TO,  292,  309,  321,  324,  378, 
546,  560,  789,  801,  831,  844, 
986,  1041,  1189,  1190,  1194. 
OTssfl^Lo  '  though  you  say, 

though,'  82,  102,  222,  328,  499, 
6l9>  638,  730,  768,  770,  1199. 

<STOT7-(£0)^  (§  121),  36.  OTSST  forms 
verbs  with  the  particles  «^LO, 
(q.v.),  1175,  1144. 
^  ill 

cool,'  1104. 

'  bone,'  72,  73, 
77,  80. 

See  <oT  and 


it    will    grow 


•  See  LUfr.  1.  An  interrogative 
447,  1299.  2.  Part,  denoting 
emphasis  and  certainty,  9,  1064, 
1309,  1283,  1240.  3.  Emph. 
and  exclusive :  '  that  and  that 
alone,'  25,  27,  242,  585,  587. 
4.  Emph.  and  antithetic,  i,  39, 
40,  240,  987.  5.  Added  to 
nouns,  with  a./i. 
'  even  in  jest,'  871. 
'  even  for  a  moment,'  29. 
0><sm(L\Lc>  'even there,'  1044.  ^/r 
GesTLq/i  'even  it  alone,'.  1060. 
6.  Sign  of  8th  or  voc.  case, 
1291,  passim.  7.  F°r  §P  in 
inflexions:  ^.(SlQeuLc,  1310, 1278, 
1250.  8.  With  Gurreo,  1285. 
(§  62),  '  pass  over,'  3.  [Comp. 
;  S.  efo'.]  ® Q (&>)£&- =  <&Q6BT 
(§  87),  2. 

See   JP/JZ/.       [>«(c5  for 
D  from  <§r/H(Sj.]     <&<B5<$pjg]Ln 
though     they    languish,      bow 


[28] 


THE    KUERAL. 


humbly,'  395  ;  ' humiliter  discere  ' 
(B.).    ' 

67/57(25    (§    62),     'languish,    long 
for,    yearn    after,'    1248,    1269; 


[Comp. 


/,  268. 


410. 
'the  other  two.' 


'disgrace,'    136,    164,    275, 

432,831,884,885,1006.  (gJ^LJ 

un-®  [u©],  464. 
SH6V    '  other,    foreign,    strange,' 
913.    [Prob.  <5T^  +  ^;«5v.]      (Qj^ssr 
60) LD     '  indifference,    alienation,' 
816.     tytsl eu  'extraneous  things,' 

44O,     1089.  CjJ^iSU/rSOT,    -<Ql<i5l6VlT 

'strangers,  enemies,'  188,  190, 
440,  837,  862,  1099,  1129,  1130, 
1224,  1300,  Nal.  122. 
-<&&  (§  62),  'extol.'  [>  =  'up.' 
(er^.  Comp.  (Lp>J53},  L$)^^.] 
<&  J5&$  (§  62),  '  rise  ;  bear  up.' 
5r/F^a),  772.  <5}r5J£iuLi  '  lofty,' 
899. .  (gr^^Lo,  970. 

,  873;  with  a.jj/  =  *  be 
mad  ;  madness ;  security,  safety.' 
[?  S.  kshema.]  <5TLDLjqSsssr, 

306,  1164.  <§TLOL£i  'guard,  de- 
fence,' 1131,  815,  766,  738. 
<§jLbffir  (=<siT<S)j<ovmrD*),  448.  [§r/i 
+  ^!T.  ?  QsuLa  +  ^jriT  'a  king 
like  a  fiery  serpent.']  ^JLD/TLJL^ 
'safety;  exaltation,'  112,  126, 
398,  458,  459;  'decus,  sublimitas' 
(B.).  <5r/j3/7LJ/_9G)(2?<s53fl,  1068. 

[Comp.       306.].  <&LaiTIT<g&6V 

(<&Lc  +  ^tT='  bind  '),  '  guard,' 
660.  [Another  reading  is 

o  '  deception.'] 
1.  'A  team,  yoke  of  oxen 
and  plough,  ploughing,'  14, 
1031,  872,  1038.  2.  '  Like  '  (as 
a  team),  1089,  1272.  3.  'Fit- 
ness, beauty,'  1053,  1098,  1305. 
'^uS)CTr'  'if,'  1 8,  1118. 
.jj/eueuGeorei)  '  if  he 
is  not,'  386.  $6vrQrD&u  '  sm 
minus,'  996,  556,  573,  575,  1014, 
1144.  2_6OTG°L_6u  'if  it  exist,' 
368.  2.  'Take,  receive.' 
^7/D.p  (§  70,  like  .sew),  716. 

(57  J^LD  =  c|^u3<£^L£>  =  cf$<@2/i-£i,      997, 

43°- 

<  other,'      392,     505,     704. 


(§  62),    '  stir   up.'       [Comp. 

£&.         v/<§7.]  <&6V®J    (§    148, 

149),  'command,  instigation,' 
5I5>9°7,9°9-  <QJGU<SHLZ  (§  168), 
'  even  when  .  .  .  incite,'  848. 

1.  'A  lion,'  59,  381. 
[Comp.  OT(Lp,  tLiuqij,  ®<Sij,  <5jj5gi  ; 
v/^r.]  _  2.  (§  62)  'Ascend.' 
<5r/r9@)/r  '  they  (who)  have 
climbed.'  <&  $  $  zvr  (y  IT  *  they 

(who)  have  climbed  and  taken 
their  stand,'  29,  758.  <qj^iLc> 
'will  mount  ;  swell,'  1132,  1133, 
1264.  si  (y  '  that  mounts  not,' 

"37- 

(§172),  'seven.'       OT(^,  62, 
107,  126,  398,   538,    835,    1278. 

[See   (oTOLO.]  <oT(L£LJ3j],   639. 

wretch,'    873. 


1.  'Lord,'  771.      2.  'Doubt.' 
353'  845-       %>'JJuu®  (see 
LJ©),    702,     958.  ggttJLJL//r© 

'  doubt,'  587.  ggiL/flj®/  (see 
S..P),  'suspicion,'  510.  3.  'Five,' 
(§172).  ^  'perception  by  the 
five  senses,'  354.  ggti,  43,  1101. 
gg/jr^:,  6,  24,  25,  27,  126,  271, 
343,  632,  675,  738,  939,  983. 

4.  Sign  of  2nd  case,   509,   702. 

5.  Replaces  final  ^  of  S.  ^&s<su 
=  <f<5®u  =  sa'bhd.         So  in  deriv. 
Comp.   euiTu.  — '  place,' with    <sroay. 

6.  Term,  of  2nd  sing,  in  verbal 
forms =C^ILJ  (§  31).        ^elSsu^ 
'  thou  art  not.'       Q<S>J%SU='  thou 
art  a  dart,'  1221. 


(§  64),  '  befit,  resemble,  agree,' 
993.          $><g^  with 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[29] 


befits,'  561.  ^&<!Bg2t  214. 
epfg^ev,  993.  <g,£Jil  '  thou  viest 
with,'  1119.  <§>&&  'belike!' 
490.^  9<£<&6\;  '  kindred,'  43. 

vr     '  if    it    agree,'      noo. 

i  'is  the  same,'  972.  <spuu 
'  equal  to,'  702.  QUUIT  '  they 
are  alike,'  413.  QUU^I  '  what 
equals,'  162,  363;  'resembles,' 
63J'  993'  S36-  eg&Ljq,  993,  800, 
812.  65LJL9<5u/rfr  'unfitting  per- 
sons.' epuuiTifl  'what  corre- 
sponds' [term,  «^rfl],  1071. 
6$LJLj.o-<a/  [comp.  ^uLfffa/],  Ch. 
xxii.  (see  Notes),  213,  218,  220; 
with  ^CTjrsD)L£i,  480  [=f$sfr]. 
QUIT  '  is  not  the  same,'  972. 
1114. 

(§  62),  'lie  hidden.' 
[Comp.  esy/-.]  gg©<5c®LD  '  re- 
serve,' 486.  <j£®rrz(8jLc>  '  will 
lie  concealed,'  828. 

L-®  (§  62),  '  adhere  to.'      egilL- 
'in  conformity  with,'    140,482. 
'  the    attacking,'     499. 
'  attaching     to    oneself,' 
679.       epLLi—fTiT  '  non-adherents, 
enemies,'  678,  826. 
i—LJLD  (from  g&efr),    'splendour, 
praise,'  404,  425. 
<5syr-     See  g&efr. 

and  $}3?^pr),  'one,  the 
one,  any,'  1091,  118,  119,  126, 
168,  156,  248,  357,  397,  634, 
974,  1042,  1095,  1146,  1196, 
1266,  1269.  [Comp.  £|)(/5,  FFtr, 


40,  161,  181,  220,  226,  336,  366, 
400,  405,  414,  454,  609,  600,  797, 
971,  988,  967,  1004,  1021,  1023, 
1026,  1052,  1197,661,  397,  398, 
871,  875.  &($&£),  I3I3-  ^ 
(r5/s@5  'at  once,'  343,  554,  610, 
733'  76o,  951,  1056.  g>/r,  24, 
429,  465,  645,  704,  796,  848,  902, 
1053,1098,1153,1307.  epesr^i, 
87,  109,  in,  831,  833,  836,  838, 
839,  128,  221,  148,  i55' 232,  233, 

758>  773'  8o°'  8°5'  875*291',  462' 


257,  259,  281,  300,  825,932/934, 
1006,  1007,  1049,  1080,  1091, 
1202,  1216,  1035,  1241,  1247, 
1252,  1255,  1257,  1271-75.  v. 
(§  62).  ^eyrroei)  '  the  existing,' 
886.  e^eorfSliUii  fr  '  those  who 
are  united,'  886.  <<>ps0r(y<o®Ln 
'disunion,'  886. 

(§   62),    '  avoid,  shun,   re- 
nounce.' gg  ff  (|)}  —  g£  (TTJajS,      Il6, 

422,  797,  830,  1009. 
652;   Qirireu,  153,  662. 
'shun!'    800.         g5©2_' 

c,  812.       ggjr/r/f,  658. 

(§  64),  '  sound,  make  a  noise,' 

763.        <Z£6®:§<£. 

(§  62),  *  relax,  despond  ' ; 
'  relaxari,  suam  proprietatem 
amittcTe '  (33.).  sg6u<&/r»o)L£> 

662.         ^eo&n-ir,   136,  218,  597. 

(§    62),     'be    possible.' 
'  (which)    is   possible,'    33,    673, 

Q  Q         Q  . 

709?     oio.  s^evsu^ij     1149. 

sp6U6D/T£3r  '  he  who  cannot 
manage,'  870.  g&eueu/r^?  *  (it) 
is  not  possible  to,'  870,  559. 

$>®JSO[T,  139,  673,  1064,  1136, 
1271. 

'  swiftly  '   [cor.  from    zpeo 
e$6u©6DS5r],    563,  564,  826, 
1096. 

(§57,  64),  '  cease  ,  cause  to 
cease,  leave  off.'  <$>$ILJ  (§  170), 
113,  240,  338,  1231,  Nal.  123. 
sgy9<^5  'having  abandoned,' 
280. 

(§    62),    'live,    conduct 
oneself.'         [Qpp.  @(J£.     Comp. 

445,    482,    524,    602,    694,^  845, 

(Zj>£6U,    Ch.    LXX.  ;       ^(^pCgi^^Uj 

444.  9(ip«,  in,  154,  446,  698, 
855-  g&cy5®^*  I41'  278,  551, 
563,  603,  874,  907.  e^Q^Bek, 
294,  359*  892,  974-  ^(^@siy/7"/r, 
143,  246,  326,  691,  896,  921, 

'  474.          $><i-£(c5   (§    62) 
',48. 


[30] 


THE    KURBAL. 


<&&  '  conduct,  decorum  '  (= 
JTLQ)  ;  '  rectitudo,  or  do,  supple 
morum'  (B.).  <z£(Lp<£<55(Lp<5mi—<s®L& 
1  mores,  decorous  conduct,  confor- 
mity to  the  rule  of  life,'  Ch.  xiv. 
a.i-/rQo;/r(u>£<ff{jb  '  unworthy 
conduct,'  Ch.  XXVIIT.  With  /EGO 
and  j$t  1 38  = 'good  and  evil 
conduct';  with  ui$-£)]  =  l  faulty 
conduct,  indecorum,'  271,275,  6, 

2I»  I3l~39>  4i5>  952-        9e£«© 

=  9(Lptf5<ffiL£>,    2O,    148,    l6l. 

'bright,'  727,  1125.  g&afer, 
760,  1009,  1088,  noi,  1240, 
Nal.  102.  sgsKjreroLfl  '  glory, 
brightness,'  844.  gp/luLb  [comp. 

£g)6STLJL£>,  ^JgSTLJLO,   JpLLlJUi],   404, 

425.         9syfl    'light,    sense    of 
sight;  glory'    [opp.    ®syfl],    27, 

267,   39°'    556'    653>   698»   87o> 
921,  939,  970,  971,  1118,   1329. 

@&fllLI!TIT,6£<Sfr<offluJIT,  <o£ 6TT gyfl IU <3)J IT , 
487,   714. 

(§  64),  'hide.'  [Comp.  ge/^l.] 
'  where  will  (he)  hide 
himself  ?  '  1070. 
'  what  (he)  has  hidden,'  928. 

(§  64),  '  punish,  blame,  vex.' 

IT,  779.     9^^^/r/r, 
X55»  J56-       gg^uLJ^,  561.       9 
579.    QJlifaA,  3H,  55°- 
z  'misery/  414. 

(§  62),  '  spy  out,  look  out 
for,  examine.'  '  &jbjA  '  having 
spied  out,'  583,  588,  927; 
'  sought  for,'  927  ;  '  examined,' 
1261.  QjbjgJ  4a  spy,  a  detec- 
tive,' 581-90.  9/i)(7?7i_6u  '  the 
employment  of  detectives,'  Ch. 
LIX. 

See  905. 
See  9(5. 

^sar^^aj/r  'foes,'  165, 
264,  608,  630,  756,  827,  828. 
(See  9(75.) 


.     1.    An   interrogative  (§    46), 
483,   591,   705.    707>   968>   987> 


1085,  1318,  1323;  with 
1208;  with  Q&rrev,  85,  1048, 
1081,  1328  ;  with  Lossr,  1206, 
1329.  2.  An  interjection,  epg&, 
1088,  1176,  1204.  (See  ^j<sfT 
QueoL.)  3.  gp<^  (§  62), 
'  cease.'  [Commonly  epiLi.  Comp. 
g&®ffl/.]  QGvn-  'unceasing,'  734, 
1205.  Q<surT($<$  (§  77),  'with- 
out intermission,'  33,  933.  g§> 


'desisting  from,'   653.. 

..] 

'sound,'     27.       [= 
Comp.  g^^j  and  ^)OTO<F.] 

c^*  (§  62),  '  wield  or  sway  as  a 
sceptre,  uplift  in  a  threatening 
manner.'  [?  a.tL//r^jo.  Comp. 
g&/H(gj.]  G>&n-G>6V[r&&Lc>,  544, 
545.  "gp<F^,  562. 

(§62),  'run.'  g>z_/r  (§  110), 
it  runs  not,'  496.  ^©LQ  'it 
will  run,'  496.  Lo^/sG'.s/r^L 
'  having  transgressed,  run  to 
one  side,'  210.  [/x»0/H@.] 
[With  <35®sor  :  —  the  idea  is  of  the 
'  benignant  glance  sent  forth  '  ; 
576  j 

541  ; 
578;        <5B6GCrQ<&)UjL,        579;          &SGOT 

G<6oo)tlL_^,  983,  571-75,  577- 
Ch.  LVIII.]  9^1©  'defeat,'  775 

(=g&LlL_Lb,    §    190). 

(§  62),  @>@,  'recite,  study 
the  Vedas,'  834.  [S.  vad.] 
§>$&  (§  1^0),  '  the  Vedas,  reci- 
tation,' 134. 

LDL/  (§  62),  [comp.  «rii],  'guard 
against;  guard  ;  attend  to,  watch 
over,  cherish,  care  for.'  [With  air 
'  keep  watch  and  ward.'J  ^/@ 
fQfvvLzH  (§  27),  'fear  not,' 
1149.  9^L9ssr  (§  95),  '  if  you 
would  keep  in  safety,'  1155. 
gj>LDLJ6x;  (§  148),  v.n.  and  opt. 
(really  v.n.  and  QeuGssrGiLo  und.), 
'the  guarding  against,  warding 
off,'  1155,  612,  642,  820,  89,  43» 
390.  ^Q^^Q^iTLdU&j,  Ch.  ix., 
'  Hospitality  —  due  attention  to 
guests.'  gE>o>q<£6w,  322,  626. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[31] 


77),  549,81,85,86,88, 

132,  244.  ^/iL/ii  (§  74),  968. 
gp/iq<«  (§  140),  '  beware  of,' 
506,  861.  §>L*U  (§  92),  '  should 
be  attended  to.'  [LJ®.]  ^iJ^utr 
(§  121),  'that  does  not  sedu- 
lously attend  to,'  89.  (=g&iiu/r 
Loei;)  'not  guarding  against  or 
shunning,'  861.  ggiiL^su/rsor 
(=6pLaLju<sij£3r,  §  88), 'he  who 
attends  to,  cherishes,'  83,  84. 

40,  366,  an  expletive, 
supposed  to  be  meaningless  ; 
perhaps  from  e&/r  '  consider,' 
and='  mark  well ! '  It  is  used 
by  Tiruv.  with  each  of  two  con- 
trasted notions.' 

*•  1.  (§  64),  357,  gj»/r,srj3  (§  77), 
'  ponder,  examine.'  [Comp.  cf$fr.] 
§>ir/5gi  (§  57),  541.  §>jrrriT 
(§  110),  695.  §>inr  '  having  in- 
vestigated,' 548.  [Comp.  §  97, 
of  the  form  QfiLuuir.']  2.  See 


.     See 


a  quarter  Q^/rtf  ,  1037. 
fF®       'fault.'       [y  <s?<F  =   'be 
bitter.'  Seems  to  have  the  notion 
of  '  bitter  dregs.']     «^/_/D  '  fault- 
lessly,' 391,  717,  845- 


LJ/r  obligation,  duty  J  =  e&iJ 
qjrffl/,  211  [LJ©]  ;  '  munificentia, 
laryitio  '  (B.).  <si_<a/err.  '  God,' 
title  of  Ch.  I.  si—(Si]<5(i<sufn^^^. 
[Comp.  c^/®^'  Qu/r(2j«r.] 
<£5t_£cr  'duty,  moral  obligation,' 
218,  638,  687,  802,  981,  1053. 
cSL-eO  '  sea,  the  wide  sea,'  10,  17, 
103,  496,  1137?  Il64>  1166, 

1175,  1200. 


the  secretion  of  an  ele- 
phant in  rut.'  arrL-n-tB-ssifl^)] 
'  an  elephant  in  rut,'  1087. 


'guard.'  <si£.Q<£/rssbr£_fl-/r  '  he 
has  guarded  (his  heart  against 
me).'  (§  57)  'guard  against, 
reprehend,  punish.'  (gjibprsj-s 
b,  Ch.  XLIV.  <$iq-/5<$,  658. 
,  658,  668. 


,  with  the  idea  of  '  hardness, 
swiftness,  severity.'  [Comp. 
Q/_y0,  ^,75  ;  also  Q«/r®.]  <£E©L£I 
'fierce,'  386,  566,  567,  570,  1134, 
1167.  <&iq-ULJ5sr  '  a  cruel  man,'  564. 
siy.  *p  'with  severity,'  562.  (§  64) 
'  be  harsh,  angry,  suspicious.' 
&®^^^i  '  the  soul's  anger,'  706. 
&(£iJ5<gL9s3r  'after  auger  has 
arisen,'  693.  <si—n^\  '  not  ex- 
citing distrust,'  585.  (See  <jysrr 


(§  62),  'hasten  to  an  end.' 

t  564.    [«©.] 

[ffi©.]  1.  '  A  limit,  place.' 
(III.  Gr.  63.)  2.  '  Where  or  when,' 
with  rel.  part.,  53,  230,  315,  372, 
469,  478,  803,  837,  964,  1019, 
1059,1149,1195.  So  also  when 
asm—  is  inflected  as  'sSS^5sr<ssf  we 
have  <s<5tj)i—<££]Lb  =  l  although,  '  = 
and  when  it  is  in  the  place  that, 
637,  823.  3.  'The  last,  lowest 
place.' 
virtue,' 

outer  gate,'  142  ;   'porta  exterior 
domui,   et    hie    significat    extra  ' 

(B.),   328,   729,   998.  <£60)L_<£ 

Q&(rL-&  '  so  as  to  merit  accept- 

ance at  last,'  663.  SG6)L-(Lf)0S)JD 

'at   last,'    792.        <E5soL-.ujiT  '  the 

lowest,'      395. 


'  outside  of 
'  neighbour's 


(§  64),  '  persevere,  hold  on  till 
th 


1; 


e  end,'  944. 

ar  +  ^Ssr/'  ?] , '  touch- 
stone, test,'  505,  986. 

'  Eye  '       [S.     aksha  ; 

see    <ffi/r®5sr],  107,    184,   392, 
445,  500,   573-77,  58lJ   585: 


[32] 


THE  KURRAL. 


1267,   1272, 
1290,   I3II, 

Ch. 
1119,1125, 
1180,     1305. 
;  '  miseratio,' 
184,  566, 


1084-86,  1091,  1092,  1095,  1  100, 
1126,  1127,  1140,  1136,  1170-79, 

I2IO,   1212,  1231,  1232,  1239, 
1240,  I26l,  1265, 
1280,  1283,  1285, 

1315. 

cxvin. 

1142.         *  sar  (6os)/r, 

2.  l  Kindliness,  pity 

(B.),  184.       .fFodsrsac 

1252.        <SS3Br(?<63B)ilL_<i,  Ch.LVIII. 

'  favourably,  kindly  regard.' 
(See  under  ^©.)  '3.  'Place,' 

52,  184  (?),  1055,  1058.  IUITIEI 
<sjp/La  'everywhere'  [<u/r],  864. 
It  becomes  ='  where  or  when,' 
573,  574,  312,  349,  514,  521, 
606,  740,  750,  955,  354,  670, 
1292.  4.  Sign  of  7th  case,  579, 
223,  216,  217,  874,  878,  951,  34, 
89,  117,  146,  176,  141,  135,  241, 
284,  285,  286,  408,  493,  521,  590, 
517,  519,  503,  612,  613,  642,  668, 
750,  784,  886,  806,  810,  832,  957, 
958,  986,  1059,  1061,  1044,  1099, 
uoi,  1174,  1197,  1090,  1153, 

1284,   1243,   1309. 

1  in  the  midst,1  473. 

«SL!©,  a 

+  ,s&j=*it  belongs  to  the  place  ') 
which  still  remains  as  a  sign  of 
7th  case  (§  251),  27,  502,  513  ; 
=  'it  is  possessed  of  eyes,'  1083. 

In      comounds     (see    under 


[ut_/ni],  1087.       4. 

[f&©]  ;      e5?s3srG)@s)LLt_iii     'kind 

ness.' 


I.  1,  si/ ssr <3> o5or  [<5L/6uJ=^'  bravery,' 

632,       7^2,    7^4'  <SL/!SOT<fi5{G03)/r, 

1156,726,  228,   689,   775,   1027. 
<su  sor <s -osor  <sssr ^    '  what    has   cruel 
eyes,'  1222.       2.  ^^]<ssssr  'fero- 
city '   [/Fjplt  773-        3.  ^-^]<s5sssr 
'trouble'  '{e-jp/J,  261.      4.  £|)s3r  I 
«5ZK!r    'pleasure'    [g)sar],    1152.   | 
5.    L/sar««fisr     'sadness'     [t^eu], 
1152;     L^ssrcSodcrsaOT^y    'gloomy- 
eyed,'    1222.         6.    <&[TLa£G)Sr<&<95650r    \ 

688TSVT,   Brahmjl,   1103.     7.  @®<&   ! 
«22»r.     (See  @©). 

II.  1.  «.5J5OTLj/r©  'sleep'  [LJ©],  ! 
1049.  2.     aassrostftT     'tear' 

[A]i    555,  78o,  828.       [Comp.   , 
107.]       3.    <asL-UL-rrLa    'a    veil' 


See 

[S.].  1.  'An  instant' 
[S.  Xft£ana],  29.  2.  'A  class' 
[S.  gano],  <$tEi$<stftT;g<&iT  'those 
of  one's  tribe,'  720. 

'an  axe,'  1251.  [S. 
vr  'an  arrow,'  279. 
'wrath,'  130. 
l  a  door,'  1251. 

'woman's  hair.' 
,  1105. 

'  swiftly,'      imitative 
word.    (See  OTSST.) 

'a  stake,  staff  to  lean  on,' 
507.     [S.  skandha.~\ 

'a  fish  :  Cyprianus  L.,  carp,' 
1212. 

j(S5)£n  [  ^/  (ffioj  =  ^tp]  *  baseness,' 
Ch,  cvin.  Nal.  Ch.  xxxvi.  &iu 
IT,  1071-1080.  [Opp.  tftrssr 


'rope,'  482. 

^r  (§  66),  '  conceal  '  ;  hence  '  refuse 
to  give.'  [Comp.  S.  Uri.  Syn. 
LDSO/D,  g&syfl.]  S]Tj5<S&>,  1054, 
1162.  tijTUurrir,  &iruu<3i]K, 
1067,  1070.  cSjrL/LJ/r<s@  (§  97), 
'that  it  will  hide,'  1127,  1129. 

dSffUlSlGBr,    1051.  -SJIULSl^JLDj 

1271.        fSTULJ,   1053,   1055,    1056. 

/,   1068,  1069;  'guile,'  288. 
,  527,  1035,  1061. 

'black,'    1123.       [<®(5^,  «/fl, 
^(^erom.       Comp.     jy^.] 
n-    '  those  who  are  black,' 

277.  <S((^<S<35friLJ    [S.    S0  = 

'  germ  ']  =   '  immature      fruit,' 

1306.   [«fnu.]     <s/r/r  'dark,'  287. 

<  an  instrument,'  421,  483, 
537,   631,  675.     [Comp.  S.  l-n  ', 


fi  'witness,'  25,  245,  1060. 
[Prob.  from  &($.  «ffl  is  '  char- 
coal.'] 

(§    62),     'think,    devise, 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[33J 


ponder,  aim  at.'     [Comp. 

337-      &Q5 ^gat-leu IT,  485. 

285,  463,  484,  485,  687,  696,  700, 

852,  949.     SQ^f^yu^,  484. 

'sugar-cane,'  1078. 

1.  (§  57),  'call,'  527.  i 
2.  'Shore,'  1167. 

[S.  karma],  'work,'  266,  ; 
467,  5°5>  578,^818,  ion,  1021.  j 
In  Nal.  <£5L£iL£)ii,  393. 

(§  66),  tr.  and  int.,  'mix,  join  ; 
battle,  embrace,  arrive  at.' 
<35<si}<5<5<s\j  'embracing,'  1259, 
1276.  <S€ouQutar  '  I  shall  com- 
bine (the  two),'  1267. 
1121,  1246,  1268. 
'my  husband,'  1212. 
'  affliction.'  «6u/s@  (§  62, 160), 
'beconfused.'  <£6u/i/£)(Sff)<ofr,  1290. 

1116.  <B5<svLD,  1.  '  An  ornament,' 
1262;  with  /zreu,  60;  with  jysssfl, 
575.  2.  'A  vessel,  pot,'  660, 
1000,  1029.  <es6»6or  'a  vessel, 
ship,'  605,  Nal.  206,  12. 
&<&  (§60), 'weep,' 1 1 71,  1173, 
Nal.  393. 

_  1.  'Stone,'  38,  505,  771.  | 
&<5BT£)i  (§  62),  'grow  intense';  i 
with  <$rr<$&j,  284,286.  2.  (§  70),  j 
'  learn  ';  con.  with  .jy/rfl.  [Comp.  j 
Q&dr.]  aej-sSl  (§  190),  Ch.  XL., 
383,  398,  400,  684,  717,  939. 
<&rb&  (§  140),  391,  725.  epp& 
(§  87),  2,  650.  <sprD  '  things 
learned,'  '  who  has  learnt,' 
39J>  398,  722,  724,  727>  730, 
823.  *p&  (§  77),  130,  356,. 
396>  399»  5°3>.  632>  686,  717, 

(§     100),      I4O,     728.  &(T)UtoG)<SU 

(§  88),  39i;     *pLS,an0  (§  100), 

373.  <S5;r)(l>(yn~,  <srr>(yiT  (§  87), 
393>  395>  .403,  410,  722,  724, 
949.  <ffiel)6u/r,  (SseuoUiT^,  397, 

4O5j     8l4j      845*  <S>  ®J  6\J  [T  4g  (all  68T } 

(Sexjgu/T^/rsar,  393,  395>  402—9, 
729.  <s6U6v/rfr,  140,  408,  570, 

870.       <£6i>SUfl-60L£>,  Ch.  XLI. 

«  617 /r' grasp  at,' i  oo. 


[S.],  '  the  yak,  boa  grun- 

'dice,'  920,  935. 
'  anxiety,'  7. 

'  umbrella,'  389. 
(§    57),   '  be  overturned,' 
1114. 

«6i/GY7-  'elephant's  temples,'  678. 
&6Sl<5GT      'beauty,'      1234,     1235, 

1250. 

<55 si/ 63) su  (r=  Q<£5s/rsz5)Si.'),  '  scandal, 
evil  report,'  1143-48,  1150.  <&& 
sSltfj  'is  full  of  scandal,'  1144. 

&Lp<ssfl  'afield/  Nal.  122. 

i    'a    gaming   table/    935, 

937- 

LP^O    'the   foot-ring  of   honour 

given  to  a  warrior,'  777. 

<^   (§    57),   'pass   off  or  away, 

slip      off,       surpass,      exceed.' 

<s5L£s\jj,  L/S(»j.  '  (if  fated  evils) 
shall  pass  away.'  <ssL$iL]Ln 

(=//s@ii)  (§  72),  '  will  slip 
off/  378,  1169,  1262.  &L£<UJ 
pzirgi  (§  41,170),  'an  exceed- 
ingly good  thing/  404. 

«L$,  root  as  adj.  or  adv.  (§  270 
(5)  and  Intro,  p.  xvii.).  <at^ 
/F6u@F<a/  'extreme  poverty/  657. 
<g5L£i(£ufl<G®inLj[r6ifr  'an  excessively 
great  eater/  946.  <s5L$Qu(nji5i 
<$rrifl<SG)<s  '  exceedingly  great 
beauty/  571.  •si^Qu^fEi'SiT 
LD<5<5iT6sr  '  a  man  of  exceeding 
great  lust/  866. 

(§  62),  'wash.'       GLpir^ 
(§  121),  '  unwashed/  840.     (See 

field/  1224.      [S.  khala.] 
<s(strssr  '  an  assembly/  730. 
<s<srr/r  '  sterile  land,  bog/  406,  500. 
'  use  fraud  ';    '  pluck  out, ' 
weed  '  (§  70,  like  (2<£e?r).    [Comp. 

<sSstr.  I      <&L t £jQj  ffi)(b) ,  550*     ^5' 

i LJ/SCT,    1038.  & <2fl 6u rr ir ,   200. 

(SeTr<sfr/r/r,  290.      <ssff<s(rfr<sou^,  Ch. 
xxix.,     281.         ff6B<?6uti,     282. 


[34] 


THE    KUBRAL. 


,  n84,  1275, 
'falsehood,  guile,  theft/  283, 
284,  286,  287,  288,  289.  «£3br 
<£5®rr<a/  'furtive  glance/  1092. 
,  Ch.  xcin.  <s<srr 
'  palm-wine,  toddy/ 
1201,  1281,  1145,  1288,920,921, 
922,  924,  926,  927,  930.  dstfrroj, 
1288.  <s5<srT6urr,  813,  1258. 
6Y/7  (§  64),  (SsyfL^^eu,  1281. 
'drink/  1145. 
/r/r <£(<$),  1288,  929,  930. 
or,  928,  838.  <&&fl 
'intoxication/  923. 
ziflgu  \_&<sifl='  the  furious  one  '], 
'elephant/  500,  597,  714,  1087. 
[Comp.  Nal,  358.] 

'weed/  550.  [Comp.  «err.] 
(v.)  G%e(reugi  '  which  will  re- 
move/ 788.  after LU (T <srr  'she 
does  not  nip  off/  1115.  <&&SYT 

rr  '  those  who  pluck  out/  879. 
(§  64),  '  be  angry.'  sgi^gi, 
312. 

'chastity/ 54,  Nal. 381-90. 

a/  'a  dream/  819,  1054, 1211- 
1220,  Ch.  cxxii. 

.  to 


ripe  fruit,'  100,  1191,  1306. 
[Opp.  to  «/TOJ.] 

65657- ,£2/.  1.  See  «eu.  2.  'Calf,' 
Nal.  101,  115. 

656sr/i  [S.],  'weight,  value,'  1081. 

65/r.  1t  (&n-<sui$.)  'the  bambu  on 
the  shoulder  which  supports  a 
balanced  load  at  each  end,' 
1163,  1196.  2.  (§64), 'defend'; 
with  gpjiq.  «/r«@;/i,  57,  421, 
429,  547.  «s/r<ffi£)OTr,  301,  305. 
«/r««,  122,  127,  132,  281,  305, 

434,  883.        tf/r^eu,    29,    385, 
632.     Arjlrjh  56,  130,  442,  549, 

642.       <&n-<5}&,  385.         <B5tTLJU,  878. 

•snuutTesr,  24,  301.  fEiruuirp 
gliLD,  388.  [«$4>,fl3/.]  <s/TLJq, 
57,  744,  781,  1038.  strew,  127, 
301,^305.  aireuirg',  535.  «/r 
eurresr,  127,  560.  .s/reuff^/rcar, 

435.  &rr<siJ6vcsr  Baking,'  560. 


'crow,'  481,  527.    [S.  «/r 


'vinegar/  1050. 

(§  70),  'see'  [from  «ewr]. 
[Comp.  siriL®,  £)/r><fE<s<55afi.]  As 
interjection,  'behold!'  1202, 

1294    [Comp.     1185].  <3SIT<5GSr&) 

(§   148),    1244.         <S/r£E5OTL_6U    (=<S5fT 

LJ©^  H4,  185,  298,  349,  1 2 10, 
1327,  1079,  III9,  1140,  I28l. 

•s/T-sabr*  (§  140),  '  let  me  see  ! ' 
1265.  &[T<offir<s5Lc>,  pi.  of  optat. 
'  let  us  see  ! '  1301.  (Intro, 

p.  xx.   §  7.)  <SIT<OIXTL\    (noun, 

§  190),  'the  sight  is  rare/ 
1 6.  Grrtcssruircvr  (as  v.n.  and 
fin.  v.),  99,  656.  <s/rs?srLj/r  '  they 
will  behold/  620,  1034. 


_  (with  jy^sy),  '  the  recogni- 
tion is  wisdom/  355,  358,  423, 
424.  airemiu*  (rel.  part.),  224, 

710,  859,  930,    III2,   1286.  <£5/T 

essflear,  488,  821,  1040,  1051, 
1056,  1057,^1074,  1079,  III2» 
1114=  <S5tf<offiTQn)LSl6vr..  Neg. : — 

<fi?/T<60<5),    866,     1285,      1286;  <S51T 

(WO)J5J,  H78,    1283;        <S5IT(g53)<§<SU<oOr, 

849;  (£5/7"(2>S33r>(o(Jr,  1167,  1285, 
1286;  <a5n-@ft)<osr,  849,  859,  1197  ; 
<ffi/T(6W>/r,  857,  1220.  <«(sdbr©,  277, 
387,  399,  565,  noi,  1240,  1259; 
(with  eplfbg)),  249,  758,  1 1 10. 

<S63OT©/i,   580,    1291.      <£5<55Sri—,  491, 

668,  849,  1177, 1215,  1265,  1285, 
1292.  .sessrL-^,  300,  1071,  1146, 

II7I,     1215-  <£<S3OTL_/r6V,     1246. 

<ffissbrL_/re3r,    91,    141,   356,    1084, 

'  mourning  because  evening  is 
seen/  Ch.  CXXITI. 

siriL®  (§  190), '  vision.'  SITL. 
&lLU<si][T,&trLL@liLjfriT1  174,  199,  218, 
258,  352,  654,  699  (note  how 
the  epithets  vary  !j;  '  sight/  386. 

<s/TLl©  (§  62),  '  cause  to  see, 

Show.'        <3>rTL-®<£60, 929.        &IJL-1—, 

1171.  sfTL-UjuLi  'in  order  to 
show/  1313  (§  97,  note).  SKiLiy. , 
334,  454,  '  showing  itself  as,'  28, 
167.  <S5[riL®Lc>}  706,  959. 
7  S49. 


[Comp.    S. 


«/r®   'forest,'    742. 
Mshtha.~\ 

'desire,    love,'    284,   440, 
921,      1195,      1298.          [Comp. 

~ 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE . 

arrir.     See  art* 


Ch.  cxni.        Dec. 

(Intro,  p.  xxii.)  :  —  <ssn-<g 
(1  pi.),  'we  love,'  1314; 
(2  sing.),  'thou  (shalt 
be)  desired,'  1118; 
(3  sing.),  209  ; 
(3  sing.),  940  ;  &[r<56oir,  -sir 
<56vn-fr,  cs/r^euay/r  (3  pers.),  'a 
lover,'  1150,  1208,  1099,  1185, 
1211,  1216,  1219,  1224,  1246, 
1278,1308;  strpw  (3  pers.), 
440;  afrparea>LD  (§  154),  507, 
832.  ^sfr^ffSl  (§  64),  940. 

srr^eSl&^Ln  '  will  incite  desire  ' 
['  desire,'  Nal.  123]. 

See  «/r.  (§  190.) 
«  /TLOLO  '  desire,  love,  lust  .'  [S.  Jed- 
ma.']  <&n-La<£3}!Uun-eo  '  pleasure,' 
Ch.  cix.-cxxxin.  1.  *  Lust,'  360. 
2.  'Love.'  In  Book  III.  it  is 
the  equivalent  to  gDssruLa  :  1090, 
1092,  1131,  1137,  1138,  1139, 
1144,  ii45>  IJ48,  1159,  1163, 
1164,  1166,  1167,  1175,  II9I> 
1196,  1201,  1202,  1214,  1247, 
1251-1257,  1264,  1281,  1282, 

I2§9,    1306,    1326,    I33O.          <SfTIM<S 

'a'  pleasure-  boat,'    605. 
(with   gLjy,  q.v.),  399,  402, 
649,    1133.          &[rLa<5<£fr<ssr,    866. 


'the  pains  of  love,' 
1159,  1175,  I255>  1280. 
1  Cupid,'  1197,  Nal.  391-400. 

<35fTLDLj  'banibu,'  1272. 


ff/riu.  1.  'Unripe  fruit,'  100, 
1306.  [Comp.  <$&  ;  L/LpLo,  &<oafl.'] 
2.  (§  57),  '  be  hot,  angry.'  air 
iqLn  '  scorch,'  77 ;  '  will  not  be 
angry,'  1313,  1319,  1320.  «/rtu 
<surrfr  '  those  who  warm  them- 
selves,' 691.  &fruSlg£!JLc>  'though 
(you)  are  angry,'  707.  smuirir 
1  he  is  not  angry,'  1208.  SITUJGLI 
'anger,'  1246.  <sirtL^  'thou 
art  angry.' 


[35] 


[S.],    'cause,    reason,' 
270,  529,  53°,  929- 
/r/#65><£    'ornament,'    571,    777, 
1262, 1272. 

See  air. 


&rr<sv,  <s/T6X)LD.  (See  Nal.  122, 
123.)  1.  '  Wheel,' 496,  Nal.  2. 
2.  '  Foot,'  500,  840.  3.  '  Stalk,' 
1115.  4.  'Foundation,'  1030. 
5.  '  Germ,  shoot,'  959.  g.  sneDLz 
='time,'  102,  949,631,696,  516, 
675,  686,  687,830;  'right  time, 
opportunity,'  Ch.  XLIX.,  483, 
484,  485,  487.  [Syn.  Qu(r(L£g], 
U(B)€k/££.]  <5fr0u,  with  rel.  part, 
poss.  and  neg.,  1080,  60 1,  503, 
695,  489,  14,  379,.  859,  36,  1094, 
987,  127,  673,  674,  1218,  1296, 
305,  710,  930,  1285,  1286,830, 
1166,  301,  763,362,  1064,  1270, 
733>  773>  1104,  1179.  ^(rH^/reu, 
248. 

<$,T$SV  (1)   [?  for  GfrQev]    '  the 
morning'  [opp.  toia/rSsu],  1225, 

1226,    1227,   937.        (2)    for     <£5/T6U, 

'when,'  1094.  (3)  (=«/T6i)ii), 
799- 

<5/r^-  1.  'Stone  (of  fruit),'  1191. 
2.  (§  64),  '  grow  strong,  harden.' 

'exceedingly,'  760;  lita  ut  obdu- 
rescunt,  h.e.  persistentiam  ha- 
beant*  (B.). 

<S/TSWLD  'forest,'  772.  [S.  M- 
nana.  Comp.  <s5fr®.^ 

(§  66).  Qi—iijQjSesr  'I  lay.' 
i£lL-i5<£sj]  '  what  has  lain  open,' 

446,    583,     IOOI.  !J5)l—l5<g<86)La 

'  what  has  lain  in  anything  :  its 
quality,'  959. 

RDLD  'essential  quality,  pro- 
priety,' 785,  80 1,  805.  [Comp. 
Q&(ip.~]  QLpGusvr  '  proprietor,' 
1039,  Nal.  101. 


(§  66),  Ch.  cxxv., '  soli- 
loquy.'  Qttsutr  '  that  speaks 
not,'  715. 


[36] 


ir  (  friends,'  796. 


THE    KUERAL. 

[Comp. 


under.'        [Comp.  <ssiu 

1.  Adv.,  929,  973. 
2."  Case-ending,  389,  1034. 
3.  Noun,  'a  base  man'  (=«uj 

6U6VT,      <£<5G)L-),     IO74,     IO75,    1078, 

1079.        4.  Verb  (§  57),  'depre- 
ciate,' 80 1,  Si^^^i.     5.  In  comp. 
with   L$fD    and    LJ®,    409,    558. 
»,  Nal.  341-50. 

[S.],    1029;     (=@tf) 
'family.'       (^L-LDSTOLJ 'egg,  nest, 
shell,'  338.     @L-i5]&rr  'hut,'  890. 
[S.].     1.  'Family,'  171,  601- 
609,^887,  888, 898, 1022-28, 1030. 

i<a/<5B)<£,  Ch.  GUI. 

[.    'Subjects,'    381,    390,    632, 
42-49.     3.  '  Noble  family  '  (= 
@evLo),  502,  681,  794,  952,  953, 

954,  955,  957,  992-          ®<f  «»u>, 
133,  793;    Gh.  xcvi.  '  prosapiae 
nobilitas'  (B.),  Nal.  141-50. 
(3j <s?ni_  'umbrella, '103 4.  [ 
Nal.  3. 

(jSFjgwrti)    (=LJ6rorq)   [S.]   'quality,   j 
attribute,'  982.      (ajsssr^^/rssr,  9  ; 

*   Vk  -i /•*  V*   mnoli  +  TT 


542 


high  quality,'  29,1125. 
good  quality,'  504,  793,  868. 

(§  64).     <§&ppeo  '  escaping,' 
269. 

'  peck,  strike,'  490. 
-,  an  expletive,  1045. 

'family'  (=®if)»  956~59> 

960,    1019.          @6UOTT,  223. 

(&j  <su  'far    l  water-lily  ,'     1114,    Nal  . 
236. 

tank,'  523.      ®erfl  (§  64), 
bathe,  go  under  water.'       (^syfl 
929. 

'pipe,'  66,  1228. 

l    *a   tender   infant,'    757, 
Nal.  101.     [Comp.  @60)ip.] 

«  an  assembly,'   332,  840. 
735- 

&Lp='  tender'].  1.  (§  57) 
'  Shrivel  up,  become    sad.'       @ 


90.      2.  '  An  ear-ring/ 
3^/r.),  221  ; 


1081. 

(§  64). 

for  @,o$c£j£},  1095 
(pi.)  (&)r$l<5&  '  what  depends  on,' 
1013  ;  '  what  is  indicated,'  704. 
(§r£l<J5<£<5®Lb  '  the  having  in- 
tended,' 827.  (Gjtfilui-i  '  sign, 
indication,  meaning,  intention,' 
696,  701-5,  1097,  1253.  @$u 

Unfl,56V,  Ch.  LXXI.,    CX.  (Q/Slu 

unSlfsijjpi&j^ev,  Ch.  cxxvin. 

small.'  (gjguJBQ&rriy-,  1135. 
'defect,'  612,  680,  908. 
(§  57)  ((Lp^-ffi)  (gj<5®ff)  ft 45 ^  (see 
'  what  is  wise,'  707. 
'  if  it  be  deficient,' 
941.  (&)£)(£)  (§  62),  (^^K^^eo 
'  the  approach,'  820.  @^@^ 
'when  it  approaches,'  1104. 

fjpjLsLj  'rapine,  the  work  of  the 
urrambar,'  735.  rgssr^  (§  62), 
'  grow  less.'  (^isor^suir  (§  72), 
'  will  be  brought  low,'  965. 
(^ssr^L'LD  'will  diminish,'  17,  239, 
560.  @£3T/r5?  (§  74;  =i_ 
*  diminished.'  [Apoc. 
®6v(n,  III.  Gr.  41.] 
(§  121),  '  of  undiminished  splen- 
dour, &c.,'  601,  736,  793.  (®)<ssr 
fSleor  (§  95),  'if  it  diminish,'  990. 
(®)6&nr)6i)  (§  148),  'diminution,' 
778,  811.  [Opp.  QLj(/5«el).] 
(geisrfD  (§  168),  'to  fail,  slight- 
ingly detract  from,'  134,  898, 
961.  @drgi<sn  (§  88),  'low 

things,'  954,  965.  (&,zvr£u  'a 
hill '  (from  its  conical  shape), 
758,  898,  965,  29.  (§&sr(£l  (  = 
'  the  pointed  ')  '  the  abrus  preca- 
torius ' ;  its  seed  is  of  an  intense 
scarlet,  with  a  jet-black  point : 
965,  277.  @pfoi^  'fault,  defi- 
ciency,' 171,  188,  190,  272,433, 
434,  436,  549,  502,  504,  604,  609, 
793,  846,  868,  957,  980,  1025, 
1029.  (8jtbir><i5<5<aufr  'faulty  ones/ 

924.  (3jfbn)K]<£5l$.<£&),  Ch.  XLIV. 

'an  owl/  481. 
'a  dance/   332. 
(§  62),  '  assemble,  come  to- 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[37] 


gethor,  be  possible,  fit  ;  join  in 
*»-u  embrace.'  <£&_L_6t>  (§  148). 
'  embracement,'  1284,  1327,  1328, 


,  1330;  765  (='  combining'). 
(§  74),  '  the  joy  of  love's 
embrace,'  1264.  «ffiLi$nu/r/r  (§  87), 
'  who  are  joined,'  1  109.  &L.UJL 
Z  'though  they  unite,'  887. 
n-^  'it  combines  not.' 
,  in  comp.  =  '  inconsistent, 
feigned.'  &LL_/rQo//r(i££dK£ 

'  indecorum,'  Ch.  xxviii.  <5LL_/r 
fBL-L\  '  feigned  friendship,'  Ch. 
LXXXIII.,  Nal.  231-40.  With 
^Ssv  :  ^Ss\;c£ce*_Lf  'meeting,'  394. 

With   <50)c£  :   <50)<£&<9ii_©L£>    '  it  is  pOS- 

sible,'  269,  284.  [Comp.  Nannfil, 
176.]  <9^©  'a  cage,'  122. 

/       (§     62,      160,    ,/.), 

'contract  (oneself),  shut  up; 
bring  together,  fold.'  <5®<$<g^LJL3 
'  having  clasped,  folded  the 
hands,'  260.  s^u^u0o  'con- 
tracting, folding  up,  as  a  flower,' 
425.  &.LnLjLoLJQijGULa  '  when 
it  is  the  season  for  holding  in,' 
490,  Nal.  215. 

'  sharp.'     (See  .jy/r.) 
'  what  is  sharp,  effective,' 
759.          d&_  /r  /&  =  ;»-  (5  ii     'sharp,' 
599.  &L_/r£a>La,      tS^_/r<50)Lo£iJ/r 

'  sharp,  clever  people,'  997. 
(§  57)  in  compounds  :  this  is 
common  with  .jyserL/,  &c.,  but 
only  once  in  (gtp&r  :  (surotsi 
&-rrjsg$  '  having  failed  to  yield 
rain,'  1010. 

'  wages,  reward,'  619. 
.  1.  'Provisions;  boiled  rice,' 
64,  381.  cffiLLp^^?  'pro- 
visioned,' 745,  .Nal.  i,  2. 
2.  'Wealth,'  554.  3.  '(Grow- 
ing) grain,'  550. 

.    1.  (§  62)  'Say,  announce.' 
[Comp.    Gr.    Kiqp  and    Kr/pucnro).] 

0,  100,  638,  1236.        $j)6sfiuj 

i»,  Ch.  x.         cffiLp,   186. 

1,  183.         <&>-£)]<svn-<osr,   186. 

<fl»-A     183,    980.  <ffii_^«3r,     22, 

933.       «L(^60)m,  701,  704  ;  'wow 


detrahere'  (B.). 
Ch.  xix.  <5L.(^«Jr,  181.  [Comp. 
LSs^giu*  'extol,'  386.]  2.  'A 
division,'  950.  e^rony  '  it  is  of 
four  parts'  (=«L/0/D^).  <5s_/f) 
.p  '  what  is  destined,  death  ' 

(  =  ffi-/D4ff)i^7),j   326,       765,       1050, 

1083.  &.£>/DLb=&-/D.gy,  269, 
894,  1085,  ^al-  7- 

*bent.'  &.£3r<s6)<$iLiiT  'men 
with  fists  doubled,'  1077. 
«O.  1.  'Destruction  '  =  Q«©  si/, 
117.  2.  (§  68)  'Perish.' 
jr/r/r  '  those  doomed  to 
destruction  '  (a9.  Q^/r.),  605. 
Q«t_eu,  612,  856,  893.  Q^© 
u,  208.  Q«i_,  359,  360,  1266. 
let  him  perish,'  1062. 
u  'I  shall  perish,'  116. 
r,  369?  854.  G)«©LO, 

109,  134,  166,  176,  283,  360, 
435>  437^  448,  466,  474,  479, 
480,  548,  553,  563-69,  601,  622, 
763,  1028,  1056,  1069,  1203. 
Q&t—fr,  809.  Q&LLt—fresr, 

967.  Q«*tlL_/r/r,  15,  539,  1293. 
3.  (§  64)  'Destroy.'  Q&Quug,, 
15.  *®£0tbf  447,  937,  1043. 
r,  448.  Q<«©^^,  938. 
(opp.  to  c^««zi',  0Lj(/5« 
D),  'destruction,'  32, 
115,  165,  169,  204,  220,  235, 
307,  400,  478,  642,  700,  732, 
736,  791,  796.  cgy0/aG'<SL_6ar, 
210  [conip.  732]. 

.  lt  'Intimacy.' 
[Comp.  Slip,  Q<$em<5&Lz.']  With 
45<S6)&  and  ^•sro.ssroui  '  intimacy,' 
700,  802,  803,  804,  807.  2.  (§  62) 
'  Be  intimate,  blessed.'  Q&L$@) 
for  (o)<s(L^sSl  (see  <=gy<srr©LJsro/_)  = 
'  showing  friendship,'  820  ;  for 
'  intimate,'  806.  Qs 
'  are  unb  lest,'  1194. 


'a  well,'  396.      [S. 


1.  '  Lover,'  1222  [comp. 

'  intimate  friend,'  808, 
882.     PL  G«srfl/r,  187,615,  1267. 
,    106,   441,  519,   709, 


[38] 


THE    KUEKAL. 


782,  792>  797>  799'  8oo>  8°7» 
811,  812,  815,  818,  822,  839. 
2.  (§  70)  'Hear,  ask.'  (2<s?/li_6u, 
65.  Q&iLGt,  noi.  (2<£L!_L_,  69, 
1076.  Q<SLLi—rrir,  643.  (S&LL-as, 
414,  416,  587,  695.  (2<s5L.urr, 

607.  G'(5?Ll@fi,    648.  (o<3>L-iS) 

gg)JLB,  418,    423,    697.  Q&GfTfTj 

418,  808.  G><s<otr(rg],  804,  893. 
CD^STT/T/T,  643.  (o<3S(Sirrr^su!r,  66. 
Q&tsrrsQ  '  hearing,  receiving  in- 
struction/ Ch.  XLII.,  413,  417, 
418,  419. 

1.    '  Hand '     [?    con.    with 

Q&i'u  =  Q <Fu9],  64,  260,  307,  727, 
788,  828,  838,  879,  894,  935 
(=' business'),  1021,  1036,  1077, 
1157,  1238.  2.  'Measure/  567, 
1271.  3.  'Propriety/  832,925. 
6®&s£lG>  '  forsake  '  (see  aS)©),  799, 
928,1245.  6®<&iu<£l '  be  sensible, 
skilful'  (see  «^^9),  836,  925. 
6D><5uQufT(/5<ofr  '  wealth/  178, 
371.  <o®&iu(T£)]  'affliction/  627. 
<5®<$<sj£]  '  wealth/  593,  758. 
(cM&Gt&iL  '  work  with  one's 
hands/  1035.  <°®&<&>-®  'be  pos- 
sible/ 268,  484.  Gn&LQLatrjrii 
'equivalent/  211,  1183.  <5®<as 
'  hand-javelin/  774. 

(=<&&uu),  '  so   as  to  be 
bitter  to/  389.     [<5ro<£,  &&.'] 

'  heron/  490. 
'jaw/  1077. 
.     See 


j.i;. 
Q«/T<SB>L_ 


'cruel.'    [Comp.  «©.] 

1086.        QcSfra 

•  >    ^i 

®  tEjQ  &  IT  £w  <o8)Lb       tyranny,     L/n. 

LVI.     Q<£E/r©«3)L£i  'cruelty/  1169, 

1235.  Q.fEfr^L^,     279)     551* 
©cffi/r^Liu/r,  550,  1169,  1217,  1235, 

1236,  1237.       2.  (§  64),  'give.' 
[Comp.  Q#rt- err,  of  which  it  seems 
to  be  a  causal  =  G)<sfr  err  +  js  ;  the 
verbs  are  correlative.] 


525,  725.     Wtf/rwjfl^j,  925. 
@^^LD  '  though  you  pay  a 
price    for    it/    703,    794,    867. 
b,  924.    [Comp.  q/o/Jb, 


Q-sj/rOuu^f,  166,  1005. 
.'a  gift/   390.  ©<£/r<ss>/_ 
RJT,  526. 

'  a   reverse  of  fortune/ 

/     7*(      L* 

(o)  &  rr  GMT  &  <5vr  '&  husband/  1186, 
1265,1266,1283,1285.  [Qcs/rar; 

but  COmp.   O<35lT(Lf>.'] 

(o)&n~(Ln-fE€vr  'a  husband/  55. 
[Comp.  Q&rr@SGr<B563r,  and  C^err.] 

(o)&nrLbUir  (  =  ©<s/TL£)L^),  'branch/ 
476. 

Qff/rei).  1.  A  particle  :  interroga- 
tive, nonne?  189,  228,  1220,  930, 
1157,  1197;  www?  263,  1203, 
1204,  1205,  1207,  932,  1307, 

IIO3;    With     (STtSST,     2,     7O,     1225; 

<sT6sY2507~,  1 88  ;  and  gp,  211,  318  ; 
with  <oT<5i]<syr,  1225,  345,  and  g&, 
1171,  99;  with  tLJrrjgi,  1211; 
with  <or<2L/6ar  and  Lrxssr,  1207, 1165  ; 
with  f£,  1081,  1328,  1048,  1004, 
340,  1029,  1070.  In  an  enume- 
ration =  '  whether  .  .  .  or  .  .  / 


Q«/reu,  1081.  2.  (§  70), 'Kill/ 
Q&trd)  (<aS).  Q^r/r.),  '  murderous/ 
735.  Q<ssiTe\j<£5  'destroy/  879. 
Q«s/T6U6u  '  crush/  1078.  Q&ITGO 
eu/r,  984.  Q&trw&ofrevr,  260. 
©.s/reveu/reoLfl,  Ch.  xxxni.  321- 
326,  254.  Qtf/reujj^ii  'hurt, 
kill/  304,  305,  532,  879,  ^1228. 
Q&iresrrD,  no.  Q<$ir<sor(yfr,  fig. 
'  murderers  of/  no.  Ossiresr^ 
(Jifl)  =  '  rejecting/  638;  'by 
murder/  328  ;  *  cut/  1030. 
Q<3>rr<sGrrD<5sr<5Gr  'as  though  one 
committed  murder/  109.  Q^/rsaV 
(yisHg)  'as  (it)  has  destroyed/ 
532.  Q&iTisvrrog]  'what  has 
crushed/  1048.  Q^/reueiS  '  mur- 
derer' (personification),  306. 
©cffifrSsu  'killing/  325,  329,  550, 
551.  (o)<srr(fcu<{B<s5<sfrLCi  'battle- 
field/ 1224.  Q&rrjbpiJn  'vic- 
tory/ 583.  Q&lTDGO  for 
£\Jj<$<5V  (SO 

254,321. 

Q«/rsrr  (§  56,  III.),  '  take,  accept, 
buy,  approve.'     [Comp. 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[39] 


T  (©.s/rsdbr,  -sS.  Q^/r,  1223, 
1029.  Q<s5[r<srr<&,  161,  875.  O«/r 
•srreu.  1.  *  Obtain,  take,  receive, 
esteem,  buy/  134,  222,  279,  443, 
45°,  504,  530,  677,  702,  703, 
714,  724,  745»  794,  795,  867>  925, 
986,  401,  720.  2.  'Middle 
voice'  (§  106,  259),  442,  445, 

588,   633,   679,    1026.  G&!TL-<3D 

(rrQtf/refr^r^cu;    comp.  Q&rQGo, 

G?<S/T/D6U),     646,     678,     Ch.      XLV., 

Nal.  101  .  Q<$ir(m)<3(r,  583,  1244, 
699.  O-s/refr^Lo,  1092.  G><$rr<sfr 
QtsiJLB,  976.  Q&rrerflevr,  630,  836, 
939.  Q«s/T(syB^2/^,  872.  0<£/r<srr 
256,  470,  627,  1016. 
792.  Q<s/r<sfr 
470,  699.  Qairefrefftr, 
1195,  1064.  G)<®/T6fr®fr/r/r  '  they 
accept  not,'  404.  Q£sn-<str(D<3>, 
798,827,872.  Q&rrzsor®  'being 
master  of,'  974,  22,  326,  1082, 
1095  (see  <$$),  603,  775»  831, 
845,  921,  1146,  551.  With  a 
noun=*by  means  of:  as  sign 
of  4th  case. 
'she  took,'  1315. 

659,    745. 

Q&irsssrL-rriT,  551,  253,  1183, 
1195,  1205.  jgrbQ&iTtotkiri-iTissr 

'  her  husband,'  51,  56.     [Comp. 

Q<S/T65br<f56Br.]  0  <£5  /T  6TT  <SU  /T  ,     IO4, 

433,  680.  Q  <ss  rr  <srr.<si]  IT  fr  ,  704,  813, 
1009.  O^/reroi^j  (with  (JLoeu), 
262,  1055.  QGir&rQijbjSJi,  1187 


,    713,    981,    873. 

'tenet,  principle,'  899,  1019. 
0<s/TLLcS  (=Q<s/r<sfrsrr),  'so  as  to 
accept/  Q<ssmLSl63r  (  =  G)<±5/rerr 
eyfl^sr),  'if  (they)  accept,'  663. 
Some  say  Q«^L.@  (§  62),  '  come 
to  notice,  whirl  round.'  (See 


«»«).  1.  'Faculty  of  perception,' 
9.  2.  'The  taking,'  220,  780, 
1059.  3.  '  Accepted  principle 
of  action,'  311,  312,  646,  662. 

G)&IT<otf)j)   (GCL£>6i»),  for    Q<S5lT(^sSl, 

from  G)<s/T(GT5(Siy  (§  62),  a  causal 
deriv.  of  ©  &rr  err  ='  cause  to  ob- 


tain,' with  other  uses  ;  '  giving 
falsehood  the  predominance,' 
938.  [Comp.  836,  845-] 

KB.— Q&rrsh  (§  106)  is  used 
in  <§p®r  (1)  as  a  verb  ;  (2)  as 
auxiliary  (§  259) ;  (3)  with  nouns 
it  forms  verbs:  thus,  snpp 
G)<£/r<srr='  love  ';  (4)  compounded 
with  QLCXSI)  (q.v.),  'undertake, 
prevail';  (5)  Q&n-sscrG),  as  sign 
of  3rd  case  =  '  by  means  of  ' 
(§  239). 

Q&iriy-  [S.],  '  ten  millions,  crore,' 
337,  377,  639,  816,^  817,  954, 
1005,  1 06 1  ;  '  the  point  of  any- 
thing '  [S.  ejrlfVj.  1.  10,000,000. 
2.  '  A  corner,  nook.'  ^jslQ^JT 

'  the  length  of  one  of  its  recesses 
was  an  infinitude  of  millions  of 
Kadarns.' 

(o&tr®.  1.  'Crookedness;  a 
curve,'  279  ;  '  tusk'  ( 
'  it  is  tusked  ')  ;  '  branch,' 
©LJ ^,1313;  'bank,'  523, Nal.  215. 
2.  (v.  §62),'  bend, swerve,  deflect, 
become  unjust.'  Q  a  trip.,  554, 

559.       (o<£5frt—[r,   IO86.      Q<3>(T1—(T^, 

520,546.     Gsairi—rrsmLjo,  520,  115, 

1 1 8.  Q&fTLLL-Ln    'perversion,' 

119.  G><s>/r©Q<£5/7"(oL_<ipjzii    'my 
bosom  swells  with  joy.'     [Prob. 
an  imitative  word,  §  273.] 

G?($/T6i)  '  staff,  rod,  pencil,  sceptre,' 
118,  542-46,  552,  554,  558,  710, 
796,  1285,  39O>  ^smib^i&Qsn'Gj, 
415.  G><£n-£er®5)Ln  'sway  of  the 
sceptre.  G)<fFKiQ><S}[r<svr6G)L£it  Ch. 
LV.,  'just  rule,'  556.  0«/r®/a 
(o&ir 6oi  SOLO,  Ch.  LVI.,  '  tyranny.' 

^QO.       (o) SU fSJ \o  £5 (T 6U SST     c6^. 
*J  /  '   j    */ 

[S.  goshti],  '  assembly  ' 
,  401,  720;  (with  Q&tT&r 
'  holding  a  conference  with 
learned  men.' 

[S.], 'king,1  25. 
'  scandalous     report.' 
See  <s®j0s.Gu,   1143-48, 


1150. 


[40] 


THE    KURRAL. 


'  a    bandy- wheel,' 
Nal.  2.     [Comp.  <ffr<s5fr®.'] 

level,'  118.      &LncsrQ<PiLjfj£ 
'  adjusting  itself.' 

'evil,'    660,   956.         [S. 


/7-    (§58),   'die.'       [Comp. 
<ffi9<syft.]  <F/r<£<fis/r©    'death' 

[?  '  the  death-wilderness,'  by 
met.  for  '  death  '],  235,  339,  780. 
&fruL]6u<sv<so  '  a  deadly  embrace,' 
829.  (See  qa;j^j.)  ^/r/i 

(=<*F/r(5ti),  397,  792.  <Ptr<>£®}, 
183,  230,  1124.  (F/rsu/r/r,  723, 
779.  tfrrSlroLSlssr  '  if  (they) 
die,'  780.  [<F/r@  +  ^)ear  +  L5)sw- 
'If  ...  die—  then.'  §  95.]  «F/T 
'  Ambrosia,'  82. 


1001. 


r,  214,  926, 


a  wagon,'  475.     [Comp. 


(§  57),  '  lean,  fall.'  [Comp. 
'  while  they  are 
defeated,'  749.  <s5S5sr<ffnuu<3ijrr 
'those  whose  eyes  incline,'  927. 
Grffiirfiriu  'oppose,  resist,'  855, 
858.  tf  [TLu  GO  '  beauty,'  1183. 

<fF/r/f  (§  57),  'draw  near  to,  be 
joined  with.'  [Comp.  <?«F/T, 
firuj,  whose  meanings  it  com- 
bines.] tSlsor&rrir  'afterwards.' 
&[Tff[T  (=&(Tirn-LAGL>  and  ^  /rjr  /r^), 
'  void  of  ,'  194,  815,  1047.  (F/r/r 
^jr/r  (=<Fn".ir/r),  '  approaches  not.' 
(See  ^(5.)  ffirirjB(rf)iJb  '  clinging 
^°>'  359-  «ff=/r/TL/  'what  one 
clings  to,  leans  on  :  a  support,' 
76»  359>  449>  900.  «F/r/r<a/,  15. 

4F/r^u  (§  170).  </F/reu  'to  be  full'; 
adv.  '  very  much,  abundantly,' 
475,  77°»  I037>  I233-  f  /r^/i 
(with  <ffirfl),  *  sufficient  witness,' 
25,  1060.  &(T&srp  'full  of, 

filling,'  56,  581,  1001.  &iT6sr 

fuluess 


of  good  and  active  exercise  of 
it],  '  real,  perfect  excellence,' 
Ch.xcix.,  981,  989,  990.  tfinsar 
Q(yrr,  enevrrotsun-  '  the  excellent,' 
69,  115,  118,  148,  197,  299,  328, 
458,  656,  657,802,  840,  922,923, 
982,^  985,  990,  1014,  1078. 
<F/T6t>q  '  complete  excellence,' 
105,  983-88,  956,  1013,  1064. 
frp^i  (§  62),  &rrib^](2<siJ6sr  T 
shall  declare,'  1212. 

&  course  of  food,'  Nal.   i, 
1  8.       Explained    by   the    Com. 
cffisuarr/jD    (in    S. 

:  sikfho). 

(§  57,  62),  'perish,  de- 
stroy.' [S.  chhida  and  Q«©.] 
&<ss)<$-iun-Lzeo  'without  injury 

to,'     578.  &!S®!£-&&<80<oVn-<5iTn' 

'those    who    cannot    frustrate,' 
880.       [For  form  comp.  26,  863, 

427    (II39)>    2I9']  £)6B)<S>-<2>/ 

'  ruin,'  112,  597. 

(§64),  from  noun—  'box, 
casket.'  QiAipppjbjp  '  like  as 
if  one  caught,'  274. 

,  Qsvir  'few  things  or  persons,' 
649,  270,  1289.     [Comp.  &ji/.] 

'a  litter,'  37. 
V  'a  partridge.' 
(§    66),   'be    distinguished.' 
[Comp.  S.  shri  ;  0/r.]       &!«)£&, 
531,     900.  ®fl)]50fresr,t    515. 

£)fDUL-i  '  anything  distinguished; 
distinction,  glory,'  1  8,  31,  58,  74, 
75,  311,  358,  590,  630,  972,  977, 
1012,  1208.  ffifDULSlasr,  961. 
,  Ch.  ir.  sfiftp^ 

},  Ch.  CXIII. 

See  ^.p. 
'fort,  custody,  defence,'  57, 

499,  569- 

ear     Qflujj    m       'little.' 


[Comp. 

498,  744,  1092,  870,  1010,  1322. 
&l£U60)u>,  98,  431,  45Jj  5°5,  769» 
934,  978-80.  fij3/a»to^^?  '  it 
is  a  little  one,'  889  ;  '  anything 
mean,  servile.'  ^JoSleoru^  'low 
association,'  451. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


141] 


,  Ch.  XLVI. 

'sensual  delight/  173.  ffifi^ 
'a  little  thing/  102,412,  1075, 
1301,  1302.  &r?JI(.u  'little/  963. 

aH  fS)  LLJ  (/T  )  IT ,     &l  ^  UJ  QJ  IT ,      26,      680, 

815,  976.  &ji/@  (§  62),  'grow 
small.'  &lg!](§Lb  '  will  dwindle/ 
568.  &j$]@<su  (Intro,  p.  xxii.), 
'  things  which  will  degrade.' 
£)ro<£<s<ssBfl  (§  64),  '  wink,  make 
the  eye  small.1  ^^(S^essfh^gf/rsfr, 
1095. 
<o3TLn  'anger/  301-10,  431,  568. 

wrathful  person/  866,  Nal.  61-70. 
(§  64),  'bud.'  [S.  Jan.] 
'  what  is  produced/ 
1203. 

'ir  [S.  m],  'prosperity,  glory, 
worth.'  See  ^0,  which  is  an- 
other form  of  the  same  Sanskrit 
word,  499,  778,  934,  962,  1010. 
[Comp.  ®p.']  @ir<s\j6v  '  ignoble 
things/  962.  ^irirnr  '  worthy- 
persons/  9OO.  ^J6V6U<SUfT 

'  worthless  persons/  977.  £F/T 
^r«@  (§  62),  '  weigh/  118,813. 
^STOLO  '  glory/  123,  195.  @rr 
(§  62),  ?fft,0pi£  '  flourish/  962  ; 

'  when    things    are   favourable/ 


490. 


'be  angry.'      [Comp. 
(§  62),  899.     (So  Q 


900. 


(§  62),  'shine.'       [Comp. 

.  <flfL_(5/i),    267. 

(§  68),  'burn.'  *i_,  896. 
'as  it  hotly  burns/ 
267.  <ffp<_<£<gF/_(/5Lr>,  267.  <sfzlL_, 
129.  <sF©ai  <it  will  burn, 

destroy,  torture/  293,  306,  799, 
1019,  1207.     ^42-^ar,  <»/—  ei>,  1159. 

'lime/  714.       [Comp. 


(§  6)-      &L&&&  'endure,  bear/ 
488.  [Comp.      Qutrgi]  ;      S. 

Jcsham.~\ 

in  adver- 
sity/ 963. 


y  *a  beetle/  Nal.  122. 

'  taste/  27,  253,  420,  Nal.  i. 

(§  56,  III.),  '  whirl.'      *tp 
'which  will  reach  far  and 

wide/  777.       MLpsorgyLz  '  though 

it  wander/  1031. 

(§  62),  '  surround.'  [Comp. 

^fJFLp^/.]  <&JT)JplLa      'Will 

surround/  1025.  &jbpuLj®Lcl, 
524,  525.  -sF/p/DLn  *  those  who 
are  around,  kindred,  depen- 
dants/ 166,  451,  522,  524,  529, 
584,  1025.  jF/p/DjFjfftp/reu,  Ch. 
LIII.  &prr)&1£[Tn  '  kindred/ 

521. 

gambling/  Ch.  xciv.  931- 
940.  [S.  dyutam.]  &&ir,  932. 

(§  57),  lit.  surround: 
'ponder,  contrive.'  [<&&&•] 
@LP,  176.  @(J£">,  204,  324. 
(^L^«JT,  204.  (y%L$£gjLz  '  though 
you  devise/  380.  (^i^p<s 
'  compass  not !'  204.  (gs&pgi 
445,  45J>  46i.  (^ip/F^^,  640. 
(&2Lpj5<5£u<SBr,  204.  (^Lp<a//rs3r, 
325,445,1294,  @tpsu^'what 
must  be  pondered/  1276. 

(gLplTgl,    465,    554-  @Lp/TLfl6U, 

1024.    @La<ff^  '  circumspection, 

deliberation/  671. 

(§  62),  '  put  on,  as  a  wreath.' 
L^/LO  'if  (I)  put  on/  1313. 
r    'have    you    put    on/ 

1313.     [Comp.  ^Ip.] 

0«F,  Q<F£i,  G*^  (see  Q&iL).    [Cp. 
cSy/r.]  ©<Fm  '  right,   kindly, 

true/  91,  358,  390,  556,  1092, 
Ch.  LV.  Q&i&Q&iTttKo&La  'just 
government.' 


gyearuLo, 
'equity.'  Q&eusS    'oppor- 

tunity, fitting  time/  130,  565, 
1289.  ['  Pulchritudo  '  (B.),  130, 
see  Notes.]  Qff^jsS^i  'it  is 
straight,'  279.  Q<EF^is^lujirssr 

'the  right-minded  man/  169. 
G&  '  beautiful/  mo. 

^O  (§  64).  Q&t&jtisffd '  destroy/ 
259. 


[42] 


THE    KUBRAL. 


See  Q«F. 
'  a  casket,'  887.     [? 


pride,'    880. 


(§   64),    'be    haughty,' 

1074. 

)<fFUJ     (§    58,    97),    'do,    make, 
cause,  acquire.'     [Coinp.  S.  kri.~\ 

I.    Boot,  £&%56r<£Q<5[T<SG)&. 

[Intro,  p.  xvii.  §  4  (&).]  Q<FUJ 
^<SULD  'asceticism  that  should 
be  practised,'  265.  Q&uj<£<es<g5 
'  things  fit  for  (one)  to  do,'  466, 
663.  QcFojQ^/n-^eu  '  the  work 
(one)  does,'  972.  Q^iusSt^ssr 
'  the  deeds  done  ;  work,  business,' 
455'  463*  653,  677.  Q&MisdrfSl 
'  a  benefit  conferred,'  no.  (/£ 
is  doubled  in  many  editions  ;  it 
need  not  be  so.)  Q&ujnfssrfSi 
uj  p$l<sd)  'the  recognition  of 
benefits  conferred ;  gratitude,' 
Ch.  xi. 

II.  Inf.  mood,  QetLiu  (§/l6S); 
sometimes  Q&tu.         Q&LU  <  (for 
them)  to  do,'    446,  1001  ;     'in 
order  to  do,'  1021  ;    '  if  he  does,' 

466.  G)<SFUJUJLJUG>LZ       (§     92), 

'should  be  done,'  335.  Q&UJU 
UL-i—irff  (LJ©)  'those  on  wh^m 
it  is  conferred,'  105. 

III.  Opt.  Q&UJ&  (§  140)  '  thou 
shouldst  do,  acquire,'    36,  669, 
759,  893  ;   '  he  should  do,'  512. 

IV.  Verb,  noun,  Q&UJ&J,  Q&iL 
UJGU,    Q&ujpeo    (§    148),     '  the 
doing,'  67, 182, 192,  274,  316,318, 
375,  634,  664,  677,  679,  832,  835, 

894,  9°5'  975'  843»  954,  1090, 
1201,1226.  Qffuurb&filiu  'things 
hard  to  accomplish,'  26,489,781. 
Q&uj6\)  (an  opt.  in  use,  with 
ellipsis  of  G>(2u«3sr©Lb),  'do  thou!' 
33'  333'  46i,  489  [cp.  470,  538], 
471,  516,  518,  668,  673,675,676, 
948,  949.  QffLurQutrev  (LJ/TSU) 
'  what  ought  to  be  done,'  40, 
437,  672.  Q&iii<5jb(f>)urr([TjL-.(J3> 
(QuiTQ^&r)  'for  the  sake  of 
doing,'  81,  212. 


UJ®J<S1J6®<95,  Ch.  XLVII. 

,  Ch.  LXVIII.     QLJ/r(fij6rr 

,  Ch.    LXXVI.  @U?- 

Q&UJ<&}<Sil<5lS)<£5,  Ch.  GUI. 

V.  Past  tense,  part,  and  nouns 


(§  74,  77,  87).  QfiLifiirir  '  those 
who  have  done,'  158,  208,  314, 
320,658,987,1162,1243.  Q&iLi 
j2,  118,  246,  314,388,  551*  563» 
660,  815,  829,  878,  907,  934,  1025, 
1028,  1035,  1073,  1275. 

,  289,  803.      Q<FUJ 

is  like  doing/ 

1303.  ifujp  that  has  (been) 
done,'  101,  102,  103,  109,  313, 


1175,1176,1225. 


that 


which  hath   done,'    1240,  1279. 

Qf  iL<gj  <su^<s  OTr^i/iii  [sw  inserted  ; 
<ss3sr]  '  even  when  —  has  done,'  312. 
VI.  Fut.  part,  noun  (§  72,  74, 
88).  QcFtuajeti  'I  will  make,'  1023. 
Q«FUjCoffl;ear,  1211.  Q^tueu/r, 

Q  &  LLJ  <sii  rr  civ  jOfdjeufTrr.  (1)  '(they) 
,    640, 


will    do,'     26,    266, 


752  ; 


(2)  '(they)  who  will  do,'  120, 
266,  295,  462,  516,  520,  584, 
677»  758,  867,  909,  998,  1028. 
(=  Q-fiLeuirir),  1195- 
='that  which  will 
do,  the  acting,'  541.  G)&iL\L\Lz. 
(1)  '  it  will  do,  cause,'  57,  79,  272, 
574,  803,  847,  941  ;  (2)  'which 
will  do,'  219,  249,  545,  631,  672, 
700,  751,  735,  1208. 

VII.  Cond.  Q<P\&W,  Q*iL-uS 
^ju  (§  95-97),  '  if  —  do,'  116, 
120,  175,  205,  319,  483,  484,  493, 
494,  497,  537,  547,  559»  59°» 
804,  805,  808,  881,  965,  1257. 
'  he  who  will  haply 
inserted.] 
if  he  will  do,' 


(§  300),  'though  (you)  do,'  104, 
109,  150,  157,  181,308,586,807, 
852,  1283,  I288. 

VIII.  Neg.  Q&ujrbG  'do  not  !  ' 
[Intro,  p.  xx.],  205,  206,  327,  590, 
655,656.  Q<fujiuiT6sr(ir)  (§  110). 
(1)  '(they)  do  not,'  164,  172, 
173,  174,  210,  320,  654,  699, 
956,  9624_J2)  '  he  who  does 
not,'  865.  <3x$iLJUJ(rgj  (§  121). 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[43] 


(1)  '  it  does  not,'  255  ;  (2)  '  not  I 
doing '  =  ©<F  IL/WJ/TLO  6i>,    219,  437,  i 
538.        Q<9=iLiurrL&®j  '  not  doing, 
though  it  has  not  been  done,' 
101.      [Other  reading   Q&LLULHT 
«»i£>.]  Q&iLujir    'that   does 

not,'  548,  553,  558,  569,  987; 
'not  doing '^©(VFujMj/rLoev,  203. 
\Vith  <jy6u  : — ©^FtL/iL/eu  '  they  do 
not,'  1086  ;  QffiLi&eoireor  'he 
does  not,'  848  ;  ©^iL/.seu/r^/r/r 
'  they  are  persons  who  do  not,' 
26. 

IX.  Deriv.  Q&iue®<£  (§  143), 
'the  work,'  631.  ©<£rti-<'M_//r60)Lo 
(§154),  'the  not  doing,'  157, 
261,  297,  311,  312,  313,317,466, 
655,  852. 
Ch.  xxxn. 

6TOLO,  Ch.  LVII. 

§)iuir)GG)<E5),  'artificial' method* of 
acting,  theory,'  637. 


r  \_Q& ;  S. 
sri],  '  Lakshmi.' 

&i&ir.  1.  'Desire,  passion,'  258, 
330,  Nal.  358.  2.  (§  64),  'Be 
wroth.'  G)<Fu3/fLJLj<ay/r  '  ene- 
mies,' 880. 

'a  battle,'    569.        [Comp. 


Jj,  i  So,  201,  346,  431, 
598,  613,  759,  844,  860,  878, 
ii  93;  'fascinum,  est  enim  i.q. 

L&IU&&LA  '      (B.).  LJeOL-^OcF 

(J5<ffi(g>  '  greatness,  conceit,  spirit, 
infatuation,'  Ch.  LXXVIII.  Q& 
(Tfj&Q  (as  from  verb,  §  62), 
'  exulting  in.' 

(§  56,  HI.),  'go,  proceed.' 

parting    guest.'  Q&&J6$t—Lc> 

'  favourable  circumstances  or 
place,'  301,302,  498.  Q&6V6U 
(iSleor),  1293.  ©<F6i>  '  go,  pre- 
vail,' 422,  424,  686,  719,  722, 
724,  728,  730.  Q&drgy,  207, 

335,  753,  784,  895,  966, 967, 1045, 

IO48.  Q&SOTff),  422,  I26l.  Q&63T 
(anQSST)  1259,  1284.  ©  & 63T  ffi  IT } 

1210,     1231,      1263,     1269,     1278. 

Q^c0r££r,   1284. 


33»  250,  594,  1269. 

472,  1185.  Q&<8v<su[r6ffr,  950. 
Gufr  (L$SVT.),  1033.  G)<F0u 
67.  0*fiua//nu,  1248. 
pLSlssr,  1170. 

766.       Q<F6\j<5,  684. 

302,  33°'  56i,  769, 1255. 

eu/r^j,  18,  326. 

472.  OcFeueu/reroLfl,      1151. 

©tF6U6D/T63r,     1039.  ©cF6U<SUfi 

'  wealth,  prosperity ' ;  with  afl(^, 
QutgjLo,  G)/F©LO,  ULpQtJ,  31,  125, 
178,  216,  217,  241,311,  332,363, 
375,  400,  411,  437,  524,  555,  565, 
566,  738,  757,  837,  937,  939, 
1000, 1006,  1007,  1008,  Nal.  261. 
^sar^u^euQcFeusuzi,  Ch.  ci., 
Nal.  261-70.  Q&0ijaujjl%si> 

UJ/T6TOLD,      Nal.       I-IO.  Q&6U 

a//r,  125,  472,  731,  752,  1010. 
Q&rosv  (=©<F6\;t^;(^6i;),  1256. 
QuissBreuifl&Q&pd)  '  uxorious- 
ness,' Ch.  xci.  Q 

GUtTlLj),    1249,  1292  ;      = 

1244.      Forms  compounds  with 

q.v. 

*ear,'  65,  389,  411-18,  420, 
694,  1199. 

foQeQ  'nurse,'  757. 

&$  (§  56,  I. ;  sS.  Qpir.),  'be 
close,  near,'  mo,  1275.  [G)«5:"'.] 
©cF^iay  'modest  reserve,  near- 
ness,' 123,  684,  715  ;  'compressio, 
et  metaphorice  fraenatio '  (B.) 

(§  62),  '  be  wroth.' 
esr,  897,  900.        Q & 
778. 

(§  56,  n.),  'hate,  destroy.' 
FtfQ&pgu  l  destroy- 
ing,'1 68.  pK&Gi&fbjps1  paralysing 
the  tongue,'  335.  ^pQ^p^ 
'mortifying, afflicting,' 1009.  Q<F 
^euirn-  *  foes,'  203,  421,  843,  869. 
Qfgipfr,  488,  759.  Q&Q?^ 
*  not  being  hostile,'  1096.  Q& 
(y^n  'those  not  unfriendly,' 
1096,1292.  QfjpiQffrrGu  'words 
that  kill,'  1096. 
'  murderous  hate,'  734. 
(2?/r  'foes,'  313,  446,  1096,  1245, 
1255,1256.  Q&g)iuu  (asfrom 


[44] 


THE    KUERAL. 


§  64),   'suppress/    1318. 


wilt  fill  up/  1 200. 
&•     See  Q&. 

'  afar  off/  869,  1231,  1269. 
(§  60,  as  j§ir), '  draw  near  to, 
be  intimately  related  to'  [<Ffr/f, 

,    5    (s&.    Qjsir.    III.    G-r. 

opp.    f@/r).       So 


153; 

243, 


492,     910    (with 
691. 


498. 

731. 

306. 


Qffirjspirir,    3 

5 
10. 


694. 
LO«jr«r6Byr* 

o,  691. 

17.9. 


7,  8, 
,  734. 
,  Ch. 


XLVI. 


[S. 


.     See  ©<£F6u. 

(§  57),  *  sprinkle,  scatter.' 


1.  *  Word,  talk,  speech  ' 
,  65,  97,  127,  819,  825, 
826;  'a  saying/  70,  184,  200, 
196,  198,  387,  642-46,  717,  721, 
1046,  1096,  1097,402,  607,  1147, 
1  1  54»  589,  Nal.  311.  2.  '  Fame, 
(good)  report/  56,  1024,  453, 
aj/ruj^Q^/rev,  91,  415,  959,  nop.' 
g)^rQ<Fn-6u,  387,911,91-99,  525, 

1198,  35,  564,  953-  4«rGw€uf 
189.  cueiJrQ^^eu,  99.  Q&'S®& 
Q&ir®),  694.  ^^©^/reu,  128. 

UUJ63fl6l)Q<F/r6U,  196  (198).       LJS2S5T 

94. 


160,159. 
566. 


827. 
647,   682. 
405,    818. 
872. 
635. 


,  Ch.  LXV., 

Q&tr&jevtri—,    1070, 
Q<fireuG><so(rF)Lp<s!uiT, 


(§  70),  'speak.' 


j,  648,  664. 
139,  192,  291,  634,  647,  696,  713, 
718.          Q^n-feu)^,    649,    107 


&;£,  195,  200,  644,  645, 
711,712.  G&neueQ,  187,424, 
646,  685,  686,  697,  724,  795, 
1280,  Nal.  312. 


96,  195,  2OO,  711, 
712.  QffmsveSgvuLn,  184,  197, 
826,  1046,  1096. 
184,  200,  719. 
'things  that  will  speak/  1232. 
191,  719,  722. 
,  160,  185,  193,  Neg. 

),  1241. 

eu/r,  697,  984. 
403.  Q^/reu6u/r«ar(/f),  198,  199, 
4T7>  635.  Q&irevevn-fgrrir,  728, 
730.  G^/reueufnsro/ji,  Ch.  xx., 
197.  Q<g:n-n)jr!]  =  Q<9:iT<8\}6Sl<oGr32, 
Nal.  313,  '  belonging  to  words.' 
Q&rr&rr  (§  62),  Gfir&truun-  'they 
will  suffer  anguish/  127.  [S. 


(§57),  'fail,  faint,  forget.' 
LD,  847,  1234.  G^/rjr, 
8  1  8.  Qffrrjrn-,  Q&irsrirn'  (with 
eutTLu),  '  trip  with  the  tongue/ 
689,  721.  QfiriTGij  'oblivion, 
forgetfulness  ;  segnitia,'  56,  405, 
531,  586,  642,  647,  930,  1044, 
1046.  [Coinp.  ' 


l  battle-field/  1088. 
'the   pendant  globe    of 
earth  '    (with   epithets,    always 
varied:      Lo/ruS0,     shliuesr, 


LD/T),    102,    141,    245,    484,  485, 
557,  648,  999,  1016,  1058. 
/T65ru>   [S.]  '  wisdom.'     Not  in 
K;   Nal.  311. 

Tjrresr^/  (=p[rtfr)t  '  a  day  '  (= 
'a  revolution';  see  pirey],  @IT 
jj^.j  [Comp.  ^€3r,p.]  Only  in 
phrase  ^r^^n-esr^La  (=<or<ssr 
jjiii),  *  all  the  days,  always/  44, 
M5>  3J7>  36l»439»  582,635,697, 
701,  864,  870,  886,  903,  905,  910, 
921,926,  927,  Nal.  174.  (See  OT.) 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[45] 


'  ram,'  486. 

(§  56,  II.,  117,  118), 'be  fit, 
right.'  Used  often  in  compounds 
of  which  a  verbal  root  is  the 
first  member :  Q&i'u,  Q<&ir<sir, 
and  others.  <§&  'fitly,'  391. 
fgems  'fitness,  excellence,  beauty, 
appropriate  quality  ';  '  conditio  ' 
(B.),  916,  1182. 

804.       Qu<e58TL—<cm&,    1084. 

^6B)<35,   804.      QUQTJ ]])<££ 6® &(lLJiT68T  ), 

217?  9^8.  n)6\)^jje?;6B)<g5,   1305. 

I— 1 6\}&e£<56)<&)  ISO?'        LJ&SH. & <3> ®5) <& . 

700.       \Jjy / £DrD@5)<{E)  768.         <$@6)SUJ 

socr/sj^^p^^eu,  Ch.  cix.,  '  pain 
arising  from  the  beauty  of  the 
princess.'  ^rsrocfELa/rssbrL,  807. 

*  £  •  J_ 

possesses    the    quality    of,'    125, 

486, 1064,  Nal.  101,  211.  <£<ss>& 
uj,  643,  418. 

«5>«),   874,   613. 

447'  (&LJ(TTjJ7)££<oG)<&<oK>La,     1255. 

Q&(Lgff;GG)&<S6)L£>,      7OO,     8O2,       803, 

808.  <§(§$  '  justice,  integrity,' 
in,  158.  ^asa/  'worth,'  114, 
^««(§157),  51,  54,  466,  5-80,  805, 
993^  1288.  jF««jnErQ£,  561. 
<$<£<s^,  220,  466,  663,  686,  732, 
780,  1018,  1137,  1173.  fssirn-, 
114,  212,^  446,  731,  897,  1006, 

IO5I.  <§S<3a(T<3(T,  51.  <3i <G5 <S <55T <3fT , 
I3l6. 

(§    62),    'abide,    remain.' 

^/ijffi),  472.  ^isiQpjr)],  613,  874. 
<$iEj£l63r,  608.  ^rsiSlujfrsyr,  117. 
19. 

'  utterly,'  863,  1300. 
(§  57),  f5i$-j5#2  '  diminishing,' 


^633T    (§56,   L,   66),    'separate.' 

I  ^fooor.  I    "  ^£G35r  fc3j6G)L&     '  separa- 

tion,'  1233,  1277. 
£>GKm  '  abate.'      ^(osofitS^Lo  (§  64), 

'will   alleviate.'         [^essr,    com. 

meanings    of     ^^y,    heal    and 


'  cool;  low,'  1239. 
'coolness,'  30,  1277.  [Perhaps 
/ff«jbr-t-eSy^='  the  prince  of  the 
shore  of  the  cool  sea.']  ^sssr 
Q €ssr ssr goy  L&  '  will  become  cold,' 
1104.  (See  OTSOT-.) 
'  low  condition,'  548. 

(§  62),  'be  relieved.' 
[^ew.]  ^GSGT i—frQ 'rs n 'iL  '  reme- 
^iless  suffering,'  1171. 

[S.],  '  punishment,'  567. 

'  father,'  67,  70,  Nal.  197. 
n  ;  the  onlv  words  for  father 
inK.] 

(§  62),  'fail.'     [Comp.  ^a/, 
.]    jsuun- '  unfailing,'  217; 
'  omnibus  obvia  '  (B.). 

J63T.     See  under  ^freyr. 
.     See  PIT. 

*O  (§  ^^)j  ^©^®  'exulting 
in,'  935- 

^Ss^.  1.  'Head,'  9,  16,  488,  964. 
2.  'What  is  chief,'  43,  47,  57, 
151,  203,  295,  317,322,325,  4H, 
444,  579'  657,  687,  736,  761,  770, 
814,  1031.  s^fffj^Ssu,  ^(S^Soi; 
'one  side,  both  sides,'  1196. 
e&0^2suuj/r  '  decidedly,  abso- 
lutely,' 119,  357,  634.  ^25Ui£>« 
«efr  ''leaders,'  770,  Nal.  216. 
'assemble,  join,'  394. 
not  that  it  may 
not  make  head,'  561.  ^Zsvuu® 
'attain  to,  gain,  practise,'  88, 

269,  348,  356,    1289.  <5%SV®JQ5 

'  attack,'  767.       ptfauQuuj  '  as- 
semble,' 405.      ^SsuuLflffl  '  sepa- 
rate,'  97,   258,  810,  955.     Here 
=^61)^  =  '  place.' 

[S.  to/pas'],  '  austerity,  pen- 
ance,' Ch.  xxin.,  19,  261-66, 
274,  295,  842.  [a/zf/rswq.] 

'fault,  slip'    [^®/],   469, 
1154,  1286,  1321,  1325.     [Comp. 


(§  62),  ^<SUIT^  'unfailing,' 
361,367.  fgeufr^  'not  failing, 
ceasing,'  368.  ^<sueo  'failure, 
cessation,'  853,  856. 


[46] 


THE    KUEBAL. 


'  it   will  fail.1     (See  ercar.) 
failure.' 


1135. 


j5<su<sy)GiJ  (from  (^<m/),<the  goddess 
of  misfortune':  elder  sister  of 
good  fortune, 
(§  62), 


544 


&>(Ln3£l 

,    Nal. 


'  embrace.' 
^  what  it  has 
embraced,'  425.  p 
'  embracing,  loving,' 
213.  &IDIDJSPLP 
<$6u)  '  lore  of  kindred  and  de- 
pendants,' Ch.  LITI.,  Nal.  201-10. 
<5Lf{j)ujn)£}]  '  is  as  the  embra- 
cing,' 913.  (See  f$jibjpi.!) 

(§  57),  '  stagger.'  f&up 
<strnrj5<5n)jr)]  '  is  like  losing  one's 
footing,'  716. 

(§    64),      'shoot,      bud.' 
so  as  to  spring  forth,' 
1106.      p&ftor&pfbjpi  '  as  though 
it  budded,'  78. 

Grr(GtJj  (§  62),  '  fail.'  [Not  used 
in  K.  in  its  com.  sense  of  '  push.'~\ 
'  it  will  fail,'  290.  <£w 
'though  it  fail,'  596. 
non-failure,  suc- 
cess,' 596.  ^errsrr/r  '  unfailing,' 
731.  ^(sfnsrr/r^j  '  it  fails  not,' 
290. 

(§  68),  '  bind.'          LO^L^P 
having  girt  up  the  loins,'  1023. 
'  undaunted    bravery,' 
(See  <35<3m.) 

See  Direst . 
See  gstrsw. 

'  quality/    767,      1144. 

$<oCf<5G>LD^^i,  355- 

855. 

(§  70),  <  give.'    [S.  da.-] 
I273«  ^^^-^j    434- 

275,    284,    296,  313,    321,    370, 

416,  457,    492»  5°7»    5°8,    5Jo» 

522,   611,    619,  651,    658,    663, 

692,   700,    739,  785,    792,    845, 

853,   884,    885,  892,    902,    903, 

911,  1044,  1162,  1229.        ,ff£jp, 

1089,    I1[83-  j$JBp,    212,    588. 

I  182.  jff>  J5 <3i ^1 ,   1065. 


773- 

5 


(See 


'to  strike 
lsn'<&&rb(&j  'for 


767. 


'  she    caused,' 
•sireo,  131,  859,  1214. 
113.         ^(^(su^i,  546,  839,  934. 
^0«si;/r/r,  256.         With  <F/T/T  for 
tfrririr    we    find    &[rir<£irn'  ;     for 
<£F/T^/5LD,    cF/r/r^^ii,    3595     with 
>,  1273;  witn  ui-ir,  1229. 

(§  64). 

against,'   1068. 

an  assault,'  486.  pn-&(3j  "  an 
attack,'  599'  ^[r<s<sisssris](^ 

1  the  goddess  that  attacks : 
Lakshmi.' 

•/rffif<g  (§  64),  '  support.'      [Ou/r 

^?;,  <*£^.]       <£[riEi(&jLct  '  which  will 

uphold,  bear,  sustain,'   151,  767 

^n-^Q      ( bearing,'     733,     *•**• 

990. 

[S.],  'lotus.'       [tD(srojr.] 
^^        she  of  the  lotus : 
Lakshmi,'  617. 

(oscreyr  '  the  lotus-eyed  one :  Brah- 
ma,' 1103. 

J,  '  a  mother,'  69,  1047, 
Nal.  15,  101.      [^esrSsor.] 

'  van  of  an  army,'  767  ;  '  equi- 
tatus '  (B.). 

'army,'    76,   77,   78,   770, 
1082. 

'wasting,'     853;      (§  64), 
which  has 
passed,  stepped  over,'  610. 

'  a  bolt,'  71,  1251 
(§  57),  'become  low.' 
'  unfailing,'  620,  1024. 
'  in  subjection  to,'  903. 
'depression,'  117,731. 
'  neglect  of  duty,'  671. 
^/rerr.      1.  'Foot':  ^tf,  7,  8,  9 
[comp.  ^j/rtp],     2.  'Effort,'  212, 

'persevering  effort,'  613,  617, 
Nal.  191-200. 

j&irGGTLA  [S.  ddna'jj  'gift,'  19,  295  ; 
with  ^Qjii.  [Comp.  FF<SS)<S.~\ 

prresr  'self.'  SING.— (i.)  ^/resr, 
n,  17,  43,  82,  206,  209,  250,  251, 
272,  424,  446,  451,  305>3l8,327, 
380,  548,  540,  707,  792,785,515, 
834,  835,847,848,849,862,875, 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[47] 


974,  977,  98o>  IO°6>  IO23>  IO24, 
1026,  1060,  1094,  1102,  1215, 
1290,  268,  1  2O2.  (ii.)  ^carcfeor 
'oneself,'  206,  209,  250,  305,316, 
974,  293,^1319,  439,  474,  97$. 
(in.)  <5®sr&@  l  to  —  self,'  7,  847. 


(iv.)     <&ssr<saflcnr    f  than    oneself,' 


250,  603  (with  &.LD).  (v.) 
'its,  her,  one's  own,'  17,  251, 
69,  272,  318,  327,  387,  373,  161, 
186,  116,  1102,  838,  268,  875, 
630,  436,  535,  293,  244,  471,  608, 
615.  (vi.)  jScvr&sim  '  in  regard  to 
oneself,'  794.  PLUR.  —  (i.)  ^/r/i, 
989,  1173,  1191,  1194,  1195,  158, 
539,  319,  1103,  I076,  399>  I325» 
1171,  1176,  1140,  1150,  843,  1169, 
229,  646,  658.  (ii.)  ^iisroia, 
843,  151,  1312,  1303,  237. 
(iii.)  ^^QLO/T®,  470.  (iv. 
(^,  72,  319.  (v.) 
1107.  fSLauSssr  'than  them- 
selves,' 68,  444.  (vi.)  <su>  '  their 
own,'  63,  64,  66,  68,  1024,  595, 
107,  237,  1191,  916,  158,  473, 
539,  1015,  1051,  1205,  315,  584. 
<£pj$Lz  '  each  one's,'  63.  <£<£@LQ, 
505.  ^LO^J  '  what  is  their  own,' 

IIp7.  <£[T(Lp<SG)L-lLJy    1299,    1300. 

(vii.)  ^LcojiiSlsw-,  846. 

pax  (,-^/D),  for  <S6zr%55r,  &c.,  in 
comp.,  878,  883,  529,  1009,  51, 
56,  157,  741,  Nal.  IGI.  f<5Lo/r 
'one's  own  people,'  1300,  529, 
881,  837,  814,  443,  444,  1027. 
<s>L&  'one's  own  (fate),'  376,  120. 
<si£luj6vr  '  one  by  himself,  alone,' 
873.  <&L£liuerr  '  a  female  alone,' 
1007.  jguSiun-,  229.  ^GsftQuj 
'alone,'  1296.  ^sofleroLo  '  loneli- 

ness,'   814.  <g<3sflLJUL-  IT  [£!(§$, 

Ch.  cxx.    '  The  excess  of  solitary 
grief.'       ^Gofl^  'alone,'  338. 

(§  57),  '  gleam.' 
'  what    gleams.'  J 

'  which  gleams.'     (See 


'the  moon,'  1146.  [Comp. 


16S9T  (^/l),  '  strength.' 
'  strength,'  54,  743,  988.  ^dsr 
<s5sfl(L//r  '  men  of  strength,'  666. 
Lo  '  strength,  firmness,'  66 1, 


665,    67o. 

'strength  in  action,'  Ch.  LXVII. 

-eor  '  firmness,'  910. 

(§  57),  '  turn,  change.'  (Lp&js 
'with  changed  counte- 
nance,' 90.  J^rfl/^/Djp;  '  as 
when  it  changes,'  452,  1000. 


'  remaining  fixed,'  124,  Nal.  212. 

^  [S.  $H],  'prosperity,  wealth, 
goddess  of  fortune,'  168,  179, 
215,  374,  408,  482,  519,  568, 
6 1 6,  920,  1072.  [Comp.  £/r.] 
^(TTjjiy^ei)  an  epithet  of  a  woman : 
*  one  on  whose  brow  Lakshmi 
sits,'  ion,  1123. 

i,  ^jfD<5yr  '  worth,  ability, 
method,  opportunity,'  157 
('aequitas,  bonitas,'  B.),  179, 
186  ('quod  majus  est,'  B.),  441, 
501,  635,  644,  754,  1184,  1298. 
See  LJ®.  LJ6ro«^ 
w,  Ch.  LXXXVIII. 
'  millet '  (with  ^Sssar,  and 
opposed  to  u2scr),  104,  144,  433, 
1282,  Nal.  105. 

'6sr(§56,  in.), 'eat.' 

'eating,'  254,  256.  >r  _  . 
1244.  jfjlasfiuj  (=!$ GST  GST],  1296. 
IT  '  eaters,'  252,  Nal.  211. 
(§  62),  '  touch.'  [Comp. 
wi—<so  '  the  touch- 
ing,' 65,"  227,  1106. 
(§  110),  '  infect  not.' 

I.  '  Evil.'      Its  opp.  is 

-,  201,  2O9,  210. 

,  Ch.  xxi.,   Nal.    121-30. 

j$J5L-Lj,  Ch.  LXXXII.  ^J57,  3O2, 

l82,  190,  671,  192,  222,  282, 
422,  531,  754-  plUGDOl,  ^OJ, 

202,  203,  205,  208,  375,  139,  302, 

303,    62.  ^LJLJ/T6U,     2O6,     Nal. 

223.       ji&Q&lTGU,  128.         jjJGUfTL^KBS 

330.        jijQujn'(Lp<5£5Lci,  138. 
iGTLc,  460.       jiuiSlestsfl,    227. 
:evil,'  827.      ^«5)^  'evil,' 
98471000,   143,  291,  511.       ji 

^LO^^J,    45O. 

II.    'Fire,'     129,^202,    1159, 
1260,  1104,  929,  Nal.  224,  225. 
'  a  smouldering  fire,' 


[48] 


THE    KURRAL. 


674.  ^S'Sfnueufrir  'those  who 
warm  themselves  at  a  fire,'  691. 
$VH$  '  hell,'  1  68.  ^ajm<^  '  the 
digestive  power,'  947. 

ir  (§  57,  64),  'free  from,  be 
freed  from.'  fiir  (opp.  to 

Gffrr,  5.),  '  free  from,'  6,  Nal.  2. 
$ju  '  absolutely  —  so  as  to  be 
free  from,'  348.  $jrir  'that 
passes  not  away,'  1201,  508,  510. 
jinr<5<56u  'relieve  thou/  226. 
jin-js-sn-ir  '  men  who  have  failed 
of,  failed  to  do,'  612,  170. 
jiiTiF<£68rjr)]  (GjirJBpgi'),  'has  aban- 
doned,' 612.  j$jrrr<o®La=jjjrn~LCi6() 
1  so  that  it  fails  not,'  482.  j$fru 
urrssr  '  the  remover  of  disease/ 
950.  j$irGU[ru*  'we  shall  get 
rid  of,'  1063.  jjrr&(£)LD  '  which 
will  remove,'  1241,  1275.  j§!ri5<£ 
(as  rel.  part,  and  verb,  noun), 
'freed  from,  things  devoid  of,' 
199,  292. 

/,  verb,  root,  'enjoy*  (§  62); 
sometimes  written  gnii,  and 


I.  ^uun-fi-  (§  88),  '  those  who 
will  enjoy  food:  eaters,'  12. 

II.  ^jaj<su/r<ssr  (§  110),  '  he  en- 
joys not  vigour,'  862  ;  '  enjoys  not 
his  wealth,'   1006.          jpoysy/nu 
'thou    wilt    not    enjoy,'     1294. 
jtfGufiy/r^su/r  (§  121),  '  those  who 
enjoy   not   affluence,    the   poor,' 
42.       ^i<sijeun<50Lo  (§  154),  '  non- 
enjoyment  :  poverty,'  94. 

III.  jsuq  (§  190).     1.  'Food 
which  is  enjoyed,1  12.     [^juu/r<s 
Q,  ^uuiruj^i'].    2.  'Enjoyment,' 
12.     gjuuiriLi  (=@6ofl6rouiUJ/rssr) 
'  pleasant.'         3.  '  Enjoyment  of 
vigour;  strength,'  862.         QGUJF; 
giu\-\      'stern    strength,'      895. 

4.  '  Enmity  ;  strength  put  forth 
against*   (opp.  to    f5iL(-\),    1165. 

5.  '  Aid  ;  strength  exerted  for,' 
1  06.' 

IV.  jpuqFfi^.          [For  form 
comp.  ^uL^F<si/.     S-jra/  seems  to 

i  li«-n  1  lie  meaning.]    1.  (as 
,  1.),  1050.        2,  (as 


2,)>  378.     3.  (as  ^LJL/,  5.),  '  aid  ; 
supplying  their  needs/  263. 

(§  62),  '  sleep.'  [Comp. 
si;,  ^RiEi@.~\  jpj (gj <F 6u  '  slum- 
bering/ 1049.  ^(Sj^eu  '  if  it 
slumber/ 1 21 2.  ^(^5 <&•££>,  1218. 
^  (®fr  <SF  n~ ,  1179* 
'  slumberers/  926. 
U6&L-.  (§64),  'wipe.' 
'having  wiped  away/  615. 
>,  107. 

57),  'decide.' 
'decide  thou/  467. 
^iSlesr  'after  having  decided/ 
467.  j^gBaflffl/  '  decision,  con- 
clusion/ 21,  533,  669,  671.  ja 
6tfofl(si]<5G>L-66>L£>  '  decision  of  cha- 
racter/ 383,  688. 

I.  'Assistance/  471,  497, 
651,  1299,  862,  875,  41,  42,  76, 
132,  414,  242,  460,  635,  36,  51. 

&il  CtoQOT  <5&) LQ ,   OOO. 

II.  'Companion/  1168,   1222, 
1263,    1234. 

w,  Ch.  XLV. 
'  companions,    assistants/ 

Ch.'vi. 

III.  'Similarity/  310. 

IV.  '  jj/fflna//  '  until/  156,  433, 
22,  87,  104,  144,  397,  1282,  Nal. 
105,  218. 

VLD(Lp  (§  62),  'sneeze';  'a 
sneeze/  1318.  sjiLnL&eo  '  sneez- 
ing/ 1203,  1253.  g)Lbi&G$irt 
1317.  g}LDU$<go)iT,  1312.  joiL 
®r,  1317. 

'sorrow/  1135,  1165,  1275; 
792.       [S.  duh.     Comp. 


^gjuSlev  <•  sleep/ 605,  1103.   [Comp. 

^(gJJF.]  3$(&fb£)l     (§   62),  'lull 

to  sleep/  1 1 68. 

(§  64),  '  enjoy,  eat.'     [Comp. 

^•~\  gdiu gj 45 GO  '  enjoyment,' 

377.       gnua&,  944- 
'  enjoyment/  1005. 

(§  62),  '  seek  for.' 

'=&Q5-s8),  '  is  like  seek- 
ing  for/  929. 


LEXICON    AND    OONCOBDANCE. 


[49] 


986. 


'balance.'    [S.    tula.'] 

T  '  those  not  one's  equals,' 


(inf.  of  jz<aj(5  l  he  liarsh'), 
'much,'  944,  1050. 
J6rr&(3j,     ^jsrriEJ(^       (§      62), 
'move.'  gjGtriEi&rrsji    'not 

wavering,'  668.  g\<8irs>$<b{D 

'  unwavering,'  699. 

'a  drop  of  rain,'  16,  557. 
(§  66),  '  renounce  (the  world).' 
[Comp.  ^irirLo.~]  g;pj£&,  342. 
gtpJBpirfr,  22,  42,  159,  276,  310, 
342,  348^,  529,  586,  1  1  88,  1250. 
j£jfl9LJL//r/r,  378,  1017.  ^p/D£f/nr, 
276,  806,  1017.  gijD&<ss,  342. 
^rosuros,  106.  gipsy  'renun- 
ciation,' Ch.  xxxv.,  Nil.  51-60. 

fSfTfjjS)]  ^£0^6®  IT  <£<£&),     Ch.     CXIV. 

&j]rr)!5<5@5)L&,  1  1  57.         ^rosutrGQLn, 

1050,  Nal.  226. 
^  ®n  p  <siJ  GST  'Lord  of  the  haven,' 

1157,  1277.      [^jsro/r?.] 
^£7  <otf$  '  anger,  sorrow,  pain,  poverty, 

fear,'  769,  1010,  1223,  1294,  1306, 

1322   [comp.  ^s3T-ULz~]  ;    (§  64) 

'  sulking,'  1290. 
^jsyruLn    'affliction'    [opp.     ;§)«sr 

ULQ  ;      S.   dur],    106,   267,  368, 

369,  615,   628,  629,    940,    1045, 

1052,  1223,  1299,  1307.   ^SOTL\, 

with  s-ji1,  94- 

(§  62),  'approach.' 
494-  j2£OT<joO),  1250. 
~ir  'friends,'  188,  494. 

209.  ^J63T(g)6n)lD, 

316,  Nal.  226. 

r.  1.  '  Hostility,'  685.  2.  '  A 
support'  (jjr^ssr),  455  ['for- 
ceps' (B.),  but?].  3.  See  ^iriii. 

(§62),  'lift  up,  weigh.' 
(§  62),  'hang  down,' 
allow  to  be  in  suspense,  pro- 
tract.' gir&Q  '  weighing,'  471, 
912.  ^ir&arriT  'they  weigh 
not,'  103.  sffl&Bsiff  'if  you 

weigh,'  103.  ^Fcsr^LQ  'which 
will  weigh,'  118,  813.  ^ir<s<SLa 
'  sleep,'  668.  ^yrra@/i  '  which 


will  hang/  1163.  girisiQ  'al- 
lowing to  be  deferred/  672. 
sjirtEisirg)  'not  delaying/  672. 
jjff&HSjba  '  do  without  hesita- 
tion/ 672.  giri5i(<3j<s  '  do  with 
slowness/  672. 
'not  delaying/  383. 

'pillar/ 6 1 5,  983. 

a  fishing-hook/  931. 

[S.]  '  a  message,  embassy/ 
Ch.  LXIX.,  681,  682,  1211;  'an 
ambassador/  685,  686,  690, 
1228. 

'  a  stack.'  GQGU £> gsr jry  '  a 
stack  of  straw/  435. 

==  ^ff    'purity.'  ^ITLLKSOLCt 

'purity/  159,  298,  364,  455,  688» 
711.  eQ$Bv£g?iLi6BLos  Ch.  LXVI. 
sffiun-fr  '  pure  ones/  456,  Nal. 
41-50. 

(§  62).  '  let  droop.'  sosr^r 
G>6iJ6Gr,  '  I  will  not  relax  my 
efforts/  1021.  j5/rae5/  'down, 
feathers/  1120. 

•irpgiJ  (§  62),  'defame,  spread  a 
report.'  ^irf)(yQ<stT<su  '  doth  it 
not  proclaim/  1157.  sjirrbtyiT 
'  they  noise  abroad/  1190.  ^F/D 
JJ/LD  '  which  will  bruit  about/ 
188. 

ii/LD  [S.]  '  the  divinity;  gods, 
divine  power/  43,  45,  50,  55, 
619,  702,  1023. 

(§  57),  'be  clear,  discrimi- 
nate, select.'  [Comp.  GP^/r, 
(£<££)),  Qf<sifl.~]  Qf£ifl<s&j  '  dis- 
crimination,'634,  717.  U6B)<£<£ 
^/D^Q^rfl^ei),  Ch.  LXXXVIII. 
Q^/floj/r,  329^  104. 
27*  (o/ •^/r/UJ/Tssr,  947* 
583.  Q<£if)(LiiEj<55[T&j  '  when  you 
see  clearly/  503.  Q^/fl^^j,  23, 
132,  i_86,  501,  712,  1172.  Q& 

3«,       Ch.       XLVII. 
fTL_6U,      Ch.        LII. 
,  462,    712. 

(§    56,     III.),      'know 
'    clearly.'     [Q^/fl.] 

a 


[50]  THE    KURRAL. 

pir&r  '  he  who  sees  not  clearly,' 
249. 

Gl^Bsuei]     'hatred.' 
'enemies,'    639. 
foes/  771. 

« clear.' 


/f  '  ye 


Q<g<sifl    [comp. 

Qfitr]    (§  57), 

'become  clear,  trust';  (§64), 
'  promise.'  Qps&restf  nr  '  clear 
water,'  1065.  Q<&<sift<£6i>  'con- 
fidence.' Qpfi\JBg)QpGlftj5&) 

'  trust  after  due  selection/  Ch. 
LI.  Q  <$  <sifl  fitgrr  <oi$r  'he  (who) 
has  trusted,'  508,  143;  'those 
whose  minds  are  clear  from 
guile,'  353;  'one  in  whom  you 
have  reposed  confidence,'  510. 
©^(S/fiiay  '  clearness,'  464  ;  '  con- 
fidence,' 502,  510,  513.  Q^err 
Gifiiuir  'men  of  upright  mind,' 
374.  QtgisfrffffltS^Q&iTGi) 

'plighted  word,'  1154,  Nal.  219. 
pgu  (§  56,  XL,  as  jyjy),  'de- 
stroy.' Q<g£)j(o)uiT(ifj6ir  '  ene- 

mies'   spoil,'    756. 
'destruction,'    264. 
'  will  destroy,'  674,  883,  1104. 
pjbQp&ra      'certainly,'      581. 
(See  OTSST;  Q<gpjri]  =  (  certainty.') 
<£<s$r     [Cor.     of     S.     dakshina], 
'south,'  43.     (See  qeu/i.) 

'  country.'         [S.    dega.'] 
through  the   lands.' 

(§  57,  64),  '  be  worn  away  ; 
wear  away.'  Q^uu  '  while  (it)  is 
worn  away,'  96.  Q><£(L\LZ  '  will 
be  worn  away,'  888.  G><&iut5<5 
'they  have  been  worn  away,' 
1261.  G>(^tLj«@LD  'which  will 
wear  away,'  555,  567. 

Co  <sir  'chariot,'  496,  667.     [Qy.  by 
metathesis  from  S. 


(§  57),  'know,  investigate 
thoroughly.'  [Another  form  of 
Q^ffi.  Comp.  Gjsjpi.']  Q&flevr, 
249.  (ojSiflgpjLa,  132,  242  ; 

'  attente  inspicere  '  (B.). 
441,  462,  541,  634. 
509.  G><sirir6sr,    144   ('supple 

peccati  graviiatemj  B.),  508,  510. 


509.        Q<£fr&!(Fl  'accu- 
rate knowledge,'  635. 
<s<sijnr  [S.],  'the  gods,'  1073, Ml. 
112. 

<  know  thoroughly,  so  as  to 
trust.'         [Comp.   Q^srfl, 
Co^/r.]    (5^/0,501,589. 
'trusting,'  506,  507. 
825.       Q<srSl6V))Lb  .  .  . 
G>^(y<ssr,  876,  848. 
1154.      QjSf&uj,  514. 

nps,  .  .  .  (o^guLn,  509. 

(§  62),  caus.  of  $<$£>],  but 
used   for  it  sometimes  (§  160). 
Q><5rb(y&<si}?r    '  those    who    have 
not  gained  the  knowledge  to  .  .  ., 
187,  289,  626,  649,  1054.      Qpp 
u  '  inspiring  confidence,'  693. 
'  certainty,  confidence,' 
513,766,1153.  [Comp.  Q-ST/DJJ/.] 
'honey,'  1121. 

(§  64  and  56,  II.),  'col- 
lect together,  amass.'  Q^/r 
(gjjg^/r/r,  377.  Q^fr (&,<£<& sun) 
jyefr  '  amidst  all,  collected  to- 
gether,' 322;  (§  87,  251),  'be 
summed  up.'  Q^ir<s '  concisely,' 
685.  Q<£[r&&  (=Q^n-<s<s<5sxsu}, 
1  things  in  which  all  the  three 
agree = the  sum  of  their  con- 
senting testimony,'  589.  Q<sir>fE 
&  (§  ^<0>  '  having  combined, 
together,'  545.  0^/r0j:<ffi  'the 
sum  total,'  711,  1043. 
<srri_iT  (§  57),  'follow  after,  be 
connected  with.'  [Q^/r®,  g&®, 
a.t_«5r.]  Q^r/ri—jr/T/r,  695. 
Q<$rri—iT<o®<35  'connection,'  450. 
O^/ri-fl-q,  73,  782,  806,  819, 
820,  882,  920.  QpiTiTuuir® 
'connection,'  345,  Nal.  211. 

(§  62),  'begin.' 
Q^n-L-iasfffr,  464. 
491. 

Q<SfrG)  (§  68),  'touch;  dig.' 
\QftffGSSf (St. ~\  Q ft rr is^evr  '  if  you 
touch,'  1159.  Q<5tTL-(b) '  having 
dug,'  396,  Nal.  2. 

'a      wreath,'      1135. 

,  §  64.] 


LEXICON   AND    CONOOEDANOE. 


[51J 


1.  '  A  bracelet,'  and  by 
met.  'a  woman,'  911,  1101,  1135, 
1234-38,  1275,  I279-  (Without 
epithet  four  times ;  with  epithet 


no  epithet  used  twice.)  2.  '  An 
ounce,'  1037. 

pir&o  (§  57,  64),  'perish,  de- 
stroy.' QfSn^xo^  '  destruction/ 
762,  806. 

'ancient,'  762,  1043, 
1234,  1235.  O^/retiSsu  '  anti- 
quity,' 806,  Ml.  101,  166,  216. 

(§60),  '  worship,  serve.' 
ct,  260,  268.  Q^/r^^j, 
55,  970,  1033.  Qptrwp,  828. 
©^/TLp/r.jy/r,  2.  QfgrrLpn-^tsrr, 

55.  Q^n-ifi&j  '  work,  duty, 
mark,  affair,'  394,  428,  549,  560, 
582,648,833,972,1252.  Qpir 
L^/rjj;  (Intro,  p.  xxiii.),  977. 
G^F/f^p,  QpiTtLpQipKiL  *  leprosy  ' 
(?  Q^/TL_/T,  Nal.  123.) 
(o<srr®  <  wreath  of  flowers,'  1105. 
[O^/r©.] 

[S.],  'a  goad,'  24. 
<a  boat,'  1068. 
(§  57),   'touch,  embrace.' 
149.  QfSiriuiTiT, 

914-16.  Q^tTiueijiT,    917. 

(S^triusuesrtosr  '  as  though  it  en- 
veloped,' 308. 


'every.'  (1)  With  noun  :  pir 
Ln  'every  day,'  520;  is  IT 
Lz,  553.  (2)  With  v. 
root:  ^fiSQc^^yii,  uaSlQ(y^]Lci, 
783;  &<oifl<£Q<5n-£)]uz,  1145  >  cSy«flJ/ 
pSlG>@[Tj!}]Lc>)  i  no; 
,  1106.  (3)  With 
inf. :  ^Le^Q^rr^j/ra.ti,  £_/£,<£ 
Q^rr^pir^Ln,  940.  (4)  With 
fut.  rel.  part. :  QeueiftuuGljb 
1145. 

(§      62),      'appear.' 
srpev,  236,  1119.         Q^ir&sr 
371,  1322,    1324.        Q^irsor 
$,    1253.  (afSfTttr^issr,    236, 

884,     885,     958.  QptT&rtfluj, 

1328.  G><5rr£orgu<35,    236. 

G>  <& rr e& (y ,  479.  G><5[T6sr(y<oG)LD, 
236.  Q^rrfbfDLD  'appearance,' 
124,  272,  1003,  1059. 


1.  'Skin,'  80,  273. 
2.  'Beauty,'  1043.  3.  (§  70, 
as  <£<su),  'Suffer  defeat.'  [Opp. 
G)<su6i;.]  G><&[rn}rD<siitT  'those 

who  have   been  worsted;    1329. 

defeat,'  986. 

'  female  companion;  1284. 
[Comp.    G^/rLpLD,  fern,  of 


Qpfretr.  1.  '  Shoulder,  arm,  per- 
son,' 149  (corpus,  B.),  906,  916, 
917,  919,  1103,1105,  1106,  1113, 
1218,  1233,  1236,  1237,  1262, 
1265,1272,1279,1325.  2.  (§  70, 
as  (2<s<sTr)  'perforate.'  Q^inL 
&uuL-(r<$Q<s:s£l  'the  unopened 
ear,'  418.  [Comp. 


75 (5  (§  56,  II.), '  laugh,  be  kindly, 
deride.'  p<sd>  'laughing,  cheer- 
fulness,' 86O,  999.  J5(3j^6Vt 

784.  rzf&jLz  'will  deride,'  271, 
774,  1040,  1094,  1095,  1098. 
^«,  187,  685,  786,  829,  873,  927, 
IT73-  P@u,  1140.  &(&)&, 
621.  rf)<f£tr JDI,  824.  j&05)<£5 

'laughter,'  182,  304,  694,  817, 
871,  953,  995>  I274- 

(§  57),  'desire.'  [Comp. 
^6D)<F^)  '  desiring,' 
1263.  (See  ^effQuGni — ) 

p<5®<f$j)iLin'fr  '  the  object  of  my 
desires,'  1199.  rs<3®&  'desire,' 
1043,  ll$6. 

(§    62),    'desire.'       [^ero^, 

poison,'  580,  926.        J5&& 
'  poisonous,'  1008. 

(§  66)  '  walk.'        ^eo)L_  '  gait, 
method,'  59,  712,  1014. 


[52] 


THE    KURRAL. 


'  middle,'  1008.  O<srr.] 
'  justice,  impartiality,'  1  13, 
116,  117,  171,  172.  (5® 
6&/LO  '  equity,'  Ch.  xn. 
<£(<5  'trembling.' 
firm.'  IB  GIB®  (§  62),  '  tremble.' 
r  'fearful  war,'  1086. 
*  trembling,'  680. 
/ssrr,  (BL-  'nearness.'  [Opp. 
cssftiug]  '  it  is  near,' 
353.  /5<sssft<££$  'it  is  near,' 
856.  pem^i  (§  62),  'draw 
near.'  ^<smQ<sysreor  '  I  draw  not 
nigh,'  1311.  ^OTT(6oo)/r  'foes,' 
1088.  par  (§  56,  III.),  'be 
friendly.'  ^(srrsrr/r,  912. 
784,  791.  pLiugi,  786. 
781.  ^tl®,  8l2,  830. 

791.  pL-L-trrr,  192,  679,  804, 

805,  808,  826,  908,  1293. 
rsostxL]  '  friendship.'  74,  998. 
J5L-L}  'friendship'  [O^/ri_/rq, 
uaoipGDio],  106,  107,  187,  338, 
381,782-89,  790-98,  800-7,  821, 

829,      830,       874,        1122,      ^165, 

Ch.  LXXIX.  j5L-U{nnrdjp&,  Ch. 
LXXX.  ^ilq,  Ch.  LXXXII. 

h.  LXXXIII. 

'advantage,    gain,'     235. 

[S.   ^<£<55LO,  c^WJLQ.] 

/5UJ6ST,  'benefit,  gain,  plea- 
sure, reason,'  97,  103,  192,  193, 
194,  197,  216,  219,  314,  783, 
860,  994,  998,  912.  [Comp. 


(§  66),  '  desire.'      [Comp. 

pUJ<5  <£&<£,  580.         J5UJ 

<sujr><Bst  439.        js  vujsp  &rrt   1181, 
1232.        ^ujsu/reroLD,  150. 

GMTj&GUGOr,   147. 

(§160),  1189,  1190. 
ft  'a  jackall,'  500. 

'good.'       [Opp.  ^,  qev,  $#.] 

I.  In  comp.   ^esr,  pp,  2,  314, 
860,  138,  171,  60,  335,  460,  719, 
746,  908,  1000,  1026,  1030,  mi, 
1133,    1134,    1189,    1322,    1247. 
peoevrrjpj,    41,    222,    242,     324. 
Pfouneo,  659.        P&M&Q5F&  '  a 
worthy  guest,'  84,  86. 

II.  ptSreou*  '  goodness,  worth,' 


103,  194,  292,  511,  712,  1013. 
P6or(3j  '  what  is  good  '  ;  adv. 
'well,'  458,  513,  534,  712,  719, 
728,  1046.  J5<s8rn5l  '  a  benefit,' 
67,  97,  102,  104,  108,  no,  117, 
138,  422,  439,  652,^  685,  994. 
Q&tL(JB)p6arfl$iuf&]$&)  '  grati- 
tude,' Ch.  XI.  rsesrrSldSipQ'SFGO 

GULG  '  wealth  without  benefit,'  Ch. 
ci.  J56VLO,  piso'svr  '  goodness, 
beauty,'  407,  457-59»  499»  511* 
641,  651,  914-16,  958,  960,  982, 
984,  1007,  1019,  1305.  <sun-L£Js 

tjb,  Ch.  VI.  pFVLQ 
Ch.  CXII. 
Ch.  CXXIV. 

'  men  to  whom  good- 
ness is  a  special  property,'  149. 

III.  As  a9§507-<ffi^Ljq  (§  184). 

^6U6U/T<sfr,      924,      IO4O.  pGO 

6u(/r)/r,  403,  408,  450,   729,  903, 

905,    1305,    IOII.          </5-6V6u(-STO(5u), 

96,  213,  300,   375,  379,  416,  679, 

823,  826,  905,  981,    III5.  f£6V 

6VJP>  323.  pesrj!))   '  what   is 

good,  'tis  good,'  38,  49,  92,  108, 
109,  in,  113,  125,128,  150,  152, 

157,  197,  222,  236,  253,  297,  308, 
323,  328,  379,  404,  456,  469,  655, 
673,  715,  815,  908,  932,  967, 
1072,  1038,  1190,  1225. 

IV.  Deri7.  peo^  (§  62),  '  grant 
a  favour,  be  kind.'    p®j@Gu(ir)ir, 
1150,  1156.  pGo&rrir,  1199, 

1248.  JB  6V  £5  IT<$  SUIT,  121%,    1244, 

1249.  ^6U<ffi/T,    1217.          J5<30&(T 
<5G)LA,    Il8l,    1190,    1232. 

Y.  peo&^Qij  (§  57)  'be  poor' 
[?  '  seek  for  good  '].  /?6i;@ir<s^ 
'  poverty,'  Ch.  cv.,  1043,  IO45» 
1047,  657.  p6u&L.iri5<&friT  '  the 
poor,'  219,  1046,  Nal.  301. 

««0«u(§  70),  'learn.'  p.  <&&&&& 
(aS).  Q^/r.),  'whenever  you  learn,' 

783. 


'fragrant,'    1231.        [Comp. 
~        j5(y    'palm-tree    sap, 
toddy,'  1090. 

iB<55T<sii    *a  state   of   wakefulness,' 
1  2  1  3-20.    [Opp.  <£<soT(5iy  '  dream.'] 
'  much,'  403. 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[53] 


/5&W-    (§  57)    '  become  wet/ 
-.,  678. 


'tongue,'    127,   129,   335,  641, 
1066. 


[S.],  'snake,  dragon,'  763. 
u  [S.],  'urbanity,'  580. 
fsrr.       1.     (§  62),   'search   out/ 
Ml.  15,  10  1.      [Used  often  with 
G><5®  in  common.]         prri—,  739. 
.2>/r/£.,  96,  242,504,511,  516,  553, 

561,   948,    1214.  p(TL$-UJ,    518. 

fER®<5,  52O.  pHL-tr,  739,  74. 
pITI—fT^,  791'  njiri—fnanLQ,  833. 

2.  'A  country,'  397,  553,  731- 
740,966,  1323.  ,/7fffLL_  'they 
belong  to  the  land,'  545. 
fbrressr,  lEirmgi.  \t  'Modesty, 
shame  '  ;  verecundia,  cu'Sws,  502, 
902,  903,  907,  924,  951,  952,  983, 

IOII-I7,  IO2O,  1089,  1132-34, 
II5I,  H57,  Il62,  1163,  II§3, 
1247,  1297.  pn-sssflssrGOLn 

'  shamelessness/  1019.        ^/rjpy 

6TO/-STOLQ,       Ch.      Oil.,     960,      1012, 

1014.  !5ttGi§&J53jin)®]<a®!iJ5&<sV) 
Ch.  cxiv.  (§  62),  <  be  ashamed 

Of.'  J51T&5GT,   314,    I0l8,    1149. 

^/rjp/^eu,  ion.          i5[T  jp/  SUIT  /r, 
433»    794,   1015. 
172.      pirGssflioGr,  1231 

5O6,    IOl8,    I2O5. 

833.    2.  'A  cord.'    (STjfl-sscr,  1020. 

'day'  [>/r3srr],  38,  156,  326, 
334,  520,  553,  776,  808,  1146, 
1169,  I2°6,  1278,  1261,  1266, 
1269,  1233.  rsn-G&TLn  'I  am 
seven  days/  1278. 

[S.].  1.  'Name/  360. 
2.  'Fear/  149.  [Beschi  says 
'  am  nil  significat.'] 

/5/r/r  '  affection.'  pn-iflsvrsQLa 

'want  of  affection/  833,  958. 

fBfrsurruj  «  a  ship/  496  [S.  ram  ; 
navis,  vcu)?.] 

(§  62),  'emit  fragrance.' 
PIT  (12,650.  isnrrbfDLz  '  fragrance/ 
27,  1113,  1274. 

/T65T(^  'four/  35,  146,382,390, 
501,  513,  605,  743,  766,  953. 


(§  57),  '  go  on.'     fa£ 
'things  that  happen/  582. 

SILJ  '  perpetual/     [S. 
nitya.~\ 

fat/  1260. 

F  (§  66),  '  arrange.'  iSjr^^tsun 
'  those  arranged/  821.  jSirjs^] 
1  setting  in  order/  648. 

'poverty/  532,  1048,  1049, 
1060,  Ml.  287. 

,  iQjruLj  (§  62),  'be  full, 
fill/  flrruiSiu  'abundance/  229. 
ifltjLziSliLi  '  full,  ample/  401. 

(§  70),  '  stand,  abide/  jBp<ss 
(§  140),  '  stand  ! '  391  ;  inf.  708. 
flnXgLD,  145,  232,  288,  544,  765, 
946,  1141.  filjbQuLo,  1260. 

fi&frgy,  II,  13,  184,  286,  468, 
771,  1053,  1055.  jfjIeorrosvr^iT 
'  those  who  seemed  to  stand 
as  .  .  ./  898.  $®srp  41,  698, 
1019,  1157.  $Gsrro<sun-,  771. 
",  6,  29,  142,  806.  $esr 

,    176,    552'  plssrff)^],    543* 

,    592;     pi.    331.         $6VW 

771.       Forms  compounds 

with  OT^fT,   (LpSVT)  <&<o5GT. 

jSevLCt,  rfjlGvecr  'earth,  ground, 
soil,  country/  3,  28,  68,  151, 

239'  307,  3"83>  3^6,  413^  452, 
496,  499,  526,  544,  990,  959,  898, 
1039,  1040?  1094.  jS&o<su0s)jrj 
234.  $6v&@,  570,  572,  1003. 

j§%ov '  position,  standing-place, 
permanence/  124,  325,  449,  716, 
745,  789,  964,^  966,  1189,  1036. 
j8<fcvu$<56r  '  things  permanent/ 
331.  s-oS/r^Ssu 'body/  80,  255, 
290.  /§%sv<o$> LA  =  $<&),  273.  p® 

1  instability/  349,  Ch.  xxxiv., 
Nal.  ch.  i.-in.  Jiffl'teoQiL), 

37^j      4^9?      9^7'  J$<fevLA<S5<£5<5fl' 

'  soldiers,    rank   and   file/    770. 
^SsvLL/eroj-^^eu,  Ch.  cxxn. 

shadow/    208,    742,    88 1, 
1309.     ^tpeu,  1034. 

(§  64),  '  place,  put  a  stop  to  ' 


[54] 


(caus.  of 
1174. 


THE    KURRAL. 
1132 


(§  57),  '  become  full  '  (caus., 
§  64).  [Comp.  tfrrfru,  ^jrziq.] 
$<S®{QULJ  '  so  as  to  be  full/  1282. 
fiGnppp  '  which  is  full  or  fills/ 
HI/,  1272.  $<cG>rQJ5ff;(r)Q>r[)  '  as 
though  it  were  full,'  215,  523. 

J§&>p.       1.    ©9.  0^/T.,     28,    782, 

^S-  2.  fulness,  excellence, 
modest  reserve  (=^/reuq),  57, 
864,  917,  1138,  1251,  1254.  fl 
<stnrDiuL£i<£6\j,  Ch.  cxxvi.,  '  reserve 
overcome.'  ^6ro/r)LL/i5D)i_6D)Lo,  154. 

(§  64  or  57),  '  think,  reflect, 
devise.'         [Syn.  «0^ 
^§5Dr««,  169;  imp.  250. 

1202.  /SSsonL/zi,  674. 

1241,       I32O.  $<8oGT<g<g,      1296. 

ficteoruLJirffsr,  519.       /^cfeQTULJsu/r, 

1203.  ffasrjsgi,  1209.      fjltfacrfi 
^eu/fqeu/iueli    'lamentation    at 
thought  of  the  past,'  Ch.  cxxi. 

fl$5STUJiTiT,  1203. 

1208. 


(§  70,  as  Qs&r).  [Comp. 

'  it  will  be  extended,' 
1022;  'grow,'  1147.  /ffcur  'so 
as  to  be  prolonged,'  1302.  ^© 
(§  62),  'extend,  prolong,  delay.' 
/©<£,  1330.  $®<si]^,  1307. 
/tl©  (§  62),  'stretch  out,'  796. 
L/^ilL-eu.]  ,/fforr  (adj.),  'pro- 

longed,'    234,      IO22.  /L-.L-LG 

'length,'  595.  /£©  'prolonged 
duration,'  3,  6,  566,  1312. 

'thou,'  1123,  1221,  1242,  1249, 
1291.  fir  'you,'  1319,  1320.  flesr 
'thy,'  1151,  1222,  1271,  1288, 
1311.  /$6wQ(GC)©,  1294.  /^tfsr 
6OT^affcb|  mi.  ^pit-air  'your,' 
1318. 

(§  64),  'remove'  (act.). 

ffif(Sj,  /£-«(5  (§62),  'remove' 
(a.  and  n.). 

I.  f&<&,  1262.  /ppirir  'he, 
they,  who  left,'  21,  325,  1220. 
$,gf5inTQu(iT)<o6)Ln  'the  greatness 
of  those  who  have  renounced 
all.'  JS/D,  Cb.  m.  f<5<5,  1149. 


3r,  370,  969,  1154.    fuuir, 
969.     fuiDgjHU),  327. 

II.  $&<§&,    195,    1124,    519, 
1265.     frnQiuirar,  341.      ^/afi, 
246,  352,  353>    502,    592,  1234. 

fitsj&luj,  98.  /iB&lesr,  495,  1104, 
1155.  /Ef«s,  358.  ^  /H«/T,  383. 
jjjfEJ&tr  SOLD,  154,  562. 
[cSyew],  1216.  ^/5/«/r<53r, 

III.  /«(^ii,  194,  327 
920.   ^SJssr,  853.   f 

330.    /«©,  384,  436,  685,  787, 
1132,  1  1  60,  Nal.  i. 

(§  62),  '  swim.'  ^^eu,  8. 
'they  swim  not,'  1170. 

1167.  /JSglLb,     1164. 

r,  10.  f/bpirir,  10. 
/r.  I.  'Water,'  13,  20,  149,  215, 
298>  4525  523»  660,701,  718,  742, 
881,  929,  1038,  1066,  1093,  ii2i, 
1147,  n6i,  1170,  1174,  1309, 
1323.  <£5(63sr)<sssf/r  'tears,'  71, 


780,  828   [Comp.    1315]. 

278.     Q^isdbrfoosf/r,  1065. 
II.  '  Quality,  essence,'  34,  88  1. 

f   'procrastination,'    605. 

'  those  who  possess  a 
quality,'  1319,  527,  782.  ^JT^J 
'it  has  (this)  nature,'  221,  745. 
fiT<2S)Lz  'quality,'  17,  219,  1272, 
195.  firr<sg]  'it  is  thus,'  431, 
596,777,  1143.  ppjieas  'thou 
hast  a  good  nature,'  mi. 
Qic>Gyr<odrjr<siT  '  she  is  tenderer,' 
mi.  L^esr&^rjr  '  things  having 
a  nature  that  deteriorates,'  782. 
tBeapfijr  '  things  that  improve,' 
782.  Q&Glfirrir  'men  doomed 
to,  fitted  for,  destruction,'  605. 

'the  waist,'  1115. 

ji—  '  fine,  subtle,'  407, 
424,  726.  ^ismrGssfluj  'subtle,' 
373.  jgJ63or<o6isfiiLiiT  'a  penetrating 
one/  1126.  j£is&r<sGsfliLiLb  '  we  are 
sagacious/  710.  ^sssrrsjgj  (§  62), 
'be  subtle.'  ^i<5ssrisjSliu  're- 
fined/ 419.  ^7  OTST  «  «  LO  '  refine- 

ment.' L}6Vs9j£l<5GSr<&<£5LC>,     Ch. 

cxxxii.,    '  the    artifices   of   jea- 
lousy.'    ^j  il  u  LZ  '  subtlety.' 
'brow/  1238,  1327. 


,    908. 
1123.     (l(rfjjgi<5<GGr<&)<506uni,    ion. 

U,  IO88,   I24O. 

(§  64),  *  extinguish.' 
Quiz,  1148. 

See  f. 

(§57),   eS.  Qprr.,  'enter, 
penetrate,'  407. 
['  B.  reads 

'tip,*  476- 

'a  scientific  treatise,'  ZiJ. 
'thread'  [Nannul  24],  401,  4 Jo, 
440,  543>  56o>  636>  683>  726, 
727»  743.  7$3>  I273-  [Comp. 
L/£jy«U6u.]  .JS/sssrGBsfliD.jp'eu,  373; 
Q.&s^iT'fn'eorfDj^ireb,  581.  jprGeu/rfr 
'scientific  writers,'  322,  533, 
683,  941. 

'hundred,'  932. 

(§  57),  'become  loose, 
flaccid  ;  slip  off.'  Q/F^LP,  1236. 
Q/5^5<£Fiii  'mind,  heart,  con- 
science,' 116,  253,  272,  706,  910, 
917,  1252,  1259,  ^  1299,  1300, 
1310.  [Syn.  Loeorii.] 

Q/F£$<sF,276,  281,  288,  293,  842, 
917,  1053,  1081,  1200,  1284, 
1242,  1246,  1248,  1249,  1264, 
1291,  1292,  1295-98.  Q/^^GV, 

III2,  1237,  1241,   1243,   1244, 

1245,  I247»  I29l>  I293>  I294- 
Qi5(&#<5g)  '  in  or  of  mind,'  115, 
161,  288,  928,  1072,  1204,  1205, 
1250.  Q/5-@$@)/r,  243,  1260. 
Q^*£^/*/r«r,  169,  185,  1128, 
1218.  O^@O*/r©»ar^a) 
'  colloquy  with  one's  own  heart/ 

Ch.  CXXV.      Qp<gF>Q&lT®l-l6V15<560 

'quarrel  with  one's  own  heart,' 
Ch.  cxxx. 

QfB®     '  long,      extensive,'       605. 

[Comp.  far.]      Q$®LZ,  17,  495, 

496,  566.      QpGlfir  '  tardiness,' 

605.      Q^ifuj,  1169. 

562,  943- 
Q/5JU   '  ghi,'  1148. 


LEXICON   AND   CONCORDANCE.  [55] 

'way,'    6,    324,    356»   477- 


(?/5/r  'similarity.'  (§  57),  '  yield  ; 
agree;  vow.'  G'^/raj^j,  733. 
Qpjririr,  821.  Qfsfr^QfSesr,  1181. 

(?/5/r  (§  58),  'suffer  pain,  grieve, 
complain  of.'  [Comp.  G^/reu.] 
Gy/r  '  suffering  pain  '  (=G>/®-/rtij), 
157;  for  Qpntu  'things  which 
are  meet  to  bring  pain,'  805. 
Qi^frsu&o  'I  shall  suffer,'  1236. 
Q/Hfrpej,  341,  1308.  QpnGUKn 
'  they  should  complain  of,'  237, 
1219.  G>f5Ksup&  'don't  bewail 
your  sorrows,'  877.  Cy/rsujp 
'  the  complaining  of,'  237,  1242. 
,  1236.  ©/F/r/F^sypj,  877. 
rr,  1308. 

'pain,  disease,'  261, 
286,  315,  320,359,  360,429,  848, 
851,  853,  941,  946,  947>  948, 
1091,  1102,  ii47»  JI59>  nob, 
1161,  1162,  1171-76,  1183,  1200, 
1226,  1227,  1241,  1243,  1255, 
1266,  1280,  1301,  1303. 
/5/r<sB(5  (§  62),  'regard,  look 
at.' 

I.    Act.        <3plT<353,       90,       1047, 

1098.   QptraQ,  93,  189,  528, 
542,  673,  701,  708,  1093,  1173, 

1279.       QnyfTS&l&ir,  528. 

1172 


,  1320. 

®fffr,  1320. 

1082,   1093.         G>J5tT&@<$6V,   1082, 


'a  thorny   plant :    tri- 
bulus  terrestris.' 

'yesterday,'    336,    1048. 
/,  1278." 


1099.        Qp[T&@LD,    1094, 

II.  Neg.  Qfsfr&siT,  1094,  184. 

G>J5fr<£&(r<g,     148.  (oI5IT<£&!Tg), 

1009.  QpiTS&lTSsr,    528,    865. 

(o^/ra^/rsiDLo,  1095* 

III.  Deriv.  (2pn-&(§   'a  look,' 
976,     1082,    1089,     1091,    1099. 
C>/rc£<£Lh.     'look,  glance,'  1085, 
1092. 

(?/5/reu     (§    70,    as    «eu),  'suffer, 
perform      penance.'  [Comp. 

Qpaarp&i       261. 
,    269.  (oprr/b(y&sr, 

70.      QpiTpuiTfr,    48,    160,    270. 
QfffpQpu&tff  (Intro,  p.  xxii.  9), 
159,  267.         <2ff/r<sc),  I_I32,  1163. 
JiT,  270. 


[56] 


THE    KURRAL. 


'penance,    suffering/    48,    984. 

Qj5tT<c%r\-\,  344. 

U6tn<F  'tenderness.'   [LJ^JF.]     us®*? 
srr' the  tender  maiden/  1098. 

'  green,    tender.'         [Comp. 


iqeu  'the  green  grass/   16. 
'  unburnt  clay/  660. 

'hunger/  13,  225,  227,  656, 
734.  ^L£IU&  '  ravening  hun- 
ger/ 226.  (§  64)  'suffer 
hunger/  uffiuurr,  837.  LJ^^ 
&>  944- 


sorrow.' 

/5J«6U,  Ch.  CXVII. 

,  Ch.  cxx.         (§  57)  ut-fr 
i    '  will   spread.'       [Comp. 


L/i_/rLD  'a  veil,'  1087. 
the  earth,'  606. 

'ascetics,'  586   [corr. 


of  S. 

uiy-gv  'deceit/  91.  ,  ,_     ^ 

(Lps&Ln    '  pretended   good   con- 
duct/ 271,  275. 

u®.  It  is  often  added  to  trans, 
verbs  and  forms  a  passive ; 
comp.  §  92,  262. 

I.  u®    (§  56,  II.;    root,  for 

UL-L-  or  LJ©LO),  'will  be,  turn 

out  to  be,  result,  accrue/  172, 

279,     676,     Nal.    7,    239,    246. 

UL-eu    (v.  n.),    'closing/     1175, 

1136    [comp.    1049].         u®^<sv 

(v.  n.),  with  U/TLP,  83  ;  with  OTSOT, 

7;    with  ®ff&&,  224,  Nal.  18, 

277.       LJL-  (inf.  mood,  §  97, 

41),    524,   922'   NfL   295>.364; 

=  'to   become   spring'    (with  a 

noun),    231,    237;    forming    an 

adv.  (§  168),  640,  Nal.  116,  156.  | 

u'lt^.  (part.,  §  77),  'having  suf- 

597,    996;    '  fallen 

:.-r/     1074,    1297,    ill,    266, 

47.66,317.       uuf. ax  (§  95, 

.  217,  272,  558,886,977, 

Lf<f,fl0fii  (§100),  654, 

896.    UL-t-gi  (past  tense,  §  70*), 

'•• ;  (as  part,  noun,  §  87),  49, 


L/i 

for 

>  = 

348, 
285, 
'en- 


Nal.   117,    1  60,     196,  212. 

(=LJ/_L/_^'; 

999-  U 

gpL£>),  699.  LJilL_/r/r,  165, 
819,  920,  936,  Nal.  229, 
287,  325.  UL-L-  (§  74), 
dured,  enjoyed/  408;  'felt/  878, 
1140,  Nal.  6,  38,  91,  108,  no, 
129,  180,  197,  237,  291.  LJ©LQ 
(fut.  tense,  §  72.)  The  3rd  neut. 
used  for  all  genders  and  both 
numbers  ;  ='  will  be  or  suffer/ 
50,  114,  169,  185,  186,  214,  191, 
298>  349»  388>  405,  525,  575,  625, 
665,  822,  824,  826,  836,  850, 
947,  958,  1037,  1045,  I046,  1047, 
1096,  1138,  1254,  1327,  1078, 
Nal.  6,  9,  150,  176,  236,  242, 
274,  288,  306,  326,  340,  345, 

347»  35°>  373'  IO°;  ='  should 
be/  131,  154,  202,  265,  335,  412, 
501,  589,  698,  Nal.  37,  42,  89, 
133;  =rel.  part.  (§  74),  453, 
1145.  u®  <sufr=l  they  will  be/ 
927,  1078,  356.  u®u  (u  = 
au/r/r),  810,  626.  LJ©SU  (§  88) 
=  '  things  that  will  be/  172. 
Lj©su/r/r  (§  87)  =  '  those  (that) 
will  be/  1193,  1194,  1289,  Nal. 
139,  180,  208,  272.  UL-1—trn- 
(§  87)='  those  that  have  en- 
dured/ 895,  Nal.  21,  136.  u© 
<sw^j='  that  which  will  be/  291, 
324,  379,  438,  591,  801,  844. 

LJLlj_<5U/T  (§  87),  269.        U®UIT&(3ij 

(§  97)  =  '  that  (it)  will  ensue/ 
136,  164.  UL-.i—iTib(&>  'as  it 
suffers/  1189.  (See  c^/s^.) 
UL-rr^n-  (§  110),  921,  1194. 
UL-rrtjl  (§  121,  poet,  for  ui-trQp), 
'  set  not  !  '  1210.  iLii—rr^ij  702, 
Nal.  134,  183.  ui-trp  (§  121), 
776,  418.  LJL_/r(^y)  (§  121), 
1140,  1108,  1087,  1115  (§  110), 
Nal.  142,  169,  250,  255. 
uL-fT^<sun-  (§  121),  623,  1004. 
ui-irpniT,  88.  UL-{r<s®La  (§  154, 
used  for  ui—rru^ev),  38. 


II.  u®uu&  .(§  64,  87),  'that 
which    will   cause   to   be/    460, 
465.          u©#£j    (§    77),    512. 
L&  (§  72),  372.      u®uufr 


LEXICON   AND   CONCORDANCE. 


[57] 


(§  72),  623.         u(D^r/rcar,   590. 
U®&#L*  (§  100),  747- 

III.  LJ/T®,  (1)  '  anything  that 
befalls,  or  is  suffered'  ;  then  (2) 
*  dignity,  honour,'  409,  597,  768, 
906,  995,  1237,  1322,  Nal.  105, 
187,  252,  281,  340.  In  com- 
pounds :  —  <g)i—fruu[T  ©  'affliction,' 
624.  s-L-LDUtr®  '  agreement,' 


890. 


hindrance,' 


945-  Grpuuir®  '  disgrace/  464. 
goujULJ/r©  'doubt/  587.  <&L_LJ 
un- ©  '  duty,  obligation/  211,  Nal. 
261.  <ssssrun~®  '  sleep/  1049, 
Nal.  366  [comp.  Nal.  169]. 
1  ability/  640.  Q^tr 
'  connection/  345. 
'  disagreement/  945. 
Gueyrutr®  (GussrumLL-g]  'what 
pertains  to  impudence  '),  1063. 

IV.  LJ©  is  compounded  with 
q/Dti,  LjffLp  ('  become  waste/ 
83),  eo)«,  UITGO  ('behave/  111), 

,  uiLjffsr  (1078), 
('attain  to/  1289  [see 
348),  ^qz.,  ®y®,  $,  @L£    (='fall 
under/  55^)»  ^^^ij  (Lpsw,  a. sir. 

.  'Instrument/  555,  828, 
985,  1228,  1258,  1324.  [LJ©.] 
2.  'Army'  (=^rra^sr),  253,381, 

498,   761—69.         LJ60)L_LQ/TLL^,   Ch. 
LXXVII.  Uta®l—&Q<S:(TF><&(@j,  Ch. 

LXXVIII. 

anvil/  821.       [LJ©  + 


t-iL—ip.    'meanness/    1074.      (See 


(§  57),  'bow  down,  be 
humble.'  uesttf  (a9.  Q^/r.), 
1121,  1258.  Ljecjsfl^eij,  125,  963, 
985-  LJ <oscfl {LI LC> }  978.  LJ60sti<ay, 
95?  960.  Ljecsfl^^j,  680. 

LJOotsm  '  strength/  1234. 

L-/6337-    '  melody  ;  sound  of  musical 
instrument/     573.  ussbrq    | 

'quality,     good    quality,    excel-    ; 
lence,    courtesy/    45,     97,    389,   | 
469,    579,    681,   683,    688,   783, 
8 10,    811,   912,  937,  ^  955,  993- 

'  right  conduct,  courtesy/      Ch. 


c.,    991  -  1000. 

579.  LJS3srqsB>L_(L//r/r,     996. 

ussGnSleo/soir^siiiT  '  those  desti- 
tute of  human  feelings/  997. 
usssruirfb(yiT  '  those  who  act  not 
worthily/  998.  usmiSleussr  'a 
worthless  person/  865,  1000. 

LJ  vSOST iSl  civ  <S6)  L£) ,     85!.  LJS33TLS6U 

^§5C7",     871.  LJ03S7"LJ6U6U,      JOO. 

usssTLSIevQ^eo,  194.      LJOTrqsroL- 

3T,    874. 

'  material,  goods/  475. 
'formerly/   1083,  1133. 


'foot,manner/  _ 

see  g>®58r~\.      <oTssoru<9;LJb  'easiness 
of  access/   548,  991. 

'chaff'  (B.  scoria!).  [Comp. 


utsl    [S.]     'place/     1116,     1229. 
'  abode/   1015. 

'ten/  450,  817.     (§  172.) 

'profit,  fruit.'  [Comp. 
ueusar,  LJLnii.  S.  pliala.~}  ULUSST 
LOJTLD,  216,  2,  45,  87,  97,  103, 
104,  128,  177,  198,  200,  239,  354, 
524,  560,  606,  646,  676,  901,  912, 

994,    I  100,     1109.  UlULA,    728, 

74O.        UlUS^i   7O5.        <oT£3T6VT  LJtLJ<Bj 

pQpn-  '  of  what  use  is  it  ?  '  987. 
uiuscrffrinT  'useless/  194.  LJ© 
uiu&sr,  172.  UiUssruG),  1078. 
uLU<5sfleoQ<s:rr&i)6^[r/oO)Lct)  Ch.  xx., 
191-200. 
LJUJ  (§66),  'yield,  produce.' 

UIU<£<$60,    2O2.  UUJ<rE(yjLC>,    97, 

123,  292,  351,  461,  659,  669, 
854.  UtUfijSjbjpl,  1192.  LJUJLJ 
L9^2//i,  690.  ULULJU^l,  685, 

690.  ULUSUfT,  406,  439,   652. 

uSlfr)   (§  70,  as  Osuaj),  '  practise, 
enjoy.'       uu9Q(yjyLo,  783. 

(§  66),  '  be  extended.'      urrfigi 
'wandering/  1062. 
urr<5<5<5$r  '  a  profligate.'     ujr-J5<&\ 
*  thou  profligate!'   1311. 

(§  57)  '  compassionate,  en- 
dure, defend,  dread.'  [?  S.  bri.~\ 
LjffliqLo  '  ward  off/  862  ;  'dread/ 
502.  LJifysjeu  '  suffering/  1243. 


[58] 


THE    KURRAL. 


'  having  compassion,' 
1248,  1243;  'having  suffered, 
toiled,'  132,  1172;  'laborare,'  B. 
LJffluS^Lo  '  though  you  toil,' 
376.  ufluj^  ( 

'  great.' 

u  05  (5  (§62),  'drink.' 

'I  shall  taste  of  joy,'  1266. 
uqf)<s<5U(rn-  '  those  who  will  de- 
vour you  with  affection,'  8  1  1  . 

[S.]  'season,'  1028.     u® 
even  in    the   season,' 
218.     u(^eu^^i  'in  the  season,' 
490.       uqjjQjpQpiT®    'cling   to 


the  favourable  season,'  482. 
'suffer.'  (See  uifl, 
o  '  suffering,'  1197,  1240. 
'suffering,  83.  UQ^ 
<sujTfrir  'he  suffers  not,'  1126. 
Lj&uLjgyuQjjeuirGo  '  suffering 
from  the  wanness  of  hue,'  Ch. 
cxix. 

'many'  (§184),  242,  322,  735, 
1045.     [OPP-  ^®>«]     U!^t  1258. 
,  140,  337,  342,  373,  649,  823, 


868,  934,  1034.         LJ6u<m/Lo,  275, 

492,    522,   884,   885.  LJ6i>6U(50)<a/, 

728.         uevfr,  270,  278,  468,  473, 

514,    528,771,    III2,    1119,1141, 

1149,  IJ6o.      LJ6V6u/r/r,  191,  192, 
194,  450,  873. 

'old.'     [uy>fl9asBr,  Ml.   123, 
Ch.  XL] 

I.  LJLt>Lo  'fruit,'  1  1  20.         [S. 
phal  ;    comp. 

(§  64),  '  fruit.' 

'as    though   it   fruited?'    216, 

1008. 

II.  'Old,'  955.     [Comp. 
Q<£5(Lp.]        LJ6OLe><5B>Lo    '  old  inti- 
macy,'   Ch.    LXXXI.,    80  1,     521. 
u®!)Lpuj[rir    'old    friends,'    810. 

'we  are  old  friends.' 
(§   62),   '  become    accus- 
u 'habit,'  785. 


tomed.' 


j  'wonted,'  803,  937. 

'fault;  evil,'  639.  [LJL&.] 
z.  '  guilt'  ;  'vituperium,  censura  ' 
(B.),  40,  44,  62,  137,  145,  146, 
172,  1  86,  433»  5°6,  618,  657, 
794,  865,  1015,  1051,  1285. 


(§  64),  '  blame,'  UL$& 
(g>ai,  656.  ULfluun-fT  '  those 
who  will  malign,'  820.  UL$<£ 
'  what  it  has  condemned,' 
49.  [Comp. 


280. 


'crystal,'  706. 
'bed,'  840. 

upS)  (§  64),  '  pluck  out.' 
(=u^^-  §97),  774. 

UP  (§  66)>  '  %  away.' 

Qp  '  it  is  as  the  flight,'  338*. 

U6s>fD  'a  drum,'  1076,  1115,  1180. 


1.  (§  62),  'Seize,  hold, 
cling  to.'  upnSI,  347,  956.  LJ£ 
PP@i  747-  Ljrb(yiir  '  enemies,' 
865.  urr)£)]<s5)  350.  umny 

'  deeds  of  variance,'  852.  LJ/P 
flSlojiriT^  748.  2.  'A  grasp,  what 
one  clings  to,  attachment,'  88, 
275,  347,  35<\  5°6>  521,  606, 
748.  ujb^j'sh&TLCi  '  an  avari- 
cious soul,'  438.  [Comp.  S. 
bhaj.] 

u «o3T7  '  dew  ;  coolness,'   1223,  I232, 


1  121  (or 

a  book,'  21. 

'a  palmyra  tree,'  104,  433, 
1282,  Ml.  96,  105.  (See  jsiVssr 
and  gi%sssr.) 

fr  (§  64),    '  distribute.'       [LJ@.] 
44,  227,  1107. 

[S.],  '  portion,  half  ,'  1092. 


O  '  happily.' 

1.  See  LJ®.        2.   (§  62), 
Sing.'       LJ/r/_6u  '  singing.' 

'a     garden-bed,'      718. 
LJirt5J5$uu®uug)i  plant 
out,'  465.     (See  LJ©.) 
LJ/TUJ  (§  57),  'leap,  spring.'     UITUJ 


ir  '  those  who  will  leap  into,' 
1287. 

<  introduction/  Ch.  i. 


u  rr  IT  tr  i. 


See  u/r/r. 


uirfruu{T<5sr    'a  Brahman,'    134. 
[?  corr.  of  S.] 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[59] 


I.  (§  62),  <  See,  watch  for, 
behold.'  [&n-etssr,  C^/r*®.] 
urriT<ggJ,  86,  487,  676.  UITIT& 

285.  Ufrireuisij  'sight,'  1152. 
Lin-jnrtL®  (see  ^©),  196,  521, 
994. 

II.  '  A  sandbank,   rock,   bar,' 
1068,  Nal.  122.       [Comp.  L//rif .] 

(§  64),  'spread,  make  much 

Of.'       LJ/TffilJU/r/r,  916.        U(Tlfl<£3jl, 

193.       uinfl&tgjLo,  851.      [Comp. 


1.  'Milk,'  1000,  1 121. 
2.  l  Portion,  division'  (  =  u<s<sv). 
(1)  ^{Djs^uuireo,  Ch.  v.- 

XXXVIII.  ;    (2)   QLJ/r<2Jill_//T6i>,  Ch. 

xxxix.-cix. ;  (3) 
Ch.  ex.  ad  Jin. 
LJ/reu  '  thing  or  things  that  per- 
tain to.'  J£58$5sruun-&L>  '  evil 
things,'  209,  206,  437,  871,  82, 
825>  5!5>  376,  378,  659,  40, 
342,  672.  3.  'Side,'  118,  422- 

4.  'Kind,   sort,'   533,   950,    279. 

5.  'Land.'        Gussrurreu  'barren 
soil,'   78.         6.  As    <s£l<te5r<B5(Sjn5)LJ 
L/(ip/D,p.         (Intro,     p.    xxiii.) 
urr/bjpj  'it   is    meet   to  be,'    n, 
829,    Nal.     i.        un-puiL®     'as 
befits  each  order  of   men,'   in. 
un~(buLLi_^  '  has  fallen  into,  is 
in  the  state  of,'  999. 

'  a  snake,'  890,  1146. 

desolation.'  [L/SOLDUJ.] 
'  becoming  void,' 
83.  LJ IT LP© -5= ILJ iij LCI  '  which  lays 
waste,'  735. 

[S.],    'sin,'j46.       [Syn. 
,  ^LJLj/rev, 


'a  sinner'  (personification),  168, 
1042. 


'puppet;    image  on  the 
retina,'    407,    1020,   1058.       urr 
0  image  !'   1123. 

(§  64),  'sieze.'      L%<£JJJ  'a 
handful,'  1037.     GGOL-uL^iq.^^ 
(see  <ffi<60L_),  *  persevering,'  944. 
'  a  corpse,'  913. 


1.  '  Disease,'  949,  1014, 
1102.  ^utSlessfl,  227.  iSl&ssf! 
ti3s3rso)LD,738.  gteun-uLSosffi,  734. 
2.  (§  64),  'Bind.'  LS!<ossft&@L* 
'will  bind,'  570;  'which  will 
enchain,'  643. 

'hind:  cerva,'   1085,  1089. 

(§  57,   64),    'separate;     go 
apart.'       /Jrfl^eu,  394.        With 


258; 


(see 

departing  from,'  955  ; 
,  97;  ^SsuuLSr 
LJLSltf]uj[r<£(r!!r,  810. 
r,  633,  1248,  1264. 
530.  '  LS/fl<a/,  839,  1152,  1153, 
1156,  1158,  1160,  1295.  t9ffl 
Ch.  cxvi.  L^rfl 
I  sever  myself  not,'  1315. 
),  633.  LSffluL/fr  '  they 
will  put  asunder,'  187. 

(§  64),  '  miss,  sin  against.' 

.   iSlff.']  LSl®®L£LJLSl<S3r  '  if 

you  err  in,'  1019.  tSlmLp^^ 
'erring,  offending,'  417,  896. 
LSenippp  'which  has  missed,' 
772.  '  LSsrotp^^ji]  'what  has 
been  done  wrong,'  779.  iSt&nLp 

'it    misses     not,'      307. 

/rso)LQ  '  avoiding  offence.' 
Ch. 
xc.  iSl<5S)Lp  'a  fault,'  535. 

I.  [Comp.  S.  para.]  '  Other 
(things),'   8,    34,    61,    95,    213, 

297>  3°°>  302>  3°4,  32I>  495» 
661,  710,  909,  917,  982,  ion, 
1102,  1181,  1184.  LSlffxsyLo, 

120.  L^rQGSr,    49,     141-50,    163, 

178,    186,   204,    282,   316,   508, 

IO47.  lSlr068fi®Js£l<o5)LpLLin~<5G)LD, 

Ch.  xv.  L9fl9/r,  72,  160,  206, 
311,  319,  424,  436,  646,  834, 
1009,  1015,  1018,  1076,  1079, 
1319.  iSlrtig],  251,  257,  315, 
327,  645,  841,  842. 

II.   [Comp.   S.  jpra.]     (§   66), 
'Be  born.'      iSirp^^&o,  303,  681, 

992.         LS/D«@/i,   1044.          iSlrofi 
409,  951-59,   1044.      L$PP 
502,  794.       i3pjb&u>,   409. 

,  603,  1026. 
362.     L$//Dffl8  'birth,'  10. 


[60] 


THE    KUBEAL. 


'birth,'  62,  107,   133,  i34,   339, 
345,349,35i,357,358,36i,ioo2, 

>^@    (§    62),    'appear,    shine 
torth.      [iSp.]      Qu(j5«MflL9/D/B 

'it  has   shone  forth,'  23. 

v_p/s/c£/7-LJLj<53srq      *  faultless 
excellence,'  62. 

'  the   crescent  moon,'    782. 
[Comp.  Lzjgl.]     pneo,  125. 

(§ 225), 'after.' 1. Adv. 'after- 
wards; 53  5, 780.  2.  As  prep.  gov. 
case  with  ^)scr  or  ^JSOT,  160,  225, 
323.  3.  As  conj.  with  rel.  part., 
293,  39^.467,  491,  509,  662,  693, 

(gj.,  LSesrGBr^]  'it  comes  after,' 
1031.  5.  Forms  compounds  : — 
(1)  With  verbs  :  /_9 ear Q^gu 'fol- 
low after,'  207,  966,  967,  1033, 
1248,  1255,  1256,  1293;  iSlevr 
Q$x>)<fs@  '  regard  the  future,' 
184;  L$  SOT  gofl^  '  survive,'  1160; 
LSlpuuj  'yield after,'  659.  (2)  With 
nouns:  iSlrnu&d)  'afternoon,'  319; 
iSlssrtotfiir '  things  that  deteriorate,' 
782. 

'pride,  greatness,'  59,  968, 
1014,  1021,  1088.  fComp. 
LJ/T©.] 

*  peacock's  feather,'  475. 
^     'affliction,'  658,  839,  843. 
[Comp.    iSltfi.]         gift    (§    64), 

:L$<£5@L£>,  843.        L?L^LJ 
1217. 

(=@)<o®&)  'praise,'  5,  39, 
59,  156,  296,  457,  532,  652,  966, 
Ch.  xxiv.,  232-37 
M«f&  533-  (§57,.  , 
'  things  praised,'  538. 
5  (§  56,  IT.),  'enter.' 
4  entering,' 1 44,  243,  840. 
'will  enter,'  346.  q^ear  'if  it 
enter,'  937.  q<£@  'having 
entered,'  835,  996.  q@^J§ 
(§  160),  'having  caused  to  en- 


'a  wound,'  129,    257, 
575,  776.  ^ 


ter,'  608,  6  1  6. 


(§  62). 


1187. 


a  dwelling,'  340. 
'place'   (§    251).        With 
I  changed    my   place,' 


57),     'join,    embrace.' 
,  1109,  1326. 

if  you  can,'  308. 
1260.     L/s^/ray^y,  1307. 

-^'  those  who  embrace,'  917. 
'reunion,'   1152,   1155.' 
'  union,  intimacy,'  785! 
^areu,      Ch.      cxi. 
a)U6u,  Ch.  cxxix  ' 
/  306,1134,1164. 
=q^/r)  'thicket,'  274. 

*£a®r)  'children.' 
[?  corr.  of  Lfffjra:]  q^euoj 
eroiTLj  Qugu<£6u  '  the  obtaining  of 
children,'  Ch.  vn. 

'a  sheaf  (of  arrows),'  597. 

'a  deity,'  2  13,  234,  290; 
pi.  q^G^^/r,  58.       q^G>(6D5)@ 
'the  celestial  world,'  966,  1323. 
'a  cloud,'  14. 

'a  king,'    780.     [S.= 
Tndra.] 

(§  56,   III.),   'roll   away.' 
Ljir<3fr38t_6L>  '  let  it  go  !  '  755. 

[S.],  'an  eye-brow,'  1086. 

1.'  Worth,'  9  1  9.  g.  'Fault,' 
292.     [Comp.  Qu^i,  L5(SB>ip.] 

(§  66),  'sulk,  feign  dislike,' 
'  affecting  anger,'  1323. 
/F^^/rQqsv^^gu,  Ch.cxxx., 
'  finding  fault  with  the  mind.' 
qsu,  1316,  1305.  qem^'  being 
sulky,'  1039,  I246,  I287-  L/6^ 
^/r/r  'those  that  sulk  with  one,' 
1303.  q  eD^gro^  '  be  reserved  , 
as  if  angry,'  1301.  qeuuL/eu 
'I  will  show  myself  angry,' 
1259.  i-]<oou(oU6sr  '  shall  I  stand 
aloof?'  1267.  qsusS,  Ch.  cxxxr. 

I3O2,  1306,  1309,  1324. 

Ch.  cxxxu. 


6VLb,  (1)  'place,'  43.  (2)  'field,' 
85.  (3)  'knowledge,'  407,71^: 
qeuoj/r'the  learned,'  234,  394. 
(4)  '  senses,'  174,  343;  'objeeta: 
ponit  objecta  pro  potentiis  ad  ilia 
tendentibus.'  gg/iqevew  '  enjoy- 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


ment  coming   through   the  five 

senses,'  noi. 

(§  62),  'lament.'      fiVssr/s 
jevLaueu,  Ch.  cxxi. 

1.  'Grass,'  16.  2.  'Mean, 
trifling,  wan,'  71,  189,  331,  719, 
815,  846,  914,  915,  916,  1222. 
\-\606tifSl  61)  K  <om<5®L&  'folly,'  Ch. 
LXXXV.  q3ou=qs3r<5roai  :  qSeu 
(aSltyocnuir  'vicious  persons,'  329. 
q«3T<ss3sr  'sorrow,'  1152.  (See 
<£ES23sr.)  qssnsoLrt  '  meanness,' 
174,  185,  329.  q< 
'  it  will  be  low,'  790.  (See 
Upotos  '  a  decoction  of  vege- 
tables,' 1065. 

'a  tiger,'  273,  599. 

(§  62), '  embrace.' 
'  embracing,'  827. 
1290.  q eli <sS  '  having  embraced,' 
1187,  1324.  L-i&j&jiG><susvr  '  shall 
I  embrace,'  1267.  Ljeo6$G><oGr6vr 
'I  embraced,'  1259.  qeuew, 
1303.  qeueu/r^j,  1301.  qeu 
eun-ir,  755.  qeueu/rsfr,  1316. 

H^  (§  57),  '  desire,  aim  at.'     qffys 
jsirif,  5,  287.     qffl^^j  '  concupis- 
cere  '  (B.),    59,    541,    607,    143. 
511,  977,  994. 

'flesh,'  257,  259. 

sO,  Ch.  xxvi. 
'  dust,  earth,'   1037. 


[S. 


'a  bird,'  274,  338- 

,    L//D63T.      I.  '  Outside  ' 

],  277,  298,  487,  933. 

II.  <s£l.  @.     (Intro,  p.  xxxiii.) 
HfD;§<£  '  are  things  externe,'  39. 
HP  <£<£<&  IT  '  as  a  thing   outside,' 
82. 

III.  Compounds:     1.    Verbs. 

L\fDUU®^ft(TGST     [U©  (56,  III.)], 

'  make  known,'  590.  \-\pm 
'defend,'  549.  up  mi 
'forsake,'  924. 
'defame,'  181,  183. 
,  Ch.  xix.  m£>OJ5 
s,  185.  L^roQt^sSl 
'  watching  for  his  absence,'  189. 
'defaming,'  182. 


(See 


[61] 

2.    Nouns.  q/D^^^jLJL/  '  exter- 
nal members,'    79. 
'  foreign  course,'  46. 

See  qev. 

1261. 
dimness.'       [ 

Sub.  £G<55Br&<srr  '  my  eyes 
have  grown  dim.' 

'<°vr<°v  'a  stream  of  water,'  495, 
737,  H34,  1167,  1287. 

'  Fetters,'  836. 
2.  (§  57),  'adorn,  laud.'  qSoor 
uSjg2/L£>  '  though  you  adorn  it, 
laud  it,'  790.  qSsor 
'  adorned,'  407.  js& 

65) IT 3}  J$ 6V ,  Ch.  CXII. 

;  '  aflower,'  1112,1115, 1305,  1313. 

(§  64),  '  bloom.''  ytJu/r',  248. 

'  clamour,'  61,  1237. 

r  'worship,'  18.  [S.  puja.~] 
L^ewr  (§  56,  II.),  '  put  on  as  an  or- 
nament. ^fOLDL^toSsri—friT  '  those 
who  have  arrayed  themselves  in 
virtue,'  23.  ysacr©  'having put 
on,'  30.  LfrssviLA  '  will  put  on,' 
836. 

[S.],  '  the  elements,'  271. 

L^iflujir&Gfr   'the    vile,' 
241,  919. 
Lp  '  a  quail,'  Ml.  122. 

jQuL-,  Quevvr  (§  70).  [See 
sir.]  1. 'Desire.'  Q>uiLi—&<s 
<&rrQ  \_Qumr  for  Qutl<s],  '  being 
to  be  desired,'  732.  QuiLi-mr 
'  he  who  desired,'  1 178.  QuiLu, 
fut.  inf.,  '  so  as  to  give  pleasure,' 
1276  ;  v.  noun,  'things  one  de- 
sires,' 1257,  1283.  Qu/1© 
'having  desired,'  141.  OuiL 
L_/T/Q@  '  as  —  has  desired,'  908, 
1293.  2.  ©Ljisosr  'a  woman,'  54, 
56,  902,  907,  910,  1137.  In 
comp.,  '  womanly,'  907,  909, 
1083,  1084,  1311  ;  'womanhood,' 

4O2,    1272,    I28O.         QU(o5ST<Sl]L$Q<B: 

CD  GO  '  being  under  woman's 
guidance,'  Ch.  xci.  ;  pi.  Quessr 
i$L/r,  58,  913,  920.  GL/SWCTOLO 


[62] 


THE    KURRAL. 


1280, 


'womanhood,'    147,    150, 
1258. 

QuiLJir  (§  57,  64),  n.  and  a., 
'  change.'  [Spelt  also  QUIT.  I 
have  retained  the  spelling  of  all 
the  editions.]  QU($LZ  '  will 
change,'  486.  Qujrrr  'un- 

changing, remediless,'  370,  892. 
QuujirJBQ<86ST '  I  changed,'  1187. 

'  though  eternal  fate  be  moved, 
they  move  not,'  989.  Quiufrtij^ 
'  again,'  205,  344.  Qurr<sg], 
357- 

QUUJ  (§58),  '  drop  (as  rain), 
pour  in,  place,  assemble.'  QUILI 
Qujscf  LjQu(u(LiLdSG)LQ  '  it  will  rain 
when  she  bids  it,'  55.  QUUJ, 

580.       Quiilg],   66O.  QULLJ   (i2$. 

G^,T.),     475.  QuuScsr,     475. 

QUUJ®},  545,  559,  1174.       ©u(u 
pirar  '  she  put  on  as  a  girdle,' 
1115.       [Comp.  ^Sa)Lj©LJtu  '  as- 
semble.'    See  is^).~\ 
Quqfj    (Quifluj,     QUIT),    '  great.' 

gyomp.  csy®,  cgyfl"-',  c^,^,  §  131.] 
LJ0,  Qu($LD,  10,  54,  58,  198, 
217,  332,  38o>  526,  565,  571,  732, 
805,816,  837,  847,  866,924,  968, 
1000,  1001,  1006,  1137,  1239, 
1255.  © u (5 u3<$Ln  'pride,  great- 
ness,' 431,  979.  [S.  urfluSj&Lz.'] 
Guffl^j,  69,  102,  103,  124,  328, 
839,  947,  I092>  Il66>  1272,^1276. 
Gurfluj^p,  902.  Quirlajirfr,  Qu 
rfloj/r,  26,  160,  443,  444,  680,  694, 
892,  896,  976.  ©LJrfliD/rerojrLJ 
i,  Ch.  xc.  Qutflujrr 
Ch.  XLV. 
'  greatness,'  21-28. 

33r>>   4i6,    451*    5°5'   6ll>    9°7> 
102 1.       Ch.    XCVIIT.,    974-980. 
^£0/rrrGu(75«DLo,  Ch.  in.    QUIT, 
744,   1083.     QujTfSeuiT&reor,  215  ; 
1  glutton  ' ;   comp. 
breDLfl,     148,     773,    962. 
(§    62),   'grow   great.' 

LO,  96,    604. 

(§  62),  'multiply.' 
••ease,1     8 1 1 . 

>j>erity,'  115,  170,  431,  963. 
'  increasing,  feeding,' 


251. 
revenue 


'increasing 


512. 


(§  56,  II.)  '  obtain,  bear,  or 
beget  children  ;  come  to  pass/ 
L^6usu<so).frLjG)ucp/$£6l;,  Ch.  vn. 

I.  Quroeu,  213,  1  1  80.        ©LJJ2,' 
^eu,    1190.      Quffilsvr   'if  (you) 
obtain,   if  it   come  to  pass,  if,' 
54,  58,  62,  92,  in,  119,  123,  162, 
257,   334,   403,    540,   648,    666, 
680,   708,   709,    838,    869,   988, 
1270,  1295,  1330.        Qufil^jLD, 
311,   812,  954.         Qugxaiir,  58. 
Qugueijrrsvr,    842.      Quji/iL,    61, 
768,  1322.     QujruGusji  l  what  can 
be  gained,'  46,  813. 

'we  shall  gain,'  1328. 

QIUIT  '  wilt  thou  gain?  '  1237. 

II.  Qujbp,    524,    1000,    1109, 
1270.       Qu/b(7j?/r,  1191.       Qup 
(yecr   'a  husband,  one  who  has 
obtained,'     58,    226,    268,    943. 

1067,  1104.         QUID 
626.         Qu/D/Dfiuir,   1191. 
333.          Qur0/D£vr<oGr, 
QurbrD^^rrd)  (=Quir> 
524. 

Qu(ygi,      1143,      1198. 
1295.     Qu(y^,  238. 
'  gain,'  60,   61,  162- 
a  cow,'  273.       GiutbfSl 
(MJ/T/T),  442  [0Lj(/r)/i5?='  nature']. 

'hermaphrodite,'  614,   727. 


1143. 
^/r 
III. 


IV. 


(§  62),  'cherish.' 

©LJSTT.]      GLJSSOT,  866. 

56,     120,  442,  443,  633,  917,  976. 

(Jueafliu/r/r  'my  lover,'  1257. 
Gu^eroui,  833,  866.  Quests), 
924.  0^(650)^,  163,  892,  902, 
1178,  1283.  G>u<gG3)£or,  526. 

(oUGssreuiT  'they  cherish  not,' 
1016. 


(ou<otn<£.     1.  'A   simple    person,' 
603,  8  1  6,  833-88.  Qucnpu 

u©«@/i  'will  stultify,'  372. 
2.  'A  woman,'  1084,  1106,  1136, 
1238,  1239,  1248,  1272,  1274. 
GueopiLHrnr,  142,  782,  797,  834, 
839.  Gu6n<$<5C)L&  '  folly,'  141, 


LEXICON   AND   CONCORDANCE. 


[63] 


358,  417,  428,  507,  805,  831,  832, 
910,  1242,  Oh.  LXXXIV. 
(OUILJ  <  a  demon,'  565. 
QUIT.     See  Qutun-  and  QLJ^. 
See  Qugy. 

'pining  grief,'  1172, 
1175,  1197,  1223,  1239,  1243, 
1266;  with  S.LD.  [Comp.  with 


See  u&. 

*  green    grain,'    550. 
Qprny-  '  yellow  (golden)  arnilet/ 
1234,  1238. 
<5S)uiu  '  softly,'  1098. 

(§       66),      'forget.' 
jF-ffn-js^Ln      '  though     they 
forget,'  199,  719.         Quirtf-Firis 
f  those    oblivious   of,'  246. 
533.  QLJ/T<F 

,    285,     532, 

534.  Qun-ff^ireun-j       537. 

Qun-fffrrsun-GOLct  '  not  being  ob- 
livious of  duties/  Oh.  LIV. 
ufT^gj     *  common,     alike/    528, 
915,  1099,  1311. 
/r$  (§  57),  '  store  up.'       QLJ/T 

J55- 

gv  'hole.'  [Comp.  Qunfi 
^j.]  QutTjSgiuuGilLn  '  will  fail/ 
468. 

Qurriij.  1.  'A  lie,  what  is 
false/  6,  836,  938,  1246.  [Opp. 
QLOOJ.]  In  comp.  =  '  false.' 
2.  (§  64)  '  deceive,  lie.'  GLJ/TUJ^ 
^eu,  1287.  Quirib^fS,  293. 

Qu(riurb<s,  293.         QurriuuLSlzsr, 
13.  0  LJ  IT  ILIUJ  rr  ,    299,    753. 

QumLiLun-&)],  294.         GLJ/TUJ^^J, 

l82,    183.  QutTLULCKSVLZ,    292, 

913.       QLj/r(Lttj/r<2DL£>,  296,  297. 
Qu/r0     (§    60)     'fight,    attack.' 
QuiT(iTj<&&n-   'the    fighting  ram' 

(s&SsorcgO,  486.        Qu(rqf)g)t  888. 
QLJ/T^^,  888.  (auirrr  'war/ 

758,  767. 

^y       (§     62),      'join.' 
<£  «£<£>,  633.       [Opp.  L^ffl^ 
u.      «/Qu/r/r.] 

1.  'Reality,1  5,  351, 


434. 


424. 


Book  II.  :          ufTQ^l 

2.     'Meaning/ 
424,      509,     1046,      583,      199. 

3.  'Property/  63,  122,  128,  141, 
176,  212,  226,  241-49,  252,  254, 
282,  285,  307,  501,  477,644,660, 
732,  592,  741,909,911,  913,  914, 
925>   933>   938>    I23°>  75^  753» 
755>  756,  757,  759>   IOOI>   I002- 

4.  'A  thing,  matter/  355,  423, 
462,  675,  695,  746,  901,  588,  751  ; 
with    Uiuzyr,     Q<F6u<a;<i>,    «£££!&, 

^'GS&LCi.  QiOUJLJ 

249,    355,    356,    423, 
857.          Q<SFLctQutr(^<sfr,  358,  91. 

,  424. 
fr,  760. 

-Q^dr,  914. 
-^srr,  178,  371. 
rr,  870.  ^( 

orr,  760,  1009. 
fr,  897.          ^«sr©LJ/r(/5(ofr, 
171.       QuiTQTjisinTiT,  914.       Gu/r 
Ch.     LXXVI. 
'neighbour's 
wife';    '  mulier  propria'    (B.), 

141,   1001,   1002.  QutTQfjlL® 

'for  the  sake  of/  81,212,725, 

784.       QurrQfjiLi—fTGo,  256,  1017. 

uir(Lg,gi  (1)  *time'  (=«/r6uii), 

481;  (2)  'day';    (3)  'evening.' 
'  when/  1215.      Qu/r 
'than   in   the   time/  69. 
'even   one  day/ 

337.         utrg),  412,  539,  1229. 

QuiTLfttBlGsr  '  in   the   time/   569, 

930,  1105.       Qufr<if^i£5sssri^-irf5i 

•sou  '  mourning  at  eventide/  Ch. 

CXXIIT. 
Qurr&rQ  swear    'suddenly/     487. 

[OTSST,  §  82.] 
Qurr<sv<svir<£    'evil    things/    176. 

[Pfrom  v.  G)LJ/r6i;j2/  (§  62)='  be 

fitting.'] 
QuiTfS.     1,    'A  sense,   organ   of 

sense/  6,  9.        2.  '  Fate.'     QUIT 
'want  of  luck.' 

(§    64),   'bear,   endure.' 
151,  152.          QUIT 
i,  389.  QLJ/T^P^^?, 

579,  1032.          QurrQ/DGsr,  1247. 


[64] 


THE    KUERAL. 


37,     155,     'S6- 

239- 

(1)    'patience,'   153, 

xvi.        (2)  '  burthen,'  "189,  570, 

572,733,  99°,  I0°3,  I027- 
Qunrsifr    'gold,   any   metal,'    155, 

267,  888,  931. 
Qu/rsflfrjy  (§  62),  'die.'      [Comp. 

QU(T.~\  QLJ/rCBr^La,   36,    156. 

QuiTGfrfS,  171.        Qufrsor(y,  36. 

886."^ 
QUIT    (§  58,  258),  '  go.'     Causal : 

O^/r.),  371.  (OUTSIT^)!  'expen- 
diture,' 478.  GutnLi,  46,  933. 
GUITLD,  659,  848,  1070.  Qurr 
0(Tiu  '  go  thou  ! '  1123.  Qurr<ss, 
831.  Qu(T&(T,  376. 
1126.  Qurr&Q,  774, 
'  the  dismissal,'  332. 
Quir&n-g)  '  not  capable  of  being 
undermined,'  764. 

1.  See  Qu/r®.     2.  (§  64), 

273- 
a  flower,'  1227.     [Comp. 


cover. 


(§  57),   '  pass   between.' 
[Gu/r.]       (Ju/rip,  1108,  1239. 

See  QLJ/T^^J. 
(§  70),  '  resemble  '  [comp. 
§227].  QuiTev,  59,  118,  120,  126, 
155,  190,  235,  267,276,  253,315, 
334,  395,  574,  706,  781,  826,  882, 
887,  940,  946,  957,  1078,  1090, 
1096,  1097,  1118,  1  1  80,  1  1  86, 
If  1253,  1269,  1273,  I274, 
1285,1287.  QUIT  eu,  77,151,283, 
288,  435»  454,  479,  6l4,  674,  788, 
822,  888,  974,  1027,  1047,  1095, 
1099,  1117,  1159,  nK  1196, 
1224.  QUITCH*,  339,  552,783, 
997,  1048,  1054,  1105,  1228, 
1232,1233.  QuireQ&yiJQ,  811. 
<7u/r».»a//r,  997,  1071.  QUITGSTJDI, 
135,  822,  1007,  1170,  1203. 
QUIT  so*  *b«- 

(§  62),  '  make  much  of, 


extol,  defend,  ward  off.' 
foeo,  693,  891.  QuirprSl,  154, 
493,  477,  537,  538,  942.  GLJ/T/D 
^ear,  693.  Qurrp.^^Lei,  468. 

.T/r,  891.  G>U!Tff)£)l 

741.  Quirfb(H?t  315. 

234. 
252.       Q>utrni(yiT,  493. 


'  child.'  [Pronounced  by  the 
Tudas  max-]  L&&GVT  (used  with 
'  father,'  ^cro^),  '  son,'  67,  69, 
70,  196;  'man,'  no.  LD&&T 
'daughter';  pi.  LQ<ssyfi/r='  wo- 
men,' 57,  822,  ^912,  918,  974, 
ajea>sreSlesrLct<&6TfliT,  Ch.  xcn. 


[syn.  q^exjay/r],  'chil- 
dren,' 196,  388,  60-68  ;  '  sons  of 
men,'  410,  600,  993,  997,  1071. 
$%soL&&<s5<srr  '  private  soldiers,' 
770.  ^Sa)/j3<ffi«<ofr  '  officers,'  770. 
Lo/r<ffi<ffi(sfr,  irreg.  pi.  '  human 
beings,'  329,  420.  [Syn. 
and 


(§  57),  'rejoice,  exult'.; 
'gladness,'  1090,  1  20  1.  LzQi.pf£lt 
53  1,  539.  LQ^LD,  1281. 


IO57. 
Ch.  CXI. 


[S.],  '  blessing,'  60. 

become  bent,  folded,  in- 
dolent.'  LOL-isjQeor,  1036.   [^^L.] 

LDL_LD  [S.],  'simplicity,  folly,' 
1297,  1089.  LQL_ero^  'folly.' 

LQL-GurrtT  'fools,'  89,  153.  LDL_^ 
ero^  'a  maiden,'  1116,  1122, 
1273.  L^u.euu'Go  '  a  woman,' 

1085. 

L0i_e\)  <a  palmyra  leaf  -stem;  a 
horse  made  of  such  stems,  on 
which  a  suffering  lover  mounted 
to  proclaim  his  grief,'  1131-37. 

].     1.  '  The  fold  of  a 
irment,'  1023.       2.  '  Laziness/ 
371,  601-10,    1028. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


'  alertness/  Ch.  LXI. 
'  laziness/  608. 

(§57,  64),      perish,  de- 
stroy,     604.  LQUjLIUrr^LQUjL&tt 

(§  97,  Note),  602.  Lotf(L//i,  603. 
LAUJLLQ^LS  Q&rT'S&GrQ)!,  603.  The 
former  LGL$.  is  a$).  Q&ir.  '  possess- 
ing the  laziness  which  should  le 
destroyed.' 

©  (§  64),    '  hinder.' 
624. 

'wedded  folks/  1221,  '1226. 
L&em-jsjspireir  '  the  wedding-dav  ' 
1233,  Nal.  23,  25. 


396- 


'  a    well    in   the   sand/ 


2.  'Apple    of°  the   eye/'    1122. 

3.  '  Beauty/  742. 

'earth/  660,  407,  576,  742, 
996;  'an  earthern  vessel/  883. 
[Opp.  eSlsxr.  See  /^sssrei;.] 

'  a  pillar/  449. 
®  [S.],  'the  full  moon/  1116- 
1119,  782,  957,  1210.       [Comp. 


JS.]  (§  64),  '  esteem,  honour.'   I 
LJL9sar  'if  ...  esteem/    898.  ! 
(n.)J  intellect/  636,  915,  1229. 

[S.],    '  counsellor ';   =  ^   I 
&<&,  639. 

_    (§    62),    '  be    confused ' 

[S.].  [Comp.   6TOLO,   L&LLKSi),   LCtfT     \ 

as  'confusion/  360. 


[S.    mayura],     '  pea- fowl/   , 

Intro,  p.  ii.] 

'  hair/  964,  969. 

'nature.'       oijL9@)^,  188. 

'a  tree/  78,  216,  217,  600, 
576,  879,  997,  1008  ;  prefixed = 
'  wooden/  1020,  1058. 

0/57(5     'side'     [u««*i],    210, 
526. 


[65] 


(§  56,  III.),  'be  bewildered.' 
1139,  1229;  'bewilder- 
351,  352,1002,  1222,  1230. 
®  (§    62),   'pretend,   imi- 

tate. LnQfjLLlSjLUJrbg)],   IO2O. 

0/5^y  'medicine/   82,  217,942, 
950,  968,  1091,  1102,  1241,  1275, 
Ch.  xcv.     ['  Corr.  of  S.  amrita.'] 
Oa/  (§  62)  'cherish.' 
800.        L&t?®,  227.        (See 


<&  flower  full-blown/  3, 
1142,  1289,  iii2,  650,  1231, 
1119;  'the  lotus-flower/  595. 

[Comp.  L^,  ^(/^Lbq,  Gu^r^?.] 
^>6W(5  (§  57),  '  blow  as  a  flower, 
expand.'  Lflev/r^eu,  425.  /z><su 
Otis,  1227. 

&o.     lt    'Mountain/    124,    737, 
742.  2.    (§    57),    'abound.' 

,  657. 

(§  62),  'abound.'      [Comp. 

^£)^U,   LD6U6U00.]  LH6U(ffi  '  with 

copious  tears/  780. 

'abundance/  245. 
'babbling/  66. 

^  (§  64),  '  shave.' 
280. 


ran  12,  15,  55  ;  n  conip. 
=  'weeping,  tearful/  1239; 
'cloud/  Ml.  361. 

(§  66),  '  forget.'     [Q 

D^&d),  32,    152,  303. 

'  forget  not/  1  06. 

1284.         LarofigiLa,  204. 

1297.  LbpnjfSn'fr,  263. 

r,  1316.         LafDuuir,  560. 
1125,      1207,     1262. 
134.  LAflDUUgj, 

108.  tc/D«<£Ea^6u/r,    1297. 

L&lfluLJ,     I2O7,     1125.  LDfD'oS, 

'  forgetfulness/  605. 
'  sin/  76. 

'bravery/    384     ('  genero- 
;  B.),  766.     i&peufr  '  heroes/ 
778. 

1.     'Spot/     957,     1117. 
b,  Lo/r<8r.]       2.  '  Other.' 


[66] 


THE    KURKAL. 


In  Loji/isroLfl  'the  other  world/ 
98,  459,  9°4>  1042,  Nal.  i. 
3.  (§  62)  'Eefuse,  deny,  reject.' 

LO^dj^eU  :    L-l6ViT&trL£>jr)l£)<£60,  Ch.     ! 
XXVI.  LQ£i]^}<£;[T<£3r,       260.     j 

j,  945  ;   (=' again'),  312. 

[Comp.  tfljz/.]  1.  A 
particle  which  often  seems  to 
have  no  meaning,  a  mere  ^GRff 
$%sv ;  but  often  marks  an  an- 
tithesis =  'but/  15,  16  (with 

4g/E»(2«),   30,   802,  490,  506,  I3l6, 

266,  695,773,356,  359,  362,364, 
1178,  60,  36,  65,  323,  966,  591, 
1308,596,  905,  923,  968,  1122, 
1 1 66.  2.  'Other'  (with 

<oTGoeo[TLa),  'all  else/  39,  221, 
226,  655,  95,  588,  1033,  1206, 
380,  459.  Lapfl5)<ovruLc>,  173. 

su,  248.      Lo/rua/Lo  'after- 


wards,'    540,   344;  'other/    345,   | 
205;     'nevertheless/    373,  Nal. 
19.       3.  'Otherwise/  349,  1294, 

II5I,       U55.  L£>p<56)rOUJtT{r 

'others/  365,  348,  214,  263. 
L&p6®rr)'uj((5G)<su)  'other  things/ 
400,  289,  661. 

1.       'Street/      1139. 
2.    (§    62),    'wander     abroad.' 


[Comp.  L^.]  1.  '  A  secret, 
concealment/  590,697,  847,  1076, 
1180,  1138,  1254.  /j360)tf?©LD/rL$, 
28.  2.  (§  57,64),  'be  hidden; 
conceal.'  i&es>p/6pes>w  '  hidden 
things/  587.  LOSTO/D^^,  278, 

274  ('hypocritically  ').      LzGarDS 

@LD,   980.  U*66>0)<£<$6U,  846. 

u*6B><D&£}ltrt  1318. 
1161,    1253. 

IO2Q.        LcxoO/DULSssr,  1086. 

'mind/  253,  295,  454,  822, 
823,  825,  7,  661,  317,  453-59> 
920,  34.  [S.  manas.  Comp.  a.eir 
orrii.]  L&esr  <&<££]  (  what  is  in 
the  mind/  278.  u^esf^fsit&sr  '  he 
whose  mind  is  —  /  271. 

«  a  house  '  [comp.  ®eu],  51, 
52,  60,  820,  1268;  '  a  house-  wife  ' 
(so  @6\j  for  ^eOexj/refr),  148,  901. 
'  wife/  904.  [The 


com.  LnSsoraS)  is  not  found  in 
K] 

1.  An  emphatic  particle, 
378,  540,  996,  1086,  1125,  1161, 
1184,  1189,  1212,  1216,  1253, 
1254,  1265,  1266,  1284.  LQSST 

C^dg),  819,  990,  1016,  1170,  1178, 

1206,  1329.     With  Q<£/reu,  1165, 

1207.  2.  (§  62),  'Endure,  last.' 
Lflggrjgp/Lb,  1146,  1164,  1327.       I11 
comp.  (oij).  QjStr.)  LQggrjogj/LiSl/r,  68, 
190,   244,  268,   318,  457,  1168; 
'  homines    in    mundo    existentes ' 
(B.).       Lnoar^tL-n-  '  very  tender/ 
138.      LDggr^jgp/^gp,  556.       LD^iir.so), 
556.      L^<osr<ooflLU,  692.       L&eorssrffsr, 
Lz<oisrm<3i]<ovr    'a  king/    386,    388, 
455,  458,  542-46,   553,  556,  558, 
559,  581,  583,  610,  692. 

certainly/     143     (B     has 
i=cerfo),   229,    649,    867, 

880,    1136.         [Comp.      LOS8T.] 

'the  street/  820.  [Opp. 
to  LnSoQT.  Comp.  LQJJ/^.]  LOSJJT 
^juQiM  '  will  become  public/ 
1138,  1154- 

/T  [S.  maha].  1.  'Great/  68, 
245,  520'  544,  617,  999,  1058. 
[Comp.  Lo/r63br.J  2.  *  Horse/ 

814.        [Coinp.    Lfl/T63r.]        <35<SljflLOfr, 

969. 

'stain/    278,    601.     [Comp. 
]     LAirtfrop  '  stainless/  956, 
649.       LD/T^/D^/T    '  the    spotless 
ones/  106,  311,  312,  646.       LD^T 
r    'one    without    spot/    34. 
iLitsiifr     'those    who 
have  seen  the  vision  pure/  192, 
352. 

1.  'Prosperity.'  (See 
u*rr,  LDffsdbr.)  2.  'Place.'  Its 
inflex.  base  LD/ril©  (§  251)  is 
used  as  a  prep,  sign  of  7th  case 
(III.  Gr.  63)  = 'near,  unto,  in 
regard  to';  5,  94,  175,  188,  211, 

3°3>  536,  541,  991'  I054,  1 1  io, 
1199.  iutTiTLatTLL<£lLn  '  unto  any 
one  whatsoever.' 

LO/TSB3T    (LD/TZ_).         [Comp.    os/r.] 
I.  Lo/rsssr,  adj.    '  glorious,    re- 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[67] 


splendent,  excellent,  worthy,'  3, 
407,  606,  901,  919,  1114. 

II.  v.  'excel!'  (56,  III.,   like 
S.SWT).     1.   Inf.   (§  168,  used  as 
an   adverb),    Lo/ressr   '  exceeding, 
much,'   102,    124,  883;     'valde.' 

2.  Past  (§    87  ;  =  Lo/rdbri-ay/r), 
LnrrsscrL-rrir     '  men    of    excellent 
virtue,'  278,  665.  L&n-sixr-L-gi 
'that   which  has  excelled,'  631, 
632,  749.                Lofrsssri—  (§  74), 
'  (which  has  become)  excellent,' 
604,       607,^    766,      897,  ^  915. 

3.  LA  iT  loSST  L—60     (  =  Lb  [T  638)1  <5  60^)  ,     V. 

noun  (§  148),  'the  excelling,' 
177.  4.  Neg.  (§  121):  as/T®/r, 
lit.  'those  who  are  without 
excellence  '='foes,'  823.  LnrttgH) 
'  not  possessing  excellence,  un- 
dignified, degraded,'  53,  317 
(v.n.),  351,  432,  884,  1002,  1297. 
LorT<gm)^  '  things  not  excellent,' 
867  [comp.  317]. 

III.  Nouns.    (§  190).     1.  u>rnL 
&  '  excellence,  glory,'  52,  60,  646, 
750.        [Commonly    Lotfi 

syn.  ^/DLjq,  Qu^esaa.'] 
LarnL&l,  Ch.  xxxix. 

Ch.         LXXVII. 

Ch.  LXXXVII.         2. 
cellence  (moral)    in  virtue,'    51, 
53,  432.      [Comp.  LJsasrq.J 
/T^/T     <a   woman,'     1081,    1117, 
1118,  1  120,  1087.      [^n\£7»  S.] 
fT-stslGmnurrrr   [S.],    406.      M. 
'  those      who    are    a    measure.' 
As   in   coll.   L&{T:£JJ£lirLA  =  '  only,' 
so  here  :  '  they  have  the  measure 
and  nothing  more;  they  are  only 
persons  who  exist.' 
/r/B^/f  'men,  human  beings,'  28, 
278,  396,  452,  453,  499»  5H,  595» 
964,  1012.    [Comp.  S.  manushya. 
Other   forms,  Loo&ft^n-,  La/r<soflL_/r, 


ing,'  6OI.  LAtTULJIT    (  = 

'enduring,'  1230. 

'rain-cloud,'      211,      1010. 


'  ex- 


[S.], 'deceit,'    918,    1258. 
[Comp.  sroLQtfjeb.] 

Lorrtu  (§  57),  '  perish.'  [LQfrujLb.] 
Lo/TU-j'Lb  'will  perish,'  878,  1230. 
Lo/riL.'<si;fr  '  they  will  perish,'  898. 
Lo[rdj<sug2  '  it  is  that  which  will 
perish,'  996.  u^mL^^j  '  perish- 


ree- 


'breast,' 1288,  1311. 

(§    62),    'be    bewildered/ 

L£>fTJ}2/^>,    IO8l. 

.     [Comp.  S.  maZa.]      1.  *® 
uq.'      LD/rSoUWJ<su/r,  1035,  1230. 
2.  'Evening,'  1135,  1221-30,  1268. 
P  (§  62),  '  become  dim.'     Lo/rip 
ii,  653. 

(§  62),  'vary,  be  changed.' 
[uijj/='  other.'  Comp.  S.  mar, 
causalfrom  wiri.]  LO/T/O^J/  (§  62), 
'change.'  LQ/TC/J?  (§  121),  'un- 
changing,' 701. 
flDi_  =  '  repel,'  985. 
'to  amend,'  609. 
'  changing,  relieving,'  7  ;  'ex- 
change, giving  in  exchange  ;  per- 
mutarej*  101.  L^rrjb^J^irn'  '  those 
who  will  relieve,'  225. 
6w/r  '  enemies,'  749. 
'foe,'  471,  868,  985.  LQ 
(n.),  'hostility,'  86  1  ;  'disag 
ment,'  944.  Lo/r^LJ/r©  [LJ, 
945.  en&LDLDiTgu  '  equivalent,' 
211,1183.  Lo/r/D/DLD  'word,' 

reply,'  689,  725. 

LArr<55i'LD  [S.],  'honour,'  Ch.  xcvu., 
970,  384,  766,  432>  1028;  'dis- 
honour,' 968  (=<gi<5UL&[r®srLn). 

!_&€&&.  1t  'Upon,  over,'  3. 
[Comp.  L£,  L8u9<5®&,  G0m6u.] 
2.  v.  (§57),  'Eat.'  uS^fsuirssr^s- 

LS&-&6v  =  <or<F&lev  'what  is  left,' 
85.  [Comp.  L&0s>f.~\ 

(§56,11.),  'exceed.'  [Comp. 
S.  mahd.]  Lti/gju*  '  will  prevail,' 
373,928,  1161.  L&&  'much,' 
829,  1007,  1074.  /^«6u  '  preva- 
lence of,'  855-59.  u3<E5<s5  '  what 
exceeds,'  504,  724.  L&&&QSHSII 
'  acts  of  overweening  pride,'  158. 
Lj9&&ro£»  '  as  though"  (it)  were 
in  excess,'  1302.  uS-fsstrrr  'those 
who  excel,'  724.  &P(^  *  pride, 
insolence,'  158,  784.  psafluu 
i,  Ch.  cxx.  L&<s®<5  '  ex- 


[68] 


THE    KUKRAL. 


cess,   preponderance,'  345,    504. 

L£!tsi,<jgijLn  'if  it  be  in  excess,'  941. 

'  above.'      LE&<SL.£))LO    '  will  ex- 

toll,'    386.       [<si^.]        [Comp. 


1.  (S.  minam)  'a,  fish,' 
931.  2.  (from  uSeor  'glisten') 
'a  star,'  1116. 

rip  sip.  ((ip}  (Lp^),  '  the  elder  sister 
of  fortune,  misfortune,'  617.  u>/r, 
936. 

(ip&esr  [S.],    'face,  fore- 
front/   84,    90,  92,  224,  706-8, 

786,    IIl6,    IIl8,    III9.        (Lp<S5<5@, 

500.  (Lp&<£<$n-6vr,    93,    565. 

(Lp&<£g]  'in  presence  of,'  393, 
574,  749,  923,  1117.  (Lp&£@^, 
824. 

(Lp6S)<35    'bud,'    1274. 

(§  57,  64),  '  come  to  an  end  ; 
accomplish.'  (ip^L*@Lo,  517. 
(Lp>iq-]5<£n'6\2]Lc>,  658.  (Lpif-tu/r/r, 
908.  (Lpi$-®j  'end,'  640,  671, 
676,  1024. 
L-Q  (§  62),  '  hinder.'  (LpLL<_/r, 

547- 

a  crocodile,'  495. 

[^/MU.]    1.  'Beginning.' 


caeteraj  941.   2.  'Stem,'  1304. 
3.  'Cause,'    948.      4.   'Capital,' 

449,    463.  ftP^  'old.'          (Lp^fi! 

(&><o®p    (§    57),    '  what  is    expe- 
rienced,   wise.' 
^.,  707.  [Comp.  (_ 

r  '  the  elders,'  715. 

>  [S.]  'pearl,'  1113. 
(§  62)  '  precede.' 

0ULJ  '  so  as  to  take  precedence,' 
67.  (Lp<53}  seems  an  adverb  in 
380,  603,  707,  715,  1023. 

3UJ/E/(5  (§62),  'embrace.'  (Lpiuisi 
&IILI,  1238.  (Lpu_/<5<£ELD  'embrace,' 
913.  (tpaj<£Efd5,  918,  1107,  1186, 
1239,  1108.  (LpujiEia,  1330. 

tujgy  (§  70,  as  Qayeu),  'use 
effort.'  (Lptuev,  265.  (ipiueo 
47.  Qpiup®  'effort,'  611, 


616,  619. 
sence 


ab- 


}I9 
of  effort,'  6 1 6. 

=  (ip<3F<5\)  'a  hare,'  772. 
'strength,'  492,  567. 

^   (§  57V  break '[comp. 
(§  64)  Nal.  123.      (Lpff/^^j,  473, 
899  (with  £g)ioro£_). 

'  female  breast,'  402,  1087. 
'thorn.'     (LpssorLGirLn,  879. 
'  tender  shoot.'     [^srsyfl/r.] 
ravffu  'tooth,'   1113. 

'  Manner,  course, 
order,'  677,  508,  541.  &GBL- 
(Lpsro/o  '  at  last,'  792.  2.  'Re- 
lation,' 885,  698.  3.  'Justice,' 
388,  547,  548,  553.  558,  559- 

(Lppgu  (§62),  (1)  'end';  (2) 'be- 
siege.' (Lppgiiz  '  it  will  end,' 
491.  (Lp/b(y^i  'not  blockading,' 
747.  (Lpn^j  679,  747.  (Lf*p£)) 
'a  siege,'  748.  (Lpjbfliu,  748. 

<3PS3^  (§  57),  '  be  angry.'  (LQ&OTKJ, 
191. 

'edge     of     battle,'    749. 


pegr  (§  225).  1.  Prep,  'before,' 
59,  192,  250,  395,  403,  714,  718, 
720,  722,  724.  2.  Adv.  335  ; 
(with  fieo),  184,  636,  771,^1053, 
535,442.  3.  In  comp.  :  (Lprbu&d) 
'forenoon,'  319;  (Lptbasxs;  '  fore- 
arm,' 1157.  (Lpeonosrrr,  435,  716 
1277.  [Comp.  (Lpp&, 


>.  1.  'Three'  (§  172). 
41,  589.  {Lpeor&i,  383,  682,  941, 
952,  1085.  {Lpesrjfi&r,  360,  684, 
688.  2.  'Old'  [(ip^O;  'Srow 
old'  (§  64),  ^p^fflvrf/ffl/,  441- 
1007. 

'  nose,'  277. 

(§  64),  'cover.'       ^PL-UUL. 
ir,  936. 

QLDUJ.  1.  'Body,'  65,  619,  774, 
925.  2.  'Reality,'  249,^354,  355> 
356,  423.  QinLqisoOT/f^ei1,  Cb. 
xxxvi.  QLctiLujfTj  300. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[69] 


QLQ&)  'soft.'  QLZSST,  919,  1103, 
1111,1265,1279,1325.  QLZ&UW 
'softly,'  562,  1094.  QLzeSlujiTiT, 

250,      561.  (o)L&GJ6$£3)l)       1289- 

©Oi£<JrS£LO,    877-  ©LQSlS    (§   57), 

'  wasting  away.' 

iriSl£560t  Ch.  CXVII. 

(?LO/U  (§  57),  '  graze.' 
£)j,  273. 

(]>LDG\).  [Comp.  L£$)«6\;.]  1.  '  A 
creat  man,'  627.  (oLosueusu/r/f, 
973.  2.  Prep.  '  above,  over,  ; 
against,' 232,  250,  861,  973,  1016, 
1079,  1087,  1182,  1262.  3.  With 
verbs:  GI&GO,  G)<£5/j~<srr,  <su(25j  262, 

326,  335,  409,551,713,  733,765, 
784,    836,  845,  938,  981,   1055. 

1027.     (ouseu/r,   1218.     5.  Comp.    | 

L£>  '  heaven,'  222.  (OLQSBT 
su    '  more   and    more,'    368.    I 
'  superiority,'   137. 

(§  62),  'desire,  join.'       [-a9    | 


1059.        Ufiotfl/ifl,  857.        Gaj-<5    . 
,86l.        G>Lc><3urr)<&>  (^     : 
,  877.        G>LO    : 
1073. 

'body'  ('a-L_6u'),  1113, 
1182,  1185,  1189,  1278.  [ 


459,  1042  ; 

,   1 26.       6£(77}6ri)LO     i 

•  in     this    life,'     '  in    hac     via, 
proprie  est  unus  ortus'  (B.),  126    j 
(see  ^0)  ;    OT^OTOLA  '  the  life  to   j 


come  '  ;    *  alterd  vita,  proprie  est 
In 


septem  ortus*  (B.).       2. 

6TOLO,  &C.    98,   645,     153.  3. 

'  bewilderment,'     1112. 


fusion,'    539    [comp. 

x;  '  confusion,'   838. 

'bud,'   1274.    [Comp. 


courage. 
492. 

1.  (n.)  'A   word,'    28,    ! 
1 12 1,    1258,    567,    1258    [always 
with  epithet,  ^ero/o,  Lfl<sro/r>,  u®>ifi, 
or  LJsofi,  «©].     2.  (§  57), '  Speak.' 


295. 


,   643. 


(§  60,    as     ®(2j), 

90. 


smell.' 


«u/r.  I.  (§  64),  'tie,  join.'  [Comp. 
4£<r.]  LLKT&&  'jointhou,'  793. 
[For  the  g)  comp.  III.  Gr.  24, 
NanniU,  164.]  uj/iuq  'a  tie, 
tying,'  777,  1093. 


'body,  compacted,'  79,  239,  942. 
,  Nal.  21- 


-So- 
il. For  CT  (§  47),  'which.' 
[Comp.  jy,  @,  s.,  ST.]  (1)  ttj/r 
(sub.  and  obj.),  'what  or  which 
things?'  54,  127,  380.  ILJIT 
before  a  noun  and  2_ii>  after: 
'any  whatsoever,'  641.  (2)  UJIT^I 
'what?'  178,  254,  291,  321,324, 
341,  397,  462,  703,  789,  801,  831, 
833,  842,  986,  1041,  1049,  I2.12 

[with       IL/-b,      <§> SSI  ^Jj Ld ,       ^^(o&ILCi^. 

(3)  iLinir  'who?'  (ni.f.),  94,  149, 
162,  175,  ^256,  509,  536,  541; 
Without  iu :  e^/r,  991,  1249, 
1294,  1314,  1317,  Nal.  2.  uutrQff 
(double  int.),  ^  477,  779,  855, 
1299.  Lun~(r<£(&)LD,  317,  618, 

647,  664,  693,  864,  960,  ii8i; 
tLnririLJn'iT&(8)Lc>,  20.  lumriurriT 
eu/ril/,  423.  luirisi^  'where?' 
1070.  ILI  rr  IEJ  <SE  £8®i  LD  '  every- 

where,'  864.    ujrrssar®,  iLXT<sm®Lz, 
4,  585,  895,  1104. 
/TLDtL     [S.]     'midnight,'     1136, 
1167,  1252.       ujfTLD^^i  '  at  mid- 
night.' 

'  lute,'  66,  279.    [«${£.] 
turrBsyr    'elephant'    [^Ssw],    599, 
678,  758,  772,  Nal.  3',  21. 


UJ/T 63T  =1/5/7-657-  (§10),  'I.'    SlNG.— 
(1)    UJ/T63T,    Il6,    346,     1071,     1094, 

1098,  1161,  1167,  1125,  1184, 

1206,      1212,      1225,      1247,      1253, 
1254.  (2)   <oT6V%501,    1316,    1244, 


[70] 


THE    KTJBRAL. 


1256,  1296. 
«jr«(g,  1151 
1290.  (6) 


1297 
"75 


(3)  ...  :      (4)  cr 

(5)    CT GST SSU  6ffi/ LJD f 

ar,  771,  1081,1185, 
1139,  1292,  1295,  1296, 
1284,  1264,  1252,  1254, 
1316,  1310,  1324,  1230, 
1262,  1242,  1246,  1248,  1249, 
1209,  1213,  1237,  1170,  1163, 
1168,  1181,  1182,  1189.  OTSST^J, 

346.        (7)    £T6W«oaOT,    1174. 

PLUB.— (1)  IUITLD,  61,  300,  790, 
844,  iin,  1123,  1140,  1150, 
1171,  1204,  1245,  I278»  I265> 

1312,1329.      {EITLO,  1195.      (2)  OTLD 

«j>u>,  1205,  1217,  1318.    (3)  ...  .  . 

(4)  J5LD<fE(3j,  I  195,  123  I.       6TLD'«(<£5, 

790,1142,1176,1291.    (5)  pLouQ 
£3/05,1277.    (6)^/^,1220,1258. 

«TLD,  1278,  I  1 80,  II26,Il85,I204, 
1205,1222.   (7)  (oTti)L£9(SD)t_,  1122. 


(§  64).    [Comp. 
v,  385.      •KgpflTfir,  377.      oj 
377-     «^«tt«  'manner,'  33, 
77.  465,  514,  953- 

h.  XLVII. 
,  Ch.  LXVIII. 

,  Ch.  cm. 

,  Ch.   LXXVI. 
,  713,721,878. 

if),  27.  6L'«j><sLoff65OTi_  '  possessed 
of  all  manner  of  excellence,'  897. 
/r,  817.  Q;«J><&«J>L£>  = 

,  709. 

«  disgrace,  reproach,  blame,' 
238-40.     [Opp.  to 
@^ii>  [8.]  'deceit.' 
824.          aj®*L&6tsiffi0rT6a,     271. 
(§  <>4),  •  d  fflj© 

,  276.         GJ(g5^LJU^,  366. 

•/©.         1.      Scar,     u :  129. 

IV  502,  549,  689,  1079. 
/«B9rfij(0j  (§  62;.  bow, 

1.  [tt&rr.]  «;«B8T»fiiL,  419. 
•i«0rc«/r,  o.  a;esjr««Lr)  'reve- 
rence, bending,'  827. 


[S.]     *  method,'      561, 
664;  'colour,'  714. 
(5176337.     See  fii/6fr. 

'belly,'  412. 

(§251),  'place';  used  as 
sign  of  7th  case  :  '  in  oneself,' 
846 ;  '  where  it  springs  up,'  a9. 
QjSir.,  177.  [Comp.  «SKL^).] 
^sufrsL/oQssr  sij)^L£iLy6\j  'mutual 
longing,'  Ch.  cxxvu. 
<suir<ssr  [S.],  'a  boon;  bliss,'  24. 
[Comp.  eujTLn.'] 

order  of  merit'  [^(g^], 
528.  [Comp.  surf).] 
(f^fB^j  (§  62),  'suffer,  take 
pains.'  [Comp.  UQ$<SU!JGO.~]  <su(/5^ 
^@>n-  '  those  who  suffer,'  1131. 
suQTjjs-gn-,  468.  <a;0^LQ 

'trouble,  pains,'  468,  619. 

1.  'Limit,'  480.  )|;«p 
the  time  to  destroy,'  488. 
the  measure  of  one's 
means,'  480.  LS/Oissreueroj-uj/refr 
'  she  who  is  within  the  limits, 
possession  of  an  other,'  15°; 
'  quae  est  intra  limites'  (B.). 
^eva/erojT  '  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth,'  234.  2.  (§  57)  '  Take, 
accept  as  one's  limit.'  ^tDasreu 
<SG)ff'uj(T6sr  '  who  takes  not  virtue 
as  his  limit,  measure  of  conduct,' 
150.  (sueoir^jp  'it  has  as  its 
limit,  measure,'  105.  <5u<5ojru-|ii 
'as  far  as,'  748.  <su<s®v<sn  'limit 
of  decorum,  modestia,'  919. 

6L'6D>jr<a9iS3rLD<ffi6Tfin",          Ch.         XCII., 

'  women  who  are  immodest.' 

6U6V.  eueor  'strong,  hard  cruel; 
prompt,'  273,  496,  721,  737. 
[Comp.  uev,  ©uf'V,  S.]  <a«r 
Q<£Fff6u  '  harsh  words,'  99.  euesi 
uneu  'rocky,  sterile  soil,'  78. 
eL'6B7<£5«JbT  'a  hard  eye;  pitiless- 
ness  or  cool  determination,'  228, 
276,  632,  689,  726,  762,  764 
775,  1027,  1156,  1198,  1222. 

SL6&   '  btlVU<ztl),'   273,   380,  471, 

473,  1131.  euebuufftpeo,  Ch. 
XLVIII.  ^fpireueSiujpippev 
Ch.  iv.  eu6W6o>L£>  '  strength, 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[71] 


153,  444,  682,  1063,  1151. 
QavreuawsaroTOLo,  Ch.  LXV.  swsar 
urr®  'strength.'  (See  u®.) 
Qj«JrLj£li_^7  '  what  possesses 
strength,'  1063.  eueSiuirfr  'those 
who  are  strong,'  250,  86  1. 
[Opp.  G)Lo6$tfj/r/r.]  eu  GO  eopSljSGo 
'prompt  discernment,'  582. 
[Comp.  <a/6\j3su.] 

Conj.  app.  (Intro,  p.  xxiii.), 
(SueuSsv  'thou  art  able,'  1118. 
Qj6i»6u(/r)s37-,  387,  446,  647  (pi.), 
683,  578,  648,  717,  795,  808, 

855,   999.  6lJ6V6Ugl,     385,    585, 

633>  634,  713,  845,  1321,  Nal. 
101.  07/0^,587,  1079.  <su6v3su 
(adv.),  'swiftly,'  480.  [Comp. 
sueo  in  1151,  582.] 

«  net,'  348.     [?  <su3sYr.] 
Lp-iEi(3j  (§62),  'be  current,  be 
in  use,  pass  round,  give.'   [Comp. 


II.        <SUL£!E!(3jLZ,   245,  477. 

9.         <SUip/S@QJ^,   99,   955. 

'method;  cause,'  73,  75, 
795.  99*>  992- 

5$.  1.  'A  way,'  38,  766,  1170. 
Qu&ftrsijL&lfQ&noeo,  Ch.  xci. 
2.  'After,  the  sequel,'  865,  508, 
461.  3.  '  Posterity,'  44. 

4.  With  verb,  root  or  adj.  part. 
='  when,'  770,  846,  1224,  1299, 
1300,  1308.  «suL^)iL/<R5)jr  'deliver 
a  message,'  688.  GU$VU^  '  what 
is  in  the  way  of,'  80.  <ajL£,<sufi<g 
'  old,  veteran,  hereditary,'  764, 
807,  809. 

(L£3>(5  (§  62),  '  slip.'  eufLfAQ 
(L\LD  'though  they  slip,'  139,  165. 
'  not  failing'  (  = 
,  536.  <&(!£&(  'a 
slip,  failure,'  776.  [Comp. 


[Comp. 


(§   62),    'salute,    bless.' 


(§  57)  '  grow.' 
'what  is  growing,'  718 
'  so  as  to  increase,'  1223. 

for  Qj3srr<sy  '  a  circuit,  bank,' 


523.  [siy'Ssrr.]  ^isrra/srr/r  '  the 
compass  of  a  tank.' 

wind'  \_sir  rr)g)}~],  245,  1108, 
1239;  euir&LA  in  med.,  941. 

eutfofT  'a  bangle,  bracelet,'  1157, 
1277.  [<ay?fcrr  '  encircle.'] 

6ii<srr,  6U6$sr  'strong,  prosperous,' 
239.  <5u  err  sift  IULZ  '  we  are  prospe- 
rous,' 598.  [Comp.  Quifiiu.] 
<a/^rr/i  '  produce,  income,  plenty, 
prosperity,'  14,^  480,  512,  736, 
739.  eusfr^^sGT  'yielding 

plenty,'  739.  sii'otr^^-^sn'tsrr 

'  she  who  expends  according  to 
her  husband's  means,'  51. 

eiJGrrGir)  'a  creeper,  a  species  of 
convolvulus,'  1304. 

t   3         >          r         •    -| 

Qry.          su6u.  I  <su  rnisiDi  A 

'  poverty,'  408,  769,  934.  <supih 
<3a-ir  'grow  dry.'  \_6U£u -\-JDJ  LA ; 
see  ^./r.]  tsurSluuirn-  'poor 

people,'  221.    [Cornp. 

A  •          -Ik  J  A I 

ay/D/@fr,  JNal.  i. 

^P  (§  66),  '  grow  dry.' 
(cSjCoLoeu,  1 8.       <sumn)Go  '  dry  ness,' 

78. 

(§  70), '  come,  result.' 

I.  («a/(7F),    <suj5d£.)    <oii(TFj<9)    '  may 
he  come!'  1266.    (-a9.  Qpir.)  <&($, 
83,86,737,1269.     ffl/0tj  'things 
which  come,'  961.       eujrev,  1205, 

1263.          <SM (ffj &> 6V }    II,   642.  SL/(7K 

^^J  39,  429,  IO48,  I2O2.  <SU(2JLD, 
63,  220,  264,  303,  319,362-68, 
455,  529,  621,  IO42,  1223,  1224. 

euQ^ib'SfTeo  '  when  it  comes,'  733, 
830,  859.  <su(/5(LpeJrssr/r  'before 
it  comes,'  435.  (SW^LJSWSOT-,  774. 
eurflsisr,  969,  970,  1052,  1179, 
1267,  1282.  6urfi,£S2/Lb,  433,  625> 
669,  765.^ 

II.  Si/^^j,    1058.  GujE&jiTssr, 
530.       euisp,  609,  754,  767,  968  ; 

seems=nearly  to  a.efr<5rr  or  term. 
'  -tive,'  &c.,  563,  569,  654,  764, 
807,  809,  1044,  1066. 

III.  eu/rjT/r,    335,     356,     755, 
1179. 

IV.  <a/jr£iy    '  a   coming,'    1043, 
1151,  1165,  1264. 


[72] 


THE    KURBAL. 


eufr®  'wither.'      QJ/T©  (eSl. 

1237.      <su,TL^tL},  1234,  1235.     su/r 

1322. 

'draughts:  game,'  401. 

[S.],    'merchandise,' 
1 20. 
siifr^LD  [S.],  'word,'  685. 

(§  64,  57),  '  succeed,  be  fit- 
ting ;  exist.' 

.  I.  <5D(Ti&Gvr  '  if  it  be  obtained,' 
536.  <su  nr  iu  jij  f&  '  suitable,'  737. 
sumL'Uu  '  things  which  are  fit- 
ting,' 948.  <5u/rtuLJLJ£(5r,  865. 

II.  '  Place,'  33,  624,  673,  789, 
948,    1001,    1117;   'mouth,'    91, 
139,    159,    415,    420,    423,    424, 
689,   721,   959,  noo.     Q7/ru^)tocr/r, 
419. 

III.  o//ru$€u  (=.<S)J[T&®O}  '  g&te, 
way,'  6.       ®jn-iL<o®LD  '  truth,'  Ch. 
xxx.,   291,    292,    295,   298,   300, 
364,  688,  952,  953,  983. 

(§  62),  'pour.'         su/r<25ii, 
1232. 

^  [S.],  '  income,'  512  ;  '  water,' 
14. 

tsurnsVj    eiv/rssr    'pure,    white,'    2, 
714,  ii2i.     [Comp.  Qsusfr.] 

(§    57) ,  prosper,  live  pros- 
perously.'    Comp.  <SU£P'J 

I.  <af/rLg>  (sSl.  Q^fr.),   38,  326- 
wmpfgeo,    183,    231,    967,   1062, 
1124,  1158.    QJ/TL£)  'hail!  salve T 

IIII,  IIl8,  12 10,  1221,  1222, 
124.2.  <51j/TLf9uJ,  1 2OO.  <SU/T/.p@, 

1312.  Gu[T(Lpir,    58,    392,    542, 

cry.  <su  [T  (if /S  L'CI  ,  1193-  <SuiTt£ 
sufi-sw",  41,  42,  147,  214,  1025. 
<surrL£<suirn ,  3,  6,  240,  276,  528, 
1033,  1160,  1192,  1198.  ew/rtp 

LJSUC3T,   47,    5O.        GUL^><SU^1,  8l,  337- 

have  lived;  viximus!'  956,971. 

479.        (SJiry^fr,  969. 
~,  240,  237.      <5Lin~Lpn~<&, 
970.     sufru$jjgiiLc>,  420,  906. 

II.  <a//TLp<ffiiso)c5       '  prosperity, 
happiness,  happy  life,'  44~49>  5J> 

52,  78>  83.  33Q»  435»  479'  523> 
856,890,897,968. 


,  Ch.  v.,  46,  47. 
,  Ch.  vi. 
III.  SU/TLP^J^  '  praise,'   Ch.  i. 


ay/reir  'sword,'  334,  726,727,  882; 
'brightness,'  1261  [^srfl].       <su^r 
'  swordsmanship,'  614. 

<su  IT  <5$r  LD  ,  forms  of  the 
same  word  ;  the  change  is 
<£6ot_<fE@<oro/r>,  III.  Gr.  41.  [Coinp. 
S.  varuna.~\ 

I.  <su/r65TLf).      1.  LoisroLp   '  rain,' 

19.        2.        G>LO«5t£>        'Cloud,'       559. 

3.  ^GIT&LD      'sky,'      18,     1192. 

4.  s^Ll©6ti=sL£>      'the     heavenly 
world,'      353.  <suir@sr<§<£5<&jn' 
(§    184),    'the    inhabitants    of 
heaven,'  86. 

II.  fiurresr.        1.    /JDSJDLP    '  rain,' 

11,20.        2.   4$<S.TcFU3,  542.       fiU/TSOT- 

&l{DULj  '  the  excellence  of  rain,' 
Ch.  11.  eu/rG@)o-  (§  184),  '  the 
heavenly  ones,'  18,  346.  <su/r«5or 
<s^  [opp.  60>a;uj«Lb],  'thel^ea- 
venly  place,  coelum,'  101.  QJ/T 
jjgyismrouLjisQ&LUtsiJiM  [opp.  ISZDQJ 
ttjti],  'the  divinity  that  dwells 
in  heaven,'  50.  <a//r<ssrQufl-(/5<srr 
'  great  wealth,  heaped  up  to 
heaven,'  897.  <surr^jujtT  Q^np 
PLZ  'a  form  that  is  high  as 
heaven,'  272.  [Syn. 


III.   See 

'hiccough,'  335. 
[Comp.      S. 


1.'  Cloud,'  1  6.   [(?Lo«a>ii.]  2.  'fir- 
mament,'  25,  957.     [^<s/rujai.] 

(§68,   254),    'leave;    emit; 
put.'     It  is  often  redundant. 

I.  <s£)©  (imp.),  1247  ;  (-aS).O^/r), 
689.  aS)©*,  928.  <s£)/_,  niS. 
sfli_a;,  113,  158,  203,  314,  343> 
350,  697,  517,  818,  830,  831,876, 
979,  912,  961,  1245,  450,  755, 

797,  I3O2,    I2O3.       6$©#6U,    1038. 

sfilO/i,  28,  121,  128,  138,  167, 
168,  267,  45J»  476,  498>  535>  592» 
608,  616,  980,  1039,  1068,  1253. 
799,  1310. 


LEXICON    AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[73] 


'if,'  17,  238,  280,    1159.         G®if- 
,<g2/ti>,  876. 

II.  a9i_/r,     347,     422, _    1324. 
sfiti—irgi,    1210.         sSt—iiiT,    809. 
'sSlt—rr^  6v.fr,  347. 

III.  sSliLL—,  695.         sSiLQi—Ln, 
1036. 

IV.  eft®    (=29©^6u),  '  relin- 
quishmeut,'  791. 

,  a  variation  of  ®j[rsvr,  'cloud,' 


107  [B.  has 
qszjbr  *  a  deadly  wound,'  776  (B. 
'  specials  ac  notdbile  vulnus'). 
2.  '  Affliction  '  [^ssrLJLn].  GQfLp- 
Lo/i,  io7(?),  284,  313,  663  (diff. 
epi.  in  each).  3.  'Excellence,' 
162,  363.  &lrouL-i  'celsitudo' 
(B.).  a9(Lp-LJLJLb,  21,  131. 

201. 


(§  64),  'sprinkle.' 

JT/r/T,    1077. 

eQ&u>L/,  <sQ^jui_i   (§    62),    'de- 
sire.'      229(77jLoLy  ] 

i),  Ch.  cxxvii. 
tLtjeu,  Ch.  cxxix. 

},  Ch.    cxvm.       s$ 
LJq  'desire,'  1290. 

[S.], '  learned  men,'  235. 
J57    [S.],   'seed,'  24,  85,   138, 
361.      [ 


<&$  (§  64),  '  see,  awake.' 

339.          S$L$dF;5,    775, 

ii,  1218. 

>.     1.  (§  57), 'fall.' 


(§    66),    'admire,     praise.' 
•  <snrb<£,  439.        G&iuj-njff?,  978.    I 
•J5&n6&)  474-    ®Sluj-<o3r '  wide,' 
13,  19,  716,  1016. 

uj/fiJu  (§  64),  'perspire,'  1328.   I 
(See  (Jo;/r.) 

'finger,'  1261,  Nal.  123. 

(§   57,  64),  'expand.'         ®9. 

/r,  13.     <s$ if) - ^> ^ ,  650. 

1.  'A  feast,'  121 1, 
1268.  [Com.  says  it  means  'a 
novelty';  hence  =  'Aosfo's.'] 
2.  'A  guest,'  43,  81-90.  aS)^^ 
Q@!TLbu<8u  'hospitality,'  Ch.  ix. ; 
opp.  '  •38(nj/B(o<5n'irn'c§)j6u)'  J53- 

'  desire,'  522.    [aQ^/iq.] 
'  hasten.'       s^erojr^^,  474, 
1080,  1218.     -s&GorrpiSaj),  679. 

'beast,'  410. 

'price,'  256.     [affeu,  •s$p.~] 
'  bow,'    827,    872.      [Coinp. 


(§  62)   'swallow,'    931. 

[  s£l  (Lg  S1  LU  p  £}]  .  ] 

(§    57)}    Desire   eagerly.' 
(aS/.  Q^rr.),  804.      SfiDip. 
"-/,  810.         a9<8s>Lp-u-|££>,  630,  911, 

809.  sSl<5G)Lp-U,   692.  £$6B)Lp- 

<S^,^7,   1036.  fiS€BDLp-6W/T6ar,  615, 

901,  902.  aSeoLp-uj/Tsar,  615, 

628,  911,  810.       etieni 

629.  <5&68)L£-/L//r<SO)LC>,  692. 

G)La,  Ch.   XV. 

(§  62),  'shine.'  [Comp. 
ai9<5rr-/Q(<s>LD,    717,    957. 
,  299,-  1186.     aSar-«ffi<s/i, 
6o1'  753'  853. 

1.  (§57),  'die,  disperse/ 
s^rriT  '  the  dead,'  143. 
/LQ,  1209.  stiioift-iun-^, 
145.  <s$<oift-fc<s;ir)ji)]  '  it  is  as  the 
dispersing,'  332.  2.  (§  64), 
'  call.'  a9«ffl^F/Djp  '  it  is  like 
summoning,'  894. 

(§    57),    'grow.'      [Comp. 

is.]  G&fcff-Qjgj,  732.  eS 
-<a/'  growth,'  284,  738.  (sSSsrr. 
rr  '  produce,'  545,  731.  [Comp. 


.)  'where  they  grow,'  177. 
'victory,'  180.    ['  QajrbjS.''] 
$<s»  (§  70,  as  «eu),   'sell.' 

s&mjpl,    2  2O.         s&pro/bo,      1080. 

[See 

(§  62),  'enquire.' 

u/(l£0)UJ     (^^  aul 66T Sul)    '  asklll(r 

the  way,'  594. 

[?  S.  vi  +  ni.~]  I.  'Action 
in  general,'  279,  367,  439,  483, 
519,  631,  612,  697,  758,  901, 

1022,     456,     584,    684,    819,     836. 

^efrs£)25or    'activity,'   618,    632, 

IO22.       ^(ofrsSSsOT  iqSO)i_6B)L£>,  Ch. 

K 


[74] 


THE    KURRAT.. 


512-20 

LXVI. 


335. 


LXII.  ffi98s33TiL/frSJWr<oD)LD,     904. 

Ch.      LII., 
uflDio,  Ch. 

D,  Ch.  LXVII. 

Ch.    LXVIII., 
651-80.         QfiLsBfaB"   'action/ 

455'  953.  677. 

II.  *  Deed,  with  idea  of  retri- 
bution,'   63,    244,    327,   Nal.    3, 
101-10.     [Comp.  utpsSfer,  Nai. 
Ch.  xi.]        ^/paQSsor    'virtuous 
action,  'LS/os^Ssor  'other  (vicious) 
action,'  321,  909. 

'nemesis,'  207. 

201,  209,  210 
,  Ch.  xxi.      Hence 

5. 

III.  '  Warlike  operations,'  471, 

491,   749,   750,    1268.  QSUSQT 

n51s£l%55r  l  the   action   that  gains 
the  victory,'  683. 

IV.  'Hostility,'  781. 
ttJ/r  'doers,'  329. 

(§  57),  '  fail.' 
'they  will  fail,'  289. 
'  unfailing,'  207,  208. 
284. 

(§  62),  '  swell.' 


iurr 


(§  64),  '  let  down,  fasten ' 
(causal  of  £>%:=<  fall ')  ;  (§  57), 
'  fall,  love '  [poet,  for  aS^  and 
(2$<oO)Lp).  <s§L^  '  to  be  loved,' 

1191,1193,1194.  <s§L$6er  '  if  it 
fall,'  1 6.  <s£ip-<a;/r  '  will  love,' 
1103,  1191,  1192,  1194,  1198, 
1202,  1325.  ^(LpLo  'will  fall,' 
1030;  '"who  love,'  1108,  1123. 
£$£-£<$ '  fastened,'  1251. 
js<&  'fallen,'  955. 
Clovers;  loved  one,'  1193. 
UISU&T  'she  whom  I  love,'  mi. 

^/refr  'a  lost  day,'  38. 

'  greatness,   majesty,'    665, 
749,  904  (with  ertu).  eSjbjfl 

0«so<s     '  supreme      greatness,' 
789. 
Qeu  '  hot,  swift,  severe.' 


Q 


'  a  tyrant,'  563.  Q<su-is- 
'  hot  anger.'  OQJ^^LJ 
QcsuJBgi  '  an  angry  king,' 
895.  Qtau-iugi  'anything  hot; 
quickly,'  569,  1128.  Q<a!-o3aj 
'  sunshine.' 

II.  Q<su-@<^  (§  62)  '  be  angry.' 
Q<aj@@5iL£),  870.  Qa/(^6rfl 
'  wrath,'  29,  35,  309,  864.     [=^ 

(SQTLD,   <5J^L£).]  G)tSU(3j<cfrfr<5®L£> 

'absence  of  wrath,'  Ch.  xxxi., 
303,  308,  360,  526,  531,  1060. 

III.  Qo/-(5    'fear.'       [Comp. 
fear-,  Lat.  ver-eor.']          O<ai0(S^ 

(§  62)  'fear.'  0su(y5^Lh  = 

Q<ay(/5<ci/t£»  (.jysrrQ/jeroL-)  '  will 
fear,'  599.  QSH^GUQ^  (see  aw/r) 
'  fear.'  Qeyqja/^^  '  things  that 
cause  fear,  tyrannical  acts,'  563. 

Q<51J((JJG11I5<&          QcFlUtfJ/TSTOLO,         Ch. 

LVII.        QeuqijQjjBgp  '  dreading,' 

569- 

IV.  O®7-o°o(5    (§  62),  '  desire, 

covet.'         [Comp.    aSero/p,    S^LP, 
]  Q  <&]-<?*(&)  ^  GO,  174. 

sr,  171,  1  80.       QSIJ-&Q, 

Qsu-°o£5[T,    179.         GfflJ- 

,  Ch.  xvin. 

V.  Qa;-^     (1)    'detestable.' 
QsurSliu    'hateful    things,'    175. 
(2)  (§  64),  'detest.        G^jj/uq 
'  detestation,'  696.      (3)  '  Admi- 
ration.'      Q<su£y  <£<&&<$    'admir- 
able,' 993.  (4)  Q<ajcp-<ffi<sG)<£& 
'  glory,  '600  ('sedes,'  B.),  761,  971. 

VL  Go;  (§  58),  'burn.'     ©eu- 

^^7,    899.  Q<SU-U[T<S(^    (§     97, 

Note),  'it  will  burn,'  1128. 
See  Q<aj<s?r. 


172-77. 


'tyranny.' 


(§  70),  'conquer.' 

I.  Qojei;      (aSI.    0^/r.),     761. 

6u,  647. 
481,  495,  645,  769. 

748. 

II.  ©(SUSOT-^,          931,          1268. 

Qeueor-fD,  174.  Q<3uesr-(yiT, 

1327.        Q<susyr-ro^i,  931. 

III.  Qtsn'sor-^)    'victory,'    546, 
683. 

IV.  G'eueu    '  a  javelin,'     500, 
546,    552,    772,  774,  775>    IIJ3- 
Geueu/r/r  'javelin-bearers,'    683. 


LEXICON   AND    CONCORDANCE. 


[75] 


Q<su%so  (§  184),  '  thou  art  a  dart,' 

1221. 

G)<si/Grr  'white.'  ©<aj6rr<srrti>  'a 
stream  of  water,'  595,  622,  1170. 
Qfflysrfljz/  '  ignorance,'  503. 
Qeusssrsis)Lc>  '  ignorance.'  844. 
Q<sL'<syfl  '  open.'  Qsusifluu® 

'  become  manifest,'  1145.       Qa/ 
ff  'ignorant  persons,'  714. 

'  fragrance,'  1113. 
Q  6ii  iL.®  <su  <5$r     '  a     hunter,'     274. 
[PG'suerr.] 

0)5176337-®    [Gj<aj<srr  ;    COmp.    C'LJSaCT] 

(§   62),      '  want,    ask,    require.' 

0> QjssbrO^ou  'desire,    4*     ^o^usssr 

I—  6U,        82,        871*  (o6U€BBTt--i 

364.  (osnsssn—jb<ss  '  seek  not,' 
177,  931.  (o<ffij63br©<SL'/r6ar,  281. 

696.  Q <SLI <o8GT @ u 5u IT  'those  who 
want,'  173,  320,  562,  580,  602, 
962.  Q>Gusm®Lb  '  will  require,' 
21  ;  'is  needed,'  178,  85,  257, 
316,  362,  343,  481,  47o>  538>  652,  | 
653,  611,  667,  794,  867,  960,  963, 
1150,  1282,  1060;  '(when,  as) 
you  seek,'  362,  367.  QsuzmLp., 
263,  ^  265,  777,  804,  1256. 
Qeus^orL^-iu,  265,  343>  651. 
G'si/sasrLjLWJSu/r,  1177.  Qtisu&ssr 

q-esr,  154,  342,  893,  960,  1150, 
1062.  QeudssTL-tTfr,  670.  (Seu-sxsr 
i—n~&],  670,  1037.  Qeusm-L-ir  'it 
is  not  necessary,'  37,  211,  280, 

357>  497»  777>  7^5.  9OI?  942, 
1003.  QeuG&rt-irpirear,  163,  206, 

_  Q  /^  <> 

sO4jQ22«  xO  (SI/  rb3oT  / /T  dD)  LQ 

'absence  of  desire,'  4,  180,  362. 
[G*iSL/g3cr©ii>  is  used  impersonally 
as  in  common  Tamil.  For  the 
neg.,  in  942,  Q<3ua%rt—iT<sijn-Ln  is 
found,  and  simply  G><susvsrL—rr,  not 


«king'    (see 
382»    389*   39°»   48i,    528,   530, 
549»  557,  564,  567-69,  582,  665, 


689,  691,  756,  761,  899,  1268. 
Qeupg],  550,  551,  561,  681,  735, 
740,  895. 

bambn,'  1113.     [^p/aSeu.] 
(§  64),  '  perspire,  be  angry  ' 
'       (See  </Gteu.)      Q<sn 

fTfT,  487. 
See  ^/Qeu. 
<&  hedge,'  1016. 

Qsuswr©],  'favour,  desire.' 
beneficence,'  81, 
212,613,614.  Co <su sir- efl  'bene- 
ficence,' 87,  88  ;  '  offering  ' :  five 
are  enumerated,  (1)  study  of  the 
Vedas,  to  BramM;  (2)  fire- 
offerings,  to  gods ;  (3)  food- 
offerings,  to  all  living  creatures  ; 
(4)  water-offerings,  to  the 
Manes  ;  (5)  alms,  to  the  needy. 
[Comp.  S.  ydgaJ]  (§  70), '  sacri- 
fice ;  desire  eagerly.'  (£a/£lL-€u 
'  offering,'  259.  Q<suil.u  '  so  as 
t(»  desire,'  643,  646,  696.  Q<SUL- 
LJSOT  '  desirable  things,'  697. 
Q<snL-L-  'when  —  desired,'  1105. 

Q&J^U  'other.'  [Comp.  izgu 

'vary.']  Also, as  anoun,  =  ' kind,' 
374,  143,  514,  600,704,  819,822, 

926,   IOI2,   1209.  Q><SUfb£))0S)L&, 

972. 

63)6)7.      ^^  '  The  earth.'      <SS)SULULD, 
189,  50,  353.  <56)<siiuj<5<g]  'on 

earth,'  22,  850.  GSXSUUJ&LD,  75, 
101,  547;  terra.  eo<suujs(§,  701. 
(sroojiL/^^/r/r,  238.  2.  (§  64,  261), 
'Place,  put,  consider,'  Nal.  i. 

<50SU<SS<3S,  50,  214,  388,  850. 
6JBQ;«S@ti,  776.  60)07^^7,  228, 

840,  1269.          eDajjBpirear,  1001. 

6QG1JLJLJIT,    155.  <3S)<SUILJiriT,   155. 

<5m3)jujn'<g),  117,  841.  esxsuLJq 

'land,'  24,  149;  'place,'  226. 
3.  'Straw,'  435- 

65)617<5E>ffU      '  a     day.' 

'  daily,'  83,  Nal.  7,  39. 


LA  IT  LG  QJj  p  3$ 


0  <su  osbr  u  rr  . 

Sweet  to  the  thought,  sweet  to  the  ear,  sweet  to  the  mouth, 
Great  cure  for  twofold  deeds'  disease,  is  Valluvar's 
Sweet  Kurral-Venpd  verse,  with  tongue  right  eloquent 
Set  forth,  that  we  the  way  of  good  may  know. 


INDEX. 


A,  the  letter,  3,  184. 

Action,  186.     See  Deed. 

Adultery,  21. 

Aeschylus,  187. 

Agastya,  302. 

Agriculture,  140,  191. 

Ahankara,  245. 

Ahimsa,  241. 

Aid  of  great  men,  64. 

Akbar,  256. 

Alliances,  290. 

Ambassadors,  280. 

Ahgam,  282. 

Anger,  41. 

Appellatives,  xxiii. 

Apramada,  265. 

Arhata,  277. 

Ariel,  M.,  i.,  xiii. 

Aristotle,  xii.,  213,  217,  237. 

Army,  288. 

Arugan,    184,    186.      [S.  Arhat.'] 

See  Arhata. 

Ascetics,  5,  6,  34,  192,  &c. 
Attributes,  188. 
Augustine,  S-,  xv. 
Avvaiyar,  251,  253,  307. 
Ayirani,  206. 

Babington,  B.  G.,  Pref.  v. 

Backbiting,  26. 

Bahu-vrihi,  290. 

Earth,  Dr.,  i.,  201,  219,  243. 

Baseness,  145. 

Becoming  conduct,  30. 

Benefits,  16. 

Benevolence,  34. 

Benignity,  81. 

Beschi,  Pref.  iv.  &c. ;  Intro,  vi. 


Bhagavan,  183. 

Bhagavat  Gita,  183,  189,  196,  197, 

219,    220,  242,  245,   247.      See 

Gita. 

Bhartrihari,  322. 
Bonds,  Ch.  xxxv. 
Bohtlingk,  Pref.  iv. 
Brotherton,  T.,  Pref.  v. 
Browning,  R.,  198. 

Qakuntala,  322,  323. 
(Jarvanaperumalaiyar,  v. 
Cato  Dionysius,  294. 
Catullus,  326. 
Censoriousness,  26. 
Children,  11  [v.  60-70]. 
Qivaga-Qmtamani,  iv. 
Clemency,  269. 
Complainings,  160. 
Compounds,  xviii. 
Confidence,  72. 
Conington,  Prof.,  185. 
Consideration,  67. 
Council,  283. 
Courtesy,  135. 
Courtiership,  281. 
Covetousness,  25. 
Cowards,  v.  534. 
Cowell,  Prof.,  277. 

Dante,  187. 
Declension,  xix. 
Decorum,  20. 
Deeds,  186,  248. 
Deliberation,  67. 
Demon,  268. 
Detectives,  82. 
Dhamma-pada,  241,  265. 


[78] 


INDEX. 


Diet,  128. 

Domestic  life,  9. 

Dowson's     Class.   Diet,    of   Hindu 

Myth.,  278. 

Draughts  (game),  v.  401. 
Dravidian,  xv. 
Dread  of  evil  deeds,  29. 
Drew,  W.  H.,  Pref.  v.  ;  v.,  xii. 
Drunkenness,  125,  305. 
Duty,  v.  211. 

Effort,  86. 


. 

Ellipsis,  xvii. 

Ellis,  R  W.,  Pref.  v.  ;  Intro,  v. 
Energy,  83. 

Enlargements  of  sub.  or  obj.,  xviii. 
Enmity,  241. 
-  within,  120. 
Enthusiasm,  289. 
Envoys,  95,  280,  &c. 
Envy,  24. 
Evil,  fear  of,  29. 
--  not  doing,  42. 
Eyes,  v.  573,  Ac. 

Familiarity,  110,  293. 

Famine,  5,  190. 

Fate,  52,  248,  Ac.,  v.  619. 

Faults,  63. 

Firmness,  278. 

Five-fold  uprightness,  243. 

Flesh,  35. 

Folly,  114,  296. 

Forts,  103,  286. 

Fortune,  goddess  of,  86,  273. 

Foulkes,  T.  192. 

Fraud,  39. 

Friendship,  108,  Ac.,  290. 

Gaming,  127,  306. 

Gandharva  marriage,  149,  322. 

Gita,  272,  274. 

Giving,  31. 

God,  vii.,  3,  4,  184,  Ac. 

Gough,  Prof.,  277. 

Grammar,  xv. 

Grant,  Sir  A.,  xii. 

Grant-Duff's   Hist,    of  Mahrattas, 

286. 

Gratitude,  16. 
Graul,  Dr.,  Pref.  iii.  ;  iv.,  xiii. 


j  Greatness,  132. 
Guests,  14. 
Guru  Noodle,  Pref.  v. 

Harmony,  v.  573. 
Harshness,  268. 
Hearing,  61. 

Hit6pade?a,  249,  251,  278. 
Honour,  131,  309. 
Hopefulness,  87. 
Horace,  186,  201. 
Hospitality,  14. 
Hostility,  117. 

Ignorance,  59,  115. 

Impartiality,  17. 

Inconsistency,  37. 

Indische  Sinnpflanzen,  Pref.  iii, 

Indolence,  272. 

Indra,  v.  25,  206,  302. 

Injustice,  78,  267. 

Instability,  46. 

Invocation,  183. 

Irony,  297. 

Jains,  ii.,  v.  189,  192,  200,  277. 
Justice,  77,  266. 

Kaman,  xiii. 
Kfunattu-pfil,  xiii. 
Kamban,  194,  305. 
Karma,  243. 
Keble,  202. 
Killing,  44,  242. 
Kindred,  74. 
Kurral,  iii. 
Kurrambar,  285. 

Lamia,  305. 

Lamp,  v.  299. 

Land,  102,  284. 

Leaders,  v.  770. 

Learning,  58. 

Linch-pin,  278. 

Long-grief  and  Long-life,  241. 

Lotus,  271. 

Love,  12,  149,  187. 

Lucretius,  188. 

Madras,  289. 
Mahamaya,  273. 
Mammata,  245. 


INDfiX. 


[79] 


Manly  effort,  86,  273. 

Manu,  Pref.  iv.  183,  200,  201,  241, 

250,  251,  263,  266,  267,  268,  270, 

275,285,286,302,  307. 
Marka-9akayan,  x. 
Marriage,  199,  200. 
Mayilapur,  i.,  x. 
Mean  associations,  66. 
Medicine,  128,  307. 
Mendicancy,  142,  143,  318-20. 
Metonomy,  xviii. 
Metre,  xxv. 

Military  spirit,  107,  289. 
Ministers  of  State,  89,  275. 
Misfortune,  goddess  of,  278. 
Monier- Williams,  Sir  M.,  322,  774. 
Moore,  T.,  187. 
Mozley,  239. 

Miiller,  Prof.  F.  Max,  241,  265. 
Murder,  44. 

Nahusha,  302. 

Naishadam,  284. 

Naladi,  xiii. 

Nannul,  184,  253,  285. 

Nero,  287. 

Netti,  320. 

Nirvana,  186. 

Niti-nerri-vilakkani,  277. 

Nobility,  130,  308,  310. 

Noscitur  a  sociis,  Ch.  XLVI.,  453. 

Offending  the  great,  122. 
Oldenberg's    Buddha,    210,     241, 

242. 

Omnipresence,  184. 
Orme,  286. 
Ovid,  212. 

Palm- wine,  125. 
Palmyra  horse,  156,  323. 
Pancnadacaprakaranam,  247. 
Paiichatantra,  256. 
Pantoenus,  ii. 
Paranar,  iii. 
Pariah,  i. 
Parimelaragar,  vi. 
Parraya  caste,  i. 
Patience,  22. 
Penance,  36. 
Perfectness,  133. 
Personality,  183. 


Pincott,  F.,  Pref.  vi 

Place,  71. 

Pleasant  words,  15. 

Polygamy,  303. 

Pope's  Indian  History,  290,  296. 

Poverty,  141,  317. 

Power,  68. 

Praise  of  God,  3,  4. 

Predicates,  xix. 

Profitless  words,  27. 

Propertius,  328. 

Punarbhava,  243. 

Purity,  91. 

Puttamittiranar,  xvi. 

Pythagoras,  185. 

Rain,  4,  5,  189. 

Ramanuja  Kavirayar,  v. 

Ramayanam,  194,  284,  305. 

Religious  observances,  34-45. 

Renown,  32. 

Renunciation,  47. 

Resident,  280. 

Robinson,   Rev.   E.   J.,   Pref.   iii., 

271. 

Rost,  Dr.  R.,  Pref.  vi. 
Royalty,  57. 

S.  Augustine,  xv. 

Sacrifices,  242. 

Sankhya  Karika,  272. 

Sarva-dar9ana-sangraha,  277. 

Savaka,  254. 

Sceptre,  77-79. 

Selection,  72,  73. 

Self-restraint,  19. 

Seneca,  274. 

Separation,  159. 

Sepoys,  289. 

Shakspere,  191. 

Shame,  137. 

Shelley,  293. 

Sluggishness,  84. 

Sons,  11. 

Spies,  82,  270. 

Spirit  (energy),  271. 

Stokes,  H.,  277. 

Suetonius,  287. 

Sympathy,  209. 

Tact,  275,  282. 
Tamasa,  272. 


[80] 


INDEX. 


Tamil,  i.,  xv. 
--  country,  284. 
Tamotaram  Pillai,  xvi.  n. 
Telugu,  Intro,  xix.,  xx.,  277. 
Tempavani,  Pref.  v. 
Tennyson,  188. 
Tenses,  xix.,  xxi. 
Terrorism,  79,  268. 
Theocritus,  322. 
Time,  69. 
Tirupati,  209. 
Tiruvalluvar,  i.  &c. 
Tolkappiyam,  322. 
Toddy,  125,  305. 
Touchstone,  v.  505. 
Treachery,  120. 
Treasure,  287. 
Trees,  v.v.  576,  600. 
Trench,  Abp.,  xv. 
True,  Knowledge  of  the,  48. 
Tyranny,  78. 

Unforgetfulness,  76,  265. 

Unsluggishness,  84,  272. 


i,  x.,  205. 
Valluvar,  Intro,  i. 


Varuna,  190. 

Vedanta,  274. 

Vediyar  Orukkam,  Pref.  v. 

Vemana,  205,  215. 

Yenpa,  xxv.,  xxvii. 

Veracity,  40. 

Verb  in  Tamil  poetry,  xix.-xxiii. 

Vergil,  185,  289,  316. 

Vira9oriyam,  xvi.  n.,  xviii. 

Vinson,  M.  Jules,  Pref.  iv. 

Virtue,  Book  I.  3, 

domestic,  9-33. 

ascetic,  34. 

—  strength  of,  7. 
Vishnu,  Intro,  iii.,  272. 
Vishnu-purana,  184,  201. 
Vision,  277.  ' 

Wanton  women,  124. 

Wealth,  104,  287. 

Weber,  322. 

Wedded  love,  159,  324. 

Wife,  10,  123,  303. 

Wilson,  H.  H.,  184,  192,  201,  272. 

Women,  123. 

Words,  15. 

Work,  278. 

World,  harmony  with,  v.  140. 


London:  Printed  by  W.  TT.  Allen  &  Co.,  13  Waterloo  Place.     S.W. 


H&UGHTON'S  SANSCRIT  AND  BENGALI  DICTIONARY. 

In  the  Bengali  Character,  with  Index  serving  as  a  reversed  Dictionary.  4to.  30s. 

WILLIAMS'  ENGLISH  AND  SANSCRIT  DICTIONARY. 

4to.     £3  3s. 

SANSCRIT  GRAMMAR. 

By  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  M. A.,  &e.     Second  Edition.     Royal  8vo.     15s. 

A  SANSCRIT  GRAMMAR. 

By  Sir  0.  WILKINS.    4to.     15s. 

INSTITUTES    OP    MENU. 

With  English  Translation.     By  Sir  GRAVES  C.  HAUGHTON.    2  vols.    4to.    24s. 

HITOPADESA. 

The  Text,  with  a  Vocabulary.     By  FRANCIS  JOHNSON.    Imperial  8vo.     15s. 

Translated  into  English  by  F.  PINCOTT.     4to.     6s, 
Sanscrit,  with  Bengali  and  English  Translation.    STO.     IQs.  ad. 

SAKUNTALA. 

The  Text,  with  Literal  English  Translation  of  all  the  Metrical  Passages, 
Schemes  of  the  Metres,  and  Copious  Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes. 
By  MONIHR  WILLIAMS,  M.A.  Royal  STO.  21s. 


DICTIONARY,  BENGALI   &  SANSCRIT. 

In  the  Bengali  Characters.  Explained  in  English,  and  adapted  for  Students 
of  either  language ;  with  an  Index,  serving  as  a  reversed  Dictionary.  In 
4to.  £1  10s.  This  is  the  best  Sanscrit  Dictionary  now  procurable. 

GRAMMAR  OF  THE  BENGALI  LANGUAGE. 

To  which  is  added  a  Selection  of  Easy  Phrases  and  Useful  Dialogues.  By 
DUNCAN  FORBES,  LL.D.  Royal  8vo.  12s.  6d. 

BENGALI  READER.  ^^™ 

Consisting  of  Easy  flections  from  the  best  Authors  ;  with  a  Translation 
a  Vocabulary.     By  DONCAN  FORBES,  LL.D.     Royal  8vo.     12s 

SINGHASAN  BATTISI.    8vo.    5s. 
TOTA  ITIHAS.    8vo.    5s. 


ARABIC-ENGLISH-   DICTIONARY. 

By  F.  STEINGASS,  Ph.D.  of  the  University  of  Munich.     Demy  8vo. 

ENGLISH-ARABIC  DICTIONARY. 

By  F.  STEINGASS,  Ph.D.  of  the  University  of  Munich.    Demy  8vo. 

RICHARDSON'S  ARABIC,  PERSIAN,  AND  ENGLISH 
DICTIONARY. 

Edition  of  1852.     By  F.  JOHNSON.     4to.    Cloth.    £4.  ^H 

A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  ARABIC  LANGUAGE. 

By  DUNCAN  FORBES,  LL.D.    Royal  8vo.    Cloth.    18s. 

ARABIC  READING  LESSONS. 

Consisting  of  Easy  Extracts  from  the  best  Authfcrs,  together  with  a  Vocabu- 
lary of  all  the  words  occurring  in  the  Text.  By  DUNCAN*  FORBES,  LL.D. 
Royal  8vo.  Cloth.  15s. 


W.  H.  ALLEN  &  CO.fS  ORIENTAL  MANUALS. 

THE  PERSIAN  MANUAL. 

Containing  a  Concise  Grammar,  with  Exercises,  Useful  Phrases,  Dialogues, 
and  Subjects  for  Translation  into  Persian  ;  also  a  Vocabulary  of  Useful 
Words,  English  and  Persian.  By  Capt.  H.  W.  CLARKE,  ll.K.  1 8mo.  7s.  tid. 


DMtlor 


Comprish 
Read 
Usefi 


Comprisii 
aCoi 
Dialc 
FKEI 
Panj 
Urdi 


Containin 
and 
Edit! 


Comprisii 
Prov 


Comprisii 
logue 
a  Co 
J.  Ni 

EGYPT: 

ASk 
Forc< 
Ph.D 


Comprisio 
logue 
ANTO 


By  MOXIER  , 

18mo.     7s.  ticu 


University  of  Toronto 
library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


vincial ; 
ition ; 
•y.  By 
,juman-i- 
Editor  of  the 
a."  Fcap.  6s. 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 

Under  Pat.  "Ref.  Index  File" 

Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU 


s.'lBOOK. 
e  British 
>N  TIEN. 


ry,  Dia- 
;he  Rev. 


.  Gough. 


KEY  TO  THE  EXEECISES  IN  WILLIAMS'S  SANSCEIT 
MANUAL. 

By  A.  E.  GOUGH.     18mo.     4s. 


„%  A  complete  Catalogue  of  Messrs.  W.  H.  Allen  and  Co's  Books  in  the 
Eastern  Languages  will  be  sent  gratis  on  application. 


